956

“Having killed Ravana with his followers
and given satisfaction to you (thereby), | will
exert my strength before long in such a way
that you will get pleased with me. (4)
अलं वैक्लव्यमालम्ब्य धैर्यमात्मगतं स्मर।
त्वद्विधानां न सदृशमीदूशं बुद्धिलाघवम्॥५॥

“Cease giving way to mental weakness
and call to mind your native fortitude. Such
littleness of mind is not becoming of people
like you. (5)
wend fe शोचामि af न च परित्यजे॥६॥

“Great adversity born of separation from
my spouse has been met with by me too. I,
however, neither grieve nor lose courage
thus. (6)

नाहं तामनुशोचामि wept वानरोऽपि सन्।
महात्मा च विनीतश्च किं पुनर्धृतिमान् महान्॥७॥

“A common monkey though | am, | do
not grieve for her; how much less should
you, a great man, high-souled and cultured
and endowed with courage as you are? (7)
बाष्पमापतितं धैर्यान्निग्रहीतुं त्वमर्हसि।
मर्यादां सत्त्वयुक्तानां धृतिं नोत्स्रष्टुमर्हसि॥ ८॥

“By recourse to fortitude you ought to
restrain the tears which have appeared in
your eyes. You ought not to abandon propriety
of conduct and fortitude, characteristic of
those possessed of resolution. (8)

व्यसने वार्थकृच्छे वा भये वा जीवितान्तगे।
विमृशंश्च स्वया बुद्ध्या धृतिमान् नावसीदति॥ ९॥

“Deliberating by recourse to his own
faculty of judgment as to what remedy be
adopted in suffering, caused by separation
from one’s object of love or in a financial
crisis or in a danger leading to the end of
one’s life, a man of fortitude does not come
to grief. (9)
बालिशस्तु नरो नित्यं वैक्लव्यं योऽनुवर्तते।

स मज्जत्यवश: शोके भाराक्रान्तेव नौर्जले॥ Qo Il

“A foolish man, however, who always

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

gives way to mental weakness, is helplessly
plunged in grief, even as a boat loaded with
excessive weight sinks in water. (10)

एषोऽञ्जलिर्मया बद्ध: प्रणयात् त्वां Wares |
Wet श्रय शोकस्य नान्तरं दातुमर्हसि॥११॥

“Here are palms joined by me (in
supplication) and | beseech you through
love: pray, have recourse to manliness; you
ought not to allow grief a passage to enter
your mind. (11)

ये शोकमनुवर्तन्ते न तेषां विद्यते सुखम्।
तेजश्च क्षीयते तेषां न त्वं शोचितुमर्हसि॥ ee

“Happiness does not dwell in them who
yield to grief; their strength too diminishes.
Hence you should not grieve. (12)

शोकेनाभिप्रपन्नस्य जीविते चापि संशय:।
स शोकं त्यज राजेन्द्र धैर्यमाश्रय केवलम्॥ १३॥

“There is danger even to the life of
a man, who is overwhelmed with grief.
Therefore, cast away grief, O king of kings,
and have recourse to fortitude alone. (13)

fed वयस्यभावेन gfe नोपदिशामि a
वयस्यतां पूजयन्मे न त्वं शोचितुमर्हसि॥ evil

“| tender a salutary advice to you ina
spirit of friendship and do not moralize.
Honouring my friendship you should not
grieve.” (14)
मधुरं सान्तवितस्तेन सुग्रीवेण स waa: |
मुखमश्रुपरिक्लिन्नं वस्त्रान्तेन प्रमार्जयत्॥१५॥

Sweetly comforted in these words by
the aforesaid Sugriva, the celebrated Sri Rama
wiped his face, which had been bathed in
tears, with an end of his loin-cloth. (15)

प्रकृतिस्थस्तु काकुत्स्थ: सुग्रीवचनात् TY:
सम्परिष्वज्य सुग्रीवमिदं वचनमब्रवीत्॥१६॥

Closely embracing Sugriva, when he

(Sri Rama) had returned to his normal

condition, as a result of the former’s words

of consolation, Lord Sri Rama (a scion of
Kakutstha) for his part replied as follow :

(16)
