902

showed her to his minister. Scanning her
very features, the minister, who was well-
versed in physiognomy, said to Ravana: (37)

गृहस्थैषा fe सुश्रोणी त्वद्वधायैव दृश्यते।
एत्तच्छुत्वार्णवे WA at प्रचिक्षेप रावण:॥ ३८॥

“‘If this woman of shapely limbs stays
in your house, she will prove to be your
destroyer.’ Hearing this, O Rama, Ravana
threw her into the sea. (38)

सा wa क्षितिमासाद्य यज्ञायतनमध्यगा।
Tal हलमुखोत्कृष्टा पुनरप्युत्थिता सती॥ ३९॥

“Reaching the shore she came to the
middle of a sacrificial ground. Dug out by
the ploughshare of the king, Janaka, she
came up again. (39)
सैषा जनकराजस्य प्रसूता तनया प्रभो।
तव भार्या महाबाहो विष्णुस्त्वं हि सनातन:॥४०॥

“O Lord, the same Vedavati reborn as
the daughter of King Janaka, is Your wife

now. O mighty-armed Lord, You are indeed
Visnu, the ancient one. (40)

ya क्रोधहत: शत्रुर्ययासौ निहतस्तया।
उपाश्रयित्वा शैलाभस्तव वीर्यममानुषम्॥४१॥

« VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

“Falling back upon Your superhuman
prowess, the same lady by whom Your
mountain-like enemy was consumed by her
wrath, in her former birth, actually killed him.

(41)

एवमेषा महाभागा Aye पुन:।
at हलमुखोत्कृष्टे वेद्यामग्निशिखोपमा॥४२॥

“In this manner this highly meritorious
lady will continue to appear again among
mortals (in the following cycles), drawn out
by a ploughshare in a furrowed field, like a
fire on an altar. (42)

एषा वेदवती नाम पूर्वमासीत् कृते युगे।
त्रेतायुगमनुप्राप्य वधार्थं तस्य रक्षस:॥४३॥
उत्पन्ना मैथिलकुले जनकस्य महात्मन:।
सीतोत्पन्ना तु सीतेति मानुषै: पुनरुच्यते॥४४॥

“She who was known as Vedavati in
her former birth in Krtayuga, appeared again
in the Tretayuga as a daughter of the high-
souled Janaka in the line of the kings of
Mithila for bringing about the destruction of
that Raksasa. Since she came out of a
furrow (Sita), she is called ‘Sita’ by human
beings.” (43-44)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये उत्तरकाण्डे TACT: सर्ग: ॥ १७॥

Thus ends Canto Seventeen in the Uttarakanda of the glorious Ramayana of Valmiki,
the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

अष्टादश: सर्ग:
Canto XVIII

Marutta’s discomfiture at the hands of Ravana; Indra and the other
gods confer boons on the peacock and other birds

प्रविष्टायां हुताशं तु वेदवत्यां स रावण:।
पुष्पकं तु समारुह्य परिचक्राम मेदिनीम्॥१॥
“Ascending the Puspaka, when
Vedavati had entered the fire, Ravana ranged
the earth once more. (1)

उशीरबीजमासाद्य ददर्श स तु रावण:॥ २॥

“Reaching Usirabija, Ravana for his
part saw king Marutta performing a sacrifice
in the company of gods. (2)

संवर्तो नाम ब्रह्मर्षि: साक्षाद् भ्राता बृहस्पते:।
याजयामास धर्मज्न सर्वैर्देवगणैर्वृत:॥ ३॥

“Surrounded by the hosts of gods, a
Brahmarsi, Sarnvarta by name, a brother of
