716

उत्पेततुस्तदा तूर्णं जघ्नतुश्च परस्परम्।
भुजैश्चिक्षिपतुर्वीरावन्योन्यमपराजितौ ॥। २७॥

They sprang on their feet at once and
began to strike each other once more.
Remaining undiscomfited, the two heroes
pushed each other with their arms. (27)
जग्मतुस्तौ st वीरौ बाहुयुद्धे परंतपौ।
आजहार तदा खड्गमदूरपरिवर्तिनम्॥ २८॥
राक्षसश्चर्मणा सार्धं महावेगो महोदर:।
तथैव च महाखड्गं चर्मणा पतितं सह।
woe वानरश्रेष्ठ: सुग्रीवो वेगवत्तर:॥ २९॥

The two champions, the scourge of
their enemy, felt exhausted in the course of
their wrestling. The ogre Mahodara, who
was endowed with great impetuosity then
picked up a sword alongwith a shield lying
not very far. Likewise, Sugriva, the foremost
of the monkeys, too, who was even more
impetuous, seized of a huge sword with a
shield. (28-29)

ततो रोषपरीताङ्गौ नदन्तावभ्यधावताम्।
उद्यतासी रणे wel युधि शस्त्रविशारदौ॥ ३०॥
Thereupon the two warriors, who were
adept in the use of weapons on the battlefield
and whose limbs were seized with anger,
sprang forward roaring with joy to meet
each other with their swords upraised. (30)
अन्योन्यमभिसंक्रुद्धौ wa प्रणिहितावुभौ॥ ३१॥
Both moved with great rapidity from left
to right and from right to left of each other to
parry the strokes of their adversary. Both
were enraged at each other and intent on
conquering each other. (31)

स तुं शूरो महावेगो वीर्यश्लाघी महोदर:।
महावर्मणि तं Get पातयामास दुर्मति:।॥ ३२॥
The evil-minded hero, Mahodara, for
his part, who was endowed with great
impetuosity and was proud of his own virility,
let fall his aforesaid sword on the heavy
mail of Sugriva. (32)

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA +

लग्नमुत्कर्षत: Get खड्गेन कपिकुञ्जर:।
जहार सशिरस्त्राणं कुण्डलोपगतं शिर:॥ ३३॥
Sugriva (an elephant among the
monkeys) severed with his own sword the
head of Mahodara, which was adorned with
ear-rings, helmet and all, even while the
latter was extracting his sword, which had
got stuck into Sugriva’s armour. (33)

निकृत्तशिरसस्तस्य पतितस्य महीतले।
तद् बलं राक्षसेन्द्रस्य दृष्टवा AT न दृश्यते॥ ३४॥
Beholding the fall of Mahodara, the
ogre chief, who lay on the earth’s surface,
his head having been severed, his army
could no longer be seen on the battlefield.
(34)

हत्वा तं amt: सार्धं ननाद मुदितो aft: |
Gals च दशग्रीवो बभौ हृष्टश्च राघव:॥ ३५॥

Having made short work of Mahodara,
the monkey, Sugriva, began to cheer with
the monkeys, delighted as he was; while
Ravana, the ten-headed monster, flew into
a rage and Sri Rama, a scion of Raghu,
looked happy. (35)

विषण्णवदना: Wa राक्षसा दीनचेतस:।
विद्रवन्ति dd: सर्वे भयवित्रस्तचेतस:॥ ३६॥

With their faces downcast all the ogres
felt dejected. Nay, their mind stricken with
fear, all fled away from the batlefield. (35)

महोदरं तं

सूर्यात्पजस्तत्र Tt लक्ष्म्या
सूर्य: स्वतेजोभिरिवाप्रधृष्य: It ३७॥
Having thrown to the ground the
aforesaid Mahodara, who looked like a part
of a huge mountain broken off, Sugriva, son
of the sun-god, shone in his glory on the
battlefield like the sun, which is unassailable
on account of its rays. (37)

अथ विजयमवाप्य वानरेन्द्र:
समरमुखे सुरसिद्धयक्षसङ्घै: |
