# YUDDHAKANDA #

at aa विहितौ ea: पर्वतौ तौ महोदधौ।

अयं वायुसुतो राजन् हनूमांस्तत्र गच्छतु॥ ३२॥
“Those two well-known mountains were

placed in that ocean by the gods themselves.

Let the yonder Hanuman, son of the wind-

god, proceed there.” (32)

एतस्मिन्नन्तरे वायुर्मेघाश्चापि सविद्युत:।
Tae सागरे तोयं कम्पयन्निव पर्वतान्॥ 33 Ul

In the meantime there arose a wind—
as well as clouds accompanied by flashes
of lightning—which, having whipped up the
sea-water, began to shake the mountains,
as it were. (33)

Tet पशक्षवातेन सर्वद्वीपमहाद्रुमा:।
निपेतुर्भग्नविटपा: सलिले लवणाम्भसि॥ ३४॥

Their boughs broken by that mighty
wind caused by the flutter of wings, large
trees of the entire island of Lanka fell headlong
into the water of the salt sea. (34)

अभवन् पन्नगास्त्रस्ता भोगिनस्तत्रवासिन:।
शीघ्रं सर्वाणि यादांसि जग्मुश्च लवणार्णवम्॥ ३५ UI
The huge serpents inhabiting that island
got alarmed, nay, all the sea-monsters, which
had crawled to the shore, quickly (re-) entered
the salt sea. (35)
ततो मुहूर्ताद् wes dada महाबलम्।
वानरा ददरृशु: Wa ज्वलन्तमिव पावकम्॥ ३६॥
In an instant all the monkeys saw
Garuda (the king of birds and a carrier of
lord Visnu), son of Vinata, who is endowed

with extraordinary might, and resembled a
blazing fire in brilliance. (36)

तमागतमभिप्रेक्ष्य नागास्ते विप्रदुद्रुवु:।
यैस्तु dt पुरुषौ बद्धौ शरभूतैर्महाबलै:।॥ ३७॥

Perceiving him arrived on the scene,
those serpents, for their part, by which,
serving as arrows, the aforesaid two
personages, Sri Rama and Laksmana, had
been bound and which were endowed with
extraordinary might, fled away for good. (37)

475

तत: सुपर्ण: काकुत्स्थौ स्पृष्ट्वा प्रत्यभिनन्ह्य च।
विममर्शं च पाणिभ्यां मुखे चन्द्रसमप्रभे॥ ३८॥

Touching Sri Rama and Laksmana,
the two scions of Kakutstha, and wishing
them victory, Garuda, of beautiful wings,
then wiped with his hands their faces,
which shone like the moon. (38)

वैनतेयेन संस्पृष्टास्तयो:- संरुरुहुर्व्रणा:।

सुवर्णे च ay स्निग्धे तयोराशु बभूवतु:॥ ३९॥
Duly touched by Garuda (son of

Vinata), their wounds got cicatrized and

their bodies immediately turned bright and
smooth. (39)

तेजो वीर्यं बलं चौज उत्साहश्च महागुणा:।
प्रदर्शनं च बुद्धिश्च स्मृतिश्च द्विगुणा तयो:॥४०॥

Their majesty, prowess, — strength
and splendour as well as dash, perspicacity
and _ intelligence as also memory got
redoubled. (40)

तावुत्थाप्य महातेजा Weel वासवोपमौ।
उभौ च सस्वजे BST रामश्चैनमुवाच ह॥४१॥

Raising the two princes, who were the
compeers of Indra (the ruler of gods),
Garuda, who was endowed with extraordinary
energy, joyfully embraced them both; and
Sri Rama, they say, spoke to him as follows:

(41)
भवत्प्रसादाद् व्यसनं रावणिप्रभवं महत्।
उपायेन व्यतिक्रान्तौ शीघ्रं च बलिनौ कृतौ॥४२॥

“Thanks to your goodwill, we two have
by recourse to a remedy passed over the
great danger that proceeded from Indrajit
(son of Ravana) and have also been quickly
made strong again. (42)
यथा ad दशरथं यथाजं च पितामहम्।
qa भवन्तमासाद्य हृदयं मे प्रसीदति॥४३॥

“My heart rejoices to meet you in the
same way as it would on meeting my father,
DaSaratha, or my grandfather, Aja. (43)
