56

वारणैश्च चतुर्दन्तै: श्वेताभ्रनिचयोपमै:।
भूषितै रुचिरद्वारं मत्तैश्च मृगपक्षिभि:॥ २८॥
राक्षसाधिपतेर्गुप्तमाविवेश गृहं कपि:॥२९॥

He further saw them carrying sharp
edged pikes, armed with thunderbolt and
endowed with extraordinary might. Hanuman
also saw the central garrison, one hundred
thousand strong, lodged in a huge building
in front of the royal gynaeceum as directed
by Ravana, the suzerain lord of ogres.
Having seen on that occasion the aforesaid
building in which the garrison was housed
with large golden archways, that mighty
Hanuman beheld the well-known palace of
Ravana, the lord of ogres, erected on the
summit of Mount Trikuta, girded by a number
of moats adorned with white lotuses. Hanuman
approached the wonderful and well-protected
gynaeceum of Ravana, the suzerain lord of
ogres, which resembled paradise and was
resonant with marvellous sounds, which
was rendered noisy with the neighing of
horses and the tinkling of ornaments, whose

« VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

portals looked charming with the presence
of chariots and other conveyances such as
palanquins as well as with aerial cars such
as Puspaka, as also with beautiful horses
and elephants, nay, with four-tusked
elephants decked with jewels and resembling
masses of white clouds as well as with
birds and deer in heat, and which was
guarded by thousands of exceptionally
powerful Yatudhanas. (23—29)

a हेमजाम्बूनदचक्रवालं
महार्हमुक्तामणि भूषितान्तम्।
स रावणान्त:पुरमाविवेश॥ ३०॥

The celebrated Hanuman finally entered
the gynaeceum of Ravana, which was
encircled with walls of refined gold and pure
gold (so-called because it was found in the
olden days in the bed of the Jambu river,
now known by the name of Jammu); whose
inside was embellished with pearls and gems
of great value and which was daily sprinkled
with water containing superb agallocum and
sandalwood. (30)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये सुन्दरकाण्डे चतुर्थ: सर्ग: ॥ ४॥

Thus ends Canto Four in the Sundarakanda of the glorious Ramayana of Valmiki,
the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

पञ्चम: सर्ग:
Canto V

Even though seeing ogres and ogresses of various grades and orders while
the moon was ascending the heavens, Hanuman gives way to
anxiety on his not being able to find Sita

ad: स मध्यंगतमंशुमन्तं
ज्योत्स्नावितानं मुहुरुद्वमन्तम्।
cat धीमान् भुवि भानुमन्तं
गोष्ठे qe मत्तमिव भ्रमन्तम्॥१॥
Thereupon the wise Hanuman beheld
the moon arrived at the meridian and
repeatedly spreading out the canopy of its

light over the earth like the sun, and
resembling a bull in rut ranging in a cow-
pen. (1)
लोकस्य पापानि विनाशयन्तं
महोदधिं चापि समेधयन्तम्।
भूतानि सर्वाणि विराजयन्तं
cast शीतांशुमथाभियान्तम्॥ २॥
