Procedure of reading the full Valmiki-Ramayana
in Nine days

Devotees have been advised to undertake a full nine-day reading of Srimad Valmiki-
Ramayana from the 5" to the 13'" of the bright half of any of the three months, Caitra,
Magha and Kartika' of the Hindu calendar. The Valmiki-Ramayana should be read at some
holy spot or place of pilgrimage, in a temple or at one’s own residence in the presence
of an image of Lord Visnu or the sacred Salagrama stone (which is regarded as a symbol
of Lord Visnu) and the sacred basil plant. The ground on which the Ramayana is to be
read should as far as possible be purified by being cleared, swept clean and plastered with
cowdung etc., and also decorated with flags and buntings and covered with a canopy. The
pavilion under which the reading is to take place should be sixteen square cubits in area
and in the centre of it should be raised an altar with a figure of Sarvatobhadra formed on
it. There should be other altars, sacrificial pits and altars of sand too under the pavilion.
In the south-western portion of the pavilion should be placed a seat for the reader and
another for the principal hearer in front of the former. A seat for the book should also be
placed in front of the reader. Arrangements should be made for seating the other hearers
too. The seat for the reader should be higher than that intended for the principal hearer,
while the seat for the book should be higher even than that for the reader.”

After going through the expiatory rites and finishing one’s daily devotions an image
of Sri Rama should be installed or the presence of Sri Sita-Rama alongwith Their
entourage, viz., Laksmana, Bharata, Satrughna, Hanuman and others should be mentally
invoked on the book itself. Then a water-pot endowed with all accessories such as the
leaves of five holy trees, viz., the mango, the peepul (the Indian fig-tree), the banyan
tree, the Parkata and the Udumbara tree, should be installed as a symbol of various
deities including Varuna (the god of water). And after reading benedictory verses
and offering worship to Lord Ganesa, Vatuka Bhairava’, Ksetrapala (a spirit believed
to preside over fields), the Yoginis*, the sixteen Matrkas or divine mothers®, the

1. aa माघे कार्तिके च fad va च वाचयेत्।
नवाहं सुमहापुण्यं श्रोतव्यं च प्रयत्नत:॥
पञ्चम्या दिनमारभ्य रामायणकथामृतम्।
नवाहश्रवणेनैव सर्वपापै: प्रमुच्यते॥
(रामसेवाग्रन्थ)
2. श्रोतृभ्यश्च तथा apa ग्रन्थस्य चोच्चता।
(Ibid)
3. An attendant of Lord Siva credited with the form of a lad and devoted to His divine Consort
(Parvati).
4. Semi-divine females endowed with supernatural powers created by Goddess Durga and attending
on Her or on Lord Siva.
5. The sixteen divine mothers are: Gauri, Padma, Saci, Medha, Savitri, Vijaya, Jaya, Devasena,
Swadha, Swaha, Santi, Pusti, Dhrti, Tusti, Atmadevata and Kuladevata.
