# YUDDHAKANDA #

and Samunnata all these four adjutants of
Prahasta made short work of the monkeys
(lit., dwellers in the woods). (19)
द्विविदो गिरिशृङ्गखेण जघानैकं नरान्तकम्॥२०॥

Of the aforesaid four ogres, who were
rushing with speed and also killing the
monkeys, Dwivida struck down with a
mountain peak one viz., Narantaka. (20)

दुर्मुख: weer कपि: सविपुलद्रुमम्।
Tad क्षिप्रहस्तं तु समुन्नतमपोथयत्॥२१॥

Springing on his feet with a giant tree
in his hand, the monkey Durmukha for his
part then killed the quick-handed Samunnata.

(21)
पातयामास तेजस्वी महानादस्य वक्षसि॥ २२॥

Firmly seizing hold of a huge rock, the
energetic Jambavan for his part, who was
highly enraged, hurled it on the chest of
Mahanada. (22)

अथ कुम्भहनुस्तत्र तारेणासाद्य वीर्यवान्।
FAUT ASAT सद्य: प्राणान् संत्याजयद् TT २३॥
Meeting with Tara, the powerful
Kumbhahanu closed with him; and the former
deprived him of his life with a huge tree.
(23)

अमृष्यमाणस्तत्कर्म प्रहस्तो रथमास्थित:।
चकार met घोरं धनुष्पाणिर्वनौकसाम्॥ २४॥

Intolerant of this exploit, and mounted
on his chariot, bow in hand, Prahasta caused
a dreadful havoc among the monkeys (lit.,
dwellers in the woods). (24)

aad sa संजज्ञे सेनयोरुभयोस्तदा।
क्षुभितस्याप्रमेयस्य सागरस्येव नि:स्वन:॥ २५॥

With the rapid manoeuvring of both the
armies there arose at that time an uproar
resembling the roar of a vast tempestuous
sea. (25)

503

महता fe शरौघेण राक्षसो woreda:
अर्दयामास संक्रुद्धो वानरान् परमाहवे॥ २६॥

Getting infuriated, the ogre, Prahasta,
who was maddened by combat, actually
began to torment the monkeys with an
immense stream of arrows in that major
conflict. (26)

वानराणां शरीरैस्तु राक्षसानां च मेदिनी।

बभूवातिचिता घोरै: पर्वतैरिव संवृता॥ ron
Strewn excessively with the heaps of

dead bodies of monkeys and ogres, the

earth was covered with fearful mountains,
as it were. (27)

सा मही रुधिरौघेण प्रच्छन्ना सम्प्रकाशते।
eT माधवे मासि पलाशैरिव पुष्पितै:।॥ २८॥

Veiled by torrents of blood, the earth
shone brightly as if it were fully clothed with
Palasa trees in blossom in the month of
Vaisakha (the second month of the vernal
season). (28)

हतवीरौघवप्रां तु भग्नायुधमहाद्रुमाम्।
शोणितौघमहातोयां यमसागरगामिनीम्॥ २९॥
यकृत्प्लीहमहापङ्कां विनिकोर्णान्त्रशैवलाम्।

भिन्नकायशिरोमीनामङ्गावयवशाबद्बलाम् ॥३०॥
गृध्रहंसवराकीर्णां कङ्कसारससेविताम्।
मेद:फेनसमाकोर्णामार्तस्तनितनि:स्वनाम् ॥३१॥

तां कापुरुषदुस्तारां युद्धभूमिमयीं नदीम्।
नदीमिव wma हंससारससेविताम्॥ ३२॥
राक्षसा: कपिमुख्यास्ते तेरुस्तां दुस्तरां नदीम्।
यथा पद्मरजोध्वस्तां नलिनीं गजयूथपा:॥ ३३॥
The ogres as well as the foremost of
monkeys for their part crossed the river in
the shape of the battle-field, which had heaps
of slain warriors for its banks, broken
weapons for large trees (standing on its
banks) and the torrents of blood for its vast
sheet of water; which was rushing towards
the sea of Death; which had livers and
spleens for its vast mire, the scattered entrails
for its duckweeds, severed trunks and heads
