* ARANYAKANDA «

restricted diet, and was devoted to the good
of all created beings. (7-8)
ase वनगतं we परिभूय महाबलम्।
तापसोऽयमिति ज्ञात्वा पूर्ववैरमनुस्मरन्॥९॥
अभ्यधावं सुसंक्रुद्धस्तीक्ष्णशृङ्गो मृगाकृति:।
जिघांसुरकृतप्रज्ञस्तं प्रहारमनुस्मरन्॥ १० ॥

“Belittling Rama, who had retired to the
forest, even though he was possessed of
great might, thinking that he was an ascetic
only, and recalling my past enmity with him,
| rushed towards him, highly enraged, in the
form of a sharp-horned deer, thoughtlessly
seeking to kill him, remembering as | did the
blow dealt by him. (9-10)

तेन त्यक्तास्त्रयो बाणा: शिता: शत्रुनिबर्हणा: |
विकृष्य सुमहच्चापं सुपर्णानिलतुल्यगा:॥११॥

“Stretching at full length his very mighty
bow, three sharp arrows—which were
capable of putting an end to the enemy and
which sped like Garuda, the king of birds
and the carrier of Lord Visnu, and the wind—
were shot by him. (11)

ते बाणा वज्रसंकाशा: TART रक्तभोजना:।

आजग्मु: सहिता: सर्वे त्रय: संनतपर्वण:॥१२॥
“All those three most dreadful and flat-

knobbed arrows, which shone brightly as

lightning, and were fond of sucking blood—
sped towards me together. (12)

पराक्रमज्ञो रामस्य शठो दृष्टभय: पुरा।
समुत्क्रान्तस्ततो मुक्तस्तावुभौ राक्षसौ हतौ॥१३॥

“Knowing as | did the prowess of Rama
and having seen the peril to which | had
exposed myself on a previous occasion, |
slipped away, cunning as | was, and was
thereby saved since the arrow of Rama
never hits a fugitive while both those ogres
(my companions) were killed. (13)

शरेण मुक्तो रामस्य कथंचित् प्राप्य जीवितम्।
इह प्रव्राजितो युक्तस्तापसोऽहं समाहित:॥१४॥

“Having somehow got back my life,
being spared by the shaft of Rama, | have

817

been forced to turn a recluse here and,
being calm and collected, have taken to the
practice of yoga (concentration of mind),
adopting an ascetic life. (14)

वृक्षे qa fe पश्यामि चीरकृष्णाजिनाम्बरम्।
गृहीतधनुषं रामं पाशहस्तमिवान्तकम्॥१५॥

“In every tree | actually perceive Sri
Rama clad in the bark of trees and the
black antelope-skin, wielding a bow and
resembling Death with a noose in his hand.

(15)
अपि रामसहस्राणि भीत: पश्यामि रावण।
रामभूतमिदं सर्वमरण्यं प्रतिभाति मे॥१६॥

“Being terrified, O Ravana, | even behold
thousands of Rama. Nay, to me the whole
of this forest appears as having turned into
Rama. (16)

waa fe पश्यामि रहिते राक्षसेश्वर।
दृष्टवा स्वप्नगतं राममुद्भ्रमामि विचेतन:॥ १७॥

“Indeed, | perceive Rama even in a
solitary place, O lord of ogres ! Nay, beholding
Rama in a dream | get bewildered like one
returned to waking life. (17)

रकारादीनि नामानि रामत्रस्तस्य रावण।
रत्नानि च रथाश्चैव वित्रासं जनयन्ति मे॥ १८॥

“Names beginning with the letter ‘R’
such as the word ‘Ratnas’ (jewels) and
‘Rathas’ (chariots) as well cause terror to
me, afraid as | am of Rama, O Ravana !

(18)
अहं तस्य प्रभावज्ञो न युद्धं तेन ते क्षमम्।
बलिं वा नमुचिं वापि हन्याद्धि रघुनन्दन:॥१९॥

“lam aware of his power; an encounter
with him is, therefore, not advisable for you.
Rama, the delight of the Raghus, can surely
kill Bali and even Namuci. (19)

TW रामेण युद्धस्व क्षमां वा He रावण।
Ad रामकथा कार्या ate At द्रष्टुमिच्छसि॥ २०॥

“Either contend with Rama on a field of
battle or bear with him, O Ravana! In no
case should a reference be made to Rama
