1062

न खल्वस्ति मम त्रासो लक्ष्मणान्नापि राघवात्।
fat स्वस्थानकुपितं जनयत्येव सम्भ्रमम्॥६॥
“Indeed | have no fear from Laksmana
nor even from Sri Rama since | have done
no wrong to them; a friend, however, who
is angry without justification does create
misgiving. (6)
सर्वथा सुकरं fit gent प्रतिपालनम्।
अनित्यत्वात् तु चित्तानां प्रीतिरल्पेऽपि भिद्यते॥ ७॥
“It is quite easy to make friends, but
difficult to sustain friendship till the end. Due
to fickleness of the minds, really speaking
friendship is broken even in the event of a
minor difference. (7)

अतोनिमित्तं त्रस्तोऽहं WATT तु महात्मना।

यन्ममोपकृतं wet प्रतिकर्तुं न तन्मया॥८॥
“For this reason alone | am

apprehensive; for the good turn that has

been done to me by the high-souled Sri
Rama can in no way be repaid by me.” (8)

सुग्रीवेणैवमुक्ते तु हनूमान् हरिपुंगव:।
उवाच TAT तर्केण मध्ये वानरमन्तरिणाम्॥९॥

When Sugriva had spoken as aforesaid,
Hanuman, the foremost among monkeys,
for his part submitted as follows in the midst
of Vanara counsellors on the basis of his
own presumption : (9)
सर्वथा नैतदाश्चर्यं यत् त्वं हरिगणेश्वर।

न विस्मरसि सुस्निग्धमुपकारं कृतं शुभम्॥१०॥

“It is not at all a matter of surprise that
you, O lord of the hordes of monkeys,

should not forget a conspicuous service
rendered to you with the utmost love. (10)

राघवेण तु वीरेण भयमुत्सृज्य दूरत:।
त्वत्प्रियार्थं हतो वाली शाक्रतुल्यपराक्रम:॥११॥
“Shedding fear of obloquy at a
respectable distance, Vali, who equalled Indra,
the ruler of gods, in prowess, was actually
slain by the heroic Sri Rama (a scion of
Raghu) for the sake of your pleasure. (11)

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

सर्वथा प्रणयात् क्रुद्धो राघवो AA संशय:।
भ्रातरं सम्प्रहितवाँल्लक्ष्मणं लक्ष्मिवर्धनम्॥१२॥
“Enraged purely through affection for
you has Sri Rama (a scion of Raghu) duly
sent to you his younger brother, Laksmana,
the promoter of fortune: there is no doubt
about it. (12)
त्वं प्रमत्तो न जानीषे कालं कालविदां वर।
फुल्लसप्तच्छ्दश्यामा VST तु INSP V3 ll
“Heedless as you are, you have no
idea of the passage of time, O jewel among
those conversant with time! The blessed
autumn, green with Saptachhada trees in
blossom, has already set in. (13)

निर्मलग्रहनक्षत्रा द्यौ: प्रणष्टबलाहका।
प्रसन्नाश्च fest: wal: सरितश्च सरांसि च॥ १४॥

“The sky, from which clouds have totally
disappeared, is illumined with bright planets
and stars. All the four quarters as well as
the rivers and lakes have assumed a
cheerful aspect. (14)
प्राप्तमुद्योगकालं तु नावैषि हरिपुंगव।
त्वं प्रमत्त इति व्यक्तं लक्ष्मणोऽयमिहागत:॥ १५ ॥

“You are not at all aware of the time
for military endeavour, which has already
arrived, O jewel among monkeys! Thus
evidently you are forgetful. Hence has
Laksmana come here to remind you of your
duty. (15)

आर्तस्य Ee परुषं पुरुषान्तरात्।
वचनं मर्षणीयं ते राघवस्य महात्मन:॥१६॥
“The harsh language of the high-souled
Sri Rama (a scion of Raghu), who is in
distress and has been deprived of his spouse,
as heard from the mouth of another man,
Laksmana, ought to be tolerated by you.
(16)
कृतापराधस्य fe ते नान्यत् पश्याम्यहं क्षमम्।
अन्तरेणाञ्जलिं बद्ध्वा लक्ष्मणस्य प्रसादनात्॥ १७॥

“Indeed | do not consider anything other
than pacifying Laksmana with joined palms
