140

“Alas, it is painful indeed that two months
(on the expiry of which | am going to be
killed by Ravana) will before long slip away
past me, afflicted for long, even as the night
at the end of which a thief, placed in fetters
under the detention orders of a king is to be
executed, passes away in his cell. (7)

a राम a लक्ष्मण a सुमित्रे

a राममात: सह A जनन्य:।
war विपद्याम्यहमल्पभाग्या

महार्णवे नौरिव मूढवाता॥८॥

“O Rama, 0 Laksmana, O Sumitra, O
Kausalya (Sri Rama’s mother) and alongwith
these my own mothers too, |, a woman of
scanty fortune, am going to perish like a
bark caught in a whirlwind in mid-ocean. (8)

सिंहर्षभौ gia वैद्युतेन॥९॥

“Like a pair of excellent lions killed by
a stroke of lightning, those two agile princes
(Sri Rama and Laksmana) were undoubtedly
killed on my account by the being who had
assumed the guise of a deer. (9)
Tt स कालो मृगरूपधारी
मामल्पभाग्यां लुलुभे तदानीम्।
यत्रार्यपुत्रौ विससर्ज मूढा
रामानुजं लक्ष्मणपूर्वजं च॥१०॥
“It was surely the Time-Spirit, who,
having assumed the form of a deer, beguiled
me, a woman of scanty fortune that | am, at
that time and to whom I, a stupid woman,
despatched the two sons of my father-in-
law, Laksmana, a younger brother of Sri
Rama, and Sri Rama, the eldest brother of
Laksmana. (10)
a wa सत्यव्रत दीर्घबाहो
ह्रा पूर्णचन्द्रप्रतिमानवक्त्र।
हा जीवलोकस्य fea: प्रियश्च
वध्यां न मां वेत्सि fe राक्षसानाम्॥ ११॥

“O Sri Rama of unfailing vows and long

« VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

arms, whose countenance resembles the
full moon, you, who are friendly to and
beloved of the world of living beings, do not
actually know me to have been sentenced
to death by the king of ogres. (11)
अनन्यदेवत्वमियं क्षमा च
भूमौ च शय्या नियमश्च धर्मे।
pd कृतघ्नेष्विव मानुषाणाम्॥ १२॥
“My devotion to a single deity in the
form of my husband and this forbearance,
nay, my reposing on the ground, and my
observing rules of righteousness and loyalty
to my husband—all this has proved futile
like the service rendered by human beings
to ungrateful men. (12)

मोघो fe धर्मश्चरितो ममायं
तथैकपत्नीत्वमिदं निरर्थकम्।
या त्वां न पश्यामि कृशा विवर्णा
ह्रीना त्वया संगमने निराशा॥१३॥
“Only in vain has this virtue been
practised by me and this exclusive devotion
of mine to my husband has also proved
futile in that | do not behold you and,
separated from you, have grown pale and
emaciated and lost all hope of being re-
united with you. (13)
पितुर्निदेशं नियमेन कृत्वा
वनान्निव्रत्तश्चरितव्रतश्च ।
स्त्रीभिस्तु मन्ये विपुलेक्षणाभि:
संरंस्यसे वीतभय: कृतार्थ:॥१४॥

“When, having carried out the behest
of your father according to rules and
completed your vow of fourteen years of
ascetic life, you return from the forest, rid of
all fear and accomplished of purpose, you
for your part will, | believe, revel with many
large-eyed women after marrying them. (14)

अहं तु wa त्वयि जातकामा

चिरं विनाशाय निबद्भभावा।
मोघं चरित्वाथ तपो ad च

त्यक्ष्यामि धिग्जीवितमल्पभाग्याम्॥ १५ ॥
