484

स भङ्क्त्वा तु रथं तस्य हनूमान् मारुतात्मज:।
रक्षसां कदनं चक्रे सस्कन्धविदटपैर्द्रमै:।॥। ३०॥
Having shattered his chariot, Hanuman,
sprung from the loins of the wind-god, for
his part started exterminating the ogres
with trees, inclusive of their trunks and
boughs. (30)

विभिन्नशिरसो भूत्वा राक्षसा रुधिरोक्षिता:।
wa: प्रमथिताश्चान्ये निपेतुर्धरणीतले॥ ३१॥

Their heads smashed, the ogres were
bathed in blood; while others, who were
crushed by the trees, fell down to the earth’s
surface. (31)
विद्राव्य राक्षसं सैन्यं हनूमान् मारुतात्मज:।
fr: शिखरमादाय धूम्राक्षमभिदुद्रुवे॥ ३२॥

Having dispersed the army of the ogres,
Hanuman, an offspring of the wind-god,

rushed towards Dhumraksa, seizing hold of
the top of a mountain. (32)

तमापतन्तं धूम्राक्षो गदामुद्यम्य वीर्यवान्।
विनर्दमान: सहसा हनूमन्तमभिद्रवत्॥ ३३॥

Lifting up his mace on seeing Hanuman
and rushing towards him, the powerful
Dhumraksa darted headlong towards him,
roaring. (33)
तस्य क्रुद्धस्य WATT गदां at बहुकण्टकाम्।
पातयामास धूम्राक्षो मस्तकेऽथ हनूमत:॥ ३४॥

Dhumraksa in his rage _ forthwith
brought down that mace, studded with
numerous points, on the head of the celebrated

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA +

Hanuman, who was seized with fury. (34)

ताडित: स तया at गदया भीमवेगया।
स कपिर्मारुतबलस्तं प्रहारमचिन्तयन्॥३५॥
धूम्राक्षस्य शिरोमध्ये गिरिशृङ्गमपातयत्।
a विस्फारितसर्वाङ्खो गिरिशृङ्खेण atfsa: 36 u
पपात सहसा wat विकीर्णं sa ude: |
धूम्राक्षं निहतं gear हतशेषा निशाचरा:।
त्रस्ता: प्रविविशुर्लङ्कां वध्यमाना: प्लवंगमै: 11 ३७॥
Not minding in the least the aforesaid
blow, when struck on the field of battle with
that mace, which descended with
tremendous. violence, that celebrated
monkey, who was mighty as the wind, flung
the mountain-top on the skull of Dnumraksa.
With all his limbs shattered when struck
with the mountain-top, the latter precipitately
fell to the ground like a mountain that had
broken into fragments. Seeing Dhumraksa
killed, the night-rangers, who had somehow
survived, re-entered Lanka terrified, while
being battered by the monkeys. (35—37)

स तुं पवनसुतो निहत्य शत्रून्
ada: सरितश्च संविकीर्य।

रिपुवधजनितश्रमो महात्मा
मुदमगमत् कपिभि: सुपूज्यमान:॥ ३८॥
Having exterminated his enemies
and causing streams of blood to flow, that
high-souled son of the wind-god, who
had been exhausted with the slaughter
of enemies, experienced joy while being
warmly acclaimed by the fellow monkeys.
(38)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये FERS GIA: सर्ग: ॥ 4? Il

Thus ends Canto Fifty-two in the Yuddhakanda of the glorious Ramayana
of Valmiki, the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

