178

ततो मांससमायुक्तो वायस: पर्यतुण्डयत्।
We लोष्टमुद्यम्य वारयामि स्म वायसम्॥१५॥

“‘Thereupon a crow, greedy of flesh,
began to peck at me. Picking up a clod of
earth | kept the crow back. (15)
दारयन् स च मां काकस्तत्रैव परिलीयते।

न चाप्युपारमन्मांसाद् भक्षार्थी बलिभोजन:॥ १६॥

“‘In order to pierce me, the said crow,
however, who lived on fragments of food
offered at meals, remained in hiding on that
very spot and would not leave its prey,
desirous as it was of food. (16)
उत्कर्षन्त्यां च WH क्रुद्धायां मयि पक्षिणे।
स्रंसमाने च वसने ततो Get त्वया ह्यहम्॥ १७॥
त्वया विहसिता चाहं क्रुद्धा संलज्जिता तदा।
भक्ष्यगृद्धेन काकेन दारिता त्वामुपागता॥ Ve tl

“As my skirt slipped while | was pulling
its string in order to tighten it, angry as |
was at the bird, | was actually seen by you
in that state and laughed at. | felt nettled and
abashed at that moment. Pecked once more
by the crow, who was avid of food, | sought
shelter with you. (17-18)

तत: श्रान्ताहमुत्सङ्घमासीनस्य तवाविशम्।
क्रुध्यन्तीव प्रहृष्टेन aad परिसान्त्विता॥१९॥
“‘Feeling exhausted, | sought your lap
as though angry, seated as you were, and
was duly comforted by you, fully delighted
as | was with your presence. (19)
बाष्पपूर्णमुखी we चक्षुषी परिमार्जती।
लक्षिताहं त्वया नाथ वायसेन प्रकोपिता॥ २०॥

“‘Gently wiping my eyes, my face bathed
in tears, | was marked by you, O lord, as

having been annoyed by the crow. (20)
परिश्रमाच्च सुप्ता हे राघवाङ्केऽस्म्यहं चिरम्।
पर्यायेण प्रसुप्तश्च ममाङ्के भरताग्रज:॥२१॥

“‘Nay, due to exhaustion, O Hanuman,
| lay asleep in the arms of Sri Rama (a
scion of Raghu) for long. And Sri Rama (the
eldest brother of Bharata) in his turn lay fast
asleep in my arms. (21)

« VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

a तत्र waa वायस: समुपागमत्।
ad: सुप्तप्रबुद्धां मां राघवाङ्कात् समुत्थिताम्।
वायस: सहसागम्य विददार स्तनान्तरे॥ २२॥
“‘Meantime (while Sri Rama was lying
asleep in my arms) the same crow appeared
on the scene once more. Descending all of
a sudden, the crow presently clawed me in
the breasts even as | awoke from slumber
and rose from the arms of Sri Rama, a
scion of Raghu. (22)

UA: पुनरथोत्पत्य विददार स मां भृशम्।

तत: समुत्थितो WaT मुक्तै: शोणितबिन्दुभि: । २३॥
“‘Flying up again, it forthwith tore me

grievously once more. At the touch of drops

of blood discharged from the wound, Sri

Rama presently awoke from sleep. (23)

स मां दृष्ट्वा महाबाहुर्वितुन्नां स्तनयोस्तदा।
आशीविष इव क्रुद्ध: श्वसन् वाक्यमभाषत॥ २४॥
oat ते नागनासोरु विक्षतं वै स्तनान्तरम्।
क: क्रीडति सरोषेण पञ्चवक्तेण भोगिना॥ २५॥

“‘Incensed to see me lacerated at both
the breasts, and hissing like a venomous
serpent, he then spoke as follows: ‘By
whom have your breasts been actually
wounded, O lady with thighs resembling
the proboscis of an elephant? Who is
playing with an angry five-headed serpent?’

(24-25)
वीक्षमाणस्ततस्तं a aad समवैक्षत।
we: सरुधिरैस्तीक्ष्णैर्मामेवाभिमुखं स्थितम्॥ २६॥

“‘Gazing all round, he thereupon actually

perceived that crow sitting with its face

turned towards me alone, its sharp claws
stained with blood. (26)
Ua: किल स शक्रस्य वायस: Udat वर:।
धरान्तरं गत: vist पवनस्य गतौ सम:॥ vil
“That crow, the foremost of birds, was,
they say, no other than the son of Indra (the
ruler of gods), who had quickly descended
from the heaven to the earth, vying as he
did with the wind in speed. (27)
