1042

अहं तु हृतदारश्च राज्याच्च महतश्च्युत:।
नदीकूलमिव facade लक्ष्मण॥ ५८॥
“Deprived of my wife and disinherited
from my extensive kingdom, I, however, suffer
in the same way as a river bank submerged
in water gets corroded, O Laksmana! (58)

शोकश्च मम विस्तीर्णो वर्षाश्च भृशदुर्गमा:।
Tangy महाञ्छत्रुरपार: प्रतिभाति Ane
“Nay, my grief is enormous and the
rains are exceedingly difficult to pass; while
my great enemy, Ravana, appears to me
an endless expanse. (59)
अयात्रां चैव दृष्टवेमां मार्गांश्च भृशादुर्गमान्।
प्रणते चैव सुग्रीवे न मया किंचिदीरितम्॥६०॥
“Seeing the roads extremely difficult to
tread and a martial expedition, therefore out
of the question, no demand was made by
me on Sugriva even though he was
submissive to me. (60)

अपि चापि परिक्लिष्टं Fare att: समागतम्।
आत्मकार्यगरीयस्त्वाद् वक्तुं नेच्छामि वानरम्॥ ६१॥

“| did not feel inclined to say anything to
the monkey chief, who had been sore afflicted
till the other day and was united with his wife
after a long time and also because my own
work of conducting a search for Sita was
very long and arduous. (61)

स्वयमेव fe विश्रम्य ज्ञात्वा कालमुपागतम्।
उपकारं च सुग्रीवो Acad AT संशय:॥६२॥
“Having taken adequate rest after the
heavy strain, he has had to bear in recovering
his lost kingdom and come to know of the
time for action, (viz., the end of the monsoon)
having arrived, Sugriva must of his own
accord remember the obligation | have placed
him under and try to repay it: there is no
doubt about it. (62)

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

तस्मात्कालप्रतीक्षोऽहं स्थितोऽस्मि शुभलक्षण।
सुग्रीवस्य नदीनां च प्रसादमभिकांक्षयन्॥६३॥
“Therefore, keenly seeking the goodwill
(in the shape of his inclination to take up my
work) of Sugriva as well as a favourable
turn of rivers, | am biding my time, O prince
bearing auspicious marks on your body ! (63)

उपकारेण वीरो fe प्रतीकारेण युज्यते।
अकृतज्ञोऽप्रतिकृतो हन्ति सत्त्ववतां मन:॥६४॥

“A heroic soul, who has been placed
under an obligation by a friend, is surely
seized with an inclination to pay his debt;
while an ungrateful soul who does not repay
his debt hurts the feelings of those endowed
with goodness.” (64)
अथैवमुक्त: प्रणिधाय लक्ष्मण:

कृताञ्जलिस्तत् प्रतिपूज्य भाषितम्।
sara रामं स्वभिरामदर्शनं
प्रदर्शयन् दर्शनमात्मन: PSTN KY Il

Acclaiming the aforesaid observation
of Sri Rama and reflecting awhile, Laksmana,
when told thus, replied with folded hands as
follows to Sri Rama of extremely pleasing
aspect, thereby demonstrating his good
judgment : (65)

यदुक्तमेतत् तव सर्वमीप्सितं
नरेन्द्र cal नचिराद्भरीश्चर:।
जलप्रपातं रिपुनिग्रहे धृत:॥६६॥
“Sugriva, the lord of monkeys, O ruler
of men, will before long accomplish all this
desired object of yours, which has been
pointed out by you. Awaiting the autumn,
bear you this obstruction caused by the
rains, remaining intent on the destruction of
the enemy.” (66)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये किष्किन्धाकाण्डेऽष्टाविंश: सर्ग: ॥ २८ il

Thus ends Canto Twenty-eight in the Kiskindhakanda of the glorious Ramayana of
Valmiki, the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

