782

marched in the van of the army)—
Mahakapala, Sthulaksa and Pramathi, who
was possessed of great might—rushed
towards Sri Rama together, bound as they
were with the noose of Death, the ogre
Mahakapala lifting a huge pike, Sthulaksa
holding a scimitar and Pramathi an axe.
Seeing them approaching, Sri Rama (a scion
of Raghu) for his part greeted them with
whetted and sharp-edged arrows as one
would receive newcomers arrived in one’s
presence. Sri Rama (the delight of the
Raghus) severed the head of Mahakapala,
overpowered Pramathi with innumerable
volleys of arrows and filled the large eyes of
Sthulaksa with arrows. (17—21)
स पपात edt wat विटपीव महाद्रुम:।
दूषणस्यानुगान् पञ्चसाहस्रान् कुपित: क्षणात्॥ २२॥
हत्वा तु पञ्चसाहस्रैरनयद् यमसादनम्।
दूषणं निहतं श्रुत्वा तस्य चैव पदानुगान्॥२३॥
व्यादिदेश खर: क्रुद्ध: सेनाध्यक्षान् महाबलान्।
अयं विनिहत: Gel दूषण: सपदानुग:॥ २४॥
महत्या सेनया सार्धं युद्ध्वा WH कुमानुषम्।
शस्तैर्नानाविधाकारैर्हनध्वं सर्वराक्षसा:॥ २५ ॥
Having been killed, the trio dropped down
on the ground like a large tree with branches.
Striking the five thousand followers of Dusana
with an equal number of arrows, the angry
Sri Rama for his part despatched them to the
abode of death. Enraged to hear of Dusana
and of those following at his heels having
been killed, Knara commanded the generals
of his army, who were possessed of great
might, as follows : “Here is Dusana slain in
battle as well as all those who followed at his
heels. Giving battle to Rama, the wretched
human being, with your mighty army, let you
all ogres kill him with the weapons of various
shapes.” (22—25)

एवमुक्त्वा खर: क्रुद्धो राममेवाभिदुद्रुवे।
शयेनगामी पृथुग्रीवो यज्ञशत्रुर्विहंगम:॥ २६॥
दुर्जय: करवीराक्ष: Wea: कालकार्मुक:।
हेममाली महामाली सर्पास्यो रुधिराशन:॥ २७॥

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

द्वादशैते महावीर्या बलाध्यक्षा: ससैनिका:।
राममेवाभ्यधावन्त विसृजन्त: शरोत्तमान्॥ २८॥

Saying so, the angry Khara attacked
Rama at once. Nay, Syenagami, Prthugriva,

YajhaSatru, Vihangama, Durjaya,
Karaviraksa, Parusa, Kalakarmuka,
Hemamali, Mahamali, Sarpasya and

RudhiraSana—these twelve generals also,
who were possessed of extraordinary
prowess, together with the rank and file
attacked Rama together, discharging the
best of arrows. (26—28)

aa: पावकसंकाशैर्हेमवज्रविभूषितै: |
जघान शेषं तेजस्वी तस्य सैन्यस्य सायकै:॥ २९॥

Then with his arrows encrusted with
gold and diamonds, and shining like flames
the glorious Rama destroyed the remnant of
Khara’s army. (29)

a रुक्मपुङ्खा विशिखा: सधूमा इव पावका:।

निजघ्नुस्तानि रक्षांसि वज्रा इव महाद्रुमान्॥ ३०॥
Those arrows with golden feathers,

which shone like flames emitting smoke,

made short work of those ogres even as
thunderbolts destroy large trees. (30)

रक्षसां तु wd wa: शतेनैकेन कर्णिना।

West तु सहस्रेण जघान रणमूर्धनि॥ ३१॥
In the van of the fight Sr Rama

despatched a hundred ogres with a hundred

arrows and a thousand ogres with a thousand
all atonce. (31)

तैर्भिन्नवर्माभरणाश्छिन्नभिन्नशरासना: ।

निपेतु: शोणितादिग्धा धरण्यां रजनीचरा:॥ ३२॥
With their coats of mail and ornaments

shattered and bows split into two and broken

and themselves besmeared with blood, the
night-stalkers dropped on the ground. (32)

तैर्मुक्तकेशै: समरे पतितै: शोणितोक्षितै:।
विस्तीर्णा वसुधा कृत्स्ना महावेदि: कुशैरिव॥ ३३॥
Like a large sacrificial altar with blades

of the sacred KuSa grass, the whole area
was completely strewn with the ogres fallen
