454

“In a forest what other fate than the
hardships of forest life can befall the youths,
who had never known suffering before and
who have been consigned by you to a
forest life following the wishes of Kaikeyi?

(7)
a रत्नहीनास्तरुणा: फलकाले विवासिता:।
कथं वत्स्यन्ति कृपणा: फलमूलै: कृताशना:॥ ८॥

“Exiled at a time when they should
have in the ordinary circumstances enjoyed
the fruits (amenities) of life, how shall the
poor youths, who have been deprived of all
precious things, drag their existence living
on fruits and roots? (8)

अपीदानीं स काल: स्यान्मम शोकक्षय: शिव:।
सहभार्यं सह Wat पश्येयमिह राघवम्॥९॥
“Will that happy time, marked with the
end of my grief, ever come, when | shall be
able to see Rama (a scion of Raghu)

accompanied by his wife and younger brother
back in Ayodhya? (9)

श्रुत्वैवोपस्थितौ at कदायोध्या भविष्यति।
यशस्विनी हृष्टजना सूच्छितध्वजमालिनी।॥ १०॥

“When will Ayodhya regain her pristine
glory, throb with joyous crowds and be
adorned once more with rows of towering
banners the moment it hears of the two
heroic princes, Sri Rama and Laksmana,
being present? (10)

कदा Wet नरव्याघ्रावरण्यात् पुनरागतौ।
भविष्यति पुरी हृष्टा समुद्र sa पर्वणि॥११॥

“When will the city wax jubilant again
like an ocean on a full moon night to
perceive the two princes, who are really
tigers among men, come back from the
forest? (11)

कदायोध्यां महाबाहु: पुरीं dk: प्रवेक्ष्यति।
पुरस्कृत्य रथे dat gaat गोवधूमिव॥१२॥
“When will the mighty-armed hero, Sri
Rama, enter again the city of Ayodhya placing
Sita at his head in the chariot, even as a
bull would follow a cow? (12)

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

कदा प्राणिसहस्राणि राजमार्गे ममात्मजौ।
लाजैरवकरिष्यन्ति प्रविशन्तावरिदमौ ।। १३॥

“When will thousands of men cover
with parched grains of paddy on the public
road my two sons, Rama and Laksmana,
the subduers of their enemy, entering the
city? (13)

प्रविशन्तौ कदायोध्यां द्रक्ष्यामि शुभकुण्डलौ।
उदग्रायुधनिस्रिंशौ सशृङ्गाविव पर्वतौ॥१४॥

“When shall | be able to see the two
princes, adorned with splendid earrings and
armed with excellent bows and swords,
entering Ayodhya like a pair of mountains
crowned with peaks? (14)

कदा सुमनस:कन्या द्विजातीनां फलानि च।
प्रदिशन्त्य: पुरीं हृष्टा: करिष्यन्ति प्रदक्षिणम्॥ १५॥
“When will the three darlings merrily go
round the city clockwise, receiving on the
way flowers from the hands of virgins and
fruits from those of Brahmanas? (15)

Hel परिणतो बुद्ध्या वयसा चामरप्रभा:।
अभ्युपैष्यति धर्मात्मा सुवर्ष ga लालयन्॥१६॥

“When will the pious Rama, grown ripe
in intellect and shining like a god in point of
age (eternal youth), return, fostering the
world like a good (timely) shower? (16)

नि:संशयं मया मन्ये पुरा at कदर्यया।
पातुकामेषु वत्सेषु ATG शातिता: स्तना:॥१७॥

“Undoubtedly in some past life, | believe,
O valiant king, the teats of cows were cut
off by me, mean-minded as | was, while
their calves stood waiting to suck them.
(17)
साहं गौरिव सिंहेन विवत्सा वत्सला कृता।
कैकेय्या पुरुषव्याघ्र बालवत्सेव गौर्बलात्॥ १८॥

“Fond of my child like a cow, O tiger
among men, | have for this very reason
been forcibly deprived of my child by Kaikeyi
in the same way as a cow, having a calf of
tender age, may be deprived of her calf by
a lion. (18)
