* AYODHYAKANDA +

Saying so and entering the hermitage
of Valmiki, Sita and Sri Rama, and with
folded hands, Laksmana, too, greeted sage
Valmiki. (16)

ar महर्षि: प्रमुदित: पूजयामास धर्मवित्।
आस्यतामिति चोवाच स्वागतं तं निवेद्य an १७॥

Greatly delighted and offering welcome
to Sri Rama (the principal guest), the eminent
sage, Valmiki, who knew what is right,
received them with honour and said, “Be
seated !” (17)

ततोऽब्रवीन्महाबाहुर्लक्ष्मणं लक्ष्मणाग्रज:।
संनिवेद्य यथान्यायमात्मानमृषये प्रभु:॥१८॥

Duly presenting himself to the seer
according to the rules of propriety (obtaining
in those days), the powerful Sri Rama of
mighty arms, the eldest brother of Laksmana,
then spoke as follows to Laksmana: (18)

लक्ष्मणानय दारूणि get च वराणि च।
कुरुष्वावसथं सौम्य वासे मेऽभिरतं मन:॥१९॥

“Fetch, 0 Laksmana, strong and
excellent logs of wood and erect a hut, O
gentle brother ! My mind is intent on dwelling
here.” (19)

तस्य तद्वचनं श्रुत्वा सौमित्रिर्विविधान् द्रुमान्।
आजहार ततश्चक्रे पर्णशालामरिंदम:॥ २०॥

Hearing his aforesaid command,
Laksmana (son of Sumitra) brought boughs
of various trees and with them the prince, a
subduer of his foes, erected a hut of leaves.

(20)
at निष्ठितां बद्धकटां दृष्टवा राम: सुदर्शनाम्।
शुश्रूषमाणमेकाग्रमिदं वचनमब्रवीत्॥ २१॥

503

Seeing the hut consolidated with a wall
of strong wooden stakes and thatched and
charming to look at, Sri Rama spoke as
follows to Laksmana, who stood listening
with rapt attention : (21)
ऐणेयं मांसमाहृत्य शालां यक्ष्यामहे वयम्।
कर्तव्यं वास्तुशमनं सौमित्रे चिरजीविभि:।॥ २२॥

“Fetching the pulp' of the bulb known
by the name of Gajakanda we shall propitiate
the deity presiding over the hut (roasting the
pulp and offering it as an oblation to the
deity). The rite of appeasing the evil spirit
haunting a newly-erected structure must be
gone through by those wishing to live long.

(22)

मृगं हत्वाऽऽनय fart लक्ष्मणेह शुभेक्षण।
कर्तव्य: शास्त्रदृष्टो हि विधिर्धर्ममनुस्मर॥ २३॥

“Digging out the bulb? known by the
name of Gajakanda, bring it here at once, O
fair-eyed Laksmana; for the procedure laid
down in the scriptures must be observed.
Always mind your sacred obligations.” (23)

भ्रातुर्वचनमाज्ञाय लक्ष्मण: परवीरहा।
चकार च यथोक्तं fe तं राम: पुनरब्रवीत्॥ २४॥
ऐणेयं श्रपयस्वैतच्छालां यक्ष्यामहे वयम्।
त्वर सौम्यमुहूर्तोऽयं gas दिवसो ह्ययम्॥ eI
Clearly perceiving the command of his
eldest brother, the aforesaid Laksmana, the
destroyer of hostile warriors, actually did as
he was told and Sri Rama said to him again,
“Dress this bulb, we shall propitiate the
deities (the fire-god, Parjanya and so on,
numbering fifty) presiding over the hut by
offering the dressed bulb to them. Look

1. The words `ऐणेयं मांसम्` in the above verse have been purposely taken to mean the pulp of the bulb
known by the name of Gajakanda; for if the words are interpreted otherwise in the sense of the meat of
a deer, such an interpretation would expose Sri Rama to self-contradiction inasmuch as he has already
signified his intention in the presence of his own beloved mother “to live on bulbs, roots and fruits (alone)
during the period of his exile in the forest, forswearing meat like ascetics” (II. xx. 29), reiterated this
intention to live on fruits and roots to his father in II. xxxiv. 59 and repeated the thing once more to Sage
Bharadwaja in IL.liv. 16. And since it has been said by the poet himself in praise of Sri Rama elsewhere
that he never altered his statement (रामो द्विर्नाभिभाषते) and firmly adhered to his utterances, he could not even

be conceived to have gone back upon his word.

2. The Madanapala-Nighantu treats the word ‘WT’ as an equivalent of the bulb named Gajakanda.
