562

“Indeed, having got you for his wife,
my highly illustrious father, King DaSaratha,
who was true to his promise and was sore
stricken with acute agony, born of separation
from his eldest son, has passed away.

(6)
विनाशितो महाराज: पिता A धर्मवत्सल:।
कस्मात् प्रव्राजितो राम: कस्मादेव वनं गत:॥ ७॥

“Wherefore was the Emperor, my father,
who was so lovingly devoted to duty, deprived
of his life by you? For what precise reason
was Sri Rama sent into exile and he
proceeded to the forest? (7)

कौसल्या च सुमित्रा च पुत्रशोकाभिपीडिते।
gent यदि जीवेतां प्राप्य त्वां जननीं amc
“Having got you, my mother for their
co-wife, Kausalya and Sumitra too have
been tormented with grief caused by
separation from their own son. They would
indeed accomplish something hard if they
survive any longer. (8)

नन्वार्योऽपि च eaten त्वयि वृत्तिमनुत्तमाम्।
वर्तते गुरुव्रत्तिज्ञो यथा mat वर्तते॥९॥

“Surely, my elder brother, Sri Rama,
too, whose mind is given to piety and who
knows full well how to serve his elders,
rendered the best services to you as he did
to his own mother ! (9)

तथा ज्येष्ठा fe मे माता कौसल्या दीर्घदर्शिनी ।
vata धर्मं समास्थाय भगिन्यामिव वर्तते॥१०॥

“Even so, ॥॥ _ seniormost mother,
Kausalya, who takes a long-range view of
things, behaved towards you as towards
her own sister, following, as she does, the
principles of right conduct. (10)
तस्या: Ut महात्मानं चीरवल्कलवाससम्।
प्रस्थाप्य वनवासाय Ha पापे न शोचसे॥११॥

“Having sent her high-souled son, clad
in tatters and the bark of trees, into exile in
a forest, wherefore do you not grieve, O
sinful woman? (11)

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

अपापदर्शिनं शूरं कृतात्मानं यशस्विनम्।
प्रव्राज्य चीरवसनं किं नु पश्यसि कारणम्॥१२॥
“Having sent into exile, clad in the bark
of trees, the illustrious hero, who never
detected others’ sin and had mastered his
self, what gain on earth do you expect? (12)

ern विदितो मन्ये न ass राघवं यथा।
तथा ह्यनर्थो राज्यार्थं त्वयाऽऽनीतो महानयम्॥ १३॥

“To you, who are full of greed for power
and pelf, | am not known, | believe, in my
reality as to how devoted | am to Sri Rama
(a scion of Raghu). That is why this great
tragedy has been enacted by you for the
sake of sovereignty. (13)

ae fe पुरुषव्याघ्रावपश्यन् रामलक्ष्मणौ।
केन शक्तिप्रभावेण राज्यं रक्षितुमुत्सहे॥१४॥

“Failing to perceive the two tigers among
men, Sri Rama and Laksmana, by virtue of
what strength can | venture to protect the
kingdom of Ayodhya? (14)
तं fe नित्यं महाराजो बलवन्तं महौजसम्।
उपाश्रितोऽभूद् धर्मात्मा मेरुर्मेरुवनं यथा॥१५॥

“Even the Emperor, whose mind was
given to piety, ever depended on the
might of the powerful Sri Rama—who is
possessed of extraordinary strength—just
as Mount Meru depends for its protection
against inroads on the forest grown on it.

(15)
ase कथमिमं भारं महाधुर्यसमुद्यतम्।
दम्यो धुरमिवासाद्य सहेयं केन चौजसा॥१६॥

“How and with what stamina shall ।,
whose only strength is Sri Rama, sustain
this burden of kingship any more than a calf
would stand the strain on getting a load,
borne with ease by a giant bull? (16)

अथवा मे भवेच्छक्तिर्योगैर्बुद्धिबलेन वा।
सकामां न करिष्यामि त्वामहं पुत्रगद्धिनीम्॥ १७॥
“Or, even if such capacity could be
brought out in me through contrivances or
through intellectual calibre, | shall never
