334

prey and reptiles and having duly found
honey does not drink it. (2)

ईश्वरस्येश्वर: कोऽस्ति aa शत्रुनिर्बहण।
रमस्व सह ade शत्रूनाक्रम्य मूर्धसु॥ ३॥
“Who can lord it over you, a sovereign,
O destroyer of foes? Setting your foot on
the heads of your enemies, revel with
Sita (a princess of the Videha territory).

(3)

बलात् कुक्कुटवृत्तेन Wadet महाबल।
आक्रम्याक्रम्य सीतां वै तां Tet च रमस्व च॥ ४॥

“Act in the manner of a cock, using force
against her, O ruler endowed with
extraordinary might! Assaulting Sita again
and again, enjoy her and revel with her. (4)

लब्धकामस्य ते पश्चादागमिष्यति किं भयम्।
प्राप्तमप्राप्तकालं वा ad प्रतिविधास्यसे॥ ५॥

“Once you have attained your desired
end, what peril will come upon you
afterwards? And you will surely be able to
meet every risk, no matter whether it is
already present or is yet to come. (5)
कुम्भकर्ण: सहास्माभिरिन्द्रजिच्च महाबल:।
प्रतिषेधयितुं शक्तौ सवज्रमपि वज्रिणम्॥६॥

“In conjunction with us Kumbhakarna
and Indrajit, who are endowed with
extraordinary might, are capable of keeping
back even Indra, armed with his thunderbolt.

(6)
उपप्रदानं सान्त्वं वा भेदं वा कुशलै: कृतम्।
समतिक्रम्य दण्डेन सिद्धिमर्थेषु रोचये॥७॥

“Leaving aside gift, conciliation or even
the policy of sowing dissension in the
enemy’s ranks, resorted to by the wise, |
prefer to achieve success in our concerns
by use of force. (7)
इह Wa at सर्वाञ्छत्रूंस्तव महाबल।
वशे शस्त्रप्रतापेन करिष्यामो न संशय:॥८॥

“We shall reduce to submission by the
strength of our arms all your enemies

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA +

arrived here, O ruler endowed with
extraordinary might! There is no doubt about
it.” (8)
एवमुक्तस्तदा राजा महापाशर्वेन रावण:।
तस्य सम्पूजयन् वाक्यमिदं वचनमब्रवीत्॥९॥
Acclaiming his counsel when exhorted
in the foregoing words by Mahaparswa on
that occasion, King Ravana made the
following reply: (9)
महापार्श्व निबोध त्वं tweet किंचिदात्मन:।
चिरव्त्तं तदाख्यास्ये यदवाप्तं पुरा मया॥१०॥
“Hear you, 0 Mahaparswa, of a certain

secret of mine, of an incident which took
place long ago, of a fruit which was

gathered by me in the past. | shall
presently confide it to you. (10)
पितामहस्य भवनं गच्छन्तीं पुञ्जिकस्थलाम्।

चञ्चूर्यमाणामद्राक्षमाकाशेऽग्निशिखामिव ॥११॥

“Once | beheld a celestial nymph,
Pufjikasthala by name, flashing like a flame
and sneaking away for fear of me through
the heavens to the abode of Brahma (the
grandfather of the entire creation, which
was evolved by his mind-born sons, Marici
and others). (11)

सा Weel मया भुक्ता Hat विवसना aa: |
स्वयम्भूभवनं प्राप्ता लोलिता नलिनी यथा॥१२॥

“She was stripped of her garment and
ravished by me. She then reached the
abode of Brahma, the self-born creator, like
a lotus plant violently shaken by an elephant.

(12)

तच्च तस्य तथा मन्ये ज्ञातमासीन्महात्मन:।
अथ संकुपितो वेधा मामिदं वाक्यमब्रवीत्॥ १३॥

“The aforesaid incident, | presume,
came to be known precisely as it had
occurred to that exalted soul. Highly
enraged, the creator forthwith addressed
the following words to me: (13)
