528

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA +

चतु:षष्टितम: सर्ग:
Canto LXIV

DaSaratha continues to tell Kausalya how, having sought the presence of
the aged parents of the deceased, he apprised them of the sad incident
and escorted them to the river bank, where their son lay dead; how,
clasping the boy to their bosom, they both piteously wailed and
offered libations of water to his spirit for its benefit; how, invested
with an ethereal body, the spirit ascended to heaven while
consoling the aged couple and finally how, having cursed
the king that he too would meet his death in his agony of
separation from his son, the ascetic couple gave up
the ghost and attained the Supreme. Having thus
related the story of his imprecation and loudly
lamenting, the Emperor breathes his last with
the thought of Sri Rama foremost in his mind

वधमप्रतिरूपं तु महर्षेस्तस्य राघव:।
विलपन्नेव धर्मात्मा कौसल्यामिदमब्रवीत्॥१॥

Recalling how that great seer was killed
undeservedly by him, the pious-minded
DaSaratha, a scion of Raghu, for his part
continued to speak as follows to Kausalya,
mourning all the time for his son: (1)
तदज्ञानान्महत्पापं कृत्वा संकुलितेन्द्रिय:।
एकस्त्वचिन्तयं बुद्ध्या कथं नु सुकृतं भवेत्॥ २॥

“Having perpetrated through ignorance
that egregious sin, | thought with the help of
my reason, my _ senses being utterly
confounded and | being alone, how good
luck may yet attend on me. (2)
ततस्तं घटमादाय yor परमवारिणा।
आश्रमं तमहं प्राप्य यथाख्यातपथं गत:॥ ३॥

“Taking that pitcher (left by the
deceased) when it had been filled with purified
water of the Sarayu, and proceeding along
the track already pointed out by the hermit
boy, | reached the hermitage referred to by
the deceased. (3)
wae 8 दुर्बलावन्धौ वृद्धावपरिणायकौ।
saya तस्य पितरौ लूनपक्षाविव द्विजौ॥४॥

“There | saw his feeble, blind and aged
parents, with none to conduct them here
and there and resembling a pair of birds
whose wings had been clipped. (4)

तन्निमित्ताभिरासीनौ कथाभिरपरिश्रमौ ।
तामाशां मत्कृते हीनावुपासीनावनाथवत्॥७५॥
“Remaining occupied with talks

concerning their only son, they sat free
from ennui and like two forlorn persons they
fondly hugged the hope of meeting their
son, though deprived of it through my doing.
(5)

शोकोपहतचित्तश्च भयसंत्रस्तचेतन: |
तच्चाश्रमपदं गत्वा भूय: शोकमहं गत:॥६॥
“My intellect being already clouded
with grief and my mind dismayed through
apprehension of incurring the displeasure of
the ascetic couple, | fell a prey to further
grief on reaching the site of that hermitage.
(6)

पदशब्दं तु मे श्रुत्वा मुनिर्वाक्यमभाषत।
fe चिरायसि मे ua पानीयं क्षिप्रमानय॥७॥
“Hearing my footfalls, the sage for
his part spoke as follows: ‘Why are you
