884

हा लक्ष्मण महाबाहो पश्यसे त्वं प्रियां क्वचित्।
a प्रिये aa गता भद्रे a सीतेति पुन: पुन:॥ ३५॥
इत्येवं विलपन् राम: परिधावन् वनाद् वनम्।
क्वचिदुद्भ्रमते वेगात् क्वचिद् विभ्रमते बलात्॥ ३६ Ul

“Ah, mighty-armed Laksmana, do you
perceive my darling anywhere? Ah Sita, my
darling, where have you gone, O blessed
one?” Wailing in these words again and
again and running about from grove to grove,
Sri Rama now sprang up with impetuosity
and now violently revolved like a whirlwind.

(35-36)
क्वचिन्मत्त इवाभाति कान्तान्वेषणतत्पर:।
स वनानि नदी: ster गिरिप्रस्रवणानि च।
काननानि च at भ्रमत्यपरिसंस्थित:॥ ३७॥

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

Intent on finding out his darling, he now
appeared as though drunk and (now) he
would range with rapidity forests, rivers,
mountains, cataracts falling from mountains
and woodlands too, knowing no rest. (37)

det स गत्वा विपुलं महद् at
परीत्य सर्वं त्वथ मैथिलीं प्रति।

अनिष्ठिताश: स चकार मार्गणे
पुन: प्रियाया: परमं परिश्रमम्॥ ३८ ॥
Then entering the large and dense forest
and forthwith ransacking it all with a view to
tracing out Sita, the princess of Mithila, the
aforesaid Sri Rama, who had not yet given
up hope of finding out Sita, once more put
forth great exertion for tracing out his darling.
(38)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्येऽरण्यकाण्डे षष्टितम: सर्ग: ॥ Go ॥

Thus ends Canto Sixty in the Aranyakanda of the glorious Ramayana of Valmiki, the
work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

एकषष्टितम: सर्ग:
Canto LXI

The quest of Sri Rama and Laksmana for Sita; not finding her,
Sri Rama gets unnerved

दृष्टवाऽऽश्रमपदं शून्यं WAT दशरथात्मज:।
रहितां पर्णशालां च प्रविद्धान्यासनानि च॥१॥
अदृष्ट्वा at aed संनिरीक्ष्य च सर्वश:।
उवाच WH: प्राक्रुश्य wa रुचिरौ भुजौ॥ २॥
Seeing the site of the hermitage desolate,
the hut made of leaves deserted and the
grassy seats cast away, nay, fully casting
his eyes all round and yet not finding Sita (a
princess of the Videha territory) there, Sri
Rama spoke as follows to Laksmana, calling
out Sita at the top of his voice and lifting up
his charming arms : (1-2)

क्व नु लक्ष्मण वैदेही कं वा देशमितो गता।
केनाहृता वा सौमित्रे भक्षिता केन वा प्रिया॥ ३॥

“Where on earth, O Laksmana, could

Sita, a princess of the Videha kingdom, be?
Nay, to what territory has she gone from
this place? Or, by whom, O darling of Sumitra,
has she been borne away or by whom has
she been devoured? (3)

वृक्षेणावार्य यदि मां ata हसितुमिच्छसि।
अलं ते हसितेनाद्य मां भजस्व सुदु:खितम्॥४॥
(Addressing fantasy of Sita, he
continued) “If, hiding yourself behind a tree,
O Sita, you want to jest with me, have done
with your jest today. Pray, betake yourself
to me, sore distressed as | am. (4)

a: परिक्रीडसे सीते बिश्वस्तैर्मृगपोत्तकॆ;।
Ud हीनास्त्वया सौम्ये ध्यायन्त्यस्राविलेक्षणा: ॥ ५ ॥

“Bereft of you, the fearless offsprings
