582

तं प्रेक्ष्य भरत: क्रुद्धं शत्रुघ्नमिदमब्रवीत्।
अवध्या: सर्वभूतानां प्रमदा: क्षम्यतामिति॥ २१॥
Perceiving Satrughna enraged, Bharata
spoke to him as follows: “Women are
undeserving of death at the hands of all
men. Let her be forgiven as such. (21)
यदि At धार्मिको रामो नासूयेन्मातृघातकम्॥ २२॥
“| myself would have slain this sinful
Kaikeyi of vicious conduct had it not been
for the fact that the pious Sri Rama is sure
to get angry with me for my having killed my
own mother. (22)

इमामपि edt कुब्जां यदि जानाति wera: |
wat च मां चैव धर्मात्मा नाभिभाषिष्यते ध्रुवम्॥ २३ ॥

Nay, Sri Rama, whose mind is given to
piety, will surely never speak not only with
you but also with me if he ultimately comes
to know even of this humpback having
been killed by us.” (23)

भरतस्य TA: श्रुत्वा VAT लक्ष्मणानुज:।
न्यवर्तत ततो दोषात् AT मुमोच च मूर्छिताम्॥ २४॥

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

Hearing the admonition of Bharata,
Satrughna, the younger brother of Laksmana,
desisted from the aforesaid crime and left
her almost unconscious. (24)
सा पादमूले कैकेय्या went निपपात ह।
नि:श्चसन्ती सुदु:खार्ता Poot विललाप Ti २५॥

The notorious Manthara, it is said, fell
at the soles of Kaikeyi’s feet. (Nay) drawing
a deep audible breath expressive of
sadness, sore stricken as she was with
sorrow, she piteously wailed: so the tradition
goes. (25)

शत्रुघ्नविक्षेपविमूढसंज्ञां
समीक्ष्य कुब्जां भरतस्य माता।
क्रौञ्चीं विलग्नामिव वीक्षमाणाम्॥ २६ ॥

Perceiving the humpback stunned
because of her having been dragged to and
fro by Satrughna, and wearing a wretched
look and looking on her boss like a female
crane released from captivity, Bharata’s
mother slowly calmed her. (26)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्येऽयोध्याकाण्डेऽष्टसप्ततितम: सर्ग: ॥ ७८ il

Thus ends Canto Seventy-eight in the Ayodhyakanda of the glorious Ramayana of
Valmiki, the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

Canto LXXIX

On the fourteenth day the foremost of counsellors entreat Bharata to
accept the throne. Turning down their entreaty, Bharata, who is keen
to bring Sri Rama back to Ayodhya, urges them to detail expert
engineers to construct a road, bridges and causeways etc.,
to facilitate his journey to the place of Sri Rama’s abode

ad: प्रभातसमये दिवसेऽथ चतुर्दशे।
समेत्य राजकर्तारो भरतं वाक्यमब्रुवन्॥१॥
Coming together on the fourteenth day
at daybreak, the king’s counsellors forthwith
spoke to Bharata as follows: (1)

गतो दशरथ: स्वर्गं यो नो गुरुतरो गुरु:।
रामं प्रव्राज्य वै ज्येष्ठं लक्ष्मणं च महाबलम्॥ २॥
“Alas, having sent into exile his eldest
son, Sri Rama, as well as Laksmana, who
is possessed of extraordinary might,
