* BALAKANDA +

who were possessed of immense glory,
entered the city and, placing the bow ahead,
came out of the city. (3)

मञ्जूषामष्टचक्रां तां समूहुस्ते कथंचन॥४॥
Five thousand unusually tall and well-
built men somehow managed to propel the

chest containing the bow, mounted on eight
wheels. (4)

तामादाय सुमञ्जूषामायसीं यत्र तद्भधनु:।
सुरोपमं ते जनकमूचुर्नृपतिमन्त्रिण:॥५॥

Taking with them that iron chest of good
design, in which the said bow had been
placed, those counsellors of the king said to
Janaka, who resembled a god in lustre : (5)
इदं धनुर्वरॆ राजन् पूजितं सर्वराजभि:।
मिथिलाधिप राजेन्द्र दर्शनीयं यदीच्छसि॥ ६॥

“This superb bow, O king, which is
worshipped by all the kings, may kindly be
shown to Sri Rama and Laksmana, if you
will, O ruler of Mithila, O king of kings !” (6)

तेषां Ta aa: श्रुत्वा कृताञ्जलिरभाषत।
विश्वामित्रं महात्मानं तावुभौ रामलक्ष्मणौ॥७॥
Hearing their prayer, the king submitted
with folded-hands to the high-souled
ViSwamitra and both the aforesaid princes,
Sri Rama and Laksmana: (7)
धनुर्वरॆ ब्रह्मञ्जनकैरभिपूजितम्।
राजळ्ळिभश्च महावीर्यैरशक्तै: पूरितं तदा॥८॥
“This excellent bow, O holy Brahmana,
has been worshipped by the Janakas and
extolled by kings, who were unable to bend
it, though they were very powerfull. (8)

नैतत् सुरगणा: wd सासुरा न च राक्षसा:।
गन्धर्वयक्षप्रवरा: सकिन्नरमहोरगा: ॥ ९ ॥
aa गतिर्मानुषाणां च धनुषोऽस्य प्रपूरणे।
आरोपणे समायोगे वेपने तोलने तथा॥१०॥
“Not even hosts of gods _ including

demons nor ogres nor the foremost of
Gandharvas and Yaksas including Kinnaras

253

and great Nagas were able to string it. How
then can there be any capacity in poor human
beings to bend this bow, string it, fitan arrow
to it, vibrate its string and toss it in their palms
in order to estimate its weight? (9-10)
दर्शयैतन्महाभाग अनयो राजपुत्रयो:॥११॥

“This bow, the best of all, has been
brought before you, O jewel among sages !
Kindly show it now, O highly blessed one,
to these two princess.” (11)

विश्वामित्र: सरामस्तु strat जनकभाषितम्।
वत्स WA धनु: पश्य Bit राघवमब्रवीत्॥१२॥

Hearing the request of Janaka alongwith
Sri Rama, Viswamitra spoke to the latter as
follows : “Child Rama, behold the bow !”(12)

महर्षेर्वचनाद् wat aa तिष्ठति ag: |
मञ्जूषां Aaa दृष्टवा धनुरथाब्रवीत्॥१३॥
Opening at the instance of Viswamitra,
the eminent seer, the chest in which the
famous bow lay encased, and beholding
the bow, Sri Rama forthwith said : (13)
sd Rod सं ; णिना।
यत्नवांश्च भविष्यामि तोलने पूरणेऽपि aru exit
“| hereby hold with my hand this
excellent heavenly bow and shall try to toss
it on my palms and even to bend it.” (14)

बाढमित्यब्रवीद् राजा मुनिश्च समभाषत।
लीलया स धनुर्मध्ये जग्राह वचनान्मुने:॥१५॥
“Amen!” said the king and the sage
too dittoed the remark. At the instance of
the sage Sri Rama sportfully seized the
bow at the middle. (15)
आरोपयत् स धर्मात्मा सलीलमिव Aa: uke
Nay, the celebrated scion of Raghu,
whose mind is given to righteousness, strung
that bow as though in sport while a great
mass of populace stood looking on. (16)

आरोपयित्वा मौर्वीं च पूरयामास तद्धनु:।
तद् बभञ्ज धनुर्मध्ये नरश्रेष्ठो महायशा:॥१७॥
