* SUNDARAKANDA +

तस्योरुवेगोन्मथिता: पादपा: पुष्पशालिन:।
निपेतुर्भूतले भग्ना:; शाक्रायुधहता इव॥४४॥
Violently shaken and broken by the
impetus of his thighs, trees charming with
blossom fell to the ground as though struck
by Indra’s thunderbolt. (44)
सिंहानां निनदो sitar नभो भिन्दन् हि शुश्रुवे॥ ४५ ॥
The terrible roar of lions endowed with
great vigour, dwelling in the interior of caves
and subjected to pressure was heard rending
the skies, as it were. (45)

त्रस्तव्याविद्ध्वसना व्याकुलीकृतभूषणा:।
विद्याधर्य: समुत्पेतु: सहसा धरणीधरात्॥४६॥
Vidyadhara women rose all of a sudden
from the mountain, their raiment in disorder
through fear and ornaments fallen off. (46)

अतिप्रमाणा बलिनो दीप्तजिह्वा महाविषा:।
निपीडितशिरोग्रीवा व्यवेष्टन्तं महाहय:॥४७॥

Large mighty snakes, immense in size
and highly poisonous, with flaming tongues,
their hoods and necks severely pressed,
lay coiled. (47)

245

किंनरोरगगन्धर्वयक्षविद्याधरास्तथा ।
पीडितं तं नगवरं त्यक्त्वा गगनमास्थिता:॥४८॥
Deserting that jewel among mountains,
subjected to extraordinary pressure, Kinnaras,
Nagas, Gandharvas, Yaksas and Vidyadharas
took their stand in the airspace. (48)

स च after: sitar बलिना तेन tifsa:
सवृक्षशिखरोदग्र: प्रविवेश रसातलम्॥४९॥

Nay, pressed by the mighty Hanuman,
that glorious mountain, conspicuous with its
peaks crowned with trees, sank into the
bowels of the earth. (49)

दशयोजनविस्तारस्तिंशद्योजनमुच्छित: ।
धरण्यां समतां ad: A AYA धराधर:॥५०॥
Ten Yojanas (or eighty miles) in extent
and thirty Yojanas (or two hundred and forty
miles) in height, the aforesaid mountain got
level with the earth. (50)

a लिलङ्घयिषुर्भीमं सलीलं लवणार्णवम्।

कल्लोलास्फालवेलान्तमुत्पपात AMT BT UG I
Eager to leap sportingly across the

formidable salty sea, whose shores were

being lashed by its waves, the said monkey,
Hanuman, sprang in the airspace. (51)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये सुन्दरकाण्डे
षट्पञ्चाश: सर्ग: ॥ ५६ Il

Thus ends Canto Fifty-six of the Sundarakanda in the glorious Ramayana of Valmiki,
the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

