920

tricks after carefully observing them. Then
he ranged Rasatala (the penultimate celestial
region) in search of the city of Varuna. (16)

ततोऽश्मनगरं नाम कालकेयैरधिष्ठितम्।
गत्वा तु कालकेयांश्च Sa AA बलोत्कटान्॥ १७॥
शूर्पणख्याश्च भर्तारमसिना प्राच्छिनत् तदा।
Valet च बलवन्तं च विद्युज्जिह्वं बलोत्कटम्॥ १८ I
जिह्वया संलिहन्तं च राक्षसं समरे तदा।
तं विजित्य मुहूर्तेन जघ्ने दैत्यांश्चतुशतम्॥१९॥
Reaching the city named ASmanagara,
inhabited by the Kalakeyas, and making
short work there of the latter, who were
proud of their might, Ravana for his part
thereupon cut to pieces with his sword then
and there, his mighty — brother-in-law
Vidyujjinva, the husband of his _ sister,
Surpanakha, who was proud of his strength
and was going to lick the ogre to death then
and there on the battlefield. Having conquered
him, Ravana exterminated four hundred of
the Daityas in less than an hour. (17—19)

तत: पाण्डुरमेघाभं कैलासमिव भास्वरम्।
वरुणस्यालयं दिव्यमपश्यद् राक्षसाधिप:॥ २०॥
Thereupon the suzerain lord of the ogres
saw the heavenly abode of Varuna (the god
of water) which looked like a white cloud
and shone like Mount Kailasa. (20)

ad च पयस्तत्र सुरभिं गामवस्थिताम्।
यस्या: पयोऽभिनिष्पन्दात् क्षीरोदो ATT सागर: ॥ २१॥
ददर्श रावणस्तत्र गोवृषेन्द्रवरारणिम्।
यस्माच्चन्द्र: प्रभवति शीतरश्मिर्निशाकर:॥ २२॥
a समाश्रित्य जीवन्ति फेनपा: परमर्षय:।
अमृतं यत्र चोत्पन्नं स्वधा च स्वधभोजिनाम्॥ २३॥

Ravana also saw stationed there the
cow of plenty pouring out milk (from her
teats) called Surabhi, the mother of the
foremost of bulls (the mount of Lord Siva),
from the flow of whose milk comes into
existence the ocean named Ksiroda (the
ocean of milk) from which springs up the
moon of cool rays—who ushers in the night—
nay, on which depend the highest Rsis (the

« VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

seers of Vedic Mantras) living on the froth
of milk and in which appears nectar (the
food of the immortals) and Swadha, the food
of the manes. (21—23)
यां Gated नरा लोके सुरभिं नाम नामत:।
प्रदक्षिणं तु तां कृत्वा रावण: परमाद्भुताम्।
प्रविवेश महाघोरं गुप्तं बहुविधैर्बलै:॥ २४॥
Walking clockwise round that most
wonderful cow, whom human beings on this
mortal plane speak of by the name of Surabhi,
Ravana for his part deeply penetrated into
the exceedingly formidable domain of Varuna
(the god of water), protected by troops of
various kinds. (24)
ततो धाराशताकीर्णं शारदाभ्रनिभं तदा।
नित्यप्रहष्टं ददरृशे वरुणस्य गृहोत्तमम्॥ २५॥
Thereupon he saw on that occasion the
excellent dwelling of Varuna, surrounded by

hundreds of waterfalls, shining like an autumnal
cloud and always highly delightful. (25)

ततो हत्वा बलाध्यक्षान् समरे तैश्च ताडित:।
अब्रवीच्च Aa योधान् राजा शीघ्रं निवेद्यताम्॥ २६ ॥

Having thereupon struck down the
generals of Varuna’s army on the battlefield
and struck in turn by them, Ravana then
said to the former’s warriors: “Let your ruler
be speedily notified (in the following words):

(26)

युद्धार्थी रावण: प्राप्तस्तस्य युद्धं प्रदीयताम्।
वदवा न भयं तेऽस्ति निर्जितोऽस्मीति साञ्जलि: It २७॥
‘Seeking an encounter, Ravana has
arrived at your door; battle may be given to
him or admit with joined palms that you
stand defeated. Then there is no fear for
you.’ (27)
एतस्मिन्नन्तरे Boel वरुणस्य महात्मन:।
पुत्रा: पौत्राश्च निष्क्रामन् गौश्च पुष्कर एव च॥ २८॥
In the meantime provoked to anger,
issued forth the sons and grandsons of the

high-souled Varuna as well as their two
generals, Gau and Puskara. (28)
