* AYODHYAKANDA +

“If Bharata gets delighted to receive
this sovereignty free from hindrance, let not
that which he offers to me after my death
by way of obsequial oblations intended for
his departed ancestors reach me in the
other world.” (9)

अथ रेणुसमुद्ध्वस्तं समुत्थाप्य नराधिपम्।
न्यवर्तत तदा देवी कौसल्या शोककर्शिता॥१०॥
Forthwith lifting up the king, who was
soiled with dust due to his having toppled
down, Queen Kausalya, who had been
emaciated through grief, then returned to
the palace with the king. (10)

हत्वेव ब्राह्मणं कामात् स्पृष्टवाग्निमिव पाणिना।
अन्वतप्यत धर्मात्मा Ut संचिन्त्य राघवम्॥११॥
Thinking deeply of his son, Sri Rama,
a scion of Raghu, DaSaratha (of pious mind)
gave way to repentance for having sent
him into exile under pressure from Kaikeyl,
even as one is stung with remorse on
having voluntarily killed a Brahmana or on
touching a blazing fire with one’s own hand.
(11)

Fada fata सीदतो रथवर्त्मसु।
Tat नातिबभौ रूपं ग्रस्तस्यांशुमतो यथा॥१२॥

The appearance of the king, who, turning
back again and again, exerted himself to gaze
on the path which the chariot of Sri Rama
had taken, did not look charming any more
than the orb of the sun in eclipse. (12)
विललाप स दु:खार्त: frat पुत्रमनुस्मरन्।
नगरान्तमनुप्राप्तं बुद्ध्वा पुत्रमथाब्रवीत्॥१३॥

Thinking all the time of his beloved
son, Sri Rama, he lamented, stricken with
agony as he was. Coming to know of his
son having reached the outskirts of the city,
he then spoke as follows: (13)
वाहनानां च मुख्यानां वहतां तं ममात्मजम्।
पदानि पथि दृश्यन्ते स महात्मा न GVA १४॥

“The marks of the hoofs of the excellent
horses drawing the chariot of my celebrated

451

son are no doubt seen on the road, but
that high-souled prince is no longer seen.
(14)

a सुखेनोपधानेषु शेते चन्दनरूषित:।
वरीज्यमानो महार्हाभि: स्त्रीभिर्मम सुतोत्तम:॥१५॥
स Wi क्वचिदेवाद्य व्रृक्षमूलमुपाश्रित:।
काष्ठं वा यदि वाश्मानमुपधाय शयिष्यते॥१६॥
“That jewel among my sons, who,
having been smeared all over with sandal-
paste, used to repose comfortably on
cushions and pillows, while being fanned by
women possessed of great comeliness and
adorned with costly jewels, will surely lie
down today at some unknown place at the
foot of a tree resting his head on a block of
wood or stone! (15-16)

उत्थास्यति च मेदिन्या: कृषपण: पांसुगुण्ठित:।
विनि:श्वसन् प्रस्रवणात् करेणूनामिवर्षभ:॥ १७॥

“Nay, at the close of night he will rise
from the bare ground in a wretched condition,
enveloped in dust and exhaling audibly like
a leader of elephants rising from beside a
spring. (17)

द्रक्ष्यन्ति नूनं पुरुषा दीर्घबाहुं वनेचरा:।
राममुत्थाय गच्छन्तं लोकनाथमनाथवत्॥१८॥
“Undoubtedly people living in the forest
will behold Rama, the protector of the world,
who is possessed of long arms, rising from
sleep in the forest and going forth like one
forlorn. (18)

सा Tt जनकस्येष्टा सुता सुखसदोचिता।
कण्टकाक्रमणक्लान्ता वनमद्य गमिष्यति॥ १९॥
“That beloved daughter of Janaka, who
is ever worthy of all kinds of amenities, will
surely walk today to the forest barefooted
and, therefore, injured by treading on thorns.
(19)

अनभिज्ञा वनानां सा नूनं भयमुपैष्यति।
श्वपदानर्दितं श्रुत्वा गम्भीरं रोमहर्षणम्॥२०॥
“Unacquainted as she is with the woods,
she will doubtless be struck with fear to
