866

निशाचरैस्ताड्यमानो मीनैरिव महोदधि:।

शार्ङ्गमायम्य दुर्धर्षो राक्षसेभ्योऽसृजच्छरान्॥७॥

“Attacked by the Raksasas, as the
ocean is lashed by fishes, Lord Visnu, the
invincible, pulled the string of His bow known
as the Sarnga and discharged arrows at the

Raksasas. (7)
we: पूर्णायतोत्सृष्टैर्वज्रकल्यैर्मनोजवै: ।

चिच्छेद विष्णुर्निशितै: शतशोऽथ सहस्रश:॥ ८॥

By means of sharp arrows hard like
adamant and having the speed of the mind,
shot from the bow, whose string was pulled
to the extreme length, Visnu mangled to
pieces the Raksasas in their hundreds and
thousands. (8)

विद्राव्य शरवर्षेण वर्षं वायुरिवोत्थितम्।
पाञ्चजन्यं महाशङ्खं प्रदध्मौ पुरुषोत्तम:॥९॥
Having dispersed the Raksasas by the
shower of arrows, even as wind disperses
the rainbearing clouds, Purusottama blew
His mighty conch, Paficajanya. (9)

सोऽम्बुजो हरिणा sara: सर्वप्राणेन शङ्खराट्।
wea भीमनिर्ह्यदस्त्रैलोक्यं व्यथयन्निव॥१०॥

That conch, the best of its kind, blown
with all His might by Visnu, produced a
terrific noise, thereby causing agony to the
three worlds, as it were. (10)

शङ्खराजरव: सोऽथ त्रासयामास राक्षसान्।
मृगराज इवारण्ये समदानिव कुञ्जरान्॥११॥
The terrific sound produced by the best
of conches frightened the Raksasas even
as a lion roaring in a forest would frighten
the elephants in rut. (11)

न शेकुरश्वा: संस्थातुं विमदा: कुञ्जराऽभवन्।
स्यन्दनेभ्यश्च्युता वीरा: शङ्खरावितदुर्बला:॥१२॥
Getting unnerved on hearing the noise
of the conch, horses were unable to stand,
elephants lost their fury and soldiers slipped
from their chariots. (12)

शार्ङ्गचापविनिर्मुक्ता वज्रतुल्यानना: INT: |
विदार्य तानि रक्षांसि सुपुङ्खा विविशु: क्षितिम्॥ १३॥

« VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

The beautifully-feathered arrows shot
from the Sarnga bow, with their heads hard
like adamant, cleaving the bodies of the
Raksasas entered the ground. (13)

भिद्यमाना: शरै: संख्ये नारायणकरच्युतै:।
निपेतू राक्षसा भूमौ ser वज्रहता इव॥ १४॥
Being pierced in battle by the arrows
shot from the hands of Narayana, the
Raksasas fell on the ground like mountains
struck by thunderbolts. (14)

व्रणानि परगात्रेभ्यो विष्णुचक्रकृतानि हि।
STITH क्षरन्ति धाराभि: स्वर्णधारा इवाचला: ॥ १५ UI
Blood gushed out of the wounds caused
on the bodies of the enemies by Visnu’s discus
like streams of ochre from mountains. (15)

शङ्खराजरवश्चापि शार्ङ्गचापरवस्तथा।
राक्षसानां रवांश्चापि wad बैष्णवो रव:॥१६॥

The noise of the best of conches, the
twang of the bow Sarnga and the war-cry of
Visnu (all combined) drowned the noise
produced by the Raksasas. (16)
तेषां शिरोधरान् धूताञ्छरध्वजधनूंषि च।
रथान् पताकास्तूणीरांश्चिच्छेद स हरि: WU १७॥

By means of His arrows the said Sri
Hari cut down their unsteady necks, arrows,

banners, bows, chariots, pennants and
quivers. (17)
सूर्यादिव करा घोरा वार्योघा ya सागरात्।

पर्वतादिव नागेन्द्रा धारौघा इव चाम्बुदात्॥१८॥
तथा शार्ङ्गविनिर्मुक्ता: शरा नारायणेरिता:।
निर्धावन्तीषवस्तूर्णं शतशोऽथ सहस्रश:॥१९॥
Like the fierce rays from the sun, waves
from the sea, huge serpents from a mountain
and torrents from clouds, the deadly arrows
shot by Narayana from His bow, Sarnga,
flew with speed in their hundreds and
thousands in all directions. (18-19)
शरभेण यथा feet: सिंहेन feet यथा।
द्विरदेन यथा व्याघ्रा व्याघ्रेण द्वीपिनो यथा॥ २०॥
द्वीपिनेव यथा Var: VAT मार्जारको यथा।
मार्जारेण यथा सर्पा: सर्पेण च यथाखव:॥ २१॥
