278

इमां वा त्वद्गतिं राम तपोबलसमर्जितान्।
लोकानप्रतिमान् वापि हनिष्यामीति मे aft: uot
“| shall as an alternative take away,
O Rama, your present capacity of
unobstructed movement in all the three worlds
or put an end to your title to the peerless
ethereal worlds, duly acquired by dint of
asceticism: such is my mind. (7)

न wa वैष्णवो दिव्य: we: परपुरंजय:।
मोघ: पतति वीर्येण बलदर्पविनाशन:॥८॥
“This transcendent arrow of Lord Visnu,
capable as it is of reducing the stronghold
of an enemy and crushing the might as well
as the pride of an adversary by its unique
power, never goes without hitting its mark.”
(8)
पितामहँ पुरस्कृत्य समेतास्तत्र सर्वश:॥९॥
Placing Brahma (the progenitor of the
entire creation) at their head, all the gods,
accompanied by hosts of Rsis, assembled
there in their aerial cars in order to behold
Sri Rama wielding the superb weapon of
Lord Visnu. (9)
गन्धर्वाप्सरसश्चैव सिद्धचारणकिंनरा: |
यक्षराक्षसनागाश्च Aq द्रष्टुं महदद्भुतम्॥१०॥
Gandharvas and celestial dancing girls
as well as Siddhas, Caranas and Kinnaras
as also Yaksas, ogres and Nagas too

collected there in order to witness that great
marvel. (10)

जडीकृते dat लोके Wa वरधनुर्धरे।
निर्वीर्यो जामदग्नयोऽसौ रामो राममुदैक्षत॥११॥

People gathered there, having been
stunned at that time with fear at the thought
of the dire consequences that might follow
from the show of valour on the part of Sri
Rama, when Sri Rama took up the superb
bow of Lord Visnu, the celebrated
Parasurama, son of Jamadagni, now rendered
powerless, looked with wonder at Sri Rama.

(11)

« VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

तेजोभिर्गतवीर्यत्वाज्जामदग्न्यो जडीकृत:।

WH कमलपत्राक्षॆ We मन्दमुवाच ह॥१२॥
Dazed by the brilliance of Sri Rama,

due to his having been rendered powerless,

the son of Jamadagni spoke in a low tone

as follows to Sri Rama, whose eyes

resembled the petals of a lotus: (12)

काश्यपाय मया दत्ता यदा ud वसुंधरा।
विषये मे न वस्तव्यमिति at काश्यपोऽब्रवीत्॥ १३॥

“When in the past the dominion of
the earth was bestowed by me on Sage
Kasyapa, KaSyapa spoke to me as follows :
‘You must no longer inhabit my dominion.’

(13)
सोऽहं गुरुवच: कुर्वन् पृथिव्यां न वसेनिशाम्।
तदाप्रभृति काकुत्स्थ Hal A काश्यपस्य ह॥ १४॥

“Enjoined thus and obeying the
command of my preceptor, KaSyapa, | do
not remain on earth at night from that time
onward inasmuch as a pledge has been
taken by me to that effect before Kasyapa,
which is a well-known fact, O Rama! (14)
मनोजवं गमिष्यामि महेन्द्रं पर्वतोत्तमम्॥१५॥

“Be pleased, therefore, O heroic scion
of Raghu, not to put an end to my present
unhampered movement in all the three
worlds. | shall retire to Mount Mahendra, the
foremost of mountains, with the speed of
thought. (15)

लोकास्त्वप्रतिमा राम निर्जितास्तपसा मया।
WE ताञ्छरमुख्येन मा भूत् कालस्य पर्यय: 1 १६॥

“Peerless worlds have actually been
earned by me by dint of asceticism, O
Rama! Put an end to my title to them by
means of your superb shaft. Let there be
no loss of time. (16)
अक्षय्यं WEA जानामि wat सुरेश्वरम्।
धनुषोऽस्य परामर्शात् स्वस्ति तेऽस्तु UAT I १७॥
एते सुरगणा: wa निरीक्षन्ते समागता:।
त्वामप्रतिमकर्माणमप्रतिद्वन्द्वमाहवे ॥ १८॥
