* AYODHYAKANDA +

Hearing the remonstrance of Siddhartha,
the king, for his part, whose voice had
grown very feeble, spoke as follows to
Kaikeyi in a tone overwhelmed with grief:

(31)
एतद्वचो नेच्छसि पापरूपे
fad न जानासि ममात्मनोऽथवा।
आस्थाय मार्गं कृपणं कुचेष्टा
ar fe ते साधुपथादपेता॥ ३२॥

“Do you not like this advice, O
embodiment of sin? Having taken to a path
leading to woe, are you not alive to my

433

interests or your own? Indeed, your gesture
is remote from the path of the righteous and
as such an undesirable one. (32)
अनुव्रजिष्याम्यहमद्य रामं
राज्यं परित्यज्य TE धनं च।
सर्वे च राज्ञा भरतेन च त्वं
यथासुखं भुङ्छ्ष्व चिराय राज्यम्॥ ३३॥
“Abandoning the kingly state, bodily
comfort and wealth, | shall follow Rama to
the forest today as also all the people of
Ayodhya. Rule you the kingdom happily for
long with Bharata.” (33)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्येऽयोध्याकाण्डे षट्त्रिंश: सर्ग: ॥ ३६ ॥

Thus ends Canto Thirty-six in the Ayodhyakanda of the glorious Ramayana of Valmiki,
the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

Canto XXXVII

Sri Rama urges his servants to fetch the bark of trees for being used as his
wearing apparel. At this Kaikeyi herself brings them the desired dress,
which both Sri Rama and Laksmana cover themselves with, taking off

their princely robes. Sita, however, finds it difficult to wear the
bark supplied to her and ultimately puts it on over her own
dress with the help of Sri Rama despite the remonstrances
of Vasistha, who severely castigates Kaikeyi
for her cruelty in exiling them

महामात्रवच: श्रुत्वा रामो दशरथं तदा।
अभ्यभाषत वाक्यं तु विनयज्ञो विनीतवत्॥ १॥
Hearing the remonstrance of the chief
minister, Sri Rama, for his part, who was an
adept in courtesy, politely addressed on
that occasion the following words to
DaSaratha : (1)

त्यक्तभोगस्य मे राजन् वने वन्येन जीवत:।
fe कार्यमनुयात्रेण त्यक्तसङ्घस्य सर्वत:॥ २॥

“What purpose of mine, who have
renounced all enjoyment and shaken off
attachment for everything and am going to

live on the products of the forest alone, will
be served, O king, with an army following
me? (2)
यो fe दत्त्वा द्विपश्रेष्ठं कक्ष्यायां Hed मन:।
रज्जुस्नेहेन fe तस्य त्यजत: BSAA ३॥
“He who, having parted with an
excellent elephant, seeks to retain the tether
is indeed a fool. What is to be gained
through attachment to a tether by him who
has forgone an excellent elephant? (3)

तथा मम सतां ss किं ध्वजिन्या जगत्पते।
सर्वाण्येवानुजानामि चीराण्येवानयन्तु मे॥४॥
