344

तत: पापसमाचारा कैकेयी पार्थिवं पुन:।
उवाच परुषं वाक्यं वाक्यज्ञा रोषमूच्छिता॥ २०॥
Overwhelmed with anger, Kaikeyi of
vicious conduct, who knew how to speak,
thereupon addressed the following pungent
words to the king once more: (20)
किमिदं भाषसे राजन् वाक्यं गररुजोपमम्।
आनाययितुमक्लिष्टं पुत्रं राममिहार्हसि॥ २१॥
“Why do you utter such words hurtful
as poison and disease? You ought to
summon your son Rama here without being
agonized. (21)

स्थाप्य WR मम सुतं कृत्वा WH वनेचरम्।
नि:सपत्नां च मां कृत्वा Hepa भविष्यसि॥ २२॥

“You will have done your duty by me
only when you have installed my son,
Bharata, on the throne, sent Rama into exile
to roam about in the woods and rid me of
thorns (in the shape of all hostile elements).”

(22)
स dt ga dem प्रतोदेन हयोत्तम:।
राजा Walfedts Ment कैकेय्या वाक्यमब्रवीत्॥ 23 ॥

Importuned again and again by Kaikeyi
like an excellent horse lashed with a sharp
whip, the king made the following reply :

(23)
धर्मबन्धेन बद्धोऽस्मि नष्टा च मम चेतना।
ज्येष्ठं Ua fret रामं द्रष्टुमिच्छामि धार्मिकम्॥ २४॥

“| stand bound with the cord of morality
and my judgment is lost. |, therefore, wish
to see my eldest and beloved son, the
pious Rama.” (24)
तत: प्रभातां रजनीमुदिते च दिवाकरे।
qua नक्षत्रयोगे च मुहूर्ते च समागते॥ २५॥
वसिष्ठो गुणसम्पन्न: शिष्यै: परिव्रृतस्तथा।
उपगृह्याशु सम्भारान् प्रविवेश पुरोत्तमम्॥ २६॥

Meanwhile when, on the night being
over, the sun had risen and the sacred hour
propitious for the installation had duly arrived,

nay, when the moon got united with a
favourable lunar mansion viz., Pusya, Sage

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

Vasistha, who is endowed with rare virtues,
hastily entered Ayodhya, the foremost of
cities, accompanied by his pupils and taking
with him all the requisites connected with
the installation. (25-26)
सिक्तसम्मार्जितपथां पताकोत्तमभूषिताम्।
संहृष्टमनुजोपेतां समृद्धविपणापणाम्॥ २७॥
महोत्सवसमायुक्तां राघवार्थे समुत्सुकाम्।
चन्दनागुरुधूपैश्च सर्वत: परिधूमिताम्॥ ci
तां पुरीं समतिक्रम्य पुरंदरपुरोषमाम्।
ददर्शान्त:पुरं श्रीमान् नानाध्वजगणायुतम्॥ २९॥
पौरजानपदाकीर्णं ब्राह्मणैरुपशोभितम्।
यष्टिमद्धि: सुसम्पूर्णं सदश्वै: urate: it ३०॥
Passing through the aforesaid city—
whose streets had been watered and
thoroughly swept, which had been decorated
with excellent buntings and was thronged
with overjoyed men, which consisted of
market-places stocked with abundant
commodities and was marked with great
festivities, which eagerly longed for the
installation of Sri Rama, a scion of Raghu,
and was fumigated on all sides with the
incense of sandal-wood and aloe, nay, which
vied with Amaravati, the capital of Indra, the
ruler of gods—the glorious sage beheld the
gynaeceum, which was decorated with rows
of flags of every description and crowded
with citizens and people hailing from the
countryside, nay, which was graced with
Brahmanas and fully packed with liveried
servants carrying a staff and excellent horses
richly adorned. (27—30)
तदन्त:पुरमासाद्य व्यतिचक्राम तं जनम्।
afass: परमप्रीतत परमर्षिभिरावृत:॥ ३१॥
Having reached the said gynaeceum,
the highly delighted Vasistha, surrounded
as he was with the greatest Rsis, overpassed
that crowd standing outside and arrived in
front of the gate. (31)

स त्वपश्यद् विनिष्क्रान्तं सुमन्त्रं नाम सारथिम्।
द्वारे मनुजसिंहस्य सचिवं प्रियदर्शनम्॥३२॥
