* AYODHYAKANDA +

woods for fourteen years, as | am doing,
how shall | comply with the prayer of Bharata,
flouting the command of my father? (24)

स्थिरा मया प्रतिज्ञाता प्रतिज्ञा गुरुसंनिधौ।
Weare देवी कैकेयी चाभवत् तदा॥ २५॥

“A firm vow was taken by me in the
presence of my father and Queen Kaikeyi
felt highly delighted at heart to hear it at that
moment. How can | now go back upon my
word of honour and cause sorrow to her?(25)
aad वसन्नेव शुचिर्नियतभोजन:।
मूलपुष्पफलै: पुण्यै: पितॄन् देवांश्च तर्पयन्॥ २६॥
अकुह: श्रद्दधान: सन् कार्याकार्यविचक्षण: ॥ २७॥

“Having controlled my _ diet and
propitiating gods as well as manes by means
of sacred roots, flowers and fruits while
continuing to reside in the forest only and
remaining pure of body and mind, with all
the five senses fully sated, nay, free from
all viles, devout and fully cognizant of what
ought to be done and what ought not to be
done, | propose to discharge my worldly
obligations in the form of carrying out the
behest of my father. (26-27)

कर्मभूमिमिमां प्राप्य कर्तव्यं कर्म यच्छुभम्।
अग्निर्वायुश्च सोमश्च कर्मणां फलभागिन:॥ २८॥

“Having reached this terrestrial globe
(the realm of action), virtuous action alone
should be undertaken. The god of fire as
well as the wind-god and the moon-god
enjoy, in their respective realms, the fruit of
their meritorious action. (28)

wd क्रतूनामाहृत्य देवराट् fafed गत:।
तपांस्युग्राणि चास्थाय दिवं WaT महर्षय:॥ २९॥

“Indra, the ruler of gods, was able to
attain the sovereignty of heaven only after
performing a hundred sacrifices. The eminent
seers of Vedic Mantras too ascended to the
ethereal regions (the realms even higher
than heaven) after practising rigorous
austerities only.” (29)

679

विगर्हमाणो वचनानि तस्य॥ ३०॥

Hearing the plea put forward by the
aforesaid sage, Jabali, in the form of a
heretic utterance (denying the life beyond
death) and resenting, nay, censuring his
words, Sri Rama, son of King DaSaratha,
who was endowed with a formidable spirit,
forthwith spoke to him once again as follows :

(30)
सत्यं च at च Wed च
भूतानुकम्पां प्रियवादितां च।
द्विजातिदेवातिथिपूजनं च
पन्थानमाहुस्त्रिदिवस्य सन्त:॥ ३१॥

“The sages speak of truthfulness and
piety and valour and compassion for created
beings and polite speech and worship of
Brahmanas, gods and unexpected guests
as a road to heaven. (31)

तेनैवमाज्ञाय यथावदर्थ-
मेकोदयं सम्प्रतिपद्य विप्रा:।
धर्मं चरन्त: सकलं यथावत्
कांक्षन्ति लोकागममप्रमत्ता:॥ ३२॥
“Scrupulously and duly practising virtue
in all its aspects, having in the first instance
correctly understood its meaning through
the aforesaid utterance of sages and
reached complete unanimity on the point,
Brahmanas seek to attain realms of their
choice. (32)

“| denounce the action mentioned below,
of my father, who picked up as his counsellor-
priest you, a staunch unbeliever, who has
not only strayed away from the path of
righteousness but whose mind is set on a
