216

अस्त्रेणापि fe age भयं मम न जायते।
पितामहमहेन्द्राभ्यां रक्षितस्यानिलेन च ॥४३॥
He said to himself: ‘No fear is
experienced by me even though | stand bound
by means of a missile, protected as | am by
Brahma and Indra, the ruler of gods, as well
as by the wind-god, my own procreator.(43)

ग्रहणे चापि रक्षोभिर्महन्मे गुणदर्शनम्।
राक्षसेन्द्रेण संवादस्तस्माद् Wed मां परे॥४४॥

‘| discern a great advantage, viz., the
opportunity of a talk with Ravana, the ruler
of ogres, following from my capture at the
hands of the ogres. Therefore, let my enemies
seize me.’ (44)

स निश्चितार्थ: परवीरहन्ता

समीक्ष्यकारी विनिव्रत्तचेष्ट:।
प्रसह्याभिगतैर्निगृह्य

wae ded: Ufa: tl vu I

Being chided by different ogres, who
had arrived near and forcibly caught hold of
him, Hanuman, the slayer of hostile heroes,
who acted after fully considering the pros
and cons, had decided upon his course of
action as above and had fully ceased all
movement of body, and groaned as though
in pain. (45)

ततस्ते राक्षसा gear विनिश्चेष्टमरिंदमम्।
बबन्धु: शणवल्कैश्च द्रुमचीरैश्च Pedi: ॥४६॥
Seeing Hanuman bereft of all movement,
the said ogres forthwith bound him with
plaited cords of hemp and bark. (46)
a रोचयामास wy we
wa वीरैरभिगर्हणं च।
कौतूहलान्मां यदि राक्षसेन्द्रो
द्रष्टुं व्यवस्येदिति निश्चितार्थ: ॥ ४७॥
He approved of his having been forcibly
bound and reviled by the hostile warriors
since, having decided to seek the presence
of Ravana, he felt sure that Ravana, the
ruler of ogres, might make an effort to see
him out of curiosity. (47)

परै:

« VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

स बद्धस्तेन वल्केन विमुक्तोऽस्त्रेण वीर्यवान्।
अस्त्रबन्ध: स चान्यं हि न बन्धमनुवर्तते॥४८॥

Bound with that rope, the powerful
Hanuman was set free by the missile; for
the bondage of that missile does not at all
co-exist with another bondage and leaves

its victim. (48)
= तं —

विचार्य वीर: कपिसत्तमं तम्।
विमुक्तमस्त्रेण जगाम चिन्ता-

मन्येन बद्धोऽप्यनुवर्ततेऽस्त्रम्॥४९॥
at महत् कर्म कृतं निरर्थं

न राक्षसैर्मन्त्रगतिर्विमृष्टा।
Ug नास्त्रे विहतेऽस्त्रमन्यत्

प्रवर्तते संशयिता: स्म सर्वे॥ ५०॥

Recognizing that jewel among the
monkeys, who had now been bound with a
rope made of the bark of trees, as having
been set free by the missile, Indrajit now
became thoughtful when he saw that, even
though bound with other means, the monkey
was behaving as if he was still bound with
the missile. He said to himself, ‘Oh, my great
exploit in the form of taking this monkey
captive has been rendered futile by the ogres,
by whom the mode of operation of the mystic
formula (by which this missile is controlled)
was Surely not taken into consideration. Once
the missile has been rendered ineffective,
another round of the missile cannot be
operative again; and thus we have all been
placed in a predicament.’ (49-50)

अस्त्रेण हनुमान् मुक्तो नात्मानमवबुध्यते।
कृष्यमाणस्तु रक्षोभिस्तैश्च बन्धैर्निपीडित:॥७५१॥
Even though set free by the missile,
Hanuman did not reveal himself as aware of
this fact, while being dragged by the ogres
and held fast with earthly cords. (51)

हन्यमानस्तत: HL राक्षसै: कालमुष्टिभि:।
समीपं राक्षसेन्द्रस्य प्राकृष्यत A वानर:॥७५२॥

Being struck by cruel ogres with their
severe fists, the aforesaid monkey was
