+ UTTARAKANDA +

vehicles, sallied forth having been sent by
the lord of wealth. (21)

तेन चक्रेण मारीचो विष्णुनेव रणे हत:।
पतितो भूतले शैलात् क्षीणपुण्य ga ग्रह:॥ २२॥

“Struck by him in battle with a discus
as by Lord Visnu, Marica fell on the ground
from the mountain like a star when the merit
responsible for its stay in heaven is
exhausted. (22)

ससंज्ञस्तु मुहूर्तेन स विश्रम्य निशाचर:।

तं यक्षं योधयामास स च भग्न: प्रदुद्रुवे॥ २३॥
“Recovering his consciousness in an

hour or so, and having rested awhile, that

Raksasa fought once more the aforesaid

Yaksa, who having been defeated, took to
his heels. (23)

तत: काञ्चनचित्राङ्गं वैदूर्यरजतोक्षितम्।

मर्यादां प्रतिहाराणां तोरणान्तरमाविशत्॥ २४॥
“Then Ravana entered the portals plated

all over with gold and inlaid with cat’s-eye

gems and silver and which marked the last
line guarded by gate-keepers. (24)

तं तु राजन् दशग्रीवं प्रविशन्तं निशाचरम्।
सूर्यभानुरिति ख्यातो द्वारपालो न्यवारयत्॥ २५॥
“A gate-keeper, Suryabhanu by name,
stopped DaSagriva, the Raksasa, while he
was entering the portal. (25)

स वार्यमाणो यक्षेण ufaast निशाचर:।
यदा तु वारितो राम न व्यतिष्ठत् स राक्षस:॥ २६॥

891

ततस्तोरणमुत्पाट्य तेन यक्षेण ताडित:।
रुधिरं Weer भाति vet धातुस्त्रबैरिव॥ २७॥

“The Raksasa, however, made good his
entry though stopped by the Yaksa. When,
however, O Rama, the Raksasa did not stop,
though prevented by the Yaksa, he was then
struck by the Yaksa, with a post which he
pulled out from the portal. Bleeding profusely,
DaSagriva looked like a hill with streams of
molten ochre flowing from it. (26-27)
a शैलशिखराभेण तोरणेन समाहत:।
जगाम न क्षतिं ART वरदानात् Taya: Ut २८ ॥

“Though struck with the door-post
resembling the crest of a hill, the hero
(DaSagriva) could not be slain, thanks to
the boons granted to him by Brahma (the
self-born creator). (28)

wa तोरणेनाथ यक्षस्तेनाभिताडित:।
नादूश्यत dat यक्षो भस्मीकृततनुस्तदा॥ २९॥

“Struck back with the same door-post
by him, the Yaksa was seen no more, his
a een been reduced to powder. (29)

: Wd दृष्टवा रक्ष:पराक्रमम्।
a ae विविशुर्भयपीडिता:।
त्यक्तप्रहरणा: श्रान्ता विवर्णवदनास्तदा॥ ३०॥

“Seeing the might of the Raksasa, all
began to run. Exhausted and pale, stricken
with fear as they were, they threw away
their weapons and entered the rivers or the
caves.” (30)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये उत्तरकाण्डे चतुर्दश: AW: ॥ १४॥

Thus ends Canto Fourteen in the Uttarakanda of the glorious Ramayana of Valmiki,
the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

पञ्चदश: सर्ग:
Canto XV
Defeat of Manibhadra and Kubera; Ravana takes hold of the Puspaka

ततस्ताँल्लक्ष्य वित्रस्तान् यक्षेन्द्रांश्च ASNT: |

रावणं wie यक्षेन्द्र दुर्वृत्तं पापचेतसम्।

धनाध्यक्षो महायक्षॆ माणिभद्रमथाब्रवीत्॥१॥ | शरणं भव वीराणां यक्षाणां युद्धशालिनाम्॥ २॥
