740

Lifted up by the mighty prince, that
brilliant javelin, which was rendered sonorous
by its bells, lit up the sky like a meteor
appearing at the end of the world-cycle.(65)

सा क्षिप्ता राक्षसेन्द्रस्य तस्मिञ्छूले पपात ह।
भिन्न: शक्त्या महान् शूलो निपपात गतद्युति: ।। ६६ U

The javelin hurled by Sri Rama fell on
that dart of Ravana (the king of ogres): so
the tradition goes. Split up by the javelin and
bereft of its splendour, the enormous dart

fell down. (66)
निर्बिभेद ततो बाणैर्हयानस्य महाजवान्।
रामस्तीक्ष्णैर्महावेगैर्वज्रकल्पैरजिह्मगै: TEACH]

Sri Rama then pierced the exceedingly
fleet horses of Ravana with his sharp arrows
resembling the thunderbolt, which flew with
great speed and went straight to their target.

(67)

निर्बिभेदोरसि तदा रावणं निशितै: शरै:।
waa: परमायत्तो ललाटे पत्रिभिस्तिभि:।॥। ६८ i

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA +

Sri Rama (a scion of Raghu) who was
extremely energetic, then pierced Ravana
in the breast with whetted shafts and also in
the forehead with three arrows. (68)

a शरैर्भिन्नसर्वाङ्गो गात्रप्रस्नुतशोणित:।
राक्षसेन्द्र: समूहस्थ: फुल्लाशोक इवाबभौ॥ ६९॥

Pierced with arrows all over his body,
blood flowing from his limbs, Ravana, the
ruler of ogres, standing in the midst of a
gathering of ogre-warriors, shone like an
Asoka tree in blossom. (69)

a रामबाणैरतिविद्धगात्रो
निशाचरेन्द्र: क्षतजार्द्रगात्र: |
जगाम खेदं च समाजमध्ये
क्रोधं च चक्रे सुभृशं तदानीम्॥७०॥

His limbs severely pierced with the
arrows of Sri Rama and his body bathed in
blood, the aforesaid ruler of ogres (lit., rangers
of the night) felt exhausted in the midst of his
warriors and at the same time gave vent to a
violent rage at that moment. (70)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये FERS GUTH MATA: AT: ॥ 207 Il

Thus ends Canto One hundred and two in the Yuddhakanda of the glorious
Ramayana of Valmiki, the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

त्र्रधिकशततम: at:
Canto Clll

Sri Rama upbraids Ravana, who, when wounded by
the former is removed from the battlefield
by his charioteer

स तु तेन तदा क्रोधात् काकुत्स्थेनार्दितो भृशम्।
रावण: समरश्लाघी महाक्रोधमुपागमत्॥१॥
Hard pressed by the celebrated scion of
Kakutstha in fury at that time, the said Ravana,
for his part, who was given to bragging on
the field of battle, flewinto greatrage. (1)

स दीप्तनयनोऽमर्षाच्चापमुद्यम्य वीर्यवान्।
अभ्यर्दयत् सुसंक्रुद्धो wad परमाहवे॥२॥

Raising his bow, his eyes flaming
with anger, extremely enraged as he was,
the gallant Ravana pressed Sri Rama
(a scion of Raghu) hard in that major conflict.

(2)
बाणधारासहस्रैस्तै: स तोयद इवाम्बरात्।
Tad रावणो बाणैस्तटाकमिव पूरयन्॥ ३॥

He for his part continued to cover
