786

Screened by the network of arrows
discharged by both the warriors, who were
fiercely fighting in their zeal to kill each other,
the sun was not visible at that time. (9)

ddl नालीकनाराचैस्तीक्ष्णाग्रैश्च विकर्णिभि: |
आजघान WY रामं तोत्रैरिव महाद्विपम्॥१०॥

Then, like one striking a lordly elephant
with a goad, Khara hit Sr’ Rama with arrows
of various kinds such as, Nalikas, Naracas
and sharp-pointed Vikarnis on the field of
battle. (10)
तं रथस्थं धनुष्पाणिं ward पर्यवस्थितम्।
CE: सर्वभूतानि पाशहस्तमिवान्तकम्॥११॥

All created beings saw that ogre rooted
firmly in his chariot, bow in hand, like Death
himself with a noose in his hand. (11)

हन्तारं सर्वसैन्यस्य पौरुषे पर्यवस्थितम्।
Unset महासत्त्वं AT WH खरस्तदा॥१२॥
At that time Khara thought Sri Rama,
the destroyer of his entire army, who was
possessed of great might and intent on
heroism, to be dead tired. (12)
तं सिंहमिव दि 1 Risk गि ।
दृष्टवा Ahead राम: सिंह: क्षुद्रमृगं यथा॥ esi
Sri Rama, however, did not feel
perturbed in the least to see him bold as a
lion and striding like one, any more than a
lion would feel perturbed to see a small
deer. (13)
ad: सूर्यनिकाशेन WH wed खर:।
आससादाथ तं रामं पतङ्ग sa पावकम्॥१४॥
Then, in a large chariot blazing as the
sun, Khara approached the celebrated Sri

Rama even, as a moth would approach a
fire. (14)
ततोऽस्य सशरं चापं मुष्टिदेशे महात्मन:।
खरश्चिच्छेद रामस्य दर्शयन् हस्तलाघवम्॥१५॥
Thereupon, displaying his dexterity of
hand, Khara split the bow alongwith the

arrow near the fist of the high-souled Sri
Rama. (15)

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

स पुनस्त्वपरान् Wa शरानादाय मर्मणि।
निजघान रणे क्रुद्ध: शक्राशनिसमप्रभान्॥१६॥

Again, taking seven more arrows,
shining brightly as the thunderbolt of Indra,
Khara, for his part, angrily discharged them
at the vital parts of Sri Rama on the battle-
field. (16)

ad: शरसहस्रेण राममप्रतिमौजसम्।
अर्दयित्वा महानादं ननाद समरे खर:॥१७॥
Then, hurting Sri Rama of unparalleled
prowess with a thousand arrows, Khara
uttered a loud roar on the battlefield. (17)

ततस्तत्प्रहतं बाणै: खरमुक्तै: सुपर्वभि:।
Ud कवचं भूमौ रामस्यादित्यवर्चसम्॥१८॥

Hit hard by the smooth-knobbed arrows
discharged by Khara, the well-known armour
of Sri Rama, bright like the sun, thereupon
fell on the ground. (18)

a शरैरर्पित: ge: सर्वगात्रेषु राघव:।
रराज समरे रामो विधूमोऽग्निरिव ज्वलन्॥१९॥

Getting enraged when pierced with
arrows all over his limbs, Sri Rama (a scion
of Raghu) shone on the battlefield like a
smokeless burning fire. (19)

ततो गम्भीरनिर्हादं wa: शत्रुनिबर्हण:।
चकारान्ताय स Rut: सज्यमन्यन्महद्भधनु:।॥ २०॥
Then Sri Rama, the exterminator of his
foes, strung another mighty bow, which made
a deep sound, to bring about the end of his
enemy. (20)
वरं aq wera wt समभिधावत॥ ee il
Raising that excellent and very mighty
bow belonging to Lord Visnu, that had been
gifted by the eminent sage, Agastya, he
darted towards Khara. (21)

ad: कनकपुङ्खैस्तु शरै: संनतपर्वभि:।
चिच्छेद राम: संक्रुद्ध: खरस्य समरे ध्वजम्॥ २२॥

Then, highly enraged, Sri Rama cut down
the ensign of Khara on the battle-field by
