+ UTTARAKANDA +

1027

एकोनषष्टितम: सर्ग:
Canto LIX

King Yayati borrows youth from his son Puru, in exchange for his own old
age. Satisfied after a long time with the enjoyment of the objects
of pleasure, he returns his youth to Puru and consecrates
him king and pronounces curse on Yadu

श्रुत्वा तूशनसं BR तदार्तो नहुषात्मज:।
जरां परमिकां प्राप्य ad वचनमब्रवीत्॥१॥
Hearing the words of USana uttered in
rage, the penitent son of Nahusa, Yayati,
then possessed of ripe old age said to
Yadu: (1)

यदो त्वमसि धर्मज्ञो मदर्थं प्रतिगृह्यताम्।
जरा परमिका पुत्र भोगै रंस्ये महायश:॥ २॥

‘O Yadu, my son of a great fame, you
are righteous, accept for my sake my old
age, may | enjoy the objects of desire. (2)

न Wad कृतकृत्योऽस्मि विषयेषु नरर्षभ।
अनुभूय dal कामं dd: प्राप्स्याम्यहं जराम्॥ ३॥
‘| have not been satisfied with the
pleasure of senses. O bull among men,
having experienced the joy of senses, |
shall again attain my old age’ (3)

यदुस्तद्वचनं श्रुत्वा प्रत्युवाच नरर्षभम्।
पुत्रस्ते दयित: पूरु: प्रतिगृह्णतु a जराम्॥४॥
Hearing these words of Yayati, Yadu
replied to the bull among men (Yayati), ‘Puru
is your dear son, may he accept the old
age. (4)
बहिष्कृतोऽहमर्थेषु संनिकर्षाच्च पार्थिव।
प्रतिगृह्णातु वै राजन् यै: सहाश्नासि भोजनम्॥ ५॥
‘O King, | have been deprived of the
objects of desire and wealth and also your

company. He alone among men with whom
you take your food, can accept it.’ (5)

तस्य तद् वचनं श्रुत्वा राजा पूरुमथाब्रवीत्।
इयं जरा महाबाहो मदर्थं प्रतिगृह्यताम्॥६॥

Hearing these words spoken by him,

Yayati, the king then said to Puru: ‘O one of
long-arms, please accept this old age.’ (6)

नाहुषेणैवमुक्तस्तु पूरु: प्राञ्जलिरब्रवीत्।
धन्योऽस्म्यनुगृहीतोऽस्मि शासनेऽस्मि तव स्थित: ॥ ७॥

Thus requested by Yayati, the son of
Nahusa, Puru with folded hands said: ‘I am
fortunate and feel obliged to you, | am at
your command.’ (7)

WeeerarsTa नाहुष: परया मुदा।
प्रहर्षमतुलं लेभे जरां संक्रामयच्च ताम्॥८॥
Having heard the word of Puru, the
son of Nahusa, Yayati, was highly pleased,
and transferred that old age to him. (8)

तत: स राजा तरुण: प्राप्य यज्ञान् सहस्रश:।
बहुवर्षसहस्राणि पालयामास मेदिनीम्॥९॥
Then the youthful king, having performed

a thousandfold sacrifices ruled over the earth
for many thousand years. (9)

अथ दीर्घस्य कालस्य राजा पूरुमथाब्रवीत्।
आनयस्व जरां पुत्र न्यासं निर्यातयस्व मे॥१०॥
Then after a long time the king spoke
thus to Puru: ‘O dear son, bring forth my old
age, return that which was deposited in you
as trust. (10)

न्यासभूता मया Ua त्वयि संक्रामिता जरा।

तस्मात् प्रतिगृहीष्यामि At SAT मा व्यथां PAT: UW ११॥
‘O son! the old age which was in the

form of deposit, was transferred to you;

therefore, now । shall take back my old age,
do not feel pained. (11)

प्रीतश्चास्मि महाबाहो शासनस्य प्रतिग्रहात्।
त्वां चाहमभिषेक्ष्यामि प्रीतियुक्तो नराधिषपम्॥ १२॥
