938

incomparable speech of Sita (a princess of
the Videha territory), excellent, sweet and
wholesome and interspersed with smiles
and fun? (110)
प्राप्य दु:खं वने श्यामा मां मन्मथविकर्शितम्।

नष्टदु:खेव Wea साध्वी साध्वभ्यभाषत॥ १११॥

“Even though undergoing suffering in
the forest, the youthful and virtuous lady
spoke lovingly to me, sore stricken as |
was with love, as though she were happy
and as though she had no suffering. (111)
किंनु वक्ष्याम्ययोध्यायां कौसल्यां fe नृपात्मज।
क्व सा स्नुषेति पृच्छन्तीं कथं चापि मनस्विनीम्॥ ११२॥

“What on earth shall | actually tell the
lofty-minded Kausalya (my mother) when
she puts the following question to me in
Ayodhya (on my return from exile): ‘Where
and also how is that princess, my daughter-
in-law?’ (112)
Ted लक्ष्मण पश्य त्वं भरतं भ्रातृवत्सलम्।

Wale जीवितुं शक्तस्तामृते जनकात्मजाम्॥ ११३॥

“Depart, 0 Laksmana, and see you
Bharata, who is so fond of his brothers; for
| am no longer able to survive without the
said daughter of Janaka.” (113)
sft रामं महात्मानं विलपन्तमनाथवत्।
उवाच लक्ष्मणो भ्राता वचनं युक्तमव्ययम्॥ ११४॥

Brother Laksmana made the following
judicious and flawless reply to the high-
souled Sri Rama, who was lamenting like a
forlorn creature : (114)

संस्तम्भ WA Us ते मा Wa: पुरुषोत्तम।
नेदृशानां मतिर्मन्दा भवत्यकलुषात्मनाम्॥११५॥
“Have fortitude, O Rama! May prosperity
attend on you. Pray, do not grieve, O jewel
among men! The intellect of such people
as you, whose mind is free from sin, never
gets languid. (115)

स्मृत्वा वियोगजं दु:खं त्यज Ge प्रिये जने।
अतिस्नेहपरिष्वङ्गाद् वर्तिरार्द्रपि दह्यते॥११६॥

“Bearing in mind the grief born of

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

desolation, give up your fondness for the
beloved ones. Even a wet wick begins to
burn through contact with excessive oil (the
word used here to denote oil is ‘Sneha’,
which also means love). (116)

ate गच्छति पातालं ततोऽभ्यधिकमेव ar
सर्वथा रावणस्तात न भविष्यति waa ११७॥

“Ravana, O dear brother, will not survive
at all even if he descends into Patala (the
nethermost subterranean region) or a still
darker region than that, O scion of Raghu.

(117)

प्रवृत्तिर्लभ्यतां तावत् तस्य पापस्य रक्षस:।
ततो हास्यति वा सीतां ert वा गमिष्यति॥ ११८ ॥

“Let the whereabouts of that sinful ogre
be ascertained first. He will then either yield
up Sita or meet his end. (118)
ate याति feist रावणं we सीतया।
तत्राप्येनं हनिष्यामि न चेद्दास्यति मैथिलीम्॥ ११९॥

“If Ravana enters with Sita the womb
of Diti (the mother of the demon race), |
shall kill him even there in case he refuses
to yield up Sita (a princess of Mithila). (119)
अर्थो हि नष्टकार्यार्थैरयत्नेनाधिगम्यते॥ 220 tl

“Have recourse to blessed forbearance
which is your normal state, O noble sir, and
let the abject mentality of despondency be
given up. For, the object of pursuit cannot
be attained without exertion by those whose

endeavour has been foiled and purpose
thwarted. (120)

उत्साहो बलवानार्य नास्त्युत्साहात् परं बलम्।
सोत्साहस्य fe लोकेषु न किंचिदपि दुर्लभम्॥ १२१॥
“Strenuous effort alone is powerful, O
worthy Sir! There is no might greater than
exertion. Indeed nothing whatsoever is difficult
to attain in all the worlds for a man given to
endeavour. (121)
उत्साहवन्त: पुरुषा नावसीदन्ति कर्मसु।
उत्साहमात्रमाश्रित्य प्रतिलप्स्याम जानकीम्॥ १२२॥
