392

सर्वलोकप्रभुर्ब्रह्मा deed तथर्षय:।
ये च शेषा: सुरास्ते तु रक्षन्तु वनवासिनम्॥ २५॥

“May Brahma, the suzerain lord of all
the worlds, Brahma, the Infinite, responsible
for the existence of all created beings, and
the Rsis as well as the gods that have not
so far been mentioned by me, guard you

while you reside in the forest.” (25)
इति माल्यै: सुरगणान् गन्धैश्चापि यशस्विनी।
स्तुतिभिश्चानुरूपाभिरानर्चायतलोचना ॥ २६ ॥

Saying so, the illustrious Kausalya, who
had large eyes, worshipped the various
gods with flowers and perfumes too as well
as by means of hymns befitting them. (26)

ज्वलनं समुपादाय ब्राह्मणेन महात्मना।
हावयामास विधिना राममङ्गलकारणात्॥ २७॥

Duly procuring fire, she caused
oblations to be poured into it with due
ceremony for the welfare of Sri Rama by a
high-souled Brahmana. (27)

घृतं श्वेतानि माल्यानि समिधश्चैव सर्षपान्।
उपसम्पाढयामास कौसल्या परमाङ्गना।॥ २८ Ul
Kausalya, the lady par excellence, made
available to the Brahmana ghee, white
flowers, pieces of firewood for feeding the

sacrificial fire and mustard seeds as well.
(28)

उपाध्याय: स विधिना हुत्वा शान्तिमनामयम्।
हुतहव्यावशेषेण बाह्यं बलिमकल्पयत्॥२९॥

Having poured oblations into the sacred
fire according to the scriptural ordinance for
the sake of security and health of her son
the priest offered oblations to Indra and the
other nine guardians of the ten directions
outside the area reserved for fire-worship
with the remnants of materials used as
offering to the fire. (29)

मधुदध्यक्षतघृतै: स्वस्तिवाच्यं द्विजांस्तत:।
वाचयामास रामस्य वने स्वस्त्ययनक्रियाम्॥ ३०॥

She then got Brahmanas—who were
supplied with honey, curds, unbroken grains

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA +

of rice and ghee in order to enable them to
invoke blessings on Sri Rama by the
repetition of certain Mantras—to utter prayers
for the welfare of Sri Rama in the forest.
(30)
ततस्तस्मै द्विजेन्द्राय राममाता यशस्विनी।
दक्षिणां प्रददौ काम्यां Wad चेदमब्रवीत्॥ ३१॥
The illustrious Kausalya, Sri Rama’s
mother, next bestowed on the aforesaid
leader of Brahmanas his fee as desired

by him and spoke as follows to Sri Rama:
(31)

waged सहस्राक्षे सर्वदेवनमस्कृते।
वृत्रनाशे समभवत् तत् ते भवतु मङ्गलम्॥३२॥
“May the same victory woo you as
wooed Indra (the thousand-eyed god), who

is hailed by all the gods on the destruction
of the demon Vrtra. (32)

waged सुपर्णस्य विनताकल्पयत् पुरा।
अमृतं प्रार्थयानस्य ad A भवतु मङ्गलम्॥ ३३॥
“May the same blessing descend on
you as Vinata (the mother of Garuda) invoked
in the past on Garuda, who sought for
nectar. (33)

अमृतोत्पादने दैत्यान् घ्नतो वज्रधरस्य यत्।
अदितिर्मङ्गलं प्रादात् तत् ते भवतु मङ्गलम्॥ ३४॥
“Let the same blessing come to you as
Aditi, the mother of the gods, invoked on
Indra, the wielder of the thunderbolt, while
he was engaged in making short work of
the Daityas at the time of extracting nectar
out of the ocean of milk. (34)

त्रिविक्रमान् प्रक्रमतो विष्णोरतुलतेजस:।
यदासीन्मङ्गलं WA तत् aA भवतु मङ्गलम्॥ ३५॥
“Let the same good fortune come to
you as attended Lord Visnu, who is endowed
with immense glory, while He took the three
well-known strides in order to measure the
three worlds, O Rama! (35)

WIA: सागरा star वेदा लोका festa ते।
मङ्गलानि महाबाहो दिशन्तु शुभमङ्गलम्॥३६॥
