* ARANYAKANDA «

आसीत् क्रुद्धस्तु काकुत्स्थो विवशस्तेन मोहित: |
अथावतस्थे सुश्रान्तश्छायामाश्रित्य शाद्बले॥९॥

Beguiled by him and feeling helpless,
Sri Rama (a scion of Kakutstha) for his part
felt enraged and, seeking the shade of a
tree, thoroughly exhausted as he was, stood
at ease on a spot covered with velvety
grass. (9)

स तमुन्मादयामास मृगरूपो निशाचर:।
Wi: परिवृतोऽथान्यैरदूरात् प्रत्यदृश्यत॥१०॥

That ogre appearing in the form of a
deer puzzled him. Surrounded by other deer,
he presently came into view not far off. (10)

ग्रहीतुकामं दृष्टवा तं पुनरेवाभ्यधावत।
तत्क्षणादेव संत्रासात् पुनरन्तर्हितोऽभवत्॥११॥

Beholding Rama eager to capture it, it
took to flight once more and out of fright
instantly went out of sight again. (11)

पुनरेव ततो दूराद qerauere विनि:सृत:।
Gea रामो महातेजास्तं हन्तुं कृतनिश्चय:॥ १२॥
भूयस्तु Mg कुपितस्तत्र राघव:।
सूर्यरश्मिप्रतीकाशं ज्वलन्तमरिमर्दनम्॥ १३॥
संधाय age चापे विकृष्य बलवद्बली।
wa मृगमुद्दिश्य श्वसन्तमिव पन्नगम्॥१४॥
मुमोच ज्वलितं दीप्तमस्त्रं ब्रह्मविनिर्मितम्।
mt मृगरूपस्य विनिर्भिद्य शरोत्तम:॥१५॥
मारीचस्यैव ea बिभेदाशनिसंनिभ:।
तालमात्रमथोत्प्लुत्य न्यपतत् स भृशातुर:॥ १६॥
व्यनदद् भैरवं नादं धरण्यामल्पजीवित:।
म्रियमाणस्तु मारीचो जहौ at कृत्रिमां तनुम्॥ १७॥

Then again it issued forth from a distant
cluster of trees. Seeing the deer and pulling
out with great fury a blazing arrow bright as
a sunbeam and capable of destroying the
enemy, nay, firmly setting it to the bow and
aiming it at that very animal, drawing the
bow with full force, the mighty Sri Rama, the
celebrated scion of Raghu, for his part, who
was endowed with extraordinary energy and
had made up his mind to make short work
of the deer, discharged in that forest that

831

flaming and effulgent missile fashioned by
Brahma (the creator) and looking like a fiery
serpent. Having thoroughly and deeply
penetrated through the heart of the deer
form, that excellent arrow, which shone
brightly as lightning, pierced the heart of
Marica himself. Bounding as high as a
palmyra tree, the deer, which felt sore
afflicted, fell down to the ground and uttered
a terrific roar, its life being very short, while
dying, however, Marica shed that assumed
form. (12—17)

स्मृत्वा तद्वचनं Tal दध्यौ केन तु लक्ष्मणम्।
इह प्रस्थापयेत् सीता तां शून्ये रावणो हरेत्॥ १८॥

Recalling the instruction of Ravana,
the ogre for his part reflected how Sita
should send away Laksmana to that spot
and how Ravana should bear her away in
her isolation. (18)

स प्राप्तकालमाज्ञाय चकार च ad: स्वनम्।
Get राघवस्येव a सीते लक्ष्मणेति च॥१९॥

Nay, perceiving what was opportune,
the ogre forthwith uttered a cry precisely
resembling the voice of Sri Rama (a scion
of Raghu), saying “Alas Sita ! An Laksmana !”

(19)

तेन मर्मणि ffag शरेणानुपमेन हि।
मृगरूपं तु तत् त्यक्त्वा राक्षसं रूपमास्थित:।॥ २०॥
चक्रे स सुमहाकायं मारीचो जीवितं त्यजन्।
तं दृष्टवा पतितं भूमौ राक्षसं भीमदर्शनम्॥ २१॥
रामो रुधिरसिक्ताङ्गं चेष्टमानं महीतले।
जगाम मनसा सीतां लक्ष्मणस्य वच: स्मरन्॥ २२॥

Casting off the aforesaid form of a
deer, deeply pierced in the vital parts by
that peerless arrow, and taking on the form
of an ogre, the said Marica, while giving up
the ghost, revealed his gigantic body. Seeing
that ogre of terrible aspect, fallen on the
ground, writhing on the earth’s surface, his
limbs bathed in blood, Sri Rama mentally
turned towards Sita, recollecting the warning
of Laksmana. (20—22)
