* ARANYAKANDA «

cool due to the softening influence of the
ocean. (18)

पाण्डुराणि विशालानि दिव्यमाल्ययुतानि च।
तूर्यगीताभिजुष्टानि विमानानि समन्तत:॥१९॥
तपसा जितलोकानां कामगान्यभिसम्पतन्।
गन्धर्वाप्सरसश्चैव cast धनदानुज:॥ २०॥
Driving at full speed through the air,
Ravana (the younger half-brother of Kubera,
the lord of riches) beheld on all sides
spacious aerial cars of a whitish colour,
festooned with celestial wreaths and
enlivened by both instrumental and vocal
music, belonging to those who had won the
higher worlds by virtue of their austerities
and coursing according to one’s will, and
also beheld Gandharvas and _ celestial
nymphs. (19-20)
निर्यासरसमूलानां चन्दनानां सहस्रश:।
वनानि पश्यन् सौम्यानि घ्राणतृप्तिकराणि च॥ २१॥
अगुरूणां च मुख्यानां वनान्युपवनानि च।
तक्कोलानां च जात्यानां फलिनां च सुगन्धिनाम्॥ २२॥
पुष्पाणि च तमालस्य गुल्मानि मरिचस्य च।
Tart च समूहानि शुष्यमाणानि तीरत:॥ २३॥
sent प्रवरांश्चैव प्रवालनिचयांस्तथा।
काञ्चनानि च शृङ्गाणि राजतानि तथैव च॥ २४॥
प्रस्रवाणि मनोज्ञानि प्रसन्नान्यद्भुतानि a
धनधान्योपपन्नानि स्त्रीरत्नैरावृतानि च॥ २५॥
हस्त्यश्वरथगाढानि नगराणि विलोकयन्।
तं समं सर्वत: स्निग्धं मृदुसंस्पर्शमारुतम्॥ २६॥
अनूपे सिन्धुराजस्य ददर्श त्रिदिवोपमम्।
तत्रापश्यत् स मेघाभं न्यग्रोधं मुनिभिर्वृतम्॥ २७॥
समन्ताद् यस्य ता: शाखा: शतयोजनमायता:।
यस्य हस्तिनमादाय महाकायं च कच्छपम्॥ २८॥
भक्षार्थं Wes: शाखामाजगाम महाबल:।
तस्य At ASA शाखां भारेण पतगोत्तम:॥ २९॥
सुपर्ण: पर्णबहुलां बभञ्जाथ महाबल:।
तत्र वैखानसा माषा वालखिल्या मरीचिपा:॥ ३०॥
आजा बभूवुर्धूम्राश्च संगता: परमर्षय:।
तेषां दयार्थं गरुडस्तां शाखां शतयोजनाम्॥ ३१॥
भग्नामादाय वेगेन तौ चोभौ गजकच्छपौ।
एकपादेन धर्मात्मा भक्षयित्वा तदामिषम्॥ ३२॥

807

निषादविषयं हत्वा शाखया पतगोत्तम:।
प्रहर्षमतुलं लेभे मोक्षयित्वा महामुनीन्॥३३॥

Nay, he proceeded further beholding
delightful forests pleasing to the olfactory
sense, of sandal-trees, whose roots exuded
a sap in the form of resin, and also surveying
forests of excellent Aguru trees and groves
of fragrant Takkola trees of superior quality
and laden with fruits, also the flowers of
Tamala trees and shrubs of pepper, nay,
heaps of pearls getting dried up on the
shore, rocks as also heaps of excellent
coral and similarly peaks of gold as well as
of silver, charming, crystal and wonderful
caskets as also cities provided with wealth
and food-grains, crowded with jewels of
womanhood and thick with elephants, horses
and chariots. He saw on the shore of the
ocean a level piece of ground smooth on
every side, fanned by breezes which were
soft to the touch, and delightful as heaven.
There he saw a banyan tree looking like a
cloud and resorted to on all sides by ascetics,
whose prominent branches extended up to
a hundred Yojanas (800 miles) all round.

It was to a bough of this tree that
Garuda (the king of birds and the carrier of
Lord Visnu), who was_ possessed of
extraordinary might, flew taking (in his claws)
an elephant and a gigantic tortoise for repast.
With his enormous weight the very mighty
Garuda, the foremost of birds, forthwith broke
all of a sudden the bough which was thick
with leaves. There, under that tree, were
assembled foremost Rsis (seers of Vedic
Mantras) belonging to the categories of
Vaikhanasas, Masas, Valakhilyas, Maricipas
and Dhumras (who inhaled smoke while
remaining suspended from the boughs of
trees head downwards). Carrying with speed
that broken bough, a hundred Yojanas long,
as also the elephant and the tortoise both in
one claw and eating up their flesh (in the air
itself), nay, destroying with the bough the
territory of the Nisadas (who lived by hunting
