786

रक्षोभिर्बहुभिर्गुप्तामाजहार विभीषण: ॥ १५ UI

Prevailing upon Sita to ascend a brilliant
palanquin covered with an exceedingly
valuable cloth and guarded by numerous
ogres, after she had laved her head, and
had put on very costly robes and had been
adorned with exceedingly valuable jewels
and decorated, Vibhisana then brought her
to the presence of Sri Rama. (14-15)

सोऽभिगम्य महात्मानं ज्ञात्वापि ध्यानमास्थितम्।
प्रणतश्च wees प्राप्तां dat न्यवेदयत्॥१६॥
Approaching Sri Rama (the high-souled
prince), and even after coming to know that
he was still absorbed in thought, nay, bent
low and full of great joy, he announced to
him that Sita had arrived. (16)

तामागतामुपश्रुत्य रक्षोगृहचिरोषिताम्।
रोषं हर्षं च et च राघव: प्राप MAT Vl
Hearing that Sita, who had lived long in
the abode of an ogre, had arrived, Sri Rama
(a scion of Raghu), the destroyer of enemies,
was filled with indignation and joy and felt
miserable too. (17)
विभीषणमिदं वाक्यमहृष्टो राघवोऽब्रवीत्॥१८॥
Feeling distressed on considering with
deep thought the question of Sita having
come all the way in a palanquin, Sri Rama
(a scion of Raghu) then spoke to Vibhisana
as follows: (18)

राक्षसाधिपते सौम्य fret मद्बिजये रत।
aed संनिकर्षं A fad समभिगच्छतु॥१९॥
“Let Sita (a princess of the Videha
territory) duly seek my presence soon, O
suzerain lord of ogres, O gentle one, ever
intent on scoring a victory for me!” (19)
तस्य तद् वचनं श्रुत्वा राघवस्य विभीषण:।
तूर्णमुत्सारणं at कारयामास धर्मवित्॥ ou
कञ्चुकोष्णीषिणस्तत्र वेत्रझर्झरपाणय: |
उत्सारयन्तस्तान् योधान् समन्तात् परिचक्रमु:॥ २१॥

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA +

Hearing the foregoing command of the
aforesaid scion of Raghu, Vibhisana, who
knew what is right, speedily began to disperse
the crowd (of monkeys, who had gathered
out of curiosity to have a look at Sita).
Ogres clad in jackets and wearing turbans,
their hands carrying staffs, which made a
jingling sound, paced all round dispersing
the aforesaid warriors. (20-21)

ऋक्षाणां वानराणां च राक्षसानां च सर्वश:।

वृन्दान्युत्सार्यमाणानि दूरमुत्तस्थुरन्तत: ।॥। २२॥
While being driven away collectively

from the vicinity of the palanquin, the hordes

of bears, monkeys and ogres moved to a
distance. (22)

तेषामुत्सार्यमाणानां नि:स्वन: सुमहानभूत्।
वायुनोद्धूयमानस्य सागरस्येव नि:स्वन:॥ २३॥

A tremendous uproar, resembling the
roar of sea, which was being lashed by a
storm, arose even as the aforesaid warriors
were being driven away. (23)

उत्सार्यमाणांस्तान् दृष्टवा समन्ताज्जातसम्भ्रमान्।
दाक्षिण्यात्तदमर्षाच्च वारयामास राघव:॥ २४॥
Seeing them being dispersed on all
sides and, therefore, excited, Sri Rama (a
scion of Raghu) stopped those who were
dispersing them, out of kindness (for those
who were being dispersed) and resentment
at the behaviour of the ogres who were
dispersing them. (24)

संरम्भाच्चाब्रवीद् रामश्चक्षुषा प्रदहन्निव।
विभीषणं महाप्राज्ञं सोपालम्भमिदं aa: eu tl

Nay, consuming the ogres with his
glances, as it were, Sri Rama addressed in
indignation the following reproachful words
to the highly intelligent Vibhisana: (25)

किमर्थं मामनादूत्य क्लिश्यतेऽयं त्वया जन:।
निवर्तयैनमुद्वेग जनोऽयं स्वजनो मम॥ २६॥

“Why, disregarding me, are these people
being harassed by you? Pray, stop this
annoyance. They are my own people. (26)
