292

देवासुरमनुष्याणां सर्वास्त्रेषु विशारद:।
सम्यग् विद्याव्रतस्नातो यथावत् साङ्गवेदवित्॥ ३४॥

गान्धर्वे च भुवि श्रेष्ठो बभूव भरताग्रज:।
कल्याणाभिजन: साधुरदीनात्मा महामति:॥ ३५॥
“He is skilled in the use of all missiles
used by gods, demons and human beings
and has duly concluded his vow of studying
the various sciences and has duly learnt all
the Vedas alongwith the six branches of
knowledge auxiliary to a study of the Vedas
(viz., 1. Siksa or Phonetics, 2. Vyakarana
or Grammar, 3. Chandas or Prosody, 4.
Nirukta or Etymology, 5. Jyotisa_ or
Astronomy and 6. Kalpa or the branch of
knowledge prescribing the ritual and giving
rules for ceremonial or sacrificial acts)*.
Sri Rama, the elder brother of Bharata, has
proved to be the foremost on earth in the
science of music. He is of blessed descent,
saintly, magnanimous and highly intelligent.
(34-35)

द्विजैरभिविनीतश्च श्रेष्ठैर्धर्मार्थनैपुणै: |
यदा व्रजति संग्रामं ग्रामार्थे नगरस्य वा॥३६॥

गत्वा सौमित्रिसहितो नाविजित्य निवर्तते।

संग्रामात् पुनरागत्य कुञ्जरेण WA वा॥३७॥
पौरान् स्वजनवन्नित्यं कुशलं परिपृच्छति।
पुत्रेष्वग्निषु दारेषु प्रेष्यशिष्यगणेषु च॥ ३८॥
Race च frat पुत्रानिवौरसान्।
शुश्रूषन्ते च a: शिष्या: कच्चिद् वर्मसु दंशिता: ॥ ३९ Ul
इति A: पुरुषव्याघ्र: सदा रामोऽभिभाषते।
व्यसनेषु मनुष्याणां yet भवति दु:खित:॥४०॥
उत्सवेषु च सर्वेषु पितेव परितुष्यति।
सत्यवादी महेष्वासो वृद्धसेवी जितेन्द्रिय:।॥॥४१॥
“Nay, he has been instructed all round
by the noblest Brahmanas skilled in the
exposition of Dharma (the principles of
righteousness) and the discussion of fiscal
matters. Whenever, accompanied by
Laksmana, he sets out on an expedition in
the interests of a village or a city, he never

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

returns without scoring a victory once he is
out. Returning from an encounter on the
back of an elephant or in a chariot, he
always lovingly inquires of the citizens of
Ayodhya in their totality according to their
order of seniority about their welfare
concerning sons, sacrificial fires, wife,
servants and groups of pupils as of his own
kindred or as a father would inquire of sons
sprung from his own loins. Nay, Sri Rama,
a tiger among men, every now and then
says to us, Brahmanas, “Do your pupils
serve you?” and to the Ksatriyas, “Do your
bodyguards, protected with an armour, wait
upon you?” “He feels sore distressed when
he finds men in straits and rejoices like
a father in all their jubilations. He always
utters the truth, wields a mighty bow, serves
his elders and has his mind under control.

(36—41)

स्मितपूर्वाभिभाषी च धर्मं सर्वात्मनाश्रित:।
सम्यग्योक्ता श्रेयसां च न विगृह्यकथारुचि: ।॥। ४२ i
उत्तरोत्तरयुक्तौ च at वाचस्पतिर्यथा।
सुभ्रूरायतताम्राक्ष: Gate विष्णुरिव स्वयम्॥ ४३ ॥

“He prefaces his speech with a smile
and has embraced righteousness with all
his being. He duly accomplishes beneficent
deeds and never relishes arguments carried
on in a controversial spirit. Nay, he is a
debater of Brhaspati’s rank in the field of
argument and counter-argument carried on
in a friendly spirit for arriving at the truth.
With shapely brows and large ruddy eyes
he appears like Lord Visnu Himself in human
semblance. (42-43)

Tat लोकाभिरामोऽयं शौर्यवीर्यपराक्रमै: |
प्रजापालनसंयुक्तो न रागोपहतेन्द्रिय: ॥॥४४॥

‘The aforesaid Sri Rama delights the
world by his intrepidity, valour and might.
Although he remains assiduously engaged
in protecting the people, his mind is never
blinded by passion. (44)

* शिक्षा व्याकरणं oat निरुक्तं ज्यौतिषं तथा। कल्पश्चेति व्याहृतानि वेदाङ्गानि मनीषिभि:॥।
