+ UTTARAKANDA +

the Sakti, Malyavan fell into a deep swoon;
pulling himself up, however, he stood
unshaken like a mountain. (14)

तत: कालायसं Bot कण्टकैर्बहुभिश्चितम्।
प्रगृह्याभ्यहनद् देवं स्तनयोरन्तरे दूढम्॥१५॥
Then he violently struck Sri Hari in the
centre of the chest with a pike made of iron
and covered with many spikes. (15)

ada रणरक्तस्तु मुष्टिना वासवानुजम्।
ताडयित्वा धनुर्मात्रमपक्रान्तो निशाचर:॥१६॥

Likewise, striking the younger brother
of Indra, Sri Hari, with his fist, the Raksasa,
keen on fighting, then withdrew to a bow’s
length. (16)

ततोऽम्बरे महान् शब्द: साधुसाध्विति चोत्थित: ।
आहत्य राक्षसो विष्णुं गरुडं MAASAI १७॥
A loud cry of ‘Bravo, Bravo!’ then arose

in the skies. Having struck Visnu, the
Raksasa struck Garuda also. (17)

वैनतेयस्तत: क्रुद्ध: पक्षवातेन राक्षसम्।
व्यपोहद् बलवान् वायु: शुष्कपर्णचयं यथा॥ Ve Il

Provoked to anger, Garuda thereupon
drove off the Raksasa with the blast (arising
from the flapping) of his wings even as a
strong wind would scatter a heap of dried
leaves. (18)

द्विजेन्द्रपक्षवातेन द्रावितं qa पूर्वजम्।

सुमाली स्वबलै: सार्धं लङ्कामभिमुखो Tatu १९॥
Seeing his elder brother driven off by

the blast arising from the wings of Garuda,

Sumali made for Lanka, accompanied by
his forces. (19)

पक्षवातबलोद्धूतो माल्यवानपि राक्षस:।

स्वबलेन समागम्य ययौ लङ्कां feat qa: ol
Blown away by the wind arising from

the wings of Garuda, and covered with

shame, the Raksasa, Malyavan too, fled to
Lanka, joined by his forces. (20)

एवं a राक्षसा Wa हरिणा कमलेक्षण।
बहुश: संयुगे भग्ना हतप्रवरनायका:॥ २१॥

871

“O lotus-eyed Rama, in this manner
those Raksasas were repeatedly worsted
in battle by Sr Hari and their foremost
leaders were killed. (21)

+ । ° 4 ; |
त्यक्त्वा लङ्का गता वस्तु पाताल सहपत्नय: ॥ २२॥

“Tormented by His might, the Raksasas,
being unable to fight Visnu in return, left
Lanka and went to the nether world with
their wives to reside there. (22)
सुमालिनं समासाद्य werd रघुसत्तम।
स्थिता: प्रख्यातवीर्यास्ते वंशे arene ge tl २३॥

“Those warriors well-known for their
bravery, lived there under the protection of

Sumali who was born in the line of
Salakatankata. (23)
ये त्वया निहतास्ते तु पौलस्त्या नाम राक्षसा:।
सुमाली माल्यवान् माली ये च तेषां पुर:सरा: ।

सर्व Ud महाभागा रावणाद् बलवत्तरा:॥ २४॥

“Sumali, Malyavan and Mali and those
who marched at their head, were all highly
blessed and stronger than Ravana; while
the other Raksasas who were killed by
You, came in the line of Pulastya, O jewel
among the Raghus! (24)

नचान्यो राक्षसान् हन्ता सुरारीन् देवकण्टकान्।

ऋते नारायणं देवं शङ्खचक्रगदाधरम्॥२५॥
“None other than Lord Narayana, the

bearer of the conch, the discus and the

club, could have killed the Raksasas, the

enemies and tormentors of gods. (25)

Var नारायणो देवश्चतुर्बाहु: सनातन:।
राक्षसान् हन्तुमुत्पन्नो ह्यजय्य: प्रभुरव्यय:॥ २६॥
“You are indeed Lord Narayana, the
four-armed, the ancient one; You are the
invincible and imperishable Lord! You were
born to destroy the Raksasas. (26)
नष्टधर्मव्यवस्थानां काले काले प्रजाकर:।
उत्पद्यते दस्युवधे शरणागतवत्सल:॥ २७॥
“You, the creator, who are fond of those
who have taken refuge in You, appear from
