678

दत्तमिष्टं हुतं चैव तप्तानि च तपांसि a
वेदा: सत्यप्रतिष्ठानास्तस्मात् सत्यपरो भवेत्॥ १४॥
“Charity, sacrificial performances, as
well as offering oblations into the sacred
fire, nay, austerities actually practised and
the Vedas studied have their foundation on
truth. Hence one should remain devoted to
truth. (14)
एक: पालयते लोकमेक: पालयते कुलम्।
मज्जत्येको fe निरय एक: स्वर्गे महीयते॥ eu ll

“According to the degree of virtue and
sin practised in one’s past lives one rules
over the world,another simply supports one’s
race alone; a third actually sinks into hell,
and yet another is respected in heaven.(15)
सोऽहं पितुर्निदेशं तु किमर्थं नानुपालये।
सत्यप्रतिश्रव: सत्यं सत्येन समयीकृतम्॥१६॥

“Wherefore, then, shall |, who know all
this, not carry out the behest of my father,
which was based on truth and solemnized
through swearing by truth, true to my promise
as | am? (16)

नैवलोभान्न मोहाद्वा न चाज्ञानात् तमोऽन्वित: |
सेतुं सत्यस्य भेत्स्यामि गुरो: सत्यप्रतिश्रव:॥ १७॥

“Neither from greed of sovereignty nor
even from infatuation nor again from ignorance
shall 1, overpowered by obtuseness of
understanding, violate the sanctity of my
father’s pledge given to mother, Kaikeyi,
true to my promise as | am. (17)

असत्यसंधस्य सतश्चलस्यास्थिरचेतस:।

नैव देवा न पितर: प्रतीच्छन्तीति न: श्रुतम्॥ १८॥
“It has been heard by us that neither

gods nor even manes accept the offerings

of a man who is not true to his promise, and

has thus deviated from truth and is of

irresolute mind. (18)

प्रत्यगात्ममिमं धर्मं सत्यं पश्याम्यहं ध्रुवम्।

भार: सत्पुरुषैश्चीर्णस्तदर्थमभिनन्द्यते।। १९ ॥
“| recognize this virtue in the form of

truthfulness as binding on all embodied beings

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA +

and foremost. The burden in the form of
matted locks has been made much of by
good men; hence it is welcomed by me.
(19)

at धर्ममहं त्यक्ष्ये ह्यधर्मं धर्मसंहितम्।
acids सेवितं पापकर्मभि:।॥ २०॥
“| shall certainly renounce the duty of
a Ksatriya (in the shape of assuming the
rulership of Ayodhya in violation of my
father’s injunction) which consists mostly of
unrighteousness, though seemingly attended
with an iota of virtue and which is followed
generally by petty, cruel and greedy men of
sinful deeds. (20)

कायेन Hed Ud मनसा सम्प्रधार्य तत्।
अनृतं जिह्वया चाह त्रिविधं कर्म पातकम्॥ २१॥
“Having first resolved upon a sinful
deed with the mind, a man speaks of his
vile intention to his friends and associates
with his tongue and then perpetrates it
with his body with the help of others. In this
way a sinful deed is accomplished in three
ways, viz., by thought, word and deed.
(21)

भूमि: कीर्तिर्यशो लक्ष्मी: पुरुषं प्रार्थयन्ति fe
सत्यं समनुवर्तन्ते सत्यमेव भजेत् तत:॥ २२॥

“Land, renown, glory and _ fortune
undoubtedly woo a man devoted to truth.
The wise pursue truth, hence one should
worship truth alone. (22)

TS ह्यनार्यमेव Ve Aq भवानवधार्य AML |
आह युक्तिकरैर्वाक्यैरिदं भद्रं कुरुष्व ह॥ २३॥

“What you have recommended to me
after concluding it to be the best for me in
so many logical words, viz., ‘this sovereignty
is good for you, unhesitatingly accept it,’
must be unquestionably improper for me.

(23)
कथं ह्यहं प्रतिज्ञाय वनवासमिमं गुरो:।
भरतस्य करिष्यामि वचो हित्वा Waa: il २४॥

“Having actually given my word of

honour to my father to remain in exile in the
