* AYODHYAKANDA +

“*`[ do not expect that mother Kausalya
and the king and, even so, my own mother,
Sumitra—all these will survive till this night.

(15)

जीवेदपि च A माता शात्रुघ्नस्यान्ववेक्षया।
ofan या fe कौसल्या वीरसूर्विनशिष्यति॥ १६॥

“Even if my mother survives in
expectation of the return of Satrughna, the
afflicted Kausalya, who has given birth to a
hero like Sri Rama, will surely die. (16)

अतिक्रान्तमतिक्रान्तमनवाप्य मनोरथम्।
राज्ये राममनिक्षिप्य पिता a विनशिष्यति॥ eon

“‘Failing to install Sri Rama on the
throne of Ayodhya and thus without realizing
his long cherished ambition, my father will
expire exclaiming “Everything is past and
gone |” (17)

प्रेतकार्येषु सर्वेषु संस्करिष्यन्ति भूमिपम्॥१८॥

“‘Accomplished of purpose indeed are
they who will, when the time comes for it,
consecrate my father, the deceased emperor,
in the course of all the funeral rites. (18)

रम्यचत्वरसंस्थानां सुविभक्तमहापथाम्।
हर्म्यप्रासादसम्पन्नां सर्वरत्नविभूषिताम्॥ १९॥
गजाश्वरथसम्बाधां तूर्यनादविनादिताम्।
सर्वकल्याणसम्पूर्णां हृष्टपुष्टजनाकुलाम्॥ २०॥
आरामोद्यानसम्पूर्णां समाजोत्सवशालिनीम्।
सुखिता विचरिष्यन्ति राजधानीं पितुर्मम॥ २१॥
““And happy are they who will, in the
event of my father’s survival, move about in
the capital of my father, the cross-roads of
which are located in beautiful spots, whose
main roads are clearly defined, which is richly
endowed with mansions as well as with
temples and palaces and adorned with all
sorts of precious things, which is crowded
with elephants, horses and chariots and made

601

resonant by the sound of clarionets, which is
full of all blessings and peopled by joyous
and well-fed men and women, and which is
rich in gardens and pleasances and looks
charming with a series of festivals. (19—21)

अपि सत्यप्रतिज्ञेन सार्धं कुशलिना वयम्।
Rad समये ह्यस्मिन् सुखिता: प्रविशेमहि॥ २२॥
“When this term of exile is actually over,
shall we Sita and myself happily return to
Ayodhya alongwith Sri Rama, who shall have
safely redeemed his word?’ (22)

परिदेवयमानस्य तस्यैवं हि महात्मन:।
तिष्ठतो राजपुत्रस्य शार्वरी सात्यवर्तत॥ २३॥

“Even while that high-souled prince,
Laksmana, who remained sitting all the while,
was lamenting as aforesaid, that night actually
slipped away. (23)
ward विमले aa कारयित्वा wet उभौ।
अस्मिन् भागीरथीतीरे Ga संतारितौ मया॥ २४॥

“Next morning, when a cloudless sun
appeared in the sky, both the brothers
alongwith Sita were safely ferried by me
across the stream after helping them in
entangling their locks into a mass of hair as
ascetics do, on this very bank of the Ganga.

(24)

व्यपेक्षमाणौ As सीतया गतौ ।। २५ ॥

“Wearing matted locks and attired in
the bark of trees, nay, wielding an excellent
quiver and bow each and looking all round
to scan the beauty of the landscape, the
two princes, who were possessed of
extraordinary strength and looked like a pair
of lordly elephants, and were capable of
tormenting their enemy, departed with Sita.”

(25)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रारामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्येऽयोध्याकाण्डे षडशीतितम: सर्ग: ॥ ८६ Il

Thus ends Canto Eighty-six in the Ayodhyakanda of the glorious Ramayana of
Valmiki, the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

