350

hearing of Vali, who went clockwise round
the four oceans squeezing Ravana in his
arm-pit, having been killed with a single
arrow as well as of Sugriva having been
crowned king by you, Vibhisana (who longed
for sovereignty) has for his part deliberately
come here. Taking all this into consideration
it seems advisable in any case to accept
him as our own. (66-67)

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA +

यथाशक्ति मयोक्तं तु राक्षसस्यार्जवं प्रति।
प्रमाणं त्वं fe शेषस्य श्रुत्वा बुद्धिमतां वर॥ ६८॥

“A plea has been given by me to the
best of my ability in favour of the ogre’s
sincerity. Having heard it, O prince of the
wise, you are indeed the best judge to
decide the rest what should be done.”

(68)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये FERS सप्तदश: AA: ॥ १७॥

Thus ends Canto Seventeen in the Yuddhakanda of the glorious Ramayana of

Valmiki, the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

अष्टादश: सर्ग:
Canto XVIII

Having heard the arguments of his counsellors, Sri
Rama decides to accept Vibhisana as his own

अथ राम: प्रसन्नात्मा श्रुत्वा वायुसुतस्य ह।
प्रत्यभाषत दुर्धर्ष: श्रुतवानात्मनि स्थितम्॥१॥

Delighted in his mind to hear from the
mouth of Hanuman, son of the wind-god,
what existed in his own mind, Sri Rama,
who was difficult to overpower and was
proficient in the sacred lore, forthwith replied
as follows: (1)

ममापि च विवक्षास्ति काचित् प्रति विभीषणम्।
श्रोतुमिच्छामि aq सर्वं vate: श्रेयसि स्थितै: ।। २॥
“There exists a desire in me too to say
something about Vibhisana. | would like to
have all that heard by you, who are devoted
to my welfare. (2)
मित्रभावेन word न त्यजेयं कथंचन।
दोषो यद्यपि तस्य स्यात् सतामेतदगर्हितम्॥ ३॥
“| cannot refuse to receive under any
circumstances him who has come to me
in a friendly spirit. Even if there in any
wickedness in him, his acceptance is not
reprehensible in the eyes of good people.”(3)

सुग्रीवस्त्वथ तद्वाक्यमाभाष्य च विमृश्य च।
ad: शुभतरं वाक्यमुवाच हरिपुङ्खव:॥४॥
Reflecting on Sri Rama’s reply and
also repeating it, Sugriva, the foremost of
monkeys, for his part thereupon immediately
made the following eminently suitable
submission: (4)
स ger वाप्यदुष्टो वा किमेष रजनीचर:।
ईदृशं व्यसनं Wa भ्रातरं a: परित्यजेत्॥५॥
“What does it matter if he is wicked
or otherwise? He is a ranger of the night
after all. When he can desert his own half-

brother, fallen in such adversity, there is
none on earth whom he would not betray.”

(5)
को नाम स भवेत् तस्य यमेष न परित्यजेत्।
वानराधिपतेर्वाक्यं श्रुत्वा सर्वानुदीक्ष्य quai
ईषदुत्स्मयमानस्तु लक्ष्मणं पुण्यलक्षणम्।
इति Bara काकुत्स्थो वाक्यं सत्यपराक्रम:॥ ७॥
Hearing the submission of Sugriva, the
suzerain lord of monkeys, and looking round
