# YUDDHAKANDA #

इत्युक्तो लोकपालैस्तै: स्वामी लोकस्य राघव: |
अब्रवीत् त्रिदशश्रेष्ठान् wat धर्मभृतां वर:॥ १०॥

Spoken to in these words by the
aforesaid protectors of the world, Sri Rama,
a scion of Raghu, the lord of the universe
and the foremost of those upholding the
cause of righteousness replied as follows
to the aforesaid jewels among the gods:

(10)
सोऽहं AI यतश्चाहं wate ब्रवीतु मे॥११॥

“| account myself a human being,
Rama by name, sprung from the loins of
Emperor DaSaratha. And yet let the glorious
lord Brahma tell me that which | as such
really am and whence | have come.” (11)
इति ब्रुवाणं काकुत्स्थं ब्रह्मा ब्रह्मविदां ae: |
अब्रवीच्छृणु A वाक्यं सत्यं सत्यपराक्रम॥ १२॥

To Sri Rama (a scion of Kakutstha),
who was speaking in this strain, Brahma,
the creator, the foremost of the knowers of
Brahma, replied as follows: “Listen, O Lord
of unfailing prowess, to my true submission.

(12)
Var नारायणो sa: श्रीमांश्चक्रायुध: WA: |
Hye वराहस्त्वं भूतभव्यसपत्नजित्॥१३॥

You are Lord Narayana Himself, the
glorious god who wields the discus,
‘Sudarsana’. Nay, You are the divine
Boar with a single tusk, the conqueror of
Your bygone as well as future enemies.

(13)

अक्षरं Gal सत्यं च AA चान्ते च राघव।
लोकानां त्वं परो धर्मो विष्वक्सेनश्चतुर्भुज:।॥ १४॥

“You are the imperishable Brahma, the
Absolute, the Truth abiding at the beginning,
in the middle, as well as at the end of the
universe, O scion of Raghu! You are the
supreme Law operating in all the worlds.
Your forces in the shape of Your controlling

795

agents are spread all round; You are the
four-armed Lord, Sri Hari. (14)

शार्ङ्गधन्वा हृषीकेश: Tea: पुरुषोत्तम:।
अजित: खड्गधृग् विष्णु: कृष्णश्चैव बृहद्बल: ॥ १५ ॥
“You are are the Wielder of the Sarnga
bow, the Subduer of the senses, the Inner
Controller and the Supreme Person, the
invincible Visnu, the Wielder of a sword

called Nandaka as well as Sr Krsna
endowed with great might. (15)
सेनानीरग्रामणीश्च त्वं बुद्धि: सत्त्वं क्षमा दम:।
प्रभवश्चाप्ययश्च त्वमुपेन्द्रो मधुसूदन:॥१६॥
“You. are Lord’ Kartikeya_ (the

commander of the celestial army) as well
as the village headman. You are the faculty
of understanding, strength, forbearance and
sense-control. You are the origin as well as
the end of all. You are the Divine Dwarf (the
younger brother of Indra) as also the
exterminator of the demon Madhu. (16)

इन्द्रकर्मा महेन्द्रस्त्वं पद्मनाभो रणान्तकृत्।
शरण्यं शरणं च त्वामाहुर्दिव्या महर्षय:॥ Voll
“You are the creator of Indra (in the
form of Prajapati, a creator of beings), the
Supreme Ruler, Lord Visnu (who has a
lotus sprung from His navel), who puts an
end to all in combat. Eminent divine sages
pronounce You to be fit to afford protection
to all as well as the refuge of all. (17)

सहस्रशृङ्गो वेदात्मा शतशीर्षो महर्षभ:।
त्वं त्रयाणां fe लोकानामादिकर्ता स्वयंप्रभु: ।। १८ ॥
In the shape of the Vedas, You are the
great Bull with a thousand horns (in the
shape of as many redactions) and a hundred
heads in the shape of as many precepts.
You are the first Creator of all the three
worlds and the self-constituted Lord of all.
(18)

सिद्धानामपि साध्यानामाश्रयश्चासि gas: |
त्वं यज्ञस्त्वं वषट्कारस्त्वमोंकार: परात्पर:॥१९॥

You are the refuge as well as the
