# YUDDHAKANDA #

ते वध्यमाना: WAX वानरा: पादपायुधा:।
अभ्यवर्षन्त सहसा Wafer seme’: ३५॥

While being struck on the battlefield by
Indrajit, as aforesaid, all the monkeys, who
were armed with trees, covered the son of
Ravana all of a sudden (where he stood
concealed and from where he discharged
his arrows and other weapons) with crags
and trees. (35)

इन्द्रजित् तु तदा Hal महातेजा महाबल:।
वानराणां शरीराणि व्यधमद् रावणात्मज:॥ ३६॥
Seized with wrath, the exceptionally
mighty Indrajit, son of Ravana, for his part,
who was endowed with extraordinary energy,
then began to tear into pieces the bodies of
the monkeys. (36)

शरेणैकेन च हरीन् नव we च सप्त च।
बिभेद समरे क्रुद्धो राक्षसान् सम्प्रहर्षयन्॥ ३७॥

Nay, filled with rage, Indrajit pierced
with a single arrow as many as nine, five
and seven monkeys, respectively, on the
field of battle, bringing excessive delight to
the ogres. (37)

स शरै: सूर्यसंकाशै: शातकुम्भविभूषणै: |
वानरान् समरे वीर: प्रममाथ सुदुर्जय:॥ ३८॥
The heroic Indrajit, wno was exceedingly
difficult to conquer, exterminated the monkeys
on the field of battle with his arrows, which
glittered like the sun and were decorated
with gold. (38)
a भिन्नगात्रा: wart वानरा: शरपीडिता:।
पेतुर्मथितसंकल्पा: सुरैरिव महासुरा:॥३९॥
Overwhelmed by the arrows, the
aforesaid monkeys, whose limbs were
pierced, and whose designs had been
frustrated, fell like great demons oppressed
by gods with their arrows. (39)

a तपन्तमिवादित्यं घोरैर्बाणगभस्तिभि:।
अभ्यधावन्त संक्रुद्धा: संयुगे वानरर्षभा:॥४०॥
Highly enraged, the said bulls among

607

the monkeys, rushed on the field of battle in
the direction of Indrajit, who was blazing like
the sun with his rays in the form of arrows.
(40)
ततस्तु वानरा: aa भिन्नदेहा विचेतस:।
व्यथिता विद्रवन्ति स्म रुधिरेण समुक्षिता:॥४१॥

Bathed in blood, their bodies mutilated,

nay, agonized and distressed, all the
monkeys for their part thereupon
stampeded. (41)

रामस्यार्थे पराक्रम्य वानरास्त्यक्तजीविता:।
नर्दन्तस्तेऽनिव्रत्तास्तु समरे सशिलायुधा:॥४२॥

Having exhibited their prowess, the
monkeys, who had staked their lives in the
cause of Sri Rama, did not retrace their
steps and kept roaring on the battlefield,
armed with rocks. (42)

ते ga: पर्वताग्रैश्च शिलाभिश्च प्लवंगमा:।
अभ्यवर्षन्त समरे रावणिं समवस्थिता:॥४३॥

Remaining firm on the battlefield, the
aforesaid monkeys began to cover the son
of Ravana with trees, mountain peaks and
rocks. (43)
तं द्रुमाणां शिलानां च ad प्राणहरं महत्।
व्यपोहत महातेजा रावणि: समितिंजय:॥४४॥

Indrajit, son of Ravana, who was ever
victorious in combat and was endowed
with extraordinary energy, dispersed that
mighty and deadly hail of trees and
rocks. (44)

तत: पावकसंकाशै: शरैराशीविषोपमै:।
वानराणामनीकानि बिभेद समरे प्रभु:॥४५॥
The mighty ogre thereupon began to
split the simian ranks on the battlefield with
his arrows, which shone brightly as fire and
resembled venomous serpents. (45)
अष्टादशशरैस्तीक्ष्णै: स विद्ध्वा गन्धमादनम्।
विव्याधं नवभिश्चैव नलं दूरादवस्थितम्॥४६॥

Having pierced Gandhamadana with
