624

Endowed with flags and pennons,
equipped with excellent axes shaped like
swords, nay, consisting of formidable horses,
chariots and elephants, crowded with foot
soldiers of every description and distinguished
by shining pikes, maces, swords, spears,
lances and bows, that terrible army of ogres
was noted for its redoubtable valour and
prowess. (54-55)
ag ज्वलितप्रासं किङ्किणीशतनादितम्।
हेमजालाचितभुजं व्यावेष्टितपरश्वधम्॥ ५६ I
व्याघूर्णितमहाशस्त्रं बाणसंसक्तकार्मुकम्।
गन्धमाल्यमधूत्सेकसम्मोदितमहानिलम् ॥५७॥
de geal बलमायातं राक्षसानां दुरासदमू।।५८।।
संचचाल प्लवंगानां बलमुच्चैर्ननाद च।
जवेनाप्लुत्य च पुनस्तद् Tet रक्षसां महत्॥५९॥
अभ्ययात् प्रत्यरिबलं पतंगा sa पावकम्।
तेषां भुजपरामर्शव्यामृष्टपरिघाशनि Il ६० UI
राक्षसानां बलं श्रेष्ठं भूय: परमशोभत।
तत्रोन्मत्ता इवोत्पेतुर्हहयोऽथ युयुत्सव:॥६१॥
तरुशैलैरभिघ्नन्तो मुष्टिभिश्च निशाचरान्।
तथैवापततां तेषां हरीणां निशितै: शरै:॥६२॥
शिरांसि सहसा we राक्षसा भीमविक्रमा:।
दशनैर्हतकर्णाश्च मुष्टिभिर्भिन्नमस्तका:।
शिलाप्रहारभग्नाङ्गा विचेरुस्तत्र राक्षसा:॥६३॥

It looked dreadful with its shining lances,
was rendered noisy by hundreds of tiny
bells tied round the chariots and elephants
etc., and the arms of its warriors were
adorned with sets of gold ornaments. Axes
were being brandished, mighty weapons
were being waved about and arrows were
being fitted to the bows. The extensive
atmosphere of the battlefield was rendered
fragrant by the abundance of sandal-paste,
garlands and wine. The army was crowded
with gallant warriors and thundered like
huge clouds. Beholding the aforesaid army
of ogres—which was difficult to assail—
arrived, the army of monkeys marched forth

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA +

to meet it and let forth loud cries.
Nay, springing forward with all speed, that
mighty army of ogres rushed once more
towards the hostile army as moths would
towards a flame. The excellent army of
ogres, in which iron clubs and Asanis (a
kind of missile) were being brandished
through the action of their arms shone all
the more brightly. As though frenzied, the
monkeys there, who were eager to fight,
rushed forth at once, striking the night-
stalkers with trees, crags and fists. Likewise
with their whetted shafts the ogres of
redoubtable prowess precipitately tore off
the heads of those monkeys even as they
came rushing forward. Their ears bitten off
with the teeth of the monkeys, their skulls
smashed with the fists of the monkeys
and their limbs broken with the blows
of rocks hurled by the monkeys, the
ogres moved about in the streets of Lanka.

(56—63)

तथैवाप्यपरे wet कपीनामसिभि: fore: |
प्रवरानभितो जघ्नुर्घोररूपा निशाचरा:॥६४॥

Even so the other night-stalkers of
grim aspect struck the foremost of the
aforesaid monkeys on all sides with their
sharp swords. (64)

घ्नन्तमन्यं जघानान्य: पातयन्तमपातयत् |
गर्हमाणं जगर्हान्यो दशन्तमपरोऽदशत्॥६५॥
One warrior struck his adversary striking
another; a second one threw down his
adversary throwing down another; a third
one reproached his opponent reproaching
another, while a fourth one bit his rival
biting another. (65)

देहीत्यन्यो ददात्यन्यो ददामीत्यपर: पुन:।

किं क्लेशयसि तिष्ठेति तत्रान्योन्यं बभाषिरे॥ ६६ ॥
“Give battle to me,” said one, on which

the other offered to fight with him; while

still another intervened, saying: “Il offer

resistance to him, tarry; why do you subject
