+ UTTARAKANDA +

alas वामदेवं च जाबालिमथ काश्यपम्।
द्विजांश्च सर्वप्रवरानश्वमेधपुरस्कृतान्॥ २॥
Ua सर्वान् समानीय मन्त्रयित्वा च लक्ष्मण।
wa लक्षणसम्पन्नं विमोक्ष्यामि समाधिना॥ ३॥
‘O Laksmana, after having brought
together all the sages e.g., Vasistha,
Vamadeva, Jabali, KaSyapa, and _ all
Brahmanas belonging to all Pravaras (Rsi
ancestors) and proficient in the performance
of the ASvamedha and also consulting them,
| shall let loose a horse, with auspicious
marks, carefully.’ (2-3)

तद् वाक्यं राघवेणोक्तं श्रुत्वा त्वरितविक्रम:।
द्विजान् सर्वान् समाहूय दर्शयामास राघवम्॥४॥

Hearing those words of the descendant
of Raghu, Sri Rama, Laksmana of speedy
gait, calling all Brahmanas presented them
to the scion of Raghu. (4)

a दृष्टवा देवसंकाशं कृतपादाभिवन्दनम्।
Tard सुदुराधर्षमाशीभि: समपूजयन्॥७५॥
Having seen him, who was like a god,
and had adored their feet, they honoured Sri
Rama, the invincible, with blessings. (5)

Wate: स det भूत्वा राघवो द्विजसत्तमान्।

उवाच धर्मसंयुक्तमश्वमेधाश्रितं वच:॥६॥
Then folding his hands in salutation,

the scion of Raghu, spoke to the best

Brahmanas about Asvamedha, full of
righteousness. (6)
तेऽपि रामस्य तच्छृत्वा नमस्कृत्वा FAAS |

अश्वमेधं द्विजा: सर्वे पूजयन्ति स्म सर्वश:॥७॥
All those Brahmanas too having heard
(the intention) of Sri Rama paying obeisance
to Mahadeva, the god with the bull as His
emblem, spoke very high of ASvamedha. (7)
a तेषां द्विजमुख्यानां वाक्यमद्भुतदर्शनम्।
अश्वमेधाश्रितं श्रुत्वा et प्रीतोऽभवत् तदा॥ ८॥
Having heard the wonderful words of

the leading Brahmanas, related to the
Asvamedha, he was extremely pleased. (8)

1097

fasta कर्म तत् तेषां रामो लक्ष्मणमब्रवीत्।
प्रेषयस्व महाबाहो सुग्रीवाय महात्मने॥९॥
यथा महद्भिर्हरिभिर्बहुभिश्च वनौकसाम्।
सार्धमागच्छ भद्रं A अनुभोक्तुं महोत्सवम्॥१०॥

Knowing their intention to perform that
sacrifice, Sri Rama spoke to Laksmana : ‘O
one of long arms, send for the noble Sugriva,
alongwith several great monkeys and other
denizens of the forest, to enjoy this great
ceremony; may welfare be with them. (9-10)

विभीषणश्च रक्षोभि: कामगैर्बहुभिर्वृत:।
अश्वमेधं महायज्ञमायात्वतुलविक्रम: 1 ११ ॥

‘May Vibhisana, too, possessed of great
power, come to the great sacrifice,
Asvamedha, accompanied by the Raksasas
(demons) moving at will. (11)

राजानश्च महाभागा a a प्रियचिकोर्षव:।
सानुगा: क्षिप्रमायान्तु यज्ञं भूमिनिरीक्षका:॥१२॥

‘All those kings of great fortune, who
are desirous of my welfare, will come soon
with attendants to see the ground of
Asvamedha. (12)

देशान्तरगता ये च द्विजा धर्मसमाहिता:।
आमन्त्रयस्व तान् सर्वानश्वमेधाय लक्ष्मण॥१३॥
ऋषयश्च महाबाहो आहूयन्तां तपोधना:।
देशान्तरगता: सर्वे सदाराश्च द्विजातय:॥१४॥

‘O Laksmana, invite all those
Brahmanas, who have migrated to other
countries, are devoted to righteousness, on
the occasion of ASvamedha. O one of long
arms, invite the sages rich in penance, and
all the Brahmanas staying abroad together
with their spouses. (13-14)

तथैव तालावचरास्तथैव नटनर्तका:।
यज्ञवाटश्च सुमहान् गोमत्या नैमिषे वने॥१५॥
आज्ञाप्यतां महाबाहो ax पुण्यमनुत्तमम्।
शान्तयश्च महाबाहो प्रवर्तन्तां समन्तत:॥१६॥
‘So also call the dancers with symbols,

the actors and other dancers, make the great
sacrificial place to be ready. O one of long
