* SUNDARAKANDA +

The said offspring of the wind-god,
Hanuman, regarded with an eye full of esteem
Aksa—who, having seized his bow, was
covering the sky with various excellent
arrows, keen as he was for an encounter—
and became thoughtful. (24)

विचिन्तयामास रणे पराक्रमम्॥ 24 UI

Roaring, when pierced in the breast
with shafts by the high-minded Aksa, the
foremost of princes, the mighty-armed
Hanuman, who knew how to act under
particular circumstances, reflected on the
following lines on the prowess of Aksa on
the field of battle. (25)

अबालवद् बालदिवाकरप्रभ:
करोत्ययं कर्म महन्महाबल:।

न ura सर्वाहवकर्मशालिन:
प्रमापणे मे मतिरत्र जायते॥ २६॥

“Endowed with extraordinary might and
possessing the splendour of the rising sun,
this boy is accomplishing great deeds unlike
a boy! Nor do | feel inclined to kill on this
occasion this youth, who is distinguished in
his acts of warfare. (26)
अयं महात्मा च महांश्च वीर्यत:

समाहितश्चातिसहश्च संयुगे।
दि [गणे :
सनागयक्षैर्मुनिभिश्च पूजित:॥ २७॥

“This prince is high-souled and also
eminent in valour; nay, he is circumspect
and extremely enduring in combat and is
adored even by hermits including Nagas

and Yaksas due to exaltation of his deeds
and virtues. (27)

पराक्रमोत्साहविवृद्धमानस:

समीक्षते At प्रमुखोऽग्रत: ere: |
पराक्रमो ह्यस्य मनांसि कम्पयेत्

सुरासुराणामपि शीघ्रकारिण:॥ २८॥

209

“Standing in the van as the leader,
reassured as he is by prowess and strength
of will, he looks me straight in the eyes.
Surely the valour of this warrior, who is
quick of action, would shake the mind even
of gods and demons. (28)

न खल्वयं नाभिभवेदुपेक्षित:
पराक्रमो ह्यस्य रणे विवर्धते।
प्रमापणं ह्यस्य AAT रोचते
न वर्धमानोऽग्निरुपेक्षितुं aa: २९॥
“If disregarded, he would undoubtedly
get the better of me; for his prowess grows
in combat. Putting an end to him, therefore,
now finds favour with me. A spreading fire
is not worth neglecting.” (29)

इति प्रवेगं तु परस्य तर्कयन्
स्वकर्मयोगं च विधाय वीर्यवान्।
चकार at तु महाबलस्तदा
मतिं च चक्रेऽस्य वधे तदानीम्॥ ३०॥
Pondering thus the tremendous speed
of the enemy and determining the course of
his own action, the powerful Hanuman for
his part, who was endowed with extraordinary
might, made up his mind to kill him without
delay and increased his momentum for that
purpose. (30)
स तस्य तानष्ट वरान् महाहयान्
समाहितान् भारसहान् विवर्तने।
जघान dk: पथि वायुसेविते
तलप्रहारै: पवनात्मज: कपि:।। ३१॥
Coursing through the airspace, that
valiant Hanuman, sprung from the loins of
the wind-god, killed with the blows of his
palm Aksa’s well-known eight big horses,
trained in turning quickly to the right and left
and capable of enduring the burden of the
chariot. (31)

ततस्तलेनाभिहतो महारथ:
स तस्य पिङ्गाधिपमन्तिनिर्जित: |
a wre: परिव्रत्तकूबर:
पपात भूमौ हतवाजिरम्बरात्॥ ३२॥
