« KISKINDHAKANDA +

and shone like a star dropped from the
heavens : (1)

गुणदोषकृतं जन्तु: स्वकर्म फलहेतुकम्।
अव्यग्रस्तदवाप्नोति सर्वं प्रेत्य शुभाशुभम्॥२॥

Hanuman pleaded : “An embodied soul
steadily reaps on departing from this world
all the good and evil fruit of his actions done
under the notion of virtue or vice and with an
eye to their good or evil consequences. (2)
शोच्या शोचसि कं शोच्यं दीनं दीनानुकम्पसे।

HY कस्यानुशोच्योऽस्ति देहेऽस्मिन् बुद्बुदोपमे Ul ३ ॥

“Yourself worth grieving for, whom else
do you grieve for as pitiable and, yourself
miserable, what miserable beings do you
commiserate? This body being evanescent
like a bubble, who is worth grieving for and
to whom? (3)
अङ्गदस्तु कुमारोऽयं द्रष्टव्यो जीवपुत्रया।
आयत्यां च विधेयानि समर्थान्यस्य चिन्तय॥४॥

“This boy, Angada, for his part should
be looked after by you, the mother of a
surviving son. Please also bestow your
thought on the rites that should be performed
by you hereafter for the good of Vali, in the
other world. (4)
जानास्यनियतामेवं भूतानामागतिं गतिम्।
तस्माच्छुभं fe कर्तव्यं पण्डिते Ae लौकिकम्॥ ५॥

“You know the birth and death of created
beings to be indefinite; therefore, O wise
lady, only that which yields good results
hereafter should be done on these occasions
of bereavement from one’s near and dear
ones and nothing which is purely worldly
such as wailing and crying for a departed
soul. (5)

यस्मिन् हरिसहस्राणि शतानि नियुतानि च।
वर्तयन्ति कृताशानि सोऽयं दिष्टान्तमागत:॥ ६॥
“This Vali, on whom hundreds of
thousands, nay, hundreds of millions of
monkeys depended with their hopes centred
in him, has reached the end of his allotted
span 0 life. (6)

1009

Gea न्यायदूष्टार्थ सामदानक्षमापर:।
Tat धर्मजितां भूमिं At शोचितुमर्हसि॥७॥
“Since Vall, who attended to the affairs
of his state in conformity with the principles
of equity and was intent on giving solace to
the afflicted, bestowing gifts on the needy
and forgiving the wrongdoer—is sure to
ascend to the realm of those who have
scored a victory through righteousness, you
ought not to grieve for him. (7)

wa च हरिशार्दूला: पुत्रश्चायं तवाङ्गद:।
हर्यक्षपतिराज्यं च त्वत्सनाथमनिन्दिते॥८॥

“Nay, all the tigers among monkeys as
well as this son of yours, Angada, and the
kingdom of the monkeys and the bears
have their protector in you, O irreproachable
lady ! (8)

ताविमौ शोकसंतप्तौ शनै: प्रेरय भामिनि।
त्वया परिगृहीतोऽयमङ्गद: शास्तु मेदिनीम्॥९॥

“Gradually spur on to activity these
two, Sugriva and Angada, who are distracted
with grief, O good lady ! Let Angada, taken
by the hand by you, rule the earth. (9)
संततिश्च यथा दृष्टा peat यच्चापि साम्प्रतम्।
राज्ञस्तत् क्रियतां सर्वमेष कालस्य Fara: it १०॥
संस्कार्यो हरिराजस्तु अङ्गदश्चाभिषिच्यताम्।
सिंहासनगतं ot पश्यन्ती शान्तिमेष्यसि॥११॥

“Let all that for which a male offspring
is commended in the scriptures and which
is salutary for the deceased king in the
other world be gone through: this is the
decree of Time. Vali (the king of monkeys)
ought in every case to be cremated and let
Angada be installed on the throne. Beholding
your son seated on the throne you will have
peace of mind.” (10-11)

सा तस्य वचनं श्रुत्वा भर्तृव्यसनपीडिता।
अब्रवीदुत्तरं तारा हनूमन्तमवस्थितम्॥१२॥

Hearing the admonition of Hanuman, the
celebrated Tara, who was afflicted due to the
evil plight of her husband, made the following
reply to Hanuman, standing near : (12)
