* BALAKANDA +

233

खष्टितम: सर्ग:
Canto LX

At the instance of ViSwamitra the sages assembled at his hermitage
commence a sacrifice; on the gods failing to appear at the
sacrifice to accept the offerings, Viswamitra sends
Trisanku bodily to heaven by dint of his own
Spiritual power, but the latter is expelled by
Indra, on which ViSwamitra stops him in
the air and proceeds to create a new
heaven and desists from his purpose
only on the gods granting his desire

तपोबलहतान् ज्ञात्वा वासिष्ठान् समहोदयान्।
ऋषिमध्ये महातेजा विश्वामित्रोऽभ्यभाषत॥ १॥
Coming to know by his yogic power of
Vasistha’s sons having been ruined alongwith
Mahodaya by dint of his spiritual power, the
exceptionally glorious Viswamitra spoke as
follows in the midst of the Rsis assembled
at his hermitage : (1)

अयमिक्ष्वाकुदायादस्त्रिशङ्कुरिति © fasta: |
धर्मिष्ठश्च वदान्यश्च at चैव शरणं गत:॥ २॥
स्वेनानेन शरीरेण देवलोकजिगीषया।
यथायं स्वशरीरेण देवलोकं गमिष्यति॥ ३॥
तथा प्रवर्त्यतां यज्ञो भवद्धिश्च मया सह।
विश्वामित्रवच: श्रुत्वा सर्व Wa महर्षय:॥४॥
ऊचु: समेता: सहसा wat धर्मसंहितम्।
अयं कुशिकदायादो मुनि: परमकोपन:॥७५॥
“Here is a scion of Ikswaku, widely
known by the name of TriSanku, who is not
only exceedingly pious but generous also
and has moreover sought me as his refuge
with the desire of ascending to the realm
of gods in his own present form of a
Candala. A sacrifice may kindly be set on
foot by you collectively alongwith me so
that this prince may ascend to the region of
gods in his own embodied state.” Hearing
the request of ViSwamitra, all the great Rsis
(present in that assembly), who knew what
is right, conferred and quickly made to one

another the following observation, consistent
with righteousness : “This sage, ViSwamitra
(the son of Kusika), is exceedingly irascible.
(2—5)

यदाह वचनं सम्यगेतत् कार्यं न संशय:।
अग्निकल्पो fe भगवान् शापं areata रोषत:॥ ६॥
“The proposal that he has put forward
must be duly carried out: there is no doubt
about it; for the almighty sage, who is
bright as fire, will pronounce a curse (upon
us) through anger if his desire is not
accomplished. (6)

तस्मात् प्रवर्त्यतां aa: सशरीरो यथा दिवि।
गच्छेदिक्ष्वाकुदायादो विश्वामित्रस्य तेजसा॥७॥

“Therefore, let a sacrifice be set on
foot so that TriSanku, a scion of Ikswaku,
may bodily ascend to heaven by virtue of
ViSwamitra’s spiritual energy. (7)
Wa: प्रवर्त्यतां aa: aad समधितिष्ठत।
`एवमुक्त्वा महर्षय: संजह्रुस्ता: क्रियास्तदा॥८॥

“Hence let a sacrifice be started and
you all take up your respective priestly
duties.” Saying so, the great Rsis assembled
there, then duly took charge of their respective
priestly functions. (8)

याजकश्च महातेजा विश्वामित्रोऽभवत् क्रतौ।
masse मन्त्रवन्मन्त्रकोविदा:॥ ९॥
चक्रु: सर्वाणि कर्माणि यथाकल्पं यथाविधि।
तत: कालेन महता विश्वामित्रो महातपा:॥ १०॥
