1044

regained by you and the prosperity of your

royal house stands heightened by you.
(1—9)

मित्राणां संग्रह: शेषस्तद् भवान् कर्तुमर्हति।

यो fe मित्रेषु कालज्ञ: सततं साधु वर्तते॥१०॥

तस्य राज्यं च कोर्तिश्च प्रतापश्चापि वर्धते।

यस्य aig दण्डश्च मित्राण्यात्मा च भूमिप।

समान्येतानि सर्वाणि स राज्यं महदश्नुते॥११॥

“The earning of the goodwill of friends
(by obliging them through opportune
services) remains and that you must do.
The dominion, fame and glory of a sovereign
who, having a sense of time, conducts
himself well towards his allies, grow. He to
whom exchequer, military strength, allies
and his own self—all these are equally dear
enjoys a large dominion, O protector of the
earth ! (10-11)

aq भवान् ares: स्थित: पथि निरत्यये।
मित्रार्थमभिनीतार्थं यथावत् कर्तुमर्हति॥१२॥

“Rich in moral conduct and established
in a path (the path of virtue) which is free
from danger, you ought duly to accomplish
the purpose of your friend, which has been
undertaken by you. (12)

Gera सर्वकर्माणि मित्रार्थे यो न ada
सम्भ्रमाद् विकृतोत्साह: सोऽनर्थैर्नावरुध्यते॥ १३॥

“He who does not wholly give up all
other duties and attend with alacrity to the
cause of his friend exhibiting his zeal in a
special degree for that cause, meets with
disaster. (13)

यो fe कालव्यतीतेषु मित्रकार्येषु add
स कृत्वा महतोऽप्यर्थान्नं मित्रार्थेन युज्यते॥१४॥

“He who actually attends to the
concerns of his friend when their time has
definitely passed, does not work in unison
with the purpose of his friend, even though
achieving great things. (14)

dec मित्रकार्यं a: कालातीतमरिदम।
क्रियतां राघवस्यैतद् वैदेह्या: परिमार्गणम्॥ १५॥

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

“The present object of our friend, viz,
the search of Sita (a princess of the Videha
territory) will get delayed, O tamer of foes !
Therefore, let this work of Sri Rama
(a scion of Raghu) be accomplished apace.

(15)
न च कालमतीतं a निवेदयति कालवित्।
त्वरमाणोऽपि स प्राज्ञस्तव राजन् वशानुग:॥ १६॥

“Submitting, as he does, to your will, O
king, the wise Sri Rama would not tell you
the time for action had passed, even though

he has a sense of time and is also in a
hurry to get his work done. (16)

कुलस्य eq: स्फीतस्य दीर्घबन्धुश्च Wea: |
अप्रमेयप्रभावश्च स्वयं चाप्रतिमो गुणै:।॥ १७॥
“Sri Rama, a scion of Raghu, is
responsible for your race being prosperous
and will continue to be your friend for a long
time. Nay, immeasurable is his power and
he is peerless in personal virtues. (17)
तस्य त्वं He a कार्यं ud तेन ad तव।
हरीश्वर कपिश्रेष्ठानाज्ञापयितुमर्हसि॥ १८ ॥
“Pray, accomplish his object in the
same way as your purpose has already
been accomplished by him, O lord of
monkeys ! In this behalf you ought to issue
orders to the foremost of monkeys to bring
together Vanara hordes. (18)

नहि Waa wad कालो व्यतीतश्चोदनादृते।
चोदितस्य fe कार्यस्य भवेत् कालव्यतिक्रम: 8

“Time will not be considered as having
elapsed in vain if the work is commenced
without any pressure from him. If, however,
the work is commenced under pressure
from Sri Rama, delay will surely be regarded
as having taken place. (19)

अकर्तुरपि कार्यस्य var कर्ता हरीश्वर।
fe पुन: प्रतिकर्तुस्ते राज्येन च वधेन AI Roll
“You ought to accomplish the work of

Sri Rama even if he had not achieved your
purpose, O lord of monkeys! Much more
