« KISKINDHAKANDA +

(Arjuna) trees, which have appeared, as it

were, with my thought, are also seen here.
(24)

अहो सुरमणीयोऽयं देश: शत्रुनिषूदन।

दृढं tera सौमित्रे साध्वत्र निवसावहे॥ २५॥

“Ah, this region is most delightful, O
destroyer of foes! Let us live comfortably
here, O son of Sumitra! We shall surely
enjoy life at this place. (25)

इतश्च नातिदूरे सा किष्किन्धा चित्रकानना।
सुग्रीवस्य पुरी wer भविष्यति नृपात्मज॥ २६॥

“Kiskindha, that lovely capital of Sugriva,
consisting of wonderful woodlands, will not
be very far from here, O prince ! (26)
गीतवादित्रनिर्घोष: sad जयतां atl
नदतां वानराणां च मृदङ्गाडम्बरै: AEN २७॥

“The sound of vocal music and the
crash of musical instruments coming from
monkeys howling to the beat of clay tomtoms
is being heard, O jewel among the victorious !

(27)
qa नन्दति सुग्रीव: सम्प्राप्य महतीं श्रियम्॥ 2c

“Having regained his wife and got back
his kingdom and having fully recovered a
great fortune, Sugriva, the foremost of
monkeys, is surely rejoicing in the midst of
his near and dear ones.” (28)

इत्युक्त्वा न्यवसत् AT WHA: सहलक्ष्मण:।
बहुदृश्यदरीकुञ्जे तस्मिन् प्रस्रवणे गिरौ॥ २९॥

Saying so, Sri Rama (a scion of Raghu)
alongwith Laksmana took up his abode on
that Prasravana hill comprising caves and
bowers and full of numerous objects worth
seeing in that region. (29)
wae fe बहुद्रव्ये afer fe धरणीधरे।
वसतस्तस्य रामस्य रतिरल्पापि नाभवत्॥ ३०॥
wat हि भार्यां स्मरत: प्राणेभ्योऽपि गरीयसीम्।
उदयाभ्युदितं gear शशाङ्कं च विशेषत:॥ ३१॥
आविवेश न तं frat निशासु शयनं गतम्।
तत्समुत्थेन शोकेन बाष्पोपहतचेतनम्॥३२॥

1033

Not the least joy was found by Sri
Rama while he was actually living on that
mountain, which was full of great comforts
and contained abundant wealth in the shape
of flowers and fruits etc., remembering as
he did his abducted consort, who was more
valuable to him than life. Sleep did not come
upon him during the nights even though he
lay on his bed, particularly on seeing the
moon risen on the eastern mountain with a
full orb, seized as he was with grief caused
by the thought of his lost wife, his
consciousness being obscured through his
constantly shedding tears. (30—32)
तं शोचमानं काकुत्स्थं नित्यं शोकपरायणम्।
तुल्यदु:खोऽब्रवीद्भ्राता लक्ष्मणोऽनुनयं TA: ।। ३३ ॥

His younger brother, Laksmana, who
shared his grief, addressed the following
words, full of supplication, to the aforesaid
Sri Rama (a scion of Kakutstha), who was
constantly mourning and was given over to
grief: (33)
अलं वीर व्यथां गत्वा न त्वं शोचितुमर्हसि।
शोचतो ह्यवसीदन्ति सर्वार्था विदितं हि ते॥ ३४॥

“Cease giving way to agony, O heroic
prince! you ought not to grieve. It is
undoubtedly known to you how all the
purposes of a grieving man get actually
frustrated. (34)

भवान् क्रियापरो लोके भवान् देवपरायण:।
आस्तिको धर्मशीलश्च व्यवसायी च राघव॥ ३५॥

“You are devoted to your duties in this
world. You are a votary of gods, believe in
the existence of God and the other world
and are pious by nature and energetic too,
O scion of Raghu! (35)

न ह्यव्यवसित: wa ward तं विशेषत:।

समर्थस्त्वं रणे हन्तुं विक्रमे जिह्मकारिणम्॥ ३६॥
“Remaining inactive, you will not at all

be able to kill in an encounter your enemy,

particularly that ogre, Ravana, who practises
wiles where prowess is needed. (36)
