+ UTTARAKANDA +

give up anger and control like a charioteer,
one’s senses, running forth towards their
objects like very wicked horses, after turning
them away from their objects (17—23)
मनसा कर्मणा वाचा चक्षुषा च समाचरेत्।
NT लोकस्य चरतो न द्वेष्टि न च लिप्यते॥ २४॥
न तत् कुर्यादसिस्तीक्ष्ण: सर्पो वा व्याहत: WaT |
अरिर्वा नित्यसंक्रुद्धो यथाऽऽत्मा दुरनुष्ठित:॥ २५ Ul
विनीतविनयस्यापि प्रकृतिर्न विधीयते।
Welt गूहमानस्य निश्चयेन कृतिर्भुवा॥ २६॥
“A man should do good to the people
around himself by thought, by action and by
speech. He should not hurt anybody. No
sin, therefore, will attach to him. The harm,
which is wrought by evil thoughts, are not
done by a sharp sword or a serpent trampled
by foot or an ever wrothful enemy. One who
has learnt discipline, even his temperament
cannot be changed. Even if someone
conceals his evil nature, it is surely betrayed
by his action. (24—26)

wage: a faut वै रामेणाक्लिष्टकर्मणा।
feu: सर्वार्थसिद्धस्तु अब्रवीद् रामसंनिधौ॥ २७॥

Thus asked by Sri Rama, who was
unwearied in actions, the _Brahmana
Sarvarthasiddha said this in Sri Rama’s
presence: (27)
मया दत्तप्रहारोऽयं क्रोधेनाविष्टचेतसा।
भिक्षार्थमटमानेन काले विगतभैक्षके॥ २८॥
रथ्यास्थितस्त्वयं VAT वै गच्छ गच्छेति भाषित: ।
अथ TAROT गच्छंस्तु रथ्यान्ते विषमं स्थित:॥ २९॥

‘While | was going about for begging food
the appropriate time for begging had passed,
| was overpowered by anger, so | beat it. The
dog, which was standing on the road (blocking
my way) was asked by me to move away.
Not moving at all, it stood in the middle of the
road in an odd manner. (28-29)
क्रोधेन क्षुधयाविष्टस्ततो दत्तोऽस्य राघव।
प्रहारो राजराजेन्द्र शाधि मामपराधिनम्॥ ३०॥
त्वया शस्तस्य राजेन्द्र नास्ति मे नरकाद्भयम्।
अथ रामेण सम्पृष्टा: सर्व Wa सभासद:॥ ३१॥

1033

‘Overtaken by hunger, O Rama! | beat
it angrily. O King of kings! Punish me, a
guilty person, O chief of kings! Having been
punished by you, | would not be afraid of
hell.’ Thereafter Sri Rama asked all the
members of the assembly, ‘What should be
done to him, and what punishment should
be meted out to him? For, if proper punishment
is given to the guilty, the subjects are
protected.’ (30-31)
किं कार्यमस्य वै ब्रूत दण्डो वै कोऽस्य पात्यताम्।
सम्यक्प्रणिहिते दण्डे प्रजा भवति रक्षिता॥ ३२॥
भृग्वाङ्गिरसकुत्साद्या वसिष्ठश्च सकाश्यप:।
धर्मपाठकमुख्याश्च सचिवा नैगमास्तथा॥ ३३॥
Ud चान्ये च बहव: पण्डितास्तत्र संगता:।
अवध्यो ब्राह्मणो दण्डैरिति शास्त्रविदो fare: 1 ३४॥

Bhrgu, Angira, Kutsa and others,
Vasistha alongwith Kasyapa, eminent
teachers of laws, ministers and interpreters
of the Vedas—these and many other scholars
were present there. All of them—the masters
of scriptures and those who were well-
versed in state-affairs told Sri Rama that a
Brahmana is not to be awarded capital
punishment, it is declared by experts in
scriptures. (832—34)
qad wad ad राजधर्मेषु निष्ठिता:।
अथ a Wa: Wa राममेवान्रुवंस्तदा॥ 34 Il
राजा शास्ता fe सर्वस्य त्वं विशेषेण राघव।
त्रैलोक्यस्य भवान् शास्ता देवो विष्णु: सनातन: ॥ ३६ ॥

Then all the hermits addressed Sri Rama
in following words, “A King holds sway over
everyone. O Sri Rama! Specially You, who
is the eternal god Visnu, are the ruler of the
three worlds.” (35-36)

एवमुक्ते तु तै: Wa: Yat aA वचनमब्रवीत्।

यदि तुष्टोऽसि मे wa यदि देयो at मम॥ ३७॥

प्रतिज्ञातं त्वया att किं करोमीति विश्रुतम्।

प्रयच्छ ब्राह्मणस्यास्य कौलपत्यं नराधिप॥ Be I

कालञ्जरे महाराज कौलपत्यं प्रदीयताम्।

एतच्छुत्वा तु रामेण कौलपत्येऽभिषेचित:॥ ३९॥
When all of them had addressed thus,
