+ UTTARAKANDA +

power of that arrow ! O my children, this is
the eternal powerful arrow of the former God,
the creator of the world, Visnu, due to which
the gods are in fear; this mighty arrow was
created for the destruction of those two sons
of Diti, Madhu and Kaitabha; Visnu alone knows
well about this powerful arrow. (26—28)

एषा Ua तनु: Yat विष्णोस्तस्य महात्मन:।
Bal Weed पश्यध्वं वध्यमानं महात्मना॥ २९॥
रामानुजेन वीरेण लवणं राक्षसोत्तमम्।
wa a देवदेवस्य Pera वचनं सुरा:॥ ३०॥
आजग्मुर्यत्र युध्येते शत्रुघ्नललवणावुभौ।
तं शरं दिव्यसंकाशं शत्रुघ्नकरधारितम्॥ ३१॥
aa: सर्वभूतानि युगान्ताग्निमिवोत्थितम्।
आकाशमावृतं दृष्टवा देवैर्हि रघुनन्दन:॥ ३२॥
सिंहनादं भृशं कृत्वा cast लवणं पुन:।
आहूतश्च पुनस्तेन शत्रुघ्नेन महात्मना॥३३॥

‘This arrow is the ancient form of the
noble Visnu; go from here, O my children,
and witness Lavana being killed by the
noble and heroic Satrughna, the younger
brother of Sri Rama.’

The gods hearing the words of the God
of gods, came to the place where both
Satrughna and Lavana were engaged in
fighting; all beings witnessed that divine arrow
borne by Satrughna in his hand, as if it was
the fire that broke out at the time of universal
destruction. Seeing the sky filled with the gods,
Satrughna, again having roared like a loin,
looked at Lavana; he (Lavana) was again
challenged by the noble Satrughna.(29—33)

लवण: क्रोधसंयुक्तो युद्धाय समुपस्थित:।
आकर्णात् स विकृष्याथ ag धनुर्धन्विनां aT: 11 ३४॥
स मुमोच महाबाणं लवणस्य महोरसि।
उरस्तस्य विदार्याशु प्रविवेश रसातलम्॥३५॥
गत्वा रसातलं दिव्य: शरो विबुधपूजित:।
पुनरेवागमत् तूर्णमिक्ष्वाकुकुलनन्दनम्॥ ३६ ॥

1055

Lavana filled with anger appeared to give
him (Satrughna) the fight. He, Satrughna, the
best among archers, then having stretched
that bow up to his ear, shot the arrow at the
mighty chest of Lavana. That divine arrow
descended to the nether-world breaking open
Lavana’s chest, and having gone there, being
worshipped by the gods, came back quickly
again to Satrughna, the descendant of the
family of Iksvaku. (34—36)

शत्रुघ्नशरनिर्भिन्नो लवण: स निशाचर:।
पपात सहसा भूमौ वज्राहत इवाचल:॥ ३७॥
That demon Lavana being struck by
the arrow of Satrughna, fell on the ground all
at once like the mountain struck by the
thunderbolt. (37)

wert शूलं महद् feet ed लवणराक्षसे।

पश्यतां सर्वदेवानां रुद्रस्य वशमन्वगात्॥ ३८॥
On the Raksasa Lavana being killed,

that mighty divine arrow too, came back to

the quiver of Rudra as all the gods looked
on. (38)

स्तम: प्रणुद्येव RGA: 138 UI
ततो fe car ऋषिपन्नगाश्च
प्रपूजिरे ह्यप्सरसश्च सर्वा:।
दिष्ट्या जयो दाशरथेरवाप्त-
स्त्यक्त्वा भयं सर्प इव प्रशान्त:॥४०॥
Then the champion of Raghus,
Satrughna, felled with one arrow the terror of
three worlds, shone forth as the sun dispelling
the darkness. All gods, sages, serpents paid
homage to him and Apsaras hailed the fearless
victory of the son of Sri DaSaratha, the serpent
laid to rest. (39-40)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये उत्तरकाण्डे एकोनसप्ततितम: Wl: ॥ ६९ il

Thus ends Canto Sixty-nine in the Uttarakanda of the glorious Ramayana of Valmiki,
the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

