836

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

षट्चत्वारिंश: सर्ग:
Canto XLVI

Ravana seeks the presence of Sita in the guise of a recluse;
Sita invites him to accept her hospitality

तया परुषमुक्तस्तु कुपितो राघवानुज:।
स विकांक्षन् भृशं रामं weet नचिरादिव॥ १॥
Enraged when spoken to in harsh words
by Sita, and ardently longing to meet Sri
Rama, Laksmana, the younger brother of
Sri Rama, departed without delay as it were.
(1)

तदासाद्य दशग्रीव: क्षिप्रमन्तरमास्थित:।
अभिचक्राम वैदेहीं परिव्राजकरूपधूक्॥ २॥

Getting an opportunity to meet Sita
alone, provided by the departure of Laksmana
and availing himself of it, nay, assuming the
form of a wandering anchorite, Ravana, the
ten-headed monster, quickly advanced
towards Sita, a princess of the Videha
territory. (2)
श्लक्ष्णकाषायसंवीत: Prat छत्री उपानही।
वामे चांसेऽवसज्याथ शुभे यष्टिकमण्डलू॥ ३॥
परिव्राजकरूपेण वैदेहीमन्ववर्तत।
तामाससादातिबलो भ्रातृभ्यां wed वने॥४॥
tet सूर्यचन्द्राभ्यां संध्यामिव महत्तम:।
तामपश्यत् ततो बालां राजपुत्रीं यशस्विनीम्॥ ५॥
रोहिणीं शशिना हीनां ग्रहवद् भृशदारुण:।
तमुग्रं पापकर्माणं जनस्थानगता द्रुमा:॥६॥
aera न प्रकम्पन्ते न प्रवाति च मारुत:।
शीघ्रस्रोताश्च तं दृष्ट्वा वीक्षन्तं रक्तलोचनम्॥७॥
स्तिमितं गन्तुमारेभे ware गोदावरी नदी।
TR त्वन्तरं प्रेप्सुर्दशग्रीवस्तदन्तरे॥८॥
उपतस्थे च वैदेहीं भिक्षुरूपेण रावण:।

सहसा भव्यरूपेण तृणै: HA इवावृत:॥१०॥
अतिष्ठत् प्रेक्ष्य वैदेहीं रामपत्नीं यशस्विनीम्।
तिष्ठन् सम्प्रेक्ष्य च तदा पत्नीं रामस्य रावण:॥ ११॥

wat रुचिरदन्तोष्ठी पूर्णचन्द्रनिभाननाम्।
आसीनां पर्णशालायां बाष्पशोकाभिपीडिताम्॥ १२॥
स तां पद्मपलाशाक्षीं पीतकौशेयवासिनीम्।
अभ्यगच्छत वैदेहीं हृष्टचेता निशाचर:॥१३॥
Appearing in the form of a wandering
recluse, clad in a neat ochre-coloured
garment, with a tuft of hair on the crown of
his head and with shoes on, carrying an
umbrella on the right shoulder and bearing a
glossy staff and a bright Kamandalu (a
vessel made of marine cocoanut shell for
carrying water) on the left shoulder, he tried
to humour Sita, a princess of the Videha
kingdom. Ravana, who was possessed of
great might, approached her while she was
bereft of the two brothers, Sri Rama and
Laksmana, even as_ thick darkness
overtakes dusk, which is without the sun
and the moon. The exceedingly cruel fellow
then saw that illustrious and youthful princess
in the same way as an unpropitious planet
would frown at Rohini (a consort of the
moon-god and a constellation of that name)
bereft of the moon. Perceiving that fierce
ogre of sinful deeds, the trees existing in
Janasthana did not wave nor did the wind
blow freely. Seeing the red-eyed monster
looking intently on the river, the river Godavari
too, which had a swift current, began to
course slowly for fear of him. Seeking to
obtain an opportunity when Sri Rama should
be away from Sita, Ravana, the ten-headed
monster, sought the presence of Sita, a
princess of the Videha territory, in the guise
of a wandering mendicant during the absence
of Sri Rama. In a propitious garb the
unpropitious Ravana approached Sita, a
princess of the Videha kingdom, who was
then grieving for her husband, even as the
