836

Nay, placing Sage Vasistha, the family
priest, at their head, in the meantime, when
they were back in Ayodhya, the ministers of
King DaSsaratha deliberated suitably the
coronation of Sri Rama. (23)

अशोको विजयश्चैव सिद्धार्थश्च समाहिता:।
मन्त्रयन् रामवृद्ध्यर्थमृद्धयर्थं ATT च॥ २४॥

Composed in mind, the ministers ASoka
as well as Vijaya as also Siddhartha held
consultation with one another with a view to
the advancement of Sri Rama and the
prosperity of the city of Ayodhya. (24)

सर्वमेवाभिषेकार्थं wader महात्मन:।
कर्तुमर्हश रामस्य ae यन्मङ्गलपूर्वकम्॥ २५॥

They said to the servants: “Beginning
with a benedictory prayer with a view to
ensuring success, you ought to do
unreservedly all that is needed for the
consecration on the throne of Ayodhya of
the high-souled Sri Rama, who deserves all
felicitation.” (25)

इति ते atau: wd संदिश्य च पुरोहित:।
नगरान्निर्ययुस्तूर्णं रामदर्शनबुद्धय: ॥ २६॥

Having issued the foregoing instructions,
all the aforesaid ministers as well as the
family priest speedily set forth from the city,
their mind set on the blessed sight of Sri
Rama. (26)

हरियुक्तं सहस्राक्षो रथमिन्द्र इवानघ:।
प्रययौ रथमास्थाय रामो नगरमुत्तमम्॥ २७॥

Taking his seat in a chariot even as the
thousand-eyed Indra would in his chariot
drawn by green horses, the sinless Sri Rama
drove to the excellent city of Ayodhya. (27)

जग्राह भरतो WH शात्रुघ्नश्छत्रमाददे।
लक्ष्मणो व्यजनं तस्य WS संवीजयंस्तदा॥ २८॥
Bharata took up the reins of the horses
as a charioteer, Satrughna held the parasol
in his hand, while Laksmana carried a
fan thereby driving a current of air upon
Sri Rama’s head on that occasion. (28)

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA +

vad च वालव्यजनं जगृहे परित: स्थित:।
अपरं चन्द्रसंकाशं राक्षसेन्द्रो विभीषण:॥ २९॥

Standing on the other side of Sri Rama,
opposite to Laksmana, Vibhisana, the ruler
of ogres, held another white fan, consisting
of a bunch of hair from the tail of a yak,
shining brightly as the moon. (29)
ॠषिसङ्घैस्तदाऽऽकाशे देवैश्च समरुद्गणै:।
स्तूयमानस्य रामस्य शुश्रुवे मधुरध्वनि:।। ३०॥

The sweet song which was sung in the
sky by groups of Rsis (the seers of Vedic
Mantras) as well as by gods accompanied
by the wind-god, while Sri Rama was being
praised by them, was heard on that
occasion. (30)
ad: शत्रुञ्जयं नाम pat पर्वतोपमम्।
आरुरोह महातेजा: सुग्रीव: प्लवगर्षभ:॥ ३१॥

Sugriva, a jewel among the monkeys,
who was endowed with extraordinary energy,
thereupon rode an elephant, Satrurhjaya by
name, which looked like a mountain in size.

(31)
नव नागसहस्राणि ययुरास्थाय वानरा:।
मानुषं विग्रहं कृत्वा सर्वाभरणभूषिता:॥ ३२॥

Assuming a human semblance, and
adorned with all kinds of jewels, the monkeys
rode on nine thousand elephants. (32)

merTTeS दुन्दुभीनां च fre:
प्रययौ पुरुषव्याघ्रस्तां पुरीं हर्म्यमालिनीम्॥ ३३॥

Accompanied by blasts of conches and
shouts of joy uttered by men and the roll of
drums, Sri Rama, a jewel among men, drove
in state to that city adorned with rows of
mansions. (33)
aed समायान्तं राघवं सपुर:सरम्।
विराजमानं वरपुषा रथेनातिरथं तदा॥ ३४॥

The people of Ayodhya saw proceeding
in a chariot Sri Rama, an exceedingly
consummate car-warrior, shining brightly in
his own person on that occasion and
preceded by an advance party. (34)
