822

who is boorish in his manners, O_ night-
stalker ! (11)

ये तीक्ष्णमन्त्रा: सचिवा भुज्यन्ते सह तेन a
विषमेषु रथा: vith मन्दसारथयो यथा॥१२॥

“Ministers who counsel णिडां
measures surely reap suffering alongwith
the counselled even as chariots driven by a
dull-witted charioteer, coursing swiftly on
uneven roads perish with the chariot. (12)

aea: साधवो लोके युक्तधर्ममनुष्ठिता:।
परेषामपराधेन विनष्टा: सपरिच्छ्दा:॥ १३॥

“Many righteous souls in the world who
have practised virtue enjoined on them have
perished with their followers through the
offence of others. (13)

स्वामिना प्रतिकूलेन प्रजास्तीक्ष्णेन रावण।
रक्ष्यमाणा न वर्धन्ते मेषा गोमायुना यथा॥ १४॥

“Being protected by a violent and
adversely disposed master, O Ravana,
people do not prosper any more than the
rams protected by a jackal. (14)

अवश्यं विनशिष्यन्ति ad रावण were: |

येषां त्वं कर्कशो राजा दुर्बुद्धिरजितेन्द्रिय:।॥ १५॥
“The ogres, O Ravana, whose ruler

are you, cruel, evil-minded and a slave to

senses will all surely perish. (15)

अत्र त्वं शोचनीयोऽसि ससैन्यो विनशिष्यसि॥ १६ i
“Although this terrible and unforeseen

calamity in the form of death at your hands

has been met with by me, nevertheless on
this score you alone deserve to be pitied

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

and not |, inasmuch as you are going to
meet your doom with your army. (16)

मां निहत्य तु रामोऽसावचिरात् cat वधिष्यति।
अनेन कृतकृत्योऽस्मि म्रिये चाप्यरिणा हत:॥ १७॥

“Having killed me, the aforesaid Rama
for his part will dispose you of before long.
| shall, however, feel accomplished of
purpose through such death; for | would fain
give up the ghost when killed by an enemy
rather than be killed by you, my king. (17)

आत्मानं च हतं विद्धि ear सीतां सबान्धवम्॥ १८ ॥
“Take me as killed at the very sight of
Rama and deem yourself as killed with your

kith and kin as soon as you bear away Sita.
(18)

आनयिष्यसि चेत् सीतामाश्रमात् सहितो AAT |
नैव त्वमपि नाहं वै नैव लङ्का न राक्षसा:॥१९॥
“If, accompanied by me, you fetch Sita
from the hermitage, under no circumstance
will you survive, nor I, nor even Lanka, your
capital, nor the ogres. (19)

निवार्यमाणस्तु wart हितैषिणा

न मृष्यसे वाक्यमिदं निशाचर।
परेतकल्पा fe गतायुषो नरा

fect न गृह्णन्ति सुहृद्भिरीरितम्॥ २०॥

“You do not heed this counsel of mine,
though being checked by me, your well-
wisher, O ranger of the night! For men
whose span of life has come to an end and
who are on the verge of death do not
accept the salutary advice tendered by their
selfless friends. (20)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्येऽरण्यकाण्डे एकचत्वारिंश: सर्ग: ॥ ४१ ॥

Thus ends Canto Forty-one in the Aranyakanda of the glorious Ramayana of Valmiki,
the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

