970

Gaede: सुमेरुर्नाम पर्वत:।
aa राज्यं प्रशास्त्यस्य hat ara वै frau eeu

“There is a mountain, Sumeru by name,
rendered golden by virtue of a boon bestowed
on it by the sun-god, where reigns Hanuman’s
father, Kesari by name, they say. (19)

तस्य wat बभूवेष्टा अञ्जनेति परिश्रुता।
जनयामास तस्यां वै वायुरात्मजमुत्तमम्॥२०॥
Kesari’s beloved wife was widely known
by the name of Anjana. The wind-god
procreated an excellent son through her,
they say. (20)
शालिशूकनिभाभासं प्रासूतेमं तदाञ्जना।
फलान्याहर्तुकामा वै निष्क्रान्ता गहनेचरा॥ २१॥
“Anjana then gave birth to Hanuman,
who possessed the hue of paddy awns.

Desiring to get excellent fruits, the belle
actually went out into the forest. (21)

एष मातुर्वियोगाच्च क्षुधया च भृशार्दित:।
ete शिशुरत्यर्थं शिशु: शरवणे यथा॥ २२॥

“Due to separation from his mother and
sore stricken with hunger, the babe cried
aloud as did Kartikeya in the thicket of
reeds (where he was born). (22)
तदोद्यन्तं विवस्वन्तं जपापुष्पोत्करोपमम्।
cat फललोभाच्च ह्युत्पपात ta प्रति॥ २३॥

“That very moment he espied the rising
sun having the hue of a heap of Japa
(China rose) flowers and in his eager desire
to get at it, thinking it to be a fruit, he sprang
towards the sun. (23)

बालार्काभिमुखो बालो बालार्क इव मूर्तिमान्।
ग्रहीतुकामो बालार्कं प्लवतेऽम्बरमध्यग:॥ २४॥

“With his face turned towards the sun,
the babe, which looked like the rising sun
incarnate, continued to shoot up in mid
heavens with intent to catch hold of the
rising sun. (24)

एतस्मिन् waar तु शिशुभावे हनूमति।
देवदानवयक्षाणां विस्मय: सुमहानभूत्॥ २५॥

« VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

“While the yonder Hanuman in his
childlike simplicity was shooting up in this
manner, the gods, Danavas and Yaksas felt
extremely astonished. (25)

Wad वेगवान् वायुर्गरुडो न मनस्तथा।
यथायं वायुपुत्रस्तु क्रमतेऽम्बरमुत्तमम्॥ २६॥
They said to themselves: ‘Neither the
wind-god nor Garuda (the king of birds, the
mount of Lord Visnu), nor even the mind
moves so swiftly as does this son of the
wind-god course through the high skies.
(26)

ae तावच्छिशोरस्य geen गतिविक्रम:।
Wat बलमासाद्य कथं वेगो भविष्यति॥ 2011

“When such is his speed and prowess
as a mere babe, what will be his speed
when he has attained the vigour of youth?’

(27)
तमनुप्लवते वायु: प्लवन्तं पुत्रमात्मन:।
सूर्यदाहभयाद् रक्षंस्तुषारचयशीतल: ॥ २८ ॥

“Cool to the touch like a mass of snow,
the wind-god too followed his son in his
flight, protecting him from the danger of
getting scorched by the sun. (28)

बहुयोजनसाहस्रं क्रमन्नेव गतोऽम्बरम्।
पितुर्बलाच्च बाल्याच्च भास्कराभ्याशमागत: ॥ २९॥
“Shooting up through the heavens for
many thousands of Yojanas by virtue of his
father’s might and his own childlike simplicity,
he drew near to the sun. (29)

शिशुरेष त्वदोषज्ञ इति मत्वा दिवाकर:।
कार्यं चास्मिन् समायत्तमित्येवं न ददाह स:॥ ३०॥
“Realizing that he was a mere innocent
child and also that a great purpose (of
Sri Rama) waited to be accomplished by
him, the said sun-god did not consume him.
(30)
wa feat राहुर्जिघृक्षति दिवाकरम्॥ ३१॥
“Rahu (the demon who is traditionally
believed to devour the orb of the sun during
