420

“Let the forest itself, for which Sri Rama,
a scion of Raghu, is leaving, turn into a city
and let the city of Ayodhya, when deserted
by us, be converted into a forest. (22)

बिलानि दंष्ट्रण: सर्वे सानूनि मृगपक्षिण:।
त्यजन्त्वस्मद्भयाद्भीता गजा: सिंहा वनान्यपि ।। २३ ॥

“Scared by fear of us, all the snakes
will forsake their holes; the deer and birds,
their abode on the mountain-peaks and
elephants and lions, the forests. (23)

अस्मत्त्यक्तं Weed सेव्यमानं त्यजन्तु च।
तृणमांसफलादानां देशं व्यालमृगद्विजम्॥ २४॥
प्रपद्यतां fe कैकेयी सपुत्रा सह बान्धवै:।
राघवेण at ad at वत्स्याम निर्वृता:॥ २५॥

“Let them abandon the region going to
be inhabited by us and flee for protection to
the one forsaken by us. Let Kaikeyi with her
son and relations actually obtain as her share
the region where grass, meat and fruits can
be had in abundance and which is inhabited
by ferocious beasts and birds. We shall, on
the other hand, live happily in the forest with
Sri Rama, a scion of Raghu.” (24-25)

इत्येवं विविधा वाचो नानाजनसमीरिता:।
शुश्राव Waa: sear न विचक्रेऽस्य मानसम्॥ २६ ॥

Sri Rama, a scion of Raghu, heard the
aforesaid remarks of diverse kinds uttered
by various men; hearing them, however, his
mind was not in the least disturbed. (26)

स तु asm पुनर्मातु: कैलासशिखरप्रभम्।
अभिचक्राम धर्मात्मा मत्तमातङ्गविक्रम:॥ २७॥

The prince, whose mind was given to
piety, for his part walked once more with the
strides of an elephant in rut to the palace of
mother Kaikeyi, which shone as a peak of
the Kailasa mountain and in which his father
was still lingering. (27)

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

विनीतवीरपुरुषं प्रविश्य तु नृपालयम्।
ददर्शावस्थितं दीनं सुमन्त्रमविदूरत:॥ २८॥
Entering the royal palace, however,
which was being guarded by disciplined
and valiant soldiers, he saw Sumantra
standing disconsolate not very far from the
palace. (28)

जगाम राम: पितरं दिदृक्षु
पितुर्निदेशं विधिवच्चिकीर्षु:।॥। २९॥

Appearing in no way afflicted, even
though seeing the people of Ayodhya, his
native place, distressed at that time, Sri Rama
as though smiling, forthwith approached his
father, eager to see him and desirous of duly
carrying out his behest. (29)

Catching sight of Sumantra before that,
while approaching the king, who wore a
wretched appearance, the high-souled and
high-minded Sri Rama, son of Dagaratha, a
scion of Ikswaku, waited awhile to announce
his presence to his father. (30)

पितुर्निदेशेन तु धर्मवत्सलो
वनप्रवेशे कृतबुद्धिनिश्चय:।

स राघव: Wat सुमन्त्रमन्रवी-
न्निवेदयस्वागमनं नृपाय मे॥ ३१॥

Perceiving Sumantra, the illustrious Sri
Rama, a scion of Raghu, who was devoted
to his duty and had for his part deliberately
made up his mind to retire to the woods in
obedience to the command of his father,
said to him, “Pray, announce my arrival to
His Majesty.” (31)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्येऽयोध्याकाण्डे त्रयस्तिंश: सर्ग: ॥ 33 ॥

Thus ends Canto Thirty-three in the Ayodhyakanda of the glorious Ramayana of
Valmiki, the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

