756

the constellation known by the name of
Pusya, look dusty with frost, and become
colder and longer. (12)

रविसंक्रान्तसौभाग्यस्तुषारारुणमण्डल: ।
नि:श्वासान्ध इवादर्शश्चन्द्रमा न प्रकाशते॥१३॥

“Having transferred her pleasantness to
the sun, and with its orb looking reddish due
to snow, the moon does not shine any more
than a mirror soiled with exhalation. (13)

ज्योत्स्ना तुषारमलिना पौर्णमास्यां न राजते।
सीतेव चातपश्यामा लक्ष्यते न च शोभते॥ evil

“Even on a full-moon day the moonlight
does not look bright, obscured as it is with
frost even as Sita appears tanned with the
sun and does not look as attractive as
(14)

प्रवाति पश्चिमो ara: caret द्विगुणशीतल:॥ १५ Ul

“Cool to the touch by its very nature
and now saturated with snow the westerly
wind blows doubly cold in the morning. (15)

बाष्पच्छन्नान्यरण्यानि यवगोधूमवन्ति च।
शोभन्तेऽभ्युदिते सूर्ये नदद्भि: क्रौञ्चसारसै: ॥। १६॥

“Shrouded in mist and rich with crops
of barley and wheat, the woodlands look
attractive at sunrise with noisy herons and
cranes. (16)
खर्जूरपुष्पाकृतिभि: शिरोभि: पूर्णतण्डुलै: |
शोभन्ते किंचिदालम्बा: शालय: कनकप्रभा: ॥ १७॥

“Wearing a golden lustre and slightly
bent with their weight of corn, paddy crops
look charming with their ears full of corn
and resembling date flowers in appearance.

(17)
मयूखैरुपसर्पद्धिर्हिमनीहारसंव्रतै: ।
दूरमभ्युदित: सूर्य: शशाङ्क Fa लक्ष्यते॥१८॥

“With its approaching rays wrapped in
frost and fog, the sun, though risen high,
looks like the moon. (18)

आग्राह्यवीर्य: gate मध्याह्ने स्पर्शत: qe: |
aon: किंचिदापाण्डुरातप: शोभते झक्षितौ॥ ee i

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

“With its glory faintly perceptible in the
forenoon and agreeable to the touch at
noon, the sunshine, which is partially bright
red and partially pale, is spreading its charm
on the earth. (19)
अवश्यायनिपातेन किंचित्प्रक्लिन्नशाद्बला।
वनानां शोभते भूमिर्निविष्टतरुणातपा॥ २०॥

“With its grass slightly drenched with
dew-drops, the land of the woods penetrated
as it is with the morning sunshine, looks
charming. (20)
स्पृशन् सुविपुलं शीतमुदकं fore: सुखम्।
अत्यन्ततृषितो aa: प्रतिसंहरते HTN’

“Though touching for the sake of
gratification the excessively cold water of a
pool, the wild elephant, seized as it was
with extreme thirst, withdraws its trunk (due
to its cold touch). (21)

ut fe समुपासीना विहगा जलचारिण:।
नावगाहन्ति सलिलमप्रगल्भा इवाहवम्॥ २२॥

“Though standing very close to water,
the aquatic birds do not actually dive into it
even as the pusillanimous do not plunge
into a fight though standing very close to
the scene of fighting. (22)
अवश्यायतमोनद्धा नीहारतमसाव्रता: |
प्रसुप्ता sa लक्ष्यन्ते विपुष्पा वनराजय:॥ २३॥

“Covered with dewdrops and enveloped
in darkness at night and shrouded in the
dark occasioned by fog, the rows of forest

trees bereft of their blossom appear as
though buried in slumber. (23)

बाष्पसंछन्नसलिला रुतविज्ञेयसारसा:।
हिमार्द्रवालुकैस्तीरै: सरितो भान्ति साम्प्रतम्॥ २४॥

“With their water shrouded in mist and
the cranes inhabiting them, discernible only
by their cries, the streams are perceptible
at this time only through their banks with
their sands wet with frost. (24)

तुषारपतनाच्चैव मृदुत्वाद् भास्करस्य च।
शैत्यादगाग्रस्थमपि प्रायेण रसवज्जलम्॥ २५॥
