* BALAKANDA +

इमे द्वे धनुषी श्रेष्ठे दिव्ये लोकाभिपूजिते।
qe बलवती मुख्ये apd विश्वकर्मणा॥११॥

“These two excellent heavenly bows
(one of which was broken by you the other
day, the other being with me), strong,
powerful and foremost as they are, were
adored by the whole world and were skilfully
manufactured by Viswakarma. (11)
अनुसृष्टं सुरैरेकं त्र्यम्बकाय युयुत्सवे।
त्रिपुरघ्नं नरश्रेष्ठं भग्नं काकुत्स्थ यत्त्वया॥१२॥

“One of them, which has been broken
by you, O scion of Kakutstha, was handed
over by the gods to Lord Siva (the three-
eyed divinity), eager to fight with the demon
Tripura, and ultimately succeeded in killing
him, O jewel among men! (12)
se द्वितीयं gett विष्णोर्दत्तं सुरोत्तमै:।
तदिदं बैष्णवं WH धनु: परपुरंजयम्॥१३॥

“This second one, hard to prevail
against, was given by the foremost of the
gods to Lord Visnu. This, which you behold
in my hand, is the same bow of Lord Visnu,
which is able to reduce the enemy’s
stronghold, O Rama ! (13)

समानसारं काकुत्स्थ रौद्रेण धनुषा त्विदम्।
तदा तु देवता: Gal: पृच्छन्ति TH पितामहम्॥ १४॥
शितिकण्ठस्य विष्णोश्च बलाबलनिरीक्षया।
अभिप्रायं तु विज्ञाय देवतानां पितामह:॥ १५॥
विरोधं जनयामास तयो: सत्यवतां वर:।
विरोधे तु Wed युद्धमभवद् रोमहर्षणम्॥ १६॥
शितिकण्ठस्य विष्णोश्च परस्परजयैषिणो:।
तदा तु जृम्भितं शैवं धनुर्भीमपराक्रमम्॥ १७॥
हुंकारेण महादेव: स्तम्भितोऽथ त्रिलोचन:।
देवैस्तदा समागम्य सर्षिसङ्घ: सचारणै:॥१८॥
याचितौ प्रशमं तत्र जग्मतुस्तौ सुरोत्तमौ।
जृम्भितं ae धनुर्दृष्टवा शैवं विष्णुपराक्रमै: 1 १९॥
अधिकं मेनिरे विष्णुं देवा: सर्षिगणास्तथा।
धनू रुद्रस्तु संक्रुद्धो विदेहेषु महायशा:॥ oll
देवरातस्य राजर्षेर्ददौ हस्ते ससायकम्।
इदं च awed राम धनु: परपुरंजयम्॥ २१॥

275

ऋचीके भार्गवे Were विष्णु: स न्यासमुत्तमम्।
ऋचीकस्तु महातेजा: पुत्रस्याप्रतिकर्मण:॥ २२॥
पितुर्मम ददौ दिव्यं जमदग्नेर्महात्मन:।
न्यस्तशस्त्रे पितरि मे तपोबलसमन्विते॥ २३॥
अर्जुनो विदधे मृत्युं प्राकृतां बुद्धिमास्थित:।
वधमप्रतिरूपं तु पितु: strat सुदारुणम्।
क्षत्रमुत्सादयं रोषाज्जातं जातमनेकश:॥ २४॥

“It is in fact equal in strength to the
bow of Rudra, which has already yielded to
your strength, O scion of Kakutstha, as will
appear from the following anecdote :

“At that very time when the demon
Tripura was killed by Lord Siva, all the gods
approached and put a question to Brahma,
the progenitor of the entire creation with a
view to ascertaining the relative strength
and weakness of Lords Siva (whose neck
is marked with a blue patch) and Visnu.
Reading the mind of the gods, Brahma, the
foremost of the votaries of truth, for his part
sowed the seed of discord between the two
divinities. As a sequel to that tension a
terrible and thrilling combat actually ensued
between Lords Siva and Visnu, who were
eager to conquer each other. In the course
of that combat, of course, the bow of Lord
Siva, possessed as it was of terrible strength,
was rendered inoperative and the three-
eyed Lord Mahadeva too struck motionless
by the very roar of Lord Visnu. The two
foremost divinities came to terms on that
occasion only when they were approached
and entreated on that very spot by the
gods, accompanied by hosts of Rsis as
well as by Caranas (celestial bards), to
compose their differences.

“Seeing the celebrated bow of Lord Siva
rendered inoperative as aforesaid by the
prowess of Lord Visnu, the gods alongwith
the hosts of Rsis assembled there accounted
Lord Visnu superior to Lord Siva. Feeling
enraged, the most illustrious Lord Rudra (the
god of destruction) thereupon delivered the
bow together with the arrows into the hands
