+ UTTARAKANDA +

Narmada as if one would look upon one’s
beloved wife turned refractory. (8)

पश्चिमेन तु तं gear सागरोद्गारसंनिभम्।
वर्धन्तमम्भसो at पूर्वामाशां प्रविश्य तु॥९॥
ततोऽनुद्भ्रान्तशकुनां स्वभावे UTA स्थिताम्।
निर्विकाराङ्गनाभासामपश्यद् रावणो नदीम्॥१०॥

Surveying the rapid flow of water from
the west gathering force on entering the
east like the flood-tide in a sea, Ravana for
his part found the river existing in its absolutely
natural state, as was evident from the fact
that the birds did not feel the least bewildered
and thus resembling a lady free from agitation.

(9-10)

wane ह्यशब्दास्यो दशानन:।
वेगप्रभवमन्वेष्टुं सोऽदिशच्छुकसारणौ It ११॥
Without uttering a word with his mouth,
that ten-headed monster directed with a
finger of his right hand Suka and Sarana to
seek out the cause of the rapid flow. (11)

at तु रावणसंदिष्टौ भ्रातरौ शुकसारणौ।
व्योमान्तरगतौ at प्रस्थितौ पश्चिमामुखौ॥ १२॥

Commanded by Ravana, the two heroic
brothers, Suka and Sarana, set out with
their faces turned towards the west, coursing
through the airspace. (12)
अर्धयोजनमात्रं तु गत्वा तौ रजनीचरौ।
पश्येतां पुरुषं ada क्रीडन्तं सहयोषितम्॥१३॥
बृहत्सालप्रतीकाशं तोयव्याकुलमूर्धजम्।
मदरक्तान्तनयनं मदव्याकुलचेतसम्॥ १४॥
नदीं बाहुसहस्रेण रुन्धन्तमरिमर्दनम्।
गिरिं पादसहस्रेण रुन्धन्तमिव मेदिनीम्॥१५॥
बालानां वरनारीणां सहस्रेण समावृतम्।
Wert करेणूनां सहस्रेणेव कुञ्जरम्॥१६॥

Advancing half a Yojana (four miles)
only, the aforesaid rangers of the night saw
sporting with women in the waters a man
resembling a huge sal tree, his hair tossed
about in the waters, the corners of his eyes
red through inebriety and his mind distracted
through intoxication, and capable of crushing

957

his enemy, blocking the river with his
thousand arms, even as a mountain would
block the earth with its thousand offshoots,
and surrounded by a thousand comely young
women like an elephant surrounded by a
thousand she-elephants in rut. (13—16)

तमद्भुततरं दृष्टवा राक्षसौ शुकसारणौ।
संनिव्त्तावुपागम्य रावणं तमथोचतु:॥१७॥
Beholding that highly prodigious man,
the ogres, Suka and Sarana turned back
and, approaching Ravana, spoke to him as
follows: (17)

बृरहत्सालप्रतीकाश: कोऽप्यसौ राक्षसेश्वर।
नर्मदां रोधवद् रुद्ध्वा क्रीडापयति योषित: Wee i

‘Blocking the Narmada like a dyke, O
ruler of ogres, an unknown person, resembling
an enormous sal tree, is providing amusement
to women. (18)

wt बाहुसहस्रेण संनिरुद्धजला नदी।

सागरोद्गारसंकाशानुद्गारान् सृजते मुहु:॥१९॥
‘With its waters blocked by him with

his thousand arms, the river is repeatedly

disgorging volumes of water resembling the
flood-tide in a sea.’ (19)

इत्येवं भाषमाणौ at निशम्य शुकसारणौ।

रावणोऽर्जुन इत्युक्त्वा A ययौ युद्धलालस:॥ २०॥
Saying “So it is!” Arjuna, on hearing the

aforesaid Suka and Sarana speaking as

above, the notorious Ravana sallied forth,
thirsting for an encounter. (20)

अर्जुनाभिमुखे तस्मिन् रावणे राक्षसाधिपे।

चण्ड: Walla पवन: Gale: सरजस्तथा॥ २१॥

When Ravana, the suzerain lord of
ogres, set forth with his face directed towards
Arjuna, the wind blew furiously with a noise
and dust. (21)

सकृदेव Hal Wa: सरक्तपृषतो घनै:।
महोदरमहापार्श्वथूम्राक्षशुकसारणै: ॥ २२॥
Pad राक्षसेन्द्रस्तु तत्रागाद् यत्र चार्जुन:।
अदीर्घेणैव कालेन स det राक्षसो बली॥ २३॥
