Due to their outgoing breaths the
excellent covering and garland on their body
shook gently as on facing a gentle breeze.

(31)

चन्दनस्य च शीतस्य सीधोर्मधुरसस्य च।
विविधस्य च माल्यस्य पुष्पस्य विविधस्य च॥ ३२॥
ag मारुतस्तस्य गन्धं विविधमुद्बहन्।
स्नानानां चन्दनानां च धूपानां चैव मूच्छित: 33 I
प्रववौ सुरभिर्गन्धो विमाने पुष्पके तदा।
श्यामावदातास्तत्रान्या: काश्चित् POT वरांगना: ।। ३४॥
काश्चित् काञ्चनवर्णाम्य: प्रमदा राक्षसालये।
तासां निद्रावशत्वाच्च मदनेन विमूर्छछितम्॥ ३५॥
पद्मिनीनां प्रसुप्तानां रूपमासीद् यथैव हि।
एवं सर्वमशेषेण रावणान्त:पुरं कपि:।
ददर्श स महातेजा न ददर्श च जानकीम्॥ ३६॥

Nay, wafting the varied scent of cool
sandal-paste, sweet-tasting wine as well as
of the diverse floral wreaths and various
flowers as also of sandal-paste fit to be used
for bath and of incenses burning in that
edifice, the wind blew hard in many ways at
that time and its fragrance spread over the
aerial car, Puspaka, standing outside. In the
abode of that ogre, Ravana, some belles
were of a dark-brown complexion, while
others were fair-complexioned. Some were
dark-complexioned, while other young
women were of a golden complexion. Withered
partly due to the influence of sleep and partly
due to excessive indulgence in sexual delights,
the elegance of those women precisely
resembled the grace of closed lotus flower
indeed. In this way Hanuman, the
exceptionally glorious monkey, thoroughly
searched the entire gynaeceum of Ravana,
but he did not find Sita, Janaka’s daughter.

(32—36)
निरीक्षमाणश्च ततस्ता: era: स महाकपि:।
जगाम महतीं शंकां धर्मसाध्वसशंकित:॥ ३७॥

While gazing on those women, that

great Hanuman fell a victim to grave misgiving,
seized as he was with apprehension

« VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

regarding the infringement of the moral code
on his part. (37)

परदारावरोधस्य प्रसुप्तस्य निरीक्षणम्।
इदं Ua ममात्यर्थं धर्मलोपं करिष्यति॥ ३८॥

He said to himself : ‘Gazing on a group
of others’ wives lying fast asleep and,
therefore, deshabille, is not good. Indeed it
will utterly neutralize my virtue. (38)

न fe मे went दृष्टिर्विषयवर्तिनी।

अयं चात्र wat ge: परदारपरिग्रह:॥ ३९॥
‘My gaze never fell on the wives of

others heretofore. Nay, this fellow Ravana,

who had taken the consorts of others to

wife, has also been seen by me, which in

itself is sinful.’ (39)

तस्य प्रादुरभूच्चिन्ता पुनरन्या मनस्विन:।
निश्चितैकान्तचित्तस्य कार्यनिश्चयदर्शिनी।॥४०॥

Another thought then cropped up in the
mind of the high-minded Hanuman, whose
mind was definitely devoted to a single
purpose—a thought which showed to him
the way of determining his duty. (40)

कामं दृष्टा मया सर्वा विश्वस्ता रावणस्निय: ।
न तु मे मनसा किंचिद् वैकृत्यमुपपद्यते॥४१॥

He said to himself: ‘True, all the
consorts of Ravana were seen by me lying
unsuspicious of my presence; yet no foulness
of purpose entered my mind. (41)

मनो fe tq: सर्वेषामिन्दियाणां प्रवर्तने।
शुभाशुभास्ववस्थासु तच्च मे सुव्यवस्थितम्॥४२॥

‘The mind is undoubtedly instrumental
in impelling all the sense-organs to good
and evil actions; and that mind of mine is
firmly established in righteousness. (42)

नान्यत्र fe war ween वैदेही परिमार्गितुम्।
स्नियो fe स्त्रीषु दृश्यन्ते सदा सम्परिमार्गणे॥४३॥

‘Surely Sita, a princess of the Videha
territory, could not be searched for by me
anywhere else; for when search has to be
carried out thoroughly, women are always
looked for in the midst of women. (43)
