1024

“After the conclusion of the sacrifice,
Bhrgu addressed, ‘O King! | am pleased
with you. । shall restore your soul
(consciousness).’ (12)

सुप्रीताश्च a: wd निमेश्चेतस्तदाब्रुवन्।
at वरय राजर्षे क्व ते चेतो निरूप्यताम्॥ १३॥

“All the gods were also very much
pleased and thus addressed the King, ‘O
sage-king! Ask for a boon. Where should
your soul (consciousness) be made to
reside?’ (13)

wage: at: सर्वैर्निमेश्चेतस्तदाब्रवीत्।
नेत्रेषु सर्वभूतानां वसेयं सुरसत्तमा:॥१४॥
“On being thus told by all the gods, the
spirit of Nimi said, ‘O Best of gods! Let me
dwell on the eye-lids of all living beings.’
(14)

बाढमित्येव fag निमेश्चेतस्तदाब्रुवन्।
नेत्रेषु सर्वभूतानां वायुभूतश्चरिष्यसि॥१५॥

“The gods said to Nimi’s spirit: ‘Very
well! You will dwell (move about) on the
eye-lids of all the living beings in the form of
air. (15)
त्वत्कृते च निमिष्यन्ति wets पृथिवीपते।
वायुभूतेन चरता विश्रामार्थं मुहुर्मुहु:॥ १६॥

“O Lord of the earth! In order to provide
rest to you, who would be ever moving

about in the form of air, living beings shall
blink their eyes frequently.’ (16)

एवमुक्त्वा तु विबुधा: सर्वे जग्मुर्यथागतम्।
ऋषयोऽपि महात्मानो Fads समाहरन्॥१७॥

« VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

अरणिं aa निक्षिप्य मथनं चक्रुरोजसा।
मन्त्रहोमैर्महात्मान: पुत्रहेतोर्निमेस्तदा॥ १८ ॥
अरण्यां मध्यमानायां प्रादुर्भूतो महातपा:।
मथनान्मिथिरित्याहुर्जननाज्जनकोऽभवत् ॥१९॥
यस्माद् विदेहात् सम्भूतो वैदेहस्तु Aa: स्मृत:।
एवं विदेहराजश्च win: पूर्वकोऽभवत्।
मिथिर्नाम महातेजास्तेनायं मैथिलोऽभवत्॥ २०॥

“Having said thus, all the gods left as
they had come. The high-souled sages held
Nimi’’s body and started churning Arani
vigorously. In order that a son should be
born to Nimi, when the high-souled ones
were subjecting the fire-producing wood to
friction and performing ‘oblation’ and reciting
hymns a son was born called Mithi, by the
great ascetics. He was called Videha as he
was born of ‘Videha’. He was called Mithi,
having been born from friction. He was
called Janaka, since he was born in a
mysterious manner. Thus at first the
illustrious Janaka was also called Mithi, and
hence the dynasty of Janaka was called
Maithila (Dynasty). (17—20)

इति सर्वमशेषतो मया

कथितं सम्भवकारणं तु सौम्य।

नृपपुङ्खवशापजं द्विजस्य
द्विजशापाच्च यदद्भुतं नृपस्य॥ २१॥
“O Gentle-one! | have thus fully narrated
the circumstances leading to the birth of
Brahmana Vasistha as a result of the curse
of Nimi, the foremost among kings and of
king Nimi as a result of the curse of Brahmana
Vasistha.” (21)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये उत्तरकाण्डे TATA: सर्ग: ॥ ५७॥

Thus ends Canto Fifty-seven in the Uttarakanda of the glorious Ramayana of Valmiki,
the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

