7३4

न जीवन् यास्यते शत्रुस्तव बाणपथं गत:।
नर्दतस्तीक्ष्णदंष्ट्रस्य सिंहस्येव महागज:॥७५४॥
“Fallen a victim to your shafts, your
adversary cannot escape alive any more
than an elephant fallen in the clutches of a
roaring lion, possessing sharp teeth. (54)

अहं तु वधमिच्छामि शीघ्रमस्य दुरात्मन:।
यावदस्तं न यात्येष कृतकर्मा दिवाकर:॥७५५॥
“|, for my part, wish to see this evil-

minded fellow die quickly before the yonder
sun sinks below the horizon, its task

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA +

(of going round the sky) accomplished. (55)
ate वधमिच्छसि रावणस्य संख्ये

यदि च कृतां हि तवेच्छसि प्रतिज्ञाम्।
ae तव राजसुताभिलाष ara

Qe च वचो मम vile वीर॥ ५६॥

“If you seek to kill Ravana on the field
of battle and if you wish to fulfil the vow
actually taken by you and there is a longing in
you for the daughter of Janaka, O worthy
hero, pray, do what | tell you without delay.”

(56)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये FERS एकाधिकशततम: सर्ग: Il १०१ ॥

Thus ends Canto One hundred and one in the Yuddhakanda of the glorious
Ramayana of Valmiki, the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

द्व्यधिकशततम: wat:
Canto Cll

Seated in a chariot sent by Indra (the ruler of gods),
Sri Rama renews his combat with Ravana

लक्ष्मणेन तु aq वाक्यमुक्तं श्रुत्वा स Waa: |
संदधे परवीरघ्नो धनुरादाय वीर्यवान्॥१॥
रावणाय शरान् घोरान् विससर्ज चमूमुखे।
अथान्यं रथमास्थाय रावणो राक्षसाधिप:॥ २॥

अभ्यधावत काकुत्स्थं स्वर्भानुरिव भास्करम्।
दशग्रीवो रथस्थस्तु रामं वज्रोपमै: gt
आजघान महाशैलं धाराभिरिव तोयद:॥ ३॥

Seizng hold of his bow on hearing the
aforesaid counsel tendered by Laksmana,
that valiant scion of Raghu, Sri Rama, the
destroyer of hostile champions, for his part
put formidable shafts to it and discharged
them on Ravana at the head of his army.
Taking his seat in another chariot, Ravana,
the suzerain lord of ogres, forthwith rushed
against Sri Rama, a scion of Kakutstha, as
the planet Rahu (the demon presiding over

the planet of that name) would rush towards
the sun on the eve of a solar eclipse.
Seated in his chariot, Ravana, the ten-headed
monster for his part struck Sri Rama with
shafts hard as adamant, even as a rainy
cloud would lash a huge mountain with
torrents. (1—3)

दीप्तपावकसंकाशै: शरै:३ काञ्चनभूषणै:।
अभ्यवर्षदु TY Wa दशग्रीवं समाहित:॥४॥
Sri Rama steadily covered the ten-
headed monster on the battlefield with arrows
decked with gold and shining like a blazing
fire. (4)
भूमौ स्थितस्य रामस्य रथस्थस्य स रक्षस:।
न समं युद्धमित्याहुर्देवगन्धर्वकिंनरा:॥७५॥
“The combat between Sri Rama, who
is standing on the ground, and the ogre,
