« KISKINDHAKANDA +

वीरस्तस्य सखा Ua: सुग्रीवो नाम वानर:।
राजावानरघुख्याम्यानायेनप्रस्थापिताक्यम्॥क्षा।

सहैभिर्वानरैर्मुख्यैरङ्गदप्रमुखैर्वयम्
रावणं सहिता: ad राक्षसं कामरूपिणम्।
सीतया we acer मार्गध्वमिति चोदिता:॥ ८॥

“A friend of the aforesaid sovereign is
a valiant monkey, Sugriva by name, the
ruler of the foremost of monkeys, by whom
we have been dispatched alongwith these
leading monkeys, headed by Angada, to the
southern quarter, inhabited by Sage Agastya
and protected by Yama (the god of retribution).
And we have been commanded as follows :
‘Look out all of you together for the ogre,
Ravana who is capable of changing his
form at will, alongwith Sita a princess of the
Videha territory.’ (6—8)
विचित्य तु at wd समुद्रं दक्षिणां दिशम्।
ad बुभुक्षिता: ad वृक्षमूलमुपाश्रिता:॥९॥

“Having scoured the entire forest in
this area and eager to explore the ocean
and the rest of the southern quarter we for
our part all took shelter at the foot of a tree,
hungry as we were. (9)

विवर्णवदना: ad ad ध्यानपरायणा:।
नाधिगच्छामहे ut मग्नाश्चिन्तामहार्णवे॥१०॥

“All pale-faced and all absorbed in
thought, we were sunk in an ocean of anxiety
whose end we did not perceive, O lady ! (10)

चारयन्तस्ततश्चक्षुर्दृष्टवन्तो महद् बिलम्।
लतापादपसंछन्नं तिमिरेण समावृतम्॥११॥
“Casting our eyes all-round, we then
beheld this extensive cave hidden by climbers
and trees and totally enveloped in gloom. (11)

अस्माद्भधंसा जलक्लिन्ना: पक्षै: सलिलरेणुभि: |
कुररा: सारसाश्चैव निष्पतन्ति wafer: ez

“From this cave, however, flew out
birds, viz., swans, ospreys and cranes too,
wet with water, their wings dusted with the
pollen of lotuses. (12)

1127

साध्वत्र प्रविशामेति मया तूक्ता: प्लवङ्गमा:।
तेषामपि हि सर्वेषामनुमानमुपागतम्॥१३॥

“We had better penetrate deep into it:’
so were the monkeys told by me. The idea
that water existed inside the cave equally
struck all of them as well. (13)

अस्मिन् निपतिता: सर्वेऽप्यथ कार्यत्वरान्विता:।
ततो we निपतिता गृह्य हस्तै: परस्परम्॥१४॥
“Full of hurry to accomplish our purpose
we forthwith ventured into this cave one
and all. Catching hold of one another by the
hand, we then penetrated deep into it. (14)
एतन्न: कार्यमेतेन कृत्येन वयमागता:॥१५॥
“In this way we precipitately forced our
way into this cave enveloped in darkness.

This is our purpose and with this motive we
have come to this place. (15)

wat चैवोपगता: सर्वे परिद्यूना बुभुक्षिता:।
आतिथ्यधर्मदत्तानि मूलानि च फलानि च॥ १६॥

अस्माभिरुपयुक्तानि बुभुक्षापरिपीडितै:।
यत् त्वया रक्षिता: सर्वे म्रियमाणा बुभुक्षया॥ १७॥
ब्रूहि प्रत्युपकारार्थं किं ते कुर्वन्तु वानरा:।
Wage तु सर्वज्ञा वानरैस्तै: स्वयंप्रभा॥ Vc il
प्रत्युवाच तत: सर्वानिदं वानरयूथपान्।
सर्वेषां परितुष्टास्मि वानराणां तरस्विनाम्॥१९॥
“Nay, famished and wasted away we
have all approached you. Sorely tried as we
were by hunger, the roots and fruits too so
kindly offered by you out of consideration for
hospitality have been, partaken of by us.
Since we have all been saved by you, dying
as we were of starvation, pray, speak out
what can the monkeys do to you in return for
your invaluable service.” Spoken to in these
words by those monkeys, the all-knowing
Swayamprabha for her part thereupon replied
to all the monkey-leaders as follows : “I am
highly pleased with you all, the monkeys,
which are all heroic. (16—19)

चरन्त्या मम धर्मेण न कार्यमिह केनचित्।
Waa: शुभं वाक्यं तापस्या धर्मसंहितम्॥ २०॥
