+ UTTARAKANDA +

“Supremely satisfied, Brahma for his
part stood before him in the company of
other gods and said, ‘O Dasagriva, | am
really pleased with you. (13)

शीघ्रं वरय eta वरो यस्तेऽभिकांक्षित:।
कं ते कामं करोम्यद्य न GM ते परिश्रम:॥ १४॥

“‘Select the boon of your choice without
delay, O knower of what is right! What
desire of yours shall | fulfil today? Your
austerities should not go in vain.’ (14)

अथाब्रवीद् दशग्रीव: प्रहृष्टेनान्तरात्मना।
wre शिरसा ed हर्षगद्गदया गिरा॥१५॥

“Pleased at heart, DaSagriva bowed
down to the god and said in a voice choked
with joy: (15)
भगवन् प्राणिनां नित्यं नान्यत्र मरणाद् भयम्।
नास्ति मृत्युसम: शत्रुरमरत्वमहँ वृणे॥१६॥

“‘O Lord, to living beings the only
constant source of fear is death; there is no

enemy like unto death. | choose immortality.’
(16)

एवमुक्तस्तदा ब्रह्मा दशग्रीवमुवाच ह।
नास्ति सर्वामरत्वं A वरमन्यं quitter मे॥१७॥

“Thus addressed, Brahma, thereupon
said to DaSagriva, ‘There can be no absolute
immortality for you; ask for some other boon
of me.’ (17)

Wag तदा WA ब्रह्मणा लोककर्तॄणा।
दशग्रीव उवाचेदं कृताञ्जलिरथाग्रत:॥१८॥

“O Rama, Brahma, the creator of the
world, having spoken thus at that time,
DaSagriva, standing in front, submitted as
follows with folded hands: (18)
सुपर्णनागयक्षाणां दैत्यदानवरक्षसाम्।
अवध्योऽहं प्रजाध्यक्ष देवतानां च शाश्वत॥ १९॥

““O eternal lord of created beings, |
want immunity from death at the hands of
Suparnas (eagles), Nagas (serpents),
Yaksas, Daityas, Danavas, Raksasas, as
also from gods. (19)

877

ae चिन्ता ममान्येषु प्राणिष्वमरपूजित।
तृणभूता fe ते मन्ये प्राणिनो मानुषादय:॥ २०॥
“‘O god, worshipped by the immortals,
| have no cause of anxiety from other living
beings; for | think of those other creatures
such as human beings as mere straw.’ (20)

`एवमुक्तस्तु धर्मात्मा दशग्रीवेण रक्षसा।
sara वचनं देव: Ge देवै: पितामह:॥ २१॥
“Addressed thus by DaSagriva, the
Raksasa, the pious-minded god Brahma,
who was accompanied by other gods, said
as follows: (21)

भविष्यत्येवमेतत् dt वचो राक्षसपुङ्खव।
एवमुक्त्वा तु तं राम दशग्रीवं पितामह:॥ २२॥
श्रृणु चापि वरो ya: प्रीतस्येह wat मम।
हुतानि यानि शौर्षाणि पूर्वमग्नौ त्वयानघ॥ २३॥
पुनस्तानि भविष्यन्ति तथैव aa राक्षस।
वितरामीह a सौम्य at चान्यं दुरासदम्॥ Wil
छन्दतस्तव रूपं च मनसा aq यथेप्सितम्।
एवं पितामहोक्तस्य दशग्रीवस्य रक्षस:॥ २५॥
अग्नौ हुतानि शीर्षाणि पुनस्तान्युत्थितानि वै।
एवमुक्त्वा तु तं राम दशग्रीवं पितामह:॥ २६॥
विभीषणमथोवाच वाक्यं लोकपितामह:।
विभीषण त्वया वत्स धर्मसंहितबुद्धिना॥ २७॥
परितुष्टोऽस्मि धर्मात्मन् at वरय सुव्रत।
विभीषणस्तु धर्मात्मा वचनं प्राह साञ्जलि:। २८॥
qa: सर्वगुणैर्नित्यं चन्द्रमा रश्मिभिर्यथा।
भगवन् कृतकृत्योऽहं यन्मे लोकगुरु: स्वयम्॥ २९॥
“*) jewel among the Raksasas, this
request of yours shall be fulfilled.’ Having
said this to DaSagriva, O Rama, Brahma
added: ‘Hear now of another auspicious
boon from me who am pleased, O sinless
one, the heads which were previously offered
as a sacrifice into the fire, will again appear
as before, O ogre. | will give you on this
occasion another boon, not easily to be
obtained, O dear one! You will assume any
form at will.’ So of DaSagriva, who was thus
assured by Brahma, the heads which were
offered as sacrifice into the fire were
