* AYODHYAKANDA +

With joined palms the charioteer then
sought the presence of the aged Emperor,
who was dolefully sighing, seized as he
was with agony and grief and, feeling sore
distressed and ill at ease, was mourning for
Sri Rama alone and thus resembled a newly-
captured elephant, hissing and remembering
the leader of its herd. (2-3)

राजा तु Wa Ud ध्वस्ताङ्गं समुपस्थितम्।
अश्रुपूर्णमुखं दीनमुवाच परमार्तवत्॥४॥
Like one sore afflicted, the king for his
part said to the charioteer, who stood
respectfully, wearing a wretched look, his
limbs stained with dust and his face bathed
in tears : (4)
क्व नु वत्स्यति धर्मात्मा qermperqurtsra: |
सोऽत्यन्तसुखित: aa किमशिष्यति wea: uy
“Where will Rama, a scion of Raghu,
whose mind is given to piety, live, taking
shelter under a tree? What, O charioteer,
will he eat, having lived most comfortably all
along (right from his birth)? (5)

दु:खस्यानुचितो ga ara शयनोचित:।
भूमिपालात्मजो भूमौ शेते कथमनाथवत्॥६॥

“How, 0 Sumantra, does the prince,
who is undeserving of suffering and is worthy
of reposing on a costly bed, lie down
miserably on the ground like one forlorn?

(6)
a यान्तमनुयान्ति स्म पदातिरथकुञ्जरा:।
a वत्स्यति wet रामो विजनं वनमाश्रित:॥७॥

“How will Rama, whom foot-soldiers,
chariots and elephants used to follow
whenever he went out of his palace, live
confined to a lonely forest? (7)
व्यालैर्मृगैराचरितं कृष्णसर्पनिषेवितम्।
wa कुमारौ वैदेह्या सार्धं वनमुपाश्रितौ॥८॥

509

“How have the two princes taken up
their abode with Sita (a princess of the
Videha clan) in a forest frequented by
carnivorous animals and deer and infested
with cobras? (8)

सुकुमार्या तपस्विन्या सुमन्त्र सह सीतया।
राजपुत्रौ कथं पादैरवरुह्य रथाद् गतौ॥ ९॥

“How did the two princes, Rama and
Laksmana, with Sita of delicate frame and
engaged in austerities, proceed on foot, getting
down from the chariot, O Sumantra? (9)

सिद्धार्थ: खलु सूत त्वं येन Geel ममात्मजौ।
वनान्तं प्रविशन्तौ तावश्चिनाविव मन्दरम्॥१०॥

“Accomplished of purpose indeed are
you, O charioteer, by whom my aforesaid
two sons, Rama and Laksmana, have been
seen entering deep into the forest region as
the Aswins, the twin-born physicians of gods,
enter the precincts of Mount Mandara (a
mountain frequented by gods). (10)

किमुवाच वचो राम: किमुवाच च लक्ष्मण:।
सुमन्त्र ame किमुवाच च मैथिली॥११॥

“Having reached the forest, O
Sumantra, what words did Rama utter and
what did Laksmana say? And what did Sita,
daughter of the king of Mithila, say? (11)
जीविष्याम्ययमेतेन ययातिरिव साधुषु॥१२॥

“Pray, speak to me about the mode of
Rama’s sitting, lying down to sleep and
eating, 0 charioteer ! | shall survive on the
strength of this information even as King
Yayati, when hurled down from heaven on
his stock of merits having been exhausted
through self-praise, lived happily in the midst
of pious souls.”* (12)

इति सूतो नरेन्द्रेण died: सज्जमानया।
उवाच वाचा राजानं स बाष्पपरिबद्धया॥ १३॥

क We read in the Mahabharata, Adiparva, how when doomed to fall from heaven, King Yayati
requested Indra to cast his lot with saints. He was accordingly sent down to a spot on the earth, where four
ascetics—Astaka, Pratardana, Vasuman and King Sibi had been practising austerities, and had a discourse

with them (Discourses LXXXVIII to XCIID).
