* AYODHYAKANDA +

राममेवानुगच्छामि स राजा द्विपदां at
त्रयाणामपि लोकानां weal राज्यमर्हति॥ esi

“| shall, therefore, follow Sri Rama
alone. Being the foremost of men, he
alone is the ruler of this kingdom. Nay, Sri
Rama, a scion of Raghu, deserves the
sovereignty even of all the three worlds
(viz., earth, heaven and the intermediate
region).” (16)
हर्षान्मुमुचुरश्रूणि रामे निहितचेतस:॥१७॥

Hearing the aforesaid reply, which was
in full accord with righteousness, all those
who sat in the assembly shed tears through

joy, their mind being absorbed in Sri Rama.
(17)

यदि ward न शक्ष्यामि विनिवर्तयितुं वनात्।
al तत्रैव वत्स्यामि यथार्यो लक्ष्मणस्तथा॥ १८॥

“If, however, Bharata continued, | do
not succeed in bringing my elder brother
back from the forest, | shall continue in that
forest itself in the same way as the noble
Laksmana is doing. (18)
सर्वोपायं तु वर्तिष्ये विनिवर्तयितुं बलात्।
समक्षमार्यमिश्राणां साधूनां गुणवर्तिनाम्॥१९॥

“In the presence of the honourable
members of this assembly, who are all
impartial and practise good virtues, | for my
part shall try every means to bring him back
forcibly. (19)
विष्टिकर्मान्तिका: wad मार्गशोधकदक्षका:।
प्रस्थापिता मया पूर्वं यात्रा च AA रोचते॥ २०॥

“All expert road-workers working on
or without wages, have already been
despatched by me. Hence journeying to the
forest alone finds favour with me.” (20)

एवमुक्त्वा तु धर्मात्मा भरतो भ्रातृवत्सल:।
समीपस्थमुवाचेदं सुमन्त्रं मन्त्रकोविदम्॥ २१॥
Having spoken thus, the pious-minded
Bharata for his part who was so fond of his
elder brother, spoke as follows to Sumantra,

591

who sat near him and was accomplished in
giving counsel : (21)

तूर्णमुत्थाय गच्छ त्वं सुमन्त्र मम शासनात्।
यात्रामाज्ञापय fad act चैव समानय॥ २२॥

“Getting up at once, O Sumantra, depart
you under my command and issue orders
to all to proceed on a journey to the place
where Sri Rama may be and quickly send
out the army too.” (22)

Wan: सुमन्त्रस्तु भरतेन महात्मना।
Wee: सोऽदिशत् Wa यथासंदिष्टमिष्टवत्॥ २३॥

Sumantra for his part felt highly rejoiced
when commanded in the foregoing words
by the high-souled Bharata. He communicated
to all everything as instructed by Bharata
as something welcome. (23)

ता: प्रहृष्टा: प्रकृतयो बलाध्यक्षा बलस्य च।
श्रुत्वा यात्रां समाज्ञप्तां राघवस्य निवर्तने॥ २४॥

The citizens present in the assembly
as well as the generals were immensely
delighted to hear of the departure to the
forest of the army duly ordered by Bharata
with the object of bringing Sri Rama back to
Ayodhya. (24)

ततो योधाङ्गना: सर्वा भर्तॄन् सर्वान् गृहे गृहे।
यात्रागमनमाज्ञाय त्वरयन्ति स्म हर्षिता:॥ २५॥

Delighted to know of the expedition of
the army on a pilgrimage to the forest to
bring back Sri Rama, all the wives of soldiers
thereupon urged, in their eagerness to see
Sri Rama and others back in Ayodhya, all
the husbands in their own homes to make
haste to depart. (25)

a हयैर्गोरथै: शीघ्रं स्यन्दनैश्च मनोजवै:।

सह योषिद्वलाध्यक्षा बलं सर्वमचोदयन्॥ २६॥
The aforesaid generals urged the entire

army to march quickly with the womenfolk,

on horseback, in bullockcarts as well as in
chariots quick as thought. (26)

सज्जं तु तद् बलं दृष्टवा भरतो गुरुसंनिधौ।
रथं मे त्वरयस्वेति सुमन्त्रं पार्श्वतोऽब्रवीत्॥२७॥
