988

« VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

Canto XL

Sri Rama sends back the monkeys, the bears and ogres
to their respective abodes

तथा स्म तेषां वसतामृक्षवानररक्षसाम्।
राघवस्तु महातेजा: सुग्रीवमिदमब्रवीत्॥१॥

Of the aforesaid bears, monkeys and
ogres sojourning with Him, Sri Rama for his
part, who was endowed with extraordinary
energy, spoke as follows to Sugriva: (1)
पालयस्व सहामात्यै राज्यं निहतकण्टकम्॥ 2 Il

“Return, 0 gentle one, to Kiskindha,
which cannot easily be assailed by the
gods and the demons alike; and rule with
your ministers the kingdom, all of whose
enemies have been exterminated. (2)
sige च महाबाहो प्रीत्या परमया युत:।
पश्य त्वं हनुमन्तं च नलं च सुमहाबलम्॥ ३॥

“Nay, regard you with supreme affection,
O mighty-armed one, Angada and Hanuman
as also the exceptionally mighty Nala. (3)
ead wa adit नीलं da महाबलम्॥४॥
at शतबलिं da We द्विविदमेव a
Tt Tare Tat शरभं च महाबलम्॥७५॥
ऋक्षराजं च दुर्धर्षं जाम्बवन्तं महाबलम्।
पश्य प्रीतिसमायुक्तो गन्धमादनमेव ANG I
ma च सुविक्रान्तं प्लवङ्गं च सुपाटलम्।
केसरिं शरभं शुम्भं शङ्खचूडं महाबलम्॥७॥

“Replete with love, cast your look on
your father-in-law, the heroic Susena and
Tara, the foremost of the mighty, as well as
on Kumuda, who is so difficult to assail
as also on Nila, who is endowed with
extraordinary might, on the valiant Sataballi,
as also on Mainda as well as on Dwivida,
Gaja, Gavaksa, Gavaya and_ the
exceptionally mighty Sarabha, on the very
mighty Jambavan, the king of bears, who is

so difficult to assail, as also on
Gandhamadana, and on the highly valiant
Rsabha and on the monkey Supatala, on
Kesarl, Sarabha, Sumbha and on the
exceptionally mighty Sankhacuda. (4—7)
ये ये च सुमहात्मानो मदर्थे त्यक्कतजीविता:।
पश्य त्वं प्रीतिसंयुक्तो मा चैषां विप्रियं कृथा:॥ ८॥
“Nay, full of affection, cast your eyes
on all the high-souled monkeys who risked

their lives for My sake. Never do anything
displeasing to them.” (8)

एवमुक्त्वा च सुग्रीवमाश्लिष्य च UA: पुन:।
विभीषणमुवाचाथ wat मधुरया Frei

Having spoken as aforesaid to Sugriva
and embraced him again and again, Sri
Rama then spoke as follows to Vibhisana in
a sweet tone: (9)
लङ्कां प्रशाधि धर्मेण धर्मज्ञस्त्वं मतो मम।
पुरस्य राक्षसानां च भ्रातुर्वैश्रवणस्य च॥१०॥

“Rule Lanka with righteousness; you
are held to be a knower of what is right by
Me, by the city of Lanka, by the ogres as a

whole and by your eldest brother, Kubera,
son of ViSrava. (10)

मा च बुद्धिमधर्मे त्वं Hal राजन् कथंचन।
ahead fe राजानो ध्रुवमश्नन्ति मेदिनीम्॥ ११॥

“Nay, never set your mind in any case
on unrighteousness, O king! Prudent kings
do rule the earth firmly. (11)

अहं च नित्यशो राजन् सुग्रीवसहितस्त्वया।
स्मर्तव्य: परया प्रीत्या गच्छ त्वं विगतज्वर:॥ १२॥

“Nay, alongwith Sugriva | should be
constantly cherished in memory by you with
supreme affection, O king! Depart you free
from anxiety.” (12)
