# YUDDHAKANDA #

यतो fe ददृशाते तौ शरान् निपतिताञ्छितान्।
ततस्तु तौ दाशरथी ससृजातेऽस्त्रमुत्तमम्॥३२॥

Those two sons of Dasaratha for their
part directed their excellent missiles in the
direction from which they saw the aforesaid
sharp arrows dropping. (32)

watered fast: wat रथेनातिरथोऽपतत् |
विव्याध तौ दाशरथी लघ्वस्त्रो निशितै: ot: 133 1

Indrajit, son of Ravana, for his part,
who was a superior car-warrior, and was
swift in discharging missiles, coursed in
his chariot on all sides, pierced the aforesaid
two sons of DaSaratha with whetted shafts.

(33)

बभूवतुर्दाशरथी पुष्पिताविव किंशुकौ॥ ३४॥

Pierced deeply with well-crafted golden-
shafted arrows, those heroic sons of
DaSaratha appeared like two Kirnsuka trees
in blossom. (34)
नास्य वेगगतिं कश्चिन्न च रूपं धनु: शरान्।

न चास्य fated किंचित् सूर्यस्येवाभ्रसम्प्लवे। ३५ UI

None could perceive 86 rapid
movement nor the form, much less the bow
and arrows of Indrajit. Nor could anything
about him be known any more than the
position of the sun when the sky is thickly
overcast with clouds. (35)

wt विद्धाश्च eat निहताश्च गतासव:।
बभूवु:३ शतशस्तत्र पतिता धरणीतले॥ ३६॥
Nay, pierced and struck down by him
on the battlefield, monkeys dropped dead
on the earth’s surface in hundreds. (86)

लक्ष्मणस्तु तत: क्रुद्धो भ्रातरं वाक्यमब्रवीत्।
ब्राह्ममस्त्रं प्रयोक्ष्यामि वधार्थं सर्वरक्षसाम्॥ ३७॥

Roused to anger, Laksmana for his
part thereupon submitted as follows to his
eldest brother, Sri Rama: “I shall now fall
back upon the mystic missile presided over

645

by Brahma (the creator) with a view to the
destruction of all the ogres.” (37)
तमुवाच ततो WAY लक्ष्मणं शुभलक्षणम्।
नैकस्य हेतो रक्षांसि पृथिव्यां हन्तुमर्हसि॥ sei
Thereupon Sri Rama admonished in
the following words the aforesaid Laksmana,
who was endowed with auspicious bodily
marks: “To get square with one individual
you ought not to exterminate all the ogres
on the surface of the earth. (38)
अयु` : : लिं ।
पलायमानं मत्तं वा न हन्तुं त्वमिहार्हसि॥ ३९॥
“You ought not to kill on this earth one
who is not actually fighting, lies hidden, has
come for protection with joined palms, is
fleeing for life or is intoxicated. (39)

तस्यैव तु वधे यत्नं करिष्यामि महाभुज।
आदेक्ष्यावो महावेगानस्त्रानाशीविषोपमान्॥४०॥

“| for one shall make an earnest
endeavour for the destruction of Indrajit alone,
O mighty-armed one! We two shall press
into service mystic missiles endowed with
great impetuosity and resembling venomous
serpents. (40)
Tad निहनिष्यन्ति gear वानरयूथपा:॥४१॥

“On seeing him the commanders of
monkey troops will forcibly kill this petty
ogre, who is skilled in conjuring tricks and
whose chariot remains invisible. (41)
यद्येष भूमिं विशते fed वा

रसातलं वापि नभस्तलं वा।
एवं विगूढोऽपि ममास्त्रदग्ध:
पतिष्यते भूमितले गतासु:॥४२॥

“Consumed by my mystic missiles, he
will fall dead on the ground even if he
makes his way into the earth or into heaven,
enters the subterranean world or penetrates
the vault of heaven, and remains completely
hidden in the aforesaid manner.” (42)
