* ARANYAKANDA «

तमुवाच ततस्तत्र क्षुभिता जनकात्मजा।
सौमित्रे मित्ररूपेण भ्रातुस्त्वमसि शत्रुवत्॥५॥
यस्त्वमस्यामवस्थायां भ्रातरं नाभिपद्यसे।
इच्छसि त्वं विनश्यन्तं WH लक्ष्मण मत्कृते॥६॥
Getting upset thereby, Sita (daughter of
Janaka) spoke to him on that occasion as
follows : “You are as it were an enemy of your
brother in the guise of a friend, O Laksmana
(son of Sumitra), in that you do not rush to
the help of your brother even in this
predicament. For my sake, O Laksmana, you
wish Sri Rama to perish. (5-6)

लोभात्तु मत्कृते Ta नानुगच्छसि waar
व्यसनं a प्रियं मन्ये स्नेहो भ्रातरि नास्ति aun

“Surely due to greed for me you do not
follow Sri Rama (a scion of Raghu). | believe
that your brother’s sad plight is dear to you
and that there is no affection in you for him.

(7)
तेन तिष्ठसि विस्त्रब्धं तमपश्यन् महाद्युतिम्।
किं हि संशयमापन्ने तस्मिन्निह मया भवेत्॥८॥

२ ॥ १०॥
अशक्यस्तव वैदेहि wat We न संशय:।
देवि देवमनुष्येषु गन्धर्वेषु पतत्रिषु॥११॥
राक्षसेषु पिशाचेषु किन्नरेषु मृगेषु च।
दानवेषु च घोरेषु न a विद्येत शोभने॥१२॥
यो wa प्रतियुध्येत ane वासवोपमम्।
अवध्य: समरे Wa नैवं त्वं वक्तुमर्हसि॥१३॥

“That is why you stand unperturbed
without seeing Sri Rama, who is possessed
of extraordinary splendour. Indeed, what
purpose will be served by me, remaining
secure here when he, with whom as your
leader you have come, has fallen into
danger?” To Sita, a princess of the Videha
territory—who was full of tears and
possessed with grief and felt frightened as
a female deer, and who was speaking in the
above strain—Laksmana replied as follow :

833

“Your husband, O princess of the Videha
kingdom, is unconquerable by Nagas,
demons, Gandharvas, gods, titans and
ogres: there is no doubt about it. There
exists none among gods and human beings,
Gandharvas, birds, ogres, fiends, Kinnaras
and wild beasts as well as among the terrible
demons, O blessed lady, who can encounter
in battle Sri Rama, who is equal to Indra.
Nay, Sri Rama cannot be killed in an
encounter. You ought not (therefore) to speak
like that. (8—13)
न त्वामस्मिन् at हातुमुत्सहे wad विना।
अनिवार्यं at तस्य बलैर्बलवतामपि॥ १४॥
हृदयं निर्वृतं तेऽस्तु संतापस्त्यज्यतां तव॥१५॥
“| dare not leave you in the forest without
Sri Rama (a scion of Raghu). His might cannot
be repulsed even by the forces of mighty
warriors nor even by the three worlds joined
together including gods and the three lords of
the universe, Brahma, Visnu and Siva. Let
your heart, therefore, be at ease and let all
agony be shed by you. (14-15)
आगमिष्यति ते vat शीघ्रं हत्वा मृगोत्तमम्।
न स तस्य स्वरो aah न कश्चिदपि दैवत:॥ १६॥

Having killed the foremost of deer, your
husband will soon return. Clearly it was not
his voice, which was heard by us, nor was
it the incorporeal voice of any deity. (16)

गन्धर्वनगरप्रख्या माया तस्य च रक्षस:।
न्यासभूतासि वैदेहि न्यस्ता मयि महात्मना॥ १७॥
रामेण त्वं वरारोहे न त्वां त्यक्तुमिहोत्सहे।
कृतवैराश्च कल्याणि वयमेतैर्निशाचरै:।॥ १८॥
ख्रस्य निधने देवि जनस्थानवधं प्रति।
राक्षसा विविधा वाचो cata महावने॥ ee il
हिंसाविहारा वैदेहि न चिन्तयितुमर्हसि।
लक्ष्मणेनैवमुक्ता तु Bal संरक्तलोचना॥ oll
अब्रवीत् परुषं वाक्यं लक्ष्मणं सत्यवादिनम्।
अनार्याकरुणारम्भ नृशंस कुलपांसन॥ २१॥
रामस्य व्यसनं दृष्टवा तेनैतानि प्रभाषसे॥ २२॥
