« KISKINDHAKANDA +

now make an appeal to one who will surely
accomplish our purpose.” (34)
तत: Udit प्लवतां वरिष्ठ-

मेकान्तमाश्रित्य सुखोपविष्टम्।
संचोदयामास हरिप्रवीरो

हरिप्रवीरं हनुमन्तमेव।। ३५ UI

1161

Thereupon Jambavan, a prominent
hero among the monkeys and bears, made
an appeal to none else than the celebrated
Hanuman, another prominent hero of the
monkey race, the foremost of monkeys,
who was sitting at ease apart. (35)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये किष्किन्धाकाण्डे

पञ्चषष्टितम:

सर्ग: ॥ ६५ Il

Thus ends Canto Sixty-five in the Kiskindhakanda of the glorious Ramayana of
Valmiki, the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

wentyaa: at:
Canto LXVI

Reminding Hanuman of his descent from the loins of the wind-god
through Anjana and of the circumstances which led to his getting the
name of Hanuman and also how he received boons from Brahma
(the creator) and others, and glorifying him, Jambavan
encourages Hanuman to leap across the sea and thereby
deliver the monkeys from their wretched plight

अनेकशतसाहस्रीं विषण्णां हरिवाहिनीम्।
जाम्बवान् समुदीक्ष्यैवं हनूमन्तमथाब्रवीत्॥१॥
Perceiving the monkey force, which was
many lakhs strong, despondent, Jambavan
presently spoke to Hanuman as follows :(1)

ax वानरलोकस्य सर्वशास्त्रविदां ar

तूष्णीमेकान्तमाश्रित्य हनूमन् fe न जल्पसि॥ २॥

“Sitting quietly apart, O hero of the
Vanara kingdom, O jewel among those well-
versed in all the scriptures, why don’t you
speak, O Hanuman! (2)

हनूमन्हरिराजस्य सुग्रीवस्य wat ह्यसि।
रामलक्ष्मणयोश्चापि तेजसा च at Ans

“Indeed you are a compeer, O
Hanuman, of Sugriva, the ruler of all monkeys,
nay, even of Sri Rama and Laksmana in
point of valour and might. (3)

अरिष्टनेमिन: ह्मी वैनतेयो महाबल: |
गरुत्मानिव विख्यात उत्तम: सर्वपक्षिणाम्॥४॥

“You are as widely known as Garuda,
son of Aristanemi (Sage Kasyapa) through
Vinata, and the foremost of all winged
creatures, who is possessed of extraordinary
strength. (4)

ag fe मया ge: सागरे स महाबल:।
भुजङ्गानुद्धरन् पक्षी महाबाहुर्महाबल:॥५॥
“That bird, Garuda, of mighty arms and
possessed of extraordinary strength and
courage has actually been seen by me on
many an occasion picking up huge serpents
at sea. (5)
पक्षयोर्यद् act तस्य भुजवीर्यबलं तव।
विक्रमश्चापि amy न a तेनापहीयते॥६॥
“The strength which inheres in his wings
and the power and strength of your arms are
equal. Your prowess and energy too are in
no way inferior to his (Garuda’s). (6)

बलं बुद्धिश्च तेजश्च ad च हरिपुङ्खव।
विशिष्टं सर्वभूतेषु किमात्मानं न सज्जसे॥७॥
