* BALAKANDA +

Having installed his son, Bhagiratha,
on the throne, the king, who was a jewel
among men, ascended to paradise, the realm
of Indra, through merit earned by his own
self. (10)

भगीरथस्तु राजर्षिर्धार्मिको रघुनन्दन।
अनपत्यो महाराज: प्रजाकाम: स च प्रजा:॥११॥
मन्तिष्वाधाय तद्राज्यं गङ्गावतरणे रत:।
तपो दीर्घं समातिष्ठुद गोकर्णे रघुनन्दन॥१२॥

Emperor Bhagiratha, a pious royal sage,
was issueless and as such desirous of
progeny, O scion of Raghu ! Having entrusted
the people as well as their rulership to his
ministers, intent as he was on the descent
of the Ganga to the terrestrial plane, he
practised prolonged askesis on Mount
Gokarna, a summit of the Himalayas, O
delight of the Raghus ! (11-12)

ऊर्ध्वबाहु: पञ्चतपा मासाहारो जितेन्द्रिय: |
तस्य वर्षसहस्राणि घोरे तपसि तिष्ठत:॥१३॥
अतीतानि महाबाहो तस्य राज्ञो महात्मन:।
सुप्रीतो भगवान् ब्रह्मा प्रजानां प्रभुरीश्चर:॥ १४॥
With uplifted arms and senses fully
controlled he exposed himself to five fires
(placing himself in the midst of four fires,
one in each quarter with the fifth in the
shape of the sun overhead) and partook of
food only once a month. A thousand years
elapsed even as he remained engaged in
severe asceticism, O mighty-armed one!
The almighty Brahma, the creator, the lord
and ruler of all created beings, got much
pleased with that high-souled king. (13-14)

तत: सुरगणै: सार्धमुपागम्य पितामह:।
भगीरथं महात्मानं तप्यमानमथाब्रवीत्॥१५॥
Calling with hosts of gods on the high-
souled Bhagiratha, who had been practising
austerities, Brahma (the progenitor of the
entire creation) thereupon forthwith spoke
to him as follows : (15)

भगीरथ महाराज wWeaedse जनाधिप।
तपसा च सुतप्तेन at ata सुव्रत॥ १६॥

187

“ am pleased with the askesis duly
practised by you, O great king, the ruler of
people! Therefore, ask of me a boon of
your choice, O king of noble vows!” (16)

तमुवाच महातेजा: सर्वलोकपितामहम्।
भगीरथो महाबाहु: कृताञ्जलिपुट: स्थित:॥ gio
Standing with folded hands_ the
exceptionally glorious and mighty-armed
Bhagiratha submitted as follows to Brahma,
the progenitor of all the worlds : (17)

ate मे भगवान् प्रीतो यद्यस्ति तपस: फलम्।
सगरस्यात्मजा: सर्वे मत्त: सलिलमाप्नुयु:॥ १८॥

“If the lord is pleased with me and if
there is any reward for asceticism, let all the
sons of Sagara receive water from me. (18)

गङ्गाया: सलिलक्लिन्ने भस्मन्येषां महात्मनाम्।
Tat गच्छेयुरत्यन्तं सर्वे च प्रपितामहा:॥१९॥

“When the ashes of these princes of
gigantic body get soaked with the waters of
the Ganga, all my aforesaid grand-uncles
bid fair to attain the everlasting heaven.

(19)
देव याचे ह संतत्यै नावसीदेत् Hot च न:।
इक्ष्वाकूणां Hot देव UT ASH AL: पर:॥ oll

“Born in the line of Ikswaku, O glorious
one, | ask for a male progeny so that our
race may not get extinct. Let this be treated
as another boon, O lord!” (20)
उक्तवाक्यं तु राजानं सर्वलोकपितामह:।
प्रत्युवाच शुभां वाणीं मधुरां मधुराक्षराम्॥ २१॥

Brahma, the progenitor of all the worlds,
thereupon answered the king, who had
uttered the aforesaid prayer, in the following
benignant and agreeable speech, full of
sweet expressions : (21)

मनोरथो महानेष wit महारथ।
एवं Wad WR A इक्ष्वाकुकुलवर्धन॥२२॥

“Great is this ambition of yours, O
Bhagiratha, a great car-warrior as you are!
May it be realized ! May success attend on
you, O promoter of Ikswaku’s race! (22)
