1052

addressed the demon, who roamed about
thus at right, ‘O evil one, | wish to have a
duel with you. (10)

पुत्रो दशरथस्याहं भ्राता रामस्य धीमत:।

शत्रुघ्नो नाम शात्रुघ्नो वधाकाङ्क्षी तवागत:॥ ११॥
‘Lam the son of (King) Dasaratha, and

the brother of the wise Sri Rama, the extirpator

of foes, Satrughna by name. | have come
with a desire to kill you. (11)

तस्य मे युद्धकामस्य द्वन्द्वयुद्धं प्रदीयताम्।
शत्रुस्त्वं सर्वभूतानां न A जीवन् गमिष्यसि॥ १२॥
‘So give the duel to me, who desires to
fight with you! You are the enemy of all beings;
with me alive here you shall not escape.’ (12)

तस्मिस्तथा ब्रुवाणे तु राक्षस: प्रहसन्निव।
प्रत्युवाच नरश्रेष्ठं दिष्ट्या प्राप्तोऽसि दुर्मते॥१३॥
When Satrughna had spoken thus, that
Raksasa, Lavana, replied to the best among
men, as if laughing: ‘O wicked one, it is my
good luck that you have come within my
reach. (13)
मम Urea रावणो नाम राक्षस:।
Ba WAT दुर्बुद्धे स्त्रीहेतो: पुरुषाधम॥ evil
‘O insensate one, the Raksasa Ravana
the brother of my maternal aunt, was killed
by Rama for the sake of a woman. (14)
तच्च Ue मया क्षान्तं रावणस्य कुलक्षयम्।
अवज्ञां पुरत: कृत्वा मया यूयं विशेषत:॥१५॥
All | had forgiven, the destruction of the
family of Ravana, and ignoring specially
you. (15)
निहताश्च fe a ad परिभूतास्तृणं यथा।
भूताश्चैव भविष्याश्च यूयं च पुरुषाधमा:॥१६॥

« VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

‘But now all of you, that have been
born or will be born and even you vile ones,
will be swept away by me like straws.(16)

तस्य ते युद्धकामस्य युद्धं दास्यामि दुर्मते।
fers त्वं च Wed तु यावदायुधमानये॥१७॥

‘| shall indeed give you a fight, who
wish it, O fool of vicious intellect. Just wait
for a moment, while | bring my weapon
(trident). (17)
Shad यादृशं तुभ्यं सज्जये यावदायुधम्।
तमुवाचाशु शत्रुघ्न: क्व मे जीवन् गमिष्यसि॥ १८ ॥

1 क going to be equipped with the
weapon with which | desire to kill you.’ At

this Satrughna at once spoke out: ‘Where
will you go as long as | am alive? (18)

स्वयमेवागत: wat मोक्तव्य: कृतात्मना।
यो fe विक्लवया sagt wat शत्रवे दिशेत्।
स हतो मन्दबुद्धि: CMs यथा कापुरुषस्तथा॥ १९॥
‘The enemy that has come of his own
accord does not deserve to be set free by
one disciplined in mind. Whoever with
unsettled mind gives freedom to a foe to
disappear, that weak-minded one indeed
would be killed as a coward. (19)
: कुरु —
शरै: शितैस्त्वां विविधैर्नयामि।
यमस्य गेहाभिमुखं fe ue
रिपुं त्रिलोकस्य च राघवस्य॥ २०॥
‘You, therefore, have a good look at
this world of mortals, O wicked one! | shall
carry you to Yama’s abode with many sharp

arrows, O foe of the three worlds and also
of Raghu’s family.’ (20)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये उत्तरकाण्डेऽष्टषष्टितम: A: ॥ ६८ ॥

Thus ends Canto Sixty-eight in the Uttarakanda of the glorious Ramayana of Valmiki,
the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

