646

इत्येवमुक्त्वा वचनं महार्थं

रघुप्रवीर: प्लवगर्षभैर्वृत: |
वधाय रौद्रस्य नॄशंसकर्मण-

स्तदा महात्मा त्वरितं निरीक्षते॥४३॥

Having made the foregoing speech,

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA +

which was full of great significance, the
high-souled Sri Rama, the foremost hero of
the Raghus, who was surrounded by the
foremost of the monkeys, now began to
reflect on the speedy means of putting an
end to the fierce ogre of cruel deeds. (43)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये युद्धकाण्डेऽशीतितम: AT: ॥ Co Il

Thus ends Canto Eighty in the Yuddhakanda of the glorious Ramayana of Valmiki,
the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

Canto LXXXI

Indrajit kills an illusory living image of Sita

fasta qt मनस्तस्य Tea महात्मन:।
स निव्रृत्याहवात् तस्मात् प्रविवेश Wt aa: ug it
Withdrawing from that encounter on
divining the intention of that high-souled
scion of Raghu, Indrajit for his part thereupon
re-entered the city. (1)
सोऽनुस्मृत्य वधं तेषां राक्षसानां तरस्विनाम्।
क्रोधताम्रेक्षण: शूरो निर्जगामाथं रावणि:॥२॥
Recalling the destruction of those mighty
ogres, the heroic son of Ravana sallied
forth for an encounter immediately, his eyes
blood-shot through anger. (2)

a पश्चिमेन द्वारेण निर्ययौ राक्षसैर्वृत:।
इन्द्रजित् सुमहावीर्य: पौलस्त्यो देवकण्टक:॥ ३॥

Surrounded by other ogres, the
notorious Indrajit, a scion of Sage Pulastya
(one of the nine mind-born sons of Brahma
entrusted with the duty of creating the world)
and a thorn in the side of gods, who was
endowed with exceptional prowess, issued
through the western gate. (3)

इन्द्रजित्तु ततो दृष्टवा भ्रातरौ रामलक्ष्मणौ।
रणायाभ्युद्यतौ ART मायां प्रादुष्करोत् तदा॥४॥

Seeing the two gallant brothers, Sri

Rama and Laksmana, prepared for an
encounter in everyway, Indrajit for his part
thereupon revealed on that occasion his
proficiency in conjuring tricks. (4)

इन्द्रजित्तु रथे स्थाप्य dat मायामयीं तदा।
बलेन महतावृत्य तस्या वधमरोचयत्॥५॥
Placing an illusory living image of Sita
on his chariot and with a huge army
surrounding it, he intended to kill her. (5)
हन्तुं सीतां व्यवसितो वानराभिमुखो ययौ॥६॥
Making up his mind to hoodwink all
who were present there, and resolved to kill
‘Sita’, the exceptionally evil-minded ogre for
his part advanced to meet the monkeys.
(6)

तं दृष्टवा त्वभिनिर्यान्तं सर्वे ते काननौकस:।
sangeet: शिलाहस्ता युयुत्सव:॥७॥
Infuriated to see him sallying forth for
an encounter, all those denizens of the forest
rushed towards him with rocks in their hands,
agitated as they were to fight. (7)

हनूमान् पुरतस्तेषां जगाम कपिकुञ्जर:।
प्रगृह्य aes पर्वतस्य दुरासदम्॥८॥
