660

“Therefore, shake off, O prince, this
grief and agony, which have appeared in
you without any ostensible reason. This
anxiety too should be given up inasmuch as
it considerably enhances the joy of the
enemy. (8)
saa: क्रियतां dit wd: समुपसेव्यताम्।
Ween यदि a सीता हन्तव्याश्च निशाचरा:॥ ९॥

“Let a strenuous and continuous effort
be made, O hero, and let enthusiasm be
fully resorted to, if Sita is to be recovered
by you and the rangers of the night are to
be exterminated. (9)

रघुनन्दन वक्ष्यामि sat मे fed वच:।
साध्वयं यातु सौमित्रिर्बलेन महता वृत:॥१०॥
धनुर्मण्डलनिर्मुक्तैराशीविषविषोपमै: ॥ ११॥
wt aor तपसा वरदानात् स्वयंभुव:।
अस्त्रं ब्रह्मशिर: Wa कामगाश्च तुरङ्गमा:॥१२॥
“Pray, listen carefully, O delight of the
Raghus, to my salutary counsel, which | am
presently going to submit. Accompanied by
a huge army, this son of Sumitra should
proceed to dispatch in an encounter Indrajit,
son of Ravana, duly arrived in the sanctuary
of Nikumbhila. Laksmana, who is armed
with a mighty bow, who has ever been
victorious in combat, is capable of killing the
son of Ravana with the arrows deadly as
the poison of a venomous serpent, shot
from his bow, which assumes a circular
shape when stretched at full length. A mystic
missile known by the name of Brahmasira
(so-called because it is presided over by
Brahma) as well as horses coursing at his
will has been well-nigh secured* by that

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA +

hero by virtue of a boon granted by Brahma
(the self-born creator) pleased with his
asceticism. (10—12)

स एष किल सैन्येन ore: किल निकुम्भिलाम्।
यद्युत्तिष्ठेत् कृतं कर्म हतान् सर्वांश्च विद्भि A: ।॥ १३॥

“Nay, they say he has already actually
reached Nikumbhila with his army. If he
gets up after concluding the ritual undertaken
by him, take us all as killed. (13)
निकुम्भिलामसम्प्राप्तमकृताग्निं च यो रिपु:।
त्वामाततायिनं हन्यादिन्द्रशत्रो A A वध:॥१४॥

““That enemy of yours who strikes
you while you are marching against him
with a stretched bow, and while you have
not yet reached the foot of the banyan tree
known by the name of Nikumbhila or even
while you have not yet propitiated the fire,
will prove to be the cause of your death, O
enemy of Indra!’ (14)

वरो ait महाबाहो सर्वलोकेश्वरेण FI
इत्येवं विहितो राजन् वधस्तस्यैष धीमत:॥१५॥

“Such was the boon granted in his
favour by Brahma, the ruler of all the worlds,
O mighty-armed prince, and in this way
has the end of that sagacious ogre been
ordained. (15)
वधायेन्द्रजितो wa संदिशस्व महाबलम्।
हते तस्मिन् ed fate रावणं ससुहृद्रणम्॥१६॥

“Therefore, depute, O Rama, Laksmana,
who is endowed with extraordinary might,
for compassing the destruction of Indrajit.
When he is killed, take Ravana as killed
with the host of his kinsfolk.” (16)
विभीषणवच: श्रुत्वा रामो वाक्यमथाब्रवीत्।
जानामि तस्य रौद्रस्य मायां सत्यपराक्रम॥ १७॥

* The boon granted by Brahma was that at the conclusion of the pouring of oblations into the sacrificial

fire by Indrajit the ogre would receive from the god of fire a chariot drawn by horses coursing at his will as the

mystic missile known by the name of Brahmasira and that by virtue of that mystic missile he would remain

death-proof till he had discharged the first arrow.
