654

are destroyed by their own unrighteousness,
O scion of Raghu, the unrighteousness
itself, consisting as it does in an act of
killing etc., will be forthwith destroyed
inasmuch as an action is momentary. Whom
will that unrighteousness destroy, which is
itself destroyed in the course of three
seconds? (22)

अथवा विहितेनायं ead हन्ति चापरम्।
fafa: स लिप्यते तेन न स पापेन कर्मणा॥ २३॥

“Or, if a man is destroyed by recourse
to a malevolent ritual prescribed in the
scriptures or kills another by recourse to
such a ritual, the destiny (alone) which is
engendered by the aforesaid ritual is tainted
by that sinful act and not the agent. (23)

अदृष्टप्रतिकारेण अव्यक्तेनासता सता।
wa wet परं we धर्मेणारिविकर्षण॥ २४॥
“How can another, viz., the person
going to be destroyed, be reached, O
destroyer of enemies, by righteousness in
the form of a malevolent ritual, which, being
unconscious, has never known how to
retaliate, is unmanifest and is, therefore, as
good as non-existent? (24)
यदिसत्स्यात्सतां मुख्य नासत्स्यात् तव किंचन।
त्वया यदीदृशं Wet तस्मात् तन्नोपपद्यते॥ RG II
“If a good destiny (engendered by a
virtuous act) existed, O jewel among the
virtuous, no evil would ever accrue to you.
Since, however, such evil has been reaped
by you, therefore, the hypothesis that the
destiny engendered by good acts is real is
not proved.* (25)

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA +

अथवा दुर्बल: क्लीबो Act धर्मोऽनुवर्तते।
दुर्बलो हृतमर्यादो न सेव्य इति मे मति:॥ २६॥

“If being feeble and ineffective, virtue
needs the help of might, the former, which
lacks strength and has been deprived of its
capacity, should no longer be pursued: such
is my view. (26)

बलस्य यदि चेद्धर्मो गुणभूत: पराक्रमै:।
धर्ममुत्सृज्य वर्तस्व यथा धर्मे तथा बले॥ २७॥

“Giving up the predominance of virtue
by plucking up courage, if the former is
subordinate to might, depend on might as
you do now on virtue. (27)

अथ चेत्सत्यवचनं a: fet परंतप।
अनृतं त्वय्यकरणे किं न बद्धस्त्वया विना॥ २८॥

If, on the other hand, it is urged by you
that virtue in the form of redeeming the
truthfulness of your father is being followed
by you, O scourge of your enemies, your
father was disunited from you by force of
the mendacity which was resorted to by
him in not redeeming his announcement
made regarding installing you as the Prince
Regent. Were you not bound by that
announcement too? (28)

यदि धर्मो भवेद्भूत अधर्मो वा परंतप।
न स्म हत्वा मुनिं वज्री कुर्यादिज्यां शतक्रतु: ।। २९॥

“Had virtue alone been worth pursuing
(to the exclusion of unrighteousness) or
unrighteousness (to the exclusion of virtue),
O scourge of your enemies, Indra (who is
presupposed to have performed a hundred
horse-sacrifices as a condition precedent
to his attaining Indrahood), the wielder of the

* The dissertation contained in verses 14 to 25 above disproving the existence of good and evil destiny

engendered by good and evil acts respectively was apparently given by Laksmana in a mood of frustration

which had come upon him on seeing Sri Rama disconsolate over the ‘death’ of his beloved spouse. Even as

falling a prey to grief on the part of the divine Sri Rama at the destruction of an illusory living image of his

darling was a mere sport of love, the utterance of such apparently incoherent words on the part of Laksmana too

ina fit of agony on seeing Sri Rama agonized shows his agitation caused by love. Later on, as his grief subsides,

Laksmana himself says in verse 44 below that he had given expression to such things only to assuage the grief

of Sri Rama and spur him on to action.
