608

men were conversing with each other as
aforesaid, Guha submitted to Bharata with
folded hands as follows : (4)

कच्चित्सुखं नदीतीरेऽवात्सी: काकुत्स्थ MATA |
कच्चिच्च सहसैन्यस्य da नित्यमनामयम्॥७५॥

“| hope you spent the night comfortably
on the river bank, O scion of Kakutstha.
And | hope you are entirely free from
distemper alongwith your army.” (5)
गुहस्य तत् तु वचनं श्रुत्वा स्नेहादुदीरितम्।
रामस्यानुवशो वाक्यं भरतोऽपीदमब्रवीत्॥६॥

Hearing the aforesaid question asked
with affection by Guha, Bharata too, for his
part, who had subordinated his will to Sri
Rama, made the following reply : (6)

सुखा A: शार्वरी धीमन् पूजिताश्चापि ते वयम्।
Tet तु नौभिर्बह्वीभिर्दाशा: संतारयन्तु न:॥७॥
“It was a happy night for us, O
sagacious friend, and we have been properly
entertained by you. Let your fishermen now
duly ferry us across the Ganga on a number
of boats.” (7)

ततो We: संत्वरित: श्रुत्वा भरतशासनम्।

प्रतिप्रविश्य नगरं तं ज्ञातिजनमब्रवीत्॥८॥
Hearing Bharata’s command and

returning to the city with great expedition,

Guha forthwith spoke as follows to his said
kinsmen : (8)
उत्तिष्ठत प्रबुध्यध्वं भद्रमस्तु fe a: सदा।
नाव: समुपकर्षध्वं तारयिष्यामि वाहिनीम्॥९॥
“Wake up and rise: may prosperity
ever actually attend you. Duly haul the boats
to the bank, | shall have the army ferried
across the Ganga.” (9)
ते तथोक्ता: समुत्थाय त्वरिता राजशासनात्।
Us नावां शतान्येव समानिन्यु: समन्तत:॥१०॥
अन्या: स्वस्तिकविज्ञेया महाघण्टाधरावरा:।
शोभमाना: पताकिन्यो युक्तवाहा: सुसंहता:॥ ११॥

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

“Springing up on their feet when
addressed thus by Guha, the boatmen
hurriedly brought together from all sides in
obedience to their chiefs command five
hundred boats and other excellent boats
too, known by the name of Swastika
(because of their bearing the mark of
Swastika), which looked charming, were
distinguished by flags and equipped with
rowers, nay, which were strongly built and
had large bells tied to their sails. (10-11)
ad: स्वस्तिकविज्ञेयां पाण्डुकम्बलसंव्रृताम्।
सनन्दिघोषां कल्याणीं Wel नावमुपाहरत्॥१२॥

Then Guha himself brought a lovely
boat, also known by the name of Swastika,
the floor of which was covered with white
rugs (fit for kings) and which was
distinguished by the sound of festal music.

(12)

तामारुरोह भरत: शत्रुघ्नश्च महाबल:।
कौसल्या च सुमित्रा च याश्चान्या राजयोषित: ॥ १३॥

Bharata and Satrughna, who was
possessed of great might, as well as
Kausalya, Sumitra and whatever other royal
ladies there were, ascended it. (13)

Bers wl se ees

अनन्तरं राजदारास्तथैव शकटापणा:॥१४॥

Sage Vasistha, the family priest, and
whatever elderly Brahmanas were present
there took their seats even before Bharata
and the royal ladies and immediately after
these followed the other ladies of the royal
family as well as the bullock-carts and the
provisions, which were loaded on other
boats. (14)
आवासमादीपयतां तीर्थं चाप्यवगाहताम्।
भाण्डानि चाददानानां घोषस्तु दिवमस्पृशत्॥ १५॥

The din of men setting fire* to the huts

* It has been a convention among Indian troops in the past to burn whatever is left in the shape of
huts and fuel etc., after removing their essential things and tents while leaving a halting place in the course
of their march to a destination. The idea is not to leave any trace of their whereabouts for the enemy. The
practice was also believed to bring triumph to the troops who resorted to it.
