* AYODHYAKANDA +

नेदानीं गुह योग्योऽयं वासो मे सजने वने।
अवश्यमाश्रमे ara: कर्तव्यस्तद्गतो विधि: ॥ ६६ i

“It is not proper for me on this occasion
to dwell, as | am doing, in a forest in which
my own men are present. Therefore, an
abode must be taken up by me in a hermitage
in an uninhabited region and the procedure
to be followed in this behalf must be observed
by me. (66)

aise गृहीत्वा नियमं तपस्विजनभूषणम्।
हितकाम: पितुर्भूय: सीताया लक्ष्मणस्य AI ६७॥
Wet: pean गमिष्यामि न्यग्रोधक्षीरमानय।
wet राजपुत्राय गुह: क्षिप्रमुपाहरत्॥६८॥
“Adopting with the concurrence of Sita
and Laksmana a discipline in the shape of
eating wild fruits, roots and bulbs etc., and
reposing on the ground and so on, which
serves as an embellishment for ascetics,
seeking as | do the spiritual welfare of my
father, and wearing matted hair, | should
like to proceed further. Therefore, please
bring the milk-like exudation of a banyan
tree.” Guha fetched such exudation at once
for the prince. (67-68)

लक्ष्मणस्यात्मनश्चैव रामस्तेनाकरोज्जटा:।
दीर्घबाहुर्नरव्याघ्रो जटिलत्वमधारयत्॥ ६९ ॥

With that exudation Sri Rama, a tiger
among men, who was possessed of long
arms, formed his own locks as well as those
of Laksmana (who had also taken a vow of
ascetic life) into a mass of clotted hair and
thus wore the distinguishing mark of an ascetic
in the shape of matted hair. (69)

तौ तदा चीरसम्पन्नौ जटामण्डलधारिणौ।
अशोभेतामृषिसमौ भ्रातरौ रामलक्ष्मणौ॥७०॥

Clad in the bark of trees and wearing a
rounded mass of matted locks on their head
those two brothers, Sri Rama and Laksmana,
looked charming at that time like two Rsis
(ascetic sages). (70)

ad वैखानसं मार्गमास्थित: सहलक्ष्मण:।
व्रतमादिष्टवान् Wa: सहायं गुहमब्रवीत्॥७१॥

487

Having temporarily adopted the ways
of a hermit alongwith Laksmana and accepted
the vow of an ascetic life, Sri Rama then
spoke as follows to his helpmate, Guha :

(71)
अप्रमत्तो बले कोशे Gl जनपदे तथा।
भवेथा Te we fe दुरारक्षतमं मतम्॥७२॥

“Remain vigilant in the matter of your
army, exchequer, fortress and the people,
O Guha; for a state is recognized as most
difficult to protect.” (72)

ततस्तं समनुज्ञाप्य गुहमिक्ष्वाकुनन्दन:।
जगाम तूर्णमव्यग्र: सभार्य: सहलक्ष्मण:॥ ७३॥
Having duly taken leave of the
celebrated Guha, and remaining undisturbed
all the time, Sri Rama, the delight of the
Ikswakus, then quickly departed alongwith
his consort, Sita, and with Laksmana. (73)

स तु Gear नदीतीरे नावमिक्ष्वाकुनन्दन:।
fate: शीघ्रगां गङ्गामिदं वचनमब्रवीत्॥७४॥
Beholding a boat on the bank of the
river and keen to cross the swift-flowing
Ganga, Sri Rama, the delight of the
Ikswakus, for his part spoke to Laksmana
as follows : (74)
आरोह त्वं नरव्याघ्र स्थितां नावमिमां शनै:।
सीतां चारोपयान्वक्षं परिगृह्य मनस्विनीम्॥७५॥
“Holding the boat standing there and
thereby steadying it, help the timid Sita to
get into it slowly and step you into it forthwith,
O lion among men !” (75)

स Ud: शासनं श्रुत्वा सर्वमप्रतिकूलयन्।
आरोप्य मैथिलीं पूर्वमारुरोहात्मवांस्तत:॥ ७६ I

Hearing the command of his elder
brother and helping Sita, a princess of Mithila,
to get into the boat first, the self-possessed
Laksmana stepped into the boat afterwards,
thus acting in full conformity with his brother's
command. (76)

अथारुरोह तेजस्वी स्वयं लक्ष्मणपूर्वज:।
ततो निषादाधिपतिर्गुहो ज्ञातीनचोदयत्॥ ७७॥
