« KISKINDHAKANDA +

एतत्ते सर्वमाख्यातं वैरानुकथनं महत्।
अनागसा मया प्राप्तं व्यसनं पश्य राघव॥ २९॥
“In this way the whole momentous story
of my hostility with Vali has been narrated
to you by me. See for yourself, O scion of
Raghu, the misfortune met with by me,
innocent though | am. (29)

वालिनश्च भयात् तस्य सर्वलोकभयापह।
कर्तुमर्हसि A at Ward तस्य निग्रहात्॥३०॥

“Nay, you ought to bring immunity to
me, situated as | am, from the threat of Vali
through his subjugation, O gallant prince,
the dispeller of the fear of all the worlds !”

(30)

Wag: स तेजस्वी धर्मज्ञो धर्मसंहितम्।
वचनं वक्तुमारेभे aid प्रहसन्निव॥ ३१॥

Requested as aforesaid, the glorious
Sri Rama, who knew what is right, proceeded
to address the following words, conformable
to righteousness, to Sugriva as though
laughing heartily : (31)

अमोघा: सूर्यसंकाशा निशिता A शरा इमे।
afer वालिनि दुर्वृत्ते पतिष्यन्ति रुषान्विता: ।। ३२॥

967

“Full of wrath these unfailing sharp
arrows of mine, brilliant as the sun, will
descend on that Vali of immoral conduct.

(32)

aad तं नहि पश्येयं aa भार्यापहारिणम्।
तावत् स जीवेत् पापात्मा वाली चारित्रदूषक: ॥ ३३॥

“The aforesaid Vali, whose mind is set
on sin and who has transgressed morality,
will survive only till | do not behold that
usurper of your spouse. (33)

आत्मानुमानात् पश्यामि मग्नस्त्वं शोकसागरे।
त्वामहं तारयिष्यामि are प्राप्स्यसि पुष्कलम्॥ ३४॥

“Through inference based on my own
example | can see that you are plunged in
an ocean of grief. | shall accordingly help
you to cross it and you will surely be able
to regain all that you have lost, viz., your
consort and sovereignty, too.” (34)

तस्य ae वचनं श्रुत्वा हर्षपौरुषवर्धनम्।

gia: ula: सुमहद्वाक्यमब्रवीत्॥ ३५॥
Supremely rejoiced to hear the aforesaid

assurance of Sri Rama, which intensified

his joy and courage, Sugriva gave a most
momentous reply. (35)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये किष्किन्धाकाण्डे
SIA: सर्ग: I १० ॥

Thus ends Canto Ten in the Kiskindhakanda of the glorious Ramayana of Valmiki,
the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

