# YUDDHAKANDA #

नैवायं वानरान् राजन् न विजानाति राक्षसान्।

Wa: शोणितगन्धेन स्वान् परांश्चैव खादति॥ १२८ ॥।
“Intoxicated, as he is, with the smell of

blood, this fellow, O prince, can no longer

discriminate the monkeys and ogres and is

indiscriminately devouring friends and foes

alike. (128)

साध्वेनमधिरोहन्तु सर्वतो वानरर्षभा:।
यूथपाश्च यथा मुख्यास्तिष्ठन्त्वस्मिन् समन्तत: ॥ १२९॥

“Let the foremost of the monkeys as
well as the commanders of troops climb
straight upon him from all sides and duly
stay on him. (129)

अद्यायं gala: काले गुरुभारप्रपीडित:।

WAT TAA भूमौ नान्यान्हन्यात्प्लवंगमान्॥ १३० UI
“Sore oppressed by the heavy weight

of the monkeys, this evil-minded ogre will

no longer be able to kill the other monkeys
while moving about on the earth.” (130)

तस्य ag वचनं श्रुत्वा राजपुत्रस्य धीमत:।

ते समारुरुहुर्हृष्टा: कुम्भकर्णं महाबला:॥१३१॥
Hearing the aforesaid direction of the

sagacious prince, the monkeys, who were

endowed with extraordinary might, climbed

joyfully upon Kumbhakarna. (131)

कुम्भकर्णस्तु संक्रुद्ध: AAAS: प्लवंगमै: |
व्यधूनयत् तान् वेगेन दुष्टहस्तीव हस्तिपान्॥ १३२॥

Highly enraged when climbed upon by
the monkeys, Kumbhakarna for his part shook
them off with vehemence as a refractory
elephant would shake off his mahout. (132)

तान्दृष्ट्वा निर्धुतान् रामो रुष्टोऽयमिति राक्षसम्।
समुत्पपात वेगेन धनुरुत्तममाददे॥१३३॥
Finding them shaken off and concluding
that the ogre was enraged, Sri Rama darted
towards him with impetuosity, holding in his
hand his excellent bow. (133)

क्रोधरक्तेक्षणो धीरो निर्दहन्निव चक्षुषा।
राघवो wad वेगादभिदुद्राव वेगित:।
यूथपान्हर्षयन् सर्वान् कुम्भकर्णबलार्दितान्॥ १३४॥

567

He eyes red with fury, as if he was
going to burn his adversary with his very
glance, and seized with impetuosity, the
intrepid Sr Rama (a scion of Raghu)
rushed towards the ogre with vehemence
bringing delight to all his troop-commanders,
who were oppressed by the might of
Kumbhakarna. (134)

a . .

Taking in his hand his formidable bow,
which resembled a serpent, was _ strung
with a stout cord and looked charming with
its ornamental crust of gold, nay, fully
restoring the monkeys to confidence, the
celebrated Sri Rama bounded forward, a
quiver full of excellent arrows fastened at
his back. (135)

स वानरगणैस्तैस्तु oda: परमदुर्जयै:।
लक्ष्मणानुचरो A: सम्प्रतस्थे महाबल:॥ १३६ Il
Surrounded by the aforesaid troops of
monkeys who were extremely difficult to
conquer, the aforesaid hero, who was
endowed with extraordinary might, duly
proceeded to meet Kumbhakarna, followed
by Laksmana. (136)
a cast महात्मानं किरीटिनमरिंदमम्।
शोणिताप्लुतरक्ताक्षं कुम्भकर्णं महाबल:॥ १३७॥
Sri Rama, who was endowed with
extraordinary might, saw the colossal
Kumbhakarna, the tamer of his enemies,
adorned with a diadem and bathed in blood,
his eyes red with fury. (137)

सर्वान् समभिधावन्तं यथा रुष्टं दिशागजम्।
मार्गमाणं हरीन् क्रुद्धं राक्षसै: परिवारितम्॥ १३८ I
Surrounded by ogres and hunting for
the monkeys, full of rage, he was pursuing
them all like a furious elephant guarding one
of the quarters. (138)
