820

जित्वा शत्रुगणान् राम: प्राप्य चानुत्तमं यश:।
उपायाति समृद्धार्थ: we मित्रैर्महाबलै:।॥ १३॥
“Say to him, ‘Having conquered the
hosts of enemies and won unsurpassed
glory, his purpose thus accomplished, Rama
has arrived near with other friends endowed
with extraordinary might.’ (13)
एतच्छृत्वा यमाकारं भजते भरतस्तत:।
स च ते वेदितव्य: स्यात् ae यच्चापि मां प्रति।। १४॥
“Nay, the expression which Bharata
wears on his face on hearing this news
should also then be observed by you as
also all what he intends to do in relation to
me (14)

ज्ञेया: Ud च qaed भरतस्येङ्गितानि च।
तत्त्वेन मुखवर्णेन दृष्ट्या व्याभाषितेन च॥ १५॥

“All the reactions of Bharata and his
gestures too should be truly ascertained
through the colour of his face, glances and
speech. (15)
पितृपैतामहं Ut कस्य नावर्तयेन्मन:॥१६॥

“Whose mind will a kingdom exceedingly
rich in all coveted enjoyments, nay, teeming
with elephants, horses and chariots and
inherited from one’s father and grandfather,
not actually attract? (16)
संगत्या भरत: श्रीमान् राज्येनार्थी स्वयं भवेत्।
Wied वसुधां सर्वामखिलां रघुनन्दन:॥१७॥

“If through association with rulership or
with his mother, the glorious Bharata has
himself grown covetous of sovereignty, let
the delight of Raghu rule the entire globe
without exception. (17)

wea बुद्धिं च विज्ञाय व्यवसायं च वानर।

यावन्न दूरं याता: TA: क्षिप्रमागन्तुमर्हसि॥ १८॥
“Ascertaining his mind and resolve as

well, O Hanuman, you ought to return apace

before we are gone far from the hermitage
of Sage Bharadwaja.” (18)

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA +

इति प्रतिसमादिष्टो हनूमान् मारुतात्मज:।
मानुषं धारयन् रूपमयोध्यां त्वरितो ययौ॥१९॥

Assuming a human semblance when
commanded as aforesaid by Sri Rama,
Hanuman, an offspring of the wind-god, left
in all haste for Ayodhya. (19)

अथोत्पपात वेगेन SAM मारुतात्मज:।
गरुत्मानिव वेगेन जिघृक्षन्नुरगोत्तमम्॥२०॥

Hanuman, son of the  wind-god,
forthwith sprang forward towards Ayodhya
with speed even as Garuda, the king of
birds and the transport of Lord Visnu, would
with impetuosity when seeking to lay hands
on a jewel among the serpents. (20)

गङ्गायमुनयोर्भीमं समतीत्य समागमम्॥२१॥
स वाचा शुभया wer हनूमानिदमब्रवीत्॥ २२॥

Sweeping through the air (the course
of his father, the wind-god), the charming
abode of the jewels among birds, nay, duly
crossing over the formidable confluence of
the Ganga and the Yamuna rivers, at
Prayaga, reaching Srngaverapura and
meeting Guha, the Nisada chief, the
celebrated and powerful Hanuman joyfully
spoke as follows in a charming voice:

(21-22)
सखा तु तव काकुत्स्थो Wa: सत्यपराक्रम:।
ससीत: सह सौमित्रि: स cat कुशलमब्रवीत्॥ २३॥

“With Sita as well as Laksmana (son
of Sumitra) your friend, Sri Rama, that scion
of Kakutstha of unfailing prowess, has for

his part enquired of you about your welfare.
(23)

पञ्चमीमद्य रजनीमुषित्वा वचनान्मुने:।
भरद्वाजाभ्यनुज्ञातं द्रक्ष्यस्यत्रैव राघवम्॥२४॥

“You will be able to see Sri Rama (a
scion of Raghu) at this very place today
when he has been duly permitted by Sage
