620

sandals and leather shoes, small caskets
containing collyrium, combs, brushes for
combing moustaches and beards, nay,
umbrellas, and bows, armour and different
kinds of beds and seats, tanks full of water
worth drinking, feed for donkeys, camels,
elephants and horses, as well as tanks,
provided with excellent descents, where one
could easily take a plunge, full of lilies and
lotuses, resembling the sky in hue, containing
limpid water and pleasing to bathe in and
heaps of tender grass resembling the blue
cat’s-eyes gem in hue for the consumption
of animals. (75—79)

व्यस्मयन्त मनुष्यास्ते स्वप्नकल्पं तदद्भुतम्।
दृष्टाऽऽतिथ्यं कृतं AS भरतस्य महर्षिणा॥ ८०॥
The aforesaid men were amazed to
see that entertainment, wonderful like a
dream, provided so long for Bharata by the
eminent sage Bharadwaja. (80)
gaa रममाणानां देवानामिव नन्दने।
भरद्वाजाश्रमे wa सा रात्रिर्व्यत्यवर्तत॥८१॥
While the people that had followed
Bharata in his journey to Citrakuta were still
busy enjoying, as aforesaid, in that lovely

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

hermitage of Bharadwaja the delights provided
by the sage like so many gods in the
Nandana grove in paradise, that night passed
away. (81)

प्रतिजग्मुश्च ता नद्यो गन्धर्वाश्च यथागतम्।
भरद्वाजमनुज्ञाप्य Ay सर्वा वराङ्गना:॥८२॥
Taking leave of Bharadwaja, those rivers
as well as the Gandharvas (celestial
musicians) and all the lovely women, viz.,
the celestial nymphs, returned even as they
had come. (82)

ada मत्ता मदिरोत्कटा नरा-
स्तथैव दिव्यागुरुचन्दनोक्षिता:।
ada दिव्या विविधा: स्तरगुत्तमा:
पृथग्विकीर्णा मनुजै: प्रमर्दिता: ॥ ८३॥

The people, however, remained flushed
and drunk with wine much in the same way
even at dawn; they stood smeared with the
exquisite paste of aloe wood and sandalwood
even as before; and the excellent celestial
garlands of various kinds lay strewn here
and there separately as fresh as at the
beginning, crushed as they were by men
through constant use for the whole night.

(83)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्येऽयोध्याकाण्डे एकनवतितम: सर्ग: ॥ ९१ ॥

Thus ends Canto Ninety-one in the Ayodhyakanda of the glorious Ramayana of
Valmiki, the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

द्विनवतितम: at:
Canto XCII

Questioned with folded hands about the road to Citrakuta, Bharadwaja shows
the way to Bharata and then inquires of him about the names of his three
mothers, who stood bowing down to the sage. Having told him the
names of all the three of his mothers with the history of each, and
commanding the army to get ready for the journey ahead,
Bharata proceeds to Citrakuta with his retinue

ततस्तां रजनीं व्युष्य भरत: Tufte: |

Having spent the previous night with
his family at the hermitage of Bharadwaja,

कृतातिथ्यो भरद्वाजं कामादभिजगाम ह॥१॥ | Bharata, to whom hospitality had been
