* BALAKANDA +

पुत्रस्ते et: पुत्र भविष्यति सुधार्मिक:।
गाधिं प्राप्स्यसि तेन त्वं कीर्तिं लोके च शाश्वतीम्॥ ३॥

“*A most pious son, worthy of you, will
be born to you, my son! You will have
Gadhi for your son and thereby attain undying
glory in the world.’ (3)

“Informing King KuSanabha accordingly,
O Rama, Kusa withdrew to the immortal
Satyaloka (the realm of Brahma, from which
he had obviously come), coursing through
the airspace. (4)

कस्यचित् AM कालस्य कुशनाभस्य धीमत:।
जज्ञे परमधर्मिष्ठो गाधिरित्येव नामत:॥५॥

“After sometime indeed a most pious
son, Gadhi by name, the very name given
by KuSa, was born to the wise KuSanabha.

(5)
स पिता मम काकुत्स्थ गाधि: परमधार्मिक:।

कुशवंशप्रसूतोऽस्मि कौशिको रघुनन्दन॥६॥

“That exceedingly pious man, Gadhi
by name, was my father, O descendant of
Kakutstha! And descended in the line of
Kusa, | am known as Kausika, O scion of
Raghu ! (6)

पूर्वजा भगिनी चापि मम waa सुव्रता।
नाम्ना सत्यवती नाम ऋचीके प्रतिपादिता॥ i

“| had an elder sister too, of noble
vows, known by the name of Satyavati and
given away to the sage, Rcika. (7)

सशरीरा गता स्वर्गं भर्तारमनुवर्तिनी।
कौशिकी परमोदारा Yau च महानदी॥८॥
feet पुण्योदका wear हिमवन्तमुपाश्रिता।
लोकस्य हितकार्यार्थं प्रव्रत्ता भगिनी मम॥९॥

“Following as she did, the wishes of her
husband throughout her life, my sister bodily
ascended to heaven and later on turned into
a most beneficent and delightful great
river—Kausiki (the modern Kosi), flowing by
the side of the Himalayas, unearthly in

165

character, whose waters confer merit on those
using it—and is thus engaged in doing good
to the world. (8-9)

ततोऽहं हिमवत्पाश्वे वसामि नियत: सुखम्।
भगिन्यां स्नेहसंयुक्त: कौशिक्यां रघुनन्दन॥१०॥
“Full of affection for my sister, | had
been happily leading a life of self-discipline
since then by the side of the Himalayas on
the banks of the Kausiki, O scion of Raghu !
(10)

सा तु सत्यवती पुण्या सत्ये धर्मे प्रतिष्ठिता।
पतिव्रता महाभागा कौशिकी सरितां वरा॥११॥

“That pious and highly blessed lady,
Satyavati, who was established in the virtue
of truthfulness and exclusively devoted to
her husband, is still extant in the form of
Kausiki, the foremost of rivers. (11)

a fe नियमाद् राम हित्वा at समुपागत:।
सिद्धाश्रममनुप्राप्त: सिद्धोऽस्मि तव तेजसा॥१२॥

“Leaving that river | came down to
the plains because of my vow to perform
a sacrifice at some consecrated spot and
arrived at Siddhasrama, where | got
accomplished of my purpose by dint of your
glory (might). (12)

एषा राम ममोत्पत्ति: स्वस्य वंशस्य कीर्तिता।
देशस्य fe महाबाहो यन्मां त्वं परिपृच्छसि॥ १३॥

“In this way has been told by me my
birth from the loins of Gadhi, the genesis of
my race (from Kusa, son of Brahma) and
the history of the land of Girivraja extending
along the bank of the Sona, which you
asked me in particular, O mighty-armed
Rama ! (13)

गतोऽर्धरात्र: काकुत्स्थ कथा: कथयतो मम।
निद्रामभ्येहि ug ते मा yg विघ्नोऽध्वनीह A: i १४॥

“Half of the night has passed in my
narrating past episodes, O scion of
Kakutstha ! Peace be with you! Now go to
sleep. Let there be no interference in this
journey of ours due to torpor caused by
sleeplessness. (14)
