604

prepared a sacred bed for Sri Rama, a
scion of Raghu. (20)

तस्मिन् समाविशदू राम: स्वास्तरे सह सीतया।
प्रक्षाल्य च तयो: पादौ व्यपाक्रामत् स लक्ष्मण: tt २१ ॥
“Sri Rama sat down on the bed with
Sita and, washing the feet of Sri Rama and
Sita (Sri Rama’s with his own hands and
Sita’s by giving water to her), the celebrated
Laksmana moved to a distance. (21)

एतत् तदिङ्गु च तत् तृणम्।
यस्मिन् रामश्च सीता च रात्रिं तां शयितावुभौ ।। २२॥

“This is the foot of the same Ingudi tree
and these are the same blades of Kusa

grass where and on which Sri Rama and
Sita both reposed that night. (22)

नियम्य asd तु तलाङ्गुलित्रवान्
vt: सुपूर्णाविषुधी परंतप:।

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

महद्धनु: सज्जमुपोह्य लक्ष्मणो
निशामतिष्ठत् परितोऽस्य केवलम्॥ २३॥

“Fastening at his back, one on each
side, a pair of quivers fully packed with
arrows and donning gloves about his hands
and wielding a large stringed bow, Laksmana,
a tormentor of his foes, for his part remained
walking round Sri Rama during the night
singly. (23)
ततस्त्वहं चोत्तमबाणचापभृत्

स्थितोऽभवं तत्र स यत्र लक्ष्मण: |

र्महेन्द्रकल्पं परिपालयंस्तदा॥ २४॥

“Wielding excellent arrows and bow, |

too remained posted where the aforesaid
Laksmana kept moving, carefully guarding
Sri Rama (who vied with Indra) with my vigilant
kinsmen carrying bows in their hands.” (24)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्येऽयोध्याकाण्डे सप्ताशीतितम: सर्ग: ॥ ८७॥

Thus ends Canto Eighty-seven in the Ayodhyakanda of the glorious Ramayana of
Valmiki, the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

Canto LXXXVIII

Showing to Kausalya and others the bed of Kuga grass on which Sri Rama
and Sita spent their night, and contrasting it with the royal splendour and
luxury in which he lived in Ayodhya, Bharata laments for him and,
holding himself responsible for this turn of events and complimenting
Laksmana and Sita for throwing their lot with Sri Rama and
sharing his privations, makes up his mind henceforth to
dwell in the forest as a representative of Sri Rama,

wearing matted locks on his head like him

wep निपुणं ad भरत: सह मन्तिभि:।

इङ्गुन्दोक्कामागम्य रामशय्यामवैक्षत॥ १॥

Hearing all that attentively and reaching
the foot of the Ingudi tree with the king’s
counsellors, Bharata saw Sri Rama’s bed.

(1)

अब्रवीज्जननी: Wal se तस्य महात्मन:।
wet शयिता भूमाविदमस्य विमर्दितम्॥ २॥

He said to all his mothers, “Here was
the night spent by that high-souled prince
lying on the ground. These are the blades of
KuSa grass crushed by his body while
reposing on them. (2)
