# YUDDHAKANDA +

standing here like an elephant in rut and
who when enraged would violently churn up
the sea itself went all the way to Lanka in
search of Sita (a princess of the Videha
territory) as well as of yourself, O lord.
Behold this monkey seen (by you) before
and come for a second time. (8-9)

ज्येष्ठ: केसरिण: Yat वातात्मज इति श्रुत:।
हनूमानिति विख्यातो लङ्घितो येन सागर:॥१०॥

“The eldest son of Kesar, he is also
known as an offspring of the wind-god and
is widely known as Hanuman, by whom the
sea was crossed. (10)

कामरूपो हरिश्रेष्ठो बलरूपसमन्वित:।
अनिवार्यगतिश्चैव यथा सततग: प्रभु:॥११॥

“This prince of monkeys is able to
change his form at will, is richly endowed
with might and physical charm and cannot
be stayed in his course any more than
the powerful wind, which constantly blows.

(11)
उद्यन्तं भास्करं दृष्टवा बाल: किल बुभुक्षित: |
त्रियोजनसहस्रं तु अध्वानमवतीर्य हि॥१२॥
आदित्यमाहरिष्यामि न मे ata प्रतियास्यति।
sta निश्चित्य मनसा पुप्लुवे बलदर्पित:॥१३॥

“Seeing the rising sun when yet a child,
feeling hungry, and resolving in his mind
that ‘I shall eat up the sun inasmuch as my
hunger will not be appeased otherwise,’
nay, actually bounding to a distance of three
thousand Yojanas (or twenty-four thousand
miles), they say, he leapt up in the sky,
proud as he was of his own might.(12-13)

अनाधृष्यतमं देवमपि देवर्षिराक्षसै:।
अनासाद्यैव पतितो भास्करोदयने गिरौ॥ १४॥

“Unable as he was to reach the
sun-god, who is most unassailable even to
gods, Rsis and ogres, he, however, fell on
the eastern mountain on which the sun
rises. (14)

391

पतितस्य कपेरस्य हनुरेका शिलातले।
किंचिद् भिन्ना दृढहनुर्हनूमानेष तेन aN eal

“Even as the monkey fell on the surface
of a rock, one of his jaws got slightly
fractured; nevertheless it became all the
more solid. Hence he actually came to be
known as Hanuman. (15)
सत्यमागमयोगेन ममैष विदितो हरि:।
नास्य शक्यं बलं WT प्रभावो वानुभाषितुम्॥ १६॥

“Through association with the monkeys
who came in contact with me, this monkey
is known to me in reality. His strength,
physical charm or glory is not capable of
being described. (16)

wa आशंसते लङ्कामेको मथितुमोजसा।
at जाज्वल्यतेऽसौ a धूमकेतुस्तवाद्य 41
लङ्कायां निहितश्चापि कथं विस्मरसे कपिम्॥१७॥
“He aspires to destroy Lanka single-
handed by his own might. How can you
actually forget today the monkey by whom
fire, which had been deprived of its lustre
by your glory, was lighted on his tail at that
time and also scattered in Lanka? (17)
यश्चैषोऽनन्तर: शूर: vara: पद्मनिभेक्षण:।
इक्ष्वाकूणामतिरथो लोके विश्रुतपौरुष:॥ १८॥
यस्मिन् न चलते धर्मो यो धर्मं नातिवर्तते।
यो ब्राह्ममस्त्रं वेदांश्च वेद वेदविदां वर:॥१९॥
यो भिन्द्याद् गगनं बाणैर्मेदिनीं aft दारयेत्।
यस्य मृत्योरिव क्रोध: शाक्रस्येव पराक्रम:॥ Ro ll
यस्य भार्या जनस्थानात् सीता चापि AT त्वया ।
स एष रामस्त्वां राजन् योद्धुं समभिवर्तते॥ २१॥
“Again, this valiant prince—who stands
close by, nay, who is dark-brown of
complexion and has lotus-like eyes, is a
great car-warrior among the scions of
Ikswaku, whose heroism is well-known in
the world, in whom virtue never wavers,
who never transgresses righteousness, who
knows the use of the (mystic) missile presided
over by Brahma (the creator) as also the
