946

Spoken to in these words by Sri Rama,
Laksmana (son of Sumitra) for his part, who
knew how to speak, replied as follows to
the monkey, Hanuman (son of the wind-
god), a minister of Sugriva, who also knew
how to speak : (36)

विदिता नौ गुणा विद्वन् सुग्रीवस्य महात्मन:।

Wa चावां मार्गाव: सुग्रीवं प्लवगेश्वरम्॥ ३७॥
“The virtues of the high-minded Surgriva

are known to us, O learned monkey! We

too are looking for the self same Sugriva, a

ruler of monkeys. (37)

यथा ब्रवीषि हनुमन् सुग्रीववचनादिह।
ae तथा fe करिष्यावो वचनात् तव सत्तम॥ ३८॥

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

“O excellent Hanuman, as desired by
Sugriva, we are prepared for an alliance with
him.” (38)
ad तस्य वाक्यं Prout निशम्य

प्रहुष्टरूप: पवनात्मज: cle: |
मन: समाधाय जयोपपत्तौ
सख्यं तदा कर्तुमियेष ताभ्याम्॥ ३९॥

Having carefully heard the aforesaid reply
of Laksmana, and setting his heart on the
consummation of Sugriva’s truimph, Hanuman
(the monkey sprung from the loins of the
wind-god), who wore a most cheerful
countenance, sought then and there to
negotiate an alliance with the two princes. (39)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये किष्किन्धाकाण्डे
gaa: सर्ग: ॥ ३॥
Thus ends Canto Three in the Kiskindhakanda of the glorious Ramayana of Valmiki,
the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

ada: सर्ग:
Canto IV

Hanuman inquires of Sri Rama the purpose of his visit to Pampa. Having
narrated to Hanuman, as urged by Sri Rama, his life-story up to his separation
from Sita, Laksmana tells him that cultivation of friendship with
Sugriva, in pursuance of the advice of Kabandha, was the purpose of
their visit to the Pampa. Observing that Sugriva was in a predicament
similar to the one in which Sri Rama found himself placed and
as such stood in need of Sri Rama’s sympathy and goodwill,
Hanuman resumes his real form and, placing Sri Rama

and Laksmana on his shoulders, reaches Rsyamtka

तत: Weer हनुमान् कृत्यवानिति aga:
श्रुत्वा मधुरभावं च सुग्रीवं मनसा गत:॥१॥
Highly rejoiced to hear the aforesaid
speech of Sri Rama as well as of Sri
Rama’s friendly feeling towards Sugriva
and to learn that Sri Rama too had some
purpose in meeting him, Hanuman then
mentally sought the presence of Sugriva.

(1)

भाव्यो राज्यागमस्तस्य सुग्रीवस्य महात्मन:।
यदयं कृत्यवान् We: कृत्यं चैतदुपागतम्॥ २॥
He said to himself, ‘Attainment of
sovereignty on the part of that high-souled
Sugriva is sure to come about as is clear
from the fact that Sri Rama has come
here with a purpose and the duty of
accomplishing it has devolved on Sugriva.’

(2)
