430

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA +

Canto XL

Ascending the highest peak of the Suvela mountain alongwith a division
of his army, Sri Rama catches sight of Ravana perched on the top
of a gate of his palace. Infuriated at his very sight, Sugriva
springs upon him by surprise from the mountain-top,
throws down the diadem from his head, struggles
with him for a long time and, eluding
him, returns victorious to the
presence of Sri Rama

ततो Wa: सुवेलाग्रं योजनद्वयमण्डलम्।
उपारोहत् ससुग्रीवो हरियूथै: समन्वित:॥१॥

Accompanied by Sugriva and followed
by battalions of monkeys, Sr Rama
thereupon ascended the top of the Suvela
mountain, which had a circumference of
two Yojanas (or sixteen miles). (1)

स्थित्वा dad ata दिशो दश विलोकयन्।
त्रिकूटशिखरे wa निर्मितां विश्वकर्मणा॥ २॥
wal लङ्कां सुन्यस्तां रम्यकाननशोभिताम्।
तस्य गोघुस्श्रंङ्गस्थ राक्षसेन्द्रं TALI ३॥

॥ ५ ॥।
शशलोहितरागेण संवीतं रक्तवाससा।
संध्यातपेन संछन्नं मेघराशिमिवाम्बरे॥६॥

Halting a while on that very spot and
surveying all the ten directions, he caught
sight of Lanka, which had been built by
ViSwakarma, the architect of gods, and
beautifully laid out on a lovely peak of the
Trikuta mountain and was adorned with
delightful groves. He saw perched on the
top of a gate of that city Ravana, the ruler
of ogres, who was difficult to approach, was
being fanned with white whisks on both
sides, was graced with a triumphal parasol
held over his head, smeared all over with

red sandal-paste and adorned with
scarlet ornaments, who closely resembled
a dark cloud in hue and was attired in
raiment embroidered with gold, who bore
on his breast scars of indentations made
by the points of tusks of Airavata (the
elephant who carries Indra, the ruler of
gods, on his back), nay, was covered by
a red outer garment of the colour of a hare’s
blood and looked like a mass of clouds in
the sky, enveloped with sunshine at sunset.
(2—6)

पश्यतां वानरेन्द्राणां राघवस्यापि पश्यत:।
दर्शनाद् राक्षसेन्द्रस्य सुग्रीव: सहसोत्थित:॥ ७॥
At the very sight of Ravana, the ruler
of ogres, Sugriva got up all at once, while
the monkey chiefs as well as Sri Rama (a
scion of Raghu) looked on. (7)

क्रोधवेगेन संयुक्त: सत्त्वेन च बलेन al
अचलाग्रादथोत्थाय पुप्लुवे गोपुरस्थले॥८॥

Rising from the mountain-top, seized
as he was with impetuosity, occasioned by
wrath and endowed with courage and bodily
strength, he sprang to the top of the gate,
where Ravana was. (8)

स्थित्वा wed सम्प्रेक्ष्य निर्भयेनान्तरात्मना।

तृणीकृत्य च ag Wa: सोऽब्रवीत् परुषं वच:॥ ९॥
Pausing a while and gazing on Ravana

with an intrepid mind, nay, taking that ogre
