1110

Wed प्रस्थितस्यास्य परिज्ञातस्य कर्मभि:।

wat परिगृहीतस्य ga: कार्यफलोदय:॥१०॥
“Therefore, the success of the

endeavour of Hanuman, who has been tested

by his deeds and chosen for this work by

his master, and who is now moving out (in

obedience to his master’s call) is certain.”
(10)

तं समीक्ष्य महातेजा व्यवसायोत्तरं हरिम्।
pad st संहृष्ट: प्रहृष्टेन्द्रयमानस:॥११॥
Perceiving the aforesaid monkey,
Hanuman, who was_ pre-eminent — in
accomplishing the work entrusted to him,
Sri Rama, who was’ endowed with
extraordinary energy, felt overjoyed as though
he had gained his end, his senses and mind
thrilled with delight. (11)

ददौ तस्य तत: Wha: स्वनामाङ्कोपशोभितम्।
अङ्गुलीयमभिज्ञानं UST: परंतप:॥१२॥

Full of joy, Sri Rama (the scourge of
his foes) gave to Hanuman a ring inscribed
with his name as a token of identification to
Sita (the daughter of a king). (12)

अनेन त्वां हरिश्रेष्ठं चिह्नेन जनकात्मजा।
मत्सकाशादनुप्राप्तमनुद्विग्नानुपश्यति ॥ १३॥

He said to him, “Through this token, O
jewel among the monkeys, Sita (the daughter
of Janaka) will unperturbedly recognize you
to have arrived from my presence. (13)

व्यवसायश्च a dit सत्त्वयुक्तश्च विक्रम:।
सुग्रीवस्य च संदेश: fake कथयतीव मे॥ १४॥

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

“Nay, your resolution as well as your
prowess coupled with courage as also the
words of Sugriva addressed to you predict
success, as it were, to my mind.” (14)

स तद् गृह्य हरिश्रेष्ठ: कृत्वा मूर्धि Harter: |
ara चरणौ चैव प्रस्थित: प्लवगर्षभ:॥ १५॥

Taking the ring and placing it on his
head and bowing down at Sri Rama’s feet,
Hanuman, a jewel among the monkeys, set
forth with joined palms. (15)

स तत् प्रकर्षन् हरिणां महद् बलं

aye वीर: पवनात्मज: कपि: |
गताम्बुदे व्योम्नि विशुद्धमण्डल:

शशीव नक्षत्रगणोपशोभित: ॥ १६॥

Leading that mighty band of monkeys,
the aforesaid monkey, the gallant Hanuman
(son of the wind-god) shone like the moon
with a stainless orb graced by a galaxy of
stars in a cloudless sky. (16)

अतिबल बलमाश्रितस्तवाहं

हरिवर विक्रम विक्रमैरनल्पै:।
पवनसुत यथाधिगम्यते सा

जनकसुता हनुमंस्तथा कुरुष्व॥ १७॥

“Sri Rama sent him away with the
following words: “Il depend on your might,
O Hanuman, endowed as you are with
surpassing strength. Exert yourself in such
a way by dint of your great valour, O son of
the wind-god, possessing as you do the
might of the foremost of lions, that Sita,
daughter of Janaka, may be found.” (17)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये किष्किन्धाकाण्डे
चतुश्चत्वारिंश: सर्ग: il ४४॥
Thus ends Canto Forty-four in the Kiskindhakanda of the glorious Ramayana of
Valmiki, the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

