* ARANYAKANDA «

परा त्वत्तो गतिर्वीरं पृथिव्यां नोपपद्यते।
परिपालय A: सर्वान् राक्षसेभ्यो नृपात्मज॥ २०॥

“O brave prince, there can be no better
help on earth than you. Protect us all from
the ogres.” (20)

एतच्छुत्वा तु काकुत्स्थस्तापसानां तपस्विनाम्।
इदं प्रोवाच धर्मात्मा सर्वानेव तपस्विन:॥ २१॥

Hearing this from the ascetic sages,
the righteous Kakutstha for his part addressed
all the ascetics as follows: (21)
नैवमर्हथ मां वक्तुमाज्ञाप्योऽहं तपस्विनाम्।
केवलेन स्वकार्येण प्रवेष्टव्यं वनं AAT २२॥
विप्रकारमपाक्रष्टुं राक्षसैर्भवतामिमम्।
पितुस्तु निर्देशकर: प्रविष्टोऽहमिदं वनम्॥ २३॥

“You should not pray to me thus. | am
at the service of the ascetics. | have to
enter the forest not only for my own business,
it is to stop this persecution of yours by the
ogres that | have entered this forest in
obedience to the command of my father.

(22-23)

729

भवतामर्थसिद्ध्यर्थमागतोऽहं यदृच्छया।
wet मेऽयं at वासो भविष्यति महाफल:॥ २४॥

“By chance, | have come here to
achieve your purpose. Thus getting the
opportunity, this stay of mine in the forest is
going to yield great results. (24)

तपस्विनां रणे शत्रून् हन्तुमिच्छामि राक्षसान्।
पश्यन्तु वीर्यमृषय: सभ्रातुर्मे तपोधना:॥ २५॥
“| desire to kill ogres, the enemies of
ascetics, on the battlefield. Let the ascetic
sages see my valour together with my
brother's.” (25)
ara at चापि तपोधनानां
धर्मे धृतात्मा सह लक्ष्मणेन।
सुतीक्ष्णमेवाभिजगाम वीर:॥ २६॥

Giving an assurance to the ascetics,
the righteous-minded hero, Sri Rama, the
bestower of noble gifts, proceeded towards
Sutiksna alone, together with Laksmana (and
Sita) as well as with all the ascetics. (26)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्येऽरण्यकाण्डे WS: We ॥ ६ ॥

Thus ends Canto Six in the Aranyakanda of the glorious Ramayana of Valmiki,
the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

Canto VII

Rama goes to Sutiksna together with Sita and Laksmana
and stays with him during the night

रामस्तु सहितो wat सीतया च परंतप:।
सुतीक्ष्णस्याश्रमपदं जगाम सह get eH
Rama, the tormentor of foes, together
with his brother and Sita and also with the
Brahmanas, went to the site of Sutiksna’s
hermitage. (1)
स गत्वा दूरमध्वानं adteitat बहूदका:।
cast विमलं शैलं महामेरुमिवोन्नतम्॥२॥

Going a long distance and crossing

the rivers of deep waters he saw a bright
mountain, high like the great Meru. (2)

ततस्तदिक्ष्वाकुवरौ सततं विविधैर्द्रमै:।
काननं dt विविशतु: सीतया ae राघवौ॥ ३॥
Then those two Raghavas, the best

amongst the Ikswakus, together with Sita,
entered that forest full of a variety of trees.(3)

Weer at at बहुपुष्पफलद्रुमम्।
ददर्शाश्रममेकान्ते चीरमालापरिष्कृतम्॥ ४॥
