326

the ten-headed monster, the destroyer of

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA +

prowess in combat, forthwith dismissed his

the celestial forces, who was endowed with | younger half-brother, Vibhisana, who had

extraordinary valour and exhibited terrific | elucidated the truth.

(29)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये युद्धकाण्डे GTA: सर्ग: ॥ १० ॥
Thus ends Canto Ten in the Yuddhakanda of the glorious Ramayana of
Valmiki, the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

एकादश: सर्ग:
Canto XI

When Ravana entered the assembly hall to hold consultations
with his counsellors, other leading ogres as well
as Vibhisana follow suit

स aya कृशो राजा मैथिलीकाममोहित:।
असन्मानाच्च सुहृदां पाप: पापेन कर्मणा॥१॥

King Ravana, who was infatuated with
passion for Sita (a princess of Mithila) and
had begun to be looked upon as sinful
because of his evil doing in the shape of
Sita’s abduction, grew emaciated through
disrespect shown to him by his near and
dear ones and his consuming passion for
sita. (1)

aia कामसम्पन्नो वैदेहीमनुचिन्तयन्।
अतीतसमये काले तस्मिन् वै युधि रावण:।
अमात्यैश्च सुहृद्धिश्च प्राप्तकालममन्यत॥ २॥

The time for holding consultation
having elapsed, war being actually
imminent, Ravana, who was exceedingly
full of longing for Sita and was constantly
thinking of Sita (a princess of the
Videha territory), thought consultation with
his ministers and well-wishers to be
opportune. (2)

a हेमजालविततं मणिविद्रुमभूषितम्।
उपगम्य विनीताश्वमारुरोह महारथम्॥ ३॥

Approaching a huge chariot overlaid
with a lattice-work of gold, decked with

gems and corals and drawn by trained
horses, he ascended it. (3)
तमास्थाय रथश्रेष्ठं महामेघसमस्वनम्।

प्रययौ रक्षसां श्रेष्ठो दशग्रीव: सभां प्रति॥४॥

Taking his seat in that excellent
chariot, which produced a rattling sound
resembling the rumbling of a large cloud,

Ravana, the ten-headed monster, the
foremost of ogres, drove towards the
assembly hall. (4)
असिचर्मधरा योधा: सर्वायुधधरास्तत:।

TAA राक्षसेन्द्रस्य पुरस्तात् सम्प्रतस्थिरे॥५॥

At that time ogre troops carrying swords
and bucklers and all kinds of weapons
marched in order at the head of the ruler of
ogres. (5)

नानाविकृतवेषाश्च नानाभूषणभूषिता:।
usda: पृष्ठतश्चैनं uftard ययुस्तदा॥६॥
Nay, ogres attired in various strange
robes and adorned with all kinds of jewels,
marched giving cover to him at his sides as
well as at his back at that time. (6)

रथैश्चातिरथा: vit मत्तैश्च aan:
अनूत्पेतुर्दशग्रीवमाक्रीडद्धिश्च वाजिभि: ।॥ ७॥
