310

सा वानराणां ध्वजिनी सुग्रीवेणाभिपालिता।
त्रिधा निविष्टा महती रामस्यार्थपराभवत्॥१०७॥

Protected on all sides by Sugriva and
devoted to the cause of Sri Rama, that
huge army of monkeys was encamped in
three divisions viz., (i) bears, (ii) Go-Langulas
or long-tailed monkeys (74) and (iii)
monkeys. (107)

सा महार्णवमासाद्य हृष्टा वानरवाहिनी।
वायुवेगसमाधूतं पश्यमाना महार्णवम्॥१०८॥

Having reached the vast sea and
beholding the ocean lashed by the force of
the winds, the said army of monkeys felt
rejoiced. (108)
दूरपारमसम्बाधं रक्षोगणनिषेवितम्।
पश्यन्तो वरुणावासं निषेदुर्हरियूथपा:॥१०९॥
चण्डनक्रग्राहघोरं क्षपादौ दिवसशक्षये।
wea फेनौघैर्नृत्यन्तमिव चोर्मिभि:॥ ११०॥
चन्द्रोदये समुद्भूतं प्रतिचन्द्रसमाकुलम्।
चण्डानिलमहाग्राहै: कीर्णं तिमितिमिंगिलै: ॥ १११॥
दीप्तभोगैरिवाकीर्णं भुजङ्घैर्वरुणालयम्।
अवगाढं महासत्त्वैर्नानाशैलसमाकुलम्॥११२॥
सुदुर्गं दुर्गमार्गं तमगाधमसुरालयम्।
मकरैर्नागभोगैश्च विगाढा वातलोलिता:।
उत्पेतुश्च निपेतुश्च प्रहृष्टा जलराशय:॥११३॥

The leaders of the monkey troops sat
surveying the sea (lit., the abode of Varuna,
the god of water), with shores far apart,
nay, stretching without any obstruction for
hundreds of miles together and infested
with hordes of ogres—the sea which looked
terrible on account of its furious crocodiles
and alligators; which was tossed high at the
close of the day and the approach of night
at moonrise and was full of images of the
moon, reflected on its billows, which laughed
as it were through volumes of foam produced

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA +

by its waves and danced as it were through
its billows; which was crowded with huge
alligators, swift as a furious gale as well as
with Timis* (a species of gigantic fish
believed to be a hundred Yojanas or eight
hundred miles long) and Timingilas (fish
capable of devouring even Timis); which
was swarmed with serpents endowed with
flaming hoods and thus looked like Patala,
the abode of Varuna; which was crowded
with enormous aquatic creatures and thickly
set with mountains (under water), which
had excellent fastnesses like Lanka on its
shore, which could not be easily crossed,
and which was fathomless and an abode of
demons. Volumes of its water, whipped into
motion by the winds and penetrated into by
sharks and the bodies of serpents, rose
and fell joyfully. (109—113)

अग्निचूर्णमिवाविद्धं भास्वराम्बुमहोरगम्।
सुरारिनिलयं at पातालविषयं सदा॥११४॥

wr चाम्बरप्रख्यमम्बरं सागरोपमम्।
am चाम्बरं चेति निर्विशेषमदृश्यत॥ ees il
With its sparkling spray, the sea,
which is always the dread refuge of demons
(the enemies of gods) and is infested with
huge serpents and reaches in its depth up
to Patala (the nethermost subterranean
region), looked like a multitude of sparks
thrown here and there and also presented
the appearance of the firmament whose
sparkling frozen dew-drops appeared like
so many sparks thrown here and there,
nay, which is frequented by Nagas, is
the abode of demons and is deep as
Patala; while the firmament above looked
like another sea. Nay, the sea as well as
the firmament looked just the same.
(114-115)

* We read in the Puranas:

अस्ति मत्स्यस्तिमिर्नाम शतयोजनमायत:।
तं यो गिलति मत्स्य: स तिमिंगिलि sda:
तिमिंगिलगिलोऽप्यस्ति तद्गिलोऽप्यस्ति सागरे॥
