+ UTTARAKANDA +

duly entered the battlefield, inspiring terror in
the enemy ranks. Two highly valiant and
intrepid sons of Aditi, Twasta and Pusa,
likewise entered together the field of battle
with their army at that very moment. Then
ensued the conflict with ogres and the gods,
who were jealous of the glory of the ogres,
who never retreated in battles. Then all the
ogres began to hit in hundreds of thousands
the gods present on the battlefield with their
formidable weapons of various kinds. The
gods too with their stainless weapons
dispatched to the abode of Death the terrible
ogres who were endowed with extraordinary
might and prowess. Provoked to anger, in
the meantime, O Rama, the notorious ogre,
Sumali by name, equipped with every kind
of weapon, rushed upon the army of gods.
Full of rage, he with his whetted weapons of
various kinds exterminated the entire army
of the gods even as a hurricane would
disperse the clouds. Being lashed with hails
of mighty arrows, as well as with pikes and
spears, none of the aforesaid gods could
stand united. Provoked to anger while the
gods were being put to flight by Sumali,
Savitra, the eighth among the Vasus,
however, stood firm. Nay, surrounded by
his own troops, the god, who was endowed

939

with extraordinary energy, stayed by dint of
his prowess the ranger of the night, who
was acting on the offensive in the battle.
Then followed a great conflict, which caused
one’s hair to stand on end, between the two
warriors, Sumali and the Vasu, who never
retreated in battles.

Hit with mighty arrows, the chariot of
Sumali, which was drawn by serpents, was
overthrown in an instant by the exceptionally
high-souled Vasu. Having destroyed in the
course of the struggle the chariot of Sumall,
which was covered with hundreds of arrows,
the Vasu picked up a mace in his hand to
make short work of the ogre. Grasping tightly
the mace, which with its flaming had resembled
the rod of Death, Savitra actually brought it
down on the head of Sumali. Descending on
the ogre, the mace in question which shone
like a meteor, flashed like a mighty thunderbolt
hurled with a crash by Indra (the ruler of
gods) on a mountain. Having been reduced
to ashes by the mace, neither the bones nor
the head nor the flesh of the ogre who was
killed could be seen on the field of battle.
Seeing him killed in battle, all the ogres ina
body fled in every direction calling out one
another. Being put to flight by the Vasu, the
ogres could not stand. (27—52)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये उत्तरकाण्डे सप्तविंश: Wr ॥ २७॥

Thus ends Canto Twenty-seven in the Uttarakanda of the glorious Ramayana of
Valmiki, the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

Canto XXVIII
A duel between Meghanada and Jayanta (Indra’s son); Jayanta is removed
to another place by Puloma (his maternal grandfather); the appearance
of Indra (the ruler of gods) on the field of battle; the destruction
of the Raksasa army by the Rudras and the wind-gods;
a duel between Indra and Ravana

तत: स बलवान् क्रुद्धो रावणस्य सुतस्तदा।

स्वसैन्यं विद्रुतं चापि लक्षयित्वार्दितं at: ॥ १॥ | निवर्त्य राक्षसान् सर्वान् मेघनादो व्यवस्थित:॥ २॥
