374

“On what authority or ground, 0 jewel
among men, does he seek to confer on the
son of Kaikeyi this kingdom, which has as
a matter of right devolved on you? = (14)

त्वया चैव मया चैव कृत्वा वैरमनुत्तमम्।
कास्य शक्ति: श्रियं दातुं भरतायारिशासन॥ १५॥

“What power has he to bestow royal
fortune on Bharata entering into bitter enmity
with you as well as with me, O chastiser of
foes?” (15)
अनुरक्तोऽस्मि भावेन भ्रातरं देवि ara: |
Wat धनुषा चैव दत्तेनेष्टेन A शपे॥१६॥

Turning again to Kausalya he said: “l
swear to you by my bow as well as by the
merit attained by me through truthfulness,
charity and worship of gods that | am truly
devoted to my eldest brother with the core
of my heart, O godly lady ! (16)

दीप्तमग्निमरण्यं वा ale wa: प्रवेक्ष्यति।
प्रविष्टं at मां देवि त्वं पूर्वमवधारय॥ १७॥

“If Sri Rama enters a blazing fire or retires
to the forest, know me, O glorious lady, as
having already entered the same. (17)

हरामि drag दु:खं a तम: ga इवोदित:।
देवी पश्यतु मे वीर्यं राघवश्चैव पश्यतु॥१८॥
“| shall presently dispel your sorrow by
dint of my prowess even as the sun when
risen drives away darkness. Let all people
as well as Sri Rama (a scion of Raghu)
witness my valour. (18)
हनिष्ये fat वृद्धं कैकेय्यासक्तमानसम्।
कृपणं च स्थितं बाल्ये Gear गर्हितम्॥१९॥
“| shall kill my aged and wretched father,
whose mind is attached to Kaikeyi and who
is going through his second childhood as a
result of his senility and has accordingly
grown contemptible.” (19)

एतत् तु वचनं Aral लक्ष्मणस्य महात्मन:।
उवाच WH कौसल्या रुदती शोकलालसा॥ २०॥

On hearing the aforesaid utterance of
the high-minded Laksmana, Kausalya, who

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

was plunged in grief, spoke weeping as
follows to Sri Rama: (20)

भ्रातुस्ते वदत: UT लक्ष्मणस्य wd त्वया।
यदत्रानन्तरं तत्त्वं Her यदि रोचते॥२१॥
“The statement of your younger brother,
my son, has been heard by you even as he
spoke. Do you now, if it so pleases you,
what should be done next in this connection.
(21)

न चाधर्म्य वच: श्रुत्वा सपत्न्या मम भाषितम्।
विहाय शोकसंतप्तां गन्तुमर्हसि मामित:॥२२॥

“Hearing the unjust command given by
my co-wife, you ought not in any case to
depart from Ayodhya leaving me sore stricken
with grief. (22)

धर्मज्ञ sha धर्मिष्ठं धर्मं चरितुमिच्छसि।
शुश्रूष मामिहस्थस्त्वं चर धर्ममनुत्तमम्॥२३॥

“If, as one who is well-versed in morality,
you wish to do what is right, O most pious
son, serve you me remaining here and
practise thus the highest virtue. (23)

शुश्रूषुर्जननीं ya स्वगृहे नियतो वसन्।
WOT तपसा युक्त: काश्यपस्त्रिदिवं गत:॥ २४॥
“Staying self-disciplined at home in the
service of his mother and endowed with
supreme asceticism, a son of Kasyapa
attained the position of a Prajapati, lord of
creation, in heaven. (24)
यथैव राजा weed गौरवेण तथा ह्यहम्।
त्वां साहं नानुजानामि न गन्तव्यमितो वनम्॥ २५ ॥
“As the king is worthy of adoration to
you, more so am | from the point of view of
merit. As such | do not grant leave to you to
depart. Hence you should not proceed to
the forest from this place. (25)

त्वद्वियोगान्न मे कार्यं जीवितेन सुखेन च।
त्वया सह मम श्रेयस्तृणानामपि भक्षणम्॥ २६॥

“After my separation from you, | have
no longer any use for life and happiness. In
your company it is better for me even to live
on blades of grass. (26)
