* AYODHYAKANDA +

And having done such an unkind act to her,
what reply shall | make to her inquiry in this
behalf? Nay, whenever Kausalya—who has
always sought to please me and speaks
kind words to me and who has given birth
to my pet son and deserves to be kindly
treated by me—waited on me like a maid-
servant in rendering personal service to me
and a friend in tendering salutary advice as
well as in sport, like a better half while
assisting me in the performance of sacred
duties and a sister while procuring me other
wives as well as like a mother while serving
up dinner, the godly lady was never kindly
treated by me for fear of displeasing you.
The good behaviour which was shown by
me towards you at that time stings me now
even as food taken with unwholesome
sauces fills an ailing person with remorse.
Filled with apprehension about her own sons,
Laksmana and Satrughna to perceive the
ignominy shown to Rama by withholding the
office of Prince Regent from him as well as
his exile to the forest, how will Sumitra put
faith in me any longer?

“Alas! with great agony will Sita, a
princess of the Videha territory, hear
simultaneously of two unwelcome incidents
viz., of me having met my end and of Rama
having retired to the forest. Alas, like a
Kinnara girl bereft of her partner in a flank of
the Himalayan range, Sita (a princess of the
Videha territory) will spend her life lamenting
about me as well as about her husband.
Rama living as an exile in a great forest and
Sita, daughter of the king of Mithila, too
weeping due to separation from her spouse,
| would under no circumstance survive long.
Deprived of your husband, you will as such
undoubtedly carry on the administration
with your son as the undisputed king.

(67—75)
रूपिणीं विषसंयुक्तां पीत्वेव मदिरां नर:॥७६॥

“| look upon you, a devoted and comely

335

wife as you are, as ultimately proving to be
most disloyal, even as one, having drunk
wine mixed with poison, though possessing
a charming appearance, ultimately concludes
it to be noxious. (76)

अनृतैर्बत मां सान्त्वै: सान्त्वयन्ती स्म भाषसे।
गीतशब्देन संरुध्य cet मृगमिवावधी:॥ ७७॥

“Alas ! Though you have been talking
with me as a friend, coaxing me with empty
blandishments, you have actually killed me
even as a hunter kills a deer after enticing
it with melodious sound. (77)

अनार्य sft मामार्या: पुत्रविक्रायकं ध्रुवम्।
विकरिष्यन्ति रथ्यासु सुरापं ब्राह्मणं यथा॥ oe i

“Worthy men in the streets will surely
stigmatize me, who is going to barter away
my pet son for the pleasure of my wife, as
an ignoble man, even as they revile a
Brahmana drinking wine. (78)

दु:खमेवंविधं we पुरा कृतमिवाशुभम्॥७९॥

“How distressing, oh, how painful it is
for me that | have to put up with your harsh
words ! Such suffering has evidently been
reaped by me as an evil consequence earned
in a previous life. (79)
fat खलु मया पापे त्वं पापेनाभिरक्षिता।
अज्ञानादुपसम्पन्ना रज्जुरुद्बन्धनी यथा॥८०॥

“Like a halter placed round one’s neck
through ignorance, O wicked woman, you
have been lovingly maintained by me, sinful
as | am. (80)
रममाणस्त्वया सार्धं मृत्युं cat नाभिलक्षये।
बालो रहसि हस्तेन कृष्णसर्पमिवास्पृशम्॥८१॥

“Enjoying life with you, | did not perceive
you to be the cause of my death. | have
embraced you in retirement even as an
infant would handle a black cobra in a
solitary place. (81)
तं तु at जीवलोकोऽयं नूनमाक्रोष्टुमर्हति।
मया ह्यपितृक: UA: A महात्मा दुरात्मना॥८२॥
