258

O godlike lady, as to what | should do. | can
carry you, if you so please, to the presence
of Sri Rama and Laksmana. What is your
response?’ (100)

एतच्छुत्वा विदित्वा च सीता जनकनन्दिनी।

Be रावणमुत्पाट्य राघवो At नयत्विति॥ १०१ i
“Hearing this and knowing the truth,

Sita, the delight of Janaka, replied, ‘Let Sri

Rama, a scion of Raghu, take me back

after destroying Ravana.’ (101)

प्रणम्य शिरसा देवीमहमार्यामनिन्दिताम्।
राघवस्य मनोह्लादमभिज्ञानमयाचिषम्॥१०२॥

“Having respectfully saluted the godlike
noble and irreproachable lady, Sita, with my
head bent low, | asked her for a token
which should bring delight to the mind of Sri
Rama, a scion of Raghu. (102)

अथ मामब्रवीत् सीता गृह्यतामयमुत्तम:।
मणिर्येन महाबाहू रामस्त्वां बहु मन्यते॥१०३॥
“Sita thereupon said to me, ‘Let this
excellent jewel be taken by you, for which
the mighty-armed Sri Rama will hold you in
great esteem.’ (103)

इत्युक्त्वा तु वरारोहा मणिप्रवरमुत्तमम्।
प्रायच्छत् परमोद्विग्ना वाचा मां संदिदेश Fi १०४॥
“Saying so, Sita (a lady with lovely
limbs), for her part, delivered to me an
excellent jewel (the foremost of jewels) for
the head and, feeling highly upset, further
related to me in so many words one or two
incidents known to Sri Rama alone. (104)

ततस्तस्यै प्रणम्याहं Ue समाहित:।
प्रदक्षिणं परिक्राममिहाभ्युद्गतमानस: ।। १०७५ UI
“Having respectfully bowed down to
that princess, | thereupon then devoutly
went clockwise round her with a mind intent
upon returning to this place. (105)
उत्तरं पुनरेवाह निश्चित्य मनसा तदा।
हनूमन् मम वृत्तान्तं वक्तुमर्हसि राघवे॥१०६॥

« VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

“Having deliberated with her mind, she
then once more addressed the following
to me: ‘You ought to relate my story to
Sri Rama, a scion of Raghu, O Hanuman !

(106)

यथा श्रुत्वैव नचिरात् तावुभौ रामलक्ष्मणौ।
सुग्रीवसहितौ वीरावुपेयातां तथा कुरु॥१०७॥

“‘Nay, act in such च way that
immediately on hearing my story both those
heroes, Sri Rama and Laksmana, may turn
up before long alongwith Sugriva. (107)

यदन्यथा भवेदेतद् gt मासौ जीवितं मम।
न मां द्रक्ष्यति काकुत्स्थो म्रिये साहमनाथवत्॥ १०८ Il

““If this proves to be otherwise, my life
is to continue only for a month (two
fortnights*). If Sri Rama does not appear
within this period |, as such, shall have to
die like one without a protector and Sri
Rama, a scion of Kakutstha, will no longer
be able to see me.’ (108)

तच्छृत्वा Hout वाक्यं क्रोधो मामभ्यवर्तत।
उत्तरं च मया FS कार्यशेषमनन्तरम्॥१०९॥

“When | heard that pathetic appeal,
anger took possession of me and what
remained to be done by me next was forthwith
envisaged by me. (109)

ततोऽवर्धत A कायस्तदा पर्वतसंनिभ:।
युद्धाकाङ्क्षी at तस्य विनाशयितुमारभे॥ ११०॥

“My body then began to expand and
presently grew to the size of a mountain.
Seeking a combat, | forthwith proceeded
to devastate the pleasure-grove of Ravana.

(110)
aq भग्नं वनखण्डं तु भ्रान्तत्रस्तमृगद्विजम्।
प्रतिबुद्ध्य निरीक्षन्ते राक्षस्यो विकृतानना:॥ १११॥

“Waking up from slumber, the ugly faced

ogresses beheld that part of the grove laid

waste and its beasts and birds bewildered
and panic-striken. (111)

* The word `मासौ` in this verse has been construed by one commentator as used in the sense of two

fortnights according to the Sruti texts—uat वै मासा:`
