676

the high-souled Vibhisana took up his position
there in order to relieve the fatigue,
occasioned by the combat, of Laksmana,

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA +

who was invincible in the forefront of battle,
thereby affording him pleasure and doing a
good turn to him. (77)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये युद्धकाण्डेऽष्टाशीतितम: सर्ग: ॥ CL Il

Thus ends Canto Ejighty-eight in the Yuddhakanda of the glorious Ramayana of
Valmiki, the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

एकोननवतितम: सर्ग:
Canto LXXXIX

Vibhisana takes the offensive against the ogres and
encourages the commanders of monkey-troops
to carry on the struggle. Laksmana kills the
charioteer of Indrajit and the monkeys
make short work of his horses

युध्यमानौ ततो gaat wel नरराक्षसौ।
प्रभिन्नाविव मातङ्गौ परस्परजयैषिणौ॥१॥
wag द्रष्टुकामो वरचापधरो बली।
Ue: स रावणभ्राता तस्थौ संग्राममूर्धनि॥ २॥

Seeing Laksmana (a man) and Indrajit
(an ogre), who were fond of fighting, striving
like two elephants in rut, desirous as they
were of overcoming each other, the valiant
Vibhisana, the mighty youngest brother of
Ravana, who was eager to witness their
combat, and carried an excellent bow,
thereupon took up his position in the forefront
of the battle. (1-2)

ततो विस्फारयामास महद् धनुरवस्थित:।
उत्ससर्ज च तीक्ष्णाग्रान् राक्षसेषु महाशरान्॥३॥
Standing firm, he now pulled the string
of his mighty bow and shot long, sharp-
pointed arrows against the ogres. (3)

a शरा: शिखिसंस्पर्शा निपतन्त: समाहिता:।
राक्षसान् द्रावयामासुर्वज्राणीव महागिरीन्॥४॥

Falling thick and fast, the aforesaid
shafts, which impinged like fire, tore the

ogres to pieces as thunderbolts would cleave
mighty mountains. (4)

विभीषणस्यानुचरास्तेऽपि शूलासिपद्विशै:।
चिच्छिदु: समरे वीरान् राक्षसान् राक्षसोत्तमा:॥ ५॥

The well-known followers of Vibhisana,
too, who were the foremost of ogres, rent
asunder the heroic ogres in combat with
their pikes, swords and_ sharp-edged
spears. (5)
राक्षसैस्तै: परिव्रृत: स dar तु विभीषण:।
at मध्ये प्रधृष्टानां कलभानामिव द्विप:॥ ६॥

Surrounded by those ogres, Vibhisana
for his part shone at that time like an
elephant in the midst of proud young
tuskers. (6)
तत: संचोदमानो a हरीन् रक्षोवधप्रियान्।
उवाच वचनं काले कालज्ञो रक्षसां वर:॥७॥

Emboldening the monkeys, who were
really fond of destroying the ogres, Vibhisana
(the foremost of ogres), who knew what
was befitting to the occasion, thereupon
spoke the following opportune words: (7)
