434

“Similarly, O jewel among the virtuous,
what purpose of mine will be served with an
army, O ruler of the world? |, therefore,
allow all things to be used by Bharata. Let
the servant-maids of mother Kaikeyi bring
me robes fit for a dweller in forests alone.”

(4)
Grater चोभे समानयत गच्छत।
चतुर्दश at वासं वर्षाणि aed मम॥५॥

Addressing the maid-servants, he
continues: “go and duly bring a spade and
a basket both for me, who am going to take
up my abode in a forest for fourteen years.”(5)

अथ चीराणि कैकेयी स्वयमाहृत्य राघवम्।
उवाच परिधत्स्वेति जनौघे निरपत्रपा॥६॥

Personally bringing pieces of bark for
being put on by Sri Rama and others, Kaikeyi,
who was lost to all shame, forthwith said to
Sri Rama in the midst of that concourse of
men, “Put these on!” (6)

स चीरे पुरुषव्याघ्र: कैकेय्या: प्रतिगृह्य ते।
सूक्ष्मवस्त्रमवक्षिप्य मुनिवस्त्राण्यवस्त ह॥७॥

Receiving from Kaikeyi two pieces of
bark for being used as a loin-cloth and a
cover respectively and discarding his raiment
of fine yarn, that tiger among men put on the
garb of ascetics: so the tradition goes. (7)

लक्ष्मणश्चापि ata fart aay शुभे।
तापसाच्छादने चैव woe पितुरग्रत:॥८॥
Nay, leaving his exquisite robes on
that very spot, Laksmana too put on in the
presence of his father two pieces of bark fit
for ascetics. (8)
अथात्मपरिधानार्थं सीता कौशेयवासिनी।
ame dt संत्रस्ता पृषती वागुरामिव॥९॥
Gazing with reverence on the piece of
bark intended for being donned by her, Sita,
who was clad in silken robes, felt dismayed
as a doe would on seeing a snare set for
entrapping it. (9)
सा व्यपत्रपमाणेव We च सुदुर्मना:।
कैकेय्या: HMAC A जानकी शुभलक्षणा॥ १०॥

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

अश्रुसम्पूर्णनेत्रा च धर्मज्ञा धर्मदर्शिनी।
गन्धर्वराजप्रतिमं भर्तारमिदमब्रवीत्॥ ११ ॥

Feeling much abashed, as it were, while
taking from the hand of Kaikeyi the two
articles of wearing apparel made of KuSsa
grass and greatly troubled in mind, Sita
(daughter of Janaka), who was endowed
with auspicious bodily marks, knew what is
right and served as an illustration of virtue,
spoke as follows, her eyes overflowing with
tears, to her husband, who vied with
Citraratha, the ruler of the Gandharvas :

(10-11)

कथं नु चीरं बध्नन्ति मुनयो वनवासिन:।
इति ह्यकुशला सीता सा मुमोह मुहुर्मुहु:॥ १२॥

“| wonder how ascetics dwelling in forests
put on the bark of trees.” Saying so, the
celebrated Sita, who was in no way adept in
wearing the bark of trees, erred again and
again in her attempt to do so. (12)

कृत्वा कण्ठे स्म सा चीरमेकमादाय पाणिना।
Tat ह्यकुशला Aa व्रीडिता जनकात्मजा॥ १३॥

Placing one piece about her neck and
taking another in her hand, the said daughter
of Janaka stood abashed, inapt as she was
in wearing the bark. (13)

तस्यास्तत् क्षिप्रमागत्य रामो धर्मभृतां वर:।
At बबन्ध सीताया: कौशेयस्योपरि स्वयम्॥ १४॥

Quickly going near her, Sri Rama, the
foremost of those upholding the cause of
virtue, then personally fastened the bark
over her silken garment. (14)
रामं Get q सीताया बध्नन्तं चीरमुत्तमम्।
अन्त:पुरचरा नार्यो मुमुचुर्वारि नेत्रजम्॥१५॥
ऊचुश्च परमायत्ता रामं ज्वलिततेजसम्।
aa नैवं नियुक्तेयं वनवासे मनस्विनी॥१६॥

Perceiving Sri Rama fastening the
excellent bark about Sita, the female inmates
of the gynaeceum began to shed tears and,

sore distressed as they were, spoke as
follows to Sri Rama of dazzling glory : “This
