+ UTTARAKANDA +

931

Canto XXVI

Ravana violates the celestial nymph Rambha and receives a
terrible curse from Nalakubara

स तु तत्र दशग्रीव: we सैन्येन वीर्यवान्।
अस्तं प्राप्ते दिनकरे निवासं समरोचयत्॥१॥
The sun having set, that powerful ten-
headed monster for his part chose to encamp
there with his army. (1)

उदिते विमले चन्द्रे तुल्यपर्वतवर्चसि।
Wad सुमहत् Bet नानाप्रहरणायुधम्॥२॥
When the cloudless moon, equal in
splendour to the mountain on which it
appeared, had risen, the huge army, equipped
with various arms, lay fast asleep. (2)

रावणस्तु महावीर्यो निषण्ण: steel

a ददर्शं गुणांस्तत्र चन्द्रपादपशोभितान्॥३॥
Resting on the top of the hill, the

exceptionally powerful and notorious Ravana

for his part surveyed the charms of the

mountain brought into relief by the moon

and the trees. (3)

कर्णिकारवनैर्दीप्तै: कदम्बबकुलैस्तथा।
पद्मिनीभिश्च फुल्लाभिर्मन्दाकिन्या जलैरपि॥४॥
चम्पकाशोकपुंनागमन्दारतरुभिस्तथा ।
चूतपाटललोध्रैश्च प्रियङ्ग्वर्जुनकेतकै: ।॥ ५ ॥
तगरैर्नारिकेलैश्च प्रियालपनसैस्तथा।
एतैरन्यैश्च तरुभिरुद्धासितवनान्तरे।। ६ I
किन्नरा मदनेनार्ता रक्ता मधुरकण्ठिन:।
wt सम्प्रजगुर्यत्रॆ मनस्तुष्टिविवर्धनम्॥७॥

On that mountain—whose _ forest
recesses were adorned with brilliant Karnikara
groves as also Kadamba and Vakula trees,
lotus ponds full of the waters of the Mandakini
and spotted with full blown flowers, Campaka,
Asoka, Punnaga and Mandara trees and
with mango, Patala, and Lodhra as well as
with Priyangu, Arjuna and Ketaka, Tagara,
coconut, Priyala, Panasa (bread-fruit) and

other trees—love-stricken and sweet-throated
Kinnaras beautifully sang with emotion in
concert melodies which intensified the delight
of one’s mind. (4—7)
विद्याधरा मदक्षीबा मदरक्तान्तलोचना:।
afte: we संक्रान्ताश्चिक्रीडुर्जहषुश्च auc
Intoxicated with drink, the corners of
their eyes reddened by drunkenness,
Vidyadharas (celestial artistes) mingled with

their consorts actually sported and made
merry. (8)
चण्टानामिव date: शुश्रुवे मधुरस्वन:।
अप्सरोगणसङ्घानां गायतां धनदालये॥९॥
Like the ringing of bells, the sweet
melody of troupes of celestial nymphs singing

in the mansion of Kubera (the bestower of
riches) was heard. (9)

पुष्पवर्षाणि मुञ्चन्तो नगा: पवनताडिता:।

Vet तं वासयन्तीव मधुमाधवगन्धिन:॥१०॥
Raining showers of flowers when shaken

by the winds, trees, bearing the fragrance of

all vernal flowers, were perfuming the said

mountain, as it were. (10)

मधुपुष्परज:पृक्त गन्धमादाय पुष्कलम्।
प्रववौ वर्धयन् कामं रावणस्य सुखोऽनिल:।॥ ११॥
Wafting the copious fragrance mixed
with the pollen as well as the honey of
flowers, a delightful breeze gently blew
inflaming the concupiscence of Ravana. (11)

गेयात् पुष्पसमृद्ध्या च Meare वायोर्गिरेर्गुणात्।
Vata रजन्यां च चन्द्रस्योदयनेन च॥१२॥
रावण: स महावीर्य: कामस्य वशमागत:।
विनि:श्वस्य विनि:श्वस्य शशिनं समवैक्षत॥ १३॥
By reason of the music, the wealth of
blossom, the coolness of the wind, the charm
