# YUDDHAKANDA #

एवं कथयमानं तु प्रशस्य पवनात्मजम्।
सुषेणो वानरश्रेष्ठो जग्राहोत्पाट्यं चौषधी: ॥४२॥
Applauding Hanuman (sprung from the
loins of the wind-god), who was speaking
as aforesaid, and pulling out the herbs,
Susena, the foremost of monkeys, for his
part took hold of them. (42)

विस्मितास्तु ayaed सर्वे वानरपुङ्खवा:।
दृष्टवा तु हनुमत्कर्म सुरैरपि सुदुष्करम्॥४३॥

All those bulls among monkeys, who
were present there, for their part were
amazed to witness the feat of Hanuman,
which was really most difficult to perform
even for gods. (43)

ad: संक्षोदयित्वा ararael वानरोत्तम:।
लक्ष्मणस्य ददौ AEA: सुषेण: सुमहाद्युति: lt ४४॥

Crushing that herb, Susena, the
foremost of monkeys, who was endowed
with exceptional splendour, thereupon
administered it to Laksmana through his
nostrils. (44)

सशल्य: स समाघ्राय लक्ष्मण: परवीरहा।

विशल्यो विरुज: शीघ्रमुदतिष्ठन्महीतलात्॥ ४५ ॥

Duly inhaling it, Laksmana, the destroyer
of hostile champions, who still retained the
javelin in his body, instantly rose from the
earth’s surface, rid as he was of the javelin
as also of his pain. (45)

तमुत्थितं तु हरयो भूतलात् प्रेक्ष्य लक्ष्मणम्।
साधुसाध्विति सुप्रीता लक्ष्मणं प्रत्यपूजयन्॥४६॥

Overjoyed to perceive the aforesaid
Laksmana, who ७5 endowed _ with
auspicious marks, risen from the earth’s
surface, the monkeys for their part applauded
him, saying “Excellent! Excellent!!” (46)

एह्येहीत्यब्रवीद् war लक्ष्मणं परवीरहा।
सस्वजे गाढमालिङ्गय बाष्पपर्याकुलेक्षण:॥४७॥
Sri Rama, the destroyer of hostile

heroes, said to Laksmana, “Come, come.”
Nay, tightly folding him in his arms, he

733

pressed him to his bosom, his eyes
bedimmed with tears. (47)
अब्रवीच्च परिष्वज्य सौमित्रिं राघवस्तदा।
दिष्ट्या cat वीर पश्यामि मरणात् पुनरागतम्॥ ४८ UI
Nay, after embracing Laksmana (son
of Sumitra), Sri Rama, a scion of Raghu,
then said to him, “Luckily enough, O gallant

one, | see you returned from the jaws of
Death. (48)

नहि मे जीवितेनार्थ: सीतया च wast वा।
को fe मे जीवितेनार्थस्त्वयि पञ्चत्वमागते॥४९॥

“Indeed, no purpose of mine would
have been be served by my own life, nor by
Sita, nor by victory. What end of mine
would be achieved by my survival had you
returned to the five elements?” (49)

इत्येवं ब्रुवतस्तस्य राघवस्य महात्मन:।
Rar: शिथिलया वाचा लक्ष्मणो वाक्यमब्रवीत्॥ ५० ।।
Pained by the irresolute talk of the
high-souled Sri Rama (a scion of Raghu),
who was speaking in this strain, Laksmana
submitted as follows: (50)
wt प्रतिज्ञां प्रतिज्ञाय पुरा सत्यपराक्रम।
लघु: कश्चिदिवासत्त्वो नैवं त्वं वक्तुमर्हसि॥ ५१॥
“Having solemnly taken that pledge of
killing Ravana and crowning Vibhisana on the
throne of Lanka before, O prince of unfailing
prowess, you ought not to speak as you have
done like a weak and spiritless man. (51)

नहि प्रतिज्ञां कुर्वन्ति वितथां सत्यवादिन:।
लक्षणं fe महत्त्वस्य प्रतिज्ञापरिपालनम्॥५२॥

“Those who always speak the truth
never render their vow futile; for the fulfilment
of one’s vow is the mark of greatness. (52)

नैराश्यमुपगन्तुं च नालं ते मत्कृतेऽनघ।

art रावणस्याद्य प्रतिज्ञामनुपालय॥५३॥
“Moreover, it is not becoming of you to

give way to despair on my account, O

sinless one! Pray, redeem your pledge by
killing Ravana today. (53)
