768

creature? Get up. Rise. Don’t, don’t behave
like this. Cease to be unnerved.” (5)

इत्येवमुक्ता दुर्धर्षा खरेण परिसान्तिता।
विमृज्य नयने wet wt भ्रातरमब्रवीत्॥६॥

Feeling comforted in everyway when
spoken to in these words by Khara, and
rubbing her tearful eyes, the ogress (who
was hard to placate) replied as follows to
her brother Khara :

“| called on you a little while ago with
my ears and nose lopped off, drenched in a
stream of blood, and was fully consoled by
you. (7)

प्रेषिताश्च त्वया शूरा राक्षसास्ते चतुर्दश।
निहन्तुं wed घोरं मत्परियार्थं सलक्ष्मणम्॥८॥
“Nay, in order to make short work of
the terrible Rama, a scion of Raghu, with
Laksmana, his younger brother, and thereby
to please me, those fourteen valiant ogres
were despatched by you. (8)

a तु रामेण सामर्षा: शूलपट्टिशपाणय:।
war निहता: wad सायकैर्मर्मभेदिभि:॥ ९॥

“Though full of indignation and armed
with darts and PattiSas, they were all,
however, killed in battle by Rama with arrows
piercing the vital parts. (9)

तान् भूमौ पतितान् दृष्ट्वा क्षणेनैव महाजवान्।
रामस्य च महत्कर्म महांस्त्रासोऽभवन्मम॥ Qo

“Ever since | saw those ogres of great
impetuosity fallen in an instant and witnessing
the extraordinary exploit of Rama, a great
fear has seized me. (10)

सास्मि भीता समुद्विग्ना विषण्णा च निशाचर।
शरणं wat पुन: Wat सर्वतो भयदर्शिनी॥११॥
“Dismayed, highly perturbed and

dejected, and seeing fear on all sides, O
night-stalker, | have sought you as my
protector once more. (11)

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

विषादनक्राध्युषिते परित्रासोर्मिमालिनि।
fe मां न त्रायसे मग्नां विपुले शोकसागरे॥ १२॥

“Why do you not rescue me, drowned
as | am in a vast ocean of grief, infested
with the crocodile of dejection and rough
with billows of terror? (12)

wa च निहता भूमौ रामेण निशितै: vit: |
ये च मे पदवीं प्राप्ता राक्षसा: पिशिताशना:॥ १३॥

“And those flesh-eating ogres who
followed me are lying on the ground, killed
by Rama with exceptionally sharp arrows.

(13)

मयि ते यद्यनुक्रोशो यदि रक्ष:सु ay च।
रामेण यदि शक्तिस्ते ast afer निशाचर॥ १४॥
दण्डकारण्यनिलयं whe राक्षसकण्टकम्।
afe रामममित्रघ्नं न त्वमद्य वधिष्यसि॥ १५॥
तव चैवाग्रत: प्राणांस्त्यक्ष्यामि निरपत्रपा।
बुद्ध्याहमनुपश्यामि न त्वं रामस्य संयुगे॥ १६॥
स्थातुं प्रतिमुखे शक्त: सबलोऽपि महारणे।
शूरमानी न weed मिथ्यारोपितविक्रम:॥ १७॥

“If you have compassion for me and if
you have mercy for those ogres, nay, if you
have power or prowess to contend with Rama,
O prowler of the night, make short work of
that thorn in the side of the ogres, who has
taken up his abode in the Dandaka forest. If,
however, you do not kill Rama, the slayer of
his foes, today, | shall give up the ghost,
already divested as | am of my honour (in the
shape of my mutilated nose and ears). | can
vividly see with the eye of my intuition that,
even though followed by your army on the
battlefield, you cannot stand in front of Rama
in a major combat. Even though you account
yourself to be brave, you are not really valiant;
you have falsely assumed that you are brave.

(14—17)
अपयाहि जनस्थानात् त्वरित: सहबान्धव:।
we त्वं समरे मूढान्यथा तु कुलपांसन॥१८॥
मानुषौ तौ न Menthe हन्तुं वै रामलक्ष्मणौ।
नि:सत्त्वस्याल्पवीर्यस्य वासस्ते कोदृशस्त्विह॥ १९॥
