* AYODHYAKANDA +

541

सप्तषष्टितम: सर्ग:
Canto LXVII

Attributing the rise and fall of a kingdom to the presence and
disappearance of its ruler, Markandeya and other great sages,
who attended the king’s court the following day, urge
Vasistha to install any of the princes
on the throne immediately

आक्रन्दिता निरानन्दा सामस्त्रकण्ठजनाविला।
अयोध्यायामवतता सा व्यतीयाय शर्वरी॥१॥

That night, which was full of laments
and shorn of joy and, therefore, appeared
long and was thronged with crowds of tearful
men, in Ayodhya came to an end. (1)

व्यतीतायां तु शार्वर्यामादित्यस्योदये तत:।
समेत्य राजकर्तार: सभामीयुर्दविजातय:॥ २॥

Coming together at sunrise, when the
night had ended, Brahmanas who carried
on all the duties of a king during the
interregnum, arrived for their part at the
court. (2)

मार्कण्डेयोऽथ मौद्गल्यो वामदेवश्च कश्यप:।
कात्यायनो गौतमश्च जाबालिश्च महायशा:॥ ३॥

wa द्विजा: सहामात्यै: पृथग्वाचमुदीरयन्।
वसिष्ठमेवाभिमुखा: श्रेष्ठं राजपुरोहितम्॥४॥

Seated with their faces turned towards
Vasistha alone, the arch-priest of the royal
family, Markandeya and Maudgalya,
Vamadeva and Kasyapa, Katyayana and
Gautama, as well as Jabali, who enjoyed
great fame, these Brahmanas alongwith the
ministers separately made speeches, (the
substance of which is given below) : (3-4)

अतीता wat दु:खं या नो वर्षशतोपमा।
अस्मिन् पञ्चत्वमापन्ने पुत्रशोकेन पार्थिवे॥५॥

“The yonder king having met his end
due to grief born of separation from his
sons, Rama and Laksmana, the night, which
weighed upon us like a hundred years, has
ended with difficulty. (5)

स्वर्गस्थश्च महाराजो रामश्चारण्यमाश्रित:।
लक्ष्मणश्चापि तेजस्वी रामेणैव wa: सह॥६॥

“Not only is the Emperor away in
heaven, but Sri Rama too has taken up his
abode in the forest. Nay, the powerful
Laksmana too has left with the same Sri
Rama. (6)

sit भरतशत्रुघ्नौ केकयेषु परंतपौ।
पुरे राजगृहे रम्ये मातामहनिवेशने॥७॥

“Both Bharata and Satrughna, who are
capable of chastising the enemy, are in the
lovely palace of their maternal grandfather
at his capital, Rajagrha, in the Kekaya
kingdom. (7)

इक्ष्वाकूणामिहाद्यैव कश्चिद् राजा विधीयताम्।
अराजकं fe नो wee विनाशं समवाप्नुयात्॥ ८॥
“Someone among the ३०१8 of
Dasaratha (who are scions of Ikswaku)
should be crowned king this very day; for
without a ruler our state of Kosala may
meet with ruin. (8)

नाराजके जनपदे विद्युन्माली महास्वन:।
अभिवर्षति पर्जन्यो महीं दिव्येन वारिणा॥९॥

“In a land destitute of a ruler the
thundering cloud wreathed with lightning does
not drench the earth with rain water. (9)

नाराजके जनपदे बीजमुष्टि: प्रकोर्यते।
नाराजके पितु: पुत्रो भार्या वा add वशे॥१०॥

“In a rulerless land handfuls of seeds
are no longer scattered for fear of uncertainty
of crops. Nay, in a rulerless land a son is
not amenable to the control of his father nor
