३62

Get wet de सागरान्तव्यपाश्रयम्॥६॥
अस्यता च पुन: Wea ज्याघातविहतत्वचम्।
दक्षिणो दक्षिणं बाहुं महापरिघसंनिभम्॥७॥
गोसहस्ररप्रदातारं ह्युपधाय wt महत्।
अद्य मे तरणं वाथ मरणं सागरस्य वा॥८॥
इति रामो धृतिं कृत्वा महाबाहुर्महोदधिम्।
अधिशिष्ये च विधिवत् प्रयतो नियतो ah: eu

Actually using as a pillow his unusually
long right-arm, strictly speaking, the portion
above the elbow—which resembled a large
club and had given away thousands of
cows; which had been kneaded more than
once (at the time of unction and bath) by
the arms of excellent women, full of maternal
affection, and which has been adorned with
armlets of gems and gold and most excellent
jewels of pearls; which was_ formerly
perfumed with sandalwood and aloe and
with saffron-pastes emitting the lustre of the
rising sun; which was in the past graced by
the head of Sita on the (nuptial) couch
covered with a white sheet and having been
painted with saffron-paste, resembled the
coils of Taksaka (a serpent whose body
has been depicted as possessing a red
hue) supported on the water of the Ganga
(which is a fitting analogue to the white
sheet in point of purity); which heightened
the grief of his foes on the field of battel and
conduced to the delight of his friends and
was long like a yoke and served as a
support for the entire earth bounded by
the four oceans, and whose skin had
been hardened by strokes of the bowstring
while it propelled arrows to the left—(nay)
having resolved that either the sea would
be crossed by him or the sea-god would
meet his death at his hands, the mighty-
armed Sri Rama, who was full of
consideration for others, lay down by the
ocean with his body, speech and mind duly
controlled. (83—9)

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA +

तस्य रामस्य सुप्तस्य कुशास्तीर्णे महीतले।
नियमादप्रमत्तस्य निशास्तिस्रोऽभिजग्मतु:।॥ १०॥
Three nights actually rolled by even as
Sri Rama lay on the earth’s surface spread
with the sacred KuSa grass, remaining strictly
devoted to his sacred vow. (10)
स त्रिरात्रोषितस्तत्र नयज्ञो धर्मवत्सल:।
उपासत तदा Wa: सागरं सरितां पतिम्॥११॥
Having lain down for three nights on
that spot, the celebrated Sri Rama, who
was skilled in policy and was fond of piety,
waited on that occasion upon Ocean, the
lord of rivers. (11)
न च aad रूपं मन्दो रामस्य सागर:।
प्रयतेनापि रामेण यथार्हमभिपूजित:॥१२॥
Though honoured according to his
worth by the piously disposed Sri Rama,
the indolent Ocean did not, all the same,
manifest his personal form to Sri Rama.
(12)
समुद्रस्य Ad: Heal WAT रक्तान्तलोचन:।
समीपस्थमुवाचेदं लक्ष्मणं शुभलक्षणम्॥१३॥
Enraged against Ocean, the outer
corners of his eyes turned red. Sri Rama
thereupon spoke as follows to Laksmana,
endowed with auspicious bodily marks, who
stood near: (13)
अवलेप: समुद्रस्य न दर्शयति य: स्वयम्।
was क्षमा चैव anid प्रियवादिता॥१४॥
असामर्थ्यफला ह्येते निर्गुणेषु सतां गुणा:।
आत्मप्रशंसिनं ge धृष्टं विपरिधावकम्॥ १५॥
सर्वत्रोत्सृष्टदण्डं च लोक: सत्कुरुते नरम्।
न साम्ना शबक्यते कीर्तिर्न साम्ना शक्यते AT: ॥ १६ ॥
Ure लक्ष्मण लोकेऽस्मिञ्जयो वा रणमूर्धनि।
अद्य मद्बाणनिर्भग्नैर्मकरैर्मकरालयम्॥ १७॥
निरुद्धतोयं सौमित्रे wate: पश्य add: |
भोगिनां पश्य भोगानि मया भिन्नानि लक्ष्मण । १८ ॥
महाभोगानि मत्स्यानां करिणां च करानिह।
सशङ्खशुक्तिकाजालं समीनमकरं तथा॥१९॥
