424

अङ्गदो वालिपुत्रस्तु बलेन महता वृत:।
दक्षिणे बाधतां द्वारे महापार्श्वमहोदरौ॥ २७॥
“Nay, surrounded by a large army,
Angada, son of Vali, should press and drive
away Mahaparswa and Mahodara posted at

the southern gate. (27)
हनूमान् ulsagr निष्पीड्यं पवनात्मज:।
प्रविशत्वप्रमेयात्मा बहुभि: कपिभिर्वृत:॥ २८॥

“Pressing against the western gate,
surrounded by numerous’ monkeys,
Hanuman, an offspring of the wind-
god, who is endowed with immeasurable
firmness and sturdiness, should make good
his entry into it. (28)

दैत्यदानवसङ्घानामृषीणां च महात्मनाम्।
विप्रकारप्रिय: क्षुद्रो वरदानबलान्वित:॥ २९॥

परिक्रमति a: सर्वान्लोकान्संतापयन् प्रजा: |
तस्याहं राक्षसेन्द्रस्य स्वयमेव al धृत:॥३०॥

st नगरद्वारमहँ सौमित्रिणा सह।
निपीड्याभिप्रवेक्ष्यामि सबलो यत्र रावण:॥ ३१॥
“Pressing against the northern gate of
the city of Lanka alongwith Laksmana
(son of Sumitra), personally bent as
| am on the destruction of that petty-
minded ruler of ogres—who is fond of
oppressing multitudes of Daityas (giants)
and Danavas (demons) as well as the high-
souled Rsis, nay, who is armed with power
derived from boons (conferred on him
by Brahma and others) and who ranges all
the worlds persecuting created beings—|
shall force my entry into that gate, where
Ravana himself is stationed with his army.
(29—31)

वानरेन्द्रश्च बलवानृक्षराजश्च वीर्यवान्।
राक्षसेन्द्रानुजश्चैव गुल्मे भवतु मध्यमे॥ ३२॥

“Nay, let the mighty Sugriva, the ruler
of monkeys and the powerful Jambavan,
the king of bears, as well as Vibhisana (the
youngest half-brother of Ravana) be stationed
at the central post. (32)

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA +

न da मानुषं wa are हरिभिराहवे।

एषा भवतु A: संज्ञा युद्धेऽस्मिन् AAT बले॥ 33
“No human semblance should be

assumed at any event by the monkeys on

the field of battle. In the simian ranks let

this serve as our distinctive mark in this

battle. (33)

arnt wa नश्चिह्नं स्वजनेऽस्मिन् भविष्यति।
वयं तु मानुषेणैव सप्त योत्स्यामहे परान्॥३४॥

“The monkeys alone will be the sign
of recognition in distinguishing our ranks
in this conflict. Only we seven shall, however,
fight the enemies in a human form. (34)

अहमेव सह War लक्ष्मणेन महौजसा।
आत्मना पञ्चमश्चायं सखा मम विभीषण:॥ ३५॥

“| myself will be one, with my younger
brother, Laksmana, who is endowed with
extraordinary energy and who will be the
second; while, of the other five, this friend of
mine, Vibhisana, in his own person will be
the fifth over and above his four ministers.”

(35)

स राम: कृत्यसिद्ध्यर्थमेवमुक्त्वा विभीषणम्।
सुवेलारोहणे ag चकार मतिमान् प्रभु:।
रमणीयतरं gear सुवेलस्य गिरेस्तटम्॥ ३६॥

Having spoken to Vibhisana as
aforesaid with a view to the success of his
undertaking, and beholding the excessively
charming slopes of the Suvela mountain,
the aforesaid sagacious and powerful Sri
Rama made up his mind to climb up the
Suvela mountain. (36)

ततस्तु रामो महता बलेन
प्रच्छाद्य सर्वा पृथिवीं महात्मा।
प्रहुष्टरूपोऽभिजगाम लङ्कां
कृत्वा wt सोऽरिवधे महात्मा॥ ३७॥
Having fully covered the entire land

of that region with his huge army and
having resolved upon the destruction of
