+ UTTARAKANDA +

भरतं Ga सौमित्रे युष्माकं या च dala:
न fe शक्ष्याम्यहं भूयो मन्युं धारयितुं हृदि॥७॥
‘Inform about me at this very moment
Sri Rama, O son of Sumitra, If you do not do
so, | shall curse this city, you, this territory,
Bharata and also Rama and even this city’s
progeny, | am indeed unable to contain my
anger inside me anymore. (6-7)
चिन्तयामास मनसा तस्य वाक्यस्य निश्चयम्॥ ८॥
Hearing those dreadful words of the
Mahatma (Durvasa), Laksmana thought in
his mind the real purport of his (Durvasa)
words. (8)

एकस्य मरणं मेऽस्तु मा भूत् सर्वविनाशनम्।
इति बुद्ध्या विनिश्चित्य राघवाय न्यवेदयत्॥ ९॥
‘Let me die alone, let not all others
perish’ deciding thus he reported the arrival
of Durvasa to Sri Rama. (9)
लक्ष्मणस्य वच: श्रुत्वा WA: कालं विसृज्य च।
नि:सृत्य त्वरितो राजा st: Ut ददर्शं ह॥१०॥
Hearing the words of Laksmana, the
king Sri Rama disposing Death, came out in
haste and saw the son of Atri (Durvasa).
(10)
सोऽभिवाद्य महात्मानं ज्वलन्तमिव तेजसा।
किं कार्यमिति काकुत्स्थ: कृताञ्जलिरभाषत॥ ११॥

Having saluted him the noble one,
enflamed with effulgence, Sri Rama, the
descendant of Kakutstha, with folded hands
said: ‘What has to be done by me.’ (11)
Ag वाक्यं राघवेणोक्तं श्रुत्वा मुनिवर: प्रभु:।
प्रत्याह WA दुर्वासा: श्रूयतां धर्मवत्सल॥१२॥
aq वर्षसहस्रस्य समाप्तिर्मम waa
ase भोजनमिच्छामि यथासिद्धं तवानघ॥ १३॥

1123

Hearing these words spoken by Sri
Rama, Durvasa replied: ‘O one of loving
piety, listen, the thousand years of my vow
of keeping fast has ended today, so | want
cooked food, whatsoever may be ready.’

(12-13)
तच्छुत्वा वचनं राजा Wea: Waar: |

भोजनं मुनिमुख्याय यथासिद्धमुपाहरत्॥१४॥

Hearing these words Sri Rama the
king, with gratified mind, offered food readily
available. (14)

ag भुक्त्वा मुनिश्रेष्ठस्तदन्नममृतोपमम्।
साधु रामेति सम्भाष्य स्वमाश्रममुपागमत्॥ eu II

Durvasa the best among ascetics,
having consumed that food like nectar, ‘saying
appreciatory words to Sri Rama’, went away
to his hermitage. (15)

तस्मिन् गते मुनिवरे स्वाश्रमं लक्ष्मणाग्रज:।
संस्मृत्य कालवाक्यानि ततो दु:खमुपागमत्॥ १६॥
After Durvasa was gone to his
hermitage, Rama remembering — the
utterances of Kala became sad. (16)

Gat च सुसंतप्त: स्मृत्वा तद्घोरदर्शनम्।
अवाङ्मुखो दीनमना Aled A शशाक ह॥ १७॥

Thinking of terrible sorrow that would
be ensued from the separation of a brother
like Laksmana, Rama was tormented to the
extreme. With his down cast face and a
miserable heart he could not speak a word.

(17)
ततो बुद्धया विनिश्चित्य कालवाक्यानि राघव: |
नैतदस्तीति निश्चित्य तूष्णीमासीन्महायशा:॥ १८॥

Considering pros and cons of the
utterances of Kala, Rama came to the
conclusion that now nothing will remain, he
kept silent. (18)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये उत्तरकाण्डे पञ्चाधिकरशशततम: सर्ग: ॥ १०५ ॥

Thus ends Canto One hundred and five in the Uttarakanda of the glorious Ramayana
of Valmiki, the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.
