374

“The earth, it appears, will be covered
with rocks, darts and swords hurled by
monkeys and ogres and will be thick with a
morass of flesh and blood. (12)
क्षिप्रमद्यैव दुर्धर्षां पुरीं रावणपालिताम्।
अभियाम जवेनैव सर्वैर्हरिभिरावृता:॥१३॥

“Accompanied by all the monkeys, we
should without delay march with all speed
this very day towards the city of Lanka,
ruled over by Ravana, which is difficult to
assail.” (13)

इत्येवमुक्त्वा धन्वी स राम: संग्रामधर्षण:।
प्रतस्थे पुरतो रामो लङ्कामभिमुखो विभु:॥ १४॥
Having spoken as_ aforesaid, the

celebrated and powerful archer, Sri Rama,
the delight of the people and the subduer of

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA +

his foes on the field of battle, set forth in the
van in the direction of Lanka. (14)

सविभीषणसुग्रीवा: wl a वानरर्षभा:।
प्रतस्थिरे विनर्दन्तो धृतानां fguat वधे॥१५॥

Accompanied by Vibhisana and Sugriva,
all the well-known jewels among the monkeys
sallied forth, roaring for the destruction of
their foes, the ogres, who were determined
to fight. (15)
राघवस्य frat q सुतरां वीर्यशालिनाम्।
Bort कर्मचेष्टाभिस्तुतोष रघुनन्दन:॥१६॥

Sri Rama (the delight of the Raghus)
for his part felt gratified by the actions and
movements of the exceedingly powerful
monkeys, who all intended to please Sri
Rama, a scion of Raghu. (16)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये युद्धकाण्डे त्रयोविंश: AWA: ॥ २३ ॥
Thus ends Canto Twenty-three in the Yuddhakanda of the glorious Ramayana
of Valmiki, the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

Canto XXIV

Beholding Lanka and applauding it, nay, drawing up his army in battle
array, Sri Rama orders the release of Suka (a spy of Ravana),
who was captured earlier and kept under detention by
the monkeys. Going back to Ravana the ogre
speaks to him about the military strength
of Sri Rama. Infuriated by this report,

Ravana vauntingly harps on
his own prowess

सा वीरसमिती war विरराज व्यवस्थिता।
शशिना शुभनक्षत्रा पौर्णमासीव शारदी॥१॥

Drawn up in battle array by the king,
Sugriva, that army of heroes looked
exceptionally charming like an autumnal
full-moon night presided over by the moon
and illumined by bright stars. (1)

प्रचचाल च वेगेन त्रस्ता Wa वसुंधरा।
पीड्यमाना बलौघेन at सागरवर्चसा॥ २॥

Nay, being pressed under foot by that
multitude of troops—glorious like a sea,
and alarmed too, the earth violently
shook because of the swift movement
of the army. (2)
