# YUDDHAKANDA +

The monkeys, who all felt highly rejoiced
and cheerful, protected as they were on all
sides by Sugriva, and who all welcomed
war, eager as they were to get Sita liberated,
walked with quick steps and did not linger
anywhere even for an hour. (69)

Wd: पादपसम्बाधं नानावनसमायुतम्।
सह्यपर्वतमासाद्य वानरास्ते समारुहन्॥७०॥
Then, reaching the Sahya mountain
(identified with a part of the Western Ghats),
thick with trees and rich in varied woodlands,
the aforesaid monkeys climbed up to it.
(70)

काननानि विचित्राणि नदीप्रस्रवणानि च।
पश्यनपि ययौ राम: सह्यस्य मलयस्य AI ७१॥
Sri Rama marched on, seeing diverse

forests as well as the streams and cascades
on the Sahya and Malaya mountains. (71)

चम्पकांस्तिलकांश्चूतानशोकान् सिन्दुवारकान्।
तिनिशान् करवीरांश्च भञ्जन्ति स्म प्लवंगमा:॥ ७२॥
The monkeys broke down Campaka,
Tilaka, Mango, Asoka, Sinduvara, Tinisa
and Karavira trees standing on the aforesaid
mountains. (72)

अङ्कोलांश्च करञ्चांश्च प्लक्षन्यग्रोधपादपान्।
जम्बूकामलकान् नीपान् भञ्जन्ति स्म प्लवंगमा: ॥ ७३ Ul
They also broke down Ankola, Karafja,

Plaksa and Nyagrodha, Jambu, Myrobalan
and Nipa trees. (73)

प्रस्तरेषु च way विविधा: काननद्रुमा:।
वायुवेगप्रचलिता: पुष्पैरवकिरन्ति तान्॥७४॥
Violently shaken by the fury of the
winds, generated by the swift march of the
monkeys, the various forest trees standing
on lovely rocks covered the monkeys with
their blossom. (74)

Wed: सुखसंस्पर्शो ata चन्दनशीतल:।
षट्पदैरनुकूजद्धिर्वनेषु मधुगन्धिषु॥ ७५ ॥

307

Accompanied by humming bees, a
breeze delightful to the touch and cool through
the contact of sandalwood trees was blowing
through the woods emitting the odour of
honey. (75)

अधिकं शैलराजस्तु धातुभिस्तु विभूषित:।
धातुभ्य: प्रसृतो रेणुर्वायुवेगेन घट्टित:॥७६॥
सुमहद्वानरानीकं छादयामास सर्वत:।
गिरिप्रस्थेषु रम्येषु सर्वत: सम्प्रपुष्पिता:॥७७॥
केतक्य: सिन्दुवाराश्च वासन्त्यश्च मनोरमा:।

माधव्यो गन्धपूर्णाश्च कुन्दगुल्माश्च पुष्पिता:।॥ ७८॥

Richly adorned with minerals, the lord
of mountains for its part shone all the brighter.
The dust raised from the minerals and brought
together by the wind covered the huge army
of monkeys on all sides. Clothed with
blossom on all sides on the lovely plateaux,
the Ketaki and Sinduvara trees and Vasanti
creepers ravished the soul. The Madhavi
creepers were charged with odour, while
the Kunda (jasmine) shrubs were in blossom.

(76—78)

चिरिबिल्वा मधूकाश्च Age बकुलास्तथा।
रञ्जकास्तिलकाश्चैव नागव्क्षाश्च पुष्पिता:॥७९॥

Nay, Ciribilva and Madhuka, Vafjula
and Bakula, Rafjaka and Tilaka trees and
Naga trees too burst into blossom. (79)
चूता: पाटलिकाश्चैव कोविदाराश्च पुष्पिता:।
मुचुलिन्दार्जुनाश्चैव शिंशपा: कुटजास्तथा॥८०॥
हिन्तालास्तिनिशाश्चैव चूर्णका नीपकास्तथा।
नीलाशोकाश्च सरला अङ्कोला: पद्मकास्तथा॥ ८१॥

Mango as well as Patala and Kovidara,
Muculinda as well as Arjuna, Simsapa and
Kutaja, Hintala as well as Tini$a, Curna
and Nipa, blue Asoka, Sarala, Ankola

and Padmaka trees too were in blossom.
(80-81)

प्रीयमाणै: प्लवंगैस्तु Wa पर्याकुलीकृता:।
वाप्यस्तस्मिन् गिरौ रम्या: पल्वलानि तथैव च॥ ८२॥
