* BALAKANDA +

105

चतुर्दश: सर्ग:
Canto XIV

King Dasaratha proceeds with the horse-sacrifice; Rsyasrnga grants
him a boon regarding the birth of four sons

अथ संवत्सरे gol तस्मिन् wa तुरंगमे।
सरय्वाश्चोत्तरे तीरे wal यज्ञोऽभ्यवर्तत॥१॥

The aforementioned horse having
returned on the completion of a twelve month
period after its release, the ASwamedha Yajfhia
(horse-sacrifice) commenced on the northern
bank of the Sarayu. (1)

Rays पुरस्कृत्य कर्म «uggs: |
अश्वमेधे महायज्ञे राज्ञोऽस्य सुमहात्मन:॥२॥

Placing Rsyasrnga at their head (as
the arch-priest or Brahma, whose function
is to supervise a sacrifice, the other three
priests officiating at a sacrifice being severally
known by the names of Hota, Adhwaryu
and Udgata), the foremost among the
Brahmanas discharged their functions in
the great ASwamedha sacrifice started by
this exceptionally noble-minded monarch. (2)

कर्म कुर्वन्ति विधिवद् याजका वेदपारगा:।
यथाविधि यथान्यायं परिक्रामन्ति शास्त्रत:॥ ३॥

The priests officiating at the sacrifice,
who had all mastered the Vedas, duly
performed their respective duties and
proceeded according to the scriptural
ordinance abiding by the procedure laid
down in the Kalpa-Sutras and following the
order of sequence given in the Mimamsa-
Sastra. (3)
Ward शास्त्रत: कृत्वा तथैवोपसदं fest:
aes विधिवत् सर्वमधिकं कर्म शास्त्रत:॥४॥

Having gone through the rite known by
the name of Pravargya (auxiliary to a horse-

sacrifice, in which fresh milk is poured into
a heated vessel called Mahavira or Gharma,
or into boiling ghee) as well as through the
Isti (a minor sacrifice) called Upasada,
according to the scriptural ordinance, the
Brahmanas also duly performed every
additional rite even beyond the express
injunctions of the Sastras. (4)

अभिपूज्य तदा हृष्टा: wd चक्रुर्यथाविधि।
प्रात:सवनपूर्वाणि कर्माणि मुनिपुंगवा:॥५॥

Offering worship to the gods, sought to
be propitiated through the various rites, all
the eminent sages officiating at the sacrifice
duly performed, full of delight on the said
occasion, the rites commencing from the
morning Savana (i.e., morning Savana, mid-
day Savana and third Savana) (act of
pressing out the Soma juice). (5)

wag विधिवद् cat राजा चाभिषुतोऽनघ:।
मध्यन्दिनं च Wat Wadd यथाक्रमम्॥६॥
The oblation intended for Indra, the lord
of paradise, was duly offered to him and the
creeper* known by the name of Soma (the
king of herbs), that drives away all sin, was
crushed and its sap extracted. And the
midday Savana was set on foot in due
order. (6)

तृतीयसवनं चैव राज्ञोऽस्य सुमहात्मन:।
चक्रुस्ते शास्त्रतो GET यथा ब्राह्मणपुंगवा:॥ ७॥
Ascertaining the procedure by reference

to the Sastras, those jewels among the
Brahmanas further duly conducted the third

* We read in the Kalpa-Sutras on the subject :

“Placing the creeper known by the name of King Soma on a slab of stone one should crush it by means

of other stones.”
