# YUDDHAKANDA #

“Nay, hearing the news of that princess
of Mithila being alive and firm in her devotion
to him, Sri Rama for his part regained the
hope to survive even as an ailing man, who
has approached the end of his life, would on
drinking nectar. (47)

उद्योजयिष्यन्नुद्योगं दध्रे लङ्कावधे मन:।
जिघांसुरिवलोकान्ते सर्वाल्लोकान् विभावसु: ।। ४८ ।।
“Putting forth a war effort, he set his
mind upon the destruction of Lanka even as
at the dissolution of the world the fire of
universal destruction would proceed to
destroy all the worlds, when intending to do
SO. (48)

ad: समुद्रमासाद्य नलं सेतुमकारयत्।
अतरत् कपिवीराणां वाहिनी तेन सेतुना॥४९॥
“Reaching the seashore, he _ then
caused the monkey chief, Nala to construct
a bridge across the sea and the army of
monkey heroes crossed the sea by means
of that bridge. (49)

प्रहस्तमवधीन्नील: कुम्भकर्णं तु राघव:।
लक्ष्मणो रावणसुतं स्वयं रामस्तु रावणम्॥५०॥
“The monkey’ chief, Nila, the
Commander-in-chief of the simian army, killed
the ogre, Prahasta, whereas Sri Rama, a
scion of Raghu, disposed of Kumbhakarna,
the younger brother of Ravana, Laksmana
dispatched Indrajit, the eldest son of
Ravana, and Sri Rama himself got rid of
Ravana (50)
स शक्रेण समागम्य यमेन वरुणेन च।
महेश्वरस्वयंभूभ्यां तथा दशरथेन ANGI
तैश्च दत्तवर: श्रीमानृषिभिश्च aan: |
सुरर्षिभिश्च काकुत्स्थो atety परंतप:॥७५२॥

“Coming together, Indra, the ruler of

827

gods, Yama, the god of retribution, and
Varuna, the god of water, Lord Siva (the
Supreme Ruler) and Brahma, the self-born
creator and likewise with the spirit of his
deceased father, nay, granted boons by
them as also by the Rsis (seers of Vedic
Mantras) and celestial sages assembled
there, the glorious Rama, a scion of
Kakutstha, the scourge of his enemies,
gratefully received them. (51-52)

स तु दत्तवर: प्रीत्या arts ward: |
पुष्पकेण विमानेन किष्किन्धामभ्युपागमत्॥ ५३॥

“Nay, having been granted boons, Sri
Rama for his part joyfully flew to Kiskindha
in the aerial car known as Puspaka alongwith
the monkeys who had collected there. (53)
अविघ्नं पुष्ययोगेन श्वो WH द्रष्टुमर्हसि॥ ५४॥

“Tomorrow, when the moon will be in
conjunction with the asterisk Pusya, you
will be able without any hindrance to see Sri
Rama, who, having already reached the
bank of the holy Ganga once more, is
staying for a day in the presence of Sage

Bharadwaja.” (54)
aa: a वाक्यैर्मधुरैर्हनूमतो
निशम्य हृष्टो भरत: कृताञ्जलि:।
चिरस्य पूर्ण: खलु मे मनोरथ:॥५५॥

Delighted to hear of Sri Rama's
impending return to Ayodhya in the sweet
words of Hanuman, the celebrated Bharata
with joined palms thereupon made the
following reply, which brought excessive
joy to his mind: “After a long time indeed
has my desire been fulfilled.” (55)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये युद्धकाण्डे षड्विंशत्यधिकशततम: सर्ग: ॥ १२६ Il

Thus ends Canto One hundred and twenty-six in the Yuddhakanda of the glorious
Ramayana of Valmiki, the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

