860

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

Canto LUI
Sita reproaches Ravana

ख्मुत्पतन्तं तं gear मैथिली जनकात्मजा।
gfe परमोद्विग्ना wa महति वर्तिनी॥१॥
रोषरोदनताम्राक्षी भीमाक्षॆ राक्षसाधिपम्।
रुदती करुणं सीता ह्रियमाणा तमब्रवीत्॥२॥

Distressed and greatly alarmed to see
the aforesaid Ravana, the suzerain lord of
ogres, of fearful eyes rising to the heavens,
Sita, a princess of Mithila and daughter of
Janaka—who was involved in a great risk
(of losing her honour and chastity) and
whose eyes had grown red_ through
indignation and weeping—spoke to him as
follows, crying piteously while being borne
away through the sky: (1-2)

न व्यपत्रपसे नीच कर्मणानेन रावण।
ज्ञात्वा विरहितां यो मां चोरयित्वा पलायसे॥ ३॥

“Do you not feel ashamed of this act,
O vile Ravana—you, who, having stealthily
abducted me, knowing me to be alone, are
fleeing away like a coward? (3)

त्वयैव Tt दुष्टात्मन् भीरुणा हर्तुमिच्छता।
ममापवाहितो भर्ता मृगरूपेण मायया॥४॥

“Seeking to abduct me, surely it was
you alone, O evil-minded fellow, who caused
my husband to be lured away by an ogre
appearing in the disguise of a deer through
a conjuring trick, timid as you are. (4)
यो fe मामुद्यतस्त्रातुं सोऽप्ययं विनिपातित:।
गृध्रराज: पुराणोऽसौ श्वशुरस्य सखा मम॥५॥

“Even the yonder aged Jatayu, the
king of vultures, a friend of my father-in-law,
who actually strove to rescue me, lies killed
there. (5)
परमं Ga a वीर्यं दृश्यते राक्षसाधम।
विश्राव्य नामधेयं हि युद्धे नास्मि जिता त्वया॥ ६॥

“Indeed the highest valour is seen in
you in that | have not been won by you in

a combat with my husband even after
disclosing your name, O vile ogre ! (6)

samt गर्हितं कर्म कथं कृत्वा न लज्जसे।
स्नियाश्चाहरणं नीच रहिते च परस्य च॥७॥
“How do you not feel ashamed even
after perpetrating such a reproachful act as
bearing away a woman, much more the
wife of another, and that too in a lonely
place where there is none to protect her?
(7)

कथयिष्यन्ति लोकेषु पुरुषा: HH कुत्सितम्।
सुनृशंसमधर्मिष्ठं तव शौटीर्यमानिन:॥८॥

“People will poclaim throughout the
worlds the aforesaid act of yours—even
though you pride yourself on your valour—
as reproachful, extremely cruel and most
unrighteous. (8)
fap a शौर्यं च सत्त्वं च यत्त्वया कथितं तदा।
कुलाक्रोशकरं लोके धिक् ते चारित्रमीदृशम्॥ ९॥

“Fie upon your valour and energy too,
of which you spoke at that time. And
accursed in the world is such conduct of
yours, which brings reproach on your race!

(9)
मुहूर्तमपि तिष्ठ त्वं न जीवन् प्रतियास्यसि॥ १०॥

“Of course, what can be done just at
this moment when you are flying with such
speed? Halt you but for an hour or so and
you will not return alive. (10)

नहि चक्षु:पथं प्राप्य तयो: पार्थिवपुत्रयो: |
ससैन्योऽपि समर्थस्त्वं मुहूर्तमपि जीवितुम्॥११॥

“Having reached the range of sight of
those two princes, Sri Rama and Laksmana,
you will surely not be able to survive even
for an hour or so, no matter if you are
followed by an army. (11)
