878

Severely reproaching his younger
brother, Laksmana, who wore a distressed
appearance, nay, heaving a deep breath,
Sri Rama, whose mouth was parched from
hunger, fatigue and thirst, grew despondent
to perceive the site of his hermitage desolate
on reaching it. (19)

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

एतत्तदित्येव निवासभूमौ
प्रहष्टरोमा व्यथितो aya २०॥

Directly entering his own hermitage,
nay, exploring some of Sita’s sporting
grounds and saying to himself that it was
the same place where she used to disport,
the aforesaid hero felt disquieted in his own
abode, his hair standing on end through
agony. (20)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्येऽरण्यकाण्डेऽष्टपञ्चाश: सर्ग: ॥ ५८ il

Thus ends Canto Fifty-eight in the Aranyakanda the glorious Ramayana of Valmiki,
the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

Canto LIX
Dialogue between Sri Rama and Laksmana

अथाश्रमादुपावृत्तमन्तरा रघुनन्दन:।
परिषप्रच्छ सौमित्रिं wat दु:खादिदं वच:॥१॥
Earlier Sri Rama, the delight of the
Raghus, painfully proceeded to put the
following question to Laksmana (son of
Sumitra), returned from his hermitage,
meeting him half way. (1)
तमुवाच किमर्थं त्वमागतोऽपास्य मैथिलीम्।
यदा सा da विश्वासाद् वने विरहिता मया॥ २॥
Sri Rama said to him, “What for have
you come leaving Sita (the princess of Mithila)
alone, when she had been confided by me
to your care in the forest? (2)
दृष्टवैवाभ्यागतं cat मे मैथिलीं त्यज्य लक्ष्मण।
VSAM महत् पापं यत्सत्यं व्यथितं मन:॥ ३॥
“Apprehending grave danger, my mind
was forsooth filled with pain the moment |
saw you come back leaving the princess of
Mithila alone, O Laksmana ! (3)
स्फुरते नयनं सव्यं बाहुश्च wa च मे।
दृष्टवा लक्ष्मण दूरे cat सीताविरहितं पथि॥४॥

“Seeing you alone, without Sita, on the way

at some distance, my left eye and arm as well
as the heart began to throb, O Laksmana !”(4)

एवमुक्तस्तु सौमित्रिर्लक्ष्मण: शुभलक्षण:।
भूयो दु:खसमाविष्टो दु:ख्रितं राममब्रवीत्॥७५॥

Twitted in these words, Laksmana, son
of Sumitra, for his part, who was endowed
with auspicious bodily marks, and was
overcome with sorrow all the more, submitted
as follows to the afflicted Sri Rama: (5)

न स्वयं कामकारेण तां त्यक्त्वाहमिहागत:।
प्रचोदितस्तयैवोग्रैस्त्वत्सकाशमिहागत: uel

“| have not come here leaving her of
myself voluntarily by action. | have sought
your presence here only when urged by her
in pungent words. (6)

आर्येणेव परिक्रुष्टठं लक्ष्मणेति सुविस्वरम्।
परित्राहीति यद्वाक्यं मैथिल्यास्तच्छुतिं गतम्॥७॥
(The fact is that) the shrill cry in the words
“Laksmana, protect me !” which was uttered
in a voice resembling your's, as it were,
reached the ears of Sita, the princess of
Mithila, (7)
