150

स्वप्नो मयायं विकृतोऽद्य दृष्ट:

शाखामृग: शास्त्रगणैर्निषिद्ध:।
स्वस्त्यस्तु WAT सलक्ष्मणाय

तथा पितुर्मे जनकस्य Tae il

‘This hideous dream has been seen by
me today. The vision of a monkey has been
condemned by the scriptures. May good
luck attend on Sri Rama with Laksmana as
well as on my father, King Janaka. (9)

स्वप्नो fe ara नहि मेऽस्ति निद्रा
शोकेन दु:खेन च पीडिताया:।
ae fe a नास्ति ad विहीना
तेनेन्दुपूर्णप्रतिमाननेन Noll

‘Surely this cannot be a dream; for
sleep does not come to me, stricken as |
am with grief and sorrow. Nor indeed is
there any joy for me, separated as |
am from that prince whose countenance
resembles the full moon (10)

रामेति waft ada बुद्धया
विचिन्त्य वाचा ब्रुवती तमेव।
तस्यानुरूपं च Hat तदर्था-
मेवं प्रपश्यामि तथा so ee i
‘Pondering with my mind at all times on
the concept conveyed by the word ‘Rama’
and speaking of the same Rama with my
tongue, | hear as well a talk corresponding
to the same thought and likewise visualize
the talk heard by me in conformity with the
same theme. (11)

« VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

ae हि तस्याद्य मनोभवेन
सम्पीडिता तद्गतसर्वभावा।
विचिन्तयन्ती सततं तमेव
तथैव पश्यामि तथा son १२॥
‘Constantly thinking as | do of him alone,
tormented as | am by a longing for him, my
whole affection being fastened on him, | likewise
behold him and hear of him alone. (12)
मनोरथ: स्यादिति चिन्तयामि
तथापि बुद्ध्यापि वितर्कयामि।
सुव्यक्तरूपश्च वदत्ययं AMI १३॥
‘| speculate that what | am seeing may
be a mere image; yet | reflect with my mind
as to what can be the cause of this apparition;
for a conceptual image has no concrete form,
while this monkey appearing before me has
a distinct form and is also talking to me. (13)
नमोऽस्तु वाचस्पतये सवज्रिणे
स्वयम्भुवे चैव हुताशनाय।
अनेन चोक्तं यदिदं ममाग्रतो
वनौकसा Ted AAT नान्यथा॥ १४॥
‘Let my salutation be to Sage Brhaspati
(the master of speech) alongwith Indra (who
is armed with a thunderbolt), to Brahma (the
self-born creator) as well as to the god of
fire (the deity presiding over the organ of
speech) ! May all that which has been uttered
now in my presence by this monkey (lit., a
denizen of the forest) prove true and not
otherwise.’ (14)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये सुन्दरकाण्डे द्वात्रिंश: सर्ग: ॥ 32 ॥

Thus ends Canto Thirty-two of the Sundarakanda in the glorious Ramayana of Valmiki,
the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

