* AYODHYAKANDA +

milk boiled with rice and sugar, seasoned
rice boiled with sesame seeds and Moong
(a kind of kidney bean), and goat-milk in
vain (without offering them in the first instance
to the almighty Lord, gods and manes etc.,)
and of showing disrespect to his elders by
failing to rise on their arrival and greet them.

(30)

गाश्च स्पृशतु Wet गुरून् परिवदेत aI
मित्रे gaa सोऽत्यर्थं यस्यार्योऽनुमते गत:॥ ३१॥
“Let him with whose concurrence my
elder brother has departed for the forest
incur the sin of touching the body of cows
with his feet, reviling his elders and bearing
deep-rooted malice to a friend. (31)
विश्वासात् कथितं किंचित् परिवादं मिथ: क्वचित्।
faquirg स दुष्टात्मा यस्यार्योऽनुमते Wed: ३२॥
“Let that evil-minded fellow with whose
concurrence my elder brother has departed
for the forest incur the sin of revealing to
someone else a fault of another confessed
in private out of reliance (that he will not
divulge the secret before anyone). (32)

अकर्ता चाकृतज्ञश्च त्यक्तात्मा निरपत्रप:।
लोके भवतु विद्विष्टो यस्यार्योऽनुमते Wa: ३३॥

“Let the fellow with whose concurrence
my elder brother has departed for the woods
never be in a position to return a service;
nay, let him prove ungrateful and shameless,
let him be shunned by good men and hated
by all. (33)

पुत्रैर्दासैश्च भृत्यैश्च wage परिवारित:।
स एको मृष्टमश्नातु यस्यार्योऽनुमते गत:॥ ३४॥

“Let the fellow with whose concurrence
my elder brother has departed for the woods
incur the sin of partaking of a savoury dish
alone, at his own home, though surrounded
by a number of sons, servants and
dependants. (34)

571

अप्राप्य AG दाराननपत्य: प्रमीयताम्।
अनवाप्य क्रियां att यस्यार्योऽनुमते गत:॥ ३५ ॥
“Let the fellow with whose concurrence
my elder brother has departed for the woods
die issueless, failing to secure a wife
becoming of him, in point of pedigree,
disposition and so on and in this way
not enjoying the privilege of performing
sacred duties like Agnihotra etc., which
can be performed only by a married couple.
(35)

माऽऽत्मन: संततिं द्राक्षीत् स्वेषु दारेषु दु:खित: |
आयु:समग्रमप्राप्य यस्यार्योऽनुमते गत:॥ BK UI

“Let the fellow with whose concurrence
my elder brother has departed for the woods
not behold the face of a male child through
his wedded wife and die full of agony without
attaining the full age of a hundred years.

(36)
राजस्त्रीबालव्रद्धानां वधे यत् पापमुच्यते।
भृत्यत्यागे च यत् पापं तत् पापं प्रतिपद्यताम्॥ ३७॥

“Let him incur the same sin which is
declared as attaching to the act of killing a
ruler, woman, infant or aged man and
forsaking a dependant. (37)

लाक्षया मधुमांसेन लोहेन च विषेण al
सदैव बिभूयाद् भृत्यान् यस्यार्योऽनुमते गत:॥ ३८ ॥

“Let him with whose concurrence my
elder brother has departed (for the woods)
always support his dependants through sale
of lacquer, honey and flesh, iron and poison,
which is prohibited in the Sastras*. (38)
संग्रामे समुपोढे च शत्रुपक्षभयंकरे।
पलायमानो वध्येत यस्यार्योऽनुमते गत:॥३९॥

“Let him with whose concurrence my
elder brother has departed for the woods be
killed while fleeing at a time when a battle
inspiring terror into the adversaries has
commenced. (39)

* A Smrti text says ;

लाक्षालवणमांसानि वर्जनीयानि विक्रये।

“Lacquer, salt and flesh should be eschewed in sale.”
