« KISKINDHAKANDA +

“One should, therefore, neither
assassinate nor reproach nor insult nor speak
unpalatable words to them. Being gods
themselves, these kings move about on
earth in human semblance. (42)

त्वं तु धर्ममविज्ञाय act रोषमास्थित:।
विदूषयसि at et पितृपैतामहे स्थितम्॥४३॥

“Not fully knowing the principles of
righteousness and holding fast to anger
alone, you bitterly reproach me, devoted as
| am to the code of conduct, followed by my
forefathers.” (43)

एवमुक्तस्तु WAT वाली प्रव्यथितो भृशम्।
न ae राघवे दध्यौ धर्मेऽधिगतनिश्चय:॥४४॥

Deeply pained when spoken to as
aforesaid by Sri Rama, Vall for his part no
longer found fault with Sri Rama (a scion
of Raghu), certainty with regard to
righteousness having now been attained by
him. (44)

प्रत्युवाच ततो रामं प्राञ्जलिर्वानरेश्चर:।
यत् त्वमात्थ ACHES AL तथैव न संशय:॥४५॥

With joined palms Vali, the ruler of
monkeys, thereupon replied as follows to
Sri Rama: “What you have said, O jewel
among men, is precisely true: there is no
doubt about it. (45)

प्रतिवक्तुं प्रकृष्टे fe नापकृष्टस्तु शक्नुयात्।
यदयुक्तं मया Ye Waele वाक्यमप्रियम्॥४६॥
तत्रापि खलु मां दोषं कर्तुं नार्हसि Weal
त्वं fe दृष्टार्थतत्त्वज्ञ: Wart च fed ta: |
कार्यकारणसिद्धौ च प्रसन्ना बुद्धिरव्यया॥४७॥

“Indeed a dwarf cannot argue with a
giant. Certainly you ought not to find fault, O
scion of Raghu, with me even for the
unbecoming and unpalatable words that were
addressed by me to you before this through
mistake. Indeed you have directly perceived
the truth about the four objects of human
pursuit and are a wise man. Nay, you are
devoted to the good of the people and your
mind is clear and unbaffled in determining

1001

your duty and weighing the circumstances
on which you base your decision. (46-47)
मामप्यवगतं धर्माद् व्यतिक्रान्तपुरस्कृतम्।
धर्मसंहितया ara wa परिपालय॥४८॥
“Encourage me too, 0 knower of what
is right, placed as | am in the forefront of
those who have definitely strayed from the
path of virtue and known too as such, with

words of consolation, conformable with
righteousness.” (48)

बाष्पसंरुद्धकण्ठस्तु वाली सार्तरव: शनै:।
उवाच WH सम्प्रेक्ष्य पङ्कलग्न sa द्विप:॥४९॥
Looking intently on Sri Rama, and
groaning like an elephant sunk in a morass,
Vali, for his part, whose throat was completely
chocked with tears, slowly continued as
follows : (49)

न चात्मानमहं शोचे न तारां नापि बान्धवान्।

यथा Ut Wrasse कनकाङ्गदम्॥५०॥
“| neither grieve for myself nor for my

wife Tara, nor even for my kinsmen as | do

for my son, Angada, who is foremost in

point of virtues and is adorned with armlets
of gold. (50)

सममादर्शनाद्दीनो बाल्यात् प्रभृति लालित:।
तटाक इव पीताम्बुरुपशोषं गमिष्यति॥५१॥

“Miserable at not being able to see me,
the boy, who has been cherished by me
since his very infancy, will pine away like
a pond whose waters have been dried up.

(51)

बालश्चाकृतबुद्धिश्च एकपुत्रश्च A fra:
aval Wa Maat रक्षणीयो महाबल:॥ ५२॥

“Angada (son of Tara), who is sitill
young, though exceptionally mighty, and
whose judgment has not yet matured, and
who is my only son and as such dear to
me, deserves to be protected by you, O
Rama ! (52)

सुग्रीवे चाङ्मदे wa विधत्स्व मतिमुत्तमाम्।
त्वं हि गोप्ता च शास्ता च कार्याकार्यविधौ स्थित: ।। ५३ ॥
