« KISKINDHAKANDA +

his eyes on the aforesaid Kiskindha,
surrounded by those exceptionally mighty
monkeys, standing trees in hand, which
was difficult of access. (26)

ततस्ते हरय: सर्वे प्राकारपरिखान्तरात्।
निष्क्रम्योदग्रसत्त्वास्तु तस्थुराविष्कृतं तदा॥ ou

Coming out of the fortification wall and
crossing the limits of the moat surrounding
it, all the aforesaid monkeys for their part,
who were exceptionally mighty, thereupon
stood in the open on that occasion. (27)

सुग्रीवस्य wre च पूर्वजस्यार्थमात्मवान्।
दृष्टवा क्रोधवशं वीर: पुनरेव जगाम स:॥ २८॥

Considering the negligence on the part
of Sugriva as well as the purpose of his
eldest brother, Sri Rama, the valiant
Laksmana, even though self-possessed, fell
a victim to anger once more. (28)
स दीर्घोष्णमहोच्छ्वास: कोपसंरक्तलोचन:।
aya नरशार्दूल: AIT इव पावक:॥२९॥

Heaving deep and burning sighs, his
eyes blood-red through anger, that tiger
among men looked like fire enveloped in
smoke. (29)
बाणशल्यस्फुरज्जिह्व: सायकासनभोगवान्।
स्वतेजोविषसम्भूत: पञ्चास्य sq पन्नग:॥ ३०॥

With the head of the arrow for its
flickering tongues and the bow for its coils
and full of poison in the shape of his martial
ardour, Laksmana stood like a five-headed
serpent. (30)
तं दीप्तमिव कालाग्निं नागेन्द्रमिव कोपितम्।
समासाद्याङ्गदस्त्रासाद् विषादमगमत् परम्॥३१॥

Duly approaching Laksmana, who
shone like the blazing fire of universal
destruction and resembled the infuriated king
of serpents, Sesa, Prince Angada gave
way to utter despondency through fear. (31)

सोऽङ्गदं रोषताम्राक्ष: संदिदेश महायशा:।
Gia: कथ्यतां वत्स ममागमनमित्युत॥ ३२॥

His eyes bloodshot through anger, the

1059

highly glorious Laksmana commanded
Angada as follows : “Let Sugriva, my child,
be apprised of my arrival as below: (32)

एष रामानुज: प्राप्तस्त्वत्सकाशमरिदम।
भ्रातुर्व्यसनसंतप्तो git तिष्ठति लक्ष्मण:॥ ३३॥

“ “Arrived in your presence, O tamer of
enemies, here waits Laksmana, Sri Rama’s
younger brother, at your door, tormented as
he is by the said plight of his eldest brother,
Sri Rama. (33)

wea ated ate ofa: क्रियतां साधु वानर।
इत्युक्त्वा शीघ्रमागच्छ वत्स वाक्यमरिदम॥ ३४॥

““His advice may be duly followed if it
pleases you, O monkey chief!’ Delivering
this message of mine, O tamer of foes,
return soon, my child !” (34)

लक्ष्मणस्य वच: श्रुत्वा शोकाविष्टोऽङ्गदोऽब्रवीत्।
faq: समीपमागम्य सौमित्रिरयमागत:॥ ३५॥

Overcome with grief to hear the
message of Laksmana, and seeking the
presence of his uncle, Sugriva, Angada
submitted to him, “Here is Laksmana (son
of Sumitra) come.” (35)
अथाङ्गदस्तस्य सुतीव्रवाचा

सम्भ्रान्तभाव: परिदीनवक्त्र:।
निर्गत्य पूर्वं नृपतेस्तरस्वी
ततो रुमायाश्चरणौ ववन्दे॥ ३६॥

Slipping away from the presence of
Laksmana, the swift-footed Angada, who
was perplexed in mind at the highly pungent
words of Laksmana, and wore a most
wretched look on his countenance, bowed
first at the feet of the king (his uncle Sugriva)
and then at those of his aunt, Ruma, as well
as of his own mother, Tara. (36)

संगृह्य पादौ पितुरुग्रतेजा

जग्राह Ad: Gta पादौ।
पादौ रुमायाश्च निपीडयित्वा

निवेदयामास ततस्तदर्थम्॥ ३७॥

Clasping tightly the feet of his uncle,
Angada, who was endowed with terrific
