428

“Nor should any Brahmana dwell in
your kingdom. If you perpetrate today such
an act of impropriety (as you are intent on
perpetrating), we shall all positively follow
the path resorted to by Sri Rama. What joy,
O royal lady, will be derived through
attainment of sovereignty by you, who will
thus be deserted for good by all your kith
and kin, Brahmanas and other pious souls?
You seek to perpetrate such an act of
impropriety. (11—13)

आश्चर्यमिव पश्यामि यस्यास्ते व्रत्तमीदृशम्।
आचरन्त्या न विव्रृता सद्यो vata मेदिनी॥ १४॥
महाब्रह्मर्षिसृष्टा वा ज्वलन्तो भीमदर्शना:।
धिग्वाग्दण्डा न हिंसन्ति रामप्रव्राजने स्थिताम्॥ १५ ॥

“| reckon it a wonder that the earth is
not immediately rent asunder as a sequel to
your resorting to such improper conduct.
Nor do rods of punishment in the form of
fiery and obviously fearful reproach uttered
by great Brahmana sages (Vasistha and
others) kill you, who are bent on exiling Sri
Rama! (14-15)

amg छित्त्वा कुठारेण निम्बं परिचरेत् तु क:।
यश्चैनं पयसा सिञ्चेन्नैवास्य मधुरो भवेत्॥१६॥

“Who on earth will nurture a Neem tree
(with its proverbially bitter leaves and fruits
etc.,) felling down a mango tree with an
axe? And a Neem tree will not turn sweet
for him who nourishes it with milk. (16)

आभिजात्यं fe a मन्ये यथा मातुस्तथैव च।
न हि निम्बात् aa क्षौद्रं लोके निगदितं aa: 11 १७॥
“Indeed, | account your innate

disposition to be exactly similar to that of
your mother. The proverb is often quoted in
the world that surely honey does not flow
from a Neem tree. (17)

wa मातुरसद्ग्राहं faa yt यथा श्रुतम्।
पितुस्ते ate: कश्चिद् ददौ वरमनुत्तमम्॥१८॥
“We know, as heard of in the past, the
intentness of your mother on evil. Someone
capable of granting boons bestowed a most

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

excellent boon on your father.

सर्वभूतरुतं तस्मात् संजज्ञे वसुधाधिप:।

तेन तिर्यग्गतानां च wart विदितं aa: eeu
“By virtue of it the king, your father,

could understand the language of all created

beings. The talk of those belonging to the

sub-human species was thereby understood

by him. (19)

ततो जृम्भस्य शयने विरुताद् भूरिवर्चस:।
पितुस्ते विदितो भाव: स तत्र बहुधाहसत्॥ २०॥
“From the shrill cry of a bird heard by
him while in his bed the meaning of it was
accordingly deciphered by your exceedingly
glorious father and he laughed over it
repeatedly. (20)

wa a जननी क्रुद्धा मृत्युपाशमभीप्सती।
Bet ते नृपते सौम्य जिज्ञासामीति चाब्रवीत्॥ २१॥

“Your mother grew indignant at this
and, seeking even to hang him in case he
refused to disclose the reason of his laughter,
spoke as follows: ‘I wish to know the
meaning of your laughter, O gentle monarch !

(21)
नृपश्चोवाच at cat ae शंसामि a यदि।
ततो मे मरणं सद्यो भविष्यति न संशय:॥ २२॥

“The King too replied to that royal lady,
‘If | tell you the reason of my laughter, my
death will speedily follow from it: there is no
doubt about it.’ (22)

माता ते faat देवि पुन: केकयमब्रवीत्।
Wa A sila वा मा वा न मां त्वं प्रहसिष्यसि॥ २३॥

“Your mother then said to your father,
the ruler of the Kekayas, ‘Live or die as you
will; in any case tell me the reason of your
laughter. Then alone shall | be satisfied
that you shall not laugh at me hereafter.’

(23)
प्रियया च तथोक्त: स केकय: पृथिवीपति: |
wat तं वरदायार्थं कथयामास तत्त्वत:॥ २४॥

“Told thus by his beloved consort, the
said king of the Kekayas for his part correctly

(18)
