186

असकृत् तैर्महोत्साहै: ससागरधराधरा।
प्रदक्षिणीकृता भूमिर्वायुमार्गानुसारिभि:॥ ३७॥

“The earth including the oceans and
mountains has been circumambulated by
them clockwise more than once following
the aerial path, endowed as they are with
extraordinary energy. (37)

मद्दिशिष्टाश्च तुल्याश्च सन्ति aa वनौकस:।
मत्त: प्रत्यवर: कश्चिन्नास्ति सुग्रीवसंनिधौ॥ ३८ ॥

“There exist in that army monkeys who
are my equals and even superior to me.
None is inferior to me in the company of
Sugriva. (38)

अहं तावदिह wre: किं पुनस्ते महाबला:।
नहि प्रकृष्टा: प्रेष्यन्ते प्रेष्यन्ते dat जना:॥ ३९॥

“When | have arrived here, how easily
can they arrive, who are endowed with
extraordinary might! Surely these superior
ones are not sent on errands, only the
inferior ones are so sent. (39)

तदलं परितापेन देवि शोको व्यपैतु ते।

एकोत्पातेन a लङ्कामेष्यन्ति हरियूथपा:॥४०॥
“Therefore, have done with sorrowing,

O godlike lady ! Let your grief disappear. In

a single bound those leaders of monkey
hordes will reach Lanka. (40)

मम पृष्ठगतौ तौ च चन्द्रसूर्याविवोदितौ।
त्वत्सकाशं महासङ्घौ नृसिंहावागमिष्यत:॥४१॥
“Nay, like the sun and the moon
appearing on the horizon, those two lions
among men, Sri Rama and Laksmana,
followed by large multitudes, will arrive in
your presence mounted on my back. (41)

तौ fe वीरौ नरवरौ सहितौ रामलक्ष्मणौ।
आगम्य नगरीं लङ्कां सायकैर्विधमिष्यत:॥४२॥
“Arriving together, those two heroic
jewels among men will undoubtedly blow
away Lanka with their shafts. (42)
सगणं रावणं wat राघवो रघुनन्दन:।
त्वामादाय amie स्वपुरीं प्रति यास्यति॥४३॥

« VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

“Making short work of Ravana alongwith
his hordes, Sri Rama, the delight of the
Raghus, will return to his own city Ayodhya,
taking you with him, O lady of excellent
limbs ! (43)

तदाश्वसिहि भद्रं ते भव त्वं कालकाङ्क्षिणी |
नचिराद् द्रक्ष्यसे रामं प्रज्वलन्तमिवानलम्॥४४॥

“Therefore, take heart and bide you
your time. May good betide you! Before
long you shall be able to see Sri Rama
shining bright like fire. (44)

Pet राक्षसेन्द्रे च सपुत्रामात्यबान्धवे।
त्वं समेष्यसि रामेण शशाङ्केनेव रोहिणी॥४५॥

“Nay, when Ravana, the lord of ogres,
is slain with his sons, ministers and kinsfolk,
you shall be re-united with Sri Rama as
Rohini (a consort of the moon god presiding
over a constellation of the same name) is
with the moon-god. (45)

क्षिप्रं त्वं देवि शोकस्य पारं द्रक्ष्यसि मैथिलि।
रावणं चैव रामेण द्रक्ष्यसे Ped बलात्॥४६॥

“Soon you shall see the end of your
grief, O godlike princess of Mithila! Nay,
you will also see Ravana killed by Sri Rama
by force of superior might.” (46)
एवमाश्वास्य वैदेह्मं STAT ASMA: |
गमनाय मतिं pear add पुनरब्रवीत्॥४७॥

Having comforted Sita, a princess of
the Videha territory, as above, and making
up his mind to depart, Hanuman, sprung
from the loins of the wind-god, spoke to Sita
once more as follows : (47)
तमरिघ्नं कृतात्मानं fad द्रक्ष्यसि राघवम्।
लक्ष्मणं च धनुष्पाणिं लङ्काद्वारमुपागतम्॥४८॥
; “You shall soon behold the celebrated
Sri Rama (a scion of Raghu), the destroyer
of his foes, who has subdued his soul, as
also Laksmana, arrived at the gate of Lanka,
bow in hand. (48)
नखदंष्ट्रायुधान् वीरान् सि॰॰हश्"र्दूलबिक्र॰ मान्।
वानरान् वारणेन्द्राभान् fart द्रक्ष्यसि संगतान्॥ ४९॥
