384

दैवं पुरुषकारेण a: समर्थ: प्रबाधितुम्।
न दैवेन विपन्नार्थ: पुरुष: सोऽवसीदति॥ १७॥

“A man who is capable of setting aside
the decree of fate through personal effort
never feels disheartened on his purpose
being thwarted by destiny. (17)

द्रक्ष्यन्ति त्वद्य दैवस्य पौरुषं पुरुषस्य च।
दैवमानुषयोरद्य व्यक्ता व्यक्तिर्भविष्यति॥ १८॥

“People will see today the relative
strength of fate and a human being. The
distinction between fate and a human being
will be manifest today. (18)
अद्य A पौरुषहतं दैवं द्रक्ष्यन्ति A जना:।
यैर्दैवादाहतं asa दृष्टं राज्याभिषेचनम्॥१९॥

“People by whom your installation on
the throne of Ayodhya has been seen
interrupted through destiny today will find
fate worsted this very day by my valour.

(19)
अत्यङ्कुशमिवोद्दामं गजं मदजलोद्धतम्।
प्रधावितमहँ दैवं पौरुषेण Prada on

“By sheer dint of bravery | shall repulse
destiny rushing headlong like an
uncontrollable and unrestrained elephant,
haughty with fluid exuding from its temples.

(20)
लोकपाला: समस्तास्ते नाद्य रामाभिषेचनम्।
नचकृत्स्नास्त्रयो लोका विहन्यु: किं पुन: पिता॥ २१॥

“Neither all the guardians of the spheres
nor the denizens of all the three worlds, O
Rama, can interrupt your consecration today;
how, then, can father do it? (21)
यैर्विवासस्तवारण्ये fret राजन् समर्थित:।
अरण्ये ते विवत्स्यन्ति चतुर्दश समास्तथा॥ २२॥

“They alone by whom, O king, has
your exile to the forest been unanimously
supported will likewise live in exile for fourteen
years. (22)

Be तदाशां धक्ष्यामि पितुस्तस्याश्च या तव।
अभिषेकविघातेन पुत्रराज्याय वर्तते॥२३॥

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

“| shall bring to naught that hope of
father as well as of hers (Kaikeyi) which is
directed towards securing sovereignty for
her son through interruption of your
consecration. (23)

agen विरुद्धाय न ee दैवबलं तथा।
प्रभविष्यति दु:खाय यथोग्रं पौरुषं मम॥ २४॥
“For him who is antagonistic to my
strength, the power of destiny will not prove
helpful to the same extent as my fierce
might will redound to his suffering. (24)

ऊर्ध्व वर्षसहस्रान्ते प्रजापाल्यमनन्तरम्।
आर्यपुत्रा: करिष्यन्ति वनवासं गते त्वयि॥ २५॥

“Later on when you have retired to
take up your abode in the forest at the end
of thousands of years, sons of your worthy
self will rule over the people without
interruption (leaving no room for others even
then). (25)

पूर्वराजर्षिवृत्त्या fe वनवासोऽभिधीयते।
प्रजा निक्षिप्य पुत्रेषु पुत्रवत् परिपालने॥ २६॥

“In conformity with the conduct of
ancient royal sages, residence in the forest
is recommended for kings only when they
have committed the people to the care of
their sons for being protected as sons.

(26)
स aq राजन्यनेकाग्रे राज्यबिभ्रमशाङ्कया।
नैवमिच्छसि धर्मात्मन् राज्यं राम त्वमात्मनि।। २७॥

“If, constituted as you are, O pious-
minded Rama, you do not really seek
sovereignty for yourself for fear of disaffection
in the state, the king being irresolute in the
matter of renouncing the kingship and retiring
to the forest, you need not harbour any
misgiving on that score. (27)

प्रतिजाने च ते वीर मा भूवं वीरलोकभाक।
TI च तव रक्षेयमहं Acta सागरम्॥ २८॥
“Nay, | promise to you, O valiant brother,

that | shall guard you as well as your
kingdom even as the coastline guards the
