# YUDDHAKANDA #

territory killed. Now vain is your exertion to
secure her.” (31)

तत: खड्गेन महता हत्वा तामिन्द्रजित्स्वयम्।

ee: A रथमास्थाय ननाढ च महास्वनम्॥ ३२॥
Nay, mounting his chariot after he

had personally done ‘her to death with his

mighty sword, Indrajit joyfully raised a loud

shout. (32)

वानरा: शुश्रुवु: शब्दमदूरे प्रत्यवस्थिता:।
व्यादितास्यस्य नदतस्तददुर्गं संथश्रितस्य तु॥ ३३॥

Arrayed not far from him, the monkeys
heard his roar even as he shouted with his

649

mouth wide open while comfortably seated
in that aerial chariot, which was actually
difficult of access for otherss. (33)
तथा तु dat विनिहत्य दुर्मति:
Yea: स aya रावणि:।
तं हृष्टरूपं समुदीक्ष्य amt
विषण्णरूपा: समभिप्रदुद्रुवु: ।। ३४॥
Having disposed of Sita as aforesaid,
that evil-minded son of Ravana for his part
felt greatly rejoiced in mind. Assuming a
melancholy air on seeing him cheerful of
aspect, the monkeys fled en masse
precipitately. (34)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये युद्धकाण्डे एकाशीतितम: सर्ग: ॥ ८१ Il
Thus ends Canto Eighty-one in the Yuddhakanda of the glorious Ramayana of
Valmiki, the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic

Canto LXXxXIl

Led by Hanuman, the monkeys meet the ogres in an
encounter; Hanuman returns to the presence of
Sri Rama and Indrajit pours oblations into
the sacred fire at the sanctuary
of Nikumbhila

श्रुत्वा तु भीमनिर्ह्यदं शक्राशनिसमस्वनम्।
वरीक्ष्यमाणा दिश: सर्वा दुद्रुवुर्वानरा भृशम्॥१॥

Hearing the terrible roar of Indrajit, the
monkeys for their part fled with great
speed in all directions, gazing on Indrajit
whose roar resembled the peal of thunder.

(1)
तानुवाच dd: Pall हनूमान् मारुतात्मज:।
विषण्णवदनान् दीनांस्त्रस्तान् विद्रवत: पृथक ॥ २॥

Hanuman, sprung from the loins of the
wind-god, thereupon spoke as follows to
all those monkeys, who wore melancholy
looks, were feeling miserable and alarmed

and were fleeing singly: (2)
कस्माद् विषण्णवदना विद्रवध्वं प्लवंगमा:।
त्यक्तयुद्धसमुत्साहा: शूरत्वं क्व नु al गतम्॥ ३॥
“Having lost your zeal for fighting, why
are you fleeing with a downcast mien, O
monkey? Where on earth has your valour
gone? (3)

पृष्ठतोऽनुव्रजध्वं मामग्रतो यान्तमाहवे।
शूरैरभिजनोपेतैरयुक्तं हि निवर्तितुम्॥४॥

“Return, close on my heels, to the battle
while | am marching ahead. It is ill-advised
indeed for champions of noble descent to
shrink back from the battlefield.” (4)
