« KISKINDHAKANDA +

Nay, seeing the sky clear, free as it
was from lightning and clouds, and resonant
with the cries of cranes, Sri Rama lamented
in plaintive tones. (5)

आसीन: पर्वतस्याग्रे हेमधातुविभूषिते।
शारदं WH दृष्टवा जगाम मनसा प्रियाम्॥६॥
Observing the autumnal sky, while
seated on the top of the mountain, rendered
picturesque with minerals of golden hue, Sri
Rama mentally approached his darling, Sita.
(6)

सारसारावसंनादै: सारसारावनादिनी ।
याऽऽश्रमे रमते बाला साद्य मे रमते कथम्॥७॥

He said to himself : ‘In what way does
that youthful lady of mine—whose voice
resembles the notes of a crane, nay, who
diverted herself in the hermitage with the
cries of cranes uttered with the intention of
calling their mates—divert herself now? (7)

पुष्पितांश्चासनान् दृष्टवा काञ्चनानिव निर्मलान्।
Hat सा रमते बाला पश्यन्ती मामपश्यती॥८॥

‘Beholding the Asana trees in blossom,
which were bright as gold, but not seeing
me, how does that youthful lady divert
herself? (8)

या WT कलहंसानां कलेन कलभाषिणी।
बुध्यते चारुसर्वाङ्मी साद्य A रमते कथम्॥९॥

‘How does that lady of mine, who spoke
in such sweet tones and was charming of
every limb, and who used to wake up in the
morning with the notes of swans, divert
herself now? (9)

नि:स्वनं चक्रवाकानां निशम्य सहचारिणाम्।
पुण्डरीकविशालाक्षी कथमेषा भविष्यति॥ go il

‘How will that lady with eyes as big as
a lotus feel on hearing the cry of Cakravaka
birds (the red geese) moving about in pairs?
(10)

सरांसि सरितो वापी: काननानि वनानि a
wt विना मृगशावाक्षीं चरन्नाद्य TE ANU LVI

‘| derive no more joy while roaming

1047

about on the brink of lakes, rivers and tanks
and over woodlands and groves without
that fawn-eyed lady. (11)

अपि at मद्बियोगाच्च सौकुमार्याच्च भामिनीम्।
सुदूरं पीडयेत् काम: शरद्गुणनिरन्तर:।॥१२॥

‘Constantly intensified by the beauties
of autumn, the pangs of love are, | am
afraid, cruelly tormenting that beloved lady
due to her separation from me and due to
her tenderness.’ (12)

एवमादि नरश्रेष्ठो विललाप Urata: |
विहंग sa ang: alert त्रिदशेश्वरात्॥१३॥
In this and many other ways did Sri
Rama (son of a monarch), a veritable jewel
among men, wail after the manner of a
Cataka bird seeking water from Indra, the
ruler of gods. (13)

ततश्चञ्चूर्य रम्येषु went गिरिसानुषु।
east पर्युपाव्रत्तो लक्ष्मीवाँल्लक्ष्मणोऽग्रजम्॥ १४॥

Having duly returned after wandering
hither and thither on the lovely mountain-
peaks in quest of fruit, the charming
Laksmana presently saw his elder brother.

(14)
a चिन्तया geen परीतं
विसंज्ञमेकं विजने मनस्वी।

भ्रातुर्विषादात् त्वरितोऽतिदीन:
समीक्ष्य सौमित्रिरुवाच दीनम्॥ १५ ॥

Perceiving him in a_ lonely spot,
desolate, absent-minded and miserable, nay,
overcome with anxiety, which was difficult
to endure, the high-minded Laksmana, son
of Sumitra, who felt extremely wretched
due to his brothers despondency, quickly
submitted to him as follows : (15)

feat ame वशंगतेन
किमात्मपौरुष्यपराभवेन ।
अयं ह्रिया संह्रियते समाधि:
feat योगेन निवर्तते न॥१६॥

“What will be gained by you if you
belittle your own virility allowing yourself to
