904

“‘An encounter is out of the question
for one who stands consecrated for a
sacrificial performance, and temper is also
out of the question for such a one; moreover,
victory is uncertain in a battle and the
Raksasa is very hard to vanquish.’” (17)

a fant गुरोर्वाक्यान्मरुत्त: gferdtata: |
विसृज्य सशरं चापं स्वस्थो मखमुखोऽभवत्॥ Ve I
Bowing to his preceptor’s remonstrance,
King Marutta withdrew; throwing away his
bow and arrows, he became self-poised
and addressed himself to the performance
of the sacrifice. (18)

ततस्तं निर्जितं मत्वा घोषयामास वै शुक:।
रावणो जयतीत्युच्चैर्हर्षाननादं विमुक्तवान्॥१९॥

Taking him to be vanquished, Suka
thereupon raised in glee a shout in a high
pitch, saying, “Ravana has triumphed !” (19)

तान् भक्षयित्वा तत्रस्थान् महर्षीन् यज्ञमागतान्।
वितृप्तो रुधिरैस्तेषां पुन: सम्प्रययौ महीम्॥२०॥
Having devoured the celebrated and
great sages who had come to the sacrifice
and who were still there, and fully sated with
their blood, Ravana ranged the earth once
more. (20)

रावणे तु wa देवा: सेन्द्राश्चैव दिवौकस:।
तत: स्वां योनिमासाद्य तानि सत्त्वानि चाब्रुवन्॥ २१॥

When Ravana had left, the gods and
other denizens of heaven including Indra
resumed their original form and spoke to
these animals. (21)

Bid तदाब्रवीदिन्द्रो wat नीलबर्हिणम्।
प्रीतोऽस्मि तव धर्मज्ञ भुजङ्गाद्धि न A भयम्॥ २२॥
In joy Indra then said to the peacock
with a blue tail: “O knower of Dharma, | am
pleased with you; there will be no fear for
you from the snakes. (22)

इदं नेत्रसहस्रं तु यत् de se भविष्यति।
वर्षमाणे मयि As प्राप्स्यसे प्रीतिलक्षणाम्॥ २३॥

Spots resembling these thousand eyes

« VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

(of mine) will appear in your tail. Nay, when |
send down a shower of rain, you will rejoice
as a token of love (you cherish for me).”(23)

एवमिन्द्रो वरं प्रादान्मयूरस्य सुरेश्वर: sil

In this way, Indra, the ruler of gods,
conferred boons on the peacock. (24)

sitet: किल पुरा बर्हा मयूराणां नराधिप।
सुराधिपाद् वरं प्राप्य गता: सर्वेऽपि बर्हिण:॥ २५॥

Formerly the tails of peacocks were plain
blue alone, O suzerain lord of men; after
obtaining boons from the lord of the gods, the
whole body of the peacocks left. (25)

धर्मराजोऽब्रवीद् राम प्राग्वंशे वायसं प्रति।
पक्षिस्तवास्मि सुप्रीत: प्रीतस्य वचनं OTN २६॥
Yama, 0 Rama! said to the crow
perched on the PragvarhSa* in front of him:
“O bird, | am greatly pleased with you; listen
to my words which | am addressing to you
out of gratification: (26)

यथान्ये विविधै रोगै: dread प्राणिनो मया।
aaa प्रभविष्यन्ति मयि vid न संशय:॥ २७॥

‘As | am pleased with you, the various
diseases with which other living beings are
tormented by me, shall have no effect on
you. There is no doubt about this. (27)

यावत्त्वां न वधिष्यन्ति नरास्तावद् भविष्यसि॥ २८ ॥
‘In consequence of the boon granted
by me, O bird, there is no fear for you from
Death. You will live so long as people do not
kill you. (28)
ये च मद्विषयस्था a मानवा: क्षुधयार्दिता:।
त्वयि भुक्ते सुतृप्तास्ते भविष्यन्ति सबान्धवा:॥ २९॥
‘When you have been fed, the people
who are in my domain and who are afflicted

with hunger, will feel perfectly sated alongwith
their relations.’ (29)

gan प्रीतिसंयुक्तं वच: पत्ररथेश्वर॥ ३०॥

* A shed constructed for the dwelling of the sacrificer and his wife to the east of the sacrificial hall.
