# YUDDHAKANDA #

Hearing the report of Yupaksa
concerning the discomfiture of his elder
brother, Kumbhakarna with rolling eyes replied
to Yupaksa as follows: (78)

सर्वमद्यैव यूपाक्ष हरिसैन्यं सलक्ष्मणम्।
राघवं च रणे जित्वा ततो द्रक्ष्यामि रावणम्॥ Ve I
“Conquering this very day, O Yupaksa,
the entire army of monkeys as also Rama
with Laksmana, | shall see Ravana only
then. (79)
राक्षसांस्तर्पयिष्यामि हरीणां मांसशोणितै:।
रामलक्ष्मणयोश्चापि स्वयं पास्यामि शोणितम्॥ ८०॥
“| shall gorge the ogres with the flesh
and blood of monkeys and shall quaff the
blood of Rama and Laksmana myself.” (80)

बभाषे। ८१॥

Hearing the aforesaid reply of
Kumbhakarna, even as he was speaking,
which was full of arrogance, Mahodara, the
foremost of ogre warriors, submitted as
follows with joined palms to Kumbhakarna,
whose anger had enhanced his violent temper
beyond measure: (81)

रावणस्य वच: श्रुत्वा गुणदोषौ विमृश्य च।
पश्चादपि महाबाहो शत्रून् युधि विजेष्यसि॥ ce ti

“You should conquer the enemies in
combat only after hearing the command of
Ravana and weighing the advantages and
disadvantages of the course you are going
to take, O mighty-armed one!” (82)

महोदरवच: श्रुत्वा राक्षसै: परिवारित:।
कुम्भकर्णो महातेजा: सम्प्रतस्थे महाबल:॥ ८३॥

Hearing the advice of Mahodara and
surrounded by ogres, Kumbhakarna, who
was endowed with extraordinary energy
and possessed of great might, prepared to
depart. (83)

529

सुप्तमुत्थाप्य भीमाक्षॆ भीमरूपपराक्रमम्।
राक्षसास्त्वरिता जग्मुर्दशग्रीवनिवेशनम्॥८४॥

Having roused Kumbhakarna of frightful
eyes and of terrible aspect and prowess,
who was lying asleep, the ogres hastily
returned to the palace of Ravana (the
ten-headed monster). (84)

तेऽभिगम्य दशग्रीवमासीनं परमासने।
ऊचुर्बद्धाञ्जलिपुटा: wad wa निशाचरा:॥८५॥

Approaching Ravana, seated on an
excellent throne, all the aforesaid ogres
submitted to him as follows with joined palms:

(85)

कुम्भकर्ण: प्रबुद्धोऽसौ भ्राता ते राक्षसेश्वर।
कथं ata निर्यातु द्रक्ष्यसे तमिहागतम्॥८६॥

“Kumbhakarna, your younger brother,
O lord of ogres, is fully awake. How should
he proceed? Should he sally forth straight
to the battlefield or would you see him
arrived here?” (86)

रावणस्त्वब्रवीद्धृष्टो राक्षसांस्तानुपस्थितान्।
द्रष्टुमेनमिहेच्छामि यथान्यायं च Waar ८७॥
Feeling rejoiced, Ravana for his part
replied to the aforesaid ogres, standing near.
“| wish to see him here. Nay, let him be
honoured as propriety demands.” (87)

तथेत्युक्त्वा तु ते सर्वे पुनरागम्य राक्षसा:।
कुम्भकर्णमिदं वाक्यमूचू रावणचोदिता:॥ ८८॥

Saying “Amen!” and coming back
forthwith, all those ogres submitted to
Kumbhakarna as follows, as commanded
by Ravana: (88)

गमने क्रियतां ahguiat सम्प्रहर्षय॥८९॥

“The king, who is a veritable bull among
all the ogres, desires to see Your Royal
Highness. Therefore, let your mind be made
up to depart. Be pleased to bring excessive
joy to your elder brother.” (89)
