« KISKINDHAKANDA +

armed monkey, gave birth to you in a cave,
O jewel among the monkeys! (20)

अभ्युत्थितं तत: Ga बालो दृष्टवा महावने।
फलं चेति जिघृक्षुस्त्वमुत्प्लुत्याभ्युत्पतो दिवम्॥ २१॥

Seeing the sun just risen in an extensive
forest while you were still a child, and
bounding with intent to have it, taking it to
be a fruit, you rose to the sky. (21)

शतानि त्रीणि गत्वाथ योजनानां महाकपे।
तेजसा तस्य निर्धूतो न विषादं गतस्तत:॥ २२॥

Having sprung to an altitude of over
three thousand Yojanas* (or twenty-four
thousand miles), O great monkey, you were
repulsed by the brilliance of the sun but did
not meet with despondency on that account.

(22)
त्वामप्युपगतं तूर्णमन्तरिक्षे महाकपे।
क्षिप्तमिन्द्रेण a वज्रं कोपाविष्टेन तेजसा॥ २३॥
तदा शैलाग्रशिखरे वामो हनुरभज्यत।
ततो fe नामधेयं a हनुमानिति कोर्तितम्॥ २४॥

Seeing you risen to the sky in no time
even on being repulsed, O great monkey,
Indra hurled his thunderbolt with violence at
you, possessed as he was with anger,
dashing you against the foremost summit of
a mountain, with the result that the left side of
your chin got immediately fractured. From
that time onward your name became current
as Hanuman (one with a broken or defective
chin). (23-24)
ततस्त्वां निहतं दृष्टवा वायुर्गन्धवह: स्वयम्।
त्रैलोक्यं भृशसंक्रुद्धो न ववौ वै प्रभञ्जन:॥ २५॥

“Seeing you badly hurt, the wind-god,
the wafer of odour, himself felt extremely

enraged and the wind now ceased to visit
the three worlds. (25)

1163

सम्भ्रान्ताश्च सुरा: सर्वे त्रैलोक्ये क्षुभिते सति।
प्रसादयन्ति dH मारुतं भुवनेश्वरा:।॥ २६॥
“All the three worlds being agitated for
want of air, all the gods felt perplexed. The
rulers of the worlds, Brahma and others,

proceeded to pacify the infuriated wind-god.
(26)

प्रसादिते च vat ब्रह्मा तुभ्यं at adil
अशस्त्रवध्यतां तात समरे सत्यविक्रम॥ २७॥

“The wind-god being placated, Brahma
granted in your favour a boon in the form of
invulnerability in combat, O dear child of
unfailing prowess ! (27)

ama च निपातेन विरुजं wat समीक्ष्य च।
सहस्त्रनेत्र: प्रीतात्मा ददौ ते वरमुत्तमम्॥ २८॥
स्वच्छन्दतश्च Wo तव स्यादिति a प्रभो।
स त्वं केसरिण: ga: क्षेत्रजो भीमविक्रम:। २९॥
मारुतस्यौरस: पुत्रस्तेजसा चापि तत्सम:।
त्वं fe वायुसुतो वत्स प्लवने चापि तत्सम:॥ ३०॥

“Pleased at heart to observe you free
from anguish despite the impact of the
thunderbolt and notwithstanding your being
dashed against a mountain-peak, Indra (the
thousand-eyed god) too conferred another
excellent boon on you to the effect that
death will come to you only when you wish
to die, O powerful monkey ! In this way you
are, on the one hand, the son of Kesar,
begotten through his wife, and by another,
are endowed with terrible prowess. Again,
sprung as you are from the loins of the
wind-god, you are his equal in energy. Indeed,
being a son of the wind-god, you are his
equal even in leaping. (28—30)

वयमद्य गतप्राणा भवानस्मासु साम्प्रतम्।
दाक्ष्यविक्रमसम्पन्न: कपिराज इवापर:॥ ३१॥

“Our vitality has now all but gone. You

* Counting the figures in the reverse order according to the rule ` अङ्कानां वामतो गति:` and placing the figure
3 ( त्रीणि ) at the beginning and 100 `शतानि` afterwards, the number will come to 3100, and since `शतानि ` is in the
plural, the figure will work up to three thousand and a few hundred. Hence `शतानि afer’ has been construed by
one of the commentators to mean over three thousand so as to bring the figure into line with a statement made
in Uttarakanda that Hanuman sprang to a height of many thousand Yojanas ( बहुयोजनसाहस्ररम् ).
