* AYODHYAKANDA +

full of indignation (at the nonchalant attitude
of Kaikeyi) and sorrow (at her inevitable
ruin) : (1)
wi किमर्थमस्थाने कृतवत्यसि बालिशे।

शोकसागरमध्यस्थं नात्मानमवबुध्यसे॥ २॥

“Wherefore have you expressed joy,
O foolish lady, when there is no occasion
for it? Obviously you do not perceive yourself
surrounded by an ocean of grief? (2)

मनसा प्रसहामि cat देवि दु:खार्दिता सती।
यच्छोचितव्ये हृष्टासि प्राप्य त्वं व्यसनं महत्॥ ३॥
“Afflicted as | am with sorrow, O royal
lady, | mentally laugh at you in that even on
meeting with a great calamity you feel
rejoiced where there is reason to mourn!
(3)
शोचामि दुर्मतित्वं a का fe Wat प्रहर्षयेत्।
ak: सपत्नीपुत्रस्य व्रद्धिं मृत्योरिवागताम्॥४॥

“| pity perverseness of your mind; for
else what wise lady would exult over the
prospective exaltation of a stepson, a veritable
foe, any more than on the imminent advance
of death? (4)

भरतादेव रामस्य राज्यसाधारणाद् भयम्।
तद्विचिन्त्य विषण्णास्मि भयं भीताद्धि जायते॥ ७५ Ul

“Rama has every cause for fear from
Bharata alone, who has an equal claim to
sovereignty. | am sad to ponder that; for
danger naturally follows to the man who is
feared from an individual seized with fear.

(5)
लक्ष्मणो fe महाबाहू WH सर्वात्मना गत:।
शत्रुघ्नश्चापि भरतं काकुत्स्थं लक्ष्मणो यथा॥६॥

“The mighty-armed Laksmana, of
course, follows Rama with all his being and
Satrughna too is a follower of Bharata in the
same way as Laksmana is of Rama (a
scion of Kakutstha). (6)

प्रत्यासन्नक्रमेणापि भरतस्यैव भामिनि।
राज्यक्रमो विसृष्टस्तु तयोस्तावद्यवीयसो:॥ ७॥

“According to the order of seniority too

313

the claim to the throne of Ayodhya of Bharata
alone can be pressed; that of Laksmana
and Satrughna, who are both junior to
Bharata, is out of the question, O proud
Lady ! (7)

fage: क्षत्रचारित्रे प्राज्ञस्य प्राप्तकारिण:।
भयात् waa रामस्य चिन्तयन्ती तवात्मजम्॥ ८॥

“| shudder with fear to think of the
danger to your son from Rama, who is not
only learned and well-versed in the conduct
of a Ksatriya, but also promptly does what
is called for. (8)
सुभगा किल कौसल्या यस्या: पुत्रोऽभिषेक्ष्यते।
यौवराज्येन महता va: पुष्येण द्विजोत्तमै: et

“Fortunate indeed is Kausalya, whose
son is going to be invested with the great
office of Prince Regent tomorrow under the
asterism Pusya by the foremost of
Brahmanas. (9)
उपस्थास्यसि कौसल्यां दासीवत् त्वं कृताञ्जलि: ।। १० ॥

“With joined palms you will wait like a
maid-servant on Kausalya, when she has
attained the rulership of the globe and
disposed of her enemies in the person of
Bharata and yourself and derived joy
thereby, trusted as she is by her husband.(10)

एवं च त्वं सहास्माभिस्तस्या: प्रेष्या भविष्यसि।
पुत्रश्च dat रामस्य werd fe गमिष्यति॥११॥

“In this way you too alongwith us will
be reduced to the position of her maid-
servant and your son as well will surely be
degraded to the status of Rama’s servant.

(11)
Ber: खलु भविष्यन्ति रामस्य परमा: स्निय:।
set भविष्यन्ति स्नुषास्ते भरतक्षये॥१२॥

“The most blessed ladies of Rama’s
household will feel positively rejoiced, while
as a sequel to Bharata’s destruction your
daughter-in-law and her companions will feel
unhappy.” (12)
