# YUDDHAKANDA #

contemplated thereupon to do a kindly act
to his friends, Sugriva and others, as well
as to the people of Ayodhya. (1)

चिन्तयित्वा ततो gfe वानरेषु न्यपातयत्।
उवाच धीमांस्तेजस्वी हनूमन्तं प्लवंगमम्॥२॥
Taxing his brain awhile, the sagacious
and glorious prince then cast his glance on
the monkeys and spoke as follows to the
monkey chief, Hanuman: (2)
अयोध्यां त्वरितो गत्वा शीघ्रं प्लवगसत्तम।
जानीहि कच्चित् कुशली जनो नृपतिमन्दिरे॥ ३॥
“Moving with all speed to Ayodhya, O
jewel among the monkeys, quickly find out
if people in the royal palace are happy. (3)
निषादाधिपतिं ब्रूहि कुशलं वचनान्मम॥४॥
“Reaching Srngaverapura earlier,
communicate in my name my welfare to
Guha, the suzerain lord of the Nisadas,*
who dwells in the woods. (4)
Tr तु at कुशलिनमरोगं विगतज्वरम्।
भविष्यति We: प्रीत: स ममात्मसम: सखा॥ ५॥
“Guha will feel actually delighted to
hear of me as being safe and sound and

free from anxiety. He is my friend, as good
as my own self. (5)

अयोध्यायाश्च ते मार्गं Wart भरतस्य च।
निवेदयिष्यति प्रीतो निषादाधिपतिर्गुह:॥ ६॥
“Feeling pleased, Guha, the suzerain
lord of the Nisadas, will tell you the way to
Ayodhya as well as the news about Bharata.
(6)

भरतस्तु त्वया वाच्य: Hct वचनान्मम।
सिद्धार्थं शंस मां तस्मै सभार्यं सहलक्ष्मणम्॥७॥
“Bharata, too, should be asked by you
of his welfare in my name. Nay, speak to
him of me as having returned accomplished
of purpose with my wife and Laksmana. (7)

819

eu चापि ate रावणेन बलीयसा।
सुग्रीवेण च संवादं वालिनश्च ad रणे॥८॥
मैथिल्यन्वेषणं चैव यथा चाधिगता त्वया।

लङ्घयित्वा महातोयमापगापतिमव्ययम्॥ ९ ॥

“Nay, also speak to him of abduction
of Sita (a princess of the Videha territory)
by the exceedingly mighty Ravana as also
of my conversation with Sugriva and the
destruction by me of his elder brother, Vali,
on the field of battle, as well as of the
search conducted by Sugriva for Sita (a
princess of Mithila) and mention to him how
she was traced out by you after leaping
across the never-diminishing sea (the lord
of rivers) and consisting of a vast expanse
of water. (8-9)

उपयानं समुद्रस्य सागरस्य च दर्शनम्।
यथा च कारित: Ad रावणश्च यथा हत:॥१०॥
“Also tell him of my going near the
ocean and the appearance of the Ocean
and also how a bridge was thrown over
it and how Ravana was ultimately killed.
(10)

Ret ws Wau वरुणेन च।
महादेवप्रसादाच्च पित्रा मम समागमम्॥११॥

“Further tell him of bestowal on me of
boons by the mighty Indra, the ruler of
gods, Brahma (the creator) and Varuna, the
god of waters, and of my meeting with my
deceased father in an ethereal form through
the grace of Lord Siva, the Supreme Deity.

(11)
उपयातं च मां सौम्य भरताय निवेदय।
सह राक्षसराजेन हरीणामीश्वरेण च ॥१२॥

“Also speak to Bharata of me as having
arrived near Ayodhya with Vibhisana, the
king of ogres and Sugriva, the ruler of
monkeys, O gentle one! (12)

* A caste believed to have originated from a Sidra mother through a Brahmana father and as such

regarded as low.
