+ UTTARAKANDA +

1091

Canto LXXXVIII

Ila and Budha see each other, Budha gives the name Kirmpurusis
to her and her companions and asks them to take
their abode on the foot of the mountain

at कथामैलसम्बद्धां रामेण समुदीरिताम्।
लक्ष्मणो भरतश्चैव श्रुत्वा परमविस्मितौ॥१॥
Laksmana and Bharata were extremely

wonderstruck, after hearing the story of Ila,
narrated by Sri Rama. (1)

तौ रामं प्राञ्जली भूत्वा तस्य राज्ञो महात्मन:।
विस्तरं तस्य भावस्य तदा पप्रच्छतु: पुन:॥ २॥
Both of them again asked Sri Rama
with folded hands to delineate in detail the
story of Ila and also his double form: (2)

कथं स राजा स्त्रीभूतो वर्तयामास दुर्गति:।
Gea: स यदा भूत: कां वृत्तिं वर्तयत्यसौ॥ ३॥
‘Being formed into a woman, how did the

king fare in misery, and when he was changed
into a male, what was his way of life.’ (ॐ)

तयोस्तद् भाषितं श्रुत्वा कौतूहलसमन्वितम्।
कथयामास काकुत्स्थस्तस्य राज्ञो यथागतम्॥४॥
Hearing the words of the two, spoken
out of curiosity, Sri Rama, the scion of
Kakutstha narrated the story of that king as
was traditionally handed down: (4)

wa प्रथमं मासं स्त्री भूत्वा लोकसुन्दरी।
ताभि: uaa स्त्रीभिर्येऽस्य ve पदानुगा:॥७५॥
‘Becoming a lady matchlessly beautiful
for the first month, (he) was surrounded by
those (women), who formerly followed him
in their masculine form. (5)

तत्काननं विगाह्याशु विजह्रे लोकसुन्दरी।
द्रुमगुल्मलताकीर्णं पद्भ्यां पद्मदलेक्षणा॥६॥

‘The feminine bea She the unparalleled
beauty of the worlds having penetrated that
forest full of trees, chesters and creepers,
roamed on foot, possessed of eyes like
lotus-petals. (6)

वाहनानि च सर्वाणि संत्यक्त्वा a समन्तत:।
पर्वताभोगविवरे तस्मिन् रेमे इला तदा॥७॥

‘Leaving aside all carriers, Ila then
sported on in that cavity of the great
mountain. (7)

अथ तस्मिन् वनोद्देशे पर्वतस्याविदूरत:।
सर: सुरुचिरप्रख्यं नानापक्षिगणायुतम्॥८॥
‘Then in that forest, not far from the
mountain, was a pond beautiful in appearance,
abided by many groups of birds. (8)

ददर्श सा इला तस्मिन् बुधं सोमसुतं तदा।
ज्वलन्तं स्वेन ager पूर्णं सोममिवोदितम्॥९॥
तपन्तं च तपस्तीव्रमम्भोमध्ये दुरासदम्।
यशस्करं कामकरं तारुण्ये पर्यवस्थितम्॥१०॥
‘Ila then saw in that lake Budha, the
son of Soma (moon), quite youthful, effulgent
with his own brilliant form as if (he was) the
moon arisen. He was performing severe
penance inside the waters of the lake,
producing fame and fulfilling desires. (9-10)
सा तं जलाशयं ae क्षोभयामास विस्मिता।
सह a: पूर्वपुरुषै: स्त्रीभूतै रघुनन्दन॥११॥
‘O descendant of Raghu, fully amazed,
she stirred up the entire lake together
with those former men changed into women.
(11)
बुधस्तु at समीक्ष्यैव कामबाणवशं गत:।
नोपलेभे तदात्मानं स चचाल तदाम्भसि॥ १२॥
‘Budha on seeing her, came under
the influence of the arrow of cupid, he could
not control himself and moved in the waters.
(12)
इलां निरीक्षमाणस्तु त्रैलोक्यादधिकां शुभाम्।
चित्तं समभ्यतिक्रामत् का न्वियं देवताधिका॥ १३॥
