* AYODHYAKANDA +

erected for them as well as resorting to
the descent in order to be able to ascend
the boats and collecting the utensils in
order to load them, actually rose to the
skies. (15)
पताकिन्यस्तु ता नाव: स्वयं दाशैरधिष्ठिता:।
वहन्त्यो GAAS तदा सम्पेतुराशुगा:॥ १६॥
Ferrying the men seated in them, those
swift-going boats, which were adorned with

flags and controlled by the fishermen, then
sailed automatically, as it were. (16)

नारीणामभिपूर्णास्तु काश्चित् काश्चित् तु वाजिनाम्।
काश्चित् तत्र वहन्ति स्म यानयुग्यं महाधनम्॥ १७॥
Some boats were full of women, while
others were loaded with horses; while some
more of them ferried costly chariots and
animals of draught. (17)

तास्तु गत्वा परं तीरमवरोप्य च तं जनम्।
निवृत्ता: काण्डचित्राणि क्रियन्ते दाशबन्धुभि: ।। १८ ॥
Having reached the opposite bank and
enabled those men etc., to land, the boats
for their part returned and were plied as so

many toy-boats on water by the rowers,
who were all kinsmen of Guha. (18)

सवैजयन्तास्तु गजा गजारोहै: प्रचोदिता:।
Wt: स्म प्रकाशन्ते सपक्षा sa पर्वता:॥१९॥
Swimming across the Ganga as urged
by their mahouts, the elephants with flags
on their back actually shone like winged
mountains. (19)
नावश्चारुरुहुस्त्वन्ये THATS TAT |
अन्ये कुम्भघटैस्तेरुरन्ये तेरुश्च aly: oll
Nay, other men took their seats on
boats while others crossed the river by

609

means of rafts; still others swam across
with the help of big and small earthen vessels
and the rest swam with their arms alone.
(20)
सा पुण्या ध्वजिनी गङ्गां दाशै: संतारिता स्वयम्।

मैत्रे मुहूर्ते प्रययौ प्रयागवनमुत्तमम्॥२१॥
Ferried across the Ganga by the
fishermen themselves, that holy army which
was hallowed through contact with holy men
like Prince Bharata and Sage Vasistha as
well as through a bath in the Ganga and
other sacred streams and was proceeding
on the holy mission of bringing Sri Rama
back to Ayodhya, marched towards the
excellent forest encircling Prayaga during
the hour known by the name of Maitra*
(because of its being sacred to Mitra, the
sun-god). (21)

आश्वासयित्वा च चमूं महात्मा

निवेशयित्वा च यथोपजोषम्।

we भरद्वाजमृषिप्रवर्य-

मृत्विक्सदस्यैर्भरत: प्रतस्थे॥ २२॥

Nay, cheering up the troops and
comfortably encamping them in the forest
encircling Prayaga, the hight souled Bharata
alongwith the priests and the (king’s)
councillors set out to meet Bharadwaja, the
foremost of Rsis (the seers of Vedic Mantras).

(22)

स ब्रह्मणस्याश्रममभ्युपेत्य

महात्मनो देवपुरोहितस्य |
ददर्श रम्योटजवृक्षदेशं

महद्वनं विप्रवरस्य रम्यम्॥२३॥

Reaching the hermitage of the high-
souled Bharadwaja (the family priest of gods),

* Muhiurta, loosely translated as an hour, really consists of 48 minutes. There are fifteen such
Muhurtas in a day. They are named in order by Brhaspati as Raudra, Sarpa, Maitra, Paitra, Vasava, Apya,
Vaiswa, Brahma, Praja, Isa, Aindra, Aindragna, Nairta, Varunaryamana and Bhagi.

ts: सर्पस्तथा aa: tt वासव wa च । आप्यो agen aa: प्राजेशैन्द्रास्तथैव ai
ऐन्द्राग्नो नैर्ऋतश्चैव वारुणार्यमणो भगी । एतेऽह्नि क्रमशो Fat मुहूर्तां दश पञ्च a

Bharadwaja is referred to as a family priest of gods because he was sprung from the loins of Sage

Brhaspati, the preceptor of gods.
