506

odours, rivers and lakes, villages and cities,
the charioteer carefully drove along at a
quick speed. (4)

ad: सायाह्नसमये द्वितीयेऽहनि सारथि:।
अयोध्यां समनुप्राप्य निरानन्दां cat ह॥५॥
Duly reaching Ayodhya at dusk on the
second day (since his departure from
Srngaverapura), the charioteer found it
cheerless : so it is said. (5)

स शून्यामिव नि:शब्दां दृष्टवा परमदुर्मना:।
सुमन्त्रश्चिन्तयामास शोकवेगसमाहत: ॥ ६ U
Greatly troubled in mind to see Ayodhya
noiseless as though desolate, and
overpowered with the vehemence of grief,
Sumantra reflected : (6)

कच्चिन्न सगजा साश्वा सजना सजनाधिपा।
रामसंतापदु:खेन दग्धा शोकाग्निना पुरी॥७॥
“| hope the city of Ayodhya with its
elephants, horses, people and sovereign has
not been consumed by the fire of grief caused
by the agony of separation from Sri Rama.”(7)

sta चिन्तापर: सूतो वाजिभि: शीघ्रयायिभि:।
नगरद्वारमासाद्य त्वरित: प्रविवेश ह॥८॥

Reaching the city gate by the chariot
driven by swift-going horses, while pondering
thus, the charioteer, they say, hastily entered
the city. (8)
सुमन्त्रमभिधावन्तत शतशोऽथ सहस्रश:।
क्व राम इति पृच्छन्त: सूतमभ्यद्रवन् नरा:॥९॥

Inquiring where Sri Rama was, people
forthwith rushed in their hundreds and
thousands towards Sumantra, who was
driving in the direction of the palace. (9)
अनुज्ञातो निव्रत्तोऽस्मि धार्मिकेण महात्मना॥ १०॥

He replied to them, “Taking leave of Sri
Rama (a scion of Raghu), when sent back
by that pious and lofty-minded prince, on

the bank of the Ganga at Srngaverapura, |
have returned from that place.” (10)

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

a तीर्णा इति विज्ञाय बाष्पपूर्णमुखा नरा:।
अहो धिगिति नि:श्चस्य ar रामेति विचुक्रुशु:॥ ११॥

Coming to know for certain that the
exiles had crossed the Ganga, and sighing
with the words “Oh, fie upon us!” people
with their faces bathed in tears cried aloud,
“Ah Rama!” (11)
शुश्राव च वचस्तेषां वृन्दं Gad च तिष्ठताम्।
हता: स्म Gel ये नेह पश्याम इति राघवम्॥ १२॥

Nay, he heard the lament of the people,
who stood in batches saying, “Doomed
indeed are we, who do not perceive Sri
Rama (a scion of Raghu) in this chariot!

(12)

दानयज्ञविवाहेषु समाजेषु महत्सु च।
न द्रक्ष्याम: पुनर्जातु धार्मिकं राममन्तरा॥१३॥

“Alas, we shall never see the pious Sri
Rama in our midst again on the occasions
of bestowing gifts, sacrificial performances
and weddings nor in large gatherings. (13)
sta रामेण नगरं पित्रेव परिपालितम्॥१४॥

“The citizens of Ayodhya were looked
after by Sri Rama as by a father with due
regard to what was conducive to one’s
good, what was agreeable to an individual
and what brought happiness to one.” (14)
वातायनगतानां च रबीण।मन्वन्तराप'णानू।
राममेवाभितप्तानां शुश्राव परिदेवनाम्॥१५॥

Driving through the bazars, Sumantra
heard the wailing of women standing at the
windows of their houses and _ feeling
distressed on account of Sri Rama’s exile.

(15)
स राजमार्गमध्येन सुमन्त्र: पिहितानन:।
at राजा दशरथस्तदेवोपययौ गृहम्॥१६॥

His face covered with cloth, the said
Sumantra headed through the middle of the
king’s highway towards the palace where
King DaSaratha was. (16)
