824

suzerain lord of ogres, than beheld the
hermitage of Sri Rama, a scion of Raghu.
Descending from that chariot decked with
gold and taking Marica by the hand, Ravana
spoke to him as follows : “Here is seen the
site of Rama’s hermitage, hemmed in with
plantain trees. (9—13)
स रावणवच: श्रुत्वा मारीचो राक्षसस्तदा॥ १४॥
मृगो भूत्वाऽऽश्रमद्वारि रामस्य विचचार ह।
स तु रूपं समास्थाय महदद्भुतदर्शनम्॥१५॥
मणिप्रवरशृङ्गाग्र: सितासितमुखाकृति: |
रक्तपद्मोत्पलमुख् इन्द्रनीलोत्पलश्रवा: ॥ १६ ॥
किंचिदभ्युन्नतग्रीव इन्द्रनीलनिभोदर: |
Teed कञ्जकिञ्जल्कसंनिभ:॥ १७॥
इन्द्रायुधसवर्णेन पुच्छेनोर्ध्व विराजित:॥१८॥
मनोहरस्निग्धवर्णो रत्नैर्नानाविधैर्वृत:।
क्षणेन राक्षसो जातो मृग: परमशोभन:॥१९॥
“Do that quickly, my friend, for which
we have come.” Turning into a deer the
moment he heard the request of Ravana,
that ogre, Marica, paced to and fro at the
entrance of Sri Rama’s hermitage: so the
tradition goes, Assuming a remarkable form
presenting a wonderful sight, the aforesaid
ogre for his part turned in an instant into a
most attractive deer, with the tips of its
horns bright as sapphire, its head partly
white and partly dark, the upper part of its
snout bearing the hue of a red lotus and the
lower that of a blue lotus, its ears shining as
sapphire and resembling a blue lotus, its
neck slightly projecting upwards, its belly
having the hue of a sapphire, its flanks pale
as a Madhuka flower and the animal itself
shining brightly like the filaments of a lotus,
its hoofs resembling a cat’s-eye gem and
body well-compacted with slender legs and
looking splendid with its tail resembling the
rainbow at the top and wearing a charming
glossy skin freckled with a number of jewel-
like spots. (14—-19)

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

at प्रज्वलयन् Ta रामाश्रमपदं च तत्।
मनोहरं दर्शनीयं रूपं कृत्वा A Waa: i oll
प्रलोभनार्थं वैदेह्या नानाधातुविचित्रितम्।
विचरन् गच्छते सम्यक् MIST समन्तत:॥ २१॥
Having assumed a soul-captivating and
attractive form, coloured with various minerals
in order to fascinate Sita (a princess of the
Videha territory), the aforesaid ogre began
to move about with confidence, illumining
that lovely forest and the site of Sri Rama’s
hermitage and grazing heartily the green
verdure. (20-21)

रौप्यैर्बिन्दुशतैश्चित्रं wat च प्रियदर्शन:।
विटपीनां किसलयान् भक्षयन् विचचार ह॥ २२॥
Putting on an enchanting appearance
with hundreds of silvery spots and lovely to
look at, the ogre strayed here and there nibbling
the tender shoots of trees : so it is said. (22)

कदलीगृहकं गत्वा कर्णिकारानितस्तत:।
समाश्रयन् मन्दगतिं सीतासंदर्शनं तत:॥ २३॥
राजीवचित्रपृष्ठ:उ स विरराज महामृग:।
रामाश्रमपदाभ्याशे विचचार यथासुखम्॥ २४॥

Entering the plantain grove, and then
the cluster of Karnikara trees, and seeking
to attract the full notice of Sita, nay, adopting
a tardy gait, that large stag with its back
looking attractive like the filament of a lotus
shone brightly and paced hither and thither
complacently near the site of Sri Rama’s
hermitage. (23-24)

पुनर्गत्वा fads विचचार मृगोत्तम:।

गत्वा मुहूर्तं त्वरया पुन: प्रतिनिवर्तते॥२५॥
Having returned after disappearing

awhile, that jewel among the deer roamed

about on that very spot. Leaving the place

for an hour or so, it came back again in

haste. (25)

विक्रीडंश्च क्वचिद् भूमौ gata निषीदति।
आश्रमद्वारमागम्य मृगयूथानि गच्छति॥ २६॥

Nay, playing about at one time, it sat
down on the ground once more. And reaching
