+ UTTARAKANDA +

His eyes closed, taking leave of His brothers
entered His own apartment with his heart

1001

agitated by sorrow, deeply sighed as an
elephant. (20—25)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये उत्तरकाण्डे पञ्चचत्वारिंश: AA: ॥ ४५ ॥

Thus ends Canto Forty-fifth in the Uttarakanda of the glorious Ramayana of Valmiki,
the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

Canto LVI

Laksmana proceeds to the forest, alongwith Sita in order to leave her in the
vicinity of Valmiki’s Asrama and reaches on the bank of Ganga

ad रजन्यां व्युष्टायां लक्ष्मणो दीनचेतन:।
सुमन्त्रमन्रवीद् वाक्यं मुखेन परिशुष्यता॥१॥

Then as the night passed away,
Laksmana agitated in mind and bearing an
emaciated face spoke thus to Sumantra:

(1)
सारथे तुरगान् vila योजयस्व रथोत्तमे।
स्वास्तीर्णं राजवचनात् सीतायाश्चासनं शुभम्॥ २॥

‘O Charioteer, yoke the speedy horses
to the best chariot and equip it with the
splendid seat for Sita, as ordered by the
King. (2)

सीता fe राजवचनादाश्रमं पुण्यकर्मणाम्।
मया नेया महर्षीणां शीघ्रमानीयतां रथ:॥३॥

‘Sita has to be taken to the hermitage
of the pious sages at the command of the
king; please do not delay in bringing the
chariot.’ (3)

सुमन्त्रस्तु तथेत्युक्त्वा युक्तं परमवाजिभि:।
ta सुरुचिरप्रख्यं स्वास्तीर्णं सुखशय्यया॥४॥
आनीयोवाच सौमित्रिं मित्राणां मानवर्धनम्।
रथोऽयं समनुप्राप्तो यत्कार्यं क्रियतां प्रभो॥५॥
“It shall be as you say !”, replying thus
Sumantra, after having brought the chariot
yoked with the best horses, beautifully
shaped and well-equipped with comfortable
seats, spoke thus again to laksmana (son
of Sumitra), the giver of greater honour to

his friends: ‘The chariot is ready, O Lord,
kindly do the needful.’ (4-5)

Waa: सुमन्त्रेण राजवेश्मनि लक्ष्मण:।
Wasa सीतामासाद्य व्याजहार नरर्षभ:॥६॥
त्वया किलैष नृपतिर्वरं a याचित: प्रभु:।
नृपेण च प्रतिज्ञातमाज्ञप्तश्चाश्रमं प्रति॥७॥
Thus spoken to by Sumantra,
Laksmana, the foremost of men, after having
entered in the palace approached Sita and
said to her: “By you, O lady, the king (our
Lord Sri Rama) was enquired with regard to
seeing the hermitages. The king has
approved and ordered me to take you to the
hermitages. (6-7)
गङ्गातीरे मया देवि ऋषीणामाश्रमान् शुभान्।
शीघ्रं गत्वा तु वैदेहि शासनात् पार्थिवस्य न:॥८॥
अरण्ये मुनिभिर्जुष्टे अपनेया भविष्यसि।
Wage तु वैदेही लक्ष्मणेन महात्मना॥९॥
प्रहर्षमतुलं लेभे TW चाप्यरोचयत्।
वासांसि च महार्हाणि tent विविधानि च॥ १०॥
गृहीत्वा तानि वैदेही गमनायोपचक्रमे।
इमानि मुनिपत्नीनां दास्याम्याभरणान्यहम्॥ ११॥
वस्त्राणि च महार्हाणि धनानि विविधानि a
सौमित्रिस्तु तथेत्युक्त्वा रथमारोप्य मैथिलीम्॥ १२॥
wet शीघ्रतुरगं रामस्याज्ञामनुस्मरन्।
अब्रवीच्च Tal सीता लक्ष्मणं लक्षिमिवर्धनम्॥ १३॥
अशुभानि बहून्येव पश्यामि रघुनन्दन।
नयनं A स्फुरत्यद्य गात्रोत्कम्पश्च Trad evil
