# YUDDHAKANDA +

“Here is also another son, Dhumra by
name of Gadgada. Further, there is Kesari
(son of Sage Brhaspati, the preceptor of
Indra—who is believed to have performed a
hundred horse-sacrifices as a condition
precedent to his attaining the position of
Indra), by whose son, Hanuman, alone a
holocaust of ogres was brought about. (21)

सुषेणश्चात्र धर्मात्मा yat धर्मस्य वीर्यवान्।
सौम्य: सोमात्मजश्चात्र राजन् दधिमुख: कपि: ।। २२॥

“And here is the valiant son of Dharma
(the deity presiding over righteousness),
Susena, whose mind is set on virtue. Again,
here is the placid monkey Dadhimukha,
sprung from the loins of Soma, the moon-
god. (22)
सुमुखो दुर्मुखश्चात्र वेगदर्शी च वानर:।
मृत्युर्वानररूपेण नूनं सृष्ट: स्वयंभुवा॥ २३॥

“Here are Sumukha and Durmukha as
well as the monkey Vegadarsi. Undoubtedly
they are no other than Death, evolved in the

form of monkeys by Brahma, the self-born
creator. (23)

पुत्रो हुतवहस्यात्र नील: सेनापति: स्वयम्।
अनिलस्य तु पुत्रोऽत्र हनूमानिति विश्रुत:।। २४॥

“Here is Nila himself, the commander-
in-chief, a son of the god of fire (the
bearer of sacrificial offerings). And here is
the son of the wind-god, widely known as
Hanuman. (24)

नप्ता शक्रस्य geet बलवानङ्गदो युवा।
मैन्दश्च द्विविदश्चोभौ बलिनावश्विसम्भवौ॥। २५॥

“The mighty and youthful Angada is
a grandson of Indra and difficult to overpower.
Again, the mighty Mainda and Dwivida are
both offsprings of Aswins (the twingods
who are the physicians of gods). (25)

पुत्रा वैवस्वतस्याथ पञ्च कालान्तकोपमा:।
TR गवाक्षो गवय: शरभो गन्धमादन:॥ २६॥

Again, Gaja, Gavaksa, Gavaya,

399

Sarabha and Gandhamadana, who vie with
Kala (the Time-Spirit) and Death, are the
five sons of Yama (the god of retribution, a
son of the sun-god) (26)

दश वानरकोट्यश्च शूराणां युद्धकाङ्क्षिणाम्।

श्रीमतां देवपुत्राणां शेषं नाख्यातुमुत्सहे॥ २७॥
“Moreover, there are as many as ten

crores of such monkeys, who are all valiant,

bellicose, glorious and sons of gods. The
rest | am not able to count. (27)

Yat दशरथस्यैष सिंहसंहननो युवा।
दूषणो निहतो aa wey त्रिशिरास्तथा॥ २८॥

“The yonder youth, who is well-built
like a lion, is Rama (son of DaSaratha), by
whom was killed Dusana as well as Khara
as also Trisira. (28)

नास्ति रामस्य सदृशे विक्रमे भुवि कश्चन।
विराधो निहतो येन कबन्धश्चान्तकोपम:॥ २९॥

“No one on earth can compare in
prowess with Rama, by whom was killed
Viradha as well as Kabandha, who vied
with Death. (29)

वक्तुं न शक्तो रामस्य गुणान् कश्चिन्नर: क्षितौ |
जनस्थानगता येन तावन्तो राक्षसा हता:॥ ३०॥
“No human being on earth is able to
recount the excellences of Rama, by whom
as many ogres as were present in
Janasthana were dispatched. (30)

लक्ष्मणश्चात्र धर्मात्मा मातंगानामिवर्षभ:।

यस्य बाणपथं yar न जीवेदपि वासव:॥ ३१॥
“Here is Laksmana too, whose mind is

set on virtue, who resembles the foremost

of elephants, and falling within the range

of whose arrows even Indra would not
survive. (31)

Vad ज्योतिर्मुखश्चात्र भास्करस्यात्मसम्भवौ ।

वरुणस्याथ पुत्रोऽथ हेमकूट: प्लवंगम:॥ ३२॥
“Here are Sweta दाप Jyotirmukha,

sprung from the loins of the sun-god. And
