# YUDDHAKANDA #

ad: स राक्षसो भीम: सुमित्रानन्दवर्धनम्।
सावज्ञमेव प्रोवाच वाक्यं मेघौघनि:स्वन:॥ १०५ Il

Thereupon that terrible ogre, whose
voice resembled the rumbling of a multitude
of clouds spoke as follows to Laksmana
(who enhanced the joy of his mother, Sumitra)
rather disdainfully: (105)

अन्तकस्याप्यकष्टेन युधि जेतारमाहवे।
युध्यता मामभीतेन ख्यापिता वीरता त्वया॥ १०६ Il

“Valour has surely been exhibited by
you on the battlefield while giving battle
undauntedly to me, who would conquer even
Death in an encounter without difficulty.

(106)
प्रगृहीतायुधस्येह मृत्योरिव महामृधे।
तिष्ठन्नप्यग्रत: पूज्य: fay युद्धप्रदायक:॥ १०७॥

“Worthy of honour is he who is able in
this world even to face me, a rival of Death
ready for a major conflict, weapon in hand,
much more so, the one who gives battle to
me (107)

ऐरावतं समारूढो qa: सर्वामरै: Wa: |
नैव शक्रोऽपि wax स्थितपूर्व: कदाचन॥ १०८ Il

“Duly mounted on his elephant, Airavata
and surrounded by all the gods, even the
mighty Indra never stood before me in an
encounter in the past. (108)

अद्य त्वयाहं सौमित्रे बालेनापि पराक्रमै: |
तोषितो गन्तुमिच्छामि त्वामनुज्ञाप्य WITLI १०९॥

“Gratified by you with your feats of
valour today, O son of Sumitra, even though
you are a youngster, yet | wish to meet
Rama (a sion of Raghu), taking leave of
you. (109)
यत् तु वीर्यबलोत्साहैस्तोषितोऽहं रणे त्वया।
राममेवैकमिच्छामि ed यस्मिन् हते STL ११०॥

“Inasmuch as | have been gratified by
you with your prowess, strength and martial
ardour in combat, |, for my part, seek
precisely to kill Rama alone; for, when he is

565

dispatched, the entire army of monkeys will
stand destroyed. (110)

TH मयात्र निहते येऽन्ये स्थास्यन्ति संयुगे।
ae योधयिष्यामि स्वबलेन प्रमाथिना॥१११॥

“When Rama has been got rid of by
me in this struggle, | shall force those others,
who will remain on the battlefield, to fight
with my devastating army.” (111)

इत्युक्तवाक्यं Ae रक्ष: प्रोवाच स्तुतिसंहितम्।
मृधे घोरतरं वाक्यं सौमित्रि: प्रहसन्निव॥११२॥

To that exceedingly formidable ogre,
when he had made this boastful reply,
Laksmana (son of Sumitra) addressed the
following rejoinder, full of praise, on the
battlefield, as though heartily laughing:

(112)

aed शक्रादिभिर्देवैरसह्य: प्राप्य पौरुषम्।
Ae सत्यं नान्यथा AT दृष्टस्तेऽद्य पराक्रम: ॥ ११३॥

“Your assertion that, having acquired
extraordinary prowess, you have grown
irresistible for even gods headed by Indra,
their ruler, is true; it is not otherwise, O
champion! Your valour has been witnessed
by me today. (113)

एष दाशरथी रामस्तिष्ठत्यद्रिरिवाचल:।
इति श्रुत्वा ह्यनादृत्य लक्ष्मणं स निशाचर:॥ ११४॥
अतिक्रम्य च सौमित्रिं कुम्भकर्णो महाबल: |
राममेवाभिदुद्राव कम्पयन्निव मेदिनीम्॥११५॥

“Here stands Sri Rama, son of
DaSsaratha, immovable as a mountain.”
Hearing this rejoinder, nay, disregarding
Laksmana and passing him by, that prowler
of the night, Kumbhakarna, who was
endowed with extraordinary might, rushed
towards Sri Rama alone, causing the
earth to shake even as he sped along.

(114-115)

अथ दाशरथी wa रौद्रमस्त्रं प्रयोजयन्।
कुम्भकर्णस्य हृदये ससर्ज निशितान् शरान्॥ ११६॥
