* AYODHYAKANDA +

चिन्ताबाष्पमहाधूमस्तवागमनचिन्तज: ।
कर्शयित्वाधिकं पुत्र नि:श्वासायाससम्भव:॥ ७॥
त्वया विहीनामिह at शोकाग्निरतुलो महान्।
प्रधक्ष्यति यथा met चित्रभानुर्हिमात्यये॥८॥

“Emaciating me to a remarkable degree,
my son, this huge and incomparable fire of
grief—which has its source in the mind, is
fanned by the wind of your impending
absence and fed by the firewood of anguish
caused by weeping and is nourished by
oblations poured in the shape of tears welling
up at the time of weeping, nay, which is
crowned with voluminous smoke in the form
of intensity of thought, which springs up
from anxiety concerning your return from
exile at the end of fourteen years and which
grows in intensity through pumping in the
form of respiration—will consume me, bereft
of you, here in the same way as a forest fire
burns away dry wood and grass etc., at the
end of winter. (6—8)
कथं fe धेनु: स्वं वत्सं गच्छन्तमनुगच्छति।
अहं त्वानुगमिष्यामि aa वत्स गमिष्यसि॥९॥

“It is well Known how a milch cow
follows its roaming calf. | too shall accordingly
follow you whithersoever, my child, you will
go.” (9)
यथा निगदितं मात्रा तद् वाक्यं पुरुषर्षभ:।
श्रुत्वा रामोऽब्रवीद् वाक्यं मातरं भृशदु:खिताम्॥ Qo ॥

Duly hearing the aforesaid speech
uttered by his mother, Sri Rama, a jewel

among men, replied as follows to his mother,
who was extremely distressed : (10)

कैकेय्या वज्चितो राजा मयि चारण्यमाश्रिते।
भवत्या च परित्यक्तो न नूनं वर्तयिष्यति॥११॥
“Betrayed by Kaikeyi and particularly
when | have retired to the forest, the king
will surely not survive if he is further deserted
by you. (11)
स भवत्या न aden मनसापि विगर्हित:॥ १२॥

387

“Moreover, it is sheer cruelty on the
part of a woman to desert her husband.
That should not be done by you even with
the mind; for it is highly deprecated. (12)

यावज्जीवति काकुत्स्थ: frat मे जगतीपति: |
शुश्रूषा क्रियतां तावत् स fe धर्म: सनातन:॥ १३॥

“So long as my father, Emperor
DaSaratha, a scion of Kakutstha, survives,
let service be rendered to him by you; for
such is the eternal moral code.” (13)

एवमुक्ता तु रामेण कौसल्या शुभदर्शना।
तथेत्युवाच सुप्रीता राममक्लिष्टकारिणम्॥ ex

Feeling highly delighted when
admonished as aforesaid by Sr Rama,
Kausalya of benign aspect, for her part,
said “Amen!” to Sri Rama, who did things
without undergoing any exertion. (14)
एवमुक्तस्तु वचनं Wat धर्मभृतां at
भूयस्तामब्रवीद् वाक्यं मातरं MTS: FAAP १५ ॥

Addressed in the foregoing words, Sri
Rama, the foremost among those upholding
the cause of righteousness, however, further

spoke as follows to his aforesaid mother,
who was feeling deeply distressed: (15)

मया चैव भवत्या च कर्तव्यं वचनं faa: |

राजा भर्ता गुरु: HS: सर्वेषामीश्वर: प्रभु:॥ १६॥
“Fathers command must be carried

out by you as well as by me. He is the king,

supporter, elder, superior, controller and
master of us all. (16)

इमानि तु महारण्ये fast नव ws च।
वर्षाणि परमप्रीत्या स्थास्यामि वचने तव॥ १७॥

“Having sported in some great forest
during the ensuing nine years and five with
supreme delight, | shall then continue to be
at your beck and call.” (17)
एवमुक्ता प्रियं Gt बाष्पपूर्णानना तदा।
उवाच परमार्ता तु कौसल्या सुतवत्सला॥ १८॥

Spoken to in these words, Kausalya,
for her part, who was full of affection for her
son and was extremely miserable, then
