+ UTTARAKANDA +

1049

Canto LXVII

The sage Cyavana apprises Satrughna of the power of Lavana’s lance and
narrates the events connected with the slaying of king Mandhata

अथ Wat प्रवृत्तायां शत्रुघ्नो भृगुनन्दनम्।
पप्रच्छ च्यवनं fay लवणस्य यथाबलम्॥१॥
शूलस्य च बलं ब्रह्मन् के च पूर्वं विनाशिता:।
अनेन शूलमुख्येन द्वन्द्वयुद्धमुपागता:॥२॥
Then as the night appeared, Satrughna
asked the Brahmana, Cyavana, son of Bhrgu
the exact might of Lavana, and the power of
the trident also. He enquired, ‘O Brahmana,
who were killed by this special trident having
entered into a duel with Lavana.’ (1-2)

तस्य Aq वचनं श्रुत्वा शत्रुघ्नस्य महात्मन:।
प्रत्युवाच महातेजाश्च्यवनो रघुनन्दनम्॥३॥
Hearing these words of the noble
Satrughna, the mighty Cyavana said in reply
to the scion of the Raghus: (3)

असंख्येयानि कर्माणि यान्यस्य रघुनन्दन।

sepa A qd तच्छृणुष्व मे॥४॥
‘Among the innumerable doings of this

Lavana listen to me that which took place in

the context of the originator of the family of
Iksvaku (Mandhata). (4)

अयोध्यायां पुरा राजा युवनाश्वसुतो बली।
मान्धाता sft विख्यातस्तरिषु लोकेषु वीर्यवान्॥५॥

‘In the old days, there was a powerful
king, the son of Yuvanasva, known as
Mandghata, noted for his might in the three
worlds. (5)

स कृत्वा पृथिवीं कृत्स्नां शासने पृथिवीपति: ।

सुरलोकमितो जेतुमुद्योगमकरोन्नृप: ॥ ६ ॥
‘Having ruled over the entire earth, that

king, lord of the earth, embarked on a

conquest of the world of the gods from here,
the earth. (6)

इन्द्रस्य च भयं da सुराणां च महात्मनाम्।
मान्धातरि कृतोद्योगे देवलोकजिगीषया॥७॥

‘Great fear overcame Indra and other
mighty gods, when Mandhata prepared to
fight with a desire to conquer the world of
gods. (7)

अर्धासनेन शक्रस्य राज्यार्धेन च पार्थिव:।
ara: सुरगणै: प्रतिज्ञामध्यरोहत॥ ८॥

Propitiated by the host of gods,
Mandhata, the king, having vowed to take
one half of Indra’s kingdom and the other
half of earthly sovereignty, went up to raid
heaven. (8)

तस्य पापमभिप्रायं विदित्वा पाकशासन:।

सान्त्वपूर्वमिदं वाक्यमुवाच युवनाश्वजम्॥९॥
‘Indra, the conqueror of Paka Daitya,

having known his evil intentions, uttered

these conciliatory words to the progeny of
Yuvanasva. (9)

राजा त्वं मानुषे लोके न तावत् पुरुषर्षभ।
अकृत्वा पृथिवीं वश्यां देवराज्यमिहेच्छसि॥ १०॥
‘O bull among men, Mandhata, you are
still not established as a king in the mortal
worlds, and you desire the kingdom of the
gods here without subjugating the earth.
(10)

यदि वीर समग्रा ते मेदिनी निखिला वशे।
देवराज्यं कुरुष्वेह सभृत्यबलवाहन:॥११॥

‘O brave one, if the entire earth is
indeed under your sway then you may rule
over the kingdom of the gods together with
your attendants, army and carriers. (11)
इन्द्रमेवं ब्रुवाणं तं मान्धाता वाक्यमब्रवीत्।
awa मे शक्र प्रतिहतं शासनं पृथिवीतले॥१२॥

Mandhata said to Indra: ‘O Indra, where

does my rule over the earth is obstructed’?
(12)
