644

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

Mada: at:
Canto C

Placing Bharata on his lap, Sri Rama gives him instruction in judicature under
the pretext of inquiring after the welfare of his father and others

cast रामो दुर्दर्शं युगान्ते भास्करं यथा॥१॥
Sri Rama beheld Bharata fallen on the
ground with folded hands, wearing matted
locks on his head, clad in bark and as such
painful to the sight like the sun at the time of
universal destruction coming at the end of a
cycle. (1)

कथंचिदभिविज्ञाय विवर्णवदनं कृशम्।
wet भरतं wa: परिजग्राह पाणिना॥२॥
Anyhow recognizing his younger brother,
Bharata, pale-faced and emaciated as he
was, Sri Rama lifted him up with his hand.
(2)

आघ्राय रामस्तं Ae परिष्वज्य च राघवम्।
अङ्के भरतमारोप्य पर्यपृच्छ्त सादरम्॥३॥

Smelling the head of Bharata as a
token of affection and embracing the scion
of Raghu, nay, placing him on his lap, Sri
Rama tenderly questioned him as follows :

(3)
wa नु तेऽभूत् पिता तात यदरण्यं त्वमागत:।

न हि त्वं जीवतस्तस्य वनमागन्तुमर्हसि॥४॥

“Where, | wonder, has our father gone,
my darling, that you have come all the way
to the forest, leaving him alone? So long
as he is alive, you ought not to have
come to the forest under any circumstances.

(4)
चिरस्य बत पश्यामि दूराद् भरतमागतम्।
दुष्प्रतीकमरण्येऽस्मिन् foe तात वनमागत:॥ ५॥

“lam glad | behold after a long time
Bharata, though difficult to recognize
because of his pale countenance and
emaciated limbs, come to this forest from a
distant land (the home of his maternal

grandfather). How have you come to the
forest, my darling? (5)

कच्चिन्नु धरते तात राजा यत् त्वमिहागत:।
कच्चिन्न दीन: Geel राजा लोकान्तरं We: ug Il

“Does the king, our father, survive, |
ask you, that you have come to this place?
| hope the miserable king has not departed
to the other world all of a sudden. (6)

कच्चित् सौम्य न ते राज्यं AS बालस्य शाश्वतम्।
कच्चिच्छुश्रूषसे तात पितु: सत्यपराक्रम॥७॥

“| hope, 0 gentle brother, your
sovereignty, which has come down from
eternity, has not been lost, tender of age as
you are? Are you rendering service to our
father, my darling of unfailing prowess? (7)

कच्चिद् दशरथो राजा कुशली सत्यसंगर:।
राजसूयाश्वमेधानामाहर्ता धर्मनिश्चित: We ।

“Is King DaSaratha, our father, who is
true to his promise and has performed a
number of Rajasuya and Aswamedha
sacrifices, and who is_ resolute upon
righteousness, enjoying good health? (8)

स कच्चिद् ब्राह्मणो विद्वान् धर्मनित्यो महाद्युति: ।
इक्र्वाकूणामुपाध्यायो यथावत् तात पूज्यते॥९॥
“Is the celebrated Vasistha, the
preceptor of the Ikswakus, who has realized
Brahma, or is a mind-born son of Brahma,
is learned in all the branches of knowledge,
ever devoted to virtue and possessed of
great splendour, duly honoured by you, my
darling? (9)

तात कच्चिच्च कौसल्या सुमित्रा च प्रजावती।
Ghat कच्चिदार्या च देवी नन्दति कैकयी tt १० ॥

“Is Kausalya as well as Sumitra, who
is blessed with good progeny, happy? |
