578

the best of horses and fully equipped with
all kinds of weapons. (22)

त्रिशिरा रथमास्थाय विरराज धनुर्धर:।
सविद्युदुल्क: सज्वाल: सेन्द्रचाप इवाम्बुद: 1 २३॥

Taking his seat in the chariot, Trisira,
who carried a bow, shone brightly like a
rainy cloud attended by lightning, meteors,
light and rainbow. (23)

fafa: किरीटैस्त्रिशिरा: शुशुभे स रथोत्तमे।
हिमवानिव शैलेन्द्रस्त्रिभि: काञ्चनपर्वतै:।॥ २४॥

With his three diadems adorning his
three heads, Trisira shone in his excellent
chariot like the Himalaya, the lord of
mountains, with its three golden offshoots
constituting its peaks. (24)
अतिकायोऽतितेजस्वी राक्षसेन्द्रसुतस्तदा।
आरुरोह रथश्रेष्ठं श्रेष्ठ: सर्वधनुष्मताम्॥ २५॥
सुचक्राक्षं सुसंयुक्तं स्वनुकर्षं सुकूबरम्।
तूणीबाणासनैर्दीप्तं प्रासासिपरिघाकुलम्॥ २६॥

Then Atikaya another son of Ravana
(the ruler of ogres), the foremost of all
archers, who was full of exceeding martial
ardour, mounted his superb chariot with
excellent wheels and axles, magnificent
horses, strong Anukarsas (axle-trees) and
stout Kubaras (poles to which the yoke is
fixed), nay, radiant with quivers and bows
and fully furnished with spears, swords and
clubs studded or tipped with iron. (25-26)

a काञ्चनविचित्रेण किरीटेन विराजता।
भूषणैश्च बभौ मेरु: प्रभाभिरिव भासयन्॥ २७॥

With his sparkling coronet encrusted
with gold and ornaments, he looked like
Mount Meru shining in its own splendour.

(27)

a रराज रथे तस्मिन् राजसूनुर्महाबल:।

adit नैर्ऋतशार्दूलैर्वज्रपाणिरिवामरै: ॥। २८ ॥

Surrounded by the foremost of ogres,
the said prince, who was_ endowed
with extraordinary might, shone in that

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA +

chariot like Indra, who carries the thunderbolt
in his hand, surrounded by immortals. (28)

हयमुच्चै:श्रव:प्रख्यं श्चेतं कनकभूषणम्।
मनोजवं महाकायमारुरोह नरान्तक:॥ २९॥
Narantaka ascended a huge white horse
resembling Uccaihsrava, the mount of Indra,
evolved out of the churning of the ocean of
milk, nay, harnessed with gold and swift as
thought. (29)

गृहीत्वा प्रासमुल्काभं विरराज नरान्तक:।

शक्तिमादाय तेजस्वी गुह: शिखिगतो यथा॥ zo tt
Holding a spear shining as a meteor,

Narantaka shone brightly like the glorious

Kartikeya, son of Lord Siva mounted on his
peacock taking a javelin in his hand. (30)
देवान्तक: समादाय परिघं हेमभूषणम्।
परिगृह्य गिरिं deat वपुर्विष्णोर्विडम्बयन्॥ ३१॥
Firmly grasping his club tipped with
iron and decked with gold, Devantaka stood
resembling the figure of Lord Visnu holding
(as he did) the Mandara mountain in His
arms while proceeding to churn the ocean
of milk for drawing out nectar. (31)

Teast महातेजा गदामादाय वीर्यवान्।
विरराज गदापाणि: gat sa संयुगे॥ ३२॥
Bearing a mace, the - valiant
Mahaparswa, who was endowed with martial
ardour, shone brightly like Kubera (the god
of riches) standing mace in hand on the
field of battle. (32)

ते प्रतस्थुर्महात्मानोऽमरावत्या: सुरा sal
तान् गजैश्च तुरङ्गैश्च रथैश्चाम्बुदनि:स्वनै: ।। ३३॥
अनूत्पेतुर्महात्मानो राक्षसा: प्रवरायुधा:।
a विरेजुर्महात्मान: pant: सूर्यवर्चस:॥ ३४॥
किरीटिन: श्रिया जुष्टा ग्रहा दीप्ता इवाम्बरे।
प्रगृहीता बभौ तेषां शस्त्राणामवलि: सिता॥ ३५॥
शरदभ्रप्रतीकाशा हंसावलिरिवाम्बरे।
मरणं वापि निश्चित्य शत्रूणां वा पराजयम्॥ ३६॥
जगर्जुश्च प्रणेदुश्च चिक्षिपुश्चापि सायकान्॥ ३७॥
