* ARANYAKANDA «

881

एष्टितम: at:
Canto LX

Uttering a loud wail Sri Rama inquires of the trees the whereabouts of Sita,
cries like one distracted and looks about for her again and again

भृशमाव्रजमानस्य तस्याधो वामलोचनम्।
प्रास्फुरच्चास्खलद् रामो वेपथुश्चास्य जायते॥१॥
While Sri Rama was returning to his
hermitage, his lower left eyelid* violently
throbbed again and again, he _ himself
stumbled and a tremor ran through his limbs.
(1)

उपालक्ष्य निमित्तानि सोऽशुभानि मुहुर्मुहु:।
अपि at तु सीताया इति वै व्याजहार ह॥ २॥
Observing the evil omens appearing
again and again, he instinctively spoke as
follows, so the tradition goes: “Is all well
with Sita?” (2)

त्वरमाणो जगामाथ सीतादर्शनलालस:।
शून्यमावसथं दृष्टवा बभूवोद्विग्नमानस:॥ ३॥

Eager to see Sita, he went with hasty
steps, but he felt perturbed in mind to find
the dwelling deserted. (3)

उद्भ्रमन्निव वेगेन विक्षिपन् रघुनन्दन:।
wa तत्रोटजस्थानमभिवीक्ष्य समन्तत:॥४॥
ददर्श पर्णशालां च सीतया रहितां तदा।
श्रिया विरहितां ध्वस्तां हेमन्ते पद्मिनीमिव॥ ५॥

Appearing on account of his speed as
though he were flying and moving his hands
etc., with impatience on his not finding Sita
anywhere, nay, closely examining the site
of the hut made of leaves all over, on every
side, Sri Rama (the delight of the Raghus)
found the hut at the moment bereft of Sita
and resembling a lotus flower blighted and
deprived of its charm in winter. (4-5)

रुदन्तमिव वृक्षैश्च ग्लानपुष्पमृगद्बिजम्।
श्रिया fadtt विध्वस्तं संत्यक्तं वनदैवतै:।॥६॥
विप्रकीर्णाजिनकुशं विप्रविद्धबृसीकटम्।
दृष्टवा शून्योटजस्थानं विललाप पुन: पुन:॥७॥
Seeing the site of the lonely hut desolate
and shorn of its charm, deserted by the
sylvan deities and crying as it were through
its creaking trees, its flowers faded, deer
and birds ill at case, deerskin and blades
of KuSa grass scattered all around and
seats of fresh grass and mats lying in
disorder, he wailed again and again as
follows : (6-7)

हृता Yat वा नष्टा at भक्षिता वा भविष्यति।
निलीनाप्यथवा भीरुरथवा वनमाश्रिता॥८॥

“The timid lady Sita must have been
carried away or devoured or is dead or lost
in the way or she lies hidden somewhere
out of fun or has entered the forest. (8)

गता विचेतुं पुष्पाणि फलान्यपि च वा पुन:।
अथवा पद्मिनीं याता जलार्थं वा नदीं गता॥९॥

“Or she has gone out to pluck flowers
or even fruits for that matter or has gone to
the lotus pond for a bath or to the river to
bring water.” (9)

यत्नान्मृगयमाणस्तु नाससाद at प्रियाम्।
शोकरक्तेक्षण: श्रीमानुन्मत्त sa लक्ष्यते॥१०॥

Though looking about for her in that
forest with effort, he did not find his darling.
His eyes red through grief, the glorious one
looked as though gone mad. (10)

* We read in books on the science of omens `अधोवामदृश: स्फूर्ती बह्वनिष्टं भजेत्पुमान्`.

“When a man’s left lower eyelid throbs, he meets with grave danger.”

प्रयाणकाले स्खलनं करोतीष्टस्य भञ्जनम्।

“The act of stumbling at the time of one’s leaving a place is sure to shatter one’s cherished purpose.”
