+ UTTARAKANDA +

coming from the sky as follows: “Dear
Rama, look on me with affection beaming
from your face; Know me, O Lord, to be the
Puspaka, come from the mansion of Kubera.
(2-3)
wa शासनमाज्ञाय गतोऽस्मि भवनं प्रति।
उपस्थातुं नरश्रेष्ठ स च मां प्रत्यभाषत॥४॥

“Obeying Your command, O best of
men, | went home to wait on him (Kubera),
but he said to me: (4)

निर्जितस्त्वं नरेन्द्रेण राघवेण महात्मना।
निहत्य aft gett रावणं राक्षसेश्वरम्॥७५॥

“‘Having killed in battle the unassailable
Ravana, the king of the Raksasas, Sri Rama
(a scion of Raghu), the high-souled king of
men, has won possession over you. (5)

ममापि परमा प्रीतिर्हते तस्मिन् दुरात्मनि।
रावणे सगणे चैव सपुत्रे सहबान्धवे॥६॥

“*A great delight has fallen to my lot
too on that wicked Ravana having been
killed alongwith his hosts, with his sons and
other relations. (6)

स त्वं wan लङ्कायां निर्जित: परमात्मना।
a सौम्य aa त्वमहमाज्ञापयामि ते॥७॥

“*As such you have been won in Lanka
by Sri Rama, who is the Highest Being. O
gentle one! You carry Him indeed: | command
you. (7)

परमो ह्येष मे कामो यत् त्वं राघवनन्दनम्।
वहेर्लोकस्य da गच्छस्व विगतज्वर:।॥८॥

“‘It is my highest desire that you serve
as a carriage of Sri Rama (the delight of
Raghu’s race) who is the support of the
entire world: go without qualms.’ (8)

sé शासनमाज्ञाय weet महात्मन:।

त्वत्सकाशमनुप्राप्तो निर्विशङ्क: प्रतीच्छ माम्॥९॥
“I, who was ordered thus, have come

to your presence abiding by the command

of the high-souled Kubera; accept me kindly
without any hitch. (9)

991

चराम्यहं प्रभावेण तवाज्ञां परिपालयन्॥१०॥

“By virtue of my power | am unassailable
by the entire range of created beings. By
Kubera’s order | shall move through all the
spheres carrying out your behest.” (10)

एवमुक्तस्तदा WA: पुष्पकेण महाबल:।
sara पुष्पकं दृष्टवा विमानं पुनरागतम्॥११॥
Thus addressed by Puspaka, Sri Rama
of great strength then spoke as follows, casting
a benign look on the aerial car known as
Puspaka, which had come back: (11)

यद्येवं स्वागतं तेऽस्तु विमानवर पुष्पक।

आनुकूल्याद् धनेशस्य PASH न नो भवेत्॥ १२॥
“If it is so, you are welcome, O Puspaka,

the best of aerial cars! On account of this

favour of Kubera, the charge of unfair dealing
will not be laid at our doors.” (12)

amiga तथा पुष्पैर्धूपैश्चैव सुगन्धिभि:।
पूजयित्वा महाबाहू राघव: Uh तदा॥१३॥
Having worshipped Puspaka after that
with fried grains of rice and flowers as well
as incenses and also sandal-pastes, the
mighty-armed Sri Rama (a scion of Raghu),
spoke as follows: (13)

गम्यतामिति चोवाच आगच्छ त्वं स्मरे यदा।
सिद्धानां च गतौ सौम्य मा विषादेन योजय॥ १४॥
“Depart for the present. You should
come whenever | recall you. Vanishing in
thin air, the dwelling place of the Siddhas,
be not oppressed by grief at my separation.
(14)

प्रतिघातश्च ते मा भूद् यथेष्टं गच्छतो FET: |
`एवमस्त्विति रामेण पूजयित्वा विसर्जितम्॥ १५॥
Vaated तस्मिन् पुष्पके सुकृतात्मनि॥१६॥

भरत: प्राञ्जलिर्वाक्यमुवाच रघुनन्दनम्।
विबुधात्मनि दृश्यन्ते त्वयि att प्रशासति॥ eo

अमानुषाणि सत्त्वानि omen मुहुर्मुहु:।
अनामयश्च AA AA मासो गतो ह्ययम्॥ १८॥
