460

एवमार्तप्रलापांस्तान् वृद्धान् प्रलपतो द्विजान्।
अवेक्ष्य सहसा रामो रथादवततार ह॥१७॥

Perceiving those aged Brahmanas
uttering such plaintive words, Sri Rama
precipitately got down from the chariot: so
the tradition goes. (17)

पद्भ्यामेव जगामाथ ससीत: सहलक्ष्मण:।
संनिकृष्टपदन्यासो Wal वनपरायण:॥१८॥

Taking close strides in order to enable
the aged Brahmanas to overtake him, Sri
Rama now proceeded on foot with Sita and
Laksmana in the direction of the forest,
which constituted his final destination (without
stopping or receding to meet and console
the Brahmanas since that would amount to
a breach of the vow undertaken by him to
depart for the forest). (18)
द्विजातीन् fe पदातींस्तान् रामश्चारित्रवत्सल:।

न शशाक घृणाचक्षु: परिमोक्तुं रथेन स:॥१९॥

For, the said Sri Rama, who was
affectionate by disposition and _ had
compassion in his eyes, could not send
back those Brahmanas walking on foot while
continuing to be in the chariot himself. (19)
गच्छन्तमेव तं दृष्टवा WA सम्भ्रान्तमानसा:।

Ba: परमसंतप्ता Wa वाक्यमिदं द्विजा:॥ २०॥

Perplexed in mind, nay, sore distressed
to see the celebrated Sri Rama still pressing
on, the Brahmanas spoke to him as follows :

(20)
ब्राह्मण्यं कृत्स्नमेतत् त्वां ब्रह्मण्यमनुगच्छति।
द्विजस्कन्धाधिरूढास्त्वामग्नयोऽप्यनुयान्त्वमी ॥ २१॥

“The whole of this Brahmana community
is following you, devoted as you are to the
Brahmanas. Nay, borne on the shoulders of
the Brahmans through the medium of the
two pieces of wood used for kindling the fire
by attrition and the vessel intended for holding
it, these sacred fires too are following them.

(21)

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA +

वाजपेयसमुत्थानि च्छत्राण्येतानि पश्य A: |
पृष्ठतोऽनुप्रयातानि मेघानिव जलात्यये॥ २२॥

“Pray, look at these canopies* obtained
by us during the performance of a Vajapeya
sacrifice and following at your heels like
white clouds appearing in autumn, marking
the end of the monsoon. (22)

अनवाप्तातपत्रस्य रश्मिसंतापितस्य ते।
एभिश्छायां करिष्याम: स्वैश्छत्रैर्वाजपेयकै: i २३॥

“With these canopies of ours, obtained
during a Vajapeya sacrifice, we shall give
shade to you, who have got no canopy and
as such are being scorched with rays of the
sun. (23)

या fe न: Wad बुद्धिर्वेदमन्त्रानुसारिणी।
त्वत्कृते सा Ha AT वनवासानुसारिणी॥ २४॥

“Indeed that mind of ours, which was
heretofore engaged in pursuing the study of
Vedic texts, has now been made to follow
the course of exile to the forest for your
sake, O darling ! (24)

हृदयेष्ववतिष्ठन्ते वेदा A न: W धनम्।
array गृहेष्वेव दाराश्चारित्ररक्षिता:॥ २५॥

“The Vedas, which constitute our
supreme riches, stand preserved in our
hearts (memory); and protected by their
character, our consorts too will continue to
stay in our homes alone. We need not,
therefore, be deterred by any anxiety on
their score. (25)

पुनर्न निश्चय: कार्यस्त्वद्गतौ सुकृता Ala: |
त्वयि धर्मव्यपेक्षे तु किं Garg धर्मपथे स्थितम्॥ २६ ॥
“No decision need be taken by us on
the matter afresh, since our mind is fully
determined to follow you to the forest. Yet
we should like to tell you that in the event of
your turning indifferent to piety (in the form
of listening to the advice of Brahmanas),
what being will remain devoted to the path
of virtue? (26)

* It is laid down in the Vedas that he who performs a Vajapeya sacrifice must be supplied with a white

canopy : श्वेतच्छत्री भवति।
