540

“Nonplussed through adversity and
treated disrespectfully by Kaikeyi, how shall
we live without you and that heroic prince?

(21)
aa च राजा TAM लक्ष्मणश्च महालल:।
सीतया सह संत्यक्ता: सा HAS न हास्यति॥ २२॥

“Whom else will she—by whom have

been abandoned the king as well as Rama

with Sita and the very mighty Laksmana—
not abandon?” (22)

ता बाष्पेण च संवीता: शोकेन विपुलेन च।
व्यचेष्टन्तं निरानन्दा राघवस्य aera: i २३॥

Bathed in tears and seized with
enormous grief, those charming consorts of
DaSaratha (a scion of Raghu) tossed about
on the ground, divested of joy as they were.

(23)

निशा नक्षत्रहीनेव eta भर्तृविवर्जिता।
Ut नाराजतायोध्या EAT WaT महात्मना॥ २४॥

Bereft of its high-souled ruler, King
DaSaratha, the city of Ayodhya did not shine
any more than a night without stars or a
woman deprived of her husband. (24)

बाष्पपर्याकुलजना हाहाभूतकुलाङ्गना।
शून्यचत्वरवेश्मान्ता न बभ्राज यथापुरम्॥ २५॥

With its men bathed in tears and women
of high pedigree raising a cry of distress,
and its cross-roads and entrances of houses
looking desolate, the city did not look
charming as before. (25)

Te तु शोकात् त्रिदिवं नराधिपे

Ferra: सहसा गतो रवि:
Garant wet ह्युपस्थिता॥ २६॥

The king for his part having departed
for heaven due to grief caused by separation

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

from his sons and daughter-in-law and the
king’s consorts tossing on the floor, the sun
suddenly disappeared (below the horizon),
its rays having ceased to be diffused, and
the night actually fell, darkness having
commenced to spread. (26)

ऋते तु Gale दहनं महीपते-

र्नारोचयंस्ते सुहृद: समागता:।
इतीव तस्मिन् शयने न्यवेशयन्

विचिन्त्य राजानमचिन्त्यदर्शनम्॥ २७॥

Those friends and relations of the
Emperor that stood assembled on the
occasion did not favour his cremation in the
absence of a son. Therefore, considering
the king as having assumed an appearance
beyond conception, they laid the king in that
trough, which served as his bed. (27)

गतप्रभा afta भास्करं fear
व्यपेतनक्षत्रगणेव wat |

Ut बभासे teat महात्मना
कण्ठास्त्रकण्ठाकुलमार्गचत्वरा।। २८ ॥

Bereft of DaSaratha, an exalted soul,
the city with its roads and cross-roads full
of men whose throats were choked with tears
that ran past their throats, looked like the
firmament shorn of splendour in the absence
of the sun and further resembled a night
with its host of stars gone out of sight. (28)
नराश्च नार्यश्च समेत्य संघशो

विगर्हमाणा भरतस्य मातरम्।
तदा नगर्यां नरदेवसंक्षये
बभूवुरार्ता न च MH लेभिरे॥ २९॥

Coming together in batches and
reproaching Bharata’s mother, men and
women in the city felt distressed at that time

on the king’s demise and found no rest.
(29)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्येऽयोध्याकाण्डे षट्षष्टितम: सर्ग: ॥ ६६ ॥

Thus ends Canto Sixty-six in the Ayodhyakanda of the glorious Ramayana of Valmiki,
the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

