542

creator) haunts you, | shall forthwith drive it
away even as the sun disperses the
darkness of the night. (52)

अपि cart: शयिष्यन्ते मयि क्रुद्धे महीतले।
aa च शमयिष्यामि भक्षयिष्यामि पावकम्॥ ५३ ॥

“Even gods will fall flat on the earth’s
surface on my getting enraged. Nay, | shall
quell Yama, the god of retribution, and devour
the god of fire. (53)
आदित्यं पातयिष्यामि सनशक्षत्रं महीतले।
शतक्रतुं वधिष्यामि पास्यामि वरुणालयम्॥ GY I

“| shall hurl down on the earth the sun
alongwith the constellations. Nay, | shall kill
Indra (who is presupposed to have performed
a hundred horse-sacrifices in his previous
birth or births as a condition precedent for
his attaining Indrahood) and drink up the
ocean (the abode of Varuna, the god of
water). (54)

पर्वतांश्चूर्णयिष्यामि दारयिष्यामि मेदिनीम्।
दीर्घकालं प्रसुप्तस्य कुम्भकर्णस्य विक्रमम्॥ ५५॥
अद्य पश्यन्तु भूतानि भक्ष्यमाणानि सर्वश:।
न त्विदं त्रिदिवं सर्वमाहारो मम पूर्यते॥५६॥

“| shall pulverize mountains and rend
the earth. Let the created beings who are

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA +

going to be devoured by me on all sides
witness the prowess of Kumbhakarna
(myself), who remained fast asleep for long,
i.e., till now. If all the three worlds, viz.,
heaven, earth and the intermediate region,
are offered to me as food, my stomach will
not be filled thereby. (55-56)

amt od ame: सुखावहं

qa wrest ant
fea wi we लक्ष्मणेन

Trea सर्वान् हरियूथमुख्यान्॥५७॥

“Through the destruction of Rama (son
of Dasaratha), | proceed to bring to you
happiness which may prove conducive to
more and more happiness in future. After
killing Rama alongwith Laksmana, | shall
devour all the leaders of monkey troops. (57)

रमस्व राजन् fra चाद्य वारुणीं

कुरुष्व कृत्यानि विनीय दु:खम्।
मयाद्य रामे गमिते यमशक्षयं

चिराय सीता वशगा भविष्यति॥ ७५८॥

“Revel, O king, and drink wine today.
Nay, banishing agony, discharge your duties.
When Rama is dispatched by me to the
abode of Yama, the god of retribution, today,
Sita will submit to your will for long.” (58)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये युद्धकाण्डे त्रिषष्टितम: AW: ॥ ६३॥

Thus ends Canto Sixty-three in the Yuddhakanda of the glorious Ramayana of
Valmiki, the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

चतु:षष्टितम: सर्ग:
Canto LXIV

Mahodara twits Kumbhakarna and suggests to Ravana a device
to achieve his end without a struggle

तदुक्तमतिकायस्य बलिनो बाहुशालिन:।

the colossal and mighty Kumbhakarna, who

कुम्भकर्णस्य वचनं श्रुत्वोवाच महोदर:॥ १॥ | was adorned with brawny arms, Mahodara

Hearing the aforesaid braggadocio of

spoke as follows:

(1)
