824

“Sri Rama forthwith penetrated deep
into the dreadful, lonely and extensive
Dandaka forest, which had been trampled
down by wild elephants and was crowded
with lions, tigers and deer. (11)

तेषां पुरस्ताद् बलवान् गच्छतां गहने वने।

विनदन् सुमहानादं विराध: प्रत्यदूश्यत॥ १२॥
“Before them, even as they were

advancing into the dense forest, there

suddenly appeared the mighty ogre, Viradha,
uttering forth a tremendous roar. (12)

तमुत्क्षिष्य महानादमूर्ध्वबाहुमधोमुखम्।
निखाते प्रक्षिपन्ति स्म नदन्तमिव HAC १३॥
“Getting rid of that ogre, who rushed
with uplifted arms and head bent low, all the
three, Sri Rama, Sita and Laksmana, cast
him into a pit, even as he was emitting a
loud cry like an elephant. (13)

तत् Heal दुष्करं HH भ्रातरौ रामलक्ष्मणौ।
सायाह्ने शरभङ्गस्य रम्यमाश्रममीयतु:॥ १४॥
“Having accomplished that feat, which
was difficult for others to perform, the two
brothers, Sri Rama and Laksmana reached
the lovely hermitage of Sage Sarabhanga
at the close of the same day. (14)

शरभङ्गे fet प्राप्ते राम: सत्यपराक्रम:।
अभिवाद्य मुनीन् सर्वाञ्जनस्थानमुपागमत्॥ १५॥

“Greeting all the anchorites, when
Sarabhanga had ascended to heaven, Sri
Rama of unfailing prowess moved to the
region known as Janasthana. (15)

पश्चाच्छूर्पणखा नाम रामपार्श्वमुपागता।
ततो रामेण संदिष्टो लक्ष्मण: सहसोत्थित: ।॥ १६॥
चतुर्दश सहस्राणि रक्षसां भीमकर्मणाम्॥१७॥
हतानि वसता तत्र राघवेण महात्मना।
एकेन सह संगम्य रामेण रणमूर्धनि॥१८॥
अह्नश्चतुर्थभागेन नि:शेषा राक्षसा: कृता:।
महाबला महावीर्यास्तपसो विघ्नकारिण:॥१९॥

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA +

Feat राघवेणाजौ दण्डकारण्यवासिन:।
राक्षसाश्च विनिष्पिष्टा: wars edt रणे॥ २०॥
दूषणं चाग्रतो हत्वा त्रिशिरास्तदनन्तरम्।
ततस्तेनार्दिता बाला रावणं समुपागता॥ २१॥

“Subsequently an ogress, Surpanakha
by name, sought the presence of Sri Rama.
Enjoined by Sri Rama, Laksmana, who was
endowed with extraordinary might, thereupon
rose suddenly and firmly seizing hold of his
sword, cut off her ears and nose. Nay,
fourteen thousands of ogres of terrible deeds
were made short work of by the high-souled
Sri Rama, a scion of Raghu, while sojourning
in that region. On closing with Sri Rama
alone in the van of the fight the ogres were
wholly exterminated in a fraction of a quarter
of a day. The ogres dwelling in the Dandaka
forest, who were endowed with extraordinary
might and distinguished for their great valour,
and who interfered with the austerities of
the ascetics, were extirpated in combat by
Sri Rama. Not only were the ogres utterly
destroyed but even Khara, their leader, was
made short work of in combat. Nay, after
killing Dusana, his brother, first, Trisira, the
other brother, was dispatched immediately
afterwards. Pained by the aforesaid incident,
the foolish Surpanakha sought refuge with
Ravana. (16—21)

रावणानुचरो घोरो मारीचो ATA राक्षस:।
लोभयामास वैदेहीं भूत्वा रत्नमयो मृग:॥ २२॥
“Assuming the guise of a deer with a
form consisting of precious stones, a
redoubtable ogre, Marica by name, a follower
of Ravana, wrought his charm on Sita (a
princess of the Videha territory). (22)

सा राममब्रवीद gear वैदेही गृह्यतामिति।
अयं मनोहर: कान्त आश्रमो नो भविष्यति॥ २३॥
“That princess of the Videha territory

said to Sri Rama, ‘Let this deer be captured.
This hermitage of ours will turn out to be
