* AYODHYAKANDA +

sphere of influence of Punarvasu, the
asterism preceding Pusya. Tomorrow, the
astrologers declare, will take place the positive
conjunction of the moon with Pusya. (21)

wa पुष्येऽभिषिञ्चस्व मनस्त्वरयतीव माम्।
शवस्त्वाहमभिषेक्ष्यामि यौवराज्ये परंतप॥ २२॥

“Be installed when the said Pusya is in
the ascendant; my mind is urging me as it
were to expedite things. | shall positively
install you in the office of Prince Regent
tomorrow, O chastiser of enemies! (22)

तस्मात् त्वयाद्यप्रभृति निशेयं नियतात्मना।
सह वध्वोपवस्तव्या दर्भप्रस्तरशायिना॥ २३॥

“Therefore, from this moment on, a fast
should be observed by you with your spouse
for the night, keeping your mind and body
fully controlled and sleeping on a mat of
Darbha grass with a slab of stone under
your head for a pillow. (23)

सुहृदश्चाप्रमत्तास्त्वां रक्षन्त्वद्य समन्तत:।
भवन्ति बहुविघ्नानि कार्याण्येवंविधानि हि॥ २४॥
“Let your friends vigilantly guard you
on all sides tonight; for ceremonials of this
kind, as your installation in the office of

Prince Regent, are hampered by many
obstacles. (24)

विप्रोषितश्च भरतो यावदेव पुरादित:।
तावदेवाभिषेकस्ते प्राप्तकालो मतो मम॥ २५॥

“Your installation as Prince Regent in
my opinion must take place during the very
interval when Bharata is away from this city
of Ayodhya.* (25)

कामं खलु सतां Sd भ्राता ते भरत: स्थित:।
ज्येष्ठानुवर्ती धर्मात्मा सानुक्रोशो जितेन्द्रिय: ।। २६ ॥

301

किं नु चित्तं मनुष्याणामनित्यमिति मे मतम्।
सतां च धर्मनित्यानां कृतशोभि च राघव॥ २७॥
“Although your brother, Bharata,
scrupulously abides by the conduct of the
righteous, is obedient to you (his elder
brother), pious of mind and full of compassion
and has brought his senses under control,
the mind of men nonetheless is inconstant;
such is my belief. And the mind of the
righteous, who are wedded to piety, rejoices
only in action (rather than in speculation), O
scion of Raghu !” (26-27)

इत्युक्त: सोऽभ्यनुज्ञात: श्वोभाविन्यभिषेचने।
व्रजेति wa: पितरमभिवाद्याभ्ययाद् गृहम्॥ २८ ॥

Instructed thus in connection with his
installation, which was going to take place
the very next day, and permitted to leave in
the words “Depart now”, and greeting his
father, Sri Rama withdrew to his palace.

(28)
प्रविश्य चात्मनो aga राज्ञाऽऽदिष्टेऽभिषेचने।
तत्क्षणादेव निष्क्रम्य मातुरन्त:पुरं ययौ॥ २९॥

Entering his own palace in order to
break the news of the installation announced
by the Emperor (to Sita), but coming out
instantly on not finding her in her apartments,
he moved to his mother’s apartments in the
gynaeceum. (29)
wa तां प्रवणामेव मातरं क्षौमवासिनीम्।
वाग्यतां देवतागारे ददर्शायाचतीं श्रियम्॥ ३०॥

There he saw in the temple his aforesaid
mother clad in silken robes, exclusively
devoted to the worship of her chosen deity
and silently praying for royal fortune in favour
of Sri Rama. (30)

* Tn verse 3 of Canto CVI, P. 673 (Vol. 1), we find S17 Rama telling his younger brother, Bharata,

as follows :

पुरा wea: पिता न: स मातरं ते समुद्वहन्। मातामहे समाश्रौषीद्राज्यशुल्कमनुत्तमम्॥

“While marrying Kaikeyi (your mother now) in the former days, O brother, our celebrated father
(Emperor DaSaratha), promised to your maternal grandfather that as a price of the highest value for the
marriage, the sovereignty of Ayodhya would descend to the son that might be born of her.”

Emperor DaSaratha is apparently referring here to this promise made by him and suspects that Bharata
might press his claim for the rulership of Ayodhya if Sri Rama were installed as Prince Regent in his presence.
