* BALAKANDA +

239

Canto LXII

On reaching Puskara, while Ambarisa is taking rest, SunahSepa approaches
ViSwamitra, who was practising austerities there, and inquires of him
a means of escaping death without meeting with the king’s
opposition, whereupon ViSwamitra teaches him a prayer
each for propitiating Indra and Lord Visnu, respectively,
by reciting which the boy secures release from
Ambarisa’s bondage and the latter gets the
reward of the sacrifice without
sacrificing him

शुन:शेषं नरश्रेष्ठं गृहीत्वा तु महायशा:।
व्यश्रमत् पुष्करे राजा मध्याह्ने रघुनन्दन॥१॥
Taking Sunahgepa with him, 0 jewel
among men, the highly illustrious king
Ambarisa for his part rested at Puskara at
noon, O scion of Raghu ! (1)

तस्य विश्रममाणस्य शुन:शेषो महायशा:।
पुष्करं ज्येष्ठमागम्य विश्वामित्रं ददर्शं ह॥२॥
तप्यन्तमृषिभि: सार्धं मातुलं परमातुर:।
विषण्णवदनो दीनस्तृष्णया च श्रमेण च॥३॥
पपाताङ्के At WH वाक्यं चेदमुवाच ह।
न मेऽस्ति माता न पिता ज्ञातयो बान्धवा: Het: ॥ ४॥

Making his way to the elder (main)
Puskara (there being two other lakes in the
vicinity of the main lake, known as the middle
and the younger Puskara respectively), while
the latter was taking rest, the highly renowned
Sunahégepa, so the tradition goes, saw his
maternal uncle*, ViSwamitra, practising
austerities with other sages. Nay, pulling a
long face and looking miserable from thirst
(or desire to live) and fatigue, the boy, who
was sore afflicted, sank into the sage’s lap,
O Rama, and spoke as follows, so it is said :
“There is no mother nor father to me; how
then could there be any kinsmen or relations?

(2—4)

त्रातुमर्हसि मां सौम्य धर्मेण मुनिपुंगव।
त्राता त्वं fe arses सर्वेषां त्वं fe भावन:॥ ५॥
“Be pleased to deliver me, O gentle
Sir, in the name of piety, O jewel among
sages; for you are the redeemer of all as
well as their benefactor. (5)

राजा च कृतकार्य: स्यादहं दीर्घायुरव्यय:।
स्वर्गलोकमुपाश्नीयां तपस्तप्त्वा ह्यनुत्तमम्॥६॥

“Pray, so arrange that the king Ambarisa
may realize his object in the shape of a
reward of his projected sacrifice, while |
may be saved from death and, attaining a
long life and practising austerities, ascend
to the celestial plane, the highest of all the
three worlds. (6)

स मे नाथो ह्यनाथस्य भव भव्येन चेतसा।
पितेव ut धर्मात्संस्त्रातुमर्हसि किल्बिषात्॥७॥
“With a cheerful mind indeed be you,
celebrated as you are, a protector to me, a
forlorn child. You ought to protect me, O

pious soul, against adversity born of sin,
even as a father protects his son.” (7)

तस्य ae वचनं श्रुत्वा विश्वामित्रो महातपा:।
सान्त्वयित्वा बहुविधं पुत्रानिदमुवाच ह॥८॥

Hearing the aforesaid prayer of
Sunahsepa and consoling him in many ways,

* Tt has already been mentioned in verse 7 of Canto XXXIV that Viswamitra had a sister, Satyavati
by name, who was given in marriage to Rcika. It was of this Satyavatt that Sunahsepa was presumably born.
