# YUDDHAKANDA #

भवतस्तेजसा सर्वं Hd दशगुणं मया॥५७॥
“Review you your exchequer,
storehouses, palace and army. Everything
has been increased tenfold (by me) by
virtue of your moral force.” (57)
तथा ब्रुवाणं भरतं दृष्टवा तं भ्रातृवत्सलम्।
मुमुचुर्वानरा बाष्पं राक्षसश्च विभीषण:॥५८॥
Seeing the said Bharata, who was so
fond of his elder brother, speaking as above,

the monkeys began to shed tears as also
the ogre, Vibhisana. (58)
ad: प्रहर्षाद् भरतमङ्कमारोप्य राघव:।
ययौ wt विमानेन ससैन्यो भरताश्रमम्॥५९॥
Placing Bharata on his lap in excessive
joy, Sri Rama, a scion of Raghu, then flew
with his entire army of monkeys and bears
in that aerial car to the hermitage of Bharata.
(59)
भरताश्रममासाद्य ससैन्यो राधवस्तदा |
अवतीर्य विमानाग्रादवतस्थे महीतले॥६०॥

Alighting from the top of the aerial car
with the simian army on reaching the
hermitage of Bharata, Sri Rama, a scion of
Raghu, stood on the ground for the time
being. (60)

अब्रवीत् तु तदा रामस्तद् विमानमनुत्तमम्।
ae वैश्रवणं देवमनुजानामि गम्यताम्॥६१॥

Sri Rama for his part then said to that

833

aerial car, which was unsurpassed by any
other, “Let thee be gone and serve the
glorious Kubera (son of Sage Visrava). |
grant you leave to depart.” (61)

ततो रामाभ्यनुज्ञातं तद् विमानमनुत्तमम्।
sat दिशमुद्दिश्य जगाम धनदालयम्॥६२॥
Proceeding in a northerly direction when
duly permitted by Sri Rama, that aerial car,
which was unsurpassed by any other, then
flew to the celestial abode of Kubera, the
bestower of riches. (62)
अगमद् धनदं AME रामवाक्यप्रचोदितम्॥६३॥
Impelled by the instruction of Sri Rama,
the heavenly aerial car, Puspaka, which for
its part had been seized by the ogre, Ravana,
returned with all speed to Kubera. (63)

पुरोहितस्यात्मसखस्य राघवो

qed: शक्र इवामराधिप:।
निपीड्य पादौ पृथगासने शुभे

सहैव तेनोपविवेश वीर्यवान्॥६४॥

Lovingly pressing the feet of his family
priest, sage Vasistha, who was his great
well-wisher, even as Indra, the suzerain
lord of immortals, would press the feet of
Sage Brhaspati, the preceptor of gods, the
powerful Sri Rama (a scion of Raghu) sat
by his very side, though apart from him, on
a splendid seat. (64)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये FERS सप्तविंशत्यधिकरशततम: AT: ॥ 220 I

Thus ends Canto One hundred and twenty-seven in the Yuddhakanda of the glorious
Ramayana of Valmiki, the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

