* AYODHYAKANDA +

655

द्व्यधिकशततम: at:
Canto CII

Bharata tells Sri Rama that, having been deprived of the privilege of serving
his elder brother, he will have nothing to do with sovereignty and
requests him to offer water to the spirit of his deceased father, who
died with the thought of Sri Rama alone foremost in his mind,
and further implores him to get himself consecrated for the
sovereignty of Ayodhya, the obsequies of their imperial
father having been duly performed by the two

brothers, Bharata and Satrughna, at Ayodhya

रामस्य वचनं श्रुत्वा भरत: प्रत्युवाच ह।
fe मे धर्माद् विहीनस्य राजधर्म: करिष्यति॥ १॥

Hearing the exhortation of Sri Rama,
Bharata, it is said, replied as follows : “How
will the code of conduct prescribed for a
king avail me, who stand outside the range
of that code (disqualified as | am for
sovereignty, being a younger issue of the
king-emperor)? (1)

शाश्वतोऽयं सदा धर्म: स्थितोऽस्मासु नरर्षभ।
ज्येष्ठे पुत्रे स्थिते राजा न कनीयान् भवेन्नृप:॥ २॥

“This has ever been the perpetual law
amongst us (the Ksatriyas of the solar
dynasty), O jewel among men, that so long
as the eldest prince is alive, a younger one
can never be king. (2)

स समृद्धां मया सार्धमयोध्यां wes राघव।
अभिषेचय चात्मानं कुलस्यास्य भवाय न:॥ ३॥

“Therefore, return with me to the affluent
city of Ayodhya, O scion of Raghu, and get
yourself consecrated for the kingship for
the continuance of this race of ours. (3)
राजानं मानुषं प्राहुर्देवत्वे सम्मतो मम।
यस्य धर्मार्थसहितं वृत्तमाहुरमानुषम्॥४॥

“The king, whom the common people
speak of as a human being and yet whose
conduct, which goes hand in hand with
righteousness and worldly prosperity, they
declare as superhuman, is esteemed by me
as verging on divinity. (4)

केकयस्थे च मयि gq त्वयि चारण्यमाश्रिते।
धीमान् स्वर्गं गतो राजा यायजूक: सतां मत:॥ ५॥
“While | was away to the kingdom of
Kekaya and you had proceeded to the
forest, the sagacious king, who was given
to the performance of sacrifices and was
esteemed by the virtuous, ascended to
heaven. (5)

निष्क्रान्तमात्रे watt सहसीते सलक्ष्मणे।

दु:खशोकाभिभूतस्तु राजा त्रिदिवमभ्यगात्॥६॥
“Accompanied by Sita and Laksmana,

you had just gone out of Ayodhya when,

overwhelmed with sorrow and grief, the king
departed for heaven. (6)

उत्तिष्ठ पुरुषव्याघ्र क्रियतामुदकं पितु:।
अहं चायं च Way: पूर्वमेव कृतोदकौ॥७॥
“Get up, O tiger among men! Let water
be offered to the spirit of our deceased
father. Satrughna standing here and myself
too have already offered water to him. (7)

प्रियेण fea ad fe पितॄलोकेषु राघव।
aaa भवतीत्याहुर्भवांश्चैव faq: frauen

“For, the knowers of Truth declare that
water etc., offered by a beloved son surely
becomes inexhaustible in the realm of manes,
O scion of Raghu; and you are undoubtedly
the beloved of our deceased father. (8)
त्वामेव शोचंस्तव दर्शनेप्सु-

स्त्वय्येव सक्तामनिवर्त्य बुद्धिम्।
