144

terrified by that sound; while Tataka, who
was stunned in the first instance by that
sound, got terribly enraged. (7)

तं शब्दमभिनिध्याय राक्षसी क्रोधमूच्छिता।
श्रुत्वा चाभ्यद्रवत् क्रुद्धा यत्र शब्दो विनिस्सृत: i ८ i

The ogress was overwhelmed with wrath
on hearing that sound and, having heard it,
rushed angrily in the direction whence the
sound had emantated. (8)
तां GBI राघव: क्रुद्धां विकृतां विकृताननाम्।
प्रमाणेनातिवृद्धां च लक्ष्मणं सोऽभ्यभाषत॥ ९॥

Seeing her enraged and deformed with
a mis-shapen countenance and monstrous
in size, the celebrated Sri Rama, a scion of
Raghu, addressed Laksmana as follows:

(9)
पश्य लक्ष्मण यक्षिण्या भैरवं दारुणं aq: |
भिद्येरन् दर्शनादस्या भीरूणां हृदयानि Aigo

“Behold, O Laksmana, the formidable
and fearful body of the Yaksa woman; the
hearts of the timorous will break at her very
sight. (10)
एतां पश्य दुराधर्षां मायाबलसमन्विताम्।
विनिव्त्तां करोम्यद्य हृतकर्णाग्रनासिकाम्॥११॥

“See how | put her to flight today once
she has been deprived of her ears and the
tip of her nose, even though she is difficult
to subdue and equipped with the power of
Maya (conjuring tricks). (11)

नह्येनामुत्सहे हन्तुं स्त्रीस्वभावेन रक्षिताम्।
वीर्यं aren aft चैव हन्यामिति fe मे मति: ।। १२॥

“| do not really feel inclined to kill her,
protected as she is by her womanhood. Let
me put an end to her prowess (capacity to
worst others) as well as to her power of
motion by depriving her of her hands and
feet and thereby rendering her incapable
of further devastation: such indeed is my
resovle.” (12)

एवं ब्रुवाणे WA तु ताटका क्रोधमूच्छिता।
उद्यम्य बाहुं गर्जन्ती राममेवाभ्यधावत॥१३॥

« VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

Even while Sri Rama was speaking
thus to Laksmana, Tataka, overwhelmed
with anger, rushed towards Rama himself,
lifting up her arms and roaring. (13)

विश्वामित्रस्तु welfiganronrasreet ताम्।
स्वस्ति राघवयोरस्तु We चैवाभ्यभाषत॥ evil

Threatening her with the sound of ‘hum’,
the Brahmana sage ViSwamitra, however,
exclaimed saying “Good luck to the two
scions of Raghu!” and further raised a
shout of “Victory !” (14)

उद्धुन्वाना Tit Gl ताटका राघवावुभौ।
रजोमेघेन महता Yad सा व्यमोहयत्॥१५॥

Raising plentiful dust, the said Tataka
perplexed both the scions of Raghu with a
huge cloud of dust for an hour or so. (15)

ततो मायां समास्थाय शिलावर्षेण राघवौ।
अवाकिरत् सुमहता ततश्चुक्रोध राघव:॥१६॥

Then, falling back upon conjuring tricks,
she covered the two scions of Raghu with
a tremendous shower of rocks. Thereupon
Sri Rama, a scion of Raghu, flew into a
rage. (16)
शिलावर्षं Wed तस्या: शरवर्षेण राघव:।
प्रतिवार्योपधावन्त्या: chit Forse पत्रिभि: ।। १७॥

Parrying the copious shower of rocks
sent down by her with a counter shower of
shafts, Sri Rama cut off her arms with
arrows even as she came running towards
him. (17)

ततश्छिन्नभुजां श्रान्तामभ्याशे परिगर्जतीम्।
सौमित्रिरकरोत् क्रोधाद्धृतकर्णाग्रनासिकाम्॥ १८ ॥

Then out of anger Laksmana (son of
Sumitra, the second wife of Dasaratha)
deprived her of her ears and the tip of her
nose while she was roaring close by
exhausted, with her arms severed. (18)

कामरूपधरा सा तु Heal रूपाण्यनेकश:।
अन्तर्धानं Wat यक्षी मोहयन्ती स्वमायया॥१९॥

Assuming numerous forms, the said
Yaksa woman, however, capable as she
