116

conduct of the virtuous. Others’ wives too
deserve to be protected by you in the same
way as your own, O prowler of the night ! (7)

आत्मानमुपमां कृत्वा स्वेषु Ry रम्यताम्।
age स्वेषु दारेषु चपलं चपलेन्द्रियम्।
नयन्ति निकृतिप्रज्ञं परदारा: पराभवम्॥८॥
“Making a model of yourself, take delight
in your wife alone. Others’ wives lead to
humiliation of the fickle man of vagrant senses
and reproachful understanding, who is not
contented with his own wife. (8)

इह सन्तो न वा aha सतो वा नानुवर्तसे।
यथा fe विपरीता ते बुद्धिराचारवर्जिता॥९॥

“Either there are no pious men here or
you do not follow them in that your mind is
SO perverse and has turned away from right
conduct. (9)

वचो मिथ्याप्रणीतात्मा पथ्यमुक्तं विचक्षणै:।
राक्षसानामभावाय त्वं वा न प्रतिपद्यसे॥ Qo

“Or, you do not listen to the wholesome
advice tendered by the wise, your mind
being set on the unreal, bent as you are on
the destruction of ogres. (10)

अक्कृतात्मानमासाद्य राजानमनये रतम्।
समृद्धानि विनश्यन्ति राष्टाणि नगराणि TN LeU
“Having found as their ruler one who
has not been able to control his mind and
who is given to unrighteousness, even affluent
kingdoms and cities go to ruin. (11)
ada wat समासाद्य लंका रत्नौघसंकुला।
अपराधात् तवैकस्य नचिराद् विनशिष्यति॥ १२॥
“Even so, having got you as its ruler,
Lanka, which is full of heaps of precious
stones, will perish before long for the fault of
one individual, viz., yourself. (12)

pes lala रावणादीर्घदर्शिन: |
अभिनन्दन्ति भूतानि विनाशे पापकर्मण:॥१३॥

“All beings rejoice over the destruction,
O Ravana, of that short-sighted fellow who
is given to sinful deeds and is being killed
by his own doings. (13)

« VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

एवं त्वां पापकर्माणं वक्ष्यन्ति निकृता जना:।
दिष्ट्यैतद् व्यसनं प्राप्तो we इत्येव हर्षिता:॥ १४॥
“In the same way people tormented by
you will speak of you as a man of sinful
deeds and feeling rejoiced will say: ‘Luckily
enough has the terrible being met with this
reverse.’ (14)

शक्या लोभयितुं नाहमैश्वर्येण धनेन वा।
अनन्या राघवेणाहं भास्करेण यथा प्रभा॥ १५॥

“| am not capable of being tempted with
power or riches; | am undivided from Sri
Rama, a scion of Raghu, even as sunlight
is from the sun. (15)
उपधाय भुजं तस्य लोकनाथस्य सत्कृतम्।
कथं नामोपधास्यामि भुजमन्यस्य कस्यचित्॥ १६ ॥

“Having rested on the honoured arm of
that lord of the people, how shall | actually
rest on the arm of anyone else? (16)

अहमौपयिकी भार्या तस्यैव च end: |
व्रतस्नातस्य विद्येव विप्रस्य विदितात्मन:॥ eon

“lam the lawful wife of that ruler of the
globe alone even as knowledge of Veda
lawfully belongs to a Brahmana who has
realized the Self and has had his ceremonial
bath as a token of having completed his
vow of celibacy. (17)
साधु रावण रामेण मां समानय दु:खिताम्।
at वासितया सार्धं करेण्वेव गजाधिपम्॥ १८॥

“Unite me straight with Sri Rama,
wretched as | am, even as one would unite
a lordly elephant with a female elephant in
heat in a forest, O Ravana ! (18)
बन्धं चानिच्छता घोरं त्वयासौ पुरुषर्षभ:॥१९॥

“It would be but meet that that jewel
among men, Sri Rama, be made friends by
you if you seek to preserve your fortress
Lanka and if you do not wish to suffer
terrible bondage. (19)

fafea: wderta: शरणागतवत्सल:।
तेन मैत्री wad a ate जीवितुमिच्छसि॥ २०॥
