* BALAKANDA +

three worlds, left with their mind fully satisfied.
(19)

या चान्या शैलदुहिता कन्याऽऽसीद् रघुनन्दन।
उग्रं सुव्रतमास्थाय तपस्तेपे तपोधना॥ RoI
“The other daughter of Himavan, who
looked upon askesis as Her only wealth, O
scion of Raghu, practised austerities in the
shape of meditation on Lord Siva, while
remaining a virgin and observing a noble and
formidable vow of forgoing even dry leaves
to keep Her body and soul together. (20)
उग्रेण तपसा युक्तां ददौ शैलवर: सुताम्।
रुद्रायाप्रतिरूपायं उमां लोकनमस्कृताम्॥ २१॥
“Himavan, the chief of mountains, gave
away to Lord Rudra (the god of destruction),
who has no rival, this daughter, Uma who
was rich in severe asceticism and adored
by the universe. (21)

Ut a शैलराजस्य सुते लोकनमस्कृते।
गङ्गा च सरितां श्रेष्ठा उमा देवी च राघव॥ २२॥

“Ganga, the foremost of rivers, and
Goddess Uma, these are the two well-

169

known daughters of Himavan, the king of
mountains, who are venerated by the whole
universe, O scion of Raghu ! (22)

Wid a सर्वमाख्यातं यथा त्रिपथगामिनी।
खं गता प्रथमं aa गतिं गतिमतां वर॥ २३॥
सैषा सुरनदी रम्या शैलेन्द्रतनया तदा।
सुरलोकं समारूढा विपापा जलवाहिनी॥ २४॥

“In this way everything connected with
the origin of Ganga has been narrated to
you. Now hear how it followed a threefold
course. In the first place (as | have told you
in verse 18 above), O dear Rama, it rose
into the sky, which allows moving space to
all mobile beings alongwith the gods who
took her away to heaven. Then this
celebrated daughter of Himavan, the king of
mountains, rose to heaven (the realm of
gods) in the form of the delightful Mandakini,
the heavenly stream visible in the form of
the milky way, and last of all assumed the
form of an earthly stream, Ganga, capable
of ridding the world of its sins.” (23-24)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये बालकाण्डे पञ्चत्रिंश: सर्ग: ॥ 34 ॥

Thus ends Canto Thirty-five in the Balakanda of the glorious Ramayana of Valmiki,
the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

Canto XXXVI

Gods interrupt the amorous pastimes of Lord Siva and His Consort, Goddess
Uma, on which She curses gods, including Mother Earth

उक्कतवाक्ये मुनौ तस्मिन्नुभौ राघवलक्ष्मणौ।
Wears कथां वीरावूचतुर्मुनिपुंगवम्॥१॥

The aforesaid sage, Viswamitra, having
concluded his speech, both the heroes, Sri
Rama and Laksmana, hailed with joy the
story of the two daughters of Himavan, told
by him and spoke as follows to ViSwamitra,
the foremost of sages : (1)

दुहितु: शैलराजस्य ज्येष्ठाया वक्तुमर्हसि।
विस्तरं विस्तरज्ञोऽसि दिव्यमानुषसम्भवम्॥ २॥
“You have narrated, holy Sir, this most
excellent story capable of conferring merit on
those who hear it. Be pleased now to give a
detailed account of Ganga (the elder daughter
of Himavan), relating to her celestial and earthly
career, since you know these details. (2)
त्रीन् पथो हेतुना केन प्लावयेल्लोकपावनी।
wai wet त्रिपथगा विश्रुता सरिदुत्तमा॥ ३॥
