870

behind by Padmanabha, Lord Visnu,
Malyavan forthwith returned to the field as
does the sea after touching the shore. (1)

संरक्तनयन: क्रोधाच्चलन्मौलिर्निशाचर: ।

पद्मनाभमिदं we वचनं पुरुषोत्तमम्॥ zi
With blood-shot eyes and shaking his

head with wrath, the ogre addressed the

following words to Padmanabha, also known
as Purusottama: (2)

नारायण न जानीषे क्षात्रधर्मं पुरातनम्।
अयुद्धरमनसो भीतानस्मान् हंसि यथेतर:॥३॥

‘O Narayana, you do not know the
ancient rules of warfare; like any other
ignorant person you are killing us, frightened
souls who have given up all thought of war.

(3)
पराङ्मुखवधं wd य: करोति सुरेश्वर।
स हन्ता न गत: स्वर्गं लभते पुण्यकर्मणाम्॥४॥

‘O Lord of gods, the slayer who commits
the sin of killing those who have given up
fighting, does not go to heaven, which is
reserved for those who have done meritorious
deeds. (4)

युद्धश्रद्धाथवा तेऽस्ति शङ्खचक्रगदाधर।
até स्थितोऽस्मि पश्यामि बलं दर्शय यत् तव॥ ५॥

‘O bearer of the conch, the discus and
the club, if you are keen on fighting, here |
stand; show your prowess, so that | may
witness it.’ (5)
माल्यवन्तं स्थितं Gear माल्यवन्तमिवाचलम्।
sara राक्षसेन्द्रं तं देवराजानुजो बली॥६॥

Seeing Malyavan, the chief of the
Raksasas, standing firm like Mount Malyavan,
the mighty younger brother of Indra spoke
to him as follows: (6)

युष्मत्तो भयभीतानां tart a मयाभयम्।

राक्षसोत्सादनॆ दत्तं तदेतदनुपाल्यते॥७॥
‘1am implementing the assurance of

safety and the pledge of exterminating the

Raksasas given by me to the gods, who
are afraid of you. (7)

« VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

aise oat निहनिष्यामि रसातलगतानपि॥८॥
‘Service must always be done to the
gods by me even at the cost of my life
hence | will kill you all even though you
enter the nether world.’ (8)
देवदेवं ब्रुवाणं तं रक्ताम्बुरुहलोचनम्।
शक्त्या बिभेद संक्रुद्धो राक्षसेन्द्रो भुजान्तरे॥ ९॥
The enraged Raksasa chieftain struck
with his Sakti (javelin) the breast of the Lord
of gods, whose eyes were like a red lotus,
even while He was speaking as above. (9)

माल्यवद्भुजनिर्मुक्ता शक्तिर्घण्टाकृतस्वना।
हेरेरुरसि बभ्राज मेघस्थेव शतह्रदा॥१०॥

Hurled by the arm of Malyavan, the
Sakti, with jingling bells, shone on Hari’s
breast like a streak of lightning athwart a
cloud. (10)

ततस्तामेव चोत्कृष्य शक्तिं शक्तिधरप्रिय:।
माल्यवन्तं समुद्दिश्य चिक्षेपाम्बुरुहेक्षण:॥११॥
Pulling out that very Sakti, Hari, the
lotus-eyed, the Beloved of Lord Skanda
(the bearer of a lance), hurled it back at
Malyavan. (11)

स्कन्दोत्सृष्टेव सा शाक्तिर्गोविन्दकरनि:सृता।
कांक्षन्ती राक्षसं प्रायान्महोल्केवाञ्जनाचलम्॥ १२॥
As though shot by Skanda, that Sakti
shot by the hands of Govinda, went in
search of Malyavan like a large meteor
would proceed towards a hill of antimony.
(12)

सा manta विस्तीर्णे हारभारावभासिते।
आपतद् राक्षसेन्द्रस्य गिरिकूट इवाशनि:।॥ १३॥

On the broad chest of that Raksasa
chieftain, which was illumined with necklaces,
the Sakti descended even as the thunderbolt
on a mountain-peak. (13)

तया भिन्नतनुत्राण: प्राविशद् विपुलं aa: |
माल्यवान् पुनराश्वस्तस्तस्थौ गिरिरिवाचल:॥ १४॥

With his armour broken to pieces by
