798

Sri Rama: “Here is your spouse, Sita, a
princess of the Videha territory! No sin exists
in her. (5)
नैव वाचा न मनसा नैव बुद्ध्या न चक्षुषा।

Pam वृत्तशौटीर्यं न त्वामत्यचरच्छुभा॥६॥

“The blessed lady, whose conduct has
been excellent, has never been unfaithful to
you, who are endowed with strength of
character, either by word or by mind or
again by conception or even by glance. (6)

रावणेनापनीतैषा वीर्योत्सिक्तेन रक्षसा।
त्वया विरहिता दीना विवशा निर्जने सती॥७॥

“This wretched yet virtuous lady was
borne away by the ogre, Ravana, who was
proud of his valour—while she was lonely in
her hermitage and separated from you, and
as such powerless. (7)

रुद्धा चान्त:पुरे TAT त्वच्चित्ता त्वत्परायणा।
रक्षिता राक्षसीभिश्च घोराभिर्घोरबुद्धिभि:।॥ ८॥

“Though detained in his gynaeceum,
kept hidden and guarded by frightful ogresses
of a cruel mind, she kept her mind focussed
on you and looked on you as her ultimate
resort. (8)

प्रलोभ्यमाना विविधं तर्ज्यमाना च मैथिली।
नाचिन्तयत तद्रक्षस्त्वद्रतेनान्तरात्मना ।॥ ९ ॥

“With her mind set on you, the princess
of Mithila never thought of that ogre, even
while being tempted in various ways and
threatened by him. (9)
विशुद्धरभावां निष्पापां प्रतिगृह्णीष्व मैथिलीम्।

न किंचिदभिधातव्या अहमाज्ञापयामि ते॥१०॥

“Therefore, accept the sinless princess
of Mithila of absolutely untainted mind. |
hereby command you that she should not
be told anything harsh.” (10)

तत: प्रीतमना WA: श्रुत्वैवं वदतां वर:।
दध्यौ मुहूर्तं धर्मात्मा हर्षव्याकुललोचन:॥११॥

Sri Rama, the foremost of the eloquent,
whose mind was set on virtue, felt rejoiced

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA +

in mind to hear the aforesaid speech, and
reflected for a while, his eyes blinded by
tears of joy. (11)

Waal महातेजा धृतिमानुरुविक्रम:।
sara त्रिदशश्रेष्ठं Wat धर्मभृतां वर:॥१२॥

Spoken to as aforesaid, Sri Rama, the
foremost of those upholding the cause of
virtue, who was endowed with extraordinary
energy and great valour, and was full of
firmness, replied as follows to the god of fire
(the foremost of gods): (12)

अवश्यं चापि लोकेषु सीता पावनमर्हति।
दीर्घकालोषिता ह्रीयं रावणान्त:पुरे शुभा॥१३॥

“Sita undoubtedly needed _ this
purificatory ordeal in the eyes of the people
inasmuch as this blessed lady had lived for
a long time in the gynaeceum of Ravana.(13)

बालिशो Ad कामात्मा WAT दशरथात्मज:।
इति वक्ष्यति at लोको जानकीमविशोध्य feu १४॥
“The world would murmur against me
saying that Rama, son of DaSaratha, was
really foolish and that his mind was dominated
by lust, if | actually accepted the daughter
of Janaka without proving her chastitiy.(14)
अनन्यहृदयां सीतां मच्चित्तपरिरक्षिणीम्।
अहमप्यवगच्छामि मैथिलीं जनकात्मजाम्॥ १५ Il
“| too know Sita, the daughter of Janaka
and a princess of Mithila, to be undivided in her
affection to me and agreeable to my mind. (15)

इमामपि विशालाक्षीं रक्षितां tat तेजसा।
रावणो नातिवर्तेत वेलामिव महोदधि:॥ १६॥

“Ravana could not violate this large-
eyed lady either, protected as she was by
her own moral power, any more than a sea
would transgress its bounds. (16)
प्रत्ययार्थं तु लोकानां त्रयाणां सत्यसंश्रय:।
saat चापि वैदेहीं प्रविशन्तीं हुताशनम्॥१७॥

“In order, however, to convince the

denizens of the three worlds, |, whose sheet-
anchor is truth, ignored Sita (a princess of
