* ARANYAKANDA «

wielder of the thunderbolt, discharge the
thunderbolt against a mountain. (25)
मम भुजबलवेगवेगित:
पततु शरोऽस्य महान् महोरसि।
व्यपनयतु तनोश्च जीवितं

पततु ततश्च महीं विघूर्णित:॥ २६॥

719

“Let the great arrow getting impulse
from the force exerted by the strength of
my arms fall on his huge breast and take
away the life from the body and then let
him fall down on the earth whirling round.”

(26)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्येऽरण्यकाण्डे द्वितीय: सर्ग: ॥ २॥

Thus ends Canto Two in the Aranyakanda of the glorious Ramayana of Valmiki,
the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

Canto ITI

Conversation between Rama and Viradha; Rama and Laksmana strike
at him; he goes with them to another forest

अथोवाच पुनर्वाक्यं विराध: पूरयन् वनम्।
पृच्छ्तो मम fe ब्रूतं कौ युवां aa गमिष्यथ:॥ १॥
Then, Viradha again said filling the forest
with his voice, “While | am asking you, tell me,
who are you two and where will you go?” (1)

तमुवाच ततो रामो राक्षसं ज्वलिताननम्।
Yard सुमहातेजा इक्ष्वाकुकुलमात्मन:॥ २॥
क्षत्रियौ वृत्तसम्पन्नौ विद्धि नौ वनगोचरौ।
त्वां तु वेदितुमिच्छाव: कस्त्वं चरसि दण्डकान्॥ ३॥
Then, Rama of extraordinary lustre
spoke of his own Ikswaku dynasty to that
demon of flaming mouth, who was inquiring,
“Know us two to be Ksatriyas of character,
who have come to the forest. For our part,
we want to know you—who are you
wandering in the Dandaka forest?” (2-3)

तमुवाच विराधस्तु रामं सत्यपराक्रमम्।
हन्त वक्ष्यामि a राजन् निबोध मम Wea xl
Viradha for his part said to Rama of
unfailing valour: “Ah! O king! | shall tell
you. Listen to me, O scion of Raghu! (4)
Ua: किल जवस्याहं माता मम शतह्रदा।
feta sft मामाहु: पृथिव्यां सर्वराक्षसा:॥५॥

“They say that | am the son of Java;

my mother is Satahrada; all the ogres on
earth call me ‘Viradha’. (5)

तपसा चाभिसम्प्राप्ता ब्रह्मणो fe wares
Wena लोकेऽच्छेद्याभेद्यत्वमेव च॥६॥

“| have attained, through penance,
protection from being killed in the world by
a weapon, from being cut or broken, by the
grace of Lord Brahma. (6)

उत्सृज्य प्रमदामेनामनपेक्षौ यथागतम्।
त्वरमाणौ पलायेथां न वां जीवितमाददे॥७॥

“Run away with haste as you have
come, giving up this lady without any
expectation; | shall not take your life.” (7)
a Wa: प्रत्युवाचेदं कोपसंरक्तलोचन:।
Tad विकृताकारं विराधं पापचेतसम्॥८॥

Rama, with his eyes blood-red from

anger, replied thus to that ogre, Viradha, of
ugly form and sinful mind : (8)

as fp cat तु हीनार्थं मृत्युमन्वेषसे ध्रुवम्।
रणे प्राप्स्यसि संतिष्ठ न मे जीवन् विमोक्ष्यसे॥ ९॥

“O petty fellow, fie upon you of vile
purpose ! You are certainly seeking death.
Wait, you will get it on the battlefield. You
will not be left alive by me.” (9)
