678

arta जहृषिरे लाङ्गूलानि च विव्यधु:।
ततस्तु कपिशार्दूला: क्ष्वेडन्तश्च पुन: पुन:।
मुमुचुर्विविधान् नादान् मेघान् दृष्टवेव बर्हिण: tt २०॥

Roaring like lions again and again, the
aforesaid tigers among the monkeys for
their part then emitted warbling sound of
various kinds even like peacocks on
beholding clouds. (20)

जाम्बवानपि a: ad: स्वयूथ्यैरभिसंवृत:।
तेऽश्मभिस्ताडयामासुर्नखैर्दन्तैश्च राक्षसान्॥२१॥

Surrounded by all the well-known troops
of his own kind, Jambavan too as also the
monkeys began to strike the ogres with stones
as well as with their nails andteeth. (21)
निघ्नन्तमृक्षाधिपतिं राक्षसास्ते महाबला:।
परिवव्रुर्भयं erat तमनेकविधायुधा:॥ २२॥

Shaking off all fear, the aforesaid ogres,
who were endowed with extraordinary might
and armed with every variety of weapons,
surrounded Jambavan, the suzerain lord of
bears, who was playing havoc among the
ogre hordes. (22)

जाम्बवन्तं मृधे जघ्नुर्निघ्नन्तं राक्षसीं चमूम्॥ 23

They assailed Jambavan, who was
destroying the army of ogres on the battlefield
on all sides, with arrows, sharp axes, sharp-
edged spears, staffs and iron clubs. (23)

स सम्प्रहारस्तुमुल: संजज्ञे कपिरक्षसाम्।
देवासुराणां क्रुद्धानां यथा भीमो महास्वन:॥ २४॥
Accompanied with a loud clamour, that
vehement encounter between the monkeys,
and ogres, who were fired with wrath, was
terrible like the well-known conflict between
the gods and the demons, which took place
in the hoary past. (24)

हनूमानपि संक्रुद्ध: सालमुत्पाट्य पर्वतात्।
स लक्ष्मणं स्वयं पृष्ठादवरोप्य महामना:॥ २५॥
रक्षसां wed चक्रे दुरासाद: सहस्रश:।
स दत्त्वा तुमुलं युद्धं पितृव्यस्येन्द्रजिद् ae it २६॥

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA +

लक्ष्मणं परवीरघ्न: पुनरेवाभ्यधावत।
तौ प्रयुद्धौ तदा वीरौ मृधे लक्ष्मणराक्षसौ॥ २७॥
शरौघानभिवर्षन्तौ जघ्नतुस्तौ परस्परम्।
अभीक्ष्णमन्तर्दधतु: शरजालैर्महाबलौ ।। २८ ।।
चन्द्रादित्याविवोष्णान्ते यथा मेघैस्तरस्विनौ।
नह्यादानं न संधानं धनुषो वा परिग्रह:॥ २९॥
न विप्रमोक्षो बाणानां न विकर्षो न विग्रह:।
न मुष्टिप्रतिसंधानं न लक्ष्यप्रतिपादनम्॥ ३०॥
अदरृश्यत तयोस्तत्र युध्यतो: पाणिलाघवात्।
चापवेगप्रयुक्तैश्च बाणजालै:र समन्तत:॥ ३१॥
अन्तरिक्षेऽभिसम्पन्ने न रूपाणि चकाशिरे।
लक्ष्मणो रावणिं प्राप्य रावणिश्चापि लक्ष्मणम्॥ ३२॥
अव्यवस्था भवत्युग्रा ताभ्यामन्योन्यविग्रहे।
ताभ्यामुभाभ्यां तरसा प्रसृष्टैर्विशिखै: शितै: ।। ३३॥
निरन्तरमिवाकाशं बभूव तमसा adi
a: Wakes बहुभिस्तयो: शरशतै: शितै:।॥ ३४॥
दिशश्च प्रदिशश्चैव aya: शरसंकुला:।
ama विहितं सर्वमासीत् प्रतिभयं महत्॥ ३५॥
Causing Laksmana to dismount from
his back, and tearing up a sal tree from a
mountain, the high-minded Hanuman too,
who felt enraged and was difficult to approach
for his enemies, himself began to exterminate
the ogres in their thousands.Giving a fearful
fight to his uncle, Vibhisana, the mighty
Indrajit, the destroyer of hostile champions,
rushed once more towards Laksmana.
Strenuously engaged in fighting on the
battlefield, the two celebrated heroes,
Laksmana and the ogre, Indrajit, began to
assail each other, showering streams of
arrows on their adversary. The two warriors,
who were endowed with extraordinary might,
covered each other off and on with multitudes
of arrows in the same way as the powerful
sun and moon are veiled by clouds at the
end of summer. Due to quickness of hand
even as they fought there it could not be
distinctly perceived when they shuffled the
bow from one hand to the other, tightly held
the bow as well as the string with the fist,
