* BALAKANDA + 91

ae:

सर्ग:

Canto IX
A dialogue between Emperor Dasaratha and Sumantra

एतच्छुत्वा रह: सूतो राजानमिदमब्रवीत्।
श्रूयतां Ad Wad पुराणे च मया श्रुतम्॥१॥
Hearing of this intention of Emperor
Dasaratha to undertake a horse-sacrifice
for being blessed with a son, Sumantra, the
charioteer as well as a minister of DaSaratha,
spoke to the king in private as follows:
“Kindly listen to a popular legend, also heard
by me in the course of a Puranic exposition.
(1)

ऋत्विग्भिरुपदिष्टोऽयं पुराव्रत्तो मया श्रुत:।
सनत्कुमारो भगवान् पूर्वं कथितवान् कथाम्॥ २॥
काश्यपस्य च पुत्रोऽस्ति विभाण्डक इति श्रुत: ।॥। ३॥
“This expedient in the form of a horse-
sacrifice, recommended by the priests,
Vasistha and others, has also been heard
of by me as the theme of a legend. The
omniscient sage Sanatkumara, O king,
foretold of yore an anecdote in the presence
of seers in connection with the future birth
of four sons to you. The narrative as told by
Sanatkumara runs as under: There is a
son born to the sage Kasyapa and known
by the name of Vibhandaka. (2-3)

mays इति ख्यातस्तस्य wat भविष्यति।
स oat नित्यसंवृद्धो मुनिर्वनचर: सदा॥४॥
नान्यं जानाति विप्रेन्द्रो fret पित्रनुवर्तनात्।
द्वैविध्यं ब्रह्मचर्यस्य भविष्यति महात्मन:॥५॥
लोकेषु प्रथितं राजन् fats कथितं सदा।
wad वर्तमानस्य ae: समभिवर्तत॥६॥

अग्निं शुश्रूषमाणस्य frat च यशस्विनम्।
एतस्मिन्नेव काले तु रोमपाद: प्रतापवान्॥७॥
अङ्गेषु प्रथितो राजा भविष्यति महाबल:।
तस्य व्यतिक्रमाद् राज्ञो भविष्यति सुदारुणा॥८॥
अनावृष्टि सुघोरा a सर्वलोकभयावहा।
अनावृष्ट्यां तु वृत्तायां राजा दु:खसमन्वित:॥ ९॥
ब्राह्मणाञ्छुतसंवृद्धान् समानीय प्रवक्ष्यति।
Vad: श्रुतकर्माणो लोकचारित्रवेदिन:॥ Qo Il

“A son, who will be known by the
name of Rsyasrnga, will be born to the
latter. Constantly brought up in the woods
and ever moving about in the woods alone,
the aforesaid hermit, who will be a ruler of
the Brahmanas, will know nothing about
the world beyond constant service to his
father, Vibhandaka. Both* the types of
Brahmacarya (celibacy) well-known in the
three worlds and ever extolled by the
Brahmanas, will be observed by the high-
souled sage. Time will roll past the said
young sage even while living as aforesaid
in the woods with his own father as his
teacher, attending the sacred fire as well as
his illustrious father. In those very days, of
course, the glorious and mighty Romapada
will be the well-known ruler of the Anga
territory. Through some transgression by
that king there will be a most severe and
fearful drought, that will be a source of
terror to all men. When a drought has
actually set in, the king, full of agony, will

* The primary type of Brahmacarya is the one characterized by the wearing of a girdle of Mufja grass
and deerskin and living singly in the house of a teacher; while the secondary type of Brahmacarya consists
in marrying a girl of one’s own Varna (grade in society), after undergoing a course of training in his teacher’s
house, and copulating with her only during the second, fourth, sixth, eighth, tenth, twelfth, fourteenth
and sixteenth nights following the menstruation, barring of course the first four nights as well as the Parva

days, viz.,
Yajnavalkya :

the new moon and the full moon and the eighth and fourteenth lunar days. Says the sage

षोडशर्तुर्निशा: स्त्रीणां तस्मिन् युग्मासु संविशेत्। ब्रह्मचार्येव पर्वाण्याद्याश्चतस्त्रश्च वर्जयेत्॥
