* AYODHYAKANDA +

“The intoxicating fragrance of spirituous
liquor, the scent of flowers and the odour of
sandalwood and aloewood, which once used
to be spread on all sides, is not being

wafted. (20)
यानप्रवरघोषश्च सुस्निग्धहयनि:स्वन: |
प्रमत्तगजनादश्च महांश्च रथनि:स्वन:॥ २१॥

नेदानीं श्रूयते पुर्यामस्यां रामे विवासिते।
चन्दनागुरुगन्धांश्च महार्हाश्च | ATS RR
गते wa fe तरुणा: संतप्ता नोपभुञ्जते।
ateatat न गच्छन्ति चित्रमाल्यधरा नरा:॥ २३॥

“Sri Rama having been sent into exile,
neither the noise of the foremost of chariots
nor the most delightful neighing of horses,
neither the trumpeting of highly excited
elephants nor the great noise of chariots is
heard in this city now. Sore distressed on Sri
Rama having departed from Ayodhya, indeed,
young men here no longer use the paste of
aloewood and sandalwood nor costly garlands
of sylvan flowers to cool their body with; nor
do men go out for excursion wearing wreaths
of various flowers. (21—23)
नोत्सवा: सम्प्रवर्तन्ते रामशोकार्दिते पुरे।

सा fe नूनं मम भ्रात्रा पुरस्यास्य द्युतिर्गता॥ २४॥

“Festivities no longer duly proceed in
the capital, stricken, as it is, with grief caused
by separation from Sri Rama; the former
splendour of this city has, truly speaking,
undoubtedly departed with my elder brother,
Sri Rama. (24)

नहि राजत्ययोध्येयं सासारेवार्जुनी क्षषा।
कदा नु Ue A भ्राता महोत्सव इवागत:॥ २५ ॥

697

जनयिष्यत्ययोध्यायां ee ग्रीष्म इवाम्बुद:।
तरुणैश्चारुवेषैश्च नरैरुन्नतगामिभि: ।। २६ ॥
सम्पतद्भिरयोध्यायां नाभिभान्ति महापथा:।
इति ब्रुवन् सारथिना दु:खितो भरतस्तदा॥ २७॥
अयोध्यां सम्प्रविश्यैव विवेश वसतिं पितु:।
तेन att नरेन्द्रेण सिंहहीनां गुहामिव॥ २८॥

“This Ayodhya, with tears flowing from
the eyes of its citizens, does not look charming
any more than the night of a bright fortnight,
with a continuous shower. Oh, when will my
elder brother, returned to Ayodhya like a great
festival, bring forth joy in Ayodhya like a rainy
cloud in summer? The highways no longer
shine forth with youngmen, clad in an attractive
garb and walking with a proud gait, pouring
into Ayodhya from outside.” Immediately on
penetrating into the heart of Ayodhya, Bharata,
who was talking in the above strain with his
charioteer, Sumantra, at that time, stricken
as he was with agony, entered his father’s
palace, which looked desolate like a cave
without a lion, bereft as it was of that ruler of
men. (25—28)

सुरैरिवोत्कृष्टमभास्करं दिनम्।
निरीक्ष्य सर्वत्र विभक्तमात्मवान्
मुमोच बाष्पं ata: सुदु:खित: tt २९॥
Sore distressed to gaze at that moment
on the well-known gynaeceum—which,
having shed its splendour, resembled a day
without the sun, bewailed by gods*, and
was untidy everywhere, Bharata, who though
self-possessed, shed tears. (29)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्येऽयोध्याकाण्डे AEM TH MITT: सर्ग: ॥ ११४॥

Thus ends Canto One hundred and fourteen in the Ayodhyakanda of the glorious
Ramayana of Valmiki, the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

* The commentators refer here to a story in the Puranas, according to which, in the course of the
great conflict between gods and demons the former lost ground and the sun-god was thrown down by Rahu.
This was followed by a chaos in the universe, when there was no division of days and nights. The gods
approached Brahma, who appointed Sage Atri to officiate for the sun-god for a week. One of these days
of chaos is referred to here as a day without the sun, deplored by gods.
