1120

The powerful Sri Rama worshipped him
with offerings of Arghya and then began to
ask him about his welfare. (9)

Gey कुशलं तेन WAN aad वर:।

आसने काञ्चने feet निषसाद महायशा:॥१०॥
The famous ascetic, the best among

speakers, being thus enquired about his

welfare by Sri Rama, seated himself on the
beautiful golden seat. (10)

तमुवाच ततो Wa: स्वागतं ते महामते।

प्रापयस्व च वाक्यानि यतो दूतस्त्वमागत:॥ ११॥
Then Sri Rama said to him, ‘Welcome

to you, O one of great wisdom. Please do

convey the message of him from whom you
have come as messenger.’ (11)

चोदितो राजसिंहेन मुनिर्वाक्यमभाषत।
BS ह्येतत् प्रवक्तव्यं fed A यद्यवेक्षसे॥१२॥
Impelled by Sri Rama, the lion among
kings, the ascetic said: ‘My message is to
be conveyed only between two of us secretly,
if you keep the common interest in mind.
(12)
a: sorta निरीक्षेद् वा स वध्यो भविता तव।
wae a मुनिमुख्यस्य वचनं यद्यवेक्षसे॥१३॥

‘If you pay heed to the words of the
chief of the ascetics, the intruder who sees

« VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

us or hears our talk must be sentenced to
death. (13)

तथेति च प्रतिज्ञाय रामो लक्ष्मणमब्रवीत्।

द्वारि तिष्ठं महाबाहो प्रतिहारं विसर्जय॥ १४॥
Saying “So shall it be”, Sri Rama said

to Laksmana, “Go, and stand at the door; O

one of long arms and dismiss the door-

attendant. (14)

स मे वध्य: खलु भवेद वाचं द्वन्द्वसमीरितम्।
ROA च सौमित्रे पश्येद् वा श्रृणुयाच्च य:॥ १५॥

He shall indeed be killed who sees or
hears the words spoken between two of
us.’ (15)
ततो निक्षिप्य काकुत्स्थो लक्ष्मणं द्वारि संग्रहम्।
तमुवाच मुने वाक्यं कथयस्वेति राघव:॥१६॥

Then placing Laksmana, who could
catch of the meaning of Sri Rama’s word at
the door, the descendant of Raghu said to
that ascetic, ‘O ascetic, speak what you
have to say. (16)

तत् ते मनीषितं वाक्यं येन वासि समाहित:।
कथयस्वाविशङ्कस्त्वं ममापि de वर्तते॥१७॥

Do speak out the intention of that one
by whom you have been sent without any
hesitation. | am eager to know what you
have got to say. (17)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये उत्तरकाण्डे त्र्यधिकशततम: सर्ग: ॥ 203 ॥

Thus ends Canto One hundred and three in the Uttarakanda of the glorious Ramayana
of Valmiki, the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

चतुरधिकशततम: सर्ग:
Canto CIV
The Ascetic conveys the message of Brahma to Sri Rama

To राजन् महासत्त्व यदर्थमहमागत:।

पितामहेन देवेन प्रेषितोऽस्मि महाबल॥१॥
‘Hear, 0 King of great prowess, the

purpose for which | have come, O powerful

one, | have been sent by the god Brahma.
(1)

तवाहं Uae भावे Ua: परपुरंजय।

मायासम्भावितो वीर काल: सर्वसमाहर:॥ २॥
