572

कपालपाणि: पृथिवीमटतां चीरसंवृत:।
भिक्षमाणो यथोन्मत्तो यस्यार्योऽनुमते गत:॥४०॥

“Let him with whose concurrence my
elder brother has departed for the woods
roam about like a madman, clad in tatters
and begging alms, bowl in hand. (40)

मद्यप्रसक्तो Mad स्त्रीष्वक्षेषु च नित्यश:।
कामक्रोधाभिभूतश्च यस्यार्योऽनुमते गत:॥४१॥

“Let him with whose concurrence my
elder brother has departed for the woods be
given over from day to day to wine as well
as to women and dice and overpowered by
lust and anger. (41)

मास्य धर्मे मनो भूयादधर्मं स निषेवताम्।
अपात्रवर्षी भवतु यस्यार्योऽनुमते गत:॥४२॥

“Let the man with whose concurrence
my elder brother has departed for the woods
indulge in unrighteousness and shower his
wealth on the undeserving and let his mind
never take delight in piety. (42)

संचितान्यस्य वित्तानि विविधानि सहस्ररश:।
दस्युभिर्विप्रलुप्यन्तां यस्यार्योऽनुमते गत:॥४३॥

“Let the possessions of every
description, accumulated in thousands, of
the fellow with whose concurrence my elder
brother has departed for the woods be
looted by robbers. (43)

उभे संध्ये शयानस्य यत् पापं परिकल्प्यते।
तच्च पापं भवेत् तस्य यस्यार्योऽनुमते गत:॥४४॥

“Let that very sin which attaches to a
man who sleeps during both the twilights be
incurred by him with whose concurrence
my elder brother has departed for the woods.

(44)
यदग्निदायके पापं यत् पापं गुरुतल्पगे।
मित्रद्रोहे च यत् पापं तत् पापं प्रतिपद्यताम्॥ ४५ ॥

“Let him incur that very sin which
attaches to the man who practises arson, to
him who violates the bed of his teacher and
to the fellow who plays a friend foul. (45)

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

देवतानां पितॄणां च मातापित्रोस्तथैव च।
मा स्म कार्षीत् स शुश्रूषां यस्यार्योऽनुमते गत: ॥ ४६ UI

“Let the fellow with whose concurrence
my elder brother has departed for the woods
not have an opportunity to do service to
gods in the form of Agnihotra etc., and to
the manes in the form of periodical Sraddha
and likewise to his living parents. (46)

सतां लोकात् सतां lM: सज्जुष्टात् कर्मणस्तथा |
भ्रश्यतु क्षिप्रमद्यैव यस्यार्योऽनुमते गत:॥४७॥
“Let the man with whose concurrence
my elder brother has departed for the woods
forfeit this very day, nay, at once his claim to
the region inhabited by the virtuous after their
death, forfeit his claim to the reputation enjoyed
by good men and fall from the course of
conduct followed by the righteous. (47)

अपास्य मातृशुश्रूषामनर्थे सोऽवतिष्ठताम्।
दीर्घबाहुर्महावक्षा यस्यार्योऽनुमते गत:॥४८॥

“Let the fellow with whose concurrence
my elder brother, distinguished by long arms
and a broad chest, has departed for the
woods be devoted to the evil path, giving up
service to his mother. (48)

बहुभृत्यो दरिद्रश्च ज्वररोगसमन्वित:।
समायात् सततं क्लेशं यस्यार्योनुमते गत:॥४९॥

“Let him with whose concurrence my
elder brother has departed for the woods be
a pauper though having many dependants
to support; let him be seized with ailment
in the form of fever and suffer hardship
continually. (49)

आशामाशंसमानानां ATE aT |
अर्थिनां वितथां pate यस्यार्योऽनुमते गत:॥ ५०॥
“Let the man with whose concurrence
my elder brother has departed for the woods
falsify the hopes of destitute suppliants

uttering his praises and looking upwards in
his face in expectancy. (50)

मायया wat नित्यं gee: पिशुनोऽशुचि:।
Tat भीतस्त्वधर्मात्मा यस्यार्योऽनुमते गत:॥५१॥
