* SUNDARAKANDA +

“Both the aforesaid princes, who are
tigers among men and are beyond reproach
and who are determined to see you, will
reduce Lanka to ashes. (15)

हत्वा तु समरे रक्षो रावणं सहबान्धवै:।
राघवौ cat विशालाक्षि tat पुरीं प्रति Tera: १६ ॥

“Nay, killing in combat the ogre Ravana,
alongwith his kinsfolk, the two scions of
Raghu, O large-eyed lady, will take you
back to their own capital. (16)

aq रामो विजानीयादभिज्ञानमनिन्दिते।
प्रीतिसंजननं भूयस्तस्य त्वं दातुमर्हसि॥ १७॥

“You ought further to give me a token
which Sri Rama alone may be able to
recognize and which may cause him delight,
O irreproachable lady !” (17)

Wade दत्तमेवाहो मयाभिज्ञानमुत्तमम्।
एतदेव fe रामस्य दृष्ट्वा यत्नेन भूषणम्॥ १८॥
श्रद्धेयं हनुमन् वाक्यं da ate भविष्यति।
स तं मणिवरं गृह्य श्रीमान् प्लवगसत्तम:॥१९॥
प्रणम्य शिरसा देवीं गमनायोपचक्रमे।
तमुत्पातकृतोत्साहमवेक्ष्य हरियूथपम्॥ २० ॥
वर्धमानं महावेगमुवाच जनकात्मजा।
अश्रुपूर्णमुखी दीना बाष्पगद्गदया गिरा॥२१॥

She replied, “An excellent token has
already been handed over to you by me, O
Hanuman! On his having carefully seen
this jewel alone, your statement, O gallant
Hanuman, will actually prove worthy of
credence to Sri Rama.” Having taken that
excellent jewel and made_ respectful
obeisance to the godlike lady with his head
bent low, the glorious Hanuman, the foremost
of monkeys, prepared to depart. Observing
that leader of monkey hordes, who was
possessed of great impetuosity, expanding

189

and striving to leap across the sea, Sita,
Janaka’s daughter, spoke as follows in a
voice choked with sobs, her face bathed in
tears, distressed as she was: (18—21)

हनूमन् सिंहसंकाशौ भ्रातरौ रामलक्ष्मणौ।

सुग्रीवं च सहामात्यं सर्वान् ब्रूया अनामयम्॥ २२॥
“Pray, apprise, O Hanuman, all, viz.,

the two brothers, Sri Rama and Laksmana,

who resemble a pair of lions, as well as
Sugriva and his ministers, of my welfare.(22)

यथा च स महाबाहुर्मां तारयति राघव:।
TATE दु:खाम्बुसंरोधात् त्वं समाधातुमर्हसि॥ २३॥
“You ought to make efforts to see that
that mighty-armed scion of Raghu delivers
me from this ocean of sorrow. (23)
इदं च dtd wa शोकवेगं
रक्षोभिरेभि: परिभर्त्सनं च।
ब्रूयास्तु रामस्य गत: समीपं
शिवश्च तेऽध्वास्तु हरिप्रवीर॥ २४॥

“Arrived in the presence of Sri Rama,
speak to him of the acute vehemence of my
grief as well as of the threats of these ogres
and let your journey be happy, O great hero
among the monkeys !” (24)

a राजपुत्र्या प्रतिवेदितार्थ:

तदल्पशेषं प्रसमीक्ष्य are
fest ह्युदीचीं मनसा जगाम॥ २५॥
Apprised by the princess, Sita, of her
object, nay, greatly delighted at heart on his
purpose of visiting Sita having been
accomplished and thinking that only a small
fraction of his duty remained to be performed,

he mentally sought the northern direction.
(25)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये सुन्दरकाण्डे चत्वारिंश: AA: ॥ ४० ॥

Thus ends Canto Forty of the Sundarakanda in the glorious Ramayana of Valmiki,
the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

