* AYODHYAKANDA +

481

द्विपञ्चाश: सर्ग:
Canto LIT

While about to step into the boat brought by Guha’s men and asked by Guha
if he could be of any further use to the prince, Sri Rama enjoins him to
obey the Emperor. Importuned by Sumantra to take him as a personal
attendant to the forest, the prince declines his loving offer and,
expostulating with him, sends him back to Ayodhya. Entangling
their locks into a thick mass with the milk of a banyan tree,
procured by Guha, Sri Rama and Laksmana with Sita
get into the boat. On reaching the middle of the
stream, Sita offers prayers to Mother Ganga
(the deity presiding over the stream) and
after crossing the river all the three halt

for the night at the foot of a tree

प्रभातायां तु शार्वर्यां पृथुवक्षा महायशा:।
sara राम: सौमित्रिं लक्ष्मणं शुभलक्षणम्॥१॥
The night having ended in dawn, the
highly illustrious Sr Rama, who was
distinguished by a broad chest, spoke as
follows to Laksmana, who was endowed
with auspicious bodily marks : (1)

भास्करोदयकालोऽसौ Wat भगवती निशा।
stat सुकृष्णो विहग: कोकिलस्तात कूजति॥ २॥

“The hour of sunrise is at hand and the
glorious night has passed. Over there the
very dark bird, the cuckoo, is uttering its
notes, O dear brother ! (2)

बर्हिणानां च निर्घोष: sad नदतां वने।
तराम जाह्नवीं सौम्य शीघ्रगां सागरङ्गमाम्॥ ३॥
“The shrill note of peacocks crying in
the woodland is also heard. Let us, therefore,
O good brother, cross the swift-flowing

Ganga (the daughter of Jahnu*), which runs
towards the sea.” (3)

विज्ञाय रामस्य aa: सौमित्रिर्मित्रनन्दन:।
Teas सूतं च सोऽतिष्ठद भ्रातुरग्रत:॥४॥

Grasping the intention of Sri Rama’s
words and informing Guha as well as the
charioteer accordingly, the said Laksmana,
the delight of his friends, stood facing his
elder brother, Sri Rama. (4)

स तु we वचनं निशम्य प्रतिगृह्य च।
स्थपतिस्तूर्णमाहूय सचिवानिदमब्रवीत्॥ ५ U
Hearing the command of Sri Rama and
bowing to it, nay, speedily summoning his
ministers, Guha, the ruler of the Nisadas,
for his part spoke to one of them as follows :
(5)

. । रीं शुभाम्।
सुप्रतारां दृढां तीर्थे शीघ्रं नावमुपाहर॥६॥
“Quickly bring to the landing-place a
beautiful and stout boat, duly equipped with

oars and a helmsman, by which Sri Rama
and his party could easily ferry across.” (6)

* The river Ganga, when brought down from heaven by the austerities of Emperor Bhagiratha,
followed the latter to the subterranean regions in order to consecrate the remains of his great grand-uncles.
In its course it inundated the sacrificial ground of Rsi Jahnu, who in his anger drank up its waters. But the
gods and sages and particularly Bhagiratha appeased his anger and he consented to release the waters
through his ears. The river is thenceforth regarded as his daughter.
