* BALAKANDA +

fire when the sun had set, the sages, who
were all possessed of immense glory, sat
down placing ViSwamitra at their head.
Paying their homage to the aforesaid sages
and greeting them all, Sri Rama_ too,
accompanied by Laksmana, presently sat
down facing the wise ViSwamitra. Now Sri
Rama, who was possessed of exceptional
glory, asked Viswamitra, a tiger among
sages, whose only wealth was _ his

159

asceticism, with great curiosity as follows :
“What land could this possibly be, graced
with a thriving forest, O venerable Sir? |
wish to hear of it. Be pleased to tell me
accurately about it. God bless you!”
Prompted by the aforesaid question of Sri
Rama, the great ascetic, ViSwamitra, of
noble vows proceeded to speak elaborately
about that land in the midst of the seers
accompanying him. (19—24)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये बालकाण्डे एकत्रिंश: TW: ॥ 32 ॥

Thus ends Canto Thirty-one in the Balakanda of the glorious Ramayana of Valmiki,
the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

Canto XXXII

An account of the four sons of Kusa; the hundred daughters of KuSanabha
turn hunch-backed under a curse of the wind-god

ब्रह्मयोनिर्महानासीत् कुशो नाम महातपा:।
अक्लिष्टव्रतधर्मज्ञ: सज्जनप्रतिपूजक: tl १॥
There was a noble and great ascetic-
king of unobstructed vows, Kusa by name,
born of Brahma, who knew what is right and
honoured righteous men. (1)

स महात्मा कुलीनायां युक्तायां सुमहाबलान्।
वैद्भ्यां जनयामास चतुर: AE सुतान्॥२॥
कुशाम्बं कुशनाभं च असूर्तरजसं वसुम्।
दीप्तियुक्तान् महोत्साहान् क्षत्रधर्मचिकीर्षया॥ ३॥
तानुवाच BM: पुत्रान् धर्मिष्ठान् सत्यवादिन: |
क्रियतां पालनं पुत्रा धर्मं प्राप्स्यथ पुष्कलम्॥४॥
Through his high-born and worthy wife,

who hailed from Vidarbha, that exalted soul
begot four exceptionally mighty sons

becoming of himself, Kusamba, KuSanabha,
Asurtarajasa* and Vasu, who were not only
brilliant and possessed of great zeal but
were also extremely pious and veracious.
With intent to urge them to their duty of
protecting people, appropriate to a Ksatriya,
KuSa said to them, “The duty of protecting
people must be done by you. Thereby you
will earn unbounded merit.” (2—4)

कुशस्य वचनं श्रुत्वा चत्वारो लोकसत्तमा:।

निवेशं चक्रिरे ad पुराणां नॄवरास्तदा॥५॥
Hearing the admonition of KuSa all those

four jewels among men, who were the

noblest in the world, forthwith laid the
foundation of four cities. (5)

कुशाम्बस्तु महातेजा: कौशाम्बीमकरोत् पुरीम्।
कुशनाभस्तु धर्मात्मा yt चक्रे महोदयम्॥६॥

* The author of the famous commentary entitled the “Ramayana-Siromani” has accepted the variant

“Amiurtirajasa.” In the Mahabharata (Vana., LXLV. 17) we come across the name Amurtaraya and the
character bearing this name is stated there to have founded the city of Dharmaranya, which was encompassed
by a sacred forest of the same name. This represents the tract lying round Gaya. The city of Gaya was built
by a king named Gaya, who has been referred to as a son of Amurtaraya. This establishes the identity of
Gaya with Dharmaranya. In the Mahabharata (Vana., LXXXIV.85) the lake Brahmasarovara forming part
of the township of Gaya has been declared as surrounded by the forest of Dharmaranya. In Vana., LX XXII.
47 worship of the manes has been commended at Dharmaranya.
