# YUDDHAKANDA #

“Nay, decorate the dwellings on the
roadside till sunrise with garlands strung
both sparsely and closely as well as with
loose flowers of charming colours as also
with five coloured ornaments. (9)

राजमार्गमसम्बाधं किरन्तु शतशो नरा:।
ततस्तच्छासनं श्रुत्वा शत्रुघ्नस्य मुदान्विता:॥१०॥

धृष्टिर्जयन्तो fasta: सिद्धार्थश्चार्थसाधक:।
अशोको मन्त्रपालश्च सुमन्त्रश्चापि निर्ययु:॥ ११॥

मत्तैर्नागसहस्रैश्च सध्वजै: सुविभूषितै:।
अपरे हेमकक्षाभि: सगजाभि: करेणुभि:।॥ १२॥

निर्ययुस्तुरगाक्रान्ता रथैश्च सुमहारथा:।
शक्त्यृष्टिपाशहस्तानां सध्वजानां पताकिनाम्॥ १३॥

तुरगाणां सहस्रैश्च मुख्यैर्मुख्यतरान्वितै:।
पदातीनां सहस्रैश्च वीरा: परिव्रृता ययु:॥ १४॥
“Also let hundreds of men line the main
road in order to see that it remains
unobstructed.” Hearing the foregoing
command of Satrughna, all the eight
ministers, viz., Dhrsti Jayanta, Vijaya,
Siddhartha as also Arthasadhaka, Asoka
and Mantrapala and Sumantra too thereupon
issued forth on the back of elephants, full of
joy (to receive Sri Rama and others), followed
by thousands of elephants in rut, bearing
standards and splendidly adorned. Other
highly eminent car-warriors rode on the back
of elephants and female elephants provided
with golden girths, on horse-back or in
chariots. Champions went forth surrounded
by thousands of selected horses and even
by still superior ones bearing standards and
pennons, as well as by thousands of foot
soldiers carrying javelins, spears and nooses.
(10—14)

ततो यानान्युपारूढा: Wat दशरथस्तिय:।
कौसल्यां प्रमुखे कृत्वा सुमित्रां चापि निर्ययु: 1 १५ ॥
कैकेय्या सहिता: सर्वा नन्दिग्राममुपागमन्॥ १६॥
Placing at their head Kausalya (the

mother of Sri Rama) as well as Sumitra (the
mother of Laksmana and Satrughna), nay,

829

seated in palanquins, all the consorts of
DaSaratha thereupon issued forth to meet
Sri Rama and his party; and, accompanied
by Kaikeyi (Bharata’s mother), all reached
Nandigrama. (15-16)

माल्यमोदकहस्तैश्च मन्तिभिर्भरतो वृत:॥१७॥
शङ्खभेरीनिनादैश्च बन्दिभिश्चाभिनन्दित:।
आर्यपादौ गृहीत्वा तु शिरसा धर्मकोविद:॥ १८॥
पाण्डुरं छत्रमादाय शुक्लमाल्योपशोभितम्।
Wat च वालव्यजने राजार्हे हेमभूषिते॥१९॥
उपवासकृशो दीनश्चीरकृष्णाजिनाम्बर:।
भ्रातुरागमनं श्रुत्वा तत्पूर्वं हर्षमागत:॥२०॥
प्रत्युद्ययौ यदा रामं महात्मा सचिवै: सह।
अश्वानां Ges रथनेमिस्वनेन च॥२१॥
शङ्खदुन्दुभिनादेन संचचालेव मेदिनी।
गजानां बृंहितैश्चापि शङ्खदुन्दुभिनि:स्वनै:।॥ २२॥
pet तु नगरं ad तु नन्दिग्राममुपागमत्।
समीक्ष्य भरतो वाक्यमुवाच पवनात्मजम्॥ २३॥
Placing the wooden sandals of his elder
brother, Sri Rama, on his head, nay, taking
the white parasol (intended for Sri Rama)
adorned with white garlands as well as two
white whisks decked with gold and eminently
worthy of kings, nay, surrounded by the
foremost of the Brahmanas (lit., the twice-
born), leaders of the guilds of traders and
artisans including the VaiSyas (members of
the mercantile class) and the counsellors
with garlands and ball-shaped sweets in
their hands and cheered by the blasts of
conches and the roll of kettledrums as well
as by panegyrists, the high-souled Bharata
for his part, whose mind was set on virtue,
who was well-versed in the secret of
righteousness, and who was emaciated
through fasting, nay, who felt emaciated,
was clad in the bark of trees and the skin
of a black antelope and who experienced
joy even before the advent of his elder
brother, Sri Rama, on hearing of it—went in
advance with his ministers to meet Sri Rama.
