* AYODHYAKANDA +

the
(40)

outstanding veracity, pray, deliver
Emperor from a delicate situation.”

न चैव Wa: प्रविवेश शोकम्।
प्रविव्यथे चापि महानुभावो

राजा च पुत्रव्यसनाभितप्त:॥४१॥

363

Even though Kaikeyi spoke unkindly
as above, Sri Rama did not yield to grief at
all. The king, however, even though he was
possessed of great strength of mind, felt
sore distressed, afflicted as he was by the
agony of impending separation from his dear
son. (41)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्येऽयोध्याकाण्डेऽष्टादश: सर्ग: ॥ १८ Il

Thus ends Canto Eighteen in the Ayodhyakanda of the glorious Ramayana of Valmiki,
the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

Canto XIX

Having agreed to leave for the forest, Sri Rama proceeds
to take leave of his mother Kausalya

तदप्रियममित्रघ्नो att मरणोपमम्।
श्रुत्वा न विव्यथे wa: कैकेयीं चेदमब्रवीत्॥१॥
Sri Rama, the destroyer of his enemies,
did not feel distressed to hear that message,
which was so unpleasant to hear and was
like death itself, and spoke to Kaikeyi as
follows : (1)

एवमस्तु गमिष्यामि at वस्तुमहं त्वित:।
जटाचीरधरो = Ue: प्रतिज्ञामनुपालयन्॥ २॥
“Amen ! Honouring the promise made
by the king and wearing matted locks and
the bark of trees, | will undoubtedly proceed
from Ayodhya to the forest to take up my
abode there. (2)
Be तु ज्ञातुमिच्छामि किमर्थं at महीपति:।
नाभिनन्दति दुर्धर्षो यथापूर्वमरिंदम:॥ ३॥
“|, however, desire to know wherefore
His Majesty, who is capable of chastising

his enemies and is himself hard to assail,
does not welcome me as before. (3)

मन्युर्न च त्वया कार्यो देवि ब्रूमि तवाग्रत:।
यास्यामि भव सुप्रीता वनं चीरजटाधर:॥४॥

“Nor should displeasure be shown by

you to me, O queen, because | am putting
this question to you. Wearing the bark of
trees and matted locks, | will certainly
proceed to the forest. Be fully pleased with
me. (4)

fet गुरुणा fir कृतज्ञेन नृपेण al
नियुज्यमानो fester: किं न कुर्यामहं प्रियम्॥ ५॥
“Enjoined by the Emperor, who is my
friend, preceptor and father, all in one, and
appreciates a service done to himself, what
kindly act shall | not do unhesitatingly to
him? (5)
अलीकं मानसं ah wa ced मम।
स्वयं यन्नाह मां राजा भरतस्याभिषेचनम्॥६॥
“One mental anguish, however, galls
my heart, viz., that His Majesty should not
personally speak to me about Bharata’s
installation. (6)
até fe सीतां राज्यं च प्राणानिष्टान् धनानि च।
Bel भ्रात्रे स्वयं दद्यां भरताया प्रचोदित:॥७॥
“For, commanded by you, | would
myself joyfully part with, in favour of Bharata,
not only the kingdom of Ayodhya and
my personal property but even Sita, my
