602

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA +

Canto LXXXVII

Overwhelmed with grief to hear from the mouth of Guha how his two brothers
got their hair entangled into a mass, Bharata falls unconscious on the
ground. On regaining consciousness, he despatches Guha to reassure
mother Kausalya, who is filled with apprehension about the safety of
Sri Rama and his party on hearing of Bharata’s swoon, and apprise
her of its real cause and also of Sri Rama’s welfare. While doing
so Guha also tells her how Sri Rama and Sita lay down on
a bed of KuSa grass prepared by Laksmana with his own
hands when the party broke journey at Srngaverapura
and how Guha with Laksmana kept watch the whole

night for the protection

गुहस्य वचनं श्रुत्वा भरतो भृशमप्रियम्।
ध्यानंजगामतत्रैवयत्रतच्छूत्तमप्रियम्।।१।।

Hearing the report of Guha about Sri
Rama’s matted locks of hair, which was
most disagreeable to hear, Bharata began
to think deeply of Sri Rama alone, of whom
that unpleasant news was heard by him as
it made him apprehensive that Sri Rama
might not return to Ayodhya now that he
had entangled his hair into a mass. (1)

सुकुमारो महासत्त्व: सिंहस्कन्धो महाभुज:।
पुण्डरीकविशालाक्षस्तरुण: प्रियदर्शन: 12
waa ded तु कालं परमदुर्मना:।
ससाद सहसा dele विद्ध ga द्विप:॥ ३॥

Having remained composed awhile, the
mightly-armed prince, Bharata, for his part—
who, though tender of body, was possessed
of extraordinary strength, whose shoulders
resembled a lion’s and who had eyes big as
a lotus, and who was both young and pleasing
of appearance—suddenly sank to the ground
extremely sad at heart, like an elephant pierced
with goads. (2-3)

wd मूर्छितं geat विवर्णवदनो गुह:।

aya व्यथितस्तत्र भूमिकम्पे यथा द्रुम:॥४॥
Seeing Bharata unconscious, Guha felt

shaken at that time like a tree during an

of Sri Rama and Sita

earthquake, and his face grew pale.
तदवस्थं तु भरतं शत्रुघ्नोऽनन्तरस्थित:।
परिष्वज्य रुरोदोच्चैर्विसंज्: शोककर्शित:॥५॥
Embracing Bharata, lying ॥ that
unconscious state, Satrughna, for his part,

who stood nearby, got non-plussed, stricken
as he was with grief, and loudly cried. (5)

ad: Gat: समापेतुर्मातरो भरतस्य ता:।
उपवासकृशा दीना भर्तृव्यसनकर्शिता:॥६॥

Then rushed together all the mothers
of Bharata. They were emaciated through
fasting, looked miserable and felt afflicted
due to separation from their husband. (6)

ताश्च तं पतितं wat रुदत्य: पर्यवारयन्।
कौसल्या त्वनुसृत्यैनं दुर्मना: परिषस्वजे॥७॥

Nay, shedding tears they surrounded
Bharata fallen on the ground. Approaching
him sad at heart, Kausalya for her part
hugged him. (7)

वत्सला स्वं यथा वत्समुपगुह्य तपस्विनी।
परिपप्रच्छ भरतं रुदती शोकलालसा॥८॥

Pressing him to her bosom as a cow
does its own calf, that exceedingly thoughtful
lady, who was totally given up to grief,
questioned Bharata in the following words,
shedding tears all the time: (8)

(4)
