# YUDDHAKANDA #

हनूमतस्तु तद् वाक्यं न कृतं क्षुद्रया मया।
ade तस्य पृष्ठेन तदायासमनिर्जिता॥५५॥
नाद्यैवमनुशोचेयं भर्तुरङ्कगता सती।
मन्ये तु हृदयं तस्या: कौसल्याया: फलिष्यति॥ ५६ I
एकपुत्रा यदा ut विनष्टं श्रोष्यते युधि।
सा fe जन्म च बाल्यं च यौवनं च महात्मन:॥ ७५७॥
धर्मकार्याणि रूपं च रुदती संस्मरिष्यति।
निराशा fed Gt दत्त्वा श्राद्धमचेतना॥५८॥
अग्निमावेक्ष्यते नूनमपो वापि प्रवेक्ष्यति।
धिगस्तु कुब्जामसतीं wert पापनिश्चयाम्॥५९॥
यन्निमित्तमिमं शोकं कौसल्या प्रतिपत्स्यते।
इत्येवं मैथिलीं दृष्टवा विलपन्तीं तपस्विनीम्॥ ६०॥
रोहिणीमिव चन्द्रेण बिना ग्रहवशं गताम्।
एतस्मिन्नन्तरे तस्य अमात्य: शीलवान् शुचि: ।॥। ६१॥
सुपारश्वो नाम मेधावी रावणं रक्षसां वरम्।
निवार्यमाण: सचिवैरिदं वचनमब्रवीत्॥६२॥

“Alas! That sane counsel of Hanuman
was not followed by me, vile that | am. Had
| left at that time, mounted on his back,
though not won back by my husband, |
would not have grieved as | am doing today,
as | should be resting in that case
in the lap of my husband. | am sure the
heart of the blessed Kausalya Sri Rama’s
mother will actually break asunder when the
lady, who has only one son, hears of her
son having perished in the fight. Weeping,
she, for her part, will vividly recall the birth
and childhood as well as the youth of the
high-souled prince, as also his pious acts
and comliness. Having offered up the
obsequies on her son having been killed
and getting despondent and unconscious,
the lady will surely enter the flame or be
drowned in water. Woe be to the vile hunch-
back Manthara, of sinful resolve, on whose
account Kausalya will suffer this grief.”

In the meantime, seeing the unfortunate
princess of Mithila wailing, as aforesaid, like
Rohini (the deity presiding over a constellation
of this name) fallen under the sway of the

697

planet Mars when away from the moon-god
(her husband), a good-natured, upright
and highly intelligent minister of Ravana,
Suparswa by name spoke as follows to
Ravana, the foremost of ogres, in spite of
his being restrained by other ministers:

(55—62)

कथं नाम दशग्रीव साक्षाद्वैश्रवणानुज।
हन्तुमिच्छसि adet क्रोधाद् धर्ममपास्य च॥ ६३॥

“How on earth do you, 0 ten-headed
monarch, a younger brother of Kubera
(the god of riches and a guardian of the
world) himself, seek to put Sita (a princess
of the Videha territory) to death in a fit of
anger, casting righteousness to the winds?

(63)

वेदविद्याव्रतस्नात: स्वकर्मनिरतस्तथा।
feat: कस्माद् वधं AT मन्यसे राक्षसेश्वर॥ ६४॥

“Ever since you completed the vow of
celibacy essential for a study of the Vedic
lore, you have remained engaged in the
religious observances incumbent on you (in
the shape of Agnihotra). How then do you
deem it fit to kill a woman, O valiant king of
ogres? (64)
मैथिलीं रूपसम्पन्नां प्रत्यवेक्षस्व पार्थिव।
तस्मिन्नेव सहास्माभिराहवे क्रोधमुत्सृज॥ ६५॥

“Take care of Sita, a princess of Mithila,
who is richly endowed with comeliness, O ruler
of the earth, and vent your wrath on Rama
alone, alongwith us all, in an encounter. (65)

अभ्युत्थानं त्वमद्यैव कृष्णपक्षचतुर्दशी।
कृत्वा निर्याह्यमावास्यां विजयाय बलैर्वृत: 1 ६६॥
“Girding yourself for the offensive this
very day, today being the fourteenth day of
the dark fortnight, march you to victory on
the morrow, which is a moonless day,
surrounded by troops. (66)

शूरो धीमान् रथी खड्गी रथप्रवरमास्थित:।
BT दाशरथिं रामं भवान् प्राप्स्यति मैथिलीम्॥ ६७॥
