204

quarters, assailed him with their dreadful
weapons of all descriptions from every side.
Five sharp and white polished steel shafts
with yellow (golden) tips were dug into his
head by Durdhara and shone like petals of
lilies Causing no more pain to him than lilies.
(15—22)
a a: पञ्चभिराविद्ध: ot: शिरसि वानर:।
उत्पपात नदन् व्योम्नि दिशो दश विनादयन्॥ २३॥

Pierced in the head with those five
arrows, the monkey leapt roaring in the sky,
making all the ten directions resound thereby.

(23)

ततस्तु दुर्धरो वीर: सरथ: सज्जकार्मुक:।
किरन् शरशतैर्नैकैरभिपेदे महाबल:॥ २४॥

Thereupon the valiant Durdhara, who
was endowed with extraordinary might,
arrived near him in his chariot, with his bow
duly drawn and covered him with many
hundreds of shafts. (24)

a कपिर्वारयामास तं व्योम्नि शरवर्षिणम्।
वृष्टिमन्तं पयोदान्ते पयोदमिव मारुत:॥ २५॥

Continuing in the air, Hanuman kept
back by means of his very roar Durdhara,
who was raining arrows on him, even as the
wind would keep back a rainy cloud at the
end of the monsoon. (25)

STEARATE A दुर्धरेणानिलात्मज:।
aan Fad भूयो व्यवर्धत च वीर्यवान्॥ २६॥
Being tormented by the aforesaid
Durdhara, the powerful Hanuman emitted a
roar once more and grew immensely in
size. (26)
स at सहसोत्पत्य दुर्धरस्य रथे at
निपपात महावेगो विद्युद्राशिर्गिराविव॥ २७॥
Bounding high into the sky, Hanuman
precipitately jumped with great impetuosity
on the chariot of Durdhara like a mass of
lightning on a mountain. (27)

ad: स मथिताष्टाश्वं रथं भग्नाक्षकूबरम्।
विहाय न्यपतद् भूमौ दुर्धरस्त्यक्तजीवित:॥ २८॥

« VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

Having lost his chariot, whose axle
and pole had been broken and all the eight
horses mangled, Durdhara dropped down
dead on the ground. (28)

तं विरूपाक्षयूपाक्षौ gear निपतितं भुवि।
at जातरोषौ दुर्धर्षावुत्पेततुररिंदमौ॥ २९॥

Enraged to see him fallen flat on the
ground, the notorious Virupaksa and
Yupaksa, who were difficult to overcome
and were capable of taming the enemy,
sprang up in the sky. (29)

स ताभ्यां सहसोत्प्लुत्य विष्ठितो विमलेऽम्बरे।
मुद्गराभ्यां महाबाहुर्वक्षस्यभिहत: कपि:॥ ३०॥

Stationed in the cloudless sky, the
aforesaid mighty-armed Hanuman was struck
by them in the chest all of a sudden with
clubs even as they sprang up in the sky. (30)

तयोर्वेगवतोर्वेगं निहत्य स महाबल:।
निपपात पुनर्भूमौ सुपर्ण ga वेगित:॥ ३१॥

Having foiled the onrush of the aforesaid
two generals, who were full of impetuosity,
Hanuman, who was-~ endowed with
extraordinary might and full of vehemence,
swooped down on the earth again like Garuda
with beautiful feathers. (31)

स Megara समुत्पाट्यं च AMT: |
तावुभौ राक्षसौ वीरौ जघान पवनात्मज:॥३२॥

Reaching a sal tree and uprooting it,
Hanuman, sprung from the loins of the wind-
god, struck down with it both those valiant
ogres. (32)

ततस्तांस्त्रीन् हतान् ज्ञात्वा वानरेण तरस्विना।
अभिषेदे महावेग: प्रहस्य Wael बली॥ ३३॥
भासकर्णश्च संक्रुद्ध: शूलमादाय वीर्यवान्।
एकत: कपिशार्दूलं यशस्विनमवस्थितौ॥ ३४॥
Finding all those three killed by
Hanuman, who was full of agility and laughing
heartily, the mighty Praghasa, who was
endowed with extraordinary swiftness,
arrived next, as also the powerful
Bhasakarna, highly enraged, taking a dart in
