+ UTTARAKANDA +

सहसा पतिता wat भगिनी रावणस्य सा।
तां स्वसारं समुत्थाप्य रावण: परिसान्त्वयन्॥ २५॥
अब्रवीत् किमिदं भद्रे वक्तुकामासि मां द्रुतम्।
सा बाष्पपरिरुद्धाक्षी रक्ताक्षी वाक्यमब्रवीत्॥ २६॥

“This act of laying his hands on others’
wives, however, is quite unworthy of him.
Since this wretch among the ogres takes
delight in the wives of others, hence the
evil-minded fellow will undoubtedly meet his
death through the sighs of a woman alone.”
When such an imprecation was pronounced
by those virtuous and noble women, kettle-
drums sounded in the heavens and a shower
of flowers fell on the earth. Cursed by virtuous
women devoted to their husband, Ravana
for his part, lost his lustre like one whose
vigour had been destroyed and _ felt
disconsolate, as it were. Hearing their lament,
Ravana (a bull among the ogres) penetrated
deep into the city of Lanka, acclaimed by
the rangers of the night. In the meantime the
notorious sister of Ravana, a formidable
ogress, who could change her form at will,
suddenly came and dropped down on the
ground. Consoling his sister in everyway
after lifting her up, he said, “O blessed one,
what is it you want to say to me so
urgently?” With eyes bloodshot and covered
with tears she replied as follows: (20—26)

कृतास्मि विधवा राजंस्त्वया बलवता बलात्।
Wea राजंस्त्वया sate दैत्या विनिहता रणे॥ २७॥
कालकेया इति ख्याता: सहस्राणि चतुर्दश।
प्राणेभ्योऽपि गरीयान् A तत्र भर्ता महाबल:॥ २८ ॥

सोऽपि त्वया हतस्तात रिपुणा भ्रातृगन्धिना।
त्वयास्मि निहता राजन् स्वयमेव हि बन्धुना॥ २९॥

“By you, mighty as you are, O king, |
have been forcibly made a widow. Daityas
known as the Kalakeyas, and numbering
fourteen thousand, were exterminated, O
king, by you the other day in combat by dint
of prowess. My exceptionally mighty husband
too, who was dearer to me than life itself,
was also killed among others by you, O

925

dear one, my so-called brother, who acted
as an enemy. In this way, | myself stand
virtually destroyed by you, my kinsman, O
king! (27—29)

राजन् वैधव्यशब्दं च भोक्ष्यामि त्वत्कृतं ह्यहम्।
ननु नाम त्वया रक्ष्यो जामाता समरेष्वपि॥ ३०॥
“Nay, | shall actually enjoy the title of
widow bestowed by you, O king ! Did my
husband (who was your son-in-law, | being
your younger sister, and, as such a daughter
to you) not deserve to be spared by you
even in conflicts? (30)

a त्वया निहतो युद्धे स्वयमेव न लज्जसे।
एवमुक्तो दशग्रीवो भगिन्या क्रोशमानया॥ ३१॥
add सान्त्वयित्वा at सामपूर्वमिदं aa: |
अलं वत्से रुदित्वा ते न भेतव्यं च सर्वश:॥ ३२॥

“He was, on the contrary, killed by you
in an encounter with yourself. Yet you do
not feel remorseful.” Comforting her through
appeasement when reproached in these
words by his wailing sister, Ravana (the
ten-headed monster) replied to her as follows:
“Have done with weeping, my child; you
should not be afraid of anyone. (31-32)
दानमानप्रसादैस्त्वां तोषयिष्यामि aera: |
युद्धप्रमत्तो व्याक्षिप्तो जयाकांक्षी क्षिपन् शरान्॥ 33 ॥
नाहमज्ञासिषं युध्यन् स्वान् परान् वापि संयुगे।
जामातरं न जाने स्म प्रहरन् युद्धदुर्मद:॥ ३४॥

“| shall particularly gratify you by means
of gifts, politeness and favours. Intoxicated
in war and distracted, longing as | did for
victory, | went on raining arrows and was
unable to distinguish between my own people
and others in combat while fighting. While
striking, fierce as | was in combat, | failed
to recognize my own son-in-law. (33-34)

तेनासौ निहत: संख्ये मया vat तव स्वस:।

अस्मिन् काले तु यत् प्राप्तं तत् करिष्यामि ct हितम्॥ ३५ ।
“Hence, 0 sister, your aforesaid

husband was killed by me on the field of battle.

However, | shall do to you whatever good
turn is called for at the present moment. (35)
