* BALAKANDA +

aed क्षुभितं स्थानान्मम ast ह्यनुत्तमम्।
धारयिष्यति कस्तन्मे ब्रुवन्तु सुरसत्तमा:॥१४॥
“But who shall receive that vital fluid of
Mine, unsurpassed as it is, which is already
shaken from its seat in the heart? Tell Me
this, O jewels among gods!” (14)

`एवमुक्तास्ततो देवा: प्रत्यूचुर्वृषभध्वजम्।
यत्तेज: क्षुभितं ह्यद्य ag धरा धारयिष्यति॥ १५॥

Questioned thus by Lord Siva, the gods
thereupon replied to Lord Siva (whose ensign
bears the device of a bull), ‘Earth (who is
capable of holding everything) will indeed
receive the vital fluid that has got dislodged
so far.’ (15)

wage: सुरपति: प्रमुमोच महाबल:।
तेजसा पृथिवी येन व्याप्ता सगिरिकानना॥ 2g
Addressed thus by the gods, the
almighty Lord Siva, the Ruler of gods, let fall
His seed, by which was covered the entire

globe including the mountains and forests.
(16)
ततो ca: पुनरिदमूचुश्चापि हुताशनम्।
आविश त्वं महातेजो रौद्रं वायुसमन्वित:॥ १७॥
Thereupon fearing lest the earth may
be cracked by being covered all over by the
powerful fluid, the gods further addressed
the following prayer to the god of fire
that feeds on the sacrificial offerings :
‘Accompanied by the wind-god (and mobilized
by him) suck you the mighty seed of Rudra
(the god of destruction).’ (17)
feet शरवणं चैव पावकादित्यसंनिभम्॥ ec ॥
यत्र जातो महातेजा: कार्तिकेयोऽग्निसम्भव:।
अथोमां च शिवं चैव देवा: सर्षिगणास्तथा॥ १९॥
पूजयामासुरत्यर्थं सुप्रीतमनसस्तदा।
aa शैलसुता राम त्रिदशानिदमब्रवीत्॥ २०॥
समन्युरशपत् सर्वान् क्रोधसंरक्तलोचना।
यस्मान्निवारिता ae संगता पुत्रकाम्यया॥ २१॥

171

अपत्यं स्वेषु दारेषु नोत्पादयितुमर्हथ।
अद्यप्रभृति युष्माकमप्रजा: सन्तु पत्नय:॥२२॥

Concentrated by fire (assisted by the
wind-god), it now got consolidated into a
white mountain and was_ subsequently
transformed into a thicket of white reeds
resplendent as fire and the sun, in which
was born the exceptionally glorious Kartikeya
(so-called because he was suckled later on
by the deities presiding over the group of
stars known by the name of Krttikas), who
is accordingly spoken of as fire-born. “Highly
delighted in mind on that occasion, the
gods including the hosts of Rsis that
accompanied them, now _ profusely
worshipped Uma and, even so, Lord Siva.
Thereupon Uma, Daughter of Himavan, with
eyes bloodshot through anger pronounced
an imprecation on all gods and angrily
addressed them as follows: ‘Since I, who
was united with My Spouse with the desire
of getting a son, have been deterred from
the act by you, you shall no longer be able
to beget an offspring through your respective
consorts. Let your wives remain issueless
from this day.’ (18—22)

एवमुक्त्वा सुरान् सर्वान् शशाप पृथिवीमपि।
अवने नैकरूपा त्वं बहुभार्या भविष्यसि॥ २३॥

Having addressed all the gods as
aforesaid, she cursed Earth, too, in the
following words : ‘You will have a multiform
surface, O earth, and shall have many
masters. (23)
न च पुत्रकृतां Witt मत्क्रोधकलुषीकृता।
प्राप्स्यसि त्वं सुदुर्मेधो मम पुत्रमनिच्छती॥ २४॥

‘Agitated by My curse, nor shall you
enjoy the delight of having a son,* O highly
evil-minded lady, since you do not wish that
| should have a son.’ (24)

ar सर्वान् पीडितान् Spt सुरान् सुरपतिस्तदा।
गमनायोपचक्राम दिशं वरुणपालिताम्॥ २५॥

* The demon Naraka, the son born of the union of Mother Earth with Her Consort, Lord Visnu,
manifested as the divine Boar, was later on killed by the same Lord in the form of Sri Krsna.
