908

तत: स राजा राजेन्द्र Ta: tard त्रिविष्टपम्।

« VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

ascended to the realm of heaven. And when

स्वर्गते च Fa तस्मिन् राक्षस: सोऽपसर्पत॥ ३२॥ | the said king ascended to heaven, the ogre

Then that king, O ruler of rulers,

left. (32)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये उत्तरकाण्डे एकोनविंश: सर्ग: ॥ १९ ॥

Thus ends Canto Nineteenth in the Uttarakanda of the glorious Ramayana of Valmiki,
the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

७
ad
a

सर्ग:

Canto XX

Ravana is pulled up by Narada; at his suggestion he seeks the abode
of Yama for combat; Narada’s curiosity on that account

ततो वित्रासयन् Wea पृथिव्यां राक्षसाधिप:।
आससाद घने तस्मिन् नारदं मुनिपुङ्खवम्॥१॥

While terrorizing the mortals on the
earth, Ravana (the suzerain lord of the ogres)
met Narada one day in the midst of clouds
while coursing in the heavens. (1)

तस्याभिवादनं कृत्वा दशग्रीवो निशाचर:।
अब्रवीत् कुशलं Yat हेतुमागमनस्य च॥२॥

Having greeted him and made inquiries
regarding his welfare, Dasagriva, the
Raksasa, asked him the reason of his visit
to the terrestrial region. (2)

Sailing on a cloud, Narada, the Devarsi
of immeasurable effulgence, said to Ravana
who was seated in his aerial car, the
Puspaka: (3)
राक्षसाधिपते der तिष्ठ fasta: सुत।
प्रीतोऽस्म्यभिजनोपेत विक्रमैरूर्जितैस्तव tt ४॥

“O suzerain lord of the Raksasas and
son of Visrava, O my friend, of noble descent,
wait awhile; | am pleased with your noble
exploits. (4)
विष्णुना दैत्यघातैश्च गन्धर्वोरगधर्षणै:।
त्वया aad विमर्दैश्च sot fe परितोषित:॥५॥

“Indeed, | stand highly gratified by Lord
Visnu through encounters killing the Daityas
and equally by you through conflicts
overcoming the Gandharvas and Nagas. (5)

किंचिद्वक्ष्यामि तावत् तु श्रोतव्यं श्रोष्यसे यदि।
wa निगदतस्तात समाधिं श्रवणे कुरु॥६॥

“|, however, O friend, shall presently tell
you something which is worth listening to, if
you are willing to listen. Pray, concentrate on
listening as | speak, O dear son! (6)

feat वध्यते aa त्वयावध्येन dad:
हत Wa Wa लोको यदा मृत्युवशं गत:॥७॥
“What for is this world of mortals being
destroyed by you, who cannot be killed
even by the gods, O my child? For this
world stands virtually destroyed in that it is
in the grip of Death. (7)

देवदानवदैत्यानां यक्षगन्धर्वरक्षसाम्।
अवध्येन त्वया Meh: क्लेष्टुं योग्यो न मानुष: ॥ ८ I
“The world of humans does not deserve
to be tormented by you, who cannot be
killed even by the gods, the Danavas and
the Daityas, much less by the Yaksas, the
Gandharvas and the Raksasas. (8)
नित्यं श्रेयसि wae महद्धिर्व्यसनैर्वृतम्।
हन्यात् कस्तादृशं लोकं जराव्याधिशतैर्युतम्॥ ९॥

“Who would destroy people who are
