* BALAKANDA +

स्कन्धे चासज्ज्य परशुं धनुर्विद्युद्गणोपमम्।
Wea शरमुग्रं च त्रिपुरघ्नं यथा शिवम्॥१९॥
Nay, covered all over with dust, the
whole of Dasaratha’s army _ stood
dumbfounded, as it were. At that time only
Vasistha and the other sages as well as the
king including his four sons retained their
consciousness, all the rest on that spot
became unconscious, as it were. In that
dreadful darkness the aforesaid army of
DaSaratha, which was actually covered with
dust, as well as the king beheld the terrible-
looking sage Parasurama (son of Jamadagni),
the destroyer of the Ksatriyas, born in the
race of Bhrgu, wearing matted locks formed
into a coil at the crown, unassailable as Mount
Kailasa, irresistible as the destructive fire
raging at the time of universal dissolution,
blazing as it were with effulgence and as
such difficult to gaze upon for common men,
with an axe on his right shoulder and a bow
on his left and holding in his hand a fierce
shaft, resembling streaks of lightning, like
another Lord Siva, the Destroyer of the demon
Tripura. (15—19)
तं दृष्टवा भीमसंकाशां ज्वलन्तमिव पावकम्।
वसिष्ठप्रमुखा विप्रा जपहोमपरायणा:॥ Ro Il
संगता Wa: Wd संजजल्पुरथो मिथ:।
कच्चित् पितृवधामर्षी ert नोत्सादयिष्यति॥ २१॥

Seeing the sage, terrible of aspect and
blazing like fire, all the Brahmana seers and

273

sages, given to the practice of austerities
and Homa (offering oblations to the sacred
fire), with Vasistha at their head, collected
at one place and talked to one another,
“Let us hope, full of indignation over the
assassination of his father, he is not going
to exterminate the Ksatriya race over again.

(20-21)

yt क्षत्रवधं कृत्वा गतमन्युर्गतज्वर:।
क्षत्रस्योत्सादनं भूयो न खल्वस्य चिकीर्षितम्॥ २२॥

“Surely it is not his intention to wipe out
the Ksatriyas once more, since having
massacred the Ksatriyas in the past, he
has his anger appeased and has been rid
of his agony caused by his father’s death.”

(22)

`एवमुक्त्वार्घ्यमादाय भार्गवं भीमदर्शनम्।
waa WA रामेति मधुरं वाक्यमब्रुवन्॥ २३॥
Talking in this strain and taking in their
hands water to wash his hands with, the
sages accosted the scion of Bhrgu, who
wore a terrible aspect, in sweet words,
“Rama, O Rama!” (23)
प्रतिगृह्य तु at पूजामृषिदत्तां प्रतापवान्।
WH दाशरथिं रामो जामदग्नयोऽभ्यभाषत॥ २४॥
While accepting that honour done by
the sages, Vasistha and others, the glorious
Parasurama, son of Jamadagni, spoke as
follows to Sri Rama, the eldest son of
DaSaratha. (24)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये बालकाण्डे
चतुस्सप्ततितम: सर्ग: ॥ ७४॥

Thus ends Canto Seventy-four in the Balakanda of the glorious Ramayana of Valmiki,
the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

