650
एवमुक्ता: सुसंक्रुद्धा वायुपुत्रेण धीमता।
शैलश्रृङ्गान् द्रुमांश्चैव जगृहुर्हृष्टमानसा:॥५॥

Admonished in these words by the
sagacious son of the wind-god, the monkeys,
who now felt delighted in mind, seized hold
of mountain-peaks and trees as well in
great fury. (5)
अभिपेतुश्च गर्जन्तो राक्षसान् वानरर्षभा:।
परिवार्य हनूमन्तमन्वयुश्च महाहवे Ut ६ ।।

Nay, surrounding Hanuman on all sides,
the leaders of monkeys followed him in the
great fight and rushed roaring towards the

(6)

Surrounded on all sides by those
monkey leaders, the said Hanuman began
to annihilate the hostile army like a flaming
fire. (7)

स राक्षसानां कदनं चकार सुमहाकपि:।
at वानरसैन्येन कालान्तकयमोपम:॥८॥
Accompanied by the simian army, that
exceptionally mighty monkey, who resembled
Yama assuming the role of Death at the
time of universal dissolution, played havoc
among the ogres. (8)

स तु शोकेन चाविष्ट: कोपेन महता कपि:।
हनूमान् रावणिरथे vedi पातयच्छिलाम्॥९॥

Filled with inordinate grief and anger,
the aforesaid monkey, Hanuman, for his
part hurled a huge rock on the chariot of
Indrajit (son of Ravana). (9)
तामापतन्तीं दृष्ट्वैव रथ: सारथिना तदा।
विधेयाश्वसमायुक्त: विदूरमपवाहित: 1 १० Il

The moment his charioteer saw the
rock coming towards the chariot, the chariot,
which was drawn by obedient horses, was
now driven aside to a long distance by
him. (10)

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA +

तमिन्द्रजितमप्राप्य रथस्थं सहसारथिम्।
facet धरणीं भित्त्वा सा शिला व्यर्थमुद्यता॥ ११॥

Failing to reach the aforesaid Indrajit
seated in his chariot alongwith the charioteer,
the rock in question, which was employed
in vain, entered the bowels of the earth after
splitting it open. (11)
निपतन्त्या च शिलया राक्षसा मथिता भृशम्॥ १२॥

As the rock fell, the army of the ogres
for its part felt disquieted; nay, the ogres
were violently crushed by the rock even as
it fell. (12)

तमभ्यधावन् शतशो नदन्त: काननौकस:।
ते द्रुमांश्च महाकाया गिरिशृङ्गाणि चोद्यता:॥ १३॥
Monkeys (lit., dwellers in the woods) in
their hundreds rushed roaring towards Indrajit.
Nay, seizing hold of trees and mountain-
tops too, those colossal monkeys became
fully active. (13)
क्षिपन्तीन्द्रजितं संख्ये वानरा भीमविक्रमा:।
वृक्षशैलमहावर्षं विसृजन्त: प्लवंगमा:॥ १४॥
शत्रूणां कदनं चक्रुर्नेदुश्च विविधै: tat:
वानरैस्तैर्महाभीमैर्घोररूपा निशाचरा: ॥ १५ ॥
वीर्यादभिहता वृक्षैर्व्यचेष्टन्त रणक्षितौ।
स सैन्यमभिवीक्ष्याथ वानरार्दितमिन्द्रजित्॥ १६॥
प्रगृहीतायुध: क्रुद्ध: परानभिमुखो ययौ।
स शरौघानवसृजन् स्वसैन्येनाभिसंवृत:॥ १७॥
जघान कपिशार्दूलान् सुबहून् दूढविक्रम:।
शूलैरशनिभि: wet: पद्टिशै: शूलमुद्गरै:॥ १८॥
The monkeys of redoubtable prowess
began to rail Indrajit on the battlefield. Nay,
discharging a mighty shower of trees and
rocks, the monkeys created havoc among
the enemies and shouted in various tones.
Vehemently struck on all sides with trees by
those exceptionally redoubtable monkeys,

the rangers of the night of hideous aspect
rolled about restlessly on the battlefield.
