1018

लब्धव्यान्येव Aud दु:खानि च सुखानि a
Ud जात्यन्तरे वत्स मा विषादं कुरुष्व Fu Voi
“| shall dwell in the pits till the period of
curse lasts. May the fragrant flowers be
planted, so that they cover one and half
Yojanas around me always.” Having ordered
thus he (Nrga) then placing Vasu on the
throne said: “O son, abiding always in
Dharma (Royal Conduct), protect your
subjects according to the law and suzerainty.
O best among men, you know how it was in
your presence that the curse was
pronounced on me by the two Brahmanas
in anger, even for a fault so meagre. So, O
bull among men, do not repent for me; O
son, fate, indeed, is powerful, that has put
me in such misery. One attains that only
which is pre-ordained to be attainable by
him; proceeds only to that place, which is
his pre-ordained destination; gains only that

« VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

which is pre-ordained for him to obtain;
similarly, all forms of happiness and sorrows
that result from former birth verily, therefore,
do not be dejected.” (12—17)

एवमुक्त्वा नृपस्तत्र Ud राजा महायशा:।
va जगाम सुकृतं वासाय पुरुषर्षभ॥ १८॥
“Having addressed thus his son, the

famous king Nrga entered to dwell in the well-
constructed pit, O bull among men. (18)

श्वभ्रं महद्रत्नविभूषितं तत्।
सम्पादयामास तदा महात्मा
शापं द्विजाभ्यां fe रुषा विमुक्तम्॥ १९॥
“Thus, having entered the huge pit,
adorned with jewels, the high-souled king
did undergo the consequence of the curse

pronounced angrily by the two Brahmanas.”
(19)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये उत्तरकाण्डे चतु:पञ्चाश: सर्ग: ॥ ५४॥

Thus ends Canto Fifty-four in the Uttarakanda of the glorious Ramayana of Valmiki,
the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

पञ्चपञ्चाश: सर्ग:
Canto LV

King Nimi and sage Vasistha leave their bodies as a
result of mutual curse

we a नृगशापस्य विस्तरोऽभिहितो मया।
यद्यस्ति श्रवणे श्रद्धा श्रृणुष्वेहापरां कथाम्॥१॥
“Thus | have narrated to you in detail
the story of the curse pronounced on Nrga.
If you are interested in hearing more of
such stories, then do listen now to another
story. (1)

`एवमुक्तस्तु रामेण सौमित्रि: पुनरब्रवीत्।
तृप्तिराश्चर्यभूतानां कथानां नास्ति मे नृप॥ २॥
Thus asked by Sri Rama, Laksmana
again said, “O king! | do not feel contented
by listening to such wonderful stories.” (2)

लक्ष्मणेनैवमुक्तस्तु राम BRAT Aa: |
कथां परमधर्मिष्ठां व्याहर्तुमुपचक्रमे॥३॥

Having been thus told by Laksmana,
Sri Rama, a source of delight to the Iksvaku
family, began narrating the highly moral story.

(3)

आसीद् राजा निमिर्नाम इक्ष्वाकूणां महात्मनाम्।
Yat द्वादशमो वीर्ये धर्मे च परिनिष्ठित:॥४॥

“O Laksmana (the joy of Sumitra) there
was a king named Nimi, who was the twelfth
among the sons of Iksvaku. He was eminently
full of prowess and highly religious. (4)
