1056

« VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

सप्ततितम: सर्ग:
Canto LXX

Having obtained a boon from the gods and after founding Madhupuri,
in the twelfth year, Satrughna decides to meet Sri Rama

हते तु लवणे देवा: सेन्द्रा: साग्निपुरोगमा:।
ऊचु: सुमधुरां वाणीं wast शत्रुतापनम्॥१॥
After Lavana was killed, the gods,
together with Indra and Agni as their head,
spoke these sweet words to Satrughna, the
tormentor of the foes. (1)

दिष्ट्या ते विजयो ace दिष्ट्या लवणराक्षस: |
हत: पुरुषशार्दूल वरं वरय सुव्रत॥ २॥
‘O lion among men, by good fortune,

victory is yours and the Raksasa is dead,
O! of a noble vow! ask us for a boon. (2)

वरदास्तु महाबाहो ad wa समागता:।
विजयाकाङ्क्षिणस्तुभ्यममोघं दर्शनं fe Aust
‘All desirous of your victory are intending

to grant boon to you. We have come; our
presence here will not be fruitless.’ (3)

cart भाषितं strat शूरो fet कृताञ्जलि:।
प्रत्युवाच महाबाहु: शत्रुघ्न: प्रयतात्मवान्॥४॥
Hearing the words of the gods,
Satrughna, the long-armed one, disciplined
in mind, keeping his folded hands on his
head replied thus : (4)

sa मधुपुरी रम्या मधुरा देवनिर्मिता।
निवेशं प्राप्नुयाच्छीघ्रमेष मेऽस्तु वर: पर:॥७५॥
‘This city of Madhu, Madhura by name,
built by the gods, may become the capital
soon. This is the only boon that | desire: (5)
तं देवा: प्रीतमनसो बाढमित्येव राघवम्।
भविष्यति पुरी Tat शूरसेना न संशय:॥६॥
The gods said: ‘So be it’ O scion of the
Raghus: This beautiful city will be Surasena

indeed, possessed of an army of brave
men, there is no doubt about it.’ (6)

a तथोक्त्वा महात्मानो दिवमारुरुहुस्तदा।
शत्रुघ्नोऽपि महातेजास्तां सेनां समुपानयत्॥७॥

Thus saying the holy gods फीडा
ascended to heaven. Satrughna too, the
powerful one, brought back the army from
the banks of the Ganga. (7)

सा सेना VITA AAT |
निवेशनं च शत्रुघ्न: श्रावणेन समारभत्॥८॥
That army came soon, hearing the news
of the death of Lavana at the hands of
Satrughna and commenced the establishment
of the capital in the month of Sravana (roughly
corresponding to July-August). (8)
सा पुरा दिव्यसंकाशा at द्वादशमे शुभे।
Piece: शूरसेनानां विषयश्चाकुतोभय:॥९॥
That holy country was established as
the territory of the Surasenas, in the course

of twelve years, as there was no cause for
fear. (9)

क्षेत्राणि सस्ययुक्तानि काले वर्षति वासव:।
अरोगवीरपुरुषा शत्रुघ्नभुजपालिता।॥ १० ॥

The fields were full with grains, Indra
(the rain-god) brought forth rain in time, the
warriors, protected by Satrughna, were free
of disease. (10)

अर्धचन्द्रप्रतीकाशा यमुनातीरशोभिता।
शोभिता गृहमुख्यैश्च चत्वरापणवीथिकै:।

चातुर्वर्ण्यसमायुक्ता नानावाणिज्यशोभिता॥ ११॥

That city, shaped like the half-moon,
beautified by the banks of the Yamuna, was
also embellished with special mansions and
quadrangular market-place. It was inhabited
by the four Varnas (castes) and abounded
in all forms of merchandise and trade. (11)

यच्च तेन पुरा शुभ्रं लवणेन Hd महत्।
तच्छोभयति VAT नानावर्णोपशोभिताम्॥ १२॥
आरामैश्च विहारैश्च शोभमानां समन्तत:।
शोभितां शोभनीयैश्च तथान्यैर्देवमानुषै:॥१३॥
