+ UTTARAKANDA +

1085

Canto LXXXV
Visnu’s lustre enters Indra’s body and his thunderbolt, Indra kills
Vrtra with his thunderbolt and is guilty of killing a
Brahmana and as a consequence has to go
to the region of darkness

लक्ष्मणस्य तु Ag वाक्यं श्रुत्वा शत्रुनिबर्हण:।
व्रत्रघातमशेषेण कथयेत्याह सुव्रत॥१॥

Hearing those words of Laksmana, the
extirpator of foes, Sri Rama, said: ‘O
observer of vows, narrate in totality the
killing of Vrtra.’ (1)

राघवेणैवमुक्तस्तु सुमित्रानन्दवर्धन:।
wa wa कथां दिव्यां कथयामास Gad uu
Being thus spoken to by the scion of
Raghu, Sri Rama, the enhancer of the joy of
Sumitra, Laksmana, the observer of vows,
narrated the divine story of the killing of
Vrtra again. (2)

सहस्राक्षवच: श्रुत्वा सर्वेषां च दिवौकसाम्।
विष्णुर्देवानुवाचेदं सर्वानिन्द्रपुरोगमान्॥ ३॥
‘Having heard the words of the
thousand-eyed one, Indra, and also of all
the gods, Visnu spoke thus to all the gods
headed by Indra. (3)

yd सौहृदबद्धोऽस्मि grate महात्मन:।
तेन युष्मत्प्रियार्थं fe नाहं हन्मि महासुरम्॥४॥
‘Formerly | was attached affectionately
to Vrtra here and thus for your good indeed
| am not killing the great Asura. (4)
अवश्यं करणीयं च भवतां सुखमुत्तमम्।
तस्मादुपायमाख्यास्ये सहस्राक्षो वधिष्यति॥ ५॥

‘That which leads to your great
happiness, has indeed to be performed:
Therefore, | shall tell you the means by
which Vrtra will be killed; the thousand-eyed
one, Indra, will kill Vrtra. (5)

त्रेधाभूतं करिष्यामि आत्मानं सुरसत्तमा:।
wt qt सहस्राक्षो वधिष्यति न संशय:॥६॥

‘O best among gods, | shall divide
myself threefold, by that the thousand-eyed
one, Indra, will indeed kill Vrtra. There is no
doubt about it. (6)

एकांशो ard ar द्वितीयो ama qi

तृतीयो भूतलं aq dat qt हनिष्यति॥७॥
‘One part of mine may go to Vasava

(Indra), the second part may enter the

thunderbolt and third, the earth; then Indra
shall kill Vrtra.’ (7)

तथा gata cast cal वाक्यमथाब्रुवन्।
एवमेतन्न संदेहो यथा adhe दैत्यहन्॥८॥

On the lord of gods, Visnu, speaking
thus, the gods then said: ‘This is as You
say, there is no doubt, O killer of the Daityas,
sons of Diti. (8)

भद्रं तेऽस्तु गमिष्यामो वृत्रासुरवधैषिण:।
भजस्व परमोदार aad Taq तेजसा॥९॥

‘Let welfare be with You, we shall now
depart desiring the killing of the Asura, Vrtra.
O extremely liberal one, Visnu, may you
bestow Vasava with your power.’ (9)

तत: Ga महात्मान: सहस्राक्षपुरोगमा:।
तदरण्यमुपाक्रामन् यत्र Gat महासुर:॥ १०॥
Then all the noble ones headed by the
thousand-eyed god, Indra, went to that forest
where the great Asura, Vrtra, was. (10)
तेऽपश्यंस्तेजसा भूतं तप्यन्तमसुरोत्तमम्।
पिबन्तमिव लोकांस्त्रीन् निर्दहन्तमिवाम्बरम्॥ ११॥
They saw the mighty Asura possessed
of his own power performing penance, as if

drinking the three worlds and burning up the
sky. (11)
