* BALAKANDA +

131

Canto XXI

The wrath of ViSwamitra; the intercession of Vasistha
in favour of ViSwamitra

तच्छुत्वा वचनं तस्य स्नेहपर्याकुलाक्षरम्।
समन्यु: कौशिको वाक्यं प्रत्युवाच महीपतिम्॥ १॥
Hearing the reply, quoted above, of
Dasaratha, marked with faltering accents,
expressive of parental affection, Viswamitra
(descended in the line of KuSa), full of rage,
made the following rebuttal to the king : (1)

पूर्वमर्थं प्रतिश्रुत्य प्रतिज्ञां हातुमिच्छसि।
राघवाणामयुक्तोऽयं कुलस्यास्य विपर्यय:॥ २॥

“Having first promised to grant the object
solicited by me, you want to go back upon
your word! This breach of promise is
unworthy of the scions of Raghu and will
prove to be the ruin of this race. (2)

adie a at wer गमिष्यामि यथागतम्।
मिथ्याप्रतिज्ञ: काकुत्स्थ Tat भव Geqaa: 3
“If this is bearable to you, | shall return
even as | came without taking Rama with
me. With your promise thus falsified, O

scion of Kakutstha, remain at ease in the
midst of your relations.” (3)

तस्य रोषपरीतस्य विश्चामित्रस्य धीमत:।

चचाल AGM कृत्स्ना देवानां च भयं महत्॥४॥
When Viswamitra, who was full of

wisdom, was seized with fury, the whole

earth shook and a grave fear entered the
mind of gods. (4)
त्रस्तरूपं तु fama wie ad महानूषि:।
नृपतिं सुव्रतो धीरो वसिष्ठो वाक्यमब्रवीत्॥५॥
Perceiving the entire world to be greatly
alarmed indeed, the great and wise Rsi

Vasistha of noble vows addressed the
following words to the king : (5)

इक्ष्वाकूणां Het जात: साक्षाद् धर्म इवापर:।
धृतिमान् सुव्रत: श्रीमान् न धर्मं हातुमर्हसि॥ ६॥

“Born in the line of the Ikswakus, you
are the highest virtue personified, as it were.
Full of firmness and observing excellent
vows, as you do, Your Majesty ought not to
abandon righteousness (in the form of fidelity
to your word). (6)

त्रिषु लोकेषु विख्यातो धर्मात्मा इति wea:
स्वधर्मं प्रतिपद्यस्व नाधर्मं वोढुमर्हसि॥७॥

“A scion of Raghu as you are, celebrated
in all the three worlds as one whose mind is
given to piety, resort to your innate character,
i.e., fidelity to truth. You ought not to embrace
unrighteousness in the form of breach of
promise. (7)

प्रतिश्रुत्य करिष्येति उक्तं वाक्यमकुर्वत:।
इष्टापूर्तवधो भूयात् तस्माद् रामं विसर्जय॥८॥

“Merit that has accrued to you from
sacrificial performances (culminating in a
horse-sacrifice) and works of public utility
(like the construction of wells etc.) will be
lost if you fail to redeem the promise made
by you, having once solemnly declared that
you will do a thing. Therefore, send Rama
with him. (8)

कृतास्त्रमकृतास्त्रं वा At शक्ष्यन्ति राक्षसा:।
TH कुशिकपुत्रेण ज्वलनेनामृतं यथा॥९॥

“The ogres will not be able to overpower
him, no matter whether he has mastered
archery or not, so long as he is protected
by ViSwamitra (son of Gadhi, a scion of
KuSa) as nectar was guarded by (a belt*
of) fire. (9)

* Vide Mahabharata I, xxxii 22—25.
