« KISKINDHAKANDA +

1109

Canto XLIV

With a view to inspiring confidence in Sita, when found, Sri Rama hands
over to Hanuman his signet ring as a token of recognition while
sending him away to the south. Bowing down at Sr Rama’s
feet, Hanuman leaves his presence alongwith a
contingent of the Vanara forces

विशेषेण तु सुग्रीवो हनूमत्यर्थमुक्तवान्।
स हि तस्मिन् हरिश्रेष्ठे निश्चितार्थोऽर्थसाधने॥ १॥

Sugriva for his part broached the
subject (of conducting a search for Sita) in
particular before Hanuman, for, so far as
the question of achieving that purpose was
concerned, he was sure about that jewel
among monkeys being able to accomplish
the task. (1)

sada हनूमन्तं विक्रान्तमनिलात्मजम्।

Gia: परमप्रीत: wy: सर्ववनौकसाम्॥ zi
Nay, supremely pleased with Hanuman,

Sugriva, the lord of all the denizens of the

forest, spoke as follows to Hanuman, the
valiant son of the wind-god : (2)
न भूमौ नान्तरिक्षे वा नाम्बरे नामरालये।
नाप्सु वा गतिसङ्गं ते पश्यामि हरिपुंगव॥ ३॥
“Neither on earth nor in the air nor
again in the sky nor in heaven (the abode of
immortals) nor in waters for that matter do |
find any obstruction to your movement, O
bull among the monkeys ! (3)

ae: सहगन्धर्वा: सनागनरदेवता:।
विदिता: सर्वलोकास्ते ससागरधराधरा:॥४॥

“All the worlds inhabited by demons, by
Gandharvas, by Nagas (semi-divine beings
having the face of a man and the body of a
serpent and said to inhabit Patala), by human
beings and by gods and including oceans
and mountains are known to you. (4)

गतिर्वेगश्च तेजश्च लाघवं च महाकपे।
पितुस्ते west dk मारुतस्य महौजस:॥५॥

“Your unhampered movement and
speed, energy and adroitness too are similar
to those found in your father, the wind-god,
who is possessed of extraordinary strength,
O heroic and great monkey ! (5)

तेजसा aft a ad न समं भुवि विद्यते।
ae यथा लभ्यते सीता तत्त्वमेवानुचिन्तय॥६॥

“There is no created being on earth
equal to you in vigour either. Therefore, you
alone should ponder on the way in which
Sita may be found. (6)

waa हनुमन्नस्ति बलं बुद्धि: पराक्रम:।
देशकालानुवृत्तिश्च was नयपण्डित॥७॥

“Nay, in you alone, O Hanuman, repose
strength, wisdom, prowess, conformability
to place and time, and prudence too, O past
master in statecraft !” (7)

ad: RATATAT GATT हनूमति।
विदित्वा हनुमन्तं च चिन्तयामास राघव:॥८॥

Concluding from the aforesaid words
of Sugriva that the success of the venture
depended on Hanuman, and also knowing
Hanuman to be capable of accomplishing
the work, Sri Rama (a scion of Raghu)
reflected as follows: (8)

सर्वथा निश्चितार्थोऽयं हनूमति atta:
निश्चितार्थतरश्चापि हनूमान् कार्यसाधने॥९॥

“This lord of monkeys is cock-sure
about Hanuman being’ capable _ of
accomplishing the work entrusted to him,
while Hanuman too is even more confident
about his being able to accomplish the task.

(9)
