# YUDDHAKANDA #

तथा व्यभासीद्धरिसैन्यमध्ये
निहत्य रामो युधि कुम्भकर्णम्॥ १७५॥
Having made_- short’ work of

Kumbhakarna in combat, the celebrated Sri
Rama shone brightly in the midst of the
simian ranks in the same way as the sun
would when delivered from the mouth of
Rahu, after dispersing the darkness of the
celestial world. (175)

प्रहर्षमीयुर्बहवश्च वानरा:
प्रबुद्धपद्मप्रतिमैरिवाननै: ।
अपूजयन् राघवमिष्टभागिनं
eat रिपौ भीमबले नृपात्मजम्॥ १७६॥
Numerous monkeys, who were
distinguished by faces resembling full-blown

573

lotuses, experienced great joy on an enemy
endowed with terrible might having been got
rid of, and extolled Prince Rama, who had
achieved their desired end. (176)

a कुम्भकर्णं सुरसैन्यमर्दनं
महत्सु युद्धेषु कदाचनाजितम्।
ननन्द हत्वा भरताग्रजो रणे

महासुरं वरत्रमिवामराधिप: it १७७॥

Sri Rama, the elder brother of
Bharata,felt rejoiced on having disposed of
in combat Kumbhakarna, the destroyer of
celestial armies, who had never been
conquered in major conflicts, even as Indra,
the suzerain lord of gods, did on making
short work of the mighty demon, Vrtra. (177)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये युद्धकाण्डे सप्तषष्टितम: AW: ॥ ६७॥
Thus ends Canto Sixty-sevem in the Yuddhakanda of the glorious Ramayana of
Valmiki, the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

अष्टषष्टितम: at:
Canto LXVIII

Ravana’s lament over Kumbhakarna’s fall

कुम्भकर्णं हतं दृष्टवा राघवेण महात्मना।
राक्षसा राक्षसेन्द्राय रावणाय न्यवेदयन्॥१॥
Seeing Kumbhakarna killed by the the
high-souled Sri Rama. the ogres present on
the field of battle reported the matter in the
following words to Ravana, the ruler of ogres:
(1)

राजन् स कालसंकाश: संयुक्त: कालकर्मणा।
faster वानरीं सेनां भक्षयित्वा च वानरान्॥ २॥

प्रतपित्वा मुहूर्तं तु प्रशान्तो रामतेजसा।
कायेनार्धप्रविष्टेन समुद्रं भीमदर्शनम्॥३॥

निकृत्तनासाकर्णेन विक्षरद्रुधिरिण a
रुद्ध्वा gt शरीरेण लङ्काया: पर्वतोपम:॥४॥

कुम्भकर्णस्तव Wel काकुत्स्थशरपीडित:।
अगण्डभूतो विव्रृतो aaa sa SAG

‘Having scattered the simian ranks and
devoured the monkeys and exhibited his
prowess for a space, O king, Kumbhakarna,
who vied with Yama (the god of retribution)
has been claimed by death. Tormented by
the arrows of Rama (a scion of Kakutstha),
nay, quelled by his superior strength, your
celebrated younger brother, Kumbhakarna
for his part, who resembled a mountain in
size, lies reduced to a headless and limbless
mass, resembling a tree scorched by a
forest conflagration, with his trunk half
submerged in the terrible-looking sea and
blocking the main gate of Lanka with his
head, which has its nose and ears lopped
off and from which blood is streaming
profusely.” (2—5)
