« KISKINDHAKANDA +

Sugriva then called the foremost of
monkeys in a loud voice, saying “Come
hither !” Hearing the aforesaid call of Sugriva,
all the monkeys who were permitted to see
the ladies in the gynaeceum quickly came
with folded hands. To them, when arrived in
his presence, the king, Sugriva, whose
splendour resembled the brilliance of the
sun, presently said: (7-8)

उपस्थापयत fat शिबिकां मम वानरा:।
श्रुत्वा तु वचनं तस्य wa: शीघ्रविक्रमा:॥९॥
समुपस्थापयामासु: शिबिकां प्रियदर्शनाम्।
तामुपस्थापितां gear शिबिकां वानराधिप: ti १० ॥
लक्ष्मणारुह्यतां शीघ्रमिति सौमित्रिमब्रवीत्।
इत्युक्त्वा काञ्चनं यानं सुग्रीव: सूर्यसंनिभम्॥ ११॥
बहुभिर्हरिभिर्युक्तमारुरोह सलक्ष्मण: |
पाण्डुरेणातपत्रेण ध्रियमाणेन मूर्धनि॥१२॥
शुवलैश्च वबालव्यजनैर्धूयमानै: समन्तत:।
बन्दिभिश्चाभिनन्दित: ।। १३ ॥
निर्ययौ प्राप्य सुग्रीवो राज्यश्रियमनुत्तमाम्।
स वानरशतैस्तीक्ष्णैर्हुभि: शस्त्रपाणिभि:॥ १४॥
परिकीर्णो ययौ तत्र यत्र रामो व्यवस्थित:।

स तं देशमनुप्राप्य श्रेष्ठं रामनिषेवितम्॥१५॥
अवातरन्महातेजा: शिबिकाया: सलक्ष्मण:।
आसाद्य च ततो WA कृताञ्जलिपुटोऽभवत्॥ १६॥

“Bring my palanquin soon, O monkeys !”
Hearing his command, monkeys who walked
with rapid strides duly brought a palanquin
which was pleasing to the sight. Seeing the
aforesaid palanquin ready, Sugriva, the
suzerain lord of monkeys, said to Laksmana
(son of Sumitra), “Let it be mounted soon, O
Laksmana !” Saying so, Sugriva ascended
with Laksmana the gold palanquin, which
shone brightly like the sun and was supported
by a number of monkeys. Distinguished by
a white canopy supported over his head
and a number of white whisks being waved
all about him, and hailed with the sound of
conches and kettledrums and eulogized by
bards, Sugriva sallied forth in regal state for
the first time after attaining the highest royal

1081

fortune. Surrounded by many hundreds of
warlike monkeys bearing weapons in their
hands, he proceeded to the spot where Sri
Rama had taken up his abode. Having
reached the excellent region which had been
resorted to by Sri Rama, Sugriva, who was
endowed with high spirits, descended from

the palanquin’ with Laksmana_ and,
approaching Sri Rama, now stood with folded
hands. (9—16)

कृताञ्जलौ स्थिते तस्मिन् वानराश्चाभवंस्तथा।
तटाकमिव तं दृष्टवा UA: कुड्मलपङ्कजम्॥ १७॥
वानराणां Fed सैन्यं सुग्रीवे प्रीतिमानभूत्।
Wea: पतितं Yat तमुत्थाप्य atari ec i
Wor च बहुमानाच्च wea: परिषस्वजे।
परिष्वज्य च धर्मात्मा निषीदेति ततोऽब्रवीत्॥ १९॥

When Sugriva stood with folded
hands, the other monkeys too did likewise.
Beholding the large army of monkeys
with folded hands resembling a lake full of
lotus buds, Sri Rama got pleased with
Sugriva. Raising the aforesaid Sugriva,
the lord of monkeys, fallen at his feet,
touching the ground with his head, Sri Rama
(a scion of Raghu) embraced him with love
and high esteem. Nay, having embraced
him, Sri Rama, whose mind was set on
virtue, thereupon said, “Please sit down.”

(17—19)
निषण्णं तं ततो दृष्टवा क्षितौ रामोऽब्रवीत् तत:।
धर्ममर्थं च कामं च काले यस्तु निषेवते॥ २०॥
far wad ak a राजा हरिसत्तम।
हित्वा धर्मं तथार्थं च कामं यस्तु निषेवते॥ २१॥
a वृक्षाग्रे यथा qa: पतित: प्रतिबुध्यते।
अमित्राणां वधे amt मित्राणां संग्रहे Ta: २२॥
त्रिवर्गफलभोक्ता च राजा धर्मेण युज्यते।
उद्योगसमयस्त्वेष प्राप्तत शत्रुनिषूदन॥ २३॥

Seeing him seated on the ground, Sri
Rama then spoke as follows : “A king in the
true sense of the term is he who ever

pursues religious merit, wealth and sensuous
enjoyment too at the opportune moment,
