* BALAKANDA +

Full of vigilance and armed with exquisite
bows, the two heroes, capable as they were
of subduing the enemy, kept by the side of
Viswamitra, the foremost of sages, and
guarded him as well as his sacrifice. (6)

अथ काले गते तस्मिन् षष्ठेऽहनि तदाऽऽगते।
सौमित्रिमब्रवीद् wat यत्तो va समाहित:॥७॥

Now as time rolled on (five days
had elapsed) and the sixth day (night), the
most important on which the Soma juice
is extracted, arrived, Sri Rama said to
Laksmana, “Be prepared for a tussle and be
vigilant.” (7)

रामस्यैवं ब्रुवाणस्य त्वरितस्य युयुत्सया।
प्रजज्वाल ततो वेदि: सोपाध्यायपुरोहिता॥ cu

Even as Sri Rama, who was impatient
because of his eagerness to fight with the
Raksasas, spoke as aforesaid, the fire at
the sacrificial altar at once blazed forth
in the presence of the Brahma, the
superintending priest viz., Viswamitra and
the other priests officiating at the sacrifice.

(8)

सदर्भचमसस्त्रुक्का ससमित्कुसुमोच्चया।
विश्वामित्रेण सहिता वेदिर्जज्वाल स्त्विजा॥ ९॥

The fire at the altar, which was
distinguished by the presence of the sacred
KuSa grass, a Camasa (a wooden vessel,
generally of a square shape and furnished
with a handle, used at sacrifices for drinking
the Soma juice), a Sruk (a sort of large
wooden ladle used for pouring clarified butter
on a sacrificial fire and properly made of
Palasa or Khadira wood and about as long
as an arm, with a receptacle at the end of
the size of a hand), pieces of firewood and
heaps of flowers for decoration and worship
and was surrounded by Viswamitra and the
other priests—blazed forth all of a sudden,
heralding the onslaught of the Raksasas.

(9)
मन्त्रवच्च यथान्यायं यज्ञोऽसौ सम्प्रवर्तते।
THIS च महाञ्छब्द: प्रादुरासीद् भयानक: ॥ १० I

155

The sacrificial performance in question
duly proceeded, accompanied by the recitation
of sacred texts and presently there arose a
loud and fearful clamour in the sky. (10)

आवार्य गगनं मेघो यथा ware दृश्यते।

तथा मायां विकुर्वाणौ राक्षसावभ्यधावताम्॥ ११॥
aay सुबाहुश्च तयोरनुचरास्तथा।
आगम्य भीमसंकाशा रुधिरौघानवासृजन्॥१२॥

Just as a cloud appears during the
monsoon, enveloping the sky, the two
Raksasas, Marica and Subahu, swooped
down upon the sacrificial altar spreading
their Maya (sorcery). They as well as their
followers of terrible aspect presently arrived
and rained torrents of blood as well as of
flesh, pus and so on. (11-12)

at a7 रुधिरौघेण वेदीं वीक्ष्य समुक्षिताम्।
सहसाभिद्रुतो रामस्तानपश्यत् deat दिवि॥१३॥

Clearly perceiving the altar in question
drenched with that shower of blood, Sri
Rama ran forth at once to discover the
cause and presently beheld the ogres in the
air. (13)

तावापतन्तौ सहसा SBT राजीवलोचन:।

लक्ष्मणं त्वभिसम्प्रेक्ष्य रामो वचनमब्रवीत्॥१४॥
Seeing the two Raksasas_ rushing

headlong towards him, the lotus-eyed Rama

for his part gazed at Laksmana and spoke
the following words to him: (14)

पश्यलक्ष्मण दुर्वृत्तान् राक्षसान् पिशिताशनान्।
मानवास्त्रसमाधूताननिलेन यथा घनान्॥१५॥
करिष्यामि न संदेहो नोत्सहे हन्तुमीदृशान्।
इत्युक्त्वा वचनं रामश्चापे संधाय वेगवान्॥१६॥
ame परमोदारमस्त्रं परमभास्वरम्।
चिक्षेप परमक्रुद्धो मारीचोरसि राघव:॥१७॥
“Look here, O Laksmana, | shall scatter
the wicked Raksasas, that feed on raw flesh,
by means of the Manavasira, the missile
presided over by Swayambhuva Manu, as
clouds are dispersed by the wind: there is no
doubt about it. | do not feel inclined to kill
