* AYODHYAKANDA +

अथवा नौ ध्रुवं मन्ये मन्यमान: सुखोचितौ।
वनवासमनुध्याय गृहाय UTA २२॥

“Nay, considering us to be deserving
of comfort and bearing in mind the privations
attendant on residence in a forest, father
will, | believe, surely take us back home.

(22)
इमां चाप्येष वैदेह्रीमत्यन्तसुखसेविनीम्।
पिता मे राघव: श्रीमान् वनादादाय यास्यति॥ २३॥

“Again, my aforesaid father, the glorious
DaSaratha, a scion of Raghu, will return to
the capital taking with him from the forest
this Sita (a princess of the Videha kingdom)
too, who has always enjoyed the utmost
amenities of life. (23)

एतौ at सम्प्रकाशेते गोत्रवन्तौ मनोरमौ।
वायुवेगसमौ वीरौ जवनौ तुरगोत्तमौ॥ २४॥

“Here are to be clearly seen the two
spirited and excellent fleet horses of noble
breed, pleasing to the mind and vying with
the wind in swiftness. (24)

a एष सुमहाकाय: कम्पते वाहिनीमुखे।
नाग: शत्रुंजयो नाम वृद्धस्तातस्य धीमत:॥ RG I
“Here is the well-known gigantic and
aged elephant, Satrufijaya by name, of our
wise father, rocking about at the head of the
army. (25)
न तु पश्यामि तच्छत्रं पाण्डुरं लोकविश्रुतम्।
पितुर्दिव्यं महाभाग संशयो wade मे॥ २६॥
“|, however, do not behold that white
heavenly umbrella of my father, well-known
in the world, O highly blessed one! Doubt
on this point fills my mind.” (26)
वृक्षाग्रादवरोह त्वं He लक्ष्मण Age: |
इतीव रामो धर्मात्मा सौमित्रिं तमुवाच ह॥ २७॥

637

“Do my bidding, O Laksmana, and climb
you down from the tree-top.” In these precise
words did Sri Rama, whose mind was given
to piety, address the celebrated Laksmana,
son of Sumitra: so the tradition goes. (27)

अवतीर्य तु सालाग्रात् तस्मात् स समितिंजय:।
लक्ष्मण: प्राञ्जलिर्भूत्वा तस्थौ रामस्य पार्श्वत: ॥ २८ ॥

Getting down from that top of the sal
tree, the aforesaid Laksmana, the conqueror
of hostile forces, for his part, stood by the
side of Sri Rama with folded hands. (28)

भरतेनाथ dept सम्मर्दो न भवेदिति।

समन्तात् तस्य sera सेना वासमकल्पयत्॥ २९॥
Admonished by Bharata in the words:

“Let there be no molestation to the hermitage

of Sri Rama”, his army encamped round-
about that mountain. (29)

अध्यर्धमिक्ष्वाकुचमूर्योजनं पर्वतस्य ह।
wey = न्यविशदावृत्य गजवाजिनराकुला॥ ३०॥

Occupying an area of one Yojana and

a half, they say, the army of Bharata, of
Ikswaku’s line, full of elephants, horses and
men, encamped by the side of the mountain.
(30)

सा चित्रकूटे भरतेन सेना

af पुरस्कृत्य विधूय दर्पम्।
रघुनन्दनस्य

विरोचते नीतिमता प्रणीता॥ ३१॥

Brought with the purpose of propitiating
Sri Rama, the delight of the Raghus, by
Bharata, who was rich in the sense of
propriety, placing righteousness in the
forefront and shaking off vanity, the aforesaid
army shone brightly in the vicinity of
Citrakuta. (31)

प्रसादनार्थं

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्येऽयोध्याकाण्डे
सप्तनवतितम: सर्ग: ॥ ९७॥

Thus ends Canto Ninety-seven in the Ayodhyakanda of the glorious Ramayana of
Valmiki, the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

