312

and protect your son, your own self and me
too, O lady of marvellous insight!” —_ (30)

मन्थराया वच: श्रुत्वा शयनात् सा शुभानना।
उत्तस्थौ हर्षसम्पूर्णा चन्द्रलेखेव शारदी॥ ३१॥

Flooded with joy to hear the report of
Manthara, that lady of charming appearance
rose from her bed like the orb of the autumnal
full moon. (31)

अतीव सा तु संतुष्टा कैकेयी विस्मयान्विता।
दिव्यमाभरणं तस्यै कुब्जायै Weel WML ३२॥
Full of amazement and extremely
gratified, the celebrated Kaikeyi for her part
gave away to the aforesaid hunchback a
wonderful and shining jewel. (32)

दत्त्वा त्वाभरणं तस्यै कुब्जायै प्रमदोत्तमा।
कैकेयी मन्थरां हृष्टा पुनरेवाब्रवीदिदम्॥ ३३॥
Feeling positively rejoiced on having
bestowed the jewel on that hunchback,
Kaikeyi, the foremost of young ladies, once
more spoke to Manthara as follows: (33)
एतन्मे प्रियमाख्यातं किं वा भूय: करोमि ते॥ ३४॥

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

“This is indeed a most welcome news
broken to me by you, O Manthara ! This is
a delightful tidings to me. What more, for
that matter, shall | do for you? (34)

wa a wa ae विशेषं नोपलक्षये।
तस्मात्तुष्टास्मि यद्राजा रामं राज्येऽभिषेक्ष्यति। ३५ Ul

“| perceive no difference between Rama,
on the one hand, and Bharata, on the other.
| am, therefore, pleased to know that the
Emperor is going to install Sri Rama on the
throne. (35)
न मे परं किंचिदितो at पुन:

at परं ते प्रददामि तं वृणु॥ ३६॥

“No exquisite and agreeable nectar-
like expression other than this could, of
course, have been easily addressed to me,
O woman deserving kindness! Since,
however, you have spoken as aforesaid to
me, | therefore offer to you another dearest
boon; please ask it of me.” (36)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्येऽयोध्याकाण्डे

सप्तम: सर्ग: ॥ ७॥

Thus ends Canto Seven in the Ayodhyakanda of the glorious Ramayana
of Valmiki, the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

Canto VIII

While Manthara was thus trying to impress on Kaikeyi’s mind that the
installation of Sri Rama on the throne of Ayodhya would spell
disaster to Bharata, Kaikeyi for her part went on harping on
Sri Rama’s virtues and maintained that his installation as
Prince Regent was quite welcome to her. Manthara,
however, goes on labouring her point and urges
Kaikeyi to interrupt the installation

Tet त्वभ्यसूय्यैनामुत्सृज्याभरणं हि तत्।
उवाचेदं ततो वाक्यं कोपदु:खसमन्विता॥१॥

Censuring Kaikey! and throwing away
the said jewel gifted by her, however,
Manthara thereupon spoke to her as follows,
