* SUNDARAKANDA +

ferocious son of Prahasta, who had large
teeth, carried a bow and was difficult to
conquer in battle, sallied forth clad in crimson
and adorned with a garland of red flowers, a
chaplet and brilliant earrings, and stretching
with impetuosity his large bow, which
resembled a rainbow, was furnished with
shining arrows and which when twanged
produced a sound like that of thunder and
that accompanying a stroke of lightning, his
eyes rolling through anger. (1—3)

wer विस्फारघोषेण धनुषो महता fast: |
प्रदिशश्च wa सहसा समपूर्यत॥४॥

All the four quarters as well as the
intermediate points as also the sky got filled
all of a sudden with the thunderous twang of
that bow. (4)

Wt खरयुक्तेन तमागतमुदीक्ष्य स:।
हनूमान् वेगसम्पन्नो wet च ननाद च॥७५॥
Observing him arrived in a chariot drawn
by donkeys, the celebrated Hanuman, who
was full of vigour, rejoiced and roared too.
(5)

तं तोरणविटङ्कस्थं हनूमन्तं महाकपिम्।
जम्बुमाली महातेजा विव्याध निशितै: शरै:॥६॥
Jambumali, who was endowed with
extraordinary energy, pierced with sharpened
arrows that great monkey, Hanuman,
standing on the top of the archway. (6)

अर्धचन्द्रेण वदने शिरस्येकेन कर्णिना।
बाह्वोर्विव्याध नाराचैर्दंशभिस्तु कपीश्वरम्॥७॥

He for his part hit Hanuman, the leader
of monkeys, in the mouth with an arrow with
a crescent-shaped head, on the head with a
single barbed shaft and in the arms with ten
steel arrows. (7)

तस्य तच्छुशुभे aa शरेणाभिहतं मुखम्।
शरदीवाम्बुजं फुल्लं fag भास्कररश्मिना॥८॥
Pierced with an arrow, his well-known

coppery countenance looked charming like
a blown red lotus lit by a sunbeam in autumn.

(8)

199

तत्तस्य th tht tad शुशुभे मुखम्।
यथाऽऽकाशे महापद्मं सिक्तं काञ्चनबिन्दुभि: ie i
Stained with blood, his ruddy face
looked splendid like a large red lotus in the
sky, sprinkled with drops of honey of a red
Asoka flower. (9)

genre बाणाभिहतो राक्षसस्य महाकपि:।

तत: पार्श्वऽतिविपुलां cast महतीं शिलाम्॥ go I
Wounded by the shafts of the ogre, the

great monkey waxed wroth. Presently he

sighted by his side a big rock of immense
proportions. (10)

wat तां समुत्पाट्य fasta जववद् बली।
at शरैर्दशभि: क्रुद्धस्ताडयामास राक्षस:॥११॥
Tearing it up with impetuosity, the mighty
monkey hurled it with vehemence. Full of
rage the ogre broke it asunder with ten
arrows. (11)
विपन्नं कर्म dq दृष्ट्वा हनूमांश्चण्डविक्रम:।
सालं विपुलमुत्पाट्य भ्रामयामास वीर्यवान्॥१२॥
Uprooting a huge sal tree on seeing
the aforesaid feat brought to naught, the
powerful Hanuman, who was endowed with
terrific prowess, began to whirl it. (12)
चिक्षेप सुबहून् बाणाञ्जम्बुमाली महाबल:॥ १३॥
Perceiving the monkey, who was
endowed with extraordinary might, spinning
the sal tree, the highly powerful Jambumali
let loose numerous shafts. (13)
सालं चतुर्भिश्चिच्छेद amt पञ्चभिर्भुजे।
उरस्येकेन बाणेन दशभिस्तु स्तनान्तरे॥१४॥
He rent the sal asunder with four arrows
and pierced the monkey in his arms with

five others, in the chest with a further dart
and between the breasts with ten more. (14)

a शरै: पूरिततनु: क्रोधेन महता aa: |
waa परिघं Ta भ्रामयामास वेगित:॥१५॥

Seizing the same iron club (which he
had made use of in the very first instance),
