464

powered by grief caused by the report about
the death of her husband, the ogresses for
their part then helped her to ascend the
aerial car, Puspaka. Then, placing Sita
alongwith Trijata in Puspaka, the ogresses
proceeded to show Sri Rama and Laksmana
to her. In this way Ravana caused her to fly
over Lanka (the city dressed with rows of
flags and pennons). (10—15)
प्राघोषयत हृष्टश्च लङ्कायां राक्षसेश्वर:।
राघवो लक्ष्मणश्चैव हताविन्द्रजिता रणे॥१६॥
The delighted Ravana (the lord of ogres)
also had it widely proclaimed in Lanka that
Sri Rama (a scion of Raghu) as also
Laksmana had been killed in combat by
Indrajit. (16)
विमानेनापि गत्वा q सीता त्रिजटया सह।
ददर्शं वानराणां तु Wa Sat निपातितम्॥१७॥
Flying in the aerial car with Trijata, Sita
for her part beheld a large army of the
monkeys actually destroyed. (17)

Weems cast पिशिताशनान्।
वानरांश्चातिदु:खार्तान् रामलक्ष्मणपार्श्वत:॥ १८॥
Nay, she also found the ogres
excessively delighted in mind and the
monkeys, sore stricken with agony, standing
by the side of Sri Rama and Laksmana.
(18)

aa: सीता ददर्शोभौ शयानौ शरतल्पगौ।
लक्ष्मणं चैव wt च विसंज्ञौ शरपीडितौ॥१९॥

विध्वस्तकवचौ वीरौ विप्रविद्धशरासनौ।
सायकैश्छिन्नसर्वाङ्गौ शरस्तम्बमयौ fardt i २०॥

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA +

Sita then saw both the heroes,
Laksmana and Sri Rama, laying unconscious
on the ground on a bed of arrows, their
armour shattered and bows cast aside.

(19-20)

तौ gear भ्रातरौ at Want पुरुषर्षभौ।

Wart पुण्डरीकाक्षौ कुमाराविव पावकी॥ २१॥
शरतल्पगतौ वीरौ तथाभूतौ नरर्षभौ।
दु:खार्ता करुणं सीता सुभृशं विललाप ह॥ २२॥

Stricken with agony to behold the two
gallant brothers, the foremost of men, who
were distinguished heroes and jewels among
men and had lotus-like eyes, stretched ona
bed of arrows in that wretched plight like the
two sons of the fire-god (Sakha and Visakha)
lying on a bed of reeds, Sita wailed piteously
and vehemently. (21-22)

लक्ष्मणं चासितेक्षणा।
Wet पांसुषु चेष्टन्तौ रुरोद जनकात्मजा॥ २३॥
Gazing on her husband as well as on
Laksmana tossing about in the dust, the

dark-eyed Sita (Janaka’s daughter) of
faultless limbs burst into sobs. (23)

सबाष्पशोकाभिहता समीक्ष्य
at भ्रातरौ देवसुतप्रभावौ।
वितर्कयन्ती fet तयो: सा
दु:खान्विता वाक्यमिदं जगाद॥ २४॥
Observing the aforesaid two brothers,
who were powerful as the offspring of gods,
and suspecting their death, Sita, full of tears

and agony, and smitten with grief, spoke as
follows: (24)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये FERS सप्तचत्वारिंश: सर्ग: ॥ ४७॥

Thus ends Canto Forty-seven in the Yuddhakanda of the glorious Ramayana of
Valmiki, the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

