* ARANYAKANDA «

“Kalaka too gave birth to Naraka and
also Kalaka. Tamra for her part bore the
following five daughters well-known in the
world—Kraufici, Bhasi as also Syeni,
Dhrtarastri and Suki. Kraufici gave birth to
Ulukas (owls), Bhasi bore Bhasas (a species
of birds of prey), Syeni gave birth to Syenas
(hawks) and vultures of bright lustre.
Dhrtarastri for her part bore swans and
Kalahamsas of all types. (17—19)

चक्रवाकांश्च us a विजज्ञे सापि भामिनी।

Bot नतां विजज्ञे तु नतायां विनता सुता॥ २०॥
“Luck be to you ! That lady also gave

birth to Cakravaka birds. Suki bore a

daughter, Nata by name, and of Nata was
born a daughter, Vinata. (20)

दश क्रोधवशा wa विजज्ञेऽप्यात्मसंभवा:।
wt च मृगमन्दां च हरीं भद्रमदामपि॥ २१॥
मातङ्गीमथ शार्दूलीं श्वेतां च at तथा।
सर्वलक्षणसम्पन्नां सुरसां कटद्रुकामपि॥ २२॥
“O Rama, Krodhavasa also bore ten
daughters—Mrgi and Mrgamanda, Hari as
also Bhadramada, Matangi and then Sarduli,
Sweta as also Surabhi, Surasa endowed
with all auspicious characteristics and also
Kadru. (21-22)
अपत्यं तु am: ad Wear नरवरोत्तम।
RAIA मृगमन्दाया: सृमराश्चमरास्तथा॥ २३॥
“O jewel among the foremost of men,
all the deer are the progeny of Mrgi; Rksas
(bears), Srmaras (a species of antelopes)
and camaras (another species of antelopes),
of Mrgamanda. (23)
ततस्त्विरावतीं AT जज्ञे भद्रमदा सुताम्।
तस्यास्त्वैरावत: पुत्रो लोकनाथो महागज:॥ २४॥
“Then Bhadramada bore a daughter
named Iravati. The great elephant, Airavata,
coveted by the world, is her son. (24)

हर्याश्च हरयोऽपत्यं वानराश्च तपस्विन:।
गोलाङ्गूलाश्च शार्दूली व्याघ्रांश्चाजनयत् सुतान्॥ VEU

“Lions and the poor monkeys and

751

baboons are the progeny of Hari. Sardali
bore tigers as her sons. (25)

मातङ्ग्यास्त्वथ मातङ्गा अपत्यं न्धृर्षंभ।
दिशागजं तु काकुत्स्थ VAM व्यजनयत् सुतम्॥ २६ ॥
“O jewel among men, the elephants
are the progeny of Matangi; O Kakutstha !
Sweta bore a son, Disagaja (the elephant
guarding the quarters). (26)

ततो दुहितरौ wa athe व्यजायत।
रोहिणीं नाम भद्रं ते गन्धर्वीं च यशस्विनीम्॥ २७॥
“Then, O Rama, Surabhi bore two
daughters named Rohini and the famous
Gandharvi. Luck be to you ! (27)

रोहिण्यजनयद् गावो गन्धर्वी वाजिन: सुतान्।
सुरसाजनयन्नागान् राम कद्रूश्च पन्नगान्॥ २८॥
“Rohini gave birth to the bovine race
and Gandharvi to the horses as her sons.
Surasa bore the Nagas and Kadru the
serpents, O Rama ! (28)

मनुर्मनुष्याञनयत् कश्यपस्य महात्मन:।
ब्राह्मणान् क्षत्रियान् वैश्यान् शूद्रांश्च मनुजर्षभ॥ २९॥

“Manu, wife of the high-souled Kasyapa,
gave birth to men—viz., Brahmanas,
Ksatriyas, Vaisyas and Sudras, O jewel
among men ! (29)

मुखतो ब्राह्मणा जाता उरस: क्षत्रियास्तथा।
ऊरुभ्यां जज्ञिरे वैश्या: पद्भ्यां शूद्रा इति श्रुति: ।। ३० Ul
“Brahmanas appeared from the mouth,
the Ksatriyas from the breast, the Vaisyas
from the thighs and the Sudras from the
feet—so says the Sruti text. (30)

सर्वान् पुण्यफलान् व्क्षाननलापि व्यजायत।
विनता च शुकोपौत्री कद्रूश्च सुरसास्वसा॥ ३१॥
“Anala also gave birth to all the trees of
holy fruits; Vinata was the grand-daughter
of Suki (the daughter of Tamra) and Kadrd
was the sister of Surasa. (31)

कद्रूर्नागसहस्रं तु विजज्ञे धरणीधरान्।
द्वौ पुत्रौ विनतायास्तु गरुडोऽरुण एव च॥ ३२॥

“Kadru bore a thousand Nagas, the
