* AYODHYAKANDA +

TI नूनं दशरथ: सत्त्वमाविश्य भाषते।
नहि राजा प्रियं पुत्रं विवासयितुमर्हति॥१०॥

“Surely King DaSaratha has announced
today his decision to banish Sri Rama,
identifying himself with some evil spirit; for
otherwise had he been his normal self he
would not have sent his dearest son into
exile. (10)

निर्गुणस्यापि पुत्रस्य कथं ere विनिवासनम्।
fe पुनर्यस्य लोकोऽयं जितो gat केवलम्॥ ११॥

“How could banishment be inflicted even
on a son devoid of virtue, much less on him
whose character alone has won the affection
of the entire world? (11)

आनृशंस्यमनुक्रोश: श्रुतं शीलं दम: शम:।
राघवं शोभयन्त्येते षड्गुणा: पुरुषर्षभम्॥१२॥

“Harmlessness, compassion, learning,
amiability of disposition, subjugation of the
senses and tranquillity of mind—these six
excellences adorn Sri Rama, the foremost
of men. (12)

तस्मात् तस्योपघातेन प्रजा: परमपीडिता:।
औदकानीव सत्त्वानि ग्रीष्मे सलिलसंक्षयात्॥ १३॥

“People, therefore, feel extremely pained
by the injury which is being done to him by
way of unmerited banishment, even as
aquatic creatures are afflicted by depletion
of water. (13)

पीडया पीडितं wa जगदस्य जगत्पते: |
मूलस्येवोपघातेन = Fat: पुष्पफलोपग:॥ १४॥

“The whole world feels injured by the
suffering inflicted on this protector of the
world, even as a tree with its flowers and
fruits is damaged by injury caused to its
root. (14)

मूलं ह्येष मनुष्याणां धर्मसारो महाद्युति:।
पुष्पं फलं च Ut च शाखाश्चास्येतरे जना:॥ १५॥

“For, Sri Rama, whose strength is virtue
and who is possessed of extraordinary
lustre, is the root of the tree of humanity;
while other men are flowers and fruits,

419

leaves and boughs.
a लक्ष्मण sa क्षिप्रं सपत्न्य: सहबान्धवा:।
गच्छन्तमनुगच्छामो Gt गच्छति राघव:॥१६॥

“As such even as Laksmana we will
also with our wives and relations forthwith
follow the departing Sri Rama, a scion of
Raghu, on the path the former is going to
tread. (16)

उद्यानानि परित्यज्य क्षेत्राणि च गृहाणि a
एकदु:ख्सुखा राममनुगच्छाम धार्मिकम्॥१७॥
“Relinquishing for good our gardens
and fields and houses too, let us follow the
pious Sri Rama, sharing his joys and sorrows.
(17)

समुद्धृतनिधानानि परिध्वस्ताजिराणि च।
उपात्तधनधान्यानि हतसाराणि सर्वश:॥१८॥

रजसाभ्यवकीर्णानि परित्यक्तानि cad:
मूषकै: परिधावद्भिरुद्बिलैरावृतानि च॥१९॥

अपेतोदकधूमानि हीनसम्मार्जनानि च।
प्रणष्टबलिकर्मेज्यामन्त्रहोमजपानि च॥ २०॥

दुष्कालेनेव भग्नानि भिन्नभाजनवन्ति च।
अस्मत्त्यक्तानि कैकेयी वेश्मानि प्रतिपद्यताम्॥ २१॥

“Let Kaikeyi enjoy as her share the
dwellings deserted by us and robbed of
their substance in every way—their treasures
unearthed, their courtyards neglected, their
wealth and stocks of foodgrains removed—
nay, covered by dust on all sides and as
such deserted by the deities presiding over
them, overrun by mice coming out of their
holes and scurrying here and there, water
and smoke having disappeared from them,
unswept, dilapidated as though by adverse
times and strewn with broken vessels, the
rites of offering oblations to all creatures
as well as to the sacred fire, worship of
gods, the chanting of sacred texts and
muttering of prayers having altogether
ceased. (18—21)

at नगरमेवास्तु येन गच्छति राघव:।
अस्माभिश्च परित्यक्तं पुरं सम्पद्यतां वनम्॥ २२॥

(15)
