271

* BALAKANDA +

who followed the directions of Vasistha,
grasped with their hands the hands of the
four princesses. Going clockwise round the
sacrificial fire, the altar as well as round
Janaka and the sages too, the high-souled
princes, the jewels among the Raghus,
alongwith their brides thereupon went through
the wedding ceremony in accordance with
the correct procedure as laid down in our
scriptures. (34—36)

पुष्पवृष्टिर्महत्यासीदन्तरिक्षात् सुभास्वरा।
दिव्यदुन्दुभिनिर्घोषैर्गीतवादित्रनि:स्वनै: ॥। ३७॥
Accompanied by the loud beating of
celestial kettledrums and the melodious
sound of vocal and instrumental music, an
abundant and most splendid shower of
blossoms fell from the heavens. (37)

ननृतुश्चाप्सर:सङ्घा गन्धर्वाश्च Wy: कलम्।
विवाहे रघुमुख्यानां तदद्भुतमदृश्यत॥ ३८॥

Nay, bevies of celestial nymphs danced
and Gandharvas sang in a sweet voice.
That was a marvellous phenomenon which
was noticed during the wedding of the jewels
of Raghu’s race. (38)

ईदृशे वर्तमाने तु तूर्योद्घुष्टनिनादिते।
त्रिरग्निं ते परिक्रम्य ऊहुर्भार्या महौजस:॥ ३९॥
While such a celestial consonance of
sounds prevailed with its echo, those highly
glorious princes went round the sacrificial fire
thrice and married their respective bride. (39)

अथोपकार्यं जग्मुस्ते सभार्या रघुनन्दना:।
राजाप्यनुययौ पश्यन् सर्षिसङ्घ: सबान्धव:॥४०॥

Accompanied by their consorts, those
scions of Raghu then retired to their tents.
The Emperor too with the hosts of Rsis and
his relations followed suit, beholding with
joy the brides and the bridegrooms. (40)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये बालकाण्डे त्रिसप्ततितम: सर्ग: ॥ 93 ॥

Thus ends Canto Seventy-three in the Balakanda of the glorious Ramayana of
Valmiki, the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

Canto LXXIV

Taking leave of Janaka and DaSaratha, Viswamitra returns to his own
hermitage and, accepting large wedding presents, DaSaratha too
turns back to Ayodhya alongwith his sons and their newly-
wedded brides. On the way the irascible and redoubtable
Parasurama, a sworn enemy of the Ksatriyas, suddenly
appears before them, axe in hand, and Vasistha
and the other sages accompanying the
party offer worship to him

अथ teat व्यतीतायां विश्वामित्रो महामुनि:।
आपृष्टवा तौ च राजानौ जगामोत्तरपर्वतम्॥१॥

Asking leave of both the kings, the
night having passed, the eminent sage
Viswamitra forthwith proceeded direct to the
northern mountain, the Himalayas. (1)

विश्वामित्रे गते राजा ace मिथिलाधिपम्।
MIA जगामाशु राजा दशरथ: WN २॥
Asking permission of Janaka, who
belonged to the line of the Videhas, the ruler
of Mithila, the moment ViSwamitra had
departed, the glorious King Dasaratha too
proceeded immediately to his capital. (2)
