194

वासवस्य Va दूतो दूतो वैश्रवणस्य वा।
प्रेषितो वापि रामेण सीतान्वेषणकाङ्क्षया॥ १५॥

“He may be an emissary of Indra (the
ruler of gods) or an envoy of Kubera (the
god of riches) or he may have been
dispatched even by Rama with intent to
have Sita traced out. (15)

तेनैवाद्भुतरूपेण यत्तत्तव मनोहरम्।
नानामृगगणाकोर्णं प्रमृष्टं प्रमदावनम्॥१६॥

“By that very monkey of marvellous
form has your soul-captivating pleasance,
which was crowded with herds of beasts of
every variety, has been laid waste. (16)

न da कश्चिदुद्देशो यस्तेन न विनाशित:।
यत्र सा जानको eat स aa न विनाशित:॥ १७॥

“There is not a single quarter in that
pleasance, which has not been utterly
devastated by him. That place alone where
lives that godlike lady, Sita, Janaka’s
daughter, has not been destroyed. (17)

जानकोरक्षणार्थं वा श्रमाद् वा नोपलक्ष्यते।
अथवा क: श्रमस्तस्य सैव तेनाभिरक्षिता॥ ec

“It is not definitely known whether he
has spared it with a view to saving her or
due to exhaustion. Or, since exhaustion is
unknown to him, Janaka’s daughter has
definitely been saved by him. (18)
चारुपल्लवपत्राढ्यं यं सीता स्वयमास्थिता।
प्रवृद्ध: शिंशपावृक्ष: स च तेनाभिरक्षित:॥१९॥

“That fully developed Sirnsapa tree too,
which is rich in lovely foliage and in the
shade of which Sita herself remains
ensconced has been spared by him. (19)
तस्योग्ररूपस्योग्रं त्वं दण्डमाज्ञातुमर्हसि।
सीता सम्भाषिता येन वनं तेन विनाशितम्॥ २०॥

“You ought to enjoin some severe
punishment on that monkey having a frightful
form, by whom Sita has been spoken to. By
him alone has the grove been devastated.

(20)

« VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

मन:परिगृहीतां तां तव रक्षोगणेश्वर।

क: सीतामभिभाषेत यो न स्यात् त्यक्तजीवित: ॥ २१ ॥
“Who would dare to talk with Sita, who

has been mentally accepted by you, save

him who has given up all hope of survival,

O ruler of ogre hordes?” (21)

राक्षसीनां वच: श्रुत्वा रावणो राक्षसेश्वर:।
चिताग्निरिव spar कोपसंवर्तितेक्षण:॥ २२॥

Hearing the report of the ogresses,
Ravana, the lord of ogres, flared up like a
funeral fire, his eyes rolling rapidly through
rage. (22)

तस्य क्रुद्धस्य नेत्राभ्यां प्रापतन्नश्रुबिन्दव:।
दीप्ताभ्यामिव दीपाभ्यां सारचिष: स्नेहबिन्दव: 1 २३ ॥
From his eyes, angry as he was,
trickled down tear-drops like burning drops
of oil from a pair of kindled lights. (23)

आत्मन: सदृशान् वीरान् किंकरान्नाम राक्षसान्।
व्यादिदेश महातेजा निग्रहार्थं हनूमत:॥ २४॥
Ravana, who was endowed with
extraordinary energy, ordered in particular
valiant ogres, named Kinkaras, who vied
with himself, to capture Hanuman. (24)
ते an ; विं : रि ।
निर्ययुंभंबनात् तस्मात् कूटमुद्गरपाणय: ॥ २७५ Il
Of the aforesaid energetic Kinkaras,
eighty thousand sallied forth from that palace,
iron mallets and clubs in hand. (25)

महोदरा महादंष्द्रा घोररूपा महाबला:।
युद्धाभिमनस: सर्वे हनूमद्ग्रहणोन्मुखा:॥ २६॥
They were all big-bellied, had large
teeth and of terrible form, were endowed
with extraordinary might, inclined to fighting
and eager to lay hold on Hanuman. (26)
ते कपिं तं समासाद्य तोरणस्थमवस्थितम्।
अभिपषेतुर्महावेगा: पतंगा sa पावकम्॥ VII
Duly approaching the aforesaid monkey,
who was stationed at the archway, ready to

fight, they darted at him with great vehemence
like moths rushing towards a flame. (27)
