+ UTTARAKANDA +

“Rest awhile on this lovely rock, O
lady of shapely hips! Nay, he who lords it
over the three worlds is certainly no other
than myself. (26)

तदेवं Wate: Wal याचते cat दशानन:।
भर्तुर्भर्ता विधाता च त्रैलोक्यस्य भजस्व माम्॥ 29

With joined palms Ravana, the ten-
headed monster, who is the master of the
lords of the three worlds as well as their
sustainer, submissively supplicates you in
this way. Pray, therefore accept me.” (27)

एवमुक्ताब्रवीद् रम्भा वेषमाना कृताङ्जलि:।
प्रसीद नार्हसे वक्तुमीदृशं त्वं fe A गुरु:॥ २८॥
Shaking, when spoken to in these
words, Rambha replied with joined palms,
“Be gracious to me; you ought not to speak
in this strain, since you are my elder. (28)

अन्येभ्योऽपि त्वया रक्ष्या प्राप्नुयां धर्षणं यदि।
तद्धर्मत: स्नुषा तेऽहं तत्त्वमेतद् Ta AUVs il

“| stand in the relation of a daughter-in-
law to you from the legal point of view: | tell
you this truth. Hence | deserve to be protected
by you even from others if | suffer violence
at their hands.” (29)

अथाब्रवीद् दशग्रीवश्चरणाधोमुखीं स्थिताम्।
रोमहर्षमनुप्राप्तां दृष्टमात्रेण तां तदा॥३०॥

Ravana, the ten-headed monster, then
said to Rambha, who stood with her face
downcast, her eyes focussed on her feet,
and experienced horripilation at his mere
sight: (30)
सुतस्य यदि मे भार्या ततस्त्वं हि स्नुषा भवे: 1
बाढमित्येव सा रम्भा We रावणमुत्तरम्॥ ३१॥

“If you are my son’s wife, then only
you can be my daughter-in-law.” “Indeed!”
said the celebrated Rambha in reply to
Ravana. (31)
धर्मतस्ते सुतस्याहं wal राक्षसपुङ्खव।

Ua: प्रियतर: प्राणैर्भरातुर्वैश्रवणस्य ते॥३२॥

“lam lawfully the wife of your son, O
bull among the ogres! He is a son of your

933

brother, Kubera (son of ViSrava), dearer to
him than his own life. (32)

विख्यातस्तिषु लोकेषु नलकूबर इत्ययम्।
धर्मतो यो vag विप्र: क्षत्रियो वीर्यतो भवेत्॥ ३३॥
क्रोधाद् यश्च भवेदग्नि: क्षान्त्या च वसुधासम: ।
तस्यास्मि कृतसंकेता लोकपालसुतस्य STU ३४॥
“He is widely known in all the three
worlds as Nalakubara. | have actually made
an appointment to meet that son of a guardian
of the world, who is a Brahmana from the
legal point of view (sprung as he is from the
loins of a Brahmana) but who is a Ksatriya
in respect of valour, nay, who is a fire in
wrath but a compeer of Mother Earth in
forbearance. (33-34)

तमुद्दिश्य q a ad विभूषणमिदं कृतम्।
यथा तस्य fe नान्यस्य भावो at प्रति तिष्ठति॥ ३७५ ॥

“All this decoration has been made by
me for his sake alone. Precisely as his
heart is set on me as on none else, my
heart too is set on him alone. (35)
तेन सत्येन मां राजन् मोक्तुमर्हस्यरिंदम।

स fe तिष्ठति धर्मात्मा at प्रतीक्ष्य समुत्सुक:।॥ ३६॥

“Since that pious-minded soul stands
eagerly waiting for me, O scourge of your
foes, you should let me go, O king, on the
basis of this truth. (36)

wa fast तु तस्येह ad नार्हसि मुञ्च माम्।
सद्भिराचरितं मार्गं wes राक्षसपुङ्खव॥ ३७॥
“Certainly you ought not to thwart this
purpose of his; therefore leave me. Walk in
the path trodden by the virtuous, O bull
among the ogres. (37)

माननीयो मम त्वं fe पालनीया तथास्मि ते।
Vaal दशग्रीव: प्रत्युवाच विनीतवत्॥ ३८॥

“Inasmuch as you deserve to be
honoured by me, | likewise deserve to be
protected by you.” Spoken to in these words
by her, Ravana, the ten-headed monster,
replied like a humble man 853 follows:

(38)
