366

(appearing all of a sudden), the sky
then blazed forth. And, accompanied by
unparalleled peals of thunder, flashes of
lightning shot forth from the sky. (9)

वपु:प्रकर्षेण ववुर्दिव्यमारुतपङ्क्तय: |
ays च del व्रुक्षाञ्जलदानुद्वहन्मुहु: ।॥ १० ll
A great number of celestial winds known
by the names of Parivaha and so on, blew
with great vehemence. Nay, sweeping away
clouds before them, the winds now tore up
the trees again and again. (10)

आरुजंश्चैव शैलाग्रान् शिखराणि बभञ्ज च।
दिवि च स्म महामेघा: संहता: समहास्वना:॥ ११॥
मुमुचुरवद्युतानग्नींस्ते महाशनयस्तदा।
यानि भूतानि दृश्यानि चुक्रुशुश्चाशने: समम्॥ LI
aga च भूतानि मुमुचुर्भेरवस्वनम्।
Riba चाभिभूतानि संत्रस्तान्युद्विजन्ति च॥ १३॥

Nay, chopping off the points of rocks,
they pulled down mountain-peaks. In the
sky mighty flashes of lightning, forming one
mass, nay, possessing extraordinary velocity
and accompanied by loud peals of thunder,
shot fires of lightning. Beings which could
be seen roared like thunder; while those
which could not be seen emitted fearful
cries. Thrown into confusion by the peals of
thunder, greatly alarmed and trembling with
fear, they lay prostrate. (11—13)

सम्प्रविव्यथिरे चापि न च पस्पन्दिरे भयात्।
सह Ya: सतोयोर्मि: सनाग: सहराक्षस:॥ Vv il
सहसाभूत् ततो वेगाद् भीमवेगो महोदधि:।
योजनं व्यतिचक्राम वेलामन्यत्र सम्प्लवात्॥ १५॥

Nay, others felt deeply agonized and
could not stir through fear. Due to that fury
of Sri Rama’s arrow, the ocean with its
mass of water and waves, the creatures
inhabiting it, its serpents and ogres suddenly
exhibited a terrible vehemence and surged
beyond its confines to the extent of a Yojana
(or eight miles), even though the final Deluge
had not yet come. (14-15)

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA +

तं तथा समतिक्रान्तं नातिचक्राम Wea: |
समुद्धतममित्रघ्नो रामो नदनदीपतिम्॥१६॥
Sri Rama, a scion of Raghu, the
destroyer of his foes, did not retreat before
the overweening Ocean (lit., the lord of
rivers and streams), even though it had
thus fully transgressed its limits. (16)
ततो मध्यात् समुद्रस्य सागर: स्वयमुत्थित:।
उदयाद्रिमहाशैलान्मेरोरिव दिवाकर: I १७॥
Then rose Ocean himself from mid
sea even as the sun would emerge from
behind the huge eastern mountain associated
with the rising of the sun, an offshoot of
Mount Meru. (17)

पन्नगै: सह दीप्तास्यै: समुद्र: प्रत्यदूश्यत।
स्निग्धवैदूर्यसंकाशो जाम्बूनदविभूषण:॥ ec

Shining brightly like a glossy cat’s eye
and decked with jewels inlaid in gold, the
sea-god appeared in person in the company
of serpents with flaming hoods. (18)

रक्तमाल्याम्बरधर: पद्मपत्रनिभेक्षण: |
सर्वपुष्पमयीं दिव्यां शिरसा धारयन् स्रजम्॥१९॥
He was clad in red robes and wore a
garland of red flowers, his eyes resembled
the petals of a lotus and he bore on
his head a celestial wreath of all kinds of
flowers. (19)

जातरूपमयैश्चैव तपनीयविभूषणै: |
आत्मजानां च रत्नानां भूषितो भूषणोत्तमै: ।। २०॥
धातुभिर्मण्डित: शैलो विविधैर्हिमवानिव।
एकावलीमध्यगतं तरलं पाण्डरप्रभम्॥ Rl
विपुलेनोरसा बिभ्रत्कौस्तुभस्य सहोदरम्।
आघूर्णिततरङ्गौघ: कालिकानिलसंकुल:॥ २२॥
गङ्गासिन्धुप्रधानाभिरापगाभि समावृत:।
उद्वर्तितमहाग्राह: सम्भ्रान्तोरगराक्षस: Ul २३ ॥
देवतानां सुरूपाभिर्नानारूपाभिरीश्वर:।
सागर: समुपक्रम्य wast वीर्यवान्॥ २४॥
अब्रवीत् प्राञ्जलिर्वाक्यं राघवं शरपाणिनम्॥ २५॥

Decked with jewels studded in refined
