* BALAKANDA +

glory which had no parallel in the world,
nay, who longed to bring the Ganga down
to the earth, was full of excellences,
possessed a splendour resembling that of
great Rsis, was my equal in asceticism and
devoted to the duties of a Ksatriya. (9-10)

दिलीपेन महाभाग तव पित्रातितेजसा।

पुनर्न शकिता नेतुं गङ्गां प्रार्थयतानघ॥११॥
“The Ganga could not be brought down

to the terrestrial plane, O highly blessed

one, even by your exceedingly glorious father,

Dilipa, much though he implored her to that

effect, O sinless prince ! (11)

सा त्वया समतिक्रान्ता प्रतिज्ञा पुरुषर्षभ।
प्राप्तोऽसि परमं लोके यश: परमसम्मतम्॥१२॥

“That vow has been implemented by
you, O jewel among men, and you have in
consequence attained the highest glory,
solicited even by the greatest in the world.

(12)
अनेन च भवान् प्राप्तो धर्मस्यायतनं महत्॥१३॥

“The celebrated achievement in the
shape of bringing down the Ganga to the
terrestrial plane has been accomplished by
you, O subduer of foes! and by this you
have attained the great reward of virtue in
the shape of the realm of Brahma. (13)

प्लावयस्व त्वमात्मानं नरोत्तम सदोचिते।
सलिले पुरुषश्रेष्ठं शुचि: पुण्यफलो भव॥ १४॥

“Even though pure, bathe yourself, O
jewel among men, in the water of the holy
Ganga, which is fit for bath all the year
round (unlike other rivers which are rendered
unfit for bath during the monsoons) and
attain the reward of your merit, O superman!

(14)
पितामहानां सर्वेषां कुरुष्व सलिलक्रियाम्।
स्वस्ति तेऽस्तु गमिष्यामि स्वं लोकं TAA नृप॥ १५ ॥

“Offer water to all your great grand-
uncles, may all be well with you. | shall now
go back to my realm, you may also return

193

to your own capital, O protector of men!”
(15)

इत्येवमुक्त्वा देवेश: सर्वलोकपितामह:।
यथाऽऽगतं TANTS देवलोकं महायशा:॥ १६॥
(Viswamitra continues) “Saying so, the
highly glorious Brahma (the progenitor of all

the worlds), the overlord of gods, ascended
to the realm of gods even as he had come. (16)

भगीरथस्तु राजर्षि: peat सलिलमुत्तमम्।
यथाक्रमं यथान्यायं सागराणां महायशा:॥ Vo
कृतोदक: Wet राजा स्वपुरं प्रविवेश ह।
समृद्धार्थो ATS स्वराज्यं प्रशशास ह॥१८॥

“Having offered the best water to
Sagara’s sons in order of seniority and
according to the scriptural ordinance, and
having similarly gratified his other forbears
too and getting purified thereby, the
exceptionally glorious Bhagiratha, a seer
among kings, for his part returned to his
capital: so the tradition goes. His aim having
been realized thereby, he ruled over his
kingdom, O jewel among men! (17-18)

प्रमुमोद च लोकस्तं नृपमासाद्य Waal
नष्टशोक: समृद्धार्थो बभूव विगतज्वर:॥१९॥

“The people greatly rejoiced to get him—
their king—once more, O scion of Raghu !
With their grief, caused by separation from
him, dispelled, they felt accomplished of
purpose and found their anxiety gone. (19)

wa a राम गङ्गाया विस्तरोऽभिहितो मया।
स्वस्ति प्राप्नुहि भद्रं ते संध्याकालोऽतिवर्तते॥ २०॥

“In this way, O Rama, the story of the
descent of the Ganga has been narrated to
you at length by me. Attain blessedness as
a reward of hearing it, may prosperity attend
you ! The hour of Sandhya prayers is slipping
past. (20)
धन्यं यशस्यमायुष्यं wat स्वर्ग्यमथापि च।

a: श्रावयति विप्रेषु क्षत्रियेष्वितरेषु च॥ २१॥
प्रीयन्ते पितरस्तस्य प्रीयन्ते tanh a

इदमाख्यानमायुष्यं गङ्गावतरणं शुभम्॥२२॥
