# YUDDHAKANDA #

sharp-edged pikes, arrows, swords and axes,
capable of destroying life, at the monkeys.

(7)
वानराश्च द्रुमान् शैलान् राक्षसान् प्रति चिक्षिपु:।
स संग्रामो महाभीम: सूर्यस्योदयनं प्रति॥८॥
रक्षसां वानराणां च तुमुल: समपद्यत।
तेर्व्यश्चचित्र।'षि-ग्;प्रसिं;खङ्गे;परश्वधै;।।९।।
अन्योन्यं समरे जघ्नुस्तदा वानरराक्षसा:।
एवं Wad संग्रामे ह्यद्भुतं सुमहद्रज:॥ १०॥
मातंगरथकूलाश्च शरमत्स्या ध्वजद्रुमा:॥११॥
शरीरसंघाटवहा: = wee: शोणितापगा:।
ततस्ते वानरा: सर्वे शोणितौघपरिप्लुता:॥१२॥
ध्वजवर्मरथानश्वान् नानाप्रहरणानि च।
आप्लुत्याप्लुत्य समरे वानरेन्द्रा बभञ्जिरे॥ १३॥

The monkeys too in their turn hurled
trees and rocks on the ogres. Towards sunrise
that fierce fight between the ogres and the
monkeys became tumultuous. The aforesaid
monkeys and ogres then proceeded to strike
each his opponent with multi-coloured maces,
darts, swords and axes on the battlefield.
Curiously enough, when fight was thus in
progress, the enormous dust raised by the
two contending armies was actually settled
down by the streams of blood proceeding
from the ogres and monkeys. With elephants
and chariots for their banks, arrows for the
fish, ensigns for the trees on the banks
and carrying dead bodies for logs of wood,
rivers of blood flowed on the battlefield.
Leaping hither and thither on the battlefield,
bathed in streams of blood, all the aforesaid
monkeys in general, and the monkey chiefs
in particular destroyed the ensigns, armour
and chariots, horses and weapons of every
kind. (8—13)

केशान् कर्णललाटं च नासिकाश्च प्लवंगमा: |
रक्षसां दशनैस्तीक्ष्णैर्नखैश्चापि व्यकर्तयन्॥१४॥

Nay, the monkeys tore off with their

699

sharp teeth and nails too the hair, ears and
brows as well as the noses of the ogres.
(14)

अभ्यधावन्त फलिनं get शकुनयो यथा॥१५॥
A hundred leaders of monkeys rushed

at each single ogre on the battlefield even
as birds would fly towards a tree laden with
fruits. (15)

तदा गदाभिर्गुर्वीभि: प्रासै: खड्गै: परश्वथै: |
निर्जघ्नुर्वानरान् घोरान् राक्षसा: पर्वतोपमा:॥ १६॥

Thereupon the ogres too, who
resembled mountains in size, struck down
the redoubtable monkeys with their heavy
maces, darts, swords and axes. (16)

राक्षसैर्वध्यमानानां वानराणां महाचमू:।

शरण्यं शरणं याता WA दशरथात्मजम्॥१७॥
The mighty army of the monkeys, who

were being struck down by the ogres, sought

as its refuge Sri Rama, son of Dagaratha,
who was fit to protect them. (17)

ततो WaT महातेजा धनुरादाय वीर्यवान्।
प्रविश्य cad सैन्यं शरवर्षं aad च॥१८॥

Taking up his bow and penetrating deep
into the ogre ranks, the powerful Sri Rama,
who was endowed with extraordinary energy,
thereupon rained a hail of arrows on them.

(18)
प्रविष्टं तु तदा wt मेघा: सूर्यमिवाम्बरे।
नाधिजग्मुर्महाघोरा निर्दंहन्तं शराग्निना॥१९॥

The fierce rangers of the night for their
part dared not approach Sri Rama—who,
having penetrated deep into the lines of the
ogres, was consuming them with the fire of
his shafts on that occasion—any more than
clouds would approach the scorching sun
in the sky. (19)

कृतान्येव सुघोराणि रामेण रजनीचरा:।
TH रामस्य ददृशु: कर्माण्यसुकराणि Ti oll
