790

इत्युक्त्वा परमक्रुद्ध: स Wal परमाङ्गदाम्।
खरश्चिक्षेपष रामाय प्रदीप्तामशनिं यथा॥ २५॥
Saying so and getting highly enraged,
he hurled his mace adorned with excellent
gold rings and resembling a_ blazing
thunderbolt at Sri Rama. (25)

ख्रबाहुप्रमुक्ता सा प्रदीप्ता महती गदा।

भस्म वृक्षांश्च गुल्मांश्च कृत्वागात् तत्समीपत: VE Ul
Reducing to ashes the intervening

trees and shrubs, that huge and blazing

mace released from the hands of Khara
drew near Sri Rama. (26)

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

अन्तरिक्षगतां रामश्चिच्छेद बहुधा yt: २७॥

With his arrows Sri Rama split into pieces
that huge mace, resembling the noose of Yama
in its deadly action even as it came flying and
while it was yet in the air. (27)

सा विशीर्णा शरैर्भिन्ना पपात धरणीतले।
गदा मन्त्रौषधिबलैर्व्ययालीव विनिपातिता॥ २८॥

Broken and smashed with the arrows,
that mace fell on the ground like a female
serpent thrown down by the power of
charms and herbs. (28)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्येऽरण्यकाण्डे एकोनत्रिंश: सर्ग: ॥ २९ ॥

Thus ends Canto Twenty-nine in the Aranyakanda of the glorious Ramayana
of Valmiki, the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

७
ad
a

सर्ग:

Canto XXX

Rama kills Khara. Gods

भित्त्वा तु at गदां बाणै राघवो धर्मवत्सल:।
स्मयमान इदं वाक्यं संरब्धमिदमब्रवीत्॥१॥
Having shattered that mace with arrows,
Sri Rama, a scion of Raghu, for his part,
who was fond of virtue, smilingly uttered the
following furious words : (1)

Udd ते बलसर्वस्वं दर्शितं राक्षसाधम।
शक्तिहीनतरो मत्तो ge त्वमुपगर्जसि॥ २॥

“Is this the totality of your strength that
you have exhibited, O vile ogre? Though
much deficient in strength as compared to
me, you brag in vain ! (2)

एषा बाणविनिर्भिन्ना गदा भूमितलं गता।
अभिधानप्रगल्भस्य तव प्रत्ययघातिनी॥३॥

“Fallen to the ground when split into
pieces by my arrows, this mace of yours,
you being bold in braggadocio alone, has
dashed to pieces the confidence reposed in

it by you. (3)

and sages applaud Him

यत् wath विनष्टानामिदमश्रुप्रमार्जनम्।
राक्षसानां करोमीति मिथ्या तदपि a वच:॥४॥

“Even the declaration that was made
by you in the following words: ‘I hereby
wipe away the tears of the relatives of the
ogres killed in battle’ has proved false. (4)

नीचस्य क्षुद्रशीलस्य मिथ्यावृत्तस्य रक्षस:।
प्राणानपहरिष्यामि गरुत्मानमृतं TUN I

“Even as Garuda, the king of birds,
snatched away nectar from the custody of
the gods in heaven, | shall take away the
life of the vile ogre that you are, mean of
nature and immoral of conduct. (5)

aa ad भिन्नकण्ठस्य फेनबुद्बुदभूषितम्।
विदारितस्य मद्बाणैर्मही पास्यति शोणितम्॥६॥

“The earth will quaff your blood enriched
with foam and bubbles, when your throat
has been pierced and your body torn with
my shafts. (6)
