1016

“Responding indeed to that call of the
hungry Brahmana, who was like the sacred
fire, the cow followed him, as he went. (13)

योऽपि पालयते fam: सोऽपि गामन्वगाद् द्रुतम्।
गत्वा च तमृषिं चष्टे मम गौरिति सत्वरम्॥१४॥
“The Brahmana, who had looked after
the cow, too followed the cow in haste and
approaching the Rsi at once declared: “This
is my cow.’ (14)

स्पर्शिता राजसिंहेन मम cat नृगेण ह।
तयोर्ब्रह्मणयोर्वादो महानासीद् विपश्चितो: ।॥ १५॥

“The other Brahmana on the other hand
said, ‘This cow is touched and given to me
by Nrga, the lion among kings’. Thus great
dispute arose between the two learned
Brahmanas. (15)

विवदन्तौ ततोऽन्योन्यं दातारमभिजग्मतु:।
तौ राजभवनद्वारि न प्राप्तौ नृगशासनम्॥१६॥

“Quarrelling among themselves, the two
Brahmanas approached the donor (Nrga);
both waited at the gate of the Royal palace,
but could not gain entry into the palace on
Nrga’s orders. (16)
अहोरात्राण्यनेकानि वसन्तौ क्रोधमीयतु:।
ऊचतुश्च महात्मानौ तावुभौ द्विजसत्तमौ॥१७॥
अर्थिनां कार्यसिद्ध्यर्थं यस्मात्त्वं नैषि दर्शनम्॥ १८ ॥
aga: सर्वभूतानां कृकलासो भविष्यसि।
बहुवर्षसहस्राणि बहुवर्षशतानि च ॥१९॥

“Spending many days and nights staying
there, both good Brahmanas were enraged,
and in rage, being totally anguished spoke
out these dreadful words: ‘As you fail to
appear before us to fulfil the demands of
those, who seek business, you shall attain
the form of a lizard and remain invisible to
all beings for many thousands and hundreds
of years. (17—19)

« VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

Vay त्वं कृकलीभूतो दीर्घकालं निवत्स्यसि।
उत्पत्स्यते fe लोकेऽस्मिन् यदूनां कोर्तिवर्धन: ॥ २०॥

“*You will stay inside the pit as a lizard.
In this world, there will be born God Visnu in
human form, known as Vasudeva (the son
of Vasudeva), who will add to the fame of
the line of the Yadus. (20)

वासुदेव sit wnat विष्णु: पुरुषविग्रह:।
सते मोक्षयिता शापाद् राजंस्तस्माद् भविष्यसि।। २१ ॥
कृता च तेन कालेन निष्कृतिस्ते भविष्यति।
भारावतरणार्थं हि नरनारायणावुभौ॥ २२॥
उत्पत्स्येते महावीर्यौ कलौ an उपस्थिते।
एवं at शापमुत्सृज्य ब्राह्मणौ विगतज्वरौ॥ २३॥
at गां fe दुर्बलां agit ददतुर्ब्रह्मणाय वै।
एवं स राजा तं शापमुपभुङ्क्ते सुदारुणम्॥ २४॥
कार्यार्थिनां विमर्दो हि राज्ञां दोषाय कल्पते।
तच्छीघ्रं दर्शनं मह्यमभिवर्तन्तु cA: २५॥

““He will release you from the curse. O
king! henceforth, you will be a lizard and
after a long time, your deliverance shall take
place as pronounced. Both Nara and
Narayana will be born in Kali Age to deliver
beings of this world from the weight of
sin.’ Thus pronouncing the curse, both
Brahmanas, free from affliction now, gave
away at last that weak and old cow to
another Brahmana.”

“Thus that king fell under the curse so
terrible. Negligence towards a dispute among
those who come with plaint, indeed constitutes
a fault for the king. Therefore, please, do not
neglect men with plaint and seeking my
presence. (21—25)

सुकृतस्य fe कार्यस्य wet नावैति पार्थिव:।
TAT Wes प्रतीक्षस्व सौमित्रे कार्यवाञ्जन:॥ २६॥
“The king does not attain the fruits of

the good deeds. Hence wait upon the men
who seek business, O son of Sumitra.” (26)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये उत्तरकाण्डे त्रिपञ्चाश: सर्ग: ॥ 43 Il

Thus ends the Canto Fifty-three in the Uttarakanda of the glorious Ramayana of
Valmiki, the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

