# YUDDHAKANDA +

आदित्यमभिवाश्यन्ति जनयन्तो महद्भयम्।
दीना दीनस्वरा ant अप्रशस्ता मृगद्विजा:॥ १६॥

“Wretched-looking, dreadful and ominous
beasts and birds are crying in pitiful tones
facing the sun, inspiring great fear. (16)
रजन्यामप्रकाशश्च संतापयति चन्द्रमा:।
कृष्णरक्तांशुपर्यन्तो यथा लोकस्य संक्षये॥१७॥

“Nay, bereft of radiance even at night
the moon is radiating heat contrary to its
nature. It is invested with a black and red

halo even as at the time of universal
dissolution. (17)

Beal रूक्षोऽप्रशस्तश्च परिवेष: सुलोहित:।
आदित्यमण्डले नीलं लक्ष्म लक्ष्मण FAT IU १८॥
“A short, dreary, inauspicious and
crimson halo as also a blue spot are seen
in the solar orb, O Laksmana! (18)

Gat न यथावच्च नक्षत्राण्यभिवर्तते।
युगान्तमिव लोकस्य पश्य लक्ष्मण शंसति॥१९॥

“The stars are not clearly seen as
before. Lo! This phenomenon, O Laksmana,
forebodes to the living creation the dissolution
of the world, as it were. (19)

काका: श्येनास्तथा गृध्रा नीचै: परिपतन्ति च।

शिवाश्चाप्यशुभा वाच: प्रवदन्ति AMAT: I २०॥
“Crows, hawks and vultures too are

descending to the ground, nay, crying aloud;

she-jackals also are emitting portentous
howls. (20)

Ve: शूलैश्च खड्गैश्च विमुक्तै: कपिराक्षसै:।
भविष्यत्याव्रता भूमिर्मांसशोणितकर्दमा॥ २१॥

“The earth it appears will be covered
with rocks, darts and swords hurled by
monkeys and ogres and will be thick with a
morass of flesh and blood. (21)
क्षिप्रमद्य दुराधर्षां पुरीं रावणपालिताम्।
अभियाम जवेनैव सर्वतो हरिभिर्वृता:॥ २२॥

“Surrounded by the monkeys on all
sides, we should without delay march with

435

all speed today towards the city of Lanka,
ruled over by Ravana, which is difficult to
storm.” (22)

इत्येवं तु वदन् ART लक्ष्मणं लक्ष्मणाग्रज:।
तस्मादवातरच्छीघ्रं पर्वताग्रान्महाबल: ॥ २३ ॥

While speaking as_ aforesaid to
Laksmana, the heroic Sri Rama, the eldest
brother of Laksmana for his part, who was
endowed with extraordinary might, rapidly
descended from that mountain-peak. (23)
अवतीर्य तु धर्मात्मा तस्माच्छैलात् स राघव:।
ut: परमदुर्धर्षं ददर्शं बलमात्मन:॥ २४॥

Climbing down from that mountain,
the celebrated Sri Rama (a scion of Raghu)
for his part, whose mind was set on virtue,
held a review of his own army, which was
supremely difficult to assail for the foes.

(24)

संनह्य तु vata: कपिराजबलं महत्।
कालज्ञो राघव: काले संयुगायाभ्यचोदयत्॥ २७५ UI

Having marshalled the huge army of
Sugriva (the ruler of monkeys) in co-operation
with the latter, Sri Rama (a scion of Raghu)
for his part, who knew the right moment to
act, commanded the army to advance at a
propitious hour for military operations. (25)

ad: काले महाबाहुर्बलेन महता qa:
प्रस्थित: पुरतो धन्वी लङ्कामभिमुख: पुरीम्॥ २६॥
Surrounded by a large contingent and
armed with a bow, the mighty-armed prince
then marched ahead at an auspicious
moment, facing the city of Lanka. (26)

तं विभीषणसुग्रीवौ हनूमाञ्जाम्बवान् Act: |
ऋक्षराजस्तथा नीलो लक्ष्मणश्चान्वयुस्तदा॥ २७॥
Vibhisana and Sugriva, Hanuman,
Jambavan, the king of bears, Nala and Nila,
as well as Laksmana followed him at that
moment. (27)

ad: पश्चात् सुमहती पृतनर्क्षवनौकसाम्।
Weare महतीं भूमिमनुयाति स्म राघवम्॥ il
