396

seen ahead of you in your drive back to the
gynaeceum, O gallant prince? (16)
न च काञ्चनचित्रं a पश्यामि प्रियदर्शन।
भद्रासनं पुरस्कृत्य aed a पुर:सरम्॥१७॥
“Nor again do | perceive marching before
you a servant carrying in his hand an
excellent seat (sitting mat) embroidered with
a gold figure, O valiant prince of delightful
appearance ! (17)

अभिषेको get सज्ज: किमिदानीमिदं aa
अपूर्वो मुखवर्णश्च न vats लक्ष्यते॥१८॥

“When the preparations for your
consecration are complete, how is it that
the colour of your face appears so changed
and no great joy is perceived in you at this
moment?” (18)

इतीव विलपन्तीं at प्रोवाच रघुनन्दन:।
att तत्रभवांस्तात: प्रव्राजयति मां वनम्॥१९॥

Sri Rama, a scion of Raghu, replied as
follows to Sita, who was wailing as
aforesaid : “My adorable father, O Sita, is
sending me into exile to the forest. (19)

कुले महति सम्भूते धर्मज्ञे धर्मचारिणि।
श्रृणु जानकि येनेदं क्रमेणाद्यागतं AAI oll

“Hear in order of sequence, O daughter
of Janaka, descended, as you are, in a
noble family, Knowing as you do what is
right and practising virtue, wherefore this
exile has fallen to my lot today. (20)

Ta सत्यप्रतिज्ञेन fra दशरथेन 4
wha मम मात्रे तु पुरा दत्तौ महावरौ॥ २१॥

“Indeed, a couple of momentous boons
were actually granted in the days gone by
in favour of mother, Kaikeyi, by my father,
King DaSaratha, who is so true to his promise.

(21)
तयाद्य मम सज्जेऽस्मिन्नभिषेके नृपोद्यते।
प्रचोदित: स समयो धर्मेण प्रतिनिर्जित:॥ २२॥

“The preparations for my consecration,

arranged through the Emperor’s endeavour,
being complete today, the king was pressed

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

hard by her to grant those boons and,
having been bound with an oath, was
completely brought under her thumb on
grounds of morality. (22)

aden fe वर्षाणि वस्तव्यं दण्डके मया।
पित्रा A भरतश्चापि यौवराज्ये नियोजित:॥ २३॥

“| must take up my abode in the forest
of Dandaka for fourteen years and,
furthermore, Bharata has been nominated
by my father for the office of Prince Regent.

(23)
सोऽहं त्वामागतो द्रष्टुं प्रस्थितो विजनं वनम्।
भरतस्य समीपे ते नाहं HMA: कदाचन॥ Vil

“As such | have come to see you while
on my way to the lonely forest of Dandaka.
| should never be praised by you in the
presence of Bharata whenever he calls on
you in order to pay his respects to you, lest
you should forfeit his goodwill. (24)

ऋद्धियुक्ता fe पुरुषा न Med परस्तवम्।
तस्मान्न ते गुणा: कथ्या भरतस्याग्रतो मम॥ २७५॥

“For, men endowed with power and
fortune do not brook to hear the glorification
of others. Therefore my virtues should never
be extolled by you before Bharata. (25)

ae ते नानुवक्तव्यो विशेषेण कदाचन।
अनुकूलतया wert समीपे तस्य वर्तितुम्॥ २६॥
“| should never be exalted to the skies
by you even before your companions. You
can stay with him only by _ behaving
conformably to him. (26)
तस्मै दत्तं नृपतिना यौवराज्यं सनातनम्।
a प्रसाद्यस्त्वया da नृपतिश्च विशेषत:॥ २७॥
“The office of Prince Regent has been
conferred on him by the king once for all.
He should, therefore, be pleased by you, O
Sita, more so because he is going to be the
king as well. (27)
ae चापि प्रतिज्ञां at गुरो: समनुपालयन्।
वनमद्यैव यास्यामि स्थिरीभव मनस्विनि॥ २८॥

“Duly implementing the aforesaid pledge
