# YUDDHAKANDA +

a ददर्श dat लङ्कां सशैलवनकाननाम्।
असंख्येयैर्हरिगणै: सर्वतो युद्धकाङ्क्षिभि:।। ३॥

He saw Lanka with its mountains,
woods and forests, besieged on all sides
by innumerable monkeys, who were all eager
to fight. (3)

स दृष्टवा at: सर्वैर्वसुधां कपिलीकृताम्।
कथं क्षपयितव्या: स्युरिति चिन्तापरोऽभवत्॥४॥
Beholding the earth round about Lanka,
rendered brown by all the monkeys gathered
there, he became thoughtful as to how they
were to be exterminated. (4)

a चिन्तयित्वा सुचिरं धैर्यमालम्ब्य रावण:।
wad हरियूथांश्च ददर्शायतलोचन:॥७५॥
Having pondered for a pretty long time
and embracing firmness, the notorious
Ravana with dilated eyes gazed on Sn
Rama (a scion of Raghu) and the simian
troops. (5)

waa: We सैन्येन मुदितो नाम पुप्लुवे।
लङ्कां ददर्श गुप्तां a सर्वतो राक्षसैर्वृताम्॥६॥

Full of delight, Sri Rama, a scion of
Raghu, pressed forward with his army and
saw Lanka surrounded on all sides and
guarded by ogres. (6)

दृष्टवा दाशरथिर्लङ्कां चित्रध्वजपताकिनीम्।
जगाम सहसा tat दूयमानेन चेतसा॥७॥

Seeing Lanka, which was dressed with
picturesque flags and buntings, Sri Rama
(son of DaSaratha) suddenly thought of Sita
with a mind which was being consumed
with affliction. (7)

अत्र सा मृगशावाक्षी मत्कृते जनकात्मजा।
पीड्यते शोकसंतप्ता कृशा स्थण्डिलशायिनी॥ ८॥

He said to himself: “Here is वां
daughter of Janaka, with eyes resembling
those of a fawn, undergoing suffering on
my account, tormented, as she is, with
grief, emaciated and reposing, as she does,
on the ground.” (8)

443

निपीड्यमानां धर्मात्मा वैदेहीमनुचिन्तयन्।
क्षिप्रमाज्ञापयद् wet वानरान् द्विषतां वधे॥९॥
Thinking again and again of Sita (a
princess of the Videha territory), who was
being sore oppressed by ogresses, Sri Rama,
whose mind was set on virtue, speedily
commanded the monkeys to make short
work of the enemy. (9)
wage तु वचसि रामेणाक्लिष्टकर्मणा।
संघर्षमाणा: प्लवगा: सिंहनादैरनादयन्॥१०॥
When the aforesaid command was
issued by Sri Rama, who was unwearied in
action, the monkeys, who were struggling
hard to outdo one another in advancing
against the enemy, made Lanka resound
with their shouts, resembling the roar of a
lion. (10)
शिखरैर्विकिरामैतां लङ्कां मुष्टिभिरेव ari
sta स्म दधिरे aa मनांसि हरियूथपा:॥११॥

All the monkey-generals made the
following resolve: ‘Let us crush this Lanka

with mountain-peaks or with our fists
alone.’ (11)
sera faterertor महान्ति शिखराणि च।

तरूंश्चोत्पाट्य विविधांस्तिष्ठन्ति हरियूथपा:॥ १२॥
Lifting up mountain-peaks as well as
huge rocks, and uprooting trees of various
kinds, the commanders of monkey troops
stood prepared to launch an attack on Lanka.
(12)

प्रेक्षतो राक्षसेन्द्रस्य तान्यनीकानि भागश:।
राघवप्रियकामार्थं लङ्कामारुरुहुस्तदा॥। १३॥
In order to accomplish Sri Rama’s
cherished desire, the aforesaid simian troops
then began to scale the walls of Lanka in
various parts, while Ravana, the ruler of
ogres, stood gazing. (13)

ते ताम्रवक्त्रा हेमाभा Ware त्यक्तजीविता:।
लङ्कामेवाभ्यवर्तन्त सालभूधरयोधिन: ॥ १४॥

Contending with sal trees and mountain-
