172

Seeing all those gods tormented by the
curse of His Spouse, Lord Siva (the Ruler
of gods) prepared to proceed in a westerly
direction, the quarter ruled over by Varuna,
the god of water. (25)

स गत्वा तप आतिष्ठत् पाश्वे तस्योत्तरे गिरे: ।
हिमवत्प्रभवे ys सह देव्या ASAT UWI
Going there the celebrated Lord Siva,

the supreme Divinity, took to asceticism
alongwith His Consort, Goddess Parvati,

« VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

on the summit called Himavatprabhava in
the northern wing of the celebrated mountain,
Himalaya.” (26)

एष ते विस्तरो wa शैलपुत्र्या निवेदित:।
गङ्गाया: प्रभवं चैव YUL A सहलक्ष्मण॥ २७॥
In this way have | told you, O Rama, a
detailed account of Goddess Uma, Daughter
of Himavan. Now hear from me alongwith
Laksmana the story of the origin of the
Ganga too. (27)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये बालकाण्डे
षट्त्रिंश: सर्ग: ॥ ३६ Il
Thus ends Canto Thirty-six in the Balakanda of the glorious Ramayana of Valmiki,
the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

Canto XXXVII
A detailed account of Kartikeya’s birth through Ganga

तप्यमाने dat देवे सेन्द्रा: साग्निपुरोगमा:।
सेनापतिमभीप्सन्त: पितामहमुपागमन्॥ १॥

“At that time, while the divinity, Lord
Siva was busy practising austerities alongwith
His Consort, Goddess Uma, the gods
alongwith Indra (their ruler) and accompanied
by the god of fire as their leader approached
Brahma, the progenitor of the entire creation,
seeking to secure a commander for their
forces. (1)

ततोऽब्रुवन् सुरा: Ad wrest पितामहम्।
प्रणिपत्य सुरा राम सेन्द्रा: साग्निपुरोगमा:॥ २॥
“Falling prostrate before him, all the
gods including Indra and accompanied by
the god of fire as their leader thereupon
addressed the venerable Brahma as follows,
O Rama (the delighter of gods) : (2)

at सेनापतिर्देव adit भगवता पुरा।
a a: परमास्थाय dad स्म सहोमया॥ ३॥

“‘Resorting to supreme asceticism, the
almighty Lord Siva, O glorious one, by whom

a commander for our forces was vouchsafed
in the form of seed some time back is
practising austerities alongwith Goddess
Uma, His Consort. (3)
Graded विधानज्ञ त्वं fe a: परमा गति:॥४॥

“‘Pray, accomplish what should be
done next in this connection with the intention
of doing good to the worlds, O knower of
expedients, since you are our supreme
resort.’ (4)

देवतानां वच: श्रुत्वा सर्वलोकपितामह:।
सान्त्वयन् मधुरैर्वाक्यैस्त्रिदशानिदमब्रवीत्॥ ५॥

“Hearing the submission of the gods,
Brahma, the progenitor of the whole universe,
addressed the following words to the gods,
comforting them with sweet assurances. (5)

Seen यदुक्तं तन्न प्रजा: ware पत्निषु।
wa वचनमक्लिष्टं सत्यमेव न संशय:॥६॥

“ ‘What has been uttered by Goddess
Parvati, the daughter of Himavan, viz., that
