946

nay, who was beside himself with anger,
then penetrated deep into the fierce army of
gods. (22)
तां प्रविश्य महामायां wat पशुपते: पुरा।
प्रविवेश सुसंरब्धस्तत् सैन्यं समभिद्रवत्॥ २३॥
Taking cover under the mighty power
of illusion obtained by him in the past as a
boon from Lord Siva, he penetrated deep
into the army of gods in fury and completely
dispersed the army of gods. (23)

स Gal देवतास्त्यक्त्वा शक्रमेवाभ्यधावत।
महेन्द्रश्च महातेजा नापश्यच्च सुतं रिपो:॥ २४॥

Leaving all the other gods alone, he
rushed on Indra himself; but the mighty Indra,
though endowed with extraordinary energy,
could not perceive the enemy’s son. (24)

विमुक्तकवचस्तत्र वध्यमानोऽपि रावणि:।
त्रिदशै: सुमहावीर्यैर्न चकार च किंचन॥ २५॥

His armour having fallen off on the
battlefield, while he was being struck by the
gods, who were endowed with exceptional
prowess, the son of Ravana did not entertain
the least fear. (25)

स मातलिं समायान्तं ताडयित्वा शरोत्तमै:।
Wek बाणवर्षेण भूय एवाभ्यवाकिरत्॥ २६॥

Having hit Matali, who was advancing,
with the best of arrows, he then covered the
mighty Indra with a shower of arrows. (26)

ततस्त्यक्त्वा Tet शक्रो विससर्ज च सारथिम्।
Wad समारुह्य मृगयामास रावणिम्॥ २७॥

Leaving the chariot, Indra thereupon
dismissed the charioteer and, duly mounting
the elephant, Airavata, he began to search
for Meghanada (son of Ravana). (27)

स तत्र मायाबलवानदृश्योऽथान्तरिक्षग:।
इन्द्रं मायापरिक्षिप्तं pear स प्राद्रवच्छरै:॥ २८॥

Confounding Indra by means of his
Maya (conjuring tricks) while remaining
invisible and moving in the air, endowed as
he was with the power of Maya, the notorious
Meghanada assailed him with arrows. (28)

« VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

स तं यदा परिश्रान्तमिन्द्रं जज्ञेऽथ Taft: |
तदैनं मायया बद्ध्वा स्वसैन्यमभितोऽनयत्॥ २९॥

Having bound Indra by dint of Maya
the moment he came to know of the former
having been worn out, Meghanada (son of
Ravana) forthwith took him to the flank of
his army. (29)

तं तु gear बलात् तेन नीयमानं महारणात्।
महेन्द्रममरा: सर्वे किं नु स्यादित्यचिन्तयन्॥ ३०॥

Seeing him, the mighty Indra, being
borne away by force from the great fight, all
the gods for their part wondered what was
actually going to happen. (30)

दृश्यते न स मायावी शक्रजित् समितिंजय:।
विद्यावानपि येनेन्द्रो माययापहृतो बलात्॥ ३१॥

“The notorious Meghanada, the
conqueror of Indra’, they added, “who is an
adept in conjuring tricks and has come out
victorious in battle and by whom Indra, though
skilled in dispelling Maya, has been borne
away by force by dint of conjuring tricks,
cannot be perceived.” (31)

एतस्मिन्नन्तरे क्रुद्धा: Al सुरगणास्तदा।
रावणं विमुखीकृत्य शरवर्षैरवाकिरन्॥३२॥

In the meantime, compelling Ravana to
turn his face away (from the field of battle), all
the hosts of gods, who were provoked to anger,
then covered him with showers of shafts. (32)
रावणस्तु समासाद्य आदित्यांश्च ager!

न शशाक A संग्रामे योद्धुं शत्रुभिरर्दित:॥ ३३॥

Having duly reached the twelve sons
of Aditi and the eight Vasus on that occasion,
Ravana failed to encounter them on the field
of battle, hard pressed as he was by the
enemies. (33)

स तं दृष्टवा परिम्लानं प्रहारैर्जर्जरीकृतम्।

रावणि: पितरं युद्धेऽदर्शनस्थोऽब्रवीदिदम्॥ ३४॥
Seeing his father languid and shattered

by blows in the encounter, Meghanada

(son of Ravana) spoke to him as follows,
remaining invisible all the while: (34)
