« KISKINDHAKANDA +

declare that | can leap eighty Yojanas (or

six hundred and forty miles).” (9)

तेषां कथयतां तत्र सर्वांस्ताननुमान्य च।

ततो वृद्धतमस्तेषां जाम्बवान् प्रत्यभाषत॥ Qo I
Showing respect to them all, while

they were speaking on that spot, Jambavan,

the oldest of them all, then submitted as
follows : (10)

पूर्वमस्माकमप्यासीत् कश्चिद् गतिपराक्रम:।
ते ad वयस: पारमनुप्राप्ता: स्म साम्प्रतम्॥११॥
“Formerly we too had some leaping
capacity. Now, of course, we have reached
the fag-end of our life. (11)
fe q Aa गते शक्यमिदं कार्यमुपेक्षितुम्।
यदर्थं कपिराजश्च was कृतनिश्चयौ॥१२॥
साम्प्रतं कालमस्माकं या गतिस्तां निबोधत।
नवतिं योजनानां तु गमिष्यामि न संशय:॥ १३॥
“Even in such circumstances, however,
the work in hand, which Sugriva (the king of
monkeys) and Sri Rama too are determined
to carry through, can on no account be
neglected. Please hear of the leaping
capacity which now exists in me: | shall
certainly cover in one leap ninety Yojanas
(or seven hundred and twenty miles): there
is no doubt about it.” (12-13)

तांश्च सर्वान् हरिश्रेष्ठाञ्जाम्बवानिदमब्रवीत्।
न खल्वेतावदेवासीद् गमने A पराक्रम:॥ १४॥

Nay, Jambavan spoke as follows to all
those jewels among the monkeys : “Surely,
| did not have only this much leaping capacity
in the past. (14)

मया वैरोचने यज्ञे प्रभविष्णु: सनातन:।
प्रदक्षिणीकृत: पूर्वं क्रममाणस्तिविक्रमम्॥१५॥

“At the well-known sacrifice performed
by King Bali (the son of Virocana) in the
former days, the all-pervading and immortal
Lord Trivikrama (who measured the whole
universe in three strides) was gone round
clockwise by me while taking His strides
over the universe. (15)

1159

स इदानीमहं ag: wat मन्दविक्रम:।
यौवने च तदासीन्मे बलमप्रतिमं परम्॥१६॥

“Having grown old |, whose surpassing
strength in youth was unequalled, have now
become tardy of movement in leaping. (16)

सम्प्रत्येतावदेवाद्य wet A WA स्वत:।
नैतावता च संसिद्धि: कार्यस्यास्य भविष्यति॥ १७॥

“This much only is my capacity in leaping
unaided today and at this moment. The
success of this undertaking of ours is,
however, out of the question with this much
capacity.” (17)

अथोत्तरमुदारार्थमब्रवीदङ्गदस्तदा ।
अनुमान्य तदा Wal जाम्बवन्तं महाकपि:॥ १८॥
Showing respect to Jambavan at that
moment, the wise Angada, the mighty monkey,
forthwith made on that occasion the following
reply, which bore a noble import : (18)
अहमेतद् गमिष्यामि योजनानां शतं महत्।
निवर्तने तु मे शक्ति: tart वेति न निश्चितम्॥ १९॥
“| shall surely cover these hundred
long Yojanas (or eight hundred miles), but it
is not certain whether | shall be able to
return or not.” (19)

तमुवाच हरिश्रेष्ठं जाम्बवान् वाक्यकोविद:।
Wat गमने शक्तिस्तव हर्युक्षसत्तम॥ oll

To Angada, the foremost of monkeys,
Jambavan, who was a master of expression,
submitted as follows: “Your power of
movement is known to us, O jewel among
the monkeys and bears ! (20)

कामं शतसहस्रं at नह्येष विधिरुच्यते।
योजनानां भवाञ्शक्तो Wet प्रतिनिवर्तितुम्॥ २१॥
“Nay, you may easily be able to leap a
hundred or (even) a thousand Yojanas and
come back. Surely, however, this is not
said to be the rule. (21)
नहि प्रेषयिता तात स्वामी wea: कथंचन।
भवतायं जन: सर्व: Wa: प्लवगसत्तम॥ २२॥
“A master, O dear Angada, who sends
or directs an expedition, can under no
