630

Yat विव्याधबाणाभ्यामुल्काभ्यामिव PAA |
wa सुस्राव रुधिरं पिहिते चास्य लोचने॥ UI

He, in his turn, let fall showers of rocks
and trees on the head of Kumbha: so the
tradition goes. That glorious son of
Kumbhakarna, however, tore asunder all
those trees and rocks hurled by the son of
Vali. Nay, perceiving the leader of monkey
hordes advancing towards him, Kumbha
pierced his eyebrows with two arrows even
as one would strike an elephant with a pair
of firebrands. Blood flowed from his eyebrows
and his eyes got veiled thereby. (560—52)

अङ्गद: पाणिना wa पिधाय रुधिरोक्षिते।
सालमासन्नमेकेन परिजग्राह पाणिना॥५३॥

Protecting his eyes, bathed in blood,
with one hand, Angada seized hold of a sal
tree, standing near, with the other. (53)

सम्पीड्योरसि सस्कन्धं करेणाभिनिवेश्य च।
किंचिदभ्यवनम्यैनमुन्ममाथ महारणे ॥ ५४॥

Propping it, branches and all, on his
chest, nay, pressing it tightly with one hand
and bending its twigs to some extent, he
tore it up in that great combat. (54)
तमिन्द्रकेतुप्रतिमं get मन्दरसंनिभम्।
समुत्सृजत वेगेन मिषतां सर्वरक्षसाम्॥५५॥

He hurled with velocity the aforesaid
tree—which was tall like the banner of Indra
and closely resembled Mount Mandara in
size—at Kumbha while all the ogres present
there stood looking on. (55)

स fase शितैर्बाणै: सप्तभि: कायभेदनै: |
अङ्गदो विव्यथेऽभीक्ष्णं स पपात मुमोह च॥ ५६॥
Kumbha, however, tore it asunder with
seven sharp arrows, capable of cleaving
the body. Angada felt greatly disturbed
at this; he fell down and swooned.
(56)
दुरासदं हरिश्रेष्ठा राघवाय न्यवेदयन्॥५७॥

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA +

Seeing Angada, who was difficult to
assail, fallen down and_ sinking into
despondency as though in a sea, the leaders
of the monkeys reported the matter to Sri
Rama, a scion of Raghu. (57)
रामस्तु व्यथितं श्रुत्वा वालिपुत्रं महाहवे।
व्यादिदेश हरिश्रेष्ठाञ्जाम्बवत्प्रमुखांस्तत:॥ ५८ II

Hearing of Angada (the son of Vall)
being seized with anguish in a major conflict,
Sri Rama for his part thereupon sent out for
his help the leaders of monkeys headed by
Jambavan. (58)

ते तु वानरशार्दूला: श्रुत्वा रामस्य शासनम्।
अभिपेतु: सुसंक्रुद्धा: कुम्भमुद्यतकार्मुकम्॥ ५९॥
Hearing the command of Sri Rama,
the aforesaid tigers among the monkeys
rushed in great fury towards Kumbha, who
stood with an uplifted bow. (59)

ततो द्रुमशिलाहस्ता: कोपसंरक्तलोचना:।
रिरक्षिषन्तोऽभ्यपतन्नङ्गदं वानरर्षभा: ॥ ६०॥
Keen to protect Angada, the leaders
of monkeys thereupon darted towards
Kumbha, bearing trees and rocks in their
hands, their eyes blood-red through anger.
(60)

जाम्बवांश्च सुषेणश्च वेगदर्शी च वानर:।
कुम्भकर्णात्मजं वीरं क्रुद्धा: समभिदुद्रुवु:॥ ६१॥
Full of fury, Jambavan and Susena as
also the monkey Vegadarsi assailed the
heroic son of Kumbhakarna in a body. (61)

समीक्ष्यापततस्तांस्तु वानरेन्द्रान् महाबलान्।
आववार शरौघेण नगेनेव जलाशयम्॥६२॥
Perceiving the aforesaid monkey chiefs,
who were endowed with extraordinary might,
advancing towards him, Kumbha for his
part intercepted them with a volley of shafts
even as one would obstruct the course of a
torrent by means of a rock. (62)

तस्य बाणपथं प्राप्य न शेकुरपि वीक्षितुम्।
वानरेन्द्रा महात्मानो वेलामिव महोदधि:॥ ६३॥
