« VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

Canto II

Reflecting on the difficulty of penetrating into Lanka, which was strongly
guarded by ogres, Hanuman further contracts his body and
enters it at moonrise

स सागरमनाधृष्यमतिक्रम्य महाबल:।
त्रिकूटस्य तटे cient स्थित: स्वस्थो cast Fu १॥

Standing at ease on a slope of the
Trikuta mountain, on having negotiated the
inviolable sea, Hanuman, who was endowed
with extraordinary might, surveyed Lanka:
so the tradition goes. (1)

aa: पादपमुक्तेन पुष्पवर्षेण वीर्यवान्।
अभिवृष्टस्ततस्तत्र at पुष्पमयो हरि:॥२॥

Covered all over by a shower of
blossoms discharged by the trees on all
sides, the powerful monkey, Hanuman, looked
as if consisting of flowers only. (2)
अनि:श्चसन् कपिस्तत्र न ग्लानिमधिगच्छति॥ 3 i

Even on having covered a hundred
Yojanas (eight hundred miles), the glorious
Hanuman, who was endowed with prowess
of the first magnitude, did not gasp for breath
nor did he experience any fatigue. (3)
fe UA: सागरस्यान्तं संख्यातं शतयोजनम्॥४॥

He said to himself: ‘Il am able to journey
many hundreds of miles, to say nothing of
reaching the opposite shore of a sea, which
has been calculated as being at a distance
of a hundred Yojanas only.’ (4)

स तु वीर्यवतां sre: प्लवतामपि ara: |
जगाम वेगवाँल्लंकां लङ्घयित्वा महोदधिम्॥५॥

Having negotiated the vast sea,
Hanuman, for his part, who was the foremost
of powerful beings and a jewel among the
monkeys, and was full of energy, reached
Lanka. (5)

wget च नीलानि गन्धवन्ति वनानि a
मधुमन्ति च मध्येन जगाम नगवन्ति च॥६॥

He passed through dark green meadows
and groves full of fragrance, nay, full of
trees and full of honey too. (6)
शैलांशच तरुसंछन्नान् वनराजीश्च पुष्पिता:।
अभिचक्राम तेजस्वी हनूमान् प्लवगर्षभ:॥७॥

The glorious Hanuman, the foremost of
monkeys, further coursed through mountains

covered with trees and groves laden with
blossom. (7)

a तस्मिन्नचले तिष्ठन् वनान्युपवनानि a
स नगाग्रे स्थितां लंकां cast पवनात्मज:॥ ८॥

Stationed on that mountain, he saw
forests and groves. That son of the wind-
god, Hanuman, also beheld Lanka perched
on the top of the mountain. (8)
सरलान् कर्णिकारांश्च खर्जूरांश्च सुपुष्पितान्।
प्रियालान्मुचुलिन्दांश्च कुटजान् केतकानपि॥ ९ ॥
प्रियङ्गृनूगन्थपूणस्रिच नीपान् सप्तच्छदांस्तथा।

असनान् कोविदारांश्च करवीरांश्च पुष्पितान्॥ १० ॥
पुष्पभारनिबद्धांश्च aM मुकुलितानपि।
पादपान् विहगाकोर्णान् पवनाथूतमस्तकान्॥ ११॥
हंसकारण्डवाकीर्णा वापी: पद्मोत्पलाव्रृता:

आक्रीडान् विविधान् war विविधांश्च जलाशयानू।।१२।।
उद्यानानि च रम्याणि cast कपिकुञ्जर:॥१३॥

Hanuman, an elephant among the
monkeys, further saw Saralas (a species of
pine trees), and Karnikaras, as also date-
palms in full blossom, Priyalas and muculindas
(a species of oranges), KUutajas, also Ketakas
and fragrant Priyangus (trees yielding long
pepper as their fruit), Nipas (a species of
