730

Having entered the fearful forest having
trees laden with flowers and fruits, he saw
in one corner a hermitage decorated with
bark-garments and garlands. (4)

तत्र तापसमासीनं मलपङ्कजधारिणम्।
राम: सुतीक्ष्णं विधिवत् तपोधनमभाषत॥५॥

Rama spoke with due decorum to the
ascetic, Sage Sutiksna, sitting there in the
posture of Padmasana for purification : (5)

रामोऽहमस्मि भगवन् भवन्तं द्रष्टुमागत:।
तन्माभिवद ata vet सत्यविक्रम॥६॥
“Sir, | am Rama, come to see you.

Hence, O knower of Dharma, great sage of
true spiritual might, please speak to me.” (6)

a निरीक्ष्य ततो धीरो wt धर्मभृतां am
समाश्लिष्य च बाहुभ्यामिदं वचनमब्रवीत्॥७॥

That wise seer then saw Rama, the
best amongst the upholders of Dharma,
folded him in his arms and addressed to
him the following words : (7)

स्वागतं ते रघुश्रेष्ठ राम सत्यभृतां वर।
आश्रमोऽयं त्वयाऽऽक्रान्त: सनाथ Fa साम्प्रतम्॥ ८ ॥

“Welcome to you, O Rama, the foremost
amongst the Raghus, the best amongst the
upholders of truth. With your arrival this
hermitage has now found its master, as it
were. (8)

प्रतीक्षमाणस्त्वामेव नारोहेऽहँ महायश:।
देवलोकमितो dit देहं त्यक्त्वा महीतले॥९॥

“Awaiting you only, | am not ascending
to the realm of gods from here, abandoning
the body on the surface of the earth, O
highly illustrious hero ! (9)

चित्रकूटमुपादाय राज्यभ्रष्टोऽसि A श्रुत:।
इहोपयात: काकुत्स्थ देवराज: YH: i oll
“O Kakutstha, Indra, the king of gods,
had come here. | have heard that abandoning
the kingdom you have come over to Citrakuta.
(10)

उपागम्य च मे cal महादेव: सुरेश्वर:।
सर्वाल्लोकाञ्जितानाह मम पुण्येन कर्मणा॥११॥

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

ay देवर्षिजुष्टेषु जितेषु तपसा मया।
मत्प्रसादात् सभार्यस्त्वं विहरस्व AAMT: ULI
“Coming to me, Indra, the great god,
the king of gods, told me that | have won all
the higher worlds through meritorious action.
| urge you that, you may please rejoice in
those worlds inhabited by divine sages,
won by me, together with your wife and
Laksmana.” (11-12)
प्रत्युवाचात्मवान् रामो ब्रह्माणमिव aga: १३॥
The self-restrained Rama replied to that
great resplendent sage of austere penance,
who had taken a vow to speak the truth, as
Indra does to Brahma: (13)

अहमेवाहरिष्यामि स्वयं लोकान् महामुने।
आवासं त्वहमिच्छामि प्रदिष्टमिह कानने॥ १४॥

“O great sage, | shall myself bring all
the worlds within your reach. However, at
this moment, | desire that a place for my
abode in this forest be pointed out to me.(14)

War सर्वत्र कुशल: सर्वभूतहिते रत:।
आख्यातं शरभङ्गेन गौतमेन ASIST eu Il

‘The high-souled Sarabhanga of
Gautama family told me that you are well-
versed in all sciences and devoted to the
good of all creatures.” (15)

एवमुक्तस्तु रामेण महर्षिर्लोकविश्रुत:।
अब्रवीन्मधुरं वाक्यं हर्षेण महता युत:॥१६॥
Thus addressed by Rama, the great
sage, well-known in the world, uttered the
following sweet words with great delight :
(16)

अयमेवाश्रमो Wa गुणवान् रम्यतामिति।
marta: सदा मूलफलैर्युत:॥ १७॥
“Rama, this very hermitage, frequented
by multitudes of sages and always abounding
in roots and fruits, is comfortable; you may
please stay happily here. (17)

इममाश्रममागम्य मृगसंघा महीयस:।
अहत्वा प्रतिगच्छन्ति लोभयित्वाकुतोभया:॥ १८॥
