180

that whosoever comes before them has
interfered with their sacrificial performance

« VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

and that the sacrificial horse has been taken
away by him.’ (26)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये बालकाण्डे एकोनचत्वारिंश: AW: ॥ ३९ ॥

Thus ends Canto Thirty-nine in the Balakanda of the glorious Ramayana of Valmiki,
the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

Canto XL

Brahma reassures the gods by telling them that the sons of Sagara will be
destroyed by the curse of Sage Kapila. The sons of Sagara in the
course of their excavation arrive in the presence of Kapila
and, behaving insolently towards him, are forthwith
reduced to ashes by the fire of his wrath

देवतानां वच: seat भगवान् वै पितामह:।
प्रत्युवाच सुसंत्रस्तान् कृतान्तबलमोहितान्॥१॥

“Hearing the representation of the gods
the venerable Brahma replied as follows to
the gods, who were greatly alarmed, and
had been thrown into confusion by the
might of the sons of Sagara, who had brought
about the destruction of living beings on a
large scale: (1)

यस्येयं वसुधा कृत्स्ना वासुदेवस्य धीमत:।
महिषी माधवस्यैषा स एवं भगवान् प्रभु:॥ २॥
कापिलं रूपमास्थाय धारयत्यनिशं धराम्।
wer कोपाग्निना दग्धा भविष्यन्ति नृपात्मजा:॥ ३॥
“This Goddess Earth is a Consort of
the all-wise Lord Visnu, the Spouse of
Laksmi, the goddess of fortune, to whom
this entire globe belongs. Assuming the form
of Kapila the same almighty Lord incessantly
supports the earth by dint of His yogic
power. The sons of Sagara will be shortly
consumed by the fire of His wrath. (2-3)

पृथिव्याश्चापि निर्भेदो qe Wa सतानत:।
सगरस्य च पुत्राणां विनाशो दीर्घदर्शिनाम्॥४॥

“The excavation of the earth invariably

takes place in every Kalpa. And the
destruction of the sons of Sagara too is
foreseen by men possessing a long range
of vision. Hence there is no occasion for
grief on this account either.” (4)

पितामहवच: श्रुत्वा त्रयस्तिंशदरिंदमा:।

cat: परमसंहृष्ठार पुनर्जग्मुर्यथागतम्॥५॥

Hearing the reply of Brahma, the
progenitor of the entire creation, the gods,
thirty-three* in number, all capable of
subduing their enemy, returned extremely
delighted to their respective abode the way
they had come. (5)

सगरस्य च पुत्राणां प्रादुरासीन्महास्वन:।

पृथिव्यां भिद्यमानायां निर्घातसमनि:स्वन:॥६॥
And while the earth was _ being

excavated at the hands of Sagara’s sons,

there arose a terrific sound like that of a
thunderstorm. (6)

ततो भित्त्वा महीं Wat कृत्वा चापि प्रदक्षिणम्।
सहिता: सागरा: सर्वे पितरं वाक्यमब्रुवन्॥७॥
Having walked round the whole earth

and excavated it too, all the sons of Sagara
then sought the presence of their father

* The thirty-three principal gods are the eight Vasus, the eleven Rudras, the twelve Adityas and the
two Aswinikumaras (the twin-born physicians of gods).
