62

resembled a cloud, and thence into that of
Vibhisana. (18)

Tera च तथा विरूपाक्षस्य aa fF
विद्युज्जिह्वस्य भवनं विद्युन्मालेस्तथैव च॥१९॥

He further leapt into the house of
Mahodara and likewise into that of Virupaksa
as well and similarly into those of Vidyujjinva
and Vidyunmal. (19)

वज्रदंष्टरस्य च तथा पुप्लुवे स महाकपि:।
शुकस्य च महावेग: सारणस्य च धीमत:॥ २०॥
That great Hanuman, who was
possessed of extraordinary speed, similarly
bounded into the house of Vajradamstra as
also into the houses of Suka and the wise
Sarana. (20)
तथा चेन्द्रजितो age जगाम हरियूथप:।
जम्बुमाले: सुमालेशच जगाम हरिसत्तम:॥ २१॥

Hanuman, the commander of monkey
forces, likewise passed on to the palace of
Indrajit (Ravana’s eldest son) and then that
jewel among the monkeys went into the
dwellings of Jambumali and Sumali. (21)
रश्मिकेतोश्च wat सूर्यशत्रोस्तथैव च।
वज्रकायस्य च तथा पुप्लुवे स महाकपि:॥ २२॥

That great Hanuman also leapt into the
abode of Rasmiketu, and likewise into that
of Suryasatru, and similarly into that of
Vajrakaya. (22)
धूम्राक्षस्याथ सम्पातेर्भवनं मारुतात्मज:।
विद्युद्रूपस्य भीमस्य घनस्य विघनस्य च॥ २३॥
Wns चक्रस्य शठस्य कपटस्य AI
ह्रुस्वकर्णस्य eee लोमशस्य च रक्षस:॥ २४॥
युद्धोन्मत्तस्य मत्तस्य ध्वजग्रीवस्य सादिन:।
विद्युज्जिहृद्विजिह्वानां तथा हस्तिमुखस्य च॥ Ru I
करालस्य पिशाचस्य शोणिताक्षस्य चैव हि।
THAT: क्रमेणैव हनुमान् मारुतात्मज:॥ २६॥
तेषु तेषु महार्हेषु भवनेषु महायशा:।
तेषामृद्धिमतामृद्धिं cast स महाकपि:॥ २७॥

The son of the wind-god Hanuman,
then visited the habitations of Dhumraksa,
Sampati, Vidyudrupa, Bhima, Ghana and

« VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

Vighana, Sukanabha, Cakra, Satha and
Kapata, Hraswakarna, Damstra and the ogre
Lomasa, Yuddhonmatta, Matta, Dhwajagriva,
Sadi, (another) Vidyujjinva and Dwijihva and
likewise those of Hastimukha, Karala, PiSaca
and also of Sonitaksa. Leaping one after
another into the various mansions of great
value, that mighty and highly illustrious
Hanuman, son of the wind-god, marked the
affluence of those wealthy ogres. (23—27)

सर्वेषां समतिक्रम्य भवनानि समन्तत:।
आससादाथ लक्ष्मीवान् राक्षसेन्द्रनिवेशनम्॥ २८॥

Passing clearly beyond the residences
of all the aforesaid principal ogres on every
side, Hanuman, endowed with riches in the
form of virility, once more reached the palace
of Ravana, the ruler of ogres. (28)
रावणस्योपशायिन्यो ददर्शं हरिसत्तम:।
विचरन् हरिशार्दूलो राक्षसीर्विकृतेक्षणा:॥ २९॥

While wandering about the palace of
Ravana, Hanuman, a tiger among the
monkeys, beheld a number of ogresses with
ghastly eyes, guarding the bed-chamber of
Ravana. (29)
शूलमुद्गरहस्तांश्च शक्तितोमरधारिण:।
ददर्श विविधान्गुल्मांस्तस्य रक्ष:पतेर्गृहे॥ ३०॥

He also saw in the abode of that lord of
ogres various troops of ogres bearing darts

and clubs in their hands and carrying javelins
and lances. (30)

राक्षसांशच महाकायान् नानाप्रहरणोद्यतान्।
रक्तान् श्चेतान्सितांश्चापि हरींश्चापि महाजवान्॥ ३१॥
He further observed gigantic ogres with
uplifted weapons of every description and also
found tethered in the stables red as well as
white steeds of high speed. (31)

कुलीनान् रूपसम्पन्नान् गजान् परगजारुजान्।
शिक्षितान् गजशिक्षायामैरावतसमान् युधि॥ ३२॥
निहन्तॄन् परसैन्यानां ye afer, ददर्श स:।
क्षरतश्च यथा मेघान् स्रवतश्च यथा गिरीन्॥ ३३॥
मेघस्तनितनिर्घोषान् दुर्धर्षान् समरे परै:।
west वाहिनीस्तत्र जाम्बूनदपरिष्कृता:॥ ३४॥
