# YUDDHAKANDA #

affectionate reply to him, while Laksmana
listened: (3)

कृतप्रयत्नकर्माण: Ad Wa वनौकस:।
रत्नैरर्थैश्च विविधै: सम्पूज्यन्तां विभीषण॥४॥

“Let all the monkeys and bears (lit.,
denizens of the woods) without exception,
who have fought diligently, be duly honoured
with precious stones and riches of various
kinds, O Vibhisana! (4)

सहामीभिस्त्वया लङ्का निर्जिता राक्षसेश्वर।
Be: प्राणभयं त्यक्त्वा संग्रामेष्वनिवर्तिभि:। ५॥
“Lanka, O ruler of ogres, has been
conquered by you in collaboration with these
monkeys, who have never turned their back
in conflicts and fought joyfully ignoring all
risk to their life. (5)

a St कृतकर्माण: wl Wa वनौकस:।
धनरत्नप्रदानैश्च कर्मैषां सफलं Bene

“All these monkeys (lit., denizens of the
forest) without exception have accomplished
their task. Reward their achievement with
gifts of gold and precious stones. (6)

एवं सम्मानिताश्चैते नन्द्यमाना यथा त्वया।
भविष्यन्ति कृतज्ञेन निर्वृता हरियूथपा:॥७॥

“Highly honoured in this way and duly
cheered by you, cognizant of their services,
the commanders of monkey troops will feel
happy. (7)
सर्वे त्वामभिगच्छन्ति तत: सम्बोधयामि ते॥८॥

“In the event of your doing so, all will
recognize you to be munificent as well as
the accumulator of wealth, full of kindness
and one who has mastered his senses.
Hence | admonish you in this behalf. (8)

ह्रीनं रतिगुणै: सर्वैरभिहन्तारमाहवे |
सेना त्यजति dam नृपतिं तं aware
“Feeling disaffected, the army deserts

that ruler of men, O king, who is devoid of
all virtues evoking devotion, as one who

809

brings about the destruction of so many
lives on the field of battle for nothing.” (9)

एवमुक्तस्तु रामेण वानरांस्तान् विभीषण:।
रत्नार्थसंविभागेन सर्वानेवाभ्यपूजयत्॥ १०॥
Admonished in these words by Sri
Rama, Vibhisana for his part honoured all
the aforesaid monkeys by duly distributing
precious stones and gold among them.
(10)

ततस्तान् पूजितान् दृष्ट्वा रत्नार्थैर्हरियूथपान्।
आरुरोह det रामस्तद् विमानमनुत्तमम्॥११॥
लक्ष्मणेन सह भ्रात्रा विक्रान्तेन धनुष्मता॥१२॥
Seeing on that occasion all those
commanders of monkey troops rewarded
with precious stones and riches, Sri Rama
then ascended that aerial car, which was
unsurpassed in its manifold virtues, alongwith
his younger brother, Laksmana, a valiant
archer, taking the high-souled princess of
the Videha territory, who was feeling abashed
in his arms. (11-12)

अब्रवीत् स विमानस्थ: पूजयन् सर्ववानरान्।
सुग्रीवं च महावीर्यं काकुत्स्थ: सविभीषणम्॥ १३॥
Bestowing attentions on all the monkeys
as well as on Sugriva, who was endowed
with great valour, as also on Vibhisana,
while standing in the aerial car, that scion of
Kakutstha, spoke as follows: (13)
मित्रकार्यं कृतमिदं भवद्धिर्वानरर्षभा:।
अनुज्ञाता मया सर्वे यथेष्टं प्रतिगच्छत॥ १४॥
“This work of a friend has been
accomplished by you, O jewels among the
monkeys! Permitted by me, go you all where
you will. (14)

यत् तु कार्यं aren स्निग्धेन च हितेन च।
कृतं सुग्रीव aq aa भवताधर्मभीरुणा॥ १७५ il
“All that which ought to have been

done by an affectionate and kindly-disposed
friend has been done by you, O Sugriva,
