1052

lovely women adorned with jewels, stands
enhanced today. (49)

aiararacerita शब्द: ॥ ५० UI

“Blended with the music produced in
the form of the whistling of bamboos and
circulated by the breeze in the morning and,
therefore, spread all round, the echo coming
from the caves and the bellowing of the
bulls supplement each other, as it were.

(50)

कूलानि काशैरुपज्ञोळ्ळिभतानि॥५१ T

“The banks of rivers stand decorated
with fresh bunches of KaSa grass smiling
joyfully in the form of their blossom, nay,
being swung by a gentle breeze and shining
brightly like strips of linen washed clean

with water. (51)
वनप्रचण्डा मधुपानशौण्डा:
प्रियान्विता: षट्चरणा: WRT: |
कुर्वन्ति पद्मासनरेणुगौरा:॥५२॥
“Flying unhampered in the woods and
adept in sucking honey, nay, drunk with
honey in the woods and turned grey with
the pollen of lotus and Asana flowers, the
black bees accompanied by their loved ones
and transported with joy follow the course
of the wind. (52)
क्रौञ्चस्वनं शालिवनं विपक्वम्।
मृदुश्च वायुर्विमलश्च चन्द्र:
शंसन्ति वर्षव्यपनीतकालम्॥ ५३॥

“Pellucid water in the rivers, lakes
etc., smiling joyfully in the form of lotus and
other flowers and made noisy with the cries

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

of cranes, fully ripe paddy-fields, nay, the
gentle breeze and the cloudless moon
betoken the time of passing away of the
rains. (53)
airastatSrat :
नदीवधूनां गतयोऽद्य मन्दा:।
प्रभातकालेष्विव कामिनीनाम्॥ ५४॥
“The pace of matrons in the form of
rivers with their girdles visible in the form of
fishes is slow today like that of passionate
women enjoyed (the previous night) by their
beloved one and walking with a tardy gait at
the time of sunrise. (54)

सचक्रवाकानि सशैवलानि
काशैर्दुकूलैरिव संवृतानि।
सपत्ररेखाणि सरोचनानि
वधूमुखानीव नदीमुखानि॥७५५॥

“Full of Cakravaka birds (a species of
red geese) and duck-weeds floating on
them and covered with bunches of Kasa
grass as though with a piece of cloth, the
faces of rivers resemble the faces of matrons
severally painted with Gorocana (a yellow
orpiment prepared from the bile of a cow)
and decorated with lines or streaks drawn
with musk and other fragrant substances.

(55)

प्रहष्टषट्पादनिकूजितेषु ।
प्रचण्डचापोऽद्य वनेषु काम:॥ ५६॥

“Wielding a fierce bow, the god of love,
who is cruel in his violence started against
the love-lorn with the bow grasped in his
hand, has made his appearance today in
woodlands adorned with Bana and Asana
trees in full blossom and rendered very
noisy by highly delighted black bees. (56)
लोकं सुवृष्ट्या परितोषयित्वा

नदीस्तटाकानि च पूरयित्वा।
