* BALAKANDA +

Laksmana and Satrughna or thirteen days
after the advent of Sri Rama, which took
place two days earlier). Supremely delighted
the sage Vasistha, on behalf of the king,
made the eldest, an embodiment of the
Supreme Spirit, known by the name of
‘Rama’, the son of Kaikeyi by that of
‘Bharata’, the first son of Sumitra by that of
Laksmana and the other by that of Satrughna
on that occasion. (21-22)

ब्राह्मणान् भोजयामास पौरजानपदानपि।
अददद् ब्राह्मणानां च रत्नौघममलं बहु॥ २३॥
The sage, on behalf of the Emperor,
fed the Brahmanas of the capital as well as
of the entire kingdom of Kosala and gave
away to the said Brahmanas a large heap
of shining jewels. (23)
तेषां जन्मक्रियादीनि सर्वकर्माण्यकारयत्।
तेषां केतुरिव ज्येष्ठो रामो रतिकर: पितु:॥ २४॥
He further caused to be performed
from time to time with respect to the four
princes all purificatory rites commencing
from the Jatakarma and ending with
Upananyana or investiture with the sacred
thread. The eldest of them, Sri Rama,
proclaimed the greatness of his race like a
flag and proved to be the delight of his
father. (24)

aya भूयो भूतानां स्वयम्भूरिव सम्मत:।
Wa वेदविद: शूरा: सर्वे लोकहिते रता:॥ २५॥

Again, he was esteemed by all created
beings as Brahma, the self-born. All the four
princes turned out to be masters of the
Vedas and great heroes, and all were intent
upon doing good to the people. (25)

wa ज्ञानोपसम्पन्ना: wl समुदिता Wr: |
तेषामपि महातेजा राम: सत्यपराक्रम:॥ २६॥

All were endowed with wisdom and all
were adorned with virtues. Sri Rama,
however, was exceptionally glorious of them
all and possessed of true, unfailing prowess.

(26)

123

Be: सर्वस्य लोकस्य शशाङ्क इव निर्मल:।
गजस्कन्धेऽश्चपृष्ठे च रथचर्यासु सम्मत:॥ Vl

Like the full moon in a clear sky, he
was the beloved of all people and was
esteemed in the art of riding on elephants
and on horseback and in the various
processes of driving a chariot. (27)

ade च fra: faq: शुश्रूषणे रत:।
बाल्यात् प्रभृति सुस्निग्धो लक्ष्मणो लक्षिमवर्धन: ॥ २८ ॥
TH लोकरामस्य भ्रातुर्ज्यष्ठस्य नित्यश:।
सर्वप्रियकरस्तस्य रामस्यापि शरीरत:॥२९॥
लक्ष्मणो लक्षमिसम्पन्नो बहि:प्राण इवापर:।
न च तेन fan fat लभते पुरुषोत्तम:॥ ३०॥
मृष्टमन्नमुपानीतमश्नाति नहि तं विना।
यदा fe हयमारूढो मृगयां याति राघव:॥ ३१॥
अथैनं पृष्ठतोऽभ्येति सधनु: परिपालयन्।
भरतस्यापि VAN लक्ष्मणावरजो fF स:॥ ३२॥
प्राणै: प्रियतरो नित्यं तस्य चासीत् तथा प्रिय: ।
a चतुर्भिर्महाभागै: पुत्रैर्दशरथ: प्रियै: ।। ३३॥
aya परमप्रीतो देवैरिव पितामह:।
a यदा ज्ञानसम्पन्ना: Wa समुदिता AW u ३४॥
ह्रीमन्त: कीर्तिमन्तश्च सर्वज्ञा दीर्घदर्शिन:।
तेषामेवं प्रभावाणां सर्वेषां दीप्ततेजसाम्॥ ३५॥
पिता दशरथो हृष्टो ब्रह्मा लोकाधिपो यथा।
a चापि मनुजव्याघ्रा वैदिकाध्ययने रता:॥ ३६॥
पितृशुश्रूषणरता धनुर्वेदे च निष्ठिता:।
अथ राजा दशरथस्तेषां दारक्रियां we zou
चिन्तयामास धर्मात्मा सोपाध्याय: सबान्धव:।
तस्य चिन्तयमानस्य मन्तिमध्ये महात्मन:॥ ३८॥
अभ्यागच्छन्महातेजा विश्वामित्रो महामुनि:।
स राज्ञो दर्शनाकाङ्क्षी द्वाराध्यक्षानुवाच ह॥ ३९॥

He took delight in the science of archery
and was devoted to the service of his
father. Laksmana, the promoter of fortune of
those who sought his protection, was ever
deeply attached from his very infancy to his
eldest brother, Sri Rama, the delight of the
world. He gratified the latter in everyway.
Laksmana, who was rich in splendour, was
a second life, as it were, to Sri Rama,
