« KISKINDHAKANDA +

दीयतां सम्प्रदानं च परिष्वज्य च वानरान्।
सर्वशाखामृगेन्द्रस्त्वं संसादय सुहृज्जनम्॥३४॥
“‘Let loving presents be given to the
monkeys after embracing them. Take you
leave of your dear and near ones, the ruler
as you are of all monkeys. (34)
सुदृष्टां ge किष्किन्धां कुरुष्वात्मसमं पुरे।
क्रोडस्व च समं स्त्रीभिरहं ते दर्पशासन:॥ BG Il
“‘Let Kiskindha be carefully seen for
the last time, since you are not going to see
it any more; place a replica of yours in the
person of your son in charge of the city to
look after it when you are no more and revel
finally in the company of your wives till
sunrise; for | am going to tame your
arrogance soon. (35)
यो fe मत्तं wad वा भग्नं वा ted कृशम्।
हन्यात् स भ्रूणहा लोके त्वद्विधं मदमोहितम्॥ ३६॥
“‘He who kills one who is drunk, is
unwary, has broken a limb or has been
deprived of his weapons, is emaciated of
body or is blinded by passion like you is
indeed as despicable as a foeticide.’ (36)

स Weetadard क्रोधात् तमसुरेश्वरम्।
विसृज्य a: Pera: सर्वास्ताराप्रभृतिकास्तदा tl ३७॥
Laughing heartily and dismissing all
those ladies led by Tara, Vali now angrily
replied as follows to the silly lord of demons :
(37)

मत्तोऽयमिति मा मंस्था यद्यभीतोऽसि संयुगे।
मदोऽयं सम्प्रहारेऽस्मिन् वीरपानं समर्थ्यताम्॥ ३८ I
“*“[)0 not be misled to think that | am
drunk, if you are not afraid of engaging ina
contest with me. Let this inebriety of mine
be construed as a state of drunkenness

resorted to by a hero on the occasion of
this duel with you.’ (38)

तमेवमुक्त्वा संक्रुद्धो मालामुत्क्षिप्य काञ्चनीम्।

frat दत्तां महेन्द्रेण युद्धाय व्यवतिष्ठत॥ ३९॥
“Replying to him thus and throwing

about his neck a chain of gold gifted to him

971

by his father, the mighty Indra, Vali stood
prepared for an encounter with the demon,
highly enraged. (39)
विषाणयोर्गृहीत्वा तं दुन्दुभिं गिरिसंनिभम्।
आविध्यत तथा वाली विनदन् कपिकुञ्जर: ॥४०॥
“Seizing by the horns the aforesaid
Dundubhi, who looked like a mountain, Valli,
an elephant among monkeys, forthwith began

to revolve him, uttering a loud deep hoarse
sound. (40)

बलाद् व्यापादयांचक्रे AAS च महास्वनम्।
श्रोत्राभ्यामथ Th तु तस्य सुस्राव UTA: tl ¥ Ul

“Vali then threw him down and uttered
a loud cry. While he was being thrown
down, blood immediately flowed from his
ears. (41)

तयोस्तु क्रोधसंरम्भात् परस्परजयैषिणो:।

qe समभवद् घोरं दुन्दुभेर्वालिनस्तथा॥४२॥
“A terrible struggle then raged between

the two combatants, Dundubhi and Vali,

who were keen to conquer each other in the
vehemence of their wrath. (42)

अयुध्यत तदा वाली शाक्रतुल्यपराक्रम:।
मुष्टिभिर्जानुभि: पद्भि: शिलाभि: पादपैस्तथा it ४३ ॥

“Vali, who was equal to Indra, the ruler
of gods, in prowess, then struck with fists,
knees, feet, rocks and trees. (43)

Wet घ्नतोस्तत्र वानरासुरयोस्तदा।
आसीद्धीनोऽसुरो युद्धे शक्रसूनुर्व्यवर्धत॥४४॥
“While the monkey and the demon were
striking one another on that spot at that
time, the demon began to lose ground in the

contest, while Vali (Indra’s son) gained the
upper hand. (44)

तं तु दुन्दुभिमुद्यम्य धरण्यामभ्यपातयत्।

युद्धे प्राणहरे तस्मिन्निष्पिष्टो दुन्दुभिस्तदा॥४५॥
“Lifting Dundubhi, Vali for his part

dashed him to the ground with the result

that Dundubhi was instantly crushed in that

deadly contest. (45)
