# YUDDHAKANDA #

rushed forward in great rage, scattering the
monkeys on the battle-field. (145)
दारयन्निव सर्वेषां हृदयानि वनौकसाम्।
प्रहस्य विकृतं भीमं a मेघस्तनितोपमम्॥ १४६ ॥
कुम्भकर्णो महातेजा राघवं वाक्यमब्रवीत्।
नाहं विराधो विज्ञेयो न कबन्ध: खरो न च।
न वाली न च मारीच: कुम्भकर्ण: समागत: ॥ १४७॥

Heartily laughing in an unnatural and
hideous way, producing a sound like the
rumbling of a cloud, and, therefore, rending
as it were the hearts of all the monkeys (lit.,
the dwellers in the wood s). Kumbhakarna,
who was endowed with extraordinary energy,
spoke to Sri Rama (a scion of Raghu) as
follows: “Il should neither be accounted
Viradha nor Kabandha nor Khara nor Vali
nor Marica. It is Kumbhakarna arrived here.

(146-147)
पश्य मे मुद्गरं भीमं aa कालायसं महत्।
अनेन निर्जिता cat दानवाश्च पुरा मया॥ १४८ ॥

“Behold my dreadful and mighty club
wrought entirely of iron. With this gods and
demons were formely conquered by me.

(148)
विकर्णनास sit at नावज्ञातुं त्वमर्हसि।
स्वल्पापि fe न A पीडा कर्णनासाविनाशनात्॥ १४९ ॥

“You ought not to hold me in contempt
in that | have been deprived of my nose and

569

ears. Not the least pain is experienced by
me due to the loss of my ears and nose. (149)

दर्शयेक्ष्वाकुशार्दूल वीर्यं गात्रेषु मेऽनघ।
ततस्त्वां भक्षयिष्यामि दृष्टपौरुषविक्रमम्॥ १५०॥

“Exhibit your prowess on my limbs, O
tiger among the Ikswakus! | shall then devour
you as soon as your manliness and prowess
have been witnessed (by me), O sinless
warrior!” (150)

a कुम्भकर्णस्य aa निशम्य

wa: सुपुङ्खान् विससर्ज बाणान्।
वज्रसमप्रवेगै-

र्न चुक्षुभे न व्यथते सुरारि:॥१५१॥

Hearing the braggadocio of
Kumbhakarna, Sri Rama shot plumed arrows
at him; struck with those arrows, which flew
with tremendous speed, vying with the speed
of lightning, Kumbhakarna (the enemy of
gods) felt neither disturbed nor agonized.

(151)

तैराहतो

a सायकै: wear निकृत्ता
वाली हतो वानरपुङ्खवश्च।
a कुम्भकर्णस्य तदा शारीरं
वज्रोपमा न व्यथयाम्प्रचक्रु:॥१५२॥

Those very arrows by which the
foremost of sal trees were cut down and

the duty of a warrior. Bidding adieu to your affection for a brother, do what is pleasing to Rama (a scion
of Raghu). Our work has been accomplished my darling, in that you have sought refuge with Sri Rama.
You are the solitary figure in the world of ogres, who has vindicated truth and virtue. Misfortune can
never befall those who are devoted to righteousness. You alone will make for the perpetuation of this
race of Pulastya. By the grace of Rama (a scion of Raghu) you will attain the sovereignty of the ogres.
Familiar, as you are, with my nature, O brother, who are difficult to overcome, pray, get out of my way
soon. You should not tarry before me, my judgment having been lost due to confusion. Engaged in combat,
I cannot discriminate friends from enemies, O prowler of the night! You, however, deserve protection at
my hands, my child! I tell you this truth.’ Spoken to in these words by the sagacious Kumbhakarna, the
mighty-armed Vibhisana replied to Kumbhakarna as follows: “Advice was tendered by me for the
preservation of this race, O tamer of enemies! But it went unheeded by all the ogres. Hence I came
away to Sri Rama. That has in any case been done by me, O highly fortunate brother, be it virtuous
or sinful.’ Saying so, with eyes full of tears, and retiring to a lonely corner, Vibhisana, mace in hand,

stood reflecting. ]
