1064

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

Canto XXXII

Ushered into Kiskindha by Angada and others, Laksmana beholds stately
mansions and other curios on both sides of the main road and, hearing the
sound of vocal music accompanied by the sound of various musical
instruments as well as the sweet jingling of anklets etc., coming
from the palace of Sugriva, twangs his bowstring. Hearing the
twang of his bow, Sugriva dispatches Tara to him and the latter
tries to pacify Laksmana by apprising him of Sugriva having
already sent his generalissimo Nila to collect all the
monkey forces scattered here and there. His anger having
been appeased to some extent by the news, he is
led by Tara to the gynaeceum and sees Sugriva

अथ प्रतिसमादिष्टो लक्ष्मण: परवीरहा।
प्रविवेश गुहां रम्यां किष्किन्धां रामशासनात्॥१॥
Requested by Angada on the latter’s
coming back from the presence of Sugriva,
Laksmana, the destroyer of hostile warriors,
duly entered the delightful cave comprising
the city of Kiskindha as per the command of
Sri Rama. (1)
द्वारस्था wae महाकाया महाबला:।
बभूवुर्लक्ष्मणं दृष्ट्वा सर्वे प्राञअलय: स्थिता:॥ २॥

The monkeys that kept watch at the
main gate of the city, who were gigantic of
body and possessed of extraordinary might,
all stood with folded hands on beholding
Laksmana. (2)

नि:श्चसन्तं तु तं geal He दशरथात्मजम्।
बभूवुर्हरयस्त्रस्ता न चैनं पर्यवारयन्॥३॥

The monkeys for their part were alarmed
to see the aforesaid son of King Dasaratha
snorting in anger, and did not encompass
him as he entered the gate to escort him. (3)
स at रत्नमयीं दिव्यां श्रीमान् पुष्पितकाननाम्।
रम्यां रत्नसमाकीर्णां ददर्शं महतीं गुहाम्॥४॥
हर्म्यप्रासादसम्बाधां नानारत्नोपशोभिताम्।
सर्वकामफलैर्वृक्षै: पुष्पितैरुपशोभिताम्॥ ५ ॥
देवगन्धर्वपुत्रैश्च amt: कामरूपिभि:।
दिव्यमाल्याम्बरधरै: शोभितां प्रियदर्शनै:॥ ६॥

weet गन्धै: सुरभिगन्धिताम्।
मैरेयाणां मधूनां च सम्मोदितमहापथाम्॥७॥
विन्ध्यमेरुगिरिप्रख्यै: प्रासादैर्नैकभूमिभि:।
watt गिरिनद्यश्च विमलास्तत्र राघव:॥८॥

The glorious Laksmana beheld the
aforesaid magnificent, delightful and extensive
cave abounding in precious stones and full
of precious things and containing groves laden
with blossom, which was thickly set with
mansions as well as with palaces and temples,
was illumined with jewels of every description
and adorned with trees in blossom bearing
fruits that yielded all one’s desires, which
was graced with monkeys of pleasing looks,
sprung from the loins of gods and Gandharvas
(celestial musicians), capable of assuming
any form at will, and wearing celestial garlands
and raiment, which was rendered fragrant
with the odour of sandalwood, aloewood and
lotuses, nay, whose highways were scented
with the fragrance of wines of various kinds
and which was adorned with many-storeyed
palaces looking like the Vindhya and Meru
mountains in height. Laksmana, a scion of
Raghu, also saw there mountain-streams free
from mud. (4—8)

अङ्गदस्य गृहं रम्यं tee द्विविदस्य a

गवयस्य TATA गजस्य शरभस्य च॥९॥
