* AYODHYAKANDA +

तं प्रसादय गत्वा त्वं न त्वा संकुपित: शपेत्।
विशल्यं कुरु At राजन् मर्म मे निशित: शर:॥ ४५ UI
रुणद्धि मृदु सोत्सेधं तीरमम्बुरयो यथा।
सशल्य: क्लिश्यते प्राणैर्विशल्यो विनशिष्यति tt ४६ ।।
इति मामविशच्चिन्ता तस्य शल्यापकर्षणे।
दु:खितस्य च दीनस्य मम शोकातुरस्य च॥४७॥
लक्षयामास स ऋषिश्चिन्तां मुनिसुतस्तदा।
ताम्यमानं स At कृच्छ्रादुवाच परमार्थवित्॥४८॥

““Approaching him, seek his forgiveness
lest he should get enraged and execrate
you. Render me free from pain by extracting
the shaft from my body, O king, since your
sharp-pointed arrow torments my vital part
in the same way as a river current corrodes
a high sandy bank.’ “While | was going to
extract the arrow from his body, the following
thought entered my mind: ‘With the arrow
still rankling in his body the hermit boy will
continue to suffer, even though he will survive,
while he will surely expire the moment the
shaft is removed from his body.’ That sage,
son of a hermit, immediately perceived my
anxiety, distressed, miserable and stricken
with grief as | was. The hermit boy, who
knew the essence of the scriptures, spoke
with difficulty as follows to me, who was
feeling perplexed in mind: (45—48)

सीदमानो विवृत्ताङ्गोऽचेष्टमानो गत: क्षयम्।
संस्तभ्य vith धैर्येण स्थिरचित्तो भवाम्यहम्॥ ४९॥

“*`[#0०9] getting faint and motionless,
with my eyes turned round, since | have
approached my end, | am trying to compose
my mind, restraining my grief by recourse
to firmness. (49)

527

ब्रह्महत्याकृतं तापं हृदयादपनीयताम्।

न द्विजातिरहं राजन् मा भूत् ते मनसो व्यथा॥ Go Il
“* [ झ agony caused by the thought of

your having killed a Brahmana be driven

away from your heart. | am not a Brahmana,

O king; hence let there be no anguish in

your mind on that score. (50)

शूद्रायामस्मि वैश्येन जातो नरवराधिप।
इतीव वदत: Peas बाणाभिहतमर्मण:॥ ५१॥
विघूर्णतो विचेष्टस्य वेपमानस्य भूतले।
Ta त्वाताम्यमानस्य तं बाणमहमुद्धरम्।
स मामुद्वीक्ष्य संत्रस्तो wet प्राणांस्तपोधन:॥ ५२॥

“‘l was procreated by a Vaisya through

a Sidra woman, 0 ruler of the foremost of

men ! “While he was speaking as aforesaid

with difficulty, his vital part having been

smitten with the arrow, and was now rolling

on the ground, now tossing about, now

quivering and now fainting, | took out that

arrow from his body. Looking dismayed

(due to anxiety on the score of his parents)

at me, the boy, whose only wealth was his

asceticism, gave up the ghost. (51-52)
जलार्द्रगात्रं तु विलप्य pes

व्रणं : ।

समीक्ष्य भद्रे सुभृशं विषण्ण: 1&3

“| felt extremely sad, O blessed lady,

to behold him sighing again and again after

speaking out his mind with difficulty, his

vital part having been injured, and then lying

dead on the bank of the Sarayu, drenched
all over his body with water.” (53)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्येऽयोध्याकाण्डे
त्रिषष्टितम: सर्ग: ॥ ६३॥

Thus ends Canto Sixty-three in the Ayodhyakanda of the glorious Ramayana of
Valmiki, the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

