102

and so was Trisira brought low as also Dusana,

endowed with extraordinary energy, by Sri

Rama, who has realized the Self. (10)

tad वानराणां च geist वालिपालितम्।

अस्या निमित्ते सुग्रीव: प्राप्तवाँल्लोकविश्रुत: 1 ११॥
‘Nay, on account of her Sugriva, who

is well-known throughout the world, attained

the lordship of monkeys which was difficult
to acquire, guarded as it was by Vali. (11)

सागरश्च मयाऽऽक्रान्त: श्रीमान् नदनदीपति: ।
अस्या हेतोर्विशालाक्ष्या: Ut चेयं निरीक्षिता॥ १२॥
‘Nay, for the sake of this large-eyed
lady has the mighty sea, the lord of rivers
and streams, been crossed by me and this
city of Lanka explored. (12)

ae wa: समुद्रान्तां मेदिनीं परिवर्तयेत्।
अस्या: कृते जगच्चापि युक्तमित्येव Fafa: १३॥
‘If for her sake Sri Rama turned the
earth bounded by the oceans upside down,
or even the universe, it would be justifiable:
such is my belief. (13)

राज्यं वा त्रिषु लोकेषु सीता वा जनकात्मजा।
त्रैलोक्यराज्यं सकलं सीताया नाप्नुयात् कलाम्॥ १४॥
‘If sovereignty over all the three worlds,
on the one hand, and Sita, daughter of King
Janaka, on the other, were put on the scales,
the integral sovereignty of the three worlds
would not approach even a fraction of Sita.
(14)

sa सा धर्मशीलस्य जनकस्य महात्मन:।
सुता मैथिलराजस्य सीता भर्तृदृढव्रता॥१५॥

‘She is no other than the celebrated
Sita, daughter of Janaka, the virtuous and
high-souled king of Mithila, unswerving in
her vow of devotion to her lord. (15)
उत्थिता मेदिनीं भित्त्वा eat हलमुखक्षते।
पद्मरेणुनिभै: कोर्णा शुभै: केदारपांसुभि:॥ १६॥

‘While a field was being furrowed with
a ploughshare, she rose splitting open the

earth, and covered with the dust of the field,
which gleamed like pollen. (16)

« VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

विक्रान्तस्यार्यशीलस्य संयुगेष्वनिवर्तिन:।
स्नुषा दशरथस्यैषा ज्येष्ठा राज्ञो यशस्विनी॥ १७॥

‘She is the illustrious and senior most
daughter-in-law of the valiant King DaSaratha
of noble disposition, who never turned his
back on the field of battle. (17)

धर्मज्ञस्य कृतज्ञस्य रामस्य विदितात्मन:।
sa सा दयिता भार्या राक्षसीवशमागता॥ ec i

‘Fallen under the sway of ogresses,
she is the beloved consort of Sri Rama,
who knows what is right, is conscious of
services rendered to him and is a knower of
the Self. (18)

सर्वान् भोगान् परित्यज्य भर्तृस्नेहबलात् कृता।
अचिन्तयित्वा कष्टानि प्रविष्टा निर्जनं वनम्॥ १९॥

‘Completely renouncing all enjoyments
and not minding hardships, she entered the
lonely forest, overcome as she was by love
for her husband. (19)

संतुष्टा फलमूलेन भर्तॄशुश्रूषणापरा।
या Ut wad प्रीतिं वनेऽपि wat यथा॥ oll
सहते यातनामेतामनर्थानामभागिनी ॥ २१ ॥
‘That very Sita of golden limbs, ever
given to speaking with a sweet smile and
undeserving of woes—who, contented as
she was with fruit and roots alone and
devoted to the service of her husband,
experienced the same degree of supreme
felicity in the forest as in her own royal
abode—is undergoing this suffering here !
(20-21)

इमां तु शीलसम्पन्नां द्रष्टुमिच्छति waa: |
रावणेन प्रमथितां प्रपामिव पिपासित:॥ २२॥

‘Like a thirsty man yearning to find a
place where water is freely distributed to
passers-by, Sri Rama (a scion of Raghu)
for his part longs to see this lady, rich in
chastity, though tormented by Ravana. (22)

अस्या नूनं पुनर्लाभाद् wea: प्रीतिमेष्यति।
राजा राज्यपरिभ्रष्ट: पुन: प्राप्येव मेदिनीम्॥ २३॥
