* ARANYAKANDA «

my part am very doubtful that all is well with
Sita and Laksmana, bereft of me in the
forest; for, | stand antagonized by the ogres
on the score of my having devastated their
colony at Janasthana. (7—9)

निमित्तानि च घोराणि दृश्यन्तेऽद्य बहूनि च।
इत्येवं चिन्तयन् राम: श्रुत्वा गोमायुनि:स्वनम्॥ १० ॥
निवर्तमानस्त्वरितो जगामाश्रममात्मवान्।
i THAT MU ११॥
आजगाम जनस्थानं राघव: परिशङ्कित:।
तं दीनमानसं दीनमासेदुर्मृगपक्षिण:॥१२॥
सव्यं कृत्वा महात्मानं घोरांश्च ससृजु: स्वरान्।
तानि दृष्टवा निमित्तानि महाघोराणि wera: |
न्यवर्तताथ त्वरितो जवेनाश्रममात्मन:॥१३॥

‘Nay, many evil portents too of a fearful
nature are seen by me today.’ Reflecting
thus on hearing the cry of the jackal, and
hastily retracing his steps, Sri Rama, the
master of his Self, proceeded towards his
hermitage. Reviewing with apprehension
the event of his having been lured away by
the ogre, Marica, appearing in the disguise
of a deer, Sri Rama, a scion of Raghu,
proceeded on his way back to Janasthana.
Sri Rama passed beasts and birds, who felt
miserable and distressed in mind, keeping
the high-souled prince to their left, and uttered
fearful cries. Witnessing those exceedingly
fearful portents and taking rapid strides, Sri
Rama, a scion of Raghu, presently retraced
his steps with expedition to his hermitage.

(10—13)
ततो लक्ष्मणमायान्तं ददर्श विगतप्रभम्।
ततोऽविदूरे रामेण समीयाय A लक्ष्मण:॥१४॥
विषण्ण: सन्विषण्णेन दु:खितो दु:खभागिना।

स जगर्हेऽथ तं भ्राता दृष्टवा लक्ष्मणमागतम्॥ १५ Il
विहाय dat विजने वने राक्षससेविते।
गृहीत्वा च करं सव्यं लक्ष्मणं रघुनन्दन:॥१६॥
उवाच मधुरोदर्कमिदं परुषमार्तवत्।
अहो लक्ष्मण Tel ते कृतं यत् त्वं विहाय ताम्॥ १७॥
सीतामिहागत: सौम्य कच्चित् स्वस्ति भवेदिति।
न मेऽस्ति संशयो AT सर्वथा जनकात्मजा॥ १८॥

875

विनष्टा भक्षिता वापि राक्षसैर्वनचारिभि:।
अशुभान्येव भूयिष्ठं यथा प्रादुर्भवन्ति मे॥१९॥

In the meantime he espied Laksmana
approaching, his splendour entirely gone.
Presently at no considerable distance the said
Laksmana, who was feeling despondent and
afflicted, got united with Sri Rama, who too
looked dejected and shared the agony of
Laksmana. Seeing Laksmana come, having
abandoned Sita in a lonely forest frequented
by ogres, the aforesaid brother, Sri Rama,
forthwith proceeded to censure him. Taking
hold of his left hand, Sri Rama (the delight of
the Raghus), like one distressed, addressed
to Laksmana the following harsh words, though
agreeable in consequence : “Ah Laksmana,
a reproachful act has been done by you in
that you came away here leaving alone Sita,
who deserved protection, O gentle brother !
Can she be expected to be doing well? No,
doubt lurks in my mind, O heroic brother,
that the daughter of Janaka has at all events
been removed out of sight or even devoured
by ogres ranging in the forest, as is evident
from the fact that evil portents alone appear
before me in abundance. (14—19)

अपि लक्ष्मण सीताया: सामग्रयं प्राप्नुयामहे।
जीवन्त्या: पुरुषव्याघ्र सुताया जनकस्य वै॥ २०॥

“Shall we actually be able to find, O
Laksmana, the entire being of Sita, daughter
of Janaka, continuing to live, O tiger among
men? (20)

यथा a मृगसंघाश्च गोमायुश्चैव भैरवम्।
वाश्यन्ते शकुनाश्चापि प्रदीप्तामभितो दिशम्।
अपि स्वस्ति भवेत् तस्या राजपुत्र्या महाबल॥ २१॥
“Nay, from the way in which herds of
deer as well as the jackal as also birds
actually utter fierce cries facing the quarter
brightened by the sun it is doubtful that all
may be well with that princess, O brother,
possessed of extraordinary might! (21)

प्रलोभ्य मां दूरमनुप्रयातम्।
