210

Overpowered by Hanuman, the
counsellor of Sugriva (the suzerain lord of
monkeys), nay, struck by him with his palm,
that well-known huge chariot of Aksa, which
had its interior broken, its pole overturned
and horses already killed, thereupon fell to
the earth from the sky. (32)

स तं परित्यज्य महारथो रथं

विहाय देहं मरुतामिवालयम्॥ ३३॥

Bounding into the air with his bow and
sword, having abandoned that chariot, that
great chariot-warrior, Aksa, now looked like
a Rsi (the seer of a Vedic Mantra), possessing
tremendous power, ascending to the realm
of gods on quitting his body through practice
of yoga. (33)
कपिस्ततस्तं विचरन्तमम्बरे

पतत्तिराजानिलसिद्धसेविते ।
समेत्य तं मारुतवेगविक्रम:
PAT जग्राह च पादयोर्दृढम्॥ ३४॥

Meeting the prince, ranging through the
heavens, frequented by Garuda, the king of
birds, the wind-god and the Siddhas,
Hanuman, who was endowed with the speed
and prowess of the wind-god, caught him
firmly by the legs one after the other. (34)

महीतले संयति वानरोत्तम:॥ 34

Catching hold of him even as Garuda,
the king of birds, would seize a huge
serpent, and spinning him round thousands
of times, Hanuman, a jewel among
monkeys, whose prowess equalled that
of his father, the wind-god, dashed him

« VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

violently to the battle-ground.

a भग्नबाहूरुकटीपयोधर:
क्षरन्नसृङ्निर्मथितास्थिलोचन: ।
प्रविकीर्णबन्धनो

हत: feral वायुसुतेन राक्षस:॥ ३६॥

Killed by Hanuman, son of the wind-
god, that ogre fell to the ground, dripping
with blood, his arms, thighs, waist and chest
fractured, bones and eyes crushed, joints
dislocated and sinews shattered. (36)

महाकपिर्भूमितले futer तं
चकार रक्षोऽधिपतेर्महद्भयम्।
vestige: समागतै:

(35)

& gat a afetiifir: ॥ ३७॥

Having dashed him to the earth’s surface,
the huge monkey, Hanuman, struck terror
into Ravana, the suzerain lord of ogres. Nay,
on the prince having been killed, Hanuman
was gazed upon by eminent Rsis ranging the
stellar sphere, who had gathered together in
a body to witness the combat alongwith genii,
accompanied by Yaksas and Nagas, as also
by gods including Indra, their ruler, who were
greatly astonished at the feat. (37)
Pea तं वज्रिसुतोपमं रणे

Sarat क्षतजोपमेक्षणम्।
तदेव वीरोऽभिजगाम तोरणं
कृतक्षण: काल SA प्रजाक्षये॥ ३८ ॥

Having dispatched Prince Aksa, who
vied with Jayanta, Indra’s son, and was
distinguished by bloodshot eyes on the field
of battle, the hero, Hanuman, sought the same
archway, biding time for a further opportunity
to destroy ogres even like the Time-Spirit
bent on the destruction of created beings.(38)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये सुन्दरकाण्डे सप्तचत्वारिंश: सर्ग: ॥ ४७॥

Thus ends Canto Forty-seven of the Sundarakanda in the glorious Ramayana of
Valmiki, the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

