* SUNDARAKANDA +

275

त्रिषष्टितम: सर्ग:
Canto LXII
Having heard from the mouth of Dadhimukha the story of Madhuvana
having been laid waste by the monkeys, Sugriva concludes from
the jubilation of the monkeys that Sita has been traced out.
Comforting Dadhimukha, he asks him to send Angada
and others without delay

ततो eat निपतितं वानरं वानरर्षभ:।
दृष्ट्वैवोद्बिग्रहदयो वाक्यमेतदुवाच ह॥१॥

Feeling anxious at heart on seeing the
monkey Dadhimukha fallen flat with his head
touching the ground, Sugriva, the foremost
of monkeys, forthwith spoke as follows: so
it is said: (1)
उत्तिष्ठोत्तिष्ठ कस्मात् त्वं पादयो: पतितो मम।
अभयं ते प्रदास्यामि सत्यमेवाभिधीयताम्॥ २॥

“Stand up, rise! Why are you lying
prostrate at my feet? | shall grant you
immunity from all fear: let the bare truth be
spoken. (2)
किं सम्भ्रमाद्धितं कृत्स्नं gfe aq वक्तुमर्हसि।
कच्चिन्मधुवने स्वस्ति श्रोतुमिच्छामि वानर॥ ३॥

“Through whose fear have you come?
Speak out that which is wholly conducive to
our interest, since you are free to speak
anything you like. | hope all is well with
Madhuvana. | wish to hear everything from
you, O monkey !” (3)

a समाश्वासितस्तेन सुग्रीवेण महात्मना।
उत्थाय स महाप्राज्ञो वाक्यं दधिमुखोऽब्रवीत्॥४॥

Getting up when fully comforted in the
foregoing words by the aforesaid Sugriva,
who had a lofty mind, that highly sagacious
monkey, Dadhimukha, spoke as follows:

(4)
नैवर्क्षरजसा राजन् न त्वया न च वालिना।
at निसृष्टपूर्वं a नाशितं aq वानरै:॥५॥

“That grove Madhuvana, which had

never before suffered either by your father

Rksaraja or by yourself or even by your
elder brother and predecessor, Vali, to be
freely enjoyed by anyone, has been actually
laid waste by the monkeys, O king! (5)

न्यवारयमहँ सर्वान् सहैभिर्वनचारिभि:।
अचिन्तयित्वा at eet भक्षयन्ति पिबन्ति ans i

“Alongwith these monkey-guards, |
checked them all; disregarding me, however,
they merrily continued to feast on the fruits
and drink the honey. (6)

एभि: प्रधर्षणायां च att वनपालकै:।
मामप्यचिन्तयन् देव भक्षयन्ति वनौकस:॥७॥
“On the depredation being commenced
by them, resistance was offered by the
guards of the grove; but disregarding even

me, O lord, the monkeys continued to eat
and drink the produce of the grove. (7)

शिष्टमत्रापविध्यन्ति भक्षयन्ति तथापरे।
निवार्यमाणास्ते ud भ्रुकुटिं दर्शयन्ति हि॥८॥

“Some monkeys not only partook of
the honey but they threw away what remained
in the honeycomb. While being checked
they all actually frowned at us. (8)

sa fe संरब्धतरास्तदा तै: सम्प्रधर्षिता:।
निवार्यन्ते वनात् तस्मात् क्रुद्धैर्वानरपुङ्खवै:।॥ ९॥

“When these guards got more enraged,
they were actually assaulted by the intruders.
Nay, they were driven away from that grove
by the excited leaders of monkeys. (9)
ततस्तैर्बहुभिर्वीरैर्वानरैर्वानरर्षभा: ।
संरक्तनयनै: क्रोधाद्धरय: सम्प्रधर्षिता:॥१०॥

“The monkeys guarding the grove, who
