* AYODHYAKANDA +

नजजीवितं Aska कुत: पुन: TS
विनात्मजेनात्मवतां कुतो te: |
ममाहितं देवि न कर्तुमर्हसि
स्पृशामि पादावपि ते wate Au १११॥
“My life cannot be prolonged without
my son, Rama; how, then, can there be any
happiness for me? How can there be any
joy without a son even to the knowers of
the Self? Therefore, you ought not to do an
unfriendly act to me, O queen ! | even stoop
down to touch your feet. Be gracious to
me.” (111)

339

स भूमिपालो विलपन्ननाथवत्
स्निया गृहीतो हृदयेऽतिमात्रया।
पपात देव्याश्चरणौ प्रसारिता-
वुभावसम्प्राप्य यथाऽऽतुरस्तथा॥ ११२॥

Wailing like a forlorn child, the said
monarch—who had been afflicted in the
heart by Kaikeyi, who had transgressed
all bounds of decorum—sank down
unconscious like an ailing man, not fully
reaching the queen’s feet, both of which lay
stretched before him. (112)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्येऽयोध्याकाण्डे द्वादश: Wr ॥ १२॥

Thus ends Canto Twelve in the Ayodhyakanda of the glorious Ramayana of Valmiki,
the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

त्रयोदश: wet:
Canto XIII

Further tormented by Kaikeyi through her importunity to have the boons granted by
the Emperor implemented, the latter piteously wails his lot and reproaches
her. The sun having set in the meanwhile, the Emperor continues till the
following morning his solicitations to Kaikeyi to allow Rama to be
installed as Prince Regent. But, Kaikeyi remaining adamant, the
king in his extreme anguish of mind sinks down unconscious
on the floor and, on regaining his consciousness, stops
all music pertaining to the occasion of the
king’s quitting his bed

see | महाराजं शयानमतथोचितम्।
ययातिमिव पुण्यान्ते देवलोकात् परिच्युतम्॥ १॥
अनर्थरूपासिद्धार्था ह्यभीता भयदर्शिनी।
पुनराकारयामास ara वरमङ्गना॥ २॥
The dauntless queen Kaikeyi—who was
evil-incarnate, nay, whose object had not
yet been accomplished and who scented
mischief to Bharata in Rama’s installation—
once more addressed the same good
monarch, who did not deserve such callous
behaviour from the queen and was lying
in an unseemly manner like Yayati fallen
from heaven on the exhaustion of his merit

that had earned him a dwelling in heaven :
(1-2)

त्वं कत्थसे महाराज सत्यवादी दूढव्रत:।
मम ad at Here विधारयितुमिच्छसि॥ ३॥
“You brag, O monarch, that you are
veracious and faithful to your vows. Yet

wherefore do you seek to withhold the
aforesaid boons standing to my credit?” (3)

`एवमुक्तस्तु कैकेय्या राजा दशरथस्तदा।
प्रत्युवाच तत: क्रुद्धो Yad विह्वलन्निव॥४॥

Scolded thus by Kaikeyi on_ that
occasion, however, King DaSaratha remained
