* ARANYAKANDA «

तदासीनस्य रामस्य कथासंसक्तचेतस:।
तं देशं राक्षसी काचिदाजगाम यदृच्छया॥५॥
While Sri Rama was seated there, his

mind engrossed in talk, a certain ogress
visited that region by chance. (5)

सा तु शूर्पणखा नाम दशग्रीवस्य रक्षस:।
भगिनी राममासाद्य cast त्रिदशोपमम्॥६॥

Having arrived there, the aforesaid sister
of the ogre Ravana, (who was endowed
with ten heads), Sdrpanakha (whose nails
resembled a winnowing basket) beheld Sri
Rama, who looked like a god. (6)

dart च महाबाहुं पद्मपत्रायतेक्षणम्।
गजविक्रान्तगमनं जटामण्डलधारिणम्॥ ७॥

बभूवेन्द्रोपमं दृष्टवा राक्षसी काममोहिता।
सुमुखं दुर्मुखी रामं gant महोदरी॥ ९॥
विशालाक्षॆ विरूपाक्षी सुकेशं ताम्रमूर्धजा।
प्रियरूपं विरूपा सा सुस्वरं भैरवस्वना॥१०॥
तरुणं दारुणा वृद्धा दक्षिणं वामभाषिणी।
न्यायवृत्तं सुदुर्वृत्ता प्रियमप्रियदर्शना॥११॥
शरीरजसमाविष्टा राक्षसी राममब्रवीत्।
wet तापसवेषेण सभार्य: शरचापधूक॥१२॥
आगतस्त्वमिमं देशं कथं राक्षससेवितम्।
किमागमनकृत्यं ते तत्त्वमाख्यातुमर्हसि॥ १३॥
Seeing Sri Rama with इच radiant
countenance, mighty arms, eyes large like
the petals of a lotus, and a majestic gait like
that of an elephant, wearing a rounded mass
of matted hair, tender, yet possessed of
extraordinary strength, endowed with the
bodily marks of a monarch, cerulean like a
blue lotus, having a splendour similar to that
of Cupid and looking like Indra (the ruler of
gods), the ogress got infatuated with love.
Overcome with passion, the ogress, who
had an ugly face, large belly, deformed eyes,
coppery hair, was misshapen, had a frightful
voice, was hard-hearted and aged, spoke
adversely, was extremely vile of conduct

759

and had a repelling aspect, spoke as
follows to Sri Rama, who had a charming
face, a slender waist, large eyes, beautiful
locks, a pleasing aspect and a sweet voice,
was youthful and candid, of right conduct
and amiable: “Wearing matted locks and
dressed in an ascetic garb, wielding a bow
and arrows and accompanied with your wife,
how have you come to this region frequented
by ogres? What is the object of your visit?
Be pleased to relate that.” (7—13)

`एवमुक्तस्तु राक्षस्या शूर्पणख्या परंतप:।
ऋजुबुद्धितया सर्वमाख्यातुमुपचक्रमे।॥ १४॥
Thus spoken to by the ogress
Surpanakha, Sri Rama (the tormentor of foes)
proceeded to narrate everything, possessed
as he was of a guileless mind : (14)

आसीद् दशरथो नाम राजा त्रिदशविक्रम:।
तस्याहमग्रज: UAT Wa नाम जनै: श्रुत:॥ १५॥
“There was a king named DaSaratha,
possessing the prowess of gods. | am his
eldest son, known among the people by the
name of Rama. (15)

भ्रातायं लक्ष्मणो नाम यवीयान् मामनुव्रत:।

इयं भार्या च वैदेही मम सीतेति विश्रुता॥ १६॥
“Here is my younger brother, Laksmana

by name, devoted to me, and here is my

wife, the princess of Videha, known by the

name of Sita. (16)

नियोगात् तु नरेन्द्रस्य पितुर्मातुश्च afar: |
धर्मार्थं धर्मकांक्षी च ad वस्तुमिहागत:॥१७॥
“Fettered by the command of my father,
the king, and my mother (Kaikeyi), and
seeking to discharge my sacred obligation
to them and in order to practise virtue in the
form of austerities, | have come to stay in
this forest. (17)

त्वां तु वेदितुमिच्छामि कस्य त्वं कासि कस्य वा।
त्वं fe तावन्मनोज्ञाङ्गी राक्षसी प्रतिभासि Age ti
“I, for my part, desire to know you.

Whose daughter are you? What is your
name and whose wife are you? Possessed
