974

by Gandharvas, Rsis (the seers of Vedic
Mantras), Yaksas and ogres, including gods,

« VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

thereupon immediately took pity on the
child.” (65)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये उत्तरकाण्डे VAT: सर्ग: ॥ 34 ॥

Thus ends Canto Thirty-five in the Uttarakanda of the glorious Ramayana of Valmiki,
the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

Canto XXXVI

After bringing Hanuman back to life, Brahma and other gods grant boons
of various kinds in his favour. The wind-god takes him to Anjana.
Due to a curse pronounced on him by some Rsis, Hanuman
remains unconscious of his might. Sri Rama permits
Agastya and other sages to depart after requesting
them to be present at the sacrifice
to be performed by Him

aa: पितामहं दृष्टवा arg: पुत्रवधार्दित:।
शिशुकं तं समादाय उत्तस्थौ धातुरग्रत:॥१॥
“On seeing Brahma (the grandfather of
the entire creation, which is evolved by his
ten mind-born sons), the wind-god, who
was tormented by the death of his son,
stood in front of the creator, bearing that
child in his arms. (1)

चलकुण्डलमौलिस्त्रक तपनीयविभूषण:।
पादयोर्न्यपतद् वायुस्तिरुपस्थाय वेधसे॥२॥
“Standing thrice submissively before
the creator, the wind-god with swinging
earrings, nay, adorned with a diadem and
garland, and ornaments of gold, fell at the
former's feet. (2)

तं तु वेदविदा तेन लम्बाभरणशोभिना।
वायुमुत्थाप्य हस्तेन शिशुं तं परिमृष्टवान्॥३॥
“Lifting up the wind-god, Brahma (the
knower of the Vedas) stroked that child with
his long, outstretched and adorned hand. (3)
स्पृष्टमात्रस्तत: सोऽथ सलीलं पद्मजन्मना।
जलसिक्तं यथा सस्यं पुनर्जीवितमाप्तवान्॥४॥

“The moment Hanuman was sportingly

touched by Brahma (the lotus-born), he
thereupon forthwith came back to life like a
crop which has been watered. (4)

प्राणवन्तमिमं दृष्टवा प्राणो गन्धवहो मुदा।
चचार सर्वभूतेषु संनिरुद्धुं यथा पुरा॥७५॥

“Seeing Hanuman restored to life, the
wind-god, constituting the vital breath of
the entire creation, began once more to
circulate inwardly as before in all creatures.

(5)
मरुद्रोधाद् विनिर्मुक्तास्ता: Wat मुदिताऽभवन्।
शीतवातविनिर्मुक्ता: पद्मिन्य sa साम्बुजा:॥६॥

“Completely freed from the obstruction
caused by the wind-god, all those created
beings became joyful again like lakes spotted
with lotus flowers when rid of cold winds.

(6)

ततस्तियुग्मस्त्रिककुत् त्रिधामा त्रिदशाचित:।
उवाच देवता ब्रह्मा मारुतप्रियकाम्यया॥७॥

“Thereupon Brahma, who is endowed
with three pairs of divine properties (viz.,
glory and prowess, power and wealth, wisdom
and dispassion), who appears in three forms
(viz., Brahma, Visnu and Siva), who has
