748

this Sita feels happy and comfortable here.
Coming with you to the forest, she has
done a difficult thing. (4)

wat fe प्रकृति: स्त्रीणामासृष्टे रघुनन्दन।
समस्थमनुरज्यन्ते विषमस्थं त्यजन्ति Tne

“Ever since the dawn of creation, it
has been the nature of women that they
love a man only so long as he is in prosperity
and give him up when he is in adversity. (5)
शतह्रदानां लोलत्वं शस्त्राणां तीक्ष्णतां तथा।
Teste: sees योषित:॥६॥

“Women follow the inconstancy of
lightning, the sharpness of weapons and
the speed of an eagle and wind. (6)

इयं oq भवतो sat दोषैरेतैर्विवर्जिता।
VAN च व्यपदेश्या च यथा देवीष्वरुन्धती i ७॥

“This wife of yours, however, is entirely
free from these blemishes and praiseworthy;
and deserves to be reckoned among the
divine ladies like Arundhati. (7)

अलंकृतोऽयं देशश्च ux सौमित्रिणा सह।
ace चानया wa वत्स्यसि त्वमरिंदम॥ ८॥

“Nay, this region where you are going
to stay, O Rama, vanquisher of foes, together
with the son of Sumitra and this Sita, stands
graced today.” (8)

एवमुक्तस्तु मुनिना waa: संयताञ्जलि:।
sara प्रश्रितं वाक्यमृषिं दीप्तमिवानलम्॥९॥
Thus spoken to by the sage, Raghava,
with folded hands, addressed the following
polite words to the sage, who looked like a
blazing fire : (9)

धन्योऽस्म्यनुगृहीतोऽस्मि यस्य A मुनिपुंगव:।
गुणै: सभ्रातृभार्यस्य Wed: परितुष्यति॥१०॥
“Blessed and favoured am I, with whose
virtues as well as with those of my brother
and wife, you, the foremost of sages and our
object of veneration, are fully pleased. (10)
fe तु व्यादिश मे देशं सोदकं बहुकाननम्।
यत्राश्रमपदं pa वसेयं निरत: सुखम्॥११॥

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

“But please tell me the region, abounding
in water and forests, where | can happily
and joyously stay, setting up a hermitage.”

(11)
ततोऽब्रवीन्मुनिश्रेष्ठ: श्रुत्वा रामस्य भाषितम्।
ध्यात्वा मुहूर्तं धर्मात्मा ततोवाच वच: शुभम्॥ १२॥

Hearing the submission of Sri Rama,
the righteous Agastya, the foremost of sages,
meditated a while and then spoke the
following auspicious words : (12)

इतो द्वियोजने तात बहुमूलफलोदक:।

देशो बहुमृग: श्रीमान् पञ्चवट्यभिविश्रुत: ।॥ १३॥
“Two Yojanas (sixteen miles) from here,

O dear one, is a splendid region abounding

in roots, fruits and water, having many deer,

and is known all round as Paficavati. (13)

तत्र गत्वाऽऽश्रमपदं कृत्वा सौमित्रिणा सह।
रमस्व त्वं पितुर्वाक्यं यथोक्तमनुपालयन्॥१४॥

“Going there with Laksmana and setting
up a hermitage, live you all happily fully obeying
to the letter the command of your father. (14)

विदितो au वृत्तान्तो मम सर्वस्तवानघ।
तपसश्च प्रभावेण स्नेहाद् दशरथस्य च॥१५॥
“O sinless one, all this story of yours’
as well as that of DaSaratha (your father) is
known to me through the power of my
austerities and by virtue of my affection to
you all. (15)

waa च a च्छन्दो विज्ञातं तपसा war

इह वासं प्रतिज्ञाय war सह तपोवने॥१६॥
“| have also come to know the purpose

in your mind in inquiring of me a place

suitable for your abode after having agreed

to stay in this penance-grove with me.(16)

अतश्च त्वामहं ब्रूमि गच्छ पञ्चवटीमिति।
a fe wat वनोद्देशो मैथिली तत्र रंस्यते॥ eel

“It is, therefore, that | say to you: ‘Go
to Pafcavati. For, that part of the forest is
charming. The princess of Mithila will rejoice
there. (17)
