830
प्रदक्षिणेनातिबलेन पक्षिणा
जटायुषा बुद्धिमता च लक्ष्मण।

प्रतिक्षणं सर्वत Ta शाङ्कित:॥ ५१॥
“Keeping Sita (a princess of Mithila) by

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

your side, O Laksmana, remain vigilant every
moment and full of apprehension from all
quarters in the company of the wise bird
Jatayu, who is very powerful and possessed
of great might.” (51)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्येऽरण्यकाण्डे त्रिचत्वारिंश: सर्ग: ॥ ४३ ॥

Thus ends Canto Forty-three in the Aranyakanda of the glorious Ramayana of Valmiki,
the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

Canto XLIV
Rama kills Marica and feels concerned to hear his call to Sita and Laksmana

तथा तु तं समादिश्य wat रघुनन्दन:।
बबन्धासि महातेजा जाम्बूनदमयत्सरुम्॥१॥
Having duly cautioned as above his
aforesaid brother, Laksmana, Sri Rama (the
delight of the Raghus), for his part, who
was possessed of exceptional glory fastened
to his girdle his sword with a golden hilt.
(1)
ततस्तिविनतं चापमादायात्मविभूषणम्।
आबध्य च कलापौ gl जगामोदग्रविक्रम:॥ २॥
Then, seizing his triply-curved bow,
which served as his adornment, and fastening
two quivers, Sri Rama of terrific prowess
sallied forth. (2)

तं वन्यराजो wend निरीक्ष्य a

बभूवान्तर्हितस्त्रासात् पुन: संदर्शनेऽभवत्॥३॥
Observing Sri Rama, the ruler of rulers,

approaching, Marica, the foremost of deer,

went out of sight awhile through fear and
again came into full view. (3)

बद्धासिर्धनुरादाय प्रदुद्राव यतो मृग:।
तं स्म पश्यति रूपेण द्योतयन्तमिवाग्रत:॥४॥
अवेक्ष्यावेक्ष्य धावन्तं धनुष्पाणिर्महावने।
अतिवृत्तमिवोत्पाताल्लोभयानं कदाचन॥ ५॥

Taking his bow, with the sword fastened
to his girdle, Sri Rama (the wielder of a

bow) ran fast towards the spot where the
deer stood and saw it radiating lustre as it
were by its form in front of it. Looking back
again and again it ran in the large forest.
Now it slipped past after a leap and then
tempted Sri Rama to catch hold of it by
coming very near. (4-5)

wist तु समुद्भ्रान्तमुत्पतन्तमिवाम्बरम्।
ward च वनोद्देशेषु केषुचित्॥६॥
मुहूर्तादेव ददृशे मुहुर्दूरात् प्रकाशते॥७॥
Now it appeared seized with fear of
being hurt by Sri Rama’s arrow, utterly
confused and leaping in the air; while at
other times it disappeared into some depths
of the forest like the orb of the autumnal
moon screened by fragmented clouds. Just
after a while it became visible at hand and
again flashed into view at a distance the
very next moment. (6-7)

दर्शनादर्शनेनैव सोऽपाकर्षत राघवम्।

a दूरमाश्रमस्यास्य मारीचो Wat गत:॥८॥
Just by coming into view and going out

of sight, that notorious Marica, who had

assumed the form of a deer, bore Sri Rama,

a scion of Raghu, far away from his

hermitage. (8)
