* ARANYAKANDA «

Rama, Laksmana will show you _ stout
monkeys roaming in the forest and reposing
in caves. You will see those stout monkeys
arrived on the brink of the Pampa due to
longing for water, and having drunk water,
lowing like bulls, O jewel among men!
Beholding trees putting on blossom and the
delightful water of the Pampa while roving at
dusk, O Rama, you will cast off grief. The
Tilaka and Naktamala trees in that forest are
covered with blossom and the lotuses and
lilies in the lake are expanded, O scion of
Raghu! The lake being beyond human
reach, no man would ever venture to
pluck and wear those flowers on his person.
(14—22)

न च वै म्लानतां यान्ति न च शीर्यन्ति राघव।
मतड्गशिष्यास्तत्रासन्नृषय: सुसमाहिता: ॥ २३॥
“The flowers in that region neither fade
nor decay, O scion of Raghu! Formerly
there lived in that forest Rsis (seers of
Vedic Mantras) who were pupils of Sage
Matanga and were highly composed. (23)

तेषां भाराभितप्तानां वन्यमाहरतां गुरो:।
ये प्रपेतुर्महीं तूर्णं शरीरात् स्वेदबिन्दव:॥ २४॥

तानि माल्यानि जातानि मुनीनां तपसा तदा।

स्वेदबिन्दुसमुत्थानि न विनश्यन्ति राघव॥ २५॥

“The drops of perspiration that fell down
from their body to the ground when they felt
oppressed with their load while bringing the
produce of the forest for their teacher quickly
turned into flowers by force of their austerities
at that time. Sprung as they are of those
drops of perspiration, they never die, O
scion of Raghu ! (24-25)

तेषां गतानामद्यापि 3 qad परिचारिणी।
श्रमणी शबरी नाम काकुत्स्थ चिरजीविनी।। २६॥

“Even though they have departed for
the higher worlds earned by virtue of their
austerities, their female attendant, an ascetic
woman, Sabarl by name, who is long lived,
is still to be seen, O scion of Kakutstha !

(26)

921

rat तु धर्मे स्थिता नित्यं सर्वभूतनमस्कृतम्।
दृष्टवा देवोपमं wa स्वर्गलोकं गमिष्यति॥ २७॥

“The woman, who is ever devoted to
virtue, will ascend to heaven (the realm of
Brahma) only after seeing you, who are
greeted by the whole world, godlike as you
are, O Rama! (27)

ततस्तद्राम पम्पायास्तीरमाश्रित्य पश्चिमम्।
आश्रमस्थानमतुलं गुह्यं काकुत्स्थ पश्यसि॥ २८॥

“After that, O Rama, you will see the
site of a well-known hermitage, the former
abode of Matanga, now occupied by Sabari,
located on the western edge of Pampa,
which is incomparable and hidden from public
view, being inaccessible to man, O scion of
Kakutstha ! (28)

न तत्राक्रमितुं नागा: शक्नुवन्ति तदाश्रमे।
POT मतङ्गस्य विधानात् Tet काननम्॥ २९॥
मतङ्गवनमित्येव विश्रुतं रघुनन्दन।
तस्मिन् नन्दनसंकाशे देवारण्योपमे वने॥ ३०॥
नानाविहगसंकोर्णे रंस्यसे wa निर्वृत:।
ऋष्यमूकस्तु पम्पाया: पुरस्तात् पुष्पितद्रुम: 1 ३१॥
सुदु:खारोहणश्चैव शिशुनागाभिरक्षित:।
उदारो ब्रह्मणा चैव पूर्वकालेऽभिनिर्मित:॥ ३२॥

“Through the spiritual power of the
aforesaid Sage Matanga (who cast off his
body long ago) elephants, which abound in
the forest round about the hermitage, are not
able to intrude into that hermitage in that forest.
The forest in question is widely known by the
name of Matangavana only (inasmuch as it
is the haunt of elephants), O joy of the race
of Raghu! In that forest, resembling the
Nandana grove in paradise and looking like
a heavenly forest, crowded with birds of
different species, you will enjoy life happily,
O Rama! To the east of Pampa stands the
munificent Rsyamuka Hill, the trees on which
are ever in blossom, nay which being steep
and high is most difficult of ascent and is
guarded on all sides by young elephants, and
which was specially evolved by Brahma (the
creator) in the olden days. (29—32)
