+ UTTARAKANDA +

स तस्यां जनयामास यदपत्यं निबोध adi

वज्रमुष्टिर्विरूपाक्षो दुर्मुखश्चैव wera: ३६॥
सुप्तघ्नो यज्ञकोपश्च मत्तोन्मत्तौ aa a
अनला चाभवत् कन्या सुन्दर्यां राम सुन्दरी॥ ३७॥
“The highly fortunate maidens were
given by their mother at a time when the
asterisk Uttara-Phalguni was visible. The
sons of SukeSa being married, revelled with
their wives as do the immortals (gods) with
Apsara women (celestial nymphs), O Rama !
Learn from me about the children that
Malyavan begot of his wife, the beautiful
Sundari. They were Vajramusti, Virupaksa,
the Raksasa Durmukha, Suptaghna,
Yajhakopa, Matta and Unmatta. Of Sundari,
O Rama, there was also born a beautiful girl
by name Anala. (34—37)

सुमालिनोऽपि भार्याऽऽसीत् पूर्णचन्द्रनिभानना।
नाम्ना केतुमती राम प्राणेभ्योऽपि गरीयसी॥ ३८॥

“Sumal’s wife, Ketumati by name, too had
a face beaming like the full moon, and who
was dearer to him than his life, O Rama ! (38)

सुमाली जनयामास यदपत्यं निशाचर:।
केतुमत्यां महाराज तन्निबोधानुपूर्वश:॥ ३९॥
“Hear from me, O monarch, about the

children that Sumali the Raksasa, begot of
Ketumati in order of their seniority. (39)
प्रहस्तोऽकम्पनश्चैव विकट: कालिकामुख:।
धूम्राक्षश्चैव दण्डश्च सुपाश्वश्च महाबल:॥४०॥
संह्रादि: प्रघसश्चैव भासकर्णश्च राक्षस:।
Weal पुष्पोत्कटा चैव कैकसी च शुचिस्मिता: ॥ ४१ ॥
कुम्भीनसी च sad सुमाले: प्रसवा: स्मृता:॥४२॥
“Prahasta, and Akampana, Vikata,
Kalikamukha and Dhumraksa and Danda,
Suparswa of great strength, Sarmhradi and
Praghasa and the ogre Bhasakarna, and

the girls Raka, Puspotkata, Kaikasi and
Kumbhinasi of bright smiles were the

859

children of Sumali. (40—42)

मालेस्तु वसुदा नाम गन्धर्वी रूपशालिनी।
भार्यासीत् पद्मपत्राक्षी स्वक्षी यक्षीवरोपमा॥४३॥

“Mali’s wife was Vasuda, a Gandharva
lady. She was lovely and her beautiful eyes
resembled the petals of a lotus. She compared
with the best of the Yaksa ladies. (43)

सुमालेरनुजस्तस्यां जनयामास यत् प्रभो।

अपत्यं कथ्यमानं तु मया त्वं AV राघव॥४४॥

“Listen, O King Rama, to what | say
about the children that Sumali’s brother begot
of her. (44)

अनलश्चानिलश्चैव wR: सम्पातिरेव च।
Ue विभीषणामात्या मालेयास्ते निशाचरा: ॥४५॥

“They were Anala and Anila, Hara and
Sampati. These Raksasas, the sons of Mali,
were the ministers of Vibhisana. (45)

सहेन्द्रानृषिनागयक्षान्

बबाधिरे aM बहुवीर्यदर्पिता:॥४६॥
“Surrounded by night-rangers and
hundreds of sons, those three bulls among
the Raksasas, who had grown haughty by
reason of their excessive valour, harassed
the said gods including Indra, the Rsis, the
Nagas and the Yaksas. (46)

जगद्भ्रमन्तोऽनिलवद् दुरासदा

Try मृत्युप्रतिमानतेजस: |
वरप्रदानादपि गर्बिता yet

क्रतुक्रियाणां प्रशमंकरा: सदा॥४७॥

“Roaming about the world like the wind,
they were unapproachable. In battle they
were as fierce as Yama. They had grown
immensely haughty by reason of the boons
they had obtained. They always put obstacles
in the way of Vedic sacrifices.” (47)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये उत्तरकाण्डे TAA: सर्ग: ॥ ५ Il

Thus ends Canto Five in the Uttarakanda of the glorious Ramayana of Valmiki,
the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

