* BALAKANDA +

255

Canto LX VII

Reaching Ayodhya, the counsellors of Janaka tell Dagaratha how Sri Rama
broke the bow of Lord Siva in Janaka’s custody and won the hand of
his daughter, and convey to him their master’s invitation for the
wedding, on which Dasaratha makes up his mind in consultation
with Vasistha to depart for Mithila at an early date

जनकेन समादिष्टा दूतास्ते क्लान्तवाहना:।
त्रिरात्रमुषिता ant तेऽयोध्यां प्राविशन् पुरीम्॥ १॥

Commanded by Janaka, the aforesaid
counsellors sent as envoys halted for three
days on the way, their horses being
exhausted, and then they entered the city of
Ayodhya. (1)
a राजवचनाद् गत्वा राजवेश्म प्रवेशिता:।
ददृशुर्देवसंकाशं qe दशरथं नृपम्॥२॥

Proceeding to the royal palace, they
were ushered into the court under orders of

the king and beheld there the aged King
DaSaratha, who looked like a god. (2)

बद्धाञ्जलिपुटा: wd दूता विगतसाध्वसा:।
Tat प्रश्रितं वाक्यमब्रुवन् मधुराक्षरम्॥ ३॥
All the envoys, whose feeling of awe
had altogether disappeared, thanks to the
benign look and amiable disposition of
DaSsaratha, made the following polite and
sweetly-worded submission to the king:
(3)
मैथिलो जनको राजा साग्निहोत्रपुरस्कृत:।
मुहुर्मुहुर्मधुरया स्नेहसंरक्तया Fre ¥ it
कुशलं चाव्ययं चैव सोपाध्यायपुरोहितम्।
जनकस्त्वां महाराज Test सपुर:सरम्॥५॥
“With the sacred fire placed before him
and in a polite language imbued with affection,
O monarch, King Janaka, the ruler of Mithila
and a source of happiness to his people,
has again and again enquired after your
undecaying welfare (through our mouth), as
also after that of your preceptor and family
priest as well as of your attendants. (4-5)

पृष्टवा कुशलमव्यग्रं acer मिथिलाधिप:।
कौशिकानुमते वाक्यं भवन्तमिदमब्रवीत्॥६॥

“Enquiring after your undisturbed
welfare, King Janaka, of the Videha dynasty,
the ruler of Mithila, has with the consent of
ViSwamitra (son of Kusika) sent you the
following message : (6)

पूर्वं प्रतिज्ञा विदिता वीर्यशुल्का ममात्मजा।
राजानश्च कृतामर्षा निर्वीर्या विमुखीकृता:॥७॥

“‘My pledge that my daughter shall be
won only through valour must already be
known to you, as also the fact that kings
lacking in strength (that could enable them
to pass the test) were repulsed, even though
they resented it. (7)

सेयं मम सुता राजन् विश्वामित्रपुरस्कृतै:।
यदृच्छयाऽऽगतै राजन् निर्जिता तव Gah: uc i

“This celebrated daughter of mine, O
illustrious king, has been decisively won by
your beloved and worthy son, Sri Rama, who
arrived through my good luck at my capital
with sage ViSwamitra as his guide. (8)
तच्च Ta धनुर्दिव्यं मध्ये भग्नं महात्मना।
रामेण fe महाबाहो महत्यां जनसंसदि॥९॥

“‘Nay, that superb heavenly bow of
Lord Siva was actually broken at the middle
by the high-souled Sri Rama in the midst of
a huge concourse of men, O long-armed
one |! (9)
अस्मै देया मया सीता वीर्यशुल्का महात्मने।
प्रतिज्ञां तर्तुमिच्छामि तदनुज्ञातुमर्हसि॥१०॥

““Sita, my daughter, who has thus been
won through personal valour, now remains
