300

प्रविशन्नेव च श्रीमान् राघवो भवनं fag: |

cast पितरं दूरात् प्रणिपत्य कृताञ्जलि:॥१०॥
Falling prostrate with his palms joined

together (as a token of submission), the

moment he entered his father’s chamber,

the glorious Sri Rama, a scion of Raghu,

saw his father from a distance. (10)

प्रणमन्तं तमुत्थाप्य सम्परिष्वज्य भूमिप:।
प्रदिश्य चासनं चास्मै WH च पुनरब्रवीत्॥११॥

Lifting him up, even while he was lying
prostrate, nay, pressing him closely to his
bosom and offering him a seat, the Emperor
spoke to Sri Rama again as follows: (11)

राम वृद्धोऽस्मि दीर्घायुर्भुक्ता भोगा यथेप्सिता: |
अङ्गवद्भि: क्रतुशतैर्यथेष्टं भूरिदक्षिणै:॥ १२॥
“Having lived a long life | have now
grown old; nay, luxuries have been enjoyed
by me as desired and God has been
propitiated by me with due ceremony through
hundreds’ of sacrificial performances
ranging from Jyotistoma to ASwamedha,
accompanied by large gifts of foodgrains
and liberal fees (paid to the officiating priests).
(12)

जातमिष्टमपत्यं मे त्वमद्यानुपमं भुवि।
दत्तमिष्टमधीतं च मया पुरुषसत्तम॥१३॥
“A son (of the type) desired by me and
having no compeer on earth today has been
born to me in your person. Gifts of the desired
type have been given and the Vedas etc.,
studied by me, O jewelamong men! (13)

अनुभूतानि चेष्टानि मया वीर सुखान्यपि।
देवर्षिपितृविप्राणामनृणोऽस्मि तथाऽऽत्मन:॥ १४॥

“Sense-delights sought by me have
also been enjoyed by me, O gallant one ! In
this way | have repaid my debt to gods
through sacrificial performances, to Rsis
through a study of the Vedas, to manes
through procreation and to the Brahmanas
by bestowing gifts on them as well as to
myself through enjoyment of sense-delights.

(14)

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

न किंचिन्मम ade तवान्यत्राभिषेचनात्।

अतो यत्त्वामहं Gat तन्मे त्वं कर्तुमर्हसि॥ १५॥
“Nothing else than installing you as

Prince Regent remains to be accomplished

by me. Hence you ought to do for my sake

what | ask you to do. (15)

अद्य प्रकृतय: सर्वास्त्वामिच्छन्ति नराधिपम्।
अतस्त्वां युवराजानमभिषेक्ष्यामि पुत्रक॥ १६॥

“All the people would have you as
their sovereign now; hence | shall install
you as Prince Regent, my dear son! (16)

अपि चाद्याशुभान् राम स्वप्नान् पश्यामि राघव।
सनिर्घाता दिवोल्काश्च पतन्ति fe महास्वना:॥ १७॥

“Further, | see these days ominous
dreams, O Rama! _ Nay, meteors
accompanied by thunderbolts bereft of clouds
and attended with great noise fall by day, O
scion of Raghu ! (17)

अवष्टब्धं च मे राम नक्षत्रं दारुणग्रहै:।

आवेदयन्ति दैवज्ञा: सूर्याङ्गारकराहुभि:॥ १८॥
“Astrologers declare that the asterism

under which | was born is under the influence

of unpropitious planets, viz., the Sun, Mars
and Rahu. (18)

want च निमित्तानामीदृशानां समुद्भवे।
राजा fe मृत्युमाप्नोति घोरां चापदमृच्छति॥१९॥
“On the appearance of such evil
portents a monarch surely suffers a terrible
calamity and ultimately meets his end.
(19)

तद् यावदेव मे चेतो न विमुह्यति weal
तावदेवाभिषिञ्चस्व चला fe प्राणिनां ata: to tl

“Therefore, so long as my mind does
not get perverted as a result of pleading to
the contrary from any other quarter, be
installed; for fickle is the judgment of human
beings. (20)

अद्य चन्द्रोऽभ्युपगमत् पुष्यात् पूर्वं पुनर्वसुम्।
va: पुष्ययोगं नियतं वक्ष्यन्ते दैवचिन्तका:॥ २१॥

“The moon has reached today the
