178

gan विस्तरो wa सगरस्य महात्मन:।
शंकरश्वशुरो नाम्ना हिमवानिति विश्रुत:॥४॥

विन्ध्यपर्वतमासाद्य निरीक्षेते परस्परम्।
तयोर्मध्ये समभवद् यज्ञ: स पुरुषोत्तम॥५॥
“Hear, O Rama, a detailed account of
the sacrificial performance of the high-
souled Sagara. The father-in-law of Lord
Sankara, widely known by the name of
Himavan, and the Vindhya mountain gaze
on one another, Himavan overlooking
Vindhya and vice versa. The aforesaid
sacrifice took place in the region lying
between the two ranges, O chief of men!
(4-5)

a fe देशो नरव्याघ्र प्रशस्तो यज्ञकर्मणि।
तस्याश्वचर्या काकुत्स्थ दृढधन्वा महारथ:॥६॥
अंशुमानकरोत् तात सगरस्य ad स्थित:।

तस्य पर्वणि तं यज्ञं यजमानस्य वासव:॥७॥
राक्षसीं तनुमास्थाय यज्ञियाश्वमपाहरत्।
ह्रियमाणे तु काकुत्स्थ तस्मिन्नश्वे महात्मन:॥ ८॥
उपाध्यायगणा: ad यजमानमथान्रुवन्।
अयं पर्वणि वेगेन यज्ञियाश्वोऽपनीयते॥९॥
eat जहि काकुत्स्थ हयश्चैवोपनीयताम्।
यज्ञच्छिद्रं भवत्येतत् सर्वेषामशिवाय न:॥१०॥
“That land,* O tiger among men, is
really commended for व sacrificial
performance. Remaining at Sagara’s beck
and call, O dear Rama (a scion of Kakutstha),
Amsuman, a great car-warrior, who was
armed with a strong bow played the role of
attending the sacrificial horse during its
wanderings as its guard. Assuming the
semblance of an ogre Indra stole away the
sacrificial horse of Sagara, while he was
busy performing the said sacrifice on the
day of Ukthya (a liturgical ceremony). While
the aforesaid horse of the high-souled Sagara
was actually being taken away, all the priests

« VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

Officiating at the sacrifice forthwith addressed
the sacrificer as follows: ‘On the day of
Ukthya, the sacrificial horse is being taken
away with vehemence over there. Kill the
thief, O scion of Kakutstha, and let the
horse be recovered. This obstruction in the
sacrificial performance is calculated to bring
ill-luck to us all. (6—10)

तत्तथाक्रियतां राजन्यज्ञोऽच्छिद्र: Goal भवेत्।
सोपाध्यायवच: श्रुत्वा तस्मिन् सदसि पार्थिव: 1 ११॥
षष्टिं पुत्रसहस्राणि वाक्यमेतदुवाच ह।
गतिं पुत्रा न पश्यामि रक्षसां पुरुषर्षभा:॥१२॥
मन्त्रपूतैर्महाभागैरास्थितो हि महाक्रतु:।
aq गच्छथ विचिन्वध्वं पुत्रका भद्रमस्तु व:।॥ १३॥

‘Therefore, it may be so arranged, O
king, that the sacrificial performance is
cleared of this impediment.’ Hearing the
report of the priests including the family-
priest, gathered in that assembly, the king
addressed the following words to his sixty
thousand sons: so the tradition goes : “I do
not perceive, my sons, even the access of
ogres to this sacrificial performance, O jewels
among men, since this great sacrifice is
presided over by highly blessed souls
consecrated by the recitation of holy texts.
Therefore, go and track out the thief, my
beloved sons; may good luck attend you all.

(11—13)
समुद्रमालिनीं wat पृथिवीमनुगच्छथ।

एकैकं योजनं पुत्रा विस्तारमभिगच्छत॥ १४॥

‘Ransack the entire globe encircled by

the oceans. Apportion to yourselves, my

sons, land with an area of one square
Yojana (64 sq. miles) each and scour it.

(14)

यावत् तुरगसंदर्शस्तावत् waa मेदिनीम्।
awa हयहर्तारॆ मार्गमाणा ममाज्ञया॥१५॥

* The region intervening the Vindhyan and Himalayan ranges has been designated as Aryavarta and

declared in the Sastras as sacred—

आर्यावर्त: पुण्यभूमिर्मध्यं हिमवद्विन्ध्ययो: |
