366

containing the requisites for the projected
consecration, Sri Rama moved slowly along
without casting his eyes on it, keen as he
was to leave the place. (31)

न चास्य महतीं लक्ष्मीं राज्यनाशोऽपकर्षति।
लोककान्तस्य कान्तत्वाच्छीतरश्मेरिव क्षय:॥ ३२॥

Loss of sovereignty, however, did not
detract in the least from his extraordinary
splendour because of his being naturally
pleasing of aspect, any more than the waning
of the orb of the moon, distinguished by its
cool rays, which is delightful to the world,
detracts from the latter's charm. (32)

न वनं गन्तुकामस्य त्यजतश्च वसुंधराम्।
सर्वलोकातिगस्येव लक्ष्यते चित्तविक्रिया॥ ३३॥
No change of mood was perceived in
him—any more than in a master-Yogi, who
surpasses all common men because of his
having risen above all pairs of opposites—
even though he was ready to retire to the
woods and was renouncing the sovereignty
of the entire globe. (33)
प्रतिषिध्य शुभं Bt व्यजने च स्वलंकृते।
विसर्जयित्वा स्वजनं रथं पौरांस्तथा जनान्॥ ३४॥
धारयन् wea दु:खमिन्दियाणि निगृह्य a
प्रविवेशात्मवान् वेश्म मातुरप्रियशंसिवान्॥ ३५॥

Forbidding the use of the beautiful
umbrella as well as of a pair of richly adorned
chowries and sending away his own people,
the chariot and the citizens, nay, inhibiting
his agony caused by the agony of his own
people with his mind and controlling his
senses, Sri Rama, who had full mastery
over his self, entered his mother’s apartments
in order to break the unpalatable news to
her. (34-35)

सर्वोऽप्यभिजन: sitar श्रीमत: सत्यवादिन: |
नालक्षयत रामस्य कंचिदाकारमानने॥ ३६॥

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

Everyone around him, who looked smart,
did not notice any change in the looks of the
glorious and truthful Sri Rama. (36)

उचितं च महाबाहुर्न जहौ हर्षमात्मवान्।
शारद: समुदीर्णांशुश्चन्द्रस्तेज इवात्मजम्॥ ३७॥

The mighty-armed Sri Rama, who was
noted for his self-control, did not shed his
characteristic and native joy any more than
the autumnal moon with its intensely bright
rays loses its natural splendour. (37)

वाचा मधुरया wa: सर्वं सम्मानयञ्जनम्।
Td: समीपं धर्मात्मा प्रविवेश महायशा:॥ ३८॥

Duly honouring all men with his suave
speech, the highly illustrious Sri Rama, whose
mind was given to piety, entered the
presence of his mother. (38)

तं गुणै: समतां प्राप्तो भ्राता विपुलविक्रम:।
सौमित्रिरनुवव्राज धारयन् दु:ख्मात्मजम्॥ ३९॥

Controlling the agony caused in his mind
by the interruption of Sri Rama’s installation
and the news of his impending exile, his
younger brother, Laksmana son of Sumitra,
who had attained equality with Sri Rama by
virtue of his excellences and was possessed
of great prowess, followed him. (39)
प्रविश्य वेश्मातिभृशं Yat ad

समीक्ष्य at चार्थविपत्तिमागताम्।

न चैव रामोऽत्र जगाम विक्रियां

सुहृज्जनस्यात्मविपत्तिशङ्कया ॥४०॥

Entering the palace of Kausalya, which
was full of immense joy at the projected
installation of Sri Rama, Sri Rama did not
undergo any change of mood at all even on
perceiving that loss of worldly fortune, that
had come upon him at this moment, for fear
of bringing about the loss of life of his near
and dear ones. (40)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्येऽयोध्याकाण्डे एकोनविंश: सर्ग: il १९ ॥

Thus ends Canto Nineteen in the Ayodhyakanda of the glorious Ramayana of Valmiki,
the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

