868

“Show your grace to me at once; | am
your obedient servant. Let not these words
uttered by me pining from love fall flat on your
ears. It is well-known that Ravana never
salutes any woman whatsoever with his head

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

bent low.” Having spoken as aforesaid to Sita
(the princess of Mithila), daughter of Janaka,
Ravana, the ten-headed monster, who had
fallen a prey to Death, thought to himself,
‘She is now mine.’ (36-37)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्येऽरण्यकाण्डे VATA: सर्ग: ॥ ५५ ॥

Thus ends Canto Fifty-five in the Aranyakanda of the glorious Ramayana of Valmiki,
the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

षट्पञ्चाश: सर्ग:
Canto LVI

Giving expression to her undivided love for Sri Rama, Sita reproaches
Ravana, whereupon under his orders ogresses take her to the
Asoka Garden and intimidate her

सा तथोक्ता तु वैदेही निर्भया शोककर्शिता।
तृणमन्तरत: कृत्वा रावणं प्रत्यभाषत॥१॥
*Interposing a blade of grass between
herself and Ravana when spoken to as
aforesaid, Sita (a princess of the Videha
territory), for her part, emaciated as she
was through grief, fearlessly replied to Ravana
as follows: (1)

राजा दशरथो नाम धर्मसेतुरिवाचल:।
सत्यसंध: परिज्ञातो यस्य पुत्र: स राघव:॥ २॥
Ta aa स धर्मात्मा त्रिषु लोकेषु विश्रुत: ।
दीर्घबाहुर्विशालाक्षो दैवतं स पतिर्मम॥ ३॥

“There was a king, DaSaratha by name,
who was, as it were, an unflinching bulwark
of righteousness, was true to his promise
and well-known for these virtues all over the
world, whose son is the celebrated scion of
Raghu, Sri Rama by name. The latter, whose
mind is set on virtue, is equally well-known in
all three worlds, and is distinguished by long
arms and large eyes. He is my husband, and
the object of my adoration. (2-3)

इक्ष्वाकूणां Hot जात: सिंहस्कन्धो महाद्युति: |
लक्ष्मणेन सह भ्रात्रा यस्ते प्राणान् वधिष्यति॥ ४॥

“Born in the line of Ikswakus, he has
shoulders like those of a lion and is
possessed of extraordinary splendour. It is
he who, with his younger brother, Laksmana,
will put an end to your life. (4)

waa यद्यहं तस्य त्वया वै धर्षिता बलात्।
vital त्वं हत: संख्ये जनस्थाने यथा aT UG I

“Had | been forcibly laid violent hands
upon by you before his eyes, you would
have surely lain on the ground, killed in
battle by him as Khara in Janasthana. (5)

य Ud राक्षसा: प्रोक्ता घोररूपा महाबला:।
waa निर्विषा: wd सुपर्णे पन्नगा यथा॥६॥

“These ogres of grim visage and
extraordinary might, who have just been
commanded by you to proceed to Janasthana
will all become powerless in the presence
of Sri Rama, a scion of Raghu, as serpents
turn venomless in the presence of Garuda
of beautiful wings. (6)

* According to the Hindu etiquette a virtuous lady must not talk to a male stranger, much less to
a sinner like Ravana, without a medium. Being forced to violate this rule at this emergency, Sita takes

recourse to this expedient.
