वसन्त्यग्निनिकाशानां घोराणां कामरूपिणाम्।
पावकार्चि:प्रतीकाशा: समवेता: समन्तत:॥ २१॥

नात्यासादयितव्यास्ते वानरैर्भीमविक्रमै:।
नादेयं च thet तस्माद्देशात् किंचित् WASH: ।। २२ ॥
“The whole of this mountain should be
explored by the monkeys, who are capable
of changing form at will. Arriving at that sea,
O monkeys, you will behold the golden
summit, a hundred Yojanas (or eight hundred
miles) long and difficult to be seen by
others, of the Pariyatra mountain. On that
summit dwell twenty-four crores of terrible
Gandharvas (celestial musicians) full of
speed, shining brightly as fire and capable
of changing form at will. Effulgent as flames
of fire and come together from all sides,
they should not be given offence to by the
monkeys even though they are possessed
of terrific prowess nor should any fruit be
plucked from that region by the monkeys.
(19—22)

quad fe a वीरा: सत्त्ववन्तो महाबला:।
फलमूलानि ते तत्र रक्षन्ते भीमविक्रमा:॥ २३॥

“For, the aforesaid heroes are dangerous
to approach, are full of courage, possessed
of extraordinary might and endowed with
terrific prowess. They guard the fruits and
roots growing there. (23)

wa यत्नश्च ade मार्गितव्या च जानकी।
नहि तेभ्यो भयं किंचित् कपित्वमनुवर्तताम्॥ २४॥

“Sita, daughter of King Janaka, should
be diligently sought for and an effort made
to find out her whereabouts. Of course,
there is no fear of any kind from them to
you so long as you maintain your simian
character. (24)

तत्र वैदूर्यवर्णाभो वज्रसंस्थानसंस्थित:।
नानाद्रुमलताकोर्णो वज्रो ATA महागिरि:॥ २५॥
star, समुदितस्तत्र योजनानां शतं समम्।
गुहास्तत्र विचेतव्या: प्रयत्नेन प्लवङ्गमा:॥ २६॥
“In the vicinity of the Pariyatra mountain
in that ocean there is a large and glorious

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

mountain, Vajra by name, which is possessed
of splendour resembling that of a cat’s-eye
gem and solid as the composition of a
diamond, nay, which is covered with trees
and creepers of every description and is a
hundred Yojanas (or eight hundred miles)
high all round. The caves of that mountain
should be explored with effort, O monkeys !

(25-26)

चतुर्भागे समुद्रस्य चक्रवान् नाम Udder: |
wa चक्रं सहस्रारं निर्मितं विश्चकर्मणा॥ eeu
“Covering a quarter of the Arabian
sea rises a mountain Cakravan by name.
There a discus with a thousand spokes
was forged by ViSwakarma, the architect of
gods. (27)
wa पञ्चजनं हत्वा हयग्रीवं च दानवम्।
SEN ततश्चक्रं शङ्खं च पुरुषोत्तम:॥ rl
“Having slain Pafcajana, who had a
conch for his body, as well as the demon
Hayagriva (so-called because he had the
head of a horse on a human trunk), Lord
Visnu, the Supreme Person, took away the
discus from the latter and the conch from
the dead body of Paficajana. (28)

तस्य सानुषु way विशालासु गुहासु al
रावण: Ge ace मार्गितव्यस्ततस्तत:॥ २९॥

“Ravana alongwith Sita, a princess of
the Videha territory, should be sought for
everywhere, on the lovely peaks and the
extensive caves of the aforesaid mountain.

(29)

योजनानि चतु:षष्टिर्वराहो नाम ude: |
सुवर्णशृङ्ग सुमहानगाधथे वरुणालये॥ Boll

“In the fathomless sea there is a huge
mountain, Varaha by name, which is sixty-
four Yojanas (or five hundred and twelve
miles) long and has golden peaks. = (30)
wa प्राग्ज्योतिषं नाम जातरूपमयं पुरम्।
यस्मिन् वसति दुष्टात्मा नरको ATA दानव:॥ ३१॥

“On that mountain is located the golden
