+ UTTARAKANDA +

“When this noble soul was born, flowers,
they say, fell in showers on the earth, and
kettledrums of the gods sounded in the
heavens. ‘Good, excellent!’ were the words
spoken in mid heaven. (36)

at तु at महारण्ये agqend महौजसौ।
कुम्भकर्णदशग्रीवौ लोकोद्वेगकरौ तदा॥ ३७॥
“Then both, Kumbhakarna = and
DaSagriva, of great strength and tormentors
of the world, grew up in that big forest. (37)

कुम्भकर्ण: Wate महर्षीन् धर्मवत्सलान्।
त्रैलोक्ये नित्यासंतुष्टो भक्षयन् विचचार ह॥ ३८॥

“Wanton Kumbhakarna, ever
discontented, roamed about the three worlds
devouring the great sages fond of
righteousness. (38)

विभीषणस्तु धर्मात्मा नित्यं धर्मव्यवस्थित:।
स्वाध्यायनियताहार sara विजितेन्द्रिय:।॥ ३९॥
“The pious-minded Vibhisana, who was
ever fully established in rectitude and highly
self-controlled, lived on a sparse diet, and
was given to the study of the Vedas. (39)

अथ वैश्रवणो देवस्तत्र कालेन केनचित्।
आगत: पितरं द्रष्टुं पुष्पकेण VAT: I Xo Il
“Now after sometime god Kubera (son
of ViSrava), the lord of riches, came in his
aerial car to see his father. (40)

तं दृष्टवा कैकसी aa ज्वलन्तमिव तेजसा।
आगम्य राक्षसी तत्र दशग्रीवमुवाच ह॥४१॥
“On seeing him, blazing as it were with
lustre, the ogress, Kaikasi came up there
and said to DaSagriva: (41)
पुत्र वैश्रवणं पश्य भ्रातरं तेजसा वृतम्।
भ्रातृभावे समे चापि पश्यात्मानं त्वमीदृशम्॥४२॥
‘Son, look at your (half-) brother,

VaiSravana (Kubera), full of lustre; look upon
yourself, who are so poor, though equal

875

to him as a brother.

दशग्रीव यथा at कुरुष्वामितविक्रम।
यथा त्वमपि मे पुत्र भवेर्वैश्रवणोपम:॥४३॥

‘Make every effort, so that you too
become like him, O DaSagriva! you have
limitless prowess, my son.’ (43)

मातुस्तद् वचनं श्रुत्वा दशग्रीव: प्रतापवान्।
अमर्षमतुलं लेभे प्रतिज्ञां चाकरोत् तदा॥४४॥

“Hearing these words of his mother,
the valiant Dasagriva became immeasurably
envious and took the following vow: (44)

सत्यं ते प्रतिजानामि भ्रातृतुल्योऽधिकोऽपि ar |
भविष्याम्योजसा चैव संतापं त्यज हृद्गतम्॥४५॥

‘| swear to you truly, | will rise equal to
VaiSravana and even excel him in respect of
power; give up grieving in your heart.’ (45)
तत: क्रोधेन Ata दशग्रीव: सहानुज:।
चिकीर्षुर्दुष्करं md तपसे धरृतमानस:॥४६॥
प्राप्स्यामि तपसा काममिति कृत्वाध्यवस्य च।
आगच्छदात्मसिद्ध्यर्थं गोकर्णस्याश्रमं शुभम्॥ ४७॥

“Then in a fit of spleen, Dasagriva,
having set his mind on performing Tapas,
and seeking to accomplish a difficult task,
came to the holy Asrama at Gokarna for
achieving success determined to gain his
ends by practising austerities with his
younger brothers. (46-47)

(42)

ददौ स Tex वराञ्जयावहान्॥४८॥

“That Raksasa of terrible prowess, in
the company of his younger brothers,
practised unsurpassed Tapas in that place;
thereby he pleased the all-powerful Brahma
who, in the plenitude of his pleasure, granted
boons which would bring victory.” (48)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये SRPMS नवम: सर्ग: ॥ ९ ॥

Thus ends Canto Nine in the Uttarakanda of the glorious Ramayana of Valmiki,
the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

