422

“He is about to proceed to the extensive
forest. Pray, behold the prince, who is
encompassed by kingly virtues even as the
sun is encircled by rays.” (8)

स सत्यवाक्यो धर्मात्मा गाम्भीर्यात् सागरोपम:।
आकाश sat निष्पङ्को नरेन्द्र: प्रत्युवाच तम्॥९॥

That pious monarch, who was truthful
of speech and vied with the ocean in
profundity, nay, who was stainless as the
sky, replied to him as follows : (9)

सुमन्त्रानय मे दारान् ये केचिदिह मामका:।

at: परिवृत: सर्वैर्द्रष्टुमिच्छामि राघवम्॥ gol
“Sumantra, bring all my consorts who

are here in the gynaeceum. | wish to see

Rama, a scion of Raghu, when | am
accompanied by my wives.” (10)

सोऽन्त:पुरमतीत्यैव स्नियस्ता वाक्यमब्रवीत्।
आर्यो ह्वयति वो राजा गम्यतां तत्र मा चिरम्॥ ११॥

Directly on entering the apartments of
the other queens, Sumantra addressed those
ladies as follows: “His Majesty the king
summons you all; pray, let yourselves
proceed there without delay.” (11)

Wann: fara: Gat: सुमन्त्रेण नृपाज्ञया।
प्रचक्रमुस्तद् भवनं भर्तुराज्ञाय शासनम्॥१२॥
Coming to know the command of their
husband, when addressed as above by
Sumantra under orders of His Majesty, all
the royal ladies proceeded to Kaikeyi’s
apartments. (12)

अर्धसप्तशतास्तत्र प्रमदास्ताम्रलोचना: |
कौसल्यां परिवार्याथं शानैर्जग्मुर्धृतव्रता:॥१३॥

Encircling Kausalya, the seniormost
queen, three hundred and fifty young ladies,
steadfast in their vow of devotion to their
husband, forthwith repaired to the king’s
presence, their eyes reddened through grief
over their impending separation from Sri
Rama. (13)

आगतेषु च दारेषु ander महीपति:।
उवाच राजा तं सूतं सुमन्त्रानय A सुतम्॥१४॥

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

Observing his consorts when they
had come, the King-Emperor said to the
celebrated charioteer, “Sumantra, now bring
my son before me.” (14)

स सूतो राममादाय लक्ष्मणं मैथिलीं तथा।
जगामाभिमुखस्तूर्णं सकाशं जगतीपते:। १५॥
Taking Sri Rama, Laksmana and Sita,
princess of Mithila, the said charioteer
speedily returned to the Emperor’s presence
with his face turned towards the latter.
(15)

स राजा पुत्रमायान्तं दृष्टवा चारात् कृताञ्जलिम्।
उत्पपातासनात् तूर्णमार्त: स्त्रीजनसंवृत:॥ १६॥
Beholding his son, Sri Rama, coming
with folded hands from a distance, the
illustrious king immediately rose from his
seat alongwith the ladies, afflicted as he
was. (16)
सोऽभिदुद्राव वेगेन रामं दृष्टवा विशाम्पति: |
तमसम्प्राप्य दु:खार्त: पपात भुवि मूच्छित: 1 १७॥
Seeing Sri Rama, the said king ran
with impetuosity towards the latter. Before
reaching him, however, he dropped senseless

to the ground, stricken as he was with
sorrow. (17)

तं रामोऽभ्यपतत् क्षिप्रं लक्ष्मणश्च महारथ:।
विसंज्ञमिव दु:खेन सशोकं नृपतिं तथा॥१८॥
Sri Rama as well as Laksmana, an
eminent chariot-warrior, rushed at once to
the king, who lay quite unconscious as
aforesaid, full of grief as he was through
agony. (18)
स्त्रीसहस्ररनिनादश्च संजज्ञे राजवेश्मनि।
a a रामेति सहसा भूषणध्वनिमिथ्रित:॥१९॥
Nay, there burst forth all of a sudden in
the palace a loud wail, mixed with the tinkling
of ornaments, of thousands of women crying
“Alas! Alas !! O Rama !!!” (19)
तं परिष्वज्य बाहुभ्यां तावुभौ रामलक्ष्मणौ।
was सीतया सार्धं रुदन्त: समवेशयन्॥२०॥
