* AYODHYAKANDA +

high-minded princess has not been so
commanded to reside in the forest (as you),
dear child ! (15-16)

पितुर्वाक्यानुरोधेन गतस्य fast वनम्।
तावद् दर्शनमस्या A: सफलं भवतु WTI Vil
“At least let her blessed sight continue
to bring its reward to us during the interim
period when you have departed to the lonely
forest in obedience to your father’s command,
O lord! (17)

लक्ष्मणेन सहायेन at गच्छस्व पुत्रक।

नेयमर्हति कल्याणि वस्तुं तापसवद् वने॥१८॥
“Proceed to the forest, dear son, with

Laksmana alone as your companion. This

blessed princess does not deserve to dwell
in the forest like an ascetic. (18)

कुरु नो याचनां aa सीता तिष्ठतु भामिनी।
धर्मनित्य: स्वयं स्थातुं न हीदानीं त्वमिच्छसि॥ १९॥
“Grant our solicitation, O darling! Let
Sita, the pretty young lady, continue to stay
in Ayodhya though surely you are not
personally inclined to stay any _ longer,
righteousness being your eternal companion.”
(19)

तासामेवंविधा वाच: YUVA दशरथात्मज:।
बबन्धैव तथा चीरं सीतया तुल्यशीलया॥ २०॥

Even though hearing ऽपरनो loving
remonstrances of those women, Sri Rama,
son of DaSaratha, persisted in fastening the
bark over her silken garment as aforesaid
(vide verse 14) as desired by Sita, whose
conduct came into line with his own. (20)

at गृहीते तु तया सबाष्पो Fate: |
निवार्य सीतां कैकेयीं वसिष्ठो वाक्यमब्रवीत्॥ २१॥

Stopping Sita when the bark was taken
by her (from the hands of Kaikeyi), Sage
Vasistha, the king’s preceptor, for his part,
spoke to Kaikeyi with tears in his eyes, as
follows : (21)

अतिप्रवृत्ते दुर्मेधे कैकेयि कुलपांसनि।
वञ्चयित्वा तु राजानं न प्रमाणेऽवतिष्ठसि॥ २२॥

435

“Having hoodwinked the king, O evil-
minded Kaikeyi, who have exceeded your
limits and brought disgrace to your family,
you do not keep within bounds yet! (22)

न गन्तव्यं at ter सीतया शीलवर्जिते।
अनुष्ठास्यति रामस्य सीता प्रकृतमासनम्॥ २३॥
“O woman, dead to all decorum,
Princess Sita shall not proceed to the forest.
She will occupy the throne which was offered
to Rama. (23)
आत्मा fe ant: सर्वेषां दारसंग्रहवर्तिनाम्।
आत्मेयमिति रामस्य पालयिष्यति मेदिनीम्॥ २४॥

“A wife is the very self to all
householders. As the other self of Rama,
she will rule over the globe. (24)

अथ यास्यति aedt at रामेण संगता।

वयमत्रानुयास्याम: «at चेदं गमिष्यति॥ २५॥
“If Sita, a princess of the Videha territory,

retires to the forest alongwith Rama, we, who

are present here at this moment, shall follow
suit and the people of this city too will go. (25)
अन्तपालाश्च यास्यन्ति सदारो AT Wea: |
सहोपजीव्यं We च Wt च सपरिच्छ्दम्॥ २६॥
“The soldiers guarding the gynaeceum
too will go where Rama, a scion of Raghu,
stays with his wife. Nay, the entire state of
Kosala including all its resources as well as
the city of Ayodhya with its goods and
chattels will also go. (26)

Wigs सशत्रुघ्नश्चीरवासा वनेचर:।
वने वसन्तं काकुत्स्थमनुवत्स्यति Tar २७॥

“Clad in the bark of trees and dwelling
in a forest, Bharata too with Satrughna will
adopt the mode of life of his elder brother,
Rama, a scion of Kakutstha, living in the
forest. (27)
तत: शून्यां गतजनां वसुधां wed: सह।
त्वमेका शाधि दुर्वृत्ता प्रजानामहिते स्थिता॥ २८ I

“Rule you alone after that the desolate
earth, deserted by men, with its trees
because it will be reduced to a mere forest,
