# YUDDHAKANDA #

कुरर्य इव दु:खार्ता बाष्पपर्याकुलेक्षणा:॥ २६॥

Thus lamented like female ospreys the

767

aforesaid consorts of Ravana, the suzerain
lord of ogres, stricken with agony as
they were, their eyes bedimmed with tears.

(26)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये FERS TMH MATA: सर्ग: ॥ ११० ॥

Thus ends Canto One hundred and ten in the Yuddhakanda of the glorious
Ramayana of Valmiki, the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

एकादशाधिकशततम: सर्ग:
Canto ५१८

Mandodari’s lament and the funeral of Ravana

तासां विलपमानानां तदा राक्षसयोषिताम्।
ज्येष्ठपत्नी प्रिया dar wat समुदैक्षत॥ १॥
Of the aforesaid consorts of the ogre,
Ravana, who were lamenting as above on
that occasion, the beloved and seniormost
consort, who was feeling miserable, gazed
on her husband. (1)

दशग्रीवं हतं दृष्टवा रामेणाचिन्त्यकर्मणा।
पतिं मन्दोदरी at Hu पर्यदेवयत्॥२॥
Seeing her spouse, Ravana, the ten-
headed monster, made short work of by Sri
Rama of inconceivable exploits, the wretched
Mandodari lamented as follows on that spot:
(2)

ननु नाम महाबाहो तव वैश्रवणानुज।
क्रुद्धस्य waa wit त्रस्यत्यपि पुरंदर:॥ ३॥
“Indeed, it is well known, O mighty-
armed younger brother of Kubera (son of
Sage Visrava), that even Indra, the destroyer
of citadels, feared to stand in front of you
when you were angry. (3)

कऋरषयश्च महान्तोऽपि गन्धर्वाश्च यशस्विन:।
ननु नाम तवोद्वेगाच्चारणाश्च दिशो गता:॥४॥
Even eminent Rsis (seers of Vedic

Mantras) and illustrious Gandharvas (celestial
musicians) and Caranas (celestial bards)

too, they say, actually fled in all directions
for fear of you. (4)

स त्वं मानुषमात्रेण रामेण युधि निर्जित:।
न व्यपत्रपसे राजन् किमिदं राक्षसेश्वर॥५॥
“How is it that you do not feel abashed
even though vanquished in combat by Rama
a mere mortal, O king, O ruler of ogres! (5)
कथं त्रैलोक्यमाक्रम्य श्रिया वीर्येण चान्वितम्।
अविषह्यं जघान cat मानुषो वनगोचर:॥६॥
“How did a mortal, wandering in the
woods, kill you, who, having overcome all
the three worlds by dint of your prowess,

had grown irresistible and were endowed
with glory? (6)

मानुषाणामविषये चरत: कामरूपिण:।
विनाशस्तव रामेण संयुगे नोपपद्यते॥७॥

“That you, who lived in a_ place
inaccessible to man and were able to assume
any form at will, were destroyed in combat
by Rama, is not compatible with reason. (7)

न चैतत् कर्म रामस्य श्रद्दधामि चमूमुखे।
Wat: समुपेतस्य तव तेनाभिमर्षणम्॥८॥

“Nor do | believe that your discomfiture
at his hands in the van, of your army, fully
equipped as you were with all implements
of war, was the achievement of Rama. (8)
