466

women, which have been declared as
unfailing in their effect by those who are
able to read the bodily marks of a man or
woman, are proving false in my case today
in that Sri Rama has been killed. (8)

केशा: सूक्ष्मा: समा नीला wat चासंहते मम।
qd चारोमके we दन्ताश्चाविरला मम॥९॥

“My locks are fine, of even length and
dark, my eyebrows are not joined, nay my
shanks are round and hairless and my
teeth are closely set. (9)

शङ्खे नेत्रे करौ पादौ गुल्फावूरू समौ चितौ।
अनुवृत्तनखा: स्निग्धा: समाश्चाङ्गुलयो मम॥१०॥

“The pairs of my temporal bones, eyes,
hands, feet, ankles and thighs are even-
shaped and fleshy; nay, the fingers of both
my hands are evenly matched, smooth
and provided with rounded and _ well-
proportioned nails. (10)

स्तनौ चाविरलौ पीनौ मामकौ मग्नचूचुकौ।
TAM चोत्सेधनी नाभि: पार्श्वचोरस्कं च मे चितम्॥ ११॥

“My breasts too are well-knit and fully
developed and have depressed nipples;
nay, my navel is deep with the surrounding
region elevated; while my flanks and
bosom are fleshy. (11)

मम aut मणिनिभो मृदून्यङ्गरुहाणि च।
प्रतिष्ठितां द्वादशभिर्मामूचु: शुभलक्षणाम्॥१२॥

“My complexion has the sheen of a
polished gem, while the hair on my skin
are soft. Nay, those who are able to read
the bodily marks of an individual spoke of
me as endowed with auspicious marks,
in that | touched the ground with my
twelve limbs, viz., the ten toes and the two
soles. (12)
समग्रयवमच्छिद्रं पाणिपादं च वर्णवत्।
मन्दस्मितेत्येव च At कन्यालाक्षणिका विदु: u १३॥

“Those capable of interpreting the bodily
marks of maidens declared my hands and

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA +

feet to be rosy, devoid of space between
the fingers and toes and with the mark of
a barley corn fully manifest on them and
also spoke of me as distinguished by
a gentle smile, which are all auspicious
marks. (13)

आधिराज्येऽभिषेको मे ब्राह्मणै: पतिना सह।
कृतान्तकुशलैरुक्तं तत् सर्वं वितथीकृतम्॥ evil

“It was predicted by Brahmanas well-
versed in the principles of astrology that
| should be consecrated alongwith my
husband on the imperial throne. All that
has, however, been falsified. (14)

शोधयित्वा जनस्थानं प्रवृत्तिमुपलभ्य च।
drat सागरमक्षोभ्यं भ्रातरौ गोष्पदे हतौ॥ ea il

“Having scoured Janasthana (in search
of me), nay, having crossed the sea, which
is incapable of being disturbed, after securing
intelligence about me, the two scions of
Raghu have been killed in the attempt to
overcome the Maya (sorcery) of Indrajit
(which was like the imprint of a cow’s hoof)!

(15)

ननु aes वायव्यमेव च।
अस्त्रं ब्रह्मशिरश्चैव राघवौ प्रत्यपद्यत॥ १६॥

“Surely Sri Rama and Laksmana, the
two scions of Raghu, knew the use of the
mystic missiles presided over by Varuna
(the god of water), Agni (the god of fire),
Indra (the god of rain) as well as of that
presided over by Vayu (the wind-god) as
also the use of the missile presided over by
Brahma (the creator). How, then, did they
not resort to the use of these missiles as a
last resort? (16)

अदृश्यमानेन रणे मायया वासवोपमौ।
मम नाथावनाथाया निहतौ रामलक्ष्मणौ॥१७॥
“Sri Rama and  Laksmana, the

protectors of this forlorn creature, who were
compeers of Indra, have evidently been
