722

स विद्धौ बहुभिर्बाणै: खड्गाभ्यां च परिक्षत:।
निष्पिष्टो बहुधा भूमौ न ममार स राक्षस:॥८॥

Though pierced with many arrows and
injured with two swords and crushed several
times on the ground, that ogre did not die.

(8)
तं Wer राम: सुभृशमवध्यमचलोपमम्।
भयेष्वभयद: श्रीमानिदं वचनमब्रवीत्॥९॥

Seeing him very much incapable of
being killed and looking like a mountain, the
glorious Rama, who gave protection in
danger, spoke these words to Laksmana :

(9)
तपसा पुरुषव्याघ्र राक्षसोऽयं न शक्यते।
शस्त्रेण युधि निर्जेतुं राक्षसं निखनावहे॥१०॥

“O tiger-man, by virtue of his penance
this ogre cannot be conquered in battle with
a weapon. We two shall bury him in a pit. (10)

कुञ्जरस्येव रौद्रस्य राक्षसस्यास्य लक्ष्मण।
aster सुमहच्छ्वभ्रं खन्यतां रौद्रवर्चस:॥ ११॥
“O Laksmana, dig a very big pit in this
forest for this terrible ogre of fierce lustre,
looking like an elephant.” (11)

इत्युक्त्वा लक्ष्मणं WA: Wat: खन्यतामिति।
तस्थौ विराधमाक्रम्य HVS पादेन वीर्यवान्॥१२॥

Thus telling Laksmana to dig a pit, the
valorous Rama stood stamping his foot on
the neck of Viradha. (12)

Te WaT Ware: प्रश्रितं वच:।
इदं प्रोवाच काकुत्स्थं विराध: पुरुषर्षभम्॥ १३॥

Hearing the command given by the
scion of Raghu, the ogre Viradha made this
polite submission to the descendant of
Kakutstha, the best among men: (13)

हतोऽहं पुरुषव्याघ्र शक्रतुल्यबलेन 4

मया तु पूर्वं त्वं मोहान्न ज्ञात: पुरुषर्षभ॥१४॥
“O tiger-man, | stand killed by you,

equal in strength to Indra. However, O jewel

among men, earlier due to delusion you

were not recognized by me. (14)

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

कौसल्या सुप्रजास्तात रामस्त्वं विदितो मया।
वैदेही च महाभागा लक्ष्मणश्च महायशा:॥ १५॥
“O dear, Kausalya is possessed of
good progeny in you. You are known by me
as Rama, as also the princess of Videha
territory, who is very fortunate, and
Laksmana, who is very well-known. (15)
अभिशापादहं घोरां प्रविष्टो राक्षसीं तनुम्।
तुम्बुरुर्नाम wed: oar वैश्रवणेन हि॥१६॥
“Indeed, | am a Gandharva named
Tumburu, cursed by Kubera. Due to the curse
| entered the fierce form of an ogre. (16)

प्रसाद्यमानश्च मया सोऽब्रवीन्मां महायशा:।
यदा दाशरथी रामस्त्वां वधिष्यति संयुगे॥ १७॥
dat प्रकृतिमापन्नो भवान् स्वर्गं गमिष्यति।
अनुपस्थीयमानो मां स क्रुद्धो व्याजहार TU १८॥

“When requested for grace by me, he,
possessed of great fame, said to me, ‘When
Rama, son of Dasaratha, will kill you in
battle, then regaining your pristine state you
will go to paradise.’ He, not being attended
upon by me, angrily addressed me thus.

(17-18)

इति वैश्रवणो राजा रम्भासक्तमुवाच ह।

तव प्रसादान्मुक्तोऽहमभिशापात् सुदारुणात्॥ VF
‘King Kubera spoke thus to me, who

was attached to Rambha. With your grace

| stand freed from a very terrible curse. (19)

भुवनं स्वं गमिष्यामि स्वस्ति वोऽस्तु परंतप।

Bat वसति धर्मात्मा MAE: प्रतापवान्॥२०॥

अध्यर्धयोजने तात महर्षि: सूर्यसंनिभ:।

तं क्षिप्रमभिगच्छ त्वं स ते श्रेयोऽभिधास्यति॥ २१॥

“| shall go to my own realm, O tormentor
of foes, good luck be to you. There lives
the righteous and powerful great sage
Sarabhanga, effulgent like the sun—just a
Yojana and a half from here. Go quickly to
him. He will give you good advice. (20-21)

sae चापि at राम निक्षिप्य कुशली at
रक्षसां गतसत्त्वानामेष धर्म: AAT २२॥
