1106

by all of you. Beyond the Kraufca mountain
rises a mountain, Mainaka byname. (29)
मयस्य भवनं AA दानवस्य स्वयंकृतम्।
मैनाकस्तु विचेतव्य: ससानुप्रस्थकन्दर:।॥ ३०॥
“The abode of the demon Maya,
constructed by himself, stands on it. The
said Mainaka too should be explored by
you alongwith its summits, tablelands and
caves. (30)
स्त्रीणामश्वमुखीनां तु निकेतस्तत्र at तु।
तं देशं समतिक्रम्य आश्रमं सिद्धसेवितम्॥ ३१॥
“The abodes of Kinnara women (whose
heads resemble the heads of horses) are
seen here and there. Passing clearly beyond
that region you will see a hermitage occupied
by perfect beings. (31)

सिद्धा वैखानसा aa वालखिल्याश्च तापसा:।
वन्दितव्यास्तत: सिद्धास्तपसा वीतकल्मषा:॥ ३२॥
प्रष्टव्या चापि सीताया: प्रव्रत्तिर्विनयान्वितै: |
हेमपुष्करसंछन्नं aa वैखानसं सर:॥ ३३॥
तरुणादित्यसंकाशैर्हंसैर्विचरितं ws:
औपवाह्य: कुबेरस्य सार्वभौम sft Ba: u ३४॥
Tat: पर्येति तं देशं सदा सह करेणुभि:।
ad सर: समतिक्रम्य नष्टचन्द्रदिवाकरम्।
अनक्षत्रगणं व्योम निष्पयोदमनादितम्॥ ३५॥

“In that hermitage dwell ascetics of the
orders of Vaikhanasas and Valakhilyas, who
have reached perfection. The said realized
souls, who have been completely rid of sin
through askesis, should then be saluted
and information concerning Sita should be
sought from them by you in all humility.
Close to that hermitage there is a lake
called Vaikhanasa (after those ascetics),
covered with golden lotuses and frequented
by beautiful swans shining brightly as the
rising sun. The elephant, carrying Kubera
on its back and known by the name of
Sarvabhauma, always roams about the
aforesaid region with she-elephants. Clearly
beyond the aforesaid lake stretches the
vast expanse of the sky devoid of the moon

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

and the sun as well as of the hosts of
stars and without clouds and their rumbling.
(32—35)

गभस्तिभिरिवार्कस्य स तु देश: प्रकाश्यते।
विश्राम्यद्भिस्तप: सिद्धैर्देवकल्पै: स्वयंप्रभै:।॥। ३६ ॥
“That region is, however, illumined, as
if by (So many) rays of the sun, by self-
effulgent god-like sages, who have attained

God-Realization through askesis and repose
there. (36)

तं तु देशमतिक्रम्य शैलोदा नाम निम्नगा।
उभयोस्तीरयोस्तस्या: कीचका ATT वेणव:॥ ३७॥

“Beyond that region, again, flows a
river named Sailoda. On both its banks
there are bamboos of the Kicaka species
(which are hollow within and as such make
a rattling or whistling sound when the wind
passes through them). (37)
a नयन्ति ut तीरं सिद्धान् प्रत्यानयन्ति च।
Tt: कुरवस्तत्र कृतपुण्यप्रतिश्रया:॥ ३८॥

“Getting interlaced the bamboos
growing on both the banks enable the
aforesaid God-realized souls to reach the
opposite bank and return. “The land of the
Uttara (northern) Kurus, the abode of those
who have done meritorious deeds, stretches
on the bank of the aforesaid Sailoda river.

(38)
तत: काञ्चनपद्याभि: पद्मिनीभि: कृतोदका:।
नीलवैदूर्यपत्राढ्या नद्यस्तत्र सहस्रश:॥३९॥

“Further on, in that land there are
thousands of streams rich in lotus leaves,
dark-green as a cat’s-eye jewel, whose
waters are joined with lotus-ponds containing
golden lotuses. (39)

रक्तोत्पलवनैश्चात्र मण्डिताश्च हिरण्मयै:।
तरुणादित्यसंकाशा भान्ति AT जलाशया:॥४०॥
महार्हमणिपत्रैश्च काञ्चनप्रभकेसरै: |
नीलोत्पलवनैश्चित्रै: स देश: सर्वतो वृत:॥४१॥
निस्तुलाभिश्च मुक्ताभिर्मणिभिश्च महाधनै: |
उद्धूतपुलिनास्तत्र जातरूपैश्च निम्नगा:॥४२॥
