964

Ravana (the ten-headed monster), they say,
Pulastya too, (a mind-born) son of Brahma
( the grandfather of the entire creation) and
the foremost of ascetics, went back to the
realm of Brahma (the creator). (20)

एवं स रावण: प्राप्त: कार्तवीर्यात् प्रधर्षणम्।
पुलस्त्यवचनाच्चापि पुनर्मुक्तो महाबल:॥ २१॥

In this way the notorious and highly
powerful Ravana sustained defeat at the
hands of Arjuna (son of Krtavirya) and was
then also set at liberty once more at the
intercession of Pulastya. (21)

एवं बलिभ्यो बलिन: aba राघवनन्दन।
नावज्ञा fe परे कार्या य इच्छेच्छेय आत्मन:॥ २२॥

« VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

Thus, O delight of the scions of Raghu,
there are warriors mightier than the mighty;
hence by him who seeks his own welfare
no disrespect should be shown to his enemy.

(22)
wa: स राजा पिशिताशनानां
सद्रुखबाहॊरुपलश्या मैत्रीम् |
पुनर्नृपाणां कदनं चकार
चकार सर्वां पृथिवीं च दर्पात्॥ २३॥

Having secured the alliance of Arjuna
(the thousand-armed prince), the said king
of ogres (lit., flesh-eaters) resumed the

destruction of rulers of men and arrogantly
ranged over the entire globe. (23)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये उत्तरकाण्डे त्रयस्तिंश: AW: ॥ ३३ ॥

Thus ends Canto Thirty-three in the Uttarakanda of the glorious Ramayana of Valmiki,
the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

Canto XXXIV
Ravana’s humiliation at the hands of Vali; Ravana makes friends with him

अर्जुनेन विमुक्तस्तु रावणो राक्षसाधिप:।
चचार पृथिवीं सर्वामनिर्विण्णस्तथा कृत:॥१॥
Having been set free by Arjuna, and
thus rendered free from all causes of
despondency, Ravana, the suzerain lord of
ogres, for his part ranged over the entire
globe. (1)

राक्षसं वा मनुष्यं वा श्रृणुते यं बलाधिकम्।
रावणस्तं समासाद्य युद्धे ह्वयति दर्पित:॥२॥
Approaching whomsoever he heard of
as superior in might, irrespective of whether
he was an ogre or a human being, Ravana,
full of arrogance, challenged him to a duel.
(2)

ad: कदाचित् किष्किन्धां नगरीं वालिपालिताम्।
गत्वाऽऽह्वयति Gera वालिनं हेममालिनम्॥ ३॥

Making his way to the city of Kiskindha,

ruled over by Vali, on a certain day, he then
challenged Vali, who was adorned with a
gold necklace, to a duel. (3)

ततस्तु वानरामात्यास्तारस्तारापिता WT: I
उवाच वानरो वाक्यं युद्धप्रेप्सुमुपागतम्॥४॥

Thereupon Tara, a minister of Vali (the
chief of monkeys), Susena (father of Tara,
Vali’s consort), Angada (the Crown prince)
and Sugriva (the junior monkey chief) spoke
as follows to Ravana, who had come seeking
combat: (4)

राक्षसेन्द्र गतो वाली sed प्रतिबलो भवेत्।

कोऽन्य: प्रमुखत: स्थातुं तव शक्त: प्लवङ्गम: ॥ ५ ॥
“Vali, O ruler of ogres, who may be a

match for you, has gone out. What other

monkey is capable of standing before
you? (5)
