# YUDDHAKANDA #

इति प्रतिसमादिश्य पुत्रौ सीतां च राघव:।
इन्द्रलोकं विमानेन ययौ दशरथो नृप:॥ ३८॥
Having admonished as aforesaid his two
sons, Sri Rama and Laksmana, as well as
his daughter-in-law, Sita, King DaSaratha, a
(quondam) scion of Raghu, ascended in his
aerial car to heaven, the realm of Indra. (38)

विमानमास्थाय महानुभाव:
Bra च संहृष्टतनुर्नृपोत्तम:।

803

aaa पुत्रौ we सीतया च
जगाम देवप्रवरस्य लोकम्॥३९॥

Taking his seat in the aerial car and
bidding adieu to his two sons and Sita, too,
Dasaratha, the foremost of the rulers of
men, who had a majestic bearing, was
clothed with splendour and felt thrilled all
over with delight, ascended to the realm of
Indra, the foremost of gods. (39)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये युद्धकाण्डे एकोनविंशत्यधिकशततम: सर्ग: ॥ ११९ ॥

Thus ends Canto One hundred and nineteen in the Yuddhakanda of the glorious
Ramayana of Valmiki, the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

Canto CXX

At the instance of Sri Rama, Indra brings back to life all
the monkeys who had lost their life in combat,
the gods disperse and the simian army
enjoy their well-earned rest

प्रतिप्रयाते काकुत्स्थे महेन्द्र: पाकशासन:।
अब्रवीत् परमप्रीतो werd प्राञ्जलिं स्थितम्॥१॥
DaSaratha (a former scion of Kakutstha)
having returned to heaven, the mighty Indra,
the tamer of the demon Paka, who felt
supremely rejoiced, spoke as follows to Sri
Rama (a scion of Raghu), standing before
him with joined palms: (1)
अमोघं दर्शनं राम तवास्माकं नरर्षभ।
प्रीतियुक्ता: स्म तेन त्वं ब्रूहि यन्मनसेप्सितम्॥ 2
“Your sight of us, O Rama, a jewel
among human beings, must not go in vain.
We are pleased with you. Therefore, you speak
out, what is sought after by your mind.” (2)

एवमुक्तो महेन्द्रेण प्रसन्नेन महात्मना।
सुप्रसन्नमना हृष्टो वचनं We राघव:॥३॥
Highly gratified at heart when told thus

by the mighty and high-souled Indra, who
was pleased with him, Sri Rama, a scion of
Raghu, joyfully submitted as follows: (3)

यदि प्रीति: समुत्पन्ना मयि a विबुधेश्वर।

वक्ष्यामि कुरु मे सत्यं वचनं वदतां वर॥४॥
“If goodwill towards me has arisen in

you, O ruler of gods, | shall speak out my

mind to you. Pray, grant my prayer, O jewel
among the eloquent. (4)

मम हेतो: पराक्रान्ता ये Wa यमसादनम्।
a Wa जीवितं प्राप्य समुत्तिष्ठन्तु वानरा:॥५॥

“Gaining a fresh lease of life, may all
those monkeys who, having exhibited their
prowess in my cause, have reached the
abode of Death, duly rise again. (5)

मत्कृते विप्रयुक्ता ये पुत्रैर्दारैश्च वानरा:।
ar प्रीतमनस: सर्वान् द्रष्टुमिच्छामि मानद॥ ६॥
