554

acquire glory. If struck down, on the
other hand, we shall enjoy the riches of
Brahmaloka, the realm attained by heroes,
O monkeys! (25)

न कुम्भकर्ण: काकुत्स्थं Gea जीवन् गमिष्यति।
दीप्यमानमिवासाद्य पतङ्गो ज्वलनं यथा॥ २६॥

“Kumbhakarna will never escape alive
on coming face to face with Sri Rama
(a scion of Kakutstha) any more than a
moth on approaching a blazing fire. (26)

पलायनेन चोद्दिष्टा: प्राणान् रक्षामहे वयम्।
एकेन बहवो भग्ना यशो नाशं गमिष्यति॥ २७॥

“If, though distinguished in war, we
preserve our life by fleeing, when routed by
one, even though many, our glory will come
to an end.” (27)
द्रवमाणास्ततो वाक्यमूचु: शूरविगर्हितम्॥ २८॥

To the said heroic Angada, who was
adorned with armlets of gold, even while
he was speaking as _ aforesaid, the
monkeys, who were still fleeing, made the
following reply, which was condemned by
the valiant: (28)
pd A: Het घोरं कुम्भकर्णेन रक्षसा।

न स्थानकालो गच्छामो दयितं जीवितं fe A: २९॥

“Terrible havoc has been made of us by
the ogre Kumbhakarna. It is not the moment
to stay. We are going; for life is dear to us.”

(29)

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA +

`एतावदुक्त्वा वचनं ad a भेजिरे दिश:।

art भीमाक्षमायान्तं दृष्टवा वानरयूथपा:॥ ३०॥
Having uttered only so many words,

all the aforesaid commanders of monkey

troops scattered in all directions on seeing

the redoubtable ogre with frightful eyes

coming. (30)

द्रवमाणास्तु A वीरा अङ्गदेन बलीमुखा:।
सान्त्वनैश्चानुमानैश्च da: aa निवर्तिता:॥ ३१॥

Though still fleeing, all the aforesaid
heroic monkeys for their part were then
caused to return from where they were by
Angada by means of heartening words and
arguments too establishing the invincibility
of Sri Rama. (31)

प्रहर्षमुपनीताश्च वालिपुत्रेण धीमता।
आज्ञाप्रतीक्षास्तस्थुश्च सर्वे वानरयूथपा:॥ ३२॥
Nay, restored to their high spirits, by
the sagacious Angada (son of Vali), all the
(aforesaid) commanders of monkey troops
stood awaiting his command. (32)

कुमुदसुषेणगवाक्षरम्भतारा: ।
स्त्वरिततराभिमुखं रणं प्रयाता:॥ ३३॥
Rsabha, Sarabha, Mainda, Dhumra and
Nila, Kumuda, Susena, Gavaksa, Rambha
and Tara headed by Dwivida, Panasa
and Hanuman (son of the wind-god),
marched ahead to the battle-field with
quicker steps. (33)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये FERS षट्षष्टितम: सर्ग: ॥ ६६ Il

Thus ends Canto Sixty-six in the Yuddhakanda of the glorious Ramayana of

Valmiki, the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

