+ UTTARAKANDA +

तथा a राक्षसा: सर्वे विष्णुना प्रभविष्णुना।
द्रवन्ति द्राविताश्चान्ये शायिताश्च महीतले॥ २२॥

Like lions chased by (the fabulous
animal known as) Sarabha, like elephants
by a lion, like tigers by an elephant, like
leopards by a tiger, like dogs by a leopard,
like cats by a dog, like snakes by a cat, and
like rats by a snake, even so all the
Raksasas, chased by the mighty Visnu,
took to their heels while others lay stretched
on the ground. (20—22)

राक्षसानां सहस्राणि निहत्य मधुसूदन:।
वारिजं ware dad सुरराडिव॥ २३॥
Having killed thousands of Raksasas,

Madhusudana blew His conch tremendously
as Indra charges a cloud with water. (23)

नारायणशरत्रस्तं शङ्खनादसुविह्वलम्।
ययौ लङ्कामभिमुखं प्रभग्नं Wad बलम्॥२४॥
The worsted Raksasa forces, terrified
by Narayana’s arrows and unhinged by
the sound of the conch, fled towards Lanka.
(24)

प्रभग्ने राक्षसबले नारायणशराहते।
सुमाली शरवर्षेण निववार wr हरिम्॥२५॥
When the Raksasa forces were put to
flight while being struck by Narayana’s
arrows, Sumali blocked Narayana on the
battlefield by the shower of his arrows. (25)

स तु तं छादयामास नीहार sa भास्करम्।
राक्षसा: सत्त्वसम्पन्ना: पुनर्थैर्यं समादधु:॥ २६॥
He screened Him (Narayana) even as
mist does the sun. The powerful Raksasas

again mustered up courage. (26)
अथ सोऽभ्यपतद् Wars राक्षसो बलदर्पित:।
महानादं प्रकुर्वाणो राक्षसाञ्जीवयन्निव॥ २७॥

The enraged Raksas, arrogant by
reason of his strength, jumped forward
making a huge noise as if infusing new life
into the Raksasas. (27)

Shera लम्बाभरणं धुन्वन् करमिव fgu:
Tea राक्षसो wid सतडित्तोयदो यथा॥ २८॥

867

Raising his hand with an ornament
hanging about it and waving it even as an
elephant would wave its trunk, the elated
Raksasas roared like a cloud accompanied
by lightning. (28)
सुमालेर्नर्दतस्तस्य शिरो ज्वलितकुण्डलम्।
चिच्छेद यन्तुरश्वाश्च भ्रान्तास्तस्य तु रक्षस:॥ २९॥

Sri Hari cut off the head, adorned with
dazzling earrings, of the charioteer of the
roaring Sumali. The horses of the Raksasa
then ran wildly. (29)
wvauie urd: सुमाली राक्षसेश्वर:।
इन्द्रियाश्वै: परिभ्रान्तैर्धृतिहीनो यथा नर:॥ ३०॥

Like the unsteady man who is tossed
this side and that by his fickle sense-organs,
which may be likened to horses, Sumali, the
lord of the Raksasas, was drawn this side
and that by those horses running helter-
skelter. (30)

wm सुमालेरश्वैश्च रथे विष्णुरथं प्रति॥ ३१॥
माली चाभ्यद्रवद् युक्त: प्रगृह्य सशरं धनु:।
मालेर्धनुश्च्युता बाणा: कार्तस्वरविभूषिता:॥ ३२॥
विविशुर्हरिमासाद्य lst पत्ररथा sal
ala: शरै: सोऽथ मालिमुक्तै: सहस्रश:॥ ३३॥
चुक्षुभे न wr विष्णुर्जितेन्द्रिय इवाधिभि:।
अथ मौर्वीस्वनं eal भगवान् भूतभावन:॥ ३४॥
मालिनं प्रति बाणौघान् ससर्जासिगदाधर:।
a मालिदेहमासाद्य वज्रविद्युतप्रभा: शरा:॥ ३५॥
पिबन्ति रुधिरं तस्य नागा इव सुधारसम्।
मालिनं विमुखं कृत्वा शङ्खचक्रगदाधर:॥ ३६॥
विरथस्तु Wet Ta माली नक्तंचरोत्तम:॥ ३७॥
आपुप्लुवे गदापाणिर्गिर्यग्रादिव केसरी।
Tea गरुडेशानमीशानमिव चान्तक:॥ ३८॥
ललाटदेशेऽभ्यहनद् वज्रेणेन्द्रो यथाचलम्।
गदयाभिहतस्तेन मालिना गरुडो भृशम्॥ ३९॥
Wea Ha देवे मालिना West Ai vou
