* ARANYAKANDA «

was a hundred Yojanas (800 miles) long.
(19)
नेच्छता तात A हन्तुं तदा वीरेण रक्षित:।
रामस्य शरवेगेन निरस्तो भ्रान्तचेतन:॥ २०॥
पातितोऽहं तदा तेन गम्भीरे सागराम्भसि।
प्राप्य संज्ञां चिरात् तात लङ्कां प्रति गत: पुरीम्॥ २१॥
“Spared on that occasion by the hero,
who did not want to kill me, O dear one, and
flung by the impetus of Rama’s arrow at
that moment, | was hurled by him into the
deep waters, rendered unconscious.
Regaining consciousness after a long time,
| proceeded towards the city of Lanka, O
dear one ! (20-21)

एवमस्मि तदा मुक्त: सहायास्ते निपातिता:।
अकृतास्त्रेण रामेण बालेनाक्लिष्टकर्मणा॥ २२॥

“In this way | was let go at that time,
while my well-known companions were slain
by the child Rama of unwearied action, who
had not yet practised archery. (22)

तन्मया वार्यमाणस्तु यदि रामेण विग्रहम्।
करिष्यस्यापदां ant fad प्राप्य न शिष्यसि॥ २३॥

“If, therefore, you enter into hostilities
with Rama, though being dissuaded by me,
you will soon meet with a terrible catastrophe,
and shall not survive. (23)
क्रीडारतिविधिज्ञानां समाजोत्सवदर्शिनाम्।
रक्षसां चैव संतापमनर्थं चाहरिष्यसि॥ २४॥

“Nay, you will also bring suffering and
doom to the ogres, who know the technique
of sports and enjoyment and are fond of
enjoying social festivities. (24)
हर्म्यप्रासादसम्बाधां नानारत्नविभूषिताम्।
द्रक्ष्यसि त्वं पुरीं लङ्कां विनष्टां मैथिलीकृते॥ २७५ ॥

“You will see the city of Lanka, thick
with mansions and palaces and adorned
with jewels of every description, laid waste
on account of Sita, the princess of Mithila.

(25)
अकुर्वन्तोऽपि पापानि शुचय: पापसंश्रयात्।
परपापैर्विनश्यन्ति मत्स्या नागह्रदे यथा॥ २६॥

815

“Though not committing sins
themselves, even innocent people perish
because of others’ sins through contact
with the sinful, even like the fish living in a
snake-infested lake. (26)
दिव्यचन्दनदिग्धाङ्गान् दिव्याभरणभूषितान्।
द्रक्ष्यस्यभिहतान् भूमौ तव दोषात् तु राक्षसान्॥ २७॥

“You will see ogres with their bodies
besmeared with celestial sandal-paste as
well as those adorned with heavenly
ornaments, lying killed on the ground for
your fault. (27)

wean सदारांश्च दश faxadt दिश:।
हतशेषानशरणान् द्रक्ष्यसि त्वं निशाचरान्॥ २८॥

“You will also see night-stalkers, other
than those killed in action, fleeing without a
protector in all directions, their wives having
been borne away, and others with their
wives. (28)

शरजालपरिक्षिप्तामग्निज्वालासमाव्रृताम् ।
प्रदग्धभवनां लङ्कां द्रक्ष्यसि त्वमसंशयम्॥२९॥
“You will without doubt see Lanka
screened with a network of arrows and
surrounded with flames with its houses
(consequently) reduced to ashes. (29)

परदाराभिमर्शात् तु नान्यत् पापतरं महत्।
प्रमदानां सहस्राणि तव राजन् परिग्रहे॥ ३०॥
“Surely there is no greater sin than
consorting with another's wife. There are
thousands of young ladies in your
gynaeceum, O king ! (30)
भव स्वदारनिरत: स्वकुलं ta राक्षसान्।
मानं वृद्धिं च राज्यं च जीवितं चेष्टमात्मन: 11 ३१॥
“Remain devoted to your own wives
and preserve your race, as well as the

ogres, as also your honour, prosperity,
kingdom and your dear life. (31)

कलत्राणि च सौम्यानि मित्रवर्गं तथैव च।
यदीच्छसि चिरं भोक्तुं मा par रामविप्रियम्॥ ३२॥

“Nay, if you wish to enjoy for long your
charming wives as also the company of
