614

“From that mountain you will be able to
see the golden and very lofty Rsabha
mountain, the foremost of mountains, and
(climbing) on that mountain you will be able
to behold the peak of Mount Kailasa, O
exterminator of your enemies! (30)

wa: शिखरयोर्मध्ये प्रदीप्तमतुलप्रभम्।
सर्वौषधियुतं वीर द्रक्ष्यस्योषधिपर्वतम्॥ ३१॥

“Between the two aforesaid peaks, O
gallant monkey, you will be able to perceive
a flaming mountain covered with medicinal
herbs, casting a matchless splendour and
abounding in all kinds of herbs. (31)

तस्य वानरशार्दूल Uda AST सम्भवा:।
द्रक्ष्यस्योषधयो दीप्ता दीपयन्तीर्दिशो earn ३२॥
मृतसञ्जीवनीं चैव विशल्यकरणीमपि।
सुवर्णकरणीं wa संधानीं च महौषधीम्॥ ३३॥

“Growing on the summit of that mountain,
O tiger among monkeys, you will discover
four flaming herbs illuminating all the ten
directions, viz., (1) Mrtasarnjivani (capable
of restoring the dead to life) and also
(2) Visalyakarani (capable of extracting
weapons and healing all wounds inflicted by
weapons), as well as (3) Suvarnakarani
(restoring the body to its original complexion)
and (4) the great herb Sandhani (capable
of joining severed limbs or fractured
bones). (32-33)

ता: wat हनुमन् Ta क्षिप्रमागन्तुमर्हसि।
आश्वासय हरीन् प्राणैर्योज्य गन्धवहात्मज॥ ३४॥
“Taking all the four aforesaid herbs, O
Hanuman, you ought to come back with all
speed. Nay, reassure the monkeys after
uniting them back with life, O offspring of
the wind-god!” (34)

श्रुत्वा जाम्बवतो वाक्यं हनूमान् मारुतात्मज:।
आपूर्यत बलोद्धर्षैर्वायुवेगैरिवार्णव: ॥ ३५ ॥

Hearing the advice of Jambavan,
Hanuman, an offspring of the wind-god, was

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA +

infused with tremendous power even as
the ocean heaves with the force of the
wind. (35)

स पर्वततटाग्रस्थ: पीडयन् पर्वतोत्तमम्।
हनूमान् दृश्यते वीरो द्वितीय ga पर्वत:॥ ३६॥
Standing on the summit of the
TrikUta mountain, pressing the foremost of
mountains under his feet, the aforesaid
hero, Hanuman, looked like a second
mountain. (36)

हरिपादविनिर्भग्नो निषसाद स पर्वत:।

न शशाक तदात्मानं ae भृशनिपीडित:॥ ३७॥
Trodden down by the monkey’s feet,

the said mountain sank. Nay, violently

pressed by them, it could no longer stand

its weight. (37)

तस्य पेतुर्नगा भूमौ हरिवेगाच्च जज्वलु:।
yet च and पीडितस्य हनूमता॥ ३८॥

The trees standing on the mountain
pressed by Hanuman fell to the ground,
while some caught fire due to the impetuosity
of the monkey, and its peaks too got
shattered. (38)

तस्मिन् सम्पीड्यमाने तु भग्नद्रुमशिलातले।
न ङेकुर्वानरा: स्थातुं घूर्णमाने नगोत्तमे॥ ३९॥
The monkeys for their part could no
longer stand on that prince of mountains,
which began to reel while being pressed
hard by Hanuman so that the trees standing
on it as well as its rocks began to be
shattered. (39)

सा घूर्णितमहाद्वारा प्प्रभग्नगृहगोपुरा।
लङ्का त्रासाकुला Wat प्रनृत्तेवाभवत् तदा॥४०॥

Stricken with panic, the city of Lanka,
whose mighty gates were shaken and whose
dwellings and main gates were shattered,
appeared to be dancing at night on that
occasion. (40)

पृथिवीधरसंकाशो friter पृथिवीधरम्।
पृथिवीं क्षोभयामास सार्णवां मारुतात्मज:॥४१॥
