* AYODHYAKANDA +

661

चतुरधिकशततम: सर्ग:
Canto CIV

Accompanied by Kausalya and others, Sage Vasistha proceeds to the hermitage
of Sri Rama. Showing to her co-wives the lumps of the pulp of the
Ingudi fruit offered to the spirit of his deceased father by Sri Rama
on blades of KuSa grass placed with their ends pointing to the
south along the bank of the Mandakini on the way, Kausalya
grieves for her deceased husband. Reaching the hermitage,
Kausalya and others see the two brothers, Sri Rama
and Laksmana, fall at their feet. Kausalya bewails
the lot of Sita when the latter falls at her feet.

Bowing down at the feet of his preceptor, Sri
Rama takes his seat. Accompanied by the

counsellors, Bharata too sits nearby

वसिष्ठ: Ud: कृत्वा दारान् दशरथस्य च।
अभिचक्राम तं देशं रामदर्शनतर्षित:॥१॥
Placing the widows of King Dasaratha
in the forefront, Vasistha, who was feeling
athirst for the sight of Sri Rama, proceeded
to that region where Sri Rama was
sojourning. (1)

राजपत्न्यश्च गच्छन्त्यो We मन्दाकिनीं प्रति।
ददरृशुस्तत्र तत् तीर्थं रामलक्ष्मणसेवितम्॥ २॥

Making their way with slow paces
towards the river Mandakini the dowager
queens saw there a descent (suitable for
bathing etc.) to the river resorted to by Sri
Rama and Laksmana. (2)

कौसल्या बाष्पपूर्णेन मुखेन परिशुष्यता।
सुमित्रामब्रवीद् dat याश्चान्या राजयोषित:॥ ३॥
With a withering face bathed in tears,
Kausalya spoke as follows to the afflicted
Sumitra and the other queens that were
present there : (3)
se तेषामनाथानां क्लिष्टमक्लिष्टकर्मणाम्।
at प्राक्कलनं तीर्थं ये a निर्विषयीकृता:॥४॥
“Here is the descent selected for the
first time by those fatherless children, who
have been expelled from their kingdom and

who are now living a hard life in the forest,
though unwearied in action. (4)

इत: सुमित्रे पुत्रस्ते सदा जलमतन्दित:।
wa atta सौमित्रिर्मम पुत्रस्य कारणात्॥५॥
“Along this route, 0 Sumitra, does your
elder son, Laksmana, ever unweariedly fetch
water himself for the sake of my son (his
elder brother). (5)
जघन्यमपि ते पुत्र: कृतवान् न तु गर्हित:।
भ्रातुर्यदर्थरहितं wd aq गर्हितं गुणै:।॥६॥
“Your son has not been subjected to
any reproach, even though he has done
menial service to his elder brother. All that
which is devoid of use to one’s elder brother,
who is held to be on a par with one’s father,
is censured by men possessed of noble
qualities. (6)
अद्यायमपि ते Ua: क्लेशानामतथोचित:।
नीचानर्थसमाचारं सज्जं कर्म प्रमुञ्चतु॥७॥
“Let this son of yours, too, who is
undeserving of the hardships, which are
being experienced by him, totally give up
the work in hand whose execution is painful
and fit for menials, now that his elder brother
is soon returning to Ayodhya.” (7)
