* AYODHYAKANDA +

gaze on the spot where a column of smoke
was visible. (26)

व्यवस्थिता या भरतेन सा चमू-
र्निरीक्षमाणापि च भूमिमग्रत:।
aya हृष्टा नचिरेण जानती
प्रियस्य रामस्य समागमं तदा॥ २७॥

627

Even though perceiving the place
(where Sri Rama was supposed to be)
ahead, the aforesaid army, which was held
up on that spot by Bharata, felt rejoiced
even then anticipating (as they did) their
meeting with their beloved Rama at no distant
hour. (27)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्येऽयोध्याकाण्डे

त्रिनवतितम:

सर्ग: ॥ ९३ ॥

Thus ends Canto Ninety-three in the Ayodhyakanda of the glorious Ramayana of
Valmiki, the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

Canto XCIV

Diverting his own mind and seeking to please Sita, Sri Rama gives a graphic
description of Citrakuta, stressing the special features

दीर्घकालोषितस्तस्मिन् गिरौ गिरिवरप्रिय:।
वैदेह्या: प्रियमाकांक्षन् स्वं च चित्तं विलोभयन्॥ १॥

अथ दाशरथिश्चित्रॆ चित्रकूटमदर्शयत्।
भार्याममरसंकाश: शचीमिव पुरंदर:॥२॥
Seeking to please Sita, a princess of
the Videha territory, and diverting his own
mind, Sri Rama, son of Dagaratha, who
was fond of excellent mountains and had
now lived on that mountain, Citrakuta, for a
long time covering a period of about three
months, nay, who shone brightly as a god,
showed to his spouse the beauties of the
wonderful Citrakuta, deservedly so-called,
consisting as it did of many wonders, and
Indra, the destroyer of strongholds, would
show the beauties of the Nandana grove to
Saci, his consort : (1-2)

न राज्यभ्रंशनं wt न सुहृद्धिर्विनाभव:।
मनो मे aad gear रमणीयमिमं गिरिम्॥ ३॥

“On seeing this delightful hill neither
loss of sovereignty nor separation from my
near and dear ones vexes my mind, O
good lady ! (3)

पश्येममचलं भद्रे नानाद्बिजगणायुतम्।
fret: खमिवोद्विद्धैर्धातुमद्धिर्विभूषितम्॥४॥
“Behold this mountain, inhabited by
flocks of birds of every description, and
adorned with peaks rich in minerals, that
stand piercing the skies, as it were, O
blessed one! (4)

केचिद् रजतसंकाशा: केचित् क्षतजसंनिभा:।
पीतमाञ्जिष्ठवर्णाश्च केचिन्मणिवरप्रभा: ॥ ५ ॥
पुष्पार्ककेतकाभाश्च केचिज्ज्योतीरसप्रभा:।
विराजन्तेऽचलेन्द्रस्य देशा धातुविभूषिता:॥६॥

“Adorned with minerals, parts of this
king of mountains shine brightly, some
glittering like silver, some blood-red, some
yellowish, some red as madder, some
sparkling like the foremost of gems, some
possessing the lustre of topaz and crystal
and the hue of the Ketaka flower and others
shinning like stars and mercury. (5-6)

Arpanet: ।
अदुष्टैर्भात्ययं शैलो बहुपक्षिसमाकुल:॥७॥

“Teeming with herds of deer of every
