424

are by nature and your mind being given to
piety, O darling, cannot be reversed. (32)

ata त्विदानीं writ oa मा गच्छ सर्वथा।
एकाहं दर्शनेनापि साधु तावच्चराम्यहम्॥ ३३॥
“Pray, do not leave in any case today
and stay at least for this night with me, so
that | may live happily by your sight at least
for a day. (33)
मातरं मां च सम्पश्यन् वसेमामद्य शर्वरीम्।
तर्पित: सर्वकामैस्त्वं Va: काल्ये साधयिष्यसि।। ३४॥

“Looking at your mother and myself,
stay on the coming night today. Having
been gratified by me with all desired objects
you may leave the very next morning. (34)

gat feat ut सर्वथा waa fra
त्वया fe मत्परियार्थं तु वनमेवमुपाश्रितम्॥३५॥

“Something which is in every respect
hard to accomplish for others is being done
by you, my beloved son, since it is for my
sake that the forest is thus being resorted
to by you, O scion of Raghu! (35)

न चैतन्मे ft at शपे सत्येन राघव।
छन्नया चलितस्त्वस्मि fora भस्माग्निकल्पया it ३६ ।।

“But | swear by my faith, my son : your
exile is not agreeable to me, O Rama! On
the other hand, | have been deflected from
my course by Kaikeyi, who concealed her
intentions and thus resembled a fire covered
with ashes. (36)

वञ्चना या तु लब्धा मे at त्वं निस्तर्तुमिच्छसि।
अनया वृत्तसादिन्या कैकेय्याभिप्रचोदित:॥ ३७॥
“How noble of you that egged on by
Kaikeyi, who has cast to the winds the
time-honoured family custom of a kingdom
being inherited by the eldest son, you seek
to redeem a pledge which was fraudulently
extracted from me ! (37)

न चैतदाश्चर्यतमं यत् त्वं ज्येष्ठ: सुतो मम।
अपानृतकथं पुत्र पितरं कर्तुमिच्छसि॥ ३८॥

“It is no great wonder, my child, that
you, my seniormost son, both in point of

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

age and virtue, should seek to make your
father free from mendacity.” (38)

अथ रामस्तदा श्रुत्वा पितुरार्तस्य भाषितम्।
लक्ष्मणेन सह wat दीनो वचनमब्रवीत्॥ ३९॥
Distressed to hear on that occasion
the request of his afflicted father, Sri Rama,
alongwith his younger brother, Laksmana,

submitted as follows : (39)
प्राप्स्यामि यानद्य गुणान् को मे श्वस्तान् प्रदास्यति।
अपक्रमणमेवातर Adee वृणे॥४०॥

“Tomorrow who will offer me the
delicacies which | hope to get today? |
should therefore only prefer to get away
in lieu of all the enjoyments you can offer.

(40)

sa सराष्टा सजना धनधान्यसमाकुला।
मया विसृष्टा वसुधा भरताय प्रदीयताम्॥४१॥

“Relinquished by me, this earth including
the state of Kosala and its people and full of
riches and foodgrains, may be made over
to Bharata. (41)

वनवासकृता बुद्धिर्न च Ase चलिष्यति।
यस्तु युद्धे वरो दत्त: कैकेय्यै वरद त्वया॥४२॥
dad निखिलेनैव सत्यस्त्वं भव पार्थिव।
ae fest भवतो यथोक्तमनुपालयन्॥४३॥
चतुर्दश समा at वने वनचरै: सह।
मा विमर्शो वसुमती भरताय प्रदीयताम्॥४४॥

“My resolution to dwell in the forest
shall in no case be shaken. The boon which
was granted by you on the battlefield in
favour of Kaikeyi, O bestower of boons,
may, therefore, be implemented in toto at all
events, and thus vindicate you your
truthfulness, O ruler of the earth! Carrying
out your aforesaid command | shall dwell
in the forest with ascetics for fourteen
years. Let there be no demur on your part.
The earth may be made over to Bharata.

(42—44)
नहि मे कांक्षितं राज्यं सुखमात्मनि वा प्रियम्।
यथानिदेशं md A तवैव रघुनन्दन॥४५॥
