1114

Many a thousand years passed while
Sri Rama upraised the course of Dharma

« VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

(religion) by performing various sacrifices.
(20)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये उत्तरकाण्डे एकोनशशततम: सर्ग: ॥ ९९ ॥

Thus ends Canto Ninety-nine in the Uttarakanda of the glorious Ramayana of Valmiki,
the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

Mada: at:
Canto C

Gargya comes with a token gift of pleasure to SH Rama; Bharata
proceeds towards the territory of the Gandharvas with
his sons and army on the order of Sri Rama

PAA AM कालस्य युधाजित् केकयो TT: ।
स्वगुरुं प्रेषयामास राघवाय महात्मने॥१॥
गार्ग्यमङ्गिस: Ut ब्रह्मर्षिममितप्रभम्।
wt चाश्वसहस्राणि प्रीतिदानमनुत्तमम्॥२॥
कम्बलानि च रत्नानि चित्रवस्त्रमथोत्तमम्।
रामाय प्रददौ राजा शुभान्याभरणानि च॥३॥

After some time, the King of Kekaya,
Yudhajit, sent his preceptor, Brahmana
Gargya, the son of Angira, possessed of
inimitable lustre to Sri Rama, the noble
descendant of Raghu. The King presented
a gift of ten thousand horses as a token of
affection and also blankets and precious
gems, and garments of various kinds and
brilliant ornaments. (1—8)

Tra सम्पूजयामास यथा शक्रो बहस्पतिम्।।५।।

Having heard that the great sage
Gargya had come, bringing with him the rich
gifts sent by the maternal uncle, Asvapati,
Sri Rama, alongwith his brothers, welcomed
Gargya at a distance of two miles in advance,
and honoured Gargya as Indra honours
Brhaspati. (4-5)

तथा सम्पूज्य तमृषिं aq धनं ulate च।
Gea werd सर्वं कुशलं मातुलस्य ANI
किमाह मातुलो वाक्यं यदर्थं भगवानिह॥७॥
Wat वाक्यविदां श्रेष्ठ: साक्षादिव बृहस्पति: |
रामस्य भाषितं श्रुत्वा महर्षि: कार्यविस्तरम्॥८॥
वक्तुमद्भुतसंकाशां राघवायोपचक्रमे।
मातुलस्ते महाबाहो वाक्यमाह नरर्षभ:॥९॥
युधाजित् प्रीतिसंयुक्तं seat यदि रोचते।
अयं गन्धर्वविषय: फलमूलोपशोभित:॥१०॥
सिन्धोरुभयत: Urge देश: परमशोभन:।
तं च रक्षन्ति गन्धर्वा: सायुधा युद्धकोविदा:॥ ११॥
शैलूषस्य सुता ate तिस्त्र: कोट्यो महाबला:।
aM विनिर्जित्य काकुत्स्थ गन्धर्वनगरं शुभम्॥ १२॥
निवेशय महाबाहो स्वे पुरे सुसमाहिते।
अन्यस्य न गतिस्तत्र देश: परमशोभन:।
रोचतां a महाबाहो नाहं त्वामहितं वदे॥१३॥
Thus having honoured that sage and
accepting the gifts, he enquired of the welfare
of his maternal uncle. Sri Rama asked the
holy one when he had seated himself thus:
‘What has my maternal uncle said for which
O Venerable Sir, best among the knowers
of Sastras, like Brhaspti himself, you have
come.’ Having heard the words of Sri Rama,
