३6

Vedic Mantras) and spirits too fell a prey to
panic, seized as they were with the
apprehension of their falling. (123)

तत: क्रुद्ध: सहस्राक्ष: पर्वतानां शतक्रतु:।
पक्षांश्चिच्छेद वज्रेण Ad: शतसहस्रश:॥ १२४॥

“Provoked to anger by their fear, Indra
(who is presupposed to have performed
a hundred Aswamedha sacrifices in his
previous existences as a condition precedent
for attaining that position) thereupon lopped
off with his thunderbolt the wings of mountains
in hundreds of thousands. (124)

स मामुपगत: क्रुद्धो वज्रमुद्यम्य देवराट्।
ततोऽहं सहसा faa: श्वचसनेन महात्मना॥ १२५ I
अस्मिँल्लवणतोये च प्रक्षिप्त: प्लवगोत्तम।
गुप्तपक्ष: समग्रश्च da पित्राभिरक्षित:॥ १२६॥
“Lifting up his thunderbolt in anger, the
aforesaid Indra, the ruler of gods, approached
me too; |, however, was thereupon suddenly
tossed into the sky by the high-souled wind-
god and then violently cast into this salty
sea. In this way my wings were preserved;
nay, | was saved with all my being by your
father, O jewel among monkeys ! (125-126)

ततोऽहं मानयामि cat मान्योऽसि मम मारुते।
त्वया ममैष सम्बन्ध: कपिमुख्य महागुण:॥ १२७॥

“Therefore, do | esteem you and you
are worthy of honour to me, O son of the
wind-god ! This bond of mine with you in the
shape of your being my benefactor’s son is
full of great potentialities, O leader of
monkeys ! (127)

अस्मिन्नेवंगते aad सागरस्य aa ai
प्रीतिं प्रीतमना: ad त्वमर्हसि महामते॥ १२८ ॥
“This long awaited and welcome
opportunity of repaying my debt to your
father having thus fortunately arrived, you
ought to oblige the deity presiding over the
ocean as well as myself with a glad heart,
O highly talented Hanuman ! (128)

श्रमं मोक्षय ut च गृहाण हरिसत्तम।
प्रीतिं च मम मान्यस्य प्रीतोऽस्मि तव दर्शनात्॥ १२९॥

« VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

“Therefore, pray, relieve your fatigue
and accept my hospitality as well as my
affection, O jewel among the monkeys! |
am pleased to see you, worthy of honour as
you are to me.” (129)

wage: कपिश्रेष्ठस्तं नगोत्तममब्रवीत्।
प्रीतोऽस्मि कृतमातिथ्यं मन्युरेषोऽपनीयताम्॥ १३० ॥

Spoken to as above by Mainaka,
Hanuman, the foremost of monkeys, replied
as follows to the aforesaid jewel among
mountains: “| am pleased with you and
homage has been done by you in the form
of kind words. Let this sad thought that your
hospitality has not been accepted by me be
banished from your mind. (130)

त्वरते कार्यकालो A अहश्चाप्यतिवर्तते।
प्रतिज्ञा च मया दत्ता न स्थातव्यमिहान्तरा॥ १३१॥
“The time allotted to my duty of leaping
across the sea and tracing out Sita is
hastening me. The day too is passing. Nay,
plighted word has been given by me to my
fellow monkeys to the effect that | would not
tarry here midway.” (131)

BARA पाणिना शैलमालभ्य हरिपुङ्खव:।
जगामाकाशमाविश्य वीर्यवान् प्रहसन्निव॥ १३२॥

Saying so and touching the mountain
with his hand as a token of respect and
friendship, nay, rising to the skies, the valiant
Hanuman, the foremost of monkeys, sped

on as though heartily laughing. (132)
स पर्वतसमुद्राभ्यां बहुमानादवेक्षित:।
पूजितश्चोपपन्नाभिराशीर्भिरभिनन्दित:र ॥१३३॥

He was on that occasion regarded with
great esteem, adored and cheered with
suitable benedictions by the deities presiding
over the mountain and the ocean both. (133)

अथोर्ध्व दूरमागत्य हित्वा शैलमहार्णवौ।

faq: पन्थानमासाद्य जगाम विमलेऽम्बरे॥ १३४॥
Then, rising high, nay, leaving the

mountain as well as the ocean, far below

and reaching the path of the wind (i.e., his
