680

wrong path opposed to the Vedic path, nay,
who is moving about in the world with such
an ideology conforming to the doctrine of the
atheistic Carvaka, who believes only in the
world of senses, as has been set forth in
your foregoing speech. (33)
यथा fe an: स तथा हि बुद्ध-
स्तथागतं नास्तिकमत्र विद्धि।
तस्माद्धि य: शक्यतम: प्रजानां
स नास्तिके नाभिमुखो बुध: स्यात्॥ ३४॥
“It is a well-known fact that a follower
of Buddha condemning the Vedas deserves
to be punished precisely in the same way
as a thief inasmuch as a heretic robs people
of their faith; and know an unbeliever (a
follower of the Carvaka or materialistic school
of philosophy) to be on a par with a Bauddha.
Therefore, among such unbelievers he who
is most tameable should undoubtedly be so
punished in the interest of the people; in no
other case should a wise man even stand
face to face with an unbeliever, but should
shun him. (34)
त्वत्तो जना: पूर्वतरे द्विजाश्च
शुभानि कर्माणि बहूनि चक्रु:।
छित्त्वा सदेमं च परं च लोकं
aang द्विजा: स्वस्ति कृतं हुतं च ।। ३५ Ul
“Men that lived before you, as well as
Brahmanas ever performed numerous blessed
deeds in obedience to the injunctions of the
Vedas giving up all hopes of reward in this
world as well as in the next. Hence following
the injunctions of the Vedas, Brahmanas
pursue harmlessness, truthfulness and other
virtues, perform noble deeds such as practice
of austerities, making gifts, doing a good turn
to others and so on and offer oblations into
the sacred fire. (35)
धर्मे रता: सत्पुरुषै: समेता-
स्तेजस्विनो दानगुणप्रधाना:।
अहिंसका वीतमलाश्च लोके
भवन्ति पूज्या मुनय: प्रधाना:॥ ३६॥

Foremost sages, like Vasistha, who

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

are devoted to righteousness, remain in
communion with good men, are endowed
with spiritual glory, have the virtue of
munificence predominant in them, practise
harmlessness and are entirely free from
impurity of all kinds become worthy of
adoration in the world.” (36)
TH महात्मानमदीनसत्त्वम्।

sara पथ्यं पुनरास्तिकं च
सत्यं aa: सानुनयं च fay: i ३७॥
To the high-souled Sri Rama, who never
felt dejected at heart and was speaking
angrily as above, the Brahmana Jabali now
politely addressed the following wholesome
and truthful words, which showed his belief
in the authority of the Vedas, the otherworld
and so on: (37)

ननास्तिकोऽहं न च नास्ति किंचन।

समीक्ष्य कालं पुनरास्तिकोऽभवं

भवेय काले पुनरेव नास्तिक:॥ ३८॥

“| do not as a rule repeat the words of
unbelievers nor am | an unbeliever at heart
nor is it a fact that nothing exists beyond
this visible universe. Perceiving the time
opportune for it, now that | find you bent on
implementing the pledge given to your father,
| have become a believer once more and to
suit the exigencies of the moment, may
again pose as an unbeliever when the time
comes for it. (38)

स चापि कालोऽयमुपागत: शनै-
SOT मया नास्तिकवागुदीरिता।
निवर्तनार्थं तव राम कारणात्
प्रसादनार्थं च मयैतदीरितम्॥ ३९॥
“That time too had now come when a
heretical speech was slowly made by me in
order to deflect you from your purpose of
remaining in exile in the forest and also from

another motive viz., to establish your
reputation as a great believer by evoking
