* SUNDARAKANDA +

Honoured by the two, viz., Jambavan
and Angada, and propitiated by the other
monkeys, the valiant Hanuman, who merited
such honourable welcome, submitted in brief
that the godlike lady had been seen by him.

(36)
निषसाद च हस्तेन गृहीत्वा वालिन: सुतम्।
रमणीये वनोद्देशे महेन्द्रस्य गिरेस्तदा॥३७॥

Nay, taking Angada (Vali’s son) by the
hand, he then sat down in a lovely part of
the woodland on the Mahendra mountain. (37)

हनूमानब्रवीत् पृष्टस्तदा तान् वानरर्षभान्।
अशोकवनिकासंस्था FEET सा जनकात्मजा॥ ३८ ॥
रक्ष्यमाणा सुघोराभी राक्षसीभिरनिन्दिता।
एकवेणीधरा बाला रामदर्शनलालसा॥३९॥
उपवासपरिश्रान्ता मलिना जटिला कृशा।

ततो दृष्टेति वचनं महार्थममृतोपमम्॥४०॥
निशम्य ured: aa मुदिता वानराभवन्।
क्ष्वेडन्त्यन्ये नदन्त्यन्ये गर्जन्त्यन्ये महाबला:॥४१॥
ae: किलकिलामन्ये प्रतिगर्जन्ति चापरे।
केचिदुच्छितलाङ्गूला: प्रहृष्टा: कपिकुञ्जरा: iS? I
अपरे तु हनूमन्तं श्रीमन्तं वानरोत्तमम्॥४३॥
आप्लुत्य गिरिशृङ्गेषु संस्पृशन्ति स्म हर्षिता:।
उक्कतवाक्यं हनूमन्तमङ्गदस्तु तदाब्रवीत्॥४४॥
सर्वेषां हरिवीराणां मध्ये वाचमनुत्तमाम्।
ara वीर्ये न ते कश्चित् समो वानर विद्यते॥ ४५ ॥
यदवप्लुत्य विस्तीर्णं art पुनरागत:।
जीवितस्य प्रदाता नस्त्वमेको वानरोत्तम॥४६॥
Enquired by them, Hanuman then told
those jewels among the monkeys that Sita,
Janaka’s daughter, had been seen by him
dwelling in the Asoka grove; that the young
lady, who was beyond reproach, was being
guarded by exceedingly dreadful ogresses,
wore a single plait of hair as a mark of
desolation and sighed for Sri Rama’s sight,
and that she had been thoroughly worn out
through fasting, wore matted locks, and was
emaciated and stained with dust. All the
monkeys thereupon felt rejoiced to hear the

249

nectar-like report of Hanuman to the effect
that Sita had been seen by him, which was
full of great significance. Some roared like
lions, others raised jubilanteries, while still
other monkeys, who were endowed with
extraordinary might, bellowed like bulls.
Others again raised shouts expressive of
joy, while yet others roared in return. With
their tails lifted up some _ elephant-like
monkeys, who felt overjoyed, waved their
thick long curled tails. Bounding from the
peaks of the mountain, full of joy, others for
their part embraced the glorious Hanuman,
the foremost of monkeys. In the midst of all
monkey heroes, Angada for his part then
paid the following most excellent compliment
to Hanuman, who had spoken as above:
“No one stands equal to you, O Hanuman,
in courage or valour, since having leapt
across the extensive sea, you have come
back. You are the sole life-giver to us, O
jewel among the monkeys ! (38—46)

त्वत्प्रसादात् समेष्याम: सिद्धार्था राघवेण FI
अहो स्वामिनि ते भक्तिरहो वीर्यमहो धृति: u wei

“Through your grace alone shall we be
united with Sri Rama, a scion of Raghu, our
purpose in the shape of Sita’s discovery
having been accomplished. Wonderful is your
devotion to your master, amazing is your
valour and marvellous your firmness. (47)

दिष्ट्या दृष्टा त्वया देवी रामपत्नी यशस्विनी।
दिष्ट्या त्यक्ष्यति काकुत्स्थ: vith सीतावियोगजम्॥ ४८ ।।

“Luckily has the godlike and illustrious
consort of Sri Rama been seen by you and
luckily will Sri Rama, a scion of Kakutstha,
shed his grief born of separation from Sita.”

(48)
ततोऽङ्गदं हनूमन्तं जाम्बवन्तं च वानरा:।
परिवार्य प्रमुदिता भेजिरे विपुला: शिला:॥४९॥

Surrounding Angada, Hanuman and
Jambavan, and full of great joy, the monkeys,

thereupon betook themselves to extensive
rocks. (49)
