536

संरक्तनयन: क्रोधाद् रावणं वाक्यमब्रवीत्।
किमर्थमहमादृत्य त्वया राजन् प्रबोधित:॥११॥

Kumbhakarna occupied a_ splendid,
heavenly, excellent seat. Having taken up
his position on that seat, the said
Kumbhakarna, who was endowed with
extraordinary might, submitted as follows
to Ravana, his eyes blood-red with anger:
“What for have | been awakened by you
with effort, O king? (10-11)
शंस कस्माद् भयं ASA को वा प्रेतो भविष्यति।
भ्रातरं WAT: क्रुद्धं कुम्भकर्णमवस्थितम्॥ १२॥
रोषेण uaa नेत्राभ्यां वाक्यमब्रवीत्।
अद्य A सुमहान् काल: शयानस्य महाबल॥ १३॥
सुषुप्तस्त्वं न जानीषे मम रामकृतं भयम्।
wa दाशरथि: श्रीमान् सुग्रीवसहितो बली॥ १४॥
समुद्रं लङ्घयित्वा तु मूलं न: परिकृन्तति।
हन्त पश्यस्व लङ्कायां वनान्युपवनानि च॥१५॥
सेतुना सुखमागत्य वानरैकार्णवं कृतम्।

ये राक्षसा मुख्यतमा हतास्ते वानरैर्युधि॥ १६॥

“Say from whom springs your fear and
who is going to die (at my hands today).” His
eyes rolling through indignation, Ravana
spoke as follows to his younger brother,
Kumbhakarna, firmly seated by his side: “A
very long time has rolled past you till now,
while you remained asleep, O brother,
endowed with extraordinary might! Having
remained buried in deep slumber, you could
not know of the fear that has been engendered
for me by Rama. Having crossed the sea,
this glorious and mighty son of Dasaratha,
accompanied by Sugriva, for his part is cutting
at our very roots. Alas! see how after arriving
with ease in Lanka, the groves and gardens
in Lanka have been converted into a single
sea of monkeys. Those ogres who were the
foremost leaders have been killed by the
monkeys in combat. (12—16)
वानराणां क्षयं ag न पश्यामि कथंचन।

न चापि वानरा युद्धे जितपूर्वा: कदाचन॥ vy tl

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA +

“| do not, however, envisage the
destruction of the monkeys on the battlefield
in anyway. Nor have the monkeys been
conquered at any time before. (17)

तदेतद् भयमुत्पन्नं त्रायस्वेह महाबल।
नाशय त्वमिमानद्य तदर्थं बोधितो भवान्॥१८॥

“Such is the fear engendered by Rama.
Save us at this juncture, O brother, endowed
with extraordinary might! You destroy them
today. For this you have been awakened.

(18)
सर्वक्षपितकोशं च स त्वमभ्युपपद्य माम्।
त्रायस्वेमां पुरीं लङ्कां बालव्रद्धावशेषिताम्॥१९॥

“Nay, obliging me, whose resources
have been totally exhausted, save you as
such this city of Lanka, in which children
and the aged alone have been left. (19)

भ्रातुरर्थे महाबाहो Be कर्म सुदुष्करम्।
wad नोक्तपूर्वो fe भ्राता कश्चित् ATI २०॥
“For the sake of your brother myself,
O mighty-armed one, accomplish a feat
which is very difficult to accomplish (for
others). Surely no brother was requested
by me like this ever before, O scourge of

your enemies! (20)
त्वय्यस्ति मम च As: परा सम्भावना च मे।
देवासुरेषु युद्धेषु बहुशो राक्षसर्षभ॥ २१॥

त्वया देवा: प्रतिव्यूह्य निर्जिताश्चासुरा युधि॥ २२॥

“There is affection in my heart for you
and my supreme hope is also fastened on
you. On many an occasion in the wars
between the gods and demons, O bull among
the ogres, were the gods as well as
the demons utterly routed by you on the
battlefield after joining the opposite ranks.

(21-22)

तदेतत् सर्वमातिष्ठं वीर्यं भीमपराक्रम।
नहि a सर्वभूतेषु दृश्यते सदूशो बली॥ २३॥

“Therefore accomplish all the aforesaid
deeds of valour, O brother of terrific prowess!
