# YUDDHAKANDA #

Indeed, no one mighty as you is seen
among all created beings. (23)

कुरुष्व मे प्रियहितमेतदुत्तमं

यथाप्रियं प्रियरण बान्धवप्रिय।
स्वतेजसा व्यथय सपत्नवाहिनीं

शरद्घनं पवन इवोद्यतो Aer wu

537

“Do this supreme, helpful act and
service to me keeping in view your love
for me, O lover of war and lover of kins-folk!
Torment the hostile army with your fiery
spirit in the same way as an active, mighty
wind would dissipate an autumnal cloud.”

(24)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये युद्धकाण्डे द्विषष्टितम: AW: ॥ G2 Il

Thus ends Canto Sixty-two in the Yuddhakanda of the glorious Ramayana of
Valmiki, the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

त्रिषष्टितम: at:
Canto LXIll

Kumbhakarna twits Ravana for all his misdeeds and, reassuring
him, shows his determination for a conflict

तस्य राक्षसराजस्य निशम्य परिदेवितम्।
कुम्भकर्णो बभाषेदं वचनं प्रजहास च॥१॥
Hearing the lament of Ravana (the king
of ogres), Kumbhakarna heartily laughed
and made the following reply: (1)

ger दोषो fe योऽस्माभि: पुरा मन्त्रविनिर्णये।
हितेष्वनभियुक्तेन सोऽयमासादितस्त्वया॥ २॥

“The same disaster which was actually
envisaged by us before while taking the
final decision after consultation with
Vibhisana and others has now been reaped
by you, who were distrustful towards your
well-wishers. (2)
निरयेष्वेव पतनं यथा दुष्कृतकर्मण:॥३॥

“Speedily enough has the fruit of your
sinful deed in the shape of Sita’s abduction
come upon you, even as damnation would
visit a person of sinful deeds. (3)

wat a महाराज कृत्यमेतदचिन्तितम्।
केवलं वीर्यदर्पेण नानुबन्धो विचारित:॥४॥

“Initially, of course, was this course of

action not weighed by you. Nor was
the consequence taken into account in the
sheer pride of your prowess, O great king !

(4)

a: पश्चात्पूर्वकार्याणि कुर्यादैश्चर्यमास्थित:।
पूर्वं चोत्तरकार्याणि न a aq नयानयौ॥५॥

“Confident of his power, he who defers
duties which ought to be performed earlier
and accomplishes earlier, duties which can
be deferred, does not know what is right
and what is wrong. (5)
देशकालविहीनानि कर्माणि विपरीतवत्।
क्रियमाणानि दुष्यन्ति हवींष्यप्रयतेष्विव॥ ६॥

“Actions which are performed without
regard to time and place prove disastrous
like those done at an adverse time and
place, even as oblations poured into fires
which have not been consecrated get foiled.

(6)
त्रयाणां पञ्चधा योगं HAUT य: Weld
सचिवै: समयं Ha स सम्यग् ada पथि॥ ७॥

“Holding consultation with his ministers,

he who takes into consideration the five
