« KISKINDHAKANDA +

bed of his teacher—all these descend to
the world of those whose mind is set on sin.
(37)
अधार्यं चर्म मे सद्भी रोमाण्यस्थि च वर्जितम्।
अभक्ष्याणि च मांसानि त्वद्विधैर्धर्मचारिभि: ।। ३८ ui

“My skin, in other words, the skin of a
monkey, is not permitted to be worn by the
virtuous; my hair and bones too are precluded
from use and my flesh is not permitted to be
partaken of by those practising virtue like
you. (38)

पञ्च पञ्चनखा भक्ष्या ब्रह्मक्षत्रेण राघव।
शल्यक: श्वाविधो गोधा शश: PAs TBA: ॥ ३९ ॥

“Only the following five species of
animals endowed with five claws (on each
paw), viz., the rhinoceros, the porcupine,
the iguana and the hare, the turtle being the
fifth, are permitted to be partaken of by
(meat-eaters-among) the Brahmanas and
Ksatriyas (and Vaisyas too). (39)

चर्म चास्थि च मे राम न स्पृशन्ति मनीषिण: |
अभक्ष्याणि च मांसानि सोऽहं पञ्चनखो Sa: Ul Xo I

“The wise do not even touch my (i.e.,
a monkey’s) skin and bones either, O Rama,
while my flesh is not at all worth eating. Yet
।, an animal endowed with five claws (and
therefore not fit to be partaken of) have
been wantonly killed by you. (40)
तारया वाक्यमुक्तोऽहं सत्यं सर्वज्ञया हितम्।
तदतिक्रम्य मोहेन कालस्य वशमागत:॥४१॥

“| was given by Tara, who knows
everything, an advice which was correct
and wholesome. Disregarding it through
ignorance, | have fallen under the sway of
Death. (41)
त्वया नाथेन काकुत्स्थ न सनाथा वसुंधरा।
प्रमदा शीलसम्पूर्णा पत्येव च विधर्मणा॥४२॥

“With you as its lord, O scion of
Kakutstha, the earth is not blessed with a
protector any more than a young woman,
who is rich in moral character, is safe with
a husband who is acting unlawfully. (42)

995

शठो नैकृतिक: ast मिथ्याप्रश्रितमानस:।

HA दशरथेन त्वं जात: पापो महात्मना॥४३॥
“How were you, who are deceitful,

mischievous, petty-minded, sinful and

pseudo-tranquil-minded, procreated by the

high-souled Dasaratha? (43)

छिन्नचारित्र्यकक्ष्येण सतां धर्मातिवर्तिना।
त्यक्तधर्माङ्कुशेनाहं निहतो रामहस्तिना॥४४॥

“| have been killed by the elephant in
the form of Rama, who has broken the
chain of morality, transgressed the code of
conduct of the virtuous and disregarded the
goad of righteousness. (44)
अशुभं चाप्ययुक्तं च wat da विगर्हितम्।
वक्ष्यसे Uw कृत्वा Ug: सह समागत:॥४५॥

“Having done such a vicious and
undesirable act, which is condemned by the
virtuous, what will you say in justification of
your conduct when come into contact with
holy men? (45)

उदासीनेषु योऽस्मासु विक्रमोऽयं प्रकाशित:।
अपकारिषु ते राम नैवं पश्यामि विक्रमम्॥४६॥

“| do not find you exhibiting the same
kind of valour against the wrongdoers that
has now been shown by you against us,
who have been neutral towards you. (46)

दृश्यमानस्तु युध्येथा मया युधि नृपात्मज।
wa वैवस्वतं देवं पश्येस्त्वं निहतो मया॥४७॥

“Had you fought with me on the
battlefield remaining before my eyes, O
prince, you would have seen God Yama
(son of the sun-god) when killed by me this
very day. (47)

त्वयादृश्येन तु रणे निहतोऽहं दुरासद:।
Waa: पन्नगेनैव A: पापवशं गत:॥४८॥
“Being difficult to approach, | have been
killed by you, while you were not to be seen
on the field of battle, even as a man fallen
into the clutches of sin would when bitten
by a serpent while fast asleep. (48)
