« KISKINDHAKANDA +

son, even though he was capable of doing
it, which he ought to have done looking to
my love for the late Emperor Dasaratha.”
Even while Sampati was speaking as
aforesaid with the monkeys collected together,
a pair of wings presently appeared on his
sides in the presence of those dwellers of
the forest. He experienced an ecstasy of
delight, which was unequalled, on seeing his
body covered by two newly grown wings
with ruddy feathers, and spoke to the monkeys
as follows : “By the grace of the royal sage
NiSakara, who was possessed of immense
spiritual power, my pair of wings, which had
been completely burnt by the rays of the sun,
have newly appeared. | find in me today the
same prowess, strength and virility which
existed in me when | was passing through
my youth. Let an all out effort be made to
trace out Sita; you will surely be able to
discover Sita. (5—12)
पक्षलाभो ममायं a: सिद्धिप्रत्ययकारक:।
इत्युक्त्वा तान् हरीन् सर्वान् सम्पाति: पतगोत्तम:॥ १३॥
उत्पपात गिरे: शृङ्गाज्जिज्ञासु: खगमो गतिम्।
तस्य तद् वचनं श्रुत्वा प्रतिसंहृष्टमानसा:।
बभूवुर्हरिशार्दूला विक्रमाभ्युदयोन्मुखा:॥ १४॥

1155

“This recovery of wings on my part is
a pledge of your success.” Having spoken
as aforesaid to all those monkeys, Sampati,
the foremost of birds, flew from the
mountain-peak, keen as he was to see for
himself once again how a bird flew. Highly
pleased in mind in their turn to hear the
foregoing words of Sampati, those tigers
among the monkeys became hopeful of
their success, which depended on their
valour. (13-14)

अथ पवनसमानविक्रमा:

प्लवगवरा: प्रतिलब्धपौरुषा:।
अभिजिदभिमुखां fest ययु-
र्जनकसुतापरिमार्गणोन्मुखा: ॥ १५ UI
Having regained their virility, which had
been lost as a result of their frustration, the
aforesaid leaders of monkeys, who were
endowed with a speed equal to that of the
wind, headed towards the southern quarter
in which the constellation known by the
name of Abhijit (a name associated by
astrologers with triumph) appears foremost,
keen as they were to trace out Sita (daughter
of King Janaka). (15)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये किष्किन्धाकाण्डे
त्रिषष्टितम: सर्ग: Il ६३ Il
Thus ends Canto Sixty-three in the Kiskindhakanda of the glorious Ramayana of
Valmiki, the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

Canto LXIV
On the monkey heroes getting despondent at the sight of the (Indian) ocean,
which they found difficult to cross, Angada inquires of them if
anyone of them was capable of leaping across the sea dividing
India from Lanka. When all keep mum, he encourages all
to proclaim each his own leaping capacity and prowess

आख्याता गृध्रराजेन समुत्प्लुत्य प्लवङ्गमा:।

Leaping at full height in a body when

संगता: प्रीतिसंयुक्ता विनेदु: सिंहविक्रमा:॥ १॥ enlightened by the king of vultures on the
