1114

“Reaching the eastern quarter then, |
beheld trees of all kinds, delightful mountains
with caves, as well as lakes of every kind.

(14)
sea तत्र पश्यामि udd धातुमण्डितम्।
ane सागरं चैव नित्यमप्सरसालयम्॥१५॥

“| saw there the eastern mountain
adorned with minerals and also the ocean
of milk, the constant abode of celestial
nymphs. (15)

परिकाल्यमानस्तदा वालिनाभिद्रुतो ह्यहम्।
Urge सहसा प्रस्थितोऽहं तदा विभो॥१६॥
“Flying on and on when pursued by
Vali, and then returning, | forthwith departed
all of a sudden, O powerful prince. (16)

दिशस्तस्यास्ततो भूय: प्रस्थितो दक्षिणां दिशम्।
विन्ध्यपादपसंकीर्णां चन्दनद्रुमशोभिताम्॥१७॥

“Turning from the eastern quarter, |
then made for the southern quarter, crowded
with trees growing on the Vindhyan range
and graced by sandalwood trees. (17)

द्रुमशैलान्तरे पश्यन् भूयो दक्षिणतोऽपराम्।
अपरां च दिशं प्राप्तो वालिना समभिद्रुत:।॥। १८॥
“Seeing Vali from behind the trees
and hills again and again, and still steadily
pursued by Vali, | reached a quarter different
from the south, viz., the western quarter.
(18)
स पश्यन् विविधान् देशानस्तं च गिरिसत्तमम्।
wea चास्तं गिरिश्रेष्ठमुत्तरं सम्प्रधावित:॥१९॥

“Observing various lands as also the
western mountain, the foremost of mountains,
and finally reaching the western mountain,
the crown of all mountains, | ran with all

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

speed towards the north.

हिमवन्तं च Ae च समुद्रं च तथोत्तरम्।
यदा न विन्दे शरणं वालिना समभिद्रुत:।॥ २०॥
ततो At बुद्धिसम्पन्नो हनुमान् वाक्यमब्रवीत्।
इदानीं A स्मृतं राजन् यथा वाली हरीश्वर:।॥ २१॥
मतङ्गेन dat शप्तो ह्यस्मिन्नाश्रममण्डले।
प्रविशेद् यदि वै वाली मूर्धास्य शतधा भवेत्॥ २२॥

“When, constantly and steadily pursued
by Vali, | did not find shelter even on seeking
the Himalayan range and Mount Meru and,
even so, the Northern Sea, Hanuman, who
was richly endowed with wisdom (and who
was all along with me), thereupon submitted
to me as follows : ‘It is now recollected by
me, O king, how Vali, the lord of monkeys,
was at one time actually cursed by Sage
Matanga that if he should ever venture
into the limits of his hermitage, his head
would surely get split into a hundred pieces.

(20—22)
da are: सुखोऽस्माकं निरुद्विग्नो भविष्यति।
तत: पर्वतमासाद्य ऋष्यमूकं नृपात्मज॥ २३॥
न विवेश det वाली मतङ्गस्य भयात् तदा।
एवं मया तदा राजन् प्रत्यक्षमुपलक्षितम्।
पृथिवीमण्डलं सर्वं गुहामस्म्यागतस्तत:॥ २४॥

““Our residence there would be happy
and free from fear.’ Then, reaching the
Rsyamuka mountain, O prince, | took up
my abode there. During those days Vali
dared not enter that region for fear of the
imprecation pronounced by Rsi Matanga. In
this way, O king, the entire terrestrial globe
was directly perceived by me at that time
and then | withdrew to the cave on Mount
Rsyamuka.” (23-24)

(19)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये किष्किन्धाकाण्डे
षट्चत्वारिंश: सर्ग: ॥ ४६ Il
Thus ends Canto Forty-six in the Kiskindhakanda of the glorious Ramayana of
Valmiki, the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

