770

wa परुषित: पूर्वं पुनरेव प्रशंसित:।
sade दूषणं नाम खर: सेनापतिं तदा॥७॥

Snubbed in the first instance and then
definitely praised by her, Khara now
commanded his general, Dusana by name
in the following words : (7)

ade सहस्राणि मम चित्तानुवर्तिनाम्।
रक्षसां भीमवेगानां समरेष्वनिवर्तिनाम्॥८॥
नीलजीमूतवर्णानां लोकहिंसाविहारिणाम्।
सर्वोद्योगमुदीर्णानां रक्षसां सौम्य कारय॥९॥
“O gentle one, get all the fourteen
thousand ogres who follow my mind, who
are possessed of terrible impetuosity, who
never restreat from the fields of battle, who
possess the hue of dark blue clouds, who
divert themselves by indulging in carnage
and are full of martial zeal, to exert in every
way for war. (8-9)
उपस्थापय मे fad wi सौम्य धनूंषि च।
wig चित्रान् खड्गांश्च शक्तीश्च विविधा: शिता: ॥। १० ॥
“Place before me quickly my chariot
and bows, as well as my arrows, swords of
diverse kinds and various sharp javelins, O
gentle one । (10)

amt निर्यातुमिच्छामि पौलस्त्यानां महात्मनाम्।
वधार्थं दुर्विनीतस्य रामस्य रणकोविद॥११॥

“| wish to march at the head of the
high-souled Paulastyas (ogres claiming their
descent from Sage Pulastya) for the
destruction of the haughty Rama, O brother
skilled in warfare !” (11)

इति तस्य ब्रुवाणस्य सूर्यवर्णं महारथम्।
सदश्वै; शबलैर्युक्तमाचचक्षेऽथ दूषण:॥१२॥

“Even while he was speaking as
aforesaid, Dusana presently announced to
Khara the arrival of a huge chariot shining
like the sun and drawn by excellent spotted
horses. (12)

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

मत्स्यै: UNA: शैलैश्चन्द्रसूर्यैश्च काञ्चनै:।
माङ्गल्यै: पक्षिसङ्घैश्च ताराभिश्च समावृतम्॥१४॥
ध्वजनिस्निरशसम्पन्नं किंकिणीवरभूषितम्।
सदश्वयुक्तं सोऽमर्षादारुरोह खरस्तदा॥१५॥
The celebrated Khara then indignantly
ascended the aforesaid spacious chariot,
resembling a peak of Mount Meru, decked
with refined gold, furnished with golden wheels
and a pole of cat’s-eye jewels, and
encompassed with decorative golden figures
of alligators, flowers, trees, mountains, moons
and suns, flocks of birds and stars, furnished
with ensigns and swords etc., decorated
with excellent small bells and drawn by high
breed horses. (18—15)

ख्रस्तु तन्महत्सैन्यं रथचर्मायुधध्वजम्।
निर्यातेत्यब्रवीत् Wet दूषण: सर्वराक्षसान्॥१६॥

Keenly observing that mighty army
equipped with chariots, shields, weapons
and ensigns, Khara and Dusana charged all
the ogres to advance. (16)

ततस्तद् राक्षसं सैन्यं घोरचर्मायुधध्वजम्।
निर्जगाम जनस्थानान्महानादं महाजवम्॥१७॥
Then that army of ogres, equipped with
dreadful shields, weapons and ensigns,
sallied forth from Janasthana with a loud
noise and great onrush. (17)

खड्गैश्चक्रैश्च eeu: सतोमरै:।॥ १८॥
शक्तिभि: परिघैर्घोरैरतिमात्रैश्च क्र।र्मुकॆ; ।
गदासिमुसलैर्वज्रैर्गृहीतैर्भीमदर्शनै: ues
राक्षसानां सुघोराणां सहस्राणि चतुर्दंश।
निर्यातानि जनस्थानात् खरचित्तानुवर्तिनाम्॥ २०॥
With clubs, PattiSas, darts, exceptionally
sharp axes, glittering swords, discuses held
in their hands alongwith iron clubs and also
with javelins, fearful clubs tipped with iron
and huge bows, maces, scimitars, Musalas
and terrible-looking thunderbolts seized by
them, all the fourteen thousand of the most
dreadful ogres, who followed the mind of Khara,
sallied forth from Janasthana. (18—20)
