+ UTTARAKANDA +

wert बहुधनौ हृष्टपुष्टजनावृतौ।
स्वे पुरे प्रेषयामास भ्रातरौ at कुशीलवौ॥ २०॥

e (Sri Rama) sent the two brothers,
KuSa and Lava to their respective kingdoms,
with many gems and a lot of wealth and full
of happy and prosperous men. (20)

1127

अभिषिच्य ततो वीरौ प्रस्थाप्य स्वपुरे तदा।
दूतान् सम्प्रेषयामास शत्रुघ्नाय महात्मने॥ २१॥

Then, having coronated both of them
and establishing them in their own kingdom,
caused messengers to be sent to the noble
Satrughna. (21)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये उत्तरकाण्डे सप्ताधिकशततम: सर्ग: ॥ १०७॥

Thus ends Canto One hundred and seven in the Uttarakanda of the glorious
Ramayana of Valmiki, the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

Canto CVIII

Sri Rama decides to go to heaven with his brothers, monkeys and bears.
He advises Vibhisana, Hanuman, Jambavan, Mainda,
and Dwivida to remain on the earth

८

at gat रामवाक्येन चोदिता लघुविक्रमा:।
प्रजग्मुर्मधुरां शीघ्रं चक्रुर्वासं न चाध्वनि॥१॥
Then the messengers of speedy gait,
receiving the orders of Sri Rama, went to
Madhura with all haste and did not halt on
the way. (1)
ततस्तिभिरहोरात्रै: सम्प्राप्य मधुरामथ।
WAT यथातत्त्वमाचख्यु: सर्वमेव तत्॥२॥
लक्ष्मणस्य परित्यागं प्रतिज्ञां राघवस्य al
पुत्रयोरभिषेकं च पौरानुगमनं तथा॥३॥
Then after three days and nights, having
reached Madhura, they (the messengers)
narrated all that had happened exactly; the
desertion of Laksmana, and the determination
of Sri Rama, the descendant of Raghu, on
the consecration of the two sons (of Sri
Rama) and the citizens following Him.(2-3)
कुशस्य नगरी रम्या विन्ध्यपर्वतरोधसि।
कुशावतीति नाम्ना सा Hat रामेण धीमता॥४॥
श्रावस्तीति पुरी रम्या श्राविता च लवस्य ह।
अयोध्यां विजनां कृत्वा Weal भरतस्तथा॥ ५॥
स्वर्गस्य गमनोद्योगं कृतवन्तौ महारथौ।
एवं ad निवेद्याशु शत्रुघ्नाय महात्मने॥६॥

प्रबृक्तोरत्तुसमानीयकाञ्चनचघुगेधसम्।
तेषां सर्वं यथाव्रत्तमब्रवीद् रघुनन्दन:॥८॥

That beautiful city of KuSa at the foot of
the Vindhya mountain, was named KuSavati
by the wise Sri Rama and that beautiful city
of Lava, Sravasti, was also made famous.
Thus after having rendered Ayodhya desolate,
the descendant of Raghu, Sri Rama and
Bharata, the two great warriors, have made
themselves ready to go to heaven. Having
thus narrated all events to the noble Satrughna,
those messengers then stopped narrating and
said: ‘O king, make haste’, having heard the
terrible news of his family coming to an end,
the descendant of Raghu, calling all his
subjects and the priest Kafcana, spoke to
them all that had happened. (4—8)

आत्मनश्च विपर्यासं भविष्यं भ्रातृभि: सह।
Wa: पुत्रद्वयं वीर: सोऽभ्यषिञ्चन्नराधिप:॥ ९॥
सुबाहुर्मधुरां लेभे शत्रुघाती च वैदिशम्।
द्विधा Heat तु at सेनां माधुरीं पुत्रयोर्द्वयो:।
धनं च युक्तं कृत्वा वै स्थापयामास पार्थिव:॥ १०॥
