* BALAKANDA +

तथाभूता हि सा चर्या न शापस्तत्र मुच्यते।
Tat राजशार्दूल रामं सत्यपराक्रमम्॥८॥
काकपक्षधरे dit ers मे दातुमर्हसि।
शक्तो ह्येष मया Wal दिव्येन स्वेन तेजसा॥९॥
Tart a विकर्तारस्तेषामपि विनाशने।
श्रेयश्चास्मै प्रदास्यामि aad न संशय:॥१०॥
त्रयाणामपि लोकानां येन ख्यातिं गमिष्यति।
न च at राममासाद्य शक्तौ स्थातुं कथंचन॥ LE Il
“For such is the character of that
observance: no execration can be uttered
in the course of it. Be pleased, therefore, to
place at my disposal, O tiger among kings,
your eldest and heroic son, Sri Rama, who
is possessed of true and unfailing prowess
though yet a boy (adorned with side-locks
of hair hanging over the temples after the
fashion of the day). For, by virtue of his
own transcendent glory and guarded by
me, he is equal even to the extermination
of all ogres that act in a hostile manner.
Nay, | shall confer on him manifold boons
whereby he will attain fame in all the three
worlds: there is no doubt about it. And on
coming face to face with Sri Rama the two
ogres cannot stand in any case. (8—11)

न च dt राघवादन्यो हन्तुमुत्सहते पुमान्।
वीर्योत्सिक्तौ fe at पापौ कालपाशवशं Tet i १२॥

रामस्य राजशार्दूल न पर्याप्तौ महात्मन:।
न च पुत्रगतं स्नेहं कर्तुमर्हसि पार्थिव॥१३॥

“Nor can any man other than Rama (a
scion of Raghu) kill them. The two wicked
fellows, who are proud of their prowess and
have been caught in the noose of Death,
are surely no match for the high-souled
Rama. You should not, therefore, allow your
parental affection to prevail, O ruler of the
earth ! (12-13)
até a प्रतिजानामि हतौ तौ विद्धि राक्षसौ।
ae afl महात्मानं Wa सत्यपराक्रमम्॥१४॥

“| give you my word for it : take you the
two ogres as killed. | Know the high-souled

Rama as possessed of true, unfailing
prowess. (14)

127

वसिष्ठोऽपि महातेजा ये चेमे तपसि स्थिता:।
यदि ते धर्मलाभं तु ama परमं भुवि॥१५॥
स्थिरमिच्छसि राजेन्द्र रामं मे दातुमर्हसि।
यद्यभ्यनुज्ञां काकुत्स्थ ad Aa मन्त्रिण:॥ १६॥
वसिष्ठप्रमुखा: सर्वे ततो रामं विसर्जय।
अभिप्रेतमसंसक्तमात्मजं दातुमर्हसि॥ १७॥
दशरात्रं हि यज्ञस्य रामं राजीवलोचनम्।
नात्येति कालो यज्ञस्य यथायं AA WaT १८॥
तथा कुरुष्व भद्रं ते मा च Mile WA: Pa: |
इत्येवमुक्त्वा धर्मात्मा धर्मार्थसहितं वच:॥१९॥
विरराम महातेजा विश्वामित्रो महामति:।
स तन्निशम्य राजेन्द्रो विश्चामित्रवच: शुभम्॥ २०॥
शोकेन महताऽऽविष्टश्चचाल च मुमोह च।
लब्धसंज्ञस्तदोत्थाय व्यषीदत भयान्वित:॥ २१॥

“The highly glorious sage Vasistha and
all these who stand vowed to asceticism
also know him as such. If at all you seek
the acquisition of religious merit as well as
the highest renown for you on earth for all
time to come, O king of kings, be pleased
to make over Rama to me. If all your
counsellors with the sage Vasistha as their
leader give their consent to you, O scion of
Kakutstha (Purafijana), then let Rama go
with me. Be pleased to hand over to me
your beloved son, the lotus-eyed Rama,
who being grown up is no longer deeply
attached (to you) for a period of ten days
and nights only in the interests of my
sacrifice. Act in such a way as to ensure
that the period of my sacrificial performance
is not exceeded, O scion of Raghu, and do
not plunge your mind in grief. May good
betide you!” Having uttered these words,
full of piety and truth, the highly intelligent
sage ViSwamitra, whose mind is given to
righteousness and who is possessed of
extraordinary glory, became silent. Obsessed
with excessive grief to hear that righteous
request of ViSwamitra, the said emperor
trembled and fainted, too. Regaining his
consciousness later on, he got up and
became sad, seized as he was with fear of
losing his eldest son. (15—21)
