640

राघवेणैवमुक्तस्तु मकराक्षो महाबल:।
बाणौघानमुचत् तस्मै राघवाय रणाजिरे॥ २१॥

Spoken to in these words by Sr
Rama (a scion of Raghu), Makaraksa for
his part, who was endowed with extraordinary
might, shot volleys of shafts on the aforesaid
scion of Raghu on the field of battle. (21)

ताञ्छराञ्छरवर्षेण रामश्चिच्छेद नैकथधा।

निपेतुर्भुवि विच्छिन्ना रुक्मपुङ्खा: सहस्रश:॥ २२॥
Sri Rama, however, tore those arrows

into pieces with a hail of arrows. The ogre’s

arrows, which were provided with shafts of
gold, fell to the ground, when torn in

thousands. (22)
We युद्धमभवत् तत्र समेत्यान्योन्यमोजसा।
खरराक्षसपुत्रस्य सूनोर्दंशरथस्य TN BB II

On their meeting each other at close
quarters, a notable encounter furiously
raged between Makaraksa (son of the
ogre Khara) and Sri Rama (son of
DaSaratha). (23)

जीमूतयोरिवाकाशे शब्दो ज्यातलयोरिव।
धनुर्मुक्त: स्वनोऽन्योन्यं श्रूयते च रणाजिरे॥ २४॥

The sound released by the bows as
produced by the friction of the hands and
the bow-string (of the two warriors) was
mutually heard on the field of battle on that
occasion, like the rumbling of clouds in
(24)

अन्तरिक्षगता: सर्वे द्रष्टुकामास्तदद्धुतम्॥ २५॥

Gods, devils and Gandharvas (celestial
musicians), Kinnaras (a class of demigods
with a human figure and the head of a
horse) and huge serpents stood in the air to
witness that astounding combat. (25)

The limbs of both were pierced by

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA +

each other, yet their strength was redoubled.
The two warriors inflicted wounds on each
other on the battlefield and each returned
the blows of the other. (26)

राममुक्तांस्तु बाणौघान् राक्षसस्त्वच्छिनद् रणे।
रक्षोमुक्तांस्तु Wa वै नैकथा प्राच्छिनच्छरै: ।। २७॥

The ogre for his part actually tore the
volleys of shafts shot by Sri Rama; while Sri
Rama actually split into pieces with his arrows
the shafts discharged by the ogre. (27)

बाणौघवितता: dat दिशश्च प्रदिशस्तथा।
संछन्ना वसुधा Wa समन्तान्न प्रकाशते॥ २८॥

All the four quarters as well as the
intermediate points were covered with volleys
of shafts; nay, the earth itself was entirely
obscured on all sides and could not be
seen. (28)

तत: Gael महाबाहुर्धनुश्चिच्छेद संयुगे।
अष्टाभिरथ नाराचै: सूतं faces राघव:॥ २९॥

Full of anger, the mighty-armed Sri
Rama thereupon split asunder the bow of
Makaraksa in the course of the combat.
The scion of Raghu further pierced the
charioteer with as many as eight steel
arrows. (29)

भित्त्वा रथं शरै रामो हत्वा अश्वानपातयत्।
विरथो वसुधास्थ: स मकराक्षो निशाचर:॥ ३०॥

Having split asunder the chariot with
his arrows and struck the horses, he laid
them low. Deprived of his chariot, that prowler
of the night, Makaraksa, stood on the ground.

(30)
तत्तिष्ठदू वसुधां tat: शूलं जग्राह पाणिना।
त्रासनं सर्वभूतानां युगान्ताग्निसमप्रभम्॥३१॥

Standing on the ground, the aforesaid
ogre seized hold of his pike, which struck

terror into all created beings and shone
like the fire at the end of the world-cycle. (31)
