# YUDDHAKANDA #

Sipping water thrice with the name of
the Lord on his lips and getting purified
in this way, nay, looking intently on
the orb of the sun and repeating this prayer,
the valiant one experienced supreme
felicity. Seizing hold of his bow afterwards
and fixing his eyes on Ravana, the hero,
who felt delighted in mind, advanced
on the battlefield with a view to attaining
victory in combat. He stood vowed to
kill Ravana with an intense and_ all-
encompassing effort. (29—30)

749

ay रविरवदन्निरीक्ष्य रामं
मुदितमना: परमं प्रहृष्यमाण:।

निशिचरपतिसंक्षयं विदित्वा
सुरगणमध्यगतो वचस्त्वरेति॥ ३१॥
Delighted in mind to gaze on Sri Rama,
nay, feeling supremely exhilarated on
perceiving the destruction of Ravana
(the ruler of the night-stalkers) at hand,
the sun-god, standing in person in the midst
of a host of gods, exclaimed: “Make haste!”
(31)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये युद्धकाण्डे पञ्चाधिकरशततम: सर्ग: Il १०५ ॥

Thus ends Canto One hundred and five in the Yuddhakanda of the glorious
Ramayana of Valmiki, the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

षडधिकशततम: सर्ग:
Canto CVI

Catching sight of Ravana’s chariot, Si Rama asks Matali
to be on his guard. A description of portents
prognosticating the fall of Ravana and
good omens predicting the
victory of Sri Rama

sarah पूर्णं पत्ताकाध्व्।जमालिनम्।।२।।
ग्रसन्तमिव चाकाशं नादयन्तं वसुंधराम्।
प्रणाशं परसैन्यानां स्वसैन्यस्य प्रहर्षणम्॥३॥
Tarra wa क्षिप्रं चोदयामास सारथि:।
तमापतन्तं सहसा स्वनवन्तं महाध्वजम्॥४॥
Tt राक्षसराजस्य नरराजो dat ह।
कृष्णवाजिसमायुक्तं युक्तं रौद्रेण वर्चसा॥५॥
दीप्यमानमिवाकाशे विमानं सूर्यवर्चसम्।
तडित्पताकागहनं दर्शितेन्द्रायुधप्रभम्॥ ६ I
शरधारा विमुञ्जन्तं धाराधरमिवाम्बुदम्।
स दृष्टवा मेघसंकाशमापतन्तं रथं रिपो:॥७॥

गिरेर्वज्राभिमृष्टस्य दीर्यत: सदूशस्वनम्।
विस्फारयन् a वेगेन बालचन्द्रानतं धनु:॥८॥
उवाच मातलिं राम: सहस्राक्षस्य सारथिम्।
मातले पश्य संरब्धमापतन्तं रथं रिपो:॥९॥
यथापसव्यं पतता वेगेन महता पुन:।
समरे हन्तुमात्मानं तथानेन Ha मति:॥१०॥
Feeling delighted, that charioteer, the
charioteer of Ravana, drove forward with
speed his chariot, a chariot which was
capable of crushing the enemy’s army and
was a wonderful piece of art (like the city of
the Gandharvas), which bore exceptionally
lofty pennons and was drawn by horses
richly endowed with excellent qualities and
adorned with gold necklaces, which was
