* ARANYAKANDA «

एतद् ब्राह्मण रामस्य ad धृतमनुत्तमम्।
तस्य भ्राता तु वैमात्रो लक्ष्मणो नाम वीर्यवान्॥ १८ ॥
रामस्य पुरुषव्याघ्र: सहाय: समरेऽरिहा।
स भ्राता लक्ष्मणो AM ब्रह्मचारी दृढव्रत:॥१९॥
अन्वगच्छद् धनुष्पाणि: प्रव्रजन्तं मया सह।
जटी तापसरूपेण मया Ae सहानुज:॥ oll
प्रविष्टो दण्डकारण्यं धर्मनित्यो दृढव्रत:।
ते वयं प्रच्युता राज्यात् कैकेय्यास्तु कृते त्रय: ।। २१॥
विचराम द्विजश्रेष्ठं ad गम्भीरमोजसा।

समाश्वस मुहूर्तं तु Wet वस्तुमिह त्वया॥ २२॥
“Such, O Brahmana, is the unsurpassed
vow held fast by Sri Rama. A powerful half-
brother of his, Laksmana by name, a tiger
among men and the slayer of his foes on the
battlefield, is the companion of Sri Rama.
The aforesaid brother, Laksmana by name,
who is firm of vows and is practising
continence, followed, bow in hand, Sri Rama,
who was going into exile with me. Wearing
matted locks, and accompanied by his
aforesaid half-brother, Sri Rama, who is ever
devoted to piety and firm of vows, penetrated
in the form of an ascetic into the Dandaka
forest with me. Expelled from the kingdom on
account of Kaikeyi, we, the aforesaid three,
O jewel among the Brahmanas, are ranging
the dense forest banking on our own strength.
Rest awhile if it is possible for you to stay
here. (18—22)
आगमिष्यति मे vat वन्यमादाय पुष्कलम्।
SET गोधान् वराहांश्च हत्वाऽऽदायामिषं बहु॥ २३॥
“Having killed Rurus (a species of deer),
iguanas and boars (by way of sport), and
taking all kinds of wild products fit for the
consumption of ascetics in abundance for
repast, my husband will come back very
soon. (23)

स त्वं नाम च गोत्रं च कुलमाचक्ष्व Arad: |
Way दण्डकारण्ये किमर्थं चरसि द्विज॥ २४॥

“Now please make known to me
accurately your name as well as your family
name and descent. Please also relate,

841

O Brahmana, what for you roam about in
the Dandaka forest alone.” (24)
प्रत्युवाचोत्तरं तीव्रं रावणो राक्षसाधिप:॥ २५॥
While Sita, the consort of Sri Rama,
was speaking as aforesaid, Ravana, the
suzerain lord of ogres, who was possessed
of great might, made the following sharp
reply : (25)
येन वित्रासिता लोका: सदेवासुरमानुषा:।
ae स रावणो AA Ala रक्षोगणेश्वर:॥ २६॥

“lam the celebrated ruler of the hordes
of ogres, Ravana by name, by whom all
people, including gods, demons and human
beings, have been struck with terror, O
Sita ! (26)
त्वां तु काञ्चनवर्णाभां दृष्ट्वा कौशेयवासिनीम्।
रतिं स्वकेषु दारेषु नाधिगच्छाम्यनिन्दिते॥ २७॥

“Having seen you possessing the hue
and brilliance of gold and clad in silk, | no
longer find delight in my own consorts, O

lady beyond reproach in point of comeliness
of form ! (27)

बह्वीनामुत्तमस्त्रीणामाहतानामितस्तत: ।
सर्वासामेव ous ते ममाग्रमहिषी भव॥ २८॥
“Become the foremost queen among

all the numerous excellent women carried
away from here and there by me. (28)

लङ्का WA समुद्रस्य मध्ये मम महापुरी।
सागरेण परिक्षिप्ता निविष्टा गिरिमूर्धनि॥ २९॥
“My great capital, Lanka by name, is
set in the midst of the sea, girt by the ocean
and built on the summit of a hill. (29)

wa सीते मया are वनेषु विचरिष्यसि।
न चास्य वनवासस्य स्पृहयिष्यसि भामिनि॥ ३०॥
“There you will roam about with me in

woodlands and will never long for this sojourn
in the forest, O youthful Sita ! (30)

Us दास्य: सहस्राणि सर्वाभरणभूषिता:।
सीते परिचरिष्यन्ति भार्या भवसि मे यदि॥ ३१॥
