546

keenly perceiving lakes with full-blown
flowers and rivers containing limpid waters,
the aforesaid messengers swiftly moved on
because of the pressing nature of their
errand. (13-14)
a प्रसन्नोदकां feet नानाविहगसेविताम्।
उपातिजग्मुर्वेगेन शरदण्डां जलाकुलाम्॥१५॥
Reaching the bank of the charming
river Saradanda, which not only contained
translucent waters but was also full of water
and was frequented by birds of various
kinds, they speedily crossed it. (15)

निकूलवृक्षमासाद्य feet सत्योपयाचनम्।
अभिगम्याभिवाद्यं तं कुलिङ्गां प्राविशन् पुरीम्॥ १६ ॥
Reaching a holy tree (inhabited by some
divinity) standing on the western bank of the
Saradanda, and named Satyopayacana (so-
called because prayers addressed to it
invariably proved efficacious), which was
worthy of salutation, and going round it
clockwise as a token of respect, the
messengers entered the city of Kulinga. (16)
अभिकालं तत: प्राप्य तेजोऽभिभवनाच्च्युता: |
पितृपैतामहीं पुण्यां तेरुरिक्षुमतीं नदीम्॥१७॥
Emerged from the village of
Tejobhibhavana and reaching thence the
village of Abhikala, the messengers crossed
the holy river Iksumati, associated with the
father and grandfather of the deceased
Emperor. (17)

अवेक्ष्याञ्जलिपानांश्च ब्राह्मणान् वेदपारगान्।
ययुर्मध्येन बाह्लीकान् सुदामानं च पर्वतम्॥१८॥
Nay, perceiving Brahmanas, who had
mastered the Vedas and lived on as much
water as could be contained in the hollow of

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

their palms, they reached the Sudama
mountain in the interior of the Bahlika kingdom,
now known by the name of Balkh. (18)
विष्णो: पदं प्रेक्ष्यमाणा विपाशां चापि शाल्मलीम्।
नदीर्वापीतटाकानि पल्वलानि सरांसि च॥१९॥
पश्यन्तो विविधांश्चापि सिंहान् व्याघ्रान् मृगान् द्विपान्।
aq: पथातिमहता शासनं भर्तुरीप्सव:॥ २०॥
Beholding the spot on the top of Sudama
mountain containing the footprints of Lord
Visnu, as well as the rivers Vipasa (now
known by the name of Beas) and Salmali
and other rivers, big wells provided with
stairs to reach the water and ponds, pools
and lakes, and looking on lions, tigers, deer
and elephants of various kinds, they
proceeded along an exceptionally broad
highway, keen as they were to execute the
command of their master. (19-20)

ते श्रान्तवाहना दूता विकृष्टेन सता पथा।
गिरिव्रजं पुरवरं शौघ्रमासेदुरञ्जसा॥२१॥

Even though their horses felt exhausted,
the messengers shortly and directly reached
the foremost town of Girivraja, the capital of
the Kekaya kingdom, by a long yet peaceful
route. (21)

भर्तुश्च वंशस्य परिग्रहार्थम्।
अहेडमानास्त्वरया स्म दूता
Tat तु ते तत्पुरमेव याता:॥ २२॥
For the pleasure of their master, Sage
Vasistha, as well as for the protection of the
people and for vindicating the honour of
their king’s race, the messengers for their

part respectfully and speedily entered that
town during the night itself. (22)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्येऽयोध्याकाण्डेऽष्टषष्टितम: सर्ग: ॥ ६८ Il

Thus ends Canto Sixty-eight in the Ayodhyakanda of the glorious Ramayana of
Valmiki, the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

