* BALAKANDA +

हिमवत्प्रतिमे राम जटामण्डलगह्वरे।
सा कथंचिन्महीं गन्तुं नाशक्नोद यत्नमास्थिता॥ ८ ॥

Swelling into the form of a very mighty
stream and acquiring a formidable force,
the celebrated Ganga, the elder daughter of
Himavan, the adored of all the worlds,
thereupon descended forthwith, O Rama,
from the heavens (her reputed home) on
the blessed head of Lord Siva: so the tradition
goes. Nay, the said Ganga, who is all-
glorious and most difficult to sustain, thought
within herself: “Wafting Lord Sankara
alongwith my stream, | might as well
enter Patala.” Enraged to perceive her
arrogance, the three-eyed Lord Sankara (the
Destroyer of the universe) for His part
forthwith made up His mind to conceal her
in the midst of His matted locks. Fallen on
the holy head of Lord Rudra, thick with
coils of matted hair and resembling the
Himalayas, in its colossal size, O Rama,
that sacred river could in no way reach the
earth even though it made every effort to
do so. (4—8)

qa सा निर्गमं ad जटामण्डलमन्तत:।

तत्रैवाबभ्रमद् देवी संवत्सरगणान् बहून्॥९॥

Revolving in the coils of His matted
locks it did not find an egress even on
reaching their end; the divine stream
continued to meander on His head alone
for several rounds of years. (9)

तामपश्यत् पुनस्तत्र तप: परममास्थित:।
a तेन तोषितश्चासीदत्यन्तं रघुनन्दन॥१०॥
Bhagiratha saw it there and took to
supreme asceticism once more. Lord Siva
felt extremely pleased with that, O scion of
Raghu ! (10)
विससर्ज adt wet हरो बिन्दुसर: प्रति।
wer विसृज्यमानायां aa स्रोतांसि जज्ञिरे॥ ११॥
Thereupon Lord Siva (the Destroyer of

the universe) let fall the Ganga into the
Bindusara, a lake in the region of the

189

Himalayas, attributed to Brahma. While the
river was being released, it got split up into
seven streams. (11)

Stet पावनी da नलिनी च ata a

तिस्त्र: प्राचीं दिशं जग्मुर्गङ्गा: शिवजला: शुभा: ।। १२॥
Of these, three blessed streams of the

Ganga, consisting of delightful waters, viz.,

Hladini, Pavani and even so Nalini too, ran
in an easterly direction. (12)

सुचक्षुश्चैव dia च सिन्धुश्चैव महानदी।
तिस्त्रश्चैता fast जग्मु: प्रतीचीं तु शुभोदका:॥ १३॥
Again, Sucaksu and Sita and even so
the great river Sindhu—these three,
consisting of blessed waters, flowed in a
westerly direction. (13)
सप्तमी चान्वगात् तासां भगीरथरथं तदा।
भगीरथोऽपि राजर्षिर्दिव्यं स्यन्दनमास्थित:॥१४॥
प्रायादग्रे महातेजा गङ्गा तं चाप्यनुव्रजत्।
गगनाच्छंकरशिरस्ततो धरणिमागता ।। १५ Ul
Again, the seventh of them forthwith
followed the chariot of Bhagiratha. Mounted
on इच beautiful chariot, the royal sage
Bhagiratha too, invested with unique
splendour, marched ahead and the Ganga,
really speaking, followed him. In this way
the holy river descended from the heavens
to the head of Lord Sankara and came
down from there to the earth and thereby
justified the appellation of “Tripathaga” or
the river following a threefold path, enjoyed
by it. (14-15)
असर्पत जलं तत्र तीव्रशब्दपुरस्कृतम्।
मत्स्यकच्छपसंघैश्च शिंशुमारगणैस्तथा। १६ ॥
wits: पतितैश्चैव व्यरोचत वसुंधरा।
ततो देवर्षिगन्धर्वा यक्षसिद्धगणास्तथा॥ १७॥
व्यलोकयन्त ते तत्र गगनाद् गां गतां तदा।
विमानैर्नगराकारैर्हयैर्गजवरैस्तथा ॥ १८॥
पारिप्लवगताश्चापि देवतास्तत्र विष्ठिता:।
तदद्भुतमिमं लोके गङ्गावतरमुत्तमम्॥१९॥
दिदरृक्षवो देवगणा: समीयुरमितौजस:।
Ware: सुरगणैस्तेषां चाभरणौजसा॥२०॥
