306

Thus spoke Laksmana (son of Sumitra),
feeling cheerful on having reassured his
eldest brother, Sri Rama. Meanwhile, the
army of the monkeys moved along, covering

the entire globe, as it were. (55)
ऋक्षवानरशार्दूलैर्नखद्रंष्टायुधैरपि ।
कराग्रैश्चरणाग्रैश्च वानरैरुद्धतं रज:॥५६॥

भीममन्तर्दथे लोकं Part सवितु: प्रभाम्।
सपर्वतवनाकाशं दक्षिणां हरिवाहिनी॥ ५७॥
छादयन्ती ययौ भीमा द्यामिवाम्बुदसंतति:।
उत्तरन्त्याश्च सेनाया: Add बहुयोजनम्॥५८॥
नदीस्ररोतांसि सर्वाणि सस्यन्दुर्विपरीतवत्।
सरांसि विमलाम्भांसि द्रुमाकीर्णांश्च पर्वतान्॥ ५९॥
war, भूमिप्रदेशांश्च वनानि फलवन्ति a
मध्येन च समन्ताच्च तिर्यक् चाधश्च साविशत्॥ ६०॥
a हृष्टवदना: सर्वे जग्मुर्मारुतरंहस:॥६१॥
ह्रयो राघवस्यार्थे समारोपितविक्रमा:।
Be वीर्यं बलोद्रेकान् दर्शयन्त: परस्परम्॥६२॥
यौवनोत्सेकजाद् cig विविधांश्चक्रुरध्वनि।
wa faq gt जग्मुरुत्पेतुश्च तथापरे॥६३॥
केचित् किलकिलां चक्रुर्वानरा वनगोचरा:।
प्रास्फोटयंश्च पुच्छानि संनिजघ्नु: पदान्यपि॥ ६४॥
Intercepting the sunlight, the terrible
dust raised by the monkeys—who consisted
of some tiger-like bears and monkeys having
nails and teeth for their weapons—with the
fore parts of their hands and feet covered
the earth. Like a continuous line of clouds
enveloping the heavens, the formidable army
of monkeys proceeded along encompassing
the southern quarter alongwith the mountains,
the woods and the sky. While the army
crossed the rivers on the way, all their
currents flowed in the opposite direction for
many leagues continuously. The aforesaid
army entered lakes with pellucid waters
through the centre, mountains clothed with
trees obliquely, level plains through every
side and woodlands laden with fruit from
underneath. The huge army thus advanced,

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA +

covering the entire globe all over, as it
were. Their prowess in the cause of Sri
Rama having redoubled, all the aforesaid
monkeys wore a cheerful countenance and
moved with the swiftness of the wind.
Exhibiting joy, prowess and superior strength
in relation to one another through haughtiness
born of high spirits natural to youth, they
made various gestures on the way (as
follows). Some of them walked quickly, while
others sprang in the air. Still other monkeys,
who ranged in the woods, emitted sounds
expressive of joy, lashed their tail and also
stamped their feet. (56—64)

भुजान् विक्षिप्य शैलांश्च द्रुमानन्ये बभञ्जिरे।
आरोहन्तश्च शृङ्गाणि गिरीणां गिरिगोचरा:॥ ६५॥
Stretching their arms, and climbing up
the peaks of mountains, other monkeys (lit.,
rangers of mountains) broke off the rocks
and trees. (65)

महानादान् प्रमुञ्जचन्ति श्र्वेडामन्ये प्रचक्रिरे।
ऊरुवेगैश्च ममृदुर्लताजालान्यनेकश: ॥ ६६ ॥

Some thundered at the top of their
voice, while others roared like lions. Still
others destroyed many networks of creepers
with a jerk of their thighs. (66)

जृम्भमाणाश्च विक्रान्ता विचिक्रीडु: शिलाद्रुमै: |
ad: शतसहस्रैश्च कोटिभिश्च सहस्रश:॥६७॥
वानराणां सुघोराणां श्रीमत्परिव्रता मही।
सा स्म ata दिवारात्रं महती हरिवाहिनी॥ ६८॥
Even while stretching their limbs at the
time of yawning, some powerful monkeys
sported with rocks and trees. Presently the
earth was splendidly covered by thousands,
nay, lakhs and crores of most formidable
monkeys. The huge army of monkeys thus
moved on day and night. (67-68)

प्रहष्टमुदिता: सर्वे सुग्रीवेणाभिषपालिता:।
वानरास्त्वरिता यान्ति सर्वे युद्धाभिनन्दिन:।
प्रमोक्षयिषव: dat मुहूर्तं क्वापि नावसन्॥६९॥
