* SUNDARAKANDA +

147

Canto XXXI

Transported with joy to hear the story commencing from the birth of
Sri Rama and ending with Hanuman’s espying Sita, narrated in a
human tongue by Hanuman, remaining perched on the Sirhsapa
tree and casting her eyes all round, Sita catches sight
of Hanuman sitting on a bough of the same
Sirngapa tree beneath which she stood

संश्रवे मधुरं वाक्यं वैदेह्या व्याजहार ह॥१॥

Having indulged in speculation of various
kinds as aforesaid, Hanuman who was
endowed with extraordinary intelligence, they
say, made the following sweet speech within
the hearing of Sita: (1)

राजा दशरथो नाम रथकुञ्जरवाजिमान्।
पुण्यशीलो महाकोर्तिरिक्ष्वाकूणां महायशा:॥ २॥

“In the line of the Ikswakus there was
a highly illustrious and greatly renowned
king named DaSaratha, who was given to
meritorious deeds and owned excellent
chariots, elephants and horses. (2)

राजर्षीणां गुणश्रेष्ठस्तपसा चर्षिभि: सम:।
चक्रवर्तिकुले Wa: पुरंदरसमो बले॥३॥

“Born in a line of universal monarchs,
he was the foremost of royal sages in point
of virtues, vied with seers in asceticism and
was a compeer of Indra, the ruler of gods,
in might. (3)

अहिंसारतिरक्षुद्रो uit सत्यपराक्रम:।
मुख्यस्येक्ष्वाकुवंशस्य लक्ष्मीवाँल्लक्ष्मिवर्धन:॥४॥
पार्थिवव्यञ्जनैर्युक्त पृथुश्री: पार्थिवर्षभ:।
पृथिव्यां चतुरन्तायां विश्रुत: सुखद: सुखी॥ it
“That jewel among monarchs took
delight in harmlessness, was magnanimous,
compassionate and distinguished by unfailing
prowess. He enhanced the glory of the
already distinguished line of Ikswaku, was
full of prosperity, adorned with all the bodily
marks, distinguishing a ruler of the earth,

was endowed with a vast splendour and
well-known all over the earth bounded by
the four seas in the four quarters, and was
not only happy himself but conferred
happiness on others too. (4-5)
तस्य Ua: प्रियो ज्येष्ठस्ताराधिपनिभानन:।
Twa aa विशेषज्ञ: ses: सर्वधनुष्मताम्॥६॥
“His favourite eldest son, whose
countenance resembled the full moon, nay,
who was skilled in archery and the foremost

of all bowmen, was known by the name of
Rama. (6)

रक्षिता स्वस्य वृत्तस्य स्वजनस्यापि रक्षिता।
erat जीवलोकस्य ate च परंतप:॥७॥

“Sri Rama, the scourge of his foes, was
a zealous upholder of his own character, the
protector also of his own people, nay the
protector of the whole world of living beings
and the defender of righteousness. (7)

तस्य सत्याभिसंधस्य वृद्धस्य वचनात् fig: |
सभार्य: सह च भ्रात्रा वीर: प्रव्रजितो वनम्॥८॥

“In deference to the plighted word (given
to his own stepmother) of his aforesaid
father, who was aged and true to his promise,
the hero, accompanied by his consort and
his younger brother, Laksmana, proceeded
in exile to the forest. (8)

wt तत्र महारण्ये मृगयां परिधावता।
Tae निहता: शूरा बहव: कामरूपिण:॥९॥
“By him, while chasing game in that

vast forest, were slain many gallant ogres,
able to change their form at will. (9)
