« Procedure of reading the full Valmiki-Ramayana in nine days « 11

a: Wea जनकात्मजाया:।
आदाय तेनैव ददाह लङ्कां

जितेन्द्रियं बुद्धिमतां वरिष्ठम्।
वातात्मजं वानरयूथमुख्यं

श्रीरामदूतं शिरसा नमामि॥

“| salute Hanuman (son of the wind-god), who sprang across the sea as though it
were an impression made by the hoof of a cow, (nay) who crushed the ogres (of Lanka)
as though they were (So many) mosquitoes and who is a jewel (as it were) adorning the
great necklace of (the story of) the Ramayana. | bow down to the heroic Hanuman (a ruler
of monkeys), the delight of Afjana (his mother), who dispelled the grief of Sita (Janaka’s
Daughter), made short work of Aksa (son of Ravana, the demon king of Lanka) and
proved a source of terror to Lanka. | bow down with joined palms to the celebrated
Hanuman (son of Afijana), who, having leapt across the water of the sea (parting the land
of Bharatavarsa from Lanka, which is now identified with the Laccadive Islands) as a
matter of sport and, picking up the fire of grief of Sita (Janaka’s Daughter) burnt Lanka
with that very fire. | contemplate on the son of Anjana, the delight of the wind-god, who
has a bloodred-face, is endowed with a personality charming as a mountain of gold and
who has taken up his abode at the foot of a Parijata tree (one of the five kinds of celestial
tree credited with the virtue of granting one’s desire). Bow to Hanuman (son of the wind-
god), the destroyer of ogres, who is present with his palms joined above his head and with
his eyes flooded with tears (of joy) wherever the names and praises of the Lord of the
Raghus are being sung. | bow my head to Hanuman (son of the wind-god), a leader of
the army of monkeys and the foremost of those endowed with intelligence, who is swift
as thought, (nay) who equals the wind-god in speed and has mastered his senses, and
who played the role of an envoy of Sri Rama (in delivering His message to Sita and
ascertaining the strength of Ravana, who had stolen Her away).”

MEDITATION ON SRI RAMA AND HIS ENTOURAGE

वैदेहीसहितं सुरद्रुमतले हैमे महामण्डपे

मध्येषुष्पयकमासने मणिमये वीरासने संस्थितम्।
अग्रे वाचयति प्रभञ्जनसुते तत्त्वं मुनिभ्य: परं

व्याख्यातं भरतादिभि: परिव्रृतं रामं भजे श्यामलम्॥
वामे भूमिसुता पुरस्तु हनुमान् पश्चात् सुमित्रासुत:

शत्रुघ्नो भरतश्च पार्श्वदलयोर्वाय्वादिकोणेषु च।
सुग्रीवश्च विभीषणश्च gente तारासुतो जाम्बवान्

मध्ये नीलसरोजकोमलरुचिं रामं भजे श्यामलम्॥

