+ UTTARAKANDA +

Then the gods, indeed, worshipped the
God that was Visnu in form, so also the
Sadhyas, the hoots of Maruts, with Indra
and Agni leading as their head. (13)
ये च fee ऋषिगणा गन्धर्वाप्सरसश्च ar: |
सुपर्णनागयक्षाश्च दैत्यदानवराक्षसा: 1 १४॥
साधुसाध्विति तैर्देवैस्त्रिदिवं गतकल्मषम्॥१५॥
All those divine sages and also the
Gandharvas and Apsaras, Suparnas, the
Nagas and the Yaksas, the sons of Diti, the
demons and the Raksasas (ogres) were
stout and happy and had their desires
fulfilled—so the gods uttered ‘well done’
seeing the  three-worlds blemishless.
(14-15)

aq विष्णुर्महातेजा: पितामहमुवाच ह।
एषां लोकं जनौघानां दातुमर्हसि Pad ec

Then the powerful Visnu (Rama) spoke
to Brahma, ‘O accomplisher of vows, you
should grant to these hosts of men also the
‘lokas’, ethereal spheres. (16)

sa fe ad स्नेहान्मामनुयाता यशस्विन:।
भक्ता fe भजितव्याश्च त्यक्तात्मानश्च मत्कृते॥ १७॥

‘All of these renowned beings have
followed me due to their extreme affection
for me. My devotees, who forsook their
mundane comforts, are indeed worthy of my
favour.’ (17)
तच्छुत्वा विष्णुवचनं TEM लोकगुरु: WY: |
लोकान् सांतानिकान्नामयास्यन्तीमे समागता: ॥ १८ ॥

Having heard these words of Lord Visnu,
Brahma, the lord and preceptor of the three

worlds, said: ‘All these who have come here
will go to the world named Santanaka. (18)

aed तिर्यग्गतं किंचित् त्वामेवमनुचिन्तयत्।
प्राणांस्त्यक्ष्यति भक्त्या तत् संतानेषु निवत्स्यति॥ १९॥
सर्वैर्ब्रह्मगुणैर्युक्ते ब्रह्मलोकादनन्तरे |
वानराश्च स्विकां योनिमृक्षाश्चैव तथा ययु:॥ २०॥

‘That animal which will breathe last
thinking of you in this manner will leave its

1133

mortal frame and shall reside in Santanaka
due to devotion to you. They will reside in
the world of Santanaka, close to the world
of Brahma and replete with all the merits
of Brahma. The monkeys and the bears
also entered their primeval forms (godhood).

(19-20)

येभ्यो विनि:सृता: Wa सुरेभ्य: सुरसम्भवा:।
ay प्रविविशे wa सुग्रीव: सूर्यमण्डलम्॥ २१॥

‘All those monkeys and bears born of
gods entered into that form of the god from
which they had sprung; among them Sugriva
entered the orb of the sun. (21)

तथा gata देवेशे गोप्रतारमुपागता:॥२२॥

‘They united with their ancestors,
watched by all the gods. Speaking thus, all
approached Gopratara (a ford on the bank
of the Sarayu). (22)

भेजिरे ws wd हर्षपूर्णाश्रुविक्लवा:।
अवगाह्याप्सु यो यो वै प्राणांस्त्यक्त्वा प्रहृष्टवत्॥ 23 Ul
मानुषं देहमुत्सृज्य विमानं सोऽध्यरोहत।
तिर्यग्योनिगतानां च शतानि सरयूजलम्॥ २४॥
सम्प्राप्य त्रिदिवं wy: wararagh तु।
दिव्या दिव्येन वपुषा car दीप्ता इवाभवन्॥ 24 Ul
‘They entered the Sarayu agitated by
tears of joy. Whoever took bath in the waters
of the Sarayu, they after leaving their bodies
happily and discarding the human forms,
ascended the divine chariot. Those, in animal
form in hundreds, having come in touch with
the waters of the Sarayu, went to heaven
and with lustrous bodies, became divine
with divine forms and as lustrous as the
gods. (23—25)

गत्वा तु सरयूतोयं स्थावराणि चराणि च।
प्राप्य तत्तोयविक्लेदं देवलोकमुपागमन्॥ २६॥

‘Even the moving animals and
stationary objects, having bathed in the
waters of the Sarayu went to the world of
gods. (26)
