694

ललाटे भ्रुकुटीभिश्च संगताभिर्व्यरोचत।
युगान्ते सह नक्रैस्तु महोर्मिभिरिवोदधि:॥ १८॥

Nay, with eyebrows contracted on his
forehead, he shone brightly like the ocean
at the end of a world-cycle with crocodiles
and large waves. (18)

कोपाद् विजृम्भमाणस्य वक्त्राद् व्यक्तमिवज्वलन्।
उत्पपात सधूमाग्निर्वृत्रस्य वदनादिव॥१९॥

From the mouth of Ravana, even as
he yawned in rage, burst forth a flame with
smoke as though visibly burning, as it actually
did from the mouth of the demon Vrtra in the
former days. (19)
स पुत्रवधसंतप्त: शूर: क्रोधवशं गत:।
समीक्ष्य रावणो बुद्धया वैदेह्या WAT AMA It २०॥

Pondering with his mind, the evil-minded
Ravana, who, though heroic, had fallen a
prey to anger, afflicted as he was with the

fall of his son, resolved upon the destruction
of Sita. (20)
तस्य प्रकृत्या Th च रक्ते क्रोधाग्निनापि च।
रावणस्य महाघोरे दीप्ते AT बभूवतु:॥ २१॥
The eyes of the aforesaid Ravana,
which were naturally red and were glowing
red through the fire of anger, looked very
dreadful. (21)
चोरं प्रकृत्या Wa तत् तस्य क्रोधाग्निमूच्छितम्।
aya रूपं क्रुद्धस्य रुद्रस्येव दुरासदम्॥२२॥
The aspect of Ravana, which was
terrible by nature, and was overcome by the
fire of wrath, became threatening like that of
Rudra, the god of destruction, in rage. (22)
तस्य क्रुद्धस्य नेत्राभ्यां प्रापतन्नश्रुबिन्दव:।
दीपाभ्यामिव दीप्ताभ्यां सार्चिष: स्नेहबिन्दव: ।। २३॥
Tears fell from the eyes of the angry
Ravana like flaming drops of oil from a pair
of burning lamps. (23)

दन्तान् विदशतस्तस्य श्रूयते दशनस्वन:।
यन्त्रस्याकृष्यमाणस्य wad दानवैरिव॥ २४॥

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA +

The sound produced by the friction of
his teeth even as he ground them was
heard like the noise of the rod (in the shape
of Mount Mandara) which churned the ocean
of milk while being revolved by the Danavas
(devils) in collaboration with gods. (24)
कालाग्निरिव संक्रुद्धो at at दिशमवैक्षत।
तस्यां तस्यां भयत्रस्ता राक्षसा: संविलिल्यिरे॥ २५ Ul

Stricken with fear, ogres hid themselves
(behind pillars etc.) in the very quarter to
which he directed his look, infuriated as he
was like the fire of universal destruction.

(25)
तमन्तकमिव gee चराचरचिखादिषुम्।
वीक्षमाणं दिश: सर्वा राक्षसा नोपचक्रमु:॥ २६॥

Ogres dared not approach Ravana,
who was surveying all the four quarters,
eager as he was like enraged Death to
devour both the mobile and immobile creation.

(26)
तत: परमसंक्रुद्धो रावणो राक्षसाधिप:।
अब्रवीद् रक्षसां मध्ये संस्तम्भयिषुराहवे॥ २७॥

Eager to rally the ogres on the field of
battle, Ravana, the suzerain lord of ogres,
who was extremely enraged, spoke as
follows in their midst: (27)
मया वर्षसहस्राणि चरित्वा परमं aa:
तेषु तेष्ववकाशेषु way: परितोषित:॥ २८॥

“Having practised rigorous austerities
for thousands of years, | propitiated Brahma,

the self-born creator, at the conclusion of
those austerities. (28)

तस्यैव तपसो व्युष्ट्या प्रसादाच्च स्वयंभुव: |

नासुरेभ्यो न देवेभ्यो भयं मम कदाचन॥ २९॥
“As a reward of those very austerities

and through the grace of the self-born creator,

there is no danger to me at any time either
from the demons or from the gods. (29)

कवचं aed A यदादित्यसमप्रभम्।
देवासुरविमर्देषु न च्छिन्नं वज्रमुष्टिभि:।॥। ३०॥
