* AYODHYAKANDA +

443

Canto XL

Going clockwise round DaSaratha (as a token of respect), Sita, Rama and
Laksmana greet him. Accompanied by Sita, Sri Rama salutes Kausalya.
Laksmana too hails Kausalya first and then his own mother, Sumitra.
Sumitra for her part tenders salutary advice to her son. The princes
and the princess having mounted the chariot, Sumantra flicks
the horses. The citizens that had assembled, closely follow
the chariot; but unable to keep pace with its swift
movement, they return desolate. DaSaratha too
runs after the chariot alongwith Kausalya
and others, but being unable to walk
begins to totter and stops short
on the road yielding to the
remonstrances of his
wise ministers

अथ Way सीता च लक्ष्मणश्च Harter: |
उपसंगृह्य राजानं चक्रुर्दीना: प्रदक्षिणम्॥१॥
Clasping the feet of and bowing to the
king, Sri Rama and Sita as well as
Laksmana, who felt miserable (because of
their inability to be of any service to their
aged parents) forthwith went round him
clockwise with folded hands. (1)
तं चापि समनुज्ञाप्य धर्मज्ञ: सह सीतया।
Wad: शोकसम्मूढो जननीमभ्यवादयत्॥ २॥
Duly obtaining leave of him and
accompanied by Sita, Sri Rama (a scion of
Raghu), who knew what is right and stood

through desolate grief of his mother, bowed
to Kausalya. (2)

अन्वक्षं लक्ष्मणो wid: कौसल्यामभ्यवादयत्।
aft मातु: सुमित्राया wore चरणौ पुन:॥३॥
Following at the heels of his brother,

Laksmana too greeted Kausalya; then he
clasped the feet of his own mother, Sumitra.

(3)
तं वन्दमानं रुदती माता सौमित्रिमब्रवीत्।
हितकामा महाबाहुं मूर्ध्यपाघ्राय लक्ष्मणम्॥४॥

Smelling as a token of affection the
head of the mighty-armed Laksmana, who
was saluting her, the mother, who wished
well of him, spoke weeping to that son of
hers as follows : (4)

Gerd वनवासाय स्वनुरक्त: सुहृज्जने।
TH प्रमादं मा कार्षी: UA भ्रातरि गच्छति॥ ५॥
“Excessively fond as you are of your
kinsman, Rama, you have been permitted
by me to dwell in the forest with your eldest
brother. But do not neglect, my son, the
service of your brother, Rama, who is going
with you. (5)

व्यसनी वा समृद्धो at गतिरेष तवानघ।
एष लोके सतां धर्मो यज्ज्येष्ठवशगो भवेत्॥६॥

“He alone is your refuge, whether in
adversity or in affluent circumstances, O
sinless one! Such is the rule of conduct
followed by the virtuous in the world that a
younger brother should be subject to the
control of his elder brother. (6)
se fe quad कुलस्यास्य सनातनम्।
दानं dat च aay तनुत्यागो मृधेषु हि॥७॥
