# YUDDHAKANDA #

with Sita? Nay, bereft of Kumbhakarna, |
have no mind even to preserve my life. (17)

यद्यहं Wdedt न हन्मि युधि राघवम्।
ननु मे मरणं श्रेयो न Ae व्यर्थजीवितम्॥ ec i
“If | do not kill in combat Rama (a scion
of Raghu), the destroyer of my brother,
surely death is best for me; but in no case
this life has no meaning for me now. (18)
अद्यैव तं गमिष्यामि देशं यत्रानुजो मम।
नहि UI समुत्सृज्य क्षणं जीवितुमुत्सहे॥१९॥
“| shall proceed this very day to that
region where my _ younger _ brother,
Kumbhakarna, is. Indeed, sending away
my brothers, | dare not survive even for an
instant. (19)

देवा fe मां हसिष्यन्ति दृष्टवा पूर्वापकारिणम्।
कथमिन्द्रं जयिष्यामि कुम्भकर्णं हते त्वयि॥ २०॥
“Surely on seeing me, who have
wronged them in the past, the gods will
mock me. Now that you have been killed,
how shall ।, O Kumbhakarna, be able to
conquer Indra, the ruler of gods? (20)
तदिदं मामनुप्राप्तं विभीषणवच: शुभम्।
यदज्ञानान्मया तस्य न गृहीत महात्मन: WR Il
“This calamity, which was adumbrated

575

by that high-souled Vibhisana, has fallen upon
me only because his wholesome advice was
not accepted by me through ignorance. (21)

विभीषणवचस्तावत् कुम्भकर्णप्रहस्तयो:।
विनाशोऽयं समुत्पन्नो मां व्रीडयति दारुण:॥ २२॥
“Ever since the cruel शार्प of
Kumbhakarna and Prahasta came about
the other day, the admonition of Vibhisana
is making me blush. (22)

तस्यायं कर्मण: प्राप्तो विपाको मम शोकद:।
यन्मया धार्मिक: श्रीमान् स निरस्तो विभीषण: ॥ २३ ॥

“Since the pious and fortunate Vibhisana
was expelled by me, this bitter fruit of that
action, which is a source of grief, has come

to me.” (23)

इति बहुविधमाकुलान्तरात्मा
कृपणमतीव विलप्य कुम्भकर्णम्।

न्यपतदपि दशाननो भृशार्त-
स्तमनुजमिन्द्ररिपुं हतं विदित्वा॥ २४॥

Having thus lamented piteously and
profusely in various ways on coming to
know of his aforesaid younger brother,
Kumbhakarna, an enemy of Indra, having
been killed, Ravana (the ten-headed
monster), whose inmost mind was agitated,
sank down sore distressed. (24)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये युद्धकाण्डेऽष्टषष्टितम: सर्ग: ॥ GC Il
Thus ends Canto Sixty-eight in the Yuddhakanda of the glorious Ramayana
of Valmiki, the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

एकोनसप्ततितम: सर्ग:
Canto LXIX

Ravana’s sons and brothers sally forth for an encounter and
Narantaka meets with his death at the hands of Angada

एवं विलपमानस्य रावणस्य दुरात्मन:।
श्रुत्वा शोकाभिभूतस्य त्रिशिरा वाक्यमब्रवीत्॥ १॥

Hearing the utterance of the evil-minded

Ravana, who was lamenting as aforesaid,
overcome as he was with grief, Trisira
(one of his sons) submitted as follows:

(1)
