३62

such words expressing doubt about my
devotion to my father! You ought not to
speak such words to me, O glorious lady !
At the bidding of my father | am actually
prepared to leap into fire. (28)
“aaa fas dent पतेयमपि चार्णवे।
नियुक्तो गुरुणा frat नृपेण च हितेन च॥ २९॥
“Commanded by the Emperor, who is
my teacher, father and friend, all in one, |
might as well swallow deadly poison and
take a plunge into the ocean. (29)

ae we वचनं देवि tat यदभिकांक्षितम्।
करिष्ये प्रतिजाने च रामो द्विर्नाभिभाषते॥ ३०॥

“Therefore, speak out what you have
got to say, O glorious lady ! | shall do that
which is coveted by the king and give my
plighted word for it. Know that Rama does
not speak twice.” (30)

तमार्जवसमायुक्तमनार्या सत्यवादिनम्।
उवाच रामं कैकेयी वचनं भृशदारुणम्॥ ३१॥

To the said Sri Rama, who always
spoke the truth and was richly adorned with
guilelessness, the ignoble Kaikeyi addressed
the following exceptionally cruel words :

(31)

पुरा carat युद्धे frat ते मम Waal
रक्षितेन att दत्तौ सशल्येन महारणे॥ ३२॥

“Formerly in the course of a conflict
between gods and demons, O scion of
Raghu, a couple of boons were granted to
me by your father, who had been rescued
by me in a major battle when a shaft which
remained dug into his body and was extracted
afterwards by me. (32)

wa 8 याचितो राजा भरतस्याभिषेचनम्।
Tat दण्डकारण्ये तव चाद्यैव राघव॥ ३३॥

“As against those boons the king was
solicited by me this very day to acquiesce
in the installation as Prince Regent of Bharata
and your departure to the Dandaka forest,
O scion of Raghu! (33)

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA +

ate सत्यप्रतिज्ञं त्वं पितरं कर्तुमिच्छसि।
आत्मानं च नरश्रेष्ठ AN वाक्यमिदं श्रृणु॥ ३४॥
“If you want to prove your father and
yourself to be true to your promises, O
jewel among men, please listen to the following
exhortation of mine: (34)

संनिदेशे पितुस्तिष्ठं यथानेन प्रतिश्रुतम्।
त्वयारण्यं प्रवेष्टव्यं aq वर्षाणि uy च॥ ३५॥

“Be faithful to the word of your father:
as promised by him, you ought to retire to
the woods for nine years and five. (35)

भरतश्चाभिषिच्येत यदेतदभिषेचनम्।
त्वदर्थे विहितं war तेन सर्वेण राघव॥ ३६॥

“And let Bharata be consecrated with
all the material that has been got together
by the king for your consecration, O scion
of Raghu ! (36)

सप्त aa च वर्षाणि दण्डकारण्यमाश्रित:।
अभिषेकमिदं त्यक्त्वा जटाचीरधरो vai ३७॥

“Forgoing the forthcoming installation
and ensconced in the Dandaka forest, wear
matted locks and the bark of trees for seven
and seven years. (37)

भरत: कोसलपते: प्रशास्तु वसुधामिमाम्।
नानारत्नसमाकीर्णां सवाजिरथसंकुलाम्॥ ३८॥

“Let Bharata rule with an iron hand
over this globe which is owned by DaSaratha,
the king of Ayodhya, and is full of precious
stones of various kinds and crowded with
chariots driven by horses. (38)

एतेन त्वां नरेन्द्रोऽयं कारुण्येन समाप्लुत:।
शोकै: संक्लिष्टवदनो न शक्नोति निरीक्षितुम्॥ ३९॥

“Overwhelmed with compassion for you
due to this circumstance of having granted
a couple of boons in my favour, this monarch
cannot even gaze at you, his face withered
from grief. (39)

Wid ge नरेन्द्रस्य वचनं रघुनन्दन।
Wat महता राम तारयस्व नरेश्वरम्॥४०॥

“Implement this pledge of the Emperor,
O delight of the Raghus! By vindicating his
