« KISKINDHAKANDA +

निष्पन्नसस्यां वसुधां च कृत्वा
त्यक्त्वा नभस्तोयधरा: प्रणष्टा: ।। ५७॥
“Having saturated the earth with
abundant rainfall and filling the rivers and
tanks, nay, having provided the earth with
ripe corns and leaving the sky, the clouds
have totally disappeared. (57)

दर्शयन्ति शरन्नद्य: पुलिनानि शनै: शनै:।
नवसंगमसव्रीडा जघनानीब AT Ne

“The autumnal streams gradually reveal
their banks in the same way as brides
bashful in their first meeting with their spouse
uncover their body by degrees. (58)
प्रसन्नसलिला: सौम्य कुरराभिविनादिता:।
चक्रवाकगणाकीर्णा विभान्ति सलिलाशया: ॥ ५९ ॥

“With their pellucid water, the lakes
and ponds, which are made noisy by ospreys
and crowded with swarms of Cakravaka
birds (a species of red geese), look very
charming, O gentle one ! (59)
अन्योन्यबद्धवैराणां जिगीषूणां नृपात्मज।
उद्योगसमय: सौम्य पार्थिवानामुपस्थित:॥६०॥

“The time has come for kings who
have deep-seated animosity with one another
and are thirsting for conquest to embark on
their military campaigns, O gentle prince !

(60)
इयं सा प्रथमा यात्रा पार्थिवानां नॄपात्मज।
न च पश्यामि सुग्रीवमुद्योगं च तथाविधम्॥६१॥

“This is the occasion for kings to
undertake their very first expedition for
conquest after the monsoon, O prince! |,
however, neither see Sugriva nor any
endeavour of that kind on his part so far.

(61)

असना: सप्तपर्णाश्च कोविदाराश्च पुष्पिता:।
wat बन्धुजीवाश्च श्यामाश्च Ragu ez

“Asana and Saptaparna as well as
Kovidara and Bandhujiva as also Tamala
trees are seen in blossom on the mountain-
peaks. (62)

1053

हंससारसचक्राह्वै कुरैश्च समन्तत:।
पुलिनान्यवकीर्णानि नदीनां पश्य ASAT ६३॥

“See, 0 Laksmana, the sandy banks
of rivers crowded with swans, cranes and
Cakravakas as well as with ospreys on all
sides. (63)

चत्वारो वार्षिका मासा Wat वर्षशतोपमा:।
Wa शोकाभितप्तस्य तथा सीतामपश्यत:॥६४॥

“The four rainy months have well-nigh
elapsed like a hundred years past me,
tormented as | am with grief because | do
not behold Sita. (64)

चक्रवाकीव Wat पृष्ठतोऽनुगता वनम्।
विषमं दण्डकारण्यमुद्यानमिव चाङ्गना॥६५॥

“The belle followed at my back to the
forest of Dandaka, which was hard to
penetrate, even as a female Cakravaka
would follow her mate to a garden. (65)

प्रियाविहीने दु:खार्ते हृतराज्ये विवासिते।
Pa न Hed राजा सुग्रीवो मयि ceo ६६॥

“King Sugriva, 0 Laksmana, is not
showing his goodwill to me, even though |
am bereft of my darling, stricken with agony,
deprived of my kingdom and exiled from my
home. (66)
अनाथो Bass रावणेन च धर्षित:।
दीनो दूरगृह: कामी at चैव शरणं गत:॥६७॥
sad: कारणै: सौम्य सुग्रीवस्य दुरात्मन:।
we arma परिभूत: परंतप:॥६८॥

“A scorcher of foes, as | am, | have
been held in contempt by Sugriva, the evil-
minded king of monkeys, on the grounds
that | am forlorn, have been deprived of my
kingdom and outraged by Ravana, that | am

miserable, far from my home and love-sick
and have sought him for protection. (67-68)

a कालं परिसंख्याय सीताया: परिमार्गणे।
कृतार्थ: समयं Heat दुर्मतिर्नावबुध्यते॥६९॥

“Having fixed a limit of time for the
search of Sita and arrived at an
