960

resembling the great Indra’s thunderbolt and
looking like angry serpents, O highly blessed
one ! (22-23)
वालिसंज्ञममित्रं a भ्रातरं कृतकिल्बिषम्।
शरैर्विनिहतं ust विकीर्णमिव पर्वतम्॥ २४॥
“See your hostile brother, Known by
the name of Vali, who has done you wrong,
struck down with arrows like च cleft
mountain.” (24)

राघवस्य वच: sear सुग्रीवो वाहिनीपति:।
प्रहर्षमतुलं लेभे साधु साध्विति चाब्रवीत्॥ २५॥

Sugriva, who was the leader of an
army, derived incomparable joy on hearing
the assurance of Sri Rama (a scion of
Raghu) and said, “Excellent! Bravo !! (25)

राम शोकाभिभूतोऽहं शोकार्तानां भवान् गति: ।
वयस्य sit कृत्वा fe त्वय्यहं परिदेवये॥ २६॥

“lam overwhelmed with grief, while
you are the refuge of those stricken with
grief. | ventilate my grievance to you, knowing
you as | do to be my friend. (26)

त्वं fe पाणिप्रदानेन वयस्यो मेऽग्निसाक्षिकम्।
कृत: प्राणैर्बहुमत: सत्येन च शपाम्यहम्॥ २७॥

“By offering my hand of friendship
to you, we have been made friends, with
fire as a witness and you are more highly
esteemed than my very life. | swear by
truth. (27)

वयस्य इति कृत्वा च विस्रब्ध: प्रवदाम्यहम्।
दु:ख्मन्तर्गतं तन्मे wT aft नित्यश:॥ २८॥

“Nay, recognizing you to be my friend,
| have revealed to you in confidence the
sorrow residing in my heart, which distracts
my mind from day to day.” (28)

एतावदुक्त्वा वचनं बाष्पदूषितलोचन:।
बाष्पदूषितया ATA नोच्चै: शक्नोति भाषितुम्॥ २९॥

Having spoken words to the extent
noted above, his eyes bedimmed with tears,
he could not speak aloud any more due to
his voice getting choked with tears. (29)

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

aaa तु सहसा नदीवेगमिवागतम्।
धारयामास धैर्येण सुग्रीवो रामसंनिधौ॥ ३०॥

By recourse to firmness in the presence
of Sri Rama, Sugriva, however, controlled
the stream of his tears that had precipitately
welled up like a river in spate. (30)

a निगृह्य तु तं बाष्पं प्रमृज्य नयने शुभे।
विनि:श्वस्य च तेजस्वी राघवं पुनरूचिवान्॥ ३१॥

Restraining those tears, nay, wiping
his charming eyes and drawing a deep
breath, the strong-willed monkey for his part
submitted to Sri Rama (a scion of Raghu)
once more as follows : (31)

पुराहं वालिना Wa राज्यात् स्वादवरोपित:।
परुषाणि च संश्राव्य निर्धूतोऽस्मि बलीयसा॥ ३२॥

“In the past, O Rama, | was deposed
by Vali from my throne (which | had ascended
under his instruction and with his
concurrence) and, addressing pungent
words, was exiled by him, mightier as he
was. (32)

हृता भार्या च मे तेन प्राणेभ्योऽपि गरीयसी।
सुहृदश्च मदीया a संयता बन्धनेषु ते॥३३॥

“My spouse too, who was more precious
than my very life, was wrested (from me)
by him and those who were my near and
dear ones were bound with chains. (33)

यत्नवांश्च स दुष्टात्मा मद्बिनाशाय राघव।
बहुशस्तप्रयुक्ताश्च वानरा fed मया॥३४॥

“Nay, that malevolent 8०७ is
endeavouring to bring about my destruction,
O scion of Raghu! Monkeys employed by
him for this purpose on many occasions
have been killed by me. (34)

शङ्खया त्वेतयाहं च दृष्ट्वा त्वामपि राघव।
नोपसर्पाम्यहं भीतो wa ad fe बिभ्यति॥ ३५॥

“Nay, dismayed through this fear alone
| could not have courage to approach you
even on seeing you, O scion of Raghu; for
in the face of danger all get nervous. (35)
