* BALAKANDA +

Romapada will instantly part with the sage
Rsyasrnga (the husband of Santa), already
blessed with a son. (6)

प्रतिगृह्यं च तं fad स राजा विगतज्वर:।
आहरिष्यति तं यज्ञं प्रहृष्टेनान्तरात्मना॥७॥

“Taking with him the said Brahmana,
Rsyasrnga, and rid of his agony by securing
his very presence, the celebrated monarch
DaSaratha will perform with his help and
guidance the aforementioned sacrifice for
being blessed with a son, with his inner
mind highly gratified. (7)
तं च राजा दशरथो यशस्काम: कृताञ्जलि: |
mays द्विजश्रेष्ठं वरयिष्यति धर्मवित्॥८॥
यज्ञार्थं प्रसवार्थं च स्वर्गार्थं च नरेश्वर:।
लभते च स तं कामं द्विजमुख्याद् विशाम्पति: eu

“Nay, desirous of fame, King DaSaratha,
the ruler of men, who knows what is right
will request Rsyasrnga, the foremost among
the Brahmanas, with folded hands to officiate
as a priest for conducting the sacrifice, for
obtaining a male progeny and securing an
abode in heaven through a son. And through
that jewel among the Brahmanas, King
DaSaratha, the ruler of the people, will get
that desired object. (8-9)

पुत्राश्चास्य भविष्यन्ति चत्वारोऽमितविक्रमा:।
वंशप्रतिष्ठानकरा: सर्वभूतेषु विश्रुता:॥१०॥
“And as a result of that sacrifice there
will be born to him as many as four sons
possessed of immense prowess, and well-

known among all created beings, who will
bring honour to their lineage.” (10)

Wa स caver: Ud कथितवान् कथाम्।
सनत्कुमारो भगवान् UT देवयुगे प्रभु:॥११॥
So did that omniscient and powerful
sage Sanatkumara, the foremost among
heavenly beings, utter of yore a prophecy in
the Satyayuga, preceding the current round
of four Yugas. (11)

स त्वं पुरुषशार्दूल समानय सुसत्कृतम्।
स्वयमेव महाराज गत्वा सबलवाहन:॥ १२॥

97

“As such, keen as you are to obtain a
male progeny, O tiger among men, bring
you the sage, highly honoured, with due
ceremony, going personally to escort him
with a detachment of your troops and animals
and vehicles used for conveying men, O
great king !” (12)

सुमन्त्रस्य वच: seat हृष्टो दशरथोऽभवत्।
अनुमान्य वसिष्ठं च सूतवाक्यं निशाम्य च॥ १३॥
सान्त:पुर: सहामात्य: प्रययौ यत्र स द्विज:।
वनानि सरितश्चैव व्यतिक्रम्य शनै: शनै:॥ १४॥
अभिचक्राम तं देशं at a मुनिपुंगव:।
आसाद्य तं द्विजश्रेष्ठं रोमपादसमीपगम्॥१५॥
ऋषिपुत्रं ददर्शाथो दीप्यमानमिवानलम्।
ततो राजा यथायोग्यं पूजां चक्रे विशेषत:॥ १६॥
सखित्वात् तस्य वै राज्ञ: प्रहृष्टेनान्तरात्मना।
रोमपादेन चाख्यातमृषिपुत्राय धीमते॥१७॥
सख्यं सम्बन्धकं चैव तदा तं प्रत्यपूजयत्।
एवं सुसत्कृतस्तेन सहोषित्वा नरर्षभ:॥१८॥
सप्ताष्टदिवसान् राजा राजानमिदमब्रवीत्।
शान्ता Aa सुता राजन् सह at विशाम्पते॥ १९॥
तथेति राजा संश्रुत्य गमनं तस्य धीमत:॥ २०॥
sara वचनं विप्रं wes त्वं सह भार्यया।
ऋषिपुत्र: प्रतिश्रुत्य तथेत्याह नृपं तदा॥ २१॥
Dasaratha was rejoiced to hear the
advice of Sumantra; nay, having conveyed
the opinion of the charioteer to Vasistha and
on securing his consent, king Dasaratha
proceeded with the queens (the inmates of
his gynaeceum) as well as with his ministers
to the place where that Brahmana was—
passing through forests and crossing streams,
he gradually reached that land where
Rsyasrnga, the foremost among the sages,
actually lived. Reaching that place, he forthwith
saw the son of Vibhandaka, the foremost
among the Brahmanas, resplendent as
fire and seated near Romapada. With an
extremely delighted mind the king (Romapada)
thereupon offered worship in order of seniority
to the emperor as well as to those who
