# YUDDHAKANDA +

ama रक्षसां राजा यथोक्तं वचनं ATU २२॥
(Addressing the ogres again) “On
returning to the great city of Lanka, Ravana
(a younger half-brother of Kubera), the ruler
of ogres, should be spoken to by you in my
words as actually uttered by me: (22)
aq बलं त्वं समाश्रित्य सीतां A हृतवानसि।
तद् दर्शय यथाकामं ससैन्यश्च सबान्धव:॥ २३॥
“‘Display at will with your troops and
kinsmen the strength relying on which you
stole away my Sita. (23)
श्च: काल्ये नगरीं लङ्कां सप्राकारां सतोरणाम्।
रक्षसां च बलं usa शरैर्विध्वंसितं मया॥ evi
“*Tomorrow at break of day behold the
city of Lanka, with its defensive walls
and arches, as well as the army of
ogres completely destroyed by me with
arrows. (24)
क्रोधं भीममहं aed ससैन्ये त्वयि रावण।
Va: काल्ये वज्रवान् वज्रं दानवेष्विव वासव: । २५ ॥
“‘Tomorrow at daybreak | shall let loose
my terrible wrath on you, including your
forces, O Ravana, even as Indra, the wielder

of the thunderbolt, discharges his thunderbolt
on the demons.’ ” (25)

इति प्रतिसमादिष्टौ राक्षसौ शुकसारणौ।
जयेति प्रतिनन्द्यैनं राघवं धर्मवत्सलम्॥ २६॥
आगम्य नगरीं लङ्कामब्रूतां राक्षसाधिषम्।
विभीषणगृहीतौ तु वधार्थं राक्षसेश्वर॥ २७॥
दृष्टवा धर्मात्मना मुक्तौ रामेणामिततेजसा।
एकस्थानगता यत्र चत्वार: पुरुषर्षभा:॥ २८॥
लोकपालसमा: शूरा: कृतास्त्रा दूढविक्रमा:।
WaT दाशरथि: श्रीमाँल्लक्ष्मणश्च विभीषण: ॥ २९॥
सुग्रीवश्च महातेजा महेन्द्रसमविक्रम:।
Ud शक्ता: पुरीं लङ्कां सप्राकारां सतोरणाम्॥ ३०॥
sured संक्रामयितुं wd तिष्ठन्तु वानरा:।
यादृशं तद्धि रामस्य रूपं प्रहरणानि Wise

381

वधिष्यति पुरीं लङ्कामेकस्तिष्ठन्तु ते त्रय:।
रामलक्ष्मणगुप्ता सा सुग्रीवेण च वाहिनी।
aya दुर्धर्षतरा सर्वैरपि सुरासुरै:॥ ३२॥

Hailing the aforesaid Sri Rama, a scion
of Raghu, a lover of piety, in the words “Be
victorious!” when commanded by Sri Rama
as above and returning to the city of Lanka,
the two ogres, Suka and Sarana submitted
as follows to Ravana, the suzerain lord of
ogres: “On seeing us taken captive by
Vibhisana for killing us, O lord of ogres, we,
for our part, were set free by Rama, whose
mind is given to piety and who is endowed
with immense energy. Since these four
jewels among men, who are valiant like the
guardians of the world, skilled in archery
and unyielding in prowess, viz., the glorious
Rama, son of DaSaratha, and Laksmana,
Vibhisana, and Sugriva, who is endowed
with great energy and is equal to the mighty
Indra in prowess, are at one place, they are
able to transplant elsewhere, the city of
Lanka with its protective walls and arches,
after tearing up its foundations, even if all
the monkeys keep aloof. Surely, he who
possesses charm as well as weapons, the
like of which are possessed by Sri Rama,
would destroy the city of Lanka single-
handed, even if the other three stand by.
Protected by Rama and Laksmana as well
as by Sugriva, that army of monkeys
has become exceedingly difficult to
overcome even for all the gods and demons
combined. (26—32)
प्रहृष्टयोधा ध्वजिनी महात्मनां

वनौकसां watt योद्भुमिच्छताम्।
अलं विरोधेन शमो विधीयतां
प्रदीयतां दाशरथाय मैथिली॥ ३३॥

“The army of the gigantic monkeys
(lit., the denizens of the woods), who are
keen to fight just now, consists of warriors
who feel highly rejoiced to get this opportunity
