« KISKINDHAKANDA +

943

Canto ITI

Approaching in the guise of a mendicant Sri Rama and Laksmana and bowing
low to them, Hanuman enquired of them as to who they were and, having
narrated to them the story of Sugriva, apprised them of the latter’s anxiety
to enlist their goodwill. Pleased with the cleverness of Hanuman, Sri
Rama compliments the former on his knowledge of the Veda and
grammar. With the approval of Sri Rama, Laksmana gives
utterance to the former’s desire to secure Sugriva’s alliance

aa विज्ञाय हनुमान् सुग्रीवस्य महात्मन:।
पर्वतादृष्यमूकात् तु पुप्लुवे at राघवौ॥१॥

Receiving respectfully the bidding of
the high-souled Sugriva, Hanuman for his
part jumped from (the top of) the Rsyamuka
hill to the spot where stood Sri Rama and
Laksmana, the two scions of Raghu. (1)

कपिरूपं परित्यज्य हनुमान् मारुतात्मज:।
भिक्षुरूपं ततो भेजे शठबुद्धितया कपि:॥ २॥
Concealing the form of a monkey,
because of his having a suspicious mind, a
monkey as he was, Hanuman, son of the

wind-god, thereupon assumed the form of a
mendicant (recluse). (2)

ततश्च BAM वाचा श्लक्ष्णया सुमनोज्ञया।
विनीतवदुपागम्य राघवौ प्रणिपत्य च ॥३॥
आबभाषे च तौ वीरौ यथावत् प्रशशंस च।
सम्पूज्य विधिवद् वीरौ हनुमान् वानरोत्तम:॥४॥
उवाच कामतो वाक्यं मृदुं सत्यपराक्रमौ।
राजर्षिदेवप्रतिमौ तापसौ संशितव्रतौ॥७५॥
देशं कथमिमं wet भवन्तौ वरवर्णिनौ।
त्रासयन्तौ मृगगणानन्यांश्च वनचारिण:॥६॥
पम्पातीररुहान् Tar वीक्षमाणौ समन्तत:।
इमां नदीं शुभजलां शोभयन्तौ तरस्विनौ॥ ot
Approaching the two scions of Raghu
like a humble man and falling prostrate before
them, Hanuman then accosted the aforesaid
two heroes in a soft and most pleasing
language and duly extolled them. Offering
due homage to the two heroes according to

the scriptural ordinance, Hanuman, the
foremost of monkeys, addressed the following
gentle words to them according to the desire
of Sugriva: “How have you two ascetics of
remarkable vigour, unfailing prowess, most
austere vows and excellent appearance and
resembling a couple of royal sages or gods,
come to this region, causing fright to the
herds of deer and other denizens of the
forest, nay, surveying the trees growing on
all sides on the brink of Pampa and lending
charm as you do to this lake of sparkling
water? (83—7)

धैर्यवन्तौ सुवर्णाभौ कौ gat चीरवाससौ।
नि:श्वसन्तौ वरभुजौ पीडयन्ताविमा: प्रजा:॥८॥

“Who are you of charming arms and
remarkable fortitude, clad in the bark of
trees and possessing a charming complexion
and lustre, sighing and causing discomfort
to these creatures by your very august
presence? (8)
सिंहविप्रेक्षितौ वीरौ महाबलपराक्रमौ।
शक्रचापनिभे चापे गृहीत्वा शत्रुनाशनौ॥९॥
श्रीमन्तौ रूपसम्पन्नौ वृषभश्रेष्ठविक्रमौ।
हस्तिहस्तोपमभुजौ द्युतिमन्तौ नरर्षभौ॥१०॥
प्रभया पर्वतेन्द्रोऽसौ युवयोरवभासित:।
राज्यार्हावमरप्रख्यौ met देशमिहागतौ॥११॥

“Wielding a pair of bows shining brightly
like rainbows, how have you, two heroic
jewels among men, visited this region—you,
who are endowed with the gaze of a lion and
are possessed of extraordinary might and
