* SUNDARAKANDA +

the ardour of those ogres (the progeny of
Nirrti) for war. (25)

हिताश्च शूराश्च समाहिताश्च
Hay Wats महागुणेषु।
कोपप्रशस्ता: सुभृताश्च योधा: ॥ २६ ॥
तदेकदेशेन बलस्य तावत्
केचित् तवादेशकृतोऽद्य यान्तु।
तौ राजपुत्रावुपगृह्य मूढौ
परेषु aA भावयितुं प्रभावम्॥ २७॥
“Therefore, in order to make your
greatness known to the enemies, let a few
warriors, who are well-disposed and valiant,
nay, devoted and born in families noted for
their great qualities, high-minded, foremost
among armed soldiers, renowned for their

229

burning ardour, handsomely paid and
obedient to your commands, proceed today
with a section of your army and return after
capturing the two princes, distracted as they
are through agony caused by separation
from Sita.” (26-27)
निशाचराणामधिपोऽनुजस्य

विभीषणस्योत्तमवाक्यमिष्टम् ।
जग्राह बुद्ध्या सुरलोकशत्रु-

र्महाबलो राक्षसराजमुख्य:॥ २८॥

Ravana, the foremost of the rulers of

ogres, the suzerain lord of the rangers of
the night and an enemy of the celestial
realm, who was endowed with extraordinary
might, accepted with his mind the sound
and palatable advice of his younger brother,
Vibhisana. (28)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये सुन्दरकाण्डे द्विपञ्चाश: AA: ॥ ५२॥

Thus ends Canto Fifty-two of the Sundarakanda in the glorious Ramayana of Valmiki,
the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

Canto LIII

Wrapping up the tail of Hanuman in rags and soaking it in oil, and then
lighting it up, the ogres, as urged by Ravana, take Hanuman round the city
to the accompaniment of beat of drums. Hearing this news from the lips
of the ogresses, Sita prays to the god of fire on oath to see that
Hanuman remains unscathed. Climbing up the gate and shedding
the fire by attenuating his body, and then resuming vast
proportions and seizing the iron bar of the gate,

Hanuman kills with it the ogres guarding the gate

तस्य ae वचनं श्रुत्वा दशग्रीवो महात्मन:।
देशकालहितं वाक्यं भ्रातुरुत्तरमब्रवीत्॥१॥
Hearing the foregoing advice of his
younger brother, the high-souled Vibhisana,
which was salutary both from the point of
view of time and place, Ravana, the ten-
headed monster, made the following assertion
by way of a reply: (1)

सम्यगुक्तं fe wan दूतवध्या विगर्हिता।
अवश्यं तु वधायान्य: क्रियतामस्य fae ।॥ २॥
“It is truly said by you that the killing of
a messenger has been severely condemned.
In any case, some punishment other than
death need must be meted out to him. (2)
तदस्य दीप्यतां शौघ्रं तेन दग्धेन गच्छतु॥ ३॥
