166

निष्पन्दास्तरव: ad निलीना मृगपक्षिण:।
नैशेन तमसा व्याप्ता दिशश्च रघुनन्दन॥१५॥

“All the trees are motionless, the beasts
and birds are buried in sleep and the quarters
stand enveloped in the darkness of night,
O scion of Raghu! (15)

शनैर्विसृज्यते संध्या नभा नेत्रैरिवाव्रृतम्।
नक्षत्रतारागहनं ज्योतिर्भिरवभासते॥ १६ ॥

“The evening twilight has gradually
receded and the firmament, thick set with
lunar mansions and other stars, is shinning
with the heavenly bodies as though covered
with innumerable eyes. (16)

उत्तिष्ठते च शीतांशु: शशी लोकतमोनुद:।
ह्लादयन् प्राणिनां लोके मनांसि प्रभया स्वया॥ १७॥

“The moon, which dispels the darkness
of the world at night, is just rising*, diffusing
its cool rays and delighting the minds of all
living beings in the world by its soothing and
refreshing splendour. (17)

नैशानि सर्वभूतानि प्रचरन्ति ततस्तत:।

यक्षराक्षससंघाश्च रौद्राश्च पिशिताशना:॥१८॥
“All nocturnal beings, viz., fearful hosts

of Yaksas and Raksasas as well as fiends

(feeding on raw flesh) are freely roaming
here and there.” (18)

एवमुक्त्वा महातेजा विरराम महामुनि:।
साधु साध्विति ते सर्वे मुनयो ह्यभ्यपूजयन्॥१९॥

Saying so, the exceptionally glorious
and great sage ViSwamitra, became silent

« VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

and all the aforesaid sages, who
accompanied him, applauded him saying
“Well spoken ! Good !! (19)

कुशिकानामयं वंशो महान् धर्मपर: सदा।

ब्रह्मोपमा महात्मान: कुशवंश्या नरोत्तमा:॥ २०॥
“Great is this race of KuSa and ever

given to righteousness too. The high-souled

kings descended in the line of Kuga have
been as good as Brahmana Rsis. (20)

विशेषेण भवानेव विश्वामित्र महायश:।
कौशिकी सरितां श्रेष्ठा कुलोद्द्योतकरी तव॥ २१॥

“You, O highly illustrious Viswamitra,
who have attained Brahmanhood by dint of
your austerities, are particularly so. And
Kausiki, the foremost of rivers, has added
to the lustre of your race.” (21)

afacdPrenge: प्रशस्त: कुशिकात्मज:।
निद्रामुपागमच्छीमानस्तंगत इवांशुमान्॥ २२॥

Extolled thus by the foremost of sages,
who were full of delight, the glorious
Viswamitra, the son of Gadhi, a scion of
KuSa, fell asleep even as the sun sinks
below the horizon. (22)

wast सहसौमित्रि: किंचिदागतविस्मय:।
प्रशस्य मुनिशार्दूलं निद्रां समुपसेवते॥ २३॥

Glorifying ViSwamitra, a tiger among
sages, Sri Rama too, who felt a bit amazed
to hear the family history of ViSwamitra,
courted sleep alongwith Laksmana, son of
Sumitra. (23)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये बालकाण्डे
चतुस्तरिंश: सर्ग: ॥ ३४॥
Thus ends Canto Thirty-four in the Balakanda of the glorious Ramayana of Valmiki,
the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

* From the above description it can be easily inferred that it was the ninth night of a dark fortnight.
