618

स तस्य श्रृङ्गं सनगं सनागं
सकाञ्चनं धातुसहस्ररजुष्टम्।
विकीर्णकटं रि :
We वेगात् सहसोन्ममाथ॥६७॥
Vehemently seizing hold of the top of
that mountain, which was adorned with
thousands of minerals, with its. trees,
elephants and gold, Hanuman broke it off at
once with the result that its projections got
shattered and the crest of its plateau was
set on fire. (67)

स तं wer खमुत्पपात
वित्रास्य लोकान् ससुरासुरेन्द्रान्।
संस्तूयमान: ख्चरैरनेकै-
र्जगाम वेगाद् गरुडोग्रवेग:॥६८॥
Uprooting it and striking terror into the
worlds including the leaders of gods and
demons inhabiting them, the monkey sprang
with it into the air and sped away with the
terrible speed of Garuda, being acclaimed
all the while by numerous aerial beings.
(68)
a भास्कराध्वानमनुप्रपन्न-
स्तं भास्कराभं शिखरं we
बभौ तदा भास्करसंनिकाशो
Ta: समीपे प्रतिभास्कराभ:॥६९॥

Having reached the heavens (lit., the
orbit of the sun) carrying that mountain-
peak, radiant as the sun, Hanuman, who
closely resembled the sun, appeared in the
vicinity of the solar orb to be its very image

at that time. (69)
a तेन शैलेन भृशं रराज

शैलोपमो गन्धवहात्मजस्तु।
सहस्रधारेण सपावकेन

चक्रेण खे विष्णुरिवार्पितेन॥७०॥

Coursing in the airspace with that crag,
that offspring of the wind-god (lit., the wafter
of odour), for his part, who resembled a
mountain himself, looked most charming like

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA +

Lord Visnu with His flaming discus with a
thousand edges, borne in His hand. (70)
तं वानरा: Wer तदा विनेदु:
a तानपि प्रेक्ष्य yer ननाद।
लङ्कालया भीमतरं विनेदु:॥७१॥
Observing him come, the monkeys
emitted tremendous roars on that occasion
and Hanuman too in his turn roared with joy
on perceiving them. Nay, hearing their loud
noise, the denizens of Lanka set up a still
more terrible roar. (71)

ततो महात्मा निपपात तस्मिन्

शैलोत्तमे वानरसैन्यमध्ये।
हर्युत्तमेभ्य: शिरसाभिवाद्य

विभीषणं at च सस्वजे स:॥७२॥

Hanuman (of gigantic proportions) then
descended on that prince of mountains,
Trikuta, in the midst of the simian ranks.
And having greeted the jewels among the
monkeys with his head bent low, he
embraced Vibhisana standing there. (72)

तावप्युभौ मानुषराजपुत्रौ
तं गन्धमाघ्राय महौषधीनाम्।
बभूवतुस्तत्र del विशल्या-
amas च हरिप्रवीरा:॥७३॥
Inhailing the unique fragrance of the
powerful herbs, both the aforesaid sons of
a ruler of men were healed of their wounds
then and there; and other eminent heroes
among the monkeys, who were lying
unconsious on the battlefield, sprang on
their feet. (73)

wa विशल्या विरुजा: ar
हरिप्रवीराश्च हताश्च ये स्यु:।
गन्धेन तासां प्रवरौषधीनां
सुप्ता निशान्तेष्विव सम्प्रबुद्धा:॥७४॥
Nay, even those eminent heroes among

the monkeys, who had been killed, were
healed of their wounds and rid of their pain
