270

monkeys now felt extremely delighted. Nay,
feeling rejoiced, they then began to dance
merrily here and there. (15)

गायन्ति केचित् प्रहसन्ति केचि-

न्नृत्यन्ति केचित् प्रणमन्ति केचित्।
पतन्ति केचित् प्रचरन्ति केचित्

प्लवन्ति केचित् प्रलपन्ति केचित्॥ १६॥

While some sang, others laughed to
their heart’s content, still others danced,
while many more meekly bowed down. Again,
some fell down, others moved quickly, still
others bounded and some more raved. (16)

परस्परं केचिदुपाश्रयन्ति

wert केचिदतिन्रुवन्ति।
ye gt केचिदभिद्रवन्ति

क्षितौ नगाग्रान्निपतन्ति केचित्॥ १७॥

Some leaned against one another,
others disputed with one another, still others
ran from one tree to another while many
more jumped to the ground from tree-tops.

(17)

हसन्तमन्य: प्ररुदन्नुपैति।। १८ ti

Some with increased impetuosity flew
to the top of gigantic trees from the earth’s
surface. While one was singing, another
approached him laughing to his heart’s
content; and while one was laughing, another
went up to him weeping bitterly. (18)

तुदन्तमन्य: प्रणदन्नुपै।ते
समाकुलं तत् कपिसैन्यमासीत्।
न ua aya aya मत्तो
न चात्र कश्चिन्न बलभूव Ga Veil
While one was pinching another, a third
approached the former roaring. In short,
greatly excited was that entire army of
monkeys. None in that army was not drunk;
and none in that army was not haughty. (19)

« VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

ततो at ad परिभक्ष्यमाणं
द्रुमांश्च विध्वंसितपत्रपुष्पान्।
समीक्ष्य कोपाद् दधिवक्त्रनामा
निवारयामास aft: कपींस्तान्॥ २०॥

Perceiving that grove being wrecked
and the trees stripped off their leaves and
blossom, the monkey named Dadhimukha
(who had been placed in charge of the
grove by King Sugriva) angrily checked the
aforesaid monkeys. (20)

स तै: Wag: uferetart
वनस्य गोप्ता हरिव्रद्धवीर:।

चकार भूयो मतिमुग्रतेजा
वनस्य Tat प्रति वानरेभ्य:॥ २१॥

While being upbraided by those arrogant
monkeys, that elderly hero among the
monkeys, who guarded the grove, and was
endowed with terrific energy, further
contemplated the means of protecting the
grove against the monkeys. (21)

sara कांश्चित् परुषाण्यभीत-
मसक्तमन्यांश्च

समेत्य कैश्चित् कलहं चकार
तथैव साम्नोपजगाम कांश्चित्॥ २२॥

He dauntlessly spoke harsh words to
some, while others he smote immediately
with his palms; coming at close quarters
with others, he wrangled with them, while
still others he approached with soothing
words. (22)
a तैर्मदादप्रतिवार्यवेगै-

dearer तेन प्रतिवार्यमाणै: |
प्रधर्षणे त्यक्तभयै: समेत्य

प्रकृष्यते चाप्यनवेक्ष्य दोषम्॥ २३॥

Dadhimukha began to be dragged
violently by those monkeys, who were being
forcibly checked by him even though their
vehemence had become irresistible due to
their inebriety, nay, who had cast away all
fear and who had joined together, taking no
account of the guilt involved in assaulting a
servant of the king. (23)

तलैर्जघान।
