762

वीरविक्रान्त विख्यात प्रवीण नयकोविद।
महार्हशयनोपेत fe we निहतो भुवि॥ २॥
निक्षिप्य det fet भुजावङ्गदभूषितौ।
मुकुटेनापवृत्तेन भास्कराकारवर्चसा It ३॥

“O renowned and valiant hero, powerful
and skilled in polity, having thrown about
your two arms, which though still adorned
with armlets are now motionless, and with
your diadem, brilliant as the sun, knocked
down, why are you lying killed on the ground,
O brother, who were accustomed to a
luxurious bed? (2-3)
तदिदं वीर ward यन्मया पूर्वमीरितम्।
काममोहपरीतस्य यत् dat रुचितं तव॥४॥

“That very fate which was predicted
by me has been met with by you, O valiant
brother, inasmuch as my aforesaid advice
did not find favour with you, overcome
as you were with concupiscence and
infatuation. (4)

यन्न दर्पात् weed वा नेन्द्रजिन्नापरे जना:।
न कुम्भकर्णोऽतिरथो नातिकायो नरान्तक:।
न स्वयं बहु मन्येथास्तस्योदर्कोऽयमागत:॥५॥

“This calamity has come about as a
sequel to the fact that in their presumption
neither Prahasta nor Indrajit nor other people
nor even Kumbhakarna, an exceeding car-
warrior, nor, again, Atikaya nor Narantaka
nor you yourself prized my counsel. (5)

Tet: Od: सुनीतानां गतो धर्मस्य विग्रह:।
गत: सत्त्वस्य संक्षेप: सुहस्तानां गतिर्गता॥६॥
आदित्य: पतितो भूमौ मग्नस्तमसि चन्द्रमा:।
चित्रभानु: प्रशान्ताचिर्व्यवसायो free: |
अस्मिन् निपतिते ait भूमौ शास्त्रभृतां वरे॥७॥

“Since this hero, who was the prince
of those wielding weapons, has fallen on
the ground, the foremost of those conducting
themselves with prudence has disappeared,
the incarnation of virtue has departed, the
repository of might has left for good, the
refuge of deft-handed warriors has gone out

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA +

of sight, the sun has fallen to earth, the
moon has merged in darkness, fire has
ceased to emit flames and all enthusiastic
energy has become worthless. (6-7)

fe शेषमिहलोकस्य गतसत्त्वस्य सम्प्रति।
रणे राक्षसशार्दूले प्रसुप्त sa पांसुषु॥८॥

“Now that Ravana, a tiger among the
ogres, is lying fast asleep, as it were, in the
dust on the battlefield, everything belonging
to the people in this city of Lanka, whose
strength has departed, has gone to the
dogs. (8)

धृतिप्रवाल्न: प्रसभाग्रयपुष्प-
स्तपोबल: शौर्यनिबद्धमूल: |
रणे महान् राक्षसराजव्क्ष:
सम्मर्दितो राघवमारुतेन॥ ९॥
‘With firmness for its foliage,

stubbornness for its excellent blossom,
asceticism for its strength and valour for its
firm roots, the huge tree in the shape of
Ravana (the king of ogres) has been crushed
on the battlefield by the tempest in the
shape of Sri Rama, a scion of Raghu. (9)
कोपप्रसादापरगात्रहस्त:

।]

सुप्त fat रावणगन्धहस्ती॥१०॥
“With ardour for its tusks, the line of
ancestors for its backbone, wrath for its
lower parts (legs etc.,) and graciousness
for its proboscis, the elephant in rut in the
shape of Ravana is lying asleep on the
ground, its body having been overthrown by
a lion in the shape of Sri Rama, a scion of
Ikswaku. (10)

इ`

पराक्रमोत्साहविजृम्भितार्चि-

र्नि:श्वासधूम: स्वबलप्रताप:।
प्रतापवान् संयति राक्षसाग्नि-

र्निर्वापितो रामपयोधरेण ।॥ ११॥

“With prowess and energy for its
