600

prowess, thereupon precipitately fitted to
his bow an arrow of terrific velocity. (104)

तस्मिन् art तु नियुज्यमाने
सौमित्रिणा बाणवरे शिताग्रे।
दिशश्च चन्द्रार्कमहाग्रहाश्च

नभश्च तत्रास WA चोर्वीं॥ oun

While that excellent missile, presided
over by Brahma, was for its part being
infused into the foremost of arrows with
a sharp point by the son of Sumitra, the four
quarters as well as the moon and the sun
and the other major planets as also the
vault of heaven shook and the earth creaked.

(105)
तं ब्रह्मणोऽस्त्रेण नियुज्य चापे
सौमित्रिरिन्द्रारिसुतस्य तस्य

Wat बाणं युधि वज्रकल्पम्॥१०६॥
Having charged that arrow, feathers
and all, with the missile presided over by
Brahma, the creator, and placed it on his
bow, the son of Sumitra discharged that
shaft, which now looked like a messenger
of Death and was hard as adamant, at the
aforesaid son of Ravana (an enemy of Indra)
on the field of battle. (106)
तं लक्ष्मणोत्सृष्टविवृद्धवेगं
समापतन्तं शवसनोग्रवेगम्।
सुपर्णवज्रोत्तमचित्रपुङ्खं
तदातिकाय समरे ददर्श॥१०७॥
Atikaya forthwith beheld on the battle-
field the arrow shot by Laksmana, which
possessed the terrific velocity of the wind,
was provided with lovely feathers resembling
the wings of Garuda (the king of birds)
and decked with excellent diamonds—

flying towards Atikaya with redoubled
speed. (107)
a प्रेक्षमाण: सहसातिकायो

जघान ल्राणैर्निशितैरनेकै: |

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA +

a सायकस्तस्य सुपर्णवेग-
स्तथातिवेगेन जगाम पार्श्वम्॥१०८॥

Closely observing it, Atikaya forcibly
struck it with numerous whetted shafts.
Possessing as it did the swiftness of Garuda,
that arrow none the less drew near him with
terrific speed. (108)

wart प्रेक्ष्य तदातिकायो
बाणं प्रदीप्तान्तककालकल्पम्।

शक्त्यृष्टिगदाकुठारै:
शूलै: शरैश्चाप्यविपन्नचेष्ट: ॥ १०९ Ui
Perceiving that flaming arrow terrible
as Death and the Time-Spirit arrived, Atikaya
forthwith struck it with javelins, spears, maces
and axes as also with pikes and arrows
with unceasing endeavour. (109)

तान्यायुधान्यद्भुतविग्रहाणि
मोघानि कृत्वा स शरोऽग्निदीप्त:।
We तस्यैव किरीटजुष्टं
तदातिकायस्य शिरो जहार॥११०॥

Rendering all the aforesaid weapons
of wonderful shapes ineffectual, and
transfixing the head of the selfsame Atikaya,
which was covered with a diadem, that
arrow blazing like fire forthwith severed
it. (110)
तच्छिर: सशिरस्त्राणं लक्ष्मणेषुप्रमर्दितम्।
पपात सहसा भूमौ ye हिमवतो यथा॥१११॥

Cut off by the arrow of Laksmana, the
aforesaid head with its diadem precipitately

fell to the ground like a peak of the Himalaya
mountain. (111)

तं भूमौ पतितं दृष्टवा विक्षिप्ताम्बरभूषणम्।
बभूवुर्व्यथिता: सर्वे हतशेषा निशाचरा:॥११२॥
All the ogres who had escaped being
killed, felt distressed to behold the prince
fallen on the ground, his raiment and
adornments in disarray. (112)

a विषण्णमुखा दीना: प्रहारजनितश्रमा:।
विनेदुरुच्चैर्बहव: सहसा विस्वरै: स्वरै:।॥ ११३॥

जघान
