* AYODHYAKANDA +

निवेशयत मे सैन्यमभिप्रायेण सर्वत:।
विश्रान्ता: प्रतरिष्याम: श्व इमां सागरङ्घमाम्॥ २३॥
“Let my army encamp at will on all

sides. Having taken rest today we shall
cross this sea-bound river tomorrow. (23)

ad च तावदिच्छामि स्वर्गतस्य महीपते:।
और्ध्वदेहनिमित्तार्थमवतीर्योदकं नदीम्॥ २४॥
“In the meantime, descending into the
river, | wish to offer libations of water to the
spirit of the emperor, my father, who has

ascended to heaven, for happiness in his
life after death.” (24)

तस्यैवं ब्रुवतोऽमात्यास्तथेत्युक्त्वा समाहिता:।
न्यवेशयंस्तांशछन्देन स्वेन स्वेन पृथक पृथक॥ २५॥

595

Saying “Amen” to Bharata, who was
speaking as above, the ministers, who were
all attention, encamped the troops separately,
each unit according to its liking. (25)

चमूं विधानै: परिबर्हशोभिनीम्।
उवास रामस्य तदा महात्मनो
विचिन्तमानो भरतो निवर्तनम्॥ २६ ॥

Having caused that army, which looked
charming with its equipage in the shape of
tents etc., to encamp methodically along the
bank of the great river Ganga, Bharata too
halted then, reflecting all the time how to
bring the high-souled Sri Rama back to
Ayodhya. (26)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्येऽयोध्याकाण्डे त्र्यशीतितम: सर्ग: ॥ ८३ Il

Thus ends Canto Ejighty-three in the Ayodhyakanda of the glorious Ramayana of
Valmiki, the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

चतुरशीतितम: सर्ग:

Canto LXXXIV

Scenting mischief in the mind of Bharata, who was taking a large army
with him, Guha orders the ferrymen to guard the boats so as to prevent
Bharata’s men from crossing the Ganga, and himself seeks the
presence of Bharata in order to know his mind. Being satisfied
about his good intention, he entertains Bharata and his
men with fruits and roots etc., brought by him and,
on his having taken rest awhile and overcome
his fatigue, allows him to advance

निषादराजो दृष्ट्वैव ज्ञातीन् स परितोऽब्रवीत्॥ १॥

The moment Guha, the chief of the
Nisadas, saw the army of Bharata encamped
along the bank of the river Ganga, he now
spoke as follows to his kinsmen sitting
around him: (1)

महतीयमित: सेना सागराभा प्रदृश्यते।
नास्यान्तमवगच्छामि मनसापि विचिन्तयन्॥ २॥

“Even from this place this huge army
appears like a sea. Though pondering deeply,
| do not perceive its end even with the mind.

(2)
यदा नु Gat दुर्बुद्धिर्भरत: स्वयमागत:।
awa fe महाकाय: कोविदारध्वजो रथे॥ ३॥
बन्धयिष्यति वा ua वास्मान् वधिष्यति।
अनु दाशरथिं wa पित्रा ween विवासितम्॥४॥

“If Bharata—who has surely come in
