+ UTTARAKANDA +

wise man tendered the following advice
worthy of the House of Brahma (the
grandfather of the universe): (17)

यन्मया वार्यमाणस्त्वं नावगच्छसि qa: |

पश्चादस्य wet प्राप्य ज्ञास्यसे निरयं Wa: ec
“O fool, though being warned by me,

you do not listen; you will, however, come

to your senses later when, as a result of
your misdeeds, you go to hell. (18)

यो fe arate विषं पीत्वा नावगच्छति दुर्मति: |
स तस्य परिणामान्ते जानीते कर्मण: फलम्॥१९॥

“The fool who, out of delusion, drinks
poison and does not recognize it as such,
will come to know the result of that action
when he reaps its fruit. (19)

दैवतानि न नन्दन्ति धर्मयुक्तेन केनचित्।
येन त्वमीदृशं भावं नीतस्तच्च न TTA २०॥
“The gods will not be pleased even
with an act which is righteous in your eyes.
Deluded by that displeasure (of the gods)
you have been led to this violence; yet you
do not understand that. (20)
स पश्यति wet तस्य प्रेतराजवशं गत:॥ २१॥
“He who insults his mother, father,
teacher and a Brahmana will reap the
consequence when he has fallen under the
sway of Yama (the king of the departed).
(21)

aga fe शरीरे यो न करोति तपोऽर्जनम्।
स पश्चात् तप्यते मूढो मृतो गत्वाऽऽत्मनो गतिम्॥ २२॥

“The fool who does not practise
austerities with his transient body will repent
when he meets with his destiny after death.

(22)

धर्माद् राज्यं धनं सौख्यमधर्माद् दु:खमेव च।
wea धर्मं सुखार्थाय कुर्यात् पापं विसर्जयेत्॥ २३ ॥
From virtue follow sovereignty, wealth

and happiness; misery alone results from
unrighteousness. Hence to secure happiness

893

one should practise virtue and abjure
sin. (23)

पापस्य fe फलं दु:खं Ag भोक्तव्यमिहात्मना।
तस्मादात्मापघातार्थं मूढ: पापं करिष्यति॥ evil
“The fruit of sin is misery and it must be
reaped by the sinner himself; hence a fool
commits sin for his own destruction. (24)
कस्यचिन्न fe दुर्बुद्धेश्छन्दतो जायते मति:।
यादृशं Hed HA तादृशं फलमश्नुते॥ २५॥
“Sense does not dawn on an evil-minded
man of its own accord. As he sows so he
reaps. (25)
ऋद्धि रूपं बलं पुत्रान् fad शूरत्वमेव च।
प्राप्नुवन्ति नरा लोके निर्जितं पुण्यकर्मभि: ॥ २६॥
“People attain in this world prosperity,
personality, strength, sons, wealth and valour
as earned by their meritorious deeds. (26)
एवं निरयगामी त्वं aa a मतिरीदृशी।
न त्वां समभिभाषिष्येऽसद्वृत्तेष्वेव Puta: ॥ २७॥
“Thus you will go to hell since your
mind is disposed to evil. | shall soeak to you
no more. This is the rule laid down in regard
to men of bad conduct.” (27)

एवमुक्तास्ततस्तेन तस्यामात्या: समाहता:।
मारीचप्रमुखा: सर्वे विमुखा विप्रदुद्रुवु:॥ २८॥
Admonished in such words and hit hard
by Kubera, the ministers of Ravana, headed
by Marica, thereupon lost their enthusiasm
and fled. (28)

ततस्तेन दशग्रीवरो यक्षेन्द्रेण महात्मना।
गदयाभिहतो Aft न च स्थानात् प्रकम्पित:।॥ २९॥
Then Ravana was struck on the head
by the noble leader of the Yaksas with his
club, but he did not budge from his position.
(29)

ततस्तौ राम निघ्नन्तौ तदान्योन्यं महामृधे।
न विह्वलौ न च श्रान्तौ तावुभौ यक्षराक्षसौ॥ ३०॥

The Yaksa and the Raksasa thereafter
exchanged blows in the course of the great
