286

said : “Sita will live long if she survives for
a month. |, however, would not survive
even for a moment without that dark-eyed
lady, O gallant one ! (10)

नय मामपि तं देशं aa gsr मम प्रिया।
न तिष्ठेयं क्षणमपि प्रव्रत्तिमुपलभ्य च॥११॥
“Please take me as well to that region
where my darling was seen by you. Nay,
having received news about her, | cannot
tarry even for a moment. (11)
कथं सा मम सुश्रोणी भीरुभीरु: adt तदा।
भयावहानां घोराणां मध्ये तिष्ठुति रक्षसाम्॥१२॥
“How does my virtuous consort, Sita,
with charming limbs, who is extremely timid,
stay all the time in the midst of violent and
frightful ogres? (12)
शारदस्तिमिरोन्मुक्तो नूनं Ux sarge: |
stadt वदनं तस्या न विराजति साम्प्रतम्॥ १३॥

“Surely her countenance, resembling,

« VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

as it does, the autumnal moon bereft of its
spot, though screened by clouds, does not
shine so brightly any more. (13)

किमाह सीता हनुमंस्तत्त्वत: कथयस्व मे।
UW wea जीविष्ये भेषजेनातुरो यथा॥१४॥

“Pray, tell me correctly, O Hanuman,
what Sita said to you. | shall surely survive
on the strength of her message even as an
ailing man would with the help of medicine.

(14)

मधुरा मधुरालापा किमाह wa भामिनी।
मद्बिहीना वरारोहा हनुमन् कथयस्व मे।
दु:खाद् दु:खतरं we He जीवति जानकी ।। १५ I
“Please tell me, O Hanuman, what my
beloved consort, who has a comely exterior
and is sweet of expression, who is endowed
with excellent limbs and has been separated
from me, said to you. How does the daughter
of Janaka survive even on meeting with a
misfortune harder than before?” (15)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये सुन्दरकाण्डे षट्षष्टितम: सर्ग: ॥ ६६ Il

Thus ends Canto Sixty-six of the Sundarakanda in the glorious Ramayana of Valmiki,
the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

सप्तषष्टितम: सर्ग:
Canto LXVII

Hanuman reproduces at length the incident connected with a crow that
took place during the sojourn of Sita with Sri Rama at Citrakita,
related by her by way of a token, and further describes her
piteous lament and the way in which she was
comforted by Hanuman

एवमुक्तस्तु हनुमान् राघवेण महात्मना।
सीताया भाषितं ae न्यवेदयत राघवे॥१॥
Urged in the foregoing words by the
high-souled Sri Rama, a scion of Raghu,
Hanuman for his part repeated as follows to
Sri Rama all that was said by Sita: (1)

इदमुक्कतवती देवी जानकी पुरुषर्षभ।
पूर्वव्रत्तमभिज्ञानं चित्रकूटे यथातथम्॥२॥

“The godlike lady Sita related as follows,
even as it had occurred, O jewel among
men, an incident that had taken place at
Citrakuta in the past. (2)

सुखसुप्ता त्वया ae जानकी पूर्वमुत्थिता।
वायस: सहसोत्पत्य विददार स्तनान्तरम्॥३॥

“Having slept happily at your side on
one occasion, Sita, daughter of Janaka, got
