# YUDDHAKANDA #

रूक्षं श्रावयसे वीर werd: प्राकृतामिव॥५॥

“Why do you, like a common man,
address to me, O hero, such unkind and
unbecoming words, which are so jarring to
the ear, as a common man would do to an
ordinary woman? (5)

न तथास्मि महाबाहो यथा मामवगच्छसि।
Wet गच्छ मे स्वेन चारित्रेणैव a शपे॥६॥

“ am not as you take me to be, O
mighty-armed one! Be restored to confidence
about me. | swear to you by my own
character. (6)
पृथक्स्त्रीणां प्रचारेण जातिं त्वं परिशङ्कसे।
परित्यजैनां wet तु यदि asé परीक्षिता॥७॥

“Judging by the conduct of vulgar
women, you seem to distrust the entire
womankind, which is not reasonable. Pray,
shake off this doubt if | have been actually
tested and found trustworthy by you. (7)
कामकारो न मे at ea तत्रापराध्यति॥८॥

“| was helpless when | came into contact
with the person of Ravana; | did not act of
my own free will on that occasion. My
adverse fate alone is to blame on that
score, my lord. (8)

मदधीनं तु यत् at हृदयं त्वयि add
पराधीनेषु Tay fe करिष्याम्यनीश्वरी॥९॥

“That which is under my control, viz.,
my heart, ever abides in you. What could |
do, helpless as | was, with regard to my
limbs, which had fallen under the sway of
another? (9)
We संवृद्धभावेन संसर्गेण च मानद।
यदि ase न विज्ञाता हता तेनास्मि शाश्वतम्॥ १० ॥

“If | could not be fully Known to you,
O bestower of honour on others, in spite
of our love for each other having
simultaneously grown and despite our having

791

lived together for so many years, | am
undone for good, thanks to such ingnorance.
(10)

प्रेषितस्ते महावीरो हनुमानवलोकक:।
लङ्कास्थाहं त्वया राजन् किं तदा न विसर्जिता॥ ११ ॥
“When the eminent hero, Hanuman,
was dispatched by you in order to find me
out, why, O king, was | not repudiated by
you even while | was still in Lanka? (11)

प्रत्यक्षॆ वानरस्यास्य तद्वाक्यसमनन्तरम्।

त्वया संत्यक्तया वीर त्यक्तं स्याज्जीवितं मया॥ १२॥
“Life, O hero, would have been yielded

up by me, when repudiated for good by

you, immediately on hearing the message,

conveying the repudiation, before the very

eyes of this monkey, Hanuman. (12)

AAMT ते श्रमोऽयं स्यात् संशये न्यस्य जीवितम्।
सुहृज्जनपरिक्लेशो न चायं विफलस्तव॥ 23 i

“This useless exertion in the shape of
crossing over to Lanka and waging war
with the mighty Ravana, which you have
put forth exposing your life to danger, would
not have been undertaken nor would your
friends, viz., the monkeys and Vibhisana),
have been put to such fruitless hardship.(13)

त्वया तु Met रोषमेवानुवर्तता।
लघुनेव मनुष्येण स्त्रीत्वमेव पुरस्कृतम्॥१४॥

“By you, however, who, like a small
man, gave yourself up to anger alone, O
jewel among the rulers of men, womanliness
alone has been mainly taken _ into
consideration. (14)

अपदेशो मे जनकान्नोत्पत्तिर्वसुधातलात्।
ममवृत्तंचबृत्तज्ञबहुतेनफूम्।।१५।।
“Only my appellation, Janaki or Vaidehi,
has been derived from King Janaka (not
that | owe my descent to him), since my
birth took place from the sacrificial ground
of Janaka. This divine origin of mine was,
however, not taken into account by you. My
