# YUDDHAKANDA #

रामरावणमुक्तानामन्योन्यमभिनिघ्नताम् ।
वराणां च शराणां च AYA तुमुल: स्वन:॥ ५९॥
Nay, a confused din arose from the
excellent arrows shot by Sri Rama, on the
one hand, and Ravana, on the other, as
each struck his opponent. (59)

विच्छिन्नाश्च विकीर्णाश्च रामरावणयो: INT: |
अन्तरिक्षात् प्रदीप्ताग्रा निपेतुर्धरणीतले॥६०॥
Split asunder and scattered, the shafts
with flaming points of Sri Rama and Ravana
fell from the airspace to the earth’s surface.
(60)

qarsataertarat रामरावणयोर्महान्।
त्रासन: सर्वभूतानां सम्बभूवाद्भुतोपम:॥६१॥

729

The mighty sound produced by the
impact of the bow-string on the palms of
the two heroes, which struck terror in all
living beings, was astonishing, as it were, to
hear. (61)

यथानिलेनाभिहतो बलाहक: ॥ ६२॥

Being covered by hails of shafts and
overwhelmed by the high-souled Sri Rama,
who was armed with a flaming bow, on
closing with Ravana, who took to his heels
out of fear, even as a cloud would disperse
when propelled by a gale. (62)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये FERS शततम: AT: ॥ १०० ll

Thus ends Canto One hundred in the Yuddhakanda of the glorious Ramayana of
Valmiki, the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

एकाधिकशततम: सर्ग:
Canto Cl

ऽत Rama laments over the precarious condition of Laksmana.
The latter regains consciousness under the treatment
of the monkey Susena with the help of a herb
brought at his instance all the way from
the Himalaya mountain by Hanuman

शक्त्या निपातितं दृष्ट्वा रावणेन बलीयसा।
लक्ष्मणं समरे शूरं शोणितौघपरिप्लुतम्॥१॥
a दत्त्वा तुमुलं युद्धं रावणस्य दुरात्मन:।
विसृजन्नेव बाणौघान् सुषेणमिदमब्रवीत्॥ 2
Beholding the heroic Laksmana soaked
in a stream of blood, when struck down in
combat with a javelin by the exceedingly
mighty Ravana, and having offered a fierce
combat to the evil-minded Ravana, Sri
Rama spoke as follows to the monkey chief,
Susena, even while discharging streams of

shafts at his mighty opponent: (1-2)
एष रावणवीर्येण लक्ष्मण: पतितो भुवि।
सर्पवच्चेष्टते a मम शोकमुदीरयन्॥३॥
“Fallen on the ground yielding to the
prowess of Ravana, here is the gallant

Laksmana writhing like a serpent and causing
grief to me. (3)

शोणितार्द्रमिमं वीरं प्राणै: प्रियतरं मम।
पश्यतो AA का शाक्तिर्योद्धुं पर्याकुलात्मन:॥४॥

“My strength to fight is failing even as
| behold this hero, who is dearer to me than
