104

« VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

सप्तदश: सर्ग:
Canto XVII
His eyes filled with joy on beholding Sita surrounded by ogresses with
hideous and deformed faces while the moon was at the meridian,
Hanuman mentally bows to Sri Rama and Laksmana and
remains hidden behind the boughs of the Sirnéapa tree

तत: कुमुदखण्डाभो निर्मलं निर्मलोदय:।
प्रजगाम नभश्चन्द्रो हंसो नीलमिवोदकम्॥१॥

Then at the end of the day the moon,
which looked like a cluster of water-lilies
and had risen quite stainless, ascended the
cloudless sky like a swan swimming through
blue waters. (1)

साचिव्यमिव कुर्वन् स प्रभया निर्मलप्रभ:।
चन्द्रमा रश्मिभि: शीतै: सिषेवे पवनात्मजम्॥ २॥

Rendering aid to him, as it were, with its
light so as to enable him to see Sita clearly,
the moon, possessed of bright lustre,
ministered to Hanuman with its cool rays. (2)

a cast da: सीतां पूर्णचन्द्रनिभाननाम्।
शोकभारैरिव न्यस्तां भारैर्नावमिवाम्भसि॥ ३॥
He thereupon beheld Sita, whose face
shone like the full moon and who was
weighed down by the pressure of grief even
as a boat sinking in water under heavy
loads. (3)

दिदृक्षमाणो वैदेह्रीं हनूमान् मारुतात्मज:।

स ददर्शाविदूरस्था राक्षसीर्घोरदर्शना:॥४॥
While seeking openly to see Sita, a

princess of the Videha territory, the said

Hanuman, sprung from the loins of the wind-

god, beheld ogresses of terrible aspect sitting
at a short distance from her. (4)

एकाक्षीमेककर्णां च कर्णप्रावरणां तथा।
HHT शङ्कुकर्णां च मस्तकोच्छ्वासनासिकाम्॥ ५ ।।
afta च तनुदीर्घशिरोधराम्।
ध्वस्तकेशीं तथाकेशीं केशकम्बलधारिणीम्॥ ६॥
लम्बकर्णललाटां च लगम्बोदरपयोधराम्।
east चिबुकोष्ठी च लम्बास्यां लम्बजानुकाम्॥ ७॥

Beat दीर्घा च कुब्जां च विकटां वामनां तथा।
करालां भुग्नवक्त्रां च पिंगाक्षीं विकृताननाम्॥ ८॥
He found one of them single-eyed,
another with a single ear, a third using her
extensive ears as a covering for her body,
still another without ears, another with dart-
like ears, another with her nose for respiration
on the forehead, another with her head
disproportionately large, yet another with a
thin long neck, another with her hair fallen
off, still another hairless, another wearing
her hair as a blanket wrapped about her
person, another with long ears and brow,
another with a protruding belly and breasts,
another with protruding lips, another with
her lips hanging over the chin, another with
a long face and still another with protruding
knees, another stunted, yet another tall,
another humpbacked, another with a crooked
body, yet another a dwarf, another frightful,
yet another with her face set awry, another
with tawny eyes and yet another with a
deformed face. (5—8)

कालायसमहाशूलकूटमुद्गरधारिणी: ॥ ९ ॥
वराहमृगशार्दूलमहिषाजशिवामुखा: ।
गजोष्ट्रहयपादाश्च निखातशिरसोऽपरा:॥१०॥
एकहस्तैकपादाश्च खरकर्ण्यश्वकर्णिका:।
गोकर्णीर्हस्तिकर्णीश्च हरिकर्णीस्तथापरा:।॥ ११॥
अतिनासाश्च काश्चिच्च तिर्यङ्नासा अनासिका:।
गजसंनिभनासाश्च ललाटोच्छ्वासनासिका: ।॥। १२॥
हस्तिपादा महापादा गोपादा: पादचूलिका:।
अतिमात्रशिरोग्रीवा अतिमात्रकुचोदरी: ॥ १३॥
अतिमात्रास्यनेत्राश्च दीर्घजिह्वाननास्तथा।
अजामुखीर्हस्तिमुखीर्गोमुखी: सूकरीमुखी: 1 १४॥
