* AYODHYAKANDA +

myself just in the same way without any
hesitation or scruple towards him: this was
my duty. (3)

किं पुनर्यो गुणश्लाघ्य: सानुक्रोशो जितेन्द्रिय: ।
स्थिरानुरागो धर्मात्मा मातृवत्पितृवत्प्रिय:॥४॥

“How much more worthy of devotion
then is he who is deserving of praise
by virtue of his excellences and full of
compassion, nay, who has controlled all his
senses including the mind, the inner sense,
who is constant in his love, whose mind is
set on righteousness and who is loving
both as a mother and father combined!

(4)
यां वृत्तिं add wa: कौसल्यायां महाबल:।
तामेव नृपनारीणामन्यासामपि वर्तते॥५॥

“Sri Rama, who is possessed of great
might, conducted himself towards the other
consorts of the king, his stepmothers, in the
same way as he did towards Kausalya, his
own mother. (5)

ape grat ely नृपेण Wace: |
मातृवद् वर्तते वीरो मानमुत्सृज्य धर्मवित्॥६॥
“Giving up all self-esteem, the gallant
prince, who was lovingly devoted to the
king, his father, and knew what is right,
conducted himself as he would towards his
own mother, even towards the women who
had been looked upon with love by the king
but once. (6)
आगच्छन्त्याश्च fart amd भयावहम्।
समाहितं fe A श्वश्र्वा हृदये यत् Ret मम॥ ७॥
“Whatever was taught to me by my
mother-in law while | was coming to the
lonely forest, which is so frightful as well,
stands inscribed on my heart. (7)

पाणिप्रदानकाले च यत् पुरा त्वग्निसंनिधौ।
अनुशिष्टं जनन्या मे वाक्यं तदपि A धृतम्॥८॥
“Nay, that lesson too which was actually

imparted to me in the past by my mother,
while making over my hand to the bridegroom

707

at the time of marriage in the presence of
the sacred fire is still remembered by me.
(8)
न विस्मृतं तु मे aed वाक्यै: स्वैर्धर्मचारिणि।
पतिशुश्रूषणान्नार्यास्तपो नान्यद् विधीयते॥९॥

“All that teaching has actually been
renewed in my mind by your teachings, O
lady given to the practice of virtue! No
askesis other than the service of one’s
husband is enjoined on a matron. (9)

सावित्री पतिशुश्रूषां कृत्वा स्वर्गे महीयते।
तथावृत्तिश्च याता त्वं पतिशुश्रूषया दिवम्॥ oll

“Having rendered service 10 her
husband all her life, Savitri (the celebrated
wife of Prince Satyavan) is now greatly
respected in heaven; nay, conducting
yourself in the same way, you too have
virtually ascended to heaven through service
to your husband. (10)

वरिष्ठा सर्वनारीणामेषा च fafa देवता।
रोहिणी न विना चन्द्रं मुहूर्तमपि दृश्यते॥११॥

“By virtue of her devotion to her spouse,
this Rohini (the most favourite consort of
the moon-god, presiding over a constellation
of the same name), the most excellent of all
women and now dwelling in heaven as a
deity, is not seen in the heavens without the
moon even for a while. (11)

एवंविधाश्च प्रवरा: feat भर्तृदृढव्रता:।
देवलोके महीयन्ते पुण्येन स्वेन कर्मणा॥१२॥

“Nay, steadfast in their vow of fidelity
to their husband, more such exalted women
are highly respected in the realm of gods by
virtue of their meritorious action.” (12)

ततोऽनसूया संहृष्टा श्रुत्वोक्तं सीतया ae: |
शिरसाऽऽघ्राय चोवाच मैथिलीं हर्षयन्त्युत॥ १३॥

Highly rejoiced to hear the reply made
by Sita, and smelling her head as a token of
affection, Anasuya thereupon said, cheering
the princess of Mithila at the same time:

(13)
