752

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

supporters of the earth. Garuda and Aruna
are the two sons of Vinata. (32)

तस्माज्जातोऽहमरुणात् सम्पातिश्च ममाग्रज:।

जटायुरिति at विद्धि श्येनीपुत्रमरिंदम॥ ३३॥
“| came into being from the said Aruna,

and also my elder brother, Sampati. Know

me to be Jatayu, the son of Syeni, 0
vanquisher of foes ! (33)

सोऽहं वाससहायस्ते भविष्यामि यदीच्छसि।
इदं af fe कान्तारं मृगराक्षससेवितम्।
सीतां च तात रक्षिष्ये त्वयि याते ASAT I ३४॥
“If you so desire, | shall be your assistant
at your dwelling. For, this inaccessible forest
is frequented by beasts and ogres; and, O
dear one, when you go out with Laksmana,
| shall guard Sita.” (34)
जटायुषं तु प्रतिपूज्य राघवो ।
मुदा परिष्वज्य च संनतोऽभवत्।

पितुर्हि शुश्राव सखित्वमात्मवा-
Berge संकथितं पुन: पुन:॥ ३५॥
Raghava honoured Jatayu, embraced
him with joy and bowed low to him; for,
the self-restrained Rama had heard about
the vulture’s friendship with his father,
DaSaratha, spoken of by Jatayu again and
again. (35)
स aa सीतां परिदाय मैथिलीं
सहैव तेनातिबलेन पक्षिणा।
जगाम at पञ्चवटीं सलक्ष्मणो
Raq दिधक्षञ्शालभानिवानल: ॥ ३६ I
Entrusting Sita, the princess of Mithila,
to the care of Jatayu, he proceeded to the
well-known Paficavati, together with the
selfsame mighty bird and Laksmana, seeking,

as it were, to burn the enemy as fire would
burn moths. (36)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्येऽरण्यकाण्डे चतुर्दश: AWA: ll १४॥

Thus ends Canto Fourteen in the Aranyakanda of the glorious Ramayana of Valmiki,
the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

Canto XV

Rama, Sita and Laksmana dwell in a cottage built by
Laksmana in Paficavatt

wa: पञ्चवटीं गत्वा नानाव्यालमृगायुताम्।
उवाच लक्ष्मणं रामो भ्रातरं दीप्ततेजसम्॥१॥
Then going to Pafcavati full of various
beasts of prey and deer, Rama said
to Laksmana, his brother of bright lustre :
(1)
आगता: स्म यथोद्दिष्टं यं देशं मुनिरब्रवीत्।
अयं पञ्चवटीदेश: सौम्य पुष्पितकानन:॥२॥
“According to our plan we have come
to the region of which the sage spoke to us.
O gentle brother, this is the region of
Paficavati with woodlands in blossom. (2)

सर्वतश्चार्यतां दृष्टि: कानने निपुणो ara
आश्रम: कतरस्मिन् नो देशे भवति सम्मत:॥ ३॥
“Since you are a man of insight, cast a
look all around in the forest: At which place
will a hermitage be suitable for us? (3)

Tad यत्र acd wae Ga लक्ष्मण।
तादृशो दृश्यतां देश: संनिकृष्टजलाशय:॥४॥
वनरामण्यकं यत्र जलरामण्यकं तथा।
संनिकृष्टं च यस्मिंस्तु समित्पुष्पकुशोदकम्॥५॥

“Look about for a site with a pool nearby,
in which the princess of Videha, yourself and
