* AYODHYAKANDA +

नहि तावद्गुणैर्जुष्टं सर्वशास्त्रविशारदम्।
एकपुत्रा fet पुत्रमहँ जीवितुमुत्सहे॥१९॥
“Having only one son, | am surely
unable to survive without that son, who is
endowed with all virtues and is well-versed
in all the scriptures. (19)

न fe मे जीविते किंचित् सामर्थ्यमिह कल्प्यते।
अपश्यन्त्या: frat Ut लक्ष्मणं च महाबलम्॥ २०॥
“There is not the least capacity in me

to sustain my life here so long as | fail to
perceive my beloved son, Rama, and the

valorous Laksmana.

यथा निदाघे भगवान् दिवाकर: M1 28

“This fire, born of grief occasioned by
separation from my son, which is exceedingly
harmful to me sure enough, is torturing
me today in the same way as the glorious
sun, possessed of greatest splendour,
scorches this earth with its rays in summer.”

(21)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्येऽयोध्याकाण्डे त्रिचत्वारिंश: सर्ग: ॥ ४३ ॥

Thus ends Canto Forty-three in the Ayodhyakanda of the glorious Ramayana of
Valmiki, the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

Canto XLIV

Establishing the greatness of Sri Rama, Sumitra, who is a pastmaster in
eloquence, assuages Kausalya’s grief

विलपन्तीं तथा तां तु कौसल्यां प्रमदोत्तमाम्।
इदं ad स्थिता धर्म्य सुमित्रा वाक्यमब्रवीत्॥ 8
Sumitra, who was devoted 10
righteousness, addressed for her part the
following words, which were in consonance
with the spirit of righteousness, to the
celebrated Kausalya, the foremost of women,
who had been wailing as aforesaid: (1)

तवार्ये सद्गुणैर्युक्त: स Ua: पुरुषोत्तम:।
fe a विलपितेनैवं कृपणं रुदितेन वा॥२॥

“That son of yours, O noble lady, is
adorned with excellent virtues and is the
foremost among men. What purpose will be
served by your wailing in this way or by
weeping piteously? (2)
यस्तवार्ये गत: पुत्रस्त्यक्त्वा राज्यं महाबल:।
साधु कुर्वन् महात्मानं frat सत्यवादिनम्॥३॥
शिष्टैराचरिते सम्यकशश्वत् Wa फलोदये।
रामो धर्मे स्थित: श्रेष्ठो न स शोच्य: HATS Mt ४॥

“Your noblest son, Rama, who is
possessed of great strength, O noble lady,
and who, having renounced the throne, has
proceeded to the forest, thereby proving his
high-souled father to be perfectly truthful, is
devoted to the path of virtue, which has
been eternally and duly followed by the
cultured and which brings its reward in the
other world. As such he never deserves to
be pitied. (3-4)
add चोत्तमां Git लक्ष्मणोऽस्मिन् सदानघ:।
दयावान् सर्वभूतेषु लाभस्तस्य महात्मन:॥५॥

“The sinless Laksmana, who is full of
compassion to all created beings, always
renders the best form of service to Rama.
Thus there is gain alone to that high-souled
prince. (5)
अरण्यवासे यद् Ga जानन्त्येव सुखोचिता।
अनुगच्छति वैदेही धर्मात्मानं तवात्मजम्॥६॥

“The daughter of the ruler of the Videhas
