« KISKINDHAKANDA +

monkeys with his angry look, O lord of

monkeys, there stands at your door the

powerful Laksmana, his eyes suffused with

anger. (49)

तस्य Wet प्रणामं त्वं सपुत्र: सहबान्धव:।

गच्छ शीघ्रं महाराज Wal WEIMAR I Ko Il
“Accompanied by your son and kinsfolk,

make respectful obeisance to him with your
head bent low. Depart quickly, O monarch !

1061

Let his anger be appeased this very day.
(50)

यथा fe wat धर्मात्मा तत्कुरुष्व समाहित:।
राजंस्तिष्ठं स्वसमये va सत्यप्रतिश्रव:॥५१॥

“Devoutly act precisely as Sri Rama,
whose mind is set on virtue, directs you to
do, O king; abide by your understanding
with him and remain true to your promise.”

(51)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये किष्किन्धाकाण्डे एकत्रिंश: सर्ग: ॥ 32 ॥

Thus ends Canto Thirty-one in the Kiskindhakanda of the glorious Ramayana of
Valmiki, the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

Canto XXXII

Seeing Sugriva dismayed to hear of Laksmana’s wrath from the mouth of
Angada, Hanuman tells Sugriva that the delay in honouring the
understanding arrived at with Sri Rama was at the root of
the latter’s displeasure, and advises Sugriva to pacify
Laksmana and initiate the search for Sita

अङ्गदस्य वच: श्रुत्वा सुग्रीव: सचिवै: Tel
लक्ष्मणं कुपितं श्रुत्वा मुमोचासनमात्मवान्॥१॥
Hearing the submission of Angada
accompanied by his own counsellors, Plaksa
and Prabhava and learning of Laksmana
being angry, Sugriva, who had control over
his self, quitted his bed in a flurry. (1)

स च तानब्रवीद् वाक्यं निश्चित्य गुरुलाघवम्।
मन्त्रज्ञान् मन्त्रकुशलो मन्त्रेषु परिनिष्ठित:॥ २॥

Nay, having definitely come to know
the greatness of Sri Rama and his own
frivolity, Sugriva, who was an adept in turning
to account the counsel of his ministers and
was exceptionally clever at deliberations,
spoke to them who were skilled in counsel,
as follows : (2)
न मे gated किंचिन्नापि a दुरनुष्ठितम्।
लक्ष्मणो राघबभ्राता Bea: किमिति चिन्तये॥ ३॥

“Neither has anything harsh been uttered

by me nor has anything wrong been done
by me to Sri Rama. |, therefore, wonder
why Laksmana, younger brother of Sri
Rama (a scion of Raghu), is angry with me.

(3)
असुहृद्धिर्ममामित्रैर्नित्यमन्तरदर्शिभि: ।
मम दोषानसम्भूताञ्श्रावितो राघवानुज:॥४॥
॥ “Surely Laksmana, younger brother of
Sri Rama, has been told of my imaginary
faults by my malevolent enemies who are
ever given to picking holes. (4)

अत्र तावद् यथाबुद्धि: adta यथाविधि।
भावस्य निश्चयस्तावद् विज्ञेयो निपुणं शनै:॥५॥

“In this connection, at the very outset,
however, what exists in the mind of
Laksmana should by degrees be carefully
ascertained by all taken together in the
proper way so that we may know the cause
of his anger. (5)
