* ARANYAKANDA «

Laksmana and then pointing to the chariot
showed the wonder to his brother. (12)

अर्चिष्मन्तं श्रिया जुष्टमद्भुतं पश्य लक्ष्मण।
प्रतपन्तमिवादित्यमन्तरिक्षगतं रथम्॥ १३॥
“O Laksmana, see in the sky the
wonderful chariot possessed of lustre,
attended by grandeur and glowing like the
sun. (13)

ये हया: पुरुहूतस्य पुरा शक्रस्य न: श्रुता:।
अन्तरिक्षगता दिव्यास्त इमे हरयो ध्रुवम्॥१४॥
“Indeed, here in the sky are those
celestial horses of Indra—the horses of
which we had heard so much earlier. (14)

इमे च पुरुषव्याघ्र ये तिष्ठन्त्यभितो दिशम्।
शतं Vd कुण्डलिनो युवान: खड्गपाणय:॥ १५॥
विस्तीर्णविपुलोरस्का: परिघायतबाहव:।
शोणांशुवसना: सर्वे व्याघ्रा SA दुरासदा:॥ VE Il

“And 0 tiger-man, those who are
standing all round in groups of hundreds—
youngmen wearing earrings, holding swords
in their hands, having very broad chests
and large arms resembling iron clubs and
wearing red garments—all are unassailable
like tigers. (15-16)
उरोदेशेषु सर्वेषां Et ज्वलनसंनिभा:।
wu बिभ्रति सौमित्रे पञ्चविंशतिवार्षिकम्॥ १७॥

“At the breast-regions of all hang
garlands bright as fire. O son of Sumitra, all

are possessed of a form aged twenty-five
years. (17)

एतद्धि किल cart वयो vata नित्यदा।
यथेमे पुरुषव्याघ्रा दृश्यन्ते प्रियदर्शना:॥१८॥
“Indeed, they say this is the permanent

age of gods, as these tiger-men of agreeable
looks appear. (18)

sea we वैदेह्या ued तिष्ठं लक्ष्मण।
यावज्जानाम्यहं व्यक्तं क UT द्युतिमान् रथे॥१९॥
“Laksmana, stay here only awhile with
Vaidehi till | find out clearly who this lustrous
being in the chariot is.” (19)

725

तमेवमुक्त्वा सौमित्रिमिहैव स्थीयतामिति।
अभिचक्राम काकुत्स्थ: शरभङ्गाश्रमं प्रति॥ २०॥
Thus telling the said Saumitri to stay

there only, Kakutstha walked towards the
hermitage of Sarabhanga. (20)

ad: समभिगच्छन्तं Wer wa शचीपति:।
शरभङ्गमनुज्ञाप्य विबुधानिदमब्रवीत्॥ २१॥

Then, seeing Rama coming near, the
husband of Saci, Indra, took leave of
Sarabhanga and said this to the gods:

(21)
इहोपयात्यसौ रामो यावन्मां नाभिभाषते।
Prot नयत तावत् तु ततो At द्रष्टुमर्हति॥ २२॥
जितवन्तं कृतार्थं fe तदाहमचिरादिमम्।
कर्म ह्यनेन कर्तव्यं महदन्यै: सुदुष्करम्॥ २३॥

“Here comes this Rama; before he
speaks to me, make a move, let him not
see me. Shortly when he has conquered
Ravana and achieved his purpose, then |
shall see him. For, he has to do a great

deed which is very difficult to be done by
others.” (22-23)

अथ वज्री तमामन्त्य मानयित्वा च तापसम्।

Wt हययुक्तेन ययौ दिवमरिंदम:॥ २४॥
Then having taken leave of and having

honoured that ascetic, the wielder of the

thunderbolt, a subduer of enemies, rose to
heaven in his chariot drawn by horses. (24)

प्रयाते q सहस्राक्षे राघव: सपरिच्छद:।
अग्निहोत्रमुपासीनं शरभङ्गमुपागमत्॥ २५ ॥

When, however, the thousand-eyed
one had left, Raghava together with his
followers approached Sarabhanga, who was
worshipping the fire. (25)

तस्य पादौ च संगृह्य WA: सीता च ASAT: |
निषेदुस्तदनुज्ञाता लब्धवासा निमन्त्रिता:॥ २६॥

Rama, Sita and Laksmana touched his
feet and sat down with his permission. He
invited them to be his guests and gave
them rooms to stay. (26)
