462

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

षट्चत्वारिंश: सर्ग:
Canto XLVI

Having reached the bank of the Tamasa and thinking of the plight of the
people of Ayodhya, Sri Rama lays himself down on a bed of leaves
bewailing the lot of his parents and feeling reassured by the thought
of Bharata’s noble qualities; while Laksmana opens his dialogue
with Sumantra on the divine excellences of Sri Rama. Waking
up in the meantime, Sri Rama urges the charioteer-minister to
drive the chariot in such a way as to put the citizens, that
had accompanied them, off the scent and lead them to
think that the chariot had turned back towards
Ayodhya instead of proceeding towards the forest.

He then mounts the chariot alongwith Sita and
Laksmana and presses on to the forest

ततस्तु तमसातीरं रम्यमाश्रित्य राघव:।
सीतामुद्वीक्ष्य सौमित्रिमिदं वचनमब्रवीत्॥१॥

Then, taking his stand on the delightful
bank of the Tamasa and gazing on Sita,
Sri Rama (a scion of Raghu) spoke to
Laksmana, son of Sumitra, as follows : (1)

sara निशा gat सौमित्रे प्रहिता वनम्।
वनवासस्य भद्रं ते न चोत्कण्ठितुमर्हसि॥ २॥

“Today, O Laksmana, is the very first
night of our exile in the forest. And since it
is to the forest that we have been sent
away, you ought not to feel anxious for
those that have been left behind; may all be
well with you ! (2)

wa शून्यान्यरण्यानि रुदन्तीव समन्तत:।
यथानिलयमायद्धिर्निलीनानि WES: ।। ३॥

“Look here: sought for shelter by beasts
and birds retiring to their respective abode,
the desolate woods are crying, as it were,
on all sides. (3)

अद्यायोध्या तु नगरी राजधानी पितुर्मम।
सस्त्रीपुंसा गतानस्मान् शोचिष्यति न संशय:॥४॥
“The city of Ayodhya, the capital of my

father, King DaSaratha, with its men and
women will for its part lament today for us

three, that have departed for the forest:
there is no doubt about it. (4)

अनुरक्ता fe मनुजा राजानं बहुभिर्गुणै:।
त्वां च मां च नरव्याघ्र शत्रुघ्नभरतौ ATU I

“For, the people of Ayodhya are devoted
to the king no less than to you and myself,
as also to Bharata and Satrughna, for our
manifold virtues, O tiger among men! (5)
frat चानुशोचामि मातरं च यशस्विनीम्।
अपि नान्धौ भवेतां नौ रुदन्तौ तावभीक्ष्णश: ॥ ६॥

“| bewail the lot of my father as well as
my illustrious mother, Kausalya. | fear lest
those parents of ours, who must be
incessantly weeping, should be deprived of
their eyesight. (6)
भरत: Gea धर्मात्मा frat art च मे।
धर्मार्थकामसहितैर्वाक्यैराश्वासयिष्यति wou

“| am sure that the pious-minded
Bharata will console my father and mother

by means of words assuring them of religious
merit, material welfare and sense-gratification.

(7)
भरतस्यानृशंसत्वं संचिन्त्याहं पुन: पुन:।
नानुशोचामि पितरं मातरं च महाभुज॥८॥

“Reflecting again and again on the
