1070

“As a result of this lakhs and crores of
monkeys possessed of extraordinary valour
and capable of assuming any form at will
and dwelling on different mountains have
actually arrived. (60)

तदागच्छ महाबाहो चारित्रं रक्षितं त्वया।
अच्छलं मित्रभावेन सतां दारावलोकनम्॥६१॥

“Therefore, come in, 0 mighty-armed
prince; chastity has been maintained by you
in not intruding into the presence of women in
our private apartments but by remaining
outside. To look on others’ ladies with a
friendly eye, rather than with lustful eyes, is
not sinful in the eyes of the virtuous.” (61)

Invited in the first instance by Tara and
further impelled by hurry to carry out the
behest of his elder brother, the mighty-
armed Laksmana (the tamer of his foes)
duly entered the inner apartments. (62)

wd: सुग्रीवमासीनं काञ्चने परमासने।
महार्हास्तरणोपेते ददर्शादित्यसंनिभम्॥ ६३ ॥
दिव्यमाल्याम्बरधरं महेन्द्रमिव दुर्जयम्॥६४॥

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

दिव्याभरणमाल्याभि: प्रमदाभि: समावृतम्।
संरब्धतररक्ताक्षो बभूवान्तकसंनिभ: WEG ॥

Thereupon he beheld seated on an
excellent couch of gold with a costly cover,
and surrounded by young women adorned
with celestial jewels and garlands, the
illustrious Sugriva, blazing like the sun and
endowed with a godlike form, nay, wearing
heavenly garlands and raiment and difficult
to conquer like the mighty Indra, his limbs
appearing wonderful with heavenly
ornaments. Seeing this Laksmana_ got
enraged all the more, and with bloodshot
eyes, looked dreadful like the god of death.

(63—65)
em तु a: परिरभ्य गाढं
वरासनस्थो वरहेमवर्ण: ।
ददर्श सौमित्रिमदीनसत्त्वं
विशालनेत्र: स विशालनेत्रम्॥ ६६॥

Seated on the excellent couch (referred
to in the foregoing lines), closely embracing
Ruma, the large-eyed heroic Sugriva, for
his part, who possessed the hue of
excellent gold, saw the large-eyed Laksmana
(son of Sumitra), who had a powerful mind.

(66)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये किष्किन्धाकाण्डे त्रयस्तिंश: सर्ग: ॥ 33 ॥

Thus ends Canto Thirty-three in the Kiskindhakanda of the glorious Ramayana of
Valmiki, the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

Canto XXXIV
Laksmana warns Sugriva to rectify his mistake in neglecting his duty of

conducting a search for Sita, which amounted to ingratitude on his
part, and not to follow the path of his elder brother, Vali

apartments unchecked and was full of anger,

(1)

Seeing the aforesaid Laksmana, the | @& Peaerart तं प्रदीप्तमिव तेजसा।
foremost of men, who had entered his inner UTqeteracdca दृष्टवा दशरथात्मजम्॥ २॥
