* SUNDARAKANDA +

“Stricken with fear, O jewel among
monkeys, | may then fall down from your
back while you are contending with those
ogres of cruel deeds. (52)
अथ tate भीमानि महान्ति बलवन्ति च।
कथंचित् साम्पराये at जयेयु: कपिसत्तम॥ ५३॥
अथवा युध्यमानस्य पतेयं विमुखस्य ते।
पतितां च गृहीत्वा मां नयेयु: पापराक्षसा:॥७५४॥

“In case the ogres, who are terrible,
huge and mighty, are somehow able to
overcome you in conflict, or if | slip when
you have turned your eyes away from me
while fighting with them, the sinful ogres
may bear me away, laying hold on me when
fallen. (53-54)

मां वा हरेयुस्त्वद्धस्ताद् विशसेयुरथापि वा।
अनवस्थौ fe gad Gg जयपराजयौ॥ ५५॥

“Or, they may wrest me from your
grasp or even kill me afterwards; for victory
and defeat in combat are said to be uncertain.

(55)
a aft faced रक्षोभिरभितर्जिता।
त्वत्प्रयत्नो हरिश्रेष्ठ भवेन्निष्फल wa quasi

“Or, | may even die when intimidated
by the ogres. Your endeavour to take me to
the presence of Sri Rama may in that case
prove utterly futile, O jewel among monkeys!

(56)
कामं canta पर्याप्तो Ped सर्वराक्षसान्।
राघवस्य यशो AA, त्वया शस्तैस्तु राक्षसै:।॥ ५७॥

“Even though you are able to kill all the

ogres, the fame of Sri Rama, a scion of

Raghu, may suffer diminution because of
the ogres having been killed by you. (57)

अथवाऽऽदाय रक्षांसि न्यसेयु: Gad हि माम्।
a a नाभिजानीयुर्हरयो नापि राघव:॥७५८॥

“Or, bearing me away, the ogres may
actually lodge me in a secret place, where
neither those monkeys nor Sri Rama, a
scion of Raghu, may know anything about
me. (58)

175

आरम्भस्तु मदर्थोऽयं ततस्तव निरर्थक:।
त्वया fe सह रामस्य महानागमने गुण:॥५९॥

“This adventure of yours undertaken
on my account will then prove to be in vain.
A great advantage indeed lies in Sri Rama’s
advent with you. (59)
मयि जीवितमायत्तं राघवस्यामितौजस:।
MGT च महाबाहो Ta राजकुलस्य च॥६०॥

“The life of Sri Rama, who is endowed
with immeasurable strength, as well as of
his three younger brothers, as also of your
king, Sugriva and his family is dependent on
me, O mighty-armed monkey ! (60)
at निराशौ मदर्थं च शोकसंतापकर्शितौ।

We सर्वर्क्षहरिभिस्त्यक्ष्यत: प्राणसंग्रहम्॥६१॥

“Despondent and emaciated through
grief and agony on my account, the two
princes, Sri Rama and Laksmana, will give
up their hold on life alongwith all the bears
and monkeys. (61)

भर्तुर्भक्तिं पुरस्कृत्य रामादन्यस्य वानर।
नाहं WS स्वतो गात्रमिच्छेयं वानरोत्तम॥६२॥

“Keeping as | do devotion to my lord in
the forefront, O Hanuman, | do not wish to
touch of my own free will the body of anyone
other than Sri Rama, 0 jewel among
monkeys ! (62)
अनीशा किं करिष्यामि विनाथा विवशा सती ।। &3 UI

“That | was forced into contact with
Ravana was because, being helpless, without
a protector and having lost control of myself,
| could not do anything. (63)

afte wat दशग्रीवमिह हत्वा सराक्षसम्।
मामितो गृह्य गच्छेत Ad तस्य MET VATU EY UI
“If, having killed Ravana alongwith the
other ogres on this soil, and recovering me,
Sri Rama departs from this place, that would
be worthy of him. (64)
श्रुताश्च Get fe मया पराक्रमा
महात्मनस्तस्य रणावमर्दिन:।
