230

“In the case of monkeys the tail, they
say, is the cherished embellishment.
Therefore, let his tail be set on fire at once
and let him return with his tail burnt. (ॐ)

ad: पश्यन्त्वमुं दीनमङ्गवैरूप्यकर्शितम्।

सुमित्रज्ञातय: सर्वे बान्धवा: ससुहृज्जना:॥४॥
“Thereupon let his beloved friends and

relations and his kinsfolk including his well-

wishers, all find him wretched and distressed
through mutilation.” (4)

आज्ञापयद् राक्षसेन्द्र: पुरं We सचत्वरम्।

लाङ्गूलेन प्रदीप्तेन रक्षोभि: परिणीयताम्॥५॥
Ravana, the ruler of ogres, issued the

following command: “Let the monkey be

taken by the ogres with his tail on fire round
the entire city with its cross roads.” (5)

तस्य तद् वचनं श्रुत्वा राक्षसा: कोपकर्कशा:।

बेष्टन्तेतस्यलङ्गूजीर्णै कार्पासिकै: पटै: ॥ ६ ॥
Hearing his aforesaid command, the

ogres, who were merciless through rage,

began to wrap the tail of Hanuman in cotton
tatters. (6)

संवेष्ट्यमाने ot व्यवर्धत महाकपि:।
शुष्कमिन्धनमासाद्य वनेष्विव हुताशनम्॥७॥

While his tail was being swathed, the
huge monkey grew out of all proportion like
a fire in woodlands on catching dry wood.

(7)
तैलेन परिषिच्याथ तेऽग्निं तत्रोपपादयन्।
लाङ्गूलेन प्रदीप्तेने राक्षसांस्तानताडयत्॥८॥
रोषामर्षपरीतात्मा बालसूर्यसमानन:।

a भूय: संगतै: Re राक्षसैर्हरिपुङ्खव:॥९॥

Having soaked the tail in oil, the ogres
forthwith set fire to it and Hanuman, whose
countenance shone like the rising sun, his
mind seized with anger and indignation,
began to smite those ogres with his blazing
tail. That jewel among the monkeys was
bound more tightly by the cruel ogres who
had gathered together there. (8-9)

« VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

Vectors जग्मु: प्रीतिं निशाचरा:।
निबद्ध: क्रृतवान् वीरस्तत्कालसदरृशीं मतिम्॥ १०॥

The rangers of the night, including their
womenfolk, children and the aged, were
filled with delight. Bound tightly, the hero
arrived at the following resolution in
consonance with that juncture: (10)

कामं खलु न मे शक्ता निबद्भस्यापि राक्षसा:।
छित्त्वा पाशान् समुत्पत्य हन्यामहमिमान् पुन:।॥ ११॥

“Even though | stand bound to all
appearance, the ogres cannot in any case
prevail against me. Severing my bonds and
springing up, | shall be able to kill the ogres
again. (11)

ae भर्तृहितार्थाय aed भर्तॄशासनात्।
निबध्नन्ते दुरात्मानो न तु मे निष्कृति: Hau ez

“If under the command of their master
the evil-minded fellows have bound me,
ranging as | did for the purpose of doing
good to my master, no reprisal at all could
be made by them for the grave injuries
inflicted on them by me. (12)

सर्वेषामेव पर्याप्तो राक्षसानामहँ युधि।
fe तु रामस्य प्रीत्यर्थं विषहिष्येऽहमीदृशम्॥ १३॥
“| am strong enough for all the ogres
taken together in combat. Still for the pleasure
of Sri Rama, | shall put up with such bonds.
(13)

ag चारयितव्या a wa भवेदिति।
wat नहि सुदृष्टा A दुर्गकर्मविधानत:॥१४॥
“Lanka will thus be involuntarily caused
to be surveyed by me once more; for at
night it was not closely perceived from the
point of view of the technique of its fortification.
(14)

अवश्यमेव द्रष्टव्या मया cist निशाक्षये।
कामं बध्नन्तु A भूय: पुच्छस्योद्दीपनेन TN १५॥

पीडां कुर्वन्ति रक्षांसि न मेऽस्ति मनस: श्रम:।
ततस्ते Paden सत्त्ववन्तं महाकपिम्॥१६॥

परिगृह्य ययुर्हृष्टा राक्षसा: कपिकुञ्जरम्।
शङ्खभेरीनिनादैश्च घोषयन्त: स्वकर्मभि:॥ १७॥
