# YUDDHAKANDA #

सैन्यं तु fagd Gear धूम्राक्षो राक्षसर्षभ:।
रोषेण Het चक्रे वानराणां युयुत्सताम्॥ Vc ii

Seeing his army run away, Dhumraksa,
a bull among the ogres, for his part started
playing havoc among the bellicose monkeys,
in anger. (18)

प्रासै: प्रमथिता: केचिद्वानरा: शोणितस्त्रवा: ।
मुद्गरैराहता: केचित् पतिता धरणीतले॥१९॥

Mutilated with lances, some monkeys
began to spit blood; while, struck with
wooden mallets, others fell on the earth’s
surface. (19)

परिघैर्मथिता: केचिद् भिन्दिपालैश्च दारिता:।
पट्टिशैर्मथिता: aha विह्वलन्तो गतासव:॥ २०॥

Some were pounded with iron bars,
while others were torn with javelins.
Staggering when mangled with sharp-edged
spears, still others gave up the ghost. (20)

केचिद् विनिहता भूमौ efentat वनौकस:।
केचिद् विद्राविता नष्टा: संक्रुद्धै राक्षसैर्युधि॥ २१॥

Mowed down by the ogres, some
monkeys (lit, denizens of the woods)
dropped on the ground dripping with blood.
Put to flight on the battlefield by the
exasperated ogres, others made good their
escape. (21)

विभिन्नहृदया: केचिदेकपार्श्वन शायिता:।
विदारितास्तरिशूलैश्च केचिदान्रैर्विनि:सृता:॥ २२॥
Their hearts torn open, some were
laid low on their side. Nay, slashed with
tridents, others were divested of their entrails.
(22)
प्रबभौ शस्त्रबहुलं शिलापादपसंकुलम्॥ 23 II
That major conflict assumed most fearful
proportions, in that monkeys and ogres
promiscuously took part in it; nay, it abounded
in weapons and was thick with rocks and
trees. (23)

483

rpadtareyt  — हिक्कातालसमन्वितम्।
मन्दस्तनितगीतं तद् युद्धगान्धर्वमाबभौ॥ २४॥
Rendered sweet by the sound of Vinas
in the form of the twang of bowstrings, nay,
accompanied by the sound of wooden
cymbals in the form of the neighing of
horses and vocal music in the form of
the trumpeting of elephants, that conflict
resembled a symphony. (24)

धूम्राक्षस्तु धनुष्पाणिर्वानरान् रणमूर्धनि।
हसन् विद्रावयामास दिशस्ताञ्छरवृष्टिभि: ।। २५॥

Bow in hand, Dhumraksa for his
part dispersed laughing the aforesaid
monkeys in all directions with the showers
of his arrows in the forefront of the battle.

(25)

धूम्राक्षेणार्दितं Hat व्यथितं Ger मारुति:।
अभ्यवर्तत संक्रुद्ध: प्रगृह्य विपुलां शिलाम्॥ २६॥

Infuriated to behold his army perturbed
when harassed by Dhumraksa, Hanuman
(son of the wind-god) turned towards the
latter, seizing hold of a huge rock. (26)

क्रोधाद् द्विगुणताम्राक्ष: पितुस्तुल्यपराक्रम:।
Pret at पातयामास धूम्राक्षस्य रथं प्रति॥ २७॥
His eyes having turned doubly red
through anger, Hanuman (who was equal
in prowess to his father) flung that rock at
the chariot of Dnumraksa. (27)

आपतन्तीं शिलां दृष्टवा गदामुद्यम्य सम्भ्रमात्।
रथादाप्लुत्य वेगेन वसुधायां व्यतिष्ठत॥ २८॥
Leaping down from his chariot and lifting
up his mace in a flurry on seeing
the rock flying towards him, Dhumraksa
took up his position firmly on the ground.
(28)

सा प्रमथ्य रथं तस्य निपपात शिला भुवि।
सचक्रकूबरं साश्वं Bast सशरासनम्॥ २९॥
Smashing his chariot with its wheels,

pole, horses, banner and bow, that rock
rolled on the ground. (29)
