812

अकम्पनश्च निहतो बलिनोऽन्ये च राक्षसा:।
त्रिशिराश्चातिकायश्च देवान्तकनरान्तकौ ।। ९ ॥

“Akampana too was made short work
of here by Hanuman, as well as other mighty
ogres, viz., Trisira (by Hanuman) and Atikaya
(by Laksmana) as also Devantaka (by
Hanuman) and Narantaka (by Angada).(9)

युद्धोन्मत्तश्च मत्तश्च राक्षसप्रवराव्रुभौ।
निकुम्भश्चैव कुम्भश्च कुम्भकर्णात्मजौ Feit १०॥
वज्रदंष्ट्रश्च dey बहवो राक्षसा हता:।
मकराक्षश्च दुर्धर्षो wer af निपातित:॥११॥

“Nay, many other ogres were killed,
such as Yuddhonmatta and Matta, the two
jewels among the ogres, as also Nikumbha
and Kumbha, the two mighty sons of
Kumbhakarna (by Hanuman and Sugriva
respectively) and also Vajradamstra and
Damstra (by Angada). Again, Makaraksa,
who was so difficult to overpower, was
struck down in combat by me. (10-11)

अकम्पनश्च निहत: शोणिताक्षश्च वीर्यवान्।
amas wigs निहतौ तु महाहवे॥१२॥
“Again, Akampana was made short
work of, as also the mighty Sonitaksa (by
Dwivida). Yupaksa and Prajangha too for
their part were disposed of in a major conflict
(by Mainda and Angada respectively).(12)

विद्युज्जिह्वोऽत्र निहतो राक्षसो भीमदर्शन:।
यज्ञशत्रुश्च निहत: सुप्तघ्नश्च महाबल:॥१३॥
“Here was dispatched the ogre
Vidyujjinva, who was dreadful to look at.
Yajfhiasatru too was made short work of as
also Suptaghna, who was endowed with
extraordinary might. (13)

सूर्यशत्रुश्च निहतो ब्रह्मशत्रुस्तथापर:।
aa मन्दोदरी AWA wat तं पर्यदेवयत्॥१४॥
सपत्नीनां सहस्रेण साग्रेण परिवारिता।
Ud तु दृश्यते तीर्थं समुद्रस्य वरानने॥१५॥
यत्र सागरमुत्तीर्य at रात्रिमुषिता वयम्।
एष सेतुर्मया बद्ध: सागरे लवणार्णवे॥१६॥

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA +

तव हेतोर्विशालाक्षि नलसेतु: सुदुष्कर:।
UT सागरमक्षोभ्यं वैदेहि वरुणालयम्॥ Vil
अपारमिव गर्जन्तं शङ्खशुक्तिसमाकुलम्।
हिरण्यनाभं शैलेन्द्रं काञ्चनं पश्य मैथिलि॥ ecu
विश्रमार्थं हनुमतो frat सागरमुत्थितम्।
Ud कुक्षौ समुद्रस्य स्कन्धावारनिवेशनम्॥१९॥
अत्र Ud महादेव: प्रसादमकरोद् fey: |
Ud तु दृश्यते तीर्थं सागरस्य महात्मन:॥ २०॥
सेतुबन्ध sft ख्यातं त्रैलोक्येन च पूजितम्।
एतत् पवित्रॆ परमं महापातकनाशनम्॥ २१॥
अत्र राक्षसराजोऽयमाजगाम विभीषण:।
TH सा दृश्यते सीते किष्किन्धा चित्रकानना Ul २२॥
सुग्रीवस्य पुरी रम्या यत्र वाली मया हत:।
HA दृष्ट्वा पुरीं सीता किष्किन्धां वालिपालिताम् ।। २३ Ut
अब्रवीत् प्रश्रितं वाक्यं रामं प्रणयसाध्वसा।
सुग्रीवप्रियभार्याभिस्ताराप्रमुखतो FTN २४॥
गन्तुमिच्छे सहायोध्यां राजधानीं त्वया सह॥ २५॥

“SuryaSatru was also struck down here
as also another ogre, Brahmasatru.
Surrounded by more than a thousand of her
co-wives, here did Ravana’s principal consort,
Mandodari by name, lament for him. Here is
seen the landing-place on the seashore,
where, having crossed the ocean, we spent
that night O lovely lady; Here is the bridge
called Nala-setu (so called because it was
constructed by the monkey chief Nala),
which was so difficult to execute for others,
caused to be thrown over the salt sea by
me on your account, O large-eyed lady!
Behold, O princess of the Videha territory,
the roaring, imperturbable and seemingly
boundless ocean, the abode of Varuna (the
god of waters), which is teeming with conchs
and Oyster-shells. See, O princess of Mithila,
the golden mountain Mainaka (the ruler of
mountains), which has ores of gold in its
cavities, and which rose the other day
cleaving the ocean in order to provide rest
to Hanuman. Here lies the island in the
