1132

« VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

दशाधिकशततम: सर्ग:
Canto CX

S17 Rama enters alive the divine lustre of Visnu alongwith his
brothers; others go to Santanika world

अध्यर्धयोजनं गत्वा नदीं पश्चान्मुखाश्रिताम्।
wa पुण्यसलिलां cast रघुनन्दन:॥१॥
Sri Rama the descendant of Raghu,
going one and a half Yojana westward saw
the river Sarayu full with holy waters. (1)
at नदीमाकुलावर्तां सर्वत्रानुसरन् नृप:।
आगत: सप्रजो रामस्तं देशं रघुनन्दन:॥ २॥
Following that river stirred up by
whirlpools, all along its course, King Sri Rama,
the descendant of Raghu, together with the
subjects reached a particular place. (2)

अथ तस्मिन् ded तु ब्रह्मा लोकपितामह:।
wa: परिव्रतो देवैर्ऋषिभिश्च महात्मभि:॥ ३॥
आययौ यत्र काकुत्स्थ: स्वर्गाय समुपस्थित:।
विमानशतकोटीभिर्दिव्याभिरभिसंव्रत: ॥ ४॥
At that moment, Brahma, the grandfather
of the world, accompanied by all the gods,
high sages and noble ones, came to the
place where the scion of Kakutstha was
ready to depart to heaven. He, the scion
of Kakutstha, was surrounded by divine
chariots in millions. (3-4)
दिव्यतेजोव्तं व्योम ज्योतिर्भूतमनुत्तमम्।
स्वयंप्रभै: स्वतेजोभि: स्वर्गिभि: पुण्यकर्मभि: । ५॥
The sky was full with unparalleled lustre,
it was flooded with an unearthly light emitted

by the residents of heaven, the meritorious
and self-luminous. (5)

पुण्या वाता aga गन्धवन्त: सुखप्रदा:।
पपात पुष्पवृष्टिश्च देवैर्मुक्ता महौघवत्॥६॥
The holy fragrant winds blew which
gave comfort to all. A shower of flowers
was poured by the gods on Sri Rama, of
great prosperity. (6)
dearest: कीर्णे गन्धर्वाप्सरसंकुले।
सरयूसलिलं राम: पद्भ्यां समुपचक्रमे॥७॥

Then, at that time, when hundreds of
instruments were being sounded and the
place was full of Gandharvas and Apsaras,
Sri Rama set on entering the waters of the
Sarayu on foot. (7)

aa: पितामहो वाणीं त्वन्तरिक्षादभाषत।
आगच्छ विष्णो we a दिष्ट्या प्राप्तोऽसि Wea i ८ i

Then Brahma spoke from the heaven,
‘O Visnu come, may welfare be with you, O
descendant of Raghu, luckily you have come
back. (8)
भ्रातृभि: ae cars: प्रविशस्व स्विकां तनुम्।
यामिच्छसि महाबाहो at तनुं प्रविश स्विकाम्॥९॥
वैष्णवीं At महातेजो यद्वाऽऽकाशं सनातनम्।
त्वं fe लोकगतिर्देव न त्वां केचित् प्रजानते॥ १०॥
wa मायां विशालाक्षीं aa पूर्वपरिग्रहाम्।
त्वामचिन्त्यं महद् भूतमक्षयं चाजरं तथा।
यामिच्छसि महातेजस्तां तनुं प्रविश स्वयम्॥११॥

‘With your brothers equal to gods, enter
your own form, O one of long arms, or take
to the form you wish, O one of great power,
assume the form of Visnu, or the eternal
sky, O God, you are the resort of the
worlds, no one knows you well except the
big-eyed Maya, that was your former spouse,
Sita. You, the incomprehensible, the
imperishable and undecaying one, whichever
form you desire, enter that yourself, O
powerful one.’ (9—11)

पितामहवच: strat विनिश्चित्य महामति:।
विवेश aera तेज: सशरीर: सहानुज:॥१२॥
Hearing the words of Brahma, the very

wise Sri Rama decided and entered into the
Visnu’s form alive alongwith his brothers. (12)

ततो विष्णुमयं देवं पूजयन्ति स्म cad:
साध्या मरुद्गरणाश्चैव सेन्द्रा: साग्निपुरोगमा:॥ १३॥
