14 « VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

चरितं रघुनाथस्य शतकोटिप्रविस्तरम्।
एकैकमशक्षरं प्रोक्तं महापातकनाशनम्॥
श्रृण्वन् रामायणं भक्त्या य: Ue पदमेव वा।
a याति ब्रह्मण: स्थानं ब्रह्मणा पूज्यते सदा॥
रामाय रामभद्राय रामचन्द्राय वेधसे।
रघुनाथाय नाथाय सीताया: पतये नम:॥
यन्मङ्गलं सहस्राक्षे सर्वदेवनमस्कृते।
व्।न्रनाशे समभवत् तत् a Wad मङ्गलम्॥

यदासीन्मङ्गलं TH तत्ते भवतु मङ्गलम्॥
ऋषय: सागरा gat वेदा citer दिशश्च a
ages महाबाहो दिशन्तु तव सर्वदा॥
कायेन oat मनसेन्दियैर्वा
GEASS वा प्रकृतिस्वभावात्।
att a यत् सकलं wet
नारायणायेति समर्पये तत्॥

“Let all be well with (all) created beings. Let (all) the rulers of the earth protect the
earth following the righteous path. Let prosperity ever attend on the cows and the
Brahmanas (members of the priestly class). Let all the people be happy. Let the rain-god
pour showers in time. Let the earth be adorned with crops. Let this land be free from
agitation and let the Brahmanas be rid of (all) fear. May those without a son be blessed
with a son and may those with a son be blessed with a grandson. May those who are
destitute become rich and live for a (whole) century. The story of Sri Rama (the Protector
of the Raghus) extends to a hundred crore couplets. Every single letter of this (vast book)
destroys the major sins of people (going through it). He who listens with devotion to a
single foot of a verse or even to a single word of Srimad Ramayana ascends (after death)
to the realm of Brahma (the creator) and is always honoured by the latter. Hail to Lord Sri
Rama, the blessed Rama, the moon-like Rama, the Maker and Controller of the universe,
the Protector of the Raghus, the Spouse of Sita! Let that good luck attend on You, which
fell to the lot of Indra, (the thousand-eyed god)—who is greeted by all the gods—on the
occasion of the destruction of the demon Vrtra. Let that benediction descend on You,
which Vinata (mother of Garuda) bestowed on Garuda (the king of birds and the carrier
of Lord Visnu) when the latter went out in search for nectar. Good luck to the Ruler of the
territory of Kosala, an ocean of laudable virtues, son of a universal monarch! Good luck
to the Ruler of the entire globe ! Let that benediction go to You, which Aditi (the mother
of Indra) bestowed on Indra (the wielder of a thunderbolt) when the latter destroyed the
demons on the occasion of churning the ocean for drawing out nectar. Let that good luck
attend on You, which fell to the lot of Lord Visnu—who is endowed with immense energy—
