« KISKINDHAKANDA +

appeared above horizon, held by me
alongwith a pair of whisks; pray, accept it
and allow it to be held over your head and
the whisks to be waved on both sides of
you. (3)
आर्तस्तत्र बिलद्वारि स्थित: संवत्सरं FTI
दृष्टवा च शोणितं द्वारि बिलाच्चापि समुत्थितम्॥ ४॥
शोकसंविग्नह्दयो भृशं व्याकुलितेन्द्रिय:।
अपिधाय facet शैलशृङ्गखेण ad तदा॥७५॥
तस्माद् देशादपाक्रम्य किष्किन्धां प्राविशं पुन:।
विषादात्तविह मां gear पौरैर्मन्त्रिभिरेव च॥६॥
अभिषिक्को न कामेन तन्मे क्षन्तुं त्वमर्हसि।
त्वमेव राजा मानार्ह: सदा Ue यथा पुरा॥७॥
“‘Having waited at the mouth of that
hole for a full year, O monarch, even though
| felt distressed over your entry into the
hole, | felt agitated at heart through grief to
see blood welled up from the hole and
collected at its mouth, my mind being
distracted. Closing the aforesaid mouth of
the hole with the top of a cliff and withdrawing
from that area, | then entered Kiskindha
again through despondency. Seeing me
forlorn, without you for a year, I, for my part,
was installed on the throne by the citizens
as well as the ministers and not through
covetousness on my part. You ought,
therefore, to forgive the aforesaid offence
on my part, unintentional as it was. You
alone are the sovereign deserving of honour,
while | am ever your servant as heretofore.
(4—7)
राजभावे नियोगोऽयं मम त्वद्विरहात् qa: |
सामात्यपौरनगरं स्थितं निहतकण्टकम्॥८॥
न्यासभूतमिदं wet da निर्यातयाम्यहम्।
मा च रोषं कृथा: सौम्य मम wart ९॥
“‘This installation of mine on the throne
of Kiskindha was brought about due to your
absence. | hereby restore to you your
kingdom including ministers, citizens and
the city of Kiskindha, which vested in me as
a sacred trust and which has been rid of all
thorns. Therefore, O gentle brother do not

965

give vent to anger towards me, O
exterminator of foes ! (8-9)
याचे cat शिरसा राजन् मया बद्धोऽयमञ्जलि: |

बलादस्मिन् समागम्य मन्तरिभि: पुरवासिभि: ti १० ॥
राजभावे नियुक्तोऽहं शून्यदेशजिगीषया।
स्निग्धमेवं ब्रुवाणं at a विनिर्भरत्स्य वानर:॥ ११॥

धिक्त्वामिति च मामुक्त्वा बहु तत्तदुवाच ह।
प्रकृतीश्च समानीय abaya सम्मतान्॥१२॥
मामाह सुहृदां मध्ये वाक्यं परमगर्हितम्।
विदितं at मया रात्रौ मायावी स महासुर:॥ १३॥
मां समाह्वयत क्रुद्धो युद्धाकांक्षी तदा पुरा।
तस्य Ae भाषितं श्रुत्वा नि:सतोऽहं नृपालयात्॥ १४॥
“‘l solicit you, O sovereign, with my
head bent low to get pleased with me and
here stand my palms joined together in
supplication. | was forcibly installed on this
throne by your ministers and the citizens in
a body lest a rulerless state should tempt
others to conquer it.’ “Censuring me, even
though | spoke such loving words, and
saying ‘Fie upon you!’ the said monkey,
Vali, actually uttered many abusive
words. Nay, calling together (accredited
representatives of) the people as well as
ministers who were held in high esteem, he
spoke to me most contemptible words in
the midst of my near and dear ones as
follows : “ ‘It is known to you how that mighty
demon, Mayavi, who sought a trial of arms
with me, angrily challenged me to a duel the
other day at dead of night. Hearing his
aforesaid challenge, | sallied forth from my
royal residence. (10—14)

अनुयातश्च मां तूर्णमयं भ्राता सुदारुण:।
स तु Gada मां रात्रौ सद्वितीयं महाबल:॥ १५॥
प्राद्रवद् भयसंत्रस्तो वीक्ष्यावां समुपागतौ।
अभिद्रुतस्तु वेगेन विवेश a महाबिलम्॥१६॥
“‘This most cruel younger brother of
mine too followed me apace. The moment
the demon saw me followed by another at
night, the fellow, even though possessed of
great might, fled for life, distracted as he
