* SUNDARAKANDA +

त्वया विज्ञातपूर्वश्च वाली वानरपुङ्खव:।
स तेन fea: संख्ये शरेणैकेन वानर:॥११॥

“Nay, Vali, the foremost of monkeys,
was already known to you. That monkey
was killed on the battle-field by Sri Rama
with a single arrow. (11)

a सीतामार्गणे cam: सुग्रीव: सत्यसंगर:।
Bry सम्प्रेषयामास दिश: सर्वा हरीश्वर:॥१२॥

“Impatient to find out Sita and true to
his promise, the celebrated Sugriva, the lord
of monkeys, duly dispatched monkeys in all
directions. (12)

तां हरीणां सहस्राणि शतानि नियुतानि च।
fea सर्वासु मार्गन्ते ह्यधश्चोपरि चाम्बरे॥१३॥

“Hundreds and thousands, nay, lakhs
of monkeys are searching for her in all
the four quarters as also below in the
subterranean regions and above in the
heavens. (13)
वैनतेयसमा: केचित् केचित् तत्रानिलोपमा:।
असङ्गगतय: शीघ्रा हरिवीरा महाबला:॥१४॥

“The monkey heroes are swift and
endowed with extraordinary might, and can
move without any footing. Some of them are
equal in speed to Garuda (the son of Vinata),
while others vie with the wind in swiftness
of motion. (14)

अहं तु हनुमान्नाम मारुतस्यौरस: सुत:।
सीतायास्तु कृते तूर्णं शतयोजनमायतम्॥१५॥
भ्रमता च AM दृष्टा गृहे A जनकात्मजा॥ VE Ul

“|, for my part, am Hanuman by name,
son of the wind-god, sprung from his loins.
Having quickly leapt across the sea itself
(dividing the main land from Lanka), which
is really a hundred Yojanas (or eight hundred
miles) wide, for the sake of Sita, | have
come here, longing as | did to see you.
While | was roaming in search of her,
Janaka’s daughter was discovered by me
in your pleasance. (15-16)

223

तद् भवान् दृष्टधर्मार्थस्तप:कृतपरिग्रह:।
परदारान् महाप्राज्ञ नोपरोद्धुं त्वमर्हसि॥१७॥

“Therefore, having known the truth about
righteousness and earthly gain, and having
amassed riches by dint of askesis, O most
wise king, you ought not to detain another's
wife. (17)

we धर्मविरुद्धेषु बह्वपायेषु कर्मसु।
मूलघातिषु सज्जन्ते बुद्धिमन्तो भवद्विधा:॥ १८॥

“Wise people like you do not engage in
actions which are antagonistic to virtue,
lead to many evils and destroy the doer,
root and branch. (18)

SY लक्ष्मणमुक्तानां रामकोपानुवर्तिनाम्।
शराणामग्रत: स्थातुं BH देवासुरेष्वपि॥१९॥

“And who is capable, even among gods
and demons of withstanding the shafts shot
by Laksmana in the wake of Sri Rama’s
wrath? (19)

न चापि fy लोकेषु राजन् faa कश्चन।
राघवस्य व्यलीकं य: कृत्वा सुखमवाप्नुयात्॥ २०॥
“Nor is there anyone in all the three
worlds, O king, who will enjoy happiness
even after committing an offence against Sri
Rama. (20)

ad त्रिकालहितं वाक्यं धर्म्यमर्थानुयायि च।
मन्यस्व नरदेवाय जानकी प्रतिदीयताम्॥ २१॥

“Therefore, accept my advice, which is
conducive to your good in all the three
divisions of time (viz., the past, present and
future), is in perfect accord with virtue and
leads to material gain as well. Let the daughter
of Janaka be restored to Sri Rama (a god
among men). (21)

Ger हीयं मया cat लब्धं यदिह दुर्लभम्।
sat कर्म यच्छेषं निमित्तं तत्र wean २२॥

“The aforesaid godlike lady has actually
been seen by me; what was difficult to achieve
on this occasion has been achieved. Sri
Rama, a scion of Raghu, is capable of doing
that which remains to be done as a sequel. (22)
