* ARANYAKANDA «

निदधे रावण: dat मयो मायामिवासुरीम्।
अब्रवीच्च दशग्रीव: पिशाचीर्घोरदर्शना:॥ १४॥
यथा नैनां पुमान् स्त्री वा सीतां पश्यत्यसम्मत: |
मुक्तकामणिसुवर्णानि वस्त्राण्याभरणानि च॥ १५॥
ae यदिच्छेत् तदैवास्या देयं मच्छन्दतो यथा।
या च वक्ष्यति वैदेहीं वचनं किंचिदप्रियम्॥ १६॥
SAM यदि वा ज्ञानान्न TEM जीवितं प्रियम्।
तथोक्त्वा राक्षसीस्तास्तु राक्षसेन्द्र: प्रतापवान्॥ १७॥
निष्क्रम्यान्त:पुरात् तस्मात् किं कृत्यमिति चिन्तयन्।
ददर्शाष्टौ महावीर्यान् राक्षसान् पिशिताशनान्॥ १८ ॥

In his flurry, however, Ravana (the
ten-headed monster) did not at all perceive
the aforesaid act of Sita. The tawny-eyed
monkey chiefs then beheld with unwinking
eyes as it were (through wonder and
compassion) that large-eyed Sita crying
loudly. Having passed beyond the Pampa
lake, that ruler of ogres proceeded with his
face towards the city of Lanka, taking the
princess of Mithila, who continued to cry all
the time. Extremely delighted, Ravana bore
in his arms his own death in the form of Sita
as one would carry in one’s arms a highly
venomous female serpent with sharp fangs.
Coursing through the air like an arrow shot
from a bow, he quickly left clearly behind
forests, rivers, mountains and lakes. Having
reached the Indian ocean, the abode of
Timis (a species of fish of an enormous
size) and crocodiles, the seat of Varuna
(the god of waters), which knows no
depletion, and the resting-place of rivers,
Ravana for his part passed clearly beyond
it. While Sita (a princess of the Videha
territory) was being carried away by Ravana,
the ocean (the seat of Varuna) found its
billows brought to a standstill and its fishes
and large aquatic serpents rendered
motionless due to fear of Ravana. At that
moment Caranas (the celestial bards)
standing in the airspace uttered the following
remark: “This act of bearing away Sita
marks the end of Ravana, the ten-headed
monster.” The Siddhas too spoke likewise.

863

Bearing in his arms Sita, his death-
incarnate, the said Ravana for his part
entered the city of Lanka. Reaching the
large city of Lanka, which contained well-
ramified roads and whose gateways remained
thronged with people, he entered his own
gynaeceum. There Ravana lodged the
celebrated Sita, who was noted for the dark
corners of her eyes and was seized with
grief and infatuation—even as the demon
Maya (the suzerain lord of Tripura) would
shed his demoniac Maya (conjuring trick).
Nay, Ravana commanded fiendesses of
terrible aspect as follows: “Take care that
no unauthorized man or woman looks on
Sita. Pearls, gems and gold, articles of
wearing apparel and ornaments—whatever
she desires should be supplied to her that
very moment in deference to my wishes
according to her choice. Nay, | presume life
is not dear to the ogress who utters any
harsh word to her through ignorance or
consciously.” Having instructed the aforesaid
ogresses accordingly and sallying forth from
that gynaeceum contemplating as to what
should be done next, the powerful Ravana
(the king of ogres) for his part granted
interview to eight exceptionally powerful flesh-
eating ogres. (4—18)

स तान् Gea महावीर्यो वरदानेन मोहित:।
उवाच तानिदं वाक्यं प्रशस्य बलवीर्यत:॥१९॥

Having met and extolled them on the
score of their strength and prowess, and
blinded by the boon he had received from
Brahma, the exceptionally powerful Ravana
spoke to them as follows : (19)
नानाप्रहरणा: क्षिप्रमितो गच्छत सत्वरा:।
जनस्थानं हतस्थानं भूतपूर्वं खरालयम्॥ Ro Il

“Equipped with diverse weapons
proceed at once from this place with all
speed to Janasthana, which was formerly

the abode of Khara, but whose dwellings
have since been laid waste by Rama. (20)
