330

destruction even as one would lodge a
highly venomous female serpent knowing it
to be a princess. When the entire living
creation extols the virtues of Rama, for
what offence shall | forsake my beloved
son? Nay, | can, if need be, forsake my
other two wives, Kausalya and Sumitra or
even my royal fortune, nay, my very life,
but | would on no account part with Rama,
who is so fond of his father. Supreme is
my delight on seeing my eldest son; while
my very consciousness is lost if | fail to
see Rama. The world may continue to exist
without the sun or a crop may live without
water; life, however, cannot in any case
continue in my body without Rama. Therefore,
have done with it. Let this resolution be
given up, O lady with a sinful resolve!

(9—14)

aft ते चरणौ qat स्पृशाम्येष wate मे।
किमर्थं Parad पापे त्वया परमदारुणम्॥१५॥

“ even hereby touch your feet with my
head as a token of submission; be gracious
to me. What for has this most cruel design
been conceived by you, O sinful woman?

(15)
अथ जिज्ञाससे at त्वं भरतस्य प्रियाप्रिये।
अस्तु यत्तत्त्वया Ud aed Wea प्रति॥१६॥

“If, however, you wish to ascertain my
kindly or unkindly feeling towards Bharata,
let that which was recommended by you
first in connection with Bharata (a scion of
Raghu), come into effect (let him be forthwith
installed as Prince Regent instead of Rama).

(16)

स मे ज्येष्ठसुत: श्रीमान् धर्मज्येष्ठं इतीव मे।
ad त्वया प्रियवादिन्या सेवार्थं कथितं भवेत्॥ १७॥
“The observation so often made by
you that ‘the glorious Rama, who is senior
in the practice of virtue too, is my eldest
son as it were’, must have been uttered in
order to coax me or to exact some service
from him. (17)

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

तच्छ्त्वा शोकसंतप्ता संतापयसि Ar भृशम्।
आविष्टासि Te शून्ये सा त्वं परवशं गता॥ Ve Ul
“Afflicted with grief to hear of his
projected installation, you are severely
tormenting me too. Possessed by an evil
spirit in a lonely house, you are subject to
the control of another. (18)
इक्ष्वाकूणां कुले देवि सम्प्राप्त: सुमहानयम्।
अनयो नयसम्पन्ने aa a faa मति:॥१९॥

“This very great misfortune, O queen,
has visited the race of the Ikswakus, rich in
righteous conduct, due to which your mind
has thus been perverted. (19)

नहि किंचिदयुक्तं वा विप्रियं वा पुरा मम।
sated विशालाक्षि तेन न श्रद्दधामि ते॥ २०॥

“You did nothing unreasonable or
repugnant to me in the past, O large-eyed
one! Therefore, | fail to believe what
has been done by you today, which |
presume is the doing of some malignant
spirit. (20)

ननु ते राघवस्तुल्यो भरतेन महात्मना।
age fe स्म बाले त्वं HAM: कथयसे मम॥ २१॥

“Indeed, Rama (a scion of Raghu) is
on a par with the high-souled Bharata to
you; for many times have you told me
stories illustrating this, O young lady ! (21)

तस्य धर्मात्मनो देवि वने वासं यशस्विन:।
wma रोचयसे भीरु aa वर्षाणि पञ्च च॥ २२॥

“How have you come to view with
favour the banishment for nine years and
five of that pious-minded and _ illustrious
Rama, O glorious yet timid lady? (22)
अत्यन्तसुकुमारस्य तस्य धर्मे कृतात्मन:।
कथं रोचयसे वासमरण्ये भृशदारुणे॥२३॥

“How have you come to view with
favour the sojourn in a most dreadful forest
of Rama, who is extremely delicate of body
and has given his mind to piety? (23)
रोचयस्यभिरामस्य रामस्य शुभलोचने।
तव शुश्रूषमाणस्य किमर्थं विप्रवासनम्॥ २४॥
