* BALAKANDA +

terrestrial plane through a curse were rid
of their sin (responsible for the curse) by
bathing in it. Having been rid of their sin
through the very touch of that water and
further invested with merit, they ascended
once more to the heavens and returned to
their respective realms. Already delighted
with the very sight of that sparkling water
and rid of their sin by having bathed in the
Ganga, people rejoiced all the more.
Mounted on a charming chariot, Emperor
Bhagiratha, the royal sage, drove ahead,
while the Ganga followed at his heels. Full
of delight all gods including hosts of Rsis,
as well as Daityas, Danavas and ogres, the
foremost among Gandharvas and Yaksas,
including Kinnaras and great Nagas, as well
as serpents and celestial nymphs, as also
all species of aquatic creatures that existed
followed the Ganga, keeping behind
Bhagiratha’s chariot. The illustrious Ganga,
the foremost of all rivers, which is capable
of eradicating all sins, followed in whatever
direction Bhagiratha drove. Proceeding from
there, it is said, the Ganga actually inundated
the sacrificial ground of the high-souled sage
Jahnu, the worker of miracles, who had
been performing a sacrifice. Jahnu felt
enraged to perceive the pride of Ganga, O
scion of Raghu, and drank up by dint of his
yogic power all the water of the Ganga,
which was a supreme miracle indeed. Highly
astonished, the gods_ including’ the
Gandharvas and Rsis thereupon glorified
the high-souled Jahnu, the foremost among
men, and reduced the Ganga to the
position of a daughter of that exalted soul

191

by prevailing upon him to eject the Ganga.
(16—37)
ततस्तुष्टो महातेजा: श्रोत्राभ्यामसृजत् प्रभु:।
तस्माज्जह्नुसुता गङ्गा प्रोच्यते जाह्नवीति च॥ ३८॥
Pleased at that, the powerful sage,
invested as he was with exceptional glory,
discharged the Ganga through his ears.
Hence the Ganga is spoken of as a daughter
of Jahnu and called by the name of Jahnavi
(descended from Jahnu). (38)
जगाम च पुनर्गङ्गा भगीरथरथानुगा।
are चापि सम्प्राप्ता सा सरित्प्रवरा तदा॥ ३९॥
रसातलमुपागच्छत् Faget तस्य कर्मण:।
भगीरथोऽपि राजर्षिर्गङ्गामादाय यत्नत:॥४०॥
पितामहान् भस्मकृतानपश्यद् गतचेतन:।
Tea पूतपाप्मान: स्वर्गं प्राप्ता रघूत्तम॥४१॥
The Ganga once more followed in the
wake of Bhagiratha’s chariot and duly
reached the excavation made by Sagara’s
sons and filled it*. Then that foremost of
rivers forced its way into Rasatala (the
penultimate subterranean’ region) for
consummating the feat of Bhagiratha, viz.,
the deliverance of his departed forbears.
Leading the Ganga with superhuman effort
to Rasatala as aforesaid, the royal sage
Bhagiratha too beheld his great grand-uncles
reduced to ashes and fainted (as it were
partly from grief and partly from exhaustion).
The most sacred water of the Ganga forthwith
submerged the heaps of their ashes and,
purged of their sin, the souls of Sagara’s
departed sons ascended to heaven, O jewel
among the Raghus ! (39—41)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये बालकाण्डे
त्रिचत्वारिंश: सर्ग: ॥ ४३ Il

Thus ends Canto Forty-three in the Balakanda of the glorious Ramayana of Valmiki,
the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

* The water turned brackish only when it was later drunk up and discharged by the sage Agastya.
