+ UTTARAKANDA +

त्वं गच्छारिष्टमव्यग्र: पन्थानमकुतोभयम्।
प्रशाधि राज्यं धर्मेण गतिर्हि जगतो भवान्॥१३॥

‘You go with pleasure on your path
unagitated and without fear and rule over
your Kingdom righteously; you are the resort
of this world.’ (13)

एवमुक्तस्तु मुनिना प्राञ्जलि: प्रग्रहो नृप:।
अभ्यवादयत प्राज्ञस्तमृषिं सत्यशीलिनम्॥१४॥
Thus spoken to by the sage, the king
with folded and outstretched hands, the wise
one, saluted that sage of truthful conduct. (14)
अभिवाद्य ऋषिश्रेष्ठं तांश्च सर्वांस्तपोधनान्।
अध्यारोहत् तदव्यग्र: पुष्पकं हेमभूषितम्॥१५॥
Saluting the best among sages, Agastya,
and all other great ascetics, he ascended
unagitated that Puspaka, ornamented with
gold. (15)
तं प्रयान्तं मुनिगणा आशीर्वादै: समन्तत:।
अपूजयन् महेन्द्राभं सहस्राक्षमिवामरा:॥१६॥
The host of sages on all sides honoured
him with blessings as the gods honour Indra,
the thousand-eyed one. (16)
Gea: स ay Wa: पुष्पके हेमभूषिते।
शशी मेघसमीपस्थो यथा जलधरागमे॥१७॥

1081

The well-composed Sri Rama on the
Puspaka, ornamented with gold, looked like
the moon near the cloud at the approach of
the rainy season. (17)

ततोऽर्धदिवसे प्राप्ते पूज्यमानस्ततस्तत:।
अयोध्यां प्राप्य काकुत्स्थो मध्यकक्षामवातरत्॥ १८ ॥
Then, by the advent of midday, being
honoured here and there, and having reached
Ayodhya, the scion of Kakutstha descended
in the middle of the city. (18)
विसर्जयित्वा गच्छेति स्वस्ति तेऽस्त्विति च प्रभु:।॥ १९॥
Then leaving the beautiful Puspaka,
moving at will, He said: ‘Leaving me, go to
Kubera, O powerful one; may welfare be
with thee.’ (19)
कक्षान्तरस्थितं क्षिप्रं द्वा:स्थं रामोऽब्रवीद् वच: |
लक्ष्मणं भरतं चैव गत्वा at लघुविक्रमौ।
ममागमनमाख्याय शब्दापयत मा चिरम्।। २०॥
Then Sri Rama hurriedly ordered the
door-keeper in the other apartment : ‘Go to
Laksmana and Bharata, those two of swift

valour, and having conveyed to them my
arrival, call them here, do not delay.’ (20)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये उत्तरकाण्डे द्व्यशीतितम: WE ॥ ८२॥

Thus ends Canto Ejighty-two in the Uttarakanda of the glorious Ramayana of Valmiki,
the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

त्र्यशीतितम: सर्ग:
Canto LXXXIII

S11 Rama abandons the proposal of performing Rajasiiya
sacrifice at the instance of Bharata

eae भाषितं तस्य रामस्याक्लिष्टकर्मण:।
BU: कुमारावाहूय राघवाय न्यवेदयत्॥१॥

Having heard the words of Sri Rama,
who was unwearied in performance,
the door-keeper called the two princes

and they reported to the scion of Raghu.
(1)

दृष्टवा तु Waa: प्राप्तावुभौ भरतलक्ष्मणौ।

परिष्वज्य ततो wat वाक्यमेतदुवाच ह॥ २॥

The scion of the Raghus seeing both
