644

midst of monkeys and discharging volleys
of arrows. (20)

इमौ ताविति संचिन्त्य सज्यं Heat च कार्मुकम्।
संततानेषुधाराभि: पर्जन्य इव वृष्टिमान्॥२१॥

Concluding that they were the two
princes whom he was seeking, nay, stringing
his bow, the ogre covered the quarters with
streams of arrows as a raining cloud would
with torrents of rain. (21)

स तु वैहायसरथो af at रामलक्ष्मणौ।
अचक्षुर्विषये तिष्ठन् विव्याध निशितै: शरै: ।। २२॥

Seated in his aerial car, and remaining
out of sight, Indrajit for his part pierced with
whetted shafts the two princes, Sri Rama
and Laksmana, standing on the battlefield
below. (22)

a तस्य शरवेगेन परीतौ रामलक्ष्मणौ।
धनुषी सशरे Het दिव्यमस्त्रं प्रचक्रतु:॥ २३॥

Fitting arrows to their bows when
covered by the fury of his shafts, Sri
Rama and Laksmana revealed divine
missiles. (23)

प्रच्छादयन्तौ Ws शरजालैर्महाबलौ।
we: सूर्यसंकाशैर्नैव पस्पर्शतु: शरै:॥ २४॥

Though covering the sky with streams
of arrows, the two princes, who were
endowed with extraordinary might, could
not even touch Indrajit with their arrows,
charged with mystic missiles and effulgent
as the sun. (24)

स fe धूमान्धकारं च चक्रे प्रच्छादयन्नभ:।
दिशश्चान्तर्दथे sitar नीहारतमसा व्रृता:॥ २५॥

Nay, the glorious prince actually brought
about, by dint of conjuring tricks, darkness
accompanied by smoke, thereby obscuring
the sky and also rendered the quarters
invisible, enveloped as they were by him
with the darkness of fog. (25)

Wa ज्यातलनिर्घोषो न च नेमिखुरस्वन:।
शुश्रुवे चरतस्तस्य न च रूपं प्रकाशते॥ २६॥

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA +

Even though he kept moving about,
neither the sound produced by the impact of
his palm on the bow-string, nor the sound of
his chariot’s wheels or the clattering of hoofs
of the horses, could be heard, nor did his
form come to view. (26)

चनान्धकारे तिमिरे शिलावर्षमिवाद्भुतम्।
a aad महाबाहुर्नाराचशरवृष्टिभि:।। २७॥

In the midst of the thick darkness,
which rendered one blind, the mighty-armed
prince appeared to discharge a marvellous
shower of rocks with hails of his steel arrows.

(27)
a we सूर्यसंकाशै: शरैर्दत्तवरैर्भृशम्।
विव्याधं समरे क्रुद्ध: सर्वगात्रेषु रावणि:॥ 2 Il

Getting enraged, the aforesaid son of
Ravana grievously pierced Sri Rama on the
battlefield in all limbs with arrows, effulgent
as the sun, which had been bestowed (on
him) by way of a boon. (28)

at हन्यमानौ नाराचैर्धाराभिरिव पर्वतौ।
हेमपुङ्खान् नरव्याघ्रौ तिग्मान् मुमुचतु: शरान्॥ २९॥

While being hit with steel arrows as a
pair of mountains with torrents, the two
celebrated tigers among men shot piercing
golden-shafted arrows. (29)

अन्तरिक्षे समासाद्य रावणिं कङ्कपत्रिण:।
निकृत्य पतगा भूमौ पेतुस्ते शोणिताप्लुता:॥ ३०॥

Duly reaching the son of Ravana in the
air and piercing him, those shafts, adorned
with the plumes of a buzzard, fell to the
ground soaked in blood. (30)

अतिमात्रं शरौघेण दीप्यमानौ नरोत्तमौ।
तानिषून् पततो भल्लैरनेकैर्विचकर्ततु:॥ ३१॥

Shining beyond measure with a mass
of arrows (clinging to their body), the two
foremost of men began to tear asunder
those arrows which were falling on them
with numerous arrows called by the name
of Bhallas. (31)
