524

“Therefore speedily rouse
Kumbhakarna, who is endowed with
extraordinary might. That mighty armed ogre,
the foremost of all ogres, will undoubtedly
strike down at once the monkeys as well as
the two princes (Rama and Laksmana).(18)

एष केतु: परं संख्ये मुख्यो वै सर्वरक्षसाम्।
कुम्भकर्ण: सदा शेते मूढो ग्राम्यसुखे रत:॥१९॥

“Addicted as he is to a vulgar delight
in the form of sleep, this insensate
Kumbhakarna, who is the most distinguished
in combat, and is actually the foremost of all
ogres—remains ever asleep. (19)
रामेणाभिनिरस्तस्य संग्रामेऽस्मिन् सुदारुणे।
भविष्यति न मे शोक: कुम्भकर्णे विबोधिते॥ २०॥
fe करिष्याम्यहं तेन शक्रतुल्यबलेन fel
Sot व्यसने घोरे यो न साह्याय कल्पते॥ २१॥

“On Kumbhakarna being fully roused,
the grief preying on those who _ stand
vanquished by Rama in this most terrible
struggle, will cease. Even though he is the
equal of Indra in might, what shall | do of
him if he is not able to assist me even in
such a terrible calamity.” (20-21)
ते ag वचनं श्रुत्वा राक्षसेन्द्रस्य राक्षसा:।
जग्मु: परमसम्भ्रान्ता: कुम्भकर्णनिवेशनम्॥ २२॥

Hearing the aforesaid speech of
Ravana, the lord of ogres, the said ogres
proceeded to the residence of Kumbhakarna,

extremely puzzled for they did not know
how to rouse Kumbhakarna before time. (22)

a रावणसमादिष्टा मांसशोणितभोजना:।
Wel Aled महद्भक्ष्यमादाय सहसा ययु:॥ २३॥
Taking with them perfumery, garlands
and immense food, when duly commanded
by Ravana, the said ogres, who fed on
flesh and blood, left all at once for
Kumbhakarna’s residence. (23)
तां प्रविश्य महाद्वारां सर्वतो योजनायताम्।
कुम्भकर्णगुहां Tat पुष्पगन्धप्रवाहिनीम्॥ २४॥

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA +

कुम्भकर्णस्य नि:श्चासादवधूता महाबला:।
प्रतिष्ठमाना: कृच्छ्रेण यत्नात् प्रविविशुर्गुहाम्॥ २५॥

Having penetrated deep into that lovely
subterranean abode of Kumbhakarna, which
was provided with enormous gates, nay,
which was one Yojana (or eight miles) in
extent on every side, and from which issued
a stream of odour of flowers—the ogres,
though endowed with extraordinary might,
were pushed back by force of the wind from
the nostrils of Kumbhakarna and, pressing
forward with difficulty, forced their way into
the cave with effort. (24-25)
at ufava गुहां रम्यां रत्नकाञ्चनकुट्टिमाम्।
ददृशुर्नैर्ऋतव्याघ्रा:: शयानं भीमविक्रमम्॥ २६॥

Penetrating deep into the delightful
underground dwelling with its pavement of
precious stones and gold, the aforesaid
tigers among ogres beheld Kumbhakarna of
terrible prowess sleeping. (26)
ते तु तं विकृतं ot विकीर्णमिव पर्वतम्।
कुम्भकर्णं महानिद्रं समेता: प्रत्यबोधयन्॥ २७॥

Those ogres for their part collectively
began to waken the said Kumbhakarna,
who, while lying asleep in an unnatural state,
looked like a scattered mountain, and was
buried in deep slumber. (27)
ऊर्ध्वलोमाञ्चिततनुं श्वसन्तमिव पन्नगम्।
भ्रामयन्तं विनि:श्चासै: शयानं भीमविक्रमम्॥ २८॥
भीमनासापुटं तं तु पातालविपुलाननम्।
wat न्यस्तसर्वाङ्गं मेदोरुधिरगन्धिनम्॥२९॥
ददृशुर्नैर्ऋतव्याघ्रं कुम्भकर्णमरिंदमम्॥ ३०॥

They, for their part, found Kumbhakarna
of terrible prowess, a veritable tiger among
the ogres (scions of Nirrti, the ogre presiding
over the south-west) and the tamer of his
enemies, hissing like a serpent, nay, making
people turn back by the force of his outgoing
breaths, while sleeping, distinguished by
horrible nostrils and a mouth enormous as
