950

“The woman was widely known as
‘Ahalya’ in that there was no reproachability
in her. Nay, ‘Ahalya’ itself was proclaimed
by me as her name. (23)
निर्मितायां च देवेन्द्र तस्यां नार्या सुरर्षभ।
भविष्यतीति कस्यैषा मम चिन्ता ततोऽभवत्॥ २४॥

“On that woman having been evolved,
O ruler of gods, and a jewel among the
gods, the thought now haunted me: ‘Whose
partner should she be?’ (24)

त्वं तु शक्र तदा नारीं जानीषे मनसा प्रभो।
स्थानाधिकतया पत्नी ममैषेति पुरंदर॥ २५॥

“You, however, O mighty Indra, the
destroyer of citadels, began to entertain the
thought in your mind about that woman:
‘She must be my consort in view of the
superiority of my position.’ (25)

सा मया न्यासभूता तु गौतमस्य महात्मन:।
न्यस्ता बहूनि वर्षाणि तेन निर्यातिता च ह॥ २६॥

“She was, however, kept by me as a
sacred trust in the charge of the high-souled,
Sage Gautama, for many years, and was
eventually returned by him. (26)

ततस्तस्य परिज्ञाय महास्थैर्यं महामुने:।
ज्ञात्वा तपसि सिद्धिं च पत्न्यर्थं स्पर्शिता deri २७॥

“Having then tested the extraordinary
self-control of that eminent sage and coming
to know of the successful conclusion of his
austerities, | gave her away to him for being
taken to wife on that occasion : (27)

a तया सह धर्मात्मा Tad स्म Aaah: |
आसन्निराशा देवास्तु गौतमे दत्तया तया॥ २८॥
“That eminent and pious-minded sage
lived happily with her; on her having been
given away to Gautama, however, the gods
became despondent. (28)
त्वं क्रुद्धस्त्विह कामात्मा गत्वा तस्याश्रमं मुने: ।
दृष्टवांश्च dar at स्त्रीं दीप्तामग्निशिखामिव॥ २९॥
“Proceeding to the hermitage of that
sage, angry as you were at this, your mind

« VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

given over to lust, you saw at that time the
said woman bright like a tongue of fire. (29)

सा त्वया धर्षिता शक्र कामार्तेन समन्युना।
दृष्टस्त्वं स dal at आश्रमे परमर्षिणा॥ ३०॥

“She, O Indra, was violated by you,
love-stricken as you were and full of anger.
Nay, you were seen on that occasion by
the eminent Rsi (a seer of Vedic Mantras) in
his hermitage. (30)

ad: क्रुद्धेन तेनासि wea: परमतेजसा।
गतोऽसि येन देवेन्द्र दशाभागविपर्ययम्॥ ३१॥

“Thereupon you were execrated in the
following words by that supremely powerful
sage who was provoked to anger, due to
which, O ruler of gods, you had to undergo
a reversal of fortune: (31)

यस्मान्मे धर्षिता पत्नी त्वया वासव निर्भयात्।
तस्मात् त्वं समरे शक्र शात्रुहस्तं गमिष्यसि॥ ३२॥
“`5#108 my wife, O chief of the Vasus,
was audaciously violated by you, therefore,
O Indra, you will fall into the hands of your
enemy in war. (32)

अयं तु भावो दुर्बुद्धे यस्त्वयेह Wala: |
मानुषेष्वपि लोकेषु भविष्यति न संशय:॥ ३३॥

‘The way of life which you for your part
have introduced into this world, O god of
perverse intellect, will gain ground even
among human beings: there is no doubt
about it. (33)

तत्रार्धं तस्य a: कर्ता त्वय्यर्धं निपतिष्यति।
न च ते स्थावरं स्थानं भविष्यति न संशय: ॥ ३४॥
‘On him who perpetrates such a sin,
only one-half of it will fall to his lot and the
other half will accrue to you. Nor will your
position be stable: there is no doubt about it.
(34)

यश्च यश्च सुरेन्द्र: Cale Ya: स न भविष्यति।
WS शापो मया मुक्त इत्यसौ cat तदाब्रवीत्॥ ३५॥
‘Whosoever comes to be the ruler of
gods shall not endure. This is the curse
