+ UTTARAKANDA +

cheerfully to him (Satrughna), the noble one:
“Welcome to thee, O famous one. (5)

स्वमाश्रममिदं सौम्य राघवाणां कुलस्य वै।
आसनं पाद्यमर्घ्य च निर्विशङ्क: प्रतीच्छ मे॥६॥
“O gracious one, this hermitage is indeed
your own, the family of the descendants of
Raghu. Accept without hesitation the Padya

(ablutions of the foot), Arghya and the seat
offered by me.” (6)

प्रतिगृह्य तदा ust फलमूलं च भोजनम्।
भक्षयामास काकुत्स्थस्तृप्तिं च परमां गत:॥७॥
Accepting then the homage and the
fruits and the roots, the scion of Kakutstha,
took the food and was fully satisfied. (7)

स भुक्त्वा फलमूलं च महर्षि तमुवाच ह।
पूर्वा यज्ञविभूतीयं कस्याश्रमसमीपत:॥८॥

Having taken the fruits and the roots,
he (Satrughna) said to that great Rsi: ‘To
whom belong all these accoutrements of
sacrifice that are seen on the eastern side,
close to the hermitage’ (8)

तत् तस्य भाषितं श्रुत्वा वाल्मीकिर्वाक्यमब्रवीत्।
WT YT यस्येदं बभूवायतनं पुरा॥९॥
Hearing these words of Satrughna,
Valmiki spoke out: “O Satrughna! listen as
to whom this place of sacrifice belonged
formerly. (9)

युष्माकं पूर्वको राजा सुदासस्तस्य भूपते:।
पुत्रो वीरसहो नाम वीर्यवानतिधार्मिक:॥१०॥
“Among your ancestors there was
Saudasa, and of that king, was a son named
Virasaha, who was very brave and extremely
pious. (10)
a बाल wa सौदासो मृगयामुपचक्रमे।
चञ्चूर्यमाणं aq स शूरो राक्षसद्वयम्॥११॥
“Although young, yet valiant Saudasa

went out for hunting in forest and saw two
Raksasas roaming about. (11)

शार्दूलरूपिणौ घोरौ मृगान् बहुसहस्रश:।
भक्षमाणावसंतुष्टौ पर्याप्तिं नैव जग्मतु:॥१२॥

1045

“Those two Raksasas assuming the
dreadful shape of the lion and devouring
many thousands of animals, yet they were
still unsatiated. (12)

स तु तौ राक्षसौ दृष्टवा निर्मृगं च वनं कृतम्।
क्रोधेन महताविष्टो जघानैकं महेषुणा॥१३॥
“Seeing those two Raksasas and the
forest devoid of animals, he, Saudasa, was
enraged and killed one of them with a mighty
shaft. (13)

विनिपात्य तमेकं तु सौदास: पुरुषर्षभ:।
विज्वरो विगतामर्षो ad vat ह्युदैक्षत॥ १४॥

“Having killed one of the Raksasas the
bull among men, Saudasa, without worry
and anger looked at the slain Raksasa. (14)

निरीक्षमाणं तं दृष्टवा सहायं तस्य रक्षस:।
संतापमकरोद् घोरं सौदासं चेदमब्रवीत्॥१५॥
यस्मादनपराधं तं सहायं wa जघ्निवान्।
तस्मात् तवापि पापिष्ठ प्रदास्यामि प्रतिक्रियाम्॥ १६ ॥
“Having seen the dead Raksasa, his
comrade was greatly pained and said to
Saudasa: ‘As you have killed that Raksasa,
a friend of mine, who was not at all guilty, so

O sinful one, | shall take my revenge on
you.” (15-16)
एवमुक्त्वा तु dq रक्षस्तत्रैवान्तरश्रीयत।
कालपर्याययोगेन राजा मित्रसहोऽभवत्॥१७॥
Having said so, that Raksasa
disappeared. After the lapse of some time,
Mitrasaha (Virasaha) became the king of
Ayodhya. (17)
राजापि यजते यज्ञमस्याश्रमसमीपत:।
aware महायज्ञं तं वसिष्ठोऽप्यपालयत्॥ १८॥
The king also performed the great
sacrifice, the ASvamedha (horse-sacrifice)

near the hermitage and Vasistha also
participated in that sacrifice. (18)

तत्र यज्ञो महानासीद् बहुवर्षगणायुत:।
समृद्ध: परया लक्ष्म्या देवयज्ञसमोऽभवत्॥१९॥

The great sacrifice lasted for many
