680

Laksmana pierced him with whetted
shafts while his hands were occupied with
the horses; and he discharged arrows at
the horses while he was busy once more
with his bow. (44)

fexq तेषु बाणौघैर्विचरन्तमभीतवत्।
अर्दयामास समरे सौमित्रि: शीघ्रकृत्तम:॥४५॥

On such occasions Laksmana (son of
Sumitra), who acted with extreme alacrity,
wounded with the streams of his arrows
Indrajit, who was ranging the battlefield as
though undaunted. (45)

Pred सारथिं दृष्टवा WAL रावणात्मज:।

Wet समरोद्धर्षं विषण्ण: A बभूव Ti ve ll
Seeing his charioteer killed in combat,

the aforesaid son of Ravana completely

lost his zest for combat and grew
despondent, they say. (46)
विषण्णवदनं दृष्ट्वा ward हरियूथपा:।
तत: परमसंहृष्टा लक्ष्मणं चाभ्यपूजयन्॥४७॥
Beholding the ogre dejected in
appearance, the commanders of simian
troops thereupon felt extremely delighted
and acclaimed Laksmana. (47)
तत: प्रमाथी wa: शरभो गन्धमादन:।
अमृष्यमाणाश्चत्वारश्चक्रुर्वेगं हरीश्वरा: ॥ ४८ ॥
Getting impatient, four monkey chiefs,
viz., Pramathi, Rabhasa, Sarabha and
Gandhamadana thereupon gave vent to their

impetuosity. (48)
a चास्य हयमुख्येषु तूर्णमुत्पत्य वानरा:।
चतुर्षु सुमहावीर्या निपेतुर्भीमविक्रमा:॥४९॥

Nay, springing up rapidly, the aforesaid
monkeys, who were endowed _ with

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA +

remarkable valour and terrific prowess, fell
on the four excellent horses of Indrajit. (49)

तेषामधिष्ठितानां तैर्वानरै: पर्वतोपमै:।
मुखेभ्यो et व्यक्तं हयानां समवर्तत॥५०॥

Blood perceptibly gushed forth from
the mouths of those horses pressed under
the weight of those monkeys, huge as
mountains. (50)

ते हया मथिता भग्ना व्यसवो धरणीं गता:।
a निहत्य हयांस्तस्य प्रमथ्य च महारथम्।
पुनरुत्पत्य वेगेन तस्थुर्लक्ष्मणपार्श्वत:॥५१॥

Crushed and mutilated, the aforesaid
horses sank lifeless to the ground. Having
killed his horses and crushing his huge
chariot, nay, bounding again with impetuosity,
they stood once more by the side of
Laksmana. (51)

स हताश्वादवप्लुत्य रथान्मथितसारथि:।
शरवर्षेण सौमित्रिमभ्यधावत रावणि:॥५२॥

Leaping down from his chariot, whose
horses had been killed, Indrajit (son of
Ravana), whose charioteer too had already
been made short work of, assailed Laksmana
with a hail of shafts. (52)

ततो महेन्द्रप्रतिम: स लक्ष्मण:

पदातिनं तं निहतैर्हयोत्तमै:।
सृजन्तमाजौ निशितान् शारोत्तमान्

भृशं तदा बाणगणैर्व्यदारयत्॥५३॥

Thereupon, the celebrated Laksmana,
who vied with the mighty Indra, grievously
mangled with volleys of his shafts Indrajit,
who was discharging excellent whetted
arrows on the battlefield at that time while
moving on foot due to his stately horses
having been killed. (53)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये युद्धकाण्डे एकोननवतितम: सर्ग: ॥ ८९ ॥

Thus ends Canto Ejighty-nine in the Yuddhakanda of the glorious Ramayana of
Valmiki, the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

