+ UTTARAKANDA +

1071

Canto LXXVII

Sage Agastya narrates the story of the king Sveta,
who after eating corpse acquires heaven

पुरा त्रेतायुगे राम aya बहुविस्तरम्।
समन्ताद् योजनशतं विमृगं पक्षिवर्जितम्॥१॥
“O Sri Rama! In the former Tretayuga
there was a forest, extending to hundred
Yojanas, where there were neither animals
nor birds. (1)

तस्मिन् निर्मानुषेऽरण्ये कुर्वाणस्तप उत्तमम्।
अहमाक्रमितुं सौम्य तदरण्यमुपागमम्॥२॥

“In that forest, uninhabited by men, |
practised askesis, which was the best of
penances, O gracious one ! | set my foot to
know all about the forest. (2)

तस्य रूपमरण्यस्य निर्देष्टुं न शशाक ह।
meet: सुखास्वादैर्बहुरूपैश्च पादपै:।॥ ३॥
“| could not indeed specify the beauty

of that forest with its tasty fruits and roots
and groves of various types. (3)

तस्यारण्यस्य मध्ये q सरो योजनमायतम्।
हंसकारण्डवाकीर्णं चक्रवाकोपशोभितम्॥४॥

“In the midst of the forest was a lake,
one Yojana wide; filled with swans and ducks
and beautified with Cakrawaka birds. (4)
पद्मोत्पलसमाकीर्णं समतिक्रान्तशैवलम्।
तदाश्चर्यमिवात्यर्थं सुखास्वादमनुत्तमम्॥ ५ I
अरजस्कं तदक्षोभ्यं श्रीमत्पक्षिगणायुतम्।
तस्मिन् सर:समीपे तु महदद्भुतमाश्रमम्॥६॥
पुराणं पुण्यमत्यर्थं तपस्विजनवर्जितम्।
तत्राहमवसं «= Uttara पुरुषर्षभ॥७॥

“The lake was full of lotuses and water-
lilies with no trace of moss, it was a great
wonder, enjoyable and excelled by none, it
was Clear like crystal and calm and inhabited
by innumerable lovely birds. Near that lake
there was a strong, brilliant, wonderful
hermitage, old and extremely holy; but not

inhabited by the ascetics: There O bull
among men ! | dwelt one summer night.
(5—7)

Wud कल्यमुत्थाय सरस्तदुपचक्रमे।
अथापश्यं wa तत्र सुपुष्टमरज: क्वचित्॥८॥
“Rising in the early morning for day-
break-duties | reached the lake and then
saw there a corpse (dead body) plump and
spotless shining in the water. (8)

तिष्ठन्तं परया cee तस्मिस्तोयाशये नृप।
तमर्थं चिन्तयानोऽहं dst at राघव॥९॥
विष्ठितोऽस्मि सरस्तीरे fer Fad स्यादिति wat |
अथापश्यं मुहूर्तात् तु दिव्यमद्भुतदर्शनम्॥१०॥
अत्यर्थं स्वर्गिणं तत्र विमाने रघुनन्दन॥११॥
उपास्तेऽप्सरसां at सहस्रं दिव्यभूषणम्।
गायन्ति काश्चिद् रम्याणि वादयन्ति तथापरा:।॥ १२॥
मृदङ्गवीणापणवान् yeaa च तथापरा:।
अपराश्चन्द्ररश्म्याभैर्हेमदण्डैर्महाधनै: ॥ १३॥
दोधूयुर्वदनं तस्य पुण्डरीकनिभेक्षणा:।
तत: सिंहासनं हित्वा मेरुकूटमिवांशुमान्॥१४॥
पश्यतो A det wa विमानादवरुह्य a
तं We भक्षयामास स स्वर्गी रघुनन्दन॥१५॥
Pondering over it lying with all its beauty
inside the lake, |, fora moment, O descendant
of Raghu, stood apart and thought: O lord,
what could this be. Then all at once | saw a
divine and wonderful spacious chariot yoked
by swans and having the speed of mind; O
scion of Raghus! | saw a denizen of the
heaven on that chariot, thousands of divinely
ornamented nymphs served him, some were
singing, others were melodiously playing on
the Mrdanga (drum), lute and Panava
(symbol), and others were dancing; Some
other with lotus-like eyes fanned his face
