164

“Feeling happy and strong, resolved as
they were to discover you, all the monkeys
headed by Angada then arrived near the
seashore. (70)

चिन्तां जग्मु: पुनर्भीमां त्वद्दर्शनसमुत्सुका:।
sare हरिसैन्यस्य सागरं qa सीदत:॥७१॥
लङ्का चापि मया Wal प्रविष्टा राक्षसाकुला॥ ७२॥
“The monkeys, however, who were very
keen to find you, fell a prey to a terrible
anxiety at the sight of the sea. Dispelling the
acute fear of the monkey army, which was
sinking into despondency on beholding the
sea, | forthwith leapt across a distance of
one hundred Yojanas (or eight hundred
miles). Nay, Lanka too, which is crowded
with ogres, was duly penetrated into by me
at night. (71-72)
रावणश्च मया दृष्टस्त्वं च शोकनिपीडिता।
एतत् ते सर्वमाख्यातं यथाव्रत्तमनिन्दिते॥७३॥
“Ravana also was beheld by me as
well as you, who are sore stricken with
grief. All this has been narrated to you by

me in accordance with facts, O irreproachable
lady ! (73)

अभिभाषस्व मां efa gat दाशरथेरहम्।
wat wiper त्वन्निमित्तमिहागतम्॥७४॥
सुग्रीवसचिवं देवि बुद्ध्यस्व पवनात्मजम्।
कुशली तव काकुत्स्थ: सर्वशस्त्रभृतां वर:॥ ७५॥
“Speak to me, O godlike lady; | am a
messenger of Sri Rama, son of Daégaratha.
Therefore, know me, O godlike lady, to be
Hanuman, son of the wind-god, a minister of
Sugriva, arrived here for your sake, having
exerted in the cause of Sri Rama. All is well
with your lord, Sri Rama, a scion of Kakutstha,
the foremost of all wielders of weapons.
(74-75)
गुरोराराधने युक्तो लक्ष्मण: शुभलक्षण:।
तस्य वीर्यवतो देवि भर्तुस्तव हिते रत:॥७६॥

“So is Laksmana, who remains ever
engaged in propitiating his eldest brother

« VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

and is endowed with auspicious bodily marks,
nay, is devoted to the well-being of your
aforesaid powerful husband, O godlike lady !
(76)
अहमेकस्तु सम्प्राप्तत सुग्रीववचनादिह।
मयेयमसहायेन चरता कामरूपिणा॥७७॥
दक्षिणा दिगनुक्रान्ता त्वन्मार्गविचयैषिणा।
दिष्ट्याहं हरिसैन्यानां त्वन्नाशमनुशोचताम्॥ ७८॥
अपनेष्यामि संतापं तवाधिगमशासनात्।
दिष्ट्या fe न मम व्यर्थं सागरस्येह लङ्घनम्॥ ७९॥

“l, for my part, have arrived here alone
in obedience to the command of Sugriva.
This southern quarter has been scoured by
me, moving all alone, capable as | am of
changing my form at will and keen as | was
to find out your whereabouts. By good luck
| shall be able to dispel the agony of the
monkey hordes who are bewailing your loss
by telling them your discovery. Luckily
enough, my leaping across the sea on this
occasion will not go in vain. (77—79)
प्राप्स्याम्यहमिदं देवि त्वद्दर्शनकृतं यश:।
राघवश्च महावीर्य: क्षिप्रं त्वामभिपत्स्यते॥८०॥
सपुत्रबान्धवं हत्वा रावणं राक्षसाधिपम्।
माल्यवान् नाम वैदेहि गिरीणामुत्तमो गिरि:॥ ८१॥
ततो गच्छति गोकर्णं पर्वतं केसरी at:

स च देवर्षिभिर्दिष्ट: पिता aa महाकपि:।
तीर्थे नदीपते: Wa शम्बसादनमुद्धरन्॥८२॥

“| shall win, O godlike lady, this renown
of having discovered you. Nay, having killed
Ravana, the suzerain lord of ogres, with his
sons and kinsfolk, Sri Rama, a scion of
Raghu, will soon meet you. There is a
mountain, Malyavan by name, which is the
foremost of mountains, O princess of the
Videha territory ! From that mountain, which
constituted the abode of KeSari, the monkey
KeSari repaired to the Gokarna mountain.
Enjoined by celestial sages, the aforesaid
mighty monkey, who is my father, killed
Sambasadana (a demon of that name, who
oppressed the people on the seaside) on
that sacred spot on the seashore. (80—82)
