198

extensive whirlpool in the stream of the
Ganga. The infuriated Hanuman thereupon
took on a terrible aspect. Tearing up with
impetuosity a pillar, decked with gold, and
bristling with a hundred edges of that edifice,
the great Hanuman, sprung from the loins of
the wind-god and endowed with extraordinary
might, then began to spin it round, so that
fire was generated from it due to its attrition
with other pillars and the edifice was set
ablaze with it. (13—18)
दह्यमानं ततो gear प्रासादं हरियूथप:।
स राक्षसशतं हत्वा वज्रेणेन्द्र इवासुरान्॥१९॥
अन्तरिक्षस्थित: श्रीमानिदं वचनमब्रवीत्।
मादृशानां सहस्राणि विसृष्टानि महात्मनाम्॥ २०॥
बलिनां वानरेन्द्राणां सुग्रीववशवर्तिनाम्।
अटन्ति वसुधां peat वयमन्ये च वानरा:॥ २१॥
Having dispatched all the hundred ogres
posted there by means of that pillar, even
as Indra got rid of demons with his
thunderbolt, and on seeing that monument
in flames, that glorious leader of monkey
hordes then proclaimed as follows, standing
in airspace all the while: “Thousands of
colossal and mighty leaders of monkeys,
resembling me and amenable to the control
of Sugriva, have been dispatched in all
directions. We as well as other monkeys
are scouring the entire globe. (19—21)

« VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

दशनागबला: केचित् केचिद् दशगुणोत्तरा: |
केचिन्नागसहस्रस्य बभूवुस्तुल्यविक्रमा:॥ २२॥

“Some of them are endowed with the
strength of ten elephants, others are ten
times as strong as the former, while still
others are equal in prowess to a thousand
elephants. (22)

सन्ति चौघबला: केचित् सन्ति वायुबलोपमा: |
अप्रमेयबला: केचित् तत्रासन् हरियूथपा:।॥ २३॥

“Some leaders of monkey hordes out
of them are endowed with the strength of a
flood, while others are as strong as the
wind, while still others possess strength
beyond measure. (23)

ईदृग्विथैस्तु हरिभिर्वृतो दन्तनखायुथै:।
wa: शतसहस्रैश्च कोटिभिश्चायुतैरपि॥ २४॥
आगमिष्यति सुग्रीव: सर्वेषां at निषूदन:।
नेयमस्ति Ut लङ्का न यूयं न च रावण:।
यस्य त्विक्ष्वाकुवीरेण बद्धं At महात्मना॥ २५॥

“Surrounded by hundreds, nay, myriads,
lakhs and even crores of such monkeys,
Sugriva, who is capable of destroying you
all, will come here soon. Neither will this city
of Lanka endure, nor you, ogres, nor again
Ravana, by whom enmity has actually been
courted with the high-souled Sri Rama, the
hero of the House of Ikswaku.” = (24-25)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये सुन्दरकाण्डे त्रिचत्वारिंश: सर्ग: ॥ ४३ ॥

Thus ends Canto Forty-three of the Sundarakanda in the glorious Ramayana of
Valmiki, the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

Canto XLIV
Dispatched by Ravana to capture Hanuman, Jambumali is killed in battle by the former

संदिष्टो राक्षसेन्द्रेण प्रहस्तस्य सुतो बली।

धनु: शक्रधनु:प्रख्यं महद् रुचिरसायकम्।

जम्बुमाली महादंष्टो निर्जगाम धनुर्धर:॥१॥। विस्फारयाणो वेगेन वज्राशनिसमस्वनम्॥३॥

रक्तमाल्याम्बरधर: स्रग्वी रुचिरकुण्डल:।

Commanded by Ravana, the lord of

समरदुर्जय: tt २॥ | ogres, Jambumali, the eminent, mighty and
