324

full of hunched and dwarf women and
abounded in arbours and picture galleries
adorned with ASoka and Campaka trees,
as well as in raised seats made of ivory,
silver and gold. It was graced with trees
ever laden with blossoms and fruits as well
as with extensive wells provided with
descents and was furnished with excellent
seats of ivory, silver and gold. Nay, it was
provided with food and drinks of various
kinds as well as with edibles of every
description and adorned with costly
ornaments and vied with paradise. Freely
entering his own gynaeceum, which was
full of riches, the king did not perceive his
better half, Kaikeyi, on her excellent bed.
Seized with an ardent longing to see Sri
Rama installed as Prince Regent, and not
finding his beloved consort in her bedroom,
the king, who sought to bring delight to her
by breaking the news of Sri Rama’s
installation, called out to her and failing to
elicit response, felt disconsolate. The queen
had never before missed that time of the
Emperor's visit. (83—18)
न च राजा गृहं शून्यं प्रविवेश कदाचन।
aa गृहगतो राजा कैकेयीं पर्यपृच्छत॥१९॥
यथापुरमविज्ञाय स्वार्थलिप्सुमपण्डिताम्।
प्रतिहारी ह्यथोवाच संत्रस्ता तु करृताञ्जलि:॥ Roll
Nor did the king ever enter her
bedchamber in a deserted condition. Then,
having entered the apartment, the king
inquired of the portress about Kaikeyi as
he did on previous occasions, not knowing
that the foolish lady was keen to achieve
her own selfish end (in the shape of
Bharata’s installation and Sri Rama’s exile).
Filled with dismay, however, the portress
with joined palms forthwith replied as follows :
(19-20)
ea देवी भृशं क्रुद्धा क्रोधागारमभिद्रुता।
प्रतीहार्या वच: श्रुत्वा राजा परमदुर्मना:॥ २१॥
विषसाद पुनर्भूयो लुलितव्याकुलेन्द्रिय:।
तत्र at पतितां भूमौ शयानामतथोचिताम्॥२२॥

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA +

प्रतप्त इव दु:खेन सोऽपश्यज्जगतीपति:।
स वृद्धस्तरुणीं भार्यां प्राणेभ्योऽपि गरीयसीम्॥ २३॥
अपाप: पापसंकल्पां ददर्शं धरणीतले।
लतामिव विनिष्कृत्तां पतितां देवतामिव॥ २४॥
किन्नरीमिव निर्धूतां च्युतामप्सरसं यथा।
मायामिव परिभ्रष्टां हरिणीमिव संयताम्॥ २५॥
करेणुमिव दिग्धेन विद्धां मृगयुना वने।
महागज इवारण्ये स्नेहात् परमदु:खिताम्॥ २६॥
परिमृज्य च पाणिभ्यामभिसंत्रस्तचेतन:।

कामी कमलपत्राक्षीमुवाच वनितामिदम्॥ २७॥

“Highly enraged, O my lord, the queen
has entered the sulking-chamber.” Greatly
troubled in mind (not to find Kaikeyi), the
king felt all the more dejected to hear the
report of the portress, his senses getting
agitated and confused by the news. Sore
distressed as it were with agony, the
celebrated Emperor found her fallen on the
floor and lying in the sulking-chamber in an
unseemly manner. The sinless and aged
monarch saw his young spouse, who was
dearer to him than his very life and harboured
a sinful resolve, lying on the ground like a
creeper violently torn asunder from the tree
supporting it or like a fallen deity or like a
Kinnara woman thrust forth from heaven or
like a celestial nymph dropped from heaven
or like a frustrated conjuring trick or again
like a doe caught in a snare—even as a
lordly elephant in a forest would perceive a
she-elephant lying pierced with an
envenomed shaft by a hunter in the woods.
Fondly stroking with his hands the lady,
who possessed eyes resembling the petals
of a lotus and was sore distressed, the
loving king, whose mind was greatly alarmed
in everyway, spoke to her as follows:

(21—27)
न तेऽहमभिजानामि क्रोधमात्मनि संथ्रितम्।
देवि केनाभियुक्तासि केन atte विमानिता॥ २८ ॥
यदिदं मम दु:खाय शेषे कल्याणि पांसुषु।
भूमौ शेषे किमर्थं त्वं मयि कल्याणचेतसि॥ २९॥
