# YUDDHAKANDA #

Seizing hold of his bow, that prince of
archers, who was fully composed, discharged
arrows resembling venomous serpents and
capable of tearing the flesh of the enemy.

(39)

तस्य तच्छुशुभे भूय: WN धनुरुत्तमम्।
विद्युदैरावताचिष्मद्द्वितीयेन्द्रधनुर्यथा ॥ ४० ॥
Endowed with an arrow, that excellent
bow of Kumbha shone brightly like a second
bow of Indra (the rain-god) illumined by
flashes of lightning and the splendour of
Airavata (the elephant bearing Indra on his
back). (40)

आकर्णकृष्टमुक्तेन जघान द्विविदं तदा।
तेन हाटकपुङ्खेन पत्रिणा पत्रवाससा॥४१॥

He struck Dwivida on that occasion
with a golden-shafted plumed arrow, which
was discharged after being pulled with the
bow-string up to the ear. (41)

सहसाभिहतस्तेन विप्रमुक्तपद: स्फुरन्।
निपपात त्रिकूटाभो विह्वलन् प्लवगोत्तम:॥४२॥

Staggering when struck all of a sudden
with the arrow, Dwivida, the foremost of
monkeys, who resembled the Trikuta
mountain in size, dropped down wriggling,
his legs fully outstretched. (42)

मैन्दस्तु भ्रातरं तत्र भग्नं दृष्टवा महाहवे।
अभिदुद्राव वेगेन wre विपुलां शिलाम्॥४३॥

Seizing hold of a huge rock on seeing
his brother, Dwivida, overthrown in that great
combat, Mainda for his part rushed forward
with impetuosity. (43)
wt शिलां तु प्रचिक्षेप राक्षसाय महाबल:।
बिभेद at शिलां कुम्भ: प्रसन्नै: पञ्चभि: शरै: ।। ४४॥

The monkey, who was endowed with
extraordinary might, for his part violently
hurled that rock at the ogre. Kumbha,
however, shattered that rock with five whetted
shafts. (44)

629

संधाय चान्यं सुमुखं शरमाशीविषोपमम्।
आजघान महातेजा वक्षसि द्विविदाग्रजम्॥४५॥
Nay, putting another arrow with a
beautiful head and resembling a venomous
serpent, Kumbha, who was endowed with
extra-ordinary energy, struck the elder
brother of Dwivida in the breast. (45)

स तु तेन vero मैन्दो वानरयूथप:।

मर्मण्यभिहतस्तेन पपात भुवि मूच्छित:।॥४६॥
Struck by the ogre in his vitals with

that blow, the aforesaid leader of monkey

hordes, Mainda, fell unconscious to the
ground. (46)

अङ्गदो मातुलौ दृष्ट्वा मथितौ तु महाबलौ।
अभिदुद्राव वेगेन कुम्भमुद्यतकार्मुकम्॥४७॥

Seeing his two maternal uncles
wounded, though endowed with extraordinary
might, Angada for his part rushed headlong
towards Kumbha, who stood with his bow
uplifted. (47)
तमापतन्तं विव्याध कुम्भ: पञ्चभिरायसै:।
त्रिभिश्चान्यै:; शितैर्बाणैर्मातंगमिव तोमरै:।
सोऽङ्गदं बहुभिर्बाणै: कुम्भो विव्याध वीर्यवान्॥ ४८ ।।

Kumbha pierced Angada, even as he
was advancing, with five steel arrows and
three other penetrating shafts even as one
would pierce an elephant with goads. The
aforesaid Kumbha, who was full of valour,
pierced Angada with numerous shafts.(48)

अकुण्ठधारैर्निशितैस्तीक्ष्णै:; कनकभूषणै: |
age: प्रतिविद्धाङ्गो वालिपुत्रो न कम्पते॥४९॥
Though pierced all over his body
with whetted steel arrows decked with gold,
whose points were still sharp, Angada, son
of Vali, remained unshaken. (49)

शिलापादपवर्षाणि तस्य yet aat ह।
सप्रचिच्छेदतान् सर्वान्बिभेद च पुन: शिला: ॥ ५० UI
कुम्भकर्णात्मज: श्रीमान् वालिपुत्रसमीरितान्।
आपतन्तं च Tae कुम्भो वानरयूथपम्॥५१॥
