816

your friends, do not give offence to Rama.
(32)

यमक्षयं रामशरास्तजीवित:॥ 33

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

“If you forcibly take away Sita, in spite
of being repeatedly dissuaded by me—your
disinterested friend—you will reach the abode
of Death together with your kith and kin,
your army being destroyed and your life
being brought to an end by the arrows of
Rama. (33)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्येऽरण्यकाण्डेऽष्टात्रिंश: सर्ग: ॥ ३८ Il

Thus ends Canto Thirty-eight in the Aranyakanda of the glorious Ramayana
of Valmiki, the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

Canto XXXIX
Marica tries to bring Ravana round

एवमस्मि da um: कथंचित् तेन संयुगे।
इदानीमपि aq ge तच्छृणुष्व यदुत्तरम्॥१॥
“As aforesaid, | was somehow let go by
him in the encounter on that occasion. Now
hear of that which happened latterly and which
is something out of the common. (1)

राक्षसाभ्यामहँ द्वाभ्यामनिर्विण्णस्तथाकृत:।
सहितो मृगरूपाभ्यां प्रविष्टो दण्डकावने॥ २॥

“Never daunted, though dealt with in
that way by Rama, | penetrated deep into the
Dandaka forest accompanied by two ogres,
who had assumed the form of deer. (2)

दीप्तजिह्वो महादंष्ट्रस्तीक्ष्णशृङ्गो महाबल:।

व्यचरन् दण्डकारण्यं मांसभक्षो महामृग:॥ ३॥
“| ranged the Dandaka forest in the

form of a large carnivorous stag possessed

of great strength with a flaming tongue, big
teeth and pointed horns. (3)

अग्निहोत्रेषु तीर्थेषु चैत्यवृक्षेषु रावण।
अत्यन्तघोरो व्यचरंस्तापसांस्तान् प्रधर्षयन्॥४॥
Fea दण्डकारण्ये तापसान् धर्मचारिण:।
रुधिराणि पिबंस्तेषां तन्मांसानि च भक्षयन्॥७५॥
“Looking most frightful and assaulting
the ascetics in fire-sanctuaries, the descents

of rivers and lakes etc., and under the
shade of trees growing on holy spots, O
Ravana, nay, quaffing the blood of ascetics
practising virtue in the Dandaka forest, and
feeding on their flesh after killing them, |
roamed at will. (4-5)

ऋषिमांसाशन: क्रूरस्त्रासयन् वनगोचरान्।
तदा रुधिरमत्तोऽहं व्यचरं दण्डकावनम्॥६॥
“Living on the flesh of Rsis (the seers
of Vedic Mantras), cruel as | was, nay,
causing fear to the denizens of the forest
and drunk with their blood, | ranged the
Dandaka forest at that time. (6)

dale दण्डकारण्ये faa धर्मदूषक:।
आसादयं तदा रामं तापसं धर्ममाश्रितम्॥७॥
वैदेहीं च महाभागां लक्ष्मणं च महारथम्।
तापसं नियताहारॆ सर्वभूतहिते रतम्॥८॥
“Roaming about in the Dandaka forest
at that time offending against righteousness,
| forthwith approached Rama, who had
adopted the course of conduct prescribed
for ascetics, as well as the highly blessed
Sita (a princess of the Videha territory) and
the great chariot-warrior, Laksmana, who
was practising austerities and living on a
