* AYODHYAKANDA +

सर्वथा सदृशं सीते मम स्वस्य कुलस्य च।
व्यवसायमनुक्रान्ता कान्ते त्वमतिशोभनम्॥४१॥
“Beloved Sita, you have arrived at a

most welcome decision worthy in everyway
of my race as well as of yours. (41)

आरभस्व शुभश्रोणि वनवासक्षमा: fara: |

नेदानीं त्वदृते सीते स्वर्गोऽपि मम रोचते॥४२॥
“Proceed with the duties preliminary to

a sojourn in the woods, O lady with charming

limbs! Without you even heaven does not
catch my fancy at this moment. (42)

ब्राह्मणेभ्यश्च रत्नानि भिक्षुकेभ्यश्च भोजनम्।

देहि चाशंसमानेभ्य: संत्वरस्व च मा चिरम्॥४३॥
“Nay, bestow valuable gifts on the

Brahmanas and also offer food to mendicants

asking for it. Again, be very quick. Make no

(43)

रमणीयाश्च ये केचित् क्रीडार्थाश्चाप्युपस्करा: It ४४॥
Twa यानानि मम चान्यानि यानि च।

देहि स्वभृत्यवर्गस्य ब्राह्मणानामनन्तरम्॥४५॥

“Give to the various grades of your

409

dependants whatever costly ornaments, fine
articles of wearing apparel and whatever
lovely articles of household use and those
meant for diversion, couches and
conveyances, both mine as well as yours,
and whatever articles are left after satisfying
the Brahmanas.” (44-45)

अनुकूलं तु सा Adalat गमनमात्मन:।
faa प्रमुदिता edt दातुमेव प्रचक्रमे॥४६॥

Overjoyed to know her departure to
the forest acceptable to her husband, the
godly lady Sita for her part quickly and
definitely set about making gifts accordingly.

(46)
ad: प्रहृष्टा प्रतिपूर्णमानसा
यशस्विनी भर्तुरवेक्ष्य भाषितम्।
धनानि रत्नानि च दातुमङ्गना
प्रचक्रमे धर्मभृतां मनस्विनी॥४७॥

Feeling reassured in mind = and
overjoyed to ponder over the speech of her
husband, the illustrious and strong-minded
lady forthwith commenced gifting riches and
jewels to virtuous souls. (47)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्येऽयोध्याकाण्डे
त्रिंश: GT: ॥ ३० Il
Thus ends Canto Thirty in the Ayodhyakanda of the glorious Ramayana of Valmiki,
the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

Canto XXXI

Hearing the dialogue of Sri Rama and Sita, Laksmana seeks his permission
to accompany him to the forest. Sri Rama desires him to stay in
Ayodhya in order to look after his mothers. But seeing his
insistence, he agrees to take him as well and urges him
to bring Suyajfa and other Rsis, accounting them
worthy of receiving gifts from him

एवं श्रुत्वा स Wale लक्ष्मण: पूर्वमागत:।

between Sri Rama and Sita as reproduced

aah Ditch MAMI It 2 11 | above, the illustrious Laksmana, who had

Hearing the dialogue that passed | already reached there from Kausalya’s
