* SUNDARAKANDA +

of a lion, and gazed on him with eyes full of
pride. (8)

स तस्य वेगं च कपेर्महात्मन:

पराक्रमं चारिषु रावणात्मज:।
विचारयन् ta च बलं महाबलो

युगक्षये सूर्य इवाभिवर्धत॥ ९॥

Reflecting on the speed of that gigantic
Hanuman as well as on his prowess with
regard to his enemies as also on his own
strength, that son of Ravana, who was
endowed with extraordinary might, began to
swell in glory like the sun at the end of the
world cycle. (9)

a जातमन्यु: प्रसमीक्ष्य विक्रमं

स्थित: स्थिर: संयति दुर्निवारणम्।
समाहितात्मा हनुमन्तमाहवे

प्रचोदयामा’प्त fora: Tifaru: ।॥। १०॥

Enraged to observe his valour, he took
his stand firmly with a concentrated mind
and provoked Hanuman, who was difficult
to check in combat, to an encounter by
piercing him with three whetted shafts. (10)

aa: कपिं तं water गर्बितं

जितश्रमं शत्रुपराजयोचितम्।
समुदीर्णमानसं

सबाणपाणि: प्रगृहीतकार्मुक:॥ ११॥

Observing Hanuman full of pride
inasmuch as he had conquered fatigue, was
capable of vanquishing his enemies and
whose zeal for fighting had grown (as a
result of his repeated triumphs over his
enemies), and firmly holding his bow, Prince
Aksa, arrow in hand, gazed on him. (11)

स हेमनिष्काङ्गदचारुकुण्डल:
समाससादाशुपराक्रम: कपिम्।
तयोर्बभूवाप्रतिम: समागम:
सुरासुराणामपि सम्भ्रमप्रद:॥१२॥
Adorned with an ornament for the breast,
a pair of armlets and charming earrings, all
made of gold, Aksa of fiery spirit met
Hanuman at close quarters and an encounter

अवैक्षताक्ष:

207

took place between them, which was without
a parallel and struck awe even in gods and
demons. (12)
ररास भूमिर्न तताप भानुमान्
ववौ न वायु: प्रचचाल चाचल:।
कपे: कुमारस्य च वीर्यसंयुगं
ननाद च द्यौरुदधिश्च चुक्षुभे॥१३॥
Witnessing the mighty contest between
the valiant Hanuman and the prince, the earth
shrieked in agony under their heavy footfalls,
the sun did not shine brightly, the wind ceased
to blow, the mountain (Trikuta on which the
city of Lanka stood) shook, the firmament
rang and the sea too was convulsed. (13)
स तस्य वीर: सुमुखान् पतत्रिण:
सुवर्णपुङ्खान् सविषानिवोरगान्।
समाधिसंयोगविमोक्षतत्त्ववि-
च्छरानथ त्रीन् कपिमूर्ध्यताडयत्॥ १४॥
That hero, who correctly knew how to
fix his gaze on the target, to fit a shaft to the
bow and to discharge it, forthwith dug into
the monkey’s head three winged shafts with
lovely heads and golden feathers, which
resembled venomous serpents. (14)
a a: eae समं निपातितै:
क्षरन्नसृग्दिग्धविवृत्तनेत्र: ।
नवोदितादित्यनिभ: शरांशुमान्
व्यराजतादित्य इवांशुमालिक: UW १७५ Il
Discharging blood from his wounds
caused by those shafts simultaneously dug
into his head by Aksa, and bathed in it and
thereby looking like the newly risen sun, his
eyes rolling rapidly through indignation,
Hanuman shone brightly like the sun,
surrounded by a circle of rays, having the
arrows transfixed into his forehead for its
rays. (15)
aa: प्लवङ्गाधिपमन्त्रिसत्तम:
समीक्ष्य तं राजवरात्मजं रणे।
उदग्रचित्रायुधचित्रकार्मुकं
Wet चापूर्यत चाहवोन्मुख:॥ १६॥

Hanuman, the foremost of ministers of
