940

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

for Vali due to an imprecation uttered by | sacred and pleasant and whose interior

the sage) and hence was capable of
affording protection to them, nay, which was

was permanently inhabited by monkeys.
(130)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये किष्किन्धाकाण्डे प्रथम: सर्ग: ॥ १ ॥

Thus ends Canto One in the Kiskindhakanda of the glorious Ramayana of Valmiki,
the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

Canto II

Seeing the two princely brothers and suspecting them to have been sent by
his elder brother, Val1, Sugriva goes into hiding with his counsellors.
There Hanuman reassures him by recourse to reasoning. Sugriva
then sends Hanuman to ascertain what was in the
mind of the two princes

at तु Fear महात्मानौ भ्रातरौ रामलक्ष्मणौ।
वरायुधधरौ वीरौ सुग्रीव: शाङ्कितोऽभवत्॥१॥

Sugriva was seized with apprehension
to see the two aforesaid gallant brothers,
the high-souled Sri Rama and Laksmana,
who for their part carried excellent weapons
on their person. (1)

उद्बिग्नह्दय: wal fam: समवलोकयन्।
न व्यतिष्ठत कस्मिंश्चिद् देशे वानरपुंगव:॥ २॥

Glancing round on all sides, perturbed
at heart as he was, Sugriva (the foremost of
monkeys) could not find rest at any one
place. (2)

Aa चक्रे मन: स्थातुं वीक्षमाणौ महाबलौ।
कपे: परमभीतस्य fad व्यवससाद ह॥३॥

Perceiving the two princes’ of
extraordinary might, Sugriva did not feel
inclined to stay at his own place. The mind
of the monkey who was extremely frightened,
gave way to despondency: so the tradition
goes. (3)

चिन्तयित्वा स धर्मात्मा विमृश्य गुरुलाघवम्।
ita: परमोद्विग्न: सर्वैस्तैर्वानरै: सह॥४॥

Pondering himself and considering with

his ministers the superiority of the enemy’s
strength and his own weakness, the
celebrated Sugriva, whose mind was set on
virtue, felt extremely perturbed with all the
aforesaid monkeys. (4)
तत: स सचिवेभ्यस्तु सुग्रीव: प्लवगाधिप:।
शशंस Wag: पश्यंस्तौ रामलक्ष्मणौ॥५॥
Beholding the said Sr Rama and
Laksmana, the celebrated Sugriva, the
overlord of monkeys, for his part, who was
extremely sad, thereupon pointed out the
two princes to his ministers in the following
words : (5)
wit वनमिदं af वालिप्रणिहितौ gan
wr चीरवसनौ प्रचरन्ताविहागतौ॥ ६॥
“Undoubtedly sent by Vali (my elder
brother), these two princes, who are clad in
the bark of trees by way of disguise, have
come roaming about to this forest here,
which is difficult of access.” (6)

ad: सुग्रीवसचिवा geet परमधन्विनौ।
जग्मुर्गिरितटात् तस्मादन्यच्छिखरमुत्तमम्॥७॥

Seeing the two great bowmen, the
counsellors of Sugriva moved from that
mountain-side to another excellent peak. (7)
