280

सन्नतिर्हि तवाख्याति भविष्यच्छुभयोग्यताम्॥ २०॥

“This speech is quite becoming of you
and does not become anyone else. Indeed
this extreme humility indicates your fitness
for further good fortune. (20)

सर्वे वयमपि प्राप्तास्तत्र गन्तुं कृतक्षणा:।
a यत्र हरिवीराणां सुग्रीव: पतिरव्यय:॥ २१॥
“We all too have come here eager to

proceed to where Sugriva, that imperishable
lord of monkey-heroes, is. (21)

त्वया ह्यनुक्तैर्हरिभिर्नैव Wet पदात् पदम्।
क्वचिद् Tt हरिश्रेष्ठ ब्रूम: सत्यमिदं तु AN
“It is surely not at all possible for us
monkeys to advance even one step from
where we stand in any direction, unless
commanded by you, O jewel among
monkeys : we tell you this quite correctly.”(22)
एवं तु वदतां तेषामङ्गद: प्रत्यभाषत।
MY गच्छाम इत्युक्त्वा खमुत्पेतुर्महाबला:॥ २३॥
While they were speaking thus, Angada
for his part replied, “All right !’ Saying : “Let
us move!”, the monkeys, who were all

endowed with extraordinary might, sprang
in the air. (23)
उत्पतन्तमनूत्पेतु सर्वे ते हरियूथपा:।
कृत्वाऽऽकाशं FRIST यन्त्रोत्किप्ता इवोपला: UN २४॥
Filling the space, all those leaders of
monkey-hordes followed Angada, even as

he sprang, like so many stones shot from a
catapult (24)

अङ्गदं पुरत: कृत्वा हनूमन्तं च वानरम्।
ASAT सहसोत्पत्य वेगवन्त: प्लवङ्गमा:॥ २५॥
विनदन्तो महानादं wat वातेरिता यथा।
अङ्गदे समनुप्राप्ते सुग्रीवो awa २६॥
समाश्वसिहि भद्रं ते दृष्टा देवी न संशय:॥ २७॥
Springing all of a sudden in the air,

placing Angada at their head, as also the
monkey, Hanuman, the aforesaid monkeys,

« VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

full of impetuosity, darted along, thundering
like so many clouds propelled by the wind.
Angada having arrived near Sugriva, the
lord of monkeys, submitted as follows to Sri
Rama with lotus-like eyes, who was
tormented with grief : “Take heart ! May good
betide you! The godlike lady, Sita, has
been discovered : there is no doubt about it.
(25—27)

नागन्तुमिहि शबक्यं तैरतीतसमयैरिह।
अङ्गदस्य प्रहर्षाच्च जानामि शुभदर्शन॥ २८॥
“It was not possible for them to return
here otherwise, the time-limit fixed by me
having been exceeded by them long before.

| conclude this also from Angada’s ecstatic
delight, O prince of charming looks! (28)

न मत्सकाशमागच्छेत् pea fe विनिपातिते।
युवराजो महाबाहु: प्लवतामङ्गदो वर:॥२९॥

“Had their design been frustrated, the
mighty-armed Crown Prince Angada, the
foremost of monkeys, would not have sought
my presence in any case. (29)

यद्यप्यकृतकृत्यानामीदूश: स्यादुपक्रम: |
भवेत् तु दीनवदनो भ्रान्तविप्लुतमानस:॥ ३०॥

“Even though such a conduct may be
possible even on the part of those who
have not been able to accomplish their
purpose, he would have worn a wretched
aspect and felt bewildered and disturbed in
mind, which he is not. (30)

पितृपैतामहँ चैतत् पूर्वकैरभिरक्षितम्।
न मे मधुवनं हन्याददृष्ट्वा जनकात्मजाम्॥ ३१॥

“Without seeing Janaka’s daughter,
none would have dared to destroy my
Madhuvana, which was bequeathed to my
father, Rksaraja, by my grandfather, Brahma,
and has been protected on all sides by my
forbears. (31)

कौसल्या सुप्रजा राम समाश्वसिहि सुव्रत।
दृष्टा देवी न संदेहो न चान्येन SAAT ३२॥

“Kausalya, your mother, is blessed with
