# YUDDHAKANDA #

who is seated in a chariot, is not well-
matched,” so declared the gods, Gandharvas
(celestial musicians) and Kinnaras (a class
of demigods credited with a human figure
and the head of a horse). (5)

ततो देववर: श्रीमान् श्रुत्वा तेषां वचोऽमृतम्।
आहूय मातलिं wet वचनं चेदमब्रवीत्॥६॥

Summoning his charioteer, Matali, on
hearing their talk, sweet as nectar, the
glorious Indra, the foremost of gods, thereupon
spoke as follows: (6)
रथेन मम भूमिष्ठं vite याहि रघूत्तमम्।
आहूय भूतलं यात He देवहितं महत्॥७॥

“Proceed with all speed in my chariot
to Sri Rama, the foremost of the Raghus,
who stands on the ground; and, on reaching
the earth, invite him to mount the chariot,
and thus render a signal service to the gods
thereby.” (7)
इत्युक्तो देवराजेन मातलिर्देवसारथि:।
प्रणम्य शिरसा देवं ततो वचनमब्रवीत्॥८॥

Saluting the god with his head bent
low, when commanded as aforesaid by Indra,
the ruler of gods, Matali, the charioteer of
gods, thereupon submitted as follows: (8)
vit arent देवेन्द्र सारथ्यं च करोम्यहम्।
ततो हयैश्च dara ett: स्यन्दनोत्तमम्॥९॥

“| shall proceed immediately, O lord of
gods, and perform the duty of a charioteer
to Sri Rama.” Nay, provided with green
horses, the excellent chariot of Indra, the

ruler of gods, he forthwith brought it to the
presence of Indra. (9)

aa: cantare: किङ्किणीशतभूषित:।
तरुणादित्यसंकाशो वैदूर्यमयकूबर:।
सदश्वै: काञ्चनापीडैर्युक्त: श्वेतप्रकीर्णकै:॥ १० ॥
हरिभि: सूर्यसंकाशैर्हेमजालविभूषितै: |
च्छिदुंणुष्णा. श्रीमान् देवराजरथो वर:॥११॥

Then came the glorious and excellent
chariot of Indra (the ruler of gods), bearing

735

a standard raised on a golden staff, the
body of which was wrought with gold and
looked splendid, nay, which was fitted up
with hundreds of tiny bells and with its pole
of cat’s-eye gems shone like the morning
sun, and which was yoked to excellent
green horses, decked with gold ornaments
and white whisks and covered with nets of
gold and shining like the sun. (10-11)

देवराजेन संदिष्टो रथमारुह्य मातलि:।
अभ्यवर्तत काकुत्स्थमवतीर्य त्रिविष्टपात्॥१२॥

Mounting the chariot as enjoined by
Indra (the ruler of gods), and descending
from paradise, Matali stood before Sri Rama,
a scion of Kakutstha. (12)

अब्रवीच्च det WA सप्रतोदो रथे स्थित:।
प्राञ्जलिर्मातलिर्वाक्यं सहस्राक्षस्य सारथि:॥ १३॥

Nay, remaining seated in his chariot,
armed with a lash, Matali, the charioteer of
Indra (the thousand-eyed god), then made
with joined palms the following submission
to Sri Rama: (13)

सहस्राक्षेण काकुत्स्थ रथोऽयं विजयाय a
दत्तस्तव महासत्त्व श्रीमन् शत्रुनिबर्हण॥ १४॥

“This chariot has been sent to you by
Indra (the thousand-eyed god) to bring
you victory, O glorious scion of Kakutstha,
the exterminator of your enemies, endowed
as you are with extraordinary courage.

(14)
शराश्चादित्यसंकाशा: शक्तिश्च विमला शिवा॥ ge Ui

“Here is the mighty bow belonging to
Indra, as well as his armour shining as fire,
nay, his arrows bright as the sun and his
stainless auspicious javelin. (15)
आरुह्येमं रथं वीर uae जहि रावणम्।
मया सारथिना ca महेन्द्र इव दानवान्॥१६॥

“Mounting this chariot, O gallant prince,
with me as your charioteer, make short
