* SUNDARAKANDA +

igniting a fierce and terrible fire in the dwellings
of the ogres. (30)

प्रपलायितरक्ष:स्त्रीबालवृद्धसमाकुला ।
जनकोलाहलाध्माता क्रन्दन्तीवाद्रिकन्दरै: 11 ३१॥
दग्धेयं नगरी लङ्का साट्टप्राकारतोरणा।
जानकी न च दग्धेति विस्मयोऽद्भुत एव न:॥ ३२॥
“Thickly crowded with ogres, their
womenfolk, children and the aged in rapid
flight and filled with the noise of the people,
this city of Lanka, which is shrieking, as it
were, in the form of its denizens, has been
burnt with its mountains, caverns, attics,
defensive walls and archways; yet Sita,
Janaka’s daughter, has not been even
touched by fire. This is an unprecedented
wonder to us.” (31-32)

इति शुश्राव हनुमान् वाचं ताममृतोपमाम्।
बभूव चास्य मनसो हर्षस्तत्कालसम्भव:॥ ३३॥

Hanuman heard the aforesaid talk, which
was sweet as nectar, and the joy which
sprang up in his heart at that moment
pervaded his soul. (33)

241

a निमित्तैश्च gerd: कारणैश्च महागुणै:।
ऋषिवाक्यैश्च हनुमानभवत् प्रीतमानस:॥ ३४॥

On account of good omens whose
welcome results had been perceived by him
on many an occasion in the past; nay, for
very potent reasons such as the glory of Sri
Rama and Sita’s exclusive devotion to her
husband, which led him to conclude that
Sita was alive as also on the strength of the
words of the Caranas, who could see
everything, the aforesaid Hanuman. felt
delighted in mind. (34)

ad: कपि: प्राप्तमनोरथार्थ-

स्तामक्षतां राजसुतां विदित्वा।
प्रत्यक्षतस्तां पुनरेव दृष्ट्वा

प्रतिप्रयाणाय मतिं चकार॥ ३५॥

Coming to know of that princess having
escaped unscathed, and then seeing her
once more with his own eyes, Hanuman,
who had attained his end and acquired the
speed of thought, made up his mind to
return to the presence of Sri Rama. (35)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये सुन्दरकाण्डे पञ्चपञ्चाश: सर्ग: ॥ 44 ॥

Thus ends Canto Fifty-five of the Sundarakanda in the glorious Ramayana of Valmiki,
the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

षट्पञ्चाश: सर्ग:
Canto LVI

Hanuman sees Sita once more and bidding adieu to her,
takes a leap across the sea

ततस्तु शिंशपामूले जानकीं पर्यवस्थिताम्।
अभिवाद्यान्रवीद् दिष्ट्या पश्यामि त्वामिहाक्षताम्॥ १॥
Greeting the daughter of Janaka
ensconced at the foot of the SimSapa tree,
Hanuman for his part said to her, “Luckily |
find you unscathed at this moment.” (1)
ततस्तं प्रस्थितं सीता वीक्षमाणा पुन: पुन:।
ud: स्नेहान्विता वाक्यं हनूमन्तमभाषत॥ २॥

Gazing again and again on Hanuman,
who had made ready to depart, Sita, who
was full of affection for her lord, spoke as
follows to him: (2)

ae त्वं मन्यसे aa वसैकाहमिहानघ।
क्वचित् सुसंव्रते देशे fasted: vat गमिष्यसि॥ ३॥

“If at all you deem fit, O dear son, halt
for a day here, O sinless one! Having
