888

other assumed a grey colour as though
soiled by dust, through the supernatural
powers of the Devi. (24)

ततोऽहमन्यद् विस्तीर्णं गत्वा तस्य गिरेस्तटम्।
तूष्णीं वर्षशतान्यष्टौ समधारं महाव्रतम्॥ २५॥

“Then | went to another spacious
plateau of the Himalayas and observed silently
the great vow for eight hundred years. (25)

समाप्ते नियमे तस्मिस्तत्र cal महेश्वर:।

तत: प्रीतेन मनसा प्राह वाक्यमिदं प्रभु:॥ २६॥
“‘When | had completed the observance

of that vow, the great Lord Siva appeared

there and, pleased at heart, addressed the
following words to me: (26)
प्रीतोऽस्मि da aa तपसानेन aad
मया चैतद् ad चीर्णं त्वया चैव धनाधिप॥ २७॥
““O Suvrata (one who has successfully
observed a vow) and Dharmajfia (one who
knows Dharma), | am pleased with the Tapas
that you have just performed. This was first
observed by me and again by you, O lord of
riches! (27)

तृतीय: Gear नास्ति यश्चरेद व्रतमीदृशम्।

at सुदुष्करं ह्येतन्मयैवोत्पादितं gerne
“‘There is no third person who can

observe such a vow. | originated this vow in

the past. It is very difficult to observe. (28)

तत्सखित्वं War सौम्य रोचयस्व evar
तपसा निर्जितश्चैव सखा wa ममानघ॥ २९॥
“Therefore, be pleased to make friends
with me, O lord of wealth; | have been
conquered by you through your austerities,
O sinless one. (29)
देव्या दग्धं प्रभावेण यच्च सव्यं तवेक्षणम्।
पैङ्गल्यं यदवाप्तं fe देव्या रूपनिरीक्षणात्॥ ३०॥
एकाक्षपिङ्गलीत्येव नाम स्थास्यति शाश्वतम्।
एवं तेन सखित्वं च प्राप्यानुज्ञां च शङ्करात्॥३१॥
आगतेन मया चैवं श्रुतस्ते पापनिश्चय:।
तदधर्मिष्ठसंयोगान्निवर्तं कुलदूषणात्॥ ३२॥

“Since your left eye was burnt and the

« VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

other was turned grey by the supernatural
powers of the Devi for just gazing on her
beauty, you will be known as Ekaksapingali
(one who has his one eye turned grey)
forever. When having thus secured friendship
with Lord Sankara and obtained his leave, |
returned, | heard of your sinful resolve.
Therefore refrain from this unrighteous
conduct which tarnishes the reputation of
the family. (30—32)

चिन्त्यते fe वधोपाय: सर्षिसङ्घै: सुरैस्तव।
एवमुक्तो दशग्रीव: कोपसंरक्तलोचन:॥ ३३॥
Rear दन्तांश्च सम्पिष्य वाक्यमेतदुवाच ह।
विज्ञातं ते मया दूत वाक्यं यत् त्वं प्रभाषसे॥ ३४॥
“*The gods alongwith the hosts of Rsis
are considering the way of encompassing
your destruction.’ Hearing these words,
DaSagriva wrung his hands and ground his
teeth and, his eyes red with anger, spoke
as follows: ‘O messenger, | understand the
words which you utter. (33-34)

नैव त्वमसि नैवासौ भ्रात्रा येनासि चोदित:।
fed नैष ममैतद्धि ब्रवीति धनरक्षक:॥ ३५॥
“You will not live nor that brother by
whom you have been ordered to speak
thus. What the lord of wealth says is not to
my good. (35)
महेश्वरसखित्वं तु Ye: stead किल।
नैवेदं क्षमणीयं मे यदेतद् भाषितं त्वया॥ ३६॥
““That fool evidently tells me of his
friendship with Lord Maheswara. | will not
tolerate what you have said. (36)
यदेतावन्मया कालं ga तस्य q मर्षितम्।
न हन्तव्यो गुरुर्ज्यष्ठो मयायमिति मन्यते॥ ३७॥
“‘In the belief that an elder brother is not
to be killed, | have put up with all the insults
that he has heaped on me, O envoy! (37)
तस्य त्विदानीं श्रुत्वा मे वाक्यमेषा कृता मति: |
त्रील्लोकानपि जेष्यामि बाहुवीर्यमुपाश्रित:॥ ३८॥

“‘But after hearing these words of his,
| have made up my mind to conquer all the
