# YUDDHAKANDA #

स्पृशन्तमादित्यमिवात्मतेजसा ।
वनौकस: wea विवृद्धमद्भुतं
भयार्दिता दुद्रुवरि यतस्तत:॥९८॥

Oppressed with fear to behold the

531

prodigy, who resembled the peak of a
mountain and was adorned with a diadem,
who was touching the sun, as it were, with
the brilliance of his person and had grown
immensely in size, the monkeys ran hither
and thither. (98)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये युद्धकाण्डे षष्टितम: AW: ॥ Go ॥

Thus ends Canto Sixty in the Yuddhakanda of the glorious Ramayana of
Valmiki, the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

एकषष्टितम: सर्ग:
Canto LXI

Vibhisana acquaints Sri Rama with Kumbhakarna and the
monkeys take up their position firmly at the gates of
Lanka for an encounter under orders of Srt Rama

ततो WaT महातेजा धनुरादाय वीर्यवान्।
किरीटिनं महाकायं कुम्भकर्णं cast ह॥१॥
Taking up his bow, the valiant Sri Rama,
who was endowed with extraordinary energy,
beheld the gigantic Kumbhakarna, adorned
with a diadem. (1)

तं दृष्टवा राक्षसश्रेष्ठं पर्वताकारदर्शनम्।
क्रममाणमिवाकाशं UT नारायणं यथा॥ २॥

Perceiving that prince of ogres, who
looked like a mountain, taking strides across
space, as it were, like Lord Narayana
(manifested in the form of Trivikrama, who
measured the whole universe in a couple of
strides), he became alert. (2)

geal UWA: प्रदुद्राव वानराणां महाचमू:॥ ३॥
Catching sight of the ogre, who closely
resembled a cloud charged with rain and was
adorned with gold armlets, the huge army of
monkeys fled with full soeed again. (3)
fagat वाहिनीं दृष्ट्वा वर्धमानं च राक्षसम्।
सविस्मितमिदं wat विभीषणमुवाच ह॥४॥

Seeing the army scared away, and the
ogre becoming larger in size, Sri Rama with
astonishment asked Vibhisana as follows:

(4)
कोऽसौ पर्वतसंकाश: किरीटी हरिलोचन:।
लङ्कायां दृश्यते dk: सविद्युदिव तोयद:॥५॥

“Who is that with a diadem and tawny
eyes and resembling a mountain? He is seen
in Lanka, like a cloud riven by lightning. (5)
पृथिव्यां केतुभूतोऽसौ महानेकोऽत्र दृश्यते।

यं दृष्ट्वा वानरा: aa विद्रवन्ति ततस्तत:॥६॥

“The colossal ogre is seen here like a
solitary comet on earth, beholding whom

all the monkeys are fleeing in every
direction. (6)
आचक्ष्व सुमहान् कोऽसौ Tait वा यदि ATA: |

न मयैवंविधं wd दृष्टपूर्वं कदाचन॥७॥
“Please point out to me who that

colossus is, an ogre or a demon? No such
being was ever seen by me before.” (7)

सम्पृष्टो राजपुत्रेण रामेणाक्लिष्टकर्मणा।
विभीषणो wets: काकुत्स्थमिदमब्रवीत्॥८॥
