898

Mahadeva, O Rama, then spoke to DaSanana
as follows: (35)

प्रीतोऽस्मि da dives शौटीर्याच्च दशानन।
शैलाक्र।न्तेन यो मुक्तस्त्वया Wa: सुदारुण: ॥ ३६ ll
यस्माल्लोकत्रयं चैतद् रावितं भयमागतम्।
तस्मात्त्वं रावणो नाम ATT राजन् भविष्यसि Ul ३७॥
““O DaSanana, | am pleased with your
manliness, a hero as you are, as well as
with your encomium. Since the denizens of
all the three worlds were set acrying, seized
as they were with fear by the fierce cry
which was set forth by you when you were
crushed by the hill. Therefore, O king, you
will go by the name of Ravana. (36-37)

ead मानुषा Bat A चान्ये जगतीतले।
एवं त्वामभिधास्यन्ति रावणं लोकरावणम्॥ ३८॥

“`[#6 gods, human beings, Yaksas
and whatever other beings exist on the
earth’s surface will, henceforth call you by
the name of Ravana because you thus set
the world acrying. (38)

Tree पौलस्त्य विस्त्रब्धं पथा येन त्वमिच्छसि।
मया चैवाभ्यनुज्ञातो राक्षसाधिप गम्यताम्॥ ३९॥

“QO grandson of Pulastya, proceed
without fear by whichever path you wish to
take. Permitted by Me, O suzerain lord of
ogres, you may go.’ (39)

एवमुक्तस्तु लङ्केश: शम्भुना स्वयमब्रवीत्।
प्रीतो यदि महादेव at A देहि याचत:॥४०॥

“When spoken to in these words by
Lord Sambhu Himself, the king of Lanka
said, ‘O Mahadeva, if you are pleased with
me, kindly vouchsafe a boon to me, who
beg for the same. (40)
अवध्यत्वं मया we देवगन्धर्वदानवै:।
राक्षसैर्गुह्यकैर्नागैर्ये चान्ये बलवत्तरा:॥४१॥

“| have already secured immunity from
death at the hands of gods, Gandharvas
and Danavas, Raksasas, Guhyakas, Nagas
and others who are mightier than these.

(41)

« VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

मानुषान् न गणे देव स्वल्पास्ते मम सम्मता:।

दीर्घमायुश्च A प्राप्तं ब्रह्मणस्तिपुरान्तक॥४२॥
asad चायुष: शेषं शस्त्रं त्वं च प्रयच्छ मे।
एवमुक्तस्ततस्तेन रावणेन स शङ्कर:॥४३॥
ददौ wat महादीप्तं चन्द्रहासमिति श्रुतम्।
आयुषश्चावशेषं च ददौ भूतपतिस्तदा॥४४॥
“ ` do not reckon the human beings, O
Lord, because they are regarded by me as
very insignificant. A boon of long life has
been secured by me from Brahma, O
destroyer of Tripura ! Give me the remaining
lease of life sought by me and give me also
a weapon.’ Requested thus by the aforesaid
Ravana, the well-known Lord Sankara gifted
to him the highly shining sword known as
Candrahasa. The Lord of spirits granted to
him also the remaining lease of life on that
occasion. (42—44)

दत्त्वोवाच dd: शम्भुर्नावज्ञेयमिदं त्वया।
अवज्ञातं यदि fe a मामेवैष्यत्यसंशय:॥४५॥
“Bestowing it on him, He said, ‘This
sword is not to be despised by you; if it is
disregarded by you, it shall doubtless return
to me.’ (45)

एवं महेश्वरेणैव कृतनामा A रावण:।
अभिवाद्य महादेवमारुरोहाथ पुष्पकम्॥४६॥
“Having thus been named by the

supreme Deity Siva, greeting Mahadeva,
the said Ravana re-ascended Puspaka. (46)

ad महीतलं wa पर्यक्रामत रावण:।
क्षत्रियान् सुमहावीर्यान् बाधमानस्ततस्तत: ॥४७॥

“Thereafter, O Rama, Ravana ranged
over the earth’s surface oppressing Ksatriyas
possessed of exceeding valour here and
there. (47)

केचित् तेजस्विन: शूरा: क्षत्रिया युद्धदुर्मदा: |
तच्छासनमकुर्वन्तो विनेशु: सपरिच्छ्दा:॥४८॥

“Disobeying his command some valiant
Ksatriyas, who were full of martial ardour
and ferocious in battle, perished alongwith
their followers. (48)
