* SUNDARAKANDA +

at पुरीं तादृशीं दृष्टा दुराधर्षां सुरासुरै:।
हनूमांश्चिन्तयामास विनि:श्चस्य मुहुर्मुहु:॥ ३६॥
Beholding that city to be of the kind
mentioned above and difficult to overcome
even for gods and demons, and sighing
again and again, Hanuman reflected as
follows : (36)
केनोपायेन पश्येयं मैथिलीं जनकात्मजाम्।
SCSI राक्षसेन्द्रेण रावणेन दुरात्मना॥ ३७॥
‘Through what device shall | be able to
behold Sita, daughter of King Janaka and
a princess of Mithila, myself remaining
unperceived by the evil-minded Ravana, the
ruler of the ogres? (37)

न विनश्येत् कथं cared रामस्य विदितात्मन:।
एकामेकस्तु पश्येयं रहिते जनकात्मजाम्॥ ३८॥

‘How shall | be able to see the daughter
of Janaka alone in secret with none else beside
me, so that the cause of Sri Rama, the knower
of the Self, may not be altogether lost? (38)

भूताश्चार्था विनश्यन्ति देशकालविरोधिता: |
विक्लवं दूतमासाद्य तम: सूर्योदये यथा॥ sei
‘Nay, even as darkness disappears at
sunrise, objects which are all but accomplished
are completely lost at the hands of a timid or

thoughtless messenger when they are set in
opposition to time and place. (39)

अर्थानर्थान्तरे बुद्धिर्निश्चितापि न शोभते।
चातयन्तीह कार्याणि gat: पण्डितमानिन:॥४०॥

‘Even a decision duly arrived at by a
ruler in consultation with his ministers
regarding what should be done and what
should be refrained from, does not yield good
results when implemented by a thoughtless
messenger. Messengers fancying themselves
clever, but really not so, bring to nought all
undertakings on such occasions. (40)
न विनश्येत् कथं कार्यं वैक्लव्यं न कथं भवेत्।
लङ्घनं च समुद्रस्य कथं नु न भवेद वृथा॥४१॥

‘How should | act to ensure that the
purpose may not be frustrated? How should

47

| guard against thoughtlessness? And how,
| wonder, should | ensure that my leaping
across the sea does not go in vain? (41)

मयि ge तु रक्षोभी रामस्य विदितात्मन:।
भवेद व्यर्थमिदं कार्यं रावणानर्थमिच्छत:॥४२॥

‘If | am detected by the ogres, this
project (in the shape of my being sent to
Lanka) of Sri Rama, who is a knower of the
Self, and who seeks the overthrow of Ravana,
will miscarry. (42)

नहि शक्यं क्वचित् स्थातुमविज्ञातेन राक्षसै:।
अपि राक्षसरूपेण किमुतान्येन केनचित्॥४३॥

‘It is not possible at this place for anyone
to remain anywhere unknown by the ogres
even in the disguise of an ogre, much less
in aeqrere other form. (43)

नाज्ञातश्चरेदिति मतिर्मम।
नह्यत्राविदितकिचिद्रक्षसा भीमकर्मणाम्॥ ४४॥

‘My belief is that even the wind cannot
circulate here undetected. Certainly nothing
here is unknown to the ogres of terrible
deeds. (44)
विनाशमुपयास्यामि भर्तुरर्थश्च हास्यति॥४५॥

‘If | remain here in my native form, |
shall certainly meet with destruction and the
cause of my master will suffer. (45)
तदहं स्वेन रूपेण रजन्यां ह्रुस्वतां गत:।
लंकामभिपतिष्यामि राघवस्यार्थसिद्धये॥४६॥

‘Therefore, reduced to a small size, |
shall penetrate into Lanka by night in my
own form for carrying through the purpose
of my master: (46)

रावणस्य at wat प्रविश्य सुदुरासदाम्।

प्रविश्य भवनं सर्वं द्रक्ष्यामि जनकात्मजाम्॥४७॥
‘Entering by night the capital of Ravana,

which is most difficult of access, and

penetrating through every dwelling, | shall
find out Janaka’s daughter.’ (47)

Sta निश्चित्य हनुमान् सूर्यस्यास्तमयं कपि:।
आचकाङ्क्षे तदा वीरो वैदेह्या दर्शनोत्सुक: ॥ ४८ ॥
