160

Kusamba, who was_ possessed of
exceptional glory, for his part founded the
city of KauSambi (named after himself);
while KuSanabha, whose mind was given to
piety, built the city named Mahodaya, the
modern Kannauja. (6)

असूर्तरजसो नाम धर्मारण्यं महामति:।

चक्रे wat राजा agi गिरिव्रजम्॥७॥
Astrtarajasa built a city, Dnharmaranya

by name; while the prince named Vasu built

Girivraja, the modern Rajgir, the foremost of
all cities. (7)

एषा वसुमती नाम वसोस्तस्य महात्मन:।
Wa शैलवरा: पञ्च प्रकाशन्ते समन्तत:॥८॥

This capital of that high-souled prince,
Vasu, was also designated after him as
Vasumati. These five great hills* cast their
splendour all round the city of Girivraja,
justifying the appellation given to it. (8)

सुमागधी नदी रम्या मगधान् विश्रुताऽऽययौ।
पञ्चानां शैलमुख्यानां मध्ये मालेव शोभते॥९॥

The beautiful and celebrated river Sona,
which spreads its charm like a garland in
the midst of these five prominent hills flows
from the west into the territory of Magadha
and is accordingly known as the _ holy
Magadhi. (9)
aor fe मागधी राम वसोस्तस्य महात्मन:।
पूर्वाभिचरिता wa सुक्षेत्रा सस्यमालिनी॥ go ti

This celebrated river Magadhi, O Rama,
which flows in an easterly direction and is
lined with charming fields on both sides and
is thus adorned with rows of crops, is

connected with the same high-souled Vasu,
O Rama! (10)

कुशनाभस्तु राजर्षि: कन्याशतमनुत्तमम्।
जनयामास धर्मात्मा घृताच्यां रघुनन्दन॥११॥

The royal sage Kusanabha, for his
part, whose mind was given to righteousness,

« VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

O scion of Raghu, begot a hundred
daughters, excelled by none, through an
Apsara or celestial nymph named Ghrtaci.
(11)

तास्तु यौवनशालिन्यो रूपवत्य: स्वलंकृता:।
उद्यानभूमिमागम्य प्रावृषीव शतह्रदा:॥१२॥

गायन्त्यो नॄत्यमानाश्च वरादयन्त्यस्तु राधव।
आमोदं परमं जग्मुर्वराभरणभूषिता:॥१३॥
With their comeliness enhanced on their
attaining maturity, they for their part would
repair to the grounds of the royal garden
duly adorned with sandal-paste and flowers
etc., and decked with excellent jewels and
shining like flashes of lighting during the
monsoon, and they experienced supreme
delight while singing, dancing and playing
on their lutes, O scion of Raghu! (12-13)

अथ ताश्चारुसर्वाङ्मयो रूपेणाप्रतिमा भुवि।
उद्यानभूमिमागम्य तारा इव घनान्तरे॥१४॥

Lovely of every limb and peerless on
earth in comeliness of form they shone like
stars in the midst of clouds on reaching the
garden grounds. (14)

ता: Gal गुणसम्पन्ना रूपयौवनसंयुता:।
दृष्टा सर्वात्मको वायुरिदं वचनमब्रवीत्॥१५॥

Seeing them all endowed with
excellences and rich in beauty and youth,
one day the wind-god, who is bodily present
everywhere, addressed the following words
to them: (15)

अहं a: कामये wat wat मम भविष्यथ।
मानुषस्त्यज्यतां भावो दीर्घमायुरवाप्स्यथ॥ १६॥

“| wish to have you all as my own. You
should, therefore, be my wedded wives.
The thought that you are human beings
should be given up. In this way you will
attain a long lease of life. (16)
aad det wer अमर्यश्च भविष्यथ॥ eon

* In the Mahabharata (Sabha., XXI.2) these five hills have been named as Vipula, Varaha, Vrsabha

(Rsabha), Rsigiri (Matanga) and Caityaka.
