1082

apportioning time to each, O jewel among
the monkeys ! He, however, who pursues
sensuous enjoyment, neglecting religious
merit and worldly prosperity, wakes up only
when he has fallen from his high position,
like one lying asleep on a tree-top. A king
intent on the destruction of his foes and
fond of winning allies is rewarded with
religious merit, nay, enjoys the fruit in the
shape of the three ends of life, viz., religious
merit, worldly prosperity and sensuous
enjoyment. Now alone has come the time
for endeavour, O exterminator of foes !
(20—23)

संचिन्त्यतां हि पिङ्गेश हरिभि: ae abate: |
एवमुक्तस्तु सुग्रीवो we वचनमब्रवीत्॥२४॥

“Therefore, let the procedure of work
be carefully considered in consultation with
the monkeys in general and the ministers in
particular. O lord of monkeys !” Spoken to
in the foregoing words by Sr Rama,
Sugriva for his part replied as follows to Sri
Rama : (24)

प्रणष्टा sites कीर्तिश्च कपिराज्यं च शाश्वतम्।
त्वत्प्रसादान्महाबाहो पुन: प्राप्तमिदं मया॥ २५॥

“My fortune and fame as well as the
lasting rulership of monkeys, which had
been lost for good—all this has been regained
by me through your goodwill, O mighty-
armed prince ! (25)
qa ea प्रसादाच्च ws जयतां वर।
कृतं न प्रतिकुर्याद् य: पुरुषाणां fe दूषक:॥ २६॥

“All this has been achieved by me, O
lord, through your goodwill as well as through
that of your brother, O jewel among the
victorious! He who does not repay the
obligation of others is surely a disgrace to
men. (26)

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

एते ARTIS शतश: Wada!
प्राप्ताश्चादाय बलिन: पृथिव्यां सर्ववानरान्॥ २७॥
“These leaders of monkeys, numbering
hundreds, have arrived after summoning
all the mighty monkeys on the globe, O

destroyer of your enemies! (27)
ऋक्षाश्च वानरा: शूरा गोलाङ्गूलाश्च राघव।
कान्तारवनदुर्गाणामभिज्ञा चोरदर्शना: ॥ २८ ॥

देवगन्धर्वपुत्राश्च वानरा: कामरूपिण:।
स्वै: a: uaa: सैन्यैर्वर्तन्ते पथि wea २९॥

“Surrounded by their own troops, bears
and monkeys as well as valiant baboons
terrible to look at and having intimate
knowledge of wildernesses and forests as
well as of places difficult of access, and
monkeys sprung from the loins of gods
and Gandharvas (celestial musicians) and
capable of changing form at will are already
on their way to Kiskindha, O scion of Raghu !

(28-29)
We: शतसहस्रैश्च ada कोटिभिस्तथा।
अयुतैश्चावृता वीर शङ्कुभिश्च परंतप॥ ३०॥
अर्बुदैरर्बुदशतैर्मध्यैश्चान्त्यैश्च वानरा:।
समुद्राश्च wats ह्रयो हरियूथपा:॥ ३१॥

“The monkeys are followed severally
by hundreds and tens of thousands, hundreds
of thousands and crores, Arbudas (ten
crores), and Kharvas (one hundred Arbudas),
Sankus (one thousand Kharvas) and Antyas
(one hundred Kharvas) and Madhyas (one
thousand Sankus). Nay, some monkeys
and their troop-commanders number many
Samudras (or ten Sankus) and (even)
Parardhas* (or ten Madhyas), O scourge of
your enemies !” (30-31)

आगमिष्यन्ति ते राजन् महेन्द्रसमविक्रमा:।
मेघपर्वतसंकाशा मेरुविन्ध्यकृतालया: 132 Ul

The aforesaid monkeys etc., O prince,

* The following text from some work on Astronomy, quoted by one of the commentators, will give
an idea of these numbers, each of which is ten times as much as the one immediately preceding it:
एकं दश शतमस्मात् सहस्रमयुतं da: परं लक्षम् । vat कोटिमथार्बुदवृन्दे wa fad ai
तस्मान्महासरोजं शङ्कुं सरितांपतिं त्वन्तम् । मध्यं परार्धमाहुर्यथोत्तरॆ दशगुणं तथा ज्ञेयम्॥
