690

greeting him, the son of Sumitra then stood
rooted beside his eldest half brother even
as Lord Vamana, the younger brother of
Indra, would stand beside Indra, the ruler of

(4)

आचचक्षे dat वीरो घोरमिन्द्रजितो वधम्॥५॥

Making his appearance and vociferating,
as it were, by his very return with a cheerful
look on his face, the heroic Vibhisana then
reported to the high-souled Sri Rama (a scion
of Raghu) the ghastly end of Indrajit. (5)

Tard शिरश्छिन्नं लक्ष्मणेन महात्मना।
न्यवेदयत रामाय dar wet विभीषण:॥६॥
Filled with delight, Vibhisana, for his
part, forthwith submitted to Sri Rama that
the head of Indrajit (son of Ravana)
had been severed by the high-souled
Laksmana. (6)

yaa q महावीर्यो लक्ष्मणेनेन्द्रजिद्वधम्।
प्रहर्षमतुलं लेभे वाक्यं चेदमुवाच ह॥७॥

Sri Rama, who was endowed with
extraordinary prowess, for his part,
experienced immense joy the very moment
he heard about the fall of Indrajit at the
hands of Laksmana and uttered the following
words; so the tradition goes: (7)

साधु लक्ष्मण तुष्टोऽस्मि कर्म चासुकरं कृतम्।
रावणेर्हि विनाशेन जितमित्युपधारय॥८॥
“Well done, O Laksmana ! | feel gratified
with what you have done. Nay, a feat which
was not easy to accomplish (for others)
has been performed by you. Know it for
certain that victory has actually been scored
by us through the destruction of Indrajit, son
of Ravana.” (8)

a तं शिरस्युपाघ्राय लक्ष्मणं कीर्तिवर्धनम्।
लज्जमानं बलात् स्नेहादङ्कमारोप्य वीर्यवान्॥९॥
उपवेश्य तमुत्सङ्घे परिष्वज्यावपीडितम्।
भ्रातरं लक्ष्मणं स्निग्धं पुन: पुनरुदैक्षत॥ gol

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA +

Smelling the head of the aforesaid
Laksmana, who had enhanced his glory
and yet who was feeling abashed to hear
himself being praised, nay, forcibly drawing
him to his lap and placing him on it and
embracing him, wounded as he was, the
valiant Sri Rama tenderly gazed upon his
fortunate brother again and again. (9-10)
शल्यसम्पीडितं wed नि:श्वसन्तं तु लक्ष्मणम्।
रामस्तु दु:खसंतप्तं तं तु नि:श्वासपीडितम्॥११॥
af चैनमुपाघ्राय wa: संस्पृश्य च ATL
उवाच लक्ष्मणं वाक्यमाश्वास्य पुरुषर्षभ:॥१२॥

Smelling once more as a token of
affection the head of Laksmana, who was
feeling greatly tormented by the arrows that
had penetrated into his body, who had
been lacerated, nay, who was breathing
hard due to excessive exertion, was afflicted
with agony and was feeling pained at the
time of respiration—and hurriedly stroking
him and restoring him to confidence (with a
view to relieving him of his pain), Sri Rama,
a bull among men, for his part spoke to him
as follows: (11-12)
pd परमकल्याणं कर्म दुष्करकर्मणा।

TI मन्ये हते UA रावणं निहतं युधि॥ १३॥

“A feat which was supremely beneficial
has been accomplished by you, whose
exploits are difficult to perform for others. |
account Ravana killed in combat now that
his son has been made short work of. (13)

stare विजयी शत्रौ ect तस्मिन् दुरात्मनि।
रावणस्य नृशंसस्य दिष्ट्या वीर त्वया TT १४॥
fart fe दक्षिणो org: स fe तस्य व्यपाश्रय: |
विभीषणहनूमद्भ्यां कृतं HH ed रणे॥१५॥

“ दो victorious today inasmuch as
that evil-minded adversary of ours has been
despatched. Luckily enough, O hero, has
the right arm of the merciless Ravana been
actually severed by you. Indeed, Indrajit
was his sheet-anchor. A remarkable exploit
