* AYODHYAKANDA +

with joined palms, and spoke to him (as
follows) as though smiling : (42)
लक्ष्मणेमां मया सार्धं प्रशाधि त्वं वसुंधराम्।
द्वितीयं मेऽन्तरात्मानं त्वामियं श्रीरुपस्थिता॥४३॥
“Rule you beneficently over this earth

with me, O Laksmana! This royal fortune has
come to you, who are my second life. (43)

सौमित्रे भुङ्छ्व भोगांस्त्वमिष्टान् राज्यफलानि च।
जीवितं चापि राज्यं च त्वदर्थमभिकामये॥४४॥

Enjoy you, 0 Laksmana, the pleasures

303

coveted by you as well as the rewards of
sovereignty (religious merit and fame etc.).
| desire to live and even to rule but for you.”

(44)

इत्युक्त्वा लक्ष्मणं रामो मातरावभिवाद्य च।
अभ्यनुज्ञाप्य सीतां च ययौ स्वं च निवेशनम्॥ ४५ I

Having spoken to Laksmana as
aforesaid and greeting both his mothers,
Kausalya and Sumitra, and having secured
leave to depart on behalf of Sita too, Sri
Rama retired to his own palace. (45)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्येऽयोध्याकाण्डे
aga: सर्ग: ॥ ४॥

Thus ends Canto Four in the Ayodhyakanda of the glorious Ramayana
of Valmiki, the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

पञ्चम: सर्ग:
Canto V

At the instance of the Emperor, Vasistha calls at Sri Rama’s
palace and instructing him alongwith Sita to fast for the
night, returns to DaSaratha. Permitted by the sage,
the Emperor adjourns the assembly and
retires to the gynaeceum

संदिश्य wa नृपति: शएवोभाविन्यभिषेचने।
पुरोहितं समाहूय वसिष्ठमिदमब्रवीत्॥१॥

Having instructed Sr Rama_ in
connection with his installation fixed for the
morrow, and summoning the sage, Vasistha,
his family priest, DaSaratha (a ruler of men)
spoke to him as follows: (1)
गच्छोपवासं काकुत्स्थं कारयाद्य तपोधन।
श्रेयसे राज्यलाभाय वध्वा सह यतव्रत॥ २॥

“Kindly go and get Sri Rama, a scion
of Kakutstha, to observe a fast alongwith
his wife, Sita, tonight for his welfare in the
shape of removal of obstacles and for his
acquiring sovereignty, O Vasistha, rich in
asceticism, firm of resolve, as you yourself
are | (2)

waft च a राजानमुक्त्वा वेदविदां वर:।
स्वयं वसिष्ठो भगवान् ययौ रामनिवेशनम्॥ ३॥
उपवासयितुं वीरं मन्त्रविन्मन्त्रकोविदम्।
aa रथवरं युक्तमास्थाय सुधृतव्रत:॥४॥
Saying “Amen!” to the Emperor and
mounting an_ excellent chariot fit for
Brahmanas and ready with horses yoked to
it, the celebrated and powerful sage Vasistha,
the foremost of those well-versed in the
Vedas, and a knower of Mantras (sacred
spells), who had firmly kept his vows,
personally proceeded to Sri Rama’s palace
in order to ask the hero, a knower of Mantras
(himself), to undertake a fast. (3-4)

a रामभवनं wa पाण्डुराभ्रघनप्रभम्।
fra: कक्ष्या wea fads मुनिसत्तम:॥५॥
