« KISKINDHAKANDA +

1111

पञ्चचत्वारिंश: सर्ग:
Canto XLV

Bowing to the command of Sugriva and leading their respective bands,
Vinata and other monkey chiefs set forth towards the
quarter assigned to them by Sugriva

सर्वांश्चाहूय सुग्रीव: प्लवगान् प्लवगर्षभ:।
समस्तांश्चाब्रवीद् राजा रामकार्यार्थसिद्धये॥ १॥
Summoning all the monkeys in a body,
King Sugriva, the foremost of monkeys,
spoke to them as follows with a view to
accomplishing the end sought to be achieved
by Sri Rama : (1)
wade विचेतव्यं भवद्भिर्वानरोत्तमै:।
तदुग्रशासनं भर्तुर्विज्ञाय हरिपुंगवा:॥ २॥
शलभा sa संछाद्य मेदिनीं सम्प्रतस्थिरे।
TH: प्रस्रवणे afer न्यवसत् सहलक्ष्मण:॥ ३॥
प्रतीक्षमाणस्तं मासं सीताधिगमने कृत:।
sat तु दिशं रम्यां गिरिराजसमावरृताम्॥४॥
प्रतस्थे सहसा वीरो aft: शतबलिस्तदा।
gat fast प्रतिययौ विनतो हरियूथप:॥५॥

ताराङ्गदादिसहित:र प्लवग: पवनात्मज:।
अगस्त्याचरितामाशां दक्षिणां हरियूथप:॥६॥

“All this area specified by me ought to
be scoured by you, the foremost of monkeys,
in the way pointed out by me.” Fully
comprehending that formidable command of
their master and overruning the earth like
locusts, the leaders of monkeys duly sallied
forth. Waiting for the period of one month,
which had been fixed as a limit for finding
out the whereabouts of Sita, Sri Rama
continued to live on the celebrated Mount
Prasravana with Laksmana. The valiant
monkey Satabali for his part then set out
with a dash towards the delightful northern
quarter blocked by the Himalaya mountain,
the king of mountains. The monkey chief,
Vinata, marched towards the eastern quarter;
while accompanied by Tara, Angada and
others, the monkey Hanuman (son of the

wind-god), another monkey chief, proceeded
towards the southern quarter, resorted to
by Sage Agastya. (2—6)

पश्चिमां च fest घोरां सुषेण: प्लवगेश्वर:।
प्रतस्थे हरिशार्दूलो fast वरुणपालिताम्॥७॥

Again, the monkey chief, Susena, a
tiger among monkeys, set forth towards the
fearful western quarter, the quarter protected
by Varuna (the god of water). (7)

तत: at दिशो राजा चोदयित्वा यथातथम्।
कपिसेनापतिर्वीरो मुमोद ead: सुखम्॥८॥

Having dispatched the monkeys to all
the quarters according to their worth, the
valiant Sugriva, the lord of the monkey
forces, felt gratified and happy in his heart.

(8)
एवं संचोदिता: सर्वे Wat वानरयूथपा:।
स्वां स्वां दिशमभिप्रेत्य त्वरिता: सम्प्रतस्थिरे॥ ९॥
नदन्तश्चोन्नदन्तश्च गर्जन्तश्च प्लवंगमा:।
east धावमानाश्च विनदन्तो महाबला:॥१०॥

Shouting and howling, thundering and
roaring growling and running, when enjoined
by the king as aforesaid, all the generals of
the monkey army, who were endowed with
extraordinary might, hastily marched each
towards the quarter assigned to him. (9-10)

एवं संचोदिता: Wad Wal वानरयूथपा:।

आनयिष्यामहे सीतां हनिष्यामश्च रावणम्॥११॥
Directed thus by the king, all the

commanders of the monkey army said, “We

shall dispose of Ravana and bring Sita
back.” (11)

अहमेको वधिष्यामि we रावणमाहवे।
ततश्चोन्मथ्य सहसा हरिष्ये जनकात्मजाम्॥१२॥
