* AYODHYAKANDA +

Approaching that sage, the said Kalindi for
her part greeted him. (20)

स तामभ्यवदत् प्रीतो वरेप्सुं पुत्रजन्मनि।
पुत्रस्ते भविता देवि महात्मा लोकविश्रुत:॥ २१॥
धार्मिकश्च सुभीमश्च वंशकर्तारिसूदन:।
श्रुत्वा प्रदक्षिणं कृत्वा मुनिं तमनुमान्य च॥ २२॥
पद्मपत्रसमानाक्षं पद्मगर्भसमप्रभम्।
तत: सा गृहमागम्य पत्नी पुत्रमजायत॥ २३॥
“Gratified to receive her respects, he
said to the queen, who sought from him a
boon ensuring the birth of a son to her, ‘A
lofty minded son, widely known in the world,
pious and most formidable, the founder of a
dynasty and the destroyer of his foes, will
be born to you, O queen!’ Hearing this
benediction, and going round the sage
clockwise as a mark of respect and taking
leave of him, and then returning home, the
queen brought forth a son who had lotus-
like eyes and shone like Brahma, the lotus-
born. (21—23)

सपत्न्या तु गरस्तस्यै दत्तो गर्भजिघांसया।
TOT सह तेनैव तस्मात् A सगरोऽभवत्॥ २४॥

“The boy was born alongwith that very
poison that had actually been administered
to the queen by her fellow-consort with the
intention of destroying the foetus; hence he
became known as Sagara (lit., with poison).

(24)
स राजा WR नाम य: समुद्रमखानयत्।
Bet पर्वणि वेगेन त्रासयान SAT: प्रजा:॥ २५॥

“King Sagara was he who, getting
consecrated for a sacrifice on a full-moon
day or new moon day, caused the ocean to
be dug by his sons, sixteen thousand in
number, causing fear to the people here by
the speed of digging. (25)
असमञ्जस्तु पुत्रोऽभूत् सगरस्येति A: श्रुतम्।
जीवन्नेव स पित्रा तु निरस्त: पापकर्मकृत्॥ २६॥

“It has been heard by us that Sagara’s
eldest son, really speaking, was Asamanija.

683

A perpetrator of sinful deeds as he was, he,
however, was abandoned by his father,
even when alive. (26)

अंशुमानपि पुत्रोऽभूदसमञ्जस्य वीर्यवान्।
fecituissaa: ust दिलीपस्य भगीरथ:॥ २७॥
“Amsuman, again, who was full of valour,
was the son of Asamafija. Dilipa was the son
of Arnsuman and Bhagiratha, of Dilipa. (27)

भगीरथात्ककुत्स्थश्च काकुत्स्था येन तु स्मृता: ।
ककुत्स्थस्य तु पुत्रोऽभूद् रघुर्येन तु राघवा:॥ २८॥

“Again, from the loins of Bhagiratha
appeared Kakutstha, after whose name his
descendants came to be called, Kakutsthas,
the scions of Kakutstha. And Kakutstha’s
son was Raghu, after whom his descendants
were known as Raghavas, the scions of
Raghu. (28)

रघोस्तु पुत्रस्तेजस्वी Wag: पुरुषादक:।
कल्माषपाद: सौदास इत्येवं प्रथितो भुवि॥ २९॥

“Raghu’s glorious son for his part came
to be known on earth by the names of
Pravrddha, Purusadaka (lit., a man-eater or
ogre), Kalmasapada and Saudasa. (29)

कल्माषपादपुत्रोऽभूच्छङ्खणस्त्विति A: श्रुतम्।

यस्तु तद्वीर्यमासाद्य सहसैन्यो व्यनीनशत्॥३०॥
“It has been heard by us_ that

Kalmasapada’s son was Sankhana, who,

even on attaining remarkable valour on the

field of battle, perished, army and all, in an

encounter.” (30)

शङ्खणस्य तु पुत्रोऽभूच्छूर: श्रीमान् सुदर्शन:।
सुदर्शनस्याग्निवर्ण अग्निवर्णस्य शीघ्रग:॥ ३१॥
“The glorious Sudarsana for his part
was the heroic son of Sankhana. Agnivarna
was the son of Sudargana and Sighraga, of
Agnivarna. (31)
शीघ्रगस्य AS: Gat मरो: TA: प्रशुश्रुव:।
प्रशुश्रुवस्य पुत्रोऽभूदम्बरीषो महामति:।। ३२॥
“Maru was the son of Sighraga and
Maru’s son was Prasusruva. The _ highly
