* AYODHYAKANDA +

reported the matter to the sage who had
bestowed the boon on him. (24)

Wd: स ate: साधू राजानं प्रत्यभाषत।
म्रियतां ध्वंसतां ad मा शंसीस्त्वं महीपते॥ २५॥

“Thereupon the holy man who had
bestowed the boon on him replied to the
king, ‘Let her die or depart (from your house
for her parents’ home); reveal you not the
secret to her, O ruler of the earth!’ (25)

स तच्छुत्वा वचस्तस्य प्रसन्नमनसो नृप:।
मातरं ते निरस्याशु विजहार कुबेरवत्॥ २६॥

“Hearing the aforesaid reply of the holy
man, who was pleased at heart with him,
and speedily repudiating your mother, the
said king (your father) lived happily like
Kubera (the god of riches). (26)

तथा त्वमपि राजानं दुर्जनाचरिते पथि।
असद्ग्राहमिमं मोहात् कुरुषे पापदर्शिनी॥ २७॥

“Treading on the path trodden by wicked
men and seeing evil everywhere, you too
likewise are urging this Emperor through
infatuation to adopt an evil course. (27)

सत्यश्चात्र प्रवादोऽयं लौकिक: प्रतिभाति मा।
पितॄन् समनुजायन्ते नरा मातरमङ्गना:॥२८॥

“Nay, the popular saying on this subject
that males take after their father and females
after their mother appears to me as true.

(28)
नैवं भव गृहाणेदं यदाह वसुधाधिप:।
भर्तुरिच्छामुपास्वेह जनस्यास्य गतिर्भव॥ २९॥

“Do not follow the ways of your mother,
and accept that which the Emperor enjoins
on you. Following the will of your husband,
be a protectress to these people here. (29)

मा त्वं प्रोत्साहिता पापैर्देवराजसमप्रभम्।
wait लोकभर्तारमसद्धर्ममुपादध॥ ३०॥

“Do not, as incited by the wicked,
constrain your husband—who is, at the same
time, the protector of the world and vies in
splendour with Indra—to adopt an improper
course of conduct. (30)

429

ae मिथ्या प्रतिज्ञातं करिष्यति तवानघ:।
श्रीमान् दशरथो राजा देवि राजीवलोचन:॥ ३१॥
“The glorious and lotus-eyed King
Dasaratha, who is free from sin, would not
belie the promise made by him to you, O
royal lady ! (31)
ज्येष्ठो वदान्य: कर्मण्य: स्वधर्मस्यापि रक्षिता |
रक्षिता जीवलोकस्य बली रामोऽभिषिच्यताम्॥ ३२॥

“Let Rama, the eldest of his sons—
who is generous, strong and given to
righteous acts and is capable not only of
vindicating his own duty as a Ksatriya but
also of protecting the entire living creation,
be installed on the throne of Ayodhya. (32)

परिवादो fe a देवि महाँल्लोके चरिष्यति।
यदि रामो at याति विहाय पितरं नृपम्॥३३॥

“A great calumny will surely spread
about you, O royal lady, if Rama goes to
the forest, leaving his royal father. (33)
स्वराज्यं राघव: पातु भव त्वं विगतज्वरा।
नहि ते राघवादन्य: क्षम: पुरवरे वसन्॥३४॥

“Let Sri Rama, a scion of Raghu, protect
his own kingdom and be you free from
anxiety. Ruling over Ayodhya, the foremost
of cities, no king other than Sri Rama will be
favourably disposed to you. (34)

wa fe यौवराज्यस्थे राजा दशरथो वनम्।
प्रवेक्ष्यति महेष्वास: पूर्ववृत्तमनुस्मरन्॥३५॥

“Bearing in mind the conduct of his
forbears, King Dasaratha, who wields a
mighty bow, will surely retire to the forest in
the event of Sri Rama being installed in the
office of Prince Regent.” (35)

इति सान्त्वैश्च तीक्ष्णैश्च कैकेयीं राजसंसदि।

भूय: संक्षोभयामास सुमन्त्रस्तु कृताञ्जलि:।। ३६॥
In this way with folded hands Sumantra

for his part violently shook Kaikeyi with

pungent remarks as well as with kind words
in the king’s court. (36)

नैव सा क्षुभ्यते देवी न च स्म परिदूयते।
न चास्या मुखवर्णस्य लक्ष्यते विक्रिया तदा॥ ३७॥
