# YUDDHAKANDA +

monkey, Hanuman, blocked the western
gate. (34—40)

प्रमाथिप्रघसाभ्यां च वीरैरन्यैश्च संगत:।
मध्यमे च स्वयं गुल्मे सुग्रीव: समतिष्ठत॥४१॥
सह सर्वैर्हरिश्रेष्ठै: सुपर्णपवनोपमै:।
वानराणां तु षट्त्रिंशत्कोट्य: प्रख्यातयूथपा: Mt ४२॥
निपीड्योपनिविष्टाश्च सुग्रीवो यत्र वानर:।
शासनेन तु रामस्य लक्ष्मण: सविभीषण:॥४३॥
द्वारे द्वारे हरीणां तु कोटिं कोटीर्न्यवेशयत्।
पश्चिमेन तु रामस्य सुषेण: सहजाम्बवान्॥४४॥
अदूरान्मध्यमे गुल्मे तस्थौ बहुबलानुग:।
ते तु वानरशार्दूला: शार्दूला इव दंष्ट्रिण:।
Tea द्रुमशैलाग्रान् WET युद्धाय तस्थिरे॥४५॥

Nay, alongwith all the monkey
chiefs, who vied with Garuda of beautiful
wings and the wind-god in speed, Sugriva
himself took up his position at the intermediate
military post between the northern and
western gates. Having exerted pressure on
the ogres occupying that post, thirty six
crores of monkeys, all highly renowned
generals, for their part stood encamped where
the monkey king, Sugriva, was (viz., near
the intermediate military post). Accompanied
by Vibhisana, Laksmana for his part posted
under order of Sri Rama a crore or crores
of monkeys at each gate, as necessary.
Accompanied by Jambavan and followed
by a vast army, Susena for his part took up
his position at the intermediate post at the
back of Sri Rama not far from him. Seizing
trees and peaks of mountains, the aforesaid
tigers among monkeys, who were endowed
with sharp teeth like tigers, stood gladly
waiting for an encounter. (41—45)

wa विकृतलाङ्गूला: सर्वे दंष्ट्वानखायुधा:।

wa विकृतचित्राङ्मा: ad च विकृतानना:॥४६॥
All had their tails lifted up in an unnatural

way (on account of fury), all had teeth and

437

nails for their weapons, their eyes etc.,
were distorted and looked strange, suffused
as they were with blood, and their faces too
were distorted through anger. (46)

दशनागबला: केचित् केचिद् दशगुणोत्तरा:।
केचिन्नागसहस्रस्य बभूवुस्तुल्यविक्रमा:॥४७॥

Some monkeys were endowed with
the strength of ten elephants, while others
were ten times as strong as the latter; while
still others were equal in prowess to a
thousand elephants. (47)

सन्ति चौघबला: केचित् केचिच्छतगुणोत्तरा:।
अप्रमेयबलाश्चान्ये तत्रासन् हरियूथपा:॥४८॥

Some commanders of monkey troops
were endowed with the strength of an Ogha*
of elephants, while others were a hundred
times stronger than the latter. Still others
possessed immeasurable strength. (48)

अद्भुतश्च विचित्रश्च तेषामासीत् समागम:।
तत्र वानरसैन्यानां शलभानामिवोद्गम:॥४९॥

Marvellous and astonishing too was
the gathering in that area of those monkey
troops, which resembled a flight of locusts.

(49)

परिपूर्णमिवाकाशं सम्पूर्णेव च मेदिनी।
लङ्कामुपनिविष्टैश्च सम्पतद्भिश्च वानरै:॥५०॥

The air was completely filled, as it
were, with the monkeys bounding towards
Lanka and the land round about Lanka was
fully covered as it were with those that were
already stationed beneath its walls. (50)
wd शतसहस्राणां पृतनर्क्षवनौकसाम्।
लङ्काद्वाराण्युपाजग्मुरन्ये योद्धुं समन्तत:॥५१॥

A hundred divisions of one lakh bears
and monkeys each marched to the four
gates of Lanka to reinforce those already
posted there; while others proceeded to
fight on every side. (51)

* For the number represented by one Ogha vide XXVIII. 37 above, P. 393.
