96 « VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

with due ceremony water to wash his hands
with and begged of that prince among
Brahmanas a boon to the effect that no
wrath might enter the mind of the sage or
his father for his having caused the sage to
be lured away to his kingdom from his
father’s hermitage. (31)

अन्त:पुरं प्रवेश्यास्मै Heat दत्त्वा यथाविधि।
Wied शान्तेन मनसा राजा हर्षमवाप स:॥ ३२॥

Having ushered him into the gynaeceum

and duly given away with a tranquil mind his
daughter, Santa, the said king experienced
great joy. (32)

एवं स न्यवसत् तत्र सर्वकामै: सुपूजित:।
RATS महातेजा: शान्तया सह भार्यया॥ ३३॥

Duly entertained with all the desired
objects in this way, the said Rsyasrnga,
who was possessed of unique glory, lived
there in the gynaeceum of King Romapada
with his wedded wife, Santa. (33)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये बालकाण्डे SIA: सर्ग: Il १० ॥

Thus ends Canto Ten in the Balakanda of the glorious Ramayana of Valmiki,
the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

एकादश: सर्ग:
Canto XI

Urged by Sumantra, Emperor Dasaratha calls on his friend,
King Romapada, and brings with the latter's permission
Santa and Rsyasrnga to his own palace

wa wa fe राजेन्द्र श्रृणु A वचनं हितम्।
यथा स देवप्रवर: कथयामास बुद्धिमान्॥१॥

Further hear from me, O king of kings,
the wholesome words which the aforesaid
wise seer, the foremost of all heavenly
beings, was actually pleased to utter: (1)

इक्ष्वाकूणां Hot जातो भविष्यति सुधार्मिक:।
नाम्ना दशरथो राजा श्रीमान् सत्यप्रतिश्रव:॥ २॥
“In the line of the Ikswakus will be born
a highly pious and glorious king, DaSaratha
by name, who will be true to his promise.
(2)

अङ्गराजेन सख्यं च तस्य राज्ञो भविष्यति।
कन्या चास्य महाभागा शान्ता नाम भविष्यति।। ३॥

“Friendship will be developed by the
said monarch with the ruler of the Angas.
And the latter will have a highly blessed
daughter, Santa by name (given in adoption
to him by DaSaratha). (3)

पुत्रस्त्वङ्गस्य राज्ञस्तु रोमपाद इति श्रुत:।

तं स राजा दशरथो गमिष्यति महायशा:॥४॥
“The ruler of the Angas (the son of

King Anga) will be known by the name of

Romapada. Possessed of great renown,

the said King DaSaratha will approach the

latter with the following request : (4)

अनपत्योऽस्मि धर्मात्मञ्शान्ताभर्ता मम क्रतुम्।
आहरेत त्वयाऽऽज्ञप्त: संतानार्थं कुलस्य ANG ll
‘Since | am without a male issue, O
king whose mind is given to piety, let the
sage Rsyagrnga, the husband of Santa,
when permitted by you, perform a sacrifice
for the propagation of my race’. (5)

श्रुत्वा राज्ञोऽथ Aq वाक्यं मनसा स विचिन्त्यच।
प्रदास्यते पुत्रवन्तें शान्ताभर्तारमात्मवान्॥६॥

“Hearing the aforesaid request of the
emperor and revolving it in his mind, and
resolving to comply with it, the noble-minded
