* ARANYAKANDA «

with extraordinary might, which set virtue on
foot by giving light and energy to the world
and set the world going by providing a
measure of time and on which everything in
the world rest, have to suffer eclipse. (11)

सुमहान्त्यपि भूतानि देवाश्च पुरुषर्षभ।
न da प्रमुञ्चन्ति सर्वभूतानि देहिन:॥१२॥

“Even very great beings and gods are
not immune from the control of fate, much less
all embodied beings, O flower of men! (12)

शक्रादिष्वपि देवेषु वर्तमानौ नयानयौ।
श्रूयेते नरशार्दूल न त्वं शोचितुमर्हसि॥१३॥

“Righteousness and unrighteousness
are known to yield their fruit in the shape of
happiness and misery, even in the case of
Indra and other gods, O tiger among men!
You ought not, therefore, to grieve. (13)

मृतायामपि वैदेह्यां नष्टायामपि weal
शोचितुं नार्हसे aC AMA: प्राकृतस्तथा॥ १४॥

“Even in the event of Sita (a princess of
the Videha territory) being dead or having
disappeared as a result of being carried away
by someone, O heroic Rama (a scion of
Raghu), you ought not to grieve in the same
way as any other common man. (14)

त्वद्विधा नहि शोचन्ति add सर्वदर्शना:।
सुमहत्स्वपि कृच्छरषु रामानिर्विण्णदर्शना:॥१५॥

“People like you, who perceive
everything with their intuitive eye, do not
really give way to grief even in the face of
the gravest perils, O Rama, but ever remain
undepressed in their outlook. (15)

तत्त्वतो fe नरश्रेष्ठं बुद्ध्या समनुचिन्तय।
GEM युक्ता महाप्राज्ञा विजानन्ति शुभाशुभे॥ १६॥
“Discriminate between right and wrong
in true perspective by recourse to reason.
Endowed with reason, highly intelligent souls

901

are correctly able to know what is good and
evil, O jewel among men! (16)

अदृष्टगुणदोषाणामध्रुवाणां तु कर्मणाम्।
नान्तरेण क्रियां तेषां फलमिष्टं च वर्तते॥१७॥

“Actions, whose merits and demerits
have not been perceived except through
the scriptures and which are not everlasting,
inasmuch as they cease after yielding their
fruit, cannot be performed without individual
effort. And once they are performed their
welcome as well as unwelcome fruit is
inevitable and must be reaped. (17)

मामेवं fe पुरा वीर त्वमेव बहुशोक्तवान्।
अनुशिष्याद्भि को नु त्वामपि साक्षाद् बृहस्पति: ॥ १८ ।।

“Indeed you alone have often instructed
me accordingly in the past, O heroic brother !
In fact, who on earth can instruct you, be he
Brhaspati, the preceptor of gods, himself. (18)
बुद्धिश्च a महाप्राज्ञ देवैरपि दुरन्वया।
शोकेनाभिप्रसुप्तं ते ज्ञानं सम्बोधयाम्यहम्॥१९॥

“Nay, your intelligence, 0 highly
sagacious prince, cannot be fathomed even
by gods. | simply try to awaken your wisdom,
which has been dimmed, as it were, by
grief. (19)
feat च मानुषं चैवमात्मनश्च पराक्रमम्।
इक्ष्वाकुवृषभावेक्ष्य यतस्व द्विषतां वधे॥ २०॥

“Nay, bearing in mind your divine as
well as human prowess, strive for the
destruction of your enemies, O flower of the
Ikswakus ! (20)
fe ते सर्वविनाशेन कृतेन पुरुषर्षभ।
waa तु Ra पापं विज्ञायोद्धर्तुमर्हसि॥ २१॥

“What object of yours will be achieved
through universal destruction wrought by you?

Therefore, finding out your sinful adversary,
you ought to root him out alone. (21)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्येऽरण्यकाण्डे षट्षष्टितम: सर्ग: ॥ ६६ Il

Thus ends Canto Sixty-six in the Aranyakanda of the glorious Ramayana of Valmiki,
the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

