142

सुन्दे तु निहते राम अगस्त्यमृषिसत्तमम्।
ताटका सह पुत्रेण प्रधर्षयितुमिच्छति॥१०॥

“Sunda having been killed by the sage
Agastya by means of a curse, O Rama,
Tataka alongwith her son sought to kill
Agastya, the foremost of Rsis. (10)
भक्षार्थं जातसंरम्भा गर्जन्ती साभ्यधावत।
आपतन्तीं तु at दृष्टा अगस्त्यो भगवानृषि:।॥ ११॥
राक्षसत्वं भजस्वेति मारीचं व्याजहार स:।
अगस्त्य: परमामर्षस्ताटकामपि शप्तवान्॥१२॥

“Her rage having been excited, she
(as well as Marica) ran towards the sage in
order to devour him. Seeing her rushing
towards him, Agastya, the mighty Rsi,
however, said to Marica, “Attain the state of
an ogre !” Full of extreme anger the aforesaid
Agastya cursed Tataka too in the following
words : (11-12)

पुरुषादी महायक्षी विकृता विक्रृतानना।

Be रूपं विहायाशु दारुणं रूपमस्तु ते॥१३॥
“Dropping this comely form at once,

get transformed into an ugly man-eating

ogress with a mis-shapen countenance, a

great Yaksa woman as you are! Let your

personality assume a cruel aspect.’ (13)

सैषा शापकृतामर्षा ताटका क्रोधमूच्छिता।
देशमुत्सादयत्येनमगस्त्याचरितं शुभम्॥ १४॥

“Her indignation having been aroused
by the execration, the aforesaid Tataka,
thus transformed and bewildered with anger,
ravages this holy tract, once trodden by
Agastya. (14)
Wit wat दुर्वृत्तां यक्षीं परमदारुणाम्।
गोब्राह्मणहितार्थाय जहि दुष्टपराक्रमाम्॥१५॥

“For the good of the cows and the
Brahmanas, O Rama, get rid of this most
cruel Yaksa woman of evil conduct and
perverted valour. (15)
Red fra लोकेषु त्वामृते रघुनन्दन॥१६॥

« VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

“No man in all the three worlds other
than you dare kill this woman, made
formidable by a curse, O scion of Raghu !

(16)

नहि a स्त्रीवधकृते gor कार्या नरोत्तम।
चातुर्वर्ण्यहितार्थं fe कर्तव्यं राजसूनुना॥१७॥

as वा प्रजारक्षणकारणात्।
पातकं वा सदोषं वा कर्तव्यं रक्षता सदा॥ १८ ॥

“No disgust should be felt by you for
the act of killing a woman, O jewel among
men! For in the interest of the four grades
of society, even a cruel deed has in any
case to be perpetrated by a Ksatriya prince
as well as an act which is anything but
cruel. For the protection of the people even
that which is sinful or wrong must invariably
be done by one whose duty it is to protect.

(17-18)

राज्यभारनियुक्तानामेष धर्म: सनातन:।
sera wie काकुत्स्थ धर्मो ह्यस्यां न विद्यते।। १९ ॥

“Such is the eternal duty of those
charged with the onus of administration.
Make short work of the impious woman, O
scion of Kakutstha; for there exists no
righteousness in her. (19)

gad fe qa welt विरोचनसुतां नृप।
पथिवीं हन्तुमिच्छन्तीं मन्थरामभ्यसूदयत्॥ Ro Il

“It is heard that in the former days
Indra killed Manthara, daughter of Virocana
(son of Prahlada), who desired to destroy
the earth, O protector of men! (20)

विष्णुना च पुरा राम भृगुपत्नी पतिव्रता।
अनिन्द्रं लोकमिच्छन्ती काव्यमाता निषूदिता॥ २१॥

“Again, the wife of the sage Bhrgu and
the mother of Sukracarya (the well-known
preceptor of the demons), who, though
devoted to her husband, desired to see the
world bereft of Indra, was disposed of by
Lord Visnu* in the past, O Rama! = (21)

* We read in the Matsya-Purana (Discourse XLVII) how during the absence of her son, Sukra, who
