304

Arka, who were followed by numerous
monkeys, guarded the other, left, flank. (33)

सुषेणो जाम्बवांश्चैव ऋक्षैर्बहुभिरावृतौ।
सुग्रीवं wd: pa wet area avi
Surrounded by numerous bears and
placing Sugriva at their head, Susena as
well as Jambavan carefully guarded the
rear. (34)
तेषां सेनापतिर्वीरो नीलो वानरपुंगव:।
सम्पतन् प्लवतां श्रेष्ठस्तद् बलं पर्यवारयत्॥ ३५ UI
Marching ahead Satabali and others, in
order to clear the passage, the heroic
Commander-in-Chief, Nila, the foremost
among monkeys, nay, a veritable bull among
them, held that army in check lest it should
do any harm to the cities etc., falling on the
way. (35)
दरीमुख: प्रजङ्घश्च जम्भोऽथ रभस: कपि:।
सर्वतश्च ययुर्वीरास्त्वरयन्त: प्लवंगमान्॥ ३६॥
The heroes, Darimukha and Prajangha,
as well as Jambha and the monkey Rabhasa
went about urging the monkeys move
forward on all sides. (36)

एवं a हरिशार्दूला गच्छन्ति बलदर्पिता:।
अपश्यन्त गिरिश्रेष्ठं सह्यं गिरिशतायुतम्॥ ३७॥
सरांसि च सुफुल्लानि तटाकानि वराणि च।
रामस्य शासनं ज्ञात्वा भीमकोपस्य भीतवत्॥ ३८ ॥
वर्जयन् नागराभ्याशांस्तथा जनपदानपि।
सागरौघनिभं भीमं dq वानरबलं महत्॥३९॥
नि:ससर्प overt = भीमघोषमिवार्णवम्।
तस्य दाशरथे: Uys शूरास्ते कपिकुञ्जरा:।॥४०॥
तूर्णमापुप्लुवु: सर्वे सदश्वा इव चोदिता:।
कपिभ्यामुह्यमानौ तौ शुशुभाते नरर्षभौ॥४१॥
महद्भ्यामिव संस्पृष्टौ ग्रहाभ्यां चन्द्रभास्करौ।
at वानरराजेन लक्ष्मणेन सुपूजित:॥४२॥
जगाम रामो धर्मात्मा ससैन्यो दक्षिणां दिशम्।
तमङ्गदगतो रामं लक्ष्मण: शुभया गिरा॥४३॥
उवाच परिपूर्णार्थं पूर्णार्थप्रतिभानवान्।
हृतामवाप्य वैदेहीं fad हत्वा च रावणम्॥४४॥

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA +

समृद्धार्थ: समृद्धार्थामयोध्यां प्रतियास्यसि।
महान्ति च निमित्तानि fafa भूमौ च Wea ४५॥
शुभानि तव पश्यामि सर्वाण्येवार्थसिद्धये।
अनुवाति शिवो arg: सेनां मृदुहित: सुख:॥ ४६॥

In this way the aforesaid tigers among
monkeys, who were all proud of their
might, pressed forward. Meanwhile, they
caught sight of the Sahya mountain, the
foremost of mountains, surrounded by
hundreds of other smaller mountains, as
also lakes with full-blown lotuses and other
flowers, as well as excellent ponds. Avoiding
the precincts of cities as well as the rural
parts like one seized with fear, Knowing as
it did the command of Sri Rama, whose
wrath gave rise to fear, that redoubtable
and huge monkey army, which resembled
the tide of a sea, surged forward like an
exceedingly dreadful ocean roaring terribly.
Like swift steeds urged on with a spur, all
those heroic elephants among monkeys
bounded forward with agility to the side of
the aforesaid Sri Rama, son of Daégaratha.
Being borne by the two monkeys, Angada
and Hanuman, Laksmana and Sri Rama,
the aforesaid two jewels among men, shone
brightly like the moon and the sun conjoined
with two major planets, Jupiter and Venus,
respectively. Highly honoured by Sugriva,
the king of monkeys, as well as by
Laksmana, and accompanied by the army,
Sri Rama, whose mind was set on piety,
thereupon proceeded towards the southern
quarter. To the said Sri Rama, whose purpose
ever stood fully accomplished, Laksmana,
who was mounted on the shoulders of
Angada and who had intuitive knowledge of
the fruition of an undertaking, submitted
as follows in happy accents: “Killing Ravana
in no time and recovering the abducted
princess of the Videha territory, you will
return fully accomplished of purpose to
Ayodhya, which will also have its purpose
