* AYODHYAKANDA +

असावत्यन्तनिर्भग्नस्तव पुत्रो भविष्यति।
अनाथवत् सुखेभ्यश्च राजवंशाच्च वत्सले॥ २५॥

“Like a child without a guardian, your
aforesaid son will be altogether deprived of
comforts and cast out from the royal dynasty,
O lady full of affection (for your child) !

(25)
साहं त्वदर्थे सम्प्राप्ता त्वं तु मां नावबुद्ध्यसे।
सपत्निवृद्धौ या A त्वं प्रदेयं दातुमर्हसि॥ २६॥

“Such as | am, | have come to you to
awaken you to your own interests, while
you do not recognize my worth in that you
seek to bestow a reward on me on the
exaltation of your co-wife ! (26)

qa तु भरतं राम: प्राप्य राज्यमकण्टकम्।
देशान्तरं नाययिता लोकान्तरमथापि वा॥ २७॥

“Having attained sovereignty shorn of
enemies, Rama for his part will surely send
Bharata into exile or even to the other world.

(27)

बाल Wa तु Aged भरतो नायितस्त्वया।
संनिकर्षाच्च सौहार्दं जायते स्थावरेष्विव॥ २८॥

“Even as a boy, Bharata, on the other
hand, has been despatched by you to his
maternal uncle’s; while love is engendered
through contiguity even as among inanimate
beings like trees and creepers. (28)

भरतानुवशात् सोऽपि शात्रुघ्नस्तत्समं गत:।
लक्ष्मणो fe यथा रामं तथायं भरतं गत:॥ २९॥

“In obedience to the will of Bharata the
celebrated Satrughna too left with him,
inasmuch as the latter is devoted to Bharata
in the same way as Laksmana is to Rama.

(29)

gad fe ga: कश्चिच्छेत्तव्यो वनजीवनै: |
संनिकर्षादिषीकाभिर्मोचित: UATE भयात्॥ ३०॥

“A certain tree marked down for being
felled by those living on the produce of
forests was actually saved from the great
danger by thorny shrubs through sheer
proximity: so it is heard. (30)

315

गोप्ता fe wa सौमित्रिर्लक्ष्मणं चापि wera: |
अश्विनोरिव सौभ्रात्रं तयोर्लोकेषु विश्रुतम्॥ ३१॥

“Indeed Laksmana (son of Sumitra)
will protect Rama and Rama (a scion of
Raghu) too will protect Laksmana. Their
brotherly love for each other, which is akin
to the love of the Aswins (the twin-born
physicians of gods), is widely known in all
the worlds. (31)

तस्मान्न लक्ष्मणे राम: पापं किंचित् करिष्यति।

रामस्तु भरते UG कुर्यादेव न संशय:॥ ३२॥
“Therefore, Rama will never do any

wrong to Laksmana. Against Bharata,

however, he must perpetrate a wrong: there
is no doubt about it. (32)

तस्माद् राजगृहादेव at गच्छतु Waa: |

एतद्धि Wad Wa wet चापि fed तव॥ ३३॥
“Therefore let Rama, a scion of Raghu,

retire to the woods even from the palace.

This alone appeals to me and is also
supremely good for you. (33)

एवं ते ज्ञातिपक्षस्य श्रेयश्चैव भविष्यति।
यदि Wa भरतो धर्मात् पित्र्यं राज्यमवाप्स्यति॥ ३४॥

“In case Bharata rightly secures his
paternal throne (as promised by his father),
then only will the welfare of those (like
myself) belonging to the side of your parents
be ensured. (34)

स a सुखोचितो बालो रामस्य सहजो रिपु:।
समृद्धार्थस्य नष्टार्थो जीविष्यति Het वशे॥ ३५॥

“Having lost his fortune, how will that
boy of yours, a born enemy of Rama—
whose object has been realized—and
deserving a life of ease, live in subjection to
Rama? (35)
अभिद्रुतमिवारण्ये सिंहेन गजयूथपम्।
Wert रामेण भरतं त्रातुमर्हसि॥ ३६॥

“You ought to protect Bharata when
like the leader of a herd of elephants chased
in a forest by a lion he is overpowered by
Rama. (36)
