774

possessed as it was with terrible impetuosity,
suddenly approached those two princes like

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

a group of planets rushing towards the moon
and the sun. (34)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्येऽरण्यकाण्डे त्रयोविंश: WA: ॥ 23 ॥

Thus ends Canto Twenty-three in the Aranyakanda of the glorious Ramayana
of Valmiki, the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

Canto XXIV
Good omens to Rama. Rama prepares for the fight

आश्रमं प्रतियाते तु खरे खरपराक्रमे।
तानेवौत्पातिकान् राम: We भ्रात्रा ददर्शं ह॥१॥

When Khara of terrible prowess arrived
at the hermitage, Rama, they say, with his
brother perceived the same evil portents. (1)

प्रजानामहितान् दृष्टवा वाक्यं लक्ष्मणमब्रवीत्॥ २॥

Filled with great indignation to see those
most ominous portents, harmful to the people
(viz., the Raksasas), Sri Rama said to
Laksmana: (2)

इमान् पश्य महाबाहो सर्वभूतापहारिण:।
समुत्थितान् महोत्पातान् संहर्तुं सर्वराक्षसान्॥३॥

“Behold, O mighty-armed brother, these
evil portents of a major type, foreboding
universal destruction, that have appeared
for the destruction of all the ogres. (3)

अमी रुधिरधारास्तु विसृजन्ते खरस्वना:।
व्योम्नि मेघा निवर्तन्ते परुषा गर्दभारुणा:॥४॥

“Those clouds, greyish like a donkey,
which float in the heavens, are for their part
raining torrents of blood with a violent crash.

(4)
सधूमाश्च शरा: Ha मम युद्धाभिनन्दिता:।
रुक्मपृष्ठानि चापानि विचेष्टन्ते विचक्षण॥ ५॥

“In reference to the smoke arising, as
an evil portent all my arrows feel transported
with joy at the prospect of a conflict, while
my gold-plated bows too are bestirring, as it

were, in their endeavour to get strung of
themselves, O clever brother ! (5)

ag se कूजन्ति पक्षिणो वनचारिण:।
अग्रतो नोऽभयं Wa Geral जीवितस्य च॥६॥

“The type of wild birds which are crying
here proclaim that security stands ahead
for us and risk of life for the ogres. (6)

सम्प्रहारस्तु सुमहान् भविष्यति न संशय:।
अयमाख्याति A ae: स्फुरमाणो Ade: ell

संनिकर्षे तु न: We जयं शत्रो: पराजयम्।
सुप्रभं च प्रसन्नं च da aad fe लक्ष्यते॥८॥
“A very great conflict will take place :
there is no doubt about it. Throbbing again
and again, this right arm of mine foretells
victory for us and defeat for the enemy in
the immediate future. Moreover, your face
is undoubtedly perceived to be extremely
radiant and cheerful, O valiant brother !
(7-8)

उद्यतानां fe युद्धार्थं येषां vata लक्ष्मण।
निष्प्रभं वदनं तेषां भवत्यायु: परिक्षय:॥९॥
“Loss of life surely awaits those, O
Laksmana, whose face is bereft of lustre at
the time they are ready for a combat. (9)

आहतानां च भेरीणां Wars: क्रूरकर्मभि:॥ Qo il
“Here is the terrible roar of the thundering

ogres as also the crash of kettledrums
beaten by the ogres of cruel deeds. (10)
