950

पञ्चम:

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

सर्ग:

Canto V
Having presented himself before Sugriva on the Malaya mountain and apprised
him of his having brought the two scions of Raghu to Rsyamutka, Hanuman
narrates to him the story of the two princes. Pleased to hear this news

and approaching Sri Rama in the

form of a human being, Sugriva

offers his hand for being clasped by Sri Rama as a token of
friendship. Sri Rama responds by clasping it with his own and
hugs him to his bosom. Their friendship having been
solemnized in the presence of a fire, Sugriva narrates to
him his tale of woe and requests S11 Rama to get rid of

Vali, his hostile brother.

ऋष्यमूकात् तु हनुमान् गत्वा तं मलयं गिरिम्।
आचचक्षॆ dar वीरौ कपिराजाय राघवौ॥१॥
Springing to the celebrated Mount
Malaya (an offshoot of Rsyamuka) from the
Rsyamuka hill, Hanuman for his part forthwith
announced Sri Rama and Laksmana (the
two scions of Raghu) to Sugriva (the king of
monkeys). (1)

अयं WAT महाप्राज्ञ सम्प्राप्तो दृढविक्रम:।
लक्ष्मणेन सह भ्रात्रा रामोऽयं सत्यविक्रम:।॥ २॥

“Here is Rama duly arrived with
Laksmana, his younger brother, O highly
wise king of unbending prowess! The
aforesaid Rama is possessed of unfailing
prowess. (2)
इक्ष्वाकूणां Het जातो WAT दशरथात्मज:।
धर्मे निगदितश्चैव पितुर्निर्देशकारक:॥३॥

“Born in the line of Ikswakus, Sri Rama
is sprung from the loins of King DaSaratha,
and is well-known for his devotion to duty.

He has come to the forest in obedience to
the behest of his father. (3)

राजसूयाश्वमेधैश्च वह्निर्येनाभितर्पित: ।
दक्षिणाश्च तथोत्सृष्टा गाव: शतसहस्रश:॥४॥
Sri Rama is a son of the same King

Dasaratha by whom the god of fire was
fully propitiated by means of Rajasuya and

Sri Rama promises this

Aswamedha sacrifices and liberal fees were
given away as well as cows in hundreds of
thousands. (4)

तपसा सत्यवाक्येन age a पालिता।
स्त्रीहेतोस्तस्य पुत्रोऽयं रामोऽरण्यं समागत:॥५॥
“Nay, the earth was ruled by him by
recourse to truthful words and asceticism.
Because of the plighted word given by the
aforesaid king to his wife (Kaikeyi, Rama’s
stepmother) Sri Rama has come to (live in)
the forest. (5)
तस्यास्य वसतोऽरण्ये नियतस्य महात्मन:।
रावणेन हृता wat स त्वां शरणमागत:॥६॥

“The spouse of the same high-souled
Sri Rama was carried off by Ravana while
the former was leading a disciplined life in
the forest. He has accordingly sought you
as his refuge. (6)

भवता सख्यकामौ dt wet रामलक्ष्मणौ।
We चार्चयस्वैतौ पूजनीयतमावुभौ॥७॥

“Receiving and accepting as your own
the aforesaid two brothers, Sri Rama and
Laksmana, who seek friendship with you
and are most deserving of homage, pray,
offer (formal) worship to both these princes.”

(7)
श्रुत्वा हनूमतो वाक्यं सुग्रीवो वानराधिप:।
दर्शनीयतमो भूत्वा प्रीत्योवाच च राघवम्॥८॥
