* AYODHYAKANDA +

transgress your command. Realize the
potency of your charms, O lady of sluggish
disposition ! (26)

मणिमुक्तासुवर्णानि रत्नानि विविधानि च।
दद्याद् दशरथो राजा मा स्म तेषु AA: PAT: Ut २७॥
“King DaSaratha may offer you gems,
pearls and gold as well as precious stones
of various kinds; pray, do not set your mind
on them. (27)

at dt carat युद्धे att दशरथो ददौ।
dt स्मारय महाभागे सोऽर्थो न त्वा क्रमेदति॥ 22 1

“Remind the monarch, O highly blessed
lady, of those two momentous boons
which DaSaratha offered to you in the course
of the conflict between gods and demons.
Let not that cherished object in the shape
of Bharata’s installation as Prince Regent
and Rama’s exile slip out of your mind.

(28)

Gal तु a at दद्यात् स्वयमुत्थाप्य राघव:।
व्यवस्थाप्य महाराजं त्वमिमं GUST वरम्॥२९॥
“When, however, lifting you up
personally, DaSaratha, a scion of Raghu,
offers to you the promised boon, ask you
the following boon of the Emperor, binding
him with an oath : (29)

रामप्रव्रजनं Gg नव वर्षाणि w al

भरत: क्रियतां राजा पृथिव्यां पार्थिवर्षभ॥ ३०॥
“‘Let Rama be sent afar into exile for

fourteen years and let Bharata be installed

as the ruler of the globe, O jewel among
kings ! (30)

चतुर्दश fe वर्षाणि wa प्रव्राजिते वनम्।
BEX कृतमूलश्च We स्थास्यति A सुत:॥ ३१॥
“For, when Rama is sent into exile for
fourteen years, your son will have been
established and firmly rooted on the throne
of Ayodhya by the time Rama returns after
completing the term of his exile and will
continue as king for the rest of his life.
(31)

319

रामप्रव्राजनं चैव ea याचस्व तं वरम्।
Ud सेत्स्यन्ति पुत्रस्य सर्वार्थास्तव कामिनि॥ ३२॥
“Over and above the installation of
Bharata as Prince Regent, also positively
ask of the king the boon in the shape of
Rama’s banishment, O glorious lady! In
this way all the objects of your son, Bharata,
will be accomplished, O seeker of your
son’s kingship ! (32)

wa प्रव्राजितश्चैव रामोऽरामो भविष्यति।
भरतश्च गतामित्रस्तव राजा भविष्यति॥ ३३॥

“Nay, exiled thus, Rama will surely
become unpopular, while your son, Bharata,
will be a ruler without enemies. (33)

येन कालेन wags वनात् प्रत्यागमिष्यति।
अन्तर्बहिश्च पुत्रस्ते कृतमूलो भविष्यति॥ ३४॥
संगृहीतमनुष्यश्च Ue: साकमात्मवान्।
प्राप्तकालं नु मन्येऽहं राजानं वीतसाध्वसा॥ ३५॥

रामाभिषेकसंकल्पान्निगृह्य विनिवर्तय।
अनर्थमर्थरूपेण ग्राहिता सा ततस्तया॥ ३६॥

Bel प्रतीता कैकेयी मन्थरामिदमब्रवीत्।
सा fe वाक्येन कुब्जाया: किशोरीवोत्पथं गता it ३७॥
कैकेयी विस्मयं प्राप्य ut परमदर्शना।
Yat a नावजानामि श्रेष्ठे श्रेष्ठाभिधायिनि॥ ३८ ut
“And by the time Rama returns from
the forest, your son, Bharata, will be firmly
established with his relations and friends
internally (in the mind of his subjects) as
well as externally (in his dominion) and will
have won people to his side, a man of self-
control as he is. | regard this as an opportune
moment for carrying out your design. Binding
the monarch with an oath, fearlessly deter
him from his resolve of installing Rama as
Prince Regent.” Taught by the hunchback
to look upon evil as good and convinced
accordingly, the aforesaid Kaikeyi thereupon
felt delighted in mind. Having positively gone
astray like a young (inexperienced) girl,
thanks to the advice of the hunchback,
though possessed of great wisdom, and
experiencing great astonishment, Kaikeyi
