552

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA +

Canto LXXI

When Bharata reaches Ayodhya after crossing many streams and rivers and
passing through different territories and finds the city cheerless and
wearing a deserted look, he sets about brooding and speculating
as to what may be the reason for this and, speaking to the
charioteer about it, enters the palace
dejected and disconsolate

स Wena राजगृहादभिनिर्याय dar
ad: सुदामां द्युतिमान् संतीर्यावेक्ष्य at नदीम्॥ i
ह्रादिनीं दूरपारां च प्रत्यक्स्रोतस्तरङ्निणीम्।
शतद्रुमतरच्छीमान् नदीमिक्ष्वाकुनन्दन: ॥ २॥
Proceeding from Rajagrha in an easterly
direction and then surveying and crossing
the well-known river Sudama* as well as
the broad river Hradini, the powerful and
dignified Bharata, a glorious scion of Ikswaku,
crossed the river Satadru (the modern Sutle)),
whose stream takes a westward course.
(1-2)

tant नदीं drat प्राप्य चापरपर्वतान्।
शिलामाकुर्वतीं dicat आग्नेयं शल्यकर्षणम्॥ ३॥

Crossing another stream at Ailadhana,
a village of that name, and reaching the
territory of Aparaparvata and crossing a
river which petrified everything thrown into
it, he reached the tract lying to the south-
east and known by the name_ of
Salyakarsana (so-called because it abounded
in a herb possessing the virtue of extracting
a thorn etc.,). (3)

सत्यसंध: शुचिर्भूत्वा प्रेक्षमाण: शिलावहाम्।
अभ्यगात् स महाशैलान् at चैत्ररथं प्रति॥४॥
Gazing on the river Silavaha (so-called
because it carried away even rocks along
its swift stream) and getting purified (through

bathing in it), Bharata, who was true to his
promise, crossed the MahasSaila hills heading
towards the forest of Caitraratha. (4)

सरस्वतीं च गङ्गां च युग्मेन प्रतिपद्य च।
उत्तरान् वीरमत्स्यानां भारुण्डं प्राविशाद् वनम्॥ ५॥

Reaching the river Saraswati, flowing
towards the west and a branch of the
holy Ganga at their confluence, he passed
through the northern part of the Viramatsya
territory and entered the forest of Bharunda.

(5)
यमुनां प्राप्य संतीर्णो बलमाश्वासयत् तदा॥६॥

Having duly crossed the swift and
thundering river named Kulinga, hemmed in
by mountains, and reaching the Yamuna,
he allowed the detachment accompanying
him to rest for the time being. (6)

शीतीकृत्य तु गात्राणि क्लान्तानाश्वास्य वाजिन: |
तत्र स्नात्वा च पीत्वा च प्रायादादाय चोदकम्॥ ७॥

Refreshing the limbs of the horses by
bathing them and giving the fatigued animals
food and rest in the shade of trees, nay,
himself bathing and quenching his thirst,
and taking water for the journey ahead,
Bharata proceeded further. (7)

राजपुत्रो महारण्यमनभीक्ष्णोपसेवितम्।
भद्रो भद्रेण यानेन मारुत: खमिवात्यगात्॥८॥

* The messengers sent to call Bharata from his maternal grandfather’s rode to Rajagrha by a shorter
yet more difficult route through the forest region. Bharata, however, was accompanied by an army and
therefore drove through a broader yet longer route. Hence it took him a full week to reach Ayodhya as he
had to pass through places which the messengers did not come across in their journey.
