# YUDDHAKANDA #

कुम्भकर्णो महानादस्त्रासयन् सर्ववानरान्।
शूलं ससर्ज वै रोषादङ्गदे तु महाबल:॥४६॥

Making a great noise, and terrifying all
the monkeys, Kumbhakarna for his part
who was endowed with extraordinary might,
forthwith hurled his pike in rage at Angada.

(46)
तदापतन्तं बलवान् युद्धमार्गविशारद:।
लाघवान्मोक्षयामास बललवान् वानरर्षभ: ॥ ४७॥

The mighty Angada, a bull among the
monkeys, who was an adept in the technique
of warfare, dodged the approaching pike
with agility. (47)

उत्पत्य चैनं तरसा तलेनोरस्यताडयत्।
स तेनाभिहत: कोपात् प्रमुमोहाचलोपम:॥४८॥

Nay, jumping up, he gave the ogre a
blow with vehemence on the chest. Struck
by Angada with fury, the ogre, who resembled
a mountain (in size), fainted. (48)

स लब्धसंज्ञोऽतिबलो मुष्टिं संगृह्य राक्षस:।
अपहस्तेन चिक्षेप fads: स पपात ह॥४९॥

Doubling his fist, when he regained his
senses, the notorious ogre, who was endowed
with exceeding might, dealt a blow with the
back of his hand, and Angada fell down
unconscious: so the tradition goes. (49)

तस्मिन् प्लवगशार्दूले विसंज्ञे पतिते भुवि।
तच्छूलं समुपादाय सुग्रीवमभिदुद्रुवे॥५०॥

Seizing that pike, when the aforesaid
tiger among monkeys had _ dropped
unconscious on the ground, the ogre rushed
towards Sugriva. (50)
तमापतन्तं सम्प्रेक्ष्य कुम्भकर्णं महाबलम्।
उत्पपात det वीर: सुग्रीवो वानराधिप:॥ ५१॥

Perceiving the notorious Kumbhakarna,
who was endowed with extraordinary might,
approaching, the heroic Sugriva, the suzerain
lord of monkeys, bounded in the air. (51)

स पर्वताग्रमुत्क्षिप्य समाविध्य महाकपि:।
अभिदुद्राव वेगेन कुम्भकर्णं महाबलम्॥७५२॥

559

Lifting up a mountain peak and
flourishing it, that mighty monkey darted
towards Kumbhakarna, who was possessed
of great might. (52)

तमापतन्तं सम्प्रेक्ष्य कुम्भकर्ण: प्लवंगमम्।
तस्थौ विवृत्तसर्वाङ्गो वानरेन्द्रस्य सम्मुख:॥ ५३॥
Perceiving that monkey advancing,

Kumbhakarna stood facing the lord of
monkeys, with all his limbs braced. (53)

कपिशोणितदिग्धाङ्गं भक्षयन्तं महाकपीन्।

कुम्भकर्णं स्थितं दृष्टवा सुग्रीवो वाक्यमब्रवीत्॥ ५४॥
Seeing Kumbhakarna ४७00 stood

devouring the colossal monkeys and whose

limbs were smeared with their blood, Sugriva
spoke to him as follows : (54)

पातिताश्च त्वया वीरा: कृतं HA सुदुष्करम्।
भक्षितानि च सैन्यानि wed ते परमं यश:॥ ५५ ॥

“A feat exceedingly difficult to perform
has been accomplished by you, in that
champions have been struck down,
battalions devoured and the highest renown
attained by you. (55)

त्यज ae वानरानीकं प्राकृतै: किं करिष्यसि।
सहस्वैकं ford A पर्वतस्यास्य राक्षस॥ ५६॥

“Let alone that army of monkeys. What
are you to do with the rank and file? Stand
only the exclusive impact of this mountain
going to be hurled by me, O ogre!” (56)

qq वाक्यं हरिराजस्य सत्त्वधैर्यसमन्वितम्।
श्रुत्वा राक्षसशार्दूल: कुम्भकर्णोऽब्रवीद् TA: I ५७॥
Hearing the aforesaid challenge of
Sugriva (the ruler of monkeys), which was full
of courage and fortitude, Kumbhakarna,
a tiger among ogres, made the following
reply: (57)

प्रजापतेस्तु पौत्रस्त्वं तथैवर्क्षरज:सुत:।
धृतिपौरुषसम्पन्नस्तस्माद् गर्जसि ATT UG

“You are a grandson of Brahma (the
lord of created beings) and even so son of
Rksaraja (sprung from the yawn of Brahma)
