* ARANYAKANDA «

trees with their topmost branches set into
motion said (to Sita) as it were: “Don’t be
afraid !” (34)

नलिन्यो ध्वस्तकमलास्त्रस्तमीनजलेचरा:।
सखीमिव गतोत्साहां शोचन्तीव स्म मैथिलीम्॥ Be ॥

With their faded lotuses and frightened
fishes and other aquatic creatures, the lotus-
ponds, as it were, felt sorry for the princess
of Mithila as for a dispirited friend. (35)

समन्तादभिसम्पत्य सिंहव्याघ्रमृगद्विजा: |
अन्वधावंस्तदा रोषात् सीताच्छायानुगामिन: ॥ ३६ ॥

Collecting from all sides, lions, tigers,
as well as other beasts and birds angrily
rushed behind on that occasion following
the shadow of Sita. (36)

जलप्रपातास्त्रमुखा: शृङ्गैरुच्छितबाहुभि:।
सीतायां ह्रियमाणायां विक्रोशन्तीव पर्वता:॥ ३७॥
While Sita was being carried away by
Ravana, mountains with their faces bathed
in tears in the form of cataracts and with
their arms uplifted in the form of peaks,
screamed, as it were. (37)

ह्रियमाणां तु वैदेहीं दृष्टवा दीनो दिवाकर:।
प्रविध्वस्तप्रभ: श्रीमानासीत् पाण्डुरमण्डल:॥ ३८ ॥

Seeing Sita, a princess of the Videha
territory, being borne away by Ravana, the
glorious sun itself felt wretched with its
splendour totally eclipsed and its orb rendered
pale. (38)
नास्ति धर्म: कुत: सत्यं नार्जवं नानृशंसता।
यत्र रामस्य वैदेहीं सीतां aft रावण:॥ ३९॥

“Righteousness is extinct, how then
could truth prevail? Guilelessness is no more,
nor is there kindness, now that Ravana is
carrying away Sita, a princess of the Videha
kingdom, and the consort of Sri Rama !” (39)

859

sta भूतानि सर्वाणि गणश: पर्यदेवयन्।
वित्रस्तका दीनमुखा रुरुदुर्मृगपोतका:॥४०॥

So did all living beings lament in
multitudes. Even fawns shed tears with
dejected looks, greatly alarmed. (40)

उद्बीक्ष्योद्वीक्ष्य नयनैर्भयादिव विलक्षणै:।
सुप्रवेपितगात्राश्च बभूवुर्वनदेवता: ॥ ४१॥
विक्रोशान्तीं दृढं सीतां Fat दु:खं AMT गताम्।
तां तु लक्ष्मण रामेति क्रोशन्तीं मधुरस्वराम्॥४२॥
अवेक्षमाणां बहुशो वैदेहीं धरणीतलम्।
स तामाकुलकेशान्तां विप्रमृष्टविशेषकाम्।
जहारात्मविनाशाय दशग्रीवो मनस्विनीम्॥४३॥

Seeing Sita fallen in great distress as
aforesaid and uttering a loud cry, and looking
at her again and again with eyes shorn of
their lustre, the deities presiding over the forest
found their limbs seized with a violent tremor
through fear of Ravana. To his own destruction
Ravana (the ten-headed monster), however,
carried away the aforesaid princess of the
Videha territory, that strong-minded lady, who
was crying in sweet accents : “Laksmana, O
Rama !!” and repeatedly looking towards the
earth’s surface, whose hair had _ got
dishevelled and whose auspicious mark on
the forehead had effaced. (41—43)

ततस्तु सा चारुदती शुचिस्मिता

विनाकृता बन्धुजनेन मैथिली।
अपश्यती राघवलक्ष्मणावुभौ

विवर्णवक्त्रा भयभारपीडिता॥ ४४॥

Bereft of her own kin and failing to
perceive both Sri Rama (a scion of Raghu)
and Laksmana, the aforesaid princess of
Mithila for her part, who had beautiful teeth
and was distinguished by a bright smile,
was oppressed by the weight of fear and
her face grew pale. (44)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्येऽरण्यकाण्डे द्विपञ्चाश: सर्ग: ॥ ५२॥

Thus ends Canto Fifty-two in the Aranyakanda of the glorious Ramayana of Valmiki,
the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

