664

blazing with glory in the garb of an ascetic,
Bharata, for his part, who was seated
closeby at that time and was exceedingly
powertul, folded his hands in the same way
as the mighty Indra submissively would
before Brahma, the lord of created beings.
(30)
किमेष वाक्यं भरतोऽद्य waa
प्रणम्य सत्कृत्य च साधु वक्ष्यति।
इतीव तस्यार्यजनस्य तत्त्वतो
बभूव कौतूहलमुत्तमं तदा॥ ३१॥

A great curiosity really arose at that
moment in the mind of those worthies
assembled there as to what submission
yonder Bharata would now politely make

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

after bowing low and paying his homage to
Sri Rama, a scion of Raghu, that day. (31)

स राघव: सत्यधृतिश्च लक्ष्मणो

महानुभावो भरतश्च धार्मिक:।
qa: सुहृद्धिश्च विरेजिरेऽध्वरे

यथा सदस्यै: सहितास्त्रयोऽग्नय: 11.32 ॥

Nay, surrounded by their near and
dear ones, the celebrated Sri Rama, a scion
of Raghu, who was firmly devoted to
truthfulness, and the noble-minded Laksmana
and the pious Bharata shone brightly on the
sacrificial ground like the three sacrificial
fires (known by the names of Garhapatya,
Ahavaniya and Daksina) accompanied by
the superintending priests. (32)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्येऽयोध्याकाण्डे चतुरधिकरशततम: A: ॥ १०४॥

Thus ends Canto One hundred and four in the Ayodhyakanda of the glorious
Ramayana of Valmiki, the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

पञ्चाधिकशततम: सर्ग:
Canto CV

Bharata implores Sri Rama to oblige him by accepting the throne of Ayodhya
being offered by him to Sri Rama with the concurrence of Kaikeyi, even
though bestowed on him by their deceased father. Consoling
Bharata, who held himself responsible for Sri Rama’s exile
to the forest and was languishing with sorrow on that
score, Sri Rama, however, tries to pacify him in
various ways and urges him to shoulder the
burden of rulership

aa: पुरुषसिंहानां gaat a: equ:
शोचतामेव रजनी दु:खेन व्यत्यवर्तत॥१॥
The night subsequently passed away
in sorrow in the case of the said tigers
among men, accompanied by those near
and dear ones, while the former were grieving.

(1)
रजन्यां सुप्रभातायां भ्रातरस्ते सुहृदवृता:।
मन्दाकिन्यां हुतं जप्यं कृत्वा राममुपागमन्॥ २॥

Having offered oblations into the sacred
fire and muttered their prayers on the bank
of the Mandakini, when the night had been
vividly relieved by dawn, the aforesaid
brothers, accompanied by their near and
dear ones, sought the presence of Sri Rama.

(2)
तूष्णीं ते समुपासीना न कश्चित् किंचिदब्रवीत्।
भरतस्तु सुहृन्मध्ये we वचनमब्रवीत्॥३॥

They all sat down mute, none spoke
