1116

seated with Sri Rama on a plateau of Mount
Prasravana, all the three troop-leaders
submitted to him as follows : (10)

विचिता: ude: सर्वे वनानि गहनानि च।
निम्नगा: सागरान्ताश्च सर्वे जनपदाश्च ये॥११॥
“All the mountains and dense forests,
also rivers falling into the sea and all the
countrysides which were met with by us
have been explored. (11)
गुहाश्च विचिता: wat याश्च ते परिकोर्तिता:।
विचिताश्च महागुल्मा लताविततसंतता:॥१२॥
“Nay, all the caves which were specified
by you have also been ransacked. Also
large bowers roofed with canopies of climbers
have been scoured. (12)

Tey च देशेषु दुर्गेषु विषमेषु च।
सत्त्वान्यतिप्रमाणानि विचितानि हतानि a
ये चैव गहना देशा विचितास्ते Ga: पुन:॥ १३॥

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

“Animals of huge proportions have been
sought for (under the suspicion that they
may be Ravana) in regions which were
difficult to penetrate into, in places difficult of
access and in uneven stretches of land,
and killed. Nay, those areas which were
difficult to penetrate into were explored again
and again. (13)

उदारसत्त्वाभिजनो हनूमान्
a मैथिलीं areata वानरेन्द्र।
fest तु यामेव गता तु सीता
तामास्थितो वायुसुतो हनूमान्॥ १४॥

“The celebrated Hanuman (alone), who
is endowed with a noble character and is
nobly born, will be able to find Sita (a princess
of Mithila), O lord of monkeys ! Hanuman,
son of the wind-god, has luckily enough
resorted to the same quarter to which Sita
has been taken away.” (14)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये किष्किन्धाकाण्डे सप्तचत्वारिंश: सर्ग: ॥ ४७॥

Thus ends Canto Forty-seven in the Kiskindhakanda of the glorious Ramayana of
Valmiki, the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

Canto XLVI

Accompanied by Angada and others, Hanuman seeks for Sita in the dense
forests and caves of the Vindhyan range. Making their way into a forest
whose trees had ceased to flower and bear fruits because of a curse
pronounced by Sage Kandu, overwhelmed with grief occasioned by
the loss of his son, the monkeys, who felt exhausted due to exertion,
behold a demon. As the latter swoops upon the monkeys with a
raised fist, Angada makes short work of him thinking him to
be Ravana. Feeling exhausted through peregrination in
the forest, the monkeys seek the foot of a tree

सह ताराङ्गदाभ्यां तु सहसा हनुमान् कपि:।
सुग्रीवेण यथोद्दिष्टं गन्तुं देशं प्रचक्रमे॥१॥
Alongwith Tara and Angada the monkey,
Hanuman, for his part, proceeded all at
once to march towards the region duly

assigned to him by Surgiva. (1)
स तुं दूरमुपागम्य सर्वैस्तै: कपिसत्तमै:।
ततो विचित्य विन्ध्यस्य गुहाश्च गहनानि च॥ २॥
Travelling a long distance in the
company of all those monkey chiefs and
