838

Taking Sugriva by the hand on hearing
the aforesaid command of Sri Rama, Bharata
of unfailing prowess penetrated deep into
the palace. (46)

ततस्तैलप्रदीपांश्च पर्यङ्कास्तरणानि च।
गृहीत्वा विविशु: fad शत्रुघ्नेन प्रचोदिता:॥ ४७॥
Taking oil lamps and coverlets for the
couches as enjoined by Satrughna, servants
thereupon speedily entered the palace. (47)

उवाच च महातेजा: सुग्रीवं राघवानुज:।
अभिषेकाय UH दूतानाज्ञापय WT set

Nay, Bharata (a younger brother of Sri
Rama), who was endowed with extraordinary
energy, said to Sugriva, “Pray, dispatch
couriers to bring sea-water for the
consecration of Sri Rama on the throne of
Ayodhya, my lord.” (48)
सौवर्णान् वानरेन्द्राणां चतुर्णां चतुरो घटान्।
ददौ fag स सुग्रीव: सर्वरत्नविभूषितान्॥४९॥
तथा प्रत्यूषसमये चतुर्णां सागराम्भसाम्।
पूर्णैर्घटै: प्रतीक्षध्वं तथा Hed वानरा:॥५०॥

The celebrated Sugriva quickly gave
over to four monkey-chiefs four golden pails
encrusted with all kinds of precious stones,
and said, “Set your programme in such a
way, O monkeys, that you await my orders
tomorrow at dawn with your pails filled with
water from the four seas, respectively.”

(49-50)
Watt महात्मानो वानरा वारणोपमा:।
उत्पेतुर्गगनं शीघ्रं West sa VT UU

Commanded thus, the colossal
monkeys, who looked like elephants, swiftly
sprang in the air like swift-flying eagles.

(51)
जाम्बवांश्च हनूमांश्च वेगदर्शी च वानर:।
ऋषभश्चैव कलशाञ्जलपूर्णानथानयन्॥ & 2 ॥
पूर्वात् समुद्रात् HAM जलपूर्णमथानयत्॥५३॥
सुषेण: सत्त्वसम्पन्न: सर्वरत्नविभूषितम्।
ea दक्षिणात्तूर्णं समुद्राज्जलमानयत्॥५४॥

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA +

Tea: पश्चिमात् तोयमाजहार महार्णवात्॥५५॥
रत्नकुम्भेन महता शीतं मारुतविक्रम:।
उत्तराच्च जलं vitt गरुडानिलविक्रम:॥५६॥
आजहार स धर्मात्मानिल: सर्वगुणान्वित:।
ततस्तैर्वानरश्रेष्ठैरानीतं प्रेक्ष्य तज्जलम्॥५७॥
अभिषेकाय रामस्य wae: सचिवै: सह।
पुरोहिताय श्रेष्ठाय सुहृद्भ्यश्च न्यवेदयत्॥५८॥

Jambavan, the king of bears, and
Hanuman as also the monkey Gavaya (who
exhibited great impetuosity) as well as
Rsabha presently brought pails full of sea
water. Another five hundred monkeys brought
water from five hundred different rivers in the
various parts of the country in different pails.
Jambavan, who led an excellent army, who
was richly endowed with courage, forthwith
brought a pail, encrusted with all sorts of
jewels, and full of water from the eastern
sea, now known as the Bay of Bengal. Taking
a golden pail, painted with red sandal-paste
and camphor, Rsabha speedily brought water
from the southern sea, north of Lanka.
Gavaya, who vied with the wind-god in
prowess, brought in a large pail made of
precious stones cold water from the western
ocean, now called the Arabian Sea. And the
celebrated Hanuman, son of the wind-god,
who vied with Garuda, the king of birds, and
the wind-god in prowess, nay, whose mind
was set on virtue and who was endowed
with all excellences, brought water with all
speed from the northern sea (now known as
the Arctic Ocean). Perceiving that water
brought by the aforesaid jewels among the
monkeys, Satrughna, with his ministers,
placed it at the disposal of Sage Vasistha,
the arch-priest of Ikswaku’s race, and other
friends (such as the ministers) for the
consecration of Sri Rama on the throne of
Ayodhya. (52—58)

aa: स Waal वृद्धो वसिष्ठो ब्राह्मणै: सह।
TH रत्नमये पीठे ससीतं संन्यवेशयत्॥५९॥
