* AYODHYAKANDA +

in them have fallen down. The lotuses in the
ponds have got dried up and the fishes and
water-fowls in them have perished. (7)

जलजानि च पुष्पाणि माल्यानि स्थलजानि च।
नातिभान्त्यल्पगन्धीनि फलानि च यथापुरम्॥ ८॥

“Nay, giving forth very little fragrance,
aquatic flowers and those growing on land
do not look very charming and fruits too are
not so luscious as before. (8)

अत्रोद्यानानि शून्यानि प्रलीनविहगानि च।
न चाभिरामानारामान् पश्यामि मनुजर्षभ॥९॥

“Desolate are the gardens in the city
and the birds in them have disappeared.
Nor do | find the parks so pleasing, O jewel
among men ! (9)

प्रविशन्तमयोध्यायां न कश्चिदभिनन्दति।
नरा राममपश्यन्तो नि:श्चसन्ति Ade: gol

“None greeted me as | entered Ayodhya.
Not perceiving Sri Rama, men sighed again
and again. (10)
देव राजरथं gear विना राममिहागतम्।
दूरादश्रुमुख: सर्वो राजमार्गे गतो जन:॥११॥

“Seeing from a distance the royal chariot
arrived in Ayodhya without Sri Rama, O
lord, all the people present on the main road
had their faces drenched with tears. (11)

हरम्यैर्विमानै:३ प्रासादैरवेक्ष्य रथमागतम्।
ह्राहाकारकृता नार्यो रामादर्शनकर्शिता:॥१२॥

“Perceiving from their mansions, seven-
storeyed buildings and palaces the chariot
returned from the forest, the ladies, who
were feeling distressed due to their not
being able to see Sri Rama, broke into
lamentation. (12)

आयतैर्विमलैर्नेत्रैरश्रुवेगपरिप्लुतै: ।
अन्योन्यमभिवीक्षन्तेऽव्यक्तमार्ततरा: स्रिय:॥ १३॥

“The ladies, who were sore afflicted
due to the exile of Sri Rama, mutely gazed
on one another with their large eyes flooded
with an upsurge of tears, their collyrium
washed thereby. (13)

513

नामित्राणां न मित्राणामुदासीनजनस्य a
अहमार्ततया कंचिद् विशेषं नोपलक्षये॥१४॥
“| do not perceive any difference in
point of affliction between his enemies, friends
and neutrals. (14)

a दीननागतुरंगमा।
आर्तस्त्ररपरिं।लाना विनि:श्वसितनि:स्वना ।॥ १५ ॥

निरानन्दा महाराज रामप्रव्राजनातुरा।
कौसल्या Urea अयोध्या प्रतिभाति मे॥ १६॥

“With its cheerless men and women
and wretched elephants and horses, nay,
looking blasted through plaintive cries and
full of noise in the shape of sighs, O great
monarch, Ayodhya appears to me joyless
and distressed through the banishment of
Sri Rama, like Empress Kausalya, bereft of
her son.” (15-16)

सूतस्य वचनं श्रुत्वा वाचा परमदीनया।
बाष्पोपहतया सूतमिदं वचनमब्रवीत्॥१७॥

Hearing the submission of Sumantra,
DaSaratha made the following reply to the
charioteer in a most piteous tone, faltering
through tears: (17)

कैकेय्या विनियुक्तेन पापाभिजनभावया।
Ta न मन्त्रकुशलैर्वृद्धै: सह समर्थितम्॥१८॥

“No deliberation was made by me on the
point of sending Rama into exile with the elders,
clever in giving counsel, dictated as | was by
Kaikeyi of sinful birth and intention. (18)

न सुहृद्भिर्न चामात्यैर्मन्त्रयित्वा सनैगमै:।
मयायमर्थ: सम्मोहात् स्त्रीहेतो: ASAT कृत:॥ १९॥
“Without taking counsel with my well-
wishers and ministers, including those well-
versed in the Vedas, was this step
precipitately taken by me through excessive
infatuation in order to please my wife.
(19)

भवितव्यतया नूनमिदं वा व्यसनं महत्।
कुलस्यास्य विनाशाय प्राप्तं सूत यदृच्छ्या॥ २०॥
“Or, this great calamity has surely taken
us by surprise by the will of Providence for
