410

“The reason for which that ruler of
ogres has sallied forth agitated has also
been ascertained by me on the spot after
going out, O princess of Mithila । (7)
न wet सौप्तिकं ad रामस्य विदितात्मन:।
वधश्च पुरुषव्याघ्रे तस्मिन् नैवोपपद्यते॥८॥

“It is not at all possible to kill Sri Rama,
a knower of his Self, while he is asleep.
Nay, even death is not possible in the case
of that tiger among men. (8)

न aad वानरा ed शक्या: पादपयोधिन:।
सुरा देवर्षभेणेव रामेण fe सुरक्षिता:॥९॥
“Fighting, as they do, with trees, the
monkeys too are not capable of being killed
in that wise inasmuch as they stand fully

protected by Sri Rama even as gods are by
Indra, the foremost of gods. (9)

दीर्घवृत्तभुज: श्रीमान् महोरस्क: प्रतापवान्।
rat संनहनोपेतो धर्मात्मा भुवि विश्रुत:॥१०॥
विक्रान्तो रक्षिता नित्यमात्मनश्च परस्य च।

लक्ष्मणेन सह UAT Heit नयशास्त्रवित्॥ ११॥
हन्ता परबलौघानामचिन्त्यबलपौरुष: |

न हतो राघव: star सीते शत्रुनिबर्हण:॥ १२॥

“Endowed with long rounded arms, a
broad chest and a muscular body, the
glorious and triumphant Sri Rama, an archer
well-known in the world, the exterminator
of hostile armies and the destroyer of his
foes—who is full of fire and valour, whose
mind is set on virtue, who, with his younger
brother, Laksmana, is ever capable of
defending himself as well as others, is well-
born and well-versed in the science of politics
and is possessed of inconceivable might
and manliness, has not been killed, O Sita!

(10—12)
अयुक्तबुद्धिकृत्येन सर्वभूतविरोधिना।
एवं प्रयुक्ता रौद्रेण माया मायाविना त्वयि॥ १३॥

“In this way a conjuring trick was played
on you by the cruel Ravana, who is skilled

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA +

in employing conjuring tricks, who is perverse
in thought and action and is antagonistic to
all created beings. (13)
शोकस्ते विगत: सर्वकल्याणं त्वामुपस्थितम्।
qa cat भजते लक्ष्मी: frat a भवति sop १४॥
“Your grief is now gone once for all,
nay, every form of goodluck awaits you.
Prosperity will surely attend on you and
something agreeable is going to happen to
you, hark! (14)

उत्तीर्य सागरं राम: सह वानरसेनया।
संनिविष्ट: समुद्रस्य तीरमासाद्य दक्षिणम्॥ १५॥

“Having crossed the sea alongwith
the army of monkeys and reached its
southern shore, Sri Rama is settled in camp
there. (15)

Gel मे परिपूर्णार्थ: काकुत्स्थ: सहलक्ष्मण: |
सहितै: सागरान्तस्थैर्बलैस्तिष्ठति रक्षित:॥१६॥

“Sri Rama, a scion of Kakutstha, who
stands fully accomplished of purpose, has
been seen by me with Laksmana. He stands
protected by troops gathered together and
stationed on the seashore. (16)

अनेन प्रेषिता ये च राक्षसा लघुविक्रमा:।
राघवस्तीर्णं saa प्रवृत्तिस्तैरिहाहृता॥ १७॥

“Nay, by the swift-footed ogres, who
were dispatched by Ravana, this very
intelligence has been brought here that Sri
Rama, a scion of Raghu, has crossed the
sea. (17)

स तां श्रुत्वा विशालाक्षि waft राक्षसाधिप: |
एष मन्त्रयते ad: सचिवै: सह रावण:॥१८॥

“Hearing the aforesaid news, O large-
eyed lady, yonder Ravana, the suzerain
lord of ogres, is busy holding consultation
with all his ministers.” (18)

इति ब्रुवाणा सरमा राक्षसी सीतया सह।
सर्वोद्योगेन सैन्यानां शब्दं शुश्राव भैरवम्॥१९॥

While talking thus with Sita, the ogress
