* ARANYAKANDA «

ogres attack us, O sinless one ! You are
the greatest asylum for us poor ascetics,
who are seeking an asylum, assailed as we
are by the ogres. Although we are able to
kill the night-wanderers by virtue of our
austerities, we do not desire to waste the
power accumulated by us for a long time. O
Raghava, austerities are beset with many
obstacles and are always difficult to be
performed. (10—14)

तेन शापं न मुञ्जामो भक्ष्यमाणाश्च Tera: |
तदरद्यमानान् रक्षोभिर्दण्डकारण्यवासिभि: ।। १५ ॥
Ta नस्त्वं सह wat त्वन्नाथा fe ad वने।
मया चैतद्वच: श्रुत्वा कात्स्न्येन परिपालनम्॥ १६॥
RAT दण्डकारण्ये Wd जनकात्मजे।
संश्रुत्य च न शक्ष्यामि जीवमान: प्रतिश्रवम्॥ १७॥
मुनीनामन्यथा ad सत्यमिष्टं fe मे सदा।
अप्यहं जीवितं जह्यां cat वा सीते सलक्ष्मणाम्॥ १८ ॥
न तु प्रतिज्ञां संश्रुत्य ब्राह्मणेभ्यो विशेषत:।
तदवश्यं मया कार्यमृषीणां परिपालनम्॥१९॥
अनुक्तेनापि वैदेहि प्रतिज्ञाय कथं पुन:।
मम स्नेहाच्च सौहार्दादिदमुक्तं त्वया वच:॥ २०॥
“Therefore, though being eaten up by
the ogres, we do not pronounce a curse.
Hence, alongwith your brother, you protect
us, Oppressed as we are by ogres dwelling
in the Dandaka forest. For, you alone are
our master in the forest.’ And having heard
this speech, | promised complete protection
to the sages living in the Dandaka forest, O

737

daughter of Janaka ! And having made a
promise, | dare not, as long as | am alive,
falsify the word given to the sages. For,
truth is always dear to me. | can even give
up my life for you, together with Laksmana,
but not my plighted word, given especially
to the Brahmanas. Therefore, O Vaidehi, |
am compelled to protect the sages, even if
| had not given the word, much more so
when a vow has been taken. You have
uttered these words due to your love and
goodwill for me. (15—20)

परितुष्टोऽस्म्यहं सीते न ह्यनिष्टोऽनुशास्यते।
सदृशं चानुरूपं च कुलस्य तव शोभने।
सधर्मचारिणी A त्वं प्राणेभ्योऽपि गरीयसी॥ २१॥

“O Sita, | am fully pleased. For, a
person is never advised unless he is dear.
And, it is becoming and proper not only for
you but for your family too, O beautiful
lady ! You are dearer to me even than life,
being my companion in Dharma.” (21)

इत्येवमुक्त्वा वचनं महात्मा

सीतां प्रियां मैथिलराजपुत्रीम्।
रामो धनुष्मान् सह लक्ष्मणेन

जगाम रम्याणि तपोवनानि॥ २२॥

Having addressed these words to his
beloved Sita, the princess of Mithila, the
high-souled Rama, the wielder of a bow,
together with Laksmana, proceeded to the
charming groves inhabited by ascetics. (22)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्येऽरण्यकाण्डे दशम: सर्ग: Il 20 ॥

Thus ends Canto Ten in the Aranyakanda of the glorious Ramayana of Valmiki,
the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

