# YUDDHAKANDA #

musicians), Yaksas (a class of demigods),
ogres and serpents was sought by me, but
not at the hands of mortals. (7)
इक्ष्वाकुकुलजातेन अनरण्येन यत् WT ८ il
उत्पत्स्यति हि मद्वंशपुरुषो राक्षसाधम।
यस्त्वां सपुत्रं सामात्यं सबलं साश्वसारथिम्॥ ९ ॥
निहनिष्यति संग्रामे wat कुलाधम दुर्मते।
शप्तोऽहं वेदवत्या च यथा सा धर्षिता पुरा॥१०॥
“| conclude this Rama, an offspring of
DaSaratha, to be that mortal of whom mention
was made by King Anaranya, born in the
race of Ikswaku, by whom | was formerly
cursed in the following words: ‘In my house
will undoubtedly be born a man, who will
exterminate on the field of battle you with
your sons, ministers, army, horses and
charioteers, O evil-minded bane of your
race, the vilest of ogres! | was further
cursed by one, Vedavati, as she was violated
by me of old. (8—10)

Sa सीता महाभागा जाता जनकनन्दिनी।
उमा नन्दीश्वरश्चापि रम्भा वरुणकन्यका॥११॥
यथोक्तास्तन्मया प्राप्तं न मिथ्या ऋषिभाषितम्।
Wier समागम्य यत्नं कर्तुमिहार्हथ॥१२॥
राक्षसाश्चापि तिष्ठन्तु चर्यागोपुरमूर्धसु।
a चाप्रतिमगाम्भीर्यो देवदानवदर्पहा॥ १३॥
ब्रह्मशापाभिभूतस्तु कुम्भकर्णो विबोध्यताम्।
समरे जितमात्मानं प्रहस्तं च निषूदितम्॥१४॥
ज्ञात्वा रक्षोबलं भीममादिदेश महाबल:।
द्वारेषु यत्न: क्रियतां प्राकारश्चाधिरुह्यताम्॥ १५॥
निद्रावशसमाविष्ट: कुम्भकर्णो विबोध्यताम्।
we स्वपिति निश्चिन्त: कामोपहतचेतन:॥ १६॥
“The same highly blessed lady has been
born as this daughter of Janaka. The result,

523

which Uma (the divine Consort of Lord Siva),
Nandiswara (a monkey-faced attendant of
Lord Siva), Rambha (a celestial nymph) and
Pufjikasthala (another celebrated nymph,
daughter of Varuna) predicted, has also been
attained by me.* The prediction made by
those endowed with prophetic vision can
never be untrue. Knowing this very fact, you
ought to strive to conquer the enemy. And
let ogres too take up their position on the
main roads as well as on the top of gates.
Nay, let Kumbhakarna for his part, who is
unparalleled in profundity and is capable of
crushing the vanity of gods and demons alike
and who remains overwhelmed with slumber
due to the execration of Brahma, be fully
roused.” Knowing himself to have been
conquered in combat, and Prahasta to have
been killed, Ravana, who was endowed with
extraordinary might, commanded the army
of ogres as follows: “Remaining stationed
at the gates, let an attempt be made to
guard them; and let the defensive walls
be scaled (and a watch be kept at the
enemy). Also, Kumbhakarna be fully roused.
His understanding vitiated by lust, he is
slumbering at ease, free from all cares.

(11—16)

नव सप्त दशाष्टौ च मासान् स्वपिति Ware: |
Wa कृत्वा प्रसुप्तोऽयमितस्तु नवमेऽहनि॥ १७॥

“The ogre sleeps for nine, ten or eight
months. Having deliberated with me, he for
his part fell fast asleep nine months ago
from now. (17)

तं तु बोधयत fad कुम्भकर्णं महाबलम्।
a fe संख्ये महाबाहु: ककुदं सर्वरक्षसाम्।
वानरान् राजपुत्रौ च क्षिप्रमेव हनिष्यति॥ १८॥

* Frightened on the occasion of Ravana’s lifting up the Kailasa mountain, Goddess Uma pronounced
the imprecation that a woman would be the ultimate cause of his death. Nandiswara, who was laughed at
by Ravana because of his monkey-like features, cursed him saying that those akin to him in features and
prowess would bring about the destruction of his race. Nalakubera (son of Kubera) on behalf of Rambha
and Brahma on behalf of Pufjikasthala uttered the curse that Ravana would meet his death if he ravished

any woman.
