652

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA +

त्र्यशीतितम: at:
Canto LXXXIll

Sri Rama faints away on being told that Sita has been done to death.
After consoling him, Laksmana prepares for action

राघवश्चापि विपुलं तं राक्षसवनौकसाम्।
er संग्रामनिर्घोषं जाम्बवन्तमुवाच ह॥१॥
Nay, hearing that great tumult following
the encounter between the ogres and the
monkeys (lit., dwellers in the woods), Sri
Rama (a scion of Raghu) too spoke as
follows to Jambavan: (1)

सौम्य नूनं हनुमता कृतं कर्म सुदुष्करम्।
श्रूयते च यथा भीम: सुमहानायुधस्वन:॥२॥
“From the way in which a terrible and
exceptionally loud rattling of arms is heard,
it appears that a feat exceedingly difficult
(to perform for others) has undoubtedly
been performed by Hanuman, O dear one!
(2)
क्षिप्रमृक्षपते तस्य कपिश्रेष्ठस्य युध्यत:॥ ३॥

“Therefore, accompanied by your own
army (of bears), go and instantly lend your
aid, O lord of bears, to that prince of
monkeys, who is fighting.” (3)

ऋक्षराजस्तथेत्युक्त्वा स्वेनानीकेन संव्रत:।
आगच्छत्पश्चिमं द्वारं हनूमान् यत्र वानर:॥४॥

Saying “Amen”, and surrounded by his
own army, Jambavan (the lord of bears)
sought the western gate, where the monkey,
Hanuman, was. (4)
अथायान्ते हनूमन्तं ददर्शर्क्षषतिस्तदा।
art: pad: श्वसद्भिरभिसंवृतम्॥५॥

The lord of bears forthwith saw
Hanuman returning at that time accompanied
by monkeys, who had given fight and were
sighing (on account of grief caused by the
destruction of ‘Sita’). (5)

aul पथि हत्रूमाश्च तदृक्षललमुद्यतम् |
नीलमेघनिभं भीमं संनिवार्य न्यवर्तत॥६॥
Beholding that redoubtable army of
bears, resembling a dark cloud, on their
way, ready for an encounter, and effectively
intercepting it, Hanuman retreated with them
all. (6)
a तेन We सैन्येन संनिकर्षं महायशा:।
शीघ्रमागम्य रामाय ¢:Radt वाक्यमब्रवीत्॥७॥
Speedily seeking the presence of Sri
Rama with that army, the highly illustrious

Hanuman sorrowfully submitted to him as
follows: (7)

समरे युध्यमानानामस्माकं प्रेक्षतां च स:।
जघान रुदतीं सीतामिन्द्रजिद्रावणात्मज:॥ ८॥

“While we, who were carrying on a
fight on the battlefield, stood looking on,
that offspring of Ravana, Indrajit, killed ‘Sita’,
even though she continued to weep. (8)
उद्भ्रान्तचित्तस्तां दृष्टा विषण्णोऽहमरिंदम।
qe भवतो gd विज्ञापयितुमागत:॥९॥

Bewildered in mind and dejected on
seeing her, O tamer of enemies, | have
come back to break the aforesaid news to
you.” (9)

तस्य तद् वचनं श्रुत्वा राघव: शोकमूच्छित: |
निपपात तदा भूमौ छिन्नमूल sa द्रुम:॥ १०॥
Rendered insensible through grief on
hearing the aforesaid submission of
Hanuman, Sri Rama (a scion of Raghu)
forthwith fell to the ground like a tree whose
roots have been severed. (10)
तं भूमौ देवसंकाशं पतितं qva राघवम्।
aad: समुत्पत्य सर्वत: कपिसत्तमा:॥११॥
