870

qa धर्मनित्यस्य धर्मपत्नी दृढव्रता।
त्वया स्प्रष्टुं न MMS राक्षसाधम पापिना॥ १९॥

“|, the lawful wife, firm of vows, of him
who is constantly devoted to virtue, cannot
likewise be laid hands upon by you, a sinner
as you are, O vile ogre! (19)
क्रीडन्ती राजहंसेन पद्मषण्डेषु नित्यश:।
हंसी सा तृणमध्यस्थं कथं द्रक्ष्येत मद्गुकम्॥ २०॥

“How can a female swan, well-known
for its rare virtues, and ever sporting with a
male swan among tufts of lotuses, cast its

wistful eyes on a diver bird standing in the
midst of reeds? (20)

इदं शरीरं नि:संज्ञं बन्ध वा घातयस्व वा।

नेदं शरीरं रक्ष्यं A जीवितं वापि राक्षस॥ २१॥
“Put this body, which is insentient by

itself, in chains or cause it to be put to death,

as you will. This body is not to be preserved
by me, not even life, O ogre ! (21)
न तु शक्यमपक्रोशं पृथिव्यां दातुमात्मन:।
Waa तु वैदेही क्रोधात् सुपरुषं वच:॥ २२॥
रावणं जानकी at पुनर्नोवाच किंचन।
सीताया वचनं श्रुत्वा परुषं रोमहर्षणम्॥ २३॥
प्रत्युवाच तत: सीतां भयसंदर्शनं वच:।
sq मैथिलि मद्बाक्यं मासान् द्वादश भामिनि॥ २४॥
“It is not possible for me to give a bad
name to myself on earth.” Having spoken
very harsh words as aforesaid in anger to
Ravana, Sita (a princess of the Videha
territory), daughter to King Janaka, for her
part, said nothing further on that occasion.
Hearing the harsh words of Sita, which made
his hair stand on their end, Ravana now made
the following threatening reply to Sita : “Hear
my warning, O Princess of Mithila: | allow
you an interval of twelve months, O comely
and youthful lady ! (22—24)

कालेनानेन नाभ्येषि यदि मां चारुहासिनि।
ततस्त्वां प्रातराशार्थं सूदाश्छेत्स्यन्ति लेशश:॥ २५ ॥

“If you do not yield voluntarily to me
within this period, O lady of smiles with

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

love, my cooks will then cut you into small
pieces for my breakfast.” (25)
इत्युक्त्वा परुषं वाक्यं रावण: YAMA: |
राक्षसीश्च तत: Gee इदं वचनमब्रवीत्॥ २६॥
Having given this stern warning to Sita,
Ravana, who made his enemies cry by his
cruel actions, then angrily addressed the
following words to the ogresses guarding
Sita : (26)
शीघ्रमेव fe राक्षस्यो विरूपा घोरदर्शना:।
दर्पमस्यापनेष्यन्तु मांसशोणितभोजना: ॥ २७॥
“Take away without delay the vanity of
this lady, O misshapen ogresses of terrible
aspect, subsisting on flesh and blood !” (27)

वचनादेव तास्तस्य सुघोरा घोरदर्शना:।
कृतप्राञ्जलयो भूत्वा मैथिलीं पर्यवारयन्॥ २८॥

Joining their palms at his very command,
those ferocious ogresses of grim visage
surrounded the princess of Mithila. (28)

स ता: प्रोवाच राजासौ रावणो घोरदर्शना:।
प्रचल्य चरणोत्कर्षैर्दारयन्निव मेदिनीम्॥ २९॥

Taking a few strides, the celebrated
King Ravana, referred to above, spoke to
those ogresses of terrifying looks as follows,
rending the earth with his very footsteps, as
it were : (29)
अशोकवनिकामध्ये मैथिली नीयतामिति।
तत्रेयं रक्ष्यतां गूढं युष्माभि: परिवारिता॥३०॥

“Let the princess of Mithila be taken to
the heart of the Asoka grove. Let her remain

surrounded by you and guarded in a
clandestine way. (30)

तत्रैनां तर्जनैर्घोरे: पुन: सान्त्वैश्च मैथिलीम्।

आनयध्वं वशं सर्वा वन्यां गजवधूमिव॥ ३१॥
“Win over, all of you, this princess of

Mithila there by recourse to fearful threats

and again with conciliatory words as one
would tame a wild she-elephant.” (31)

gta प्रतिसमादिष्टा राक्षस्यो रावणेन ता:।
अशोकवनिकां जग्मुर्मैथिलीं परिगृह्य तु॥ ३२॥
