334

ate भर्तु: frat कार्यं लोकस्य भरतस्य च।
नृशंसे पापसंकल्पे क्षुद्रे दुष्कृतकारिणि॥६०॥

“Like a woman whose mind has been
perverted by some evil spirit, you do not
feel ashamed to speak in such an outspoken
way to me. | did not know before that
seemliness of behaviour has altogether taken
leave of you. | really find your conduct at
the present moment contrary as it were to
what it was when you were young. From
what circumstance for that matter has fear
cropped up in you, who actually seek of me
such a boon, viz., to see Bharata seated on
the throne and Rama (a scion of Raghu)
settled in the forest. Therefore, have done
with this hostile attitude as well with this
groundless apprehension towards Rama if
a kindly act is sought to be done by you to
your husband i.e., myself and the world at
large as well as to Bharata, O cruel, petty-
minded woman of sinful resolve and wicked
deed ! (57—60)
fe नु दु:खमलीकं वा मयि रामे च पश्यसि।

न कथंचिदरृते Ware भरतो राज्यमावसेत्॥६१॥
रामादपि हि तं मन्ये धर्मतो बलवत्तरम्।
कथं द्रक्ष्यामि रामस्य at गच्छेति भाषिते॥६२॥
मुखवर्णं विवर्णं तु यथैवेन्दुमुपप्लुतम्।
तां तु मे सुकृतां बुद्धिं ade: सह निश्चिताम्॥ ६३॥
कथं द्रक्ष्याम्यपाव्रत्तां परैरिव हतां चमूम्।
किं मां वक्ष्यन्ति राजानो नानादिग्भ्य: समागता: ॥ ६४॥
बालो बतायमैक्ष्वाकश्चिरं राज्यमकारयत्।
यदा fe बहवो वृद्धा गुणवन्तो बहुश्रुता:।॥ ६५॥
परिप्रक्ष्यन्ति काकुत्स्थं वक्ष्यामीह कथं तदा।
कैकेय्या क्लिश्यमानेन Ua: प्रव्राजितो मया॥ ६६॥

“What grievance can you possibly have
against Rama and myself or what offence
do you find have we done against you?
Without Rama, Bharata will in no case dwell
in the kingdom of Ayodhya, much less rule
over it; for | consider Bharata stronger in
virtue even than Rama. How when the words
‘Proceed to the forest!’ have been uttered
by me, shall | behold even once the pallor of

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

Rama’s face resembling in everyway the
eclipsed moon? How shall | bear to see my
aforesaid scheme of installing Sri Rama as
Prince Regent, which was not only well-
designed but finalized in consultation with
my well-wishers, foiled like an army destroyed
by enemies? The kings assembled from
various quarters will say of me, ‘Alas, how
did this foolish scion of Ikswaku rule for
such a long time?’ When many qualified and
highly learned elderly men actually inquire
of me about Rama (a scion of Kakutstha),
how shall | then tell them that the boy has
been exiled by me, hard pressed as | was
by Kaikeyi (yourself)? (61—66)
ae सत्यं ब्रवीम्येतत् dead भविष्यति।

fee at वक्ष्यति कौसल्या waa वनमास्थिते॥ ६७॥
किं चैनां प्रतिवक्ष्यामि कृत्वा विप्रियमीदृशम्।

यदा यदा च कौसल्या दासीव च सखीव AN ६८ ॥
भार्यावद् भगिनीवच्च मातृवच्चोपतिष्ठति।

सततं प्रियकामा मे प्रियपुत्रा प्रियंवदा॥६९॥
न मया सत्कृता देवी सत्कारार्हा कृते तव।

इदानीं तत्तपति At यन्मया सुकृतं waa voll

अपथ्यव्यञ्जनोपेतं भुक्तमन्नमिवातुरम्।
विप्रकारं च रामस्य सम्प्रयाणं वनस्य च॥७१॥
सुमित्रा प्रेक्ष्य a भीता कथं मे विश्वसिष्यति।

कृपणं बत वैदेही श्रोष्यति द्वयमप्रियम्॥७२॥
मां च पञ्चत्वमापन्नं रामं च वनमाश्रितम्।
वैदेही Sat A प्राणान् शोचन्ती क्षपयिष्यति॥ ७३॥
én हिमवत: urd किंनरेणेव feat
नहि wang gear yaad महावने॥७४॥
सा नूनं विधवा wet सपुत्रा कारयिष्यसि॥ ७५॥
“If | plead in support of my action that
this has been done to vindicate the cause
of truth (inasmuch as | did so only to redeem
the promise made to you), my latest
announcement made in public to the effect
that Rama would be installed as Prince
Regent the following day would be falsified.
What will Kausalya say to me when Rama
(a scion of Raghu) proceeds to the forest?
