+ UTTARAKANDA +

himself ready to depart, having spent seven
nights there. (19)

आमन्त्य तु महात्मानं रामं सत्यपराक्रमम्।

wd लक्ष्मणं चैव महारथमुपारुहत्॥२०॥
Taking leave of the noble Sri Rama of

true valour, and also Bharata and Laksmana,

1061

he ascended the marvellous chariot.

दूरं पद्भ्यामनुगतो लक्ष्मणेन महात्मना।
भरतेन च शत्रुघ्नो जगामाशु पुरीं तदा॥ २१॥

Followed by the noble Laksmana and
Bharata on foot, for a long distance, Satrughna
sped in haste to the city, Madhupurl. (21)

(20)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये उत्तरकाण्डे द्विसप्ततितम: सर्ग: ॥ 92 ॥

Thus ends Canto Seventy-two in the Uttarakanda of the glorious Ramayana of Valmiki,
the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

त्रिसप्ततितम: et:
Canto LXXIII

A Brahmana arrives at the palace-gate, carrying the dead
body of his son, and laments blaming the king
for the death of the child

प्रस्थाप्य तु स शात्रुघ्नं भ्रातृभ्यां सह Waa: |
wae सुखी wt धर्मेण परिपालयन्॥१॥

Having despatched Satrughna, the
descendant of Raghu, Sri Rama, together
with the two brothers lived happily and
contented, ruling rightfully over his kingdom.

(1)
तत: कतिपयाह:सु व्रृद्धो जानपदो द्विज:।
qt बालमुपादाय राजद्वारमुपागमत्॥२॥

Then after a few days an old Brahmana
citizen of Ayodhya, carrying his dead son’s
body, appeared at the royal gate. (2)
eel बहुविधा ara: स्नेहदु:खसमन्वित:।
असकृत् पुत्रपुत्रेति वाक्यमेतदुवाच ह॥३॥
किं नु मे दुष्कृतं कर्म पुरा देहान्तरे कृतम्।
ae पुत्रमेकं तु पश्यामि निधनं गतम्॥४॥

Filled with affection and sorrow, and crying,
pronounced these words (exclamations)
repeatedly ‘O son ! O son ! What evil deed
have | committed in my former birth that |
should see my only son dead. (3-4)
अप्राप्तयौवनॆ et पञ्चवर्षसहस्रकम्।

अकाले कालमापन्नं मम दु:खाय पुत्रक॥५॥

‘Oson, you have met with death untimely,
having not reached adolescence and being a
child of merely five thousand days (less than
fourteen years) which leads to my sorrow.(5)

अल्पैरहोभिर्निधनं गमिष्यामि न aera:
अहं च Wet da तव शोकेन पुत्रक॥६॥

‘O son, I, alongwith your mother, shall
meet with death in a few days, there is no
doubt about it. (6)
न स्मराम्यनृतं Oh न च feat स्मराम्यहम्।
सर्वेषां प्राणिनां ad न स्मरामि कदाचन॥७॥

‘| do not remember having spoken
untruth, nor, even ever having committed
sinful acts with regard to all beings. (7)

केनाद्य दुष्कृतेनायं बाल Wa ममात्मज:।
अकृत्वा पितृकार्याणि गतो वैवस्वतक्षयम्॥८॥

‘Due to what evil deed, my own son,
although a child, has gone away to the
abode of Yama, the son of Vivasvan, without
having performed the paternal rites (our last
rites). (8)
नेदृशं geqd A श्रुतं वा घोरदर्शनम्।
मृत्युरप्राप्तकालानां रामस्य विषये ह्ययम्॥९॥
