360

Spoken to as aforesaid, Sugriva, the
Suzerain lord of monkeys, the foremost of
monkeys, who was endowed with extra-
ordinary strength and undepressed in spirit,
forthwith made the following faultless reply to
Suka, the spy of the ogre, Ravana: (22)

न मेऽसि fat न तथानुकम्प्यो
न चोपकर्तासि न a प्रियोऽसि।
रामस्य सहानुबन्ध्र-
स्ततोऽसि area aes वध्य:॥ २३॥
“(Address Ravana on my behalf as
follows:) You are neither my friend nor worthy
of commiseration, nor are you my benefactor,
nor beloved of me. You are (on the other
hand) an enemy of Sri Rama and, therefore,
merit death with your kinsfolk as Vali did, O

अरिश्च

ogre deserving of death! (23)
सज्ञातिवर्गं रजनीचरेश।

wa: करिष्यामि समेत्य भस्म॥ २४॥
“Turning up with a large army and all
others, | shall make short work of you with
your sons and brothers including all your
relations, O lord of ogres, and reduce the
entire city of Lanka to ashes. (24)

न Wem wan राघवस्य

हतोऽसि रामेण सहानुजस्त्वम्॥ २५॥

“You shall not be spared by Sri Rama, a
scion of Raghu, even though protected by
gods including Indra (their ruler), O insensate
Ravana ! You shall be slain by Sri Rama with
your younger brother, Kumbhakarna, even if
you have gone out of sight by virtue of a
conjuring trick or risen to the heavens (lit.,
the sun’s orbit) or, likewise, penetrated deep
into Patala, the nethermost subterranean

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA +

region, or taken shelter at the lotus feet of
Lord Siva, the Lord of Kailasa. (25)

तस्य ते fay लोकेषु न पिशाचं न राक्षसम्।
त्रातारं नानुपश्यामि न गन्धर्वं न चासुरम्॥ २६॥

“| find no fiend, nor ogre, nor Gandharva,
nor demon capable of protecting you as
such in all the three worlds, viz., earth,
heaven and the intermediate region. (26)
अवधीस्त्वं Wag गृध्रराजं जटायुषम्।

किं नु ते रामसांनिध्ये सकाशे लक्ष्मणस्य च।
SM सीता विशालाक्षी यां त्वं Wel न बुध्यसे॥ २७॥

“If you are powerful, why did you kill
Jatayu, the king of vultures, who, though
long-lived, had been overtaken by old age?
Again, why on earth was the large-eyed
Sita not borne away by you in the presence
of Sri Rama and Laksmana? And having
seized hold of Sita, why don’t you foresee
the impending calamity? (27)
न बुध्यसे रघुश्रेष्ठं यस्ते प्राणान् हरिष्यति॥ 2

“Evidently you are not aware of SriRama
(the foremost of the Raghus) being endowed
with extraordinary might, high-souled and
difficult to overcome even for gods—Sri Rama,
who will (Surely) take your life.” (28)

ततोऽब्रवीद् वालिसुतोऽप्यङ्गदो हरिसत्तम:।
wa gat महाराज चारक: प्रतिभाति मे॥ २९॥
Thereupon Angada too, son of Vali and
the foremost of monkeys, said, “This fellow,
O great monarch, is no envoy; he appears
to be a spy. (29)
तुलितं fe act सर्वमनेन aa तिष्ठता।
गृह्यतां मागमल्लङ्कामेतद्धि मम रोचते॥३०॥
“Your entire strength has surely been
gauged by him (even) while standing here.
Let him, therefore, be arrested, let him not

return to Lanka: this indeed finds favour
with me.” (30)

ततो WaT समादिष्टा: समुत्पत्य वलीमुखा:।
जगृहुश्च बबन्धुश्च विलपन्तमनाथवत्॥३१॥
