+ UTTARAKANDA +

show to me, give the same attention to that
lady, she indeed is worthy of respect from
you all in particular.” (22)
मुहुर्मुहुश्च वैदेहीं परिदाय महायशा:।

स्वमाश्रमं Rega: पुनरायान्महातपा:॥ २३॥

1009

Thus after handing over Sita to the
female ascetics again and again, the Rsi, of
great fame, and performer of great penances,
Valmiki, surrounded by his disciples returned
again to his hermitage. (23)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये उत्तरकाण्डे एकोनपञ्चाश: सर्ग: ॥ ४९ ॥

Thus ends Canto Forty-nine in the Uttarakanda of the glorious Ramayana of Valmiki,
the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

पञ्चाश: सर्ग:
Canto L
Dialogue between Laksmana and Sumantra

दृष्टवा तु मैथिलीं सीतामाश्रमे सम्प्रवेशिताम्।
संतापमगमद् घोरं लक्ष्मणो दीनचेतन:॥१॥

Laksmana agitated in mind seeing Sita
being ushered into the hermitage fell into
deep sorrow. (1)

अब्रवीच्च महातेजा: सुमन्त्रं मन्त्रसारथिम्।
सीतासंतापजं दु:खं पश्य रामस्य सारथे॥ २॥

The mighty Laksmana also spoke thus
to the charioteer, who drove with skill: “O
Charioteer, consider the great grief of Sri Rama
resulting from the separation of Sita. (2)

ततो gut fe नु राघवस्य भविष्यति।
पत्नीं शुद्धसमाचारां विसृज्य जनकात्मजाम्॥ ३॥
॥ ‘What greater grief could there be for
Sri Rama (the scion of Raghu) than that
caused by banishing his own wife, the
daughter of Janaka, so pure of conduct. (3)
व्यक्तं tae मन्ये राघवस्य विनाभवम्।
वैदेह्या सारथे fet दैवं fe दुरतिक्रमम्॥४॥
“This separation of Rama from Sita is

truly the effect of Destiny. Fate is indeed
inexorable at all times. (4)

यो fe देवान् सगन्धर्वानसुरान् सह राक्षसै:।

निहन्याद् राघव: क्रुद्ध: स दैवं पर्युपासते॥७५॥
“Is it not surprising that Rama (the

scion of Raghu), who in anger could extirpate

the gods alongwith the Gandharvas, as also
the Asuras with the Raksasas, should submit
to fate. (5)

पुरा wa: पितुर्वाक्याद् दण्डके विजने वने।
उषित्वा नव वर्षाणि पञ्च चैव महावने॥६॥

“Having passed fourteen years in the
dense forest of Dandaka, formerly ordered
by the father (Sri Rama was in misery). (6)

ततो gaat ya: सीताया विप्रवासनम्।
पौराणां वचनं श्रुत्वा are प्रतिभाति Anew

“It seems to me, it pained him more to
banish Sita once again, hearing the cruel
words of the citizens. (7)

को नु धर्माश्रय: सूत कर्मण्यस्मिन् यशोहरे।
मैथिलीं समनुप्राप्तत पौरैर्हीनार्थवादिभि:॥८॥
“What religious merit has accrued to
him from this ignoble act to Sita on account
of the citizens speaking ill of her (Sita).” (8)

Ud वाचो बहुविधा: श्रुत्वा लक्ष्मणभाषिता:।
सुमन्त्र: श्रद्धया प्राज्ञो वाक्यमेतदुवाच ह॥९॥

Hearing such words of different kinds,
spoken by Laksmana, Sumantra, the wise
one, on his part spoke thus: (9)
न संतापस्त्वया कार्य: सौमित्रे मैथिलीं प्रति।
दृष्टमेतत् पुरा fad: पितुस्ते लक्ष्मणाग्रत:॥ १०॥
