Scaring away the birds, nay, pulverizing
the trees with his breast and crushing very
many deer and other wild animals under his
feet, the brave and wise Hanuman, who
was endowed with extraordinary might, trod
at ease, in the meantime, like a full-grown
lion on the swards possessing the hue of a
cat’s-eye gem and stretching evenly like a
sheet of green water. (3-4)

नीललोहितमाञ्जिष्ठपद्मवर्णै: सितासितै: ।
स्वभावसिद्धैर्विमलैर्धातुभि: समलंकृतम्॥ ५॥
कामरूपिभिराविष्टमभीक्ष्णं सपरिच्छदै: |
यक्षकिंनरगन्धर्वैर्देवकल्पै: सपन्नगै: ।। ६ ॥।
a तस्य गिरिवर्यस्य at नागवरायुते।
तिष्ठन् कपिवरस्तत्र ec AM इवाबभौ॥७॥

Stopping short at the well-known foot
of that jewel among mountains—which was
crowded with lordly elephants, was rendered
most charming by spotless natural minerals
of purple, rosy, ruby-like and white and
black hues and was constantly visited by
Yaksas (a class of demigods ruled over by
Kubera, the god of riches), Kinnaras (a
class of semi-divine beings credited with a
human figure and the head of a horse or
with a horse’s body and a human head),
Gandharvas (celestial musicians), and Nagas
(serpent-demons believed to have a human
face with serpent-like lower extremities), who
very nearly resembled the gods, were capable
of changing their form at will and were
accompanied by their retinue—Hanuman,
the foremost of monkeys, looked like a
large-bodied elephant standing in a pool.

(5—7)

a Gala wea vata स्वयम्भुवे।
भूतेभ्यश्चाञ्जलिं Heat चकार WT मतिम्॥ ८॥
Joining his palms by way of salutation
to the sun-god, the mighty Indra (the ruler of
gods), the wind-god (his own procreant),
Brahma (the self-born) and the genii (the
attendants of Lord Siva), he made up his
mind to depart. (8)

« VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

ततो fe aqe wet दक्षिणो दक्षिणां दिशम्॥ ९॥

Joining his palms towards the east in
salutation to the wind-god, his procreant,
the proficient Hanuman then actually grew
in size in order to proceed to the southern
quarter. (9)

प्लवगप्रवरैर्दृष्टऽ प्लवने कृतनिश्चय:।

वव्रृधे रामवृद्ध्यर्थं WAR sa पर्वसु॥१०॥
Gazed on with wonder and love by

foremost of the monkeys and having resolved

to take a leap, he swelled in size further for

the purpose of Sri Rama as the sea swells

on the full-moon days. (10)

निष्प्रमाणशरीर: सँल्लिलङ्घयिषुरर्णवम्।
बाहुभ्यां पीडयामास चरणाभ्यां च पर्वतम्॥ Le Ul

Wishing to leap across the sea, his
body having grown immensely, Hanuman
pressed the mountain with his hands and
feet. (11)

a चचालाचलश्चाशु मुहूर्तं कपिपीडित:।
तरूणां पुष्पिताग्राणां Aa पुष्पमशातयत्॥१२॥
Pressed by Hanuman, the aforesaid
mountain forthwith shook awhile and caused
all the flowers of the trees standing on it to
fall, the ends of their branches being laden
with blossom. (12)

तेन पादपमुक्तेन पुष्पौघेण सुगन्धिना।
सर्वत: संवृत: शैलो बभौ पुष्पमयो यथा॥१३॥

Covered on all sides with that fragrant
shower of flowers, discharged by the trees,
the mountain appeared as though it were all
flowers. (13)

तेन चोत्तमवीर्येण पीड्यमान: स Uda:
सलिलं सम्प्रसुस्राव मदमत्त ga द्विप:॥१४॥
Nay, while being pressed by Hanuman,
who was endowed with surpassing might,
the said mountain spurted water profusely
even as an elephant in rut would exude
ichor in abundance. (14)
