510

Urged thus by the Emperor, the said
charioteer replied to the king in a faltering
voice choked with tears as follows: (13)

अब्रवीन्मे महाराज धर्ममेवानुपालयन्।
अञ्जलिं राघव: peat शिरसाभिप्रणम्य च॥ १४॥
सूत Aged तस्य तातस्य विदितात्मन:।
शिरसा वन्दनीयस्य वन्द्यौ पादौ महात्मन:॥ १५॥

“Folding his hands and offering respectful
greetings with bent head and thus strictly
following the prescribed course of conduct,
O great king, Sri Rama, a scion of Raghu,
said to me, ‘The feet of that high-souled
father of mine, who has realized the Self
and deserves to be greeted with bent head,
should be saluted in my name, O charioteer !

(14-15)

सर्वमन्त:पुरं ara सूत Aged त्वया।
आरोग्यमविशेषेण यथार्हमभिवादनम्॥ १६॥
“*The whole gynaeceum, O charioteer,
should be asked without distinction on my
behalf of their welfare by you and should be
offered greetings in the order of their rank
(seniority). (16)
माता च मम कौसल्या कुशलं चाभिवादनम्।
अप्रमादं च amen ब्रूयाश्चैनामिदं वच:॥१७॥
“‘And my mother, Kausalya, should be
told of my welfare and offered greetings on
my behalf and assured of my punctiliousness
with regard to my sacred obligations. Again
the following message should be delivered
to her: (17)

धर्मनित्या यथाकालमग्न्यगारपरा भव।

देवि देवस्य uel च देववत् परिपालय॥ १८॥

“‘Remain constantly devoted 10
righteousness and attend the fire-sanctuary
at the proper time (the time of fire-worship).
And tend, O godly lady, the feet of your
spouse as those of a deity. (18)

अभिमानं च मानं च त्यक्त्वा वर्तस्व ATT |
अनुराजानमार्यां च कैकेयीमम्ब कारय॥१९॥

“Shaking off pride of descent and self-

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

esteem born of seniority, treat my other
mothers on an equal footing. And, O mother,
treat Kaikeyi, to whom the king is so devoted,
as superior to you. (19)

कुमारे भरते व्रत्तिर्वर्तितव्या च राजवत्।
अप्यज्येष्ठा हि राजानो राजधर्ममनुस्मर॥ २०॥

“*Treatment should be accorded to
Prince Bharata as to His Majesty. Even
though junior in age, kings deserve to be
honoured. Pray, bear in mind your duty
towards a king. (20)

We: कुशलं वाच्यो वाच्यो aga च।
सर्वास्वेव यथान्यायं ght वर्तस्व ATU VII

“‘Bharata too should be told of my
welfare and admonished in the following
words on my behalf: Pray, behave justly
towards all your mothers. (21)

वक्तव्यश्च महाबाहुरिक्ष्वाकुकुलनन्दन: |
पितरं यौवराज्यस्थो राज्यस्थमनुपालय॥ २२॥

“The mighty-armed Bharata, the delight
of Ikswaku’s race, should be further exhorted
as follows : Even when installed in the office
of Prince Regent, please serve your father,
who still occupies the throne of Ayodhya.

(22)

अतिक्रान्तवया राजा मा स्मैनं व्यपरोरुध:।
कुमारराज्ये जीवस्व तस्यैवाज्ञाप्रवर्तनात्॥ २३॥

“*The king has gone beyond the age of
rulership: do not dethrone him on this score.
Therefore, by keeping up his authority above
all else, maintain yourself by the office of
Prince Regent.’ (23)

अब्रवीच्चापि मां भूयो भृशमश्रूणि वर्तयन्।
मातेव AA माता A द्रष्टव्या UAT evi

“‘Nay, shedding tears again and again,
Sri Rama further asked me to tell Bharata :
My mother (Kausalya), who is excessively
fond of myself (her son), should be looked
upon as your own mother.’ (24)

gad मां महाबाहुर्ब्रवन्नेव महायशा:।
TH राजीवपत्राक्षो भृशमश्रूण्यवर्तयत्॥ २५॥
