736

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

Canto X

Rama expresses his firmness in keeping the vow of killing
the ogres for the protection of sages

वाक्यमेतत् तु वैदेह्या व्याहृतं भर्तृभक्तया।
श्रुत्वा धर्मे स्थितो राम: प्रत्युवाचाथ जानकीम्॥ १॥

Having heard these words uttered by
Vaidehi, devoted to her husband, Rama,
firmly adhering to Dharma, then, replied to
Janaki : (1)
हितमुक्तं त्वया देवि स्निग्धया get aa: |
कुलं व्यपदिशन्त्या च धर्मज्ञे जनकात्मजे॥ २॥

“O daughter of Janaka, knower of
Dharma, O queen, you being affectionate,
have given a wholesome advice, which is
becoming of you, referring as it does to the
duty of my race. (2)

fe नु वक्ष्याम्यहं देवि त्वयैवोक्कतमिदं aa: |
क्षत्रियैर्धार्यते चापो नार्तशब्दो भवेदिति॥ ३॥
“O queen, what shall | say? You yourself
have stated that a bow is wielded by Ksatriyas
so that there should be no cry of the
sufferers. (3)
a चार्ता दण्डकारण्ये मुनय: संशितव्रता:।
मां सीते स्वयमागम्य शरण्यं शरणं गता:॥४॥
“In the Dandaka forest those suffering
sages, with austere vows, themselves came
to me, O Sita, and resorted to me, knowing
me capable to protect them. (4)
वसन्त: कालकालेषु वने मूलफलाशना:।
न लभन्ते Ge भीरु राक्षसै: क्रूरकर्मभि:॥ ५॥
“Always dwelling in the forest, eating
roots and fruits, they are not getting
happiness, O timid one, due to ogres of
cruel activities. (5)
भक्ष्यन्ते राक्षसैर्भीमैर्नरमांसोपजीविभि: |
at भक्ष्यमाणा मुनयो दण्डकारण्यवासिन:॥ ६॥
अस्मानभ्यवपद्येति मामूचुद्विजसत्तमा: |
मया तु वचनं श्रुत्वा तेषामेवं मुखाच्च्युतम्॥७॥

pa वचनशुश्रूषां वाक्यमेतदुदाहृतम्।
प्रसीदन्तु भवन्तो A Ska तु ममातुला॥८॥
यदीदृशैरहं विप्रैरुपस्थेयैरुपस्थित: |

fe करोमीति च मया व्याहृतं द्विजसंनिधौ॥ ९॥

“They are being eaten up by the terrible
ogres living on human flesh. Being devoured
by these, the sages dwelling in the Dandaka
forest, the best among the Brahmanas, asked
me to show favour to them. I, for my part,
having heard the words that had escaped
from their mouth and having shown the
desire to listen to their speech, made the
following statement: ‘Be you gracious to
me. Indeed it is a great shame for me that
| have been approached by such Brahmanas
as are worthy of being approached.’ | then
asked the Brahmanas as to what | should
do. (6—9)
सर्वैरव समागम्य वागियं समुदाहृता।
राक्षसैर्दण्डकारण्ये बहुभि: AAA: Il १०॥
अर्दिता: स्म yet Wa भवान् नस्तत्र रक्षतु।
होमकाले तु सम्प्राप्ते पर्वकालेषु चानघ॥११॥
धर्षयन्ति सुदुर्धर्षां राक्षसा: पिशिताशना:।
राक्षसैर्धर्षितानां च तापसानां तपस्विनाम्॥१२॥
गतिं मृगयमाणानां wary A: परमा ata: |
कामं तप:प्रभावेण शक्ता Sed निशाचरान्॥१३॥
चिरार्जितं न चेच्छामस्तप: खण्डयितुं वयम्।
बहुविघ्नं तपो fet दुश्चरं चैव Wea evil

“Coming together, all of them made the
following submission : ‘We have been greatly
tormented in the Dandaka forest by many
ogres assuming different forms according
to their will. Rama, you protect us from
them. When the time comes for pouring

oblations into the sacred fire and also on
holy occasions, the flesh-eating, unassailable
