628

description and hosts of harmless tigers,
leopards and bears, and crowded with

numerous birds, this mountain looks
charming. (7)
अङ्कोलैर्भव्यतिनिशैर्बिल्वतिन्दुकवेणुभि: wen
काश्मर्यारिष्टवरणैर्मधूकैस्तिलकैरपि ।

बदर्यामलकैर्नीपैर्वेत्रधन्वनबीजकै: ॥ ९ ॥

Wea: फलोपेतैश्छायावद्धिर्मनोरमै:।
`एवमादिभिराकीर्ण: श्रियं पुष्यत्ययं Fre: i १०॥
“Abounding in umbrageous trees laden
with flowers and fruits and pleasing to the mind,
the foremost of which are mangoes, rose-
apples and Asanas, Lodhras, Priyalas
(commonly called Payals), bread-fruit trees,
Dhavas, Ankolas, Bhavyas and Tinisas,
Bilvas (Bel trees), Tindukas and bamboos,
Kasmaris, margosas and Varanas, Madhukas
and Tilakas, jujube trees and trees bearing
emblic myrobalans, Kadambas, cane,
Dhanvanas and pomegranates, called Bijaka
because they abound in seeds, this mountain
thereby is enhancing its own beauty. (8—10)

शैलप्रस्थेषु रम्येषु पश्येमान् कामहर्षणान्।
किंनरान् FEN भद्रे रममाणान् मनस्विन:।॥ ११॥

“Behold these Kinnaras rejoicing at will
and sporting in couples on the level grounds
on the tops of this mountain with their minds
focussed on each other. (11)

शाखावसक्तान् खड्गांश्च प्रवराण्यम्बराणि च।
usa विद्याधरस्त्रीणां क्रीडोद्देशान् मनोरमान्॥ १२॥

“Also behold suspended on the boughs
of trees the swords of the Kinnaras as also
the excellent garments of Vidyadhara women
as well as their sporting-grounds, so pleasing
to the mind. (12)

जलप्रपातैरुद्धेदैर्निष्पन्दैश्च क्वचित् क्वचित्।
स्रवद्भिर्भात्ययं शैल: स्रवन्मद sa द्विप:॥१३॥

“With its cascades and springs flowing
here and there this mountain looks like an
elephant with ichor exuding from its temples.

(13)

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

गुहासमीरणो गन्धान् नानापुष्पभवान् बहून्।
घ्राणतर्पणमभ्येत्य कं WNT NII

“What man will the wind issuing from
the caves, catching on its way numerous
odours emanating from various flowers, not
enrapture, regaling his olfactory sense? (14)

ade शरदोऽनेकास्त्वया सार्धमनिन्दिते।
लक्ष्मणेन च वत्स्यामि न मां शोक: प्रधर्षति॥ १५ ॥

“If | dwell in this forest for many autumns
with you and Laksmana, O irreproachable
lady, grief will not overpower me. (15)

बहुपुष्पफले रम्ये नानाद्विजगणायुते।
विचित्रशिखरे ह्यस्मिन् रतवानस्मि भामिनि॥ १६॥

“lam really enamoured of this enjoyable
mountain containing abundant flowers and
fruits, nay, inhabited by flocks of birds of
every description and adorned with charming
peaks, O proud lady ! (16)

अनेन वनवासेन मम प्राप्तं फलद्वयम्।
पितुश्चानृण्यता धर्मे भरतस्य प्रियं तथा॥१७॥

“A twofold gain has been secured by
me through this exile of mine, viz., that |
have got square with my father, who was
devoted to piety in the form of truthfulness,
and the pleasure of Bharata has been
accomplished. (17)

वैदेहि wea कच्चिच्चित्रकूटे war सह।
पश्यन्ती विविधान् भावान् मनोवाक्कायसम्मतान्॥ १८ ॥

“Do you feel happy in Citrakuta with
me, beholding various objects agreeable to
your mind, speech and body? (18)

इदमेवामृतं प्राहू राज्ञि राजर्षय: परे।
वनवासं भवार्थाय wea a प्रपितामहा:॥१९॥

“My forefathers, Manu and _ others,
who were all foremost royal sages, O my
queen, have pronounced such disciplined
residence in the forest as nectar-like and as
conducive to cessation from rebirth after
death. (19)
age बहुलैर्वर्णैर्नीलपीतसितारुणै: ॥ २० ॥
