# YUDDHAKANDA #

by their maid-servants, their hair dishevelled,
stricken as they were with grief like cows
that had lost their calf. (1-2)

उत्तरेण विनिष्क्रम्य द्वारेण ae waa:
प्रविश्यायोधनं घोरं विचिन्वन्त्यो edt पतिम्॥ ३॥

आर्यपुत्रेति वादिन्यो a नाथेति च सर्वश:।
परिपेतु: कबन्धाङ्कां महीं शोणितकर्दमाम्॥४॥
Issuing out of the northern gate of
Lanka alongwith ogres, and penetrating
deep into the dreadful battlefield searching
for their husband, who had been killed,
nay, crying out, “O my husband! Ah my
lord!!”, they all ran hither and thither on the
ground, which was covered with headless
trunks and rendered muddy with gore.
(3-4)

ता बाष्पपरिपूर्णाक्ष्यो भर्तृशोकपराजिता:।
करिण्य इव नर्दन्त्य: करेण्वो हतयूथपा:॥५॥

ददृशुस्ता महाकायं महावीर्यं महाद्युतिम्।
want fred भूमौ नीलाञ्जनचयोपमम्॥६॥
Crying like female elephants, their eyes
full of tears, overcome as they were with
grief for their husband, the aforesaid
ogresses, who also looked like female
elephants that had lost the leader of their
herd, saw the gigantic Ravana, who was
endowed with extraordinary prowess and
invested with great splendour, lying killed on
the ground like a heap of black antimony.
(5-6)

ता: ult सहसा Gear wart रणपांसुषु।
निपेतुस्तस्य गात्रेषु च्छिन्ना वनलता इव॥७॥
Beholding their husband lying in the
dust of the battlefield, they precipitately fell
down on his limbs like so many uprooted
wild creepers. (7)

बहुमानात् परिष्वज्य काचिदेनं wile ह।
चरणौ काचिदालम्ब्य काचित्कण्ठेऽवलम्ब्य च॥ ८ I

Embracing him out of great regard, one
burst into tears, another sobbed holding his

765

feet; while a third began to weep hanging on
his neck. (8)

Shera च भुजौ काचिद् भूमौ सुपरिवर्तते।
हतस्य वदनं दृष्टवा काचिन्मोहमुपागमत्॥९॥

Yet another rolled on the ground,
throwing up her arms; while still another fell
into a swoon on seeing the face of her
deceased husband. (9)

काचिदङ्के शिर: कृत्वा रुरोद मुखमीक्षती।
स्नापयन्ती Fa बाष्पैस्तुषारैरिव पङ्कजम्॥१०॥

Laying his head in her lap, one wept as
she looked on his countenance, bathing his
face with tears even as nature would cover
a lotus with dew-drops. (10)

THU शोकाद् भूयस्ता: पर्यदेवयन्।।११।।

Afflicted thus to see their husband,
Ravana, lying killed on the ground as
mentioned above, the ladies cried in diverse

ways out of grief and then began to wail as
follows: (11)

येन वित्रासित: शक्रो येन वित्रासितो aa: |
at वैश्रवणो राजा पुष्पकेण वियोजित:॥१२॥
गन्धर्वाणामृषीणां च सुराणां च महात्मनाम्।
भयं येन रणे ad सोऽयं शेते रणे हत:॥१३॥
“Here lies killed on the battlefield the
warrior by whom Indra was thrown into a
fright and Yama (the god of retribution) was
also struck with terror, nay, by whom Kubera
(son of Sage Visrava), the king of Yaksas,
was deprived of his aerial car, Puspaka,
and by whom fear was inspired on the
battlefield in the Gandharvas (celestial
musicians), in the Rsis (the seers of Vedic
Mantras) as well as in the lofty-minded
gods. (12-13)
असुरेभ्य: सुरेभ्यो वा पन्नगेभ्योऽपि वा तथा।
भयं यो न विजानाति तस्येदं ANTE भयम्॥ १४॥
“This catastrophe in the form of death

has come from a mortal to him who did
not conceive any fear from the demons or
