402

bent low, given over, as she was, to grief
and thinking all the time of her husband and
being kept on eye on at close quarters by
hideous ogresses. Approaching Sita, and
mentioning his own name with great delight,
he then addressed the following impudent
words to Janaka’s daughter: “That husband
of yours, Rama (a scion of Raghu), the
slayer of Khara, relying on whom you have
been treating me with disdain while being
coaxed by me, O blessed lady, has been
killed in combat. Your roots stand completely
severed and your vanity has been crushed
by me. (10—15)
व्यसनेनात्मन: सीते मम भार्या भविष्यसि।
विसृजैतां मतिं मूढे fe मृतेन करिष्यसि॥ १६॥
“Compelled by your misfortune in the
shape of your husband’s death, you will
become my wife (of your own accord).
Give up your present resolution of spurning
my advances, O stupid woman! What
will you do with your deceased husband ? (16)

भवस्व Ut भार्याणां सर्वासामीश्वरी मम।

अल्पपुण्ये Fame मूढे पण्डितमानिनि।
श्रृणु wast सीते घोरं व्रत्रवधं यथा॥१७॥

“Become, O blessed lady, the queen of
all my consorts, now that your object in the
shape of getting re-united with your husband
has come to an end, O stupid woman of
scant virtue, who deem yourself wise. Now
hear, if you so please, the story of how your
husband was killed, which is as hideous as
that relating to the destruction of the demon
Vrtra at the hands of Indra. (17)
समायात: समुद्रान्तं ed At किल waa: |
वानरेन्द्रप्रणीतेन बलेन महता वृत:॥१८॥

“Surrounded by a huge army collected
by Sugriva (the ruler of monkeys), they
say, Rama, a scion of Raghu, duly reached
the sea-shore to destroy me. (18)

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA +

संनिविष्ट: समुद्रस्य पीड्यं तीरमथोत्तरम्।
बलेन महता wat व्रजत्यस्तं दिवाकरे॥१९॥

“While the sun was going to set, Rama
with his vast army forthwith duly struck
camp encroaching upon the northern shore.

(19)
अथाध्वनि परिश्रान्तमर्धरात्रे स्थितं बलम्।
सुखसुप्तं समासाद्य चरितं vert चरै:॥ २०॥

“Duly making their way at midnight to
the army, which lay comfortably asleep,
completely exhausted as it had been in the
course of the journey, my _ spies first
reconnoitred it. (20)

तत्प्रहस्तप्रणीतेन बलेन महता मम।

बलमस्य हतं Wal यत्र WA: सलक्ष्मण:॥ २१॥

“The said army of Rama was eventually
destroyed during the night itself on the
very spot where Rama was encamping
with Laksmana, by my huge army led by
Prahasta. (21)

पट्टिशान् परिघांश्चक्रानृष्टीन् दण्डान् महायुधान्।
बाणजालानि शूलानि भास्वरान् कूटमुद्गरान्॥ २२॥
यष्टीश्च तोमरान् प्रासांश्चक्राणि मुसलानि च।
उद्यम्योद्यम्य रक्षोभिर्वानरेषु निपातिता:॥ २३॥

“Uplifting again and again scimitars,
iron bars, small discuses, javelins, staffs,
large weapons, bundles of arrows, darts,
sparkling maces bristling with nails, sticks,
iron clubs, lances, large discuses and
Musalas, the ogres hurled them against the
monkeys. (22-23)
अथ सुप्तस्य रामस्य प्रहस्तेन प्रमाथिना।
असक्तं कृतहस्तेन fret महासिना॥ २४॥

“The head of Rama, who was lying
asleep at that moment, was then severed at

once with a big sword by the ferocious
Prahasta, who is skilled in archery. (24)

विभीषण: समुत्पत्य निगृहीतो यदृच्छया।
fest: प्रव्राजित: सैन्यैर्लक्ष्मण: प्लवगै: सह॥ २५ ॥
