* SUNDARAKANDA +

who was profusely adorned with ornaments
set with pearls and gems and who was
illumining the excellent edifice with her
splendour, as it were. Seeing her lying
adorned and endowed with wealth of beauty
and exuberance of youth, the mighty-armed
Hanuman, sprung from the loins of the wind-
god, inferred her to be Sita; filled with great
delight, that leader of monkey hordes felt
transported with joy. (50—53)

79

आस्फोटयामास चुचुम्ब पुच्छं
ननन्द चिक्रीड जगौ जगाम।
स्तम्भानरोहन्निपपात भूमौ
निदर्शयन् tat प्रकृतिं कपीनाम्॥ ५४॥
Demonstrating his simian nature, he
clapped his arms and kissed his tail, rejoiced,
frolicked, sang and paced, climbed up the

pillars and dropped back on the ground.
(54)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये सुन्दरकाण्डे GTA: A: ॥ १० ॥

Thus ends Canto Ten in the Sundarakanda of the glorious Ramayana of Valmiki,
the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

एकादश: सर्ग:
Canto XI

Banishing by recourse to reason the thought that the lady whom he had seen
was Sita, Hanuman searches for Sita once more in the gynaeceum as well
as in the banqueting hall and sees there a number of women lying
in various states, as well as drinking vessels. He is seized with
fear of having incurred the sin of gazing on others’
wives; but the thought that he had looked on them

with a lust-free mind eases

अवधूय च at बुद्धिं बभूवावस्थितस्तदा।
जगाम चापरां चिन्तां सीतां प्रति महाकपि:॥ १॥
Having dismissed that thought,
Hanuman, the great monkey, became normal
again. Then he indulged in further reflection
concerning Sita as follows : (1)

न रामेण वियुक्ता सा स्वप्तुमर्हति भामिनी।
न भोक्तुं नाप्यलंकर्तुं न पानमुपसेवितुम्॥ et
“Separated from Rama, the foresaid
belle should not be able to sleep, nor to eat,
nor again to adorn herself, much less to
enjoy drink. (2)
न fe रामसम: कश्चिद् विद्यते त्रिदशेष्वपि॥ 3 i
“Nor would she consort with another
male, be he the lord of celestials himself; for

his conscience

there is none equal to Sri Rama even among
the gods (who have only three stages in life,
viz., childhood, adolescence and youth, the
fourth, viz., old age, being absent in them).”
(3)
अन्येयमिति निश्चित्य भूयस्तत्र चचार स:।
पानभूमौ हरिश्रेष्ठ: सीतासंदर्शनोत्सुक:॥४॥

Concluding that she must be someone
other than Sita, Hanuman, the foremost of
monkeys, began to move about in the
banquet hall once more, keen as he was to
discover Sita. (4)
क्रोडितेनापरा: क्लान्ता गीतेन च तथापरा:।
नृत्येन चापरा: क्लान्ता: पानविप्रहतास्तथा॥ ५॥

Some had been worn out through

gambling, while others had likewise got
fatigued through singing. Still others had
