« KISKINDHAKANDA +

a वीर्योत्सेकदुष्टात्मा वरदानेन मोहित:।
जगाम स महाकाय: समुद्रं सरितां पतिम्॥८॥
“Blinded by a boon, that gigantic buffalo,
whose mind had been perverted by pride of
strength, approached Ocean, the lord of
rivers. (8)
ऊर्मिमन्तमतिक्रम्य सागरं रत्नसंचयम्।
मम युद्धं प्रयच्छेति तमुवाच महार्णवम्॥९॥
“Disdaining the turbulent sea, the
storehouse of jewels, he said to the
celebrated Ocean, ‘Give battle to me!’ (9)

ad: समुद्रो धर्मात्मा समुत्थाय महाबल:।
Tae वचनं राजन्नसुरं कालचोदितम्॥१०॥
Duly rising (as a mark of respect), the
very mighty Ocean, whose mind was set
on righteousness, then replied as follows to

the demon, who was impelled by the Time-
Spirit : (10)

समर्थो नास्मि ते ad युद्धं युद्धविशारद।
श्रूयतां त्वभिधास्यामि यस्ते युद्धं प्रदास्यति॥ ११॥

“lam not competent to give battle to
you, O demon skilled in warfare! Listen, |
will presently name him who will give battle
to you. (11)
शैलराजो महारण्ये तपस्विशरणं परम्।
शंकरश्वशुरो नाम्ना हिमवानिति fasta: nee i

““There exists in a large forest the lord
of mountains, Himavan by name, the supreme

resort of ascetics and the far-famed father-
in-law of Lord Siva. (12)

महाप्रस्रवणोपेतो बहुकन्दरनिर्झर: |

a समर्थस्तव प्रीतिमतुलां कर्तुमर्हति॥१३॥
“‘Adorned with big waterfalls and

comprising numerous caves and cascades,

he is powerful and ought to render

incomparable satisfaction to you through

his skill in warfare. (13)

हिमवद्वनमागम्य शरश्चापादिव च्युत:॥१४॥

“‘Concluding Ocean to be afraid of

969

himself, Dundubhi (the foremost of demons)
sped to the forest of Himavan like an arrow
shot from a bow. (14)

ततस्तस्य गिरे: शवेता गजेन्द्रप्रतिमा: शिला:।
चिक्षेप ager भूमौ दुन्दुभिर्विननाद च॥१५॥

“Then he hurled to the ground in a
large number white cliffs of that mountain,
resembling lordly elephants, and loudly
roared. (15)

ad: श्वेताम्बुदाकार: सौम्य: प्रीतिकराकृति: |
हिमवानब्रवीद् वाक्यं ta wat foray स्थित:।॥ १६॥

“Remaining established on his own
summit, the gentle Himavan, who looked
like a white cloud and wore a pleasing
aspect, spoke as follows : (16)

क्लेष्टुमर्हसि मां न त्वं दुन्दुभे धर्मवत्सल।
रणकर्मस्वकुशलस्तपस्विशरणो ह्यहम्॥ १७॥

“‘You ought not to pester me, O
Dundubhi, who are fond of righteousness. |
am not adept in warfare, the resort as | am
of ascetics.’ (17)
तस्य aq वचनं श्रुत्वा गिरिराजस्य धीमत:।
sara दुन्दुभिर्वाक्यं क्रोधात् संरक्तलोचन:॥ १८॥

“Hearing the aforesaid reply of the wise
king of mountains, Dundubhi spoke as
follows, his eyes turned crimson through
anger : (18)
यदि युद्धेऽसमर्थस्त्वं मद्धयाद् वा Freee: |
तमाचक्ष्व प्रदद्यान्मे यो fe युद्धं युयुत्सत:॥१९॥

“If you are incapable of an encounter
(with me) or are inactive through fear of me,

name him who may actually give battle to
me in earnest, eager as | am to fight.’ (19)

हिमवानब्रवीद् वाक्यं श्रुत्वा वाक्यविशारद:।
अनुक्तपूर्वं धर्मात्मा क्रोधात् तमसुरोत्तमम्॥ २०॥

“Hearing this, Himavan, who was an
adept in expression and whose mind was
set on virtue, angrily spoke as follows to
Dundubhi the foremost of demons, to whom
the name of a rival had not been mentioned
before : (20)
