* AYODHYAKANDA +

689

Canto CXII

Collected in the heavens to hear the dialogue of Bharata and Sri Rama,
heavenly beings applaud the two brothers. Having decided upon his course
of action, Sri Rama turns his face towards his hut; while pleading his
inability to protect the kingdom, now that his attempts to take Sri Rama
back to Ayodhya had been frustrated, Bharata prays to Sri Rama for
mercy once more. But when he comes to know that his elder
brother cannot be made to swerve an inch from his vow, he
places a new pair of wooden sandals decked with gold in
front of his brother and requests him to place his feet on
them. Readily acceding to his request, Sri Rama hands
over the sandals to Bharata, who takes a vow before
the former to enter the fire in case he did not return
immediately on the expiry of his term of exile. Sri
Rama confirms his vow and after embracing
Bharata and Satrughna and bidding good-
bye to all with due respect according to
the rank of each, enters his cottage

तमप्रतिमतेजोभ्यां भ्रातृभ्यां रोमहर्षणम्।
विस्मिता: संगमं Yer समुपेता महर्षय:॥ १॥
The eminent sages who had assembled
there were astonished to behold at close
quarters that thrilling meeting of the two
brothers, Sri Rama and Bharata, who were
endowed with matchless glory. (1)

अन्तर्हिता मुनिगणा: स्थिताश्च परमर्षय:।
at भ्रातरौ महाभागौ काकुत्स्थौ प्रशशंसिरे॥ २॥

Hosts of sages who stood invisible in
the air and most eminent Rsis bodily present
there applauded in the following words
those two highly blessed brothers, Sri
Rama and Bharata, the scions of Kakutstha :

(2)
सदार्यौ राजपुत्रौ gt धर्मज्ञौ धर्मविक्रमौ।
श्रुत्वा ad fe सम्भाषामुभयो: स्पृहयामहे॥ ३॥

“Ever noble are the two princes, Sri
Rama and Bharata, who not only know
what is right but also tread the path of

virtue. Indeed, having heard the dialogue of
the two, we long to hear it again and again.”
(3)

ततस्त्वृषिगणा: fad दशग्रीववधैषिण:।
भरतं राजशार्दूलमित्यूचु: Wat वच:॥४॥
Then the hosts of Rsis for their part,
who longed for the death of Ravana, hastily
addressed with one voice the following
exhortation to Bharata, a tiger among
princes : (4)

कुले We महाप्राज्ञ महाव्रत्त महायश:।
Ma wae वाक्यं a पितरं यद्यवेक्षसे॥ ५॥

“O prince of high birth, nay, endowed
with exceptional intelligence, distinguished
by a noble conduct and enjoying great
renown, the advice of Sri Rama ought to be
accepted by you, if you have the least
regard for your father. (5)

अनृणत्वाच्च कैकेय्या: स्वर्गं दशरथो गत:॥६॥
