594

another, highly rejoiced as they were over

the prospect of being able to see Sri Rama,

the citizens went forth to meet Sri Rama.
(10)

ये च तत्रापरे wd सम्मता ये च नैगमा:।
रामं प्रतिययुर्हृष्टा: सर्वा: प्रकृतय: शुभा:॥११॥

Those merchants who were held in
great esteem in Ayodhya and all others who
were not so honoured and, even so, all
other good citizens joyously proceeded to
meet Sri Rama. (11)

मणिकाराश्चये केचित्कुम्भकाराश्च शोभना: |
सूत्रकर्मविशेषज्ञा ये च शस्त्रोपजीविन:॥१२॥
मायूरका: क्राकचिका वेधका रोचकास्तथा।
दन्तकारा: सुधाकारा ये च गन्धोपजीविन:॥ १३॥
सुवर्णकारा: प्रख्यातास्तथा कम्बलकारका: |
स्नापकोष्णोदका वैद्या धूपका: शौण्डिकास्तथा Ul १४॥
रजकास्तुन्नवायाश्च ग्रामघोषमहत्तरा: |
शैलूषाश्च सह स्त्रीभिर्यान्ति कैवर्तकास्तथा॥ १५॥

Whatever lapidaries there were in the
city and skilled potters, those adept in
weaving and those who lived by manufacture
of arms, those who made fans etc., of
peacock-feathers, those who lived by the
saw, those who pierced gems and pearls
etc., as well as polishers of gems, ornaments
and utensils etc., those who made articles
of ivory, those who prepared lime by burning
limestone etc., and those who lived by
perfumery, highly reputed goldsmiths and
weavers of blankets and other woollen
goods, those who provided baths for others,
masseurs, physicians, fumigators and
distillers and vintners, washermen and tailors,
chiefs of villages and hamlets and dancers
with their womenfolk as well as boatmen
joined the expedition. (12—15)

समाहिता वेदविदो ब्राह्मणा वृत्तसम्मता:।
गोरथैर्भरतं यान्तमनुजग्मु:३ सहस्रश:॥१६॥
Brahmanas remaining absorbed in

meditation, well-versed in the Vedas and
highly respected for their conduct followed

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

the departing Bharata in thousands on
bullockcarts, etc. (16)

सुवेषा: शुद्धवसनास्ताम्रमृष्टानुलेपिन: |
wa a विविधैर्यानै: शनैर्भरतमन्वयु:॥ १७॥
Decently dressed, clad in pure raiment
and having smeared their body with
sandal-paste mixed with red substances
like saffron, they all followed slowly in the
wake of Bharata on various kinds of vehicles.
(17)

प्रहृष्टमुदिता सेना सान्वयात् कैकयीसुतम्।
भ्रातुरानयने Ad wd Baer ecu
Thrilled with joy and delighted in mind,
the aforesaid army too followed Bharata,
the son of Kaikeyi, who was so fond of
his elder brother and set out on the mission
of bringing his said brother back from the
forest. (18)
a गत्वा दूरमध्वानं रथयानाश्वकुञ्जरै:।
समासेदुस्ततो गङ्गां शृङ्गवेरपुरं प्रति॥१९॥
यत्र रामसखा वीरो गुहो ज्ञातिगणैर्वृत:।
निवसत्यप्रमादेन देशं तं परिपालयन्॥२०॥
Having covered a long distance from
Ayodhya in chariots, on palanquins and on
the back of horses and elephants, they
reached the bank of the holy Ganga in the
precincts of Srigaverapura, where dwelt
the valiant Guha, a friend of Sri Rama,
surrounded by hosts of his kinsmen and
ruling that area with vigilance. (19-20)
व्यवतिष्ठत सा सेना भरतस्यानुयायिनी॥ २१॥
Having arrived at the bank of the Ganga,
adorned by Cakrawaka birds, that army
following in the wake of Bharata halted. (21)
निरीक्ष्यानुत्थितां Sat at च गङ्गां शिवोदकाम्।
Wd: सचिवान् सर्वानब्रवीद् वाक्यकोविद:॥ २२॥
Seeing the aforesaid army inactive and
beholding the Ganga with its holy waters,
Bharata, who was a master of expression,
spoke to all his ministers as follows: (22)
