196

Nay, grasping the bar tightly, the gallant
Hanuman, son of the wind-god, ranged
through the air and began to destroy the
ogres even as Indra (the god with a thousand
eyes) killed the Daityas (sons of Diti) with
his thunderbolt. (41)
स हत्वा राक्षसान् वीर: किंकरान् मारुतात्मज: ।
युद्धाकाङ्क्षी महावीरस्तोरणं समवस्थित:॥४२॥

Having made short work of the ogres
known by the collective name of Kinkaras,
the aforesaid valiant Hanuman, who was an

eminent hero, stood rooted at the gate
thirsting for combat. (42)

ततस्तस्माद् भयान्मुक्ता: कतिचित्तत्र राक्षसा:।
निहतान् किंकरान् सर्वान् रावणाय न्यवेदयन्॥ ४३॥

« VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

Free from that fear, being at a
considerable distance from Hanuman, a few
ogres, who had survived there, spoke to
Ravana of all the Kinkaras having been
disposed of. (43)
a राक्षसानां fed महाबलं

निशम्य राजा परिव्रत्तलोचन:।
समादिदेशाप्रतिमं पराक्रमे
Weert समरे सुदुर्जयम्॥४४॥

Hearing of the large army of ogres
having been wiped out, King Ravana whose
eyes began to roll rapidly through rage, duly
commanded Jambumali, son of Prahasta,
who was unequalled in prowess and was
most difficult to conquer in battle. (44)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये सुन्दरकाण्डे द्विचत्वारिंश: सर्ग: ॥ ४२॥

Thus ends Canto Forty-two of the Sundarakanda in the glorious Ramayana of Valmiki,
the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

Canto XLII

Having disposed of the Kinkaras sent by Ravana and making up
his mind to demolish the sanctuary sacred to the guardian deity
of ogres, Hanuman climbs it up and, killing the guards posted
there, exhibits his prowess by uttering the name of Sri
Rama in a thundering voice. Nay, uprooting a pillar
of the sanctuary, he brandishes it and burns the
sanctuary with the fire produced thereby

ad: स किंकरान् हत्वा हनूमान् ध्यानमास्थित: |
वनं भग्नं मया चैत्यप्रासादो न विनाशित:॥१॥
Having killed the Kinkaras, the
celebrated Hanuman then thought to himself :
‘The grove has been devastated by me, but
the edifice of the sanctuary, sacred to the
guardian deity of the ogres, has not been
demolished.’ (1)
तस्मात् प्रासादमद्यैवमिमं विध्वंसयाम्यहम्।
इति संचिन्त्य हनुमान् मनसादर्शयन् बलम्॥ २॥

Hanuman, therefore, stood revolving in
his mind as follows : ‘Exhibiting my strength,
| shall, therefore, likewise destroy this edifice

today.’ (2)
चैत्यप्रासादमुत्प्लुत्य मेरुशृङ्गमिवोन्नतम्।
आरुरोह हरिश्रेष्ठो SM मारुतात्मज:॥ ३॥

Taking a leap, Hanuman, the foremost
of monkeys, climbed up the edifice of the
sanctuary, which was high as a peak of
Mount Meru. (3)
