« KISKINDHAKANDA +

“| have knowledge of the worlds
presided over by Varuna (the god of water)
as also those measured in three strides by
Lord Visnu (descended in the form of the
Divine Dwarf and then assuming inordinate
proportions). | am equally aware of the
conflicts that took place between the gods
and the demons and also how nectar was
churned out of the ocean of milk. (13)
Wat च edt तेज: प्राणाश्च शिथिला मम॥ १४॥

“Even though my energy has been
snatched away by old age and my vitality is
ebbing, this errand of Sri Rama, which you
have mentioned, must be accomplished by
me first. (14)

तरुणी रूपसम्पन्ना सर्वाभरणभूषिता।

ह्रियमाणा मया दृष्टा रावणेन दुरात्मना॥१५॥
क्रोशन्ती रामरामेति लक्ष्मणेति च भामिनी।

भूषणान्यपविध्यन्ती गात्राणि च विधुन्वती॥ १६॥

“A Lovely young lady richly endowed
with comeliness and adorned with all kinds
of jewels was seen by me the other day
crying out ‘Rama !’, ‘O Rama !’ ‘O Laksmana,
nay, dropping down her ornaments and
tossing her limbs in her attempt to extricate
herself while being borne away by the evil-
minded Ravana. (15-16)

सूर्यप्रभेव शैलाग्रे तस्या: कौशेयमुत्तमम्।
असिते राक्षसे भाति यथा वा तडिदम्बुदे॥ १७॥

“Her exquisite silken robe shone against
the dark-complexioned ogre as the splendour
of the sun against a mountain-peak or as a
flash of lightning in the sky. (17)

at तु सीतामहं मन्ये रामस्य परिकीर्तनात्।
श्रूयतां मे कथयतो निलयं तस्य रक्षस:॥१८॥

“From the fact that she was uttering
the name of Rama again and again, | believe
her to have been Sita without doubt. Now
hear from me, as | speak, about the abode
of that ogre. (18)

1143

पुत्रो विश्रवस: साक्षाद् भ्राता वैश्रवणस्य च।
अध्यास्ते नगरीं लङ्कां रावणो ATA राक्षस:॥१९॥

“The son of Sage Visrava himself and
a (half-) brother of Kubera (son of ViSrava),
the ogre, Ravana by name, lives in the city
of Lanka. (19)

इतो द्वीपे समुद्रस्य सम्पूर्णे शतयोजने।
तस्मिँल्लङ्का पुरी रम्या निर्मिता विश्वकर्मणा॥ २०॥
जाम्बूनदमयैद्वारिश्चित्रै: काञ्चनवेदिकै: |
प्रासादैर्हेमवर्णैश्च महद्भि:र सुसमाकृता॥२१॥
प्राकारेणार्कवर्णेन महता च समन्विता।
तस्यां वसति वैदेही दीना कौशेयवासिनी॥ २२॥
रावणान्त:पुरे रुद्धा राक्षसीभि: सुरक्षिता।
जनकस्यात्मजां राज्ञस्तस्यां द्रक्ष्यथ मैथिलीम्॥ २३॥
“On a well-known island in the sea,
situated at a distance of full one hundred
Yojanas (or eight hundred miles) from this
shore, lies the lovely city of Lanka,
constructed by ViSwakarma (the architect
of gods), abounding in wonderful gates of
Jambunada (gold found on the banks of the
Jammu river) and stately mansions of golden
hue with terraces of gold and enclosed by a
massive fortification wall bright as the sun.
“In that city lives the agonized Sita (a princess
of the Videha territory), clad in silk, confined
in the gynaeceum of Ravana and strongly
guarded by ogresses. There you will be
able to see Sita (a princess of Mithila),
daughter of King Janaka. (20—23)

लङ्कायामथ गुप्तायां सागरेण समन्तत:।
सम्प्राप्य सागरस्यान्तं सम्पूर्णं शतयोजनम्॥२४॥
आसाद्य दक्षिणं तीरं ततो द्रक्ष्यथ रावणम्।
aaa त्वरिता: क्षिप्रं विक्रमध्वं प्लवङ्गमा:॥ २७५॥
“Duly reaching the end of the sea,
which lies at a distance of a full hundred
Yojanas (or eight hundred miles), and arriving
at its southern coast you will be able to
see after that Ravana in Lanka, protected
by the sea on all sides. Reaching there
expeditiously show your valour soon, O
monkeys ! (24-25)
