« KISKINDHAKANDA +

कर्तव्यं ad वयस्येन स्निग्धेन च हितेन a
अनुरूपं च युक्तं च कृतं सुग्रीव तत् त्वया॥ १७॥
“That which ought to be done by a
loving and benevolent friend, nay, that which
is worthy of you as well as proper has been
done by you, O Sugriva ! (17)

we च प्रकृतिस्थोऽहमनुनीतस्त्वया सखे।
दुर्लभो हीदृशो बन्धुरस्मिन् काले विशेषत:॥ Ve

“Counselled by you, my friend, | have
returned to normalcy now. Such a friend as
you are, is indeed difficult to get, particularly
at this time of adversity. (18)

किं तु यत्नस्त्वया कार्यो मैथिल्या: परिमार्गणे।

राक्षसस्य च रौद्रप्त्य रावरणस्य दुरात्मन: ॥१९॥
“Endeavour should, however, be made

by you in the direction of tracing out Sita

(the princess of Mithila) as well as the
terrible and evil-minded ogre, Ravana. (19)

मया च यदनुष्ठेयं विस्त्रब्धेन तदुच्यताम्।
वर्षास्विव च सुक्षेत्रे Ud सम्पद्यते तव॥ २०॥

“It may also be pointed out by you
unreservedly what should be done by me.
All your desire will be accomplished even
as all seeds sown in a good field during the
rains bear fruit. (20)

मया च यदिदं वाक्यमभिमानात् समीरितम्।
तत्त्वया हरिशार्दूल तत्त्वमित्युपधार्यताम्॥ २१॥

“The assurance (to the effect that |
shall kill Vali) that has been duly given by
me out of self-confidence should be taken

957

by you to be a bare truth, O tiger among
monkeys! (21)

अनृतं नोक्तपूर्वं मे न च वक्ष्ये कदाचन।
Wad प्रतिजानामि सत्येनैव शपाम्यहम्॥ २२॥

“Never before has a falsehood been
uttered by me nor shall | ever utter it. |
solemnly affirm this to you and swear by
truth alone.” (22)

तत: Wee: सुग्रीवो amt: सचिवै: सह।
राघवस्य वच: seat प्रतिज्ञातं विशेषत:॥ २३॥

Sugriva alongwith his counsellors, who
were all monkeys felt immensely delighted
to hear the words of Sri Rama (a scion of
Raghu), particularly the promise made by
him. (23)
`एवमेकान्तसम्पृक्तौ ततस्तौ नरवानरौ।
उभावन्योन्यसदृशं सुखं दु:खमभाषताम्॥ २४॥

United thus in a lonely retreat, both the
aforesaid friends, a human being and a
monkey, thereupon spoke each about his
joys and sorrows, which were akin to those
of the other. (24)

महानुभावस्य वचो निशम्य
हरिर्नृपाणामधिपस्य तस्य।
ed स मेने हरिवीरमुख्य-
स्तदा च कार्यं हृदयेन विद्वान्॥ २५॥
Hearing the assurance of Sri Rama,
the king of kings, who was possessed of
great might, the wise Sugriva, the foremost
of monkey heroes, forthwith took his object
mentally accomplished. (25)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये किष्किन्धाकाण्डे
सप्तम: सर्ग: ॥ ७॥

Thus ends Canto Seven in the Kiskindhakanda of the glorious Ramayana of Valmiki,
the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

