832

ते कृत्वा ATT BE AMT: कामरूपिण:।
कुशलं पर्यपृच्छंस्ते प्रहृष्टा भरतं तदा॥४५॥
Assuming a human semblance, the
celebrated monkeys, who were able to
change their form at will and felt highly
rejoiced, duly inquired of Bharata his welfare
on thar occasion. (45)

अथाब्रवीद् राजपुत्र: सुग्रीवं वानरर्षभम्।
परिष्वज्य महातेजा भरतो धर्मिणां वर:॥४६॥
त्वमस्माकं चतुर्णां वै भ्राता सुग्रीव पञ्चम:।
सौहृदाज्जायते मित्रमपकारोऽरिलक्षणम्॥४७॥

Embracing Sugriva, the foremost of
monkeys, prince Bharata, a jewel among
the virtuous, who was endowed with
extraordinary energy, said, “You are a fifth
brother to us four brothers, O Sugriva!
For a friend is made through beneficence
actuated by good-will and a friend is as
good as a brother, while maleficence is that
which distinguishes an enemy.” (46-47)

विभीषणं च भरत: सान्त्ववाक्यमथाब्रवीत्।
दिष्ट्या त्वया सहायेन कृतं HA सुदुष्करम्॥४८ Il
To Vibhisana as well did Bharata then
address the following kind words: “By good
fortune an exceedingly difficult task has

been accomplished by you as an ally of Sri
Rama.” (48)

शत्रुघ्नश्च तदा राममभिवाद्य सलक्ष्मणम्।
सीतायाश्चरणौ वीरो विनयादभ्यवादयत्॥४९॥

Having greeted Sri Rama as well as
Laksmana (his elder twin), the valiant
Satrughna too bowed reverently at the feet
of Sita on that occasion. (49)
रामो मातरमासाद्य विवर्णां शोककर्शिताम्।
जग्राह Word: पादौ मनो मातु: प्रहर्षयन्॥५०॥

Approaching Kausalya (his own
mother), who looked pale and had got
emaciated through grief born of separation
from her husband as well as from her two

sons and daughter-in-law), Sri Rama, who
bent low with reverence, clasped the feet of

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA +

her mother, thereby bringing excessive delight
to her mind. (50)

अभिवाद्य सुमित्रां च कैकेयीं च यशस्विनीम्।
स मातूश्च dd: सर्वा: पुरोहितमुपागमत्॥५१॥

Nay, having greeted Sumitra (the mother
of Laksmana and Satrughna) as well as the
illustrious Kaikeyi (Bharata’s mother), he
then approached and greeted all the rest of
his mothers as well as Sage Vasistha (his
family priest). (51)

स्वागतं ते महाबाहो कौसल्यानन्दवर्धन।
Sit प्राञ्ञलय: सर्वे नागरा राममब्रुवन्॥५२॥

With joined palms all the citizens of
Ayodhya, said to Sri Rama, “Blessed is
your arrival here, O mighty-armed prince,
the enhancer of Kausalya’s delight!” (52)

तान्यञ्जलिसहस्राणि प्रगृहीतानि नागरै:।
व्याकोशानीव want cast भरताग्रज:॥५३॥

Sri Rama, the elder brother of Bharata,
beheld thousands of joined palms held tightly
by the citizens like so many full-blown
lotuses. (53)

पादुके ते तु रामस्य गृहीत्वा भरत: स्वयम्।
चरणाभ्यां Ase योजयामास धर्मवित्॥५४॥
अब्रवीच्च तदा रामं भरत: स कृताञ्जलि: |
Ud a सकलं राज्यं न्यासं निर्यातितं मया॥ ५५॥
Taking the wooden sandals bestowed
on him by Sri Rama, Bharata for his part,
who knew what is right, himself placed them
below the feet of Sri Rama, a ruler of men.
Nay, with joined palms the said Bharata
spoke as follows to Sri Rama: “Here is your
entire kingdom, held in trust by me so long,
rendered back to you by me. (54-55)

TI WI कृतार्थं A संवृत्तश्च मनोरथ:।

यत् Tat पश्यामि राजानमयोध्यां पुनरागतम्॥ ५६ I
“Accomplished of purpose is my

birth today and my desire too stands

consummated in that | see you, its king
come back to Ayodhya. (56)
