* SUNDARAKANDA +

हनूमन्तं महावेगं ded sa दृष्टिभि:॥४॥

राघवे चार्थनिर्वृत्तिं कर्तुं च परमं यश:।
समाधाय समृद्धार्था: कर्मसिद्धिभिरुन्नता:॥५॥
Having made up their mind 10
accomplish the purpose of Sri Rama, a
scion of Raghu, and to bring the highest
renown to him, and leaping from the aforesaid
summit of the Mahendra mountain, all the
jewels among monkeys—who were gigantic
like the Meru and Mandara mountains and
resembled lordly elephants in rut, and were
endowed with extraordinary might, nay, who
were accomplished of purpose and felt
exalted due to successes in _ their
undertakings, leapt forward in the direction
of Kiskindha, full of joy, with Hanuman (son
of the wind-god) at their head, covering the
space, as it were, nay, bearing the celebrated,
self-possessed and exceptionally mighty
Hanuman, who was endowed with great
impetuosity and was being honoured by
heavenly beings by their gazes, as it were.
(2—5)

प्रियाख्यानोन्मुखा: ad सर्वे युद्धाभिनन्दिन:।
wa रामप्रतीकारे निश्चितार्था मनस्विन:॥६॥
All were keen to break the pleasant
tidings; all hailed war and all were determined
to assist Sri Rama in subduing Ravana, and
were high-minded. (6)

THAT: खमाप्लुत्य ततस्ते काननौकस:।
नन्दनोपममासेदुर्वनं द्रुमशतायुतम्॥ ७॥
Bounding into the air, the aforesaid
monkeys arrived, leaping at a grove full of
hundreds of trees and vying with the Nandana
grove in paradise. (7)

यत् waged नाम सुग्रीवस्याभिरक्षितम्।
aye सर्वभूतानां सर्वभूतमनोहरम्॥८॥
aq रक्षति महावीर: सदा दधिमुख: कपि:।
मातुल: कपिमुख्यस्य सुग्रीवस्य महात्मन:॥९॥
a तद् वनमुपागम्य aya: परमोत्कटा:।
वानरा वानरेन्द्रस्य मन:कान्तं महावनम्॥१०॥

269

Those monkeys felt supremely eager
to partake of the honey etc., in which the
grove abounded or reaching that grove,
Madhuvana by name, belonging to Sugriva,
which was an extensive grove protected on
all sides, and as such inviolable for all
created beings, nay, which captivated the
soul of all created beings, which was
constantly guarded by the exceptionally
gallant monkey, Dadhimukha, maternal
uncle of the high-souled Sugriva, the
foremost of monkeys, and which was pleasing
to the mind, O Sugriva, the ruler of monkeys.

(8—10)
ततस्ते वानरा हृष्टा Feat मधुवनं महत्।
कुमारमभ्ययाचन्त मधूनि मधुंपिङ्ग॰ला; ।। ११॥

Rejoiced to see the’ extensive
Madhuvana, the aforesaid monkeys, who
were reddish brown as honey, thereupon
asked Prince Angada for permission to taste
the honey. (11)

‘ad: PAN Teg ANAT Hart |
अनुमान्य ददौ तेषां निसर्गं मधुभक्षणे॥१२॥
Securing the consent of those elderly
monkeys headed by Jambavan, the prince
then granted them permission to partake of
the honey. (12)

a निसृष्टा: कुमारेण धीमता वालिसूनुना।
Ra: समपद्यन्त द्रुमान् मधुकराकुलान्॥१३॥
Authorized by the sagacious Prince
Angada (son of Vali), those monkeys
approached the trees swarming with bees.
(13)

भक्षयन्त: सुगन्धीनि मूलानि च फलानि च।
Wy: Wet aA सर्वे बभूवुश्च मदोत्कटा:॥१४॥
Feasting on the fragrant roots and fruits
too, they all experienced great joy and got
excited through drink. (14)

ततश्चानुमता: सर्वे सुसंहृष्टा वनौकस:।
मुदिताश्च ततस्ते च प्रनृत्यन्ति ततस्तत:॥ १५॥

Having been granted permission by
Angada to partake of the honey, all the
