618

The keepers (created and detailed by
Bharadwaja) of the animals carrying
Bharata’s men on their backs duly fed the
horses, elephants, donkeys, camels as well
as the bullocks with articles fit for their
consumption. (55)

sas मधुलाजांश्च भोजयन्ति स्म वाहनान्।
इक्ष्वाकुवरयोधानां चोदयन्तो महाबला:॥ ५६॥
Coaxing the animals carrying the gallant
warriors of Ikswaku’s race on their back,
the aforesaid very mighty keepers fed
them with pieces of sugarcane as well as
with fried grains of paddy soaked in honey.
(56)

नाश्वबन्धोऽश्वमाजानान्न गजं BATE: |
मत्तप्रमत्तमुदिता सा चमूस्तत्र सम्बभौ॥ ५७॥

The groom did not recognize the horse
in his charge nor did the elephant-keeper
recognize his charge (since the animals
were fed and groomed so well that they got
changed beyond recognition). The aforesaid
army appeared intoxicated, maddened and
enraptured on that spot. (57)

Sated with all desired enjoyments and
smeared with red sandal-paste, the troops,
attended by hosts of celestial nymphs, uttered
the following words : (58)
नैवायोध्यां गमिष्यामो न गमिष्याम दण्डकान्।
कुशलं भरतस्यास्तु रामस्यास्तु AMT सुखम्॥ ५९॥

“We shall neither return to Ayodhya
nor go to the Dandaka forest. Let all be well
with Bharata because of whom we are
enjoying heavenly delights here on earth
and let lasting happiness be the lot of Sri
Rama as a foretaste of whose blessed
sight we have secured these heavenly
enjoyments !” (59)

Stat पादातयोधाश्च हस्त्यश्वारोहबन्धका:।
अनाथास्तं विधिं लब्ध्वा वाचमेतामुदीरयन्॥ ६०॥

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA +

So did the foot soldiers as well as
those mounted on horses and elephants
and their keepers too, who in their inebriety
considered themselves independent (lit.,
without a master) on receiving such
attentions from the sage, utter the aforesaid
words. (60)
सम्प्रहष्टा विनेदुस्ते नरास्तत्र सहस्रश:।
भरतस्यानुयातार: स्वर्गोऽयमिति चाब्रुवन्॥६१॥

Extremely rejoiced to see the untold
affluence and power of the sage, those men
on that spot, who had followed Bharata
in his journey to Citrakuta, to bring Sri
Rama back to Ayodhya, in their thousands
thundered and said, “This is heaven indeed.”

(61)

TAs हसन्तश्च गायन्तश्चैव सैनिका:।
समन्तात् परिधावन्तो माल्योपेता: ASST: WE?

Adorned with garlands the troops in
their thousands ran in every direction dancing
and laughing and singing. (62)
ततो भुक्तवतां तेषां तदन्नममृतोपमम्।
दिव्यानुद्वीक्ष्य भक्ष्यांस्तानभवद् भक्षणे मति: ।॥। ६३॥

In spite of their having partaken of that
ambrosia-like food, their mind felt inclined
to eat again the moment they saw those
excellent dishes. (63)

प्रेष्याश्चेट्यश्च वध्वश्च बलस्थाश्चापि सर्वश:।
बभूवुस्ते भृशं प्रीता: सर्वे चाहतवासस:॥ ६४॥
Servants and maid-servants as also
the wives of the troops as well as the
troops themselves—they all felt highly
delighted, nay, all were supplied with a new
set of clothes. (64)

कुञ्जराश्च GUSTY गोऽश्चाश्च मृगपक्षिण:।
बभूवु: सुभृतास्तत्र नातो ह्यन्यमकल्पयत्॥६५॥
Elephants and donkeys and camels
too as well as bullocks and horses, nay,
even deer and birds in that region were fully
nourished; hence they coveted nothing else.
(65)
