* BALAKANDA +

देवर्षयश्च सम्भ्रान्ता गन्धर्वा: समहोरगा:।
त्रैलोक्यमासीत् संत्रस्तं ब्रह्मास्त्रे TAA eu i

The aforesaid missiles having been
rendered ineffectual, Viswamitra (son of
Gadhi) discharged Brahmastra, a missile
presided over by Brahma, the creator. The
gods with the god of fire as their leader, the
celestial sages and Gandharvas alongwith
eminent Nagas were struck with awe to see
that missile ready for being hurled. Nay, all
the three worlds were alarmed when the
said missile presided over by Brahma was
fully discharged. (14-15)
वसिष्ठो wad Wd ब्रह्मदण्डेन राघव॥१६॥

Vasistha, however, neutralized even that
exceptionally terrible Brahmastra in its entirety,
including all its limbs, by his Brahmanical staff
combined with the Brahmanical (spiritual)
glory, O scion of Raghu ! (16)

ब्रह्मास्त्रं ग्रसमानस्य वसिष्ठस्य महात्मन:।

त्रैलोक्यमोहनं Ws रूपमासीत् सुदारुणम्॥१७॥
While the mighty Vasistha was

consuming the Brahmastra, he assumed a

most violent and fierce aspect that stupefied
all the three worlds. (17)

रोमकूपेषु aay वसिष्ठस्य महात्मन:।
मरीच्य इव निष्पेतुरग्नेर्धूमाकुलाचिष:॥१८॥

From all the pores of skin of the high-
souled Vasistha shot forth like as many
rays, tongues of fire enveloped in smoke
(the smoke issuing from the extinguished
Brahmastra). (18)

प्राज्वलद् ब्रह्मदण्डश्च वसिष्ठस्य करोद्यत:।
विधूम gat कालाग्नेर्यमदण्ड इवापर:॥१९॥

Even the Brahmanical staff raised in
the hand of Vasistha blazed forth like the

225

smokeless fire of universal destruction or
like a second rod of Yama (the god of
punishment). (19)
ततोऽस्तुवन् मुनिगणा वसिष्ठं जपतां वरम्।

अमोघं a बलं ब्रह्मस्तेजो धारय तेजसा॥ २०॥

Thereupon hosts of sages glorified as
follows Vasistha, the foremost of ascetics :
“Unfailing is your might, O holy one ! Quench
the fire of your person as well as of the
Brahmanical staff by your own glory. (20)

निगृहीतस्त्वया ब्रह्मन् विश्वामित्रो महाबल:।
अमोघं ते बलं Mes लोका: सन्तु गतव्यथा:॥ २१॥

“The very mighty ViSwamitra has been
tamed by you, O holy Brahmana! Your
power knows no failure, O noblest soul ! Let
the worlds be rid of their agony.” (21)

एवमुक्तो महातेजा: शमं चक्रे महाबल:।
विश्वामित्रो विनिकृतो विनि:श्वस्येदमब्रवीत्॥ २२॥

Prayed to in these words, the
exceptionally glorious and mighty Vasistha
regained his natural calm; and, heaving a
deep sigh, the worsted ViSwamitra spoke
as follows : (22)
एकेन ब्रह्मदण्डेन सर्वास्त्राणि हतानि मे॥ २३॥

“Reproachtful is the might of a Ksatriya.
Even so, the strength proceeding from the
glory of a Brahmana is real strength. All my
missiles stand neutralized by a _ single
Brahmanical staff.” (23)
तदेतत् प्रसमीक्ष्याहं प्रसन्नेन्द्रियमानस:।

ATT महत् समास्थास्ये AS वै ब्रह्मत्वकारणम्॥ २४॥

Clearly perceiving this superiority of
Brahmanical glory, therefore, | shall with my
senses and mind purified undertake severe

austerities that will enable me to attain
Brahmanhood in this very life.” (24)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये बालकाण्डे षट्पञ्चाश: सर्ग: ॥ ५६ ॥

Thus ends Canto Fifty-six in the Balakanda of the glorious Ramayana of Valmiki,
the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

