376

of those knowing the art of expression as
also of all bowmen, then spoke to Laksmana
as follows : (38)

qa लक्ष्मण जानामि मयि स्नेहमनुत्तमम्।
विक्रमं चैव सत्त्वं च तेजश्च सुदुरासदम्॥३९॥

“| know your unsurpassed love for me
as also your valour and strength as well
as your glory, which cannot be easily
approached by others. (39)

मम मातुर्महद् दु:खमतुलं शुभलक्षण।
अभिप्रायं न विज्ञाय सत्यस्य च VAST च॥४०॥

“Not knowing the import of truthfulness
and self-control, as understood by me, great
agony, which is unequalled anywhere is
being experienced by my mother, O prince
endowed with noble characteristics! (40)

धर्मो fe परमो लोके धर्मे सत्यं प्रतिष्ठितम्।
धर्मसंश्रितमप्येतत् पितुर्वचनमुत्तमम्॥ ४१॥

“Indeed, righteousness is paramount
in the world and truthfulness is rooted in
piety. This command of my father too is
supreme in that it is based on righteousness.

(41)
संश्रुत्य च पितुर्वाक्यं मातुर्वा ब्राह्मणस्य वा।
न कर्तव्यं gar aie धर्ममाश्रित्य तिष्ठता॥४२॥

“Having plighted one’s word to do the
bidding of one’s father, mother or a Brahmana,
O gallant Laksmana, he who takes his stand
on righteousness should not falsify it. (42)

ase न शक्ष्यामि पुनर्नियोगमतिवर्तितुम्।
पितुर्हि वचनाद् वीर कैकेय्याहं प्रचोदित:॥४३॥
“Since | have been commanded by
Kaikeyi to go into exile according to the
pledge given to her by my father, O valiant
prince, I, constituted as | am, dare not flout
her command in any case. (43)
धर्ममाश्रय मा Aad मद्बुद्धिरनुगम्यताम्॥४४॥
“Therefore, give up this unworthy
thought of assuming the reins of government
even by taking captive or killing the reigning

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

king, deriving its support from military heroism.
Take your stand on righteousness and do
not resort to severity. Let my resolution of
carrying out the royal command, be followed.”

(44)

तमेवमुक्त्वा सौहार्दाद् Wat लक्ष्मणाग्रज:।
उवाच भूय: कौसल्यां प्राञ्जलि: शिरसा नत:॥ ४५ ॥
Having thus admonished his aforesaid
younger brother, Laksmana, out of affection,
Sri Rama (Laksmana’s eldest brother)
submitted once more to his’ mother,
Kausalya, with joined palms and his head
bent low as follows : (45)

अनुमन्यस्व मां देवि गमिष्यन्तमितो वनम्।
शापितासि मम प्राणै: कुरु स्वस्त्ययनानि मे॥४६॥

“Grant leave, O glorious lady, to me,
ready as | am to depart from Ayodhya to
the forest. You are hereby bound with an
oath on my life: please perform rites ensuring
my welfare in the journey. (46)

तीर्णप्रतिज्ञश्च वनात् पुनरेष्याम्यहं पुरीम्।
ययातिरिव राजर्षि: पुरा हित्वा पुनर्दिवम्॥४७॥

“Having honoured my vow of remaining
in exile for fourteen years, | shall come
back from the forest to Ayodhya, even as in
the former days the royal Sage Yayati
ascended back to heaven after leaving it
once. (47)
शोक: संधार्यतां मातर्हृदये साधु मा शुच:।
वनवासादिहैष्यामि पुन: कृत्वा पितुर्बच:॥४८॥

“Let grief be fully inhibited in the heart,
O mother! Pray, do not sorrow. Having
carried out the behest of my father, | shall
return to Ayodhya from my exile in the
forest. (48)

त्वया मया च aden लक्ष्मणेन सुमित्रया।
पितुर्नियोगे स्थातव्यमेष धर्म: सनातन:॥४९॥

“Yourself, Sita (a princess of the Videha
territory), Laksmana, Sumitra and myself
should abide by the injunctions of my father:
such is the eternal law of morality. (49)
