+ UTTARAKANDA +

conduct seeing Laksmana so _ agitated
uttered thus: “Why do you cry, having come
to the banks of Ganga (the daughter of
Jahnu) where to come was only desire
felt since long, (surely) at this hour of joy;
O Laksmana, do not make me depressed.

(25-26)

नित्यं त्वं waedy ada पुरुषर्षभ।
कच्चिद् विनाकृतस्तेन द्विरात्रं शोकमागत:॥ २७॥

“You remain always at the side of Rama,
O best of men; is it that separated as you
are from him for just two nights, you are
grieved. (27)
ममापि दयितो war जीवितादपि लक्ष्मण।
न चाहमेवं शोचामि मैवं त्वं बालिशो भव॥ २८॥

“Sri Rama for me too, is dearer even
than my life, but no sorrow comes to me, so
please act not as a foolish one. (28)

तारयस्व च मां गङ्गां दर्शयस्व च तापसान्।

ततो मुनिभ्यो वासांसि दास्याम्याभरणानि च॥ २९॥

तत: कृत्वा महर्षीणां यथार्हमभिवादनम्।

तत्र चैकां निशामुष्य यास्यामस्तां पुरीं पुन:॥ ३०॥
“Take me across the Ganga, and show

me the ascetics. | shall give to the ascetics
the garments and the ornaments and then

1003

having thus done homage to the great Rsis
according to their position, and spending
only a night there, we shall again return to
Ayodhya. (29-30),
त्वरते fe मनो RS WH रमयतां वरम्॥३१॥

“My heart too, urges me on to see that
one of lotus-eyed, the lion breasted one,
with a slender waist, the best of those that
please all’. (31)

तस्यास्तद् वचनं श्रुत्वा WAT नयने शुभे।
नाविकानाह्वयामास लक्ष्मण: परवीरहा।
इयं स सज्जा नौश्चेति दाशा: प्राञ्जलयोऽब्रुवन्॥ ३२॥

Laksmana, the destroyer of the heroes
among foes, hearing these words of her, he
wiped his eyes dry summoned the boatmen.
The ferry-men with folded hands replied
thus: “This boat is already made to depart”

(32).
तितीर्षुर्लक्ष्मणो गङ्गां शुभां नावमुपारुहत्।
Tet संतारयामास लक्ष्मणस्तां समाहित:॥ ३३॥

Desiring to cross the holy Ganga,
Laksmana ascended the boat, and _ fully

composed, he made her cross the Ganga.
(33)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये उत्तरकाण्डे षट्चत्वारिंश: सर्ग: Il ४६ ॥

Thus ends Canto Forty-six in the Uttarakanda of the glorious Ramayana of Valmiki,
the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

Canto XLVII

Carrying Sita across the Ganga, Laksmana laments agony and talks
with a heavy heart thinking of her future

अथ नावं सुविस्तीर्णां नैषादीं राघवानुज:।
आरुरोह समायुक्तां पूर्वमारोप्य मैथिलीम्॥१॥
Then Laksmana (the younger brother

of Rama) ascended the boat brought by
Nisada, which was spacious and well-

furnished, seating Sita (the princess of Mithila)
first. (1)

सुमन्त्रं wa सरथं स्थीयतामिति लक्ष्मण:।
sara शोकसंतप्त: प्रयाहीति च नाविकम्॥ २॥

Laksmana struck with grief ordered
