# YUDDHAKANDA #

who is superior in point of devotion to her
husband, even to Arundhati (wife of Sage
Vasistha) and Rohini (the principal spouse
of the moon-god), who deserved to be
respected and who is the model of
forbearance even to Goddess Earth and a
model of grace even to Sri, the goddess of
fortune and charm, and is extremely fond of
her husband. (16—21)

सीतां सर्वानवद्याङ्गीमरण्ये विजने शुभाम्।
आनयित्वा तु तां दीनां छद्मनाऽऽत्मस्वदूषणम्॥ २२॥
“Bearing away by recourse to a fraud
the aforesaid Sita, who was living in a
lonely forest, was faultless of every limb
and charming, though miserable, ruination
has undoubtedly been brought by you on
yourself as well as on your relations. (22)
अप्राप्य तं चैव कामं मैथिलीसंगमे कृतम्।
पतिव्रतायास्तपसा Tt दग्धोऽसि A प्रभो॥ २३॥
“Nay, having failed to realize the well-
known ambition cherished by you for union
with Sita, the princess of Mithila, you have
surely been consumed by the asceticism of
that lady devoted to her husband, O my
lord! (23)
तदैव यन्न दग्धस्त्वं धर्षयंस्तनुमध्यमाम्।
देवा बिभ्यति a ad Sat: साग्निपुरोगमा:॥ २४॥
“It is because all the gods together
with Indra (the ruler of gods), including those
headed by the god of fire, fear you that you
were not consumed even while laying violent
hands on that slender-waisted lady. (24)

अवश्यमेव लभते फलं पापस्य कर्मण:।
Wd: पर्यागते काले कर्ता नास्त्यत्र संशय:॥ 2G ॥
“When the time for retribution comes, O

my lord, the doer assuredly reaps the fruit of
his sinful deed: there is no doubt about it. (25)

शुभकृच्छुभमाप्नोति पापकृत् पापमश्चुते।

विभीषण: Ge प्राप्तस्त्वं प्राप्त: पापमीदूशम्॥ २६॥
“The doer of a blessed act gathers

happiness, while the perpetrator of a sinful

769

act reaps misery. While Vibhisana has
attained happiness, you have met with such
an evil destiny. (26)
सन्त्यन्या: प्रमदास्तुभ्यं रूपेणाभ्यधिकास्तत:।
अनङ्गवशमापन्नस्त्वं तु मोहान्न बुद्ध्यसे॥ २७॥
“There are in your gynaeceum other
young ladies superior to Sita in physical
charm; having fallen a prey to concupiscence,
however, you did not perceive this through
ignorance. (27)

न कुलेन न रूपेण न दाक्षिण्येन मैथिली।
मयाधिका वा तुल्या वा तत् तु मोहान्न बुद्ध्यसे ।। २८ ॥

“The princess of Mithila is no match for
me, much less superior to me, in birth, nor
in comeliness, nor again in urbanity. You,
however, did not perceive this through
infatuation. (28)
सर्वदा सर्वभूतानां नास्ति मृत्युरलक्षण:।
तव तद्बदयं मृत्युर्मैथिलीकृतलक्षण:॥ २९॥

“Death does not come to any living
being at any time without any (exciting)
cause. Your demise on this occasion has

likewise been brought about on account of
Sita (a princess of Mithila). (29)

सीतानिमित्तजो मृत्युस्त्वया दूरादुपाहृत:।
मैथिली ae रामेण विशोका विहरिष्यति॥ ३०॥
अल्पपुण्या we aie पतिता शोकसागरे।
कैलासे मन्दरे मेरौ aa चैत्ररथे वने॥ ३१॥

देवोद्यानेषु सर्वेषु विहृत्य सहिता त्वया।
विमानेनानुरूपेण या याम्यतुलया श्रिया॥ ३२॥
भ्रंशिता कामभोगेभ्य: सास्मि वीर वधात् तव॥ ३३॥

“Death, which was to be brought about
on account of Sita, was invited by you from
afar. Rid of her grief, the princess of Mithila
will now sport with Sri Rama. |, however,
whose stock of merit was poor, have tumbled
into a fearful ocean of grief. |, who, having
sported with you on Mount Kailasa, Mount
Mandara, Mount Meru, in the grove known
