884

अथ दत्त्वा tad Tall मृगयामटते स्म तत्।
तत्रापश्यत् ततो TH मयं नाम fad: सुतम्॥ ३॥
“After giving her away, the Raksasa
went about sporting in the forest and saw
there, O Rama, Maya, son of Diti. (3)

कन्यासहायं तं eat दशग्रीवो निशाचर:।

अपृच्छत् को भवानेको निर्मनुष्यमृगे वने॥४॥

अनया मृगशावाक्ष्या किमर्थं ae तिष्ठसि।
मयस्तदाब्रवीद् राम पृच्छन्तं तं निशाचरम्॥७५॥
“Seeing him accompanied by his
daughter, DaSagriva, the Raksasa, inquired
of him: ‘Who are you and why do you
stay in this forest, devoid of human beings
and animals, in the company of this girl
whose eyes resemble a doe’s?’ O Rama,
Maya then replied to the inquisitive Raksasa:
(4-5)

श्रूयतां सर्वमाख्यास्ये amg तव।
हेमा नामाप्सरास्तात श्रुतपूर्वा यदि त्वया॥६॥

‘| will narrate all the events as they
took place. Please listen. There was an
Apsara by name Hema. You might have
heard of her. (6)

दैवतैर्मम सा दत्ता पौलोमीव शतक्रतो:।
तस्यां सक्तमना ह्यासं दशवर्षशतान्यहम्॥७॥

‘Just as Paulomi, the daughter of Puloma,
was given in marriage to Indra, even so
Hema was given to me by the gods in
marriage. | was deeply attached to her
and lived with her for thousands of years.

(7)
सा च दैवतकार्येण गता वर्षांश्चतुर्दश।
तस्या: कृते च हेमाया: Ud हेममयं पुरम्॥८॥
वज्रवैदूर्यचित्रं च मायया निर्मितं मया।
तत्राहमवसं दीनस्तया हीन: सुदु:खित:॥९॥

‘It is now fourteen years since she
departed to serve the purpose of the gods.
For the sake of Hema, | created this city
entirely made of gold by my magical powers
and decked it with diamonds and cat’s-eye
gems. Bereaved of her, | lived there, dispirited

« VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

and extremely desolate.

तस्माद् पुराद् दुहितरं गृहीत्वा वनमागत:।
इयं ममात्मजा राजंस्तस्या: कुक्षौ विवरधिता॥ १०॥

‘From that city | came to the forest
taking my daughter with me, O king. This is
my daughter who grew in her (Hema’s)
womb. (10)

भर्तारमनया सार्धमस्या: प्राप्तोऽस्मि मार्गितुम्।

कन्यापितृत्वं दु:खं fe सर्वेषां मानकांक्षिणाम्॥ ११॥
‘| have come in her company in search

of a husband for her; for, to be the father of

an unmarried girl is a headache to all parents
who hanker after reputation. (11)

कन्या हि द्वे कुले नित्यं संशये स्थाप्य तिष्ठति।
पुत्रद्वयं ममाप्यस्यां भार्यायां सम्बभूव ह॥१२॥
‘An unmarried girl throws into jeopardy

the reputation of two families. Of her (Hema)
two sons, too, were born to me. (12)

मायावी प्रथमस्तात दुन्दुभिस्तदनन्तर:।

एवं ते सर्वमाख्यातं याथातथ्येन पृच्छत:॥१३॥
‘Of them Mayavi was the first and

Dundubhi, the second. To you who have

questioned me, O dear one, | have narrated

everything exactly according to facts. (13)

त्वामिदानीं कथं aa जानीयां को भवानिति।
एवमुक्तं तु dq रक्षो विनीतमिदमब्रवीत्॥१४॥
ae पौलस्त्यतनयो दशग्रीवश्च नामत:।

मुनेर्विश्रवसो यस्तु तृतीयो ब्रह्मणोऽभवत्॥१५॥

‘Now, how can | know you? Who are
you?’ “Questioned thus, the Raksasa humbly
said: ‘| am a grandson of Pulastya and a
son of sage ViSrava, who is third in descent
from Brahma himself. | go by the name of
DaSagriva.’ (14-15)

एवमुक्तस्तदा UA राक्षसेन्द्रेण दानव:।
महर्षेस्तनयं ज्ञात्वा मयो हर्षमुपागत:॥१६॥
“Spoken to thus, O Rama, by the lord
of the Raksasas and coming to know that
he was a son of an eminent sage, Visrava,
Maya, the Danava, became glad. (16)

(8-9)
