858

lips and possessed a golden hue—did not
look charming in the heavens in the absence
of Sri Rama any more than the moon risen
during the day. (21-22)

सा हेमवर्णा नीलाङ्गं मैथिली राक्षसाधिपम्।
शुशुभे काञ्चनी काञ्ची नीलं गजमिवाश्रिता॥ २३॥

Confined in the lap of the dark-bodied
Ravana (the suzerain lord of ogres), the
said princess of Mithila, who possessed a
golden hue, shone brightly like a girth of
gold round a dark-blue elephant. (23)

सा पद्मपीता हेमाभा रावणं जनकात्मजा।
fage, घनमिवाविश्य शुशुभे तप्तभूषणा॥ २४॥

Nearing Ravana’s back, the said
daughter of Janaka—who possessed a
yellowish hue, resembling the filaments of a
lotus, and was bright as gold, nay, who was
adorned with jewels of refined gold—shone
like lightning flashing athwart a cloud. (24)

तस्या भूषणघोषेण वैदेह्या राक्षसेशर्वर:।
aya विमलो नील: सघोष ga तोयद:॥ २५॥

Due to the jingling of ornaments of the
aforesaid Sita (a princess of the Videha
territory) the king of ogres appeared like a
clear dark-blue rumbling rain-cloud. (25)

उत्तमाङ्गच्युता तस्या: पुष्पवृष्टि: Wada: |
सीताया ह्रियमाणाया: पपात धरणीतले॥ RE II
While Sita was being borne away, a
shower of flowers dropped from her head,
rained on all sides on the earth’s surface.
(26)

सा तु रावणवेगेन पुष्पवृष्टि: समन्तत:।
समाधूता दशग्रीवं पुनरेवाभ्यवर्तत॥ २७॥

Raised on all sides by the tempest
released by the vehemence of Ravana,
however, the rain of blossoms covered the
ten-headed monster once more. (27)

अभ्यवर्तत पुष्पाणां धारा वैश्रवणानुजम्।
नक्षत्रमाला विमला मेरुं नगमिवोन्नतम्॥ २८॥

That shower of flowers descended on
Ravana (a younger half-brother of Kubera)

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

as does the immaculate belt of the lunar
mansions descend on Mount Meru, the
foremost of mountains. (28)

चरणान्नूपुरं भ्रष्टं वैदेह्या रत्नभूषितम्।
विद्युन्मण्डलसंकाशं पपात धरणीतले॥ २९॥

A bejewelled anklet of gold, loosed
from a foot of Sita (a princess of the Videha
territory) and resembling a circular flash of
lightning, dropped on the earth’s surface.(29)

तरुप्रवालरक्तका सा नीलाङ्गं राक्षसेश्वरम्।
प्रशोभयत add गजं कक्ष्येव काञ्चनी॥ ३०॥

Ruddy like the shoots of certain trees,
the aforesaid princess of the Videha kingdom
adorned the dark-limbed king of ogres as a
girth of gold would adorn an elephant. (30)
at महोल्कामिवाकाशे दीप्यमानां स्वतेजसा।
जहाराकाशमाविश्य सीतां वैश्रवणानुज:॥ ३१॥

Betaking himself to the heavens, the
younger brother of Kubera, Ravana (son of
Sage Visrava), bore away the celebrated
Sita, who was blazing with her own effulgence
as a big meteor in the heavens. (31)

तस्यास्तान्यग्निवर्णानि भूषणानि महीतले।
सघोषाण्यवशीर्यन्त क्षीणास्तारा इवाम्बरात्॥ ३२॥

The aforesaid jewels of Sita, shining
like fire, dropped on the earth’s surface with
a jingling sound like worn-away meteors
falling from the firmament. (32)

तस्या: स्तनान्तराद् भ्रष्टो हारस्ताराधिपद्युति: ।
वैदेह्या निपतन् भाति गङ्गेव गगनच्युता॥ ३३॥

Dissociated from the heart of the
aforesaid princess of the Videha territory
and dropping down, the necklace of pearls,
which shone like the moon (the suzerain
lord of stars) looked like the Ganga
descending from the heavens. (33)

उत्पातवाताभिरता नानाद्बिजगणायुता: |

मा भैरिति विधूताग्रा व्याजह्रुरिव पादपा:॥ ३४॥
Violently shaken by a portentous blast

(released by the flight of Ravana) and

inhabited by birds of every description, the
