728

अभिगम्य च धर्मज्ञा wt धर्मभृतां वरम्।
oa: परमधर्मज्ञमृषिसङ्घा: समागता:॥७॥
Having approached him, the assembled
hosts of sages—the knowers of Dharma—
said to Rama, the best amongst the
upholders of Dharma and the supreme
knower of Dharma: (7)

त्वमिक्ष्वाकुकुलस्यास्य पृथिव्याश्च महारथ:।
प्रधानश्चापि नाथश्च देवानां मघवानिव॥८॥

“You are a great car-warrior and the
principal personality and master of this
Ikswaku dynasty as well as of the earth, as
Indra is of gods. (8)

fasaiarsy, लोकेषु यशसा विक्रमेण al
पितृव्रतत्वं सत्यं च त्वयि धर्मश्च पुष्कल:॥९॥
“You are well-known in the three worlds
by virtue of your fame and valour. In you
abide filial devotion, truth and abundant virtue.

(9)
त्वामासाद्य महात्मानं धर्मज्ञं धर्मवत्सलम्।
अर्थित्वान्नाथ वक्ष्यामस्तच्च A: क्षन्तुमर्हसि॥ १०॥

“Having met you, the magnanimous
knower of Dharma and_ lover of
righteousness, we shall speak like a
petitioner. You may please forgive us for
this encroachment, O lord! (10)

अधर्म: सुमहान् नाथ भवेत् तस्य तु भूपते:।

यो ae बलिषड्भागं न च रक्षति पुत्रवत्॥११॥
“It would be a great Adharma (failure in

duty), O master, on the part of that king

who would just take away the sixth part by

way of land revenue and not protect his

subjects like his own children. (11)

युञ्जान: स्वानिव प्राणान् प्राणैरिष्टान् सुतानिव।
नित्ययुक्त: सदा Ta सर्वान् विषयवासिन:॥ १२॥
प्राप्नोति शाश्वतीं राम कीर्तिं स बहुवार्षिकीम्।
ब्रह्मण: स्थानमासाद्य aA चापि Aad esi
“Always attentively protecting all the

people dwelling within the kingdom like his
own life or like the sons who are dearer

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

than life, Keeping himself engaged, he attains,
O Rama, continuous fame lasting for many
years and, having reached the realm of
Brahma, is honoured even there. (12-13)

यत् करोति at धर्मं मुनिर्मूलफलाशन:।
तत्र राज्ञश्चतुर्भाग: Wat धर्मेण रक्षत:॥१४॥

“Whatever great Dharma a sage living
on roots and fruits does, the fourth part of it
goes to the king, who protects the people
with Dharma. (14)

सोऽयं ब्राह्मणभूयिष्ठो वानप्रस्थगणो महान्।
त्वन्नाथोऽनाथवद् WA राक्षसैर्हन्यते भृशम्॥१५॥
“This great multitude of forest-dwellers,
mainly consisting of Brahmanas and having
you as their master, O Rama, is being killed
like the forlorn in large numbers by the
ogres. (15)

Ue पश्य शरीराणि मुनीनां भावितात्मनाम्।
हतानां राक्षसैर्घोरैर्बहूनां बहुधा वने॥१६॥

“Come, see the bodies of many pure
minded sages killed by the terrible ogres in
several ways in the forest. (16)

पम्पानदीनिवासानामनुमन्दाकिनीमपि ।
चित्रकूटालयानां च क्रियते wet महत्॥१७॥

“A great destruction is being wrought of
the sages living along the Pampa river, and
by the side of Mandakini and also of those
having their residence on Citrakuta. (17)
एवं aa न मृष्यामो विप्रकारं तपस्विनाम्।
क्रियमाणं at ant रक्षोभिर्भीमकर्मभि:॥ १८॥

“Thus we cannot brook the awful
persecution to which ascetics in the forest
are being subjected by the ogres of fierce
activities. (18)
ततस्त्वां शरणार्थं च शरण्यं समुपस्थिता:।
परिपालय नो राम वध्यमानान् निशाचरै:॥१९॥

“Hence we have come to you, who are
a fit resort, for protection. Rama, protect us;
we are being killed by the ogres, the night-
stalkers. (19)
