980

« VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

due ceremony, Sri Rama, the foremost of | the gynaeceum when the night had set in.

jewels among men, for His part retired into

(62-63)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये उत्तरकाण्डे षट्त्रिंश: AWA: ॥ 3G Il

Thus ends Canto Thirty-six in the Uttarakanda of the glorious Ramayana of Valmiki,
the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

Canto XXXVII
Sri Rama sits in court with His courtiers

अभिषिक्ते तु काकुत्स्थे धर्मेण विदितात्मनि।
व्यतीता या निशा gat पौराणां हर्षवर्धिनी॥१॥

Sri Rama (a scion of Kakutstha), who
understood the nature of the soul, having
been consecrated on the throne of Ayodhya
in accordance with the prescribed rule, the
first night, which enhanced the delight of the
citizens of Ayodhya, passed. (1)
वन्दिन: समुपातिष्ठन् सौम्या नृपतिवेश्मनि॥ २॥

The said night having ended, the
following morning the gentle bards who were
charged with the duty of waking the king
assembled at the royal palace. (2)

a रक्तकण्ठिन: ad किन्नरा sa शिक्षिता:।
तुष्टुवुर्नृपतिं dit यथावत् सम्प्रहर्षिण:॥३॥

Sweet-voiced as they were and trained
in the art of singing like the Kinnaras
(celestial minstrels), they all, full of excessive
joy, began duly to extol the heroic king as
follows: (3)

a सौम्य प्रबुध्यस्व कौसल्याप्रीतिवर्धन।
जगद्धि Wa स्वपिति त्वयि सुप्ते नराधिप॥४॥

“Awake, O gentle hero, the enhancer
of the delight of mother Kausalya! Indeed
the whole world remains buried in sleep
while you are asleep, O suzerain lord of
men! (4)

विक्रमस्ते यथा विष्णो रूपं चैवाश्विनोरिव।
qemu बृहस्पतेस्तुल्य: प्रजापतिसमो ह्यसि॥ i

“Your prowess is like that of Lord Visnu,
and your comeliness is like that of the twin-
born Aswins, the physicians of gods. You
are a compeer of Sage Brhaspati (the
preceptor of gods) in intelligence, and in
ruling over the people you are the equal to
Brahma, the lord of creation. (5)

क्षमा ते पृथिवीतुल्या तेजसा भास्करोपम:।
वेगस्ते वायुना तुल्यो गाम्भीर्यमुदधेरिव॥६॥

“Your forbearance is unshaken like the
earth; in glory you are a compeer of the sun.
Your onrush vies with the wind, while your
profundity is like that of the deep ocean. (6)

अप्रकम्प्यो यथा स्थाणुश्चन्द्रे सौम्यत्वमीदृशम्।
नेदृशा: पार्थिवा: पूर्वं भवितारो नराधिप॥७॥

“You are unshakable in conflict like
Lord Siva such delightfulness as exists in
you is found in the moon. Kings such as
you, never existed in the past nor will they
be hereafter, O suzerain lord of human
beings! (7)
यथा canta दुर्धर्षो धर्मनित्य: प्रजाहित:।

न त्वां wala कीर्तिश्च लक्ष्मीश्च पुरुषर्षभ॥ i

“You are difficult to overpower in the
true sense of the term, constant as you are
in virtue and friendly to the people. Nay,
glory does not forsake you, much less
fortune, O jewel among men! (8)

श्रीश्च धर्मश्च काकुत्स्थ cata Pret प्रतिष्ठितौ |
एताश्चान्याश्च मधुरा वन्दिभि: परिकीर्तिता:॥९॥
