+ UTTARAKANDA +

अस्मिन्नेवाभिसम्प्राप्तं लोके विदितमस्तु ते।
विभीषणवच: श्रुत्वा राक्षसेन्द्र: स रावण:॥ २९॥
दौरात्स्येनात्मनोद्धूतस्तप्ताम्भा इव सागर:।
ततोऽब्रवीद् दशग्रीव: क्रुद्ध: संरक्तलोचन:॥ ३०॥
“Though kept under watch in your
gynaeceum, she was borne away after
overpowering her. Even on hearing of it, O
great monarch, the insult was pocketed by
us—the fellow was not killed; for a maiden
needs must be given away to a husband by
her brothers. Let it be known to you that this
is surely the fruit of your sinful deeds as
well of your perverse mind, reaped in this
very existence.” Looking like an ocean with
turbulent waters when wrought up through
viciousness practised by himself on hearing
the speech of Vibhisana, his eyes bloodshot
through anger, that ten-headed monster,
Ravana, the king of ogres, spoke as follows:
(27—30)
HAA A रथ: शीघ्रं शूरा: सज्जीभवन्तु A: |
भ्राता मे कुम्भकर्णश्च ये च मुख्या निशाचरा: ।। ३१॥
वाहनान्यधिरोहन्तु नानाप्रहरणायुधा: ।
Ta तं समरे हत्वा मधुं रावणनिर्भयम्॥ ३२॥
सुरलोकं गमिष्यामि युद्धाकाङ्क्षी सुहृद्वृत:।
अक्षौहिणीसहस्राणि चत्वार्यग्र्याणि रक्षसाम्॥ ३३॥
नानाप्रहरणान्याशु निर्ययुर्युद्धकाङ्क्षिणाम्।
इन्द्रजित् त्वग्रत: सैन्यात् सैनिकान् परिगृह्य च॥ ३४॥
जगाम रावणो मध्ये कुम्भकर्णश्च पृष्ठत:।
विभीषणश्च धर्मात्मा लङ्कायां धर्ममाचरन्॥ ३५॥

“Let my chariot be harnessed speedily
and let our heroes get ready, let my brother,
Kumbhakarna, and whoever other leading
rangers of the night there are, get into their
vehicles armed with all kinds of weapons.
After killing in combat today the notorious
Madhu, who is not afraid even of Ravana,
i.e., myself, and accompanied by friends, |
shall proceed to the realm of gods seeking
an encounter with them.” Four thousand
Aksauhinis of picked ogres, thirsting for
combat and armed with all kinds of weapons,
sallied forth with all speed. Nay, taking troops

929

with him, Indrajit for his part marched at the
head of the army; Ravana rode in the centre
and Kumbhakarna in the rear. The pious-
minded Vibhisana stayed behind in Lanka
practising virtues. (31—35)
शेषा: aa महाभागा ययुर्मधुपुरं प्रति।
खरैरुष्टैर्हयैर्दीप्तै: शिशुमारैर्महोरगै: 11 ३६ ॥।
राक्षसा: प्रययु: सर्वे कृत्वाऽऽकाशां निरन्तरम्।
दैत्याश्च शतशस्तत्र कृतवैराश्च cad: uso
रावणं प्रेक्ष्य गच्छन्तमन्वगच्छन् हि पृष्ठत:।
स तुं गत्वा मधुपुरं प्रविश्य च दशानन:॥ ३८॥
न ददर्श मधुं तत्र भगिनीं at gear
सा च प्रह्वाञ्जलिर्भूत्वा शिरसा चरणौ गता॥ ३९॥
तस्य राक्षसराजस्य त्रस्ता कुम्भीनसी तदा।

wt समुत्थापयामास न भेतव्यमिति ब्रुवन्॥४०॥
रावणो राक्षसश्रेष्ठ: fee aly करवाणि ते।

साब्रवीद् यदि मे राजन् प्रसन्नस्त्वं महाभुज॥४१॥
भर्तारं न ममेहाद्य हन्तुमर्हसि मानद।
नहीदृशं wa किंचित् कुलस्त्रीणामिहोच्यते॥४२॥
All the rest, who were highly fortunate,
set out towards the city of Madhu. All the
ogres marched on the back of donkeys,
camels, excited horses, dolphins and huge
serpents, leaving no space in the sky. Nay,
perceiving Ravana on the march, Daityas in
their hundreds who bore enmity to the gods,
actually followed at his heels. Reaching the
city of Madhu and entering it, Ravana (the
ten-headed monster) saw his sister there
but did not find Madhu. Nay, joining her
palms as a token of submission, alarmed as
she was, the said Kumbhinasi fell at the feet
of that ruler of ogres with her head touching
them on that occasion. Saying, “You ought
not to be afraid,” Ravana, the foremost of
ogres, lifted her up and added, “What shall
| do for you?” She replied, “If you are pleased
with me, O mighty-armed monarch, you
ought not to kill my husband here today, O
bestower of honour! For nothing is said to
be so dreadful as the death of a husband in
the eyes of ladies of noble birth in this
world. (36—42)
