* SUNDARAKANDA + 61

felt happy with the prospect of finding out
Sita while keenly observing the palace, which
was surrounded with figures drawn in molten
silver, archways decked with ornaments of
gold, beautiful concentric enclosures and
charming gateways; which was waited upon
by drivers of elephants mounted on them,
unwearied heroes and horses which could
not be killed and which drew chariots; which
was ever frequented by marvellous chariots
protected with armours of lion-skins and
tiger-skins, bearing images of ivory, gold
and silver and accompanied by a musical
sound produced by tiny bells fastened round
them; which was filled with many precious
stones, embellished with most excellent seats
and provided with sheds in which big chariots
could be made to stand and with spacious
quarters for lodging great chariot-warriors;
which was crowded on all sides with well-
known beasts and birds of every species,
most charming and worth seeing and
numbering many thousands; nay, which was
scrupulously protected by disciplined soldiers
guarding the boundaries as well as by other
ogres and was thronged on every side with
pre-eminent belles. (1—9)
मुदितप्रमदारत्नं राक्षसेन्द्रनिवेशनम्।
वराभरणसंह्रादै: समुद्रस्वननि:स्वनम्॥ १० ॥
तद् राजगुणसम्पन्नं मुख्यैश्च वरचन्दनै:।
महाजनसमाकीर्णं सिंहैरिव महद् वनम्॥११॥
नित्यार्चितं पर्वसुतं पूजितं wed: सदा॥१२॥
समुद्रमिव गम्भीरं समुद्रसमनि:स्वनम्।
महात्मनो महद् वेश्म महारत्नपरिच्छ्दम्॥१३॥
महारत्नसमाकीर्णं «cast स महाकपि:।
farm वपुषा गजाश्वरथसंकुलम्॥१४॥
That great Hanuman beheld the
spacious palace of Ravana, the lord of
ogres, full of joyous belles, which on account
of the tinkling of excellent jewels produced a
sound that resembled the roaring of sea,
nay, which was equipped with royal
appurtenances, was rendered fragrant with

the foremost varieties of sandalwood and
remained thronged with eminent personages
as a large forest infested with lions; which
was resonant with the sound of kettledrums
and clay tomtoms and was rendered noisy
by the blowing of conches, which was ever
respected and kept tidy and clean by the
ogres and in which the Soma juice was
extracted during sacrificial performances at
every change of the moon (viz., on the
eighth and fourteenth days of each half
month and the days of the full moon and no
moon); which was inscrutable like the sea
and noisy as the sea and was full of
ornaments made of precious jewels; nay,
which abounded with precious jewels
and looked most charming due to the
person of that mighty soul Ravana and was
crowded with elephants, horses and chariots.
(10—14)
लंकाभरणमित्येव सोऽमन्यत महाकपि:।
चचार हनुमांस्तत्र रावणस्य समीपत:॥१५॥

That mighty Hanuman reckoned the
palace to be the very ornament of Lanka
and wandered about the abode of Ravana
at that time. (15)
गृहाद् गृहं राक्षसानामुद्यानानि च सर्वश:।
AAAS AACA: प्रासादांशच चचार स:॥ १६॥

Moving from house to house belonging
to the ogres and even observing all the

gardens as well as the palaces, he ranged
undaunted everywhere. (16)

अवप्लुत्य महावेग: प्रहस्तस्य निवेशनम्।
ततोऽन्यत् पुप्लुवे AVA महापार्श्वस्य वीर्यवान्॥ १७॥

Leaping down into the mansion of
Prahasta, the powerful Hanuman, who was
endowed with extraordinary vehemence,
sprang from that house to another which
belonged to Mahaparswa. (17)

अथ मेघप्रतीकाशं कुम्भकर्णनिवेशनम्।
विभीषणस्य च तथा पुप्लुवे स महाकपि:।॥ १८॥

That mighty Hanuman then bounded
into the palace of Kumbhakarna, which
