532

is reserved for a donor of land, for him who
has maintained the sacred fire all his life,
who has taken a vow of marrying a single
wife, those who have gifted a thousand
cows, those who are vowed to the service
of their preceptor or who have dropped their
body by journeying to the Himalayas or
drowning themselves in water or leaping
into the flames. (43-44)

नहित्वस्मिन् कुले जातो गच्छत्यकुशलां गतिम्।
स तु areata येन त्वं निहतो मम बान्धव:॥ ४५ ll

“‘In fact no one born in this race of
ascetics can ever meet with an evil destiny
after death. He alone by whom you, my
son, have been killed will meet with such a
destiny.’ (45)
एवं स Hut at पर्यदेवयतासकृत्।
ततोऽस्मै कर्तुमुदकं Wat: सह भार्यया॥४६॥

“The ascetic piteously wailed again and
again as aforesaid on that spot. Thereafter
he proceeded with his wife to offer libations
of water to the spirit of his departed son. (46)

स तु दिव्येन रूपेण मुनिपुत्र: स्वकर्मभि:।
स्वर्गमध्यारुहत् fart शक्रेण सह धर्मवित्॥४७॥
“By virtue of his own virtuous deeds,
that sage’s son, for his part, who knew
what is right, immediately ascended in an
ethereal form to heaven in the company of
Indra, who had evidently come in person
drawn by the exceptional merits of the hermit
in order to escort him. (47)

आबभाषे च तौ वृद्धौ शक्रेण सह तापस:।
आश्वस्य च ded तु frat वाक्यमब्रवीत्॥४८॥

“Nay, the ascetic for his part alongwith
Indra talked with the aged couple and,
comforting them awhile, spoke to his father
as follows : (48)

स्थानमस्मि महत् प्राप्तो भवतो: परिचारणात्।
भवन्तावपि च fad मम मूलमुपैष्यथ:॥४९॥

‘Through service rendered to you both
| have attained an exalted place. You two

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

as well will soon reach my presence.’ (49)

एवमुक्त्वा तु दिव्येन विमानेन ager
आरुरोह दिवं क्षिप्रं मुनिपुत्रो जितेन्द्रिय: yo
“Having spoken as aforesaid the sage’s
son, for his part, who had subdued his
senses, quickly rose to heaven in a shapely
aerial car of heavenly design. (50)

स कृत्वाथोदकं तूर्णं awa: We भार्यया।
मामुवाच महातेजा: कृताञ्जलिमुपस्थितम्॥ ५१॥

“Having quickly offered libations of
water with his wife, the exceptionally glorious
ascetic spoke as follows to me, who stood
near him with folded hands : (51)

अद्यैव जहि At राजन् मरणे नास्ति मे व्यथा।

य: शरेणैकपुत्रं मां त्वमकार्षीरपुत्रकम्॥५२॥
“Since with one arrow you have

rendered me sonless—me, who had only

one son, pray, kill me as well this very day,

O king; no agony will be experienced by me

in dying. (52)

त्वयापि च यदज्ञानान्निहतो मे स बालक:।
तेन त्वामपि शप्स्येऽहं सुदु:खमतिदारुणम्॥ ५३॥

““Again, since that boy of mine has
been killed by you through ignorance, | shall
accordingly pronounce a most painful and
very severe curse on you too. (53)

पुत्रव्यसनजं Ga यदेतन्मम साम्प्रतम्।

एवं त्वं पुत्रशोकेन राजन् कालं करिष्यसि॥ ५४॥
“As this agony caused by the death

of my son is being experienced by me at

this moment (through you), you too will

likewise meet your end through grief born of

separation from your son. (54)

अज्ञानात्तु हतो यस्मात् क्षत्रियेण त्वया मुनि: ।
तस्मात् त्वां नाविशत्याशु ब्रह्महत्या नराधिप॥ ५७५ ॥
“`5#160&, however, an ascetic has been
killed by you, a Ksatriya, through ignorance,
the sin of killing a Brahmana is not going to
visit you forthwith (as may be feared by
you), O ruler of men! (55)
