* BALAKANDA +

जीवितुं मुनिशार्दूल न रामं नेतुमर्हसि।
यदि वा wad ब्रह्मन् नेतुमिच्छसि सुव्रत॥ ९॥
चतुरङ्गसमायुक्तं मया we च तं नय।
षष्टिर्वर्षसहस्राणि जातस्य AA कौशिक॥ १०॥
कृच्छ्रेणोत्पादितश्चायं न we नेतुमर्हसि।
चतुर्णामात्मजानां fe प्रीति: परमिका मम॥११॥
ज्येष्ठे धर्मप्रधाने च न wa नेतुमर्हसि।
किं वीर्या राक्षसास्ते च कस्य पुत्राश्च के च ते॥ १२॥
कथं प्रमाणा: के चैतान् रक्षन्ति मुनिपुंगव।
कथं च प्रतिकर्तव्यं तेषां रामेण रक्षसाम्॥१३॥
मामकैर्वा Acetate AA वा कूटयोधिनाम्।
wa मे शंस भगवन् He तेषां मया रणे॥१४॥

स्थातव्यं दुष्टभावानां वीर्योत्सिक्ता हि राक्षसा: ।
तस्य तद् वचनं श्रुत्वा विश्वामित्रोऽभ्यभाषत॥ १५ ॥
“Besides he is no match for the

Raksasas; for the ogres are given to
treacherous fighting. Disunited from Rama,
| cannot really survive even for an hour or
so, O tiger among ascetics! You should
not, therefore, take away Rama. If, on the
other hand, you are keen to take him (a
scion of Raghu), O Brahmana of noble
vows, take him with me as well as with my
army consisting of four parts, viz., elephants,
chariots, cavalry and infantry. Sixty millennia
have elapsed since | was born, O ViSwamitra
(born in the line of King Kusa) and this boy
has been begotten with such hardship at
this ripe old age. You ought not, therefore,
to take away Rama. Of all the four sons my
supreme affection is truly speaking fastened
on the eldest, in whom piety is predominant.
Hence you ought not to take away Rama.
Of what prowess are those Raksasas, and
whose sons are they? Again, who are they
(by name) and of what size? Nay, who
protect them and how can resistance be
offered to those Raksasas, given as they
are to treacherous fighting, by Rama or my
forces or by myself, O holy Brahmana? Tell
me everything, O venerable sage! What
position should be taken up by me on the

129

battlefield opposite to those ogres of wicked

intent? For the Raksasas are proud of their

prowess.” Hearing his above-quoted speech

the sage ViSwamitra replied as follows :
(8—15)

पौलस्त्यवंशप्रभवो रावणो नाम राक्षस:।

स ब्रह्मणा दत्तवरस्त्रैलोक्यं बाधते भृशम्॥ VE Il

महाबलो महावीर्यो राक्षसैर्बहुभिर्वृत:।

श्रूयते च महाराज रावणो राक्षसाधिप:॥१७॥

Mare वैश्रवणभ्राता पुत्रो विश्रवसो मुने:।

यदा न Gey यज्ञस्य विघ्नकर्ता महाबल:॥ Ve Il

तेन संचोदितौ तौ तु राक्षसौ च महाबलौ।

मारीचश्च सुबाहुश्च यज्ञविघ्नं करिष्यत:॥१९॥

“There is an ogre, Ravana by name,
descended in the line of the sage Pulastya
(one of the nine mind-born sons of Brahma,
who are the procreators of the entire
creation). Having been granted a boon of
immunity from death at the hands of all
others except a human being by Brahma
and followed by numerous Raksasas, and
possessed of extraordinary strength and
great prowess, he oppresses all the three
worlds (heaven, earth and the intermediate
region) to the utmost degree. Nay, Ravana,
the ruler of Raksasas, O great king, is
widely known to be a son of the sage
Visrava (Pulastya’s son) and a real half-
brother of Kubera, the eldest son of
Visrava. When the mighty ogre does not
personally interfere with a particular sacrifice,
considering it below his dignity to interrupt
a small undertaking, those two mighty
ogres, Marica and Subahu, actually cause
obstruction in that sacrifice even as directed
by him.” (16—19)

इत्युक्तो मुनिना at राजोवाच aft तदा।

नहि शक्तोऽस्मि संग्रामे स्थातुं TET दुरात्मन:॥ २०॥
Thus addressed by the aforesaid sage,

Viswamitra, the king then replied to the

hermit as follows : “ am not at all able to

stand in an encounter with that evil-minded

fellow. (20)
