* AYODHYAKANDA +

ताभ्यश्चैवाहृतं dt समुद्रेभ्यश्च सर्वश:।
क्षौद्रं दधि yd लाजा cul: सुमनस: पय:॥७॥
set च कन्या SRT मत्तश्च वरवारण:।
सजला: क्षीरिभिश्छन्ना Tel: काञ्चनराजता:॥ ८॥
पद्मोत्पलयुता भान्ति पूर्णा: परमवारिणा।
चन्द्रांशुविकचप्रख्यं पाण्डुरुं रत्नभूषितम्॥९॥
सज्जं तिष्ठति रामस्य वालव्यजनमुत्तमम्।
चन्द्रमण्डलसंकाशमातपत्रं च पाण्डुरम्॥१०॥
सज्जं द्युतिकरं श्रीमदभिषेकपुरस्सरम्।
पाण्डुरश्च वृष: सज्ज: पाण्डुराश्वश्च संस्थित: ॥ ११॥
Water was also brought from as
many other holy rivers, pools, wells and
lakes as there are—rivers like the Narmada
whose streams have their origin in the
east and flow in a westerly direction, those
whose streams originate in lofty mountains
and flow towards the plains and others
such as the Ganga at Varanasi, the
Gandaka and the Sona, flowing northward
or southward and having water white as
milk—as well as from the seas on all sides.
Honey, curds, ghee, grains of parched
paddy, blades of the sacred KuSa grass,
flowers appropriate to the occasion, water,
eight charming virgins, an excellent elephant
in rut, gold and silver pitchers full of water
covered with leaves of trees yielding a milk-
white resin—pitchers which were not only
filled with excellent water but also contained
lotuses and lilies, all shone brightly. An
excellent pair of white chowries resplendent
as the scattered rays of the moon and
adorned with jewels was kept ready for
fanning Sri Rama with at the time of his
installation. A white and splendid umbrella,
which resembled the lunar orb that cast its
effulgence all round, stood ready in front
of all other articles required for the
consecration. A white bull was also ready
and a white horse stood fully ready.
(6—11)

वादित्राणि च सर्वाणि वन्दिनश्च तथापरे।
इक्ष्वाकूणां यथा राज्ये सम्भ्रियेताभिषेचनम्॥ १२॥

349

तथाजातीयमादाय राजपुत्राभिषेचनम्।
ते राजवचनात् at समवेता महीपतिम्॥१३॥
अपश्यन्तोऽब्रुवन् को नु राज्ञो न: प्रतिवेदयेत्।
न पश्यामश्च राजानमुदितश्च दिवाकर:॥१४॥

Also all kinds of musical instruments
and panegyrists as well as bards were
present. Failing to perceive the Emperor,
the Brahmanas and others who had
assembled there in obedience to the latter’s
command, taking with them requisites for
the consecration of a prince as Prince
Regent, of a standard and on a scale
according to which requisites for such
installation are got together in a kingdom
ruled by the Ikswakus, said to one another,
“Who on earth will announce our presence
to the king? And we don’t see the king,
although the sun is already up. (12—14)

यौवराज्याभिषेकश्च सज्जो रामस्य धीमत:।

sft ay garry सर्वांस्तांश्च महीपतीन्॥१५॥
अब्रवीत् तानिदं वाक्यं सुमन्त्रो राजसत्कृत:।
रामं राज्ञो नियोगेन त्वरया प्रस्थितो ह्यहम्॥ १६॥

“Nay, everything in connection with the
installation of the wise Sri Rama to the office
of Prince Regent is ready.” While they were
saying so, Sumantra, who was honoured by
the king, spoke as follows to them all as well
as to the kings present there : “Under orders
of His Majesty, | am really out in a hurry to
bring Sri Rama. (15-16)
पूज्या राज्ञो भवन्तश्च रामस्य तु विशेषत:।
अयं पृच्छामि वचनात् सुखमायुष्मतामहम्॥ १७॥
Ta: सम्प्रतिबुद्धस्य चानागमनकारणम्।
इत्युक्त्वान्त:पुरद्वारमाजगाम फू'।'णवित्।। १८ ॥

“You are, however, worthy of adoration
even to the king, much more so to Sr
Rama. | shall, therefore, presently inquire
after His Majesty’s welfare on behalf of your
blessed selves as also the reason of his
failure to appear before you even though he
is fully awake.” Saying so, Sumantra, who
knew many ancient anecdotes, being many
