* ARANYAKANDA «

दिशो विचेतुं ai सीतां त्वद्वियोगेन शोचतीम्।
अन्वेष्यति वरारोहां मैथिलीं रावणालये॥ २६॥
“Searching with the monkeys rivers,
large mountains, crags and caves to the
extent the thousand-rayed sun blazes forth,
O scourge of enemies, he will trace out
your spouse. Nay, he will send out monkeys
of large proportions to scour the quarters
and will seek for the aforesaid Sita, (a
princess of Mithila) of excellent limbs, grieving
through separation from you in the abode of
Ravana. (24—26)

919

निहत्य रक्षांसि पुन: प्रदास्यति॥ २७॥

“Having entered his abode and
exterminated the ogres, that jewel among
monkeys will restore to you your beloved
spouse, who is beyond reproach, even if
she has reached the summit of Mount
Meru or has found place in the depths of
Patala (the nethermost subterranean region).”

(27)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्येऽरण्यकाण्डे द्विसप्ततितम: Wr ॥ 92 I

Thus ends Canto Seventy-two in the Aranyakanda of the glorious Ramayana of
Valmiki, the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

Canto LXXIII
Appearing in an ethereal form, Kabandha shows to Sri Rama and Laksmana
the way to Rsyamuka Hill and the Pampa Lake and, giving them
information about the grove of Sage Matanga and
his hermitage, takes leave of them

दर्शयित्वा तु रामाय सीताया: परिमार्गणे।
वाक्यमन्वर्थमर्थज्ञ कबन्ध: पुनरब्रवीत्॥१॥
Having shown to Sri Rama the means
of searching out Sita, Kabandha, who knew
the matter in hand, again spoke the following
meaningful words : (1)

एष wa शिव: wer यत्रैते पुष्पिता Far:

प्रतीचीं दिशमाश्रित्य प्रकाशन्ते मनोरमा:॥ २॥
“Going westward, this is the path

propitious for you to reach Rsyamuka, O

Rama, where these trees in blossom, so
pleasing to the mind, appear. (2)

जम्बूप्रियालपनसा न्यग्रोधप्लक्षतिन्दुका: ।
अश्वत्था: कर्णिकाराश्च चूताश्चान्ये च पादपा: 3
धन्वना नागवृक्षाश्च तिलका नतक्कमालका:।
नीलाशोका: कदम्बाश्च करवीराश्च पुष्पिता:॥४॥

अग्निमुख्या अशोकाश्च सुरक्ता: पारिभद्रका:।
तानारुह्याथवा भूमौ पातयित्वा च तान् बलात्॥ ५॥
फलान्यमृतकल्पानि भक्षयित्वा गमिष्यथ:।
तदतिक्रम्य काकुत्स्थ at पुष्पितपादपम्॥६॥
नन्दनप्रतिमं चान्यत् कुरवस्तूत्तरा sal
सर्वकालफला यत्र पादपा मधुरस्रवा:॥७॥

“They are Jambu (rose-apple), Priyala
and jack-fruit trees, banyans, Plaksas and
Tindukas, peepul trees and Karnikaras,
mango and other trees too, Dhavas and
Nagakesara trees, Tilakas, Naktamalakas,
blue AsSokas and Kadambas, blossomed
Karaviras too, Agnimukhyas and Asokas,
red sandalwood trees and Mandaras.
Climbing them or bending their branches by
force to the ground, and partaking of their
nectar-like fruits, you should march along.
Passing beyond that forest with trees in
