* AYODHYAKANDA +

Brhaspati (lit, a master of eloquence),
advanced arguments and counter-arguments
in support of his contention. (17)

अरोगस्तरुणो वाग्मी वपुष्मान् देशकालवित्।
लोके पुरुषसारज्ञ: साधुरेको विनिर्मित:॥१८॥
He was free from diseases, youthful,
eloquent and possessed of a robust body
and knew the right place and time for action.
He was the only pious soul, evolved in the
world, who could know the worth of every
individual appearing before him. (18)

स तु श्रेष्ठैर्गुणैर्युक्त: wart पार्थिवात्मज:।
बहिश्चर sa Wo बभूव गुणत: प्रिय:॥१९॥
Endowed with superb qualities, the
aforesaid prince actually grew to be the
favourite of the people by virtue of his manifold
excellences and was like their very life
moving outside. (19)

सर्वविद्याव्रतस्नातो यथावत् साङ्गवेदवित्।
इष्वस्त्रे च पितु: श्रेष्ठो aya भरताग्रज:॥ २०॥
Sri Rama, the elder brother of Bharata,
had mastered all sciences and fulfilled all
sacred vows, had duly studied all the four
Vedas, including the branches of knowledge
auxiliary to them and proved superior even
to his father, Emperor DaSaratha, a unique
bowman himself, in archery as well as in
the use of missiles propelled by force of
mystic spells. (20)

कल्याणाभिजन: साधुरदीन: सत्यवागृजु:।
वृद्धैरभिविनीतश्च द्विजैर्धर्मार्थदर्शिभि: 1 २१ ॥

A source of all blessings, beneficent,
ever undepressed, truthful of speech and
guileless, he had been instructed all round
by elderly Brahmanas possessing insight
into the moral principles and secular interests.

(21)

धर्मकामार्थतत्त्वज्ञ: स्मृतिमान् प्रतिभानवान्।
लौकिके समयाचारे कृतकल्पो विशारद:॥ २२॥

285

He knew the truth about the principles
of righteousness, material enjoyment and
prosperity, was possessed of a keen memory
and perspicacious. He had _ acquired
proficiency in the discharge of his secular
duties and was well-versed in Vedic rites
too. (22)

निभृत: संव्रृताकारो Wart: सहायवान्।
अमोघक्रोधहर्षश्च त्यागसंयमकालवित्॥ २३॥

He was modest and kept his feelings
concealed and his deliberations secret and
attracted good many followers. His wrath
and pleasure both were unfailing and he
knew when to release funds and when to
withhold them. (23)

दृढभक्ति: स्थिरप्रज्ञो नासद्ग्राही न दुर्वच:।
निस्तन्द्रीरप्रमत्तश्च स्वदोषपरदोषवित्॥ २४॥

He was unflinching in devotion and
stable of mind, did not gather unworthy men
about him nor did he utter foul words. He
was free from sloth and ever vigilant and
was alive to the faults of his own people as
well as to those of others. (24)

शास्त्रज्ञश्च कृतज्ञश्च पुरुषान्तरकोविद:।
य: प्रग्रहानुग्रहयोर्यथान्यायं विचक्षण:॥ २५॥

He was well-versed in sacred lore and
recognized the services of others, could
read men’s mind and was upright in meeting
out punishment and bestowing favours
according to the principles of equity. (25)

सत्संग्रहानुग्रहणे स्थानविन्निग्रहस्य al
आयकर्मण्युपायज्ञञ संदूष्टव्ययकर्मवित्॥ २६॥

He was expert in gathering pious men
about him and patronizing them, and knew
where to use force. He was conversant
with the methods of tapping the sources of
income (without oppressing the people) and
also knew the art of expending money as
laid down in the Sastras (works on political
economy).* (26)

* In the Mahabharata the celestial sage Narada says to Yudhisthira:

कच्चिदायस्य चार्धेन चतुर्भागेन वा पुन: । पादभागैस्तरिभिर्वापि व्यय: संशुद्ध्यते तव॥

(Sabha. V. 71)

“Is your expenditure duly carried on with one-half or one-fourth or three-fourths of your income?”
