* AYODHYAKANDA +

`एतस्यास्तौ सुतौ देव्या: कुमारौ देववर्णिनौ।
उभौ लक्ष्मणशात्रुघ्नौ वीरौ सत्यपराक्रमौ॥ २४॥

“Both Laksmana and Satrughna, those
two heroic princes of godlike appearance
and unfailing prowess, are the sons of this
godly lady. (24)
यस्या: Ha नरव्याघ्रौ जीवनाशमितो गतौ।
राजा पुत्रविहीनश्च स्वर्गं दशरथो गत:॥ २५॥
क्रोधनामकृतप्रज्ञां gat सुभगमानिनीम्।
ऐश्चर्यकामां कैकेयीमनार्यामार्यरूपिणीम्॥ २६॥
यतोमूलं हि पश्यामि व्यसनं महदात्मन:॥ २७॥

“Know this irate, vain, vulgar, though
noble to all appearance, and cruel Kaikeyi,
my mother of uncultured mind and sinful
resolve, who esteems herself good-looking
and is covetous of power, nay, thanks to
whose designs, Sri Rama and Laksmana,
the two tigers among men, have reached
here, the end of their life in the form of exile
in the forest, which is fraught with dangers
at every step, while King DasSaratha, having
been deprived of his two sons, Rama and
Laksmana, has ascended to heaven and
whom | consider to be the root cause of
the great adversity that has befallen me.”

(25—27)

इत्युक्त्वा नरशार्दूलो बाष्पगद्गदया गिरा।
विनि:श्चस्य स ताम्राक्ष: क्रुद्धो AMT Fa AAT Ul २८ ॥

Having uttered these words in a voice
choked with tears and his eyes reddened
through anger mixed with grief, that tiger
among men began to draw a deep audible
breath like a cobra hissing in wrath. (28)
प्रत्युवाच महाबुद्धिरिदं वचनमर्थवित्॥२९॥

To the said Bharata, who was speaking
thus, Bharadwaja, the eminent sage, who
was gifted with great intelligence and who
knew everything, made the following answer :

(29)

623

न दोषेणावगन्तव्या कैकेयी wa त्वया।
रामप्रव्राजनं dad सुखोदर्क भविष्यति॥ ३०॥
“Kaikeyi, O Bharata, should not be
regarded by you as guilty, for this banishment
of Sri Rama will result in happiness to all.
(30)

देवानां दानवानां च ॠषीणां भावितात्मनाम्।
हितमेव भविष्यद्धि रामप्रव्राजनादिह॥ ३१॥
“In fact, good alone in this universe will
result from the exile of Sri Rama to gods,
demons and Rsis, who contemplate on the
Supreme Self.” (31)

अभिवाद्य तु संसिद्ध: कृत्वा चैनं प्रदक्षिणम्।
आमन्त्य भरत: सैन्यं युज्यतामिति चाब्रवीत्॥ ३२॥

Greeting the sage and going round him
clockwise, and taking leave of him, Bharata,
for his part, who had achieved his object by
coming to know the whereabouts of Sri
Rama and receiving the benedictions of the
sage, commanded the army in the following
words : “Let preparations be made for the
journey.” (32)

ततो वाजिरथान्युक्त्वा दिव्यान् हेमविभूषितान्।
अध्यारोहत् प्रयाणार्थं बहून् बहुविधो जन:॥ ३३॥

Then, having joined the horses to their
many excellent chariots embellished with
gold, the different kinds of people ascended
them for the march. (33)

गजकन्या गजाश्चैव हेमकक्ष्या: पताकिन:।
जीमूता sa घर्मान्ते सघोषा: सम्प्रतस्थिरे॥ ३४॥

She-elephants and male elephants
provided with girths of gold and flags marched
in body, distinguished by the sound of bells,
like thundering clouds at the close of summer.

(34)
विविधान्यपि यानानि महान्ति च लघूनि च।

Waa: सुमहार्हाणि पादैरपि पदातय:॥ ३५॥

People drove in various highly precious
conveyances, big as well as small; while
those travelling on foot proceeded on foot.

(35)
