306

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

Canto VI

Enjoined by sage Vasistha, Sri Rama undertakes a vow to bathe
early next morning, worship the gods and sleep for the night
on a mat of Kusa grass. On waking up the next morning,
he says his Sandhya prayers and Brahmanas wish him
a propitious day. The citizens decorate the city in
order to give it a festal appearance and it is
thronged with men eager to witness
the installation of Sri Rama
as Prince Regent

Tt पुरोहिते wa: स्नातो नियतमानस:।
सह Ue बि'शाल'।'क्ष्य'।' नारायणमुपागमत्॥ १ Ul
Having bathed himself, when Vasistha
(the family priest) had left, Sr’ Rama with
a concentrated mind worshipped Lord
Narayana with the co-operation of his
wife, Sita, who had exceptionally large eyes.
(1)

wre शिरसा पात्रीं हविषो विधिवत् aa:
महते दैवतायाज्यं wera ज्वलितानले॥ २॥

Taking up with his head bent low in
reverence the vessel containing ghee for
being poured into the sacred fire as oblation,
he then consigned the ghee to the lighted
fire with due ceremony for the pleasure of
Lord Visnu, the Supreme Deity. (2)
शेषं च हविषस्तस्य प्राश्याशास्यात्मन: प्रियम्।
ध्यायन्नारायणं देवं स्वास्तीर्णे कुशसंस्तरे॥ ३॥
वाग्यत: We ace भूत्वा नियतमानस:।
श्रीमत्यायतने विष्णो: शिश्ये नरवरात्मज:॥४॥

Tasting the remainder of that offering
and expecting in return what was dear to

him, Sr Rama (son of Daégaratha, the
foremost of men) silently lay down to sleep

with his mind fully controlled, on a mat of
KuSa grass spread by himself in the hall
of the glorious temple of Lord Visnu*
alongwith Sita (a princess of the Videha
kings) contemplating on Lord Narayana.
(3-4)
एकयामावशिष्टायां wat प्रतिविबुध्य a: |
अलंकारविधिं Wap कारयामास वेश्मन:॥५॥

Waking up three hours before the close
of night, he duly caused the temple hall to
be decorated. (5)

wa श्रृण्वन् सुखा ara: सूतमागधवन्दिनाम्।
vat संध्यामुपासीनो जजाप सुसमाहित:॥६॥
Hearing there the delightful words of
the Sutas, who recited Pauranika stories,
Magadhas (who regularly recorded and
recounted on festive occasions the genealogy
of the families of their patrons) and Vandis
(panegyrists) and saying his Sandhya
prayers for the morning (in which the deity
presiding over the morning twilight is invoked
and prayed to), he repeated the Gayatri
Mantra with a fully concentrated mind. (6)

qea प्रणतश्चैव शिरसा मधुसूदनम्।
विमलक्षौमसंवीतो वाचयामास स द्विजान्॥७॥

* The learned commentators point out that the Deity referred to here is no other than Lord Sri
Ranganatha, who had been worshipped by a long line of the rulers of Ayodhya as their chosen deity in
a separate shrine built within the precincts of the royal palace. We are told at length in the Patala-Khanda,
of the Padma Purana how Sri Rama so kindly handed over the image to Vibhisana, through whom it reached
Srirangam (near Tiruchirapally) in South India, where it exists even to this day and is held in the highest
reverence by the Vaisnavas and other devotees all over India.
