1098

arms, in the Naimisa forest on the banks of
the Gomati, that Naimisa forest is extremely
holy; may propitiatory rites for averting evil
be performed on all sides. (15-16)

शतशश्चापि धर्मज्ञा:; क्रतुमुख्यमनुत्तमम्।
अनुभूय महायज्ञे नैमिषे रघुनन्दन॥१७॥
qe: पुष्टश्च सर्वोऽसौ मानितश्च यथाविधि।
प्रतियास्यति धर्मज्ञ शीघ्रमामन्त्यतां जन:॥१८॥
‘O one of long arms, descendant of
Raghu, may righteous persons in thousands
be satisfied, seeing the great sacrifice, the
best among rites, ASvamecha. O knower of
righteousness, do invite all people soon,
they will return satisfied, well-fed and honoured
in the proper manner. (17-18)
अयुतं तिलमुद्गस्य प्रयात्वग्रे महाबल॥१९॥
चणकानां कुलित्थानां माषाणां लवणस्य च।
अतोऽनुरूपं स्नेहं च We संक्षिप्तमेव च॥ oll
‘O mighty one, Laksmana, may hundred
thousand carriers carry unbroken rice, and
ten thousand of them carry sesame and
beans, grains, pulses, black gram a little
and salt; and in proportionate quantity,
lubricants and fragrant materials. (19—20)

सुवर्णकोट्यो agen हिरण्यस्य शातोत्तरा:।
अग्रतो भरत: कृत्वा गच्छत्वग्रे समाधिना॥ २१॥
अन्तरापणवीथ्यश्च सर्वे च नटनर्तका:।
सूदा नार्यश्च agar fret यौवनशालिन:॥ 22 11
भरतेन तु सार्धं ते यान्तु सैन्यानि चाग्रत:।
नैगमान् बालवृद्धांश्च द्विजांश्च सुसमाहितान्॥ २३॥
कर्मान्तिकान्वर्धकिन: कोशाध्यक्षांश्च नैगमान्।
मम मातृस्तथा सर्वा: कुमारान्त:पुराणि च॥ २४॥
काञ्चनीं मम पत्नीं च दीक्षायां ait कर्मणि।
अग्रतो भरत: कृत्वा गच्छत्वग्रे महायशा:॥ २५॥

‘May Bharata proceed carrying coins

« VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

in many hundred millions of gold and silver,
carefully. Many rows of mobile markets, all
actors and dancers, cooks, many damsels
possessed of eternal charm, may they
accompany Bharata; the citizens, both young
and aged ones, Brahmanas in front leading
the march, the labourers, carpenters,
treasurers and knowers of Veda, all my
mothers (Kaikeyi with Sumitra and Kausalya),
the spouses of the princes (Bharata etc.)
‘the gold statue of my wife, Sita, and the
knowers of the consecration ceremony, may
Bharata possessed of great fame proceed.’
(21—25)

उपकार्यां महार्हाश्च पार्थिवानां महौजसाम्।
सानुगानां नरश्रेष्ठो व्यादिदेश महाबल:॥ २६॥
The powerful, Sri Rama, possessed of
great power ordered to be built many costly
dwellings for the powerful kings, together
with their attendants. (26)

अन्नपानानि वस्त्राणि अनुगानां महात्मनाम्।
Wa: A तदा यात: शत्रुघ्नसहितस्तदा॥ २७॥
He also ordered for the provision of
food and drinks for the noble ones, who
followed them (kings). Bharata then
proceeded together with Satrughna. (27)

वानराश्च महात्मान: सुग्रीवसहितास्तदा।
विप्राणां wert: सर्वे चक्रुश्च परिवेषणम्॥ २८॥
The noble monkeys, together with
Sugriva and the select Brahmanas, then
served the food. (28)

विभीषणश्च रक्षोभि: स्त्रीभिश्च बहुभिर्वृत:।
ऋॠषीणामुग्रतपसां US चक्रे महात्मनाम्॥ २९॥
Vibhisana together with the Raksasas

and many women, received with honour the
noble Rsis of great penances. (29)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये SRPMS एकनवतितम: WA: ॥ ९१ ॥

Thus ends Canto Ninety-one in the Uttarakanda of the glorious Ramayana of Valmiki,
the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

