« KISKINDHAKANDA +

ततस्ते वानरा: ster गिरं मुनिसमीरिताम्।
निश्चक्रमुर्वनात् तस्मात् तान् दृष्टवा वालिरब्रवीत्॥ ५९॥

“Hearing the malediction uttered by the
sage, the aforesaid monkeys thereupon went
away from that forest. Seeing them, Vali
said to them: (59)

fe wed: समस्ताश्च मतङ्गवनवासिन:।
मत्समीपमनुप्राप्ता अपि स्वस्ति वनौकसाम्॥६०॥

“Wherefore have you and all the
denizens of Matangavana (the grove
occupied by Sage Matanga) sought my
presence? | hope all is well with the denizens
of the said forest.’ (60)

ततस्ते कारणं Ge तथा शापं च वालिन:।
शशंसुर्वानरा: सर्वे वालिने हेममालिने॥६१॥

“Thereupon all those monkeys reported
to Vali, who was adorned with a chain of
gold, the whole reason of their sudden
departure from the forest and referred to the
malediction pronounced on Vali. (61)

एतच्छुत्वा तदा वाली वचनं वानरेरितम्।
स महर्षि समासाद्य याचते स्म कृताञ्जलि:।। ६२॥

“Hearing the aforesaid explanation given
by the monkeys, and duly approaching the
eminent sage, the aforesaid Vali with joined
palms craved his indulgence. (62)

महर्षिस्तमनादृत्य प्रविवेशाश्रमं प्रति।
शापधारणभीतस्तु वाली बिह्वलतां गत:॥६३॥

“Disregarding him, however, the eminent
sage entered deep into the hermitage, while
Vali, who was afraid of receiving the curse,
was reduced to a state of utter confusion.

(63)
ad: शापभयाद् भीतो ऋष्यमूकं महागिरिम्।
प्रवेष्टुं नेच्छति हरिर्द्रष्टुं वापि नरेश्वर॥६४॥

“Stricken with fear of the curse, the
monkey, Vali, no longer seeks to enter the
boundary of the great Rsyamuka hill or even
to look at it, O lord of human beings! (64)
तस्याप्रवेशं ज्ञात्वाहमिदं WH महावनम्।
विचरामि सहामात्यो विषादेन विवर्जित:॥६५॥

973

“Knowing that he cannot penetrate into
it, O Rama, | roam about in this large forest
with my ministers, entirely free from anxiety
as | am. (65)

एषोऽस्थिनिचयस्तस्य दुन्दुभे: सम्प्रकाशते।
वरीर्योत्सेकान्निरस्तस्य गिरिकूटनिभो महान्॥ ६६॥

“Here is the colossal heap, shining
most conspicuously like a mountain-top, of
the bones of Dundubhi, who was thrown
with pride of virility. (66)

इमे च विपुला: साला: सप्त शाखावलम्बिन: |
यत्रैकॆ घटते वाली निष्पत्रयितुमोजसा॥६७॥

“These are the seven gigantic sal trees,
hanging low with their boughs, each of which
Vali can denude of its leaves by shaking it
with his might. (67)
एतदस्यासमं वीर्यं मया Wa प्रकाशितम्।
कथं तं वालिनं ad समरे शक्ष्यसे Teen

“Such is the matchless strength of Vali
revealed by me, O Rama! How will you be
able to kill that Vali in a combat, O protector
of men?” (68)
तथा त्रुवाणं सुग्रीवं प्रहसँल्लक्ष्मणोऽब्रवीत्।
कस्मिन् कर्मणि निर्वृत्ते श्रद्दध्या वालिनो वधम्॥ ६९॥

To Sugriva, who was speaking as
aforesaid, Laksmana, heartily laughing, said,
“On what feat being accomplished should
you believe that Vali can be disposed of by
Sri Rama?” (69)

तमुवाचाथ सुग्रीव: सप्त सालानिमान् पुरा।
Wathen वाली विव्याधाथ स चासकृत्॥ Vo it

To him Sugriva forthwith replied, “In
the past Vali pierced these seven sal trees
one after another and he did so more than
once even later. (70)

रामो निर्दारयेदेषां बाणेनैकेन च द्रुमम्।

वालिनं निहतं मन्ये great रामस्य विक्रमम्॥ ७१॥
“If Sri Rama too should be able to split

one of these trees with a single arrow, |

shall consider Vall killed on witnessing Sri
Rama’s prowess. (71)
