100

ऋषिपुत्रप्रभावेण कामान् प्राप्स्यामि चाप्यहम्।
तत: साध्विति तद्वाक्यं ब्राह्मणा: प्रत्यपूजयन्॥ १० ॥
वसिष्ठप्रमुखा: सर्वे पार्थिवस्य मुखाच्च्युतम्।
ऋष्यशृङ्गपुरोगाश्च प्रत्यूचुर्नृपतिं तदा॥११॥

“And | shall certainly attain all my desired
ends through the influence (spiritual power)
of Rsyasrnga.” Thereupon, saying “Amen !”
all the Brahmanas with Vasistha as their
leader acclaimed the aforesaid proposal that
had emanated from the lips of the king. And
those headed by Rsyasrnga then replied to
the king as follows : (10-11)

सम्भारा: सम्भियन्तां ते तुरगश्च विमुच्यताम्।
सरय्वाश्चोत्तरे तीरे यज्ञभूमिर्विधीयताम्॥१२॥

“Let all the requisites for the sacrifice
be got together and your horse be released
and let a sacrificial ground be prepared on
the northern bank of the Sarayu. (12)

सर्वथा प्राप्स्यसे पुत्रांश्चतुरोऽमितविक्रमान्।
यस्य a धार्मिकी बुद्धिरियं पुत्रार्थमागता॥१३॥

“You, to whom such a pious idea has
occurred for securing a son, shall at all
events secure four sons possessed of
immense prowess.” (13)

तत: प्रीतोऽभवद् राजा श्रुत्वा तु द्विजभाषितम्।
अमात्यानब्रवीद् राजा हर्षेणेदं शुभाक्षरम्॥१४॥

The king was really pleased to hear
the acclamation of the Brahmanas. The
monarch then joyfully spoke to the ministers
in sweet words as follows: (14)

TRU वचनाच्छीघ्रं सम्भारा: awed मे।
समर्थाधिष्ठितश्चाश्व: सोपाध्यायो विमुच्यताम्॥ १५॥

“Let the requisites for the sacrifice
be got together apace according to the
instructions of my elders. And let the sacrificial
horse be let loose under the superintendence
of four hundred Ksatriya princes capable of
guarding and controlling it, alongwith the
chief-priest. (15)

सरय्वाश्चोत्तरे तीरे यज्ञभूमिर्विधीयताम्।
शान्तयश्चाभिवर्धन्तां यथाकल्पं यथाविधि॥ १६॥

« VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

“Nay, let च sacrificial ground be
prepared on the northern bank of the Sarayu
and let propitiatory rites (intended to avert
evils) be elaborately gone through in proper
order of sequence and in accordance with
the scriptural ordinance. (16)

शक्य: कर्तुमयं यज्ञ: सर्वेणापि महीक्षिता।
नापराधो भवेत् Heel यद्यस्मिन् क्रतुसत्तमे॥ १७॥

“This horse-sacrifice is capable of being
accomplished by any and every monarch
provided there is no grievous transgression
(in the shape of omission of certain essential
rites) made in the course of this pre-eminent
sacrificial performance. (17)
fos fe मृगयन्त्येते विद्वांसो ब्रह्मराक्षसा:।
विधिह्रीनस्य यज्ञस्य Gea: Hat विनश्यति॥ १८॥

“For Brahmanas that have attained the
form of an ogre due to the omission of
Mantras and rites, though learned (well-
versed in the science of ritual acts) are on
the look-out even for a minor transgression
(in order to get an opportunity to spoil the
sacrifice and thereby get the share of the
gods) and he who undertakes a sacrificial
performance bereft of the prescribed
procedure forthwith perishes. (18)

aq यथा विधिपूर्वं मे क्रतुरेष समाप्यते।
तथा विधानं क्रियतां समर्था: करणेष्विह॥ १९॥

“Therefore steps may be taken to ensure
that this sacrificial undertaking of mine is
concluded in accordance with the prescribed
procedure; for you are capable of doing all
this.” (19)
तथेति च da: सर्वे मन्त्रिण: प्रत्यपूजयन्।
पार्थिवेन्द्रस्य तद् वाक्यं यथाऽऽज्ञप्तमकुर्वत॥ २०॥

Thereupon all the counsellors of the
king acclaimed the aforesaid command of
the Emperor with the words “Let it be so”,
and did as they were enjoined to do. (20)

ततो द्विजास्ते धर्मज्ञमस्तुवन् पार्थिवर्षभम्।
अनुज्ञातास्तत: सर्वे पुनर्जग्मुर्यथागतम्॥२१॥

Those Brahmanas next glorified the
Emperor, who knew what was right. Then,
