764

submission in the interest of his deceased
eldest brother. (20)
a: wrens वासवेन।
भवन्तमासाद्य रणे विभग्नो
वेलामिवासाद्य यथा AAR URI

“This ogre, who had never been
vanquished before in trials of strength by all
the gods combined, or even by Indra himself,
has been routed on confronting you on the
battlefield even as the sea breaks up on
reaching the shore. (21)

अनेन दत्तानि वनीपकेषु
भुक्ताश्च भोगा निभृताश्च भृत्या:।
समर्पितानि

धनानि मित्रेषु
वैराण्यमित्रेषु च यापितानि॥ २२॥

“By him gifts were conferred on
mendicants, pleasures too were enjoyed
and dependants were fully maintained, riches
were bestowed on friends and grudges
against enemies were also revenged. (22)

एषोऽहिताग्निश्च महातपाश्च

वेदान्तग: कर्मसु चाग्रयशूर:।
Wet यत् प्रेतगतस्य pa

ad कर्तुमिच्छामि तव प्रसादात्॥ २३॥

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA +

“Nay, he maintained a perpetually sacred
fire and practised great religious austerities,
had completely mastered the Vedas and
was highly proficient in ritual acts. Through
your goodwill | seek to perform that which
ought to be performed in relation to this
brother of mine, who has departed to the

other world.” (23)
a wa ae: करुणैर्महात्मा
waa: साधु विभीषणेन।
आज्ञापयामास नरेन्द्रसूनु:
स्वर्गीयमाधानमदीनसत्त्व: ॥ २४॥

Appealed to by Vibhisana in his own
pathetic words, that high-souled prince,
Sri Rama, who was undepressed in spirits,
commanded him to perform funeral rites,
which were calculated to lead the departed
soul to heaven: (24)

मरणान्तानि वैराणि निर्वृत्तं न: प्रयोजनम्।
क्रियतामस्य संस्कारो ममाप्येष यथा तव॥ २५ ॥

“Animosity ends with death. Our
purpose has been achieved. Therefore, let
obsequies be performed in relation to him
now. He is as good as mine too as yours.”

(25)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये FERS नवाधिकशततम: AT Il १०९ ॥

Thus ends Canto One hundred and nine in the Yuddhakanda of the glorious
Ramayana of Valmiki, the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

दशाधिकशततम: at:
Canto CX

The lament of Ravana’s consorts

want निहतं श्रुत्वा राघवेण महात्मना।
अन्त:पुराद् विनिष्पेतू राक्षस्य: शोककर्शिता:॥१॥
वार्यमाणा: सुबहुशो वेष्टन्त्य: झक्षितिपांसुषु।
विमुक्तकेश्य: शोकार्ता Weal वत्सहता इव॥ २॥

Emaciated through grief on hearing of

Ravana having been killed by the high-
souled Sri Rama (a scion of Raghu),
the ogresses living in the gynaeceum
of Ravana, rushed out of the gynaeceum,
rolling in the dust of the streets,
though being held back every now and then
