610

who was not only a knower of Brahma but

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

surrounding the hermitage, consisting of

also the foremost of Vedic scholars,* Bharata | clusters of trees interspersed with lovely

saw the extensive and delightful grove | huts of leafy twigs.

(23)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्येऽयोध्याकाण्डे एकोननवतितम: सर्ग: ॥ ८९ ॥

Thus ends Canto Ejighty-nine in the Ayodhyakanda of the glorious Ramayana of
Valmiki, the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

नवतितम: सर्ग:
Canto XC

Leaving his party a couple of miles away on this side of the hermitage, Bharata
enters it with Vasistha and Satrughna. After exchange of compliments
between Sages Vasistha and Bharadwaja, Bharata bows down at the
feet of the latter, who inquires of his health and seeks to know his mind
about Sri Rama. Bharata thereupon remorsefully apprises him of
his intention to bring Rama back from the forest and questions
him about his whereabouts. To this the sage replies that
Sri Rama was sojourning on Mount Citrakita, and advises
Bharata to see the latter the following morning

भरद्वाजाश्रमं Wat क्रोशादेव नरर्षभ:।
जनं सर्वमवस्थाप्य जगाम we मन्तिभि:।॥ १॥
पद्भ्यामेव तु धर्मज्ञो न्यस्तशस्त्रपरिच्छद:।
वसानो वाससी att पुरोधाय पुरोहितम्॥ २॥

Having reached the precincts of the
hermitage of Bharadwaja and leaving all his
people only a couple of miles away on this
side of the hermitage so as not to cause
disturbance to the hermits living peacefully
there, Bharata, a jewel among men, for his
part, who knew what is right, proceeded
further with his counsellors on foot, placing
Sage Vasistha (his family-priest) ahead and
putting on only a pair of silk garments (viz.,
a loin-cloth and an outer covering), laying
aside his weapons and ornaments etc.

(1-2)

तत: संदर्शने तस्य भरद्वाजस्य Waa:
मन्त्रिणस्तानवस्थाप्य जगामानुपुरोहितम्॥ ३॥

Bidding the aforesaid counsellors stay
behind, the moment the celebrated
Bharadwaja was clearly in sight, Bharata
(a scion of Raghu) then proceeded at the
heels of Vasistha, his family-priest. (3)
वसिष्ठमथ दृष्टैव भरद्वाजो महातपा:।
संचचालासनात् तूर्णं शिष्यानर्घ्यमिति ब्रुवन्॥४॥

At the very sight of Vasistha,
Bharadwaja, who practised great austerities,
at once hurriedly rose from his seat, asking

his pupils to fetch water to wash the hands
of the distinguished guest with. (4)

समागम्य वसिष्ठेन भरतेनाभिवादित:।
अबुध्यत महातेजा: सुतं दशरथस्य तम्॥५॥

* A Smrti-text says :

जन्मना जायते शूद्र: कर्मणा wad द्विज: । वेदाभ्यासेन विप्रत्वं ae जानाति ब्राह्मण:॥
“By birth (even) a Brahmana boy is born as a Sidra; he is spoken of as a Dwija (a twice-born) on
his following the vocation of a Brahmana; he attains the status of a Vipra through a (thorough) study of
the Vedas and is known as a Brahmana (only) when he comes to know (the truth of) Brahma (the Absolute).’’
