174

grand-daughter of Sumeru, a mountain of
gold, it shone accordingly as molten gold of
the purest type. (17-18)
ताम्रं aroitad चैव तैश्र्ण्यादेवाभिजायत॥ 28
“Its residue that fell on earth turned into

gold and silver of matchless splendour. Due
to the very severity of its heat even distant
areas were converted into copper and iron.
(19)

मलं तस्याभवत् at aq सीसकमेव च।
तदेतद् धरणीं प्राप्य नानाधातुरवर्धत॥ २०॥

“Its dross turned into tin and lead on
the earth. In this way on reaching the earth
the seed (of Lord Siva) grew to be various
metals. (20)

निक्षिप्तमात्रे गर्भे तु तेजोभिरभिरञ्जितम्।
wd पर्वतसंनद्ध सौवर्णमभवद् वनम्॥२१॥
“The moment the seed was deposited
on earth, really speaking the entire thicket
of white reeds referred to (in verse 18 of
Canto XXXVI) above, alongwith the white
mountain was irradiated with its splendour
and turned into gold. (21)
जातरूपमिति wid तदाप्रभृति राघव।
सुवर्णं पुरुषव्याघ्र हुताशनसमप्रभम्।
तृणव्रक्षलतागुल्मं सर्वं भवति काञ्चनम्॥२२॥
“From that time onward, O scion of
Raghu, gold, which shines like fire, came to
be known as Jatarupa, because it was at
that time that its splendid form was brought
to light, O tiger among men! and the grass,
the creeper plants, the trees and the Gulma—
all turned into gold by the contact of that
seed. (22)

तं कुमारं ततो जातं सेन्द्रा: सहमरुद्गणा:।

क्षीरसम्भावनार्थाय कृत्तिका: समयोजयन्॥ २३॥
“Thereupon the hosts of gods alongwith

Indra, their ruler, brought together the boy

thus born as well as the Krttikas (the female
deities presiding over the group of six stars

« VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

forming the constellation of that name) in a
body for the purpose of suckling the babe.
(23)

ता: et जातमात्रस्य कृत्वा समयमुत्तमम्।
ददु: पुत्रोऽयमस्माकं सर्वासामिति निश्चिता:॥ २४॥

“Having arrived at च sublime
understanding that the babe in question would
be the son of them all and determined
accordingly, they (synchronously) suckled
the boy as soon as he was born. (24)

adel देवता: Wal: कार्तिकेय sit ब्रुवन्।
पुत्रस्नैलोक्यविख्यातो भविष्यति न संशय:॥ २५॥

“Thereupon all the gods said, ‘The boy
will be celebrated in all the three worlds
(heaven, earth and the space intervening
them) as a son of the Krttikas : there is no
doubt about it.’ (25)
तेषां तद् वचनं श्रुत्वा स्कन्नं गर्भपरिस्त्रवे।
स्नापयन् परया लक्ष्म्या दीप्यमानं यथानलम्॥ २६॥

“Hearing the aforesaid utterance of the
gods which was so agreeable to them, the
Krttikas bathed the babe that had first trickled
down in the form of seed from the body of
Lord Siva and again on its oozing from the
womb of Ganga shone with supreme
effulgence like fire. (26)

स्कन्द इत्यब्रुवन् देवा: thet गर्भपरिस्त्रवे।
कार्तिकेयं महाबाहुं काकुत्स्थ ज्वलनोपमम्॥ २७॥
“The gods named the mighty-armed
son of the Krttikas, who was effulgent as
fire, O scion of Kakutstha, as Skanda (from

the root ‘Skand’—to flow) because he had
slipped from the womb of Ganga. (27)

Wed तत: at कृत्तिकानामनुत्तमम्।
षण्णां षडाननो भूत्वा जग्राह स्तनजं पय:॥ २८॥
गृहीत्वा क्षीरमेकाह्ना सुकुमारवपुस्तदा।
अजयत् स्वेन वीर्येण दैत्यसैन्यगणान् Fay: २९॥
सुरसेनागणपतिमभ्यषिञ्चन् महाद्युतिम्।
ततस्तममरा: सर्वे समेत्याग्निपुरोगमा:॥ ३०॥
“Then there appeared milk, excelled
by no other milk, in the breasts of the
