314

तां Gear परमप्रीतां ब्रुवन्तीं मन्थरां ad: |
रामस्यैव गुणान् देवी कैकेयी प्रशशंस ह॥१३॥
Seeing the aforesaid Manthara speaking
most unkindly as above, the godlike Kaikeyi
thereupon merely extolled the virtues of

Sri Rama as follows : so the tradition goes—
(13)

धर्मज्ञो गुणवान् दान्त: कृतज्ञ: सत्यवान् शुचि: ।
TH राजसुतो ज्येष्ठो यौवराज्यमतोऽर्हति॥ VY

“A knower of what is right, Sri Rama is
a repository of virtues, disciplined, grateful,
devoted to truth, upright and the eldest of
the princes. He, therefore, deserves to be
installed in the office of Prince Regent.(14)

भ्रातॄन् भृत्यांश्च दीर्घायु: पितृवत् पालयिष्यति।
संतप्यसे कथं Host श्रुत्वा रामाभिषेचनम्॥ १५॥

“The long-lived child Rama will look
after his younger brothers and servants as
a father does his children. How then do you
feel distressed, O hunchback, to hear of his
installation? (15)

भरतश्चापि रामस्य yt वर्षशतात् परम्।
पितृपैतामहँ राज्यमवाप्स्यति नरर्षभ:॥१६॥

“After a hundred years of Rama’s
installation (when Rama retires due to old
age) Bharata too, the foremost of men, will
inherit his ancestral throne in the natural
course. (16)

सा त्वमभ्युदये प्राप्ते दह्यमानेव मन्थरे।
भविष्यति च कल्याणे किमिदं परितप्यसे॥ eon

“When an occasion for rejoicing like
the present one is at hand and when a
festive occasion, similar to the one at hand,
is to come off in future (too in the shape of
Bharata’s installation, no matter even if it
comes after a hundred years) how is it that,
well-known as you are for your wisdom,
you feel agonized like this as though burning
with jealousy, O Manthara? (17)

यथा a भरतो मान्यस्तथा भूयोऽपि राघव:।
कौसल्यातोऽतिरिक्तं च AT शुश्रूषते बहु॥१८॥

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

“Precisely as Bharata is worthy of
esteem to me, Rama, a scion of Raghu, is
even more so. Nay, the latter does greater
service to me than to Kausalya. (18)

we यदि fe रामस्य भरतस्यापि aq तदा।
मन्यते fe यथाऽऽत्मानं यथा भ्रातॄंस्तु Wea: १९॥

“If the throne really goes to Rama, it
would be equally Bharata’s at that very time;
for Rama, a scion of Raghu, actually esteems
his brothers just as his own self.” (19)

कैकेय्या वचनं seat went भृशदु:खिता।
दीर्घमुष्णं विनि:श्वस्य कैकेयीमिदमब्रवीत्॥ २०॥

Heaving a doleful sigh, Manthara, who
was sore distressed to hear Kaikey/’s reply,
spoke to the latter as follows: (20)

अनर्थदर्शिनी मौरख्यान्नात्मानमवबुध्यसे।
शोकव्यसनविस्तीर्णे मज्जन्ती दु:खसागरे॥ २१॥

“Unable to perceive the truth due to
stupidity, and about to sink in an ocean of
misery, swollen through grief and adversity,
you fail to assess your real position. (21)

भविता राघवो राजा राघवस्य च य: सुत:।
राजवंशात्तु भरत: कैकेयि परिहास्यते॥ २२॥

“Rama, a scion of Raghu, will be
crowned king and after him he who is born
as his son; whereas Bharata, O Kaikeyi,
will be excluded from the royal line. (22)

नहि Ua: Gat: सर्वे राज्ये तिष्ठन्ति भामिनि।
स्थाप्यमानेषु सर्वेषु सुमहाननयो Mai el

“All the sons of a king do not retain
their hold on the throne, O proud woman !
For, if all are installed on a throne at one
and the same time, a very great impropriety
will be caused. (23)

तस्माज्ज्येष्ठे हि कैकेयि राज्यतन्त्राणि पार्थिवा: |
स्थापयन्त्यनवद्याङ्गि गुणवत्स्वितरेष्वपि॥ २४॥

“Therefore, kings, O Kaikeyi, actually
hand over the reins of government to the
eldest son, even though others, viz., the
younger may be full of virtues, O lady with
faultless limbs ! (24)
