570

O noble lady, guileless as | am and did not
know anything about Sri Rama’s exile before
| returned to Ayodhya? Nay, you know my
great love borne towards Sri Rama, a scion
of Raghu. (20)

कृतशास्त्रानुगा बुद्धिर्मा भूत् तस्य कदाचन।
सत्यसंध: सतां श्रेष्ठो यस्यार्योऽनुमते गत:॥ २१॥
“Let his judgment never follow (the
teachings of) the scriptures as taught by his
preceptor, with whose concurrence my elder
brother, who is true to his promise and is
the foremost of the virtuous, has gone into
exile. (21)
प्रैष्यं पापीयसां ad wf च ula ea
हन्तु पादेन गा: GAT यस्यार्योऽनुमते गत:॥ २२॥
“Let him with whose concurrence my
elder brother has gone into exile suffer the
lot of a servant of men belonging to the
lowest stratum of society, incur the sin of
answering the calls of nature facing the sun
and reap the consequences of kicking cows
lying asleep. (22)

कारयित्वा महत् कर्म भर्ता भृत्यमनर्थकम्।
अधर्मो योऽस्य सोऽस्यास्तु यस्यार्योऽनुमते गत: ॥ २३॥

“Let him with whose concurrence my
elder brother has gone into exile incur the
sin that attaches to a master who robs his
servant of his resources after getting him
accomplish a great deed for him. (23)
परिपालयमानस्य राज्ञो भूतानि पुत्रवत्।
ततस्तु द्रुह्यतां पापं यस्यार्योऽनुमते गत:॥ २४॥

“Let the sin attaching to those bearing
enmity to a king protecting his subjects as
his own offspring, be incurred by him with
whose concurrence my elder brother has
gone into exile. (24)

बलिषड्भागमुद्धृत्य नृपस्यारक्षितु: प्रजा:।
अधर्मो योऽस्य सोऽस्यास्तु यस्यार्योऽनुमते गत: ॥ २५ ॥
“Let the sin that attaches to a king who

fails to protect the people even after collecting
the land revenue in the form of one-sixth of

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

the produce be incurred by him with whose
concurrence my elder brother has gone into
exile. (25)

संश्रुत्य च तपस्विभ्य: WA वै यज्ञदक्षिणाम्।
at चापलपतां पापं यस्यार्योऽनुमते गत:॥ २६॥
“Let the sin attaching to those
withholding payment of the sacrificial fee
even after promising it to the priests
practising austerities and officiating at a
sacrifice be incurred by him with whose
concurrence my elder brother has gone into
exile. (26)

हस्त्यश्चरथसम्बाधे युद्धे शस्त्रसमाकुले।
मा स्म कार्षीत् सतां धर्मं यस्यार्योऽनुमते गत: ॥ २७॥
“Let the sin attaching to the man who
fails to observe the code of warfare followed
by the virtuous on a field of battle crowded
with elephants, horses and chariots and
thick with weapons of all kinds be incurred
by him with whose concurrence my elder
brother has gone into exile. (27)
स नाशयतु दुष्टात्मा यस्यार्योऽनुमते गत:॥ २८॥
“Let that wicked soul with whose
concurrence my elder brother has gone into
exile forget the sacred lore expounding the
most esoteric truths, taught with great pains
by an enlightened preceptor. (28)

मा च तं व्यूढबाह्वंसं चन्द्रभास्करतेजसम्।
द्राक्षीद् राज्यस्थमासीनं यस्यार्योऽनुमते गत:॥ २९॥
“Let him with whose concurrence my
elder brother has departed for the forest not
live to see Sri Rama of muscular arms and
shoulders, and possessing the splendour of
the moon and the sun installed on the throne.
(29)

पायसं कृसरं छागं gar सोऽश्नातु निर्घृण:।
Tessas यस्यार्योऽनुमते गत:॥ ३०॥
“Let that merciless fellow with whose

concurrence my elder brother has departed
for the woods incur the sin of partaking of
