1096

with lovely peaks and trees, which has
entered deep into the ocean on one side.
Indra, the thousand-eyed god, ever visits
on every fifteenth day of a dark fortnight the
aforesaid mountain, highly pleasing to the
mind, which is adorned with trees in blossom
of every description as well as with creepers,
graced by the foremost of gods, Rsis and
Yaksas (a species of demigods) and celestial
nymphs and thronged with hosts of Siddhas
(a class of demigods endowed with mystic
powers from their very brith) and Caranas
(celestial bards). On the other side of the
ocean there is a resplendent island extending
to a distance of one hundred Yojanas (or
eight hundred miles), which is inaccessible
to human beings. Scour it on all sides.
There Sita should be specially sought for
with all one’s mind. (20—24)

a fe देशस्तु वध्यस्य रावणस्य दुरात्मन:।
राक्षसाधिपतेर्वास: सहस्राक्षसमद्युते; Il २५ ।।

“The aforesaid land is without doubt
the abode of the evil minded Ravana, the
overlord of all ogres, whose brilliance
compares with that of Indra (the thousand-
eyed god) and who deserves in every way
to be got rid of. (25)

दक्षिणस्य समुद्रस्य मध्ये तस्य I राक्षसी।
अङ्गारकेति विख्याता छायामाक्षिप्य भोजिनी।। २६ ॥

“In the middle of that southern ocean (now
known as the Indian Ocean) there actually
lives an ogress widely known by the name of
Angaraka—who procures her prey by seizing
the shadow of those flying inthe air. (26)
एवं नि:संशयान् Heal संशयान्नष्टसंशया:।
Wee नरेन्द्रस्य पत्नीममिततेजस:॥ २७॥

“Having removed through a careful
search all doubts about the places of which
you are doubtful, and thus rid of all doubts
about the existence of Sita, search for the
consort of Sri Rama, a ruler of men, of
limitless energy, elsewhere if she is not to
be found there. (27)

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

तमतिक्रम्य लक्ष्मीवान् समुद्रे शतयोजने।
गिरि: पुष्पितको ara सिद्धचारणसेवित:॥ २८॥
च्न्द्रसूर्यांशुसंकाश: सागराम्बुसमाश्रय:।
भ्राजते विपुलै: seit विलिखन्निव॥ २९॥

“In the ocean extending to a distance
of one hundred Yojanas (or eight hundred
miles) beyond the aforesaid island of Lanka
(in the Indian Ocean) shines a glorious hill,
Puspitaka by name, inhabited by Siddhas
and Caranas, nay, bright as the rays of the
sun and the moon, partly submerged in the
ocean on the northern side and scratching
the vault of the heavens with its peaks as it
were. (28-29)

तस्यैकं काञ्चनं शृङ्गं Gad यं दिवाकर:।

Mt राजतमेकं च सेवते यन्निशाकर:।

न तं कृतघ्ना: पश्यन्ति न नृशंसा न नास्तिका: Ut ३० ॥
“It has a golden peak, on which the

sun lingers, and another white, made of

silver, on which the moon rests. Neither the

ungrateful nor the hardhearted, nor, again,
the unbelieving can behold it. (30)

प्रणम्य शिरसा शैलं तं विमार्गथ arr: |
तमतिक्रम्य दुर्धर्षं सूर्यवान्नाम पर्वत:॥३१॥
अध्वना दुर्विगाहेन योजनानि चतुर्दंश।
ततस्तमप्यतिक्रम्य वैद्युतो नाम पर्वत:॥ ३२॥
सर्वकामफलैर्वृक्षै: सर्वकालमनोहरै: |
तत्र भुक्त्वा वरार्हाणि मूलानि च फलानि च॥ ३३॥
मधूनि पीत्वा जुष्टानि Ut West वानरा:।
wa नेत्रमन:कान्त: कुञ्जरो AWA पर्वत:॥३४॥
अगस्त्यभवनं यत्र निर्मितं विश्वकर्मणा।
तत्र योजनविस्तारमुच्छितं दशयोजनम्॥ ३५॥
aa भोगवती AA सर्पाणामालय: पुरी॥ ३६॥
विशालरथ्या दुर्धर्षा सर्वत: परिरक्षिता।
रक्षिता पन्नगैर्घोरैस्तीक्ष्णदंष्टैर्महाविषै: 11 ३७॥
“Respectfully saluting that mountain with

your head bent low, diligently carry on your
search there, O monkeys! Beyond that
