(42)

103. Fallen into a swoon to hear of his father’s ascent to heaven and

brought back to consciousness by Bharata and others, who sprinkle

water on him and employ other such devices, Sri Rama laments in

various ways. Comforted by Bharata and having in his turn consoled

Sita and repairing to the bank of the Ganga, nay, offering water and

balls of cooked food to the spirit of his departed father, he returns to

his hut. Hearing their cry of distress, the troops approach them and

are greeted by Sri Rama according to their rank. ............................................. 656
104. Accompanied by Kausalya and others, Sage Vasistha proceeds to

the hermitage of Sri Rama. Showing to her co-wives the lumps of the

pulp of the Ingudi fruit offered to the spirit of his deceased father by

Sri Rama on blades of Kuga grass placed with their ends pointing to

the south along the bank of the Mandakini on the way, Kausalya

grieves for her deceased husband. Reaching the hermitage, Kausalya

and others see the two brothers, Sri Rama and Laksmana, fall at their

feet. Kausalya bewails the lot of Sita when the latter falls at her feet.

Bowing down at the feet of his preceptor, Sri Rama takes his

seat. Accompanied by the counsellors, Bharata too sits nearby. ..................... 661
105. Bharata implores Sri Rama to oblige him by accepting the throne of

Ayodhya being offered by him to Sri Rama with the concurrence of

Kaikeyi, even though bestowed on him by their deceased father.

Consoling Bharata, who held himself responsible for Sri Rama’s exile

to the forest and was languishing with sorrow on that score, Sri

Rama, however, tries to pacify him in various ways and urges

him to shoulder the burden of rulerShip. ............................................................ 664
106. Imploring Sri Rama with cogent reasons to accept the throne of

Ayodhya, Bharata takes a vow not to return to Ayodhya but to

continue in the forest in case Sri Rama does not grant his prayer.

Mother Kausalya and others too join Bharata and urge Sri Rama

to grant his request when they find Sri Rama adamant in the matter

and insistent on implementing the words of their deceased

fea >) ee 669
107. Sri Rama tries to impress upon Bharata, who believed that Dasaratha

was prompted by lustful attachment to his mother in making over the

kingdom to him, that DaSaratha was compelled to do so because,

in the first place, he had promised to Kaikeyi’s father while marrying

her that the latter's son alone would succeed to the throne after

DaSaratha’s death, and secondly he was keen to repay the debt he

owed to her for having come to his rescue in his encounter with the

demons, and accordingly urges Bharata to assume the rulership of

7ANY (016 |). Capper 672
108. Bharata having been silenced by Sri Rama, an eminent sage,

Jabali by name, tries to persuade Sri Rama to accept the throne by

advocating the theory of the Nastikas (non-believers) with intent

to arouse in him the lust of Sovereignty. ...............................................५५५५५५५५५५५५० 674
