* BALAKANDA +

अन्यमिन्द्रं करिष्यामि लोको वा स्यादनिन्द्रक: |
दैवतान्यपि स क्रोधात् स्रष्टुं समुपचक्रमे॥ २३॥
Nay, having created a new galaxy of
lunar mansions in the southern quarter while
remaining seated in the midst of Rsis
assembled in his hermitage, excited with
anger, he set about evolving in indignation
a hierarchy of gods as well, saying to
himself, “I shall create another Indra or else
let my heaven remain without an Indra |”
(22-23)

तत: परमसम्भ्रान्ता: सर्षिसङ्घा: सुरासुरा:।
विश्वामित्रं महात्मानमूचु: सानुनयं Fa २४॥
Greatly perturbed at that, the gods
as well as the demons, including the hosts
of Rsis, addressed to the high-souled
Viswamitra the following submission full of
conciliatory expressions : (24)

अयं राजा महाभाग गुरुशापपरिक्षत:।
सशरीरो fet ad नार्हत्येव तपोधन॥ २५॥

“This monarch, TriSanku, O highly
blessed soul, who stands divested of his
stock of merits by the curse of his preceptor,
does not at all deserve to ascend bodily to
heaven, O sage rich in asceticism!” (25)
अब्रवीत् सुमहद् वाक्यं कौशिक: सर्वदेवता: ॥ २६॥

Hearing the aforesaid submission of
those gods, ViSwamitra (son of KuSika), a
veritable jewel among hermits, gave the
following noble reply to all the gods: (26)

सशरीरस्य भद्रं वस्तिशङ्कोरस्य भूपते:।

आरोहणं प्रतिज्ञातं नानृतं कर्तुमुत्सहे॥२७॥
“A pledge has been given by me to this

monarch, TriSanku, to help him ascend bodily

to heaven. May prosperity attend on you! |
dare not go back upon it. (27)

स्वर्गोऽस्तु सशरीरस्य त्रिशङ्कोरस्य शाश्वत:।
नक्षत्राणि च सर्वाणि मामकानि ध्रुवाण्यथ॥ २८ ॥

“Let perpetual heavenly bliss be the lot
of this Trisanku in his physical body and

235

also let all the lunar mansions created by
me be abiding. (28)

यावल्लोका धरिष्यन्ति तिष्ठन्त्वेतानि सर्वश:।
यत् Pat सुरा: सर्वे तदनुज्ञातुमर्हथ॥ २९॥

“Nay, let all these heavenly bodies
evolved by me endure as long as these
worlds of Brahma’s creation shall exist. Be
pleased you all to grant that.” (29)

एवमुक्ता: सुरा: सर्वे प्रत्यूचुर्मुनिपुंगवम्।

एवं भवतु भद्रं a तिष्ठन्त्वेतानि सर्वश:॥ Boll
Requested thus, all the gods replied

as follows to ViSwamitra, a jewel among

sages: “Amen! May all be well with you !!

Let all these endure !!! (30)

TH तान्यनेकानि वैश्वानरपथाद् ate: |
नक्षत्राणि मुनिश्रेष्ठं तेषु ज्योति:षु जाज्वलन्॥ ३१॥
अवाक्शिरास्त्रिशङ्कुश्च तिष्ठत्वमरसंनिभ:।
अनुयास्यन्ति चैतानि ज्योतींषि नृपसत्तमम्॥ ३२॥
कृतार्थं कीर्तिमन्तं च स्वर्गलोकगतं यथा।
विश्वामित्रस्तु धर्मात्मा सर्वदेवैरभिष्टुत:।॥ ३३॥
ऋषिमध्ये महातेजा बाढमित्येव देवता:।
ततो देवा महात्मानो ऋषयश्च तपोधना:।
जग्मुर्यथागतं सर्वे यज्ञस्यान्ते नरोत्तम॥ ३४॥
“Let those many lunar mansions endure
in the heavens beyond the orbit of the
stellar sphere (as defined by standard works
on astronomy), O jewel among sages ! And
let Trisanku, happy as a god, remain
suspended with his head downward, shining
brightly in the midst of those stars. Nay,
these stars will circumambulate TriSanku
(the noblest among kings), who will be
accomplished of purpose and glorious like a
denizen of the heavenly regions.” Glorified
by all the gods in the midst of the Rsis
assembled there, the highly glorious
ViSwamitra too, whose mind is given to
piety, merely said to the gods, “All right!”
Then, at the end of the sacrifice (which was
in the meantime concluded by replacing
TriSanku by a representative and after the
gods had partaken of the offerings), O jewel
