84

enjoyment. There was none who did not put
on a smart appearance after taking bath.
No one was there who did not smear his
body with sandal-paste and did not use
scents. (10)

नाहस्ताभरणो वापि दृश्यते नाप्यनात्मवान्॥११॥

Nobody was seen in Ayodhya taking
unholy food, not giving alms and not exercising
control over his mind. No one was found there
who had no gold bangles, a gold ornament
for the neck and armlets on his person. (11)

नानाहिताग्निर्नायज्वा न क्षुद्रो वा न तस्कर:।
कश्चिदासीदयोध्यायां न Ulead न संकर:॥ १२॥
There was none in Ayodhya who did
not maintain and worship the sacred fire
and did not perform sacrifices; no one among
them was petty-minded, given to thieving,
immoral and impure of origin. (12)

स्वकर्मनिरता fret ब्राह्मणा विजितेन्द्रिया: |
दानाध्ययनशीलाश्च संयताश्च प्रतिग्रहे॥ १३॥

The Brahmanas inhabiting Ayodhya
were ever devoted to their duties and
exercised effective control over their senses.
They gave away alms, pursued their studies
and were disinclined to accept gifts. (13)

नास्तिको नानृती वापि न कश्चिदबहुश्रुत:।
नासूयको न चाशक्तो नाविद्वान् विद्यते क्वचित्॥ १४॥

There was no member of the twice-
born classes who was unbelieving, untruthful,
lacking in knowledge of scriptures, busy
finding fault with others, resourceless and
bereft of learning. (14)

नाषडङ्गविदन्नास्ति नाव्रतो नासहस्रद:।
न दीन: क्षिप्तचित्तो वा व्यथितो वापि कश्चन॥ १५ ॥

There was no one in that city who had
not mastered the six branches of knowledge,
auxiliary to a study of the Vedas, and did not
observe pious vows. There was no donor of
scanty gifts and no miserable man. There was
none who was either distracted in mind or
afflicted. (15)

« VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

कश्चिन्नरो वा नारी वा नाश्रीमान्नाप्यरूपवान्।

RS शक्यमयोध्यायां नापि राजन्यभक्तिमान्॥ १६॥
There was no man or woman in

Ayodhya who was devoid of splendour, not

good-looking and not loyal to the king. (16)

वर्णेष्वग्रूयचतुर्थेषु देवतातिथिपूजका: ।
कृतज्ञाश्च वदान्याश्च शूरा विक्रमसंयुता:॥ १७॥
People belonging to all the four grades
of society, with the Brahmana as the
foremost, were fond of worshipping the gods
and unexpected visitors. They were grateful,
generous, heroic and powerful. (17)

दीर्घायुषो नरा: Wa धर्मं सत्यं च संथश्रिता:।
सहिता: पुत्रपौत्रैश्च नित्यं स्त्रीभि: पुरोत्तमे॥ १८॥

All the residents of that great city enjoyed
along lease of life and were devoted to virtue
and truth, and as such were never deprived
of their wives, sons, and grandsons. (18)

The Ksatriyas followed the lead of the
Brahmanas, the VaiSyas were devoted to
the Ksatriyas and the Sudras took delight in
their own work while serving the other three
Varnas. (19)

सा तेनेक्ष्वाकुनाथेन पुरी सुपरिरक्षिता।
यथा पुरस्तान्मनुना मानवेन्द्रेण धीमता॥२०॥

King DaSaratha, the lord of the Ikswakus,
fully protected Ayodhya on all sides in the
same way as the all-wise Manu, the ruler of
mankind, did in former times. (20)

योधानामग्निकल्पानां पेशलानाममर्षिणाम्।
सम्पूर्णा कृतविद्यानां Wet केसरिणामिव॥ २१॥
Like a cave full of lions, the city was
thronged with warriors who had mastered
the science of archery and were refulgent
like fire, devoid of crookedness and were
unable to pocket insults. (21)

काम्बोजविषये जातैर्बाह्लीकैश्च gard: |
वनायुजैर्नदीजैश्च पूर्णां हरिहयोत्तमै:॥ २२॥
