+ UTTARAKANDA +

Saying so, and taking off ornaments of
great value from His body, the illustrious
One fastened them on the person of Angada
and Hanuman. (19)

आभाष्य च महावीर्यान् राघवो यूथपर्षभान्।
नीलं नलं केसरिणं कुमुदं गन्धमादनम्॥ Ro ll
सुषेणं wa dt मैन्दं द्विविदमेव a
जाम्बवन्तं Ware च विनतं धूम्रमेव च॥ २१॥
बलीमुखं wig च संनादं च महाबलम्।
दरीमुखं दधिमुखमिन्द्रजानुं च यूथपम्॥२२॥
मधुरं श्लक्ष्णया वाचा नेत्राभ्यामापिबन्निव।
Get मे भवन्तश्च शरीरं भ्रातरस्तथा॥ २३॥
युष्माभिरुद्धृतश्चाहं व्यसनात् काननौकस:।
धन्यो राजा च सुग्रीवो भवद्भि: सुहृदां वरै:। २४॥

एवमुक्त्वा ददौ तेभ्यो भूषणानि यथार्हत:।
वज्राणि च महार्हाणि सस्वजे च नरर्षभ:॥ २५॥

Nay, sweetly accosting the foremost
of His troop-commanders, who were all
endowed with extraordinary prowess, viz.,
Nila, Nala, Kesari, Kumuda, Gandhamadana,
Susena, Panasa, the valiant Mainda as well
as Dwivida, Jambavan and Gavaksa, Vinata
and Dhumra too, Balimukha and Prajangha,
as well as the exceptionally mighty Sannada,
Darimukha, Dadhimukha and the _ troop-
commander Indrajanu in a soft tone, as
though He would drink them up with His
eyes, and saying, “you are My friends, nay,
My other self, as also My brothers. By you
alone was | delivered from misfortune, O
dwellers in the woods! Nay, King Sugriva is
blessed because of you, the foremost among
his friends,” Sri Rama (a scion of Raghu),
the foremost of human beings, bestowed on
them, according to their deserts, ornaments

987

and diamonds of great value and embraced
them. (20—25)

a पिबन्त: सुगन्धीनि मधूनि मधुपिङ्गला:।
मांसानि च सुमृष्टानि मूलानि च फलानि च॥ २६॥

The monkeys (who were reddish brown
as honey) stayed there, quaffing fragrant
honeys, and subsisting on royal dishes,
roots and fruits. (26)
मुहूर्तमिव a ad wave च मेनिरे॥ २७॥

More than a month elapsed on that
occasion while they stayed at Ayodhya as
aforesaid. Nay, because of their devotion to
Sri Rama, they all felt it to be less than an
hour. (27)
रामोऽपि रेमे तै: सार्धं वानरै: कामरूपिभि:।
राक्षसैश्च महावीर्यैर्ऋक्षैश्चैव महाबलै: ।। २८॥

Sri Rama too spent his time happily in
the company of those aforesaid monkeys,
who could change their form at will, as also
with the ogres, who were endowed with

extraordinary prowess, as well as with bears
who were exceptionally mighty. (28)

एवं तेषां ययौ मासो द्वितीय: शिशिर: सुखम्।
वानराणां प्रहृष्टानां राक्षसानां च सर्वश:॥ २९॥
इक्ष्वाकुनगरे रम्ये परां प्रीतिमुपासताम्।
रामस्य प्रीतिकरणै: कालस्तेषां सुखं ययौ॥ Zo ll

In this way the second month, Phalguna,
of the extreme cold season also passed
happily with the monkeys and the ogres, who
felt highly rejoiced in every way and enjoyed
supreme gratification through the hospitality
of Sri Rama. Their time passed merrily in the
delightful city of the Ikswakus. (29-30)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये उत्तरकाण्डे एकोनचत्वारिंश: सर्ग: ॥ ३९ ॥

Thus ends Canto Thirty-nine in the Uttarakanda of the glorious Ramayana of Valmiki,
the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

