476

को Var रूपसम्पन्नो दिव्यस्त्रगनुलेपन:।
वसानो विरजे वस्त्रे दिव्याभरणभूषित:॥४४॥

“By the way, who are you, richly
endowed as you are with bodily charm,
decked with celestial garlands and anointed
with ethereal unguents, wearing a pair of
garments free from dust and adorned with
celestial jewels?” (44)

तमुवाच महातेजा वैनतेयो महाबल:।

पतत्रिराज: प्रीतात्मा हर्षपर्याकुलेक्षणम्॥४५॥

With a delighted mind Garuda (son
of Vinata), the king of birds, who was
endowed with extraordinary energy and was
full of great might, replied as follows to
Sri Rama, whose eyes were wild with
joy: (45)
अहं सखा a काकुत्स्थ fra: प्राणो ates: |
गरुत्मानिह सम्प्राप्तो युवयो: साह्यकारणात्॥४६॥

“lam Garuda, your beloved friend,
nay, your very breath moving outside,

arrived here for your help O scion of
Kakutstha! (46)

असुरा वा महावीर्या दानवा वा महाबला:।
सुराश्चापि सगन्धर्वा: पुरस्कृत्य शतक्रतुम्॥४७॥

नेमं मोक्षयितुं शक्ता: शरबन्धं सुदारुणम्।
मायाबलादिन्द्रजिता निर्मितं क्रूरकर्मणा॥४८॥
“Demons endowed with extraordinary
prowess or giants possessed of great might,
nay, even gods accompanied by Gand-
harvas, if they made their appearance here,
placing Indra (who is presupposed to have
performed a hundred sacrifices in his past
life as a condition precedent for his attaining
the position of Indra) at their head, would
not have been able to undo these most
formidable bonds wrought with arrows by
Indrajit of ruthless deeds by dint of magic.
(47-48)

एते नागा: काद्रवेयास्तीक्ष्णदंष्टा विषोल्बणा: ।
रक्षोमायाप्रभावेण शरभूतास्त्वदाश्रया: ॥ ४९ Al

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA +

“These snakes, which had fettered you,
were no other than the sons of Kadru with
sharp fangs and full of poison, converted
into arrows by dint of conjuring tricks
employed by the ogre, Indrajit. (49)

सभाग्यश्चासि धर्मज्ञ wa सत्यपराक्रम।
लक्ष्मणेन सह wat समरे रिपुघातिना॥५०॥

“Indeed you are lucky with your younger
brother, Laksmana, the destroyer of his
foes in combat, O Rama of unfailing prowess,
the knower of what is right! (50)

इमं श्रुत्वा तु वृत्तान्तं त्वरमाणोऽहमागत:।
सहसरैवावयो: स्नेहात् सखित्वमनुपालयन्॥५१॥
“Hearing this news of your having
been fettered by snakes, and vindicating
the friendship existing between us two, I, for

my part, have hastened to this place all at
once out of affection for you. (51)

मोक्षितौ च महाघोरादस्मात् सायकबन्धनात्।
अप्रमादश्च कर्तव्यो युवाभ्यां नित्यमेव हि॥५२॥

“And you both have been liberated from
this most formidable bond wrought with
arrows. Nay, you should actually remain on
your guard all the time. (52)

प्रकृत्या राक्षसा: Wa संग्रामे कूटयोधिन:।
शूराणां शुद्धभावानां भवतामार्जवं बलम्॥ ५३॥
“All ogres are by nature given to fighting
treacherously on the field of battle; while
guilelessness is the strength of you gallant
souls with a pure mind. (53)

wa विश्चसनीयं at राक्षसानां रणाजिरे।
एतेनैवोपमानेन fret जिह्मा fe राक्षसा:॥५४॥
“On this very analogy you should never

trust the ogres on the field of battle; for
ogres are always crooked.” (54)

Vata तदा We सुपर्ण: स महाबल:।
परिष्वज्य च सुस्निग्धमाप्रष्टुमुपचक्रमे॥५५॥
Having spoken 3 aforesaid and
embraced Sri Rama most tenderly, the
aforesaid Garuda, who was endowed with
