106

Savana on behalf of this exceptionally noble-
minded monarch. (7)

आह्वयांचक्रिरे at शक्रादीन् विबुधोत्तमान्।
ऋष्यशृङ्गादयो wed: शिक्षाक्षरसमन्वितै:। ८॥।
Through incantations marked with letter-
sounds the correct pronunciation and
intonation of which was picked up during
the period of their study, Rsyasrnga and
others invoked the presence in that sacrificial
hall of the foremost of gods headed by
Indra, the ruler of gods. (8)

गीतिभिर्मधुरै: स्निग्धैर्मन्त्राह्वानैर्यथार्हत: |
Brant ददुरावाह्य हविर्भागान् दिवौकसाम्॥ ९॥

Invoking them by means of charming
invocatory Mantras (sacred texts) sweetened
with songs of praise, the Hotas (priests whose
function is to invoke the gods at a sacrifice)
offered oblations to the gods (the denizens
of heaven) according to their rank. (9)

न चाहुतमभूत् तत्र स्खलितं वा न किंचन।
दृश्यते ब्रह्मवत् ad क्षेमयुक्तं fe चक्रिरे॥ १०॥

In that sacrifice no oblation was wrongly
offered nor was any rite omitted through
ignorance; for every item was seen
accompanied with the uttering of a Mantra
and the priests did everything in such a way
as to avoid transgressions in the matter of
procedure. (10)
न तेष्वहस्सु श्रान्तो वा क्षुधितो वा न दृश्यते।
नाविद्वान् ब्राह्मण: कश्चिन्नाशतानुचरस्तथा॥ ११॥

During those days when the sacrifice
was in progress no priest officiating at the
sacrifice was seen exhausted (too tired to
carry on his duties) or hungry or even
thirsty and there was ॥0 Brahmana,
particularly in that sacrifice, who was not
learned and did not have at least a hundred
attendants/pupils. (11)

ब्राह्मणा भुञ्जते नित्यं नाथवन्तश्च भुञ्जते।
तापसा भुञ्जते चापि श्रमणाश्चैव भुञ्जते॥१२॥
वृद्धाश्च व्याधिताश्चैव स्त्रीबालाश्च तथैव च।
अनिशं भुञ्जमानानां न तृप्तिरुपलभ्यते॥१३॥

« VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

The Brahmanas as well as the members
of the other twice-born classes took their
food everyday and so did the members of
the servant class, the Sudras and so on.
The ascetics, the Brahmacaris and the
Vanaprasthas, also took their meals under
the auspices of the sacrifice and so did the
recluses too as well as the aged and the
diseased as also women and children. The
dishes were so delicious that no satiety
was observed in the latter, even though
they were fed day and night. (12-13)

दीयतां दीयतामन्नं वासांसि विविधानि =a
इति संचोदितास्तत्र तथा चक्रुरनेकश:॥१४॥

Pressed by men at the helm of affairs
in the words “Let food be given again and
again and also articles of wearing apparel of
various kinds !” many men in that sacrifice
did as they were told, i.e., freely gave away
food and raiment. (14)

अन्नकूटाश्च qed बहव: पर्वतोपमा:।
दिवसे दिवसे तत्र सिद्धस्य विधिवत् तदा॥ eu

Numerous heaps, resembling mountains
of rice cooked from day-to-day in the
traditional way were seen on that occasion
on the sacrificial grounds. (15)

नानादेशादनुप्राप्ता: पुरुषा: स्त्रीगणास्तथा।
अन्नपानै: सुविहितास्तस्मिन् यज्ञे ATA: ke UI

The men as well as the hosts of women
that had arrived from different lands were
fully entertained at that sacrificial performance
of the high-souled Emperor. (16)
अन्नं fe विधिवत् targ प्रशंसन्ति द्विजर्षभा: |
अहो Ta: TA US ते इति शुश्राव राघव:॥ १७॥

The noble Brahmanas spoke well of
the food they ate as indeed cooked in the
proper way and tasteful too and Dasaratha
(a scion of Raghu) heard them saying, “Oh,
we are fully sated. May you be blessed !”

(17)

स्वलंकृताश्च पुरुषा ब्राह्मणान् पर्यवेषयन्।
उपासन्ते च तानन्ये सुमृष्टमणिकुण्डला:॥ १८॥
