« KISKINDHAKANDA +

elephants and bathed in the dust of the
earth, as well as other denizens of the
forest and birds moving in the air, they
moved apace following the will of Sugriva.
(5—12)

तेषां तु गच्छतां तत्र त्वरितं रघुनन्दन:।
द्रुमषण्डवनं दृष्टवा Wa: सुग्रीवमब्रवीत्॥१३॥
Seeing a grove consisting of a cluster
of trees, Sri Rama for his part among those
who were moving apace towards Kiskindha
spoke to Sugriva as follows : (13)

एष AT इवाकाशे AMIS: प्रकाशते।
मेघसंघातविपुल: पर्यन्तकदलीवरृत: i १४॥
किमेतज्ञातुमिच्छामि wa कौतूहलं मम।
कौतूहलापनयनं कर्तुमिच्छाम्यहं त्वया॥१५॥

“Here shines prominently a clump of
trees resembling a cloud in the sky. | wish
to Know, my friend, what is that which is
huge as a mass of clouds and hemmed in
at the end by plantain trees? | wish to know
this; for great is my curiosity in the matter.
| seek to overcome this curiosity through
you.” (14-15)

तस्य तद्वचनं श्रुत्वा राघवस्य महात्मन:।
गच्छन्नेवाचचक्षेऽथ सुग्रीवस्तन्महद् वनम्॥१६॥

Hearing the aforesaid question of the
high-souled Sri Rama, a scion of Raghu,
Sugriva, still moving on, forthwith related to
him as follows the history of that momentous
grove : (16)

Wag राघव विस्तीर्णमाश्रमं श्रमनाशनम्।
उद्यानवनसम्पन्नं स्वादुमूलफलोदकम्॥ १७॥

“This extensive hermitage relieves the
fatigue of all in that it is rich in gardens and
groves and contains delicious roots, fruits
and water. (17)

अत्र सप्तजना AA मुनय: संशितव्रता:।
सप्तैवासन्नध:शीर्षा नियतं जलशायिन:॥१८॥
“Here lived sages of most austere

vows, Saptajanas by name, who were seven
only in number, held their heads downward

981

while practising their austerities and as a
rule slept on water. (18)

सप्तरात्रे कृताहारा वायुनाचलवासिन:।
fed वर्षशतैर्याता: सप्तभि: सकलेवरा:॥१९॥

“They subsisted on air inhaled once at
the end of seven nights and had their abode
fixed (never stepping out of it). After seven
hundred years they ascended in their bodies
to heaven. (19)

WTA: it Ro tt

“By virtue of their glory this hermitage,
surrounded as it is by an enclosure of
trees, is most difficult to assail even for
gods and demons including Indra (the ruler
of gods). (20)

पक्षिणो वर्जयन्त्येतत् तथान्ये वनचारिण:।
विशन्ति मोहाद् येऽप्यत्र न निवर्तन्ति ते पुन:॥ २१॥

“Birds as well as other wild creatures
eschew it; even they that step into it through
ignorance never return. (21)

विभूषणरवाश्चात्र श्रूयन्ते सकलाक्षरा:।
तूर्यगीतस्वनश्चापि गन्धो दिव्यश्च WaT २२॥
“Sounds of ornaments together with
sweet accents are heard in this hermitage,
as also the music of instruments and singing
and an ethereal fragrance is inhaled, O
scion of Raghu! (22)

त्रेताग्नयोऽपि दीप्यन्ते धूमो ह्येष प्रदृश्यते।
वेष्टयन्निव FAM कपोताङ्गारुणो घन:॥ २३॥

“The three sacred fires (viz., Daksina,
Garhapatya and Ahavaniya) are also lit;
here is seen their smoke, grey as the body
of a dove, enveloping the tops of trees like

a cloud. (23)
Ud Gat: प्रकाशन्ते धूमसंसक्तमस्तका:।
मेघजालप्रतिच्छन्ना वैडूर्यगिरयो यथा॥ २४॥

“With their crests crowned with smoke
and covered by a mass of clouds, the trees
sparkle like mountains of cat’s-eye gems.

(24)
