1118

इमौ राज्येऽभिषेक्ष्यामि देश: साधु विधीयताम्।
रमणीयो ह्यसम्बाधो wat aa धन्विनौ॥ ३॥

‘| shall consecrate these two, find out a
suitable region, that is enjoyable and where
the two archers may remain happily without
being obstructed. (3)

न राज्ञां aa पीडा स्यान्नाश्रमाणां विनाशनम्।
स देशो दृश्यतां सौम्य नापराध्यामहे यथा॥४॥

‘O gracious one, find out that place,
where the kings are not tormented and the
hermitages are well-protected and we may
not be at fault later on.’ (4)
तथोक्कतवति WA तु We: प्रत्युवाच ह।
अयं कारुपथो देशो रमणीयो निरामय:॥५॥
निवेश्यतां at पुरमङ्गदस्य महात्मन:।
Used: Gert चन्द्रकान्तं निरामयम्॥६॥

On Sri Rama saying thus, Bharata
replied: ‘This region known as Karupatha is
indeed beautiful and free from all ills. Establish
there the city under the noble Angada and
also a region known as Candrakanta free
from sorrow, for Candraketu, the noble one.’

(5-6)
तद् वाक्यं भरतेनोक्तं प्रतिजग्राह Wea: |
तं च कृत्वा वशे देशमङ्गदस्य न्यवेशयत्॥७॥

This statement of Bharata was
accepted by Sri Rama, descendant of Raghu
and having brought that territory Karupatha
under him, he established the city there for
Angada. (7)
अङ्गदीया ut रम्याप्यङ्गदस्य निवेशिता।
रमणीया सुगुप्ता च रामेणाक्लिष्टकर्मणा॥८॥

The city that was bestowed by Sri

Rama on Angada was beautiful indeed and
well-protected on all sides. (8)

चन्द्रकेतोश्च मल्लस्य मल्लभूम्यां निवेशिता।
चन्द्रकान्तेति विख्याता दिव्या स्वर्गपुरी यथा॥९॥
For the wrestler Candraketu, the city well-

known as Candrakanta in Malla country was
established as the divine city in heaven. (9)

« VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

ततो Wa: परां Witt लक्ष्मणो भरतस्तथा।
ययुर्युद्धे दुराधर्षा अभिषेकं च चक्रिरे॥१०॥

Then Sri Rama, Laksmana and Bharata,
all difficult to conquer in war, were highly
pleased and performed the coronation of
Angada and Candraketu. (10)

अभिषिच्य कुमारौ gt प्रस्थाप्य सुसमाहितौ।

अङ्गदं पश्चिमां भूमिं चन्द्रकेतुमुदङ्मुखम्॥११॥
Having consecrated and sent Angada

to the western region and Candraketu

northwards, both firm in mind, they were well

pleased. (11)

अङ्गदं चापि सौमित्रिर्लक्ष्मणोऽनुजगाम ह।
चन्द्रकेतोस्तु Wd: Ufo बभूव ह॥१२॥

Laksmana, the son of Sumitra, too,
followed Angada and Bharata on his part
followed Candraketu as the rear guard. (12)

लक्ष्मणस्त्वङ्गदीयायां संवत्सरमथोषित:।

पुत्रे स्थिते दुराधर्षे अयोध्यां पुनरागमत्॥१३॥
Having stayed for one full year in the

city of Angada, when his son, difficult to

conquer was well-established, Laksmana
came back again to Ayodhya. (13)

भरतोऽपि तथैवोष्य संवत्सरमतोऽधिकम्।
अयोध्यां पुनरागम्य रामपादाव्रुपास्त स:॥१४॥

Bharata too, having spent a year and
more, in the same manner returned to Ayodhya
and worshipped the feet of Sri Rama. (14)

उभौ सौमित्रिभरतौ रामपादावनुव्रतौ।
कालं गतमपि Gert जज्ञातेऽतिधार्मिकौ॥ १५॥

Both—the son of Sumitra (Laksmana)
and Bharata, the most noble ones, ardently
attached to the feet of Sri Rama, were
oblivious of the lapse of time due to the
deep affection of Sri Rama. (15)
एवं वर्षसहस्राणि दश तेषां ययुस्तदा।
धर्मे प्रयतमानानां पौरकार्येषु नित्यदा॥ १६॥

Thus, ten thousand years passed with
Sri Rama, Bharata and Laksmana striving
always to perform tasks for the citizens and
always ready to follow Dharma. (16)
