* ARANYAKANDA «

| will feel delighted, where there is beauty of
forest and beauty of water, and also in the
vicinity of which there are firewood, flowers,
the holy KuSa grass and water.” (4-5)

`एवमुक्तस्तु रामेण लक्ष्मण: संयताञ्जलि:।
सीतासमक्षं काकुत्स्थमिदं वचनमब्रवीत्॥६॥
Thus addressed by Rama, Laksmana

with folded hands spoke as follows to
Kakutstha in the presence of Sita: (6)

परवानस्मि काकुत्स्थ त्वयि वर्षशतं स्थिते।
स्वयं तु रुचिरे देशे क्रियतामिति at वद॥ ७॥

“O Kakutstha, so long as you are
present, say, a hundred years, | am a
dependent only. Therefore, tell me of your
own accord to erect a hut at a place which
is agreeable to you.” (7)

सुप्रीतस्तेन वाक्येन लक्ष्मणस्य महाद्युति: |
विमृशन् रोचयामास देशं सर्वगुणान्वितम्॥८॥
Very much pleased by this reply of
Laksmana and thinking for a while, Sri Rama
of surpassing lustre, selected च spot,
possessed of all good qualities. (8)

स तं रुचिरमाक्रम्य देशमाश्रमकर्मणि।
हस्ते गृहीत्वा हस्तेन राम: सौमित्रिमब्रवीत्॥९॥

He went to that spot selected for setting
up a hermitage and clasping Laksmana by
the hand, Sri Rama said to the son of
Sumitra : (9)
अयं देश: Wa: श्रीमान् पुष्पितैस्तरुभिर्वृत:।
इहाश्रमपदं TE यथावत् कर्तुमर्हसि॥१०॥

“This plot is even, grand and surrounded

by trees in blossom. Here you ought duly to
set up a beautiful hermitage. (10)

इयमादित्यसंकाशै: पद्मै: सुरभिगन्धिभि:।
अदूरे दृश्यते wen पद्मिनी पद्मशोभिता॥११॥
“Here is seen nearby a lake looking
delightful with fragrant sun-like lotuses and
further beautified by blue lotuses. (11)

यथाख्यातमगस्त्येन मुनिना भावितात्मना।
sa गोदावरी रम्या पुष्पितैस्तरुभिर्वृता॥१२॥

753

“As pointed out by sage Agastya, the
pure-minded sage, this is the site of charming
Godavari, hemmed with trees in blossom.

(12)
हंसकारण्डवाकीर्णा चक्रवाकोपशोभिता।
नातिदूरे न चासन्ने मृगयूथनिपीडिता॥१३॥

“Crowded with swans and Karandava
birds, beautified by Caravaka birds and

stirred by herds of deer, it is neither very far
nor very near. (13)

मयूरनादिता रम्या: प्रांशवो बहुकन्दरा:।
gad fra: dha फुल्लैस्तरुभिराव्रता:॥ ex it
“Here are seen lofty and charming
mountains made noisy by peacocks, having
many caves and covered with trees, in
blossom, O gentle Laksmana ! (14)

सौवर्णै राजतैस्ताम्रैर्देशे देशे तथा शुभै:।
गवाक्षिता इवाभान्ति गजा: परमभक्तिभि:॥ १५॥
“Speckled here and there with shining

golden, silvery and coppery minerals, they
look like elephants decorated with exquisite

coloured diagrams resembling _ latticed
windows. (15)
सालैस्तालैस्तमालैश्च at: | पनसैर्द्रमै:।

नीवारैस्तिनिशैश्चैव पुन्नागैश्चोपशोभिता:॥१६॥
चूतैरशोकैस्तिलकै: केतकैरपि चम्पकै:।
पुष्पगुल्मलतोपेतैस्तैस्तैस्तरुभिरावृता: ॥ १७॥
स्यन्दनैश्चन्दनैर्नीपै: पर्णासैर्लकुचैरपि।
धवाश्वकर्णखदिरे::३ शमीकिंशुकपाटलै:॥ १८॥
“The mountains are graced with Sal,
palmyra, Tamala, date, jack-fruit, Nivara
(watery Kadamba), Tiniga and Punnaga trees
and covered by mango, Asoka, Tilaka,
Ketaka, Campaka, Syandana, sandalwood,
Nipa, Parnasa, Lakuca, Dhava, ASwakarna,
Khadira, Sami, Kirnguka and Patala trees
laden with blossoms and surrounded with
shrubs and climbers. (16—18)
sd मिदं मिदं रि ।
इह वत्स्याम सौमित्रे सार्धमेतेन पक्षिणा॥१९॥

“This spot is holy, this is charming, this
