# YUDDHAKANDA +

gold as also with excellent ornaments of
precious stones from his own domain, he
looked like the Himalaya mountain embellished
with precious minerals. He wore on his
broad bosom a prominent jewel shedding a
white lustre and resembling the well-known
Kaustubha gem adorning the bosom of Lord
Visnu, and hanging in the middle of a single
string of pearls. With a multitude of waves
moving up and down by his side, he was
impeded by a mass of clouds and winds
and surrounded by deities presiding over
rivers headed by the Ganga and the Sindhu
(Indus). Duly coming near in the company
of the deities presiding over the aforesaid
rivers—who were endowed with diverse
forms and looked like so many goddesses—
and accosting at the outset Sri Rama, a
scion of Raghu, who had an arrow in his
hand, the powerful sea-god, their ruler
spoke as follows with joined palms, gigantic
alligators being tossed up by the waves and
serpent-demons as well as orgres thrown
into confusion: (20—25)

पृथिवी वायुराकाशमापो ज्योतिश्च राघव।
स्वभावे सौम्य तिष्ठन्ति शाश्वतं मार्गमाश्रिता: ॥ २६ ॥

“Earth, air, ether, water and fire, O
gentle scion of Raghu, remain fixed in their
nature, abiding, as they do, by the eternal
law of nature governing it. (26)

तत्स्वभावो ममाप्येष यदगाधोऽहमप्लव:।
विकारस्तु Tae गाध Wad ते प्रवदाम्यहम्॥ २७॥

“My nature too, therefore, is such that
| am fathomless and incapable of being
swum across. Fordability would constitute
a deviation from my _ natural _ state.
Nonetheless, | tell you the following device
of crossing me. (27)

नकामान्न चलोभाद्वा न भयात्पार्थिवात्मज।
ग्राहनक्राकुलजलं स्तम्भयेयं कथंचन॥ २८॥

“Neither from covetousness, nor from
avidity, nor again from fear, O Prince, may
| allow, in any case, my waters infested as

367

they are with alligators, and crocodiles, to
solidify. (28)
विधास्ये येन गन्तासि विषहिष्येऽप्यहं तथा।
न ग्राहा विधमिष्यन्ति यावत्सेना तरिष्यति।
हरीणां तरणे राम करिष्यामि यथा स्थलम्॥ २९॥

“Nevertheless, | shall make arrangements
to see that you are able to cross over. | too
shall bear everything that way. The alligators
shall not be aggressive till the army will have
reached the other shore. | shall strive so as
to provide a foothold to enable the monkeys
to cross over.” (29)

तमब्रवीत् तदा WA: AUT A वरुणालय।
अमोघोऽयं महाबाण: कस्मिन् देशे निपात्यताम्॥ Bo I

Sri Rama then said to the sea-god,
“Listen to me, O Varuna, the god of water!
In which region should this mighty and
unfailing arrow be directed to descend?” (30)

रामस्य वचनं श्रुत्वा तं च दृष्टवा महाशरम्।
महोदधिर्महातेजा राघवं वाक्यमब्रवीत्॥३१॥
Hearing the question of Sri Rama and
perceiving that mighty arrow, Ocean, who was
endowed with extraordinary energy, submitted
as follows to Sri Rama, a scion of Raghu:(31)

उत्तरेणावकाशोऽस्ति कश्चित् पुण्यतरो मम।
द्रुमकुल्य इति ख्यातो लोके ख्यातो यथा भवान्॥ ३२॥

“To my north there is a very holy
region known by the name of Drumakulya
and well-known in the world like you. (32)

उग्रदर्शनकर्माणो बहवस्तत्र दस्यव:।
आभीरप्रमुखा: पापा: पिबन्ति सलनिलं Wan ३३॥

“Dwelling in that region, numerous sinful
marauders of terrible aspect and deeds, the
foremost of whom are Abhiras by caste,
drink my waters. (33)
wt तत्स्पर्शनं पापं सहेयं पापकर्मभि:।
amare: क्रियतां Wa अयं तत्र शरोत्तम:॥ ३४॥

“| cannot tolerate evil in the form of the
contact of my waters with those people of
