590

“Sovereignty with all its thorns
completely removed has been conferred on
you by your father and elder brother. Assisted
by ministers, who are all pleased with you,
enjoy it and quickly get yourself consecrated
for the coronation. (7)

उदीच्याश्च प्रतीच्याश्च दाक्षिणात्याश्च केवला:।
कोट्यापरान्ता: सामुद्रा रत्नान्युपहरन्तु auc

“Let the rulers of the north and the
west as well as of the south and the east
and the kings of the western borders near
the Sahya mountains, who are without a
throne and, therefore, not enjoying sovereign
rights, as well as seafaring traders bring
countless jewels as offerings to you.” (8)

तच्छुत्वा भरतो वाक्यं शोकेनाभिपरिप्लुत:।
जगाम मनसा रामं धर्मज्ञो धर्मकांक्षया॥९॥

Overwhelmed with grief to hear the
aforesaid advice of his family-priest, Bharata,
who knew the right course, viz., to restore
the kingdom to his elder brother, mentally
betook himself to Sri Rama with intent to get
inspiration from him to do the right thing in
the shape of waiting as a servant on his
elder brother rather than superseding his
claim to the throne. (9)

सबाष्पकलया वाचा कलहंसस्वरो युवा।
विललाप सभामध्ये जगर्हे च पुरोहितम्॥१०॥

In a voice choked with tears, the prince,
who was in the prime of his youth and
therefore incapable of renunciation, lamented
as follows in the open assembly in tones
resembling the cackling of a swan and
reproached his family-priest for his unjust
advice and offering the kingship to a cruel
and unrighteous fellow like himself: (10)

चरितब्रह्मचर्यस्य विद्यास्नातस्य धीमत:।
धर्मे प्रयतमानस्य को राज्यं मद्बिधो हरेत्॥११॥

“What sensible and knowing man like
me can usurp the kingdom of a sagacious
prince, like Sri Rama, who has duly studied
the Vedas with a vow of celibacy in the

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

house of a teacher and gone through the
ceremony of lustration after completing his
studies and is applying himself to the practice
of virtue in the shape of redeeming the
plighted word of his father? (11)

HA दशरथाज्जातो भवेद् राज्यापहारक:।
we चाहं च रामस्य धर्मं वक्तुमिहार्हसि॥१२॥
“How can I, sprung from the loins of
DaSaratha, who renounced his very life on
being told that Sri Rama had not returned to
Ayodhya and had left for the forest, become
a usurper of the throne of my elder brother,
when not only the throne, but | too belong to
Sri Rama? Therefore, in this conclave you
ought to speak what is right. (12)

ज्येष्ठ: श्रेष्ठश्च धर्मात्मा दिलीपनहुषोपम:।
लब्धुमर्हति काकुत्स्थो राज्यं दशरथो यथा॥१३॥

“Sri Rama, a scion of Kakutstha, who
is not only the eldest of us all, but the
worthiest too, whose mind is intent on piety
and who vies in eminence with Dilipa and
Nahusa, two most ancient and illustrious
representatives of the solar and the lunar
dynasty respectively deserves 10 inherit
the kingdom as did Dasaratha in the past.

(13)
इक्ष्वाकूणामहं लोके भवेयं कुलपांसन:॥१४॥

“If | perpetrate this sin of superseding
the claims of my elder brother, which is
resorted to only by unworthy men and does
not lead to heaven, | shall bring disgrace to
the line of Ikswaku in the world. (14)
इहस्थो वनदुर्गस्थं नमस्यामि कृताञ्जलि:॥१५॥

“| do not even approve of, much less
be a party to, the sinful act in the shape of
disinheriting and banishing Sri Rama that
has actually been committed by my mother.
That is why even though present here, |
salute with folded hands Sri Rama sojourning
in a forest region difficult of access. (15)
