1112

वेपमानां श्रमेणाद्य vate: स्थीयतामिति।
एक एवाहरिष्यामि पातालादपि जानकीम्॥ १३॥

“Single-handed | shall kill Ravana arrived
on the field of battle and then, destroying his
associates too, | shall forcibly bear away
today Janaka’s daughter, trembling through
affliction and fear. You should all stay here.”
“Single-handed | shall bring Janaka’s
daughter even from Patala (the lowermost
subterranean region). (12-13)

विधमिष्याम्यहं gary दारयिष्याम्यहं गिरीन्।
धरणीं दारयिष्यामि क्षोभयिष्यामि सागरान्॥ १४॥
“| shall smash down trees. | shall cleave

the mountains, shall rend the earth and
shall churn up the oceans.” (14)

शतयोजनसंख्याया: we समधिकं ह्यहम्॥ १५॥

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

“| can leap across the waters to the
extent of a hundred Yojanas (or eight hundred
miles).” “Il can surely leap to a distance of
more than a hundred Yojanas (or eight
hundred miles).” (15)

भूतले सागरे वापि शैलेषु च वनेषु च।
पातालस्यापि वा मध्ये न ममाच्छिद्यते गति: ।। १६ ॥

“My progress cannot be intercepted on
the earth’s surface or even in the ocean, on
the mountains or in the woods or even in
the heart of Patala (the nethermost
subterranean region).” (16)

इत्येकैकस्तदा at वानरा बलदर्पिता:।
ऊचुश्च वचनं aa हरिराजस्य संनिधौ॥ १७॥
Such words did the monkeys, proud of
their might, utter one by one, in the presence
of the celebrated Sugriva (the king of
monkeys) at that time on that spot. (17)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये किष्किन्धाकाण्डे पञ्चचत्वारिंश: सर्ग: Il ४५ ॥

Thus ends Canto Forty-five in the Kiskindhakanda of the glorious Ramayana of
Valmiki, the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

षट्चत्वारिंश: सर्ग:
Canto XLVI

While Sugriva gave instructions to his various generals mentioning in detail
the places they were to visit in the course of their expedition in search of
Sita, Sri Rama was struck by the knowledge of world geography revealed
by Sugriva and inquired of the latter how he had come to acquire such
wonderful and accurate knowledge of geography. In reply to this
Sugriva tells him of the encounter of Vali with Dundubhi, which
led the former to conceive an inveterate hatred towards him
(Sugriva) who when pursued by Vali had to range from one
end of the world to another and this enabled him (Sugriva)
to gather a first-hand knowledge of all parts of the globe

may वानरेन्द्रेषु राम: सुग्रीवमब्रवीत्।
कथं var विजानीते सर्वं a मण्डलं ya: १॥
The leaders of monkeys having left, Sri
Rama said to Sugriva, “How do you directly
know the entire terrestrial globe?” (1)

सुग्रीवश्च ततो राममुवाच प्रणतात्मवान्।
श्रूयतां सर्वमाख्यास्ये विस्तरेण वचो मम॥ २॥
And Sugriva then with his body bent

low through humility replied as follows to
Sri Rama: “Pray, let my _ submission
