1028

‘O one of long-arms, | am pleased by
your acceptance of my command, | shall
also consecrate you with joy as a ruler of
the subjects among men.’ (12)
एवमुक्त्वा Yd Ye ययातिर्नहुषात्मज:।
देवयानीसुतं Heal राजा वाक्यमुवाच ह॥१३॥
राक्षसस्त्वं मया जात: क्षत्ररूपो दुरासद:।
प्रतिहंसि ममाज्ञां त्वं प्रजार्थे विफलो wan १४॥

Thus having spoken to his son Puru,
Yayati, the son of Nahusa, in anger uttered
these words to the son of Devayani: ‘By
me, you are born a Raksasa (demon) in the
form of Ksatriya. As you defy my orders
you lose chance to rule over the subjects.

(13-14)
fart गुरुभूतं मां यस्मात् त्वमवमन्यसे।
राक्षसान् यातुधानांस्त्वं जनयिष्यसि दारुणान्॥ १५ UI

‘As thou showest disrespect to me,
your father and preceptor, you will create
the cruel Raksasas and Yatudhanas (evil
spirits). (15)

न तु सोमकुलोत्पन्ने वंशे स्थास्यति दुर्मते: |
वंशोऽपि भवतस्तुल्यो दुर्विनीतो भविष्यति॥ १६॥

‘Your progeny will not belong to the
family originating from the race of Soma, the
moon. O evil-minded one, your family will
also be wicked as you are.’ (16)

तमेवमुक्त्वा राजर्षि: ge राज्यविवर्धनम्।
अभिषेकेण सम्पूज्य आश्रमं प्रविवेश ह॥१७॥
Thus admonishing Yadu then, honouring
Puru, the enhancer of the royal suzerainty
with consecration, entered the other ASrama
(Vanaprastha). (17)
तत: कालेन महता दिष्टान्तमुपजग्मिवान्।
त्रिदिवं स गतो राजा ययातिर्नहुषात्मज:॥ १८॥

« VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

Then after a long time approaching his
destiny as desired, the king Yayati (the son
of Nahusa) departed to heaven. (18)

पूरुश्चकार a राज्यं धर्मेण महता qa:
प्रतिष्ठाने पुरवरे काशिराज्ये महायशा:॥१९॥

Puru the mighty one ruled with great
righteousness in the famous city of
Pratisthana in the kingdom of Kasi. (19)

यदुस्तु जनयामास यातुधानान् सहस्रश:।
a क्रौञ्चवने दुर्गे राजवंशबहिष्कृत:॥ २०॥

Yadu produced Yatudhanas (evil beings)
in thousands, in the forest of Krauficavana,
difficult to traverse, banished as he was
from the royal family. (20)

Wa तूशनसा AM: शापोत्सर्गो ययातिना।
धारित: क्षत्रधर्मेण a निमिश्चक्षमे न च॥ २१॥

This is how the mighty curse that was
uttered by Usana, which fell on Yayati, was
borne by him according to the code of
conduct of the Ksatriyas, and which Nimi
could not forbear. (21)
Wad ते सर्वमाख्यातं दर्शनं सर्वकारिणाम्।
अनुवर्तामहे सौम्य दोषो न स्याद् यथा FTN २२॥

“All this has been narrated to you; we
shall grant audience to all who come for
action, so that we do not commit the fault
that was committed by the king, Nrga.” (22)

sta कथयति TA चन्द्रतुल्याननेन
प्रविरलतरतारं व्योम जज्ञे तदानीम्।
अरुणकिरणरक्ता दिग् बभौ चैव पूर्वा
कुसुमरसविमुक्तं वस्त्रमागुण्ठितेव॥ २३॥
As Rama with moon-like face narrated
this, the sky with fading stars appeared.
The eastern quarter shone with red rays as
if enveloped with a red garment. (23)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये उत्तरकाण्डे एकोनषष्टितम: सर्ग: ॥ ५९ ॥

Thus ends Canto Fifty-nine in the Uttarakanda of the glorious Ramayana of Valmiki,
the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

