1130

वयमाश्वयुजे मासि कालसंख्याव्यवस्थिता:।
प्रस्थिता: सोऽपि चातीत: किमत: कार्यमुत्तरम्॥ ९॥

“Bound by a time-limit we sallied forth
in the month of Agwina _ (roughly
corresponding to September of the Gregorian
calendar). That month too has passed. What
should be done after this? (9)

Vat: प्रत्ययं wer नीतिमार्गविशारदा:।
हितेष्वभिरता भर्तुर्निसृष्टा: सर्वकर्मसु॥१०॥

“You have earned the confidence of
your master, are adept in the ways of
propriety and devoted to his best interests
and have been detailed by him on all sorts
of errands. (10)
कर्मस्वप्रतिमा: सर्वे fee विश्रुतपौरुषा:।

मां पुरस्कृत्य निर्याता: पिङ्गाक्षप्रतिचोदिता:॥ ११॥

“You are incomparable in every work,
your virility is well-known in every quarter.
Commanded by Sugriva (who _ is
distinguished by his reddish brown eyes)
you came away on this expedition placing
me at your head. (11)
हरिराजस्य संदेशमकृत्वा क: सुखी भवेत्॥१२॥

“Now death is sure to befall us, who
have failed to accomplish our purpose: there
is no doubt about it. Having failed to execute
the instructions of Sugriva, the lord of
monkeys, who can hope to be happy? (12)

अस्मिन्नतीते काले तु सुग्रीवेण कृते स्वयम्।
प्रायोपवेशनं युक्तं सर्वेषां च वनौकसाम्॥१३॥
“The time-limit fixed by Sugriva himself
having expired now, it is but proper for us,
all the monkeys, to sit down without food
awaiting death. (13)

HAT: प्रकृत्या सुग्रीव: स्वामिभावे व्यवस्थित: 1
न क्षमिष्यति न: सर्वानपराधक्रृतो गतान्॥१४॥
‘“Vehement by nature and now

established in authority, Sugriva would never
forgive us all if we approach him as
offenders. (14)

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

अप्रव्रत्तौ च सीताया: पापमेव करिष्यति।

तस्मात् क्षममिहाद्यैव wet प्रायोपवेशनम्॥१५॥
त्यक्त्वा पुत्रांश्च दारांश्च धनानि च गृहाणि च।
ae नो हिंसते राजा सर्वान् प्रतिगतानित:॥ १६॥
“And in default of any news about Sita
he will surely make short work of us.
Therefore, it is desirable for us to have
recourse to fasting for death this very day,
bidding adieu to our progeny and wife and
also our wealth and homes. The king will
undoubtedly kill us all when returned from
this place (without any news about Sita).
(15-16)
वधेनाप्रतिरूपेण श्रेयान् मृत्युरिहैव न:।
न We यौवराज्येन सुग्रीवेणाभिषेचित:॥ १७॥

“Our death at this very place is
preferable to an unbecoming death at the
hands of Sugriva. Moreover, | was not
invested with the office of Prince Regent of
Kiskindha by Sugriva. (17)

नरेन्द्रेणाभिषिक्तोऽस्मि रामेणाक्लिष्टकर्मणा |

स Ye बद्धवैरो मां राजा दृष्टवा व्यतिक्रमम्॥ १८॥
चातयिष्यति दण्डेन तीक्ष्णेन कृतनिश्चय:।
fe मे सुहृद्धिर्व्यसनं पश्यद्भिर्जीवितान्तरे।
इहैव प्रायमासिष्ये पुण्ये सागररोधसि॥१९॥
“| was so invested by Sri Rama, the
ruler of men, of unwearied action. Perceiving
my transgression, the aforesaid king Sugriva,
who nursed a grudge against me in the
former days (when he was robbed of his
kingdom and wife by Vali, my father) and
has, therefore, made up his mind to dispose
me of, will surely cause me to be killed by
recourse to a cruel punishment. What shall
| do with my near and dear ones witnessing
my being killed in cold blood? | shall
accordingly sit down for a fast awaiting
death on this holy sea shore itself.” (18-19)

एतच्छुत्वा कुमारेण युवराजेन भाषितम्।
सर्वे ते वानरश्रेष्ठा: करुणं वाक्यमब्रुवन्॥ २०॥

Hearing this statement made by Angada,
the Prince Regent of Kiskindha, all the
