132

wa विग्रहवान् धर्म we वीर्यवतां at

we विद्याधिको लोके तपसश्च परायणम्॥१०॥
‘Viswamitra is piety incarnate; he is

the foremost of those endowed with prowess.

He is superior in learning to all and is a

great repository of asceticism. (10)

एषोऽस्त्रान् विविधान् वेत्ति त्रैलोक्ये सचराचरे।
नैनमन्य: पुमान् वेत्ति न च वेत्स्यन्ति केचन॥ ११॥
न देवा नर्षय: केचिन्नामरा न च राक्षसा:।
गन्धर्वयक्षप्रवरा: सकिंनरमहोरगा: ॥ १२॥
“He knows the use of the different
types of missiles. In all the three worlds
including the mobile and immobile creation
inhabiting them no other man (than myself)
knows him nor shall any other creatures
know him, neither gods nor any Rsis nor
again the Raksasas nor the foremost of the
Gandharvas and Yaksas_ including the
Kinnaras and great Nagas. (11-12)

सर्वास्त्राणि कृशाश्वस्य Yat: परमधार्मिका:।
कौशिकाय पुरा दत्ता यदा राज्यं प्रशासति॥ १३॥

“All the missiles were formerly born as
the most pious sons of Krsaswa (a lord of
created beings) and were gifted by Lord
Siva to Viswamitra while he ruled over a
kingdom. (13)

तेऽपि पुत्रा: कृशाश्वस्य प्रजापतिसुतासुता:।
नैकरूपा महावीर्यां दीप्तिमन्तो जयावहा:॥ १४॥

“The aforesaid sons of Krsaswa, born
as they were of the daughters of Daksa
(another lord of created beings), were
possessed of varied forms, endowed with
extraordinary prowess and full of splendour,
and brought victory to him who employed
them in his service. (14)

जया च सुप्रभा wa दक्षकन्ये सुमध्यमे।
ते सूतेऽस्त्राणि शस्त्राणि शतं परमभास्वरम्॥ १५ ॥

“Jaya and Suprabha, the two aforesaid
daughters of Daksa, who were both
possessed of well-proportioned limbs, gave
birth to a hundred most effulgent missiles
as well as other weapons. (15)

« VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

पञ्चाशतं सुताँल्लेभे जया लब्धवरा वरान्।
वधायासुरसैन्यानामप्रमेयानरूपिण: ॥ १६॥

“Of these, Jaya, who had secured a
boon (to this effect), got fifty excellent sons,
possessed of infinite glory and devoid of
form, for the destruction of Asuric (diabolic)
forces. (16)
सुप्रभाजनयच्चापि Gar पञ्चाशतं पुन:।
संहारान् नाम दुर्धर्षान् दुराक्रामान् बलीयस:॥ १७॥

“Suprabha too brought forth fifty more
sons, who were exceptionally powerful, hard
to overpower, nay difficult even to assail,
and collectively known by the name of
Samharas (destructive forces). (17)

तानि चास्त्राणि वेत्त्येष यथावत् कुशिकात्मज: |
अपूर्वाणां च जनने शक्तो भूयश्च धर्मवित्॥ १८ ॥

“The son of Gadhi, present before you,
who is conversant with the principles of
righteousness, not only knows the use of all
those missiles as one ought to but is also
capable of evolving new ones. (18)

तेनास्य मुनिमुख्यस्य धर्मज्ञस्य महात्मन:।

न किंचिदस्त्यविदितं भूतं भव्यं च राघव॥१९॥
“Hence nothing relating to the past and

the future is unknown, O scion of Raghu, to

this high-souled jewel among the sages,

who knows everything concerning Dharma,

i.e., virtue. (19)

एवंवीर्यो महातेजा विश्वामित्रो महायशा:।

न रामगमने राजन् संशयं गन्तुमर्हसि॥२०॥

“Of such extraordinary might is the
highly renowned and exceptionally glorious
ViSwamitra. You ought not, therefore, to
entertain any doubt about sending Sri Rama
with him, O king! (20)

तेषां निग्रहणे शक्त: स्वयं च कुशिकात्मज:।
तव पुत्रहितार्थाय त्वामुपेत्याभियाचते॥ २१॥

“Though capable of punishing the
Raksasas himself, it is for the sake of doing
good to your son, Sri Rama, that the sage
ViSwamitra (son of Gadhi) has sought you
and has solicited him.” (21)
