850

दशग्रीव स्थितो at पुराणे सत्यसंश्रय:।
भ्रातस्त्वं निन्दितं कर्म कर्तुं नार्हसि साम्प्रतम्॥ ३॥
जटायुर्नाम नाम्नाहं गृध्रराजो महाबल:।
राजा सर्वस्य लोकस्य महेन्द्रवरुणोपम:॥४॥
लोकानां च fed युक्तो Ta दशरथात्मज:।
तस्यैषा लोकनाथस्य धर्मपत्नी यशस्विनी॥५॥
सीता ATT वरारोहा यां त्वं हर्तुमिहेच्छसि।
कथं राजा स्थितो धर्मे परदारान् परामृशेत्॥६॥
“Ravana (who are endowed with ten
heads), | am the well-known king of vultures,
Jatayu by name, possessed of great might,
devoted to the eternal code of virtue and
true to my promise. Brother, you ought not
to perpetrate a reproachful act at least at
this moment in my presence. Sri Rama, son
of Dasaratha, is the ruler of the entire globe,
vying with the mighty Indra and Varuna (the
god presiding over the waters) and devoted
to the welfare of all beings. This lady, whom
you seek to bear away at this moment, is
the illustrious and lawfully wedded wife of
excellent limbs of the aforesaid protector of
the world, Sita by name. How dare a king,
firm on virtue, lay his finger on another’s
consort? (3—6)

रक्षणीया विशेषेण राजदारा महाबल।
Rada गतिं नीचां परदाराभिमर्शनात्॥७॥
“The consorts of kings, O ogre of
extraordinary might, are deserving of
protection in a special degree. Therefore,
avert a vile destiny which is sure to follow
from the sin of laying one’s finger on another's
wife. (7)

न तत् समाचरेद् धीरो यत् परोऽस्य विगर्हयेत्।
यथाऽऽत्मनस्तथान्येषां दारा TAT विमर्शनात्॥ ८॥

“A wise man should not deliberately do
that on account of which others may revile
him. The consorts of others should be
protected from another's touch in the same
way as one’s own wife. (8)

अर्थं वा यदि वा कामं शिष्टा: शास्त्रेष्वनागतम्।
व्यवस्यन्त्यनुराजानं धर्मं पौलस्त्यनन्दन॥९॥

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

“The cultured pursue wealth or sensuous
enjoyment or even virtue not sanctioned in
the scriptures following the example of a king,
O delight of Pulastya’s race ! (9)

राजा धर्मश्च कामश्च द्रव्याणां चोत्तमो निधि: ।

धर्म: शुभं वा पापं वा राजमूलं प्रवर्तते॥१०॥
“A king embodies virtue and sensuous

enjoyment and is an excellent repertory of

riches in that virtue; right conduct or sin has

its root in a king and proceeds from him.
(10)
पापस्वभावश्चपल: ma त्वं रक्षसां वर।
ऐडश्वर्यमभिसम्प्राप्तो विमानमिव दुष्कृती॥११॥
“Though sinful of disposition and fickle,
how have you stumbled upon lordship, O
jewel among ogres, as a man of sinful
deeds would come upon an aerial car (which
as a rule is the lot of the virtuous alone)?
(11)
कामस्वभावो य: सोऽसौ न शक्यस्तं प्रमार्जितुम्।
नहि दुष्टात्मनामार्यमावसत्यालये चिरम्॥१२॥

“The man, who is licentious by nature,
is not able to get rid of such nature; for
eminence does not abide for long in the
house of the evil-minded. (12)

विषये वा yt वा ते यदा रामो महाबल:।
नापराध्यति धर्मात्मा कथं तस्यापराध्यसि॥ १३॥

“When Sri Rama, who is possessed of
extraordinary might and whose mind is set
on virtue, does not commit any wrong in
your territory or capital, why should you
(take into your head to) wrong him? = (13)

ae शूर्पणखाहेतोर्जनस्थानगत: खर:।
strait हत: Ya रामेणाक्लिष्टकर्मणा॥ १४॥
अत्र ब्रूहि यथातत्त्वं को रामस्य व्यतिक्रम:।
यस्य त्वं लोकनाथस्य हृत्वा भार्यां गमिष्यसि॥ १५॥

“If Knara stationed in Janasthana, who
transgressed his limits in order to wipe the
tears of Sdrpanakha, was killed in action in
the past by Sri Rama of unwearied action,
tell me truly what the fault of Sri Rama was
