* AYODHYAKANDA +

to others., spoke to Laksmana as follows: so
the tradition goes : (1)

अद्येयं प्रथमा रात्रिर्याता जनपदाद् बहि:।
या सुमन्त्रेण teat at नोत्कण्ठितुमर्हसि॥ २॥

“This night, which has overtaken us
today outside the territory inhabited by our
own people, is the first night which will pass
without Sumantra. You ought not to sorrow
over it. (2)

जागर्तव्यमतन्दिभ्यामद्यप्रभृति रात्रिषु ।
योगक्षेमौ fe सीताया ada लक्ष्मणावयो:।॥ ३॥
“Remaining free from lassitude, we must
both keep awake during the coming nights;
for the procuration of what is needed by
Sita and the protection of her person and
honour etc., are our care, O Laksmana! (3)

we कथंचिदेवेमां सौमित्रे वर्तयामहे।
अपवर्तामहे भूमावास्तीर्य स्वयमर्जितै: ॥४॥

“Let us pass this night anyhow, O son
of Sumitra! Let us lie down on the ground,
covering it with straw, leaves and so on
procured with our own hands.” (4)

स तु fava मेदिन्यां महार्हृशयनोचित:।
इमा: सौमित्रये WAT व्याजहार HAT: शुभा:॥ ५॥

Sitting on the bare ground, the said Sri
Rama, for his part, who was accustomed to
costly beds, addressed the following suitable
remarks to Laksmana : (5)

श्रुवमद्य महाराजो दु:खं स्वपिति लक्ष्मण।
कृतकामा तु कैकेयी तुष्टा भवितुमर्हति॥६॥

“Surely the Emperor must be sleeping
uncomfortably tonight, O Laksmana ! Kaikey/,
on the other hand, who has her desired object
accomplished, ought to feel gratified. (6)

सा fe tat महाराजं कैकेयी राज्यकारणात्।
अपि न च्यावयेत् प्राणान् दृष्टवा भरतमागतम्॥ ७॥

“Seeing Bharata returned from his
maternal grandfathers, Queen Kaikeyi, |
am afraid, may not actually rob the Emperor
of his very life for the sake of sovereignty.

(7)

491

अनाथश्च fe वृद्धश्च मया da faa कृत:।
fee करिष्यति कामात्मा कैकेय्या वशमागत:॥ ८॥

“What will the king—whose desire to
see me installed as Prince Regent lingers
even now in his mind and who has fallen
into the clutches of Kaikeyi, nay, who is
aged and, therefore, helpless and has further
been disunited from me—do to foil her
designs upon his life? (8)

इदं व्यसनमालोक्य wag मतिविभ्रमम्।
काम एवार्थधर्माभ्यां गरीयानिति मे मति:॥९॥

“Viewing this evil plight of mine and the
perversion of the king’s mind, | am led to
think that gratification of the senses is of
greater moment than earthly gain and
religious merit. (9)

को ह्यविद्वानपि पुमान् प्रमदाया: कृते त्यजेत्।
छन्दानुवर्तिनं Ut तातो मामिव लक्ष्मण॥१०॥

“What man, even though ignorant, would
actually abandon for the sake of a woman,
a son following his will, even as father has
abandoned me, O Laksmana? (10)

Gat ad ques भरत: केकयीसुत:।
मुदितान् कोसलानेको यो भोक्ष्यत्यधिराजवत्॥ 8k Ul

“Ah, Kaikeyi’s son, Bharata alone is
happy and the spouse of a lucky woman in
that he is going to rule over the prosperous
kingdom of Kosala like an overlord, his
claim being disputed by none! (11)

a हि राज्यस्य wader सुखमेकं भविष्यति।
ad तु वयसातीते मयि चारण्यमाश्रिते॥१२॥

“For, he will enjoy the undivided
blessings of the entire kingdom, now that
father is superannuated and | have retired
to the forest. (12)

अर्थधर्मौ परित्यज्य य: काममनुवर्तते।

एवमापद्यते fat राजा दशरथो यथा॥१३॥
“He who pursues sensuous pleasure,

neglecting wealth and virtue, soon comes to

grief in the same way as King DaSsaratha
has. (13)
