494

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

Canto LIV

Set out on his journey for the Dandaka forest with Sita and Laksmana, Sri
Rama reaches at dusk the hermitage of Sage Bharadwaja in the vicinity
of the confluence of the holy Ganga and Yamuna rivers. Paying
due honours to Sri Rama and his party, the sage recommends
CitrakUta as the fittest place for him to sojourn in.

Spending the night in discourses on various
topics with him, the sage grants him
leave early next morning to
depart for Citrakuta

a तु तस्मिन् महाव्रृक्षे उषित्वा रजनीं शुभाम्।
विमलेऽभ्युदिते सूर्ये Tee देशात् Walter ug tt

Having spent the beautiful night under
that big tree, the party for their part set out
from that place when the sun had clearly
risen. (1)

जग्मुस्तं देशमुद्दिश्य विगाह्य सुमहद् वनम्॥२॥

Travelling across a fairly extensive
forest they proceeded in the direction of that
region where the Yamuna rushes to meet
the Ganga (associated with the name of
Emperor Bhagiratha, who had the credit of
bringing down the stream to the terrestrial
plane by dint of his devotion and austerities
in order to purify the ashes of his departed
great granduncles). (2)

तेभूमिभागान् विविधान् देशांश्चापि मनोहरान्।
अदृष्टपूर्वान् पश्यन्तस्तत्र तत्र यशस्विन:॥ ३॥
Beholding here and there various tracts
of land and soul-captivating regions never
seen before, the illustrious travellers moved
on. (3)
यथा क्षेमेण सम्पश्यन् पुष्पितान् विविधान् द्रुमान्।
निर्वृत्तमात्रे दिवसे wa: सौमित्रिमब्रवीत्॥४॥
प्रयागमभित: पश्य सौमित्रे धूममुत्तमम्।
अग्नेर्भगवत: ad we संनिहितो मुनि:॥५॥

Gazing on the various trees laden with

blossoms while travelling at ease, Sri Rama
said to Laksmana (son of Sumitra) when
the day had just ended : “Behold, O son of
Sumitra, agreeable fragrant smoke, the
emblem of the glorious god of fire near
Prayaga (the confluence of the holy Ganga
and Yamuna rivers). From this | conclude
the sage Bharadwaja is near about. (4-5)

नूनं Wa: स्म सम्भेदं गङ्गायमुनयोर्वयम्।
तथाहि श्रूयते शब्दो वारिणोर्वारिघर्षज:॥६॥

“We have surely reached _ the
confluence of the Ganga and Yamuna rivers;
for the noise produced by the clashing of
the waters of the two streams is heard.(6)

दारूणि परिभिन्नानि वनजैरुपजीविभि:।
छिन्नाश्चाप्याश्रमे wa दृश्यन्ते विविधा द्रुमा:॥ ७॥

“Logs of wood, hewn by men living by
the produce of the forest, as also the trees
of various kinds thus dismembered are seen
in the hermitage here.” (7)

धन्विनौ तौ Ga गत्वा लम्बमाने दिवाकरे।
Teta: संधौ प्रापतुर्निलयं मुने:॥८॥
Walking at ease the aforesaid two
archers reached the outskirts of the sage’s
dwelling in the space intervening the Ganga
and the Yamuna, while the sun was going
down. (8)
रामस्त्वाश्रममासाद्य त्रासयन् मृगपक्षिण:।
गत्वा मुहूर्तमध्वानं भरद्वाजमुपागमत्॥ ९॥
