* BALAKANDA +

इति मुनिवचनात् प्रसन्नचित्तो रघुव्रषभश्च मुमोद पार्थिवाग्र्य: ।

गमनमभिरुरोच राघवस्य प्रथितयशा: कुशिकात्मजाय बुद्ध्या॥ २२॥
Delighted in mind by the aforesaid

explanation by sage Vasistha, King

DaSaratha, a jewel among the Raghus, the

133

foremost of kings, whose fame was spread
far and wide, felt rejoiced and mentally
acquiesced in the act of sending Sri Rama (a
scion of Raghu) in order to gladden ViSwamitra
(son of Gadhi, a scion of KuSa). (22)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये बालकाण्डे एकविंश: सर्ग: ॥ २१ ॥

Thus ends Canto Twenty-one in the Balakanda of the glorious Ramayana of Valmiki,
the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

Canto XXII

King Dagaratha sends Sri Rama and Laksmana with Vigwamitra
and the two princes receive initiation from the latter in the

two mystic spells,

तथा वसिष्ठे ब्रुवति राजा दशरथ: स्वयम्।
प्रहृष्टबदनो राममाजुहाव सलक्ष्मणम्॥१॥
While Vasistha was speaking as
aforesaid, King Dasaratha with an
exceptionally cheerful countenance personally
called Sri Rama alongwith Laksmana
(knowing as he did that the two were
inseparable). (1)
कृतस्वस्त्ययनं मात्रा far दशरथेन a
पुरोधसा वसिष्ठेन मङ्गलैरभिमन्त्रितम्॥ २॥
a Ut मूर्ध्यपाघ्राय राजा दशरथस्तदा।
ददौ कुशिकपुत्राय सुप्रीतेनान्तरात्मना॥ ३॥
Smelling the head of his son as a
token of affection, after he had been blessed
by his mother, Queen Kausalya, as well as
by his father, King Dasaratha, and
consecrated by Vasistha, the family priest,
by means of benedictory Vedic texts, King
Dasaratha then committed him to the care
of Viswamitra (son of Gadhi) with an extremely
delightful mind. (2-3)

ततो वायु: सुखस्पर्शो नीरजस्को ववौ तदा।
विश्चामित्रगतं रामं gst राजीवलोचनम्॥४॥

Seeing the lotus-eyed Rama following

Bala and Atibala

Viswamitra at that moment, च breeze
delightful to the touch and free from dust
began to blow at once. (4)

पुष्पवृष्टिर्महत्यासीद् देवदुन्दुभिनि:स्वनै:।
शङ्खदुन्दुभिनिर्घोष: wad तु महात्मनि॥५॥
Even as the high-souled Rama was
about to depart, there was a shower of
flowers from the heavens and a loud blast
of conches and beating of kettledrums in
the capital, accompanied by the beat of
celestial drums. (5)

विश्वामित्रो ययावग्रे ततो WaT महायशा:।
काकपक्षधरो धन्वी तं च सौमित्रिरन्वगात्॥६॥
ViSwamitra walked in the van and the
highly renowned Rama, adorned with side-
locks and armed with a bow, followed next;
while Laksmana (son of Sumitra) followed
the latter. (6)

कलापिनौ धनुष्पाणी शोभयानौ दिशो दश।
विश्वामित्रं महात्मानं त्रिशीर्षाविव पन्नगौ॥७॥
अनुजग्मतुरक्षुद्रौ पितामहमिवाश्चिनौ |
अनुयातौ श्रिया दीप्तौ शोभयन्तावनिन्दितौ॥ ८॥

Equipped each with a pair of quivers,
bow in hand, and illuminating the ten
