* AYODHYAKANDA +

and aged hermitess, who is worth saluting
in the eyes of all created beings, and is
ever free from anger.” (13)

एवं Fart तमृषिं तथेत्युक्त्वा A Wa: |
सीतामालोक्य धर्मज्ञामिदं वचनमब्रवीत्॥१४॥
Saying “Amen!” to the aforesaid Rsi,
who was speaking in this strain and looking
at Sita, who knew what is right, the celebrated

Sri Rama (a scion of Raghu) addressed the
following words to her: 14)

राजपुत्रि श्रुतं त्वेतन्मुनेरस्य समीरितम्।
श्रेयोऽर्थमात्मन: शीघ्रमभिगच्छ तपस्विनीम्॥ १५॥

“The foregoing utterance of this sage
has surely been heard by you, O princess!
For your own good, therefore, quickly
approach the hermitess with reverence. (15)

अनसूयेति या लोके कर्मभि: ख्यातिमागता।
at शीघ्रमभिगच्छ त्वमभिगम्यां तपस्विनीम्॥ १६॥

“Speedily seek you respectfully the
ascetic lady, who is worth approaching with
reverence and who has attained celebrity in
the world through her actions under the
name of Anasuya (lit., free from jealousy).”

(16)
सीता त्वेतद् वच: श्रुत्वा राघवस्य यशस्विनी |
तामत्रिपत्नीं धर्मज्ञामभिचक्राम मैथिली॥ १७॥
सततं ast wart कदलीमिव॥ १८॥

Hearing this exhortation of Sri Rama
(a scion of Raghu), the illustrious Sita, a
princess of Mithila, for her part proceeded
to meet the celebrated and aged consort of
Atri, who knew what is right, nay, who was
feeble of body and wrinkled, with her hair
turned grey due to old age, and whose
frame constantly shook like a banana tree
in a storm. (17-18)

तां तु सीता महाभागामनसूयां पतिव्रताम्।
अभ्यवादयदव्यग्रा स्वं नाम समुदाहरत्॥१९॥

Sita for her part calmly greeted the
highly blessed Anasuya, devoted to her

705

husband, and duly uttered her own name by
way of introduction. (19)

अभिवाद्य च वैदेही तापसीं at दमान्विताम्।
बद्धाञ्जलिपुटा हृष्टा पर्यपृच्छ्दनामयम्॥ २०॥

Nay, having greeted that hermitess,
who was endowed with self-restraint, Sita
(a princess of the Videha kingdom), full of
joy, enquired after her health with folded
hands. (20)
तत: सीतां महाभागां दृष्ट्वा at धर्मचारिणीम्।
सान्त्वयन्त्यब्रवीद् Geet दिष्ट्या धर्ममवेक्षसे॥ २१॥

Seeing the highly blessed and
celebrated Sita, who was given to the practice
of virtue, the old lady, thereupon, comfortingly
said to her, “Luckily enough, you have your
eyes fixed on righteousness. (21)

त्यक्त्वा ज्ञातिजनं सीते मानव्रद्धिं च मानिनि।
aes at रामं दिष्ट्या त्वमनुगच्छसि॥ २२॥

“Having forsaken your relations and given
up your exaltation, O proud Sita, | am glad,
you are following your husband, Sri Rama,
who has been exiled into the forest. (22)

नगरस्थो वनस्थो वा शुभो वा यदि वाशुभ:।
यासां स्त्रीणां प्रियो भर्ता तासां लोका महोदया: ।। २३ ॥

“Worlds that are attended with great
prosperity await those women to whom their
husband is dear, no matter whether he
lives in a city or in a forest, whether he is
propitious or adverse. (23)
दु:शील: HM वा eat परिवर्जित:।
स्त्रीणामार्यस्वभावानां परमं tad पति:॥ २४॥

“In the eyes of women who are blessed
with a noble disposition the husband is the
highest deity, no matter whether he is ill-
mannered or licentious or entirely devoid of
riches. (24)
नातो विशिष्टं पश्यामि बान्धवं विमृशन्त्यहम्।
सर्वत्र योग्यं वैदेहि तप:कृतमिवाव्ययम्॥ २५॥

“Though deeply pondering, | do not

see for a woman a friend greater than the
husband and more capable of yielding one’s
