996

“What are the people of the town and
the country talking about me and about Sita,
Bharata and Laksmana and what indeed
about Satrughna and mother Kaikeyl? Kings
are criticized in the forests and in the
kingdom.” (5-6)

wage तु रामेण wa: प्राञ्जलिरब्रवीत्।
स्थिता: शुभा: HAT राजन् वर्तन्ते पुरवासिनाम्॥ ७॥
On being thus questioned by Sri Rama,
Bhadra with his palms joined together replied:
“O King ! Elegant are the talks of the citizens.
(7)

am तु विजयं सौम्य दशग्रीववधार्जितम्।
भूयिष्ठं स्वपुरे Ut: कथ्यन्ते पुरुषर्षभ॥ ८॥
“O gentle one, the best of men! It is
indeed the conquest gained by killing Ravana
(the ten-headed monster) which is being
mainly talked about by the citizens in the
town.” (8)

एवमुक्तस्तु भद्रेण राघवो वाक्यमब्रवीत्।
कथयस्व यथातत्त्वं सर्वं निरवशेषत:॥९॥
शुभाशुभानि वाक्यानि कान्याहु: पुरवासिन:।
श्रुत्वेदानीं शुभं Hat न कुर्यामशुभानि च॥१०॥

Having been thus replied to by Bhadra,
Sri Rama (a scion of Raghu) spoke the
following words: “Leaving nothing, tell me
everything exactly as it is. What are the
good and ill words that the citizens speak?
Now after having heard, | shall practise
what is good and refrain from evil actions.
(9-10)

कथयस्व च ferret निर्भयं विगतज्वर:।
कथयन्ति यथा पौरा: पापा जनपदेषु च॥११॥
“Tell me with confidence and without
fear and mental anguish, what ill the people

in the town and in the country are speaking
about me?” (11)

राघवेणैवमुक्तस्तु भद्र: सुरुचिरं वच:।
प्रत्युवाच महाबाहुं wate: सुसमाहित:॥१२॥

On being thus spoken to by Sri Rama
(a scion of Raghu), Bhadra on his part with

« VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

a composed mind and with palms joined
together replied to the mighty-armed Sri Rama
in these pleasing words! (12)

SUT राजन् यथा UAT: कथयन्ति शुभाशुभम्।
चत्वरापणरध्यासु वनेषूपवनेषु च ॥१३॥

“O King ! Listen how the citizens talk
good and ill words about you at the
crossroads, in the markets, on the streets,
in the forests and in the groves. (13)

दुष्करं pda Wa: Was सेतुबन्धनम्।
अश्रुतं पूर्वकै: कैश्चिद् देवैरपि ward: u १४॥
““By constructing a bridge across the
sea, Sri Rama has performed a difficult feat,
unheard of as having been accomplished
by former kings and even by gods and
demons. (14)
रावणाश्च दुराधर्षो sd: सबलवाहन:।
वानराश्च वशं नीता ऋक्षाश्च सह राक्षसै:॥ १५ Il
“‘Besides, Ravana, difficult to be
vanquished, was killed alongwith his army
and mounts. The Vanara and the Rksa
alongwith the Raksasas were brought under
control. (15)
हत्वा च रावणं संख्ये सीतामाहृत्य Wea: |
अमर्षं पृष्ठत: Heal CAV पुनरानयत्॥१६॥
“‘Having killed Ravana in battle and
fetched Sri Sita, Sri Rama (a scion of
Raghus) took her into His house again,
renouncing anger or remorse (caused by
the polluting touch of Ravana). (16)

कोदृशं ea तस्य सीतासम्भोगजं सुखम्।
अङ्कमारोप्य तु WT रावणेन बलाद्धृताम्॥१७॥
लङ्कामपि पुरा नीतामशोकवनिकां गताम्।
रक्षसां वशमापन्नां कथं Wa न कुत्स्यति॥ १८॥
अस्माकमपि दारेषु सहनीयं भविष्यति।
यथा fe कुरुते राजा प्रजास्तमनुवर्तते॥१९॥
“What must be the pleasure in his
heart born out of conjugation with Sri Sita?
Why does not Sri Rama censure her, who

formerly had been forcibly carried away by
Ravana, placing her in his lap and even
