* SUNDARAKANDA +

तत: शरीरं संक्षिप्य तन्महीधरसंनिभम्।
पुन: प्रकृतिमापेदे वीतमोह इवात्मवान्॥ २०८॥
Then, contracting his aforesaid
expanded body, which closely resembled a
mountain, he once more assumed his native
form, even as he, who has mastered his
self and is completely free from infatuation,
realizes his own blissful divine nature. (208)

तद्रूपमतिसंक्षिप्य हनूमान् प्रकृतौ स्थित:।
त्रीन् क्रमानिव विक्रम्य बलिवीर्यहरो aft: ।॥। २०९॥

Having considerably contracted that form
of his, Hanuman returned to his natural state,
even as having taken three strides in His
Cosmic Form and thereby frustrated the power
of Bali, the demon king, Lord Sri Visnu
descended as the Divine Dwarf, returned to
His former state (of a dwarf). (209)
a चारुनानाविधरूपधारी

परं समासाद्य समुद्रतीरम्।
समीक्षितात्मा समवेक्षितार्थ:॥ २१०॥

Having duly reached the other shore of
the sea, which could not be approached by
anyone else, Hanuman, who was capable
of assuming various graceful forms, gazed
on his own body and, fully considering his
mission of tracing out Sita, regained his
native form. (210)
तत: स लम्बस्य fit: समृद्धे

विचित्रकूटे निपपात कूटे।

43

सकेतकोद्दालकनारिकेले
महाभ्रकूटप्रतिमो महात्मा॥ २११॥

Then the high-souled Hanuman, who
resembled a huge mass of clouds, descended
on a summit of the Lamba mountain, rich in
fruit and blossom and covered with Ketaka,
Uddalaka and coconut trees and consisting
of wonderful lower peaks. (211)

ततस्तु सम्प्राप्य समुद्रतीरं
समीक्ष्य लंकां गिरिवर्यमूध्नि।
कपिस्तु तस्मिन् निपपात पर्वते
विधूय रूपं व्यथयन्मृगद्विजान्॥ २१२॥

Duly reaching the seashore and
perceiving from there Lanka perched on a
summit of the Trikuta mountain, the foremost
of mountains, Hanuman for his part descended
on that mountain, Trikuta, abandoning his
assumed colossal form and agitating the
beasts and birds inhabiting that mountain with
his gigantic monkey form. (212)
a ant दानवपन्नगायुतं

बलेन विक्रम्य महोर्मिमालिनम्।
निपत्य dit च महोदधेस्तदा
ददर्शं लंकाममरावतीमिव॥ २१३॥

Having leapt by dint of his vigour over
the sea infested with demons and reptiles
and heaving with series of huge waves, and
descending on the shore of the vast sea,
Hanuman then saw Lanka standing like
Amaravati, the city of gods, the capital of
Indra. (213)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये सुन्दरकाण्डे WIA: सर्ग: ॥ १ il

Thus ends Canto One of the Sundarakanda in the glorious Ramayana of Valmiki,
the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

