# YUDDHAKANDA #

जानुभिश्च हता: केचिद् भग्नदेहाश्च राक्षसा:।
शिलाभिश्चूर्णिता: केचिद् वानरैर्युद्धदुर्मदै:॥ २४॥

Abandoning their weapons, some
warriors began to wrestle with one another,
and struck with palms as well as with
feet and fists as also with trees and knees,
some ogres had their bodies smashed;
while others were crushed under rocks
by monkeys maddened by fight. (23-24)

aadel yet बाणै wr वित्रासयन् हरीन्।
चचार लोकसंहारे पाशहस्त इवान्तक:॥ २५॥

Repeatedly striking the monkeys
by his arrows, causing consternation,
Vajradamstra rode the battlefield as Death
would, noose in hand, for the destruction of
the world. (25)

बलवन्तोऽस्त्रविदुषो नानाप्रहरणा रणे।
जघ्नुर्वानरसैन्यानि राक्षसा: क्रोधमूच्छिता:॥ २६॥

Distracted with anger, the mighty
ogres, who knew the use of mystic missiles
and were armed with weapons of every kind,
destroyed the simian ranks in combat.

(26)

जघ्ने तान् राक्षसान् सर्वान् धृष्टो वालिसुतो रणे।
क्रोधेन द्विगुणाविष्ट: संवर्तक इवानल:॥ २७॥
Filled with redoubled anger, the
fearless Angada (son of Vali) began to
exterminate all the ogres on the battle-
field like fire at the time of universal
destruction. (27)

487

तान् राक्षसगणान् सर्वान् वृक्षमुद्यम्य वीर्यवान्।
अङ्गद: क्रोधताम्राक्ष: fae: क्षुद्रमृगानिव॥ ecu
Wat कदनं घोरं शक्रतुल्यपराक्रम:।
अङ्गदाभिहतास्तत्र राक्षसा भीमविक्रमा:॥ २९॥
विभिन्नशिरस: पेतुर्निकृत्ता इव पादपा:।
शरीरैर्हरिरक्षसाम्॥ ३०॥
रुधिरौघेण det भूमिर्भयकरी तदा।

हारकेयूरवस्त्रैश्च शस्त्रैश्च समलंकृता॥३१॥
भूमिर्भाति wr da शारदीव यथा निशा।
अङ्गदस्य च वेगेन dq राक्षसबलं महत्।
प्राकम्पत dat dt पवनेनाम्बुदो यथा॥ ३२॥

Lifting up a tree, his eyes red with
anger, the valiant Angada, the equal of Indra,
the ruler of gods, in prowess, began to play
havoc with all those hordes of ogres even
as a lion would with the smaller beasts.
Struck down by Angada on the field of
battle, the ogres of terrible prowess fell like
trees that have been cut down, their skulls
smashed. Covered all over with chariots,
picturesque ensigns, horses, the bodies of
monkeys and ogres, as also with a stream
of blood the earth looked fearful at that time.
Fully decorated with necklaces, armlets and
raiment as well as with weapons, the earth
on the site of that conflict glowed like an
autumnal night. Nay, under the impetuosity
of Angada, that huge army of the ogres
violently shook on that occasion at that spot
even as a cloud would under the pressure
of the wind. (28—32)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये युद्धकाण्डे त्रिपञ्चाश: सर्ग: ॥ ५३ ॥

Thus ends Canto Fifty-three in the Yuddhakanda of the glorious Ramayana
of Valmiki, the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

