668

O ogre, as though you were unaware of my
disposition? (18)

राक्षसेन्द्रसुतासाधो पारुष्यं त्यज गौरवात्।
कुले यद्यप्यहं जातो रक्षसां क्रूरकर्मणाम्।
TON य: प्रथमो FUT तन्मे शीलमराक्षसम्॥१९॥
“Give up harshness of speech in view
of my seniority, O impious son of Ravana,
the ruler of ogres! Even though | was born
in the race of ogres of cruel deeds, my
disposition, consisting as it does of Sattva
or goodness (the foremost virtue of human
beings), is not ogre-like. (19)

न रमे दारुणेनाहं न चाधर्मेण a रमे।
भ्रात्रा विषमशीलोऽपि कथं भ्राता निरस्यते॥ २०॥

“| do not delight in cruel action, nor
indeed do | revel in unrighteousness. But
how can a brother be expelled by his brother,
even though the former’s disposition is
dissimilar? (20)

धर्मात् प्रच्युतशीलं fe Get पापनिश्चयम्।
त्यक्त्वा सुखमवाप्नोति हस्तादाशीविषं यथा॥ २१॥
“Renouncing a man of sinful resolve,
whose conduct has swerved from righteous-
ness, one undoubtedly attains happiness
even as one who shakes off a venomous
serpent from his hand. (21)

परस्वहरणे ah परदाराभिमर्शकम्।
त्याज्यमाहुर्दुरात्मानं aH प्रज्वलितं यथा॥ २२॥

“The wise speak of the evil-minded
fellow, who is intent on seizing other's
property and has intercourse with another’s
wife, as worth shunning in the same way
as a house in flames. (22)
Wert च हरणं परदाराभिमर्शनम्।
सुहृदामतिशङ्का च त्रयो दोषा: क्षयावहा:॥ २३॥

“To take possession of other’s property
and have intercourse with another's wife
and over-suspiciousness with regard to
one’s friends—are the three faults which
lead to destruction. (23)

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA +

महर्षीणां वधो an: सर्वदेवैश्च विग्रह:।
अभिमानश्च Way वैरत्वं प्रतिकूलता॥ evil
Wa दोषा AA भ्रातुर्जीवितैश्वर्यनाशना:।
गुणान् प्रच्छादयामासु: पर्वतानिव तोयदा:॥ २५॥
“The terrible slaughter of eminent Rsis
and war on all the gods, nay, haughtiness,
irascibility, lasting animosity and
refractoriness—these failings, which put an
end to one’s life and lordship, have obscured
the good qualities of my eldest brother,
Ravana, as clouds would veil mountains.
(24-25)
दोषैरेतै: परित्यक्तो war भ्राता पिता तव।
नेयमस्ति पुरी लङ्का न च त्वं न च ते पिता॥ २६॥

“My brother, and your father, was
abandoned by me on account of the vices
enumerated above. Neither will this city of
Lanka exist any longer, nor you, nor your
father. (26)

अतिमानश्च बालश्च दुर्बिनीतश्च राक्षस।
बद्धस्त्वं कालपाशेन Ge At Ae यदिच्छसि॥ २७॥
“Full of great pride, nay, foolish and ill-
mannered, and caught in the noose of Death,
as you are, say whatsoever you will, O
ogre! (27)
Yas न त्वया शक्यं न्यग्रोधं राक्षसाधम॥ २८॥
“This calamity has come to you today
because you have spoken harshly to me.
The banyan tree can no longer be reached
by you, O vile ogre! (28)
धर्षयित्वा च काकुत्स्थं न शक्यं जीवितुं AAT |
युध्यस्व नरदेवेन लक्ष्मणेन Wl सह।
हतस्त्वं देवताकार्यं करिष्यसि यमशक्षयम्॥ २९॥
“Nay, on attacking Laksmana (a scion
of Kakutstha), it will not be possible for you
to survive. Strive with Prince Laksmana on
the battlefield. Reaching the abode of Yama,
the god of retribution, when made short
work of by Laksmana, you will accomplish
the purpose of gods by causing satisfaction
to them. (29)
