1124

« VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

ष्उडधिकशततम: at:
Canto CVI

Laksmana departs and goes to heaven
alongwith his body

अवाङ्मुखमथो दीनं gear सोममिवाप्लुतम्।
Wad लक्ष्मणो वाक्यं El मधुरमब्रवीत्॥१॥
Seeing the descendant of Raghu, Sri
Rama, speechless and in sorrow like the
moon eclipsed by Rahu, Laksmana cheerfully
spoke to him in sweet accents: (1)

न संतापं महाबाहो मदर्थं कर्तुमर्हसि।
पूर्वनिर्माणबद्धा fe कालस्य गतिरीदृशी।। २॥

‘O one of long arms, you should not
feel grieved for me, because bound by
former actions, this is the law of time
(Death). (2)
we at सौम्य विस्त्रब्धं प्रतिज्ञां परिपालय।
ह्रीनप्रतिज्ञा: काकुत्स्थ प्रयान्ति नरकं नरा:॥३॥

‘Give me death award, O gracious one,
and confidently keep your word, O scion of
Kakutstha; those men who do not keep their
promises do go to Hell. (3)

यदि प्रीतिर्महाराज यद्यनुग्राह्यता मयि।
we मां निर्विशङ्कस्त्वं at ada राघव॥४॥

‘O King, descendant of Raghu, Kill
me without hesitation if you have love for
and are favourable to me, and promote
righteousness.’ (4)

लक्ष्मणेन तथोक्तस्तु Wa: प्रचलितेन्द्रिय:।
fat: समुपानीय तथैव च पुरोधसम्॥७५॥
अब्रवीच्च तदा Gd तेषां Ast A राघव:।
दुर्वासोऽभिगमं da प्रतिज्ञां तापसस्य च॥६॥

Thus spoken to by Laksmana, Sri Rama
with his senses disturbed, summoned his
councillors and also priests, and said in
their midst, what had happened, i.e., the
arrival of Durvasa and also the promise
made in accordance with the condition laid
down by the ascetic. (5-6)

तच्छुत्वा Ufa: सर्वे सोपाध्याया: समासत।
वसिष्ठस्तु महातेजा वाक्यमेतदुवाच ह॥७॥

Hearing these words all the councillors
together with the preceptors kept mum. Then
Vasistha, the powerful one, however, said
thus: (7)

दृष्टमेतन्महाबाहो क्षयं ते रोमहर्षणम्।
लक्ष्मणेन वियोगश्च dat राम महायश:॥८॥
‘O one of long arms, this end of yours
was foreseen by me, which causes
horripilation and also separation from
Laksmana, O Sri Rama, possessed of glory.
(8)
त्यजैनं बलवान् कालो मा प्रतिज्ञां FAT कृथा:।
प्रतिज्ञायां fe नष्टायां धर्मो fe विलयं व्रजेत्॥९॥
‘Leave him, Laksmana. Time (Death)
is indeed too powerful, do not give up your
promise, for, it being given up, righteousness
will perish. (9)
ततो धर्मे विनष्टे तु त्रैलोक्यं सचराचरम्।
सदेवर्षिगणं ad विनश्येत् तु न संशय:॥१०॥
‘With righteousness gone, the three
worlds, both moving and stationary, indeed
the hosts of divine sages, shall perish, there
is no doubt. (10)

स त्वं पुरुषशार्दूल त्रैलोक्यस्याभिपालनात्।
लक्ष्मणेन विना चाद्य जगत् स्वस्थं कुरुष्व ह॥ ११॥
‘Therefore, O lion among men, separated
from Laksmana today, you, on your part,
restore normalcy to this earth with the
protection of the three worlds.’ (11)
श्रुत्वा परिषदो मध्ये रामो लक्ष्मणमब्रवीत्॥१२॥
Hearing these words full of righteous
import, spoken by those assembled,
