* ARANYAKANDA «

void by my death due to separation from
Sita before the expirity of this period. | am
sure Kaikeyi will have her desire fulfilled
and feel gratified when |, O Laksmana, son
of Sumitra, am dead because of my separation
from Sita and you return to Ayodhya alone.
(6-7)

सपुत्रराज्यां सिद्धार्थां मृतपुत्रा तपस्विनी।
उपस्थास्यति कौसल्या कच्चित्सौम्येन कैकयीम्॥ ८ ।।
“Will my mother, the wretched Kausalya
with her son (myself) dead, wait with
reverence on Kaikeyi, who is with her son
by her side and also enjoying sovereignty,
and has her object accomplished? (8)

afe vata वैदेही गमिष्याम्याश्रमं पुन:।
SEM यदि TA सा प्राणांस्त्यक्ष्यामि AAT It ९॥
“If Sita (a princess of the Videha
kingdom) is alive, | shall enter my hermitage
once more. lf, however, that lady of excellent
conduct is dead and gone, | shall yield up
my life, O Laksmana ! (9)

afe मामाश्रमगतं aedt नाभिभाषते।
पुर: प्रहसिता सीता विनशिष्यामि लक्ष्मण॥ १०॥

“If Sita, a princess of the Videha territory,
does not speak to me with her smiling face
before me, when । reach the hermitage, |
shall perish. (10)

gle लक्ष्मण dest यदि जीवति वा न वा।
vata wad रक्षोभिर्भक्षिता वा तपस्विनी॥११॥

“Speak, O Laksmana, if Sita (a princess
of the Videha kingdom) is still alive. And if
not, has the poor lady been, on the other
hand, devoured by ogres since you failed in
your duty of protecting her? (11)

सुकुमारी च बाला च नित्यं चादु:खभागिनी |
मद्वियोगेन वैदेही ch शोचति दुर्मना:॥१२॥

“Tender and youthful, and having never
experienced agony, Sita (a princess of
the Videha territory) is evidently feeling
disconsolate and grieving due to separation
from me. (12)

877

सर्वथा रक्षसा तेन जिह्मेन सुदुरात्मना।
वदता लक्ष्मणेत्युच्चैस्तवापि जनितं भयम्॥१३॥
“Fear was in all probability incited even
in you by that crooked and most evil-minded
ogre, crying out ‘Laksmana !’ (13)

TAT AY वैदेह्या स स्वर: सदृशो मम।
त्रस्तया प्रेषितस्त्वं च द्रष्टुं मां शीघ्रमागत:॥ १४॥
“That cry for help, uttered in a voice
resembling mine, was | believe heard by
Sita (a princess of the Videha kingdom) too.
And sent by her, alarmed as she was, you
came away with all speed to see me. (14)
सर्वथा तु pd He सीतामुत्सृजता वने।
प्रतिकर्तुं FTA रक्षसां दत्तमन्तरम्॥१५॥
“But an error, which was grievous in
every respect, has been committed by you,
leaving Sita alone in the forest, inasmuch
as an opportunity has been afforded thereby
to the cruel ogres to retaliate. (15)

faa: खरघातेन were: पिशिताशना:।
a: सीता निहता घोरैर्भविष्यति न संशय:॥ १६॥
“The flesh-eating ogres were feeling
aggrieved on account of the destruction of
Khara; Sita must have been slain by those
fearful ogres : there is no doubt about it.(16)
अहोऽस्मि व्यसने wa: सर्वथा रिपुनाशन।
किं त्विदानीं करिष्यामि og प्राप्तव्यमीदृशम्॥ १७॥
“Alas, | stand plunged in adversity in
everyway, O exterminator of foes ! But what
shall | do now to avert this tragedy? | fear
such a calamity must be faced.” (17)
gta सीतां वरारोहां चिन्तयन्नेव waa:
आजगाम जनस्थानं त्वरया सहलक्ष्मण: ॥ १८ il
Thus thinking solely of Sita of excellent

limbs, Sri Rama, a scion of Raghu, hastened
to his hermitage in Janasthana with Laksmana.

(18)
विगर्हमाणोऽनुजमार्तरूपं
क्षुधाश्रमेणैव पिपासया च।
विनि:श्वसन् शुष्कमुखो विषण्ण:
प्रतिश्रयं प्राप्य समीक्ष्य शून्यम्॥ १९॥
