* AYODHYAKANDA +

full of gems, conches and dust of gold, the
aforesaid court graced with the august
presence of Bharata, son of Dasaratha,

589

looked as it did when adorned with
the presence of Dasaratha in the past.
(16)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्येऽयोध्याकाण्डे एकाशीतितम: सर्ग: ॥ ८१ ॥

Thus ends Canto Ejighty-one in the Ayodhyakanda of the glorious Ramayana of
Valmiki, the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

Canto LX XXII

Sage Vasistha urges Bharata to accept the kingdom bequeathed to him by his
father and elder brother. Bharata, however, scornfully declines the offer and
takes a solemn pledge to depart for the forest and try his level best to
bring his elder brother back to Ayodhya. At his instance
Sumantra gets a chariot ready to take him to the
forest and brings the chariot to his presence

तामार्यगणसम्पूर्णां भरत: प्रग्रहां सभाम्।
cat बुद्धिसम्पन्न: पूर्णचन्द्रां निशामिव॥१॥
Bharata, who was rich in intelligence,
beheld the aforesaid assembly, full of hosts
of worthy men and attended by great souls
like Vasistha and as such resembling a
night illumined by a full moon and adorned
with other major planets. (1)
आसनानि यथान्यायमार्याणां विशतां तदा।
वस्त्राङ्गरागप्रभया द्योतिता सा सभोत्तमा॥२॥
That eminent gathering was lit up with
the splendour of the raiment worn and the
pigment painted on the person of the worthies
occupying their seats according to their
deserts on that occasion. (2)

सा विद्वज्जनसम्पूर्णा सभा सुरुचिरा तथा।
aq घनापाये पूर्णचन्द्रेव शर्वरी॥३॥
That most brilliant conclave looked as
charming as a night illumined by a full moon
during the autumn marked by the absence
of clouds. (3)

राज्ञस्तु प्रकृती: Gat: स सम्प्रेक्य च धर्मवित्।
इदं पुरोहितो वाक्यं भरतं मृदु चाब्रवीत्॥४॥

Looking intently on and reading the
mind of all the king’s ministers and the
people present there, the said Vasistha (the
family-priest of the rulers of Ayodhya), for
his part, who Knew what was right, spoke
as follows and gently too to Bharata: (4)

तात राजा दशरथ: स्वर्गतो धर्ममाचरन्।
धनधान्यवतीं स्फीतां wera पृथिवीं तव॥५॥

“King Dasaratha, my _ child, has
ascended to heaven practising virtue (in
the form of redeeming his plighted word)
and bequeathing the sovereignty of the
prosperous earth, full of gold and foodgrains,
to you. (5)

रामस्तथा सत्यव्त्ति: सतां धर्ममनुस्मरन्।
नाजहात् पितुरादेशं शशी ज्योत्स्नामिवोदित:॥ ६॥

“Bearing in mind the duty of virtuous
souls, viz., obeying the command of their
parents, Sri Rama, who is truthful of conduct
like his father, did not disregard the command
of his father any more than the risen moon
quits the moonlight. (6)

frat भ्रात्रा च a दत्तं राज्यं निहतकण्टकम्।
ae भुङ्क्ष्व मुदितामात्य: क्षिप्रमेवाभिषेचय॥ ७॥
