370

Seeing his mother, who did not deserve
suffering, fallen unconscious like a banana
tree, Sri Rama for his part lifted her up. (33)
उपावृत्योत्थितां dat वडवामिव वाहिताम्।
पांसुगुण्ठितसर्वाङ्गीं विममर्शं च पाणिना॥३४॥

Nay, he brushed the dust with his own
hands off the person of his distressed mother,
who had all her limbs covered with it like a
mare that had been made to carry a heavy
load and had just risen after rolling on the
ground. (34)

सा राघवमुपासीनमसुखार्ता सुखोचिता।
उवाच पुरुषव्याघ्रमुपश्रृण्वति लक्ष्मणे॥ ३५॥
Stricken with agony, Kausalya, who
deserved happiness, spoke as follows to
Sri Rama, a scion of Raghu, a tiger among
men, standing by her side, within the hearing
of Laksmana : (35)

यदि Ua न जायेथा मम शोकाय राघव।
न स्म दु:खमतो भूय: पश्येयमहमप्रजा:॥ ३६॥
“Had you not been born, my son, this
would have certainly caused grief to me in
the shape of issuelessness, O scion of
Raghu ! Even if childless, | would not have
experienced the present agony caused by
separation from a grown up and married
son, greater than the former. (36)

एक Wa हि वन्ध्याया: शोको भवति मानस: |
अप्रजास्मीति संतापो न ह्यन्य: पुत्र विद्यते॥ ३७॥

“Indeed there is only one mental anguish
for a barren woman—the feeling that she is
issueless; there is certainly no other agony
to her, my son! (37)
न दृष्टपूर्वं कल्याणं सुखं वा पतिपौरुषे।
afr yt विपश्येयमिति रामास्थितं मया॥ ३८॥

No good fortune or happiness was
enjoyed by me in the past through the
effort of my husband. Hope was, however,
entertained by me, O Rama, that with my
son in power | might see both in abundance.

(38)

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

सा बहून्यमनोज्ञानि वाक्यानि हृदयच्छिदाम्।
ae श्रोष्ये सपत्नीनामवराणां परा सती॥ ३९॥

“Seniormost though | am of all the
queens, | shall in my present plight, as
separated from you, hear many unpalatable
words from my junior co-wives, who will
rend my heart thereby. (39)
अतो grant fe नु प्रमदानां भविष्यति।
मम शोको विलापश्च यादृशोऽयमनन्तक:॥४०॥

“What can possibly be more painful
than this for the fair sex? The kind of grief
and lamentation that has now fallen to my
lot is unending. (40)
waa संनिहितेऽप्येवमहमासं निराकृता।
fe पुन: प्रोषिते तात ga मरणमेव हि॥४१॥

“Even with you by my side, | have
been despised; how much more shall | be
despised when you are away, O dear child?
Surely my death is but inevitable. (41)
अत्यन्तं निगृहीतास्मि भर्तुर्नित्यमसम्मता।
परिवारेण कैकेय्या: समा वाप्यथवावरा॥४२॥

“Not esteemed by my husband, | have
always been greatly snubbed by him. |
have been treated on a par with or even on
a lower footing than Kaikeyi’s servants !

(42)
यो fe at tad कश्चिदपि वाप्यनुवर्तते।
कैकेय्या: पुत्रमन्वीक्ष्य स जनो नाभिभाषते॥४३॥

“Whosoever serves me or even speaks

kindly to me, would no longer speak to me
on perceiving Bharata. (43)

नित्यक्रोधतया तस्या: कथं नु खरवादि तत्।
कैकेय्या वदनं द्रष्टुं पुत्र शक्ष्यामि दुर्गता॥४४॥
“Reduced to a bad plight, my son, how
shall | possibly be able to cast my eyes on
those lips of Kaikeyi uttering harsh words
due to her being constantly angry? (44)
दश Ga च वर्षाणि जातस्य da Waal
अतीतानि प्रकांक्षन्त्या मया दु:खपरिक्षयम्॥४५॥

“Ten and seven years have been spent
