784

प्रहृष्टो वा हते TA जनस्थानं प्रयास्यसि।
af वा निहते we संयुगाय प्रयास्यसि॥५॥

“You will either return to Janasthana
highly delighted in the event of Rama being
killed by me or in the event of my being
slain, you will march against Rama for an
engagement with him.” (5)

ख्रस्तरिशिरसा तेन मृत्युलोभात् प्रसादित:।
Ts युध्येत्यनुज्ञातो राघवाभिमुखो sare it

When Khara was won over by the said
Trisira due to his being covetous of death at
the hands of Sri Rama, and Trigira was granted
leave in the words “Go, fight’, the latter
proceeded towards Sri Rama, a scion of
Raghu. (6)

त्रिशिरास्तु wea वाजियुक्तेन भास्वता।
अभ्यद्रवद् रणे रामं yg इव पर्वत:॥७॥
Trisira, for his part, who with his three
heads looked like a three-peaked mountain,
drove in a glittering chariot drawn by horses
against Sri Rama on the field of battle. (7)

शरधारासमूहान् स महामेघ इवोत्सृजन्।
व्यसृजत् west नादं जलार्द्रस्येव दुन्दुभे:॥८॥
Pouring volleys of arrows like a huge
cloud, he uttered a roar like the crash of a
drum drenched with water. (8)
आगच्छन्तं त्रिशिरसं राक्षसं wer राघव:।
धनुषा प्रतिजग्राह विधुन्वन् सायकान् शितान्॥९॥
Perceiving the ogre Trisira coming, Sri
Rama (a scion of Raghu), greeted him with
his bow discharging sharp arrows. (9)

a सम्प्रहारस्तुमुलो रामत्रिशिरसोस्तदा।

सम्बभूवातिबलिनो: सिंहकुञ्जरयोरिव॥ १०॥
That clash between Sri Rama and

Trisira, who were both possessed of great

might, raged fiercely at that time like the
clash between a lion and an elephant. (10)

ततस्तरिशिरसा बाणैर्ललाटे ताडितस्निभि:।
अमर्षी कुपितो राम: संरब्धं इदमब्रवीत्॥११॥

Feeling provoked and excited when hit

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

by Trisira with three arrows on the forehead,
the indignant Sri Rama spoke as follows :

(11)

अहो विक्रमशूरस्य राक्षसस्येदृशं बलम्।
पुष्पैरिव शरैर्योऽहं ललाटेऽस्मि परिक्षत:॥१२॥

“O ! Such is the strength of this ogre,
who is brave in launching an offensive, and
by whom | have been struck on the forehead
with arrows like flowers ! (12)
ममापि प्रतिगृह्णीष्व शरांश्चापगुणाच्च्युतान्।
एवमुक्त्वा सुसंरब्ध: शरानाशीविषोपमान्॥१३॥
त्रिशिरो वक्षसि क्रुद्धो निजघान wade
चतुर्भिस्तुरगानस्य et: संनतपर्वभि:।॥ १४॥
न्यपातयत तेजस्वी चतुरस्तस्य वाजिन:।
अष्टभि: सायकै: सूतं रथोपस्थे न्यपातयत्॥ १५ ॥

“Now receive the arrows shot from my
bow-string too.” Saying so, Sri Rama, who
was highly excited and enraged discharged
fourteen serpent-like arrows on the chest of
Trisira. With four arrows having bent nodes,
the glorious Sri Rama struck down the four
swift-footed horses of his chariot, while with
eight more arrows he knocked down the
charioteer on his very seat in the chariot.

(1383—15)
रामश्चिच्छेद बाणेन ध्वजं चास्य समुच्छितम्।
ततो हतरथात् तस्मादुत्पतन्तं निशाचरम्॥१६॥
चिच्छेद रामस्तं बाणैर्हृदये सोऽभवज्जड:।
सायकैश्चाप्रमेयात्मा सामर्षस्तस्य रक्षस:॥१७॥
शिरांस्यपातयत् त्रीणि वेगवद्भिस्तिभि: शरै: |
a धूमशोणितोद्गारी रामबाणाभिपीडित:॥ १८॥
न्यपतत् पतितै: gel समरस्थो निशाचर:।
हतशेषास्ततो भग्ना राक्षसा: खरसंश्रया:॥१९॥
द्रवन्ति स्म न तिष्ठन्ति व्याघ्रत्रस्ता मृगा इव।
तान् GU द्रवतो Geant निवर्त्य रुषितस्त्वरन्।
राममेवाभिदुद्राव राहुश्चन्द्रमसं यथा॥२०॥

Sri Rama further broke his tall ensign with
an arrow. Then he pierced with arrows the
ogre himself in his heart while he was jumping

from his shattered chariot, so that he became
motionless. Nay, full of indignation, SriRama
