« KISKINDHAKANDA +

“Full of joy the birds carol at will in
flocks, calling to one another, as it were,
and intoxicating me with love. (46)

aad यदि ant at a वसति fra
नूनं परवशा dat सापि शोचत्यहं यथा॥४७॥

“If spring has set in even in that region
where my darling, Sita is living, fallen as
she is under the sway of others, undoubtedly
she too is pining as | do. (47)
नूनं न तु वसन्तस्तं देशं स्पृशति ar सा।
कथं ह्यसितपद्माक्षी वर्तयेत् सा मया विना॥४८॥

“Surely Spring will never touch the fringe
of that region where Sita dwells. Even then

how can that lady with dark lotus-like eyes
survive without me? (48)

अथवा add at वसन्तो aa a fran
fe करिष्यति सुश्रोणी सा तु निर्भत्सिता at: ।॥ ४९॥

“Or, Spring does prevail where my
darling dwells. But, scolded, as she is, by
enemies, what will that fair-limbed lady do? (49)

शयामा पद्मपलाशाक्षी मृदुभाषा च मे प्रिया।
नूनं वसन्तमासाद्य परित्यक्ष्यति जीवितम्॥५०॥

“Surely on crossing the threshold of
Spring my juvenescent darling, who has eyes
resembling lotus petals and is gentle of speech,
will forthwith give up the ghost. (50)

a हि wa बुद्धिर्मम सम्परिवर्तते।
नालं वर्तयितुं सीता साध्वी मद्बिरहं TATUNG? I

“The thought steadily revolves in my
heart that, having fallen a prey to separation
from me, the virtuous Sita is unable to
survive. (51)

मयि भावो fe वैदेह्यास्तत्त्वतो विनिवेशित:।
ममापि wa: सीतायां सर्वथा विनिवेशित:॥ ५२॥
“The affection of Sita (a princess of the
Videha territory) is undoubtedly and truly
riveted on me and my affection too is riveted
wholly on Sita. (52)

एष Wat वायु: सुखस्पर्शो हिमावह:।
at विचिन्तयत: कान्तां पावकप्रतिमो मम॥ ५३॥

9३३

“This breeze carrying the fragrance of
flowers, which is delightful to the touch and
brings coolness to the body, is like fire to
me even as | think deeply of my darling.

(53)

सदा सुखमहं मन्ये यं qT सह सीतया।
मारुत: स विना सीतां शोकसंजननो मम॥ ५४॥

“The selfsame breeze which |
considered as ever agreeable at one time in
the company of Sita is causing grief to me,
bereft, as | am, of Sita. (54)

at विनाथ विहङ्गोऽसौ पक्षी प्रणदितस्तदा।
वायस: पादपगत: प्रहृष्टमभिकूजति॥ ५५॥

“In the past the yonder bird (which is a
crow) emitted a hoarse cry while flying
through the air (thereby foreboding the
abduction of Sita). Now, in the absence of
Sita, the crow is crying most delightfully
while remaining perched on the tree (thereby
predicting her return). (55)
एष a aq acer fae: प्रतिहारक:।
पक्षी मां तु विशालाक्ष्या: समीपमुपनेष्यति॥ 4s

“While this bird, viz.,a crow, proved at
that time (viz., during the presence of Sita)
instrumental (by foreboding evil) in bringing
about the abduction of Sita (a princess of
the Videha territory), the bird will this time
lead me to the presence of Sita, a lady with
large eyes. (56)

wa लक्ष्मण संनादं at मदविवर्धनम्।
पुष्पिताग्रेषु वृक्षेषु द्विजानामवकूजताम्॥५७॥

“Know the chorus in the forest of the
birds warbling on the trees crested with
flowers to be instrumental in heightening my
joy beyond measure, O Laksmana! (57)

विक्षिप्तां पवनेनैतामसौ तिलकमञ्जरीम्।

षट्पद: सहसाभ्येति मदोद्धूतामिव प्रियाम्॥ ५८ i
“The yonder bee suddenly approaches

this flower-stalk of a Tilaka tree, shaken by

the wind, even as a lover would approach
his loved one thrilled with joy. (58)
