# YUDDHAKANDA #

465

Canto XLVIII

“Those well-versed in physiognomy and palmistry had prophesied
that I would never be widowed and would bear sons. How
could their predictions prove untrue?” While Sita was
absorbed in these thoughts on beholding S1i
Rama and Laksmana, Trijata reassures
her on the strength of good omens
and, cheering her soul, takes her
back to the Asoka grove

भर्तारं Ped दृष्ट्वा लक्ष्मणं च महाबलम्।
विललाप sgt सीता करुणं शोककर्शिता॥१॥
On seeing her husband as _ well
as Laksmana, who was endowed with
extraordinary might, sturck down, Sita who
was already emaciated through grief
lamented piteously and vehemently: (1)

ऊचुर्लाक्षणिका ये at पुत्रिण्यविधवेति च।
asa Wd हते WA ज्ञानिनोऽनृतवादिन:॥ २॥

“Wise men, capable of reading the
lineaments on the person of an individual,
who had predicted with reference to me
that | would bear sons and would never be
widowed, have all turned out to be liars
today in that Sri Rama has been killed. (2)
यज्वनो महिषीं ये मामूचु: पत्नीं च सत्रिण:।
asa Wd हते WA ज्ञानिनोऽनृतवादिन:॥ ३॥

“The wise men who had predicted about
me that | should be the crowned consort of
a performer of sacrifices and an undertaker
of long-term sacrificial performances in which
a number of priests officiated have proved
to be liars today in that Sri Rama has been
killed. (3)

वीरपार्थिवपत्नीनां ये विदुर्भर्तृपूजिताम्।
asa wd हते WA ज्ञानिनोऽनृतवादिन:॥४॥
“Those wise men who _ prophesied
about me that | should be held as venerable
among the consorts of gallant monarchs

and honoured by my husband have all proved
to be liars today in that Sri Rama has been
killed. (4)

BA: संश्रवणे ये मां द्विजा: कार्तान्तिका: शुभाम्।
asa सर्वे हते WA ज्ञानिनोऽनृतवादिन:॥५॥

“Those wise Brahmanas, well-versed
in astrology, who had predicted within my
hearing that | should remain happy with my
husband have all proved to be liars today in
that Sri Rama has been killed. (5)

इमानि खलु want पादयोर्वै कुलस्निय:।
आधिराज्येऽभिषिच्यन्ते art: पतिभि: सह॥ ६॥

“Indeed here are on my soles the marks
of a lotus by virtue of which high-born women
are actually consecrated on the imperial
throne alongwith their lords, who are rulers
of men. (6)

वैधव्यं ata यैर्नार्योऽलक्षणैर्भाग्यदुर्लभा:।
नात्मनस्तानि पश्यामि पश्यन्ती हतलक्षणा॥७॥

“| do not find on my person those
sinister marks by virtue of which women
to whom good luck is difficult of access
meet with widowhood. Even though seeing
propitious marks on my limbs, they are
proving ineffectual in my case. (7)

सत्यनामानि पद्मानि स्त्रीणामुक्तानि लक्षणै: |
तान्यद्य Fea wa वितथानि भवन्ति मे॥८॥

“The marks of a lotus on the person of
