720

Saying so and causing all the ten
directions to resound with the rattling of his
chariot, that mighty and surpassing car-
warrior drove rapidly and rushed towards
Sri Rama, a scion of Raghu. (6)

पूरिता तेन शब्देन सनदीगिरिकानना।
संचचाल मही सर्वा त्रस्तसिंहमृगद्बिजा॥७॥

Filled by that sound the entire globe
including rivers, mountains and _ forests,
trembled throwing the lions and other beasts
as well as birds into a fright. (7)
निर्ददाह कपीन् सर्वांस्ते Wad: समन्तत:॥८॥

He manifested exceedingly
formidable and _ terrific, mystic missile
presided over by Rahu (a giant presiding
over the planet of that name and consisting
of darkness), and with it he began to
consume all the monkeys, who started falling
down on all sides. (8)
उत्पपात रजो भूमौ तैर्भग्नै: सम्प्रधावितै:।
नहि तत् सहितुं शेकुर्ब्रह्मणा निर्मितं स्वयम्॥९॥

Dust rose on the earth as they ran with
all speed when frustrated, for they could no
longer endure the missile, which had been
brought into being by Brahma, the creator,
himself. (9)
तान्यनीकान्यनेकानि रावणस्य शारोत्तमै:।
दृष्टवा भग्नानि शतशो waa: पर्यवस्थित: il १०॥

Seeing those numerous divisions of
the monkeys routed in hundreds by the
excellent arrows of Ravana, Sri Rama, a
scion of Raghu took his stand firmly on the
battlefield. (10)

ततो राक्षसशार्दूलो विद्राव्य हरिवाहिनीम्।
स ददर्शं ततो wa तिष्ठन्तमपराजितम्॥११॥
लक्ष्मणेन सह भ्रात्रा विष्णुना वासवं यथा।
आलिखन्तमिवाकाशमवष्टभ्य महद् धनु:॥ १२॥
पद्मपत्रविशालाक्षं दीर्घबाहुमरिंदमम्।
ततो रामो महातेजा: सौमित्रिसहितो बली॥ १३॥

an

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA +

वानरांश्च Wl भग्नानापतन्तं च रावणम्।
समीक्ष्य Weal हृष्टो मध्ये जग्राह कार्मुकम्॥ १४॥
Having put the army of the monkeys to
flight, that tiger among the ogres then beheld
Sri Rama, the tamer of his enemies, who
was endowed with long arms and eyes
large as lotus petals standing unconquered
with his younger brother, Laksmana, like
Indra accompanied by his younger brother,
Upendra, Lord Visnu—holding up his bow
as though scraping the sky. Nay, perceiving
the monkeys routed in combat and Ravana
aproaching, the mighty Sri Rama, who was
endowed with extraordinary energy and
was accompanied by Laksmana, thereupon
joyfully took hold of his bow at the middle.
(11—14)

विस्फारयितुमारेभे dd: स धनुरुत्तमम्।
महावेगं महानादं निर्भिन्दन्निव मेदिनीम्॥ १५॥
He then began to stretch the excellent
bow, which was endowed with great impelling
force, loud and sonorous, as though he was
going to rend the globe asunder. (15)

रावणस्य च बाणौघै रामविस्फारितेन a
शब्देन राक्षसास्तेन पेतुश्च शतशस्तदा॥१६॥

Nay, ogres fell to the ground in their
hundreds at the well-known buzzing sound
produced by the streams of Ravana’s as
well as by the twang of Sri Rama’s bow.(16)

तयो: शरपथं प्राप्य रावणो राजपुत्रयो:।
स बभौ च यथा राहु: समीपे शशिसूर्ययो: u १७॥

Again, coming within the range of the
aforesaid two princes, Laksmana and Sri
Rama, the notorious Ravana resembled Rahu
(the Daitya presiding over the planet of that
name, who is held by the Puranas to be
responsible for the solar as well as the
lunar eclipses standing in the vicinity of the
moon and the sun). (17)

मुमोच धनुरायम्य शरानग्निशिखोपमान्॥१८॥
