886

care of by excellent women, that son of
Ravana grew up in the beautiful gynaeceum

« VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

like fire concealed
(31-32)

of Ravana, O Rama,
under pieces of wood.”

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये उत्तरकाण्डे द्वादश: सर्ग: ॥ १२॥

Thus ends Canto Twelve in the Uttarakanda of the glorious Ramayana of Valmiki,
the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

Canto XIII
Kumbhakarna goes to sleep in the mansion built at the command of Ravana;
Ravana’s transgressions; Kubera sends a messenger to pull him up; the
messenger is put to death by the enraged Ravana

अथ लोकेश्वरोत्सृष्टा AA कालेन केनचित्।
Frat समभवत् तीव्रा कुम्भकर्णस्य रूपिणी i १॥

“Now after sometime deep sleep, as
sent by Brahma (the lord of the universe),
seized Kumbhakarna in the form of yawning
etc., in Lanka. (1)
ततो भ्रातरमासीनं कुम्भकर्णोऽब्रवीद् वच:।
Frat मां बाधते राजन् कारयस्व ममालयम्॥ २॥

“Thereupon Kumbhakarna spoke as
follows to his elder brother, who was seated
beside him: ‘O king, sleep is troubling me;
have a mansion built for me.’ (2)

विनियुक्तास्ततो tat शिल्पिनो विश्वकर्मवत्।
विस्तीर्णं योजनं स्निग्धं ततो द्विगुणमायतम्॥ ३॥
दर्शनीयं निराबाधं कुम्भकर्णस्य चक्रिरे।
स्फाटिकै: काञ्चनैश्चित्रै: स्तम्भै: सर्वत्र शोभितम्॥ ४॥
“Ordered by the king, architects as
good as ViSwakarma (the architect of gods)
built for Kumbhakarna a lovely mansion,
one Yojana (ten miles) in width and twice as
much in length. It had a beautiful appearance
and was free from disturbance. It was
adorned on all sides with lovely columns of
crystal, as well as of gold. (3-4)

वैदूर्यकृतसोपानं किङ्किणीजालकं तथा।
दान्ततोरणविन्यस्तं वज्रस्फटिकवेदिकम्॥ ५ UI
wie सर्वसुखं कारयामास wae:
waa सुखदं नित्यं मेरो: पुण्यां गुहामिव॥६॥

“The stairways were made of cat’s-eye
gems. Its lattice windows were fringed with
tiny bells. Its portals were made of ivory. It
contained daises built of crystal and diamond.
It was not only soul-captivating but the
Raksasa (Ravana) provided it with all
amenities and made every part of it
comfortable in all seasons. It resembled a
holy cave of Mount Meru. (5-6)

aa fiat समाविष्ट: कुम्भकर्णो महाबल:।
बहून्यब्दसहस्राणि शयानो न च बुध्यते॥७॥

“Buried in slumber, the very mighty
Kumbhakarna lay asleep there, and did not
wake up for many thousand years. (7)

निद्राभिभूते तु तदा कुम्भकर्णे दशानन:।

देवर्षियक्षगन्धर्वान् संजघ्ने fe निरङ्कुश:॥८॥
“While Kumbhakarna was _ thus

overpowered by sleep, DaSanana destroyed

the gods, the Rsis, the Yaksas and the
Gandharvas without restraint of any kind. (8)

उद्यानानि विचित्राणि नन्दनादीनि यानि च।

तानि गत्वा सुसंक्रुद्धो भिनत्ति स्म दशानन:॥ ९॥
“The highly enraged DaSanana overran

the Nandana grove (the pleasure-garden of

Indra) and other beautiful gardens and laid
them waste. (9)

wat गज इव क्रीडन् Gary वायुरिव ferry
नगान् वज्र इवोत्सृष्टो विध्वंसयति Were: i Qo ti
