474

aforesaid, unsated as they were with the
sight of Sri Rama, Sri Rama, a scion of
Raghu, passed beyond their sight just as
the sun goes out of sight at the
commencement of night. (7)

ततो धान्यधनोपेतान् दानशीलजनान् शिवान्।
sete रम्यांश्चैत्ययूपसमावृतान्॥ ८ ॥
उद्यानाम्रवणोपेतान् सम्पन्नसलिलाशयान्।
तुष्टपुष्टजनाकोर्णान् गोकुलाकुलसेवितान्॥ ९ ॥
रक्षणीयान् नरेन्द्राणां ब्रह्मघोषाभिनादितान्।
रथेन पुरुषव्याघ्र: कोसलानत्यवर्तत॥१०॥

Sri Rama, a tiger among men, then
crossed in His chariot the blessed and
lovely territory of Kosala, which was full
of foodgrains and other riches and was
peopled by men given to charity, which had
no fear from any quarter and was covered
all over with temples and sacrificial posts,
which was rich in gardens and mango groves
and strewn with ponds full of water, which
was thickly populated with contented and
well-fed people and abounded in herds of
cows, nay, each village of which deserved
to be protected by kings and which was
made resonant with the chanting of the
Vedas. (8—10)
मध्येन मुदितं स्फीतं रम्योद्यानसमाकुलम्।
राज्यं भोज्यं नरेन्द्राणां ययौ धृतिमतां वर:॥११॥

Thence Sri Rama, the foremost of
those possessed of firmness drove at a
moderate speed to a happy and prosperous
territory ruled over by a number of feudatory
chiefs and abounding in lovely gardens.

(11)
तत्र त्रिपथगां दिव्यां शीततोयामशैवलाम्।
wast राघवो गङ्गां रम्यामृषिनिषेविताम्॥१२॥

There in the confines of that kingdom

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

Sri Rama, a scion of Raghu, saw the celestial
and lovely river Ganga, which takes a
threefold course flowing as it does through
heaven, earth and the subterranean regions,
carries cool waters, is free from duck-weed
sand and is frequented by Rsis. (12)

आश्रमैरविदूरस्थै: श्रीमद्भि: समलंकृताम्।
कालेऽप्सरोभिर्हृष्टाभि: सेविताम्भोह्रदां शिवाम्॥ १३ ॥

The blessed river was adorned with
splendid hermitages standing not very far
from one another; and its pools, overflowing
with water, were resorted to at suitable
hours by merry celestial nymphs. (13)
देवदानवगन्धर्वै: किंनरैरुपशोभिताम्।
नागगन्धर्वपत्नीभि: सेवितां सततं शिवाम्॥ १४॥

Nay, the blessed river was graced
with the presence of gods and demons,
Gandharvas_ (celestial musicians) and
Kinnaras and was constantly* visited by
the consorts of Nagas and Gandharvas.

(14)
देवाक्रीडशताकीर्णां देवोद्यानयुतां नदीम्।
देवार्थमाकाशगतां विख्यातां देवपद्मिनीम्॥ १५॥

The well-known river was hemmed in
by hundreds of pleasure-hills forming part of
the Himalayan range and adorned with
celestial gardens; it coursed through the
heavens for the benefit of gods and contained
celestial lotuses. (15)
जलाघाताट्ठहासोग्रां फेननिर्मलहासिनीम्।
क्वचिद्वेणीकृतजलां क्वचिदावर्तशोभिताम्॥ १६ ॥

It assumed a severe aspect while
indulging in a horse-laugh in the form of a
noise produced by the striking of its waters
against rocks, and seemed to shed a bright
smile when covered with white foam. At
some places its water was reduced to the

* We read in the Mahabharata :

भुक्त्वा वा यदि ayaa wit वा यदि at fear

न कालनियम: कश्चिद्

Tet wea सरिद्वराम्॥

“One can bathe in the Ganga after taking one’s meals or without taking meals and as well by day
as by night. There is no restriction about time once you reach the Ganga, the foremost of all rivers.”
