* SUNDARAKANDA +

good charioteer controls the horses of his
chariot swirling on a wrong path. (3)

वाम: कामो मनुष्याणां यस्मिन् किल निबध्यते।
जने तस्मिंस्त्वनुक्रोश: स्नेहश्च किल जायते॥४॥

“It is a well-known fact that compassion
and affection are generated towards that
individual on whom cruel love gets actually
fastened. (4)

एतस्मात् कारणान्न cat घातयामि वरानने।
वधार्हामवमानार्हा मिथ्या प्रव्रजने रताम्॥५॥

“It is on this account that | do not
cause you to be put to death even though
you are deserving of death and ignominy,
devoted as you are to asceticism (the way
of life of recluses) in vain, O lady of charming
countenance ! (5)

परुषाणि fe वाक्यानि यानि यानि ब्रवीषि माम्।
ay ay वधो युक्तस्तव मैथिलि दारुण:॥६॥

“Indeed for all those cutting remarks
that you have uttered with reference to me,
violent capital punishment is proper for you,
O princess of Mithila !” (6)
एवमुक्त्वा तु ace रावणो राक्षसाधिप:।
क्रोधसंरम्भसंयुक्त: सीतामुत्तरमब्रवीत्॥ ७॥

Having spoken thus to Sita, a princess
of the Videha territory, Ravana, the suzerain

lord of ogres, who was filled with anger,
addressed the following words to Sita: (7)

Bl मासौ रक्षितव्यौ मे योऽवधिस्ते मया qa: |
qd: शयनमारोह मम त्वं वरवर्णिनि॥८॥

“According to the time-limit of twelve
months which has been fixed by me, | must
wait for two months (that now remain). After
that you must share my bed, O lady of
excellent complexion ! (8)
द्वाभ्यामूर्ध्व q मासाभ्यां भर्तारं मामनिच्छतीम्।
मम at प्रातराशार्थे सूदाश्छेत्स्यन्ति खण्डश:॥ ९॥

“My cooks will mince you for my morning
repast in case you do not consent to have

119

me for your husband even after two months
from now.” (9)

तां MAA सम्प्रेक्ष्य राक्षसेन्द्रेण जानकीम्।
देवगन्धर्वकन्यास्ता विषेदुर्विकृतेक्षणा: ॥ १० ॥

Gazing on that daughter of Janaka being
threatened by Ravana, the lord of ogres, those
daughters of gods and Gandharvas, who had
been forcibly borne away like Sita, grew
melancholy with troubled eyes. (10)

ओष्ठप्रकारैरपरा नेत्रैर्वक्त्रैस्तथापरा:।
सीतामाश्वासयामासुस्तर्जितां तेन रक्षसा॥११॥

Some of them reassured by the
expression of their lips and others by their
eyes and faces Sita, who was _ being
menaced as above by that ogre. (11)

ताभिराश्वासिता सीता wear राक्षसाधिपम्।
उवाचात्महितं वाक्यं वरृत्तशौटीर्यगर्वितम्॥१२॥

Restored to confidence by them, Sita
addressed to Ravana, the suzerain lord of
ogres, the following reply, which was in his
own interest and which was full of pride for
her own morality as well as for her husband’s
valour : (12)

नूनं न ते जन: कश्चिदस्मिन्नि:श्रेयसि स्थित:।
निवारयति यो नत्वां कर्मणोऽस्माद्विगर्हितात्॥ १३ ॥

“Surely in this city there is no man
intent on your welfare, since no one deters
you from this most reproachful act in the
shape of detaining another’s wife forcibly
without her concurrence. (13)

त्वदन्यस्तरिषु लोकेषु प्रार्थयेन्मनसापि क:॥१४॥
राक्षसाधम रामस्य भार्याममिततेजस:।
SHAM यत् पापं क्व गतस्तस्य मोक्ष्यसे॥ १५॥
“Indeed, who other than you in all the
three worlds will seek even with his mind to
have me, the consort of Sri Rama, who has

set his mind on virtue, even as one would
seek Saci, the spouse of Indra? Going
