* BALAKANDA +

अधर्मसहिता नार्यो हता: पुरुषसत्तमै:।
तस्मादेनां FUT त्यक्त्वा जहि मच्छासनान्नृप॥ २२॥

“Women characterized by impiety were | O protector of men !”

143

killed by all these as well as by many other
high-souled Ksatriya princes, who were the
foremost of men. Therefore, shaking off all
tenderness, despatch her by my command,
(22)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये बालकाण्डे पञ्चविंश: सर्ग: ॥ 24 ॥

Thus ends Canto Twenty-five in the Balakanda of the glorious Ramayana of Valmiki,
the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

Canto XXVI

Sri Rama kills Tataka

मुनेर्वचनमक्लीबं श्रुत्वा नरवरात्मज:।
राघव: प्राञ्जलिर्भूत्वा प्रत्युवाच दृढव्रत:॥१॥
Hearing the utterance of the sage
ViSwamitra, which was anything but cowardly,
Prince Rama, a scion of Raghu, firm of
resolve as he was, replied as follows with
folded hands : (1)

पितुर्वचननिर्देशात् पितुर्वचनगौरवात्।
an कौसिकस्येति कर्तव्यमविशङ्कया॥ २॥
अनुशिष्टोऽस्म्ययोध्यायां गुरुमध्ये महात्मना।
पित्रा amd नावज्ञेयं fe तद्वच:॥३॥

“In the midst of other elders at Ayodhya
| was instructed by my high-souled father,
King DaSaratha, in the following words : ‘In
pursuance of the instructions of your father
conveyed in his actual words and out of
respect for your father’s word the command
of Viswamitra (a scion of Kusa) must be
carried out by you without any scruple !’ His
admonition, therefore, should on no account
be ignnored by me. (2-3)

सोऽहं पितुर्वच: श्रुत्वा शासनाद् ब्रह्मवादिन:।
करिष्यामि न संदेहस्ताटकावधमुत्तमम्॥४॥

“Having heard the aforesaid exhortation

of my father and in obedience to the command
of an exponent of the Vedas in you, | shall
accordingly discharge my foremost duty in
the form of killing the ogress, Tataka—there
is no doubt about it. (4)

गोब्राह्मणहितार्थाय ara च feat ai
wat चैवाप्रमेयस्य at कर्तुमुद्यत:॥५॥

“For the purpose of doing good to the
cows and the Brahmanas and in the interest
of this region as well as in your own interest
(in the shape of your gratification) | am
prepared to do your bidding, possessed as
you are of immeasurable glory.” (5)

Wana धनुर्मध्ये बद्ध्वा मुष्टिमरिंदम:।
ज्याघोषमकरोत् तीव्रं दिश: शब्देन नादयन्॥ Ul
Saying so and clenching his left fist
around the middle of his bow, Sri Rama
(who was capable of taming his enemy)
produced a sharp twang, making the quarters
resound with loud reverberations. (6)

wt शब्देन वित्रस्तास्ताटकावनवासिन:।
ताटका च सुसंक्रुद्धा तेन शब्देन मोहिता॥७॥

The dwellers in the forest haunted by
Tataka (viz., the followers of Tataka) were

had gone out to practise austerities, the demons, hard pressed by the heavenly army, sought the wife of
Bhrgu for protection and how the latter, who accordingly tried to destroy the gods including Lord Visnu,
was subsequently killed by Lord Visnu at the request of Indra.
