534

a we निर्गतो dit: शिबिराद् भीमविक्रम:।
वानरान् भृशसंक्रुद्धो भक्षयन् परिधावति॥ seu

“Having emerged from his royal retreat,
extremely enraged, this champion of terrible
prowess is darting to and fro, devouring the
monkeys. (31)

कुम्भकर्णं समीक्ष्यैव हरयोऽद्य Wega: |
कथमेनं रणे क्रुद्धं वारयिष्यन्ति वानरा:॥ ३२॥

“The monkeys have run away merely
on beholding Kumbhakarna today. How then
will the monkeys be able to check him on
seeing him enraged in combat? (32)

उच्यन्तां वानरा: सर्वे यन्त्रमेतत् समुच्छितम्।
इति विज्ञाय wat भविष्यन्तीह निर्भया:॥ ३३॥

“Let the monkeys be told that it is a
mere mechanical device standing very high,
which they see before them. The monkeys
will be rid of fear on coming to know this on
this occasion.” (33)

विभीषणवच: strat हेतुमत् सुमुखोद्गतम्।
sara राघवो वाक्यं नीलं सेनापतिं तदा॥ ३४॥

Hearing the speech of Vibhisana, which
was full of reason and had been made with
a pleasing air, Sri Rama, a scion of Raghu,
spoke to Nila, the Commander-in-Chief, as
follows: (34)

Tres सैन्यानि सर्वाणि oper तिष्ठस्व पावके।
द्वाराण्यादाय लङ्कायाश्चर्याश्चास्याथ संक्रमान्॥ Be ॥
शैलशृङ्गाणि gatas शिलाश्चाप्युपसंहरन्।
भवन्त: सायुधा: सर्वे वानरा: शैलपाणय:॥ ३६॥

“Go, disposing all the troops in battle
array, nay, occupying the gates, highways
and bridges of Lanka and getting together

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA +

mountain-tops, trees and rocks too, stand
ready for operation, O son of the fire-god!
And, armed with weapons and rocks in hand,
you too remain alert, O monkeys!” (35-36)

राघवेण समादिष्टो नीलो हरिचमूपति:।
शशास atch यथावत् कपिकुञ्जर:॥ ३७॥
Duly instructed as above, Nila, the
Commander-in-Chief of the simian army, an
elephant among the monkeys, commanded
the army of the monkeys as it should be.
(37)

ततो गवाक्ष: शरभो हनूमानङ्गदस्तथा।
शैलशृङ्गाणि शैलाभा गृहीत्वा द्वारमभ्ययु:॥ ३८॥
Taking peaks of mountains, Gavaksa,
Sarabha, Hanuman and Angada, who looked
like mountains themselves, thereupon
marched to the gate of Lanka. (38)

रामवाक्यमुपश्रुत्य हरयो जितकाशिन:।
पादपैरर्दयन् वीरा वानरा: परवाहिनीम्॥ ३९॥

Hearing the command of Sri Rama, the
heroic monkeys, who were bent upon taking
the life of their enemies, and who had
assumed a triumphant air, began to strike
the hostile army guarding the precincts of
the city outside the gates. (39)
ततो हरीणां तदनीकमुग्रं

रराज शैलोद्यतवृक्षहस्तम्।

गिरे: समीपानुगतं यथैव
महन्महाम्भोधरजालमुग्रम् ॥ ४० tt
Carrying rocks and uplifted trees

in their hands, that formidable army of
monkeys shone precisely like a terrible and
huge mass of clouds hanging close to a
mountain. (40)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये FERS एकषष्टितम: सर्ग: ॥ ६१ ॥

Thus ends Canto Sixty-one in the Yuddhakanda of the glorious Ramayana of
Valmiki, the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

