1014

noble feet, leaving Sita, the daughter of
Janaka, so pure of conduct and famed among
the wives devoted to their husbands, at the
holy hermitage of Valmiki on the banks of
the Ganga, as directed, | have returned
once again to serve at the feet of yours, the
heroic one, Sri Rama. (8-9)

मा शुच: पुरुषव्याघ्र कालस्य गतिरीदृशी।
त्वद्विधा नहि शोचन्ति बुद्धिमन्तो मनस्विन:॥ १०॥

“Please do not grieve being separated
from Sita; O tiger among men, such is
decreed by Destiny. The wise and able
ones like you do not feel dejected. (10)

सर्वे क्षयान्ता निचया: पतनान्ता: समुच्छ्रया:।
संयोगा विप्रयोगान्ता मरणान्तं च जीवितम्॥ ११॥

तस्मात् पुत्रेषु दारेषु मित्रेषु च धनेषु च।
नातिप्रसङ्ग: कर्तव्यो विप्रयोगो fe ater ez
“All accumulations end in attenuation,
all elevations would end in fall, all forms of
union would end in separation, and this life
would end in death; therefore, interim
attachment to sons, spouses, friends, or
even riches is not proper, for separation
from them is certain. (11-12)

शक्तस्त्वमात्मनाऽऽत्मानं विनेतुं मनसा मन:।

लोकान् सर्वांश्च काकुत्स्थ किं पुन: शोकमात्मन: ।। १३॥
“You are indeed capable of controlling

yourself or your mind through itself and also

all the worlds, O scion of Kakutstha, what
then is this sorrow for yourself. (13)

नेदृशेषु विमुह्यन्ति त्वद्विधा: पुरुषर्षभा:।
अपवाद: स किल a पुनरेष्यति Wea १४॥

« VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

यदर्थं मैथिली wear अपवादभयान्नृप।
सोऽपवाद: पुरे राजन् भविष्यति न संशय:॥ १५॥
“The bulls among men, like you, are
not infatuated on such matters, for the ill-
report will veritably come back to be
associated with you. O Rama (a scion of
Raghu), that ill-report shall again circulate in
the city, without doubt, for which you have
forsaken Sita, O king. (14-15)

स त्वं पुरुषशार्दूल धैर्येण सुसमाहित:।
त्यजेमां दुर्बलां बुद्धिं संतापं मा कुरुष्व ह॥ Ve Il
“O tiger among men, it behoves you
that you with fortitude set aside this mental
weakness and do not indeed be grieved.”
(16)

Wath: स काकुत्स्थो लक्ष्मणेन महात्मना।
उवाच परया wien सौमित्रिं मित्रवत्सल:॥ १७॥

Thus spoken to by the noble Laksmana,
the scion of Kakutstha, so affectionate to
friends, Sri Rama spoke to the son of Sumitra
in great joy. (17)

एवमेतन्नरश्रेष्ठ यथा वदसि लक्ष्मण।
परितोषश्च A ae मम कार्यानुशासने॥१८॥

“O best among men Laksmana, it is as
you say, and O heroic one, in the carrying
out my orders, lies my satisfaction. (18)

निव्रत्तिश्चागता सौम्य संतापश्च निराकृत:।

vag: सुरुचिरैरनुनीतोऽस्मि लक्ष्मण॥१९॥
Peace is attained, O Laksmana, and

grief has been averted by sweet words

uttered by you and | am again my own self.”
(19)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये उत्तरकाण्डे IAT: सर्ग: ॥ ५२॥

Thus ends Canto Fifty-two in the Uttarakanda of the glorious Ramayana of Valmiki,
the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

