* AYODHYAKANDA +

587

Canto LXXXI

The king’s bards, panegyrists and minstrels having commenced eulogizing
Bharata in the customary way in the midst of festal music at sunrise the
following morning, Bharata stops it, disclaiming sovereignty, and
complains to Satrughna of the ill-turn done to the world by his
own mother. In the meantime Sage Vasistha enters the royal
court and sends messengers to Bharata urging him
to be present in the court; and in response to
his call Bharata, accompanied by Satrughna
and others, enters the assembly

qq: सविशेषज्ञा:; स्तवैर्मङ्गलसंस्तवै:। १॥

Seeing the night preceding the
Nandimukha* and other festal ceremonies
(proposed to be performed by Vasistha
preliminary to Bharata’s coronation the
following morning) approaching its end, the
bards and panegyrists well-versed in
eulogizing kings and princes on special
occasions extolled Bharata by means of
benedictory encomia. (1)

सुवर्णकोणाभिहत: प्राणदद्यामदुन्दुभि: ।
दध्मु: शङ्खांश्च शतशो वाद्यांश्चोच्चावचस्वरान्॥ २॥

Struck with a gold stick, the drum which
was beaten at regular hours to notify the
end of every quarter of the day sounded
loudly. Nay, the servants blew conches and
sounded hundreds of musical instruments
of various pitches. (2)

a तूर्यघोष: सुमहान् दिवमापूरयन्निव।
भरतं शोकसंतप्तं भूय: शोकैररन्धयत्॥३॥

Filling the space on all sides, as it
were, that very loud sound of musical
instruments further oppressed with grief
Bharata, who was already tormented with
grief. (3)

ad: Wael weet घोषं संनिवर्त्य च।
नाहं राजेति चोक्त्वा तं शत्रुघ्नमिदमब्रवीत्॥४॥
Causing that music to be completely
stopped the moment he was roused as a
result of it, and saying that he was not the
ruler, spoke to the celebrated Satrughna as
follows : (4)

पश्य WA कैकेय्या लोकस्यापकृतं महत्।
विसृज्य मयि दु:खानि राजा दशरथो गत:॥५॥

“See, 0 Satrughna, the great wrong
that has been done to the world by Kaikeyi.
And leaving a legacy of sufferings to my
share, King DaSsaratha too has departed
from this world. (5)

तस्यैषा धर्मराजस्य धर्ममूला महात्मन:।
परिभ्रमति राजश्रीर्नैरिवाकर्णिका जले॥६॥

“This royal fortune, rooted in
righteousness, of that high-souled monarch,
who was an embodiment of piety, is drifting
like a boat without a pilot in water. (6)

यो fe न: सुमहान् नाथ: सोऽपि प्रव्राजितो वने।
अनया धर्ममुत्सृज्य मात्रा A Wea: स्वयम्॥७॥

“Even the celebrated Sri Rama (a scion
of Raghu), who was undoubtedly our very
great protector and lord, has been sent in

* The name of a Sraddha offered at the beginning of a festive occasion to one’s departed ancestors

to secure their blessings.
