# YUDDHAKANDA +

for the sins that have been committed by
you through ignorance against Rsis (seers
of Vedic Mantras) and gods as well as
against Gandharvas (celestial musicians)
and celestial nymphs, as also against Nagas
(a class of semi-divine beings credited with
a human face and serpent-like lower
extremities ), Yaksas (a species of demigods)
and human kings, conceited as you were,
O ranger of the night! Surely your arrogance
begotten of the boon that was conferred on
you by Brahma (the self-born creator) has
gone asunder, O ogre! (62-63)

यस्य दण्डधरस्तेऽहं दाराहरणकर्शित:।
दण्डं धारयमाणस्तु CSTE crafted: ॥ ६४॥

“Wielding the rod of punishment, I, your
chastiser, for my part have taken up my
position firmly at the gates of Lanka,
emaciated as | am due to the abduction of
my consort. (64)
पदवीं देवतानां च महर्षीणां च राक्षस।
राजर्षीणां च सर्वेषां गमिष्यसि युधि स्थिर: ।। ६५॥

“Remaining firm in combat and giving
up the ghost while fighting, you shall reach
the destiny of gods and eminent Rsis (seers
of Vedic Mantras) as well as of all royal
sages, O ogre! (65)

बलेन at a सीतां मायया राक्षसाधम।

मामतिक्रमयित्वा त्वं हृतवांस्तन्निदर्शय॥६६॥

“Display, O the vilest of ogres, the
strength by virtue of which you actually
bore away Sita after putting me off the
scent by recourse to deception. (66)

अराक्षसमिमं लोकं कर्तास्मि निशितै: शरै:।
न चेच्छरणमभ्येषि तामादाय तु मैथिलीम्॥६७॥
“| shall rid this world of ogres with my
sharp arrows if you, for your part, do not
seek me as a protector taking with you the
aforesaid princess of Mithila. (67)
धर्मात्मा राक्षसश्रेष्ठ: सम्प्राप्तोऽयं विभीषण:।
लङ्घेश्चर्यमिदं श्रीमान् ध्रुवं प्राप्नोत्यकण्टकम्॥ ६८ UI

439

‘Vibhisana, the foremost of ogres, whose
mind is set on virtue, has also arrived with
me here. The glorious ogre shall undoubtedly
attain the sovereignty of Lanka without
opposition. (68)

नहि राज्यमधर्मेण भोक्तुं क्षणमपि त्वया।
शक्यं मूर्खसहायेन पापेनाविदितात्मना॥६९॥

“Surely sovereignty cannot’ be
enjoyed even a moment longer through
unrighteousness by you, a sinner, with fools
as your helpmates and by whom the Self
has not been realized. (69)

युध्यस्व मा धृतिं कृत्वा शौर्यमालम्ब्य राक्षस।
मच्छैस्त्वं रणे शान्तस्तत: पूतो भविष्यसि॥ Vo I

“Taking recourse to firmness and
embracing gallantry, meet me in combat, O
ogre! Getting extinct on the field of battle
through my arrows, you will be purified
thereby. (70)

यद्याविशसि लोकांस्त्रीन् पक्षीभूतो निशाचर।
मम gue प्राप्य न जीवन् प्रतियास्यसि॥ ७१॥

“Entering the range of my sight, you
shall never return alive even if you range all
the three worlds in the form of a bird, O
prowler of the night! (71)
ब्रवीमि cat fed वाक्यं क्रियतामौर्ध्वदेहिकम्।
सुदृष्टा क्रियतां लङ्का जीवितं ते मयि स्थितम्॥ ७२ ॥

“| tender this salutary advice to you: let
obsequies be performed by yourself for
the benefit of your soul in advance; for no
ogre will be letft in the world to perform
obsequies for your departed soul, and let
Lanka be adequately seen by you for the
last time; for your life is now dependent on
me!” (72)
इत्युक्त: स तु तारेयो रामेणाक्लिष्टकर्मणा।
जगामाकाशमाविश्य मूर्तिमानिव हव्यवाट्॥७३॥

Ascending in the air when counselled

in these words by Sr Rama, who was
unwearied in action, Angada (son of Tara)
