* AYODHYAKANDA +

of my father, | for my part shall proceed to
the forest this very day. Please remain firm,
O high-minded lady ! (28)

ad च मयि कल्याणि at मुनिनिषेवितम्।
व्रतोपवासपरया भवितव्यं TAT NN २९॥

“Nay, when | have left for the forest,
inhabited by ascetics, O blessed lady, you
should take to sacred observances and
fasts, O sinless one! (29)
कल्यमुत्थाय देवानां कृत्वा पूजां यथाविधि।
वन्दितव्यो दशरथ: पिता मम जनेश्वर:॥ ३०॥

“Rising at dawn and after performing
worship of the gods according to the
scriptural ordinance, King Dasaratha, my
father, must be saluted by you. (30)

माता च मम कौसल्या Gael संतापकर्शिता।
धर्ममेवाग्रत: peal त्वत्त: सम्मानमर्हति॥ ३१॥
“My mother, Kausalya too, aged as she
is and emaciated through agony, deserves
to be duly respected by you since you must
keep virtue foremost in your mind. (31)

वन्दितव्याश्च a नित्यं at: शेषा WA मातर:।
स्नेहप्रणयसम्भोगै: war fe मम मातर:॥ ३२॥

“Those others too who are related to
me as mothers deserve to be saluted by
you everyday since all mothers are equal in
my eyes, in point of affection and goodwill
they cherish for me and the way in which
they have looked after me when | was a
child. (32)
भ्रातृपुत्रसमौ चापि द्रष्टव्यौ च विशेषत:।
त्वया भरतशत्रुघ्नौ प्राणै: प्रियतरौ मम॥ ३३॥

“My brothers, Bharata and Satrughna
too, who are dearer to me than life, should

be particularly regarded by you as your
own brothers or sons. (33)

397

fata च न adel भरतस्य कदाचन।

स हि राजा च वैदेहि देशस्य च कुलस्य च॥ ३४॥
“No offence should be given to Bharata

at any time; for he is now, as it were, the

ruler of our country as well as of our family,

O princess of the Videha territory! (34)

आराधिता fe शीलेन प्रयत्नैश्चोपसेविता:।
राजान: सम्प्रसीदन्ति प्रकुप्यन्ति विपर्यये॥ ३५॥
“Kings, really speaking, get highly
pleased when propitiated through good
conduct and_ served with continued
endeavours and feel enraged otherwise. (35)

औरस्यानपि wart fe त्यजन्त्यहितकारिण:।
समर्थान् सम्प्रगृह्णन्ति जनानपि नराधिपा:॥ ३६॥

“Rulers of men forsake even sons
sprung from their own loins if they are
adverse, and duly accept as their own even
strangers who are friendly to them. (36)

सा त्वं ade कल्याणि wa: समनुवर्तिनी।
भरतस्य Tt धर्मे सत्यव्रतपरायणा॥ ३७॥

“Dwell you as such in Ayodhya under
the protection of the Emperor and
conformably to the will of Bharata, remaining
devoted to righteousness and _ following
sacred observances of unfailing efficacy, O
blessed lady ! (37)
ate गमिष्यामि महावनं fra

त्वया fe वस्तव्यमिद्दैव भामिनि।
यथा व्यलीकं कुरुषे न कस्यचित्
AA CAA कार्यमिदं TAT AAU ३८ i

“| shall immediately proceed to the great
forest of Dandaka, my darling; while you
should live here only, O high-minded lady !
You should conduct yourself in such a way
as not to offend anyone: this is my advice
to you.” (38)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्येऽयोध्याकाण्डे षड्विंश: A: ॥ 2 Il

Thus ends Canto Twenty-six in the Ayodhyakanda of the glorious Ramayana
of Valmiki, the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

