# YUDDHAKANDA +

to be a mere straw, he spoke harsh words
to him as follows: (9)

लोकनाथस्य रामस्य सखा दासोऽस्मि राक्षस।
न मया मोक्ष्यसेऽद्य त्वं पार्थिवेन्द्रस्य तेजसा॥ १०॥

“lam a friend and servant of Sri Rama,
the ruler of the world, O ogre! You shall not
be spared by me this day, endowed as
| am with the strength of that king of kings.”

(10)
इत्युक्त्वा सहसोत्पत्य पुप्लुवे तस्य चोपरि।
आकृष्य मुकुटं fat पातयामास aq भुवि॥ ११॥

Saying so and springing all of a sudden,

Sugriva leapt upon him and, snatching off

the marvellous diadem from his head, threw
it on the ground. (11)

समीक्ष्य तूर्णमायान्तं बभाषे तं निशाचर:।
सुग्रीवस्त्वं परोक्षं मे हीनग्रीवो भविष्यसि॥ १२॥

Perceiving Sugriva coming with great
speed towards him, the night-ranger spoke
to him as follows: “You had a beautiful neck
only so long as you were out of my sight;
you shall be deprived of your neck now that
you have come to my view.” (12)

इत्युक्त्वोत्थाय तं क्षिप्रं बाहुभ्यामाक्षिपत् तले।
कन्दुवत् स समुत्थाय बाहुभ्यामाक्षिपद्धरि: ।। १३॥

Saying so and rising from his seat,
Ravana caught him with his arms and
flung him to the ground. Bouncing up like
a ball, the aforesaid monkey too lifted Ravana
with his arms and dashed him to the ground.

(13)

परस्परं स्वेदविदिग्धगात्रौ
परस्परं शोणितरक्तदेहौ।
परस्परं श्लिष्टनिरुद्धचेष्टौ

परस्परं शाल्मलिकिंशुकाविव॥ १४॥

Their limbs were first covered all over
with perspiration by being pressed against
each other; then their bodies got dyed red
with blood by being scratched with the sharp
nails of each other, and, lastly, while their

431

bodies stood motionless when interlocked,
they looked like a silk-cotton and KirnSuka
tree, overlapping each other. (14)

मुष्टिप्रहारैश्च तलप्रहारै-
ररत्निघातैश्च कराग्रघातै: |
a चक्रतुर्युद्धमसह्यरूपं
महाबलौ राक्षसवानरेन्द्रौ॥ १५ ।।

The said ruler of ogres and the lord of
monkeys, who were both endowed with
extraordinary might, carried on a duel which
was unbearable (to each other) with blows
of fists, slaps, blows of the forearm and
blows of fingers. (15)

कृत्वा Fae भृशमुग्रवेगौ
कालं चिरं गोपुरवेदिमध्ये।
Shera चोत्झषिप्य विनम्य देहौ
पादक्रमाद् गोपुरवेदिलग्नौ ।। १६ ।।

Having wrestled hard for a long time in
the centre of the flat roof of the gate, nay,
throwing up repeatedly and pressing down
the bodies of each other, the two combatants,
who were seized with terrific impetuosity,
got stuck to the surface by moving their feet
in a particular way. (16)
अन्योन्यमापीड्यं विलग्नदेहौ

तौ पेततु: सालनिखातमध्ये।
उत्पेततुर्भूमितलं स्पृशान्तौ
स्थित्वा मुहूर्तं त्वभिनि:श्वसन्तौ॥ १७॥

Having squeezed one another, they
dropped down between the defensive walls
and the moat, their bodies still clung together.
Having lain a while touching the ground and
breathing hard, they, for their part, sprang
on their feet again. (17)

संरम्भशिक्षाबलसम्प्रयुक्तौ
gerd: waa agai: ueci
Repeatedly pressing one another to
their bosom, the two champions, who were

तौ ।
