* AYODHYAKANDA +

असत्यशीला विकृता दुर्गा अहृदया: सदा।
असत्य: पापसंकल्पा: क्षणमात्रविरागिण:॥ २२॥

“Wicked are those women who are
ever untruthful by nature and swayed by
passion, are difficult to comprehend, heartless
and of sinful resolve and who get estranged
in a moment. (22)
न कुलं न ad fae न ad नापि संग्रह:।
स्त्रीणां गृह्णाति हृदयमनित्यहृदया fe ता:॥ २३॥

“Neither noble birth nor good turn, nor
learning, nor gift nor even marriage ties
capture the heart of such women, fickle of
heart as they are. (23)

साध्वीनां तु स्थितानां तु शीले सत्ये श्रुते स्थिते।
स्त्रीणां पवित्रं urd पतिरेको विशिष्यते॥ २४॥

“In the case, however, of virtuous
women, who are, in fact, devoted to good
conduct, truthfulness and the precepts of
their elders and keep within the bounds of
decorum laid down for their family, their
husband is the most sacred object and he
alone excels all. (24)

स त्वया नावमन्तव्य: UA: प्रव्राजितो वनम्।
तव देवसमस्त्वेष निर्धन: सधनोऽपि ari 24 il

“Though being sent into exile to the
forest, my son, Sri Rama, should not be
despised by you. Endowed with means or
resourceless, he is surely aS good as a
deity to you.” (25)
विज्ञाय वचनं सीता तस्या धर्मार्थसंहितम्।
कृत्वाञ्जलिमुवाचेदं श्वश्रूमभिमुखे स्थिता॥ २६॥

Perceiving her advice to be in
consonance with righteousness, which
constituted her aim in life, and joining her

palms, Sita replied to her mother-in-law as
follows, standing in front of her: (26)

करिष्ये सर्वमेवाहमार्या यदनुशास्ति माम्।
अभिज्ञास्मि यथा भर्तुर्वर्तितव्यं ad च मे॥ २७॥
“| shall surely do all that your worthy
self instructs me to do. | know how | should
behave towards my husband and | have

441

also heard about it from my elders.

न मामसज्जनेनार्या समानयितुमर्हति।
धर्माद् विचलितुं नाहमलं चन्द्रादिव प्रभा॥ २८॥

“Your noble self ought not to equate
me with wicked women. | am unable to
deviate from virtue even as moonlight is
incapable of parting from the moon. (28)

नातन्त्री वाद्यते वीणा नाचक्रो विद्यते रथ:।
नापति: सुखमेधेत या स्यादपि शतात्मजा॥ २९॥

“A ‘Vina’ is of no use without chords
and a chariot is of no use without wheels.
Nor can a wife, who is bereft of her husband,
prosper in a happy state even though she
may have a hundred sons. (29)

अमितस्य तु दातारं भर्तारं का न पूजयेत्॥ ३०॥

“Indeed, a father bestows limited joy, a
brother too bestows limited joy and a son
as well bestows limited happiness. What
woman, then, would not adore her husband,
the bestower of unlimited joy? (30)

साहमेवंगता श्रेष्ठा श्रुतधर्मपरावरा।
आर्ये किमवमन्येयं frat vat fe दैवतम्॥ ३१॥

“Having heard about the special and
ordinary duties of a wife from my superiors
and thus convinced that the husband is a
veritable deity to a married woman, how
can |, such as | am, despise my husband,
O venerable lady?” (31)
सीताया वचनं श्रुत्वा कौसल्या हृदयङ्गमम्।
शुद्धसत्त्वा मुमोचाश्रु सहसा दु:खहर्षजम्॥ ३२॥

Hearing Sita’s reply, which touched
the chords of her heart, Kausalya of pure
mind suddenly began to shed tears born of
agony at the thought of the impending
separation from her sons and daughter-in-
law and delight over the pious sentiments
expressed by Sita. (32)

at प्राञ्ञलिरभिप्रेक्ष्य मातृमध्येऽतिसत्कृताम्।
TH: परमधर्मात्मा मातरं वाक्यमब्रवीत्॥ ३३॥

Gazing at Kausalya, his own mother,

(27)
