« KISKINDHAKANDA +

low with

(7)

me, whose body was _ bent
submission.

स तु निर्धूय सर्वान् नो निर्जगाम महाबल:।
ततोऽहमपि सौहार्दान्नि:सृतो वालिना सह॥८॥

“Repelling us all, Vali, however, who
was possessed of extraordinary might, went
forth. Out of affection | too thereupon sallied
forth with Vali. (8)

स तु मे भ्रातरं Gea at च दूरादवस्थितम्।
असुरो जातसंत्रास: प्रदुद्राव dal भृशम्॥९॥
“Seized with terror to see from a
distance my elder brother, Vali, stationed in
a firm position to give battle, as well as
myself, Mayavi forthwith ran quickly for
life. (9)
प्रकाशोऽपि hat मार्गश्चन्द्रेणोद्च्छता AAT Il Lo Il
“While he was fleeing alarmed for life,
we two followed faster; the road was illumined
at that time by the moon appearing in the
horizon. (10)
a तृणैरावृतं at धरण्या faat महत्।
प्रविवेशासुरो वेगादावामासाद्य विष्ठितौ॥११॥
“The aforesaid demon entered with
expedition a large hole in the earth, which
was covered with grass and hence difficult
of access; while we two stood rooted on
reaching the spot. (11)
तं प्रविष्टं रिपुं gear fact रोषवशं गत:।
मामुवाच ततो वाली वचनं क्षुभितेन्द्रिय: ।। १२॥
“Fallen a prey to anger on seeing his
aforesaid adversary having penetrated deep
into a hole, Vali thereupon spoke to me as
follows, his mind being agitated : (12)

Be तिष्ठाद्य ata बिलद्वारि समाहित:।

यावदत्र प्रविश्याहं निहन्मि समरे रिपुम्॥१३॥
“Remain alert at the mouth of this hole

today, O Sugriva, till |, penetrating deep into

the hole, make short work of my enemy in
the course of a duel.’ (13)

963

मया ade वच: श्रुत्वा याचित: स WAT: |
शापयित्वा च at पद्भ्यां प्रविवेश बिलं तत:॥ १४॥
“Though implored by me to take myself
alongwith him on hearing this command,
Vali, for his part, the scorcher of his foes,
thereupon penetrated deep into the hole,
binding me on oath in the name of his own
person to remain outside. (14)

तस्य प्रविष्टस्य fact साग्र: संवत्सरो गत:।
स्थितस्य च बिलद्वारि स कालो व्यत्यवर्तत॥ १५ ॥

“More than a year slipped away since
he penetrated deep into the hole and the
same period elapsed even as | remained
stationed at the mouth of the hole. (15)
अहं तु WS तं ज्ञात्वा स्नेहादागतसम्भ्रम:।
भ्रातरं न प्रपश्यामि पापशङ्कि च मे मन:॥ १६॥

“Since | did not perceive my elder brother
with my own eyes all these long months, my
mind began to apprehend his death. Nay,
concluding him to have been killed by the

demon, | for my part was overcome by a
feeling of misgiving through affection. (16)

अथ दीर्घस्य कालस्य बिलात् तस्माद् विनि:सृतम्।
सफेनं रुधिरं gear ततोऽहं भृशदु:खित:॥ १७॥
“Then, on seeing after a long time blood
mixed with foam emerged from the aforesaid
hole, | felt extremely distressed because of
that. (17)
नर्दतामसुराणां च ध्वनिर्मे श्रोत्रमागत:।
न रतस्य च संग्रामे क्रोशतोऽपि स्वनो TT: १८॥
“The yell of thundering demons too
reached my ears, while the noise of my
elder brother, even though he was roaring
while engaged in the encounter, did not fall
on my ears. (18)
we त्ववगतो बुद्धया चिह्नैस्तैर्भातरं हतम्।
पिधाय च facet शिलया गिरिमात्रया॥१९॥
शोकार्तश्चोदकं कृत्वा किष्किन्धामागत: A |
गूहमानस्य मे ad त्वं यत्नतो APA: श्रुतम्॥ २०॥
“By recourse to reason on the strength
of the aforesaid indications, |, for my part,
