1012

at seeing them thus protected by her,
severed the head of the spouse of Bhrgu
with his discus. (13)
शशाप सहसा क्रुद्धो विष्णुं रिपुकुलार्दनम्॥ १४॥
यस्मादवध्यां मे पत्नीमवधी: क्रोधमूच्छित:।

तस्मात् त्वं मानुषे लोके जनिष्यसि जनार्दन॥ १५॥

“Then the scion of the Bhrgu family
seeing his spouse thus done to death, with
rage, in haste cursed Visnu, the destroyer
of His enemies (the Daityas) thus: ‘As you
have killed my spouse who did not deserve
to be killed, infatuated as you are with anger,
so you will take birth in the mortal world
O remover of mortal woes. (14-15)
aa पत्नीवियोगं त्वं प्राप्स्यसे बहुवार्षिकम्।
शापाभिहतचेतास्तु स्वात्मना भावितोऽभवत्॥ १६॥
अर्चयामास तं देवं भृगु: शापेन पीडित:।
तपसाऽऽराधितो देवो ह्यब्रवीद् भक्तवत्सल:॥ १७॥
लोकानां सम्परियार्थं तु तं शापं गृह्यमुक्तवान्।
इति शप्तो महातेजा भृगुणा पूर्वजन्मनि॥१८॥
इहागतो हि पुत्रत्वं तव पार्थिवसत्तम।
wa इत्यभिविख्यातस्तिषु लोकेषु मानद॥१९॥

‘Then in your mortal existence you will
meet with separation from your spouse for
many years.’ By this curse, afflicted in mind
Bhrgu was, however impelled as if by the
indweller to request him to accept the
curse. Being in pain by the curse, Bhrgu
worshipped that God, Visnu, and the God
affectionate to his devotees, thus worshipped,
spoke thus: ‘For the welfare of the world
this curse will be accepted by Me.’ Thus
cursed by Bhrgu, He (Visnu) has become
here your son, O best among kings, and
has been named Rama, revered in the three
worlds. (16—19)

तत् फलं प्राप्स्यते चापि भृगुशापकृतं महत्।
अयोध्याया: पती War दीर्घकालं भविष्यति॥ २०॥
सुखिनश्च समृद्धाश्च भविष्यन्त्यस्य ASTM: |
दशवर्षसहस्राणि दशवर्षशतानि च॥ २१॥

« VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

रामो राज्यमुपासित्वा ब्रह्मलोकं गमिष्यति।
समृद्धैश्चाश्वमेधैश्च इष्ट्वा परमदुर्जय:॥ २२॥
राजवंशांश्च बहुशो बहून् संस्थापयिष्यति।
द्वौ पुत्रौ तु भविष्येते सीतायां राघवस्य तु॥ २३॥

“The fruit of that curse (separation
from Sita) He will bear. Rama will be the
Lord of Ayodhya for a long time and all
those who follow Him shall be happy and
prosperous. Having resided in His kingdom
for eleven thousand years, He the invincible
one will proceed to Brahmaloka, after having
performed many costly ASvamedhas and
He will establish many royal families. Two
sons of the scion of Raghu will be born of
Sita; (20—23)
a सर्वमखिलं राज्ञो वंशस्याह गतागतम्।
sera सुमहातेजास्तूष्णीमासीन्महामुनि: Ut २४॥

“That great and powerful ascetic,
Durvasa, having thus narrated the future

course of the royal family of Sri Rama
extensively, became silent. (24)

तूष्णींभूते तदा तस्मिन् राजा दशरथो मुनौ।
अभिवाद्य महात्मानौ पुनरायात् पुरोत्तमम्॥ २५॥

“Then as the ascetic stopped speaking,
Dasaratha having saluted both the great
ones (Vasistha and Durvasa) returned again
to Ayodhya, the best of the cities. (25)

एतद् Ta मया aa मुनिना Stet पुरा।

ad dea निक्षिप्तं नान्यथा ag भविष्यति॥ २६॥
“These words spoken by the ascetic

formerly, | have heard and taken to heart. It

shall not be otherwise. (26)

सीतायाश्च तत: पुत्रावभिषेक्ष्यति राघव:।
अन्यत्र न त्वयोध्यायां मुनेस्तु वचनं यथा॥ २७॥

“The scion of Raghu will thereafter
coronate the two sons of Sita, but not at
Ayodhya, however, as predicted by the
ascetic. (27)

एवं गते न dat कर्तुमर्हसि weal
सीतार्थे राघवार्थे वा दृढो Va नरोत्तम॥ २८॥
