674

व्यशीर्यत रथोपस्थे ताराजालमिवाम्बरात्॥५४॥

Completely shattered by the aforesaid
shafts, the heavy golden armour of Indrajit
fell to pieces in the interior of the chariot
like a mass of stars from the heavens. (54)

विधूतवर्मां नाराचैर्बभूव स कृतव्रण:।
इन्द्रजित् समरे वीर: wee भानुमानिव॥७५५॥

His coat of mail shattered by the steel
arrows of Laksmana, the aforesaid champion,
Indrajit, was wounded in combat and bathed
in blood looked like the morning sun. (55)

तत: शरसहस्रेण संक्रुद्धो रावणात्मज:।
fave समरे वीरो लक्ष्मणं भीमविक्रम:॥ ५६॥

Fully roused to anger, the heroic Indrajit
(sprung from the loins of Ravana) of
redoubtable prowess, pierced Laksmana
with a thousand arrows on the battlefield.

(56)
व्यशीर्यत weet कवचं लक्ष्मणस्य तु।
कृतप्रतिकृतान्योन्यं बभूवतुररिंदमौ ।। ५७॥

The mighty and celestial armour of

Laksmana too got shattered. The two

warriors, the tamers of their enemies, took
the offensive and also retaliated. (57)

अभीक्ष्णं नि:श्वसन्तौ तौ युध्येतां तुमुलं युधि।
शरसंकृत्तसर्वाङ्गौ सर्वतो रुधिरोक्षितौ॥७५८॥

Breathing heavily again and again, they
fought vehemently on the battlefield, their
limbs got lacerated by arrows and they
were bathed all over in blood. (58)

सुदीर्घकालं at वीरावन्योन्यं निशितै: wt:
ततशक्षतुर्महात्मानौ रणकर्मविशारदौ।
बभूवतुश्चात्मजये यत्तौ भीमपराक्रमौ॥५९॥

For a pretty long time the two heroes
of redoubtable prowess, who were endowed
with extraordinary courage and were skilled
in fighting, tore each other with whetted
shafts and were strenuously engaged in

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA +

securing victory each for himself.

तौ शरौघैस्तथाकीर्णौ निकृत्तकवचध्वजौ।
सृजन्तौ Set चोष्णं जलं प्रस्रवणाविव॥ go
Covered all over with arrows, which
had stuck to their bodies, their armour and
standards torn to pieces, they stood emitting
hot blood as two waterfalls gushing hot
water. (60)
mrad ततो घोरं मुञ्चतोर्भीमनि:स्वनम्।
सासारयोरिवाकाशे नीलयो: कालमेघयो:।॥ ६१॥
तयोरथ महान् कालो व्यतीयाद् युध्यमानयो: |
न च तौ युद्धवैमुख्यं क्लमं चाप्युपजग्मतु:।। ६२॥
A considerable time slipped by while
the two warriors fought, shooting a formidable
hail of shafts with a dreadful clamour like
two dark destructive clouds pouring a hard
shower from the heavens. They, however,
neither turned their back on the battlefield
nor experienced any fatigue. (61-62)

अस्त्राण्यस्त्रविदां श्रेष्ठौ दर्शयन्तौ पुन: पुन:।
शरानुच्चावचाकारानन्तरिक्षे बबन्धतु: ।॥। ६३ ॥

Displaying their missiles time and again,
the two warriors, who were the foremost
among those skilled in the use of missiles,
set up as network of arrows, both large and
small, in the airspace. (63)

व्यपेतदोषमस्यन्तौ लघु fat च सुष्ठु च।
उभौ तुं तुमुलं घोरं चक्रतुर्नरराक्षसौ॥६४॥

Shooting their arrows with agility and
grace in a wonderful way, which was entirely
free from reproach, both the man and the
ogre for their part carried on a vehement
and formidable struggle. (64)

तयो: पृथक् पृथग् भीम: शुश्रुवे तलनिस्वन:।
स कम्पं जनयामास Praia sat दारुण:॥६५॥

The appalling sound produced by the
impact of the palms of the two warriors on
their bowstrings could be heard apart. Like
a violent thunderstorm it made people
tremble. (65)

(59)
