« KISKINDHAKANDA +

mortally wounded and motionless on the
ground, spoke proudly to Sri Rama (who
behaved proudly on the battlefield) in a
language full of meaning the following
harsh words, which were at the same
time courteous and _ conformable 10
righteousness : (14—15)
त्वं नराधिपते: ga: प्रथित: प्रियदर्शन:।
पराङ्मुखवधं Pa कोऽत्र प्राप्तस्त्वया TUT: |
wee युद्धसंरब्धस्त्वत्कृते निधनं गत:॥१६॥
“You are the son of a sovereign,
renowned and pleasing of aspect. Having
brought about the death of one who did not
face you in battle, what merit has been
earned by you on this earth, since | met my
death at your hands at a time when । was in
the heat of contest with another? (16)

कुलीन: सत्त्वसम्पन्नस्तेजस्वी चरितव्रत:।
Ta: करुणवेदी च प्रजानां च fed Ta uo

“‘Rama is of noble birth, richly endowed
with the quality of goodness and full of
courage and has practised religious vows;
he knows what is compassion and is devoted
to the good of the people. (17)

सानुक्रोशो महोत्साह: समयज्ञो दृढव्रत:।
इत्येतत् सर्वभूतानि कथयन्ति यशो भुवि॥ १८॥

“‘Nay, he is compassionate, is endowed
with great vigour, knows what should be
done at what time and is firm in his vows.’
In these words do all created beings utter
your praises on earth. (18)

दम: शम: क्षमा धर्मो धृति: सत्यं पराक्रम:।
पार्थिवानां गुणा Ws दण्डश्चाप्यपकारिषु॥ १९॥
“Control of the senses and_ the
mind, forgiveness, righteousness, fortitude,
truthfulness, valour and punishing the evil-

doers are the virtues of kings, O prince !
(19)

तान् गुणान् AMS चाभिजनं तव।
तारया प्रतिषिद्ध: सन् सुग्रीवेण समागत:॥ २०॥

“Believing the aforesaid virtues as

993

existing in you and also fully considering
your highest pedigree, | engaged in a combat
with Sugriva, though forbidden by Tara. (20)

न मामन्येन संरब्धं wrt वेद्धुमर्हसि।
sta A बुद्धिरुत्पन्ना बभूवादर्शने तव॥ २१॥

“So long as | did not see you the idea
cropped up in my mind that you would
never stoop to strike me while | was furiously
engaged with another and unwary. = (21)

a wat विनिहतात्मानं धर्मध्वजमधार्मिकम्।
जाने पापसमाचारं तृणै: कूपमिवावृतम्॥ २२॥

“Now, however, | have come to know
you to be one who has killed one’s soul by
acting against one’s consciousness, nay,
one who makes a show of virtue but is
really impious, is sinful of conduct and is
deceptive like a well of which the mouth
is covered by grass and other vegetation.

(22)
नाहं त्वामभिजानामि धर्मच्छद्याभिसंवृतम्॥ 23

“| did not know you till now to be sinful,
though wearing the guise of the virtuous,
and wholly covered by a mask of piety,
thus resembling a hidden fire. (23)
विषये वा ut वा ते यदा पापं करोम्यहम्।

न चत्वामवजानेऽहं कस्मात् तं हंस्यकिल्बिषम्॥ २४॥
मामिहाप्रतियुध्यन्तमन्येन च समागतम्॥ २५॥

“While | did not perpetrate any sin in
your dominion or capital, nor did | show
contumely to you, why did you kill me, a
monkey free from guilt, who ever lived on
fruit and roots alone and in woods, nay,
who was not offering resistance to you and
was engaged here in a combat with
another? (24-25)

त्वं नराधिपते: aa: प्रतीत: प्रियदर्शन:।
लिङ्गमप्यस्ति ते राजन् दृश्यते धर्मसंहितम्॥ २६॥

“You are a sovereign’s son, hence
worthy of trust, and pleasing of aspect too.
