* SUNDARAKANDA +

addressed by him, O king, to me: ‘My consort
has been borne away by an ogre. You
ought to give me your pledge to render help
in her recovery.’ (139)

वालिना erm सुग्रीवेण सह प्रभु:।
चक्रेऽग्निसाक्षिकं सख्यं राघव: सहलक्ष्मण: ॥ १४० ॥
“‘The powerful Sri Rama, who was
accompanied by his younger brother,
Laksmana, solemnized his alliance with me
(Sugriva), who had been robbed of my
sovereignty by Vali (my elder brother), in
the presence of fire as a witness. (140)

तेन वालिनमाहत्य शरेणैकेन संयुगे।
वानराणां महाराज: कृत: सम्प्लवतां प्रभु:॥ १४१॥
“*`)128 killing Vali with a single arrow
on the field of battle, | (Sugriva), the lord of
monkeys, was crowned by him suzerain
lord of all monkeys. (141)

तस्य साहाय्यमस्माभि: कार्यं सर्वात्मना त्विह।
at प्रस्थापितस्तुभ्यं समीपमिह धर्मत:॥१४२॥

“‘Help must be rendered to him by us
with all our being in this life: with this end in
view an envoy has been dispatched by me
(Sugriva) to your presence in Lanka in
accordance with the principles of
righteousness. (142)
क्षिप्रमानीयतां सीता दीयतां राघवस्य च।
यावन्न wa वीरा विधमन्ति बलं तव॥ १४३॥

“‘Let Sita be brought and restored to
Sri Rama, a scion of Raghu, before the
monkey heroes exterminate your forces.(143)

वानराणां प्रभावोऽयं न केन fated: पुरा।
देवतानां सकाशं च ये गच्छन्ति निमन्त्रिता:। १४४॥
“*To whom is this glory of the monkeys
not already known, who seek the presence
even of gods only when invited by the latter
for help?’ (144)
इति वानरराजस्त्वामाहेत्यभिहितो मया।
मामैक्षत ततो रुष्टश्चक्षुषा प्रदहन्निव॥ १४५ Il
“‘Sugriva, the ruler of monkeys, has

sent the foregoing message to you.’

261

“Provoked to anger when spoken to in these
words by me, Ravana presently looked at
me as though he was going to reduce me to
ashes by his very gaze. (145)

तेन वध्योऽहमाज्ञप्तो रक्षसा रौद्रकर्मणा।
मत्प्रभावमविज्ञाय रावणेन दुरात्मना॥ १४६॥
“| was ordered to be put to death by
that ogre of violent deeds, the evil-minded
Ravana, who did not know my glory in the
shape of my immunity from death. (146)

ततो विभीषणो नाम तस्य भ्राता महामति: ।
तेन राक्षसराजश्च याचितो मम कारणात्॥ १४७॥

“His younger brother, Vibhisana by
name, who is endowed with great sagacity,
was also present there. By him was Ravana
(the ruler of ogres) solicited on my behalf in
the following words: (147)

नैवं राक्षसशार्दूल त्यज्यतामेष निश्चय:।
राजशास्त्रव्यपेतो हि ant: संलक्ष्यते त्वया॥ १४८ ॥

“* ११० such attempt should at all be made,
O tiger among the ogres ! Let this resolve be
abandoned by you. A course which is
repugnant to the code governing the conduct
of kings is being envisaged by you. (148)

दूतवध्या न ger fe राजशास्त्रेषु राक्षस।
दूतेन वेदितव्यं च यथाभिहितवादिना॥ exe i

“*`[#28 killing of an envoy is surely not
approved of in the codes governing the
conduct of rulers, O ogre! The message of
his master must be delivered by an envoy,
who simply reiterates what he has been told

by his master. (149)
सुमहत्यपराधेऽपि दूतस्यातुलविक्रम।

विसूपकरणं ge न वधोऽस्ति fe शास्त्रत: geo Ul

“‘Even in the event of a very grave
offence committed by an envoy, O brother
endowed with incomparable prowess,
mutilation alone, and not death, has been
approved in the scriptures.’ (150)

विभीषणेनैवमुक्तो रावण: संदिदेश ari
राक्षसानेतदेवाद्य लङ्गू दह्यतामिति॥ १५१ ॥
