776

fires, which were borne by priests well-
versed in Yajurveda and were contained in
copper vessels, nay, which were bursting
into flames at that time, went in front of
Ravana. All the well-known women of the
gynaeceum followed at his heels with quick
paces, sobbing and tottering on all sides.
Having placed the bier bearing Ravana ona
consecrated spot, Vibhisana and others,
who were all feeling sore afflicted, piled up a
pyre with logs of sandalwood, as well as
with blocks of Padmakawood, the fragrant
root of the Usira plant and the grass
Bhadrakali in accordance with Vedic rites,
and covered it with the skin of black
antelopes. (109—1 13)

wap राक्षसेन्द्रस्य पितृमेधमनुत्तमम्।
वेदिं च दक्षिणाप्राचीं यथास्थानं च पावकम्॥ ११४॥
पादयो: Whe प्रापुरूर्वोश्चोलूखलं तदा॥११५॥

Placing Ravana on the pyre, they then
duly performed the obsequies in honour of
the ruler of ogres in a superb way as
follows: Constructing an altar to the south-
east of the funeral pile and placing the
sacred fire in its proper place, they then
poured a ladle full of ghee mixed with curds
on his shoulders and placed a cart on his
feet and a mortar on his thighs. (114-115)

दारुपात्राणि सर्वाणि अरणिं चोत्तरारणिम्।
दत्त्वा तु मुसलं चान्यं यथास्थानं विचक्रमु: 11 ११६ ॥
शास्त्रदूष्टेन विधिना महर्षिविहितेन a
तत्र मेध्यं पशुं हत्वा राक्षसेन्द्रस्य राक्षसा:॥ LV il
परिस्तरणिकां राज्ञो घृताक्तां समवेशयन्।
गन्धैर्माल्यैरलंकृत्य रावणं दीनमानसा:॥११८॥
विभीषणसहायास्ते वस्त्रैश्च विविधैरपि।
लाजैरवकिरन्ति स्म बाष्पपूर्णमुखास्तथा॥११९॥

Having set at the proper places all the
wooden vessels (used in Agnihotra) the lower
piece of wood used for kindling fire at a sacrifice
as well as the upper wood, (which is rotated
at great speed on the lower one to produce
fire by friction), as also the wooden pestle

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA +

used in a Caturmasya sacrifice, they
performed the obsequies according to the
rules prescribed in the Vedas as well as
according to the ordinance laid down by
eminent Rsis (in the Kalpa-Sutras or manuals
containing aphoristic rules for the performance
of sacrifices). Having sacrificed a goat fit for
sacrifice on that spot, the ogres spread a
sheet daubed with ghee on the king of ogres.
Nay, adorning Ravana’s body with perfumes
and garlands the ogres accompanied by
Vibhisana, who were afflicted at heart,
covered the former with clothes of various
kinds as well as with parched grains of rice,
their faces bathed in tears. (116—119)
स ददौ पावकं तस्य विधियुक्तं विभीषण:।
स्नात्वा चैवार्द्रवस्त्रेण तिलान् दर्भविमिश्रितान्॥ १२० ॥
उदकेन च सम्मिश्रान् प्रदाय विधिपूर्वकम्।
ता: स्नियोऽनुनयामास सान्त्वयित्वा GA: TA: ULV Ui
The celebrated Vibhisana set fire to
Ravana’s body according to the scriptural
ordinance. Nay, washing himself and offering
with due ceremony in a wet cloth sesamum
seeds mixed with blades of the sacred
KuSa grass as well as with water, he
entreated the aforesaid ladies to return,
consoling them again and again. (120-121)

गम्यतामिति at: wat विविशुर्नगरं तत:।
प्रविष्टासु Ut स्त्रीषु राक्षसेन्द्रो विभीषण:।
रामपार्श्वमुपागम्य समतिष्ठदू विनीतवत्॥१२२॥

Thereupon they all re-entered the city.
Moving, when the ladies had penetrated
deep into the city, to the side of Sri Rama,
Vibhisana, the king of ogres, remained
standing in a submissive manner. (122)

रामोऽपि सह सैन्येन ससुग्रीव: सलक्ष्मण:।
ae लेभे RG हत्वा at वज्रधरो यथा॥१२३॥

Having made short work of his enemy,
Sri Rama too experienced joy with his army
as well as with Sugriva and Laksmana,
even as Indra, the wielder of the thunderbolt,
did on dispatching of the demon Vrtra. (123)
