* SUNDARAKANDA +

aa च वीर संदेहस्तिष्ठतीव ममाग्रत:।
सुमहांस्त्वत्सहायेषु हर्यक्षेषु हरीश्वर॥ II
कथं नु खलु दुष्पारं तरिष्यन्ति महोदधिम्।
तानि हर्यक्षसैन्यानि तौ वा नरवरात्मजौ॥ २५॥

“Nay, this very great doubt ever stands
before me as it were about your associate
monkeys and bears, O heroic lord of monkeys,
as to how on earth those hordes of monkeys
and bears, or, for that matter, those two princes
will actually be able to cross the vast sea,
which is so difficult to cross. (24-25)

त्रयाणामेव भूतानां सागरस्येह लङ्घने।
शक्ति: स्याद् वैनतेयस्य तव वा मारुतस्य AT २६॥

“The capacity to cross the sea in this
world exists in three created beings only,
viz., Garuda (son of Vinata), the wind-god
and yourself. (26)

तदस्मिन् कार्यनिर्योगे ditt दुरतिक्रमे।

fe पश्यसे समाधानं त्वं fe कार्यविदां az: २७॥
“What means do you perceive, O hero,

for the accomplishment of this task, which

is so very hard to get through? For, you are

the foremost of those who know how to

accomplish a task. (27)

काममस्य त्वमेवैक: कार्यस्य परिसाधने।
uate: परवीरघ्न यशस्यस्ते फलोदय:॥ २८ ॥

“Although you are definitely equal to
the accomplishment of this task of rescuing
me single-handed, O destroyer of hostile
warriors, the attainment of success in that
case will redound to your own glory rather
than to that of Sri Rama. (28)

बलै: समग्रैर्युधि at रावणं जित्य संयुगे।
विजयी स्वपुरं यायात् तत्तस्य Age भवेत्॥ २९॥
“If, on the other hand, conquering
Ravana on the battlefield with the help of all
his forces, Sri Rama returns victorious in
combat to his own capital, that indeed would
be worthy of him. (29)

Ti नयेद्यदि काकुत्स्थस्तत् तस्य AGA भवेत्॥ Bo Il

185

“If, overrunning Lanka with his forces,
Sri Rama (a scion of Kakutstha) the scourge
of hostile forces, for his part, takes me back
from Lanka, that alone would be worthy of

him. (30)
तद्यथा तस्य विक्रान्तमनुरूपं महात्मन:।
भवेदाहवशूरस्य तथा त्वमुपपादय॥ ३१॥

“Therefore, act you in such a way that
the exalted soul, valiant in combat, may
exhibit prowess worthy of him.” (31)
तदर्थोपहितं वाक्यं प्रश्रितं हेतुसंहितम्।
Porat हनुमान् शेषं वाक्यमुत्तरमब्रवीत्॥३२॥

Hearing the aforesaid utterance of Sita,
which was full of significance, polite and
logical, Hanuman made the following final
reply: (32)
देवि हर्यक्षसैन्यानामीश्वर: प्लवतां वर:।
Gia: सत्यसम्पन्नस्तवार्थे कृतनिश्चय:॥ ३३॥

“The lord of the monkey and bear
hordes and the foremost of monkeys,
Sugriva, who is richly endowed with
truthfulness, is determined to liberate you,
O godlike lady ! (33)
a वानरसहस्राणां कोटीभिरभिसंव्रत:।
क्षिप्रमेष्यति वैदेहि राक्षसानां निबर्हण:॥ ३४॥

“Surrounded by crores of monkeys, O

princess of the Videha territory, that destroyer
of ogres will make his appearance soon. (34)

तस्य विक्रमसम्पन्ना: सत्त्ववन्तो महाबला:।
मन:संकल्पसम्पाता निदेशे हरय: स्थिता:॥ ३५॥
येषां नोपरि नाधस्तान्न fren सज्जते गति: |
न च कर्मसु सीदन्ति महत्स्वमिततेजस:॥ ३६॥

“Monkeys, who are richly endowed with
valour, full of Courage and extraordinarily
mighty, nay, who can leap to any distance
according to their mental resolve, whose
course is impeded neither upwards nor
downwards nor to their right or left, who never
lose heart even in great undertakings and
are endowed with extraordinary energy, remain
standing at Sugriva’s beck and call. (35-36)
