* BALAKANDA +

एवमुक्तो भरद्वाजो वाल्मीकेन महात्मना।
प्रायच्छत मुनेस्तस्य वल्कलं नियतो गुरो:॥ ७॥
Enjoined thus by the _ high-souled
Valmiki, Bharadwaja handed over the bark
to the aforesaid sage, devoted as he was to
his teacher. (7)

स शिष्यहस्तादादाय acne नियतेन्द्रिय: |
विचचार ह पश्यंस्तत् सर्वतो विपुलं वनम्॥८॥

Taking the bark from the hand of his
pupil, the sage, who had fully controlled his
senses and as such had no inclination to
see anything delightful to the senses,
sauntered about, they say, surveying the
extensive forest on all sides. (8)

तस्याभ्याशे तु मिथुनं चरन्तमनपायिनम्।
ददर्श भगवांस्तत्र क्रौञ्चयोश्चारुनि:स्वनम्॥९॥

Close to that descent the glorious sage
actually perceived in that forest a pair of
cranes moving about, never parting from
one another and making a charming sound.

(9)
तस्मात् तु मिथुनादेकं पुमासं पापनिश्चय:।
war वैरनिलयो निषादस्तस्य पश्यत:॥१०॥

A Nisada (a member of a wild tribe
living on hunting) of sinful resolve and full of
animosity even towards innocent creatures,
struck with an arrow one of the said pair,
the male bird, even while the sage looked
on. (10)
तं शोणितपरीताङ्गं चेष्टमानं महीतले।
भार्या तु निहतं GET रुराव करुणां गिरम्॥११॥
वियुक्ता पतिना तेन द्विजेन सहचारिणा।
ताम्रशीर्षेण मत्तेन पत्तिणा सहितेन वै॥१२॥

Seeing it mortally wounded and tossing
about on the ground with its limbs smeared
all over with blood, the female bird naturally
gave out a piteous wail, parted as she was
from her mate and companion, the aforesaid
bird, that was endowed with a coppery
crest, was inflamed with passion, nay,
sexually united with her and as such had
distended its wings. (11-12)

69

तथाविधं fest get निषादेन निपातितम् ।
ऋॠषेर्धर्मात्मनस्तस्य कारुण्यं समपद्यत॥१३॥

On seeing the bird struck down by the
fowler in that state of copulation, pity was
aroused in the heart of that pious seer. (13)

Wa: करुणवेदित्वादधर्मोऽयमिति द्विज:।
निशाम्य रुदतीं क्रौञ्चीमिदं वचनमब्रवीत्॥१४॥
Further seized with compassion to
behold the shrieking female bird and
considering the fowler’s act to be sinful, the

sage addressed the following words to the
hunter : (14)

मा निषाद प्रतिष्ठां त्वमगम: शाश्वती: GAT: |
यत् क्रौञ्चमिथुनादेकमवधी: काममोहितम्॥ १५॥

“May you not have peace of mind for
endless years, O fowler, since you have
killed one of the pair of cranes infatuated
with passion.” (15)

तस्येत्थं ब्रुवतश्चिन्ता aya हृदि वीक्षत:।
शोकार्तेनास्य शकुने: किमिदं cared मया॥ Ve Il
Even as he spoke in this strain, and
then reflected: “What is it that has been
uttered by me, tormented as | was with grief
for this bird”, uneasiness appeared in his
heart. (16)

चिन्तयन् स महाप्राज्ञश्चकार मतिमान् मतिम्।
fra चैवाब्रवीद् वाक्यमिदं स मुनिपुङ्खव: ॥ १७॥
Brooding awhile, the sage, who was
highly learned and full of wisdom, made up
his mind and the said chief of the sages
addressed the following words to his pupil,
Bharadwaja : (17)

पादबद्भधोऽक्षरसमस्तन्त्रीलयसमन्वित: ।
शोकार्तस्य Waa A शलोको भवतु नान्यथा॥ १८ ॥

“Let this utterance made by me while |
was stricken with grief, nay, set in four
metrical feet, each containing an equal
number of letters (viz., eight) and possessing
the rhythm of a song that can be sung to a
lute, be accepted as real poetry and not
otherwise.” (18)
