912

इति gar दृढसत्यविक्रमो

महायशा दाशरथि: प्रतापवान्।
अवेक्ष्य सौमित्रिमुदग्रविक्रम:

Rent तदा स्वां मतिमात्मनाकरोत्॥ ७५१ ॥

Looking at Laksmana (son of Sumitra),

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

who looked miserable, while speaking, as
aforesaid, the highly illustrious and glorious
Sri Rama (son of Dagaratha) who was
possessed of unflinching and _ unfailing
prowess and exalted valour, presently
collected his mind by himself. (51)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्येऽरण्यकाण्डे एकोनसप्ततितम: सर्ग: ॥ ६९ ॥

Thus ends Canto Sixty-nine in the Aranyakanda of the glorious Ramayana of Valmiki,
the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

सप्ततितम: सर्ग:
Canto LXX

After deliberation with each other, Sri Rama and Laksmana sever the
arms of Kabandha, who extends his welcome to them

तौ तु तत्र स्थितौ दृष्टवा भ्रातरौ रामलक्ष्मणौ।
बाहुपाशपरिक्षिप्तौ कबन्धो वाक्यमब्रवीत्॥१॥

Seeing the aforesaid two brothers, Sri
Rama and Laksmana, standing there
encircled by the cord of his arms, Kabandha
for his part spoke as follows : (1)

तिष्ठत: किं नु मां दृष्टवा क्षुधार्तं क्षत्रियर्षभौ।
आहारार्थं तु संदिष्टौ cat हतचेतनौ॥ २॥

“With your wits come to an end,
destined as you are by fate to serve as my
food, why, | wonder, do you for your part
stand motionless even on seeing me,
oppressed with hunger, O jewels among
Ksatriyas?” (2)
तच्छुत्वा लक्ष्मणो वाक्यं प्राप्तकालं हितं तदा।
उवाचार्तिसमापन्नो विक्रमे कृतनिश्चय:॥ ३॥

Hearing the aforesaid question,
Laksmana, who was stricken with agony
and had made up his mind to fall upon his
prowess, presently tendered the following
opportune and friendly advice to Sri Rama:

(3)
wat च मां च पुरा तूर्णमादत्ते राक्षसाधम:।
तस्मादसिभ्यामस्याशु बाहू छिन्दावहे गुरू॥४॥

“This vile ogre promptly caught hold of
us at the very outset without any provocation
from us, hence let us quickly cut off his
vast arms with our swords. (4)
भीषणोऽयं महाकायो राक्षसा भुजविक्रम:।
लोकं ह्यतिजितं कृत्वा ह्यावां हन्तुमिहेच्छति॥ ५॥

“This gigantic ogre, whose prowess,
inasmuch as he is unarmed, resides in his
arms alone, is frightful. Indeed, having
thoroughly conquered the people, he actually
seeks to make short work of us. (5)

निश्चेष्टानां वधो राजन् कुत्सितो जगतीपते:।
क्रतुमध्योपनीतानां पशूनामिव राघव॥६॥

“Like the slaughter of animals brought
in the course of a sacrificial performance,
killing those, who, being unarmed, are
defenceless, is reproachful for a ruler of the
earth, O royal scion of Raghu !” (6)

एतत् संजल्पितं श्रुत्वा तयो: क्रुद्धस्तु राक्षस:।
विदार्यास्यं ततो रौद्रं तौ भक्षयितुमारभत्॥७॥
Enraged to hear this talk of the two
princes and opening his fearful mouth wide,
the ogre for his part now proceeded to
devour them. (7)
