* ARANYAKANDA «

| seek the protection of all the animals of
different species, the herds of deer and the
flocks of birds, which actually dwell in this
forest, and pray : “Kindly tell my husband of
his beloved spouse, more valuable to him than
his very life, being borne away, and add the
following : Your Sita has been carried away
by Ravana, helpless as she was. (33-34)

विदित्वा तु महाबाहुरमुत्रापि महाबल:।
आनेष्यति पराक्रम्य वैवस्वतहृतामपि॥ ३५॥

“Taking recourse to his prowess on
coming to know of my presence even in
the other world, the mighty-armed prince,
possessed as he is of great strength, will
recover me even though carried away by
Yama (son of the sun-god).” (35)

सा dat करुणा वाचो विलपन्ती सुदु:ख्रिता।
वनस्पतिगतं et ददर्शायतलोचना॥३६॥
Uttering loud laments as aforesaid, sore
distressed as she was, the large-eyed Sita
presently caught sight of the vulture, Jatayu,
perched on a tree. (36)
सा तमुद्बीक्ष्य सुश्रोणी रावणस्य वशंगता।
Wed भयपरा दु:खोपहतया गिरा॥ ३७॥

849

Perceiving him, Sita of comely limbs,
who had given way to fear, fallen as she
was into the clutches of Ravana, cried loudly
in a voice choked with agony : (37)

wert पश्य मामार्य ह्रियमाणामनाथवत्।
अनेन राक्षसेन्द्रेणाकरुणं पापकर्मणा॥ ३८॥

“Look at me being ruthlessly borne
away, like a woman bereft of her protector,
by this Ravana, king of ogres, of sinful
deeds, O noble Jatayu! (38)
नैष वारयितुं शक्यस्त्वया क्रूरो निशाचर:।
सत्ववाञ्जितकाशी च सायुधश्चैव दुर्मति:।॥ ३९॥

“This cruel prowler of the night is
incapable of being stopped by you, mighty

and proud of his victory, armed with weapons
and evil-minded too as he is. (39)
waa q यथातत्त्वं जटायो Rt मम।
लक्ष्मणाय च तत् सर्वमाख्यातव्यमशेषत:॥४०॥
“In any case, O Jatayu, my abduction
as well as all that is worth relating in that
connection must be correctly reported by
you to Sri Rama and Laksmana in full.”
(40)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्येऽरण्यकाण्डे एकोनपञ्चाश: सर्ग: ॥ ४९ ॥

Thus ends Canto Forty-nine in the Aranyakanda of the glorious Ramayana of Valmiki,
the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

पञ्चाश: सर्ग:
Canto L

Jatayu tries to deter Ravana from his evil design and eventually
challenges him to a duel

तं शब्दमवसुप्तस्तु जटायुरथ शुश्रुवे।
निरैक्षद् रावणं क्षिप्रं वैदेहीं च cast स:॥१॥
Jatayu, for his part, who was lying fast
asleep at that time, presently heard that
call. He forthwith perceived Ravana and
also saw Sita, च princess of the Videha
territory. (1)

ad: पर्वतशरृङ्गाभस्तीक्ष्णतुण्ड: खगोत्तम:।
वनस्पतिगत: श्रीमान् व्याजहार शुभां Pre २॥
Continuing on the tree, the glorious
Jatayu, the foremost of birds, who looked
like a mountain-peak and had a sharp
bill, thereupon addressed the following
wholesome words to Ravana : (2)
