348

Sumantra, issued forth once more with great
delight from the lovely gynaeceum, which
appeared like a pool in the sea as compared
to the whole city, of which it formed only a
small part. Coming out, he saw the main
entrance crowded with men on the front
side. (65—68)
wa: पुरस्तात् सहसा विनि:सृतो

महीपतेर्द्रगतान् विलोकयन्।

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

cat पौरान् विविधान् महाधना-
नुपस्थितान् द्वारमुपेत्य विष्ठितान्॥६९॥

Fully emerged out of the gynaeceum
all of a sudden and taking note of the
Officials stationed at the gate, Sumantra
saw citizens of various classes collected
close to the door and present with abundant
riches brought by way of offerings. (69)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्येऽयोध्याकाण्डे Aes: AT: ॥ १४॥

Thus ends Canto Fourteen in the Ayodhyakanda of the glorious Ramayana of Valmiki,
the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic

Canto XV

While going out of the gynaeceum to bring Sri Rama, Sumantra sees Vasistha
and others as well as a number of kings waiting at the gate and hastens
back to announce their presence to the king. He is, however, sent back

to fetch Sri Rama and forthwith enters the latter's apartments

a तु at रजनीमुष्य ब्राह्मणा वेदपारगा:।
उपतस्थुरुपस्थानं सह राजपुरोहिता:॥१॥
Having spent the aforesaid night
presumably at the hermitage of Vasistha,
the Brahmanas that had mastered the Vedas
and had been invited to officiate at the
installation ceremony stood at the gate of
the royal palace alongwith the king’s family
priests—Vasistha, Vamadeva and others.
(1)
अमात्या बलमुख्याश्च मुख्या ये निगमस्य च।
राघवस्याभिषेकार्थे प्रीयमाणा: सुसंगता:॥ २॥

Full of delight, the ministers as well as
the commanders of the army as also those
who happened to be the foremost among the
mercantile community also gathered together
in a systematic manner for the installation of
Sri Rama, a scion of Raghu. (2)

Stet विमले सूर्ये qa चाभ्यागतेऽहनि।
लग्ने whe प्राप्ते जन्म रामस्य च स्थिते॥ ३॥

अभिषेकाय रामस्य द्विजेन्द्रैरुपकल्पितम्।
काञ्चना जलकुम्भाश्च भद्रपीठं स्वलंकृतम्॥४॥
रथश्च सम्यगास्तीर्णो भास्वता व्याघ्रचर्मणा।
गङ्गायमुनयो: Yad संगमादाहतं जलम्॥५॥
A clear sun having risen and the
asterism named Pusya having appeared with
the moon in the daytime and the sun having
entered the zodiacal sign named Cancer (the
fourth sign of the zodiac), a phenomenon
which had appeared at the time of SriRama’s
birth as well, everything required for the
installation of Sri Rama as Prince Regent
was got ready by the foremost of Brahmanas.
Gold pitchers full of water and an auspicious
wooden seat duly adorned, also a chariot
completely upholstered with a_ brilliant
tigerskin and water brought from the sacred
confluence of the holy Ganga and Yamuna
were kept ready. (83—5)

याश्चान्या: सरित: पुण्या Fal: PAT: सरांसि च।
प्राग्वहाश्चोर्ध्ववाहाश्च तिर्यग्वाहाश्च क्षीरिण:॥६॥
