# YUDDHAKANDA +

अद्य Get wet ays परिशोषये।
क्षमया fe समायुक्तं मामयं मकरालय:॥ Roll
असमर्थं विजानाति free क्षमामीदरृशे जने।
न दर्शयति साम्ना मे सागरो रूपमात्मन:॥ २१॥

“Oh the vanity of Ocean, who does not
reveal himself in person (before me)! Indeed
calmness (forbearance) and forgiveness,
also guilelessness and politeness of
speech—these virtues of the noble are mis-
construed as weakness, when directed
towards those bereft of these virutes. The
world treats with respect a man who indulges
in self-praise, is vile and impudent, runs
about advertising himself and uses the rod
of punishment everywhere indiscriminately.
Neither fame nor popularity nor victory in
the forefront of battle can be won in this
world through a policy of conciliation, O
Laksmana! See today the deep (lit., the
abode of alligators) with its water screened
on all sides by alligators split asunder by
my arrows and floating dead, O son of
Sumitra! Also see with your own eyes, O
Laksmana, the coils of aquatic serpents,
the large bodies of alligators as well as the
trunks of sea elephants dwelling here divided
into parts by me. By waging a formidable
war against the deity presiding over it today
| shall dry up the sea with its conches and
pearl-shells, fishes and alligators. This Ocean
(lit., an abode of alligators) accounts me
powerless, endowed as | am_ with
forbearance. Out with forbearance shown
to such an individual! Due to my mildness
the sea does not reveal its personal form
before me. (14—21)

चापमानय सौमित्रे शरांश्चाशीविषोपमान्।
समुद्रं शोषयिष्यामि पद्भ्यां यान्तु प्लवंगमा:।॥ २२॥
“Therefore, bring me the bow and arrows
resembling venomous snake, O son of
Sumitra! | shall presently dry up the sea. Let
the monkeys proceed on foot to Lanka. (22)

363

अद्याक्षोभ्यमपि क्रुद्ध: क्षोभयिष्यामि सागरम्।
are कृतमर्यादं सहस्रोर्मिसमाकुलम्॥२३॥

“Provoked to anger | shall set into
commotion the imperturbable sea, which
though riotous with thousands of waves,
has its limits fixed in the form of its shores.

(23)
निर्मर्यादं करिष्यामि सायकैर्वरुणालयम्।
Tete क्षोभयिष्ये महादानवसंकुलम्॥ VV Il

“| shall cause by my arrows the sea
(lit., the abode of Varuna, the god of water)
overstep its bounds and shall set into
commotion the ocean, which is overcrowded
with mighty demons.” (24)

एवमुक्त्वा धनुष्पाणि: क्रोधविस्फारितेक्षण:।
aya रामो दुर्धर्षो युगान्ताग्निरिव ज्वलन्॥ २५॥

Blazing like fire at the end of the world
cycle on having spoken thus, his eyes
dilated through anger, Sri Rama, who held a
bow in has hand, assumed the aspect of
one who is hard to overcome. (25)

waiter च धनुर्घोरं कम्पयित्वा शरैर्जगत्।
मुमोच विशिखानुग्रान् वज्रानिव शतक्रतु:॥ २६॥

Forcibly bending his fearful bow (at
one end), nay, gently stringing it and causing
the world to tremble with its twang, he
discharged fierce arrows as Indra (who is
supposed to have performed a hundred
horse-sacrifices as a condition precedent to
his attaining that position) would hurl
thunderbolts. (26)

ते ज्वलन्तो महावेगास्तेजसा सायकोत्तमा:।
प्रविशन्ति समुद्रस्य जलं वित्रस्तपन्नगम्॥ २७॥

Flaming with lustre his excellent arrows,
full of great impetuosity, penetrated deep
into the sea-water, striking the serpents
with terror. (27)

dram: समुद्रस्य समीनमकरो महान्।
a बअभूव Ta: समारुतरवस्तथा॥ २८॥
That great onrush of the sea-water
