# YUDDHAKANDA #

Reaching this conclusion, the king of
monkeys tore off with his sharp nails all of
a sudden the lower end of the ears of
Kumbhakarna, the enemy of the ruler of
gods, nay, bit off the latter's nose with his
teeth and split open his sides with the nails

of his toes. (86)
स कुम्भकर्णो हतकर्णनासो

विदारितस्तेन रदैर्नखैश्च।
रोषाभिभूत: क्षतजार्द्रगात्र

सुग्रीवमाविध्य पिपेष | WAT ।। ८७॥

Overwelmed with anger when deprived
of a part of his ears and nose by Sugriva
and split open in the sides with the latter’s
teeth and nails, his limbs bespattered with
blood, nay, spinning Sugriva down, the
notorious Kumbhakarna pounded him with
ferocity against the ground. (87)

a भूतले भीमबलाभिपिष्ट:
सुरारिभिस्तैरभिहन्यमान: ।
ख कन्दुकवज्जवेन

पुनश्च रामेण समाजगाम॥ ८८॥

Rubbed against the earth’s surface by
Kumbhakarna, who was endowed with terrific
might, and while being struck by those
enemies of gods (who stood by his side),
Sugriva bounced in the air like a ball and
got re-united with all speed with Sri Rama.

(88)

कर्णनासाविहीनस्तु कुम्भकर्णो महाबल:।
रराज शोणितोत्सिक्तो गिरि: प्रस्रवणैरिव॥ ८९॥

Deprived of the lower ends of his ears
and nose and bathed in blood, Kumbhakarna
for his part, who was endowed with
extraordinary might, shone like a mountain
with springs. (89)

viforerst महाकायो राक्षसो भीमदर्शन:।
युद्धायाभिमुखो भूयो मनश्चक्रे निशाचर:॥९०॥

Drenched in blood, the colossal and
terrible-looking ogre, a ranger of the night,

जगाम

563

made up his mind once more to fight with
his face turned towards the enemy. (90)

अमर्षाच्छोणितोद्गारी शुशुभे रावणानुज:।
नीलाञ्जनचयप्रख्य: ससंध्य sa तोयद:॥९१॥
Vomiting blood in __ indignation,
Kumbhakarna (a younger brother of Ravana)
who resembled a mass of collyrium, shone
like an evening cloud with च reddish
tinge. (91)

गते च तस्मिन् सुरराजशत्रु:
क्रोधात् प्रदुद्राव रणाय भूय:।
अनायुधोऽस्मीति विचिन्त्य रौद्रो
at तदा मुद्गरमाससाद॥ ९२॥
Nay, Sugriva having escaped,
Kumbhakarna (an enemy of the ruler of
gods) furiously rushed for an encounter
once more. Reflecting within himself that ‘I
am weaponless’. the ferocious ogre then
seized hold of a formidable mallet. (92)
ad: स Yat: सहसा महौजा
निष्क्रम्य a वानरसैन्यमुग्रम्।
बभक्ष रक्षो युधि कुम्भकर्ण:
प्रजा युगान्ताग्निरिव प्रवृद्ध:॥९३॥
Issuing all of a sudden from the city,
the aforesaid ogre, Kumbhakarna, who was
endowed with extraordinary vigour, then
began to consume the redoubtable army of
monkeys on the battlefied even as the fire
swollen at the end of the world-cycle would
consume created beings. (93)

बुभुक्षित: शोणितमांसगृध्नु:
West तद् वानरसैन्यमुग्रम्
ware रक्षांसि at पिशाचा-
aig मोहाद् युधि कुम्भकर्ण:।
यथैव मृत्युर्हरते युगान्ते
a भक्षयामास हरींश्च Teresi
Penetrating deep into that formidable
army of monkeys, Kumbhakarna, who,
being famished, was covetous of flesh and
