198

reason Aditi’s sons became known as Suras
(those who take wine). The gods felt thrilled
and overjoyed due to their acceptance of
Varuni. (38)
उच्चै:श्रवा TANS मणिरत्नं च कौस्तुभम्।

उदतिष्ठन्नरश्रेष्ठ तथैवामृतमुत्तमम्॥ ३९॥

“Next emerged, O jewel among men,
Uccaihsrava, the foremost of all horses;
Kaustubha, the most valuable of all gems,
and, even, so nectar, the excellent drink. (39)

अथ तस्य Ha WA महानासीत् कुलक्षय:।
अदितेस्तु dd: पुत्रा दितिपुत्रानयोधयन्॥४०॥

“Now over nectar there ensued a
colossal destruction of the two races, gods
and demons. On that occasion the sons of
Aditi actually fought with the sons of Diti. (40)

एकतामगमन् wd असुरा wad: सह।
युद्धमासीन्महाघोरं वीर त्रैलोक्यमोहनम्॥४१॥

“All demons got united with ogres. The
result was a most deadly conflict, that
bewildered all the three worlds (heaven,
earth and the space intervening them), O
valiant Rama! (41)
अमृतं सोऽहरत् तूर्णं मायामास्थाय मोहिनीम्॥ wR

« VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

“When the whole host of the gods and
the demons approached destruction, the
exceptionally mighty Lord Visnu then hastily
carried away the nectar, exhibiting His
deluding potency in the form of a charming
damsel. (42)

a गताभिमुखं विष्णुमक्षरं पुरुषोत्तमम्।

सम्पिष्टास्ते तदा युद्धे विष्णुना प्रभविष्णुना॥ ४३॥
“Those who opposed the immortal Lord

Visnu, the Supreme Person, on that occasion

were completely crushed in an encounter
by the almighty Visnu. (43)

अदितेरात्मजा वीरा fed: gar निजघ्निरे।
afer घोरे महायुद्धे दैतेयादित्ययोर्भृशम्॥४४॥

“In this terrible major conflict between
the sons of Diti and those of Aditi the heroic
sons of Aditi completely destroyed the sons
of Diti. (44)
शशास मुदितो लोकान् सर्षिसंघान् सचारणान्॥ ४५ ॥

“Having destroyed the sons of Diti and
attained sovereignty, Indra (the destroyer
of strongholds) felt delighted and ruled the

three worlds including the hosts of Rsis and
the Caranas, celestial bards.” (45)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये बालकाण्डे
पञ्चचत्वारिंश: सर्ग: ॥ ४५ ॥
Thus ends Canto Forty-five in the Balakanda of the glorious Ramayana of Valmiki,
the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

