78

characterized by the nine sentiments of
love, pathos, mirth, wrath, terror and heroism
etc., including disgust, wonder and serenity.

(8-9)

तौ तु गान्धर्वतत्त्वज्ञौ स्थानमूर्च्छनकोविदौ।
भ्रातरौ स्वरसम्पन्नौ गन्धर्वाविव रूपिणौ॥१०॥

The two brothers were really masters of
music, possessed knowledge of the threefold
source of the modulations of the voice, viz.,the
lungs, the throat and the cerebrum, and also
knew how to play upon the lute etc., had a
sweet voice like the Gandharvas, celestial
musicians, and were handsome too like them
(i.e., Gandharvas). (10)

स्पलक्षणसम्पन्नौमधुरस्वरभाषिणौ
बिम्पादिबोत्थितौबिज्जौर।'मदेहान्तथापरौ।।११।।

Endowed with physical charm and
auspicious marks on their body, they spoke
in a sweet strain and, like two images made
from the original, they looked like two other
Ramas sprung from the loins of Sri Rama.

(11)
तौ राजपुत्रौ कात्सर्न्यन धर्म्यमाख्यानमुत्तमम्।
वाचोविधेयं तत् aa कृत्वा काव्यमनिन्दितौ tl १२॥
Tato च द्विजातीनां साधूनां च समागमे।
यथोपदेशं तत्त्वज्ञौ जगतु: सुसमाहितौ॥१३॥

Having committed to memory the whole
of that exquisite and historical poem, the
Ramayana, which was entirely devoted to
virtue, the two irreproachable princes, who
knew the real purport of the Vedas and
other scriptures, chanted it even as they
had been instructed, with their mind fully
concentrated, in a concourse of seers,
members of the twice-born classes and
other pious men. (12-13)

महात्मानौ महाभागौ सर्वलक्षणलक्षितौ।
at कदाचित् समेतानामृषीणां भावितात्मनाम्॥ १४॥
मध्येसभं समीपस्थाविदं काव्यमगायताम्।
तच्छुत्वा मुनय: सर्वे बाष्पपर्याकुलेक्षणा:॥१५॥
साधुसाध्वितितान्नून्रु Ut विस्मयमागता:।
a प्रीतमनस: सर्वे मुनयो धर्मवत्सला:॥१६॥

« VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

प्रशशंसु: प्रशस्तव्यौ गायमानौ कुशीलवौ।
अहो गीतस्य माधुर्यं श्लोकानां च विशेषत:॥ १७॥

On a certain day the two boys, who
were exceptionally talented, highly blessed
and equipped with all good qualities, chanted
the poem in open assembly standing by the
side of the assembled seers of purified mind.
Seized with great wonder to hear it, the
sages universally applauded them, saying
“Well done ! Excellent !!”, their eyes bedimmed
with tears. Delighted in mind, the sages, who
were all virtue-loving, extolled in the following
words both the singers, KuSa and Lava, who
deserved all praise: “Wonderful is the
melody of music, and particularly the recitation
of the verses ! (14—17)

Retard प्रत्यक्षमिव दर्शितम्।
प्रविश्य तावुभौ सुष्ठु तथाभावमगायताम्॥१८॥
एवं प्रशस्यमानौ तौ तप:श्लाघ्यैर्महर्षिभि:।॥ ee i
संरक्ततरमत्यर्थं मधुरे तावगायताम्।
प्रीत: कश्चिन्मुनिस्ताभ्यां संस्थित: कलशं ददौ ।। २० ॥

“Though the events took place long
ago, the picture has been vividly placed
before the eye as though it belonged to the
present. Having entered into the spirit of the
poem, the two princes chanted it with one
voice exquisitely, in a sweet loving tone and
with all the richness of music!” Being
applauded thus by eminent seers, deserving
of praise for their asceticism, the two boys
sang all the more sweetly and with deeper
emotion. Pleased with them and getting up
as a mark of admiration, a certain sage
presented to them a pitcher. (18—20)

Weal वल्कलं कश्चिद् ददौ ताभ्यां महायशा:।
अन्य: कृष्णाजिनमदाद् यज्ञसूत्रं तथापर:॥ २१॥

Full of delight, a certain sage, who had
earned great fame for his proficiency in the
science of music, gave them the bark of a
tree for being used as loin-cloth. Another
gave them the skin of a black deer and still
another a sacred thread for being worn
baldric wise. (21)
