522

तस्मिन् प्रभग्ने त्रिदशेन्द्रशत्रौ
सुरासुरा भूतगणा दिशश्च।
तथैव भूम्यम्बुचरा: प्रहृष्टा:॥ १४६॥

On that enemy of Indra (the ruler of

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA +

gods) having been routed, the gods as well
as the guardians of the four quarters including
the seas, the Rsis (seers of Vedic Mantras)
and large serpents and, even so, the
creatures of land and water felt highly
rejoiced. (146)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये FERS एकोनषष्टितम: सर्ग: ॥ ५९ ॥

Thus ends Canto Fifty-nine in the Yuddhakanda of the glorious Ramayana of
Valmiki, the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

षष्टितम: सर्ग:
Canto LX

The slumbering Kumbhakarna is roused by the ogres under orders
of their king, who felt disconsolate at his own defeat, and the
monkeys get alarmed to see the former

a प्रविश्य gt लङ्कां रामबाणभयार्दित:।
भग्नदर्पस्तदा राजा बभूव व्यथितेन्द्रिय:॥ १॥

Entering the city of Lanka stricken with
the fear of Sri Rama’s arrows, the king, who
had his vanity crushed, felt troubled in mind.

(1)
मातंग ga feet Testa पन्नग:।
अभिभूतोऽभवद् राजा राघवेण महात्मना॥२॥

Ravana, the king was overcome by
the high-souled Sri Rama (a scion of Raghu)
as an elephant is by a lion and a serpent by
Garuda, the king of birds. (2)
ब्रह्मदण्डप्रतीकानां विद्युच्चलितवर्चसाम्।
स्मरन् राघवबाणानां विव्यथे राक्षसेश्वर:।॥। ३॥

The king of ogres felt disquieted while
recalling the arrows of Sri Rama (a scion of
Raghu), which resembled Brahmadanda
(a fiery comet appearing at the time of
universal dissolution) and emitted an
unsteady light like lightning. (3)

a काञ्चनमयं दिव्यमाश्रित्य परमासनम्।
विप्रेक्षमाणो रक्षांसि रावणो वाक्यमब्रवीत्॥४॥

Having taken his seat on his magnificent
and excellent throne of gold and letting his
gaze wander over the ogres, Ravana spoke
as follows: (4)
Wa तत् खलु मे मोघं यत् aa परमं तप:।
यत् समानो महेन्द्रेण मानुषेण विनिर्जित:॥५॥

“All that asceticism of the supreme
type, which was practised by me, has
undoubtedly proved infructuous in that I, the
equal of the mighty Indra (the ruler of gods)
have been utterly defeated by a mere mortal.

(5)
मानुषेभ्यो विजानीहि wa त्वमिति तत्तथा॥६॥

“That terrible warning of Brahma in the
words: ‘Know you for certain of danger from
humans!’ has now flashed upon me. It is
coming true. (6)

देवदानवगन्धर्वैर्यक्षराक्षसपन्नगै:
अबध्यत्वमयाप्रोक्तमानुषेभ्योनयाचित्तम्॥७॥

“Immunity from death at the hands
of gods, demons, Gandharvas (celestial
