* BALAKANDA +

replied that jewel among the Brahmanas to
the king, “so that four such sons will be
born to you as will propagate your race.”(59)
स तस्य वाक्यं मधुरं निशम्य प्रणम्य तस्मै प्रयतो नृपेन्द्र: ।

जगाम BS परमं महात्मा तमृष्यशृङ्गं पुनरप्युवाच ।। ६० I

111

That high-souled and piously-disposed
Emperor experienced great joy to hear his
sweet assurance and bowing low to him,
reiterated his prayer to the celebrated
Rsyasrnga. (60)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये बालकाण्डे चतुर्दश: AW: ॥ १४॥

Thus ends Canto Fourteen in the Balakanda of the glorious Ramayana of Valmiki,
the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

पञ्चदश: सर्ग:
Canto XV

Rsyasrnga conducts a sacrifice for securing the birth of sons to Dasaratha;
the gods approach Brahma in that very sacrifice with a prayer for
bringing about the death of Ravana; Brahma implores Lord
Visnu (also present there) to descend in the house of
Dasaratha and do away with Ravana and the
Lord undertakes to kill Ravana

मेधावी q ततो ध्यात्वा स किंचिदिदमुत्तरम्।
लब्धसंज्ञस्ततस्तं तु वेदज्ञो नृपमब्रवीत्॥१॥

Having deeply pondered a little then as
to what should be done next and presently
becoming conscious of his surrounding, the
highly intelligent Rsyasrnga, well-versed in
the Vedas, spoke to King DaSaratha as
follows : (1)
इष्टिं asé करिष्यामि पुत्रीयां पुत्रकारणात्।
अथर्वशिरसि प्रोक्तैर्मन्रै:; सिद्धां विधानत:॥ २॥

“For the sake of securing sons to you
| shall duly perform a sacrifice capable of
procuring a male progeny and well-known
for its unfailing effect with the help of Mantras
(sacred texts) taught in the Atharva-Veda.”

(2)
तत: प्राक्रमदिष्टि at पुत्रीयां पुत्रकारणात्।
जुहावाग्नौ च तेजस्वी मन्त्रदृष्टेन कर्मणा॥ ३॥

For securing the birth of four sons to
DaSaratha, the glorious Rsyasrnga forthwith
commenced the said sacrifice capable of

procuring a male progeny, and poured
oblations into the sacred fire according to
the procedure shown in the sacred texts.

(3)
adt cat: सगन्धर्वा: सिद्धाश्च परमर्षय:।
भागप्रतिग्रहार्थं a समवेता यथाविधि॥४॥

The various gods, including Brahma,
accompanied by Gandharvas (celestial
musicians), Siddhas (a class of semi-divine
beings naturally endowed with mystic powers),
and the greatest of seers assembled there
to accept in person their share of offerings
according to the established procedure. (4)

ता: समेत्य यथान्यायं तस्मिन् सदसि cad:
अब्रुवल्लोककर्तारं ब्रह्माणं वचनं तत:॥५॥

Approaching Brahma, the maker of
the universe, in that very assembly,
congregated for the sacrifice, according to
their respective rank (of course unperceived
by mortal men), the aforesaid divinities
presently addressed the following prayer to
him : (5)
