208

produced by the creator with great effort
and looked like a product of magic, who
looked like a blazing flame wrapped all over
in smoke or like the halo of the full moon
obscured by a veneer of snow and screened
by a cloud or again like a dazzling bright
circle of light round the sun appearing in the
midst of water existing in clouds. (12—15)

सा fe गौतमवाक्येन दुर्निरीक्ष्या aya ह।
त्रयाणामपि लोकानां aad रामस्य दर्शनम्।
शापस्यान्तमुपागम्य तेषां दर्शनमागता॥१६॥
Under the curse of Gautama, really
speaking, she had grown imperceptible to
all the three worlds, pending her sight of Sri
Rama; so it is said. Having reached the end
of the curse she had now come within the
range of their sight. (16)

राघवौ तु तदा तस्या: पादौ जगृहतुर्मुदा।
स्मरन्ती गौतमवच: प्रतिजग्राह सा हि तौ॥ १७॥

Sri Rama and Laksmana, the two scions
of Raghu, for their part clasped her feet with
joy on that occasion; while she in her turn
welcomed both, recalling, as she did, the
prophesy of Gautama. (17)

पाद्यमर्घ्य तथाऽऽतिथ्यं चकार सुसमाहिता।
प्रतिजग्राह काकुत्स्थो विधिदरृष्टेन कर्मणा॥ ec tl

Fully composed in mind she offered to
them, with due ceremony as enjoined by the
scriptural ordinance, water to wash their feet
and hands with as well as other hospitality
and Sri Rama gladly accepted them. (18)

« VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

पुष्पवृष्टिर्महत्यासीद् देवदुन्दुभिनि:स्वनै:।
गन्धर्वाप्सरसां wa महानासीत् समुत्सव:॥१९॥

There was an abundant shower of
flowers, from the heavens, accompanied by
the beating of kettledrums by gods. And
there followed a great rejoicing among
Gandharvas and celestial nymphs. (19)

साधु साध्विति देवास्तामहल्यां समपूजयन्।
तपोबलविशुद्धाङ्गीं गौतमस्य वशानुगाम्॥२०॥

“The gods heartily applauded the
aforesaid Ahalya—who had been perfectly
purified of body by dint of her austerities
and now followed the will of Gautama—in
the words “Good! Excellent !!” (20)

गौतमोऽपि महातेजा अहल्यासहित: सुखी।
रामं सम्पूज्य विधिवत् तपस्तेषे महातपा:॥ २१॥
“The exceptionally glorious Gautama
too (who had evidently returned to his
hermitage on being foretold of the advent of
Sri Rama) felt happy in the company of
Ahalya; nay, having duly worshipped Sri
Rama according to the scriptural ordinance,
the great ascetic resumed his austerities.
(21)

रामोऽपि परमां पूजां गौतमस्य महामुने:।
सकाशाद्विधिवत् प्राप्य जगाम मिथिलां तत: ॥ २२ ॥
Having duly received the highest honour
at the hands of the eminent sage Gautama,

Sri Rama too proceeded from that hermitage
to Mithila. (22)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये बालकाण्डे
एकोनपञ्चाश: सर्ग: il ४९ il

Thus ends Canto Forty-nine in the Balakanda of the glorious Ramayana of Valmiki,
the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

