* AYODHYAKANDA +

after coming together; for inevitable is their
separation. (26-27)

नात्र कश्चिद् यथाभावं प्राणी समतिवर्तते।
तेन तस्मिन् न सामर्थ्य प्रेतस्यास्त्यनुशोचत:॥ २८॥

“No living being in this world can escape
its destiny in the shape of birth and death
when the time comes for it. Hence the
power to avert his own death does not
inhere in a man, even though mourning
again and again for a dead person. (28)

यथा fe सार्थं गच्छन्तं ब्रूयात् कश्चित् पथि स्थित: |
अहमप्यागमिष्यामि पृष्ठतो भवतामिति॥ २९॥
तमापन्न: कथं शोचेद् यस्य नास्ति व्यतिक्रम: ।। Bo ॥

“How can he who has got on the
inevitable path trodden by his forbears, viz.,
his father, grandfather and so on, and from
which there is no escape—even as one
standing on the roadside would cry to a
group of travellers passing by, ‘I shall also
follow at your heels (and would forthwith
follow them), mourn for his parents and
other departed relations? (29-30)
aaa: पतमानस्य स्रोतसो वानिवर्तिन:।
आत्मा सुखे नियोक्तव्य: सुखभाज: प्रजा: स्मृता:।। ३१॥

“Foreseeing the inevitable end of one’s
ebbing life, which does not return any more
than a stream, one’s own self should be
employed in a pursuit leading to blessedness;
for living beings are declared as pursuing
happiness. (31)

धर्मात्मा सुशुभै: Hea: क्रतुभिश्चाप्तदक्षिणै:।
धूतपापो गत: स्वर्गं पिता न: पृथिवीपति: । ३२॥
“Our father, the king, the lord of the
earth, was a virtuous person. He performed
almost all extremely auspicious sacrifices
and paid plentiful sacrificial fees to the
officiating priests and Brahmins. All his sins
were washed away and so he went to the
heaven. (32)

अर्थादानाच्च धर्मेण पिता afeafed गत:॥ ३३॥

667

“On account of properly maintaining
the servants, protecting and guarding the
subjects and realising taxes in the manner
prescribed by scriptures from them, our
father has gone to the heaven. (33)
कर्मभिस्तु शुभैरिष्टै: क्रतुभिश्चाप्तदक्षिणै:।
स्वर्गं दशरथ: wre: पिता a: पृथिवीपति: ।। ३४॥

“Our father, Dasaratha, the lord of the
earth, has reached heaven on account of
his performing all auspicious acts desirable,
and performing many sacrifices involving
heavy sacrificial fees. (34)

Bel बहुविधैर्यज्ञैर्भोगांश्चावाप्य पुष्कलान्।
उत्तमं चायुरासाद्य स्वर्गत: पृथिवीपति:।। ३५॥

“Having propitiated the Yajhapurusa by
performing different types of sacrifices,
enjoying worldly pleasures in plenty and
having lived a long and virtuous life, the lord
of the earth has gone to the heaven. (35)

आयुरुत्तममासाद्य भोगानपि च राघव:।

न स शोच्य: पिता तात स्वर्गत: सत्कृत: सताम्॥ BE ॥
“Having obtained a long life and worldly

luxuries, the father, from the Raghu dynasty,

has gone to the heaven coveted and honoured

by the virtuous people, O dear ! He is not at

all to be lamented upon. (36)

a जीर्णमानुषं देहं परित्यज्य frat fe न:।
दैवीमृद्धिमनुप्राप्तो ब्रह्मलोकविहारिणीम्॥ ३७॥

“Having shed his worn-out human frame,
our father has surely attained celestial wealth
in the form of an ethereal body etc., which
enables him to sport even in the realm of
Brahma (the highest heaven). (37)

तं तु नैवंविध: कश्चित् wa: शोचितुमर्हसि।
त्वद्बिधो मद्बिधश्चापि श्रुतवान् बुद्धिमत्तर:। ३८॥
“No highly wise, learned and
exceptionally clever man, such as you and
| are, ought to grieve for the emperor. (38)

Ud बहुविधा: शोका विलापरुदिते तदा।
वर्जनीया fe धीरेण सर्वावस्थासु धीमता॥ ३९॥

“These manifold griefs as well as wailing
