* AYODHYAKANDA +

नाराजके जनपदे शरान् संततमस्यताम्।
श्रूयते तलनिर्घोष इष्वस्त्राणामुपासने॥ २१॥

“In a rulerless land the sound of
plucking the bow-string with the hand,
produced by Ksatriyas, uninterruptedly
discharging arrows while practising the use
of bows is not heard. (21)

नाराजके जनपदे वणिजो दूरगामिन:।
गच्छन्ति क्षेममध्वानं बहुपण्यसमाचिता:॥ २२॥
“In a rulerless land merchants travelling

far and wide do not safely move about fully
equipped with abundant saleable goods. (22)

नाराजके जनपदे चरत्येकचरो वशी।
भावयन्नात्मनाऽऽत्मानं यत्र सायं गृहो APA: Us Ul
“In a rulerless दापि self-controlled
ascetics, moving all by themselves and
contemplating on the Self with their own
mind and taking up their abode wherever
the evening falls, do not move about freely
for want of hospitable householders. (23)

नाराजके जनपदे योगक्षेम: «= Wadd |

न चाप्यराजके सेना शत्रून् विषहते युधि॥ २४॥
“In a rulerless land there is no acquisition

of property and no security of possessions.

Nor is the army able in a rulerless land to
vanquish the foes in a battle. (24)

नाराजके जनपदे ge: परमवाजिभि:।
नरा: संयान्ति सहसा wy प्रतिमण्डिता:॥ २५॥
“In a rulerless land people do not quickly
move out decked with ornaments in chariots
driven by spirited horses of excellent breed.
(25)

नाराजके जनपदे At: शास्त्रविशारदा:।
संवदन्तोपतिष्ठन्ते वनेषूपवनेषु TN RII

“In a rulerless land men well-versed in
sacred lore do not meet freely, holding
disputations in forests and groves. (26)

नाराजके जनपदे माल्यमोदकदक्षिणा:।
देवताभ्यर्चनार्थाय कल्प्यन्ते नियतैर्जनै:॥ २७॥

“In a rulerless land flowers, sweetmeats

543

and sacrificial fees are not got together for
the worship of deities by self-controlled men.
(27)

नाराजके जनपदे चन्दनागुरुरूषिता:।
राजपुत्रा विराजन्ते वसन्ते sa शाखिन:॥ २८॥

“In a rulerless land princes smeared
with paste of sandal and aloe wood do not
figure prominently as trees in the vernal
season. (28)

यथा ह्यनुदका नद्यो यथा वाप्यतृणं वनम्।
अगोपाला यथा गावस्तथा राष्ट्मराजकम्॥ २९॥

“A state without a ruler is really no
better than rivers without water, a woodland
without grass and cows without a keeper.

(29)
ध्वजो रथस्य प्रज्ञानं धूमो ज्ञानं विभावसो:।
तेषां यो नो ध्वजो राजा A देवत्वमितो गत:॥ ३०॥

“A standard is the distinguishing mark
of a chariot, while smoke is a testimony to
the presence of fire. King DasSaratha, who
likewise brought us, counsellors, into
prominence by bestowing this honour on us
has passed from the human state to the
state of gods. (30)

नाराजके जनपदे tah भवति कस्यचित्।
मत्स्या इव जना नित्यं भक्षयन्ति परस्परम्॥ ३१॥
“In a rulerless land nothing is one’s

own in the eyes of anyone. Like fishes, men
always devour one another. (31)

ये हि सम्भिन्नमर्यादा नास्तिकाश्छिन्नसंशया: |
asta भावाय कल्पन्ते राजदण्डनिपीडिता:॥ ३२॥

“In the absence of a stable government,
even those who do not believe in life after
death and have flagrantly violated the rules
of conduct prescribed by the Vedas and
who have consequently been tormented with
punishment inflicted by the king, and whose
fear of punishment has now been dispelled
by the anarchy prevailing at the time are
able to impose their unauthorised authority
over others. (32)
