222

« VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

एकपञ्चाश: सर्ग:
Canto LI

Narrating the story of Sri Rama from the latter’s entry into the forest, to his
own sight of Sita being borne away by Ravana through the air over the
Rsyamiika mountain, and celebrating the glory of Si Rama, Hanuman
points out to Ravana that if he longed to survive he should
restore Sita to Sri Rama and that he should be prepared for the
worst if, on the other hand, he chooses not to part with her

तं समीक्ष्य महासत्त्वं सत्त्ववान् हरिसत्तम:।
बाक्यमर्थवदव्यग्रस्तक्कुच दशाननम्॥ १॥
Looking intently on Ravana, the ten-
headed monster, who was endowed with
extraordinary might, the mighty Hanuman
coolly made to him the following submission,
pregnant with meaning: (1)
ae सुग्रीवसंदेशादिह प्राप्तस्तवान्तिके।
राक्षसेश हरीशस्त्वां भ्राता कुशलमब्रवीत्॥२॥
“Carrying a message from Sugriva, |
have sought your presence here. Sugriva,
the lord of monkeys, who is like a brother to
you (being your well-wisher) has enquired
after your welfare, O lord of ogres! (2)

wd: YO, समादेशं सुग्रीवस्य महात्मन:।
धर्मार्थसहितं वाक्यमिह चामुत्र च क्षमम्॥३॥
“Now hear the message of your brother,
the high-souled Sugriva, consisting of the
following advice, conformable to piety and
earthly gain, and conducive to your good in
this as well as in the other world. (3)

राजा दशरथो नाम रथकुञ्जरवाजिमान्।
पितेव बन्धुर्लोकस्य सुरेश्वरसमद्युति:॥४॥

“There was a king, Dasaratha by name,
who owned chariots, elephants and horses,
nay, who was a befriender of the people like
a father and equalled Indra in splendour. (4)

ज्येष्ठस्तस्य महाबाहु: Ua: प्रियतर: wa:
पितुर्निदेशान्निष्क्रान्त: प्रविष्टो दण्डकावनम्॥ ५॥
लक्ष्मणेन सह wear सीतया we भार्यया।
रामो AT महातेजा धर्म्य पन्थानमाश्रित:॥६॥

“His mighty-armed, powerful and
exceedingly beloved eldest son, Sri Rama
by name, who is endowed with extraordinary
energy and abides in the path of virtue,
went out on exile in obedience to the
command of his father, and penetrated deep
into the Dandaka forest alongwith his wife,
Sita, and brother, Laksmana. (5-6)

तस्य भार्या जनस्थाने भ्रष्टा सीतेति विश्रुता।

वैदेहस्य सुता राज्ञो जनकस्य महात्मन:॥७॥
“His consort, well-known by the name

of Sita, daughter of the high-souled Janaka,

king of Videha territory, got lost in
Janasthana. (7)
मार्गमाणस्तु at cat राजपुत्र: सहानुज:।
Raga: सुग्रीवेण च संगत:॥८॥
“Seeking for the said godlike lady, the
prince, accompanied by his younger brother,
Laksmana, reached Mount Rsyamuka and
came in contact with Sugriva. (8)

तस्य तेन प्रतिज्ञातं सीताया: परिमार्गणम्।
सुग्रीवस्यापि wor हरिराज्यं निवेदितुम्॥९॥

“By Sugriva was promised him a search
for Sita, while a promise was made by Sri
Rama too to procure and make over to
Sugriva his lost kingship of monkeys. (9)

ततस्तेन मृधे हत्वा राजपुत्रेण वालिनम्।
सुग्रीव: स्थापितो Wt ATT गणेश्वर: ॥ १०॥
“After killing Vali on the field of battle,
Sugriva was re-installed by that prince, Sri
Rama, on the throne as the lord of hordes of
monkeys and bears. (10)
