* BALAKANDA +

offender and the gravity or otherwise of the
offence committed by him. (13)

शुचीनामेकबुद्धीनां सर्वेषां सम्प्रजानताम्।
नासीत् पुरे वा Wes वा मृषावादी नर: क्वचित्॥ १४॥
As a result of the ministers being all
upright in their dealings, nay,of one mind
and fully discerning, there was no man who
told a lie anywhere in the city of Ayodhya
or, for that matter, in the entire kingdom.
(14)
क्वचिन्न दुष्टस्तत्रासीत् परदाररतिर्नर:।
प्रशान्तं सर्वमेवासीद् We Wat च तत्॥१५॥
Nay, there was no wicked man or
one having liaison with another’s wife
anywhere in that kingdom. On the other
hand, the whole state as well as the aforesaid
city of Ayodhya (the foremost of all cities)
was perfectly tranquil (free from turmoil or
tribulation). (15)

सुवासस: सुवेषाश्च A च सर्वे शुचिव्रता:।
हितार्थाशर्च नरेन्द्रस्य जाग्रतो नयचक्षुषा॥१६॥

They were all finely dressed and well-
adorned, and were of holy resolve; the
welfare of the king (the state) was their sole
purpose in life and they were always wide
awake, seeing everything with the eyes of
prudence. (16)

गुरोर्गुणगृहीताश्च प्रख्याताश्च पराक्रमै:।
विदेशेष्वपि विज्ञाता: सर्वतो बुद्धिनिश्चया:॥ १७॥
Favoured of the preceptor of the king
because of their numerous virtues and
celebrated for their prowess, they were

87

universally recognized even in foreign lands,
their conclusions being based on their own
intellect. (17)

अभितो गुणवन्तश्च न चासन् गुणवर्जिता:।
संधिविग्रहतत्त्वज्ञा: Wheat सम्पदान्विता:॥ १८॥

They were qualified all round and were
never devoid of virtues. They were
conversant with the principles determining
the propriety of peace and war and were
naturally endowed with the divine properties.

(18)
मन्त्रसंवरणे शक्ता: शक्ता: सूक्ष्मासु बुद्धिषु।
नीतिशास्त्रविशेषज्ञा:; aad प्रियवादिन:॥ १९॥

They were capable of maintaining the
secrecy of deliberations and further capable
of subtle reasoning. They possessed a special
knowledge of political science and always
spoke kindly. (19)
ईदृशैस्तैरमात्यैशच राजा दशरथोऽनघ:।
उपपन्नो गुणोपेतैरन्वशासद् वसुंधराम्॥२०॥

Assisted by such qualified ministers,
as mentioned above, and priests and
counsellors, free from all vices*, Emperor
Dasaratha ruled over the entire globe (the
Kingdom). (20)
अवेक्ष्यमाणश्चारेण Wat धर्मेण रक्षयन्।
wit पालनं कुर्वन्नधर्मं परिवर्जयन्॥२१॥
विश्रुतस्त्रिषु लोकेषु वदान्य: सत्यसंगर:।

स तत्र पुरुषव्याघ्र: were पृथिवीमिमाम्॥ २२॥

Seeing everything with his eyes in the
form of spies and protecting the people

* Lord Manu says—
दश

तथाष्टौ क्रोधजानि च । व्यसनानि दुरन्तानि प्रयत्नेन विवर्जयेत्॥

“A monarch should scrupulously eschew the ten insurmountable vices born of lust and the eight born

of anger.”

The following are the ten vices born of lust :

मृगयाक्षो दिवास्वाप: परिवाद: स्नियो मद: । तौर्यत्रिकं Gare च कामजो दशको गण:॥

“Hunting, playing at dice, taking a nap during the day, slandering others, indulgence in women,
inebriety, the three items of music (singing, dancing and playing upon musical instruments) and idly
loitering about—these are the ten vices born of lust.”

The following eight constitute the vices born of anger :

पैशुन्यं साहसं te gatgaigadt । वाग्दण्डनं चपारुष्यंक्रोधजोऽपिगणोऽष्टक:॥

“Backbiting, rashness, malice, jealousy, prying into others’ faults, unjust seizure of property, using

abusive words and harsh speech—these are the eight vices born of anger.”
