986

“Protected by the might of arms of Sri
Rama and Laksmana we could have fought
at ease on the other side of the sea (dividing
the island of Lanka from the mainland), free
from anxiety.” (5)

एताश्चान्याश्च राजान: = HATA सहस्रश:।

कथयन्त: स्वराज्यानि जग्मुर्हर्षसमन्विता:॥६॥

Saying these and other things in
thousands on the way, the kings returned to
their respective dominions, full of joy. (6)

स्वानि राज्यानि मुख्यानि ऋद्धानि मुदितानि च।

समृद्धधनधान्यानि पूर्णानि वसुमन्ति च॥७॥
यथापुराणि ते गत्वा रत्नानि विविधान्यथ।

रामस्य प्रियकामार्थमुपहारॆ Fa ददु:॥८॥
अश्वान् यानानि रत्नानि हस्तिनश्च मदोत्कटान्।
चन्दनानि च मुख्यानि दिव्यान्याभरणानि च॥ ९॥
मणिमुक्ताप्रवालांस्तु दास्यो रूपसमन्विता:।
अजाविकं च विविधं रथांस्तु विविधान् बहून्॥ १० Il
Duly reaching their own well-known
kingdoms, which were prosperous and
happy, with plentiful gold and grains, self-
contained and full of treasures, and then to
their respective cities, the aforesaid rulers
of men forthwith bestowed on the escorts
accompanying them as representatives of
Sri Rama by way of so many presents for
the gratification of Sri Rama, valuable things
of various kinds, horses, vehicles, precious
stones and elephants excited by passion,
also excellent pieces of sandalwood and
brilliant ornaments, gems, pearls and coral,
nay, servant-maids richly endowed with
comeliness, she-goats and sheep of different
species and numerous chariots of every
description. (7—10)
भरतो लक्ष्मणश्चैव शत्रुघ्नश्च महाबल:।
आदाय तानि रत्नानि स्वां पुरीं पुनरागता:॥११॥
Taking the aforesaid valuable presents,
Bharata as well as Laksmana and Satrughna,

who was endowed with extraordinary
might, returned to their own city, Ayodhya.

(11)

« VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

आगम्य च पुरीं रम्यामयोध्यां पुरुषर्षभा:।
तानि रत्नानि चित्राणि रामाय समुपानयन्॥१२॥

Nay, reaching the delightful city of
Ayodhya, the jewels among men handed
those wonderful objects to Sri Rama. (12)

प्रतिगृह्य च ad ae wa: प्रीतिसमन्वित:।

सुग्रीवाय ददौ Ua महात्मा कृतकर्मणे॥१३॥
विभीषणाय च ददौ तथान्येभ्योऽपि wea: |

राक्षसेभ्य: कपिभ्यश्च यैर्वृतो जयमाप्तवान्॥१४॥

Accepting all that, the high-souled Sri
Rama, a scion of Raghu, full of joy bestowed
them on King Sugriva, who had done his
duty to Sri Rama, as well as on Vibhisana
and on other monkeys and ogres, surrounded
by whom He had scored a victory over
Ravana. (13-14)

a aa रामदत्तानि रत्नानि कपिराक्षसा:।
शिरोभिर्धारयामासुर्भुजेषु च महाबला:॥१५॥

All the aforesaid monkeys and ogres,
who were endowed with extraordinary might,
wore the precious stones bestowed on them
by Sri Rama, on their heads as well as
around their arms. (15)

opt a yatatearqur were: |

wee सुपुत्रोऽयं मस्री चाप्यनिलात्मज: ॥ १७॥

सुग्रीवमन्तिते युक्तौ wa ala fed रतौ।
अर्हतो विविधां पूजां त्वत्कृते A हरीश्वर॥ ec
Placing Hanuman and Angada too in
His lap, Sri Rama, the powerful king of the
Ikswakus, a great chariot-warrior, whose
eyes resembled the petals of a lotus, spoke
as follows to Sugriva: “This Angada, your
worthy son (nephew) and your minister, the
son of the wind-god, too, O Sugriva, the lord
of monkeys, who have both remained
engaged in giving counsel to you and have
been devoted to My interests, too, actually
merit every kind of honour.” (16—18)

इत्युक्त्वा व्यवमुच्याङ्गाद् भूषणानि महायशा:।
a बबन्ध महार्हाणि तदाङ्गदहनूमतो:॥१९॥
