1066

Laksmana, who was possessed of
extraordinary might, also saw in the palace
of Sugriva numerous ladies of different
shapes, proud of their comeliness and youth.

(22)

दृष्टवाभिजनसम्पन्नास्तत्र माल्यकृतस्त्रज:।
वरमाल्यकृतव्यग्रा भूषणोत्तमभूषिता: ॥ २३ ॥
नातृप्तान् नाति चाव्यग्रान् नानुदात्तपरिच्छदान्।
सुग्रीवानुचरांश्चापि लक्षयामास लक्ष्मण:॥ २४॥

Seeing those women there, who were
rich in pedigree, were adorned with wreaths
made of flowers and busy knitting excellent
garlands and were decked with the best of
ornaments, Laksmana_ also _ perceived
Sugriva’s attendants, who were never
unsated, never without zeal in service to
their Master and never without excellent
ornaments. (23-24)
कूजितं नूपुराणां च काञ्चीनां नि:स्वनं तथा।
सनिशम्य तत: श्रीमान् सौमित्रिर्लज्जितोऽभवत्॥ २५ I

The glorious Laksmana (son of Sumitra)
now felt abashed because of his pious vow
to shun the presence of others’ wives to
hear at close quarters the jingling of their
anklets and the tinkling of the ornaments
worn round their waist. (25)

रोषवेगप्रकुपित: श्रुत्वा चाभरणस्वनम्।
चकार ज्यास्वनं ART दिश: Vert पूरयन्॥ २६॥
Highly excited through vehemence of
rage to hear the jingling of ornaments, the
heroic prince, Laksmana, twanged the string
of his bow, filling all the four quarters with
the aforesaid sound. (26)

चारित्रेण महाबाहुरपकृष्ट: स लक्ष्मण:।
तस्थावेकान्तमाश्रित्य रामकोपसमन्वित:॥ २७॥

Restrained from entering Sugriva’s
private apartments by his high moral sense,
the said Laksmana, who was distinguished
by his mighty arms, stood receding to a
lonely corner, possessed as he was with
anger on Sri Rama’s account whose cause
had till then been totally and woefully

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

neglected by Sugriva.
wt चापस्वनेनाथ सुग्रीव: प्लवगाधिप:।
विज्ञायागमनं त्रस्त: स चचाल वरासनात्॥ २८॥
Alarmed to know for certain the arrival
of Laksmana from the aforesaid twanging
of his bow, the said Sugriva, the suzerain
lord of monkeys, forthwith stirred from his
excellent seat. (28)

अङ्गदेन यथा मह्यं पुरस्तात् प्रतिवेदितम्।
सुव्यक्तमेष सम्प्राप्त: सौमित्रिभ्रातृवत्सल:॥ २९॥

He said to himself: ‘As was already
announced to me by Prince Angada, here
has Laksmana (son of Sumitra), who is so
fond of his eldest brother, most evidently
arrived.’ (29)
अङ्गदेन समाख्यातो ज्यास्वनेन च AMT |
बुबुधे लक्ष्मणं Wa मुखं चास्य व्यशुष्यत॥ ३०॥

Duly informed by Angada as well as
by the twang of the bowstring of Laksmana,
Sugriva, the monkey chief, came to know of

Laksmana having arrived at his very door
and his mouth got parched through fear. (30)

ततस्तारां हरिश्रेष्ठ: सुग्रीव: प्रियदर्शनाम्।
उवाच हितमव्यग्रस्त्राससम्भ्रान्तमानस: | ३१॥

Thereupon Sugriva, the foremost of
monkeys, calmly gave the following friendly
admonition to Tara of pleasing looks, though
his mind was puzzled through fear: (31)

किं नु रुट्कारणं TY प्रकृत्या मृदुमानस:।
सरोष st सम्प्राप्तो येनायं राघवानुज:॥ ३२॥
“What may be the cause, | wonder, for
anger, O lady with charming eyebrows,
actuated by which this younger brother of
Sri Rama, a scion of Raghu, who is soft-
hearted by nature, has arrived as though
full of anger? (32)

fe पश्यसि कुमारस्य रोषस्थानमनिन्दिते।
न खल्वकारणे कोपमाहरेन्नरपुङ्खव:॥३३॥

“Do you know the occasion for the
prince’s anger, O irreproachable lady?
Surely Laksmana, a jewel among men, would

(27)
