* AYODHYAKANDA +

been ailing for a long time, 4. who has been
ostracised by his own kith and kin, 5. who
is pusillanimous, or 6. is surrounded by
cowards, 7. who is greedy, or 8. has greedy
associates, 9. who has estranged his
ministers and others, 10. who is extremely
voluptuous, 11. who confers with fickle-
minded persons, 12. who speaks ill of divine
beings and Brahmanas, 13. who is ill-fated
and 14. a fatalist, 15. who is afflicted by
famine, and 16. by military reverses, 17. who
mostly remains away from home, 18. who
has numerous enemies, 19. who is in the
clutches of adverse times, and 20. who is
not devoted to truth and piety*; the entire
population of the State; setting forth on an
expedition for conquest against an enemy;
drawing up an army in battle-array; coming
to terms with an enemy and waging war
against him, the first of which serves as a
ground for the two policies of duplicity
and seeking the protection of a powerful
enemy, while the other serves as a ground
for the other two policies of marching against
the enemy and biding time to seek a
favourable opportunity to march against an
enemy, O highly intelligent scion of Raghu !
(68—70)

मन्तरिभिस्त्वं यथोद्दिष्टं चतुर्भिस्तिभिरेव वा।
कच्चित् समस्तैर्व्यस्तैश्च मन्त्रं मन्त्रयसे TTI ७१॥
“Do you hold consultation in accordance
with scriptural injunctions with only four or
three selected counsellors collectively or
severally to guard against a split among
them and to prevent the secrets from leaking
out, O wise one? (71)

कच्चित् ते सफला वेदा: कच्चित् ते सफला: क्रिया:।
कच्चित् ते सफला दारा: कच्चित् ते सफलं श्रुतम्॥ ७२ UI

651

“Has your study of the Vedas borne fruit
in the shape of moulding your conduct
according to their injunctions? Are your
undertakings fruitful? Has your spouse given
birth to offspring? Has your learning borne
fruit in the shape of culture and humility?

(72)

कच्चिदेषैव ते बुद्धिर्यथोक्ता मम राघव।
आयुष्या च यशस्या च धर्मकामार्थसंहिता॥ ७३॥
“| hope your conclusion is precisely
the same as mine, which has been set forth
in the foregoing verses, O scion of Raghu,
and which is conducive to longevity and
fame and is attended with religious merit,
enjoyment and wealth. (73)

यां att ade तातो यां च न: प्रपितामह:।
at वृत्तिं ade कच्चिद् या च सत्पथगा शुभा ।। ७४॥
“Do you follow the way of life which
our father treads and which our forbears
trod, nay, which is in accord with the way of
the virtuous and which is righteous in itself?
(74)
कच्चित् स्वादुकृतं भोज्यमेको नाश्नासि राघव।
कच्चिदाशंसमानेभ्यो मित्रेभ्य: सम्प्रयच्छसि॥ ७५ I
“| hope you do not partake by yourself
of food nicely cooked. | hope you offer it to
friends who seek it. (75)
राजा तु धर्मेण fe पालयित्वा
महीपतिर्दण्डधर: प्रजानाम्।
अवाप्य कृत्स्नां वसुधां यथाव-
दितश्च्युत: स्वर्गमुपैति विद्वान्॥ ७६ ॥
“Having obtained as his share, and

ruled in the right way over the entire globe,
a wise Ksatriya holds sway over the earth

* get gal दीर्घरोगी तथा ज्ञातिबहिष्कृत: 1 भीरुको भीरुजनको लुब्धो लुब्धजनस्तथा॥

विरक्तप्रकृतिश्चैव
दैवोपहतकश्चैव दैवचिन्तक wa
अदेशस्थो बहुरिपुर्युक्तोऽकालेन यश्च
एतै: संधिं न gata विगृह्णीयात्तु केवलम् ।

विषयेष्वतिसक्तिमान् | अनेकचित्तमन्त्रश्च
च । दुर्भिक्षव्यसनोपेतो बलव्यसनसंयुत: II
वै । सत्यधर्मारतश्चैव विंशति: पुरुषा अमी।॥

देवब्राह्मणनिन्दक: ।।
