916

धक्ष्यामस्त्वां वयं at श्वभ्रे महति कल्पिते।
स त्वं सीतां समाचक्ष्व येन वा यत्र वा AAT AG il

“Nor are we aware of his home or even
of his might. It is but becoming of you to
show compassion to us, who are helplessly
knocking about here and there in this way,
stricken as we are with grief at the loss
of Sita, and behaving with benevolence
towards all. Fetching dry logs of wood broken
by elephants, we shall in course of time
cremate you, 0 valiant ogre, after throwing
you in an extensive pit dug by us. While being
cremated by us as aforesaid, furnish to us
detailed information about Sita as to by whom
she has been borne away and where she
has been kept. (23—25)

कुरु कल्याणमत्यर्थं यदि जानासि Arad: |
Wage, UAT वाक्यं दनुरनुत्तमम्॥ RE II
Gara कुशलो amt वक्तारमपि राघवम्।
दिव्यमस्ति न मे ज्ञानं नाभिजानामि मैथिलीम्॥ २७॥

“Render this great service to us if you
know the thing correctly.” Requested in these
words by Sri Rama, the demon for his part,
who was an eloquent speaker, addressed the
following most excellent reply to Sri Rama
(a scion of Raghu), who too was an orator :
“| have no divine knowledge, nor am | aware
of Sita, the princess of Mithila. (26-27)
यस्तां वक्ष्यति तं वक्ष्ये दग्ध: स्वं रूपमास्थित: ।
योऽभिजानाति तद्रक्षस्तद् ART WA तत्परम्॥ २८ Il

“Having got back my native form when
cremated by you | shall point out to you him
who will be able to give correct information

about Sita. After that alone | shall point out
who is aware of that ogre, O Rama! (28)

अदग्धस्य fe विज्ञातुं शक्तिरस्ति न मे प्रभो।
राक्षसं तु महावीर्यं सीता येन हृता तव॥ २९॥

“The power does not lie in me, so long

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

as | am not cremated, to know definitely
anything about the ogre, possessed of great
prowess, by whom your Sita, has been
borne away, my lord! (29)

विज्ञानं fe wee we शापदोषेण राघव।
स्वकृतेन मया We रूपं लोकविगर्हितम्॥ 80 I

“My extraordinary supersensuous
knowledge has indeed been interrupted by
the detrimental effect of the curse pronounced
on me, O scion of Raghu! Because of my
own doing again, has this form, condemned
by the people, attained by me. (30)
fe q यावन्न यात्यस्तं सविता श्रान्तवाहन:।
तावन्मामवटे fama दह wa यथाविधि॥ ३१॥

“But, throwing me into a pit, cremate
me, O Rama, in accordance with the

scriptural ordinance before the sun sinks
below horizon, his horses exhausted. (31)

दग्धस्त्वयाहमवटे न्यायेन रघुनन्दन।
वक्ष्यामि तं महावीर यस्तं वेत्स्यति राक्षसम्॥ ३२॥
“Cremated by you in a pit with due
ceremony, O joy of the Raghus, | shall point
out to you the individual, O great hero,
who will know the whereabouts of the ogre.
(32)

wT सख्यं च adel aera राघव।
कल्पयिष्यति a वीर साहाय्यं लघुविक्रम॥ 33 i
“An alliance should be made by you
with that individual of righteous conduct, O
scion of Raghu ! He will render help to you,
O hero of quick steps ! (33)

नहि तस्यास्त्यविज्ञातं त्रिषु लोकेषु राघव।
सर्वान् परिव्रृतो लोकान् पुरा वै कारणान्तरे॥ ३४॥

“Nothing is really unknown to him in all
the three worlds, O scion of Raghu; for, due
to some reason he has actually travelled
through all the worlds in the past.” — (34)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्येऽरण्यकाण्डे एकोनसप्ततितम: सर्ग: I ७१ ॥

Thus ends Canto Seventy-one in the Aranyakanda of the glorious Ramayana of
Valmiki, the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

