# YUDDHAKANDA #

of Ravana) seized as they are with panic at
his very sight. (9)

शीघ्रमेतान् सुसंत्रस्तान् ager विप्रधावितान्।
पर्यवस्थापयाख्याहि विभीषणमुपस्थितम्॥१०॥

“Quickly rally the yonder monkeys who
have fled in many directions, greatly alarmed
as they are; inform them of Vibhisana, and
not Indrajit, being present here”. (10)

सुग्रीवेणैवमुक्तस्तु जाम्बवानृक्षपार्थिव:।

वानरान् सान्त्वयामास संनिवर्त्य प्रधावत:॥११॥

Duly calling the fugitive monkeys back,
when commanded as above by Sugriva,
Jambavan, the king of bears, for his part
restored them to confidence. (11)

ते निवृत्ता: पुन: सर्वे वानरास्त्यक्तसाध्वसा:।

ऋक्षराजवच: श्रुत्वा तं च gear विभीषणम्॥ १२॥
Shaking off their fear on hearing the

call of Jambavan and perceiving the well-

known Vibhisana, all the aforesaid monkeys
eventually retraced their steps. (12)

विभीषणस्तु रामस्य gear गात्रं शरैश्चितम्।
लक्ष्मणस्य तु धर्मात्मा बभूव व्यथितस्तदा॥ १३॥
Vibhisana for his part, whose mind
was given to piety, felt distressed on that
occasion to see the person of Sri Rama as
also of Laksmana covered with arrows.(13)

जलक्लिन्नेन हस्तेन तयोर्नेत्रे विमृज्य च।
Weems ete विललाप च॥ १४॥

Nay, having washed their eyes with his
hand dipped in water, his mind tormented
with grief, Vibhisana wept and wailed (as
follows): (14)

इमौ at सत्त्वसम्पन्नौ विक्रान्तौ प्रियसंयुगौ।
इमामवस्थां गमितौ werd: कूटयोधिभि:।॥ १५॥

“These two well-known and powerful
princes, who are endowed with energy
and fond of combat, have been reduced to
this predicament by ogres fighting in crafty
ways! (15)

473

भ्रातृपुत्रेण चैतेन दुष्पुत्रेण दुरात्मना।
राक्षस्या जिह्मया बुद्ध्या वञ्चितावृजुविक्रमौ।। १६॥

“The two princes, who were exhibiting
their prowess in a guileless manner, have
been played foul by this evil-minded nephew
of mine, an unworthy son of his father
through his crooked judgment characteristic
of ogres. (16)

शरैरिमावलं fact रुधिरेण समुक्षितौ।
वसुधायामिमौ सुप्तौ दृश्येते शल्यकाविव॥ १७॥

‘Pierced fiercely by arrows and bathed
in blood, these two aforesaid princes are
lying on the ground like two porcupines.

(17)

ययोर्वीर्यमुपाश्रित्य प्रतिष्ठा काङ्क्षिता मया।
ताविमौ देहनाशाय प्रसुप्तौ पुरुषर्षभौ॥१८॥

‘These two celebrated jewels among
men, banking on whose prowess installation
on the throne of Lanka was sought by me,
are lying fast asleep, as it were, waiting for
the dissolution of the body. (18)
Weta विपन्नोऽस्मि नष्टराज्यमनोरथ:।
प्राप्तप्रतिज्ञश्च Ry: सकामो रावण: कृत:॥१९॥

‘My ambition for sovereignty having
been frustrated, | am as good as dead,
though alive, nay, having had his vow (of
not returning Sita) fulfilled, the enemy,
Ravana, has been enabled by his son to
realize his ambition of retaining Sita in his
possession.’ (19)
wa विलपमानं तं परिष्वज्य विभीषणम्।
Gia: सत्त्वसम्पन्नो हरिराजोऽब्रवीदिदम्॥ २०॥

Embracing Vibhisana, who was
lamenting as above, Sugriva, the ruler of
monkeys, who was endowed with energy,
reassured him in the following words: (20)
रावण: सह पुत्रेण स्वकामं नेह लप्स्यते॥ २१॥

“You shall attain the sovereignty of
Lanka, there is no doubt about it, O knower
