1026

प्रहृष्टमिह ते aat गतासोरपि मानद।
अस्तार्कसमवर्णं च Wad जीवतो यथा॥४२॥

“Even though life has departed from
you, O bestower of honour on others, your
countenance, whose colour resembles the
hue of the setting sun, looks highly delighted
even now as it did when you were living.

(42)

एष त्वां रामरूपेण काल: Hila वानर।
येन स्म विधवा: Gat: Pat एकेषुणा रणे॥४३॥

“In the form of Sri Rama, by whom all
of us have been widowed with a single
arrow discharged on the battlefield where
you were engaged in a passage of arms
with another, the Time-Spirit alone is hereby
snatching you away from our midst to the
other world, O monkey chief ! (43)

इमास्तास्तव राजेन्द्र वानर्योऽप्लवगास्तव।
पादैर्विकृष्टमध्वानमागता: fae न बुध्यसे॥४४॥

“Don’t you know, O Indra among kings,
that these consorts of yours, who, though
belonging to the monkey race, cannot leap,
have trodden the long path on foot? (44)

तवेष्टा ननु चैवेमा भार्याश्चन्द्रनिभानना:।
इदानीं नेक्षसे कस्मात् सुग्रीवं प्लवगेश्वर॥ ४५ UI

“Wherefore do you not cast your look
at this moment on these wives of yours,
whose countenance shines like the moon
and who are surely dear to you, as well as
on Sugriva, O lord of monkeys? (45)

wa हि सचिवा राजंस्तारप्रभृतयस्तव।
पुरवासिजनश्चायं परिवार्य विषीदति॥४६॥

“These counsellors of yours, Tara and
others, O king, as also these citizens stand
dejected around you indeed. (46)

विसर्जयैनान् सचिवान् यथापुरमरिंदम।
ad: क्रीडामहे सर्वा GAY मदनोत्कटा:॥४७॥

“Dismiss these counsellors as you did
in the past, O tamer of your foes! Then,
intoxicated with love we shall all sport with
you in the woodlands.” (47)

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

उत्थापयन्ति CA तदा वानर्य: शोककर्शिता:॥ ४८ Ul

Emaciated through grief, the Vanara
women then raised Tara, who was
overwhelmed with sorrow caused by the
loss of her husband and was lamenting as
aforesaid. (48)

सुग्रीवेण aa: सार्धं सोऽङ्घद: पितरं war
चितामारोपयामास शोकेनाभिप्लुतेन्द्रिय: ॥४९॥

With the help of Sugriva, the celebrated
Angada, who was weeping all the time,
placed his father’s body on the funeral pile,
his mind plunged in grief. (49)
ततोऽग्निं विधिवद् दत्त्वा सोऽपसव्यं चकार ह।
frat दीर्घमध्वानं प्रस्थितं व्याकुलेन्द्रिय:।॥। ५०॥

Offering fire to the deceased in
accordance with the scriptural ordinance,
he then with a troubled mind went clockwise

round his father, set out on his long journey
to the other world: so the tradition goes.(50)
संस्कृत्य वालिनं तं तु विधिवत् प्लवगर्षभा:।
आजग्मुरुदकं कर्तुं नदीं शुभजलां शिवाम्॥५१॥
Having cremated the aforesaid Vali with
due ceremony, the foremost of monkeys
for their part sought the blessed river
(Tungabhadra) carrying sacred waters, in
order to offer water to the departed soul for
his satisfaction in the other world. (51)

ततस्ते सहितास्तत्र Wed स्थाप्य चाग्रत:।
सुग्रीवतारासहिता: सिषिचुर्वालिने जलम्॥५२॥

Nay, placing Angada ahead, they all
with Sugriva and Tara then offered on that
spot handfuls of water in a body to the spirit
of Vali. (52)

सुग्रीवेणैव दीनेन दीनो भूत्वा महाबल:।
समानशोक: काकुत्स्थ: प्रेतकार्याण्यकारयत्॥ ५३ Ul

Feeling miserable, as it were, alongwith
the wretched Sugriva, whose grief he shared,
the very mighty Sr Rama (a scion of
Kakutstha) got the obsequies performed
under his directions and guidance. (53)
