« KISKINDHAKANDA +

monkeys as also to that army of monkeys,
the glorious Angada, the tamer of his foes,
presently addressed to them the following
significant words : (14)
क इदानीं महातेजा लङ्घयिष्यति सागरम्।
क: करिष्यति सुग्रीवं सत्यसंधमरिदमम्॥१५॥
“What monkey of extraordinary energy
will take a leap across the sea at this
juncture? Who will enable Sugriva, the
subduer of his foes, to prove himself to be
true to his promise of wresting Sita from the
clutches of Ravana? (15)
को वीरो योजनशतं लङ्घयेत प्लवङ्गम:।
SAT यूथपान् सर्वान् मोचयेत् को महाभयात्॥ १६ ॥
“What heroic monkey can leap to a
distance of a hundred Yojanas (or eight
hundred miles)? Again, who will deliver all
these leaders of monkey hordes from the
great fear viz., that of incurring the wrath of
Sugriva? (16)

कस्य प्रसादाद् दारांश्च पुत्रांश्चैव गृहाणि च।

इतो निव्रत्ता: पश्येम सिद्धार्था: सुखिनो वयम्॥ १७॥
“By whose good-will shall we be able

to see, when returned accomplished of

purpose and happy from this place, our wife

as well as our sons and home? (17)

कस्य प्रसादाद् रामं च लक्ष्मणं च महाबलम्।
अभिगच्छेम संहृष्टा: सुग्रीवं च वनौकसम्॥ १८॥
“By whose grace shall we be able to
meet Sri Rama and Laksmana, who are
possessed of extraordinary might, and the

1157

monkey Sugriva, and feel transported with

joy? (18)

afte कश्चित् समर्थो a: सागरप्लवने at |

स ददात्विह न: शीघ्रं पुण्यामभयदक्षिणाम्॥ १९॥
“If any monkey among you is capable

of leaping across the sea, let him quickly

vouchsafe to us on this spot a holy boon in

the shape of a vow to that effect, thereby
ridding us of fear.” (19)

अङ्गदस्य वच: श्रुत्वा न कश्चित् किंचिदब्रवीत्।
स्तिमितेवाभवत् सर्वा सा तत्र हरिवाहिनी॥ २०॥

Hearing the question of Angada nobody
said anything. The entire Vanara force stood
motionless, as it were. (20)

पुनरेवाङ्मद: We तान् हरीन् हरिसत्तम:।
सर्वे बलवतां श्रेष्ठा भवन्तो दृढविक्रमा:।

व्यपदेशकुले जाता: पूजिताश्चाप्यभीक्ष्णश: i २१ ॥

Once more did Angada, the foremost
of monkeys speak as follows to the aforesaid
monkeys : “You are all pre-eminent among
the mighty and endowed with unbending
prowess. Born in a family free from all
stigma, you have also been honoured time
and again for your valour by the royal court.

(21)

नहि at गमने Ue: कदाचित् कस्यचिद् भवेत्।
ब्रुवध्वं यस्य या शक्ति: प्लवने प्लवगर्षभा: ॥ २२॥

“No obstruction is ever possible in the
movement of any of you. Therefore, speak
out, O leaders of monkeys, who can leap
how far?” (22)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये किष्किन्धाकाण्डे
चतु:षष्टितम: सर्ग: ॥ ६४॥
Thus ends Canto Sixty-four in the Kiskindhakanda of the glorious Ramayana of
Valmiki, the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

