448

sifted: सुदुर्धर्षो रश्मिकेतुश्च राक्षस:।
सुप्तघ्नो यज्ञकोपश्च रामेण सह संगता:॥११॥
Agniketu, who was very hard to
overcome as well as the ogres Rasmiketu,
Suptaghna and Yajfiakopa closed with Sri
Rama. (11)

वज्रमुष्टिश्च मैन्देन द्विविदेनाशनिप्रभ:।
राक्षसाभ्यां सुघोराभ्यां कपिमुख्यौ समागतौ i १२॥

Vajramusti grappled with Mainda and
ASaniprabha with Dwivida. The aforesaid
two leaders of monkeys thus closed with
two most formidable ogres. (12)

वीर: प्रतपनो घोरो राक्षसो रणदुर्धर:।
समरे तीक्ष्णवेगेन नलेन समयुध्यत॥१३॥

The valiant and redoubtable ogre
Pratapana. who was difficult to restrain on
the field of batle, fought steadily with Nala
of vehement impetuosity in combat. (13)

धर्मस्य पुत्रो बलवान् सुषेण sta विश्रुत:।
a विद्युन्मालिना सार्धमयुध्यत महाकपि:।॥ १४॥

That great monkey, the mighty son
of Dharma (the god of piety), widely known
by the name of Susena, fought with
Vidyunmali. (14)
वानराश्चापरे घोरा राक्षसैरपरै: सह।
we Ua: सहसा युद्ध्वा च बहुभि: सह॥ १५॥

Nay, having fought with many ogres
at a time, other fierce monkeys too entered

all of a sudden into a duel with other
(15)

रक्षसां वानराणां च वीराणां जयमिच्छताम्॥ १६॥

There raged on that occasion a fierce
and confounding fight, which made one’s
hair stand on end, between the heroic ogres
and monkeys, who sought victory for their
own army. (16)

हरिराक्षसदेहेभ्य: प्रभूता: केशशाद्बला:।
शरीरसंघाटवहा: wee: शोणितापगा:॥१७॥

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA +

Having issued from the bodies of
monkeys and ogres, and strewn with
duckweeds in the form of hair, streams of
blood flowed rapidly, bearing away logs of
wood in the form of dead bodies. (17)

आजघानेन्द्रजित् क्रुद्धो AMT शतक्रतु:।
age गदया वीरं शात्रुसैन्यविदारणम्॥१८॥

Filled with rage, Indrajit, the eldest
son of Ravana, struck with his mace the
valiant Angada, the destroyer of hostile
forces, even as Indra (who is presupposed
to have performed in his previous births
a hundred AsSwamedha sacrifices as a
condition precedent to his _ attaining
Indrahood) would attack his adversary with
his thunderbolt. (18)

तस्य काञ्चनचित्राङ्गं रथं साश्वं ससारथिम्।
जघान गदया श्रीमानङ्गदो वेगवान् हरि:॥१९॥

With the same mace, snatched from
the ogre’s hand, the glorious monkey,
Angada, who was full of impetuosity, in his
turn struck Indrajit’s chariot—the framework
of which was bright with gold—horses,
charioteer and all. (19)

सम्पातिस्तु प्रजङ्घेन त्रिभिर्बाणै: समाहत:।
निजघानाश्वकर्णेन प्रजङ्घं रणमूर्धनि॥२०॥

Grievously wounded with three arrows
by Prajangha, Sampati for his part killed
Prajangha with an Aswakarna tree in the
van of the battle. (20)

जम्बुमाली रथस्थस्तु रथशक्त्या महाबल:।
बिभेद समरे क्रुद्धो हनूमन्तं स्तनान्तरे॥ २१॥

Taking up his position in a chariot and
full of rage, Jambumali for his part, who
was endowed with extraordinary might,
pierced Hunuman in the breast with a
javelin kept in his chariot on the field of
battle. (21)

तस्य तं रथमास्थाय हनूमान् मारुतात्मज:।
Ws तलेनाशु सह तेनैव रक्षसा॥२२॥
