774

अप्रियामिव कस्माच्च मां नेच्छस्यभिभाषितुम्।
धिगस्तु हृदयं यस्या wae न सहस्रधा॥८५॥
त्वयि पञ्चत्वमापन्ने wed शोकपीडितम्।
इत्येवं विलपन्ती सा बाष्पपर्याकुलेक्षणा॥ ८६॥
स्नेहोपस्कन्नहृदया तदा मोहमुपागमत्।
कश्मलाभिहता सन्ना बभौ सा रावणोरसि॥ ८७॥
संध्यानुरक्ते were दीप्ता विद्युदिवोज्ज्वला।
तथागतां समुत्थाप्य सपत्न्यस्तां भृशातुरा:॥ ८८॥
पर्यवस्थापयामासू रुदत्यो रुदतीं भृशम्।
किं ते न विदिता देवि लोकानां स्थितिरध्रुवा॥ ८९॥
दशाविभागपर्याये Wat A चञ्चला: श्रिय:।
इत्येवमुच्यमाना सा सशब्दं प्ररुरोद ह॥९०॥
स्नपयन्ती तदास्त्रेण स्तनौ वक्त्रं सुनिर्मलम्।
एतस्मिन्नन्तरे रामो विभीषणमुवाच ह॥९१॥
संस्कार: क्रियतां भ्रातु: Sabo: परिसान्त्व्यताम्।
तमुवाच ततो धीमान् विभीषण इदं वच:॥९२॥
विमृश्य बुद्ध्या प्रश्रितं धर्मार्थसहितं हितम्।
त्यक्तधर्मव्रतं क्रूरं नृशंसमनृतं तथा॥९३॥
नाहमर्हामि संस्कर्तुं परदाराभिमर्शनम्।
भ्रातृरूपो fe A ware सर्वाहिते रत:॥९४॥
रावणो नार्हते पूजां पूज्योऽपि गुरुगौरवात्।
Wie sit at wa वक्ष्यन्ति मनुजा भुवि॥ ९५॥
“And why do you not feel inclined to
speak to me as though | were loathsome to
you? Woe be to me, whose heart does not
split into a thousand pieces, even though
stricken with grief, now that you have returned
to the five elements.” Wailing as aforesaid,
Mandodari, her eyes bedimmed with tears
and heart moistened by love, presently fell
into a swoon. Fallen on the breast of Ravana
in a fit of unconsciousness, she shone like
a vivid flash of lightning across a rainy cloud
reddened by the glow of twilight. Raising up
Mandodarl, who was reduced to such a
plight, and was still bitterly weeping, her co-
wives, who were also weeping, sore
distressed as they were, restored her to her
normal condition. They said to her: “Is the
uncertain existence of the worlds known to
you, O queen? The wealth of kings actually
becomes unsteady when there is a change

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA +

in the tide of their fortune.” While being
consoled in these words, Mandodari, they
say, wailed aloud at that moment, bathing
her breasts as well as her spotless
countenance in tears. In the meantime Sri
Rama spoke as follows to Vibhisana: “Let
obsequies be offered to your eldest brother
and let the womenfolk be comforted.”
Reflecting within himself, the sagacious
Vibhisana thereupon made to Sri Rama
the following humble and wholesome
submission, which was in conformity with
righteousness and self-interest: “Il cannot
perform the funeral rites in relation to one
who had abandoned the path of virtue and
good conduct, who was cruel, merciless
and untrue and laid his hands upon others’
wives. Intent upon doing harm to all, Ravana
was my virtual enemy in the guise of a
brother. Though worthy of adoration by virtue
of his seniority in that he was my elder
brother, he does not merit my respect. On
my refusing to perform his obsequies people
on earth will surely brand me as ruthless,
O Rama! (85—95)

श्रुत्वा तस्यागुणान् सर्वे वक्ष्यन्ति सुकृतं TA: |
were परमप्रीतो रामो धर्मभृतां वर:॥९६॥

विभीषणमुवाचेदं वाक्यज्ञं वाक्यकोविद:।
तवापि मे frat care त्वत्प्रभावान्मया जितम्॥ ९७॥
“On hearing of his blemishes, however,
all will speak of me as having done well.”
Highly pleased to hear the aforesaid answer,
Sri Rama, the foremost of those upholding
the cause of virtue, who was an adept in
the art of expression, replied as follows to
Vibhisana, who also knew how to speak:
“A kindly act must be done by me
to you as well inasmuch as victory has
been scored by me through your might.
(96-97)

अवश्यं तु क्षमं वाच्यो मया त्वं राक्षसेश्वर।
अधर्मानृतसंयुक्त: कामं त्वेष निशाचर:॥९८॥
तेजस्वी बलवाञ्छूर: संग्रामेषु च नित्यश:।
weeded: श्रूयते न पराजित:॥९९॥
