* AYODHYAKANDA +

had spoken as above, impatient as he was
to leave the place. (23)

अभिनन्द्य समापृच्छ्य समाधाय च राघवम्।

स जगामाश्रमं त्यक्त्वा कुलै: कुलपति: सह॥ २४॥
Extolling, duly taking leave of and

consoling Sri Rama (a scion of Raghu), the

aforesaid leader of the sages departed with

the hosts of sages, leaving the hermitage. (24)

Sond AeA कुलपतिमभिवाद्य ऋषिम्।
सम्यक्प्रीतैस्तैरनुमत उपदिष्टार्थ:
que वासाय स्वनिलयमुपसम्पेदे॥ २५॥

Seeing off the multitude of sages from
that area by following them to a distance, and
greeting the Rsi who presided over the entire

703

host, nay, instructed by the sages about his
duty, Sri Rama, when permitted by them, who
were highly pleased with him, returned to his
sacred dwelling for rest. (25)

आश्रममृषिविरहितं प्रभु:
क्षणमपि न wet स राघव:।
wat हि सततमनुगता-
स्तापसाश्चार्षचरिते धृतगुणा:॥ २६ ॥
The powerful Sri Rama, a scion of
Raghu, referred to above, did not leave the
hermitage, now bereft of the sages, even
for a moment; while the ascetics, who had
fixed their mind on Sri Rama, who followed
the conduct of sages, constantly followed
Sri Rama, with their mind. (26)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्येऽयोध्याकाण्डे
षोडशाधिकशततम: AA: ॥ ११६ Il

Thus ends Canto One hundred and sixteen in the Ayodhyakanda of the glorious
Ramayana of Valmiki, the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

सप्तदशाधिकशततम: सर्ग:
Canto CXVII

Afraid of prolonging his stay at Citrakuta because of many handicaps,
Sri Rama leaves that mountain and, reaching the hermitage of Sage
Atri, greets the aforesaid Rsi. Glorifying the ascetic life of his wife,
Anasuya, the sage urges Rama to send his consort, Sita, to
her. Kindly receiving the princess, who greeted the
venerable old lady on reaching her, as instructed
by her husband, Anasuya gives her instructions

on the duties of a devoted wife

राघवस्त्वपयातेषु सर्वेष्वनुविचिन्तयन्।

न तत्रारोचयद् वासं कारणैर्बहुभिस्तदा॥ १॥
Reflecting again and again, when all

the ascetics had left, Sri Rama, a scion of

Raghu, for his part did not like to continue

his stay there any more for many reasons.

(1)

इह मे भरतो Gt मातरश्च सनागरा:।
सा च मे स्मृतिरन्वेति am नित्यमनुशोचत:॥ २॥

“At this place was Bharata seen by me
as well as my mothers with the people of
Ayodhya. Nay, that memory still haunts me,
and | mourn for them daily. (2)
