* ARANYAKANDA «

एवमुक्त्वा चितां दीप्तामारोप्य पतगेश्वरम्।
ददाह TH धर्मात्मा स्वबन्धुमिव दु:खित:॥ ३१॥
Saying so, and placing the king of
winged creatures on the pyre, which was
got ready in the meantime by Laksmana
and was then lighted, distressed though he
was, Sri Rama, whose mind was set on
virtue, cremated him as one would cremate
one’s own kinsman. (31)

रामोऽथ सहसौमित्रिर्वनं गत्वा स वीर्यवान्।
स्थूलान् हत्वा महारोहीननुतस्तार तं द्विजम्॥३२॥

Repairing to the interior of the forest
alongwith Laksmana (son of Sumitra) and
digging out bulky roots known by the name
of Maharohi, the powerful, Sri Rama, who
then covered the ground with blades of the
sacred KuSa grass with a view to offering
them to the spirit of the deceased bird. (32)
रोहिमांसानि चोद्धृत्य पेशीकृत्वा महायशा:।
शकुनाय ददौ wat wat हरितशाद्बले॥३३॥

Nay, tearing off the pulp of the Maharohi
roots and kneading it into balls, the highly
illustrious Sri Rama offered them to the soul
of the cremated bird on the ground
overspread with green KuSa grass and lovely
to look at. (33)
यत् तत् प्रेतस्य मर्त्यस्य कथयन्ति द्विजातय:।
ae स्वर्गगमनं पित्र्यं तस्य Ta जजाप ह॥ ३४॥

For the benefit of the bird Sri Rama
also uttered, they say, in a low voice the
body of those holy texts, sacred to the
manes, which the Brahmanas recommend
as conducive to the ascent of the spirit of a
deceased mortal to heaven. (34)
ततो गोदावरीं गत्वा नदीं नरवरात्मजौ।
उदकं चक्रतुस्तस्मै गृध्रराजाय तावुभौ॥ ३५॥

907

Repairing to the bank of the Godavari
river, both the aforesaid sons of DaSaratha,
the foremost of men, then proceeded to
offer water to the spirit of the said king of
vultures. (35)
शास्त्रदृष्टेन विधिना जलं गृध्राय राघवौ।
स्नात्वा तौ गृध्रराजाय उदकं चक्रतुस्तदा॥ ३६॥

Having first bathed in the river, those
two scions of Raghu then offered water to
the spirit of the king of vultures according
to the ceremony found prescribed in the
scriptures. (36)
स गृध्रराज: कृतवान् यशस्करं

सुदुष्करं कर्म wr निपातित:।
महर्षिकल्पेन च संस्कृतस्तदा
जगाम पुण्यां गतिमात्मन: शुभाम्॥ ३७॥

Having in the first place accomplished a
glorious deed (in the shape of staking his life
to rescue Sita from the clutches of Ravana,
which was most difficult to accomplish, and
secondly having been killed in action against
Ravana and further cremated by Sri Rama,
who was as good as an eminent seer of
Vedic Mantras, the aforesaid king of vultures
presently attained a holy destiny conducive
to the blessedness of the soul. (37)

कृतोदकौ तावपि पक्षिसत्तमे

Renta बुद्धिं प्रणिधाय जग्मतु: |
प्रवेश्य सीताधिगमे ततो मनो

at सुरेन्द्राविव विष्णुवासवौ॥ ३८ ॥

Having offered water to the bird and
setting their mind fully at rest about the
future of Jatayu, the foremost of birds, nay,
focussing their mind on the recovery of
Sita, the two princes thereupon proceeded
on their journey to the forest like Lord Visnu
and Indra, the two rulers of gods. (38)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्येऽरण्यकाण्डेऽष्टषष्टितम: Wp: ॥ ६८ ॥

Thus ends Canto Sixty-eight in the Aranyakanda of the glorious Ramayana of Valmiki,
the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

