810

Janasthana Sita, resembling a daughter of
gods, the wife of Rama, by whom, relying
on his physical strength alone, was my
sister, SUrpanakha, deformed in the forest
by depriving her of her ears and nose without
any show of hostility. Be my helper in the
said undertaking. Indeed, with you as my
associate standing by my side here and
backed by my brothers (Kumbhakarna and
others), O exceptionally mighty ogre, | do
not care a fig for all the gods. Therefore, be
you my helper since you are powerful enough
to help me. (6—15)

at युद्धे च दर्पे च न ह्यस्ति सदृशस्तव।
उपायतो महान् शूरो महामायाविशारद:॥१६॥

“Indeed, none is your equal in prowess,
warfare and martial pride, an eminent hero
as you are even in devising manoeuvres
and an adept in major conjuring tricks. (16)
एतदर्थमहँ प्राप्तस्त्वत्समीपं निशाचर।

TOT तत् कर्म साहाय्ये यत् HT वचनान्मम॥ १७॥

“With this object alone have | sought
your presence, O night-stalker ! Hear now
about that role which has to be played by
you by way of help to me at my instance.

(17)
सौवर्णस्त्वं मृगो भूत्वा चित्रो रजतबिन्दुभि:।
आश्रमे तस्य रामस्य सीताया: प्रमुखे ATU Veil

“Assuming the form of a golden deer
freckled with silvery spots, roam you at the
hermitage of the said Rama before Sita.

(18)
त्वां तु नि:संशयं सीता gear तु मृगरूपिणम्।
गृह्यतामिति wat लक्ष्मणं चाभिधास्यति॥१९॥
ततस्तयोरपाये तु शून्ये सीतां यथासुखम्।
निराबाधो हरिष्यामि राहुश्चन्द्रप्रभामिव॥ २०॥

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

“Beholding you in the form of a deer,
Sita for her part will undoubtedly say to her
lord and Laksmana, “Let it be captured.”
When Rama and Laksmana go far away
from their hermitage, then rid of all hindrance.
| shall for my part bear Sita away easily in
solitude, as does Rahu take away the
splendour of the moon. (19-20)

ad: पश्चात् सुखं रामे भार्याहरणकर्शिते।
fastest प्रहरिष्यामि कृतार्थेनान्तरात्मना॥ २१॥

“After that, with my inner mind satisfied
as a result of my object having been
accomplished | shall with ease confidently
strike at Rama emaciated through the
abduction of his wife.” (21)

तस्य रामकथां श्रुत्वा मारीचस्य महात्मन:।
शुष्कं समभवद् वक्त्रं परित्रस्तो बभूव Ail २२॥
On hearing the mention of Sri Rama,

the mouth of that high-minded Marica was
parched and he got alarmed. (22)

ओष्ठौ परिलिहन् शुष्कौ नेत्रैरनिमिषैरिव।
मृतभूत इवार्तस्तु रावणं समुदैक्षत॥२३॥

Licking his dry lips, Marica, for his part,
who looked like one dead, afflicted as he was,
stared at Ravana with unwinking eyes. (23)
स Want त्रस्तविषण्णचेता

महावने रामपराक्रमज्ञ:।
कृताञ्जलिस्तत्त्वमुवाच वाक्यं
हितं च तस्मै हितमात्मनश्च॥ २४॥

With a frightened and dejected mind
and joined palms, Marica, who had come to
know the prowess of Rama in a great forest,
addressed to Ravana the following truthful
words, which were conducive to his good
as well as to his own. (24)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्येऽरण्यकाण्डे षट्त्रिंश: सर्ग: ॥ ३६ ॥

Thus ends Canto Thirty-six in the Aranyakanda of the glorious Ramayana of Valmiki,
the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

