1116

Having spent one and half months on
the way, the army, hale and hearty, bearing

« VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

happy and well-fed men, reached Kekaya
territory. (25)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये उत्तरकाण्डे शततम: AA: Il 200 ॥

Thus ends Canto Hundred in the Uttarakanda of the glorious Ramayana of Valmiki,
the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

Canto CI
Bharata and Yudhajit reach the city of the Gandharva, their fight with

Gandharvas, latter are defeated. Bharata installs Taksa on Taksasila
and Puskala on Puskalavata and return to Ayodhya

श्रुत्वा सेनापतिं प्राप्तं भरतं केकयाधिप:।
gate गार्ग्यसहितं परां प्रीतिमुपागमत्॥१॥
Yudhajit, the king of Kekaya, having
heard of the arrival of Bharata as the
Commander-in-chief of his army, was highly
pleased together with Gargya. (1)

a निर्ययौ जनौघेन महता केकयाधिप:।
त्वरमाणोऽभिचक्राम गन्धर्वान् कामरूपिण:॥ २॥
He, the lord of Kekaya, and Bharata

set out accompanied by a large army and
quickly reached the capital of the Gandharvas.

(2)
भरतश्च चयुधाजिच्च समेतौ लघुविक्रमै:।
गन्धर्वनगरं Wat सबलौ सपदानुगौ॥३॥

Bharata and Yudhajit accompanied by

the rapid action warriors reached the city of
Gandharvas with the army and attendants.

(3)
श्रुत्वा तु भरतं Wa गन्धर्वास्ते समागता:।
योद्धुकामा महावीर्या व्यनदंस्ते समन्तत:॥४॥

Those Gandharvas, possessed of great

power, and desirous of war came out,
shouting war cries every where. (4)

Wd: Pave तुमुलं लोमहर्षणम्।
ant wet न चान्यतरयोर्जय:॥५॥

Then there ensued a great battle

enough to cause horripilation for seven nights
in a terrible form, and yet none came out
victorious. (5)

खड्गशक्तिधनुर्ग्रहा ve: शोणितसंस्त्रवा:।
नृकलेवरवाहिन्य: Wat: सर्वतोदिशम्॥६॥

Rivers with streams of blood, having
crocodiles in the form of swords, arrows
and bows, and carrying the corpses of men,
gushed forth on all sides. (6)

ततो रामानुज: क्रुद्ध: कालस्यास्त्रं सुदारुणम्।
Pad नाम भरतो गन्धर्वेष्वभ्यचोदयत्॥७॥
Then Bharata, the brother of Sri Rama,
highly enraged directed the most terrible
weapon of death, Sarnvarta by name, towards
the Gandharvas. (7)

a बद्धा: कालपाशेन dada विदारिता:।

क्षणेनाभिहतास्तेन fre: कोट्यो महात्मना॥ ८॥
Struck by the mighty Sarvarta, as if

bound by the noose of death, they the

Gandharvas, three million in number, perished
in a moment. (8)

aq युद्धं तादूशं घोरं न स्मरन्ति दिवौकस:।
निमेषान्तरमात्रेण तादृशानां महात्मनाम्॥९॥
Even the gods did not remember a

battle so fierce in which those mighty
Gandharvas were killed in a moment. (9)
