# YUDDHAKANDA +

that huge army of monkeys, which was
unlimited and _ irresistible, King Ravana
questioned Sarana as follows: “Which
monkeys of these are foremost? Which
of them are valiant and which endowed with
extraordinary might? (6—8)
के पूर्वमभिवर्तन्ते महोत्साहा: समन्तत:।
केषां श्रृणोति सुग्रीव: के वा यूथपयूथपा:॥ ९॥
“Full of great zeal on all sides, they
march in the van? To whose advice does
Sugriva listen and who are the commanders
of commanders of monkey hordes? (9)
सारणाचक्र्व मे सर्वं किं प्रभावा: प्लवंगमा:।
सारणो राक्षसेन्द्रस्य वचनं परिपृच्छत:॥१०॥
आबभाषेऽथ मुख्यज्ञो मुख्यांस्तत्र athe: |
we योऽभिमुखो लङ्कां नर्दस्तिष्ठति ArT: ee tl
यूथपानां सहस्राणां शतेन परिवारित:।
यस्य घोषेण महता सप्राकारा सतोरणा॥१२॥
लङ्का प्रतिहता सर्वा सशैलवनकानना।
सर्वशाखामृगेन्द्रस्य सुग्रीवस्य महात्मन:॥१३॥
बलाग्रे तिष्ठते वीरो नीलो नामैष यूथप:।
बाहू प्रगृह्य य: पद्भ्यां महीं गच्छति वीर्यवान्॥ १४॥
लङ्कामभिमुख: कोपादभीक्ष्णं च विजृम्भते।
गिरिशरृङ्गप्रतीकाश: पद्मकिंजल्कसंनिभ:।॥ १५॥
स्फोटयत्यतिसंरब्धो लाङ्गूलं च पुन: पुन:।
यस्य लाङ्गूलशब्देन स्वनन्ति प्रदिशो दश॥१६॥
एष वानरराजेन सुग्रीवेणाभिषेचित:।
युवराजोऽङ्गदो नाम त्वामाह्वयति संयुगे॥१७॥
“Nay, how powerful are the monkeys?
Tell me everything, 0 Sarana!” Hearing
the questionnaire of Ravana (the king of
ogres), who was questioning him as
aforesaid, Sarana, who knew the army
chiefs, forthwith submitted as_ follows
about the leading monkeys in that army:
“The monkey who stands here roaring with
his face turned towards Lanka and
surrounded by one lakh of commanders of
monkey hordes, nay, by whose powerful

383

voice the entire Lanka with its defensive
walls and arches and_ including _ its
mountains, groves and wood-lands is
repeatedly struck, and who has taken up
his position at the head of the army of the
lofty-minded Sugriva, the ruler of all the
monkeys, is the gallant and well-known
commander of monkey hordes, Nila by name.
He who, lifting his arms, is walking on the
earth with his feet, who, standing, as he
does, with his face turned towards Lanka,
yawns repeatedly in fury, who looks like the
peak of a mountain in stature and resembles
the filaments of a lotus in complexion, who
getting highly excited, lashes his tail again
and again, nay, with the swish of whose tail
all the ten directions resound, is the Crown
prince, Angada by name, installed by
Sugriva, the king of monkeys. He challenges
you to combat. (10—17)

वालिन: Age: UA: सुग्रीवस्य सदा fra: |
राघवार्थे पराक्रान्त: शक्रार्थे वरुणो Baru १८॥

“A son worthy of Vali (his father), he is
ever beloved of Sugriva (his uncle) and is
ready to display his prowess in the cause
of Sri Rama (a scion of Raghu) as Varuna
(the god of water) in the cause of Indra, the
ruler of gods. (18)

Ua सा मति: Pat Ag दूष्टा जनकात्मजा।
हनूमता वेगवता राघवस्य हितैषिणा॥१९॥

“That Sita, daughter of Janaka, was
seen by Hanuman, who is full of speed
and is a well-wisher of Rama (a scion of
Raghu), was wholly the design of Angada.

(19)

बहूनि वानरेन्द्राणामेष यूथानि वीर्यवान्।
परिगृह्याभियाति cat स्वेनानीकेन मर्दितुम्॥ Ro Il

“Taking with him many battalions of the
foremost of monkeys, this powerful monkey
is marching forward to crush you with his
army. (20)
