« KISKINDHAKANDA +

is now the ruler of all the monkey chiefs.
Dispatched by him and directed by Sri Rama,
and looking about here and there in this
way, we could not find Sita (a princess of
the Videha territory) any more than one
would perceive the splendour of the sun at
night. (14-15)
a ad दण्डकारण्यं विचिंत्य सुसमाहिता:।
अज्ञानात् तु प्रविष्टा: स्म धरण्या विव्रृतं बिलम्॥ १६ ॥
“Having explored the Dandaka forest
most carefully, we, however, penetrated
deeply through ignorance into a gaping hole
in the ground. (16)
मयस्य मायाविहितं ae fact च विचिन्वताम्।
व्यतीतस्तत्र नो मासो यो WaT समय: Ga: १७॥

“Nay, even as we were scouring that
cavern constructed by the demon Maya by

1141

dint of his wonderful architectural skill, the
period of one month appointed by the king,
Sugriva, as the time-limit for the search,
slipped past us. (17)

a ad कपिराजस्य ad वचनकारिण:।
कृतां संस्थामतिक्रान्ता भयात् प्रायमुपासिता: ॥ १८ ॥

“Having exceeded the time-limit fixed
by the king, we all, who were engaged in
carrying out the command of Sugriva (the
ruler of monkeys), have sat down through
fear to starve ourselves to death. (18)

क्रुद्धे तस्मिंस्तु काकुत्स्थे सुग्रीवे च सलक्ष्मणे।
गतानामपि सर्वेषां तत्र नो नास्ति जीवितम्॥१९॥

“In the event of Sri Rama, a scion of
Kakutstha, as well as Sugriva with Laksmana
being angry, there is no hope of survival for
us all even if we return to Kiskindha.” (19)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये किष्किन्धाकाण्डे सप्तपञ्चाश: सर्ग: ॥ ५७॥

Thus ends Canto Fifty-seven in the Kiskindhakanda of the glorious Ramayana of
Valmiki, the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

अष्टपञ्चाश: सर्ग:
Canto LVI

Sampati tells Angada how having once soared with his younger brother to the
neighbourhood of the solar orb in his eagerness to test their relative strength
and flying power, he had his own wings burnt in trying to save the wings
of Jatayu by spreading his own wings over them as a canopy, and
dropped on a peak of the Vindhyan range. Inquired by Angada if he
knew anything about the abduction of Sita, he acknowledged his
having seen a youthful lady being borne away by Ravana and
crying out “Rama, which now leads him to think that she was no
other than Sri Rama’s beloved spouse. Sampati further tells
Angada how, gifted as he was with an inordinately long
vision, he could see Lanka, the capital of Ravana, at a
distance of one hundred Yojanas, as well as the place
where Sita has been lodged. On his expressing a
desire to offer water to the spirit of his deceased
brother, the monkeys take him to the seashore and
bring him back on his having concluded the rite
