* AYODHYAKANDA +

of the Citrakuta hill, he devotes himself
entirely to virtuous acts and never sets his
mind on sin. (30)

ऋॠषयस्तत्र बहवो faa शरदां शतम्।
तपसा दिवमारूढा: कपालशिरसा सह॥ ३१॥

“Having spent a hundred winters in
austerities as though in sport on that mountain,
many a seer with a head hoary through
age as a bare skull ascended to heaven.

(31)
प्रविविक्कतमहं मन्ये तं वासं Vad: सुखम्।
ge वा वनवासाय dd WA मया सह॥ ३२॥

“| consider that mountain to be a very
lonely and comfortable place for you to live
in. Else dwell with me here at the confluence
of the Ganga and the Yamuna for the period
of exile.” (32)

स रामं सर्वकामैस्तं भरद्वाज: प्रियातिथिम्।
au सह च भ्रात्रा प्रतिजग्राह हर्षयन्॥३३॥

The celebrated Sage Bharadwaja
entertained his aforesaid beloved guest, Sri
Rama, with his consort, Sita, and with his
younger brother, Laksmana, delighting them
with all desired objects. (33)

तस्य प्रयागे रामस्य तं महर्षिमुपेयुष:।
प्रपन्ना रजनी पुण्या चित्रा: कथयत: कथा:॥ ३४॥

While Sri Rama, having approached
that great seer at Prayaga (the confluence
of the Ganga and the Yamuna), was talking
with him on various topics, the delightful
night arrived. (34)

सीतातृतीय: काकुत्स्थ: परिश्रान्त: सुखोचित: |
भरद्वाजाश्रमे रम्ये at रात्रिमवसत् सुखम्॥ ३५॥

Greatly fatigued, Sri Rama (a scion of
Kakutstha), who was accompanied by Sita
as the third (Laksmana being the second)
and deserved all comforts, happily spent
that night at the lovely hermitage of
Bharadwaja. (35)
प्रभातायां तु शार्वर्यां भरद्वाजमुपागमत्।
उवाच नरशार्दूलो मुनिं ज्वलिततेजसम्॥ ३६॥

497

The night having ended in dawn, Sri
Rama, a tiger among men, approached and
spoke as follows to Sage Bharadwaja of
resplendent glory : (36)

wet भगवन्नद्य सत्यशील तवाश्रमे।

उषिता: स्मोऽह वसतिमनुजानातु नो भवान्॥ ३७॥

“We have lodged tonight at your
hermitage, O venerable sir! Pray, allow us
to proceed to the place fixed for our abode
now, O sage given to truthfulness!” (37)
मधुमूलफलोपेतं चित्रकूटं व्रजेति ह॥ ३८॥

That night having come to an end,
Bharadwaja, when requested as above,
replied for his part, they say, as follows:
“Proceed gladly to Citrakuta, rich in honey,

roots and fruits. (38)
वासमौपयिकं wet aa wa महाबल।
नानानगगणोपेत: किन्नरोरगसेवित:॥ ३९॥

मयूरनादाभिरतो गजराजनिषेवित: |
गम्यतां भवता शैलश्चित्रकूट: स विश्रुत: ॥४०॥
पुण्यश्च रमणीयश्च बहुमूलफलायुत:।
तत्र कुञ्जरयूथानि मृगयूथानि चैव हि॥४१॥
विचरन्ति वनान्तेषु तानि द्रक्ष्यसि राघव।

सरित्प्रस्रवणप्रस्थान् दरीकन्दरनिर्झरान्।
wa: सीतया सार्धं नन्दिष्यति मनस्तव॥४२॥

“| deem it a fit place for your abode, O
Rama, possessed of great strength ! Repair
you to that well-known sacred and lovely
mountain, Citrakuta, which is adorned with
clusters of trees of every description and
frequented by Kinnaras and Nagas, is
rendered charming by the cries of peacocks
and infested with lordly elephants and
abounds in roots and fruits. Since herds of
elephants as well as troops of deer roam
about in the sylvan regions there, you will
behold them, O scion of Raghu, as well as
rivers, cascades, peaks of mountains,
fissures in rocks, caves and rivulets, which
will delight your mind as you roam about in
the woods with Sita. (39—42)
