890

“Between the Yaksas and the Raksasas
then started a thick fight in which the said
ministers of the Raksasa felt alarmed. (8)

स दृष्टवा तादृशं सैन्यं दशग्रीवो निशाचर:।
हर्षनादान् Te Healt A क्रोधादभ्यधावत॥ ९॥

“Seeing his army in that plight, the
Raksasa, DaSagriva, rushed out in anger
raising many shouts of encouragement. (9)

ये तु ते राक्षसेन्द्रस्य सचिवा घोरविक्रमा:।

तेषां सहस्रमेकैको यक्षाणां समयोधयत्॥१०॥
“The ministers of the king of the

Raksasas were terribly valiant. Each one of

them for his part fought with a thousand

Yaksas. (10)

ततो गदाभिर्मुसलैरसिभि: शाक्तितोमरै:।
हन्यमानो दशग्रीवस्तत्सैन्यं समगाहत॥११॥

“Under an attack of clubs, pestles,
swords, javelins and iron clubs, Ravana
entered the enemy’s army. (11)

स निरुच्छ्रवासवत् तत्र वध्यमानो दशानन:।
वर्षद्भिरिव जीमूतैर्धाराभिरवरुध्यत ।। १२ ॥

“Being struck with volleys of arrows by
the Yaksas as though with torrents of raining
clouds, DaSanana was held up and was
unable even to breathe, as it were. (12)

न dant व्यथां चैव यक्षशस्त्रै:; समाहत:।
महीधर इवाम्भोदैर्धाराशतसमुक्षित: ॥ १३ ॥
“Just as a mountain is not shaken
even though drenched by clouds with
hundreds of torrents, even so he (DaSagriva)
did not feel tormented though wounded by
the weapons shot by the Yaksas. (13)

स महात्मा समुद्यम्य कालदण्डोपमां गदाम्।
प्रविवेश तत: सैन्यं नयन् यक्षान् यमक्षयम्॥ १४॥
“Lifting up a club, resembling the rod of
Death (Kaladanda), the gigantic DasSagriva
thereupon entered the army, dispatching the
Yaksas to the abode of Yama. (14)

a कक्षमिव विस्तीर्णं शुष्केन्धनमिवाकुलम्।
वातेनाग्निरिवादीप्तो यक्षसैन्यं ददाह तत्॥१५॥

« VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

“Like a fire ablaze on account of the
wind, he burnt the aforesaid army of the
Yaksas, which was spread out as grass
and concentrated like dried wood. (15)

तैस्तु तत्र महामात्यैर्महोदरशुकादिभि:।
अल्पावशेषास्ते यक्षा: कृता वातैरिवाम्बुदा: UW १६॥

“By those great ministers, Mahodara,
Suka and others, the Yaksas were reduced
largely in number even as clouds are
dispersed by the winds. (16)

केचित् समाहता भग्ना: पतिता: समरे क्षितौ।
ओष्ठांश्च दशनैस्तीक्ष्णैरदशन् कुपिता WT १७॥

“Some of them, badly mutilated when
struck in the battle, fell on the ground, while
others in anger bit their lips with their sharp
teeth on the battlefield. (17)

श्रान्ताश्चान्योन्यमालिङ्गय भ्रष्टशस्त्रा रणाजिरे।
सीदन्ति च तदा यक्षा: कूला Fa जलेन Til Veil
“Just like the bank of a river eroded by
water, some of the Yaksas, exhausted and
embracing one another, sank down on the
battlefield, their weapons fallen down. (18)
हतानां गच्छतां स्वर्गं युध्यतामथ धावताम्।
प्रेक्षतामृषिसङ्घानां न बभूवान्तरं दिवि॥१९॥
“The atmosphere was thickly crowded
with those who, having lost their lives, were
proceeding to heaven, with those who were
still fighting, with those who were running
away and with the host of Rsis witnessing
the fight. (19)

भग्नांस्तु तान् समालक्ष्य यक्षेन्द्रांस्तु महाबलान्।

धनाध्यक्षो महाबाहु: प्रेषयामास AMATI Ro Il
“Seeing those exceptionally mighty

leaders of the Yaksas put to flight, the

mighty-armed lord of wealth sent other mighty
Yaksas. (20)

एतस्मिन्नन्तरे राम विस्तीर्णबलवाहन:।
प्रेषितो न्यपतद् यक्षो नाम्ना संयोधकण्टक:॥ २१॥
“In the meantime, O Rama, a Yaksa,

Samyodhakantaka by name, with a huge
army and a vast number of mounts and
