548

with sesame oil, he took a dip again and
again, head foremost in the oil. (10)

स्वप्नेऽपि सागरं शुष्कं चन्द्रं च पतितं भुवि।
उपरुद्धां च Wd तमसेव समाव्रृताम्॥११॥
“Also in the dream | saw the ocean
dry and the moon fallen on the earth and the
entire globe molested by Raksasas and
others and enveloped, as it were, in darkness.
(11)

औषपवाह्यस्य नागस्य विषाणं शकलीकृतम्।
सहसा चापि संशान्ता ज्वलिता जातवेदस:॥ १२॥
“| further beheld a tusk of the king’s
elephant broken to pieces and blazing fires
suddenly extinguished. (12)

अवदीर्णां च पृथिवीं शुष्कांश्च विविधान् द्रुमान्।
अहं पश्यामि विध्वस्तान् सधूमांश्चैव पर्वतान्॥ १३॥
“| also saw the earth riven and trees of

various kinds withered up and mountains too
emitting smoke and razed to the ground. (13)

Ws Hrataa चैव निषष्ण्णं कृष्णवाससम्।
प्रहरन्ति स्म राजानं प्रमदा: कृष्णपिङ्गला:॥१४॥
“Young women, dark and reddish brown

of complexion, assailed the king, seated on
an iron seat, attired in black. (14)

त्वरमाणश्च धर्मात्मा रक्तमाल्यानुलेपन:।
Wt खरयुक्तेन प्रयातो दक्षिणामुख:॥ १५॥

“Nay, adorned with a garland of crimson
flowers and smeared with red sandal-paste,
the pious-minded king hastily departed
southward in a chariot drawn by donkeys.(15)

प्रहसन्तीव राजानं प्रमदा रक्तवासिनी।
प्रकर्षन्ती WaT दृष्टा राक्षसी विकृतानना॥१६॥
“A young ogress with an ugly face and

clad in crimson was seen by me mocking
the king, as it were, and dragging him. (16)

एवमेतन्मया दृष्टमिमां ult भयावहाम्।
अहं रामोऽथवा राजा लक्ष्मणो वा मरिष्यति॥ १७॥

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

“During the last night, fearful as it was,
this was the vision seen by me as aforesaid.
This prognosticates that either myself or
Sri Rama or the king or Laksmana is going
to die. (17)

नरो यानेन य: स्वप्ने खरयुक्तेन याति fe
अचिरात्तस्य धूम्राग्रं चितायां सम्प्रदृश्यते॥ ecu
“A column of smoke is surely and
vividly perceived before long on the funeral
pile of a man who drives in a dream in a
chariot drawn by donkeys. (18)

एतन्निमित्तं दीनोऽहं न aa: प्रतिपूजये।
शुष्यतीव aA कण्ठो न स्वस्थमिव मे मन:॥ १९॥

“This is why | feel depressed and do
not make much of your words. My throat is
getting parched, as it were, and my mind is
not quite at ease. (19)
न पश्यामि भयस्थानं भयं चैवोपधारये।
wey स्वरयोगो A छाया चापगता मम।
जुगुप्सु इव चात्मानं न च पश्यामि कारणम्॥ २०॥

“| do not perceive any tangible ground
for fear, yet | experience fear. Nay, my
voice has become hoarse and my lustre
has departed. Moreover, | have begun to
hate myself, yet | do not see any cause for
it. (20)
इमां च दु:स्वप्नगतिं निशम्य fe

त्वनेकरूपामवितर्कितां पुरा।
wa महत् तुद हृदयान्न याति मे
विचिन्त्य राजानमचिन्त्यदर्शनम्॥ २१ ॥

“Even as | reflect on the course of my
evil dreams, which were seen in many
forms—a course which was never imagined
by me before—and even as | think deeply
of the king, whose sight is something which
can no longer be anticipated, the great fear
that has been roused in me does not depart
from my heart.” (21)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्येऽयोध्याकाण्डे एकोनसप्ततितम: सर्ग: ॥ ६९ ॥

Thus ends Canto Sixty-nine in the Ayodhyakanda of the glorious Ramayana of
Valmiki, the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

