656

waa विहीनस्तव शोकरुग्ण-
स्त्वां संस्मरन्नेव गत: पिता ते॥ ९ ॥
“Bereft of you and stricken with grief
caused by separation from you and unable

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

to divert his mind, which was solely attached
to you alone, our father departed from this
world grieving only for you, longing for your
sight and fondly remembering you alone.” (9)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्येऽयोध्याकाण्डे द्व्यधिकशततम: सर्ग: ॥ 202 ॥

Thus ends Canto One hundred and two in the Ayodhyakanda of the glorious
Ramayana of Valmiki, the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

Canto CH

Fallen into a swoon to hear of his father’s ascent to heaven and brought back
to consciousness by Bharata and others, who sprinkle water on him and
employ other such devices, Sri Rama laments in various ways. Comforted
by Bharata and having in his turn consoled Sita and repairing to the
bank of the Ganga, nay, offering water and balls of cooked food to
the spirit of his departed father, he returns to his hut. Hearing
their cry of distress, the troops approach them and are
greeted by Sri Rama according to their rank

तां श्रुत्वा करुणां area पितुर्मरणसंहिताम्।
राघवो wart Wa गतचेतन:॥१॥
Hearing the pathetic news relating to
the death of his father, King DaSaratha, told
by Bharata, Sri Rama, a scion of Raghu,
fainted there. (1)

तं तु वज्रमिवोत्सृष्टमाहवे दानवारिणा।
वाग्वज्रं भरतेनोक्तममनोज्ञं परंतप: WAU
Wea wit ag वै पुष्पिताङ्ग sa द्रुम:।
a परशुना कृत्तस्तथा ya पपात ह॥ ३॥
Hearing the aforesaid unpleasant and
heart-rending news broken by Bharata, which
was piercing like a thunderbolt discharged
by Indra, the enemy of demons, on a field of
battle, and raising his arms, Sri Rama, the
scorcher of his enemies, for his part actually
sank to the ground precisely like a tree with
boughs full of blossom felled down with an
axe in a forest: so it is said. (2-3)

कूलघातपरिश्रान्तं watt कुञ्जरम्॥४॥

भ्रातरस्ते महेष्वासं सर्वत: शोककर्शितम्।
रुदन्त: सह ace fata: सलिलेन angi

Weeping with Sita, a princess of the
Videha territory, his celebrated brothers,
Bharata, Laksmana and Satrughna, promptly
sprinkled water all over Sri Rama, the ruler of
the earth and the wielder of a mighty bow,
fallen on the ground, as aforesaid, blasted
with grief, like an elephant exhausted by
striking with his tusks against a river bank
and lying fast asleep due to fatigue. (4-5)

aq संज्ञां पुनर्लब्ध्वा नेत्राभ्यामश्रुमुत्सृजन्।
उपाक्रामत काकुत्स्थ: PAT ag भाषितुम्॥ i
Shortly regaining his consciousness,
the aforesaid Sri Rama, a scion of Kakutstha,
for his part, began piteously to wail, dropping
tears from his eyes. (6)
स राम: स्वर्गतं strat frat पृथिवीपतिम्।
उवाच भरतं वाक्यं धर्मात्मा धर्मसंहितम्॥७॥
Hearing of the emperor, his father,
having ascended to heaven, the celebrated
