868

उदतिष्ठन्महान् शब्दो रक्षसामभिनर्दताम्।
रक्षसां रुवतां Wa श्रुत्वा हरिहयानुज:॥४१॥
तिर्यगास्थाय संक्रुद्ध: पक्षीशे भगवान् ale: 1
पराङ्मुखोऽप्युत्ससर्ज मालेश्चक्रं जिघांसया॥४२॥

“When Sumali’s chariot was being
drawn into confusion by his horses, the
alert Mali, holding the bow and an arrow in
his hands, rushed towards the mount of
Visnu, the mighty-armed, who was darting
towards him on the battlefield. Mali’s arrows,
decked with gold and shot from his bow,
reaching Visnu, entered His body as birds
enter into the Kraufica hill. Pierced by
thousands of arrows, shot by Mali, Visnu
did not feel ruffled on the battlefield even as
a self-controlled man is not perturbed by
mental agonies. Then, hearing the twang of
Malis bow-string, the Lord, the Creator of
beings, who was armed with a mace and a
sword, shot volleys of arrows at Mali. Those
arrows, bright as a diamond and shining like
lightning, reaching Malis body, drank his
blood as though the Nagas (huge serpents)
would be drinking nectar. “Having put Mali
to flight, Sri Hari (the Bearer of a conch, a
discus and a club), flung to the ground
Malrs crest, his banner, his bow and his
horses. Having lost his chariot, and seizing
hold of his club, Mali, the best of Raksasas,
with the weapon in his hand, leapt like a lion
from a mountain peak. With his club he hit
Garuda (the king of ealges) on the forehead
even as Yama hit Siva and Indra would
strike a mountain with his thunderbolt. Hit
hard by the said Mali with his club, Garuda,
unable to stand the acute pain, made the
Lord turn His back on the battle. A great
clamour rose from the Raksasas, who roared
when Lord Hari was, in fact, made to turn
His back on the battlefield alongwith Garuda
by Mali. “Highly incensed to hear the noise
of the roaring Raksasas, Lord Hari, the
younger brother of Indra, even sitting obliguely
on Garuda’s back, as His face was turned
away from the battle, threw His discus at
Mali with a view to kill him. (31—42)

« VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

Ad सूर्यमण्डलाभासं स्वभासा भासयन् नभ:।
कालचक्रनिभं चक्रं माले: शीर्षमपातयत्॥४३॥

Resembling the wheel of time and
lustrous like the orb of the sun, that discus,
illuminating as it did the skies by its own
blaze, brought Mali’s head to the ground.

(43)

तच्छिरो राक्षसेन्द्रस्य चक्रोत्कृत्तं विभीषणम्।
पपात रुधिरोद्गारि पुरा राहुशिरो यथा॥४४॥

That fierce-looking head of the Raksasa-
chief, cut off by the discus, fell on the
ground emitting blood, like Rahu’s head of
yore. (44)

तत: Ot: सम्प्रहृष्टै: सर्वप्राणसमीरित:।
सिंहनादरवो am: साधु देवेतिवादिभि:।॥ wy

Then a clamour like the roar of a lion,
saying ‘Well done, O Lord!’ was raised with
all their might by the gods, who were
transported with joy. (45).
मालिनं fed gear सुमाली माल्यवानपि।
सबलौ शोकसंतप्तौ लङ्कामेव प्रधावितौ॥४६॥

Seeing Mali dead, Sumali and Malyavan,
stricken with grief fled to Lanka with the
remnant of the forces. (46)

Tes समाश्वस्त: संनिव्रत्य यथा WT

राक्षसान् द्रावयामास पक्षवातेन कोपित:॥४७॥
Having recovered, the enraged Garuda

returned and dispersed as before the

Raksasas by the blast (arising from the
flapping) of his wings. (47)

चक्रकृत्तास्यकमला गदासंचूर्णितोरस:।
लाङ्गलग्लपितग्रीवा मुसलैर्भिन्नमस्तका:॥४८॥
केचिच्चैवासिना छिन्नास्तथान्ये शरताडिता:।

निपेतुरम्बरात् तूर्णं राक्षसा: सागराम्भसि॥४९॥

The Raksasas quickly fell into the sea-
water from the skies; some had their lotus-
like faces cut by the discus, some had their
breasts pulverized by the club, some had
their necks rent by the ploughshare, some
had their heads broken by the pestle, some
