* AYODHYAKANDA +

635

Canto XCVII

Pointing out to Laksmana who was waxing indignant at Bharata, the impropriety
of killing the latter, Sri Rama pacifies him by assuring him of the pious
intentions of Bharata. Ashamed of himself to hear the opinion of his
brother about Bharata, and climbing down the tree, Laksmana
hides his shame by changing the topic. Commanded by
Bharata, who was anxious to avoid causing disturbance
to the hermitage occupied by Sri Rama, the army

encamps roundabout Citrakuta

* ।।

सुसंरब्धं तु भरतं लक्ष्मणं क्रोधमूच्छितम्।
रामस्तु परिसान्त्व्याथ वचनं चेदमब्रवीत्॥१॥

Sri Rama, for his part, pacified in
everyway Laksmana, who actually bore an
utterly bellicose attitude towards Bharata
and was beside himself with rage, and then
spoke to him as follows: (1)

किमत्र धनुषा कार्यमसिना वा सचर्मणा।
महाबले महोत्साहे भरते स्वयमागते॥ २॥

“When the very mighty Bharata, full of
great longing to see me, has turned up in
person, what purpose will be served at this
moment with a bow or with a sword
accompanied by a shield? (2)

faq: सत्यं प्रतिश्रुत्य हत्वा भरतमाहवे।
fe करिष्यामि राज्येन सापवादेन लक्ष्मण॥ ३॥

“Having given, in the first instance, my
word of honour to implement the pledge of
my father and killed Bharata in an encounter,
O Laksmana, what shall | do with a kingdom
stained with infamy (that will be occasioned
by my going back upon my word of honour
and robbing Bharata of the gift bestowed on
him by our father)? (3)
यद् द्रव्यं बान्धवानां वा मित्राणां वा क्षये भवेत्।
नाहं तत् प्रतिगृह्णीयां wear विषकृतानिव॥४॥

“ am not going to accept a fortune that
will descend on the destruction of my kinsfolk

or friends any more than one would partake
of dishes mixed with poison. (4)

धर्ममर्थं च कामं च पृथिवीं चापि लक्ष्मण।
इच्छामि भवतामर्थे एतत् प्रतिश्रृणोमि ते॥५॥

“| seek virtue, fortune, gratification of
senses and even sovereignty of the earth,
O Laksmana, only for you people, my
brothers, and not for any personal gain: |
give this word of honour to you. (5)
भ्रातूणां संग्रहार्थं च सुखार्थं चापि लक्ष्मण।
राज्यमप्यहमिच्छामि सत्येनायुधमालभे I ६ A

“| seek sovereignty too only for the
protection and gratification of my brothers, O
Laksmana: | swear by my bow. (6)

wa मम मही सौम्य दुर्लभा सागराम्बरा।
नहीच्छेयमधर्मेण शक्रत्वमपि लक्ष्मण॥७॥
“The sovereignty of this globe, hemmed
in by the sea, O gentle brother, is not
difficult for me to acquire; but | do not covet
even the position of Indra_ through
unrighteousness, O Laksmana ! (7)
aq विना भरतं wat च wad वापि are
भवेन्मम UE किंचिद् भस्म Ad Heat शिखी ।। ८ i
“If any joy comes to me without Bharata
and yourself, or even without Satrughna, O
respecter of others, let fire reduce it to
ashes. (8)

मन्येऽहमागतोऽयोध्यां भरतो भ्रातृवत्सल:।
मम प्राणै: प्रियतर: कुलधर्ममनुस्मरन्॥९॥
श्रुत्वा प्रव्राजितं at fe जटावल्कलधारिणम्।
जानक्या सहितं axe त्वया च पुरुषोत्तम॥१०॥
