* BALAKANDA +

was of taking any form at will, went out of
sight, mystifying the two brothers by her
conjuring tricks. (19)
अश्मवर्षं विमुञ्चन्ती भैरवं विचचार सा।
ततस्तावश्मवर्षेण कोर्यमाणौ समन्तत:॥ Roll
get गाधिसुत: श्रीमानिदं वचनमब्रवीत्।
अलं ते घृणया राम पापैषा दुष्टचारिणी॥ २१॥
यज्ञविघ्नकरी sat पुरा aid मायया।
वध्यतां तावदेवैषा पुरा संध्या प्रवर्तते॥२२॥

Pouring a terrible shower of rocks, she
freely moved about hither and thither. Seeing
them being covered by a shower of stones
on all sides, the glorious ViSwamitra, son of
Gadhi, tendered the following advice to
them : “Have done with your tenderness, O
Rama ! This sinful Yaksa woman of wicked
conduct, interfering as she does with
sacrificial performances, should be got rid
of even before she gains strength through
her conjuring tricks. The twilight is fast
approaching there. (20—22)
रक्षांसि संध्याकाले तु दुर्धर्षाणि भवन्ति हि।
इत्युक्त: स तु तां यक्षीमश्मवृष्ट्याभिवर्षिणीम्॥ २३॥
दर्शयञ्शब्दवेधित्वं तां रुरोध स सायकै:।

सा रुद्धा बाणजालेन मायाबलसमन्विता॥ २४॥
अभिदुद्राव काकुत्स्थं लक्ष्मणं च विनेदुषी।
तामापतन्तीं वेगेन विक्रान्तामशनीमिव॥ २५॥
शरेणोरसि विव्याध सा पपात ममार च।
at हतां भीमसंकाशां दृष्टा सुरपतिस्तदा॥ २६॥
साधु साध्विति काकुत्स्थं सुराश्चाप्यभिपूजयन्।
उवाच UAT: सहस्राक्ष: पुरंदर:॥ २७॥
wma wd deer विश्वामित्रमथाब्रुवन्।
TA कौशिक भद्रं ते सेन्द्रा: सर्वे मरुद्गणा:॥ २८॥
तोषिता: कर्मणानेन we दर्शय राघवे।
प्रजापते: HMMA पुत्रान् सत्यपराक्रमान्॥ २९॥
तपोबलभृतो ब्रह्मन् राघवाय निवेदय।
पात्रभूतश्च ते ब्रह्मंस्तवानुगमने रत:॥ ३०॥

“For in the evening, really speaking,
the ogres are hard to overcome.” Showing
his skill in hitting a target (not visible to the

eye) with the help of the sound coming from
it, the celebrated Sri Rama, thus addressed

145

by Viswamitra, impeded that notorious Yaksa
woman, who was covering them with a
shower of stones, with his own arrows.
Intercepted with a network of arrows the
ogress, equipped as she was with the power
of conjuring tricks, ran roaring towards Sri
Rama, a scion of Kakutstha, and Laksmana.
Sri Rama hit her in the breast with a shaft
as she came rushing like a thunderbolt
discharged with force by Indra, with the
result that she fell down dead. Seeing her,
so terrible of aspect, dead, Indra, the ruler
of gods, as well as the other gods applauded
Sri Rama, a scion of Kakutstha, saying
“Well done! Bravo !!” Highly pleased, the
thousand-eyed Indra (the demolisher of
strongholds) as well as all the gods,
extremely delighted, presently said to
Viswamitra as follows: “May good betide
you, O ViSwamitra, a scion of KuSa! All the
hosts of gods including Indra (their ruler)
stand gratified with this feat. Please show
your affection towards Sri Rama, a scion of
Raghu. Impart to Sri Rama the knowledge
of the missiles presided over by the sons of
Kfsaswa—a lord of created beings—
possessed of unfailing prowess and wielding
great might acquired through austerities. He
is worthy of receiving your favour and is
devoted to your service, O holy Brahmana !
(23—30)
कर्तव्यं सुमहत् कर्म सुराणां राजसूनुना।
`एवमुक्त्वा सुरा: सर्वे जग्मुर्हृष्टा विहायसम्॥ ३१॥
विश्वामित्रं पूजयन्तस्तत: संध्या Wadd
ततो मुनिवर: प्रीतस्ताटकावधतोषित:॥ ३२॥
aa राममुपाघ्राय sé ववनमब्रवीत्।
इहाद्य रजनीं TH वसाम शुभदर्शन॥३३॥
va: प्रभाते गमिष्यामस्तदाश्रमपदं मम।
विश्चामित्रवच: श्रुत्वा हृष्टो दशरथात्मज:॥ ३४॥
उवास रजनीं तत्र ताटकाया at सुखम्।
amd at dat तस्मिन्नेव तदाहनि।
रमणीयं विबभ्राज यथा चैत्ररथं वनम्॥ ३५॥

A great object of gods is going to be
