# YUDDHAKANDA +

“Wherefore, having brought me _ all
the way from Ayodhya to Janasthana,
O jewel among the resourceful, have
you departed from this world to the
other, deserting even me, the miserable
woman? (22)
कल्याणै रुचिरं Wa परिष्वक्तं मयैव तु।
क्रव्यादैस्तच्छरीरं ते नूनं विपरिकृष्यते॥ २३॥

“That body of yours, which looked
charming with festive decorations, and was
till now embraced by me alone, is surely
being violently dragged here and there by
carnivorous beasts. (23)

अग्निष्टोमादिभिर्यज्ञैरिष्टवानाप्तदक्षिणै: ।
अग्निहोत्रेण संस्कारं केन त्वं न तु लप्स्यसे॥ २४॥

“Why are you not really going to secure
the privilege of being cremated with a
sacrificial fire even though you have
worshipped the Lord through sacrificial
performances such as Agnistoma, in which
handsome fees were paid to the officiating
priests? (24)
प्रव्रज्यामुपपन्नानां त्रयाणामेकमागतम्।
परिप्रेकष्यति कौसल्या लक्ष्मणं शोकलालसा॥ २५ I
“What a pity that completely given
up to grief, Kausalya (your mother) will
eagerly see returned Laksmana alone
of the three who went into exile from
Ayodhya! (25)
a wen: परिपृच्छन्त्या वधं मित्रबलस्य ते।
तव चाख्यास्यते नूनं निशायां राक्षसैर्वधम्॥ २६॥
“To her, when she keenly inquires about
you, he will undoubtedly communicate to
her the extermination at night by the ogres
of the army of your ally, Sugriva, as well as
your own death. (26)
सा wat सुप्तं हतं ज्ञात्वा मां च रक्षोगृहं गताम्।
हृदयेनावदीर्णेन न भविष्यति wean २७॥
“Coming to know of your having been
killed while asleep and of myself having

407

found my way into the abode of the ogre,
Ravana, she with a broken heart will not
survive, O scion of Raghu! (27)

मम हेतोरनार्याया अनघ: पार्थिवात्मज:।
TH: सागरमुत्तीर्य वीर्यवान् गोष्पदे हत:॥ २८॥

“How strange that having crossed the
sea on my account, unworthy as | am,
Sri Rama, a sinless prince, who was full
of valour, has been killed in the footprint
of a cow (without any struggle). (28)
अहं दाशरथेनोढा मोहात् स्वकुलपांसनी।
आर्यपुत्रस्य रामस्य भार्या मृत्युरजायत॥ २९॥

“The obloquy of my race, | was
wedded by Sri Rama (a son of Dagaratha)
through ignorance. The wife has eventually
proved to be the death of Sri Rama,
her consort, the son of a worthy father!

(29)
याहमद्यैव शोचामि wat सर्वातिथेरिह॥ ३०॥

“Undoubtedly in some other brith a
supreme gift, viz., the gift of a girl in
marriage, was obstructed by me in that l,
the consort of one who was hospitable
to all, grieve even at this age on this spot.

(30)
साधु घातय at fad रामस्योपरि रावण।
समानय पतिं पत्न्या कुरु कल्याणमुत्तमम्॥ ३१॥

“Kill me at once by all means, laying
me on the body of Sri Rama, O Ravana!
Unite a husband with his wife and thus
practise a supreme virtue. (31)
frat a शिरश्चास्य कायं कायेन योजय।
रावणानुगमिष्यामि गतिं भर्तुर्महात्मन:॥ ३२॥

“Join my head with his head and my
body with his body. | shall follow the way of
my high-souled husband, O Ravana!” (32)
इतीव दु:खसंतप्ता विललापायतेक्षणा।
ad: शिरो धनुश्चैव capt जनकात्मजा॥ ३३॥
