696

लोकपाला fe चत्वार: क्रुद्धेनानेन निर्जिता:।
बहव: शत्रवश्चान्ये संयुगेष्वभिषातिता:॥४२॥

“By this ogre in fury all the four guardians
of the world have been utterly vanquished.
Many other enemies too have been struck
down by him in the course of conflicts.

(42)

त्रिषु लोकेषु रत्नानि भुङ्क्ते आहृत्य रावण:।
विक्रमे च बले चैव नास्त्यस्य सदृशो भुवि॥४३॥

“Fetching treasures existing in all the
three worlds, Ravana enjoys them. Nay,
there is none equal to him on earth in
prowess and might too.” (43)
अभिदुद्राव वैदेहीं रावण: क्रोधमूच्छित:॥४४॥

While they were talking thus, Ravana,
who was filled with anger, darted towards
Sita, a princess of the Videha territory,
present in the Asoka grove. (44)

वार्यमाण: सुसंक्रुद्ध: सुहृद्भिर्हितबुद्धिभि:।
अभ्यधावत संक्रुद्ध: खे ग्रहो रोहिणीमिव॥४५॥
Even though being kept back by
friends whose mind was set on his welfare,
Ravana, who was highly enraged, ran
towards Sita, even as an evil planet in the
sky would dart in fury towards the
constellation Rohini. (45)

मैथिली रक्ष्यमाणा तु राक्षसीभिरनिन्दिता।
ददर्श wad क्रुद्धं निस्तिंशवरधारिणम्॥४६॥

While being guarded by ogresses, the
irreproachable princess of Mithila, Sita, for
her part beheld the furious ogre bearing an
excellent sword to make short work of her.(46)

तं निशम्य सनिस्तिंशं व्यथिता जनकात्मजा।

निवार्यमाणं बहुश: सुहृद्धिरनिवर्तिनम्॥४७॥
Sita (daughter of Janaka) felt distressed

to see Ravana armed with a sword, who

was being repeatedly kept back by friends,
yet who was not receding. (47)

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA +

सीता दु:खसमाविष्टा विलपन्तीदमब्रवीत्।
यथायं मामभिक्रुद्ध: समभिद्रवति स्वयम्॥४८॥
वधिष्यति सनाथां मामनाथामिव safe: |
बहुशश्चोदयामास भर्तारं मामनुव्रताम्॥४९॥
भार्या मम भवस्वेति प्रत्याख्यातो ध्रुवं मया।
सोऽयं मामनुपस्थाने व्यक्तं नैराश्यमागत:॥५०॥
क्रोधमोहसमाविष्टो व्यक्तं at हन्तुमुद्यत:।
अथवा dl नरव्याघ्रौ भ्रातरौ रामलक्ष्मणौ॥ ५१॥
मन्निमित्तमनार्येण समरेऽद्य निपातितौ।
भैरवो fe महान् नादो राक्षसानां श्रुतो मया॥ ५२॥
बहूनामिह हृष्टानां तथा विक्रोशतां frei
अहो धिङ्मन्निमित्तोऽयं विनाशो राजपुत्रयो: ।। ५३ ॥
Possessed with sorrow and, therefore,
wailing, Sita spoke as follows: “From the
way in which this fellow himself is rushing
headlong towards me in fury, | fear the evil-
minded ogre is going to kill me as if | were
protectorless, even though | have a protector
in my husband. He entreated me on many
an occasion, devoted as | am to my husband,
saying, “Be my consort !” He was, however,
uncompromisingly repulsed by me every
time. Having evidently fallen a prey to despair
on my refusing to wait upon him, nay, filled
with anger and infatuation, this Ravana is
obviously intent on killing me. Or, those two
brothers, Sri Rama and Laksmana, who are
tigers among men, have been struck down
in combat by this unworthy fellow on my
account today. A loud and terrific noise of
numerous jubilant ogres calling loudly to
their loved ones was actually heard by me.
Woe be to me if the aforesaid destruction of
the two princes was brought about on my
account. (48—53)

अथवा YAMA अहत्वा रामलक्ष्मणौ।
विधमिष्यति at रौद्रो wera: पापनिश्चय:॥ ५४॥

“Or, having not been able to kill Sri
Rama and Laksmana, the fierce ogre of sinful
resolve is going to make short work of me,
stricken as he is with grief over his son. (54)
