* BALAKANDA +

सव्रीड इव संवृत्तश्चिन्ताशोकपरायण:।
बुद्धिर्मुने: समुत्पन्ना सामर्षा रघुनन्दन॥१०॥
अहोरात्रापदेशेन गता: संवत्सरा STUN AVI
काममोहाभिभूतस्य विघ्नोऽयं प्रत्युपस्थित:।
स नि:श्वसन् मुनिवर: पश्चात्तापेन दु:खित:॥ १२॥
Indeed, in the form of this nymph a
great obstacle in the way of his austerities
presented itself before Viswamitra. Ten years
were spent happily by her while living in that
pleasant hermitage of Viswamitra, O Rama !
So much time having rolled by unperceived,
the great sage ViSwamitra felt ashamed as it
were and fell a prey to anxiety and grief. The
revelation dawned on him, with a feeling of
indignation, O scion of Raghu, that all that,
which was a deep-laid design to rob him of
the spiritual energy stored by him through
askesis, was the work of the gods. He said
to himself, “Ten long years have rolled by me
as though it were a day and _ night,
overwhelmed as | was by infatuation born of
concupiscence. This is nothing but an
obstacle come in my way !” Sighing deeply
with this thought the said ViSwamitra, the
foremost of sages, felt distressed through
remorse. (8—12)
मेनकां मधुरैर्वाक्यैर्विसृज्य कुशिकात्मज:॥१३॥
उत्तरं पर्वतं wa विश्वामित्रो जगाम ह।
स कृत्वा नैष्ठिकीं बुद्धिं जेतुकामो ASAT: ih १४॥
कौशिकीतीरमासाद्य तपस्तेपे दुरासदम्।
तस्य वर्षसहस्राणि घोरे तप उपासत:॥१५॥
sat पर्वते Wa देवतानामभूद् भयम्।
आमन्त्रयन् समागम्य सर्वे सर्षिगणा: सुरा:॥ १६॥
Seeing the celestial nymph, Menaka,
standing before him with folded hands,
trembling with fear, and dismissing her with
sweet expressions, O Rama, ViSwamitra,

243

son of Kusika, proceeded to the northern
mountain, the Himalayas: so the tradition
goes. Making a firm resolve to observe
lifelong celibacy with intent to conquer
passion, and reaching the bank of the
Kausiki*, ViSwamitra, the highly illustrious
sage, practised austerities which were hard
to accomplish (for others). Fear entered the
mind of gods when they saw Viswamitra
practising terrible austerities on the northern
mountain for thousands of years past.
Approaching Brahma, all the gods
accompanied by hosts of Rsis, prayed to
him as follows : (18—16)
देवतानां वच: श्रुत्वा सर्वलोकपितामह:॥ १७॥
महर्षे स्वागतं वत्स तपसोग्रेण तोषित:॥१८॥
महत्त्वमृषिमुख्यत्वं daft aa कौशिक।
ब्रह्मणस्तु वच: श्रुत्वा विश्वामित्रस्तपोधन:॥ १९॥
Wate: प्रणतो भूत्वा प्रत्युवाच पितामहम्।
ब्रह्मर्षिशब्दमतुलं स्वार्जितै: कर्मभि: शुभै:।॥ २०॥
यदि मे भगवन्नाह ततोऽहं विजितेन्द्रिय:।
Wars ततो ब्रह्मा न तावत् त्वं जितेन्द्रिय: i २१॥
“May yonder ViSwamitra (son of Kusika)
deservedly receive the title of Maharsi, an
eminent seer.” Hearing the intercession of
the gods, Brahma, the progenitor of the
entire creation, addressed the following sweet
words to ViSwamitra, whose only wealth
was his asceticism : “Hail, O eminent seer !
Pleased with your severe austerities, O
dear child, | hereby confer on you the
distinction in the shape of the foremost rank
among Rsis, O son of Kusika !” Hearing
the boon of Brahma, ViSwamitra, however,
whose only wealth was his asceticism,
replied to Brahma (the progenitor of the
entire creation) with folded-hands as follows,
bending low with humility : “If your Holiness

* A reference is invited once more in this connection to verses 7-8 of Canto xxxiv, in which it has
already been shown how the elder sister of ViSwamitra, having followed her deceased husband to heaven,
further turned into a river and still flows under the name of Kausiki (the modern Kosi) in Bihar.
