* AYODHYAKANDA +

of clearing or guarding the way, hewers of
trees and cooks, men expert in plastering
and whitewashing etc., those preparing mats
and winnowing fans etc., from bamboos
and making articles of leather such as
saddles, and capable guides set forth in
advance. (1—3)

स तु हर्षात् तमुद्देशं जनौघो विपुल: wart
अशोभत महावेग: सागरस्येव पर्वणि॥४॥

Marching with joy to the region where
Sri Rama was sojourning, that huge multitude
of men really shone like a great upsurge of
the ocean on a full moon. (4)

a ant समास्थाय वर्त्मकर्मणि कोविदा:।
करणैर्विविधोपेतै३ पुरस्तात् सम्प्रतस्थिरे॥५॥

Seeking the company of their own
confreres, men skilled in constructing roads
etc., marched ahead with implements of
various kinds. (5)

लता वल्लीश्च गुल्मांश्च स्थाणूनश्मन Va च।
जनास्ते चक्रिरे मार्गं छिन्दन्तो विविधान् द्रुमान्॥ ६॥

Removing boughs of trees as well as
creepers and shrubs, stumps and rocks too
and cutting down trees of every description
that obstructed the way, those men hewed
out a path. (6)

अवृक्षेषु च देशेषु केचिद् वृक्षानरोपयन्।
केचित् कुठारैष्टङ्कैश्च दात्रैश्छिन्दन् क्वचित् क्वचित्॥ ७॥

Nay, some men raised trees in treeless
areas for providing shade; while others
hewed the existing ones here and there
by means of axes, hatchets and sickles.

(7)
अपरे वीरणस्तम्बान् बलिनो बलवत्तरा:।
विधमन्ति स्म दुर्गाणि स्थलानि च ततस्तत:॥ ८॥

Still others, who were stronger than
the rest, tore by the roots with their own
hands tufts of Virana grass (a fragrant
grass), that had got firmly rooted, and levelled
uneven stretches of land at different places.

(8)

585

अपरेऽपूरयन् कूपान् पांसुभि: श्वभ्रमायतम्।
निम्नभागांस्तथैवाशु समांश्चक्रु: समन्तत:॥९॥
Others filled waterless wells covered
with grass etc., that fell on the way, as_ well
as extensive pits with earth. Similarly, they
levelled low-lying lands all round in no time.

(9)
बबन्धुर्बन्धनीयांश्च क्षोद्यान् संचुक्षुदुस्तथा।
बिभिदुर्भेदनीयांश्च तांस्तान् देशान् नरास्तदा॥ १०॥

On that occasion the workmen bridged
the streams that could be bridged, and
likewise crushed the pebbles etc., that could
be crushed and smashed the impediments
that obstructed the passage of water and
were worth smashing. (10)

अचिरेण तु कालेन परिवाहान् बहूदकान्।
चक्रुर्बहुविधाकारान् सागरप्रतिमान् बहून्॥११॥

By constructing dams they actually
turned in a short time rivulets into many
ponds of various sizes and_ shapes,
containing plentiful water and resembling
seas. (11)

निर्जलेषु च देशेषु खानयामासुरुत्तमान्।
उदपानान् बहुविधान् वेदिकापरिमण्डितान्॥ १२॥

Nay, in waterless tracts they caused
to be sunk excellent wells of every
description embellished with platforms for
people to sit on. (12)

ससुधाकुट्टिमतल: प्रपुष्पितमहीरुह:।
मत्तोद्घुष्टद्विजगण: पताकाभिरलंकृत:॥ १३॥
चन्दनोदकसंसिक्तो नानाकुसुमभूषित:।
बह्वशोभत सेनाया: पन्था: सुरपथोपम:॥१४॥

The highway carved out for the army
to pass along was paved with concrete
mixed with lime and lined with trees laden
with blossoms. Flocks of birds excited with
sexual passion and giving out shrill cries
were seen on those trees and the road was
also decorated with buntings. The road,
which was sprinkled with water mixed with
sandal-paste, and adorned with flowers of
