* ARANYAKANDA «

`एवमुक्त्वा फलैर्मूलै: पुष्पैश्चान्यैश्च राघवम्।
पूजयित्वा यथाकामं ततोऽगस्त्यस्तमब्रवीत्॥ ३१॥
Thus saying and entertaining Raghava
according to the latter's desire with fruits,
roots, flowers and other things, Agastya
then said to him: (31)
वैष्णवं पुरुषव्याघ्र निर्मितं विश्वकर्मणा॥ ३२॥
“Here is a great divine bow of Visnu
ornamented with gold and diamonds and
manufactured by Viswakarma, O tiger among
men ! (32)
अमोघ: सूर्यसंकाशो ब्रह्मदत्त: शरोत्तम:।
दत्तौ WA महेन्द्रेण तूणी चाक्षय्यसायकौ i ३३॥
सम्पूर्णौ निशितैर्बाणैरज्वलद्भिरिव पावकै:।
महाराजतकोशोऽयमसिर्हेमविभूषित: ॥। ३४॥
“This jewel among arrows, never failing
and bright as the sun, was given by Brahma.
Mahendra gave me two inexhaustible quivers
full of sharp arrows burning like fire. This is

747

a sword ornamented with gold and kept ina
gold sheath. (33-34)

अनेन धनुषा राम eal संख्ये महासुरान्।
आजहार श्रियं दीप्तां पुरा विष्णुर्दिवौकसाम्॥ ३५ ॥

“Formerly, O Rama, Visnu killed on the
battlefield great demons with this bow and
brought back to the denizens of heaven
their bright splendour. (35)

तद्धनुस्तौ च quit च शरं wet च मानद।
जयाय प्रतिगृह्णीष्व वज्रं वज्रधरो यथा॥ BE II

“O bestower of honour, accept for your
victory that bow, those two quivers, the arrow
and the sword, as Indra accepted the
thunderbolt.” (36)

एवमुक्त्वा महातेजा: समस्तं तद्वरायुधम्।
दत्त्वा रामाय भगवानगस्त्य: पुनरब्रवीत्॥ ३७॥

Thus speaking and giving all that
collection of foremost weapons to Rama,
the revered Agastya of great lustre said
again : (37)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्येऽरण्यकाण्डे द्वादश: सर्ग: ॥ १२॥

Thus ends Canto Twelve in the Aranyakanda of the glorious Ramayana of Valmiki,
the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

Canto XIII
Agastya advises Rama and others to stay in Paficavati

राम प्रीतोऽस्मि भद्रं ते परितुष्टोऽस्मि लक्ष्मण।
अभिवादयितुं यन्मां प्राप्तौ ta: सह सीतया॥ १॥
“Rama, | am pleased with you. Luck
be to you! Laksmana, | am fully satisfied
that you two have come to greet me together
with Sita. (1)
अध्वश्रमेण वां खेदो बाधते प्रचुरश्रम:।
व्यक्तमुत्कण्ठते वापि मैथिली जनकात्मजा॥ २॥
“Fatigue due to exertion entailed by
journey and marked by profuse perspiration
is troubling you two and it is evident that the

Princess of Mithila, daughter of Janaka, too
longs for rest. (2)
एषा च सुकुमारी च खेदैश्च न विमानिता।
प्राज्यदोषं वनं प्राप्ता भर्तृस्नेहप्रचोदिता॥३॥
“She is tender and has never been
tormented by fatigue before; she has come
to the forest full of risks due to sheer love
for her husband. (3)

यथैषा रमते WH ge सीता तथा कुरु।
दुष्करं कृतवत्येषा at त्वामभिगच्छती॥४॥

“O Rama, do that by which Sita may
