« VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

त्रयोदश: wet:
Canto XIII

Coming out of the aerial car, Puspaka, and not finding Sita even on searching
for her on all sides, Hanuman concludes her to have been killed. Believing
that her untraceability, no matter whether it is reported to Sr Rama or not,
may lead to disastrous consequences, Hanuman decides not to return to
the mainland. Meanwhile, as he contemplates fasting till death or
suicide or the killing of Ravana, he catches sight of a grove
which he does not remember to have seen and before
proceeding to explore it mentally invokes the succour
of Rsis and gods for success in his undertaking

विमानात् तु स संक्रम्य Wan हरियूथप:।
हनूमान् वेगवानासीद् यथा विद्युद् घनान्तरे॥१॥

Passing from the aerial car on to the
defence wall, the agile Hanuman, a leader
of monkey hordes, for his part flashed like
lightning athwart a cloud. (1)

सम्परिक्रम्य हनुमान् रावणस्य निवेशनान्।
अदृष्ट्वा जानकीं सीतामब्रवीद् वचनं कपि:॥ २॥
Ranging observantly through the
apartments of Ravana, but not finding Sita,
Janaka’s daughter, anywhere, Hanuman
spoke to himself as follows : (2)
भूयिष्ठं लोलिता लंका रामस्य चरता प्रियम्।
न fe पश्यामि aedt सीतां सर्वांगशोभनाम्॥ ३॥
‘In my attempt to do what is pleasing to
Sri Rama, Lanka has been explored by me
many a time; yet | do not perceive Sita, a
princess of the Videha territory, who is
charming of every limb. (3)

पल्वलानि तटाकानि सरांसि सरितस्तथा।

नद्योऽनूपवनान्ताशच दुर्गाशच धरणीधरा:॥४॥

लोलिता agen सर्वा न च पश्यामि जानकीम्।

se सम्पातिना सीता रावणस्य निवेशने।

STATA गृध्रराजेन न च सा दृश्यते न किम्॥ ५॥
‘Pools, ponds, lakes and streams, rivers

and forest regions abounding in water as

also mountains difficult of access, nay, the
entire land comprised of Lanka has been

scoured; but | do not find Sita, Janaka’s
daughter. Sita was reported by Sampati, the
ruler of vultures, to be here in the abode of
Ravana; yet she is not to be seen. | wonder
why she is not found. (4-5)

fe नु सीताथ aed मैथिली जनकात्मजा।
उपतिष्ठेत विवशा रावणेन BA बलात्॥६॥

‘Forcibly borne away by Ravana, can
Sita, the offspring of King Janaka, a princess
of Mithila and claiming her descent from the
Videha kings, helplessly consort with him?

(6)
क्षिप्रमुत्पततो मन्ये सीतामादाय रक्षस:।
बिभ्यतो रामबाणानामन्तरा पतिता भवेत्॥७॥

‘| presume she might have dropped
midway from the grasp of the ogre, Ravana,
as he was flying in a hurry taking Sita in his
arms, fearing the arrows of Sri Rama. (7)

अथवा ह्रियमाणाया: uf सिद्धनिषेविते।
मन्ये पतितमार्याया हृदयं प्रेक्ष्य सागरम्॥८॥

‘Or, while she was being borne away
along the path of the Siddhas (a class of
semi-divine beings endowed with mystic
powers from their very birth), the very heart
of the noble lady crumbled, | believe, at the
sight of the sea. (8)

रावणस्योरुवेगेन भुजाभ्यां पीडितेन च।
war मन्ये विशालाक्ष्या त्यक्तं जीवितमार्यया॥ ९॥
