* ARANYAKANDA «

प्रधर्षितायां वैदेह्यां बभूव सचराचरम्।
जगत् सर्वममर्यादं तमसान्धेन संवृतम्॥९॥
When Sita, a princess of the Videha
territory, was assaulted in this way, the
whole world including the animate and
inanimate creation went out of order and
was enveloped in thick darkness. (9)
न alta मारुतस्तत्र निष्प्रभोऽभूद् दिवाकर:।
दृष्टवा सीतां परामृष्टां car दिव्येन चक्षुषा॥ १०॥
कृतं कार्यमिति श्रीमान् व्याजहार पितामह:।
Weer व्यथिताश्चासन् सर्वे A परमर्षय:॥११॥
दृष्टवा सीतां परामृष्टां दण्डकारण्यवासिन:।
रावणस्य विनाशं च We बुद्ध्वा यदृच्छया॥ १२॥
The wind did not blow at that moment
and the sun grew lustreless. Perceiving by
his divine eye Sita, laid violent hands on by
Ravana, the glorious Lord Brahma (the
grandfather of the entire creation) exclaimed:
“Our purpose is accomplished!” Seeing Sita
seized by Ravana, all the great sages
dwelling in the Dandaka forest and mentioned
before, felt agonized. They were also highly
rejoiced to foresee the destruction of Ravana
brought about as a matter of course.
(10—12)
स तु at wa wala रुदतीं लक्ष्मणेति च।
जगामादाय चाकाशं रावणो राक्षसेश्वर:॥१३॥

Nay, laying hold of Sita, who was crying
“Rama, O Rama, O Laksmana!” Ravana,
the ruler of ogres, rose to the skies. (13)

तप्ताभरणवर्णाङ्गी पीतकौशेयवासिनी ।
रराज राजपुत्री तु विद्युत्सौदामनी यथा॥१४॥

With her limbs possessing the hue of
her ornaments of molten gold and clad in
yellow silk, the princess for her part shone
like lightning athwart a cloud. (14)

उद्धूतेन च AAU तस्या: पीतेन Wau: |
afr परिबभ्राज गिरिर्दीप्त इवाग्निना॥१५॥

Because of her yellow garment being
shaken violently by the wind, Ravana shone
all the more brightly like a mountain illumined
by a fire. (15)

857

तस्या: परमकल्याण्यास्ताम्राणि सुरभीणि च।
पद्मपत्राणि वैदेह्या अभ्यकीर्यन्त रावणम्॥१६॥

The coppery and fragrant petals of
lotuses dropping from the person of the
aforesaid supremely blessed Sita, a princess
of the Videha territory, covered Ravana.

(16)

तस्या: कौशेयमुद्धूतमाकाशे कनकप्रभम्।
aut चादित्यरागेण ताम्रमभ्रमिवातपे॥१७॥

Nay, shaken violently in the air, her
silken garment possessing a golden hue,
shone like a cloud rendered coppery by the
sun’s rays at dusk. (17)

तस्यास्तद् विमलं वक्त्रमाकाशे रावणाङ्कगम्।
न रराज विना wa विनालमिव पङ्कजम्॥१८॥
Lying in the lap of Ravana in the air,
that fair countenance of Sita did not shine,
bereft as it was of Sri Rama, any more than
a lotus detached from its stalk. (18)
aya Wed नीलं frat चन्द्र इवोदित:।
सुललाटं सुकेशान्तं पद्मगर्भाभमव्रणम्॥१९॥
wae: सुविमलैर्दन्तै: प्रभावद्भिरलंकृतम्।
`तस्या: भ्रूयन वक्त्रमाकाशे WAT STA It २० Ul
Marked with a fair brow, lovely locks
and charming eyes and resembling the
interior of a lotus in hue, nay, devoid of
scars and adorned with white, entirely
spotless and brilliant teeth, her countenance
placed in the lap of Ravana in the air
resembled the moon emerged after splitting
a cloud. (19-20)
Sted व्यपमृष्टास्रें चन्द्रवत्प्रियदर्शनम्।
सुनासं चारुताम्रोष्ठमाकाशे हाटकप्रभम्॥ २१॥
राक्षसेन्द्रसमाधूतं तस्यास्तद् वदनं शुभम्।
शुशुभे न विना रामं feat ax इवोदित:॥ २२॥

Shaken with fear of Ravana (the ruler
of ogres), that lovely face of Sita—which
had just burst into tears, although her tears
had been wiped off, nay which was pleasing
like the moon to look upon, was marked
with a shapely nose and beautiful coppery
