1094

समाश्वसिहि भद्रं a निर्भयो विगतज्वर:।
फलमूलाशनो वीर निवसेह यथासुखम्॥ १४॥

‘Do not feel fear or worry. Be consoled
and well. O brave one, live here happily,
consuming fruits and roots.’ (14)

स राजा तेन वाक्येन प्रत्याश्वस्तो महामति: |
प्रत्युवाच ततो वाक्यं दीनो भृत्यजनक्षयात्॥ १५॥
The King possessed of wisdom having
regained confidence by those words, replied
auspiciously, feeling grieved on the perishing
of his attendants. (15)
त्यक्ष्याम्यहं स्वकं राज्यं नाहं भृत्यैर्विनाकृत:।
वर्तयेयं क्षणं ब्रह्मन् समनुज्ञातुमर्हसि॥१६॥
‘| shall forsake my kingdom, having
lost my attendants; | shall not subsist even

for a moment, O Brahmana, you should
advise me: what to do. (16)

सुतो धर्मपरो ब्रह्मन् ज्येष्ठो मम महायशा:।
शशबिन्दुरिति ख्यात: स मे राज्यं प्रपत्स्यते॥ १७॥

‘My righteous and famous son, O best
among Brahmanas, is well-known by the
name of Sasabindu. He shall possess my
kingdom. (17)

नहि शक्ष्याम्यहं हित्वा भृत्यदारान् सुखान्वितान्।
प्रतिवक्तुं महातेज: किंचिदप्यशुभं वच:॥१८॥
‘Having lost my _ attendants and
spouses, who were happy, O powerful one,
| shall not be able to say anything
inauspicious.’ (18)

तथा ब्रुवति राजेन्द्रे बुध: परममद्भुतम्।
सान्त्वपूर्वमथोवाच वासस्त se रोचताम्॥१९॥
When the king said so, Budha said in
a very pleasing manner consoling him, ‘O
king, you may stay here in the Asrama
happily.’ (19)

« VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

न संतापस्त्वया कार्य: कार्दमेय महाबल।
संवत्सरोषितस्येह कारयिष्यामि a हितम्॥ २०॥

‘O mighty one, son of Kardama, you
should not be grieved. | shall do well to you,
after you have passed a year here.’ (20)

तस्य तद् वचनं श्रुत्वा बुधस्याक्लिष्टकर्मण: |
वासाय विदधे बुद्धिं यदुक्तं ब्रह्मवादिना॥ २१॥

Hearing those amiable words of that
Budha, unwearied in performance, the king
contemplated, residing there as advised by
the discourses on Brahma by Budha. (21)

मासं स Gal तदा भूत्वा रमयत्यनिशं सदा।

मासं पुरुषभावेन धर्मबुद्धिं चकार स:॥ २२॥
Then he, there becoming a woman,

dallied constantly for ever for a month; and

as a man he contemplated righteous
performance for a month. (22)

da: सा नवमे मासि इला सोमसुतात् सुतम्।
जनयामास सुश्रोणी पुरूरवसमूर्जितम्॥२३॥

Then that Ila begot a powerful son,
Pururava in the ninth month, by Budha, the
son of Soma. (23)

जातमात्रे तु सुश्रोणी पितुर्हस्ते न्यवेशयत्।
ara समवर्णं च इला Ua महाबलम्॥ Wil
That one of beautiful loins, Ila, handed
over her son possessed of great power, and
similar to his father, Budha, in appearance, to
his father as he was born. (24)

are पुरुषीभूतं स a संवत्सरान्तरम्।
कथाभी रमयामास धर्मयुक्ताभिरात्मवान्॥ २५॥

For the remaining months in the
completion of a year, Budha, self-possessed,
however, pleased him during the months
when he turned into a male, with stories full
of righteous actions. (25)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये उत्तरकाण्डे एकोननवतितम: सर्ग: ॥ ८९ ॥

Thus ends Canto Ejighty-nine in the Uttarakanda of the glorious Ramayana of Valmiki,
the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

