336

बालिशो बत कामात्मा राजा दशरथो भृशम्।
स्त्रीकृते a: प्रियं पुत्रं at प्रस्थापयिष्यति॥ ८३॥
“This world of living beings is surely fit
to revile me, such as | am, saying that high-
souled boy of mine has actually been
deprived of his fatherly protection by me,
evil-minded as | am, and making the following
further observation : ‘Alas ! Extremely foolish
is King Dasaratha, whose mind is given to
concupiscence and who has exiled to the
forest his favourite son for the sake of
pleasing his wife !’ (82-83)

वेदैश्च ब्रह्मचर्यैश्च गुरुभिश्चोपकर्शित:।
भोगकाले महत्कृच्छं पुनरेव प्रपत्स्यते॥८४॥

“Emaciated, prior to his wedding, through
a study of the Vedas and privations entailed
by the vow of religious study as well as
through service rendered to his preceptors,
Rama will indeed even during his period of
enjoyment undergo again great hardship in
his forest life. (84)
नालं द्वितीयं वचनं पुत्रो at प्रतिभाषितुम्।
स at प्रव्रजेत्युक्तो बाढमित्येव वक्ष्यति॥ ८५॥

“My noble son Rama is incapable of
addressing a word of protest to me.
Commanded in the words ‘Go into exile to
the forest,’ he will only say, ‘Be itso! (85)

ale मे राघव: Haig at गच्छेति चोदित:।
प्रतिकूलं प्रियं मे स्यान्न तु ace: करिष्यति॥ ८६॥

“Should Rama (a scion of Raghu) do
the contrary when commanded in the words
‘Proceed to the forest !’, it would be welcome
to me. My darling, however, would never do
so. (86)

wae fe at प्राप्ते सर्वलोकस्य धिक्कृतम्।
मृत्युरक्षमणीयं at नयिष्यति यमक्षयम्॥ ८७॥

“On Rama (a scion of Raghu) having
repaired to the forest, Death will take me,
hooted by all men and unpardonable in their
eyes, to the abode of Yama, the god of
punishment. (87)

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

मृते मयि गते WA at मनुजपुङ्खवे।
इष्टे मम जने we fH पापं प्रतिपत्स्यसे॥ ८८॥

“Myself having joined the majority when
Rama, the foremost among men, has
proceeded to the forest, what (inconceivable)
wrong will you inflict on the remaining people
so beloved of me? (88)

कौसल्या At च रामं च पुत्रौ च यदि हास्यति।
दु:खान्यसहती eat मामेवानुगमिष्यति॥८९॥

“If Kausalya, my seniormost queen,
will miss me as well as Rama as also her
two other sons, Laksmana and Satrughna,
the former of whom is sure to follow Rama
to the forest and the latter will meet the
same fate as Rama, the godlike lady, unable
to endure the woes, will follow me to the
abode of Yama. And Sumitra will also follow
suit. (89)
कौसल्यां च सुमित्रां च at च पुत्रैस्त्रिभि: सह।
प्रक्षिप्य नरके सा त्वं कैकेयि सुखिता wai ९०॥

“Having thus thrown into hellish tortures
Kausalya and Sumitra as well as myself
alongwith our three sons, be you, the
notorious daughter of the king of the Kekayas,
happy ! (90)
मया WAT च त्यक्तं शाश्वतं सत्कृतं गुणै: |
इक्ष्वाकुकुलमक्षोभ्यमाकुलं पालयिष्यसि॥ ee

“You alone will then take care of
Iswaku’s everlasting race, which, though
adorned with manifold virtues, and incapable
of being harassed will be abandoned by
Rama as well as by myself and will as such
be mentally disturbed. (91)
fra चेद् भरतस्यैतद् रामप्रव्राजनं भवेत्।

मा स्म मे भरत: कार्षीत् प्रेतकृत्यं गतायुष: WS

“In case this banishment of Rama
proves agreeable to Bharata, let not Bharata

perform my obsequies when my life has
departed. (92)

yt मयि md wa at पुरुषपुङ्गवे।
सेदानीं विधवा राज्यं सपुत्रा कारयिष्यसि॥ ९३॥
