३52

indeed is a brother of the cruel Ravana,
O mighty-armed prince!” (18-19)

एवमुक्त्वा रघुश्रेष्ठं सुग्रीवो वाहिनीपति:।
वाक्यज्ञो वाक्यकुशलं Adal मौनमुपागमत्॥ २०॥

Having submitted as aforesaid to Sri
Rama (the foremost of the Raghus), who
knew how to speak, Sugriva then assumed
silence. (20)

स सुग्रीवस्य aq वाक्यं राम: श्रुत्वा विमृश्य च।

ad: शुभतरं वाक्यमुवाच हरिपुङ्खवम्॥२१॥
Having heard and pondered the

aforesaid submission of Sugriva, Sri Rama

thereupon addressed the following reply,

which was nobler still, to Sugriva, a bull

among monkeys: (21)

स gel anager वा किमेष write: |
सूक्ष्ममप्यहितं ad मम शक्त: कथंचन॥ २२॥

“Be he malevolent or otherwise, is this
ranger of the night capable of doing the
subtlest mischief to me in any way? (22)

पिशाचान्दानवान्यक्षान् पृथिव्यां चैव राक्षसान्।
अङ्गुक्यग्रेण तान् हन्यामिच्छन् हरिगणेश्वर॥ २३॥

“I can, if | so desire, kill with my finger-
tip all the well-known fiends, Danavas,
Yaksas and ogres on earth, O ruler of
monkey hordes! (23)

gad fe कपोतेन ya: शरणमागत:।
अर्चितश्च यथान्यायं स्वैश्च मांसैर्निमन्त्रित:।॥। २४॥

“It is related how while chasing a dove,
a fowler (its enemy), arrived under the tree
which served as its abode, was kindly received
according to the rules of hospitality and further
actually served with its own flesh. (24)

a fe तं प्रतिजग्राह भार्याहर्तारमागतम्।
कपोतो aris किं पुनर्मद्विधो जन:॥ २५॥

“The aforesaid dove actually received
with kindness the fowler, even as he came
near it, although he had carried away it’s
mate (after catching it in a snare), O Jewel
among monkeys! Much more should a man
like myself do so. (25)

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA +

A: कण्वस्य YAUT HUST परमर्षिणा।
श्रृणु गाथा पुरा गीता धर्मिष्ठा सत्यवादिना॥ VE

“Hark! There is a string of sacred verses
inculcating virtue and sung in the past by an
eminent Rsi (the seer of Vedic Mantras),
son of Sage Kanva, Kandu by name, who
always spoke the truth: (26)
न हन्यादानृशंस्यार्थमपि शत्रुं परंतप॥ २७॥

“In the name of humanity one should
not strike even an enemy arrived at one’s
door and piteously solicting protection with
joined palms, O scourge of your enemies!

(27)
आर्तो वा यदि वा ga: परेषां शरणं गत:।
अरि: WOT परित्यज्य रक्षितव्य: कृतात्मना॥ २८ UI

“An enemy come for protection against
his enmeies, be he distressed or even proud,
should be protected even at the cost of
one’s life by one who has subdued one’s
mind. (28)

Mag MAS A मोहाद् वा कामाद् वापि न रक्षति।
स्वया शक्त्या यथान्यायं तत् पापं लोकगर्हितम्॥ २९॥

“If from fear or folly or even from desire
(of some gain) a man does not justly protect
a refugee accroding to his capacity, the sin
incurred by him is despised in the world. (29)
विनष्ट: पश्यतस्तस्य रक्षिण: शरणं गत:।
आनाय सुकृतं तस्य सर्वं गच्छेदरक्षित:॥ ३०॥

“If, remaining unprotected, a refugee
perishes before the eyes of the man who is

able to protect him, the former takes away
all his merit. (30)
एवं दोषो महानत्र प्रपन्नानामरक्षणे।
अस्वर्ग्य चायशस्यं च बलवीर्यविनाशनम्॥ ३१॥
“In this way a major sin is incurred by
failure to protect refugees under such
circumstances; for such failure shuts out
heaven, brings infamy and puts an end to
one’s strength and virility. (31)
