* BALAKANDA +

energy by being incited to pronounce a
great curse on me as well as on his wife.
(3)

तन्मां सुरवरा: Wa सर्षिसंघा: सचारणा:।
सुरकार्यकरं gt सफलं कर्तुमर्हथ॥४॥
“‘Therefore, with the co-operation of
the host of seers and the celestial bards, O
jewels among gods, you should all see me
restored to my manhood, since | have served
the cause of gods.’ (4)

शतक्रतोर्वच: श्रुत्वा देवा: साग्निपुरोगमा:।
पितृदेवानुपेत्याहु३॥ सर्वे सह मरुद्गणै:॥५॥

Hearing the appeal of Indra, all the
gods, accompanied by the batches of the
wind-gods, with Agni at their head,
approached the celestial manes
(Kavyavahana and others) and spoke to
them as follows : (5)

अयं मेष: AGU: शक्रो WAIT: He: |
मेषस्य व्रृषणौ गृह्य शक्रायाशु प्रयच्छत॥६॥
“‘Here is a ram full of virility, while
Indra stands actually deprived of his manhood
by a curse from Sage Gautama. Taking the
testicles of the ram, pray, transfer them at
once to the person of Indra. (6)

अफलस्तु Hat मेष: परां तुष्टिं प्रदास्यति।
भवतां हर्षणार्थं च a च दास्यन्ति मानवा:।
set fe wei तेषां यूयं दास्यथ पुष्कलम्॥७॥
“‘The castrated ram will surely afford
you supreme satisfaction. Nay, to those
men indeed who will offer hereafter such a
ram for propitiating you, will surely be
conferred by you a handsome and undying
reward.’ (7)

अग्नेस्तु वचनं sat पितृदेवा: समागता:।
उत्पाट्य मेषवृषणौ सहस्राक्षे न्यवेशयन्॥८॥

“Hearing the intercession of Agni, the
celestial manes unanimously agreed and
removed the testicles of the ram and
actually implanted them in the scrotum of
Indra (the thousand-eyed god). (8)

207

तदाप्रभृति काकुत्स्थ पितृदेवा: समागता:।
अफलान् भुञ्जते मेषान् फलैस्तेषामयोजयन्॥ ९॥

“From that time onward, O scion of
Kakutstha, the celestial manes collectively
enjoy gelded rams alone and endow those
offering them with the fruit of offering whole

rams. (9)
इन्द्रस्तु मेषवृषणस्तदाप्रभृति राघव।

गौतमस्य प्रभावेण तपसा च महात्मन:॥१०॥

“And from that time onward, O scion of
Raghu, as an evidence of the spiritual
power of the high-souled Gautama, Indra
has actually borne the testicles of a ram.

(10)
तदागच्छ महातेज आश्रमं पुण्यकर्मण:।
तारयैनां महाभागामहल्यां देवरूपिणीम्॥११॥

“Therefore, O exceptionally glorious
prince, step into the hermitage of Gautama,
who has performed virtuous deeds, and
redeem this highly blessed woman, Ahalya,

who was heretofore invested with a celestial
form.” (11)
विश्चामित्रवच: scat राघव: सहलक्ष्मण:।
fama पुरस्कृत्य आश्रमं प्रविवेश ह॥१२॥
ददर्श च महाभागां तपसा द्योतितप्रभाम्।
लोकैरपि समागम्य दुर्निरीक्ष्यां सुरासुरे:॥१३॥
प्रयत्नान्निर्मितां धात्रा दिव्यां मायामयीमिव।
धूमेनाभिपरीताङ्गीं दीप्तामग्निशिखामिव॥ ex il
सतुषारावृतां साभ्रां पूर्णचन्द्रप्रभामिव।
मध्येऽम्भसो दुराधर्षां दीप्तां सूर्यप्रभामिव॥ eu Il
Hearing the intercession of ViSwamitra,
Sri Rama, a scion of Raghu, accompanied
by Laksmana, made his way into the
hermitage, placing Viswamitra at the head,
so the tradition goes, and beheld the celestial
lady, who was highly blessed in the sense
that Sri Rama’s eyes fell on her, whose
effulgence had been brightened by her
austerities, who could not be easily perceived
even by gods and demons, much less by
earthly beings even on drawing near due to
the curse of Gautama, who had been
