* AYODHYAKANDA +

will surely attain the same exalted position
as one who has conquered all the worlds.
(18)

aa खलु हता राम a त्वया ह्युपवञ्चिता:।
कैकेय्या वशमेष्याम: पापाया SHIRT: Ul १९॥
“We are actually ruined, O Rama, in
that, forsaken by you, we shall surely fall
under the sway of the sinful Kaikeyi and
reap suffering.” (19)

इति ब्रुवन्नात्मसमं सुमन्त्र: सारथिस्तदा।
दृष्टवा दूरगतं रामं दु:खार्तो रुरुदे चिरम्॥ oul

Speaking thus in a strain worthy of
himself, Sumantra, the charioteer, then wept
long, stricken with sorrow as he was to see
with his mental eyes Sri Rama gone to
some distance. (20)

ततस्तु विगते बाष्पे सूतं स्पृष्टबोदकं शुचिम्।
रामस्तु AE वाक्यं UA: पुनरुवाच ALIN २१॥
When his tears got dried up and the
charioteer had sipped some water and got
purified (the tears having brought defilement
in him), Sri Rama for his part repeatedly
spoke to him in a sweet tone as follows:
(21)
इक्ष्वाकूणां त्वया तुल्यं सुहृदं नोपलक्षये।
यथा दशरथो राजा मां न शोचेत् तथा कुरु॥ २२॥
“| do not perceive anyone who is as
great a friend of the Ikswakus as you are.
Pray, act in such wise that King Dasaratha
may not grieve for me. (22)

शोकोपहतचेताश्च वृद्धश्च जगतीपति:।
कामभारावसन्नश्च तस्मादेतद् aa ते॥ २३॥

“The Emperor is not only confused in
mind through grief, he is aged too and has
his host of desires (to see me installed as
Prince Regent and so on) thwarted. Hence
| tell you this : (23)

यद्यथाज्ञापयेत् किंचित् स महात्मा महीपति: ।

कैकेय्या: प्रियकामार्थं arf तदविकांक्षया॥ २४॥
“Whatever and howsoever that high-

souled Emperor may enjoin you to do with

483

intent to oblige mother Kaikeyi should be
unhesitatingly done by you. (24)

एतदर्थं fe राज्यानि प्रशासति नराधिपा:।
यदेषां सर्वकृत्येषु मनो न प्रतिहन्यते॥२५॥

“Kings rule their states only with this
end in view that their will may not be crossed
in any undertaking. (25)
यद् यथा स महाराजो नालीकमधिगच्छति।

न च ताम्यति शोकेन सुमन्त्र कुरु तत् तथा॥ २६॥

“Handle everything in such a way, O
Sumantra, that the said Emperor neither
gets displeased nor does he feel distressed
through grief. (26)
अदृष्टदु:खं राजानं aed जितेन्द्रियम्।
ब्रूयास्त्वमभिवाद्यैव मम tate वच:॥ २७॥

“Only after greeting the old and
venerable king, who has never known

suffering and has subdued his senses, make
you this submission to him on my behalf : (27)

न चाहमनुशोचामि लक्ष्मणो न च शोचति।
अयोध्यायाश्च्युताश्चेति AT वत्स्यामहेति ATU २८ I

“* ‘Neither do | grieve nor does Laksmana
nor Sita feel sorry that we have been uprooted
from Ayodhya or that we are going to dwell
in the forest. (28)

चतुर्दशसु वर्षेषु निवृत्तेषु पुन: पुन:।
लक्ष्मणं मां च सीतां च द्रक्ष्यसे शीघ्रमागतान्॥ २९॥

“When fourteen years have elapsed,
you will once more see Laksmana, myself
and Sita too returned apace (from the forest).’

(29)
एवमुक्त्वा तु राजानं मातरं च सुमन्त्र मे।
अन्याश्च tat: सहिता: कैकेयीं च पुन: TA: Bo tl
आरोग्यं ब्रूहि कौसल्यामथ पादाभिवन्दनम्।
सीताया मम चार्यस्य वचनाल्लक्ष्मणस्य च॥ ३१॥

“Having repeated as aforesaid to the
king and my mother (Kausalya), O Sumantra,
as well as to the other queens alongwith
Sumitra, as also to Kaikeyi, tell Kausalya
that | am keeping good health. Then convey
