* ARANYAKANDA «

स्वयं कार्याणि य: काले नानुतिष्ठति पार्थिव:।
ada सह राज्येन ag कार्यैर्विनश्यति॥४॥

“That monarch who does not personally
attend to his affairs gets ruined without
doubt alongwith his kingdom as well as
those affairs. (4)
अयुक्तचारं दुर्दर्शमस्वाधीनं नराधिषम्।
वर्जयन्ति नरा दूरान्नदीपङ्कमिव द्विपा:॥७५॥

“People shun from a distance the king
who has not appointed spies, is difficult to
behold for his subjects and is not self-
dependent, even as elephants shun the
mud in a river. (5)

ये न vata विषयमस्वाधीनं नराधिपा:।
ते न वृद्ध्या प्रकाशन्ते fra: सागरे यथा॥६॥

“Those rulers of men who do not reclaim
a territory which is no longer under their
control, do not shine through prosperity any
more than mountains submerged in an
ocean. (6)

आत्मवद्भिर्विगृह्य त्वं देवगन्धर्वदानवै:।
अयुक्तचारश्चपल: wet राजा भविष्यसि॥७॥

“Having entered into a conflict with
gods, Gandharvas and demons, who are
masters of their self and having not appointed
spies, how can you hope to continue as a
king, fickle as you are? (7)

त्वं तु बालस्वभावश्च बुद्धिहीनश्च राक्षस।
ज्ञातव्यं तन्न जानीषे कथं राजा भविष्यसि॥ ८॥

“You are undoubtedly childish of
disposition and devoid of intelligence and do
not know what ought to be known, O ogre!
How then will you continue to be a king?

(8)
येषां चाराश्च कोशश्च Way Wadi avi
अस्वाधीना नरेन्द्राणां प्राकृतैस्ते जनै: AAT: 8

“Those rulers of men whose spies and
coffers and policy too are not under their
control, O jewel among the victorious, are
as good as laymen. (9)

801

यस्मात्पश्यन्ति दूरस्थान् सर्वानर्थान् नराधिपा: ।
चारेण तस्मादुच्यन्ते राजानो दीर्घचक्षुष:॥१०॥
“Because rulers of men are able to
perceive all remote things through their spies,
hence they are called far-sighted. (10)

अयुक्तचारं मन्ये cat प्राकृतै: सचिवैर्युत:।
स्वजनं च जनस्थानं Ped नावबुध्यसे॥११॥
“| firmly believe, you have not appointed
spies in your kingdom, inasmuch as you
being assisted by untutored counsellors do
not know of your own people having been
killed and the area inhabited by them
devastated. (11)

चतुर्दश सहस्राणि रक्षसां भीमकर्मणाम्।
हतान्येकेन रामेण खरश्च सहदूषण:॥१२॥

“Fourteen thousand ogres of terrible
deeds as also Khara with Dusana have
been made short work of by Rama single-
handed. (12)

ऋषीणामभयं st कृतक्षेमाश्च दण्डका:।
धर्षितं च जनस्थानं रामेणाक्लिष्टकारिणा॥ १३॥
“An assurance of safety has been
vouchsafed to Rsis (the seers of Vedic
Mantras), the forest of Dandaka has been

rendered secure for them and Janasthana
devastated by Rama of unwearied action.(13)

त्वं तु लुब्ध: प्रमत्तश्च पराधीनश्च राक्षस।
विषये ta समुत्पन्नं यद् भयं नावबुध्यसे॥१४॥
“You, on the other hand, are avaricious,
careless and a slave of passion inasmuch
as you do not perceive the danger that has
cropped up in your own territory, O ogre !
(14)

तीक्ष्णमल्पप्रदातारं wad wed शठम्।
व्यसने सर्वभूतानि नाभिधावन्ति पार्थिवम्॥१५॥
“All beings decline to rush in succour
of a monarch in distress who is severe,
niggardly, careless, proud and deceitful. (15)

अतिमानिनमग्राह्यमात्मसम्भावितं नरम्।
क्रोधनं व्यसने हन्ति स्वजनोऽपि नराधिपम्॥ १६॥
