# YUDDHAKANDA #

Desiring to engage him with his own
sharpened arrows in the first instance and
stretching his bow, Laksmana shot his shafts
resembling tongues of fire. (18)

तान् मुक्तमात्रानाकाशे लक्ष्मणेन धनुष्मता।
SOT बाणैर्महातेजा WATT: प्रत्यवारयत्॥१९॥
Ravana, who was endowed with
extraordinary energy, intercepted in the air
with his own arrows the aforesaid arrows
as soon as they were shot by Laksmana,
an excellent archer. (19)

एकमेकेन बाणेन त्रिभिस्त्रीन् दशभिर्दश।
लक्ष्मणस्य प्रचिच्छेद दर्शयन् पाणिलाघवम्॥ २०॥

Demonstrating his lightness of hand,
he split the arrows of Laksmana one with
one, three with three and ten with ten arrows.

(20)

अभ्यतिक्रम्य सौमित्रिं रावण: समितिंजय:।
आससाद TT रामं स्थितं शैलमिवापरम्॥२१॥

Overpassing Laksmana (ऽ० _ of
Sumitra), Ravana, who ever won battles,
approached Sri Rama, standing like another
mountain on the battlefield. (21)

a Wad समासाद्य क्रोधसंरक्तलोचन:।

व्यसृजच्छरवर्षाणि रावणो राक्षसेश्वर:॥ २२॥
Duly approaching Sri Rama (a scion of

Raghu), his eyes turning crimson through

anger, Ravana, the lord of ogres, discharged
showers of shafts upon him. (22)

शरधारास्ततो रामो रावणस्य धनुश्च्युता:।
दृष्टवैवापतिता: शीघ्रं भल्लाञ्जग्राह सत्वरम्॥ २३॥
Immediately on beholding the volleys
of arrows discharged from the bow of Ravana
approaching, Sri Rama thereupon quickly
seized hold in all haste of Bhallas (a variety
of arrows with a crescent-shaped head).
(23)

ताञ्छरौघांस्ततो भल्लैस्तीक्ष्णैश्चिच्छेद Wee: |
दीप्यमानान् महाघोराञ्छरानाशीविषोपमान्॥ २४॥

Sri Rama, a scion of Raghu, then tore

721

asunder with sharp-edged Bhallas those
streams of flaming arrows—arrows which
were very formidable and _ resembled
venomous serpents. (24)
राघवो रावणं qui रावणो Waa तथा।
अन्योन्यं विविधैस्तीक्ष्णै:; शरवर्षैर्ववर्षतु:॥ २५॥
Sri Rama, a scion of Raghu, and
Ravana rapidly covered each other with
showers of sharp-pointed shafts of various
kinds—Sri Rama covering Ravana and vice
versa. (25)
चेरतुश्च fat fat मण्डलं सव्यदक्षिणम्।
बाणवेगात् समुस्किप्तावन्योन्यमपराजितौ॥ २६॥
Pushing back each other with the
onrush of their arrows and remaining
undefeated, the two warriors described circles
of various kinds round each other from left
to right. (26)

तयोर्भूतानि वित्रेसुर्युगपत् सम्प्रयुध्यतो: |
रौद्रयोर सायकमुचोर्यमान्तकनिकाशयो:॥ २७॥

All beings were seized with terror
even as the two redoubtable heroes, who
resembled the god of retribution and the god
of death, respectively, simultaneously struck
with violence shooting arrows at each other.

(27)
wad विविधैर्बाणैर्बभूव गगनं तदा।
चनैरिवातपापाये विद्युन्मालासमाकुलै: ।। २८ ॥

The sky was overcast at that time with
arrows of various kinds even as it is covered

during the monsoon with clouds crowded
with flashes of lightning. (28)

गवाक्षितमिवाकाशं aya शरवृष्टिभि:।
महावेगै: सुतीक्ष्णाग्रैर्गृध्रपत्रै: सुवाजितै:॥ २९॥

The vault of heaven was studded with
eye-holes, as it were, by showers of shafts
of extraordinary velocity, which were
extremely sharp-pointed, were adorned with
plumes of vultures and were discharged
with great impetuosity. (29)
