792

exalted character was not prized by you
either, O appraiser of good conduct? (15)
न प्रमाणीकृत: पाणिर्बाल्ये मम निपीडित:।
मम भक्तिश्च शीलं च सर्वं ते पृष्ठत: कृतम्॥ १६॥
“The fact that my hand was pressed
by you in my childhood as a token of your
acceptance when it was placed in yours by
my father during the nuptials was not duly
recognized by you while repudiating me.
Nay, my devotion to you as well as my
chastity have all been ignored by you.” (16)

इति ब्रुवन्ती रुदती बाष्पगद्गदभाषिणी।
sara लक्ष्मणं tat दीनं ध्यानपरायणम्॥ १७॥
Speaking as aforesaid in a voice choked
with tears and weeping all the while, Sita
appealed as follows to Laksmana, who was
absorbed in thought and feeling sore
distressed: (17)

fact मे कुरु सौमित्रे व्यसनस्यास्य भेषजम्।
मिथ्यापवादोपहता नाहं जीवितुमुत्सहे॥१८॥

“Pray, 0 Laksmana! raise for me a
pyre, the only antidote against this calamity.
| no longer desire to survive, smitten as |
am with false reproaches. (18)

अप्रीतेन गुणैर्भरत्र त्यक्ताया जनसंसदि।

या क्षमा मे गतिर्गन्तुं प्रवेक्ष्ये हव्यवाहनम्॥१९॥
“| will enter a fire, which is the only

course appropriate for me, renounced as |

am in a public gathering by my husband,
who is no longer pleased with my virtues.”(19)

`एवमुक्तस्तु ade लक्ष्मण: परवीरहा।
अमर्षवशमापन्नो राघवं ATTN २०॥

Requested thus by Sita (a princess
of the Videha territory), Laksmana, the
destroyer of hostile champions, looked at
Sri Rama (a scion of Raghu), overcome as
he was with indignation. (20)

a विज्ञाय मनश्छन्दं रामस्याकारसूचितम्।
चितां चकार सौमित्रिर्मते रामस्य वीर्यवान्॥ २१॥

Ascertaining the pleasure of Sri Rama’s

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA +

mind as revealed by his facial expression,
the valiant son of Sumitra prepared a pyre
in deference to the wishes of Sri Rama.(21)

नहि wa dar कश्चित् कालान्तकयमोपमम्।
अनुनेतुमथो वक्तुं द्रष्टुं वाप्यशकत् सुहत्॥२२॥
No one, near and dear, actually dared
on that occasion to speak to or even look
upon, much less pacify Sri Rama, who vied
with Yama (the destroyer of the worlds) at
the time of universal dissolution. (22)
अधोमुखं स्थितं रामं तत: कृत्वा प्रदक्षिणम्।
उपावर्तत वैदेही दीप्यमानं हुताशनम्॥२३॥
Walking clockwise as a mark of respect
about Sri Rama, standing with his head
bent low, Sita (a princess of the Videha
territory) approached the blazing fire. (23)

प्रणम्य दैवतेभ्यश्च ब्राह्मणेभ्यश्च मैथिली।
बद्धाञ्जलिपुटा चेदमुवाचाग्निसमीपत: ॥ २४॥

Nay, respectfully bowing down to the
gods as well as to the Brahmanas in general,
the princess of Mithila prayed as follows
with joined palms in the presence of the fire:

(24)
यथा मे हृदयं नित्यं नापसर्पति राघवात्।
तथा लोकस्य साक्षी मां सर्वत: पातु पावक:॥ २५॥

“As my heart never turns away from
Sri Rama, so may the god of fire, the
witness of the world, protect me on all
sides. (25)
यथा मां शुद्धचारित्रां get जानाति wera: |
तथा लोकस्य साक्षी मां सर्वत: पातु पावक:॥ २६॥

“Since Sri Rama (a scion of Raghu)
takes me to be corrupt, though of
unimpeachable conduct, let the god of fire,
the witness of the world, under such
circumstances, protect me on all sides.

(26)
कर्मणा मनसा वाचा यथा नातिचराम्यहम्।
Tad सर्वधर्मज्ञं तथा At पातु पावक:॥ २७॥

“Inasmuch as | have never been
