+ UTTARAKANDA +

monkeys, and also the great assembly of
the chief Brahmanas, giving them precious
gifts, Lotus-eyed Rama, after finishing the
sacrifice, alongwith his two sons, Sita in his
heart, entered Ayodhya. (5—7)

न सीताया: परां wat ad स रघुनन्दन:।
यज्ञे यज्ञे च पत्न्यर्थं जानको काञ्चनीभवत्॥८॥

That descendant of Raghu did not take
as wife any one other than Sita and at every
sacrifice (ASvamedha) the gold image of the
daughter of Janaka served as the queen.

(8)
दशवर्षसहस्राणि वाजिमेधानथाकरोत्।
वाजपेयान् दशगुणांस्तथा बहुसुवर्णकान्॥९॥

Then He, Sri Rama, performed horse-
sacrifices and Vajapeya sacrifices ten times
that number, full with the distribution of gold
coins, for ten thousand years. (9)

अग्निष्टोमातिरात्राभ्यां गोसवैश्च महाधनै:।

oa क्रतुभिरन्यैश्च स श्रीमानाप्तदक्षिणै:॥१०॥
That prosperous one, Sri Rama,

performed many Gosavas with the Agnistoma

and the Atiratra and also other sacrifices,

giving donations in plenty. (10)

Ud स काल: सुमहान् राज्यस्थस्य महात्मन:।

धर्मे प्रयतमानस्य व्यतीयाद् राघवस्य च॥११॥
Thus that period of Sri Rama elapsed,

the descendant of Raghu, acting righteously,
ruling over His Kingdom. (11)

ऋक्षवानररक्षांसि स्थिता रामस्य शासने।
अनुरञ्जन्ति राजानो ह्यहन्यहनि राघवम्॥१२॥
The bears, monkeys and demons
obeyed the command of the descendant of
Raghu, the Kings paid tributes to Him day
by day. (12)
काले वर्षति पर्जन्य: सुभिक्षं विमला Fest: |
हृष्टपुष्टजनाकीर्णं पुरं जनपदास्तथा॥१३॥
The clouds rained timely, the harvest

was good and the quarters shone clearly,
and the towns and cities were full of

1113

happy, well-fed and healthy persons in His
reign. (13)
नाकाले म्रियते कश्चिन्न व्याधि: प्राणिनां तथा।

नानर्थो विद्यते Hie रामे राज्यं प्रशासति॥ १४॥

No one died prematurely, no physical
ailment was suffered by living beings, no
calamity took place as Sri Rama ruled over
his Kingdom. (14)

अथ दीर्घस्य कालस्य राममाता यशस्विनी।
Gada: «ORT कालधर्ममुपागमत्॥१५॥

After a long lapse of time the mother
of Rama, Kausalya of great fame, surrounded
by her son and grandsons, succumbed to
the law of time. (15)

अन्वियाय सुमित्रा च कैकेयी च यशस्विनी।

a pa बहुविधं त्रिदेवे पर्यवस्थिता॥१६॥
Sumitra and the Kaikeyi also followed

her, performing various charitable deeds,

and praiseworthy, were established in
heaven. (16)

सर्वा: प्रमुदिता: स्वर्गे राज्ञा दशरथेन च।
समागता महाभागा: सर्वधर्मं च लेभिरे॥१७॥

All happy and righteous ones, united
with Dasaratha in heaven, attained the fruit
of all religious performances. (17)

तासां Wat महादानं काले काले प्रयच्छति।
मातूणामविशेषेण ब्राह्मणेषु तपस्विषु॥१८॥

Sri Rama made great donations for his
mothers, Kausalya, Kaikeyi, Sumitra, without
any difference, to the Brahmana ascetics.

(18)

पित्र्याणि ब्रह्मरत्नानि यज्ञान् परमदुस्तरान्।
चकार रामो धर्मात्मा पितॄन् देवान् विवर्धयन्॥ १९॥

Sri Rama, the noble one, donated the
most cherished things to Brahmanas and
performed the sacrifices most difficult to
accomplish, to add to the glory of his
ancestors and the gods. (19)

एवं वर्षसहस्राणि agar ययु: सुखम्।
यज्ञैर्बहुविधं धर्मं वर्धयानस्य सर्वदा॥ २०॥
