554

अयोध्या Vad दूरात् AKA पाण्डुमृत्तिका।
यज्विभिर्गुणसम्पन्नैरीह्मणैर्वेदपारगै: ॥ २०॥
भूयिष्ठमृद्धैराकीर्णा राजर्षिवरपालिता।
अयोध्यायां पुरा शब्द: श्रूयते तुमुलो महान्॥ २१॥
समन्तान्नरनारीणां तमद्य न श्रृणोम्यहम्।
उद्यानानि fe सायाह्ने क्रीडित्वोपरतैर्नरै:॥ २२॥
समन्ताद् विप्रधावद्भि: प्रकाशन्ते ममान्यथा।
तान्यद्यानुरुदन्तीव परित्यक्तानि कामिभि:॥ २३॥

“Ayodhya, O charioteer, which was
thickly crowded with Brahmanas given to
sacrificial performances, endowed with good
qualities and well-versed in the Vedas, as
well as with wealthy men and was protected
by the foremost of royal sages, looks from
a distance to be a heap of white clay.
Formerly in Ayodhya was heard on all sides
a great, confused noise of men and women;
| do not hear it today. Indeed, gardens,
which looked bright with men running helter-
skelter on all sides, having ceased sporting
in the morning after entering them at dusk
and sporting the whole night, appear to me
quite different. Deserted by gallants, they
are weeping, as it were, today. (20—23)
अरण्यभूतेव at सारथे प्रतिभाति माम्।
नह्यत्र यानैर्दृश्यन्ते न गजैर्न च वाजिभि:।
निर्यान्तो वाभियान्तो वा नरमुख्या यथा पुरा॥ २४॥

“The city, O charioteer, appears to me
as converted into a woodland; for high-
class men are not seen going out or coming

here in conveyances or on the back of
elephants or horses as before. (24)

उद्यानानि पुरा भान्ति मत्तप्रमुदितानि च।
wat रतिसंयोगेष्वत्यन्तगुणवन्ति च॥ २५॥
“The gardens in this city formerly looked
excited with joy and enraptured and were
extremely favourable for lovecontacts of
men. (25)

तान्येतान्यद्य पश्यामि निरानन्दानि सर्वश:।
स्रस्तपर्णैरनुपथं विक्रोशद्भिरिव द्रुमै:॥ २६॥

“Today | find those very gardens bereft
of joy in everyway with their trees shedding

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

tears in the form of leaves on the alleys and
piteously wailing, as it were. (26)

नाद्यापि stad शब्दो मत्तानां मृगपक्षिणाम्।
सरक्तां मधुरां वाणीं कलं व्याहरतां agi २७॥
“Not even at this hour of sunrise is
heard the cry of deer and birds in rut profusely
and inarticulately giving forth their sweet
and impassioned utterances. (27)

चन्दनागुरुसम्पृक्तो धूपसम्मूच्छितोऽमल:।
प्रवाति पवन: श्रीमान् किं नु नाद्य यथा पुरा॥ २८ ॥

“| wonder how a pure and delighttul
breeze laden with the fragrance of
sandalwood and aloe and scented with the
fume of burnt incense does not blow today
as before. (28)
भेरीमृदङ्वीणानां moras: पुन:।
fare शब्दो विरत: सदादीनगति: पुरा॥ २९॥

“It is not known how has the sound,
which ever proceeded unstintedly in the
past, of kettledrums, clay tomtoms and Vinas,
played upon with a drum-stick, palms or
fingers, has ceased today? (29)

अनिष्टानि च पापानि पश्यामि विविधानि च।
निमित्तान्यमनोज्ञानि at deft A मन:॥ ३०॥

“| also perceive unwelcome, portentous
and unpleasant omens of every description.
My mind is feeling dejected on that score.

(30)
सर्वथा कुशलं सूत दुर्लभं मम बन्धुषु।
तथा watt सम्मोहे wa सीदतीव मे॥ ३१॥

“The all-round welfare of my near and
dear ones is difficult to find, O charioteer !
For, even when there is no ostensible cause
for infatuation, my heart is sinking, as it
were.” (31)

विषण्ण: श्रान्तहृदयस्त्रस्त: संलुलितेन्द्रिय:।
भरत: प्रविवेशाशु पुरीमिक्ष्वाकुपालिताम्॥ ३२॥

Dejected and alarmed, his heart weary
and senses extremely perturbed, Bharata
speedily entered the city protected by the
scions of Ikswaku. (32)
