# YUDDHAKANDA #

his
(42)

Indrajit stood stupefied awhile, all
senses fully excited.

सोऽभिचक्राम सौमित्रिं रोषात् संरक्तलोचन:॥ ४३॥

Regaining his consciousness after a

while, his senses having returned to
normalcy, Indrajit beheld the valiant
Laksmana (sprung from the loins of

DaSaratha) standing immovable on the field
of battle and advanced towards the son of
Sumitra, his eyes having turned crimson
with anger. (43)

अब्रवीच्चैनमासाद्य UA: स wee वच:।
किं न स्मरसि ae युद्धे प्रथमे मत्पराक्रमम्।
निबद्धस्त्वं सह भ्रात्रा यदा युधि विचेष्टसे॥४४॥

Nay, approaching Laksmana, he spoke
harsh words to him again as follows: “Don’t
you remember my prowess in that first
encounter with me, when | bound you with
your brother and you writhed on the
battlefield? (44)

gat खलु महायुद्धे वज्राशनिसमै: vit:
शायितौ wert भूमौ विसंज्ञौ सपुर:सरौ॥४५॥
“Formerly in the course of a major
conflict you two brothers were laid low with
my arrows, which were equal to thunderbolts
and the weapon ASani, and lay unconscious
on the ground with your foremost warriors.
(45)

स्मृतिर्वा नास्ति ते मन्ये व्यक्तं वा यमसादनम्।
गन्तुमिच्छसि यन्मां त्वमाधर्षयितुमिच्छसि॥४६॥
“Or, | presume the thought of it no
longer exists in your mind or you evidently
desire to proceed to the abode of Yama, the
god of retribution, since you seek to
overpower me. (46)

यदि ते प्रथमे युद्धे न दृष्टो मत्पराक्रम:।
अद्य wat दर्शयिष्यामि तिष्ठेदानीं व्यवस्थित: ॥ vo i

“If my prowess was not witnessed by

673

you at our first encounter, | will demonstrate
it to you today. Remain immovably fixed on
this spot now.” (47)

इत्युक्त्वा सप्तभिर्बाणैरभिविव्याध लक्ष्मणम्।
दशभिस्तु हनूमन्तं तीक्ष्णधारै: शरोत्तमै: ve
Saying so, Indrajit pierced Laksmana
with seven shafts and Hanuman with ten
excellent sharp-edged arrows. (48)

at: शरशतेनैव Want वीर्यवान्।
क्रोधाद् द्विगुणसंरब्धो निर्बिभेद विभीषणम्॥ xe

Doubly enraged, the valiant ogre then
pierced Vibhisana in fury with a hundred
well-aimed arrows. (49)

ae दृष्ट्वेन्द्रजिता ad कृतं रामानुजस्तदा।
अचिन्तयित्वा प्रहसन्नैतत् किंचिदिति ब्रुवन्॥ ५० ॥
मुमोच च शरान् घोरान् संगृह्य नरपुंगव:।
अभीतवदन: क्रुद्धो रावणिं लक्ष्मणो युधि॥ ५१॥
Seeing the aforesaid feat accomplished
by Indrajit, yet not minding it, nay, laughing
heartily and saying: “This is nothing!”, and
taking up dreadful shafts, Laksmana, a
younger brother of Sri Rama and a bull
among men, then shot them in anger at the
son of Ravana on the field of battle with an
intrepid mien. (50-51)

Aa रणगता: शूरा: Watt निशाचर।
लघवश्चाल्पवीर्याश्च शरा हीमे सुखास्तव॥५२॥

“He said, “Heroes on the battlefield do
not strike like this, O ranger of the night!
Light and of little strength, these arrows
of yours are indeed conducive to my
delight. (52)

नैवं शूरास्तु युध्यन्ते समरे युद्धकाङ्क्षिण:।
इत्येवं तं ब्रुवन् धन्वी शरैरभिववर्षं ह॥५३॥

“Champions seeking an encounter on
the battlefield for their part do not fight in
this way.” Speaking thus, the archer,
Laksmana, covered Indrajit with arrows, they
say. (53)
