448

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

Canto XLI

The ladies of the royal gynaeceum bewail the exile of Sri Rama and others and
the citizens of Ayodhya too are reduced to a miserable plight

तस्मिस्तु पुरुषव्याघ्रे निष्क्रामति कृताञ्जलौ।
आर्तशब्दो fe संजज्ञे स्त्रीणामन्त:पुरे महान्॥१॥

Even as Sri Rama, that tiger among
men, was driving out of Ayodhya with folded
hands, a loud plaintive cry actually burst
forth from the mouths of the ladies in the
gynaeceum. (1)

अनाथस्य जनस्यास्य दुर्बलस्य तपस्विन:।
यो गति: शरणं चासीत् स नाथ: क्व नु गच्छति॥ २॥

They exclaimed : “Oh, where goes that
lord, who was the refuge and protector of
us, helpless, weak and forlorn people? (2)

न क्रुध्यत्यभिशस्तोऽपि क्रोधनीयानि वर्जयन्।
क्रुद्धान् प्रसादयन् सर्वान् समदु:ख: क्व गच्छति Ut ३॥
“Oh, where goes the prince to whom
joy and sorrow made no difference, nay
who did not lose temper even when

slandered, avoided provoking words and
pacified all who were angry? (3)

कौसल्यायां महातेजा यथा मातरि add

AMT यो वर्ततेऽस्मासु महात्मा Fa नु गच्छति॥४॥
“Where goes the high-souled Sri Rama,

who is endowed with exceptional glory and

who behaved with us in the same way as
he did with his own mother, Kausalya? (4)

कैकेय्या faa राज्ञा संचोदितो वनम्।
परित्राता जनस्यास्य जगत: Faq नु गच्छति॥५॥
“Oh, where goes Sri Rama, the
protector not only of us all but even of the
world, enjoined to proceed to the forest by
the king, who was being tormented by
Kaikey!? (5)
अहो निश्चेतनो राजा जीवलोकस्य संक्षयम्।
धर्म्य सत्यव्रतं WH वनवासे प्रवत्स्यति॥६॥

“How insensible is the king, who has

sent into exile to the forest the virtuous
Prince Rama, who is the support of the
entire living creation and is vowed to
truthfulness !” (6)

इति wat महिष्यस्ता विवत्सा sa धेनव:।
रुरुदुश्चैव cunt: सस्वरं च विचुक्रुशु:॥७॥

Stricken with agony all the aforesaid
queens lamented in this way and cried at
the top of their voice like so many cows
bereft of their calf. (7)

स तमन्तपुरे घोरमार्तशब्दं महीपति:।

पुत्रशोकाभिसंतप्त: श्रुत्वा चासीत् सुदु:खित:॥ ८ u
Hearing that frightful plaintive cry in the

gynaeceum, King Dasaratha, who was

already tormented with grief caused by
separation from his son, felt sore distressed.

(8)
नाग्निहोत्राण्यहूयन्त नापचन् गृहमेधिन:।
अकुर्वन् न wet: कार्यं सूर्यश्चान्तरधीयत॥ ९॥

No oblations were poured into the sacred
fire by those maintaining the sacred fire; no
householders cooked food; people did not
carry on their business and the sun went
out of sight even before sunset due to
untimely clouds. (9)

APM HAC ANT MA ACT A OTT I

Ut प्रथमजं लब्ध्वा जननी नाभ्यनन्दत॥ oll
Elephants dropped grass etc., from their

mouths; cows refused to give suck to their

calves; mothers did not rejoice to meet their

first-born son. (10)

त्रिशङ्कुर्लोहिताङ्गश्च बृहस्पतिबुधावपि।
दारुणा: सोममभ्येत्य ग्रहा: सर्वे व्यवस्थिता:॥ ११॥
Getting conjoined through a retrogade
movement with the moon, TriSanku and
Mars, even Jupiter and Mercury and all
