72

wings), while chains of gold on the breasts
of others appeared like Cakrawaka birds.
(49)
हंसकारण्डवोपेताश्चक्रवाकोपशोभिता: ।
आपगा इव ता रेजुर्जघनै: पुलिनैरिव॥७५०॥
With their thighs for banks, they looked

like rivers characterized by swans and ducks
and graced by Cakrawakas. (50)

किङ्किणीजालसंकाशास्ता हेमविपुलाम्बुजा:।
भावग्राहा यशस्तीरा: सुप्ता AT इवाबभु:॥ ५१॥
With the tiny bells forming part of their
girdles for buds, the gold ornaments for big
lotuses, the amorous gestures appearing on
their person in their dream for alligators and
their splendour for river banks, the women
while asleep looked like so many streams.(51)
मृदुष्वंगेषु कासांचित् कुचाग्रेषु च संस्थिता:।
बभूवुर्भूषणानीव शुभा भूषणराजय:॥७५२॥
The charming marks of ornaments
imprinted on their tender limbs as well as on
the nipples of some women looked like so
many ornaments. (52)
अंशुकान्ताशच कासांचिन्मुखमारुतकम्पिता: |
उपर्युपरि वक्त्राणां व्याधूयन्ते पुन: पुन:॥७५३॥
Shaken by the breaths of their mouths,
the ends of the upper garments drawn over
the faces of some women fluttered again
and again. (53)

ता: पताका इवोद्धूता: पत्नीनां रुचिरप्रभा:।
नानावर्णसुवर्णानां वक्त्रमूलेषु रेजिरे॥५४॥

Those pieces of cloth drawn over the
lower parts of the faces of Ravana’s consorts
of diverse lovely complexions waved like
streamers of agreeable splendour. (54)

मुखमारुतसंकम्पैर्मन्दं we च योषिताम्॥५५॥
The earrings of some women of
charming splendour gently vibrated due to

the movements of the breaths escaping
from their nostrils/mouths. (55)

« VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

शर्करासवगन्ध: स प्रकृत्या सुरभि: सुख:।

wet वदननि:श्वास: सिषेवे रावणं aguas tl
Emitting the odour of spirituous liquor

extracted from sugar, the well-known breath

escaping from their mouth, which was

naturally fragrant and delightful, was refreshing

Ravana at that time. (56)

रावणाननशंकाश्च काश्चिद् रावणयोषित:।
मुखानि च सपत्नीनामुपाजिघ्रन् पुन: TA: uae ll

Nay, some consorts of Ravana smelt
again and again the mouths of other co-
wives, suspecting them to be Ravana’s
mouth due to _ infatuation caused by
intoxication and sleep. (57)
अत्यर्थं सक्कतमनसो रावणे ता वरस्तिय:।
sada: सपत्नीनां प्रियमेवाचरंस्तदा॥ ५८॥

No longer master of themselves, their
mind being excessively attached to Ravana,
the aforesaid belles thereby brought delight
only at that time to other co-wives, who too

in their turn smelt the mouths of other co-
wives, mistaking them to be Ravana’s. (58)

aequmeararn: पारिहार्यविभूषितान्।
अंशुकानि च रम्याणि प्रमदास्तत्र शिश्यिरे॥ ५९॥

Some young woman lay there placing
their arms adorned with bracelets under
their heads by way of a pillow, while others
did so placing their lovely garments under
their head. (59)

अन्या वक्षसि चान्यस्यास्तस्या: काचित् पुनर्भुजम्।
अपरा त्वङ्कमन्यस्यास्तस्याश्चाप्यपरा क्को।।६०।।
A certain woman lay with her head
resting an anothers bosom, while another
lay using the latter arm as a pillow. Yet
another for her part lay converting the lap of
another into a pillow, while a third lay turning
the latter's breasts into a pillow. (60)

ऊरुपाशर्वकटीपृष्ठमन्योन्यस्य समाश्रिता:।
परस्परनिविष्टांग्यो मदस्नेहवशानुगा: ।। ६१ ॥

Yielding to the influence of intoxication
and love, they rested their heads on the
