* AYODHYAKANDA +

523

त्रिषष्टितम: सर्ग:
Canto । ,`\।॥]

Waking from sleep after a while and recalling his sinful deed, which spelt
death to him, DasSaratha proceeds to tell Kausalya how, while he was Prince
Regent of Ayodhya, he went out a-hunting in the forest one day and
heard during the last watch of the night the sound of a hermit boy filling
his pitcher with water by submerging into Sarayu river. Mistaking the
gurgling sound for the trumpeting of an elephant, DaSaratha hit the
boy with an arrow, which dug deep into his body and mortally
wounded him. On approaching his quarry he discovered the
fatal blunder and tendered his heartfelt apology to the hermit
boy, who asked him to extract the arrow from his body and
report the matter to his aged parents. The boy died
immediately the arrow was taken out of his body

प्रतिबुद्धो मुहूर्तेन शोकोपहतचेतन:।
aa राजा area: a चिन्तामभ्यपद्यत॥ ei

Having woken from sleep after an hour
or so, the said King DaSaratha, whose mind
was obscured through grief, now fell a prey
to anxiety. (1)

रामलक्ष्मणयोश्चैव विवासाद् वासवोपमम्।
आपेदे उपसर्गस्तं तम: सूर्यमिवासुरम्॥२॥

Consequent on the banishment of Sri
Rama and Laksmana, grief had seized the
king, who vied in might and splendour with
Indra, the ruler of gods, even as obscurity,
which is attributed to the demon Rahu (also
recognized as a planet), seizes the sun at
the time of a solar eclipse. (2)

aud fe ma wa कौसल्यां कोसलेश्वर:।
विवक्षुरसितापाङ्गीं स्मृत्वा दुष्कृतमात्मन:॥३॥

Recollecting his misdeed as responsible
for his present misfortune in the shape of
separation from his sons and daughter-in-
law, when Sri Rama had actually departed
for the forest with his wife and Laksmana,
DaSaratha (the king of Kosala) felt inclined
to tell Kausalya, the corners of whose eyes
were noted for their dark colour, all about it.

(3)

स राजा रजनीं ost रामे प्रव्राजिते वनम्।

अर्धरात्रे दशरथ: सोऽस्मरद दुष्कृतं कृतम्॥४॥
On the sixth night after Sri Rama had

been sent into exile the celebrated King

Dasaratha remembered at midnight the
misdeed perpetrated by him. (4)

स राजा पुत्रशोकार्त: स्मृत्वा दुष्कृतमात्मन:।
कौसल्यां पुत्रशोकार्तामिदं वचनमब्रवीत्॥५॥
Recollecting his misdeed, the aforesaid
monarch, who was stricken with grief caused
by separation from his son, spoke as follows
to Kausalya, who was equally stricken
with grief born of separation from her son:
(5)

यदाचरति कल्याणि शुभं वा ate वाशुभम्।
तदेव लभते भद्रे कर्ता कर्मजमात्मन:॥६॥

“A doer surely reaps, O blessed lady,
the fruit of his own deeds, corresponding to
the nature, good or evil, of that which he
does, O gracious one ! (6)

गुरुलाघवमर्थानामारम्भे कर्मणां फलम्।
ae वा यो न जानाति स बाल इति होच्यते॥ ७॥
“He who does not reckon, while

undertaking actions, the relative importance
of their fruits as well as the advantages or
