* BALAKANDA +

me only as a royal sage and not as a
Brahmana as desired by me. I, therefore,
think that Brahmanhood is not the reward
for my austerities (something more is required
for attaining the status of a Brahmana).’
Having concluded thus in his mind, the
great ascetic, Viswamitra, whose mind was
given to piety, O scion of Kakutstha, and
who was of great restraint, commenced his
austerities anew.

At this very time a king who heightened
the glory of Ikswaku’s race and was widely
known by the name of TriSanku, nay, who
ever spoke the truth and _ had_ fully
controlled his senses, took it into his head,
O scion of Raghu, to undertake a sacrifice
and thereby ascend bodily to paradise,
the highest realm of gods. Summoning
Vasistha, he revealed his mind to him.

(6—12)

अशक्यमिति चाप्युक्तो वसिष्ठेन महात्मना।
प्रत्याख्यातो वसिष्ठेन स ययौ दक्षिणां दिशम्॥ १३॥

He was, however, told by the mighty
Vasistha that it was not possible to conduct
such a sacrifice. Repulsed by Vasistha, he
proceeded to the southern quarter. (13)

ततस्तत्कर्मसिद्ध्यर्थं पुत्रांस्तस्य गतो नृप:।
वासिष्ठा दीर्घतपसस्तपो यत्र fe तेपिरे॥ १४॥

For the accomplishment of the said
purpose the king then sought Vasistha’s
sons at the place where they were actually
leading an austere life, engaged as they
were in a prolonged course of austerities.

(14)

त्रिशङ्कुस्तु महातेजा: शतं परमभास्वरम्।
वसिष्ठपुत्रान् age तप्यमानान् मनस्विन:॥ १५॥

The exceptionally glorious TriSanku
beheld from a distance the hundred high-
minded and supremely resplendent sons of
Vasistha practising austerities. (15)

सोऽभिगम्य महात्मान: सर्वानेव गुरो: सुतान्।
अभिवाद्यानुपूर्वेण ह्रिया किंचिदवाङ्मुख: ॥ १६॥

227

अब्रवीत् स महात्मान: सर्वानेव कृताञ्जलि:।
शरणं A: प्रपन्नोऽहं शरण्यान् शरणं गत:॥१७॥
Approaching and greeting in order of
seniority all the high-souled sons of Vasistha
(his family preceptor) with his face downcast
a bit through shame on his having been
repulsed by his preceptor, he submitted
with folded hands to all those exalted souls
as follows: “Though resorted to by others
as a protector, | have sought you as my
refuge, capable as you are of affording
protection to others. (16-17)

प्रत्याख्यातो fe we at वसिष्ठेन महात्मना।

यष्टुकामो = ee ATT ASTM Ve Il

“May God bless you! Though refused
by the high-souled Vasistha, your father, |
am still desirous of performing a great
sacrifice with the object of bodily ascending
to heaven. Be pleased, therefore, to grant
me leave to do so. (18)

गुरुपुत्रानहं सर्वान् नमस्कृत्य प्रसादये।
शिरसा प्रणतो याचे ब्राह्मणांस्तपसि स्थितान्॥ १९॥

“Saluting all my preceptor’s sons, |
hereby seek your favour and, fallen prostrate
touching the ground with my head, | implore
the Brahmanas in your person, devoted to
austerities. (19)

a मां भवन्त: सिद्ध्यर्थं याजयन्तु समाहिता:।
सशरीरो यथाहं A देवलोकमवाप्नुयाम्॥२०॥

“As such may you help me with a
concentrated mind in performing a sacrifice
for the accomplishment of my purpose so
that | may attain to the realm of gods in my
embodied state. (20)
प्रत्याख्यातो वसिष्ठेन गतिमन्यां तपोधना:।
गुरुपुत्रानृते सर्वान् नाहं पश्यामि कांचन॥ २१॥

“Having been repulsed by Vasistha, O
sages rich in asceticism, | do not find any
resort other than you all, the sons of my
preceptor. (21)
seaport fe सर्वेषां पुरोधा: परमा गति:।
तस्मादनन्तरं सर्वे भवन्तो dad मम॥ २२॥
