* ARANYAKANDA «

carry it away in a piece of cloth—you who
seek to bear away Sri Rama’s wife of virtuous
conduct. Nay, you desire to tread on the
heads of iron-tipped pikes—you who seek
to lay your hands on the worthy consort of
Sri Rama! (42—44)
। सिं _
यदन्तरं स्यन्दनिकासमुद्रयो: |
तदन्तरं दाशरथेस्तवैव च॥४५॥

“The same disparity exists between
Sri Rama (son of Dagaratha) and yourself
as does between a lion and a jackal in a
forest, between a sea and a brook, between
nectar (the foremost of beverages) and
Sauviraka (a sour and savoury drink
prepared by dissolving powdered rye-seeds
into water and preserving it for a day or
two). (45)

deat दाशरथेस्तवैव च ॥४६॥

“Nay, the same disparity exists between
Sri Rama (son of DaSaratha) and you as
does between gold and a base metal like lead,
between sandal-paste and mud and between
an elephant and a cat in a jungle. (46)
यदन्तरं वायसवैनतेययो-
र्यदन्तं मद्गुमयूरयोरपि।
यदन्तरं हंसकगृध्रयोर्वने
तदन्तरं दाशरथेस्तवैव च॥४७॥
“Again, the same disparity exists
between you and Sri Rama (son of
DaSaratha) as does between Garuda (son

843

of Vinata and the King of birds) and a crow,
between a peacock and a diver bird, between
a swan (which is believed to feed on pearls)
and a vulture (which feeds on the rotten
flesh of carcasses). (47)

तस्मिन् सहस्राक्षसमप्रभावे
Te स्थिते कार्मुकबाणपाणौ।
हृतापि ase न जरां गमिष्ये
आज्यं यथा मक्षिकयावगीर्णम्॥ ४८ UI
“So long as Sri Rama, whose might
equals that of Indra (the thousand-eyed god),
is alive holding a bow and an arrow in his
hand, | shall not be retained by you, even
though carried away by you, any more than
ghee swallowed by a bee (which ultimately
causes its death).” (48)

इतीव तद्वाक्यमदुष्टभावा
सुदुष्टमुक्त्वा रजनीचरं तम्।
गात्रप्रकम्पाद् व्यथिता बभूव
वातोद्धता सा कदलीव तन्वी।॥ ४९॥

Having thus addressed the foregoing
most pungent words to the said ranger of
the night, the lean and thin Sita, who
harboured no vile motive towards him, felt
afflicted due to a tremor in her body like a
plantain tree shaken by a blast. (49)
तां वेपमानामुपलक्ष्य सीतां

स रावणो मृत्युसमप्रभाव:।
कुलं act नाम च कर्म चात्मन:
समाचचक्षे भयकारणार्थम्॥५०॥

Perceiving Sita shaking through
uncertainty, the said Ravana, who was mighty
as Death, proudly mentioned his own
descent, strength, name and exploits in order
to intimidate her. (50)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्येऽरण्यकाण्डे सप्तचत्वारिंश: Wy: ॥ ४७॥

Thus ends Canto Forty-seven in the Aranyakanda of the glorious Ramayana of
Valmiki, the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

