* ARANYAKANDA «

gigantic form and hideous appearance. The
aforesaid two brothers, Sri Rama and
Laksmana, found her there to be a source
of terror to men of deficient strength,
loathsome and grim of aspect, with a
protruding belly and sharp teeth and a hard
skin, fierce and tall of stature, given to
devouring fearful beasts, her hair dishevelled.
(8—13)
सा समासाद्य तौ वीरौ व्रजन्तं भ्रातुरग्रत:।
US रंस्यावहरेत्युक्त्वा समालम्भत लक्ष्मणम्॥ १४॥

Approaching the aforesaid heroes and
saying to Laksmana. who was walking ahead
of his eldest brother, “Come, let us revel !”
caught Laksmana by the hand. (14)
sara चैनं वचनं सौमित्रिमुपगुह्य च।
ae त्वयोमुखी नाम लाभस्ते त्वमसि Fira: ui १५ ॥

Nay, embracing the darling of Sumitra,
she spoke to him as follows : “l am Ayomukhi
by name and a veritable acquisition to you,
while you are beloved of me. (15)

नाथ पर्वतदुर्गेषु नदीनां पुलिनेषु च।
आयुश्चिरमिदं dit त्वं मया सह रंस्यसे॥१६॥
“O valiant lord, you shall revel with me
throughout this long life on mountain defiles
and on the banks of rivers.” (16)

एवमुक्तस्तु कुपित: खड्गमुद्धृत्य लक्ष्मण:।
कर्णनासस्तनं तस्या निचकर्तारिसूदन:॥१७॥
Drawing his sword when spoken to as
aforesaid, Laksmana, the destroyer of his
enemies, for his part, angrily cut off her
ears, nose and breasts. (17)

कर्णनासे fed तु fact विननाद सा।

यथागतं प्रदुद्राव राक्षसी घोरदर्शना॥१८॥
Her ears and nose having been lopped

off, the aforesaid ogress of grim visage for

her part screamed loudly and ran away as
she had come. (18)

आसेदतुरमित्रघ्नौ भ्रातरौ रामलक्ष्मणौ॥१९॥

Marching forward vigorously when she

909

had left, the two brothers, Sri Rama and
Laksmana, the slayers of their foes, reached
an impenetrable forest. (19)

लक्ष्मणस्तु महातेजा: सत्त्ववाञ्छीलवाञ्छुचि: |
अब्रवीत् प्राञ्जलिर्वाक्यं भ्रातरं दीप्ततेजसम्॥ २०॥

With joined palms Laksmana, for his
part, who was endowed with great energy,
full of courage, possessed of good conduct
and pious, submitted as follows to his eldest
brother of fiery spirit : (20)

wat मे दृढं बाहुरुद्विग्रमिव A मन:।
प्रायशश्चाप्यनिष्टानि निमित्तान्युपलक्षये॥ २१॥

“My left arm is steadily throbbing,
nay, my mind is feeling perturbed as it
were, and | also behold mostly evil portents.

(21)
तस्मात् सज्जीभवार्य त्वं कुरुष्व वचनं मम।
ममैव fe निमित्तानि सद्य: शंसन्ति सम्भ्रमम्॥ २२॥

“Therefore, follow my advice and get
you ready to meet the impending peril, O
noble brother! The portents unmistakably
and definitely betoken imminent danger to
my mind. (22)

एष agent AA पक्षी परमदारुण:।
आवयोर्विजयं युद्धे शंसन्निव विनर्दंति॥ २३॥

“This most frightful bird, known by the
name of Vafijulaka, is emitting a shrill cry,
foretelling, as it were, victory for us in an
encounter.” (23)
तयोरन्वेषतोरेवं Wt ad वनमोजसा।
संजज्ञे विपुल: शब्द: प्रभञ्जन्निव Aq SALI २४॥

While the two brothers were vigorously
exploring the whole of that forest in this
way, a loud noise arose, rending the aforesaid
forest, as it were. (24)
वनस्य तस्य शब्दोऽभूद् वनमापूरयन्निव॥ 24 UI

The forest was enveloped, as it were,
in a storm. From the heart of the forest
there arose a sound, making the whole
forest resound, as it were. (25)
