# YUDDHAKANDA +

वानरेषु समासक्तं न a कार्यं विपत्स्यते।

अचिराद् द्रक्ष्यसे सीतां cieat सागरमक्षयम्॥ १८॥
“Duly entrusted to the monkeys,

your task will not suffer. Crossing the sea,

which knows no destruction, you shall
behold Sita before long. (18)
तदलं शोकमालम्ब्य क्रोधमालम्ब भूपते।
निश्चेष्टा: क्षत्रिया wer: ad चण्डस्य बिभ्यति॥ १९॥
“Therefore, give way no more to grief
and have recourse to anger, O Lord of
the earth! Spiritless Ksatriyas (members of

the warrior class) are inactive, while all
fear the wrathful. (19)

agi च घोरस्य समुद्रस्य नदीपते:।
सहास्माभिरिहोपेत: सूक्ष्मबुद्धिर्विचारय। २०॥
“Nay, accompanied by us, consider
here with us the means of crossing the
dread sea, the lord of rivers, sharp-witted
that you are. (20)

लङ्घिते at a: सैन्यैर्जितमित्येव निश्चिनु।
aa तीर्णं च मे सैन्यं जितमित्यवधार्यताम्॥ २१॥

“Once the sea has been crossed by
my forces, conclude, our victory is certain.

297

Nay, arrived beyond the sea, my entire
army should be taken as victorious. (21)

sa fe हरय: शूरा: समरे कामरूपिण:।
तानरीन् विधमिष्यन्ति शिलापादपव्रृष्टिभि: ।। २२॥

“These monkeys, heroic that they are
in combat and capable of assuming any
form at will, will surely blow away the
aforesaid enemies by their volleys of rocks
and trees. (22)
कथंचित् परिपश्यामि लङ्घितं वरुणालयम्।
हतमित्येव तं मन्ये युद्धे शत्रुनिबर्हण॥ २३॥

“If | actually find the sea (the abode
of Varuna) crossed by any means
whatsoever, | count Ravana as definitely
killed in battle, O exterminator of foes!

(23)

किमुक्त्वा agen चापि सर्वथा विजयी भवान्।
निमित्तानि च पश्यामि मनो मे सम्प्रहृष्यति॥ २४॥

“What will be gained by speaking
extensively on this topic? Nay, you will
turnout victorious in everyway. For, | perceive
good omens and my mind is excessively
delighted.” (24)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये युद्धकाण्डे द्वितीय: सर्ग: ॥ २॥
Thus ends Canto Two in the Yuddhakanda of the glorious Ramayana of
Valmiki, the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

तृतीय: सर्ग:

Canto III

Enquired about Lanka by Sri Rama on his hearing the
appeal of Sugriva, Hanuman gives a detailed
description of Lanka as he saw it

सुग्रीवस्य वच: श्रुत्वा हेतुमत् परमार्थवत्।
प्रतिजग्राह काकुत्स्थो हनूमन्तमथाब्रवीत्॥१॥

Hearing the appeal of Sugriva, which
was full of reason and exposition of the real
truth, Sri Rama (a scion of Kakutstha)

accepted it and spoke to Hanuman as
follows: (1)

तपसा सेतुबन्धेन सागरोच्छोषणेन च।
सर्वथापि समर्थोऽस्मि सागरस्यास्य ATI २॥

“| am capable in everyway of crossing
