202

to shriek wild due to various cries uttered
by its denizens. (16)

स तान् प्रव्रद्धान् विनिहत्य राक्षसान्
महाबलश्चण्डपराक्रम: कपि:।
ers: पुनरेव राक्षसै-
स्तदेव वीरोऽभिजगाम तोरणम्॥ १७॥

« VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

Having disposed of those arrogant ogres,
the heroic monkey, Hanuman, who was
endowed with extraordinary might and terrific
prowess, sought once more the same
archway, eager to give battle to other ogres.

(17)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये सुन्दरकाण्डे पञ्चचत्वारिंश: सर्ग: ॥ ४५ ॥

Thus ends Canto Forty-five of the Sundarakanda in the glorious Ramayana of Valmiki,
the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

षट्चत्वारिंश: सर्ग:
Canto XLVI

Having killed five more generals sent by Ravana, Hanuman
returns again to the archway of the Asoka grove

हतान् AAA बुद्ध्वा वानरेण महात्मना।
रावण: संवृताकारश्चकार मतिमुत्तमाम्॥१॥
Coming to know of his chief minister's
sons having been killed by the colossal
monkey, Ravana, who had _ hypocritically
concealed the expression of his face giving
a Clue to the disposition of his mind, made
a crafty resolution to renew his efforts to
tame the monkey. (1)

a विरूपाक्षयूपाक्षौ git wa राक्षसम्।
प्रघसं भासकर्णं च पञ्च सेनाग्रनायकान्॥२॥
संदिदेश दशग्रीवो वीरान् नयविशारदान्।
हनूमद्ग्रहणेऽव्यग्रान् वायुवेगसमान् युधि॥ ३॥

That ten-headed monster commanded
five leading generals of his army, viz.,
Virupaksa and Yupaksa as well as the ogre
Durdhara, Praghasa and Bhasakarna, who
were valiant, nay, past masters in strategy
and imperturbable and approached the speed
of the wind on the field of battle, to take
Hanuman captive. (2-3)

ad सेनाग्रगा: सर्वे महाबलपरिग्रहा:।
सवाजिरथमातङ्गा:; स कपि: शास्यतामिति॥४॥

“March you all, O generals, taking a

large army with you and accompanied by
horses, chariots and elephants and let that
monkey be punished. (4)

यत्तैश्च खलु भाव्यं स्यात् तमासाद्य वनालयम्।
कर्म चापि समाधेयं देशकालाविरोधितम्॥ ५॥
“Approaching that monkey, you must
surely remain alert and action should be
taken by you, which is not out of harmony
with time and place. (5)
न ह्यहं तं aft मन्ये कर्मणा uid तर्कयन्।
सर्वथा तन्महद् भूतं महाबलपरिग्रहम्॥६॥
“Judging him by his actions, | surely do
not account him a monkey. At all events he
must be some great being endowed with
extraordinary might. (6)

वानरोऽयमिति ज्ञात्वा नहि शुद्ध्यति मे मन:।

नैवाहं तं aft wat यथेयं प्रस्तुता कथा॥७॥
“My mind is surely not ready to believe

that he is a monkey. | certainly do not

account him a monkey as the story which is
told about him shows. (7)

भवेदिन्द्रेण वा सृष्टमस्मदर्थं तपोबलात्।
सनागयक्षगन्धर्वदेवासुरमहर्षय: ॥ ८॥
