* SUNDARAKANDA +

विपुलांसो महाबाहु: कम्बुग्रीव: शुभानन:।
गूढजन्रु: सुताम्राक्षो WAT नाम जनै: श्रुत:॥१५॥
“He has broad shoulders, mighty-arms,
a conch-shaped neck, a_ charming
countenance and coppery eyes; he has his
clavicle concealed behind muscles and is
known by the people by the name of Rama.
(15)

दुन्दुभिस्वननिर्घोष: स्निग्धवर्ण: प्रतापवान्।
wag सुविभक्ताङ्गो वर्णं yard समाश्रित:॥ १६॥
“He has a voice deep like the sound of
a kettledrum and a glossy skin, is full of
glory, square-built and of well-proportioned
limbs and is endowed with a dark-brown
complexion. (16)

त्रिस्थिरस्निप्रलम्बश्च त्रिसमस्तिषु चोन्नत:।
त्रिताम्रस्तिषु च स्निग्धो गम्भीरस्निषु नित्यश: ee i
त्रिवलीमांस्त्र्यवनतश्चतुर्व्यङ्गस्तरिशीर्षवान् ।
Tea: ।। १८
चतुर्दशसमद्वन्द्वश्चतुर्दंष्ट्रश्चतुर्गति: ।
पञ्चस्निग्धोऽष्टवंशवान्॥ १९॥
He is ever stiff in three limbs' (viz., the
breast, wrist and fist), long in three? (viz.,
the eyebrows, arms and the scrotum), uniform
in three? (viz., his locks, testicles and knees),
elevated in three‘ (viz., the breast, the rim of
the navel and the abdomen), coppery in
three® (viz., the rims of his eyes, nails and
the palms as well as the soles), soft in
three® (viz., the end of the membrum virile,
the lines on his soles and the hair), and

159

deep in three’ (viz., the voice, gait and the
navel). He has three folds (in the skin of his
neck and belly), is depressed at three places
(viz., the middle of his soles, the lines on his
soles, and the nipples)’, endowed with
three? spirals in the hair of his head, four
lines at the root of his  thumbs"®
(indicating his knowledge of all the four
Vedas) and four lines'' on his forehead
(indicating longevity), is four cubits high,
and has four pairs of limbs (viz., the
cheeks, arms, shanks and knees) equally
matched.'? He has fourteen other pairs of
limbs (viz., the eyebrows, nostrils, eyes,
ears, the lips, nipples, elbows, wrists, the
knees, the testicles, the loins, the hands,
the feet and the thighs equally matched.'*
The four large teeth at both the ends of
his upper and the lower jaws are very
sharp.'* He walks in four different gaits
resembling those of a lion, a tiger, an elephant
and a bull'®, is endowed with excellent lips,
chin and nose, five glossy limbs, viz., the
hair, eyes, teeth, skin and soles and eight
long limbs, viz., the arms, the fingers and
the toes, the eyes and the ears, the nose,
the backbone and the body. (17—19)

दशपद्मो awrgedrarveatay द्विशुक्लवान्।
षडुन्नतो नवतनुस्निभिर्व्यप्नोति Waa: Ro Il

“Sri Rama, a scion of Raghu, has ten
lotus-like limbs (viz., the countenance, the
mouth, the eyes, the tongue, lips, palate,

* We read in works on Physiognomy—
1 Seq मणिबन्धश्च मुष्टिश्च yod: fee: |
2. प्रलम्बा यस्य स धनी त्रयो भ्रुमुष्कबाहव:।
3 केशाग्रं बृषणं जानु समं यस्य स भूपति:।
4. नाभ्यन्तकुक्षिवक्षोभिरुन्नतो नृपतिर्भवेत्।
5.  नेत्रान्तनखपाण्यङ्ध्रितलैस्ताम्रस्तिभि: सुखी।
6. fern: भवन्ति a येषां पादरेखा: शिरोरुहा।
an लिङ्गमणिस्तेषां महाभाग्यं विनिर्दिशेत्।
7. स्वरे गतौ च नाभौ च गम्भीरस्तिषु शस्यते।
ग्रीवा प्रजननं पृष्ठं हस्वे जङ्घे च पूजिते।
आवर्तत्रययुक्तं यस्य शिर: क्षितिभृतामयं नाथ:।

39 8

10. मूलेऽङ्गुष्ठस्य रेखानां चतस्रस्तिस्रं एव वा।
Ua द्वे वा यथायोगं वेदरेखा द्विजन्मनाम्।
11. ललाटे यस्य Gad चतुस्तिद्वयेकरेखिका:।
शतद्वयं wd षष्ठिस्तस्यायुर्विंशति: क्रमात्॥
12. बाहुजानूरुगण्डानि चत्वार्यथ समानि च॥
13. yal नासापुरे नेत्रे कर्णावोष्ठौ च चूचुकौ।
ek मणिबन्धौ च जानुनी gent कटी॥
करौ पादौ स्फिजो यस्य समौ ज्ञेय: स भूपति:।
14. स्निग्धा घनाश्च दशना: सुतीक्ष्णदंष्रा: शभाश्चतस्र: Il
We have read in the Balakanda—
15. गजसिंहगती वीरौ शार्दूलवृषभोपमौ।
