* SUNDARAKANDA + 71

at the close of night, their faces again looked
at that time like lotuses with their petals
closed at night. (37)

इमानि मुखपद्मानि fad मत्तषट्पदा:।
अम्बुजानीव फुल्लानि प्रार्थयन्ति पुन: पुन:॥ ३८ ॥
इति वामन्यत श्रीमानुपपत्त्या महाकपि:।
मेने fe गुणतस्तानि समानि सलिलोद्भवै:।। ३९॥

By recourse to reason the glorious and
mighty Hanuman presumed that the drunken
bees must be repeatedly invoking the
hospitality of these lotus-like faces as they
do in the case of expanded lotuses; for he
regarded the former akin to lotuses (lit.,
flowers sprung from water). (38-39)

सा तस्य शुशुभे शाला ताभि: स्त्रीभिर्विराजिता।
शारदीव प्रसन्ना द्यौस्ताराभिरभिशोभिता॥४०॥

Irradiated by those women that chamber
of Ravana shone like the cloudless sky
spangled on all sides with stars in autumn.

(40)
स च ate: परिव्रृत: शुशुभे राक्षसाधिप:।
यथा ह्युडुपति: श्रीमांस्ताराभिरिव daa: use

And, surrounded by them, Ravana, the
suzerain lord of ogres, actually shone like
the glorious moon (lit., the lord of stars)
encircled by stars. (41)

याश्च्यवन्तेऽम्बरात् AT: पुण्यशेषसमावृता:।
इमास्ता: संगता: कृत्स्ना इति मेने हरिस्तदा॥४२॥
Hanuman thought at that time that all
those meteors that fell from the heavens,
wrapped up in the residue of their exhausted
stock of merit had been (re-) united there.
(42)

ताराणामिव सुव्यक्तं महतीनां शुभार्चिषाम्।
प्रभावर्णप्रसादाश्च विरेजुस्तत्र योषिताम्॥४३॥
Nay, the lustre, complexion and grace
of the women lying there very vividly
resembled the brilliance, charm and clearness
of big stars radiating bright lustre. (43)

व्याव्रृत्तकचपीनस्त्रक्प्रकीर्णवरभूषणा: ।
पानव्यायामकालेषु निद्रोपहतचेतस: ॥ ४४॥

Their locks and thick garlands thrown
into disorder and their excellent jewels
scattered at the time of drinking and dancing
etc., they had fallen unconscious under the
influence of slumber. (44)

व्यावृत्ततिलका: काश्चित् काश्चिदुद्भ्रान्तनूपुरा: |
पार्वे गलितहाराश्च काश्चित् परमयोषित: ॥ ४५ A

Some of them had the sacred marks
on their forehead wiped off, others had their
anklets thrown on their ankles, while still
other belles had their necklaces fallen off by
their side. (45)

मुक्ताहारव्ताश्चान्या: काश्चित् प्रस्रस्तवासस: |
व्याविद्भरशनादामा: favre ga वाहिता:॥४६॥
Some lay covered by their broken
necklaces, while others had their raiment
slipped off, while yet others, who had the
strings of their girdles snapped, lay like
young mares which had been made to carry
loads and fallen asleep under a spell of
exertion. (46)

अकुण्डलधराश्चान्या विच्छिन्नमृदितस्त्रज:।
गजेन्द्रमृदिता: Heel लता sa महावने॥४७॥

Some did not have any earrings (which
had obviously dropped in the course of their
dancing etc.,) while others had their garlands
broken and crushed and looked like
blossomed creepers lying crushed by a
lordly elephant in a large forest. (47)

चन्द्रांशुकिरणाभाश्च हारा: कासांचिदुद्गता: ।

हंसा इव बभु: सुप्ता: स्तनमध्येषु योषिताम्॥४८॥
Again, the pearl-necklaces of some

women which had come out, shone like the

rays of the moon and the sun, appeared like

swans lying asleep in the space between
their breasts. (48)

अपरासां च agal: कादम्बा इव पक्षिण:।
हेमसूत्राणि चान्यासां चक्रवाका इवाभवन्॥४९॥
Necklaces of cat’s-eye gems on the

breasts of some ladies looked like Kadamba
birds (a species of geese with dark-grey
