« KISKINDHAKANDA +

Arjuna flowers, have now ceased to blow,

though fully prepared to march. (25)

aM वारणानां च मयूराणां च लक्ष्मण।

नाद: प्रस्रवणानां च प्रशान्त: सहसानघ॥ २६॥
“The rumbling of clouds, the trumpeting

of elephants, the cry of peacocks and the

sound of waterfalls have become completely
still all at once, O sinless one! (26)

अभिवृष्टा महामेघैर्निर्मलाश्चित्रसानव: ।
अनुलिप्ता इवाभान्ति गिरयश्चन्द्ररश्मिभि:॥ २७॥

“Having been washed on all sides by
huge clouds and thus cleansed of their
impurities, the mountains with their picturesque
peaks shine forth as though illumined by the
rays of the moon. (27)
शाखासु सप्तच्छ्दपाढपाना

प्रभासु तारार्कनिशाकराणाम्।
लीलासु चैवोत्तमवारणानां
श्रियं विभज्याद्य शरत्प्रव्रत्ता॥ २८॥

“Autumn has now set in, severally
manifesting her grace (in the form of blossom)
on the boughs of Saptachhada trees, through
the light of the stars, the sun and the moon
and through the frolicking sport of excellent
elephants. (28)
सम्प्रत्यनेकाश्रयचित्रशोभा

लक्ष्मी: शरत्कालगुणोपपन्ना।
सूर्याग्रहस्तप्रतिबोधितेषु
पद्माकरेष्वभ्यधिकं विभाति॥ २९॥

“With her diversified elegance manifested
through various channels the goddess of
loveliness, adorned with the beauties of
autumn, spreads her charm in an extraordinary
degree in the clusters of lotuses opened by
the first rays of the sun. (29)
सप्तच्छ्दानां कुसुमोपगन्धी

षट्पादवृन्दैरनुगीयमान: ।
मत्तद्विपानां पवनानुसारी
ad विनेष्यन्नधिकं विभाति॥ ३०॥

“Bearing the fragrance of the blossom

of Saptachhada trees, nay being celebrated

1049

in song by swarms of black bees, drying up
the waters of the lakes and rivers etc.,
heightening the excitement of elephants in
rut and thus following the ways of the wind-
god, autumn is spreading its charm in a
special degree. (30)

अभ्यागतैश्चारुविशालपक्षै:
स्मरप्रियै:; पद्मरजोऽवकीर्णै:।
क्रीडन्ति हंसा: सह चक्रवाकै: ।। ३१॥
“The swans वाड sporting § with
Cakravakas (a species of red geese), that
have newly arrived from the Manasarovara
lake with them, are distinguished by their
lovely distended wings and covered over
with the pollen of lotuses, are fond of amorous
sport and have come in contact with them
on the sandy banks of big rivers. (31)

मदप्रगल्भेषु च वारणेषु

Tat समूहेषु च दर्पितेषु।
प्रसन्नतोयासु च निम्नगासु

विभाति लक्ष्मीर्बहुधा विभक्ता।। ३२॥

“Loveliness appears reflected severally
in elephants mad through rut, in herds of
excited bulls as well as in streams with
pellucid waters. (32)

विमुक्तबर्हाभरणा वनेषु।
प्रियास्वरक्ता विनिव्रत्तशोभा
गतोत्सवा ध्यानपरा मयूरा:॥ ३३॥

“Perceiving the sky wholly devoid of
clouds, the peacocks in the woods—that
had shed their decoration in the form of their
tail and were no longer fond of their mates,
whose grace had totally disappeared and
whose joy had departed—became absorbed

in the thought of clouds. (33)
मनोज्ञगन्धै: प्रियकैरनल्पै:
पुष्पातिभारावनताग्रशाखै: ।
सुवर्णगौरैर्नयनाभिरामै-
रुद्योतितानीव वनान्तराणि॥ ३४॥
