114

years.” Having granted the aforesaid boon,
the high-souled Lord Visnu, the adored
even of gods, now thought of Ayodhya, the
place of His projected birth, on the mortal
plane. Then Himself taking the form of
four personalities, the Lord, whose eyes
resemble the petals of a lotus, wished King
DaSaratha to be His father in that descent.
Thereupon the gods, Rsis and Gandharvas,
accompanied by Lord Rudra and bevies of
Apsaras, extolled Lord Visnu (the Destroyer
of the demon Madhu) by means of hymns,
depicting His transcendent personality :
(28—32)
विरावणं साधु तपस्विकण्टकं तपस्विनामुद्धर तं भयावहम्॥ ३३ ।।

“Pray, completely destroy that notorious

« VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

and arrogant Ravana, possessed of terrific
energy, the enemy of Indra, the ruler of
gods, the scourge of ascetics and the terror
of hermits, whose vanity knows no bounds
and who makes people scream by his
tyranny. (33)
स्वर्लोकमागच्छ गतज्वरश्चिरं FOR गुप्तं गतदोषकल्मषम्।॥ ३४॥

“Having but killed the aforesaid Ravana
of terrible prowess, who makes people loudly
wail by his tyranny, alongwith his army and
kinsmen, and thereby rid of anxiety Your
devotees, come back, O Ruler of gods, to
Heaven (Vaikuntha), Your everlasting abode,
guarded by Yourself and free from all
impurities in the shape of frailties like partiality
and prejudice.” (34)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये बालकाण्डे VAG: AA: ॥ 24 ॥

Thus ends Canto Fifteen in the Balakanda of the glorious Ramayana of Valmiki,
the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

BS: सर्ग:
Canto XVI

A dialogue between Lord Visnu and the gods bearing on Ravana; on the
disappearance of the Lord an attendant of Prajapati (Lord Visnu,
the Protector of all created beings) rises from the sacrificial
pit and hands over to DaSaratha a basin containing
milk boiled with rice and sugar and the latter
divides it among his wives

ततो नारायणो विष्णुर्नियुक्त: सुरसत्तमै:।
जानन्नपि सुरानेवं श्लक्ष्णं वचनमब्रवीत्॥१॥
Solicited thus by the foremost of the
gods, the all-pervading Narayana, though
knowing everything, thereupon addressed
the following sweet words to the gods: (1)

उपाय: को वधे तस्य राक्षसाधिपते: सुरा:।
ame तं समास्थाय निहन्यामृषिकण्टकम्॥ २॥

“What can be the device for despatching
the aforesaid ruler of the ogres, O gods, by

resorting to which | may be able to uproot
that thorn in the side of the Rsis?” (2)

एवमुक्ता: सुरा: ad प्रत्यूचुर्विष्णुमव्ययम्।
मानुषं रूपमास्थाय रावणं wie संयुगे॥ ३॥
Asked thus by the Lord, all the gods
replied to the immortal Lord Visnu as follows :
“Assuming a human semblance, make short
work of Ravana in battle. (3)
a fe a तपस्तीव्रं दीर्घकालमरिंदम।
येन तुष्टोऽभवद् Wal लोककृल्लोकपूर्वज: tl ¥ il
