124

moving outside his body. Without him Sri
Rama, the foremost of men, did not have
even a wink of sleep, nor did he partake of
a dainty dish brought for him without
Laksmana. Whenever Sri Rama, the
celebrated scion of Raghu, went out
a-hunting, mounted on horseback, Laksmana
forthwith followed at his heels, armed with a
bow and arrows and guarding him on all
sides. Satrughna, the younger brother of
Laksmana, was dearer to Bharata even
than the latter's own life and Bharata likewise
was ever dear to Satrughna.

The said King, Dasaratha, felt supremely
delighted with his four highly blessed and
beloved sons as Brahma, the progenitor
of the entire creation, with the gods viz.,
Indra, Varuna, Yama and Kubera presiding
over the four quarters. When they got
enriched with wisdom, they were all adorned
with virtues. Nay, they were modest,
glorious, all-knowing and far-sighted. King
DaSaratha, the father of them all—who were
possessed of such unique glory and luminous
splendour—felt rejoiced as Brahma, the ruler
of the universe. Those tigers among men
too were attached to their Vedic studies,
nay, devoted to the service of their parents,
and were well-versed in the science of
archery.

Now, when their studies neared
completion, King Dasaratha, whose mind
was given to piety, deliberated with his
family priests, the sages Vasistha and
Vamadeva, and relations, such as King
Romapada, about the princes’ marriage.
Even while that high-souled monarch was
deliberating on the subject in the midst of
his counsellors, the great sage ViSwamitra,
who was possessed of unique glory, arrived
at the palace of King Dasaratha. Seeking
an audience with the king, he addressed
the gate-keepers as follows : (28—39)
शीघ्रमाख्यात मां प्राप्तंकौशिकं गाधिन: सुतम्।
तच्छुत्वा वचनं तस्य राज्ञो वेश्म प्रदुद्गुवु:॥४०॥

« VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

सम्भ्रान्तमनस: सर्वे तेन वाक्येन चोदिता:।
at गत्वा waved विश्वामित्रमृषिं तदा॥४१॥

प्राप्तमावेदयामासुर्नृपायेक्ष्वाकवे तदा।
तेषां ae वचनं श्रुत्वा सपुरोधा: समाहित:॥४२॥
प्रत्युज्जगाम संहृष्टो ब्रह्माणमिव वासव:।
स दृष्टा ज्वलितं दीप्त्या तापसं संशितव्रतम्॥४३॥
प्रहष्टवबदनो राजा ततोऽर्घ्यमुपहारयत्।
a Ua: प्रतिगृह्यार्घ्य शास्त्रदृष्टेन कर्मणा॥४४॥
कुशलं चाव्ययं da पर्यपृच्छन्नराधिपम्।
Ut कोशे जनपदे बान्धवेषु Ge च॥४५॥
कुशलं कौशिको राज्ञ: पर्यपृच्छत् सुधार्मिक: |
अपि ते संनता: सर्वे सामन्तरिपवो जिता:॥४६॥

“Inform the king about me, the sage
Viswamitra belonging to the line of KuSsa,
the son of Gadhi, having arrived at his
door.” Hearing the aforesaid utterance of
the sage and spurred on by that command,
all of them ran fast to the king’s apartments
with an awe-stricken mind. Reaching the
royal apartments at once, they forthwith
reported to King Dasaratha (belonging to
the line of Ikswaku) the news of the sage
Viswamitra having arrived at the portals.
Overjoyed to hear the aforesaid statement
of theirs, the king, full of devotion, went
forth to receive him alongwith his family
priest, Vasistha, even as Indra would go to
meet Brahma.

Seeing the hermit of austere vows and
shining with effulgence, the king with a most
cheerful countenance thereupon offered to
him water to wash his hands with. Accepting
the water for washing the hands with and
other attentions offered by the king with
ceremony, as enjoined by the scriptures, he
duly inquired of the king after his health and
prosperity. The exceedingly pious sage
Viswamitra also duly inquired after the
welfare of the king’s capital, treasury,
kingdom, relations and friends. He then
said, “I hope all your vassals—are fully
submissive to you and your enemies
subdued. (40—46)
