+ UTTARAKANDA +

and becomes honoured in the other world
also. (8)
रामायणं गोविसर्गे मध्याह्ने वा समाहित:।
सायाह्ने वापराह्णे च वाचयन् नावसीदति॥ ९॥
Reciting the Ramayana attentively in
the morning, at midday, or afternoon, or
evening, such a one suffers no pain. (9)

अयोध्यापि पुरी रम्या शून्या वर्षगणान् बहून्।
may wea wart निवासमुपयास्यति॥१०॥
The beautiful Ayodhya remaining
desolate for many many years after Sri
Rama’s departure for Supreme Abode, will
again be inhabited during the reign of the
king, Rsabha. (10)
एतदाख्यानमायुष्यं सभविष्यं सहोत्तरम्।
कृतवान् Wades: GAR ब्रह्माप्यन्वमन्यत॥ ११॥
This life-giving legend, Ramayana, with
the Bhavisya (account of future events) and
the Uttarakanda, was composed by the son
of Praceta (Valmiki) and it was approved as
true by Brahma. (11)

अश्वमेधसहस्रस्य वाजपेयायुतस्य TI
aud श्रवणादेव सर्गस्यैकस्य मानव:॥१२॥

A man gets the awards of performing
one thousand ASwamecha and ten thousand
Vajpeya sacrifices merely by hearing even
one single canto of this Ramayana. (12)

प्रयागादीनि तीर्थानि were: सरितस्तथा।
नैमिषादीन्यरण्यानि कुरुक्षेत्रादिकान्यपि॥ १३॥
गतानि तेन लोकेऽस्मिन् येन रामायणं श्रुतम्।
हेमभारं कुरुक्षेत्रे ग्रस्ते भानौ प्रयच्छति॥१४॥
यश्च रामायणं लोके sorta Berar
सम्यकश्रद्धासमायुक्त: AVA राघवीं कथाम्॥ १५॥
सर्वपापात् प्रमुच्येत विष्णुलोकं स गच्छति।
आदिकाव्यमिदं त्वार्षं पुरा वाल्मीकिना कृतम्॥ VE Il
य: YU सदा WAT स गच्छेद् वैष्णवीं TTA |
पुत्रदाराश्च वर्धन्ते सम्पद: संततिस्तथा॥ ot

He is supposed to have visited all the

1135

holy places like Prayaga etc., and all the
rivers like Ganga, the forests like
Naimisaranya* and Ksetras like Kuruksetra,
in the world, who has listened to Ramayana.
One who gives two thousand Palas of gold
at Kuruksetra during sun-eclipse and the
other who hears Ramayana, both are equal
in inheriting virtues. He who listens the story
of Rama is freed from all sins and goes to
the world of Visnu. This is the first and the
foremost epic, composed in the ages of
remote past by the sage Valmiki. He who
listens to it everyday, attains the form of
Visnu, is blessed with wife, his progenies
and wealth are multiplied and he prospers.
(183—17)

सत्यमेतद् विदित्वा तु श्रोतव्यं नियतात्मभि:।
गायत्र्याश्च स्वरूपं तद् रामायणमनुत्तमम्॥१८॥
One should listen to it, taking it to be
true, with tranquil mind. The Ramayana is
the unsurpassed form of Gayatri. (18)

य: पठेच्छृणुयान्नित्यं चरितं राघवस्य Fl
भक्त्या निष्कल्मषो भूत्वा दीर्घमायुरवाप्नुयात्॥ १९॥
He who narrates or listens always the
story of Sri Rama with reverence and
devoutly, becomes sinless and attains a
(very) long life. (19)

चिन्तयेद् wee नित्यं श्रेय: प्राप्तुं य इच्छति।
श्रावयेदिदमाख्यानं ब्राह्मणेभ्यो fet दिने॥ २०॥
He who wants to secure bliss, should
contemplate on Sri Rama and should narrate
the story before Brahmanas, day by day.
(20)
सोऽसुक्षये विष्णुलोकं गच्छत्येव न संशय:॥ २१॥
He who reads this whole story of Sri

Rama undoubtedly shall attain the world of
Visnu at the end of his life. (21)

पिता पितामहस्तस्य तथैव प्रपितामह:।
तत्पिता तत्पिता चैव विष्णुं यान्ति न संशय:॥ २२॥

His father, grandfather and great

* Holiest place.
