46

सम्पूर्णा राक्षसैर्घोरैर्नागैर्भोगवतीमिव |
अचिन्त्यां सुकृतां स्पष्टां कुबेराध्युषितां पुरा॥ २४॥
दंष्टाभिर्बहुभि: शूरै: शूलपट्टिशपाणिभि:।
रक्षितां राक्षसैर्घोरैर्गुहामाशीविषैरिव॥ २७५ Ut
तस्याश्च महतीं गुप्तिं सागरं च निरीक्ष्य स:।
रावणं च रिपुं घोरं चिन्तयामास वानर:॥ २६॥
Observing the city—which was overfull
with fierce ogres as Bhogavati, the capital
of Patala, with Nagas—was beyond
conception and well-constructed, was clearly
visible and had been occupied by Kubera in
the past and was guarded by numerous
gallant and terrible ogres distinguished by
tusks and carrying spikes and Pattisas (a
kind of sharp-edged spear) in their hands,
even as a cavern by venomous serpents—
as well as its mighty defences, as also the
sea encircling it and thinking the formidable
adversary in the form of Ravana, Hanuman
reflected as follows : (24—26)

आगत्यापीह ear भविष्यन्ति निरर्थका:।
नहि युद्धेन a लंका शक्या जेतुं सुरैरपि॥ २७॥

‘The monkeys will prove of no avail
even on coming here; for Lanka cannot be
conquered in any case through warfare even
by the gods. (27)
प्राप्यापि सुमहाबाहु: fer करिष्यति राघव:॥ २८ ॥

‘What will Sri Rama, a scion of Raghu,
of highly mighty arms do even on actually
reaching this Lanka, which is surpassingly
rugged and difficult of access and is protected
by Ravana? (28)

अवकाशो न साम्नस्तु राक्षसेष्वभिगम्यते।
न दानस्य न Veet नैव युद्धस्य Tad २९॥

‘No possibility at all is perceived of
winning over ogres through persuasion or
gift nor of bringing them to their knees by
sowing dissension among them nor again of
reducing them to submission through warfare.

(29)

« VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

चतुर्णामेव fe गतिर्वानराणां तरस्विनाम्।
वालिपुत्रस्य नीलस्य मम Way धीमत:॥ ३०॥
‘Only four agile monkeys, can actually
reach this place, viz., Angada (the son of
Vali), Nila, the sagacious king Sugriva and
myself. (30)

यावज्जानामि aed afe जीवति वा न ari
तत्रैव चिन्तयिष्यामि दृष्टा at जनकात्मजाम्॥ ३१॥

‘Meanwhile, | shall find out whether
Sita, a princess of the Videha territory, is
alive or not. Having seen that daughter of
King Janaka, | shall consider other points
only then.’ (31)

ad: स चिन्तयामास ded कपिकुञ्जर:।
fire: शृङ्गे स्थितस्तस्मिन् रामस्याभ्युदयं Aa: ३२॥

Stationed on that mountain peak, that
elephant among the monkeys, Hanuman,
pondered for a while the means of discovering
Sita in which lay the welfare of Sri Rama.

(32)
अनेन रूपेण मया न शबक्या रक्षसां पुरी।
प्रवेष्टुं राक्षसैर्गुप्ता क्रूरैर्बलसमन्वितै:॥ ३३॥

He said to Himself: ‘Lanka, the city of
ogres, guarded as it is by ferocious and
mighty ogres, cannot be entered by me in
this form. (33)

महौजसो महावीर्या बलवन्तश्च राक्षसा:।
asia मया ad जानकीं परिमार्गता॥ ३४॥

‘All the ogres, who are endowed with
extraordinary energy and_ extraordinary
prowess and are full of might, must be
blindfolded by me while | continue to look
about for Sita, the daughter of Janaka. (34)

लक्ष्यालक्ष्येण रूपेण Wat लंकापुरी मया।
प्राप्तकालं Wats मे कृत्यं साधयितुं महत्॥ ३५॥
‘In order to accomplish this great task
it is advisable for me to enter the city of
Lanka during the night in a form which
cannot be directly perceived, but whose
existence could be inferred by its exploits.’
(35)
