744

“This is the beautiful hermitage, the
resort of tame animals, of that long-lived
Agastya whose deeds are well-known in
the world. (86)

एष लोकार्चित: साधुर्हिते नित्यं ta: सताम्।
अस्मानधिगतानेष श्रेयसा योजयिष्यति॥ ८७॥

“He is a saint adored by the people
and always devoted to the good of the
virtuous. He will endow us, who have come
to him, with blessings. (87)
आराधयिष्याम्यत्राहमगस्त्यं तं महामुनिम्।
शेषं च वनवासस्य सौम्य वत्स्याम्यहं प्रभो॥ ८८॥

“Here | shall adore that great sage,
Agastya, and stay for the rest of my period
of exile in the forest, O gentle and powerful
prince ! (88)
aa देवा: सगन्धर्वा: सिद्धाश्च परमर्षय:।
अगस्त्यं नियताहारा: सततं पर्युपासते॥८९॥

“Here gods and Gandharvas, Siddhas
and the greatest sages always wait upon
Agastya, living on a restricted diet. (89)

नात्र जीवेन्मृषावादी क्रूरो वा यदि वा शठ:।
नृशंस: पापव्रत्तो वा मुनिरेष तथाविध:॥९०॥

“This sage is such that a liar, or a cruel

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

man, a knave, a wicked person or a sinner
cannot live here. (90)

अत्र देवाश्च यक्षाश्च नागाश्च पतगै: el
वसन्ति नियताहारा धर्ममाराधयिष्णव:॥ ९१॥

“Seeking to observe piety, gods as
well as Yaksas and Nagas together with
birds abide here with their diet controlled.(91)

ata सिद्धा महात्मानो विमानै: सूर्यसंनिभै:।
त्यक्त्वा देहान् नवैर्देहै: स्वर्याता: परमर्षय:॥ ९२॥
“Here exalted and realized souls and
greatest sages endowed with new bodies
have ascended to heaven in aerial cars
bright as the sun, giving up their (worn-out)
bodies. (92)

यक्षत्वममरत्वं च राज्यानि विविधानि a
अत्र देवा: प्रयच्छन्ति भूतैराराधिता: BWA: uss tl
“Adored by good people, gods confer

Yaksahood, divinity and different kingdoms
on their worshippers here. (93)

आगता: स्माश्रमपदं सौमित्रे प्रविशाग्रत:।
निवेदयेह मां प्राप्तमृषये we सीतया॥९४॥
“O son of Sumitra we have reached the

site of the hermitage. Go ahead and tell the
sage that | have come here with Sita.” (94)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्येऽरण्यकाण्डे एकादश: सर्ग: Il ११ ॥

Thus ends Canto Eleven in the Aranyakanda of the glorious Ramayana of Valmiki,
the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

Canto XII

Rama and others enter the hermitage of Agastya, enjoy his hospitality
and receive divine missiles and weapons

स प्रविश्याश्रमपदं लक्ष्मणो राघवानुज:।
अगस्त्यशिष्यमासाद्य वाक्यमेतदुवाच ह॥१॥
Entering the site of the hermitage and
approaching a disciple of Agastya, that
younger brother of Raghava, Laksmana,
spoke as follows: (1)

राजा दशरथो नाम ज्येष्ठस्तस्य सुतो बली।
राम: प्राप्तो मुनिं द्रष्टुं भार्यया सह सीतया॥ २॥
“There was a king named DaSaratha.

His mighty, eldest son, Rama, has come
with Sita, his wife, to call on the sage. (2)
