1076

अनुयात्रां नरेन्द्रस्य करिष्येऽहं नरर्षभ।
Text रावणं Bt वैरिणं सपुरस्सरम्॥१०॥
“| shall join the expedition of Sri Rama,
a ruler of men, O jewel among men, when
he goes forth to get rid of his enemy, Ravana,
with those who go before him (to lead his
army). (10)

ate किंचिदतिक्रान्तं विश्वासात् प्रणयेन वा।
प्रेष्यस्य क्षमितव्यं मे न कश्चिन्नापराध्यति॥ ११॥

“If any transgression has been made
by me, your servant, out of confidence or
love, it should be forgiven by you, for there
is none (among the servants) who does no
wrong.” (11)

इति तस्य त्रुवाणस्य सुग्रीवस्य महात्मन:।
अभवल्लक्ष्मण: प्रीत: प्रेम्णा चेदमुवाच ह॥१२॥
While the high-souled Sugriva was
speaking as aforesaid, Laksmana got pleased
with him, they say, and lovingly replied as
follows : (12)

सर्वथा fe मम भ्राता सनाथो वानरेश्चर।
त्वया नाथेन सुग्रीव प्रश्रितेन विशेषत:॥१३॥

“With you, O Sugriva as his supporter,
particularly so humble, my eldest brother,
Sri Rama, is blessed in everyway, O lord of
monkeys ! (13)

यस्ते प्रभाव: सुग्रीव यच्च a शौचमीदृशम्।
अर्हस्त्वं कपिराज्यस्य श्रियं भोक्तुमनुत्तमाम्॥ १४॥

“By virtue of the dignity that you
possess, O Sugriva, and the purity
(guilelessness) of heart of the kind that
exists in you, you deserve to enjoy the
unsurpassed opulence of the kingdom of
monkeys. (14)

सहायेन च सुग्रीव त्वया राम: प्रतापवान्।
वधिष्यति रणे शत्रूनचिरान्नात्र संशय:॥१५॥

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

“With you as his associate, O Sugriva,
the glorious Sri Rama for his part will before
long destroy his enemies on the battlefield :
there is no doubt about it. (15)

धर्मज्ञस्य कृतज्ञस्य संग्रामेष्वनिवर्तिन:।
उपपन्नं च युक्तं च सुग्रीव aa भाषितम्॥ १६॥
“You being a knower of what is right,
grateful and one who has never turned
one’s back on the fields of battle, your

submission, O Sugriva, is just and reasonable
too (16)

area: सति सामर्थ्य कोऽन्यो भाषितुमर्हति।
वर्जयित्वा मम ज्येष्ठं त्वां च वानरसत्तम॥ १७॥

“What individual, who is conscious of
his own faults, other than my eldest brother,
Sri Rama, and yourself, O jewel among the
monkeys, can speak so disparagingly of
himself as you have done, even though
possessed of strength? (17)

सदृशश्चासि रामेण विक्रमेण बलेन al
सहायो दैवतैर्दत्तश्चिराय हरिपुंगव॥ १८॥

“You are on a par with Si Rama in
prowess and might and have been ordained
by the gods as his associate for a long time
to come, O jewel among the monkeys ! (18)
किं ¢ शीघ्रमितो वीर निष्क्रम त्वं मया सह।
सान्त्वयस्व वयस्यं च भार्याहरणदु:खितम्॥१९॥

“But sally you forth with me speedily
from this place, O gallant king, and reassure
your friend, Sri Rama, who is afflicted through
the abduction of his spouse. (19)

यच्च शोकाभिभूतस्य श्रुत्वा रामस्य भाषितम्।

मया त्वं परुषाण्युक्तस्तत् क्षमस्व सखे AAI Ro Il
“And forgive, my friend, the way in

which you have been spoken to in harsh

words on hearing the lament of Sri Rama,

who was overwhelmed with grief.” (20)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये किष्किन्धाकाण्डे षट्त्रिंश: सर्ग: ॥ ३६ ॥

Thus ends Canto Thirty-six in the Kiskindhakanda of the glorious Ramayana of
Valmiki, the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

