« KISKINDHAKANDA +

Shaking off grief all at once on seeing
Hanuman, the foremost of monkeys,
expanding his form with a view to leaping
over a hundred Yojanas, and being filled
with dash, the monkeys full of excessive
joy, thundered and also glorified Hanuman,
who was endowed with extraordinary might.

(1-2)
Yet विस्मिताश्चापि a वीक्षन्ते समन्तत:।
त्रिविक्रमं pare नारायणमिव प्रजा:॥ ३॥

Standing around him highly rejoiced
and amazed too, they gazed on him even
as all created beings looked on Lord
Narayana (Visnu) when he had made a
resolve to measure the entire cosmos in
His descent as Trivikrama. (3)

संस्तूयमानो हनुमान् व्यवर्धत महाबल:।
समाविद्ध्य च लाङ्गूलं हर्षाद् बलमुपेयिवान्॥४॥

Hanuman, who was endowed with
extraordinary strength, grew considerably
in size even while he was being acclaimed
and, whirling his tail with delight, recollected
his native strength. (4)

तेजसाऽऽपूर्यमाणस्य रूपमासीदनुत्तमम्॥ ७५ ॥

While he was being duly acclaimed by
the foremost of monkeys, who were all
senior in age, and while he was getting
recharged with energy, his form looked
surpassingly excellent. (5)

यथा विजृम्भते feet faaa गिरिगह्वरे।
मारुतस्यौरस: पुत्रस्तथा सम्प्रति जृम्भते॥६॥

Even as a lion stretches his limbs in
a commodious mountain-cave, Hanuman
(sprung from the loins of the wind-god) now
yawned and expanded his form likewise.
(6)
अशोभत WS तस्य जृम्भमाणस्य धीमत:।
अम्बरीषोपमं दीप्तं fay sa पावक:॥७॥

While Hanuman, the wise one, was
yawning, his mouth looked bright like a
lighted oven or a smokeless fire. (7)

1165

हरीणामुत्थितो मध्यात् सम्प्रहृष्टतनूरुह:।
अभिवाद्य हरीन् ger हनूमानिदमब्रवीत्॥ ८॥
Risen from the midst of monkeys, his
hair standing on end through excessive joy,
and greeting the older monkeys, Hanuman
spoke as follows: (8)

आरुजन् पर्वताग्राणि हुताशनसखोऽनिल:।
बलवानप्रमेयश्च वायुराकाशगोचर: WSU

“Circulating in space in the form of the
wind and shattering mountain-peaks, the
wind-god, a friend of fire, is mighty and
beyond measure. (9)
were शीघ्रवेगस्य शीघ्रगस्य महात्मन:।
मारुतस्यौरस: UA: प्लवनेनास्मि ARTA: I Qo UI

“| claim my descent from the loins of
that high-souled wind-god of rapid speed
and swift movement, and am his equal in
leaping. (10)
उत्सहेयं fe विस्तीर्णमालिखन्तमिवाम्बरम्।
मेरुं गिरिमसङ्घेन परिगन्तुं सहस्रश:॥११॥

“1 can actually circumambulate a
thousand times without pause the extensive

Mount Meru, which stands scratching the
firmament, as it were. (11)

बाहुवेगप्रणुन्नेन सागरेणाहमुत्सहे।
समाप्लावयितुं लोकं सपर्वतनदीह्रदम्॥१२॥
“With the ocean pushed away by the
might of my arms, | can fully deluge the
world including its mountains, rivers and
lakes. (12)

ममोरुजङ्घावेगेन भविष्यति समुत्थित:।
समुत्थितमहाग्राह समुद्रो वरुणालय:॥१३॥
“Stirred by the force of my thighs and
shanks, the ocean, which is the abode of
Varuna, will begin to overflow, bringing its
huge alligators to the surface. (13)
पन्नगाशनमाकाशे पतन्तं पक्षिसेवितम्।
वैनतेयमहं शक्त: परिगन्तुं सहस्रश:॥१४॥
“| am capable of going clockwise a
thousand times round Garuda (son of Vinata),
