404

तत: परमदुर्धर्षो रावणो राक्षसेशर्वर:।
सीतायामुपश्रृण्वत्यां राक्षसीमिदमब्रवीत्॥ ३७॥

Ravana, the lord of ogres, who was
most difficult to overpower, then spoke as
follows to an ogress within the close hearing
of Sita: (37)
राक्षसं क्रूरकर्माणं विद्युज्जिह्वं समानय।
येन तद्राघवशिर: संग्रामात् स्वयमाहृतम्॥ ३८॥

“Bring politely to my presence the ogre
Vidyujjinva of cruel deeds, by whom has
the well-known head of Rama (a scion of
Raghu) been personally brought from the
field of battle.” (38)

विद्युज्जिह्वस्तदा qa शिरस्तत्सशरासनम्।
प्रणामं शिरसा कृत्वा रावणस्याग्रत: स्थित:॥ ३९॥

Holding the aforesaid head alongwith a
bow, and making a respectful salute with
his head bent low, Vidyujjinva now stood in
front of Ravana. (39)

तमब्रवीत् ततो राजा रावणो राक्षसं स्थितम्।
विद्युज्जिह्वं महाजिह्वं समीपपरिवर्तिनम्॥४०॥
अवस्थां पश्चिमां भर्तु: कृपणा साधु पश्यतु॥४१॥
King Ravana thereupon spoke as follows
to the said ogre, Vidyujjinva, who had a long
tongue and stood nearby: “Place at once in
front of Sita the head of Rama (son of
DaSaratha). Let the poor woman clearly
behold the ultimate condition of her husband.”
(40-41)

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA +

एवमुक्तं तु ag tat: शिरस्तत् प्रियदर्शनम्।
उपनिक्षिप्य सीताया: क्षिप्रमन्तरधीयत॥४२॥

Placing that head, which was agreeable
to look at, by the side of Sita, when
commanded as aforesaid, the said ogre
for his part instantly vanished out of
sight (42)

रावणश्चापि चिक्षेप भास्वरं कार्मुकं महत्।
त्रिषु लोकेषु विख्यातं रामस्यैतदिति ब्रुवन्॥४३॥
Nay, Ravana too cast down the brilliant
and mighty bow, saying: “This is the bow,
famed in all the three worlds, belonging to
Rama.” (43)
Be प्रहस्तेनानीतं तं हत्वा निशि मानुषम्॥४४॥
“This is the bow,” he added, “belonging
to your Rama, duly provided with a string
and brought hither by Prahasta after disposing
of that mortal at night.” (44)

स विद्युज्जिह्वेन सहैव तच्छिरो

धनुश्च भूमौ विनिकीर्यमाण:।
विदेहराजस्य सुतां यशस्विनीं

ततोऽब्रवीत् at Wa A वशानुगा॥४५॥

Casting the bow too on the ground at

the same place where the aforesaid head
had been placed by Vidyujjinva, Ravana
then said to that illustrious daughter of
Janaka (the ruler of the Videha territory),
“Now submit to my will.” (45)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये युद्धकाण्डे CHAM: सर्ग: ॥ ३१ Il
Thus ends Canto Thirty-one in the Yuddhakanda of the glorious Ramayana of
Valmiki, the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

