830

The earth shook, as it were, on that occasion
due to the sound of the hoofs of horses and
the rattling of the felloes of the chariot wheels
as well as on account of the blare of conches
and the roll of drums. Accompanied by the
roars of elephants as well as by the blare
of conches and the roll of drums, really
speaking the entire city of Ayodhya literally
reached Nandigrama (a village on the
outskirts of Ayodhya where Bharata spent
the period of Sri Rama’s exile). Glancing
round, Bharata addressed the following words
to Hanuman, the offspring of the wind-god:
(17—23)

कच्चिन्न खलु कापेयी सेव्यते चलचित्तता।
नहि पश्यामि काकुत्स्थं राममार्यं परंतपम्॥ २४॥
“Indeed, | hope the levity, which
constitutes the very nature of monkeys,
has not been resorted to by you; for, | do

not behold Sri Rama, a worthy scion of
Kakutstha, the scourge of his enemies. (24)

सदाफलान्कुसुमितान् वृक्षान् प्राप्य मधुस्त्रवान्॥ २६ ॥
भरद्वाजप्रसादेन मत्तभ्रमरनादितान्।
तस्य चैव वरो दत्तो वासवेन परंतप॥ २७॥
ससैन्यस्य तदातिथ्यं कृतं सर्वगुणान्वितम्।
नि:स्वन: श्रूयते भीम: प्रहृष्टानां वनौकसाम्॥ २८ I
“Neither are to be seen the monkeys,
who are able to change their form at will.”
When this remark was uttered by Bharata,
Hanuman frothwith replied as follows to
Bharata of unfailing prowess, revealing to
him the truth of the matter: “Here is heard
the formidable roar of monkeys and bears
(lit., denizens of the woods), overjoyed to
come across on their way trees ever yielding
fruit, adorned with blossom, flowing with
honey and rendered noisy by the humming
of intoxicated bees—all through the grace

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA +

of Sage Bharadwaja. Nay, a boon to this
effect was definitely conferred by Indra, by
virtue of which hospitality rich in all
excellences was extended to you with your
entire army when you paid your visit to him
while going to Citrakuta to bring Sri Rama
back to Ayodhya (as also to Sri Rama with
his army during his return journey to
Ayodhya). (25—28)
Ta वानरसेना सा नदीं तरति गोमतीम्।

Treat wed wa सालवनं प्रति॥२९॥

“| presume the aforesaid army of
monkeys is crossing the sacred Gomati.
Behold the cloud of dust risen near the
grove of sal trees. (29)
adde gad aie विमानं चन्द्रसंनिभम्॥ ३०॥
रावणं बान्धवै: सार्धं हत्वा लब्धं महात्मना॥ ३१॥

“| think the monkeys are shaking the
lovely grove of sal trees. There is seen in
distance the well-known heavenly aerial car,
shining brightly like the moon, the aerial car
created with his mind by ViSwakarma (the
architect of gods, who has been referred to
here as Brahma by virtue of his creative
talent), which has been secured by the
high-souled Sri Rama after killing Ravana
alongwith his kinsfolk. (30-31)
धनदस्य प्रसादेन दिव्यमेतन्मनोजवम्॥३२॥

This celestial aerial car, swift as
thought, which is carrying Sri Rama and
shines brightly as the rising sun, belongs to
Kubera, the bestower of riches, by the grace
of Brahma, who bestowed it on that god. (32)

Waa भ्रातरौ वीरौ वैदेह्या सह राघवौ।
सुग्रीवश्च महातेजा राक्षसश्च विभीषण:॥ ३३॥
“In the yonder car are with Sita, a
princess of the Videha territory, seated
the two heroic brothers, Sri Rama and
