230

were intended to be performed by me in
order that | might ascend bodily to heaven,
O sage of pleasing aspect! But neither is
that consummation (in the shape of my
being able to perform a hundred sacrifices)
attained by me nor the reward sought by
me in the shape of my being translated to
heaven. No untruth has ever been uttered
by me in the past nor shall | ever tell a lie
in future even when reduced to straits, O
good Sir! | swear by my allegiance to the
duties of a Ksatriya. Worship has been
offered by me to God through sacrificial
performances of various kinds and people
have been governed with righteousness.
(18-19)
कृच्छेष्वपि गत: सौम्य क्षत्रधर्मेण a शपे।
यज्ञैर्बहुविधैरिष्टं wat धर्मेण पालिता:॥ २०॥
गुरवश्च महात्मान: vlads तोषिता:।
धर्मे प्रयतमानस्य यज्ञं चाहर्तुमिच्छत:॥ २१॥
परितोषं न गच्छन्ति गुरवो मुनिपुंगव।
दैवमेव परं मन्ये पौरुषं तु निरर्थकम्॥२२॥
“Nay, the elders no less than exalted

souls have been gratified through my good
qualities and right conduct. My preceptors,

« VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

however, did not derive satisfaction through
me even though | strove hard in the cause
of righteousness and sought to undertake a
sacrifice in order to be able to attain to
heaven in my physical body, O jewel among
sages! |, therefore, reckon fate alone as
supreme and personal effort as of no avail
when matched against fate. (20—22)

दैवेनाक्रम्यते ad ed fe परमा गति:।
तस्य मे परमार्तस्य प्रसादमभिकांक्षत:।
कर्तुमर्हसि भद्रं ते दैवोपहतकर्मण:।॥ २३॥

“Everything else is thrown into the
background by fate. Indeed, destiny is the
highest refuge. Be pleased, therefore, to
extend your grace to me, who eagerly long
for it, sore afflicted as | am, all my effort,
having been counteracted by an evil destiny.
May God bless you! (23)

नान्यां गतिं गमिष्यामि नान्यच्छरणमस्ति मे।

ta पुरुषकारेण निवर्तयितुमर्हसि॥ ev
“I shall seek no other shelter; in fact,

there is no other asylum for me. Be good

enough to avert my evil destiny through
personal effort.” (24)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये
बालकाण्डेऽष्टपञ्चाश: सर्ग: ॥ ५८ Il

Thus ends Canto Fifty-eight in the Balakanda of the glorious Ramayana of Valmiki,
the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

एकोनषष्टितम: सर्ग:
Canto LIX

ViSwamitra assures TriSanku of his help, sends word to a number of sages,
inviting them to conduct a sacrifice for Trisanku, and pronounces
a curse on those who decline to come

उक्कतवाक्यं तु राजानं कृपया कुशिकात्मज:।
अब्रवीन्मधुरं AT साक्षाच्चण्डालतां गतम्॥ १॥
ViSwamitra, the son of Gadhi, kindly
gave the following suave reply to the king,
TriSanku, who had actually been reduced to

the state of a Candala, when he had finished
his say: (1)
इक्ष्वाको स्वागतं ACT जानामि त्वां सुधार्मिकम्।

mot ते प्रदास्यामि मा भैषीर्नृपपुंगव॥ २॥

“Welcome is your visit to my hermitage,
