* BALAKANDA +

sage Sanatkumara has been reproduced
by me as aforesaid.” (19)

अथ BT दशरथ: सुमन्त्रं प्रत्यभाषत।
यथर्ष्यशृङ्गस्त्वानीतो येनोपायेन सोच्यताम्॥ Ro Il

9३

Full of delight DaSaratha forthwith asked
Sumantra: “It may now be pointed out to me
how and by what device the sage Rsyasrnga
was brought to the capital of Romapada.”

(20)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये बालकाण्डे नवम: सर्ग: ॥ ९ ॥

Thus ends Canto Nine in the Balakanda of the glorious Ramayana of Valmiki,
the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

दशम: सर्ग:
Canto X

How the sage Rsyasrnga was lured away to the capital of Romapada
and married to his adopted daughter, Santa

सुमन्त्रश्चोदितो Wat प्रोवाचेदं वचस्तदा।
यथर्ष्यशृङ्गस्त्वानीतो येनोपायेन मन्तरिभि:।
तन्मे निगदितं ad soy A मन्त्रिभि: सह॥ १॥

Urged by the king DaSaratha, Sumantra
then made the following reply: “Hear from
me with your counsellors, as _ being
exhaustively told by me, how and by what
device the sage Rsyasrnga was brought to
the capital of Romapada by his counsellors.

(1)

रोमपादमुवाचेदं सहामात्य: पुरोहित:।
उपायो निरपायोऽयमस्माभिरभिचिन्तित: ॥ २॥

Accompanied by the ministers, the
family-priest of Romapada_ spoke to
Romapada as follows : “The following unfailing
expedient has been carefully thought of by
us: (2)

अनभिज्ञस्तु नारीणां विषयाणां सुखस्य च॥ ३॥

“Living as he does in the woods and
rich in askesis and study of the Vedas,
Rsyasrnga is wholly unacquainted with the
fair sex as well as with the objects of
senses and the pleasures relating to them.

(3)
इन्दरियार्थैरभिमतैर्नरचित्तप्रमाथिभि: ।
पुरमानाययिष्याम: क्षिप्रं चाध्यवसीयताम्॥४॥

“We shall in no time cause him to be
brought to your capital by means of pleasing
objects of senses that attract the mind of
men; steps may, therefore, be taken towards
this end. (4)

गणिकास्तत्र गच्छन्तु रूपवत्य: स्वलंकृता:।
प्रलोभ्य विविधोपायैरानेष्यन्तीह सत्कृता:॥५॥

“Let beautifully adorned courtesans of
comely appearance proceed there to the
hermitage of his father. Received kindly by
the youthful sage, they will lure him away to
this place by recourse to diverse devices.”

(5)

श्रुत्वा तथेति राजा च प्रत्युवाच पुरोहितम्।
पुरोहितो मन्तिणश्च dal चक्रुश्च ते तथा॥६॥

Hearing this, the king Romapada
said to the priest, “So be it!” The family
priest in his turn, forthwith instructed the
counsellors accordingly and the latter did
as they were told, i.e., despatched the
courtesans with the necessary equipment.

(6)
वारमुख्यास्तु तच्छुत्वा वनं प्रविविशुर्महत्।
आश्रमस्याविदूरेऽस्मिन् यत्नं कुर्वन्ति दर्शने॥७॥
me: पुत्रस्य धीरस्य नित्यमाश्रमवासिन:।
पितु: स नित्यसंतुष्टो नातिचक्राम चाश्रमात्॥८॥

Hearing the royal command, the
