202

the celestial air and enjoying great fame,
blow in the aerial region. (5)

चत्वारस्तु arses fast a aa शासनात्।
संचरिष्यन्ति भद्रं a कालेन fe ममात्मजा:॥ ६॥
त्वत्कृतेनैव नाम्ना A मारुता इति विश्रुता:।
 श्रुत्वा सहस्राक्ष: पुरंदर:॥७॥
उवाच प्राञ्जलिर्वाक्यमितीदं बलसूदन:।
सर्वमेतद् यथोक्तं a भविष्यति न संशय:॥ ८॥

“My other four batches of seven sons
each, O jewel among gods, indeed will
actually traverse the four quarters from time
to time according to your direction. May
prosperity attend you. They will henceforth
be widely known as the Maruts according
to the very name given by yourself (vide
verse 4 above). Hearing her aforesaid appeal
the thousand-eyed Indra (the destroyer of
strongholds) and the slayer of the demon
Bala, made the following reply to Diti with
folded hands : ‘All this will come to pass as
suggested by you: there is no doubt about
it. (6—8)
विचरिष्यन्ति ae ते देवरूपास्तवात्मजा:।
एवं dt निश्चयं Her मातापुत्रौ तपोवने॥९॥
जग्मतुस्त्रिदिवं WH कृतार्थाविति A: श्रुतम्।

UT देश: स काकुत्स्थ महेन्द्राध्युषित: WT gol
दितिं aa तपस्सिद्धामेवं परिचचार स:।
इक्ष्वाकोस्तु नरव्याघ्र Ua: परमधार्मिक:॥११॥
अलम्बुषायामुत्पन्नो विशाल git fasqa: |
तेन चासीदिह स्थाने विशालेति पुरी Haru ge

“Your sons will move about in the
form of the wind-gods.’ Having reached an
agreement on these lines in the grove intended
for austerities, and thus accomplished of
purpose, the mother Diti and her step-son,
Indra, both ascended to heaven, O Rama;
so have we heard. This is that tract, O scion
of Kakutstha, formerly inhabited by the great
Indra, where he rendered personal service
as aforesaid to Diti, who achieved the end of
her austerities. Now Ikswaku, O tiger among
men, had a most pious son, born of Alambusa
and widely known by the name of Visala. By

« VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

him was built on this very site a city named
Visala, after his own name. (9—12)

विशालस्य Eat WA हेमचन्द्रो महाबल:।
सुचन्द्र sit विख्यातो हेमचन्द्रादनन्तर: il १३॥

“The mighty son of ViSala, O Rama,
was Hemacandra; while Hemacandra’s
immediate successor was known far and
wide by the name of Sucandra. (13)

सुचन्द्रतनयो राम धूम्राश्च इति fasta:
धूम्राश्चतनयश्चापि Gad: समपद्यत॥१४॥
“The son of Sucandra, O Rama, was
widely known by the name of Dhumraswa
and Srfijaya, son of Dhumraswa, came next.
(14)

सृञ्जयस्य Ya: श्रीमान् सहदेव: प्रतापवान्।
कुशाश्व: सहदेवस्य Ua: परमधार्मिक:॥१५॥
“The glorious and mighty Sahadeva
was the son of Srhjaya, and KuSaswa was
the highly pious son of Sahadeva. (15)

कुशाश्वस्य महातेजा: सोमदत्त: प्रतापवान्।

सोमदत्तस्य पुत्रस्तु काकुत्स्थ sta विश्रुत:॥ १६॥
“The exceptionally glorious and mighty

Somadatta was the son of Kusaswa, and

Somadatta’s son was known far and wide
by the name of Kakutstha. (16)

तस्य Uat महातेजा: सम्प्रत्येष पुरीमिमाम्।
आवसत् परमप्रख्य: सुमतिर्नाम दुर्जय:॥१७॥
“His yonder highly glorious and most
renowned son, Sumati by name, who is
hard to conquer, has his seat of government
in this city at present. (17)
इक्ष्वाकोस्तु प्रसादेन Wa वैशालिका नृपा:।
दीर्घायुषो महात्मानो वीर्यवन्त: सुधार्मिका:॥ १८॥
“By the grace of Ikswaku, really speaking
all the rulers of VisSala are long-lived, high-
souled, powerful and most pious. (18)
इहाद्य रजनीमेकां Ga स्वप्स्यामहे वयम्।
J: ward ars wah द्रष्टुमर्हसि॥१९॥

“We shall comfortably repose here for
this one night; tommorrow morning you ought
