400 * VALMIKI-RAMAYANA +

further there is the monkey, Hemaktta, son | brother, Vibhisana, the prince of ogres, who
of Varuna, the god of water. (32) | having secured the city of Lanka as a

विश्वकर्मसुतो वीरो नल: प्लवगसत्तम:। prospective gift from Rama, remains devoted
विक्रान्तो वेगवानत्र वसुपुत्र: स दुंर्थर॰ ।। ३३॥ to the good of Rama, a scion of Raghu.

(34)
“Nala, the foremost of monkeys is the ad ३ ।
stat समाख्यातं तथा a वानरं बलम्।
gallant son of Viswakarma, the architect of वेलेऽधिष्ठितं शैले ऐ मं ति: ।। ३५ I

gods. And here is the valiant and impetuous
son of Vasu, the celebrated Durdhara. “Thus has the entire army of monkeys,
(33) | encamped near the Suvela mountain, been

उ tually described at length by me in the
राक्षसानां वरिष्ठश्च तव भ्राता विभीषण:। ac
J way । have done. Now, you are the competent

प्रतिगृह्य पुरीं लङ्कां राघवस्य fed रत:॥३४॥ authority to decide what remains to be
“Besides, there is your younger half- | done”*. (35)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये FERS त्रिंश: AWA: ॥ ३० ॥
Thus ends Canto Thirty in the Yuddhakanda of the glorious Ramayana of
Valmiki, the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

Canto XXXI

Perturbed to learn from the spies sent by him that ऎ Rama had taken
up his position near the Suvela mountain, Ravana takes counsel
with his ministers and, after dismissing them, approaches
Sita with Vidyujjihva, who was a past master in
conjuring tricks. Telling her how her husband

had been killed by him with his entire
army, he produces before her as an
evidence the counterfeit head
of Sri Rama brought
by Vidyujjihva

ततस्तमक्षोभ्यबलं =| Ta नॄपतेश्चरा:। Lanka, spies told the king about the
सुवेले wad शैले fafa प्रत्यवेदयन्॥१॥ । celebrated Sri Rama (a scion of Raghu)

Returning from the Suvela mountain to | having encamped near the Suvela mountain

* The parentage of the principal monkeys given in this canto by Sardiila will be found to differ in
many cases from that given in Canto XVII of the Balakanda of Valmiki-Ramayana Vol. I. While in the
Balakanda, Susena, Sarabha and Gandhamadana have been spoken of as sprung from the loins of Varuna,
Parjanya and Kubera respectively, in the present canto Susena has been declared to be an offspring of the
wind-god, while Sarabha and Gandhamadana have been called the offsprings of Yama (son of Visaswan).
The commentators attribute this anomaly to the fact that the three monkeys referred to in the Balakanda
were different from the monkeys of the same name mentioned in this canto.
