258

वाक्यं वाक्यविदां श्रेष्ठ: प्रत्युवाच महीपतिम्।
प्रतिग्रहो दातृवश: श्रुतमेतन्मया पुरा॥१४॥
“You will witness here the joyous mood
of both your sons, Sri Rama and Laksmana,
acquired through personal prowess. It is
through my good fortune again that the
highly glorious and exceedingly powerful
sage Vasistha has come alongwith all the
jewels among Brahmanas even as Indra,
who attained the rulership of gods by virtue
of his having performed a full one hundred
horse sacrifices in his past life, would in the
company of gods. Fortunately enough all
obstacles that stood in the way of Sita’s
marriage have been thoroughly overcome
and luckily for me, my race has been exalted
through matrimonial alliance with the very
mighty scions of Raghu, distinguished for
their valour. The following morning, at the
conclusion of the sacrifice, O ruler of men,
you ought to celebrate the wedding with the
help of the foremost of sages, O jewel
among men!” Hearing the aforesaid
submission of Janaka in the midst of the
Rsis, DaSaratha, the paramount ruler of
men, the foremost of those who know how
to speak, replied as follows to king Janaka :
“The execution of a gift depends on the
donor: this has been heard by me in the
past. (10—14)

यथा वक्ष्यसि धर्मज्ञ ad करिष्यामहे वयम्।
aq धर्मिष्ठं यशस्यं च वचनं सत्यवादिन:॥ १५॥

« VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

श्रुत्वा विदेहाधिपति: ut विस्मयमागत:।
ad: सर्वे मुनिगणा: परस्परसमागमे॥१६॥

हर्षेण महता युक्तास्तां रात्रिमवसन् सुखम्।
अथ रामो महातेजा लक्ष्मणेन समं ययौ॥ १७॥
विश्वामित्रं पुरस्कृत्य faq: पादावुपस्पृशन्।
राजा च राघवौ gat निशाम्य परिहर्षित:॥१८॥
उवास परमप्रीतो जनकेनाभिपूजित:।
जनकोऽपि महातेजा: क्रिया धर्मेण तत्त्ववित्।

यज्ञस्य च सुताभ्यां च कृत्वा रात्रिमुवास ह॥१९॥

“We shall do as you will bid us do, O
knower of what is right !” Janaka, the ruler
of the territory of the Videhas, was filled
with great astonishment to hear that most
pious reply of the truthful monarch, which
was conducive to glory. Filled with great
delight at their meeting with one another, all
the hosts of sages assembled there
thereupon spent that night happily. Placing
ViSwamitra at his head, the highly glorious
Sri Rama with Laksmana then proceeded to
touch the feet of his father. Greatly delighted
to behold his two sons, the ornaments of
Raghu’s race, and honoured in every way
by Janaka, king Dasaratha retired for the
night full of great joy. Having concluded with
piety the rites connected with the sacrifice
which was being performed by him as well
as those positively conducive to the good of
his two daughters, Sita and Urmila, who
were now going to be married, Janaka, a
knower of the truth, retired for the night: so
the tradition goes. (15—19)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये बालकाण्डे
एकोनसप्ततितम: WA: ॥ ६९ Il

Thus ends Canto Sixty-nine in the Balakanda of the glorious Ramayana of Valmiki,
the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

