436

Fully covering a vast stretch of land,
the huge army of bears and monkeys
(lit., the denizens of the forest) then followed
in the wake of Sri Rama (a scion of
Raghu). (28)

शैलशृङ्गाणि MAM: प्रवृद्धांश्च महीरुहान्।
WIE: कुञ्जरप्रख्या AAT: परवारणा:॥ २९॥
The monkeys, who were capable of
warding off the enemy and resembled
elephants in size, bore in their hands
mountain-peaks and fully grown up trees in
hundreds. (29)
तौ त्वदीर्घेण कालेन भ्रातरौ रामलक्ष्मणौ।
रावणस्य पुरीं लङ्कामासेदतुररिंदमौ॥ ३०॥
पताकामालिनीं रम्यामुद्यानवनशोभिताम्।
चित्रवप्रां सुदुष्प्रापामुच्चै: प्राकारतोरणाम्॥ ३१॥
In a short while, those two brothers,
Sri Rama and Laksmana, the tamers of
their foes, for their part reached Lanka, the
lovely city of Ravana, which was dressed
with rows of flags, embellished with gardens
and groves, enclosed with a wonderful
defensive wall and provided with high walls
and archways and as such exceedingly
difficult of access. (30-31)

at सुरैरपि दुर्धर्षां रामवाक्यप्रचोदिता:।
यथानिदेशं water न्यविशन्त वनौकस:॥ ३२॥

Besieging the aforesaid city—which was
difficult to assail even for gods—as spurred
by the command of Sri Rama, sticking to their
posts (while doing so), the monkeys (lit., the
denizens of the forest) entered it. (32)

लङ्कायास्तूत्तरद्वारं शैलश्रृङ्गमिवोन्नतम्।
राम: सहानुजो धन्वी जुगोप च रुरोध च॥ ३३॥

Accompanied by his younger brother,
Laksmana, and armed with a bow, Sri Rama
for his part blocked the northern gate of
Lanka, which was lofty as a mountain-peak,
and also gave succour to the besieging
army. (33)

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA +

लङ्कामुपनिविष्टस्तु रामो दशरथात्मज:।
लक्ष्मणानुचरो वीर: पुरीं रावणपालिताम्॥ ३४॥
उत्तरद्वारमासाद्य यत्र तिष्ठति रावण:।
नान्यो रामाद्धि ae द्वारं समर्थ: परिरक्षितुम्॥ ३५॥
रावणाधिष्ठितं watt वरुणेनेव सागरम्।
सायुथै राक्षसैर्भीमैरभिगुप्तं समन्तत:॥ ३६॥
लघूनां त्रासजननं पातालमिव दानवै:।
विन्यस्तानि च योधानां बहूनि विविधानि च॥ ३७॥

ददर्शायुधजालानि तथैव कवचानि च।
पूर्वं तु द्वारमासाद्य नीलो हरिचमूपति:। ३८॥
अतिष्ठत् सह मैन्देन द्विविदेन च वीर्यवान्।
अङ्गदो दक्षिणद्वारुं ware सुमहाबल:॥३९॥
RAI गवाक्षेण गजेन गवयेन Al
हनूमान् पश्चिमद्वारं wa बलवान् कपि:॥४०॥
Having reached the northern gate, at
which Ravana himself had taken up his
position, the valiant Sri Rama, an offspring
of Emperor DaSaratha, for his part, who had
Laksmana for his follower, encamped near
the city of Lanka, which was protected by
Ravana. In fact, none other than Sri Rama
was capable of protecting the army besieging
that formidable gate, which was controlled
by Ravana as the ocean is by Varuna (the
god presiding over water), was guarded on
all sides by terrible ogres equipped with
arms even as Patala, the nethermost
subterranean region, is by the Danavas,
and caused terror to the weak. Nay, Sr
Rama saw properly § arranged _ there
numerous sets of weapons of every
description and even so pieces of armour
for the use of combatants. Reaching the
eastern gate, Nila, the valiant Commander-
in-Chief of the simian forces, for his part
took up his position there with Mainda and
Dwivida, Angada, who was endowed with
extraordinary might, occupied the southern
gate with Rsabha, Gavaksa, Gaja and
Gavaya. United with Pramathi and Praghasa
as well as with other heroes, the mighty
