862

Videha territory, who was fully possessed
with fear and grief, wailed piteously: so the
tradition goes. (23—25)
तदा भृशार्तां ag चैव भाषिणीं
विलापपूर्वं करुणं च भामिनीम्।
Wat पापस्तरुणीं विचेष्टतीं
नृपात्मजामागतगात्रवेपथु:

॥ २६॥

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

The villain, however, continued to bear
away the lovely and youthful princess, who
was talking much in a pathetic tone in the
wake of crying, sore distressed as she
was, and was struggling hard all the time to
get released, although a tremor ran through
his limbs. (26)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्येऽरण्यकाण्डे PATA: सर्ग: ॥ ५३ Il

Thus ends Canto Fifty-three in the Aranyakanda of the glorious Ramayana of Valmiki,
the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

चतुष्पञ्चाश: सर्ग:
Canto LIV

Sita throws her jewels and articles of wearing apparel in the midst of five
monkeys; Reaching Lanka, Ravana keeps Sita in his gynaeceum

and sends eight ogres to

ह्रियमाणा तु वैदेही कंचिन्नाथमपश्यती।
cat गिरिशृङ्गस्थान् पञ्च वानरपुङ्खवान्॥१॥
Not finding any saviour while being
carried away by Ravana, Sita, a princess of
the Videha territory, for her part caught
sight of five Vanara (monkey) chiefs sitting
on a mountain-peak. (1)
तेषां मध्ये विशालाक्षी कौशेयं कनकप्रभम्।
उत्तरीयं वरारोहा शुभान्याभरणानि च॥२॥
मुमोच यदि रामाय शंसेयुरिति भामिनी।
वस्त्रमुत्सृज्य तन्मध्ये निक्षिप्तं सहभूषणम्॥ ३॥
The lovely lady with large eyes and
other comely limbs took off from her person
her silken upper garment, brilliant as gold,
as well as her shining jewels. Having placed
other articles of her wearing apparel in the
said garment, the latter was dropped
alongwith the jewels in the midst of the
monkeys in the hope that they might break
the news of her being carried away by
Ravana to Sri Rama if he ever happened to
meet them. (2-3)

Janasthana for espionage

सम्भ्रमात् तु दशग्रीवस्तत्कर्म च न बुद्धवान्।
पिङ्गाक्षास्तां विशालाक्षीं नेत्रैरनिमिषैरिव॥४॥
विक्रोशन्तीं dar सीतां ददृशुर्वानरोत्तमा:।
स च पम्पामतिक्रम्य लङ्कामभिमुख: पुरीम्॥५॥
जगाम मैथिलीं गृह्य रुदतीं राक्षसेश्वर:।
wt जहार सुसंहृष्टो रावणो AAA NE Il
उत्सङ्गेनैव wri तीक्ष्णदंष्ट्रां महाविषाम्।
वनानि सरित: शैलान् सरांसि च विहायसा॥७॥
a fad समतीयाय शरश्चापादिव च्युत:।
fated तु वरुणालयमक्षयम्॥८॥
सरितां शरणं गत्वा समतीयाय सागरम्।
सम्भ्रमात् परिव्रत्तोर्मी रुद्धमीनमहोरग:॥ ९॥
वैदेह्यां ह्रियमाणायां बभूव वरुणालय:।
अन्तरिक्षगता वाच: ससृजुश्चारणास्तदा॥ Qo tl
एतदन्तो anita gia सिद्धास्तथान्रुवन्।
स तु सीतां विचेष्टन्तीमङ्केनादाय रावण:॥११॥
सोऽभिगम्य at लङ्कां सुविभक्तमहापथाम्॥१२॥
तत्र तामसितापाङ्गीं शोकमोहसमन्विताम्॥१३॥
