* AYODHYAKANDA +

places for worship of Lord Visnu and others.
(33)
तां वृक्षपर्णच्छदनां मनोज्ञां

यथाप्रदेशं सुकृतां निवाताम्।
सभां यथा देवगणा: सुधर्माम्॥ ३४॥
Even as multitudes of gods entered
their assembly hall, named Sudharma in
heaven, all the three princely exiles entered
together for habitation the aforesaid soul-
captivating hut, thatched with the leaves of
trees, erected well on a suitable site and

sheltered from winds.

सुरम्यमासाद्य तु चित्रकूटं

नदीं च तां माल्यवतीं सुतीर्थाम्।
ननन्द हृष्टो मृगपक्षिजुष्टां

जहौ च दु:खं पुरविप्रवासात्॥ ३५॥

Rejoiced to reach the exceedingly
delightful Citrakuta and the celebrated river,
Malyavati (Mandakini), which was provided
with good descents and was sought by
beasts and birds, Sri Rama for his part
rejoiced and shed the agony caused by his
exile from the city of Ayodhya. (35)

(34)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्येऽयोध्याकाण्डे षट्पञ्चाश: सर्ग: ॥ ५६ ॥

Thus ends Canto Fifty-six in the Ayodhyakanda of the glorious Ramayana of Valmiki,
the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic

सप्तपञ्चाश: at:
Canto LVII

Having been told of Sri Rama’s departure for Citrakita by the spies of Guha
and taking leave of the latter, Sumantra drives back to Ayodhya. Entering
the royal gynaeceum, he submits to the Emperor what he reported
earlier to the citizens who followed his chariot. DaSaratha
and Kausalya fall into a swoon to hear about
Sri Rama’s departure for Citrakuta and
all the inmates of the gynaeceum
burst into a wail from agony

कथयित्वा तु दु:खार्त: सुमन्त्रेण fat सह।
रामे दक्षिणकूलस्थे जगाम स्वगृहं TEU

Having talked long with Sumantra on
the virtues of Sri Rama, Guha for his part,
stricken as he was with agony due to
separation from Sri Rama, left for his home
when Sri Rama set his foot on the southern
bank of the Ganga. (1)

भरद्वाजाभिगमनं wart च सभाजनम्।
आ गिरेर्गमनं तेषां तत्रस्थैरभिलक्षितम्॥ २॥
The meeting of Sri Rama and others

with Bharadwaja at Prayaga and _ their
reception by the latter as well as their journey

up to the Citrakuta hill was witnessed by
the spies of Guha, resident of Srngaverapura
and reported to Guha, who apprised Sumantra
of it. (2)
अनुज्ञात: सुमन्त्रोऽथ योजयित्वा हयोत्तमान्।
अयोध्यामेव नगरीं प्रययौ SHAT ३॥
Therefore, yoking the excellent horses
to his chariot, taking leave of Guha, Sumantra

drove straight to Ayodhya, deeply
disconsolate at heart. (3)

स वनानि सुगन्धीनि सरितश्च सरांसि a
पश्यन् यत्तो ययौ शीघ्रं ग्रामाणि नगराणि च॥४॥

Viewing woodlands diffusing sweet
