348

Deeply reflecting with a = mind
enlightened by knowledge of scriptures,
the clear-sighted Jambavan for his part
next made the following submission, which
was full of excellences and free from faults:

(45)

बद्धवैराच्च पापाच्च राक्षसेन्द्रादू विभीषण:।
अदेशकाले सम्प्राप्त: सर्वथा शंक्यतामयम्॥४६॥
‘“Vibhisana has come away deserting
the sinful Ravana, the ruler of ogres, who
bears deep-rooted enmity to us, without
regard to place and time. He _ should,
therefore be viewed with suspicion in
everyway.” (46)

ततो Weed wer नयापनयकोविद:।
वाक्यं वचनसम्पन्नो बभाषे हेतुमत्तरम्॥४७॥

Deeply reflecting, Mainda for his part,
who was adept in discriminating what is
right and what is wrong and was rich in
expression, tendered the following advice,
which was exceedingly logical: (47)

अनुजो नाम तस्यैष रावणस्य विभीषण:।
पृच्छ्यतां मधुरेणायं शनैर्नरपतीश्वर॥४८॥
‘Vibhisana is well-known to be the
youngest (half-) brother of the celebrated
Ravana. Let him be gently interrogated
progressively, O ruler of kings! (48)

भावमस्य तु विज्ञाय तत्त्वतस्तं करिष्यसि।
यदि दुष्टो न दुष्टो वा बुद्धिपूर्वं नरर्षभ॥४९॥

“Having correctly read his mind by
recourse to reason as to whether he is
vicious or not, you should act accordingly,
O jewel among men!” (49)
अथ संस्कारसम्पन्नो हनूमान् सचिवोत्तम:।
उवाच वचनं श्लक्ष्णमर्थवन्मधुरं लघु॥७५०॥

Hanuman, the foremost of counsellors,
who was richly endowed with impressions
left on his mind by the study of scriptures,
made the following submission, which was
faultless in expression, full of meaning,

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA +

agreeable to the ear and concise: (50)

न Wat मतिश्रेष्ठं समर्थं aqat वरम्।
अतिशाययितुं शक्तो बृहस्पतिरपि ब्रुवन्॥५१॥
“Even Brhaspati, the preceptor of gods,
while speaking, would not be able to outdo
you, who are supreme in_ intelligence,
powerful and the foremost of the eloquent.
(51)

न वादान्नापि संघर्षान्नाधिक्यान्न च कामत:।
वक्ष्यामि Tat राजन् यथार्थं WA गौरवात्॥ ५२॥
“In view of the importance of the matter
| shall speak, O King Rama, only that which
is correct, and not for the sake of argument,
nor even in a spirit of emulation, nor with a
sense of superiority, nor again through desire
of any kind. (52)

अर्थानर्थनिमित्तं fe agh सचिवैस्तव।
wa दोषं प्रपश्यामि क्रिया नह्युपपद्यते॥५३॥
“| detect a fallacy in what has
been submitted by your counsellors
about ascertaining the advantages and
disadvantages that are likely to accrue to
us from Vibhisana; for action in the shape of
testing Vibhisana is not possible at this
stage. (53)

ऋते नियोगात् सामर्थ्यमवबोद्धुं न शक्यते।
सहसा विनियोगोऽपि दोषवान् प्रतिभाति मे॥ ५४॥

“His capacity of doing a good or evil
turn cannot be ascertained without charging
him with some duty. And entrusting him
with some duty too all at once appears
erroneous to me. (54)
चारप्रणिहितं oh यदुक्तं सचिवैस्तव।
अर्थस्यासम्भवात् AT कारणं नोपपद्यते॥ ५५॥

“No justification can be given in favour
of the suggestion offered by your counsellors
that it is advisable to send out spies
to ascertain the bona fides of Vibhisana;
for, no purpose will be served thereby.

(55)
