942

unusually long arms and large eyes, nay,
carrying a bow, sword and arrow on their
person and looking like the offspring of gods?
(20)
वालिप्रणिहितावेव शङ्खेऽहं पुरुषोत्तमौ।
राजानो बहुमित्राश्च विश्वासो नात्र हि क्षम:॥ २१॥

“| suspect these two jewels among
men to have been sent by Vali alone; for
kings have many friends and no reliance
should be placed in them. (21)

अरयश्च मनुष्येण विज्ञेयाश्छद्मचारिण:।
विश्वस्तानामविश्वस्ताङ्छिद्रेषु werd २२॥

“Enemies moving in disguise ought to
be recognized by a clever man. For remaining
distrustful themselves, they instil, trust in
their enemies and then go the length of
assailing the vulnerable points of their trustful
adversaries. (22)

कृत्येषु वाली मेधावी राजानो बहुदर्शिन:।
भवन्ति परहन्तारस्ते ज्ञेया: प्राकृतैर्नरै:॥ २३॥
“Vali is shrewd in his state affairs; nay,
kings are well-versed in many expedients
and destroy their enemies. They should be
known (in their true colours) with the help of
spies clad as ordinary men. (23)

तौ त्वया प्राकृतेनेव गत्वा ज्ञेयौ प्लवंगम।
Beat प्रकारैश्च रूपव्याभाषणेन च॥ २४॥

“Making a move to them like one
unconcerned, the aforesaid two strangers
ought to be truly known by you, O monkey
hero, through the nature of their gestures,
as also through their facial expression and
mutual talks. (24)

लक्षयस्व तयोर्भावं प्रहृष्टमनसौ यदि।
विश्वासयन् प्रशंसाभिरिङ्नितैश्च पुन: पुन:॥ २५॥

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

ममैवाभिमुखं स्थित्वा पृच्छ त्वं हरिपुङ्खव।
Wert wart वनस्यास्य धनुर्धरौ॥ २६॥

“Find out their intentions and, inspiring
confidence in them again and again by means
of my praises and gestures (corroborating
them), if they are highly rejoiced in mind,
and standing with your face turned towards
me, inquire of the two bowmen the purpose
of their entry into this forest, O bull among
monkeys ! (25-26)

शुद्धात्मानौ यदि त्वेतौ जानीहि त्वं प्लवङ्गम।
व्याभाषितैर्वा रूपैर्वा विज्ञेया दुष्टतानयो:॥ २७॥

“Even if you conclude them to be honest
of purpose, O monkey hero, their wickedness
should be discovered by means of their
talks as well as by their facial expression.”

(27)

sad कपिराजेन संदिष्टो मारुतात्मज:।
चकार गमने बुद्धि यत्र तौ रामलक्ष्मणौ॥ २८॥

Instructed thus by Sugriva (a king of
monkeys), Hanuman, son of wind-god, made
up his mind to proceed to the spot where
the aforesaid Sri Rama and Laksmana were.

(28)

waft सम्पूज्य वचस्तु तस्य

स यत्र रामोऽतिबली सलक्ष्मण: 1 २९॥

Bowing with the words “So be it” to the
command of Sugriva, who felt dismayed,
though otherwise difficult to approach, that
high-souled monkey, Hanuman, then left for
the place where Sri Rama, who was
possessed of extraordinary might, was with
Laksmana. (29)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये किष्किन्धाकाण्डे द्वितीय: सर्ग: ॥ 2 1

Thus ends Canto Two in the Kiskindhakanda of the glorious Ramayana of Valmiki,
the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

