1166

who feeds on serpents and is waited upon
by birds (whose ruler he is), while he is
coursing through the sky. (14)

उदयात् प्रस्थितं वापि ज्वलन्तं रश्मिमालिनम्।
अनस्तमितमादित्यमहँ गन्तुं समुत्सहे॥१५॥
“| am fully capable of overtaking the
blazing sun with its aureole of rays set out
from the eastern mountain before it
disappears behind the western mountain.
(15)

ततो भूमिमसंस्पृष्टवा पुनरागन्तुमुत्सहे।
vara महता भीमेन प्लवगर्षभा:॥१६॥

“Then | can even come back to the
earth and return to the sun before it sets
with the same high and terrific rapid speed
without standing on the earth for respite, O
jewels among the monkeys ! (16)
उत्सहेयमतिक्रान्तुं सर्वानाकाशगोचरान्।
सागरान् शोषयिष्यामि दारयिष्यामि मेदिनीम्॥ १७॥

“| can leave behind in a race all the
luminaries coursing in the heavens and can
dry up the oceans and rend the earth. (17)

पर्वतांश्चूर्णयिष्यामि प्लवमान: wast: |
हरिष्याम्युरुवेगेन प्लवमानो महार्णवम्॥१८॥

“| can crush mountains while jumping
on them, a monkey (lit., one who goes
leaping) as | am. Nay, leaping with great
speed | can reach the end of an ocean to
say nothing of the sea dividing the Indian
shore from Lanka. (18)
लतानां विविधं get पादपानां च सर्वश:।
अनुयास्यति are प्लवमानं विहायसा॥१९॥

“All kinds of flowers from the climbers
and trees (growing on Mount Mahendra) on
all sides will follow me (with the wind set
into motion by me) as | take a leap across
the heavens today. (19)

भविष्यति fe मे पन्था: स्वाते: पन्था इवाम्बरे।

aed घोरमाकाशमुत्पतिष्यन्तमेव च ॥२०॥
द्रक्ष्यन्ति निपतन्तं च सर्वभूतानि वानरा:।
महामेरुप्रतीकाशं At द्रक्ष्यध्वं प्लवङ्गमा:॥ २१॥

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

arnt शोषयिष्यामि wear: समाहित:॥ २२॥

“My passage through the heavens will
thus resemble the Milky Way. All created
beings, O monkeys, will perceive me
springing up into the fearful sky and also
sailing (through the air) and then descending
to the opposite shore, all at a time, as it
were. You will behold me, who look like the
great Mount Meru,—O monkeys, enveloping
heaven and engulfing the sky as it were,
while coursing through the sky. Leaping
with a concentrated mind | shall scatter the
clouds, shake the mountains and dry up the
sea. (20—22)
वैनतेयस्य वा शक्तिर्मम वा मारुतस्य at
ea सुपर्णराजानं मारुतं वा महाबलम्।
Tag भूतं प्रपश्यामि यन्मां प्लुतमनुव्रजेत्॥ २३॥

“Such extraordinary capacity inheres
either in Garuda (son of Vinata) or in the
wind-god (my procreant) or in myself. Barring
King Garuda and the  wind-god of
extraordinary might, | do not perceive that
created being who can follow me even as |
leap. (23)

निमेषान्तरमात्रेण निरालम्बनमम्बरम्।
सहसा निपतिष्यामि wre विद्युदिवोत्थिता॥ २४॥
“In the space to the mere twinkling of
an eye | shall all of a sudden envelop the
supportless vault of heaven as a flash of
lightning shot from a cloud. (24)
भविष्यति fe मे रूपं प्लवमानस्य सागरम्।
विष्णो: प्रक्रममाणस्य तदा त्रीन् विक्रमानिव॥ २७५ ॥
“My form even as | take a leap across
the sea will actually resemble that of Lord
Visnu taking His well-known three strides to
measure the universe during His descent
as Trivikrama. (25)

बुद्ध्या चाहं प्रपश्यामि मनश्चेष्टा च A तथा।
अहं द्रक्ष्यामि वैदेहीं Waleed प्लवङ्गमा:॥ २६॥

“| conclude with my reason that | shall
