294

by Hanuman to Sugriva by manifesting his
strength in proportion to his valour in this
way. (4—6)

यो हि yet नियुक्त: सन् vat कर्मणि दुष्करे।
कुर्यात् तदनुरागेण तमाहु: पुरुषोत्तमम्॥७॥

“They speak of that servant as the
foremost among men, who, when entrusted
by his master with a duty difficult to perform,
does even more; of course, in consonance
with that work. (7)

यो Fram: परं art न कुर्यान्नृपते: प्रियम्।
yet om: समर्थश्च तमाहुर्मध्यमं नरम्॥८॥
“The wise speak of that servant as a
mediocre man, who, though qualified and
capable, does not, when confided with some
work, accomplish any other allied work liked
by the king. (8)
नियुक्तो नृपते: कार्यं न Hate a: समाहित:।
भृत्यो युक्त: समर्थश्च तमाहु: पुरुषाधमम्॥९॥
“People dub that servant as the lowest
of men, who, though qualified and capable,
does not, when entrusted with a duty, carry
out the behest of a king with a composed
mind. (9)
तन्नियोगे fant gd pet हनूमता।
न चात्मा लघुतां नीत: सुग्रीवश्चापि तोषित: igo u
“Extra work was also done by Hanuman
when entrusted with the duty of search for
Sita; yet no dishonour was brought to his
own self and Sugriva too was gratified by
him by his act of valour. (10)
BE च WANA लक्ष्मणश्च महाबल:।
वैदेह्या astra धर्मत: परिरक्षिता:॥११॥
“Through the discovery of Sita, a
princess of the Videha territory, the entire
race of Raghu, as well as myself and
Laksmana too, who is endowed with
extraordinary might, have been saved from
destruction today in consonance’ with
righteousness. (11)

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA +

इदं तु मम दीनस्य मनो wa: प्रकर्षति।
यदिहास्य प्रियाख्यातुर्न कुर्मि age प्रियम्॥१२॥

“It undoubtedly wrings my soul further,
wretched that | am, to think that | have
nothing worthwhile to offer to Hanuman,
who has communicated to me this delightful
news. (12)

एष सर्वस्वभूतस्तु परिष्वङ्गो हनूमत:।
मया कालमिमं प्राप्य दत्तस्तस्य महात्मन:॥ १३॥

“This embrace, which is all that | can
call my own at this moment, is unreservedly
offered to this high-souled Hanuman.”

(13)

इत्युक्त्वा प्रीतिहृष्टाङ्गो रामस्तं परिषस्वजे।
St कृतात्मानं कृतकार्यमुपागतम्॥१४॥

Saying so, Sri Rama, whose limbs
were thrilled with delight, embraced the
celebrated Hanuman, who had disciplined
his mind and who had just returned having
carried out his behest. (14)

ध्यात्वा पुनरुवाचेदं वचनं रघुसत्तम:।

हरीणामीश्वरस्यापि सुग्रीवस्योपशृण्वत:॥१५॥
Exercising his mind awhile, Sri Rama,

the foremost among the Raghus, once more

spoke as follows, Sugriva, the ruler of
monkeys, too, listening: (15)

सर्वथा सुकृतं तावत् सीताया: परिमार्गणम्।
सागरं तु समासाद्य पुनर्नष्टं मनो मम॥१६॥

“The search for Sita has, of course,
been conducted thoroughly well. On duly
reaching the ocean, however, my mind gets
dejected once more. (16)

कथं नाम समुद्रस्य दुष्पारस्य महाम्भस:।
ह्रयो दक्षिणं ut गमिष्यन्ति समागता:॥१७॥

“How on earth will the monkeys, gather
together for the purpose of recovering
Sita from the enemy’s hands, reach the
southern shore of the sea, which is so
difficult to cross and comprises a vast
sheet of water? (17)
