978

period like a lion kept back by an elephant,
in the course of the latter’ss combat with
Vali. (43)
पराक्रमोत्साहमतिप्रताप-

सौशील्यमाधुर्यनयानयै ।
गाम्भीर्यचातुर्यसुवीर्यथैर्यै-

र्हनूमत: कोऽप्यधिकोऽस्ति लोके Ul ४४॥

“Who is there in the world superior to

Hanuman in respect of prowess, energy,
extraordinary glory, amiability, sweetness

of temper and the knowledge of what is
prudent or otherwise, as well as of profundity,

cleverness, extraordinary virility and
firmness? (44)
असौ Ureatat ग्रहीष्यन्

सूर्योन्मुख: प्रष्टुमना: कपीन्द्र:।
उद्यद्गिरेरस्तगिरिं जगाम

ग्रन्थं महद्धारयनप्रमेय: ।॥। ४५ UI

“With his face turned towards the sun-
god with a view to learn grammar and desiring
to put questions to him, (in order to remove
his doubts) the yonder chief of monkeys, of
immeasurable energy, journeyed from the
hill where the sun rises to the hill where it
sets, with intent to master the great work on
grammar. (45)
ससूत्रवृत्त्यर्थपदं महार्थं

ससंग्रहं सिद्ध्यति a कपीन्द्र:।
नह्यस्य कश्चित् सदृशोऽस्ति शास्त्र
वैशारदे छन्दगतौ तथैव॥४६॥

“Hanuman (the chief of monkeys) has
mastered the great gloss on the aphorisms
including the aphorisms of grammar as
well as the Vrtti (comment), the Vartika
(annotation) on the aphorisms and also the
monographs on the subject. Indeed there is
none like him in the knowledge of other
branches of learning as well as in prosody.

(46)
watq fara तपोविधाने
प्रस्पर्धतेऽयं fe Te सुराणाम्।

« VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

Bist नवव्याकरणार्थवेत्ता
aan भविष्यत्यपि ते प्रसादात्॥४७॥

“He actually rivals Sage Brhaspati (the
preceptor of gods) in all the branches of
learning as well as in the practice of
austerities. Well-versed in the subject-matter
of the nine systems of grammar, the yonder
Hanuman shall prove to be a very Brahma
by Your grace. (47)

प्रवीविवक्षोरिव ane

लोकान् दिधक्षोरिव पावकस्य।
लोकक्षयेष्वेव यथान्तकस्य

हनूमत: स्थास्यति क: पुरस्तात्॥४८॥

“Who can stand face to face with
Hanuman, who resembles the ocean
threatening (at the time of final dissolution)
to corrode the earth or the fire which (at the
end of the world-period) is out to consume
the universe and who resembles Death on
the occasion of the destruction of the world?

(48)
was चान्ये च महाकपीन्द्रा:
सुग्रीवमैन्द'द्बिविदा; Ae: |
सतारतारेयनला: सरम्भा-
स्त्वत्कारणाद् राम सुरैर्हि सृष्टा:॥४९॥
“Like him, other great leaders of

monkeys too, viz., Sugriva, Mainda and
Dwivida including Nila, Tara, Angada (son
of Tara) and Nala as also Rambha were
actually procreated by the gods for your
sake, O Rama! (49)
मैन्द: War ज्योतिमुखो नलश्च।
Ud च ऋक्षा: We ast
स्त्वत्कारणाद WA ale सृष्टा: Il ५० Il
“Nay, alongwith the aforesaid leaders
of monkeys, Gaja, Gavaksa, Gavaya,
Sudarmstra, Mainda, Prabha, Jyotimukha and
Nala—these bears too were _ actually

procreated by the gods for your sake only,
O Rama! (50)
