98

superior to the two aforesaid groves, as it
were, and was inconceivable, wonderful and
invested with a charming splendour. Spangled
with hosts of luminaries in the form of flowers,
it was a second firmament, as it were, and
enchanting like a fifth ocean (besides the
four oceans bounding the earth according to
the ancient geography) with hundreds of
precious stones in the form of its flowers.
Hanuman also beheld a garden forming part
of the Asoka grove, full of trees blooming in
every season and diffusing a sweet fragrance,
nay, delightful on account of its herds of
animals and birds—which emitted cries of
various kinds—which scattered many odours
and ravished the mind with its holy scents
and which was like another Gandhamadana,
the lord of mountains, rich in odours.

In the aforesaid Asoka grove that bull
among monkeys saw situated at a short
distance a lofty temple, which was supported
in the centre on a thousand pillars and was
free from impurities and white as Mount
KailaSa, which shone brightly due to its
splendour and blinded the eyes, as it were,
and appeared by virtue of its eminence to
scrape the heavens, and which was provided
with steps made of coral and platforms of
refined gold. Then he caught sight of a woman
who was surrounded by ogresses, was
emaciated through fasting and looked
miserable, who was sighing again and again
and was immaculate like the disc of the moon
at the beginning of a bright fortnight, who was
casting a delightful splendour with her form
which could only be indistinctly recognized,
who, being clad in a soiled raiment, looked
like a flame enveloped in smoke, who was
clad in a single yellow worn-out excellent cloth
and, being smeared with dust and divested
of all decoration, looked like a muddy lotus-
pond devoid of lotuses; who, being oppressed,
tormented with agony, wasted and reduced
to a pitiable condition, looked like the
constellation Rohini pressed by the planet,
Mars, who wore a wretched appearance, her

« VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

face bathed in tears, and was worn out through
abstinence from food, was given over to grief
and anxiety, felt exhausted and was ever
plunged in sorrow; who, being unable to see
her beloved ones and able to behold ogresses
alone, appeared like a she-doe disunited from
her herd and surrounded by a pack of hounds
and who, with a single braid looking like a
black serpent and reaching up to her hinder
part, looked like the earth with a dark-green
row of trees at the end of the monsoon when
the clouds have disappeared. (2—25)

Gael दु:खसंतप्तां व्यसनानामकोविदाम्।
at विलोक्य विशालाक्षीमधिकं मलिनां कृशाम्॥ २६ ॥
तर्कयामास सीतेति कारणैरुपपादिभि:।
ह्रियमाणा तदा AT रक्षसा कामरूपिणा॥ २७॥
यथारूपा fe get सा तथारूपेयमंगना।
पूर्णचन्द्राननां By चारुवृत्तपयोधराम्॥ २८॥
कुर्वतीं प्रभया देवीं सर्वा वितिमिरा दिश:।
तां नीलकण्ठी foraredt सुमध्यां सुप्रतिष्ठिताम्॥ २९ ॥
सीतां पद्मपलाशाक्षीं मन्मथस्य रतिं यथा।
set सर्वस्य जगत: पूर्णचन्द्रप्रभामिव॥ ३०॥
wat सुतनुमासीनां नियतामिव तापसीम्।
नि:श्वासबहुलां भीरुं भुजगेन्द्रवधूमिव॥ ३१॥
शोकजालेन महता विततेन न राजतीम्।
संसक्तां धूमजालेन rata विभावसो: 32
तां स्मृतीमिव संदिग्धामृद्धिं निपतितामिव।
विहतामिव च श्रद्धामाशां प्रतिहतामिव॥ ३३॥
अभूतेनापवादेन कीर्तिं निपतितामिव॥ ३४॥
रामोपरोधव्यथितां रक्षोगणनिपीडिताम्।
अबलां मृगशावाक्षीं वीक्षमाणां ततस्तत:॥ ३५॥
बाष्पाम्बुपरिपूर्णेन कृष्णवक्राक्षिपक्ष्मणा।
वदनेनाप्रसन्नेन नि:श्वसन्तीं पुन: पुन:॥ ३६॥
प्रभां नक्षत्रराजस्य कालमेघैरिवाव्रृताम्॥३७॥
wea संदिदिहे बुद्धिस्तथा सीतां निरीक्ष्य च।
आम्नायानामयोगेन विद्यां प्रशिथिलामिव॥ ३८॥
Beholding that large-eyed woman, who

looked very untidy and emaciated, who had
never known calamities before and who,
