# YUDDHAKANDA #

तत्तु मिथ्या wert At प्रधक्ष्यति न संशय:।
यन्मया न Hat राजा राक्षसानां विभीषण:॥ २२॥
“Since Vibhisana has not been
enthroned by me as the ruler of ogres, that
vain pratting of mine that Vibhisana would
be installed on the throne of Lanka will ever
consume me: there is no doubt about it.(22)

afer usd सुग्रीव प्रतियातुमितोऽर्हसि।
मत्वा at मया राजन् रावणोऽभिभविष्यति॥ 23 1

“You ought to return from this place at
this very hour, O Sugriva; for Ravana will
surely overcome you, knowing you to be
bereft of me, O king! (23)
अङ्गदं तु पुरस्कृत्य ससैन्यं सपरिच्छदम्।
सागरं तर सुग्रीव नीलेन च नलेन च॥ २४॥

“Placing Angada in the _ forefront
alongwith your army and entourage, recross
the sea alongwith Nila and Nala too, O
Sugriva! (24)
pa fe सुमहत्कर्म यदन्यैर्दुष्करं रणे।
ऋक्षराजेन तुष्यामि गोलाङ्गूलाधिपेन च॥२५॥

“Indeed, a very great exploit was
accomplished by you on the field of battle—
an exploit which was difficult to accomplish
for others. | am also satisfied with Jambavan
(the king of bears) as well as with Gavaksa
(the suzerain lord of Golangulas). (25)

अङ्गदेन कृतं कर्म मैन्देन द्विविदेन च।
युद्धं केसरिणा संख्ये at सम्पातिना कृतम्॥ २६॥
“Acts of valour were performed by
Angada, Mainda and Dwivida too, while a
formidable struggle was carried on the field
of battle by Kesari (the father of Hanuman)
and Sampati. (26)

471

Tat गवाक्षेण शरभेण We TI
अन्यैश्च हरिभिर्युद्धं मदर्थे त्यक्कजीवितै: ol

“A struggle was also carried out in my
cause by Gavaya, Gavaksa, Sarabha and
Gaja as also by other monkeys, sacrificing
their very lives for my sake. (27)
न चातिक्रमितुं शक्यं दैवं सुग्रीव मानुषै:।
यत्तु शक्यं वयस्येन सुहृदा वा परं मम॥ २८॥
कृतं सुग्रीव ad सर्वं भवता धर्मभीरुणा।
मित्रकार्यं कृतमिदं भवद्धिर्वानरर्षभा:॥ २९॥
अनुज्ञाता मया सर्वे यथेष्टं गन्तुमर्हथ।
शुश्रुवुस्तस्य ये सर्वे वानरा: परिदेवितम्॥ go Il
वर्तयांचक्रिरेऽश्रूणि AX: कृष्णेतरेक्षणा:॥ ३१॥

“Destiny cannot be over-ridden by human
beings, O Sugriva! All that could be done by
my best friend or ally has been done by
you, scrupulous as you are in the matter of
duty, O Sugriva! The purpose of an ally has
been accomplished by you, O Jewel among
monkeys! Permitted by me, you should go
where you will.” All the tawny-eyed monkeys
who heard his lamentation as above dropped
tears from their eyes. (28—31)

dd: सर्वाण्यनीकानि स्थापयित्वा विभीषण: |
आजगाम गदापाणिस्त्वरितं यत्र राघव:॥ ३२॥

Having settled all the forces, Vibhisana
hastened, mace in hand, to the place where
Sri Rama (a scion of Raghu) lay. (32)
तं दृष्टवा त्वरितं aed नीलाञ्जनचयोपमम्।
वानरा दुद्रुवु: Ad मन्यमानास्तु रावणिम्॥ ३३॥

Seeing Vibhisana, who resembled a
mass of collyrium, proceeding in haste to
the presence of Sri Rama and taking him to
be Indrajit (son of Ravana), all the monkeys
took to their heels. (33)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये FERS एकोनपञ्चाश: सर्ग ॥ ४९ ॥

Thus ends Canto Forty-nine in the Yuddhakanda of the glorious Ramayana of
Valmiki, the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

