182

ऊर्ध्व मासान्न जीवेयं सत्येनाहं ब्रवीमि ते।

रावणेनोपरुद्धां मां निकृत्या पापकर्मणा।
त्रातुमर्हसि वीर त्वं पातालादिव कौशिकीम्॥ ६५॥
“‘Out of time-limit set for my survival,
only one month is left now. | shall thus not
live beyond a month. | swear to you by
truth. You ought to rescue me, confined as
| am by Ravana of sinful deeds and subjected
to persecution at the hands of ogresses, O
heroic prince, even as Lord Visnu in His
descent as the Divine Boar rescued
Goddess Earth, born in the line of Sage
Kausika from Patala (the nethermost
subterranean region).’ ” (65)
प्रदेयो राघवायेति सीता हनुमते ददौ॥६६॥
Untying the bright divine jewel for her
head, tied in her garment, Sita thereupon
gave it to Hanuman, saying that it be
delivered to Sri Rama (a scion of Raghu).
(66)

प्रतिगृह्य ततो वीरो मणिरत्नमनुत्तमम्।
अङ्गुल्या योजयामास नह्यस्य प्राभवद् भुज:॥ ६७॥
Taking from Sita’s hand the excellent
jewel, which was _ invaluable, the hero

Hanuman placed it on his finger since his
arm (even though he had resumed his former

« VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

tiny form) was too thick for it.
मणिरत्नं after: प्रतिगृह्याभिवाद्य al
सीतां प्रदक्षिणं कृत्वा Word: पाश्वत: स्थित: 1 ६८ UI
Taking and greeting the excellent jewel
and walking round Sita clockwise as a mark

of respect, Hanuman, the foremost. of
monkeys, stood bent low by her side. (68)

हर्षेण महता aw: सीतादर्शनजेन स:।
Bat गतो रामं लक्ष्मणं च सलक्षणम्॥६९॥

Filled with great delight born of Sita’s
discovery, he mentally sought the presence
of Sri Rama, who was endowed with
auspicious bodily marks, and Laksmana.(69)
मणिवरमुपगृह्य तं महार्हं
गिरिवरपवनावधूतमुक्त:

सुखितमना: प्रतिसंक्रमं प्रपेदे॥ vo tl

Rejoiced at heart to receive that valuable
and superb jewel, borne on her person by
the daughter of King Janaka by dint of her
asceticism (so that it remained unnoticed by
the ogresses all the while). His conditioned
resembled the one fully accomplished and
happy, who was once shaken by a blast
coming from the top of a huge mountain and
then delivered from it, Hanuman prepared to
set out on his return journey. (70)

(67)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये
सुन्दरकाण्डेऽष्टात्रिंश: सर्ग: ॥ ३८ Il
Thus ends Canto Thirty-eight of the Sundarakanda in the glorious Ramayana of
Valmiki, the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

