# YUDDHAKANDA +

(Finding it impossible to worst his
formidable adversary by dint of prowess)
the ogre in the meantime proceeded to exhibit
forthwith his supernatural power. Knowing
him about to do this, Sugriva, the suzerain
lord of monkeys, who had assumed a
triumphant air and overcome his fatigue,
then sprang in the air; while, baffled by
Sugriva (the ruler of monkeys), Ravana
remained standing where he was. (27-28)

अथ हरिवरनाथ: प्राप्तसंग्रामकीर्ति-
रनिशिचरपतिमाजौ योजयित्वा श्रमेण।
गगनमतिविशालं लङ्घयित्वार्कसूनु-
र्हरिगणबलमध्ये रामपाश्वं जगाम॥ २९॥
Reducing Ravana (the lord of ogres)

to exhaustion in combat and traversing
the very extensive sky, Sugriva, a son of

433

the sun-god, the lord of monkey-chiefs, who
had won renown in combats, now arrived
by the side of Sri Rama in the midst of the
army of monkey battalions. (29)

Sta स सवितृसूनुस्तत्र ad कर्म कृत्वा
पवनगतिरनीकं प्राविशत् सम्प्रहष्ट:।

रघुवरनृपसूनोर्वर्धयन् युद्धहर्षं
तरुमृगगणमुख्यै: पूज्यमानो BIE: I ३०॥

Having accomplished on that spot the
aforesaid feat, that son of the sun-god and
ruler of monkeys, who was endowed with
the speed of the wind, now rejoined the
army of monkeys, extremely rejoiced, nay,
heightening the military zeal of Sri Rama
(son of a king), who was the foremost of the
Raghus, and being adored by the foremost
of the monkey troops. (30)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये युद्धकाण्डे चत्वारिंश: सर्ग: ॥ ४० ॥
Thus ends Canto Forty in the Yuddhakanda of the glorious Ramayana of
Valmiki, the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

Canto XLI

Sri Rama is not very pleased with the daring act of Sugriva inasmuch as he
had seen evil portents. Warning him against such action on the ground
of his being a sovereign, and commanding the monkey generals to
besiege all the four gates of Lanka, he dispatches Angada to
expostulate with Ravana and bring him to reason. Angada
tries his best to bring him round, but in vain, and
returns unsuccessful to the presence of Sri
Rama after threatening the ogres

अथ तस्मिन् निमित्तानि gear लक्ष्मणपूर्वज:।
सुग्रीवं सम्परिष्वज्य रामो वचनमब्रवीत्॥१॥

Observing the marks of a conflict on
the person of Sugriva, and closely embracing
him, Sri Rama, the eldest brother of
Laksmana, forthwith spoke as follows to
Sugriva: (1)

असम्मन्त्य मया सार्धं तदिदं साहसं कृतम्।

एवं साहसयुक्तानि न कुर्वन्ति जनेश्वरा:॥२॥
Without duly holding consultation with

me this aforesaid precipitate act has been

done by you. Sovereigns do not undertake
such daring acts. (2)
