126

« VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

distinguished by his virtues, experienced | heart but also to the ears, addressed as it
supreme delight on hearing the aforesaid | was in polite words by the high-souled

prayer, which was not only pleasing to the | monarch.

(59)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये बालकाण्डेऽष्टादश: सर्ग: ॥ १८ ॥

Thus ends Canto Eighteen in the Balakanda of the glorious Ramayana of Valmiki,
the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

Canto XIX

King Dasaratha is stunned to hear the request of Viswamitra
to send Sri Rama with him to dispose of the Raksasas
that interfered with his sacred observances

तच्छुत्वा राजसिंहस्य वाक्यमद्भुतविस्तरम्।
wera महातेजा विश्चामित्रोऽभ्यभाषत॥ १॥

Hearing the aforesaid address of
DaSsaratha (a lion among kings), marked
with uncommon length, the highly glorious
sage ViSwamitra replied as follows, his hair
standing on end:

“What you have said is worthy of you
alone and of none else on earth, O tiger
among kings—you, who are descendant of
a great pedigree and enjoy the proud privilege
of being instructed by the sage Vasistha ! (2)
यत् तु tard वाक्यं तस्य कार्यस्य निश्चयम्।
कुरुष्व Wada भव सत्यप्रतिश्रव:॥ ३॥

“Make a resolve, O tiger among kings,
to accomplish the purpose which stands
foremost in my heart, and which is just
going to be expressed in so many words,
and thereby prove true to your promise
(made in verse 58 of the foregoing canto).

(3)
sé नियममातिष्ठे सिद्ध्यर्थं पुरुषर्षभ।
wea विघ्नकरौ gt तु राक्षसौ कामरूपिणौ॥४॥

“| stand consecrated for a sacrificial

performance for the realization of my aim, O
jewel among men! Two ogres, capable of
taking any form at will, interrupt the said
performance in conjunction with their
associates. (4)

at तु बहुशश्चीर्णे समाप्त्यां राक्षसाविमौ।
मारीचश्च सुबाहुश्च वीर्यवन्तौ सुशिक्षितौ॥५॥
तौ मांसरुधिरौघेण वेदिं तामभ्यवर्षताम्।
अवधूते तथाभूते तस्मिन् नियमनिश्चये॥ ६॥
pas निरुत्साहस्तस्माद् देशादपाक्रमे।
न च मे क्रोधमुत्स्रष्टुं बुद्धिर्भवति पार्थिव॥७॥

“Towards its conclusion, when the
sacred observance had been gone through
in a large measure, however, these two
notorious Raksasas, Marica and Subahu,
who are not only possessed of great
prowess but are highly trained in the methods
of warfare, polluted the sacrificial altar with
a large volume of flesh and blood dropped
from the airspace. My vow in connection
with that sacred observance, which had
well-nigh been completed as aforesaid, having
thus been interrupted, | came away dispirited
from that region, having achieved nothing
beyond fruitless exertion. And there is no
prompting in me to give vent to my wrath in
the form of an execration, O ruler of the
earth ! (5—7)
