104

तत: प्रीतो द्विजश्रेष्ठस्तान् सर्वान् मुनिरब्रवीत्।
अवज्ञया न दातव्यं कस्यचिल्लीलयापि aru ३३॥

Pleased with their report, the sage
Vasistha, the foremost of the Brahmanas,
then said to them all, “No gift should be
made to anyone with disrespect or even
with irreverence. (33)
wa: कैश्चिदहोरात्रैरूपयाता महीक्षित:।॥ ३४॥
बहूनि रत्नान्यादाय राज्ञो दशरथस्य ह।
ततो ata: सुप्रीतो राजानमिदमब्रवीत्॥ ३५॥

“A gift made with contumely brings
ruin to the donor: there is no doubt about
it.” Some days after the departure of
Sumantra and others a number of kings
arrived with many valuable presents in the
form of jewels, pearls, articles of wearing
apparel, ornaments etc., for Emperor
DaSaratha: so the tradition goes. Highly
pleased at their arrival, Vasistha spoke to
the king as follows : (34-35)

उपयाता NATTA राजानस्तव शासनात्।
मयापि सत्कृता: सर्वे यथार्हं राजसत्तम॥ ३६॥
awa च pd wad पुरुषै: सुसमाहितै:।
निर्यातु च var यष्टुं यज्ञायतनमन्तिकात्॥ ३७॥
“Kings have arrived at your command,
O tiger among men! Nay, all have been
received with hospitality according to their
deserts by me, O jewel among monarchs !
Moreover, everything connected with the
sacrifice has been got ready by your men

« VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

with great attention. Therefore, proceed you
to the sacrificial hall close by to commence
the sacrifice. (36-37)

सर्वकामैरुपहतैरुपेतॆ at समन्तत:।
द्रष्टुमर्हसि राजेन्द्र मनसेव विनिर्मितम्॥३८॥

“Be pleased, O king of kings, to inspect
the hall, which is furnished on every side
with all the desired objects got together by
your men and looks as if provided by your
mere wish.” (38)

तथा वसिष्ठवचनादृष्यशृङ्गस्य चोभयो:।
दिवसे शुभनक्षत्रे निर्यातो जगतीपति:॥ ३९॥

On the recommendation of both the
sages, Vasistha and Rsyasrnga, DaSaratha,
the ruler of the earth, accordingly proceeded
to the sacrificial hall on a day marked with
a propitious constellation. (39)

ततो वसिष्ठप्रमुखा: ad wa द्विजोत्तमा:।
Rays पुरस्कृत्य यज्ञकर्मारभंस्तदा॥४०॥
यज्ञवाटं गता: सर्वे यथाशास्त्रं यथाविधि।
श्रीमांश्च सह पत्नीभी राजा दीक्षामुपाविशत्॥४१॥
Having reached the sacrificial hall in a
body, placing Rsyasrnga ahead, all the
foremost Brahmanas with Vasistha as their
leader (Acarya) then commenced the
sacrifice according to the scriptural ordinance
in the prescribed order the same day. Nay,
the glorious Emperor with his consorts went
through the ceremony of consecration in
order to qualify themselves for the sacrificial
performance. (40-41)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये बालकाण्डे त्रयोदश: AWA: ॥ 23 ॥

Thus ends Canto Thirteen in the Balakanda of the glorious Ramayana of Valmiki,
the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

