810

loathsome as you are to unrighteousness.
(15)

किष्किन्धां प्रति याह्याशु स्वसैन्येनाभिसंवृत:।

स्वराज्ये वस लङ्कायां मया दत्ते विभीषण।
न त्वां धर्षयितुं शक्ता: सेन्द्रा अपि दिवौकस: । १६ ॥
“Surrounded on all sides by your army,
proceed to Kiskindha at once. Settle down
in your kingdom at Lanka conferred by me,
O Vibhisana! Even all the gods (lit., denizens
of heaven) including Indra shall not be able
to attack you. (16)

अयोध्यां प्रति यास्यामि राजधानीं पितुर्मम।

अभ्यनुज्ञातुमिच्छामि सर्वानामन्त्रयामि au oii
“For myself | shall proceed to the seat

of government of my father. As such | bid

adieu to you and wish to take leave of you
all.” (17)

एवमुक्तास्तु रामेण हरीन्द्रा हरयस्तथा।

ऊचु: Wats: सर्वे राक्षसश्च विभीषण:॥ १८॥
Spoken to in these words by Sri Rama

the monkey chiefs as well as all the monkeys

as also the ogre Vibhisana submitted as

follows with joined palms: (18)

अयोध्यां गन्तुमिच्छाम: सर्वान् नयतु नो भवान्।
Ter विचरिष्यामो वनान्युपवनानि च॥१९॥

“We desire to proceed to Ayodhya; pray
take us with you. Full of joy we shall range
the groves and gardens there. (19)

दृष्ट्वा त्वामभिषेकार्द्र कौसल्यामभिवाद्य च।
अचिरादागमिष्याम: स्वगृहान् नृपसत्तम॥ Ro Il

“Seeing you drenched with ablution at
the time of coronation and greeting mother
Kausalya, we shall return to our homes
without delay, O jewel among the protectors
of men.” (20)

`एवमुक्तस्तु धर्मात्मा art: सविभीषणै:।
अब्रवीद् वानरान् WA: ससुग्रीवविभीषणान्॥ २१॥

Requested thus by the monkeys as
well as by Vibhisana, Sri Rama for his part,
whose mind was set on virtue, spoke as

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA +

follows to the monkeys including Sugriva,
as well as to Vibhisana: (21)
सर्वैर्भवद्भि: सहित: Wit लप्स्ये पुरीं गत:॥ २२॥

“Something more agreeable than
everything agreeable will be achieved by
me if | reach Ayodhya with the host of my
friends, viz., you all. | shall thereby feel
delighted with my near and dear ones,
Bharata and others. (22)

क्षिप्रमारोह सुग्रीव विमानं ae art:
त्वमप्यारोह सामात्यो राक्षसेन्द्र विभीषण॥ २३॥

“Mount the aerial car with the other
monkeys at once, O Sugriva! Mount you
too with your ministers, O Vibhisana, ruler
of ogres!” (23)

तत: स पुष्पकं दिव्यं सुग्रीव: सह at: |
आरुरोह Yat युक्त: सामात्यश्च विभीषण:॥ २४॥

Full of joy, the said Sugriva thereupon
ascended the heavenly car, Puspaka, with
the other monkeys, as well as Vibhisana
accompanied by his ministers. (24)

तेष्वारूढेषु सर्वेषु कौबेरं परमासनम्।
राघवेणाभ्यनुज्ञातमुत्पपात विहायसम्॥ २५ ॥

Duly permitted by Sri Rama (a scion of
Raghu), when they had all taken their seat
in it, the excellent aerial car of Kubera, the
god of riches, rose into the air. (25)

ख्गतेन विमानेन हंसयुक्तेन भास्वता।
Wes प्रतीतश्च बभौ राम: कुबेरवत्॥ २६॥

Feeling greatly thrilled and delighted
while travelling in the splendid aerial car,
which was now coursing through the air
and was provided with the image of a swan
(as though yoked to the car), Sri Rama
shone like Kubera, the god of riches. (26)

a wd वानररक्षाश्च राक्षसाश्च महाबला:।
यथासुखमसम्बाधं दिव्ये तस्मिन्नुपाविशन्॥ २७॥

All the aforesaid ॥101॥९8/ऽ and
bears as well as the ogres, who were
