560

a fe राजसुत: पुत्र चीरवासा महावनम्।
दण्डकान् सह वैदेह्या लक्ष्मणानुचरो गत:॥४२॥
“Actually, clad in the bark of trees, my
son, and followed by Laksmana, the aforesaid
prince proceeded to the great forest of
Dandaka with Sita, a princess of the Videha
territory.” (42)

तच्छुत्वा भरतस्त्रस्तो भ्रातुश्चारित्रशङ्कया।
स्वस्य वंशस्य माहात्म्यात् प्रष्टुं समुपचक्रमे॥४३॥
Filled with apprehension to hear the
tidings because of his misgivings about the
character of his elder brother, Sri Rama,
and remembering as he did the greatness
of his royal house, Bharata commenced
interrogating her as follows : (43)
कच्चिन्न ब्राह्मणधनं et रामेण कस्यचित्।
कच्चिन्नाढ्यो दरिद्रो वा तेनापापो विहिंसित: it ४४॥
“| hope no property of a Brahmana
was wantonly seized by Sri Rama. | am
sure, no sinless man, whether wealthy or
destitute, was killed by him. (44)

कच्चिन्न परदारान् वा राजपुत्रोऽभिमन्यते।
HAN स दण्डकारण्ये भ्राता TA विवासित: ॥ ४५ Ul

“Nor did the prince long for another’s
wife, | am sure. If not, wherefore was my
celebrated brother sent into exile to the
Dandaka forest?” (45)

अथास्य चपला माता तत् स्वकर्म यथातथम्।
तेनैव स्त्रीस्वभावेन व्याहर्तुमुपचक्रमे॥४६॥

Prompted by her feminine (frivolous)
nature, which was too well-known, Bharata’s
capricious mother forthwith began to recount
her notorious doing precisely as matters
stood. (46)
Wat तु कैकेयी भरतेन महात्मना।
sara वचनं हृष्टा व्रृथापण्डितमानिनी॥४७॥

Questioned as aforesaid by the high-
souled Bharata, Kaikeyi, for her part, who
vainly accounted her wise, merrily replied
as follows: (47)

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

न ब्राह्मणधनं किंचिद्भूतं रामेण कस्यचित्।
कश्चिन्नाढ्यो दरिद्रो वा तेनापापो विहिंसित:।
न राम: परदारान् स चक्षुरभ्यामपि पश्यति॥४८॥

“No property whatsoever of a Brahmana
or anyone else was wantonly seized by
Rama, nor was any innocent man, wealthy
or destitute, killed by him. Nor did the
celebrated Rama look on another’s wife
even with sinless eyes. (48)

मया तु पुत्र श्रुत्वैव रामस्येहाभिषेचनम्।
याचितस्ते frat wet रामस्य च विवासनम्॥४९॥

“The moment | heard of Rama’s
installation as Prince Regent on the throne
of Ayodhya, my son, your father was in fact
asked by me for the sovereignty of Ayodhya
in your favour and the banishment of Rama.

(49)
स स्वव्रत्तिं समास्थाय पिता ते तत् तथाकरोत्।
रामस्तु सहसौमित्रि: प्रेषित: we सीतया॥५०॥

“Following his own truthful nature, your
father thereupon did as he was asked by
me. Accompanied by Laksmana, Rama was
accordingly sent into exile alongwith Sita.

(50)
तमपश्यन् fret ga महीपालो महायशा:।
पुव्रशोकपरिद्युट्टं॰॰।; पञ्चत्वमुपपै।देब।न् We

“Missing his beloved son, Rama, and
stricken with grief over his separation from

that son, the highly illustrious Emperor met
his end. (51)
त्वया त्विदानीं धर्मज्ञ राजत्वमवलम्ब्यताम्।
त्वत्कृते fe मया सर्वमिदमेवंविधं कृतम्॥५२॥
“Let the throne of Ayodhya be accepted
by you now, O knower of what is right!
Indeed, all this has been manipulated by me
in this wise for your sake. (52)

मा शोकं मा च संतापं धैर्यमाश्रय पुत्रक।
त्वदधीना fe नगरी राज्यं चैतदनामयम्॥५३॥

“Do not yield to grief nor to remorse,
my dear son, but have recourse to firmness.
Indeed, the existence of the city of Ayodhya
