308

Having decorated the city as aforesaid
and coming together in batches in
quadrangles as well as in the public assembly
halls scattered throughout the city, all the
residents of that city of Ayodhya, longing as
they did for the installation of Sri Rama in
the office of Prince Regent, applauded
DaSaratha, a ruler of men, while talking to
one another on the spot: (19-20)

अहो महात्मा राजायमिक्ष्वाकुकुलनन्दन:।
ज्ञात्वा वृद्धं स्वमात्मानं रामं राज्येऽभिषेक्ष्यति॥ २१॥

“High-souled indeed is this King
DaSaratha (the delight of Ikswaku’s race),
who is going to install Sri Rama on the
throne of Ayodhya, perceiving himself to be
aged ! (21)

सर्वे ह्यनुगृहीता: स्म यन्नो WaT महीपति:।
चिराय भविता गोप्ता दृष्टलोकपरावर:॥ २२॥

“We are all grateful indeed to God that
as the ruler of the globe, Sri Rama, who has
seen for himself what is noble and ignoble
in the world, will be our protector for long.

(22)

अनुद्धतमना विद्वान् धर्मात्मा भ्रातृवत्सल:।
यथा च भ्रातृषु स्निग्धस्तथास्मास्वपि Wea: tl २३॥

“Sri Rama, a scion of Raghu, is
unpresumptuous of mind, learned, pious,
fond of his brothers, nay, as affectionate
even to us as to his own brothers. (23)

fat जीवतु eater राजा दशरथोऽनघ:।

यत्प्रसादेनाभिषिक्तं रामं द्रक्ष्यामहे वयम्॥ २४॥
“Long live the sinless King Dasaratha,

whose mind is given to piety and by whose

grace we shall see Rama installed as Prince
Regent.” (24)

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA +

एवंविधं कथयतां पौराणां शुश्रुवु: परे।
दिग्भ्यो विश्रुतव्रत्तान्ता: WAT जानपदा SAT: ॥ २५ ॥
Others, viz., people hailing from the
countryside, who had heard the news of the
projected installation and had flocked from
all sides, heard the conversation of the
citizens, who were uttering such remarks.
(25)

ते तु दिग्भ्य: पुरीं प्राप्ता द्रष्टुं रामाभिषेचनम्।
रामस्य पूरयामासु: पुरीं जानपदा जना:॥ २६॥
Having poured into the city of Ayodhya
from all directions in order to witness the
installation of Sri Rama as Prince Regent,
the people from the countryside had flooded
the prospective capital of Sri Rama. (26)

जनौघैस्तैर्विसर्पद्भि: शुश्रुवे at नि:स्वन:।
पर्वसूदीर्णवेगस्य सागरस्येव नि:स्वन:॥ २७॥

The noise in that city was heard by the
aforesaid multitudes of men while moving
here and there as the roaring of an ocean
whose impetuosity is accelerated on the full
moon. (27)

रि ‘rai पुरं

दिदृक्षुभिर्जानपदैरुपाहितै: ।
समुद्रयादोभिरिवार्णवोदकम् ॥ २८॥

On that occasion the city of Ayodhya—
which was full of noise and vied in its
splendour with Amaravati (the capital of
Indra) and which was crowded on all sides
with the people of the countryside, that had
collected there in their eagerness to behold
the capital—looked like the sea-water infested
with aquatic creatures peculiar to the ocean.

(28)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्येऽयोध्याकाण्डे
षष्ठ: सर्ग: ॥ ६ Il

Thus ends Canto Six in the Ayodhyakanda of the glorious Ramayana of Valmiki,
the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

