* BALAKANDA +

‘If, however, you fail to trace him on
the earth’s surface, excavate the earth under
my order, looking about for the very individual
who has stolen away the horse, till the
horse is found. (15)

दीक्षित: पौत्रसहित: सोपाध्यायगणस्त्वहम्।
Be स्थास्यामि भद्रं Al Aad तुरगदर्शनम्॥ VE Il

‘| for my part, who stand consecrated,
will stay here alongwith my grandson,
Armsuman, and the priests officiating at the
sacrifice till the horse is in sight; may good
betide you.’ (16)
a Gd हृष्टमनसो राजपुत्रा महाबला:।
जग्मुर्महीतलं राम पितुर्वचनयन्त्रिता:॥१७॥

“Bound by the words of their father, all
those very mighty princes traversed the

earth’s surface with a delighted mind, O
Rama ! (17)

गत्वा तु पृथिवीं सर्वामदूष्टा तं महाबला:।
योजनायामविस्तारमेकैको धरणीतलम्।
बिभिदु: पुरुषव्याघ्रा वज्रस्पर्शसमैर्भुजै:॥१८॥

“Traversing the whole earth and yet
not finding the horse, the mighty princes,
who were tigers among men, started
excavating the earth with their arms whose
impact was as hard as that of a thunderbolt,
each digging land covering an area of one
square Yojana or sixty-four square miles.

(18)

शूलैरशनिकल्पैश्च हलैश्चापि सुदारुणै:।
भिद्यमाना वसुमती ननाद रघुनन्दन॥१९॥

“The earth groaned even as it was
being dug with pikes hard as adamant as
well as with most formidable ploughshares,
O scion of Raghu! (19)
नागानां वध्यमानानामसुराणां च राघव।
राक्षसानां दुराधर्ष: सत्त्वानां निनदोऽभवत्॥ २०॥

“There was a loud roar, that could not

be easily repressed, of Nagas, demons,
ogres and other living beings inhabiting the

179

subterranean regions, that were being killed
in the course of the excavation. (20)
योजनानां सहस्राणि षष्टिं तु रघुनन्दन।
बिभिदुर्धरणीं राम रसातलमनुत्तमम्॥ २१॥
“They excavated, O scion of Raghu,
land covering an area of sixty thousand
square Yojanas as if to reach Rasatala (the
sixth or penultimate subterranean sphere),
a region excelled by no other sphere in
point of beauty, splendour and amenities of
life, O Rama ! (21)
एवं पर्वतसम्बाधं जम्बूद्वीपं नृपात्मजा:।
Gt नृपशार्दूल Add: परिचक्रमु:॥ २२॥
“In this way, O tiger among princes,
the sixty thousand sons of Sagara went
about excavating in all directions the land of
Jambudwipa, thick with mountains. (22)

ततो cat: सगन्धर्वा: सासुरा: सहपन्नगा:।
सम्भ्रान्तमनस: सर्वे पितामहमुपागमन्॥२३॥

“Agitated in mind, gods _ including
Gandharvas, demons and Nagas, all sought
the presence of Brahma, the progenitor of
the entire creation. (23)

Sa: परमसंत्रस्ता: पितामहमिदं aa: evil
“Glorifying the high-souled Brahma on
that occasion, they made the following
submission to him with a doleful face, greatly
alarmed as they were: (24)
wre पृथिवी wat खन्यते सगरात्मजै:।
बहवश्च महात्मानो वध्यन्ते जलचारिण:॥ २५॥

““O Lord, the entire globe is being
excavated and many exalted souls and
aquatic animals killed in the process by the
sons of Sagara. (25)

अयं यज्ञहनोऽस्माकमनेनाश्वोऽपनीयते।
इति ते सर्वभूतानि हिंसन्ति सगरात्मजा:॥ २६॥

“‘The aforesaid sons of Sagara are
destroying all created beings suspecting
