648

“Torn from her home, and her kingdom
too as well as from the protection of Sri
Rama, what wrong has this princess of
Mithila done to you that you are killing her,
O pitiless one? (20)
सीतां eat ¢ न चिरं जीविष्यसि कथंचन।
aie कर्मणा तेन मम हस्तगतो ह्यसि॥ २१॥

“After dispatching Sita you shall
undoubtedly not survive long in any case. It
is due to such a deed that you have actually
fallen into my hands, O creature deserving
of death! (21)

येच स्त्रीघातिनां लोका लोकवध्यैश्च कुत्सिता: |
इह जीवितमुत्सृज्य प्रेत्य तान् प्रति लप्स्यसे॥ २२॥

“Yielding up your life in this world, you
shall after death descend to those worlds
which are the lot of killers of women and
are condemned even by those who deserve
to be killed by the people.” (22)

इति ब्रुवाणो हनुमान् सायुथैर्हरिभिर्वृत:।
अभ्यधावत् सुसंक्रुद्धो राक्षसेन्द्रसुतं wean २३॥

Speaking thus and attended by monkeys
equipped with weapons of destruction such
as trees and rocks, Hanuman rushed in
great fury towards Indrajit, son of the ruler
of ogres. (23)
रक्षसां भीमकोपानामनीकेन न्यवारयत्॥ २४॥

With an army of ogres of redoubtable
fury Indrajit intercepted that army of the
monkeys (lit., dwellers in the woods), which
was endowed with extraordinary prowess
and was advancing towards him. (24)

स at बाणसहस्रेण विक्षोभ्य हरिवाहिनीम्।
हनूमन्तं हरिश्रेष्ठमिन्द्रजित् प्रत्युवाच ह॥ २५॥

Having caused a stir in that simian
army with his thousand arrows, the aforesaid
Indrajit, they say, replied as_ follows
to Hanuman, the foremost of monkeys:

(25)

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA +

सुग्रीवस्त्वं च wag यन्निमित्तमिहागता:।
at वधिष्यामि वैदेहीमद्यैव तव पश्यत:॥ २६॥

“lam going to make short work this
very day, while you stand looking on, of that
Sita (a princess of the Videha territory), for
whose sake Sugriva as well as you and
Rama have come hither. (26)
Sat हत्वा ततो WA लक्ष्मणं war च वानर।
सुग्रीवं च वधिष्यामि तं चानार्यं विभीषणम्॥ २७॥

“Having disposed her of, | shall then
make short work of Rama, Laksmana and
yourself, O monkey, as also of Sugriva as
well as of that unworthy, Vibhisana. (27)

न हन्तव्या: स्वियश्चेति ae ब्रवीषि प्लवंगम।
पीडाकरममित्राणां यच्च कर्तव्यमेव तत्॥ २८॥

“Nay, what you have said just now,
viz., that women should not be killed, is
quite correct, O monkey! But that which
causes annoyance to one’s enemies need
must be done.” (28)

तमेवमुक्त्वा रुदतीं सीतां मायामयीं च ताम्।
शितधारेण खड्गेन निजघानेन्द्रजित् स्वयम्॥ २९॥
Nay, having spoken as aforesaid to
Hanuman, Indrajit personally made_ short
work with his sharp-edged sword, of that

illusory Sita, who had been sobbing all the
while. (29)

यज्ञोपवीतमार्गेण fst da तपस्विनी।
सा पृथिव्यां पृथुश्रोणी पपात प्रियदर्शना॥ ३०॥
Split asunder by him diagonally that

poor lady of broad hips and pleasing aspect
sank on the ground. (30)

तामिन्द्रजित् fat हत्वा हनूमन्तमुवाच ह।

मया रामस्य पश्येमां प्रियां शस्त्रनिषूदिताम्।

एषा विशस्ता वैदेही निष्फलो a: परिश्रम:॥ ३१॥
Having killed that illusory woman, Indrajit

spoke as follows to Hanuman: “Behold this

darling of Rama destroyed by me with a

weapon. Here is Sita, a princess of Videha
