* ARANYAKANDA «

सा तमार्तस्वरं seat तव स्नेहेन मैथिली।
Tes गच्छेति मामाशु रुदती भयविक्लवा॥ ८॥

“unnerved with fear to hear that plaintive
cry and crying through affection for you,
Sita, a princess of Mithila, urged me at once
in the words “Go, depart!” (8)

प्रचोद्यमानेन मया गच्छेति बहुशस्तया।
प्रत्युक्ता मैथिली वाक्यमिदं तत् प्रत्ययान्वितम्॥ ९ ॥

“By me, however, who was being
repeatedly goaded by her to depart, Sita (a
princess of Mithila) was answered in the
following words calculated 10० inspire
confidence in her: (9)

न तत् पश्याम्यहं रक्षो यदस्य भयमावहेत्।
निर्वृता भव नास्त्येतत् केनाप्येतदुदाहृतम्॥१०॥

“| do not know of that ogre who could
arouse fear in Sri Rama. Be at ease. It was
not his cry; it was uttered by a stranger.(10)

fanfét च art च कथमार्योऽभिधास्यति।
त्राहीति वचनं सीते यस्त्रायेत् त्रिदशानपि॥११॥

“How could my eldest brother, who can
protect even the gods (who pass through only
three stages in life, viz., childhood, adolescence
and youth), O Sita, utter the reproachful and
mean words “Save me !”? (11)

किं निमित्तं तु केनापि भ्रातुरालम्ब्य मे स्वरम्।

विस्वरं eed वाक्यं लक्ष्मण त्राहि मामिति॥ १२॥
“In fact, imitating the voice of my eldest

brother, Sri Rama, with some sinister motive,

the words ‘Laksmana, save me !’ were loudly
uttered by a stranger. (12)

राक्षसेनेरितं वाक्यं त्रासात् त्राहीति शोभने।
न भवत्या AM कार्या कुनारीजनसेविता॥ १३॥

“The words ‘Save me’ were uttered
through fear by the ogre himself, O good
lady ! Hence no agony, which is harboured
only by bad women, should be entertained
by you. (13)
न चास्ति त्रिषु लोकेषु पुमान् यो राघवं रणे॥ १४॥

879

जातो वा जायमानो वा संयुगे य: पराजयेत्।
अजेयो राघवो युद्धे देवै: शक्रपुरोगमै:॥ १५॥

“You should not yield to nervousness.
Be at ease and free from anxiety. There is no
man born or going to be born in all the three
worlds, who can vanquish Sri Rama (a scion
of Raghu) in an encounter. Sri Rama (a scion
of Raghu) cannot be conquered in battle even
by gods headed by Indra. (14-15)

wat तु वैदेही परिमोहितचेतना।
उवाचाश्रूणि मुञ्चन्ती दारुणं मामिदं Fa: ee Ul
“Reassured in these words by me,
Sita (a princess of the Videha territory) for
her part, whose judgment was utterly clouded,
addressed the following poignant words,
shedding tears all the time: (16)

भावो मयि तवात्यर्थं पाप wa निवेशित:।
विनष्टे भ्रातरि प्राप्तुं न च त्वं मामवाप्स्यसे॥ १७॥

“The grossly sinful intention of winning
me when your eldest brother has been slain
has definitely been cherished by you with
regard to me; but you shall never secure
me. (17)
Pade wet त्वं we समनुगच्छसि।
क्रोशन्तं fe यथात्यर्थं नैनमभ्यवपद्यसे॥ ecu

“*You are closely following Sri Rama
in pursuance of a pact entered into by you
with Bharata in that you do not actually run
to the side of Sri Rama, who is crying for
your help at the top of his voice ! (18)

fq: प्रच्छन्नचारी त्वं मदर्थमनुगच्छसि।
राघवस्यान्तरं प्रेप्सुस्तथैनं नाभिपद्यसे॥१९॥

“‘An enemy of Sri Rama in disguise,
you have been following him for my sake
only, seeking an opportunity to harm him.
Hence you do not run to his succour.’ (19)

एवमुक्तस्तु वैदेह्या संरब्धो रक्तलोचन:।
क्रोधात् प्रस्फुरमाणोष्ठ आश्रमादभिनिर्गत: ॥ २० ॥
“Waxing wroth, when accused thus by

Sita (a princess of the Videha kingdom),
with eyes red and lips quivering from anger,
