# YUDDHAKANDA #

प्रीतियुक्तस्य विहितां ससैन्य: ससुहृद्रण:।
सत्क्रियां राम A तावद् गृहाण त्वं मयोद्यताम्॥ १४॥

“In the meantime, O Rama, pray,
accept you with your entire army and host
of friends my hospitality, which has been
arranged for by me in accordance with the
scriptures, full of affection as | am for you.

(14)

प्रणयाद् बहुमानाच्च सौहार्देन च waa
प्रसादयामि प्रेष्योऽहं न खल्वाज्ञापयामि ते॥ ei

“| seek this favour of you out of affection,
as well as with great esteem and a friendly
feeling, O scion of Raghu! | am your servant
and as such | am certainly not constraining
you to do so.” (15)

एवमुक्तस्ततो राम: प्रत्युवाच विभीषणम्।
रक्षसां वानराणां च सर्वेषामेव श्रृण्वताम्॥१६॥
Requested, as aforesaid, Sri Rama
thereupon replied as follows to Vibhisana
while all the ogres and monkeys present
there listened: (16)

पूजितोऽस्मि त्वया ait साचिव्येन परेण च।
सर्वात्मना च चेष्टाभि: सौहार्देन परेण च॥ १७॥

“| stand honoured by you, O hero, by
your most valued counsel as well as by
your military efforts put forth with your whole
soul and above all by your great friendship.

(17)
न खल्वेतन्न gat a वचनं राक्षसेश्वर।
तं तु मे भ्रातरं द्रष्टुं od त्वरते मन:॥१८॥
मां निवर्तयितुं योऽसौ चित्रकूटमुपागत:।
शिरसा याचतो यस्य वचनं न Hd मया॥१९॥
कौसल्यां च सुमित्रां च कैकेयीं च यशस्विनीम्।
गुहं च सुहृदं Ba पौराञ्जानपदै: सह॥ २०॥

“Nevertheless | would never dare to
turn down this request of yours either, O
ruler of ogres! My mind, however, is impatient
to see Bharata, that younger brother of
mine, who came all the way to Citrakuta to
take me back to Ayodhya the other day, yet

807

whose prayer was not granted by me even
though he besought me with his head bent
low—and my mother, Kausalya as also (my
stepmothers) Sumitra and the illustrious
Kaikeyl, as well as my friend, Guha, alongwith
the people of Ayodhya and the outlying
districts comprised in the kingdom of
Ayodhya. (18—20)

अनुजानीहि at सौम्य पूजितोऽस्मि विभीषण।
मन्युर्न Gel कर्तव्य: सखे त्वां चानुमानये॥ २१॥

“Therefore, grant me leave to go, O
gentle one! | have already been honoured
by you in so many ways, O Vibhisana. In
no case should disappointment be felt by
you, | beseech you, my friend! (21)

उपस्थापय A vite विमानं राक्षसेश्वर।
कृतकार्यस्य मे aa: कथं स्यादिह सम्मत:॥ २२॥

“Place your aerial car at my disposal
quickly, O ruler of ogres! How can my
continued stay here be considered advisable
now that my task has been accomplished!”

(22)

Uae, THOT Tare fersiterot: |

pari: offend सर्वतो रजतप्रभम्॥ २४॥
पाण्डुराभि: पताकाभिर्ध्वजैश्च समलंकृतम्।
शोभितं काञ्चनैर्हर्यैर्हेमपद्मविभूषितै: ।। २५ Ul
प्रकीर्णं किङ्किणीजालैर्मुक्तामणिगवाक्षकम्।
Were: परिक्षिप्तं सर्वतो मधुरस्वनम्॥ २६॥
Requested in these words by Sri Rama,
Vibhisana, the ruler of ogres, for his part
thereupon hastily invoked the presence of
the aerial car, Puspaka, brilliant as the sun,
whose parts were all made of gold and
were picturesque, and seats made of cat’s-
eye gems; which was full of attics and
shone like silver on all sides; which was
artistically decorated with whitish yellow
pennons and flags with armorial bearings
and graced with golden mansions adorned
