496

Seeing the aforesaid Hanuman, who
was armed with a tree, enraged and taking
their life like Death himself, the ogres took
to their heels. (24)
तमापतन्तं संक्रुद्धं राक्षसानां भयावहम्।
ददर्शाकम्पनो वीरश्चुक्षोभ च ननाद च॥ २५॥

The valiant AKampana saw Hanuman,
who was highly enraged and caused terror
in the ogres, rushing towards him and felt
perturbed and roared. (25)

a चतुर्दशभिर्बाणैर्निशितैर्देहदारणै: |
निर्बिभेद महावीर्यं हनूमन्तमकम्पन:॥ २६॥

The aforesaid Akampana_ pierced
the exceedingly powerful Hanuman with
fourteen pointed arrows which tore the flesh.

(26)
स तथा विप्रकीर्णस्तु नाराचै: शितशक्तिभि:।
हनूमान् at वीर: Wee Fa सानुमान्॥ २७॥

Riddled as aforesaid with steel arrows
and sharp-edged javelins, the valiant
Hanuman looked like a mountain overgrown
with trees. (27)

विरराज महावीर्यो महाकायो महाबल:।
पुष्पिताशोकसंकाशो विधूम sa पावक:॥ २८॥

The gigantic monkey, who was endowed
with exceeding valour and extraordinary
might, shone brightly like an Asoka tree in
blossom or like a smokeless fire. (28)

ततोऽन्यं qaqarer कृत्वा वेगमनुत्तमम्।
शिरस्याभिजघानाशु राक्षसेन्द्रमकम्पनम्॥ २९॥

Uprooting another tree and exhibiting
unsurpassed impetuosity, Hanuman
thereupon immediately struck with it the
ogre chief, Akampana, on the head. (29)

स qaut हतस्तेन सक्रोधेन महात्मना।
राक्षसो वानरेन्द्रेण Wid च AAT च॥३०॥
Struck with the tree by that high-souled
monkey chief, Hanuman, full of anger, that
ogre, Akampana, fell down and died. (30)

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA +

तं दृष्ट्वा fed भूमौ राक्षसेन्द्रमकम्पनम्।
व्यथिता राक्षसा: सर्वे क्षितिकम्प इव द्रुमा:॥ ३१॥

Seeing the aforesaid ogre chief,
Akampana, lying killed on the ground, all the
ogres felt distressed even as trees are
shaken during an earthquake. (31)

त्यक्तप्रहरणा: सर्वे राक्षसास्ते पराजिता:।
लङ्कामभिययुस्त्रासाद् वानरैस्तैरभिद्रुता:॥ ३२॥
Having abandoned their arms all those
vanquished ogres ran away in panic to
Lanka when pursued by the aforesaid
monkeys. (32)

ते मुक्तकेशा: सम्भ्रान्ता भग्नमाना: पराजिता:।
भयाच्छ्रमजलैरङ्गै: प्रस्रवद्धिर्विदुद्रुवु: ।॥ ३३ ॥
Seized with a flurry and defeated, their
hair dishevelled and pride humbled, they
fled in panic, their limbs dripping with sweat.
(33)

अन्योन्यं ये प्रमथ्नन्तो विविशुर्नगरं भयात्।
पृष्ठतस्ते तु सम्मूढा: प्रेक्षमाणा मुहुर्मुहु:॥ ३४॥
Crushing one another, in their haste,
they re-entered Lanka through fear. Greatly
bewildered, as they were, they, however,
kept on repeatedly looking back while fleeing.
(34)

तेषु लङ्कां प्रविष्टेषु राक्षसेषु महाबला:।
समेत्य हरय: सर्वे हनूमन्तमपूजयन्॥३५॥
सोऽपि प्रवृद्धस्तान् सर्वान् हरीन् सम्प्रत्यपूजयत्।
हनूमान् सत्त्वसम्पन्नो यशथार्हमनुकूलत:॥ ३६॥

Getting together, when the aforesaid
ogres had re-entered Lanka, all the monkeys,
who were endowed with extraordinary might,
paid their homage to Hanuman too, who
was richly endowed with goodness, greatly
honoured all those monkeys in return through
friendly glances, words and_ gestures
according to their worth. (35-36)

विनेदुश्च यथाप्राणं हरयो जितकाशिन:।
चकृषुश्च पुनस्तत्र सप्राणानेव राक्षसान्॥ sll
