# YUDDHAKANDA #

ten shafts which had been shot forth from
his huge bow, Sri Rama, a scion of Raghu,
who was endowed with extraordinary energy,
did not flinch. (11)

ततो विव्याधं may सर्वेषु समितिंजय:।

राघवस्तु सुसंक्रुद्धो रावणं बहुभि: wt nee
Extremely enraged, Sri Rama (a scion

of Raghu), for his part, who ever won battles,

thereupon pierced Ravana in all his limbs
with numerous arrows. (12)

एतस्मिन्नन्तरे Gael राघवस्यानुजो बली।
लक्ष्मण: सायकान् सप्त जग्राह परवीरहा॥ १३॥
Provoked to anger, in the meantime
the mighty Laksmana, younger brother of
Sri Rama (a scion of Raghu), the destroyer
of hostile champions, seized hold of seven
arrows. (13)

a: सायकैर्महावेगै रावणस्य महाद्युति:।
ध्वजं मनुष्यशीर्षं तु तस्य चिच्छेद नैकधा॥१४॥

With those shafts, which were impelled
with great force, Laksmana, who was
endowed with extraordinary splendour, for
his part tore (to begin with) into a number of
pieces the standard of Ravana, which bore
the device of a man’s head. (14)

सारथेश्चापि बाणेन शिरो ज्वलितकुण्डलम्।

Wat लक्ष्मण: श्रीमान् नैर्ऋतस्य महाबल:॥ १५ ॥
With व _ single arrow the glorious

Laksmana, who ७5 endowed _ with

extraordinary might, also severed the head

of the ogre’s charioteer, which was adorned

with flaming earrings. (15)

तस्य बाणैश्च चिच्छेद धनुर्गजकरोपमम्।
लक्ष्मणो राक्षसेन्द्रस्य पञ्चभिर्निशितैस्तदा॥ १६॥
Nay, with five whetted shafts Laksmana
then split asunder the bow of that king of
ogres, which resembled the proboscis of an
elephant. (16)

नीलमेघनिभांश्चास्य सदश्वान् पर्वतोपमान्।
जघानाप्लुत्य गदया रावणस्य विभीषण:॥ १७॥

725

And bounding forward, Vibhisana struck
down with his mace Ravana’s excellent
horses which resembled a dark cloud in
hue and were tall as hills. (17)

हताश्वात् तु तदा वेगादवप्लुत्य महारथात्।
कोपमाहारयत् तीव्रं भ्रातरं प्रति रावण:॥ १८॥
Leaping down with all speed from his
huge chariot, whose horses had been killed,
Ravana for his part then exhibited a violent
rage against his youngest brother. (18)

ad: sikh महाशक्ति: प्रदीप्तामशनीमिव।
विभीषणाय fasta राक्षसेन्द्र: प्रतापवान्॥१९॥

Thereupon the powerful king of ogres,
who was endowed with extraordinary energy,
flung at Vibhisana a flaming javelin, which
resembled the thunderbolt. (19)

अप्राप्तामेव तां बाणैस्तिभिश्चिच्छेद लक्ष्मण:।
अथोदतिष्ठत् संनादो वानराणां महारणे॥ oll
With three shafts Laksmana, however,
tore it asunder even before it reached him.
A loud cheer forthwith rose among the
monkeys in that major conflict. (20)

सम्पपात त्रिधा छिन्ना शक्ति: काञ्चनमालिनी।
सविस्फुलिङ्गा ज्वलिता महोल्केव दिवश्च्युता।। २१॥

Split into three fragments, the javelin,
which was wreathed in gold, struck the
target like an enormous flaming meteor,
emitting sparks, fallen from the heavens.(21)
aa: सम्भाविततरां कालेनापि दुरासदाम्।
wore विपुलां शक्तिं दीप्यमानां स्वतेजसा॥ २२॥

Ravana thereupon seized hold of a big
javelin, which was highly renowned for its
infallibility, was difficult to approach even
for Death, and was shining with its own
splendour. (22)

सा atta बलवता रावणेन दुरात्मना।
जज्वाल सुमहातेजा दीप्ताशनिसमप्रभा॥ २३॥

Brandished with violence by the mighty
and evil-minded Ravana, that immensely
