92 « VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

call together Brahmanas advanced _ in
learning and address them as follows : “You
have heard about my past actions
responsible for this drought and are aware
of the practices of the world. (4—10)

समादिशन्तु नियमं wart यथा भवेत्।
इत्युक्तास्ते ततो राज्ञा सर्वे ब्राह्मणसत्तमा:॥११॥

‘Kindly enjoin a course of discipline by
undergoing which my sins may be atoned
for.’ All the aforesaid jewels among the
Brahmanas will be requested in these words
by the king, Romapada. (11)

वक्ष्यन्ति a महीपालं ब्राह्मणा वेदपारगा:।
विभाण्डकसुतं wr सर्वोपायैरिहानय॥१२॥
And the said Brahmanas, all masters
of the Vedas, will speak to the king as
follows : ‘Fetch here by all possible means
the sage Rsyasrnga, (son of Sage
Vibhandaka), O king ! (12)
आनाय्य तु महीपाल ऋष्यशृङ्गं सुसत्कृतम्।
विभाण्डकसुतं राजन् ब्राह्मणं वेदपारगम्।
प्रयच्छ कन्यां शान्तां वै विधिना सुसमाहित:॥ १३॥
“Causing Rsyasrnga, Vibhandaka’s son
a Brahmana well-versed in the Vedas, to be
brought with due reverence to your capital,
O ruler of the earth, give away to him in
marriage your daughter, Santa, according
to the scriptural ordinance with a devout
and unquestioning mind, O monarch !” (13)
तेषां तु वचनं श्रुत्वा राजा चिन्तां प्रपत्स्यते।
केनोपायेन वै शक्यमिहानेतुं स वीर्यवान्॥१४॥
Hearing their suggestion, however, the
king will fall a-musing as to by what means
that mighty sage can be brought to his
capital. (14)

ततो राजा विनिश्चित्य सह मन्तरिभिरात्मवान्।
पुरोहितममात्यांश्च प्रेषयिष्यति सत्कृतान्॥१५॥

Having arrived at a conclusion in
consultation with his counsellors, the prudent
king will then despatch his family priest and
ministers to bring with honour the young

hermit with them.
ते Ua वच: श्रुत्वा व्यथिता विनतानना:।
न गच्छेम ऋषेर्भीता अनुनेष्यन्ति तं नृपम्॥१६॥

They will, however, be distressed to
hear the king’s command, and with drooping
faces submit as follows: ‘We are not
prepared to go, afraid as we are of the Rsi
Vibhandaka, Rsyasrnga’s father, who was
sure to curse those who would try to lure
away the young hermit from his father’s
presence and will try to pacify the king (in
order to avert his displeasure at their
disobedience by assuring him that they would
think out some other means of luring away
the hermit and submit their proposals in that
connection later). (16)

वक्ष्यन्तिचिन्तयित्वा तेतस्योपायांश्च तान् क्षमान्।
आनेष्यामो वयं विप्रं न च दोषो भविष्यति॥ १७॥

Duly deliberating on the feasible
methods of luring away Rsyasrnga from his
father’s hermitage, they will suggest their
plan to the king and say, “We shall try to
fetch the youthful Brahmana to your capital
and we shall do so in such a way that no
blame will attach to us.” (17)

एवमङ्गाधिपेनैव गणिकाभिर्ऋषे: सुत:।
आनीतोऽवर्षयद् देव: शान्ता चास्मै प्रदीयते॥ १८॥

In this way (according to the suggestion
of the family priest and the ministers of
King Romapada) the Rsi’s son, Rsyasrnga,
will be caused by Romapada, the ruler of
the Anga territory, to be brought to his own
capital through courtesans, when the rain-
god will cause clouds to send down rain
and Santa (Dagaratha’s daughter adopted
by Romapada) will be given in marriage to
Rsyasrnga. (18)
ऋष्यशृङ्गस्तु जामाता पुत्रांस्तव विधास्यति।
सनत्कुमारकथितमेतावद् व्याहृतं मया॥१९॥

“And Rsyasrnga, your son-in-law, will
actually get sons for you by pouring oblations
into the sacred fire. This prophecy of the

(15)
