+ UTTARAKANDA +

तत: प्रव्यथिता: लोका: संजज्ञे च तमस्तत:।
wa रावणपुत्रस्य wade निघ्नत:॥१५॥

As a result of the conjuring tricks of
Meghanada (son of Ravana) who was busy
exterminating enemy battalions, darkness
then prevailed on all sides and the worlds,
including their inhabitants, felt greatly
distressed in consequence. (15)
ततस्तद् दैवतबलं समन्तात् तं शचीसुतम्।
बहुप्रकारमस्वस्थमभवच्छरपीडितम् ॥ १६ ॥

Afflicted by the arrows, the said army
of the gods, rallying round the celebrated
son of Saci felt ill at ease in many ways.

(16)
नाभ्यजानन्त चान्योन्यं Tat वा देवताथवा।
wa तत्र विपर्यस्तं समन्तात् परिधावत॥ eon

The belligerents could not distinguish
one from the other; be it an ogre or a god,
everyone was thrown into disorder on every
side, everyone ran helter-skelter. (17)

देवा sary निजघ्नुस्ते राक्षसान् राक्षसास्तथा।
सम्मूढास्तमसाच्छन्ना व्यद्रवन्नपरे तथा॥१८॥

Getting confounded, enveloped as they
were in darkness, the gods struck the gods
and the ogres struck the ogres, while others
took to their heels. (18)

एतस्मिन्नन्तरे वीर: पुलोमा नाम वीर्यवान्।
दैत्येन्द्रस्तेन संगृह्य शचीपुत्रोऽपवाहित:॥१९॥

In the meantime there appeared on the
battlefield a powerful hero, Puloma by name,
a ruler of the Daityas. Seizing hold of
Jayanta, he for his part bore him away from
the battle-field. (19)
संगृह्य तं तु दौहित्रं प्रविष्ट: सागरं तदा।
आर्यक: स fe तस्यासीत् पुलोमा येन सा शची ।। २० UI

Taking hold of his aforesaid daughter's
son, he for his part then dived into the
sea (in the depths of which he lived); for
Puloma, by whom (Jayanta’s mother) Saci
had been begotten, was Jayanta’s maternal
grandfather. (20)

941

ज्ञात्वा प्रणाशं तु तदा जयन्तस्याथ देवता:।
अप्रहृष्टास्तत: सर्वा व्यथिता: सम्प्रदुद्रुवु:॥ २१॥
Coming to know of  Jayanta’s
disappearance, on that occasion, the gods
for their part forthwith felt cheerless and,
stricken with affliction, all then took to their
heels. (21)

रावणिस्त्वथ संक्रुद्धो Tet: परिव्रृत: स्वकै:।

अभ्यधावत देवांस्तान् मुमोच च महास्वनम्॥ २२॥
Surrounded by his forces, the son of

Ravana full of rage, for his part forthwith

rushed on the aforesaid gods and raised a
loud cry. (22)

Feat प्रणाशं पुत्रस्य दैवतेषु च विद्रुतम्।
मातलिं चाह देवेशो Ta: समुपनीयताम्॥ २३॥
Nay, seeing the disappearance of his
son and the stampede among the gods, the
ruler of the gods said to his charioteer, Matali:
“Let my chariot be brought near.” (23)

स तु fect महाभीम: सज्ज Wa महारथ:।
उपस्थितो मातलिना वाह्यमानो महाजव:॥ २४॥

Being driven by Matali for its part, that
celestial, exceedingly formidable, and duly
equipped huge chariot, which moved very
fast, stood near. (24)

ततो Fat रथे तस्मिस्तडित्त्वन्तो महाबला:।
अग्रतो वायुचपला नेदु: परमनि:स्वना:॥ २५॥
Thereupon above that chariot and at its
head very powerful clouds riven by lightning
and set in motion by the wind thundered
with a great noise. (25)
नानावाद्यानि वाद्यन्त गन्धर्वाश्च समाहिता:।
ननृतुश्चाप्सर:सङ्घा निर्याते त्रिदशेश्वरे॥ २६॥
When the ruler of gods sallied forth,
Gandharvas (celestial musicians) played on
different kinds of musical instruments in a

chorus and bevies of celestial nymphs
danced. (26)

रुद्रैर्वसुभिरादित्यैरश्विभ्यां समरुद्गणै: ।
aa नानाप्रहरणैर्निर्ययौ त्रिदशाधिप:॥ २७॥
