970

वाली नाम महाप्राज्ञ शक्रपुत्र: प्रतापवान्।
अध्यास्ते वानर: श्रीमान् किष्किन्धामतुलप्रभाम्॥ २१॥

““A glorious and mighty monkey, Vali
by name, son of Indra (the ruler of gods),
dwells in Kiskindha, which is unequalled in
splendour, O highly intelligent demon ! (21)

a समर्थो महाप्राज्ञस्तव युद्धविशारद:।
wage स ad a नमुचेरिव वासव:॥२२॥
*॥ठ]]]] intelligent and skilled in warfare,
the aforesaid Vali is capable of giving battle
to you as Indra did to Namuci in the past.
(22)

तं शीघ्रमभिगच्छ त्वं यदि युद्धमिहेच्छसि।
a fe दुर्मर्षणो fret शूर: समरकर्मणि॥ २३॥
“Approach him quickly if you seek an
encounter with some rival on this earth; for

he does not easily brook opposition and is
ever valiant in warfare.” (23)

श्रुत्वा हिमवतो वाक्यं कोपाविष्ट: स दुन्दुभि: |
जगाम तां पुरीं तस्य किष्किन्धां वालिनस्तदा॥ २४॥
धारयन् माहिषं रूपं तीक्ष्णशृङ्गो भयावह:।
प्रावृषीव महामेघस्तोयपूर्णो नभस्तले॥ २५॥
“Seized with wrath to hear the words
of Himavan, nay, retaining the form of a
buffalo and looking like a huge cloud
surcharged with water in the vault of heavens
during the rains, the said Dundubhi, who
was endowed with pointed horns and inspired
terror, forthwith sought Kiskindha, the well-
known capital of the celebrated Vali. (24-25)

ततस्तु द्वारमागम्य किष्किन्धाया महाबल:।
we कम्पयन् भूमिं दुन्दुभिर्दुन्दुभिर्यथा॥ २६॥
समीपजान् ZAM भञ्जन् वसुधां दारयन् खुरै: |
विषाणेनोल्लिखन् दर्पात् तद्द्वारं द्विरदो यथा॥ २७॥

“Reaching the gate of Kiskindha,
Dundubhi for his part, who was possessed
of great might, thundered even as a large
kettledrum would when beaten, causing the
earth to shake, snapping the trees that had
taken root in the neighbourhood, nay, rending
the earth with its hoofs and arrogantly

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

damaging the gate of Kiskindha with its horns,
as an elephant would with its tusk. (26-27)

अन्त:पुरगतो वाली श्रुत्वा शब्दममर्षण:।
निष्पपात ae स्त्रीभिस्ताराभिरिव चन्द्रमा॥ २८॥

“Hearing the roar, Vali, who was in the
gynaeceum, and who was intolerant by
nature, rushed forth with his wives even as
the moon would appear in the horizon with
hosts of stars. (28)

fad व्यक्ताक्षरपदं तमुवाच a दुन्दुभिम्।
RTE वाली सर्वेषां वनचारिणाम्॥ २९॥

‘Vali, the ruler of monkeys as well as
of all the other denizens of the forest, spoke
to the aforesaid Dundubhi in the following
few words uttered with distinct accents :

(29)
feat नगरद्वारमिदं रुद्ध्वा विनर्दसे।
दुन्दुभे विदितो मेऽसि रक्ष WOT महाबल॥ ३०॥

“Why do you utter loud threats blocking
this gate of the city, O Dundubhi? You are
already known to me; (please) save your
life (if you can), O demon possessed of
extraordinary might !’ (30)

तस्य तद् वचनं श्रुत्वा वानरेन्द्रस्य धीमत:।
sara दुन्दुभिर्वाक्यं क्रोधात् संरक्तलोचन:॥ ३१॥
“Hearing the aforesaid challenge of the
wise Vali, the ruler of monkeys, Dundubhi
replied as follows, his eyes turned crimson
with anger : (31)
न त्वं स्त्रीसंनिधौ dv वचनं वक्तुमर्हसि।
मम युद्धं प्रयच्छाद्य ततो ज्ञास्यामि ते बलम्॥ ३२॥
“*You ought not to throw out a challenge
in the presence of ladies, O gallant monkey !

Give battle to me today, then only shall |
come to know your might. (32)

अथवा धारयिष्यामि क्रोधमद्य निशामिमाम्।
गृह्यतामुदय: स्वैरॆ कामभोगेषु STAT BB II

““Or, | shall restrain my anger today;
let your passion for the enjoyment of
sensuous pleasures be freely indulged in
for this night, O monkey ! (33)
