* BALAKANDA +

Nay, men richly adorned served food
to the Brahmanas, while others, decked
with earrings made of highly polished gems,
waited upon the former in their turn. (18)

कर्मान्तरे तदा faut हेतुवादान् बहूनपि।
we: सुवाग्मिनो धीरा: परस्परजिगीषया॥१९॥

During the interval between two
Savanas (act of pressing out the Soma
juice) on that occasion, intelligent and highly
eloquent Brahmanas put forward many
reasoned arguments with the intention of
getting the better of one another. (19)

दिवसे feat aa संस्तरे कुशला द्विजा:।
सर्वकर्माणि चक्रुस्ते यथाशास्त्रं प्रचोदिता:॥ २०॥
From day-to-day in that sacrifice the
aforesaid expert Brahmanas discharged all
the functions according to the scriptural
ordinance as directed by the elders. (20)

नाषडङ्गविदत्रासीन्नाव्रतो नाबहुश्रुत: ।
सदस्यस्तस्य A राज्ञो नावादकुशलो द्विज:॥ २१॥

No Brahmana holding the office of a
Sadasya (whose duties are merely to look on
and correct mistakes) in this sacrificial
performance of that monarch (King Dasaratha)
was not conversant with the six branches of
knowledge auxiliary to the Vedas (viz., 1-Siksa
or Phonetics, 2-Vyakarana or Grammar, 3-
Chandas or Prosody, 4-Nirukta or Etymology,
5-Jyautisa or Astronomy and 6-Kalpa or the
science which prescribes the ritual and gives
rules for ceremonial or sacrificial acts), did
not observe sacred vows and was not very
learned or not skilled in argument. (21)

प्राप्तेयूपोच्छ्ये तस्मिन्षड्बैल्वा: खादिरास्तथा।
तावन्तो बिल्वसहिता: पर्णिनश्च तथा परे॥ २२॥

When the time arrived for erecting the
sacrificial pillars, there came to be set up in
that sacrifice six pillars of Bilva wood, an
equal number of Khadira, each by the side
of a Bilva one, and six more of Palasa. (22)

शलेष्मातकमयो दिष्टो देवदारुमयस्तथा।
द्वावेव तत्र विहितौ बाहुव्यस्तपरिग्रहौ॥ २३॥

107

One pillar of Slesmataka is
recommended and so are recommended
pillars of deodar (the Himalayan cedar).
Two only of such pillars of deodar are
recommended in the aforesaid sacrifice viz.,
Aswamedha and they should stand at a
distance of six feet from one another. (23)
कारिता: ad wad शास्त्रज्ञैर्यज्ञकोविदै:।
शोभार्थं तस्य यज्ञस्य काञ्चनालंकृता भवन्॥ २४॥

All these had been got ready
beforehand under the directions of those
well-versed in the scriptures and proficient
in the sacrificial technique and had been
plated with gold for gracing the sacrifice.

(24)
एकविंशतियूपास्ते एकविंशत्यरत्नय: |
वासोभिरेकविंशद्भिरेकैक समलंकृता:॥ २५॥

Those twenty-one pillars were twenty-
one spans high and had been duly adorned
(covered) with as many pieces of cloth,
each with one. (25)

विन्यस्ता विधिवत् सर्वे शिल्पिभि: सुकृता दृढा: ।
eT: सर्व Wa श्लक्ष्णरूपसमन्विता:॥ २६॥
Having been beautifully shaped by
carpenters, they were all strong and had
been fixed according to the scriptural
ordinance. Nay, they were all octangular
and had been provided with a smooth
surface. (26)

आच्छादितास्ते वासोभि: पुष्पैर्गन्धैश्च पूजिता:।
सप्तर्षयो दीप्तिमन्तो विराजन्ते यथा दिवि॥ een

Covered with pieces of cloth and
worshipped with flowers and sandal-pastes,
they shone bright as the constellation known
by the name of the Great Bear, presided
over by the seven Rsis, in the heavens.

(27)

इष्टकाश्च यथान्यायं कारिताश्च प्रमाणत:।
चितोऽग्निब्राह्मणैस्तत्र कुशलै: शिल्पकर्मणि॥ २८ ॥

The bricks had been made according
to the measurements given in the scriptures
