« Procedure of reading the full Valmiki-Ramayana in nine days « 15

while He was taking three strides (to measure all the three worlds). Let (all) the seasons,
the (four) oceans (supposed to encircle the earth), (all) the (seven) Dwipas (principal
divisions of the earth), (the deities presiding over) the (four) Vedas and the (three) Lokas
as well as the (four) quarters scatter blessings on You on all occasions, O mighty-armed
Sri Rama! Whatever | do with my body, tongue, mind or senses, reason or intellect or by
force of my inherited nature, | consecrate all as an offering to the supreme Lord
Narayana.”

The way in which Nyasas should be gone through before commencing the reading
of individual Kandas from different interested motive is given below for each Kanda
separately*:

VINIYOGA OF THE BALAKANDA

So अस्य श्रीबालकाण्डमहामन्त्रस्य ऋष्यशृङ्ग ऋषि: | अनुष्टुप् छन्द: | दाशरथि: परमात्मा देवता। रां बीजम्।
AA: शक्ति: । रामायेति कीलकम्। श्रीरामप्रीत्यर्थे बालकाण्डपारायणे विनियोग: |

RSYADINYASA

ॐ ऋष्यशृङ्गऋषये नम: शिरसि। ॐ अनुष्टप्छन्दसे नम: मुखे। ॐ दाशरथिपरमात्मदेवतायै नम: eel
ॐ रां बीजाय नम: गुह्ये। ॐ नम: VHA AA: पादयो:। So रामाय कीलकाय नम: Tals |

* The Brhaddharma-Purana specifies as follows the purposes for which a reading of the various Kandas
should be undertaken separately:

srg edetemedterrd डता: ।
आदिकाण्डं पठेयुर्ये ते मुच्यन्ते ततो भयात्॥
पुन्नजन्म ववाहादे Tea एव a

पठेच्च श्रृणुयाच्चैव द्वितीयं काण्डपुत्तमम ॥
yeah काण्डं शृणुयाद् वा स मङ्गलो ॥
मित्रलाभे तथा नष्टद्रव्यस्य च गवेषणे।
go पठित्वा कैष्किन्ध्यं काण्डं तत्तत् फलं लभेत्॥
श्राद्धेषु देवकार्येषु Ted सुन्दरकाण्डकम्।
शत्रोर्जये समुत्साहे जनवादे विगर्हिते॥
लङ्काक्राण्ड पठेत् fe वा TI स सुखी wad

मोक्षार्थी लभते मोक्षं भक्त्यर्थी भक्तिमेव च।

ज्ञानार्थी लभते ज्ञानं ब्रह्मतत्त्वोपलम्भकम्॥

“Those who, when hit hard by drought, acute pain or the evil influence of planets, read the Balakanda

are rid of such fear. On the occasion of the birth of a son, a wedding etc., or at the sight of one’s preceptor
one should read or listen to the excellent Ayodhyakanda (Book Two). A man who reads or listens to the
Aranya-kanda when hit by fire or water while living in a forest (as an anchorite or as an exile) or when
summoned to a king’s court (or a court of justice) becomes happy. Listening to or reading the Kiskindhakanda
for securing a friend or in the course of a search for lost property, the hearer or reader attains his object.
One should read the Sundarakanda in the course of a Sraddha (a ceremony performed in honour of the
departed spirit of a deceased relative on his or her death anniversary and on other occasions) or in the course
of rites intended to propitiate a deity or deities. He who reads or listens to the Lankakanda (Yuddhakanda)
for the subjugation of an enemy, in the course of a war-effort and in the event of an abominable scandal
becomes happy. He who reads or even listens to the Uttarakanda, (the book dealing with the events
following Sri Rama’s success in Lanka) during an act of rejoicing or before a journey or expedition attains
victory here as well as hereafter. Nay, a seeker of Moksa (Liberation) attains Liberation, a seeker of Devotion
secures even Devotion, a seeker of Wisdom attains Wisdom that enables one to realize the truth about
Brahma (the Absolute).” (Brhaddharma-Purana, Purva-Khanda xxvi. 9—15)
