1058

शिलाश्च शकलीकुर्वन् पद्भ्यां गज SAT: |
दूरमेकपदं त्यक्त्वा ययौ कार्यवशाद् ALI Le il

Nay, crushing the rocks under his feet
like च swift-going elephant, he moved
speedily, taking long strides due to exigency
of the moment. (15)

तामपश्यद् बलाकीर्णां हरिराजमहापुरीम्।
दुर्गामिक्ष्वाकुशार्दूल: किष्किन्धां गिरिसंकटे i १६॥

Laksmana, a tiger among the Ikswakus,
beheld Kiskindha, the famous capital of the
king of monkeys, situated in the midst of
mountains and surrounded by an army of
monkeys and, therefore, difficult of access.

(16)

रोषात् प्रस्फुरमाणोष्ठ: सुग्रीवं प्रति लक्ष्मण:।
ददर्शवानरान् भीमान् किष्किन्धायां बहिश्चरान्॥ १७॥
Laksmana, whose lips were trembling
through anger directed against Sugriva,
saw fearful monkeys roaming outside in
Kiskindha. (17)
तं geal वानरा: Wa लक्ष्मणं पुरुषर्षभम्।
शैलशृङ्गाणि शतश: प्रवृद्धांश्च महीरुहान्।
WE: कुञ्जरप्रख्या वानरा: पर्वतान्तरे॥१८॥
Seeing the celebrated Laksmana, a
jewel among men, all the monkeys, who
looked like elephants and behaved like men,
snatched mountain-peaks in hundreds as

well as fully grown up trees in the midst of
mountains. (18)

तान् गृहीतप्रहरणान् सर्वान् दृष्ट्वा तु लक्ष्मण: |
aya द्विगुणं क्रुद्धो बह्लिन्धन इवानल:॥१९॥

Laksmana for his part got doubly
enraged to see them all, weapons in hand,
as a fire would flare up when fed with
abundant firewood. (19)

तं ते भयपरीताङ्मा क्षुब्धं दृष्टवा प्लवंगमा:।
कालमृत्युयुगान्ताभं शतशो विद्रुता दिश:॥ २०॥
Seeing him agitated like the all-devouring

Time-Spirit, the god of death and the fire of
universal destruction, the monkeys fled in

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

their hundreds in all directions, their limbs
overpowered through fear. (20)

ad: सुग्रीवभवनं प्रविश्य हरिपुंगवा:।
क्रोधमागमनं चैव लक्ष्मणस्य न्यवेदयन्॥ २१॥

Duly entering the palace of Sugriva,
the leaders of monkeys then apprised him
of Laksmana’s arrival and wrath. (21)

तारया सहित: कामी सक्त: कपिव्रषस्तदा।
न तेषां कपिसिंहानां शुश्राव वचनं तदा॥ २२॥

Sugriva (the foremost of monkeys),
who was accompanied by Tara at that
moment, and who was full of longing for
women and deeply attached to the pleasure
of sense, did not instantly heed the words
of those lions among monkeys. (22)

wa: सचिवसंदिष्टा erat रोमहर्षणा:।
गिरिकुञ्जरमेघाभा नगरान्निर्ययुस्तदा It २३ ॥

As commanded by the _ ministers,
the monkeys, who looked like mountains,
elephants and clouds in size and made the
hair of those who looked on them stand on
end, thereupon issued out of the city at
once. (23)

नखदंष्ट्रायुधा: aa वीरा विकृतदर्शना:।
सर्वे शार्दूलदंष्ट्रश्च सर्वे विव्रृतदर्शना:॥ २४॥
Having nails and sharp teeth for their
weapons, they were all heroic and terrible
to look at. The teeth of them all were like
those of a tiger and they could be clearly
seen, standing as they were in the open.
(24)
दशनागबला: केचित् केचिद् दशगुणोत्तरा:।
केचिन्नागसहस्रस्य बभूवुस्तुल्यवर्चस: ॥ २५॥
Some of them possessed the strength
of ten elephants, others were ten times

stronger, while still others were equal in
energy to ten thousand elephants. (25)

aded: «cpfafieatat द्रुमहस्तैर्महाबलै: |
अपश्यल्लक्ष्मण: Hag: किष्किन्धां तां दुरासदाम्॥ VE Il

Full of wrath, Laksmana thereupon cast
