# YUDDHAKANDA #

The wind blew adversely with a
thunder-like roar. And shrouded, as they
were, with a mass of darkness, the
quarters could not be discerned. (34)

स तूत्पातांस्ततो दृष्ट्वा राक्षसानां भयावहान्।
प्रादुर्भूतान् सुघोरांश्च धूम्राक्षो व्यथितोऽभवत्।
मुमुहू राक्षसा: सर्वे धूम्राक्षस्य पुर:सरा:॥ ३५॥
Dhumraksa for his part felt perturbed
at that time to behold most terrible portents,
boding danger to the ogres, which had
come to light before him. Nay, all the ogres
marching in front of Dnumraksa fainted. (35)

481

aa: सुभीमो बहुभिर्निशाचरै-
र्वृतोऽभिनिष्क्रम्य रणोत्सुको बली।
ता राघवबाहुपालितां
महौघकल्पां ag वानरीं चमूम्॥ ३६॥
Sallying forth in front of his adversaries
accompanied as he was by numerous ogres,
the mighty and most redoubtable general,
who was eager for a fight, beheld that army
consisting of innumerable monkeys, nay,
looking like the ocean at the time of universal
dissolution and protected by the arms of Sri
Rama (a scion of Raghu). (36)

ददर्श

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये युद्धकाण्डे एकपञ्चाश: AA: ॥ ५१ ॥
Thus ends Canto Fifty-one in the Yuddhakanda of the glorious Ramayana of
Valmiki, the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

Canto LII
Dhumraksa fights and is killed by Hanuman

धूम्राक्षं Dea Prati werd भीमविक्रमम्।
विनेदुर्वानरा: सर्वे प्रहृष्टा युद्धकाङ्क्षिण:॥ १॥
Highly rejoiced, all the monkeys, who
were itching for a combat, emitted loud
cries on perceiving the ogre general,
Dhumraksa of terrible prowess, sallying
forth. (1)
अन्योन्यं पादपैर्घोरैर्निघ्नतां शूलमुद्गरै:॥२॥
An exceedingly tumultuous conflict
raged between those monkeys and the ogres,
striking the other with formidable trees on
one hand and pikes and clubs on the other.
(2)

राक्षसैर्वानरा घोरा विनिकृत्ता: समन्तत:।
art राक्षसाश्चापि द्रुमैर्भूमिसमीकृता:॥ ३॥

The redoubtable monkeys’ were
mowed down on all sides by the ogres and
the ogres too were levelled to the ground
by means of trees by the monkeys. (3)
राक्षसास्त्वभिसंक्रुद्धा वानरान् निशितै: शरै:।
विव्यधुर्घोरसंकाशै: कङ्कपत्रैरजिह्यगै: ।। ४॥

Highly enraged, the ogres for their
part transfixed the monkeys with pointed
arrows which were fearful to behold, were

furnished with the plumes of a buzzard
and flew straight to the target. (4)

a गदाभिश्च भीमाभि: पदट्टिशै: कूटमुद्गरै:।
ats परिघैश्चित्रैस्त्रिशूलैश्चापि संथश्रितै:॥। ५॥

विदार्यमाणा रक्षोभिर्वानरास्ते महाबला:।
अमर्षजनितोद्धर्षांश्चक्रु: कर्माण्यभीतवत्॥ ६ I
Full of martial ardour born of

indignation while being split asunder by the
