* SUNDARAKANDA +

ब्रूहि Aq Weal वाच्यो लक्ष्मणश्च महाबल:।
सुग्रीवो aft तेजस्वी हरयो वा समागता:॥७५२॥
“Now, please communicate what

message is to be delivered by me on your
behalf to Sri Rama (a scion of Raghu) as
well as to Laksmana, who is endowed with
extraordinary might, or even to Sugriva,
who is full of energy, or to the monkeys
assembled at Kiskindha.” (52)

इत्युक्तवति तस्मिंश्च सीता पुनरथाब्रवीत्।
कौसल्या लोकभर्तारं सुषुवे यं मनस्विनी॥५३॥
तं ममार्थे सुखं पृच्छ शिरसा चाभिवादय।
wag सर्वरत्नानि प्रियायाश्च वराङ्गना:॥५४॥
ऐश्वर्यं च विशालायां पृथिव्यामपि दुर्लभम्।
fart मातरं चैव सम्मान्याभिप्रसाद्य TANGY I
अनुप्रव्रजितो wt सुमित्रा येन सुप्रजा:।
आनुकूल्येन धर्मात्मा त्यक्त्वा सुखमनुत्तमम्॥ ५६॥
अनुगच्छति काकुत्स्थं भ्रातरं पालयन् वने।
सिंहस्कन्धो महाबाहुर्मनस्वी प्रियदर्शन:॥७५७॥
fagaq add रामे मातृवन्मां समाचरत्।
ह्रियमाणां तदा वीरो न तु Al वेद लक्ष्मण:॥ ७५८ II
वृद्धोपसेवी लक्ष्मीवान् शक्तो न बहुभाषिता।
राजपुत्रप्रियश्रेष्ठद Ag: श्वशुरस्य मे॥५९॥
मत्त: प्रियतरो नित्यं भ्राता रामस्य लक्ष्मण:।
नियुक्तो aft यस्यां तु तामुद्बवहति वीर्यवान्॥६०॥
a दृष्ट्वा राघवो Aa वृत्तमार्यमनुस्मरत्।
स ममार्थाय कुशलं वक्तव्यो वचनान्मम॥६१॥

Hanuman having spoken as aforesaid,
Sita too further spoke forthwith as follows:
“Make on my behalf inquiries concerning
the welfare of that protector of the world
whom the high-minded Kausalya brought
forth, and greet Sri Rama with your head
bent low. Inquiries concerning welfare should
be addressed on my behalf and in my name
to Laksmana, that heroic and powerful
younger brother of Sri Rama, who, having
renounced garlands and all kinds of jewels
as well as women, who were agreeable and
excellent, nay, a dominion which was hard
to attain on this vast globe, and even in
heaven, as also unsurpassed felicity, and

181

having offered profound respects to and
pacified his father and mother, followed Sri
Rama in the latter’s exile, nay, because of
whom Sumitra has earned the title of a
blessed mother, nay, whose mind is given
to piety, who follows his eldest brother, Sri
Rama (a scion of Kakutstha) with devotion
in the forest watching over him as a
bodyguard, who has shoulders broad like
those of a lion, is mighty-armed, steady-
minded, and pleasing to look upon, who
behaves towards Sri Rama as towards his
father and treated me as his own mother,
who did not know at all of my being borne
away at the time of the occurrence, who
serves his elders, is glorious and energetic,
yet measured in speech, who is the foremost
of those beloved of that prince, Sri Rama,
and a replica in gallantry of my father-in-law,
King Dagaratha, who is ever dearer to Sri
Rama more than | and who willingly and
efficiently shoulders the responsibility with
which he is saddled and on seeing whom
Sri Rama, a scion of Raghu, ceases to
remember his deceased father. (53—61)

मृदुर्नित्यं शुचिर्दक्ष: प्रियो रामस्य लक्ष्मण:।

यथा fe वानरश्रेष्ठ दु:खक्षयकरो भवेत्॥६२॥
“Nay, the inquiry should be addressed

to him in such a way that Laksmana, an

ever mild, pure and clever darling of Sri

Rama, O jewel among monkeys, may bring

my woes to an end. (62)

त्वमस्मिन् कार्यनिर्वाहे wart हरियूथप।
राघवस्त्वत्समारम्भान्मयि यत्नपरो भवेत्॥६३॥

“You are upto the accomplishment of
this task, O leader of monkey hordes! By
your effort alone can Sri Rama, a scion of
Raghu, be active on my behalf. (63)

इदं ब्रूयाश्च A नाथं शूरं रामं पुन: पुन:।
जीवितं धारयिष्यामि मासं दशरथात्मज॥६४॥
“Also please submit again and again to
my lord, the valiant Sri Rama, as follows : ‘I
am going to survive only a month, O son of
DaSaratha ! (64)
