+ UTTARAKANDA +

रामस्य भाषितं श्रुत्वा ऋक्षवानरराक्षसा:।
साधुसाध्विति काकुत्स्थं प्रशशंसु: पुन: पुन:॥१३॥
Hearing the speech of Sri Rama, the
bears, monkeys and ogres_ repeatedly
applauded Sri Rama (a scion of Kakutstha),
saying: “Well said! Excellent!! (13)

wa बुद्धिर्महाबाहो वीर्यमद्भुतमेव al
माधुर्यं We wa स्वयम्भोरिव नित्यदा॥१४॥

“Wonderful is Your wisdom, O mighty-
armed one, and your prowess too. Your
supreme geniality too, O Rama, ever vies
with that of Brahma (the self-born).” (14)
तेषामेवं ब्रुवाणानां वानराणां च रक्षसाम्।
हनूमान् प्रणतो भूत्वा राघवं वाक्यमब्रवीत्॥ १५ Il

Remaining inclined while the monkeys
and ogres were speaking as aforesaid,
Hanuman submitted as follows to Sri Rama:

(15)
स्नेहो A परमो राजंस्त्वयि तिष्ठतु नित्यदा।
भक्तिश्च Peat वीर भावो नान्यत्र गच्छतु॥ १६॥

“May my supreme affection for You
stand forever, O Lord! May my devotion be
constant to You, O valiant prince! Let not
my love be diverted to anyone else. (16)
यावद् रामकथा att चरिष्यति महीतले।
तावच्छरीरे वत्स्यन्तु WOT मम न संशय:॥ १७॥

“May life continue in my body without
doubt so long as Your story remains current
on the surface of the earth, O heroic Sri
Rama! (17)
यच्चैतच्चरितं feat mar a रघुनन्दन।
तन्ममाप्सरसो राम श्रावयेयुर्नरर्षभ॥१८॥

“Let the celestial nymphs, O Rama,
recount to me in musical notes, O jewel
among the human beings, that which passes
as Your divine life exploits, Your story, O
delight of the Raghus! (18)
तच्छृत्वाहं ततो at da चर्यामृतं प्रभो।
senvet a हरिष्यामि मेघलेखामिवानिल:॥ १९॥

“Imbibing with my ears the nectar in

989

the form of Your lifestory, My heroic lord, |
shall thereby be able to allay my longing for
Your sight even as the wind disperses a
line of clouds.” (19)
W Fat WAIT हनूमन्तं वरासनात्।
उत्थाय सस्वजे स्नेहाद् वाक्यमेतदुवाच ह॥ Ro Il
Rising from his excellent seat, Sri Rama
hugged with affection Hanuman while he
was submitting as above, and made the
following reply: so the tradition goes: (20)

`एवमेतत् कपिश्रेष्ठं भविता नात्र संशय:।
चरिष्यति कथा यावदेषा लोके च मामिका॥ २१॥
aad ते भविता कोर्ति: शरीरेऽप्यसवस्तथा।
लोका fe यावत्स्थास्यन्ति तावत् स्थास्यन्ति मे HAT: WAU

“So shall it be, O prince of monkeys;
there is no doubt about it. Your fame will
endure and life too will continue in your
body so long as this story of Mine will
remain current in the world. Nay, My stories
will surely abide so long as the worlds will
last. (21-22)

`एकैकस्योपकारस्य प्राणान् दास्यामि ते कपे।
शेषस्येहोपकाराणां भवाम ऋणिनो वयम्॥ २३॥

“| would give up My life for every single
service rendered by you here and we shall
remain in debt to you for the rest of your
services, O monkey! (23)
नर: प्रत्युपकाराणामापत्स्वायाति पात्रताम्॥ २४॥

“Let My obligation to you stand in My
heart forever, O monkey! (Let there be no
occasion for Me to repay your services); for
one deserves to be requited for services
rendered only when one is in straits.” (24)

ततोऽस्य हारं चन्द्राभं मुच्य कण्ठात् स Waa: |
वैदूर्यतरलं कण्ठे बबन्धं च हनूमत:॥ २५॥

Taking off from his neck a string of
pearls, shining as the moon, with a cat’s-
eye gem in the centre, the celebrated Sri
Rama (a scion of Raghu) then fastened it
about the neck of the said Hanuman. (25)
