# YUDDHAKANDA #

most formidable bondage wrought with
arrows. (9)

संत्रस्तहृदया: Ad प्राकारादवरुह्य a
विवर्णा राक्षसा घोरा राक्षसेन्द्रमुपस्थिता:॥ १०॥
Descending from the defensive wall,
all those fierce ogres, who looked pale,
greatly frightened as they were at heart,

approached Ravana, the ruler of ogres.
(10)

तदप्रियं दीनमुखा रावणस्य च राक्षसा:।
कृत्स्नं निवेदयामासुर्यथावद् वाक्यकोविदा: ।। ११॥

Nay, with downcast mien the ogres,
who were skilled in speech, faithfully
communicated to Ravana the whole
unpleasant tidings in the following words:(1 1)

यौ ताविन्द्रजिता युद्धे भ्रातरौ रामलक्ष्मणौ।
निबद्धौ शरबन्धेन निष्प्रकम्पभुजौ कृतौ॥१२॥
विमुक्तौ शरबन्धेन gaa dt रणाजिरे।
पाशानिव गजौ छित्त्वा गजेन्द्रसमविक्रमौ i १३॥

“Those two celebrated brothers, Rama
and Laksmana, who are powerful like two
lordly elephants, nay, who had been tightly
bound by Indrajit with bonds of arrows and
whose arms had been pinioned (i.e.
unshakeable), are seen on the field of battle,
freed from their bonds of arrows like a pair
of elephants that have snapped their fetters.”

(12-13)
तच्छुत्वा वचनं तेषां राक्षसेन्द्रो महाबल:।
चिन्ताशोकसमाक्रान्तो विवर्णवदनोऽभवत्॥ १४॥

Hearing the aforesaid report of those
ogres, Ravana (the lord of ogres), who was
endowed with extraordinary might, lost the
colour of his face, overwhelmed as he was
with anxiety and grief. (14)
चोरैर्दत्तवरैर्बद्धौ शरैराशीविषोपमै: |
अमोघै: सूर्यसंकाशै: प्रमथ्येन्द्रजिता युधि॥ १५॥
तदस्त्रबन्धमासाद्य ae ant fo मम।
संशयस्थमिदं सर्वमनुपश्याम्यहुं बलम्॥१६॥

479

He said to himself: “If my adversaries
(Rama and Laksmana)—who had been
tightly bound in combat by Indrajit with
formidable and infallible arrows, which had
been conferred on him as boons, which
resembled serpents and shone brightly like
the sun—have been liberated even on
getting bound with missiles, | perceive my
entire army in jeopardy. (15-16)
निष्फला: खलु संव्रत्ता: शरा: पावकतेजस:।
आदत्तं यैस्तु संग्रामे Root जीवितं aru eon

“My darts, bright as fire, by which the
life of my adversaries was unmistakably

taken away in combat, have surely turned
infructuous.” (17)

एवमुक्त्वा तु संक्रुद्धो नि:श्चसन्नुरगो यथा।
अब्रवीद् रक्षसां Weal धूम्राक्षं ATT राक्षसम्॥ १८॥
Having spoken as aforesaid to himself
and hissing like a serpent, infuriated as
he was, Ravana commanded the ogre,
Dhumraksa by name, in the midst of other
ogres as follows : (18)

बलेन महता युक्तो रक्षसां भीमविक्रम।

त्वं वधायाशु निर्याहि रामस्य सह वानरै:।॥ १९॥
“Sally you forth at once with a huge

army of ogres for the destruction of Rama

with the monkeys, O ogre of redoubtable
prowess |” (19)

एवमुक्तस्तु धूम्राक्षो राक्षसेन्द्रेण धीमता।
परिक्रम्य dd: vit निर्जगाम नृपालयात्॥ Zo Il

Walking round him when commanded
as above by the crafty Ravana (the ruler of
ogres), Dhumraksa for his part sallied forth
without delay from that palace. (20)
अभिनिष्क्रम्य aq et बलाध्यक्षमुवाच ह।
त्वरयस्व बलं शीघ्रं किं चिरेण युयुत्सत:॥ २१॥

Issuing from the gate of that palace, he
spoke as follows to the Commander-in-Chief
of the army: “Mobilize the army speedily;
what need is there for delay to a man
courting war?” (21)
