616

consisting of four rooms, as well as stables
for elephants and horses and charming
citygates with mansions and palaces. (32)

सितमेघनिभं aft wast सुतोरणम्।
शुक्लमाल्यकृताकारं दिव्यगन्धसमुक्षितम्॥ 33 u
There also stood a royal palace, looking
like a white cloud and provided with a lovely
arched doorway, nay, decorated with white
garlands and sprinkled with exquisite scents.
(33)

aqreraraet शयनासनयानवत् |
feat: सर्वरसैर्युक्तं दिव्यभोजनवस्त्रवत्॥३४॥
It was quadrilateral in shape,
commodious, furnished with couches, seats
and palanquins, supplied with all delicious
drinks and provided with excellent food and
clothing. (34)

Victuals of every description had been
kept ready there as well as cleaned vessels
free from dirt. All kinds of seats had been
arranged at proper places and the palace
looked charming with superb couches duly
covered with counterpanes. (35)

प्रविवेश महाबाहुरनुज्ञातो महर्षिणा।

वेश्म ae रत्नसम्पूर्णं भरत: कैकयीसुत:॥ ३६॥
Permitted by the eminent sage,

Bharadwaja, Prince Bharata, son of Kaikeyi,

who was distinguished by unusually long

arms, duly entered that palace richly stocked

with precious stones. (36)

अनुजग्मुश्च ते ad मन्त्रिण: सपुरोहिता:।
बभूवुश्च मुदा युक्तास्तं GET वेश्मसंविधिम्॥ ३७॥
All the aforesaid — counsellors
accompanied by family-priests also followed
suit and were filled with delight to see that
excellent get-up of houses. (37)
wa राजासनं fet व्यजनं छत्रमेव ai
भरतो Abate: सार्धमभ्यवर्तत राजवत्॥ ३८॥

Alongwith the counsellors Bharata went

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

clockwise round the excellent royal throne
as well as round the whisk made from the
tail of a yak and the royal umbrella kept
there, as if round a sovereign. (38)

आसनं पूजयामास रामायाभिप्रणम्य च।
वालव्यजनमादाय न्यषीदत् सचिवासने॥ ३९॥

Bowing down low to Sri Rama as though
the latter were seated on it, he paid homage
to the throne itself and, taking the whisk, sat
down on the seat meant for the chief minister.

(39)
sree सर्वे मन्तिपुरोहिता:।

Ad: सेनापति: पश्चात् प्रशास्ता च AIST It ४०॥
All the counsellors and family-priests
too sat down in order of precedence. Then
sat down the generalissimo and afterwards
the officer-in-charge of the encampment.
(40)
ततस्तत्र मुहूर्तेन नद्य: पायसकर्दमा:।
उपातिष्ठन्त भरतं भरद्वाजस्य शासनात्॥४१॥
Then after a short while streams having
milk thickened with rice, in place of mud,
flowed past Bharata on that site at the
command of Bharadwaja. (41)

आसामुभयत:कूलं पाण्डुमृत्तिकलेपना:।
रम्याश्चावसथा दिव्या ब्राह्मणस्य प्रसादजा:॥४२॥
On both the banks of these streams
rose excellent and lovely houses plastered
with lime and brought into being by the
grace of the Brahmana sage, Bharadwaja.
(42)

wa च मुहूर्तेन दिव्याभरणभूषिता:।
आगुर्विंशतिसाहस्रा: ब्रह्मणा प्रहिता: स्रिय:।॥ ४३॥

Nay, during that very hour arrived there
twenty thousand women adorned with
excellent jewels and sent by Brahma, the
creator. (43)

सुवर्णमणिमुक्तेन प्रवालेन च शोभिता:।
आगुर्विंशतिसाहस्रा: कुबेरप्रहिता: fea: usu
याभिर्गृहीत: पुरुष: सोन्माद इव लक्ष्यते।
आगुर्विंशतिसाहस्रा नन्दनादप्सरोगणा:॥४५॥
