600

is endowed with excellences of various
kinds such as devotion and obedience to his
eldest brother, and was keeping vigil for the
safety of his eldest brother and his beloved
consort, wielding an excellent bow and
arrows : (2)

sa तात Ga शय्या त्वदर्थमुपकल्पिता।
प्रत्याश्चसिहि शेष्वास्यां qa राघवनन्दन॥ ३॥
“Here is a cosy bed prepared for you,
O dear brother! Be reassured about the
safety of Sri Rama and Sita and repose on
it with ease, O delight of Raghu’s race ! (3)
उचितोऽयं जन: Gat दु:खानां त्वं सुखोचित:।
धर्मात्मंस्तस्य गुप्त्यर्थं जागरिष्यामहे वयम्॥४॥
“All of us, your servants, are used to
hardships, while you are deserving of ease.
As for Sri Rama, we shall keep awake for
his safety, O pious-minded prince ! (4)
नहि war प्रियतरो ममास्ति भुवि कश्चन।
मोत्सुको भूर्व्रवीम्येतदथ सत्यं तवाग्रत:॥५॥

“Surely none on earth is dearer to me
than Sri Rama. No longer be anxious about
the safety of your eldest brother and sister-
in-law: | tell you this truth in your presence.

(5)
अस्य प्रसादादाशंसे लोकेऽस्मिन् सुमहद्यश:।
धर्मावाप्तिं च विपुलामर्थकामौ च केवलौ॥६॥

“Through his grace | hope to acquire
very great renown in this world and to earn
religious merit in abundance as well as
wealth and enjoyment free from blemish. (6)
aise प्रियसखं we शयानं we सीतया।
रक्षिष्यामि धनुष्पाणि: ad: स्वैर्जातिभि: सह॥ i

“As such | shall guard, bow in hand,
with all my kinsmen, my beloved friend, Sri
Rama, reposing with Sita. (7)
नहि मेऽविदितं किंचिद् वनेऽस्मिश्चरत: सदा।
चतुरङ्गं ह्यपि act wan ad afc

“Surely there is nothing unknown in
this forest to me, who constantly roam about

in it. In fact, we can withstand here even
an army consisting of all the four limbs on

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

the field of battle.

एवमस्माभिरुक्तेन लक्ष्मणेन महात्मना।

अनुनीता ad ad धर्ममेवानुपश्यता॥९॥
“Spoken to by us as_ aforesaid,

the high-souled Laksmana, who kept

righteousness alone in view, politely replied
to us all in the following words : (9)

कथं दाशरथौ भूमौ wart सह सीतया।
शक्या निद्रा मया लब्धुं जीवितानि सुखानि वा It १० ॥
* 10७ can sleep be had, or even life
or comforts be enjoyed by me when Sri
Rama, son of Dasaratha, is reposing on the
ground with Sita? (10)

यो न carat: wd: waa: प्रसहितुं युधि।

तं पश्य we संविष्टं तृणेषु ae सीतया॥११॥
“Behold, O Guha, stretched on blades

of grass with Sita, he who cannot be withstood

on the field of battle by all the gods and

demons gathered together ! (11)

महता तपसा लब्धो विविधैश्च after: |
Wat दशरथस्यैष UA: सदृशलक्षण:॥१२॥

“‘This peerless son of DaSaratha,
possessing characteristics like unto his own,
was secured by virtue of great austerities
and through exertions in the shape of sacrificial
undertakings of various kinds. (12)

अस्मिन् प्रव्राजिते राजा न fat वर्तयिष्यति।
विधवा मेदिनी नूनं क्षिप्रमेव भविष्यति॥१३॥

* 1182 having been exiled, the king will
not survive long and Mother Earth will surely
be widowed soon enough. (13)

fatal सुमहानादं श्रमेणोपरता: स्निय:।
निर्घोषो विरतो नूनमद्य राजनिवेशने॥१४॥

“* २३`, having uttered a very loud cry
consequent on the emperor’ death, which
must already have occurred, the women
must have ceased crying because of
exertion; and the great noise in the palace
must have surely died out by this time. (14)

कौसल्या da राजा च ada जननी मम।
नाशंसे यदि ते सर्वे जीवेयु: शार्वरीमिमाम्॥१५॥

(8)
