782

of good speech, nay, adorned with the quality
of mellifluity and dictated by an intellect
which is characterized by the well-known
eight excellences.* (26)

शलाघनीयोऽनिलस्य त्वं सुत: परमधार्मिक:।
बलं शौर्यं श्रुतं सत्त्वं विक्रमो दाक्ष्यमुत्तमम्॥ २७॥
Ud चान्ये च बहवो गुणास्त्वय्येव शोभना:॥ २८ ॥

“You are a praiseworthy and supremely
pious son of the wind-god. Nay, physical
strength, valour, knowledge of scriptures,
vigour, prowess, superlative skill in action,
spirit, forbearance, firmness, stability and
humility: these and numerous other brilliant
qualities exist in you alone.” (27-28)

अथोवाच पुन: सीतामसम्भ्रान्तो विनीतवत्।
प्रगृहीताञ्जलिर्हर्षात् सीताया: प्रमुखे स्थित:॥ २९॥
Standing unembarrassed, with joined

palms, before Sita, Hanuman meekly and
joyfully submitted once more as follows: (29)

इमास्तु खलु राक्षस्यो aie त्वमनुमन्यसे।

हन्तुमिच्छामि at: सर्वा याभिस्त्वं तर्जिता पुरा॥ ३०॥
“If you permit me, I, for my part, would

surely make short work of all these notorious

ogresses, by whom you have been
intimidated in the past. (30)
च्चोररूपसमाचारा: क्रूरा: क्रूरतरेक्षणा:॥ 38
इह श्रुता मया देवि राक्षस्यो विकृतानना:।

असकृत्परुषैर्वाक्यैर्वदन्त्यो रावणाज्ञया। ३२॥

“These cruel ogresses of hideous
aspect and conduct and with still more cruel
eyes and distorted features were heard by
me at this very place addressing you, who

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA +

are so devoted to your husband, more than
once in unkind words at Ravana’s command
when you were suffering hardships in the
Asoka grove, O divine lady! (31-32)

facet विकृताकारा: क्रूरा: क्रूरकचेक्षणा:।
इच्छामि विविधैर्घातैर्हन्तुमेता: सुदारुणा:॥ ३३॥
“| wish to kill by means of strokes of
every description these cruel, extremely
violent, and deformed ogresses with distorted
features and hideous hair and eyes. (33)

राक्षस्यो दारुणकथा वरमेतत् प्रयच्छ मे।
मुष्टिभि: पार्षणिघातैश्च विशालैश्चैव बाहुभि: i ३४॥
जङ्घाजानुप्रहारैश्च दन्तानां चैव पीडनै:।
कर्तनै: कर्णनासानां केशानां लुञ्चनैस्तथा॥ ३५॥
Pore हन्तुमिच्छामि aa विप्रियकारिणी:।
एवं प्रहारैर्बहुभि: सम्प्रहार्य यशस्विनि॥३६॥
चातये तीव्ररूपाभिर्याभिस्त्वं तर्जिता पुरा।
इत्युक्ता सा हनुमता PUT दीनवत्सला॥ ३७॥
हनूमन्तमुवाचेदं चिन्तयित्वा विमृश्य च।
राजसंश्रयवश्यानां कुर्वतीनां पराज्ञया॥ Be Il
विधेयानां च दासीनां क: Hae वानरोत्तम।
भाग्यवैषम्यदोषेण पुरस्ताद्दुष्कृतेन च ॥३९॥
मयैतत् Wed ad स्वकृतं ह्युपभुज्यते।
Wa ae महाबाहो cat ह्येषा परा ala: vou
“| wish to make short work of these
ogresses, who have spoken harsh words
to you and wronged you, striking them down
with my fists, kicks, long arms, the blows of
my shanks and knees, as well as by causing
pain to their teeth biting off their ears and
nose and pulling out their hair. Pray, grant
your acquiscence to me. Striking them
violently by means of repeated blows as
aforementioned, | would kill the ogresses of

* The eight excellences of an intellect are enumerated in the following verse of the Nitisara Kamandaka

quoted by the commentators:

शुश्रूषा श्रवणं चैव ग्रहणं धारणं तथा। ऊहोऽपोहोऽर्थविज्ञानं तत्त्वज्ञानं च धीगुणा:॥
“(1) Keenness to hear discourses on the Spirit, (2) readiness to hear such discourses, (3) receptivity and
(4) retentive power, (5) reasoning for and (6) against a proposition, (7) the faculty of comprehension and
(8) realization of truth: these are the eight characteristics of a sound and ripe intellect.”
