440

for his part, who resembled fire-incarnate,
left for Lanka. (73)

सोऽतिपत्य मुहूर्तेन sitar रावणमन्दिरम्।
ददर्शासीनमव्यग्रं wast सचिवै: सह॥ ७४॥
Crossing over the walls to the palace
of Ravana in a moment, the glorious Angada
saw Ravana sitting unperturbed in the

company of his ministers. (74)
ततस्तस्याविदूरेण निपत्य हरिपुंगव:।
दीप्ताग्निसदृशस्तस्थावङ्गद: कनकाङ्द: ॥ ७५ ॥

Descending at a short distance from
him, Angada, a veritable bull among the
monkeys, who was adorned with armlets of
gold, now stood like a blazing fire. (75)
qq रामवचनं सर्वमन्यूनाधिकमुत्तमम्।
सामात्यं श्रावयामास निवेद्यात्मानमात्मना॥ ७६॥

Having made himself known through
himself, he delivered to Ravana with his
ministers in toto the excellent message of
Sri Rama, neither subtracting nor adding
anything of his own. (76)

दूतोऽहं कोसलेन्द्रस्य रामस्याक्लिष्टकर्मण:।
वालिपुत्रोऽङ्गदो नाम यदि a श्रोत्रमागत:॥७७॥

He spoke as follows: “Il am an envoy
of Sri Rama, the king of Kosala, who is
unwearied in action, Angada by name, son
of Vali—l wonder if my name has ever
reached your ears. (77)

आह त्वां राघवो Wa: कौसल्यानन्दवर्धन:।
निष्पत्य प्रतियुध्यस्व Feta पुरुषो भव॥७८॥

“Sri Rama, a scion of Raghu, who
enhances the joy of his mother, Kausalya,
speaks to you as follows: ‘Prove to be a
man, O ruthless ogre, and, sallying forth,
give battle to me. (78)
हन्तास्मि at सहामात्यं सपुत्रज्ञातिबान्धवम्।
निरुद्बिग्नास्त्रयो लोका भविष्यन्ति ect त्वयि॥ ७९॥

“‘l shall make short work of you
with your ministers, sons, relations and
kinsfolk. All the three worlds will be rid of

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA +

fear on your being killed.
देवदानवयक्षाणां गन्धर्वोरगरक्षसाम्।
शत्रुमद्योद्धरिष्यामि त्वामृषीणां च कण्टकम्॥ Zo Il
“‘l shall presently uproot you, an
enemy of gods, demons and Yaksas (a
class of demigods), Gandharvas (celestial
musicians), Nagas (a class of semi-divine
beings credited with the head of a man and
the lower extremities of a serpent) and ogres
and a virtual thorn in the side of Rsis (the
seers of Vedic Mantras). (80)

विभीषणस्य aged भविष्यति ed त्वयि।
न चेत् सत्कृत्य वैदेहीं प्रणिपत्य प्रदास्यसि॥ ८१॥

“‘Nay, unless you return Sita (a princess
of the Videha territory) after paying homage
to her and bowing down respectfully to me,
the royal fortune will descend to Vibhisana
on your being killed.’ ” (81)
अमर्षवशमापन्नो निशाचरगणेश्वर: ।। ८२॥

While Angada, a bull among the
monkeys, was making the foregoing harsh
speech, Ravana, the ruler of hordes of
ogres, was seized with fury. (82)

aa: स रोषमापन्न: शशास सचिवांस्तदा।
गृह्यतामिति दुर्मेधा वध्यतामिति चासकृत्॥८३॥

Swayed by passion, Ravana, thereupon
repeatedly commanded his ministers in the
following words at that moment: “Let this
evil-minded monkey be seized and put to
death.” (83)

रावणस्य aa: strat दीप्ताग्निमिव तेजसा।
जगृहुस्तं ततो घोराश्चत्वारो रजनीचरा:॥८४॥

Hearing the command of Ravana, four
terrible rangers of the night presently seized
Angada, who resembled a blazing fire in
brilliance. (84)

ग्राहयामास तारेय: स्वयमात्मानमात्मवान्।
बलं दर्शयितुं वीरो यातुधानगणे तदा॥८५॥

In order to exhibit his strength before

(79)
