* BALAKANDA +

अस्माकमपि मुख्यानि फलानीमानि हे द्विज।
गृहाण fay भद्रं ते भक्षयस्व च माचिरम्॥१९॥
While returning, they said, “Accept, O
sage, these excellent fruits offered by us
too and eat them without delay, O holy one !
This may do you good.” (19)

ततस्तास्तं समालिङ्ग्य wat हर्षसमन्विता:।
मोदकान् प्रददुस्तस्मै भक्ष्यांश्च विविधाञ्छुभान्॥ २०॥

Closely embracing him and full of
delight they all then gave him small round
sweetmeats and various kinds of other dainty
dishes to eat. (20)

तानि चास्वाद्य तेजस्वी फलानीति स्म मन्यते।

अनास्वादितपूर्वाणि वने नित्यनिवासिनाम्॥ २१॥
आपृच्छ्य च तदा विप्रं व्रतचर्यां निवेद्य च।
Treated स्मापदेशात्ता भीतास्तस्य पितु: स्निय: ।। २२ ॥

Even after enjoying them the glorious
sage took them for fruits (alone); for they
were such as had never been tasted before
by those ever dwelling in the woods. Taking
leave of the young Brahmana and telling
him of some sacred observance to be gone
through by them, those women then departed
under that pretext, afraid as they were of
his father. (21-22)

गतासु तासु सर्वासु काश्यपस्यात्मजो fest: |
अस्वस्थहृदयश्चासीद् दु:खाच्च परिवर्तते॥२३॥
When they had all left, the Brahmana,
Rsyasrnga, sprung from the loins of
Vibhandaka (a scion of the sage KaSyapa),
felt uneasy at heart and was restless through
agony. (23)
ततोऽपरेद्युस्तं देशमाजगाम स वीर्यवान्।
विभाण्डकसुत: श्रीमान् मनसा चिन्तयन्मुहु:॥ २४॥
मनोज्ञा यत्र ता Geel वारमुख्या: स्वलंकृता:।
दृष्टैव च ततो विप्रमायान्तं हृष्टमानसा:॥ २५॥
उपसृत्य तत: सर्वास्तास्तमूचुरिदं वच:।
एह्याश्रमपदं सौम्य अस्माकमिति चाब्रुवन्॥ २६॥
Thinking of them in his mind again and
again, that powerful and glorious sage

95

Rsyasrnga (son of Vibhandaka) departed
from that place the following day to that area
where those charming courtesans had been
seen by him beautifully adorned the previous
day. Going forth to meet him with a delighted
mind the moment they saw the sage coming
from his hermitage, they all then addressed
to him the following request: “Just pay a
visit to our hermitage, O gentle one!” and
further spoke as follows : (24—26)
चित्राण्यत्र बहूनि स्युर्मूलानि च फलानि च।

तत्राप्येष विशेषेण विधिर्हि भविता ध्रुवम्॥ २७॥

“Although roots and fruits of various
kinds may be had in abundance here, this
process of entertainment will surely be gone
through there in our hermitage in a special
degree even as compared to this place”.

(27)
श्रुत्वा तु वचनं तासां सर्वासां हृदयंगमम्।
गमनाय मतिं चक्रे तं च निन्युस्तथा Pera: २८ i

Hearing the prayer of them all, which was
so Captivating to the heart, he made up his
mind to go with them and the women took him
to the capital of King Romapada in that manner
in a boat on the holy Ganga. (28)
wa चानीयमाने ¢ faa तस्मिन् महात्मनि।
aad सहसा cal जगत् प्रह्लादयंस्तदा॥ २९॥

Even while the high-souled Brahmana
was being escorted there to the Anga territory,
the god of rain sent down a shower all of a
sudden at that very time, bringing great joy
to all of them. (29)
वर्षेणैवागतं fat तापसं स नराधिप:।
was मुनिं we: शिरसा च महीं गत:॥ ३०॥

Going forth to meet the ascetic
Brahmana, who had arrived in his kingdom
synchronously with the rain, the said ruler
of men bowed low to the sage and touched
the ground with his head. (30)

अर्घ्य च प्रददौ तस्मै न्यायत: सुसमाहित:।
aa were विप्रेन्द्रान्मा fad मन्युराविशेत्॥ ३१॥

Fully composed in mind he offered him
