1080

those monkeys on earth are approaching at
your call.” (36)

एवं grat ततो we: सुग्रीव: प्लवगाधिप: |

प्रतिजग्राह च प्रीतस्तेषां सर्वमुपायनम्॥ gett | love.

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

Sugriva, the suzerain lord of
monkeys, felt rejoiced to hear this and
forthwith accepted all their presents with
(37)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये किष्किन्धाकाण्डे सप्तत्रिंश: सर्ग: ॥ 3911

Thus ends Canto Thirty-seven in the Kiskindhakanda of the glorious Ramayana of
Valmiki, the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

अष्टात्रिंश: सर्ग:
Canto XXXVIII

Embracing Sugriva, who came all the way on a palanquin with Laksmana, and
bowed down at Sri Rama’s feet, and offering him a seat, the latter
instructs him in a nutshell in statecraft and reminds him of his
business. Expressing his indebtedness to Sri Rama for the unique
favour done to him and giving to him an account
of the efforts made by him, Sugriva in his turn
gratifies him by apprising him of the arrival of

countless monkeys from all the parts of globe

प्रतिगृह्य च तत् सर्वमुपायनमुपाहृतम्।
वानरान् सान्त्वयित्वा च सर्वानेव व्यसर्जयत्॥ १॥

Nay, accepting all the aforesaid
presents brought by the monkeys and
speaking kindly to them, Sugriva let all of
them go. (1)
विसर्जयित्वा स हरीन् सहस्रान् कृतकर्मण:।
मेने कृतार्थमात्मानं राघवं च महाबलम्॥२॥

Having sent away from his presence
those thousands of monkeys, who had
performed their task of bringing together all
the monkeys from the remotest corners of
the world, he deemed himself as well as Sri
Rama of extraordinary might as good as
accomplished of purpose. (2)

a लक्ष्मणो भीमबलं सर्ववानरसत्तमम्।
अब्रवीत् प्रश्रितं वाक्यं सुग्रीवं सम्प्रहर्षयन्॥ ३॥
The celebrated Laksmana spoke the
following polite words to Sugriva, the foremost
of all the monkeys, and possessed of terrific
might, bringing excessive joy to him: (3)

किष्किन्धाया विनिष्क्राम यदि ते सौम्य रोचते।
Wea ag वचनं श्रुत्वा लक्ष्मणस्य सुभाषितम्॥४॥
Gia: परमप्रीतो वाक्यमेतदुवाच ह।
एवं भवतु गच्छाम स्थेयं त्वच्छासने मया॥५॥

“Come out of Kiskindha awhile if it
pleases you, O gentle one!” Supremely
pleased to hear the aforesaid suggestion of
the celebrated Laksmana, well-worded as it
was, Sugriva, they say, replied as follows:
“Amen! Let us go out; | must obey your
order.” (4-5)

तमेवमुक्त्वा सुग्रीवो लक्ष्मणं शुभलक्षणम्।
विसर्जयामास तदा ताराद्याश्चैव योषित:॥६॥
Nay, having replied thus to the said
Laksmana, who ७5 endowed _ with
auspicious bodily marks, Sugriva forthwith
sent away Tara and the other ladies. (6)

एहीत्युच्चैर्हरिवरान् सुग्रीव समुदाहरत्।
तस्य तद् वचनं श्रुत्वा हरय: शीघ्रमाययु:॥ ७॥
बद्धाञ्जलिपुटा: सर्वे ये स्यु: स्त्रीदर्शनक्षमा:।
तानुवाच तत: प्राप्तान् राजार्कसदृशप्रभ:॥८॥
