# YUDDHAKANDA #

well as on (the back of) serpents, boars,
beasts of prey such as lions, jackals as
large as hills, as also on the back of crows,
swans and peacocks. (11-12)

प्रासपट्टिशनिस्तिंशपरश्वधगदाधरा: ।
भुशुण्डिमुद्गरायष्टिशतघ्नीपरिघायुधा: ॥ १३॥
They carried lances, sharp-edged
spears, swords, axes and maces and
were armed with Bhusundis (probably
a kind of fire-arm), mallets, Ayastis,
Sataghnis (a stone or cylindrical piece of
wood studded with iron pikes) and Parighas
(an iron bludgeon or club studded with iron).
(13)

स शङ्खनिनदै: पूर्णैर्भेरीणां चापि नि:स्वनै: |
जगाम farsa वेगेन वीर्यवान्॥१४॥
Accompanied by full blasts of conches
as well as by the sounds of kettledrums,
that valiant enemy of Indra (the ruler of
gods) proceeded with all speed to the field
of battle. (14)

a शङ्खशशिवर्णेन छत्रेण रिपुसूदन:।
रराज प्रतिपूर्णेन नभश्चन्द्रमसा यथा॥१५॥

With his parasol white as conch and
the moon, that destroyer of his enemies
shone like the firmament with the full
moon. (15)

वीज्यमानस्ततो वीरो हैमैर्हेमविभूषण:।
चारुचामरमुख्यैश्च मुख्य: सर्वधनुष्मताम्॥१६॥

The hero, who was the foremost of all
archers and was decked with gold ornaments,
was being fanned at that time with the
foremost of lovely whisks with handles of
gold. (16)
स तु gem विनिर्यान्तं बलेन महता ae!
राक्षसाधिपति: श्रीमान् रावण: पुत्रमन्रवीत्॥ १७॥

Seeing his son, Indrajit, sallying forth
surrounded by a huge army, the glorious

Ravana, the suzerain lord of ogres, for his
part spoke to him as follows: (17)

605

त्वमप्रतिरथ: Ua त्वया a वासवो जित:।
fe पुनर्मानुषं धृष्यं निहनिष्यसि राघवम्॥१८॥
“There is no warrior who can stand as
your rival, my son; by you Indra (the ruler of
gods) was actually conquered. Much more
will you (be able to) kill a mortal, Rama
(a scion of Raghu), who is subject to being
assailed.” (18)

तथोक्तो राक्षसेन्द्रेण प्रत्यगृह्णान्महाशिष:।
ततस्त्विन्द्रजिता लङ्का सूर्यप्रतिमतेजसा॥१९॥
रराजाप्रतिवीर्येण द्यौरिवार्केण भास्वता।
a सम्प्राप्य महातेजा युद्धभूमिमरिंदम:॥ २०॥
स्थापयामास रक्षांसि रथं प्रति समन्तत:।
ततस्तु हुतभोक्तारुं हुतभुक्सदृशप्रभ:॥ २१॥
जुहुवे राक्षसश्रेष्ठो विधिवन्मन्त्रसत्तमै:।
स हविर्लाजसत्कारैर्माल्यगन्धपुरस्कृतै: ॥। २२॥
Wet पावकं तत्र राक्षसेन्द्र: प्रतापवान्।
शस्त्राणि शरपत्राणि समिधोऽथ बिभीतका: 1 23 ॥
लोहितानि च वासांसि aa carota तथा।
स तत्राग्निं ware waa: सतोमरै:॥ २४॥
छागस्य कृष्णवर्णस्य Wet WME जीवत:।
सकृदेव समिद्धस्य विधूमस्य महार्चिष:॥ २५॥
बभूवुस्तानि लिङ्गानि विजयं यान्यदर्शयन्।
प्रदक्षिणावर्तशिखस्तप्तकाञ्चनसंनिभ: ॥ २६॥
हविस्तत् प्रतिजग्राह पावक: स्वयमुत्थित:।
सोऽस्त्रमाहारयामास ब्राह्ममस्त्रविशारद:॥ २७॥
धनुश्चात्मरथं wa wd तत्राभ्यमन्त्रयत्।
तस्मिन्नाहूयमानेऽस्त्रे हूयमाने च पावके।
सार्कग्रहेन्दुनक्षत्रं वितत्रास नभस्थलम्॥२८॥
Encouraged as aforesaid by the ruler
of ogres, the prince gladly accepted his
mighty blessings. Thereupon Lanka for its
part shone with Indrajit, who vied with the
sun in brilliance and who was matchless in
valour, even as the firmament with the
brilliant sun. Duly reaching the battlefield,
Indrajit, the tamer of his foes, who was
endowed with extraordinary energy, ranged
the ogres around his chariot on all sides.
Thereupon Indrajit, the foremost of ogres,
