1002

“Establish the very best understanding
between Sugriva and Angada; for you stand
as their protector and preceptor in teaching
them what should be done and what should
not be done. (53)

या a Wad ahaa लक्ष्मणे च या।
सुग्रीवे use राजंस्तां चिन्तयितुमर्हसि॥७५४॥

“You ought to cherish, O king, the
same attitude of mind towards Sugriva and
Angada which exists at the present moment
in relation to Bharata and Laksmana, O
ruler of men ! (54)
मद्दोषकृतदोषां at यथा ant तपस्विनीम्।
सुग्रीवो नावमन्येत तथावस्थातुमर्हसि॥५५॥

“Nay, you should handle the situation
in such a way that Sugriva may not treat
with disrespect poor Tara, mentioned above,
who is guilty only because | have been
guilty of persecuting him. (55)

त्वया ह्यनुगृहीतेन शक्यं राज्यमुपासितुम्।
we वर्तमानेन da चित्तानुवर्तिना॥५६॥
त्वत्तोऽहं वधमाकांक्षन् वार्यमाणोऽपि तारया॥ ५७॥
सुग्रीवेण सह भ्रात्रा द्वन्द्वयुद्धमुपागत:।
इत्युक्त्वा वानरो रामं विरराम हरीश्वर:॥ ५८॥

“A kingdom can indeed be ruled by
one who is subject to your control, follows
your mind and has thus been favoured by
you; nay, residence in heaven can be earned
and even the entire globe can be ruled.
Seeking death at your hands, | entered into
a duel with my younger brother, Sugriva,
even though | was being kept back all the
time by Tara.” Having spoken thus, the
monkey, Vali, who was a ruler of monkeys,
became mute. (56—58)

स तमाश्वासयद् Wa वालिनं व्यक्तदर्शनम्।
साधुसम्मतया वाचा धर्मतत्त्वार्थयुक्तया॥५९॥

The celebrated Sri Rama in his turn
reassured the said Vali, in whom wisdom
had now dawned, in the following words,
which were full of meaning in the shape of

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

the essence of piety, and were as such
esteemed by holy men: (59)
न संतापस्त्वया कार्य एतदर्थं प्लवङ्गम।
न वयं भवता चिन्त्या नाप्यात्मा हरिसत्तम।
aa भवद्विशेषेण धर्मत: कृतनिश्चया:॥६०॥
“No anxiety should be felt by you on this
score, O monkey ! Neither for us nor even
your own self should you be worried about,
O jewel among monkeys ! For, filled as we are
with extraordinary affection for you, we have
determined our course of action according to
the principles of righteousness. (60)

Wel य: पातयेद् दण्डं दण्ड्यो यश्चापि दण्ड्यते।
कार्यकारणसिद्धार्थावुभौ तौ नावसीदत:॥६१॥
“He who metes out punishment to one
deserving of punishment and he who is
punished as worthy of punishment, both
never come to grief inasmuch as they have
achieved their end, the punished by
undergoing punishment and the punisher by
meting it out. (61)

ag भवान् दण्डसंयोगादस्माद् विगतकल्मष: |

गत: tat प्रकृतिं meat दण्डदिष्टेन वर्त्मना॥ ६२॥
“Having been completely rid of sin by

being subjected to this punishment according

to the procedure enjoined by scriptures

ordaining such punishment, you have

regained your immaculate (spiritual) nature

consistent with the principles of
righteousness. (62)
त्यज शोकं च मोहं च भयं च हृदये स्थितम्।

त्वया विधानं हर्यग्र्य न शक्यमतिवर्तितुम्॥६३॥

“Cast away grief and infatuation and

fear abiding in your heart. What has
been ordained by Providence cannot be
transgressed by you, O jewel among

monkeys !
यथा त्वय्यङ्गदो fet add वानरेश्वर।
तथा वर्तेत सुग्रीवे मयि चापि न संशय:॥ ६४॥

“Angada will depend on Sugriva and
even on myself as he has ever done on

(63)
