890

ait स्तनौ शोणितपङ्कदिग्धौ
नूनं प्रियाया मम नाभिषात:॥८॥

“Those spherical breasts of my beloved
spouse, which were ever worthy of being
smeared with excellent red sandal-paste,
so lovely to look at, must surely have been
soiled with thickened blood (when put to the
knife for being eaten up). Yet my accursed
body does not fall to pieces ! (8)

wet मुखं कुञ्चितकेशभारम्।
रक्षोवशं नूनमुपागताया
न भ्राजते राहुमुखे यथेन्दु:॥ ९॥
“That face—which uttered bland, very
distinct and soft words and bore a mass of
curly hair on its head—of Sita, who has
surely fallen into the clutches of ogres, no
longer shines any more than the moon in
the mouth of Rahu (the deity presiding over
a planet of the same name, which is now
identified with the shadow of the earth falling
on the orb of the moon). (9)
तां हारपाशस्य सदोचितान्तां
Wat प्रियाया मम सुव्रताया:।
रक्षांसि नूनं परिपीतवन्ति
शून्ये fe भित्त्वा रुधिराशनानि॥ १० UI

“Having cut open in a lonely place the
shapely neck of my beloved spouse of
noble vows—whose circumference ever
deserved to be adorned with a beautiful
string of pearls: ogres have surely, | presume,
drunk to their heart's content beverages in
the shape of her blood. (10)

मया विहीना विजने ay सा
रक्षोभिराहृत्य विकृष्यमाणा।
नूनं विनादं कुररीव दीना
सा मुक्तवत्यायतकान्तनेत्रा॥ ११॥
“Being dragged by ogres र्वांडां
surrounding her, bereft of me, in the lonely
forest that lady of large and lovely eyes
must have surely uttered a loud cry like a
female osprey, afflicted as she was. (11)

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

afer मया सार्धमुदारशीला

शिलातले पूर्वमुपोपविष्टा।
कान्तस्मिता लक्ष्मण जातहासा

त्वामाह सीता बहुवाक्यजातम्॥ १२॥

“Seated close to me by my side on this
slab of rock and seized with laughter in the
days gone by, Sita, who was blessed with
a generous disposition and had a lovely
smile on her lips, talked to you of many
things, O Laksmana! (12)
गोदावरीयं सरितां वरिष्ठा

प्रिया प्रियाया मम नित्यकालम्।
अप्यत्र गच्छेदिति चिन्तयामि
नैकाकिनी atta fe सा कदाचित्॥ १३॥

“This Godavari, the foremost of rivers,
has been the favourite resort of my darling
at all times. | think she might have gone that
side; but she never sought its bank alone.

(13)
पद्मानना पद्मपलाशानेत्रा
पद्मानि वानेतुमभिप्रयाता।
तदप्ययुक्तं नहि सा कदाचि-
न्मया विना गच्छति पङ्कजानि॥ १४॥

“Possessed as she is of a lotus-like
countenance and eyes resembling the petals
of a lotus, she might have probably sallied
forth to gather lotuses. That too, however,
is absurd; for she would never approach
lotuses without me. (14)

at wad नु तदप्ययुक्त-
मेकाकिनी सातिबिभेति भीरु: ।। १७५ ॥।
“It is quite probable that she has left for
the yonder forest containing clusters of trees
in blossom and visited by flocks of birds
of various species. That too, however, is
improbable; for, the timid lady felt very much
afraid when left alone. (15)

आदित्य भो लोककृताकृतज्ञ
लोकस्य सत्यानृतकर्मसाक्षिन्।
