+ UTTARAKANDA +

vat a ते तिष्ठते द्वारि कार्यार्थी समुपागत:।
लक्ष्मणस्य वच: श्रुत्वा रामो वचनमब्रवीत्।
सम्प्रवेशय वै fad कार्यार्थी योऽत्र तिष्ठति॥ २८ ॥

‘O Sri Rama! listen to what | have to
say. O delighter of Kausalya! O long-armed
one! O lord! According to what you had

1031

commanded, | called on those who have
come with some business. A dog, which
has come with a request is standing at your
palace-gate.’ After hearing Laksmana’s
speech, Sri Rama said: “Let it enter quickly,
the one standing there with some request.’

(27-28)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये उत्तरकाण्डे Were: सर्ग: ॥ 2 ॥

Thus ends the Interpolated Canto One in the Uttarakanda of the glorious Ramayana
of Valmiki, the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

प्रक्षिप्त: सर्ग: २

Interpolated Canto II

न Rama does justice to the dog and makes the Brahmana ‘Kulapati’
(a ‘Mahanta’) of Kalanjara. The dog points out the evils
associated with being Kulapati

श्रुत्वा रामस्य वचनं लक्ष्मणस्त्वरितस्तदा।
शवानमाहूय मतिमान् राघवाय न्यवेदयत्॥१॥
दृष्टवा समागतं श्वानं Wat वचनमब्रवीत्।
विवक्षितार्थं A ब्रूहि सारमेय न a भयम्॥ २॥

On hearing Sri Rama’s speech, the
wise Laksmana, after hurriedly calling the
dog, informed Sri Rama about its (the dog’s)
arrival, and presented him before Sri Rama,
Having seen the dog that had come, Sri
Rama said to him, ‘O dog! Tell me what you
have to say, you need not fear at all.’ (1-2)

अथापश्यत तत्रस्थं wa vat भिन्नमस्तक:।
ततो दृष्टवा स राजानं सारमेयोऽब्रवीद् वच:॥ ३॥

Thereafter the dog whose skull was
shattered saw Sri Rama seated there. Having
seen the king, the dog addressed the following
speech: (3)
राजैव hat भूतानां राजा wa विनायक:।
राजा सुप्तेषु जागर्ति राजा पालयति प्रजा:॥४॥

“The king is the creator of all living
beings and the king is the leader of men.
The king remains awake, when others are
asleep. The king protects the subjects. (4)

नीत्या सुनीतया राजा धर्मं रक्षति रक्षिता।
यदा न पालयेद् राजा fat नश्यन्ति वै प्रजा:॥ ५॥

“The king, who is the protector of all,
protects Dharma by pursuing right policy.
When the king does not protect, the subjects
perish soon. (5)

राजा Hal च Wat च सर्वस्य जगत: पिता।
राजा कालो युगं चैव राजा सर्वमिदं जगत्॥६॥

“The king is the creator, protector and
father of the entire world. The king is the
time (sets the trend of the times) and the
‘Yuga’ (a particular age of the world). The
king is the whole world. (6)

धारणाद् धर्ममित्याहुर्धर्मेण विधृता: Watt: |
यस्माद् धारयते Wed त्रैलोक्यं सचराचरम्॥७॥
“They call it ‘Dharma’, for it sustains
the world. The created beings are sustained
by ‘Dharma’. Since it supports the three
worlds together with all the movable and
immovable things. (7)

धारणाद् विद्विषां चैव धर्मेणारञ्जयन् प्रजा:।
तस्माद् धारणमित्युक्तं a at इति निश्चय:॥ i

“He sustains even his enemies, puts
