956

« VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

and most excellent Lord Siva (who bears | the bestower of boons, the said ranger of

moonbeams on His head as an ornament),

the reliever of the agony of the virtuous and | danced before Him.

the night sang and, stretching his arms gaily
(44)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये उत्तरकाण्डे एकत्रिंश: सर्ग: ॥ ३१ ॥

Thus ends Canto Thirty-one in the Uttarakanda of the glorious Ramayana of Valmiki,
the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

Canto XXXII

The flow of the Narmada gets intercepted by the arms of Arjuna; the heap
of flowers collected for Ravana’s worship of Lord Siva is swept
away by the reversed current; the encounter of Ravana
and the other ogres with Arjuna; Arjuna captures
Ravana and bears him away to his city

नर्मदापुलिने यत्र राक्षसेन्द्र: स दारुण:।
पुष्पोपहारं कुरुते तस्माद् देशाददूरत:॥१॥
अर्जुनो जयतां श्रेष्ठो माहिष्मत्या: पति: प्रभु:।
क्रोडते सह नारीभिर्नर्मदातोयमाश्रित:॥२॥

Not far from the place where, on the
sandy bank of the Narmada, the dread king
of ogres was offering flowers to Lord Siva,
Arjuna, the powerful ruler of Mahismati and
the foremost of conquerors, was sporting
with his womenfolk in the waters of the
Narmada. (1-2)
तासां मध्यगतो राजा रराज च तदार्जुन:।
करेणूनां सहस्रस्य मध्यस्थ Fa कुञ्जर:॥३॥

Standing in their midst, King Arjuna
shone at the moment like an elephant in the
midst of a thousand of she-elephants. (3)

RATE: स तु Wet सहस्रस्योत्तमं बलम्।
रुरोधं नर्मदावेगं बाहुभिर्बहुभिर्वृत:॥४॥

Seeking to know the maximum strength
of his thousand arms, Arjuna for his part,
who was endowed with numerous arms,
blocked the Narmada. (4)
कार्तवीर्यभुजासक्तं तज्जलं wer निर्मलम्।
कूलोपहारं कुर्वाणं प्रतिस्रोत: प्रधावति॥५॥

Reaching Ravana, who was offering
flowers to Lord Siva on a sandy bank of the
Narmada, when held up by the arms of
Arjuna (son of Krtavirya), the transparent
waters of the Narmada began to flow rapidly
upstream. (5)

समीननक्रमकर: सपुष्पकुशसंस्तर:।
स नर्मदाम्भसो AT: Weenie इवाबभौ॥ ६॥
The vehemence of the Narmada, flowing
as it did with its fishes, crocodiles and
alligators as also with its flowers and layers
of sacred KuSa grass (spread out at a
sacrifice), looked as it did during the monsoon.
(6)

स am: कार्तवीर्येण सम्प्रेषित इवाम्भस:।
पुष्पोपहारं सकलं रावणस्य जहार ह॥७॥

That rapid flow of water, as though
impelled by Arjuna (son of Krtavirya), they
say, swept away all the flowers that had
been collected for being offered to Lord Siva
by Ravana. (7)

रावणोऽर्धसमाप्तं तमुत्सृज्य नियमं तदा।

नर्मदां पश्यते कान्तां प्रतिकूलां यथा प्रियाम्॥ ८॥
Leaving the observance when it was

only half-way through, Ravana looked at the
