* ARANYAKANDA «

intelligent prince, decide to proceed this
very day.” (43)

Bia रामो AA: श्रुत्वा सह भ्रात्राभिवाद्य च।
प्रतस्थेऽगस्त्यमुद्दिश्य सानुग: WE सीतया॥४४॥

Hearing thus the sage’s words and
saluting him with his brother, Rama set out
with Laksmana and Sita to meet Agastya.

(44)
पश्यन् वनानि चित्राणि पर्वतांश्चाभ्रसंनिभान्।
सरांसि सरितश्चैव पथि मार्गवशानुगान्॥४५॥
सुतीक्ष्णेनोपदिष्टेन गत्वा तेन पथा सुखम्।
इदं परमसंहृष्टो वाक्यं लक्ष्मणमब्रवीत्॥४६॥

Seeing varied forests and cloud-like
mountains, lakes and rivers on the way, he
proceeded happily along the path directed
by Sutiksna and, being supremely delighted,
he spoke as follows to Laksmana: (45-46)

एतदेवाश्रमपदं नूनं तस्य महात्मन:।
अगस्त्यस्य Wuldgyad पुण्यकर्मण:॥४७॥
“Indeed this very place appears to be

the site of the hermitage of that high-souled
brother of Sage Agastya of holy deeds. (47)

यथा GA वनस्यास्य Aral: पथि सहस्रश:।

संनता: फलभारेण पुष्पभारेण च द्रुमा:॥४८॥
“As was pointed out by Sutiksna, these

thousands of trees of this forest are seen in

the way bent down with their load of fruits
and the mass of flowers. (48)

पिप्पलीनां च पक्वानां वनादस्मादुपागत:।

गन्धोऽयं Used: सहसा कटुकोदय:॥४९॥
“This scent of the ripe Pippali fruits

wafted by the breeze and coming from this

forest is suddenly giving rise to a pungent
taste. (49)

Wa तत्र च दृश्यन्ते संक्षिप्ता: काष्ठसंचया:।

लूनाश्च परिदृश्यन्ते दर्भा वैदूर्यवर्चस:॥५०॥
“Here and there are seen collected

heaps of wood and blades of Darbha grass,

having the lustre of Vaidurya (a cat’s-eye
gem) are seen cut. (50)

741

एतच्च वनमध्यस्थं कृष्णाभ्रशिखरोपमम्।
पावकस्याश्रमस्थस्य धूमाग्रं सम्प्रदृश्यते॥५१॥
“And here in the middle of the forest is
vividly seen a column of smoke from the
fire in the hermitage, looking like the top of
a dark cloud. (51)

विविक्तेषु च तीर्थेषु कृतस्नाना द्विजातय:।
पुष्पोपहारं कुर्वन्ति कुसुमै: स्वयमर्जितै:॥ ५२॥

“Having had their bath in the holy
waters, the Brahmanas are giving offerings
(to the gods) with the flowers collected by
themselves. (52)

ad: सुतीक्ष्णवचनं यथा सौम्य मया श्रुतम्।
अगस्त्यस्याश्रमो भ्रातुर्नूनमेष भविष्यति॥७५३॥
यस्य भ्रात्रा कृतेयं दिकशरण्या पुण्यकर्मणा॥ ५४॥

“Hence, O gentle Laksmana, according
to the description of Sutiksna heard by me,
surely this must be the hermitage of the
brother of Agastya, by whose _ brother
Agastya of holy deeds, with intent to do
good to the people and controlling by his
spiritual might death (in the form of the
ogres Vatapi and Ilvala), this (southern)
quarter has been made habitable. (53-54)

इहैकदा किल क्रूरो वातापिरपि चेल्वल:।
भ्रातरौ सहितावास्तां ब्राह्मणघ्नौ महासुरौ॥ ५५॥
“Once, they say, here dwelt together

two brothers—great ogres and killers of
Brahmanas—Vatapi and also Ilvala. (55)

आमन्त्रयति विप्रान् स श्राद्धमुद्दिश्य निर्घृण: ।। ५६ ॥

“Assuming the form of a Brahmana
and speaking Sanskrit, that merciless Ilvala
used to invite Brahmanas for the sake of
Sraddha. (56)
तान् द्विजान् भोजयामास श्राद्धदृष्टेन कर्मणा ।। ५७॥

“Thereupon, cooking that brother of his,
who used to take the form of a ram, he
