872

“The highly blessed Sita, who is pledged
to the service of her lord and has ever been
brought up in comfort, is now unable to
see her husband and sees all around her
ogresses alone, surrounded as she always
is by them, and is eager to see her husband.
The city of Lanka is located on the brink of
the ocean (the lord of rivers and streams).

(3-4)
कथं ज्ञास्यति तां रामस्तत्रस्थां तामनिन्दिताम्।
Ga संचिन्तयन्ती सा बहुश: परिदुर्लभा॥७५॥

“How will Sri Rama come to know of
that irreproachable lady being present there?
Being very hard to find for her lord, she
frequently remains brooding on her suffering.

(5)
प्राणयात्रामकुर्वाणा प्राणांस्त्यक्ष्यत्यसंशयम्।
स भूय: संशयो जात: सीताया: प्राणसंक्षये॥६॥

“Nay, failing to support her life by refusing
any nourishment, she will undoubtedly give
up the ghost. In the event of Sita’s life coming
to an end, doubt will arise again about the
success of our plans. (6)
स त्वं शीघ्रमितो गत्वा सीतां पश्य शुभाननाम्।
प्रविश्य नगरीं लङ्कां प्रयच्छ हविरुत्तमम्॥७॥

“Therefore, departing from this place
without delay and penetrating into the city of
Lanka, see Sita of charming countenance
and offer to her the foremost food worth
offering to the sacred fire in the shape of
milk boiled with rice and sugar.” (7)

एवमुक्तोऽथ cas: पुरीं रावणपालिताम्।
आगच्छन्निद्रया सार्धं भगवान् पाकशासन:॥८॥
frat चोवाच गच्छ त्वं राक्षसान् सम्प्रमोहय।
सा dare मघवता edt परमहर्षिता॥९॥
देवकार्यार्थसिद्ध्यर्थं प्रामोहयत राक्षसान्।
एतस्मिन्नन्तरे देव: सहस्राक्ष: शचीपति:।॥१०॥
आससाद वनस्थां at वचनं चेदमब्रवीत्।
देवराजोऽस्मि भद्रं A ge चास्मि शुचिस्मिते॥११॥

Commanded thus by Brahma, the
glorious Indra (the tamer of the demon Paka),

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

the ruler of gods, presently reached alongwith
Nidra (the deity presiding over sleep) the
city of Lanka protected by Ravana, and
commanded Nidra as follows : “Depart you
and stupefy the ogres by burying them in
sleep.” Supremely gratified when instructed
thus by Indra, the goddess of sleep stupefied
the ogres in order to accomplish the object
aimed at by gods. In the meanwhile, Indra,
the consort of Saci, the thousand-eyed god,
approached Sita, residing in the ASoka grove
and spoke to her as follows: “I am Indra,
the ruler of gods, and am now here, O lady
of bright smiles! May all be well with you !
(8—11)

अहं त्वां कार्यसिद्ध्यर्थं राघवस्य महात्मन:।
साहाय्यं कल्पयिष्यामि मा शुचो जनकात्मजे॥ १२॥
“| will render assistance to you in order
to accomplish the object of the high-souled
Sri Rama (a scion of Raghu). Pray, do not
grieve, O daughter of Janaka ! (12)

मत्प्रसादात् समुद्रं स तरिष्यति act: सह।
मयैवेह च राक्षस्यो मायया मोहिता: शुभे॥ १३॥

“Through my goodwill he will be able to
cross the ocean with his armed forces.
Nay, by me alone have the ogresses been
stupefied by dint of Maya (my enchanting
potency) here, O good lady ! (13)
तस्मादन्नमिदं सीते हविष्यान्नमहं स्वयम्।

a wt aya वैदेहि आगत: सह निद्रया॥ १४॥

“Therefore, procuring this food fit to be
offered as an oblation to the sacred fire, |
have personally come to you with Nidra,
O Sita, princess of the Videha territory ! (14)

एतदत्स्यसि मद्धस्तान्न cat बाधिष्यते शुभे।
ae तृषा च रम्भोरु वर्षाणामयुतैरपि॥१५॥

“If you partake of this from my hand, O
good lady, neither hunger nor thirst will
trouble you, O lady with charming limbs,
even for myriad of years.” (15)

एवमुक्ता तु देवेन्द्रमुवाच परिशङ्किता।
कथं जानामि देवेन्द्रं त्वामिहस्थं शचीपतिम्॥ १६॥
