# YUDDHAKANDA #

शरैरतिमहावेगैर्वेगवान् रावणात्मज:।
सौमित्रिमिन्द्रजिद् युद्धे विव्याध शुभलक्षणम्॥ १९॥
With the aforesaid arrows of extreme
velocity the impetuous Indrajit, sprung from
the loins of Ravana, pierced in combat
Laksmana (son of Sumitra), who was
endowed with auspicious bodily marks.
(19)

a शरैरतिविद्धाङ्गो रुधिरेण समुक्षित:।
शुशुभे लक्ष्मण: श्रीमान् विधूम Fa UAH: ॥ २०॥
Bathed in blood, his limbs cruelly pierced
with arrows, the said glorious Laksmana
shone like a smokeless flame. (20)

इन्द्रजित् carer: कर्म प्रसमीक्ष्याभिगम्य च।
विनद्य सुमहानादमिदं वचनमब्रवीत्॥२१॥

Contemplating his own feat, nay,
approaching Laksmana and emitting an
exceedingly loud cry, Indrajit for his part
spoke to him as follows: (21)

पत्रिण: शितधारास्ते शरा मत्कार्मुकच्युता:।
आदास्यन्तेऽद्य सौमित्रे जीवितं जीवितान्तका: 1220

“The sharp-pointed and deadly arrows
discharged from my bow provided as they
are with feathers will take your life today, O
son of Sumitra! (22)

अद्य गोमायुसङ्घाश्च श्येनसङ्घाश्च लक्ष्मण।
गृध्राश्च Ford wat ward निहतं मया॥ esi
“Let packs of jackals and hawks as
well as vultures descend upon you when,
struck by me, you have fallen dead. (23)
क्षत्रबन्धुं सदानार्यं wa: परमदुर्मति:।
wh भ्रातरमद्यैव त्वां द्रक्ष्यति ad मया॥ २४॥
“The extremely stupid Rama will see
you, his devoted younger brother, a Ksatriya
in name only, ever ignoble, killed by me this
very day. (24)
विस्रस्तकवचं भूमौ व्यपविद्धशरासनम्।
हृतोत्तमाङ्गं सौमित्रे त्वामद्य Ped मया॥ २५॥

“He will find you with your armour

671

fallen on the ground, your bow thrown about
and your head severed when struck down
by me today, O son of Sumitra!” (25)
हेतुमद् वाक्यमर्थज्ञो लक्ष्मण: प्रत्युवाच ह॥ 2 Il

To Indrajit (sprung from the loins of
Ravana), who was speaking harshly as
aforesaid, Laksmana, who knew his purpose
and felt highly enraged, gave the following
logical answer: so the tradition goes: (26)

वाग्बलं त्यज दुर्बुद्धे क्रूरकर्मन् fe राक्षस।
अथ कस्माद् वदस्येतत् सम्पादय सुकर्मणा॥ २७॥

“Give up strength of speech in the
shape of empty words, O evil-minded ogre
of cruel deeds! Now why do you indulge in
such idle talk? Accomplish what you say in
well-executed action. (27)
अकृत्वा कत्थसे कर्म किमर्थमिह राक्षस।

He तत् कर्म येनाहं श्रद्धेयं तव कत्थनम्॥ २८॥

“Wherefore do you brag’ without
accomplishing a feat, O ogre? Accomplish
that deed of which you boast so that | may
believe your braggadocio. (28)
अविकत्थन् वधिष्यामि cat पश्य पुरुषादन॥ २९॥

“Lo! | shall kill you, O devourer of
human beings, without offering a harsh remark
against you, reviling you in the least or
playing the braggart.” (29)

इत्युक्त्वा पञ्च नाराचानाकर्णापूरितान् शरान्।
विजघान महावेगाल्लक्ष्मणो राक्षसोरसि॥ ३०॥
Saying so, Laksmana dug into the
ogre’s breast with great impetuosity five
steel arrows drawn with the bowstring up to
the ear. (30)

सुपत्रवाजिता बाणा ज्वलिता इव पन्नगा:।
नैर्ऋतोरस्यभासन्त सवितू रश्मयो यथा॥ ३१॥

The arrows shot by Laksmana, which
had been rendered swift by beautiful feathers
