+ UTTARAKANDA +

Sri Rama said to Laksmana in the midst of
that assembly: (12)

विसर्जये cat सौमित्रे मा sq धर्मविपर्यय:।

त्यागो वधो वा विहित: साधूनां ह्युभयं समम्॥ १३॥
‘| leave you, O son of Sumitra

(Laksmana), may not the cause of

righteousness suffer; desertion or slaying—
both are the same to the pious ones.’ (13)

रामेण भाषिते वाक्ये बाष्पव्याकुलितेन्द्रिय: |
लक्ष्मणस्त्वरितं प्रायात् स्वगृहं न विवेश ह॥ १४॥
On Sri Rama speaking thus, Laksmana,
with his eyes filled with tears, went out
in haste and did not enter his apartment.
(14)

स गत्वा सरयूतीरमुपस्पृश्य कृताञ्जलि:।
Pra सर्वस्रोतांसि नि:श्वासं न मुमोच ह॥ १५॥
Having reached the banks of the
Sarayu, he performed ablutions, restraining

1125

all senses and holding his breath.
अनि:श्वसन्तं युक्तं तं सशक्रा: साप्सरोगणा:।
देवा: सर्षिगणा: we पुष्पैरभ्यकिरंस्तदा॥ १६॥
The gods, together with Indra, the
Apsaras and all sages sprinkled flowers on
him, who was performing the Yoga of
restraining senses. (16)
Wea लक्ष्मणं शक्रस्त्रिदिवं संविवेश ह॥१७॥
Taking hold of Laksmana alive and

invisible to men, Indra entered the heaven

alongwith him. (17)

ततो विष्णोश्चतुर्भागमागतं सुरसत्तमा:।

Ber: प्रमुदिता: सर्वे पूजयन्ति स्म राघवम्॥ १८॥
Then all the great gods, pleased at

seeing the fourth part of Visnu coming back

to heaven, honoured indeed the descendant
of Raghu, Laksmana. (18)

(15)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये उत्तरकाण्डे षडधिकरशशततम: सर्ग: ॥ १०६ Il

Thus ends Canto One hundred and six in the Uttarakanda of the glorious Ramayana
of Valmiki, the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

Canto CVII

According to the counsel of Sage Vasistha, Sri Rama considers to take
citizens with Him and crowns KuSsa and Lava on the
kingdoms of South and North Kosala

विसृज्य लक्ष्मणं रामो दु:खशोकसमन्वित:।
पुरोधसं मन्तिणश्च नैगमांश्चेदमब्रवीत्॥१॥

Having discharged Laksmana, Sri Rama
full of agony and sorrow, spoke thus to the
priests, councillors and citizens: (1)

aa राज्येऽभिषेक्ष्यामि wad धर्मवत्सलम्।
अयोध्याया: पतिं वीरं ततो यास्याम्यहं SALI २॥
‘| shall consecrate the brave one,
Bharata, given to piety in this kingdom as
the lord of Ayodhya this very day and then
depart to the forest. (2)

प्रवेशयत सम्भारान् मा भूत् कालात्ययो यथा।
अद्यैवाहं गमिष्यामि लक्ष्मणेन wat गतिम्॥ ३॥
‘All the necessaries for consecration
may be brought without delay. | shall tread
on the path that Laksmana has gone this
very day.’ (3)
Tea राघवेणोक्तं Wal: प्रकृतयो भृशम्।
मूर्धभि: प्रणता भूमौ गतसत्त्वा इवाभवन्॥४॥
Hearing these words of the descendant

of Raghu, all subjects prostrated on the ground
and were almost rendered as if lifeless. (4)
