* SUNDARAKANDA +

He also saw exceptionally excellent
couch overlaid with gold, refulgent as fire
and overhung with wreaths of Asoka flowers.

(4)
वालव्यजनहस्ताभिर्वीज्यमानं समन्तत:।
Taya विविधैर्जुष्टं वरधूपेन धूपितम्॥५॥

It was being fanned on all sides by
women bearing chowries in their hands,
was refreshed with perfumes of various
kinds and fumigated with excellent incense.

(5)
परमास्तरणास्तीर्णमाविकाजिनसंव्रतम् ।
दामभिर्वरमाल्यानां समन्तादुपशोभितम्॥ ६ I

It was overspread with an excellent
bed, upholstered with sheepskin and decked
on every side with wreaths of excellent
flowers. (6)

तस्मिञ्जीमूतसंकाशं प्रदीप्तोज्ज्वलकुण्डलम्।
लोहिताक्षॆ महाबाहुं महारजतवाससम्॥७॥
लोहितेनानुलिप्तांग चन्दनेन सुगन्धिना।
संध्यारक्तमिवाकाशे drag सतडिद्गुणम्॥८॥
वृतमाभरणैर्दिव्यै: सुरूपं कामरूपिणम्।
सवृक्षवनगुल्माढ्यं प्रसुप्तमिव मन्दरम्॥९॥
क्रोडित्वोपरतं wal वराभरणभूषितम्।
प्रियं राक्षसकन्यानां राक्षसानां सुखावहम्॥१०॥
पीत्वाप्युपरतं चापि cast a महाकपि:।
भास्वरे शयने वीरं प्रसुप्तं राक्षसाधिपम्॥११॥

Hanuman, the great monkey, saw the
gallant and mighty-armed Ravana, the
suzerain lord of ogres, of a comely exterior
with reddened eyes, and closely resembling
a cloud in complexion, who was adorned
with bright and flashing earrings and clad in
robes of golden texture, was smeared all
over with fragrant red sandal-paste presented
the appearance of a cloud reddened at sunset
and illumined with flashes of lightning in the
sky, who was adorned with celestial
ornaments and was able to change his form
at will and who with his twenty arms etc.,

75

looked like Mount Mandara covered with
clusters of trees and rich in shrubs; and
lying fast asleep, who had retired after
dalliance at night and was decked with
excellent jewels, was beloved of Raksasa
(ogre) maids and the delight of ogres and,
having drunk to his fill, was lying fast asleep
on that magnificent couch. (7—11)

नि:श्वसन्तं यथा नागं रावणं वानरोत्तम:।
आसाद्य Uae: सोपासर्पत् सुभीतवत्॥१२॥
Extremely disgusted at the sight of that
sinful monster on approaching Ravana, who
was snoring like an elephant, Hanuman, the

foremost of monkeys, shrank back out of
repulsion. (12)
अथारोहणमासाद्य वेदिकान्तरमाश्रित: |
क्षीबं राक्षसशार्दूलं Wad स्म महाकपि:॥ १३॥
Then, going down the stairway and
stationed on a landing of the stairway at
some distance from the dais on which Ravana
lay, the mighty Hanuman began to look
intently on the drunken Ravana, a tiger
among the ogres. (13)

शुशुभे राक्षसेन्द्रस्य स्वपत: शयनं शुभम्।
गन्धहस्तिनि संविष्टे यथा प्रस्रवणं महत्॥१४॥
As Ravana, the ruler of ogres, lay
sleeping, the magnificent couch on which
he lay looked like the lofty PraSravana, a
mountain with a scent-elephant* (an elephant
of the best kind, whose scent alone drives
away hostile elephants) lying on it. (14)
काञ्चनांगदसंनद्धौ cat स महात्मन:।
विक्षिप्तौ राक्षसेन्द्रस्य भुजाविन्द्रध्वजोपमौ॥ १५॥
ऐरावतविषाणाग्रैरापीडनकृतव्रणौ ।
वज्रोल्लिखितपीनांसौ विष्णुचक्रपरिक्षतौ॥ १६॥
सुलक्षणनखांगुष्ठौ स्वंगुलीयकलक्षितौ॥ १७॥
संहतौ परिघाकारौ वृत्तौ करिकरोपमौ।
विक्षिप्तौ शयने शुभ्रे पञ्चशीर्षाविवोरगौ॥ ec

* यस्य गन्धं समाघ्राय उत्तिष्ठन्ति प्रतिद्विपा:। स a गन्धगजो aa नॄपतेर्विजयावह:॥
