* ARANYAKANDA «

of his great strength, lifted them up by dint
of his sturdiness and energy like two children
and placed them on his shoulders. (24)

तावारोप्य dd: स्कन्धं राघवौ रजनीचर:।
विराधो विनदन् घोरं जगामाभिमुखो वनम्॥ २५॥

Then placing those two scions of
Raghu on his shoulders, that night-wanderer,
Viradha, proceeded towards the forest roaring
fiercely. (25)

721

at महामेघनिभं प्रविष्टो
द्रुमैर्महद्भिर्विविधैरुपेतम् ।
नानाविधै:३ पक्षिकुलैर्विचित्रं
शिवायुतं व्यालमृगैर्विकीर्णम्॥ २६॥
He entered the forest looking like a
huge cloud, containing big trees of many
species, adorned with flocks of birds of
various kinds, having jackals and thronged
with beasts of prey. (26)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्येऽरण्यकाण्डे तृतीय: सर्ग: ॥ 3 ॥

Thus ends Canto Three in the Aranyakanda of the glorious Ramayana of Valmiki,
the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

Canto IV
Sri Rama and Laksmana kill Viradha

ह्रियमाणौ तु काकुत्स्थौ दृष्टवा सीता रघूत्तमौ।
Sea: TROT चुक्रोश प्रगृह्य सुमहाभुजौ॥ i

Seeing the descendants of Kakutstha,
the foremost of Raghu’s race, possessed
of very powerful arms, (Sri Rama and
Laksmana) being forcibly taken away, Sita,
however, cried in a loud voice : (1)

एष दाशरथी Wa: सत्यवाञ्छीलवान् शुचि:।
रक्षसा रौद्ररूपेण ह्रियते सहलक्ष्मण:॥ २॥

“This Rama, son of Dasaratha, truthful,
well-behaved and pious, is being taken away
together with Laksmana by an ogre of terrible
form. (2)

मामृक्षा भक्षयिष्यन्ति शार्दूलद्वीपिनस्तथा।

मां हरोत्सृज काकुत्स्थौ नमस्ते राक्षसोत्तम॥ ३॥
“O jewel among ogres, hail to you!

Take me away. Bears will eat me up and

so will tigers and panthers. Release the

descendants of Kakutstha.” (3)

तस्यास्तद् वचनं श्रुत्वा वैदेह्या रामलक्ष्मणौ।
at प्रचक्रतुर्वीरौ at तस्य दुरात्मन:॥४॥

Hearing the aforesaid appeal of that
princess of Videha territory, the heroic Rama
and Laksmana made haste in killing the
wicked ogre. (4)
तस्य रौद्रस्य सौमित्रि: wat ag बभञ्ज ह।
रामस्तु दक्षिणं बाहुं तरसा तस्य रक्षस:॥५॥

The son of Sumitra broke the left arm
of that terrible one and Rama for his part the
right arm of the said ogre with expedition.

(5)
a भग्नबाहु: संविग्न: पपाताशु विमूच्छित:।
धरण्यां मेघसंकाशो वज्रभिन्न इवाचल:॥६॥

He with his arms broken, and frightened
fell quickly on the ground in swoon looking

like a cloud or a mountain rent asunder by
lightning. (6)

मुष्टिभिर्बाहुभि: ule: सूदयन्तौ तु राक्षसम्।
उद्यम्योद्यम्य चाप्येनं स्थण्डिले निष्पिपेषतु:।॥ ७॥
Those two, while beating the ogre with
their fists, arms and kicks, also crushed
him on the ground, lifting him again and
again. (7)
