778

अन्तरिक्षगता रेजुर्दीप्ताग्निसमतेजस:।
असंख्येयास्तु रामस्य सायकाश्चापमण्डलात्॥ २०॥
विनिष्पेतुरतीवोग्रा रक्ष:प्राणापहारिण:।
तैर्धनूंषि ध्वजाग्राणि चर्माणि कवचानि च॥ २१॥
ae सहस्ताभरणानूरून् करिकरोपमान्।
चिच्छेद WA: समरे VASA सहस्रश:॥ २२॥

Riding in their chariots as well as on
horseback, as also on elephants resembling
mountain-peaks, the ogres, who were
endowed with gigantic bodies and possessed
of extraordinary might and looked like clouds,
rushed on Sri Rama with intent to kill him in
battle. Like huge clouds assailing Sumeru
(the king of mountains) with torrents, those
hordes of ogres rained showers of arrows
on Sri Rama. Surrounded by all the ogres,
who wore a Cruel aspect, Rama looked like
Lord Mahadeva surrounded by hordes of
his attendants on days bearing the name of
Pradosa (and sacred to Siva). By means of
his arrows the celebrated Sri Rama, a scion
of Raghu, absorbed those weapons
discharged by the ogres even as the ocean
does the rushing waters of rivers. The said
Sri Rama did not feel afflicted even with his
limbs pierced by those terrible weapons
any more than a huge mountain rent with
many blazing thunderbolts. Pierced and
besmeared with blood in all limbs the
celebrated Sri Rama, a scion of Raghu,
looked like the sun screened by evening
clouds. Gods and Gandharvas, Siddhas
and great Rsis felt dejected to behold
him standing alone surrounded by many
thousands at that time. With his bow bent to
the shape of a circle (when drawn at full
length), Sri Rama, for his part, who felt
highly enraged on the battle-field, pulled out
from his quiver hundreds and thousands of
very sharp arrows, which were difficult to
intercept and hard to endure and resembled
the noose of Death in their action, and
discharged in sport arrows tipped with gold.

Sportfully hurled on the enemy’s ranks
by Sri Rama, the aforesaid shafts took

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

away the lives of the ogres like the nooses
of Death. Having reached the air piercing
through those bodies of the ogres, those
arrows soaked in blood shone bright like
kindled fire. Most formidable arrows without
number flew from the circular bow of Sri
Rama, taking away the lives of the ogres.
With them Sri Rama split their bows, the
tops of their ensigns, shields and coats of
mail, arms adorned with ornaments for the
hands and thighs resembling the trunks of
elephants in their hundreds and thousands
on the battlefield. (9—22)

ह्यान् काञ्चनसंनाहान् रथयुक्तान् ससारथीन्।
गजांश्च सगजारोहान् सहयान् सादिनस्तदा॥ २३॥
चिच्छिदुर्बिभिदुश्चैव रामबाणा गुणच्युता:।
पदातीन् समरे हत्वा ह्यनयद् यमसादनम्॥ Wi
The arrows of Sri Rama, released from
his bow-string on that occasion, tore and
pierced the horses though protected by
golden armour, alongwith the chariots and
the charioteers, the elephants with their riders
and the horsemen with their horses; nay,
killing the foot soldiers in the encounter, he
firmly despatched them to the abode of
Yama, the god of death. (23-24)

dat नालीकनाराचैस्तीक्ष्णाग्रैश्च विकर्णिभि: |
भीममार्तस्वरं चक्रुश्छिद्यमाना निशाचरा:॥ २५॥
Being torn with his Nalikas (steel-pointed
arrows), Naracas (arrows wholly made of
steel) and sharp-pointed Vikarnis (barbed

arrows), the ogres then raised a terrific
piteous wail. (25)

aaa विविधैर्बाणैरर्दितं मर्मभेदिभि:।

न रामेण सुखं लेभे शुष्कं वनमिवाग्निना॥ २६॥
Tormented by Sri Rama with arrows of

various kinds piercing their vital parts, the

said army was ill at ease like a dry forest
oppressed by fire. (26)

केचिद् भीमबला: शूरा: प्रासान् शूलान् परश्वधान्।
चिक्षिपु: परमक्रुद्धा रामाय WRT: Il २७॥

Extremely enraged, some gallant night-
