470

“How shall | tell Satrughna and the
illustrious Bharata that | have returned
without Laksmana, who had accompanied
me to the woods? (10)

उपालम्भं न शक्ष्यामि सोढुमम्बासुमित्रया।
इहैव देहं त्यक्ष्यामि नहि जीवितुमुत्सहे॥११॥

“| shall not be able to endure the blame
which will be laid on me by mother Sumitra.
As such, | shall cast my body at this very
place since | am not inclined to survive.

(11)
लक्ष्मण: पतित: Va शरतल्पे गतासुवत्॥१२॥

“Woe be to me, an ignoble soul of
sinful deeds, on account of whom the
aforesaid Laksmana lies fallen on a bed of
arrows like one whose life has departed!

(12)
त्वं नित्यं सुविषण्णं मामाश्चासयसि लक्ष्मण।
गतासुर्नाद्य शक्तोऽसि मामार्तमभिभाषितुम्॥ १३॥

Turning towards Laksmana “You always
comforted me when | felt sore dejected, O
Laksmana! Your life having departed, as it
were, you are, however, not able even to
speak to me today, distressed as | am. (13)

येनाद्य बहवो युद्धे निहता राक्षसा: fart
तस्यामेवाद्य शूरस्त्वं शेषे विनिहत: WA ues

“Gallant as you are, you lie struck
down with darts today on the same ground
on which numerous ogres have been killed
by you in combat this very day! (14)

war: शरतल्पेऽस्मिन् सशोणितपरिस्रुत:।
शरभूतस्ततो भासि भास्करोऽस्तमिव व्रजन्॥ १५॥

“Lying on this bed of arrows, bathed
in blood, and converted into a bundle of
arrows, as it were, you look like the sun
sinking below the horizon with the arrows
transfixed in the body appearing like its
numberless rays and the blood flowing from
the numerous cuts accounting for the red
glow of the evening sun. (15)

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA +

बाणाभिहतमर्मत्वानन शक्नोषीह भाषितुम्।
रुजा चाब्रुवतो यस्य दृष्टिरागेण सूच्यते॥ १६॥

“Your vital parts having been pierced
with arrows, you cannot even speak on this
occasion. Nay, even though you are not
speaking, your anguish is revealed by the
redness of your eyes. (16)

aaa at at यान्तमनुयातो महाद्युति: |
अहमप्यनुयास्यामि तथैवैनं ATTN VII

“Even as this prince, who is clothed
with an extraordinary splendour, followed me
while | was retiring to the woods, so | too
shall follow him to the abode of Yama. (17)

इष्टबन्धुजनो fet a च नित्यमनुव्रत:।
इमामद्य गतोऽवस्थां ममानार्यस्य दुर्नयै:॥ १८॥
“He who loved his kinsfolk and was
ever devoted to me has reached this state
through the misdeeds of my ignoble self
today. (18)

सुरुष्टेनापि वीरेण लक्ष्मणेन न संस्मरे।
परुषं विप्रियं चापि श्रावितं तु कदाचन॥१९॥

“| do not recollect that a harsh and
even an unpalatable word was ever uttered
by the gallant Laksmana even when he was
deeply provoked. (19)

fara पञ्चबाणशतानि a:
इष्वस्त्रेष्वधिकस्तस्मात् कार्तवीर्याच्च लक्ष्मण: ॥ २० ॥

“Laksmana, who shot five hundred
arrows at a stretch, was as such superior
even to Kartavira (who could do so only
with his one thousand arms) in the art of
shooting arrows. (20)

अस्त्रैरस्त्राणि यो हन्याच्छक्रस्यापि महात्मन:।
Risa हत: शेते महार्हशयनोचित:॥ २१॥
“The same Laksmana, who could tear
asunder the missiles even of the mighty
Indra, the ruler of gods, and who was
deserving of reposing on a precious couch,
is lying here struck down on the bare ground!
(21)
