80

by you from the lips of these two boys
possessing the splendour of gods.” At the
same time he urged the two singers to
commence their recitation. They too chanted
the poem, whose theme was too well-known,
in a melodious and lovable tone, sweet as
the sound of a lute, nay, raised to a pitch
conformable to one’s will and agreeable to
the mind of the listeners. That song, which
sent a thrill through all the limbs and
gladdened the mind as well as the heart of
the listeners and was delightful to the ear,
made its mark in any gathering of men.
(28—34)
इमौ मुनी पार्थिवलक्षणान्वितौ कुशीलवौ चैव महातपस्विनौ ।
ममापि ag भूतिकरं प्रचक्षते महानुभावं चरितं निबोधत ।। ३७ ।।

“These two singers,” observed Sri
Rama, “are endowed with the auspicious

« VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

marks characteristic of rulers of the globe,
though they are hermits and great ascetics
to all appearances. Listen to the story sung
by them, which is of great consequence
because of its numerous literary excellences
and universal appeal and the wise declare it
as conducive even to my own well-being,
here as well as hereafter.” (35)

ततस्तु तौ रामवच:प्रचोदितावगायतां मार्गविधानसम्पदा।
स चापि राम: परिषद्गत: शनैर्बुभूषयासक्तमना THT ३६ A

Urged by the words of Sri Rama, of
course, the two boys then commenced the
recitation in full accord with the Marga*
style of singing. The celebrated Rama too,
who had by now joined the assembly,
gradually allowed his mind to be absorbed
in hearing the recitation with intent to
experience the joy surging from it. (36)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये बालकाण्डे चतुर्थ: सर्ग: ॥ ४॥

Thus ends Canto Four in the Balakanda of the glorious Ramayana of Valmiki,
the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

Canto V
A description of the city of Ayodhya

This entire globe has been the exclusive
property of victorious kings, commencing
from Vaivaswata Manu, a lord of created
beings. (1)

येषां स सगरो नाम सागरो येन Ulta: |
षष्टिपुत्रसहस्राणि Sat पर्यवारयन्॥२॥

In their line appeared the celebrated king,
Sagara by name, by whom was hollowed out
the ocean and whom, even as he went out

on an expedition to chastise his enemies, his
sixty thousand sons followed. (2)
इक्ष्वाकूणामिदं तेषां राज्ञां वंशे महात्मनाम्।
महदुत्पन्नमाख्यानं रामायणमिति श्रुतम्॥३॥
This great story, known by the name
of “Ramayana”, has its seeds in the line of
the same high-souled kings tracing their
descent from Ikswaku, the eldest son of
Vaivaswata: so it is heard. (3)

ated वर्तयिष्याव: ud निखिलमादित:।
धर्मकामार्थसहितं श्रोतव्यमनसूयता It ४॥

* Our Sastras mention two styles of singing, the Marga style and the Desi style. The former is resorted
to in singing songs in Sanskrit, while the latter is used in singing songs in the various Prakrta dialects or

vernaculars.
