1136

mt wt मे तारामाश्वासयितुमर्हथ।
Wren प्रियपुत्रा सा सानुक्रोशा तपस्विनी॥ १५॥

“You ought to console my real mother
Tara too. The poor lady is by her very
nature fond of her son (myself) and full of
compassion. (15)

विनष्टमिह मां strat व्यक्तं हास्यति जीवितम्।
एतावदुक्त्वा वचनं gota च॥ १६॥
विवेश चाङ्गदो भूमौ रुदन् दर्भेषु दुर्मना:।
wa संविशतस्तत्र रुदन्तो वानरर्षभा:॥१७॥
नयनेभ्य: प्रमुमुचुरुष्णं a aft दु:खिता:।
सुग्रीवं चैव निन्दन्त: प्रशंसन्तश्च वालिनम्॥ १८॥
परिवार्याङ्गदं सर्वे व्यवसन् प्रायमासितुम्।
ae वाक्यं वालिपुत्रस्य विज्ञाय प्लवगर्षभा:॥ १९॥
उपस्पृश्योदकं सर्वे प्राङ्मुखा: समुपाविशन्।
दक्षिणाग्रेषु दर्भेषु उदक्तीरं समाश्रिता:॥ २०॥

“She will evidently give up the ghost on
hearing of my being dead.” Saying this much
and greeting the aforesaid elderly monkeys,
Angada sank down weeping on the ground
on blades of the sacred KuSa grass, his
countenance woe begone. As he sat down
there, the foremost of monkeys shed burning
tears profusely from their eyes, sobbing at
the same time in distress. Denouncing
Sugriva and also praising Vali and
surrounding Angada, all resolved to starve
themselves to death. Reflecting on the
aforesaid utterance of Angada (the son of
Vali) and sipping water in order to consecrate
themselves, all the leaders of monkeys sat
down comfortably, their faces turned towards
the east, on blades of the sacred Kusa

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

grass with their ends pointing towards the
south, taking up their position on the northern
shore of the Indian Ocean. (16—20)

मुमूर्षवो हरिश्रेष्ठा ude क्षममिति स्म ह।
We वनवासं च क्षयं दशरथस्य च॥ २१॥
जनस्थानवधं चैव वधं चैव जटायुष:।
wu da ade वालिनश्च वधं तथा।
रामकोपं च वदतां हरीणां भयमागतम्॥ २२॥
Those jewels among the monkeys,
willing as they were to die, thought, they
say, that the aforesaid was the course
desirable for them. As the monkeys were
talking of Sri Rama’s exile and also of
DaSaratha’s death, nay, also of the carnage
in Janasthana as well as of the abduction of
Sita (a princess of the territory of Videha)
as also of the slaying of Jatayu and even
so of the killing of Vali and then of the wrath
of Sri Rama, another danger stared them in
the face. (21-22)

स संविशद्भिर्बहुभिर्महीधरो

With those numerous monkeys, who
themselves resembled the peaks of huge
mountains, sitting down and roaring in
dismay, the aforesaid mountain found
the interior of its caves resonant and
presented the appearance of the sky
resounding with the sound of thundering
clouds. (23)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये किष्किन्धाकाण्डे
पञ्चपञ्चाश: सर्ग: ॥ ५५ Il

Thus ends Canto Fifty-five in the Kiskindhakanda of the glorious Ramayana of Valmiki,
the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

