# YUDDHAKANDA +

retain my _ sovereignty even though
conjoined with stupid ministers like these.
(10)

किं नु मृत्योर्भयं नास्ति मां वक्तुं परुषं वच:।
यस्य A शासतो जिह्वा प्रयच्छति शुभाशुभम्॥ ११॥
“Did no fear of death really haunt
you when you made bold to speak such
insolent words to me, your ruler, whose
mere tongue can dispense good and evil to
you? (11)

अप्येव cet स्पृष्टवा वने तिष्ठन्ति पादपा:।
राजदण्डपरामृष्टास्तिष्ठन्ते नापराधिन: ।॥ १२॥

“Trees in a forest may remain standing
unscathed even on touching च forest
conflagration. No evil-doers can, however,
remain unpunished when made the target of
a rulers punishment. (12)
हन्यामहं त्विमौ पापौ शत्रुपक्षप्रशंसिनौ।
यदि पूर्वोपकारैर्मे क्रोधो न मृदुतां व्रजेत्॥१३॥

“| should undoubtedly put to death these
two sinful ogres hymning the praises of the
hostile ranks, had my anger not been
moderated by the thought of their past
services. (13)
अपध्वंसत नश्यध्वं संनिकर्षादितो मम।
नहि वां हन्तुमिच्छामि स्मराम्युपकृतानि वाम्।
edad कृतघ्नौ gl मयि स्नेहपराङ्मुखौ॥ १४॥

“Get out of my court for good and
disappear from my presence. | do not wish
to kill you since | am cognizant of your past
services. You two stand killed all the same,
ungrateful as you are and devoid of devotion
to me.” (14)

एवमुक्तौ तु सव्रीडौ तौ दृष्टवा शुकसारणौ।
रावणं जयशब्देन प्रतिनन्द्याभिनि:सृतौ॥ १५॥

Feeling abashed when admonished in
these words by Ravana, nay, looking at
Ravana and cheering him in the words “Be
victorious!”, Suka and Sarana, for their part,
withdrew. (15)

395

अब्रवीच्च दशग्रीव: समीपस्थं महोदरम्।
उपस्थापय मे शीघ्रं चारानिति निशाचर:।
महोदरस्तथोक्तस्तु शीघ्रमाज्ञापयच्चरान्॥ १६ Ul

Ravana, the ten-headed monster, further
said to Mahodara, standing close to him,
“Bring me other spies quickly.” Commanded
thus, the ranger of the night, Mahodara, for
his part speedily ordered spies to be present
before the king. (16)

ततश्चारा: संत्वरिता: WAT: पार्थिवशासनात्।
उपस्थिता: प्राञ्ञलयो वर्धयित्वा जयाशिष:॥ १७॥

Arrived posthaste in obedience to the
royal command, spies thereupon stood
in waiting before the king with joined
palms, pronouncing benedictions wishing him
victory. (17)

तानब्रवीत् ततो वाक्यं रावणो राक्षसाधिप:।
चारान् प्रत्यायिकाञ्शूरान् धीरान् विगतसाध्वसान्॥ १८ ॥

Ravana, the suzerain lord of ogres,
then spoke as follows to those spies,
who were trustworthy, brave, resolute and
fearless: (18)

इतो गच्छत रामस्य व्यवसायं परीक्षितुम्।
मन्त्रेष्वभ्यन्तरा येऽस्य प्रीत्या AA समागता:॥ १९॥

“Proceed from this place to ascertain
the plans of Rama as well as of those who
are nearest to him in deliberations and who
have got united with him through love. (19)

कथं स्वपिति जागर्ति fea a करिष्यति।
विज्ञाय निपुणं सर्वमागन्तव्यमशेषत:॥ २०॥

“Finding out definitely everything
thoroughly as to how he goes to bed, how
again he wakes up and what he intends to
do today, you should come back. (20)

युद्धे स्वल्पेन यत्नेन समासाद्य निरस्यते॥ २१॥

“An enemy whose movements and
strength have come to be known through a
spy is repulsed by wise monarchs with
very little effort after being assailed.” (21)
