846

survive long, but on treating with indignity a
woman like me there is no escape from

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

death for you even though you have quaffed
the drink of immortality, O ogre ! (24)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्येऽरण्यकाण्डेऽष्टचत्वारिंश: सर्ग: ॥ ४८ ॥

Thus ends Canto Forty-eight in the Aranyakanda of the glorious Ramayana of Valmiki,
the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

Canto XLIX
Ravana takes away Sita; Sita wails and catches sight of Jatayu

सीताया वचनं श्रुत्वा दशग्रीव: प्रतापवान्।
Bed हस्तं समाहत्य चकार BAe वपु:॥१॥
Hearing the rebuke of Sita, and violently
striking his hand against the other hand in
anger, the mighty Ravana, the ten-headed
monster, revealed his gigantic form. (1)

a मैथिलीं पुनर्वाक्यं बभाषे वाक्यकोविद:।
नोन्मत्तया श्रुतौ मन्ये मम वीर्यपराक्रमौ॥ २॥

A master of expression, he once more
addressed the following words to Sita, the
princess of Mithila : “I believe my valour and
prowess have not been heard of by you,
insane as you are. (2)
seed भुजाभ्यां तु मेदिनीमम्बरे स्थित:।
आपिबेयं समुद्रं च मृत्युं हन्यां रणे स्थित:॥ ३॥

“Standing in the air, | can actually lift
up the earth with my hands, drink up the
ocean on all sides and, stationed on a field
of battle, can kill even Death. (3)
कामरूपेण उन्मत्ते पश्य At कामरूपिणम्॥४॥

“With my sharp arrows | can torment
the sun and cleave the surface of the earth.
Look at me, who can take any form at will,
O lady ! intoxicated with passion and pride
of beauty !” (4)

एवमुक्तवतस्तस्य रावणस्य शिखिप्रभे।
Sat हरिपर्यन्ते Th AT Tau
By the time he had spoken thus the

eyes of the angry Ravana with dark corners
turned red and began to burn as fire. (5)

सद्य: सौम्यं परित्यज्य तीक्ष्णरूपं स Want: |

स्वं रूपं कालरूपाभं भेजे वैश्रवणानुज:॥६॥
Abandoning his benign aspect at once,

the said Ravana, a younger (half-) brother

of Kubera (son of Sage ViSrava), resumed

his own native fierce form, resembling that
of Death. (6)

संरक्तनयन: श्रीमांस्तप्तकाञ्चनभूषण: |

क्रोधेन महताविष्टो नीलजीमूतसंनिभ:॥ ७॥
With blood-red eyes the glorious ogre,

who was decked with ornaments of refined

gold and seized with great anger, looked
like a dark cloud. (7)

दशास्यो विंशतिभुजो बभूव क्षणदाचर:।
a परिव्राजकच्छद्य महाकायो विहाय aque

Shaking off the aforesaid disguise of a
wandering ascetic, the ranger of the night
assumed a colossal form with ten heads
and twenty arms. (8)

प्रतिपेदे tah BG Wau राक्षसाधिप:।
रक्ताम्बरधरस्तस्थौ स्त्रीरत्नं Yer मैथिलीम्॥९॥
Ravana, the suzerain lord of ogres,
resumed his native form and gazing on Sita,
the princess of Mithila, a veritable jewel
among women, stood clad in a red robe. (9)
स तामसितकेशान्तां भास्करस्य प्रभामिव।
वसनाभरणोपेतां मैथिलीं रावणोऽब्रवीत्॥ १०॥
