* BALAKANDA +

and jointly made the following submission to
him : (7)
परिक्रान्ता मही Gal सत्त्ववन्तश्च सूदिता:।

देवदानवरक्षांसि पिशाचोरगपन्नगा: ।। ८ ।।

“The entire globe has _ been
circumambulated and excavated and powerful
gods, demons and ogres, fiends, serpents
and Nagas destroyed by us. (8)

न च पश्यामहेऽश्वं a अश्वहर्तारमेव al
fe करिष्याम भद्रं a बुद्धिरत्र विचार्यताम्॥ ९॥

“Yet we have neither been able to
trace the horse nor the stealer of the horse.
What shall we do now? May your benign
look descend on us and let a further plan of
action be thought out for us in this matter.”

(9)
समन्युरब्रवीद् ae WR रघुनन्दन॥१०॥

Hearing the aforesaid submission of
those princes, O scion of Raghu, Sagara,
the noblest of kings, angrily replied as follows:

(10)
Wa: Gad wt at fasta वसुधातलम्।
अश्वहर्तारमासाद्य कृतार्थाश्च निवर्तत॥११॥

“May prosperity attend you, excavate
the earth further and, breaking it open,
trace the stealer of the horse and return
only when you have accomplished your
purpose.” (11)

पितुर्वचनमासाद्य सगरस्य महात्मन:।
षष्ळि पुत्रसहस्राणि रसातलमभिद्रवन्॥१२॥

Bowing to the command of their high-
souled father, Sagara, the sixty thousand
princes dug their way into Rasatala. (12)

GN ततस्तस्मिन् ददरृशु: पर्वतोपमम्।
दिशागजं विरूपाक्षं धारयन्तं महीतलम्॥१३॥
Even while the earth was being further
tunnelled, they saw as a sequel to that
excavation an elephant huge as a mountain,
Virupaksa by name, guarding the eastern
quarter and supporting the globe. (13)

181

सपर्वतवनां pet पृथिवीं रघुनन्दन।
धारयामास शिरसा क्खिपाक्षो महागज: ॥ १४॥
The great elephant Virupaksa, O scion
of Raghu, supported on his head the entire
globe including the mountains and forests.
(14)

यदा पर्वणि काकुत्स्थ विश्रमार्थं महागज:।
खेदाच्चालयते शीर्षं भूमिकम्पस्तदा भवेत्॥१५॥

Whenever, from exhaustion, O scion
of Kakutstha, the great elephant shakes his
head for the sake of relief, a convulsion of
the earth’s surface ensues. (15)
ते तं प्रदक्षिणं कृत्वा दिशापालं महागजम्।
मानयन्तो fe ते राम जग्मुर्भित्त्वा रसातलम्॥ १६॥

Walking clockwise round that great
elephant guarding the quarter, and thereby
showing their respect to him, O Rama, they
tunnelled their way through Rasatala indeed.

(16)
ad: Gat दिशं भित्त्वा दक्षिणां बिभिदु: पुन: |
दक्षिणस्यामपि दिशि ददृशुस्ते महागजम्॥१७॥
weet महात्मानं सुमहत्पर्वतोपमम्।
शिरसा धारयन्तं गां विस्मयं जग्मुरुत्तमम्॥१८॥

Having pierced the eastern quarter they
then penetrated the southern quarter too,
and in the southern quarter again they
found the great elephant, Mahapadma,
endowed with a colossal body resembling a
huge mountain and supporting the earth on
his head, and experienced great wonder.

(17-18)
ते तं प्रदक्षिणं कृत्वा सगरस्य महात्मन:।
षष्टि: पुत्रसहस्राणि पश्चिमां बिभिदुर्दिशम्॥१९॥

Walking round the elephant from left to
right as a mark of respect, the sixty thousand

sons of the high-souled Sagara penetrated
the western quarter. (19)

पश्चिमायामपि दिशि महान्तमचलोपमम्।
दिशागजं सौमनसं ददृशुस्ते महाबला:॥ २०॥

In the western quarter too those very
