* ARANYAKANDA «

“What for did Ravana bear away the
noble lady and what offence was given to
him by me, in consideration of which my
darling was borne away by Ravana? (5)
कथं तच्चन्द्रसंकाशं मुखमासीन्मनोहरम्।
सीतया कानि चोक्तानि तस्मिन् काले द्विजोत्तम॥ ६ ॥

“How did that soul-captivating moon-
like face appear and what words were uttered
by Sita at that moment, O jewel among
birds? (6)

कथं ad: कथं wa: किं Hat स च राक्षस:।

wa चास्य भवनं aa ब्रूहि मे परिपृच्छ्त:॥ ७॥
“How powerful is that ogre, how does

he look and what are his doings? Also

where is his home, dear uncle? Answer me

as | question you.” (7)

तमुद्बीक्ष्य स धर्मात्मा विलपन्तमनाथवत्।
arn विक्लवया राममिदं वचनमब्रवीत्॥८॥

Fondly perceiving Sri Rama lamenting
like one without a protector, Jatayu, whose
mind was set on virtue, replied to him in
faltering accents as follows : (8)

सा Et राक्षसेन्द्रेण रावणेन दुरात्मना।

मायामास्थाय विपुलां वातदुर्दिनसंकुलाम्॥९॥
“Falling back upon extensive conjuring

tricks ushering a storm and cloudy weather,

Sita was borne away by the evil-minded
Ravana, the ruler of ogres. (9)
परिक्लान्तस्य A तात पक्षौ छित्त्वा निशाचर:।
सीतामादाय वैदेहीं प्रयातो दक्षिणामुख:॥ १०॥
“Lopping off my wings, exhausted as |
was, O dear one, and taking Sita, a princess
of the Videha territory, the night-stalker
departed with his face towards the south.
(10)
उपरुध्यन्ति मे प्राणा gftesata राघव।

पश्यामि वृक्षान् सौवर्णानुशीरकृतमूर्धजान्॥११॥

“My senses are becoming dull and my
vision is growing unsteady. | perceive the
trees made of gold with hair resembling the
Usira grass growing on their tops. (11)

905

at याति मुहूर्तेन सीतामादाय रावण:।
विप्रणष्टं at क्षिप्रं तत्स्वामी प्रतिपद्यते॥१२॥

“The owner of a treasure, wantonly lost
during the hour in which Ravana departed
taking Sita, is able to recover it speedily. (12)

विन्दो नाम मुहूर्तोऽसौ न च काकुत्स्थ सोऽबुधत्।
त्वत्प्रियां जानकीं ea रावणो राक्षसेश्वर:।
झषवद् बडिशं गृह्य क्षिप्रमेव विनश्यति॥१३॥

“It was an hour ‘Vinda’ by name.
Ravana, however did not know it, O scion
of Kakutstha! Having borne away your
beloved spouse, Sita (daughter of Janaka),
Ravana, the king of ogres, will perish very
soon as a fish on swallowing a hook. (13)

न च त्वया व्यथा कार्या जनकस्य Tat प्रति।
वैदेह्या रंस्यसे fad war तं रणमूर्धनि॥१४॥
“Nor should anxiety be felt by you on
the score of Janaka’s daughter; for, having
killed him soon in the van of fight, you will
feel happy with Sita, a princess of the Videha
territory.” (14)

असम्मूढस्य गृध्रस्य रामं प्रत्यनुभाषत:।
आस्यात् सुस्राव रुधिरं म्रियमाणस्य सामिषम्॥ १७५ ॥
While the vulture, who remained
undeluded even though dying, was replying
to Sri Rama, blood with pieces of flesh
flowed from his mouth. (15)

पुत्रो विश्रवस: साक्षाद् भ्राता वैश्रवणस्य च।
इत्युक्त्वा CAM प्राणान् मुमोच UPA: ॥। १६॥

“He (Ravana) is a son of Sage Visrava
himself and a half-brother of Kubera, the
first-born son of ViSrava.” Saying so, Jatayu,
the king of birds, yielded up his life, which
was difficult to retain. (16)

afte ब्रूहीति रामस्य ब्रुवाणस्य कृताञ्जले:।
त्यक्त्वा शरीरं गृध्रस्य प्राणा जग्मुर्विहायसम्॥ १७॥

In the presence of Sri Rama, who went
on saying: “Speak, speak (further) !” with
joined palms as a mark of respect to his
father’s friend, the life-breath of the vulture
rose to the skies leaving his body. (17)
