* SUNDARAKANDA +

149

Canto XXXII

Imagining Hanuman to have been seen in a dream, though actually perceived
by her, and believing the sight of a monkey in a dream to be ominous,
Sita becomes anxious about the welfare of Sri Rama and others.
Then concluding him on other grounds to have been seen in
her waking hours, she prays to Brahma and other gods
that the statement of Hanuman may come out to be true

तत: शाखान्तरे लीनं gear चलितमानसा।

वेष्टितार्जुनवस्त्र तं विद्युत्संघातपिंगलम्॥१॥
Then, beholding Hanuman, clad in white

and tawny like a series of flashes of lightning,

concealed under cover of boughs, Sita felt
disturbed in mind. (1)

सा cat aft aa प्रश्रितं प्रियवादिनम्।
फुल्लाशोकोत्कराभासं तप्तचामीकरेक्षणम्॥ २॥

She noticed there a monkey, meek
and kind in speech, shining like a cluster of
expanded Asoka flowers and with eyes bright
as refined gold. (2)

साथ gear हरिश्रेष्ठं विनीतवदवस्थितम्।
मैथिली चिन्तयामास विस्मयं परमं गता॥३॥

Struck with extreme wonder to see
Hanuman, the foremost of monkeys, sitting
in a humble posture, the aforesaid princess
of Mithila now reflected as follows: (3)

अहो भीममिदं सत्त्वं वानरस्य दुरासदम्।
दुर्निरीक्ष्यमिदं मत्वा पुनरेव मुमोह सा॥४॥
‘Ah, how terrible is this being of the
monkey family !’ Nay, regarding it as difficult
to approach and hideous to behold, she
fainted once more suspecting it to be illusory.
(4)

विललाप भृशं tat करुणं भयमोहिता।
राम रामेति दु:खार्ता लक्ष्मणेति च भामिनी॥ I
Distracted with fear and stricken with
agony, the lovely Sita piteously cried again
and again: “Rama ! O Rama ! O Laksmana !”

(5)

ete wea सीता मन्दमन्दस्वरा adil
साथ gea हरिवरं विनीतवदुपागतम्।
मैथिली चिन्तयामास स्वप्नोऽयमिति भामिनी ।। ६॥

Nay, the virtuous Sita fell a-sobbing all
at once in faint accents. Seeing Hanuman,
the foremost of monkeys, come near in a
humble mien in the meantime, the lovely
Sita thought that it must be a dream (6)

सा वीक्षमाणा पृथुभुग्नवक्त्रं
शाखामृगेन्द्रस्य यथोक्तकारम्।
वातात्मजं बुद्धिमतां वरिष्ठम्॥ ७॥
Looking round, in order to make sure
that the ogresses were not looking at her or
at the monkey, she beheld Hanuman, son
of the wind-god, a jewel among the monkeys,
adored even by the great, the foremost of
the wise, who was obedient to Sugriva (the
ruler of monkeys) and who had big jaws,
one of which had been broken by means of
the thunderbolt hurled by Indra to arrest his
progress towards the sun to devour the
solar orb. (7)
सा तं समीक्ष्यैव yet विपन्ना
गतासुकल्पेव aya सीता।
विचिन्तयामास विशालनेत्रा॥ ८॥

Getting utterly unconscious at the very
sight of Hanuman, the aforesaid Sita
became like one lifeless. Nay, regaining
consciousness after a long time, the large-
eyed lady began to reflect as follows: (8)
