# YUDDHAKANDA #

divisions of the terrestrial globe from one
another) at the time of the final dissolution.
(18)

तेषां राम: शरै: षड्भि: षड्जघान निशाचरान्।
निमेषान्तरमात्रेण शरैरग्निशिखोपमै: ।। १९॥

In the mere twinkling of an eye, Sri
Rama struck down with six shafts, resembling
tongues of flame, six principal prowlers of
the night among the ogres. (19)

यज्ञशत्रुश्च दुर्धर्षो महापार्श्वमहोदरौ।
वज्रदंष्ट्रो महाकायस्तौ चोभौ शुकसारणौ॥ २०॥
They were YajhaSatru, who was difficult
to overcome, Mahaparswa and Mahodara,
the gigantic Vajradarhstra and both Suka
and Sarana, mentioned before. (20)

ते तु रामेण बाणौघै: सर्वमर्मसु ताडिता:।

युद्धादपसृतास्तत्र सावशेषायुषोऽभवन्॥ २१॥
Pierced by Sri Rama with showers of

arrows in their vital parts, the ogres, however,

slipped away from the battle, and their life
was saved thereby. (21)

निमेषान्तरमात्रेण श्चोरैरग्निशिखोपमै: |
दिशश्चकार विमला: प्रदिशश्च महारथ:॥ २२॥

In the mere twinkling of an eye, the
great car-warrior, Sri Rama, lit up all the
quarters as well as the intermediate points
with his formidable arrows resembling
tongues of flame. (22)

ये त्वन्ये राक्षसा वीरा रामस्याभिमुखे स्थिता:।

तेऽपि नष्टा: समासाद्य पतङ्गा इव पावकम्॥ २३॥
Those other ogre champions too who

for their part stood in front of Sri Rama,

perished as moths would on coming in
contact with fire. (23)

सुवर्णपुङ्खैर्विशिखै: सम्पतद्भि: समन्तत:।
aya wet चित्रा खटद्योतैरिव शारदी॥ २४॥

With golden-feathered arrows raining
on all sides the night looked bright as an
autumnal night illumined with fire-flies.

(24)

453

राक्षसानां च निनदैर्भेरीणां चैव नि:स्वनै: ।
सा aya निशा घोरा भूयो घोरतराभवत्॥ २५॥

Nay, the said night, which was already
dreadful, turned all the more fearful becaue
of the yells of the ogres and the roll of
kettledrums. (25)

तेन शब्देन महता Wat समन्तत:।
त्रिकूट: कंदराकोर्ण: प्रव्याहरदिवाचल:॥ २६॥
Resounding with that loud outcry,
that had swelled on all sides, the Trikuta
mountain, which was thickly set with caves,
responded as it were to someone's call.
(26)

गोलाङ्गूला महाकायास्तमसा तुल्यवर्चस:।
सम्परिष्वज्य बाहुभ्यां भक्षयन् रजनीचरान्॥ २७॥

Folding the prowlers of the night tightly
in their arms, the gigantic Golangulas (long-
tailed and black-faced monkeys), who were
dark as night, crushed them to death and
allowed them to be devoured by jackals and
vultures etc. (27)

अङ्गदस्तु रणे शत्रून् Ped समुपस्थित:।
रावणिं निजघानाशु सारथिं च हयानपि॥ २८॥

Angada, for his part, who was
determined to exterminate the enemies on
the field of battle, wounded in no time Indrajit
(son of Ravana), his charioteer and horses,
too. (28)

इन्द्रजित् तु रथं त्यक्त्वा हताश्वो हतसारथि:।
अङ्गदेन महाकायस्तत्रैवान्तरधीयत॥ २९॥

Leaving his chariot, Indrajit, on the
other hand, whose horses and charioteer
had been killed by Angada, vanished on that
very spot, greatly fatigued as he was.

(29)
ad कर्म वालिपुत्रस्य सर्वे देवा: सहर्षिभि:।
तुष्टुवु: पूजनार्हस्य तौ चोभौ रामलक्ष्मणौ।। ३०॥

All the gods (who had been witnessing

the combat from their arieal cars) alongwith
Rsis (seers of Vedic Mantras), as also both
