॥ श्रीसीतारामचन्द्राभ्यां नम:॥

mad Valmiki Ramayana

(Uttarakanda)
[Book Seven]

Canto |

Great seers meet Sri Rama in the audience hall, his conversation
with them and the questions he addresses to them

प्राप्तराज्यस्य रामस्य राक्षसानां at pd

आजग्मुर्मुनय: सर्वे राघवं प्रतिनन्दितुम्॥१॥
When Sri Rama had regained the

kingdom, after the destruction of the

Raksasas, all the sages came to offer their
felicitations to him. (1)

कौशिकोऽथ यवक्रीतो Wrat गालव एव च।
कण्वो मेधातिथे: पुत्र: पूर्वस्यां दिशि ये श्रिता:॥ २॥
स्वस्त्यात्रेयश्च भगवान् नमुचि: प्रमुचिस्तथा।
अगस्त्योऽत्रिश्च भगवान् सुमुखो विमुखस्तथा॥ ३॥
आजग्मुस्ते सहागस्त्या ये श्रिता दक्षिणां दिशम्।

: कवषो eta: कौशेयश्च Aerie: sl
तेऽप्याजग्मु: सशिष्या वै ये श्रिता: पश्चिमां दिशम्।
वसिष्ठ: कश्यपोऽथात्रिर्विश्वामित्र: सगौतम:॥ ५॥
जमदग्निर्भरद्वाजस्तेऽपि सप्तर्षयस्तथा।
उदीच्यां दिशि waa नित्यमेव निवासिन:॥६॥
सम्प्राप्यैते महात्मानो राघवस्य निवेशनम्।
विष्ठिता: प्रतिहारार्थं हुताशनसमप्रभा:॥७॥

वेदवेदाङ्गविदुषो नानाशास्त्रविशारदा: |
द्वा:स्थं प्रोवाच धर्मात्मा अगस्त्यो मुनिसत्तम:॥ ८॥
निवेद्यतां दाशरथेर्कषयो वरयमागता:।
प्रतीहारस्ततस्तूर्णमगस्त्यवचनाद् द्रुतम्॥ ९॥
waa राघवस्याशु प्रविवेश महात्मन:।
नयेङ्नितज्ञ: सद्वृत्तो दक्षो धैर्यसमन्वित:॥१०॥

Kausika, Yavakrita, Gargya, Galava,
Kanva, the son of Medhatithi—sages who
resided in the eastern quarter; Swastyatreya,
the revered Namuci, Pramuci, Agastya and
alongwith Agastya came the revered Atri,
Sumukha, Vimukha—sages who resided in
the southern quarter; Nrsangu, Kavasa,
Dhaumya, the great seer KauSeya—sages
who resided in the western quarter, came
attended by their disciples; Vasistha*,
Kasyapa, Atri, ViSwamitra alongwith
Gautama, Jamadagni and Bharadwaja—
seven seers residing permanently in the
northern quarter—all these high-souled

* Vasistha was already present in Ayodhya as the family-priest and preceptor of the kings of Ikswaku’s
dynsty. He simultaneously existed in another form in the region of the Saptarsis. It is this latter who is
spoken of as having arrived from that region on that occasion.
