134

“Or, the two gallant brothers, Sri Rama
and Laksmana, have been caused to be
killed through some trick by the evil-minded
Ravana, the lord of ogres. (45)

साहमेवंविधे काले मर्तुमिच्छामि ada:
न च मे विहितो मृत्युरस्मिन् दु:खेऽतिवर्तति॥४६॥

“Situated as | am, | wish to die by all
means at such a juncture; my death, however,
is not ordained even in my present extreme
agony. (46)
धन्या: खलु महात्मानो मुनय: सत्यसम्मता:।
जितात्मानो महाभागा येषां न स्त: प्रियाप्रिये॥४७॥

“Happy indeed are the magnanimous
and highly blessed hermits by whom the

highest Reality has been fully recognized
as their very Self and who have subdued

« VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

the self and in whose eyes the pleasing and
the displeasing do not exist. (47)

प्रियान्नं सम्भवेद दु:खमप्रियादधिकं भवेत्।
ताभ्यां fe ते वियुज्यन्ते नमस्तेषां महात्मनाम्॥ ४८ ।।

“To them sorrow does not follow from
the pleasing, being snatched away, nor does
it grow intense through the displeasing being
met with, inasmuch as they are rid of joy and
sorrow. Hail to those high-souled ones! (48)

साहं त्यक्ता प्रियेणैव रामेण विदितात्मना।
प्राणांस्त्यक्ष्यामि पापस्य रावणस्य गता वशम्॥ SF UI

“Situated as | am, I, who have been
forsaken by my beloved Sri Rama himself,
a knower of the Self, and I, who have fallen
into the clutches of the sinful Ravana, shall
give up the ghost.” (49)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये सुन्दरकाण्डे षड्विंश: सर्ग: ॥ २६ ॥

Thus ends Canto Twenty-six in the Sundarakanda of the glorious Ramayana of
Valmiki, the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

Canto XXVII

Risen from sleep, an ogress, Trijata by name, speaks to her companions
intimidating Sita, of a dream she saw only a few minutes before
revealing the triumph of Sri Rama and the discomfiture of Ravana,
and stops them from molesting Sita. Pressed by them,
she relates the dream to them and also speaks
of the omens portending the triumph of Sita

इत्युक्ता: सीतया घोरं राक्षस्य: क्रोधमूच्छिता:।
काश्चिज्जग्मुस्तदाख्यातुं रावणस्य दुरात्मन:॥१॥
Distracted through anger when told by
Sita of her violent intention, some ogresses
proceeded to communicate it to the evil-
minded Ravana. (1)
aa: सीतामुपागम्य राक्षस्यो भीमदर्शना:।
पुन: परुषमेकार्थमनर्थार्थमथान्रुवन्॥ २॥

Approaching Sita, the ogresses of
hideous aspect then spoke to her again the

following harsh words, which harped on the
same point and spelt disaster to them alone:

(2)
अद्येदानीं तवानार्ये सीते पापविनिश्चये।
राक्षस्यो भक्षयिष्यन्ति मांसमेतद् यथासुखम्॥ ३॥

“O wretched Sita of sinful resolve, the
ogresses will feast at pleasure on this flesh
of yours this very moment today.” (3)

राक्षसी त्रिजटा वृद्धा प्रबुद्धा वाक्यमब्रवीत्॥४॥
