# YUDDHAKANDA +

397

Canto XXX

Dispatched by Ravana to ascertain the strength of the simian army,
the ogre Sardula acquaints his master with
the topmost leaders of the monkeys

ततस्तमक्षोभ्यबलं लङ्काधिपतये चरा:।
सुवेले wad viet निविष्टं प्रत्यवेदयन्॥१॥
The spies thereupon reported to Ravana
(the sovereign of Lanka) about Sri Rama
(a scion of Raghu) having encamped
with his unshakable army on the Suvela
mountain. (1)
जातोद्वेगोऽभवत् किंचिच्छार्दूलं वाक्यमब्रवीत्॥ 2
Hearing from the mouth of his spies
about Sri Rama, who was endowed with
extraordinary might, having arrived at
the very door of Lanka, Ravana felt a
bit perturbed and spoke to Sardila as
follows: (2)

अयथावच्च A aut दीनश्चासि निशाचर।
नासि कच्चिदमित्राणां क्रुद्धानां वशमागत:॥ ३॥
“Your colour is not as it should be;
nay, you look wretched, too, O ranger of
the night! | hope you did not fall into the
sway of enraged enemies.” (3)

इति तेनानुशिष्टस्तु वाचं मन्दमुदीरयन्।
तदा राक्षसशार्दूलं शार्दूलो भयविक्लव:॥४॥

Questioned in these words by Ravana,
Sardula for his part, who had been unnerved
by fear, then replied to Ravana (a tiger
among the ogres) in faint accents as follows:

(4)
न ते चारयितुं शक्या राजन् वानरपुङ्गवा:।
विक्रान्ता बलवन्तश्च राघवेण च era: UG I

“Those bulls among the monkeys are
not liable to being spied upon, O king, valiant
and mighty and protected by Rama (a scion

of Raghu) as they are.

नापि सम्भाषितुं शक्या: सम्प्रश्नोऽत्र न लभ्यते।
सर्वतो wad wer amt: पर्वतोपमै:॥६॥

“They are not capable even of being
talked with nor is there any scope for a
question being put to them: for access to
them is guarded on all sides by monkeys
looking like mountains. (6)

प्रविष्टमात्रे ज्ञातोऽहं act तस्मिन् विचारिते।
बलाद् गृहीतो रक्षोभिर्बहुधास्मि विचारित:॥७॥

“The aforesaid army ४883 barely
penetrated into by me and began to be
examined when | was detected and forcibly
seized by the ogres forming the retinue of
Vibhisana and was made to march hither
and thither in various gaits. (7)

जानुभिर्मुष्टिभिर्दन्तैस्तलैश्चाभिहतो भृशम्।
परिणीतोऽस्मि हरिभिर्बलमध्ये अमर्षणै:॥८॥

“| was severely belaboured on all sides
with knees, fists, teeth and palms by the
indignant monkeys and paraded all through
in the army. (8)
परिणीय च ada aise रामसंसदि।
रुधिरस्राविदीनाङ्नो विह्वलश्चलितेन्द्रिय: ।। ९॥

“After parading me everywhere | was
led into the court of Rama, unnerved as |
was, my limbs bleeding and afflicted, and
my senses perturbed. (9)
हरिभिर्वध्यमानश्च याचमान: कृताञ्जलि:।
राघवेण परित्रातो मा मेति च यदृच्छया॥१०॥

“While being smitten by the monkeys
and asking for protection with joined palms,

(5)
