« KISKINDHAKANDA +

1119

Canto XLIX

Asking the monkeys who accompanied him to the south and who had begun
to feel diffident about their success to take note of the delay that was
taking place in carrying out the command of Sugriva and to beware of
Sugriva’s wrath, which was sure to follow in consequence of the
delay, Angada advises them to take heart and encourages them to
pursue their search vigorously. Encouraged by his enlivening
words, they sally forth once more to renew their search in
the cave of the Silver Mountain and, getting exhausted
after a strenuous search, repose awhile in a
grove and get ready to resume their efforts

अथाङ्गदस्तदा सर्वान् वानरानिदमब्रवीत्।
परिश्रान्तो vest: समाश्चास्य शानैर्वच:॥ १॥

Reassuring all the monkeys (which had
accompanied him), the highly intelligent
Angada, who was thoroughly exhausted as
a result of the strenuous search, now slowly
addressed the following exhortation to them
on that occasion : (1)

वनानि गिरयो नद्यो दुर्गाणि गहनानि च।
दरी गिरिगुहाश्चैव विचिता: सर्वमन्तत:॥२॥
wa da सहास्माभिर्जानकी न च दृश्यते।
तथा रक्षोऽपहर्ता च सीतायाश्चैव दुष्कृती॥ ३॥

“Woods, mountains, rivers, places
difficult of access and impenetrable forests,
holes in the ground as well as mountain-
caves have all been finally ransacked by us
together everywhere. Sita (the daughter of
King Janaka) is, however, not to be seen,
nor even the ogre, Ravana, of sinful deeds,
the abductor of Sita. (2-3)

कालश्च नो महान् यात: सुग्रीवश्चोग्रशासन:।
wate भवन्त: सहिता विचिन्वन्तु समन्तत:॥४॥

“A considerable time has moreover
slipped past us and Sugriva rules with an
iron hand. Therefore, you should carry on
the search all round together. (4)
विहाय तन्द्रीं शोकं च निद्रां चैव समुत्थिताम्।
विचिनुध्वं तथा सीतां पश्यामो जनकात्मजाम्॥ ५॥

“Giving up languor, grief and sleep that
has fully come over you, search for Sita in
such a way that we may discover the
daughter of Janaka. (5)

अनिर्वेदं च det च मनसश्चापराजयम्।
कार्यसिद्धिकराण्याहुस्तस्मादेतद् ब्रवीम्यहम्॥ Il
“They speak of untiring zeal and
capability and indefatigability of spirit as
conducive to success; hence do | speak to
you as follows: (6)
अद्यापीदं at gt विचिन्वन्तुं वनौकस:।
Gd त्यक्त्वा पुन: ad वनमेव विचिन्वताम्॥७॥
“Let all the monkeys comb this forest,
which is difficult of access, even today.

Shaking off lassitude, let them scour the
entire forest once more. (7)
अवश्यं कुर्वतां तस्य दृश्यते HAUT: फलम्।
wm निर्वेदमागम्य नहि नोन्मीलनं क्षमम्॥८॥
“To those who are engaged in action
the fruit of that action invariably becomes
manifest; it is, therefore, not at all advisable
to become inert, giving way to utter
despondency. (8)

सुग्रीव: क्रोधनो राजा तीक्ष्णदण्डश्च वानरा:।
भेतव्यं तस्य Wad Wat च महात्मन:॥९॥

“King Sugriva, O monkeys, is irascible
and metes out severe punishment. We
