164

exceptionally glorious king (KuSanabha), the
ruler of the earth, gave away with a most
cheerful mind all the hundred girls to him.
(21)
यथाक्रमं dar पाणिं जग्राह रघुनन्दन।
ब्रह्मदत्तो महीपालस्तासां देवपतिर्यथा॥ २२॥
At the time of marriage, O scion of
Raghu, King Brahmadatta, who shone like
Indra (the ruler of gods), married them one
after another by taking their hands in his in
order of seniority. (22)

स्पृष्टमात्रे तदा पाणौ विकुब्जा विगतज्वरा:।
युक्तं परमया लक्ष्म्या बभौ कन्याशतं तदा॥ २३॥
The moment their hands were touched
by Brahmadatta in the course of the wedding,
the girls got cured of their deformity and
were rid of their agony. Invested with supreme
splendour all the hundred girls shone brightly
at that time. (23)

स दृष्टा वायुना मुक्ता: कुशनाभो महीपति:।
aya परमप्रीतो हर्षं AY पुन: पुन:॥ २४॥

« VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

King KuSanabha was highly pleased to
see them freed from morbid affection of the
windy humour in their body and experienced
joy again and again. (24)
कृतोद्बाहं तु राजानं ब्रह्मदत्तं महीपतिम्।

Per प्रेषयामास सोपाध्यायगणं तदा॥ २५॥

King KuSanabha then sent away King
Brahmadatta, the delighter of his subjects,
alongwith his wedded wives and the host of
his family-priests, as soon as he was actually
married. (25)
सोमदापि सुतं दृष्टा पुत्रस्य सदृशीं क्रियाम्।
यथान्यायं च गन्धर्वो स्नुषास्ता: प्रत्यनन्दत।

CAR CST च ता: कन्या: कुशनाभं WET च Il २६ ॥

Seeing the union of her son worthy of
her, Somada, the Gandharva damsel, too
joyfully greeted her son as well as her
aforesaid daughters-in-law, one after another,
in order of seniority and, embracing the said
brides again and again and applauding
KuSanabha for his hospitality and rich dowry,
she departed from there. (26)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये बालकाण्डे FIAT: TW: ॥ 33 ॥

Thus ends Canto Thirty-three in the Balakanda of the glorious Ramayana of
Valmiki, the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

Canto XXXIV
KuSanabha performs a sacrifice for the birth of a son and is blessed

with one, Gadhi by name; the glory of the river Kausiki
(the modern Kosi in Bihar)

कृतोद्बाहे गते तस्मिन् awed च राघव।
aaa: पुत्रलाभाय पौत्रीमिष्टिमकल्पयत्॥१॥

The aforesaid Brahmadatta having left
after being married, O scion of Raghu,
Kusanabha, who had no male _ issue,
embarked upon a sacrifice intended to
procure a son with the object of securing a
male issue. (1)

इष्ट्यां q वर्तमानायां कुशनाभं महीपतिम्।
sara परमोदार: कुशो ब्रह्मसुतस्तदा॥ २॥

In the meantime, while the sacrifice

was- actually going on, the highly
magnanimous Kusa, the father of
Kusanabha and son of Brahma (the

creator) prophesied to King KuSanabha as
follows : (2)
