* BALAKANDA +

“Having realized his ambition of being
recognized as a Brahmana and remaining
devoted to his austerities, he traversed the
entire globe. In this way, O Rama, was
Brahmanhood actually attained (in this very
birth without changing his body) by the
high-minded ViSwamitra. (28)
wa wa मुनिश्रेष्ठ wa विग्रहवांस्तप:।
wea धर्म: परो नित्यं वीर्यस्यैष परायणम्॥ 28 II

“He is the foremost amongst sages,
O Rama! He is asceticism incarnate. He is
supreme virtue personified; nay, he is the
highest and perennial abode of prowess.”
(29)
एवमुक्त्वा महातेजा विरराम द्विजोत्तम:।
शतानन्दवच: श्रुत्वा रामलक्ष्मणसंनिधौ॥ ३०॥
जनक: प्राञ्जलिर्वाक्यमुवाच कुशिकात्मजम्।
धन्योऽस्म्यनुगृहीतोऽस्मि यस्य मे मुनिपुंगव॥ ३१॥
यज्ञं काकुत्स्थसहित: प्राप्तवानसि कौशिक।
पावितोऽहं त्वया ब्रह्मन् दर्शनेन महामुने॥ ३२॥
Saying so, the highly glorious
Satananda, the foremost among Brahmanas,
became silent. Hearing the narration of
Satananda, King Janaka spoke to Vigwamitra
(son of Kusika) with folded-hands in the
presence of Sri Rama and Laksmana as
follows : “I am blessed and stand beholden
to you, O jewel among sages, in that you
have paid a visit to my sacrifice alongwith
Sri Rama and Laksmana (the two scions of
Kakutstha), O son of Kusika! | stand
hallowed, O holy Brahmana, by your sight,
O great sage ! (30—32)
गुणा बहुविधा: प्राप्तास्तव संदर्शनान्मया।
विस्तरेण च a ब्रह्मन् कीर्त्यमानं महत्तप:॥ ३३॥
Tt Wat महातेजो रामेण च महात्मना।
सदस्यै: प्राप्य च सद: श्रुतास्ते Teal WOT: i ३४॥
“Manifold benefits have been derived
by me through your sight at close quarters,
inasmuch as on joining this sacrificial
assembly with my counsellors today the
story of your many great austerities as well
as an account of your many virtues, as

249

being told at length by Satananda, has
been heard by me, O highly glorious
Brahmana, as well as by the high-souled
Sri Rama. (33-34)
अप्रमेयं तपस्तुभ्यमप्रमेयं च ते बलम्।
अप्रमेया गुणाश्चैव नित्यं aA कुशिकात्मज॥ ३५॥
“Unfathomable is your asceticism and
immeasurable is your strength. And ever
incalculable indeed are your excellences, O
son of Kusika ! (35)
तृप्तिराश्चर्यभूतानां कथानां नास्ति मे विभो।
कर्मकालो मुनिश्रेष्ठं लम्बते रविमण्डलम्॥ ३६॥
“| find no satiety in hearing your
marvellous stories, O powerful sage! The
hour of religious rites to be gone through at
dusk, however, is drawing near; the sun is
setting, O jewel among sages ! (36)
Va: प्रभाते महातेजो द्रष्टुमर्हसि At TA: |
स्वागतं जपतां SS मामनुज्ञातुमर्हसि॥ ३७॥
“Tomorrow morning, O highly glorious
sage, be pleased to meet me again. Welcome
is your advent to my capital, O jewel among
ascetics ! Kindly grant me leave to depart.”
(37)
एवमुक्तो मुनिवर: प्रशस्य पुरुषर्षभम्।
विससर्जाशु जनकं प्रीतं प्रीतमनास्तदा॥ ३८॥
ViSwamitra, the foremost of sages, felt
delighted in his mind on that occasion when
addressed in these words. Extolling Janaka,

who was all love, he soon allowed that
jewel among men to go. (38)

`एवमुक्त्वा मुनिश्रेष्ठं acer मिथिलाधिप:।
प्रदक्षिणं चकाराशु सोपाध्याय: सबान्धव:॥ ३९॥
Having addressed Viswamitra (the
foremost of sages) as aforesaid, King Janaka
(of the Videha dynasty), the ruler of Mithila,
alongwith his family priest and relations
quickly went round him clockwise and
departed. (39)
विश्वामित्रोऽपि धर्मात्मा सहराम: सलक्ष्मण:।
स्ववासमभिचक्राम पूज्यमानो महात्मभि:॥४०॥

Accompanied by Sri Rama and
