* AYODHYAKANDA +

अम्ब सम्भृत्य सम्भारान् दु:खं We निगृह्य च।
वनवासकृता बुद्धिर्मम धर्म्यनुवर्त्यताम्॥५०॥

“Removing the materials collected for
the installation and restraining the agony in
the heart, let my righteous resolution of
taking up my abode in the forest be carried
out.” (50)
Uae वचस्तस्य निशम्य माता

सुधर्म्यमव्यग्रमविक्लवं च।
समीक्ष्य TH पुनरित्युवाच॥७५१॥

Hearing the aforesaid submission of
Sri Rama, which was fully conformable to
the principles of righteousness and was
marked with patience and courage, the royal
mother regained her consciousness like a
dead woman coming to life again and, looking
intently on Sri Rama, spoke to him once
more as follows : (51)
aia a ua पिता ane
Te: स्वधर्मेण सुहृत्तया a
न त्वानुजानामि न मां विहाय
सुदु:खितामर्हसि पुत्र TATUNG I
“By virtue of my having discharged my
duty of tending you as well as by virtue of
my affection towards you, | am worthy of
your adoration in the same way, my son, as
your father and | do not grant leave to you
to retire to the woods. Therefore, leaving
me sore distressed, my son, you ought not
to go. (52)
fe जीवितेनेह विना त्वया 4
लोकेन वा किं स्वधयामृतेन।
ममैव कृत्स्नादपि जीवलोकात्॥ ५३ ॥
“What is to be gained by me through
life without you in this world or what joy
shall | derive through the other world or
through offering, received by the departed
in the realm of the manes or even through
ambrosia—the food of the gods in heaven if
| am transferred to these realms after death?

377

Preferable to me is your presence even for
an hour or so than the company or even the
governance of the entire living creation !”

(53)
नरैरिवोल्काभिरपोह्यमानो
महागजो ध्वान्तमभिप्रविष्ट:।
निशम्य WA: HSU जनन्या:॥ ५४॥

Hearing, as aforesaid, the piteous wail
of his mother, Sri Rama grew all the more
impetuous (impatient to escape) even as a
lordly elephant that has entered a gloomy
retreat would, when goaded by men laying
the trap to catch it with firebrands. (54)
स मातरं wa विसंज्ञकल्पा-

मार्तं च सौमित्रिमभिप्रतप्तम्।
धर्मे स्थितो धर्म्यमुवाच वाक्यं
यथा स एवार्हति तत्र वक्तुम्॥ GY UI

Holding firmly to his duty, Sri Rama
made the following righteous reply, a reply
which he alone was capable of making on
that occasion, to his mother, who lay almost
unconscious, as well as to Laksmana (son
of Sumitra), who was feeling distressed and
greatly excited on that occasion : (55)
ae fe a लक्ष्मण नित्यमेव

जानामि भक्तिं च पराक्रमं च।

त्वभिप्रायमसंनिरीक्ष्य

मात्रा सहाभ्यर्दसि मा सुदु:खम्॥ ५६ ॥
“Indeed, O Laksmana, | know your
everlasting devotion to me as well as your
prowess. But, failing to read my mind fully,
you harass me most painfully alongwith
mother. (56)

मम

waa वश्याभिमता सपुत्रा॥ ५७॥

“Religious merit, material gain and
worldly enjoyment—which have been
positively concluded to be the means of
