(55)

they bow down to Sri Rama and Sugriva and report their inability to
find out Sita. They feel convinced for many reasons that Hanuman
alone will be able to discover Sita. ...........................................................५५५….४ 1115
Accompanied by Angada and others, Hanuman seeks for Sita in the
dense forests and caves of the Vindhyan range. Making their way
into a forest whose trees had ceased to flower and bear fruits
because of a curse pronounced by Sage Kandu, overwhelmed with
grief occasioned by the loss of his son, the monkeys, who felt
exhausted due to exertion, behold a demon. As the latter swoops
upon the monkeys with a raised fist, Angada makes short work of
him thinking him to be Ravana. Feeling exhausted through peregrination
in the forest, the monkeys seek the foot Of a tre@. ......................................... 1116

Asking the monkeys who accompanied him to the south and who had
begun to feel diffident about their success to take note of the delay
that was taking place in carrying out the command of Sugriva and to
beware of Sugriva’s wrath, which was sure to follow in consequence
of the delay, Angada advises them to take heart and encourages
them to pursue their search vigorously. Encouraged by his enlivening
words, they sally forth once more to renew their search in the cave
of the Silver Mountain and, getting exhausted after a strenuous
search, repose awhile in a grove and get ready to resume
तीडा =) 10) 6S an eee 1119

The time appointed by Sugriva for finding out the whereabouts of Sita
in the southern quarter having been exceeded in ransacking the
caves of the Vindhyan range, which were hard to explore, Hanuman
and others, who were tormented with hunger and thirst, catch sight
of a cave known by the name of Rksabila. Concluding, from the
presence of birds with wet wings at the entrance of the cave, that
there must be water inside, the monkeys enter the cave, which was
enveloped in thick darkness, in a line holding the hand of one
another. Proceeding to a short distance, the monkeys behold an
ascetic woman in a strange spot illumined by trees of gold. Greeting
her, Hanuman inquires of her the name of the place. .................................... 1121

Telling the monkeys how the cave was brought into existence, the
ascetic woman, whose name was Swayamprabha, feeds the
newcomers, the monkeys, with fruits and roots etc., and, when they
had taken rest, inquires of them what brought them to that spot. ................. 1124

Narrating the whole story from the entry of Sri Rama into the forest
round about the Pampa lake down to the entry of the monkeys into
the cave, and complimenting Swayamprabha on the hospitality shown
by her and wishing to repay her hospitality, Hanuman inquires of her
if he can be of any service to her. Swayamprabha, however, declines
his offer saying that, being engaged in the practice of virtue,
she has no purpose to achieve through anothe’. ............................................ 1126
