1124

on all sides trees laden with blossom and
fruit and shining brightly as coral and ruby
with golden bees hovering about them, as
also honeys of various kinds on all sides
and, even so, spacious couches and seats
of various kinds set with gems and gold,
again heaps of vessels of gold, silver and
bell-metal and also collections of aloe-wood
and sandal-wood of the Divya class, pure
foods as well as roots and fruits, costly
conveyances (palanquins etc.,) and delicious
honeys, piles of costly ethereal textiles
as also piles of excellent blankets and
deerskins. The monkeys also saw dazzling
and immaculate heaps of gold placed here
and there and resplendent as fire. Looking
about here and there in that cave, the
heroic monkeys, which were possessed of
extraordinary brilliance, beheld a certain
woman at a short distance from them. Nay,

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

they found her to be an ascetic woman clad
in bark and black antelope skin, restrained
in her diet and burning as it were with glory
on that spot. Full of astonishment the
monkeys halted there at some distance on
all sides. Of them, Hanuman approached
her with the following question: “Who are
you and whose cave is this?” (29—40)

कृताञ्जलिस्तामभिवाद्य व्रद्धाम्।
पप्रच्छ का त्वं भवनं fact च
रत्नानि चेमानि वदस्व कस्य॥४१॥
Greeting that aged woman with joined
palms, Hanuman, who greatly resembled a
mountain, then put the following question to
her: “Who are you and to whom do this
cave, building and these precious stones
belong? Pray, speak out.” (41)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये किष्किन्धाकाण्डे पञ्चाश: सर्ग: ॥ ५० ॥

Thus ends Canto Fifty in the Kiskindhakanda of the glorious Ramayana of Valmiki,
the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

एकपञ्चाश: सर्ग:
Canto LI
Telling the monkeys how the cave was brought into existence, the ascetic
woman, whose name was Swayamprabha, feeds the newcomers, the
monkeys, with fruits and roots etc., and, when they had taken
rest, inquires of them what brought them to that spot

इत्युक्त्वा हनुमांस्तत्र चीरकृष्णाजिनाम्बराम्।
अब्रवीत् तां महाभागां तापसीं धर्मचारिणीम्॥ १॥
Having questioned as aforesaid the
highly blessed ascetic woman, who was
clad in bark and black antelope skin and
was practising virtue there, Hanuman
submitted to her as follows : (1)
क्षुत्पिपासापरिश्रान्ता: परिखिन्नाश्च सर्वश:॥ २॥

“Exhausted with hunger and thirst and

fully tired in everyway, we rashly penetrated
deep into this cave completely shrouded in
darkness. (2)
eq धरण्या विवरं प्रविष्टा: स्म पिपासिता:।
इमांस्त्वेवंविधान् war विविधानद्भुतोपमान्॥ ३॥
दृष्टवा वयं प्रव्यथिता: सम्भ्रान्ता नष्टचेतस:।
कस्यैते काञ्चना व्रृक्षास्तरुणादित्यसंनिभा:॥४॥
शुचीन्यभ्यवहाराणि मूलानि च फलानि च।
काञ्चनानि विमानानि राजतानि गृहाणि ane i
तपनीयगवाक्षाणि मणिजालावृतानि a
पुष्पिता: weds पुण्या: aired: ue
