* AYODHYAKANDA +

नत्वां पश्यामि कौसल्ये साधु मां पाणिना स्पृश।

रामं मेऽनुगता gern न निवर्तते॥३४॥
“Kausalya, | am unable to see you.

Please touch me with your hand well. Having

followed Rama, my sight has not yet

returned.” (34)

तं

समीक्ष्य देवी शयने नरेन्द्रम्।

453

उपोपविश्याधिकमार्तरूपा
विनिश्वसन्तं विललाप कृच्छ्रम्॥ ३५ I

Perceiving the aforesaid monarch on
the couch—who was thinking deeply all the
time of Sri Rama alone and breathing hard
with difficulty—and sitting by his side, the
queen (Kausalya), who wore a distressed
look about her, began to wail. (35)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्येऽयोध्याकाण्डे
द्विचत्वारिंश: सर्ग: ॥ ४२ ॥

Thus ends Canto Forty-two in the Ayodhyakanda of the glorious Ramayana of Valmiki,
the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

Canto XLII

The Lament of Kausalya

तत: समीक्ष्य शयने सन्नं शोकेन पार्थिवम्।
कौसल्या पुत्रशोकार्तां तमुवाच महीपतिम्॥ १॥

Perceiving the king lying on the couch
stricken with grief, Kausalya, who was feeling
distressed due to grief on account of
separation from her son, Sri Rama, spoke
to the said king as follows : (1)

wad नरशार्दूले विषं मुक्त्वाहिजिह्यगा।
विचरिष्यति कैकेयी निर्मुक्तेव fe पन्नगी॥ २॥

“Having discharged her poison on Rama
(a scion of Raghu), a tiger among men,
indeed, Kaikeyi of crooked ways will surely
wander about freely like a female serpent
that has cast off its slough. (2)

विवास्य रामं सुभगा लब्धकामा समाहिता।
त्रासयिष्यति at भूयो दुष्टाहिरिव agar ३॥

“Having exiled Rama and thereby
achieving her desired end, Kaikeyi, whose
stars are propitious and whose mind is at
rest now, will further cause fear to me,
undisturbed like a wicked serpent dwelling
in one’s own house. (3)

अथास्मिन् नगरे रामश्चरन् Nat We वसेत्।
कामकारो at दातुमपि दासं ममात्मजम्॥४॥

“Even if Rama were allowed to remain
at his home in Ayodhya living on alms, it
would be preferable to me in comparison to
his exile. Nay, it would be better even to
consign my son to her as a slave. (4)

पातयित्वा तु कैकेय्या रामं स्थानाद् AMA: |
प्रविद्धो रक्षसां भाग: पर्वणीवाहिताग्निना॥५॥
“Having wantonly thrown Rama out of
his position, Kaikeyi has acted in the same
way as an oblation intended for the gods

may be consigned to ogres on a new or full
moon by one who tends the sacred fire. (5)

नागराजगतिर्वीरो महाबाहुर्धनुर्धर:।

वनमाविशते नूनं सभार्य: सहलक्ष्मण:॥६॥
“Accompanied by his wife and Laksmana

and walking like a king of elephants, bow in

hand, the mighty-armed hero will have surely
entered the forest by now. (6)

वने त्वदृष्टदु:खानां कैकेय्यनुमते त्वया।
त्यक्तानां वनवासाय कान्यावस्था भविष्यति॥ ७॥
