* SUNDARAKANDA +

up before you, when, coming down suddenly,
a crow tore the flesh of her breast with its
beak. (3)

पर्यायेण च सुप्तस्त्वं देव्यङ्के भरताग्रज।
पुनश्च किल पक्षी स देव्या जनयति व्यथा॥४॥

“You then lay asleep on the lap of the
godlike lady, O elder brother of Bharata!
And once more did that bird actually begin
to torment the godlike lady. (4)
ad: पुनरुपागम्य face भृशं किल।
ततस्त्वं बोधितस्तस्या: शोणितेन समुक्षित:॥ ५॥

“Coming near once more indeed, it
forthwith cruelly tore her breast. Bathed in
blood that began to flow from her breast,
you were awakened then by her. (5)
वायसेन च wa wad बाध्यमानया।
बोधित: किल cat त्वं सुखसुप्त: परंतप॥६॥

“Though lying happily asleep, O
tormentor of foes, you were actually
awakened by the godlike lady, who was
being ceaselessly tormented by that crow
as aforesaid. (6)

at च Get महाबाहो दारितां च स्तनान्तरे।
आशीविष इव क्रुद्धस्ततो वाक्यं त्वमूचिवान्॥७॥

“Nay, enraged like a venomous serpent
on seeing her lacerated in the breast, O mighty-
armed prince, you for your part thereupon
put the following question to her : (7)
नखाग्रै: केन a site att वै स्तनान्तरम्।

क: क्रीडति सरोषेण पञ्चवक्त्रेण भोगिना॥८॥

‘By whom has the flesh of your breast
been actually torn with the ends of his nails,
O tender one? Who is playing with an angry
five-hooded serpent?’ (8)
निरीक्षमाण: सहसा वायसं समुदैक्षथा:।
नखै: सरुधिरैस्तीक्ष्णैस्तामेवाभिमुखं स्थितम्॥९॥

“Casting your eyes around, you
suddenly observed a crow with its sharp
talons stained with blood, perched just in
front of Sita. (9)
Ge: किल स शाक्रस्य वायस: पततां वर:।
धरान्तरगत: शीघ्रं पवनस्य गतौ सम:॥१०॥

287

“Indeed, that crow was no other than
Jayanta, son of Indra, and was the foremost
of birds. Vying as he did with the wind in
swift motion, he had his abode in the
subterranean regions. (10)

ततस्तस्मिन् महाबाहो कोपसंवर्तितेक्षण:।
वायसे त्वं व्यधा: Hu मतिं मतिमतां वर॥११॥
“With your eyes rolling through anger,
O mighty-armed prince, you then thought of
punishing that crow, O jewel among the
wise! (11)

स दर्भसंस्तराद We ब्रह्मास्त्रेण न्ययोजय:।
स दीप्त इव कालाग्निर्जज्वालाभिमुखं खगम्॥ १२॥
“Snatching a blade from your bed of
the sacred KuSa grass, you as such charged
it with the potency of a mystic missile presided
over by Brahma, the creator. The blade
blazed forth like the flaming fire of universal
destruction with its end facing the bird. (12)
स त्वं ued चिक्षेप ef तं वायसं प्रति।
ade वायसं dla: स दर्भोऽनुजगाम ह॥१३॥
“You then hurled that blazing blade of
the sacred KuSa grass at the crow.
Thereupon that flaming blade of KuSa grass
for its part actually pursued the crow. (13)

भीतैश्च सम्परित्यक्त: at: was वायस:।
त्रील्लोकान् सम्परिक्रम्य त्रातारं नाधिगच्छति॥ १४॥
“The crow, however, was forsaken by
all the gods, who were seized with fear of
you, and did not find a protector even after

ranging all the three worlds (heaven, earth
and the intermediate region). (14)

पुनरप्यागतस्तत्र त्वत्सकाशमरिंदम।
त्वं तं निपतितं sat शरण्य: शरणागतम्॥ १५॥
वधार्हमपि काकुत्स्थ कृपया परिपालय:।
मोघमस्त्रं न wet तु कर्तुमित्येव Wea ec il
भवांस्तस्याक्षि काकस्य हिनस्ति स्म स दक्षिणम्।
Ta at स नमस्कृत्य राज्ञो दशरथस्य च॥ Vil

विसृष्टस्तु der काक: प्रतिपेदे स्वमालयम्।
एवमस्त्रविदां AE: सत्त्ववाञ्छीलवानपि॥ १८॥
