1160

circumstance be worthy of being directed or
sent on an expedition. On the other hand,
we all deserve to be directed or sent on an
errand by you, O jewel among the monkeys !
(22)
भवान् कलत्रमस्माकं स्वामिभावे व्यवस्थित: |
स्वामी कलत्रं सैन्यस्य गतिरेषा परंतप॥ २३॥

“You deserve to be protected by us even
like the mistress of a household, installed as
you are in the position of our master. The
ruler of an army deserves to be protected
(like the mistress of a household): such is
the rule, O scourge of your foes ! (23)

अपि वै तस्य कार्यस्य भवान् मूलमरिंदम।
तस्मात् कलत्रवत् तात प्रतिपाल्य: सदा भवान्॥ २४॥
“Moreover you are the very basis of
the work in hand to us viz., the discovery of
Sita, O tamer of your foes ! Hence, O dear
child, you deserve to be protected by us
like a housewife at all times. (24)

मूलमर्थस्य संरक्ष्यमेष कार्यविदां नय:।
मूले fe सति सिध्यन्ति गुणा: सर्वे फलोदया: It २५ ॥

“The root of a thing must be carefully
preserved: this is the maxim of those knowing
their business. Only so long as the root is
there all excellences (which are only of
secondary importance) bear fruit. (25)

तद् भवानस्य कार्यस्य साधनं सत्यविक्रम।
बुद्धिविक्रमसम्पन्नो हेतुरत्र परंतप॥ २६॥

“Therefore you are the means of
accomplishing this work, O prince of unfailing
prowess, and a key to it, richly endowed as
you are with wisdom and valour, O scourge
of your foes ! (26)
Tes गुरुपुत्रश्च त्वं fe a: कपिसत्तम।
भवन्तमाश्रित्य वयं समर्थां ह्यर्थसाधने॥ २७॥

“You are our superior and the son of
our superior. Banking on you we shall really
be able to accomplish our end, O jewel
among the monkeys !” (27)

प्रत्युवाचोत्तरं वाक्यं वालिसूनुरथाङ्गद:॥ २८॥

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

To the highly intelligent Jambavan, who
had spoken as above, the great monkey,
Angada, the son of Vali, now addressed the
following reply : (28)
यदि नाहं गमिष्यामि नान्यो वानरपुङ्खव:।

UA: खल्विदमस्माभि: कार्यं प्रायोपवेशनम्॥ २९॥

“If | do not stir nor does any other leader

of the monkeys, fasting till death must surely
be undertaken by us again. (29)

नह्यकृत्वा हरिपते: संदेशं तस्य धीमत:।
तत्रापि गत्वा प्राणानां न पश्ये परिरक्षणम्॥ ३०॥

“Having failed to carry out the
instructions of that wise ruler of monkeys, |
do not see any hope of preserving our life
even after going there. (30)

a fe ware चात्यर्थकोपे च atta |
अतीत्य तस्य संदेशं विनाशो WY भवेत्॥ ३१॥

“That monkey, Sugriva, has certainly
the absolute power to show clemency or
give vent to his extreme anger towards
us. Death is bound to follow if we depart
for Kiskindha without carrying out his
instructions. (31)

तत्तथा ह्यस्य कार्यस्य न भवत्यन्यथा गति:।

aq भवानेव दृष्टार्थ: संचिन्तयितुमर्हति॥ ३२॥
“Therefore, you alone, who have

perceived the truth of everything, should

devise some means to see that this purpose

of ours in the shape of discovery of Sita

does not actually get frustrated.” (32)

सोऽङ्गदेन dat aR: प्रत्युक्त: प्लवगर्षभ:।
जाम्बवानुत्तमं वाक्यं प्रोवाचेदं ततोऽङ्गदम्॥ ३३॥
In response to these words of Angada
at that juncture, the celebrated and heroic
Jambavan, a jewel among the monkeys
and bears, now addressed the following
excellent rejoinder to Angada : (33)

wea ते वीर कार्यस्य न किंचित् परिहास्यते।
wa संचोदयाम्येनं a: कार्यं साधयिष्यति॥ ३४॥
“Not an iota of your aforementioned
purpose will be balked, O gallant prince ! |
