+ UTTARAKANDA +

तथा वदति काकुत्स्थे अवधानपरायणा:।
उद्बिग्नमनस: सर्वे fe नु राजाभिधास्यति॥ २१॥
“You have practised the teachings of

the scriptures. You have a mature intellect.
This problem of mine deserves to be

999

deliberated upon by you all together, O
guardians of the people!” On being told
thus by Sri Rama (a scion of Kakutstha)
they all became attentive and mentally
agitated to learn what the King would say.

(20-21)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये उत्तरकाण्डे चतुश्चत्वारिंश: FW: ॥ ४४॥

Thus ends Canto Forty-four in the Uttarakanda of the glorious Ramayana of Valmiki,
the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

Canto XLV
Annoyed with the ill-report about Sita, Sri Rama orders Laksmana to take Sita

away in the forest and leave her

उवाच वाक्यं काकुत्स्थो मुखेन परिशुष्यता॥१॥
The scion of Kakutstha bearing an
emaciated face, spoke thus to them (his

brothers), who had taken their seats with
dejected minds. (1)

Wa YA Ws वो मा Heed मनोऽन्यथा।
पौराणां मम सीतायां यादृशी add Harn २॥
“Listen to me, all of you, may all be well
with you, intend not to do otherwise as |
narrate the tale that circulates among my
citizens with regard to Sita. (2)
पौरापवाद: सुमहांस्तथा जनपदस्य al
add मयि बीभत्सा सा मे मर्माणि कृन्तति॥ ३॥
“The ill-report that circulates among.
my fellow-citizens and countrymen is indeed

of great significance. That calumny of mine
verily eats up my vitals. (3)
अहं किल Hot जात इक्ष्वाकूणां महात्मनाम्।
सीतापि सत्कुले जाता जनकानां महात्मनाम्॥४॥
“| am born in the line of great IKswakus
and Sita too comes from the noble family of
the high-souled Janakas. (4)
जानासि त्वं यथा सौम्य दण्डके विजने वने।
रावणेन et सीता स च विध्वंसितो मया॥५॥

in the vicinity of Valmrki-Asrama

“You surely know, O good ones, how
Sita was taken away by Ravana from the
lonely forest and how | vanquished him. (5)
wa मे बुद्धिरुत्पन्ना जनकस्य सुतां प्रति।
अत्रोषितामिमां सीतामानयेयं कथं पुरीम्॥६॥
“So, on that account it dawned on me
then that | could on no account bring Sita to
this city, who had dwelt in Lanka with Ravana.
(6)
प्रत्ययार्थं dd: सीता विवेश ज्वलनं तदा।
Waa da सौमित्रे देवानां हव्यवाहन:॥७॥
“To convince me Sita at that time entered
the fire: before you, O Laksmana (son of
Sumitra)! Fire-god, the bearer of oblations to
gods, (7)
अपापां मैथिलीमाह वायुश्चाकाशगोचर:।
चन्द्रादित्यौ च wad सुराणां संनिधौ पुरा॥८॥
ऋषीणां चैव सर्वेषामपापां जनकात्मजाम्।
एवं शुद्धसमाचारा देवगन्धर्वसंनिधौ॥ ९॥
लङ्काद्वीपे महेन्द्रेण मम हस्ते निवेशिता।
अन्तरात्मा च मे वेत्ति सीतां शुद्धां यशस्विनीम्॥ १० ॥
“declared that Sita was free from sins,
so also Vayu, who dwells in the sky, so
also proclaimed the two—sun and moon
before the gods, Sita free from sins before
