566

“Looking upwards Indra beheld the said
Surabhi standing, weeping in the heavens
in a miserable plight, sore afflicted. (18)

तां दृष्टवा शोकसंतप्तां वज्रपाणिर्यशस्विनीम्।

इन्द्र: प्राञ्ञलिरुद्बिग्न: सुरराजोऽब्रवीद् वच:॥१९॥
“Perturbed to find the illustrious cow

agonized through grief, Indra, the ruler of gods,

who carried a thunderbolt in one of his hands,
spoke with folded hands as follows: (19)

भयं कच्चिन्न चास्मासु Halse विद्यते महत्।
कुतोनिमित्त: शोकस्ते ब्रूहि सर्वहितैषिणि॥ २०॥

‘| hope there is no grave danger to
us (heavenly beings) from any quarter
whatsoever. Now tell me, O well-wisher of
all, what is the occasion for your grief?’ (20)

vant तु ate: सुरराजेन धीमता।
प्रत्युवाच ततो धीरा वाक्यं वाक्यविशारदा॥ २१॥

Addressed in the aforesaid words by
the wise Indra, the ruler of gods, the intelligent
Surabhi for her part, who was adept in
speaking, forthwith replied in the following
words : (21)
शान्तं पापं न a: किंचित् कुतश्चिदमराधिप।
अहं तु मग्नौ शोचामि ca पुत्रौ विषमे स्थितौ ।। २२॥
एतौ दृष्टवा Het दीनौ सूर्यरश्मिप्रतापितौ।
वध्यमानौ aeitadt कर्षकेण दुरात्मना॥ २३॥

‘Heaven forbid! There is no danger
whatsoever to you from any quarter, O ruler
of immortals! |, however, grieve to see
plunged in adversity a pair of bullocks, my
own progeny, emaciated and miserable,
scorched by the sun’s rays and, on top of
it, being beaten by an evil-minded farmer.

(22-23)

मम कायात् प्रसूतौ fe दु:खितौ भारपीडितौ।

at दृष्टवा परितप्येऽहं नास्ति पुत्रसम: प्रिय:।। २४॥
‘| feel sore distressed to find the two

bullocks, who are sprung from my own

womb, afflicted and oppressed with a heavy

load; for there is none so dear to a mother

as a son.’ (24)

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

यस्या: पुत्रसहस्रैस्तु कृत्स्नं व्याप्तमिदं जगत्।

at दृष्टवा रुदतीं शक्रो न सुतान् मन्यते परम्॥ २५ ॥
“Seeing Surabhi—by whose countless

offsprings (in the shape of the bovine race)

the whole creation is filled—weeping, Indra

reckoned none as dearer to a mother than

a son. (25)

इन्द्रो ह्यश्रुनिपातं तं स्वगात्रे पुण्यगन्धिनम्।
सुरभिं मन्यते gear weet तामिहेश्चर:॥ २६॥
“Perceiving that dropping of tears, which
emitted a sweet odour, from the eyes of
Surabhi on his own person, the powerful
Indra recognized the said Surabhi to be the
greatest of all in this world. (26)

समाप्रतिमव्रत्ताया लोकधारणकाम्यया।
श्रीमत्या गुणमुख्याया: स्वभावपरिचेष्टया॥ २७॥
यस्या: पुत्रसहस्राणि सापि शोचति कामधुक् ।
fe पुनर्या विना wa कौसल्या वर्तयिष्यति॥ २८ ॥

“When even the celebrated cow of
plenty—whose conduct in the world is
uniformly beneficent to all and is without
parallel in this respect, actuated as she is
by the desire to sustain the world, nay, who
is rich in the power to grant the desire of all,
whosoever approaches her, and is foremost
in her virtue of truthfulness etc., and who is
blessed with numberless offsprings—grieves
for them as an outward expression of her
natural love for her progeny, how much
more will Kausalya, who will have to drag
her existence without Sri Rama, her only
son? (27-28)
एकपुत्रा च साध्वी च विवत्सेयं त्वया कृता।
तस्मात् त्वं सततं दु:खं प्रेत्य चेह च लप्स्यसे॥ २९॥

“Kausalya, who is blessed with one
son only and is a virtuous lady to boot, has
been deprived of her son by you. Hence
you will incessantly undergo suffering here
as well as after death. (29)
अहं त्वपचितिं भ्रातु: पितुश्च सकलामिमाम्।
वर्धनं यशसश्चापि करिष्यामि न संशय:॥ ३०॥
