138

hermitage with them, ViSwamitra and his
two pupils stayed most comfortably on that
site of the hermitage, associated with the
name of Kama; while ViSwamitra (a scion

« VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

of KuSa), the foremost of ascetics, whose

mind is given to piety, entertained the two

charming princes with delightful stories.
(21-22)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये बालकाण्डे त्रयोविंश: AWA: ॥ 23 ॥

Thus ends Canto Twenty-three in the Balakanda of the glorious Ramayana of Valmiki,
the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

Canto XXIV

An account of the Sarayu given by ViSwamitra; some facts relating to the
ogress Tataka revealed and hints given about killing her

wa: waa विमले कृताह्निकमरिंदमौ।
विश्वामित्रॆ पुरस्कृत्य नद्यास्तीरमुपागतौ॥१॥

Placing in the forefront Viswamitra,
who had just finished his daily routine of
monrning devotions, the two brothers, who
were capable of subduing their enemies,
arrived at the bank of the river Ganga.

(1)
ते च ad महात्मानो मुनय: संशितव्रता:।
उपस्थाप्य शुभां नावं विश्वामित्रमथाब्रुवन्॥ २॥

Getting an excellent boat to ferry them
across, all the high-souled sages of austere
vows, mentioned above, forthwith spoke to
Viswamitra as follows : (2)

आरोहतु भवान् A राजपुत्रपुरस्कृत:।
अरिष्टं Tes पन्थानं मा भूत् कालस्य पर्यय:॥ ३॥
“Board you the boat followed by the
king’s sons and, having crossed the river,
proceed on your journey at an auspicious
moment. Let there be no loss of time.” (3)

विश्चामित्रस्तथेत्युक्त्वा तानृषीन् प्रतिपूज्य च।
ततार सहितस्ताभ्यां सरितं सागरंगमाम्॥४॥
Saying “Amen!” and returning the
salutations of those seers assembled to
see them off with honour, ViSwamitra,
accompanied by the two brothers, began to

cross the river Ganga (hastening to meet
the ocean). (4)

wa शुश्राव A wes तोयसंरम्भवर्धितम्।
मध्यमागम्य तोयस्य तस्य शब्दस्य निश्चयम्॥५॥
ज्ञातुकामो महातेजा: WE Wa: कनीयसा।
अथ wa: सरिन्मध्ये पप्रच्छ मुनिपुंगवम्॥६॥

Reaching the middle of the stream, the
highly glorious Rama alongwith Laksmana
(the younger of the two) distinctly heard on
the river a noise enhanced by the agitation
caused by the striking of waves against one
another, and felt eager to know the definite
cause of the noise. In mid stream Sri Rama
presently questioned in the following words
Viswamitra, the foremost of hermits:

(5-6)
वारिणो भिद्यमानस्य किमयं तुमुलो eats:
राघवस्य वच: seat कौतूहलसमन्वितम्॥७॥
कथयामास धर्मात्मा तस्य शब्दस्य निश्चयम्।
कैलासपर्वते wa मनसा निर्मितं परम्॥८॥
ब्रह्मणा नरशार्दूल तेनेदं मानसं सर:।
तस्मात् Gea सरस: सायोध्यामुपगूहते॥९॥
सर:प्रवृत्ता सरयू: पुण्या ब्रह्मसरश्च्युता।
तस्यायमतुल: शब्दो जाह्नवीमभिवर्तते॥१०॥
वारिसंक्षोभजो UH word fad: कुरु।
ताभ्यां तु तावुभौ Heat प्रणाममतिधार्मिकौ।। ११॥
