1004

Sumantra to stay with the chariot on the
other banks of the Ganga and told the
ferryman to steer the boat. (2)

ततस्तीरमुपागम्य भागीरथ्या: स लक्ष्मण:।
sara मैथिलीं वाक्यं प्राञ्जलिर्बाष्पसंवृत:॥ ३॥
Then on reaching the other bank of the
Ganga, Laksmana with folded hands and
face covered with tears, uttered the following
words: (3)
Sead A महच्छल्यं यस्मादार्येण धीमता।
अस्मिन्निमित्ते वैदेहि लोकस्य वचनीकृत:॥४॥
“My heart is pierced by a mighty dart
as | have been entrusted to carry this task
(so cruel) and (made) worthy of censure
(by people). (4)
sa fe मरणं Asa मृत्युर्वां यत्परं भवेत्।
न चास्मिन्नीदृशे कार्ये नियोज्यो लोकनिन्दिते॥ i

“A death like torture or even death
would have been prefered by me. But |
should not have been employed in such a
task deserving popular condemnation. (5)

प्रसीद च न मे पापं कर्तुमर्हसि शोभने।
इत्यञ्जलिकृतो भूमौ निपपात स लक्ष्मण:॥६॥

“| beg of you, do not consider this as
my fault, O auspicious one.” Saying these
words with folded hands Laksmana fell on
the ground before Sita. (6)
मैथिली भृशसंविग्ना लक्ष्मणं वाक्यमब्रवीत्॥७॥
किमिदं नावगच्छामि ब्रूहि तत्त्वेन लक्ष्मण।
पश्यामि त्वां न च स्वस्थमपि क्षेमं महीपते: ।। ८ ।।
शापितोऽसि नरेन्द्रेण यत् त्वं संतापमागत:।
ae ya: संनिधौ मह्यमहमाज्ञापयामि ane

Seeing Laksmana crying with folded
hands and wishing for his death, the daughter
of the lord of Mithila (Sita) deeply perturbed
said to Laksmana: “Il do not know what this
is, speak out the truth. It seems you are not
well, nor is the king, Sri Rama, happy. You
are indeed sworn by the king as you seem
to be in agony, so narrate the fact before

« VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

me, this is my command.” (7—9)
वैदेह्या चोद्यमानस्तु लक्ष्मणो दीनचेतन:।
अवाङ्मुखो बाष्पगलो वाक्यमेतदुवाच ह॥१०॥
Urged by Sita (the daughter of the Lord
of Videha,) Laksmana on his part, with an
agitated mind, and face downward with tears
choking his throat spoke out (against his
wish). (10)

श्रुत्वा परिषदो मध्ये ह्यपवादं सुदारुणम्।
Wt जनपदे wa त्वत्कृते जनकात्मजे॥११॥
wa: संतप्तहृदयो wt निवेद्य गृहं गत:।
न तानि वचनीयानि war देवि तवाग्रत:॥१२॥
“O daughter of Janaka (Sita), hearing
the most painful ill-report circulating among
the citizens and countrymen, in the presence
of the courtiers, Sri Rama struck with grief,
conveying to me the report, entered the
inner apartment. The shameful words that
pierced the heart of the king in anger are not
indeed to be uttered before you, and hence
| refrain from uttering them. (11—12)

यानि राज्ञा ge न्यस्तान्यमर्षात्पृष्ठत: sha: |
सा त्वं त्यक्ता नृपतिना निर्दोषा मम संनिधौ॥ 93
पौरापवादभीतेन we efa न तेऽन्यथा।
आश्नमान्तेषु च मया त्यक्तव्या त्वं भविष्यसि॥ १४॥
Ua: शासनमादाय aa fear दौर्हृदम्।
तदेतज्जाह्नवीतीरे ब्रह्मर्षीणां तपोवनम्॥१७५॥
पुण्यं च रमणीयं च मा विषादं कृथा: शुभे।
Tat दशरथस्यैव पितुर्मे मुनिपुङ्खव:॥१६॥
सखा परमको विप्रो वाल्मीकि: सुमहायशा:।
पादच्छायामुपागम्य सुखमस्य महात्मन:।
उपवासपरैकाग्रा वस त्वं जनकात्मजे॥१७॥
पतिव्रतात्वमास्थाय WH Hel सदा हृदि।
श्रेयस्ते ua देवि तथा peat भविष्यति॥ १८॥
“You have been forsaken by the king
afraid of the ill-report circulating among the
citizens, although you were proved to be free
from blamishes by the gods even in my
presence; you should not take it otherwise.

You are to be left near the hermitage by me.
Bearing in mind the orders of the king and the
