486

and goads in their hands, they were skilled
in warfare. Other animals, viz., horses, which
were rich in noble characteristics and were
mounted by gallant warriors and endowed
with extraordinary might also took part in
the conflict. (11)

तद् राक्षसबलं wa विप्रस्थितमशोभत।

प्रावृट्काले यथा मेघा नर्दमाना: सविद्युत: 1 १२॥
Set out for a definite purpose, that

entire army of ogres looked splendid like

clouds thundering accompanied by flashes
of lightning in the rainy season. (12)

Ft: aa afarorgntaget aa यूथप:।
तेषां निष्क्रममाणानामशुभं समजायत॥१३॥

The ogres issued forth through
the southern gate at which the monkey
general, Angada, was_ stationed. Evil
portents appeared even as they were
filing out. (13)

आकाशाद्विघनात् तीव्रा उल्काश्चाभ्यपतंस्तदा।
वमन्त: पावकज्वाला: शिवा घोरा ववाशिरे॥ १४॥

Dazzling meteors fell on all sides from
the cloudless sky at that juncture. Nay,
belching forth tongues of fire, fearful
she-jackals howled. (14)

व्याहरन्त मृगा घोरा रक्षसां निधनं तदा।
समापतन्तो योधास्तु प्रास्खलंस्तत्र दारुणम्॥ १५॥
Hideous beasts foretold the destruction
of the ogres at that time; while the warriors
stumbled miserably when pushing forward.
(15)

एतानौत्पातिकान् दृष्ट्वा वज्रदंष्टो महाबल:।
धैर्यमालम्ब्य तेजस्वी निर्जगाम रणोत्सुक:॥ १६॥
Taking recourse to firmness even on
seeing these portentous phenomena, the
heroic Vajradamstra, who was endowed with
extraordinary might, and was eager for fight,
sallied forth. (16)

तांस्तु विद्रवतो gear वानरा जितकाशिन:।
Wore: सुमहानादान् दिश: शब्देन पूरयन्॥१७॥

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA +

Seeing them advancing rapidly, the
monkeys, who had assumed a triumphant
air, set up tremendous shouts and filled the
quarters with their uproar. (17)
तत: Wad qact हरीणां ward: सह।
घोराणां भीमरूपाणामन्योन्यवधकाङ्क्षिणाम्॥ १८ ॥

Then followed a fierce encounter of the
monkeys with the ogres, both of whom
were formidable and fearful to look at and

sought the destruction of the other party.
(18)

निष्पतन्तो महोत्साहा भिन्नदेहशिरोधरा:।
रुधिरोक्षितसर्वाङ्मगा न्यपतन् धरणीतले॥१९॥

Though rushing forward, full of martial
ardour, they fell to the earth’s surface, all
their limbs bathed in blood, their trunks and
necks being severed. (19)

केचिदन्योन्यमासाद्य शूरा: परिघबाहव:।
चिक्षिपुर्विविधान् शस्त्रान् समरेष्वनिवर्तिन:॥ २०॥

Approaching one another, some gallant
warriors, whose arms resembled iron clubs,
and who never turned their back on the field
of battle, flung missiles of every kind on the

adversary. (20)

द्रुमाणां च शिलानां च शस्त्राणां चापि नि:स्वन: |

श्रूयते सुमहांस्तत्र घोरो हृदयभेदन:॥ २१॥
A very loud and _ fearful noise,

which pierced the heart, produced by trees
and rocks as well as by weapons used
in the combat was heard on the field
of battle. (21)
रथनेमिस्वनस्तत्र धनुषश्चापि घोरवत्।
शङ्खभेरीमृदङ्गानां बभूव तुमुल: स्वन:॥२२॥
There followed on the _ battlefield
the clatter of chariot wheels, the fearful
twang of bows and the tumultuous noise
of conches, kettledrums and clay tomtoms.
(22)
केचिदस्त्राणि संत्यज्य बाहुयुद्धमकुर्वत॥ २३॥
तलैश्च चरणैश्चापि मुष्टिभिश्च द्रुमैरपि।
