# YUDDHAKANDA #

आसिञ्चन् सलिलैश्चैनं पद्मोत्पलसुगन्धिभि: |
प्रदहन्तमसंहार्यं सहसाग्निमिवोत्थितम्॥ १२॥

Seeing that scion of Raghu, who looked
like a god, fallen, the leaders of monkeys
hastened towards him springing from all
sides and sprinkled him with water fragrant
with the scent of lotuses and lilies even as
one would sprinkle an inextinguishable fire
which has just flared up, all of a sudden and
is burning all. (11-12)
तं लक्ष्मणोऽथ बाहुभ्यां परिष्वज्य Ue: Rac: |
उवाच राममस्वस्थं वाक्यं हेत्वर्थसंयुतम्॥१३॥

Encircling Sri Rama with his arms,
Laksmana, who was seized with great agony,
forthwith addressed to Sri Rama, who was
feeling ill at ease, the following submission,
which was full of reason and fraught with
meaning: (13)

शुभे वर्त्मनि तिष्ठन्तं त्वामार्य विजितेन्द्रियम्।
अनर्थेभ्यो न शक्नोति त्रातुं धर्मो निरर्थक:॥ १४॥

‘Virtue, O worthy brother, cannot save
you, who are sticking to the noble path and
have fully mastered the senses, from
reverses and is, therefore, useless. (14)
भूतानां स्थावराणां च जङ्घमानां च दर्शनम्।
यथास्ति न तथा धर्मस्तेन नास्तीति मे मति: ।। १५॥

“Just as joy is experienced by created
beings, both inanimate and animate, virtue
is not likewise perceived to be the cause of
their happiness. Hence virtue is not the
cause of happiness: such is my conclusion.

(15)
यथैव wat व्यक्तं जङ्घमं च तथाविधम्।
नायमर्थस्तथा युक्तस्त्वद्विधो न विपद्यते॥१६॥

“Even as it is evident that the inanimate
creation is happy (without the concomitant
practice of virtue), the animate creation
too is happy likewise. Therefore, the
presumption that virtue alone prospers is
not warranted; for, in that case a purely
virtuous man like you would not suffer. (16)

653

यद्यधर्मो भवेद्भूतो रावणो नरकं व्रजेत्।
भवांश्च धर्मसंयुक्तो नैव व्यसनमाप्नुयात्॥ १७॥
“Had unrighteousness been effective,
Ravana should have descended into hell;
while you, who are endowed with virtue,
would never suffer adversity. (17)

तस्य च व्यसनाभावाद्व्यसनं चागते त्वयि।
emf भवत्यधर्मश्च परस्परविरोधिनौ॥ ecu

“Nay, since Ravana is free from
calamity, while you have met with misfortune,
virtue and vice, which were the contraries
of each other, have changed the roles with
each other (the one turning into the other).

(18)
धर्मेणोपलभेद्धर्ममधर्मं चाप्यधर्मत:।
यद्यधर्मेण युज्येयुर्येष्वधर्म: प्रतिष्ठित:॥१९॥

न धर्मेण वियुज्येरन्नाधर्मरुचयो जना:।
धर्मेणाचरतां तेषां तथा धर्मफलं भवेत्॥ २०॥

“If one invariably attained the fruit of
virtue, viz., happiness through virtue and
likewise the fruit of unrighteousness alone
through unrighteousness, those in whom
unrighteousness is rooted would be burdened
with the fruit of unrighteousness, viz.,
suffering. Nor would people who have
no leaning towards unrighteousness would
be ever deprived of the fruit of virtue,
viz., joy. Nay, the fruit of virtue alone would
accrue to those holding by the latter.

(19-20)
यस्मादर्था विवर्धन्ते येष्वधर्म: प्रतिष्ठित:।
क्लिश्र्यन्ते धर्मशीलाश्च तस्मादेतौ निरर्थकौ i २१॥

“Since the resources of those in whom
unrighteousness is rooted, develop, while
those who are given to the practice of virtue
suffer; hence these two viz., righteousness
and unrighteousness are useless. (21)
वध्यन्ते पापकर्माणो यद्यधर्मेण राघव।
वधकर्महतोऽधर्म: स et: कं वधिष्यति॥ २२॥

If it is alleged that those of sinful deeds
