610

of Indra (the ruler of gods), is now tormenting

us with his sharp arrows. (68)

स्वयंभुवा दत्तवरो महात्मा
समाहितोऽन्तर्हितभीमकाय: ।

कथं नु शक्यो युधि नष्टदेहो
निहन्तुमद्येन्द्रजिदुद्यतास्त्र: asl

“How can the highly intelligent Indrajit—
on whom a boon of invincibility has been
bestowed by Brahma (the self-born creator),
nay, who is steadfast of purpose and has
concealed his terrible form and who stands
with his weapons uplifted, even though his
body is invisible—be struck down in combat
today? (69)

मन्ये स्वयंभूर्भगवानचिन्त्य-
स्तस्यैतदस्त्रं प्रभवश्च योऽस्य।
बाणावपातं त्वमिहाद्य धीमन्
Tat सहाव्यग्रमना: सहस्व॥ ७० I
“| know the self-born Lord Brahma—
who is the source (the creator) of this
universe—is inconceivable in his essence
and the missile used is presided over by
him. Therefore, remaining undisturbed in
mind, O wise one, endure you with me
today the hail of arrows on this spot. (70)
प्रच्छादयत्येष हि राक्षसेन्द्र:
wat दिश: सायकवृष्टिजालै:।
एतच्च wa पतिताग्रयशूरं
न भ्राजते वानरराजसैन्यम्॥७१॥
“Indeed this prince of ogres is thickly
covering all the four quarters with the
showers of his shafts. And this entire army
of Sugriva, the ruler of monkeys, whose
leading heroes have fallen, looks charming
no more. (71)

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA +

निवृत्तयुद्धौ हतहर्षरोषौ |
प्रवेक्ष्यत्यमरारिवास-
Tet समासाद्य रणाग्रयलक्ष्मीम्॥७२॥

“Finding us fallen unconscious and
bereft of joy and anger, having desisted
from fighting, nay, winning laurels in combat,
he will surely return to Lanka, the abode of
the enemies of gods.” (72)
ततस्तु ताविन्द्रजितोऽस्त्रजालै-

र्बभूवतुस्तत्र तदा विशस्तौ।
a चापि dt तत्र विषादयित्वा
ननाद हर्षाद् युधि राक्षसेन्द्र:॥७३॥

Thereupon the two princes for their
part got grievously hurt on the battlefield by
the missiles of Indrajit on that occasion.
And, having reduced the two brothers to
Straits in that struggle, that prince of ogres
shouted for joy. (73)

ततस्तदा

ध्रुवं

वानरसैन्यमेवं
Tw च संख्ये सह लक्ष्मणेन।
विषादयित्वा सहसा विवेश
पुरीं दशग्रीवभुजाभिगुप्ताम्।
संस्तूयमान: स तुं यातुधानै:
पित्रे च ad हृषितोऽभ्युवाच॥७४॥
Having prostrated in combat as
aforesaid the army of monkeys as well as
Sri Rama alongwith Laksmana on _ that
occasion, Indrajit thereupon withdrew all at
once to the city protected by the arms of
Ravana, the ten-headed monster. Nay, filled
with delight while being duly extolled by
ogres, he for his part related everything in
extenso to his father. (74)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये युद्धकाण्डे त्रिसप्ततितम: सर्ग: ॥ ७३ ॥

Thus ends Canto Seventy-three in the Yuddhakanda of the glorious Ramayana of
Valmiki, the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

