128

इति हृदयमनोविदारणं मुनिवचनं तदतीव शुश्रुवान्।

नरपतिरभवन्महान् महात्मा व्यथितमना: प्रचचाल चासनात्॥ २२ ॥
The great king, magnanimous though

he was, felt afflicted in mind even as he

« VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

heard the aforesaid request of the sage,
which was extremely agonizing to the heart
and the mind, and he thus fell down
unconscious from his seat. (22)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये बालकाण्डे एकोनविंश: सर्ग: ॥ १९ il

Thus ends Canto Nineteen in the Balakanda of the glorious Ramayana of Valmiki,
the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

>
२
२

सर्ग:

Canto XX
Dagaratha shows disinclination to part with Sri Rama, thereby enraging Viswamitra

waa राजशार्दूलो विश्चामित्रस्य भाषितम्।
मुहूर्तमिव निस्संज्ज संज्ञावानिदमब्रवीत्॥१॥
Hearing the aforesaid request of
ViSwamitra, DaSaratha, a veritable tiger
among kings, remained senseless, as it
were, for an hour or so and, regaining his
consciousness (afterwards), spoke as
follows : (1)

ऊनषोडशवर्षो मे रामो राजीवलोचन:।
न युद्धयोग्यतामस्य पश्यामि सह राक्षसै:॥ २॥

“My lotus-eyed Rama is less than
sixteen years old yet. I, therefore, do not
perceive his capacity to contend with the
Raksasas. (2)

इयमशक्षौहिणी aa were पतिरीश्वर:।
अनया सहितो गत्वा योद्धाहं तैर्निशाचरै:॥ ३॥

“Here is my army, one Aksauhini*
strong, whose maintainer and controller am
|. Marching with it, | shall personally wage
war with those ogres. (3)

इमे शूराश्च विक्रान्ता भृत्या मेऽस्त्रविशारदा:।
योग्या रक्षोगणैर्योद्धुं न रामं नेतुमर्हसि॥४॥

“These heroic and valiant retainers of
mine are all skilled in the use of missiles
and other weapons and are capable of

fighting with hosts of ogres. But you should
not take away Rama. (4)

अहमेव धनुष्पाणिर्गोप्ता समरमूर्धनि।
यावत् प्राणान्धरिष्यामि तावद्योत्स्ये निशाचरै: ।। ५ ॥

“| shall myself guard your sacrifice,
bow in hand, and shall contend with the
Raksasas in the van of a battle so long as
| breathe. (5)

निर्विघ्ना व्रतचर्या सा भविष्यति सुरक्षिता।
ae तत्र गमिष्यामि न we नेतुमर्हसि॥६॥

“Fully guarded by me, the pursuit of
the aforesaid observance by you will be rid
of all obstacles; for | shall go thither in
person. You should not, therefore, take away
Rama. (6)

at ह्यकृतविद्यश्च न च aft बलाबलम्।
न चास्त्रबलसंयुक्तो न च युद्धविशारद:॥७॥
“A child yet and untrained in the
science of warfare, he cannot estimate the
strength or weakness of the enemy. He
is neither equipped with the powerful missiles
and other weapons, nor skilled in warfare.
(7)

न चासौ रक्षसा योग्य: कूटयुद्धा fe राक्षसा:।
विप्रयुक्तो fe रामेण मुहूर्तमपि नोत्सहे॥८॥

* An Aksauhini consists of 21,870 elephants, an equal number of chariots, 65,610 horses and 109,350

foot.
