322

the aforesaid words and pierced to the quick
by them, nay, greatly amazed and enraged
again and again (at the hostile attitude of
her loving husband) the queen Kaikeyi
spoke to the hunchback as follows, placing
her hands on her heart (as a token of
amazement) : (62)
यमस्य वा मां विषयं गताभितो

निशम्य कुब्जे प्रतिवेदयिष्यसि।
at गते वा सुचिराय wad

समृद्धकामो भरतो भविष्यति॥ ६३॥

“Either Bharata will have his desire
fulfilled on Rama (a scion of Raghu) having
retired to the forest for a considerably long
period, or hearing of my having departed
from this world for the region of Death, O
hunchback, you will report me as dead to
the king. (63)
até fe नैवास्तरणानि न eit

न चन्दनं नाञ्जनपानभोजनम्।
न किंचिदिच्छामि न चेह जीवनं
न चेदितो गच्छति राघवो वनम्॥ ६४॥

In case Rama (a scion of Raghu) does
not proceed to the forest from Ayodhya, |

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

shall, really speaking, on no account seek
bed-clothes nor garlands nor sandal-paste
nor eye-salve, food or drink, nor anything
else nor even life in this world.” (64)
अथैवमुक्त्वा वचनं सुदारुणं
निधाय सर्वाभरणानि भामिनी।
असंस्कृतामास्तरणेन मेदिनीं
तदाधिशिश्ये पतितेव किंनरी।॥ ६७५ ॥
Having made this most cruel utterance
and forthwith shedding all ornaments, the
proud woman, Kaikeyi, then lay down, like a
Kinnara woman fallen from heaven, on the
floor, not covered with any bed-cloth. (65)

उदीर्णसंरम्भतमोव्रतानना

नरेन्द्रपत्नी विमना aya सा
aaa द्यौरिव मग्नतारका॥६६॥

With her face veiled by darkness in the
shape of violent rage and with her excellent
garlands and ornaments cast to the ground,
that disconsolate queen Kaikeyi looked on
that occasion like the firmament enveloped
in darkness with its stars swallowed up
by it. (66)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्येऽयोध्याकाण्डे नवम: सर्ग: ॥ ९ ॥

Thus ends Canto Nine in the Ayodhyakanda of the glorious Ramayana
of Valmiki, the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

Canto X

Having told off Sumantra and others to get together necessaries for the
installation of Sri Rama, Dagaratha calls on Kaikeyi to break the happy
news to her. Not finding her in her apartments, however, he makes
inquiries from the portress, who tells him of her presence in
the sulking-chamber. The Emperor calls on her there and,
lifting her up, cajoles her

विदर्शिता यदा eat कुब्जया पापया भृशम्।

by the sinful hunchback, she lay down on

तदा शेते स्म सा भूमौ दिग्धविद्धेव किंनरी॥ १॥ | the floor looking like a Kinnara woman pierced

When the queen was fully misguided | With an envenomed shaft.

(1)
