* ARANYAKANDA «

स्नेहाच्च बहुमानाच्च स्मारये cat तु शिक्षये।
न कथंचन सा कार्या गृहीतधनुषा त्वया॥ २४॥
बुद्धिर्वैरं विना हन्तुं राक्षसान् दण्डकाश्रितान्।
अपराधं विना हन्तुं लोको वीर न मंस्यते॥ २५॥

“Due to love and great respect | am
making you acquainted with this and advising
you that while taking the bow you should
never take into your head to kill the ogres
residing in Dandaka without enmity. People
do not commend killing without fault, O
hero ! (24-25)
क्षत्रियाणां तु वीराणां ary नियतात्मनाम्।
धनुषा कार्यमेतावदार्तानामभिरक्षणम्॥ २६ ॥

“The function of the bow for self-
restrained heroic Ksatriyas is only this much,
viz., protection of those who are suffering. (26)

क्व च शस्त्रं क्व च वनं क्व च क्षात्रं तप: क्व च।
व्याविद्धमिदमस्माभिर्देशधर्मस्तु पूज्यताम्॥ २७॥

“What connection is there between a
weapon and forest-life? What affinity is there
between the duty of a Ksatriya and
asceticism? The two are contradictory. Let
us respect the laws of the place. (27)

कदर्यकलुषा बुद्धिर्जायते शस्त्रसेवनात्।
पुनर्गत्वा त्वयोध्यायां क्षत्रधर्मं चरिष्यसि॥ २८॥

“By use of arms the mind becomes
contaminated with sin as in the case of
unworthy men. After returning to Ayodhya
you can again follow the duty of a warrior.(28)

अक्षया तु भवेत् प्रीति: श्वश्रूश्वशुरयोर्मम।
ate wet fe संन्यस्य भवेस्त्वं निरतो AP: i २९॥

“It will bring endless joy to my mother-

735

in-law and father-in-law if indeed after
renouncing the kingdom you become a
devoted sage. (29)

धर्मादर्थ: प्रभवति धर्मात् wad सुखम्।

धर्मेण लभते सर्वं धर्मसारमिदं जगत्॥३०॥
“From Dharma follows wealth, from

Dharma comes happiness, by recourse to

Dharma one gets everything. This world
has Dharma as its essence. (30)

आत्मानं नियमैस्तैस्तै: कर्षयित्वा प्रयत्नत:।
प्राप्यते निपुणैर्धर्मो न सुखाल्लभते सुखम्॥ ३१॥

“The wise emaciate themselves with
effort by imposing several restrictions on
themselves and achieve Dharma. Dharma
does not follow from merriment. (31)

नित्यं शुचिमति: सौम्य चर धर्मं तपोवने।
ad तु विदितं ast त्रैलोक्यामपि araa: 32 1
“With a pious mind, O gentle Rama,
always practise righteousness in the forest,
suited for austerities. In fact, everything
comprised in the three worlds is truly known
10 yOu. (32)
स्त्रीचापलादेतदुपाहृतं मे
ad च वक्तुं da क: wre: |
विचार्य बुद्ध्या तु सहानुजेन
Ag रोचते तत् HPS माचिरेण॥ ३३॥

“| have said this just in consonance
with the frivolity of a woman. Who is really
capable of teaching Dharma to you?
However, thinking over it by recourse to
reason together with your younger brother,
you may do whatever appeals to you. Let
there be no delay.” (33)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्येऽरण्यकाण्डे नवम: सर्ग: ॥ ९ ॥

Thus ends Canto Nine in the Aranyakanda of the glorious Ramayana of Valmiki,
the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

