754

abounds in deer and birds, O son of Sumitra !
We will stay here with this bird (Jatayu).” (19)

एवमुक्तस्तु रामेण लक्ष्मण: परवीरहा।
अचिरेणाश्रमं भ्रातुश्चकार सुमहाबल:॥ Ro Il
Spoken to in these words by Rama,
Laksmana, the slayer of hostile warriors,
possessed as he was of extraordinary might,
set up a hermitage for his brother without
delay. (20)
tat सविपलां ar सं ।
सुस्तम्भां mental: कृतवंशां सुशोभनाम्॥ २१॥
शमीशाखाभिरास्तीर्य दृढपाशावपाशिताम्।
कुशकाशशरै: पर्णै: सुपरिच्छादितां तथा॥ २२॥
समीकृततलां wat चकार सुमहाबल:।
निवासं राघवस्यार्थे प्रेक्षणीयमनुत्तमम्॥२३॥
Laksmana, who was possessed of
extraordinary might, erected a lovely and
excellent abode for Sri Rama in the shape
of a very extensive hut with a wall of mud
supported on good pillars and roofed with
long bamboo sticks, and looking very
attractive and charming, thatching it with
boughs of a Sami tree, fastened with strong
cords and also well covered with blades of
KuSa and flowers of KaSa grass and reeds
and levelling the floor. (21—23)

स गत्वा लक्ष्मण: श्रीमान् नदीं गोदावरीं तदा।
स्नात्वा पद्मानि चादाय सफल: पुनरागत: ॥ २४॥
The glorious Laksmana forthwith went

to the river Godavari, bathed in it and taking
lotuses and fruits returned. (24)

aa: पुष्पबलिं कृत्वा शान्तिं च स यथाविधि।
दर्शयामास रामाय तदाश्रमपदं HAM २७५ ॥
Then, making a flower-offering and
performing a propitiatory rite with due
ceremony, he showed the hermitage, which

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

he had duly set up, to Sri Rama.
स तं दृष्टवा pd सौम्यमाश्रमं we सीतया।
Waa: पर्णशालायां हर्षमाहारयत् परम्॥ २६॥
Seeing that delightful hermitage set up
for him, the said Sri Rama with Sita derived
supreme joy in that cottage. (26)
सुसंहृष्ट: परिष्वज्य बाहुभ्यां लक्ष्मणं तदा।
अतिस्निग्धं च गाढं च वचनं चेदमब्रवीत्॥ २७॥
Being supremely delighted and tightly
clasping Laksmana with his arms most

affectionately, Sri Rama then sopke to him
as follows : (27)

प्रीतोऽस्मि ते महत् कर्म त्वया कृतमिदं weit |

प्रदेयो यन्निमित्तं a परिष्वङ्गो मया Ha: i २८॥
“lam pleased with you. O powerful

brother, you have accomplished this great

work, as a reward for which | have given
you a well-deserved embrace. (28)

Wart कृतज्ञेन धर्मज्ञेन च लक्ष्मण।
त्वया पुत्रेण धर्मात्मा न Mae: पिता मम॥ २९॥

“Laksmana, with you as his son,
knowing my feelings, grateful and a knower
of what is right, my pious-minded father is
not dead.” (29)

Ve लक्ष्मणमुक्त्वा तु Weal लक्षिमिवर्धन:।
तस्मिन् देशे बहुफले न्यवसत् स सुखं सुखी ॥ ३०॥
Having thus spoken to Laksmana, the
happy Raghava, the promoter of others’
grandeur, stayed in that region of abundant
fruits happily. (30)
कञ्चित् कालं स धर्मात्मा सीतया लक्ष्मणेन च।
अन्वास्यमानो न्यवसत् स्वर्गलोके यथामर:॥ ३१॥
Attended upon by Sita and Laksmana,

that righteous prince stayed for some period
like a god in heaven. (31)

(25)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्येऽरण्यकाण्डे TAT: सर्ग: ॥ 24 ॥

Thus ends Canto Fifteen in the Aranyakanda of the glorious Ramayana of Valmiki,
the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

