# YUDDHAKANDA #

to his chariot and who is endowed with
extraordinary energy, was able to conquer
the demons in the conflict which raged on
the field of battle between gods and demons
in the past. (64—67)
अथैन्द्रमस्त्रं सौमित्रि: संयुगेष्वपराजितम्।
शरश्रेष्ठं धनुश्रेष्ठे विकर्षन्निदमब्रवीत्॥६८॥
लक्ष्मीवाँल्लक्ष्मणो वाक्यमर्थसाधकमात्मन: |
धर्मात्मा सत्यसंधश्च wa दाशरथिर्यदि।
Wee चाप्रतिद्वन्द्वस्तदैनं जहि रावणिम्॥६९॥
इत्युक्त्वा बाणमाकर्णं विकृष्य तमजिह्यगम्।
लक्ष्मण: समरे वीर: ससर्जेन्द्रजितं प्रति।
WHAT समायुज्य लक्ष्मण: परवीरहा॥७०॥

Fitting a missile presided over by Indra,
the ruler of gods, the foremost of arrows,
which had never been got the better of in
contests, to his excellent bow and drawing
it at full length with the bow-string, the glorious
Laksmana, son of Sumitra, now addressed
the following prayer, which was calculated
to achieve his purpose to the deity presiding
over the arrow: “If Sri Rama, son of
DaSaratha, has set his mind on virtue and
is true to his promise and is unrivalled in
prowess, make short work, then, of this son
of Ravana.” Saying so, and drawing up to
the ear that arrow, which went straight to
the target, and charging it with the missile
presided over by Indra, the ruler of gods,
the heroic and glorious Laksmana, the
destroyer of hostile champions in combat,
let it fly towards Indrajit. (68—70)

तच्छिर: सशिरस्त्राणं श्रीमज्ज्वलितकुण्डलम्।

प्रमथ्येन्द्रजित: कायात् पातयामास भूतले॥७१॥
Severing the shining head of Indrajit,

which was adorned with flaming earrings,

casque and all, from his trunk, Laksmana
felled it to the earth’s surface. (71)

ag राक्षसतनूजस्य भिन्नस्कन्धं शिरो महत्।
तपनीयनिभं भूमौ ददृशे रुधिरोक्षितम्॥७२॥

Separated from the shoulders and

687

bathed in blood, that huge head of Indrajit
(sprung from the loins of an ogre) was seen
lying on the ground, shining like gold. (72)
ed: a निपपाताथ धरण्यां रावणात्मज:।
कवची सशिरस्त्राणो विप्रविद्धशरासन:॥७३॥
Having been killed, the aforesaid son
of Ravana, forthwith fell to the ground

alongwith his armour and helmet, his bow
thrown off. (73)

चुक्रुशुस्ते ad: Aa वानरा: सविभीषणा:।
हृष्यन्ते निहते तस्मिन् देवा gaat यथा॥७४॥

Indrajit having been killed, all those
monkeys present on the battlefield, including
Vibhisana then rejoiced and shouted even
as the gods did on the death of the demon
Vrtra. (74)

अथान्तरिक्षे देवानामृषीणां च महात्मनाम्।
जज्ञेऽथ जयसंनादो गन्धर्वाप्सरसामपि॥७५॥

Now there rose in the heavens a shout
of victory from the mouth of gods and high-
souled Rsis (the seers of Vedic Mantras)
as well as from the mouth of Gandharvas
(heavenly musicians) and __ celestial
nymphs. (75)

ufad समभिज्ञाय राक्षसी सा महाचमू:।
वध्यमाना दिशो भेजे हरिभिर्जितकाशिभि: ॥ ७६ ॥

Finding Indrajit fallen, the aforesaid
army of ogres sought the quarters while
being destroyed by the monkeys, who had
assumed a triumphant air. (76)

वानरैर्वध्यमानास्ते शस्त्राण्युत्सृज्य राक्षसा:।
लङ्कामभिमुखा: waved: प्रधाविता:॥ ७७॥
Flinging down their weapons while being
struck by the monkeys, the said ogres
moved towards Lanka running fast stupefied.
(77)

दुद्रुवुर्बहुधा भीता werent: शतशो fest: |
त्यक्त्वा प्रहरणान् Wa पट्टिशासिपरश्वधान्॥ oe II

Throwing away their weapons sharp-
edged spears, swords and axes, all the
