# YUDDHAKANDA #

Sumitra. Oh, what on earth shall | say to
mother Kausalya and what shall | say to
Kaikeyi? (17)
भरतं किं नु वक्ष्यामि शत्रुघ्नं च महाबलम्।
सह तेन ot यातो विना तेनागत: HM ee
“Again, what shall | say to Bharata as
well as to Satrughna, who are endowed
with extraordinary might, when they ask
me, how | came back without Laksmana
even though | retired to the forest alongwith
him? (18)

sea मरणं श्रेयो न तु बन्धुविगर्हणम्।
fe मया दुष्कृतं कर्म कृतमन्यत्र जन्मनि॥१९॥
येन मे धार्मिको भ्राता निहतश्चाग्रत: स्थित:।
भ्रातर्मनुजश्रेष्ठ शूराणां Wat प्रभो॥ oll
एकाकी fee नु मां त्यक्त्वा परलोकाय गच्छसि।
विलपन्तं च मां भ्रात: किमर्थं नावभाषसे॥ २१॥
“It is better to give up the ghost at this
very place rather than hear the reproaches
of one’s own people. What sinful deed was
perpetrated by me in a former existence,
due to which my pious younger brother lies
killed before me? O my powerful brother,
the foremost of men and the prince of heroes,
how are you actually departing to the other
world alone, deserting me? Nay, why don’t
you actually speak to me, even though | am
lamenting, O brother? Rise and look around?
Why are you lying down? (19—21)
shares पश्य किं शेषे दीनं मां पश्य चक्षुषा।
शोकार्तस्य प्रमत्तस्य पर्वतेषु वनेषु च॥ २२॥
विषण्णस्य महाबाहो समाश्वासयिता मम।
राममेवं ब्रुवाणं तु शोकव्याकुलितेन्द्रियम्॥ २३॥
आश्वासयन्नुवाचेदं सुषेण: परमं वच:।
त्यजेमां नरशार्दूल बुद्धिं वैक्लव्यकारिणीम्॥ २४॥
शोकसंजननीं frat तुल्यां बाणैश्चमूमुखे।
नैव पञ्चत्वमापन्नो लक्ष्मणो लक्षिवर्धन:॥ २७५॥
नह्यस्य विकृतं वक्त्रं न च श्यामत्वमागतम्।
सुप्रभं च प्रसन्नं च मुखमस्य निरीक्ष्यताम्॥ २६॥

“Look at me with your own eyes,

731

miserable as | am. You have been my
comforter, whenever stricken with grief, |
roamed listlessly amidst the mountains and
woods or felt despondent, O mighty-armed
one!” Comforting Sri Rama, who was wailing
as aforesaid, his mind distracted with grief,
Susena for his part addressed the following
excellent words: “Give up this idea which
causes affliction to you, this anxiety, which
gives rise to grief and is as piercing as
shafts in the forefront of battle, O tiger
among men! Surely Laksmana, the enhancer
of prosperity, has not met his death (lit.,

returned to the five elements); for his features
have not changed, nor have they grown
dark. His countenance may yet be seen
very bright and cheerful. (22—26)

पद्मपत्रतलौ हस्तौ सुप्रसन्ने च लोचने।

नेदृशं Gad रूपं गतासूनां विशां पते॥ २७॥
“The palms of his hands still resemble

the petals of a lotus and his eyes are very

bright. The appearance of those whose life

has departed is not observed to be such,

O ruler of the people! (27)

विषादं मा कृथा वीर सप्राणोऽयमरिंदम।
आख्याति तु प्रसुप्तस्य स्रस्तगात्रस्य भूतले॥ २८॥
एवमुक्त्वा महाप्राज्: सुषेणो Wee वच:॥ २९॥
समीपस्थमुवाचेदं हनूमन्तं महाकपिम्।
सौम्य शीघ्रमितो गत्वा पर्वतं हि महोदयम्॥ ३०॥
ua तु कथितो योऽसौ ae जाम्बवता तव।
दक्षिणे शिखरे जातां महौषधिमिहानय॥ ३१॥

“Do not give way to despondency, O
hero! He is still alive, O tamer of your
enemies! The repeatedly throbbing heart of
Laksmana, who is lying on the earth’s surface
fast asleep with his limbs relaxed, proclaims
him to be living, O gallant prince!” Having
addressed the foregoing words to Sri Rama
(a scion of Raghu), the highly sagacious
Susena spoke as follows to the great
monkey, Hanuman, who stood near:
