* ARANYAKANDA «

Thereupon Laksmana, though himself
stricken with grief, humbly comforted with
folded hands in many ways his beloved
kinsman, Sri Rama. (30)

अनादृत्य तु तद् वाक्यं लक्ष्मणोष्ठपुटच्युतम्।
अपश्यंस्तां प्रियां सीतां प्राक्रोशत् स पुन: TA: ।॥ ३१॥

887

Turning a deaf ear to that submission,
issued from the lips of Laksmana, which
looked like a cup of tender leaves, Sri
Rama, however, continued to cry again and
again, unable as he was to see his aforesaid
darling, Sita. (31)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्येऽरण्यकाण्डे एकषष्टितम: Wr: ॥ ६१ ॥

Thus ends Canto Sixty-one in the Aranyakanda of the glorious Ramayana of Valmiki,
the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

Canto LXII
Rama’s Lament

सीतामपश्यन् धर्मात्मा शोकोपहतचेतन:।
face महाबाहू राम: कमललोचन:॥१॥

Not perceiving Sita, Sri Rama, whose
mind was set on virtue, and who was
distinguished by mighty arms and lotus-like
eyes, began to wail, his understanding having
been dulled by grief. (1)

पश्यन्निव च at सीतामपश्यन्मन्मथार्दित:।
sara राघवो वाक्यं विलापाश्रयदुर्वचम्॥ २॥

As though seeing her, seized as he
was with hallucination, though actually not
seeing Sita, Sri Rama (a scion of Raghu),
who was tormented with love, uttered the
following words, which could not be easily
articulated due to his sobs: (2)

त्वमशोकस्य शाखाभि: पुष्पप्रियतरा प्रिये।
आव्रृणोषि mit a मम शोकविवर्धनी॥ ३॥
“Very fond of flowers, you are hiding
your body behind the boughs of an Asoka
tree, thereby augmenting my grief all the
more, my darling ! (3)

कदलीकाण्डसदृशौ कदल्या संवृतावुभौ।
Be पश्यामि ते देवि नासि शक्ता निगूहितुम्॥४॥

“| descry, O queen, both your thighs,
even though screened with the plantain tree,

resembling as they do the stem of a plantain
tree; you are no longer able to hide them
from my view ! (4)
कर्णिकारवनं ws gaat देवि aaa

act ते परिहासेन मम बाधावहेन ang

“Jestingly you have taken cover in the
grove of Karnikara trees, O blessed lady !
But have done with your jest, which is
causing annoyance to me. (5)

विशेषेणाश्रमस्थाने हासोऽयं न प्रशस्यते।
sara a शीलं परिहासप्रियं प्रिये॥६॥
“Such fun is not praiseworthy in a

hermitage in particular, although | know your
nature, which is fond of sport, O darling ! (6)

आगच्छ त्वं विशालाक्षि शून्योऽयमुटजस्तव।
सुव्यक्तं राक्षसै: सीता भक्षिता वा हृतापि वा॥ it
न fe सा विलपन्तं मामुपसम्प्रैति लक्ष्मण।
watt मृगयूथानि साश्रुनेत्राणि लक्ष्मण॥८॥
शंसन्तीव fe A देवीं भक्षितां writ: |
हा ममार्ये क्व यातासि हा साध्वि वरवर्णिनि॥ ९॥

“Return, O large-eyed one ! This hut of
yours is desolate.” Getting disillusioned
soon after, he said to Laksmana: “Clearly
enough, Sita has either been devoured or
borne away by ogres; for she does not
