914

relate to you, O tiger among men, how and
through what insolence this monstrous

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

shape actually came to be acquired by
me. (19)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्येऽरण्यकाण्डे सप्ततितम: a7: ॥ ७० ॥

Thus ends Canto Seventy in the Aranyakanda of the glorious Ramayana of Valmiki,
the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

Canto LXXI

Kabandha narrates his story and gives assurance of help in the
discovery of Sita after his cremation

पुरा राम महाबाहो महाबलपराक्रमम्।
रूपमासीन्ममाचिन्त्यं त्रिषु लोकेषु विश्रुतम्॥१॥
यथा सूर्यस्य सोमस्य शक्रस्य च यथा वपु:।
सोऽहं रूपमिदं pet लोकवित्रासनं महत्॥ २॥
Ra वनगतान् WA त्रासयामि ततस्तत:।
aa: स्थूलशिरा नाम महर्षि: कोपितो मया॥ ३॥
“In my former existence, O mighty-
armed Rama, my form was endowed with
extraordinary might and prowess, possessed
of inconceivable splendour and well-known
through all the three worlds, resembled as it
did the forms of the sun-god, the moon-god
and Indra, the ruler of gods. Assuming this
gigantic form of an ogre, which was a source
of terror to the people, | used even then to
move from place to place and frighten the
Rsis inhabiting the forest, O Rama! During
that period an eminent Rsi (a seer of Vedic
Mantras), Sthulasira by name, was provoked
to anger by me. (1—3)

a चिन्वन् विविधं at रूपेणानेन afta: |
तेनाहमुक्त: प्रेक्ष्यैवं घोरशापाभिधायिना॥४॥

“While gathering the produce of various
kinds of the forest, he was on one occasion
assailed by me in this very form. By the
aforesaid Rsi, who pronounced a terrible
curse on me on perceiving me, | was spoken
to in the following words : (4)

Waed yi a wang विगर्हितम्।
स मया याचित: क्रुद्ध: शापस्यान्तो भवेदिति॥ & ॥

अभिशापकृतस्येति तेनेदं भाषितं वच:।
यदा fora भुजौ रामस्त्वां coq विजने वने॥ ६॥
dal त्वं प्राप्स्यसे रूपं स्वमेव विपुलं शुभम्।
श्रिया विराजितं पुत्रं दनोस्त्वं विद्धि लक्ष्मण॥ ७॥
‘Let this very form, cruel and
reprehensible as it is, be retained by you
(forever).’ When the angry Rsi was requested
by me in following words: ‘Let there be an
end to this curse called forth by my accursed
behaviour’, the following reply was made by
him to this request of mine: ‘When, having
severed both your arms, Sri Rama cremates
you in a lonely forest, then alone you will
regain your own enormous and charming
form adorned with splendour.’ Therefore,
know me originally to be a son of Danu, O
Laksmana ! (5—7)
ae fe तपसोग्रेण पितामहमतोषयम्॥८॥
“This monstrous form was acquired by
me through the wrath of Indra (the ruler of
gods) on a field of battle in the following
way : “When endowed with the form of an
ogre, | actually propitiated Brahma (the
progenitor of the entire creation) through my
rigorous austerities, (8)

दीर्घमायु: स मे प्रादात् ततो मां विभ्रमोऽस्पृशत्।
दीर्घमायुर्मया प्राप्तं किं at शक्र: करिष्यति॥ ९॥
इत्येवं बुद्धिमास्थाय Wl शक्रमधर्षयम्।
तस्य बाहुप्रमुक्तेन वज्रेण शतपर्वणा॥१०॥
