* SUNDARAKANDA +

Seeing Sita intimidated as above by
those vile women at that moment, an aged
ogress, Trijata, who had just woken up from
sleep, spoke as follows: (4)

आत्मानं खादतानार्या न सीतां भक्षयिष्यथ।

जनकस्य सुतामिष्टां स्नुषां दशरथस्य च॥५॥
“Devour yourselves, O wretches if you

will; you will not be able to feast on Sita,

Janaka’s daughter and beloved daughter-
in-law of DaSaratha. (5)

स्वप्नो Deal मया दृष्टो दारुणो रोमहर्षण:।
राक्षसानामभावाय भर्तुरस्य'।' भवाय च।॥ ६॥
“A horrible dream, which makes my hair
stand on end, has actually been seen by me
today pointing to the annihilation of ogres and
to the well-being of her husband.” (6)

`एवमुक्तास्त्रिजटया राक्षस्य: क्रोधमूच्छिता:।
सर्वा एवाब्रुवन् भीतास्त्रिजटां तामिदं वच:॥७॥
Seized with fright when spoken to as
aforesaid by Trijata, all the ogresses, who
were distracted through anger only a minute
before, spoke as follows to the aforesaid
Trijata: (7)
कथयस्व त्वया TE: स्वप्नोऽयं कीदूशो निशि।
तासां श्रुत्वा तु वचनं राक्षसीनां मुखोद्गतम्॥८॥
sara वचनं काले त्रिजटा स्वप्नसंथश्रितम्।
गजदन्तमयीं दिव्यां शिबिकामन्तरिक्षगाम्॥९॥
Gat वाजिसहस्रेण स्वयमास्थाय Wea: |
शुक्लमाल्याम्बरधरो लक्ष्मणेन समागत:॥१०॥

“Speak out what kind of dream was
seen by you this night.” Hearing the request
that had escaped from the lips of the
ogresses, Trijata for her part made the
following answer bearing on the dream seen
by her during the morning wee-hours :

“Mounting a celestial palanquin made
of ivory and coursing through the airspace,
nay, drawn by a thousand horses, Sri Rama
himself, clad in a white raiment and wearing

135

a white garland, has duly come here with
Laksmana. (8—10)
स्वप्ने चाद्य मया FECT सीता शुक्लाम्बरावृता।
सागरेण परिक्षिप्तं श्वेतपर्वतमास्थिता॥११॥
“Clad in white robes, Sita, too, was

seen by me in the dream today perched on
a white mountain surrounded by sea. (11)

TTT ATT SAT ATERLOT VAT AT |

ततस्तु सूर्यसकप्णौ दीप्यमानौ स्वतेजसा॥ १३॥
शुक्लमाल्याम्बरधरौ जानकीं पर्युपस्थितौ।
ततस्तस्य नगस्याग्रे ह्याकाशस्थस्य दन्तिन:॥ १४॥
wat परिगृहीतस्य जानकी स्कन्धमाश्रिता।
USI समुत्पत्य तत: कमललोचना॥१५॥
चन्द्रसूर्यौ मया ger पाणिभ्यां परिमार्जती।
ततस्ताभ्यां कुमाराभ्यामास्थित: स गजोत्तम:।
सीतया च विशालाक्ष्या लङ्काया उपरि स्थित: W १६॥
पाण्डुरर्षभयुक्तेन रथेनाष्टयुजा स्वयम्।
इहोपयात: काकुत्स्थ: सीतया सह भार्यया॥ १७॥
शुक्लमाल्याम्बरधरो लक्ष्मणेन सहागत:।
ततोऽन्यत्र मया दृष्टो WA: सत्यपराक्रम:॥ १८ tl
लक्ष्मणेन सह भ्रात्रा सीतया ae वीर्यवान्।
आरुह्य पुष्पकं दिव्यं विमानं सूर्यसंनिभम्॥१९॥
उत्तरां दिशमालोच्य प्रस्थित: पुरुषोत्तम:।
एवं स्वप्ने मया दृष्टो रामो विष्णुपराक्रम: Il २०॥
लक्ष्मणेन सह wat सीतया सह भार्यया।
न fe Wa महातेजा: शक्यो जेतुं सुरासुरै:।॥ २१॥
राक्षसैर्वापि चान्यैर्वा स्वर्ग: पापजनैरिव।
रावणश्च मया दृष्टो मुण्डस्तैलसमुक्षित:॥ २२॥
रक्तवासा: पिबन्मत्त: करवीरकृतस्त्रज:।
विमानात् पुष्पकादद्य रावण: पतित: क्षितौ॥ २३॥
“Nay, Sita was seen re-united with Sri
Rama as light is with the sun. Sri Rama, a
scion of Raghu, who shone brightly with

Laksmana, was further beheld by me as
mounted on a huge elephant*, closely

* We read in “Swapnadhyaya” (a treatise on dreams) :
आरोहणं गोवृषकुञ्जराणां प्रासादशैलाग्रवनस्पतीनाम्। विष्ठानुलेपो ved Ad च स्वप्नेष्वगम्यागमनं च धन्यम्॥

“To mount on the back of a cow, a bull or an elephant, to climb up a mansion, the top of a mountain
