# YUDDHAKANDA #

535

Canto LXIl

Kumbhakarna enters the palace of Ravana, who
warns him of the danger from Sri Rama and
urges him to destroy the enemy’s army

a तु राक्षसशार्दूलो निद्रामदसमाकुल:।
राजमार्गं श्रिया जुष्टं ययौ विपुलविक्रम:॥१॥
Heavy with sleep and inebriety, that
tiger among the ogres, for his part, who was
endowed with immense prowess, marched
along the king’s highway which was full of
splendour. (1)

राक्षसानां सहस्रैश्च qd: परमदुर्जय:।
Tea: पुष्पवर्षेण कीर्यमाणस्तदा aati

Nay, surrounded by thousands of ogres,
Kumbhakarna (who was exceedingly difficult
to conquer) moved on, being covered all
along with a shower of flowers from the
houses lining the road. (2)

a हेमजालविततं भानुभास्वरदर्शनम्।
ददर्श विपुलं रम्यं राक्षसेन्द्रनिवेशनम्॥३॥
He saw the vast and lovely abode of
Ravana (the ruler of ogres), which was
covered with a lattice-work of gold and as
such looked bright as the sun. (3)

स्वयंभुवं शक्र इवासनस्थम्॥४॥
Penetrating deep into the residence of
Ravana (the suzerain lord of ogres), even
as the sun would disappear into a mass of
clouds, he saw from afar his elder brother,
Ravana, seated on his throne, even as
Indra would behold Brahma (the self-born
creator) sitting on his seat. (4)

Ud: स भवनं गच्छन् रक्षोगणसमन्वित:।
कुम्भकर्ण: पदन्यासैरकम्पयत मेदिनीम्॥५॥

Proceeding to the dwelling of his elder
brother, duly accompanied by a host of
ogres, Kumbhakarna caused the earth to
tremble with his strides. (5)

सोऽभिगम्य गृहं भ्रातु: कक्ष्यामभिविगाह्य च।
ददर्शोद्विग्नमासीनं विमाने पुष्पके गुरुम्॥६॥

Reaching the palace of his elder
brother, and stepping beyond the enclosure,
he beheld his elder brother seated in his
aerial car, Puspaka, in a perturbed state.

(6)
अथ Feat दशग्रीव: कुम्भकर्णमुपस्थितम्।
तूर्णमुत्थाय संहृष्टउ संनिकर्षमुपानयत्॥७॥

Getting up immediately on seeing
Kumbhakarna arrived, Ravana (the ten-
headed monster), who felt highly rejoiced,
brought him to his side. (7)

अथासीनस्य पर्यङ्के कुम्भकर्णो महाबल:।
भ्रातुर्ववन्दे चरणौ किं कृत्यमिति चाब्रवीत्॥८॥

Kumbhakarna, who was endowed with
extraordinary might, forthwith bowed down
at the feet of his elder brother, reclining on
a couch, and inquired, “What service is
required of me?” (8)
उत्पत्य चैनं मुदितो रावण: परिषस्वजे।

स भ्रात्रा सम्परिष्वक्तो यथावच्चाभिनन्दित:॥ ९॥

Springing up from his seat once more,
Ravana, who was filled with joy, clasped
him to his bosom. In this way he was tightly
embraced by his elder brother and duly
hailed with joy. (9)
कुम्भकर्ण: शुभं feet प्रतिपेदे वरासनम्।

स तदासनमाश्रित्य कुम्भकर्णो महाबल:॥१०॥
