# YUDDHAKANDA #

auspicious bodily marks and all were given
to righteousness. (105)

दशवर्षसहस्राणि दशवर्षशतानि a
भ्रातृभि: सहित: श्रीमान् WAT राज्यमकारयत्॥ १०६ UI
With his three younger brothers, the
glorious Sri Rama ruled for ten and one
thousand (11,000) years. (106)
धर्म्य यशस्यमायुष्यं राज्ञां च विजयावहम्।
आदिकाव्यमिदं चार्षं पुरा वाल्मीकिना PALI १०७॥
य: OT सदा लोके AL: पापात् प्रमुच्यते।
पुत्रकामश्च पुत्रान् वै धनकामो धनानि च॥ १०८ Il
लभते मनुजो लोके श्रुत्वा रामाभिषेचनम्।
महीं विजयते राजा रिपंश्चाप्यधितिष्ठति॥१०९॥
He who listens everyday to this oldest
epic, composed in the days of old by Sage
Valmiki, which is calculated to bestow
religious merit, renown and longevity and to
bring victory to kings and lends support to
the Vedas, is completely rid of sin. On
hearing the narrative of his consecration on
the throne of Ayodhya a man seeking a son
obtains sons and a seeker of wealth obtains
riches in the world. A king, who does so
conquers the earth and overcomes his
enemies. (107—109)
राघवेण यथा माता सुमित्रा लक्ष्मणेन च।
भरतेन च कैकेयी जीवपुत्रास्तथा स्रिय:॥ ११०॥
भविष्यन्ति सदानन्दा: पुत्रपौत्रसमन्विता:।
श्रुत्वा रामायणमिदं दीर्घमायुश्च विन्दति॥१११॥
रामस्य विजयं चेमं सर्वमक्लिष्टकर्मण:।
श्रृणोति य इदं काव्यं UT वाल्मीकिना कृतम्॥ ११२॥
श्रद्दधानो जितक्रोधो दुर्गाण्यतितरत्यसौ।
समागम्य प्रवासान्ते रमन्ते सह बान्धवै:।॥ ११३॥
श्रृण्वन्ति य इदं काव्यं पुरा वाल्मीकिना कृतम्।
ते प्रार्थितान् वरान् सर्वान् प्राप्नुवन्तीह राघवात्॥ ११४॥
Even as Kausalya, Sri Rama’s mother,
had a living son in Sri Rama, a scion of
Raghu, Sumitra in Laksmana and Satrughna,
and Kaikeyi in Bharata, so women listening
to the aforementioned story will have living

843

sons, will ever experience joy and will be
blessed with sons and grandsons _ in
abundance. Nay, one attains a long life on
listening to this poem, the Ramayana and
particularly to this entire narrative of the
victory of Sri Rama, who was unwearied in
action. Again, he who, having conquered
his anger, reverently listens to this epic
composed in the days of old by Sage Valmiki,
overcomes all difficulties. They who listen
to this epic composed of yore by Sage
Valmiki will get reunited with their relations
at the end of their absence from home,
and rejoice with them. They will also secure
from Sri Rama, a scion of Raghu, in this
world all the boons coveted by them.

(110—114)

श्रवणेन सुरा: Aa प्रीयन्ते सम्प्रशृण्वताम्।
विनायकाश्च शाम्यन्ति गृहे तिष्ठन्ति यस्य वै॥ ११५ i

Through a hearing of this epic all the
gods of the Hindu pantheon get pleased
with those who carefully listen to it. Nay, all
obstacles coming in the way of an individual,
in whose house a copy of the epic exists,
definitely come to an end. (115)

विजयेत महीं राजा प्रवासी स्वस्तिमान् भवेत्।
स्नियो रजस्वला: श्रुत्वा पुत्रान् सूयुरनुत्तमान्॥ ११६ Ul
A king listening to this epic will be able
to conquer the earth, an individual staying
away from home will fare well and women
listening to it prior to their pregnancy will
give birth to sons who are unsurpassed by
another in point of excellences. (116)
wag पठंश्चैनमितिहासं पुरातनम्।
सर्वपापै: प्रमुच्येत दीर्घमायुरवाप्नुयात्॥११७॥
A man offering worship to and reading
this ancient historical work is completely rid
of all sins and attains longevity. (117)
प्रणम्य शिरसा नित्यं श्रोतव्यं क्षत्रियैर्दविजात्।
ऐडश्वर्यं पुत्रलाभश्च भविष्यति न संशय:॥११८॥
