260

स त्वां द्रष्टुं व्यवसित: सोपाध्यायपुरोहितम्।
मन्तिश्रेष्ठवच: श्रुत्वा राजा सर्षिगणस्तथा॥ १४॥
सबन्धुरगमत् dt जनको यत्र वर्तते।
राजा च मन्त्रिसहित: सोपाध्याय: सबान्धव:॥ १५ ॥
वाक्यं वाक्यविदां श्रेष्ठो वैदेहमिदमब्रवीत्।
विदितं ते महाराज इक्ष्वाकुकुलदैवतम्॥ १६॥
वक्ता सर्वेषु कृत्येषु वसिष्ठो भगवानृषि:।
विश्वामित्राभ्यनुज्ञात॥ सह सर्वैर्महर्षिभि:।॥ १७॥
we वक्ष्यति धर्मात्मा वसिष्ठो मे यथाक्रमम्।
तूष्णींभूते दशरथे वसिष्ठो भगवानृषि:। १८॥
उवाच वाक्यं वाक्यज्ञो वैदेहं सपुरोधसम्।
अव्यक्तप्रभवो TAM शाश्वतो नित्य अव्यय:॥ १९॥

He saw the high-souled Janaka, who
was a lover of righteousness; and greeting
Satananda as well as the most pious Janaka,
he took his seat on a most wonderful throne
worthy of kings. Having both sat down, the
valiant brothers, who were possessed of
infinite glory, called and commanded
Sudamana, the foremost of their counsellors,
in the following words : “Proceed quickly, O
chief of counsellors, to the formidable King
DaSaratha, a scion of Ikswaku, of limitless
glory and bring him alongwith his sons and
counsellors.” Going to the lodging of King
DaSaratha, of course he saw Dasaratha,
the promoter of the race of the Raghus,
and, greeting him with his head bent low,
submitted as follows : “The celebrated King
Janaka, belonging to the line of the Videhas,
the ruler of Mithila, O heroic king of Ayodhya,
is eager to see you alongwith your preceptor
and family priest.”

Hearing the submission of Sudamana,
the chief of the counsellors of Janaka, the
king DaSaratha, accompanied by a multitude
of sages as well as by his relations, called
where Janaka was. Taking his seat alongwith
his counsellors, preceptors and relations,
DaSsaratha, the foremost of those who know
how to speak, spoke to Janaka, who
belonged to the line of the Videhas, as
follows : “It may be known to you, O great

« VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

king, that the very powerful sage Vasistha,
the adored of the house of Ikswaku, is our
spokesman in all matters. Seated by the
side of all great seers, the aforesaid Vasistha,
whose mind is given to piety, will with the
approval of Viswamitra recount my pedigree
in order of sequence.” When DaSaratha
became silent, the very powerful and
omniscient Vasistha, who knows how to
speak, spoke to Janaka, the ornament of
the Videhas, and his family priest as
follows: “Born of the Unmanifest Prakrti,
Brahma, the creator of the universe, is
immortal, eternal (in the sense that he
lives to an age of two Parardhas or
31,10,40,00,00,00,000 human years) and free
from decay. (9—19)

तस्मान्मरीचि: संजज्ञे मरीचे: कश्यप: सुत:।
विवस्वान् कश्यपाज्जज्ञे मनुर्वैवस्वत: FAA: I २०॥

“To him was born Sage Marici, Marici’s
son was Sage Kasyapa. Vivaswan (the
sun-god) was born to Kasyapa. Vivaswan’s
son was known as Manu. (20)

मनु: प्रजापति: पूर्वमिक्ष्वाकुश्च मनो: सुत:।
तमिक्ष्वाकुमयोध्यायां राजानं विद्धि पूर्वकम्॥ २१॥

“Manu was a Prajapati, a lord of created
beings, in the past and Ikswaku was the
son of Manu. Know the aforesaid Ikswaku
to have been the very first ruler of Ayodhya.

(21)

इक्ष्वाकोस्तु सुत: श्रीमान् कुक्षिरित्येव fasta: |
कुक्षेरथात्मज: श्रीमान् विकुक्षिरुदपद्यत॥ २२॥

“Nay, Ikswaku’s glorious son was widely
known by the name of Kuksi and the
illustrious Vikuksi was born as a son to
Kuksi. (22)

विकुक्षेस्तु महातेजा बाण: UA: प्रतापवान्।
बाणस्य तु महातेजा अनरण्य: प्रतापवान्॥ २३ Ul
“The highly glorious and mighty Bana,
again, was the son of Vikuksi, and even so
Anaranya was the highly glorious and mighty
son of Bana. (23)
