+ UTTARAKANDA +

तस्य तद् वचनं श्रुत्वा तुरगान् स मनोजवान्।
आदिदेशाथ शत्रूणां मध्येनैव च सारथि:॥ ११॥

Hearing the aforesaid command of
Ravana, the said charioteer forthwith drove
the horses, which were swift as thought,
right through the enemy ranks. (11)

तस्य तं निश्चयं ज्ञात्वा शक्रो देवेश्वरस्तदा।
THA: समरस्थस्तान् देवान् वाक्यमथाब्रवीत्॥ १२॥

Coming to know of this resolve of
Ravana, Indra, the ruler of gods, seated in
his chariot on the battlefield, forthwith spoke
as follows on that occasion to the gods
present on the battlefield: (12)

सुरा: ATA मद्बाक्यं यत् तावन्मम रोचते।

जीवन्नेव anita: साधु tat निगृह्यताम्॥१३॥
“O gods, listen to my words; what finds

favour with me just at this moment is that

the ten-headed ogre had better be captured
even while alive. (13)

एष ह्यतिबल: Ga रथेन पवनौजसा।
गमिष्यति wage: समुद्र sa पर्वणि॥१४॥

“In his chariot, which has the speed of
the wind, this very mighty ogre will actually
rush through our army like the sea with its
swollen waves on the day of the full moon.

(14)
नह्येष हन्तुं शक्योऽद्य वरदानात् सुनिर्भय:।
aq ग्रहीष्यामहे रक्षो यत्ता Vad संयुगे॥१५॥

“He cannot be killed this day in that he
has grown utterly fearless due to the
conferment of a boon on him by Brahma;

hence we shall capture the ogre; be prepared
for this on the field of battle. (15)

यथा बलौ निरुद्धे च त्रैलोक्यं भुज्यते मया।
एवमेतस्य पापस्य निरोधो मम रोचते॥१६॥

“Even as the three worlds are being
ruled over by me only because of the demon
Bali having been taken captive by Lord
Visnu, the incarceration of this sinful ogre
finds favour with me likewise.” (16)

945

ततोऽन्यं देशमास्थाय शक्र: संत्यज्य रावणम्।
अयुध्यत महाराज राक्षसांस्त्रासयन् रणे॥१७॥
Having said so and leaving Ravana
alone, and moving to a different place, Indra
fought there causing terror to the ogres on
the field of battle, O monarch. (17)

दक्षिणेन तु Ueda प्रविवेश शतक्रतु:॥ १८॥

Ravana (the ten-headed monster), who
never retreated from the battlefield, penetrated
into the army of gods from the northern
side; while Indra (who is supposed to have
performed a hundred horse-sacrifices in his
past lives as a condition precedent for
obtaining the office of Indra) made his way
into the army of ogres from the southern
side. (18)
aa: स योजनशतं प्रविष्टो राक्षसाधिप:।
देवतानां बलं सर्वं शरवर्षैरवाकिरत्॥१९॥

Having penetrated a hundred Yojanas
(or eight hundred miles) deep, the suzerain

lord of ogres covered the entire army of
gods with showers of arrows. (19)
तत: शक्रो निरीक्ष्याथ प्रणष्टं तु स्वकं बलम्।
न्यव्।र्तयदसग्-भ्रान्त; समाव्रृत्य दशाननम्॥ २०॥
Surrounding Ravana (the ten-headed
monster) on perceiving his own army
completely destroyed, Indra for his part,
who was not the least agitated, thereupon
forthwith compelled Ravana to retreat. (20)

`एतस्मिन्नन्तरे नादो मुक्को दानवराक्षसै:।

Bl हता: TA इति Wet दृष्टवा शक्रेण रावणम्॥ २१॥
In the meantime, on seeing Ravana

overcome by Indra, an outcry was raised

by the Danavas and the ogres, saying:

“Alas, we are all undone?” (21)

ततो रथं समास्थाय रावणि: क्रोधमूच्छित:।
ad सैन्यमतिसंक्रुद्ध: प्रविवेश सुदारुणम्॥ २२॥

Taking his seat in a chariot, Meghanada,
son of Ravana, who felt greatly enraged,
