404

life must be realized by me. | must accordingly
accompany you, my Lord, O darling; it cannot
be otherwise. (10)

pares भविष्यामि गमिष्यामि त्वया सह।
कालश्चायं समुत्पन्न: सत्यवान् भवतु द्विज:॥११॥

“lam sure | shall be permitted by you
to follow you and shall eventually accompany
you. Nay, the time for the fulfilment of the
prophecy has now arrived. Let the utterance
of the Brahmanas prove true. (11)

amare fe जानामि दु:खानि agen किल।
Wert नियतं die पुरुषैरकृतात्मभि:॥ १२॥
“| certainly know there are sufferings
of various kinds in the forest. They are,
however, invariably experienced by men of
unsubdued mind alone, O heroic prince !
(12)
कन्यया च पितुर्गेहे वनवास: sat मया।
भिक्षिण्या: शमवृत्ताया मम मातुरिहाग्रत:॥१३॥
प्रसादितश्च a ud त्वं मे बहुतिथं प्रभो।
गमनं वनवासस्य कांक्षितं fe सह त्वया॥१४॥

“While | was_ still unmarried, the
prediction about my dwelling in the forest
was heard by me in my father’s house from
the mouth of a hermitess, spending her life
in quietism, in the presence of my mother.
Here too, my lord, you have been actually
asked on many an occasion in the past the
favour of taking me to the forest and spending
some time there. Indeed a journey with a
view to spending some time in the forest
with you is longed for by me. (13-14)
कृतक्षणाहं भद्रं A गमनं wa weal
वनवासस्य शूरस्य मम चर्या fe रोचते॥१५॥

“| am feeling jubilant over the prospect
of my departure for the forest. May all be
well with you, O scion of Raghu ! Service to
you,a heroic prince, dwelling in the forest is
surely delightful to me. (15)

शुद्धात्मन् प्रेमभावाद्भि भविष्यामि विकल्मषा।
भर्तारमनुगच्छन्ती wat fe परदैवतम्॥१६॥

“Following my husband to the forest with

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

loving devotion | shall surely be absolved
from all guilt, O pure-minded prince; for the
husband is the supreme deity for a wife.

(16)

प्रेत्यभावे fF कल्याण: संगमो A सदा waar

श्रुतिर्हि श्रूयते पुण्या ब्राह्मणानां यशस्विनाम्॥ १७॥
इहलोके च पितृभिर्या स्त्री यस्य महाबल।
अद्भिर्दत्ता स्वधर्मेण प्रेत्यभावेऽपि तस्य ATU १८॥

“On my remaining united with you even
in the forest, my union with you will continue
forever and will be a source of blessedness
to us both even hereafter. On this subject,
O highly powerful prince, is heard from the
lips of celebrated Brahmanas the following
holy Sruti text ; ‘Even in the other world a
woman continues to be the wife of that very
man to whom she was given away in this
world by her parents with water in their
hands to solemnize the gift according to the
moral code binding on them.’ (17-18)
नाभिरोचयसे Ad त्वं मां केनेह हेतुना॥१९॥

“Such being the case, for what reason
on earth do you not agree to take me, your
own wife, actually so devoted to her husband
and of such good character, from this city?

(19)
नेतुमर्हसि काकुत्स्थ समानसुखदु:खिनीम्॥ २०॥

“You ought, therefore, to take me, so
devoted and faithful to my husband (yourself),
miserable for fear of separation, alike to
pleasure and pain and sharing your joys
and sorrows, O scion of Kakutstha! (20)
यदि मां दु:खितामेवं at ad न चेच्छसि।
विषमग्निं जलं वाहमास्थास्ये मृत्युकारणात्॥ २१॥

“If you do not feel inclined at all to take
me, afflicted as | am as shown above, to
the forest, | shall resort to poison, fire or
water to hasten my end.” (21)

एवं बहुविधं तं सा arad गमनं प्रति।
नानुमेने महाबाहुस्तां Ad विजनं वनम्॥२२॥
