1000

“A thief (in particular and a sinner in
general) gets fully absolved from sin either
through punishment or by being let go free
by way of mercy. A king not punishing a
sinner, however, incurs his sin.* (32)

आर्येण मम मान्धात्रा व्यसनं घोरमीप्सितम्।
श्रमणेन कृते पापे यथा Wt Hd त्वया॥ ३३॥

“A terrible suffering, which was
absolutely desirable, was inflicted by my
forbear, Emperor Mandhata, by way of
punishment on a monk, for a sin similar to
the one perpetrated by you. (33)

अन्यैरपि कृतं पापं प्रमत्तैर्वसुधाधिपै:।
प्रायश्चित्तं च कुर्वन्ति तेन तच्छाम्यते रज:॥ ३४॥

“Sins perpetrated by blundering men
were likewise punished by other rulers of
the earth, too. Besides this, people undergo
expiation themselves too and through such
expiation that sin, which is expiated, gets
neutralized. (34)

तदलं परितापेन धर्मत: परिकल्पित:।
वधो वानरशार्दूल न वयं स्ववशे स्थिता:॥ ३५॥

“Therefore, have done with grief, your
death was contrived in accordance with the
principles of righteousness, O tiger among
monkeys; for we were not under our own
control (being subject to the control of the
Sastras). (35)
तच्छुत्वा fe महद् ait न मन्युं कर्तुमर्हसि॥ ३६॥

“Again, know from me another reason
why | killed you, O bull among the
monkeys! After knowing that momentous
reason, O hero, you should not be angry
with me. (36)

न मे at मनस्तापो न मन्युर्हरिपुंगव।
वागुराभिश्च पाशैश्च pes विविधैर्नरा:।। ३७॥

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

प्रतिच्छन्नाश्च दृश्याश्च गृह्णन्ति सुबहून् मृगान्।
प्रधावितान् वा वित्रस्तान् विस्रब्धानतिविष्ठितान्॥ ३८ ।।

“No agony is felt by me nor any remorse
for what | have done, O bull among monkeys !
Remaining concealed or open to view, people
catch by means of nets and nooses as well
as by means of traps of various kinds
numerous deer that have run away alarmed
or remain firmly rooted, fearless as they
are. (37-38)

प्रमत्तानप्रमत्तान् वा नरा मांसाशिनो भृशम्।
विध्यन्ति विमुखांश्चापि न च दोषोऽत्र विद्यते॥ ३९॥

“Meat-eating people hit with violence
deer, which are unwary or circumspect,
nay, even those which have their faces
turned away from the hunters and no blame
attaches to this. (39)

यान्ति राजर्षयश्चात्र मृगयां धर्मकोविदा:।
तस्मात् त्वं निहतो युद्धे मया बाणेन वानर।
अयुध्यन् प्रतियुध्यन् वा यस्माच्छाखामृगो ह्यसि ।। Yo A

“Nay, even royal sages, well-versed
in the principles of righteousness, go on
hunting. Hence, O monkey, you were mortally
wounded by me with an arrow in the course
of your encounter with Sugriva, no matter
whether you were not fighting with me or
fighting with another; for you are but a
monkey. (40)
दुर्लभस्य च धर्मस्य जीवितस्य शुभस्य च।
राजानो वानरश्रेष्ठं प्रदातारो न संशय:॥४१॥

“Kings, O jewel among monkeys, are
capable of dispensing religious merit, which
is so difficult to attain otherwise—longevity

and earthly blessings too: there is no doubt
about it. (41)

तान् न हिंस्यान्न चाक्रोशेन्नाक्षिपेन्नाप्रियं वदेत्।
देवा मानुषरूपेण चरन्त्येते महीतले॥४२॥

* Tn Manusmrti as extant today we read the two verses as below :

राजभि:

कृतदण्डास्तु pa पापानि मानवा: | निर्मला: स्वर्गमायान्ति सन्त: सुकृतिनो यथा॥

शासनाद्वा विमोक्षाद्वा स्तेन स्तेयाद्विमुच्यते । अशासित्वा तु तं राजा स्तेनस्याप्नोति किल्बिषम्॥

(VII. 315, 316)
