« VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

७
ad
a

सर्ग:

Canto XX

Seeking to cajole Sita by means of coaxing words,
Ravana implores her to accept him

स तां ukgat दीनां निरानन्दां तपस्विनीम्।
साकारैर्मधुरैर्वाक्यैर्न्यदर्शयत रावण:॥ १॥
The aforesaid Ravana disclosed his
mind in the following significant and sweet
words to the poor and wretched Sita, who
was bereft of all joy and remained surrounded
all the time by ogresses : (1)

मां दृष्ट्वा नागनासोरु WAM स्तनोदरम्।
अदर्शनमिवात्मानं भयान्नेतुं त्वमिच्छसि॥ २॥

“Concealing your breasts and belly, O
lady with thighs resembling the proboscis of
an elephant, you want to keep yourself out
of sight, as it were, through fear of me. (2)

कामये cat विशालाक्षि ag मन्यस्व मां प्रिये।
सर्वांगगुणसम्पन्ने सर्वलोकमनोहरे Ul ३॥

“| long for you, O large-eyed lady!
Pray, hold me in high esteem, O beloved
one, who are richly endowed with all bodily
excellences and ravish the mind of all people.

(3)
नेह किञ्चिन्मनुष्या वा राक्षसा: कामरूपिण:।
व्यपसर्पतु a dtd wa wea: समुत्थितम्॥४॥

“There are no men or ogres capable of
changing form at will here. And let your fear
born of me vanish for good, O Sita! (4)
स्वधर्मो रक्षसां भीरु adda न संशय:।
TH वा परस्त्रीणां हरणं सम्प्रमथ्य वा॥५॥

“It has always been the peculiar course
of conduct prescribed for ogres, O timid
one, to approach sexually the wives of others
or to bear them away by force: there is no
doubt about it. (5)
Ua चैवमकामां wait न च स्प्रक्ष्यामि मैथिलि।
कामं काम: शरीरे A यथाकामं प्रवर्तताम्॥६॥

“Notwithstanding this, O princess of

Mithila, | will not touch you so long as you
do not love me in return. | would fain let
passion hold sway at will over my body. (6)

देवि नेह wa कार्यं मयि विश्वसिहि प्रिये।
प्रणयस्व च तत्त्वेन Ae भू: शोकलालसा॥७॥

“No fear should be entertained by you
on this spot, O adorable lady! Have
confidence in me, O beloved one! Make
love to me in reality; don’t get swayed by
grief. (7)

एकवेणी अध:शय्या ध्यानं मलिनमम्बरम्।
अस्थानेऽप्युपवासश्च नैतान्यौपयिकानि ते॥८॥

“To wear a single plait, to lie on the
ground, to remain brooding all the time, to
put on a soiled attire and to observe a fast
even when there is no occasion for it—all
these are not proper for you. (8)

विचित्राणि च माल्यानि चन्दनान्यगुरूणि च।
विविधानि च वासांसि दिव्यान्याभरणानि ane
महार्हाणि च पानानि शयनान्यासनानि च।

गीतं Feat च वाद्यं च लभ मां प्राप्य मैथिलि॥ १०॥

“Having secured me as your lover,
enjoy garlands of diverse kinds as well as
sandal-pastes and aloes, as also robes of
various kinds and celestial ornaments too,
nay, costly drinks, beds and seats, vocal
and instrumental music and dancing, O
princess of Mithila ! (9-10)

मां प्राप्य fe कथं वा स्यास्त्वमनर्हा सुविग्रहे॥ ११॥

“You are a jewel among women; no
longer, therefore, remain in this shabby
condition. Wear ornaments on your limbs.
Indeed, having had me as your lover, how
can you remain unadorned, O lady endowed
with a lovely form? (11)
