542

is a wife amenable to the control of her
husband, there being no executive authority
to enforce correct conduct. (10)

अराजके धनं नास्ति नास्ति भार्याप्यराजके।
इदमत्याहितं चान्यत् Ha: सत्यमराजके॥११॥

“In a rulerless land there is no personal
property (in the absence of a protector) nor
is there a faithful wife in a rulerless land,
there being no law to check adultery. There
is this great risk in a rulerless territory. How
can any other form of truthfulness (virtue)
prevail? (11)

नाराजके जनपदे कारयन्ति सभां नरा:।
उद्यानानि च रम्याणि Ber: पुण्यगृहाणि च॥ १२॥

“In a_rulerless land, people do
not construct assembly halls for public
gatherings, there being no such gatherings,
nor do joyous men plant lovely gardens for
fear of their being destroyed by enemies of
peace and order or build sacred houses,
such as temples and buildings for the free
accommodation of travellers and strangers
etc. (12)

नाराजके जनपदे यज्ञशीला द्विजातय:।
सत्राण्यन्वासते दान्ता ब्राह्मण: संशितव्रता:॥ १३॥

“In a rulerless land the twice-born
(other than Brahmanas, viz., Ksatriyas and
Vaisyas) given to the performance of
sacrifices and self-controlled Brahmanas
observing austere vows do not undertake
sacrificial performances in which everyone
participating in it is both an officiating priest
and a sacrificer. (13)
नाराजके जनपदे महायज्ञेषु यज्वन:।
ब्राह्मणा वसुसम्पूर्णा विसृजन्त्याप्तदक्षिणा:॥ १४॥

“In a rulerless land even Brahmanas
richly endowed with wealth do not pay
handsome sacrificial fees to the priests
Officiating even at big sacrificial performances
(wherever such performances are
undertaken, lest they may be taken for rich
men and looted by brigands). (14)

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

नाराजके जनपदे WAST! |
उत्सवाश्च समाजाश्च वर्धन्ते राष्ट्वर्धना:॥ १५॥

“In a rulerless land festivals in honour
of deities in which actors and dancers exhibit
their art in a highly ecstatic mood, and
convivial gatherings promoting the welfare
of the state do not gather strength. (15)

annie जनपदे सिद्धार्था व्यवहारिण:।
कथाभिरभिरज्यन्ते कथाशीला: Hartt: u १६॥

“In a rulerless land parties to a law-suit
are not able to have their dispute settled,
nor are those given to hearing stories from
the Puranas etc., pleased with such stories
told by those to whom the narration of such
stories is agreeable. (16)

नाराजके जनपदे तूद्यानानि समागता:।
सायाह्ने क्रीडितुं यान्ति कुमार्यो हेमभूषिता:॥ १७॥

“In a rulerless land virgins decked with
gold ornaments do not for their part go
together to gardens to sport at dusk for
fear of being abducted or molested by
miscreants. (17)

नाराजके जनपदे धनवन्त: सुरक्षिता:।
शेरते विव्रृतद्वारा: कृषिगोरक्षजीविन:॥ १८॥

“In a rulerless land wealthy husband
men and cowherds, even though well
protected by their attendants, do not sleep
with open doors for fear of burglars and
dacoits. (18)

नाराजके जनपदे aed: शीघ्रवाहिभि:।
नरा निर्यान्त्यरण्यानि नारीभि: ae कामिन:॥ १९॥

“In a rulerless land lustful men do not
drive in swift-going conveyances with women
to pleasure-groves for enjoying the forest
scenery. (19)

नाराजके जनपदे बद्धघण्टा विषाणिन:।

अटन्ति राजमार्गेषु कुञ्जरा: षष्टिहायना:॥ २०॥
“In a rulerless land sixty-year old tuskers

do not (for fear of being deprived of their

tusks or bells) move about on the main
roads with bells fastened to their girths. (20)
