234

चकारावाहनं dat भागार्थं सर्वदेवता:।
नाभ्यागमंस्तदा तत्र भागार्थं सर्वदेवता:॥११॥
In that sacrifice the highly glorious
ViSwamitra was the chief priest (Adhwaryu).
The other priests too, who were all well-
versed in sacred texts, recited at the time of
pouring oblations into the sacred fire, did all
their allotted duties in their order of sequence
according to the procedure as laid down in
Kalpa (the branch of knowledge which
prescribes rules for ceremonial and sacrificial
acts) and with the recitation of relevant
Mantras. Then for a long time the great
ascetic, Viswamitra, invoked the presence
in that sacrifice of all the gods (entitled to a
share in the offerings made during a sacrifice)
to take their allotted shares. But none of
the gods appeared on that occasion in
the aforesaid sacrifice to take their share.
(9—11)

aa: कोपसमाविष्टो विश्वामित्रो महामुनि: |
स्रुवमुद्यम्य सक्रोधस्त्रिशङ्कुमिदमब्रवीत्॥१२॥
Overwhelmed with anger, the eminent
sage ViSwamitra thereupon lifted up the
sacrificial ladle (with which ghee is poured
into the sacred fire) and, full of anger,
addressed TriSanku as follows : (12)

Usa A तपसो diet स्वार्जितस्य नरेश्वर।
एष wat स्वशरीरेण नयामि स्वर्गमोजसा॥१३॥
“Behold the efficacy of the spiritual
energy acquired by me with my own effort,
O monarch! | forthwith send you in your
embodied state to heaven by virtue of my
spiritual energy. (13)

दुष्पापं स्वशरीरेण स्वर्गं गच्छ नरेशर्वर।
स्वार्जितं किंचिदप्यस्ति मया हि तपस: फलम्॥ १४॥
उक्कतवाक्ये मुनौ तस्मिन् सशरीरो नरेश्वर:।॥१५॥
स्वर्गलोकं We दृष्टवा त्रिशङ्कुं पाकशासन: ॥ १६ ॥

we ad: सुरगणैरिदं वचनमब्रवीत्।
त्रिशङ्को गच्छ भूयस्त्वं नासि स्वर्गकृतालय: Ut १७॥

« VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

“Ascend to heaven, which cannot be
easily attained in one’s physical form, O
ruler of men! If any reward of my austerities
has been earned by me at all, ascend you
bodily to heaven by virtue of its glory, O
monarch !” No sooner had the aforesaid
sage, ViSwamitra, finished his utterance,
the king, TriSanku, bodily rose to heaven, O
scion of Kakutstha, while the sages stood
looking on. Seeing TriSanku arrived in the
heavenly region, Indra (the tamer of the
demon Paka) alongwith all the hosts of
gods attending on him, spoke as follows :
“Trisanku, return you to earth since no
abode has been earned by you in paradise.

(14—17)

गुरुशापहतो As wa भूमिमवाकशिरा:।
Waal महेन्द्रेण त्रिशङ्कुरपतत् पुन:॥१८॥
विक्रोशमानस्त्राहीति विश्वामित्रं तपोधनम्।
तच्छुत्वा वचनं तस्य क्रोशमानस्य कौशिक: ॥१९॥
रोषमाहारयत् तीव्रं faces तिष्ठेति चाब्रवीत्।
ऋषिमध्ये स तेजस्वी प्रजापतिरिवापर:॥ २०॥
सृजन् दक्षिणमार्गस्थान् सप्तर्षीनपरान् पुन:।
नक्षत्रवंशमपरमसृजत् क्रोधमूच्छित: ।॥। २१॥
“Doomed (as you are) by your
preceptor’s curse, O fool, fall headlong to
the earth !” Commanded thus by the mighty
Indra, TriSanku fell again crying out to
ViSwamitra, whose only wealth was his
asceticism, as follows : “Save me !” Hearing
the aforesaid appeal of the crying TriSanku,
Viswamitra, son of Kusika, grew wildly angry
and said, “Stop! Stop where you are!!”
Seated in the midst of Rsis, stupefied with
anger, that glorious sage, like another
Brahma (the creator of beings), evolved
another group of seven constellations
(corresponding to the Great Bear) coursing
in the southern quarter, and further created
a new. galaxy of twenty-seven lunar
mansions. (18—21)

दक्षिणां दिशमास्थाय ऋषिमध्ये महायशा:।
सृष्टवा नक्षत्रवंशं च HA कलुषीकृत:॥ Wl
