* SUNDARAKANDA +

those muttering sacred formulas in the
dwellings of the ogres and also observed
Yatudhanas (a class of ogres) engaged in
the study of the Vedas. (13)

रावणस्तवसंयुक्तान् गर्जतो राक्षसानपि।
राजमार्गं wage स्थितं रक्षोगणं महत्॥१४॥
He further saw ogres united for the
purpose of glorifying Ravana and roaring,
and a large crowd of ogres which stood
blocking the road on all sides. (14)

ददर्श मध्यमे गुल्मे राक्षसस्य चरान् बहून्।
दीक्षिताञ्जटिलान् मुण्डान् गोजिनाम्बरवासस: ॥ १५ UI

In the central zone of the city he
perceived numerous spies of the ogre Ravana,
some of whom were disguised as
householders initiated into yogic practices,
others as anchorites wearing matted locks
on their head, still others as recluses with
shaven heads and others as ascetics wearing
the hide of cows or deerskin or stark naked
having no covering other than space. (15)
दर्भमुष्टिप्रहरणानग्निकुण्डायुधांस्तथा ।
कूटमुद्गरपाणींश्च दण्डायुधधरानपि।॥ १६ Ul

He saw them carrying a handful of the
sacred Kusa grass as a weapon to ward off
evil spirits, or a fire-vessel for pouring
oblations into it to invoke malevolent spirits,
also as a weapon for protection against
enemies, or bearing hammers and clubs
and also holding staffs as weapons. (16)
एकाक्षानेकवर्णांश्च लंबोदरपयोधरान्।
करालान् भुग्नवक्त्रांश्च विकटान् वामनांस्तथा It १७॥

He beheld spies who were one-eyed
or had a multi-coloured complexion, were
pot-bellied or with pendent breasts, were
hideous with crooked faces, fierce or
dwarfish. (17)

धन्विन: खड्गिनश्चैव शतघ्नीमुसलायुधान्।
परिघोत्तमहस्तांश्च विचित्रकवचोज्ज्वलान्॥ १८ ॥

He saw them armed with a bow or
sword, Sataghni or pestle, carrying an

55

excellent Parigha (a club tipped with iron) or
effulgent in curious armour. (18)

नातिस्थूलान्नातिकृशान्नातिदीर्घातिहुस्वकान्।
नातिगौरान्नातिकृष्णान्नातिकुब्जान्न वामनान्॥ १९॥

He found some of them neither very
stout nor too lean, neither very tall nor very
short-statured, neither very fair nor very
dark-complexioned, neither very humpbacked
nor dwarfish. (19)
विरूपान् बहुरूपांशच सुरूपांश्च qada: |
ध्वजिन: पताकिनश्चैव ददर्श विविधायुधान्॥ २०॥

He also found them ugly or able to
assume many forms, with a comely form or
endowed with great brilliance, carrying
banners or pennons or bearing all kinds of
weapons. (20)

क्षेपणीपाशहस्तांश्च cast स महाकपि:॥ २१॥

That great monkey, Hanuman, saw them
carrying a javelin or a tree for a weapon or
bearing a Pattisa (a kind of spear with a
sharp edge) or thunderbolt and holding a
sling or a noose in their hand. (21)

स्रग्विणस्त्वनुलिप्तांश्च वराभरणभूषितान्।
नानावेषसमायुक्तान् यथास्वैरचरान् बहून्॥ २२॥

He also saw many wearing a garland
and smeared with sandal-paste, adorned
with excellent jewels and dressed in various
garbs and ranging about at will. (22)

तीक्ष्णशूलधरांश्चैव वज्रिणश्च महाबलान्।
शतसाहस्रमव्यग्रमारक्षं = wet कपि:॥ २३॥
रक्षोऽधिपतिनिर्दिष्टं ददर्शान्त:पुराग्रत:।
स dal aq गृहं दृष्टा महाहाटकतोरणम्॥ २४॥
राक्षसेन्द्रस्य विख्यातमद्रिमूर्नि प्रतिष्ठितम्।
पुण्डरीकावतंसाभि: परिखाभि: समावरृतम्॥ २५॥
प्राकारावृतमत्यन्तं dat स महाकपि:।
त्रिविष्टपनिभं दिव्यं दिव्यनादविनादितम्॥ २६॥
वाजिह्रेषितसंघुष्टं नादितं भूषणैस्तथा।
रथैर्यानैर्विमानैश्च तथा wrt: शुभै:॥ २७॥
