974

हतस्य महिषस्यास्थि पादेनैकेन लक्ष्मण।
उद्यम्य प्रक्षिपेच्चापि तरसा द्वे धनु:शते॥७२॥

“| shall deem him killed even if lifting
with his single foot the bones of the buffalo
made short work of by Vall, Sri Rama should
be able to throw them by his might to a
distance of two hundred bows’ (or eight
hundred arms’) length, O Laksmana!” (72)

एवमुक्त्वा तु सुग्रीवो wa रक्तान्तलोचनम्।
ध्यात्वा मुहूर्तं काकुत्स्थं पुनरेव वचोऽब्रवीत्॥ ७३॥
Saying so, and contemplating awhile
on Sri Rama, Sugriva, for his part, the
corners of whose eyes were red, spoke
once more as follows to Sri Rama (a scion
of Kakutstha) : (73)
शूरश्च Wart च प्रख्यातबलपौरुष:।
बलवान् वानरो वाली संयुगेष्वपराजित:॥ ७४॥

“The powerful monkey, Vali, is valiant
and accounts himself valiant and is widely
known for his strength and manliness. He
has never been worsted in conflicts. (74)

दृश्यन्ते चास्य कर्माणि दुष्कराणि सुरैरपि।
यानि संचिन्त्य भीतोऽहमृष्यमूकमुपाश्रित: it ७५॥

“His exploits are seen to be such as
are difficult to accomplish even for gods
and pondering them | have taken shelter on
Mount Rsyamuka, afraid as | am. (75)

तमजय्यमधृष्यं च वानरेन्द्रममर्षणम्।

विचिन्तयन्न मुञ्जामि ऋष्यमूकममुं त्वहम्॥७६॥
“Thinking with apprehension of that lord

of monkeys, who is_ invincible, nay,

unassailable and intolerant, |, for my part,
do not leave this Rsyamuka mountain.(76)
अनुरक्तै: सहामात्यैर्हनुमत्प्रमुखैर्वरै: 11 ७७॥
“Perturbed and full of apprehension |
roam about in the extensive forest with my
devoted and excellent ministers headed by
Hanuman. (77)
उपलब्धं च मे श्लाघ्यं सन्मित्रं मित्रवत्सल।
त्वामहं पुरुषव्याघ्र हिमवन्तमिवाश्रित:॥७८॥

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

“Nay, a praiseworthy and noble ally
has been found by me in you, O prince,
fond of your friends ! | have taken refuge in
you as one would resort to the Himalaya
mountain, O tiger among men ! (78)

fe तु तस्य बलज्ञोऽहं qutastornters: |
suet तु मे dtd समरे तव राघव॥७९॥

“lam, however, aware of the strength
of my mighty and vile brother; while your
prowess in battle is not before my eyes, O
scion of Raghu ! (79)

न खल्वहं wat तुलये नावमन्ये न भीषये।
कर्मभिस्तस्य भीमैश्च कातर्यं जनितं मम॥८०॥

“Assuredly, | neither test you, nor belittle
you, nor do | frighten you. Nay, pusillanimity
has been engendered in me by his terrible
deeds. (80)

कामं राघव ते वाणी warot धैर्यमाकृति:।
सूचयन्ति परं तेजो भस्मच्छन्नमिवानलम्॥८१॥

“Your (unfaltering) speech, which is
trustworthy, as well as your confidence and
divine look abundantly indicate your supreme
strength, which is analogous to a fire covered
with ashes, O scion of Raghu !” (81)

तस्य तद् वचनं श्रुत्वा सुग्रीवस्य महात्मन:।
स्मितपूर्वमथो राम: प्रत्युवाच at प्रति॥८२॥
Hearing the aforesaid submission of
that high-minded Sugriva, Sri Rama then
smilingly replied as follows to the monkey,
Sugriva : (82)
यदि न प्रत्ययोऽस्मासु विक्रमे तव वानर।
wet समरे श्लाघ्यमहमुत्पादयामि ते॥८३॥

“If you have no faith in the prowess
inhering in us, O monkey, | shall presently
inspire in you confidence which is laudable

in a combat.” (83)
एवमुक्त्वा तु सुग्रीवं सान्त्वयँल्लक्ष्मणाग्रज:।
Waal दुन्दुभे: कायं पादाङ्गुष्ठेन लीलया॥८४॥

तोलयित्वा महाबाहुश्चिक्षेप दशयोजनम्।
असुरस्य तनुं शुष्कां पादाङ्गुष्ठेन वीर्यवान्॥८५॥
