276

are veritable jewels among monkeys, were
then assaulted by those numerous heroic
monkeys with eyes blood-red through anger.
(10)

पाणिभिर्निहता: केचित् केचिज्जानुभिराहता:।
प्रकृष्टाश्च तदा कामं देवमार्गं च दर्शिता:॥११॥
“Some of these were struck with their

hands, others with their knees and then
dragged at will and flung in the air. (11)

Wand हता: शूरास्त्वयि fasta भर्तरि।
pe मधुवनं da प्रकामं तैश्च भक्ष्यते॥१२॥
“In this way these valiant monkeys
have been thrashed, while you, their master,
continue to rule. Nay, the entire Madhuvana
has been wrecked by them according to
their free will.” (12)
एवं विज्ञाप्यमानं तं सुग्रीवं वानरर्षभम्।
अपृच्छत् तं महाप्राज्ञो लक्ष्मण: परवीरहा॥१३॥
The highly sagacious Laksmana, the
destroyer of hostile warriors, interrogated
as follows that jewel among monkeys, the
celebrated Sugriva, who was being informed
as above: (13)

किमयं art राजन् वनप: प्रत्युपस्थित:।
किं चार्थमभिनिर्दिश्य दु:खितो वाक्यमब्रवीत्॥ १४॥
“What for has this monkey, who guards
your grove arrived in your presence? Nay,
concerning what matter has this monkey,
full of agony, addressed an appeal to you,
O king?” (14)
एवमुक्तस्तु सुग्रीवो लक्ष्मणेन महात्मना।
लक्ष्मणं प्रत्युवाचेदं वाक्यं वाक्यविशारद:॥ १५॥
Questioned thus by the high-souled
Laksmana, Sugriva, for his part, who was a
master of expression, submitted to Laksmana
as follows: (15)

आर्य लक्ष्मण सम्प्राह वीरो दधिमुख: कपि:।
aged मधु वानरै:॥१६॥
“O noble Laksmana, the heroic monkey,

Dadhimukha, was complaining that the honey
and other products of Madhuvana had been

« VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

consumed by the heroic monkeys with
Angada as their leader. (16)

नैषामकृतकार्याणामीदृश: Tare व्यतिक्रम:।
at यदभिषन्नास्ते साधितं कर्म aq ध्रुवम्॥ १७॥

“Such an escapade could not have
been indulged in by the monkeys had they
not accomplished my purpose. Since they
have started wrecking the grove, my work
has surely been accomplished by them.(17)

वारयन्तो भृशं WAT: पाला जानुभिराहता:।
तथा न गणितश्चायं कपिर्दधिमुखो aceite i

“The guards of the grove, who were
posted there, hindering them again and again
were crushed with their knees, nay, this
mighty monkey, Dadhimukha, was not taken
into account either. (18)

पतिर्मम वनस्यायमस्माभि: स्थापित: स्वयम्।
Ger cat न संदेहो न चान्येन हनूमता॥१९॥

“This monkey Dadhimukha was posted
by me as a guardian of this grove of mine.
The godlike lady, Sita, has been discovered:
there is no doubt about it and she has been
seen by Hanuman alone and by none else.

(19)

न ह्यन्य: साधने eq: कर्मणोऽस्य हनूमत:।
कार्यसिद्धिर्हनुमति मतिश्च हरिपुङ्खवे॥२०॥
व्यवसायश्च att च श्रुतं चापि प्रतिष्ठितम्।
जाम्बवान् यत्र AAT स्यादङ्गदश्च महाबल:॥ २१॥
हनूमांश्चाप्यधिष्ठाता न da गतिरन्यथा।
अङ्गदप्रमुखैर्वीरैर्हतं मधुवनं किल॥ २२॥
विचित्य दक्षिणामाशामागतैर्हरिपुङ्खवै:।
आगतैश्चाप्रधृष्यं med मधुवनं fe तै:॥ २३॥
“Surely none other than Hanuman is
capable of accomplishing this task. The
capacity to accomplish a deed as well as
intelligence, nay strenuous effort and virility
and learning too are firmly endowed in
Hanuman, a veritable bull among monkeys.
In an army where Jambavan as well as
Angada, who is endowed with extraordinary
might, is the leader, and Hanuman a
