406

inclined to desert me, exclusively devoted
as | am to you? (5)
द्युमत्सेनसुतं वीरं सत्यवन्तमनुव्रताम्।
सावित्रीमिव at विद्धि त्वमात्मवशवर्तिनीम्॥ ६॥
“Know me you to be as obedient to
your will as Savitri (of historical fame) was

devoted to the valiant Satyavan, son of
King Dyumatsena. (6)

न mae मनसा प्यन्यं द्रष्टास्मि त्वदरृतेऽनघ।
त्वया राघव गच्छेयं यथान्या कुलपांसनी॥७॥

“| will not cast my eyes even in thought
on anyone else than you as any other
woman bringing disgrace to her family would,
O sinless one! | must accompany you, O
scion of Raghu ! (7)
स्वयं तु भार्यां कौमारीं चिरमध्युषितां सतीम्।
शैलूष इव मां राम परेभ्यो दातुमिच्छसि॥ ८॥

“How do you, like a man who lives by
his wife, intend to deliver to others of your
own will, me, your chaste wife, who was
married to you before puberty and has lived
with you for a long time, O Rama? (8)

यस्य पथ्यंचरामात्थ यस्य चार्थेऽवरुध्यसे।
त्वं तस्य wa वश्यश्च विधेयश्च सदानघ॥९॥

“Be you ever amenable to the control
of and obedient to him whom you ask me to
follow the wishes of Bharat, and for whose
sake you are being pushed back. (9)
स मामनादाय at न त्वं प्रस्थितुमर्हसि।

AAT वा यदि वारण्यं स्वर्गो वा स्यात् त्वया सह॥ १०॥

“Such as you are, you ought not to
proceed to the forest without taking me
with you. Be it a course of austerities,
forest life or heavenly life, let it be with you.

(10)
न च मे भविता aa कश्चित् पथि परिश्रम: |
पृष्ठतस्तव गच्छन्त्या विहारशयनेष्विव॥११॥

“No more exertion will be caused to
me in following at your heels on the paths in
the forest than in strolling in a garden or in
sleep. (11)

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

कुशकाशशरेषीका ये च कण्टकिनो FAT: |
तूलाजिनसमस्पर्शा मार्गे मम सह त्वया॥१२॥

“Blades of the sacred KuSa grass,
shrubs known by the name of Kasa, reeds
and rushes and whatever prickly bushes fall
in my way in your company will touch my soles
like a heap of cotton or soft deerskin. (12)

महावातसमुद्भूतं यन्मामवकरिष्यति।
रजो रमण art परार्घ्यमिव चन्दनम्॥१३॥

“| shall reckon the dust raised by a
storm that will cover my body as most
exquisite sandal dust, my lord ! (13)

शाब्बलेषु यदा शिश्ये वनान्तर्वनगोचरा।
कुथास्तरणयुक्तेषु किं स्यात् सुखतरं तत:॥ evil

“When, while living in the forest, | shall
lie down on turfs in the heart of a forest with
you, will lying in beds covered with soft
carpets be more comfortable than that? (14)
Ud मूलं फलं यत्तु अल्पं वा यदि वा ag
दास्यसे स्वयमाहृत्य तन्मेऽमृतरसोपमम्॥१५॥

“Anything you will give me in the shape
of leaves, roots or fruits, bringing it yourself
in a small or large quantity will taste like
nectar to me. (15)

न मातुर्न पितुस्तत्र स्मरिष्यामि न aya: |
आर्तवान्युपभुञ्जाना पुष्पाणि च फलानि च॥ १६॥

“Enjoying there seasonal flowers and
fruits too | shall neither remember my mother
nor father nor home. (16)

न च da तत: किंचिद् द्रष्टुमर्हसि विप्रियम्।
मत्कृते न च ते शोको न भविष्यामि दुर्भरा॥ १७॥

“You ought not to foresee anything
unwelcome following from my departure to
the forest. Nor will any grief come to you on
my account there, nor shall | prove hard to
sustain. (17)

यस्त्वया Ge स cant निरयो यस्त्वया fear
इति जानन् परां प्रीतिं गच्छ राम मया सह॥ १८॥

“An abode which will be shared by me
with you will be pleasing as heaven to me;
