1152

“Deprived of my rulership of the

feathered kingdom and my brother, and | circumstances, |

shorn of my wings and prowess, and,

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

therefore, seeking death alone under all
will fall down from a

mountain-peak.” (17)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये किष्किन्धाकाण्डे
एकषष्टितम: सर्ग: ॥ ६१ Il
Thus ends Canto Sixty-one in the Kiskindhakanda of the glorious Ramayana of
Valmiki, the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

Canto LXII

Sampati communicates to the monkeys the prediction made by Sage
Nisakara, who could foresee future events by dint of his
intuitive perception, that descending as Sri Rama
elsewhere the Lord will dispatch monkeys in
quest of Sita to the Vindhyan range and
that Sampati will get back his wings
as soon as he tells the monkeys
the whereabouts of Sita

एवमुक्त्वा मुनिश्रेष्ठमरुदं भृशदु:खित:।
अथ ध्यात्वा मुहूर्तं च भगवानिदमब्रवीत्॥१॥

“Having submitted to NiSakara, the
foremost of sages, as above, | fell asobbing,
sore distressed as | was. Reflecting a while,
the venerable sage, however, spoke as
follows : (1)

पक्षौ च a प्रपक्षौ च पुनरन्यौ भविष्यत:।
wat चैव प्राणाश्च विक्रमश्च act च ते॥२॥

““You will get back other pair of wings
as well as vision and renewed vitality as
also valour and strength too. (2)

पुराणे सुमहत्कार्यं भविष्यं fe war श्रुतम्।
qe मे तपसा wa श्रुत्वा च विदितं मम॥ ३॥
“‘It has actually been heard by me
(predicted) in the old traditional history that
a very remarkable event is going to take
place in future. It has not only been learnt
by me through hearsay but also foreseen
by me by virtue of my asceticism. (3)

राजा दशरथो wa कश्चिदिक्ष्वाकुवर्धन:।
तस्य पुत्रो महातेजा रामो नाम भविष्यति॥४॥

“There will be a certain king, DaSaratha
by name, the promoter of Ikswaku’s race.
A son, Rama by name, endowed with
extraordinary energy, will be born to him. (4)

snug च ae wat लक्ष्मणेन गमिष्यति।
तस्मिन्नर्थे नियुक्त: सन् frat सत्यपराक्रम:॥ ५॥

“Called upon by his father to do so, Sri
Rama of unfailing prowess will proceed to
the forest with his younger brother, Laksmana,
and his consort, Sita. (5)

नैर्ऋतो रावणो नाम तस्य wat हरिष्यति।
राक्षसेन्द्रो WRIT अवध्य: सुरदानवै:॥६॥

“ ‘An ogre (lit., One born in the line of
Nirrti, the deity presiding over the south-
east), Ravana by name, the ruler of ogres,
incapable of being slain by gods and demons
alike, will carry off his consort, Sita, in
Janasthana. (6)
