278

Beholding the two princes Sri Rama
and Laksmana extremely delighted with their
eyes dilated with joy as though accomplished

« VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

thrilled with delight that the success of his
enterprise was within the reach of his arms,
Sugriva, the ruler of monkeys, experienced

of purpose, nay, realizing, by his own limbs | the height of felicity. (33)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये सुन्दरकाण्डे त्रिषष्टितम: AW: ॥ G3 Il

Thus ends Canto Sixty-three of the Sundarakanda in the glorious Ramayana of
Valmiki, the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

Canto LXIV

Returning to Madhuvana as commanded by Sugriva, and craving the
forgiveness of Angada, Dadhimukha submits to the latter that
he is urgently summoned by Sugriva. Set out in the
company of Hanuman and others, and approaching
Sugriva, Prince Angada apprises Sri Rama, after
saluting him, of the discovery of Sita
and other events

सुग्रीवेणैवमुक्तस्तु wel दधिमुख: aft:
Tad लक्ष्मणं चैव सुग्रीवं चाभ्यवादयत्॥१॥
Feeling rejoiced when commanded thus
by Sugriva, the monkey Dadhimukha, for
his part, greeted Sri Rama, a scion of Raghu,
and Laksmana as well as Sugriva. (1)

स wry च सुग्रीवं राघवौ च महाबलौ।
arm: सहित: शूरैर्दिवमेवोत्पपात ह॥ २॥

Nay, having respectfully bowed down
to Sugriva as well as to Sri Rama and
Laksmana, who were endowed with
extraordinary might, he alongwith the other
monkeys, who had accompanied him, sprang
in the airspace again on their way to
Madhuvana: so the tradition goes. (2)

a यथैवागत: vd ata त्वरितं गत:।

निपत्य गगनाद् भूमौ तद् at प्रविवेश Fu sil
He journeyed back quite as quickly as

he had come before, nay, descending from

the air to the ground, they say, he penetrated
deep into the wood. (3)

a प्रविष्टो मधुवनं cast हरियूथपान्।
विमदानुद्धतान् सर्वान् मेहमानान् मधूदकम्॥४॥

Having found his way into the interior
of Madhuvana, he saw the leaders of monkey
hordes, who, though overbearing before,
had grown sober since and were all passing
as urine, honey transformed after assimilation
into water. (4)

स तानुपागमद् वीरो बद्ध्वा करपुटाञ्जलिम्।
उवाच वचनं श्लक्ष्णमिदं हृष्टवदङ्गदम्॥५॥
The said hero approached them and,
joining his palms, addressed Angada the
following sweet words like one filled with
delight : (5)
सौम्य रोषो न कर्तव्यो यदेभि: परिवारणम्।
अज्ञानाद् रक्षिभि: क्रोधाद् भवन्त: प्रतिषेधिता: ॥ ६ ॥।
“No resentment should be harboured
by you, O gentle one, for the restraint
unwittingly imposed on you by these guards,
in that you were angrily hindered by them
from enjoying the produce of this grove. (6)
