« KISKINDHAKANDA +

अल्पान्तरगताना तु Acl वचनमङ्गना।
आत्मन: प्रतिरूपं सा बभाषे Beat i १७॥
Hearing the submission of the monkeys,
who were only at a short distance from her,
the aforesaid lady, Tara, of charming
demeanour made a reply which was worthy
of herself : (17)

पुत्रेण मम किं कार्यं राज्येनापि किमात्मना।
कपिसिंहे महाभागे afer भर्तरि नश्यति॥१८॥
“Now that the highly blessed Vali, a
veritable lion among monkeys, is dying,
what purpose of mine will be served by my

son, Angada, or sovereignty or even by my
own self? (18)

पादमूलं गमिष्यामि तस्यैवाहं महात्मन:।
योऽसौ रामप्रयुक्तेन शरेण विनिपातित:॥१९॥
“| shall seek the soles of feet of that

exalted soul alone, who has been laid low
with an arrow discharged by Sri Rama.”(19)

`एवमुक्त्वा प्रदुद्राव रुदती शोकमूच्छिता।
शिरश्चोरश्च weet दु:खेन समभिघ्नती।॥ २०॥

Saying so, she ran fast crying and
severely beating on all sides with both of
her hands, her head and breast in agony,
distracted as she was with grief. (20)

सा व्रजन्ती cama पतिं निपतितं भुवि।
wan दानवेन्द्राणां समरेष्वनिवर्तिनाम्॥२१॥
क्षेप्तारं पर्वतेन्द्राणां वज्राणामिव वासवम्।
महाबातसमाविष्ठ महामेयौयनिस्त्रनम्।।२२॥

अर्चितं सर्वलोकस्य सपताकं सवेदिकम्।
नागहेतो: सुपर्णेन चैत्यमुन्मथितं यथा॥ evil

While still on her way she presently
saw fallen helpless on the ground her
husband, Vali, the slayer of demon chiefs

1005

who never retreated on the fields of battle—
Vali, who hurled against his enemy in the
course of his fight the foremost of mountains
as Indra, the ruler of gods, discharges his
thunderbolt, who had the fury of a tempest
and thundered like a mass of huge clouds,
nay, who was equal in valour to Indra, the
ruler of gods, and now looked like a cloud
that had calmed down after discharging itself,
who while roaring inspired terror in those
who roared in opposition and who, though
valiant, had been laid low by a greater hero,
nay, who looked like a lion (the king of
beasts) struck down for the sake of prey by
a tiger and resembled a place of worship
laid waste, though held sacred by all people,
with its flag and altar, by Garuda, the king of
birds, on account of a serpent dwelling in it.
(21—24)

अवष्टभ्यावतिष्ठन्तं ददर्श धनुरूर्जितम्।
we रामानुजं चैव भर्तुंश्चैव तथानुजम्॥ ei
She also beheld Sri Rama standing,
leaning on his glorious bow as well as
Laksmana, younger brother of Sri Rama,
and, even so, her brother-in-law, Surgiva.
(25)

तानतीत्य समासाद्य wait Ped रणे।
समीक्ष्य व्यथिता wat सम्भ्रान्ता निपपात ह॥ २६॥
Passing beyond them and duly reaching
her husband, who lay mortally wounded on
the battlefield, Tara, they say, was pained
to gaze on him and toppled on the ground,
deeply miserable as she was. (26)

सुप्तेव पुनरुत्थाय आर्यपुत्रेति वादिनी।
ete सा पतिं दृष्टवा संवीतं मृत्युदामभि: i २७॥
Getting up once more like one who
had been asleep and saying. “O son of a
worthy father*!” she wept to see her
husband tightly bound with the cords of
Death. (27)

* Hindu ladies are not expected to utter the name of their husband. ‘Aryaputra’ (son of a worthy
father) was the form of address generally employed by them while accosting him.
