860

« VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

Canto VI
Under the advice of Lord Siva, the gods seek the help of Sri Visnu for the

destruction of the Raksasas; they return reassured;

the Raksasas usurp the

region of the gods; the coming of ऽन Visnu to help the gods

तैर्वध्यमाना देवाश्च ऋषयश्च तपोधना:।
wera: शरणं जग्मुर्देवदेवं महेश्वरम्॥१॥
जगत्सृष्ट्यन्तकर्तारमजमव्यक्करूपिणम् ।
आधारं सर्वलोकानामाराध्यं परमं गुरुम्॥२॥
“The gods, as well as seers given to
asceticism who were being killed by them
(the Raksasas), were terribly afraid and
sought refuge in Maheswara, the god of
gods, the creator and destroyer of the world,
the unborn, the unmanifest, the support of
all the worlds, the worshipful one and the
highest Guru. (1-2)

at समेत्य तु कामारिं त्रिपुरारिं त्रिलोचनम्।
Ba: Wee cat भयगद्गदभाषिण:॥ ३॥
“Approaching in a body, the enemy of
Kama and Tripura, the three-eyed God, the
aforementioned gods said with folded hands,
in a voice faltering due to fear: (3)

सुकेशपुत्रैर्भगवन् पितामहवरोद्भतै: ।
प्रजाध्यक्ष प्रजा: सर्वा बाध्यन्ते रिपुबाधनै:॥४॥

“‘O divine lord of living beings, all
creatures are being harassed by the sons
of Sukesa who have grown haughty by
reason of the boons granted to them by
Brahma and who are the scourge of their
foes. (4)

शरण्यान्यशरण्यानि ह्याश्रमाणि कृतानि न:।
स्वर्गाच्च Cary प्रच्याव्य स्वर्गे क्रीडन्ति देववत्॥ ५ Ul
“Our habitations and hermitages have
been made unfit for our residence. Driving
out the gods from heaven, they sport there
as if they were gods. (5)
ae यमश्च वरुणश्चन्द्रोऽहं रविरप्यहम्॥६॥

इति माली सुमाली च माल्यवांश्चैव राक्षसा:।
ard समरोद्धर्षा ये च तेषां पुरस्सरा:॥७॥

“The Raksasas Mali, Sumali and
Malyavan and their lieutenants, thirsting for
battle, give us trouble saying, ॥ am Visnu, |
am Rudra, | am Brahma, | am Indra, | am
Yama, | am Varuna, | am the moon and the
sun.’ (6-7)
wt देव भयार्तानामभयं दातुमर्हसि।
अशिवं वपुरास्थाय wie वै देवकण्टकान्॥८॥

“‘O Lord, please grant fearlessness to
us, who are afraid; kill these enemies of
gods by assuming a fierce-looking form.’ (8)

इत्युक्तस्तु Ut: Wa: कपर्दी नीललोहित:।

Gest प्रति सापेक्ष: we देवगणान् Ws Il
“Spoken to in these words by all the

gods, Lord Siva, the god with matted locks,

who had some consideration for SukeSa,
said to the host of gods: (9)

अहं तान् न हनिष्यामि ममावध्या fe तेऽसुरा: |

fee तु मन्त्रं प्रदास्यामि यो वै तान् निहनिष्यति॥ १०॥
‘| will not kill them as the said ogres are

exempt from death at my hands; but | shall

advise you as regards the person who will
surely kill them. (10)

एतमेव समुद्योगं पुरस्कृत्य महर्षय:।
गच्छध्वं शरणं विष्णुं हनिष्यति स तान् प्रभु:॥ ११॥
‘With this purpose in view, O great

seers, go and seek refuge in Visnu and the
said Lord will kill them.’ (11)

ade जयशब्देन प्रतिनन्द्य महेश्वरम्।
foot: समीपमाजग्मुर्निशाचरभयार्दिता:॥ १२॥

“Then greeting Maheswara with a shout
of victory, they, who were afraid of the
