450

by the shafts, struck down with a sal tree
ASaniprabha with his chariot and horses.
(34)

विद्युन्माली रथस्थस्तु vit: काञ्चनभूषणै:।
सुषेणं ताडयामास ननाद च मुहुर्मुहु:॥ ३५॥
Mounted on a chariot, Vidyunmali for
his part hit Susena with his arrows encrusted
with gold and roared again and again.
(35)

तं रथस्थमथो दृष्ट्वा सुषेणो वानरोत्तम:।
गिरिशृङ्खेण महता रथमाशु न्यपातयत्॥ ३६॥
Seeing him mounted on a chariot,
Susena, the foremost of monkeys, knocked

down his chariot in no time with a huge
mountain peak. (36)

लाघवेन q संयुक्तो विद्युन्माली निशाचर:।
अपक्रम्य TAT तूर्णं गदापाणि: क्षितौ स्थित: ।। ३७॥
Hastily jumping down from his chariot,
the ranger of the night, Vidyunmali, for his
part, who was fully endowed with agility,
stood on the ground, mace in hand. (37)

ad: क्रोधसमाविष्ट: सुषेणो stage: |
Bret सुमहतीं qa निशाचरमभिद्रवत्॥ ३८॥

Seizing a huge rock, Susena, a bull
among the monkeys, agitated as he was
with anger, rushed towards the ranger of
the night. (38)
तमापतन्तं गदया विद्युन्माली निशाचर:।
वक्षस्यभिजघानाशु सुषेणं हरिपुङ्खवम्॥३९॥

The prowler of the night, Vidyunmali,
immediately struck Susena, that bull among
the monkeys, on the breast with a mace
even as the latter was darting towards him.

(39)

गदाप्रहारं तं घोरमचिन्त्य प्लवगोत्तम:।
at तूष्णीं पातयामास तस्योरसि महामृधे॥४०॥
Not minding that terrible blow with the

mace, Susena (the foremost of the monkeys)
quietly hurled that rock, which he bore in his

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA +

hands, upon the ogre’s breast in that mighty
fight. (40)

forengerifiedt विद्युन्माली निशाचर:।
निष्पिष्टहृदयो भूमौ गतासुर्निपपात ह॥४१॥
Struck by that blow with a rock, the
prowler of the night, Vidyunmali, whose
chest had been crushed thereby, fell down
dead to the ground; so the tradition goes.
(41)

एवं dart: wt: शूरास्ते रजनीचरा:।
द्वन्वे विमथितास्तत्र cer ga दिवौकसै:॥४२॥

In this way were those valiant prowlers
of the night crushed in the course of those
duels by the aforesaid heroic monkeys even
as demons were crushed by gods, the
denizens of heaven. (42)

भल्लैश्चान्यैर्गदाभिश्च शक्तितोमरसायकै:।
अपविद्धैश्चापि रथैस्तथा सांग्रामिकैर्हयै:।॥ ४३॥
fred: कुञ्जरैर्मत्तैस्तथा वानरराक्षसै:।
चक्राक्षयुगदण्डैश्च भग्नैर्धरणिसंश्रितै: tl ४४॥
बभूवायोधनं घोरं गोमायुगणसेवितम्।
कबन्धानि समुत्पेतुर्दिक्षु वानररक्षसाम्।
विमर्दे तुमुले तस्मिन् देवासुररणोपमे॥४५॥

The battlefield presented a ghastly
appearance, strewn as it was_ with
extraordinary spears and maces as well as
with javelins, lances and arrows, shattered
chariots, also steeds, elephants in rut as
also monkeys and ogres which had been
killed and wheels, axles and yokes which
had been broken and had fallen to the
ground, and frequented as it was by herds
of jackals. In that confused fight, which
resembled the conflict between gods and
demons, the headless trunks of monkeys
and ogres bounded here and there.(43—45)

निहन्यमाना हरिपुङ्खवैस्तदा

निशाचरा: शोणितगन्धमूच्छिता:।
wae तरसा समाश्रिता
दिवाकरस्यास्तमयाभिकाङ्क्षिण: ॥४६॥

Maddened by the smell of blood while

पुन:
