1008

that your desire has been fulfilled, O Sugriva !
You will now get back your wife, Ruma, too.
Enjoy the kingdom without feeling perturbed,
since your hostile brother has been killed.
(21)

इमा: पश्य वरा SSM भार्यास्ते वानरेश्चर॥ २२॥
“(Turning to Vali again) why do you not
speak to me, your darling, lamenting thus?
Lo! Here are your numerous pretty wives,
O ruler of monkeys !” (22)

तस्या विलपितं strat वानर्य: सर्वतश्च ता:।

परिगृह्याङ्गदं दीना दु:खार्ता: प्रतिचुक्रुशु:॥ २३॥
Hearing her lament and surrounding

Angada on all sides, all those Vanara ladies

(the wives of Vali) cried loudly, distressed
and stricken with agony as they were : (23)

किमङ्गदं साङ्गदवीरबाहो
विहाय यातोऽसि Fat प्रवासम्।

न युक्तमेवं गुणसंनिकृष्टं
विहाय ut प्रियचारुवेषम्॥ evi

Tara continues : “Why have you departed
on your long sojourn in the other world,
deserting Angada, O lord possessed of heroic

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

arms adorned with armlets? It is not meet for
you to leave abruptly in this way, abandoning
your son, who is so proximate to you in point
of excellences and is clad in an agreeable
and lovely dress. (24)
यद्यप्रियं किंचिदसम्प्रधार्य

pd मया स्यात् तव दीर्घबाहो।
क्षमस्व मे तद्धरिवंशनाथ

व्रजामि Gat तव aie पादौ॥ २५॥

“If anything repugnant to you has
inconsiderately been done by me, O lord
with long arms, pray, condone that offence
of mine, O protector of the race of monkeys;
| touch your feet with my head. O gallant
one !” (25)
तथा तु तारा करुणं रुदन्ती

ad: waa सह वानरीभि:।
व्यवस्यत प्रायमनिन्द्यवर्णा
उपोपवेष्टुं भुवि यत्र वाली॥ RE II

Wailing piteously as aforesaid, with
other Vanara ladies, by the side of her
husband, Tara of faultless complexion, for
her part, resolved to abstain from food and
drink and await death sitting on the ground
close to the place where Vali lay. (26)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये किष्किन्धाकाण्डे fas: सर्ग: ॥ 20 ॥

Thus ends Canto Twenty in the Kiskindhakanda of the glorious Ramayana of Valmiki,
the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

Canto XXI

Comforting Tara, who was lamenting through a variety of expressions,
Hanuman urges her to have the obsequies performed in respect of the
departed soul by Angada and attend to the earthly good of Angada.
Tara, however, refuses to flinch from her resolve and prefers
to follow her husband to the other world rather than
bestow any thought on the earthly welfare of her son

शनैराश्वासयामास हनुमान् हरियूथप:॥१॥

Thereupon Hanuman, a commander
of monkey hordes, slowly comforted (as
follows) Tara, who lay fallen on the ground
