792

summoned violent anger to make short work
of Khara in the battle. (19)

जातस्वेदस्ततो रामो रोषरक्तान्तलोचन:।
निर्बिभेद सहस्रेण बाणानां समरे खरम्॥ २०॥
Covered with perspiration due to anger
and with the outer corners of his eyes
reddened through anger, Sri Rama thereupon
pierced Khara on the battlefield with a
thousand arrows. (20)

TA बाणान्तराद् Th बहु सुस्राव फेनिलम्।
गिरे: प्रस्रवणस्येव धाराणां च ule: २१॥

Like the flow of torrents from Mount
Prasravana, copious foaming blood gushed
forth from the cuts made in his body by the
arrows. (21)

विकल: Hal बाणै: खरो रामेण संयुगे।
मत्तो रुधिरगन्धेन तमेवाभ्यद्रवद् द्रुतम्॥ २२॥

Rendered uneasy with his arrows by
Sri Rama in battle, and maddened by the
smell of blood indeed, Khara ran fast towards
Sri Rama. (22)
तमापतन्तं संक्रुद्धं Haat रुधिराप्लुतम्।
अपासर्पद द्वित्रिपदं किंचित्त्वरितविक्रम:॥ २३॥

Taking a bit hasty strides, Sri Rama,
who was skilled in the use of missiles,
retreated two or three steps in order to be
able to strike Khara, who was _ rushing
towards him, highly infuriated and bathed in
blood. (23)

तत: पावकसंकाशं वधाय समरे शरम्।
खरस्य Wa जग्राह ब्रह्मदण्डमिवापरम्॥ २४॥

Then, for the destruction of Khara in
battle, Sri Rama seized an arrow blazing
like fire and looking like another rod of
Brahma, the creator. (24)

स aq at मघवता सुरराजेन धीमता।
संदधे च स धर्मात्मा मुमोच च खरं प्रति॥ २५॥

Nay, the celebrated Sri Rama, whose
mind was given to righteousness, fitted to
his bow the said arrow gifted, through the
medium of Sage Agastya, by the wise Indra,

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

the ruler of gods, and discharged it towards
Khara. (25)

स विमुक्तो महाबाणो निर्घातसमनि:स्वन:।
रामेण धनुरायम्य खरस्योरसि चापतत्॥ २६॥
Discharged with great vehemence by
Sri Rama, stretching his bow, that mighty
arrow hit the chest of Khara, making a
thunder-like sound. (26)

स पपात खरो भूमौ दह्यमान: शाराग्निना।
रुद्रेणेव विनिर्दग्ध: श्वेतारण्ये यथान्धक:॥ २७॥

Being burnt by the fire of the arrow, the
notorious Khara fell to the ground as did the
demon Andhaka, entirely burnt by Lord Rudra
(the god of destruction) in the Sweta forest.

(27)

aq ga am फेनेन नमुचिर्यथा।
ae वेन्द्राशनिहतो निपपात ga: खर:॥ २८॥

Killed by Sri Rama with that arrow, as
Vrtra with a thunderbolt, Namuci with foam
or Bala with a stroke of lightning by Indra,
Khara fell down dead. (28)
eoisturera: पुष्पवर्षं समन्तत:॥२९॥
रामस्योपरि संहृष्टा ववर्षुर्विस्मितास्तदा।
अर्धाधिकमुहूर्तेन रामेण निशितै: mt: ३०॥
चतुर्दश सहस्राणि रक्षसां कामरूपिणाम्।
खरदूषणमुख्यानां निहतानि महामृधे॥ ३१॥

In the meanwhile, united with the
Caranas (celestial bards) and loudly beating
their large drums on all sides, gods, who felt
greatly rejoiced and wonder-struck, rained
a shower of flowers all round at that moment
on Sri Rama. They said, ‘In the course of
an hour and a half fourteen thousand ogres,
headed by Khara and Dusana and capable
of assuming any form at will, were got rid of
with sharp arrows in a major operation.

(29—31)
tal बत महत्कर्म wae विदितात्मन:।
अहो वीर्यमहो aed विष्णोरिव fe दृश्यते॥ ३२॥

Ah, great indeed was the feat of Sri
