1096

मरुत्त इति विख्यातस्तं यज्ञं समुपाहरत्।
ततो यज्ञो महानासीद् बुधाश्रमसमीपत:॥१५॥
They (Brahmanas) approved of that
sacrifice indeed for the appeasement of God
Rudra (Siva). A Rsi among kings, well-
known as Marutta, destroyer of enemies,
who was the pupil of Sarmvarta, made
necessary arrangements for that sacrifice.
A great sacrifice was performed close to
the hermitage of Budha. (14-15)

Say We तोषमाजगाम महायशा:।
अथ at समाप्ते तु wid: परमया मुदा॥ eail
उमापतिरद्विजान् सर्वानुवाच इलसंनिधौ।
प्रीतोऽस्मि हयमेधेन भक्त्या च द्विजसत्तमा:॥ १७॥

The mighty Rudra was_ extremely
pleased at the completion of the sacrifice.
Siva, the lord of Uma, pleased and happy,
spoke to all of them in the presence of Ila:
‘O best among Brahmanas, | am pleased by
the horse-sacrifice performed with devotion.

(16-17)
अस्य बाह्लिपतेश्चैव किं करोमि प्रियं शुभम्।
तथा वदति देवेशे द्विजास्ते सुसमाहिता:॥१८॥
प्रसादयन्ति देवेशं यथा स्यात् पुरुषस्त्विला।
aa: प्रीतो महादेव: पुरुषत्वं ददौ पुन:॥१९॥

‘What good and auspicious act may |
do for the lord of Bahlika.’ On the lord of
gods speaking thus, those Brahmanas, well-
composed, propitiated the lord of gods, Siva,
in a manner that Ila may turn into a man’.

« VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

Then pleased, the great lord Siva granted to
Ila perpetual manhood again. (18-19)

इलायै सुमहातेजा दत्त्वा चान्तरधीयत।
Rat हयमेधे च गते चादर्शनं हरे॥ २०॥
यथागतं द्विजा: ad तेऽगच्छन् दीर्घदर्शिन:।
राजा तु बाह्लिमुत्सृज्य मध्यदेशे ह्यनुत्तमम्॥ २१॥
निवेशयामास पुरं प्रतिष्ठानं यशस्करम्।
शशबिन्दुश्च राजर्षिर्बाह्निं परपुरंजय:॥ २२॥
‘The powerful Siva, having granted
manhood to Ila, disappeared; and the horse-
sacrifice being completed and Hara having
disappeared, all the farsighted Brahmanas
went away as they came. The king, Ila,
leaving Bahlika established the famous and
unequalled Pratisthana in the central region;
Sagabindu too the conqueror of fortresses
of enemies re-established Bahlika. (20—22)

प्रतिष्ठाने इलो राजा प्रजापतिसुतो बली।
स काले प्राप्तवाँल्लोकमिलो ब्राह्ममनुत्तमम्॥ २३॥

‘At Pratisthana, the king, son of Prajapati,
the powerful one, Ila in time attained the
world of Brahma. (23)

Ue: Geta राजा प्रतिष्ठानमवाप्तवान्।
ईदृशो ह्यश्वमेधस्य प्रभाव: पुरुषर्षभौ।
स्त्रीभूत: पौरुषं लेभे यच्चान्यदपि दुर्लभम्॥ २४॥

The king, Pururava, son of Ila, obtained
Pratisthana, such is the power of ASvamecha,
O bull among men, one who was formerly
a woman, achieved manhood—all that was
difficult to obtain.’ (24)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये उत्तरकाण्डे नवतितम: AW: ॥ ९० ॥

Thus ends Canto Ninety in the Uttarakanda of the glorious Ramayana of Valmiki,
the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

Canto LXXXXI
Preparation for ASvamedha by the order of Sri Rama

एतदाख्याय काकुत्स्थो भ्रातृभ्याममितप्रभ:।

लक्ष्मणं पुनरेवाह धर्मयुक्तमिदं वच:॥ १॥ | these righteous words to Laksmana:

Having narrated to his brothers, Sri
Rama, with unlimited splendour, again spoke

(1)
