« KISKINDHAKANDA +

son and even though she is richly endowed
with wealth and foodgrains, is spoken of as
a widow by the wise.

“You lie stretched, O hero, in a pool of
blood flowing from your own limbs even as
you did at home in your own bed with a
covering of deep red colour resembling that
of an insect called Indragopa. Your body
being enveloped on all sides in dust and
blood, | am unable to clasp you with my
arms, O jewel among monkeys! Sugriva,
whose fear has been dispelled by a single
arrow discharged by Sri Rama, has
accomplished his purpose today through
this most formidable antagonisms. | am
prevented by the shaft fixed in your heart
from embracing your limbs and merely
stand gazing on you even though you have
been reduced to the five elements.” Nila, a
general of Sugriva, then extracted the arrow
fixed in his body even as one would pull out
a fiery snake lying hidden in a mountain
cave. The brilliance of that shaft even while
it was being drawn out of Vali’s breast
shone forth like that of the sun whose rays
stand intercepted by a peak of the western
mountain (behind which the sun is supposed
to set). Streams of blood actually flowed
from his wounds on all sides like rivulets
mixed with red ochre flowing from a mountain.
Wiping her gallant husband covered with
the dust of combat, Tara bathed him with
the tears flowing from her eyes, badly
wounded as he was with a missile. Seeing
her killed husband bathed all over with blood,
Tara, his wife, spoke as follows to her son,
Angada, who had reddish brown eyes:
“Behold, my son, the most tragic end of
your father. (10—22)

सम्प्रसक्तस्य वैरस्य गतोऽन्त: पापकर्मणा।
बालसूर्योज्ज्वलतनुं प्रयातं यमसादनम्॥२३॥
अभिवादय राजानं पितरं पुत्र मानदम्।
Waa: समुत्थाय जग्राह aot पितु:॥ २४॥

अभिवादयमानं त्वामङ्गदं त्वं यथा पुरा॥ २५॥

1015

दीर्घायुर्भव पुत्रेति किमर्थं नाभिभाषसे।

अहं पुत्रसहाया त्वामुपासे गतचेतनम्।
सिंहेन पातितं Get गौ: सवत्सेव WTI २६॥

“The end has thus been reached by
him of the enmity which was forced on him
by his sinful deeds of some past life. Greet,
my son, your royal father, a bestower of
honour on others, whose body shone
brightly as the rising sun, and who has now
departed to the abode of Death.” Rising up,
when exhorted thus, Angada clasped the
feet of his father with his stout and rounded
arms, saying: “l am your son, Angada.”
(Tara then continued) : “Why don’t you bless
Angada, who is greeting you, in the words
‘Live long, my son!’ as you did before?
Like a cow. standing with its calf
by the side of a bull instantly struck down
by a lion, | wait with my son upon you,
from whom consciousness has departed.

(23—26)

इष्टवा संग्रामयज्ञेन रामप्रहरणाम्भसा।
तस्मिन्नवभृथे स्नात: कथं पत्न्या मया विना॥ २७॥

“Having propitiated the gods through a
sacrificial performance in the form of a duel,
how did you take part without me, your wife,
in these ablutions, so well known, performed
at the end of the sacrifice by you with water
in the form of blood provided by Sri Rama’s
arrow? (27)

या दत्ता देवराजेन da तुष्टेन संयुगे।
tenes प्रियां मालां at ते पश्यामि नेहकिम्॥ २८ I
“Why do | not see here on your person
your favourite chain of gold, which was
gifted to you by Indra (the ruler of gods)
when pleased in an encounter? (28)

राज्यश्रीर्न weft wat गतासुमपि मानद।
सूर्यस्यावर्तमानस्य शैलराजमिव TT RAI

“Even though life has departed from
you, O bestower of honour on others, kingly
glory does not leave you any more than the
light of the setting sun leaves the western
