408

limbs ! Follow me now even as Suvarcala
(nicknamed Sarhjfia, wife of the sun-god)
does the sun-god. (30)

न खल्वहं न गच्छेयं at जनकनन्दिनि।

वचनं तन्नयति at faq: सत्योपबृंहितम्॥ ३१॥
“Of course, it cannot be that | may not

proceed to the forest, O daughter of Janaka;

for that plighted word of my father is urging
me to proceed to the forest. (31)
wa धर्मश्च सुश्रोणि पितुर्मातुश्च वश्यता।
आज्ञां चाहं व्यतिक्रम्य नाहं जीवितुमुत्सहे॥ ३२॥
“Nay, obedience to one’s father and
mother—this is one’s sacred duty, O
handsome lady ! And violating their command
| dare not survive. (32)
अस्वाधीनं कथं दैवं प्रकारैरभिराध्यते।
स्वाधीनं समतिक्रम्य मातरं पितरं गुरुम्॥ ३३॥
“Disregarding one’s mother, father and
teacher, whose command can be directly
obtained, how can it be possible to propitiate
one’s chosen deity, who is not so manifest,
through traditional modes of worship? (33)
नान्यदस्ति शुभापाङ्गे तेनेदमभिराध्यते॥ ३४॥
“No other worship is so sacred or
capable of delivering the worshipper from
the great fear of transmigration on earth as
service to the aforesaid three, through which
all the three worlds (heaven, earth and the
space intervening them) can be propitiated
and all the three objects of human pursuit
viz., religious merit, earthly possessions and
gratification of senses can be obtained, O
lady with charming glances! Hence the
above-mentioned three are sought to be
propitiated by me. (34)
न सत्यं दानमानौ वा यज्ञो वाप्याप्तदक्षिणा:।
तथा बलकरा: सीते यथा सेवा पितुर्मता॥ ३५॥

“Neither truthfulness nor gifts and honour
bestowed on the deserving, nor sacrificial
performances in which sacrificial fees are
handsomely paid are so potent in securing

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

happiness in the other world as service to
one’s father and mother is believed to be.
(35)
स्वर्गो धनं वा धान्यं वा विद्या पुत्रा: सुखानि च।
गुरुवृत्त्यनुरोधेन न किंचिदपि दुर्लभम्॥ ३६॥

“Heavenly bliss or earthly riches,
foodgrains or learning, sons and amenities
of life—nothing is hard to obtain through
compliance with the wishes of one’s elders.

(36)
देवगन्धर्वगोलोकान् ब्रह्मलोकांस्तथापरान्।
प्राप्नुवन्ति महात्मानो मातापितृपरायणा:॥ ३७॥

“High-souled men exclusively devoted
to the service of their parents secure after
their death the regions of the gods and the
Gandharvas, the seventh heaven presided
over by Brahma, the creator, and other
regions, nay, even Goloka (the highest
heaven presided—over by Sri Radha and
Sri Krsna, so-called because it abounds in
cows, the pets of Sri Krsna). (37)

स at पिता यथा शास्ति सत्यधर्मपथे स्थित: |
तथा वर्तितुमिच्छामि स fe धर्म: सनातन:॥ ३८॥

“| wish to do precisely as my celebrated
father, devoted to the path of truthfulness
and virtue, enjoins me to do; for such is the
eternal law of morality. (38)
मम सन्ना ata: सीते Ad त्वां दण्डकावनम्।
वसिष्यामीति सा त्वं मामनुयातुं सुनिश्चिता॥ ३९॥

“Inasmuch as you are fully determined
to follow me to the forest with a resolution to
sojourn there, my former decision about not
taking you to the forest of Dandaka has
become feeble, O Sita ! (39)

सा fe दिष्टानवद्याङ्गि वनाय मदिरेक्षणे।
अनुगच्छस्व मां भीरु सहधर्मचरी भव॥४०॥
“Since you are now allowed by me to
proceed to the forest with me, O timid lady
with flawless limbs and bewitching eyes,
follow me as such and be my partner in the
practice of asceticism incumbent on the
dwellers in a forest. (40)
