* SUNDARAKANDA +

यस्य सत्त्वस्य या योनिस्तस्यां तत् परिमार्गते।
न Met प्रमदा नष्टा मृगीषु परिमार्गितुम्॥४४॥

‘One looks for a being amongst the
variety which comprises it. A lost woman
could not be sought for among the deer.

(44)
ated मार्गितं तावच्छुद्धेन मनसा मया।
रावणान्त:पुरं Ud दृश्यते न च जानकी॥४५॥

‘Therefore, with a pure mind only has
this entire gynaeceum of Ravana been
ransacked by me; Janaka’s daughter,
however, is not to be seen.’ (45)

देवगन्धर्वकन्याश्च नागकन्याश्च वीर्यवान्।
अवेक्षमाणो हनुमान् नैवापश्यत जानकीम्॥४६॥

Even while gazing on the daughters of

83

gods, Gandharvas and Nagas, the powerful
Hanuman did not behold Janaka’s daughter
at all. (46)

तामपश्यन् कपिस्तत्र पश्यंश्चान्या वरस्नरिय: |
अपक्रम्य del वीर: प्रस्थातुमुपचक्रमे॥४७॥

Not finding Sita there while seeing other
belles, and slipping away from that place,
the hero Hanuman then prepared to leave
for another place. (47)

a भूय: Uda: श्रीमान् मारुतिर्यत्नमाश्रित:।
आपानभूमिमुत्सृज्य oat विचेतुं प्रचक्रमे॥४८॥

Leaving the place of carousing, that
glorious son of the wind-god began once
more to search for Sita on all sides with
assiduity. (48)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये सुन्दरकाण्डे एकादश: सर्ग: ॥ 22 Il

Thus ends Canto Eleven in the Sundarakanda of the glorious Ramayana of Valmiki,
the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

Canto XII

Having failed to discover Sita even after searching for her in the picture
gallery and other places, Hanuman suspects that she might have been
disposed of by Ravana and, thus meeting with frustration, falls into
the quagmire of despair. On second thought, however, he deprecates
despair as harmful and, falling back upon self-reliance,
resumes the search. But, failing to find her even on
searching for her all round, he becomes despondent again

स तस्य मध्ये भवनस्य संस्थितो
लतागृहांश्चित्रगृहान् निशागृहान्।
जगाम सीतां प्रतिदर्शनोत्सुको
न चैव तां पश्यति चारुदर्शनाम्॥ १॥
Remaining stationed within the four walls
of that palace, Hanuman, who was keen to
discover Sita, visited the arbours, picture

galleries and dormitories, but did not perceive
that lady of charming looks. (1)

स चिन्तयामास ततो महाकपि:

प्रियामपश्यन् रघुनन्दनस्य ताम्।
qa न सीता ध्रियते यथा न मे

विचिन्वतो दर्शनमेति मैथिली॥ २॥

Not finding that beloved consort of Sri
Rama (the delight of the Raghus), that great
monkey, Hanuman, thereupon reflected as
follows : ‘Undoubtedly Sita does not survive,
in that the princess of Mithila does not meet
