1060

Satrughna, the extirpator of foes, the scion
of the Raghus, and let him go. (5)

सोऽभिवाद्य मुनिश्रेष्ठं रथमारुह्य सुप्रभम्।

अयोध्यामगमत् तूर्णं राघवोत्सुकदर्शन:॥६॥
Saluting Valmiki, the best among sages,

he, Satrughna, ascending the shining chariot,

went on speedily to Ayodhya, eager to see
the scion of the Raghus, Sri Rama. (6)

स प्रविष्ट: पुरीं रम्यां श्रीमानिक्ष्वाकुनन्दन:।
प्रविवेश महाबाहुर्यत्रॆ रामो महाद्युति:॥७॥
The descendant of Iksvaku, the
prosperous one, Satrughna, reached the city,
Ayodhya, and entered the king’s palace where
Sri Rama, the illustrious one, was. (7)
a wa मन्तिमध्यस्थं पूर्णचन्द्रनिभाननम्।
UWIAA सहस्रनयनं यथा ।। ८ Ul
सोऽभिवाद्य महात्मानं ज्वलन्तमिव तेजसा।

उवाच प्राञ्जलिर्भूत्वा रामं सत्यपराक्रमम्॥९॥
Seeing Sri Rama with a face like full
moon, seated among the councillors like
Indra among the gods, and as if enflamed
with vigour, Satrughna with folded hands
spoke to resplendant one after saluting Him:
(8-9)

यदाज्ञप्तं महाराज Wa ad कृतवानहम्।
Ba: स लवण: पाप: Ut चास्य निवेशिता॥ १०॥
‘All that you ordered me to do, | have
done; the evil Lavana has been killed and the
city, Madhupuri, has been reinstituted. (10)

द्वादशैतानि वर्षाणि cat विना रघुनन्दन।
नोत्सहेयमहँ वस्तुं त्वया विरहितो नृप॥११॥
‘These twelve years | have spent without

you. O king, | cannot now live afar, separated
from you. (11)

स मे wade काकुत्स्थ कुरुष्वामितविक्रम।
मातृहीनो यथा वत्सो न fat प्रवसाम्यहम्॥ १२॥

‘O scion of the Kakutsthas, possessed
of unmitigated power, give me thy favour, |
cannot live without you for long, like a child
separated from its mother.’ (12)

« VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

एवं gant wast परिष्वज्येदमब्रवीत्।

मा विषादं कृथा: शूर नैतत् क्षत्रियचेष्टितम्॥ 23
Then the scion of the Kakutsthas, Sri

Rama, embraced him, Satrughna, who spoke

thus and said: ‘O brave one, do not lose

heart, this does not become a Ksatriya. (13)

नावसीदन्ति राजानो विप्रवासेषु weal
प्रजा च परिपाल्या fe क्षात्रधर्मेण wean १४॥

‘O descendant of Raghu, Satrughna,
the Kings staying away from their kingdom
are not disheartened; the subjects are indeed
to be protected as laid down among duties
for the Ksatriya. (14)

काले काले तु At वीर अयोध्यामवलोकितुम्।

आगच्छ त्वं नरश्रेष्ठं गन्तासि च पुरं तव॥ ek ll

‘O brave one, come from time to time
again to Ayodhya to see me. O best among
men, you should go to your city, the city of
Madhura. (15)

ममापि त्वं सुदयित: प्राणैरपि न संशय:।
अवश्यं करणीयं च राज्यस्य परिपालनम्॥१६॥
‘You indeed are dearer to me than my

life, there is no doubt. But for you looking
after your territory is indeed obligatory. (16)

तस्मात् त्वं वस काकुत्स्थ सप्तरात्रं AAT सह।

ऊर्ध्व गन्तासि मधुरां सभृत्यबलवाहन:॥१७॥
‘Therefore, O scion of the Kakutsthas,

stay with me for seven nights and then you

should proceed to Madhura with attendants,

army and carriers.’ (17)

रामस्यैतद् वच: श्रुत्वा धर्मयुक्तं मनोऽनुगम्।
शत्रुघ्नो दीनया ara बाढमित्येव चाब्रवीत्॥ १८॥

Hearing these words of Sr Rama,
spoken rightfully and in accordance with his
Dharma, Satrughna in a depressed tone
spoke ‘So be it.’ (18)

सप्तरात्रं च काकुत्स्थो राघवस्य यथाज्ञया।
उष्य तत्र महेष्वासो गमनायोपचक्रमे॥१९॥

; As desired by the descendant of Raghu,
Sri Rama, Satrughna, the mighty one, made
