978

ततो रामो धनुष्पाणिस्तावुभौ समुदैक्षत।
अन्योन्यसदृशौ वीरावुभौ देवाविवाश्विनौ॥ ee

Bow in hand, Sri Rama thereupon keenly
watched both the aforesaid heroes, who
both closely resembled each other like the
two Aswins (the twin-gods presiding over
the star, Gemini). (19)

यन्नावगच्छत् सुग्रीवं वालिनं वापि wera: |
ततो न कृतवान् बुद्धिं मोक्तुमन्तकरं शरम्॥ Roll

Since Sri Rama (a scion of Raghu)
could not make out Sugriva or Vali because
of their close resemblance, he, therefore,
could not make up his mind to discharge his
deadly arrow (lest it should hit Sugriva and
dispose him of). (20)

एतस्मिन्नन्तरे wa: सुग्रीवस्तेन वालिना।
अपश्यन् राघवं नाथमृष्यमूकं प्रदुद्रुवे॥ २१॥
Discomfited by the aforesaid Vali and
not perceiving Sri Rama as his protector,
Sugriva in the meantime ran for life towards
Rsyamuka. (21)

क्लान्तो रुधिरसिक्ताङ्ग: प्रहारैर्जर्जरीकृत:।
वालिनाभिद्रुत: क्रोधात् प्रविवेश महावनम्॥ २२॥

Exhausted and battered with the blows
of Vali, his whole body bathed in blood, and
chased in anger by Vali, he entered the large
forest (occupied by Sage Matanga). (22)

तं प्रविष्टं वनं gear वाली शापभयात् Aa: |
मुक्तो ह्यसि त्वमित्युक्त्वा स निव्रत्तो महाबल: 11 २३ ॥

Seeing him having penetrated into the
forest and saying “Indeed you are spared,”
the aforesaid Vali, even though possessed
of extraordinary might, desisted from the
pursuit due to fear of the curse. (23)

राघवोऽपि सह wat We Wa हनूमता।
तदेव वनमागच्छत् सुग्रीवो यत्र वानर:॥ २४॥

Alongwith his younger _ brother,
Laksmana, as well as Hanuman, Sri Rama
(a scion of Raghu) too returned to the same
forest where the monkey chief Sugriva was.

(24)

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

तं समीक्ष्यागतं रामं सुग्रीव: सहलक्ष्मणम्।
ह्रीमान् दीनमुवाचेदं वसुधामवलोकयन्॥ २५॥
Discerning Sri Rama returned with
Laksmana, Sugriva piteously spoke to him
as follows, looking at the ground, full of shame
at his discomfiture, as he was : (25)

आह्वयस्वेति मामुक्त्वा दर्शयित्वा च विक्रमम्।
वैरिणा घातयित्वा च किमिदानीं त्वया कृतम्॥ २६ ॥

“Having demonstrated your prowess
and saying to me ‘Challenge Vali to a duel’,
what have you done now by getting me
smitten by the enemy? (26)

तामेव वेलां वक्तव्यं त्वया Waa ara: |

वालिनं न निहन्मीति ततो नाहमितो व्रजे॥ २७॥
“In all faith it should have been pointed

out by you that very moment: ‘I am not

going to kill Val’. Then | would not have
moved from this place.” (27)

तस्य चैवं ब्रुवाणस्य सुग्रीवस्य महात्मन:।
करुणं दीनया वाचा राघव: पुनरब्रवीत्॥ २८॥

To that high-minded Sugriva, who was
piteously speaking as aforesaid in doleful
accents, Sri Rama (a scion of Raghu) replied
again : (28)

सुग्रीव श्रूयतां तात क्रोधश्च व्यपनीयताम्।
कारणं येन बाणोऽयं स मया न विसर्जित:॥ २९॥

“Sugriva, dear brother, let anger be
banished from your mind and the reason
why this deadly arrow was not discharged
by me be heard. (29)

अलंकारेण वेषेण प्रमाणेन गतेन Al
त्वं च सुग्रीव वाली च सदृशौ स्थ: परस्परम्॥ ३०॥

“You, O Sugriva, and Vali resemble
each other in personal embellishment,
costume, stature and gait too. (30)

स्वरेण वर्चसा wa dada च वानर।
विक्रमेण च वाक्यैश्च व्यक्तिं वां नोपलक्षये॥ ३१॥
“| did not perceive any distinction between

you two—in voice as well as in splendour, in
look and in prowess as well as in speech.(31)
