* SUNDARAKANDA +

७
ad
a

143

सर्ग:

Canto XXX
Weighing the pros and cons of comforting Sita or remaining mum, now that
he had come to know everything about Sita at first hand, Hanuman
decides upon the former course at the psychological moment

हनुमानपि विक्रान्त: Wa शुश्राव Arad: |
सीतायास्त्रिजटायाश्च राक्षसीनां च तर्जितम्॥१॥
The valiant Hanuman too correctly heard
everything including the lamentation of Sita,
the dream of Trijata and the threats of the
ogresses. (1)
अवेक्षमाणस्तां edt tanita नन्दने।
ततो बहुविधां चिन्तां चिन्तयामास वानर:॥ २॥
Looking intently on that lady, who
resembled a heavenly being in the Nandana
grove (forming part of Indra’s paradise),
Hanuman thereupon indulged in speculation
of various kinds. (2)
यां कपीनां सहस्राणि सुबहून्ययुतानि च।
दिक्षु सर्वासु मार्गन्ते सेयमासादिता मया॥३॥
He said to himself: ‘The lady found by
me here is the same Sita whom many

thousands, nay, myriads of monkeys have
been seeking in all the quarters. (3)

चारेण तु सुयुक्तेन शत्रो: शाक्तिमवेक्षता।
गूढेन wat तावदवेक्षितमिदं मया॥४॥
‘By me, thoughtfully appointed by my
master as a spy and moving about incognito
in my attempt to ascertain the enemy’s
strength, for my part, the following information
has been gathered. (4)

राक्षसानां विशेषश्च ut चेयं निरीक्षिता।
राक्षसाधिपतेरस्य प्रभावो रावणस्य TUNG I

‘The relative position in regard to power
and resources of the ogres per se as well
as the topography of this city of Lanka as
also the glory of this Ravana, the suzerain
lord of ogres, has been scrutinized by me.

(5)

यथा तस्याप्रमेयस्य सर्वसत्त्वदयावत:।
समाश्वासयितुं wat पतिदर्शनकांक्षिणीम्॥ ६॥
‘It is opportune for me duly to comfort
the spouse, longing to see her husband, of
Sri Rama, who is immeasurably great and
full of compassion for all beings. (6)

अहमाश्वासयाम्येनां पूर्णचन्द्रनिभाननाम्।
अदृष्टदु:खां दु:खस्य न ह्यन्तमधिगच्छतीम्॥ ol
‘| shall presently console this lady,
whose countenance resembles the full moon,
who had never experienced sorrow before
and yet who is not reaching the end of her
suffering. (7)
afe ह्यहं सतीमेनां शोकोपहतचेतनाम्।
अनाश्वास्य गमिष्यामि दोषवद् गमनं भवेत्॥ il
‘If | actually return without reassuring
this virtuous lady, whose understanding has

been clouded by grief, my departure will be
regarded as blameworthy. (8)

गते fe मयि art राजपुत्री यशस्विनी।
परित्राणमपश्यन्ती जानकी जीवितं त्यजेत्॥९॥

‘Perceiving no means of deliverance
from her calamity, when | have actually left
for Kiskindha without meeting her, this
illustrious princess, the daughter of Janaka,
may yield up her life. (9)

यथा च स महाबाहु: पूर्णचन्द्रनिभानन:।
समाश्वासयितुं न्याय्य: सीतादर्शनलालस:॥ १०॥
‘Even as the long-armed Sri Rama,
whose countenance resembles the full moon,
and who is equally eager to behold Sita,
deserves to be comforted with the tidings of
Sita, and Sita too deserves to be comforted
with the news of Sri Rama. (10)
