788

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA +

पञ्चदशाधिकशततम: सर्ग:
Canto CXV

Regarding with suspicion the character of Sita, Sri Rama
repudiates her and asks her to seek shelter elsewhere

तां तु ured स्थितां wat राम: सम्प्रेक्ष्य मैथिलीम्।
हृदयान्तर्गतं भावं व्याहर्तुमुपचक्रमे॥ १॥

Looking intently on the aforesaid
princess of Mithila, who stood by his side
bent low, Sri Rama for his part proceeded
forthwith to give expression (as under) to
the feelings concealed in his heart: (1)

एषासि निर्जिता भद्रे शत्रुं जित्वा रणाजिरे।
पौरुषाद् यदनुष्ठेयं मयैतदुपपादितम्॥२॥

“You stand here won back by me after
conquering the enemy on the field of battle,
O blessed one! That which was worth doing
for me through human effort has been
accomplished by me. (2)

गतोऽस्म्यन्तममर्षस्य धर्षणा सम्प्रमार्जिता।
अवमानश्च शत्रुश्च युगपन्निहतौ मया॥३॥

“| have attained the reward of my
indignation; nay, the wanton offence given
to me by your abduction has been fully
requited and the indignity offered to me as
also the enemy, who did it, have been
wiped out all at once by me. (3)
अद्य A पौरुषं दृष्टमद्य A सफल: श्रम:।
अद्य तीर्णप्रतिज्ञोऽहं प्रभवाम्यद्य चात्मन:॥४॥

“Today my manliness has_ been
witnessed, today my exertion has become
fruitful, today | have fulfilled my vow
and today | am the master of myself once
more. (4)

या त्वं विरहिता नीता चलचित्तेन रक्षसा।
दैवसम्पादितो दोषो मानुषेण मया जित:॥५॥
“The wrong done to you, in that you,

when you were quite alone, were borne
away by the fickle-minded ogre (Ravana),

which was ordained by destiny, has been
repaid by me, a mortal. (5)

सम्प्राप्तमवमानं यस्तेजसा न Wanita
कस्तस्य पौरुषेणार्थो महताप्यल्पचेतस:॥६॥

“What purpose will be served by the
prowess, however great, of that petty-minded
fellow who does not avenge by his might
the insult suffered by him. (6)

ag च समुद्रस्य लङ्कायाश्चापि मर्दनम्।
सफलं तस्य च श्लाघ्यमद्य कर्म हनूमत:॥७॥
“Nay, the laudable achievement of the
celebrated Hanuman in the shape of leaping
across the sea and the devastation of Lanka
has borne fruit today. (7)

ag विक्रमतश्चैव fed मन्त्रयतस्तथा।
सुग्रीवस्य ससैन्यस्य सफलोऽद्य परिश्रम:॥८॥

“The exertion of Sugriva, who exhibited
his prowess on the battlefield with his army,
and tendered friendly counsel, is fruitful
today. (8)
विभीषणस्य च तथा सफलोऽद्य परिश्रम:।
विगुणं भ्रातरं त्यक्त्वा यो at स्वयमुपस्थित:॥ ९॥

“Nay, fruitful likewise is the exertion
today of Vibhisana, who personally sought

my presence, deserting his own brother
(Ravana), who was devoid of virtues.” (9)

इत्येवं वदत: श्रुत्वा सीता रामस्य तद् वच:।
मृगीवोत्फुल्लनयना बभूवाश्रुपरिप्लुता॥ १०॥

Hearing the foregoing speech of Sri
Rama, even while he was speaking as
aforesaid, Sita, her eyes wide open like those
of a female deer, was bathed in tears. (10)

wade तु रामस्य समीपे हृदयप्रियाम्।
जनवादभयाद् राज्ञो बभूव हृदयं द्विधा॥११॥
