246

Under his terrible curse Rambha
instantly got petrified. And, hearing the curse
of the great Rsi Viswamitra, Love as well as
Indra slipped away. (15)

कोपेन च महातेजास्तपोऽपहरणे कृते।
इन्द्रियैरजितै wa न AN शान्तिमात्मन:॥१६॥

The stock of his merit earned through
austerities having been mitigated through
his anger, O Rama, ViSwamitra too, though
highly glorious, did not get peace of mind
because of his unconquered senses. (16)

बभूवास्य मनश्चिन्ता तपोऽपहरणे कृते।

नैवं क्रोधं गमिष्यामि न च वक्ष्ये कथंचन॥ १७॥
The spiritual energy stored through his

austerities having been weakened, the

thought entered his mind: “I shall no more

give way to anger thus, nor speak on any

account. (17)

अथवा नोच्छ्वसिष्यामि संवत्सरशतान्यपि।

até fe शोषयिष्यामि आत्मानं विजितेन्द्रिय: ecu

« VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

“Nor shall | even breathe for hundreds
of years. Indeed, having fully controlled my
senses, | shall chasten my temper. (18)

Wag यावद्धि मे प्राप्तं ब्राह्मण्यं तपसार्जितम्।
अनुच्छ्वसन्नभुञ्जानस्तिष्ठेयं शाश्वती: AAT: ULF
“Till Brahmanhood is attained by me as

earned through austerities, | shall do without
breathing or eating for innumerable years. (19)
नहि मे तप्यमानस्य क्षयं यास्यन्ति ada: |
एवं वर्षसहस्रस्य दीक्षां स मुनिपुंगव:।
चकाराप्रतिमां लोके प्रतिज्ञां रघुनन्दन॥ Roll
“Nor will my limbs get atrophied so
long as | continue to practise austerities.” In
this way the celebrated ViSwamitra, the
foremost of sages, O Rama, scion of Raghu,
took a pledge which had no parallel in this
world, to embark on a sacred vow of
refraining from breathing and eating for a
thousand years. (20)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये बालकाण्डे चतु:षष्टितम: सर्ग: ॥ ६४॥

Thus ends Canto Sixty-four in the Balakanda of the glorious Ramayana of Valmiki,
the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

पञ्चषष्टितम: at:
Canto LXV

On Viswamitra not ceasing from his austerities even on his being
conferred the title of a Brahmarsi by Brahma, Vasistha, as
urged by gods, recognizes it and here ends the narration

of Satananda. Having worshipped Viswamitra,
King Janaka then returns to his palace

अथ Quad wa fast त्यक्त्वा महामुनि: |
पूर्वां दिशमनुप्राप्य तपस्तेषे सुदारुणम्॥१॥
“Leaving the northern quarter in which
stand the Himalayas, ViSwamitra (the
eminent sage) now sought the eastern
quarter and began to practise most severe
austerities again. (1)

Wt वर्षसहस्रस्य कृत्वा व्रतमनुत्तमम्।
चकाराप्रतिमं राम तप: परमदुष्करम्॥२॥

“Undertaking the supreme vow of rigid
silence extending over a period of one
thousand years, O Rama, he embarked on a
course of austerities which was most difficult
to prosecute and had no parallel. (2)

पूर्णे वर्षसहस्रे तु काष्ठभूतं महामुनिम्।
विघ्नैर्बहुभिराधूतं क्रोधो नान्तरमाविशत्॥३॥
a कृत्वा निश्चयं wa तप आतिष्ठताव्ययम्।
wma वर्षसहस्रस्य ad पूर्णे महाव्रत:॥४॥
