892

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

चतु:षष्टितम: सर्ग:
Canto LXIV

Sri Rama and Laksmana carry on the search for Sita; Sri Rama gives vent
to his grief over her disappearance; catching a hint from the deer, the
two brothers proceed in a southerly direction; S11 Rama shows
his anger towards the mountain; descrying the flowers
dropped from the person of Sita and particles of her
ornaments as well as the vestiges of an encounter,
ऽन Rama ventilates his anger towards
all the three worlds including gods

स दीनो दीनया ara लक्ष्मणं वाक्यमब्रवीत्।
शीघ्रं लक्ष्मण जानीहि गत्वा गोदावरीं ALN १॥
अपि weet deat पद्मान्यानयितुं गता।
Vane रामेण लक्ष्मण: पुनरेव हि॥२॥
तां लक्ष्मणस्तीर्थवतीं विचित्वा राममब्रवीत्॥ ३॥
Feeling miserable, Sri Rama in piteous
accents spoke as follows to Laksmana:
“Proceeding apace to the Godavari river, O
Laksmana, find out if Sita has repaired to
the Godavari to gather lotuses.” Commanded
thus by Sri Rama, Laksmana for his part
readily sought with quick paces once more
the delightful Godavari river. Having explored
the river, provided with many excellent
descents, Laksmana submitted as follows
to Sri Rama: (1—3)
नैनां पश्यामि तीर्थेषु क्रोशतो न शरृणोति मे।
कं नु सा देशमापन्ना वैदेही क्लेशनाशिनी॥४॥
“| did not find her at any of the many
descents nor did she hear my crying even
as | called her out by name. | wonder to
what region Sita (a princess of the Videha
territory), who used to drive away all agony
by her very presence, has gone. (4)
नहि तं af a wa यत्र सा तनुमध्यमा।
लक्ष्मणस्य वच: श्रुत्वा दीन: संतापमोहित:॥ ५॥
राम: समभिचक्राम wa गोदावरीं नदीम्।
a तामुपस्थितो wa: aq सीतेत्येवमब्रवीत्॥६॥

“| have no knowledge whatever of the

region where that lady of slender waist may
be, O Rama.” Distressed to hear the report
of Laksmana, Sri Rama, who felt distracted
through agony, himself sallied forth towards
the Godavari river. Having reached the river,
Sri Rama spoke to her as follows : “Where
is Sita?” (5-6)

भूतानि राक्षसेन्द्रेण वधार्हेण हृतामपि।
Toa were रामाय aM गोदावरी नदी॥७॥

Even living beings (questioned by him
before) did not report to Sri Rama about her
having been borne away by Ravana, the
king of ogres, who deserved death at his
hands and so the river Godavari too kept
mum on the point. (7)

aa: प्रचोदिता ya: शंस चास्मै प्रियामिति।
न च सा ह्यवदत् सीतां पृष्टा रामेण शोचता॥ ८॥

Thereupon the river was requested by
the elements in the following words: “Pray,
give him news about his beloved spouse.”
Even though questioned by the grieving Sri
Rama, the river, however, did not say
anything about Sita. (8)
रावणस्य च तद्रूपं कर्मापि च दुरात्मन:।
ध्यात्वा भयात् तु Aca सा नदी न शशंस ह॥ ९॥

Nay, recollecting that terrible form as
well as the deed of the evil-minded Ravana,
the said river for her part did not speak

about Sita (a princess of the Videha territory)
for fear of Ravana : so the tradition goes.(9)
