378

attaining happiness (the reward of merit ) in
the world of mortals—all undoubtedly follow
in the wake of righteousness even as one’s
wife, if obedient, is conducive to religious
merit by being helpful in the discharge of
one’s religious obligations such as hospitality
to unexpected guests, yields sensuous
enjoyment if agreeable and makes _ for
prosperity in the other world by giving birth
to a son. (57)
स्मिं सर्वे caf

धर्मो यत: स्यात् तदुपक्रमेत।
द्वेष्यो भवत्यर्थपरो हि लोके

कामात्मता खल्वपि न प्रशस्ता ।। ५८ ।।

“One should abstain from pursuits in
which all the three objects of human pursuit
do not find any scope and should undertake
that pursuit alone from which follows religious
merit; for he who is devoted to material wealth,
divorced from righteousness, becomes hateful;
while excessive addiction to sensuous
enjoyment, incompatible with righteousness,
is not commendable either. (58)
Tes राजा च frat च वृद्ध:

क्रोधात् प्रहर्षादथवापि कामात्।
ae व्यादिशेत् कार्यमवेक्ष्य धर्मं
कस्तं न कुर्यादनृशंसवृत्ति:।॥ ५९॥

“What man who is not cruel in his
dealings would fail to perform as a sacred
obligation a duty which his aged father, who
is also his preceptor and king, might enjoin
him to do, whether from anger, excessive
delight or even from concupiscence? (59)

न तेन शक्नोमि पितु: प्रतिज्ञा-
मिमां न कर्तुं सकलां यथावत्।
a ह्यावयोस्तात गुरुर्नियोगे
देव्याश्च भर्ता स गतिश्च at: gol

“Therefore, | cannot but duly implement
this pledge of my father inasmuch as he is
competent to command us both (Bharata as
well as myself), O dear brother, and he is
the asylum as also the means of happiness

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

in this as well as in the other world of the
queen (Kausalya), whose husband he is
and with whom she should live through
thick and thin rather than with her son. (60)

तस्मिन् पुनर्जीवति धर्मराजे

विशेषत: स्वे पथि वर्तमाने।
देवी मया सार्धमितोऽभिगच्छेत्

कथंस्विदन्या विधवेव नारी॥६१॥

“So long as such a husband, who is
not only a virtuous king but is staunchly
adhering to his path (the path of virtue in the
shape of truthfulness, for the sake of which
he is abandoning his dearest son and
sacrificing his interests), is alive, how can
the Empress, like an ordinary widowed
woman, who has lost her husband and lives
with her son, actually depart from Ayodhya
alongwith me? (61)
सा मानुमन्यस्व at व्रजन्तं

कुरुष्व न: स्वस्त्ययनानि देवि।
यथा समाप्ते पुनराव्रजेयं
यथा fe सत्येन पुनर्ययाति:॥ ६२॥

“As such, pray, grant leave to me
proceeding to the forest, and perform sacred
rites ensuring our welfare in the journey, O
godly lady, so that on the period of exile
being complete, | may come back even as
King Yayati ascended for the second time
to heaven by dint of truthfulness. (62)

यशो ह्यहं केवलराज्यकारणा-

न्न पृष्ठत: कर्तुमलं महोदयम्।
अदीर्घकालेन तु देवि जीविते

वृणेऽवरामद्य महीमधर्मत:॥६३॥

“For, | am unable to throw away fame,
which is of greater consequence, for the
sake of mere sovereignty divorced from
righteousness. Life being of such a short
duration, O godly lady, | am not going to
accept in any case the trivial rulership of the
globe through unrighteousness today.” (63)

प्रसादयन्नरवृषभ: स मातरं
पराक्रमाज्जिगमिषुरेव दण्डकान्।
