+ UTTARAKANDA +

निशाचर: सदसि Wal यथानल:॥ ४४॥

“Having scored that great victory by

895

dint of his valour and seated in his excellent
aerial car, that glorious ranger of the night,
who wore a brilliant diadem on his head and
a necklace of pearls on his breast, shone
like fire in a sacrificial hall.” (44)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये उत्तरकाण्डे VAM: WA: ॥ 24 ॥

Thus ends Canto Fifteen in the Uttarakanda of the glorious Ramayana of Valmiki,
the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

षोडश: सर्ग:
Canto XVI

Nandiswara curses Ravana; Lord Sankara curbs the pride of Ravana,
who obtains a sword from Lord Sankara

a frat धनदं राम भ्रातरं राक्षसाधिप:।
महासेनप्रसूतिं तद् ययौ शरवणं महत्॥१॥

“Having vanquished his brother, Kubera,
the king of the Raksasas sought the well-
known thicket of reeds ‘Saravana’ where
Lord Kartikeya was born, O Rama! _ (1)

अथापश्यद् दशग्रीवो रौक्मं शरवणं महत्।
गभस्तिजालसंवीतं द्वितीयमिव भास्करम्॥ २॥
“Now DaSagriva saw the large golden-
hued expanse of reeds bright like a second
sun surrounded by rays. (2)
स Udi समारुह्य कंचिद् रम्यवनान्तरम्।
Wad पुष्पकं तत्र wa विष्टम्भितं तदा॥३॥
“Ascending a mountain clothed with a
lovely grove, he found the Puspaka brought
to a standstill on that spot on that occasion,
O Rama! (3)
अचिन्तयद् wares: सचिवैस्तै: समावृत:॥४॥
“Surrounded by his aforesaid ministers,
the king of the Raksasas reflected, “How
has this aerial car, which had been designed
in such a way as to be able to follow its

master’s will, been rendered motionless?
Why does it not move? (4)

किंनिमित्तमिच्छया मे नेदं गच्छति पुष्पकम्।
पर्वतस्योपरिष्ठस्य pid कस्यचिद् भवेत्॥५॥
“What may be the reason for the
Puspaka not proceeding according to my
wishes? It must be the act of someone who
resides on this hill.” (5)
ततोऽब्रवीत् तदा Wa मारीचो बुद्धिकोविद:।
नेदं निष्कारणं राजन् पुष्पकं यन्न गच्छति॥ ६॥
“O Rama, the astute Marica thereupon
said on that occasion: ‘O king, it cannot be
without a reason that this aerial car, Puspaka,
does not move. (6)
अथवा पुष्पकमिदं धनदान्नान्यवाहनम्।
अतो निस्पन्दमभवद् धनाध्यक्षविनाकृतम्॥ ७॥
“‘Maybe, the aerial car, Puspaka, will
not carry anyone other than Kubera, the
god of riches. Therefore, even as it has

been disunited from him, it has become
motionless.’ (7)

इति वाक्यान्तरे तस्य कराल: कृष्णपिङ्गल:।
वामनो विकटो मुण्डी नन्दी Beast बली॥ ८॥
तत: पार्श्वमुपागम्य भवस्यानुचरोऽब्रवीत्।
नन्दीश्वरो वचश्चेदं राक्षसेन्द्रमशङ्कित:॥९॥

“Interrupting his speech, and approaching
