* SUNDARAKANDA +

He forthwith saw the moon dispelling
the sins and the resultant afflictions of the
world by shedding light everywhere and
thereby minimizing the chances of sins being
committed by the people, nay, swelling by
drawing up tides in the ocean and giving
light to all created beings while advancing in
the heavens. (2)

या भाति लक्ष्मीर्भुवि मन्दरस्था
यथा प्रदोषेषु च सागरस्था।
aa तोयेषु च पुष्करस्था
रराज सा चारुनिशाकरस्था॥ ३॥
The same splendour which is visible
on Mount Mandara on earth, which plays
during evenings on the sea, and which rests
on a lotus in the waters shone forth in the
delightful moon. (3)

हंसो यथा राजतपञ्जरस्थ:
feet यथा मन्दरकन्दरस्थ:।
at यथा गर्बितकुञ्जरस्थ-
शचन्द्रोऽपि बभ्राज तथाम्बरस्थ: ।॥ ४॥
The moon shone forth in the heavens
much in the same way as a swan displays
its charm in a silvery cage, as a lion in a

cave of Mount Mandara and as a hero
mounted on a proud elephant. (4)

Raa: ककुद्यानिव तीक्ष्णशृङ्गो

महाचल: श्वेत इवोर्ध्वशृङ्ग:।
हस्तीव जाम्बूनदबद्धशृङ्गो

विभाति चन्द्र: परिपूर्णशृङ्ग: uk il

The full moon with its horn-like spot

fully developed looked exceptionally charming
like a bull with pointed horns, like the great
white mountain, Himalaya, so-called because
of its remaining clothed with snow, with its
lofty peaks and like an elephant with gold-
plated tusks. (5)

महाग्रहग्राहविनष्टपङ्क: ।
प्रकाशलक्ष्म्याश्रयनिर्मलाङ्को

रराज चन्द्रो भगवान् शशाङ्क: ॥ ६ Ul

57

The glorious moon bearing the earth’s
shadow in the form of a hare-like figure in
the bosom of its orb—whose stain in the
form of cold water and frost (which are
supposed to have their origin in the moon,
the storehouse of cold) had been washed
away due to proximity to the equator, nay,
by whom stain in the form of darkness had
been wiped away through the reflection of
the rays of the sun (the big star) and whose
spot had turned resplendent through the
wealth of its effulgence shone brightly. (6)

शिलातलं प्राप्य यथा मृगेन्द्रो

महारणं प्राप्य यथा गजेन्द्र:।
राज्यं समासाद्य यथा नरेन्द्र-

स्तथा प्रकाशो विरराज चन्द्र:॥ ७ ॥

The radiant moon looked exceptionally
splendid in the same way as the king of
beasts on ascending the level surface of a
rock, as a lordly elephant on penetrating
deep into a large forest and a ruler of men
on duly reaching his own kingdom. (7)

प्रकाशचन्द्रोदयनष्टदोष:
;पि॰शिताज्ञादो॰ष; |
रामाभिरामेरितचित्तदोष:

स्वर्गप्रकाशो भगवान् प्रदोष:॥ ८ ॥

The glorious evening, the evil attaching
to which in the form of darkness, which
gives an incentive to the commission of
dark deeds, has been dispelled by the
appearance of the bright moon, nay, whose
other blot in the form of flesh-eating by
ogres has been intensified, and in which the
bitterness of mind caused by unrequited
love of young women and their lovers is
wiped away, scattered bliss. (8)

तन्त्रीस्वरा: कर्णसुखा: Were:
स्वपन्ति नार्य: पतिभि: सुवृत्ता:।
नक्तंचराश्चापि तथा Waar
विहर्तुमत्यद्भुतरौद्रवृत्ता: ॥ ९॥

The strains of the lute, delightful to the
ear, have started. Women of good moral
