10 « VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

“In order to put an end to all obstacles one should meditate on Lord GaneSsa, who is
clad in white robes, is clothed with a moon-like splendour, is endowed with four arms and
(always) wears a cheerful aspect. | bow down to Lord GaneSa (adorned with the head of
an elephant), by saluting whom at the beginning of every undertaking gods headed by
Brahma (the lord of Goddess Saraswati) got accomplished of purpose.”

SALUTATIONS TO ONE’S PRECEPTOR

गुरुर्ब्रह्मा गुरुर्विष्णुर्गुरुर्देवो HEAT |
Te: साक्षात् परं wal तस्मै श्रीगुरवे नम:॥
अखण्डमण्डलाकारं व्याप्तं येन चराचरम्।
aad दर्शितं at तस्मै श्रीगुरवे नम:॥

“The preceptor is Brahma (the creator); the preceptor is Lord Visnu (the Protector of
the universe) and the preceptor is Lord Siva (the supreme Lord). The preceptor is the
Supreme Brahma personified. Hail to the aforesaid Guru! Hail to the aforesaid preceptor,
by whom that ultimate end has been revealed to me by which stands perva ed the entire
universe consisting of the mobile and immobile creation and extending in the form of an
indivisible sphere.”

MEDITATION ON SARASWATI
ह्रस्तेनैकेन wat सितमपि च wh पुस्तकं चापरेण।
भासा कुलदेन्दुशङ्खस्फटिकमणिनिभा भासमानासमाना
सा मे वाग्देवतेयं निवसतु वदने सर्वदा सुप्रसन्ना॥

“May that goddess of speech abide at all times, highly pleased, in my organ of
speech, who, endowed (as she is) with four arms, holds in one a rosary of Rudraksa-like
beads made of crystal, a white lotus in another, a parrot in the third and a book in the
fourth, who resembles (in hue) a Kunda (jasmine) flower, the moon, the conch and crystal,
shines with splendour and is without parallel (in beauty and grace).”

SALUTATIONS TO SAGE VALMIKI

prt राम wit wat मधुराक्षरम्।
आरुह्य कविताशाखां ac वाल्मीकिकोकिलम्॥
a पिबन् add रामचरितामृतसागरम्।
अतृप्तस्तं मुनिं बवन्दे प्राचेतसमकल्मषम्॥

“| salute Sage Valmiki, conceived (by the poets) as a cuckoo melodiously singing the
sweet syllables ‘Rama! Rama!!’ while perched on a bough of the tree of poetry. | bow to
the sinless Sage Valmiki (son of Varuna, the god presiding over water), who, though
incessantly drinking of the ocean of nectar in the shape of Sri Rama’s narrative, remains
unsated.”

SALUTATIONS TO HANUMAN
गोष्पदीकृतवारीशां मशकीकृतराक्षसम्।
रामायणमहामालारत्नं वन्देऽनिलात्मजम्॥
अञ्जनानन्दनं art जानकीशोकनाशनम्।
कपीशमशक्षहन्तारं we लङ्काभयंकरम्॥

