# YUDDHAKANDA #

सर्वेऽस्त्रविदुषो वीरा: we युद्धविशारदा:।
ad प्रवरविज्ञाना: सर्वे लब्धवरास्तथा॥१३॥

All were richly endowed with great might,
all enjoyed widespread renown. All were
such as had never been heard of as
vanquished even by gods accompanied by
Gandharvas (celestial musicians) and united
with Kinnaras (another class of demigods
credited with a human figure and the head
of a horse or with a horse’s body and head
of a man) on reaching the battlefield. All
were adept in the use of mystic missiles
and were heroic, all were skilled in warfare,
all were endowed with great wisdom of the
scriptures and all had received boons by
virtue of their austerities. (12-13)

स तैस्तथा भास्करतुल्यवर्चसै:

adda: शत्रुबलशथ्रियार्दनै: ।
Rt राजा मघवान् यथामरै-

dat महादानवदर्पनाशनै: 11 १४॥

Surrounded as aforesaid by his said
sons, who vied with the sun in brilliance
and were capable of crushing the might
and glory of the enemy, King Ravana
shone as Indra, surrounded by immortals,
capable of quelling the vanity of mighty
Danavas. (14)

स पुत्रान् सम्परिष्वज्य भूषयित्वा च भूषणै: |
आशीर्भिश्च प्रशस्ताभि: प्रेषयामास वै रणे॥ १५॥

Closely embracing his aforesaid sons,
nay, decking them with ornaments and
enriching them with auspicious benedictions,
he actually sent them out for an encounter.

(15)
युद्धोन्मत्तं च मत्तं च भ्रातरौ चापि रावण:।
रक्षणार्थं कुमाराणां प्रेषयामास संयुगे॥ १६॥

He also dispatched his two brothers,
Yuddhonmatta (better known as
Mahaparswa) and Matta (more familiarly
known as Mahodara) to the field of battle for
the defence of the princes. (16)

577

तेऽभिवाद्य महात्मानं रावणं लोकरावणम्।
कृत्वा प्रदक्षिणं Wa महाकाया: प्रतस्थिरे॥ १७॥
Saluting the gigantic Ravana, (who made
people screem with terror) and also walking
clockwise about him as a token of submission,
those colossal warriors departed for the
battle-field. (17)
सर्वौषधीभिर्गन्धैश्च समालभ्य महाबला:।
निर्जग्मुर्नैर्ऋतश्रेष्ठा: षडेते युद्धकाङ्क्षिण:॥ १८॥
Anointing themselves with all the ten
medicinal herbs (credited with the property
of warding off injury caused by weapons)
as well as with perfumes, the following six
jewels among the ogres, who were endowed
with extraordinary might, and longed for a
fight, sallied forth: (18)

त्रिशिराश्चातिकायश्च देवान्तकनरान्तकौ।
Tareas निर्जग्मु: कालचोदिता:॥१९॥
Trisira and Atikaya, Devantaka and
Narantaka, Mahodara and Mahaparswa set
out under the sway of destiny. (19)
ad: सुदर्शनं art नीलजीमूतसंनिभम्।
ऐरावतकुले जातमारुरोह महोदर:॥ २०॥
Thereupon Mahodara mounted an
elephant, Sudarsana by name, closely
resembling a dark cloud in hue and born in
the race of Airavata, the transport of Indra,
the ruler of gods. (20)

सर्वायुधसमायुक्तस्तूणीभिश्चाप्यलंकृत: ।
रराज गजमास्थाय सवितेवास्तमूर्धनि॥ २१॥

Taking his seat on the elephant,
nay, equipped with all kinds of weapons
and furnished with quivers too, he shone
like the sun on the summit of the western
mountain and as such about to disappear.

(21)
हयोत्तमसमायुक्तं सर्वायुधसमाकुलम्।
आरुरोह रथश्रेष्ठं त्रिशिरा रावणात्मज:॥ २२॥

Trisira, sprung from the loins of Ravana,

ascended an excellent chariot drawn by
