# YUDDHAKANDA +

Sarama heard the terrible noise of troops
engaged in every effort for war. (19)

दण्डनिर्घातवादिन्या: श्रुत्वा vat महास्वनम्।
sara सरमा सीतामिदं मधुरभाषिणी॥ २०॥

Hearing the crash of kettledrums
sounding when beaten with a stick, Sarama,
who had a sweet tongue, spoke to Sita as
follows: (20)

संनाहजननी ह्येषा भैरवा ate भेरिका।
भेरीनादं च गम्भीरं yoy तोयदनि:स्वनम्॥ २१॥

“Indeed, here is a fearful kettledrum,
producing a sound signifying preparations
for war, being beaten, O timid lady! Also
hear the deep-sounding crash of kettledrums,
which resembles the rumbling of clouds.

(21)

कल्प्यन्ते मत्तमातङ्मा युज्यन्ते रथवाजिन:।
at तुरगारूढा: प्रासहस्ता: सहस्रश:॥ २२॥
“Elephants in rut are being decorated
and horses are being yoked to the chariots.
Nay, carrying spears in their hands,
horsemen are seen in their thousands.
(22)

शस्त्राणां च प्रसन्नानां चर्मणां वर्मणां तथा॥ २४॥
रथवाजिगजानां च राक्षसेन्द्रानुयायिनाम्।
सम्भ्रमो रक्षसामेष हृषितानां तरस्विनाम्॥ २५॥
वनं निर्दंहतो at यथा रूपं विभावसो:॥ २६॥
“Prepared for a fight, warriors are
rushing hither and thither in their thousands.
Nay, the principal roads are getting choked
with roaring troops presenting a weird
appearance and full of impetuosity, even
as sea is filled with streams of water. Look
at the sheen of polished weapons, shields
and coats of mail, sending forth a lustre
of many hues resembling the splendour of

411

fire consuming a forest in summer. And
here is seen the flurry of chariots, horses
and elephants following the lead of Ravana
(the ruler of ogres) as well as of ogres
thrilled with joy and full of impetuosity.
(23—26)

हयानां हेषमाणानां श्रृणु तूर्यध्वनिं तथा॥ २७॥
“Hear the ringing of bells, also hear the
rattling of chariots, nay, listen to the cry of

neighing horses as also to the flourish of
trumpets. (27)

उद्यतायुधहस्तानां राक्षसेन्द्रानुयायिनाम्।
सम्भ्रमो रक्षसामेष तुमुलो लोमहर्षणम्॥ २८॥
श्रीस्त्वां भजति शोकघ्नी रक्षसां भयमागतम्।
wa: कमलपत्राक्षो दैत्यानामिव वासव:॥ २९॥
अवजित्य जितक्रोधस्तमचिन्त्यपराक्रम: |
रावणं समरे ear wat त्वाधिगमिष्यति॥ son

“Here is the bustle of ogres carrying
uplifted weapons in their hands and following
the lead of Ravana (the lord of ogres).
Good fortune, which will bring your grief to
an end, awaits you and a danger, which will
make one’s hair stand on end, threatens the
ogres. Vanquishing and killing the notorious
Ravana in combat, even as Indra vanquished
the Daityas, your husband, Sri Rama, whose
eyes resemble the petals of a lotus, nay,
who has conquered anger and whose
prowess is inconceivable, will win you back.

(28-30)

विक्रमिष्यति रक्ष:सु vat ते सहलक्ष्मण:।
यथा WaT शत्रुघ्नो विष्णुना सह वासव:॥ ३१॥

“Accompanied by Laksmana, your
husband will show his valour against the
ogres, even as Indra, the destroyer of
his foes, exhibited his prowess against
his enemies (the demons) alongwith Lord
Visnu, who descended as his younger
brother. (31)
