94 « VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

foremost of the courtesans of Romapada’s
capital entered the extensive forest and,
staying not very far from the hermitage of
the sage Vibhandaka in the woodland
(adjoining Srngaverapura, associated with
the name of Rsyasrnga) made attempts to
have a look at the Rsi’s son, who was full
of self-control and always stayed in the
hermitage. Ever contented with his father’s
affection and fostering care, he never
stepped beyond the hermitage. (7-8)

न तेन जन्मप्रभृति geqd तपस्विना।
Tat वा पुमान् वा यच्चान्यत् सत्त्वं नगरराष्ट्रजम्॥ ९॥
Since his very birth that hermit boy
had never before seen any man or woman
or, for that matter, any other living being
born in a town or in the countryside. (9)

aa: कदाचित् तं देशमाजगाम यदृच्छया।
विभाण्डकसुतस्तत्र ताश्चापश्यद् वराङ्गना:॥१०॥

Impelled by providence one day
Rsyasrnga (son of Vibhandaka) came out
of his hermitage to the area where the
courtesans were encamping, and beheld
there the aforesaid lovely women. (10)

ताश्चित्रवेषा: Wael गायन्त्यो मधुरस्वरम्।
ऋषिपुत्रमुपागम्य सर्वा वचनमब्रुवन्॥११॥

Singing in a melodious strain, all the
aforesaid young women, who were attired
in different colours, approached Rsyasrnga
(son of Vibhandaka) and addressed to him
the following question : (11)
कस्त्वं किं ada ब्रह्मञ्ञातुमिच्छामहे वयम्।
एकस्त्वं fast दूरे at चरसि शंस न:॥१२॥

“We desire to know, O holy one, who
you are and how you get on. Pray, tell us,
wherefore do you roam about all alone in
the remote and lonely forest?” (12)

अदृष्टरूपास्तास्तेन काम्यरूपा वने fora: |

हार्दात्तस्य मतिर्जाता आख्यातुं पितरं स्वकम्॥ १३॥
Women, as they were, whose form had

never been seen by him before in that forest

and who were endowed with an exterior worth
coveting, there appeared in him an urge, born
of natural attraction, to mention the name of
his father and other things too. (13)

पिता विभाण्डकोऽस्माकं तस्याहं सुत औरस:।
mays sit ward नाम कर्म च मे भुवि॥ १४॥
“Vibhandaka is the name of my father
and | am his own son (sprung from his
loins). My name is Rsyasrnga, my prusuit
in the form of austerities is celebrated in this
tract of land. (14)

इहाश्रमपदोऽस्माकं समीपे शुभदर्शना:।
करिष्ये वोऽत्र पूजां वै सर्वेषां विधिपूर्वकम्॥ १५॥

“In this very forest close by there is the
site of our hermitage, O lovely ones! There |
shall certainly offer worship (hospitality) to
you all with due ceremony.” (15)

ऋषिपुत्रवच: श्रुत्वा सर्वासां मतिरास a1
तदाश्रमपदं द्रष्टुं जग्मु: सर्वास्ततोऽङ्गना:॥१६॥
On hearing the reply of Rsyasrnga
(son of sage Vibhandaka) there appeared in
all of them a resolve to see the site of his
hermitage, and all the women accordingly
departed from that place to the hermitage.
(16)

Tat तुं ad: पूजामृषिपुत्रश्चकार ह।
इदमर्घ्यमिदं पाद्यमिदं मूलं wet च AOI
Rsyasrnga (son of Vibhandaka), so
the tradition goes, then offered worship
(hospitality) to them even as they arrived at
his hermitage, saying, “Here is water to
wash your hands and there is water to
wash your feet with; and here are roots and
fruits offered to you by me.” (17)

प्रतिगृह्य तु at पूजां Wal Wa समुत्सुका:।
was शीघ्रं तु गमनाय मतिं दधु:॥ १८॥
Accepting the aforesaid worship

hospitality, however, all of them actually
made up their mind to return apace, ill at
ease as they were, being afraid of the Rsi
Vibhandaka, who had gone out on some
errand at that particular moment. (18)
