# YUDDHAKANDA #

राजशेषा HAT CST क्षीण: कोशो Act हतम्।
राजानमिममासाद्य सुहृच्चिह्नममित्रकम्॥ ७॥

“The king alone is left in Lanka that has
been divested of its population, its exchequer
depleted, and army destroyed. Nay, having
found access to this king, enemies,
masquerading as friends, have gathered
round him. (7)

we निर्याम्यहं युद्धमुद्यत: शत्रुनिर्जये।
दुर्नयं wade समीकर्तुं महाहवे॥८॥

“Bent on conquering the enemy, | hereby
Sally forth to the battlefield in order to redeem
in a major conflict today the disastrous
policy initiated by you all.” (8)
`एवमुक्कवतो वाक्यं कुम्भकर्णस्य धीमत:।
प्रत्युवाच ततो वाक्यं Wee राक्षसाधिप:॥ ९॥

Laughing heartily, Ravana, the suzerain
lord of ogres, then replied as follows to the

submission of the sagacious Kumbhakarna,
who had just spoken as aforesaid: (9)

महोदरोऽयं रामात् तु परित्रस्तो न संशय:।
न fe रोचयते aa युद्धं युद्धविशारद॥ gol

“This Mahodara for his part is greatly
afraid of Rama: there is no doubt about it.
Surely he does not relish war, O dear brother,
well-versed in the art of warfare ! (10)

कश्चिन्मे त्वत्समो नास्ति सौहृदेन बलेन च।
गच्छ शत्रुवधाय त्वं HH WaT च॥११॥

“There is none equal to you in affection
and might in my eyes. As such march
you to the battlefield for the destruction
of the enemy and attaining victory, O
Kumbhakarna! (11)

शयान: शत्रुनाशार्थं भवान् सम्बोधितो मया।

अयं हि काल: सुमहान् राक्षसनामरिंदम॥ १२॥
“Asleep as you were, you have been

duly awakened by me for the extermination

of the enemies; for, the present is an

exceedingly momentous period for the ogres,

O tamer of enemies! (12)

547

संगच्छ शूलमादाय पाशहस्त इवान्तक:।
वानरान् राजपुत्रौ च भक्षयादित्यतेजसौ॥ १३॥
“Therefore, taking a pike, duly proceed
to the battlefield as Death would, with a
noose in hand. Nay, devour the monkeys
as well as the two princes, bright as the
sun. (13)

समालोक्य तु a रूपं विद्रविष्यन्ति वानरा:।
रामलक्ष्मणयोश्चापि हृदये प्रस्फुटिष्यत:॥१४॥

“‘Vividly perceiving your very form, the
monkeys will flee away, and the hearts of
Rama and Laksmana will break asunder.”

(14)

एवमुक्त्वा महातेजा: कुम्भकर्णं महाबलम्।
पुनर्जातमिवात्मानं मेने राक्षसपुङ्खव:॥१५॥
Having spoken thus to Kumbhakarna,
who was endowed with extraordinary might,
Ravana (a bull among ogres), who was
possessed of great energy, thought himself
regenerated. (15)

कुम्भकर्णबलाभिज्ञो जानंस्तस्य पराक्रमम्।

aya मुदितो राजा शशाङ्क ga निर्मल:॥१६॥
Fully aware of Kumbhakarna’s might

and knowing, as he did, his prowess, the

king felt delighted and shone like the
cloudless moon. (16)

sean: संहृष्टो निर्जगाम महाबल:।
Tae वचनं श्रुत्वा योद्धुमुद्युक्तवांस्तदा॥ १७॥

Spoken to in these words, Kumbhakarna,
who was endowed with extraordinary might,
sallied forth, highly rejoiced. Nay, hearing the
king’s speech at that time, he for his part
prepared to fight. (17)
आददे निशितं शूलं वेगाच्छत्रुनिबर्हण:।

Wa कालायसं दीप्तं तप्तकाञ्चनभूषणम्॥१८॥

The ogre, who was capable of
destroying his enemies, vigorously seized a
whetted and flaming dart, which was all
made of iron and was embellished with
refined gold. (18)
