* AYODHYAKANDA +

महाराजकुलीनेन महाभागेन धीमता।
जातो are न Wa: स्वप्तुमर्हति॥३॥

“Sri Rama, who was procreated by the
wise and highly blessed DaSaratha, born in
the line of great kings, does not deserve to
sleep on the ground without any shade or
couch. (3)
अजिनोत्तरसंस्तीर्णे वरास्तरणसंचये।
शयित्वा पुरुषव्याघ्र: कथं शेते महीतले॥४॥

“Having reposed all along on a bed
consisting of a pile of excellent rugs and
covered with an outermost covering of superb
deerskin fit for kings, how does Sri Rama,
a tiger among men, sleep on the ground?

(4)
प्रासादाग्रविमानेषु वलभीषु च सर्वदा।
हैमराजतभौमेषु वरास्तरणशालिषु UW ५ ॥
पुष्पसंचयचित्रेषु चन्दनागुरुगन्धिषु।
पाण्डुराभ्रप्रकाशेषु शुकसंघरुतेषु च ॥६॥
प्रासादवरवर्येषु शीतवत्सु सुगन्धिषु।
उषित्वा मेरुकल्पेषु कृतकाञ्चनभित्तिषु॥७॥
गीतवादित्रनिर्घोषैर्वराभरणनि:स्वनै: ।
मृदङ्गवरशब्दैश्च सततं fart ct

“Sleeping always on the topmost storey
of palaces built after the style of aerial cars
and in turrets and in the foremost apartments
of excellent seven-storeyed buildings—which
were provided with floors paved with gold
and silver and furnished with excellent
carpets, which looked picturesque with heaps
of flowers and were fragrant with the odour
of sandalwood and aloe, which shone like
white clouds and were noisy with the chatter
of flocks of parrots, where natural coolness
prevailed and which emitted a sweet
fragrance of camphor etc., nay which vied
with Mount Meru in height and whose walls
were inlaid with gold—he was awakened
everyday by the strains of vocal and
instrumental music, the tinkling of excellent
jewels and the excellent sound of clay
tomtoms. (5—8)

605

बन्दिभिर्वन्दित: काले बहुभि: सूतमागधै:।
गाथाभिरनुरूपाभि स्तुतिभिश्च परंतप:॥९॥

“Again Sri Rama, the tormentor of his
enemy, was glorified at the time of waking
by a number of panegyrists, bards and
minstrels through appropriate verses and
songs of praise. (9)

अश्रद्धेयमिदं लोके न सत्यं प्रतिभाति मा।
मुह्यते खलु मे भाव: स्वप्नोऽयमिति मे मति: go tt

“This is incredible in the world and
does not appear true to me. My mind is
really confused. My conclusion, therefore,
is that this is a dream. (10)
न नूनं tad किंचित् कालेन बलवत्तरम्।
यत्र दाशरथी Wal भूमावेवमशेत स:॥११॥
यस्मिन् विदेहराजस्य सुता च प्रियदर्शना।
दयिता शयिता भूमौ स्नुषा दशरथस्य च॥१२॥

“Surely there is no deity more powerful
than Time (the will of God), impelled by
which the aforesaid Sri Rama, son of
DaSaratha, reposes on the ground in this
way and by force of which the daughter of
Janaka (the king of the Videha territory),
who is so pleasing to the sight and the
beloved daughter-in-law of DaSaratha, has
to lie down on the ground. (11-12)

sa शय्या मम भ्रातुरिदमावर्तितं शुभम्।
स्थण्डिले कठिने ad गात्रैर्विमृदितं तृणम्॥ १३॥
“This is the bed of my elder brother
and here are the blessed marks of his
changing sides in the form of all the blades

of KuSa grass crushed by his limbs against
the hard ground. (13)

मन्ये साभरणा Gat सीतास्मिन्शयने शुभा।

तत्र तत्र fe दृश्यन्ते सक्ता: कनकबिन्दव:॥ १४॥
“It appears the blessed Sita lay down

decked with ornaments on this bed; for here

and there are seen stuck to the grass

particles of gold. (14)

उत्तरीयमिहासक्तं ger सीतया तदा।

तथा ह्येते WHT सक्ता: कौशेयतन्तव:॥ १५॥
