* AYODHYAKANDA +

669

ष्उडधिकशततम: at:
Canto CVI

Imploring Sri Rama with cogent reasons to accept the throne of Ayodhya,
Bharata takes a vow not to return to Ayodhya but to continue in the
forest in case Sri Rama does not grant his prayer. Mother
Kausalya and others too join Bharata and urge Sri Rama
to grant his request when they find Sri Rama adamant
in the matter and insistent on implementing

the words of their deceased father

एवमुक्त्वा तु विरते WA वचनमर्थवत्।
ततो मन्दाकिनीतीरे रामं प्रकृतिवत्सलम्॥१॥
sara भरतश्चित्रं धार्मिको धार्मिकं aa:
को fe स्यादीदृशो cite यादृशस्त्वमरिंदम॥ २॥

When Sri Rama became silent after
making a significant speech as aforesaid,
the pious Bharata for his part now addressed
to Sri Rama, who was so fond of his
people, the following agreeable and
righteous submission on the bank of the
Mandakini: “Indeed, who can there be in
this world such as you are, O tamer of
foes? (1-2)
न त्वां yweaere दु:खं प्रीतिर्वा न प्रहर्षयेत्।
सम्मतश्चापि वृद्धानां तांश्च पृच्छसि संशयान्॥ ३॥

“Neither can sorrow torment you nor
can joy exhilarate you. Though highly thought
of by the elders, you nevertheless refer
your doubts to them. (3)

यथा मृतस्तथा जीवन् यथासति तथा सति।
यस्यैष बुद्धिलाभ: स्यात् परितप्येत केन स:॥ ४॥

“Wherefore should he grieve, he who
has developed an attitude of mind by virtue
of which, though living, he is as good as
dead to the world and which makes him as
indifferent to the existent as to the non-
existent? (4)

परावरज्ञो यश्च स्याद् यथा त्वं मनुजाधिष।
a Wa व्यसनं wea न विषीदितुमर्हति॥५॥

“He who knows the Self as well as the
non-Self as you do, O ruler of men, ought

not to feel dejected even on meeting with
adversity. (5)

अमरोपमसत्त्वस्त्वं महात्मा सत्यसंगर:।
Waa: सर्वदर्शी च बुद्धिमांश्चासि राघव॥६॥
“Possessed of valour comparing with
that of gods, and endowed with great fortitude,
you are true to your promise, all-knowing,
all-seeing and wise too, O scion of Raghu !
(6)

न त्वामेवंगुणैर्युक्तं प्रभवाभवकोविदम्।
अविषह्यतमं दु:खमासादयितुमर्हति॥ ७॥
“Even _ affliction, which is most
unbearable for us, ought not to assail you,
endowed as you are with such virtues and
conversant with the origin and end of living
beings. (7)

प्रोषिते मयि यत् पापं मात्रा मत्कारणात् कृतम्।
क्षुद्रया तदनिष्टं मे प्रसीदतु war मम॥८॥

“The sinful deed in the shape of bringing
about your exile which was perpetrated by
my mean mother for my sake when | was
away, was not to my liking. Therefore, be
gracious to me. (8)

धर्मबन्धेन बद्धोऽस्मि तेनेमां Ae मातरम्।
हन्मि तीव्रेण दण्डेन दण्डार्हा पापकारिणीम्॥९॥

“lam bound by fetters of morality
which forbid a warrior to lay his finger upon
a woman; hence | do not kill on the spot
with a severe punishment my mother of
sinful deeds, who is deserving of punishment.

(9)
