* ARANYAKANDA «

Both of them, Rama as well as
Laksmana, fastened the beautiful quivers,
took with a twang the bows and left the
hermitage for proceeding on their journey.

(19)

733

vit तौ रूपसम्पन्नावनुज्ञातौ महर्षिणा।
प्रस्थितौ धृतचापासी सीतया सह Weal roll
Permitted by the great sage and holding
the bows and the swords, the two handsome
Raghavas started with Sita. (20)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्येऽरण्यकाण्डेऽष्टम: सर्ग: ॥ ८॥
Thus ends Canto Eight in the Aranyakanda of the glorious Ramayana of Valmiki,
the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

नवम: सर्ग:
Canto IX

Sita requests Rama not to kill innocent animals
and to observe non-violence

सुतीक्ष्णेनाभ्यनुज्ञातं प्रस्थितं रघुनन्दनम्।
wren स्निग्धया वाचा भर्तारमिदमब्रवीत्॥१॥
Sita spoke thus to her husband, the
delight of Raghu, who had left with the
permission of Sutiksna, in the following
charming and loving words : (1)

अधर्मं तु सुसूक्ष्मेण विधिना प्राप्यते महान्।
Rant च शक्योऽयं व्यसनात् कामजादिह॥ २॥
त्रीण्येव व्यसनान्यत्र कामजानि भवन्त्युत।

मिथ्यावाक्यं तु परमं तस्माद् गुरुतरावुभौ॥ ३॥
परदाराभिगमनं far at च tea
मिथ्यावाक्यं न ते ud न भविष्यति राघव॥४॥
“In a very subtle way, a great man is
led to ‘Adharma’. If one keeps away from
addictions born of desire, it can be avoided
in this world. Indeed, the addiction born of
desire in this world are only three in number:
False speech is extremely bad; the other
two are even worse than that—copulation
with the wife of another and cruelty without
enmity. A false statement you have never
made nor will you ever make, O Raghava !
(2—4)
तव नास्ति मनुष्येन्द्र न चाभूत् A कदाचन॥५॥
“O ruler of men, how can there spring
up in you the desire for others’ wives, that

destroys Dharma? You have not got it, nor
was it ever with you. (5)

मनस्यपि तथा wa न ade विद्यते क्वचित्।
स्वदारनिरतश्चैव नित्यमेव TTT NE I

“Rama, nowhere is it even in your
mind. And you are always devoted to your
own wife, O prince ! (6)

धर्मिष्ठउ सत्यसंधश्च पितुर्निर्देशकारक:।
त्वयि धर्मश्च सत्यं च त्वयि सर्वं प्रतिष्ठितम्॥७॥

“Dharma and Truth—everything is well-
established in you. You are the best observer
of Dharma and true to your promise and
obedient to your father. (7)
wa वश्येन्द्रियत्वं च जानामि शुभदर्शन॥८॥

“All these, O mighty-armed one, can
be cherished by those who have conquered
the senses; | know your control over the
senses, O handsome prince ! (8)
frat क्रियते मोहात् तच्च A समुपस्थितम्॥९॥

“But the third terrible evil, viz., the taking
of others’ lives, which is done without enmity
due to ignorance, is facing you. (9)

प्रतिज्ञातस्त्वया वीर दण्डकारण्यवासिनाम्।
PAO रक्षणार्थाय वध: संयति रक्षसाम्॥१०॥
