# YUDDHAKANDA #

fury by Indrajit, by whom Indra (the ruler
of gods) was utterly vanquished of yore.
(22)
रुक्मपुङ्खै: प्रसन्नाग्रै रजोगतिभिराशुगै:।
नाराचैरर्धनाराचैर्भल्लैरञ्जलिकैरपि ।
विव्याध वत्सदन्तैश्च सिंहदंष्टै: क्षुरैस्तथा॥ २३॥

Indrajit pierced him with arrows known
as Naracas (with even and circular heads),
Ardhanaracas (shaped as Naracas only one-
half their length), Bhallas (with axe-like
heads), also Afijalikas (with heads shaped
like joined palms), Vatsadantas (with heads
resembling the teeth of च calf),
Simhadamstras (with heads resembling a
lion’s teeth) and also Ksuras (with heads
sharp as the edge of a razor), furnished
with gold feathers, those with polished heads
and those descending (unobstructed) like
dust. (23)
स वीरशयने शिश्येऽविज्यमाविध्य कार्मुकम्।
भिन्नमुष्टिपरीणाहं त्रिनतं रुक्मभूषितम्॥ २४॥

Sri Rama lay on the heroes’ bed, leaving
his gold-plated bow, which was still strung
and bent at three places (viz., the two ends
and the middle), in that the grip of his fist
had now relaxed due to his feebleness. (24)
बाणपातान्तरे रामं पतितं पुरुषर्षभम्।
Aaa लक्ष्मणो दृष्ट्वा निराशो जीवितेऽभवत्॥ २५ Ul

Beholding Sri Rama, the foremost of

457

human beings, fallen at an arrow’s throw
from him on the field of battle, the celebrated
Laksmana became despondent about his
own life. (25)
शुशोच भ्रातरं Gear पतितं धरणीतले॥ २६॥
He gave way to grief on seeing his
eldest brother, Sri Rama, whose eyes
resembled the petals of a lotus, who afforded
shelter to all and whoever rejoiced in fighting.
(26)

हरयश्चापि तं get संतापं परमं गता:।
शोकार्ताश्चुक्रुशुर्घोरमश्रुपूरितलोचना: ॥। २७॥
Nay, the monkeys too gave way to
extreme agony on beholding him in that sad
plight. Stricken with grief, they shrieked in
agony, their eyes filled with tears. (27)

बद्धौ a dt वीरशये शयानौ
a वानरा: सम्परिवार्य तस्थु:।
समागता वायुसुतप्रमुख्या
विषादमार्ता: परमं च जग्मु:॥ २८॥
The aforesaid monkeys for their part,
who had collected there with Hanuman
(son of the wind-god) as their foremost
leader, stood completely surrounding the
two princes lying bound in a net of
snakes on the heroes’ bed and gave way to
extreme despondency, distressed as they
were. (28)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये FERS पञ्चचत्वारिंश: सर्ग: ॥ ४५ ॥

Thus ends Canto Forty-five in the Yuddhakanda of the glorious Ramayana of
Valmiki, the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

