730

life itself, drenched with blood, my mind
being greatly agitated. (4)
अयं स समरश्लाघी भ्राता A शुभलक्षण:।

यदि पञ्चत्वमापन्न: प्राणैर्मे fe सुखेन वा॥५॥

“If, God forbid, this well-known brother
of mine, who is endowed with auspicious
bodily marks and always speaks highly of
war, meets with his death, of what use is
life or happiness to me? (5)

लज्जतीव fe मे वीर्यं भ्रश्यतीव कराद् धनु:।
सायका व्यवसीदन्ति दृष्टिर्बाष्पवशं गता॥६॥

“My valour is feeling shy, as it were;
my bow seems to slip from my hand; arrows
are dropping down and my vision has been
overpowered by tears. (6)

अवसीदन्ति गात्राणि स्वप्नयाने नॄणामिव।
चिन्ता मे वर्धते तीव्रा मुमूर्षापि च जायते॥७॥
भ्रातरं निहतं दृष्टवा रावणेन दुरात्मना।
विष्टनन्तं तु दु:खार्तं मर्मण्यभिहतं भृशम्॥८॥
“My limbs are failing even like those of
men in sleep; my acute anxiety is growing
and | even wish to die on seeing my younger
brother, who has been struck down by the
evil-minded Ravana, seriously wounded in
his vital parts, stricken with agony and
groaning.” (7-8)
दु:खेन महताविष्टो ध्यानशोकपरायण:॥९॥
Seeing his beloved younger brother,
who was his very life-breath moving outside,
as it were, Sri Rama (a scion of Raghu),
who was seized with great agony, gave
himself up to anxiety and grief. (9)

uw विषादमापन्नो विललापाकुलेन्द्रिय:।
भ्रातरं निहतं दृष्टवा लक्ष्मणं रणपांसुषु॥१०॥
Beholding Laksmana lying wounded in
the dust of the battlefield, he fell a prey to
extreme despondency and lamented as
follows, distracted in mind as he was: (10)
विजयोऽपि fe A शूर न प्रियायोपकल्पते।
अचक्षुर्विषयश्चन्द्र: कां प्रीतिं जनयिष्यति॥११॥

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA +

“Even victory, O hero, will not really
conduce to my pleasure. What delight will
the moon afford if it appears before a man
who has lost his vision? (11)
किं मे युद्धेन किं प्राणैर्युद्धकार्यं न विद्यते।
यत्रायं निहत: शेते रणमूर्धनि लक्ष्मण:॥१२॥

“What purpose of mine will be served
by fighting or even by life? | have no use for
the war as a result of which Laksmana lies
killed in the forefront of battle here? (12)

aia at at यान्तमनुयाति महाद्युति: |

अहमप्यनुयास्यामि तथैवैनं यमक्षयम्॥१३॥
“Even as Laksmana, who is endowed

with extraordinary splendour, followed me

when | retired to the forest, |, too, shall
likewise follow him to the abode of Death.(13)

इष्टबन्धुजनो fet at स नित्यमनुव्रत:।
इमामवस्थां गमितो राक्षसै: कूटयोधिभि:॥ १४॥
“Alas! Laksmana, who always loved
his kinsfolk like me and was ever devoted
to me, has been led to this pass by the
ogres, who are given to treacherous warfare.
(14)

देशे देशे कलत्राणि देशे देशे च बान्धवा:।
तं तु देशं न पश्यामि यत्र भ्राता सहोदर:॥ १५॥

“Wives may be found everywhere and
kinsmen too can be had everywhere. ।,
however, see no place where a uterine
(real) brother could be had. (15)

fe नु राज्येन दुर्धर्षलक्ष्मणेन feat मम।

कथं वक्ष्याम्यहं त्वम्बां सुमित्रां पुत्रवत्सलाम्॥ १६॥
“What object of mine on earth will be

achieved by sovereignty without Laksmana,

who was difficult to overpower? What shall

| actually say to mother Sumitra, who is so

fond of her son? (16)

उपालम्भं न शक्ष्यामि सोढुं दत्तं सुमित्रया।

किं नु वक्ष्यामि कौसल्यां मातरं किं नु कैकयीम्॥ १७॥
“| shall not be able to endure the

reproach which will be levelled at me by
