* SUNDARAKANDA +

though deserving of comforts, was stricken
with sorrow, Hanuman guessed her to be
Sita on convincing grounds. He said to
himself: ‘This lady is precisely endowed
with the same form in which that woman
was seen by us being borne away over
Mount Rsyamuka the other day by that
ogre, able to change his form at will.’
Gazing on that godlike lady, Sita, of
comely form, whose countenance resembled
the full moon, who had shapely eyebrows
and graceful rounded breasts and who was
dispelling the darkness of all the four quarters
by her radiance; whose neck presented a
bluish appearance due to her wearing
ornaments of sapphire which cast a bluish
splendour about them, whose lips were ruddy
like the ripe Bimba fruit, who had a slender
waist and well-disposed limbs; whose eyes
resembled the petals of a lotus, who
compared with Rati, the consort of Love,
was beloved of the whole world even as the
light of a full moon; who was seated on the
bare ground like an ascetic woman leading
an austere life and who, though timid by
nature, was hissing frequently like the consort
of the lord of serpents; who being enmeshed
in a mighty and extensive cobweb of grief,
ceased to shine like a flame intertwined with
smoke; who resembled a Smrti text of
doubtful meaning, a treasure that has been
cast away, faith that has been shattered, a
hope which has been frustrated, perfection
impeded by obstacles, understanding clouded
by passion or reputation marred by false
scandal; who was tormented by obstruction,
caused in the service of Sri Rama and
oppressed by the presence of ogres, whose
eyes resembled those of a fawn and who
was looking all round in her helplessness;
who with her cheerless countenance bathed
in tears and with her eyes distinguished by
dark and oblique lashes was sighing again
and again, who had put on a thick coat of
dirt on her person due to want of toilet and
bath, felt distressed and was undecorated
though deserving of every decoration and

99

looked like the radiance of the moon, the
king of stars, obscured by dark clouds and
who had grown very thin like knowledge
obscured for want of uninterrupted study,
the mind of Hanuman got puzzled. (26—38)

Sat बुबुधे सीतां हनुमाननलंकृताम्।
संस्कारेण यथा हीनां वाचमर्थान्तरं गताम्॥ ३९॥
With difficulty did Hanuman recognize
Sita, who was unadorned, even as one is
able to decipher with difficulty a text which
being devoid of purity of expression has
undergone a change of meaning. (39)

at समीक्ष्य विशालाक्षीं राजपुत्रीमनिन्दिताम्।
तर्कयामास सीतेति कारणैरुपपादयन्॥४०॥

Observing that large-eyed and
irreproachable princess, Hanuman concluded
her to be Sita, establishing her identity on
the following grounds : (40)

वैदेह्या यानि चांगेषु तदा रामोऽन्वकीर्तयत्।
तान्याभरणजालानि गात्रशोभीन्यलक्षयत्॥४१॥

He perceived the same ornaments
casting their charm on her limbs as Sri
Rama had mentioned at the time of his
(Hanuman’s) leaving Kiskindha as existing
on the person of Sita, a princess of the
Videha territory. (41)

सुकृतौ कर्णवेष्टौ च श्वदंष्ट्रौ च सुसंस्थितौ।
मणिविद्रुमचित्राणि हस्तेष्वाभरणानि च॥४२॥

He said to himself: ‘I find on her person
a pair of skillfully shaped earrings and also
a pair of well-fitting Swadarnstras (another
ornament for the ears), as well as ornaments
on the limbs of her hands, set with gems
and coral. (42)

श्यामानि चिरयुक्तत्वात् तथा संस्थानवन्ति च।
तान्येवैतानि मन्येऽहं यानि रामोऽन्वकीर्तयत्॥४३॥

‘Though darkened due to their not
having been brushed for a long time and
also due to their contact with her untidy
person, they are of the same shape. I,
therefore, believe them to be the same of
which Sri Rama spoke at the time. (43)
