806

स्नानानि चाङ्गरागाणि वस्त्राण्याभरणानि च।
चन्दनानि च माल्यानि दिव्यानि विविधानि च॥ २॥

“Various kinds of baths (such as hot
and cold, perfumed etc.,) and cosmetics,
garments and ornaments as also sandal-
pastes and heavenly garlands of various
kinds are ready for your use. (2)

अलंकारविदश्चैता नार्य: पद्मनिभेक्षणा:।
उपस्थितास्त्वां विधिवत् स्नापयिष्यन्ति Wea ३॥

“Nay, these women with lotus-like eyes,
who are well-versed in the art of decoration
are at your service. They will duly assist
you in bathing, O scion of Raghu!” (3)

एवमुक्तस्तु काकुत्स्थ: प्रत्युवाच विभीषणम्।
हरीन् सुग्रीवमुख्यांस्त्वं स्नानेनोपनिमन्त्रय॥४॥
Spoken to in these words, Sri Rama (a
scion of Kakutstha) replied as follows to
Vibhisana: “Invite you the monkeys headed
by Sugriva to bathe. (4)

स तु ताम्यति धर्मात्मा मम हेतो: सुखोचित:।
Geant महाबाहुर्भरत: सत्यसंश्रय:॥५॥
“That mighty-armed prince, Bharata, for
his part, whose mind is set on virtue, who is
delicate of body and was used to bodily
comforts and who takes his stand entirely
on veracity is suffering on my account. (5)

a fant कैकयीपुत्रं भरतं धर्मचारिणम्।
TA स्नानं ag मतं वस्त्राण्याभरणानि च॥६॥
“In the absence of that son of Kaikeyi,
Bharata, who is practising virtue, bathing,
raiment and jewels are of no value to me.
(6)

Vad पश्य यथा क्षिप्रं प्रतिगच्छाम at पुरीम्।
अयोध्यां Teed ह्येष पन्था: परमदुर्गम:॥७॥

“Ignoring everything else, ponder over
the question as to how we may be able
to reach Ayodhya soon; for to anyone
proceeding on foot to that city the route by
which we have come is most difficult to
tread.” (7)

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA +

एवमुक्तस्तु काकुत्स्थं प्रत्युवाच विभीषण:।
अह्ना त्वां प्रापयिष्यामि तां पुरीं पार्थिवात्मज॥ ८॥
Requested in these words, Vibhisana
for his part replied as follows to Sri Rama,
a scion of Kakutstha: “I shall enable you to
reach that city in the course of a day, O
prince! (8)
पुष्पकं नाम us a विमानं सूर्यसंनिभम्।
मम Ud: कुबेरस्य रावणेन बलीयसा॥ ९ il
त्वदर्थं पालितं चेदं तिष्ठत्यतुलविक्रम॥ go Il
“May prosperity attend you! There is a
heavenly and excellent aerial car, Puspaka
by name, brilliant as the sun and belonging
to my brother, Kubera, the ruler of Yaksas,
which was borne away by the very mighty
Ravana after conquering the former in combat
and which moves according to the will of its
rider. Nay, having been retained for your
sake, it still continues with me, O warrior of
unequalled prowess! (9-10)
येन यास्यसि यानेन त्वमयोध्यां गतज्वर:॥११॥
“The yonder aerial car, which closely
resembles a cloud, stands here in Lanka,
and by which transport you will reach
Ayodhya without any trouble. (11)

a ते यद्यनुग्राह्यो यदि स्मरसि मे गुणान्।
aa तावदिह Wat यद्यस्ति मयि सौहृदम्॥ १२॥
लक्ष्मणेन सह wat aca भार्यया सह।
अर्चित: सर्वकामैस्त्वं ततो राम गमिष्यसि॥ १३॥

“If | deserve to be treated with kindness
by you, nay, if you think of any virtue in me
and if there is any affection for me in your
heart, remain here awhile, O sagacious
prince, alongwith your younger brother,
Laksmana and with your consort, Sita,
a princess of the Videha territory. When
you have been entertained by me with all
kinds of luxuries, you shall then depart,
O Rama! (12-13)
