* AYODHYAKANDA +

At the gate of the gynaeceum, however,
he saw the charioteer-cum-minister of
DaSaratha (a lion among men), Sumantra
by name, who had a pleasing appearance
and had just come out of the gate. (382)

तमुवाच महातेजा: सूतपुत्रं विशारदम्।
वसिष्ठ: क्षिप्रमाचक्ष्व नॄपतेर्मामिहागतम्॥ ३३॥
The highly glorious Vasistha said to
that wise son of a charioteer*: “Please
announce at once to His Majesty that |
have turned up here. (33)

BA गङ्गोदकघटा: सागरेभ्यश्च काञ्चना:।
औदुम्बरं भद्रपीठमभिषेकार्थमाहतम्।॥ ३४॥
“Here are gold pitchers containing the
water of the holy Ganga as well as that
from the various seas. An excellent seat of
Udumbara wood has been brought for the
use of Rama at the time of consecration.
(34)
सर्वबीजानि गन्धाश्च tent विविधानि च।
क्षौद्रं दधि घृतं लाजा दर्भा: सुमनस: पय:॥ ३५॥
अष्टौ च कन्या रुचिरा WA वरवारण:।
चतुरश्वो ta: श्रीमान् निस्निंशो धनुरुत्तमम्॥ ३६॥
Vad च वालव्यजने भृङ्गारं च हिरण्मयम्॥ ३७॥
हेमदामपिनद्धश्च ककुद्यान् पाण्डुरो gu: |
केसरी च चतुर्दंष्द्रो हरिश्रेष्ठो महाबल:॥ ३८॥
सिंहासनं व्याघ्रतनु: समिधश्च हुताशन:।
Wa वादित्रसङ्घाश्च वेश्याश्चालंकृता: Pera: 1 ३९॥
आचार्या ब्राह्मणा गाव: पुण्याश्च मृगपक्षिण: |
पौरजानपदश्रेष्ठा नैगमाश्च गणै: सह॥४०॥
Ud चान्ये च aga: प्रीयमाणा: प्रियंवदा:।
अभिषेकाय रामस्य ae fata पार्थिवै: xe

All kinds of seeds required for the
consecration and fragrant substances as
well as precious stones of every description,
honey, curds, ghee, parched grains of
paddy, blades of Darbha grass, flowers of
the prescribed varieties, milk, nay, eight

345

charming virgins and a good elephant in rut,
a splendid gold chariot drawn by four horses,
a special kind of sword called Nistrirnsa, an
excellent bow, a palanquin with bearers and
a white umbrella resembling the moon, nay,
a pair of white chowries and a jug of gold,
also a white bull with a large hump on its
back and tethered with a gold chain as well
as a lion with four canine teeth, a highly-
spirited excellent horse, a throne with a pair
of lions made of the same material for its
charms, a tigerskin and small wooden sticks
for feeding the sacrificial fire as well as a
fire, nay, all varieties of musical instruments,
courtesans and other women decked with
ornaments, teachers and other Brahmanas,
cows, sacred beasts and birds, the foremost
of citizens and people hailing from the
countryside as well as merchants alongwith
their followers—these as well as many other
loving people, speaking kind words, await
at the door alongwith the kings, eager as
they are to witness Rama’s installation.
(35—41)

त्वरयस्व महाराजं यथा समुदितेऽहनि।

पुष्ये नक्षत्रयोगे च WAT राज्यमवाप्नुयात्॥४२॥
“Request the Emperor to take time by

the forelock so that Rama may ascend the

throne when the sun has fully risen and the

moon gets united with the constellation
named Pusya.” (42)

इति तस्य वच: श्रुत्वा सूतपुत्रो महाबल:।
स्तुवन् नृपतिशार्दूलं प्रविवेश निवेशनम्॥४३॥

Hearing the aforesaid message of Sage
Vasistha, the very mighty Sumantra (the
son of a charioteer) entered the gynaeceum
once more, glorifying Dasaratha, a tiger
among kings. (43)

तं तु पूर्वोदितं ag द्वारस्था राजसम्मता:।
न शेकुरभिसंरोद्धुं wa: प्रियचिकीर्षव:॥४४॥

The attendants too, who were esteemed

* The word ‘Suta’ evidently denotes here the son of a Ksatriya through a Brahmana wife (his business
being that of a bard or charioteer)—sT@rvat afraid: (AmarakoSa).
