# YUDDHAKANDA #

Donning an impenetrable golden coat-
of-mail capable of resisting heavy blows,
nay, brilliant as lightning and flaming with its
native effulgence, he shone like the western
mountain, the king of mountains, encircled
by evening clouds. (30)

सर्वाभरणसर्वाङ्ग: शूलपाणि: स राक्षस:।
त्रिविक्रमकृतोत्साहो नारायण इवाबभौ॥ ३१॥

Decked all over his limbs with all kinds
of jewels and pike in hand, that ogre trod
like Lord Narayana, (in His all-embracing
form) determined to take the three long
strides which were intended to cover the
entire universe. (31)

भ्रातरं सम्परिष्वज्य कृत्वा चापि प्रदक्षिणम्।
प्रणम्य शिरसा तस्मै प्रतस्थे A महाबल:॥ ३२॥

Tightly embracing his elder brother
and also going round him as a token of
respect clockwise and respectfully bowing
down to him, Kumbhakarna, who was
endowed with extraordinary might, sallied
forth. (32)
तमाशीर्भि: प्रशस्ताभि: प्रेषयामास Wau: |
शङ्खदुन्दुभिनिर्घोषै: सैन्यैश्चापि वरायुधै:।॥ ३३॥

Ravana bid him proceed with excellent
benedictions to the sound of conches and

drums and also alongwith troops armed
with the best of weapons. (33)

तं omg Wg स्यन्दनैश्चाम्बुदस्वनै:।
अनुजग्मुर्महात्मानो रथिनो रथिनां वरम्॥३४॥
Gigantic car-warriors followed that prince
of car-warriors on the back of elephants
and horses as also in chariots, emitting a
thunder-like sound. (34)

aes: witha सिंहद्विपमृगद्विजै:।

अनुजग्मुश्च तं घोरं कुम्भकर्णं महाबलम्॥ ३५॥
Ogres also accompanied the celebrated

and redoubtable Kumbhakarna, who was

549

endowed with extraordinary might, on
serpents, camels and donkeys too as well
as on lions, elephants, antelopes and birds.

(35)
a पुष्पवर्षैरवकीर्यमाणो
धृतातपत्र: शितशूलपाणि: ।
मदोत्कट: शोणितगन्धमत्तो
विनिर्ययौ दानवदेवशत्रु: ।॥ ३६ UU

Being covered with showers of
blossoms, a parasol held over his head,
nay, bearing a pointed pike in his hand,
excited by drink and maddened by the smell
of blood, that enemy of demons and gods
alike sallied forth in state. (36)

पदातयश्च बहवो महानादा महाबला:।
अन्वयू राक्षसा भीमा भीमाक्षा: शस्त्रपाणय: ॥ ३७॥
रक्ताक्षा: सुबहुव्यामा नीलाञ्जनचयोपमा:।
शूलानुद्यम्य खड्गांश्च निशितांश्च परश्वधान्॥ ३८ ॥
भिन्दिपालांश्च परिघान् गदाश्च मुसलानि च।
तालस्कन्धांश्च विपुलान् क्षेपणीयान् दुरासदान्॥ ३९॥

Lifting up pikes and swords as well as
whetted axes as also Bhindipalas (small
javelins thrown by the hand), iron clubs and
maces and mallets, enormous trunks of
palmyra trees and slings which were difficult
to meet, and raising a great uproar, numerous
formidable ogres with hideous coppery
eyes, endowed with extraordinary might,
measuring very many Vyamas* in height,
and resembling a mass of collyrium in hue,
also followed him on foot, weapon in hand.

(37—39)
अथान्यद्वपुरादाय दारुणं घोरदर्शनम्।
निष्पपात महातेजा: कुम्भकर्णो महाबल:॥४०॥

Now assuming another formidable form,
terrible to look at, Kumbhakarna, who was
endowed with extraordinary energy and
possessed of great might, rushed forth. (40)

* A measure of length equal to the space between the tips of the middle fingers of both hands when the

arms are extended.
