# YUDDHAKANDA +

with his army, which could not be shaken
(from its position by the enemy). (1)
जातोद्वेगोऽभवत् किंचित् सचिवानिदमब्रवीत्॥ 2

Having heard from the mouth of his
spies about Sri Rama, who was endowed
with extraordinary might, having arrived (at
his door), Ravana felt a bit perturbed and
spoke as follows to his ministers: (2)

मन्त्रिण: शीघ्रमायान्तु सर्वे a सुसमाहिता:।
अयं नो मन्त्रकालो fe सम्प्राप्त stat राक्षसा:॥ ३॥

“Let all my counsellors come at once
fully composed; for now indeed has the time
duly arrived for us to take counsel together,
O ogres!” (3)

तस्य तच्छासनं श्रुत्वा मन्त्रिणोऽभ्यागमन् द्रुतम्।
ad: स मन्त्रयामास wad: सचिवै: सह॥४॥

Hearing his aforesaid command, all
his counsellors instantly came together. Then
he began to confer with the ogres, his
ministers. (4)

मन्त्रयित्वा तु दुर्धर्ष: ad यत् तदनन्तरम्।
विसर्जयित्वा सचिवान् प्रविवेश स्वमालयम्॥५॥
Having for his part discussed that which
was called for immediately and after that
having dismissed the ministers, Ravana (who
was difficult to overpower) penetrated deep
into his own palace. (5)

ततो राक्षसमादाय «fear महाबलम्।
मायाविनं महामायं प्राविशद् aa मैथिली॥ ६॥
Then, taking with him the ogre named
Vidyujjinva, who was endowed with
extraordinary might, skilled in conjuring tricks,
nay, a great sorceror, Ravana entered in
state the pleasance where Sita (a princess
of Mithila) was. (6)

faghag च मायाज्ञमब्रवीद् राक्षसाधिप:।
मोहयिष्यावहे सीतां मायया जनकात्मजाम्॥७॥

Nay, Ravana (the suzerain lord of ogres)

401

spoke as follows to Vidyujjinva, who was a
knower of conjuring tricks: “We two shall
confound Sita, daughter of Janaka, by means
of conjuring tricks. (7)
शिरो मायामयं qa राघवस्य निशाचर।
मां त्वं समुपतिष्ठस्व महच्च सशरं aque
“Fetching an illusory head of Rama (a
scion of Raghu) and a mighty bow with an

arrow, duly present yourself before me, O
ranger of the night!” (8)

एवमुक्तस्तथेत्याह विद्युज्जिह्वो निशाचर:।
दर्शयामास तां मायां सुप्रयुक्तां A रावणे॥९॥
Commanded thus by Ravana, the ogre
Vidyujjinva said, “Amen!” Nay, he displayed
before Ravana the said conjuring trick,
dexterously managed. (9)

तस्य तुष्टोऽभवद् राजा प्रददौ च विभूषणम्।
अशोकवनिकायां च सीतादर्शनलालस:॥१०॥
नैर्ऋतानामधिपति:३ संविवेश महाबल:।
ततो दीनामदैन्यार्हा ददर्शं धनदानुज:॥११॥
अधोमुखीं शोकपरामुपविष्टां महीतले।
Wat समनुध्यान्तीमशोकवनिकां गताम्॥१२॥
उपास्यमानां घोराभी राक्षसीभिरदूरत:।
उपसृत्य तत: सीतां Wet नाम कीर्तयन्॥१३॥
इदं च वचनं धृष्टमुवाच जनकात्मजाम्।
सान्त्व्यमाना मया भद्रे यमाश्रित्य विमन्यसे॥ १४॥
Gen स a भर्ता Wea: समरे हत:।
fot a सर्वथा मूलं ads निहतो मया॥१५॥

The king, Ravana, was pleased with
him and parted in his favour with a precious
ornament. Nay, eagerly longing, as he did,
for a sight of Sita, Ravana, the suzerain
lord of ogres, who was endowed with
extraordinary might, duly entered the Asoka
grove. Thereupon Ravana (a younger brother
of Kubera, the bestower of riches) beheld
the wretched princess, Sita, who did not
deserve the miserable plight to which she
was being subjected, seated on the earth’s
surface in the ASoka grove with her head
