# YUDDHAKANDA #

“Neither life nor sons, wife and wealth
are going to be spared by me at this juncture.
You see me with your own eyes, willing to
sacrifice my life for your sake in combat.”

(16)
एवमुक्त्वा तु भर्तारं रावणं वाहिनीपति:।
उवाचेदं बलाध्यक्षान् Weed: पुरत: स्थितान्॥ १७॥

Having submitted as aforesaid to his
master, Ravana, Prahasta, the Commander-
in-Chief, commanded as follows the troop
leaders standing before him: (17)
समानयत A शीघ्रं राक्षसानां महाबलम्।
मद्वाणानां तु वेगेन हतानां च रणाजिरे॥ १८॥
अद्य तृप्यन्तु मांसादा: पक्षिण: काननौकसाम्।
तस्य तद् वचनं श्रुत्वा बलाध्यक्षा महाबला: Ul १९॥
बलमुद्योजयामासुस्तस्मिन् राक्षसमन्दिरे।

सा aya मुहूर्तेन भीमैर्नानाविधायुधै:॥ २०॥
लङ्का राक्षसवीरैस्तैर्गजैरिव समाकुला।
हुताशनं तर्पयतां ब्राह्मणांश्च नमस्यताम्॥२१॥
आज्यगन्धप्रतिवह: सुरभिर्मारुतो ववौ।
स्रजश्च विविधाकारा जगृहुस्त्वभिमन्त्रिता:॥ २२॥
संग्रामसज्जा: संहृष्टा धारयन् राक्षसास्तदा।
सधनुष्का: कवचिनो वेगादाप्लुत्य राक्षसा:॥ २३॥
रावणं Wer राजानं प्रहस्तं पर्यवारयन्।
अथामन्त्य तु राजानं भेरीमाहत्य Aa २४॥
आरुरोह रथं युक्त: प्रहस्त: सज्जकल्पितम्।
सम्यक्सूतं सुसंयतम्॥ २५॥
महाजलदनिर्घोषं साक्षाच्चन्द्रार्कभास्वरम्।
उरगध्वजदुर्धर्षं सुवरूथं स्वपस्करम्॥ २६॥
सुवर्णजालसंयुक्तं प्रहसन्तमिव श्रिया।
ततस्तं रथमास्थाय रावणार्पितशासन:॥ २७॥
agra निर्ययौ तूर्णं बलेन महता aa:
ततो दुन्दुभिनिर्घोष: पर्जन्यनिनदोपम:।
वादित्राणां च निनद: पूरयन्निव मेदिनीम्॥ २८॥
शुश्रुवे शङ्खशब्दश्च ward वाहिनीपतौ।
निनदन्त: स्वरान् घोरान् राक्षसा जग्मुरग्रत:।॥ २९॥
भीमरूपा महाकाया: प्रहस्तस्य पुर:सरा:।
नरान्तक: कुम्भहनुर्महानाद: समुन्नत:।
प्रहस्तसचिवा ह्येते निर्ययु: परिवार्य तम्॥३०॥

499

“Bring together before me at once a
huge army of ogres. Let carnivorous birds
be sated this day with the flesh of the
monkeys (lit., denizens of the woods), struck
down on the battlefield with the force of my
arrows.” Hearing his aforesaid command,
the commanders of the army, who were
endowed with extraordinary might, mobilized
an army near that palace of the ogre,
Ravana. In less than an hour the aforesaid
Lanka was thronged with redoubtable ogre
champions of renown, resembling elephants
and armed with weapons of every kind. A
fragrant breeze bearing the scent of ghee
blew past the ogres, who were propitiating
the god of fire (who feeds on oblations) and
bowing down to the Brahmanas. Greatly
rejoiced on that occasion, the ogres took
hold of garlands of different shapes
consecrated by reciting sacred texts and put
on military accoutrements. Springing up with
impetuosity on perceiving king Ravana, the
ogres, who were armed with bows and clad
in armour, stood round Prahasta on all sides.

Taking leave of the king and causing a
kettledrum of dreadful sound to be beaten,
the active Prahasta ascended his chariot
which was ready with all equipment and
had been furnished with every kind of
weapon, was drawn by horses endowed
with great speed, driven by a skilled
charioteer and fully controlled by him, which
thundered like a mighty cloud, shone like
the very sun and the moon, distinguished
by its ensign, bearing the device of a serpent
and was difficult to overpower, which was
provided with a wooden fence or fender as
a defence against collision and consisted of
beautiful parts, (nay) which was covered
with a net of gold and was laughing as it
were in its splendour. Taking his seat in
that chariot, Prahasta, to whom directions
had been given by Ravana, thereupon
immediately set out from Lanka, surrounded
by a large army.
