1030

आहृत्य च समुद्रेभ्य: सर्वेभ्यो वानरर्षभा:।
अप: कनककुम्भेषु निधाय विमलं जलम्॥ ३३॥
शुभैर्ऋषभशृङ्गैश्च कलशैश्चैव काञ्चनै:।
शास्त्रदूष्टेन विधिना महर्षिविहितेन च॥ ३४॥
TR गवाक्षो गवय: BMT गन्धमादन:।
मैन्दश्च द्विविदश्चैव हनूमाञ्जाम्बवांस्तथा॥ ३५॥
अभ्यषिञ्चत सुग्रीवं wat सुगन्धिना।
सलिलेन सहस्राक्षं वसवो वासवं यथा॥ ३६॥

Then, having installed Sugriva, his face
turned east-ward, with due ceremony with
the recitation of sacred texts, on an excellent
seat with legs of gold and covered with rich
draperies in a lovely attic, decorated with
bright coloured garlands, nay, collecting water
from the different streams and rivers as well
as from sacred places in all the four quarters
and bringing water from all the seas and
storing the holy water in pitchers of gold,
the foremost of monkeys, Gaja, Gavaksa,
Gavaya, Sarabha, Gandhamadana, Mainda
and Dwivida as well as Hanuman and
Jambavan, the chief of bears, bathed Sugriva
with that limpid and fragrant water poured
through beautiful horns of bulls and jars of
gold according to the procedure laid down
in the scriptures and enjoined by eminent
sages, even as the Vasus (a class of gods,
eight in number) bathed the thousand-eyed
Indra. (31—36)

अभिषिक्ते तु सुग्रीवे ad वानरपुङ्खवा:।
प्रचुक्रुशुर्महात्मानो हृष्टा: शतसहस्रश:॥ ३७॥

When Sugriva had thus’ been
consecrated with a ceremonial bath, the
foremost of monkeys for their part, who
were all lofty-minded and numbered hundreds
of thousands, roared loudly with delight. (37)

रामस्य तु वच: Hal सुग्रीवो वानरेश्चर:।
अङ्गदं सम्परिष्वज्य यौवराज्येऽभ्यषेचयत्॥ ३८ ॥

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

Doing the bidding of Sri Rama and
closely embracing Angada, Sugriva, the lord
of monkeys, for his part installed him in the
office of Prince Regent. (38)

अङ्गदे चाभिषिक्ते तु सानुक्रोशा: प्लवंगमा:।

साधु साध्विति सुग्रीवं महात्मानो ह्यपूजयन्॥ ३९॥
Angada having been installed in the

office of Prince Regent, the high-minded

monkeys, who were all full of sympathy

for Angada, acclaimed Sugriva, saying

“Excellent! Excellent !!” (39)

WH चैव महात्मानं लक्ष्मणं च UA: पुन:।
प्रीताश्च तुष्टुवु: सर्वे atest तत्र वर्तिनि॥४०॥
Sugriva and Angada being present in
Kiskindha in the capacity of a ruler and
Prince Regent, respectively, all felt rejoiced
and extolled the high-souled Sri Rama as
also Laksmana again and again. (40)

हृष्टपुष्टजनाकीर्णा पताकाध्वजशोभिता।
aya नगरी wear किष्किन्धा गिरिगह्वरे॥४१॥

Crowded with joyous and well-fed
people and decorated with buntings and
flags, the city of Kiskindha, which was
situated inside a mountain-cave, presented
a lovely look. (41)

faa war del महात्मने

महाभिषेकं कपिवाहिनीपति: |
wat च भार्यामुपलभ्य वीर्यवा-

नवाप राज्यं त्रिदशाधिपो यथा ।॥। ४२॥

Having reported to the high-souled Sri
Rama the fact of his having gone through the
momentous consecration as the ruler of
Kiskindha at that time, and having got back
his wife, Ruma, the valiant Sugriva (the leader
of the monkey army) inherited the kingdom
even as Indra, the suzerain lord of gods,
attained the sovereignty of gods. (42)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये किष्किन्धाकाण्डे षड्विंश: सर्ग: ॥ २६ Il

Thus ends Canto Twenty-six in the Kiskindhakanda of the glorious Ramayana of
Valmiki, the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

