+ UTTARAKANDA +

came and stood by his side. Standing by
his side, she spoke with folded hands as
follows: (41)
इयमस्म्यागता ca किं कार्यं करवाण्यहम्।
प्रजापतिस्तु तां प्राप्तां प्राह वाक्यं सरस्वतीम्॥४२॥
‘Having arrived | am here, O Lord!
What shall | do?’ To Saraswati, who had
come, the Prajapati for his part, said: (42)
वाणि त्वं राक्षसेन्द्रस्य भव वाग्देवतेप्सिता।
तथेत्युक्त्वा प्रविष्टा सा प्रजापतिरथाब्रवीत्॥४३॥
‘O goddess of speech, as the gods desire,
you become the speech in the mouth of the
chief of ogres, Kumbhakarna.’ Saying ‘Be it
so’, she entered the mouth of Kumbhakarna.
Then the Prajapati said to the latter: (43)

कुम्भकर्ण महाबाहो a वरय चयो मत:।
कुम्भकर्णस्तु aged श्रुत्वा वचनमब्रवीत्॥४४॥

‘O mighty-armed Kumbhakarna, ask the
boon of your choice.’ Hearing these words,
Kumbhakarna said as follows: (44)

स्वप्तुं वर्षाण्यनेकानि cada ममेप्सितम्।
`एवमस्त्विति तं चोक्त्वा प्रायाद् ब्रह्मा सुरै:समम्॥ ४५ ॥

‘O god of gods, | desire to sleep for

879

many years.’ Having said ‘Be it so’, Brahma
left with the gods. (45)

देवी सरस्वती da राक्षसं तं जहौ पुन:।
ब्रह्मणा सह देवेषु MAY च नभ:स्थलम्॥४६॥
विमुक्तोऽसौ सरस्वत्या Tat संज्ञां च ततो Te: |
कुम्भकर्णस्तु दुष्टात्मा चिन्तयामास दु:खित: ॥ ४७॥

Goddess Saraswati also left the
Raksasa. When the gods alongwith Brahma
had ascended to the heavens, and Saraswati
had left him, the evil-minded Kumbhakarna
came to himself and thought sorrowfully:

(46-47)
अहं व्यामोहितो देवैरिति wa तदागतै:॥४८॥

‘How did words like these come out of
my lips? | think | have been deceived by the
gods who came at that time.’ (48)

एवं लब्धवरा: wd भ्रातरो दीप्ततेजस:।

शलेष्मातकवनं Wat तत्र ते न्यवसन् सुखम्॥४९॥
“The brothers of shining lustre, having

obtained boons in this manner, went to a

forest of Slesmataka trees (Cordia myxor)
and lived there happily.” (49)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये उत्तरकाण्डे SA: सर्ग: ॥ १० ॥

Thus ends Canto Ten in the Uttarakanda of the glorious Ramayana of Valmiki,
the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

एकादश: सर्ग:
Canto XI
Kubera listens to the ultimatum of Ravana, leaves Lanka at the command
of his father and proceeds to Kailasa to live there. The Raksasas
occupy Lanka and Ravana is installed as its ruler

सुमाली वरलब्धांस्तु ज्ञात्वा चैतान् निशाचरान्।
उदतिष्ठदू भयं त्यक्त्वा सानुग: A रसातलात्॥ १॥
“Again, coming to know that the
aforesaid Raksasas had obtained boons
from Brahma, Sumali shedding his
fear, rose up from the netherworld with

his followers.

मारीचश्च प्रहस्तश्च विरूपाक्षो महोदर:।

उदतिष्ठन् सुसंरब्धा: सचिवास्तस्य रक्षस:॥ २॥
Marica and Prahasta, Virupaksa and

Mahodara, the ministers of that Raksasa,
also rose up with great fury. (2)

(1)
