548

इन्द्राशनिसमप्रख्यं वज्रप्रतिमगौरवम्।
देवदानवगन्धर्वयक्षपन्नगसूदनम् ॥ १९॥
It shone like Indra’s thunderbolt and
was equally heavy and was capable of
destroying gods, Danavas, Gandharvas
(celestial musicians), Yaksas (a class of
demi-gods) and Nagas (semi-divine beings
credited with a human face and the tail of a
serpent). (19)

गमिष्याम्यहमेकाकी तिष्ठत्विह बलं मम॥ २१॥

It was wreathed in garlands of crimson
flowers and emitted flames by itself. Taking
the enormous dart which was stained with
the gore of his enemies, Kumbhakarna, who
was endowed with extraordinary energy
submitted as follows to Ravana: “I will
proceed alone. Let my army remain here.

(20-21)

अद्य तान् afd: क्रुद्धो भक्षयिष्यामि वानरान्।
कुम्भकर्णवच: श्रुत्वा रावणो वाक्यमब्रवीत्॥ २२॥

“Feeling hungry and enraged, | shall
devour the monkeys today.” Hearing the
submission of Kumbhakarna, Ravana replied
as follows: (22)

wa: परिव्रतो Wes शूलमुद्गरपाणिभि:।
arm fe महात्मान: शूरा: सुव्यवसायिन:॥ २३॥
“Go out accompanied by troops carrying
pikes and mallets in their hands; for the
monkeys are gigantic, valiant and full of
great perseverance. (23)
एकाकिनं wad वा नयेयुर्दशनै: क्षयम्।
तस्मात् परमदुर्धर्ष: सैन्यै: परिव्रृतो व्रज।
रक्षसामहितं सर्वं शत्रुपक्षॆ निषूदय॥ २४॥
“They are sure to destroy with their
teeth anyone who is alone or off one’s
guard. Therefore, go out surrounded by
troops. Rendered exceedingly difficult to

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA +

assail you in this way, exterminate the entire
army of the enemy, which is so pernicious
to the ogres.” (24)

अथासनात् समुत्पत्य स्रजं मणिकृतान्तराम्।
आबबन्ध महातेजा: कुम्भकर्णस्य रावण:॥ २५॥
Springing up from his throne, Ravana,
who was endowed with extraordinary energy,
now placed round the neck of Kumbhakarna
a gold necklace interspersed with gems.
(25)

नदान्यङ्ग वराण्याभरणानि च।
हारं च शशिसंकाशमाबबन्ध महात्मन: ॥ २६ ॥
He also placed on the person of the
colossus armlets, rings, other excellent jewels
as well as a pearl necklace sparkling as the
moon. (26)

दिव्यानि च सुगन्धीनि माल्यदामानि Want: |
गात्रेषु सज्जयामास श्रोत्रयोश्चास्य कुण्डले॥ २७॥

Ravana further placed on his different
limbs wonderful fragrant garlands and
suspended earrings in his ears. (27)

काञ्चनाङ्घदकेयूरनिष्काभरणभूषित: ।
कुम्भकर्णो बृहत्कर्ण: सुहुतोऽग्निरिवाबभौ॥ २८ ॥
Thus adorned with gold armlets,
bracelets and Niskas (an ornament for the
neck), Kumbhakarna, who was distinguished
by large ears, shone like fire, well-fed with
oblations. (28)

श्रोणीसूत्रेण महता मेचकेन व्यराजत।
अमृतोत्पादने नद्धो भुजङ्घेनेव मन्दर:॥२९॥

Decked with an enormous dark-blue
girdle, he shone brightly like Mount Mandara
encircled by Vasuki, the king of serpents, at
the time of churning nectar out of the milk
ocean. (29)
a aati uae fad

विद्युत्प्रभं दीप्तमिवात्मभासा।
संध्याभ्रसंवीत इवाद्रिराज: ॥ ३० UI
