724

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA +

vada: सर्ग:
Canto C

Encounter of Sri Rama with Ravana; Laksmana
swoons under a blow of Ravana’s javelin and
Ravana flees away from the battlefield

तस्मिन् प्रतिहतेऽस्त्रे तु रावणो राक्षसाधिप:।
क्रोधं च द्विगुणं चक्रे क्रोधाच्चास्त्रमनन्तरम्॥ १॥
मयेन विहितं रौद्रमन्यदस्त्रं महाद्युति:।
उत्स्रष्टुं रावणो भीमं राघवाय प्रचक्रमे॥ २॥
The aforesaid missile having been
counteracted by Sri Rama, Ravana, the
suzerain lord of ogres, for his part doubled
his fury and in his wrath the latter, who was
endowed with extraordinary might, forthwith
proceeded to aim at Sri Rama (a scion of
Raghu) another fearful missile presided over
by Rudra (the god of destruction) and
produced by the demon Maya. (1-2)

ad: शूलानि निश्चेरुर्गदाश्च मुसलानि च।
कार्मुकाद् दीप्यमानानि वज्रसाराणि सर्वश:॥ ३॥
Wet: कूटपाशाश्च दीप्ताश्चाशनयस्तथा।
निष्पेतुर्विविधास्तीक्ष्णा वाता st युगक्षये॥४॥

Then issued forth on all sides from his
bow flaming pikes and maces as well as
clubs, hard as adamant, mallets, deceptive
nooses and fiery thunderbolts of various
kinds like piercing gales at the end of the
world-cycle. (3-4)
deat waa: श्रीमानुत्तमास्त्रविदां at
जघान परमास्त्रेण गान्धर्वेण महाद्युति:।॥५॥

The glorious Rama, a scion of Raghu,
the foremost of those proficient in the use of
excellent missiles, who was endowed with
extraordinary splendour, neutralized that
missile with the excellent missile presided
over by the Gandharvas (celestial
musicians). (5)

तस्मिन् प्रतिहतेऽस्त्रे तु राघवेण महात्मना।
रावण: क्रोधताम्राक्ष: सौरमस्त्रमुदीरयत्॥६॥

The aforesaid missile having been
rendered void by the high-souled Sri Rama,
a scion of Raghu, Ravana for his part, his
eyes coppery with wrath, employed the
missile presided over by the sun-god. (6)

ततश्चक्राणि निष्पेतुर्भास्वराणि महान्ति च।
कार्मुकाद् भीमवेगस्य दशग्रीवस्य धीमत:॥७॥

Thereupon issued brilliant and large
discuses from the bow of the resourceful
Ravana (the ten-headed monster) of terrific
impetuosity. (7)

तैरासीद् गगनं दीप्तं सम्पतद्भि: समन्तत:।
ues दिशो दीप्ताश्चन्द्रसूर्यग्रहैरिव॥८॥

Even as they rose into view and struck
on all sides, the sky was lit up and the
quarters illuminated as by the sun, the moon
and other planets. (8)

तानि चिच्छेद बाणौघैश्चक्राणि तु स Wea: |
आयुधानि च चित्राणि रावणस्य चमूमुखे॥ ९॥

The celebrated Sri Rama, a scion of
Raghu, however, split those discuses and
other strange weapons with the streams of
his shafts in the forefront of Ravana’s army.

(9)
तदस्त्रं तु हतं Gear रावणो राक्षसाधिप:।
विव्याध दशभिर्बाणै we सर्वेषु मर्मसु॥१०॥

Seeing that missile frustrated, Ravana,
the suzerain lord of ogres, for his part struck
hard Sri Rama with ten arrows in all his vital
parts. (10)

Want महातेजा न Wea Waa ie

Though grievously hurt by Ravana with
