790

तदद्य व्याहृतं भद्रे मयैतत् कृतबुद्धिना।
लक्ष्मणे वाथ भरते He बुद्धिं यथासुखम्॥ Vl
“Hence this utterance has been made
by me today, resolved as | am to act
accordingly. Set your mind on Laksmana or
even on Bharata according to your pleasure.
(22)

WA वाथ सुग्रीवे राक्षसे वा विभीषणे।
निवेशय wa: सीते यथा वा सुखमात्मना॥ २३॥
Nay, fix your mind on Satrughna or
even on Sugriva or on the ogre, Vibhisana,
O Sita, or do as it pleases your mind. (23)

नहि cat रावणो दृष्ट्वा दिव्यरूपां मनोरमाम्।
मर्षयेत चिरं सीते स्वगृहे पर्यवस्थिताम्॥२४॥

“Seeing you, who are endowed with a

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA +

charming exterior and are so soul-ravishing,
detained in his abode, Ravana could not
have endured your separation for long, O
Sita!” (24)

wa: प्रियार्हश्रवणा तदप्रियं

प्रियादुपश्रुत्य चिरस्य मानिनी।

मुमोच art रुदती तदा भृशं
गजेन्द्रहस्ताभिहतेव वल्लरी॥ २५ UI

Hearing that unpalatable speech from
the mouth of her beloved lord, the proud
lady, who had been used to hearing pleasing
words alone, thereupon shed tears for long
on that occasion, weeping bitterly and looking
like a creeper struck down by the proboscis
of a lordly elephant. (25)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये FERS पञ्चदशाधिकशततम: AT: ॥ ११५ ॥

Thus ends Canto One hundred and fifteen in the Yuddhakanda of the glorious
Ramayana of Valmiki, the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

षोडशाधिकशततम: सर्ग:
Canto CXVI

With a taunting reply, Sita undergoes a fire-ordeal in
order to prove her conjugal fidelity

एवमुक्का तु ace परुषं रोमहर्षणम्।
राघवेण सरोषेण श्रुत्वा प्रव्यथिताभवत्॥१॥

Hearing the harsh utterance, which
caused her hair to stand on end, when
spoken to as aforesaid by Sri Rama
(a scion of Raghu), who was full of anger,
Sita, a princess of Videha territory, for her
part, felt greatly afflicted. (1)

सा तदाश्रुतपूर्वं fe जने महति मैथिली।

श्रुत्वा भर्तुर्वचो घोरं लज्जयावनताभवत्॥ २॥
That princess of Mithila stood bent low

with shame on hearing on that occasion in

the presence of a large gathering the
foregoing vehement speech of her husband,

the like of which had not been actually
heard by her before. (2)

प्रविशन्तीव गात्राणि स्वानि सा जनकात्मजा।
arated: सशल्येव भृशमश्रूण्यवर्तयत्॥३॥

As though pierced by those arrow-like
words, nay, shrinking into her limbs as it
were with shame, that daughter of Janaka
shed profuse tears. (3)

ततो बाष्पपरिक्लिन्नं प्रमार्जन्ती स्वमाननम्।
शनैर्गद्गदया वाचा भर्तारमिदमब्रवीत्॥४॥

Then, wiping clean her face, which
was bathed in tears, she slowly addressed
in faltering accents the following reply to her
spouse: (4)
