# YUDDHAKANDA #

Patala (the lowest subterranean region),
emitting an odour of fat and blood from his
unrinsed mouth and shining as the sun
because of his diadem, his body covered
with bristling hair, all his limbs stretched on
a bed and his arms adorned with armlets of
gold. (28—30)

ततश्चक्रुर्महात्मान: कुम्भकर्णस्य चाग्रत:।
भूतानां मेरुसंकाशं राशिं परमतर्पणम्॥ ३१॥
The gigantic ogres then placed before
Kumbhakarna a heap of animals, resembling
Mount Meru, which was calculated to bring
him supreme satiation. (31)

मृगाणां महिषाणां च वराहाणां च संचयान्।
चक्रुर्नैर्ऋतशार्दूला राशिमन्नस्य चाद्भुतम्॥ ३२॥
The said tigers among ogres also piled
up hillocks of antelopes, buffaloes and swine
as well as a prodigious mound of victuals.
(32)

ad: शोणितकुम्भांश्च मांसानि विविधानि च।
पुरस्तात् कुम्भकर्णस्य चक्रुस्त्रिदशशत्रव:॥ ३३॥

After that the enemies of gods placed
before Kumbhakarna pails of blood and meats
of every variety as well. (33)

लिलिपुश्च परार्घ्यन चन्दनेन परंतपम्।
दिव्यैराश्चासयामासुर्माल्यैर्गन्थैश्च गन्धिभि:॥ ३४॥

Again, the ogres daubed Kumbhakarna
(the scourge of his enemies) with a superb
sandal-paste and communicated odour to
him through fragrant garlands and sweet
perfumes. (34)

धूपगन्धांश्च ससृजुस्तुष्टुवुश्च परंतपम्।
जलदा इव चानेदुर्यातुधानास्ततस्तत:॥ ३५॥
They also burnt incense and extolled
Kumbhakarna, the scourge of his enemies.
The ogres also thundered like clouds on
every side. (35)

शङ्खांश्च Waa: शशाङ्कसदृशप्रभान्।
तुमुलं युगपच्चापि विनेदुश्चाप्यमर्षिता:॥ ३६॥

Nay, they blew with full cheeks their

525

conches shining brightly like the sun and
synchronously raised a tumultuous uproar,
seized with anger, as they were. (36)

नेदुरास्फोटयामासुश्लिक्षिपुस्ते निशाचरा:।
कुम्भकर्णविबोधार्थं चक्रुस्ते विपुलं स्वरम्॥ ३७॥

The rangers of the night roared, clapped
on their arms and pushed the limbs
of Kumbhakarna. They further set up a
great clamour in order to awaken him fully.

(37)

सास्फोटितश्ष्वेलितसिंहनादम् ।
श्रुत्वा विहंगा: सहसा frag: usc
On hearing the aforesaid slapping of
arms, thundering and leonine roar, combined
with the blast of conches and the roll of
kettledrums and drums, while flying rapidly
in all the ten directions and soaring into the
sky, birds fell down all at once. (38)
यदा asi तैर्निनदैर्महात्मा
न कुम्भकर्णो बुबुधे प्रसुप्त:।
at भुशुण्डीर्मुसलानि «ad
रक्षोगणास्ते जगृहुर्गदाश्च॥ ३९॥

When the colossal Kumbhakarna, who
was fast asleep, could not be roused even
by means of those aforesaid sounds,
repeatedly set up, all those troops of ogres
seized hold of Bhusundis (a particular kind
of mallet), mallets and maces. (39)

तं शैलशृङ्गैर्मुसलैर्गदाभि-
र्वक्ष:स्थले मुद्गरमुष्टिभिश्च।
सुखप्रसुप्तं भुवि कुम्भकर्णं
रक्षांस्युदग्राणि तदा निजघ्नु:॥४०॥
The mighty ogres then began to strike
hard the celebrated Kumbhakarna, lying fast
asleep comfortably on the ground, with
mountain peaks, pestles, maces, mallets
and fists too on the chest. (40)

तस्य नि:श्चासवातेन कुम्भकर्णस्य रक्षस:।
राक्षसा: कुम्भकर्णस्य स्थातुं शेकुर्न ATA: lt ४१॥
