770

by the name of Caitraratha (belonging to
Kubera and named after Caitraratha, the
king of the Gandharvas, who is reputed to
have planted it) as well as in all celestial
gardens, adorned, as | was, with lovely
garlands and clad in picturesque robes and
invested with a matchless splendour, roamed
in a suitable aerial car, visiting various
lands of every description—have now been
deprived of all sense-enjoyments because
of your fall. (30—33)
सैवान्येवास्मि tert धिग्राज्ञां sare श्रियम्।
हाराजन्सुकुमारतेसुभ्रुसुत्ववसमुनसम्॥ ३४॥
कान्ति

किरॊटक्रूज्जांलितताम्नास्यदीप्तकुण्डलम्॥इणां।
मदव्याकुललोलाक्षं wat यत्पानभूमिषु।
विविधस्त्रग्धरं चारु वल्गुस्मितकथं शुभम्॥ ३६॥
dear ddd fe वक्त्रं न भ्राजते Wit
रामसायकनिर्भिन्नं wh रुधिरविस्त्रबै:॥ ३७॥

“Though the same, | stand transformed
into another, as it were. Woe be to the
fleeting fortune of kings! Alas, that very
countenance of yours, O king, which was
so tender and distinguished by charming
eyebrows, a glossy surface an exceptionally
prominent nose, coppery lips and brilliant
earrings, nay, which vied with the moon, the
lotus and the sun in radiance, grace and
brilliance, respectively, was illuminated by a
number of diadems which looked like so
many peaks of a mountain, which shone
with its eyes wild and rolling through inebriety
in banquet halls, bore garlands of every
description, was lovely and charming in
everyway, was lit with a captivating smile
and indulged in a delightful talk, does not
actually shine as before today, my lord!
Pierced with the shafts of Sri Rama, it lies
dyed with streams of blood. (34—37)

विशीर्णमेदोमस्तिष्कं रूक्षं स्यन्दनरेणुभि:।
हा पश्चिमा A सम्प्राप्ता दशा वैधव्यदायिनी।। ३८॥
या मयाऽऽसीन्न सम्बुद्धा कदाचिदपि मन्दया।
frat दानवराजो A val A राक्षसेश्वर:।॥ ३९॥

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA +

"at मे शक्रनिर्जेता sete Waar भृशम्।
दृप्तारिमथना: क्रूरा: प्रख्यातबलपौरुषा:॥४०॥
अकुतश्चिद्धया Ae ममेत्यासीन्मतिर्धुवा।
तेषामेवंप्रभावाणां युष्माकं राक्षसर्षभा:॥४१॥
at भयमसम्बुद्धुं मानुषादिदमागतम्।
स्निग्धेन्द्रनीलनीलं तु प्रांशुशैलोपमं महत्॥४२॥
केयूराङ्गदवैदूर्यमुक्ताहारस्ररगुज्ज्वलम् ।
कान्तं विहारेष्वधिकं दीप्तं संग्रामभूमिषु॥४३॥
भात्याभरणभाभिर्यद् विद्युद्धिरिव तोयद:।
तदेवाद्य शरीरं ते तीक्ष्णैर्नैकशरैश्चितम्॥४४॥

“It has its marrow scattered and brains
shattered and has got soiled through the
dust raised by the chariots. Alas, the last
stage of life, viz., death, which has conferred
widowhood on me, and which was never
contemplated by me, a wretched woman as
| am, has been reached by you. | was
extremely proud to think that Maya, the king
of devils, was my father, you, the king of
ogres, were my husband and Indrajit, the
conqueror of Indra, was my son. My
guardians were capable of crushing their
arrogant enemies, cruel, nay, renowned for
their might and valour and as such had no
fear from any quarter: such was my firm
conviction. How did this unknown peril come
to you, who were so powerful, O bull among
the ogres, from a mortal? That very body of
yours—which was really dark as a glossy
sapphire, gigantic like a lofty mountain, and
resplendent with Keyuras and Angadas (two
varieties of armlets), necklaces of cat’s-eye
gems and pearls and garlands, which looked
more charming during pastimes and brilliant
on the fields of battle, which shone with the
lustre of jewels as a rainy cloud with flashes
of lightning—lies transfixed with numerous
arrows today. (38—44)

पुनर्दुर्लभसंस्पर्शं परिष्वक्तुं न शक्यते।
शवाविध:

क्षितौ निपतितं राजन् yard वै रुधिरच्छवि॥ ४६॥
