* BALAKANDA +

“Indeed youth is ever fleeting, especially
in human beings. If you accept me as your
husband, you will attain undecaying (abiding)
youth and will become immortal.” (17)
तस्य Ag वचनं श्रुत्वा वायोरक्लिष्टकर्मण:।
अपहास्य ततो वाक्यं कन्याशतमथाब्रवीत्॥ १८॥
अन्तश्चरसि भूतानां सर्वेषां सुरसत्तम।
प्रभावज्ञाश्च ते सर्वा: किमर्थमवमन्यसे॥१९॥

Hearing the aforesaid proposal of the
celebrated wind-god, whose movements are
ever unobstructed, and then deriding his
offer, all the hundred damsels presently
said, “In the form of life-breath you move
inside all living beings, O jewel among gods !
And we are aware of your glory, yet we
cherish no attraction for you. Why then do
you insult us by making an unseemly offer
to us? (18-19)

कुशनाभसुता देव समस्ता: सुरसत्तम।
स्थानाच्च्यावयितुं देवं रक्षामस्तु तपो वयम्॥ २०॥

“We are all daughters of KuSanabha, O
god, the foremost of all gods ! We can bring
you down from your exalted position by
pronouncing a curse on you, yet, even though
you are a god, we are anxious to preserve
our ascetic glory (which is sure to diminish in
the event of our cursing you). (20)

मा भूत् स कालो दुर्मेध: frat सत्यवादिनम्।
अवमन्य स्वधर्मेण स्वयं वरमुपास्महे॥ २१॥

“Let not that unpropitious hour ever
turn up, O evil-minded one, when prompted
by lust (our baser nature) we should crave
for and accept a match on our own initiative
disregarding our veracious father. (21)

frat fe प्रभुरस्माकं cad परमं च स:।
यस्य नो दास्यति पिता स नो भर्ता भविष्यति॥ २२॥

161

“For father is our master; nay, he is
our supreme deity. He alone will be our
husband to whom our father will give us
away.” (22)
तासां तु वचनं ster हरि: परमकोपन:।
प्रविश्य सर्वगात्राणि बभञ्ज भगवान् प्रभु:॥ २३॥

Hearing their insolent and defiant reply,
however, the all-pervading wind-god, who
is not only glorious and powerful but
exceedingly irascible also, entered all their
limbs and distorted them. (23)

ता: कन्या वायुना भग्ना विविशुर्नृपतेर्गृहम्।
प्रविश्य च सुसम्भ्रान्ता: सलज्जा: सास्त्रलोचना: । २४॥

Distorted by the wind-god, the aforesaid
maidens returned to the king’s (their father’s)
palace. Having entered it, they felt much
perturbed and abashed and their eyes were
filled with tears. (24)

स च ता दयिता भग्ना: कन्या: परमशोभना:।
get दीनास्तदा राजा AMT इदमब्रवीत्॥ २५॥

Perplexed to see those beloved and
most charming girls deformed and miserable
at that moment, the king (KuSanabha) asked
the following question : (25)
किमिदं कथ्यतां aa: को धर्ममवमन्यते।
HOM: केन कृता: सर्वाश्चेष्टन्त्यो नाभिभाषथ।
एवं राजा विनि:श्चस्य समाधिं संदधे aa: २६॥

“What is this strange phenomenon?
The whole thing may be related to me; who
has violated the principles of justice? By
whom have you all been turned hunch-
backs and how is it that you are all making
gestures and do not utter a word?” Making
the aforesaid inquiry and heaving a deep
sigh, the king then composed himself in
order to hear their reply. (26)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये बालकाण्डे FAT: Wl: ॥ 321

Thus ends Canto Thirty-two in the Balakanda of the glorious Ramayana of Valmiki,
the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

