842

“Five thousand maid-servants decked
with all kinds of ornaments will wait on you,
if you choose to become my wife, O Sita !”

(31)

Tanager तु कुपिता जनकात्मजा।
प्रत्युवाचानवद्याङ्मी तमनादृत्य राक्षसम्॥३२॥

Enraged when spoken to as above by
Ravana and disdaining that ogre, Sita,
daughter of Janaka, of faultless limbs for

her part replied as follows: (32)
महागिरिमिवाकम्प्यं महेन्द्रसदृशं पतिम्।
महोदधिमिवाक्षोभ्यमहं राममनुव्रता I ३३ ॥

“| have taken a vow to follow the mind
of Sri Rama, my husband, who is unshakable
like a big mountain, who is a compeer of
the mighty Indra, and who is imperturbable
(calm) like the ocean. (33)

सर्वलक्षणसम्पन्नं न्यग्रोधपरिमण्डलम्।
सत्यसंधं महाभागमहँ राममनुव्रता॥३४॥
“| have taken a vow to follow the wishes
of the highly blessed Sri Rama, who is
richly endowed with all auspicious bodily
marks, who affords shelter to all like a
banyan tree and who is true to his promise.
(34)

. ach fief गि ।
qe |= सिंहसंकाशमहँ राममनुव्रता॥ ३५॥
“| am devoted to the mighty-armed Sri
Rama, a lion among men, who is distinguished
by a broad chest, who walks with the proud
gait of a lion and resembles a lion in prowess.
(35)
पृथुकीर्तिं महाबाहुमहँ राममनुव्रता॥ ३६॥
“| follow the vows of the mighty-armed
Sri Rama, whose countenance resembles
the full moon, who delights all, who is the
foremost of kings, who has mastered his
senses, and who is of wide renown. (36)

त्वं पुनर्जम्बुक: सिंहीं मामिहेच्छसि दुर्लभाम्।
नाहं शक्या त्वया स्प्रष्टुमादित्यस्य WHT यथा॥ ३७॥

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

“Nevertheless, you, a jackal, covet me,
a lioness, so hard to win here. | am
unsusceptible of even being touched by
you as the glow of the sun. (37)

पादपान्काञ्चनान् नूनं बहून् पश्यसि मन्दभाक् I
राघवस्य frat भार्यां यस्त्वमिच्छसि राक्षस॥ ३८ ॥

“Surely you behold numerous golden
trees (a portentous spectacle beheld by
men who are on the verge of death), O
short-lived ogre—you who covet the beloved
consort of Sri Rama, a scion of Raghu !

(38)
क्षुधितस्य च सिंहस्य मृगशत्रोस्तरस्विन:।
आशीविषस्य वदनाद् दंष्ट्रामादातुमिच्छसि॥ ३९॥
मन्दरं पर्वतश्रेष्ठं पाणिना हर्तुमिच्छसि।
कालकूटं विषं पीत्वा स्वस्तिमान् गन्तुमिच्छसि Ut Yo UI
अक्षि सूच्या प्रमृजसि जिह्वया लेढि च क्षुरम्।
राघवस्य प्रियां भार्यामधिगन्तुं त्वमिच्छसि॥४१॥

“You seek to extract a tooth from the
jaws of a hungry yet powerful lion, the
avowed enemy of deer, or a fang from the
jaws of a poisonous snake; nay, you seek
to carry away in your hand Mount Mandara,
the foremost of mountains, and desire to
escape safely (even) after having drunk a
deadly poison; nay, you rub your eyes with
a needle and lick a razor with your tongue—
you who seek to lay your hands on the
beloved consort of Sri Rama. (39—41)
अवसज्य शिलां कण्ठे समुद्रं तर्तुमिच्छसि।
सूर्याचन्द्रमसौ चोभौ पाणिभ्यां हर्तुमिच्छसि॥४२॥
यो रामस्य frat भार्यां प्रधर्षयितुमिच्छसि।
अग्निं प्रज्वलितं दृष्टवा वस्त्रेणाहर्तुमिच्छसि॥४३॥
Hea यो भार्यां रामस्याहर्तुमिच्छसि।
अयोमुखानां शूलानामग्रे चरितुमिच्छसि।
रामस्य सदृशीं भार्यां योऽधिगन्तुं त्वमिच्छसि॥ ४४॥

“You desire to cross a sea having tied
a slab of stone to your neck and wish to
snatch away the sun and the moon both
with your hands—you who seek to bear
away by force the beloved consort of Sri
Rama ! Seeing a blazing fire, you desire to
