802

Saying “Amen!” to Sr Rama, and
embracing Laksmana, who stood with joined
palms, the said emperor spoke to the latter
once more as follows: (27)

TH शुश्रूषता भक्त्या वैदेह्या सह सीतया।
कृता AA महाप्रीति: Wa धर्मफलं च ते॥ २८॥

“Great satisfaction has been rendered
to me and reward in the form of religious
merit earned by you in that you served
Rama alongwith Sita, a princess of the
Videha territory. (28)

ad प्राप्स्यसि ada यशश्च विपुलं भुवि।
TH प्रसन्ने स्वर्गं च महिमानं तथोत्तमम्॥२९॥

“Rama being pleased with you, you will
attain further religious merit as also extensive
renown on earth as well as an abode in
heaven and supreme glory, O Knower of
what is right! (29)

TH शुश्रूष we ते सुमित्रानन्दवर्धन।
राम: सर्वस्य लोकस्य हितेष्वभिरत: सदा॥ ३०॥

“Continue to serve Rama as heretofore,

O enhancer of Sumitra’s joy; may all be well
with you. Rama remains ever engaged in
advancing the interests of the entire universe.
(30)

Ua सेन्द्रास्त्रयो लोका: सिद्धाश्च परमर्षय:।
अभिवाद्य महात्मानमर्चन्ति पुरुषोत्तमम्॥ ३१॥

“Greeting the high-souled Rama, the
denizens of all these three worlds including
Indra, their ruler, nay, even the Siddhas (a
class of demigods endowed with mystic
powers by virtue of their very birth) as well
as eminent Rsis (the seers of Vedic Mantras)
pay homage to him as the Supreme Person.

(31)

Utd तदुक्तमव्यक्तमक्षरं ब्रह्मसम्मितम्।
देवानां हृदयं सौम्य गुह्यं राम: परंतप:॥ ३२॥
“Rama, the scourge of his enemies,

has been spoken of as the unmanifest and
imperishable Brahma, the Absolute, esteemed

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA +

by the Vedas, the heart of all gods, nay, the
secret of all gods, O gentle one! (32)

अवाप्तधर्माचरणं यशश्च विपुलं त्वया।
एवं शुश्रूषताव्यग्रं वैदेह्या सह सीतया॥ ३३॥
“The reward of the practice of all
virtues as also extensive fame has been
earned by you in that you steadily served
him, as also Sita, a princess of the Videha
territory.” (33)

इत्युक्त्वा लक्ष्मणं राजा स्नुषां बद्धाञ्जलिं स्थिताम्।
पुत्रीत्याभाष्य eat शनैरेनामुवाच TUN ३४॥
Having spoken as_ aforesaid to
Laksmana and accosting his daughter-in-
law, Sita, standing before him with joined
palms as “My daughter’, the (former) king
gently and slowly instructed her as follows:
(34)

कर्तव्यो न तु ade मन्युस्त्यागमिमं प्रति।
रामेणेदं विशुद्ध्यर्थं pd वै त्वद्धितैषिणा॥ ३५॥
“No resentment, however, should be
shown by you against this repudiation of
yours by Rama, O princess of the Videha
territory! This was undoubtedly done by
Rama, who wished well of you, in order to
demonstrate your absolute purity. (35)

सुदुष्करमिदं ula aa चारित्रलक्षणम्।
कृतं यत् तेऽन्यनारीणां यशो ह्यभिभविष्यति॥ ३६ ॥

“This act of entering the flames, which
has been done by you and which reveals
your true character, my daughter, is most
difficult to perform (for others) and will
undoubtedly overshadow the renown of other
virtuous ladies. (36)
न त्वं कामं समाधेया भर्तॄशुश्रूषणं प्रति।
अवश्यं तु मया वाच्यमेष ते दैवतं परम्॥ ३७॥

“Although you need not be instructed
in the matter of rendering service to your
husband, nonetheless it needs must be
pointed out by me that he is your supreme
deity.” (37)
