* AYODHYAKANDA +

they had come, to the city of Ayodhya,
where all good people were feeling distressed.
(15)
आलोक्य नगरीं तां च क्षयव्याकुलमानसा:।
Madara तेऽश्रूणि AA: शोकपीडितै:।॥ १६॥

Nay, seeing the city which presented
a sorry spectacle, they shed tears in
profusion through their eyes tormented
with grief, their mind distracted through
cheerlessness. (16)

एषा रामेण नगरी रहिता नातिशोभते।
आपगा गरुडेनेव ह्रदादुद्धृतपन्नगा॥१७॥

Bereft of Sri Rama, the aforesaid city
of Ayodhya did not look any more charming
than a river whose snakes have been
uprooted from its deep pool by Garuda. (17)

467

चन्द्रह्रीनमिवाकाशां तोयहीनमिवार्णवम्।
अपश्यन् निहतानन्दं नगरं ते विचेतस:॥१८॥
Those bewildered men beheld the city
joyless like the firmament bereft of the moon
and an ocean without water. (18)

ते तानि वेश्मानि महाधनानि
दु:खेन geared faye: |

नैव Wry: स्वजनं परं वा
निरीक्ष्यमाणा: प्रविनष्टहर्षा:।॥ १९॥
Entering their dwellings full of abundant
riches with difficulty, the citizens could not
distinguish between their own people and
others, though casting their eyes all round,
stricken as they were with sorrow, their
joy having altogether disappeared for good.
(19)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्येऽयोध्याकाण्डे
GIANT: सर्ग: Il ४७॥

Thus ends Canto Forty-seven in the Ayodhyakanda of the glorious Ramayana
of Valmiki, the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

Canto XLVIII
Told of Sri Rama’s departure for the forest by the citizens, who had gone
out with Sri Rama and returned, unable as they were to find out the

tracks of his chariot, their wives reproach Kaikeyi
and break into lamentation

तेषामेवं विषण्णानां पीडितानामतीव =a
बाष्पविप्लुतनेत्राणां सशोकानां मुमूर्षया॥१॥
उद्गतानीव सत्त्वानि बभूवुरमनस्विनाम्॥ 2

The life of those citizens who had
returned dejected and dispirited in this way
even after meeting Sri Rama, and felt sore
afflicted—tull of grief as they were and seized
with a longing to give up the ghost, their
eyes overflowing with tears—became extinct,
as it were. (1-2)

स्वं स्वं निलयमागम्य wer: समाव्रृता:।
अश्रूणि Wa: ad बाष्पेण पिहितानना:॥ ३॥
Reaching each his own abode and
surrounded by their sons and wife, all shed
tears, their face being covered with them.
(3)

न चाहृष्यन् न चामोदन् वणिजो न प्रसारयन्।
न चाशोभन्त पण्यानि नापचन् गृहमेधिन:॥४॥
People neither made merry nor did
they rejoice. Merchants did not spread their
merchandise, nor did the saleable goods
