648

and trading classes)—who are ever devoted
to their respective duties, have subdued
their senses and are full of great zeal—nay,
which is crowded with palatial buildings of
various patterns and is thronged with learned
men and full of highly contented people.
(40—42)

afercdetasis: सुनिविष्टजनाकुल:।
देवस्थानै: प्रपाभिश्च तटाकैश्चोपशोभित:॥४३॥
प्रहृष्टनरनारीक: समाजोत्सवशोभित: ।
सुकृष्टसीमापशुमान् हिंसाभिरभिवर्जित:॥४४॥
अदेव्।मातॄको Ta: grad: परिवर्जित:।
परित्यक्तो wa: aa: खनिभिश्चोपशोभित:॥ ४५ u
कच्चिज्जनपद: स्फीत: Ga वसति राघव॥ ४६॥
“| hope the kingdom of Ayodhya—
which is overspread with hundreds of altars
constructed for sacrificial performances and
crowded with well-established men, which
is adorned with temples, sheds where water
is stocked for free distribution to passers-
by and tanks, and peopled with highly
delighted men and women, which is graced
by social festivities and is full of well-cultivated
fields and abounds in cattle, which is totally
free from violence and does not depend
exclusively on rains for its agricultural
products, which is charming in point of
topography and is purged of beasts of prey,
which is completely rid of all fears and is
studded with mines, nay, which is bereft of
sinful men and was well-protected by our
forbears—is prosperous and faring well, O
scion of Raghu ! (43—46)

कच्चित् a दयिता: सर्वे कृषिगोरक्षजीविन:।
वार्तायां संश्रितस्तात लोकोऽयं सुखमेधते॥४७॥

“| hope the Vaisyas, who live by
agriculture and rearing the bovine race, are
all loved by you. Are these people, depending
as they do on the vocation of a Vaisya, viz.,
trade, agriculture and breeding of cattle,
thriving well at present, O dear brother?

(47)

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

तेषां गुप्तिपरीहारै: कच्चित् a भरणं कृतम्।
रक्ष्या fe wat धर्मेण ad विषयवासिन:॥४८॥

“| hope protection has been afforded
by you to them by making available to them
the objects desired by them and warding off
evil; for all the inhabitants of one’s land
deserve to be protected righteously by a
king. (48)

कच्चित् स्निय: सान्त्वयसे कच्चित् तास्ते सुरक्षिता: ।
कच्चिन्न श्रहदधास्यासां कच्चिद् गुह्यं न भाषसे ।। ४९ UI

“Do you keep your womenfolk pacified?
Are they duly protected by you? | hope you
do not repose excessive faith in them and
do not confide your secrets to them. (49)

कच्चिन्नागवनं गुप्तं कच्चित् ते सन्ति धेनुका:।
कच्चिन्न गणिकाश्चानां कुञ्जराणां च तृप्यसि॥ ५०॥
“Are the forests which are the home of
elephants preserved by you? Are milch cows
in abundance with you? | hope you do not
feel satisfied with the existing number of
female elephants, horses and elephants
owned by you. (50)

कच्चिद् दर्शयसे नित्यं मानुषाणां विभूषितम्।
उत्थायोत्थाय पूर्वाह्णे राजपुत्र महापथे॥५१॥
“Getting up regularly everyday do you
show yourself well-adorned to the people in
the assembly hall in the forenoon, O prince?
(51)

कच्चिन्न सर्वे कर्मान्ता: प्रत्यक्षास्तेऽविशङ्खया |
सर्वे वा पुनरुत्सृष्टा मध्यमेवात्र कारणम्॥५२॥

“| hope all your workmen do not appear
unhesitatingly before you nor are they kept
altogether out of your sight. In fact, a middle
course is undoubtedly profitable in this
behalf. (52)

कच्चिद दुर्गाणि सर्वाणि धनधान्यायुधोदकै: |
wag प्रतिपूर्णानि तथा शिल्पिधनुर्धरै:।॥ ५३॥

“Are all your fortifications fully supplied
with wealth and provisions, arms and water,
mechanical contrivances and equipped with
artisans and bowmen? (53)
