* ARANYAKANDA «

मम प्रिया सा aa गता हृता वा
शंसस्व A शोकहतस्य सर्वम्॥ १६॥

(Addressing the sun-god) “O sun-god
(son of Aditi), the knower of what has been
done and what has not been done in the
world and the witness of the good and evil
deeds of the people, where has my darling,
Sita, gone or has been borne away? Pray,
let me know everything, stricken with sorrow
as | am. (16)

लोकेषु सर्वेषु न नास्ति किंचिद्
यत् ते न नित्यं विदितं भवेत् तत्।

मृता er वा ua add वा॥१७॥
(Addressing the wind-god) “There is
nothing, absolutely nothing, in all the worlds,
which is not always known to you. Pray,
give me news about Sita—(that guardian
angel of my race)—whether she is dead or
has been borne away or is on her way to
some unknown destination, having been
carried away by some desperado.” (17)
sia तं

sara सौमित्रिरदीनसत्त्वो
न्याय्ये स्थित: कालयुतं च वाक्यम्॥ १८ ॥

To Sri Rama, who had been deprived

891

of his understanding, his body having been
utterly overpowered by grief, even while he
was wailing as aforesaid, Laksmana (son of
Sumitra) who was positive in spirit and ever
stuck to the right path, tendered the following
opportune advice: (18)

सोत्साहता चास्तु विमार्गणेऽस्या:।
उत्साहवन्तो हि नरा न लोके

सीदन्ति कर्मस्वतिदुष्करेषु I १९॥

“Casting off grief, take heart now. And
let vigorousness be brought to bear upon
the quest for Sita: for men who are full of
vigour never lose heart even when engaged
in pursuits which are most difficult to carry
through.” (19)
इतीव सौमित्रिमुदग्रपौरुषं

त्रुवन्तमार्तो रघुवंशवर्धन:।
न चिन्तयामास धृतिं विमुक्तवान्
पुनश्च Ga महदभ्युपागमत्॥ २०॥

Sri Rama (the promoter of Raghu’s
race), who felt distressed due to the
disappearance of Sita, took no notice of
Laksmana (son of Sumitra), who was
speaking as aforesaid and was possessed
of great manliness, lost courage once for all
and once more fell a prey to deep agony.

(20)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्येऽरण्यकाण्डे
त्रिषष्टितम: सर्ग: ॥ ६३॥
Thus ends Canto Sixty-three in the Aranyakanda of the glorious Ramayana of Valmiki,
the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

