984

दर्शिता भवता प्रीतिर्दर्शितं सौहृदं परम्।
उद्योगश्च त्वया राजन् भरतेन कृत: AS Vo
“Endeavour was made by you in
co-operation with Bharata in my coronation*,
O king, and affection and great amity was
thereby shown by you. (17)

aq भवानद्य काशेय पुरीं वाराणसीं ast
रमणीयां त्वया Wat सुप्राकारां सुतोरणाम्॥ १८॥

“Therefore, O king of Kasi, return you
today to the enchanting city of Varanasi,
which stands enclosed with a strong wall
provided with magnificent gateways and
protected by you.” (18)

एतावदुक्त्वा चोत्थाय काकुत्स्थ: परमासनात्।
पर्यष्वजत धर्मात्मा निरन्तरमुरोगतम्॥१९॥
Having spoken as above, and rising
from his magnificent throne, Sri Rama (a
scion of Kakutstha), whose mind was set
on righteousness, tightly clasped Pratardana,
who had clung to his bosom. (19)

विसर्जयामास तदा कौसल्याप्रीतिवर्धन:।
राघवेण कृतानुज्: काशेयो ह्यकुतोभय:॥ २०॥
वाराणसीं ययौ तूर्णं राघवेण विसर्जित:।
विसृज्य तं काशिपतिं त्रिशतं पृथिवीपतीन्॥ २१॥
प्रहसन् राघवो वाक्यमुवाच मधुराक्षरम्।
भवतां प्रीतिरव्यग्रा तेजसा परिरक्षिता॥ een

Sri Rama (who enhanced the joy of
Kausalya) then bid farewell to the king of
Kasi. Permitted by Sri Rama (a scion of
Raghu), the ruler of Kasi, who actually
entertained fear from none, proceeded with
all speed to Varanasi when sent off by Sri
Rama. Having sent away the said ruler of
Kasi, Sri Rama laughingly spoke in sweet
accents as follows to the three hundred
princes assembled there:

“Your unflinching devotion to Me stands
vindicated by your glory. (20—22)
धर्मश्च नियतो नित्यं सत्यं च Maat सदा।
युष्माकं चानुभावेन तेजसा च महात्मनाम्॥ २३॥

« VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

Bal दुरात्मा दुर्बुद्धी रावणो राक्षसाधम:।
Baas तत्र भवतां तेजसा हत:॥ २४॥
रावण: सगणो Bex सपुत्रामात्यबान्धव:।
भवन्तश्च समानीता भरतेन महात्मना॥ २५॥
श्रुत्वा जनकराजस्य HMA तनयां SAT
उद्युक्तानां च सर्वेषां पार्थिवानां महात्मनाम्॥ २६॥
कालोऽप्यतीत: सुमहान् गमनं रोचयाम्यत:।
West च राजानो हर्षेण महता व्रता:॥ २७॥

“Virtue is constant and truthfulness too
ever exists invariably in you. Nay, through
the majesty and glory alone of you, exalted
souls, was the evil-minded and perverse
Ravana, the vilest among the ogres, killed.
| was a mere instrument in encompassing
his death. Truly speaking, Ravana with his
followers, as also his sons, ministers and
kinsfolk—was made short work of through
your glory alone. You too were called
together by the high-souled Bharata on
hearing of Sita (the daughter of king Janaka)
having been borne away from the forest.
Nay, a pretty long time has gone by while
all of you high-souled kings have been
zealously active all these days in my interest.
Hence | deem it proper that you should
depart.”

Nay, filled with great joy, the kings
answered him thus: (23—27)

दिष्ट्या त्वं विजयी राम स्वराज्येऽपि प्रतिष्ठित: |
दिष्ट्या Weare सीता दिष्ट्या STA: पराजित: ।। २८ ॥

“By our good luck, 0 Rama, you have
come out victorious and also stand secure
in your own sovereignty. By our good fortune
Sita has been recovered and, thank God,
the enemy has been vanquished. (28)

एष न: परम: काम एषा न: प्रीतिरुत्तमा।

यत् त्वां विजयिनं राम पश्यामो हतशात्रवम्॥ २९॥
“This was our highest ambition, and

this constitutes our greatest satisfaction,

that we see you having killed your enemy
and come out victorious, O Rama. = (29)
