* SUNDARAKANDA +

and birds began to scream. Nay, fierce
portents made their appearance before the
ogres. (2)
ततो गतायां निद्रायां राक्षस्यो विकृतानना:।
aq वनं ददृशुर्भग्नं तं च वीरं महाकपिम्॥३॥
Their sleep having consequently
vanished, the ugly-faced ogresses found

that grove devastated and saw that huge
and gallant monkey before them. (3)

स ता दृष्ट्वा महाबाहुर्महासत्त्वो महाबल:।
चकार et west भयावहम्॥४॥
Beholding them, the mighty-armed
Hanuman, who was~ endowed with
extraordinary courage and might, assumed
a gigantic form striking terror into the
ogresses. (4)

ततस्तु गिरिसंकाशमतिकायं महाबलम्।
राक्षस्यो AMT दृष्ट्वा पप्रच्छुर्जनकात्मजाम्॥५॥

Seeing a colossal monkey looking like
a mountain and endowed with extraordinary
strength, the ogresses for their part forthwith
questioned the daughter of Janaka as
follows: (5)
कोऽयं कस्य Hat are किंनिमित्तमिहागत:।
कथं त्वया सहानेन संवाद: Hd saa
आचक्ष्व नो विशालाक्षि मा भूत्ते सुभगे भयम्।
संवादमसितापाङ्गि waa fe कृतवानयम्॥७॥

“Please tell us, O large-eyed lady, who
this creature is, whose messenger is he,
whence and what for he has come and also
wherefore talk was held by him with you.
No fear need be entertained by you, O
graceful lady! What conversation did he
have with you, O lady with dark-cornered
eyes?” (6-7)

अथाब्रवीत् तदा साध्वी सीता सर्वाङ्गशोभना।
रक्षसां कामरूपाणां विज्ञाने का गतिर्मम॥ ८॥

The virtuous Sita, who was charming
of every limb, then replied forthwith as
follows: “What means can | have for acquiring
correct knowledge about the ogres, who

193

are capable of changing their form at will?
(8)

यूयमेवास्य जानीत योऽयं aq वा करिष्यति।
अहिरेव ह्यहे: Wer विजानाति न संशय:॥ ९॥
“You alone ought to know who he is and
what he is about. Indeed a serpent alone has

true knowledge about the movements of a
serpent: there is no doubt about it. (9)

अहमप्यतिभीतास्मि नैव जानामि को ह्ययम्।
afr राक्षसमेवैनं कामरूपिणमागतम्॥१०॥

“| too am exceedingly frightened and
do not know at all who he really is. Of
course, | believe him to be an ogre able to
change his form at will, arrived here.” (10)

ace वचनं strat राक्षस्यो fagat द्रुतम्।
स्थिता: काश्चिद्गता: काश्चिद् रावणाय निवेदितुम्॥ 28 il
Hearing the reply of Sita (a princess of
the Videha territory), the ogresses fled with
all speed. Some of them remained rooted
there, while others left to report the matter to
Ravana. (11)

रावणस्य समीपे q राक्षस्यो विकृतानना:।
विरूपं amet भीमं रावणाय न्यवेदिषु:॥ १२॥
Arrived in the presence of Ravana, the
ugly-faced ogresses for their part reported
to Ravana the presence of a monstrous and
redoubtable monkey in the following words:
(12)

अशोकवनिकामध्ये राजन् भीमवपु: कपि:।
सीतया कृतसंवादस्तिष्ठत्यमितविक्रम: il १३॥

“A monkey of terrible proportions and
endowed with immense prowess stands, O
king, in the heart of the ASoka grove, having
held a talk with Sita. (13)

न च तं जानकी सीता हरिं हरिणलोचना।
अस्माभिर्बहुधा पृष्टा निवेदयितुमिच्छति॥ १४॥

“Though questioned by us in many
ways, Sita, Janaka’s daughter, whose eyes
resemble those of a doe, however, does not
wish to disclose the identity of the monkey.

(14)
