242

« VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

Canto LXUI

Brahma pays a visit to Viswamitra at Puskara and rewards him with
the status of a Rsi (seer). There he feels enamoured of Menaka,
a celestial nymph deputed by Indra, and enjoys life with
her for ten years. At last he realizes his folly and
retires to the Himalayas, where he renews his
austerities and is rewarded with the status of
a Maharsi by Brahma. Still dissatisfied,
he prosecutes his austerities with
renewed vigour

पूर्णे added तु adend महामुनिम्।
अभ्यगच्छन् सुरा: सर्वे तप: फलचिकीर्षव:॥ १॥

At the end of full one thousand years
all the gods headed by Brahma, the creator,
for their part, keen as they were to bestow
on the sage the fruit of his austerities,
personally called on ViSwamitra, the eminent
sage, who had just finished his ablutions
marking the conclusion of a sacred vow. (1)

अब्रवीत् सुमहातेजा ब्रह्मा सुरुचिरं aa:
ऋषिस्त्वमसि भद्रं a स्वार्जितै: कर्मभि: शुभै:।। २॥

The exceptionally glorious Brahma
addressed to him the following most pleasing
words : “May good betide you ! You have
now become a Rsi, pure and simple, while
you were till now only a royal sage by virtue
of pious acts in the shape of austerities
performed by your own self.” (2)

तमेवमुक्त्वा देवेशस्तिदिवं पुनरभ्यगात्।
विश्वामित्रो महातेजा भूयस्तेपे महत् तप:॥ ३॥
Speaking to him thus, Brahma, the
suzerain lord of the gods, returned to the
highest heaven, his own realm; while
Viswamitra, the great ascetic, embarked
once more on a course of severe austerities.
(3)

ad: कालेन महता मेनका परमाप्सरा:।
Tay ANS स्नातुं समुपचक्रमे॥४॥

Then after a long time (one day)

Menaka, a celestial nymph of the highest
order, came to bathe in the three lakes
going by the name of Puskara, O jewel
among men ! (4)

at ददर्श महातेजा मेनकां कुशिकात्मज:।
रूपेणाप्रतिमां तत्र विद्युतं wee यथा॥५॥

The highly glorious Viswamitra (son of
Kusika) beheld in the water of one of the
aforesaid lakes the celebrated Menaka,
matchless in beauty, shining like a streak of
lightning in a cloud. (5)

कन्दर्पदर्पवशगो मुनिस्तामिदमब्रवीत्।

अप्सर: स्वागतं तेऽस्तु वस We ममाश्रमे॥६॥

Succumbing to the passion of love, the
sage (ViSwamitra) spoke to her in the
following words: “My welcome to you, O
celestial nymph ! Nay, dwell in this hermitage
of mine. (6)

अनुगृह्णीष्व भद्रं ते मदनेन विमोहितम्।
इत्युक्ता सा वरारोहा AA वासमथाकरोत्॥७॥

“May prosperity attend on you! Be
gracious to me, infatuated as | am through
love.” Requested thus, the aforesaid belle
forthwith took up her abode in that hermitage.

(7)
तपसो fe महाविघ्नो विश्वामित्रमुपागमत्।
तस्यां वसन्त्यां वर्षाणि पञ्च पञ्च च राघव॥८॥
विश्वामित्राश्रमे सौम्ये सुखेन व्यतिचक्रमु:।
BT काले Td तस्मिन् विश्वामित्रो महामुनि: ।। ९॥
