602

use of all weapons, have been killed with
their battalions by Rama of unwearied action.
(4)

अन्ये च बहव: VAT महात्मानो निपातिता:।
प्रख्यातबलवीर्येण पुत्रेणेन्द्रजिता मम॥५॥

at भ्रातरौ तदा बद्धौ घोरैर्दत्तवरै: wit:
यन्न wet सुरै: सर्वैरसुरैर्वा महाबलै:॥६॥

मोक्तुं तद्बन्धनं घोरं यशक्षगन्धर्वपन्नगै:।
wat WA प्रभावैर्वा मायया मोहनेन वा॥७॥
Many other heroes of gigantic
proportions have also been struck down.
The aforesaid two brothers, Rama and
Laksmana, were bound the other day with
formidable arrows, on which boons of
infallibility had been conferred by Brahma,
by my eldest son, Indrajit, whose strength
and prowess are widely known. That
formidable bond of theirs, which could not
be undone by all the gods or even by
demons endowed with extraordinary might
nor even by Yaksas (a class of demigods),
Gandharvas (celestial musicians) and Nagas
(a class of semi-divine beings having the
face of a man and the tail of a serpent)
became free by virtue of their superhuman
powers or some conjuring trick or magical
charm, which | do not know. (5—7)

शरबन्धाद् विमुक्तौ तौ भ्रातरौ रामलक्ष्मणौ।
ये योधा निर्गता: शूरा राक्षसा मम शासनात्॥ ८ ॥
a सर्वे Peat युद्धे वानरै: सुमहाबलै:।
तं न पश्याम्यहं युद्धे योऽद्य रामं सलक्ष्मणम्॥ ९ ॥
नाशयेत् सबलं वीरं ससुग्रीवं विभीषणम्।
अहो सुबलवान् Wal महदस्त्रबलं च वै॥१०॥
यस्य विक्रममासाद्य राक्षसा निधनं गता:।
तं मन्ये wad वीरं नारायणमनामयम्॥११॥
तद्भयाद्धि पुरी लङ्का पिहितद्वारतोरणा।
अप्रमत्तैश्च सर्वत्र गुल्मे रक्ष्या पुरी त्वियम्॥१२॥
अशोकवनिका da यत्र सीताभिरक्ष्यते।
निष्क्रमो वा प्रवेशो वा ज्ञातव्य: सर्वदैव न:॥ १३॥

The aforesaid two brothers, Rama and

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA +

Laksmana, got liberated anyhow from the
network of arrows. Nay, all the gallant ogre
warriors who sallied forth at my command
were killed in combat by the monkeys, who
are endowed with exceptional might.

“| do not see the warrior who should be
able to make short work in combat today of
the heroic Rama with Laksmana and his
army as well as Vibhisana accompanied by
Sugriva. Oh, really great is the power of
Rama’s missiles and exceptionally mighty
is Rama, on reaching the range of whose
prowess the ogres have met their death. |
recognize that heroic scion of Raghu to be
no other than Lord Narayana, who is proof
against all ailment. Indeed, it is through fear
of him that Lanka has its doors and outer
gates ever closed. Nay, let this city of
Lanka for its part, and especially the ASoka
grove, where Sita is being guarded on all
sides, be defended alongwith its garrisons
by you, who have survived destruction,
remaining vigilant all the time. Every exit
from and entry into the city and the grove
must be definitely known by us at all times.

(8—13)
यत्र यत्र Vag गुल्मस्तत्र तत्र पुन: पुन:।
सर्वतश्चापि तिष्ठध्वं स्वै: स्वै: UAT ae: i १४॥

“Wherever there is a garrison, exit and
entry should be checked again and again.
Surrounded by your respective troops,
remain posted on all sides. (14)
द्रष्टव्यं च पदं तेषां वानराणां निशाचरा:।
प्रदोषे वार्धरात्रे वा Wee वापि सर्वश:॥१५॥

“Nay, the movements of the aforesaid
monkeys should be watched by you, O
prowlers of the night, in every way, whether
there is dusk or midnight or even sunrise.

(15)
नावज्ञा dt कर्तव्या वानरेषु कदाचन।
द्विषतां बलमुद्युक्तमापतत् किं स्थितं यथा॥ १६॥

“No indifference should be shown to
