* AYODHYAKANDA +

521

Canto LXII

When reproached in harsh words by Kausalya, though already feeling
disconsolate through separation from his sons and daughter-in-law,
DaSaratha falls into a swoon recalling his past sin in the form of
killing a hermit boy, which was responsible for his present
misfortune. On waking from his swoon he tries with folded
hands to conciliate Kausalya and on the latter reciprocating
his sentiments, the Emperor is lulled into a nap

एवं तु क्रुद्धया राजा राममात्रा सशोकया।
श्रावित: wed area चिन्तयामास दु:खित:॥ १॥
Told harsh words, as aforesaid, by the
angry Kausalya (Sri Rama’s mother), who
was full of grief, the king for his part felt
distressed and fell abrooding. (1)

चिन्तयित्वा स च नृपो मोहव्याकुलितेन्द्रिय: ।
अथ दीर्घेण कालेन संज्ञामाप परंतप:॥ २॥
Nay, having reflected awhile the
aforesaid monarch found his senses
confused due to a spell of unconsciousness.
And it was after a long time that the Emperor
(who was noted for subduing his enemies)
regained consciousness. (2)

a संज्ञामुपलभ्यैव दीर्घमुष्णं च नि:श्चसन्।
कौसल्यां Usd दृष्टवा ततश्चिन्तामुपागमत्॥ ३॥
Again, heaving च doleful sigh
immediately on regaining consciousness,
he relapsed into brooding on seeing Kausalya
by his side. (3)
तस्य चिन्तयमानस्य प्रत्यभात् कर्म दुष्कृतम्।
यदनेन कृतं पूर्वमज्ञानाच्छब्दवेधिना॥४॥
Even as he reflected, the sinful deed
that had been unwittingly perpetrated by
him in the past while hitting a mark (screened
from sight) with the help of sound alone
flashed on his mind. (4)

अमनास्तेन शोकेन रामशोकेन च प्रभु:।
द्वाभ्यामपि महाराज: शोकाभ्यामभितप्यते॥ ५॥

The mighty Emperor felt disconcerted

through remorse caused by the thought of
that sinful deed as well as through grief
born of separation from Sri Rama and was
tormented with the dual grief. (5)

दह्यमानस्तु शोकाभ्यां कौसल्यामाह g: faa: |
वेषमानोऽञ्जलिं peal प्रसादार्थमवाङ्मुख:॥ ६॥

Folding his hands in order to propitiate
Kausalya, the king, who was being consumed
by the twofold grief and was feeling afflicted
thereby, spoke trembling to Kausalya as
follows, his face hanging downward:

(6)
प्रसादये wat कौसल्ये रचितोऽयं मयाञ्जलि:।
वत्सला चानृशंसा च त्वं fe नित्यं परेष्वपि॥ ७॥

“| seek your favour, O Kausalya ! Here
is my supplication to you with folded hands.
In fact, you are ever full of affection even to
your enemies and tender-hearted. (7)

भर्ता तु खलु नारीणां गुणवान् निर्गुणोऽपि ar
af विमृशमानानां प्रत्यक्षं देवि दैवतम्॥८॥
“The husband for his part, be he full of
virtues or even lacking in them, is indeed a
visible deity to ladies knowing what is right,
O godly lady ! (8)
सा त्वं धर्मपरा नित्यं दृष्टलोकपरावरा।
नार्हसे विप्रियं ab दु:खितापि सुदु:खितम्॥९॥
“Though afflicted, you, who are not
only conversant with the principles of
righteousness of every kind but also ever
devoted to righteousness and have seen
both good and evil fortune in the world,
