* SUNDARAKANDA +

became silent in order to be able to hear
more of Hanuman’s delightful speech dealing
with the theme of Sri Rama. (31)

सीताया वचनं श्रुत्वा मारुतिर्भीमविक्रम:।
शिरस्यञ्जलिमाधाय वाक्यमुत्तरमब्रवीत्॥ ३२॥

Placing his folded hands on his head
as a token of submission on hearing the
reply of Sita, Hanuman, son of the wind-
god, of redoubtable prowess made the
following excellent submission: (32)

न त्वामिहस्थां जानीते Wa: कमललोचन:।

तेन wat नानयत्याशु शचीमिव पुरंदर:॥३३॥
“The lotus-eyed Sri Rama does not know

you to be here. Therefore, he does not take

you back soon as did Indra (the destroyer of

strongholds) rescue his own consort, Saci,

borne away by the demon Anuhrada. (33)

saa च वचो ve क्षिप्रमेष्यति wea: |

चमूं प्रकर्षन् महतीं warrordaari ax i
“Leading a huge army consisting of

monkeys and bears, Sri Rama, a scion of

Raghu, will instantly come here merely on
hearing my report. (34)
विष्टम्भयित्वा बाणौघैरक्षोभ्यं वरुणालयम्।
करिष्यति पुरीं लङ्कां काकुत्स्थ: शान्तराक्षसाम्॥ ३५ ॥
“Filling the sea (lit., the abode of Varuna)
through and through with volleys of shafts,
even though it cannot even be shaken by
others, Sri Rama, a scion of Kakutstha, will
rid the city of Lanka of ogres. (35)

wa यद्यन्तरा मृत्युर्यदि car महासुरा:।
स्थास्यन्ति पथि रामस्य स तानपि वधिष्यति॥ ३६ ॥
“On that occasion if Death, gods or
even mighty demons stand in the way of Sri
Rama, he would destroy them too. (36)

तवादर्शनजेनार्ये शोकेन परिपूरित:।
न wad लभते wa: सिंहार्दित sa द्विप:॥ ३७॥

“Filled with grief born of your absence,

169

O noble lady, Sri Rama does not find rest
any more than an elephant wounded by a
lion. (37)

मन्दरेण च ते देवि शपे मूलफलेन च।
मलयेन च विन्ध्येन मेरुणा दर्दुरेण AN ३८॥
यथा सुनयनं वल्गु fais चारुकुण्डलम्।
मुखं द्रक्ष्यसि रामस्य पूर्णचन्द्रमिवोदितम्॥ ३९॥
“Nay, | swear to you by the Mandara
and Malaya, Vindhya, Sumeru and Dardura
mountains, constituting the abode of
monkeys, as well as by roots and fruits which
serve as our food, O godlike lady, that you
will soon behold the charming countenance
of Sri Rama, resembling the risen full moon,
with beautiful eyes, lips like a ripe Bimba
fruit and lovely earrings. (38-39)

fad seafa aefe wa प्रस्रवणे firth
शतक्रतुमिवासीनं नागपृष्ठस्य मूर्धनि॥४०॥

“You will shortly see Sri Rama perched
on the Prasravana mountain like Indra (who
is believed to have performed a hundred
horse-sacrifices in his previous existences
as a condition precedent for being born as
Indra) seated on the back of Airavata (the
chief of elephants), O princess of the Videha
territory ! (40)
न मांसं राघवो भुङ्क्ते न चैव मधु Aad!
वन्यं सुविहितं fret भक्तमश्नाति पञ्चमम्॥४१॥

“Sri Rama, a scion of Raghu, does not
take meat nor honey. He partakes everyday
of wild fruits and boiled (wild) rice, fully

sanctioned for an ascetic, in the evening
(the fifth* period of the day). (41)

नैव दंशान् न मशकान् न कीटान् न सरीसृपान्।
राघवोऽपनयेद् गात्रात् त्वद्गतेनान्तरात्मना॥४२॥

“Sri Rama is no longer able to drive
away gnats or mosquitoes, insects or even
reptiles from his body, his mind being fixed
on you. (42)

* The five periods into which a day has been divided are—(1) morning (प्रात:), forenoon (#74),
midday (मध्याह्न), afternoon (31 Te) and evening (ae).
