* AYODHYAKANDA +

साधु राघव मा भूत् a बुद्धिरेवं निरर्थिका।
प्राकृतस्य नरस्येव ह्यार्यबुद्धेस्तपस्विन:॥ २॥

“You have spoken aright, O scion of
Raghu; but such a vain resolution, akin to
that of an ordinary man, ought not to have
been made by you, who are endowed with
a noble understanding and given to
austerities. (2)

क: कस्य पुरुषो बन्धु: किमाप्यं कस्य केनचित्।
wat fe wad wate wa विनश्यति au
“No man is the friend of anyone, nor is
anything to be gained by anyone through
anyone; for, alone is a creature born and
alone does it perish. (3)

तस्मान्माता frat चेति wa सज्जेत यो नर:।
उन्मत्त Fa स ज्ञेयो नास्ति कश्चिद्धि कस्यचित्॥ ४॥

“Therefore, the man who feels attached
to anyone believing that the latter is his
mother or father, O Rama, should be
reckoned on a par with a madman; for none
is related to another. (4)
यथा ग्रामान्तरं गच्छन् नर: कश्चिद् बहिर्वसेत्।
उत्सृज्य च तमावासं प्रतिष्ठेतापरेऽहनि॥५॥
vata मनुष्याणां पिता art गृहं agi
आवासमात्रं काकुत्स्थ सज्जन्ते AT सज्जना:॥ ६॥

“As while journeying to another distant
village a man stays abroad in the course of
his journey and, leaving that resting place
behind, proceeds further the next day, even
so, to men a father, mother, home and
wealth are only a temporary shelter, O Rama
(a scion of Kakutstha); the wise do not get
attached to these. (5-6)

frat we समुत्सृज्य स नार्हसि नरोत्तम।
आस्थातुं कापथं ga विषमं बहुकण्टकम्॥७॥
“Relinquishing the kingdom of Ayodhya,
inherited from your father, O jewel among
men, you as such ought not to tread the

wrong path, which is painful, rugged and
bristling with thorns. (7)

समृद्धायामयोध्यायामात्मानमभिषेचय ।
एकवेणीधरा fe त्वा amt सम्प्रतीक्षते॥८॥

675

“Get yourself consecrated on the throne
of the prosperous Ayodhya; for the city
eagerly awaits your return like a widow who
wears a single braid of hair as a sign of
mourning and desolation. (8)

राजभोगाननुभवन् महार्हान् पार्थिवात्मज।
विहर त्वमयोध्यायां यथा शाक्रस्तिविष्टपे॥९॥
“Enjoying kingly delights of great value,
O prince, sport you in Ayodhya as Indra
does in heaven. (9)

न ते कश्चिद् दशरथस्त्वं च तस्य च कश्चन।
अन्यो राजा त्वमन्यस्तु तस्मात् HS यदुच्यते॥ १० ॥

“DasSaratha was none to you nor
were you related in anyway to him. The
king was not you, while you are not the
king Dasaratha; therefore do what is
recommended to you. (10)
ators पिता जन्तो: शुक्रं शोणितमेव च।
संयुक्तमृतुमन्मात्रा पुरुषस्येह जन्म तत्॥११॥

“The father is only an efficient cause of
a creature; it is only the sperm and the
ovum conjointly retained by a prospective
mother during the nights favourable for

conception that constitute the material cause
of a human being in this world. (11)

Ta: स नृपतिस्तत्र गन्तव्यं यत्र तेन a
प्रवृत्तिरेषा भूतानां त्वं तु मिथ्या विहन्यसे॥ eeu

“The aforesaid king has departed to
the destination where he was bound to go,
viz., back to the five elements, from which
he had sprung up. Such is the natural way
of created beings, while you are being
harassed for no purpose.” (12)

अर्थधर्मपरा ये ये तांस्तान् शोचामि नेतरान्।
a fe दु:ख्मिह प्राप्य विनाशं wear लेभिरे॥ १३॥

“| bewail only those whosoever are
devoted to wealth and religious merit, not
others, who are devoted to sense-enjoyment
alone; for having undergone suffering in this
life for the sake of wealth and religious
merit, they have met with extermination even
after death. (13)
