1084

mags कृतज्ञश्च बुद्ध्या च परिनिष्ठित:।
शशास पृथिवीं स्फीतां धर्मेण सुसमाहित:॥६॥
“Righteous and dutiful घाप ४४8॥.-

composed in mind, he ruled over this wide
earth righteously with great care. (6)

तस्मिन् प्रशासति तदा सर्वकामदुघा मही।
रसवन्ति प्रसूनानि मूलानि च फलानि च॥७॥

“In his reign the earth yielded all such
desirable and flavoured things, as flowers,
roots and fruits. (7)

अकृष्टपच्या पृथिवी सुसम्पन्ना महात्मन:।

स राज्यं तादृशं भुङ्क्ते स्फीतमद्भुतदर्शनम्॥८॥
“The earth belonging to him yielded

forth fruits without being ploughed. He ruled

over that sort of kingdom, prosperous with

wonderful appearance. (8)

तस्य बुद्धि: समुत्पन्ना तप: कुर्यामनुत्तमम्।
तपो fe परमं sa: सम्मोहमितरत् सुखम्॥ ९॥
“It arose in his mind: ‘I shall perform
the penance unequalled, penance is indeed
the highest form of welfare; all other forms
of happiness are out of illusions.’ (9)

a निक्षिप्य ad ज्येष्ठं पौरेषु मधुरेश्वरम्।

तप उग्रं समातिष्ठत् तापयन् सर्वदेवता:॥१०॥
“Leaving his eldest son, Madhureswara,

as in-charge of the citizens, he performed

frightful penances, tormenting all gods. (10)

तपस्तप्यति qt तु वासव: परमार्तवत्।
विष्णुं समुपसंक्रम्य वाक्यमेतदुवाच ह॥११॥

“On Vrtra performing penances, Vasava
(Indra) being highly afraid, approaching Visnu
spoke thus, indeed. (11)
तपस्यता महाबाहो लोका: Ga विनिर्जिता:।
बलवान् स fe धर्मात्मा नैनं शक्ष्यामि शासितुम्॥ १२॥

« VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

““O one of long arms, all the worlds
have been conquered by him performing
penances, he is righteous and powerful, |
cannot subdue him. (12)

यद्यसौ तप आतिष्ठेद् भूय एव सुरेश्वर।
यावल्लोका धरिष्यन्ति तावदस्य वशानुगा: ।॥ १३॥
“‘If again he performs penances, all
beings of the worlds will be under him.(13)

aq चैनं परमोदारमुपेक्षसि महाबल।
क्षणं fe न ude Ga: क्रुद्धे त्वयि सुरेश्वर॥ १४॥
“‘O powerful one, you are overlooking
this demon, O lord of the gods, if you are in
anger, Vrtra will not stand even for a moment.
(14)

यदा fe प्रीतिसंयोगं त्वया विष्णो समागत:।
तदाप्रभृति लोकानां नाथत्वमुपलब्धवान्॥ १५॥
“‘Ever since you patronised him, he
has attained supremacy over the worlds.(15)

स त्वं Ware लोकानां कुरुष्व सुसमाहित:।
त्वत्कृतेन हि सर्वं स्यात् प्रशान्तमरुजं जगत्॥ १६॥
“So, have mercy on the worlds now;

by your favour, indeed, this world will be
free from pain. (16)

ga fe ad विष्णो cat निरीक्षन्ते दिवौकस:।
व्रत्रघातेन महता तेषां साह्यं Hort ह॥१७॥
“These denizens of heaven (gods) look
upon Thee, O Visnu, please help them by
killing the mighty Vrtra. (17)
त्वया fe नित्यश: साह्यं कृतमेषां महात्मनाम्।
असह्यमिदमन्येषामगतीनां गतिर्भवान्॥ १८ ॥
“By you forever succour was given to
the noble ones i.e., gods. For others these

ignoble Asuras are unbearable. You, Sir, are
the resort of those who have no shelter.” (18)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये उत्तरकाण्डे चतुरशीतितम: WA: ॥ ८४॥

Thus ends Canto Eighty-four in the Uttarakanda of the glorious Ramayana of Valmiki,
the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

