* BALAKANDA +

कश्चित् कमण्डलुं प्रादान्मौञ्जीमन्यो महामुनि: |
बसीमन्यस्तदा प्रादात् कौपीनमपरो APA WRI

A certain sage gave them a Kamandalu
(a drinking-vessel made of wild coconut),
while another great sage gave them a girdle
of Mufija grass. Yet another gave them on
the said occasion a Kusa mat (worthy of
sages), while still another gave them a strip
of cloth for covering the privities with. (22)

ताभ्यां ददौ dal हृष्ट: कुठारमपरो मुनि:।
काषायमपरो वस्त्रं चीरमन्यो ददौ मुनि:॥ २३॥

Full of joy, another hermit gave them
on that occasion a hatchet for cutting
wood; another, a piece of brown-red cloth
(generally used by Brahmacaris and
recluses); while still another hermit gave
them a scarf. (23)

जटाबन्धनमन्यस्तु HTT, मुदान्वित:।
यज्ञभाण्डमृषि: कश्चित् काष्ठभारं तथापर:॥ २४॥
Full of joy, yet another gave them a
string for binding one’s matted hair and a
cord for tying together a bundle of pieces of
wood. A certain seer gave them a sacrificial
vessel, while another gave them a faggot.
(24)

औदुम्बरीं gat: tated केचित् तदावदन्।
आयुष्यमपरे प्राहुर्मुदा तत्र महर्षय:॥ २५॥

Yet another gave them a wooden seat
made out of an Udumbara tree, while some
invoked blessings on them on that occasion.
Full of joy, other great seers present there
blessed them with long life. (25)

ददुश्चैवं वरान् ad मुनय: सत्यवादिन:।
आश्चर्यमिदमाख्यानं मुनिना सम्प्रकोर्तितम्॥ २६॥

In this way the sages present in that
assembly, who all habitually spoke the truth,
bestowed boons on the two princes and
said, “Wonderful is this narrative exquisitely
told at length by the sage Valmiki. (26)
परॆ कवीनामाधारं समाप्तं च यथाक्रमम्।
अभिगीतमिदं गीतं सर्वगीतिषु कोविदौ॥ २७॥

79

“It will serve as the chief support for
future poets and has been concluded with
due regard to the sequence of events. This
song has been beautifully sung by you, O
princes, well-versed in all styles of singing !

(27)
आयुष्यं पुष्टिजननं सर्वश्रुतिमनोहरम्।
प्रशस्यमानौ सर्वत्र कदाचित् तत्र Waar I २८॥
रथ्यासु राजमार्गेषु ददर्श भरताग्रज:।
स्ववेश्म चानीय ततो भ्रातरौ स कुशीलवौ॥ २९॥
पूजयामास «Ut राम: शत्रुनिबर्हण:।
आसीन: काञ्चने feat a च सिंहासने WH: Ul ३०॥
उपोपविष्टै: सचिवैरभ्रातृभिश्च समन्वित:।
get तु रूपसम्पन्नौ विनीतौ भ्रातरावुभौ॥ ३१॥
उवाच लक्ष्मणं राम: शत्रुघ्नं भरतं तथा।
श्रूयतामेतदाख्यानमनयोर्देववर्चसो: ॥ ३२॥
विचित्रार्थपदं सम्यग् गायकौ समचोदयत्।
at चापि मधुरं रक्तं स्वचित्तायतनि:स्वनम्॥ ३३॥
तन्त्रीलयवदत्यर्थं विश्रुतार्थमगायताम्।
ह्रादयत् सर्वगात्राणि मनांसि हृदयानि च।
श्रोत्राश्रयसुखं गेयं aq बभौ जनसंसदि॥ ३४॥

“It is conducive to long life, begets
prosperity and ravishes the ears and mind
of all who listen to it.” One day Sri Rama,
the elder brother of Bharata, beheld the
two singers roaming about chanting the
Ramayana in the lanes and streets of
Ayodhya and being applauded everywhere.
Bringing the two brothers, Kusa and Lava,
to his own palace and offering them an
exalted seat, the aforesaid Rama, the
destroyer of his foes, then duly entertained
them, deserving of honour as they were.
Seated on his celestial throne of gold and
surrounded by his ministers as well as by
his own brothers seated beside him, and
casting a look at the two brothers, who
were not only endowed with a charming
appearance but modest too, the aforesaid
King Rama addressed Bharata, Laksmana
and Satrughna as follows : “Let this narrative
couched in wonderful expressions and
dealing with diverse topics, be carefully heard
