138

यस्या ह्येवंविध: tacit दु:खिताया: wevad |

सा दु:खैर्बहुभिर्मुक्ता प्रियं प्राप्नोत्यनुत्तमम्॥४४॥
“Rid of her numerous woes, that

wretched lady about whom such a dream

has been vividly seen by me will undoubtedly

attain her beloved and highest object. (44)

भत्सितामपि याचध्वं राक्षस्य: fer विवक्षया।
राघवाद्धि भयं घोरं राक्षसानामुपस्थितम्॥४५॥

“Beseech her forgiveness, O ogresses,
even though she has been menaced by
you. What will be gained through your anxiety
to discuss the subject any more; for a
terrible danger from Sri Rama (a scion of
Raghu) threatens the ogres. (45)

प्रणिपातप्रसन्ना fe मैथिली जनकात्मजा।
अलमेषा परित्रातुं राक्षस्यो महतो भयात्॥४६॥

“Sita, a princess of Mithila, daughter of
Janaka, will get pleased with prostration
alone. She is capable of shielding you from
a terrible danger, O ogresses ! (46)

अपि aren विशालाक्ष्या न किंचिदुपलक्षये।
विरूपमपि चांगेषु सुसूक्ष्ममपि लक्षणम्॥४७॥

“Furthermore, | do not notice in the
limbs of this large-eyed lady any inauspicious
mark, however minute, which may give
indication of any mishap to her. (47)
अदु:खार्हामिमां देवीं वैहायसमुपस्थिताम्॥४८॥

“|, for my part, suspect that misfortune
has befallen this godlike lady—who does
not merit adversity and who mounted an
aerial car in the dream seen by me—only in
the shape of diminution of splendour
occasioned by want of bath, toilet etc. (48)
अर्थसिद्धिं तु वैदेह्या: पश्याम्यहमुपस्थिताम्।

i fast राघवस्य AU Yet

१ for my. part, visualize the
accomplishment of purpose of Sita, a
princess of the Videha territory to be at

« VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

hand, as also the destruction of Ravana,
the lord of ogres, and the triumph of Sri
Rama, a scion of Raghu. (49)

निमित्तभूतमेतत् तु श्रोतुमस्या महत् प्रियम्।
gad च स्फुरच्चक्षु: पद्मपत्रमिवायतम्॥७५०॥
“Nay, her left eye, large as a lotus-
petal, is seen throbbing. This is surely a
prognostication of her hearing a most pleasing
news. (50)

ईषद्धि हृषितो वास्या दक्षिणाया ह्यदक्षिण:।
अकस्मादेव At बाहुरेक: प्रकम्पते॥७५१॥

“Again, slightly thrilled, the left arm alone
of this amiable lady, Sita, a princess of the
Videha territory, is palpitating without any
visible cause at all. (51)

करेणुहस्तप्रतिम: सव्यश्चोरुरनुत्तम:।
वेपन् कथयतीवास्या राघवं पुरत: स्थितम्॥५२॥

“Her most shapely left thigh, resembling
the proboscis of an elephant, which is also
pulsating, announces, as it were, the presence
of Sri Rama, a scion of Raghu, standing in
front of her. (52)
पक्षी च शाखानिलयं प्रविष्ट:

. UA: WAVaAT Aa aAaAT
सुस्वागतां वाचमुदीरयाण:
पुन: पुनश्चोदयतीव हृष्ट:॥ ५३॥

“Nay, uttering excellent sweet notes
again and again after entering its nest on
the branch of a tree, a delighted bird is
repeatedly urging Sita, as it were, to rejoice,
uttering, as it did, a note announcing the
advent of an auspicious hour.” (53)

तत: सा ह्रीमती बाला भर्तुर्विजयहर्षिता।
अवोचद् यदि ad तथ्यं भवेयं शरणं हि व:॥ ५४॥
Rejoiced at the prospect of her husband’s
triumph, that shy youthful lady thereupon
said, “If that comes out to be true, | shall
undoubtedly be your protector.” (54)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये सुन्दरकाण्डे सप्तविंश: AWA: ॥ 20 Il
Thus ends Canto Twenty-seven in the Sundarakanda of the glorious Ramayana of
Valmiki, the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

