418

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

Canto XXXII

Having distributed his immense riches among the Brahmanas and others,
Sri Rama, accompanied by Sita and Laksmana, proceeds to his father’s
gynaeceum to take leave of him. Remaining unruffled even on
hearing en route the diverse talks of the citizens gathered
here and there, with melancholy writ large on their faces,
the royal trio reach their destination and urge Sumantra
to apprise their royal father of their arrival

ara तु सह वैदेह्या ब्राह्मणेभ्यो धनं बहु।
wag: पितरं xe dita सह राघवौ॥१॥

Having portioned out with Sita (a
princess of the Videha clan) abundant riches
to the Brahmanas, Sri Rama and Laksmana,
the two scions of Raghu, for their part
proceeded with her to see their father,
Emperor Dasaratha. (1)

ततो गृहीते प्रेष्याभ्यामशोभेतां तदायुधे।
मालादामभिरासक्ते सीतया समलंकृते॥२॥

Next to them shone the weapons of
the two brothers, held by a couple of servants
and nay, decorated with a number of wreaths
and worshipped by Sita herself with sandal
paste etc. (2)

तत: Wereeaitr विमानशिखराणि a
अभिरुह्य जन: श्रीमानुदासीनो व्यलोकयत्॥ ३॥

Ascending the roofs of temples and
mansions and the tops of seven-storeyed
buildings wealthy people gazed despondently
on them. (3)
न fe रथ्या: सुशक्यन्ते Wd बहुजनाकुला:।
आरुह्य AAT प्रासादाद् दीना: पश्यन्ति राघवम् NY

The streets could not be easily passed
through, crowded as they were with many
men; mounting, therefore, to the top of seven-
storeyed buildings, people looked sorrowfully
on Sri Rama, a scion of Raghu, from those
mansions. (4)
पदातिं सानुजं दृष्टवा ससीतं च जनास्तदा।
ऊचुर्बहुजना = area: शोकोपहतचेतस:॥५॥

Seeing Sri Rama walking with Sita and
Laksmana, his younger brother, at that time,
many men offered remarks as follows, their
mind infatuated with grief : (5)
यं यान्तमनुयाति स्म चतुरङ्गबलं महत्।
wah सीतया सार्धमनुयाति स्म लक्ष्मण:॥६॥

“Lo! the same Sri Rama, who was at
one time followed by a strong detachment
consisting of all the four limbs (viz, infantry,
cavalry, elephants and chariots), is walking,
unattended by bodyguards, with Sita, followed
by Laksmana alone. (6)
ऐडश्वर्यस्य रसज्ञ: सन् कामानां चाकरो महान्।
नेच्छत्येवानृतं hd वचनं धर्मगौरवात्॥७॥

“He who, having tasted the delights of
sovereignty, is a great repertory of objects
of enjoyment, is anxious not to belie the

plighted word of his father, prompted as he
is by respect for virtue. (7)

या न शक्या पुरा द्रष्टुं भूतैराकाशगैरपि।
aaa dat पश्यन्ति राजमार्गगता जना:॥८॥

“Even people on the roads are able today
to behold Sita, who could not formerly be
seen even by beings coursing in the air. (8)
वर्षमुष्णं च शीतं च नेष्यत्याशु विवर्णताम्॥ ९॥

“Rain, heat and cold will quickly reduce
to pallor Sita, who deserves to be daubed
with pigments (such as musk-paste) and
habitually paints her body with the paste of
red sandal. (9)
