98 « VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

accompanied him with particular reverence
because of the emperor being his esteemed
friend. By Romapada was made known to
the enlightened Rsyasrnga (the son of
Vibhandaka) his friendship with the emperor
as well as the relation in which the emperor
stood to the sage (being the real father of his
wife, Santa) as also how Santa was given
in adoption by the emperor to Romapada,
who was issueless, at the latter's request;
thereupon Rsyasrnga honoured the emperor
in return for the latter's salutations. Greatly
honoured in this way by Romapada and
having stayed with him for seven or eight
days, the emperor, the foremost among
men, spoke to the king as follows: “Let
your daughter, Santa, O king, proceed
alongwith her husband to my capital, O ruler
of the people, since there is a great
undertaking on foot there.” Having promised
the visit of that wise man, Rsyasrnga, with
the words “Amen!”, the king addressed
the following request to the Brahmana:
“Proceed you to Ayodhya with your wife !”
Hearing this, Rsyasrnga (the son of
Vibhandaka) said to the king at once, “So be
it!” (138—21)
स नृपेणाभ्यनुज्ञात: प्रययौ we भार्यया।
तावन्योन्याञ्जलिं कृत्वा स्नेहात्संश्लिष्य चोरसा Ul २२ ॥
ननन्दतुर्दशरथो रोमपादश्च वीर्यवान्।
तत: सुहृदमापृच्छ्य प्रस्थितो रघुनन्दन:॥ २३॥
Thus permitted by the king, he left with
his wife for Ayodhya. Greeting with joined
palms and clasping each other to their bosom
out of affection, the mighty Dasaratha and
Romapada both rejoiced. Taking leave of
his friend, DaSaratha, a scion of Raghu,
then departed for his capital. (22-23)

पौरेषु प्रेषयामास erm a शीघ्रगामिन:।
क्रियतां नगरं ad क्षिप्रमेव स्वलंकृतम्॥ २४॥
Ad: प्रहृष्टा: पौरास्ते श्रुत्वा राजानमागतम्॥ २५॥
तथा APM Ad सर्वं Wa यत् प्रेषितं तदा।
तत: स्वलंकृतं राजा नगरं प्रविवेश ह॥ २६॥

शङ्खदुन्दुभिनिर्हादै: पुरस्कृत्वा द्विजर्षभम्।
aa: प्रमुदिता: सर्वे दूष्टा aA नागरा द्विजम्॥ २७॥

प्रवेश्यमानं सत्कृत्य नरेन्द्रेणेन्द्रकर्मणा।
यथा दिवि सुरेन्द्रेण सहस्राक्षेण काश्यपम्॥ २८॥
While doing so he despached in
advance swift-footed messengers with the
following instructions to the citizens of
Ayodhya: “Let the whole city be tastefully
decorated at once, nay, sprinkled with water
and then dusted, fumigated with incense
and adorned with buntings.” Overjoyed to
hear of the king having well-nigh arrived,
the aforesaid citizens thereupon did at once
all that precisely as had been desired by
the king. Placing Rsyasrniga, the foremost
of the Brahmanas ahead, the king then
entered the well-decorated city in the midst
of blasts of conches and the beating of
kettle-drums; so the tradition goes. All the
citizens were really much delighted at that
time to see the Brahmana (Rsyasrnga) being
treated with respect and ushered into the
city by the king, who had rendered help to
Indra in his campaign against the demons—
even as Lord Vamana (son of the sage
KaSyapa) was ushered into paradise by the
thousand-eyed Indra, the ruler of the gods.
(24—28)

अन्त:पुरं प्रवेश्यैनं पूजां कृत्वा च शास्त्रत:।
कृतकृत्यं तदाऽऽत्मानं मेने तस्योपवाहनात्॥ २९॥
Having introduced the sage into the
gynaeceum and offered him worship
according to the scriptural ordinance,
DaSaratha thought himself at that time as
one whose object in life had been
accomplished, by escorting him to his palace.
(29)

अन्त:पुराणि सर्वाणि शान्तां FET तथागताम्।
सह vat विशालाक्षीं प्रीत्यानन्दमुपागमन्॥ ३०॥
Seeing the large-eyed Santa come with
her husband in that state with a babe, all the
queens experienced great joy through love.
(30)

पूज्यमाना तु ताभि: सा राज्ञा चैव विशेषत:।
उवास तत्र सुखिता कंचित् कालं सहद्विजा॥ ३१॥
