« KISKINDHAKANDA +

इमे जाम्बूनदमया: पादपा: कस्य तेजसा।
काञ्चनानि च पद्मानि जातानि विमले जले॥ ७॥

“Beholding such diverse curio-like
objects on entering this large hole in the
earth’s surface, seized with thirst, as we
were, we felt bewildered, disquieted and
distracted to think that they might be products
of demoniac Maya or enchantment. Whose
property are these golden trees shining
brightly like the rising sun, pure foods as
also roots and fruits golden palaces and
mansions of silver provided with windows
of gold and protected with lattices of gems?
By whose spiritual power have these holy
golden trees full of blossom and fruit and
emitting a fragrant smell been brought into
existence? And through whose might have
these golden lotuses sprung up in the pellucid
water? (83—7)

कथं मत्स्याश्च सौवर्णा दृश्यन्ते सह कच्छपै:।
आत्मनस्त्वनुभावाद् वा HET चैतत्तपोबलम्॥ ८॥

“Again, how do fishes alongwith turtles
appear golden? Is this attributable to your
own might or is this the spiritual power of
someone else acquired through askesis?

(8)
अजानतां न: सर्वेषां सर्वमाख्यातुमर्हसि।
Wage हनुमता तापसी धर्मचारिणी॥९॥
प्रत्युवाच हनूमन्तं सर्वभूतहिते रता।

Wat AA महातेजा मायावी वानरर्षभ॥१०॥

“Be pleased to point out everything to
us all, who are ignorant in this matter.”
Questioned thus by Hanuman, the ascetic
woman, who was practising virtue and was
devoted to the good of all created beings,
replied to Hanuman as follows : “There is a
conjurer, Maya by name, who is endowed
with great energy, O jewel among the
monkeys ! (9-10)

पुरा दानवमुख्यानां विश्वकर्मा aya ह॥११॥

“By him alone was this entire golden

1125

grove brought into existence by his wonderful
architectural skill. Formerly, they say, he
was the architect of the demon chiefs. (11)
स तुं वर्षसहस्राणि तपस्तप्त्वा महद्वने॥ १२॥
पितामहाद् at लेभे सर्वमौशनसं धनम्।
विधाय Wed बलवान् सर्वकामेश्वरस्तदा॥१३॥
उवास सुखित: कालं कंचिदस्मिन् महावने।
तमप्सरसि हेमायां सक्तं दानवपुङ्खवम्॥१४॥
इदं च ब्रह्मणा दत्तं हेमायै वनमुत्तमम्॥१५॥
Mad: कामभोगश्च गृहं चेदं हिरण्मयम्।
दुहिता मेरुसावर्णेरहं तस्या: स्वयंप्रभा॥१६॥
sé रक्षामि wat हेमाया वानरोत्तम।
मम प्रियसखी हेमा नॄत्तगीतविशारदा॥ gon
“By him was this foremost ethereal
golden palace constructed. Having practised
austerities in this extensive grove for
thousands of years, he for his part secured
from Brahma (the father of the progenitors
of the universe) as a boon the entire wealth
of Sage Sukra (in the form of his marvellous
creative power as well as all the materials
required for creation and the science of
architecture, which is attributed to the said
sage). Having accomplished everything,
the mighty Maya, who had absolute control
over all the objects of enjoyment evolved by
him then lived happily for some time in this
large grove. Seizing his thunderbolt and
assailing the said demon chief, who was
found attached to the celestial nymph
Hema, Indra (the destroyer of strong-holds),
the ruler of gods, made short work of him.
Nay, this excellent grove was bestowed on
Hema by Brahma (the creator), as also
perpetual enjoyment of luxuries and this
golden mansion. |, Swayamprabha by
name, daughter of Merusavarni, guard this
dwelling of the said Hema, O jewel among
the monkeys! Hema, who is my beloved
friend, is an adept in the arts of dancing and
singing. (12—17)
