# YUDDHAKANDA #

a रथेनाग्निवर्णेन बलवान् रावणात्मज:।
इन्द्रजित् कवची खड्गी सध्वज: प्रत्यदृश्यत॥ ८॥
Instantly there appeared the mighty
Indrajit, sprung from the loins of Ravana,
clad in armour, armed with a sword and
distinguished by his ensign, in a chariot
which shone like fire. (8)

wart महातेजा: पौलस्त्यमपराजितम्।
Wed wat समरे सम्यग् युद्धं प्रयच्छ मे॥९॥
Laksmana, who was endowed with
extraordinary ardour, spoke as follows to
that scion of Sage Pulastya, who had never
been vanquished in combat before: “l
challenge you to an encounter. Pray, give
battle to me in a straight contest.” (9)
एवमुक्तो महातेजा मनस्वी रावणात्मज:।
अब्रवीत् परुषं वाक्यं तत्र Gear विभीषणम्॥ १०॥
Challenged in these words, the strong-
minded Indrajit (sprung from the loins of
Ravana), who ७53 endowed with
extraordinary energy, uttered the following
harsh words on seeing Vibhisana there:
(10)

इह त्वं जातसंवृद्ध: साक्षात् भ्राता पितुर्मम।
कथं द्रुह्यसि पुत्रस्य पितृव्यो मम राक्षस॥११॥
“Born and brought up in this race of
Sage Pulastya, you are a real brother of my
father, and are my uncle. How then do you
bear hostility to me, your nephew (son),
O ogre? (11)
न ज्ञातित्वं न सौहार्दं न जातिस्तव दुर्मते।
प्रमाणं न च सौदर्यं न धर्मो धर्मदूषण॥ १२॥
“There is neither feeling of
consanguinity, nor friendliness, nor pride of
birth, nor again right judgement, nor brotherly
feeling, nor piety in you, O perverse one,
the obloquy of virtue! (12)
शोच्यस्त्वमसि दुर्बुद्धे निन्दनीयश्च साधुभि:।
यस्त्वं स्वजनमुत्सृज्य परभृत्यत्लमागत:॥१३॥

667

“You are pitiable, nay, deserve to be
reproached by the virtuous in that, having
abandoned your own kind, you have sought
service with the enemy, O evil-minded
one! (13)

नैतच्छिथिलया बुद्ध्या त्वं वेत्सि महदन्तरम्।
क्व च स्वजनसंवास: क्व च नीच पराश्रय: ।। १४॥

“With your slack understanding you do
not discern the great difference between
the two. The two are poles apart: living
together with one’s kindred and taking refuge
with strangers, O vile ogre! (14)
गुणवान् वा परजन: स्वजनो निर्गुणोऽपि ar |
निर्गुण: स्वजन: श्रेयान् य: पर: UL Wet: I १५॥

“Even if a stranger is endowed with all
excellences and one’s own kinsman is devoid
of virtues, a relation, though wanting in
merit, is preferable; he, however, who is a
stranger is always a stranger. (15)

a: tauat परित्यज्य परपक्षं निषेवते।
a स्वपक्षे क्षयं याते पश्चात् ata हन्यते॥१६॥

“He who, renouncing his own kind,
takes sides with a stranger is destroyed by
those people of the other side themselves,
when his own kinsfolk have met their end at
their hands. (16)

निरनुक्रोशता चेयं agit a निशाचर।
स्वजनेन त्वया शक्यं Wet रावणानुज॥ १७॥

“The ruthlessness of the kind shown
by you in pointing out my vulnerable point,
O ranger of the night, and the manliness
exhibited by you in escorting Laksmana to
this spot, could be shown by you, a kinsman
alone, O youngest brother of Ravana!”

(17)

इत्युक्तो भ्रातृपुत्रेण प्रत्युवाच विभीषण:।
अजानन्निव मच्छीलं fa राक्षस विकत्थसे॥ १८ i

Taunted in these words by his brother’s
son, Indrajit, Vibhisana replied as follows:
“Why do you speak perversely like this,
