+ UTTARAKANDA +

ad deat तस्मै रोचयामास aq a
करेण तु करं तस्या ग्राहयित्वा मयस्तदा॥ १७॥
Wer we deat राक्षसेन्द्रमिदं वच:।
sa ममात्मजा राजन् हेमयाप्सरसा धृता॥१८॥
कन्या मन्दोदरी नाम पत्न्यर्थं प्रतिगृह्यताम्।
areata तं Wa दशग्रीवोऽभ्यभाषत॥१९॥

Even in that place he resolved to give
his daughter to him. Causing her hand to be
grasped by his, Maya, the chief of the
Daityas, addressed the following words to
the chief of the Raksasas loudly laughing:
‘O king, this my daughter, was brought up
by Hema, the Apsara; the name of the
maiden is Mandodari; have her as your
wife. To him, O Rama, DaSagriva said, ‘All
right’. (17—19)

Ward da चैवाग्निमकरोत् पाणिसंग्रहम्।
स हि तस्य मयो राम शापाभिज्ञस्तपोधनात्॥ Ro Il
विदित्वा तेन सा दत्ता तस्य पैतामहं कुलम्।
अमोघां तस्य शक्तिं च प्रददौ परमाद्भुताम्॥ २१॥
एवं स Heal दारान् वै लङ्काया BAT: WY: UW २२॥
गत्वा तु नगरीं भार्ये भ्रातृभ्यां समुपाहरत्।
वैरोचनस्य दौहित्रीं वज्रज्वालेति नामत:॥ 23 I
at भार्यां कुम्भकर्णस्य रावण: समकल्पयत्।
गन्धर्वराजस्य सुतां शैलूषस्य महात्मन:॥ २४॥
सरमां नाम धर्मज्ञां लेभे भार्यां विभीषण:।
तीरे तु सरसो a तु संजज्ञे मानसस्य हि॥ २५॥

‘Then kindling a fire, he married her.’
“Though Maya knew that he (Dasagriva)
was under a curse from ViSrava (who was
rich in austerities), still, he gave his daughter
knowing as he did his descent from Brahma
(the grandfather of the universe). Maya also
gave him a most wonderful and infallible
javelin obtained by him through hard Tapas
and with this he struck Laksmana. Having
thus married, the mighty lord of Lanka went
to his city and secured a wife each for his
(two) brothers, Ravana decided upon the

885

grand-daughter (daughter’s daughter) of Bali
(son of Virocana), Vajrajwala by name, as
the wife of Kumbhakarna. Vibhisana obtained
as his wife, Sarama, daughter of the noble
Gandharva king, Sailasa, who knew what is
right. She was born on the bank of the

Manasa lake. (20—25)
Wea मानसं तु agli जलदागमे।
मात्रा तु तस्या: कन्याया: स्नेहेनाक्रन्दितं वच: 1 २६ ॥
सरो मा वर्धयस्वेति dd: सा सरमाभवत्।
एवं ते Haart वै War तत्र Waar: ure
स्वां स्वां भार्यामुपादाय गन्धर्वा इव नन्दने।
ततो मन्दोदरी Gt मेघनादमजीजनत्॥ २८॥

“The Manasa lake was then swelling
due to the monsoon. ‘O lake, do not overflow’,
( सरो मा वर्धयत) cried the mother of that child
out of affection. Hence her child came to be
known as Sarama. Having thus married,
the three Raksasas spent a pleasant time
there each in the company of his wife, even
as the Gandharvas did in the Nandana
grove (the pleasure-garden of Indra). Then
Mandodari gave birth to her son, Meghanada.

(26—28)
a एष इन्द्रजिन्नाम युष्माभिरभिधीयते।
जातमात्रेण हि पुरा तेन रावणसूनुना॥ २९॥
eam सुमहान् मुक्को नादो जलधरोपम:।
जडीकृता च सा लङ्का तस्य नादेन राघव॥ ३०॥

“He is the same who is called Indrajit by
all of you. Crying as soon as he was born,
this son of Ravana, made a great noise
resembling the rumbling of clouds. Lanka was
stunned by his roar, 0 Raghava! (29-30)
frat तस्याकरोन्नाम मेघनाद sit स्वयम्।
सोऽवर्धत तदा WH रावणान्त:पुरे शुभे॥ ३१॥
रक्ष्यमाणो वरस्त्रीभिश्छन्न: काष्ठैरिवानल:।
मातापित्रोर्महाहर्षं जनयन् रावणात्मज:॥३२॥

“Hence his father himself named him

Meghanada. Causing great delight to his
mother and father, and being well taken
