# YUDDHAKANDA #

geal स रोषताम्राक्षो वज्रदंष्टू: प्रतापवान्।
प्रविवेश धनुष्पाणिस्त्रासयन् हरिवाहिनीम्॥ १३॥
शरैर्विदारयामास कङ्कपत्रैरजिह्यगै: |

fave वानरांस्तत्र सप्ताष्टौ नव us च॥ १४॥

अङ्गद सम्प्रधावन्ति प्रजापतिमिव प्रजा:॥१५॥

Monkeys and ogres too fell on the
earth’s surface on the field of battle. Being
struck by the simian army, the entire
army of ogres broke, while Vajradamstra
stood gazing. Seeing the ogres sore stricken
with fear while being struck by monkeys,
the glorious Vajradarnstra penetrated the
army of monkeys, bow in hand, terrifying
them, his eyes red with anger, and tore
them with his arrows furnished with the
plumes of a buzzard, which flew straight to
the target. He pierced on the battlefield as
many as seven, eight, nine or five monkeys
together. Extremely enraged, the glorious
Vajradamstra thus pierced the monkeys.
Struck with terror the monkeys, with their
bodies hacked to pieces by arrows, flew for
protection to Angada even as created beings
fly for protection to Brahma (the lord of
creation). (11—15)

ततो हरिगणान् भग्नान् दृष्ट्वा वालिसुतस्तदा।
क्रोधेन वज्रदंष्दं तमुदीक्षन्तमुदैक्षत॥१६॥

Seeing the simian troops broken at
that moment, Angada (the son of Vall)
thereupon regarded the aforesaid
Vajradamstra, who was gazing on him with
anger at that time. (16)
वज्रदंष्द्रोऽङ्गदश्चोभौ योयुध्येते परस्परम्।
wd: परमक्रुद्धौ हरिमत्तगजाविव॥१७॥

Vajradamstra and Angada both fought
with each other and, extremely enraged,
strode on the battle-field like a lion and an
elephant intoxicated with ichor. (17)
तत: शतसहस्रेण हरिपुत्रं महाबलम्।
जघान मर्मदेशेषु शरैरग्निशिखोपमै:॥१८॥

489

Then Vajradamstra hit Angada (the son
of Vali), who was endowed with extraordinary
might, in his vital parts with a hundred
thousand arrows resembling tongues of fire.

(18)

रुधिरोक्षितसर्वाङ्गो वालिसूनुर्महाबल:।
चिक्षेपष वज्रदंष्टाय gat भीमपराक्रम:॥१९॥

Bathed in blood all over his limbs,
Angada (son of Vali), who was endowed
with terrific prowess and extraordinary might,
hurled a tree at Vajradamstra. (19)

Gem पतन्तं तं वृक्षमसम्भ्रान्तश्च राक्षस:।
चिच्छेद agen सोऽपि मथित: प्रापतद् भुवि॥ २०॥
Seeing it flying towards him, the ogre,
who did not feel perplexed in the least, tore
it into numerous pieces and having torn it
into pieces, the latter too fell on the earth.
(20)

तं दृष्टवा वज्रदंष्टरस्य विक्रमं प्लवगर्षभ:।
wa विपुलं शैलं चिक्षेप च ननाद च॥ २१॥
Breaking off a huge crag on seeing the
prowess of Vajradamstra referred to above,

Angada, the foremost of monkeys, hurled it
at him and also thundered. (21)

तमापतन्तं दृष्ट्वा स रथादाप्लुत्य वीर्यवान्।
गदापाणिरसम्भ्रान्तत पृथिव्यां समतिष्ठत॥ २२॥
Leaping down from his chariot on seeing
it flying towards him, the valiant ogre, who
did not feel perplexed at all, stood firmly on
the ground, mace in hand. (22)

अङ्गदेन शिला क्षिप्ता गत्वा तु रणमूर्धनि।
सचक्रकूबरं साश्वं waa wi तदा॥ २३॥
Flying in the forefront of the battle, the
crag discharged by Angada for its part
forthwith shattered the chariot with its wheels,
pole and horses. (23)

ततोऽन्यच्छिखरं Te विपुलं द्रुमभूषितम्।
वज्रदंष्टरस्य शिरसि पातयामास वानर:॥ २४॥
Seizing another huge crag adorned
