406

“My celebrated mother-in-law, Kausalya,
who was so fond of her offspring, O scion
of Raghu, has been disunited from you, her
son, even as a cow, who is fond of its calf,
would get disunited from its calf. (11)

सा vasa कौसल्या त्वया FAUT राघव।
वत्सेनेव यथा धेनुर्विवत्सा वत्सला Har ee ul

“Your life was predicted to be long
by astrologers, O scion of Raghu! Their
prophecy, however, has proved to be
false since your life has been so short, O
Rama! (12)

उद्दिष्टं दीर्घमायुस्ते दैवज्ञैरपि राघव।
अनृतं वचनं तेषामल्पायुरसि राघव॥१२॥

“Or, even though you were extremely
sagacious, perhaps prudence disappeared
in you, in that you fell into the enemy’s
hands while asleep. Indeed, this Time-
Spirit alone, who is the cause of existence
of all created beings, brings them to an
end. (13)

अथवा नश्यति Wat प्राज्ञस्यापि सतस्तव।
पचत्येनं aM कालो भूतानां प्रभवो ह्ययम्॥ १३॥
अदृष्टं मृत्युमापन्न: कस्मात् त्वं नयशास्त्रवित्।
व्यसनानामुपायज्ञ: कुशलो ह्यसि वर्जने॥१४॥
“How did you meet with an unforeseen
death—you, who were well-versed in the
science of political ethics, nay, who knew
the ways and means of warding off calamities
and were skilled in employing them? (14)
तथा त्वं सम्परिष्वज्य रौद्रयातिनृशंसया।
कालरात्र्या ममाच्छिद्य EA: कमललोचन॥ १५ ॥
“After tearing you from me and closely
embracing you, O lotus-eyed one, you
were in that condition of lying buried in
sleep, borne away by the horrible and most
cruel deity presiding over the night of
destruction. (15)

Be शेषे महाबाहो at विहाय तपस्विनीम्।
प्रियामिव यथा ant पृथिवीं पुरुषर्षभ॥ १६॥

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA +

“Having deserted me, a pitiable woman,
and embracing the earth like a darling, you
are lying here, O mighty-armed jewel among
men! (16)
अर्चितं सततं यत्नाद् गन्धमाल्यैर्मया तव।
इदं a मत्प्रियं वीर धनु: काञ्चनभूषितम्॥१७॥

“Here lies your bow decked with gold,
which was always meticulously worshipped
by me with sandal paste and wreaths
of flowers and which was so dear to
me, O gallant prince! (17)

fit दशरथेन त्वं श्वशुरेण ममानघ।
was पितृभि: सार्धं नूनं स्वर्गे समागत:॥१८॥
“You have surely been re-united in
heaven with your father and my father-in-
law, King DaSaratha, as well as with all the
manes, O sinless one! (18)

fefa नक्षत्रभूतं च महत्कर्मकृतं तथा।
que राजर्षिवंशं त्वमात्मन: समुपेक्षसे॥१९॥

“What a pity that you are deserting the
saintly race of royal sages to which you
belong—you, by whom such extraordinary
exploits have been performed, which shine
like luminaries in the sky! (19)

किं मां न प्रेक्षसे राजन् किं वा न प्रतिभाषसे।
बालां बालेन सम्प्राप्तां भार्यां AT सहचारिणीम्॥ २०॥
“Why don’t you look at me, O prince?
And why don’t you answer me, won by you
when you were a mere boy, as a wife and
companion of a tender age? (20)
संश्रुतं गृह्णता पाणिं चरिष्यामीति यत् त्वया।
स्मर तन्नाम काकुत्स्थ नय मामपि दु:खिताम्॥ २१॥
“Call to mind, O scion of Kakutstha,
the solemn promise that was actually made
by you while taking my hand in yours, viz.,
that ‘I shall practise virtue with you’ and
take me, the wretched one, too with you to
the other world. (21)
कस्मान्मामपहाय त्वं गतो गतिमतां वर।
अस्माल्लोकादमुं लोकं त्यक्त्वा मामपि दु:खिताम्॥ २२॥
