418

emitting a harsh peal of thunder are drenching
Lanka with hot blood on all sides. (25)
रुदतां वाहनानां च प्रपतन्त्यश्रुबिन्दव:।
रजोध्वस्ता विवर्णाश्च न प्रभान्ति यथापुरम्॥ २६॥
“Tear-drops are falling from the eyes of
weeping horses and elephants. Soiled with
dust and discoloured, the quarters do not
shine brightly as before. (26)
व्याला गोमायवो गृध्रा वाश्यन्ति च सुभैरवम्।
Yara लङ्कामारामे समवायांश्च Bad roll
“Carnivorous animals, jackals and
vultures are emitting exceedingly frightful

shrieks; nay, penetrating deep into Lanka,
they gather in gardens. (27)

कालिका: पाण्डुरैर्दन्तै: प्रहसन्त्यग्रत: स्थिता: |
Rare: स्वप्नेषु मुष्णन्त्यो गृहाणि प्रतिभाष्य च॥ २८ ॥

“Pillaging the dwellings after uttering
unpleasant notes, coal-black women with
yellowish teeth stand before us in dreams
laughing heartily. (28)
Tent बलिकर्माणि yar: पर्युपभुञ्जते।

GT We प्रजायन्ते मूषका नकुलेषु च॥२९॥

“Dogs devour the offerings of food made

to gods and other beings before the daily
meal in houses. Donkeys are born of cows

and rats of mongooses. (29)
मार्जारा द्वीपिभि: सार्धं सूकरा: शुनकै: सह।
किंनरा राक्षसैश्चापि समेयुर्मानुषै: सह॥ ३०॥

“Cats mate with leopards, pigs with
dogs and Kinnaras (a species of demigods
with a human figure and the head of a horse
or with a horse’s body and the head of a
man) with ogres as well as with human
beings. (30)
पाण्डुरा रक्तपादाश्च विहगा: कालचोदिता:।
राक्षसानां विनाशाय कपोता विचरन्ति च॥ ३१॥

“Nay, impelled by the Time-Spirit, white
and red-footed doves move about in the air,
boding the extermination of the ogres. (31)

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA +

चचरीचीकूचीति वाशान्त्य: शारिका वेश्मसु स्थिता: ।
पतन्ति ग्रथिताश्चापि निर्जिता: कलहैषिभि: 1321

“Making a chirping sound, minas living
in households grapple with other bellicose
birds and, ultimately drop down vanquished
by them. (32)

पक्षिणश्च मृगा: सर्वे प्रत्यादित्यं रुदन्ति ते।
करालो विकटो मुण्ड: पुरुष: कृष्णपिङ्गल: ॥ ३३॥
कालो गृहाणि सर्वेषां काले कालेऽन्ववेक्षते।
एतान्यन्यानि दुष्टानि निमित्तान्युत्पतन्ति च॥ ३४॥

“Birds and beasts all utter plaintive
cries, facing the sun. In the form of a frightful,
monstrous blackish fellow with a shaven
head, the Time-Spirit casts his eyes on
the dwellings of us all at times. These and
other sinister portents appear before us.

(33-34)
नहि मानुषमात्रोऽसौ राघवो दृढविक्रम:॥ ३५॥
येन बद्ध: WAX च Ad: स परमाद्भुत:।
कुरुष्व नरराजेन संधिं रामेण रावण।
ज्ञात्वावधार्य कर्माणि क्रियतामायतिक्षमम्॥ ३६॥

“We look upon Sri Rama as Lord
Visnu having assumed a human semblance.
The aforesaid Sri Rama of unyielding
prowess, by whom that most wonderful bridge
has been constructed over the deep, is no
mere human being. Therefore, conclude
peace, O Ravana, with Sri Rama, a ruler
of men. Having come to know of his
exploits, as well as of the evil portents in
Lanka, let that which is good for the
future be done after mature consideration.”

(35-36)
इदं वचस्तस्य निगद्य माल्यवान्
परीक्ष्य रक्षोधिपतेर्मन: पुन:।
अनुत्तमेषूत्तमपौरुषो ली
aya तूष्णीं समवेक्ष्य रावणम्॥३७॥

Having tendered this salutary advice

and sounding the mind of Ravana (the
