# YUDDHAKANDA #

began to split asunder the waters of the sea
of monkeys’ army in the same way as a
gigantic fish would rend the entire expanse
of a sea. (35)

तमापतन्तं सहसा समीक्ष्य
दीप्तेषुचापं युधि राक्षसेन्द्रम्।
महत् समुत्पाट्य महीधराग्रं
दुद्राव रक्षोधिपति हरीश:॥ ३६॥
Tearing up the huge peak of a mountain
on perceiving the aforesaid Ravana (the
ruler of ogres), advancing all of a sudden,
armed with a radiant bow and arrows, on
the battlefield, Sugriva, the ruler of monkeys,
darted towards the king of ogres. (36)
wea faa निशाचराय।
तमापतन्तं सहसा समीक्ष्य
चिच्छेद बाणैस्तपनीयपुङ्खै: tt ३७॥
Firmly seizing that mountain top, whose
slopes were clothed with numerous trees,
he hurled it at Ravana, the prowler of the
night. On perceiving it flying precipitately
towards himself, Ravana, however, tore it
asunder with his arrows fitted with golden

shafts. (37)
तस्मिन् प्रवृद्धोत्तमसानुवृक्षे
sys विदीर्णे पतिते पृथिव्याम्।
हिकल्यं ॥
समादधे राक्षसलोकनाथ: ॥ ३८ ॥

The aforesaid peak, whose slopes were
covered with excellent fully-grown trees,
having fallen to the ground torn into pieces,
Ravana (the lord of the ogre world) fitted
to his bow an arrow which resembled
a huge serpent and looked like Death himself.

(38)

a तं

चिक्षेपष सुग्रीववधाय रुष्ट:॥३९॥

511

Taking up that arrow, which rivalled
the wind in fury, nay, shone like a fire
emitting sparks and vied with the thunderbolt
of the mighty Indra (the ruler of gods) in
velocity, he discharged it in rage for the
destruction of Sugriva. (39)

a want रावणबाहुमुक्त:
शक्राशनिप्रख्यवपु:प्रकाशम् ।
सुग्रीवमासाद्य बिभेद वेगाद्
गुहेरिता क्रौञ्चमिवोग्रशक्ति: It ४० I

Reaching Sugriva, who shone with his
body, which resembled the thunderbolt
of Indra (the ruler of gods), the said arrows,
discharged by Ravana’s arm, pierced him
in its flight even as the fierce javelin
propelled by Kartikeya, son of Lord Siva
and the Commander-in-Chief of the celestial
army, penetrated the Kraufca mountain.

(40)
a सायकार्तो विपरीतचेता:
कूजन् पृथिव्यां निपपात वीर:।
तं वीक्ष्य भूमौ पतितं fads
नेदु: West युधि यातुधाना:॥४१॥

Stupefied when struck by that arrow,
that hero, Sugriva, fell groaning to the ground.
Perceiving him fallen to the ground deprived
of his senses, the ogres on the battlefield
shouted exultantly. (41)
adit गवाक्षो गवय: सुषेण-

स्त्वथर्षभो ज्योतिमुखो नलश्च।
प्रदुद्रुवुस्तं प्रति राक्षसेन्द्रम्॥४२॥

Tearing up crags, Gavaksa, Gavaya,
Susena as also Rsabha, Jyotirmukha and
Nala of colossal size for their part then
rushed towards that lord of ogres. (42)

तेषां प्रहारान् स Wat मोघान्

रक्षोधिपो बाणशतै:र शिताग्रै:।
तान् वानरेन्द्रानपि बाणजालै-

fate जाम्बूनदचित्रपुङ्खै: ॥ ४३॥
