# YUDDHAKANDA #

with torrents of rain, and stood firm all the
while: so the tradition goes. (11)

अचिन्तयित्वा बाणौघाञ्शरीरे पातितान् कपि:।
अकम्पनवधार्थाय मनो दध्रे महाबल:॥१२॥

Not minding the volleys of arrows
discharged on his body, the monkey,
Hanuman, who was~ endowed with
extraordinary might, set his mind on the
destruction of Akampana. (12)

स प्रहस्य महातेजा हनूमान् मारुतात्मज:।
अभिदुद्राव तद्रक्ष: कम्पयन्निव मेदिनीम्॥१३॥
Laughing heartily the exceedingly
courageous Hanuman, sprung from the loins
of the wind-god, rushed towards that ogre,
causing the earth to shake, as it were. (13)

wera नर्दमानस्य दीप्यमानस्य तेजसा।
aya wa दुर्धर्षं दीप्तस्येव विभावसो:॥ १४॥

The form of Hanuman, even as he
roared glowing as he was with energy,
forthwith became difficult to overpower even
like a blazing fire. (14)

आत्मानं त्वप्रहरणं ज्ञात्वा क्रोधसमन्वित:।
शैलमुत्पाटयामास वेगेन हरिपुङ्खव:॥१५॥
Full of anger on finding himself without
any weapon, Hanuman, a bull among the
monkeys, for his part speedily tore up a
crag. (15)
गृहीत्वा सुमहाशैलं पाणिनैकेन मारुति:।
a fara महानादं भ्रामयामास वीर्यवान्॥१६॥
Picking up that huge rock with one

hand, and yelling a roar, that valiant son of
the wind-god, Hanuman, whirled it round.(16)

ततस्तमभिदुद्राव राक्षसेन्द्रमकम्पनम्।

पुरा fe waft संख्ये वज्रेणेव पुरंदर:॥१७॥
Then he rushed towards the ogre chief,

Akampana, even as Indra (the destroyer of

citadels) in the olden days rushed towards

the demon, Namuci, with thunderbolt in his

hand. (17)

495

अकम्पनस्तु Te दृष्ट्वा गिरिशृङ्गं समुद्यतम्।
दूरादेव महाबाणैरर्धचन्दैर्व्यदारयत्॥ १८ ।।
Beholding that summit of a mountain
uplifted on the field of battle, AKampana for
his part tore it into pieces from a distance
by means of mighty arrows with a cresent-
shaped head. (18)

तं पर्वताग्रमाकाशे रक्षोबाणविदारितम्।
विकोर्णं पतितं दृष्ट्वा STAM क्रोधमूच्छित: ।॥ १९॥

Hanuman was distracted with anger
on seeing that mountain peak fallen in pieces
when torn asunder in the air by the ogre’s
shafts. (19)

सोऽश्चकर्णं समासाद्य रोषदर्पान्वितो हरि:।
तूर्णमुत्पाटयामास महागिरिमिवोच्छितम्॥ २०॥

Approaching an Aswakarna tree, lofty
as a big mountain, the aforesaid monkey,
Hanuman, quickly uprooted it, seized as he
was with anger and violence. (20)
तं गृहीत्वा महास्कन्धं सोऽश्वकर्णं महाद्युति: |
We wear wien भ्रामयामास संयुगे॥ २१॥

Picking up that ASwakarna tree with a
huge trunk, and holding it firmly, Hanuman,
who was endowed with extraordinary
splendour, brandished it with great delight.

(21)

प्रधावन्नुरुवेगेन बभञ्ज तरसा द्रुमान्।
ett WAH KAA महीम्॥ 22
Running with great rapidity and tearing
up the earth with his feet, Hanuman, who
was extremely enraged, broke down the
trees with impetuosity. (22)

गजांश्च सगजारोहान् सरथान् रथिनस्तथा।
जघान हनुमान् धीमान् राक्षसांश्च पदातिगान्॥ २३॥
The sagacious Hanuman struck down
elephants with their mahouts, car-warriors
with their chariots, as well as the ogres who
fought on foot. (23)

तमन्तकमिव Get Ast प्राणहारिणम्।
हनूमन्तमभिप्रेकष्य राक्षसा विप्रदुद्रुवु:॥ २४॥
