320

and with arrows and swords in hand, we
should then speedily reach there with quick
steps from this side. (16)

आकाशे गणश: स्थित्वा हत्वा तां हरिवाहिनीम्।
अश्मशस्त्रमहावरृष्टया प्रापयाम चयमक्षयम्॥१७॥
“Taking our stand in the airspace in
battalions and battering the army of monkeys
with a mighty hail of stones and missiles,
we should send them to the abode of
Death. (17)
wa चेदुपसर्पेतामनयं रामलक्ष्मणौ।
अवश्यमपनीतेन जहतामेव जीवितम्॥१८॥
“If Rama and Laksmana fall into our

trap, they need must succumb to our wily
stratagem. (18)

कौम्भकर्णिस्ततो वीरो निकुम्भो नाम वीर्यवान्।
erat परमक्रुद्धो रावणं लोकरावणम्॥१९॥

“Extremely enraged, the heroic and
powerful son of Kumbhakarna, Nikumbha
by name, thereupon submitted as follows to
Ravana, who made people cry by his
oppression: (19)

सर्वे भवन्तस्तिष्ठन्तुं महाराजेन संगता:।
अहमेको हनिष्यामि Wea सहलक्ष्मणम्॥ २०॥

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA +

ततो वज्रहनुर्नाम राक्षस: पर्वतोपम:॥ २१॥
क्रुद्ध: परिलिहन् सृक्कां जिह्वया वाक्यमब्रवीत्।
स्वैरं कुर्वन्तु कार्याणि भवन्तो विगतज्वरा:। २२॥
एकोऽहं भक्षयिष्यामि at wat हरिवाहिनीम्।
स्वस्था: क्रीडन्तु निश्चिन्ता: पिबन्तु मधु वारुणीम्॥ २३॥
अहमेको वधिष्यामि सुग्रीवं सहलक्ष्मणम्।
साङ्गदं च हनूमन्तं सर्वांश्चैवात्र वानरान्॥२४॥
“Let you all tarry here in the company
of our mighty ruler. | shall presently kill
single-handed, Rama, a scion of Raghu, as
well as Laksmana, Sugriva_ alongwith
Hanuman and all the other monkeys too.”
Then an ogre, Vajrahanu by name, who
looked like a mountain, submitted as follows,
licking his lips with his tongue in rage:
“Completely rid of all anxiety, you discharge
your duties without constraint. । shall
devour single-handed the whole of that
army of monkeys. Divert yourself confidently
and drink wine, getting free from
anxiety. Alone | shall kill Sugriva with
Laksmana, and Hanuman with Angada as
well as all the monkeys this very moment.”
(20—24)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये युद्धकाण्डेऽष्टम: सर्ग: ॥८॥
Thus ends Canto Eight in the Yuddhakanda of the glorious Ramayana of
Valmiki, the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

ae:

सर्ग:

Canto IX

Restraining the ogres, who were boasting each of his own strength, Vibhisana
begins to talk wisdom, on which Ravana retires to his own palace

ततो निकुम्भो रभस: सूर्यशत्रुर्महाबल:।
सुप्तघ्नो यज्ञकोपश्च
अग्निकेतुश्च दुर्धर्षो रश्मिकेतुश्च राक्षस:।

प्रहस्तोऽथ विरूपाक्षो वज्रदंष्द्रो महाबल:।
महापाश्वमहोदरौ ।। १ ॥ | धूम्राक्षश्चातिकायश्च दुर्मुखश्चैव राक्षस:॥ ३॥
परिघान् पट्टिशान्शूलान् प्रासान् शक्तिपरश्वधान्।

इन्द्रजिच्च महातेजा बलवान् रावणात्मज:॥ २॥ | चापानि च सुबाणानि खड्गांश्च विपुलाम्बुभान्॥ ४॥
