* AYODHYAKANDA +

or deserve to be sprinkled with holy water
on the head (when being installed as the
head of a state) are not enjoined to sit at the
door of anyone in this way. (17)

shag नरशार्दूल हित्वैतद् दारुणं व्रतम्।
पुरवर्यामित: क्षिप्रमयोध्यां याहि राघव॥१८॥

“Get up, O tiger among men ! Giving
up this terrible vow, return, O scion of
Raghu, speedily to Ayodhya, the foremost
of cities, from this place.” (18)

आसीनस्त्वेव भरत: पौरजानपदं जनम्।
sara सर्वत: प्रेक्ष्य किमार्यं नानुशासथ॥१९॥

Gazing on all sides, Bharata, even while
sitting, said to the citizens as well as to the
people of the countryside, “Wherefore do you
not plead with my elder brother?” (19)

a तदोचुर्महात्मानं पौरजानपदा जना:।
काकुत्स्थमभिजानीम: सम्यग् वदति राघव:॥ २०॥

The people of the city as well as of the
countryside then replied as follows to Bharata,
an exalted soul: “We know full well that
you, a scion of Raghu, speak aright to Sri
Rama, a scion of Kakutstha. (20)

एषोऽपि fe महाभाग: पितुर्वचसि तिष्ठति।
अत Ua न शक्ता: TA व्यावर्तयितुमञ्जसा॥ २१॥

“This highly blessed prince, Sri Rama,
too sincerely abides by the command of his
father. For this very reason we are, truly
speaking, not easily able to divert him from
his purpose.” (21)

तेषामाज्ञाय वचनं रामो वचनमब्रवीत्।
एवं Prater वचनं सुहृदां धर्मचक्षुषाम्॥ २२॥
Hearing their submission Sri Rama
addressed the following words to Bharata :
“Listen to the foregoing words of our friends,
who have their eyes fixed on what is right.
(22)

एतच्चैवोभयं श्रुत्वा सम्यक् सम्पश्य राघव।
Shag त्वं महाबाहो At च स्पृश तथोदकम्॥ २३॥
“Nay, hearing both these utterances
(mine as well as that of these people) weigh

687

them fully, O scion of Raghu. Get you up, O
mighty-armed prince, and touch water in
order to sip it as well as myself as an
indication of your resolve to break the vow
that you have just taken.” (23)

अथोत्थाय जलं TAT भरतो वाक्यमब्रवीत्।
ord A परिषदो मन्तरिण: श्रृणुयुस्तथा॥ २४॥

Getting up immediately and touching
water, Bharata spoke as follows: “Let all
the members of this assembly hear me. Let
the king’s counsellors too listen. (24)

न याचे पितरं राज्यं नानुशासामि मातरम्।
एवं परमधर्मज्ञं नानुजानामि Wee २५॥

“| never begged sovereignty of my
father nor did | instruct my mother to do it
on my behalf. Nor did | approve of this step
of Sri Rama (a scion of Raghu), viz., that he
should go into exile for fourteen years, he
knows best what is right. (25)
यदि त्ववश्यं वस्तव्यं कर्तव्यं च पितुर्वच:।
अहमेव निवत्स्यामि चतुर्दश वने समा:॥ २६॥

“If the behest of our father must be
carried out and if one must live in the forest
at all events, | myself shall do so for a
period of fourteen years.” (26)

धर्मात्मा तस्य सत्येन भ्रातुर्वाक्येन विस्मित:।
sara राम: Wet पौरजानपदं जनम्॥ २७॥
विक्रीतमाहितं क्रीतं यत् पित्रा जीवता मम।
न तल्लोपयितुं wat मया वा भरतेन वा॥ २८॥

Fixing his gaze on the citizens of
Ayodhya as well as on the people of the
countryside, Sri Rama, whose mind is set
on righteousness and who felt astonished
at the sincere vow of his aforesaid brother,
said “The sale, deposit or purchase effected
by our father while alive cannot be nullified
either by me or even by Bharata. (27-28)

उपाधिर्न मया कार्यो वनवासे जुगुप्सित:।
युक्तमुक्तं च कैकेय्या far मे सुकृतं कृतम्॥ २९॥

“No proxy should be sent by me into
exile in the woods; for that would be a
