172

pure and the virtues existing in him are
numerous. (14)

उत्साह: पौरुषं सत्त्वमानृशंस्यं कृतज्ञता।
विक्रमश्च प्रभावश्च सन्ति वानर राघवे॥१५॥
“Perseverance, manliness, courage,
absence of cruelty, gratitude, prowess and
energy figure in Sri Rama, a scion of Raghu,
O Hanuman ! (15)

चतुर्दश सहस्राणि राक्षसानां जघान a:
जनस्थाने विना भ्रात्रा शत्रु: कस्तस्य ANGST १६॥

“What enemy would not tremble before
him, who slew as many as fourteen thousand
ogres in Janasthana, unaided by his younger
brother, Laksmana? (16)

न स शबक्यस्तुलयितुं व्यसनै: पुरुषर्षभ:।
अहं तस्यानुभावज्ञा शक्रस्येव पुलोमजा॥ voi

“That jewel among men cannot be
shaken by woes (which are no match for
him). | know his might even as Saci (sprung
from the loins of the demon Puloma) knows
the might of her husband, Indra. (17)

शरजालांशुमान् शूर: HA रामदिवाकर:।

शत्रुरक्षोमयं तोयमुपशोषं नयिष्यति॥१८॥
“The valiant Sri Rama, who is like the

sun with his shafts for rays, O Hanuman,

will surely dry up the water in the form of the
hostile ogres.” (18)
इति संजल्पमानां at रामार्थे शोककर्शिताम्।
अश्रुसम्पूर्णवदनामुवाच हनुमान् कपि:॥१९॥
To Sita, who was speaking volubly as
aforesaid, nay, who had been emaciated
through grief on account of her separation
from Sri Rama, her face bathed in tears,
Hanuman submitted as follows : (19)

saa च वचो ve क्षिप्रमेष्यति wea: |
चमूं प्रकर्षन् vedi ederordtapciail zo tl
“Leading a huge army, full of monkeys

and bears, Sri Rama will surely hasten to
Lanka the moment he hears my report. (20)

« VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

अथवा मोचयिष्यामि त्वामद्यैव सराक्षसात्।
अस्माद् दु:खादुपारोह मम पृष्ठमनिन्दिते॥ २१॥

“Or, | myself shall deliver you from this
calamity caused by the ogre Ravana this
very day. Please climb up my back, O
irreproachable lady ! (21)
wat तु पृष्ठगतां कृत्वा संतरिष्यामि सागरम्।
शक्तिरस्ति fe मे ate लङ्कामपि सरावणाम्॥ २२॥

“| shall easily leap across the sea even
after placing you on my back; for | can
carry on my back the whole of Lanka,
Ravana and all. (22)

अहं प्रस्रवणस्थाय राघवायाद्य मैथिलि।
प्रापयिष्यामि शक्राय हव्यं हुतमिवानल:॥ २३॥

“| shall transport you this very day, O
princess of Mithila, to Sri Rama, a scion of
Raghu, staying on Mount Prasravana, even
as the sacred fire conveys the oblations
thrown into it to Indra for whom they are
intended. (23)

द्रक्ष्यस्यद्यैव वैदेहि Wed सहलक्ष्मणम्।
व्यवसायसमायुक्तं विष्णुं दैत्यवधे यथा॥ २४॥
त्वद्दर्शनकृतोत्साहमाश्रमस्थं महाबलम्।
aad नगराजस्य मूर्धनि॥ २५॥

“You will see this very day Sri Rama,
accompanied by Laksmana—Sri Rama, who
in his determination to exterminate the ogres
resembles Lord Visnu, full of determination
to destroy the demons, is endowed with
extraordinary might and resolved to see you
and remains seated in his hermitage even
as Indra (the destroyer of strongholds) on
the summit of Mount Meru, the king of
mountains, O Sita! (24-25)
पृष्ठमारोह मे देवि मा विकाङ्क्षस्व शोभने।
योगमन्विच्छ रामेण शशाङ्केनेव रोहिणी॥ २६॥

“Mount on my back, O godlike lady!
Do not show reluctance, O charming one!

Seek to be united with Sri Rama even as
Rohinr’* is with the deity presiding over

* A consort of the moon-god, presiding over a constellation of the same name.
