410

apartments alongwith Sri Rama could not
bear the grief born of his impending
separation from Sri Rama, his face covered
with tears. (1)

स भ्रातुश्चरणौ me निपीड्यं रघुनन्दन:।
सीतामुवाचातियशां wet च महाव्रतम्॥ २॥
Tightly pressing the feet of his eldest
brother, Laksmana, the delight of the Raghus,
spoke as follows to Sita, who enjoyed great
celebrity, as also to Sri Rama, a scion of
Raghu, who had undertaken a great vow:
(2)
ae त्वानुगमिष्यामि वनमग्रे धनुर्धर:॥ ३॥
“If your mind is set on proceeding to
the forest, full of deer and elephants | shall

accompany you to the woodland, walking
ahead of you armed with a bow. (3)

मया समेतोऽरण्यानि रम्याणि विचरिष्यसि।
पक्षिभिर्मृगयूथैश्च संघुष्टानि समन्तत:॥४॥

“Accompanied by me you will roam
about in delightful woodlands rendered noisy
all round by birds and swarms of deer. (4)
न देवलोकाक्रमणं नामरत्वमहँ वृणे।
ead चापि लोकानां कामये न त्वया विना॥ ५॥

“Without you | do not wish to ascend to
heaven nor do | solicit godhood nor again
do | crave for the rulership of the spheres.”

(5)
wa ब्रुवाण: सौमित्रिर्वनवासाय निश्चित:।
रामेण बहुभि: सान्त्वैर्निषिद्ध: पुनरब्रवीत्॥६॥

Speaking thus, Laksmana, son of
Sumitra, who was determined to dwell in the
forest with his eldest brother and was
discouraged by Sri Rama in so many
soothing words, submitted once more as
follows : (6)

“Even though | stand already permitted

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

by you to accompany you to the forest, how
am | being prohibited anew this moment?
(7)
यदर्थं प्रतिषेधो A क्रियते गन्तुमिच्छत:।
एतदिच्छामि विज्ञातुं संशयो fe ममानघ॥८॥

“| wish to know definitely wherefore |
am being disallowed though longing to
proceed with you; for there is doubt in my
mind, O sinless brother as to how permission
was granted in the beginning and is being
withheld now.” (8)

ततोऽब्रवीन्महातेजा रामो लक्ष्मणमग्रत:।
स्थितं प्राग्गामिनं eit याचमानं कृताञ्जलिम्॥ ९॥
Sri Rama, who was endowed with great
splendour, then replied as follows to the
strong-minded Laksmana, who stood before
him eager to precede Sri Rama to the forest
and soliciting the latters permission with
joined palms : (9)

स्निग्धो धर्मरतो धीर: Gad सत्पथे स्थित:।
प्रिय: प्राणसमो वश्यो विजेयश्च सखा च A १०॥

“Full of affection for me, devoted to
virtue, resolute, constantly firm on the right
path as shown by the Vedas, dear to me as
life, amenable to my control and obedient,
you are my boon companion too and,
therefore, worthy in every way of
accompanying me. (10)

मयाद्य सह सौमित्रे त्वयि गच्छति तद्वनम्।
को भजिष्यति HAC सुमित्रां वा यशस्विनीम्॥ ११ ॥

“Yet if you proceed with me to the
forest for which | am leaving today, O son
of Sumitra, who will serve the illustrious
Kausalya and Sumitra? (11)

अभिवर्षति कामैर्य: usta: पृथिवीमिव।
a कामपाशपर्यस्तो महातेजा महीपति:॥१२॥

“That highly glorious king, our father,
who showered blessings on the people even
as the god of rain sends down rain on the
earth stands fettered by the cord of love.

(12)
