390

resembling big mountains and all are capable
of levelling in a trice the earth with its

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA +

mountains razed to the ground and scattered,
O great king!” (48)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये युद्धकाण्डे सप्तविंश: सर्ग: ॥ 20 Il
Thus ends Canto Twenty-seven in the Yuddhakanda of the glorious Ramayana of
Valmiki, the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

Canto XXVIII

Suka completes the account given by Sarana

सारणस्य वच: श्रुत्वा रावणं राक्षसाधिपम्।
बलमादिश्य ad Wa शुको वाक्यमथाब्रवीत्॥ १॥
Suka now spoke as follows to Ravana,
the suzerain lord of ogres, when he had
listened to the submission of Sarana, who
stood silent after describing the entire army
of monkeys as mentioned above: (1)

स्थितान् पश्यसि यानेतान् मत्तानिव महाद्विपान्।
न्यग्रोधानिव गाङ्गेयान् सालान् हैमवतानिव॥ २॥
Ud दुष्प्रसहा राजन् बलिन: कामरूपिण:।
दैत्यदानवसंकाशा Ax देवपराक्रमा:॥३॥
“These monkeys, whom you see ranged
like huge elephants in rut, like banian trees
standing on the banks of the Ganga or like
sal trees growing on the Himalayas, O king,
are difficult to resist, mighty and able to
change their form at will. They look like
Daityas and Danavas and are endowed
with the prowess of gods in war. (2-3)

wa कोटिसहस्राणि va पञ्च च A च।
तथा शङ्कुसहस्राणि तथा gana Ai vil

“There are twenty-one thousand crore
(or two hundred and ten thousand millions),
a thousand Sankus* and a hundred Vrndas
of these monkeys. (4)

Ra देवगन्धर्वैरुत्पन्ना: कामरूपिण:॥५॥

“These latter, who are the allies of
Sugriva and ever dwell in Kiskindha itself,
were begotten by gods and Gandharvas
and are capable of changing their forms at
will. (5)
at तौ पश्यसि तिष्ठन्तौ कुमारौ देवरूपिणौ।
मैन्दश्च द्विविदश्चैव ताभ्यां नास्ति समो युधि॥ ६॥

“The two monkeys whom you see
standing over there, who resemble each
other and are endowed with the appearance
of gods, are Mainda and Dwivida by name;
there is none equal to them in combat. (6)

ब्रह्मणा समनुज्ञातावमृतप्राशिनावुभौ।

आशंसेते यथा लङ्कामेतौ मर्दितुमोजसा॥७॥
“Duly permitted by Brahma, the creator,

both have quaffed the drink of immortality.

These two monkeys too aspire duly to

demolish Lanka by their own might. (7)

यं तु पश्यसि fod प्रभिन्नमिव कुञ्जरम्।

यो बलात् क्षोभयेत् क्रुद्ध: समुद्रमपि वानर:॥ ८॥

एषोऽभिगन्ता लङ्कायां वैदेह्यास्तव च प्रभो।

एनं wa पुरा ge वानरं पुनरागतम्॥९॥

“The monkey whom you actually see

* The number exactly corresponding to a Sanku and a Vrnda should be understood as calculated at

the end of this canto.
