# YUDDHAKANDA #

जाज्वल्यमानमाकाशे संहारास्त्रमिवापरम्॥३२॥
यं दृष्टवा देवता: सर्वा भयार्ता विद्रुता feet: |
fauna च महच्छूलं प्रज्वलन्तं निशाचर:॥ ३३॥
स क्रोधात् प्राहिणोत् तस्मै राघवाय महाहवे।
तमापतन्तं ज्वलितं खरपुत्रकराच्च्युतम्॥३४॥
बाणैश्चतुर्भिराकाशे wet चिच्छेद राघव:।
स भिन्नो नैकधा weit दिव्यहाटकमण्डित: |
व्यशीर्यत महोल्केव रामबाणार्दितो भुवि॥ ३५॥

Nay, brandishing the great flaming
pike, which was difficult to lay one’s hands
on and had been bestowed on him by Rudra
(the god of destruction), which inspired terror
and shone brightly in the air like another
weapon of universal destruction and seeing
which all the gods fled panic-stricken in all
directions—the night-stalker furiously hurled
it against Sri Rama in that major conflict. Sri
Rama, a scion of Raghu, split with four
arrows that flaming pike discharged from the
hand of Khara’s son, even as it came flying
and while it was still in the air. Struck by the
arrows of Sri Rama and split into many
pieces, the aforesaid pike, which was decked
with ethereal gold, crumbled on the ground
like a colossal meteor. (82—35)
तच्छूलं Fad दृष्टवा रामेणाक्लिष्टकर्मणा।
साधु साध्विति भूतानि व्याहरन्ति नभोगता:॥ ३६ Ul

Seeing that pike destroyed by Sri Rama
of unwearied action, the beings standing in
the air cried out: “Well done! Bravo!!” (36)

तं gear fred शूलं मकराक्षो निशाचर:।
मुष्टिमुद्यम्य काकुत्स्थं तिष्ठ तिष्ठेति चाब्रवीत्॥ ३७॥

641

Seeing that pike destroyed and raising
his fist, the prowler of the night, Makaraksa,
called out to Sri Rama (a scion of Kakutstha),
“Wait, tarry!” (37)

स तं दृष्टवा पतन्तं तु प्रहस्य रघुनन्दन:।
पावकास्त्रं ततो Wa: Wal तु शरासने॥ ३८॥
Seeing him advancing and laughing
heartily, Sri Rama, the delight of the Raghus,
for his part thereupon put to his bow a
mystic missile presided over by the god of
fire. (38)

तेनास्त्रेण हतं रक्ष: काकुत्स्थेन तदा रणे।
संछिन्नहृदयं तत्र पपात च ममार च॥३९॥

Struck on the battlefield with that missile
by Sri Rama, a scion of Kakutstha, the
ogre, who had his heart split open, fell down
then and there and died. (39)

दृष्टवा A राक्षसा: Aa मकराक्षस्य पातनम्।
लङ्कामेव प्रधावन्त रामबाणभयार्दिता:॥४०॥

Stricken with fear of Sri Rama’s arrows
on witnessing the fall of Makaraksa, all the
ogres present ran away straight to Lanka.(40)

दशरथनृपसूनुबाणवेगै
प्रददृशुरथ देवता: WT
गिरिमिव वज्रहतं यथा विकोर्णम्॥४१॥
Highly rejoiced, the gods present at
the scene watched the aforesaid night-ranger,
the son of Khara, killed by the force of the
shafts of Sri Rama (son of King Dagaratha),
and resembling a mountain struck by
lightning and shattered. (41)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये युद्धकाण्डे एकोनाशीतितम: सर्ग: ॥ ७९ ॥

Thus ends Canto Seventy-nine in the Yuddhakanda of the glorious Ramayana of
Valmiki, the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

