518

gods), who was himself endowed with
formidable energy, seized on the battlefield
a javelin, gifted to him by Brahma, the self-

born creator. (107)
स wt सधूमानलसंनिकाशां

वित्रासनां संयति वानराणाम्।
चिक्षेपष शक्तिं तरसा ज्वलन्तीं

सौमित्रये राक्षसराष्ट्नाथ: ॥ १०८ tl

That guardian of the ogre kingdom
flung with fury at Laksmana that flaming
javelin, which shone brightly like a fire
crowned with smoke and constituted the
terror of the monkeys on the field of
battle. (108)

तामापतन्तीं भरतानुजोऽस्त्रै-

र्जघान बाणैश्च हुताग्निकल्पै:।
तथापि सा तस्य विवेश शक्ति-

र्भुजान्तरं दाशरथेर्बिशालम्॥ १०९॥

Laksmana (a younger brother of Bharata)
struck the javelin, even as it came flying
towards him with weapons and flame-like
shafts. Nevertheless that javelin entered
the broad chest of Laksmana, the aforesaid
son of Dasaratha. (109)
स शक्तिमाञ्शक्किसमाहत: सन्

जज्वाल wat स रघुप्रवीर:।
तं fer सहसाभ्युपेत्य
जग्राह राजा AAT भुजाभ्याम्॥११०॥

Grievously hurt by the javelin, that
well-known, powerful and pre-eminent hero
among the Raghus began to burn with pain
as he lay on the ground. Approaching him
all of a sudden while he was losing his
consciousness, the king of ogres caught
him vehemently in his arms. (110)

हरिमवान् मन्दरो मेरुस्त्रैलोक्यं वा सहामरै: |
शक्यं भुजाभ्यामुद्धर्तुं न शक्यो भरतानुज:॥ १११॥
But Laksmana (a younger brother of

Bharata) could not be raised by the same
arms of Ravana, by which the Himalaya,

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA +

the Mandara and the Meru mountains or
even all the three worlds (viz., heaven,
earth and the intermediate aerial region)
including gods could be easily lifted up.
(111)

शक्तया ब्राह्मया तु सौमित्रिस्ताडितोऽपि स्तनान्तरे।
विष्णोरमीमांस्यभागमात्मानं प्रत्यनुस्मरत्॥११२॥
Even though wounded in the space in
between the two breasts by a javelin (which
originally belonged to Brahma), Laksmana
recalled himself to be an inconceivable part
of Lord Visnu. (112)
ततो दानवदर्पघ्नं सौमित्रिं देवकण्टक:।
तं पीडयित्वा बाहुभ्यां न प्रभुर्लङ्घनेऽभवत्॥ ११३॥
Therefore, even on pressing between
his arms Laksmana (son of Sumitra), who
was capable of crushing the pride of demons,
Ravana (a thorn in the side of gods) was
not able to lift him up. (113)
तत: Hal वायुसुतो रावणं समभिद्रवत्।
आजघानोरसि क्रुद्धो वज्रकल्पेन AAT I ११४॥
Filled with rage, Hanuman, son of
the wind-god, thereupon darted towards
Ravana. Full of fury he struck the latter in
the chest with his fist, which came as a
thunderbolt. (114)

तेन मुष्टिप्रहारेण रावणो राक्षसेश्वर:।
जानुभ्यत्मात्मद्भूमौचचालचपपातच॥११५|।
Under that blow of his fist, Ravana, the
lord of ogres, fell to the floor of his chariot
on his knees, reeled and lay prostrate.
(115)

आस्यैश्च नेत्रै: श्रवणै: पपात रुधिरं ag
विघूर्णमानो निश्चेष्टो रथोपस्थ उपाविशत्॥ ११६ ॥
Blood flowed copiously through his
mouths, eyes and ears. Nay, rolling about,
he sank motionless into the hinder-part of
his chariot. (116)

विसंज्ञो मूच्छितश्चासीन्न च स्थानं समालभत्।
विसंज्ञं रावणं gear समरे भीमविक्रमम्॥ ११७॥
