972

स्रोतोभ्यो ag रक्तं तु तस्य Tea पात्यत:।
पपात च महाबाहु: fad पञ्चत्वमागत:॥४६॥
“While he was being thrown down,
profuse blood flowed from the openings in
his body (viz., his eyes, ears, nostrils, mouth
and so on) and the mighty-armed demon
dropped dead to the ground. (46)
तं तोलयित्वा agat गतसत्त्वमचेतनम्।
चिक्षेप वेगवान् वाली वेगेनैकेन योजनम्॥४७॥
“Lifting up with his arms Dundubhi, who
was now lifeless and as such unconscious,
the impetuous Vali hurled him with a single
effort to a distance of four miles. (47)

तस्य वेगप्रविद्धस्य वक्त्रात् क्षतजबिन्दव:।

प्रपेतुर्मारुतोस्क्षिप्ता मतङ्गस्याश्रमं wae

“Propelled by the wind, drops of blood
from the mouth of the demon, when he was
hurled with impetuosity, fell on the side of
Matanga’s hermitage. (48)

तान् Feat पतितांस्तत्र मुनि: शोणितविप्रुष:।
क्रुद्धस्तस्य महाभाग चिन्तयामास को न्वयम्॥४९॥

“Enraged to behold those drops of
blood fallen in the precincts of his hermitage,
O highly blessed prince, the sage
contemplated as to who on earth was
responsible for scattering the blood. (49)

ae सहसा wee: शोणितेन दुरात्मना।

कोऽयं दुरात्मा दुर्बुद्धिरकृतात्मा च बालिश: ॥ ५० U
“Who is the evil-minded, perverse,

wanton and stupid fellow by whom | have

been spattered with blood all at once?’ he
said to himself. (50)

इत्युक्त्वा स विनिष्क्रम्य ददूशे मुनिसत्तम:।
महिषं पर्वताकारं ward पतितं भुवि॥५१॥
“Saying so and coming out in the open,
the aforesaid jewel among ascetics beheld
a buffalo, looking like a mountain, fallen
dead on the ground. (51)

स तु विज्ञाय तपसा वानरेण ad fe adi
उत्ससर्ज महाशापं aa वानरं प्रति॥५२॥

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

“Definitely coming to know by virtue of
his askesis that it was surely the work of a
monkey, he pronounced the following terrible
imprecation on the monkey who had hurled
the carcass. (52)

इह तेनाप्रवेष्टव्यं प्रविष्टस्य वधो भवेत्।

at unis येन दूषितं रुधिरस्ररवै:।॥५३॥
““The monkey by whom the forest which

is my abode has been desecrated with

drops of blood ought not to set foot into this

forest; his death will instantly follow if he
steps into it. (53)

क्षिपता पादपाश्चेमे सम्भग्नाश्चासुरीं तनुम्।
समन्तादाश्रमं पूर्णं योजनं मामकं यदि॥५४॥
आगमिष्यति दुर्बुद्धिर्व्यक्तं स न भविष्यति।
येचास्य सचिवा: केचित्संश्रिता मामकं वनम्॥ ७५७५ UI

न च तैरिह वस्तव्यं श्रुत्वा यान्तु यथासुखम्।
तेऽपि वा ate तिष्ठन्ति शपिष्ये तानपि ध्रुवम्॥ ५६ ।।

वनेऽस्मिन् मामके fret पुत्रवत् परिरक्षिते।
पत्राङ्कुरविनाशाय फलमूलाभवाय Aes

“ ‘If the perverted fellow by whom these
trees have been smashed while throwing
away the corpse of a demon sets his foot
within a radius of full four miles of my hermitage
will surely no longer survive. Nor should his
ministers, whosoever have encamped in my
forest tarry here any longer. Let them on
hearing this malediction conveniently depart.
If, however, they too remain in this forest of
mine—which has been nurtured by me like
my own offspring—for the destruction of its
leaves and shoots as well as for the extinction
of its fruits and roots, | shall assuredly curse
them too. (54—57)

दिवसश्चाद्य मर्यादा यं द्रष्टा श्वोऽस्मि वानरम्।
बहुवर्षसहस्राणि a a शैलो भविष्यति॥५८॥

“*This day (on which | pronounced this
execration) is the deadline for their sojourn
in this forest. The monkey whom | shall see
here tomorrow will surely be changed into a
rock and continue in that state for many
thousands of years.’ (58)
