284

अयं चास्मै प्रदातव्यो यत्नात् सुपरिरक्षित:।
ब्रुवता वचनान्येवं सुग्रीवस्योपश्रृण्वत:॥ २२॥

“Nay, this jewel, which has been
carefully preserved with diligence, should
be handed over to Sri Rama after addressing
the following words within the hearing of
Sugriva : (22)

we चूडामणि: sitar मया a यत्नरक्षित:।
मन:शिलायास्तिलकं तत् स्मरस्वेति चाब्रवीत्॥ २३ ॥
“* ‘Here is the brilliant jewel for the head
associated with you and preserved by me
with diligence.’ She further said, ‘Kindly recall
that sacred mark on my forehead painted
by you with realgar. (23)

we निर्यातित: sitar मया ते वारिसम्भव:।
wt get प्रमोदिष्ये व्यसने त्वामिवानघ॥ २४॥
“‘This brilliant jewel found in the waters
is hereby being sent by me to you. Gazing
on it in my adversity | used to feel highly
rejoiced as on seeing you, O sinless prince !
(24)

जीवितं धारयिष्यामि मासं दशरथात्मज।
ऊर्ध्व मासान्न जीवेयं रक्षसां वशमागता॥ २५॥
“`] 2।7 going to survive but for a month,
O son of Dasaratha ! Fallen that | am into
the clutches of ogres, | am not going to

« VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

survive beyond a month.’

इति मामब्रवीत् सीता कृशाङ्गी धर्मचारिणी।
रावणान्त:पुरे रुद्धा मृगीवोत्फुल्ललोचना॥ २६॥

“Thus spoke to me Sita of emaciated
limbs, who looked with eyes wide open
(through fear) like a doe, was given to the
practice of virtue, and had been detained in
the pleasance of Ravana. (26)

एतदेव मयाऽऽख्यातं Us Wea Aq यथा।
सर्वथा सागरजले संतार: प्रविधीयताम्॥ २७॥

“This precisely is the news about Sita,
which has been narrated by me exhaustively
and correctly, O scion of Raghu ! A method
may now be devised to cross the sea-water
at all events.” (27)

तौ जाताश्वासौ राजपुत्रौ विदित्वा
तच्चाभिज्ञानं राघवाय प्रदाय।
देव्या चाख्यातं Hata yes,
वाचा सम्पूर्णं वायुपुत्र: शशंस॥ २८ ॥
Coming to know that the two princes,
Sri Rama and Laksmana, were restored
to confidence, and having delivered the
aforesaid token to Sri Rama, Hanuman, son
of the wind-god, reproduced in its entirety
in so many words seriatim all that was
communicated by the godlike lady. (28)

(25)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये
सुन्दरकाण्डे पञ्चषष्टितम: सर्ग: ॥ ६५ Il

Thus ends Canto Sixty-five of the Sundarakanda in the glorious Ramayana of Valmiki,
the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

