« KISKINDHAKANDA +

“Although an exploit in the form of
striking down Vali with a single arrow, whose
result in the shape of restoration of my
kingdom and lost spouse is patent, has
been accomplished as promised by you, O
ruler of men,my mind, O prince, has recoiled
from luxuries alongwith this accursed life,
which has been responsible for the death of
my own elder brother today. (4)

पुरेऽतिविक्रोशति
हते नृपे संशयितेऽङ्गदे च
न राम राज्ये रमते मनो मे॥५॥

“Now that the king has been killed, this
principal queen, Tara, for her part is weeping
bitterly, nay, the entire town is screaming,
agonized as it is due to sorrow, and Angada,
his son, is in peril of losing his life due to
extreme grief, my mind, O Rama, no longer
takes delight in sovereignty. (5)

क्रोधादमर्षादतिविप्रधर्षाद्
भ्रातुर्वधो मेऽनुमत: पुरस्तात्।
ea त्विदानीं हरियूथपेऽस्मिन्
सुतीक्ष्णमिक्ष्वाकुवर | WATT NG II

“Due to anger and _ indignation
occasioned by utter humiliation at the hands
of my deceased brother, | had consented
the destruction of my elder brother in the
past; but now that this Vali (the leader of
monkey hordes) has been killed, | shall
bitterly repent for the whole of my life, O
jewel among the Ikswakus ! (6)

श्रेयोऽद्य मन्ये मम शैलमुख्ये

afer fe वासश्चिरमृष्यमूके।
यथा तथा वर्तयत: स्ववृत्त्या

नेमं निहत्य त्रिदिवस्य oe: ot

“lam of the opinion today that my dwelling
for long on Rsyamuka, that jewel among
mountains, supporting life anyhow through
the means of subsistence natural for monkeys,
is surely preferable rather than attaining even
heaven as a sequel to killing Vall. (7)

दु:खतप्ते।

1017

न त्वा जिघांसामि चरेति यन्मा-

wae महात्मा मतिमानुवाच।
तस्यैव तद् राम वचोऽनुरूप-

fag aa: कर्म च मेऽनुरूपम्॥ ८ ॥

“The familiar words: ‘| do not wish to
kill you, depart !” which, O Rama, this high-
souled and wise monkey spoke to me on
my challenging him to a duel were worthy of
him alone: while this request which | made
to you to dispose of him and exploit (in the
shape of getting him killed by you) are
worthy of me! (8)

भ्राता कथं नाम महागुणस्य
भ्रातुर्वधं राम विरोचयेत।
राज्यस्य दु:खस्य च dt a

विचिन्तयन् कामपुरस्कृतोऽपि॥ ९॥

“How can a brother duly considering
the weight of sovereignty acquired by killing
his brother and sorrow following his death,
even though he has placed lust in the
forefront, O gallant Rama, actually find
pleasure in the destruction of his brother
endowed with exceptional virtues? (9)

वधो हि मे मतो नासीत् स्वमाहात्म्यव्यतिक्रमात्।
ममासीद् बुद्धिदौरात्म्यात् प्राणहारी व्यतिक्रम: It Qo ॥

“My destruction was surely never
deemed fit by him because it would detract
from his greatness; while due to perversity
of my intellect an offence was committed by
me, which proved fatal to him. (10)
द्रुमशाखावभग्नोऽहं ded परिनिष्टनन्।
सान्त्वयित्वा त्वनेनोक्तो न पुन: कर्तुमर्हसि॥ Ve

“While groaning for an hour or so, when
wounded by him with a bough of a tree, |
was simply admonished by him, after
comforting me, in the words: ‘You should
not repeat this error.’ (11)

भ्रातृत्वमार्यभावश्च धर्मश्चानेन रक्षित:।
मया क्रोधश्च HAY कपित्वं च प्रदर्शितम्॥१२॥

“While brotherliness, nobility and
righteousness were studiously maintained
