826

आहूयाहूय च पुनस्तं WT साधु वीक्षते।
आगच्छागच्छ wt A आर्यपुत्र सहानुज॥ ३॥
“Come along, come soon, my lord,
with your younger brother (Laksmana) !”
Calling again and again as above, she looked
intently on the deer once more. (3)

तावाहूतौ नरव्याघ्रौ वैदेह्या रामलक्ष्मणौ।
वीक्षमाणौ तु तं देशं तदा ददृशतुर्मृगम्॥४॥

Surveying that region when called by
Sita (a princess of the Videha territory),
those two tigers among men, Sri Rama and
Laksmana, for their part, presently beheld
the deer. (4)

शङ्कमानस्तु तं दृष्टवा लक्ष्मणो वाक्यमब्रवीत्।
warms मन्ये मारीचं राक्षसं मृगम्॥५॥
Seized with suspicion to see ॥,
Laksmana for his part observed as follows :
“| conclude this deer to be the same as that
ogre, Marica. (5)

चरन्तो Wat wet: पापेनोपाधिना atl
अनेन निहता राम राजान: कामरूपिणा॥६॥

“Hunting game in the forest with delight,
many kings, O Rama, have been killed by
assuming a deceptive form by this sinful
ogre, who is capable of assuming any form
at will. (6)

अस्य मायाविदो माया मृगरूपमिदं कृतम्।
भानुमत् पुरुषव्याघ्र गन्धर्वपुरसंनिभम्॥७॥

“This effulgent form of a deer assumed
by him, O tiger among men, is a hoax on
the part of the ogre—who is well-versed in
conjuring tricks—and is much like a magic
show. (7)

मृगो ह्येवंविधो रत्नविचित्रो नास्ति राघव।
जगत्यां जगतीनाथ मायैषा fe न संशय:॥८॥

“To be sure, no such deer, freckled
with jewel-like spots, exists on the face of
the earth, O scion of Raghu ! It is surely a
phantom, O ruler of the globe: there is no
doubt about it.” (8)

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

उवाच सीता संहृष्टा छद्मना हृतचेतना॥९॥

Interrupting Laksmana (a scion of
Kakutstha), who was speaking in this strain,
Sita, who had been robbed of her faculty of
judgment by the hoax practised by the ogre
and who felt overjoyed at the prospect of
laying her hands on the weird deer, spoke
as follows with a bright smile playing on her
lips : (9)

आर्यपुत्राभिरामोऽसौ मृगो हरति A मन:।
आनयैनं महाबाहो क्रीडार्थं नो भविष्यति॥ got

“The yonder charming deer captivates
my mind. Fetch it, O mighty-armed lord; it
will serve as a means of diversion. (10)

इहाश्रमपदेऽस्माकं बहव: पुण्यदर्शना:।
मृगाश्चरन्ति सहिताश्चमरा: BATE evil
ऋक्षा: पृषतसङ्घाश्च वानरा: किन्नरास्तथा।
विहरन्ति महाबाहो रूपश्रेष्ठा महाबला:॥१२॥
न चान्य: सदृशो राजन् ge: पूर्वं मृगो मया।
तेजसा क्षमया दीप्त्या यथायं मृगसत्तम:॥१३॥

“On the grounds of this hermitage of
ours range together numerous deer of
hallowed appearance as well as Camaras
and Srmaras (two distinct species of deer
with white and dark hair respectively at the
end of their tail) as also bears, herds of
spotted deer, monkeys and Kinnaras (another
species of deer), foremost in comeliness of
form and possessed of great might. No
other deer equal in agility, gentleness and
splendour of this jewel among deer has
ever been seen by me before, O prince !

(11—13)

नानावर्णविचित्राङ्घो रत्नभूतो ममाग्रत:।
द्योतयन् वनमव्यग्रं शोभते शशिसंनिभ:॥ १४॥

“Shining brightly as the moon, and
illumining the forest with its limbs diversified
because of their varied colours, this jewel of
a deer stands at ease before me spreading
its charm all-round. (14)
