848

Kumbhakarna and the Raksasa Ravana,
how does it happen that all of you praise the
son of Ravana? Disregarding the very brave
heroes, Mahodara, Prahasta, Virupaksa the
Raksasa, and the arrogant Matta and
Unmatta, Devantaka and Narantaka, how
does it happen that you applaud the son of
Ravana? (30—36)
अतिकायं त्रिशिरसं धूम्राक्षं च निशाचरम्।
अतिक्रम्य महावीर्यान् किं प्रशंसथ रावणिम्॥ ३७॥
“Overleaping the very powerful Atikaya,
Trisira and the Raksasa Dhumraksa, how
is it that you bestow plaudits on the son of
Ravana? (37)
कीदृशो वै प्रभावोऽस्य किं बलं क: UTA: |
केन वा कारणेनैष रावणादतिरिच्यते॥ ३८॥
“What is the nature of his prowess,
what the nature of his strength and valour?

For what reason is he held superior even to
his father? (38)

« VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

Wes यदि मया श्रोतुं न खल्वाज्ञापयामि a: |

यदि गुह्यं न चेद् वक्तुं श्रोतुमिच्छामि कथ्यताम्॥ ३९॥
“If it is not a secret not to be divulged,

and if | can know of it, | should like to hear

of it. Please tell me. | do not, however, order

you to do so. (39)

`झाक्रोऽपि विजितस्तेन कथं लब्धवरश्च a:
कथं च बलवान् पुत्रो न पिता तस्य रावण:॥ ४० ॥
“How did he obtain the boons and how

did he defeat even Indra? How did he become
more powerful than his father, Ravana? (40)

कथं पितुश्चाप्यधिको महाहवे
Wrest जेता हि Het स Wears: |
वरांश्च लब्धा: कथयस्व Ase
Ad पाप्रच्छतश्चास्य मुनीन्द्र सर्वम्॥ ४१॥
“O best of sages, tell me today, as |
am exceedingly inquisitive, how that Raksasa
excelled his father in warfare, how he
vanquished Indra and how he obtained boons.
Please tell me all.” (41)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये उत्तरकाण्डे VIA: DW: ॥ १ ॥

Thus ends Canto One in the Uttarakanda of the glorious Ramayana of Valmiki,
the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

Canto II

Agastya discourses on the good qualities and Tapas of
Pulastya and the origin of Visrava

तस्य de वचनं श्रुत्वा राघवस्य महात्मन:।
कुम्भयोनिर्महातेजा वाक्यमेतदुवाच ह॥१॥
Hearing these words of the high-souled
Raghava, Agastya of great lustre, spoke
the following words: (1)
श्रृणु TH aM ad तस्य तेजोबलं महत्।
जघान शत्रून् येनासौ न च वध्य: स MAN UU
“O Sri Rama, hear of his (Indrajit’s)
great valour and strength, by virtue of
which he slew his enemies but could not

be slain by any.
Wad a रावणस्येदं कुलं जन्म च राघव।
agent च तथा ad ad ब्रवीमि ते॥ ३॥
“Meanwhile | shall tell you, O Raghava,
about the family of Ravana, of his birth, of
the boons that were granted to him and
how. (3)
पुरा कृतयुगे wa प्रजापतिसुत: प्रभु:।
पुलस्त्यो नाम ब्रह्मर्षि: साक्षादिव पितामह:॥४॥

“O Sri Rama, in the remote Krtayuga

(2)
