* AYODHYAKANDA +

to do my father’s bidding and in the event of
His Majesty being angry with me | would
not survive even for an hour or so. (15)

यतोमूलं नर: पश्येत् प्रादुर्भावमिहात्मन:।
कथं afer न ada waa सति cad १६॥
“How can aman fail to be devoted to
his father, his veritable and living deity, to
whom he owes his own birth in this world?
(16)

कच्चित्ते परुषं किंचिदभिमानात् frat मम।
उक्तो भवत्या रोषेण येनास्य लुलितं मन:॥ १७॥
“Or, has my father been told by you
through vanity or anger a harsh word, by
which his heart has been stung to the quick?
(17 )

एतदाचक्ष्व मे cla तत्त्वेन परिपृच्छ्त:।

किंनिमित्तमपूर्वोऽयं विकारो मनुजाधिपे॥१८॥

“What is this unprecedented agitation
in the mind of the Emperor due to? Pray,
point this out correctly to me, inquisitive as
| am, O godly lady?” (18)

Wat तु कैकेयी राघवेण महात्मना।
उवाचेदं सुनिर्लज्जा धृष्टमात्महितं वच:॥१९॥

Questioned thus by the high-souled
Rama, a scion of Raghu, Kaikeyi, for her
part, who had grown utterly impudent, made
the following bold reply, which was calculated
to advance her own interest: (19)

न राजा कुपितो wa व्यसनं नास्य किंचन।
किंचिन्मनोगतं त्वस्य त्वद्भयान्नानुभाषते॥ २०॥

“The king is neither angry nor is there
any anguish troubling him, O Rama! There
is, however, something in his mind, which
he is not disclosing to you for fear of paining
you. (20)
तदवश्यं त्वया कार्यं यदनेनाश्रुतुं मम॥ २१॥

“Words do not proceed from his mouth
to tell you, his darling, something disagreeable
to you. That which has been promised by
him to me must, however, be implemented
by you. (21)

361

एष मह्यं at दत्त्वा पुरा मामभिपूज्य च।
स पश्चात् तप्यते राजा AMA: प्राक्कृतस्तथा॥ २२॥
“Having granted me a boon in the past
and thereby honoured me, this illustrious
monarch now repents in the same way as
any other common man. (22)

अतिसृज्य ददानीति at मम विशाम्पति: |
a निरर्थं गतजले सेतुं बन्धितुमिच्छति॥ २३॥
“Having given a pledge to me in the
words ‘I grant you a boon’ the celebrated
monarch seeks in vain to construct a dam
across a stream whose water has already
flown. (23)

धर्ममूलमिदं wa fafet च सतामपि।
Ad सत्यं न Aste राजा कुपितस्त्वत्कृते यथा॥ २४॥
“Truth is the root of piety—this is a fact
well-known even to the righteous, O Rama !
Beware lest the king should forsake that
truth, angry as he is with me for your sake.
(24)

ale ae वक्ष्यते राजा शुभं वा यदि वाशुभम्।
करिष्यसि तत: सर्वमाख्यास्यामि पुनस्त्वहम्॥ २५ ॥
“If you undertake to implement whatever
the king says, whether it is good or evil for
you, in that case, of course, | shall reiterate
everything to you. (25)

ate त्वभिहितं राज्ञा त्वयि तन्न विपत्स्यते।
ततोऽहमभिधास्यामि न ह्येष त्वयि वक्ष्यति॥ २६॥
“In case that which has been uttered
by the king does not fall flat on you, then
alone | shall give it out to you. In no case is
he going to open his lips before you.” (26)

`एतत् तु वचनं श्रुत्वा कैकेय्या समुदाहृतम्।
sara व्यथितो रामस्तां देवीं नृपसंनिधौ॥ २७॥
Distressed to hear the afore-mentioned
words uttered by Kaikeyi, Sri Rama for his
part spoke as follows to the said queen in
the presence of the Emperor : (27)

अहो feared देवि वक्तुं मामीदृशं वच:।
a fe वचनाद् Ua: पतेयमपि पावके॥ २८॥

“Oh ! how shameful it is for me to hear
