118

“It is not possible for you to stand
within the sight of Sri Rama and Laksmana
even on smelling their presence, any more
than a dog would tarry within the gaze of a
pair of tigers. (31)

तस्य a विग्रहे ताभ्यां युगग्रहणमस्थिरम्।
Pease बाहोरेकस्य विग्रहे॥ ३२॥

“Your victory in an encounter with them,
situated as you are, is uncertain in the
same way as on the part of a single arm of
the demon Vrtra in its encounter with both
the arms of Indra during the great war between
gods and demons at the beginning of creation.

(32)

fad da a नाथो मे wa: सौमित्रिणा सह।
तोयमल्पमिवादित्य: प्राणानादास्यते शरै:।॥ ३३॥

“Soon shall that lord of mine, Sri Rama,

« VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

with Laksmana (son of Sumitra), take away
your life with his shafts even as the sun
sucks up with its rays the shallow water of
a pool. (33)

गिरिं कुबेरस्य गतोऽथवाऽऽलयं

सभां गतो वा वरुणस्य Ws: |
असंशयं दाशरथेर्विमोक्ष्यसे

Teg: कालहतोऽशनेरिव॥ ३४॥

“Even if you flyaway for protection to
the mountain, KailaSa, constituting the abode
of Kubera (the god of riches) or descend on
the council-chamber of King Varuna (the
deity presiding over water), you shall
undoubtedly be deprived of your life by the
arrows of Sri Rama (son of Daégaratha),
killed as you already are by the Time-Spirit
even as a huge tree felled by lightning.” (34)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये सुन्दरकाण्डे एकविंश: सर्ग: ॥ 22 ॥

Thus ends Canto Twenty-one in the Sundarakanda of the glorious Ramayana of
Valmiki, the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

Canto XXII

Nettled by the censure uttered by Sita, Ravana allows her a time-limit of two
months to revise her decision and threatens her with death if she does not
listen to reason. Restored to confidence by the glances of Ravana’s
consorts, however, Sita condemns him once more. Leaving instructions
with ogresses of terrible and ugly aspect to bring her to reason by
recourse to intimidation and persuasion, Ravana thereupon
leaves the presence of Sita alongwith his womenfolk

सीताया वचनं श्रुत्वा परुषं राक्षसेश्वर:।
प्रत्युवाच ad: सीतां विप्रियं प्रियदर्शनाम्॥१॥
Hearing the sharp rebuff of Sita,
Ravana, the lord of ogres, then made the
following unpalatable reply to Sita of pleasing
aspect : (1)
यथा यथा सान्त्वयिता AA: स्त्रीणां तथा TAT |
यथा यथा प्रियं amr परिभूतस्तथा तथा॥२॥

“The courteous a man is to women, the
more agreeable he becomes to them. In
your case, however, | find that the more
kind words | speak the more | am snubbed
by you. (2)

संनियच्छति मे क्रोधं cata काम: समुत्थित:।
द्रवतो मार्गमासाद्य हयानिव सुसारथि:॥ ३॥

“The love that has sprung up in my
heart for you restrains my anger even as a
