244

used for me the epithet ‘Brahmarsi’ (a
Brahmana seer), which has no equal in my
eyes, as earned through pious acts performed
by myself, then only | should consider myself
as having thoroughly conquered my
senses.” Thereupon Brahma replied to him,
“You have not been able to conquer your
senses. (17—21)

यतस्व मुनिशार्दूल इत्युक्त्वा त्रिदिवं गत:।
विप्रस्थितेषु cay विश्वामित्रो महामुनि: । २२॥
ऊर्ध्वबाहुर्निरालम्बो वायुभक्षस्तपश्चरन्।
TA पञ्चतपा भूत्वा वर्षास्वाकाशसंश्रय:।॥ २३॥
शिशिरे सलिलेशायी रात्र्यहानि तपोधन:।
एवं वर्षसहस्रं fe तपो घोरमुपागमत्॥२४॥
“Strive further, O tiger among sages !”
Saying so, he rose to the highest heaven
(Brahmaloka). On the gods having dispersed,
the eminent sage, ViSwamitra, resumed his
austerities standing with his arms lifted
upwards, living on air alone and remaining
without any abode. Nay, the ascetic whose

« VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

only wealth was his asceticism, remained
seated in the midst of four fires, one in each
quarter, and the sun as the fifth overhead in
summer, in open air during the rains and
standing in water for days and nights
during the winter. In this way indeed he
practised terrible austerities for a thousand
years. (22—24)
तस्मिन् संतप्यमाने तु विश्वामित्रे महामुनौ।
संताप: सुमहानासीत् सुराणां वासवस्य च॥ २५॥
While the great sage Viswamitra was
duly practising austerities as aforesaid, deep
anguish indeed seized the mind of the gods
as well as of Indra. (25)

रम्भामप्सरसं शबक्र: Ud: सह मरुद्गणै:।
उवाचात्महितं वाक्यमहितं कौशिकस्य च॥ २६॥

Indra alongwith all the hosts of gods
called and addressed the celestial nymph
Rambha the following request, which was in
his (Indra’s) own interest, and prejudicial to
ViSwamitra (the son of Kusika) : (26)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये बालकाण्डे त्रिषष्टितम: सर्ग: ॥ ६३ ॥

Thus ends Canto Sixty-three in the Balakanda of the glorious Ramayana of Valmiki,
the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

Canto LXIV
Petrifying by means of a curse Rambha, the celestial nymph
sent by Indra to wean him from his austerities,

Viswamitra resolves upon a further
course of austerities

सुरकार्यमिदं wy ade सुमहत् त्वया।
लोभनं कौशिकस्येह काममोहसमन्वितम्॥१॥
“This very great errand of the gods in
the shape of beguiling Viswamitra conjointly
with infatuating him by rousing his passion
has to be done by you at this juncture.” (1)
तथोक्ता साप्सरा राम सहस्राक्षेण धीमता।
व्रीडिता प्राञ्जलिर्वाक्यं प्रत्युवाच सुरेश्वरम्॥ २॥

Feeling abashed when told thus by the
sagacious Indra (the thousand-eyed god),
O Rama, the aforesaid celestial nymph gave
the following reply with folded-hands to the
ruler of gods : (2)

aa gad घोरो विश्वामित्रो महामुनि:।

क्रोधमुत्स्रक्ष्यते at मयि ca न संशय:॥ ३॥
“This hot-tempered and eminent sage,

Viswamitra, will pronounce a terrible curse
