180

motiveless compassion is the highest virtue.
Nay, | know you to be endowed with
extraordinary valour, extraordinary vigour
and extraordinary might, limitless in time or
space, incapable of being disturbed and
resembling the ocean in profundity, the lord
of the earth, including the oceans and a
compeer of Indra, the lord of paradise.

(39-40)

एवमस्त्रविदां श्रेष्ठो बलवान् सत्त्ववानपि।
किमर्थमस्त्रं Taq न योजयसि राघव॥४१॥

“Wherefore, O scion of Raghu, do
you not employ your missiles against the
ogres, even though you are, as aforesaid,
the foremost of those proficient in the use
of missiles, mighty and full of courage?’ ”

(41)

न नागा नापि गन्धर्वा न सुरा न ASU: |
रामस्य समरे वेगं शक्ता: प्रतिसमीहितुम्॥४२॥

Turning to Hanuman “Neither Nagas
nor Gandharvas (celestial musicians), nor
gods nor the Maruts (the fory-nine wind-
gods) are able to resist the onrush of Sri
Rama in combat. (42)

तस्य वीर्यवत: कच्चिद् यद्यस्ति मयि सम्भ्रम: ।
किमर्थं न शरैस्तीक्ष्णै: क्षयं नयति राक्षसान्॥४३॥
“If there still exists any regard for me in
the heart of that powerful prince, wherefore
does he not destroy the ogres with his
sharp arrows? (43)

भ्रातुरादेशमादाय लक्ष्मणो वा परंतप:।
कस्य हेतोर्न मां att: परित्राति महाबल:॥४४॥

“Or, why does not the heroic Laksmana,
the scourge of the foes, nay, who is endowed
with extraordinary might, deliver me, taking
permission of his eldest brother? (44)

ae dt पुरुषव्याघ्रौ वाय्विन्द्रसमतेजसौ।
सुराणामपि दुर्धर्षौ किमर्थं मामुपेक्षत:॥४५॥

“If those two tigers among men, who
are equal to Indra and the wind-god in energy,
are difficult to overcome even by gods,
wherefore do they disregard me? (45)

« VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

ममैव दुष्कृतं किंचिन्महदस्ति न संशय:।
समर्थावपि dt यन्मां नावेक्षेते परंतपौ॥४६॥
“Some major sin of mine alone comes
in the way in that those twin scourges of
their foes, do not take care of me, even
though they are capable to do so: there is
no doubt about it.” (46)

वैदेह्या वचनं श्रुत्वा करुणं साश्रु भाषितम्।
अथाब्रवीन्महातेजा हनूमान् हरियूथप:॥४७॥
त्वच्छोकविमुखो wa ea सत्येन ते शपे।
TH दु:खाभिपन्ने तु लक्ष्मण: परितप्यते॥४८॥

Hearing the aforesaid piteous appeal
uttered by Sita, a princess of the Videha
territory, with tears in her eyes, Hanuman, a
leader of monkey hordes, who was endowed
with extraordinary energy, forthwith replied
as follows: “Il swear to you by truth, O
godlike lady, that Sri Rama has grown averse
to everything else through grief caused by
your absence. And Laksmana too suffers
agony due to Sri Rama being overwhelmed
with sorrow. (47-48)

कथंचिद् भवती Get न काल: परिशोचितुम्।
इमं ded दु:खानामन्तं द्रक्ष्यसि शोभने॥४९॥
“Somehow you have been discovered
by me; hence this is not the time for grieving.
From this very hour you will see the end of
your woes drawing near, O glorious lady !
(49)

तावुभौ पुरुषव्याघ्रौ राजपुत्रौ महाबलौ।
रेंबर्दैर्शनकृतोत्स।हों लोकान् भस्मीकरिष्यत: ॥ ५० I

“Both the aforesaid princes, who are
tigers among men and are endowed with
extraordinary might, and who are determined
to see you, will reduce all the ogres to
ashes. (50)
eat च समरक्रूरं Want सहबान्धवम्।
राघवस्त्वां विशालाक्षि tat Ot प्रति नेष्यति॥ ५१॥

“Nay, killing Ravana, who is ferocious
on the field of battle, along with his kinsfolk,
Sri Rama, a scion of Raghu, O large-eyed
lady, will take you back to his own city. (51)
