* AYODHYAKANDA +

while that which will be shorn of you will be
repellent as hell. Knowing thus my supreme
love for you, proceed to the forest with me,
O Rama! (18)
अथ मामेवमव्यग्रां at Aa नयिष्यसे।
विषमद्यैव पास्यामि मा ast द्विषतां गमम्॥१९॥
“If you definitely do not take me to the
forest, even though | am not the least afraid
of going there as shown above, | shall drink
poison this very day but would on no account
submit to the will of enemies (Bharata and
others). (19)

पश्चादपि fe दु:खेन मम नैवास्ति जीवितम्।
उज्झितायास्त्वया नाथ ACA मरणं वरम्॥२०॥

“Surely as a result of agony caused by
separation from you, | am not going to live
even afterwards when abandoned by you,
O lord! It is, therefore, better that | should
die in your very presence. (20)
किं पुनर्दंश वर्षाणि त्रीणि चैकं च दु:खिता॥ 22

“| indeed cannot endure even for less
than an hour the grief caused by separation
from you. How, then, can I, an afflicted
woman, bear it for ten years and four?”(21)
Bia सा शोकसंतप्ता विलप्य करुणं लहु।
चुक्रोश पतिमायस्ता भृशमालिङ्ग्य सस्वरम्॥ २२॥

Having wailed a lot in a piteous way
as aforesaid, and closely embracing her
husband, tormented as she was with grief,

Sita, who now felt exhausted, cried piteously
shedding stream of tears. (22)

सा fast बहुभिर्वाक्यैर्दिग्धैरिव गजाङ्गना।
चिरसंनियतं बाष्पं मुमोचाग्निमिवारणि:॥ २३॥
Tortured with many homilies like a female
elephant pierced with poisoned shafts, she
shed tears that had long been restrained

even as a piece of wood would emit fire
through attrition with another. (23)

नेत्राभ्यां परिसुस्राव पङ्कजाभ्यामिवोदकम्॥ २४॥

407

Tear-drops sparkling as crystal and
born of agony slipped from her eyes as
water from a pair of lotuses. (24)
तत्सितामलचन्द्राभं मुखमायतलोचनम्।
पर्यशुष्यत बाष्पेण जलोद्भृतमिवाम्बुजम्॥ २५॥

Her countenance, that shone like the
uneclipsed moon on a full moon night and
was distinguished by big eyes, was blasted
with hot tears as a lotus taken out of water
is withered through heat. (25)
at परिष्वज्य बाहुभ्यां विसंज्ञामिव दु:खिताम्।
उवाच वचनं राम: परिविश्वासयंस्तदा॥ २६॥

Folding in his arms Sita, who felt
distressed and had fainted, as it were, Sri
Rama then spoke to her as follows, fully
reassuring her: (26)

न देवि बत दु:खेन स्वर्गमप्यभिरोचये।
नहि मेऽस्ति भयं किंचित् स्वयम्भोरिव ada: it २७॥

“Alas, | find no delight even in heaven
obtained by causing agony to you, O pious
lady! Nor is there fear to me from any
quarter any more than to Brahma, the self-
born. (27)

तव सर्वमभिप्रायमविज्ञाय शुभानने।
वासं न रोचयेऽरण्ये शक्तिमानपि रक्षणे॥ २८॥

“Not knowing your full mind, O lady
with a charming countenance, | did not
approve of your sojourn in the forest, though
capable of protecting you. (28)

यत् सृष्टासि मया सार्धं वनवासाय मैथिलि।
न विहातुं मया शबक्या प्रीतिरात्मवता यथा॥ २९॥

“Since you were obviously born to dwell
with me in the forest, O princess of Mithila,
you are incapable of being abandoned by
me even as tenderness cannot be given up
by a man of self-knowledge. (29)

धर्मस्तु गजनासोरु सद्भिराचरित: पुरा।
तं चाहमनुवर्तिष्ये यथा सूर्यं सुवर्चला॥३०॥
“Nay, | shall abide by the moral law

actually followed by the virtuous dwellers in
the forest in the past, O lady with comely
