466

though they were wise, uttered plaintive
words as follows: (3)
Reed wa fst at ययापहतचेतस:।
नाद्य पश्यामहे WH पृथूरस्कं महाभुजम्॥४॥
“Woe indeed be to that slumber,
rendered unconscious by which we could
not perceive today Sri Rama, who is
distinguished by a broad chest and mighty
arms | (4)
कथं wat महाबाहु: a तथावितथक्रिय:।
wh जनमभित्यज्य प्रवासं तापसो गत:॥५॥

“How did that mighty-armed Sri Rama,
whose actions, as is well known, are never
ineffectual, leave for other lands in the garb
of an ascetic, abandoning us, his devoted
subjects? (5)

यो न: सदा पालयति पिता पुत्रानिवौरसान्।
कथं रघूणां स श्रेष्ठस्त्यक्त्वा नो विपिनं गत:॥ ६ ॥

“How did that jewel among the Raghus,
who ever protected us as a father does his
own children, proceed to the forest
abandoning us? (6)

इहैव निधनं याम महाप्रस्थानमेव वा।
रामेण रहितानां नो किमर्थं जीवितं हितम्॥७॥

“Let us meet our end at this very place
by fasting or definitely set out on the grand
journey to the north with a resolve to die.
For what purpose can life be good for us,
deprived as we are of Sri Rama? (7)

सन्ति शुष्काणि काष्ठानि प्रभूतानि महान्ति च।
a: प्रज्वाल्य चितां wa प्रविशामोऽथवा वयम्॥ ८॥

“Or, there are any number of big logs
of dry wood here. Lighting a funeral pile, let
us all enter the fire together. (8)

fe वक्ष्यामो महाबाहुरनसूय: प्रियंवद:।
नीत: स राघवोऽस्माभिरिति वक्तुं कथं क्षमम्॥ ९॥

“Shall we break the news when asked
by those left behind in Ayodhya that Sri
Rama (a scion of Raghu) of mighty arms,
who is free from jealousy and speaks kindly
to all, has been conveyed to the forest by

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

us? How can such words be uttered by
us? (9)

सा नूनं नगरी दीना दृष्टवास्मान् wee विना।
भविष्यति निरानन्दा सस्त्रीबालवयोऽधिका॥ १०॥

“Seeing us back without Sri Rama,
that city of Ayodhya will surely assume a
wretched and cheerless aspect with its
womenfolk, children and elderly people. (10)

निर्यातास्तेन वीरेण we facet महात्मना।
विह्रीनास्तेन च पुन: Het द्रक्ष्याम aT पुरीम्॥ ११॥
“How shall we, who went out with that

high-souled hero for good, can behold that
city again without him?” (11)

इतीव बहुधा वाचो बाहुमुद्यम्य ते जना:।
विलपन्ति स्म दु:खार्ता हृतवत्सा SAAT: 1 १२॥
Holding up their arms, the above-
mentioned men, who were stricken with
agony like cows of excellent breed, bereft
of their calf, lamented in various ways as
above. (12)

ततो मार्गानुसारेण गत्वा किंचित् तत: क्षणम्।
मार्गनाशाद् विषादेन महता समभिप्लुता:॥१३॥

Then proceeding to some distance along
the tracks, left by Sri Rama’s chariot for
some moments, they were overwhelmed
with great despondency, the tracks having
disappeared immediately afterwards due to
the chariot having returned by another route.

(13)
रथमार्गानुसारेण न्यवर्तन्त मनस्विन:।
किमिदं fer करिष्यामो दैवेनोपहता इति॥१४॥

The high-minded citizens eventually
returned to Ayodhya along the tracks left by
the chariot while leaving Ayodhya, saying
“How is it that the tracks have disappeared
so soon? What shall we do? We are doomed
by Providence.” (14)

dat यथागतेनैव मार्गेण क्लान्तचेतस:।
अयोध्यामगमन् सर्वे पुरीं व्यथितसज्जनाम्॥ १५॥

Depressed in spirits, they all then
returned by the same route along which
