904

to the brim just to refresh myself and assuage
my feelings today, even the ocean, the lord
of rivers, will surely dry up due to my
misfortune. (25)

नास्त्यभाग्यतरो लोके मत्तोऽस्मिन् स चराचरे।

येनेयं महती WAT मया व्यसनवागुरा॥ २६॥
“In this world comprising the animate and

inanimate beings there is none more unlucky

than myself, by whom this great trap in the
shape of adversity has been found. (26)

अयं पितुर्वयस्यो A गृध्रराजो महाबल:।
va विनिहतो भूमौ wa भाग्यविपर्ययात्॥ २७॥

“Due to adverseness of my fate alone
this friend of my father, Jatayu, the king of
vultures, though possessed of extraordinary
might, lies mortally wounded on the ground.”

(27)

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

इत्येवमुक्त्वा बहुशो राघव: सहलक्ष्मण:।
जटायुषं च wert पितृस्नेहं निदर्शयन्॥ २८॥

Having spoken thus, Sri Rama (a scion
of Raghu) with Laksmana stroked Jatayu
again and again, showing filial affection to

him. (28)
निकृत्तपक्षं रुधिरावसिक्तं

तं गृध्रराजं परिगृह्य राघव:।
aa मैथिली प्राणसमा गतेति

विमुच्य वाचं निपपात भूमौ॥ २९॥

Embracing the aforesaid king of
vultures—whose wings had been lopped off
and who was lying bathed in blood—and
uttering the words “Where has the princess
of Mithila, who was dear to me as life,
gone?” Sri Rama (a scion of Raghu) sank
down on the earth. (29)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्येऽरण्यकाण्डे सप्तषष्टितम: AW: ॥ ६७॥

Thus ends Canto Sixty-seven in the Aranyakanda of the glorious Ramayana of
Valmiki, the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

Canto LX VIII
Jatayu gives up the ghost and is cremated by Sri Rama

राम: प्रेक्ष्य तु तं गृध्रं भुवि रौद्रेण पातितम्।
सौमित्रिं freee वचनमब्रवीत्॥१॥
Perceiving the aforesaid vulture struck
down on the earth by the fierce ogre, Ravana,
Sri Rama for his part spoke as follows to
Laksmana (son of Sumitra), who was richly
endowed with a friendly spirit towards all :
(1)

ममायं नूनमर्थेषु यतमानो विहंगम:।
राक्षसेन हत: संख्ये प्राणांस्त्यजति Achat २॥

“Mortally struck by the ogre in an
encounter, while striving in my interests,
this bird, Jatayu, is surely giving up the
ghost for my sake alone. (2)

अतिखिन्न: शरीरेऽस्मिन् प्राणो लक्ष्मण विद्यते।
तथा स्वरविहीनोऽयं विक्लवं समुदीक्षते॥ ३॥
“Life in this body of Jatayu, O
Laksmana, is very faint. And he is getting
speechless by degrees as he is gazing on
us wildly. (3)
जटायो यदि शाक्नोषि वाक्यं व्याहरितुं पुन:।
सीतामाख्याहि भद्रं ते वधमाख्याहि चात्मन: uv
Turning towards Jatayu, “Jatayu, if you
can utter a word again, speak something more
about Sita and also as to how you came to
be killed. May all be well with you ! (4)

अपराधं तु यं Gea रावणेन am प्रिया॥ ५॥
