604

car-warriors, thereupon submitted to him as
follows: (3)
न तात We परिगन्तुमर्हसे
यत्रेन्द्रजिज्जीवति नैर्ऋतेश।
नेन्द्रारिबाणाभिहतो हि कश्चित्
प्राणान् समर्थ: समरेऽभिषातुम्॥४॥

“While Indrajit, your son, is alive, O
lord of ogres (the progeny of Nirrti), you
ought not to give way to despair, dear
father; for, struck with the arrows of Indra’s
enemy (in my person) none is able to
preserve his life on the battlefield. (4)

wa wh We लक्ष्मणेन
मद्वाणनिर्भिन्नविकीर्णदेहम् ।
गतायुषं भूमितले wart
fort: शरैराचितसर्वगात्रम्॥ ५ ॥

“Behold Rama lying dead alongwith
Laksmana on the earth’s surface today, his
body thrown about, torn to pieces by my
shafts, and covered all over with my sharp
arrows clinging fast to it (the body). (5)

सुनिश्चितां पौरुषदैवयुक्ताम्।
wa ww we लक्ष्मणेन
संतर्पयिष्यामि शरैरमोघै:॥ ६ ॥

“Listen to the following vow of Indra’s
enemy (myself), which is fully determined
and is backed by manliness and divine
blessing: | shall this very day overwhelm
Rama alongwith Laksmana with my arrows
that never miss their target. (6)

अद्येन्द्रवैवस्वतविष्णुरुद्र-

साध्याश्च वैश्वानरचन्द्रसूर्या: |
द्रक्ष्यन्ति मे विक्रममप्रमेयं

विष्णोरिवोग्रं बलियज्ञवाटे॥ ७ ॥

“Today Indra (the ruler of gods), Yama
(son of the sun-god), Visnu (the Protector
of the universe), Rudra (the god of
destruction) and the Sadhyas (a class of
gods), the god of fire, the moon-god and the

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA +

sun-god will witness my immeasurable
prowess even as they did the terrible
prowess of Visnu (as a dwarf in the form of
measuring the entire universe in a couple of
strides) in the enclosure where a sacrifice
was being performed by the demon king,
Bali.” (7)

a एवमुक्त्वा त्रिदशेन्द्रशत्रु-
रापृच्छ्य राजानमदीनसत्त्व: |
रथं खरश्रेष्ठसमाधियुक्तम्॥ ८ ॥
Having bragged as aforesaid, and
taking leave of the king, that enemy of Indra
(the ruler of gods), who was undepressed
in spirit, duly ascended his chariot, swift as
the wind, which was drawn by donkeys and
was equipped with implements of war (in
the shape of a bow, sword etc.). (8)
समास्थाय महातेजा रथं हरिरथोपमम्।
जगाम सहसा तत्र यत्र युद्धमरिंदम:॥ ९ ॥
Duly taking his seat in the chariot,
which resembled the chariot of Indra, Indrajit
(the tamer of his enemies), who was
endowed with’ extraordinary energy,
precipitately sought the battlefield. (9)
तं प्रस्थितं महात्मानमनुजग्मुर्महाबला:।
संहर्षमाणा बहवो धनु:प्रवरपाणय: ॥ १० ll
Showing great enthusiasm, numerous
ogres, who were endowed with extraordinary
might and carried excellent bows in their
hands, followed the gigantic prince, even as
he departed. (10)

गजस्कन्धगता: केचित् केचित् परमवाजिभि: ।
व्याघ्रवृश्चिकमार्जारखरोष्टैश्च UTA: ULL A
काकहंसमयूरैश्च राक्षसा भीमविक्रमा:॥१२॥

Some ogres of terrible prowess rode
on the back of elephants, while others rode
on the back of excellent horses, tigers,
scorpions, cats, donkeys and camels as
