* SUNDARAKANDA +

about to leap, Hanuman, that elephant among
the monkeys, nay, the foremost of monkeys,
who was endowed with extraordinary might,
addressed the following words to the
monkeys: “Even as an arrow shot by Sri
Rama, a scion of Raghu, would fly with the
speed of the wind, | too would, likewise,
course to Lanka, which is guarded by
Ravana. If, however, | don’t find Sita, the
daughter of Janaka, in Lanka, | shall certainly
proceed with the same speed to heaven,
the abode of gods. If | don’t find Sita in
heaven even after exerting myself much, |
shall bring Ravana, the ruler of ogres, in
chains. At all events | shall return successful
with Sita. Or, else | shall bring Lanka with
Ravana after uprooting it.” (838—42)

आनयिष्यामि वा लंकां समुत्पाट्य सरावणाम्।
एवमुक्त्वा तु हनुमान् वानरो वानरोत्तम:॥४३॥
उत्पपाताथ वेगेन वेगवानविचारयन्।
सुपर्णमिव चात्मानं मेने स कपिकुञ्जर:॥४४॥

Saying so, Hanuman, the foremost of
monkeys, for his part, who was full of vigour,
sprang up in the sky with impetuosity,
unmindful of the exertion. Nay, that elephant
among the monkeys accounted himself a
compeer of Garuda. (43-44)

समुत्पतति वेगात् तु वेगात् A नगरोहिण:।
संहृत्य विटपान् walt समुत्पेतु: समन्तत:॥४५॥

Drawing together all their boughs even
while Hanuman sprang up in the sky with
vehemenrce, the aforesaid trees growing on
the mountain flew with force on all sides. (45)

स मत्तकोयष्टिभकान् पादपान् पुष्पशालिन: |
उद्बहन्नुरुवेगेन जगाम विमलेऽम्बरे॥४६॥

Bearing aloft in his great onrush the
trees charming with flowers and with lapwings
in heat perched on them, Hanuman coursed
through the cloudless sky. (46)

ऊरुवेगोत्थिता qa aed कपिमन्वयु:।
प्रस्थितं दीर्घमध्वानं स्वबन्धुमिव बान्धवा:॥४७॥

29

Swept away by the force of his thighs,
the trees followed the monkey for a while
like relatives accompanying their near and
dear ones set out on a long journey. (47)

तमूरुवेगोन्मथिता: सालाश्चान्ये नगोत्तमा:।
अनुजग्मुर्हनूमन्तं सैन्या इव महीपतिम्॥४८॥

Uprooted by the impetus of his thighs,
sal and other excellent trees followed
Hanuman even as troops would follow a
king. (48)

सुपुष्पिताग्रैर्बहुभि: पादपैरन्वित: कपि:।
हनूमान् पर्वताकारो बभूवाद्भुतदर्शन:॥४९॥

Followed by numerous trees with their
extremities laden with blossoms, Hanuman,
who looked like a mountain in size, presented
a weird appearance. (49)

सारवन्तोऽथ ये qa न्यमज्जंल्लवणाम्भसि।
भयादिव महेन्द्रस्य पर्वता वरुणालये॥५०॥

Trees, which were solid, forthwith sank
into the brackish sea even as mountains in
the hoary past took a plunge into the ocean
(the abode of Varuna) in fear of the mighty
Indra. (50)

स नानाकुसुमै: कीर्ण: कपि:
शुशुभे मेघसंकाश: खटद्योतैरिव पर्वत।।५१।।

Covered with flowers of every kind,
dropped from the trees that followed him,
including shoots and buds, the aforesaid
Hanuman, who resembled a cloud, shone
brightly as a mountain with fireflies. (51)

विमुक्तास्तस्य वेगेन मुक्त्वा पुष्पाणि ते SAT: |
व्यवशीर्यन्त सलिले Foam: सुहृदो यथा॥७५२॥
Shedding their blossom when receded
by his impetus, the said trees dropped into
the water of the sea like near and dear ones
returned after escorting their relative up to
the margin of water. (52)

प्रबभौ स महार्णव:॥ ५३॥

Swept away by the wind set in motion
