# YUDDHAKANDA #

Spiringing to that chariot of Jambumali.
Hanuman, son of the wind-god, destroyed
it in no time alongwith that ogre himself with
a blow of his palm. (22)

नदन् प्रतपनो घोरो नलं सोऽभ्यनुधावत।
नल: प्रतपनस्याशु पातयामास चक्षुषी॥ २३॥
भिन्नगात्र: शरैस्तीक्ष्णै: क्षिप्रहस्तेन रक्षसा।
ग्रसन्तमिव सैन्यानि प्रघसं वानराधिप:॥ २४॥
सुग्रीव: सप्तपर्णेन निजघान जवेन च।
प्रपीड्य शरवर्षेण राक्षसं भीमदर्शनम्॥२५॥
निजघान विरूपाश्षं शरेणैकेन लक्ष्मण:।

अग्निकेतुश्च दुर्धर्षो रश्मिकेतुश्च राक्षस:।
सुप्तघ्नो यज्ञकोपश्च रामं निर्बिभिदु: get: २६॥
The notorious and fierce Pratapana
rushed yelling towards Nala. With his limbs
lacerated by the swift-handed ogre with
his pointed arrows, Nala (in his turn)
quickly gouged out his eyes. Nay, Sugriva,
the suzerain lord of monkeys, speedily
killed with a Saptaparna tree Praghasa, who
was consuming as it were the monkey
troops. Overwhelming in the first balance
with a hail of shaft his adversary, Virupaksa
of fearful aspect, Laksmana_ eventually
struk down the ogre with a single arrow.
Agniketu, who was diffcult to overcome,
and the ogre Rasmiketu, as also Suptaghna
and Yajfiakopa, mangled Sri Rama with
their arrows. (23—26)
क्रुद्धश्चतुर्भिश्चिच्छेद घोरैरग्निशिखोपमै:॥ een
Filled with rage on the field of battle, Sri
Rama for his part lopped off the heads of all
the four ogres with four dread arrows bright
like flames. (27)

वज्रमुष्टिस्तु tea मुष्टिना निहतो रणे।
पपात सरथ: साश्व: YE FA भूतले॥ २८॥
Struck down with his fist on the
battlefield by Mainda, Vajramusti for his
part fell to the ground, chariot, horses and

449

all, like an aerial car of gods.
निकुम्भस्तु रणे नीलं नीलाञ्जनचयप्रभम्।
निर्बिभेद शरैस्तीक्ष्णै: करैर्मेघमिवांशुमान्॥ २९॥

Even as the sun pierces a cloud with
its rays, Nikumbha for his part pierced with
his pointed arrows on the field of battle Nila,
who looked like a mass of collyrium. (29)

UA: शरशतेनाथ क्षिप्रहस्तो निशाचर:।

बिभेद समरे नीलं निकुम्भ: प्रजहास च॥ ३०॥
The nimble-handed ranger of the night,

Nikumbha then pierced Nila once more on

the field of battle with a hundred arrows and
heartily laughed. (30)

तस्यैव रथचक्रेण नीलो विष्णुरिवाहवे।
शिरश्चिच्छेद war निकुम्भस्य च सारथे:॥ ३१॥
With a wheel of the chariot of Nikumbha
himself, Nila, in his turn, lopped off on the
field of battle the former's head as well as
that of his charioteer, even as Lord Visnu,
the Protector of the universe, severs the
heads of his adversaries (the demons) in
the course of His encounter with them.
(31)

वज्राशनिसमस्पर्शो द्विविदोऽप्यशनिप्रभम्।
wart गिरिशृङ्गखेण मिषतां सर्वरक्षसाम्॥३२॥

Dwivida too, whose impact was hard
as adamant as_ the thunderbolt, hit
ASaniprabha with the peak of a mountain,
while all the ogres stood looking on. (32)
द्विविदं वानरेन्द्रं तु द्रुमयोधिनमाहवे।
शरैरशनिसंकाशै: स विव्याधाशनिप्रभ:॥ ३३॥

The notorious Asaniprabha for his part
pierced with his arrows, flashing like lightning,
monkey chief Dwivida, who fought with trees
on the field of battle. (33)

a शरैरभिविद्धाङ्गो द्विविद: क्रोधर्मूच्छित:।

सालेन सरथं साश्वं निजघानाशनिप्रभम्॥ ३४॥
Infatuated with anger, the aforesaid

Dwivida, whose limbs had been lacerated

(28)
