* AYODHYAKANDA +

नदतां भीमघोषाणां निशासु मृगपक्षिणाम्।
निशम्यमाना संत्रस्ता wad संश्रयिष्यति॥१०॥
“Greatly alarmed to hear during the
nights the noise of howling wild beasts and
birds, possessing the habit of uttering a
fearful cry, she will cling in terror to Rama,
a scion of Raghu. (10)

वृद्धश्चैवाल्पपुत्रश्च वैदेहीमनुचिन्तयन्।
सोऽपि शोकसमाविष्टो नूनं त्यक्ष्यति जीवितम्॥ ११॥

“Anxiously thinking again and again of
Sita, a princess of the Videha territory, and
overwhelmed with grief, Janaka too, who is
aged and who has few issues viz., a daughter
named Urmila, wife of Laksmana and a
god-daughter in the person of Sita, will surely
give up the ghost. (11)

साहमद्यैव feerd गमिष्यामि पतिव्रता।
sé शरीरमालिङ्ग्य प्रवेक्ष्यामि हुताशनम्॥१२॥

“| too, devoted as | am to my husband,
shall accordingly meet my destined end this
very day. Nay, embracing this body of my
husband, | shall enter the fire that will be
prepared for his funeral.” (12)
at ad: सम्परिष्वज्य विलपन्तीं तपस्विनीम्।
व्यपनिन्यु: सुदु:खार्तां कौसल्यां व्यावहारिका: ।। १३॥

The ministers  (lit., | functionaries
entrusted with the work of disposing of the
king’s dead body) then reverently removed
from that place the wretched Kausalya, who
was sore stricken with agony and lamented
holding the dead monarch in close embrace.

(13)
तैलद्रोण्यां तदामात्या: ava जगतीपतिम्।
Ua: सर्वाण्यथादिष्टाश्चक्रु: कर्माण्यनन्तरम्॥ १४॥

Consigning the deceased emperor at
that time to a trough filled with oil, the
ministers, as commanded by Vasistha and
other family priests, then performed all the
duties connected with the preservation of
the king’s dead body etc., required to be
done next. (14)

539

न तु संकालनं wat विना पुत्रेण मन्त्रिण:।
सर्वज्ञा: कर्तुमीषुस्ते ततो रक्षन्ति भूमिपम्॥१५॥

Knowing as they did _ everything
connected with the disposal of the dead
body, the aforesaid counsellors would not
of course perform the king’s funeral without
the presence of a son; hence they preserved
the body of the king. (15)
तैलद्रोण्यां शायितं तं सचिवैस्तु नराधिपम्।

Bt मृतोऽयमिति ज्ञात्वा स्नियस्ता: पर्यदेवयन्॥ १६॥

Coming to know of the king having been
laid by the ministers in the trough filled with
oil, the aforesaid ladies lamented exclaiming
as follows : “Ah, the king is dead !” (16)

बाहूनुच्छित्य कृपणा नेत्रप्रस्रवणैर्मुखै:।
रुदत्य: शोकसंतप्ता: PUTT पर्यदेवयन्॥१७॥
Throwing up their arms, the wretched
ladies, crying with their faces containing
cascades in the form of eyes, sore stricken
with grief as they were, piteously wailed as
follows : (17)

a महाराज रामेण aad प्रियवादिना।
fad: सत्यसंधेन किमर्थं विजहासि न:॥ १८॥

“Ah, wherefore, O Emperor, do you
abandon us, already bereft of Rama of
unfailing promise, who ever speaks kindly
to all? (18)
कैकेय्या दुष्टभावाया wear विवर्जिता:।
कथं सपत्न्या वत्स्याम: समीपे विधवा वयम्॥ १९॥

“Forsaken by Rama and deprived of our
husband, how shall we live in proximity to
our co-wife, Kaikeyl, of wicked intention? (19)
स हि नाथ: स चास्माकं तव च प्रभुरात्मवान्।
ad wat गत: श्रीमान् विहाय नृपतिश्रियम्॥ २०॥

“That glorious Rama was indeed our
protector and lord as well as of yours, self-
controlled as he is. Having relinquished the
royal fortune, he has departed for the forest.

(20)
त्वया तेन च वीरेण विना व्यसनमोहिता:।
कथं वयं निवत्स्याम: कैकेय्या च विदूषिता:॥ २१॥
