# YUDDHAKANDA #

एकोऽयं राक्षसेन्द्रस्य परायणमवस्थित:।
एतच्छेषं act तस्य किं तिष्ठत हरीश्वरा:॥८॥
“Here stands before you one who is
the last support of Ravana (the ruler of
ogres). And this is all that is left of his army.
Why then, O monkey chiefs, do you stand
idle? (8)

अस्मिंश्च निहते पापे राक्षसे रणमूर्धनि।
रावणं वर्जयित्वा तु शेषमस्य act हतम्॥९॥
“Nay, when this wicked ogre is disposed
of in the forefront of the battle, the remaining
army of his, save Ravana himself, is as
good as killed. (9)

प्रहस्तो निहतो वीरो निकुम्भश्च महाबल:।
कुम्भकर्णश्च कुम्भश्च धूम्राक्षश्च निशाचर:॥१०॥
जम्बुमाली महामाली तीक्ष्णवेगोऽशनिप्रभ:।
सुप्तघ्नो यज्ञकोपश्च aay राक्षस:॥११॥
संह्रादी विकटोऽरिघ्नस्तपनो we Va च।
ware: प्रघसश्चैव प्रजङ्घो WE Wa च॥१२॥
अग्निकेतुश्च दुर्धर्षो रश्मिकेतुश्च वीर्यवान्।
विद्युज्जिह्वो द्विजिह्वश्च सूर्यशत्रुश्च राक्षस:॥ १३॥
अकम्पन: TAY चक्रमाली च राक्षस:।
कम्पन: सत्त्ववन्तौ dt देवान्तकनरान्तकौ॥ १४॥

“The heroic Prahasta has been made
short work of as well as Nikumbha, who
was endowed with extraordinary might, as
also Kumbhakarna and Kumbha and the
night-ranger Dhumraksa, Jambumali,
Mahamali, Tiksnavega, Asaniprabha,
Suptaghna and Yajhakopa as also the ogre
Vajradamstra, Samhradi, Vikata, Arighna,
Tapana as well as Manda, Praghasa as
well as Praghasa, Prajangha as well as
Jangha, as also Agniketu, who was difficult
to overcome, and the valiant Rasmiketu,
Vidyujjinva and Dwijinva and the ogre
SuryaSatru, Akampana and Suparswa as
well as the ogre Cakramali, Kampana,
and those two warriors, Devantaka and

677

Narantaka, who were full of energy.

(10—14)

Tar निहत्यातिबलान् बहून् राक्षससत्तमान्।
बाहुभ्यां सागरं cheat लङ्घ्यतां गोष्पदं लघु॥ १५॥
“Having destroyed the aforesaid
numerous ogre chiefs, who were endowed
with exceeding might, and thereby swum a
sea, as it were, let this tiny hoof-mark of a
cow be promptly crossed. (15)
`एतावदेव शेषं at जेतव्यमिति वानरा:।
हता: सर्वे समागम्य राक्षसा बलदर्पिता:॥१६॥
“This much alone of the hostile army
remains to be congered by you, O monkeys.
All the ogres, proud of their might, were
killed on encountering you. (16)
घृणामपास्य रामार्थे निहन्यां भ्रातुरात्मजम्॥१७॥
“It is not meet for me, an uncle, who is
as good as a father, to compass the death
of my own nephew, who is as good as my
own son. Casting to the winds all tenderness
for the sake of Sri Rama, however, | may
take the life of my own brother's offspring,
Indrajit. (17)

हन्तुकामस्य मे बाष्पं चक्षुश्चैव निरुध्यति।
was महाबाहुर्लक्ष्मण: शमयिष्यति॥१८॥
“Nay, even as | wish to kill him, tears
cloud my vision. Hence the younger mighty-
armed Prince Laksmana alone shall make
short work of him. (18)

वानरा Ad सम्भूय भृत्यानस्य समीपगान्।
इति तेनातियशसा राक्षसेनाभिचोदिता:॥१९॥
“Coming together, therefore, O
monkeys, destroy his army standing by
him.” Encouraged in these words by that
highly illustrious ogre, Vibhisana, the monkey
chiefs rejoiced and lashed their tails as a
token of their joy. (19)
