436

vile as you are and bent upon doing harm to
the people. (28)
न fe ae भविता we यत्र रामो न भूपति: |

ae वनं भविता eee यत्र रामो निवत्स्यति॥ २९॥

“The state in which Rama is no longer
the king will not survive; while the forest
which Rama is going to inhabit is sure to
develop into a flourishing state. (29)
न ह्यदत्तां महीं पित्रा भरत: शास्तुमिच्छति।
waa वा पुत्रवद् वस्तुं यदि जातो महीपते: Ul ३० I

“Bharata surely would not rule over the
earth which has not been voluntarily alienated
by his father, nor would he live with you as
a son, if he is sprung from the loins of the
Emperor. (30)

यद्यपि त्वं क्षितितलाद् गगनं चोत्पतिष्यसि।
पितृवंशचरित्रज्त: सोऽन्यथा न करिष्यति॥ ३१॥

“Even if you soar into the heavens
leaving the earth’s surface, he would not do
anything contrary to the established usage,
knowing as he does the practice of his
forbears. (31)

ad त्वया पुत्रगर्धिन्या पुत्रस्य कृतमप्रियम्।
लोके नहि स विद्येत यो न राममनुव्रत:।॥ ३२॥

“Therefore an unfriendly act alone has
been done by you to your son, even though
you covet his well-being; for there is none in
the world who is not devoted to Rama. (32)
द्रक्ष्यस्यद्यैव कैकेयि पशुव्यालमृगद्विजान्।
गच्छत: सह रामेण पादपांश्च ACSI 33 Il

“O Kaikeyi, you will see this very day
beasts, snakes, deer and birds going with
Rama to the forest and trees too eager to
accompany him. (33)
अथोत्तमान्याभरणानि देवि

देहि स्नुषायै व्यपनीय चीरम्।
न चीरमस्या: प्रविधीयतेति
न्यवारयत् तद् वसनं वसिष्ठ:॥ ३४॥

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

“Therefore, laying aside the bark of
trees, give your daughter-in-law excellent
jewels, O queen! The bark of trees is not
meant for her.” Saying so, Vasistha forbade
Sita wearing it. (34)

वसत्वरण्ये सह राघवेण॥ ३५॥

The sage continued, “The sojourn in
the forest of Rama alone has been asked
for by you, O princess of the Kekaya
territory ! Hence let Sita, who deserves to
be decorated daily, dwell in the forest with
Rama, a scion of Raghu, richly adorned.

(35)

यानैश्च Wea: परिचारकैश्च

सुसंव्रता Tes राजपुत्री।
वस्तैश्च सर्वै: सहितैर्विधानै-
ta gat ते वरसम्प्रदाने॥ ३६॥

“Nay, let the princess proceed fully
provided with excellent conveyances and
attendants as well as with costumes of
various kinds and all useful accessories;
for, while asking for the boons her exile was
not solicited by you.” (36)

तस्मिस्तथा जल्पति विप्रमुख्ये

गुरौ नॄपस्याप्रतिमप्रभावे।
नैव wa सीता विनिव्रत्तभावा

प्रियस्य भर्तु: प्रतिकारकामा॥ ३७॥

Even though the said preceptor of
the king, the foremost among the
Brahmanas, who wielded an influence which
had no parallel, spoke as above, Sita, who
wished to follow the ways of her husband,
did not desist from her purpose in the least.

(37)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्येऽयोध्याकाण्डे सप्तत्रिंश: AWA: ॥ ३७॥

Thus ends Canto Thirty-seven in the Ayodhyakanda of the glorious Ramayana of
Valmiki, the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

