* ARANYAKANDA «

761

अष्टादश: सर्ग:
Canto XVIII
Laksmana lops the nose and ears of Sirpanakha

at तु शूर्पणखां राम: कामपाशावपाशिताम्।
स्वेच्छया श्लक्ष्णया वाचा स्मितपूर्वमथाब्रवीत्॥ १॥
To the aforesaid Surpanakha, bound
by the cords of love, Sri Rama then spoke
with a smile in sweet words as follows
according to his own liking: (1)
कृतदारोऽस्मि भवति wea दयिता मम।
त्वद्विधानां तु नारीणां सुदु:खा ससपत्नता॥ २॥
“O lady, | am already married. Here is
my beloved wife. For ladies like you the
presence of a co-wife is most painful. (2)

अनुजस्त्वेष मे भ्राता शीलवान् प्रियदर्शन:।
श्रीमानकृतदारश्च लक्ष्मणो aa वीर्यवान्॥३॥

“Of course, here is my younger brother,
Laksmana by name, of good conduct, lovely
to look at, glorious and brave and has not
got a wife with him. (3)

अपूर्वी भार्यया चार्थी तरुण: प्रियदर्शन:।
अनुरूपश्च a भर्ता रूपस्यास्य भविष्यति॥४॥

“He is possessed of unique qualities,
young and pleasing of aspect, and will prove
to be a husband worthy of this comely form
of yours if he seeks to obtain a wife. (4)
wi we विशालाक्षि wat wet मम।
असपत्ना ae मेरुमर्कप्रभा यथा॥५॥

“Accept this brother of mine as your
husband, O large eyed and charming lady,
without a rival even as sunlight woos Mount
Meru.” (5)

इति रामेण सा प्रोक्ता राक्षसी काममोहिता।
विसृज्य UH सहसा ततो लक्ष्मणमब्रवीत्॥६॥
Leaving Rama, when spoken to in these
words by Sri Rama, the aforesaid ogress,
infatuated as she was through love, suddenly
spoke to Laksmana as follows : (6)

अस्य रूपस्य a युक्ता wale वरवर्णिनी।
Ta We सुखं सर्वान् दण्डकान् विचरिष्यसि॥ ७॥

“Possessing as | do an excellent
complexion, | shall be a wife worthy of this
comely form of yours. You will happily wander
through the entire range of the Dandaka
forest with me.” (7)

`एवमुक्तस्तु सौमित्री राक्षस्या वाक्यकोविद:।
aa: शूर्पनखीं स्मित्वा लक्ष्मणो युक्तमब्रवीत्॥ ८॥

Spoken to in these words by the ogress,
Laksmana, the son of Sumitra, who was an
adept in expression, smilingly made the
following just reply to Surpanakha: (8)

कथं दासस्य मे दासी भार्या भवितुमिच्छसि।
सोऽहमार्येण War भ्रात्रा कमलवर्णिनि॥९॥

“How do you seek to turn a maid-
servant by becoming a wife to me, a slave,
possessing as you do the hue of a red
lotus? | am only dependent on my worthy
brother. (9)

समृद्धार्थस्य सिद्धार्था मुदितामलवर्णिनी।
आर्यस्य त्वं विशालाक्षि भार्या भव यवीयसी ।। १० 11

“Become you, 0 large-eyed lady, a
happy younger wife of spotless complexion
of my elder brother, who is fully endowed
with all riches, and be accomplished of
purpose thereby. (10)
भार्यां वृद्धां परित्यज्य त्वामेवैष भजिष्यति॥ ११॥

“Giving up for good this deformed, vile,
hideous and aged wife with a sunken belly,
he will accept you alone. (11)
को fe रूपमिदं श्रेष्ठं संत्यज्य वरवर्णिनि।
मानुषीषु वरारोहे Hate भावं विचक्षण:॥१२॥

“Abandoning this excellent form of yours,
what wise man indeed would fasten his love
