* SUNDARAKANDA +

285

Canto LXVI

Pressing to his bosom the jewel for the head sent by Sita and piteously wailing
in many ways, Sri Rama urges Hanuman to repeat the message of Sita

Waal हनुमता रामो दशरथात्मज:।
तं मणिं हृदये कृत्वा रुरोद सहलक्ष्मण:॥१॥
Pressing that jewel to his bosom when
spoken to as aforesaid by Hanuman, Sri
Rama, sprung from the loins of DaSaratha,
wept with his younger brother, Laksmana.
(1)

तं तु apr मणिश्रेष्ठं waa: शोककर्शित:।
नेत्राभ्यामश्रुपूर्णाभ्यां सुग्रीवमिदमब्रवीत्॥ २॥

Beholding that excellent jewel, Sri Rama,
a scion of Raghu, for his part, who was
emaciated through grief born of separation
from Sita, spoke as follows to Sugriva with
eyes full of tears: (2)

aaa धेनु: wala स्नेहाद् वत्सस्य वत्सला।
तथा waft हृदयं मणिश्रेष्ठस्य दर्शनात्॥३॥

“Even as a cow, who is fond of her
calf, begins to distil milk from her teats
through excess of affection at the very sight
of her calf, so does my heart too melt
through the sight of the excellent jewel. (3)

मणिरत्नमिदं ot aden: श्वशुरेण मे।
वधूकाले यथा agate मूर्छि शोभते॥४॥
“This excellent jewel was presented by
my father-in-law King Janaka to Sita, a
princess of the Videha territory, when she
had become a bride, and was fastened to

her head in such a way as it looked
surpassingly charming. (4)

अयं fe जलसम्भूतो मणि: प्रवरपूजित:।
यज्ञे परमतुष्टेन ad: शक्रेण धीमता॥५॥

“This jewel, which was found in the
waters and had been adored by the foremost
among gods, was actually bestowed on
King Janaka by the wise Indra (the ruler of

gods), who was highly pleased with the
former in the course of च sacrificial
performance intended to propitiate him. (5)

इमं Gp मणिश्रेष्ठं तथा तातस्य दर्शनम्।
अद्यास्म्यवगत: सौम्य वैदेहस्य तथा विभो:॥६॥

“By seeing this excellent jewel | have
indirectly obtained today the sight of my
father in whose hands the jewel was placed
by Janaka as well as that of the mighty
Janaka, the ruler of the Videha territory, in
the same way as | have obtained the sight
of Sita herself, O gentle one! (6)

ara fe शोभते तस्या: प्रियाया afet मे afar: |
अद्यास्य दर्शनेनाहं प्राप्तां तामिव चिन्तये॥७॥

“Indeed, this jewel looked extremely
charming on the head of my aforesaid darling.
Through its sight today | conceive her to
have been recovered. (7)
किमाह सीता वैदेही ब्रूहि सौम्य पुन: पुन:।
परासुमिव तोयेन सिञ्चन्ती वाक्यवारिणा॥८॥

“Please repeat, O gentle one, again
and again, what Sita, a princess of the
Videha territory, said to you, sprinkling me,
unconscious as | am, with water in the form
of her speech, as it were. (8)

इतस्तु fe दु:खतरं यदिमं वारिसम्भवम्।
मणिं पश्यामि सौमित्रे वैदेहीमागतां विना॥९॥
Turning to Laksmana, “indeed what
could be more painful, O son of Sumitra,
than the fact that | behold this jewel, found

in the waters, come without Sita, a princess
of the Videha territory? (9)

fat जीवति aedt afe मासं धरिष्यति।
क्षणं वीर न जीवेयं विना तामसितेक्षणाम्॥ १०॥

Addressing Hanuman again Sri Rama
