992

जीर्णानामपि सत्त्वानां मृत्युर्नायाति राघव।
अरोगप्रसवा नार्यो वपुष्मन्तो fe मानवा:॥१९॥

“May no obstruction hinder you as you
wander in all directions at your sweet will.”
“So be it”, replied Puspaka. Then Puspaka,
which had been asked to go, after having
been worshipped by Sri Rama, proceeded
from there in the direction of its choice.

On Puspaka, an embodiment of virtues,
having thus gone out of sight, Bharata, with
joined palms, addressed Sri Rama, the delight
of the Raghus, in the following words: “Beings
which do not claim their descent in Adam’s
line, speak again and again like men, under
your reign, O valiant One, having a divine
soul! Only more than a month has elapsed
since you took the sceptre in your hand,
O Raghava! and mortals have become
strangers to disease, death does not overtake
even men worn out with age, women undergo
no labour-pains during parturition and human
beings are well-built indeed. (15—19)

« VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

हर्षश्चाभ्यधिको राजञ्जनस्य पुरवासिन:।
काले वर्षति पर्जन्य: पातयन्नमृतं Wa: Roll

“An abundance of joy has fallen to the
lot of every citizen dwelling in the town, O
king! Pouring down nectarean water clouds
rain at the proper time. (20)

वाताश्चापि प्रवान्त्येते स्पर्शयुक्ता: सुखा: शिवा: |
geet नश्चिरुं राजा भवेदिति नरेश्वर:॥ २१॥

“Even the very winds which blow here
are capable of giving a delightful touch, and
are pleasing and healthful. People living both
in the cities and in the country, arriving in
the capital, declare, ‘May such a sovereign
be our ruler for long’, O king!” (21)

कथयन्ति Ut राजन् पौरजानपदास्तथा।

एता वाच: सुमधुरा भरतेन समीरिता:।

श्रुत्वा रामो Yat युक्तो बभूव नृपसत्तम:॥ २२॥
Hearing these exquisitely honeyed words

beautifully uttered by Bharata, Sri Rama, the
best of kings, became thrilled with joy. (22)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये उत्तरकाण्डे एकचत्वारिंश: सर्ग: ॥ ४१ ॥

Thus ends Canto Forty-one in the Uttarakanda of the glorious Ramayana of Valmiki,
the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

Canto XLII

Recreation of Sit Rama and Sri Sita in the Asoka-grove; the enceinte
Sri Sita expresses her desire to visit penance-groves
and 57 Rama accords His consent

a विसृज्य ततो wa: पुष्पकं हेमभूषितम्।
प्रविवेश महाबाहुरशोकवनिकां तदा॥१॥
चन्दनागुरुचूतैश्च तुङ्गकालेयकैरपि।
देवदारुवनैश्चापि समन्तादुपशोभिताम्॥ २॥
चम्पकाशोकपुंनागमधूकपनसासनै: ।
शोभितां पारिजातैश्च विधूमज्वलनप्रभै:॥ ३॥
Then after dismissing Puspaka, decked
with gold, the mighty-armed Sri Rama entered

the Asoka-grove, which was_ rendered
beautiful all around by the sandal, eaglewood
(Aguru) and mango trees, so also by
cocoanut, red-sandal and deodar groves
too. It was graced by Campaka (Campa
Campaka), ASoka, Punnagas, Madhuka, jack
and Asana* trees, also by Parijata trees
which looked like a blaze of fire without
smoke. (1—3)

* Also know as Saja, its latin name is Terminalia tamanosu.
