* AYODHYAKANDA +

सिक्तसम्मृष्टरथ्या fe तथा च वनमालिनी।
आसीदयोध्या तदह: समुच्छितगृहध्वजा॥ १८॥

On that day Ayodhya had all its streets
thoroughly swept and sprinkled with scented
water, overhung with garlands of sylvan
flowers and had tall flags hoisted on its
house-tops. (18)

तदा ह्ययोध्यानिलय: सस्त्रीबालाकुलो जन:।
रामाभिषेकमाकांक्षन्नाकांक्षन्नुदयं रवे:॥१९॥
Full of flurry the people living in
Ayodhya, including women and children,
longed for sunrise, eagerly looking forward
as they did to the installation of Sri Rama as
Prince Regent. (19)

प्रजालंकारभूतं च जनस्यानन्दवर्धनम्।
उत्सुकोऽभूज्जनो द्रष्टुं तमयोध्यामहोत्सवम्॥ Ro Il

Men were eager to witness that grand
festival in Ayodhya, which served as an
adornment for the people and enhanced
their joy. (20)
एवं तं जनसम्बाधं राजमार्गं पुरोहित:।
व्यूहन्निव जनौघं तं wat राजकुलं ययौ॥ २१॥

In this way Vasistha, the family priest
of DaSaratha, drove slowly to the royal
palace, parting asunder, as it were, the

crowd of men that stood blocking the main
road already crammed with people. (21)

सिताभ्रशिखरप्रख्यं प्रासादमधिरुह्य a
समीयाय नरेन्द्रेण शक्रेणेव बृहस्पति:॥ २२॥

Nay, ascending the palace, which
resembled the Himalayan range with its peaks
looking like white clouds, he met Dasaratha
(a ruler of men) as the sage Brhaspati would
meet Indra, the ruler of gods. (22)

305

तमागतमभिप्रेक्ष्य fear राजासनं नृप:।
पप्रच्छ स्वमतं ae कृतमित्यभिवेदयत्॥ २३॥

Quitting his royal seat the moment he
perceived that sage Vasistha had come,
the Emperor inquired what was in his
mind (viz., whether Sri Rama had been
approached by the sage) and the sage
reported to him that what he had been
charged with had been accomplished. (23)

तेन चैव तदा qed सहासीना: सभासद:।

आसनेभ्य: समुत्तस्थु: पूजयन्त: पुरोहितम्॥ २४॥
The councillors too, who were sitting

by the side of the Emperor at that time, duly

rose from their seats all at once, showing
their honour to the family priest. (24)

गुरुणा त्वभ्यनुज्ञातो मनुजौघं विसृज्य तम्।
विवेशान्त:पुरं राजा fear गिरिगुहामिव॥ २५॥
Proroguing that assembly of men as
soon as permitted by his preceptor, the
Emperor for his part retired to the gynaeceum
even as a lion would enter a mountain-cave.

(25)

महेन्द्रवेश्मप्रतिमं निवेशनम्।
Weta तारागणसंकुलं AA: URE Il
DaSsaratha, the ruler of the earth,
entered that charming gynaeceum, crowded
with young ladies, clad in excellent robes,
and vying with the abode of the mighty
Indra (the ruler of gods), illumining it by his
august presence as the moon would illumine
the heavens spangled with a host of stars.
(26)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्येऽयोध्याकाण्डे
पञ्चम: सर्ग: ॥ ५ Il

Thus ends Canto Five in the Ayodhyakanda of the glorious Ramayana of
Valmiki, the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

