66

visiting that splendid and beautiful aerial car,
resembling a mountain, with lovely caverns
and further looking like a tree with charming
hollows and supremely fragrant during the
spring-time (lit., the close of winter). (15)
da: स at कपिरभिपत्य पूजितां
. २२ र्परा दिशमुखबाहुपालिताम्।
अदृश्य तां जनकसुतां सुपूजितां
सुदु:खितां पतिगुणवेगनिर्जिताम्॥ १६ ॥
Reaching that honoured city, protected
by the arms of Ravana, the ten-headed
monster, and not finding anywhere, even
though moving about freely, that daughter of
King Janaka, highly respected and sore

« VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

afflicted and conquered by the force of her
consort’s virtues, Hanuman presently felt
very miserable. (16)
ततस्तदा बहुविधभावितात्मन:
कृतात्मनो जनकसुतां Fat: |
अपश्यतोऽभवदतिदु:खितं मन:
सचक्षुष: प्रविचरतो Aer: i १७॥
The mind of the high-souled Hanuman,
who had contemplated on the Supreme Spirit
in many ways and disciplined his self, nay,
who always followed the right path and who
kept his eyes open, thereupon became sore
distressed when he did not perceive Sita on
that occasion, though ranging wide. (17)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये सुन्दरकाण्डे सप्तम: सर्ग: ॥ ७॥

Thus ends Canto Seven in the Sundarakanda of the glorious Ramayana of Valmiki,
the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

अष्टम: सर्ग:
Canto VIII
A further description of the aerial car, Puspaka

स तस्य मध्ये भवनस्य संस्थितो

महद्विमानं मणिरत्नचित्रितम्।
प्रतप्तजाम्बूनदजालकृत्रिमं

ददर्श धीमान् पवनात्मज: कपि: ॥ १ ॥

Stationed in the centre of the aforesaid
palace, that intelligent Hanuman, sprung from
the loins of the wind-god, beheld a vast
aerial car, rendered picturesque by gems
and jewels and distinguished by the structure
of lattice windows of highly refined gold.

(1)
तदप्रमेयप्रतिकारकृत्रिमं
कृतं स्वयं साध्विति विश्वकर्मणा।
fet ma वायुपथे प्रतिष्ठितं
व्यराजतादित्यपथस्य लक्ष्म तत्॥ २॥

The aerial car was embellished with
images etc., of immeasurable beauty and

made by ViSwakarma (the artisan of gods)
himself, as an excellent achievement. Placed
on the aerial path lying in the heavens it
shone brightly as a beacon-light in the orbit
of the sun. (2)
न तत्र किंचिन्न ad प्रयत्नतो

न तत्र fete महार्घरत्नवत्।
न ते विशेषा नियता: सुरेष्वपि

न तत्र किंचिन्न महाविशेषवत्॥ ३॥

There was nothing in that structure
which had not been executed with special
effort and there was no part of it which was
not inlaid with precious stones of great value.
The specialities which were incorporated
into it were not to be found even in the
abodes of gods and there was nothing in it
which was not marked with some great
speciality. (3)
