* SUNDARAKANDA +

of Ravana in large chariots to which horses
were yoked, were overlaid with a protective
armour of gold, were surmounted by banners
and decorated with smaller flags and which
made a rattling sound resembling a peal of
thunder, stretching their bows inlaid with
refined gold and as such looking like clouds
accompanied by flashes of lightning.
(1—4)

जनन्यस्तास्ततस्तेषां विदित्वा किंकरान् हतान्।
बभूवु: शोकसम्भ्रान्ता: सबान्धवसुहृज्जना:॥ ५॥
Coming to know of the Kinkaras having
been killed, their mothers alongwith their near
and dear ones got confounded on account of
grief and fear of further calamity. (5)

ते परस्परसंघर्षात् तप्तकाञ्चनभूषणा:।
अभिपेतुर्हनूमन्तं तोरणस्थमवस्थितम्॥ ६ UN

Vying with one another to take the
lead, the chief ministers sons, who were
decked with ornaments of refined gold, rushed
on Hanuman, who stood on the archway
motionless. (6)

सृजन्तो ara ते रथगर्जितनि:स्वना:।
Wace इवाम्भोदा विचेरुर्नैर्ऋताम्बुदा:॥ ७॥

Discharging a hail of shafts like watery
clouds during the monsoon, the aforesaid
cloud in the shape of ogres rambled about,
emitting a sound like a clap of thunder in the
shape of the rattling of their chariots. (7)

अवकीर्णस्ततस्ताभिर्हनूमान् शरवृष्टिभि: ।
अभवत् संवृताकार: शैलराडिव वृष्टिभि:॥८॥

Covered by those showers of shafts,
Hanuman became invisible even as a king
of mountains is obscured by incessant
showers. (8)

स mM agama तेषामाशुचर: कपि:।
रथवेगांश्च वीराणां विचरन् विमलेऽम्बरे॥९॥

Wheeling about in the cloudless sky,
that swift-footed monkey, Hanuman, eluded
the shafts of those heroic ogres as well as
the onrush of their chariots. (9)

201

स तै: क्रीडन् Meats वीर: प्रकाशते।
धनुष्मद्भिर्यथा मेघैर्मारुक: WAT oll

Sporting in the air with those warriors,
each armed with a bow, the hero shone like
the powerful wind-god playing in the heavens
with clouds accompanied by rainbows. (10)
स pa निनदं घोरं त्रासयंस्तां महाचमूम्।
चकार हनुमान् वेगं ay रक्ष:सु वीर्यवान्॥११॥

Emitting a terrible roar and striking terror
into that large army, the powerful Hanuman
rushed on those ogres. (11)

मुष्टिभिश्चाहनत्कांश्चिन्नखै: कांश्चिद्व्यदारयत्॥ 22

Hanuman, the scourge of his enemies,
struck down some with the palm of his
hand, and some more with his feet. He hit
others with his fists and tore still others with
his nails. (12)

प्रममाथोरसा कांश्चिदूरुभ्यामपरानपि।
केचित् तस्यैव नादेन तत्रैव पतिता भुवि॥१३॥
He crushed some with his chest and
others against his thighs, while others fell
on the ground at the very spot where they
stood, simply at the roar of Hanuman. (13)

ततस्तेष्ववसन्नेषु भूमौ निपतितेषु च।
तत्सैन्यमगमत् सर्वं दिशो दश भयार्दितम्॥१४॥

The said sons of Ravana’s chief minister
having been got rid of and fallen on the
ground, that army fled in all the ten directions,
stricken with fear. (14)

विनेदुर्विस्वरं arm निपेतुर्भुवि वाजिन:।
भग्ननीडध्वजच्छत्रैर्भूश्च कीर्णाभवद् रथै:॥१५॥

Elephants trumpeted  dissonantly,
horses fell to the ground and the earth was
strewn with chariots which had their seats,
ensigns and canopies shattered. (15)

want रुधिरेणाथ eaxat दर्शिता: afer
विविधैश्च स्वनैर्लङ्का ननाद faced तदा॥१६॥

Rivers were presented to the view by
blood flowing on the way. Nay, Lanka seemed
