252

“They, however, could not even support
it, much less toss it in order to be able to
ascertain its weight. Perceiving as | did the
prowess of those princes, who claimed great
prowess, to be deficient, O eminent sage,
those rulers of men were rejected by me.
Now hear what they did next, O sage rich
in asceticism ! “Their prowess having been
called in question, all the kings in extreme
anger thereupon besieged Mithila, O jewel
among sages! Considering themselves as
having been insulted by me and, therefore,
filled with great anger, those jewels among
kings inflicted suffering on the city of Mithila.
Consequent on that siege, at the end of a
full twelve month all my resources got
depleted, O jewel among sages! As a result
of that | felt very wretched. Thereupon |
propitiated through askesis all the hosts of
gods. (19—23)

ददुश्च परमप्रीताश्चतुरंगबलं सुरा:।
ततो भग्ना नृपतयो हन्यमाना fast ययु:॥ २४॥

« VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

अवीर्या वीर्यसंदिग्धा: सामात्या: पापकारिण: |
तदेतन्मुनिशार्दूल धनु: परमभास्वरम्॥ RG II
रामलक्ष्मणयोश्चापि दर्शयिष्यामि सुव्रत।
यद्यस्य धनुषो राम: कुर्यादारोपणं मुने।
सुतामयोनिजां सीतां cet दाशरथेरहम्॥ RE Il
“Nay, extremely pleased, the gods
conferred on me an army complete in all its
four limbs, viz., the horse, elephants, chariots
and infantry. Being hard hit by that army
and completely routed, the villainous princes/
kings, who lacked in valour or whose
prowess was called in question, thereupon
fled with their ministers in various directions.
| shall certainly show the aforesaid most
resplendent and celebrated bow, O tiger
among ascetics, to Sri Rama and Laksmana
as well, O sage of noble vows ! If Rama
strings this bow, O sage, | promise to give
away my daughter, Sita, who was not born
of a mother’s womb, to the aforesaid son of
DaSaratha.” (24—26)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये ATH IS षट्षट्टितम: सर्ग: ॥ ६६ ॥

Thus ends Canto Sixty-six in the Balakanda of the glorious Ramayana of Valmiki,
the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

सप्तषष्टितम: at:
Canto LXVII

Urged by Vigwamitra, Sri Rama bends the bow, sent by Janaka to
the sacrificial hall, in order to string it and in the process
breaks it, whereupon Janaka with the concurrence of
ViSwamitra sends his counsellors to Ayodhya
to invite Emperor Dasaratha for the wedding

जनकस्य aa: श्रुत्वा विश्वामित्रो महामुनि: |
धनुर्दर्शय waa sia wart पार्थिवम्॥१॥
Hearing the narration of Janaka, the
eminent sage ViSwamitra, so the tradition
goes, said to the aforesaid king, “Please
show the bow to Rama.” (1)

ad: स राजा जनक: सचिवान् व्यादिदेश ह।
धनुरानीयतां feet गन्धमाल्यानुलेपितम्॥ २॥

Thereupon the celebrated King Janaka
gladly instructed as follows his counsellors
sitting by his side : “Let the heavenly bow,
adorned with sandal-paste and flowers, be
brought here.” (2)

जनकेन समादिष्टा: सचिवा: प्राविशन् पुरम्।
Tet: पुरत: कृत्वा निर्जग्मुरमितौजस:॥ ३॥

Commanded by Janaka, his counsellors,
