# YUDDHAKANDA #

gods and demons alike. There will be great
danger even to gods in fighting with him

659

when he has concluded the ritual and feels
inclined to fight.” (23)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये FERS चतुरशीतितम: AW: ॥ ८४॥

Thus ends Canto Eighty-four in the Yuddhakanda of the glorious Ramayana of
Valmiki, the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

पञ्चाशीतितम: at:
Canto LXXXV

Importuned by Vibhisana, Sri Rama commands Laksmana
to march against Indrajit to make short work of him,
and Laksmana arrives with an army near the
sanctuary of Nikumbhila

तस्य तद् वचनं श्रुत्वा Wea: शोककर्शित:।
नोपधारयते ah यदुक्तं तेन रक्षसा॥१॥
Even on _ hearing the _ aforesaid
submission of Vibhisana, Sri Rama (a scion
of Raghu), who was stricken with grief,
could not make out clearly what was
submitted by that ogre. (1)

ततो धैर्यमवष्टभ्य राम: परपुरंजय:।
विभीषणमुपासीनमुवाच कपिसंनिधौ ।। २॥

Plucking up courage, Sri Rama, the
conqueror of hostile citadels, spoke as
follows to Vibhisana, seated by his side, in
the presence of the monkey, Hanuman:

(2)
नैर्ऋताधिपते वाक्यं यदुक्तं a विभीषण।
भूयस्तच्छोतुमिच्छामि ge यत्ते विवक्षितम्॥ ३॥

“| wish to hear once more, O suzerain
lord of ogres (lit., the progeny of Nirrti, the
ogre presiding over the south-west), that
submission which was made by you, O
Vibhisana! Repeat that which was sought
to be conveyed by you.” (3)

राघवस्य Aa: श्रुत्वा वाक्यं वाक्यविशारद:।
यत् ad पुनरिदं वाक्यं बभाषेऽथ विभीषण: ॥४॥

Hearing the command of Sri Rama,

a scion of Raghu, Vibhisana, who was
skilled in expression, forthwith repeated as
follows the same submission, which was
made by him before: (4)
यथाऽऽज्ञप्तं महाबाहो त्वया गुल्मनिवेशनम्।
तत् तथानुष्ठितं at त्वद्वाक्यसमनन्तरम्॥५॥
“Immediately after your command, the
marshalling of troops was done by me in
the same way as was enjoined by you, O
mighty-armed hero! (5)

तान्यनीकानि सर्वाणि विभक्तानि समन्तत:।
विन्यस्ता यूथपाश्चैव यथान्यायं विभागश:॥६॥

“All those troops have been divided
and arrayed all-round and their commanders
too have been allotted their respective posts
according to their rank. (6)
भूयस्तु मम विज्ञाप्यं तच्छृणुष्व महाप्रभो।
त्वय्यकारणसंतप्ते संतमहृदया वयम् 9 ॥

“Now hear, O mighty lord, that which
remains to be submitted by me yet. When
you are afflicted without any cause, we too
feel pained at heart. (7)
त्यज राजन्निमं शोकं मिथ्या संतापमागतम्।
यदियं त्यज्यतां fat शत्रुहर्षविवर्धिनी॥८॥
