440

एवं मन्ये गुणवतां गुणानां फलमुच्यते।

पित्रा मात्रा च यत्साधुर्वीरो निर्वास्यते TALI Le tl
“Since a pious and valiant son is being

exiled to the forest by his very father and

mother, such | believe is declared (by the

scriptures) to be the reward of virtues of the

virtuous.” (11)

Tal वचनमाज्ञाय Wa: शीघ्रविक्रम:।
योजयित्वा ययौ तत्र रथमश्वैरलंकृतम्॥१२॥

Bowing to the king’s command and
fitting with horses a chariot decked with
ornaments, Sumantra, who was swift of
pace, returned quickly to that very spot
where Sri Rama stood ready with Sita and
Laksmana to depart for the forest. (12)

तं रथं राजपुत्राय wd: कनकभूषितम्।
आचचक्षेऽञ्जलिं Peat Bh परमवाजिभि: ।॥ १३॥
Joining his palms as च token of
submission, the charioteer announced to
the Crown prince, Sri Rama, the arrival of
the chariot, decked with gold and fitted with
excellent horses. (13)

राजा सत्वरमाहूय aad वित्तसंचये।
sara देशकालज्ञो निश्चितं सर्वत: Pa ew
Promptly summoning to his presence
the officer placed in charge of the treasury,
the king, who knew what should be done at
a particular place and time and was free
from all impurities in the shape of duplicity
etc., spoke in a decisive tone as follows :
(14)

वासांसि च वरार्हाणि भूषणानि महान्ति च।
वर्षाण्येतानि संख्याय ace: क्षिप्रमानय॥ १५॥
“Taking into consideration all the

years that Sita has to spend in exile, pray,
speedily bring for Sita, a princess of the
Videha kingdom, costly robes and valuable
ornaments.” (15)

नरेन्द्रेणैवमुक्तस्तु गत्वा कोशगृहं तत:।
प्रायच्छत् सर्वमाहृत्य सीतायै क्षिप्रमेव तत्॥१६॥

Proceeding to the treasury when

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

commanded thus by the king, and bringing
everything that he was instructed to fetch,
the officer for his part immediately delivered
the whole lot to Sita. (16)

सा सुजाता सुजातानि वैदेही प्रस्थिता वनम्।
भूषयामास गात्राणि तैर्विचित्रैर्विभूषणै:।॥ १७॥

Bound as she was for the forest, Sita,
a princess of the Videha kingdom, of noble
(uncommon) birth (in that she was not born
of a womb), adorned her limbs, which were
endowed with propitious marks, with those
marvellous jewels. (17)

व्यराजयत वैदेही aga aq सुविभूषिता।
Sadi sea: काले खं प्रभेव विवस्वत:॥ १८॥
Splendidly and profusely decked with
ornaments, Sita, a princess of the Videha
kingdom, illumined that palace (where she
stood) in the same way as the radiance of
the rising sun with its bright rays illumines
the sky in the morning, particularly when
there is no mist or cloud. (18)

तां भुजाभ्यां परिष्वज्य श्वश्रूर्वचनमब्रवीत्।
अनाचरन्तीं कृपणं मूर्ध्यपाघ्राय मैथिलीम्॥१९॥

Folding in her arms that princess of
Mithila, who never behaved in an unseemly
way, and smelling her head as a token of
affection, her mother-in-law, Kausalya, spoke
in the following words : (19)
असत्य: सर्वलोकेऽस्मिन् सततं सत्कृता: FHA: |
wait नानुमन्यन्ते विनिपातगतं स्निय:॥ ot

“Women who, though constantly adored
by their beloved consorts, cease to esteem
their husband, who has fallen on evil days,

are dubbed as wicked throughout this world.
(20)

एष स्वभावो नारीणामनुभूय WT सुखम्।
अल्पामप्यापदं प्राप्य दुष्यन्ति प्रजहत्यपि॥ २१॥
“Having enjoyed happiness in the past
they malign and even desert their husband
on meeting with the least misfortune : such
is the nature of wicked women. (21)
