+ UTTARAKANDA +

Bhargava (Sukra), in the enjoyable month of
Caitra. (3)
wa भार्गवकन्यां स रूपेणाप्रतिमां भुवि।
विचरन्तीं atest दण्डोऽपश्यदनुत्तमाम्॥४॥
There Danda saw the daughter of

Bhargava, a paragon of beauty, roaming
about in the forest. (4)

a gem at agen अनङ्गशरपीडित:।
अभिगम्य सुसंविग्नां wat वचनमब्रवीत्॥५॥
Having seen her, that wicked minded
Danda, dull-witted, one afflicted by the arrows
of cupid, greatly agitated approached the
daughter of Bhargava and said: (5)

कुतस्त्वमसि सुश्रोणि कस्य वासि सुता शुभे।
पीडितोऽहमनङ्गेन पृच्छामि wat शुभानने॥६॥
‘O one of beautiful hips and loins,
wherefrom do you hail, O beautiful one ! whose
daughter you are? O of auspicious face,
afflicted as | am by cupid, | ask you.’ (6)

तस्य त्वेवं ब्रुवाणस्य मोहोन्मत्तस्य कामिन:।
भार्गवी प्रत्युवाचेदं aa: सानुनयं त्विदम्॥७॥
When he said so, blinded by the sexual
urge and madly infatuated as he was,
the daughter of Bhargava replied thus
courteously: (7)
भार्गवस्य Yat fates देवस्याक्लिष्टकर्मण:।
अरजां नाम राजेन्द्र ज्येष्ठामाश्रमवासिनीम्॥८॥
‘Know me as the daughter of the lord

Bhargava, unwearied in action, named Araja,
the eldest one residing in the hermitage. (8)

मा मां स्पृश बलाद् राजन् कन्या PATA ह्यहम्।
Te: frat मे राजेन्द्र त्वं च शिष्यो महात्मन:॥ ९॥
‘Do not touch me by force, | am under
the control of my father, O best among
kings. My father is your preceptor and you
are the pupil of that noble one. (9)
व्यसनं सुमहत् क्रुद्ध: स A दद्यान्महातपा:।
ae वान्यन्मया कार्यं धर्मदृष्टेन सत्पथा॥१०॥
वरयस्व नरश्रेष्ठं पितरं मे महाद्युतिम्।
अन्यथा तु फलं तुभ्यं Mele घोराभिसंहितम्॥ ११॥

1077

‘Enraged, he (Bhargava), the performer
of great penances, shall cause you much
grief. If, however, for something other than
mere passion, you desire me, then ask my
hand following the righteous path from
my father, O best among men; otherwise
you will meet with frightful consequences.

(10-11)
क्रोधेन हि पिता मेऽसौ त्रैलोक्यमपि निर्दहेत्।
दास्यते चानवद्याङ्ग तव मा याचित: पिता॥ १२॥

‘In anger my father would burn up the
three worlds O one of perfect limbs. He will
give me to you if asked for.’ (12)

एवं ब्रुवाणामरजां दण्ड: कामवशं गत:।
प्रत्युवाच मदोन्मत्त: शिरस्याधाय चाञ्जलिम्॥ १३॥
To Araja speaking thus, Danda under

the power of cupid, intoxicated with passion,
replied folding his hands over his head: (13)

प्रसादं pe सुश्रोणि न कालं क्षेप्तुमर्हसि।
त्वत्कृते fe मम प्राणा विदीर्यन्ते वरानने॥१४॥

‘Please favour me, O one of beautiful
hips and loins, do not delay, O beautiful
one, my vital breaths are shattering on your
account. (14)
त्वां प्राप्य तु वधो वापि पापं वापि सुदारुणम्।
भक्तं भजस्व मां te भजमानं सुविह्वलम्॥ १५॥

‘By possessing you, let there be my
death, or a great sin committed, accept me,
devoted to you and asking for you, highly
agitated.’ (15)
एवमुक्त्वा तु तां कन्यां At प्राप्य बलाद् बली |
विस्फुरन्तीं यथाकामं मैथुनायोपचक्रमे॥ १६॥

Thus saying, he, Danda, the strong
one, seizing the trembling daughter of
Bhargava between his arms by force, he
raped her. (16)
तमनर्थं महाघोरं दण्ड: Heal सुदारुणम्।
नगरं प्रययावाशु मधुमन्तमनुत्तमम्॥१७॥

Having committed that terrible heinous

crime, he went back soon to the unparalleled
Madhumanta. (17)
