* BALAKANDA +

“What wrong has been done by me to
that eminent seer of purified mind that, even
though perceiving me to be innocent and
devoted to him, the pious soul should
abandon me?” (4)

gta संचिन्तयित्वा तु नि:श्वस्य च पुन: पुन:।
जगाम वेगेन तदा वसिष्ठं परमौजसम्॥५॥
Deeply pondering thus and sighing again
and again, she for her part forthwith ran to
the supremely powerful Vasistha. (5)

निर्धूय तांस्तदा भृत्यान् शतश: शत्रुसूदन।
जगामानिलवेगेन पादमूलं महात्मन:॥६॥
Shaking off the aforesaid retainers
numbering many hundred, O destroyer of
foes, she at once ran swift as the wind to
the soles of feet of that exalted soul. (6)

WIT सा रुदन्ती च क्रोशन्ती चेदमब्रवीत्।
वसिष्ठस्याग्रत: स्थित्वा रुदन्ती मेघनि:स्वना॥ ७॥

Standing before Vasistha while shedding
tears, the celebrated Sabala submitted to
him as follows in a voice sonorous as the
rumbling of a cloud, weeping and wailing all
the time: (7)
भगवन् किं परित्यक्ता त्वयाहं ब्रह्मण: सुत।
यस्माद् राजभटा At हि नयन्ते त्वत्सकाशत:॥ ८ ॥

“Have | been forsaken by you, O
almighty son of Brahma, in that the king’s
servants are actually taking me away from
your presence?” (8)
एवमुक्तस्तु ब्रह्मर्षिरिदं वचनमब्रवीत्।
शोकसंतप्तहृदयां स्वसारमिव दु:खिताम्॥९॥

Questioned thus by the cow, Vasistha,
the Brahmana seer, for his part replied as
follows to Sabala, whose heart was tormented
with grief, as to an afflicted sister : (9)

न त्वां त्यजामि शबले नापि मेऽपकृतं त्वया।

एष at नयते राजा AAA महाबल:॥ ol
“lam not abandoning you, 0 Sabala,

nor have you wronged me. Intoxicated with

power, this very mighty king is taking you

away. (10)

219

act राजा क्षत्रियश्च पृथिव्या: पतिरेव च॥११॥

“My strength is not equal to his; nay,
being my honoured guest, the king is
particularly strong today. The_ king,
ViSwamitra, is a Ksatriya, and the ruler of
the earth to boot. (11)

इयमशक्षौहिणी पूर्णां गजवाजिरथाकुला।
हस्तिध्वजसमाकीर्णा तेनासौ बलवत्तर:॥१२॥

“Here is his army, full one Aksauhini
strong, equipped with elephants, horses and
chariots and crowded with the best of
elephants. In that respect he is mightier
than us.” (12)

एवमुक्का वसिष्ठेन प्रत्युवाच विनीतवत्।
वचनं वचनज्ञा सा ब्रह्मर्षिमतुलप्रभम्॥१३॥

Thus addressed by Vasistha, Sabala,
who correctly understood the sense of
others’, speech, replied as follows, like a
meek lady, to the Brahmana seer of
matchless splendour : (13)

न बलं क्षत्रियस्याहुर्ब्रह्मणा बलवत्तरा:।
ब्रह्मन् ब्रह्मबलं दिव्यं क्षात्राच्च बलवत्तरम्॥ १४॥
“The wise declare the strength of a
Ksatriya as nought (as compared to that of
a Brahmana); Brahmanas are decidedly
stronger than the Ksatriyas. The strength
of a Brahmana, O holy one, is spiritual and
as such is superior to that of a Ksatriya.
(14)
अप्रमेयं बलं तुभ्यं न त्वया बलवत्तर:।
विश्वामित्रो महावीर्यस्तेजस्तव दुरासदम्॥१५॥
“Your strength is immeasurable; though
very powerful, Viswamitra is not stronger in

comparison with you. Your glory is
unassailable. (15)
नियुङ्क्ष्व At महातेजस्त्वं ब्रह्मबलसम्भृताम्।

तस्य दर्पं बलं यत्नं नाशयामि दुरात्मन:॥१६॥

“Command you me, who, fostered as |
am by your Brahmanical (spiritual) strength,
O exceptionally glorious sage, shall put an
