1154

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

त्रिषष्टितम: at:
Canto XLHUI

Even while Sampati was thus talking with the monkeys, a pair of beautiful
wings shoot forth on his sides. Feeling transported with joy at their
sight and showing them to the monkeys, nay, assuring them
that their purpose too will likewise be achieved, Sampati
soars to the sky in order to test the power of his
wings. Feeling encouraged by this, the monkeys
too resume their journey further south

एतैरन्यैश्च बहुभिर्वाक्यैर्वाक्यविशारद:।

मां प्रशस्याभ्यनुज्ञाप्य प्रविष्ट: स स्वमालयम्॥ १॥
“Having extolled me in the forgoing and

many other such words and taking leave

of me, the sage, who was a master of

expression, retired into his abode. (1)

कन्दरात् तु विसर्पित्वा पर्वतस्य ort: शनै:।
ae fast समारुह्य wad: प्रतिपालये॥ २॥
“Crawling from the mountain-cave and
climbing up the Vindhyan range, | have
been waiting for you all. (2)
TI त्वेतस्य कालस्य at साग्रशतं गतम्।
देशकालप्रतीक्षोऽस्मि हृदि कृत्वा मुनेर्वच:।। ३॥
“Since then more than eight thousand*
years have elapsed till this day. Bearing in

mind the sage’s words | have been waiting
for the predicted place and time. (3)

महाप्रस्थानमासाद्य स्वर्गते तु निशाकरे।

मां निर्दंहति संतापो वितर्केर्बहुभिर्वृतम्॥४॥
“Sage Nisakara for his part having

ascended to heaven on reaching the end of

his life, agony has been consuming me,
beset as | am with numerous doubts. (4)

Seat मरणे बुद्धिं मुनिवाक्यैर्निवर्तये।
बुद्धिर्या तेन मे दत्ता प्राणानां रक्षणे मम॥५॥
सा मेऽपनयते ga दीप्तेवाग्निशिखा aa:
gat च vat वीर्यं रावणस्य दुरात्मन:॥६॥

Ua: संतर्जितो वाग्भिर्न त्राता मैथिली कथम्।
तस्या विलपितं strat तौ च सीतावियोजितौ॥ ७॥
न मे दशरथस्नेहात् पुत्रेणोत्पादितं प्रियम्।
तस्य त्वेवं ब्रुवाणस्य संहतैर्वानरै: सह॥८॥
उत्पेततुस्तदा पक्षौ समक्षं वनचारिणाम्।
स Gea wi तनुं पक्षैरुद्गतैररुणच्छदै:।॥ ९॥
प्रहर्षमतुलं लेभे वानरांश्चेदमब्रवीत्।
निशाकरस्य Ustad: प्रसादादमितौजस:॥१०॥
आदित्यरश्मिनिर्दग्धौ पक्षौ पुनरुपस्थितौ।
यौवने वर्तमानस्य ममासीद् य: पराक्रम:॥११॥
तमेवाद्यावगच्छामि at पौरुषमेव a
सर्वथा क्रियतां यत्न: सीतामधिगमिष्यथ॥ १२॥

“| have been setting aside the thought
of suicide, which now and then appeared
in me, by recalling the words of the sage.
The determination he inspired in me to
preserve my life takes away my agony
even as a blazing flame of fire would dispel
darkness. Nay, knowing as | did the virility
of the evil-minded Ravana, my son was
twitted by me in the following words:
‘Wherefore did you not rescue Sita (the
princess of Mithila)?’ (I feel distressed to
note that even) on hearing the wails of Sita
and on coming to know of the two princes
(Sri Rama and Laksmana) having been
deprived of Sita, that which would have
conduced to my pleasure viz., an all out
attempt to rescue her, was not done by my

* Interpreting `शतम्` forming part of the compound word `वर्षशतम्` in the text, as bearing the sense of
innumerable the commentators have computed the number to be eight thousand in order to bring it into
line with the previous statement of Samapti contained in verse 9 of Canto LX above.
