1048

be over-powered by love? The composure
of your mind is hereby being disturbed
by grief. Can’t all your agony yield to
concentration of mind at this juncture, O
noble brother? (16)
समाधियोगानुगतं च कालम्।
सहायसामर्थ्यमदीनसत्त्व:
स्वकर्महेतुं च Hest ATU १७॥
“Remaining undepressed in spirit, O
dear brother, perform your daily duties in
their entirety, have peace of mind and devote
all your time to concentration of mind and
enlist the help of the strong and increase
your own strength, which is the only way

to develop your manhood, O dear brother !
(17)

न जानकी मानववंशनाथ
त्वया सनाथा सुलभा परेण।
न चाग्निचूडां ज्वलितामुपेत्य
न दह्यते वीर ate HA १८॥
“Having her protector in you, O lord of
Manu’s race, Sita (daughter of Janaka)
cannot be easily retained by another. Hugging
a blazing flame none would escape being

burnt, O hero worth being adored even by
the foremost !” (18)

स्वभावजं वाक्यमुवाच राम: |
fed च ua च नयप्रसक्तं
ससामधर्मार्थसमाहितं च ॥१९॥
Sri Rama addressed the following
words, characteristic of his innate disposition,
to Laksmana, who was endowed with
auspicious bodily marks and could not be
(easily) overpowered : “What you have said,
is useful and salutary and in consonance
with propriety and full of consolation, justice
and earthly good. (19)
क्रियाविशेषोऽप्यनुवर्तितव्य: ।

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

न तु vase दुरासदस्य
कुमारवीर्यस्य फलं च चिन्त्यम्॥ २० ॥

“The work in hand viz., the search for
Sita should undoubtedly be attended to, and
special efforts too should be made in this
behalf. The reward alone, however, of our
potent action, which is fully intensified and
difficult to counteract, should not be thought
of, O prince !” (20)

अथ पद्मपलाशाक्षीं मैथिलीमनुचिन्तयन्।
उवाच लक्ष्मणं WAT मुखेन परिशुष्यता॥२१॥

Recalling to mind Sita (a princess of
Mithila), whose eyes resembled the petals
of a lotus, Sri Rama with a withering face
then spoke once more to Laksmana as
follows: (21)

तर्पयित्वा सहस्राक्ष: सलिलेन वसुंधराम्।
निर्वर्तयित्वा सस्यानि कृतकर्मा व्यवस्थित:॥ २२॥

“Having saturated the earth with water
and ripened the corns, Indra (the god with a
thousand eyes) is now easy of mind, his
task having been accomplished. (22)

दीर्घगम्भीरनिर्घोषा: शैलद्दुम॰पुरोगमा';।
विसृज्य सलिलं मेघा: परिशान्ता नृपात्मज॥ २३॥

“Having discharged their water while
sailing in front of mountains and trees with
a prolonged and deep rumbling, the clouds
are fully at rest now, O prince! (23)

नीलोत्पलदलश्यामा: श्यामीकृत्वा दिशो दश।
विमदा इव Ast: शान्तवेगा: Talent: २४॥

“The clouds, which were till recently
dark like the petals of a blue lotus and stood
darkening all the ten directions, now look
like elephants free from rut, their fury having
abated. (24)

जलगर्भा महावेगा: कुटजार्जुनगन्धिन:।
चरित्वा विरता: सौम्य वृष्टिवाता: समुद्यता:॥ २५॥
“Having finished their round, O gentle
brother, the rainy winds, which were laden
with moisture and full of great fury, and
which bore the fragrance of Kutaja and
