+ UTTARAKANDA +

देवदुन्दुभयो नेदु: पुष्पवृष्टिश्च खाच्च्युता।
पितामहमुखाश्चैव wa देवा: प्रहर्षिता:॥७५७॥

“A woman’s strength and that of a man
are in no way equal. | beg you to forgive this
offence of mine.” Nalakubara (son of Kubera)
for his part was enraged to hear this. Hearing
of that great outrage, he then went into a trance:
so the tradition goes (in order to verify the truth
of the allegation). Having come to know of his
aforesaid act after a short while, Nalakubara
(son of Kubera), his eyes inflamed with
anger, then took water in his left hand. Holding
the water in his hand and sprinkling with it all
his sense-organs with due ceremony, he
pronounced on that occasion the following
terrible curse on Ravana, the ruler of ogres:
“Since, O blessed lady, you stand violated
by him perforce, unwilling as you were, he
shall no longer be able to approach for sexual
intercourse any other young woman who is
unwilling to accept him. When, however,
stricken with love, he will violate a woman who
is unwilling to approach him, his head will
actually be split into seven pieces that very
moment.”

When the aforesaid imprecation, which
resembled a lighted fire, was uttered, the

935

kettle-drums of gods sounded and an
abundance of flowers were showered from
the heavens. Nay, all the gods headed by
Brahma (the grandfather of the entire creation)
were transported with joy. (51—57)
ज्ञात्वा लोकगतिं सर्वां तस्य मृत्युं च रक्षस:।
ma: पितरश्चैव प्रीतिमापुरनुत्तमाम्॥५८॥
On coming to know in its entirety the
fate of the world as well as of the ogre’s
death, Rsis (the seers of Vedic Mantras) as
well as the manes experienced unsurpassed
joy. (58)
श्रुत्वा तु स दशग्रीवस्तं शापं रोमहर्षणम्।
नारीषु मैथुनीभावं नाकामास्वभ्यरोचयत्॥५९॥
Hearing of the aforesaid execration,
which caused his hair to stand on end,
Ravana (the ten-headed monster) shunned
any inclination to copulate with women who
were unwilling to approach him. (59)
तेन नीता: fara: प्री'तिम'।'पु; सर्वा: पतिव्रता:।
नलकूबरनिर्मुक्तं शापं श्रुत्वा मन:प्रियम्॥६०॥
All the ladies who were devoted to their
husband and had been borne away by him
experienced joy on hearing of the curse
pronounced by Nalakubara, which was
pleasing to their mind. (60)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये उत्तरकाण्डे षड्विंश: सर्ग: ॥ २६ ॥

Thus ends Canto Twenty-six in the Uttarakanda of the glorious Ramayana of Valmiki,
the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

Canto XX VII
Ravana, accompanied by his army, invades the realm of Indra; Indra invokes
the help of Lord Visnu; Visnu dismisses Indra with a vow to kill Ravana;
encounter of the ogres with the gods; Sumali is killed by Vasu

कैलासं लङ्घयित्वा तु ससैन्यबलवाहन:।
आससाद महातेजा इन्द्रलोकं दशानन:॥१॥
Getting beyond Kailasa, accompanied
by the might of his army and vehicles,
Ravana (the ten-headed monster) for his

part, who was endowed with extraordinary
energy, reached the realm of Indra, the ruler
of gods. (1)

तस्य राक्षससैन्यस्य समन्तादुपयास्यत:।
देवलोके बभौ शब्दो भिद्यमानार्णवोपम:॥ २॥
