574

रावण: शोकसंतप्तो मुमोह च पपात च॥६॥
Tormented with grief on hearing of
Kumbhakarna, who was endowed with
extraordinary might, having been struck down
dead in combat, Ravana fainted and sank
down. (6)
faqet Fred श्रुत्वा देवान्तकनरान्तकौ।
त्रिशिराश्चातिकायश्च weg: शोकपीडिता:॥७॥
Afflicted with grief on hearing of their
uncle having been killed, Ravana’s sons,
Devantaka and Narantaka, Trisira and
Atikaya too burst into a wail. (7)
भ्रातरं निहतं श्रुत्वा रामेणाक्लिष्टकर्मणा।
महोदरमहापार्श्वचौ शोकाक्रान्तौ बभूवतु:॥८॥
Ravana’s half-brothers, Mahodara and
Mahaparswa were overwhelmed with grief
on hearing of their half-borther, Kumbhakarna,
having been killed by Sri Rama of unwearied
action. (8)

Wd: Hest समासाद्य Gat राक्षसपुङ्खब:।
कुम्भकर्णवधाद् दीनो विललापाकुलेन्द्रिय: ।। ९॥
Regaining consciousness with difficulty,
Ravana (a bull among the ogres), who felt
miserable due to Kumbhakarna’s fall, then
began to wail as follows, distracted in mind
as he was: (9)

a वीर रिपुदर्पघ्न कुम्भकर्णं महाबल।
त्वं मां विहाय वै Care यातोऽसि यमसादनम्॥ १०॥
“Alas, having deserted me, O heroic
Kumbhakarna who crushed the pride of
your enemies and were endowed with
extraordinary might, you have, by divine
will, actually departed to the abode of Death!
(10)

मम शल्यमनुद्धृत्य बान्धवानां महाबल।
शत्रुसैन्यं प्रताप्यैक: क्व मां संत्यज्य गच्छसि॥ ११॥
“Having tormented the hostile army and

leaving me, whither are you going alone
without extracting the thorn from my side as

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA +

well as from that of my kinsfolk, O ogre
endowed with extraordinary might? (11)

इदानीं खल्वहं नास्मि यस्य मे पतितो भुज:।
दक्षिणोऽयं समाश्रित्य न बिभेमि सुरासुरात्॥ १२॥

“Surely, | shall no longer survive now
that this right arm of mine, depending on
whom | had no fear of any god or demon,
has fallen. (12)

कथमेवंविधो dit देवदानवदर्पहा।
कालाग्निप्रतिमो gel राघवेण WT हत:॥१३॥

“| wonder how such a warrior, who
quelled the pride of the gods and the demons
alike and who resembled the fire of
destruction at the time of universal dissolution,
has been killed in combat by Rama today.

(13)

यस्य ते वज्रनिष्पेषो न Hate व्यसनं सदा।
स HA रामबाणार्त: प्रसुप्तोऽसि महीतले॥१४॥

“Afflicted by the arrows of Rama, how
are you, the celebrated warrior, whom not
even a stroke of lightning ever caused any
harm, lying buried in eternal sleep on the
earth’s surface? (14)

Ua देवगणा: सार्धमृषिभिर्गगने स्थिता:।
निहतं cat रणे gear निनदन्ति प्रहर्षिता:॥ १५॥
“Standing in space greatly delighted to
see you killed in battle, the yonder hosts of
gods alongwith Rsis are raising a shout
of applause. (15)
भ्रुवमद्यैव संहृष्टा लब्धलक्षा: प्लवंगमा:।
आरोक्ष्यन्तीह दुर्गाणि ARENT सर्वश:॥ १६॥
“Highly rejoiced on having found a
suitable opportunity, the monkeys will on
this occasion assuredly scale this very day
the gates of Lanka, which were difficult of
access heretofore, on all sides. (16)

राज्येन नास्ति मे care किं करिष्यामि सीतया।
कुम्भकर्णविहीनस्य जीविते नास्ति A मति: ।। १७॥

“No purpose of mine will be served
any longer by a kingdom and what shall | do
