296

चक्रतुश्चैव aed पार्थिवाय faa a

कृतमित्येव चाब्रूतामभिगम्य जगत्पतिम्॥ २१॥
यथोक्कतवचनं प्रीतौ हर्षयुक्तौ द्विजोत्तमौ।
Wa: Gat द्युतिमान् राजा वचनमब्रवीत्॥ २२॥
राम: कृतात्मा भवता शीघ्रमानीयतामिति।
a तथेति प्रतिज्ञाय सुमन्त्रो राजशासनात्॥ २३॥
अथ तत्र सहासीनास्तदा दशरथं TALI evil
“Nay, let buntings be strung everywhere
and let the main road be sprinkled with water
(to prevent dust being raised by the traffic).
Again, reaching the second enclosure of the
king’s palace (the first one being selected for
the installation ceremony and therefore
exclusively occupied by the Brahmanas) let
the male dancers and the dancing girls,
beautifully adorned, wait there to discharge
their duty when asked to do so. Let the images
of deities deserving worship through flowers
and installed in temples and at cross-roads
be worshipped severally and served with
cooked rice and other dishes requiring
mastication and offered presents in the shape
of money too. Let armoured warriors armed
with a long sword and wearing gloves of
iguana skin and clad in a clean uniform enter
the emperor's courtyard full of great jubilation.”
Having enjoined as aforesaid the rites to be
performed for the occasion, the two
Brahmanas, Vasistha and Vamadeva,
personally did what yet remained to be done,
while keeping seated there, after making it
known to the king, of course. Nay, approaching
with a delighted mind DaSaratha, the ruler of
the world, Vasistha and Vamadeva, the
foremost of Brahmanas, full of joy in their
expression, informed him that everything had
been done as enjoined. The glorious Emperor
then spoke to Sumantra as follows: “Let
Rama of disciplined mind be speedily brought
by you in my presence.” Saying in reply
“Amen !” Sumantra brought Sri Rama, the
foremost of car-warriors, in a chariot under
the Emperor’s order to the council chamber.
(17—24)

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

प्राच्योदीच्या प्रतीच्याश्च दाक्षिणात्याश्च भूमिपा: |
म्लेच्छाश्चार्याश्च ये चान्ये वनशैलान्तवासिन:।॥ २५ ॥
उपासांचक्रिरे सर्वे तं देवा वासवं यथा।
तेषां मध्ये स राजर्षिर्मरुतामिव वासव:॥ २६॥
प्रासादस्थो दशरथो ददर्शायान्तमात्मजम्।
गन्धर्वराजप्रतिमं लोके विख्यातपौरुषम्॥ २७॥
दीर्घबाहुं महासत्त्वं मत्तमातङ्गगामिनम्।
wart राममतीव प्रियदर्शनम्॥२८॥
रूपौदार्यगुणै: पुंसां दृष्टिचित्तापहारिणम्।
घर्माभितप्ता: पर्जन्यं ह्लादयन्तमिव प्रजा:॥ २९॥
The kings belonging to all the four
quarters viz., east, north, west and south,
Mlecchas (non-Aryans) as well as Aryans
and others living on the verge of a mountain
and in the precincts of a forest, who were
comfortably seated there on that occasion,
all now danced attendance upon the aforesaid
Emperor DaSaratha as gods wait upon Indra,
the ruler of gods. Seated in his palace in their
midst, as Indra in the midst of gods, DaSaratha
saw, coming towards him, his eldest son, Sri
Rama, who vied with the ruler of Gandharvas
in comeliness of form etc., whose prowess
was widely known in the universe, who was
endowed with unusually long arms and
possessed of great might, who walked like
an elephant in rut, whose face was lovelier
than the moon, nay, who had a most pleasing
aspect, who attracted the eyes and mind of
men by his comeliness of form, liberality and
other virtues and who delighted the people
even as a cloud delights those scorched by
sunshine. (25—29)

न dad समायान्तं पश्यमानो नराधिप:।
अवतार्य सुमन्त्रस्तु राघवं स्यन्दनोत्तमात्॥३०॥
स तं कैलासशृङ्गाभं प्रासादं रघुनन्दन:॥३१॥
आरुरोह नृपं द्रष्टुं सहसा तेन राघव:।
a Water प्रणत: पितुरन्तिके॥ ३२॥
नाम स्वं श्रावयन् रामो ववन्दे चरणौ पितु: |
तं दृष्टवा Word Uys कृताञ्जलिपुटं नृप:॥ ३३॥
Teach समाकृष्य सस्वजे प्रियमात्मजम्।
तस्मै चाभ्युद्यतं सम्यङ्मणिकाञ्चनभूषितम्॥ ३४॥
