1082

the princes arrived, embraced them and
then spoke to them these words : (2)

od मया यथा तथ्यं द्विजकार्यमनुत्तमम्।
धर्मसेतुमथो wa: कर्तुमिच्छामि राघवौ॥३॥
“| have done the service to the Brahmana
as expected. Now | want to perform
Rajasuya—the outer limit of piety, O brothers.

(3)

“In my opinion the bridge of righteousness
is imperishable and unchangeable; the
discourse on righteousness destroys all
sins. (4)
युवाभ्यामात्मभूताभ्या राजसूयमनुत्तमम्।
सहितो यष्टुमिच्छामि at धर्मस्तु शाश्वत:॥५॥

“Together with both of you, who are
dear to me as myself, | wish to perform the
excellent Rajasuya. Therein resides eternal
righteousness. (5)

sem q राजसूयेन faa: शत्रुनिबर्हण:।
सुहुतेन सुयज्ञेन वरुणत्वमुपागमत्॥ ६ ॥
“The killer of foes, Mitra, attained the
position of Varuna, having performed the
Rajasuya with proper offerings and sacrifice.

(6)
सोमश्च राजसूयेन seat धर्मेण धर्मवित्।
Was सर्वलोकेषु कोर्तिं स्थानं च शाश्वतम्॥ UI

“The knower of Dharma (Law), Soma,
having performed the Rajasuya, righteously,

attained fame and eternal place in all the
worlds. (7)

अस्मिन्नहनि यच्छेयश्चिन्त्यतां तन्मया सह।

fet चायतियुक्तं च प्रयतौ वक्तुमर्हथ:॥८॥
“Reflect on what is the best this day

together with me, you two active ones should

tell me what is good for the world and also
what is proper for the future.” (8)

श्रुत्वा तु राघवस्यैतद् वाक्यं वाक्यविशारद:।
We: प्राञ्जलिर्भूत्वा वाक्यमेतदुवाच ह॥९॥

« VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

Hearing these words of the scion of
Raghus, Sri Rama, Bharata, proficient in
speaking, spoke thus, folding his hands: (9)

rata ad: पर: साधो त्वयि Gat वसुंधरा।
प्रतिष्ठिता महाबाहो यशश्चामितविक्रम॥ १०॥

“O righteous one, in you is established
the highest form of righteousness, this entire
earth and all fame, O one of long arms and
possessing uncomparable valour. (10)

महीपालाश्च aa cat प्रजापतिमिवामरा:।
निरीक्षन्ते महात्मानं लोकनाथं यथा वयम्॥११॥
“All kings like us, look upon Thee, O

holy one, the lord of worlds as the gods look
upon Prajapati. (11)

पुत्राश्च fiqag राजन् पश्यन्ति cat महाबल।
पृथिव्यां गतिभूतोऽसि प्राणिनामपि राघव॥१२॥

“O King, O Raghunandana of mighty
strength, all kings regard you as sons look to
their fathers. You are the resort of this world
and also of all beings, O scion of Raghu. (12)
a त्वमेवंविधं यज्ञमाहर्तासि कथं नृप।
पृथिव्यां राजवंशानां विनाशो यत्र दृश्यते॥१३॥

“How, O king, you being so, wish to
perform the Rajasuya sacrifice, in which there
shall be the destruction of royal families on
earth. (13)

पृथिव्यां ये च पुरुषा राजन् पौरुषमागता:।
सर्वेषां भविता at संक्षय: सर्वकोपज:॥१४॥
“O King, those men, who on this earth
are possessed of valour, all of them will be
destroyed in that Yajna due to the anger of
all. (14)
Wa गुणैरतुलविक्रम।
पृथिवीं नार्हसे हन्तुं वशे fe qa वर्तते॥१५॥
“O lion among men, possessed of
unparalleled valour, accompanied with merits,
it befits you not to destroy this earth, all
indeed are under your sway.” (15)
भरतस्य तु ad वाक्यं श्रुत्वामृतमयं यथा।
प्रहर्षमतुलं लेभे राम: सत्यपराक्रम:॥१६॥
उवाच च शुभं वाक्यं कैकेय्यानन्दवर्धनम्।
प्रीतोऽस्मि परितुष्टोऽस्मि तवाद्य वचनेऽनघ॥ १७॥
