482

ogres with terrible maces, sharp-edged
spears, iron and wooden mallets and
formidable iron bars as well as with tridents
of various kinds held in the hand, the aforesaid
monkeys, who were endowed with
extraordinary might, accomplished deeds of
valour as though they were intrepid. (5-6)

शरनिर्भिन्नगात्रास्ते शूलनिर्भिन्नदेहिन:।
Weed द्रुमांस्तत्र शिलाश्च हरियूथपा:॥७॥

Their limbs torn asunder with arrows
and having their bodies split asunder with
pikes, the aforesaid monkey generals seized
hold of trees and rocks on the field of
battle. (7)

a भीमवेगा हरयो नर्दमानास्ततस्तत:।
ममन्थू राक्षसान् वीरान् नामानि च बभाषिरे॥ ८॥

Endowed, as they were, with terrific
impetuosity, those monkeys crushed the
valiant ogres here and there, roaring all the
time and proclaimed their names. (8)
तद् बभूवाद्भुतं at Ge वानररक्षसाम्।
शिलाभिर्विविधाभिश्च बहुशाखैश्च wed: ne

That terrible conflict between the
monkeys and the ogres, carried on with rocks
of various kinds and trees consisting of
numerous boughs, was wondrous indeed. (9)

राक्षसा मथिता: केचिद् वानरैर्जितकाशिभि: |
प्रवेम् रुधिरं केचिन्मुखै रुधिरभोजना:॥१०॥

Some ogres were crushed by the
monkeys, who had conquered fear; while
other ogres, who fed on gore ejected blood
from their mouths, being thrashed by
monkeys. (10)

शिलाभिश्चूर्णिता: केचित्केचिद्दन्तैर्विदारिता:।॥ ११॥

Some were torn in their sides,while
others were reduced to pulp with trees. Still
others were pulverized with rocks, while
yet others were torn to pieces with teeth.

(11)

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA +

ध्वजैर्विमथितैर्भग्नै:; wets विनिपातितै:।
रथैर्विध्वंसितै: केचिद् व्यथिता रजनीचरा:॥ १२॥

With their standards broken and
crushed, swords struck down, and chariots
smashed, some prowlers of the night felt
agonized. (12)

Tre: पर्वताकारै: पर्वताग्रैर्वनौकसाम्।
मथितैर्वाजिभि: कीर्णं सारोहैर्वसुधातलम्॥ 83

The earth’s surface was covered with
lordly elephants looking like mountains
and horses with their riders crushed with
the summits of mountains hurled by the
monkeys (lit., dwellers in the woods). (13)

वानरैर्भीमविक्रान्तैराप्लुत्योत्प्लुत्य वेगितै:।
राक्षसा: करजैस्तीक्ष्णैर्मुखेषु विनिदारिता:॥ १४॥
The ogres were lacerated in their faces
with their nails by the monkeys of redoubtable
prowess who were seized with impetuosity
and bounded again and again. (14)

विषण्णवदना भूयो विप्रकीर्णशिरोरुहा:।
Wet: शोणितगन्धेन निपेतुर्धरणीतले॥१५॥

With downcast faces, and dishevelled
hair and rendered unconscious by the smell
of blood, they then dropped on the earth’s
surface. (15)

अन्ये तु परमक्रुद्धा राक्षसा भीमविक्रमा:।
तलैरेवाभिधावन्ति वज्रस्पर्शसमैर्हरीन्॥ १६ ॥

Extremely enraged, other ogres of
terrible prowess for their part assailed the
monkeys with their palms alone, whose
impact was hard as adamant. (16)

art: पातयन्तस्ते वेगिता वेगवत्तरै:।
मुष्टिभिश्चरणैर्दन्तै: पादपैश्चावपोथिता:॥ १७॥

Capable of felling down _ their
adversaries when seized with impetuosity,
they were crushed by the monkeys,
who were full of greater impetuosity, with
their fists, feet and teeth as well as with
trees. (17)
