# YUDDHAKANDA #

485

त्रिपञ्चाश: सर्ग:
Canto LIII

The monkeys’ tough fight with the ogre Vajradamstra
dispatched by Ravana, who is provoked
by the death of Dhumraksa

goat निहतं श्रुत्वा रावणो राक्षसेश्वर:।
क्रोधेन महताऽऽविष्टो नि:श्चसन्नुरगो यथा॥१॥

Ravana, the lord of ogres, was
filled with rage on hearing of Dnumraksa
having been killed, and stood hissing like a
serpent. (1)

दीर्घमुष्णं विनि:श्चस्य क्रोधेन कलुषीकृत:।
अब्रवीद् राक्षसं Ht ANd महाबलम्॥२॥
Heaving a long and burning sigh,
wrought up with anger as he was, he
spoke as follows to the ferocious ogre,
Vajradamstra, who was endowed with
extraordinary might: (2)

Tes त्वं dh निर्याहि uaa: परिवारित:।

wie दाशरथिं wi सुग्रीवं amt: सह॥ ३॥
“Proceed you, O champion! Sally forth,

accompanied by other ogres and make

short work of Rama, son of DaSaratha, and
Sugriva, alongwith the monkeys.” (3)

तथेत्युक्त्वा द्रुततरं मायावी राक्षसेश्वर:।
निर्जगाम बलै: सार्धं बहुभि: परिवारित:॥४॥
Saying “Amen!”, the ogre chief, who
was skilled in conjuring tricks, departed
speedily with a number of troops and
surrounded by many generals. (4)
पताकाध्वजचित्रैश्च बहुभि: समलंकृत:॥५॥
He was accompanied by elephants,
horses, donkeys and camels, was fully
concentrated of mind and was rendered
most charming by the presence of many
generals distinguished by banners and
pennons. (5)

ततो विचित्रकेयूरमुकुटेन विभूषित:।
wat स समाव्रत्य सधनुर्निर्ययौ द्रुतम्॥६॥
Artistically decked with lovely armlets
and a diadem, and donning a coat of mail,
he then set out quickly with a bow in his
hand. (6)
रथं प्रदक्षिणं कृत्वा समारोहच्चमूपति:।॥७॥
Walking clockwise round his brilliant
chariot, dressed with pennants and decorated
with pure gold, the general ascended it. (7)

ऋष्टिभिस्तोमरैश्चित्रै: श्लक्ष्णैश्च मुसलैरपि।
भिन्दिपालैश्च चापैश्च शक्तिभि: पद्टिशैरपि॥ ८॥
पदातयश्च निर्यान्ति विविधा: शस्त्रपाणय:॥९॥

Armed with double-edged swords,
strange iron clubs, also polished mallets
and slings as well as with bows, as also
javelins and sharp-edged spears; swords,
discuses and maces and sharp axes, foot
soldiers of every description issued forth,
weapons in hand. (8-9)
विचित्रवासस: wa दीप्ता राक्षसपुङ्खवा:।
गजा महोत्कटा: शूराश्चलन्त FA पर्वता:॥१०॥

Clad in lovely raiment, all the
bulls among the ogres looked splendid.
Intrepid elephants, forming part of the army
of ogres, which were intoxicated with ichor
and looked like moving hills also sallied
forth. (10)

ते युद्धकुशला रूढास्तोमराङ्कुशपाणिभि:।
अन्ये लक्षणसंयुक्ता: शूरारूढा महाबला:॥११॥

Mounted by mahouts carrying iron clubs
