# YUDDHAKANDA +

anxiety to demolish Lanka by dint of their
might, O great king! The yonder general,
Kesari by name, the foremost of leading
monkeys, revels, O king, on the lovely Sumeru
(the golden mountain), the most excellent of
all mountains, the trees on which, yielding
fruit in every season, are frequented by bees;
which, casting as it does a splendour similar
to that of the sun itself, is circumambulated
by the sun clockwise; by virtue of whose
lustre beasts and birds inhabiting that
mountain appear golden; whose peaks are
never forsaken by eminent high-souled Rsis;
the trees on which, yielding as they do all
one’s desired objects, are ever laden with
fruit and on which highly valuable honeys of
various varities can be had. There are sixty
thousand mountains, which are all lovely
mountains of gold. (30—38)
तेषां मध्ये गिरिवरस्त्वमिवानघ रक्षसाम्।
तत्रैके कपिला: श्वेतास्ताम्रास्या मधुपिङ्गला: il ३९॥
निवसन्त्यन्तिमगिरौ तीक्ष्णदंष्टा नखायुधा:।
सिंहा sa चतुर्दंष्टा व्याघ्रा Sa दुरासदा:॥४०॥
“In their midst stands out the foremost
of mountains (Savarni-Meru by name), as
you do among all the ogres, O sinless one!
On the last (the northernmost) of those sixty
thousand mountains dwell some monkeys,
brown, white, coppery-faced and yellow like
honey, with pointed teeth and having claws
for their weapons, four-toothed as lions and
dangerous to approach, as tigers. (39-40)
wad वैश्वानरसमा ज्वलदाशीविषोपमा:।
सुदीर्घाञ्चितलाङ्गूला मत्तमातङ्गसंनिभा:॥४१॥
“They are all fire-like and resemble
venomous serpents with flaming tongues.

They have very long uplifted tails and look
much like elephants in rut. (41)

महापर्वतसंकाशा महाजीमूतनि:स्वना:।
वृत्तपिङ्गलनेत्रा हि महाभीमगतिस्वना:॥४२॥

“Nay, they resemble huge mountains
in size and thunder like big clouds. Having

389

round, grey eyes, they create a most
appalling uproar while marching. (42)

मर्दयन्तीव ते ad तस्थुर्लङ्कां समीक्ष्य ते।
wa चैषामधिपतिर्मध्ये तिष्ठति वीर्यवान्॥४३॥
जयार्थी नित्यमादित्यमुपतिष्ठति वीर्यवान्।
नाम्ना पृथिव्यां विख्यातो राजन् शतबलीति A: ।॥ ४४॥
“They all stand as though they would
destroy your Lanka as soon as they gaze
on it. Nay, here stands in their midst their
valiant commander, widely known on earth,
O king, by the name of Satabali, who,
clever as he is and desirous of victory,
worships the sun-god every day. (43-44)
विक्रान्तो बलवान् शूर: पौरुषे स्वे व्यवस्थित: ॥ ४५ U
“He too aspires to demolish Lanka with
his army. Valiant, powerful and daring, he
banks on his own valour. (45)
रामप्रियार्थं Wort दयां न ped हरि:।
Ta गवाक्षो गवयो नलो नीलश्च वानर:॥४६॥
“The monkey would not spare his life
in order to please Rama. Besides the above-
named, there are Gaja, Gavaksa, Gavaya,
Nala and the monkey Nila. (46)

एकैकमेव योधानां कोटिभिर्दशभिर्वृत:।
तथान्ये वानरश्रेष्ठा विन्ध्यपर्वतवासिन:।
न शबक्यन्ते बहुत्वात् तु संख्यातुं लघुविक्रमा: it ४७॥

“Each one of them is surrounded by
ten crores of warriors. Similarly, there are
other leading monkeys inhabiting the
Vindhyan range. Quick of gait, they cannot,
however, be accounted due to their very
large number. (47)

सर्वे महाराज महाप्रभावा:
सर्वे महाशैलनिकाशकाया: |
wa समर्था: पृथिवीं क्षणेन
wed प्रविध्वस्तविकीर्णशैलाम्॥४८॥

“All the aforesaid monkeys are endowed
with extraordinary might. All have bodies
