# YUDDHAKANDA #

447

Canto XLIII

In the course of duels the ogres and the monkeys, in which Angada closes
with Indrajit, the heads of Durdharsa, Mitraghna, Agniketu and
Yajfiakopana are lopped off by Sri Rama and that of
Nikumbha by Nila and, killed by Susena,

Vidyunmali drops down dead

युध्यतां तु ततस्तेषां वानराणां महात्मनाम्।
रक्षसां सम्बभूवाथ बलरोष: सुदारुण:॥१॥
An exceedingly terrible fury forthwith
burst forth on that occasion in the ranks of
the aforesaid monkeys of gigantic proportions
and the ogres, even while they were fighting
at the sight of the strength of the hostile
army. (1)
a ow: काञ्चनापीडैर्गजैश्चाग्निशिखोपमै:।
रथैश्चादित्यसंकाशै: कवचैश्च मनोरमै:॥ २॥
निर्ययू राक्षसा वीरा नादयन्तो दिशो दश।
राक्षसा भीमकर्माणो रावणस्य जयैषिण:॥ ३॥

Mounted on the back of steeds and
elephants provided with golden trappings
as well as on chariots bright as flames, and
clad in soul ravishing coats of mail, dazzling
like the sun, the said heroic ogres of terrible
deeds, accompanied by other ogres, sallied
forth seeking the triumph of Ravana and
causing the ten directions resound with their
clamour. (2-3)

वानराणामपि «=86oaydedt जयमिच्छताम्।
अभ्यधावत at Sat रक्षसां घोरकर्मणाम्॥४॥
The huge army of the monkeys too,
that likewise longed for Sri Rama’s victory,
rushed towards the army of ogres of terrible
deeds. (4)

एतस्मिन्नन्तरे तेषामन्योन्यमभिधावताम्।
रक्षसां वानराणां च द्वन्द्वयुद्धमवर्तत॥५॥
In the meantime there ensued duels
between the aforesaid ogres and monkeys,
each side rushing towards the other. (5)

अङ्गदेनेन्द्रजित्सार्धं वालिपुत्रेण राक्षस:।
अयुध्यत महातेजास्त्र्यम्बकेण यथान्धक:॥६॥

The ogre Indrajit (the eldest son
of Ravana), who was endowed with
extraordinary energy, contended with Angada,
son of Vali, even as the demon, Andhaka,
did with Lord Siva, endowed with three
eyes. (6)

प्रजङ्घेन च सम्पातिर्नित्यं दुर्धर्षणो रणे।
जम्बुमालिनमारब्धो हनूमानपि वानर:॥७॥

Nay, Sampati, who was always hard
to overcome in an encounter, fought with
Prajangha; while the monkey, Hanuman,
proceeded to give battle to Jambumali. (7)

संगतस्तु महाक्रोधो राक्षसो रावणानुज:।
समरे तीक्ष्णवेगेन शत्रुघ्नेन विभीषण:॥८॥
The furious ogre Vibhisana, the
youngest borther of Ravana, for this part,
closed on the field of battle with Satrughna
of fiery impetuosity. (8)
तपनेन गज: सार्धं राक्षसेन महाबल:।
निकुम्भेन महातेजा नीलोऽपि समयुध्यत॥ ९॥

The very mighty Gaja steadily fought
with the ogre Tapana; and Nila too, who
was endowed with extraordinary energy,
with Nikumbha. (9)

वानरेन्द्रस्तु सुग्रीव: wet सुसंगत:।
संगत: समरे श्रीमान् विरूपाक्षेण ASAT: tl १०॥
Sugriva, the ruler of monkeys, for his
part closed well with Praghasa; while the
glorious Laksmana grappled in an encounter
with Virupaksa. (10)
