474

of what is right! With his son Indrajit, Ravana
will not be able to attain the object of his
desire in this life. (21)

गरुडाधिष्ठितावेतावुभौ राघवलक्ष्मणौ |
त्यक्त्वा मोहं वधिष्येते ATT रावणं रणे॥ २२॥

“Having shaken off their spell of
unconsciousness, and mounted on Garuda
(the king of birds and the carrier of Lord
visnu), both Sri Rama (a scion of Raghu)
and Laksmana will make short work of
Ravana with his hordes on the field of
battle.” (22)

We सान्त्वयित्वा तु समाश्चास्य तु राक्षसम्।
सुषेणं amt ms सुग्रीवस्तमुवाच ह॥२३॥

Having consoled and reassured the
aforesaid ogre, Vibhisana, in the foregoing
words, Sugriva for his part spoke as
follows to his father-in-law, Susena, standing
by his side: (23)
ae शूरैर्हरिगणैर्लब्धसंज्ञावरिंदमौ |
गच्छ त्वं भ्रातरौ गृह्य किष्किन्धां रामलक्ष्मणौ ।। २४॥

“Accompanied by heroic — simian
troops, proceed you to Kiskindha, taking
with you the two brothers, Sri Rama
and Laksmana, the tamers of their
enemies, as soon as they have regained
consciousness. (24)
we तु रावणं eal सपुत्रं सहबान्धवम्।
मैथिलीमानयिष्यामि शक्रो नष्टामिव श्रियम्॥ २५ ॥

“Having disposed of Ravana with his
sons and relatives, |, for my part, shall bring
back Sita (a princess of Mithila) even as
Indra (the ruler of paradise) recovered his
lost royal fortune from the hands of demons.”

(25)
TAI वानरेन्द्रस्य सुषेणो वाक्यमब्रवीत्।
देवासुरुं महायुद्धमनुभूतं पुरातनम्॥ २६ ॥

Hearing this command of Sugriva, the

lord of monkeys, Susena submitted as
follows: “A major conflict which took place

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA +

between the gods and the demons in the
days gone by was witnessed by me. (26)

तदा स्म दानवा देवान् शरसंस्पर्शकोविदान्।
निजघ्नु: शस्त्रविदुषश्छादयन्तो मुहुर्मुहु:॥ २७॥

“Concealing themselves by means of
conjuring tricks on that occasion, the demons
overwhelmed again and again the gods,
even though the latter were skilled in aiming
at their mark and adept in the use of arms.

(27)

तानार्तान् नष्टसंज्ञांश्च Wass बृहस्पति:।
विद्याभिर्मन्त्रयुक्ताभिरोषधीभिश्चिकित्सति ॥ २८॥

“Sage Brhaspati (the preceptor and arch-
priest of gods) restored to health and life the
gods who were wounded and rendered
unconscious as also those who had lost
their life, by means of prayers and remedies
accompanied by the recitation of sacred
texts. (28)
तान्यौषधान्यानयितुं क्षीरोदं यान्तु सागरम्।
Wet वानरा: vit सम्पातिपनसादय:॥ २९॥

“Let monkeys headed by Sampati and
Panasa proceed quickly with a swift pace
to the ocean of milk to fetch the aforesaid
medicines. (29)
eae विजानन्ति पार्वती a महौषधी।
संजीवकरणीं दिव्यां विशल्यां देवनिर्मिताम्॥ ३०॥

“Those monkeys (Sampati and others)
for their part correctly know two great
mountain herbs, the wonderful Safjivakarani
(bringing back to life) and VisSalya (capable
of healing wounds inflicted by arrows),
evolved by Brahma. (30)

चन्द्रश्च नाम द्रोणश्च क्षीरोदे सागरोत्तमे।
अमृतं यत्र मथितं तत्र ते परमौषधी॥ ३१॥

“On the bank of the ocean of milk, the
foremost of oceans, from which was churned
out nectar (the drink of immortality), are two
mountains, Candra and Drona by name: the
aforesaid two great herbs exist there. (31)
