384

अनुवालिसुतस्यापि बलेन महता adi
वीरस्तिष्ठति संग्रामे सेतुहेतुरयं नल:॥ २१॥

“Also, Surrounded by a large army,
here stands the valiant Nala, the builder of
the bridge, behind the son of Vali, ready for
a battle. (21)

a तु विष्टभ्य गात्राणि श्र्वेडयन्ति नदन्ति च।
sara च विजृम्भन्ते क्रोधेन हरिपुङ्खवा:॥ २२॥
Ud दुष्प्रसहा घोराश्चण्डाश्चण्डपराक्रमा:।
अष्टौ शतसहस्राणि दशकोटिशतानि a
य एनमनुगच्छन्ति वीराश्चन्दनवासिन:॥ २३॥
शवेतो रजतसंकाशश्चपलो भीमविक्रम:॥ २४॥
बुद्धिमान् वानर: शूरस्तिषु लोकेषु विश्रुत:।
तूर्णं सुग्रीवमागम्य पुनर्गच्छति वानर:॥ २५॥
विभजन् वानरीं सेनामनीकानि प्रहर्षयन्।
य: पुरा गोमतीतीरे wet पर्येति पर्वतम्॥ २६॥
नाम्ना संरोचनो नाम नानानगयुतो PTA:
तत्र राज्यं प्रशास्त्येष कुमुदो AA यूथप:॥ २७॥
“These formidable and irate bulls among
monkeys, of terrible prowess, numbering
a thousand crore and eight lakhs, and
difficult to resist, who, having § stiffened
their limbs, are roaring like lions and
thundering, and who, springing up on their
feet, stretch their limbs in fury, as also
yonder valiant monkeys inhabiting the forest
of sandalwood trees follow the lead of Nala,
who also aspires to crush Lanka with his
army. The clever, agile and brave monkey,
Sweta, of terrible prowess, who is silver-
like in hue, is widely known in all the three
worlds. Quickly approaching Sugriva, nay,
dividing the army of monkeys and bringing
great delight to the troops, he goes back.
On the bank of the river Gomati there
is a mountain clothed with various trees,
Samrocana by name. Here is a commander
of monkey hordes, Kumuda by name,
who in the days gone by used to roam

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA +

about that lovely mountain and_ ruled
his kingdom while living in that region.
(22—27)
योऽसौ शतसहस्राणि सहर्षं परिकर्षति।
यस्य वाला बहुव्यामा दीर्घलाङ्गूलमाश्रिता: Ut २८ ॥
अदीनो वानरश्चण्ड: संग्राममभिकाङ्क्षति।
एषोऽप्याशंसते लङ्कां स्वेनानीकेन मर्दितुम्॥२९॥
“He who joyfully draws in his train
hundreds of thousands of monkeys and
who has very long hair—coppery, yellow,
pale and white and hideous to look at,
thrown about on his tail is the intrepid
monkey Canda, who yearns to fight. He too
aspires to crush Lanka with his army.
(28-29)
यस्त्वेष सिंहसंकाश: कपिलो दीर्घकेसर:।
निभृत: Wart लङ्कां दिधक्षन्निव चक्षुषा॥ ३०॥
विन्ध्यं कृष्णगिरिं सह्यं पर्वतं च सुदर्शनम्।
राजन् सततमध्यास्ते स रम्भो नाम यूथप:।
wd शतसहस्राणां त्रिंशच्च हरिपुङ्खवा:॥ ३१॥
यं यान्तं वानरा घोराश्चण्डाश्चण्डपराक्रमा:।
परिवार्यानुगच्छन्ति लङ्कां मर्दितुमोजसा॥३२॥
“He who is tawny of hue with long
manes and looks, much like a lion, nay,
who with an attentive mind gazes on Lanka
as though he would consume it with his
glance and who continuously dwells on the
Vindhya, Krsnagiri, Sahya and Sudarsana
mountains, O king, is a commander of
monkey hordes, Rambha by _ name,
surrounding whom, even as he marches,
one crore and thirty bulls like monkeys,
formidable, ferocious and of terrific prowess,
follow in order to crush Lanka with their
might. (30—32)
यस्तु कर्णौ विवृणुते जृम्भते च पुन: पुन:।
न तु संविजते मृत्योर्न च सेनां प्रधावति॥ ३३॥
प्रकम्पते च रोषेण free च पुनरीक्षते।
wa लाङ्गूलविक्षेपं esa महाबल:॥ ३४॥
