426

should neither enjoy the sovereignty nor
feel proud of it but keep within the bounds
of righteousness salutary for a king. Let the
pledge which has been given by you to
Kaikeyi come to be true, O protector of
men ! (56)

न मे am पार्थिव धीयते मनो

महत्सु कामेषु न चात्मन: प्रिये।
यथा निदेशे तव शिष्टसम्मते

व्यपैतु दु:खं तव मत्कृतेऽनघ॥ ५७॥

“My heart is not given so much to the
great delights of sense coveted by all, nor
to that which is pleasing to the mind, as to
the carrying out of your command, which
is approved by the wise. Let your agony
on my score, O sinless king, altogether
disappear. (57)

तदद्य Aare राज्यमव्ययं
न सर्वकामान् वसुधां न मैथिलीम्।
न चिन्तितं त्वामनृतेन योजयन्
qua सत्यं व्रतमस्तु A तथा॥५८॥

“Disfiguring you, who are full of anxiety
on my score, with the stigma of mendacity,
| do not on any account court eternal
sovereignty nor all the delights of sense
coveted by the world, nor the entire earth,
nor even Sita, princess of Mithila, today, O
sinless one ! Therefore, let your pledge given
to Kaikeyi prove true. (58)

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

फलानि मूलानि च भक्षयन् वने
गिरींश्च पश्यन् aka: सरांसि a
at प्रविश्यैव विचित्रपादपं
सुखी भविष्यामि तवास्तु निर्वृति: 1 ५९ ॥

“Living in the forest on fruits and roots
and viewing the mountains, rivers and lakes,
| shall be happy the moment | enter the
forest consisting of various trees. Let peace
come to you on this account.” (59)

एवं स राजा व्यसनाभिपन्न-
स्तापेन दु:खेन च पीड्यमान:।

आलिङ्ग्य पुत्रं सुविनष्टसंज्ञो
भूमिं गतो नैव चिचेष्ट किंचित्॥ ६०॥

Embracing his son, Sri Rama, who
had spoken as above, King Dasaratha, who
had fallen on evil days and was being
tormented with a burning sensation and
agony, fell utterly unconscious to the ground
and did not show any sign of life at all. (60)

हाहाकृतं तत्र बभूव सर्वम्॥६१॥

Barring that favourite consort of
DaSsaratha, Kaikeyi, all the queens assembled
there began to cry. Weeping aloud Sumantra
too fell into a swoon and everyone there
began to lament loudly. (61)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्येऽयोध्याकाण्डे
AGRA: सर्ग: Il ३४॥
Thus ends Canto Thirty-four in the Ayodhyakanda of the glorious Ramayana of
Valmiki, the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

