658

चैत्यं निकुम्भिलामद्य प्राप्य होमं करिष्यति।
हुतवानुपयातो हि देवैरपि सवासवै:॥१४॥
दुराधर्षो भवत्येष संग्रामे रावणात्मज:।
तेन मोहयता नूनमेषा माया प्रयोजिता॥१५॥
विघ्नमन्विच्छता at वानराणां पराक्रमे।
ससैन्यास्तत्र गच्छामो यावत्तन्न समाप्यते॥१६॥

“Duly reaching the sanctuary known
by the name of Nikumbhila today, he will
pour oblations into the sacred fire. Having
returned after pouring oblations into the
sacred fire, Indrajit, sprung from the loins of
Ravana, will undoubtedly prove difficult
to overcome in battle even for gods
including Indra, the ruler of gods. Surely this
conjuring trick (in the shape of killing an
illusory living effigy of Sita) was employed
by him in order to put us off the scent,
anticipating, as he did, interruption in his
sacrificial performance at the hands of the
monkeys in the event of their prowess
remaining unchecked on the battlefield. We
shall, therefore, proceed to that place with
an army while the sacrificial performance is
not yet over. (14—16)

त्यजैनं नरशार्दूल मिथ्या संतापमागतम्।
सीदते हि act सर्वं Gea त्वां शोककर्शितम्॥ १७॥
“Shake off, O tiger among men, this
agony which has come upon you without
any real cause. Seeing you stricken with

grief, the entire army is feeling distressed.
(17)

इह त्वं स्वस्थहृदयस्तिष्ठं सत्त्वसमुच्छित:।
लक्ष्मणं प्रेषयास्माभि: सह सैन्यानुकर्षिभि:।। १८॥
“Very elevated as you are in courage,
stay you here, confident at heart, and dispatch

Laksmana with us, who are taking the army
alongwith us. (18)

त्याजयिष्यति तत्कर्म adt वध्यो भविष्यति॥ ee i

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA +

“With his whetted shafts this tiger among
men will compel the aforesaid son of Ravana
to discontinue that ritual; then he will be
prone to being dispatched. (19)

तस्यैते निशितास्तीक्ष्णा: पत्रिपत्राङ्गवाजिन:।
पतत्तिण इवासौम्या: शरा: पास्यन्ति शोणितम्॥ २०॥

“These whetted and piercing arrows of
Laksmana, which fly swiftly, furnished as
they are with the limbs of birds in the form
of their feathers, will drink Indrajit’s blood
like cruel birds. (20)

ad, संदिश महाबाहो लक्ष्मणं शुभलक्षणम्।
राक्षसस्य विनाशाय at वज्रधरो यथा॥ २१॥

“Therefore, O mighty-armed one,
dispatch Laksmana, who is endowed with
auspicious bodily marks, for the destruction
of the ogre, Indrajit, even as Indra, the
wielder of the thunderbolt, would employ the
thunderbolt for the destruction of his enemies,
the demons. (21)

मनुजवर न कालविप्रकर्षो
रिपुनिधनं प्रति यत्क्षमोऽद्य कर्तुम्।

त्वमतिसृज रिपोर्वधाय वज्रं
दिविजरिपोर्मथने यथा महेन्द्र:॥ २२॥

“Since, O jewel among human beings
(the progeny of Manu), loss of time in
compassing the death of the enemy, Indrajit,
is no longer desirable in anyway, send
Laksmana for making short work of the
enemy even as the mighty Indra, the ruler
of gods, would hurl his thunderbolt for the
destruction of an enemy of gods (lit., those
born in heaven). (22)

भवेत् सुराणामपि संशयो महान्॥ २३॥

“On concluding the ritual, that prince of
ogres will turn invisible on the battlefield to
