578

having been burnt with a blazing fire and
was further strewn with burnt bones, Bharata,
they say, grew melancholy and began to
cry. (8)
स तु gem रुदन् दीन: ware धरणीतले।

उत्थाप्यमान: शक्रस्य यन्त्रध्वज इवोच्छित:॥ ९॥

Nay, afflicted to behold the spot, Bharata
fell weeping on the ground as a tall banner
would while being raised in honour of Indra
with the help of a mechanical device. (9)

अभिषेतुस्तत: सर्वे तस्यामात्या: शुचितव्रतम्।
अन्तकाले निपतितं ययातिमृषयो यथा॥१०॥

Thereupon all his ministers rushed to
Bharata of holy resolve as royal sages
Astaka and others hastily approached King
Yayati fallen down from heaven when the
stock of his merits that sustained him in
heaven had been exhausted. (10)

शत्रुघ्नश्चापि भरतं gear शोकपरिप्लुतम्।
विसंज्ञो न्यपतद् भूमौ भूमिपालमनुस्मरन्॥११॥

Nay, perceiving Bharata overwhelmed
with grief, Satrughna too, who had all along
been thinking of the emperor his father,
dropped senseless on the ground. (11)

उन्मत्त ga निश्चित्तो विललाप सुदु:खित:।
स्मृत्वा पितुर्गुणाङ्गानि तानि तानि तदा तदा॥ १२॥

Sore distressed to remember the various
gestures of his father born of his loving
qualities and made by him from time to time,
Satrughna lamented as follows like a
madman, bewildered as he was: (12)

मन्थराप्रभवस्तीव्र कैकेयीग्राहसंकुल:।
वरदानमयोऽक्षोभ्योऽमज्जयच्छोकसागर: ॥१३॥
“The violent and formidable sea of
grief, released by Manthara, which has
appeared in the form of the boons granted by
my father in favour of Kaikeyi and has been
rendered fearful by alligators in the form of
Kaikeyis words, has engulfed us all. (13)
सुकुमारं च बालं च add लालितं त्वया।
क्व तात भरतं हित्वा विलपन्तं गतो भवान्॥ १४॥

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

Where have you gone, dear father,
leaving Bharata—who is yet a mere stripling,
tender of body, and was constantly fondled
by you—weeping? (14)

ननु भोज्येषु पानेषु वस्त्रेष्वाभरणेषु च।
प्रवारयति सर्वान् नस्तन्न: कोऽद्य करिष्यति॥ १५॥

“Indeed, you made us all, the four
brothers, have our best choice out of a
large variety of eatables, drinks, articles of
wearing apparel and ornaments placed before
us. Since you have disappeared from our
midst, who will discharge this function now?

(15)
अवदारणकाले oq पृथिवी नावदीर्यते।
fart या त्वया राज्ञा धर्मज्ञेन महात्मना॥ १६॥

“How strange that this earth, even
though it has been deprived of you, its high-
souled ruler, who knew what is right, is not
riven even at a time when it should have
been riven ! (16)

faa स्वर्गमापन्ने wa चारण्यमाश्रिते।
fe मे जीवितसामर्थ्य प्रवेक्ष्यामि हुताशनम्॥ १७॥

“My father having reached heaven and
Sri Rama having retired to the forest, what
energy has been left in me to survive? |
shall acordingly enter the fire. (17)

हरीनो भ्रात्रा च पित्रा च शून्यामिक्ष्वाकुपालिताम्।
अयोध्यां न प्रवेक्ष्यामि प्रवेक्ष्यामि तपोवनम्॥ १८॥
“Bereft of my brother and father, too, |
would not return to Ayodhya—which, though
ruled so long by scions of Ikswaku, has
now become desolate—but shall withdraw
to a forest suitable for austerities.” (18)

तयोर्विलपितं श्रुत्वा व्यसनं चाप्यवेक्ष्य तत्।

भृशमार्ततरा भूय: सर्व एवानुगामिन:॥१९॥
Hearing the lament of the two brothers

and perceiving their extreme agony

aforesaid, all their attendants felt sore
distressed even more. (19)

ततो विषण्णौ श्रान्तौ च शत्रुघ्नभरतावुभौ।
धरायां स्म व्यचेष्टेतां भग्नशृङ्गाविवर्षभौ॥ २०॥
