* AYODHYAKANDA +

403

Canto XXIX

Sita continues to implore Sri Rama to take her to the forest alongwith him.
Sri Rama, however, is adamant and goes on consoling her
and asking her to stay on in Ayodhya

एतत् तु वचनं श्रुत्वा सीता रामस्य g:Raar
प्रसक्ताश्रुमुखी मन्दमिदं वचनमब्रवीत्॥१॥

Distressed to hear this plea of Sri Rama,
Sita, for her part, who was deeply attached
to the latter, gently spoke as follows, her
face wet with tears : (1)

a त्वया कीर्तिता दोषा at वस्तव्यतां प्रति।
गुणानित्येव तान् विद्धि तव स्नेहपुरस्कृता॥ २॥

“The disadvantages that have been
enumerated by you as accruing from an
abode in the forest, know them to be so
many blessings in disguise in view of the
fact that | am foremost in your affections.

(2)
मृगा: feet गजाश्चैव शार्दूला: शरभास्तथा।
चमरा: सृमराश्चैव ये चान्ये वनचारिण:॥३॥
अदृष्टपूर्वरूपत्वात् सर्वे ad da Waal
eu दृष्टवापसर्पेयुस्तव ad fe बिभ्यति॥४॥

“Antelopes, lions and even so elephants,
tigers and Sarabhas (a legendary animal
with eight legs and said to be more powerful
even than the lion), yaks as well as Gayals
and many other beasts that roam about in
the forest are all sure to run away on seeing
your countenance since they have never
seen your face before and because all are
afraid of you. (3-4)
त्वया च सह गन्तव्यं मया गुरुजनाज्ञया।
त्वद्वियोगेन A wa त्यक्तव्यमिह जीवितम्॥५॥

“In pursuance of the orders of your
parents, | too must accompany you to the

forest inasmuch as | am your counterpart*
and cannot live apart from you. Nay, life in

this world must be cast away by me in the
event of separation from you, O Rama! (5)

ae मां त्वत्समीपस्थामपि शक्रोऽपि wea
सुराणामीश्वर: शक्त: प्रधर्षयितुमोजसा॥६॥
“In fact, not even Indra, the ruler of

gods, is capable of overpowering me by his
might so long as | am by your side. (6)

पतिहीना तु या ANT न सा शक्ष्यति जीवितुम्।
काममेवंविधं राम त्वया मम निदर्शितम्॥७॥

“Such a thing has been amply brought
home to me by you, O Rama, that a
devoted wife who stands disunited from
her husband would not be able to survive.

(7)
अथापि च महाप्राज्ञ ब्राह्मणानां मया श्रुतम्।
पुरा पितृगृहे सत्यं वस्तव्यं faa मे वने॥८॥

“Moreover, in the days gone by while
living at my father’s, O highly enlightened
prince, the prophecy—which must come
out true—was heard by me from the mouth
of Brahmanas well-versed in astrology that
| must dwell in the forest. (8)

लक्षणिभ्यो द्विजातिभ्य: श्रुत्वाहं वचनं We
वनवासकृतोत्साहा नित्यमेव महाबल॥९॥
“Having heard the prophecy at my
parents’ home from Brahmanas, able to
interpret marks on the body, | have ever
cherished a longing for forest life, O highly
powerful prince ! (9)
आदेशो वनवासस्य प्राप्तव्य: स मया किल।
सा त्वया सह Vale यास्यामि प्रिय नान्यथा॥ १०॥

“The truth of that prediction about forest

* The Sruti says—atet वा एष आत्मनो यत्पत्नी।
