* AYODHYAKANDA +

Seeing his eldest son, Sri Rama,
adorned with these manifold incomparable
virtues, Emperor Dasaratha, the chastiser
of his enemies, for his part reflected as
follows: (35)
अथ राज्ञो ayaa वृद्धस्य चिरजीविन:।
प्रीतिरेषा Het Wat राजा स्यान्मयि जीवति॥ ३६ ॥

The thought forthwith entered the mind
of the aged and long-lived emperor: “How
should Rama be crowned king during my
very lifetime? How can this delightful event
take place? (36)
wr ह्यस्त परा प्रीतिर्हृदि सम्परिवर्तते।
mal AH Ud द्रक्ष्याम्यभिषिक्तमहं प्रियम्॥ ३७॥

“When shall | actually behold my beloved
son, Sri Rama, installed as Prince Regent?
This alone is the supreme desire revolving
in my heart. (37)
व्रद्धिकामो fe लोकस्य सर्वभूतानुकम्पक:।
मत्त: प्रियतरो cite पर्जन्य इव वृष्टिमान्॥ ३८ ॥

“Commiserating all created beings, he
truly seeks the advancement of all the people.
Like a rainy cloud he is dearer to the world
than myself. (38)

यमशक्रसमो dtl बृहस्पतिसमो मतौ।
महीधरसमो धृत्यां मत्तश्च गुणवत्तर:॥३९॥
“He is a compeer of Yama and Indra in
valour, vies with Brhaspati in understanding,
resembles a mountain in firmness and excels
me in qualities. (39)

Tame कृत्स्नामधितिष्ठन्तमात्मजम्।
अनेन वयसा दृष्टवा यथा स्वर्गमवाप्नुयाम्॥४०॥

“Seeing at this ripe age my aforesaid
son, Sri Rama, holding sway over this entire
globe, let me ascend to heaven in due
course.” (40)
इत्येवं विविधैस्तैस्तैरन्यपार्थिवदुर्लभे: |
शिष्टैरपरिमेयैश्च लोके लोकोत्तरैर्गुणै:।॥४१॥
तं समीक्ष्य dat राजा युक्तं समुदितैर्गुणै:।
निश्चित्य सचिवै: सार्धं यौवराज्यममन्यत॥४२॥

Reflecting thus and perceiving Sri Rama

287

endowed with the aforesaid manifold
excellences, difficult to find in other kings,
as well as with all other innumerable
excellences, uncommon in the world, and
deliberating with his ministers, the Emperor
(Dasaratha) decided to install him as Prince
Regent. (41-42)

दिव्यन्तरिक्षॆ भूमौ च घोरमुत्पातजं भयम्।
संचचक्षेऽथ मेधावी शरीरे चात्मनो जराम्॥४३॥

The shrewd Emperor forthwith spoke
to the ministers about the grave risk
foreshadowed by the portents appearing in
the heaven, in the aerial region as well as
on earth, as also of old age telling on his
own body. (43)

पूर्णचन्द्राननस्याथ शोकापनुदमात्मन:।
लोके रामस्य बुबुधे सम्प्रियत्वं महात्मन:॥४४॥

On the other hand, he learnt from the
ministers of the great popularity of the high-
souled Sri Rama, whose countenance
resembled the full moon in its pleasing
property—a popularity which assuaged the
emperor’s own agony (caused by the thought
of those evil portents). (44)

आत्मनश्च प्रजानां च श्रेयसे च प्रियेण च।
प्राप्ते काले स धर्मात्मा भक्त्या त्वरितवान् FT: ॥ ४५ ॥

Nay, for his own good as well as for
the good of the people as also with a view
to their gratification and out of love for them,
that pious monarch urged the ministers to
make haste, when the opportune time for
the installation came. (45)

नानानगरवास्तव्यान् पृथग्जानपद।नपि ।
समानिनाय मेदिन्यां प्रधानान् पृथिवीपति: i ४६ i
The emperor caused to be summoned
to his capital the prominent citizens of various
cities as also the rulers of different parts of
the country on the globe. (46)

तान् वेश्मनानाभरणैर्यथार्हं प्रतिपूजितान्।
ददर्शालंकृतो राजा प्रजापतिरिव प्रजा:॥४७॥

Decked with jewels himself, the king
saw them when they had been honourably
