* AYODHYAKANDA +

Having reached the precincts of the
hermitage and scaring the beasts and birds
of the locality by his very appearance as a
bowman and covering the _ intervening
distance, which could be covered in a short
while, Sri Rama for his part approached the
hermitage of Bharadwaja. (9)

ततस्त्वाश्रममासाद्य मुनेर्दर्शनकांक्षिणौ |
सीतयानुगतौ वीरौ दूरादेवावतस्थतु:॥१०॥

Arriving at the hermitage, the two valiant
princes, for their part, who longed for a sight
of the sage and were accompanied by Sita,
then halted at some distance awaiting his
permission to see him. (10)

स vasa महात्मानमृषिं शिष्यगणैर्वृतम्।
संशितव्रतमेकाग्रं तपसा लब्धचक्षुषम्॥११॥

हुताग्निहोत्रं दृष्टवैव महाभाग: कृताञ्जलि:।
राम: सौमित्रिणा सार्धं सीतया चाभ्यवादयत्॥ १२॥

Eventually entering the hut occupied
by the sage after obtaining his permission
through some pupil, and beholding the high-
souled sage of rigid vows,who had acquired
omniscience through askesis and_ sat
absorbed in meditation in the midst of hosts
of his pupils, having poured oblations into
the sacred fire, the celebrated and highly
blessed Sri Rama, with Laksmana (son of
Sumitra) and Sita, greeted him with folded
hands. (11-12)

न्यवेदयत चात्मानं तस्मै लक्ष्मणपूर्वज:।
पुत्रौ दशरथस्यावां भगवन् रामलक्ष्मणौ॥१३॥
भार्या ममेयं कल्याणी वैदेही जनकात्मजा।
मां चानुयाता विजनं तपोवनमनिन्दिता॥१४॥

Nay, Sri Rama, the eldest brother of
Laksmana, introduced himself to the sage
in the following words : “We are Rama and
Laksmana, sons of Emperor DaSaratha, O
venerable sage! Here is my blessed and
irreproachable wife, a princess of the Videha
kingdom and daughter of King Janaka, who
has followed me to the lonely forest suited
for religious austerities. (13-14)

495

frat प्रव्राज्यमानं मां सौमित्रिरनुज: प्रिय:।
अयमन्वगमद् भ्राता वनमेव धृतव्रत:॥१५॥

“While | was being exiled by my father,
this my beloved younger brother, Laksmana
(son of Sumitra), of firm vows has also
followed me to the forest. (15)

fast नियुक्ता भगवन् प्रवेक्ष्यामस्तपोवनम्।
धर्ममेवाचरिष्यामस्तत्र मूलफलाशना: ॥ १६॥

“Ordered by our father, O venerable
sage, we shall retire to a forest suited for
austerities and shall practise virtue alone
there, living on roots and fruits only.” (16)

तस्य ag वचनं श्रुत्वा राजपुत्रस्य धीमत:।
उपानयत धर्मात्मा गामर्घ्यमुदकं तत:॥१७॥
Hearing the aforesaid submission of
the sagacious prince, Sri Rama, Sage
Bharadwaja, whose mind is given to piety,
thereupon offered to him by way of a present
due to an honoured guest a bull as well
as water to wash his hands with as a
preliminary to the hospitality that was to
follow. (17)

नानाविधानन्नरसान् वन्यमूलफलाश्रयान्।
तेभ्यो ददौ तप्ततपा वासं चैवाभ्यकल्पयत्॥ Ve Il

The sage, who had practised austerities,
offered them delicacies of all descriptions
prepared from wild roots and fruits, and also
arranged accommodation for them. (18)

मृगपक्षिभिरासीनो मुनिभिश्च समन्तत:।
राममागतमभ्यर्च्य स्वागतेनागतं मुनि:॥१९॥
प्रतिगृह्य तु तामर्चामुपविष्टं स राघवम्।
भरद्वाजोऽब्रवीद् वाक्यं धर्मयुक्तमिदं तदा॥ oll

Honouring with words of welcome Sri
Rama, who had approached him by slow
stages pausing a little at intervals and then
advancing meticulously out of respect, the
said Sage Bharadwaja, seated in the
company of beasts and birds as well as of
hermits all round, now addressed the following
words, consistent with righteousness, to Sri
Rama, a scion of Raghu, who had since
