+ UTTARAKANDA +

Mahoragas (huge serpents), Gandharvas
and Yaksas. (68)

चचाल
चलोपलं नीलमिवाचलाग्रम्॥६९॥

By the wind arising from the flapping of
Garuda’s wings a portion of the Raksasa
king’s army was blown away, their banners
whirled and their weapons slipped from their
hands; the said army of the king of ogres

865

shook like the crest of a blue hill with its
crags displaced. (69)

da: feta: शोणितमांसरूषितै-

वरायुधैर्निर्बिभिदुर सहस्रश:॥७०॥

The Raksasas in their thousands
surrounded Visnu and attacked Him with
sharp excellent weapons daubed with blood
and flesh, and resembling the fire arising at
the end of the world-cycle. (70)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये उत्तरकाण्डे YS: सर्ग: ॥ ६ ॥

Thus ends Canto Six in the Uttarakanda of the glorious Ramayana of Valmiki,
the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

Canto VII

The destruction of the Raksasas by Lord Visnu;
the survivors take to flight

नारायणगिरिं ते तु गर्जन्तो राक्षसाम्बुदा:।
अर्दयन्तोऽस्त्रवर्षेण वर्षेणेवाद्रिमम्बुदा: te
“Just as clouds lash hills with a
downpour, even so the Raksasa hordes,
making a terrific noise, attacked with their
volleys of missiles, Narayana who stood
like a hill. (1)

शयामावदातस्तैर्विष्णुर्नीलैर्नक्तंचरोत्तमै: ।
वृतोऽञ्जनगिरीवायं वर्षमाणै: पयोधरै:॥ २॥
The bright, though dark-complexioned
Visnu was surrounded by those sable-looking
jewels among the Raksasas like a hill of
antimony by the pouring clouds. (2)
शलभा sl Hat मशका sa पावकम्।
यथामृतघटं दंशा मकरा इव चार्णवम्॥३॥
तथा रक्षोधनुर्मुक्ता वज्रानिलमनोजवा:।
हरिं विशन्ति स्म शरा लोका sa विपर्यये॥४॥

The arrows shot from the bows of the

Raksasas, with the speed of the thunderbolt,
the air and mind, entered into the body of
Visnu as locusts rush into paddy fields,
moths into the flame, bees into a pot
containing honey, crocodiles into the sea
and the worlds into Visnu at the time of the
deluge. (3-4)

स्यन्दनै: स्यन्दनगता गजैश्च गजमूर्धगा:।
अश्वारोहास्तथाश्वैश्च पादाताश्चाम्बरे स्थिता:॥७५॥
राक्षसेन्द्रा गिरिनिभा: vit: शक्त्यृष्टितोमरै:।
निरुच्छ्वासं हरिं चक्रु: प्राणायामा ga द्विजम्॥ ६॥

Huge as mountains, the Raksasa chiefs,
sitting in chariots, or riding on elephants, or
on horses suffocated Visnu from their
chariots, elephants and horses as also the
foot-soldiers standing in airspace by means
of arrows, javelins, double-edged swords
and iron clubs, only as_ breath-control
exercises make Brahmanas (practising them)
stop their breathing (for awhile). (5-6)
