# YUDDHAKANDA #

Your valour; while Your exploits never go in
vain. (29)
अमोघास्ते भविष्यन्ति भक्तिमन्तो नरा भुवि॥ ३०॥
“Your blessed sight is unfailing in its
effects; singing Your praises, too, never goes
in vain. Nay, those who are full of devotion to
You will never be unsuccessful on earth. (30)
ये त्वां देवं ध्रुवं भक्ता: पुराणं पुरुषोत्तमम्।
प्राप्नुवन्ति तथा कामानिह लोके परत्र च॥ ३१॥

797

“Those who are devoted to You, the
primeval and eternal Lord, the Supreme
Person, likewise attain all their desired objects
here as well as hereafter.” (31)
ये नरा: कीर्तयिष्यन्ति नास्ति तेषां पराभव:॥ ३२॥

Discomfiture will never be the lot of
those men who will repeat this hymn sung
by Brahma (the foremost seer) and recount
this ancient story. (32)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये युद्धकाण्डे सप्तदशाधिकशततम: AT: ॥ 220 I

Thus ends Canto One hundred and seventeen in the Yuddhakanda of the glorious
Ramayana of Valmiki, the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

अष्टादशाधिकशततम: सर्ग:
Canto CXVIII

The god of fire emerges in person from the burning pyre with
Sita and, restoring her to Sri Rama, testifies to
her purity and the latter joyfully accept her

एतच्छुत्वा शुभं वाक्यं पितामहसमीरितम्।
अङ्केनादाय वैदेहीमुत्पपात विभावसु:॥ १॥

On hearing the foregoing excellent
panegyric addressed by Brahma, the creator,
the god of fire presently emerged from the
burning pyre taking Sita, a princess of the
Videha territory, in his arms. (1)
विधूयाथ faat at q वैदेहीं हव्यवाहन:।
उत्तस्थौ मूर्तिमानाशु गृहीत्वा जनकात्मजाम्॥ २॥

Scattering that funeral pile, and taking
the aforesaid daughter of Janaka, a princess
of the Videha territory, in his arms, the god
of fire (lit., the bearer of sacrificial offerings)
for his part forthwith rose at once from the
fire in a corporeal form. (2)

तरुणादित्यसंकाशां तप्तकाञ्चनभूषणाम्।
रक्ताम्बरधरां बालां नीलकुञ्चितमूर्धजाम्॥ 3

अक्लिष्टमाल्याभरणां तथारूपामनिन्दिताम्।
ददौ waa वैदेहीमङ्के कृत्वा विभावसु:॥४॥
Bearing in his arms the youthful
princess of the Videha territory, who was
shining brightly as the rising sun, was decked
with ornaments of refined gold and attired in
a red robe, and wore dark curly hair, who
was further adorned with ornaments of flowers
which had not been blasted even on her
entering the fire and emerging out of it, who
was absolutely beyond reproach and looked
just the same as she did while entering the
flames—the god of fire restored her to Sri
Rama. (3-4)
अब्रवीत् तु तदा Wa साक्षी लोकस्य पावक:।
war a wa वैदेही पापमस्यां न विद्यते॥५॥

The god of fire, the witness of the whole
world, for his part then spoke as follows to
