* ARANYAKANDA «

| am full of apprehension and do not anticipate
that everything is quite well, O suzerain
Lord of ogres.” (38)

एवमुक्तो महातेजा मारीचेन A रावण:।

Wa: पश्चादिदं वाक्यमब्रवीद् वाक्यकोविद: i ३९॥
Spoken to in those words by Marica

the said Ravana, who was possessed of

exceptional glory, and was adept in

expression, then spoke as follows: (39)

आरक्षो A हतस्तात रामेणाक्लिष्टकारिणा।
जनस्थानमवध्यं तत् सर्वं युधि निपातितम्॥४०॥

“Khara and others (the soldiers guarding
my frontiers) have been killed, O dear friend,
by Rama of unwearied action; nay, the
entire colony of Janasthana, which was
hitherto incapable of being destroyed, has
been exterminated in an encounter. (40)

तस्य मे He साचिव्यं तस्य भार्यापहारणे।
राक्षसेन्द्रवच: श्रुत्वा मारीचो वाक्यमब्रवीत्॥४१॥
“Lend your co-operation to me as such
in abducting his wife.” Hearing the request
of Ravana, the ruler of ogres, Marica replied
as follows : (41)
आख्याता केन वा सीता मित्ररूपेण शात्रुणा।
TAM राक्षसशार्दूल को न नन्दति नन्दित:॥४२॥

“By what enemy, in the guise of a
friend, has Sita been mentioned to you as fit
for abduction? Gladdened by you (through
gifts etc.), O tiger among ogres, who does
not rejoice in your welfare and wishes harm
to you by putting you on the wrong track?

(42)
सीतामिहानयस्वेति को watt ब्रवीहि मे।
रक्षोलोकस्य सर्वस्य क: शृङ्गं छेत्तुमिच्छति॥४३॥

“Tell me, who says, ‘Bring Sita to Lanka’?
Who seeks to get rid of the top most figure
of the ogre world? (43)
प्रोत्साहयति ay at स च WaT!
आशीविषमुखाद दंष्टामुद्धर्तुं चेच्छति त्वया॥४४॥

“Nay, whoever encourages you in this
behalf is without doubt your enemy. Through

797

you (as his tool) he desires to extract a
fang from the jaws of a snake. (44)

कर्मणानेन केनासि कापथं प्रतिपादित:।
सुखसुप्तस्य ते राजन् Vet केन मूर्धनि॥४५॥
“By whom have you been led astray
by suggesting to you this course of action?
By whom, O king, has a blow been dealt on
your head while you were lying asleep at
ease? (45)

asia: Ufterratfaaran: |
स संयुगे राघवगन्धहस्ती॥४६॥
“That elephant in rut (whose very scent
scares away other elephants) in the form of
Sri Rama (a scion of Raghu)—whose birth
in an immaculate lineage is his proboscis
and whose glory is his temporal fluid, and
whose shapely arms constitute his tusks—
O Ravana, should not even be stared in the
face in an encounter by you at this juncture.
(46)

विदग्धरक्षोमृगहा नॄसिंह:।

सुप्तस्त्वया बोधयितुं न yer:

शराङ्गपूर्णो निशितासिदंष्ट्:॥४७॥
“That lion among men, whose presence
in a field of battle constitutes his joints and
hair, who kills animals in the form of ogres
skilled in fighting, who is complete in point
of his limbs in the form of arrows and
whose sword constitutes his sharp teeth,
dare not be aroused by you when asleep.
(47)

प्रस्कन्दितुं राक्षसराज युक्तम्॥४८॥

“It is not advisable for you, O king of
ogres, to jump into the subterranean fire
forming the most dreadful mouth of the
