1000

all the Rsis. In Lanka Sita, Pure of conduct,
has been handed over to me by Mahendra
(the lord of gods), in the presence of the
gods and the Gandharvas and my inner
concience bears testimony to her purity and
nobility. (8—10)

ततो गृहीत्वा वैदेहीमयोध्यामहमागत:।
अयं तु मे महान् ale: शोकश्च ae वर्तते॥११॥
पौरापवाद: सुमहांस्तथा जनपदस्य al
अकीर्तिर्यस्य गीयेत लोके भूतस्य कस्यचित्॥ १२॥

“Then having accepted Sita, | have
come to Ayodhya, but (this is) now the
people censure me, and it pains my heart.
The censure is indeed great as it circulates
among the citizens and the countrymen.
After all the person whose infamy is a
subject of common talk in the public,

(11-12)

पतत्येवाधमाँल्लोकान् यावच्छब्द: प्रकीर्त्यते।
अकीर्तिर्निन्द्यते देवै: कीर्तिर्लोकेषु पूज्यते॥१३॥

“as long as the word of infamy circulates,
so long one does fall in the lower regions
(hell). Infamy is abhorred even by the gods
and fame gains credence in the world. (13)
कीर्त्यर्थं तु समारम्भ: सर्वेषां सुमहात्मनाम्।
अप्यहं जीवितं जह्यां युष्मान् वा पुरुषर्षभा:॥ १४॥
अपवादभयाद् भीत: किं पुनर्जनकात्मजाम्।
WATE भवन्त: पश्यन्तु पतितं शोकसागरे॥ १५॥

“Indeed, all great souls endeavour for
fame, O heroes among men, afraid of ill-
report, | can even give up my life or all of
you together, O bull among men; how much
it is incumbent to leave Sita. All of you see
me submerged in the ocean of sorrow.

(14-15)
नहि पश्याम्यहं भूतं किंचिद् दु:खमतोऽधिकम्।
शवस्त्वं प्रभाते सौमित्रे सुमन्त्राधिष्ठितं रथम्॥ १६॥
आरुह्य सीतामारोप्य विषयान्ते समुत्सृज।
गङ्गायास्तु परे UN वाल्मीकेस्तु महात्मन:॥१७॥
आश्रमो दिव्यसंकाशस्तमसातीरमाश्रित:।
तत्रैतां विजने देशे विसृज्य रघुनन्दन॥१८॥

« VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

शीघ्रमागच्छ सौमित्रे कुरुष्व वचनं मम।
न चास्मि प्रतिवक्तव्य: सीतां ula कथंचन॥ १९॥

“| do not see any greater misfortune
than this, O Laksmana (son of Sumitra)
ascending the chariot driven by Sumantra,
and made sitting Sita therein leave her
beyond the confines of the kingdom. On the
other side of the Ganga, the hermitage of
the great sage Valmiki, which looks like
celestial abode on the river Tamasa. There
in that hermitage, O Laksmana, (a scion of
Raghu) leaving her (Sita), come here soon.
Do what | say, and remember: | am not
to be told with regard to leaving Sita.

(16—19)
AT cet गच्छ सौमित्रे नात्र कार्या विचारणा।
अप्रीतिर्हि परा wet त्वयैतत् प्रतिवारिते॥ २०॥
शापिता fe मया यूयं पादाभ्यां जीवितेन च।
QM वाक्यान्तरे ब्रूयुरनुनेतुं कथंचन॥ Ril
अहिता नाम ते नित्यं मदभीष्टविघातनात्।
मानयन्तु भवन्तो मां यदि मच्छासने स्थिता:॥ २२॥
इतोऽद्य नीयतां dat कुरुष्व वचनं मम।
पूर्वमुक्तोऽहमनया गङ्गातीरेऽहमाश्रमान्॥ २३॥
पश्येयमिति तस्याश्च काम: संवर्त्यतामयम्।

एवमुक्त्वा तु काकुत्स्थो बाष्पेण पिहितेक्षण: i २४॥
संविवेश स धर्मात्मा भ्रातृभि: परिवारित:।
शोकसंविग्नहृदयो निशश्वास यथा fea: २५॥

“Therefore, 0 Laksmana (son _ of
Sumitra), go soon and carry out my behest.
Any resistance on your part will cause me
extreme displeasure. | swear to you by my
feet and also my life that whosoever speaks
out to pacify me in any manner while |
speak, shall always be inimical to me as he
will shatter all that | desire. If you are prone
to be at my command, then show respect to
me, take away Sita from here, this very
day, do what | say, ‘I wish to behold the
hermitage on the bank of the Ganga’, thus
she had told me formerly, now fulfil this
desire of her. Thus saying the descendant
of Kakutstha, Sri Rama, the noble one with
