606

who vied with the god of fire in brilliance,
worshipped the fire according to the
traditional rites, while reciting the best of
Mantras (sacred texts). Having worshipped
the sacred fire on the battlefield with offerings
of parched grains of rice preceded by flowers
and sandal-paste, that mighty ogre chief
poured oblation into it. In that sacrificial
performance weapons served the purpose
of reeds (which are strewn about the fire to
ward off evil forces), nay, chips of a Bibhitaka
tree served as fuel for the sacrificial fire,
again red pieces of cloth alone were used
and the sacrificial ladle was made of iron.
Duly strewing the fire there with reeds (in
the form of other weapons) accompanied
by lances, Indrajit elasped the neck of a
live goat of dark hue (for offering it to the
fire). From the fire, which was set ablaze by
that offering having been thrown into it but
once, and was free from smoke and had
burst into mighty flames, appeared such
signs as had betokened victory in the past.
Risen into view, the god of fire, who shone
brightly like refined gold and whose flames
turned towards the right, accepted that
offering in person. Indrajit, who was an
adept in the use of mystic missiles, invoked
the missile presided over by Brahma, the
creator, and charged the bow as well as his
chariot and all with the invocatory spell on
the field of battle. While that missile was
being invoked and the sacrificial fire was
being propitiated through oblations, the vault
of heaven including the sun, the moon and
other planets and lunar mansions shook

with fear. (19—28)
a पावकं पावकदीप्ततेजा
हुत्वा महेन्द्रप्रतिमप्रभाव:।
खेऽन्तर्दधेऽऽत्मच्मिचिन्त्यवीर्य; ॥ २९॥

Having propitiated the fire with offerings,

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA +

Indrajit, who was flaming with lustre like fire
and vied with the mighty Indra, the ruler of
gods, in might, and who was endowed with
inconceivable prowess, hid himself from view
in the sky with bow, arrows, sword, chariot,
horses, charioteer and all. (29)

ततो हयरथाकोर्णं पताकाध्वजशोभितम्।
निर्ययौ राक्षसबलं नर्दमानं युयुत्सया॥ ३०॥
Thereupon the army of ogres, which
was crowded with horses and chariots and
graced with pennants and flags, sallied forth
roaring with a longing to fight. (30)

तोमरैरङ्कुशैश्चापि वानराञ्जघ्नुराहवे॥ ३१॥

They began to strike the monkeys on
the battlefield with many wonderful and
ornamented arrows of great velocity, lances
and goads, too. (31)

रावणिस्तु सुसंक्रुद्धस्तान् निरीक्ष्य निशाचरान्।
Bel भवन्तो युध्यन्तु वानराणां जिघांसया॥ ३२॥

Keenly observing those prowlers of
the night, Indrajit, son of Ravana, for his
part, who was highly enraged, said to them,
“Be of good cheer and fight with the intention
of making short work of the monkeys.” (32)

ततस्ते राक्षसा: सर्वे गर्जन्तो जयकाङ्क्षिण:।
अभ्यवर्षस्ततो at वानरान् शरवृष्टिभि:।। ३३॥
Roaring and longing for a victory, all
those ogres thereupon terribly covered the
monkeys on all sides with hails of arrows.
(33)

स तुं नालीकनाराचैर्गदाभिर्मुसलैरपि।
रक्षोभि: Gad: संख्ये वानरान् विचकर्ष Ti ३४॥
Remaining concealed from view by
the ogres, Indrajit for his part began to
destroy the monkeys on the battlefield with
his Nalikas (broad-headed arrows), steel
arrows, maces and clubs too: so the tradition
goes. (34)
