# YUDDHAKANDA #

was performed even by Vibhisana and
Hanuman on the field of battle. (14-15)

अहोरात्रैस्त्रिभिर्वीर: कथंचिद् विनिपातित:।
निरमित्र: कृतोऽस्म्यद्य निर्यास्यति fe रावण:॥ १६॥

“In the course of three days and nights
the champion has somehow been made
short work of and | have been rid of my
enemy today. Ravana will undoubtedly sally
forth now. (16)

बलव्यूहेन महता Patera fe रावण:।
बलव्यूहेन महता श्रुत्वा पुत्रं निपातितम्॥१७॥

“Hearing of his eldest son having been
struck down with a large formation of army,
Ravana will surely come forth with a vast
formation of army. (17)
तं पुत्रवधसंतप्तं निर्यान्तं राक्षसाधिपम्।
बलेनाव्रत्य महता निहनिष्यामि दुर्जयम्॥१८॥

“Surrounding with a huge army that
suzerain lord of ogres, who is tormented by
the death of his son, even as he sallies
forth, | shall make short work of him, even
though he is difficult to conquer. (18)
त्वया लक्ष्मण नाथेन सीता च पृथिवी च मे।

न Tea हते तस्मिन् शक्रजेतरि चाहवे॥१९॥

“With you as my protector, O Laksmana,
neither Sita nor the earth will be hard to

regain, now that the aforesaid conqueror of
Indra has been killed in combat.” (19)

स तं भ्रातरमाश्वास्य परिष्वज्य च Wea: |

Wa: सुषेणं मुदित: समाभाष्येदमब्रवीत्॥ २०॥
Having restored his aforesaid younger

brother to confidence and hugged him, and

accosting Susena, the celebrated Sri Rama,

a scion of Raghu, joyfully spoke to him as

follows: (20)

विशल्योऽयं महाप्राज्ञ सौमित्रिर्मित्रवत्सल:।
यथा भवति सुस्वस्थस्तथा त्वं समुपाचर॥ २१॥

“Treat Laksmana properly in such a
way, O highly intelligent one, that this son

691

of Sumitra, who is fond of his friends, may
be rid of pain caused by the arrows that
have penetrated into his body and may be
completely healed. (21)

fastea: free fara afar: afasitacr: |
ऋक्षवानरसैन्यानां शूराणां द्रुमयोधिनाम्॥ २२॥
ये चाप्यन्येऽत्र युध्यन्ति सशल्या व्रणिनस्तथा।
तेऽपि सर्वे प्रयत्नेन क्रियन्ते सुखिनस्त्वया॥ २३॥

“Let the son of Sumitra alongwith
Vibhisana be speedily rid of pain caused by
the arrows that have penetrated into their
body. Nay, let all others too among the
gallant bear and monkey warriors fighting
with trees, who have fought on the battlefield
and stand pierced with arrows and wounded,
be healed by you with all care.” (22-23)
Wan: स WA महात्मा हरियूथप:।
लक्ष्मणाय ददौ नस्त: सुषेण: परमौषधम्॥ २४॥

Requested as aforesaid by Sri Rama,
the high-souled Susena, a commander of
monkey troops, administered a sovereign
remedy to Laksmana through the nose.

(24)
स तस्य गन्धमाघ्राय विशल्य: समपद्यत।
तदा निर्वेदनश्चैव संरूढव्रण wa च॥ २५॥

Inhaling the odour of the herb,
Laksmana was freed from arrows then and
there and rid of his pain and his wounds too
got completely cicatrized. (25)
विभीषणमुखानां च eat राघवाज्ञया।
सर्ववानरमुख्यानां चिकित्सामकरोत् तदा॥ २६॥

At the command of Sri Rama (a scion
of Raghu) Susena also forthwith treated his

friends Vibhisana and others as also all the
monkey chiefs. (26)

तत: प्रकृतिमापन्नो हृतशल्यो गतक्लम:।
सौमित्रिर्मुमुदे तत्र क्षणेन विगतज्वर:॥ २७॥
Restored to his normal state and freed

from the arrows, his lassitude having gone
and his anguish disappeared in an instant,
