# YUDDHAKANDA #

एष Fen च विष्णुश्च feta: स्कन्द: प्रजापति: |
महेन्द्रो धनद: कालो aA: सोमो ह्यपां Ula: ie i
पितरो aaa: साध्या अश्विनौ मरुतो मनु:।
aad: प्रजा: WOT ऋतुकर्ता प्रभाकर:॥९॥
आदित्य: सविता सूर्य: खग: पूषा गभस्तिमान्।
सुवर्णसदृशो भानुर्हिरण्यरेता दिवाकर:॥१०॥

“Indeed, he is the same as Brahma
(the Creator) as well as Visnu (the Protector
of the universe), Lord Siva (the god of
destruction), Skanda (son of Lord Siva),
Prajapati (the lord of creation), the mighty
Indra (the ruler of gods), Kubera (the
bestower of riches), Kala (the Time-spirit),
Yama (the god of retribution), Soma (the
moon-god), Varuna (the ruler of the waters),
the Pitrs (manes), the eight Vasus, the
twelve Sadhyas, the two Aswis (the
physicians of gods), the forty-nine Maruts
(wind-gods); Manu (a progenitor of the human
race), Vayu (the wind-god) and the god of
fire. He constitutes all created beings, he is
the life-breath of the universe, the source of
the seasons, the storehouse of light, an
offspring of Aditi, the progenitor of all, the
sun-god, the courser in the heavens, the
nourisher of all, the possessor of rays, the
golden, the brilliant, the one whose energy
constitutes the seed of the universe and the
maker of day. (8—10)

हरिदश्व: सहस्रार्चि: सप्तसप्तिर्मरीचिमान्।
तिमिरोन्मथन: शम्भुस्त्वष्टा मार्तण्डकोंऽशुमान्॥ ११॥
हिरण्यगर्भ: शिशिरस्तपनोऽहस्करो रवि:।
अग्निगर्भोऽदिते: पुत्र: शङ्ख: शिशिरनाशन:॥१२॥
व्योमनाथस्तमोभेदी ऋऋऋग्यजु:सामपारग:।
चनवृष्टिरपां मित्रो विन्ध्यवीथीप्लवंगम:॥ १३॥
आतपी मण्डली मृत्यु: पिङ्गल: सर्वतापन:।
कविर्विश्वो महातेजा रक्त: सर्वभवोद्भव:॥ १४॥
नक्षत्रग्रहताराणामधिपो विश्वभावन:।
तेजसामपि तेजस्वी द्वादशात्मन् नमोऽस्तु ते॥ १५॥
“He has seven green horses yoked to
his chariot, is myriad-rayed, full of rays, the

747

destroyer of darkness, the source of
happiness, the mitigator of the suffering of
his devotees, the infuser of life in the lifeless
cosmic egg, all-pervading and the cause of
the creation, preservation and destruction
of the universe. He is blissful by nature, the
ruler of all, the bringer of day and the Teacher.
A son of Aditi, he bears the fire of dissolution
in his womb, is bliss personified and all-
enveloping like space, the destroyer of
cold, the lord of the heavens, the disperser
of darkness, a master of the three Vedas
(Rk, Sama and Yajur), the sender of thick
showers and the producer (giver) of water.
He courses swiftly along his own orbit,
carries in him the resolve to evolve the
universe and is adorned with a circle of
rays. He is death itself, tawny of hue and
the destroyer of all. He is omniscient, all-
formed, endowed with extraordinary brilliance,
coppery, the source of all evolutes, the
controller of all lunar mansions, planets and
stars, the creator of all, the resplendent
among the splendid. O sun-god! appearing
in twelve forms in the shape of twelve
months of the year, hail to you! (11—15)
wa: ata गिरये पश्चिमायाद्रये नम:।
ज्योतिर्गणानां पतये दिनाधिपतये Aa esi
“Hail to you in the form of the eastern
mountain and hail to the western mountain.
Hail to the lord of hosts of luminaries, the
lord of the day. (16)
जयाय जयभद्राय हर्यश्वाय AAT नम:।
Wa नम: सहस्रांशो आदित्याय AAT नम:॥ Veil
“Hail to you, the giver of victory, hail to
you, the joy born of victory! Hail to you, the
god having green horses yoked to your
chariot. Hail, hail to you with thousands of
rays! Hail, hail to you, son of Aditi! (17)
wa sara वीराय सारङ्गाय नमो नम:।
नम: पद्मप्रबोधाय प्रचण्डाय नमोऽस्तु ते॥१८॥

“Hail to you, the subduer of the senses,
