# YUDDHAKANDA #

अगस्त्यस्याश्रमश्चैव ad कदलीवरत:।
दीप्तश्चैवाश्रमे ह्येष सुतीक्ष्णस्य महात्मन:॥४७॥

“Here is the well-known site of our
hermitage, O lady of excellent complexion,
and here is seen the enchanting hut of
leaves, O lady of brilliant looks whence you
were forcibly borne away by Ravana the
king of ogres. Here is the delightful and
charming river Godavari carrying limpid
waters. And here is also seen the hermitage
of Sage Agastya, surrounded with plantains.
Nay, here indeed is the glorious hermitage
of the high-souled Sage Sutiksna, disciple
of Sage Agastya. (45—47)

दृश्यते चैव वैदेहि शरभङ्गाश्रमो महान्।
उपयात: सहस्राक्षो यत्र Wor: पुरंदर:॥४८॥

“Again, there is also seen, O Sita (a
princess of the Videha territory), the spacious
hermitage of Sage Sarabhanga, where came
the thousand-eyed Indra, the destroyer of
citadels. (48)

अस्मिन् देशे महाकायो विराधो निहतो मया।
Ud a amar देवि दृश्यन्ते तनुमध्यमे॥४९॥
अत्र सीते त्वया दृष्टा तापसी धर्मचारिणी i ५०॥

“In this region was the gigantic Viradha
killed by me. Here are seen, O lady with a
slender-waist, the ascetics belonging to the
same hermitage where lives as the head of
the hermitage Sage Atri, who vies with the
sun and fire in brilliance. In this hermitage, O
Sita, was seen by you the ascetic lady,
Anasuya, wife of Sage Atri, who is given to
the practice of virtue. (49-50)
असौ सुतनु शैलेन्द्रश्चित्रकूट: प्रकाशते।
aa मां कैकयीपुत्र: प्रसादयितुमागत:॥७५१॥

“There shines forth, O lady of charming
limbs, Citrakuta, the lord of mountains. Here
came Bharata (son of Kaikeyi) to seek my

favour in the form of my consent to return to
Ayodhya. (51)

815

एषा सा यमुना रम्या दृश्यते चित्रकानना।
भरद्वाजाश्रम: श्रीमान् दृश्यते चैष मैथिलि॥ ५२॥

“Here is seen the delightful Yamuna,
which is hemmed in with lovely woods. The
glorious hermitage of Sage Bharadwaja
is also seen here, O princess of Mithila!

(52)

इयं च दृश्यते wet quer त्रिपथगा नदी।
नानाद्दिजगणाकीर्णा सम्प्रपुष्पितकानना॥५३॥

“Here is also seen the holy river, Ganga,
which wends its way through the three
worlds, viz., heaven, the earth and the
subterranean world, nay, whose banks
are crowded with flocks of birds of every
species, and which is lined with woods in
full blossom. (53)

aga चैतद् a यत्र सखा मम।
एषा सा दृश्यते सीते सरयूर्यूपमालिनी॥ ५४॥

“Again, here is the town of
Srngaverapura, where dwells my _ friend,
Guha. Here is seen, O Sita, the river
Sarayu, lined with rows of sacrificial posts
(the relics of sacrifices performed from time
to time by kings of the Ikswaku dynasty).

(54)

एषा सा gad aa राजधानी पितुर्मम।
अयोध्यां कुरु वैदेहि प्रणामं पुनरागता॥५५॥
“Here is seen, O Sita, the well-known
seat of government of my deceased father,
Emperor DaSaratha. Having duly returned
after a long time offer respectful salutations
to Ayodhya.” (55)
ततस्ते वानरा: Hel राक्षसा: सविभीषणा:।
उत्पत्योत्पत्य संहृष्टास्तां पुरीं ददृशुस्तदा॥५६॥
Bounding again and again to have a
view of it and feeling greatly delighted, all
the aforesaid monkeys and ogres, including
Vibhisana, thereupon beheld that city on
that occasion. (56)
