1092

eastern quarter. Beyond it lies the glorious
eastern mountain of gold from which the
sun is supposed to rise. (54)

तस्य कोटिर्दिवं स्पृष्टवा शतयोजनमायता।
जातरूपमयी दिव्या विराजति सवेदिका॥ ५७५॥

“Kissing the heaven, its wonderful
summit of gold, a hundred Yojanas (or eight
hundred miles) long, shines brightly with the
other mountains serving as its base. (55)

सालैस्तालैस्तमालैश्च कर्णिकारैश्च पुष्पितै:।
जातरूपमयैर्दिव्यै: शोभते सूर्यसंनिभै:॥ ५६॥
“It looks charming with heavenly sal,
palmyra, Tamala and Karnikara trees of
gold in blossom, shining brightly as the sun.
(56)

wa योजनविस्तारमुच्छितं दशयोजनम्।
qe सौमनसं नाम जातरूपमयं ध्रुवम्॥५७॥
“On that summit (a hundred Yojanas
long, of the eastern mountain) there stands
another everlasting golden peak, Saumanasa
by name, a Yojana long and ten Yojanas
high. (57)

wa Ud ud कृत्वा पुरा विष्णुस्तिविक्रमे।
द्वितीयं शिखरे मेरोश्चकार पुरुषोत्तम:॥५८॥
“Placing his first stride on that very
peak in the process of covering all the three
worlds in three strides in the former days,
Lord Visnu, the Supreme Person, placed
the second on the peak of Mount Meru in
heaven. (58)

उत्तरेण परिक्रम्य जम्बूद्वीपं दिवाकर:।
दृश्यो भवति भूयिष्ठं शिखरं तन्महोच्छ्यम्॥५९॥
“The sun becomes most clearly visible
to the inhabitants of Jambudwipa when
circumambulating Jambudwipa from the north
it ascends the said peak of great altitude.
(59)

wa dara नाम वालखिल्या vada: |
प्रकाशमाना दृश्यन्ते सूर्यवर्णास्तपस्विन:॥६०॥

“On that peak eminent sages named

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

Valakhilyas, who are all anchorites practising
asceticism and are bright as the sun, are
seen shedding their light. (60)

अयं सुदर्शनो dla: पुरो यस्य प्रकाशते।
तस्मिस्तेजश्च चक्षुश्च सर्वप्राणभृतामपि॥६१॥

“In front of the said eastern mountain
shines the island of Sudarsana (so-called
because it contains the lake named
SudarSana). Light as well as vision are
secured by all living beings only when the
sun shines on the aforesaid peak. (61)

weet तस्य पृष्ठेषु कन्दरेषु वनेषु च।
Wat: Ge ace मार्गितव्यस्ततस्तत:॥६२॥

“On the peaks as well as in the caves
and forests of the aforesaid mountain Ravana
alongwith Sita (a princess of the Videha
territory) should be sought for at every place.

(62)

काञ्चनस्य च शैलस्य सूर्यस्य च महात्मन:।
आविष्टा तेजसा संध्या Tat रक्ता प्रकाशते॥ ६३॥

Illumined with the brilliance of Sumeru
(the golden mountain) as well as of the
magnanimous sun-god, the eastern horizon
appears red. (63)

पूर्वमेतत् कृतं द्वारं पृथिव्या भुवनस्य च।
सूर्यस्योदयनं wa vat ह्येषा दिगुच्यते॥६४॥

“This eastern mountain associated with
the rising of the sun was evolved at the
beginning of creation by Brahma as the
entrance for those entering the terrestrial
region from the higher worlds as well as for
those departing from it to the higher worlds.
Hence this quarter is called the eastern (lit.,
the very first) quarter. (64)

तस्य शैलस्य पृष्ठेषु निर्झरेषु गुहासु च।
WaT: As acer Ubteaeretredta: 1&4

“Ravana alongwith Sita, a princess of
the Videha territory, should be sought for
everywhere on the summits, by the side of
cascades and in the caves of the aforesaid
mountain. (65)
