8 « VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

“| offer light fed with ghee to the celebrated story of Sri Rama, which has been written
by eminent Rsis like Valmiki.”

ॐ श्रूयते ब्रह्मणो लोके शतकोटिप्रविस्तरम्।
eG रामायणस्यास्य amt नैवेद्यमर्पये॥
—sfa नैवेद्यं समर्पयामि।

“The bulk of this (very) Ramayana is heard of as extending to a hundred crore
couplets in Brahmaloka (the realm of Brahma, the creator). | offer it food.”

At the end of the Puja lights should be waved round the book by burning camphor
and, after going clockwise round it, flowers placed in the hollow of one’s joined palms
should be offered to it. Then, falling prostrate before the book, salutation should be
offered to it by reading the following couplets—

वाल्मीकिगिरिसम्भूता रागसागरगामिनी |
पुनाति Yat पुण्या रामायणमहानदी॥
श्लोकसारसमाकीर्णं सर्गकल्लोलसंकुलम्।
काण्डग्राहमहामीनं वन्दे रामायणार्णवम्॥

“The great and holy river in the form of the Ramayana, which has descended from
the mountain in the form of Sage Valmiki and flows to the ocean embodied as Sri Rama,
purifies the world (with its contact). | bow down to the ocean in the form of the Ramayana,
which has verses for its water, cantos for its billows and the Kandas or books for its
alligators and large fish.”

After offering worship to gods and the Brahmanas the following Nyasas should be gone
through. According to the work known by the name of ‘Anusthana-Prakasa’, if one is unable
to read the entire Ramayana, one may read any of the Kandas according to the desire by
which one is actuated. For example, it lays down that a man seeking a son should read the
Balakanda and a seeker of wealth should read the Ayodhyakanda. Similarly one seeking to
recover a lost kingdom should read the Kiskindhakanda, people actuated by all sorts of
desires are called upon to read the Sundarakanda, while a man seeking to exterminate his
foes should read the Yuddhakanda. According to the Brhaddharma-Purana, the Ramayana
can be read from other interested motives too. A reference to the view of that Purana as well
as to the modes of Nyasa enjoined in it will be made later on.

ॐ अस्य श्रीवाल्मीकिरामायणमहामन्त्रस्य भगवान् वाल्मीकिर्ऋषि: | अनुष्टुप् छन्द:। श्रीराम: परमात्मा देवता।
अभयं सर्वभूतेभ्य इति बीजम्। अङ्गुल्यग्रेण तान् हन्यामिति शक्ति: | एतदस्त्रबलं दिव्यमिति कीलकम्। भगवान्नारायणो
देव sft तत्त्वम्। धर्मात्मा सत्यसंधश्चेत्यस्त्रम्। पुरुषार्थचतुष्टयसिद्ध्यर्थं पाठे विनियोग:।

ॐ श्रीं रां ष्ठाभ्यां AA: |

ॐ St रीं दातारमिति तर्जनीभ्यां नम: ।ॐरींरूंसर्वसम्पदामितिमध्यमाभ्यांनम ।

ॐ sit t लोकाभिराममित्यनामिकाभ्यां नम:। ॐ श्रीं रौ श्रीराममिति कनिष्ठिकाभ्यां नम:।

ॐ Ut भूयो भूयो नमाम्यहमिति करतलकरपृष्ठाभ्यां AA: |

Hrdayadi-Nyasa should be similarly gone through while uttering the same Mantras as
above.

The following couplet should then be read while taking one’s right hand round one’s
head clockwise by way of Digbandha (ensuring safety in all directions)—
