692

what is right, went clockwise round Sri
Rama, a scion of Raghu, and further placed
the pair of sandals on the head of an excellent
elephant. (29)
sarge प्रतिपूज्य तं जनं

TRY मन्त्रीन् प्रक्कृतीस्तथानुजौ।
व्यसर्जयद् राघववंशवर्धन:

स्थित: स्वधर्मे हिमवानिवाचल: ॥ ३०॥

Then, paying respects in the order of
precedence to all those men who had
gathered there as well as to his preceptors,
counsellors, subjects and two younger
brothers, Bharata and Satrughna, who were

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

going to Ayodhya, Sri Rama, the promoter
of Raghu’s race, who stood by his duty
unshaken like the Himalaya mountain, bade
them goodbye. (30)
तं मातरो बाष्पगृहीतकण्ठयो
दु:खेन नामन्त्रयितुं fe शेकु:।
a wa मातूरभिवाद्य सर्वा

रुदन् Hel स्वां प्रविवेश WA: ।। ३१॥

His mothers, whose throat was choked
with tears through agony, could not even
speak to him. Greeting all his mothers, the
celebrated Sri Rama too re-entered his hut
weeping. (31)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्येऽयोध्याकाण्डे
द्वादशाधिकशततम: सर्ग: | ११२॥

Thus ends Canto One hundred and twelve in the Ayodhyakanda of the glorious
Ramayana of Valmiki, the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

Canto CXTII

Departed back for Ayodhya alongwith Sage Vasistha and others, Bharata
pays his respects on the way to Sage Bharadwaja and, apprising him
of what had happened at Citrakuta and also of the pair of wooden
sandals that he had received from Sri Rama as the latter's
representative, and proceeding further, crosses the rivers
Ganga and Yamuna alongwith his followers. Departing
from Srngaverapura, he catches sight of Ayodhya
and points out to Sumantra its gloomy appearance

wa: शिरसि कृत्वा तु पादुके भरतस्तदा।
आरुरोह रथं हृष्ट:ऽ शत्रुघ्नसहितस्तदा॥१॥
Then, placing the pair of wooden
sandals on his head, Bharata for his part,
full of joy and accompanied by Satrughna,
forthwith ascended the chariot. (1)

afast वामदेवश्च जाबालिश्च दृढव्रत:।

अग्रत: Waa: सर्वे aon मन्त्रपूजिता:॥ २॥
The counsellors, Vasistha and

Vamadeva and Jabali of steadfast vows

and all others, adored for their sage counsel,
travelled in the forefront. (2)
प्रदक्षिणं च कुर्वाणाश्चित्रकूटं महागिरिम्॥ ३॥

Keeping the lovely river Mandakini and
the great Citrakuta mountain to their right
they then departed with their face turned
towards the east. (3)

पश्यन् धातुसहस्राणि रम्याणि विविधानि च।
प्रययौ तस्य पार्श्वन ससैन्यो भरतस्तदा॥४॥
