« KISKINDHAKANDA +

which are equal in prowess to the mighty
Indra, resemble clouds and mountains in
size and have taken up their abode on the
Meru and Vindhya mountains, will arrive
soon. (32)
a त्वामभिगमिष्यन्ति werd योद्धुमाहवे।

निहत्य रावणं ag ह्यानयिष्यन्ति मैथिलीम्॥ ३३॥

“They will come to you in order to fight
the ogre in combat. Killing Ravana in a
battle they will surely bring back Sita, a
princess of Mithila.” (33)

1083
तत: समुद्योगमवेक्ष्य वीर्यवान्
हरिप्रवीरस्य निदेशवर्तिन:।
aya हर्षाद् वसुधाधिपात्मज:
प्रबुद्धनीलोत्पलतुल्यदर्शन: ॥३४॥

Perceiving the consummate (martial)
endeavour on the part of Sugriva, the foremost
warriour of the monkey race, who was at
his beck and call, the powerful Si’ Rama
(son of DaSaratha, the suzerain lord of the
earth) looked like a full-blown blue lotus
through delight. (34)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये किष्किन्धाकाण्डेऽष्टात्रिंश: सर्ग: ॥ ३८ Il

Thus ends Canto Thirty-eight in the Kiskindhakanda of the glorious Ramayana of
Valmiki, the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

Canto XXXIX

While Sr Rama and Sugriva were deliberating with each other, Satabali and
other generals of the monkey army, followed by hordes of countless
monkeys of various species, which covered the sky with the
clouds of dust raised by them, arrive in their presence
and bow down at their feet

इति ब्रुवाणं सुग्रीवं रामो धर्मभृतां वर:।
बाहुभ्यां सम्परिष्वज्य प्रत्युवाच कृताञ्जलिम्॥१॥
Folding tightly in his arms Sugriva, who
was submitting as aforesaid with folded
hands, Sri Rama, the foremost of those
upholding the cause of righteousness, replied
as follows: (1)
यदिन्द्रो add at न तच्चित्रं भविष्यति।
आदित्योऽसौ सहस्रांशु: Hate वितिमिरं नभ: ॥ २॥
चन्द्रमा रजनीं कुर्यात् प्रभया सौम्य निर्मलाम्।
त्वद्बिधो वापि मित्राणां प्रीतिं कुर्यात् परंतप॥ ३॥
“It will not be strange if Indra, the god
of rain, pours a shower during the rains, if
the yonder sun with its countless rays rids
the sky of its darkness, if the moon, O
gentle one, makes the night clear by its
brilliance or if an individual like you affords

delight to his friends through good offices
rendered to them in return for their past
services, O scourge of your foes! (2-3)
Ue wala न तच्चित्रं भवेद् यत् सौम्य शोभनम्।
जानाम्यहं wat सुग्रीव सततं प्रियवादिनम्॥४॥
“Even so, the noble virtue of rendering
good offices to your friends which exists
in you, is not at all strange, O gentle one;
for | know you to be constantly in the
habit of speaking kind words to others, O
Sugriva ! (4)
त्वत्सनाथ: TS संख्ये जेतास्मि सकलानरीन्।
त्वमेव मे सुहृन्मित्रं साहाय्यं कर्तुमर्हसि॥५॥

“With you as my helpful companion, O
friend, | shall be able to conquer all enemies
in combat. You alone are my benevolent
friend and fit to render help to me. (5)
