144

निशाचरीणां प्रत्यक्षमक्षमं चाभिभाषितम्।

कथं नु खलु कर्तव्यमिदं कृच्छ्रगतो ह्यहम्॥ ee i
‘To speak to her within the sight of the

ogresses is, however, not advisable. How,

| wonder, can this be actually done? | am

really placed in a dilemma. (11)

अनेन रात्रिशेषेण यदि नाश्वास्यते मया।
सर्वथा नास्ति tee: परित्यक्ष्यति जीवितम्॥ १२॥
‘If by the end of this night she is not
restored to confidence by me, she will by all
means give up the ghost: there is no doubt
about it. (12)

रामस्तु यदि पृच्छेन्मां किं at सीताब्रवीद् वच: |

fang तं प्रतिब्रूयामसम्भाष्य सुमध्यमाम्॥१३॥
‘If Sri Rama for his part inquires of me

as to what message Sita gave to me, what

reply shall | give to him without having
spoken to Sita of slender waist? (13)

सीतासंदेशरहितं मामितस्त्वरया गतम्।
निर्दहेदपि काकुत्स्थ: क्रोधतीव्रेण चक्षुषा॥ १४॥
‘Sri Rama, a scion of Kakutstha, may
even consume me with his glance, violent
through anger, if | return from this place in
haste without taking any message from Sita.
(14)

ale वोद्योजयिष्यामि walt रामकारणात्।
व्यर्थमागमनं तस्य ससैन्यस्य भविष्यति॥ १५॥

‘Even if | prevail on my master Sugriva
to exert himself in the cause of Sri Rama,
his expedition to Lanka with an army will go
in vain in that Sita will have given up the
ghost long before his arrival. (15)

अन्तरं त्वहमासाद्य राक्षसीनामवस्थित:।
शनैराश्वासयाम्यद्य संतापबहुलामिमाम्॥ १६ Ul

‘Therefore, snatching some _ suitable
opportunity when the ogresses are inattentive,
even though stationed in the midst of the
ogresses, | shall this very day slowly console
Sita, who is full of agony. (16)

अहं ह्यतितनुश्चैव वानरश्च विशेषत:।
ard चोदाहरिष्यामि मानुषीमिह संस्कृताम्॥ १७॥

« VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

‘Lam indeed not only exceedingly small
in size but am a monkey to boot. | shall,
however, speak on this occasion the Sanskrit
language as spoken by humans. (17)
afte ard प्रदास्यामि द्विजातिरिव संस्कृताम्।
रावणं मन्यमाना AT सीता भीता भविष्यति॥ १८॥

‘But If | utter the Sanskrit language like
a Brahmana, Sita will get frightened thinking
me to be Ravana. (18)
अवश्यमेव ana मानुषं वाक्यमर्थवत्।
मया सान्त्वयितुं शक्या नान्यथेयमनिन्दिता॥ १९॥

‘The human language alone as spoken
near about Ayodhya, which will convey my
meaning to her, needs must be used by me.
This irreproachable lady cannot otherwise
be restored to confidence. (19)

सेयमालोक्य A रूपं जानकी भाषितं तथा।
रक्षोभिस्त्रासिता पूर्वं भूयस्त्रासमुपैष्यति॥ २०॥

‘Beholding my monkey form and hearing
my human speech, however, this celebrated
daughter of Janaka, already terrorized by
the ogres, will give way to fear all the more.

(20)
ततो जातपरित्रासा शब्दं कुर्यान्मनस्विनी।
जानाना at विशालाक्षी रावणं कामरूपिणम्॥ २१॥

‘Seized with terror knowing me to be
Ravana, who is able to change his form at
will, the sensitive and large-eyed lady will
then raise a cry. (21)

सीतया च Hd Vet सहसा राक्षसीगण:।
नानाप्रहरणो घोर: समेयादन्तकोपम:॥ २२॥
‘Nay, on a cry being raised by Sita, the
whole host of ogresses, armed with various
weapons and terrible as Death, will flock
together all at once. (22)

ततो मां सम्परिक्षिप्य सर्वतो विकृतानना:।

वधे च ग्रहणे da कुर्युर्यत्नं महाबला:॥ २३॥
‘Surrounding me from all sides, the

ogresses of loathsome appearance and

endowed with extraordinary might will make
an effort to kill or capture me. (23)
