# YUDDHAKANDA #

away by the ten-headed ogre, to his own
destruction. (11)

न च सीतां दशग्रीव: प्राप्नोति जनकात्मजाम्।
ae बलवता वैरमश्षयं राघवेण च॥१२॥

“The ten-headed monster, however, will
not be able to lay his hands on Sita, Janaka’s
daughter, although undying enmity has been
contracted by him with the mighty Rama, a
scion of Raghu. (12)
वैदेहीं प्रार्थयानं तं विराधं ter राक्षसम्।
हतमेकेन रामेण पर्याप्तं तन्निदर्शनम्॥१३॥

“On perceiving the notorious ogre
Viradha solicitous of Sita (a princess of the
Videha territory) the fellow was made short
work of by Rama _ single-handed. That
example should have proved _ sufficient
to convince Ravana of Rama’s invincibility.

(13)

चतुर्दश सहस्राणि रक्षसां भीमकर्मणाम्।
निहतानि जनस्थाने शरैरग्निशिखोपमै:॥ ex

“Nay, aS many as fourteen thousand
of ogres of terrible deeds were destroyed
by Rama in Janasthana with his arrows
resembling tongues of fire. (14)

ara निहत: संख्ये दूषणस्तिशिरास्तथा।
शरैरादित्यसंकाशै: पर्याप्तं तन्निदर्शनम्॥ eu i
“Khara too was struck down in combat
as also Dusana and Trisira with his shafts
which shone brightly like the sun. That
example too should have been sufficient to
open the eyes of Ravana. (15)

हतो योजनबाहुश्च कबन्धो रुधिराशन:।
क्रोधान्नादं नदन् सोऽथ पर्याप्तं तन्निदर्शनम्॥ १६॥

“The notorious Kabandha too, whose
arms were a Yojana (eight miles) long,
nay, who lived on blood, and came roaring
in wrath, was dispatched forthwith.
His example too should have been
sufficient to prove Rama’s extraordinary
might. (16)

703

जघान बलिनं राम: सहस्रनयनात्मजम्।
वालिनं मेरुसंकाशं पर्याप्तं तन्निदर्शनम्॥१७॥
“Rama also killed the mighty Vall,
sprung from the loins of Indra (the thousand-
eyed god), who resembled Mount Meru
in size. His example too should have been
sufficient to serve as an eye-opener to
Ravana. (17)

ऋष्यमूके वसंश्चैव दीनो भग्नमनोरथ:।
सुग्रीव: प्रापितो राज्यं watt तन्निदर्शनम्॥१८॥
“Living disconsolate on Mount
Rsyamuka, his ambitions dashed to pieces,
Sugriva too was restored to the throne.
That example too should have proved
sufficient to make Ravana realize the
greatness of Rama. (18)

धर्मार्थसहितं वाक्यं सर्वेषां रक्षसां हितम्।
युक्तं विभीषणेनोक्तं मोहात् तस्य न रोचते॥१९॥
“The reasonable advice tendered by
Vibhisana, which was not only in consonance
with righteousness but redounded to the
worldly interest of Ravana, nay, which was
conducive to the good of all the ogres, did
not find favour with Ravana due to his folly.
(19)

विभीषणवच: pate यदि स्म धनदानुज:।
ऽमशानभूता दु:खार्ता नेयं लङ्का भविष्यति॥ २०॥
“Had Ravana, the younger brother of
Kubera, followed the advice of Vibhisana,
this city of Lanka would not have been
afflicted with sorrow and turned a
crematorium. (20)

कुम्भकर्णं st श्रुत्वा राघवेण महाबलम्।
अतिकायं च दुर्मर्षं लक्ष्मणेन हतं तदा।
fra चेन्द्रजितं Ga रावणो नावबुध्यते॥ २१॥
“Ravana has not realized the greatness
of Rama even on hearing of Kumbhakarna,
who was endowed with extraordinary might,
having been killed by Rama, a scion of
Raghu, as well as Atikaya, who was difficult
