# YUDDHAKANDA +

the host of ogres on that occasion, the
resolute and valiant Angada (son of Tara)
voluntarily allowed himself to be seized by
the ogres. (85)

a तान् बाहुद्वयासक्तानादाय पतगानिव।
प्रासादं शैलसंकाशमुत्पपाताङ्गदस्तदा Ul ८६ A
Taking with him the four ogres clung to
his arms like so many birds, the aforesaid
Angada then leapt on to the roof of the
palace, which stood like a mountain. (86)

तस्योत्पतनवेगेन निर्धूतास्तत्र राक्षसा:।
भूमौ निपतिता: Wad राक्षसेन्द्रस्य पश्यत:॥८७॥

Violently shaken by the impetuosity of
his bound, all the four ogres fell to the
ground, while Ravana (the ruler of ogres)
stood looking on. (87)

ad: प्रासादशिखरं शैलशृङ्गमिवोन्नतम्।
चक्राम राक्षसेन्द्रस्य वालिपुत्र: प्रतापवान्॥८८॥

Thereupon the glorious Angada, son of
Vali, set his feet on the top of the palace of
Ravana (the ruler of ogres), which was lofty
as a mountain-peak. (88)

qa हिमवत: ag वज्रेणेव विदारितम्॥८९॥

Nay, trampled by Angada, the top of
the palace cleft asunder—even as a peak
of the Himalayan range did of yore when

riven by the thunderbolt—while Ravana, the
ten-headed monster, stood gazing on. (89)

भङ्क्त्वा प्रासादशिखरं नाम विश्राव्य चात्मन: |
fatal सुमहानादमुत्पपात विहायसा॥९०॥
Having shattered the top of the palace,
nay, proclaiming his own name, and emitting
a terrible roar, Angada rose into the air.
(90)

व्यथयन् राक्षसान् सर्वान् हर्षयंश्चापि वानरान्।
स वानराणां मध्ये तु रामपार्श्वमुपागत:॥९१॥
Causing pain to all the ogres and
delighting the monkeys at the same

441

time, Angada for his part returned to the
presence of Sri Rama in the midst of the
monkeys. (91)

रावणस्तु परं चक्रे क्रोधं प्रासादधर्षणात्।
विनाशं चात्मन: पश्यन् नि:श्चासपरमोऽभवत्॥ ९२॥
Ravana, on the other hand, exhibited
great anger at the assault on his palace.
Nay, foreseeing his own destruction, he
gave himself up to sighing. (92)

रामस्तु बहुभिर्हृष्टैर्विनदद्धि: प्लवङ्गमै:।
ad रिपुवधाकाङ्क्षी युद्धायैवाभ्यवर्तत॥ ९३॥

Surrounded by numerous monkeys,
who were roaring jubilantly, Sr’ Rama for
his part, who was keen to destroy his enemy,
pressed on for war alone. (93)

सुषेणस्तु महावीर्यो गिरिकूटोपमो हरि:।
बहुभि: संव्रृतस्तत्र art: कामरूपिभि:। ९४॥
The monkey, Susena, for his part, who
was endowed with extraordinary virility and
looked like a mountain-peak in size, stood
close to Lanka, surrounded by numerous
monkeys who were able to change their

form at will. (94)

स तु द्वाराणि संयम्य सुग्रीववचनात् कपि:।

पर्यक्रामत दुर्धर्षो नक्षत्राणीव चन्द्रमा:॥ ९५॥
Controlling all the four gates of

Lanka, the monkey for his part, who was
hard to overcome, patrolled under orders
of Sugriva all the entrances even as the
moon moves amidst the lunar mansions.
(95)

तेषामक्षौहिणिशतं wader वनौकसाम्।
लङ्कामुपनिविष्टानां सागरं चाभिवर्तताम्॥९६॥

Tare विस्मयं जग्मुस्त्रासं जग्मुस्तथापरे।
अपरे समरे हर्षाद्धर्षमेवोपपेदिरे।। ९७॥
The ogres were wonderstruck to
observe a hundred Aksauhinis of the
aforesaid monkeys, stationed round about
Lanka, laying siege to it, and extending up
to the sea; nay, others gay way to alarm;
