* ARANYAKANDA «

“Coming to this hermitage, large herds
of deer roam everywhere; they return without
harming anyone and having lured everyone
with their beauty. (18)

नान्यो दोषो भवेदत्र मृगेभ्योऽन्यत्र विद्धि a1
तच्छृत्वा वचनं तस्य महर्षेर्लक्ष्मणाग्रज:॥१९॥
उवाच वचनं धीरो विगृह्य सशरं धनु:।
até सुमहाभाग मृगसंघान् समागतान्॥ २०॥
हन्यां निशितधारेण शरेणानतपर्वणा।
भवांस्तत्राभिषज्येत किं स्यात् कृच्छ्रतरं तत:॥ २१॥

“Rest assured that there will be no
disturbance here except that from the frolicking
deer.” Hearing that speech of the great sage,
the valiant elder brother of Laksmana uttered
the following words picking up the bow with
arrow: “O highly fortunate sage, if perchance
| happen to kill those herds of deer collected
here with an arrow of sharp edge, bent at the
joint, you will be insulted thereby; what could
be more painful than that? (19—21)

731

एतस्मिन्नाश्रमे वासं fat तु न समर्थये।
तमेवमुक्त्वोपरमं राम: संध्यामुपागमत्॥ २२॥
“Hence | don’t favour a long stay in this
hermitage.” Saying thus to him, Rama stopped
short and left for the evening worship. (22)
अन्वास्य पश्चिमां deat तत्र वासमकल्पयत्।
सुतीक्ष्णस्याश्रमे रम्ये सीतया लक्ष्मणेन AN २३॥
Having performed the evening worship,
he took up his abode there in the charming

hermitage of Sutiksna, together with Sita
and Laksmana. (23)

संध्यानिव्रत्तौ रजनीं समीक्ष्य॥ २४॥

Then at the close of evening, seeing
the nightfall, the high-souled Sutiksna himself
honoured those jewels among men and
offered them pious food fit for ascetics. (24)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्येऽरण्यकाण्डे FAA: सर्ग: ॥ ७॥

Thus ends Canto Seven in the Aranyakanda of the glorious Ramayana of Valmiki,
the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

Canto VII

In the morning Rama, together with Laksmana and Sita,
takes leave of Sutiksna and departs

रामस्तु सहसौमित्रि: सुतीक्ष्णेनाभिपूजित:।
परिणाम्य निशां at प्रभाते प्रत्यबुध्यत॥ १॥

Honoured by Sutiksna, Rama for his
part together with Laksmana passed the
night there and got up in the morning. (1)

उत्थाय च यथाकालं Waa: Ge सीतया।
उपस्पृश्य सुशीतेन तोयेनोत्पलगन्धिना॥ २॥
Getting up at the proper time, Rama
together with Sita bathed in pleasantly cold
water fragrant with the scent of lotuses.

(2)

अथ ash aida acd रामलक्ष्मणौ।
काल्यं विधिवदभ्यर्च्य तपस्विशरणे वने॥३॥
उदयन्तं दिनकरं दृष्टवा विगतकल्मषा:।
सुतीक्ष्णमभिगम्येदं श्लक्ष्णं वचनमब्रुवन्॥४॥

Then they—Rama, Laksmana_ and
Sita—who were free from sins, worshipped
in time the fire and other gods according to
the rites, in the forest resorted to by ascetics
and, having seen the rising sun and going
to Sutiksna, uttered the following sweet
words: (3-4)
