500

Even as the Commander-in-Chief
departed, a roll of kettledrums, which
resembled the rumbling of clouds, as well
as a blast of fanfares, which seemed to fill
the earth, as also a blast of conches was
forthwith heard. Emitting fearful cries, gigantic
ogres of terrible aspect and marching in
front of Prahasta proceeded in the van.
Narantaka, Kumbhahanu, Mahanada and
Samunnata—these four adjutants of Prahasta,
also sallied forth, surrounding him on all
sides. (18—30)

aera सुघोरेण पूर्वद्वारात् स निर्ययौ।
गजयूथनिकाशेन बलेन महता वृत:॥३१॥

Surrounded by a mighty force, which
stood already disposed in battle-array and
was exceedingly formidable, and which
closely resembled a herd of elephants, he
emerged from the eastern gate. (31)

सागरप्रतिमौघेन aa बलेन स:।
प्रहस्तो Peat क्रुद्ध: कालान्तकयमोपम:॥ ३२॥
Surrounded by that army, consisting of
a stream of ogres which resembled the sea
in its vastness, Prahasta, who looked like
Kala (the Time-Spirit), Antaka (Death) and
Yama (the god of retribution), sallied forth in
rage. (32)

तस्य निर्याणघोषेण राक्षसानां च नर्दताम्।
लङ्कायां सर्वभूतानि विनेदुर्विकृतै: स्वरै:।॥ ३३॥
At the sound of kettledrums etc., beaten
at the time of his departure as also at the
noise of the roaring ogres, all created beings
in Lanka began to shriek in unnatural tones.
(33)

व्यभ्रमाकाशमाविश्य मांसशोणितभोजना:।
मण्डलान्यपसव्यानि खगाश्चक्रू रथं प्रति॥ ३४॥
Rising in the air, birds subsisting on
flesh and blood circled anti-clockwise round
the chariot. (34)

वमन्त्य: पावकज्वाला: शिवा GAT ववाशिरे।
अन्तरिक्षात् पपातोल्का वायुश्च परुषं ववौ॥ ३५॥

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA +

Vomiting forth tongues of fire, fearful
she-jackals howled. A meteor fell from the
heavens and a piercing wind blew. (35)

अन्योन्यमभिसंरब्धा ग्रहाश्च न चकाशिरे।
मेघाश्च खरनिर्घोषा रथस्योपरि रक्षस:॥३६॥

aad रुधिरं ura सिषिचुश्च पुर:सरान्।
केतुमूर्धनि गृध्रस्तु विलीनो दक्षिणामुख:॥ ३७॥

नदन्नुभयत: ure समग्रां श्रियमाहरत्।
सारथेर्बहुशश्चास्य संग्राममवगाहत: ॥ ३८ ॥

प्रतोदो न्यपतद्भधस्तात् सूतस्य हयसादिन:।
निर्याणश्रीश्च या च Bg भास्वरा च सुदुर्लभा Ul ३९॥

सा ननाश मुहूर्तेन समे च स्खलिता हया:।

प्रहस्तं तं हि निर्यान्तं प्रख्यातगुणपौरुषम्।
युधि नानाप्रहरणा कपिसेनाभ्यवर्तत॥४०॥
Nay, knitted against one another,
planets did not shine brightly. Again, making
a sound resembling the braying of a donkey,
clouds showered blood on the chariot of the
ogre and drenched those marching in front
of him. A croaking vulture, on the other
hand, perched facing the south, on the top
of its standard scratching both its sides and
thereby snatched away his entire good
fortune. Nay, the whip slipped again and
again from the hand of his charioteer, a
Suta (the son of a Ksatriya by a Brahmana
woman), busy controlling the horses, even
as he entered the battlefield. That rare
resplendent lustre which clothed Prahasta
at the time of his leaving, disappeared in a
moment and his horses stumbled even
on the level ground. Equipped with
various weapons, the simian army actually
went forward to meet in combat Prahasta,
whose excellences and manliness were
widely known, even as he sallied forth.
(36—40)

अथ ae: सुतुमुलो हरीणां समजायत।
वृक्षानारुजतां चैव Weta गृह्णतां शिला:॥४१॥

An exceedingly tumultuous clamour
forthwith arose among the monkeys even
