+ UTTARAKANDA +

Hearing these nectar-like words of
Bharata, Sri Rama of true valour was
extremely pleased and said these auspicious
words to the enhancer of the joy of Kaikeyi,
Bharata: ‘I am pleased and satisfied today
at what you say, O sinless one. (16-17)
इदं वचनमक्लीबं त्वया धर्मसमागतम्।
ced पुरुषव्याघ्र पृथिव्या: परिपालनम्॥१८॥

‘These words spoken by you are potent
and accompanied by righteousness. O tiger
among men, as they relate to the protection
of the earth. (18)

एष्यदस्मदभिप्रायाद् राजसूयात् क्रतूत्तमात्।
निवर्तयामि wit तव सुव्याहृतेन च॥१९॥

1083

‘| refrain, after what you have said,
from the performance of the excellent
sacrifice, Rajasuya, that was our intention,
O Knower of Dharma (Law). (19)
लोकपीडाकरं कर्म न कर्तव्यं विचक्षणै: |
बालानां तु शुभं वाक्यं Wet लक्ष्मणपूर्वज।
तस्माच्छृणोमि ते वाक्यं साधु युक्तं महाबल॥ Ro Il

‘That action is not to be undertaken by
the wise which causes pain to the worlds, O
elder brother of Laksmana. The words even
of the young ones are worthy of acceptance
if they are carrier of good. Therefore, | have
listened to your sagacious talk, O mighty
one; you have spoken so well.’ (20)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये उत्तरकाण्डे त्र्यशीतितम: सर्ग: ॥ C3 Il

Thus ends Canto Ejighty-three in the Uttarakanda of the glorious Ramayana of Valmiki,
the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

Canto LXXXIV
Laksmana advises Sri Rama to perform Asvamedha sacrifice and

narrates the story of Indra and Vrtra. Vrtra’s penance
and Indra’s appeal to Visnu to kill him

तथोक्कवति wa q wd च महात्मनि।
लक्ष्मणोऽथ शुभं वाक्यमुवाच रघुनन्दनम्॥१॥
When Sri Rama and the noble Bharata

had spoken thus, Laksmana addressed
these auspicious words to Sri Rama: (1)

अश्वमेधो महायज्ञ: Wet: सर्वपाप्मनाम्।
पावनस्तव दुर्धर्षो रोचतां रघुनन्दन॥२॥
“O descendant of Raghu, the great
sacrifice, ASvamedha, is the purifier of all
sins and shall be your purifier, although
difficult to perform, if you so please. (2)

gat fe Wat वासवे सुमहात्मनि।
aaeadd: wel हयमेधेन पावित:॥ ३॥

“The legend about the very noble
Vasava (Indra) is heard, that Indra tainted

by the sin of the killing of Brahmana was
purified by the Horse-sacrifice. (3)

qa किल महाबाहो देवासुरसमागमे।
gal नाम महानासीद् दैतेयो लोकसम्मत:॥४॥

“In the ancient times, O one of long
arms, in the struggle that ensued between
the gods and demons, there happened to be
the mighty Vrtra, son of Diti, honoured by
the worlds. (4)

विस्तीर्णो योजनशतमुच्छितस्तिगुणं तत:।
अनुरागेण लोकांस्त्रीन् स्नेहात् पश्यति सर्वत:।॥ ५॥
“A hundred Yojanas horizontally and
thrice in height, he out of affection for three
worlds, looked on all beings with compassion.

(5)
