7३4

एतन्निमित्तं च at दण्डका gia विश्रुतम्।
प्रस्थितस्त्वं सह WAT धृतबाणशरासन:॥११॥
“O hero, you have undertaken a vow to
kill the ogres on the battlefield for the protection
of sages living in the Dandaka forest; and for
this very purpose you have set out with arrows
and a bow towards the forest well-known as
Dandaka, with your brother. (10-11)
ततस्त्वां प्रस्थितं gear मम चिन्ताकुलं A: |
त्वद्वृत्तं चिन्तयन्त्या वै भवेन्नि:श्रेयसं हितम्॥ १२॥

“Hence, seeing you on your way to the
Dandaka, my mind is perturbed with anxiety,
thinking of your imminent doings and of
your highest well-being and worldly interests.

(12)
ae मे Wad वीर गमनं दण्डकान् प्रति।
कारणं तत्र वक्ष्यामि वदन्त्या: saat मम॥ १३॥

“| do not like, O hero, your going towards

the Dandaka. | shall tell you the reason for
that; while | speak of it, please listen. (13)

त्वं fe बाणधनुष्पाणिभ्रीत्रा सह वनं गत:।
दृष्टवा वनचरान् सर्वान् कच्चित् कुर्या: शरव्ययम्॥ १४॥
“When you go to the forest with arrows
and bow in hand together with your brother
and see all kinds of animals in the forest,
you may perhaps shoot an arrow somewhere.
(14)

क्षत्रियाणामिह धनुर्हुताशस्येन्धनानि a
समीपत: स्थितं तेजोबलमुच्छ्यते भृशम्॥ १५॥

“The bow and the fuel when placed
near the warriors and a fire, respectively,
greatly enhance their strength in this world.

(15)
पुरा किल महाबाहो तपस्वी सत्यवान् शुचि:।
कस्मिंश्चिदभवत् पुण्ये at रतमृगद्विजे॥१६॥

“They say, formerly, O mighty-armed
prince, there was a truthful and pious ascetic
in some holy forest, where animals and
birds lived in joy. (16)
तस्यैव तपसो fast कर्तुमिन्द्र: शचीपति:।
ख्ड्गपाणिरथागच्छदाश्रमं भटरूपधूक॥ १७॥

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

“Then, only to create obstruction in his
austerities, Indra, the lord of Sacil, in the
guise of a soldier, came to the hermitage,
sword in hand. (17)

तस्मिंस्तदाश्रमपदे निहित: Get उत्तम:।
a न्यासविधिना aa: qua तपसि तिष्ठत:॥ १८॥

“He kept the excellent sword in the
precincts of his hermitage. It was given as
a deposit to the sage, who was keeping
himself busy with holy austerities. (18)

a तच्छस्त्रमनुप्राप्य न्यासरक्षणतत्पर: |

at तु विचरत्येव रक्षन् प्रत्ययमात्मन:॥१९॥
“Getting that weapon दापे being

constantly mindful of guarding the deposit,

he wandered even in the forest keeping the
trust with him. (19)

यत्र गच्छत्युपादातुं मूलानि च फलानि च।

न विना याति तं खड्गं न्यासरक्षणतत्पर:॥ २०॥
“Wherever he went even to bring roots

and fruits, he would not go without that

sword, being ever mindful of guarding the

trust. (20)

Pret शस्त्रं परिवहन् क्रमेण स तपोधन:।

चकारररौद्रीं स्वां बुद्धिंत्यक्त्वा तपसि निश्चयम्॥ २१॥
“Constantly carrying the weapon as he

did, that ascetic’s mind turned cruel in course

of time, giving up his determination to carry
on his austerities. (21)

wa: स रौद्राभिरत: प्रमत्तोऽधर्मकर्षित:।
wea शस्त्रस्य संवासाज्जगाम नरकं APA WRU
“Then, while taking pleasure in cruelty
due to the company of that weapon, the
said sage became negligent, was led astray
by ‘Adharma’ and descended into hell. (22)
अग्निसंयोगवद्धेतुअ शस्त्रसंयोग उच्यते॥२३॥
“This is what happened in the past as
a result of association with that weapon.
Association with a weapon is said to be of
the same consequence as is the association
with fire. (23)
