« KISKINDHAKANDA +

Saying so and lifting in sport the carcass
of Dundubhi with his toe, the mighty-armed
and powerful Sri Rama (a scion of Raghu),
the eldest brother of Laksmana, for his part
hurled the dried up skeleton of the demon to
a distance of ten Yojanas (eighty-miles),
thereby reassuring Sugriva. (84-85)

faa Gear da: कायं सुग्रीव: पुनरब्रवीत्।
लक्ष्मणस्याग्रतो रामं तपन्तमिव भास्करम्।
हरीणामग्रतो वीरमिदं वचनमर्थवत्॥८६॥
Beholding the skeleton cast away by
Sri Rama, Sugriva then addressed once
more to the heroic Sri Rama, scorching as
the sun, in the presence of Laksmana as
well as of the other monkeys the following
significant words : (86)

आर्द्र: समांस: प्रत्यग्र: क्षिप्त: काय: TT सखे।
परिश्रान्तेन मत्तेन wat A afer तदा॥ ८७॥

“The carcass was thrown in the past,
O my friend, while it was saturated with
blood, full of flesh and fresh, having been
shortly before killed by my elder brother,
Vali, at a time when he was exhausted and
drunk. (87)
aq: watt निर्मांसस्तृणभूतश्च राघव।
faa एवं प्रहर्षेण भवता रघुनन्दन॥८८॥
“Having been stripped of its flesh, it is
now light and converted into mere straw,
as compared to its former weight, O scion
of Raghu, and has been hurled by you
with such extreme joy, O delight of Raghu !
(88)

नात्र शक्यं बलं ज्ञातुं तव वा तस्य वाधिकम्।
ams शुष्कमिति ह्येतत् सुमहद् राघवान्तरम्॥ ८९॥

“It is not possible under the
circumstances to ascertain whose strength
is greater—yours or his; for whether a

975

carcass is saturated with blood or dried up
makes a very great difference, O scion of
Raghu ! (89)

स Wa संशयस्तात तव तस्य च यद्बलम्।
सालमेकं विनिर्भिद्य भवेद व्यक्तिर्बलाबले॥ ९०॥

“The same doubt still lingers in my
mind about the strength which inheres in
you as well as in Vali, O dear friend!
Certainly in the matter of your relative strength
or weakness will be arrived at by your
thoroughly piercing a single sal tree (of the
seven trees shown to you). (90)
कृत्वैतत् कार्मुकं सज्यं हस्तिहस्तमिवाततम्।
आकर्णपूर्णमायम्य विसृजस्व महाशरम्॥९१॥

“Stringing this bow, which is like another
trunk of an elephant, and stretching it at full
length up to your ear, discharge a big arrow.

(91)
Ba fe सालं प्रहितस्त्वया शरो
न संशयोऽत्रास्ति विदारयिष्यति।
कुरूष्वराजन्प्रतिशापितोमया।। ९२॥

“Shot by you, the arrow will surely split
up the yonder sal tree: there is no doubt
about it. Reflect no more and, adjured by
me, O king, oblige me unhesitatingly. (92)

यथा fe तेज:सु at: सदा रवि-
Gor fe शैलो हिमवान् महाद्रिषु।
यथा ACUI च केसरी वर-
स्तथा नराणामसि विक्रमे वर:॥ ९३॥

“Even as the sun is always the foremost
of all luminaries, even as the Himalaya
mountain is the foremost of all large mountains
and even as a lion is the foremost of all
quadrupeds, so are you the foremost of all
human beings in prowess.” (93)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये किष्किन्धाकाण्डे THIET: सर्ग: ॥ ११ ॥

Thus ends Canto Eleven in the Kiskindhakanda of the glorious Ramayana of Valmiki,
the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

