322

ख्रो यद्यतिव्रत्तस्तु स रामेण हतो रणे।
अवश्यं प्राणिनां प्राणा रक्षितव्या यथाबलम्॥ १४॥
“If it is urged in reply that Ravana
abducted Rama’s wife because Rama had
killed Khara, our half-brother, my rejoinder
is that Khara was made short work of by
Rama in an encounter because the former
had, for his part, gone beyond his limits,
in that he had attacked Rama in the
latters own hermitage. Life needs must be
protected by living beings according to their
might. (14)

एतन्निमित्तं वैदेही भयं न: सुमहद् भवेत्।
Set सा परित्याज्या कलहार्थे Ha नु किम्॥ १५ ॥

“If Sita, a princess of the Videha
territory, was borne away because of
this grudge, she deserves to be yielded
up inasmuch as she may prove to be a
peril to us. What on earth will be gained if
anything is done which has strife for its
object? (15)

Tq aad वीर्यवता तेन धर्मानुवर्तिना।
at निरर्थकं कर्तुं दीयतामस्य मैथिली॥१६॥

“It is not at all desirable to make enmity
without any purpose with that powerful
prince, who follows the moral code. Sita, a
princess of Mithila, may, therefore, be
restored to him. (16)
Wet सगजां साश्वां बहुरत्नसमाकुलाम्।
पुरीं दारयते बाणैर्दीयतामस्य मैथिली॥१७॥

“Let Sita, a princess of Mithila, be
made over to him before he tears asunder
with his arrows Lanka, full of many precious
stones, with its elephants and _ horses.

(17)
यावत् सुघोरा महती geet हरिवाहिनी।
नावस्कन्दति नो लङ्कां तावत् सीता प्रदीयताम्॥ १८ A

“Let Sita be given back to Rama

before the huge army of monkeys, which is
most formidable and difficult to overpower,

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA +

besieges Lanka.
विनश्येद्धि पुरी लङ्का शूरा: Aa च राक्षसा:।
रामस्य दयिता पत्नी न स्वयं यदि दीयते॥१९॥

“If the beloved consort of Rama is not
restored of your own accord, the city of
Lanka as well as all the heroic ogres will
surely perish. (19)
प्रसादये त्वां बन्धुत्वात् कुरुष्व वचनं मम।
fed तथ्यं we aft दीयतामस्य मैथिली॥ २०॥

“| seek to propitiate you because of
your being my _ relation; pray, follow
my counsel. | suggest only that which is
true and conducive to your good: let Sita,
a princess of Mithila, be surrendered
to Rama. (20)

पुरा

(18)

शरत्सूर्यमरीचिसंनिभान्
नवाग्रपुङ्खान् सुदृढान् नृपात्मज:।
सृजत्यमोघान् विशिखान् वधाय ते
प्रदीयतां दाशरथाय मैथिली॥ २१॥

“Let Sita, a princess of Mithila, be
restored to Rama (son of Dasaratha)
before the prince looses for your destruction
most stiff and unfailing arrows, shining
brightly like the rays of the autumnal sun
and provided with new heads and shafts.

(21)
त्यजाशु कोपं
भजस्व धर्मं रतिकीर्तिवर्धनम्।
प्रसीद जीवेम सपुत्रबान्धवा:
प्रदीयतां दाशरथाय मैथिली॥ २२॥

“Pray, renounce at once anger, which
destroys happiness and virtues. Pursue
righteousness, which enhances joy and
fame. Be pacified, so that we may survive
with our sons and relations; and let Sita, a
princess of Mithila, be restored to Rama
(son of Dasaratha).” (22)

विभीषणवच: श्रुत्वा रावणो राक्षसेश्वर:।
विसर्जयित्वा तान् सर्वान् प्रविवेश स्वकं गृहम्॥ २३॥
