# YUDDHAKANDA #

Remaining unperplexed, Laksmana, the
tamer of his enemies, for his part intercepted
the aforesaid hail of shafts, let loose by
Indrajit, even though it was most difficult to
resist. (23)
संदर्शयामास तदा रावणिं रघुनन्दन:।
असम्भ्रान्तो महातेजास्तदद्भुतमिवाभवत्॥ २४॥

Not the least unnerved, Laksmana
(the delight of the Raghus), who was
endowed with extraordinary energy, then
demonstrated to Indrajit (son of Ravana)
his prowess, which was marvellous indeed.

(24)

राक्षसेन्द्रसुतं चापि बाणौघै: समताडयत्॥ २५॥

Getting extremely enraged, Laksmana
thereupon pierced all the aforesaid ogres
who stood on the battlefield with three arrows
each, thereby manifesting his fleetness in
discharging missiles, and also hit Indrajit
(son of the ruler of ogres) hard with streams
of arrows. (25)

सोऽतिविद्धो बलवता शात्रुणा शत्रुघातिना।
असक्तं प्रेषयामास लक्ष्मणाय बहून् शरान्॥ २६॥
Grievously wounded by his mighty
enemy, Laksmana, the destroyer of enemies,
he ceaselessly directed a number of arrows
at Laksmana. (26)

तानप्राप्तान् शितैर्बाणैश्चिच्छेद परवीरहा।
सारथेरस्य च रणे रथिनो रथसत्तम:॥ २७॥
fort wer eater भल्लेनानतपर्वणा।
असूतास्ते हयास्तत्र रथमूहुरविक्लवा:॥ २८॥
मण्डलान्यभिधावन्ति तदद्भुतमिवाभवत्।
अमर्षवशमापन्न: सौमित्रिर्दृढविक्रम: i २९॥
प्रत्यविध्यद्धयांस्तस्य शरैर्वित्रासयन् रणे।
अमर्षमाणस्तत्कर्म रावणस्य सुतो रणे॥३०॥

683

विव्याध दशभिर्बाणै: सौमित्रिं तममर्षणम्।

a तस्य वज्रप्रतिमा: शरा: सर्पविषोपमा:।
विलयं जग्मुरागत्य Had काञ्चनप्रभम्॥ ३१॥
Laksmana the destroyer of hostile
champions, the foremost of car-warriors,
whose mind was set on virtue, tore with his
sharp arrows the aforesaid shafts even
before they reached him and with a flat-
pointed arrow belonging to the species
known by the name of Bhalla he cut off on
the battlefield the head of the charioteer of
that car-warrior, Indrajit. Though left without
a charioteer, the aforesaid horses of Indrajit’s
chariot continued to draw the chariot on
the field of battle without getting perplexed
and describing circles even as_ they
advanced. That was marvellous indeed.
Swayed by wrath, Laksmana (son of Sumitra)
of untiring prowess pierced the horses of
Indrajit with arrows, thus throwing them into
panic on the battlefield. Intolerant of the
aforesaid act (of Laksmana), the son of
Ravana pierced the aforesaid indignant son
of Sumitra with ten arrows on the battlefield.
Those arrows of Indrajit, which resembled
thunderbolts and were deadly as the venom
of a serpent, gave way on reaching the
Laksmana’s armour, which shone like gold.
(27—31)

अभेद्यकवचं मत्वा लक्ष्मणं रावणात्मज:।
ललाटे लक्ष्मणं बाणै: सुपुङ्खैस्त्रिभिरिन्द्रजित्॥ ३२॥

अविध्यत् परमक्रुद्ध: शीघ्रमस्त्रं प्रदर्शयन्।
a: पृषत्कैर्ललाटस्थै: शुशुभे रघुनन्दन:॥ ३३॥

रणाग्रे समरश्लाघी frye ga पर्वत:।
a तथाप्यर्दितो बाणै राक्षसेन तदा मृधे॥ ३४॥

तमाशु प्रतिविव्याध लक्ष्मण: पञ्जभि: शरै:।
विकृष्येन्द्रजितो युद्धे AGT शुभकुण्डले॥ ३५॥

Believing Laksmana to be protected
by an impenetrable coat of mail* and

* We have already seen in LXXXVIII. 57 above how the mighty celestial armour of Laksmana was

shattered by Indrajit. It is presumed on the strength of this verse that he had in the meantime provided himself

with another impenetrable coat of mail.
