+ UTTARAKANDA +

there lived a famous and powerful Brahmarsi,
Pulastya by name, a son of Brahma and the
very like of the creator himself. (4)

arenteat गुणास्तस्य धर्मत: शीलतस्तथा।
प्रजापते: पुत्र इति वक्तुं शक्यं fe नामत:॥७५॥
“It is not possible to praise the qualities
pertaining to his righteousness and character.
They speak for themselves when it is just
stated that he was a son of the creator. (5)

प्रजापतिसुतत्वेन cami acct fe स:।
Be: सर्वस्य लोकस्य गुणै: शुभ्रैर्महामति:॥६॥
“By virtue of his being a son of the
creator, he became the favourite of gods;
by reason of his pure qualities, this great
intellectual endeared himself to all people.

(6)
aq धर्मप्रसङ्गेन मेरो: usd महागिरे:।
तृणबिन्द्वाश्रमं गत्वाप्यवसन्मुनिपुङ्खव: ।॥ ७॥

“That jewel among sages, being an
ardent votary of Dharma, went to the

hermitage of Trnabindu on the slopes of
Mount Meru, and lived there. (7)

तपस्तेषे स धर्मात्मा स्वाध्यायनियतेन्द्रिय:।
गत्वाऽऽश्रमपदं तस्य विघ्नं कुर्वन्ति कन्यका:॥ ८॥
ऋषिपन्नगकन्याश्च राजर्षितनयाश्च या:।
क्रीडन्त्योऽप्सरसश्चैव तं देशमुपपेदिरि॥९॥
सर्वर्तुषूपभोग्यत्वाद् रम्यत्वात् AMAT च।
नित्यशस्तास्तु तं देशं गत्वा क्रीडन्ति कन्यका: ।। १० ॥
देशस्य रमणीयत्वात् पुलस्त्यो यत्र स द्विज:।
गायन्त्यो वादयन्त्यश्च लासयन्त्यस्तथैव च॥११॥
मुनेस्तपस्विनस्तस्य विघ्नं चक्रुरनिन्दिता:।
BAA रुष्टो महातेजा व्याजहार महामुनि:।॥१२॥
या मे दर्शनमागच्छेत् सा गर्भं धारयिष्यति।
तास्तु सर्वा: प्रतिश्रुत्य तस्य वाक्यं महात्मन: 11 १३॥
ब्रह्मशापभयाद् भीतास्तं देशं नोपचक्रमु:।
तृणबिन्दोस्तु राजर्षेस्तनया न yu तत्॥१४॥
गत्वाऽऽश्रमपदं तत्र विचचार सुनिर्भया।
न चापश्यच्च सा तत्र कांचिदभ्यागतां सखीम्॥ १५ Il
“This Dharmatma, highly self-controlled
and intent on studying the Vedas, was

849

performing Tapas (askesis). That place,
thickly studded with trees, was quite charming
and enjoyable in all the seasons (of the
year). That is why maidens belonging to the
family of seers, Nagas and kings, as also
celestial nymphs resorted to that region
everyday, sang, sported, played on musical
instruments, and danced and thus caused
obstruction, though in an innocent manner,
to the sage, who was performing Tapas.
That sage, of great fame, got enraged and
said, ‘She, on whom my eyes fall, will become
enceinte’. Hearing these words of the high-
souled seer, those maidens never came to
that place, being afraid of the curse of the
Brahmana. “The daughter of the royal sage,
Trnabindu, however, did not hear this and
went to the Asrama and roamed about
fearlessly, but did not see any of her
companions arrived. (8—15)

तस्मिन् काले महातेजा: प्राजापत्यो महानृषि: ।
स्वाध्यायमकरोत् तत्र तपसा भावित: स्वयम्॥ १६॥

“At that time that great seer, a son of
the creator and of great lustre, was studying
the Vedas. He had been rendered lustrous
by strict discipline (Tapas). (16)

सा तु वेदश्रुतिं श्रुत्वा दृष्टवा वै तपसो निधिम्।
अभवत् पाण्डुदेहा सा सुव्यञ्जितशरीरजा॥ १७॥

“She heard the recitation of the Vedas
and also saw the repository of Tapas. With
a clear indication of pregnancy, she became
pale all over the body at once. (17)

aya च समुद्विग्ना geal तद्दोषमात्मन:।
इदं मे किंत्वितिज्ञात्वा पितुर्गत्वाऽऽश्रमे स्थिता i १८ ॥

“Seeing that transformation, she became
extremely anxious. Saying to herself, ‘I do
not understand what this means !’ she then
went to her father’s ASrama and stood before
him. (18)

तां तु दृष्ट्वा तथाभूतां तृणबिन्दुरथाब्रवीत्।
fe त्वमेतत्त्वसदृशं धारयस्यात्मनो वपु:॥१९॥

“Seeing her thus changed’ Trnabindu
