# YUDDHAKANDA #

Bharadwaja after spending at the instance
of the sage with him the night of the fifth
lunar day of the bright half of the month of
ASswina.” (24)
एवमुक्त्वा महातेजा: सम्प्रहृष्टतनूरुह:।
उत्पपात महावेगाद् वेगवानविचारयन्॥ २५॥
Saying so, not minding the fatigue of
the journey, the swift-moving Hanuman, who
was endowed with extraordinary energy,
sprang forward with great impetuosity, his
hair standing erect for joy at the thought of
his being of some little service to Sri Rama,
the Delight of the universe. (25)

सोऽपश्यद् रामतीर्थं च नदीं वालुकिनीं तथा।
ae गोमतीं चैव भीमं शालवनं तथा॥ २६॥
प्रजाश्च बहुसाहस्री: स्फीताञ्जनपदानपि।
स गत्वा दूरमध्वानं त्वरित: कपिकुञ्जर:॥ २७॥
आससाद द्रुमान् फुल्लान् नन्दिग्रामसमीपगान्।
सुराधिपस्योपवने यथा चैत्ररथे द्रुमान्॥२८॥
क्रोशमात्रे त्वयोध्यायाश्चीरकृष्णाजिनाम्बरम्॥ २९॥
ददर्श भरतं दीनं कृशमाश्रमवासिनम्।
जटिलं मलदिग्धाङ्गं भ्रात्तृव्यसनकशिंत्तम्॥इ॰॥

Ugh A पुरस्कृत्य प्रशासन्तं वसुंधराम्॥ ३२॥
चातुर्वर्ण्यस्य लोकस्य त्रातारं सर्वतो भयात्।
उपस्थितममात्यैश्च शुचिभिश्च पुरोहितै:।॥। ३३॥
बलमुख्यैश्च युक्तैश्च काषायाम्बरधारिभि:।
नहि a राजपुत्रं तं चीरकृष्णाजिनाम्बरम्॥ ३४॥
परिभोक्तुं व्यवस्यन्ति पौरा a धर्मवत्सला:।
तं धर्ममिव धर्मज्ञं देहबन्धमिवापरम्॥ 34 Il
उवाच प्राञ्जलिर्वाक्यं हनूमान् मारुतात्मज:।
वसन्तं दण्डकारण्ये यं त्वं चीरजटाधरम्॥ ३६॥
अनुशोचसि काकुत्स्थं स cat कौशलमब्रवीत्।
प्रियमाख्यामि ते देव शोकं त्यज सुदारुणम्॥ ३७॥
He came across on the way the

waters hallowed by the association of Lord
Parasurama and the rivers Valukini, Varuthini

821

and Gomati as well, as also the formidable
forest of sal trees and many thousands of
people inhabiting the kingdom of Kosala as
also the prosperous territories comprised in
that kingdom. Having speedily covered a
long distance, that jewel among the monkeys
reached the blossomed trees standing in
the neighbourhood of Nandigrama and
resembling like those comprised in the garden
of Indra, the suzerain lord of gods, and the
garden of Kubera known by the name of
Caitraratha, and frequented by women as
also by their grandsons and sons beautifully
adorned. At a distance of two miles from
Ayodhya he saw Bharata sad and emaciated,
dwelling in a hermitage with the bark of trees
and the skin of a black antelope wrapped
around his waist, wearing matted locks on
his head and afflicted through separation from
his elder brother, Sri Rama, subsisting on
fruits and roots, disciplined, and engaged in
austerities, practising virtue, distinguished by
a very high head of matted hair, covering the
upper part of his body too with the bark of
trees and a deer-skin, abstemious and clothed
with a glory equalling that of a Brahmana Rsi,
his limbs covered with dirt, though his mind
had been chastened, nay, ruling the earth
after placing the well-known wooden sandals
of Sri Rama before him, protecting the people
belonging to all the four grades, viz., the
Brahmanas, the Ksatriyas, the VaiSyas and
the Sudras from all peril and attended by
upright ministers and family priests as well
as by clever troop-commanders, all clad in
ochre robes. Indeed, the citizens of Ayodhya,
who were all lovers of virtue, would never
feel inclined to enjoy pleasures ignoring that
prince clad in the bark of trees and the skin
of a black antelope. With joined palms
Hanuman, an offspring of the wind-god, spoke
as follows to that prince, who knew what is
right and seemed to be a second Dharma,
the god of virtue, clothed with a body: “That
scion of Kakutstha for whom you are grieving,
