+ UTTARAKANDA +

son—all these were struck down there by
Hanuman single-handed. (6)

भूयो बन्धाद् विमुक्तेन भाषयित्वा दशाननम्।
ag भस्मीकृता येन पावकेनेव मेदिनी॥७॥

“Then, after speaking to Ravana (the
ten-headed monster), when he was entirely
free from bondage, Lanka was reduced to
ashes by him even as the terrestrial globe
by the fire of dissolution. (7)

न कालस्य न शक्रस्य न विष्णोर्वित्तपस्य च।
कर्माणि तानि set यानि युद्धे हनूमत:॥८॥

“Feats similar to those which were
performed in war by Hanuman are not known
to have been performed either by Kala (the
Time-Spirit) or by Indra or again by the god
of fire or Kubera, the lord of riches. (8)

एतस्य बाहुवीर्येण लङ्का सीता च लक्ष्मण:।
wer मया जयश्चैव राज्यं मित्राणि बान्धवा:॥ ९॥

“By the prowess of his arms alone
were Lanka and victory attained and Sita,
Laksmana, sovereignty, friends and kinsfolk
too regained by me. (9)
हनूमान् यदि मे न स्याद् वानराधिपते: सखा।
Gahanna को वेत्तुं जानक्या: शक्तिमान् भवेत्॥ १० ॥

“If Hanuman, the friend of Sugriva (the
suzerain lord of monkeys), were not with
Me, who else would have been able to get

the news about Sita (Janaka’s daughter)?
(10)

किमर्थं वाली चैतेन सुग्रीवप्रियकाम्यया।
तदा at समुत्पन्ने न दग्धो वीरुधो यथा॥११॥
“| wonder wherefore, when _ hostility
sprang up between Sugriva and Vali, Vali
was not consumed as a tree by fire by
Hanuman, with a desire to please Sugriva.

(11)
ae वेदितवान् मन्ये हनूमानात्मनो बलम्।
ag दृष्टवाञ्जीवितेष्टं क्लिश्यन्तं वानराधिपम्॥ १२॥

“| think Hanuman was not conscious of
his own might in that he simply watched

969

Sugriva (now the supreme ruler of the
monkeys), who was dearer to him than his
life, suffering hardships in exile. (12)

एतन्मे भगवन् सर्वं हनूमति महामुने।
विस्तरेण यथातत्त्वं कथयामरपूजित॥१३॥

“Tell me, Revered Sir, in extenso
according to facts all this about Hanuman,
O great sage, adored by gods!” (13)
राघवस्य aa: श्रुत्वा हेतुयुक्तमृषिस्तत:।
wea: wnat तमिदं वचनमब्रवीत्॥१४॥

Hearing this reasonable submission of
Sri Rama (a scion of Raghu), the seer of
Vedic Mantras thereupon replied to him
as follows in the presence of Hanuman:

(14)
सत्यमेतद् रघुश्रेष्ठं aq ब्रवीषि हनूमति।
न बले विद्यते तुल्यो न Wat न मतौ UE Ua Il

“What you say regarding Hanuman is
true, O jewel among the Raghus! None else
is equal to him in might, speed or intelligence.

(15)
अमोघशापै: शापस्तु दत्तोऽस्य मुनिभि: पुरा।
न वेत्ता fe act wed बली सन्नरिमर्दन॥१६॥

“An imprecation was, however,
pronounced on him in the past by ascetics
whose curse never went in vain, that, though
mighty he would not be aware of his entire
strength, O scourge of your enemies! (16)

बाल्येऽप्येतेन यत् कर्म pd WA महाबल।
तन्न वर्णयितुं शबक्यमिति बाल्यतयास्यते॥ १७॥

“It is not possible to recount the feat
which was performed by him even in his
very childhood, O Rama, who are endowed
with extraordinary might! Hence he remained
ignorant of his might as a child. (17)

ate ata त्वभिप्राय: संश्रोतुं तव राघव।

समाधाय मतिं wa निशामय वदाम्यहम्॥१८॥
“If, however, you have a mind to listen,

O scion of Raghus, hearken, O Rama, after

concentrating your mind, | proceed to narrate.
(18)
