1094

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

Canto XLI
Specifying the different regions of the southern quarter and fixing a limit of

one month for their return, Sugriva dispatches Hanuman, Nila, Angada
and others to that quarter for finding out the whereabouts of Sita

तत: प्रस्थाप्य सुग्रीवस्तन्महद्बानरं बलम्।
दक्षिणां प्रेषयामास वानरानभिलक्षितान्॥१॥
Having sent away that mighty host
of monkeys to the east, Sugriva then
dispatched well-tried monkeys to the south.
(1)

नीलमग्निसुतं da हनूमन्तं च वानरम्।
पितामहसुतं चैव जाम्बवन्तं महौजसम्॥ २॥

wt च शरारिं च शरगुल्मं तथैव a
TH Tee Tat सुषेणं quay तथा॥३॥

We च fefad Ga सुषेणं गन्धमादनम्।
STAG च हुताशनसुतावुभौ॥४॥

अङ्गदप्रमुखान् वीरान् ak: after: |

sateen, संदिदेश विशेषवित्॥५॥

The gallant and judicious Sugriva, the
lord of monkey bands, detailed heroes
headed by Angada, who were endowed
with speed and prowess, viz., Nila, son of
the god of fire as also the monkey chief
Hanuman as well as the exceptionally
powerful Jambavan, the ruler of bears, son
of Brahma (the father of the progenitors of
the universe), also Suhotra and Sarari and
even so Saragulma, Gaja and Gavaksa,
Gavaya and Susena (not Tara’s father) as
well as Vrsabha, Mainda and Dwivida as
also Susena (also different from Tara’s father)
and Gandhamadana, also Ulkamukha and
Ananga both sons of Hutasana. (2—5)

fara हरिवीराणामादिशद दक्षिणां दिशम्॥ ६॥

Nay, appointing Angada, who was

possessed of extraordinary strength, as the
leader of all the aforesaid monkey heroes,
he forthwith assigned to them the southern
quarter to be explored by them. (6)

a केचन समुद्देशास्तस्यां दिशि सुदुर्गमा:।
कपीश: कपिमुख्यानां स तेषां समुदाहरत्॥७॥
The said lord of monkeys specifically
mentioned to those monkey chiefs whatever
regions were exceedingly difficult of access
in that quarter. (7)
सहस्रशिरसं feet नानाद्रुमलतायुतम्।
wat च नदीं wat महोरगनिषेविताम्॥८॥
ततो गोदावरीं रम्यां कृष्णवेणीं महानदीम्।
aa च महाभागां महोरगनिषेविताम्।
मेखलानुत्कलांश्चैव दशार्णनगराण्यपि।। ९॥
आब्रवन्तीमवन्तीं च सर्वमेवानुपश्यत।
विदर्भानृष्टिकांश्चैव var माहिषकानपि॥१०॥
तथा वङ्गान् कलिङ्गांश्च कौशिकांश्च समन्तत:।
अन्वीक्ष्य दण्डकारण्यं सपर्वतनदीगुहम्॥११॥
नदीं गोदावरीं da सर्वमेवानुपश्यत।
तथैवान्ध्रांश्च YOST चोलान् पाण्ड्यांश्च केरलान्॥ १२॥
He said to them : “Explore the Vindhyan
range,* consisting of a thousand peaks and
covered with trees and creepers of every
description, as also the delightful river
Narmada infested with large serpents, then
the lovely river Godavari and the big river
Krsnaveni, as also the highly blessed river
Varada (now known as ‘Wardha’), also
infested with huge serpents, as well as the
territories of Mekhala and Utkala, also the

* Though situated to the north of the Prasravana hill (in the vicinity of Kiskindha), from where the
messengers are being dispatched by Sugriva, the Vindhyan range has been included in the list of places
in the south evidently with reference to Aryavarta, the region extending from the Arabian Sea to the Bay
of Bengal and bounded by the Vindhyan range in the south.
