156

monkey in a dream; while placidity of mind,
which is a harbinger of good fortune, has
been attained by me. (22)
किं नु स्याच्चित्तमोहोऽयं भवेद्वातगतिस्त्यम्।
उन्मादजो विकारो वा स्यादयं मृगतृष्णिका॥ २३॥
“Can this meeting of mine with a monkey
be a delusion of my mind? Or, it may be a
delusion caused by my being possessed by
a ghost (clothed with an aerial body). Or,
again, it may be a malady born of insanity or
it may only be an optic illusion. (23)

अथवा नायमुन्मादो मोहोऽप्युन्मादलक्षण:।
सम्बुध्ये चाहमात्मानमिमं चापि वनौकसम्॥ २४॥
“Or this may not be a case of insanity,
nor even delusion showing symptoms similar
to those of insanity; for | am conscious of
my own self as well as of this monkey.” (24)

इत्येवं बहुधा सीता सम्प्रधार्यं बलाबलम्।
Tae कामरूपत्वान्मेने तं राक्षसाधिपम्॥ २५॥

Having thus duly considered in many
ways the strength of ogres and the weakness
of monkeys, who cannot be expected to leap
across a vast sea, and also considering the
fact that the ogres are able to change their
form at will, Sita concluded Hanuman to be
Ravana, the suzerain ruler of ogres. (25)

एतां बुद्धिं तदा Hear सीता सा तनुमध्यमा।
न प्रतिव्याजहाराथ at जनकात्मजा॥ २६॥

Having arrived at this conclusion at
that time, that lady of slender waist, Sita,
Janaka’s daughter, did not speak any more
to the monkey, Hanuman. (26)

सीताया निश्चितं बुद्ध्वा हनूमान् मारुतात्मज: |
तां सम्प्रहर्षयन्॥ २७॥
Coming to know the decision of Sita,
Hanuman, sprung from the loins of the wind-
god, spoke as follows bringing exessive joy

to her with his words, which were delightful
to the ear: (27)

आदित्य इव तेजस्वी लोककान्त: शशी Ae |
राजा सर्वस्य लोकस्य देवो वैश्रवणो यथा॥ २८॥

« VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

“Glorious as the sun, nay, beloved of
the world as the moon, Sri Rama brings
delight to the entire universe by bestowing
riches and food grains on all as the god
Kubera, son of Sage Visrava. (28)

विक्रमेणोपपन्नश्च यथा विष्णुर्महायशा:।
सत्यवादी मधुरवाग् देवो वाचस्पतिर्यथा॥ २९॥
“He is endowed with prowess like the
highly illustrious Lord Visnu and utters truthful
and sweet words like the celestial sage
Brhaspati. (29)
स्पवान् सुभग: श्रीमान् hat इव मूर्तिमान्।
स्थानक्रोधे प्रहर्ता च श्रेष्ठो लोके महारथ:॥ ३०॥

“He is rich in comeliness, graceful and
full of splendour as Love-incarnate. He
punishes only him who deserves anger and
is the foremost chariot-warrior in the world.(30)

बाहुच्छायामवष्टब्धो यस्य लोको महात्मन:।
अपक्रप्यग्श्रमपदान्यृगरूपेण राघवम्।॥ ३१ Ul

शून्ये येनापनीतासि तस्य द्रक्ष्यसि तत्फलम्।
अचिराद् रावणं संख्ये यो वधिष्यति वीर्यवान्॥ ३२॥

क्रोधप्रमुक्तैरिषुभिरज्वलद्धिरिव पावकै:।
care प्रेषितो दूतस्त्वत्सकाशमिहागत:॥ ३३॥
“The whole world depends on the
protection of the arms of that exalted soul.
You will see for yourself the consequence
of the sinful act of Ravana, by whom you
were borne away in a state of utter desolation
after diverting Sri Rama, a scion of Raghu,
from the site of his hermitage through an
ogre disguised as a deer. | have sought
your presence here as an envoy despatched
by that powerful prince, who will before long
kill Ravana in a combat with his shafts,
resembling blazing flames and shot in anger.
(31—33)

त्वद्वियोगेन दु:खार्त: स wat कौशलमब्रवीत्।
लक्ष्मणश्च महातेजा: सुमित्रानन्दवर्धन:॥ ३४॥

अभिवाद्य महाबाहु: स cat कौशलमब्रवीत्।
रामस्य च सखा देवि सुग्रीवो AA वानर:॥ ३५॥

राजा वानरमुख्यानां स त्वां कौशलमब्रवीत्।
Pret स्मरति ते Wa: ससुग्रीव: सलक्ष्मण:॥ ३६॥
