* BALAKANDA +

to be able to see Janaka, O jewel among
men !” (19)

सुमतिस्तु महातेजा विश्चामित्रमुपागतम्।
श्रुत्वा नरवरश्रेष्ठ: प्रत्यागच्छन्महायशा:॥ २०॥
Hearing of ViSwamitra having arrived,
the exceptionally glorious and _ highly
renowned King Sumati, a veritable jewel
among the foremost of men, came ahead to
receive him. (20)
पूजां च परमां कृत्वा सोपाध्याय: सबान्धव:।
प्राञ्जलि: कुशलं opt विश्वामित्रमथान्रवीत्॥ २१॥

203

Nay, offering to him the highest worship
with the help of his family priest and kinsmen
and inquiring after his welfare, the king
forthwith spoke to ViSwamitra with folded-
hands as follows : (21)

धन्योऽस्म्यनुगृहीतोऽस्मि यस्य A विषयं मुने।
सम्प्राप्तो दर्शनं चैव नास्ति धन्यतरो मम॥ २२॥

“| am blessed and beholden to you, O
sage, in that you have visited my territory
and come within my sight too. None is more
blessed than myself.” (22)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये बालकाण्डे सप्तचत्वारिंश: AWA: ॥ ४७॥

Thus ends Canto Forty-seven in the Balakanda of the glorious Ramayana
of Valmiki, the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

Canto XLVI

Having stayed overnight at Vigala as an honoured guest of Sumati, Sri Rama,
accompanied by ViSwamitra and the other sages, heads towards Mithila
(the capital of King Janaka) and, on reaching on the way a deserted
hermitage and, inquiring about it, is told by Viswamitra how
Ahalya, wife of Sage Gautama, whose hermitage it was,
was subjected to a curse by her husband

UpT तु कुशलं at परस्परसमागमे।
कथान्ते सुमतिर्वाक्यं व्याजहार महामुनिम्॥१॥

Having inquired after the sage’s welfare,
Sumati, at the end of the dialogue that
ensued in the course of their meeting with
one another, spoke to the great sage
Viswamitra as follows : (1)

इमौ कुमारौ a a देवतुल्यपराक्रमौ।
गजसिंहगती at शार्दूलव्रूषभोपमौ॥ २॥

“May God bless you ! These two valiant
lads, who are equal in prowess to gods,
walk with the gait of the elephant and the
lion and look like a tiger and a bull,
respectively. (2)

पद्मपत्रविशालाक्षौ खड्गतूणधनुर्धरौ |
अश्विनाविव रूपेण समुपस्थितयौवनौ॥ ३॥

“Having eyes large as the petals of a
lotus and carrying, as they do, on their
person a sword, a quiver and a bow each,
they vie with the Aswins (the twin-born
physicians of gods, celebrated for their
physical charm) in their comeliness of form
and stand at the threshold of youth. (8)

यदृच्छयैव गां Wat देवलोकादिवामरौ।
कथं पद्भयामिह प्राप्तौ किमर्थं कस्य वा मुने॥४॥

“Nay, they look like two gods descended
on earth from the celestial plane of their
own will. How and what for have they
travelled on foot to this place and whose
sons are they, O sage? (4)
भूषयन्ताविमं देशं चन्द्रसूर्याविवाम्बरम्।
परस्परेण सदृशौ प्रमाणेङ्नितचेष्टितै:॥ ५॥
