+ UTTARAKANDA +

cart किल wig ort सवनार्णवा।
सपर्वता मही वीर तेऽभवन् प्रभविष्णव:॥१७॥
‘This earth (filled) with its forests, seas

and mountains belonged of yore to the
Daityas; for they were all powerful. (17)

Pea तांस्तु समरे विष्णुना प्रभविष्णुना।
देवानां वशमानीतं त्रैलोक्यमिदमव्ययम्॥१८॥

‘After killing them in war, all these three
worlds were for their part brought under the
lasting sway of the gods by the powerful
Visnu. (18)

नैतदेको भवानेव करिष्यति विपर्ययम्।
Baran ad कुरुष्व वचो मम॥१९॥

‘You are not the only one who will act
in opposition to a brother; this was done in
the past by the gods and demons alike.
Hence, do as | Say.’ (19)

एवमुक्को दशग्रीव: «= We TTI
चिन्तयित्वा ved a बाढमित्येव सोऽब्रवीत्॥ 20

“Having been addressed _ thus,
DaSagriva, pleased at heart, thought for a
while and then said, ‘All right’. (20)

स तु wa wo तस्मिन्नहनि वीर्यवान्।
at Wat दशग्रीव: सह a: क्षणदाचरै:॥ २१॥
“With the same joy, the valiant

DaSagriva went to the forest the very day
accompanied by the Raksasas. (21)

त्रिकूटस्थ: स तु तदा दशग्रीवो निशाचर:।
प्रेषयामास दौत्येन Weed वाक्यकोविदम्॥ २२॥

“Stationed on Mount Trikuta, DaSagriva,
the Raksasa, sent Prahasta, skilled in the
art of expression, as a messenger, saying:

(22)
प्रहस्त शीघ्रं गच्छ त्वं gfe नैर्ऋतपुङ्खवम्।
वचसा मम वित्तेशं सामपूर्वमिदं वच:॥२३॥

‘O Prahasta, go quickly and convey to
the lord of riches, the foremost of ogres,

these words, as coming from me, in a polite
manner: (23)

881

Ba लङ्का पुरी राजन् राक्षसानां महात्मनाम्।

त्वया निवेशिता सौम्य Ade युक्तं तवानघ॥ २४॥
‘This city of Lanka, O king, which

belonged to the mighty Raksasas, has been

occupied by you. O gentle and sinless one,

this is not proper for you. (24)

ag wary यदि नो ह्यद्य दद्यादतुलविक्रम।
कृता भवेन्मम प्रीतिधर्मश्चैवानुपालित:॥ २५॥

‘If you, O hero of peerless strength,
could give it back to us now, you will at
once have pleased me and done the right
thing.’ (25)

स तु गत्वा पुरीं लङ्कां धनदेन सुरक्षिताम्।
अब्रवीत् परमोदारं वित्तपालमिदं वच:॥ २६॥
“Proceeding to Lanka, well-protected
by Kubera, Prahasta addressed the following
words to the highly magnanimous lord of
wealth: (26)

प्रेषितोऽहं da भ्रात्रा दशग्रीवेण Yad
त्वत्समीपं महाबाहो सर्वशस्त्रभृतां वर॥ २७॥

‘O pious and best among all those who
bear arms, | have been sent by DaSagriva,
your half-brother, to your presence, O mighty-
armed one! (27)

तच्छूयतां महाप्राज्ञ सर्वशास्त्रविशारद।
वचनं मम fade aq ब्रवीति दशानन:॥ २८॥
‘O lord of wealth, learned in all the
Sastras and highly intelligent, listen to my
submission, which is precisely what
DaSagriva says: (28)

sa fea at रम्या सुमालिप्रमुखै: पुरा।
भुक्तपूर्वा विशालाक्ष राक्षसैर्भीमविक्रमै: ।। २९॥
‘This charming city, O large-eyed one,
was previously ruled over by Raksasas of
terrible might, of whom Sumali was the
foremost. (29)
wt विज्ञाप्यते सोऽयं साम्प्रतं विश्रवात्मज।
तदेषा दीयतां तात याचतस्तस्य सामत:॥ ३०॥
‘O son of ViSrava, this requisition is
being made by him now. Let it be given
