# YUDDHAKANDA +

तत: शुश्रुवुराक्रुष्टं लङ्कायां काननौकस:।
भेरीमृदङ्गसंघुष्टं तुमुलं लोमहर्षणम्॥३॥

The monkeys, (lit., the denizens of the
woods) now heard in Lanka a clamour as
well as the tumultuous and deafening sound
of kettledrums, and clay tomtoms, which
made one’s hair stand on end. (3)

ayer घोषेण संहृष्टा हरियूथपा:।
अमृष्यमाणास्तद् घोषं विनेदुर्घोषवत्तरम्॥४॥

The commanders of monkey-troops felt
highly rejoiced at that sound. Nay, not bearing
that uproar, they roared at a still higher
pitch. (4)

राक्षसास्तत् प्लवंगानां शुश्रुवुस्तेऽपि गर्जितम्।
नर्दतामिव दृप्तानां मेघानामम्बरे स्वनम्॥५॥
Those ogres too heard that roar of the
monkeys, which resembled the thundering
of overbearing clouds rumbling in space. (5)

gear दाशरथिर्लङ्कां चित्रध्वजपताकिनीम्।
जगाम मनसा सीतां दूयमानेन चेतसा॥६॥

Seeing Lanka dressed with
multicoloured flags and buntings, Sri Rama
(son of Dasaratha) mentally sought Sita
with an afflicted mind. (6)

अत्र सा मृगशावाक्षी रावणेनोपरुध्यते।
अभिभूता ग्रहेणेव लोहिताङ्गेन रोहिणी॥७॥

He said to himself: “Here is that lady
with eyes resembling those of a fawn,
detained by Ravana even as (the lunar
mansion) Rohini is overshadowed by the
red-bodied planet, Mars.” (7)

दीर्घमुष्णं च नि:श्वस्य समुद्बीक्ष्य च लक्ष्मणम्।
उवाच ae वीरस्तत्कालहितमात्मन:॥ ८॥

Heaving long and burning sighs and
gazing at Laksmana, the hero spoke the
following words, which were conducive to
his own good for the occasion: (8)

आलिखन्तीमिवाकाशमुत्थितां पश्य लक्ष्मण।
मनसेव Hat लङ्कां नगाग्रे विश्वकर्मणा॥९॥

375

“Behold on the summit of a mountain
the elevated city of Lanka, evolved as though
with his own mind by ViSwakarma, the
architect of gods, and scraping the skies,
as it were, O Laksmana! (9)

विमानैर्बहुभिर्लङ्का संकीर्णां रचिता पुरा।
विष्णो: पदमिवाकाशं छादितं पाण्डुभिर्घनै: ।॥। १० ॥
“Lanka was brought into existence in
the past, thick with numerous seven-storeyed
mansions. It presents the appearance of
the sky (lit., the orbit of the all-pervading
Lord Visnu, who traversed the heaven in a
single stride) covered with white clouds.
(10)

पुष्पितै:; शोभिता लङ्का वनैश्चित्ररथोपमै: |
नानापतगसंघुष्टफलपुष्पोपगै: WA: UM

“Lanka stands embellished with
charming groves in blosson vying with
Caitraratha, the garden of Kubera, the god
of riches, and supplying fruits and flowers
to the royal palace and filled with the songs
of birds of all species. (11)

ua मत्तविहंगानि प्रलीनभ्रमराणि a
कोकिलाकुलखण्डानि दोधवीति शिवोऽनिल: ॥ १२॥

“Lo! The delightful breeze shakes again
and again the clusters of trees which are
inhabited by birds in heat, nay, in which
bees remain hidden and which are crowded
with cuckoos.” (12)

इति दाशरथी War लक्ष्मणं समभाषत।
बलं च तत्र विभजच्छास्त्रदृष्टेन कर्मणा॥१३॥
So did Sri Rama, son of Dagaratha,
speak in confidence to Laksmana to divide
the army camping there according to the
rules found in the scriptures. (13)
शशास कपिसेनां at बलादादाय वीर्यवान्।
sige: We नीलेन तिष्ठेदुरसि दुर्जय:॥१४॥
Sri Rama issued the following directions
to that army of monkeys: “Taking his troops
