+ UTTARAKANDA +

आगच्छ तात गच्छामो रणकर्म निवर्तताम्।
fad नो विदितं तेऽस्तु स्वस्थो भव TATA: ।। ३५ ॥

“Come, dear father, we retire. Let the
act of fighting come to an end. Let our
victory be known to you. Be at ease and
free from anxiety. (35)

अयं fe सुरसैन्यस्य त्रैलोक्यस्य च य: प्रभु:।
स गृहीतो देवबलाद भग्नदर्पा: सुरा: कृता:॥ ३६॥

“Since the yonder Indra, who was till
now the master of the army of gods as well
as the lord of all the three worlds, has been
captured from the midst of the army of
gods, the vanity of the gods has thereby
been crushed. (36)
यथेष्टं भुङ्क्ष्व लोकांस्त्रीन् निगृह्यारातिमोजसा।
gam fe a श्रमेणेह युद्धमद्य तु निष्फलम्॥ ३७॥

“Having captured the enemy by dint of
your might, rule all the three worlds as you
please; what will you gain by needlessly

exerting yourself any more; fighting is now
fruitless.” (37)
ततस्ते दैवतगणा «aa रणकर्मण:।
AeA रावणेर्वाक्यं शक्रहीना: सुरा गता:॥ ३८॥
Hearing the aforesaid observation of
Meghanada (son of Ravana), the hosts of
gods thereupon desisted from the act of

fighting and, deprived of Indra, left for
heaven. (38)

अथ रणविगत: @ उत्तमौजा-
स्विदशरिपु;प्रथितोनिशाच्रिन्द्र;।

स्वसुतवचनमादरृत: प्रियं तत्
समनुनिशम्य जगाद Wat सूनुम्॥ ३९॥

Listening with deference 10 that

947

agreeable counsel of his son, Ravana, the
ruler of ogres, that notorious enemy of gods,
who was endowed with surpassing might,
retired from the field of battle and spoke to
his son as follows: (39)
मम कुलवंशविवर्धन: प्रभो।
यदयमतुल्यबलस्त्वयाद्य वै
त्रिदशपतिस्तिदशाश्च निर्जिता:॥४०॥
“You are the promoter of my race, my
powerful son, in that the yonder ruler of
gods, who was endowed with unequalled
might, as well as the other gods, have been
actually conquered by you today through
exploits which were becoming of your
superior might. (40)
नय रथमधिरोप्य वासवं
नगरमितो at सेनया वृतस्त्वम्।
अहमपि da पृष्ठतो ad
we सचिवैरनुयामि हृष्टवत्॥४१॥
“Placing Indra in the chariot, take him
to the city of Lanka and, surrounded by
your army, depart you from this region.

Accompanied by my ministers, | too will follow
at your heels with all speed joyfully.” (41)

अथ A acldd: Adler

स्निदशपतिं
स्वभवनमधिगम्य वीर्यवान्

कृतसमरान् विससर्ज राक्षसान्॥४२॥

Having reached his own abode followed

by his army and conveyances and taking

with him the ruler of gods, the powerful son

of Ravana dismissed the ogres, who had

carried on the operations. (42)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये उत्तरकाण्डे एकोनत्रिंश: A: ॥ २९ ॥

Thus ends Canto Twenty-nine in the Uttarakanda of the glorious Ramayana of Valmiki,
the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

