# YUDDHAKANDA #

वारणानां सहस्रं च शरीरेऽस्य प्रधावितम्।
कुम्भकर्णस्तदा बुद्ध्वा स्पर्शं परमबुध्यत॥ ५५॥
A thousand of elephants were also
made to run up and down his body. Waking
only then, he felt a mere touch. (55)
a पात्यमानैर्गिरिशृङ्गवृक्षै-
रचिन्तयंस्तान् विपुलान् प्रहारान्।
निद्राक्षयात् क्षुद्धयपीडितश्च
विजृम्भमाण: सहसोत्पपात॥ ७५६ ॥
Tormented by the bugbear of hunger
due to interruption in his sleep, though not
feeling in the least the heavy blows dealt
with the mountain-tops and trees, which
were still being made to descend on him,
nay, stretching his limbs from drowsiness,

he sprang to his feet all at once. (56)
a नागभोगाचलशृङ्गकल्पौ
विक्षिप्य ote जितवज्रसारौ।
निशाचरोऽसौ विकृतं जजृम्भे॥५७॥
Stretching out his arms, _ which

resembled the coils of a cobra in length
and the peaks of a mountain (in stiffness),
nay, which had conquered rivals with an
adamantine frame, and opening his mouth,
loathsome as a submarine fire, the said
ranger of the night yawned. (57)
cat मेरुशृङ्गाग्रे दिवाकर इवोदित:॥५८॥

The mouth of Kumbhakarna, which
resembled Patala (the lowest subterranean
region), while he was repeatedly yawning,
appeared like the sun risen over the top of
a summit of Mount Meru. (58)

स जृम्भमाणोऽतिबल: waged निशाचर:।
नि:श्चासश्चास्य संजज्ञे पर्वतादिव मारुत:॥५९॥

Yawning in this way, that prowler of
the night, who was endowed with
extraordinary might, woke up fully. And
breath escaped from his mouth even as he

527

yawned
mountain.

स्पमुत्तिष्ठतस्तस्य कुम्भकर्णस्य aq बभौ।
युगान्ते सर्वभूतानि कालस्येव दिधक्षत:॥ ६०॥
The well-known form of Kumbhakarna,
even as he rose, looked like Kala (the
Time-Spirit) seeking, as it were, to consume
all created beings at the time of universal
dissolution. (60)

तस्य दीप्ताग्निसदृशे विद्युत्सदृशवर्चसी।
ददृशाते महानेत्रे दीप्ताविव महाग्रहौ॥६१॥

His enormous eyes, which resembled

a blazing fire and were dazzling like lightning,
looked like two luminous major planets.
(61)

ततस्त्वदर्शयन् सर्वान् भक्ष्यांश्च विविधान् बहून्।
वराहान् महिषांश्चैव बभक्ष स महाबल:॥६२॥
Thereupon the ogres for their part
showed to him all the plentiful victuals of
various kinds. The ogre, who was endowed
with extraordinary might, ate up the meat of
boars as well as buffaloes. (62)

stag बुभुक्षितो मांसं शोणितं तृषितोऽपिबत्।
मेद:कुम्भांश्च मद्यांश्च पपौ शाक्ररिपुस्तदा॥६३॥
Feeling hungry, the enemy of Indra
(the ruler of gods) ate meat; and, feeling
thirsty, he quaffed blood as well as pails of
fat and wines at that time. (63)

ततस्तृप्त इति ज्ञात्वा समुत्पेतुर्निशाचरा:।
शिरोभिश्च wrest सर्वत: पर्यवारयन्॥६४॥

Realizing that he was sated, the rangers
of the night then came up before him and,
respectfully greeting him with their heads
bent low, surrounded him on all sides. (64)

Prattagtataed He pacer: ।
चारयन् सर्वतो दृष्टिं तान् ददर्श निशाचरान्॥ ६५॥
Casting his glance on all sides,
Kumbhakarna for his part, whose eyes were
half-closed due to sleepiness, nay, whose

like the wind blowing from a
(59)
