800

born) in the remote past his ten heads by
way of oblation at a sacrifice. As a result
of this, immunity was secured by him on
the battlefield from fear of death at the
hands of gods, demons, Gandharvas, fiends,
birds and serpents barring human beings.
In the course of sacrifices that ogre of great
might used to spill the holy Soma drink
glorified through the chanting of sacred
texts by Brahmanas in sanctuaries where
the Soma juice was extracted. The wicked
fellow used to wreck sacrifices which had
reached the stage of completion, killed
Brahmanas and perpetrated other cruel
acts, was rough, pitiless and intent on doing
harm to created beings. The said ogress
saw her cruel brother, who was possessed
of great might, made all living beings cry
through his tyranny and persecution and
was a source of terror to all the worlds.
Approaching him, the celebrated and highly
blessed Ravana, the ruler of ogres, the
delight of the race of Raksasas (the scions

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

of Pulastya), the slayer of enemies—who
was comfortably seated on his throne in
celestial robes, adorned with celestial jewels,
and decked with heavenly garlands, looked
like Kala (the all-destroying Time-Spirit active
at the time of universal dissolution) and
was surrounded by his counsellors—the
ogress, SUrpanakha, who was overpowered
with fear, proceeded to speak as follows:

(1383—24)

wade दीप्तविशाललोचनं

प्रदर्शयित्वा भयलोभमोहिता।

सुदारुणं वाक्यमभीतचारिणी
महात्मना शूर्पणखा विरूपिता॥ २५ ॥
Displaying her disfiguration,
Surpanakha, who stood bewildered with fear
and covetousness for Sri Rama and who
formerly roamed about fearlessly and had
been mutilated by the high-souled Laksmana,
addressed to Ravana, who was possessed
of large burning eyes, the following
exceptionally harsh words. (25)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्येऽरण्यकाण्डे द्वात्रिंश: AWA: ॥ 32 ॥

Thus ends Canto Thirty-two in the Aranyakanda of the glorious Ramayana of Valmiki,
the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

Canto XXXIII
Sirpanakha twits Ravana

तत: शूर्पणखा दीना रावणं लोकरावणम्।
अमात्यमध्ये संक्रुद्धा परुषं वाक्यमब्रवीत्॥१॥
Getting highly enraged, the afflicted
Surpanakha then addressed the following
harsh words to Ravana, who made people
cry by his tyranny and oppression, in the
midst of his ministers : (1)

समुत्पन्नं भयं घोरं बोद्धव्यं नावबुध्यसे॥ २॥

“Being strongly attached to sense-

enjoyments, licentious and unbridled, you
do not perceive the frightful danger that has
cropped up and which ought to be perceived.
(2)

लुब्धं न ag मन्यन्ते श्मशानाग्निमिव प्रजा:॥ ३॥
“The people do not hold in high esteem

a rapacious monarch attached to vulgar
sense-enjoyments and acting according to
his will, any more than the fire in a
crematorium. (3)
