220

end to the pride, strength and endeavour of
that wretch of a ViSwamitra.” (16)

इत्युक्तस्तु तया WA वसिष्ठस्तु महायशा:।
सृजस्वेति तदोवाच बलं परबलार्दनम्॥१७॥
Urged as aforesaid by her, O Rama,
the illustrious Vasistha for his part forthwith
said, “Create a force capable of destroying
the enemy’s army.” (17)

तस्य तद् वचनं श्रुत्वा सुरभि: सासृजत् तदा।
तस्या हुंभारवोत्सृष्टा: USAT: शतशो FTN Lil
नाशयन्ति act ad विश्वामित्रस्य पश्यत:।
स राजा परमक्रुद्ध: क्रोधविस्फारितेक्षण:॥१९॥
Usa नाशयामास शस्त्रैरुच्चावचैरपि।
विश्वामित्रार्दितान् दृष्टवा पह्नवान् शतशस्तदा॥ २०॥
भूय एवासृजद् घोरान् शकान् यवनमिश्रितान्।
तैरासीत् daa भूमि: शकैर्यवनमिश्रितै: 1 २१॥
प्रभावद्धिर्महावीर्यैर्हेमकिंजल्कसंनिभै: ।
तीक्ष्णासिपट्टिशधरैर्हेमवर्णाम्बरावृतै: ॥ २२॥

Hearing the aforesaid command of Sage
Vasistha, the said wish-yielding cow forthwith
produced a number of warriors. Created by
her very bellow, O king, Pahlavas in their
hundreds began to destroy the whole army
under the very eye of ViSwamitra. Highly

« VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

enraged and with his eyes dilated through
anger, King ViSwamitra too made short work
of the Pahlavas by means of his weapons
of various kinds. Seeing the Pahlavas killed
in their hundreds by Viswamitra, Sabala
immediately produced next the terrible Sakas,
who were akin to the Yavanas. The land
was flooded with these brilliant and most
powerful Sakas, that were akin to the
Yavanas, resembled the filaments of the
Campaka flowers in colour, carried sharp-
edged swords and Pattisas (a kind of spear)
on their person and were clad in yellow.
(18—22)
ततोऽस्त्राणि महातेजा विश्वामित्रो मुमोच ह।
तैस्ते यवनकाम्बोजा बर्बराश्चाकुलीकृता:॥ २३॥

The entire army of ViSwamitra was
consumed by them as by blazing fires.
Thereupon, it is said, the highly glorious
Viswamitra discharged a number of
missiles; by them those Yavanas and
Kambojas (another species of Mlecchas)
as well as the Barbaras (still another species
of Mlecchas) were thrown into confusion.

(23)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये बालकाण्डे
चतु:पञ्चाश: AA: ॥ ५४॥

Thus ends Canto Fifty-four in the Balakanda of the glorious Ramayana of Valmiki,
the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

