262

the grace of the sage the glorious lady
safely delivered a son. (36)

सपत्न्या तु गरस्तस्यै दत्तो गर्भजिघांसया।
सह तेन गरेणैव संजात: सगरोऽभवत्॥ ३७॥
“Poison was administered to her by
her co-wife, it will be remembered, with the
intention of killing the foetus. The boy was
named Sagara inasmuch as he was born
alongwith that very poison (गरेण ae). (37)
सगरस्यासमञ्जस्तु असमञ्जादथांशुमान्।
दिलीपोऽशुमत: ust दिलीपस्य भगीरथ:॥ ३८॥
“Sagara’s son was /ऽवावंच and from
Asamafija, again, sprang up Amsuman.
Dillpa was the son of Amsuman. Dilipa’s

son was Bhagiratha. (38)
भगीरथात् ककुत्स्थश्च ककुत्स्थाच्च रघुस्तथा।
Tae पुत्रस्तेजस्वी Wag: पुरुषादक:॥ ३९॥
कल्माषपादोऽप्यभवत् तस्माज्जातस्तु शङ्खण: |

सुदर्शन: शङ्खणस्य अग्निवर्ण: सुदर्शनात्॥४०॥

“From Bhagiratha sprang up Kakutstha
and from Kakutstha likewise sprang up Raghu;
while Raghu’s son was the glorious Pravrddha,
who later on turned out to be an ogre under
the curse of his preceptor, Vasistha, and also
became known as Kalmasapada (because
of his speckled feet).' Again, from the latter
sprang up Sankhana. Sudargana was the son
of Sankhana; from Sudargana sprang up
Agnivarna. (39-40)
शीघ्रगस्त्वग्निवर्णस्य शीघ्रगस्य We: सुत:।
मरो: प्रशुश्रुकस्त्वासीदम्बरीष: प्रशुश्रुकात्॥४१॥

« VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

“Sighraga was the son of Agnivarna
and Sighraga’s son was Maru. Maru’s son
was Prasusruka, while from PraSusruka
sprang up Ambarisa. (41)

अम्बरीषस्य पुत्रोऽभून्नहुषश्च महीपति:।
नहुषस्य ययातिस्तु नाभागस्तु ययातिज:॥४२॥

Ambarisa’s son, again, was King
Nahusa? and Nahusa’s son was Yayati;
while Nabhaga was the son of Yayati. (42)

नाभागस्य AYA अजाद् दशरथोऽभवत्।
THT दशरथाज्जातौ भ्रातरौ रामलक्ष्मणौ tl ४३॥

“Nabhaga’s son was Aja, from Aja
sprang up DaSsaratha. To this Dasaratha®
(present before you) were born the two
brothers, Sri Rama and Laksmana, alongwith
their two other brothers, Bharata and
Satrughna. (43)
इक्ष्वाकुकुलजातानां वीराणां सत्यवादिनाम्॥४४॥
रामलक्ष्मणयोरर्थे त्वत्सुते aa WI
सदृशाभ्यां नरश्रेष्ठं सदृशे दातुमर्हसि॥४५॥

“On behalf of King DaSaratha, as his
family priest, | sue for your two daughters,
O protector of men, for the sake of Sri
Rama and Laksmana, belonging as they do
to the line of exceedingly pious, valiant and
truthful monarchs born in the race of Ikswaku
and absolutely pure of descent from the
very beginning. Be pleased, O jewel among
men, to give away your worthy daughters to
the two equally worthy princes.” (44-45)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये बालकाण्डे सप्ततितम: सर्ग: ॥ ७० ॥

Thus ends Canto Seventy in the Balakanda of the glorious Ramayana of Valmiki,
the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

1. We read elsewhere how Pravrddha, when turned into an ogre by the curse of Vasistha, took water
in the palm of his hand in readiness to pronounce a counter-curse on his preceptor, but deterred by his wife,
he threw the water on one of his feet, which got speckled that very moment.

2. King Nahusa and Yayati mentioned here are different from the kings of the same name belonging
to the lunar dynasty and figuring in the Mahabharata and elsewhere.

3. The order in which the names occur here is different from that followed in some of the Puranas.
The difference can, however, be reconciled by the fact that the accounts relate to different Kalpas or cycles.
