* BALAKANDA +

ad सर्वं तत्त्वतो दृष्टा धर्मेण स महामति:।
अभिरामस्य रामस्य ad Wa कर्तुमुद्यत:॥७॥
Having seen all that in reality by dint of
yogic power, Valmiki, who was possessed
of great wisdom, girded up his loins to
render into verse the whole story of Sri
Rama, the delighter of all. (7)

कामार्थगुणसंयुक्तं धर्मार्थगुणविस्तरम्।
समुद्रमिव सतनाढ्यं सर्वश्रुतिमनोहरम्॥८॥
स यथा कथितं पूर्वं नारदेन महात्मना।
रघुवंशस्य चरितं चकार भगवान् मुनि:॥९॥
The glorious sage Valmiki composed
in verse, as it was told earlier by the high-
souled Narada, the story of Sri Rama
(descended in the line of Raghu) which
discusses in a secondary way the subjects
of Kama, i.e., sense-enjoyment, and worldly
prosperity and expatiates on the merits of
the two other objects of human pursuit, viz.,
piety and final beatitude, and thus full of
jewels like the ocean, attracts the ears as
well as the mind of all by the musical ring of
its verses and the profundity of their meaning,
respectively. (8-9)

Wa रामस्य Wed ated सर्वानुकूलताम्।
लोकस्य प्रियतां क्षान्तिं सौम्यतां सत्यशीलताम्॥ oUt
The advent of Sri Rama, his superlative
prowess, benevolence to all, universal
popularity, forgiveness, amiability and the
habit of speaking the truth; (10)

art fat: कथाश्चान्या विश्चामित्रसहायने।
जानक्याश्च विवाहं च धनुषश्च विभेदनम्॥११॥

many other wondrous episodes, e.g.,
the one relating to the descent of the holy
Ganga, told by ViSwamitra in the course
of his journey with the sage ViSwamitra first
to the latter’s hermitage and then to Mithila
in order to attend the selection of a husband
by the princess of Mithila in an assembly of
suitors; his breaking the bow (kept by the
king of Mithila in an arena in order to test
the suitors’ prowess), and the wedding of

73

Sita (Janaka’s daughter) and others (Urmila
and so on); (11)

रामरामविवादं च गुणान् दाशरथेस्तथा।
तथाभिषेकं रामस्य कैकेय्या दुष्टभावताम्॥१२॥

the vexed dialogue between Sri Rama
and Parasurama over the breaking of the
bow; a description of the extraordinary virtues
of Sri Rama, son of Dagaratha; preparations
for Sri Rama’s installation as the regent
of Ayodhya and the treachery of Kaikeyi;
(12)

विघातं चाभिषेकस्य रामस्य च विवासनम्।
Ta: शोकं विलापं च परलोकस्य चाश्रयम्॥ १३॥
interruption of the installation caused
by Kaikeyi and Sri Rama’s exile to the
forest; the king’s grief and lament and
eventual departure to the other world; (13)

प्रकृतीनां विषादं च प्रकृतीनां विसर्जनम्।
निषादाधिपसंवादं सूतोपावर्तनं तथा॥१४॥
the grief of the people of Ayodhya and
how those who followed him to the forest
were made to return by being put off the
scent; his dialogue with the chief of the
Nisadas and how the charioteer, who took
Sri Rama, Sita and Laksmana in a chariot
to the forest under the king’s command,
was sent back by Sri Rama after his meeting
with the Nisada chief; (14)
भरद्वाजाभ्यनुज्ञानाच्चित्रकूटस्य दर्शनम्॥ १५ I
how he ferried across the Ganga and
called on the sage Bharadwaja, and his

going to Citrakuta on the latter’s instruction;
(15)

वास्तुकर्म fast च भरतागमनं तथा।
प्रसादनं च रामस्य पितुश्च सलिलक्रियाम्॥ es
his erection of a leaf-thatched hut at
Citrakuta and taking up his residence there
alongwith his spouse and younger brother;
the arrival of Bharata and how he tried to
persuade Sri Rama to return to Ayodhya
