914

Stretching the bow-string up to his ear,
that enemy of Indra forthwith shot the said
arrow in rage even as Sankara did at Tripura.

(42)
तस्य रूपं शरस्यासीत् सधूमज्वालमण्डलम्।
at दहिष्यतो घर्मे दावाग्नेरिव मूर्च्छत:॥४३॥

With its circle of smoke and flames the
said arrow looked like a sylvan fire growing
in summer in order to consume a wood.

(43)
ज्वालामाली स तु शर: क्रव्यादानुगतो रणे।
मुक्तो गुल्मान् द्रुमांश्चापि भस्म कृत्वा प्रधावति॥ ४४॥

Having reduced bushes as well as
trees to ashes, when discharged, that arrow

« VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

for its part with its crown of flames coursed
through the field of battle followed by
carnivorous animals. (44)

a तस्य तेजसा दग्धा: सैन्या वैवस्वतस्य तु।
TW तस्मिन् निपतिता माहेन्द्रा इव केतव:॥४५॥

Consumed by the blaze of that shaft,
the troops of Yama (son of the sun-god) for
their part fell on the battlefield like the
standards of the mighty Indra. (45)

ततस्तु सचिवै: सार्धं राक्षसो भीमविक्रम:।
ननाद सुमहानादं कम्पयन्निव मेदिनीम्॥४६॥
Thereupon the ogre of terrible prowess

for his part with his ministers uttered a great
roar convulsing the earth, as it were. (46)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये उत्तरकाण्डे एकविंश: सर्ग: ॥ 22 ॥

Thus ends Canto Twenty-one in the Uttarakanda of the glorious Ramayana of Valmiki,
the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

Canto XXII

Duel between Yama and Ravana; Yama holds back, at the intervention of
Brahma, his rod of destruction which was raised to make short work of
Ravana; the triumphant Ravana leaves the domain of Yama

स तस्य तु महानादं श्रुत्वा वैवस्वत: प्रभु:।
शत्रुं विजयिनं मेने स्वबलस्य च संक्षयम्॥१॥
Hearing that great roar of Ravana, Lord
Yama (son of the sun-god) for his part
concluded the enemy to have got the upper
hand and that his own forces having perished.
(1)

स fe योधान् हतान् मत्वा क्रोधसंरक्तलोचन:।
अब्रवीत् त्वरित: सूतं Ta A उपनीयताम्॥ Vu
Assuming that his own soldiers had
been killed, his eyes blood-red with anger,
Yama hastily said to his charioteer, ‘Let my
chariot be brought.’ (2)

तस्य सूतस्तदा दिव्यमुपस्थाप्य महारथम्।
Rea: स च महातेजा अध्यारोहत तं रथम्॥ ३॥

Having brought his huge celestial car,
the charioteer stood before him and that god
of exceeding energy, ascended the said
chariot. (3)

प्रासमुद्गरहस्तश्च मृत्युस्तस्याग्रत: स्थित:।
येन संक्षिप्यते wd त्रैलोक्यमिदमव्ययम्॥४॥

Nay, with a lance and mallet in his
hand, the god of death by whom all these
three worlds, which are imperishable (in the
sense that they spring up and disappear in
regular succession) are destroyed, stood in
front of him (Yama). (4)

कालदण्डस्तु पार्श्वस्थो मूर्तिमानस्य चाभवत्।
यमप्रहरणं दिव्यं तेजसा ज्वलदग्निवत्॥५॥
Kaladanda, the rod of universal
