1024

“Duly comfort you the wretched
Angada, who is distressed in mind. Be you
not puerile-minded; this city of Kiskindha
depends on you. (15)

अङ्गदस्त्वानयेन्माल्यं वस्त्राणि विविधानि च।
घृतं तैलमथो गन्धान् यच्चात्र समनन्तरम्॥ १६॥
“Let Angada for his part fetch garlands
and textiles of every description, ghee, oil
and fragrant substances and whatever else
is immediately required at this moment for
the cremation. (16)
त्वं तार शिबिकां शीघ्रमादायागच्छसम्भ्रमात्।
TT गुणवती युक्ता ह्यस्मिन् काले विशेषत: ti १७॥
“Taking a palanquin quickly, return you,
O Tara, with expedition; for promptitude is
praiseworthy and particularly called for at
this hour. (17)

सज्जीभवन्तु प्लवगा: शिबिकावाहनोचिता: |
समर्था बलिनश्चैव निर्हरिष्यन्ति वालिनम्॥१८॥

“Let competent and mighty monkeys fit
to carry the palanquin, who will bear away
Vali to the crematory, get ready for the
purpose.” (18)

एवमुक्त्वा तु सुग्रीवं सुमित्रानन्दवर्धन:।

तस्थौ भ्रातृसमीपस्थो लक्ष्मण: परवीरहा॥१९॥
Having instructed Sugriva as aforesaid,

Laksmana, the slayer of hostile warriors, for

his part, who heightened the joy of Sumitra

(his own mother), stood silent by the side of

his eldest brother. (19)

लक्ष्मणस्य वच: श्रुत्वा तार: सम्भ्रान्तमानस: |

प्रविवेश गुहां शीघ्रं शिबिकासक्तमानस:॥ २०॥
Hearing the behest of Laksmana, Tara

with an agitated mind quickly entered

Kiskindha (which was situated inside a cave),
his heart set on getting a palanquin. (20)

आदाय शिबिकां तार: स तु पर्यापतत् पुन:।
वानरैरुह्यमानां ता शूरैरुद्वहनोचितै:।॥ २१॥
दिव्यां भद्रासनयुतां शिबिकां स्यन्दनोपमाम्।
पक्षिकर्मभिराचित्रां द्रुमकर्मविभूषिताम्॥२२॥

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

आचितां चित्रपत्तीभि: सुनिविष्टां समन्तत:।
विमानमिव सिद्धानां जालवातायनायुताम्॥ २३॥
सुनियुक्तां विशालां च सुकृतां शिल्पिभि: कृताम्।
दारुपर्वतकोपेतां चारुकर्मपरिष्कृताम्॥ २४॥
वराभरणहारैश्च चित्रमाल्योपशोभिताम्।
गुहागहनसंछन्नां रक्तचन्दनभूषिताम्॥ २५ ॥
पुष्पौघै: समभिच्छन्नां पद्ममालाभिरेव a

तरुणादित्यवर्णाभिरभ्राजमानाभिराव्रताम् ॥२६॥

The celebrated Tara for his part rushed
back to the spot where Vali lay dead, taking
a well-known chariot-like palanquin, which
was being borne by valiant monkeys fit to
carry it, nay, which had been got from
heaven, was furnished with an elevated and
royal seat and brought good fortune to those
travelling by it; which presented a weird
aspect with carved wooden figures of birds
of every description and was decorated
with the figures of trees; which was crowded
with the figures of foot-soldiers and had its
parts artistically disposed on all sides; which
looked like an aerial car belonging to Siddhas
and was provided with lattices and eye-
holes for the passage of air; which was
well-jointed and commodious and had been
carefully designed by carpenters; which was
provided with pleasure-mounds of wood,
and had been perfected by craftsmen of
lovable workmanship; which was adorned
with excellent ornaments and necklaces and
embellished with flowers of different colours;
which was upholstered with a net and
painted with red sandal-paste; which was
thickly covered on all sides with heaps of
flowers as well as with shining garlands of
lotuses possessing the hue of the rising
sun. (21—26)

ईदृशीं शिबिकां दृष्टवा रामो लक्ष्मणमब्रवीत्।
क्षिप्रं विनीयतां वाली प्रेतकार्यं विधीयताम्॥ २७॥

Seeing such a palanquin, Sri Rama
said to Laksmana, “Let Vali be borne away
to the crematorium with all speed and let the
obsequies relating to the deceased be gone
through.” (27)
