886

एवमुक्त: स सौहार्दाल्लक्ष्मणेन समाहित:।
सह सौमित्रिणा wat विचेतुमुपचक्रमे॥१९॥

Getting composed when exhorted in
these words by Laksmana out of affection,
Sri Rama with Laksmana (son of Sumitra)
proceeded to search for Sita. (19)

तौ ant गिरींश्चैव सरितश्च aif a
निखिलेन विचिन्वन्तौ drat दशरथात्मजौ॥ 2001

Looking about for Sita, the aforesaid
two sons of DaSaratha fully explored forests
as well as mountains, rivers and lakes too.

(20)

तस्य शैलस्य सानूनि शिलाश्च शिखराणि च।
निखिलेन विचिन्वन्तौ Aa तामभिजग्मतु:॥ २१॥

Nay, even while ransacking the
tablelands of the Prasravana mountain as
well as its rocks and peaks in their entirety,
they did not meet her at all. (21)

विचित्य सर्वत: शैलं रामो लक्ष्मणमब्रवीत्।
नेह पश्यामि सौमित्रे वैदेहीं पर्वते शुभाम्॥ २२॥

Having searched the mountain on all
sides Sri Rama said to Laksmana, “I do not
behold, O darling of Sumitra, the lovely Sita
(a princess of the Videha kingdom) on this
mountain anywhere. (22)

ततो दु:खाभिसंतप्तो लक्ष्मणो वाक्यमब्रवीत्।
fray दण्डकारण्यं भ्रातरं दीप्ततेजसम्॥ २३॥

Overwhelmed with agony, while ranging
the forest of Dandaka, Laksmana thereupon
submitted as follows to his eldest brother,
Sri Rama, of flaming energy: (23)
प्राप्स्यसे त्वं महाप्राज्ञ मैथिलीं जनकात्मजाम्।
यथा विष्णुर्महाबाहुर्बलिं बद्ध्वा महीमिमाम्॥ २४॥

“You will recover Sita (a princess of
Mithila), Janaka’s daughter, 0 highly
sagacious prince, even as the mighty-armed
Lord Visnu, in the form of the Divine Dwarf,
got back this globe for his elder brother,
Indra, after tying down Bali as a captive.”

(24)

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

एवमुक्तस्तु वीरेण लक्ष्मणेन स Waa: |
sara दीनया वाचा दु:खाभिहतचेतन:॥ २५॥

Consoled in these words by the gallant
Laksmana, the aforesaid Sri Rama (a scion
of Raghu) for his part, whose understanding
had been dulled by agony, replied in a
piteous tone: (25)

नहि पश्यामि वैदेहीं प्राणेभ्योऽपि गरीयसीम्।। २६॥

“The entire forest has been fully explored
as well as the lotus ponds with expanded
lotuses. This mountain (Prasravana) too,
abounding in caves and cascades, has been
thoroughly searched, O highly wise brother!
But | do not find Sita (a princess of the
Videha territory), who is more valuable to
me even than my life.” (26)

एवं स विलपन् wa: सीताहरणकर्षित:।

दीन: शोकसमाविष्टो मुहूर्तं विह्वलोऽभवत्॥ २७॥
Wailing thus, Sri Rama, who looked

emaciated due to agony caused by the

abduction of Sita and felt miserable,

overwhelmed as he was with grief, was
beside himself for a while. (27)

स विह्वलितसर्वाङ्गो गतबुद्धिर्विचेतन:।
निषसादातुरो दीनो नि:श्वस्याशीतमायतम्॥ २८ ॥

Drawing hot and deep breaths, Sri
Rama, whose all limbs had become out of
control, nay, who had lost his reason and
stood motionless, and who was feeling over-
anxious and miserable, gave way to
despondency. (28)
बहुश: स तु नि:श्वस्य रामो राजीवलोचन:।

a प्रियेति विचुक्रोश बहुशो बाष्पगद्गद:॥ २९॥

Sighing again and again, the aforesaid
SriRama, for his part, who had lotus-like eyes

and had his voice choked through tears,
repeatedly cried out : “Ah, my darling !” (29)

तं सान्त्वयामास ततो लक्ष्मण: प्रियबान्धवम्।
बहुप्रकारं शोकार्त: प्रश्रित: प्रश्रिताञ्जलि:।। ३०॥
