614

अग्निशालां प्रविश्याथ पीत्वाप: परिमृज्य च।
आतिथ्यस्य क्रियाहेतोर्विश्चकर्माणमाह्वयत्॥ ११॥
Entering the fire-sanctuary, sipping water
(thrice according to the Sruti text त्रिराचामेत्
with the recitation of the Divine Names for
self-purification) and wiping the lips twice
according to the Vedic injunction fg: परिमृज्य,
the sage next invoked in the following words
ViSwakarma (the architect of gods) for
providing hospitality to the army of Prince
Bharata: (11)

आह्वये विश्वकर्माणमहं त्वष्टारमेव च।
आतिथ्यं कर्तुमिच्छामि तत्र मे संविधीयताम्॥ १२॥

“| invoke god ViSwakarma, who is also
the divine carpenter (Twasta). | wish to
provide hospitality (to the army of Prince
Bharata). Let everything be got ready in that
connection for me. (12)

आह्वये लोकपालांस्त्रीन् देवान् शक्रपुरोगमान्।
आतिथ्यं कर्तुमिच्छामि तत्र मे संविधीयताम्॥ १३॥

“| further invoke the presence of the
three gods viz., Yama, Varuna and Kubera,
who are the guardians of the spheres, headed
by Indra, the ruler of gods. | wish to provide
hospitality to the army of Prince Bharata.
Let everything be got ready for me towards
that end. (13)

प्राक्स्रोतसश्च या नद्यस्तिर्यक्स्रोतस Ua च।
पृथिव्यामन्तरिक्षे च समायान्त्वद्य सर्वश:॥ १४॥

“Let all the rivers that flow in an easterly
direction as well as those flowing in a
westerly direction on the surface of the
earth as also in the aerial region meet today
in this tract of land. (14)

अन्या: Gat Wa सुरामन्या: सुनिष्ठिताम्।
अपराश्चोदकं शीतमिक्षुकाण्डरसोपमम्॥ १५ UI

“Let some of those rivers bear along
Maireya (a kind of wine made from date
palms etc.,) others highly refined Sura
(another species of wine made from jaggery,
honey and flour), and still others cool water,
delicious like the juice of sugarcane. (15)

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

आह्वये देवगन्धर्वान् विश्वावसुहहाहुहून्।
तथैवाप्सरसो देवगन्धर्वैश्चापि सर्वश:॥१६॥

“| also invoke the presence of the
celestial Gandharvas ViSwavasu, Haha and
Huhu and even so all the celestial nymphs
alongwith the other celestial Gandharvas.

(16)

घृताचीमथ विश्चाचीं मिथ्रकेशीमलम्बुषाम्।
नागदत्तां च हेमां च सोमामद्रिकृतस्थलीम्॥ १७॥
शक्रं याश्चोपतिष्ठन्ति ब्रह्माणं याश्च भामिनी: ।
सर्वास्तुम्बुरुणा सार्धमाह्वये सपरिच्छ्दा:॥ Ve I

“| invoke the Apsara named Ghrtaci
and Viswaci, Misrakesi, Alambusa, Nagadatta
and Hema as also Soma, who has taken up
her abode on a mountain called Mahendra
as well as all the nymphs that wait upon
Indra, the ruler of paradise, as also the
dancing girls that wait upon Brahma in
Brahmaloka alongwith their teacher, Tumburu
and all external appendage such as musical
instruments. (17-18)
at Hey aq दिव्यं वासोभूषणपत्रवत्।
दिव्यनारीफलं wad तत्कौबेरमिहैव तु॥१९॥

“In the same way let that celestial grove
known by the name of Caitraratha presided
over by Kubera, the guardian of the northern
quarter, which is located in the land of the
Uttara Kurus (in the north of India) and the
trees of which are clothed with leaves in the
form of heavenly raiment and jewels and
perpetually bear fruits in the form of heavenly
damsels, actually apppear at this very spot.

(19)
इह मे भगवान् सोमो विधत्तामन्नमुत्तमम्।
भक्ष्यं भोज्यं च चोष्यं च लेह्यं च विविधं बहु॥ २०॥
विचित्राणि च माल्यानि पादपप्रच्युतानि च।
सुरादीनि च पेयानि मांसानि विविधानि च॥ २१॥

“Let the glorious moon-god, the diety
presiding over the annual plants, place at
my disposal abundant excellent food of every
variety, consisting of dishes requiring
mastication as well as those that can be
