* AYODHYAKANDA +

Clad in immaculate silk he glorified
Lord Visnu (the Destroyer of the demon
Madhu) and saluted Him with his head bent
low and urged the Brahmanas to recite
benedictory Mantras (Swasti-Vacana) and
Mantras wishing him a propitious day
(Punyaha-Vacana). (7)

तेषां पुण्याहघोषोऽथ गम्भीरमधुरस्तथा।
अयोध्यां पूरयामास तूर्यघोषानुनादित:॥८॥

United with the echo of musical
instruments the sound of their Punyaha-
Vacana on that occasion, deep and
melodious as it was, filled Ayodhya. (8)

कृतोपवासं q तदा ada सह Waar
अयोध्यानिलय: श्रुत्वा सर्व: प्रमुदितो जन:॥९॥
Hearing that Sri Rama (a scion of Raghu)
had fasted with Sita (a princess of the king
of the Videhas) on that day, the entire
populace of Ayodhya felt highly rejoiced. (9)
ad: पौरजन: Ga: seat रामाभिषेचनम्।
प्रभातां रजनीं दृष्टवा चक्रे शोभयितुं पुरीम्॥१०॥
Hearing of Sri Rama’s installation and

observing that the night had ended, all the
citizens of Ayodhya now began to decorate

the city. (10)
सिताभ्रशिखराभेषु देवतायतनेषु a
चतुष्पथेषु Wa चैत्येष्वट्टालकेषु च॥११॥

नानापण्यसमृद्धेषु वणिजामापणेषु च।
कुटुम्बिनां समृद्धेषु श्रीमत्सु भवनेषु च॥१२॥
सभासु da सर्वासु वृक्षेष्वालक्षितेषु a
ध्वजा: UAHA: साधु पताकाश्चाभवंस्तथा Ul १३॥
Flags and buntings were set up aloft in
a regular way on temples, which looked like
mountain-peaks covered with white clouds,
and at cross-roads, in the midst of streets,
on sacrificial sheds and attics, as well as
on the shops of merchants amply provided
with commodities of various kinds, as also
on the prosperous and splendid residences
of householders, nay, on all public assembly
halls as well as on tops of all prominent
trees. (11—13)

307

नटनर्तकसङ्घानां गायकानां च गायताम्।
मन:कर्णसुखा Aa: शुश्राव WaT तत:॥१४॥
The populace of Ayodhya then listened
to the dialogues of actors and the verbal
representation of the movements of dancers
and the music of the singing musicians,
which delighted the mind and ears of the
listeners. (14)

रामाभिषेकयुक्ताश्च कथाश्चक्रुर्मिथो जना:।
रामाभिषेके सम्प्राप्ते चत्वरेषु गृहेषु च॥१५॥

As the installation of Sr Rama
approached, people meeting together in
quadrangles and houses mutually indulged
in talks bearing exclusively on the installation
of Sri Rama. (15)

बाला अपि क्रीडमाना Westy सङ्घश:।
रामाभिषवसंयुक्ताश्चक्रुरेव कथा मिथ:॥१६॥

The boys too, playing in batches in
front of the doorways of their houses, talked
to one another on topics relating to the
installation of Sri Rama alone. (16)

कृतपुष्पोपहारश्च धूपगन्धाधिवासित: ।
राजमार्ग: Hea: श्रीमान् UR रामाभिषेचने॥ १७॥

On the occasion of Sri Rama's
installation the main road of Ayodhya was
strewn with offerings of flowers and perfumed
with the odour of incense by the citizens
and thus rendered charming. (17)
प्रकाशकरणार्थं च निशागमनशाङ्कया।
agate चक्रुरनुरथ्यासु सर्वश:॥१८॥

Nay, in order to provide light in anticipation
of nightfall by the time Sri Rama should move
out in a procession through the streets of the
city after installation as Prince Regent, the
citizens also set up in every street throughout
the city lamp-posts shaped like trees with
lights on every bough. (18)

आकांक्षमाणा रामस्य यौवराज्याभिषेचनम्॥ १९॥
समेत्य सङ्घश: सर्वे चत्वरेषु सभासु च।
कथयन्तो मिथस्तत्र प्रशशंसुर्जनाधिपम्॥ २०॥
