३३2

“Surely, | do not see the capacity of
anyone in the world other than Rama to
cross the sea alongwith the monkeys. But
even if he succeeds in doing so, victory is
surely mine.” (26)

तस्य कामपरीतस्य निशम्य परिदेवितम्।
कुम्भकर्ण: Walt वचनं चेदमब्रवीत्॥ २७॥

Hearing the wail of Ravana, who was
overwhelmed with passion, Kumbhakarna
flew into a rage and spoke the following
words: (27)

यदा oq wet सलक्ष्मणस्य
yea सीता Ga सा इहाहृता।
apd समीक्ष्यैव सुनिश्चितं तदा
भजेत चित्तं यमुनेव यामुनम्॥ २८॥

“Even as the river Yamuna fills the
depression near its source the moment it
descends on earth, your mind ought to have
sought careful deliberation with us that very
moment when the aforesaid Sita was actually
borne away here by force (when she was
alone in the cottage) after a single impulsive
thought from the hermitage of Rama; Rama,
who was accompanied by Laksmana. (28)

सर्वमेतन्महाराज कृतमप्रतिमं तव।
विधीयेत सहास्माभिरादावेवास्य कर्मण:॥ २९॥

“All this doing of yours, O great king, is
unworthy of you. Deliberation ought to have
been held with us at the very beginning of
this act. (29)

न्यायेन राजकार्याणि a: करोति दशानन।
न स संतप्यते पश्चान्निश्चितार्थमतिर्नृप:॥ ३०॥

“A monarch who discharges his
kingly duties with justice, his mind having
determined his purpose in consultation
with his counsellors, does not have to repent
O Ravana! (30)

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA +

अनुपायेन कर्माणि विपरीतानि यानि च।
क्रियमाणानि दुष्यन्ति हवींष्यप्रयतेष्विव॥ ३१॥
“Actions which are undertaken without
recourse to fair means and run counter
to the principles of righteousness beget
sin even as oblations used in impure
sacrifices undertaken for malevolent
purposes. (31)

य: पश्चात् पूर्वकार्याणि कर्माण्यभिचिकीर्षति।
पूर्वं चापरकार्याणि स न वेद नयानयौ॥ ३२॥

“He who seeks to perform at a later
date duties requiring to be performed earlier
and those which ought to be performed
later, performs at an early date, does not
know right and wrong. (32)

चपलस्य तु कृत्येषु प्रसमीक्ष्याधिकं बलम्।
छिद्रमन्ये प्रपद्यन्ते क्रौञ्चस्य खमिव द्विजा:॥ ३३॥

“Observing the superior strength of an
enemy who is hasty in actions, others for
their part look for his weak point even as
swans seek the fissure* in the Kraufica
mountain in order to cross it. (33)
त्वयेदं महदारब्धं कार्यमप्रतिचिन्तितम्।
दिष्ट्यात्वां नावधीद् wat विषमिश्रमिवामिषम्॥ ३४॥

“This great undertaking, which was not
duly considered, has been set on foot by
you. By your good luck Rama did not kill
you, even as food mixed with poison would
kill the consumer. (34)
तस्मात् त्वया समारब्धं कर्म ह्यप्रतिमं ut: |
ae समीकरिष्यामि हत्वा शात्रूंस्तवानघ॥ ३५॥

“Therefore, making short work of your
enemies, O brother, who are free from
sorrow, | shall actually neutralize the

unworthy action that has been started by
you in relation to your enemies. (35)

* We read in the Mahabharata (Salya-Parva, 46.84) how God Kartikeya (son of Lord Siva) made a

fissure in the Kraufica mountain with His javelin.
