# YUDDHAKANDA #

time, O prince, who are ever victorious in
combat, on seeing you penetrating deep
into the forest on foot before with the sole
desire of practising virtue, clad in pieces of
bark, disinherited from sovereignty and
deprived of all enjoyments like an immortal
fallen from heaven, having renounced all
your possessions, with your spouse, Sita,
as the third (of your party besides Laksmana
and yourself), bent as you were on carrying
out the behest of your father and intent on
implementing the pledge given by your father
to Kaikeyi, and living on wild roots and
fruits. (5—7)
wad तु समृद्धार्थं समित्रगणबान्धवम्।
समीक्ष्य विजितारिं च ममाभूत् प्रीतिरुत्तमा॥८॥
“Supreme joy is, however, being
experienced by me now on perceiving you
fully accomplished of purpose, now that you
have completely conquered your enemies,
and are accompanied by hosts of your
friends and near and dear ones, viz., your
consort and younger brother, Laksmana.(8)

wd च Gage a fated wa weal
यत् त्वया विपुलं wre जनस्थाननिवासिना॥ ९॥
“Nay, all your joy and sorrow that was
experienced by you in abundance while
sojourning in the forest of Janasthana is
known to me, O Rama (a scion of Raghu)!

(9)
ब्राह्मणार्थे नियुक्तस्य रक्षत: सर्वतापसान्।
रावणेन eM wat बभूवेयमनिन्दिता॥१०॥

“This irreproachable consort of yours
was borne away by Ravana while you were
busy protecting all the ascetics, who were
carrying on their austerities in that area,
entrusted as you were by the will of
Providence with the work of safe-guarding
the interests of the Brahmanas. (10)

wae waa सीतोन्मथनमेव a
कबन्धदर्शनं wa पम्पाभिगमनं तथा॥११॥

817

सुग्रीवेण च ते सख्यं यत्र वाली हतस्त्वया।
मार्गणं चैव वैदेह्या: कर्म वातात्मजस्य TN १२॥
विदितायां च वैदेह्यां नलसेतुर्यथा कृत:।
यथा चादीपिता लङ्का प्रहृष्टैर्हरियूथपै:॥ १३॥
सपुत्रलान्धवामात्य: सल: सहव्राहन:।
यथा च निहत: संख्ये रावणो बलदर्पित:॥ १४॥
यथा च निहते तस्मिन् रावणे देवकण्टके।
warms त्रिदशैर्यथा दत्तश्च ते वर:॥१५॥
Wa ममैतद् विदितं तपसा धर्मवत्सल।
सम्पतन्ति च मे शिष्या: प्रवृत्त्याख्या: पुरीमित: 1 १६ ॥
“Nay, even the appearance of Marica
as well as the abduction of Sita by Ravana
as also the sight of Kabandha and, even so,
your arrival at the Pampa lake, again, your
alliance with Sugriva in pursuance of which
his elder brother, Vali was killed by you, also
the quest for Sita (a princess of the Videha
territory) and the exploit in the form of leaping
across the sea by Hanuman, son of the wind-
god, again, how on the said princess of the
Videha territory having been traced, a bridge
was constructed over the sea by the monkey
chief, Nala, and how Lanka was set fire to by
the commanders of monkey troops, who felt
greatly rejoiced over the fall of Indrajit and
how Ravana, who was elated with pride of
his might, was killed in combat with his sons,
kinsfolk and ministers as well as with his
army and mounts, again your meeting with
the gods on the aforesaid Ravana, who was
a thorn in the side of gods, having been
made short work of, and how boons were
conferred on you by them—all this is known
to me by virtue of my asceticism, O lover of
virtue! Nay, my disciples, who communicate
to me tidings relating to Ayodhya, repair in a
body now and then from this place to the
city. (11—16)
अहमप्यत्र ते दद्मि at शस्त्रभृतां वर।
अर्घ्य प्रतिगृहाणेदमयोध्यां श्वो गमिष्यसि॥ १७॥

“I, too, hereby confer a boon on you,
O jewel among those who bear weapons on
