398

| was unexpectedly delivered by Rama
saying “Stay! Stay!!” (10)

एष शैलशिलाभिस्तु पूरयित्वा महार्णवम्।
द्वारमाश्रित्य लङ्काया रामस्तिष्ठति सायुध:॥११॥
“Having filled the extensive sea with
rocks of mountains and taking up his
position at the very gate of Lanka, Rama
stands there duly equipped with weapons.
(11)

गरुडव्यूहमास्थाय सर्वतो हरिभिर्वृत:।
मां विसृज्य महातेजा लङ्कामेवातिवर्तते॥१२॥

“Having disposed his army in the form
of Garuda (an eagle) and surrounded as he
was on all sides by monkeys, nay, setting
me free, Rama, who is endowed with
extraordinary energy, is advancing towards
Lanka itself. (12)
पुरा प्राकारमायाति क्षिप्रमेकतरं कुरु।
सीतां वापि प्रयच्छाशु युद्धं वापि प्रदीयताम्॥ १३॥

“Before he reaches the defensive wall
do one thing or the other with all speed:

either return Sita immediately or battle may
be given to him.” (13)
मनसा Ad तदा प्रेक्ष्य तच्छुत्वा राक्षसाधिप:।
शार्दूलं सुमहद्वाक्यमथोवाच A रावण:॥१४॥
Hearing the aforesaid submission and
reviewing it in his mind then and there, the
celebrated Ravana, the suzerain lord of
ogres, now addressed the following highly
momentous reply to Sardula: (14)

ae मां प्रतियुध्यन्ते देवगन्धर्वदानवा:।
नैव सीतां प्रदास्यामि सर्वलोकभयादपि॥ १५॥

“Even if gods, Gandharvas (the
musicians of heaven) and demons were to
fight against me, | shall under no

circumstance restore Sita even under stress
of peril from all the worlds.” (15)

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA +

एवमुक्त्वा महातेजा रावण: पुनरब्रवीत्।
चरिता भवता सेना HSA VAT: प्लवंगमा:॥ १६॥

Having replied as aforesaid, Ravana,
who was endowed with extraordinary energy,
spoke again as follows: “The army stands
explored by you. Who are the gallant monkeys
in it? (16)
किं प्रभा: कीदृशा: सौम्य वानरा ये दुरासदा: |
कस्य पुत्राश्च पौत्राश्च तत्त्वमाख्याहि राक्षस॥ १७॥

“Of what description are the monkeys
who are difficult to approach, O gentle one,
and how powerful are they? Nay, whose

sons and grandsons are they? Speak the
bare truth, O ogre! (17)

तथात्र प्रतिपत्स्यामि ज्ञात्वा तेषां बलाबलम्।
अवश्यं खलु संख्यानं कर्तव्यं युद्धमिच्छता॥ १८॥
“Having known their strength and
weakness, | shall take my decision on the
matter accordingly. Indeed a calculation need

must be made of one’s own army as well as
of the hostile ranks by him who courts war.”

(18)
अथैवमुक्तर शार्दूलो रावणेनोत्तमश्चर:।

se वचनमारेभे वक्तुं रावणसंनिधौ॥१९॥

Interrogated thus by Ravana, Sardila,
the foremost spy, forthwith proceeded to
speak as follows in the presence of the
former: (19)

अधथर्क्षरजस: at aft राजन् aga: |
गद्गदस्याथ पुत्रोऽत्र जाम्बवानिति fasqa: i200

First, there is King Sugriva (son of
Rksaraja), who is very difficult to conquer in
an encounter, O king! And here is a son of
Gadgada*, widely known by the name of
Jambavan. (20)

गद्गदस्याथ पुत्रोऽन्यो गुरुपुत्र: शतक्रतो:।
met यस्य पुत्रेण कृतमेकेन रक्षसाम्॥२१॥

* Although Jambavan has been spoken of elsewhere as a progeny of Brahma, he is referred to as a
son of Gadgada in this context evidently because he was brought up by Gadgada.
