1148

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

एष्टितम: at:
Canto LX

Having inspired confidence in the monkeys, Sampati proceeds to relate to
Angada and others, who longed to hear more about Sita, the story of
Sita’s abduction in greater detail. He tells them how, having fallen on
the Vindhyan range with his wings completely burnt by the scorching
sun, he swooned and regained consciousness only on the
seventh day, when he came to know that it was the Vindhyan
range on which he had fallen. Descending with difficulty
from the eminence, he made his way into the hermitage
of a sage named Nisakara, and bowed down to him.
Recognizing him to be Sampati, the sage inquired
as to how his wings had come to be burnt

Wd: कृतोदकं स्नातं तं yet हरियूथपा:।
उपविष्टा गिरौ रम्ये परिवार्य समन्तत:॥१॥
The monkey chiefs now sat on the
lovely mountain encompassing on all sides
the vulture, Sampati, who had offered water
to the spirit of his deceased brother and
taken his bath. (1)

wage =a: सर्वैर्हरिभिर्वृतम्।
जनितप्रत्ययो हर्षात् सम्पाति: पुनरब्रवीत्॥२॥

Having inspired confidence in the
monkeys, Sampati joyously spoke once more
to the celebrated Angada, who was sitting
close by, surrounded by all those monkeys :

(2)
कृत्वा नि:शब्दमेकाग्रा: ya हरयो AAI
तथ्यं संकीर्तयिष्यामि यथा जानामि मैथिलीम्॥ ३॥

“Let all the monkeys listen to me
attentively, observing complete silence. |

will narrate in detail the truth as to how |
came to know of Sita, the princess of Mithila.

(3)
ara विन्ध्यस्य शिखरे पतितोऽस्मि पुरानघ।
सूर्यतापपरीताङ्गो निर्दग्ध: सूर्यरश्मिभि:॥४॥

“Scorched by the rays of the sun, all
my limbs overpowered by the sun’s heat, |

fell in the former days on a summit of this
Vindhyan range, O sinless ones ! (4)

लब्धसंज्ञस्तु were विवशो बिह्वलन्निव।
वीक्षमाणो fest: सर्वा नाभिजानामि किंचन॥ I

“Having regained consciousness after
six nights, | for my part stood looking all-
round, powerless and fainting as it were,
but could not distinguish anything. (5)

ततस्तु सागराञ्शैलान् नदी: Gat: सरांसि च।
वनानि च प्रदेशांश्च निरीक्ष्य मतिरागता॥६॥

“Then on scanning the seas and rocks,
all the rivers and lakes, woods and the
parts of the country, however, memory
returned to me. (6)

हृष्टपक्षिगणाकीर्ण: कन्दरोदरकूटवान्।
दक्षिणस्योदधेस्तीरे विन्ध्योऽयमिति निश्चित:॥ ७॥
“It was eventually concluded to be no
other than the Vindhya mountain on the
shore of the southern sea—a mountain which
is crowded with flocks of joyous birds and
contains caves in its flanks and a number
of peaks. (7).
आसीच्चात्राश्रमं qa सुरैरपि सुपूजितम्।
ऋषिर्निशाकरो नाम यस्मिन्नुग्रतपाऽभवत्॥८॥

“Again, here there was a holy hermitage,
