* ARANYAKANDA «

एकस्य नापराधेन लोकान् हन्तुं त्वमर्हसि।
ननु जानामि कस्यायं भग्न: सांग्रामिको रथ:॥ ६॥
केन वा Hel वा हेतो: सयुग: सपरिच्छद:।
ख्रुरनेमिक्षतश्चायं fant रुधिरबिन्दुभि:॥ ७॥
देशो निर्वृत्तसंग्राम: सुघोर: पार्थिवात्मज।
wae तु विमर्दोऽयं न द्वयोर्वदतां वर॥८॥
“You ought not to annihilate the worlds
for the offence of one individual. | shall surely
try to ascertain whose is this chariot of war,
and by whom and for what purpose it was
broken with its yoke and external appendages
such as a canopy and whisks. This piece of
ground has been cleft by hoofs and felloes
and sprinkled with drops of blood and presents
a most horrid appearance, which leads me to
think that a combat has taken place here, O
prince ! But this has been the encounter of a
single chariot-warrior, not of two, O jewel
among the eloquent ! (6—8)
नहि ad fe पश्यामि बलस्य महत: पदम्।
नैकस्य तु ha लोकान् विनाशयितुमर्हसि॥ ९॥
युक्तदण्डा fe मृदव: प्रशान्ता वसुधाधिपा: |
सदा त्वं सर्वभूतानां शरण्य: UAT Aha: i १०॥
“| do not actually perceive the footprints
of a large army imprinted on this ground.
And you ought not to annihilate the worlds
on account of one man; for suzerain lords
of the earth are just in their punishment,
mild and very composed; while you are
always fit to protect all created beings, nay,
their supreme asylum. (9-10)
को नु दारप्रणाशं A साधु मन्येत राघव।
सरित: सागरा: wen देवगन्धर्वदानवा:॥११॥
नालं ते विप्रियं कर्तुं दीक्षितस्येव साधव:।
a राजन् हृता सीता तमन्वेषितुमर्हसि॥ १२॥
मद्द्वितीयो धनुष्पाणि: सहायै: परमर्षिभि:।
was वा विचेष्याम: पर्वतांश्च वनानि च॥१३॥

899

गुहाश्च विविधा घोरा: पद्मिन्यो विविधास्तथा।
देवगन्धर्वलोकांश्च विचेष्याम: समाहिता:॥ १४॥
यावन्नाधिगमिष्यामस्तव भार्यापहारिणम्।
न चेत् साम्ना प्रदास्यन्ति पत्नीं ते त्रिदशेश्वरा: |
कोसलेन्द्र तत: पश्चात् प्राप्तकालं करिष्यसि॥ १५ ॥

“Who on earth would approve of the
disappearance or destruction of your spouse?
Even rivers, seas, mountains, gods,
Gandharvas and demons have no power to
give offence to you any more than the
saintly priests officiating at a sacrifice to do
anything distasteful to the man consecrated
for a sacrificial performance. With me as
your companion, and bow in hand, and with
the greatest of sages as your helpers, you
ought to seek out him by whom Sita has
been borne away. We shall explore the
ocean as well as the mountains and forests
as also the various fearful caves and the
different lotus-ponds, and_ shall also
steadfastly search the realms of gods and
Gandharvas until we find the abductor of
your consort. If the rulers of gods do not
restore your spouse by peaceful means,
you may then adopt a measure which is
opportune, viz., coercion, O ruler of the
kingdom of Kosala? (11—15)

vies साम्ना विनयेन सीतां
नयेन न प्राप्स्यसि चेन्नरेन्द्र।

a: समुत्सादय हेमपुङ्खै-
र्महेन्द्रवज्रप्रतिमै: TT: ॥ १६ ॥

“If you do not recover Sita through
exemplary conduct, concilation, modesty and
prudence, then annihilate the worlds with
volleys of golden-feathered arrows vying
with the thunderbolt of the mighty Indra (the
ruler of gods), O ruler of men! (16)

sere श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्येऽरण्यकाण्डे पञ्चषष्टितम: सर्ग: ॥ ६५ ॥

Thus ends Canto Sixty-five in the Aranyakanda of the glorious Ramayana of Valmiki,
the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

