512

standing with joined palms, his face covered
with tears. And so did Sita, engaged in

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

austerities, gazed weeping on the royal chariot
driven by me, as well as on me.” (37)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्येऽयोध्याकाण्डेऽष्टपञ्चाश: सर्ग: ॥ ५८ ॥

Thus ends Canto Fifty-eight in the Ayodhyakanda of the glorious Ramayana of
Valmiki, the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

एकोनषष्टितम: सर्ग:
Canto LIX

To satisfy the Emperor's curiosity, Sumantra tells him further of Sri Rama’s
departure for the forest, and also apprises him of the pitiable condition
of the animate as well as of the inanimate creation in his realm as
also of his capital consequent on Sri Rama’s exile. Hearing
of the woeful tale, DaSaratha raves like a madman
in many ways in the presence of
the charioteer-minister

मम त्वश्वा Rama न Wada वर्त्मनि।
उष्णमश्रु विमुञ्चन्तो wa सम्प्रस्थिते वनम्॥१॥
उभाभ्यां राजपुत्राभ्यामथ कृत्वाहमञ्जलिम्।
प्रस्थितो रथमास्थाय तद्दु:खमपि धारयन्॥ २॥
“Offering salutation with folded hands
to both the princes on Sri Rama having duly
departed for the forest, and mounting the
chariot, | too forthwith made ready to depart
for Ayodhya, restraining that unbearable
agony of separation from Sri Rama. My
horses, however, even as | turned my back
on Sri Rama, did not proceed on their journey
to Ayodhya and stood shedding tears of
grief. (1-2)

Tet सार्धं axa स्थितोऽस्मि दिवसान् बहून्।
आशया यदि मां Wa: पुन: शब्दापयेदिति॥ ३॥
“| remained with Guha, the chieftain of
Srngaverapura, at his own place for many
(three) days in the hope that Sri Rama
might probably call me again through
foresters. (3)

विषये ते महाराज महाव्यसनकर्शिता:।
अपि वृक्षा: परिम्लाना: सपुष्पाङ्कुरकोरका: I ४॥

“Withered through intense suffering, O
great monarch, even trees in your kingdom
with their flowers, shoots and buds have
been blasted. (4)

उपतप्तोदका Ad: पल्वलानि aia च।
परिशुष्कपलाशानि वनान्युपवनानि च॥५॥

“The water of the rivers as well as of
ponds and lakes has got dried up. Nay, the
leaves in the wood and groves have got
withered. (5)

न च सर्पन्ति सत्त्वानि व्याला न प्रचरन्ति च।
रामशोकाभिभूतं तन्निष्कूजमभवद् वनम्॥६॥

“Living beings in the forest do not move
about, nor do reptiles crawl even in search
of food, the entire living creation being
overwhelmed with grief born of separation
from Sri Rama. Nay, the forest on the way
is noiseless too, as it were, though full of
birds. (6)

लीनपुष्करपत्राश्च नद्यश्च कलुषोदका:।

aaa: पद्मिन्यो लीनमीनविहंगमा:॥७॥
“The water of the rivers, again, has

become turbid and the leaves of the lotuses
