# YUDDHAKANDA #

a वर्धयित्वा काकुत्स्थं रामेण प्रतिनन्दिता:।
अनुजग्मुर्महात्मानं भ्रातृभि: परिवारितम्॥ ३५॥

Having felicitated Sri Rama, a scion of
Kakutstha, and joyously greeted in return
by Sri Rama, they followed at the heels of
the noble-minded Sri Rama, who was
surrounded by his three brothers. (35)

अमात्यैर्ब्रह्मणैश्चैव तथा प्रकृतिभिर्वृत:।
श्रिया विरुरुचे रामो नक्षत्रैरिव चन्द्रमा:॥ ३६॥

Surrounded by his ministers as well as
by Brahmanas, as also by the people, Sri
Rama shone brightly in his own effulgence
as the moon would shine in the midst of
galaxy of stars. (36)

स पुरोगामिभिस्तूर्यैस्तालस्वस्तिकपाणिभि:।
प्रव्याहरद्भिर्मुदितैर्मङ्गलानि git ययौ॥ ३७॥

He drove surrounded by musicians,
who marched ahead of him with trumpets,
wooden cymbals and Swastikas (a kind of
musical instrument) in their hands, joyfully
singing festive songs. (37)
Aad जातरूपं च गाव: कन्या: सहद्विजा:।
नरा मोदकहस्ताश्च रामस्य पुरतो ययु:॥ ३८॥

Pots containing unbroken grains of rice,
dyed with turmeric powder and thereby
appearing golden in colour, cows and maidens
accompanied by Brahmanas (lit., the twice-
born) and men carrying balls of sweets in their
hands* marched before Sri Rama. (38)

सख्यं च राम: सुग्रीवे प्रभावं चानिलात्मजे।
वानराणां च तत् कर्म ह्याचचक्षेऽथ मन्त्रिणाम्॥ ३९॥
Sri Rama next spoke to his counsellors
about his alliance with Sugriva, the might of
Hanuman (son of the wind-god) and the
well-known achievements of the monkeys.
(39)

श्रुत्वा च विस्मयं जग्मुरयोध्यापुरवासिन:।
वानराणां च Ad कर्म राक्षसानां च तद् बलम्।
विभीषणस्य संयोगमाचचक्षेऽथ AAU so UI

The denizens of the city of Ayodhya

837

were astonished to hear of the well-known
achievements of the monkeys in the shape
of the conquest of Lanka and the commonly
known might of the ogres. Sri Rama further
spoke to his counsellors about his meeting
with Vibhisana. (40)

ह्युतिमानेतदाख्याय रामो वानरसंयुत:।
हृष्टपुष्टजनाकीर्णामयोध्यां प्रविवेश स:॥४१॥

Having communicated all this, the
celebrated and glorious Sri Rama, who was
accompanied by the monkeys, penetrated
deep into Ayodhya, which was crowded
with happy and well-fed people. (41)

ततो Gea पौरा: पताकाश्च We गृहे।
ऐक्ष्वाकाध्युषितं रम्यमाससाद पितुर्गृहम्॥४२॥

The citizens thereupon raised aloft the
pennons on their respective dwellings. Sri
Rama too reached the lovely abode of his
father, which had earlier been occupied by
the kings of Ikswaku’s dynasty. (42)
अथाब्रवीद् राजपुत्रो भरतं धर्मिणां वरम्।
अर्थोपहितया वाचा मधुरं रघुनन्दन:॥४३॥
पितुर्भवनमासाद्य प्रविश्य च महात्मन:।
कौसल्यां च सुमित्रां च कैकेयीमभिवाद्य च॥ ४४॥

Nay, having reached and penetrated
deep into the abode of his high-souled father
and greeted his mothers Kausalya as well
as Sumitra and Kaikeyl, Prince Sri Rama,
the delight of the Raghus, then spoke as
follows to Bharata, a jewel among the
virtuous, in a sweet language pregnant with
meaning: (43-44)
मुक्तावैदूर्यसंकीर्णं सुग्रीवाय निवेदय॥४५॥

“Place at the disposal of Sugriva, my
well-known grand and most splendid palace
studded with pearls and cat’s-eye gems,
including the Asoka grove attached to it.” (45)

तस्य Aq वचनं Brat भरत: सत्यविक्रम:।
Bed गृहीत्वा सुग्रीवं प्रविवेश तमालयम्॥४६॥

* The presence of all these articles, animals and individuals is believed to be auspicious.
