* AYODHYAKANDA +

your opposition to the heretical view. Again,
in order to pacify you when | found you

681

angry has this revised utterance been made
by me, O Rama!” (39)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्येऽयोध्याकाण्डे नवाधिकरशततम: AA: Il 208 ॥

Thus ends Canto One hundred and nine in the Ayodhyakanda of the glorious
Ramayana of Valmiki, the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

दशाधिकशततम: सर्ग:
Canto CX

Pacifying Sri Rama, who had got angry with Jabali, Sage Vasistha
urges him to get himself consecrated as king since from
Ikswaku, the progenitor of his race, downward the eldest

son alone had ascended the throne of Ayodhya and
because he was not only the eldest of his
father’s sons, but the ablest too

क्रुद्धमाज्ञाय we तु वसिष्ठ: प्रत्युवाच ह।
जाबालिरपि जानीते लोकस्यास्य गतागतिम्॥ १॥
Perceiving Sri Rama to be angry,
Vasistha too pleaded with him (for Jabali)
as follows: “Jabali also recognizes the
departure of the human soul from this world
and its return to the mortal plane. (1)

निवर्तयितुकामस्तु त्वामेतद् वाक्यमब्रवीत्।
इमां लोकसमुत्पत्तिं लोकनाथ Parr मे॥ २॥

He, however, spoke to you as aforesaid
desirous as he was of persuading you to
return to Ayodhya. Pray, hear from me
about the creation of worlds, O protector of
the world ! (2)

wa सलिलमेवासीत् पृथिवी aa निर्मिता।
तत: समभवद् ब्रह्मा स्वयंभूर्दैवतै: सह॥ ३॥
“There was water alone in the beginning
of creation, the earth was evolved in water.
Next appeared the self-born Brahma
alongwith gods. (3)
स वराहस्ततो भूत्वा प्रोज्जहार वसुंधराम्।
असृजच्च जगत् सर्वं सह TA: कृतात्मभि:॥ ४॥
“Appearing as the Divine Boar, Brahma,
who is the same as Visnu, the Protector,

then lifted the earth out of the water into
which it had disappeared and in conjunction
with his sons (Marici and others), who had
subdued their mind, evolved the whole
universe. (4)
आकाशप्रभवो TAT शाश्वतो नित्य अव्यय:।
तस्मान्मरीचि: संजज्ञे मरीचे: कश्यप: Wau ५॥
“The eternal, everlasting and
imperishable Brahma sprang out of ether,
which is no other than Brahma, the Absolute,
from him came forth Marici, and Kasyapa
was the son of Marichi. (5)

विवस्वान् कश्यपाज्जज्ञे मनुर्वैवस्वत: स्वयम्।
a तु प्रजापति: पूर्वमिक्ष्वाकुस्तु मनो: Aa: ug tl

‘“Vivaswan, the sun-god, descended
from Kasyapa. Manu himself was the son of
Vivaswan. Manu for his part was formerly a
lord of creation, and Manu’s son was
Ikswaku. (6)
यस्येयं प्रथमं दत्ता समृद्धा ATT मही।
तमिक्ष्वाकुमयोध्यायां राजानं विद्धि Grit

“Know that Ikswaku to be the very first
ruler of Ayodhya, to whom this prosperous

earth was entrusted for the first time by the
said Manu. (7)
