606

“Sita quite evidently had her upper
garment entangled with these blades of grass
at that time. That is why these silk threads
appear stuck to them. (15)

मन्ये Ud: सुखा शय्या येन बाला तपस्विनी |
सुकुमारी सती qa न विजानाति मैथिली ।। १६॥

“| conclude the husband’s bed, be it
soft or hard, is comfortable at all events to
a devoted wife, as is evident from the fact
that Sita, the princess of Mithila, though
youthful and tender, experiences no smart
even while reposing on such a hard and
rough bed, virtuous as she is and devoted
to austerities. (16)

हा हतोऽस्मि नृशंसोऽस्मि यत् सभार्य: कृते मम।
ईदृशीं राघव: शय्यामधिशेते ह्यनाथवत्॥१७॥

“Alas, | am ruined. Cruel am I, in that
on my account Sri Rama (a scion of Raghu)
with his wife has to lie down on such a hard
bed like a forlorn creature ! (17)

सार्वभौमकुले जात: सर्वलोकसुखावह:।
सर्वप्रियकरस्त्यक्त्वा राज्यं प्रियमनुत्तमम्॥१८॥
कथमिन्दीवरश्यामो रक्ताक्ष: प्रियदर्शन:।
सुखभागी न दु:खार्ह: शयितो भुवि राघव:॥ १९॥
“Relinquishing his beloved rulership,
which is unsurpassed, how did Sri Rama (a
scion of Raghu), born in a line of universal
monarchs, who brings happiness to the
whole world and does good to all, who is
blue as a lotus, has reddish eyes and is
pleasing of appearance and who is deserving
of happiness and unworthy of suffering, lie
down on the ground? (18-19)

धन्य: खलु महाभागो लक्ष्मण: शुभलक्षण:।

भ्रातरं विषमे काले यो राममनुवर्तते॥२०॥
“Blessed and highly fortunate indeed is

Laksmana, endowed with auspicious bodily

marks, who is following his eldest brother in

a critical period of his life ! (20)

सिद्धार्था खलु वैदेही पतिं यानुगता वनम्।
aad संशयिता: wa हीनास्तेन महात्मना॥ २१॥

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

“Truly accomplished of purpose is Sita,
a princess of the Videha kingdom, who
followed her husband to the forest ! We are,
however, all plunged in doubt as to our
getting a chance to serve him, bereft as we
are of that high-souled prince. (21)

अकर्णधारा पृथिवी शून्येव प्रतिभाति मे।
Ta दशरथे vat wa चारण्यमाश्रिते॥२२॥

“Emperor Dasaratha having ascended
to heaven and Sri Rama having taken up
his abode in the forest, the earth appears
desolate to me like a boat without a pilot.

(22)
न च प्रार्थयते कश्चिन्मनसापि वसुंधराम्।
वने निवसतस्तस्य बाहुवीर्याभिरक्षिताम्॥ २३॥

“Nor does anyone lay claim even with

his mind to the sovereignty of the globe,

which stands protected on all sides by the
very might of arms of Sri Rama dwelling in

the forest. (23)
शून्यसंवरणारक्षामयन्त्रितहयद्विपाम् ।
अनावृतपुरद्वारां राजधानीमरक्षिताम्॥ २४॥

शत्रवो नाभिमन्यन्ते भक्ष्यान् विषकृतानिव॥ २५॥

“The enemies do not claim as their
own, any more than one would like to have
articles made of poisoned food, the capital,
Ayodhya, whose protective wall is lying
undefended, the horses and elephants in
which roam about uncontrolled, whose
entrances are never closed and the troops
stationed in which are cheerless, and as
such which is altogether unprotected,
unguarded, desolate and reduced to a
wretched condition. (24-25)

अद्यप्रभृति भूमौ तु शयिष्येऽहं तृणेषु वा।
फलमूलाशनो नित्यं जटाचीराणि धारयन्॥ २६॥

“From this day onward | shall lie down
on the bare ground or on blades of grass,
living on fruits and roots alone from day to
day and wearing matted hair on my head
and the bark of trees on my person. (26)
