88

through righteousness, nay, providing
maintenance for his subjects and abstaining
from unrighteousness, the said tiger among
men, who was munificent and true to his
promise and well-known as such in all the
three worlds, ruled over this earth while
residing in Ayodhya. (21-22)

@ wena wg wan fey dautidorn 23 0

He never met an enemy, who could
match, much less excel, him in strength,
and had a number of allies; the rulers of the
adjoining territories bowed to him, i.e.,
accepted his suzerainty and all his enemies

« VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

were got rid of by his very glory. In this way
the emperor ruled over the world even as
Indra, the ruler of the gods, reigns supreme
in heaven. (23)

स पार्थिवो दीप्तिमवाप युक्तस्तेजोमयैर्गोभिरिवोदितोऽर्क: ।। VX Ut

Surrounded by the aforesaid
counsellors, who had been charged with
the act of deliberation and were devoted to
the interests of the state, nay, who were
clever and efficient and loyal to the king,
the said monarch, Emperor DaSaratha, shone
with splendour even as a rising sun shines
bright when joined with its glorious rays.

(24)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये बालकाण्डे FAA: सर्ग: ॥ ७॥

Thus ends Canto Seven in the Balakanda of the glorious Ramayana of Valmiki,
the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

Canto VII

The king’s proposal to perform a horse-sacrifice for being blessed with a son
and the acclamation of the counsellors and other Brahmanas

Beret तप्यमानस्य नासीद् वंशकर: सुत:॥१॥

There was no son to perpetuate the
line of the magnanimous King DaSaratha,
whose glory has been depicted above (in
the foregoing canto) and who knew what is
right, even though he had been grieving for
want of a son. (1)

चिन्तयानस्य तस्यैवं बुद्धिरासीन्महात्मन:।
gaat वाजिमेधेन किमर्थं न यजाम्यहम्॥ २॥
While the high-souled king was reflecting
on the matter once, the following idea
occurred to him: “Why not propitiate the
Deity by means of a horse-sacrifice in order
to be blessed with a son?” (2)
स निश्चितां मतिं कृत्वा यष्टव्यमिति बुद्धिमान्।
मन्त्रिभि: सह धर्मात्मा सर्वैरपि कृतात्मभि:॥ ३॥

ततोऽब्रवीन्महातेजा: सुमन्त्रं मन्तिसत्तम।
शीघ्रमानय A सर्वान् गुरूंस्तान् सपुरोहितान्॥४॥

Having made a firm resolve in
consultation with all his counsellors of pure
intellect that a sacrifice must be performed,
the wise king, whose mind was devoted to
righteousness and who was possessed of
uncommon glory, forthwith said to Sumantra,
“O jewel among ministers, please fetch
speedily all my celebrated preceptors
including family priests.” (3-4)
तत: सुमन्त्रस्त्वरितं गत्वा त्वरितविक्रम:।
समानयत् स तान् सर्वान् समस्तान् वेदपारगान्॥ ७५ ॥

Proceeding at once with quick steps,
the said Sumantra thereupon brought together

in a body the aforesaid preceptors, all of
whom had mastered the Vedas. (5)
