* AYODHYAKANDA +

Vet शतपत्रस्य पूर्णचन्द्रोपमप्रभम्।
वदनं तद् वदान्याया वैदेह्या न विकम्पते॥ १७॥

“The well-known face of sweet-speaking
Sita, a princess of the Videha Kingdom, which
resembles a lotus and whose effulgence vies
with that of the full moon, never fades. (17)

अलक्तरसरक्ताभावलक्तरसवर्जितौ ।
अद्यापि चरणौ तस्या: पद्मकोशसमप्रभौ॥ १८॥

“Her soles, which, though no longer
painted with Alakta (the red juice obtained
from the resin of certain trees), still look red
as Alakta and cast an effulgence akin to
that of a lotus bud. (18)

नूपुरोत्कृष्टलीलेव Wet गच्छति भामिनी।
इदानीमपि वैदेह्री तद्रागान्यस्तभूषणा॥१९॥
“The high-minded Sita (a princess of
the Videha clan), who has not renounced
her jewels out of love for Sri Rama, who is
pleased to see her adorned, walks in a
charming gait, as though outvying the cackling
of swans by the music of her anklets. (19)

गजं वा dies fas वा cara वा वनमाश्रिता।

नाहारयति dard oe रामस्य संथ्रिता॥ ou
“Though living in the forest, she does

not give way to fear on seeing an elephant

or a lion or a tiger, fully relying as she does
on the arms of Sri Rama. (20)

517

नशोच्यास्ते न चात्मा ते शोच्यो नापि जनाधिप: ।
इदं fe चरितं लोके प्रतिष्ठास्यति शाश्वतम्॥ २१॥

“Neither they, nor your own self, nor the
king deserves to be pitied. This story of Sri
Rama will abide in the world forever. (21)

faya vith परिहृष्टमानसा
महर्षियाते पथि सुव्यवस्थिता:।

at tat वन्यफलाशना: fra:
शुभां प्रतिज्ञां प्रतिपालयन्ति ते॥ २२॥

“Having shaken off grief, the three
exiles, who are firmly established with a
highly delighted mind on the path trodden by
eminent sages and are enamoured of the
forest, are fully implementing the sacred
vow of their father, living on wild fruits etc.,
alone.” (22)

तथापि सूतेन सुयुक्तवादिना
निवार्यमाणा सुतशोककर्शिता।
न चैव देवी विरराम कूजितात्
प्रियेति पुत्रेति च राघवेति च॥ २३॥

Even though being forbidden in the
aforesaid manner by the charioteer, who
spoke highly reasonable words, queen
Kausalya, who was torn with grief caused
by separation from her son, did not cease in
the least from crying out: “O my darling!
O my son!! O scion of Raghu!!!” (23)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्येऽयोध्याकाण्डे
षष्टितम: सर्ग: Il Goll
Thus ends Canto Sixty in the Ayodhyakanda of the glorious Ramayana of
Valmiki, the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

