* AYODHYAKANDA +

पुत्र व्याधिर्न a कच्चिच्छरीरं ula बाधते।
अस्य राजकुलस्याद्य त्वदधीनं fe जीवितम्॥९॥

“| hope no ailment of any kind afflicts
your body. In fact, the life of this entire royal
household hinges on you. (9)

wat दृष्टवा Ua जीवामि WA सभ्रातृके गते।

ad दशरथे राज्ञि नाथ एकस्त्वमद्य न:॥१०॥
“Looking on you alone, my son, do |

survive. Rama with his brother, Laksmana,

having left for the forest and King Dasaratha,

your father, having expired, you alone are

our protector today. (10)

कच्चिन्न लक्ष्मणे पुत्र श्रुतं ते किंचिदप्रियम्।
पुत्रे वा ह्येकपुत्राया: सहभार्ये वनं गते॥११॥
“| hope nothing unwelcome has been
heard by you regarding Laksmana or my own
son, Rama—l having only one son, who has
proceeded to the forest with his consort.” (11)
a ed समाश्वस्य रुदन्नेव महायशा:।
कौसल्यां परिसान्त्व्येदं गुहं वचनमब्रवीत्॥१२॥
Returning to his normal self after an
hour or so, and consoling Kausalya with the
assurance that nothing unwelcome had been
heard with reference to Laksmana or Sri
Rama, Bharata, the highly illustrious prince,
spoke weeping all the same to Guha as
follows : (12)

भ्राता मे क्वावसद् Wat क्व सीता क्व च AAT: |
अस्वपच्छयने कस्मिन् किं भुक्त्वा We शंस A १३॥

“Where did my elder brother, Sri Rama,
stay during the night? Where did Sita spend
the night and where Laksmana? On what
kind of bed and eating what did he repose?
Tell me this, O Guha!” (13)

सोऽब्रवीद् भरतं wet निषादाधिपतिर्गुह:।
aga प्रतिपेदे च wa प्रियहितेऽतिथौ॥ १४॥

Questioned thus, Guha, the ruler of the
Nisadas, thereupon joyfully told Bharata in
the following words what kind of arrangement
he had made for feeding and reposing his
beloved and kind guest : (14)

603

अन्नमुच्चावचं भक्ष्या: फलानि विविधानि a
रामायाभ्यवहारार्थं बहुशोऽपहतं मया॥१५॥
“Boiled rice of various kinds, other foods
requiring mastication and fruits of every
description were brought by me in abundance
to the presence of Sri Rama for his repast.
(15)

ad Wa प्रत्यनुज्ञासीद् WA: सत्यपराक्रम:।
न fe तत् प्रत्यगृह्णत् स क्षत्रधर्ममनुस्मरन्॥१६॥

“Sri Rama of unfailing prowess accepted
all that for my pleasure and returned it to
me. Bearing in mind the duty of a Ksatriya
(who is not permitted by the Sastras to
accept a gift, much less on the bank of a
holy river), however, he did not partake of it.

(16)
नह्यस्माभि: प्रतिग्राह्यं wa ca तु Adar!
Sta तेन ad ad अनुनीता महात्मना॥१७॥

“‘No gift in any case is to be accepted
by us (Ksatriyas), my friend: a gift can only
be made by us.’ In these words were we all
pacified by that high-souled prince. (17)

लक्ष्मणेन यदानीतं Ud वारि महात्मना।
औषपवास्यं तदाकार्षीद् Waa: सह सीतया॥ १८ ॥

“That water alone which was brought
by Laksmana was drunk by the high-souled
prince. Along with Sita, Sri Rama, a scion of
Raghu, then observed a fast for the day.

(18)

ततस्तु जलशेषेण लक्ष्मणोऽप्यकरोत् तदा।
वाग्यतास्ते त्रय: संध्यां समुपासन्त संहिता:॥ १९॥
“Then Laksmana too forthwith slaked
his thirst by means of the water that was
left over. All the three, viz., Sri Rama,
LakSmana and Sumantra, duly worshipped
the deity presiding over the evening twilight
silently together. (19)

सौमित्रिस्तु तत: पश्चादकरोत् स्वास्तरं शुभम्।

स्वयमानीय बर्हीषि क्षिप्रं राघवकारणात्॥ २०॥
“After that, fetching blades of Kusa

grass himself, Laksmana for his part promptly
