482

तं निशम्य गुहादेशं गुहामात्यो गतो महान्।
उपोह्य रुचिरां नावं गुहाय प्रत्यवेदयत्॥७॥

Hearing the aforesaid command of Guha,
the great minister of Guha departed and,
bringing a charming boat to the nearest landing-
place, reported the compliance to Guha. (7)

ad: स प्राञ्जलिर्भूत्वा Wet राघवमब्रवीत्।
उपस्थितेयं नौर्देव भूय: fe करवाणि ते॥८॥

Folding his hands, the said Guha then
said to Sri Rama, “Here is the boat ready,
my lord! What more shall | do for you? (8)

तवामरसुतप्रख्य तर्तुं सागरगामिनीम्।
नौरियं पुरुषव्याघ्र शीघ्रमारोह सुव्रत॥९॥
अथोवाच महातेजा Wa गुहमिदं वच:।
कृतकामोऽस्मि भवता शौघ्रमारोप्यतामिति॥ १०॥

“Here is a boat brought for you, O tiger
among men, to cross the Ganga (flowing
towards the sea), O prince, effulgent as the
son of a divinity ! Pray, get into it promptly,
O observer of noble vows!” The
exceptionally glorious Sri Rama thereupon
spoke to Guha as follows: “My desire has
been accomplished by you. Please have
everything placed in the boat quickly.”(9-10)

Ad: कलापान् संनह्य खड्गौ बध्वा च धन्विनौ ।
जग्मतुर्येन dt गङ्गां सीतया ae राघवौ॥११॥

Having equipped themselves with an
armour each and fastened their quivers and
swords to their person, the two archers, Sri
Rama and Laksmana, scions of Raghu,
with Sita then sought the said Ganga through
the same landing-place as was resorted to
by others. (11)

war q धर्मज्ञमुपागत्य विनीतवत्।

fans करवाणीति सूत: प्राञ्ञलिरब्रवीत्॥१२॥
Humbly approaching Sri Rama, who

knew what is right and stood ready to leave,

the charioteer humbly spoke with folded
hands as follows : “What shall | do?” (12)

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

qa शीघ्रं ora याहि
Ue: सकाशे भव चाप्रमत्त:।॥ १३॥
Touching Sumantra with his auspicious
right hand, Sri Rama (son of Dagaratha)
thereupon replied to him, “Return speedily
to the king’s presence, O Sumantra, and do
not lose your presence of mind.” (13)

निवर्तस्वेत्युवाचैनमेतावद्धि कृतं मम।

रथं विहाय पद्भ्यां तु गमिष्यामो महावनम्॥ १४॥
“Please return,” said he to Sumantra

and added, “this much is enough service to

me. Leaving the chariot, we shall henceforth

proceed to the great forest of Dandaka on

foot.” (14)

आत्मानं AAT: स सारथि:।
सुमन्त्र: पुरुषव्याघ्रमैश्ष्वाकमिदमब्रवीत्॥ १७ Ul

Distressed to find himself dismissed,
the said charioteer, Sumantra, for his part
submitted as follows to Sri Rama, a scion of
Ikswaku, a tiger among men: (15)

नातिक्रान्तमिदं लोके पुरुषेणेह केनचित्।

तव सभ्रातृभार्यस्य aa: प्राकृतवद् वने॥१६॥
“That destiny, by which has been

brought about your exile in the forest with

your consort and younger brother like that

of a common man, has never been set

aside by any man in this world. (16)

न मन्ये ब्रह्मचर्ये वा स्वधीते वा फलोदय:।
मार्दवार्जवयोर्वापि cat We व्यसनमागतम्॥ १७॥

“| believe there is no gain in leading the
austere life of a religious student in the
house of one’s teacher, in studying the
Vedas as an integral part of such a life
or even in cultivating tenderness and
guilelessness, when adversity has come
even to you in the shape of exile. (17)

We Waa वैदेह्या Wal Wa वने वसन्।
त्वं गतिं प्राप्स्यसे वीर त्रींल्लोकांस्तु जयन्निव॥ १८ ॥
“Living as an exile in the forest with

Sita, a princess of the Videha kingdom, and
younger brother, O scion of Raghu, you
