982

superior in the knowledge of the Vedas and
of noble descent also, likewise sat at his
side. (21)
तथा uftad राजा श्रीमद्भिर्ऋषिभिर्वरै:।

राजभिश्च महावीर्यैर्वानरैश्च सराक्षसै:॥ २२॥

The king was similarly surrounded by
glorious and eminent Rsis (seers of Vedic
Mantras) as well as by kings endowed with
extraordinary prowess and the aforesaid
monkeys alongwith the ogres. (22)

यथा देवेश्वरो नित्यमृषिभि: समुपास्यते।
अधिकस्तेन रूपेण सहस्राक्षाद् विरोचते॥ २३॥

« VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

Just as Indra, the ruler of gods, is duly
waited upon by Rsis everyday, Sri Rama
shone brightly even more than Indra (the
thousand-eyed god) in that seemingly human
form. (23)

तेषां समुपविष्टानां तास्ता: सुमधुरा: HAM: |
कथ्यन्ते धर्मसंयुक्ता: पुराणनज्ञैर्महात्मभि:।॥। २४॥

In their presence when they were all
comfortably seated, different — stories,
exceedingly sweet and full of piety, were
recited by high-souled persons well-versed
in the Puranas.* (24)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये उत्तरकाण्डे सप्तत्रिंश: TW: ॥ ३७॥

Thus ends Canto Thirty-seven in the Uttarakanda of the glorious Ramayana of Valmiki,
the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

Canto XXXVIII

Sri Rama grants leave to Kings—Janaka, Yudhajit, Pratardana and others
to proceed to their respective dominions

एवमास्ते महाबाहुरहन्यहनि राघव:।
प्रशासत् सर्वकार्याणि पौरजानपदेषु च॥१॥

In this way the mighty-armed Sri Rama
(a scion of Raghu) continued from day to
day to administer all the affairs of the citizens
as well as of the people of the outlying
districts. (1)

तत: कतिपयाह:सु वैदेहं मिथिलाधिपम्।
राघव: प्राञ्जलिर्भूत्वा वाक्यमेतदुवाच ह॥ २॥

Then after some days Sri Rama with
joined palms addressed the following
submission to King Janaka, ruler of the
Videha territory, and the suzerain lord of
Mithila, so the tradition goes: (2)

भवान् fe गतिरव्यग्रा भवता पालिता वयम्।
भवतस्तेजसोग्रेण रावरणो निहतो मया॥ ३॥

“You indeed are our permanent support;
we stand fostered by you. By virtue of the
formidable prowess alone, born of your
austerities, was Ravana killed by me. (38)
इक्ष्वाकूणां च सर्वेषां मैथिलानां च सर्वश:।
अतुला: प्रीतयो राजन् सम्बन्धकपुरोगमा:॥४॥

“Bonds of affection which have followed
from a matrimonial alliance and stand
unequalled have existed between all the
Ikswakus, on the one hand, and all the
rulers of Mithila, on the other, O king!

(4)

* Some editions of the Valmiki-Ramayana have inserted between Cantos XX XVII and XXXVIII five

Cantos as interpolated detailing the descent of Vali and Sugriva and the story of Ravana’s expedition to
Swetadwipa (an abode of Lord Visnu) as narrated by Sage Agastya. But, since mention is made of the
departure of Agastya in the previous Canto, the insertion of these Cantos at the end of Canto XXXVII
appeared to us unwarranted. We have, therefore, omitted the said interpolated Cantos.
