930

भयानामपि सर्वेषां वैधव्यं व्यसनं महत्।
सत्यवाग् भव राजेन्द्र मामवेक्षस्व याचतीम्॥४३॥
“Of all dreaded things widowhood is a
great misfortune. Be true to your word, O
ruler of rulers ! Have regard for me who am
supplicating you. (43)

त्वयाप्युक्तं महाराज न भेतव्यमिति स्वयम्।
रावणस्त्वब्रवीद्धृष्ट: स्वसारं aa संस्थिताम्॥४४॥

“An assurance has been given by
you, of your own accord, O great king, in
the following words: ‘You ought not to be
afraid.’ “ Feeling rejoiced, Ravana, however,
spoke as follows to his sister, standing
there: (44)
क्व चासौ तव भर्ता वै मम शीघ्रं निवेद्यताम्।
सह at गमिष्यामि सुरलोकं जयाय हि॥४५॥

“Nay, let it be made known to me
without delay where your husband actually
is. | shall proceed with him to the realm of
gods without doubt for the sake of conquest.

(45)
तव कारुण्यसौहार्दान्निव्रत्तोऽस्मि मधोर्वधात्।
इत्युक्ता सा समुत्थाप्य wad तं निशाचरम्॥४६॥
अब्रवीत् Mea राक्षसी सा पतिं aa: |
एष Wal दशग्रीवो मम भ्राता महाबल:॥४७॥

“Out of compassion and goodwill for
you | have desisted from the destruction of
Madhu.” Having awakened that ranger of
the night, who was fast asleep, when
reassured in these words and transported
with joy as it were, the aforesaid ogress
Kumbhinasi, spoke as follows to her
husband: “Here stands my exceptionally
mighty brother, Ravana (the ten-headed
monster) arrived. (46-47)

« VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

सुरलोकजयाकाङ्क्षी साहाय्ये cat वृणोति च।
तदस्य त्वं सहायार्थं सबन्धुर्गच्छ राक्षस॥४८॥
“Desirous of conquering the realm of
gods, he asks you for help. Therefore,
accompanied by your kinsmen, go out for
help, O ogre! (48)
स्निग्धस्य भजमानस्य युक्तमर्थाय कल्पितुम्।
तस्यास्तद् वचनं श्रुत्वा तथेत्याह मधुर्वच:॥४९॥
“It is advisable for you to do your best
in the interest of one who is affectionate to
you and loves you as a son-in-law.” Hearing

the aforesaid advice, Madhu replied as
follows: “So be it.” (49)

cast राक्षसश्रेष्ठं यथान्यायमुपेत्य स:।
पूजयामास धर्मेण रावणं राक्षसाधिपम्॥७५०॥

He saw Ravana, the foremost of ogres,
and approaching him according to propriety,
paid respects to the suzerain lord of ogres
in accordance with the prescribed code of
conduct. (50)

प्राप्य पूजां दशग्रीवो मधुवेश्मनि वीर्यवान्।
wa चैकां निशामुष्य गमनायोपचक्रमे॥५१॥

Receiving attention in the abode of
Madhu and having stayed there for one
night, the powerful Ravana (the ten-headed
monster) got ready to leave for the realm of
gods. (51)

ad: कैलासमासाद्य शैलं वैश्रवणालयम्।
राक्षसेन्द्रो महेन्द्राभ: सेनामुपनिवेशयत्॥७५२॥

Having reached Mount Kailasa, the
abode of Kubera (son of ViSrava), Ravana,
the ruler of ogres, who resembled the
mighty Indra, encamped his army there.

(52)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये उत्तरकाण्डे पञ्चविंश: सर्ग: ॥ २५ ॥

Thus ends Canto Twenty-five in the Uttarakanda of the glorious Ramayana of Valmiki,
the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

