476

अविदूरादयं नद्या बहुपुष्पप्रवालवान्।
सुमहानिङ्गुदीवृक्षो वसामोऽत्रैव सारथे॥ २८॥
“Not very far from the river stands this
very large Ingudi tree containing abundant
flowers and fresh leaves. Let us halt under

this very tree, O charioteer ! (28)
प्रेक्षामि सरितां seat सम्मान्यसलिलां शिवाम्।
देवमानवगन्धर्वमृगपन्नगपक्षिणाम् ॥ २९॥

“| shall clearly behold from that place
the benign Ganga, the foremost of rivers,
whose waters deserve to be respected by
gods, human beings, Gandharvas, beasts,
reptiles and birds alike.” (29)

लक्ष्मणश्च सुमन्त्रश्च बाढमित्येव राघवम्।
उक्त्वा तमिङ्गुद्दीबृक्ष तदोपययतुर्हयै: Bo Ui
Saying “Very well!” and nothing more
to Sri Rama, a scion of Raghu, Laksmana
and Sumantra too then drove up to the

Ingudi tree in the chariot drawn by horses.
(30)

रामोऽभियाय तं रम्यं व्रक्षमिक्र्वाकुनन्दन:।
रथाढवतरत् तस्मात् सभार्य: सहलक्ष्मण: iW ३१॥
Approaching that lovely tree, Sri Rama,
the delight of the Ikswakus, alighted from

that chariot alongwith his consort and with
Laksmana. (31)

सुमन्त्रोऽप्यवतीर्याथ मोचयित्वा हयोत्तमान्।
वृक्षमूलगतं राममुपतस्थे कृताञ्जलि:॥ ३२॥

Getting down and _ unyoking the
excellent horses, Sumantra too with joined
palms stood by the side of Sri Rama, seated
at the foot of the tree. (32)

aa राजा Wel नाम रामस्यात्मसम: Tea!
निषादजात्यो बलवान् स्थपतिश्चेति fasta: 133

The king of that territory, Guha by
name, was a friend of Sri Rama, dear to him
as his own life. He was a Nisada by birth,
possessed of bodily as well as military
strength, owning as he did a large army
consisting of all the four limbs, viz., elephants,
chariots, horsemen and foot soldiers, and

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

well-known as a ruler of the Nisadas. (33)
स श्रुत्वा पुरुषव्याघ्रं wet विषयमागतम्।
ag: परिव्रृतोऽमात्यैर्जातिभिश्चाप्युपागत:॥ ३४॥
Hearing of Sri Rama, a tiger among
men, having arrived in his territory, and

accompanied by his elderly ministers and
relations too, he sought the prince. (34)

act निषादाधिपतिं gear दूरादुपस्थितम्।
We सौमित्रिणा Wa: समागच्छद् WET स:॥ ३५॥

Seeing from a distance the ruler of the
Nisadas waiting, the said Sri Rama alongwith
Laksmana (son of Sumitra) thereupon went
forth to meet Guha. (35)

तमार्त: सम्परिष्वज्य गुहो राघवमब्रवीत्।
यथायोध्या तथेदं ते राम किं करवाणि ते॥ ३६॥
sou fe महाबाहो क: प्राप्स्यत्यतिथिं प्रियम्।
ततो गुणवदन्नाद्यमुपादाय पृथग्विधम्॥ ३७॥
अर्घ्य चोपानयच्छीघ्रं वाक्यं चेदमुवाच ह।
स्वागतं ते महाबाहो तवेयमखिला मही॥ ३८॥
Closely embracing Sri Rama, a scion
of Raghu, Guha, who felt distressed to see
him clad in the robes of a hermit, said to
him, “This principality of Sragaverapura is
as much yours as Ayodhya, O Rama!
What shall | do for you? In fact, who will get
such a beloved guest as you, O mighty-
armed prince?” Having brought cooked rice
of excellent quality and other dishes of various
kinds, he then quickly offered him water to
wash his hands with and other articles of
worship and spoke as follows: so the tradition
goes: “Welcome is your advent to this
place, O mighty-armed prince! This entire
land (of mine) is yours. (836—38)
वयं प्रेष्या भवान् भर्ता साधु राज्यं प्रशाधि A: I
भक्ष्यं भोज्यं च पेयं च लेह्यं चैतदुपस्थितम्।
शयनानि च मुख्यानि वाजिनां खादनं च ते॥ ३९॥
“We are your servants, you are our
master; pray, rule over our kingdom in the
proper way from now. Nay, here are at your
service dishes requiring mastication (such
as rice) and those which can be eaten
