1118

Subjected at that juncture to a curse by that
pious-minded soul, the whole of the vast
forest became unfit to harbour any creature,
difficult to assail and devoid of beasts and
birds. The monkeys, for their part, who
were inclined to do what was pleasing to
Sugriva, carefully explored the forest regions
of that area as well as the mountain caves
as also the sources of rivers. Yet even
there the high-souled ones did not find Sita
(the daughter of King Janaka), nor even her
abductor, Ravana. Having penetrated into
that dreadful forest, which was overgrown
with creepers and briars, the monkeys for
their part beheld a fearful demon of terrible
deeds,who had no fear from gods (by virtue
of a boon granted by them). The monkeys
felt disquieted to see that frightful demon
standing like a hill. (11—18)
गाढं परिहिता: ad gear तं पर्वतोपमम्।
सोऽपि तान् वानरान् सर्वान् नष्टा: स्थेत्यब्रवीद् बली ।। १९ ॥
Seeing the demon, who looked like a
mountain, all the monkeys stood with their
loins tightly girded. The mighty demon too
threatened all those monkeys, saying : “You
are gone !” (19)
अभ्यधावत संक्रुद्धो मुष्टिमुद्यम्य संगतम्।
तमापतन्तं सहसा वालिपुत्रोऽङ्गदस्तदा॥ Ro Il
रावणोऽयमिति ज्ञात्वा तलेनाभिजघान ह।

a वालिपुत्राभिहतो वक्त्राच्छोणितमुद्वमन्॥ २१॥

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

असुरो न्यपतद् भूमौ पर्यस्त ga पर्वत:।
ते तु तस्मिन् निरुच्छ्वासे वानरा जितकाशिन: tt २२॥
व्यचिन्वन् प्रायशस्तत्र ad ते गिरिगह्वरम्।
विचितं तु da: सर्वं सर्वे A काननौकस:॥ २३॥
अन्यदेवापरं घोरुं विविशुर्गिरिगह्वरम्।
ते विचित्य पुन: Rast विनिष्पत्य समागता:।
एकान्ते gaat तु निषेदुर्दीनमानसा:॥ २४॥

Highly enraged, Angada, son of Vali,
forthwith rushed to meet the demon, who
was swooping upon him raising his clenched
fist (to strike Angada), and struck him with
his palm, thinking him to be Ravana : so the
tradition goes. Vomiting blood from his mouth
when struck by Angada (son of Vali), the
said demon fell flat on the ground like a
mountain thrown off its base. The said wicked
fellow being dead, the monkeys, who shone
with a triumphant air, ransacked once more
almost all the mountain-caves in that region
(mistaking the demon to be Ravana). When
the entire region had been explored without
any result, all the aforesaid monkeys for
their part then penetrated into another
fearful mountain-cave, which was_ not
distant. Coming out exhausted after the
search, the monkeys assembled once more
at the foot of a tree in a lonely place and sat
down distressed in mind due to frustration.

(20—24)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये किष्किन्धाकाण्डेऽष्टचत्वारिंश: सर्ग: ॥ ४८ il

Thus ends Canto Forty-eight in the Kiskindhakanda of the glorious Ramayana of
Valmiki, the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

