338

“Neither Ravana nor Trisira of exceeding
might nor Nikumbha, son of Kumbhakarna,
nor Indrajit nor even yourself shall be
able to bear the onrush of Rama (son of
DaSaratha), who is equal to Indra in
combat. (15)
देवान्तको वापि नरान्तको वा

तथातिकायोऽतिरथो महात्मा।
अकम्पनश्चाद्रिसमानसार:
स्थातुं न शक्ता युधि राघवस्य॥ १६॥

“Neither Devantaka nor even Narantaka
nor Atikaya nor Atiratha of gigantic
proportions nor Akampana, who is mighty
as a mountain, is able to stand before
Rama (a scion of Raghu) on the field of
battle. (16)

अयं च राजा व्यसनाभिभूतो

मित्रैरमित्रप्र'तिमैंर्भवद्धि; \
अन्वास्यते राक्षसनाशनार्थे

wet: प्रकृत्या ह्यसमीक्षकारी॥१७॥

“Nay, this king, Ravana, who is

overpowered by evil addictions*, is violent
by nature and acts inconsiderately—is waited
upon by friends in you, who are no better
than foes, to the destruction of ogres. (17)

wearat

विमोचयन्तु॥ 82 ॥

“Extricating this king entwined with
violence by a formidable cobra of infinite
strength and extraordinary energy and
endowed with a thousand hoods, you make
him completely free. (18)

यावद्धि केशग्रहणात्

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA +

“The king should be _ collectively
protected all round by all his well-wishers,
whose desires have been fully gratified by
him, even by using force against him and
catching him by the hair (if necessary),
even as one, possessed by spirits of terrible
might, is protected by one’s near and dear
ones. (19)
सुवारिणा राघवसागरेण

प्रच्छाद्यमानस्तरसा भवद्भि: |
युक्तस्त्वयं तारयितुं समेत्य
काकुत्स्थपातालमुखे Ud Silo

“Ravana, for his part, who is going to
be engulfed by the sea in the shape of
Rama (a scion of Raghu)—which is full of
excellent water (in the shape of high moral
character), and who is about to fall into
the mouth of Patala (the nethermost
sub-terranean region) in the shape of Rama
(a scion of Kakutstha), is worthy of being
unitedly rescued by you. (20)
इदं पुरस्यास्य सराक्षसस्य

राज्ञश्च Ut ससुहृज्जनस्य।
wate वाक्यं स्वमतं ब्रवीमि
नरेन्द्रपुत्राय ददातु मैथिलीम्॥२१॥

“Indeed, | tender this advice, embodying
my own opinion, which is highly conducive
to the good of this city including the ogres,
as well as of the king with his near and dear
ones; let him give Sita (a princess of Mithila)
back to Rama (son of a ruler of men). (21)
wea dtd स्वबलं च बुद्ध्वा

wat क्षयं चैव तथैव वृद्धिम्।
तथा स्वपक्षेऽप्यनुमृश्य बुद्ध्या
वदेत् क्षमं स्वामिहितं स मन्त्री॥ २२॥

“A counsellor is he who after ascertaining

the relative strength of the enemy as well as

* The following are the seven evil habits to which kings are generally found addicted:
वाग्दण्डयोस्तु पारुष्यमर्थदूषणमेव च। पानं स्त्री मृगया द्यूतं व्यसनं सप्तधा प्रभो॥
“Harshness of speech and severity of punishment, extravagance, drinking, love of women, hunting
and gambling constitute the sevenfold evil addictions, O Lord!”
