* AYODHYAKANDA +

593

त्र्यशीतितम: सर्ग:
Canto LXXXIII

Leaving the capital early next morning, accompanied by the family-priests,
artisans, army and the citizens, and covering a long distance, Bharata
reaches the bank of the holy Ganga at SrAgaverapura ruled
by Guha and, encamping the army, breaks journey in
order to do Sraddha and Tarpana in honour of his
deceased father on the bank of the Ganga
and also to give rest to his followers

Wd: समुत्थित: कल्यमास्थाय स्यन्दनोत्तमम्।
प्रययौ भरत: शीघ्रं रामदर्शनकाम्यया॥१॥
Having got up from sleep at daybreak,
and mounting an excellent chariot, Bharata
forthwith departed with expedition with a
longing to see Sri Rama. (1)

अग्रत: प्रययुस्तस्य सर्वे मन्तिपुरोहिता:।
अधिरुह्य हयैर्युक्तान् रथान् सूर्यरथोपमान्॥२॥

Mounting chariots drawn by horses and
vying with the chariot of the sun-god, all the
counsellors and family-priests drove ahead
of him. (2)
नवनागसहस्राणि कल्पितानि यथाविधि।
अन्वयुर्भरतं यान्तमिक्ष्वाकुकुलनन्दनम्॥ ३ ॥

Nine thousand’ elephants — duly
caparisoned followed Bharata, the delight
of Ikswakus race, even as he moved on.

(3)
षष्ठी रथसहस्राणि धन्विनो विविधायुधा:।
अन्वयुर्भरतं at राजपुत्रं यशस्विनम्॥४॥

Sixty thousand chariots with archers
armed with varied weapons seated in them
followed the illustrious Prince Bharata (next)
as he advanced. (4)
wd सहस्राण्यश्चानां समारूढानि राघवम्।
अन्वयुर्भरतं at wat यशस्विनम्॥५॥

A hundred thousand horses mounted
by cavaliers followed Prince Bharata, an

illustrious scion of Raghu, as he proceeded
along. (5)

कैकेयी च सुमित्रा च कौसल्या च यशस्विनी।
रामानयनसंतुष्टा ययुर्यानेन भास्वता॥६॥

Kaikeyi and Sumitra and the illustrious
Kausalya too, who were highly gratified by
the thought of bringing Sri Rama back from
the forest drove in a splendid chariot each.

(6)
तस्यैव च कथाश्चित्रा: कुर्वाणा हृष्टमानसा:॥७॥
Taya महाबाहुं स्थिरसत्त्वं दृढव्रतम्।
Hel द्रक्ष्यामहे WH जगत: शोकनाशनम्॥८॥

Hosts of members of the twice-born
classes also set out with a delighted mind in
order to be able to see Sri Rama alongwith
Laksmana and Sita and saying various things
about him alone in the following strain:
“When shall we be able to behold the mighty-
armed Sri Rama, dark-brown as a cloud,
stable of mind and firm of resolve, the
dispeller of the grief of the world? (7-8)

ge wa fe न: शोकमपनेष्यति wea: |
तम: सर्वस्य लोकस्य समुद्यन्निव भास्कर:॥ ९॥

“As the sun disperses the darkness of
the whole world even while fully appearing
in the horizon, Sri Rama, a scion of Raghu,
will surely dispel our grief the moment he is
seen by us.” (9)

इत्येवं कथयन्तस्ते सम्प्रहष्टा: कथा: VAT: |
परिष्वजानाश्चान्योन्यं ययुर्नागरिकास्तदा॥१०॥

Saying many good things as mentioned
above on that occasion and hugging one
