892

एवमुक्तो महाबाहुर्माणिभद्र:३ सुदुर्जय:।
वृतो यशक्षसहस्रैस्तु चतुर्भि: समयोधयत्॥३॥
ते गदामुसलप्रासै: शक्तितोमरमुद्गरै:।
अभिघ्नन्तस्तदा यक्षा राक्षसान् समुपाद्रवन्॥४॥
कुर्वन्तस्तुमुलं Ge चरन्त: श्येनवल्लघु।
बाढं प्रयच्छ नेच्छामि दीयतामिति भाषिण:॥ &
दृष्टवा ad तुमुलं ae परं विस्मयमागमन्॥६॥
Then the gods, Gandharvas and Rsis

who were exponents of the Vedas, were
greatly surprised to witness that fierce fight.
(6)

यक्षाणां तु प्रहस्तेन weet Ped रणे।
महोदरेण चानिन्द्यं सहस्रमपरं हतम्॥७॥
Prahasta on his part killed in the battle
a thousand Yaksas and Mahodara killed
another thousand who were irreproachable
heroes. (7)

Set च dat राजन् मारीचेन युयुत्सुना।
निमेषान्तरमात्रेण द्वे सहस्रे निपातिते॥८॥
O king, by the enraged Marica, eager
for battle, two thousand more Yaksas were
killed in the twinkling of an eye. (8)

क्व च यक्षार्जवं युद्धं क्व च मायाबलाश्रयम्।
Tae पुरुषव्याघ्र at तेऽभ्यधिका युधि॥ ९॥
Altogether incomparable, O tiger among
men, were the straight warfare of the Yaksas
and the deceitful warfare of the Raksasas.

Hence the Raksasas had the upper hand in
conflict. (9)

धूम्राक्षेण समागम्य माणिभद्रो महारणे।
मुसलेनोरसि क्रोधात् ताडितो न च कम्पित:॥ १०॥

Closing with Dhumraksa in the great
struggle, Manibhadra was furiously struck
in the breast with a pestle by the former, but
he did not budge. (10)
dat Wet समाविध्य माणिभद्रेण wera: |
धूम्राक्षस्ताडितो afta fage: स पपात ह॥११॥

Then Manibhadra whirled his club and
struck the Raksasa, Dhumraksa, on the

« VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

head; he fell down confused.
अभ्यधावत संग्रामे माणिभद्रं दशानन:॥१२॥
Seeing Dhumraksa struck and fallen
bathed in blood, DaSanana rushed towards
Manibhadra in the battle. (12)
संक्रुद्धमभिधावन्तं माणिभद्रो दशाननम्।
शक्तिभिस्ताडयामास तिसृभिर्यक्षपुङ्खव:।॥ १३॥
Seeing the enraged DaSanana rushing

towards him, Manibhadra, the best of Yaksas,
struck him with three javelins. (13)

ताडितो माणिभद्रस्य मुकुटे प्राहरद् रणे।
तस्य तेन प्रहारेण मुकुटं पार्श्वमागतम्॥१४॥

When struck on the field of battle Ravana
dealt a blow at Manibhadra’s diadem; as a
result of that blow of Ravana, Manibhadra’s
diadem turned to one side. (14)

ad: प्रभृति यक्षोऽसौ पार्श्वमौलिरभूत् किल।
तस्मिस्तु विमुखीभूते माणिभद्रे महात्मनि।
संनाद: सुमहान् राजंस्तस्मिन् शैले व्यवर्धत॥ १५॥

From that day onward Manibhadra, the
Yaksa, came to be known as Parswamauli
(one whose diadem has turned to one side).
When the colossal Manibhadra turned his
face away (from the battlefield), there arose,
O king, a great clamour of the Raksasas on
that hill. (15)

ततो दूरात् प्रददृशे धनाध्यक्षो गदाधर:।
शुक्रप्रौष्ठपदाभ्यां च पद्मशङ्खसमावृत:॥१६॥
There came to view from afar the lord
of wealth, who was holding a club and was
accompanied by Sukra and Prausthapada,
his two ministers, and by the deities presiding
over two of his treasures, Padma and
Sankha. (16)
स दृष्टवा भ्रातरं संख्ये शापाद् बिभ्रष्टगौरवम्।
sara वचनं धीमान् युक्तं पैतामहे Sern eon
Seeing on the battlefield his brother

(Ravana) who had lost his sense of respect
(for elders) by reason of the curse, that

(11)
