456

too, who is worthy of all comfort, is following
your pious-minded son, even though aware
of the suffering attendant upon forest life.
(6)

कीर्तिभूतां पताकां at लोके भ्रमयति प्रभु:।
ad: सत्यव्रतपर: fe न प्राप्तस्तवात्मज:॥७॥
“What blessing has not been secured
by your powerful son, who is all virtue and
is pledged to the vow of truthfulness, and
the banner of whose fame flutters throughout
the world?

“Fully aware of the purity, which is so
well-known, as well as of the great
magnanimity of Rama, the sun ought not to
scorch his person by its rays. (8)

fra: Way कालेषु काननेभ्यो विनि:सृत:।

राघवं युक्तशीतोष्ण: सेविष्यति सुखोऽनिल:॥ ९॥
“A favourable and delightful breeze of

moderate heat and cold, blowing from the

woods at all times, will render service to
Rama. (9)
शयानमनघं रात्रौ पितेवाभिपरिष्वजन्।
चर्मघ्न: संस्पृशन् शीतश्चन्द्रमा ह्लादयिष्यति॥ १०॥
“Gently stroking him with its rays when
he is reposing at night, and hugging him like
a father, and driving away the heat of the

day, the cool moon will exhilarate the sinless
Rama. (10)
ददौ चास्त्राणि दिव्यानि यस्मै ब्रह्मा महौजसे।
दानवेन्द्रं हतं gear तिमिध्वजसुतं रणे॥११॥
स शूर: पुरुषव्याघ्र: स्वबाहुबलमाश्रित:।
असंत्रस्तो ह्यरण्येऽसौ वेश्मनीव निवत्स्यते॥ १२॥

“Relying solely on the might of his
arms, that heroic prince, a veritable tiger
among men—on whom, endowed with great
strength, Sage Viswamitra, a Brahmana who
vied with Brahma in creating a world of his
own, bestowed celestial missiles on seeing
the demon Subahu, son of Sambara, whose

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA +

banner bore the device of a large fish, the
chief of demons, killed on the battlefield by
Rama—will surely dwell undaunted in the
forest as in his own palace. (11-12)

यस्येषुपथमासाद्य विनाशं यान्ति शत्रव:।
कथं न पृथिवी तस्य शासने स्थातुमर्हति॥ १३॥

“How can the earth fail to obey the
command of Rama, to whose shafts the
enemies fall an easy prey? (13)
या ott: शौर्यं च रामस्य या च कल्याणसत्त्वता।
निव्रत्तारण्यवास: स्वं fat राज्यमवाप्स्यति॥ १४॥

“The splendour that invests Sri Rama,
the valour that is natural to him and the
beneficent strength that resides in him, lead
one to believe that when the term of his
exile in the forest has concluded, he will
speedily regain his throne. (14)

श्रिया: श्रीश्च भवेदग्रूया ate: कीर्ति: क्षमाक्षमा ।। १५ ॥
“Indeed he is the illuminator of the sun,
which illumines the whole universe, the fire,
revealer of fire, the ruler of rules, the foremost
splendour of splendour, the glory, essence
of glory and the forbearance, the sustaining
power of forbearance. (15)
gad देवतानां च भूतानां भूतसत्तम:।
wa के ह्यगुणा देवि at वाप्यथवा UT १६॥
“Nay, he is the god, adored of gods,
the foremost being of all beings. Indeed
what handicaps can there be for him in the
forest or in Ayodhya, O queen? (16)

पृथिव्या सह acer श्रिया च पुरुषर्षभ:।
fart तिसृभिरेताभि: सह रामोऽभिषेक्ष्यते॥ १७॥

“Assuredly the aforesaid Rama, a jewel
among men, will soon be installed on the
throne alongwith the following three, viz,
Mother Earth (a Consort of Lord Visnu),
Sita (a princess of the Videha kingdom) and
Sri (the Goddess of Fortune, another Consort
of Lord Visnu, whom Rama represents).

(17)
