« KISKINDHAKANDA +

तं तु तारा परिष्वज्य वालिनं प्रियवादिनी।
चकार रुदती मन्दं दक्षिणा सा Walser ११॥
Embracing the aforesaid Vali, Tara for
her part, who spoke agreeable words and
was favourably disposed towards him, went
clockwise round him (as a token of farewell
and respect), gently weeping. (11)

तत: स्वस्त्ययनं कृत्वा मन्त्रविद् विजयैषिणी |
अन्त:पुरं सह स्त्रीभि: प्रविष्टा शोकमोहिता॥ १२॥

Having performed a religious rite called
Swastyayana (which consists in scattering
boiled rice on the ground and _ invoking
blessings by the repetition of certain Mantras),
Tara, who was conversant with sacred texts
pronounced on such occasions and desired
victory for her husband, thereupon returned
to the gynaeceum with the other ladies,
dumbfounded as she was with grief. (12)

प्रविष्टायां तु तारायां सह स्त्रीभि: स्वमालयम्।

नगर्या निर्ययौ क्रुद्धो Herat इव VATU Il
When Tara had entered her apartments

with the other ladies, Vali for his part sallied

forth from his capital, hissing like a large
angry serpent. (13)

a नि:श्वस्य महारोषो वाली परमवेगवान्।
सर्वतश्चारयन् दृष्टिं शत्रुदर्शनकांक्षया॥१४॥

Breathing heavily, full of rage, the
aforesaid Vali, who was possessed of great
impetuosity, stood casting his glance on all
sides with intent to have a look at his
adversary. (14)

a ददर्श तत: श्रीमान् सुग्रीवं हेमपिङ्गलम्।
सुसंवीतमवष्टब्धं दीप्यमानमिवानलम्॥ १५ UI
The glorious Vali thereupon saw
Sugriva, reddish brown as gold, tightly clothed
below the loins, firmly rooted and glowing
as fire. (15)
तं स दृष्टवा महाबाहु: सुग्रीवं पर्यवस्थितम्।
गाढं परिदधे वासो वाली परमकोपन:॥१६॥
Seeing the aforesaid Sugriva standing
firm nearby, the celebrated Vali, who was

989

endowed with mighty arms and was highly
irascible, tightened his loin-cloth. (16)

स वाली गाढसंवीतो मुष्टिमुद्यम्य वीर्यवान्।
सुग्रीवमेवाभिमुखो sat योद्धुं कृतक्षण:॥१७॥

Raising his fist, the aforesaid Vali, who
was tightly clothed below the loins and full
of vigour, and felt rejoiced (to have secured
an opportunity to fight), proceeded precisely
against Sugriva to give battle to him. (17)
सुग्रीवोऽपि समुद्दिश्य वालिनं हेममालिनम्॥ १८॥

Raising his clenched fist at full length
and duly aiming it at Vali, who was adorned
with a chain of gold and was highly excited,
Sugriva too came up. (18)

तं वाली क्रोधताम्राक्ष: सुग्रीवं रणकोविदम्।
आपतन्तं महावेगमिदं वचनमब्रवीत्॥१९॥
To the aforesaid Sugriva, whose eyes
were red with anger and who was skilled in
the art of fighting and was rushing with
great impetuosity, Vali spoke as follows :
(19)

एष मुष्टिर्महान् sat गाढ: सुनियताङ्गुलि:।
मया वेगविमुक्तस्ते प्राणानादाय यास्यति॥ २०॥

“This mighty fist, tightly closed with its
fingers properly set will, when flung with
force by me, return only after taking your
life.” (20)

एवमुक्तस्तु सुग्रीव: क्रुद्धो वालिनमब्रवीत्।

तव चैष हरन् प्राणान् मुष्टि: पततु मूर्धनि॥ २१॥
Enraged when spoken as aforesaid by

Vali, Sugriva for his part replied to Vali, “Let

this fist too descend on your head, taking

away your life instantly.” (21)

ताडितस्तेन तं क्रुद्ध: समभिक्रम्य वेगत:।

अभवच्छोणितोद्गारी Bits sa पर्वत:॥ २२॥
Enraged when struck by Vali, who

assailed him with impetuosity, Sugriva

vomited blood and looked like a mountain
containing a cascade. (22)
