686

duty by them, you will not be transgressing
the path of the virtuous. (5)

व्रद्धाया धर्मशीलाया मातुर्नार्हस्यवर्तितुम्।
अस्या fe वचनं कुर्वन् नातिवर्ते: सतां गतिम्॥ ६॥
“You ought not to fail in your duty towards
your aged mother, who is given to piety.
Doing her bidding you will certainly not be
transgressing the path of the virtuous. (6)

भरतस्य वच: Hey याचमानस्य Weal
आत्मानॆ नातिवर्तेस्त्वं सत्यधर्मपराक्रम॥७॥

“Granting the prayer of Bharata, who is
supplicating you, you will not be overstepping
your bounds, O scion of Raghu, who are
ever united with truthfulness, piety and
valour !” (7)
एवं मधुरमुक्त: A WI Waa: स्वयम्।
प्रत्युवाच समासीनं वसिष्ठं पुरुषर्षभ:॥८॥

Instructed thus in sweet words by his
preceptor himself, Sri Rama (a scion of
Raghu), a jewel among men, replied as
follows to Vasistha, who was sitting at ease
there : (8)

यन्मातापितरौ qd तनये ped: सदा।
न सुप्रतिकरं तत् तु मात्रा पित्रा च apa eu
यथाशक्तिप्रदानेन स्वापनोच्छादनेन च।
नित्यं च प्रियवादेन तथा संवर्धनेन च॥१०॥

“The service that the parents render to
their son by giving him whatever they can,
as well as by putting him to bed and rubbing
his body with oil etc., nay, by speaking kindly
to him every moment and, even so, by
nourishing him, nay, whatever good is done
by them cannot be easily requited. (9-10)

a fe राजा cre: frat जनयिता मम।
आज्ञापयन्मां यत् तस्य न तन्मिथ्या भविष्यति॥ ११॥
“Indeed that which the celebrated King
Dasaratha, my father, who brought me into
being, has asked me to do shall not prove
untrue.” (11)
एवमुक्तस्तु रामेण भरत: प्रत्यनन्तरम्।
उवाच विपुलोरस्क: सूतं परमदुर्मना:॥१२॥

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

When Sri Rama had spoken thus,
Bharata for his part, who was distinguished
by a broad chest, and felt extremely sad at
heart, commanded as follows Sumantra,
the charioteer, who stood nearest to him:

(12)
Be तु स्थण्डिले शीघ्रं कुशानास्तर सारथे।
ard प्रत्युपवेक्ष्यामि यावन्मे सम्प्रसीदति॥१३॥

“Speedily spread for your part blades
of KuSa grass on this piece of level ground,
O charioteer ! | shall sit at the door of my
elder brother in order to exert pressure on
him until he gets fully propitiated and grants
my request. (13)

निराहारो निरालोको धनहीनो यथा द्विज:।
wa पुरस्ताच्छालायां यावन्मां प्रतियास्यति॥ १४॥
“Like a destitute Brahmana, who has
been deprived of his fortune by a debtor,
failing to repay the debt as stipulated, | shall
remain lying down in front of Sri Rama’s hut
without food or drink and depriving myself
of light by covering my face until he returns
to Ayodhya as a concession to me.” (14)

ad राममवेक्षन्तं सुमन्त्रं wea दुर्मना:।
कुशोत्तरमुपस्थाप्य भूमावेवास्थित: TALI १५॥

Perceiving Sumantra awaiting the
pleasure of Sri Rama, Bharata for his part
sat down disconsolate on the ground,
spreading a mat of KuSa grass with his own
hands. (15)
तमुवाच महातेजा रामो राजर्षिसत्तम:।

किं At भरत कुर्वाणं तात प्रत्युपवेक्ष्यसे॥१६॥

To him the highly glorious Sri Rama,
the foremost of royal sages, said, “What
wrong have | done to you, O Bharata, that
you will sit at my door to exert pressure on
me, my darling? (16)

ब्राह्मणो Hust नरान् रोद्धुमिहार्हति।

न तु मूर्धाभिषिक्तानां विधि: प्रत्युपवेशने॥ १७॥
“A Brahmana alone ought to restrain

people oppressing him by lying on one side

at their door. Ksatriyas, however, who are
