+ UTTARAKANDA +

on its waves, this Narmada, the foremost of
rivers, too, which heightens my merriment,
looks like a timid girl. (30)

aed: क्षता: शस्तरैर्नृपैरिन्द्रसमैर्युधि।
चन्दनस्य रसेनेव रुधिरेण समुक्षिता:॥३१॥

“You stand pierced with weapons by
kings vying with Indra on the field of battle
and bathed in blood as though sprinkled all
over with the sap of a red sandal tree. (31)
a यूयमवगाहध्वं नर्मदां weet शुभाम्।
सार्वभौममुखा मत्ता गङ्गामिव महागजा:॥३२॥

“As such take you a dip in the lovely and
delightful Narmada even as huge elephants
(guarding the quarters) in rut—Sarvabhauma
and others—take a dip in the Ganga. (32)

अस्यां स्नात्वा महानद्यां पाप्मनो विप्रमोक्ष्यथ।
sera पुलिने शरदिन्दुसमप्रभे॥ ३३॥
पुष्पोपहारं शनकै: करिष्यामि कपर्दिन:।
रावणेनैवमुक्तास्तु प्रहस्तशुकसारणा: ॥ ३४॥
समहोदरधूम्राक्षा नर्मदां विजगाहिरे।
राक्षसेन्द्रगजैस्तैस्तु क्षोभिता नर्मदा नदी॥ ३५॥
वामनाञ्जनपद्माद्यैर्गङ्गा इव महागजै:।
ततस्ते राक्षसा: स्नात्वा नर्मदायां महाबला:॥ ३६॥
उत्तीर्य । रावणस्य तु।
नर्मदापुलिने हृद्ये शुभ्राभ्रसदूशप्रभे॥ ३७॥
राक्षसैस्तु मुहूर्तेन pa: पुष्पमयो गिरि:।
पुष्पेषूपहतेष्वेवं रावणो TAT: BCH
तत्र स्नात्वा च विधिवज्जप्त्वा जप्यमनुत्तमम्॥ ३९॥
नर्मदासलिलात् तस्मादुत्ततार स रावण:।
तत: क्लिन्नाम्बरं त्यक्त्वा शुक्लवस्त्रसमाव्रृत: I ४० I
“Bathing in this great river, you will be
completely rid of your sin. | too shall presently
offer flowers slowly to Lord Siva (who wears
matted locks on His head) on this sandy
bank, shining like the autumnal moon.”
Commanded in these words by Ravana,
Prahasta, Suka and Sarana for their part,
accompanied by Mahodara and Dhumraksa,
took a dip in the Narmada. The river Narmada
for its part was ruffled by those elephants of

955

Ravana (the ruler of ogres) even as the
Ganga by the mighty elephants (guarding
the quarters), Vamana, Afijana, Padma and
others. Emerging after taking a dip in the
Narmada, these exceptionally mighty ogres
for their part fetched flowers for Ravana’s
worship of Lord Siva. On the delightful sandy
bank of the Narmada, shining like a white
cloud, a mountain of flowers was raised in
less than an hour by the ogres. When flowers
had been collected in this way, Ravana, the
king of ogres, descended into the river to
bathe even as a huge elephant would into
the Ganga.

Having bathed in the river and muttered
the most excellent text, the Gayatri Mantra,
with due ceremony, the notorious Ravana
came out of the well-known waters of the
Narmada. Then putting off the wet clothes,
he was duly covered with a white robe.

(33—40)
रावणं Walfet यान्तमन्वयु: सर्वराक्षसा:।
तद्गतीवशमापन्ना मूर्तिमन्त इवाचला:॥४१॥

Like incarnate mountains swayed by
his motion, all the other ogres followed him
even as he proceeded with joined palms to
offer flowers to Lord Siva. (41)

यत्र यत्र च याति स्म रावणो राक्षसेश्वर:।
जाम्बूनदमयं fag at at स्म नीयते॥४२॥
Wherever Ravana, the ruler of ogres,
went, a golden emblem of Lord Siva was
borne there. (42)

वालुकावेदिमध्ये तु तल्लिङ्गं स्थाप्य रावण:।

अर्चयामास गन्धैश्च पुष्पैश्चामृतगन्धिभि:॥४३॥
Placing the said emblem in the middle of

an altar of sand, Ravana for his part

worshipped it with sandal-pastes (of various
kinds) and flowers, of undying fragrance. (43)

ad: सतामार्तिहरं परं at

वरप्रदं चन्द्रमयूखभूषणम्।
समर्चयित्वा स निशाचरो जगौ

प्रसार्य हस्तान् WO चाग्रत:॥४४॥

Having duly worshipped the supreme
