580

ते पादपशिलाशैलैश्चक्रुर्वृष्टिमनूपमाम्।
बाणौघैर्वार्यमाणाश्च हरयो भीमविक्रमा:॥४८॥

While being intercepted by the ogres
with volleys of arrows, the said monkeys
of redoubtable prowess discharged an
unparalleled shower of trees, rocks and
crags. (48)

सिंहनादान् fates रणे राक्षसवानरा:।
शिलाभिश्चूर्णयामासुर्यातुधानान् प्लवङ्गमा: ॥४९॥
निर्जघ्नु: संयुगे Sal: कवचाभरणाव्रृतान्।
केचिद् रथगतान् वीरान् गजवाजिगतानपि॥ ५०॥
निर्जघ्नु: सहसाऽऽप्लुत्य यातुधानान् प्लवङ्गमा: |
शैलशृङ्गान्विताङ्गास्ते मुष्टिभिर्वान्तलोचना:॥५१॥
aq: पेतुश्च नेदुश्च तत्र राक्षसपुङ्खवा:।
राक्षसाश्च शरैस्तीक्ष्णैर्विभिदु: कपिकुञ्जरान्॥ ५२॥
शूलमुद्गरखड्गैश्च wey: प्रासैश्च शक्तिभि:।
अन्योन्यं पातयामासु: परस्परजयैषिण:॥५३॥
रिपुशोणितदिग्धाङ्गास्तत्र वानरराक्षसा:।
aa: शैलैश्च खड्गैश्च विसृष्टैर्हरिराक्षसै:॥ ५४॥
मुहूर्तेनावृता भूमिरभवच्छोणितोक्षिता।
विकीर्णै: पर्वताकारै रक्षोभिरभिमर्दितै:।
आसीद् वसुमती पूर्णा तदा युद्धमदान्वितै: ॥ ५५ ॥

Nay, the ogres and monkeys alike
emitted leonine roars on the field of battle.
Furious in combat, the monkeys pounded
the ogres—who were clad in armour and
decked with ornaments—with rocks and
killed them. Springing up all of a sudden,
some monkeys, for their part, killed the
heroic ogres seated in their chariots and
mounted on the back of elephants and horses.
Their bodies covered by mountain-peaks,
and eyes stuck out by the blows of fists of
the monkeys, the foremost of the ogres on
the battle-field staggered and fell and shrieked.
The ogres too pierced the foremost among
the monkeys with their sharp arrows and
struck them with pikes, mallets and swords
as also with lances and javelins. Their limbs
stained with the blood of their enemies, the
monkeys as well as the ogres, who were

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA +

eager to conquer one another, struk one
another down on the battle-field. In an instant
thereupon the field of battle was covered
with crags and swords thrown by the
monkeys and the ogres, and got drenched
with blood. The battle-field was at that time
littered with ogres looking like mountains and
drunk with martial ardour, who had been
crushed by the monkeys and were lying
scattered in pieces. (49—55)
आक्षिप्ता: क्षिप्यमाणाश्च भग्नशैलाश्च वानरा: |
पुनरङ्गैस्तदा चक्रुरासन्ना युद्धमद्भुतम्॥५६॥
Already thrown out of order and still
being thrown out of order by the ogres, at
that time, the monkeys, whose rocks had
been shattered, once more put up a
wonderful fight with their limbs alone at
close quarters. (56)

वानरान् arta जघ्नुस्ते नैर्ऋतर्षभा:।
राक्षसान् राक्षसैरेव जघ्नुस्ते वानरा अपि॥५७॥

The aforesaid ogre chiefs struck the
monkeys with other monkeys, while the
said monkeys too struck the ogres with
other ogres. (57)

आक्षिप्य च शिला: शैलाञ्जघ्नुस्ते राक्षसास्तदा |
तेषां चाच्छिद्य शस्त्राणि जघ्नू रक्षांसि ATT: UGS I

Nay, snatching the rocks and crags
from the hands of the monkeys, the aforesaid
ogres struck their enemies with them; and
tearing the weapons of the ogres, the
monkeys, in their turn, struck the ogres with
them. (58)

निर्जघ्नु: शैलशृङ्गैश्च बिभिदुश्च परस्परम्।
सिंहनादान् विनेदुश्च रणे राक्षसवानरा:॥५९॥

On the field of battle the ogres as well
as the monkeys struck one another with
mountain-peaks, cut them asunder and
emitted leonine roars. (59)

छिन्नवर्मतनुत्राणा राक्षसा वानरैर्हता:।
रुधिरं प्रसृतास्तत्र रससारमिव द्रुमा:॥६०॥
