* SUNDARAKANDA +

the Asoka grove and returned to the
gynaeceum, the aforesaid ogresses of hideous
appearance for their part ran up in a body to
Sita. (2)

aa: सीतामुपागम्य राक्षस्य: क्रोधमूच्छिता:।
परं परुषया art वैदेहीमिदमब्रुवन्॥३॥

Approaching Sita, the princess of the
Videha territory, the ogresses, who were
distracted with anger, spoke to her as follows
in exceedingly harsh tones : (3)

पौलस्त्यस्य वरिष्ठस्य रावणस्य महात्मन:।
दशग्रीवस्य भार्यात्वं सीते न बहु मन्यसे॥४॥

“Don’t you prize, O Sita, the wifehood
of the high-souled and pre-eminent Ravana,
a scion of Sage Pulastya, who is endowed
with ten heads?” (4)

ततस्त्वेकजटा नाम राक्षसी वाक्यमब्रवीत्।
आमन्त्य क्रोधताम्राक्षी सीतां करतलोदरीम्॥ ५॥
Then, addressing Sita, whose belly could
be spanned with the palm, an ogress named
Ekajata, for her part, her eyes bloodshot
with anger, spoke to her as follows: (5)
मानसो ब्रह्मण: Ua: पुलस्त्य इति विश्रुत:।॥ ६॥
“There is a mind-born son of Brahma
(the creator) widely known by the name of
Pulastya. Of the six Prajapatis,* (lords of
created beings entrusted with the work of
creation by Brahma), he is indeed the fourth
Prajapati. (6)
पुलस्त्यस्य तु तेजस्वी महर्षिर्मानस: सुत:।
नाम्ना स विश्रवा नाम प्रजापतिसमप्रभ:॥७॥
“The glorious mind-born son of Pulastya,
again, is an eminent Rsi, ViSrava by name,
who, they say, equals the Prajapatis in
glory. (7)
तस्य Oat विशालाक्षि रावण: शत्रुरावण:।
wa त्वं राक्षसेन्द्रस्य wat भवितुमर्हसि॥८॥

“Ravana, who makes his enemies cry

123

in terror, is a son of ViSrava. You deserve
to be the wife of the aforesaid lord of ogres,
O large eyed one! (8)
ततो हरिजटा नाम राक्षसी वाक्यमब्रवीत्॥९॥
विव्रत्य नयने कोपान्मार्जारसदृशेक्षणा।
येन देवास्त्रयस्तिंशद् देवराजश्च निर्जित:॥१०॥
तस्य त्वं राक्षसेन्द्रस्य भार्या भवितुमर्हसि।
वीर्योत्सिक्तस्य शूरस्य संग्रामेष्वनिवर्तिन:।
बलिनो वीर्ययुक्तस्य भार्यात्वं किं न लिप्ससे॥ ११॥

“Why don’t you acquiesce in this
proposal put forward by me, O lady! charming
of every limb?” Dilating her eyes, which
resembled a cat’s, an ogress, Harijata by
name, then angrily spoke as follows :

“You deserve to be a wife of that king
of ogres by whom were vanquished all the
thirty-three principal deities, viz., the twelve
Adityas, the eleven Rudras, the eight Vasus
and the twin Aswinikumaras, and even Indra,
the ruler of gods. Why don’t you seek the
wifehood of Ravana, who is heroic and
mighty, full of valour and proud of his
prowess, and who never turns his back on
the field of battle? (9—11)
सर्वासां च महाभागां त्वामुपैष्यति रावण:॥१२॥

“Renouncing his beloved’ wife
Mandodaril, who is much esteemed by all
his wives and is highly blessed, Ravana will
betake himself to you. (12)

We स्त्रीसहस्रेण नानारत्नोपशोभितम्।
अन्त:पुरं तदुत्सृज्य त्वामुपैष्यति रावण:॥१३॥
“Nay, leaving alone his well-known
gynaeceum, enriched by thousands of
women and decked with various jewels,
Ravana will go to you.” (13)
अन्या तु विकटा नाम राक्षसी वाक्यमब्रवीत्।
असकृद् भीमवीर्येण नागा गन्धर्वदानवा:।
निर्जिता: समरे येन स ते पार्श्वमुपागत:॥१४॥

* Their names in the order of seniority are: Marici, Atri, Angira, Pulastya, Pulaha and Kratu—

मरीचिरत्र्यङ्गिरसौ पुलस्त्य: पुलह: क्रतु:।
