292

असकृत् तैर्महाभागैर्वानरैर्बलसंयुतै: ।
प्रदक्षिणीकृता भूमिर्वायुमार्गानुसारिभि:॥। २०॥

“The earth has been gone round
clockwise more than once by those highly
blessed and mighty monkeys following the
path of the wind. (20)

मद्दिशिष्टाश्च तुल्याश्च ata aa वनौकस:।
मत्त: प्रत्यवर: कश्चिन्नास्ति सुग्रीवसंनिधौ॥ २१॥

“‘There are monkeys equal and even
superior to me in strength in Kiskindha.
There is no monkey inferior to me near
about Sugriva. (21)
अहं तावदिह wre: किं पुनस्ते महाबला:।
नहि WPS: Wet प्रेष्यन्ते हीतरे जना:॥ २२॥

“When | have arrived here leaping
across the sea, how much more would
those monkeys do, endowed as _ they
are with extraordinary might. Under no
circumstances are the seniors sent out on
errands; the juniors alone are so sent.(22)

wat परितापेन देवि मन्युरपैतु a

एकोत्पातेन ते लङ्कामेष्यन्ति हरियूथपा:॥ २३॥
“Therefore, have done with agony, O

godlike lady ! Let your despondency be over

for good. In one bound will the aforesaid leaders
of monkey hordes reach Lanka. (23)

मम पृष्ठगतौ तौ च चन्द्रसूर्याविवोदितौ।
त्वत्सकाशं महाभागे नृसिंहावागमिष्यत:॥ २४॥
“ “And perched upon my back will those
two lions among men reach your presence,
O highly blessed lady, like the moon and
the sun risen in the sky. (24)
अरिघ्नं सिंहसंकाशं क्षिप्रं द्रक्ष्यसि राघवम्।
लक्ष्मणं च धनुष्मन्तं लङ्काद्वारमुपागतम्॥ २५॥

« VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

“You will soon see Sri Rama, a scion
of Raghu, the destroyer of his foes, who,
resembles a lion, as well as Laksmana,
armed with an excellent bow, arrived at the
very gate of Lanka. (25)
नखदंष्टायुधान् वीरान् सिंहशार्दूलविक्रमान्।
वानरान् वारणेन्द्राभान् क्षिप्रं द्रक्ष्यसि संगतान्॥ २६ ॥

“You will also see gathered here soon
the gallant monkeys having nails and teeth
for their weapons and endowed with the
prowess of lions and tigers, nay, looking
like lordly elephants. (26)
शैलाम्बुदनिकाशानां लङ्कामलयसानुषु।
नर्दतां कपिमुख्यानां नचिराच्छोष्यसे स्वनम्॥ २७॥

“ हठप will before long hear the clamour
of the foremost of monkeys resembling
mountains and clouds and roaring on the
peaks of the Trikuta mountain in Lanka. (27)
निव्त्तवनवासं च त्वया सार्धमरिंदमम्।
अभिषिक्कमयोध्यायां क्षिप्रं द्रक्ष्यसि राघवम्॥ २८ ॥

“You will also soon see Sri Rama, a
scion of Raghu, the tamer of his foes, crowned
at Ayodhya with you, his term of exile in the
forest just nearing completion.’ (28)

ततो मया वाग्भिरदीनभाषिणी
शिवाभिरिष्टाभिरभिप्रसादिता |
sale शान्तिं मम मैथिलात्मजा
तवातिशोकेन तथातिपीडिता॥ २९॥

“Cheered by me with gladdening and
agreeable words, Sita, a princess of Mithila,
who, though sore afflicted with the thought
of your excessive grief on her account and
who never speaks pitiful words, derived
solace in my presence.” (29)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये सुन्दरकाण्डे अटष्टषष्टितम: सर्ग: ॥ GC Il

Thus ends Canto Sixty-eight of the Sundarakanda in the glorious Ramayana of
Valmiki, the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

॥ सुन्दरकाण्डं सम्पूर्णम्॥
END OF SUNDARAKANDA
