664

राक्षसा वानरेन्द्रेषु विक्रृताननबाहव:।
निवेशयन्त: शस्त्राणि चक्रुस्ते सुमहद्भयम्॥ ११॥

Directing their weapons towards the
monkey-chiefs, ogres of mis-shapen faces
and arms created great terror. (11)

aa सकलैर्वृक्षैर्गिरिशृङ्गैश्च वानरा:।
अभिजघ्नुर्निजघ्नुश्च समरे सर्वराक्षसान्॥१२॥

The monkeys, too, likewise, wounded
and struck down all the ogres on the
battlefield with full trees and mountain-peaks.

(12)
ऋक्षवानरमुख्यैश्च महाकायैर्महाबलै: |
रक्षसां युध्यमानानां महद्भयमजायत॥१३॥

A great fear was caused among the
ogres, fighting as they did with the foremost
of bears and monkeys endowed with gigantic
forms and extraordinary might. (13)
स्वमनीकं विषण्णं तु श्रुत्वा शत्रुभिरर्दितम्।
उदतिष्ठत ged: स कर्मण्यननुष्ठिते॥१४॥

Hearing of his own army _ being
dispirited, assailed as it was heavily by the
enemy, Indrajitt who was difficult to
overpower, got up even while the ritual had
not yet been carried through. (14)

वृक्षान्धकारान्निर्गत्य जातक्रोध: A रावणि:।
sete रथं सज्जं Wah सुसंयतम्॥१५॥
Emerging from the darkness
occasioned by the trees in whose shade he
was pouring oblations into the sacred fire,
the aforesaid Indrajit (son of Ravana), whose
indignation was aroused by the disconcerting
report, mounted his firmly equipped chariot,
to which horses had already been harnessed
and stood ready. (15)

a भीमकार्मुकशर: कृष्णाञ्जनचयोपम:।
रक्तास्यनयनो भीमो ast मृत्युरिवान्तक:॥ १६॥
With his coppery face and red eyes,

the redoubtable ogre, who was armed with
a formidable bow and arrow and resembled

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA +

a heap of black collyrium, looked like the
all-destroying Death. (16)

qeaa q रथस्थं तं पर्यवर्तत तद् बलम्।
रक्षसां भीमवेगानां लक्ष्मणेन युयुत्सताम्॥१७॥
Immediately on seeing him seated in
his chariot, the aforesaid army of ogres of
terrible impetuosity, who were eager to fight
with Laksmana, ranged round Indrajit. (17)

तस्मिंस्तु काले हनुमानरुजत् स दुरासदम्।
धरणीधरसंकाशो महाव्रक्षमरिंदम: ॥ १८ ॥
At that time the celebrated Hanuman,
the tamer of his enemies, for his part, who
resembled a mountain, uprooted a huge
tree, which was difficult to wield. (18)
स राक्षसानां तत् सैन्यं कालाग्निरिव निर्दंहन्।
चकार बहुभिर्वृक्षैर्नि:संज्ञं युधि वानर:॥१९॥
Consuming that army of ogres like the
fire of universal destruction, the aforesaid
monkey, Hanuman, rendered it unconscious
on the battlefield by battering it with numerous
trees. (19)

विध्वंसयन्तं तरसा qeda पवनात्मजम्।
राक्षसानां सहस्राणि हनूमन्तमवाकिरन्॥२०॥
Immediately on perceiving the son of
the wind-god playing havoc with his might,
thousands of ogres pounded Hanuman with
a hail of weapons. (20)

शितशूलधरा: शूलैरसिभिश्चासिपाणय:।
शक्तिहस्ताश्च शक्तीभि: पदट्टिशै: पद्टिशायुधा:॥ २१॥
परिघैश्च गदाभिश्च कुन्तैश्च शुभदर्शनै:।
शतशश्च शतघ्नीभिरायसैरपि मुद्गरै:॥ २२॥
at: परशुभिश्चैव भिन्दिपालैश्च were: |
मुष्टिभिर्वज्रकल्पैश्च तलैरशनिसंनिभै: ।। २३॥
अभिजघ्नु: समासाद्य समन्तात् पर्वतोपमम्।
तेषामपि च संक्रुद्धश्चकार Het महत्॥२४॥
Approaching Hanuman, who looked like
a mountain, ogres bearing pointed pikes

struck him on all sides with pikes, those
carrying swords in their hands, with swords;
