* ARANYAKANDA «

न त्वं तयो: शरस्पर्शं सोढुं शक्त: कथंचन।
a प्रज्वलितस्येव स्पर्शमग्नेर्विहंगम:॥ ee

“You will in no way be able to bear the
impact of their arrows any more than a bird
is able to bear the impact of a blazing fire in
a forest. (12)

साधु Heals SAA: ust Ue At AS WATT |
मत्प्रधर्षणसंक्रुद्धो भ्रात्रा सह पतिर्मम॥१३॥
विधास्यति विनाशाय त्वं at यदि न मुञ्चसि।
येन त्वं व्यवसायेन बलान्मां हर्तुमिच्छसि॥ १४॥
व्यवसायस्तु ते नीच भविष्यति निरर्थक:।
We तमपश्यन्ती भर्तारं विबुधोपमम्॥१५॥
उत्सहे शत्रुवशगा प्राणान् धारयितुं चिरम्।
न नूनं चात्मन: श्रेय: पथ्यं वा समवेक्षसे॥ १६॥
मृत्युकाले यथा ae विपरीतानि सेवते।
WANT तु सर्वेषां यत् पथ्यं तन्न Wad Vol
“Therefore, duly considering your own
welfare, you had better leave me alone, O
Ravana ! Enraged by my abduction, my lord
with his younger brother, Laksmana, will strive
for your destruction if you do not let me go.
Your sinister purpose, for which you seek to
bear me away by force, O mean fellow, will
undoubtedly prove infructuous. For if, when
fallen into the clutches of an enemy, | fail to
behold my husband, who vies with gods, |
shall not be able to sustain my life for long.
Surely you do not look to your own immediate
good or your lasting good and, even as a
man who has reached the hour of death
relishes objects which run counter to his
interests, you also do the same. As a rule,
that which is good for one’s health does not
find favour with all those who are about to
die. (183—17)

पश्यामीह fe कण्ठे cat कालपाशावपाशितम्।
यथा चास्मिन् भयस्थाने न बिभेषि निशाचर॥ १८ ॥

“| know you to be caught in the noose
of Death about your neck indeed, in that
you do not feel diffident in embarking on this
risky adventure of abducting the virtuous
wife of a hero, O prowler of the night ! (18)

861

wat वैतरणीं घोरां रुधिरौघविवाहिनीम्॥१९॥
ख्ड्गपत्रवनं wa भीमं पश्यसि रावण।
तप्तकाञ्चनपुष्पां च वैदूर्यप्रवरच्छदाम्॥ Ro Il
द्रक्ष्यसे शाल्मलीं तीक्ष्णामायसॆ: कण्टकैश्चिताम्।
नहि त्वमीदृशं कृत्वा तस्यालीकं महात्मन:॥ २१॥
धारितुं शक्ष्यसि चिरं विषं पीत्वेव निर्घृण।
बद्धस्त्वं कालपाशेन दुर्निवारेण रावण॥ २२॥
“Obviously you are vividly viewing trees
as made of gold (an unmistakable sign of
approaching death). Nay, you are going to
see in the near future, O Ravana, the fearful
river Vaitarani, carrying a flood of blood in
place of water as well as the dreadful grove
known by the name of Asipatravana (a hell of
this name depicted as consisting of a cluster
of trees or shrubs with leaves sharp-edged
as a sword) and will behold a dentate Salmali
(a silk-cotton tree) containing flowers of heated
gold and leaves of excellent cat’s eye gems
and bristling with thorns of steel. Having done
such a grievous wrong to the high-souled
Sri Rama, you shall not be able to survive
long any more than on drinking poison, O
merciless ogre ! You are caught in the noose
of Death, which is difficult to repulse, O
Ravana ! (19—22)

क्व गतो लप्स्यसे शर्म मम भर्तुर्महात्मन:।
निमेषान्तरमात्रेण विना भ्रातरमाहवे॥२३॥
Tae निहता येन सहस्राणि चतुर्दश।
कथं स राघवो वीर: सर्वास्त्रकुशलो Feit it २४॥
न त्वां हन्याच्छैस्तीक्ष्णैरिष्टभार्यापहारिणम्।
एतच्चान्यच्च परुषं वैदेही रावणाङ्कगा।
भयशोकसमाविष्टा करुणं विललाप ह॥ २५॥
“Transferred to which place will you get
shelter from the rage of my high-minded
husband? How will the aforesaid Sri Rama, a
scion of Raghu, a mighty hero, who is adept
in the use of all mystic missiles, not despatch
with sharp arrows you, who are carrying away
his beloved spouse?” Having uttered these
and many other harsh words, while still
etrapped by Ravana, Sita, a princess of the
