9३2

of the hill and the rising of the moon, now
that the night had commenced, the aforesaid
Ravana, who was exceptionally powerful,
fell a prey to concupiscence. Sighing again
and again, he gazed at the moon. (12-13)

एतस्मिन्नन्तरे तत्र दिव्याभरणभूषिता।
सर्वाप्सरोवरा रम्भा पूर्णचन्द्रनिभानना॥१४॥
दिव्यचन्दनलिप्ताङ्गी मन्दारकृतमूर्धजा।
दिव्योत्सवकृतारम्भा दिव्यपुष्पविभूषिता॥ १७५॥
च्क्षुर्मनोहरं पीनं मेखलादामभूषितम्।
Weed जघनं सरतिप्राभृतमुत्तमम्॥१६॥
कृतैर्विशेषकैरार्द्र: षडर्तुकुसुमोद्भवै:।
बभावन्यतमेव sit: कान्तिश्रीद्युतिकीर्तिभि: ।। १७॥
नीलं सतोयमेघाभं वस्त्रं समवगुण्ठिता।
यस्या वक्त्रं शशिनिभं भ्रुवौ चापनिभे शुभे॥ १८॥
Be करिकराकारौ ail पल्लवकोमलौ।
सैन्यमध्येन गच्छन्ती रावणेनोपलक्षिता॥१९॥

In the meantime appeared there Rambha,
the foremost of all celestial nymphs, decked
with celestial jewels, whose face resembled
the full moon, whose limbs were smeared
with ethereal sandal-paste, whose tresses
were adorned with heavenly Mandara
flowers, who had just commenced her journey
to revel in a heavenly joy and was adorned
with heavenly flowers, who was distinguished
by soul-captivating eyes and fleshy hips
decked with a girdle, which she carried as
an excellent gift of love as it were, and who,
what with wet ornaments made of flowers of
all the six seasons, and what with her
splendour, elegance, brilliance and fame,
shone like another Sri (the goddess of
fortune); whose face shone like the moon,
whose beautiful eyebrows resembled two
bows, whose thighs were shaped like the
trunk of an elephant and whose hands were
soft like tender leaves, and who, wearing as
she did, a blue sari resembling a rainy
cloud, was perceived by Ravana while
passing through his army. (14—19)
तां समुत्थाय गच्छन्तीं कामबाणवशं गत:।
करे गृहीत्वा लज्जन्तीं स्मयमानोऽभ्यभाषत॥ २०॥

« VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

Springing on his feet, and holding her
by the hand as she was wending her way
blushing, Ravana, who had fallen a prey to
the darts of love, then smilingly spoke to her
(as follows): (20)

क्व गच्छसि वरारोहे cht सिद्धि भजसे स्वयम्।
कस्याभ्युदयकालोऽयं यस्त्वां समुपभोक्ष्यते॥ २१॥

“Where are you going, O lady of lovely
limos? Whose cherished object are you
seeking to accomplish by yourself? Whose
is the hour of good fortune approaching,
who is going to enjoy you? (21)

त्वदाननरसस्याद्य पद्मोत्पलसुगन्धिन: ।
सुधामृतरसस्येव कोऽद्य तृप्तिं गमिष्यति॥ २२॥

“Who will be sated today by quaffing
the nectar of nectars in the shape of the
sweetness of your lips bearing the fragrance
of the lotus and the lily? (22)
स्वर्णकुम्भनिभौ पीनौ शुभौ भीरु निरन्तरौ।
कस्योर:स्थलसंस्पर्शं दास्यतस्ते कुचाविमौ॥ २३॥

“To whose bosom are these fully
developed, beautiful and closely set breasts
of yours, resembling a pair of gold pitchers,
going to give their blessed touch, O timid
one? (23)
सुवर्णचक्रप्रतिमं स्वर्णदामचितं पृथु।
अध्यारोक्ष्यति कस्तेऽद्य जघनं स्वर्गरूपिणम्॥ २४॥

“Who is going to bestride today your
broad hips resembling a disc of gold, encircled
by a girdle of gold and which is heaven
incarnate? (24)

मद्बिशिष्ट: पुमान् कोऽद्य शक्रो विष्णुरथाश्विनौ |
मामतीत्य हि यच्च त्वं यासि भीरु न शोभनम्॥ २५ Il

“What male is superior to me today—
be he Indra (the ruler of gods), Lord Visnu
(the Protector of the universe) or the ASwins
(the twin-born gods who are the physicians
of gods)? Nay, it is surely not good that you
are passing by me, O timid one! (25)

विश्रम त्वं पृथुश्रोणि शिलातलमिदं शुभम्।
त्रैलोक्ये य: प्रभुश्चैव मदन्यो नैव विद्यते॥ २६॥
