« KISKINDHAKANDA +

ad: परमगम्या स्याद् दिक्पूर्वा त्रिदशाव्रृता।
रहिता चन्द्रसूर्याभ्यामदृश्या तमसावरृता॥६६॥
“Beyond that mountain the eastern
quarter is inaccessible, inhabited as it is
solely by the deity presiding over it, viz.,
Indra, is without the moon and the sun and
as such remains enveloped in darkness
(screened as it is from the sun by the
eastern mountain standing between them)
and, therefore, invisible. (66)

शैलेषु तेषु सर्वेषु कन्दरेषु नदीषु च।
ये च नोक्ता मयोद्देशा विचेया तेषु जानकी ।॥ ६७॥

“Sita, daughter of Janaka, should be
sought for on the peaks of all the above-
mentioned mountains, at the banks of all
the aforesaid rivers and in all the
aforementioned caves as also in all other
regions which have not been mentioned by
me. (67)

अभास्करममर्यादं न जानीमस्तत: परम्॥६८॥

“Only thus far can the monkeys
proceed, O jewels among the monkeys !
We have no knowledge of the region
beyond the eastern mountain, which is
devoid of the sun and the other luminaries

1093

and is without limit.
अभिगम्य तु add निलयं रावणस्य a
मासे पूर्णे निवर्तध्वमुदयं प्राप्य पर्वतम्॥६९॥

“Having reached the eastern mountain
and definitely found out Sita as well as the
abode of Ravana, return before a month is
complete. (69)

ऊर्ध्व मासान्न वस्तव्यं वसन् वध्यो भवेन्मम।
सिद्धार्था: संनिवर्तध्वमधिगम्य च मैथिलीम्॥ ७० ॥

“You should not tarry beyond a month;
anyone doing will be punishable with death
by me. Having found out Sita (a princess of
Mithila) and thus achieved your end, return
forthwith. (70)

रे । ण्डितां
fast चरित्वा निपुणेन वानरा:।
dat Prorat: सुखिनो भविष्यथ॥ ७१ ॥

“Having combed with care the eastern
quarter loved by the mighty Indra and graced
with a number of forests, O monkeys, and
having found Sita, the beloved of Sri Rama
(born in the line of Raghu), and having
returned from that eastern quarter you will
become happy.” (71)

(68)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये किष्किन्धाकाण्डे
चत्वारिंश: सर्ग: ॥ ४० ॥
Thus ends Canto Forty in the Kiskindhakanda of the glorious Ramayana of Valmiki,
the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

