* BALAKANDA +

preliminary to matrimony. May good betide
you, O king! (23)
मघा Ga महाबाहो तृतीयदिवसे weir
फल्गुन्यामुत्तरे राजंस्तस्मिन् वैवाहिकं कुरु।
रामलक्ष्मणयोरर्थे दानं कार्यं सुखोदयम्॥ २४॥

Indeed, the constellation Magha is in

265

the ascendant today, O mighty-armed king !
On the third day, when the celebrated Uttara
Phalguni mansion is in the ascendant, my
lord, perform the wedding ceremony. Gifts,
which are calculated to bring happiness in
its wake, should be made for the welfare of
Sri Rama and Laksmana. (24)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये बालकाण्डे एकसप्ततितम: सर्ग: ॥ ७१ ॥

Thus ends Canto Seventy-one in the Balakanda of the glorious Ramayana of Valmiki,
the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

Canto LXXII

Vasistha and ViSwamitra jointly ask for the hand of the two daughters
of Kugadhwaja in favour of Bharata and Satrughna and Janaka
acquiesces in the proposal. Thereupon DaSaratha gets his
sons to perform the rite of Samavartana and himself
performs the Nandisraddha

तमुक्तवन्तं ade विश्वामित्रो महामुनि:।
उवाच वचनं वीरं वसिष्ठसहितो TATU I
To the celebrated and heroic King
Janaka (belonging to the Videha dynasty),
who had finished his say, the great sage
VisSwamitra, accompanied by _ Vasistha,
addressed the following words : (1)

अचिन्त्यान्यप्रमेयाणि कुलानि नरपुंगव।
इक्ष्वाकूणां विदेहानां नैषां तुल्योऽस्ति कश्चन॥ २॥

“The royal houses of Ikswaku and
Videha are  inconceivably great and
immeasurably glorious, O jewel among men !
There is none equal to those belonging to
these two races. (2)

wet धर्मसम्बन्ध: wee रूपसम्पदा।
रामलक्ष्मणयो राजन् सीता चोर्मिलया सह॥ ३॥

The sacred matrimonial alliance, going
to be contracted between the two houses,
is well-matched; it is well-matched in point
of physical charm as well as of riches; for
Sita alongwith Urmila is quite becoming

of Sri Rama and Laksmana.
वक्तव्यं च नरश्रेष्ठं श्रूयतां वचनं मम।
भ्राता यवीयान् धर्मज्ञ एष राजा कुशध्वज:॥४॥
There is more to be said on this subject,
O jewel among men! Let my counsel
be heard. Here is your younger brother,
King Kusadhwaja, who knows what is right.
(4)
अस्य धर्मात्मनो राजन् रूपेणाप्रतिमं भुवि।
सुताद्वयं oars पत्न्यर्थं वरयामहे॥५॥
भरतस्य कुमारस्य wae च धीमत:।
aa a ad राजंस्तयोरर्थे महात्मनो:॥६॥

We sue, O jewel among men, as a
wife to prince Bharata as also to the shrewd
Satrughna, the two others sons of Emperor
DaSaratha, the two daughters, of this pious-
minded prince, who are peerless on earth
in point of comeliness. O king, whereas |
ask your two daughters, Sita and Urmila,
for these two high-souled princes, Sri Rama
and Laksmana, O Janaka! (5-6)

(3)
