270

properly made of Palasa or Khadira wood
about as long as an arm, with a receptacle at
the end of the size of a hand) and Sruvas
(smaller wooden ladles used for pouring ghee
into the Sruk), vessels brimful with water to
be offered to a deity for washing the hands
etc., with, as well as_ with vessels full of
parched grains of paddy and smaller vessels
as also with grains of unbroken rice dyed
with the powder of dried turmeric root. Again,
bestrewing the altar with blades of Darbha
grass equal in length and placing the fire on it
according to the scriptural ordinance while
reciting sacred texts, the highly glorious
Vasistha, the foremost of sages, poured
oblations into it with due ceremony with the
recitation of sacred texts. (18—24)

ad: Oat समानीय सर्वाभरणभूषिताम्।
समक्षमग्ने; संस्थाप्य राघवाभिमुखे तदा॥ २५॥
अब्रवीज्जनको राजा कौसल्यानन्दवर्धनम्।
sa सीता मम सुता सहधर्मचरी तव॥ २६॥

Duly escorting after that Sita, adorned
with all sorts of jewels, and _ having
comfortably seated her before the sacred
fire opposite Sri Rama, the ornament of
Raghu’s race, King Janaka then spoke as
follows to Sri Rama, the promoter of
Kausalya’s joy: “This Sita, my daughter, is
going to be your helpmate in discharging
your sacred obligations. (25-26)
प्रतीच्छ चैनां भद्रं ते पाणिं गृह्णीष्व पाणिना।
पतिव्रता महाभागा छायेवानुगता सदा॥ २७॥

“Take her hand in your own and accept
her as your own. May good betide you !
She is highly fortunate and will remain
exclusively devoted to you (her husband)
and will ever follow you as a shadow.” (27)

इत्युक्त्वा प्राक्षिपद् राजा मन्त्रपूतं जलं तदा।
साधुसाध्विति देवानामृषीणां वदतां तदा॥ २८॥
देवदुन्दुभिनिर्घोष: पुष्पवर्षो महानभूत्।
एवं दत्त्वा सुतां सीतां मन्त्रोदकपुरस्कृताम्॥ २९॥
अब्रवीज्जनको राजा हर्षेणाभिपरिप्लुत:।
लक्ष्मणागच्छ भद्रं ते ऊर्मिलामुद्यतां मया॥ ३०॥

« VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

प्रतीच्छ पाणिं गृह्णीष्व मा भूत् कालस्य पर्यय: |
तमेवमुक्त्वा जनको भरतं चाभ्यभाषत॥ ३१॥

Saying so, king Janaka_ forthwith
transferred to Sri Rama’s hand the water in
his own hand, consecrated by the recitation
of sacred texts, signifying his will to offer the
hand of Sita to Sri Rama. At that time was
heard the noise of celestial kettledrums and
there fell an abundant shower of flowers rained
by gods and sages exclaiming “Good ! Well
done !” Having thus given away to Sri Rama
his daughter, Sita, in the wake of water (held
in his palm and) consecrated by the recitation
of Mantras (giving expression to his vow of
bestowing the princess on Sri Rama), King
Janaka, filled with rapture, said to Laksmana,
“Laksmana, come along; may good betide
you! Accept Urmila, being given away by
me. Take her hand in your own, let there be
no loss of time.” Having requested Laksmana
thus, Janaka spoke to Bharata too as
follows : (28—31)
गृहाण पाणिं माण्डव्या: पाणिना रघुनन्दन।
शत्रुघ्नं चापि धर्मात्मा अब्रवीन्मिथिलेश्वर: ।॥ ३२॥
श्रुतकीर्तेर्महाबाहो पाणिं गृह्णीष्व पाणिना।

Wa भवन्त: सौम्याश्च सर्वे सुचरितव्रता:॥ ३३॥

“Clasp the hand of Mandavi with your
own, O scion of Raghu!” The pious king of
Mithila further said to Satrughna, “Take in
your hand, O mighty-armed prince, the hand
of Srutakirti. You are all gentle and have all
duly observed sacred vows of celibacy etc.

(32-33)
पत्नीभि: सन्तु काकुत्स्था मा भूत् कालस्य पर्यय:।
जनकस्य TA: श्रुत्वा पाणीन्पाणिभिरस्पृशन्॥ ३४॥
चत्वारस्ते चतसूणां वसिष्ठस्य मते स्थिता:।
अग्निं प्रदक्षिणं कृत्वा वेदिं राजानमेव च॥ ३५॥
ॠषींश्चापि महात्मान: सहभार्या रघूद्वहा:।
यथोक्तेन ततश्चक्रुर्विवाहुं विधिपूर्वकम्॥ ३६॥

“Let yourselves be married, O scions

of Kakutstha ! Let there be no delay.” Hearing
the request of Janaka, all the four princes,
