844

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

Canto XLVIII
Ravana boasts of his prowess and Sita twits him sharp

ललाटे भ्रुकुटिं कृत्वा रावण: प्रत्युवाच ह॥१॥

Knitting his brows on his forehead while
Sita was speaking as aforesaid, Ravana
felt provoked and replied in the following
harsh words: so the tradition goes: (1)

भ्राता वैश्रवणस्याहं सापत्नो वरवर्णिनि।
रावणो AA भद्रं A दशग्रीव: प्रतापवान्॥२॥
यस्य देवा: सगन्धर्वा: पिशाचपतगोरगा:।
विद्रवन्ति Ger भीता मृत्योरिव सदा प्रजा:॥ ३॥
at वैश्रवणो wat वैमात्रा: कारणान्तरे।
द्वन्द्वमासादित: क्रोधाद् रणे विक्रम्य निर्जित:॥४॥

“Good luck to you, 0 lady of excellent
complexion! | am the glorious ten-headed
half-brother of Kubera (son of Sage Visrava),
Ravana by name, from whom gods including
Gandharvas, nay, fiends, birds and serpents
ever flee in terror as created beings are always
afraid of death, nay, provoked by whom to a
conflict on some excuse, his half-brother,
Kubera (son of Sage ViSrava) was assailed
and utterly vanquished. (2—4)

Ted: परित्यज्य स्वमधिष्ठानमृद्धिमत्।
कैलासं पर्वतश्रेष्ठमध्यास्ते नरवाहन:॥५॥

“Deserting for good his sumptuous
abode, Lanka, stricken as he was with fear
of me, Kubera (who is carried from place to
place on a palanquin borne by human beings)
dwells on the top of Kailasa, the foremost of
mountains. (5)
वीर्यादावर्जितं ws येन यामि विहायसम्॥६॥

“His celebrated and beautiful aerial car,
Puspaka by name, which can go wherever
one likes, and in which | range the skies,
was snatched by me by dint of my prowess,
O good lady ! (6)

मम संजातरोषस्य we दृष्टवैव मैथिलि।
विद्रवन्ति परित्रस्ता: सुरा: शक्रपुरोगमा:॥७॥
“Alarmed to see my very face when |

am provoked to anger, gods headed by Indra
take to flight, O princess of Mithila ! (7)

aa तिष्ठाम्यहं at मारुतो aa visa:
तीव्रांशु: शिशिरांशुश्च भयात् सम्पद्यते दिवि॥ ८ u

“Wheresoever | halt, the wind blows
gently through apprehension and the sun
with its fierce rays is transformed into the
moon (because of its cool rays) in the
heavens. (8)

निष्कम्पपत्रास्तरवो नद्यश्च स्तिमितोदका:।
भवन्ति यत्र dae तिष्ठामि च ane च॥९॥

“Nay, wherever | stay and move, the
trees find their leaves motionless and the
rivers find their waters still. (9)

मम UN समुद्रस्य लङ्का नाम पुरी शुभा।
सम्पूर्णा राक्षसैर्घोरैर्यथेन्द्रस्यामरावती ।। ou

“Beyond the sea stands my beautiful
capital, Lanka by name, vying with
Amaravati, the capital of Indra, and full of
fierce ogres. (10)

प्राकारेण परिक्षिप्ता पाण्डुरेण विराजिता।
हेमकक्ष्या पुरी रम्या वैदूर्यमयतोरणा॥११॥

“Enclosed and beautified by a white
enclosure wall, the city looks charming with
the inner apartments of its houses built of
gold and outer gates made of cat’s-eye
jewels. (11)

हस्त्यश्वरथसम्बाधा तूर्यनादविनादिता।
ademas: संकुलोद्यानभूषिता॥१२॥

“The city is crowded with elephants,
horses and chariots and rendered noisy by
the sound of musical instruments of every
description; nay, it abounds in trees yielding
