+ UTTARAKANDA +

| have no doubt, O noble one, when he
will proceed for flesh, having not the trident

1051

with him, victory shall be yours, O king of
men. (26)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये उत्तरकाण्डे सप्तषष्टितम: सर्ग: ॥ ६७॥

Thus ends Canto Sixty-seven in the Uttarakanda of the glorious Ramayana of Valmiki,
the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

Canto LX VII

Lavana goes out in search of food. Satrughna stays at the citygate
awaiting return of Lavana and has an angry exchange
of words with the latter

HA कथयतां तेषां जयं चाकाङ्क्षतां शुभम्।
व्यतीता रजनी vite शत्रुघ्नस्य महात्मन:॥ I
The night passed away quickly while
staying at the hermitage of Cyavana, the
noble Satrughna conversing with Cyavana
and other sages, who wished for his holy
victory (against Lavana). (1)
तत: Ware विमले तस्मिन् caret स राक्षस:।
निर्गतस्तु पुराद् वीरो भक्ष्याहारप्रचोदित:॥ २॥

Then in the morning when it was dawn,
that Raksasa, Lavana, the heroic one, went
out of his city impelled by the desire to bring
his food. (2)

एतस्मिन्नन्तरे वीर: शत्रुघ्नो यमुनां नदीम्।
drat मधुपुरद्वारि धनुष्पाणिरतिष्ठत॥ ३॥

In the meantime, Satrughna, the brave
one, having crossed the Yamuna, stood at
the gates of the city of Madhu, with bow in
his hand. (3)

ततोऽर्धदिवसे प्राप्ते क्रूरकर्मा स राक्षस:।
आगच्छद् बहुसाहस्रं प्राणिनां wage si
Then at midday that Raksasa, Lavana,

the evil-doer returned bearing the load of
many thousand creatures. (4)

ततो ददर्श शत्रुघ्नं स्थितं द्वारि धृतायुधम्।
तमुवाच ततो ve: किमनेन करिष्यसि॥५॥

Then the Raksasa saw Satrughna

armed with the bow, standing at the gate
and said to him: ‘What will you do with this
weapon? (5)
ईदृशानां सहस्राणि सायुधानां नराधम।
भक्षितानि मया रोषात् कालेनानुगतो ह्यसि॥ ६॥
‘Many thousands of men like you
accompanied with weapons, O wretched
one, have been devoured by me in anger.
Death seems to have come nearer to you.
(6)
आहारश्चाप्यसम्पूर्णो ममायं पुरुषाधम।
स्वयं प्रविष्टोऽद्य मुखं कथमासाद्य दुर्मते॥७॥
‘O vile one, my food is yet incomplete,
having come, you enter my mouth of your
own accord?’ (7)
तस्यैवं भाषमाणस्य ह्सतश्च मुहुर्मुहु:।
शत्रुघ्नो वीर्यसम्पन्नो रोषादश्रूण्यवासृजत्॥८॥
While the Raksasa spoke thus and
laughing, the heroic Satrughna broke in tears
with anger. (8)
तस्य रोषाभिभूतस्य शत्रुघ्नस्य महात्मन:।
तेजोमया मरीच्यस्तु सर्वगात्रैर्विनिष्पतन्॥९॥
Fiery rays issued forth from all the
limbs of the noble and angry Satrughna. (9)

उवाच च सुसंक्रुद्ध: शत्रुघ्न: स निशाचरम्।
योद्धुमिच्छामि दुर्बुद्धे द्वन्द्वयुद्धं त्वया सह॥ १०॥

Highly enraged, Satrughna then
