1054

तस्मिन् निपतिते वीरे हाहाकारो महानभूत्।
wa देवसंघानां गन्धर्वाप्सरसां तथा॥१३॥

So, as the brave Satrughna fell, long
cries of ‘Ha’ emanated from the sages, the
host of the gods, the Gandharvas and
Apsaras (the celestial beings). (13)
तमवज्ञाय तु हतं wasnt भुवि पातितम्।

Tat लब्धान्तरमपि न विवेश स्वमालयम्॥ १४॥

Ignoring Satrughna, fallen on the ground
whom he took killed, the Raksasa did not
enter his residence, although given time to
do so. (14)

नापि शूलं प्रजग्राह तं दृष्ट्वा भुवि पातितम्।

ततो हत इति ज्ञात्वा तान् AAT समुदावहत्॥ १५ ॥
Nor even did he, Lavana, take up the

trident seeing him (Satrughna) lying on the

ground, and then considering him, Satrughna,

dead, carried again his provisions. (15)

मुहूर्ताल्लब्धसंज्ञस्तु पुनस्तस्थौ धृतायुध:।
शत्रुघ्नो वै पुरद्वारि ऋषिभि: सम्प्रपूजित:॥१६॥
Gaining consciousness in a moment,
Satrughna, adored by the sages, stood up
and waited at the door of the city of Madhu,
weapon in his hand. (16)
ad दिव्यममोघं तं wore शरमुत्तमम्।
ज्वलन्तं तेजसा घोरं Wad दिशो दश॥ १७॥
wd पर्वसु सर्वेषु संयुगेष्वपराजितम्॥१८॥
दानवेन्द्राचलेन्द्राणामसुराणां च दारुणम्॥१९॥
तं दीप्तमिव कालाग्निं युगान्ते समुपस्थिते।
gem सर्वाणि भूतानि परित्रासमुपागमन्॥ २०॥
Then Satrughna took hold of the arrow:
the divine and excelling others, flaming with
brilliance and filling the ten quarters with its
brilliance, shaped like the thunderbolt in front,
resembling the thunderbolt in speed, equalling
Meru and Mandara mountains, flat shaped,
invincible in all encounters, smeared with red
sandal-like blood, beautiful as the winged bird,
dreadful for the lord of the Danavas and also

« VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

the mountains, resembling as if the fire of
destruction kindled at the time of final
dissolution. Seeing it, all beings were very
much frightened. (17—20)
सदेवासुरगन्धर्वं मुनिभि: साप्सरोगणम्।
जगद्धि सर्वमस्वस्थं पितामहमुपस्थितम्॥ २१॥
The whole world, together with the
Devas, Asuras and Gandharvas and the
sages, was in discomfort and all approached
Pitamaha (Brahma). (21)
उवाच देवदेवेशं वरदं प्रपितामहम्।
देवानां भयसम्मोहो लोकानां संक्षयं प्रति॥ २२॥
They narrated to the god of the gods,
Prapitamaha Brahma, the bewilderment of
the gods with fear regarding the security of
the worlds. (22)

कच्चिल्लोकक्षयो देव सम्प्राप्तो वा युगक्षय:।

नेदृशं दृष्टपूर्वं च न ad प्रपितामह॥ २३॥
‘O lord! is the destruction of the world

at hand or has the end of the universe

approached? O grand sire, never before
has such a condition of the world been seen

or heard.’ (23)

तेषां तद् वचनं श्रुत्वा ब्रह्मा लोकपितामह:।

भयकारणमाचष्ट देवानामभयंकर: ॥ २४॥
Hearing their words, Brahma the

grandfather of the worlds, protector of the
gods, revealed the cause of the fear of the
gods. (24)
sara मधुरां वाणीं शरृणुध्वं सर्वदेवता:।
वधाय लवणस्याजौ शर: शत्रुघ्नधारित:॥ २५॥
He said in a sweet voice: ‘All the gods
listen to me; the arrow has been held by
Satrughna for the slaying of Lavana in
encounter. (25)

तेजसा तस्य सम्मूढा: सर्वे स्म सुरसत्तमा:।
Wa पूर्वस्य देवस्य लोककर्तु: सनातन:॥ २६॥
शरस्तेजोमयो वत्सा येन A भयमागतम्।
एष वै कैटभस्यार्थे मधुनश्च महाशर:॥ २७॥
Wel महात्मना तेन वधार्थे दैत्ययोस्तयो:।
एक Wa प्रजानाति विष्णुस्तेजोमयं शरम्॥ २८॥

‘All the great gods are bewildered at the
