« KISKINDHAKANDA +

lord of rivers and streams), and then, after
he had offered water to the spirit of his
younger brother, taking the said king of
birds back to the same place where he

1145

lived, the aforesaid monkeys, who were
endowed with extraordinary energy, felt
rejoiced to receive the information regarding
Ravana and Sita. (36-37)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायाणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये किष्किन्धाकाण्डे
अष्टपञ्चाश: सर्ग: ॥ ५८ Il

Thus ends Canto Fifty-eight in the Kiskindhakanda of the glorious Ramayana of
Valmiki, the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

एकोनषष्टितम: सर्ग:
Canto LIX

Interrogated by Jambavan as to how Sampati came to know about Sita’s,
abduction by Ravana, the vulture tells him that it was his son,
Suparswa, who related to him how, one day, while he was ranging
along the seashore in search of food, he had seen a young
lady, shining brightly as gold, being borne away by an
ogre, of whom he had come to know later on from
the words of an eminent sage that they were
no other than Sita and Ravana, respectively

ततस्तदमृतास्वादं गृध्रराजेन भाषितम्।
निशम्य deat gerd da: प्लवगर्षभा:॥ १॥

The aforesaid leaders of monkeys were
delighted to hear the words, sweet as nectar,
uttered by the king of vultures, even as he
spoke to them. (1)

जाम्बवान् वानरश्रेष्ठ: सह Ad: प्लवङ्गमै:।
भूतलात् सहसोत्थाय गृध्रराजानमब्रवीत्॥ २॥

Rising from the ground all at once
alongwith all the monkeys, Jambavan, the
foremost of all monkeys and bears, spoke
as follows to Sampati, the king of vultures :

(2)
क्व सीता केन वा दृष्टा को वा हरति मैथिलीम्।
तदाख्यातु भवान् Ga गतिर्भव वनौकसाम्॥ ३॥

“Where is Sita and by whom was she
seen? And who abducted the princess of
Mithila? Pray, relate all that and prove to
be an asylum for the monkeys and bears

(lit., dwellers in the woods).

को दाशरथिबाणानां वज्रवेगनिपातिनाम्।

स्वयं लक्ष्मणमुक्तानां न चिन्तयति विक्रमम्॥४॥
“Who is it that does not mind the might

of the arrows of Sri Rama (son of DaSaratha),

which rush with the speed of lightning, as

well as of those discharged by Laksmana
himself?” (4)

स हरीन् प्रतिसम्मुक्तान् सीताश्रुतिसमाहितान्।
Gage प्रीत इदं वचनमब्रवीत्॥५॥

Consoling once more the monkeys,
who had now totally given up the vow of
starving themselves to death and were all
attention to hear more about Sita, Sampati
joyously made the following reply : (5)

श्रूयतामिह ace यथा मे हरणं श्रुतम्।
at चापि ममाख्यातं यत्र चायतलोचना॥६॥

“Hear how the abduction of Sita (a
princess of the Videha territory) was heard

(3)
