* SUNDARAKANDA +

ताभ्यां स परिपूर्णाभ्यां भुजाभ्यां राक्षसेश्वर: |
शुशुभेऽचलसंकाश: श्रृंगाभ्यामिव मन्दर:॥ २७॥
With his two well-built arms of well-
known might that lord of ogres, who was
colossal as a mountain, looked charming
like Mount Mandara with a pair of peaks.

(27)
तरुणादित्यवर्णाभ्यां कुण्डलाभ्यां विभूषित: |
रक्तपल्लवपुष्पाभ्यामशोकाभ्यामिवाचल: ॥ २८॥

Adorned with a pair of ear-rings

resembling the rising sun in hue, he looked
like a mountain with a pair of ASoka trees
clothed with crimson leaves and flowers.
(28)
स कल्पवृक्षप्रतिमो वसन्त sa मूर्तिमान्।
शमशानचैत्यप्रतिमो भूषितोऽपि भयंकर:॥२९॥
Though adorned like a wish-yielding
tree or like spring-incarnate, he was fearful
like a funeral monument or pyramidal column
containing the ashes of deceased persons
and existing in a crematorium. (29)
अवेक्षमाणो वैदेहीं कोपसंरक्तलोचन:।
sara रावण: सीतां भुजंग sa नि:श्वसन्॥ ३०॥
Gazing on Sita, a princess of the Videha
territory, his eyes bloodshot through anger,
and hissing like a serpent, Ravana spoke to
her as follows: (30)
अनयेनाभिसम्पन्नमर्थहीनमनुव्रते ।
नाशयाम्यहमद्य त्वां सूर्य: संध्यामिवौजसा॥ ३१॥
“O woman devoted to a man who is
beset with ill-luck and is devoid of resources,
| shall get rid of you today by recourse to
my glory even as the sun dispels the morning
twilight by its brilliance.” (31)

इत्युक्त्वा मैथिलीं राजा रावण: शत्रुरावण:।
संददर्शं dd: wat राक्षसीर्घोरदर्शना:॥३२॥
एकाक्षीमेककर्णां च कर्णप्रावरणां तथा।
गोकर्णी हस्तिकर्णी चलम्बकर्णीमकर्णिकाम्॥ ३३ UI
हस्तिपद्यश्वपद्यौ च गोपदीं पादचूलिकाम्।
एकाक्षीमेकपादीं च पृथुपादीमपादिकाम्॥ ३४॥

121

अतिमात्रशिरोग्रीवामतिमात्रकुचोदरीम् ।
अतिमात्रास्यनेत्रां च दीर्घजिह्वानखामपि॥ ३५ ॥
यथा मद्दशगा सीता fad भवति जानकी ।। ३६॥
तथा कुरुत राक्षस्य: सर्वा: क्षिप्रं समेत्य वा।
प्रतिलोमानुलोमैश्च सामदानादिभेदनै: ।। ३७॥

Having threatened Sita, a princess of
Mithila, as aforesaid, King Ravana, who
made his enemies cry in terror, commanded
as follows all the ogresses of formidable
appearance stationed there to guard Sita,
ogresses, who were either one-eyed or with
One ear only or with ears wide enough to
cover their body, or with ears resembling
those of a cow or those of an elephant, or
with long ears or devoid of ears or with the
feet of an elephant, horse or cow or with
feet having a tuft of hair or with a single eye
or single foot or enormous feet or no feet at
all, with their head and neck of inordinate
size, with enormous breasts and belly, with
a disproportionately large mouth and eyes,
with a long tongue and nails, noseless or
having the head of a lion, cow or boar: “Act
promptly in such a way, severally or jointly,
O ogresses, that Sita, Janaka’s daughter,
soon submits to my will. Reduce Sita, a
princess of the Videha territory, to submission
by acting conformably or contrary to her
will, by causing disaffection in her mind to
her husband after persuasion and gifts have
failed, and also by exercising coercion, if
necessary.” (832—37)

आवर्जयत वैदेहीं दण्डस्योद्यमनेन च।
इति प्रतिसमादिश्य राक्षसेन्द्र: UA: पुन:॥ ३८॥
काममन्युपरीतात्मा जानकीं प्रति गर्जत।
उपगम्य da: fad राक्षसी धान्यमालिनी।॥ ३९॥
परिष्वज्य दशग्रीवमिदं वचनमब्रवीत्।
मया क्रीड महाराज सीतया fe तवानया॥४०॥
विवर्णया कृपणया मानुष्या राक्षसेशर्वर।
नूनमस्यां महाराज न देवा भोगसत्तमान्॥४१॥
विदधत्यमरश्रेष्ठास्तव बाहुबलार्जितान्।
अकामां कामयानस्य शरीरमुपतप्यते॥४२॥
