* ARANYAKANDA «

earth and the intermediate region, | do not
perceive a man who may snatch by dint of
prowess you, who are protected by my
arms, O beautiful lady ! (25)
लङ्काया: सुमहद्राज्यमिदं त्वमनुपालय।
त्वत्प्रेष्या मद्बिधाश्चैव देवाश्चापि चराचरम्॥ २६॥
“Rule you over this vast dominion of
Lanka. If you agree to this proposal of mine,
those like me (viz., the ogres) as well as
gods, nay, the entire mobile and immobile
creation will automatically become your
servants (inasmuch as they are all
subservient to my will and | shall be at your
beck and call). (26)

अभिषेकजलक्लिन्ना Ter च रमयस्व च।

दुष्कृतं ATT कर्म वनवासेन तद्गतम्॥ II
wa A सुकृतं कर्म तस्येह फलमाप्नुहि।
इह सर्वाणि माल्यानि दिव्यगन्धानि मैथिलि॥ २८ i
भूषणानि च मुख्यानि तानि सेव मया सह।
पुष्पकं नाम सुश्रोणि भ्रातुर्वैश्रवणस्य मे॥२९॥
विशालं रमणीयं च तद्विमानं मनोजवम्॥ ३०॥
“Nay,' drenched with the water meant
for bath and gratified on being relieved from
fatigue, afford delight to me. Whatever sinful
act was done by you in the past has been
exhausted through exile in the forest. And
enjoy here the fruit of such meritorious acts
as stand to your credit. Share with me all
these garlands emitting a heavenly fragrance
as well as the excellent ornments that are
available here, O princess of Mithila.
Moreover, there exists an aerial car, Puspaka
by name, belonging to my (half-) brother,
Kubera (son of Sage Visrava), which shines
brightly as the sun and was won by me in
an encounter by sheer dint of superior
strength, O lady of comely limbs ! Spacious
and delightful, the said aerial car is swift as
thought. (27—30)

867

wa सीते मया सार्धं विहरस्व यथासुखम्।
वदनं पद्मसंकाशं विमलं चारुदर्शनम्॥३१॥
Wed तु वरारोहे न भ्राजति वरानने।
एवं वदति तस्मिन् सा वस्त्रान्तेन वराङ्गना॥ ३२॥
पिधायेन्दुनिभं सीता मन्दमश्रूण्यवर्तयत्।
ध्यायन्तीं तामिवास्वस्थां सीतां चिन्ताहतप्रभाम्॥ ३३ Ul
उवाच वचनं वीरो रावणो रजनीचर:।
अलं व्रीडेन वैदेहि धर्मलोपकृतेन ते॥ ३४॥
आर्षोऽयं देवि निष्पन्दो यस्त्वामभिभविष्यति।
एतौ पादौ मया स्निग्धौ शिरोभि: परिपीडितौ।॥ ३५ ॥

“Divert yourself with me in that car so
long as it gratifies you, O Sita ! Your flawless
countenance, resembling a lotus and lovely
to look at, does not look charming, oppressed
as it is with grief, O lady with a beautiful
face and other limbs !” Covering her moonlike
face while Ravana was speaking thus, that
lovely lady, Sita, gently allowed her tears to
flow. Ravana, the valiant prowler of the
night, addressed the following words to the
aforesaid Sita, who was definitely ill at ease,
her splendour having been bedimmed through
anxiety, and was contemplating on Sri Rama:
“Have done with bashfulness occasioned
by transgrassion of the prescribed course
of conduct in the shape of leaving one’s
husband and accepting another. The tie of
love which is going to be established with
you by me, O queen, is permitted by the
seers of Vedic Mantras, who allow marriage?
by force, giving it the name of Raksasa-
Vivaha. These tender soles of yours are
being lovingly pressed with my heads.

(31—35)
प्रसादं pe मे fad aver दासोऽहमस्मि ते।
SAT: शून्या मया वाच: शुष्यमाणेन भाषिता: ॥ ३६ Ul
न चापि रावण: कांचिन्मूध्ना Cat प्रणमेत ह।
`एवमुक्त्वा दशग्रीवो मैथिलीं जनकात्मजाम्।
कृतान्तवशमापन्नो ममेयमिति मन्यते॥ sel

1. This shows that Sita had not washed herself (ever since her abduction by Ravana).

2. Ravana is evidently trying here to twist the scriptural passages, which allow such marriages only
in the case of virgins and not in the case of a married woman.
