# YUDDHAKANDA #

Reaching the range of his arrows, the
gigantic monkey chiefs could not even look
at him, much less advance towards him
any more than an ocean would overstep its
shores. (63)

तांस्तु gear हरिगणान् शरवृष्टिभिरर्दितान्।
अङ्गदं पृष्ठत: कृत्वा भ्रातृजं प्लवगेश्वर: ।॥ ६४॥
अभिदुद्राव सुग्रीव: कुम्भकर्णात्मजं रणे।
Serre नागं वेगवानिव केसरी॥६५॥

Seeing the aforesaid simian ranks
tormented by hails of shafts, and placing
his nephew, Angada, in the rear, Sugriva,
the ruler of monkeys, for his part, assailed
the son of Kumbhakarna on the battle-field
even as an impetuous lion would pounce
upon an elephant roaming on the slopes of
a mountain. (64-65)

sued च Teg Aaryvacn uaa बलहून्।
अन्यांश्च विविधान् वृक्षांश्चिक्षेप a महाकपि: ।। ६६ ॥
Nay, tearing up numerous huge trees
such as the ASwakarna, as well as various
other trees, that mighty monkey hurled them
against the ogre. (66)
at छादयन्तीमाकाशं gqerafte दुरासदाम्।
कुम्भकर्णात्मज: श्रीमांश्चिच्छेद tage: शितै: i ६७॥
The glorious son of Kumbhakarna,
however, tore asunder with his sharp arrows
that shower of trees, which covered the
space and was difficult to approach. (67)

अभिलक्ष्येण तीव्रेण कुम्भेन निशितै: शरै:।
आचितास्ते द्रुमा रेजुर्यथा घोरा: शतघ्नय:।
grat तु aq भिन्नं gear कुम्भेन वीर्यवान्॥ ६८ I
areata: sitar महासत्त्वो न विव्यथे।
स विध्यमान: सहसा सहमानस्तु ताञ्छरान्॥६९॥
कुम्भस्य धनुराक्षिप्य बभञ्जेन्द्रधनु:प्रभम्।
अवप्लुत्य Ta: शीघ्रं Heal HA सुदुष्करम्॥ Vo Il
अब्रवीत् कुपित: कुम्भं भग्नशृङ्गमिव द्विपम्।
निकुम्भाग्रज वीर्यं ते बाणवेगं तदद्भुतम्॥७१॥
संनतिश्च प्रभावश्च तव वा रावणस्य वा।

प्रह्लादबलिव्त्रघ्नकुबेरवरुणोपम WORN

631

Covered all over with arrows by the
impetuous Kumbha, who was skilled in aiming
at the target, those trees shone like so
many formidable Sataghnis (stones or
cylindrical pieces of wood studded with iron
spikes). The valiant and glorious Sugriva,
the suzerain lord of monkeys, for his part,
who was highly courageous, did not feel the
least tormented on seeing the aforesaid
shower of trees dispersed by Kumbha.
Snatching all at once (after springing to his
chariot) the bow of Kumbha, which shone
like a rainbow (the bow of Indra), while he
was still being pierced by his arrows and
was standing those arrows, Sugriva for his
part snapped the bow. Speedily leaping down
from the chariot after performing the said
feat, which was exceedingly difficult for others
to perform, he angrily spoke as follows to
Kumbha, who now resembled an elephant
whose tusks have been broken: “Your well-
known prowess, which lends impetus to
your arrows, is wonderful, O elder brother
of Nikumbha! Complaisance towards the
ogres as well as majesty exist in you or in
Ravana, O compeer of Prahrada, Bali, Indra
(the destroyer of the demon Vrtra), Kubera
(the god of riches) and Varuna (the god of
water)! (68—72)

एकस्त्वमनुजातोऽसि पितरं बलवत्तरम्।
त्वामेवैकं महाबाहुं शूलहस्तमरिंदमम्॥७३॥
त्रिदशा नातिवर्तन्ते जितेन्द्रियमिवाधय:।
विक्रमस्व महाबुद्धे कर्माणि मम पश्य च॥ ७४॥

“You alone have taken after your
father, Kumbhakarna, who was exceedingly
mighty. It is you alone, the mighty-armed
tamer of your enemies, who bear a pike in
your hand, that the gods are not able to
overcome, any more than mental agonies
would overwhelm a master of his senses.
Therefore, exhibit your prowess, O highly
intelligent prince, and witness my exploits.

(73-74)
