* SUNDARAKANDA +

were dragged by the knees and, seized by
the feet, tossed up in the air.” (17)

तदा दधिमुख: Heal वनपस्तत्र वानर:।
हतं मधुवनं श्रुत्वा सान्त्वयामास तान् हरीन्॥ १८ ॥

एतागच्छ्त गच्छामो वानरानतिदर्पितान्।
बलेनावारयिष्यामि प्रभुञ्जानान् मधूत्तमम्॥१९॥

Incensed to hear of Madhuvana having
been devastated by the monkeys,
Dadhimukha, whose duty it was to guard the
grove, consoled the reporting monkeys on
that occasion as follows : “Come along, come
away; let us approach the highly arrogant
monkeys. | shall forcibly ward off the monkeys
feasting on the excellent honey.” (18-19)

श्रुत्वा दधिमुखस्येदं वचनं वानरर्षभा:।

Udit मधुवनं aa सहिता ययु:॥ २०॥
Hearing this assurance of Dadhimukha,

the aforesaid heroic jewels among monkeys

retraced their steps to Madhuvana,
accompanied by Dadhimukha himself. (20)

मध्ये चैषां दधिमुख: सुप्रगृह्य महातरुम्।
समभ्यधावन् वेगेन सर्वे ते च प्लवंगमा:॥ २१॥
Nay, uprooting and firmly seizing a
huge tree, Dadhimukha took up his position
in their midst. And all the aforesaid monkeys
ran with all speed in the direction of
Madhuvana. (21)

a शिला: पादपांश्चैव पाषाणानपि वानरा:।

गृहीत्वाभ्यागमन् क्रुद्धा Aa aA कपिकुञ्जरा:।॥ २२॥
Seizing rocks and trees as well as

slabs of stone, those monkeys arrived, full

of rage, at the place where those elephants
among monkeys were. (22)

बलान्निवारयन्तश्च आसेदुर्हहयो हरीन्।
संदष्टौष्ठपुटा: क्रुद्धा भर्त्सयन्तो मुहुर्मुहु:॥ २३॥
Forcibly hindering the monkeys, nay,
biting their lips in rage and threatening them
again and again, the monkeys came near
them. (23)
अथ Gea दधिमुखं He वानरपुङ्खवा:।
अभ्यधावन्त वेगेन हनुमत्प्रमुखास्तदा॥ २४॥

273

Seeing Dadhimukha enraged, the
aforesaid bulls among monkeys, headed by
Hanuman, forthwith ran with all speed to
meet them on that occasion. (24)
aga तं महाबाहुमापतन्तं महाबलम्।
वेगवन्तं विजग्राह बाहुभ्यां कुपितोऽङ्गद:॥ २५॥

Full of rage, Angada clasped tightly by
his arms the mighty-armed Dadhimukha,
who was endowed with extraordinary might
and was rushing with all speed, tree in
hand. (25)

मदान्धो न Hat चक्रे आर्यकोऽयं ममेति a: |
अथैनं निष्पिपेषाशु वेगेन वसुधातले॥ २६॥

Blinded with intoxication, he did not
show any mercy to him on the score of his
being his granduncle. Nay, causing him at
once to fall down, he began to rub him
against the ground with vehemence. (26)

a भग्नबाहूरुमुखो frac: शोणितोक्षित:।
ware महावीरो मुहूर्तं कपिकुञ्जर:॥ २७॥

Having completely lost control over
himself, nay, bathed in blood, his arms,
thighs and face broken, that elephant among
monkeys, an eminent hero, fainted away for
a moment. (27)

a कथंचिद् विमुक्तस्तैर्वानरैर्वानरर्षभ:।
उवाचैकान्तमागत्य स्वान् भृत्यान् समुपागतान्॥ २८ ॥
Withdrawing to a secluded corner when
let go somehow by those monkeys, that
jewel among monkeys spoke as follows to
his subordinates, who had come very near:
(28)

एतागच्छत गच्छामो भर्ता नो यत्र वानर:।

सुग्रीवो विपुलग्रीव: we रामेण तिष्ठति॥ २९॥

“Come along, come away; we shall
proceed to where the thick-necked monkey,
Sugriva, our master, is staying with Sri
Rama. (29)
अमर्षी वचनं श्रुत्वा घातयिष्यति वानरान्॥ ३०॥

“Nay, we shall make known to the king
