* AYODHYAKANDA +

471

Canto XLIX

Having covered a long distance in the meantime, Sri Rama finishes his
morning bath and devotions and, having crossed the Vedasruti,
Gomati and Syandika rivers, presses forward
talking with Sumantra

wast रात्रिशेषेण ata महदन्तरम्।
जगाम पुरुषव्याघ्र: पितुराज्ञामनुस्मरन्॥१॥
Revolving in his mind the command of
his father, Sri Rama too, a tiger among
men, covered a long distance in the course
of the remaining hours of the night itself.
(1)
तथैव गच्छतस्तस्य व्यपायाद् रजनी शिवा।
उपास्य तु शिवां संध्यां विषयानत्यगाहत॥ २॥
Even as he drove along with the same
alacrity, the delightful night passed. Having
worshipped the blissful morning twilight,
he passed beyond a number of territories.
(2)
ग्रामान् विकृष्टसीमान्तान् पुष्पितानि वनानि च।
पश्यन्नतिययौ शीघ्रं शनैरिव हयोत्तमै:।॥ ३॥
राजानं धिग् दशरथं कामस्य वशमास्थितम्॥४॥
Seeing villages whose outskirts had
been carefully tilled, and woodlands laden
with blossoms, and led by excellent horses,
he proceeded apace as though slowly,
engrossed as he was in enjoying the sights,
hearing (as under) the words of those residing
in villages and hamlets close by: “Woe
unto King Dasaratha, who has fallen into
the clutches of concupiscence. (3-4)

हा नृशंसाद्य कैकेयी पापा पापानुबन्धिनी।
तीक्ष्णा सम्भिन्नमर्यादा तीक्ष्णकर्मणि वर्तते॥ ५॥
या पुत्रमीदृशं Ua: प्रवासयति धार्मिकम्।
वनवासे महाप्राज्ञं सानुक्रोशं जितेन्द्रियम्॥६॥
“Ah, the cruel and sinful Kaikeyi, who

is hot-tempered and of sinful designs and
has transgressed the bounds of propriety,

is herself engaged at present in a cruel
game in that she has been instrumental in
sending into exile in the forest such a pious,
highly enlightened, compassionate and self-
controlled son of the Emperor. (5-6)

कथं नाम महाभागा सीता जनकनन्दिनी।
wa सुखेष्वभिरता दु:खान्यनुभविष्यति॥७॥
“How will the highly blessed sita,

daughter of King Janaka, who is ever given
to comforts, actually suffer hardships? (7)

अहो दशरथो राजा नि:स्नेह: स्वसुतं प्रति।
प्रजानामनघं रामं परित्यक्तुमिहेच्छति॥८॥
“What a pity that King Dasaratha has
grown so devoid of affection on this occasion
that he seeks to abandon Sri Rama, who is
sinless towards the people !” (8)
एता वाचो मनुष्याणां ग्रामसंवासवासिनाम्।
श्रृण्वन्नतिययौ वीर: कोसलान् कोसलेश्वर:॥ ९॥
Hearing these remarks of men residing
in the adjoining villages and hamlets, the

heroic prince of Kosala, Sri Rama, passed
beyond the limits of Kosala. (9)

ततो वेदश्रुतिं am शिववारिवहां नदीम्।
उत्तीर्याभिमुख: प्रायादगस्त्याध्युषितां दिशम्॥ १०॥
Having crossed the river named
Vedasruti, which carries auspicious waters,
he then pressed forward facing the south,
the quarter occupied by Sage Agastya.
(10)
गत्वा तु सुचिरं कालं ad: शीतवहां नदीम्।
Wad गोयुतानूपामतरत् सागरङ्गमाम्॥११॥
Journeying for his part in that direction
for a pretty long time, he next crossed the
