226

Brahma (the creator), the three-eyed Lord
Rudra (the god of destruction), the Destroyer
of the three cities (built by the demon Maya),
and the mighty sovereign Indra, the ruler of
gods, are unable to stand before Sri Rama,
a scion of Raghu, on the field of battle.” (44)

a सौष्ठवोपेतमदीनवादिन:
कपेर्निशम्याप्रतिमोऽप्रियं Ta: |

« VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

दशानन: कोपविव्रत्तलोचन:
समादिशत् तस्य वधं महाकपे: ।॥। ४५ UI

Hearing the reply, which was excellent
though distasteful, of the monkey, who was
intrepid of speech, the unrivalled Ravana
(the ten headed monster), his eyes rolling
through rage, ordained the death of that
mighty monkey. (45)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये सुन्दरकाण्डे एकपञ्चाश: सर्ग: ॥ ५१ ॥

Thus ends Canto Fifty-one of the Sundarakanda in the glorious Ramayana of Valmiki,
the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

द्विपञ्चाश: सर्ग:
Canto LII
Provoked by the harsh words of Hanuman, Ravana orders him to be put
to death. Vibhisana, however, exhorts the latter to desist from
this dastardly act, pointing out that the killing of an
envoy is forbidden by the Sastras

स तस्य वचनं श्रुत्वा वानरस्य महात्मन:।
आज्ञापयद् वधं तस्य रावण: क्रोधमूच्छित:॥ १॥
Overcome with wrath on hearing the

reply of that high-souled Hanuman, Ravana
ordered his killing. (1)

ay तस्य समाज्ञप्ते रावणेन quent
निवेदितवतो दौत्यं नानुमेने विभीषण:॥२॥

Vibhisana, however, did not signify his
approval of the death of Hanuman, who had
made known his being an envoy of Sr
Rama, ordered by the evil-minded Ravana.

(2)
तं रक्षोऽधिपतिं क्रुद्धं तच्च कार्यमुपस्थितम्।
विदित्वा चिन्तयामास कार्यं कार्यविधौ स्थित: ॥ ३॥

Seeing the aforesaid king of ogres
angry, and looking to that affair viz., the
death of an envoy which was imminent,
Vibhisana, who had his mind fixed on propriety
of action, pondered over his duty in the
circumstances. (3)

निश्चितार्थस्तत: साम्ना पूज्यं शत्रुजिदग्रजम्।
उवाच हितमत्यर्थं वाक्यं वाक्यविशारद:॥४॥
Having determined his duty, Vibhisana,
who was a master of expression, thereupon
addressed to his elder brother, who was
worthy of adoration to him, the following
appeal, which was exceedingly wholesome:
(4)
क्षमस्व रोषं त्यज राक्षसेन्द्र

दूतस्य सन्तो वसुधाधिपेन्द्रा:।। ५॥

“Pray, forgive me, and cast off anger,
O ruler of ogres ! Be propitiated and listen to
this appeal of mine. Virtuous and exalted
rulers of the earth, who know what is noble
and what is low, do not take the life of a
messenger. (5)

राजन् धर्मविरुद्धं च लोकवृत्तेश्च गर्हितम्।
qa wat dit कपेरस्य प्रमापणम्॥६॥
