* SUNDARAKANDA +

has been treated by you like the impression
of a cow’s hoof on the soil while crossing it,
laudable as you are for your prowess. (8)
ae त्वां Wed मन्ये at वानरर्षभ।
यस्य ते नास्ति संत्रासो रावणादपि सम्भ्रम:॥९॥
“Surely, | do not look upon you as an
ordinary monkey, O jewel among monkeys,
in that there exists no fear nor any awe
even for Ravana in your mind. (9)

sa च कपिश्रेष्ठ मया समभिभाषितुम्।
यद्यसि प्रेषितस्तेन रामेण विदितात्मना॥१०॥

“Nay, you deserve to be talked with by
me, O jewel among monkeys, if you have
been sent by the celebrated Sri Rama, a
knower of the Self. (10)

प्रेषयिष्यति दुर्धर्षो रामो नह्यपरीक्षितम्।
पराक्रममविज्ञाय मत्सकाशं विशेषत:॥११॥

“Surely Sri Rama, who is difficult to
overpower, would not send to my presence
in particular an untried hand without fully
ascertaining the latters prowess. (11)

दिष्ट्या च कुशली WAT धर्मात्मा सत्यसंगर:।
लक्ष्मणश्च महातेजा: सुमित्रानन्दवर्धन:॥१२॥

“Nay, luckily enough for me Sri Rama,
whose mind is given to piety and who is
unfailing in his promise, is doing well, as
also Laksmana, who is endowed with
extraordinary energy and enhances the joy
of Sumitra, his mother. (12)

कुशली ale काकुत्स्थ: किं न सागरमेखलाम्।
महीं दहति कोपेन युगान्ताग्निरिवोत्थित:॥ १३॥

“If Sri Rama, a scion of Kakutstha, is
well, wherefore does he not consume with
his wrath the earth encircled by the oceans,
as the fire of universal destruction would.

(13)
अथवा शक्तिमन्तौ dt सुराणामपि निग्रहे।
ममैव तु न दु:खानामस्ति wea विपर्यय:॥ १४॥

“Nay, the two princes are able to subdue

even gods. But | believe the end of my
sufferings has not yet arrived. (14)

167

कच्चिन्न व्यथते wa: कच्चिन्न परितप्यते।
उत्तराणि च कार्याणि Hed पुरुषोत्तम:॥ १५॥

“| hope Sri Rama does not feel afflicted
nor does he suffer agony. Does that ideal
man discharge his duties relating to the
future? (15)

कच्चिन्न दीन: सम्भ्रान्त: कार्येषु च न मुह्यति।
कच्चित् पुरुषकार्याणि Hed Td: सुत:॥१६॥

“| hope the prince does not feel helpless
or nervous and does not get perplexed in
the matter of his duties? Does he perform
his human duties? (16)

द्विविधं त्रिविधोपायमुपायमपि सेवते।
विजिगीषु: Get कच्चिन्मित्रेषु च परंतप:॥ १७॥
“| hope, acting as a friend towards his
allies, Sri Rama, the scourge of his foes,
pursues in relation to them the twofold policy
of conciliation and gift and, desirous of
victory, follows the threefold policy of
gift, chastisement and sowing seeds of
dissension with regard to his enemies. (17)

कच्चिन्मित्राणि लभतेऽमित्रैश्चाप्यभिगम्यते।
कच्चित् कल्याणमित्रश्च मित्रैश्चापि पुरस्कृत:॥ १८ ॥

“| hope he is able to gain friends and is
sought for help and protection even by
enemies. Are his friends well-disposed
towards him and is he esteemed by his
friends? (18)
कच्चिदाशास्ति देवानां Ware पार्थिवात्मज:।
कच्चित् पुरुषकारं च दैवं च प्रतिपद्यते॥१९॥

“Does the prince ever seek the favour
of gods? And does he fall back upon personal

effort as well as on Providence for the
success of his undertakings? (19)

कच्चिन्न विगतस्नेहो विवासान्मयि wea: |
कच्चिन्मां व्यसनादस्मान्मोक्षयिष्यति राघव:॥ २०॥

“| hope Sri Rama has not become
completely devoid of love towards me as a
result of my living in an alien land. Will Sr
Rama, a scion of Raghu, deliver me from
this calamity? (20)
