« KISKINDHAKANDA +

aforesaid monkey leaders gave the following
pathetic reply : (20)
तीक्ष्ण: प्रकृत्या सुग्रीव: प्रियारक्तश्च Wea: |
समीक्ष्याकृतकार्यांस्तु तस्मिश्च समये गते॥ २१॥
अदृष्टायां च वैदेह्यां Gaal चैव समागतान्।
राघवप्रियकामाय चातयिष्यत्यसंशयम्॥ २२॥
“Vehement by nature is Sugriva, while
Sri Rama (a scion of Raghu) is fond of
his consort and therefore too unconcerned
to interfere with the cruelty of Sugriva).
Already concluding, on _ the _ time-limit
appointed for the search having expired,
that we had failed to accomplish our end,
and futher seeing us returned without Sita
(a princess of the Videha territory) being
found out, Sugriva will without doubt have
us killed in his eagerness to do what is
pleasing to Sri Rama (a scion of Raghu).
(21-22)
न ad चापराद्धानां गमनं स्वामिपार्श्वत:।
प्रधानभूताश्च वयं सुग्रीवस्य समागता:॥ २३॥
“It is not advisable for offenders to
seek the presence of their master. Nay, we
are the principal servants of Sugriva arrived
here at his command. (23)

zea सीतामन्वीक्ष्य प्रवृत्तिमुपलभ्य वा।
नो ce गच्छाम तं वीरं गमिष्यामो यमक्षयम्॥ २४॥
“Let us return to the said hero, Sugriva,
only after we have found out Sita or obtained
information concerning her in this very region;
if not, we shall seek the abode of Yama, the
god of death.” (24)

श्रुत्वा वचस्तार FF बभाषे।

1131

अलं विषादेन fact प्रविश्य
वसाम सर्वे यदि रोचते a २५॥
Hearing the reply of the monkeys
stricken with fear (of meeting their death at
the hands of Sugriva), Tara for his part
made the following submission : “Away with
despondency. Re-entering the cave, let us
all take up our abode there if it meets with
your approval. (25)
प्रभूतपुष्पोदकभोज्यपेयम् ।
इहास्ति नो नैव wa पुरंदरा-
न्न राघवाद् वानरराजतोऽपि वा। २६ Ul

“Having been brought into existence
by dint of a wonderful craftsmanship, this
cave is indeed exceedingly difficult of access
and has at the same time a rich stock of
flowers, water, foods and drinks. Here there
will be no cause whatsoever for fear to us
from Indra (the destroyer of strongholds),
much less from Sri Rama (a scion of Raghu)
and still less from Sugriva (the ruler of
monkeys).” (26)

श्रुत्वाङ्गदस्यापि वचोऽनुकूल-

मूचुश्च सर्वे हरय: प्रतीता:।
यथा न हन्येम तथा विधान-

मसक्तमद्यैव विधीयतां न:॥२७॥

Restored to confidence on hearing the
favourable utterance of Angada as also of
Tara, all the monkeys cried in one voice :
“Let us without loss of time take recourse
this very day to an expedient by adopting
which we may not be killed by Sugriva.”

(27)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये किष्किन्धाकाण्डे त्रिपञ्चाश: सर्ग: ॥ 43 Il

Thus ends Canto Fifty-three in the Kiskindhakanda of the glorious Ramayana of
Valmiki, the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

