* AYODHYAKANDA +

“Indeed, neither sovereignty nor joy
nor what is pleasing to the mind is coveted
by me. On the other hand, to do as enjoined
by you is solely desired by me, O the
delight of the Raghus ! (45)

अपगच्छतु ते ga मा भूर्बाष्पपरिप्लुत:।

नहि क्षुभ्यति दुर्धर्ष: समुद्र: सरितां ofa: i we I
“Let your sorrow disappear and let you

not be bathed in tears. The ocean, the lord

of the rivers, which it is so difficult to assail,

does not overstep its bounds. (46)

नैवाहं राज्यमिच्छामि न सुखं न च मेदिनीम्।
नैव सर्वानिमान् कामान् न स्वर्गं न च जीवितुम्॥ ४७॥

“| do not at all hanker for sovereignty
or joy, nor again for the earth, nor in any
case for all these delights of sense, nor for
heaven nor even for life. (47)
त्वामहं सत्यमिच्छामि नानृतं पुरुषर्षभ।
yas da सत्येन सुकृतेन च at शपे॥४८॥

“| swear by my veracity and virtue
earned by me in my past lives as well as by
you in your presence: | only wish you to
prove true to your word and never to be
false, O jewel among men ! (48)

न च Mest मया तात स्थातुं क्षणमपि प्रभो।
स शोकं धारयस्वेमं नहि मेऽस्ति विपर्यय:॥४९॥

“Nor is it possible for me, dear father,
to stay on at home even for an instant
longer. Therefore, restrain this grief, my
lord; for there is no going back upon my
word now. (49)
अर्थितो ह्यस्मि कैकेय्या ot गच्छेति राघव।
मया चोक्तं व्रजामीति तत्सत्यमनुपालये॥५०॥

“Since | have been commanded by
mother Kaikeyi in the words ‘Proceed to the
forest, O scion of Raghu’ and the reply
given by me was ‘I am going’, | must redeem
that pledge of mine. (50)

मा Gienvet कृथा ca at रंस्यामहे वयम्।
प्रशान्तहरिणाकीर्णे नानाशकुनिनादिते॥७५१॥

425

“Nor should you feel anxious on our
score, my lord! We shall sport in the forest
crowded with highly peaceful deer and
rendered noisy by birds of various kinds.

(51)
पिता fe ead aa देवतानामपि स्मृतम्।
तस्माद् दैवतमित्येव करिष्यामि पितुर्बच:॥ ५२॥

“Indeed, a father has been declared to

be a veritable deity even among gods. Hence

| shall do the bidding of my father (yourself)
as that of a god. (52)

चतुर्दशसु वर्षेषु गतेषु नृपसत्तम।
पुनर्द्रक्ष्यसि मां प्राप्तं संतापोऽयं विमुच्यताम्॥ ५३॥
“When fourteen years have elapsed,
you will find me come back, O jewel among
kings ! Hence let this agony be given up.
(53)
येन संस्तम्भनीयोऽयं Tal बाष्पकलो जन:।
a त्वं पुरुषशार्दूल किमर्थं विक्रियां wa: wes
“Wherefore, O tiger among men, have
you fallen a victim to grief—you, by whom
all these other people, bathed in tears, ought
to be consoled? (54)

W च We च मही च केवला
मया विसृष्टा भरताय दीयताम्।
ae निदेशं भवतोऽनुपालयन्
वनं गमिष्यामि चिराय सेवितुम्॥ ५५ ।।
“Renounced by me, the city of Ayodhya
and the state of Kosala and the rest of the
globe too may be given to Bharata. Obeying
your command, | for myself shall proceed
to the forest in order to dwell in it for long.
(55)
wat विसृष्टां भरतो महीमिमां
सशैलखण्डां सपुरोपकाननाम्।
शिवासु सीमास्वनुशास्तु केवलं
त्वया यदुक्तं नृपते AMET तत्॥ ५६ Il
“Let Bharata rule over this globe,

including the mountain ranges and cities
with their gardens, relinquished by me. He
