238

excessive suffering, the mighty monkey
Hanuman, a bull among monkeys, then
quenched the fire of his tail in the sea. (49)

ततो tat: सगन्धर्वा: सिद्धाश्च परमर्षय:।
दृष्ट्वा लङ्कां प्रदग्धां at विस्मयं परमं गता:॥ ५०॥
Beholding the aforesaid Lanka reduced

to ashes, the gods including Gandharvas,
Siddhas and eminent Rsis (the seers of

« VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

Vedic Mantras) were filled with extreme
wonder. (50)
तं gaat वानरश्रेष्ठं हनूमन्तं महाकपिम्।
कालाग्निरिति संचिन्त्य सर्वभूतानि तत्रसु:॥ ५१॥
Seeing that mighty monkey, Hanuman,
the foremost of monkeys, and fancying him
to be the fire of universal dissolution, all
created beings were amazed. (51)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये सुन्दरकाण्डे AG: TART: सर्ग: ॥ ५४॥

Thus ends Canto Fifty-four of the Sundarakanda in the glorious Ramayana of Valmiki,
the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

पञ्चपञ्चाश: सर्ग:
Canto LV

Seeing the whole of Lanka reduced to ashes and presuming Sita too
to have shared its lot, Hanuman begins to reproach himself and
gets overwhelmed with grief. In the meantime, he hears
of her safety from the lips of Siddhas, Caranas
(celestial bards) and others and feels comforted

अवेक्ष्य हनुमाँल्लङ्कां चिन्तयामास वानर:॥१॥
Perceiving the city of Lanka blazing
and alarmed with its multitudes of ogres
panic stricken, Hanuman became thoughtful.
(1)

तस्याभूत् सुमहांस्त्रास: Ha चात्मन्यजायत।
लङ्कां Weed कर्म किंस्वित् कृतमिदं warn
A grave apprehension entered his mind
and there arose in him a feeling of self-
reproach. He said to himself: “What an

abominable act has evidently been done by
me in burning Lanka consummately! (2)

धन्या: खलु महात्मानो ये बुद्ध्या कोपमुत्थितम्।
निरुन्धन्ति महात्मानो दीप्तमग्निमिवाम्भसा॥ ३॥

Blessed indeed are those broad-minded
great souls who in their wisdom curb the
anger born within them even as they quench
a blazing fire with water. (3)

HE: पापं न कुर्यात् क: Heal हन्याद् गुरूनपि।
क्रुद्ध: परुषया वाचा नर: साधूनधिक्षिपेत्॥४॥

What angry man would not perpetrate
a sinful act? He who is angry may kill even
his elders. Nay an angry man may insult
even pious souls in harsh tones. (4)

वाच्यावाच्यं प्रकुपितो न विजानाति कर्हिचित्।
नाकार्यमस्ति क्रुद्धस्य नावाच्यं विद्यते क्वचित्॥ ५॥
He who is enraged can never discern
what is worth uttering and what ought not to
be uttered. There is no iniquity anywhere
which cannot be perpetrated by an angry
man and no abusive language which cannot
be uttered by him. (5)

a: समुत्पतितं क्रोधं क्षमयैव निरस्यति।

यथोरगस्त्वचं vot स a पुरुष उच्यते॥६॥
He alone is truly called a man, who

drives away by virtue of sheer forbearance

the anger that has sprung up in his heart
even as a Snake casts off its slough. (6)
