« KISKINDHAKANDA +

सा च कामै: प्रलोभ्यन्ती भक्ष्यैर्भोज्यैश्च मैथिली ।
न भोक्ष्यति महाभागा दु:खमग्ना यशस्विनी॥७॥

“Plunged in sorrow, the illustrious and
highly blessed Sita, a princess of Mithila,
however, will not partake of anything, even
though tempted with offers of dishes—worth
coveting—requiring mastication and those
which can be easily gulped. (7)

परमान्नं च वैदेह्या ज्ञात्वा दास्यति वासव:।
यदन्नममृतप्रख्यं सुराणामपि दुर्लभम्॥८॥

“Learning of this, Indra (the ruler of
gods) will offer (through his messenger
Matali, a dish of) milk boiled with rice and
sugar, a dish which will be like ambrosia
and difficult to get even for gods. (8)

dest मैथिली ura विज्ञायेन्द्रादिदं त्विति।
अग्रमुद्धृत्य रामाय भूतले निर्वपिष्यति॥ ९॥
यदि जीवति A wat लक्ष्मणो वापि car: |

tad गच्छतोर्वापि तयोरन्नमिदं त्विति॥१०॥

“Receiving that dish and taking out the
foremost part of it on coming to know for
certain that it has come from Indra, Sita (a
princess of Mithila) for her part will pour it
on the ground as an offering to Sri Rama,
saying: ‘If my husband or even Laksmana,
my brother-in-law, is alive, or even if they
have attained the celestial state, let this
food actually reach them.’ (9-10)

एष्यन्ति प्रेषितास्तत्र रामदूता: प्लवङ्गमा:।
आख्येया राममहिषी त्वया तेभ्यो fares ११॥

“Dispatched as messengers of Sri
Rama, monkeys will arrive on that spot. To
them, O bird, the information about Sita
(the consort of Sr Rama) should be
communicated by you. (11)

1153

सर्वथा तु न गन्तव्यमीदूश: aa गमिष्यसि।
देशकालौ प्रतीक्षस्व पक्षौ त्वं प्रतिपत्स्यसे॥ १२॥
“On no account, however, should you
venture out. Where can you go in this state?
Wait for a suitable place and time, you will
recover your wings. (12)
उत्सहेयमहं कर्तुमद्यैव त्वां सपक्षकम्।
इहस्थस्त्वं fe लोकानां fed कार्यं करिष्यसि॥ १३॥
“| can furnish you with wings this very
day. (But in that case you will fly away to
some other place). Continuing here, however,
you will do a friendly act of service to
mankind by enabling Sri Rama to trace out
Sita and kill Ravana, a sworn enemy of
mankind. (13)

त्वयापि खलु तत् कार्यं तयोश्च नृपपुत्रयो: ।
ब्राह्मणानां गुरूणां च मुनीनां वासवस्य च॥ १४॥
“Indeed it is your duty too to render the
aforesaid service to those two princes (Sri
Rama and Laksmana), to the Brahmanas
as well as to your teachers (viz., ourselves)
and other hermits as also to Indra, inasmuch
as the interests of all these, including yourself,
will be served by it. (14)

इच्छाम्यहमपि द्रष्टुं भ्रातरौ रामलक्ष्मणौ।
महर्षिस्त्वब्रवीदेवं दृष्टतत्त्वार्थदर्शन: ॥ १५ Ul
“| too long to see the two brothers, Sri
Rama and Laksmana; yet | do not wish to
preserve my life for a long time and will cast
off my body.” Thus spoke the great Rsi
Nisakara, who had for his part realized the
substance forming the Reality (viz., Brahma)
and mastered the Veda (which enables one
to realize It). (15)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये किष्किन्धाकाण्डे द्विषष्टितम: सर्ग: ॥ §?2 il

Thus ends Canto Sixty-two in the Kiskindhakanda of the glorious Ramayana of
Valmiki, the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

