* SUNDARAKANDA +

father),
cloudless sky.

वायुसूनुर्निरालम्बो जगाम कपिकुञ्जर:॥१३५॥
Rising still higher and looking on the
mountain below, Hanuman, a son of the

wind-god, an elephant among the monkeys,
moved on unsupported in the sky. (135)

ae द्वितीयं हनुमतो दृष्टा कर्म सुदुष्करम्।
प्रशशंसु: सुरा: सर्वे सिद्धाश्च परमर्षय:॥ १३६॥
Seeing the aforesaid second feat of
Hanuman, viz., refusal on his part to seize
the golden opportunity offered to him by
Mount Mainaka to rest on its peaks, which
was most difficult to accomplish, the gods,
and the Siddhas as well as the greatest
Rsis—all lauded him. (136)

देवताश्चाभवन् हृष्टास्तत्रस्थास्तस्य कर्मणा।
काञ्चनस्य सुनाभस्य सहस्राक्षश्च वासव:॥ १३७॥
The gods, who happened to be on the
mountain (at that time in order to see what
the mountain intended to do by rising up),
nay, Indra, the thousand-eyed god, too, all
were pleased with the act of offering
hospitality and foothold to Hanuman by that
golden mountain with beautiful slopes. (137)

sara वचनं धीमान् परितोषात् सगद्गदम्।
सुनाभं पर्वतश्रेष्ठं स्वयमेव शचीपति:॥ १३८ ॥

The sagacious Indra (the spouse of
Saci) on his own initiative addressed the
following words in faltering tones through
intense gratification to Mainaka, the foremost
of mountains, distinguished by charming
slopes : (138)

हिरण्यनाभ शैलेन्द्र परितुष्टोऽस्मि ते भृशम्।
AUS ते प्रयच्छामि गच्छ सौम्य यथासुखम्॥ १३९॥

“lam extremely pleased with you, O lord
of mountains with peaks of gold! | grant you
immunity from all fear of being shorn of your
wings by me. Therefore, proceed according
to your pleasure, O gentle one! (139)

Hanuman coursed through the
(134)

37

साह्यं pd ते सुमहद् विश्रान्तस्य हनूमत:।
wad योजनशतं निर्भयस्य wa सति॥ १४०॥
“Exceedingly valuable assistance has
been rendered by you to Hanuman, who is
fearlessly attempting to leap over a distance
of hundred Yojanas (or eight hundred miles),
even though there is every risk of his getting
exhausted in the course of his journey and
falling down, and who has had the mental
satisfaction of having rested. (140)

रामस्यैष हितायैव याति दाशरथे: कपि:।
सत्करियां कुर्वता शक्त्या तोषितोऽस्मि दृढं त्वया॥ १४१ Ul

“This monkey is journeying only for the
benefit of Sri Rama, son of Dasaratha. And
| have been highly gratified by you through
a good turn done to Hanuman according to
your capacity.” (141)

स तत् प्रहर्षमलभद् faget पर्वतोत्तम:।
देवतानां पतिं दृष्टा परितुष्टं शतक्रतुम्॥१४२॥

Seeing Indra, the ruler of gods, highly
gratified, Mainaka, the foremost of mountains,
derived deep and abundant joy. (142)

स a दत्तवर: शैलो बभूवावस्थितस्तदा।
हनूमांश्च मुहूर्तेन व्यतिचक्राम सागरम्॥१४३॥
Having been granted, as above, by
Indra the boon of security, the aforesaid
mountain then stood rooted as before, below
the surface of sea-water; while Hanuman
shortly sped over the sea. (143)

अब्रुवन् सूर्यसंकाशां सुरसां नागमातरम्॥ १४४॥
Thereupon the gods, Siddhas and the
most eminent Rsis with Gandharvas
approached and spoke as follows to Surasa,
mother of the Nagas, who shone brightly
like the sun: (144)
अयं वातात्मज: श्रीमान् wad सागरोपरि।
हनूमान् नाम तस्य त्वं मुहूर्तं विघ्नमाचर॥ १४५ ॥
राक्षसं रूपमास्थाय सुघोरं पर्वतोपमम्।
दंष्टाकरालं पिङ्गाक्षं वक्त्रं कृत्वा नभ:स्पृशम्॥ १४६ UI
