* ARANYAKANDA «

in this matter, for which you are bearing
away the spouse of that ruler of the worlds?
(14-15)

क्षिप्रं विसृज वैदेहीं मा त्वा घोरेण चक्षुषा।
दहेद् दहनभूतेन वृत्रमिन्द्राशनिर्यथा॥१६॥
“Release Sita, a princess of the Videha
territory, at once. Let not Sri Rama consume
you with his fearful eye converted into fire,
as the thunderbolt of Indra consumed the
demon, Vrtra. (16)

सर्पमाशीविषं बद्ध्वा वस्त्रान्ते नावबुध्यसे।
ग्रीवायां प्रतिमुक्तं च कालपाशं न पश्यसि॥ १७॥

“Though having tied a poisonous snake
in the end of your cloth you are unconscious
of it, and you do not perceive the noose of
Death placed round your neck; (17)

स भार: सौम्य भर्तव्यो यो At नावसादयेत्।
तदन्नमपि भोक्तव्यं जीर्यते यदनामयम्॥१८॥
“That load alone, O gentle one, should
be borne by a man, which may not oppress
him. And that food alone should be eaten,

which may be digested without giving rise
to an ailment. (18)

AL PA न भवेद् धर्मो न कीर्तिर्न यशो ध्रुवम्।
शरीरस्य भवेत् खेद: कस्तत् HA समाचरेत्॥ १९॥

“Who will knowingly perform an act as
a sequel to which follows neither religious
merit, nor glory, nor lasting fame, but in
whose wake ensues weariness of body?
(19)
षष्टिवर्षसहस्राणि जातस्य मम रावण।
पितृपैतामहँ राज्यं यथावदनुतिष्ठत:॥ २०॥
“Sixty thousand years have elapsed,
O Ravana, ever since | was born, during
which | have duly carried on the hereditary
rulership of birds. (20)

वृद्धोऽहं त्वं Yat धन्वी सरथ: Haat शरी।
न चाप्यादाय कुशली वैदेह्रीं A गमिष्यसि॥ २१॥

“| have grown old, while you are still
young, and are armed with a bow and
arrows, protected by an armour and mounted

851

on a chariot. Nevertheless you shall not
bear away Sita, a princess of the Videha
territory, safely before my eyes. (21)

न शक्तस्त्वं बलाद्धर्तुं वैदेहीं मम पश्यत:।
हेतुभिरन्यायसंयुक्तैर्धुवां वेदश्रुतीमिव।। २२॥
“You will not be able to carry away Sita,
a princess of the Videha kingdom, by force
while | stand looking on, any more than one

can alter an unalterable Vedic text by force
of arguments consistent with logic. (22)

युध्यस्व यदि शूरोऽसि ded तिष्ठं रावण।
शयिष्यसे हतो भूमौ यथा पूर्वं खरस्तथा॥ २३॥

“Fight with me if you are a hero; halt
awhile, O Ravana ! Struck dead by me, you
will lie on the ground as Khara did in the
past. (23)

असकृत्संयुगे at निहता दैत्यदानवा:।
न चिराच्चीरवासास्त्वां रामो युधि वधिष्यति॥ २४॥

“Clad in the bark of trees, Sri Rama,
by whom Daityas and Danavas have been
slain on the battlefield more than once, will
make short work of you before long. (24)
किं नु शक्यं मया कर्तुं गतौ दूरं नृपात्मजौ।
fart त्वं नश्यसे नीच तयोर्भीतो न संशय:॥ २५॥

“What can be done by me when the two
princes have gone afar? If | proceed to call
them you will flee at once, afraid of them :
there is no doubt about it, O vile ogre ! (25)
ae मे जीवमानस्य नयिष्यसि शुभामिमाम्।
सीतां कमलपत्राक्षीं रामस्य महिषीं प्रियाम्॥ २६॥

“So long as | breathe, you can on no
account carry away this blessed lady, Sita,
the beloved consort of Sri Rama, whose
eyes resemble the petals of a lotus. (26)
जीवितेनापि रामस्य तथा दशरथस्य Ai २७॥

“What is pleasing to him, the high-
souled Sri Rama, as well as to the late King

DaSaratha, needs must be done by me at
all events even at the cost of my life. (27)
