# YUDDHAKANDA #

extraordinary might, proceeded to take leave
of Sri Rama in the following words: (55)

wa waa धर्मज्ञ रिपूणामपि वत्सल।
अभ्यनुज्ञातुमिच्छामि गमिष्यामि यथासुखम्॥ ५६॥

“| wish to take leave of you, my friend,
Sri Rama (a scion of Raghu), a knower of
what is right and fond even of your enemies!
| shall now depart at ease. (56)
न च कौतूहलं कार्यं सखित्वं ula राघव।
कृतकर्मा रणे at सख्त्वं प्रतिवेत्स्यसि॥ ५७॥
“And you should not entertain any
curiosity about our friendship, O scion of
Raghu! On having accomplished your
duty on the field of battle you will come to
recognize our friendship, O gallant prince!
(57)

बालवृद्धावशेषां तु St कृत्वा शरोर्मिभि: |
रावणं तु रिपुं हत्वा सीतां त्वमुपलप्स्यसे॥ ५८ tl

“Having actually emptied Lanka of all
its male population, except for its youngsters
and the aged, with the volleys of your arrows
having killed your enemy, Ravana, you will
surely recover Sita.” (58)

इत्येवमुक्त्वा वचनं quot: शीघ्रविक्रम:।
TH च नीरुजं कृत्वा मध्ये तेषां वनौकसाम्॥ ५९॥
प्रदक्षिणं तत: कृत्वा परिष्वज्य च वीर्यवान्।
जगामाकाशमाविश्य सुपर्ण: पवनो यथा॥६०॥

Having made the aforesaid submission
in the midst of those monkeys (lit., denizens
of the forest), and rid Sri Rama of his pain,
then walking clockwise round him as a
mark of submission and embracing him, the
valiant Garuda of beautiful wings and swift
flight soared to the heavens with the speed
of the wind. (59-60)

477

नीरुजौ राघवौ दृष्ट्वा ततो वानरयूथपा:।
सिंहनादं तदा नेदुर्लाङ्गूलं दुधुवुश्च ते॥६१॥

Seeing Sri Rama and Laksmana, the
two scions of Raghu, rid of anguish, the
commanders of simian troops thereupon
roared like lions at that time and lashed their
tails. (61)

ad भेरी: समाजघ्नुर्मृदङ्गांश्चाप्यवादयन्।
दध्मु: शङ्खान् सम्प्रहष्टा: क्ष्वेलन्त्यपि यथापुरम्॥ ६२ ॥
The monkeys then beat their kettle-
drums and played upon their clay
tomtoms, blew their conches in excessive
joy and began to leap and jump as
before. (62)

अपरे स्फोट्य विक्रान्ता वानरा नगयोधिन:।
द्रुमानुत्पाट्य विविधांस्तस्थु: शतसहस्रश:॥ ६३॥
Uprooting trees of various species and
brandishing them, other valiant monkeys,
who fought with trees, stood ready to fight
in hundreds of thousands. (63)

विसृजन्तो महानादांस्त्रासयन्तो निशाचरान्।
लङ्काद्वाराण्युपाजग्मुर्योद्भुकामा: प्लवंगमा: ।॥ ६४॥
Emitting piercing cries and frightening

the prowlers of the night, the bellicose
monkeys reached the gates of Lanka. (64)
तेषां सुभीमस्तुमुलो निनादो
aya शाखामृगयूथपानाम्।
aq निदाघस्य यथा wr
we: सुभीमो नदतां निशीथे॥६७५॥
An extremely appalling and tumultuous
clamour arose amongst the aforesaid
commanders of simian troops, which
resembled the most terrible thundering of

clouds rumbling at midnight at the end of
summer. (65)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये युद्धकाण्डे VAR: AT: ॥ ५० ॥

Thus ends Canto Fifty in the Yuddhakanda of the glorious Ramayana of
Valmiki, the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

