* AYODHYAKANDA +

रमणीयान् बहुविधान् पादपान् कुसुमोत्करान्।
सीतावचनसंरब्धं आनयामास लक्ष्मण:॥ Boll

Seized with a flurry on hearing Sita’s
command, Laksmana fetched lovely twigs
of various trees, bearing bunches of flowers.

(30)
ef : . ति ।
रेमे जनकराजस्य सुता प्रेक्ष्य तदा नदीम्॥३१॥

The daughter of King Janaka rejoiced
to gaze at that time on the river distinguished
with charming sands and waters and
rendered noisy by swans and cranes.

(31)

क्रोशमात्रं ततो Wat भ्रातरौ रामलक्ष्मणौ।
Sel मेध्यान् मृगान् हत्वा चेरतुर्यमुनावने॥ ३२॥

501

Having walked only a couple of miles
from that place and killing many a
consecrated deer, the two brothers, Sri Rama
and Laksmana, roamed about in the forest

on the bank of the Yamuna. (32)
faea ते बर्हिणपूगनादिते
शुभे at वारणवानरायुते।
समं नदीवप्रमुपेत्य सत्वरं
निवासमाजग्मुरदीनदर्शना: ॥३३॥

Having diverted themselves in the
charming forest, made noisy by flocks of
peacocks and infested with monkeys and
elephants, and reaching a level ground on
the bank of the river, the princely travellers,
who wore an undepressed look, quickly
sought a tree fit for abode. (33)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्येऽयोध्याकाण्डे पञ्चपञ्चाश: सर्ग: ॥ ५५ ॥

Thus ends Canto Fifty-five in the Ayodhyakanda of the glorious Ramayana of Valmiki,
the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

षट्पञ्चाश: सर्ग:
Canto LVI

Moving further next morning and rejoicing on the way to see the loveliness
of the forest, the party reaches Citrakuta and enters the hermitage of
Valmiki. Making up his mind to sojourn there with the permission
of the sage, Sri Rama gets Laksmana to erect a hut of
leaves for themselves and, worshipping the deities
presiding over the structure, they solemnly enter

their abode at a propitious hour

अथ Wat व्यातीतायामवसुप्तमनन्तरम्।
प्रबोधयामास शनैर्लक्ष्मणं रघुपुङ्खव:॥१॥
The night having slipped past, Sri Rama,
a jewel among the Raghus, now gently
roused (in the following words) Laksmana,
who lay asleep for a second time after
waking from sleep : (1)
सम्प्रतिष्ठामहे काल: प्रस्थानस्य परंतप॥ २॥
“Hear, 0 Laksmana (son of Sumitra),

the notes of sweetly warbling wild birds, the
parrot, the cuckoo, myna and so on. Let us
duly resume our journey as the hour for
departure has commenced, O tormentor of
enemies ! (2)

प्रसुप्तस्तु ततो भ्रात्रा समये प्रतिबोधित:।
Wel निद्रां च तन्द्रां च प्रसक्तं च परिश्रमम्॥ ३॥
Awakened in time by his eldest brother,

Sri Rama, Laksmana, who was fast asleep,
for his part, immediately shook off his
