922

Mahodara, they collectively surrounded
Ravana on the field of battle, full of anger as
they were. (41)

सायकैश्चापबिभ्रष्टैर्वज्रकल्पै:३ सुदारुणै:।
दारयन्ति स्म संक्रुद्धा मेघा sa महागिरिम्॥४२॥

Filled with rage, they began to pierce
Ravana with fierce shafts, hard as adamant,
shot from their bows, even as clouds would
lash a hill. (42)

तत: क्रुद्धो दशग्रीव: कालाग्निरिव Ales: |
शरवर्षं werent तेषां मर्मस्वपातयत्॥४३॥
Provoked to anger, Ravana (the ten-
headed monster), who resembled the swollen
fire of dissolution, showered an exceedingly

formidable hail of shafts on their vital parts.
(43)

मुसलानि विचित्राणि ततो भल्लशतानि च।
पट्टिशांश्चैव शक्तीश्च शतघ्नीर्महतीरपि॥४४॥

पातयामास दुर्धर्षस्तेषामुपरि विष्ठित:।
अपविद्धास्तु ते वीरा विनिष्पेतु: पदातय:॥४५॥

ततस्तेनैव सहसा सीदन्ति wa पदातिन:।
महापङ्कमिवासाद्य कुञ्जरा: षष्टिहायना:॥४६॥
Firmly established in his chariot, Ravana
(who was difficult to overpower) then hurled
on them pestles of various kinds, hundreds
of lances, sharp-edged spears and javelins
too as well as huge Sataghnis (stones
studded with iron spikes and four Talas in
length).* Though pierced through and through,
these valiant foot-soldiers rushed forth. The
foot-soldiers, however, were reduced to
straits due to that very hail of weapons as
sixty-year old elephants would be on entering
an extensive morass. (44—46)

सीदमानान् सुतान् दृष्टवा विह्वलान् स महाबल: |
ननाद रावणो हर्षान्महानम्बुधरो यथा॥४७॥

Seeing those sons of Varuna suffering
and distracted, the notorious Ravana, who

« VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

was endowed with extraordinary might,

thundered in joy like a huge cloud. (47)

ततो TANT महानादान् मुक्त्वा हन्ति स्म वारुणान्।

नानाप्रहरणोपेतैर्धारापातैरिवाम्बुद: ॥ ४८ ॥।
Emitting great shouts, the ogre

thereupon began to strike the sons of Varuna
with various weapons in hand as a cloud
would lash trees with torrents. (48)

ततस्ते विमुखा: सर्वे पतिता धरणीतले।

रणात् स्वपुरुषै: शीघ्रं गृहाण्येव प्रवेशिता:॥४९॥
They all thereupon fell to the ground

and, thus they were speedily taken from the

battlefield to their homes by their own men.
(49)

तानब्रवीत् ततो रक्षो वरुणाय निवेद्यताम्।
रावणं त्वन्रवीन्मन्त्री प्रहासो ATT वारुण:॥७५०॥
गत: खलु महाराजो ब्रह्मलोकं जलेश्वर:।
गान्धर्वं वरुण: std यं त्वमाह्वयसे युधि॥७५१॥
The ogre then said to them, “Let my
presence be announced to Varuna.” A
counsellor of Varuna, Prahasa by name,
however, made the following reply to Ravana:
“The great king Varuna, the ruler of the
waters, whom you are challenging to a
combat, has, really speaking, gone to
Brahmaloka (the domain of Brahma) to
listen to the music of Gandharvas (celestial
musicians). (50-51)
ad fe तव यथा ate परिश्रम्य गते नृपे।
ag संनिहिता वीरा: कुमारास्ते पराजिता:॥ ७५२॥
“When the king has gone out, O hero,
what will you gain by exerting yourself in
vain? As for his valiant sons, who were
present here, they already stand vanquished
by you.” (52)
राक्षसेन्द्रस्तु तच्छुत्वा नाम विश्राव्य चात्मन:।
हर्षान्नादं विमुञ्जन् वै निष्क्रान्तो वरुणालयात्॥ ५३॥
Hearing this and proclaiming his name,
Ravana, the king of ogres, for his part made

* शतघ्नी च चतुस्तालो लोहकण्टकसंचिता। (अथवा) अय:कण्टकसंछन्ना शतघ्नी महती शिला।
