304

Reaching Sri Rama’s palace,
resplendent like a compact mass of white
clouds, Vasistha, the foremost of ascetics,
drove through its three enclosures in the
chariot itself. (5)

तमागतमृषिं रामस्त्वरन्निवं ससम्भ्रमम्।
मानयिष्यन् स मानार्हं निश्चक्राम निवेशनात्॥६॥

In order to honour the sage arrived at
his door, who deserved great respect, Sri
Rama reverently issued out of his palace in
great hurry. (6)

अभ्येत्य त्वरमाणोऽथ रथाभ्याशं मनीषिण:।
ततोऽवतारयामास परिगृह्य रथात् स्वयम्॥७॥

Hastily drawing near the sage’s chariot,
he forthwith helped him alight from that chariot,
personally taking him by the hand. (7)

स चैनं प्रश्रितं gear सम्भाष्याभिप्रसाद्य च।
प्रियार्हं हर्षयन् राममित्युवाच पुरोहित:॥८॥

Seeing him bent low with humility and
inquiring after his welfare and praising him,
the aforesaid Vasistha (his family priest)
spoke to Sri Rama as follows, bringing joy
to him by his loving words, deserving as he
was of kind words : (8)

Wasted पिता राम ara राज्यमवाप्स्यसि।
उपवासं भवानद्य करोतु सह सीतया॥९॥

“Propitious is your father to you, O
Rama, inasmuch as you are going to attain
sovereignty tomorrow. Therefore, keep you
fast for the night with Sita. (9)

प्रातस्त्वामभिषेक्ता fe यौवराज्ये नराधिप:।
पिता दशरथ: प्रीत्या ययातिं नहुषो यथा॥१०॥

“Out of love your father, Emperor
DaSaratha, is positively going to install you
in the office of Prince Regent next morning,
even as Nahusa installed his son Yayati.”

(10)
इत्युक्त्वा स det राममुपवासं यतव्रत:।
मन्त्रवत् कारयामास वैदेह्या सहितं शुचि:॥११॥

Saying so, the holy sage Vasistha of
firm resolve enjoined Sri Rama alongwith

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

Sita (a princess of the Videha territory) to
undertake a vow of fasting for the night in
accordance with sacred texts prescribing
such fasting. (11)

ततो यथावद् WAIT A राज्ञो गुरुरचित:।

अभ्यनुज्ञाप्य काकुत्स्थं ययौ रामनिवेशनात्॥ १२॥
Duly worshipped by Sri Rama and taking

leave of that scion of Kakutstha, Vasistha,

the king’s preceptor, then withdrew from Sri
Rama’s palace. (12)

सुहृद्धिस्तत्र wast सहासीन: प्रियंवदै:।
सभाजितो विवेशाथ ताननुज्ञाप्य सर्वश:॥१३॥

Sitting there with his childhood friends,
who spoke kindly to him, Sri Rama presently
took leave of them all and, greeted by them,
retired to his inner apartments. (13)

हृष्टनारीनरयुतं waayy तदा बभौ।

यथा मत्तद्विजगणं प्रफुल्लनलिनं सर:॥१४॥
Crowded with joyful men and women,

Sri Rama’s palace at that time looked like a

lake swarming with flocks of joyous birds

and adorned with full-blown lotuses. (14)

स राजभवनप्रख्यात् तस्माद् रामनिवेशनात्।
निर्गत्य ददृशे मार्गं वसिष्ठो जनसंवृतम्॥१५॥
Coming out of the aforesaid palace of
Sri Rama, which vied with the royal palace,
Vasistha found the road thronged with men.
(15)

Crowded with men full of curiosity to
witness the festivities connected with Sri
Rama’s installation, moving in multitudinous
batches, the main roads in all the quarters
of Ayodhya became impassable. (16)
aya राजमार्गस्य सागरस्येव नि:स्वन:॥ १७॥

The noise on the main roads, filled with
the hilarious sound produced by the striking
of waves in the shape of crowds of men,
resembled the roaring of a sea. (17)
