136

resembling a hill, with as many as four tusks.
Wearing white garlands and clad in white
robes and ablaze with their own effulgence,
nay, shining brightly like the sun, the two
brothers for their part then stood by the side
of Sita, Janaka’s daughter. Thereupon Sita
actually mounted the shoulders of that tusker
led by her husband, standing in the air in front
of the aforesaid white hill. Springing up from
the lap of her husband, the lotus-eyed lady
was then seen by me gently touching the
moon and the sun* with her hands. Then that
jewel among elephants, ridden by the aforesaid
two brothers as well as by the large-eyed
Sita took its stand on Lanka. | saw in another
dream that wearing a white garland and clad
in a white robe, Sri Rama, a scion of
Kakutstha, himself came here along with his
consort, Sita, in a chariot drawn by eight
white bullocks and was accompanied by
Laksmana, too. Then in another dream the
valiant Sri Rama of unfailing prowess, a jewel
among men was seen by me on the move
towards a northerly direction having ascended
the celestial aerial car, Puspaka, shining
brightly as the sun. In this way was Sri Rama,
who vies with Lord Visnu in prowess, seen
by me in a dream alongwith his younger
brother, Laksmana, and his wife, Sita. Surely
Sri Rama, who is endowed with extraordinary
energy, is incapable of being conquered by
gods and demons or even by ogres or by
any other people, even as heaven cannot be
won by sinful men.

“Ravana too was seen by me in the
dream today with a shaven head, nay, bathed
in oil, attired in red, drunken and still drinking,
adorned with garlands of oleander flowers
and fallen on the earth from the aerial car,
Puspaka. (12—23)

« VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

कृष्यमाण: स्निया HUST GS: कृष्णाम्बर: TA: |

रथेन खरयुक्तेन रक्तमाल्यानुलेपन:॥ २४॥
“He was seen in a dream once more

with a shaven head and robed in black,

wearing a red garland and smeared with red

sandal-paste and being pulled by a woman

on a chariot drawn by asses. (24)

पिबंस्तैलं हसन्नृत्यन् भ्रान्तचित्ताकुलेन्द्रिय:।
गर्दभेन ययौ शीघ्रं दक्षिणां दिशमास्थित:॥ २५॥
“Quaffing oil, laughing and dancing, his
mind confused and senses obscured, he
sped on the back of an ass in a southerly
direction. (25)
Uta मया gel रावणो राक्षसेशर्वर:।
पतितोऽवाक्छिरा भूमौ गर्दभाद् भयमोहित: UE

“Ravana, the lord of ogres, was again
seen by me fallen headlong from the back
of the ass, confused through fear. (26)

सहसरोत्थाय सम्भ्रान्तो भयार्तो मदवबिह्वल:।
उन्मत्तरूपो दिग्वासा दुर्वाक्यं प्रलपन् FU २७॥
“Leaping up suddenly, utterly bewildered,
terror-stricken, overpowered with intoxication,
looking like a madman, and sky-clad, he was
seen uttering many abusive words. (27)
दुर्गन्धं ga ant fat नरकोपमम्।
मलपङ्कं प्रविश्याशु मग्नस्तत्र स रावण:॥ २८॥
“Entering a fearful gloom, resembling
hell itself, emitting a foul smell difficult to
bear, nay, full of filth and mire, the aforesaid
Ravana soon disappeared into it. (28)
प्रस्थितो दक्षिणामाशां प्रविष्टोऽकर्दमं हरदम्।
कण्ठे बद्ध्वा दशग्रीवं प्रमदा रक्तवासिनी।॥ २९॥
एवं तत्र Wal दृष्ट: कुम्भकर्णो महाबल:॥ ३०॥

“Again having set out in a southerly

or a tree, to get bedaubed with excrement, weeping/and death as well as copulation with a woman not fit
for intercourse in dreams are looked upon as auspicious.”

* We further read in “Swapnadhyaya”:

आदित्यमण्डलं वापि चन्द्रमण्डलमेव वा। स्वप्ने गृह्णाति हस्ताभ्यां महद्राज्यं समाप्नुयात्॥

“Whoever touches with one’s hand the orb of the sun or that of the moon bids fair to attain a large

dominion.”
