952

“Alarmed as | am, my spouse too having
been taken away, | have sought shelter for
my protection in this mountain, which is
difficult of access for Vali. Having been
banished and antagonized by my brother,
(Vall), O scion of Raghu, | live in the forest
perturbed and alarmed, my mind being
confused. Therefore, grant me security, O
highly blessed one, from Vali, stricken with
fear as | am. (22-23)

कर्तुमर्हसि काकुत्स्थ भयं मे न भवेद् यथा।
`एवमुक्तस्तु तेजस्वी धर्मज्ञो धर्मवत्सल:॥ २४॥
प्रत्यभाषत काकुत्स्थ: सुग्रीवं प्रहसन्निव।
उपकारफलं fat विदितं A महाकपे॥ eeu

“You ought to ensure, O scion of
Kakutstha, that no fear may linger in me.”
Implored thus, the glorious Sri Rama (a
scion of Kakutstha), for his part, who knew
what is right and was fond of righteousness,
replied (as follows) to Sugriva as though
heartily laughing: “It is known to me that
service is the fruit yielded by a friend, O
mighty monkey ! (24-25)
वालिनं तं वधिष्यामि aa भार्यापहारिणम्।
अमोघा: सूर्यसंकाशा ममेमे निशिता: VAT: Wee

“| shall dispose of the notorious Vali,
who has wrested your wife. Infallible are

these sharpened shafts of mine, glorious as
the sun. (26)

तस्मिन् वालिनि दुर्वृत्ते निपतिष्यन्ति after: |
कङ्कपत्रप्रतिच्छन्ना महेन्द्राशनिसंनिभा: tt २७॥
तीक्ष्णाग्रा ऋजुपर्वाण: सरोषा भुजगा इव।
wa वालिनं usa तीक्ष्णैराशीविषोपमै:।। २८ ॥
शरैर्विनिहतं भूमौ प्रकीर्णमिव पर्वतम्।

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

स तु तद् वचनं श्रुत्वा राघवस्यात्मनो हितम्।
Gita: watt: परमं वाक्यमब्रवीत्॥२९॥

“Covered at the end with the feathers
of a buzzard and provided with a momentum,
and shining brightly like the thunderbolt of
the mighty Indra (the lord of paradise), these
arrows with pointed heads and straight joints
will descend like angry serpents on that Vali
of immoral conduct. See Vali struck down
today on the earth like a scattered mountain
with pointed shafts resembling venomous
serpents.” Supremely rejoiced to hear the
aforesaid assurance, favourable to him, of
Sri Rama (a scion of Raghu), the celebrated
Sugriva for his part uttered the following
excellent words : (27—29)

यथा न हिंस्यात् स पुनर्ममाग्रजम्॥ ३०॥

“By your goodwill, O lion among men,
| hope to recover my darling as well as my
sovereignty. Pray, handle my hostile elder
brother in such a way, O heroic prince, that
he may not persecute me any more.” (30)

सीताकपीन्द्रक्षणदाचराणां
राजीवहरेमज्वलनोपमानि ।

वामानि नेत्राणि समं स्फुरन्ति॥ ३१॥

On the occasion of the friendship
concluded between Sugriva and Sri Rama
the left eyes of Sita, Vali (the king of monkeys)
and Ravana (an ogre, lit., a night-stalker)—
which were lotus-like, gold-like and fire-like,
respectively, synchronously throbbed.* (31)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये किष्किन्धाकाण्डे पञ्चम: सर्ग: ॥ ५ ॥

Thus ends Canto Five in the Kiskindhakanda of the glorious Ramayana of Valmiki,
the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

* According to the science of omens the throbbing of left limbs is believed to be auspicious in the

case of females and inauspicious in that of males.
