192

shoots withered, and with the myriads of its
trees and creepers dried up, that pleasure-
grove did not look bright on that occasion,
as though it had been destroyed by a wild
fire. Those creepers too with their coverings
in the form of leaves displaced looked like
women with their robes in disarray. (17-18)

सादितै-
रव्यालैर्मृगैरार्तरवैश्च पक्षिभि:।
शिलागृहैरुन्मथितैस्तथा गृहै:
प्रणष्ट रूपं तदभून्महद वनम्॥ १९॥
With its arbours and picture-galleries
destroyed, tame beasts of prey (Such as
tigers), deer and birds emitting cries of
distress, its grottos and other structures
demolished, that extensive grove presented
the appearance of ruin. (19)
सा विह्वलाशोकलताप्रताना
वनस्थली शोकलताप्रताना।
जाता दशास्यप्रमदावनस्य
कपेर्बलाद्धि प्रमदावनस्य॥ २०॥

« VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

Through the ferocity of the monkey,
Hanuman, the woodland of that pleasure-
garden, which afforded shelter to the
womenfolk of Ravana (the ten-headed
monster) and which was distinguished by
its clusters of shaking ASoka creepers, then
became a jumble of creepers which caused
grief to the lookers-on. (20)

तत: स कृत्वा जगतीपतेर्महान्

महद व्यलीकं मनसो महात्मन:।
युयुत्सुरेको बहुभिर्महाबलै:

श्रिया ज्वलंस्तोरणमाश्रित: APA: ।॥ २१॥

Having perpetrated something which
was utterly displeasing to the mind of the
high minded ruler of the land of Lanka,
and eager to contend single-handed with
a number of warriors endowed with
extraordinary might, the great monkey,
Hanuman, took up his position at the entrance
of the pleasance, blazing with martial glory.

(21)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये सुन्दरकाण्डे एकचत्वारिंश: सर्ग: ॥ ४१ ॥

Thus ends Canto Forty-one of the Sundarakanda in the glorious Ramayana of Valmiki,
the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

Canto XLII

Perceiving the devastation of the royal pleasance at the hands of Hanuman,
the ogresses keeping watch over Sita asked her who he was. On Sita’s
pleading her ignorance in the matter, some of them hurriedly seek
the presence of Ravana and report the matter to him. Hanuman
makes short work of a company of ogres known by
the name of Kinkaras, despatched by Ravana.

Thereupon Ravana sends Prahasta’s
son to punish the intruder

ad: पशक्षिनिनादेन gauge च।

बभूवुस्त्राससम्भ्रान्ता: सर्वे लङ्कानिवासिन:॥१॥ | विद्रुताश्च

and the crash of falling trees.

waren विनेदुर्मृगपक्षिण:।

(1)

Thereupon all the denizens of Lanka caret च निमित्तानि RUN प्रतिपेदिरे ।। २॥

got terror-stricken at the screaming of birds

Put to flight, being panic-stricken, beasts
