* BALAKANDA +

कुशध्वजसुते चोभे जगृहुर्नृपयोषित:।
मंगलालापनैर्होमै:; शोभिता: क्षौमवासस:॥ १२॥
देवतायतनान्याशु सर्वास्ता: प्रत्यपूजयन्।
अभिवाद्याभिवाद्यांश्च सर्वा राजसुतास्तदा॥१३॥
कृतदारा: कृतास्त्राश्च सधना: ससुहृज्जना:॥ १४॥
शुश्रूषमाणा: पितरं वर्तयन्ति नरर्षभा:।
कस्यचित्त्वथ HITT राजा दशरथ: सुतम्॥ १५॥

Duly entertained with luxuries by his
own people, the king rejoiced at his house.
Kausalya and Sumitra as well as the graceful
Kaikeyi and whatever other queens there
were busied themselves’ with the
ceremonious reception of their daughters-
in-law. Thereupon the queens conducted
into the gynaeceum the highly blessed Sita
and the illustrious Urmila as well as both the
daughters of KusSadhwaja, Mandavi and
Srutakirti. All those queens forthwith got
the brides to offer worship in the temples
inside as well as outside the gynaeceum—
the brides, who were greeted with
benedictions pronounced by the priests,
looked splendid after having offered oblations
to the sacred fire in order to solemnize their
entry into the gynaeceum and were clad in
silken robes. Having saluted on that occasion
those who deserved to be saluted, all the
princesses without exception happily enjoyed
life with their husbands in their private
apartments. Duly married and taught the
use of various missiles and weapons and
endowed with riches, the princes, who were
jewels among men, lived in the company of
their friends and relatives, rendering service
to their father. Some time after this, one
day, King Dasaratha, the delight of the
Raghus, spoke to Bharata, the son of Kaikeyi
as follows : (10—15)

Wi कैकयीपुत्रमब्रवीद् रघुनन्दन:।
अयं केकयराजस्य Ut वसति पुत्रक॥१६॥
त्वां नेतुमागतो वीरो युधाजिन्मातुलस्तव।
श्रुत्वा दशरथस्यैतद् wa: कैकयीसुत:॥१७॥

281

गमनायाभिचक्राम शत्रुघ्नसहितस्तदा।
आपृच्छ्य पितरं शूरो रामं चाक्लिष्टकारिणम्॥ १८ ॥
मातॄश्चापि नरश्रेष्ठ: शत्रुघ्नसहितो ययौ।
युधाजित् प्राप्य भरतं सशत्रुघ्नं प्रहर्षित:॥१९॥
स्वपुरं प्राविशद् वीर: पिता तस्य तुतोष ह।
Ta च Wd रामो लक्ष्मणश्च महाबल:॥ २०॥
पितुराज्ञां पुरस्कृत्य पौरकार्याणि सर्वश:॥ २१॥
चकार राम: सर्वाणि प्रियाणि च हितानि a
मातृभ्यो मातृकार्याणि कृत्वा परमयन्तित:।॥ २२॥
गुरूणां गुरुकार्याणि काले कालेऽन्ववैक्षत।
एवं दशरथ: प्रीतो ब्राह्मणा नैगमास्तथा॥ २३॥
रामस्य शीलवृत्तेन ad विषयवासिन:।
तेषामतियशा लोके राम: सत्यपराक्रम:॥ २४॥
स्वयंभूरिव भूतानां aya गुणवत्तर:।
was सीतया सार्धं विजहार बहूनृतून्॥ २५॥
मनस्वी तद्गतमनास्तस्या de समर्पित:।
प्रिया तु सीता रामस्य दारा: पितृकृता इति॥ २६॥

गुणाद्रूपगुणाच्चापि प्रीतिर्भूयोऽभिवर्धते।
तस्याश्च भर्ता द्विगुणं हृदये परिवर्तते॥ on

“This son of the king of Kekaya, the
heroic Yudhajit, your maternal uncle, who
has come to take you to his father’s capital,
is tarrying here in the hope of being
allowed to take you.” Hearing this remark
of DaSaratha, Bharata, son of Kaikeyi,
forthwith got ready to depart alongwith
Satrughna. Nay, taking leave of his father,
King Dasgaratha and Sri Rama, who did
great things without much exertion, as well
as of all his three mothers, Kausalya,
Sumitra and Kaikeyi, the heroic Bharata, a
jewel among men, left with Satrughna for
the kingdom of Kekaya. Highly rejoiced to
get hold of Bharata alongwith Satrughna, the
valiant Yudhajit reached and duly entered
his town, and his father felt gratified at this.
Bharata as well as Satrughna having left,
the very mighty Rama and Laksmana
began to serve their god-like father when
the occasion demanded it. Placing his
father’s command above all else, Sri Rama
