250

उपविष्टा गिरेस्तस्य शिलासु विपुलासु ते।
श्रोतुकामा: समुद्रस्य लङ्घनं वानरोत्तमा:॥५०॥

दर्शनं चापि लङ्काया: सीताया रावणस्य च।
तस्थु: Weta: सर्वे हनूमद्वदनोन्मुखा:॥७५१॥
Seated on the extensive rocks of that
mountain, eager as they were to hear how
Hanuman was able to leap across the sea
and see Lanka, Sita and Ravana, all those
jewels among the monkeys waited with joined
palms, their faces turned towards Hanuman.
(50-51)

तस्थौ तत्राङ्गद: श्रीमान् वानरैर्बहुभिर्वृत:।
उपास्यमानो विबुधैर्दिवि देवपतिर्यथा॥५२॥

« VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

The glorious Angada sat there encircled
by numerous monkeys even like Indra, the
lord of gods, waited upon by gods in heaven.

(52)
हनूमता कीर्तिमता यशस्विना
तथाङ्गदेनाङ्गदनद्धबाहुना ।
मुदा तदाध्यासितमुन्नतं ve
न्महीधराग्रं ज्वलितं श्रियाभवत्॥ ७५३ UI

Full of joy at that time, the glorious
Hanuman as well as the illustrious Angada,
who had his arms adorned with a pair of

armlets, the lofty and huge mountain peak
stood illumined with splendour. (53)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये सुन्दरकाण्डे सप्तपञ्चाश: AWA: ॥ 4 Il

Thus ends Canto Fifty-seven of the Sundarakanda in the glorious Ramayana of
Valmiki, the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

अष्टपञ्चाश: सर्ग:
Canto LVUI
Enquired by Jambavan, seated alongwith the monkey hordes, Hanuman
narrates in extenso how he saw Mount Mainaka in the course of
his journey to Lanka, reached Lanka, beheld Janaka’s
daughter and returned to Mount Mahendra

ततस्तस्य गिरे: शृङ्खे महेन्द्रस्य महाबला:।
हनुमत्प्रमुखा: प्रीतिं हरयो जग्मुरुत्तमाम्॥१॥
Having met together on the summit of
the aforesaid Mahendra mountain, the
monkeys headed by Hanuman, who were
endowed with extraordinary might, presently
experienced the highest joy. (1)

प्रीतिमत्सूपविष्टेषु वानरेषु महात्मसु।
तं तत: प्रतिसंहृष्ट: प्रीतियुक्तं महाकपिम्॥ २॥
जाम्बवान् कार्यवरृत्तान्तमपृच्छ्दनिलात्मजम्।

wa Gel aM देवी Ha वा तत्र वर्तते॥३॥

The high-souled monkeys being joyfully
and comfortably seated, Jambavan, who
felt highly rejoiced, now enquired of that
great monkey, Hanuman, who was also

filled with joy, particulars about his errand in
the following words : “How was the godlike
lady discovered by you and how does she
fare there? (2-3)

तस्यां चापि कथं वृत्त: क्रूरकर्मा दशानन:।

तत्त्वत: सर्वमेतन्न: Yate त्वं महाकपे॥४॥
“Moreover, how does Ravana, the ten-

headed monster of cruel deeds behave

towards her? Please relate you all this to us
accurately in detail, O mighty Hanuman ! (4)

सम्मार्गिता कथं cat fe च सा प्रत्यभाषत।
श्रुतार्थाश्चिन्तयिष्यामो wa: कार्यविनिश्चयम्॥ ५॥
“How was the godlike lady traced by

you and what reply did she make? Having
learnt the truth from you, we shall ponder
