* AYODHYAKANDA +

aa राममित: क्षिप्रं at प्रस्थापयाम्यहम्।
यौवराज्ये भरतं क्षिप्रमद्याभिषेचये।॥ २॥
“| shall without delay despatch Rama
to the forest from here this very day and
shall further install Bharata in the office of
Prince Regent without loss of time. (2)
इदं त्विदानीं सम्पश्य केनोपायेन साधये।
We: प्राप्नुयाद् राज्यं न तु राम: कथंचन॥ ३॥
“Now just ponder over this: by what
means should | be able to ensure that
Bharata attains sovereignty and not Rama
on any account?” (3)

Wag तु सा can went पापदर्शिनी।
रामार्थमुपहिंसन्ती कैकेयीमिदमब्रवीत्॥ ४॥

Addressed thus by the queen, Manthara
of sinful mind for her part replied to Kaikeyi
as follows, impairing the (mundane) interest
of Sri Rama: (4)
हन्तेदानीं waya त्वं कैकेयि श्रूयतां aa: |
यथा ते भरतो राज्यं पुत्र: प्राप्स्यति केवलम्॥५॥

“Ah, presently see you, 0 Kaikeyl,
what | do. Listen to my advice whereby
your son, Bharata, alone will attain
sovereignty. (5)
fe न स्मरसि कैकेयि स्मरन्ती वा निगूहसे।
यदुच्यमानमात्मार्थं मत्तस्त्वं श्रोतुमिच्छसि॥६॥

“Since you wish to hear from me of the
plan conducive to your own interest, which
has already been made known (by you off
and on), do you not remember it yourself or
do you hide it from me, even though you
remember it, O Kaikeyi ! (6)
मयोच्यमानं afe a श्रोतुं wer विलासिनि।
श्रूयतामभिधास्यामि stat चैतद् विधीयताम्॥ 9 tt

“If your intention is to hear of it as told
by me, O lady full of charms, | shall presently

tell you; please listen and, when you have
heard of it, it may be acted upon.” (7)

श्रुत्वैवं वचनं तस्या मन्थरायास्तु कैकयी।
किंचिदुत्थाय शयनात् स्वास्तीर्णादिदमब्रवीत्॥ ८ ॥

317

Hearing this reply of the aforesaid
Manthara and rising a little (out of deference
mixed with curiosity) from her bed, spread
by herself and, therefore, faultless, Kaikeyi
for her part spoke as follows : (8)

कथयस्व ममोपायं केनोपायेन मन्थरे।
We: Wee राज्यं न तु राम: HAAS
“Point out to me the means. By what
device, O Manthara, may Bharata attain
sovereignty and not Rama in any case?”
(9)
एवमुक्का तदा देव्या मन्थरा पापदर्शिनी।
रामार्थमुपहिंसन्ती कैकेयीमिदमब्रवीत्॥ १० ॥

Requested thus by the queen on that
occasion, Manthara of sinful intent spoke to
Kaikeyi as follows, crushing the interest of
Sri Rama: (10)
पुरा देवासुरे युद्धे सह राजर्षिभि: पति:।
अगच्छत् त्वामुपादाय देवराजस्य साह्यकूत्॥ ११ i
दिशमास्थाय कैकेयि दक्षिणां दण्डकान् प्रति।
वैजयन्तमिति wad at aa तिमिध्वज:॥१२॥

“Proceeding in a southerly direction in
order to help the cause of Indra (the ruler of
gods) in a war between gods and demons
in the former days alongwith other dependent
royal sages, and taking you with him, your
husband, Emperor Dasaratha, O Kaikeyi,
marched against the city known by the
name of Vaijayanta in the Dandaka forest,
where lived the demon Timidhwaja (so-called
because his ensign bore the emblem of
Timi, a species of fish of enormous size).

(11-12)
स शम्बर sit Gra: शतमायो महासुर:।
ददौ शक्रस्य dod देवसङ्घैरनिर्जित:॥१३॥

“Also known as Sambara, that great

demon, who knew hundreds of conjuring

tricks and could not be conquered even by
hosts of gods, offered battle to Indra. (13)

तस्मिन् महति संग्रामे पुरुषान् क्षतविक्षतान्।
Tal प्रसुप्तान् घ्नन्ति स्म तरसापास्य राक्षसा:॥ १४॥
