+ UTTARAKANDA +

1017

Canto LIV

King Nrga gets a cosy pit prepared for himself, entrusts the kingdom to
his son and enters the pit and suffers the consequences of curse

रामस्य भाषितं श्रुत्वा लक्ष्मण: परमार्थवित्।
उवाच प्राञ्जलिर्वाक्यं राघवं दीप्ततेजसम्॥१॥
Laksmana, the knower of truth, on
hearing the words of Sri Rama, spoke thus
to Rama, a scion of Raghu, glowing with
effulgence, with folded hands: (1)
अल्पापराधे काकुत्स्थ द्विजाभ्यां शाप ईदृश:।
महान् नृगस्य राजर्षेर्यमदण्ड इवापर:॥२॥
“O scion of Kakutstha, a curse so
harsh was pronounced by the Brahmanas
on Nrga, the Rsi among kings, for committing
a minor fault, as if it was another rod of
Yama (for punishment). (2)

rr तु पापसंयुक्तमात्मानं पुरुषर्षभ।
किमुवाच wit राजा fest क्रोधसमन्वितौ॥ ३॥

“On hearing himself proclaimed guilty,
O bull among men, what King Nrga said to
the two Brahmanas, full of rage.” (3)

लक्ष्मणेनैवमुक्तस्तु राघव: पुनरब्रवीत्।
श्रृणु सौम्य यथा पूर्वं स राजा शापविक्षत:॥४॥
अथाध्वनि गतौ विप्रौ विज्ञाय स नृपस्तदा।
आहूय मन्तिण: सर्वान् नैगमान् सपुरोधस:॥५॥
तानुवाच Tt राजा सर्वाश्च प्रकृतीस्तथा।
Ga सुसमाविष्ट: serait A समाहिता:॥६॥

Thus told by Laksmana, the scion of
Raghu said: “O courteous one, listen to me,
As said the king shattered by the curse
after having known from the report that both
the Brahmanas were on their way to their
abode, the king filled with misery, calling the
counsellors together with the priest and also
all his subjects, told them: ‘Listen to me with
attention. (4—6)

ane: पर्वतश्चैव मम दत्त्वा महद्भयम्।
गतौ त्रिभुवनं भद्रौ वायुभूतावनिन्दितौ॥७॥

कुमारोऽयं aia स चेहाद्याभिषिच्यताम्।
vat च यत् Geet क्रियतां शिल्पिभिर्मम॥ ८ u
यत्राहं संक्षयिष्यामि शापं ब्राह्मणनि:सृतम्।
वर्षघ्नमेकं vat तु हिमघ्नमपरं तथा॥९॥
‘The two divine sages, Narada and
Parvata—blessed and free from taint, have
departed for the third world (the world of
Brahma,) as if with the wind, after having
caused great fear to me. The prince named
Vasu be coronated here and now; a pit quite
comfortable be dug out by my artisans,
where | shall get the curse pronounced by
the Brahmanas, gone through. May the
artisans dig out a pit that shall afford shelter
from rain and cold. (7—9)

ग्रीष्मघ्नं तु सुखस्पर्शमेकं कुर्वन्तु शिल्पिन:।
फलवन्तश्च A FAM: पुष्पवत्यश्च या लता:॥१०॥
विरोप्यन्तां बहुविधाश्छायावन्तश्च Wer: |
क्रियतां रमणीयं च श्वभ्राणां सर्वतोदिशम्॥ ११॥
‘May the artisans create another pit
that shall afford shelter during summer. May
the trees laden with fruits, and creepers
blossoming with flowers, be sown around
the pit and also bushes of all kinds. May the
pits be made lovely on all sides. (10-11)
Gena वसिष्यामि यावत्कालस्य waa: |
पुष्पाणि च सुगन्धीनि क्रियन्तां तेषु नित्यश:॥ १२॥
परिवार्य यथा मे स्युरध्यर्धं योजनं तथा।
एवं कृत्वा विधानं a dave वसुं तदा॥ १३॥
धर्मनित्य: Wat: Ua क्षत्रधर्मेण पालय।
प्रत्यक्षं a तथा शापो द्विजाभ्यां मयि पातित: ॥ १४॥
नरश्रेष्ठ सरोषाभ्यामपराधेऽपि तादृशे।
मा कृथास्त्वनुसंतापं मत्कृते fe ATU १५॥
कृतान्त: कुशल: UT येनास्मि व्यसनीकृत:।
प्राप्तव्यान्येव प्राप्नोति गन्तव्यान्येव गच्छति॥ १६॥
