632

वरदानात् पितृव्यस्ते wed देवदानवान्।
कुम्भकर्णस्तु वीर्येण सहते च सुरासुरान्॥७५॥

“Your uncle, Ravana, is able to
withstand the gods and the demons alike by
virtue of the boon conferred on him by
Brahma and Lord Siva, while Kumbhakarna,
your father, was able to withstand the gods
and the demons by virtue of his prowess.
You are rich in both and excel in this respect
your uncle as well as your father. (75)

धनुषीन्द्रजितस्तुल्य: ward रावणस्य च।
त्वमद्य रक्षसां लोके श्रेष्ठोऽसि बलवीर्यत:॥ ७६॥

“You vie with Indrajit in archery and
are a peer of Ravana in might. You are the
foremost in point of strength and prowess in
the world of ogres as on this day. (76)

महाविमर्दं समरे मया सह तवाद्भुतम्।
TI भूतानि पश्यन्तु शक्रशम्बरयोरिव॥७७॥

“Let created beings witness your
prodigious and mighty encounter with me on
the battlefield today, as they did the conflict
between Indra and the demon Sambara. (77)
कृतमप्रतिमं कर्म दर्शितं चास्त्रकौशलम्।
पतिता हरिवीराश्च त्वयैते भीमविक्रमा:॥ ७८॥

“A feat which has no equal has been
performed by you and skill in the use of
mystic missiles exhibited. These monkey
heroes of redoubtable prowess have also
been struck down by you. (78)

उपालम्भभयाच्चैव Aa dit मया हत:।
कृतकर्मपरिश्रान्तो विश्रान्त: पश्य A बलम्॥७९॥

“And you, O champion, have not been
made short work of by me only for fear of
incurring reproach, inasmuch as you stand
fully exhausted by the exploits performed
by you. Therefore, having enjoyed well-
earned rest, witness my strength.” (79)

तेन सुग्रीववाक्येन सावमानेन मानित:।
अग्नेराज्यहुतस्येव तेजस्तस्याभ्यवर्धत॥ ८०॥

Kumbha felt flattered by the foregoing

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA +

compliment of Sugriva, though it was
accompanied by disdain, with the result
that his martial ardour was redoubled in the
same way as the brightness of a fire fed with
ghee. (80)

तत: कुम्भस्तु सुग्रीवं बाहुभ्यां जगृहे तदा।
गजाविवातीतमदौ नि:श्वसन्तौ मुहुर्मुहु:॥८१॥
अन्योन्यगात्रग्रथितौ चर्षन्तावितरेतरम्।
सधूमां मुखतो ज्वालां विसृजन्तौ परिश्रमात्॥ ८२॥

Thereupon Kumbha for his part clasped
Sugriva in his arms. Then the two warriors,
fastened by each others limbs, stood
breathing heavily again and again like two
elephants intoxicated with ichor, nay, rubbing
each other and emitting flames mingled
with smoke from their mouths due to exertion.

(81-82)

तयो: पादाभिघाताच्च निमग्ना चाभवन्मही।
व्याघूर्णिततरङ्गश्च चुक्षुभे वरुणालय:॥८३॥

Nay, the earth sank under the trampling
of their feet, while the sea (lit., the abode
of Varuna) with its rolling waves became
turbulent. (83)

aa: Het wafer सुग्रीवो लवणाम्भसि।
पातयामास वेगेन दर्शयन्नुदधेस्तलम्॥८४॥

Lifting up Kumbha, Sugriva then threw
him with violence into the salt sea, showing
him the bottom of the sea. (84)

तत: कुम्भनिपातेन जलराशि: समुत्थित:।
विन्ध्यमन्दरसंकाशो विससर्प समन्तत:॥८५॥

Due to the falling down of Kumbha
there rose a mass of water as high as the
Vindhya and Mandara mountains and
spread on all sides. (85)

ad: कुम्भ: समुत्पत्य सुग्रीवमभिपात्य च।
आजघानोरसि क्रुद्धो वज्रकल्पेन Afar ce il
Springing up and throwing down
Sugriva, Kumbha thereupon furiously struck
him on the bosom with his adamantine
fist. (86)
