* SUNDARAKANDA +

ways as follows: “O my dear father, O my
beloved son, O my beloved husband, O my
friend, O lord of my life, O my dear one, our
excessive religious merit is exhausted.” (40)

हुताशनज्वालसमाव्रृता सा
हतप्रवीरा परिव्रत्तयोधा।
हनूमत: क्रोधबलाभिभूता

aya शापोषहतेव लङ्का॥४१॥
Enveloped in flames, nay, with its
eminent heroes killed and its warriors thrown
into disorder, humbled as it was by the
vehemence of the wrath of Hanuman, the
celebrated Lanka appeared as though visited
by a curse. (41)
ससम्भ्रमं त्रस्तविषण्णराक्षसां
समुक्कालक्तालहुतम्पान'।'ङ्कित्ताम्।
स्वयंभुरोषोपहतामिवावनिम् ॥४२॥
The high-minded Hanuman saw Lanka
with its ogres dismayed and despondent
and seized with a flurry, and bearing the
imprint of fire bursting into blazing flames
and thus resembling the earth destroyed by
the wrath of the self-born Lord Siva. (42)
हत्वा तु रक्षांसि महान्ति संयुगे।
दग्ध्वा पुरीं तां गृहरत्नमालिनीं
तस्थौ हनूमान् पवनात्मज: कपि: ॥ ४३॥
Having destroyed the Asoka grove, thick
with the best of trees, killed eminent ogres in
combat and burnt that city containing rows of
excellent buildings, Hanuman (sprung from
the loins of the wind-god) stood at ease. (43)
स राक्षसांस्तान् सुबहूंश्च हत्वा
ad च भङ्क्त्वा बहुपादपं तत्।
विसृज्य रक्षोभवनेषु चाग्निं

जगाम रामं मनसा महात्मा॥४४॥

Nay, having dispatched many notorious
ogres and destroyed the aforesaid grove
rich in numerous trees and kindled fire in
the dwellings of ogres, the high-souled

237

Hanuman sought the presence of Sri Rama

with his mind. (44)
महाबलं मारुततुल्यवेगम्।
प्रतुष्टुवुर्देवगणाश्च Ae UU

Thereupon all the hosts of gods on
their part gratefully extolled the highly intelligent
son of the wind-god, a prince among monkey
heroes, the foremost of the mighty, Hanuman,
who was endowed with extraordinary might
and was equal to the wind in swiftness. (45)
देवाश्च सर्वे मुनिपुङ्खवाश्च

गन्धर्वविद्याधरपन्नगाश्च ।
भूतानि सर्वाणि महान्ति तत्र
जग्मु: परां प्रीतिमतुल्यरूपाम्॥ ४६ ॥

All the gods as well as the foremost of
ascetics, even so, Gandharvas, Vidyadharas
and Nagas—nay, all great beings present
there experienced an exceeding and
unequalled joy. (46)
USHA वनं महातेजा हत्वा रक्षांसि संयुगे।
दग्ध्वा लङ्कापुरीं भीमां रराज स महाकपि: uve tl

Having destroyed the Asoka grove,
killed ogres in conflict and burnt the
redoubtable city of Lanka, that eminent

Hanuman, who was’~ endowed with
extraordinary energy, shone brightly. (47)

प्रतिष्ठितो वानरराजसिंह:।
व्यराजतादित्य इवार्चिमाली॥४८ i
Firmly seated on the marvellous top of
an excellent building, Hanuman, a lion among
monkey chiefs, who was surrounded by a
circle of flames rising from his flaming tail,
shone brightly like the sun encircled with a
nimbus. (48)
निर्वापयामास तदा समुद्रे हरिपुङ्खव:॥४९॥

Having subjected the entire Lanka to
