378

“O, when will my shafts dart towards
Rama (a scion of Raghu) as intoxicated
bees rush towards a flowered tree in the
vernal season? (37)

wal शोणितदिग्धाङ्गं दीप्तै: कार्मुकविच्युतै:।
शारैरादीपयिष्यामि उल्काभिरिव कुञ्जरम्॥ ३८॥

“O, when shall | consume with flaming
arrows discharged from my bow, Rama,
whose body, pierced with my arrows, is
stained with blood—even as they goad an
elephant with firebrands. (38)

तच्चास्य बलमादास्ये बलेन महता qa:
ज्योतिषामिव सर्वेषां प्रभामुद्यन् दिवाकर:॥ ३९॥

“Surrounded by a huge army, | shall
eclipse the aforesaid army of Rama as the
sun, even while rising, obscures the brilliance
of all the other luminaries in the sky. (39)

सागरस्येव H वेगो मारुतस्येव A बलम्।
न च दाशरथिर्वेद तेन at योद्भुमिच्छति॥४०॥

“My impetuosity resembles the fury of
the sea and my strength is like that of the
wind. Rama (son of DaSsaratha), however,
does not know this; hence he seeks to
meet me in combat. (40)

न मे तूणीशयान् बाणान् सविषानिव पन्नगान्।
राम: पश्यति संग्रामे तेन मां योद्भुमिच्छति॥४१॥

“Rama has not seen on a field of battle
the arrows reposing in my quiver like
venomous serpents. Hence he desires to
fight with me. (41)

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA +

न जानाति पुरा ate मम ag स राघव:।
मम चापमयीं वीणां शरकोणै: प्रवादिताम्॥४२॥
ज्याशब्दतुमुलां घोरामार्तगीतमहास्वनाम्।
नाराचतलसंनादां नदीमहितवाहिनीम्।
अवगाह्य «Wes वादयिष्याम्यहँ रणे॥४३॥
“He has not yet known my prowess in
combat ever before. Nor does he know of
my formidable Vina in the form of a bow,
which is played on with the heads of arrows,
nay, which strikes a mild note in the form of
a twang of the bowstring, a moderate note
in the form of cries of anguish (uttered by
the victims of those arrows) and a high-
pitched note in the form of the sound produced
by the base of steel arrows, and which |
shall play on in the course of a conflict after
entering a vast stage in the form of the
enemy ranks advancing like a river. (42-43)

न वासवेनापि सहस्रचक्षुषा
युद्धेऽस्मि शक्यो वरुणेन वा स्वयम्।
यमेन वा धर्षयितुं शाराग्निना
महाहवे वैश्रवणेन वा पुन:॥४४॥

“lam not prone to being overcome
in a combat even by the thousand-eyed
Indra (the deity presiding over the eastern
quarter) or by Varuna (the deity presiding
over the water) himself or by Yama (the
deity presiding over the south) with the
fire of his arrows or again by Kubera (the
deity presiding over the north) in a major
conflict.” (44)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये युद्धकाण्डे चतुर्विंश: WA: ॥ २४॥

Thus ends Canto Twenty-four in the Yuddhakanda of the glorious Ramayana
of Valmiki, the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

