* SUNDARAKANDA +

what decision should be taken about the
future course of action. (5)

यश्चार्थस्तत्र amet गतैरस्माभिरात्मवान्।
रक्षितव्यं च यत्तत्र A भवान् व्याकरोतु न:॥६॥

“Prudent as you are, please state clearly
what fact should be disclosed by us when
we have arrived there in the presence of Sri
Rama, and what should be kept back on
that occasion.” (6)

स नियुक्तस्ततस्तेन Ae Tee |
नमस्यन् शिरसा eet सीतायै प्रत्यभाषत॥७॥

Urged by Jambavan, and making
obeisance with his head bent low to the
godlike lady, Sita, Hanuman then replied as
follows, his hair standing on end: (7)

प्रत्यक्षमेव भवतां महेन्द्राग्रात् खमाप्लुत:।
उदधेर्दक्षिणं ut काङ्क्षमाण: समाहित:॥८॥
“Seeking to reach the southern shore
of the sea, | took a leap in the airspace with
a concentrated mind from the summit of the
Mahendra mountain in your very presence.

(8)
गच्छतश्च fe a at विघ्नरूपमिवाभवत्।
काञ्चनं शिखरं feet पश्यामि सुमनोहरम्॥ ९ ॥
स्थितं पन्थानमावृत्य मेने fast च तं नगम्।
उपसंगम्य तं दिव्यं काञ्चनं नगमुत्तमम्॥१०॥
कृता मे मनसा बुद्धिर्भेत्तव्योऽयं मयेति च।
प्रहतस्य मया तस्य लाङ्गूलेन महागिरे:॥११॥
शिखरं सूर्यसंकाशं व्यशीर्यत सहस्रधा।
व्यवसायं च तं बुद्ध्वा स होवाच महागिरि: ।। १२॥
पुत्रेति मधुरां ait wa: प्रह्लादयन्निव।
पितृव्यं चापि ut fate सखायं मातरिश्र्वन: ॥ १३॥
मैनाकमिति विख्यातं निवसन्तं महोदधौ।
पक्षवन्त: पुरा पुत्र बभूवु: पर्वतोत्तमा:॥१४॥

“Even as | was advancing, a formidable
obstacle appeared in my way, as it were. |
beheld a heavenly and exceedingly soul-
captivating golden peak, which stood blocking
my way, and | accounted that mountain an
impediment. Approaching that foremost
celestial golden mountain, the following

251

resolve was mentally made by me: ‘This
mountain must be shattered by me.’ The
peak, shinning brightly like the sun, of that
vast mountain, even as the latter was
struck by me with my tail, broke into a
thousand fragments. Perceiving the aforesaid
performance of mine, that huge mountain
uttered the following sweet words, bringing
excessive joy to my soul, as it were: ‘Know
me, my son, to be a friend of the wind-god
and as such your uncle, dwelling in the
ocean and widely known as Mainaka. The
leading mountains were endowed, my son,
with wings in the past. (9—14)
wad: पृथिवीं चेरुर्बाधमाना: समन्तत:।

श्रुत्वा नगानां चरितं महेन्द्र: पाकशासन:॥ १५॥
वज्रेण भगवान् पक्षौ चिच्छेदैषां सहस्रश:।

अहं तु मोचितस्तस्मात् da पित्रा महात्मना॥ १६॥

“`[]#8/ ranged at will all over the earth
causing molestation everywhere. Hearing of
the conduct of the mountains, the glorious
and mighty Indra, the tamer of the demon
Paka, severed with his thunderbolt the wings
of the aforesaid mountains by thousands. |
was, however, saved from that catastrophe
by your magnanimous father. (15-16)

मारुतेन dar aca waar वरुणालये।
राघवस्य wa साह्ये वर्तितव्यमरिंदम॥ eon

“| was cast at that juncture into the sea
(the abode of Varuna, the god of water) by
the wind-god, my son! | must come to the
help of Sri Rama, a scion of Raghu, O
tamer of foes ! (17)

रामो धर्मभृतां श्रेष्ठो महेन्द्रसमविक्रम:।
एतच्छुत्वा मया तस्य मैनाकस्य महात्मन:॥ १८॥
कार्यमावेद्य च गिरेरुद्धतं वै मनो मम।
तेन चाहमनुज्ञातो मैनाकेन महात्मना॥१९॥

५`3॥# Rama is the foremost of those
who uphold the cause of virtue and is equal
in prowess to the mighty Indra.’ On hearing
this submission of the high-souled Mainaka
mountain, my purpose was confided by me
to the mountain and my mind got stirred up
