* SUNDARAKANDA +

proof against age and death in that it does
not get riven even through agony. (6)

धिङ्मामनार्यामसतीं याहं at fat qari
मुहूर्तमपि जीवामि जीवितं पापजीविका॥७॥
“Woe be to me, ignoble and vile that |
am, inasmuch as | preserve my life even for
a while, though separated from him and
leading as | do a sinful existence. (7)

चरणेनापि सव्येन न wee निशाचरम्।
watt fe wre कामयेयं विगर्हितम्॥८॥
“| would not touch the ogre Ravana

even with my left foot, much less love the
despicable fellow. (8)

प्रत्याख्यानं न जानाति नात्मानं नात्मन: कुलम्।

यो नृशंसस्वभावेन मां प्रार्थयितुमिच्छति॥९॥
“He does not heed my refusal, nor

does he cognize himself, nor his own race.

Due to his cruel nature, on the other hand,
he seeks to win me over. (9)

छिन्ना भिन्ना प्रभिन्ना वा दीप्ता वाग्नौ प्रदीपिता।
रावणं नोपतिष्ठेयं किं प्रलापेन aya Qo ll
“| would not betake myself to Ravana
even if | am transfixed, cut asunder, hacked
to pieces, roasted in fire or burnt. What
shall be gained by your raving for so long?
(10)

ख्यात: प्राज्: कृतज्ञश्च सानुक्रोशाश्च Wea: |
सद्वृत्तो निरनुक्रोश: VS मद्धाग्यसंक्षयात्॥ ११॥

राक्षसानां जनस्थाने सहस्राणि adds
एकेनैव निरस्तानि a at किं नाभिपद्यते॥१२॥

“| fear Sri Rama, a scion of Raghu,
who was well-known as a wise man, alive
to the services rendered to him, nay, merciful
and a man of excellent morals, has become
pitiless due to complete loss of my good
fortune. Otherwise, why does he, by whom
alone as many as fourteen thousand ogres
were killed in Janasthana, not come to me?

(11-12)
निरुद्धा रावणेनाहमल्पवीर्येण रक्षसा।
समर्थ: Ge A vat रावणं हन्तुमाहवे॥१३॥

131

“What a pity that | have been detained
by Ravana, an ogre of poor strength, although
my husband is surely able to kill Ravana in
combat. (13)

विराधो दण्डकारण्ये येन राक्षसपुंगव:।

wr रामेण Fea: स मां किं नाभिपद्यते॥ १४॥
“Why does Sri Rama, by whom Viradha,

the foremost of ogres, was slain in the

Dandaka forest, not run up to me? (14)

कामं मध्ये समुद्रस्य लङ्घेयं दुष्प्रधर्षणा।

न तु राघवबाणानां गतिरोधो भविष्यति॥ ee i

“Granted that, situated as it is in mid-
ocean, this Lanka is difficult to storm, but
the flight of the arrows of Sri Rama, however,
can meet with no obstruction here. (15)

किं नु तत् कारणं येन Wa दूढपराक्रम:।
रक्षसापहृतां भार्यामिष्टां यो नाभिपद्यते॥१६॥

“What on earth could be the reason
why Sri Rama of unyielding prowess does
not run to the rescue of his beloved wife,
borne away by an ogre? (16)

इहस्थां At न जानीते शङ्के लक्ष्मणपूर्वज:।
जानन्नपि स तेजस्वी धर्षणां मर्षयिष्यति॥ eon

“| fear that Sri Rama, an elder brother
of Laksmana, does not know me to be here.
Knowing that | am here, will he be able to
put up with the outrage, all powerful and
mighty that he is? (17)
edt at योऽधिगत्य राघवाय निवेदयेत्।
गृध्रराजोऽपि स Wr रावणेन निपातित:॥१८॥

“That king of vultures too, who having
come to know that Ravana had borne me
away, could have reported the matter to Sri
Rama, a scion of Raghu, but was killed by
Ravana in an encounter. (18)

pd कर्म महत् तेन At तथाभ्यवपद्यता।

तिष्ठता रावणवधे व्रद्धेनापि जटायुषा॥१९॥
“A prodigious feat was accomplished

by the aforesaid Jatayu, who though old,

strove to get rid of Ravana in order to
rescue me at the moment. (19)
