834

It was surely a conjuring trick of that
ogre and unreal like an imaginary city in the
sky (visible due to some _ natural
phenomenon). You are a sacred trust placed
in my charge by the high-souled Sri Rama,
O comely princess of the Videha territory. |
dare not, therefore, leave you alone. On the
score of extermination of the ogres’ colony
in Janasthana at the time of Khara’s death
we have been made into enemies by these
night-stalkers, O blessed lady ! Ogres who
indulge in destruction of life as a recreation
simulate diverse voices in the huge forest,
O princess of the Videha kingdom! You
need not, therefore, feel anxious.” Reassured
in these words by Laksmana, Sita for her
part addressed the following harsh words to
Laksmana, who had spoken the truth, her
eyes turning blood-red through anger: “O
ignoble and merciless Laksmana of cruel
deeds, O disgrace of your race, | believe
Sri Rama’s great adversity is dear to you.
That is why you complacently utter such
words even on seeing the distress of Sri
Rama. (17—22)

नैव fat सपत्नेषु पापं लक्ष्मण ae भवेत्।
त्वद्विधेषु yey नित्यं प्रच्छन्नचारिषु॥ २३॥
“It is not at all strange, O Laksmana,
that a sinful propensity should exist in the
mind of cruel enemies like you, ever moving
in disguise. (23)
Gerd at राममेकमेकोऽनुगच्छसि।
मम हेतो: प्रतिच्छन्न: Wat भरतेन वा॥ २४॥
“With your motive cleverly concealed,
you have followed in the forest Sri Rama,
who was without a male companion, alone
for my sake or because you were engaged
by Bharata as his agent. (24)
wa सिध्यति सौमित्रे तवापि भरतस्य ar
कथमिन्दीवरश्यामं रामं पद्मनिभेक्षणम्॥ २५॥
समक्षं तव सौमित्रे प्राणांस्त्यक्ष्याम्यसंशयम्॥ २६॥

“But that object of yours or even of

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

Bharata will not be accomplished, O son of
Sumitra ! Having served as my husband Sri
Rama of lotus-like eyes and dark-brown as
a blue lotus, how can | covet an ordinary
man like you? | shall undoubtedly give up
the ghost in your presence, O son of
Sumitra ! (25-26)

wa विना क्षणमपि Aa जीवामि भूतले।
इत्युक्त: परुषं वाक्यं सीतया रोमहर्षणम्॥ २७॥
अब्रवील्लक्ष्मण: सीतां प्राञ्लि: स जितेन्द्रिय: |
sat नोत्सहे aad दैवतं भवती मम॥ २८॥

“| shall certainly not survive on the
surface of the earth even for an instant
without Sri Rama.” Spoken to in these harsh
words, which made one’s hair stand on
end, by Sita, the celebrated Laksmana, who
had mastered his senses, replied with
joined palms as follows : “I dare not make a
reply to you, since you are a deity to me.

(27-28)

वाक्यमप्रतिरूपं तु न fat स्त्रीषु मैथिलि।
स्वभावस्त्वेष नारीणामेषु लोकेषु दृश्यते॥२९॥

“It is no wonder at all for women to
utter words which are not worthy of them, O
princess of Mithila ! For such is the nature
of women, which is observed in these worlds.

(29)
विमुक्तधर्माश्चपलास्तीक्ष्णा भेदकरा: fer: |
न ae dest वाक्यं ache जनकात्मजे॥ 30 I
श्रोत्रयोरुभयोर्मध्ये तप्तनाराचसंनिभम्।
उपशृण्वन्तु मे सर्वे साक्षिणो fe वनेचरा:॥ ३१॥

“Women are generally such as have
cast decorum to the winds, are fickle, hard-
hearted and disposed to create discord.
Surely | cannot put up, O princess of the
Videha territory and daughter of Janaka,
with such words as penetrate into both my
ears like a heated steel arrow. Let all the
denizens of the forest listen to my words as
so many witnesses. (30-31)

न्यायवादी यथा वाक्यमुक्तोऽहं परुषं त्वया।
fare त्वामद्य विनश्यन्तीं यन्मामेवं विशङ्कसे॥ ३२॥
