256

मैथिलीं हन्तुमारब्ध: स्त्रीभिर्हाहाकृतं तदा।
स्त्रीणां मध्यात् समुत्पत्य तस्य भार्या दुरात्मन: ॥ ७६ ॥
वरा मन्दोदरी aa तया a प्रतिषेधित:।
उक्तश्च मधुरां aot तया स मदनार्दित:॥७७॥

“‘Sri Rama, a scion of Raghu, is
invincible, truthful of speech, valiant and a
lover of war.’ Spoken to in these harsh
words by Sita (the daughter of Janaka),
Ravana (the ten-headed monster) blazed
up all of a sudden with wrath even like a fire
deposited in a funeral pile. Rolling his cruel
eyes and raising his right fist, he proceeded
to strike the princess of Mithila. An alarm
was then raised by the women. Springing
up from their midst, the excellent wife of that
evil-minded fellow, Mandodari by name, ran
to him. By her he was restrained. Nay, the
fellow, who was smitten with love, was
spoken to by her in sweet words as follows :

(74—77)
सीतया aa fe are महेन्द्रसमविक्रम।
मया We रमस्वाद्य मद्बिशिष्टा न जानकी॥७८॥

“ ‘What purpose of yours will be served
by Sita, O lord, You, who are equal in
prowess to the mighty Indra? Pray, revel
with me today; Sita, the daughter of Janaka,
is in no way superior to me. (78)

देवगन्धर्वकन्याभिर्यक्षकन्याभिरेव al
सार्धं wat रमस्वेति सीतया fee करिष्यसि॥ ७९॥

“‘Nay, sport with the daughters of gods
and Gandharvas (celestial musicians) as
well as with those of Yaksas, my lord! You
have nothing to do with Sita.’ (79)

ततस्ताभि: समेताभिर्नारीभि: स महाबल:।
उत्थाप्य सहसा नीतो भवनं ta निशाचर:॥८०॥
“Having been raised up by those women
collectively, that ranger of the night, who
was endowed with extraordinary might, was

then abruptly conducted back to his
residence. (80)

याते तस्मिन् दशग्रीवे राक्षस्यो विकृतानना:।
tat निर्भर्त्सयामासुर्वाक्यै: क्रूरै: सुदारुणै:॥ ८१॥

« VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

“The aforesaid Ravana (the ten-headed
monster) having left, the ogresses with ugly
faces, who had been posted there to guard
Sita, threatened her in cruel and very sharp
terms. (81)
गर्जितं च तथा तासां सीतां प्राप्य निरर्थकम्॥ 22

“The daughter of Janaka, Sita, however,
accounted their effusion worth no more than
straw. Their thundering too was likewise
lost on Sita. (82)
gat गर्जितनिश्चेष्टा राक्षस्य: पिशिताशना:।
रावणाय शशंसुस्ता: सीताव्यवसितं महत्॥८३॥

“The flesh-eating ogresses, who had
become motionless due to their thundering
having proved abortive, made known to

Ravana the mighty resolve of Sita to die
rather than to submit to him. (83)

ततस्ता: सहिता: at विहताशा Freer: |
परिक्लिश्य समस्तास्ता निद्रावशमुपागता:॥ ८४॥

“Having given up all effort to persuade
Sita to submit to Ravana, now that their
hopes had been frustrated, nay, feeling
vexed, they were all collectively as well as
individually overpowered by sleep. (84)

aq चैव waar सीता भर्तृहिते रता।
विलप्य करुणं दीना प्रशुशोच सुदु:खिता॥ ८५॥

“Wailing piteously, when they had all
fallen fast asleep, Sita, who was devoted to
the good of her husband, deeply lamented,
miserable and sore distressed as she was.

(85)
तासां मध्यात् समुत्थाय त्रिजटा वाक्यमब्रवीत्।
आत्मानं खादत fad न सीतामसितेक्षणाम्॥ ८६॥
जनकस्यात्मजां साध्वीं स्नुषां दशरथस्य AI
स्वप्नो ह्यद्य AM दृष्टो दारुणो रोमहर्षण:॥ ८७॥
रक्षसां च विनाशाय भर्तुरस्या जयाय a
अलमस्मान् परित्रातुं राघवाद् राक्षसीगणम्॥ ८८॥

“Rising up from their midst, Trijata spoke
as follows : ‘Sooner feed on yourselves than
on the dark-eyed Sita, daughter of Janaka
