154

« VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

Canto XXXIV

Inferring from the suitable reply to his queries received from Sita and the
trust reposed in him by the latter, Hanuman reveals to her the role of an
envoy allotted to him by Sri Rama and repeat the inquiries made by
the two brothers about her welfare. Taking him to be Ravana
disguised as a monkey, Sita, on the other hand, reproaches him
when the latter approaches her in order to bow down at her
feet. In order to allay her fears, Hanuman for his part
discloses to her his reality as a minister of Sugriva as

well as requests her to give credence to his words

तस्यास्तद् वचनं श्रुत्वा हनूमान् हरिपुंगव:।
Gale, दु:खाभिभूताया: सान्त्वमुत्तरमब्रवीत्॥ १॥

Hearing the aforesaid speech of Sita,
who was overwhelmed with sorrow after
sorrow, Hanuman, the foremost of monkeys,
uttered the following reassuring reply: (1)

ae रामस्य संदेशाद् देवि दूतस्तवागत:।
वैदेहि कुशली wa: स wat कौशलमब्रवीत्॥ २॥

“| have sought your presence, O godlike
lady, as an envoy carrying a message sent
by Sri Rama. Sri Rama, O princess of the
Videha territory, is doing well. He has
communicated his own welfare to you. (2)

यो ब्राह्ममस्त्रं वेदांश्च dq defact az
स त्वां दाशरथी wat देवि कौशलमब्रवीत्॥ ३॥
“Nay, Sri Rama, the celebrated son of
DaSaratha, and the foremost of the knowers
of Veda, who knows the use of the mystic
missile presided over by Brahma, the creator,
as well as the import of the Vedas, O
godlike lady, has also inquired of you about
your own welfare. (3)

लक्ष्मणश्च महातेजा भर्तुस्तेऽनुचर: प्रिय:।

कृतवाञ्छोकसंतप्त: शिरसा तेऽभिवादनम्॥४॥
“Endowed with extraordinary energy,

Laksamana too, a beloved servant of your

husband, has saluted you with his head
bent low, tormented as he is with grief.” (4)

सा dat: कुशलं cat निशम्य नरसिंहयो:।
प्रतिसंहृष्टसर्वांगी हनूमन्तमथाब्रवीत्॥ ५ ॥

Thrilled all over her body to hear about
the welfare of those two lions among men,
that godlike lady now replied as follows to
Hanuman : (5)

कल्याणी बत गाथेयं लौकिकी प्रतिभाति मा।
Ua जीवन्तमानन्दो नरॆ वर्षशतादपि॥६॥

“Ah, the following popular adage that
‘joy comes to a surviving man, even though
it be at the end of a hundred years’, appears
true to me.” (6)

wat: समागमे तस्मिन् प्रीतिरुत्पादिताद्भुता।
परस्परेण चालापं विश्वस्तौ dt प्रचक्रतु:॥७॥
Consequent on that meeting of
Hanuman and Sita, a strange delight came
over them. And restored to confidence, the
two began to converse with one another. (7)

तस्यास्तद् वचनं श्रुत्वा हनूमान् मारुतात्मज:।
सीताया: शोकतप्ताया: समीपमुपचक्रमे॥८॥
Hearing the aforesaid reply of Sita,
who was stricken with grief, Hanuman, son
of the wind-god, endeavoured to draw nearer
to her. (8)

यथा यथा समीपं स हनूमानुपसर्पति।
तथा तथा रावणं सा तं सीता परिशङ्कते॥९॥
The nearer did the celebrated Hanuman
draw to her, the more did that Sita suspect
him to be Ravana. (9)
