# YUDDHAKANDA #

तस्य वर्म च पुस्फोट संजज्ञे चापि शोणितम्।
तस्य मुष्टिर्महावेग: प्रतिजघ्नेऽस्थिमण्डले॥ ८७॥

The armour of the monkey was split
asunder and blood too gushed forth from
his chest. The fist of the ogre, which
descended with great ferocity struck against
the framework of bones of Sugriva. (87)

तस्य वेगेन तत्रासीत् तेज: प्रज्वलितं महत्।
वज्रनिष्पेषसंजाता ज्वाला मेरोर्यथा fit: cen

Due to the force exerted by the fist
shot forth in that region a mighty flame
resembling the fire that bursts up on Mount
Meru from a stroke of lightning. (88)

a तत्राभिहतस्तेन सुग्रीवो वानरर्षभ:।

मुष्टिं संवर्तयामास वज्रकल्पं महाबल:॥८९॥
Struck on the bosom by Kumbha, that

bull among the monkeys, Sugriva, who was

endowed with extraordinary might, clenched

his fist, which was hard as adamant. (89)

अर्चि:सहस्रविकचरविमण्डलवर्चसम् ।
स मुष्टिं पातयामास कुम्भस्योरसि वीर्यवान्॥ Fo
The powerful Sugriva brought the fist,
which shone like the solar disc encircled by
a thousand rays, down on the breast of
Kumbha. (90)
ad तेन प्रहारेण विह्वलो भृशपीडित:।
Prada dar कुम्भो गतार्चिरिव पावक:॥९१॥

633

Severely tormented by that blow,
Kumbha, for his part, who was out of his
wits, forthwith collapsed like a fire whose
brightness had disappeared. (91)

मुष्टिनाभिहतस्तेन निपपाताशु राक्षस:।
लोहिताङ्ग इवाकाशाद् दीप्तरश्मिर्यदृच्छया॥ ९२॥

Struck with his fist by Sugriva, the
ogre instantly fell down even as _ the
planet Mars of brilliant rays would drop
down from the heavens by the will of
Providence. (92)

कुम्भस्य पततो wo भग्नस्योरसि मुष्टिना।
al रुद्राभिपन्नस्य यथा रूपं गवां पते:॥९३॥

The body of Kumbha, while he was
falling when wounded in the chest by the
fist of Sugriva, shone like the form of the
sun-god overpowered by Rudra, the god of
destruction. (93)

तस्मिन् हते भीमपराक्रमेण
प्लवंगमानामृषभेण युद्धे।
Ta सशैला सवना चचाल
wae च रक्षांस्यधिकं विवेश॥ ९४॥
When he was killed in an encounter by
Sugriva (the foremost of monkeys) of terrible
prowess, the earth with its mountains and

forests shook and fear seized the ogres all
the more. (94)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये FERS षट्सप्ततितम: सर्ग: ॥ ७६ Il

Thus ends Canto Seventy-six in the Yuddhakanda of the glorious Ramayana of
Valmiki, the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

Canto LXXVII
Nikumbha’s death at the hands of Hanuman

निकुम्भो भ्रातरं दृष्टवा सुग्रीवेण निपातितम्।

Seeing his elder brother, Kumbha, struck

प्रदहन्निव lat SARA Il 211 | down by Sugriva, Nikumbha gazed on the
