* AYODHYAKANDA +

“Possessed of a peerless countenance,
you shall by your face vying with the moon
attain a foremost position among women,
behaving with pride in the midst of my
enemies, i.e., CO-wives. (51)

तवापि कुब्जा: कुब्जाया: सर्वाभरणभूषिता:।
पादौ परिचरिष्यन्ति यथैव त्वं सदा FANG

“Adorned with all kinds of ornaments
other hunchbacked women will knead your
feet, hunchbacked even though you are,
precisely as you always do mine.” (52)

इति प्रशस्यमाना सा कैकेयीमिदमब्रवीत्।
शयानां शयने शुभ्रे वेद्यामग्निशिखामिव॥ 43

Being flattered thus, Manthara spoke
as follows to Kaikeyi, lying on a spotless
bed even like a sacred flame burning on an
altar : (53)

गतोदके सेतुबन्धो न कल्याणि विधीयते।
उत्तिष्ठं कुरु कल्याणं राजानमनुदर्शय॥५४॥

“No dam is constructed across a
stream when its water has already flowed
past, O blessed lady ! (It will be no use your
asking a boon of the Emperor when Rama
has already been installed as Prince Regent).
Therefore, get up, work your salvation and
show yourself to the king in an angry mood.”

(54)
तथा प्रोत्साहिता eat गत्वा मन्थरया सह।
क्रोधागारं विशालाक्षी सौभाग्यमदगर्विता॥ ५५॥
अनेकशतसाहस्रं मुक्काहारुं TST
अवमुच्य वरार्हाणि शुभान्याभरणानि च॥५६॥
तदा हेमोपमा तत्र कुब्जावाक्यवशंगता।
संविश्य भूमौ कैकेयी मन्थरामिदमब्रवीत्॥५७॥

Repairing alongwith Manthara to the
sulking-chamber, when incited thus by the
latter, and casting away her pearl necklace,
costing many lakhs, and other beautiful and
costly ornaments, and lying down on the floor,
the large-eyed Queen Kaikeyi, an excellent
woman, who possessed a golden complexion,
and was puffed up with pride born of
comeliness and was dominated by the words

321

of the hunchback, then spoke as follows to,
Manthara on that spot : (55—57)
इह वा At Wat Hor नृपायावेदयिष्यसि।
वनं तु Waa प्राप्ते भरत: प्राप्स्यते क्षितिम्॥ ५८ ।।
“Either on Rama, a scion of Raghu,
having gone to the forest as an exile,
Bharata will obtain the kingdom of the earth
or you shall report me dead on this very
spot to the apathetic king, O hunchback !
(58)
सुवर्णेन न मे ह्यर्थो न रत्नैर्न च भोजनै:।
एष मे जीवितस्यान्तो रामो यद्यभिषिच्यते॥ ५९॥

“For | have nothing to do with gold nor
with precious stones nor with meals any
longer. This will be the end of my life if
Rama is installed as Prince Regent.” (59)

अथो पुनस्तां महिषीं महीक्षितो

उवाच कुब्जा भरतस्य मातरं
हितं वचो राममुपेत्य चाहितम्॥ go I

The hunchback then tendered once
more to the king’s spouse and Bharata’s
mother in most cruel words counsel which
was friendly to her and hostile with reference
to Rama: (60)
प्रपत्स्यते राज्यमिदं fe राघवो

यदि ध्रुवं त्वं ससुता च तप्स्यसे।
ततो fe कल्याणि यतस्व तत् तथा
यथा सुतस्ते भरतोऽभिषेक्ष्यते॥ ६१ ॥

“If Rama, a scion of Raghu, actually
inherits this kingdom, you will surely suffer
with your son. Therefore, O blessed lady,
take adequate steps to ensure that your
son, Bharata, may be installed as Prince
Regent !” (61)
तथातिविद्धा महिषीति कुब्जया

समाहता वागिषुभिर्मुहुर्मुहु:।
विधाय हस्तौ हृदयेऽतिविस्मिता
Vota Host कुपिता पुन: TA: । ६२॥

Repeatedly struck by the hunchback

again and again with shafts in the shape of
