* AYODHYAKANDA +

charioteer cum minister of very long standing.
Gratify him with presents of costly jewels,
articles of wearing apparel and riches and
even so with animals of all kinds such as
female goats and buffaloes and a thousand
cows. Besides, here are many religious
students carrying staffs, as a distinguishing
mark of celibacy, and studying the Katha
and Kalapa recensions of the Vedas, who,
being ever engaged in the study of the
Vedas, do not practise any other austerities
in the shape of fasting etc., but are
nevertheless held in great esteem even by
the great for their devotion to study, are
inactive in the sense that they do not move
out for begging alms and yet hanker for
delicacies. (17—19)

तेषामशीतियानानि रत्नपूर्णानि दापय।
शालिवाहसहस्रं च द्वे शते भद्रकांस्तथा॥ oll

“Cause them to be given eighty camels
loaded with jewels, a thousand bullocks
carrying loads of rice and, even so, two
hundred bullocks useful for cultivation. (20)

व्यञ्जनार्थं च सौमित्रे गोसहस्रमुपाकुरु।
तेषां सहस्रं सौमित्रे प्रत्येकं सम्प्रदापय॥ २१॥

“Gift a thousand cows more 10
Brahmanas maintaining the sacred fire for
yielding milk products (curds and ghee etc.,
used for adding flavour to food), O Laksmana!
A large multitude of celibates, willing to
marry on the impending expiry of their vow
of celibacy, waits upon Kausalya, my
mother: see that they are given a thousand
cows or gold coins each so as to enable
them to pay the preceptor’s fee and defray
the nuptial expenses, O son of Sumitra !

(21)

अम्बा यथा नो नन्देच्च कौसल्या मम दक्षिणाम्।
aan द्विजातींस्तान् सर्वाल्लंक्ष्मणार्चय सर्वश: ॥ २२॥
“Nay, honour all the aforesaid

Brahmanas in everyway so liberally that our
mother, Kausalya, may rejoice to see my

415

gift to the celibates depending on her, O
Laksmana !” (22)

तत: पुरुषशार्दूलस्तद् धनं लक्ष्मण: स्वयम्।
यथोक्तं ब्राह्मणेन्द्राणामददाद् धनदो यथा॥ २३॥

Like Kubera, the bestower of riches,
Laksmana, a veritable tiger among men,
thereupon distributed that wealth of Sri Rama
among the foremost of the Brahmanas as
instructed by him. (23)

अथाब्रवीद् बाष्पगलांस्तिष्ठतश्चोपजीविन: |
स प्रदाय बह्रुद्रव्यमेकैकस्योपजीवनम्॥ २४॥

Having bestowed abundant wealth,
enough to sustain each one of them for the
entire period of his impending exile into the
forest, Sri Rama then spoke as follows to
his dependants standing with tears blocking
their throat : (24)

लक्ष्मणस्य च यद् aya गृहं च यदिदं मम।
अशून्यं कार्यमेकैकं यावदागमनं AA R&I
“Till my return from the forest the house
which belongs to Laksmana and also this
house which is now occupied by me should
always be guarded by each one of you by
turn.” (25)
इत्युक्त्वा oad wa जनं तमुपजीविनम्।
उवाचेदं धनाध्यक्षॆ धनमानीयतां TN २६॥
Having instructed thus all his
dependants, distressed as they were at the
thought of his exile, Sri Rama spoke as
follows to his treasurer, “Let my wealth be
brought here.” (26)

ततोऽस्य धनमाजह्रु: सर्व एवोपजीविन:।

a राशि: सुमहांस्तत्र दर्शनीयो ह्यदृश्यत॥ roi
All his dependants thereupon brought

his wealth before him. That huge heap of

wealth collected there really presented a
splendid spectacle. (27)

dd: स पुरुषव्याघ्रस्तद् धनं सहलक्ष्मण:।
द्विजेभ्यो बालवृद्धेभ्य: कृपणेभ्यो ह्यदापयत्॥ २८ i

With the help of Laksmana that tiger
