« KISKINDHAKANDA +

1075

Canto XXXVI

When Laksmana gets pacified by the conciliatory words of Tara, Sugriva
glorifies Sri Rama and requests Laksmana to forgive his delinquency.
Regaining his normal self, Laksmana too craves the forgiveness
of Sugriva for the harsh language employed by him
in a fit of anger and asks him to approach
ऽत Rama and beg his pardon

इत्युक्तस्तारया वाक्यं प्रश्रितं धर्मसंहितम्।
मृढदुस्वभाव: सौमित्रि: प्रतिजग्राह तद्वच:॥ १॥
Spoken to by Tara in these polite words
consistent with righteousness, Laksmana
(son of Sumitra), who was gentle by nature,
received those words with approbation. (1)

तस्मिन् प्रतिगृहीते तु वाक्ये हरिगणेश्वर:।
लक्ष्मणात् सुमहत्ररासं वस्त्रं क्लिन्नमिवात्यजत्॥ २॥
The aforesaid submission of Tara having
been received with a nod, Sugriva, the ruler
of hordes of monkeys, for his part shed his
very great fear of Laksmana as one would
discard one’s wet clothes. (2)
Wa: कण्ठगतं माल्यं fat बहुगुणं महत्।
चिच्छेद विमदश्चासीत् सुग्रीवो वानरेश्चर:।॥ ३॥
Thereupon Sugriva, the lord of monkeys,
tore off the wonderful and valuable garland
capable of yielding various enjoyments, worn
round his neck and was rid of his vanity
thereby. (3)
a लक्ष्मणं भीमबलं सर्ववानरसत्तम:।
अब्रवीत् प्रश्रितं वाक्यं सुग्रीव: सम्प्रहर्षयन्॥४॥
The aforesaid Sugriva, the foremost of
all the mokeys, then addressed the following
humble submission to Laksmana_ of
redoubtable might, thus causing him supreme
gratification : (4)
प्रणष्टा श्रीश्च कोर्तिश्च कपिराज्यं च शाश्वतम्।
रामप्रसादात् सौमित्रे पुनश्चाप्तमिदं मया॥५॥
“My fortune and fame, too, as well as
the lasting rulership of monkeys, which had

been lost forever, all this has been regained
by me through the grace of Sri Rama alone,
O son of Sumitra ! (5)

क: शक्तस्तस्य देवस्य ख्यातस्य स्वेन कर्मणा।
west प्रतिकुर्वीत अंशेनापि नृपात्मज॥६॥

“What powerful being can repay even
in part, O prince, that kind of service on the
part of the aforesaid divine personage, Sri
Rama, who is known by his own exploits?

(6)
सीतां प्राप्स्यति धर्मात्मा वधिष्यति च रावणम्।
सहायमात्रेण मया राघव: स्वेन तेजसा॥७॥

“With me as his mere companion, Sri
Rama (a scion of Raghu), whose mind is
set on virtue, will recover Sita and dispose
of Ravana by dint of his own fiery energy.

(7)

सहायकृत्यं fe तस्य at GA महाद्रुमा:।
गिरिश्च age da बाणेनैकेन afta uci

“What need is there for an assistant to
Sri Rama, by whom seven giant trees as
well as the mountain on which they stood
as also the earth, forming the base of the
mountain, were pierced with a single arrow?

(8)

धनुर्विस्फारमाणस्य यस्य शब्देन लक्ष्मण।
सशैला कम्पिता भूमि: सहायै: किं नु तस्य TUS
“In fact what help on earth can be
rendered by associates to Sri Rama, at the
twang of whose bow, while he was stretching
it, the earth with its mountains shook, O
Laksmana? (9)
