+ UTTARAKANDA +

स राजा dda: ww देवपुरोषमम्।
निवेशयामास तदा अभ्याशे गौतमस्य TUN

“The powerful king founded a city, like
the city of the gods, near the hermitage of
Gautama. (5)

पुरस्य सुकृतं नाम वैजयन्तमिति श्रुतम्।
निवेशं aa राजर्षिर्निमिश्चक्रे महायशा:॥६॥

“Vaijayanta was the good and famous
name given to the city after the name of
Indra’s palace, where the highly renowned
sage-like king built his abode. (6)

wa बुद्धि: समुत्पन्ना निवेश्य सुमहापुरम्।
art दीर्घसत्रेण faq: प्रह्लादयन् मन:॥७॥
“After founding the big city it occurred
to him that he should perform a long term
sacrifice that would make his father happy.
(7)

तत: पितरमामन्त्य seat fe मनो: सुतम्।
वसिष्ठं वरयामास ud ब्रह्मर्षिसत्तमम्॥८॥

अनन्तरं स राजर्षिर्निमिरिक्ष्वाकुनन्दन:।
state चैव wt da तपोनिधिम्॥९॥

“Then, having obtained the permission
of his father, Iksvaku, son of Manu, the
sage-like king Nimi, a source of delight to
Iksvaku, first of all chose Vasistha, the
best of Brahmarsis, as his principal priest.
Subsequently he invited Atri, Angira and Bhrgu,
who had austerities for their treasure. (8-9)

तमुवाच वसिष्ठस्तु निमिं राजर्षिसत्तमम्।
वृतोऽहं पूर्वमिन्द्रेण अन्तरं प्रतिपालय॥१०॥

“But Vasistha said to Nimi, the best of
sage-like kings, “I have already been chosen
by Indra, so please wait for sometime until
Indra’s sacrifice concludes.” (10)

अनन्तरं महाविप्रो गौतम: | We
वसिष्ठोऽपि महातेजा इन्द्रयज्ञमथाकरोत्॥११॥
“Later on (after Vasistha had left) the
great Brahmana Gautama undertook the task
of officiating as principal priest, at Nimi’s
sacrifice. And majestic Vasistha officiated
as priest at Indra’s sacrifice. (11)

1019

निमिस्तु राजा विप्रांस्तान् समानीय नराधिप:।
अयजद्धिमवत्पाश्वे स्वपुरस्य समीपत:।
पञ्चवर्षसहस्राणि राजा दीक्षामथाकरोत्॥१२॥

“Inviting the Brahmanas (viz., Atri and
others) king Nimi, the lord of men, however,
performed the sacrifice near his city
Vaijayanta, in the vicinity of the Himalayas.
The King took the initiation of sacrifice for
five thousand years. (12)

इन्द्रयज्ञावसाने तु वसिष्ठो भगवानृषि:।
सकाशमागतो राज्ञो हौत्रं कर्तुमनिन्दित:॥१३॥

तदन्तरमथापश्यद् गौतमेनाभिपूरितम्।
कोपेन महताविष्टो वसिष्ठो ब्रह्मण: सुत:॥१४॥
“After the conclusion of Indra’s sacrifice
the blameless, holy sage Vasistha came
back to king Nimi) to act as_ priest.
He found that the intervening period
(set by Vasistha for the king to wait) was
taken up by Gautama. At this Vasistha,
son of Brahma, was very much annoyed.
(183—14)

स राज्ञो दर्शनाकाङ्क्षी qed समुपाविशत्।
तस्मिन्नहनि राजर्षिर्निद्रयापहृतो भृशम्॥१५॥

ततो मन्युर्वसिष्ठस्य प्रादुरासीन्महात्मन:।
अदर्शनेन राजर्षेरव्याहर्तुमुपचक्रमे॥ १६॥

“In order to meet the king, he sat there
for sometime. That day, however, the king
was very much overtaken by sleep. Being
unable to meet the king, the high-souled
Vasistha became angry and_ began
addressing the king as follows: (15-16)

यस्मात् त्वमन्यं व्रृतवान् मामवज्ञाय पार्थिव।
चेतनेन विनाभूतो देहस्ते पार्थिवैष्यति॥ eon

“O King! since, disregarding me, you
chose someone else as Officiating priest
your body will be devoid of consciousness.”

(17)

ad: प्रबुद्धो राजा तु श्रुत्वा शापमुदाहृतम्।
ब्रह्मयोनिमथोवाच स राजा क्रोधमूर्छछित:।॥ १८॥

“On waking up the king heard about
the curse pronounced by the sage and
