# YUDDHAKANDA #

Accompanied by the other Brahmanas
(members of the priestly class), the celebrated
Sage Vasistha, who was fully active though
aged, thereupon prevailed upon Sri Rama
duly to occupy alongwith Sita, his consort,
the seat made of precious stones. (59)

वसिष्ठो वामदेवश्च जाबालिरथ काश्यप:।
कात्यायन: सुयज्ञश्च गौतमो विजयस्तथा॥६०॥
अभ्यषिञ्चन्नरव्याघ्रं प्रसन्नेन सुगन्धिना।
सलिलेन सहस्राक्षं वसवो वासवं यथा॥६१॥

Sages Vasistha and Vamadeva as also
Jabali, KaSyapa (a scion of KaSsyapa),
Katyayana and Suyajfia (son of Vasistha),
Gautama and Vijaya caused Sri Rama (the
foremost of men) to be consecrated with
transparent and fragrant water even as the
eight Vasus consecrated the thousand-eyed
Indra. (60-61)

ऋत्विग्भिर्ब्रह्मणै: yet कन्याभिर्मन्त्रिभिस्तथा।
योथैश्चैवाभ्यषिञ्चस्ते ame: सनैगमै:।॥६२॥

They got him consecrated first by the
Brahmanas officiating as priests at the
ceremony of consecration and then in order
by sixteen virgins and ministers as well as
by warriors, who felt exceedingly rejoiced,

followed by merchants. (62)
सर्वौषधिरसैश्चापि दैवतैर्नभसि स्थितै:।
चतुर्भिर्लोकपालैश्च सर्वैर्देवैश्च ard: esi

Nay, the sages also allowed him to be
sprinkled with the sap of all kinds of medicinal
herbs by all the four gods, the guardians of
the world, standing in the air, as well as by
all the other gods assembled there. (63)
अभिषिक्त: पुरा येन मनुस्तं दीप्ततेजसम्॥६४॥
तस्यान्ववाये राजान: HATS, येनाभिषेचिता:।
सभायां हेमक्लृप्तायां शोभितायां महाधनै: 1 ६५॥
रत्नैर्नानाविधैश्चैव चित्रितायां सुशोभनै:।
नानारत्नमये पीठे कल्पयित्वा यथाविधि॥ ६६॥
किरीटेन dd: पश्चाद् वसिष्ठेन महात्मना।
ऋत्विग्भिर्भूषणैश्चैव समयोक्ष्यत राघव:॥६७॥

839

There was a crown studded with
precious stones and fashioned by Brahma,
the creator, at the beginning of creation,
with which the seventh Manu (known by
the name of Vaivaswata, so called because
he was procreated by the sun-god) was
adorned when consecrated on the throne
and with which (afterwards) the kings who
followed in his line were also successively
invested when consecrated. After installing
Sri Rama, who was clothed with a dazzling
splendour, with due ceremony on a throne
made of various precious stones in the
council-hall, which was constituted of gold,
was graced with abundant riches and studded
with most charming jewels of various kinds,
the scion of Raghu was later duly adorned
with that crown as well as with jewels by
the high-souled Vasistha and other priests
Officiating at the consecration ceremony.

(64—67)
छत्रं तस्य च जग्राह WAS: पाण्डुरं शुभम्।
vad च वालव्यजनं सुग्रीवो वानरेश्वर:।॥ ६८॥
sat चन्द्रसंकाशं राक्षसेन्द्रो विभीषण:।
मालां ज्वलन्तीं वपुषा काञ्चनीं शतपुष्कराम्॥ ६९॥
राघवाय ददौ वायुर्वासवेन प्रचोदित:।
सर्वरत्नसमायुक्तं मणिभिश्च विभूषितम्॥७०॥
Trent नरेन्द्रय ददौ शक्रप्रचोदित:।
प्रजगुर्देवगन्धर्वा ननृतुश्चाप्सरोगणा: ॥ ७१ ॥
अभिषेके तदर्हस्य der रामस्य धीमत:।
भूमि: सस्यवती चैव फलवन्तश्च पादपा:॥७२॥
गन्धवन्ति च पुष्पाणि aya राघवोत्सवे।
सहस्रशतमश्वानां mt च गवां तथा॥७३॥
ददौ शतवृषान् पूर्वं द्विजेभ्यो मनुजर्षभ:।
त्रिंशत्कोटीर्हिरण्यस्य ब्राह्मणेभ्यो ददौ पुन:॥ ७४॥
नानाभरणवस्त्राणि महार्हाणि च राघव:।
अर्करश्मिप्रतीकाशां काञ्चनीं मणिविग्रहाम्॥ ७५॥
सुग्रीवाय asi feat प्रायच्छन्मनुजाधिप:।

वैदूर्यमयचित्रे च चन्द्ररश्मिविभूषिते॥७६॥
मणिप्रवरजुष्टं तं मुक्ताहारमनुत्तमम्॥७७॥
