* AYODHYAKANDA +

299

ade: सर्ग:
Canto IV

Apprehending obstruction of Sri Rama’s installation from an ominous
dream, Dagaratha summons Sri Rama immediately and asks him
to observe certain sacred vows preliminary to installation
alongwith Sita. Bidding him go by his father, Sri Rama
enters his mother’s gynaeceum and, after receiving
her blessings, retires alongwith Sita, already
present there, to his own palace

गतेष्वथ TAT ya: Uy सह मन्तिभि:।
मन्त्रयित्वा ततश्चक्रे gaa: a निश्चयम्॥१॥
श्व एव पुष्यो भविता श्वोऽभिषेच्यस्तु मे Aa: |
Ta राजीवपत्राक्षो युवराज sit प्रभु:॥ २॥

Conferring with his counsellors once
more, the citizens having dispersed, the
celebrated and powerful monarch DaSaratha,
who knew the rules regarding the time and
place of a ceremony, thereupon at once
arrived at the decision that since the
constellation Pusya was going to be in the
ascendant the day immediately following,
his eldest son, Sri Rama, whose eyes
resembled the petals of a lotus, needs must
be installed as Prince Regent the very next
(1-2)

Entering the inner apartments
immediately afterwards, King DaSaratha then
said to Sumantra, “Get Rama here once
more.” (3)

रामस्य भवनं vit राममानयितुं पुन:॥४॥
Bowing to his command, Sumantra,
the charioteer-minister, for his part hastened
to Sri Rama’s palace once more in order to
bring him again to the Emperor’s presence.
(4)

द्वा:स्थैरावेदितं तस्य रामायागमनं पुन:।
श्रुत्वैव चापि रामस्तं Wa शङ्कान्वितोऽभवत्॥ ७५ ॥

His renewed call was reported to Sri
Rama by the porters and Sri Rama too was
filled with apprehension the moment he heard
that Sumantra had arrived for the second
time. (5)
Wasa चैनं त्वरितो wa वचनमब्रवीत्।
aarp ते भूयस्तद्ब्रूह्यशेषत:॥६॥

Hastily calling him in, Sri Rama spoke
to him as follows : “Please state unreservedly
that which is sought to be achieved through
your second visit?” (6)

तमुवाच dd: सूतो राजा wat द्रष्टुमिच्छति।
श्रुत्वा प्रमाणं at त्वं गमनायेतराय वा॥७॥

Sumantra, the charioteer-minister, then
submitted to him, “The Emperor desires to
see you. Hearing my submission it is for
you to decide whether you should proceed
to your father or do otherwise.” (7)

इति सूतवच: strat रामोऽपि त्वरयान्वित:।
wet राजभवनं पुनर्द्रष्टुं नरेश्वरम्॥८॥

Hearing the aforesaid message
delivered by Sumantra (the charioteer-
minister) Sri Rama for his part hastily called
at the royal palace in order to see the
Emperor once more. (8)
तं श्रुत्वा समनुप्राप्त रामं दशरथो Fa:
प्रवेशयामास गृहं faa: प्रियमुत्तमम्॥९॥

Hearing that Sri Rama had duly arrived,
Emperor Dasaratha bade him enter his
chamber, keen as he was to announce
something most valuable and agreeable.(9)
