988

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

Canto XVI
Spurning the advice of Tara and reproaching her, Vali goes forth to meet
Sugriva and there ensues a fierce encounter between the two brothers.
When, however, Sugriva is found losing ground, Vali is struck
with an arrow by Sri Rama and he falls to the ground

act निर्भर्त्सयामास art चेदमब्रवीत्॥१॥

Vali reproached the aforesaid Tara, who
was speaking as stated before and whose
countenance shone brightly as the moon,
the suzerain lord of the stars, and replied as
follows : (1)

गर्जतोऽस्य सुसंरब्धं wld: शत्रोर्विशेषत:।
went केनापि कारणेन वरानने॥२॥

“Wherefore shall | tolerate the arrogance
of this younger brother of mine, particularly
when he is hostile to me—thundering, as
he does, O lady of charming countenance?

(2)
अधर्षितानां शूराणां समरेष्वनिवर्तिनाम्।
धर्षणामर्षणं भीरु मरणादतिरिच्यते॥ 3

“Toleration of intrusion by the enemy
on the part of heroes, who have never been
overpowered and have never retreated in
combats, is worse than death, O timid one !

(3)
सोढुं न च समर्थोऽहं युद्धकामस्य संयुगे।
सुग्रीवस्य च संरम्भं हीनग्रीवस्य गर्जितम्॥४॥

“Nay, | am not able to tolerate the
arrogance, much less the roar, of the weak-
necked Sugriva, who seeks an encounter
on the battlefield with me. (4)

न च कार्यो विषादस्ते राघवं ult मत्कृते।
धर्मज्ञश्च कृतज्ञश्च wet पापं करिष्यति॥५॥
“Nor should any anxiety be entertained
by you from the side of Sri Rama on my
account. How can Sri Rama—who knows
what is right and cognizes his duty—

perpetrate sin (in the form of killing one who
is innocent)? (5)

निवर्तस्व सह cit: कथं भूयोऽनुगच्छसि।
सौहृदं दर्शितं तावन्मयि भक्तिस्त्वया कृता॥६॥
“Please return with the other ladies.
Why do you still follow me? Affection has
been shown to such an extent and service
rendered to me by you. (6)
प्रतियोत्स्याम्यहं गत्वा सुग्रीवं जहि सम्भ्रमम्।
ad चास्य विनेष्यामि न च प्राणैर्वियोक्ष्यते॥७॥
“Going out | shall give battle to Sugriva;
pray, give up all perplexity. Nay, | shall take

away his pride, yet he will not be rid of his
life. (7)

अहं ह्याजिस्थितस्यास्य करिष्यामि यदीप्सितम्।
वृक्षैर्मुष्टिप्रहारैश्च पीडित: प्रतियास्यति॥८॥

“So long as he stays on the battlefield
| shall do what is sought by him. Tormented
with the strokes of trees and the blows of
my fists, he will retreat. (8)

न 8 गर्बितमायस्तं सहिष्यति दुरात्मवान्।
कृतं at सहायत्वं दर्शितं सौहृदं मयि॥९॥
“The evil-minded fellow will not be able
to withstand my haughtiness and tempo.
Assistance by way of friendly advice and

sage counsel has been rendered and
affection shown to me by you, O Tara! (9)

शापितासि मम प्राणैर्निवर्तस्व जनेन च।

अलं जित्वा निवर्तिष्ये तमहं wat रणे॥१०॥
“You are hereby, adjured by my life:

pray, return with your retinue; while | shall

return only after conquering my said brother
in an encounter.” (10)
