494

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA +

षट्पञ्चाश: सर्ग:
Canto LVI

Hanuman kills Akampana

aq Gea सुमहत् कर्म Hd वानरसत्तमै:।
क्रोधमाहारयामास युधि तीव्रमकम्पन:॥ १॥
Witnessing that very great exploit
executed by the foremost of monkeys,
Akampana exhibited violent rage on the
field of battle. (1)

क्रोधमूच्छितरूपस्तु धुन्वन् परमकार्मुकम्।
Gea तु कर्म शत्रूणां सारथिं वाक्यमब्रवीत्॥ २॥

Assuming an air wild with anger, nay,
brandishing his excellent bow, on witnessing
the exploit of his enemies, Akampana for
his part spoke as follows to his charioteer:

(2)
तत्रैव तावत् त्वरितो रथं wot सारथे।
Ud च बलिनो घ्नन्ति सुबहून् राक्षसान् रणे॥ ३॥

“Drive my chariot first of all, O charioteer,
to that place alone, inasmuch as these
mighty monkeys are exterminating very many
ogres in combat. (3)

Ud च बलवन्तो वा भीमकोपाश्च AMT: |
द्रुमशैलप्रहरणास्तिष्ठन्ति प्रमुखे मम॥४॥

“The yonder monkeys are mighty, as
also terrible in their wrath, too. Nay, using
trees and crags for their weapons, they
stand right in front of me. (4)

wd: प्रमथितं wd रक्षसां qvad बलम्॥५॥
“| really wish to exterminate these
monkeys, who boast of their warfare. The
entire army of ogres is seen completely
crushed by them.” (5)
wa: प्रचलिताश्वेन रथेन रथिनां at
हरीनभ्यपतद् दूराच्छरजालैरकम्पन: ॥ ६ ॥
Mounted on his chariot drawn by fast-
moving horses, Akampana, the foremost of

car-warriors, then assailed the monkeys
with showers of arrows from a distance. (6)

न tad वानरा: शेकु: किं पुनर्योद्भुमाहवे।
sear: सर्व एवाभिदुद्रुवु:॥७॥

The monkeys could not even maintain
their position, much less fight on the field of
battle. Broken by the darts of Akampana,
all took to their heels before him without
exception. (7)

तान् मृत्युवशमापन्नानकम्पनशरानुगान्।
समीक्ष्य हनुमाञ्ज्ञातीनुपतस्थे महाबल:॥८॥

Observing his kith and kin fallen under
the sway of Death when pursued by
Akampana’s_ shafts, Hanuman, who was
endowed with extraordinary might
approached Akampana. (8)
तं महाप्लवगं geal Wa ते प्लवगर्षभा:।
समेत्य समरे वीरा: संहृष्टा: पर्यवारयन्॥९॥

Getting together once more on the field
of battle on seeing that mighty monkey, all
those gallant leaders of monkeys (Kumuda,
Nala and others) surrounded him on all
sides, fully delighted. (9)

व्यवस्थितं हनूमन्तं ते दृष्ट्वा प्लवगर्षभा:।
बभूवुर्बलवन्तो हि बलवन्तमुपाश्रिता:॥१०॥

Seeing Hanuman firmly established
on the battlefield, those aforesaid jewels
among monkeys, became strong again,
having taken shelter under a powerful leader.

(10)
अकम्पनस्तु शैलाभं हनूमन्तमवस्थितम्।
: शरैरभिववर्ष ह॥११॥

Akampana for his part assailed with a
hail of arrows Hanuman, who looked like a
mountain, even as the mighty Indra would
