+ UTTARAKANDA +

desire of the pregnant woman (that has to be
fulfilled). Do not be dejected, here is that
beautiful and holy penance-grove of the
Brahmarsis, (where dwells) the famous
Brahmarsi Valmiki, who was a close friend of
my father, king DaSaratha and is the foremost

1005

among ascetics, approaching him for shelter,
do dwell observing fasts and attached to Rama.
Keeping your loyalty to your husband and
placing Sri Rama in your heart forever, O
Lady, in this manner your greater welfare shall
be achieved.” (13—18)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये उत्तरकाण्डे सप्तचत्वारिंश: सर्ग: ॥ ४७॥

Thus ends Canto Forty-seven in the Uttarakanda of the glorious Ramayana of Valmiki,
the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

Canto XLVI

Sita’s plaintive utterance, Her message to Sri Rama,
Laksmana’s departure and the wail of Sita

लक्ष्मणस्य वच: श्रुत्वा दारुणं जनकात्मजा।
ut विषादमागम्य act निपपात ह॥१॥
Sita (the daughter of the lord of Videhas)

hearing the dreadful words of Laksmana fell
on the ground in utter despondency. (1)

सा मुहूर्तमिवासंज्ञा बाष्पपर्याकुलेक्षणा।
लक्ष्मणं दीनया वाचा उवाच जनकात्मजा॥ २॥

That daughter of Janaka, Sita, swooned
away as if for a moment and then with tears
filled in her eyes, spoke these miserable
words to Laksmana. (2)

मामिकेयं तनुर्नूनं Pet दु:खाय लक्ष्मण।
धात्रा यस्यास्तथा मेऽद्य दु:खमूर्ति: प्रदृश्यते॥ ३॥

“This mortal frame of mine was indeed
created by the creator for sorrow, O
Laksmana, and hence seems today the
very embodiment of sorrow. (3)
fe नु पापं pd पूर्वं को वा दारैर्वियोजित:।
याहं शुद्धसमाचारा त्यक्ता What सती॥४॥

“What sin was committed by me, who
indeed was separated from his spouse, that
| should be forsaken by the king, although
of good conduct. (4)

पुराहमाश्रमे वासं रामपादानुवर्तिनी।
अनुरुध्यापि सौमित्रे दु:खे च परिवर्तिनी॥५॥

सा कथं ह्याश्रमे सौम्य वत्स्यामि विजनीकृता।
आख्यास्यामि च कस्याहं दु:खं दु:खपरायणा॥ ६॥
fe नु वक्ष्यामि मुनिषु ad चासत्कृतं प्रभो।
कस्मिन् वा कारणे त्यक्ता राघवेण महात्मना॥ ७॥

“Formerly, following the foot-steps of
Rama, | have even requested Rama for
residence in the hermitages, although | was
in misery. Now then how can | live in the
hermitage all alone : O Lord, what shall | say;
when enquired by the ascetics, about my
misdoings, or about what caused the great
scion of the Raghu to forsake me. (5—7)

न खल्वद्यैव सौमित्रे जीवितं जाह्नवीजले।
त्यजेयं राजवंशस्तु भर्तुर्मे परिहास्यते॥८॥
“| cannot give up my life (drowning
myself) in the waters of the daughter of
Jahnu (Ganga) for by that the royal family of
my husband will be broken (in succession
for the descendant to be born will perish).
(8)

यथाज्ञं pe सौमित्रे त्यज्य at दु:खभागिनीम्।
निदेशे स्थीयतां Ua: AUT ae वचो मम॥९॥

“O son of Sumitra, do as you are
ordered to do, forsake me, the miserable
one, obey the orders of the king, but listen
to what | say now: (9)
