« KISKINDHAKANDA +

1031

Canto XX VII
Arrived at a cave of Mount Prasravana and seeing the place suitable
for his residence, Sri Rama takes up his abode there. One day
when he is seized with anguish caused by his separation
from Sita, Laksmana comforts him

अभिषिक्ते तु सुग्रीवे प्रविष्टे वानरे गुहाम्।
आजगाम सह wat wa: प्रस्रवणं गिरिम्॥ १॥
शार्दूलमृगसंघुष्टं सिंहैर्भीमरवैर्वृतम्।
न।न।ग्॰!ल्मलताग्!ढ् बहुपादपसङ्कृम्।। २॥
ऋक्षवानरगोपुच्छैर्मार्जारैश्च निषेवितम्।
मेघराशिनिभं शैलं नित्यं शुचिकरं शिवम्॥ ३॥
The monkey chief, Sugriva, having
been installed on the throne of Kiskindha
and having withdrawn to the cave comprising
the town, Sri Rama for his part alongwith
his younger brother, Laksmana, retired to
Mount Prasravana, which was rendered noisy
by tigers and deer, and infested with lions
giving out a terrible roar, was covered with
various shrubs and climbers and was thick
with numerous trees, which was frequented
by bears, monkeys, baboons and wild cats,
nay, which looked like a mass of clouds,
consisting as it mainly did of rocks, and
was ever sanctifying and conducive to
blessedness. (1—3)

तस्य शैलस्य शिखरे महतीमायतां गुहाम्।
प्रत्यगृह्णीत वासार्थं wa: सौमित्रिणा सह॥४॥
Sri Rama with Laksmana (son of
Sumitra) chose for his residence a large
and long cave on the summit of that hill.

(4)
pa च समयं wa: सुग्रीवेण सहानघ:।
कालयुक्तं महद्वाक्यमुवाच रघुनन्दन:॥५॥
विनीतं भ्रातरं भ्राता लक्ष्मणं लक्षिमिवर्धनम्।
ga गिरिगुहा wen विशाला युक्तमारुता॥६॥

Nay, having arrived at an understanding

with Sugriva that expeditions will be sent by
the latter in all directions to carry out a

search for Sita after the rains, the sinless
brother, Sri Rama, the delight of the Raghus,
made the following opportune and momentous
observation to his modest younger brother,
Laksmana, the promoter of fortune: “This
mountain-cave is lovely, commodious and
airy too. (5-6)

अस्यां वत्स्याम सौमित्रे वर्षरात्रमरिदम।

fitted wand पार्थिवात्मज॥७॥
श्चेताभि: कृष्णताम्राभि: शिलाभिरुपशोभितम्।
नानाधातुसमाकोर्णं नदीदर्दुरसंयुतम्॥ ८ ॥।
“Let us dwell, O son of Sumitra, in this
during the rainy nights, O tamer of foes!
“This delightful and excellent mountain-peak,
O prince, is adorned with white, black and
red crags, is rich in various minerals, and
abounds in frogs having their abode in rivers.

(7-8)
विविधैर्वृक्षषण्डैश्च चारुचित्रलतायुतम्।

नानाविहगसंघुष्टं मयूरवरनादितम्॥ ९ ॥

“It is charming with clusters of trees of
every description, and embellished with
wonderful climbers, is rendered noisy by
birds of different species and made resonant
with the cries of excellent peacocks. (9)

मालतीकुन्दगुल्मैश्च सिन्दुवारै: शिरीषकै:।
HAAS पुष्पितैरुपशोभितम्॥ १०॥
“Nay, it is graced with Malati and jasmine
shrubs and Sinduvara, Sirisa, Kadamba,
Arjuna and Sarja trees in blossom. (10)
इयं च नलिनी wen फुल्लपङ्कजमण्डिता।
नातिदूरे गुहाया नौ भविष्यति नृपात्मज॥११॥

“Again, this lovely pond embellished
with full-blown lotuses will remain not very
