* AYODHYAKANDA +

installation of Sri Rama, a scion of Raghu,
be ordered at once. (55)

यथा ह्यपाला: पशवो यथा AAT ह्यनायका।
यथा aes fort रात्रिर्यथा गावो विना THT ५६ ॥
wa fe भविता we यत्र राजा न दृश्यते।
एवं Wea वच: श्रुत्वा सान्त्वपूर्वमिवार्थवत्॥ ५७॥
अभ्यकीर्यत शोकेन भूय wa महीपति:।
ततस्तु राजा तं ad सन्नहर्ष: ad प्रति॥५८॥
शोकरक्तेक्षण: श्रीमानुद्वीक्ष्योवाच धार्मिक:।
वाक्यैस्तु खलु मर्माणि मम भूयो निकृन्तसि॥ ५९॥

“Even as cattle get lost without the
keeper, even as an army loses its cohesion
without a general, nay, even as a night
forfeits its charm without the moon and cows
are unable to calve and yield milk without
a bull, a state will meet with a similar fate
where the monarch is not to be seen.”
Hearing his aforesaid significant submission,
prefaced with words of consolation, as it
were, the Emperor (lit., the ruler of the earth)
was overcome with grief once more. Looking
up towards the well-known charioteer, with
eyes reddened through grief for his son,
the glorious and pious king, whose joy had
ended for good, thereupon said to him,
“With your words of praise uttered at this
inopportune moment, indeed you are
positively cutting me to the quick once more.”

(56—59)

सुमन्त्र: करुणं श्रुत्वा दृष्टवा दीनं च पार्थिवम्।
प्रगृहीताञ्जलि: किंचित् तस्माद् देशादपाक्रमत्॥ ६०॥

Hearing his pathetic remark and finding
the king miserable, Sumantra with tightly
joined palms slipped away to some distance
from that place. (60).
यदा वक्तुं स्वयं दैन्यान्न शशाक महीपति:।
तदा सुमन्त्रं मन्त्रज्ञा कैकेयी प्रत्युवाच ह॥६१॥

When, owing to his miserable condition,
the Emperor could not speak himself, Kaikeyi,
who was well-versed in statecraft, replied

on behalf of the Emperor to Sumantra as
follows—so the tradition goes. (61)

347

“Completely exhausted due _ to
uninterrupted wakefulness during the night,
impatient as he was through jubilation over
the prospect of Sri Rama’s installation, the
king, O Sumantra, has fallen asleep. (62)

aq गच्छ त्वरितं सूत राजपुत्रं यशस्विनम्।
राममानय ws a aa कार्या विचारणा॥६३॥

“Therefore, go quickly, O charioteer,
and bring the illustrious Prince Rama here;
may good betide you ! No thought need be
bestowed on this.” (63)

अश्रुत्वा राजवचनं कथं गच्छामि भामिनि।
तच्छुत्वा AAT वाक्यं राजा मन्त्रिणमब्रवीत्॥ ६४॥
“Without hearing the king’s command,
O queen, how shall | go?” Hearing the
aforesaid reply of the minister, the king
spoke to him as follows : (64)
सुमन्त्र रामं द्रक्ष्यामि शीघ्रमानय सुन्दरम्।
स मन्यमान: कल्याणं हृदयेन ननन्द च॥६५॥
निर्जगाम च स प्रीत्या त्वरितो राजशासनात्।
सुमन्त्रश्चिन्तयामास त्वरितं चोदितस्तया॥ ६६॥
व्यक्तं रामाभिषेकार्थे इहायास्यति धर्मराट्।
इति सूतो मतिं कृत्वा हर्षेण महता WAU el
निर्जगाम महातेजा राघवस्य दिदूक्षया।
सागरह्रदसंकाशात्सुमन्त्रोऽन्त:पुराच्छुभात् ।
निष्क्रम्य जनसम्बाधं ददर्श द्वारमग्रत:॥६८॥

“Sumantra, | should like to see Rama,
please bring the charming boy at once.”
And deeming Sri Rama’s visit good for the
king, the minister rejoiced at heart and in
obedience to the king’s command he sallied
forth quickly with delight. Urged by Kaikeyi
once more in the meantime to make haste,
Sumantra thought, “Evidently | am goaded
to bring Rama quickly with the object of
seeing Rama expeditiously installed as Prince
Regent, as the pious king feels fatigued on
account of over-exertion in that connection
and is reluctant to move out.” Arriving at
this conclusion, the highly glorious charioteer,
