1064

austerity and effulgence but in Treta both
became equal and at par. (13-14)

स्थापनं चक्रिरे da चातुर्वर्ण्यस्य सम्मतम्।
तस्मिन् at प्रज्वलिते धर्मभूते ह्यनावृते॥१५॥
अधर्म: पादमेकं तु पातयत् पृथिवीतले।
अधर्मेण fe संयुक्तस्तेजो मन्दं भविष्यति॥ १६॥

‘Treta is dominated by Varnasrama
Dharma. But here itself irreligion had stepped
in even though on one foot, yet hereafter
gradually there will be decline in Dharma.

(15-16)
ad नाम aq भूतं पादेन पृथिवीतले॥१७॥

‘The Rajasika acts like agriculture was
known to be low ( अनृत) and was supposed
to be not recommendable. The same act in
the form of a foot of irreligion was firmly
rooted on the earth in Treta. (17)

अनृतं पातयित्वा तु पादमेकमधर्मत:।

तत: प्रादुष्कृतं पूर्वमायुष: परिनिष्ठितम्॥१८॥
“This way by establishing one of his

fruit in the shape of falsehood, the irreligion

limited the life span of beings in Treta in

comparison to Satyayuga. (18)

पातिते wad तस्मिन्नधर्मेण महीतले।
शुभान्येवाचरंल्लोक: सत्यधर्मपरायण: ॥ १९॥

‘Therefore in order to save themselves
from the evil effect of falsehood, one foot of
irreligion, people who were dedicated to
truthful conduct scrupulously practised fully
auspicious deeds. (19)

त्रेतायुगे च add ब्राह्मणा: क्षत्रियाश्च ये।
तपोऽतप्यन्त A Wa शुश्रूषामपरे GAT: tl oll
स्वधर्म: परमस्तेषां वैश्यशूद्रं तदागमत्।
पूजां च सर्ववर्णानां शूद्राश्चक्रुर्विशेषत:॥ २१॥
‘Yet in Treta only Brahmanas and
Ksatriyas engaged themselves in observing
penance. The rest of the people did servicing
(like production and manual labour) out of
these four categories the Vaigyas and Sudras
got as their share—the service as their own
Dharma. Sudras particularly served and

« VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

adored the other three castes. (20-21)

एतस्मिन्नन्तरे तेषामधर्मे aad च ह।
aa: wa पुनर्ह्यसमगमन्नृपसत्तम॥ २२॥

‘O best among the kings, in the
meanwhile the Treta approaches its end,
the Vaigyas and Sidras indulge in irreligion
through falsehood as one of its feet. Then
Brahmanas and Ksatriyas suffer more and
more deterioration. (22)

ad: पादमधर्मस्य द्वितीयमवतारयत्।

ततो द्वापरसंख्या सा युगस्य समजायत॥ २३॥
‘Then unrighteousness placed on the

earth its second foot, and by that the third

Yuga was counted as Dvapara (given to

two feet). (23)

तस्मिन् द्वापरसंख्ये तु वर्तमाने युगक्षये।
अधर्मश्चानृतं चैव aqdt पुरुषर्षभ॥ २४॥

“With the coming into existence of the
Dvaparayuga, unrighteousness and Anrta
( अनृत ) flourished, O bull among men. (24)

अस्मिन् द्वापरसंख्याने तपो वैश्यान् समाविशत्।
त्रिभ्यो युगेभ्यस्त्रीन् वर्णान् Hares वै aT आविशत्॥ २७५ ॥

‘In this Yuga, known as Dvapara,
penance entered the Vaisya, thus through
the three Yugas penance entered the three
Varnas (classes) successively. (25)

त्रिभ्यो युगेभ्यस्त्रीन् वर्णान् धर्मश्च परिनिष्ठित: |
न शूद्रो लभते धर्मं युगतस्तु नरर्षभ॥ २६॥

‘Righteousness was established in these
three Yugas resorting to the three Varnas
(classes), the Sudra could not attain the
right of penance in these Yugas, O bull
among men. (26)

ह्रीनवर्णो नृपश्रेष्ठं तप्यते सुमहत्तप:।
भविष्यच्छूद्रयोन्यां fe तपश्चर्या wet युगे॥ २७॥

‘O best among kings, one belonging to
lower caste performs severe penances. In
the future Kali age the performance of
penance will go to Sudra. (27)

अधर्म: परमो राजन् द्वापरे शूद्रजन्मन:।
a a विषयपर्यन्ते तव राजन् महातपा:॥ २८॥
