438

“What injury on earth could the lofty-
minded Sita, the daughter of Janaka, do to
you—Sita, who is distinguished by a pair of
blooming eyes like a female gazelle and is
possessed of a mild disposition? (9)

ननु पर्याप्तमेवं ते पापे रामविवासनम्।
किमेभि: कृप'णै'र्भूय पातकैरपि ते wa: ॥ १० ॥
“Indeed, sending Rama into exile in the
robes of a hermit, as you are doing, O sinful
woman, is enough for you. What more do
you seek to gain through these further sins
in the shape of exiling Sita and that too in
the robes of a hermitess which are going
to be perpetrated by you and which are
calculated to land you in untold suffering?
(10)

प्रतिज्ञातं मया तावत् त्वयोक्तं देवि Ua
we यदभिषेकाय त्वमिहागतमब्रवी:॥११॥
“Hearing your command,* which you
gave to Rama, who called here (the other
day) in connection with his installation as

Prince Regent, O queen, that much was
silently acquiesced in by me. (11)

तत्त्वेतत् समतिक्रम्य निरयं गन्तुमिच्छसि।
मैथिलीमपि या fe त्वमीक्षसे चीरवासिनीम्॥ १२॥

“Distinctly going beyond that, however,
as you are doing now, you seek to go to
hell in that you would have Sita, a princess
of Mithila, too, clad in the bark of trees.”(12)
अवाकशिरसमासीनमिदं वचनमब्रवीत्॥ १३॥

To his father, who sat with his head
bent low, while speaking as aforesaid, Sri

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

Rama, who was now actually on his way to
the forest, submitted as follows : (13)

sa धार्मिक कौसल्या मम माता यशस्विनी।
वृद्धा चाक्षुद्रशीला च न च cat देव गर्हते॥ १४॥

“This illustrious mother of mine,
Kausalya, has not only grown old, but is of
a generous disposition too and never speaks
ill of you, O pious monarch ! (14)
मया विहीनां ate प्रपन्नां शोकसागरम्।
अदूष्टपूर्वव्यसनां भूय: सम्मन्तुमर्हसि॥ १५॥
पुत्रशोकं यथा Aes त्वया पूज्येन पूजिता।
at fe संचिन्तयन्ती सा त्वयि जीवेत् तपस्विनी ।। १६ ॥

“When she is bereft of me and
consequently drowned in a sea of grief,
although she has known no suffering before,
O bestower of boons, you ought to show
greater regard to her, so that the poor lady
may not fall a prey to grief caused by
separation from me (her son) and treated
with respect by you, who are worthy of
adoration to her, and contemplating on me,
may survive under your care. (15-16)
इमां महेन्द्रोपम जातगर्धिनीं

तथा विधातुं जननीं ममार्हसि।
यथा वनस्थे मयि शोककर्शिता
न जीवितं न्यस्य यमक्षयं व्रजेत्॥ १७॥

“Kindly handle my mother, who is sure
to pine for me (her son), in such a way, O
compeer of the mighty Indra, the lord of
paradise, as to ensure that, stricken with
grief, when | am sojourning in the forest,
she may not depart to the abode of Yama,
the god of death, giving up the ghost.” (17)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्येऽयोध्याकाण्डेऽष्टात्रिंश: सर्ग: ॥ ३८ Il

Thus ends Canto Thirty-eight in the Ayodhyakanda of the glorious Ramayana of
Valmiki, the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

* Vide II. Xviii. 37 on p. 362 above.
