# YUDDHAKANDA #

Pressing the mountain (lit., the support
of the earth) hard under his feet, Hanuman
(sprung from the loins of the wind-god),
who resembled a mountain himself, caused
the earth with its oceans to quake. (41)

नानामृगगणाकोर्णं बहुवग्न्दरशोभित्तम्॥ ४४॥

From that mountain the monkey then
sprang to the Malaya mountain, which rose
like the Meru and Mandara mountains and
was thickly set with various springs, which
was replete with trees and climbers of every
description, abounded in blossoming lotuses
and lilies, was frequented by gods and
Gandharvas (celestial musicians) and was
sixty Yojanas (or four hundred and eigthty
miles) high, which was visited by Vidyadharas
(heavenly artistes) celestial nymphs and
hosts of hermits, was crowded with herds
of deer of every species and adorned with
numerous caves. (42—44)
सर्वानाकुलयंस्तत्र यक्षगन्धर्वकिन्नरान्।
हनूमान् मेघसंकाशो aq मारुतात्मज:॥४५॥

Throwing into confusion all the Yaksas
(a class of demigods), Gandharvas and
Kinnaras (another class of demigods credited
with a human head and the form of a
horse) living there, Hanuman, an offspring
of the wind-god, who looked like a cloud,
grew in size. (45)

पद्भ्यां तु शैलमापीड्यं वडवामुखवन्मुखम्।
faq ननादोच्चैस्त्रासयन् रजनीचरान्॥४६॥
Pressing the mountain fully with his
feet and opening his mouth, which shone
like a submarine fire, the monkey for his
part fearfully roared in order to strike terror
in the prowlers of the night. (46)

615

तस्य नानद्यमानस्य श्रुत्वा निनदमुत्तमम्।
लङ्कास्था राक्षसव्याघ्रा न शेकु: स्पन्दितुं क्वचित्॥ ४७॥
Hearing the formidable roar of the
thundering monkey, the very tigers among
the ogres dwelling in Lanka could not stir
anywhere. (47)

नमस्कृत्वा समुद्राय मारुतिर्भीमविक्रम:।
राघवार्थे परं कर्म समीहत परंतप:॥४८॥

Bowing to the sea-god, Hanuman
(son of the wind-god) of redoubtable
prowess, the scourge of his enemies,
made up his mind to embark on a great
undertaking for the sake of Sri Rama, a
scion of Raghu. (48)

a पुच्छमुद्यम्य भुजङ्घकल्प
fara पृष्ठं श्रवणे निकुच्य।
विव्रत्य वक्त्रं वडवामुखाभ-
मापुप्लुवे व्योम्नि स चण्डवेग:॥४९॥
Raising his tail resembling a serpent,
depressing his back, nay, contracting his
ears and opening his mouth, which shone
like a submarine fire, Hanuman sprang into
the air with a terrible bound. (49)

a व्रक्षखण्डांस्तरसा जहार
शैलान् शिला: प्राकृतवानरांश्च।

स्ते क्षीणवेगा: सलिले Frag: kot
He drew with him in his impetuosity
clumps of trees, crags and rocks as
well as ordinary monkeys inhabiting the
mountain. Uprooted and borne away by the
movement of his arms and thighs, they fell
into the water when their velocity had
diminished. (50)
a तौ प्रसार्योरगभोगकल्पौ
भुजौ भुजंगारिनिकाशवीर्य: ।
जगाम शैलं नगराजमग्रयं
दिश: प्रकर्षन्निवं are: uae
Stretching his well-known arms,
resembling the coils of serpents, Hanuman,
