9३6

The tumult of the army of the ogres
advancing on all sides resounded in the
realm of gods like the roar of the sea while
it was being churned. (2)
श्रुत्वा तु रावणं प्राप्तमिन्द्रश्चलित आसनात्।
देवानथाब्रवीत् तत्र सर्वानेव समागतान्॥३॥
आदित्यांश्च वसून् रुद्रान् साध्यांश्च समरुद्गणान्।
सज्जा Wad ङ्कृर्थं TATE दुरात्मन:॥ ४॥

Shaken from his royal seat on hearing
of Ravana having arrived, Indra, the ruler of
gods, for his part forthwith said to all the
gods assembled there—the twelve sons of
Aditi and the eight Vasus, the eleven Rudras
and the Sadhyas including the forty-nine
Maruts, wind-gods, “Get ready to give battle
to the evil-minded Ravana.” (3-4)

`एवमुक्तास्तु शक्रेण देवा: शक्रसमा युधि।
संनह्य सुमहासत्त्वा युद्धश्रद्धासमन्विता:॥७५॥
स तु दीन: परित्रस्तो महेन्द्रो रावणं प्रति।
faut: समीपमागत्य वाक्यमेतदुवाच ह॥६॥
Putting on armour when commanded
thus by Indra, the gods, who were equals of
Indra in war, and were endowed with
exceptional valour, were seized with martial
fervour. Seeking the presence of Lord Visnu,
the mighty Indra for his part; who was greatly
afraid of Ravana and felt dejected, submitted
as follows, they say: (5-6)
fant कथं करिष्यामि रावणं ward प्रति।
अहोऽतिबलवद् रक्षो युद्धार्थमभिवर्तते॥७॥
“How shall | deal with the ogre, Ravana,
O Lord Visnu? Alas, the very mighty ogre
stands at my door seeking an encounter.

(7)

वरप्रदानाद् बलवान् न खल्वन्येन हेतुना।
तत् तु सत्यं aa: कार्यं यदुक्तं पद्मयोनिना॥ ८॥
“Indeed he has grown mighty by virtue
of the bestowal of boons and for no other
reason. That word, which has been uttered
by Brahma (the lotus-born), has, however,
to be carried into effect. (8)

« VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

तद् यथा नमुचिर्वृत्रो बलिर्नरकशम्बरौ।
त्वद्बलं समवष्टभ्य मया दग्धास्तथा कुरु॥९॥

“Therefore, even as leaning on Your
might | exterminated the demons, Namuci,
Vrtra, Bali, Naraka and Sambara, lend me
Your strength likewise. (9)

नह्यन्यो देवदेवेश wqd मधुसूदन।
गति: परायणं चापि त्रैलोक्ये सचराचरे॥१०॥

“Indeed, there is no refuge, no ultimate
resort either, other than You, O Ruler of the
adored of gods, in all the three worlds
comprising the mobile and the immobile
creation, O Destroyer of the demon Madhu!

(10)
त्वं fe नारायण: श्रीमान् पद्मनाभ: GAT: |
त्वयेमे स्थापिता लोका: HAMS सुरेश्वर: ॥ ११॥

“Indeed, You are the glorious and eternal
Narayana, who has a lotus sprung from His
navel. By You were these worlds set up as
well as I, Indra, as the ruler of gods. (11)
त्वामेव भगवन् सर्वे प्रविशन्ति युगक्षये॥१२॥

“By You were evolved all these three
worlds including the animate and inanimate
creation. In You alone, O Lord, enter all at
the end of the world-cycle. (12)

तदाचक्ष्व यथातत्त्वं cada AN स्वयम्।
असिचक्रसहायस्त्वं योत्स्यसे रावणं प्रति॥१३॥

“Therefore, tell me Yourself, O God of
gods, the way in which victory may woo me
or whether, equipped with Your sword and
discus, You will wage war against Ravana.”

(13)

एवमुक्त: स शक्रेण sal नारायण: Wy:
अब्रवीन्न परित्रास: कर्तव्य: श्रूयतां च मे॥१४॥
Spoken to in these words by Indra,
the said almighty Lord Narayana replied
as follows: “No apprehension need be
entertained by you. And let My advice be
heard by you. (14)
