414

super-excellent ornaments. Urged by Sita,
the said Rama then spoke to Suyajfa as
follows : (5-6)

at च हेमसूत्रं च भार्यायै सौम्य हारय।
writ चाथ सा dat दातुमिच्छति ते सखी॥ ७॥

“The illustrious Sita, your wife’s friend,
wishes to bestow a pearl necklace as well
as a string of gold and also a girdle on your
wife, O gentle sage ! Please cause them to
be conveyed to her. (7)

अङ्गदानि च चित्राणि केयूराणि शुभानि च।
प्रयच्छति सखी तुभ्यं भार्यायै गच्छ्ती वनम्॥ ८॥

“Leaving for the forest this very day,
Sita, the friend of your wife, wishes to offer
for her use Angadas adorned with figures
cut in it and beautiful Keyuras too. (8)
पर्यङ्कमग्र्यास्तरणं नानारत्नविभूषितम्।
तमपीच्छति वैदेही प्रतिष्ठापयितुं त्वयि॥ ९॥

“Sita, a princess of the Videha clan,
also intends to have sent to your house as
a gift a well-known couch inlaid with various
jewels and provided with a first-class
coverlet. (9)

नाग: शत्रुंजयो नाम मातुलोऽयं ददौ मम।
aoa निष्कसहस्रेण ददामि द्विजपुङ्खव॥१०॥
“| gift to you alongwith a thousand gold
coins, the elephant, Satrufjaya by name,
which my maternal uncle gave as a present
to me, O jewel among the Brahmanas !”
(10)

इत्युक्त: स तु रामेण सुयज्ञ: views तत्।
रामलक्ष्मणसीतानां प्रयुयोजाशिष: शिवा:॥११॥
Accepting the gift, when requested as
aforesaid by Sri Rama, the celebrated

Suyajfia for his part pronounced benign
blessings on Sri Rama, Laksmana and Sita.

(11)
सौमित्रिं तमुवाचेदं ब्रह्मेव त्रिदशेश्वरम्॥१२॥

As Brahma the creator would address

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

Indra, the ruler of gods, Sri Rama then
spoke as follows to his celebrated and
beloved brother, Laksmana (son of Sumitra),
who was polite of speech and _ stood
unperturbed by his side: (12)

अगस्त्यं कौशिकं चैव तावुभौ ब्राह्मणोत्तमौ।
अर्चयाहूय सौमित्रे tet: सस्यमिवाम्बुभि:।। १३॥
तर्पयस्व महाबाहो गोसहस्रेण राघव।
सुवर्णरजतैश्चैव मणिभिश्च महाधनै:।॥ १४॥

“Calling Agastya (a son of the sage
Agastya) and Kausika (a son of ViSwamitra),
both of whom are foremost among the
Brahmanas, O son of Sumitra, honour them
by offering valuable gifts to them and then
satiate them with presents of a thousand
cows each as well as with gold and silver
pieces and costly gems even as a cloud
would drench the earth with showers, O
scion of Raghu ! (13-14)

कौसल्यां च य आशीर्भिर्भक्त: पर्युपतिष्ठति।
आचार्यस्तैत्तिरीयाणामभिरूपश्च वेदवित्॥१५॥
wa यानं च दासीश्च सौमित्रे सम्प्रदापय।
कौशेयानि च वस्त्राणि यावत् तुष्यति स द्विज: ॥ १६ U

“Further see that to the Brahmana who
waits upon Kausalya with benendictions
every day, devoted as he is to her, nay,
who is a teacher of those studying the
Taittiriya recesion of the Yajurveda, is
a knower of all the Vedas and as such
worthy in every way, O son of Sumitra,
are duly gifted a conveyance and servant-
maids and silken robes and as much wealth
as that Brahmana may feel satisfied with.

(15-16)
तोषयैनं nates रत्नैर्वस्त्रैर्धनैस्तथा॥१७॥
पशुकाभिश्च सर्वाभिर्गवां दशशतेन al
ये चेमे कठकालापा Asal दण्डमाणवा:॥ Vz Il
नित्यस्वाध्यायशीलत्वान्नान्यत् कुर्वन्ति किंचन।
अलसा: स्वादुकामाश्च महतां चापि सम्मता:॥ १९॥

“There is the venerable Citraratha, a
