432

full of indignation, had received training in
wrestling and were fully endowed with might,
fastened one another with cords in the shape
of their arms and now began to move adroitly
by employing various wrestling devices in
the combat. (18)
शार्दूलसिंहाविव जातदंष्ट्रौ
गजेन्द्रपोताविव सम्प्रयुक्तौ |
at पेततुर्वै युगपद् धरायाम्॥१९॥
Having pressed each other to their
bosom and ascertained each other’s strength
through their hands, the two heroes who
resembled a tiger and a lion, who had just
teethed (attained maturity) or the two
offsprings of a lordly elephant, that had duly
tried their strength, actually fell on the ground
synchronously. (19)

SAR

क्लमं न तौ जग्मतुराशु वीरौ॥ २०॥

Having endeavoured to overcome each
other, and snubbing each other, the
two heroes, who were full of military zeal,
had been trained in wrestling and were
richly endowed with might, moved adroitly
in many ways according to the technique of
wrestling; yet they did not feel exhausted

soon. (20)
बाहूत्तमैर्वारणवारणाभै-
र्निवारयन्तौ परवारणाभौ |
चिरेण कालेन भृशं प्रयुद्धौ
संचेरतुर्मण्डलमार्गमाशु ॥। २१॥

Keeping back each other with their
excellent arms, which resembled the trunks
of elephants, the two warriors, who looked
like a pair of elephants in rut, and who
had fought hard for a long time, moved
rapidly in a circle to elude the grip of each
other. (21)

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA +

at परस्परमासाद्य यत्तावन्योन्यसूदने।
मार्जाराविव भक्षार्थेऽवतस्थाते मुहुर्मुहु:॥ २२॥

Approaching each other, intent as they
were upon the destruction of the other, they
stood growling again and again as a pair of
cats would for the sake of food. (22)
मण्डलानि विचित्राणि स्थानानि विविधानि च।
गोमूत्रकाणि चित्राणि गतप्रत्यागतानि च॥ २३॥
तिरश्चीनगतान्येव तथा वक्रगतानि al
परिमोक्षं प्रहाराणां वर्जनं परिधावनम्॥ २४॥
अभिद्रवणमाप्लावमवस्थानं सविग्रहम्।
परावृत्तमपावृत्तमपद्रुतमवप्लुतम् ॥ २५॥
उपन्यस्तमपन्यस्तं युद्धमार्गविशारदौ।
wt विचेरतुरन्योन्यं वानरेन्द्रश्च रावण:॥ २६॥

The two warriors, viz., Sugriva, the
ruler of monkeys, and Ravana, who were
both skilled in wrestling, moved adroitly with
a view to attacking each other, described
numerous circles while moving and stood in
diverse postures, moved in a curved line
like an ox’s urine and executed various
forward and backward movements, made
horizontal and oblique movements too,
eluded the blows of each other by shifting
their position, avoided the contingency of
their own blows being baffled and circled
round the opponent when he_ stood
motionless, darted towards each other,
moved slowly or leapt like a frog, stood
facing the adversary after a trial of strength,
retreated, turned sideways, rushed in a bent
posture in order to catch hold of the knees
of the adversary and ran lifting their foot to
kick the opponent, pressed their arms to
their own bosom in order to foil the attempt
of the adversary to seize them, and stretched
their own arms to catch hold of the
opponent's. (23—26)

एतस्मिन्नन्तरे रक्षो मायाबलमथात्मन:।
आरब्धुमुपसम्पेदे ज्ञात्वा तं वानराधिप:॥ २७॥
उत्पपात तदाऽऽकाशं जितकाशी जितक्लम:।
रावण: स्थितं wart हरिराजेन वञ्चित:॥ २८॥
