« KISKINDHAKANDA +

(a princess of the Videha territory) you
experience grief and cheerlessness on the
delightful slopes of Mount Rsyamuka, the
king of mountains. (35)

त्वं वेत्थ तावद् वनिताविहीन:
प्राप्नोति दु:खं Tea: HAN: |
ad त्वं प्रजानञ्जहि at न वाली
Ga ममादर्शनजं भजेत॥ ३६॥
“You for one know how a young man
bereft of his beloved wife undergoes suffering.
Knowing this well, dispose you of me so

that Vali may not have to undergo suffering
born of failure to see me. (36)

यच्चापि मन्येत भवान् महात्मा
स्त्रीघातदोषस्तु भवेन्न मह्यम्।
आत्मेयमस्येति fe at जहि त्वं
न स्त्रीवध: स्यान्मनुजेन्द्रपुत्र॥ ३७॥

“If you, an exalted soul that you are,
are keen that the sin of killing a woman
should not fall on your head, pray, kill me
taking me to be the other self of Vali, in
which case the sin of killing a woman will
not descend on you, O prince! (37)

शास्त्रप्रयोगाद् विविधाश्च वेदा-
दनन्यरूपा: पुरुषस्य ait: |
दारप्रदानाद्धि न दानमन्यत्
प्रदृश्यते ज्ञानवतां हि लोके॥ ३८॥
“The title to perform sacrifice etc.,
enjoined in the scriptures being enjoyed in
particular by a man in conjunction with his
wedded wife only and also according to
various Vedic texts', a wife is identical with
her husband. Hence by men of wisdom no
gift is actually regarded as greater than that
of a wife in the world. (38)
त्वं चापि at तस्य मम प्रियस्य
प्रदास्यसे धर्ममवेक्ष्य वीर।
अनेन दानेन न लप्स्यसे a
मधर्मयोगं मम aT घातात्॥३९॥

1021

“If, having due regard to piety, O gallant
prince, you restore me to my aforesaid
darling, you too will by virtue of this gift not
get your share of sin which will accrue from
my destruction (according to the maxim that
through virtue one drives away sin? O heroic
prince !). (39)

चिरं न शक्ष्यामि नरेन्द्र जीवितुम्॥ So

“You ought not to spare me, distressed,
forlorn and reduced to this plight, as | am,
and when | am being torn from my husband;
for | shall not be able to survive long without
the sagacious Vali (the foremost of
monkeys), whose graceful gait resembled
that of an elephant and who was adorned
with a valuable and excellent chain of gold,

O ruler of men!” (40)
इत्येवमुक्तस्तु विभुर्महात्मा
ant समाश्वास्य fed बभाषे।
मा वीरभार्ये विमतिं कुरुष्व
लोको fe सर्वो विहितो विधात्रा u ४१ ॥
लोकोऽब्रवीत् तेन कृतं विधात्रा |
त्रयोऽपि लोका fated विधानं
नातिक्रमन्ते वशगा fe तस्य॥४२॥
प्रीतिं ut प्राप्स्यसि at तथैव
पुत्रश्च ते प्राप्स्यति यौवराज्यम्।
art विधानं विहितं ada
न wees: परिदेवयन्ति॥४३॥
Duly comforting Tara when prayed to in
the foregoing words, the powerful and high-
souled prince, Sri Rama, for his part tendered
to her the following salutary advice : “Pray,
do not pursue a wrong line of thought,
O consort of a hero! For the whole world

1. cf अर्धो वा एष आत्मनो aeaeit—A wife is a part and parcel of one’s own self.

2. धर्मेण पापमपनुदति।
