800

chested scourge of your enemies, by good
luck has this feat been performed by you, O
jewel among those upholding the cause of
virtue. (2)

दिष्ट्या सर्वस्य लोकस्य प्रव्रद्धं दारुणं तम:।
gd त्वया संख्ये WA रावणजं भयम्॥ ३॥
“Fortunately has the dread born of
Ravana—which cast an enormous formidable
gloom on the entire universe—has been
dispelled by you on the battlefield. (3)
आश्वास्य भरतं दीनं कौसल्यां च यशस्विनीम्।
hat च सुमित्रां च दृष्टवा लक्ष्मणमातरम्॥ ४॥
we राज्यमयोध्यायां नन्दयित्वा सुहृज्जनम्।
इक्ष्वाकूणां Hot वंशं स्थापयित्वा महाबल॥ ५॥
इष्टवा तुरगमेधेन प्राप्य चानुत्तमं यश:।
ब्राह्मणेभ्यो धनं दत्त्वा त्रिदिवं गन्तुमर्हसि॥६॥
“Comforting the wretched Bharata, as
well as your mother, the illustrious Kausalya,
and seeing your stepmothers, Kaikeyi and
Sumitra, the mother of Laksmana, attaining
the sovereighty of Ayodhya, bringing delight
to your dear and near ones, stabilizing your
prosperity in the race of Ikswaku, propitiating
the Lord by means of a horse-sacrifice,
nay, acquiring the highest renown and
bestowing riches on the Brahmanas, you
ought to ascend the heaven, O prince
endowed with extraordinary might! (4—6)

एष राजा दशरथो विमानस्थ: fiat aa

काकुत्स्थ मानुषे लोके गुरुस्तव ASM: ७॥
“Here is your (deceased) father, King

Dasaratha—who was your highly illustrious

senior in the world of mortals—seated in an
aerial car, O scion of Kakutstha! (7)

इन्द्रलोकं गत: श्रीमांस्त्वया पुत्रेण तारित:।
लक्ष्मणेन सह भ्रात्रा त्वमेनमभिवादय॥ ८॥

“Having been delivered by you, his
pious son, the glorious monarch has
taken up his abode in the realm of Indra.
Greet you him with your younger brother,
Laksmana.” (8)

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA +

महादेववच: श्रुत्वा Waa: सहलक्ष्मण:।
विमानशिखरस्थस्य प्रणाममकरोत् fag: neil

Hearing the speech of Lord Siva (the
Supreme Deity), Sri Rama (a scion of Raghu),
alongwith Laksmana, respectfully bowed
down to his father seated on the topmost
part of an aerial car. (9)

दीप्यमानं स्वया लक्ष्म्या विरजोऽम्बरधारिणम्।
लक्ष्मणेन सह भ्रात्रा cast पितरं प्रभु:॥१०॥

With his younger brother, Laksmana,
the lord looked on His deceased father,
who was blazing in his own effulgence and
was Clad in spotless raiment. (10)

हर्षेण महताऽऽविष्टो विमानस्थो महीपति:।
प्राणै: प्रियतरं दृष्टवा पुत्रं दशरथस्तदा॥११॥

Seated in his aerial car, DaSaratha, a
(quondam) ruler of the earth, was filled with
excessive delight to behold on that occasion
his erstwhile son, Sri Rama, who was dearer
to him than life. (11)

आरोप्याङ्के महाबाहुर्वरासनगत: «= WI
बाहुभ्यां सम्परिष्वज्य ततो वाक्यं समाददे॥१२॥

Placing the latter in his lap and folding
him tightly in his arms, the mighty-armed
(quondam) ruler, who, having landed, was
resting on an excellent seat, now commenced
his speech as follows: (12)

न मे स्वर्गो ag मत: सम्मानश्च सुरर्षभै:।
त्वया wa विहीनस्य सत्यं प्रतिश्रृणोमि Au esi

“Truly do | swear to you, O Rama, that
to me, who stand separated once for all
from you, neither does residence in heaven,
nor the honour bestowed on me by the
foremost of gods is prized by me. (13)

अद्य wat निहतामित्रं दृष्टवा सम्पूर्णमानसम्।
निस्तीर्णवनवासं च प्रीतिरासीत् परा मम॥ १४॥

“Supreme joy is being experienced by
me today on seeing you fully satisfied in
mind, now that your enemies have been
exterminated and you have fully gone through
the period of your exile. (14)
