684

demonstrating his fleetness in discharging
missiles, Indrajit, son of Ravana, who felt
extremely enraged, pierced Laksmana in
the forehead with three arrows provided
with beautiful plumes. With the aforesaid
arrows imbedded in his brow Laksmana
(the delight of the Raghus), who was fond
of fighting, looked charming in the forefront
of battle like a three-peaked mountain.
Stretching his bow, though wounded on
that occasion in combat by the ogre with his
arrows as aforesaid, the celebrated
Laksmana_ instantly pierced Indrajit in
return on the battlefield with five arrows in
his face adorned with splendid earrings.

(32—35)

लक्ष्मणेन्द्रजितौ dt महाबलशरासनौ।
अन्योन्यं जघ्नतुर्वीरौ विशिखैर्भीमविक्रमौ ।। ३६॥

The two valiant champions of terrific
prowess, Laksmana and Indrajit, who were
both endowed with extraordinary might and
armed with huge bows, struck each other
with arrows. (36)

ad: शोणितदिग्धाङ्गौ लक्ष्मणेन्द्रजितावुभौ।
रणे at रेजतुर्वीरौ पुष्पिताविव किंशुकौ॥ ३७॥

Smeared all over with blood, both the
aforesaid heroes, Laksmana and Indrajit,
thereupon shone on the battlefield like two
Kimsuka trees in flower. (37)

तौ परस्परमभ्येत्य सर्वगात्रेषु धन्विनौ।
चोरैर्विव्यधतुर्बाणै: कृतभावावुभौ जये॥ ३८॥

Meeting each other, the said two
archers, who had both set their mind on
victory, pierced their opponent in all limbs
with formidable arrows. (38)

Wa: समरकोपेन संयुतो रावणात्मज:।
विभीषणं त्रिभिर्बाणैर्विव्याध वदने शुभे॥ ३९॥

Filled with wrath, occasioned by the
conflict, Indrajit (son of Ravana) then struck
Vibhisana with three arrows, in his charming
countenance. (39)

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA +

अयोमुखैस्तिभिर्विद्ध्वा राक्षसेन्द्रं विभीषणम्।
एकैकेनाभिविव्याध तान् सर्वान् हरियूथपान्॥४०॥

Nay, having pierced Vibhisana, the ogre
chief, with three iron-tipped arrows he struck
all those celebrated commanders of simian
troops with one arrow each. (40)

तस्मै gent क्रुद्धो जघान गदया हयान्।
विभीषणो महातेजा रावणे: स दुरात्मन:॥४१॥
Violently enraged at him, the aforesaid
Vibhisana, who was- endowed _ with
extraordinary energy, struck down with his
mace the horses of the evil-minded son of
Ravana. (41)
स हताश्वादवप्लुत्य रथान्निहतसारथे:।
अथ शक्तिं महातेजा: पितृव्याय मुमोच ह॥४२॥
Leaping down from the chariot, knowing
that the horses had been killed, the charioteer
having already been made short work
of, the highly energetic Indrajit now hurled
his javelin on his uncle: so the tradition
goes. (42)

तामापतन्तीं सम्प्रेकष्य सुमित्रानन्दवर्धन:।
चिच्छेद निशितैर्बाणैर्दशधापातयद् भुवि॥४३॥

Perceiving the javelin darting towards
Vibhisana, Laksmana (who enhanced the
delight of Sumitra) split it in ten pieces with
his sharpened arrows and felled it on the
ground. (43)

तस्मै दृढधनु: Heal हताश्वाय विभीषण:।
वज्रस्पर्शसमान् पञ्च ससर्जोरसि मार्गणान्॥४४॥

Feeling angry at Indrajit (whose horses
had been killed), Vibhisana, who was armed
with a strong bow, dug into his bosom five
arrows, whose impact was as hard as that
of lightning. (44)

a तस्य कायं भित्त्वा तु रुक्मपुङ्खा निमित्तगा: |
बभूवुर्लोहितादिग्धा Tht इव महोरगा:॥४५॥

Having penetrated through his body,
the aforesaid arrows for their part, which
were provided with golden feathers and
