732

“Bounding with all speed from this place, O
gentle one, to the Mahodaya mountain, the
one which has already been made fully
known to you by Jambavan, O gallant one,
bring here the valuable herb, which has
sprung up on its southern peak. (28—31)
विशल्यकरणीं नाम्ना सावर्ण्यकरणीं तथा।

संजीवकरणीं ae संधानीं च महौषधीम्॥ ३२॥
संजीवनार्थं वीरस्य लक्ष्मणस्य त्वमानय।

इत्येवमुक्तो हनुमान् गत्वा चौषधिपर्वतम्।

चिन्तामभ्यगमच्छीमानजानंस्ता महौषधी:॥ ३३॥

“Bring you for restoring the heroic
Laksmana to consciousness the precious
herb Visalyakarani ` by name,
Savarnyakarani,? Sarnjivakarani,? and the
precious herb, Sarndhani,* gallant one!”
Springing to the said mountain, rich in herbs,
when spoken to as aforesaid, the glorious
Hanuman became thoughtful, unable as he
was to recognize those valuable herbs.

(32-33)
तस्य बुद्धि: समुत्पन्ना मारुतेरमितौजस:।
इदमेव गमिष्यामि गृहीत्वा fret गिरे:॥ ३४॥

The thought came to that son of the

wind-god, whose strength was immeasurable,

‘| shall go back taking this mountain peak
itself. (34)

अस्मिंस्तु शिखरे saree at सुखावहाम्।
प्रतर्केणावगच्छामि सुषेणो ह्येवमब्रवीत्॥३५॥

‘By recourse to reasoning | conclude
that curative herb to be growing on this
peak alone; for Susena has said so. (35)

अगृह्य यदि गच्छामि विशल्यकरणीमहम्।
कालात्ययेन दोष: स्याद्वैक्लव्यं च महद् भवेत्॥ BE Il

‘If | return without taking the herb

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA +

Visalyakarani, harm may come to Laksmana,
through passage of time and a great
perplexity may arise.’ (36)

Sta संचिन्त्य हनुमान् गत्वा क्षिप्रं महाबल:।
आसाद्य पर्वतश्रेष्ठं fa: प्रकम्प्य गिरे: शिर:॥ ३७॥
फुल्लनानातरुगणं समुत्पाट्य महाबल:।
गृहीत्वा हरिशार्दूलो हस्ताभ्यां समतोलयत्॥ ३८॥
Reflecting thus, and moving rapidly
and reaching the Mahodaya, the foremost
of the mountains, nay, violently shaking
thrice the mountain-peak, which was clothed
with multitudinous trees in flower, and
breaking it up and holding it in his two
hands, Hanuman, a tiger among monkeys,
who was endowed with extraordinary might,
balanced it. (37-38)

a नीलमिव जीमूतं तोयपूर्णं नभस्तलात्।

उत्पपात गृहीत्वा तु हनूमान् शिखरं Fre uae
Seizing hold of the mountain-peak, which

resembled a dark rainy cloud, the said

Hanuman for his part bounded from the
earth’s surface in the airspace. (39)

समागम्य महावेग: संन्यस्य शिखरं गिरे:।
विश्रम्य किंचिद्भधनुमान् सुषेणमिदमब्रवीत्॥४०॥

Approaching Susena, nay, setting
down the mountain-peak and_ resting
awhile, Hanuman, who was endowed with
extraordinary swiftness, spoke as follows:

(40)
औषधीर्नावगच्छामि ता अहं हरिपुङ्खव।
ded शिखरं कृत्स्नं गिरेस्तस्याहृतं मया॥४१॥

“Since | did not identify those herbs,
O bull among monkeys, here is a whole
summit of that mountain brought by me in
consequence.” (41)

1. A herb credited with the virtue of expelling an arrow etc., from the body, healing the wound and

relieving pain.

2. Another herb supposed to possess the property of counteracting the discolouration caused by a wound,

burn etc., and restoring the original colour of the skin.

3. Another herb believed to possess the virtue of bringing back an unconscious person to consciousness.

4. A herb credited with the property of joining a fractured bone.
