700

Those night-stalkers were able to
perceive on the battlefield the most
terrific deeds of Sri Rama, which were difficult
to perform for others, only when they had
actually been performed by him and not
while they were being performed, his
movement being quick as _ lightning.

(20)
aed न वै रामं ad वनगतं यथा॥ २१॥

They could not actually behold Sri
Rama while he was dispersing the huge
army of the ogres and destroying great
car-warriors, any more than one could see
a blast blowing in a forest. (His presence
could be detected only by his deeds).

(21)
fort भिन्नं शरैर्दग्धं vent शस्त्रपीडितम्।
बलं रामेण ददृशुर्न WA शीघ्रकारिणम्॥ २२॥

They beheld the army torn and pierced
with arrows, consumed and broken down
and tormented with weapons by Sri Rama,
but could not discern Sri Rama, who was
so quick of action. (22)

Yad शरीरेषु A a पश्यन्ति राघवम्।

इन्द्रियार्थेषु तिष्ठन्तं भूतात्मानमिव प्रजा:॥ २३॥
The ogres did not perceive Sri Rama

hitting their bodies any more than created

beings are able to perceive their soul enjoying
the sense-objects. (23)

एष हन्ति गजानीकमेष हन्ति महारथान्।

Ue हन्ति शरैस्तीक्ष्णै: पदातीन् वाजिभि: सह॥ २४॥
“Here is Rama exterminating the army

of elephants!” “There is Rama making short

work of great car-warriors!” “Here is Rama

killing with his sharp arrows foot-soldiers

alongwith horses!” (24)

इति ते राक्षसा: सर्वे रामस्य सदृशान् रणे।
अन्योन्यं कुपिता जघ्नु: सादृश्याद् राघवस्य TW २५ ॥

Saying so, all the aforesaid ogres for

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA +

their part struck one another in rage on the
battlefield, who seemed to resemble Sri
Rama in one respect or the other, because
of their supposed similarity with Sri Rama, a
scion of Raghu. (25)

न ते age we दहन्तमपि वाहिनीम्।
मोहिता: परमास्त्रेण गान्धर्वेण महात्मना॥ २६॥

Having been thrown into confusion by
the high-souled Sri Rama with the excellent
mystic missile presided over by the
Gandharvas, the ogres could not perceive
Sri Rama even though he was consuming
their army. (26)

ते तु रामसहस्राणि wt पश्यन्ति wera: |
पुन: पश्यन्ति काकुत्स्थमेकमेव महाहवे॥ २७॥

The aforesaid ogres for their part beheld
thousands of Ramas on the battlefield, while
at other times they saw only one Rama,
a scion of Kakutstha, during that major
conflict. (27)
अलातचक्रप्रतिमां ददृशुस्ते न राघवम्॥ २८॥

They perceived the curved golden ends
of the bow of the high-souled prince, Sri
Rama, revolving like a firebrand, but not Sri
Rama, a scion of Raghu. (28)
शरीरनाभि सत्त्वार्चि: शरारं नेमिकार्मुकम्।
ज्याघोषतलनिर्घोषं तेजोबुद्धिगुणप्रभम्॥ २९॥
दिव्यास्त्रगुणपर्यन्तं निघ्नन्तं युधि राक्षसान्।

Gq रामचक्रं तत् कालचक्रमिव प्रजा:॥ ३०॥

The created beings beheld the aforesaid
Sri Rama in the form of a discus, which
was exterminating the ogres on the battlefield
like the Wheel of Time, nay, which had the
middle part of the body of Sri Rama for its
navel, his strength for its flame, the arrows
discharged by Sri Rama for its spokes, his
bow for its belly, the twanging of the bow-
string and the clanging of the gauntlet for
the sound produced by its revolution, his
