# YUDDHAKANDA #

परस्परवधे sal घोररूपौ बभूवतु:।
मण्डलानि च वीथीश्च गतप्रत्यागतानि TN ३१॥
दर्शयन्तौ बहुविधां सूतौ सारथ्यजां गतिम्।
अर्दयन् रावणं WAT राघवं चापि रावण:॥ ३२॥
Tat समापन्नौ प्प्रवर्तननिवर्तने।
क्षिपतो: शरजालानि तयोस्तौ स्यन्दनोत्तमौ॥। ३३॥
ad: संयुगमहीं सासारौ जलदाविव।
दर्शयित्वा तदा at तु गतिं बहुविधां Tri svi
परस्परस्याभिमुखौ पुनरेव च तस्थतु:।
Qt धुरेण रथयोर्वक्त्रं वक्त्रेण वाजिनाम्॥ ३५॥
पताकाश्च पताकाभि: समीयु: स्थितयोस्तदा।
रावणस्य ततो Wat धनुर्मुक्तै: शितै: शरै:।॥ ३६॥
चतुर्भिश्चतुरो दीप्तान् हयान् प्रत्यपसर्पयत्।
स क्रोधवशमापन्नो हयानामपसर्पणे॥ ३७॥
मुमोच निशितान् बाणान् राघवाय दशानन:।
सोऽतिविद्धो बलवता दशग्रीवेण राघव:॥ ३८॥
जगाम न विकारं च न चापि व्यथितोऽभवत्।
चिक्षेप च पुनर्बाणान् वज्रसारसमस्वनान्॥३९॥
anit वज्रहस्तस्य समुद्दिश्य दशानन:।
मातलेस्तु महावेगा: शरीरे पतिता: NT: Xo ll
न सूक्ष्ममपि सम्मोहं व्यथां वा प्रददुर्युधि।
Ta धर्षणया क्रुद्धो मातलेर्न तथाऽऽत्मन: ॥४१॥
चकार शरजालेन राघवो विमुखं रिपुम्।
विंशतिं त्रिंशतिं षष्टिं शतशोऽथ सहस्रश:॥४२॥
मुमोच Weal वीर: सायकान् स्यन्दने रिपो: |
रावणोऽपि Ad: Heal रथस्थो राक्षसेश्वर: | ४३ ॥
गदामुसलवर्षेण रामं प्रत्यर्दयद् रणे।
तत् vad पुनर्युद्धं तुमुलं रोमहर्षणम्॥४४॥
Furiously attacking and injuring each
other on the battlefield, nay, intent on
destroying each other, the aforesaid excellent
chariots of the two warriors for their part
assumed a terrible aspect. The two
charioteers too went on_ displaying
multifarious movements of their chariots born
of their driving skill, such as moving in a
circle, moving straight and darting forward
and receding forthwith. The two warriors
had recourse to impetuosity of movement
in their forward and backward motion, Sri

755

Rama wounding Ravana and vice versa.
Those excellent chariots of the two warriors,
who were discharging streams of arrows,
ranged the battle-ground like two clouds
pouring showers. Having displayed
movements of many kinds, on the field of
battle, the two chariots once more stood
facing each other. The shafts of the two
chariots even as they stood at that moment
met one with the other; the muzzles of the
horses of the one closed with those of the
horses of the other and the pennons too of
the one closed with those of the other. With
four sharp arrows discharged from his bow
Sri Rama thereupon drove back the four
spirited horses of Ravana. Fallen a prey to
anger, on the retreating of his horses, that
ten-headed monster let fly his whetted shafts
against Sri Rama (a scion of Raghu). Though
grievously wounded by the mighty Ravana
(the ten-headed monster), the said scion of
Raghu neither felt agitated nor disquieted.
The ten-headed monster then directed arrows
which emitted a sound like a stroke of
lightning at the charioteer of Indra (who
carries the thunderbolt in his hand). Fallen
on the body of Matali, the arrows for their
part, which were shot with great impetuosity,
did not cause the least confusion or torment
to him on the battlefield. Angered by that
assault on Matali, Sri Rama (a scion of
Raghu), who for his part did not feel provoked
by the assault on himself, made his
adversary averse to fighting by directing a
stream of his arrows against him. The valiant
scion of Raghu discharged twenty, thirty,
sixty and hundreds and thousnds of arrows
on the enemy’s chariot. Provoked to anger,
while seated in his chariot, the king of ogres,
Ravana too thereupon tormented Sri Rama
with a shower of maces and mallets in
return. Then there ensued once more a
tumultuous struggle, which caused one’s
hair to stand on end. (30—44)
