778

Sita to her husband and the heroism of
Hanuman, the highly blessed ones joyously
returned as they had come. Bidding adieu
to the ethereal chariot which had been
provided to him by Indra and shone like fire,
the mighty-armed Sri Rama (a scion of
Raghu) respectfully saluted Matali (Indra’s
charioteer). Mounting the aforesaid heavenly
car, when dismissed by Sri Rama (a scion
of Raghu), Matali, Indra’s_ charioteer,
ascended to heaven itself: so the tradition
goes. Matali having ascended to heaven in
his chariot, Sri Rama (a scion of Raghu),
the foremost of car-warriors, for his part,
who felt highly rejoiced, embraced Sugriva.
Having hugged Sugriva, nay, greeted by
Laksmana and being honoured by the hordes
of monkeys, Sri Rama returned to the camp
where the troops had been stationed. The
aforesaid son of Kakutstha then spoke as
follows to Laksmana, son of Sumitra, who
was full of courage and afire with spirit, and
standing nearby: “Consecrate, O gentle one,
on the throne of Lanka the yonder Vibhisana,
who is fond of, nay, devoted to me, and has
done good offices to me in the past. It is my
foremost desire, O gentle one, that | should
see this younger brother of Ravana,
Vibhisana, consecrated on the throne of
Lanka.” Saying “Amen!” when commanded
as aforesaid by the high-souled Sri Rama
(a scion of Raghu), and supremely rejoiced,
Laksmana (son of Sumitra) for his part took
up golden jars. Nay, placing them in the
hands of monkey chiefs, he particularly
enjoined such of them as were quick as
thought and endowed with extraordinary
energy to fetch sea-water on that occasion.
Moving with all speed from that place, the
aforesaid monkeys, the foremost of them
all, for their part, who were quick as thought,
returned at once taking water from all the
four seas. Taking one jar and duly installing
Vibhisana on an excellent seat, Laksmana

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA +

(son of Sumitra) for his part then consecrated
the former as the king of ogres in Lanka in
accordance with the scriptural ordinance
with the water contained in that jar in
obedience to the command of Sri Rama. All
the ogres as also the monkeys then
consecrated Vibhisana, who was surrounded
by hosts of his dear and near ones. (2—16)

प्रहर्षमतुलं गत्वा deq राममेव fei
तस्यामात्या जहृषिरे भक्ता A चास्य राक्षसा:॥ १७॥

दृष्टवाभिषिक्तं लङ्कायां राक्षसेन्द्रं विभीषणम्।
Waa: परमां Wit जगाम सहलक्ष्मण:॥ १८ ॥
Experiencing an incomparable ecstasy,
they all actually paid tribute to Sri’ Rama
alone. His ministers as well as the ogres
who were devoted to him rejoiced to see
Vibhisana consecrated on the throne of
Lanka as the ruler of ogres. Sri Rama
(a scion of Raghu) with Laksmana too
experienced supreme felicity on this occasion.
(17-18)

स तद् राज्यं महत् प्राप्य रामदत्तं विभीषण:।
सान्त्वयित्वा प्रकृतयस्ततो राममुपागमत्॥१९॥

Having inherited that great kingdom
bestowed on him by Sri Rama, and consoled
his subjects, the celebrated Vibhisana
forthwith sought the presence of Sri Rama.

(19)
दध्यक्षतान् मोदकांश्च लाजा: सुमनसस्तथा।
आजह्रुरथ संहृष्टा: पौरास्तस्मै निशाचरा:॥ २०॥

Now the rangers of the night residing
in the city of Lanka, who were all feeling
highly rejoiced, brought to him by way of
presents curds and unbroken grains of rice
and Modakas (a variety of sweets shaped
like balls), parched grains of unhusked rice
and flowers too. (20)

स तान् गृहीत्वा दुर्धर्षो राघवाय न्यवेदयत्।

मङ्गल्यं Age wd लक्ष्मणाय च वीर्यवान्॥ २१॥
Accepting them all, the valiant

Vibhisana, who was difficult to overpower,
