780

Seeing him in the forest, those two
highly blessed princes, Rama _ and
Laksmana, thought the bird to be an ogre
and said to him, “Who are you?” (2)

ततो मधुरया ara सौम्यया प्रीणयन्निव।
sara वत्स at विद्धि वयस्यं पितुरात्मन:॥ ३॥
Then, as though delighting them with a

gentle and sweet speech, he said, “O dear
son, know me to be a friend of your father.”

(3)

ad fara मत्वा पूजयामास राधघव:।
a तस्य कुलमव्यग्रमथ पप्रच्छ नाम AI Sl
Believing him to be a friend of his

father, the scion of Raghu honoured him
and gently enquired his name and race. (4)

रामस्य वचनं श्रुत्वा कुलमात्मानमेव al
आचचक्षे द्विजस्तस्मै सर्वभूतसमुद्भवम्॥५॥
Hearing the speech of Rama, the bird
told him about himself and his descent and
the origin of all beings. (5)

पूर्वकाले महाबाहो ये प्रजापतयोऽभवन्।
तान् मे निगदत: सर्वानादित: OT राघव॥६॥
“O mighty-armed scion of Raghu, listen
to me, while | am speaking from the beginning
about all the lords of creation who existed in
the past. (6)

कर्दम: प्रथमस्तेषां विकृतस्तदनन्तरम्।
शेषश्च संश्रयश्चैव away वीर्यवान्॥७॥
स्थाणुर्मरीचिरत्रिश्च क्रतुश्चैव महाबल:।
पुलस्त्यश्चाङ्गिराश्चैव प्रचेता: पुलहस्तथा॥८॥

“Kardama was the first of them; after
him came Vikrta, Sesa, Sarmsgraya and the
powerful Bahuputra and Sthanu, Marici, Atri,
the mighty Kratu, Pulastya, Angira, Praceta
and also Pulaha. (7-8)

दक्षो विवस्वानपरोऽरिष्टनेमिश्च राघव।
कश्यपश्च महातेजास्तेषामासीच्च पश्चिम:॥९॥
“Then came Daksa, Vivaswan and
Aristanemi, O Raghava, and the last one of
great lustre amongst them was KaSyapa. (9)

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

प्रजापतेस्तु दक्षस्य बभूवुरिति विश्रुता:।
षष्टिर्दुहितरो राम यशस्विन्यो महायश:॥१०॥

“Prajapati Daksa had sixty well-known
and illustrious daughters, O Rama of great
fame ! (10)
कश्यप: प्रतिजग्राह तासामष्टौ सुमध्यमा:।
अदितिं च दितिं चैव दनूमपि च कालकाम्॥ ११॥
ताम्रां क्रोधवशां चैव मनुं चाप्यनलामपि।
तास्तु कन्यास्तत: प्रीत: कश्यप: पुनरब्रवीत्॥ १२॥

“Kasyapa married eight beautiful girls
of them—Aditi and Diti, Danu and also
Kalaka, Tamra and Krodhavasa, Manu and
also Anala. Then, pleased with them,
Kasyapa again said to those girls : (11-12)
Wieciamdy वै जनयिष्यथ मत्समान्।
अदितिस्तन्मना राम दितिश्च ata च॥१३॥
कालका च महाबाहो शेषास्त्वमनसोऽभवन्।
अदित्यां जज्ञिरे देवास्त्रयस्निंशदरिंदम॥ exit
आदित्या वसवो रुद्रा अश्विनौ च परंतप।
दितिस्त्वजनयत् पुत्रान् दैत्यांस्तात यशस्विन: 1 १५ ॥

“You will give birth to sons like me,
masters of the three worlds.’ O Rama of
mighty arms, Aditi, Diti, Danu and Kalaka
were attentive, the rest were indifferent.
“Of Aditi thirty-three gods were born, O
vanquisher of foes—the twelve Adityas, the
eight Vasus, the eleven Rudras and the two
Aswins, O tormentor of foes! Diti for her
part gave birth to the famous Daityas
(demons), O dear one ! (183—15)

तेषामियं वसुमती पुराऽऽसीत् सवनार्णवा।
दनुस्त्वजनयत् पुत्रमश्वग्रीवमरिंदम॥ १६ ॥

“Formerly they owned all this earth with
forests and oceans. Danu for her part bore a
son, ASwagriva, O vanquisher of foes ! (16)
WA कालकं Ga कालकापि व्यजायत।
क्रौञ्चीं भासीं तथा VE धृतराष्टरीं AMT शुकीम्॥ १७॥
ताम्रा तु सुषुवे कन्या: पञ्चैता लोकविश्रुता:।
उलूकाञ्जनयत् क्रौञ्ची भासी भासान् व्यजायत॥ १८ ॥
vat श्येनांश्च गृध्रांश्च व्यजायत सुतेजस:।
धृतराष्ट्री तु हंसांश्च कलहंसाश्च सर्वश:॥१९॥
