* ARANYAKANDA «

तं गृहीत्वा नखैस्तीक्ष्णैर्विददार समन्तत:।
अधिरूढो गजारोहो यथा CATS, दुष्टवारणम्॥ ३४॥
Catching hold of the latter, he tore the
ogre all over with his sharp talons as the
rider of an elephant, mounted on it, would
prick the elephant with his goad. (34)

facet नखैरस्य qs gs समर्पयन्।
केशांश्चोत्पाटयामास नखपक्षमुखायुध:॥ ३५॥

Plunging his beak into the ogre’s back,
Jatayu (who had claws, wings and a bill for
his weapons) tore him and pulled his hair
with his talons. (35)

a तथा गृध्रराजेन क्लिश्यमानो मुहुर्मुहु:।

अमर्षस्फुरितोष्ठ: सन् प्राकम्पत च राक्षस:॥ ३६॥
Nay, being tormented again and again

by the king of vultures as aforesaid, the

said ogre trembled with rage, his lips
throbbing through indignation. (36)

सम्परिष्वज्य वैदेहीं वामेनाङ्केन रावण:।
तलेनाभिजघानार्तो जटायुं क्रोधमूच्छित:।॥ ३७॥
Pressing Sita (a princess of the Videha
territory) tightly in his left lap, the afflicted
Ravana, who was beside himself with rage,
struck Jatayu with the palm of his hand. (37)

जटायुस्तमतिक्रम्य तुण्डेनास्य खगाधिप:।
वामबाहून् दश तदा व्यपाहरदरिंदम:॥ ३८॥
Dodging that blow, Jatayu, the king of
birds, the chastiser of his foes, presently
tore off his ten left arms with his beak. (38)

संछिन्नबाहो: सद्यो A बाहव: सहसाभवन्।

विषज्वालावलीयुक्ता वल्मीकादिव पन्नगा:॥ ३९॥
Even though his ten arms had been

severed, fresh arms sprang up all of a

sudden even like serpents issuing from an
ant-hill and emitting sprouts of poison. (39)

तत: क्रोधाद् दशग्रीव: सीतामुत्सृज्य वीर्यवान्।
मुष्टिभ्यां चरणाभ्यां च गृध्रराजमपोथयत्॥४०॥
Thereupon, letting alone Sita, the
powerful Ravana (the ten-headed monster)
angrily struck the king of vultures with his

855

fists and feet.

ततो मुहूर्तं संग्रामो बभूवातुलवीर्ययो:।

राक्षसानां च मुख्यस्य पक्षिणां प्रवरस्य च॥४१॥
Then, for an hour or so, a duel ensued

between the two warriors of incomparable

prowess, Ravana, the foremost of ogres,
and Jatayu, the chief of vultures. (41)

तस्य व्यायच्छमानस्य रामस्यार्थे स रावण:।
पक्षौ पादौ च Uva च खड्गमुद्धृत्य सोऽच्छिनत्॥ ४२ ॥

Again, unsheathing his sword, the said
Ravana lopped off the wings, the feet and
the flanks too of Jatayu, who was contending
in the cause of Sri Rama. (42)

a च्छिन्नपक्ष: सहसा रक्षसा रौद्रकर्मणा।
Foor महागृध्रो धरण्यामल्पजीवित:॥४३॥
With his wings sundered all at once by
the ogre of fierce deeds, the great vulture,
whose life was now of short duration, dropped
down on the ground. (43)
तं gear ufad भूमौ क्षतजार्द्र जटायुषम्।
अभ्यधावत वैदेही स्वबन्धुमिव दु:खिता॥४४॥
Distressed to see Jatayu fallen on the
ground drenched with blood, Sita, a princess
of the Videha territory, rushed towards him
as towards one of her own kin. (44)

ददर्श लङ्काधिपति: पृथिव्यां
जटायुषं शान्तमिवाग्निदावम्॥४५॥
The said Ravana (the sovereign ruler
of Lanka) beheld the celebrated Jatayu of
exalted prowess—who approached the
splendour of a dark-blue cloud and was
marked with a white breast—lying on the
ground like an extinguished forest fire. (45)
ततस्तु तं पत्ररथं महीतले
निपातितं रावणवेगमर्दितम्।
ws संगृह्य शशिप्रभानना
रुरोद सीता जनकात्मजा तदा॥ VE Ul
Then, embracing the aforesaid bird,

(40)
