1078

expedition all those leaders of monkeys
without exception, who are deeply attached
to the pleasures of sense and are given to
procrastination. (11)

अहोभिर्दशभिर्ये च नागच्छन्ति ममाज्ञया।
हन्तव्यास्ते दुरात्मानो राजशासनदूषका:॥१२॥

“Again, those evil-minded monkeys who
violate the royal command and do not return
in ten days should be done to death in
obedience to my behest. (12)

शतान्यथ सहस्राणि कोट्यश्च AA शासनात्।
प्रयान्तु कपिसिंहानां fest मम a स्थिता:॥ १३॥

“Let hundreds, nay, thousands and even
crores of such lions among monkeys as
abide by my order sally forth under my
command. (13)
मेघपर्वतसंकाशाश्छादयन्त इवाम्बरम्।
SET: कपिश्रेष्ठा यान्तु मच्छासनादित:॥ १४॥

“Let select monkeys of terrible aspect
resembling mountains of mist proceed from
this place under my command shrouding
the heavens, as it were. (14)

ते गतिज्ञा गतिं गत्वा पृथिव्यां सर्ववानरा:।

आनयन्तु हरीन् सर्वांस्त्वरिता: शासनान्मम॥ १५॥
“Let all those monkeys, knowing the

homes of the monkeys, bring with all speed

at my command all the monkeys on earth,
taking long strides.” (15)

तस्य वानरराजस्य श्रुत्वा वायुसुतो वच:।
दिक्षु सर्वासु विक्रान्तान् प्रेषयामास वानरान्॥ १६॥

Hearing the command of the celebrated
Sugriva, the king of monkeys, Hanuman,
son of the wind-god, dispatched valiant
monkeys to all the quarters. (16)

a ud विष्णुविक्रान्तं पतत्तिज्योतिरध्वगा:।
प्रयाता: प्रहिता राज्ञा हरयस्तु क्षणेन वै॥१७॥
Sent by the king, the aforesaid monkeys
for their part soared in a moment to the very
skies (the region covered in a single stride

by Lord Visnu in His descent as the Divine
Dwarf), coursing along the route of birds

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

as well as of the heavenly bodies.

a समुद्रेषु गिरिषु वनेषु च सरस्सु च।
वानरा APR सर्वान् रामहेतोरचोदयन्॥१८॥

The said monkeys caused all the
monkeys living on the seashore, on
mountains, in forests as well as on the
margin of lakes to move towards Kiskindha
for the cause of Sri Rama. (18)

मृत्युकालोपमस्याज्ञां राजराजस्य वानरा:।
सुग्रीवस्याययु: श्रुत्वा सुग्रीवभयशङ्किता:॥१९॥

Hearing the command of Sugriva, the
ruler of rulers of monkeys, who was like
Death himself to them, the monkeys turned
up with all speed, unnerved as they were
with fear of Sugriva. (19)

ततस्तेऽञ्जनसंकाशा गिरेस्तस्मान्महाबला:।
तिस्त्र: कोट्य: प्लवंगानां निर्ययुर्यत्र राघव:॥ २०॥

Then three crores of monkeys—
monkeys who were like collyrium in colour
and possessed of extraordinary might, rushed
forth from the Afjana mountain to where Sri

(17)

Rama (a scion of Raghu) was. (20)

अस्तं गच्छति यत्रार्कस्तस्मिन् गिरिवरे रता:।

संतप्तहेमवर्णाभास्तस्मात् कोट्यो दश SAAT: ।॥। २१॥
Ten crores of other monkeys,

possessing the hue of molten gold and
sporting on the foremost of mountains where
the sun sets, moved from the said mountain.

(21)
कैलासशिखरेभ्यश्च सिंहकेसरवर्चसाम्।

तत: कोटिसहस्राणि वानराणां समागमन्॥ २२॥
Again, thousands of crores of monkeys
shining like the manes of a lion came ina
body from the heights of the Kailasa mountain.
(22)

फलमूलेन जीवन्तो हिमवन्तमुपाश्रिता:।
तेषां कोटिसहस्राणां सहस्रं समवर्तत॥ २३॥
Another million crores of monkeys, who
had taken up their abode on the Himalayan
range and lived on fruits and roots, turned
up. (23)
