814

वधिष्यामि ass wa aa यथेप्सितम्।
wag: स q at राजानमिदमब्रवीत्॥८॥

“ ‘My distinguished army will no doubt
gladly go with you. Personally reaching with
my army consisting of four limbs (viz.,
elephants, cavalry, chariots and_ foot
soldiers), | shall make short work of your
enemy, the night-stalker, as desired by you,
O jewel among ascetics!’ Reassured in
these words, the aforesaid sage for his part
replied to the king as follows: (7-8)

रामान्नान्यद् Tet लोके पर्याप्तं तस्य रक्षस:।
देवतानामपि भवान् समरेष्वभिपालक:॥९॥

“‘No power in the world other than Sri
Rama is adequate to meet that ogre, even
though you have been the protector even of
gods on the fields of battle. (9)
आसीत् da कृतं कर्म त्रिलोकविदितं नृप।
काममस्ति महत् सैन्यं तिष्ठत्विह war gol

“‘The feat accomplished by you is
known through all the three worlds, O
protector of men! Even though there is a
great army with you, let it remain here, O
scorcher of your enemy ! (10)

बालोऽप्येष महातेजा: समर्थस्तस्य निग्रहे।
गमिष्ये राममादाय स्वस्ति तेऽस्तु परंतप॥११॥

“‘Though still a boy, Sri Rama is
endowed with great energy and is capable
of subduing the ogre. | shall, therefore, depart
taking him with me. May all be well with
you, O tormentor of foes !’ (11)

इत्येवमुक्त्वा स मुनिस्तमादाय नृपात्मजम्।
जगाम परमप्रीतो विश्वामित्र: स्वमाश्रमम्॥१२॥

Saying so and taking the aforesaid
prince with him, Viswamitra returned to his
own hermitage, supremely gratified. (12)

तं तथा दण्डकारण्ये यज्ञमुद्दिश्य दीक्षितम्।
बभूवोपस्थितो रामश्चित्रं विस्फारयन् धनु:॥ १३॥
“Twanging his wonderful bow, Sr

Rama stood by the side of the sage,
consecrated for a sacrifice in the Dandaka

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

forest as prearranged.
अजातव्यञ्जन: श्रीमान् बाल: FATA: शुभेक्षण:।
एकवस्त्रधरो धन्वी Prat कनकमालया॥ १४॥
शोभयन् दण्डकारण्यं दीप्तेन स्वेन तेजसा।
अदरृश्यत dal रामो बालचन्द्र इवोदित:॥ १५॥
“Tllumining the Dandaka forest with his
refulgent splendour, the glorious Rama—
who was still a boy, in whom the marks of
manhood (in the shape of moustaches etc.)
had not yet appeared, dark-brown of
complexion, with charming eyes and a single
cloth wrapped about his loins as a token of
celibacy, wielding a bow and wearing a tuft
of hair on the crown of his head and adorned
with a string of gold—looked at that time like
the new moon just risen. (14-15)
ततोऽहँ मेघसंकाशस्तप्तकाञ्चनकुण्डल:।
बली दत्तवरो दर्पादाजगामाश्रमान्तरम्॥१६॥
“At that time I—who looked like a cloud,
and was adorned with ear-rings of refined
gold, full of might and puffed up with
arrogance, a boon having been conferred
on me by Brahma—reached the heart of the
hermitage. (16)

तेन ge: प्रविष्टोऽहं सहसैवोद्यतायुध:।
मां तु दृष्टवा धनु: सज्यमसम्भ्रान्तश्चकार ह॥ १७॥

“The moment | entered the hermitage |
was espied by him. Having suddenly lifted
up his weapon on seeing me, he strung his
bow calmly indeed. (17)

अवजानन्नहं मोहाद् बालोऽयमिति राघवम्।
विश्वामित्रस्य at वेदिमभ्यधावं कृतत्वर:॥ ec i

“Disregarding Rama (a scion of Raghu)
through ignorance, thinking that he was a
mere boy, | rushed with speed towards the
well-known altar occupied by ViSwamitra. (18)

तेन मुक्तस्ततो बाण: शित: शात्रुनिबर्हण:।
तेनाहं ताडित: faa: समुद्रे शतयोजने॥१९॥
“By him was discharged at that time a
sharp arrow capable of destroying the enemy.
Struck by it | was cast into the sea which

(13)
