976

with the rising sun, the highly intelligent
ViSwakarma, the foremost among the
builders, granted him the following boon:
(19)
मत्कृतानि च शस्त्राणि यानि दिव्यानि तानि च।
तैरवध्यत्वमापन्नश्चिरजीवी भविष्यति॥ २०॥

‘Having acquired invulnerability to
celestial weapons that have been forged by
me as well as to those which exist in my
mind, he shall be long-lived.’ (20)

दीर्घायुश्च महात्मा च ब्रह्मा तं प्राब्रवीद् वच:।
सर्वेषां ब्रह्मदण्डानामवध्योऽयं भविष्यति॥ २१॥

“Brahma made the following augury
concerning the infant: ‘This infant shall be
long-lived and magnanimous and shall be
invulnerable to all rods of punishment
connected with Brahma (the creator) or to
the imprecations pronounced by _ the
Brahmanas.” (21)

तत: सुराणां तु वरैर्दृष्ट्वा ह्येनमलङ्कृतम्।
चतुर्मुखस्तुष्टमना वायुमाह जगद्गुरु:॥ २२॥

“Gratified to see the infant enriched by
the boons granted by the gods, Brahma (the
four-faced god), the teacher of the world,
spoke to the wind-god as follows: (22)
अमित्राणां भयकरो मित्राणामभयंकर:।
अजेयो भविता पुत्रस्तव मारुत मारुति:॥ २३॥

“Your son, Hanuman, O wind-god, will
prove to be a terror to his foes, will vouchsafe
immunity from fear to his friends and will
prove invincible. (23)

कामरूप: कामचारी कामग: प्लवतां वर:।
भवत्यव्याहतगति: कोर्तिमांश्च भविष्यति॥ २४॥
“This jewel among the monkeys shall
be able to change his form at will, and go
wheresoever he pleases at the speed of his
choice; his movements will remain unimpeded
and everywhere he shall turn out glorious.
(24)

रावणोत्सादनार्थानि रामप्रीतिकराणि च।
रोमहर्षकराण्येव कर्ता कर्माणि संयुगे॥ २५॥

« VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

“‘In the war he shall accomplish feats
intended to uproot Ravana, pleasing to Sri
Rama and causing one’s hair to stand on
end.’ (25)
`एवमुक्त्वा तमामन्त्य मारुतं want: सह।
यथागतं ययु: सर्वे पितामहपुरोगमा:॥ २६॥

“Saying so and taking leave of the
well-known wind-god, all the petitioners
including the gods, with Brahma (the
grandfather of the entire creation) at their
head, returned even as they had come.(26)

सोऽपि गन्धवह: Ut Whe गृहमानयत्।
अञ्जनायास्तमाख्याय वरदत्तं विनिर्गत:॥ २७॥

“Taking his son with him, the wind-god
(the wafter of smells), brought the child
home and, telling Anjana of the child having
been granted boons by the gods, departed.
(27)

wa Wa वरानेष वरदानबलान्वित:।
जवेनात्मनि संस्थेन सोऽसौ Got इवार्णव:॥ २८॥

“Having obtained boons from the gods,
and enriched by the strength which accrued
from the bestowal of boons, O Rama, this
celebrated Hanuman replete with his native
velocity, resembled the ocean. (28)

तरसा पूर्यमाणोऽपि तदा वानरपुङ्खव:।
आश्रमेषु महर्षीणामपराध्यति निर्भय:॥ २९॥

“Overflowing with vigour, Hanuman (a
bull among the monkeys) fearlessly began
to offend even against the sanctity of the
hermitages of eminent Rsis seers of Vedic
Mantras at that time. (29)
स्रुग्भाण्डान्यग्निहोत्राणि वल्कलानां च संचयान्।
भग्नविच्छिन्नविध्वस्तान् संशान्तानां करोत्ययम्॥ ३० ॥

“He broke the sacrificial ladles and
vessels, interrupted the pouring of oblations
into the sacred fires and tore to shreds the
piles of bark belonging to the perfectly tranquil
ascetics living in the hermitages. (30)

एवंविधानि कर्माणि wrada महाबल:।
सर्वेषां ब्रह्मदण्डानामवध्य: शम्भुना कृत:॥ ३१॥
