948

« VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

७
ad
a

सर्ग:

Canto XXX

Brahma grants boons to Indrajit and prevails on him to release Indra from
captivity; nay, reminding the latter of his past sin, Brahma asks him
to perform a sacrifice to propitiate Lord Visnu; at the conclusion
of the said sacrifice Indra returns to heaven

fat महेन्द्रेऽतिबले रावणस्य सुतेन al
wrote पुरस्कृत्य ययुर्लङ्कां सुरास्तदा॥१॥

Placing Brahma, the lord of created
beings, at their head, when the mighty Indra,
who was endowed with surpassing strength,
had been actually conquered by Meghanada
(son of Ravana), the gods then proceeded
to Lanka. (1)
wat रावणमासाद्य पुत्रभ्रातृभिरावरृतम्।
अब्रवीद् गगने तिष्ठन् सामपूर्वं प्रजापति:॥ २॥

Approaching Ravana, surrounded by his
sons and brothers, Brahma (the lord of created
beings), while remaining in the air, spoke (as
follows) in conciliatory tones: (2)

वत्स रावण तुष्टोऽस्मि पुत्रस्य da संयुगे।
अहोऽस्य विक्रमौदार्यं तव तुल्योऽधिकोऽपि aT it ३॥

“Dear Ravana, | am pleased with your
son’s bearing on the battlefield. Wonderful is
the greatness of his prowess. He is thus
your equal or even superior to you. _— (3)
कृता प्रतिज्ञा सफला प्रीतोऽस्मि ससुतस्य ते॥४॥

“By dint of your own energy all the
three worlds have actually been conquered
by you and your vow stands fulfilled. | am
accordingly pleased with you as well as
with your son. (4)

अयं च पुत्रोऽतिबलस्तव want वीर्यवान्।
जगतीन्द्रजिदित्येव परिख्यातो भविष्यति॥५॥

“This son of yours, O Ravana, is
exceedingly mighty and powerful, and will
henceforth be widely known in the world
by the name of Indrajit, the conqueror of
Indra. (5)

बलवान् दुर्जयश्चैव भविष्यत्येव राक्षस:।

यं समाश्रित्य ते राजन् स्थापितास्त्रिदशा वशे॥ ६॥
“This ogre, relying on whom, O king,

you have brought the gods under your

subjugation, will surely become powerful and

difficult to conquer. (6)

तन्मुच्यतां महाबाहो महेन्द्र: पाकशासन:।

किं चास्य मोक्षणार्थाय प्रयच्छन्तु दिवौकस:॥ ७॥
“Therefore, let the mighty Indra, the tamer

of the demon Paka, be set free. Again, what

should the gods (lit., denizens of heaven) pay
to you in consideration for his liberation?”(7)

अथाब्रवीन्महातेजा इन्द्रजित् समितिञ्जय:।

अमरत्वमहँ देव UT यद्येष मुच्यते॥८॥
Indrajit, who was victorious in battle

and was endowed with extraordinary energy,

thereupon replied, “Il seek immortality from
you, O lord, if he is set free.” (8)

ततोऽब्रवीन्महातेजा मेघनादं = arate: |
नास्ति सर्वामरत्वं fe कस्यचित् प्राणिनो भुवि॥ <
चतुष्पदां खेचराणामन्येषां च महौजसाम्।
श्रुत्वा पितामहेनोक्तमिन्द्रजित् प्रभुणाव्ययम्॥ १०॥
अथाब्रवीत् स तत्रस्थं मेघनादो महाबल:।
श्रूयतां या भवेत् सिद्धि: शतक्रतुविमोक्षणे॥ ११॥

Thereupon Brahma (the lord of created
beings), who was endowed with extraordinary
energy, replied as follows to Meghanada:
“There is no immunity from death at the
hands of any for any living being whatsoever
on earth, for a bird or a quadruped or for
other created beings, though endowed with
extraordinary might.” Hearing the observation
made by Lord Brahma (the grandfather of
the creation), the exceptionally mighty
