* SUNDARAKANDA « 41

Like the wind, Hanuman dragged along
with him masses of clouds of the same
colour as Agallocam (the black aloe) as
also red, yellow and white in colour. (181)

कपिना कृष्यमाणानि महाभ्राणि चकाशिरे।
प्रविशन्नभ्रजालानि निष्पतंशच पुन: पुन:॥ १८२॥
प्रावृषीन्दुरिवाभाति निष्पतन् प्रविशंस्तदा।
प्रदृश्यमान: सर्वत्र STAM मारुतात्मज:॥१८३॥
भेजेऽम्बरं निरालम्बं पक्षयुक्त इवाद्रिराट।
प्लवमानं तु तं get सिंहिका नाम राक्षसी॥ १८४॥
मनसा चिन्तयामास West कामरूपिणी।
अद्य दीर्घस्य कालस्य भविष्याम्यहमाशिता॥ १८५ ॥
इदं wa महासत्त्वं चिरस्य वशमागतम्।
इति संचिन्त्य मनसा च्छायामस्य समाक्षिपत्॥ १८६ Il
Drawn by Hanuman, the huge clouds
looked charming. Penetrating the masses of
clouds and coming out again and again, he
shone forth at that moment like the moon
emerging from and entering into the clouds
during the monsoon. Eagerly watched
everywhere by all, Hanuman, son of the wind-
god, sped through the supportless sky like
Sumeru, the king of mountains, endowed with
wings. Seeing him moving on, an ogress,
Simhika by name, who was able to change
her form at will, and had grown out of all
proportion, thought for her part within herself:
“Today | shall be sated for a long time to
come. After a long wait this huge creature
has fallen in my grasp.” Reflecting thus in her
heart, she clutched his shadow. (182—186)

समाक्षिप्तोऽस्मि सहसा पङ्गूकृतपराक्रम:॥ १८७॥
प्रतिलोमेन वातेन महानौरिव सागरे।
तिर्यगूर्ध्वमधश्चैव वीक्षमाणस्तदा कपि:॥ १८८॥
ददर्श स महासत्त्वमुत्थितं लवणाम्भसि।
ae gat चिन्तयामास मारुतिर्विकृताननाम्॥ १८९॥

On his shadow being seized, Hanuman
thought: “Clutched by someone all of a
sudden, | have been rendered powerless
like a big bark retarded in its course by an
adverse wind.” Looking about sideways as

well as both upward and below, the said
Hanuman espied a huge creature risen from
the salty sea below. Seeing that female
form with an ugly face, Hanuman, son of the
wind-god, reflected : (187—189)

कपिराज्ञा यथाख्यातं सत्त्वमद्भुतदर्शनम्।
छायाग्राहि महावीर्यं तदिदं art संशय:॥ १९०॥
“It is the same creature of weird
appearance, endowed with extraordinary
prowess and capable of securing her prey
by means of its shadow, which was depicted
in its true colours by Sugriva, the king of
monkeys; there is no doubt about it.” (190)

सतां बुद्ध्वार्थतत्त्वेन सिंहिकां मतिमान् कपि: ।
व्यवर्धत महाकाय: प्रावृषीव बलाहक:॥१९१॥
Knowing her from the correctness of
the description given by Sugriva to be
Simhika, that sagacious Hanuman grew out
of all proportions to be gigantic in form like
a cloud during the rains. (191)
तस्य सा कायमुद्वीक्ष्य वर्धमानं महाकपे:।
aed प्रसारयामास पातालाम्बरसंनिभम्॥ १९२॥
शचनराजीव गर्जन्ती वानरं समभिद्रवत्।
a ददर्श ततस्तस्या विकृतं सुमहन्मुखम्॥ १९३॥
कायमात्रं च मेधावी मर्माणि च महाकपि:।
स तस्या विकृते वक्ते वज्रसंहनन: कपि:।॥ १९४॥
संक्षिप्य मुहुरात्मानं निपपात महाकपि:।
आस्ये तस्या निमज्जन्तं ददृशु: सिद्धचारणा: ॥ १९७५ Il
ग्रस्यमानं यथा चन्द्रं पूर्णं पर्वणि राहुणा।
ततस्तस्या नखैस्तीक्ष्णैर्मर्माण्युत्कृत्य वानर:॥ १९६॥
उत्पपाताथ वेगेन मन:सम्पातविक्रम:।
at तु दिष्ट्या च धृत्या च दाक्षिण्येन निपात्य स: ।। १९७॥
कपिप्रवीरो वेगेन वव्रृधे पुनरात्मवान्।
wet हनुमता waa विधुराम्भसि।
स्वयंभुवैव हनुमान् सृष्टस्तस्या निपातने॥१९८॥
Observing the body of that mighty
Hanuman growing, she distended her mouth,
which resembled the space enclosed in
Patala (the nethermost subterranean region)
and, thundering like a mass of clouds, rushed
towards Hanuman. That huge, intelligent
