* ARANYAKANDA «

the entrance of the hermitage, it joined the
herds of deer. (26)

मृगयूथैरनुगत: पुनरेव निवर्तते।
सीतादर्शनमाकांक्षन् राक्षसो मृगतां गत:॥ २७॥
Keenly longing to attract the notice of
Sita, the ogre, who had converted into the
form of a deer, returned once more, followed
by herds of deer. (27)

परिभ्रमति चित्राणि मण्डलानि विनिष्पतन्।
समुद्बीक्ष्य च सर्वे तं मृगा येऽन्ये वनेचरा:॥ २८॥
sary समाघ्राय विद्रवन्ति दिशो दश।
राक्षस: सोऽपि तान् वन्यान् मृगान्मृगवधे रत: ।॥ २९॥
प्रच्छादनार्थं भावस्य न भक्षयति संस्पृशन्।
तस्मिन्नेव da: काले Ae शुभलोचना॥ ३०॥
कुसुमापचये व्यग्रा पादपानत्यवर्तत।
कर्णिकारानशोकांश्च चूतांश्च मदिरिक्षणा॥ ३१॥
कुसुमान्यपचिन्वन्ती चचार रुचिरानना।
अनर्हा वनवासस्य सा तं रत्नमयं मृगम्॥३२॥
तं oa रुचिरदन्तोष्ठं रूप्यधातुतनूरुहम्॥ ३३॥
विस्मयोत्फुल्लनयना सस्नेहं समुदैक्षत।
स च तां रामदयितां पश्यन् मायामयो मृग:।॥ ३४॥
विचचार ततस्तत्र दीपयन्निव dq वनम्।
अदृष्टपूर्वं दृष्टवा तं नानारत्नमयं मृगम्।
विस्मयं परमं सीता जगाम जनकात्मजा॥ ३५॥

825

Nay, while coming near Sita, he spun
describing round a number of circles. Gazing
on him from a distance, approaching him and
snuffing him, all other deer that hunted that
forest scattered in all directions. In order to
hide his intention, that ogre, though fond of
killing deer, would not devour those wild deer
even though fully touching them. That very
moment Sita (a princess of the Videha
territory), who was possessed of lovely and
bewitching eyes and a charming countenance
and was intently plucking flowers, just
appeared on this side of the Karnikara, ASoka
and mango trees and moved about plucking
flowers. Unworthy of exile in the forest, that
excellent lady sighted that jewel among
antelopes, having its limbs freckled with pearl-
like spots. With her eyes dilated through
wonder, she fondly surveyed that deer with
lovely teeth and jaws and hair shining like
silver and other minerals. Looking on her
beloved consort, Sri Rama, that illusory deer
too presently roamed about on that spot,
illumining that forest, as it were. Seeing that
deer, the like of which had never been seen
before, and which was made up of varied
jewels, as it were, Sita, Janaka’s daughter,
experienced great wonder. (28—35)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्येऽरण्यकाण्डे द्विचत्वारिंश: AW: ॥ ४२ ॥

Thus ends Canto Forty-two in the Aranyakanda of the glorious Ramayana of Valmiki,
the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

Canto XLHUI

Rama goes to hunt the deer at the persistent demand of Sita

सा तं सम्प्रेक्ष्य सुश्रोणी कुसुमानि विचिन्वती।
हेमराजतवर्णाभ्यां पाश्वाभ्यामुपशोभितम्॥ १॥
Wet चानवद्याङ्मी मृष्टहाटकवर्णिनी।
भर्तारमपि Was लक्ष्मणं Wa सायुधम्॥ २॥
Highly delighted to perceive the deer

adorned with flanks, presenting the hue of
gold and silver, respectively, the comely
Sita, who was possessed of faultless limbs
and the hue of burnished gold, and was
eagerly plucking flowers, called to her
husband as well as to Laksmana with arms
in the following words: (1-2)
