+ UTTARAKANDA +

तस्य तद् वचनं श्रुत्वा रामो रमयतां वर:।
वानरेन्द्रमथोवाच मैत्रॆ तस्यानुचिन्तयन्॥२४॥

Hearing him so saying, Rama, the best
among rejoicers, having in consideration his
friendship spoke to Sugriva: (24)

wa yup सुग्रीव न त्वयाहं विनाकृत:।
गच्छेयं देवलोकं वा परमं वा Ud महत्॥ २५॥
‘Listen to me, my friend, | do not intend
to go without you, to supreme beatitude or
even to my Saketadhama.’ (25)

तैरेवमुक्त: काकुत्स्थो बाढमित्यब्रवीत् स्मयन्।
विभीषणमथोवाच राक्षसेन्द्रं महायशा:॥ २६॥

Thus spoken to by them, the
descendant of Kakutstha, smiled and said,
‘so be it,’ then the famous one spoke to
Vibhisana: (26)
यावत् प्रजा धरिष्यन्ति तावत् त्वं वै विभीषण।
राक्षसेन्द्र महावीर्य लङ्कास्थ: स्वं धरिष्यसि॥ २७॥

‘As long as the subjects will stay alive,
so long you will stay in person as king of
Lanka. (27)
यावच्चन्द्रश्च सूर्यश्च यावत् तिष्ठति मेदिनी।
यावच्च मत्कथा लोके AMAL राज्यं तवास्त्विह॥ २८ ॥

‘As long as the sun and the moon stay,
and as long as this earth remains in this

world, as long as my tales exist in the
world, so long may your rule be. (28)

शासितश्च सखित्वेन कार्यं ते मम शासनम्।
प्रजा: संरक्ष धर्मेण नोत्तरं वक्तुमर्हसि॥ २९॥

‘Out of friendship you are commanded
by me, the orders are to be carried out by
you; protect the subjects righteously; please
do not make any reply. (29)

किंचान्यद् वक्तुमिच्छामि राक्षसेन्द्र महाबल।
आराधय जगन्नाथमिक्ष्वाकुकुलदैवतम्॥ ३०॥

‘O best among Raksasas, this much
more | wish to say, O mighty one, worship
Jagannatha (Visnu) the presiding deity of
the Iksvaku-family. (30)

1129

आराधनीयमनिशं देवैरपि सवासवै:।
तथेति प्रतिजग्राह रामवाक्यं विभीषण:॥ ३१॥

‘Visnu is to be worshipped always even
by the gods, together with Indra.’ Saying
thus: “It shall be so” Vibhisana the king of
the Raksasas, accepted in obedience the
words of Sri Rama. (31)

राजा राक्षसमुख्यानां राघवाज्ञामनुस्मरन्।
तमेवमुक्त्वा काकुत्स्थो हनूमन्तमथाब्रवीत्॥ ३२॥
जीविते कृतबुद्धिस्त्वं मा प्रतिज्ञां Far Pa: |
मत्कथा: प्रचरिष्यन्ति यावल्लोके हरीश्वर॥ ३३॥
तावद् रमस्व सुप्रीतो मद्वाक्यमनुपालयन्।
एवमुक्तस्तु हनुमान् राघवेण महात्मना॥ ३४॥
वाक्यं विज्ञापयामास परं हर्षमवाप a
यावत् da कथा लोके विचरिष्यति पावनी ।। ३५ ॥
तावत् स्थास्यामि मेदिन्यां तवाज्ञामनुपालयन्।
जाम्बवन्तं तथोक्त्वा तु वृद्धं ब्रह्मसुतं तदा॥ ३६॥
मैन्दं च द्विविदं चैव पञ्च जाम्बवता सह।
यावत् कलिश्च सम्प्राप्तस्तावज्जीवत सर्वदा॥ ३७॥

Vibhisana kept in mind the orders of
the descendant of Raghu. Having spoken
to Vibhisana, the descendant of Kakutstha
then spoke to Hanuman: ‘You have made
up your mind to live on this earth, so do
not let your resolve go in vain. O best
among monkeys, as long as my tales
circulate on this earth, so long live happily,
in compliance with my words.’ Thus spoken
to by Sri Rama, the noble descendant of
Raghu, Hanuman was highly pleased and
said to him: ‘As long as your divine tale will
circulate on this earth, so long shall | stay
here on earth, carrying out your orders.’
Saying thus to the son of Brahma, the
aged Jambavan, Sri Rama _ instructed
Mainda and Dvivida also to stay alongwith
Jambavan (including Vibhisana and Hanuman
five in all) on earth till Kali approaches.

(32—37)

तानेवमुक्त्वा काकुत्स्थ: सर्वांस्तानृक्षवानरान्।

उवाच बाढं गच्छध्वं मया सार्धं यथोदितम्॥ ३८॥
