* BALAKANDA +

Coming to know of his absence from
the hermitage due to his having gone out for
his daily bath etc., Indra (who is noted for
his thousand eyes), the spouse of Saci,
appeared in the guise of the sage Gautama
and spoke to Ahalya as follows : (17)

ऋतुकालं प्रतीक्षन्ते नार्थिन: सुसमाहिते।
संगमं त्वहमिच्छामि त्वया we सुमध्यमे॥ १८॥
““Those hankering after enjoyment do
not await the time favourable for conception
(the sixteen nights following menstruation),
O highly composed lady ! |, therefore, seek
union with you, pretty woman!’ (18)
मुनिवेषं सहस्राक्षॆ विज्ञाय रघुनन्दन।
मतिं चकार दुर्मेधा देवराजकुतूहलात्॥१९॥
“Even on recognizing him to be Indra,
the thousand-eyed god, disguised as
Gautama, O scion of Raghu, the misguided
woman set her heart upon Indra in her
eagerness to embrace the ruler of gods.(19)

अथाब्रवीत् सुरश्रेष्ठं कृतार्थेनान्तरात्मना।
कृतार्थास्मि AAS Wes शीघ्रमित: Wit io ti

“With her inner self gratified through
union with Indra, she said to Indra (the
foremost of gods), ‘I stand accomplished of
my purpose through this meeting with you,
O jewel among gods. Pray depart from this
place at once, O lord! (20)

आत्मानं मां च देवेश सर्वथा Ter गौतमात्।
इन्द्रस्तु प्रहसन् वाक्यमहल्यामिदमब्रवीत्॥ २१॥

“Only guard your own self as well as
me in everyway from the notice of Gautama,
O ruler of gods ` Thereupon Indra heartily
laughed and addressed the following words
to Ahalya : (21)
सुश्रोणि परितुष्टोऽस्मि गमिष्यामि यथागतम्।
एवं संगम्य तु dal निश्चक्रामोटजात् तत:॥ २२॥
स सम्भ्रमात् त्वरन् राम शङ्कितो गौतमं प्रति।
गौतमं स ददर्शाथ प्रविशन्तं महामुनिम्॥ २३॥

“‘Highly gratified through this meeting
with you, O charming lady, | shall depart

205

even as | came unobserved by anyone.’
Having thus copulated with her, O Rama,
he thereupon issued out of the hut with
quick steps, of course from fear of being
detected, apprehensive as he was of
meeting Gautama. Immediately he saw the
great sage Gautama entering the cottage.

(22-23)
देवदानवदुर्धर्षं तपोबलसमन्वितम्।
तीर्थोदकपरिक्लिन्नं दीप्यमानमिवानलम्॥ २४॥
गृहीतसमिधं तत्र सकुशं मुनिपुंगवम्।
get सुरपतिस्त्रस्तो विषण्णवदनोऽभवत्॥ २५॥

“Dismayed to behold there Gautama,
the foremost of sages—who was hard to
overcome even for gods and demons,
equipped as he was with spiritual energy
generated by askesis—drenched with holy
water in which he had just bathed and
blazing like fire, carrying firewood for the
sacrificial fire and blades of KuSa grass in
his hands, Indra, the ruler of gods, stood
with his face downcast. (24-25)

अथ gst Beara मुनिवेषधरं मुनि:।
दुर्वृत्तं वृत्तसम्पन्नो रोषाद् वचनमब्रवीत्॥२६॥

“Seeing Indra, the thousand-eyed god,
in his own disguise and guilty of misconduct,
the sage, who was perfect in his moral
conduct, forthwith spoke in an angry tone
as follows : (26)

मम St समास्थाय कृतवानसि दुर्मते।
अकर्तव्यमिदं यस्माद् विफलस्त्वं भविष्यसि॥ २७॥

“‘Since you have perpetrated this
misdeed having assumed my disguise, O
evil-minded one, you will be shorn of your
testicles.’ (27)

गौतमेनैवमुक्तस्य सुरोषेण महात्मना।
पेततुर्वृषणौ wat सहस्राक्षस्य तत्क्षणात्॥ २८॥

The testicles of Indra (the thousand-
eyed god) dropped instantly on the ground
even as he was cursed, as aforesaid, by
the high-souled Gautama, highly incensed
as he was. (28)
