* BALAKANDA +

their aerial cars to felicitate Sri Rama on his
victory, that had brought solace to all the
three worlds and aroused as though from
sleep, the monkeys fallen in battle,
Sri Rama flew to Ayodhya in the aerial car
known by the name of ‘Puspaka’ that had
been snatched by Ravana from his _ half-
brother, Kubera, the god of riches,
accompanied by his relations, Sita and
Laksmana and friends, Vibhisana, Sugriva
and others. (86)

भरद्वाजाश्रमं गत्वा राम: सत्यपराक्रम:।
भरतस्यान्तिके रामो हनूमन्तं व्यसर्जयत्॥८७॥

“Reaching the hermitage of the sage
Bharadwaja in the vicinity of Prayaga, Sri
Rama of unfailing prowess despatched
Hanuman in advance to the presence of
Bharata in order to apprise him of his safe
return lest he should be taken unawares.

(87)
पुनराख्यायिकां जल्पन् सुग्रीवसहितस्तदा।
Tah ad समारुह्य नन्दिग्रामं ययौ तदा॥८८॥

“Narrating past history (the
circumstances that had led to his exile in
the forest) and boarding the celebrated
Puspaka once more, he then flew to
Nandigrama (then a part of Ayodhya),
accompanied by Sugriva and others. (88)

नन्दिग्रामे जटां हित्वा भ्रातृभि: सहितोऽनघ:।

राम: सीतामनुप्राप्य राज्यं पुनरवाप्तवान्॥८९॥
“Having disentangled his matted hair at

Nandigrama alongwith his three brothers

and back with Sita, the sinless Rama
regained his kingdom too. (89)

प्रहृष्टमुदितो लोकस्तुष्ट: पुष्ट: सुधार्मिक:।
निरामयो ह्यरोगश्च दुर्भिक्षभयवर्जित:॥९०॥

“During the reign of Sri Rama people
will be positively much delighted and cheerful,
contented and well-fed, exceedingly pious,
free from mental agony and bodily ailments
and rid of the scourge of famine and fear of
theft etc. (90)

न पुत्रमरणं hag द्रक्ष्यन्ति पुरुषा: Fata |
नार्यश्चाविधवा Fret भविष्यन्ति पतिव्रता:॥ ९१॥

67

“Nowhere will men witness the death
of their son or daughter, women will never
be widows and will be ever devoted to their
husband. (91)
न चाग्निजं भयं किंचिन्नाप्सु मज्जन्ति जन्तव: |
न वातजं wa किंचिन्नापि ज्वरकृतं तथा॥९२॥

“There will be no fear from fire nor will
living beings be drowned in water. There
will be no fear from wind nor any fear of
fever. (92)
न चापि क्षुद्धयं तत्र न तस्करभयं तथा।
नगराणि च राष्ट्राणि धनधान्ययुतानि AN esl

“Nor will there be fear of starvation in
his kingdom nor that of thieves. Nay, cities
and states will be full of riches and food-
grains. (93)

नित्यं प्रमुदिता: wd यथा कृतयुगे तथा।
अश्वमेधशतैरिट्टरा तथा बहुसुवर्णकै:॥९४॥
Tat कोट्ययुतं दत्त्वा fag विधिपूर्वकम्।
असंख्येयं धनं दत्त्वा ब्राह्मणेभ्यो महायशा:॥ ९५॥
राजवंशाञ्छतगुणान् स्थापयिष्यति राघव:।
चातुर्वर्ण्य च लोकेऽस्मिन् स्वे स्वे धर्मे नियोक्ष्यति ।। ९६ ।

“All will be ever extremely happy as in
Satyayuga. Having propitiated the Lord
through hundreds of horse-sacrifices and
other sacrifices involving the use of
abundant gold, nay, bestowed with due
ceremony a billion cows on the learned and
giving away untold riches to the Brahmanas,
the highly renowned Rama will establish
royal dynasties, a hundred times more
prosperous than before, by not only
recognizing and confirming their sovereignty
but even by liberally subsidizing them. Nay,
he will direct the people belonging to all
the four grades of society to follow their
respective duties on this terrestrial plane.

(94—96)
दशवर्षसहस्राणि दशवर्षशतानि

ail
TH राज्यमुपासित्वा ब्रह्मलोकं प्रयास्यति॥ ९७॥
“Having served his kingdom for eleven

thousand years, Sri Rama will ascend to
Brahmaloka (the highest heaven).” (97)
