726

ad: शक्रोपयानं तु पर्यपृच्छत्स राघव:।
शरभङ्गश्च तत् ad राघवाय न्यवेदयत्॥२७॥
Then Rama, for his part, asked the

purpose of Indra’s visit and Sarabhanga
related the whole thing to Raghava. (27)

मामेष वरदो राम ब्रह्मलोकं निनीषति।
जितमुग्रेण तपसा दुष्प्रापमकृतात्मभि:॥ २८॥

“This bestower of boons, Indra, O Rama,
desires to take me to Brahmaloka, which
has been won by me through severe penance
and which is difficult to be attained by those
who are not self-controlled. (28)

Se ज्ञात्वा नरव्याघ्र वर्तमानमदूरत:।
ब्रह्मलोकं न गच्छामि त्वामदृष्टवा प्रियातिथिम्॥ २९॥

“O tiger-man, I, having known you to
be present nearby, decided not to go to
Brahmaloka without seeing you, my beloved
guest. (29)

त्वयाहं पुरुषव्याघ्र धार्मिकेण महात्मना।
समागम्य गमिष्यामि त्रिदिवं चावरं परम्॥ ३०॥
अक्षया नरशार्दूल जिता लोका मया शुभा:।
AAT ATH TSA प्रतिगृह्णीष्व मामकान्॥ ३१॥
“Having had a meeting with you, a
high-souled prince of righteous nature, |
shall go to the lower heaven and then to the
higher. | have won, O tiger-man, auspicious
and unending worlds—heavenly and those
of Lord Brahma; please accept all these my
worlds.” (30-31)

एवमुक्तो नरव्याघ्र: सर्वशास्त्रविशारद:।
RATT शरभङ्गेन राघवो वाक्यमब्रवीत्॥३२॥
When thus spoken to by Sage

Sarabhanga, the tiger-man, Rama, well-versed
in all sciences—replied as follows: (32)

अहमेवाहरिष्यामि सर्वाल्लोकान् महामुने।
आवासं त्वहमिच्छामि प्रदिष्टमिह कानने॥ ३३॥

“O great sage, | shall myself bring all
the worlds to you. However, | desire that a
place of abode be pointed out to me in this
forest.” (33)

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

राघवेणैवमुक्तस्तु शक्रतुल्यबलेन वै।
शरभङ्गो महाप्राज्: पुनरेवाब्रवीद् वच:॥३४॥

Thus addressed by Raghava, equal in
might to Indra, the very wise Sarabhanga
once again uttered the following words : (34)

Be राम महातेजा: सुतीक्ष्णो नाम धार्मिक:।
वसत्यरण्ये fad: स a sat विधास्यति॥ 34

“Rama, here in the forest dwells a
righteous and self-restrained sage, named
Sutiksna, possessed of great lustre. He will
do you good. (35)

सुतीक्ष्णमभिगच्छ त्वं शुचौ देशे तपस्विनम्।
रमणीये वनोद्देशे स a वासं विधास्यति॥ ३६॥

“Approach you the ascetic Sutiksna in
that pious region. He will arrange for your
residence in a charming region of the forest.

(36)
sat मन्दाकिनीं राम प्रतिस्रोतामनुव्रज।
adit पुष्पोडुपवहां ततस्तत्र गमिष्यसि॥ ३७॥

“Rama, follow against the current this
river Mandakini carrying boats of flowers;
then you will reach there. (37)

एष पन्था नरव्याघ्र qed पश्य तात माम्।
यावज्जहामि गात्राणि जीर्णां त्वचमिवोरग:॥ ३८ ।।

“This is the path, O tiger-man ! Dear,
look at me for a while as | shed the old and
worn-out limbs, just as a serpent casts off
its slough.” (38)
ततोऽग्निं स समाधाय हुत्वा चाज्येन मन्त्रवत्।
शरभङ्गो महातेजा: प्रविवेश हुताशनम्॥३९॥

Then, kindling the fire and pouring
oblations of ghee with chants, that
Sarabhanga of great lustre entered the fire.

(39)
तस्य रोमाणि केशांश्च तदा वह्निर्महात्मन:।
जीर्णां त्वचं तदस्थीनि यच्च मांसं च शोणितम्॥ ४०॥

Presently the fire burnt the hair on the

body and head, old skin and bones and

whatever flesh and blood that great soul
had. (40)
