* SUNDARAKANDA +

movement of the thighs of the high-minded
monkey, Nila, much more so the ogres. (15)

सदेवासुरयक्षेषु गन्धर्वोरगपक्षिषु।
मैन्दस्य प्रतियोद्धारं शंसत द्विविदस्य वा॥१६॥
“Point out to me a warrior among the
demons and Yaksas including the gods, as
well as among the Gandharvas, serpents
and birds, who can contend as an equal
with Mainda or Dwivida. (16)

अश्विपुत्रौ महावेगावेतौ प्लवगसत्तमौ।
एतयो: प्रतियोद्धारं न पश्यामि रणाजिरे॥ ee

“These two sons of the Aswinikumaras,
are endowed with great impetuosity and are
the foremost among monkeys. | do not find
any match for them on the field of battle. (17)

waa निहता लङ्का war भस्मीकृता पुरी।
राजमार्गेषु सर्वेषु aa विश्रावितं मया॥१८॥

“By me alone was Lanka, the ogress
presiding over Lanka, laid low and the city
set to fire and reduced to ashes. Nay, in all
the principal streets the name of Sri Rama
and others was proclaimed by me as follows:

(18)
जयत्यतिबलो WAT लक्ष्मणश्च महाबल:।
राजा जयति सुग्रीवो राघवेणाभिपालित:॥१९॥

“Victorious is Sri Rama of exceeding
might, as also Laksmana, who is endowed
with extraordinary might! Victorious is King
Sugriva, who is protected on all sides by Sri
Rama (a scion of Raghu) ! (19)
अहं कोसलराजस्य दास: पवनसम्भव:।
हनूमानिति सर्वत्र am विश्रावितं मया॥२०॥

५८१ am Hanuman, a servant of Sri Rama,
ruler of the kingdom of Kosala, and son of
the wind-god.’ In this way the name of Sri
Rama and others was proclaimed by me
everywhere. (20)
अशोकवनिकामध्ये रावणस्य दुरात्मन:।
अधस्ताच्छिशपामूले साध्वी करुणमास्थिता॥ २१॥
राक्षसीभि: परिवृता शोकसंतापकर्शिता।
मेघरेखापरिव्रता चन्द्ररेखेव निष्प्रभा॥२२॥

265

“The virtuous lady Sita abides in a
pitiable condition on the ground at the foot of
a SirnSapa tree in the heart of a grove of
Asoka trees, belonging to the evil-minded
Ravana, surrounded by ogresses, nay,
emaciated through grief and agony and bereft
of splendour like a digit of the moon veiled
by the strip of a cloud. (21-22)

अचिन्तयन्ती वैदेही रावणं बलदर्पितम्।
पतिव्रता च सुश्रोणी अवष्टब्धा च जानकी॥ २३॥

“Caring little for Ravana, who is proud
of his might, Sita of charming limbs, a princess
of the Videha territory, who has taken a vow
of fidelity to her lord, has been placed under
restraint. (23)

अनुरक्ता fe वैदेही wa सर्वात्मना शुभा।
अनन्यचित्ता रामेण पौलोमीव पुरन्दरे॥ २४॥

“Devoted to Sri Rama with her whole
being, the blessed Sita, a princess of the
Videha territory, has set her mind exclusively
on Sri Rama even as Saci (daughter of the
demon Puloma) on Indra. (24)

तदेकवास:संवीता रजोध्वस्ता aa च।
सा मया राक्षसीमध्ये तर्ज्यमाना सुहुर्मुहु:॥ २५॥
राक्षसीभिर्विरूपाभिर्दृष्टा fe प्रमदावने।
एकवेणीधरा दीना भर्तृचिन्तापरायणा॥ २६॥

“Clad in a single piece of cloth, which
she had on her person even while being
borne away by Ravana, and likewise soiled
with dust, she was actually seen by me in
a wretched condition in the midst of ogresses
in a pleasance, wearing a single braid,
absorbed in the thought of her husband and
being threatened again and again by mis-
shapen ogresses. (25-26)

अध:शय्या विवर्णाङ्गी पद्मिनीव हिमोदये।
रावणाद् विनिवृत्तार्था मर्तव्यकृतनिश्चया॥ २७॥

“She stretches herself on the bare
ground, has grown pale of body like a lotus
plant at the dawn of winter, has _ utterly
refused to have anything to do with Ravana
