1100

lion among kings, Sri Rama, was performed;
in that horse-sacrifice undertaken by Sri
Rama, the noble one, no other sound was
heard excepting cries of “Go on distributing
till the needy ones are satisfied.” In that
grand sacrifice of the noble one, were given
various articles of jellys and also sugar.
The monkeys and Raksasas were seen
distributing food among those who begged
for food till words of satisfaction did not
come out of their lips.

There was no one unclean, poor or
emaciated in that great horse-sacrifice of
the king, surrounded by happy and well-
nourished beings. Those noble ascetics,
long-lived ones, who came there, could not
recall a sacrifice of that type so enriched
with fabulous gifts and donations, who felt

« VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

satisfied with gifts of gold, indeed; he who
desired wealth, received it and one wishing
gems also received them; Heaps of silver,
gold, gems and garments being distributed
constantly was seen in that sacrifice; ‘we
have not seen such a sacrifice performed
formerly by Indra, Soma, Yama or Varuna,
thus said the sages rich in austerities. At
all corners, there stood monkeys and
demons; they distributed liberally among the
suppliants, who desired clothes, wealth and
food. (10—18)

वासोधनान्नकामेभ्य: पूर्णहस्ता ददुर्भृशम्।
ईदृशो राजसिंहस्य यज्ञ: सर्वगुणान्वित:।
संवत्सरमथो साग्रं वर्तते न च ह्रीयते॥१९॥
Such a sacrifice of the lion among
kings, possessed of all merits, went on for
more than a year unobstructed. (19)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये उत्तरकाण्डे द्विनवतितम: AW: ॥ ९२॥

Thus ends Canto Ninety-two in the Uttarakanda of the glorious Ramayana
of Valmiki, the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

त्रिनवतितम: सर्ग:
Canto LXXXXIII

Arrival of sage Valmiki with Lava and KuéSa in the Horse-sacrifice
of Sr Rama and He orders Kuga and Lava for
singing the Ramayana

वर्तमाने तथाभूते यज्ञे च परमाद्भुते।
सशिष्य आजगामाशु वाल्मीकिर्भगवानृषि: tg i
While that most wonderful sacrifice was
going on, the venerable sage Valmiki with
his pupils came there soon. (1)

a gear दिव्यसंकाशं यज्ञमद्भुतदर्शनम्।
एकान्त ऋषिवाहानां चकार उटजान् शुभान्॥ २॥
शकटांश्च Te पूर्णान् फलमूलांश्च शोभनान्।
वाल्मीकिवाटे रुचिरे स्थापयन्नविदूरत:॥ ३॥
Rsi Valmiki saw the divine and
astounding sacrifice. Valmiki got his hut raised
in the vicinity of other cottages of seers.
They were all wonderful to look at. A number

of carts, full of food-grains, lovely roots and
fruits, were provided near his hut, not far
from the sacrificial ground. (2-3)

आसीत् सुपूजितो राज्ञा मुनिभिश्च महात्मभि:।
वाल्मीकि: सुमहातेजा न्यवसत् परमात्मवान्॥४॥

The self-controlled Valmiki of great lustre
was respected by the king, Sri Rama and
other hermits and great souls staying there. (4)

स शिष्यावब्रवीद् हृष्टौ Fat गत्वा समाहितौ।
pet रामायणं काव्यं गायतां परया मुदा॥५॥
Valmiki addressed the two cheerful

pupils thus; ‘Go and carefully sing the entire
poem, Ramayana, most joyfully. (5)
