* BALAKANDA +

अनरण्यात् पृथुर्जज्ञे त्रिशङ्कुस्तु पृथोरपि।
त्रिशङ्कोरभवत् Gal धुन्धुमारो महायशा:॥ २४॥

“From the lions of Anaranya sprang up
Prthu and from Prthu was born TriSanku.
The highly illustrious Dhundhumara was the
son of TriSanku. (24)

धुन्धुमारान्महातेजा युवनाश्वो महारथ:।
युवनाश्वसुतश्चासीन्मान्धाता पृथिवीपति:।। २५॥

“From Dhundhumara_ sprang up the
highly glorious Yuvanaswa, a great car-
warrior, and King Mandhata was the son of
Yuvanaswa. (25)

मान्धातुस्तु सुत: श्रीमान् सुसन्धिरुदपद्यत।
सुसन्धेरपि पुत्रौ gt ध्रुवसन्धि: प्रसेनजित्॥ २६॥

“The glorious Susandhi, again, was born
as a son to Mandhata, while Dhruvasandhi
and Prasenjit were the two sons of Susandhi.

(26)

यशस्वी ध्रुवसन्धेस्तु भरतो नाम Arad: |
Weald तु महातेजा असितो नाम जायत॥ Vo tl
यस्यैते प्रतिराजान उदपद्यन्त शत्रव:।

हैहयास्तालजङ्घाश्च शूराश्च शशबिन्दव:॥ २८॥

“The illustrious son of Dhruvasandhi,
again, as is well known, was Bharata by
name; and from Bharata sprang up a highly
glorious son, Asita by name, against whom
the Haihayas, the Talajanghas and the
valiant Sasabindus—these rival princes stood
as enemies. (27-28)

तांश्च स प्रतियुध्यन् वै युद्धे राजा प्रवासित:।
हिमवन्तमुपागम्य भार्याभ्यां सहितस्तदा॥ २९॥
असितोऽल्पबलो राजा कालधर्ममुपेयिवान्।

द्वे चास्य wre गर्भिण्यौ बभूवतुरिति श्रुति: it ३० I

“While confronting them in battle, of
course, the said king was routed and
banished from his kingdom by the enemy,
who usurped his throne. Retiring to the
Himalayas alongwith his two consorts then,
King Asita, who had a small force left with
him met his death, a necessary adjunct of
Time. His two wives, of course, happened

261

to be enceinte at that time: so it is heard.
(29-30)

एका गर्भविनाशार्थं सपत्नै सगरं ददौ।
aa: शैलवरे रम्ये बभूवाभिरतो मुनि:॥ ३१॥

भार्गवश्च्यवनो नाम हिमवन्तमुपाश्रित:।
wa चैका महाभागा भार्गवं देववर्चसम्॥ ३२॥

ववन्दे पद्मपत्राक्षी कांक्षन्ती सुतमुत्तमम्।
तमृषिं साभ्युपागम्य कालिन्दी चाभ्यवादयत्॥ ३३॥
“One of them gave food mixed with
poison to her co-wife in order to get rid of
her foetus. At that time an ascetic, Cyavana
by name, a descendant of Sage Bhrgu,
who had taken up his abode on the
Himalayas, got enamoured of that delightful
and excellent peak and made his appearance
there. Desirous of bearing an excellent
son, one of those two widows, the highly
blessed Kalindi, who had been given poison
with food by her co-wife and who had eyes
big as the petals of a lotus, saluted Cyavana,
a scion of Bhrgu, who possessed the
splendour of god. Nay, approaching the
aforesaid seer, she greeted him once more.
(31—33)

स तामभ्यवदद् fay: पुत्रेप्सुं पुत्रजन्मनि।
तव कुक्षौ महाभागे सुपुत्र: सुमहाबल:॥ ३४॥

महावीर्यो महातेजा अचिरात् संजनिष्यति।
गरेण सहित: श्रीमान् मा शुच: कमलेक्षणे॥ ३५॥
As regards the birth of a son to her
the aforesaid Brahmana said to her, eager
as she was to have a healthy son, “From
your womb, O highly fortunate lady, will
be born with poison not long afterwards a
noble and charming son possessing unique
strength, exceedingly powerful and highly
glorious. Do not grieve, O lotus-eyed lady !”
(34—35)

wat च नमस्कृत्य राजपुत्री पतिव्रता।
पत्या विरहिता तस्मात् Ut Sat व्यजायत॥ ३६॥
Having saluted Cyavana, the widowed

princess, who was solely devoted to her
husband, returned to her cottage and through
