1048

at the two sons and made the sacrament for
both of them that kills the inauspicous Bhutas
and destroys the Raksasa. (5)

कुशमुष्टिमुपादाय ad dat तु a द्विज:।
वाल्मीकि: प्रददौ ताभ्यां Tat भूतविनाशिनीम्॥ ६ ॥
That Brahmana Valmiki took the handful
of Kusa and Lava (the lower portion of the
KuSa grass) and preparing the totemic device,
handed it over to them, the protective symbol
that kills the Bhutas. (6)

यस्तयो: पूर्वजो जात: स कुशैर्मन्त्रसत्कृतै:।
निर्मार्जनीयस्तु det कुश इत्यस्य नाम तत्॥७॥
‘He who of the two was born first should

be cleansed with the KuSas purified by chants
and then his name will be ‘KuSa.’ (7)

यश्चावरो भवेत् ताभ्यां लवेन सुसमाहित:।
निर्मार्जनीयो वृद्धाभिर्लवेति च स नामत:॥८॥

‘Who happens to be born later, should
be cleansed carefully with Lava by the old
women and will be known by the name of
Lava. (8)
एवं कुशलवौ नाम्ना तावुभौ यमजातकौ।
मत्कृताभ्यां च नामभ्यां ख्यातियुक्तौ भविष्यत: ।। ९ ॥

‘Thus these twins named ॥९३व and
Lava will become famous bearing the names
given by me.’ (9)
तां tat जगृहुस्तां च मुनिहस्तात् समाहिता:।
अकुर्वंश्च ततो Tat तयोर्विगतकल्मषा:॥१०॥

Then the old women of Asrama pure in
mind took with care the totemic device from

the hands of the sage and performed the
protective rites of the twins. (10)

तथा at क्रियमाणां च वृद्धाभिर्गोत्रनाम च।
संकीर्तनं च रामस्य सीताया: प्रसवौ शुभौ॥ ११॥
अर्धरात्रे तु शत्रुघ्न: शुश्राव सुमहत् प्रियम्।
पर्णशालां ततो गत्वा मातर्दिष्ट्येति चाब्रवीत्॥ १२॥

While in this manner (the symbolic

« VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

protection) was being performed by the old
women, Satrughna at midnight heard the
joyful Gotra and name of Sri Rama and also
the news of delivery of the two sons by Sita
and then having entered the arbour of Sita
said, ‘O mother, by the grace of God two
sons are born to you.’ (11-12)

तदा तस्य प्रहृष्टस्य शत्रुघ्नस्य महात्मन:।
व्यतीता वार्षिकी रात्रि: श्रावणी लघुविक्रमा॥ १३॥

Then the night of the rainy season of the
month of Sravana (full moon) passed swiftly
with noble Satrughna enjoying himself. (13)

Ward सुमहावीर्य: कृत्वा पौर्वाह्लिकों क्रियाम्।

मुनिं प्राञ्जलिरामन्त्य ययौ पश्चान्मुख: A: १४॥
At break of dawn, having performed

the morning ablutions, he (Satrughna) taking

leave of the sage with folded hands, started

forth to the western direction. (14)

स Tat यमुनातीरं सप्तरात्रोषित: पथि।
ऋषीणां पुण्यकीर्तीनामाश्रमे वासमभ्ययात्॥ १५॥

Reaching the banks of the Yamuna,
and having spent seven nights on the way
he (Satrughna) made for his stay in the
hermitages of the sages of holy fame. (15)

a तत्र मुनिभि: सार्धं भार्गवप्रमुखैर्नृप:।
कथाभिरभिरूपाभिर्वासं चक्रे महायशा:॥१६॥

He, the famous one, dwelt there with
the sages among whom Bhargava was the
foremost, taking part in talks proper to the
occasion. (16)
a काञ्चनाद्यैर्मुनिभि: «wid

रघुप्रवीरो रजनीं तदानीम्।
कथाप्रकारैर्बहुभिर्महात्मा
विरामयामास ARE: ॥ १७॥

This way the mightiest among Raghus
and great souled Satrughna in the company
of sages like Cyavana passed that night
through hearing various religious tales. (17)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये उत्तरकाण्डे षट्षष्टितम: सर्ग: ॥ ६६ Il
Thus ends Canto Sixty-six in the Uttarakanda of the glorious Ramayana of Valmiki,
the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

