« KISKINDHAKANDA +

उत्पपात हरिश्रेष्ठो हित्वा सौवर्णमासनम्।
महान् महेन्द्रस्य यथा स्वलंकृत इव ध्वज:॥ ३॥
Observing the said son of Emperor
DaSaratha, breathing heavily in anger and
blazing as it were with spirit, tormented as
he was with the misfortune of his elder
brother, Sri Rama, and leaving his seat of
gold, Sugriva, the foremost of monkeys,
who was richly adorned, jumped to the floor
like a tall flag raised in honour of the mighty
Indra, the ruler of gods, profusely adorned.
(2-3)

sure «=| रुमाप्रभृतय: «= Petar: |
सुग्रीवं गगने wh ask तारागणा इव॥४॥
Like hosts of stars bursting into view in
the firmament in the wake of the full moon,
the ladies too led by his own wedded wife,
Ruma, jumped immediately after Sugriva
had done. (4)

संरक्तनयन: श्रीमान् संचचार कृताञ्जलि:।
बभूवावस्थितस्तत्र कल्पवृक्षो महानिव॥५॥

With his eyes blood-red through
inebriety, the glorious monkey moved near
with folded hands; while Laksmana stood
rooted there like a mighty wish-yielding tree.

(5)
अब्रवील्लक्ष्मण: Bag: AA शशिनं यथा॥६॥

Laksmana angrily spoke as follows to
Sugriva, standing with Ruma at his side in
the midst of other ladies like the full moon
surrounded by stars : (6)

सत्त्वाभिजनसम्पन्न: सानुक्रोशो जितेन्द्रिय:।
कृतज्ञ: सत्यवादी च राजा लोके महीयते॥७॥

“A king who is endowed with goodness
and is rich in pedigree, is compassionate
and has subdued his senses, and who
recognizes the services rendered to him
and always speaks the truth is honoured in
the world. (7)

यस्तु राजा स्थितोऽधर्मे मित्राणामुपकारिणाम्।
मिथ्या प्रतिज्ञां qed को नृशंसतरस्तत:॥८॥

1071

“Who, on the other hand, is more hard-
hearted than the king who, being rooted in
unrighteousness, makes a false promise to
friends, who have rendered good offices to
him? (8)
शतमश्वानृते हन्ति weet तु Tard
आत्मानं स्वजनं हन्ति Gea: पुरुषानृते॥९॥

“On making a false promise with
reference to the gift of a single horse, a man
is supposed to have killed a hundred horses;
on uttering a false promise with reference to
the gift of a single cow, he is supposed to
have actually killed a thousand cows; while
on making a false promise to a man about
some personal service, he is supposed to
have committed suicide and killed his own
people. (9)
पूर्वं कृतार्थो मित्राणां न तत्प्रतिकरोति य:।
कृतघ्न: सर्वभूतानां स वध्य: प्लवगेश्चर॥ १०॥

“He who having first accomplished his
own purpose with the help of his friends,
does not repay the service of his friends is
ungrateful and deserves to be killed
(ostracized) by all created beings, O lord of
monkeys ! (10)
गीतोऽयं ब्रह्मणा Veit: सर्वलोकनमस्कृत:।
दृष्टवा कृतघ्नं क्रुद्धेन तन्निबोध प्लवंगम॥ ११॥

“The couplet which is being reproduced
below and which is venerated by all men
was uttered by Brahma (or his own son,
Swayambhuva Manu) when enraged to see
an ungrateful being. Pray, listen to it, O
monkey : (11)
Wer da सुरापे च चौरे भग्नव्रते तथा।
निष्कृतिर्विहिता ate: कृतघ्ने नास्ति निष्कृति: ।॥। १२॥

‘An expiation has been prescribed by
good men with respect to a man who has
killed a cow, for him as well who has drunk
wine, also for a thief and likewise for him
who has violated a sacred vow; but there is
no expiation for an ungrateful soul.’ (12),

अनार्यस्त्वं कृतघ्नश्च मिथ्यावादी च arr
पूर्वं कृतार्थो रामस्य न तत्प्रतिकरोषि यत्॥१३॥
