* AYODHYAKANDA +

ad: शत्रुघ्नभरतौ कौसल्यां wer दु:ख्रितौ।
पर्यष्वजेतां दु:खार्तां पतितां नष्टचेतनाम्॥९॥
Perceiving Kausalya, who was stricken
with sorrow, and had fallen unconscious on
the way, the two afflicted brothers, Satrughna
and Bharata, hugged her. (9)

रुदन्तौ रुदती दु:खात् समेत्यार्या मनस्विनी।
भरतं प्रत्युवाचेदं कौसल्या भृशदु:खिता॥ go tl
Embracing in return the two brothers,
who were weeping through agony, the noble
and high-minded Kausalya, who was sore
distressed, addressed Bharata as follows :
(10)
इदं ते राज्यकामस्य राज्यं प्राप्तमकण्टकम्।
सम्प्राप्तं बत कैकेय्या शीघ्रं PLOT कर्मणा॥११॥
“Enjoy this kingdom, devoid of enemies,
obtained by you, who coveted it. Alas, it
has been promptly secured for you by
Kaikeyi through a cruel deed in the shape
of banishing Rama, Sita and Laksmana.
(11)
प्रस्थाप्य चीरवसनं पुत्रं मे वनवासिनम्।
कैकेयी कं गुणं तत्र पश्यति क्रूरदर्शिनी॥१२॥
“What good did the cruel-eyed Kaikeyi
expect by sending into exile, as she did, my
son, Rama, as an ascetic clad in the bark
of trees? (12)

fag मामपि कैकेयी प्रस्थापयितुमर्हति।
हिरण्यनाभो यत्रास्ते सुतो A सुमहायशा:॥१३॥
“Kaikeyi ought to send away soon me
as well to the place where my exceptionally
illustrious son with a golden navel (a
distinguishing mark of Lord Visnu) is
sojourning. (13)

अथवा स्वयमेवाहं सुमित्रानुचरा सुखम्।
अग्निहोत्रं पुरस्कृत्य प्रस्थास्ये aa राघव:॥१४॥

“Or, placing the sacrificial fire* (carried
by a Brahmana) ahead and followed by

569

Sumitra, | shall myself depart happily along
the route by which Rama has proceeded to
the forest. (14)

कामं वा स्वयमेवाद्य at मां नेतुमर्हसि।

यत्रासौ पुरुषव्याघ्रस्तप्यते मे सुतस्तप:॥१५॥
“Or, you ought personally to take me

now freely to the place where my aforesaid

son, a veritable tiger among men, is practising
austerities. (15)
sé fe तव विस्तीर्णं धनधान्यसमाचितम्।
Rams राज्यं निर्यातितं तया॥१६॥
“This extensive kingdom overflowing
with riches and foodgrains and fully equipped
with elephants, horses and chariots has

actually been conferred on you by her, your
mother.” (16)

इत्यादिबहुभिर्वाक्यै: क्रूरै: सम्भत्सितोऽनघ:।
विव्यथे भरतोऽतीव व्रणे तुद्येव सूचिना॥१७॥

Bitterly reproached in many such cruel
words, the sinless Bharata felt extremely
pained as he would when pricked with a
needle in the wound. (17)

पपात चरणौ तस्यास्तदा सम्भ्रान्तचेतन:।
विलप्य बहुधासंज्ञो लब्धसंज्ञस्तदाभवत्॥ १८॥

Having lost his consciousness, his mind
being utterly confused to hear the taunting
words of Kausalya, Bharata presently
regained his senses and, wailing in many
ways, then fell at her feet. (18)
wa विलपमानां तां प्राञ्जलिर्भरतस्तदा।
कौसल्यां प्रत्युवाचेदं शोकैर्बहुभिरावृताम्॥ १९॥

To Kausalya, overwhelmed with griefs
of many kinds and lamenting as aforesaid,
Bharata then replied with folded hands as
follows : (19)

आर्ये कस्मादजानन्तं TEA मामकल्मषम्।
विपुलां च an प्रीतिं स्थितां जानासि राघवे॥ २०॥

“Wherefore do you reproach me,

* The king’s seniormost wife alone is entitled to preserve and worship the sacred fire in the absence

of or on the death of her husband.
