+ UTTARAKANDA +

न तावदेष दुष्टात्मा शक्यो जेतुं सुरासुरै:।
हन्तुं चापि समासाद्य वरदानेन दुर्जय:॥१५॥

“This wicked soul can in no case be
conquered by gods and demons, combined,
much less can he be killed on encountering
him, hard to conquer as he is by virtue of
the boon conferred on him by Brahma.

(15)

सर्वथा तु महत् HA करिष्यति बलोत्कट:।
राक्षस: पुत्रसहितो दृष्टमेतन्निसर्गत:॥१६॥

“Accompanied by his son, the ogre for
his part, intoxicated as he is with power, will
perform feats which will be mighty in every
way: this has been intuitively perceived by
Me. (16)

यत् तु at त्वमभाषिष्ठा युध्यस्वेति BAT |
नाहं तं प्रतियोत्स्यामि रावणं राक्षसं युधि॥ १७॥
“As regards what you have said to Me,

viz., ‘Fight’, O ruler of gods, | will not
encounter the ogre Ravana in combat. (17)

नाहत्वा समरे wa विष्णु: प्रतिनिवर्तते।
दुर्लभश्चैव कामोऽद्य वरगुप्ताद्धि रावणात्॥१८॥

‘Visnu does not, as a rule, retreat without
killing His enemy in combat. And the ambition
of scoring a victory is difficult to realize
against Ravana, who stands protected by a
boon today. (18)
प्रतिजाने च देवेन्द्र त्वत्समीपे शातक्रतो।
भवितास्मि यथास्याहं रक्षसो मृत्युकारणम्॥१९॥

“I, however, O ruler of gods, solemnly
declare in your presence, O Indra (who is
presupposed to have performed in his
previous lives a hundred AsSwamedha
sacrifices as a condition precedent for
attaining that office), that | shall prove to be
the cause of the death of this ogre when the
time comes for it. (19)

अहमेव निहन्तास्मि रावणं सपुर:सरम्।
देवता नन्दयिष्यामि ज्ञात्वा कालमुपागतम्॥ २०॥

“| Myself shall kill Ravana including
those marching ahead of him on coming to

937

know of his end having arrived and thereby
bring joy to gods. (20)
एतत् ते कथितं art देवराज शचीपते।
युद्ध्यस्व विगतत्रास: सुरै: सार्धं महाबल॥ २१॥
“Thus truth has been revealed to you,
0 king of gods and husband of Saci!

Completely rid of fear, fight alongwith gods,
O very mighty god!” (21)
Tal Sal: सहादित्या वसवो मरुतोऽश्विनौ।
संनद्धा निर्ययुस्तूर्णं राक्षसानभित: पुरात्॥ २२॥
Clad in armour, the  Rudras
accompanied by the sons of Aditi, the Vasus,
the wind-gods, the two Aswins (the twin-
born physicians of gods) thereupon sallied
forth from the city of gods with all speed to
meet the ogres. (22)

एतस्मिन्नन्तरे नाद: शुश्रुवे रजनीक्षये।
तस्य रावणसैन्यस्य प्रयुद्धस्य समन्तत:॥ २३॥

In the meantime at the close of the
night was heard on all sides the tumult of
the Raksasa army, whose method of fighting
was superior to that of the gods. (23)

ते Wael महावीर्या अन्योन्यमभिवीक्ष्य a1
संग्राममेवाभिमुखा अभ्यवर्तन्त हृष्टवत्॥ २४॥

Perceiving one another when _ fully
awakened, the ogres, who were endowed
with extraordinary valour, advanced, full of
joy with their faces turned towards the
battlefield alone. (24)

ततो दॆवतसैन्यानां date: समजायत।

तदक्षयं weet दृष्टवा समरमूर्धनि॥ २५॥
On seeing that huge and imperishable

army in the forefront of battle, a great

confusion was sown among the ranks of
the gods. (25)

ततो Ge समभवद् देवदानवरक्षसाम्।

at तुमुलनिर्ह्यदं नानाप्रहरणोद्यतम्॥ २६॥
Then ensued a grim fight between the

gods, on the one hand, and the Danavas

and ogres, on the other, amidst a tumultuous
