# YUDDHAKANDA #

Laksmana, (scions of Raghu) as also
Sugriva, who is endowed with extraordinary
energy and the ogre, Vibhisana.” (33)

ततो हर्षसमुद्भूतो नि:स्वनो दिवमस्पृशत्।
स्त्रीबालयुवव्रद्धानां रामोऽयमिति कोर्तिते॥ ३४॥

Immediately the words “Here comes
Sri Rama” were loudly uttered by Hanuman,
a clamour born of joy from the mouth of
women, children, young men and the aged
thereupon reached the skies. (34)

रथकुञ्जरवाजिभ्यस्तेऽवतीर्य महीं गता:।
ददृशुस्तं विमानस्थं नरा: सोममिवाम्बरे॥ ३५॥

Standing on the ground, on alighting
from their chariots, elephants and horses,
the people beheld Sri Rama seated in the
aerial car like the moon in the sky. (35)

Watered भूत्वा प्रहृष्टो राघवोन्मुख:।
यथार्थेनार्घ्यपाद्याद्यैस्ततो राममपूजयत्॥ ३६॥

Standing highly rejoiced with joined
palms, his face turned towards Sri Rama,
Bharata thereupon worshipped Sri Rama
(from afar) with offerings of water to wash
his hands and feet with and other articles,
extending welcome to him in the true sense,
Sri Rama’s return being truly welcome to
him. (36)

मनसा ब्रह्मणा सृष्टे विमाने भरताग्रज:।
रराज पृथुदीर्घाक्षो वज्रपाणिरिवामर:॥ ३७॥
Sri Rama, the elder brother of Bharata,
who had large and long eyes (extending up
to the ears) shone in the said aerial car
created by ViSwakarma with his mind, like
the god, Indra, who carries the thunderbolt
in his hand. (37)
ततो विमानाग्रगतं भरतो भ्रातरं तदा।
ववन्दे प्रणतो WH मेरुस्थमिव भास्करम्॥ ३८॥
Bent low with reverence, Bharata then
saluted his elder brother, Sri Rama, who
stood in the forepart of the aerial car even
as one would salute the sun appearing on
Mount Meru. (38)

831

ततो रामाभ्यनुज्ञातं तद् विमानमनुत्तमम्।
हंसयुक्तं महावेगं निपपात महीतलम्॥३९॥

Duly permitted by Sri Rama, the said
aerial car, which was unsurpassed by any
other, had a swan, as it were, yoked to it,
and was endowed with extraordinary speed,
descended to the earth’s surface. (39)

आरोपितो faart aq भरत: सत्यविक्रम:।
राममासाद्य मुदित: पुनरेवाभ्यवादयत्॥४०॥
Feeling delighted when lifted on to that
aerial car and approaching Sri Rama, Bharata
of unfailing prowess, greeted him once more.
(40)

तं समुत्थाय काकुत्स्थश्चिरस्याक्षिपथं गतम्।
ae भरतमारोप्य मुदित: परिषस्वजे॥४१॥
Fully rising from his seat and placing
on his lap Bharata who had fallen within
the range of his sight after a long time,
Sri Rama, a scion of Kakutstha, joyfully
embraced him. (41)

ततो लक्ष्मणमासाद्य aed च परंतप:।
अथाभ्यवादयत् प्रीतो भरतो ATT चाब्रवीत्॥४२॥
Approaching Laksmana (and embracing
him) as also Sita (a princess of the Videha
territory), Bharata, the scourge of his enemies
thereupon joyously saluted her and mentioned
his name too. (42)

+ । + ° |
We च द्विविदं नीलमृषभं da सस्वजे॥४३॥
Bharata (son of Kaikey!) also embraced
Sugriva, the ruler of monkeys, Jambavan,
the king of bears, and Angada (son of Vali,
Sugriva’s elder brother), as also Mainda,
Dwivida, Nila and Rsabha, too. (43)

सुषेणं च नलं चैव गवाक्षं गन्धमादनम्।
शरभं we da Uta: परिषस्वजे॥४४॥
He further embraced fully Susena and
Nala (son of Viswakarma, who constructed

the bridge across the sea), Gavaksa,
Gandhamadana, Sarabha, as well as
Panasa. (44)
