1060

energy, caught hold once more of the feet
of his mother and, pressing firmly the feet of
Ruma, he then submitted to him the aforesaid
matter. (37)

स निद्राक्लान्तसंवीतो arnt न विबुद्धवान्।

aya मदमत्तश्च मदनेन च मोहित:॥ ३८॥
The aforesaid monkey, however, who

was heavy with sleep and overwhelmed

with it, nay, who was drunk with wine and

infatuated with love, did not wake up to the
situation. (38)

aa: किलकिलां चक्रुर्लक्ष्मणं प्रेक्ष्य वानरा:।

प्रसादयन्तस्तं क्रुद्धं भयमोहितचेतस:॥ ३९॥
Perceiving Laksmana enraged, the

monkeys, whose mind was confused through

fear, thereupon raised a hue and cry, seeking
to pacify him. (39)

a महौघनिभं gear वज्राशनिसमस्वनम्।
सिंहनादं समं चक्रुर्लक्ष्मणस्य समीपत:॥४०॥

Descrying the presence of Laksmana,
they raised near about Sugriva a clamour
resembling all at once the sound of a great
onrush of water or the peals of thunder or
the roar of a lion. (40)

तेन शब्देन महता प्रत्यबुध्यत वानर:।
मदवबिह्वलताम्राक्षो व्याकुल: स्रग्विभूषण:॥४१॥

The monkey, Sugriva, woke up at that
loud noise. With blood-red eyes he was
beside himself through intoxication and felt
troubled, garlands being his only ornaments.

(41)
अथाङ्गदवच: श्रुत्वा तेनैव च समागतौ।
मन्त्रिणौ वानरेन्द्रस्य सम्मतोदारदर्शनौ॥४२॥
प्लक्षश्चैव प्रभावश्च मन्तिणावर्थधर्मयो:।
वक्तुमुच्चावचं We लक्ष्मणं dt शशंसतु:॥४३॥
प्रसादयित्वा सुग्रीवं वचनै: सार्थनिश्चितै:।
आसीनं पर्युपासीनौ यथा yeh मरुत्पतिम्॥४४॥

Hearing the submission of Angada,
and gladdening Sugriva with words which
expressed a definite opinion about the matter
in hand, two famous counsellors of Sugriva,

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

the lord of monkeys, namely Plaksa and
Prabhava—who gave sage counsel and had
come with Prince Angada himself, nay,
who were highly esteemed by Sugriva,
and were noble of appearance, and who
stood respectfully by the side of Sugriva,
sitting like Indra, the ruler of gods—
announced to him the presence of
Laksmana, who had come to teach him
various things about worldly fortune and
righteousness. (42—44)
सत्यसंधौ महाभागौ भ्रातरौ रामलक्ष्मणौ।
मनुष्यभावं सम्प्राप्तौ Tea राज्यदायिनौ॥ ४५ ॥
They said: “Having assumed for sport
a human semblance, the two brothers, Sri
Rama and Laksmana are true to their
promise, highly blessed and deserving of

sovereignty of all the three worlds and have
conferred rulership on you. (45)

तयोरेको eaeafergitt तिष्ठति लक्ष्मण:।
यस्य भीता: प्रवेपन्तो नादान् मुञ्चन्ति वानरा: ।॥। ४६ UI

“One of them, viz., Laksmana, stands
at your door, bow in hand. Afraid of him and
violently shaking, the monkeys are raising
shrill cries. (46)

स एष राघवभ्राता लक्ष्मणो वाक्यसारथि:।
व्यवसायरथ: प्राप्तस्तस्य रामस्य शासनात्॥४७॥

“Here stands the celebrated Laksmana,
younger brother of Sri Rama (a scion of
Raghu), arrived at the command of the
same Sri Rama with the latter's message
as his charioteer (guide) and _ the
determination to achieve his purpose for his
chariot. (47)
अयं च तनयो राजंस्ताराया afadisge: |
लक्ष्मणेन सकाशं ते प्रेषितस्त्वरयानघ॥४८॥

“Nay, this beloved son of Tara, Angada,
has been sent with expedition by Laksmana
to your presence, O sinless one! (48)

सोऽयं रोषपरीताक्षो git तिष्ठति वीर्यवान्।
वानरान् वानरपते चक्षुषा निर्दहन्निव॥४९॥

“And consuming, as it were, the
