# YUDDHAKANDA #

Springing up in fury and pulling a
shaft from his quiver, the son of Sumitra,
Laksmana, stretched his huge bow to full
length before Atikaya. (47)
पूरयन् स महीं सर्वामाकाशं सागरं fest: |
ज्याशब्दो लक्ष्मणस्योग्रस्त्रासयन् रजनीचरान्॥ ४८ UI

Filling the entire earth, the airspace,
the ocean as well as the quarters, and
striking terror in the prowlers of the night,
the twang of Laksmana’s bowstring was
terrible. (48)
सौमित्रेश्चापनिर्घोषं श्रुत्वा प्रतिभयं तदा।
विसिस्मिये महातेजा राक्षसेन्द्रात्मजो बली ।॥४९॥

The mighty Atikaya, sprung from
the loins of the king of orgres, who was
endowed with extraordinary energy, was
astonished on that occasion to hear the
fearful twang of the bow of Laksmana (son
of Sumitra). (49)

तदातिकाय: कुपितो दृष्टवा लक्ष्मणमुत्थितम्।
आदाय निशितं बाणमिदं वचनमब्रवीत्॥५०॥
Enraged to behold Laksmana active
and seizing hold of a whetted shaft, Atikaya
then spoke to Laksmana as_ follows:
(50)

बालस्त्वमसि सौमित्रे विक्रमेष्वविचक्षण:।
Tres किं कालसंकाशं मां योधयितुमिच्छसि॥ ७५१ ॥
“You are still a youngster, O son of
Sumitra, unskilled in exhibiting valour.
Therefore, depart! Why do you seek to
measure your strength with me, a replica of
Kala (the Time-Spirit)? (51)
सोढुमुत्सहते वेगमन्तरिक्षमथो मही॥५२॥
“Not even the Himalaya mountain, nor
the atmosphere nor even the earth can
withstand the force of the arrows discharged
by my arm. (52)

सुखप्रसुप्तं aren विबोधयितुमिच्छसि।
न्यस्य चापं निवर्तस्व प्राणान्न जहि मद्गत:॥ ५३॥

595

“Do you seek to rouse the fire of
universal dissolution, comfortably buried in
slumber? Casting away your bow, go back.
Confronting me, do not lose your life. (53)

अथवा त्वं प्रतिस्तब्धो न निवर्तितुमिच्छसि।
तिष्ठ प्राणान् परित्यज्य गमिष्यसि यमक्षयम्॥ ५४॥
“Or, if, being stubborn, you do not wish

to return, tarry. Yielding up your life, you
shall proceed to the abode of Yama (the

god of retribution). (54)
usa मे निशितान् बाणान् रिपुदर्पनिषूदनान्।
ईश्वरायुधसंकाशांस्तप्तकाञ्चनभूषणान् ॥ ५७५ ॥

“Behold my whetted shafts, capable of
crushing the pride of the enemy, nay,
resembling the weapon, trident of Lord Siva,
and decked with refined gold. (55)
एष ते सर्पसंकाशो बाण: पास्यति शोणितम्।
मृगराज इव Hal नागराजस्य शोणितम्।
इत्येवमुक्त्वा संक्रुद्ध: शरं धनुषि संदधे॥ ५६॥

“This arrow, resembling a serpent, shall
quaff your blood even as a furious lion
would drink the blood of a lordly elephant.”
Having spoken as aforesaid, Atikaya, who
was seized with fury, put an arrow to his
bow. (56)

सगर्बितं संयति राजपुत्र: |
a संचुकोपातिबलो मनस्वी
sara वाक्यं च ततो महार्थम्॥५७॥

Hearing the furious and proud utterance
of Atikaya on the field of battle, the high-
minded Prince Laksmana, who was endowed
with surpassing strength, flew into a rage
and then made the following reply, which
was full of great significance: (57)

न वाक्यमात्रेण भवान् wart

न कत्थनात् सत्पुरुषा भवन्ति।
मयि स्थिते धन्विनि बाणपाणौ

निदर्शयस्वात्मबलं दुरात्मन्॥ ५८ I

“You cannot claim to be pre-eminent
