“Though knowing himself as released
by the aforesaid missile in consequence of
a boon granted by Brahma to the effect
that after undergoing bondage for about a
couple of hours, the missile associated with
his name being infallible, he would be rid of
it, the hero, Hanuman, who was keen to
meet Ravana, deliberately bore with those
ogres who carried him in bondage to
Ravana. (76)

ततो दग्ध्वा पुरीं लङ्कामृते सीतां च मैथिलीम्।
रामाय प्रियमाख्यातुं पुनरायान्महाकपि:॥ ७७॥

“Having set on fire the city of Lanka
barring the abode of Sita, the princess of
Mithila, alone, the great monkey Hanuman,
then came back by the same route to
Kiskindha to break the delightful news, of
Sita having been found, to Sri Rama. (77)

सोऽभिगम्य महात्मानं कृत्वा रामं प्रदक्षिणम्।
न्यवेदयदमेयात्मा दृष्टा सीतेति तत्त्वत:॥७८॥

“Approaching the high-souled Sri Rama
and going round him clockwise as a mark
of respect, Hanuman, who was possessed
of infinite intelligence, submitted to him that
Sita had been seen by him in reality. (78)

तत: सुग्रीवसहितो wer dit महोदधे:।
समुद्रं क्षोभयामास शररादित्यसंनिभै:॥७९॥

“Moving to the shore of the Indian ocean
in the extreme south, accompanied by
Sugriva, Sri Rama then shook the ocean to
its lowest depths (in Patala, the nethermost
subterranean plane) by his arrows glorious
as the sun (on the latter not responding to
allow passage to the army of monkeys, that
sought to march across it in order to reach
Lanka in their bid to recover Sita). (79)

दर्शयामास चात्मानं समुद्र: सरितां पति:।
समुद्रवचनाच्चैव नलं सेतुमकारयत्॥८०॥

“At this, Ocean, the lord of the rivers,
not only revealed himself in person to Sri
Rama but also apologized to him for his
refractoriness and only at the intercession
of Ocean, Sri Rama caused Nala to build a
bridge across the sea. (80)

« VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

तेन गत्वा at लङ्कां हत्वा रावणमाहवे।
राम: सीतामनुप्राप्य परां व्रीडामुपागमत्॥८१॥

“Reaching the city of Lanka by the
bridge and killing Ravana in a combat, Sri
Rama experienced a sense of great shame
on getting back Sita (who had remained so
long at the grove of a demon in Lanka and
could be easily pronounced by critics as
polluted). (81)

तामुवाच ततो wa: wed जनसंसदि।
अमृष्यमाणा सा सीता विवेश ज्वलनं TATU ८२॥

“Sri Rama then spoke harsh words to
her in the assembly of monkeys and others.
Resenting them, the aforesaid Sita, chaste
as she was, entered fire. (82)

ततोऽग्निवचनात् सीतां ज्ञात्वा विगतकल्मषाम्।
कर्मणा तेन महता त्रैलोक्यं सचराचरम्॥८३॥
सदेवर्षिगणं तुष्टं राघवस्य महात्मन:।
aut Wa: सम्प्रहृष्ट: पूजित: सर्वदैवतै:॥ ८४॥
“Coming to know Sita as sinless from
the words of the fire-god, who testified
to her chastity, Sri Rama thereupon accepted
her. All the three worlds, comprising the
animate and inanimate creation, alongwith
the hosts of gods and Rsis were pleased
with that remarkable feat of the high-souled
Rama in the shape of the overthrow of
Ravana and the deliverance of Sita.
Honoured by all the gods, Sri Rama thereupon
looked extremely delighted. (83-84)

अभिषिच्य च लङ्कायां राक्षसेन्द्रं विभीषणम्।
papa Wa विज्वर: प्रमुमोद Fuca

“Nay, having installed Vibhisana, the
chief of the ogres, on the throne of Lanka,
Sri Rama felt accomplished of purpose and,
rid of anxiety, greatly rejoiced : so the tradition
goes. (85)

देवताभ्यो वरं प्राप्य समुत्थाप्य च वानरान्।
अयोध्यां प्रस्थितो WA: पुष्पकेण सुहृद्वृत:॥ ८६ Il

“Having received a boon to the effect
that all the combatants that had fought on
the side of Sri Rama and fallen in battle be
restored to life, from the gods, who came in
