1108

“Those who have ascended to heaven
as well as the gods who dwell in Indra’s
heaven and those who reside in the realm
of Brahma (the creator) vividly perceive that

lordly mountain. (54)
स तु देशो विसूर्योऽपि तस्य भासा प्रकाशते।
सूर्यलक्ष्म्याभिविज्ञेयस्तपतेव विवस्वता॥ ५७५ UI

“Though without the sun, that region
remains actually lighted by the brilliance of
the mountain as though by the scorching
sun, and should be recognized as blessed
with the brilliance of the sun. (55)

भगवांस्तत्र विश्वात्मा शम्भुरेकादशात्मक:।
ब्रह्मा वसति देवेशो ब्रह्मर्षिपरिवारित:॥५६॥

“There dwells Lord Visnu (the Soul of
the universe), as well as Lord Siva (the
Source of all blessings), manifested in the
form of the eleven Rudras, and, even so,
Brahma (the creator), the sovereign of gods,
surrounded by Brahmana sages (Marica
and others, his mind-born sons). (56)

न कथंचन Wiel कुरूणामुत्तरेण a:
अन्येषामपि भूतानां नानुक्रामति वै गति:।॥५७॥
“You should on no account venture to

the north of the Uttara Kurus. No way lies
beyond for other created beings either. (57)

a fe सोमगिरिर्नाम देवानामपि दुर्गम:।
तमालोक्य तत: क्षिप्रमुपावर्तितुमर्हथ॥ ५८ ॥

“The aforesaid Mount Somagiri, they
say, is really speaking difficult of access
even for gods. Having sighted it, you ought
speedily to return from that place from where
you catch sight of it. (58)

अभास्करममर्यादं न जानीमस्तत: परम्॥५९॥

“Thus far only it is possible for monkeys

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

to proceed, O jewels among the monkeys !
We have no knowledge whatsoever of the
region beyond it, which is devoid of the sun
and without limit. (59)

सर्वमेतद् विचेतव्यं यन्मया परिकीर्तितम्।
यदन्यदपि नोक्तं च तत्रापि क्रियतां मति:।॥ ६०॥

“All this area, described by me, should
be scoured by you. And a resolve should
be made by you even for exploring what
other places have not been mentioned. (60)
wa: md दाशरथेर्महत्प्रियं

महत्प्रियं चापि ततो मम प्रियम्।
pd भविष्यत्यनिलानलोपमा
विदेहजादर्शनजेन कर्मणा॥६१॥

“Through the endeavour that will be
made by you in the course of your search,
leading eventually to a sight of Sita (daughter
of King Videha), something which is highly
pleasing to Sri Rama (son of Emperor
DaSaratha) will have been done by you;
nay, through the same act what is even
much more pleasing to me will have been
accomplished, O monkeys vying with the
god of fire and the wind-god ! (61)
तत: कृतार्था: सहिता: सबान्धवा

मयार्चिता: सर्वगुणैर्मनोरमै:।
सहप्रिया भूतधरा: प्लवंगमा:॥ ६२॥

“Propitiated by me as a sequel to your
invaluable services through presents
endowed with all excellences and delightful
to the mind; nay, rid of all enmity,
accomplished of purpose, and capable of
sustaining other created beings, you will
range the earth with your friends and relatives
as well as with your beloved mates, O
monkeys !” (62)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये किष्किन्धाकाण्डे त्रिचत्वारिंश: सर्ग: ॥ ४३ ॥

Thus ends Canto Forty-three in the Kiskindhakanda of the glorious
Ramayana of Valmiki, the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

