* SUNDARAKANDA +

for your sight, both the aforesaid princes,
who are tigers among men and the scourge
of their foes, will reduce Lanka to ashes.
Nay, having made short work on the field of
battle of the violent Ravana with his kinsfolk,
Sri Rama will surely take you back to his
city Ayodhya, O lady of excellent limbs!
You, for your part, ought to make over to
me a token which Sri Rama may easily
recognize and which may fully bring delight
to him, O irreproachable lady! Surveying
all the four quarters and untying from the
end of her garment this excellent jewel fit for
being strung together with her braid, she
handed it over to me, O prince endowed
with extraordinary might! Taking the jewel
in my hands for being delivered to you, O
prince, beloved of the Raghus, and saluting
her most respectfully with my head bent
low, | was seized with a hurry to return.
Nay, perceiving me eager to depart and,
therefore, expanding my body to immense
proportions, poor Sita, daughter of Janaka,
of excellent complexion, spoke to me in
faltering accents, her throat being choked
with sobs and her face bathed in tears.
(27—33)
ममोत्पतनसम्भ्रान्ता शोकवेगसमाहता।
मामुवाच da: सीता सभाग्योऽसि महाकपे॥ ३४॥
aq द्रक्ष्यसि महाबाहुं WA कमललोचनम्।
लक्ष्मणं च महाबाहुं cat A यशस्विनम्॥ ३५॥
“Getting unnerved at the thought of my
springing up to cross the ocean and smitten
with the vehemence of grief, Sita then said
to me, ‘Fortunate you are, O Hanuman, in
that you will be able to see the mighty-
armed Sri Rama with lotus-like eyes, as
also the mighty-armed Laksmana, my
illustrious brother-in-law.’ (34-35)

सीतयाप्येवमुक्तोऽहमब्रुवं मैथिलीं तथा।
पृष्ठमारोह मे देवि fad जनकनन्दिनि॥३६॥
यावत्ते दर्शयाम्यद्य ससुग्रीवं सलक्ष्मणम्।
Twat च महाभागे भर्तारमसितेक्षणे॥ ३७॥

“Spoken to as aforesaid, | likewise said

289

to Sita, a princess of Mithila, ‘Get on my
back quickly, O godlike lady, the delight of
Janaka, and continue there till | show you
this very day Sri Rama, a scion of Raghu,
your spouse, accompanied by Sugriva and
Laksmana, O highly blessed lady of dark
eyes!’ (36-37)
साब्रवीन्मां ततो eat नैष धर्मो महाकपे।
यत्ते us सिषेवेऽहं स्ववशा हरिपुङ्खव॥ zc
“Thereupon that godlike lady replied to
me as follows : ‘It will not be virtuous on my
part, O Hanuman, if | get on your back even
when | have control over my own self, O
bull among monkeys ! (38)

पुरा च ace वीर TST गात्रेषु रक्षसा।
ware fe करिष्यामि कालेनोपनिपीडिता॥ ३९॥

“`ए४ला though | was touched the other
day by the ogre Ravana all over my limbs
while being borne away from Janasthana, O
gallant monkey, | could not help it, helpless
as | was due to my evil destiny. (39)

गच्छ त्वं कपिशार्दूल aa at ad: सुतौ।
इत्येवं सा समाभाष्य भूय: संदेष्टुमास्थिता॥४०॥
““Therefore, proceed you, O tiger among
monkeys, to where those two princes, Sri
Rama and Laksmana, are.’ Having confidently
spoken thus, Sita proceeded to give the
following further message: (40)
हनूमन् सिंहसंकाशौ तावुभौ रामलक्ष्मणौ।
सुग्रीवं च सहामात्यं सर्वान् ब्रूया अनामयम्॥४१॥
“Inquire, 0 Hanuman, on my behalf
after the welfare of both the aforesaid lion-
like princes, Sri Rama and Laksmana, as
also of Sugriva including his ministers and
all the rest. (41)

यथा च स महाबाहुर्मां तारयति राघव:।

अस्माद्दु:खाम्बुसंरोधात् तत् त्वमाख्यातुमर्हसि Ul ४२ ॥
“*You ought to deliver my message in

such a way that the celebrated Sri Rama of

mighty arms may deliver me from this ocean
of misery. (42)
