# YUDDHAKANDA +

his own master and, even so, duly considering
with his acumen the status quo, set-back or
rise of military power in the enemy’s ranks

339

as well as on his own side tenders an advice
which is proper as well as conducive to the
interests of his master.” (22)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये युद्धकाण्डे चतुर्दश: AWA: ॥ १४॥

Thus ends Canto Fourteen in the Yuddhakanda of the glorious Ramayana of
Valmiki, the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

पञ्चदश: सर्ग:
Canto XV

Reproaching in a language which, though harsh, was yet conformable
to truth, Indrajit, who was indulging in a boastful speech,
on hearing the advice of Vibhisana, the latter repeats
that concilliation of Rama was the only
opportune and salutary course

बरहस्पतेस्तुल्यमतेर्वचस्त-
न्निशम्य यत्नेन विभीषणस्य।
ad महात्मा वचनं aque
तत्रेन्द्रजिन्नैर्ऋतयूथमुख्य: ॥ १॥

Listening with restraint the foregoing
speech of Vibhisana, who was equal in
wisdom to Sage Brhaspati (the preceptor of
gods), the high-spirited Indrajit, the leader
of ogre hordes, forthwith spoke as follows
on that occasion: (1)
fe नाम a ad कनिष्ठ वाक्य-

मनर्थकं वै बहुभीतवच्च।
अस्मिन् कुले योऽपि भवेन्न जात:
सोऽपीदृशं At att कुर्यात्॥२॥

“Why on earth should you actually
utter meaningless words like one who is
greatly alarmed, O youngest uncle? Even
he who is not born in this race of Pulastya
would not utter such words or do such a
thing as is suggested by you. (2)
सत्त्वेन ater पराक्रमेण

धैर्येण शौर्येण च तेजसा ai

एक: कुलेऽस्मिन् पुरुषो विमुक्तो
विभीषणस्तात कनिष्ठं एष:॥ ३॥
“This Vibhisana, the youngest of my
uncles including father, is the only individual
in this race who is utterly devoid of courage,

virility, prowess, fortitude, heroism and

spirit. (3)

fe नाम dt मानुषराजपुत्रा-
वस्माकमेकेन fe wearer

सुप्राकृतेनापि निहन्तुमेतौ
weet कुतो भीषयसे स्म भीरो॥४॥

“What are, in fact, those two sons of
a king of men? Actually they are capable
of being killed even by a single ogre, the
most insignificant amongst us. Why then
should you frighten us, O coward? (4)

सर्वे तदा देवगणा: समग्रा:॥५॥

“Even the powerful Indra, the ruler of
gods and the protector of all the three
worlds, was cast by me to the ground. Nay,
