28

capability to remain standing in the airspace,
which had obviously been acquired through
some magical spell, the Vidyadharas, who
looked like eminent sages, stood in a body in
the airspace and gazed down on the mountain.

(27)

शुश्रुवुश्च तदा शब्दमृषीणां भावितात्मनाम्।
चारणानां च सिद्धानां स्थितानां विमलेऽम्बरे।॥ २८ 1

Nay, they heard at that time the following
observation of the pure-minded Rsis (seers
of Vedic Mantras), Caranas (celestial bards)
and Siddhas (a class of demigods endowed
with mystic powers from their very birth)
standing like them in the cloudless sky: (28)
Wa पर्वतसंकाशो हनुमान् मारुतात्मज:।
तितीर्षति महावेग: समुद्रं वरुणालयम्॥२९॥

“Looking like a mountain in size and
possessed of extraordinary vigour, the
yonder Hanuman, son of the wind-god, seeks
to leap across the sea, the abode of Varuna,
the god of water. (29)

रामार्थं वानरार्थं च चिकीर्षन् कर्म दुष्करम्।
समुद्रस्य परं पारं दुष्प्रापं प्राप्तुमिच्छति॥ ३०॥
“Eager to perform for the cause of Sri
Rama and the monkeys, a feat which is
hard to accomplish, he seeks to touch the
other (opposite) shore of the sea, which is

difficult to reach.” (30)
इति विद्याधरा ara: श्रुत्वा तेषां तपस्विनाम्।
AAMAS ददृशु:३ पर्वते वानरर्षभम्॥३१॥

Hearing the aforesaid remarks of those
ascetics, the Vidyadharas espied on the
mountain-like Hanuman, the foremost of
monkeys, whose strength was beyond
measure. (31)

दुधुवे च स रोमाणि चकम्पे चानलोपम:।
ननाद च महानादं सुमहानिव तोयद:॥ ३२॥
Nay, looking like a flame, Hanuman

shook the hair on his body and quivered and
loudly thundered like a huge cloud. (32)

argent च at लं रोमभिश्चितम्।
उत्पतिष्यन् विचिक्षेप ङ्कुक्षराज इवोरगम्॥ ३३॥

« VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

While about to spring up, he stretched
out his prominent tail which was thickly set
with hair and had been successively rolled
up in a circle—as Garuda, the king of birds,

would jolt a snake. (33)
aq ह्रियमाणो महोरग:॥ ३४॥

Curled at his back, the tail of Hanuman,
who was full of great vigour, looked like a huge
serpent being borne away by Garuda. (34)
ae संस्तम्भयामास महापरिघसंनिभौ।
आससाद कपि: कट्यां चरणौ संचुकोच AW ३५॥

Hanuman firmly fixed on the mountain
his arms, which resembled a pair of huge
iron clubs, and crouched at the waist and
also contracted his feet. (35)

dea च भुजौ श्रीमांस्तथैव च शिरोधराम्।

तेज: सत्त्वं तथा वीर्यमाविवेश स वीर्यवान्॥ ३६ ॥
Nay, drawing in his arms and likewise

his neck too, the glorious and powerful

Hanuman summoned all his energy, courage

and virility. (36)

मार्गमालोकयन् दूरादूर्ध्वप्रणिहितेक्षण:।

SUT हृदये प्राणानाकाशमवलोकयन्॥ ३७॥
Having cast his eyes upwards in order

to survey the long distance he had to cover,

he held his breath in the heart while looking
into the sky. (37)

पद्ध्यां दृढमवस्थानं कृत्वा स कपिकुञ्जर:।
निकुच्य कर्णौ हनुमानुत्पतिष्यन् महाबल:॥ ३८॥
वानरान् वानरश्रेष्ठं इदं वचनमब्रवीत्।
यथा wea: शर: श्वसनविक्रम:।॥ ३९॥
गच्छेत् तद्वद्गमिष्यामि cient रावणपालिताम्।
नहि द्रक्ष्यामि यदि at लंकायां जनकात्मजाम्॥ ४० UI
अनेनैव हि वेगेन गमिष्यामि सुरालयम्।
ate वा त्रिदिवे सीतां न द्रक्ष्यामि कृतश्रम: ॥४१॥
बद्ध्वा राक्षसराजानमानयिष्यामि रावणम्।
सर्वथा कृतकार्योऽहमेष्यामि सह सीतया॥४२॥

Having firmly established himself with
his feet, and contracting his ears, while
