738

portentous clouds circled in the sky on all
sides, thundering all the time. (41)

रामं दृष्ट्वा सुसंक्रुद्धमुत्पातांश्चैव दारुणान्।
fara: सर्वभूतानि रावणस्याभवद् भयम्॥४२॥

Finding Sri Rama extremely enraged
and also beholding fearful portents, all created
beings felt dismayed and fear seized Ravana,
too. (42)

विमानस्थास्तदा देवा गन्धर्वाश्च महोरगा:।
ऋॠषिदानवदैत्याश्च गरुत्मन्तश्च खेचरा:॥४३॥
नानाप्रहरणैर्भीमै: शूरयो: सम्प्रयुध्यतो:॥४४॥
Seated in their aerial cars, gods and
Gandharvas (celestial musicians), great
Nagas (semi-divine beings having the face
of a man and the tail of a serpent and
said to inhabit Patala, the nethermost
subterranean region), as well as Rsis (the
seers of Vedic Mantras), devils and giants
and eagles remaining in the air, they all
witnessed at that time the combat of
the two heroes, fighting steadily with
various dreadful weapons—a combat which
presented the appearance of the final
dissolution of the world. (43-44)

ऊचु: सुरासुरा: Aa तदा विग्रहमागता:।
प्रेक्षमाणा महायुद्धं वाक्यं भक्त्या प्रहृष्टवत्॥ ४५ ॥
Thrilled with delight on observing the
momentous struggle, all the gods and demons
who had come to witness the contest at

that time spoke with devotion as follows:
(45)

writ जयेत्याहुरसुरा: समवस्थिता:।
देवा राममथोचुस्ते त्वं Wala पुन: पुन:॥४६॥
Firmly established in their respective
position, the demons cried out to the
ten-headed monster: “Be victorious!!” The
aforesaid gods, on the other side, called to
Sri Rama, saying again and again, “Be you
triumphant !!” (46)

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA +

एतस्मिन्नन्तरे क्रोधाद् राघवस्य च WAT: |
प्रहर्तुकामो दुष्टात्मा स्पृशन् प्रहरणं महत्॥४७॥

वज्रसारं महानादं सर्वशत्रुनिबर्हणम्।
शैलशृङ्गनिभैर॥ कूटैश्र ॥ ४८ ॥

सधूममिव तीक्ष्णाग्रं युगान्ताग्निचयोपमम्।
अतिरौद्रमनासाद्यं कालेनापि दुरासदम्॥४९॥

त्रासनं सर्वभूतानां दारणं भेदनं तथा।
Weta इव WAU Vet WMS रावण:॥७५०॥
Nay, in the meantime, stroking an
immense weapon, viz., an exceedingly fearful
and unassailable dart—which was powerful
as the thunderbolt, which made a loud noise
when hurled at its target, and was capable
of exterminating all enemies and dreadful to
conceive, much more to behold, furnished
as it was with spikes resembling mountain
peaks, nay, which with its sharp point
resembled a smoke-crested mass of fire
blazing at the end of the world-cycle, again
which was difficult to approach even for
Death, and which was the terror of all living
beings, capable as it was of tearing and
splitting them—the evil-minded Ravana,
so-called because he made others cry, who
was keen to strike in rage Sri Rama
(a scion of Raghu), and was blazing as it
were with anger, seized hold of that dart.
(47—50)

तच्छूलं परमक्रुद्धो जग्राह युधि वीर्यवान्।
arith: war wt राक्षसै: परिवारित:॥७५१॥

Surrounded by ogres—heroic in combat
and formed into battalions—and extremely
enraged, the valiant Ravana took hold of
that dart on the field of battle. (51)

समुद्यम्य महाकायो ननाद युधि भैरवम्।
संरक्कतनयनो रोषात् स्वसैन्यमभिहर्षयन्॥५२॥

Duly raising the dart, the colossus
terribly roared on the field of battle,
thereby bringing excessive joy all round
to his army, his eyes blood-red with anger.

(52)
