* BALAKANDA +

Janaka (born in the line of the Videhas) as
follows : (9-10)

राजा दशरथो राजन् कृतकौतुकमङ्गलै:।
पुत्रैर्नरवरश्रेष्ठो दातारमभिकाङ्क्षते॥ ११॥
दातृप्रतिग्रहीतृभ्यां सर्वार्था: सम्भवन्ति fel
स्वधर्मं प्रतिपद्यस्व कृत्वा वैवाह्यमुत्तमम्॥१२॥

“Alongwith his sons, dressed in festive
attires, appropriate to the occasion of wedding,
O king, Emperor Dasaratha, a jewel among
the foremost of men, awaits the pleasure of
the donor; for all gifts take place only with the
co-operation of the donor and the donee.
Therefore, performing the noble rites pertaining
to the wedding, discharge your sacred
obligation (of redeeming the word given by
you to king Dasaratha).” (11-12)

sep: परमोदारो वसिष्ठेन महात्मना।
प्रत्युवाच महातेजा वाक्यं परमधर्मवित्॥१३॥

Requested thus by the high-souled
Vasistha, the highly glorious Janaka, who
was extremely noble and possessed the
highest knowledge of what is right, replied
as follows: (13)

क: स्थित: प्रतिहारो मे कस्याज्ञां सम्प्रतीक्षते।
स्वगृहे को विचारोऽस्ति यथा राज्यमिदं तव॥ १४॥

“Who stands at the door to guard my
entrance and whose permission does the
Emperor keenly await? What scruple should
there be in entering one’s own house? This
kingdom is as much yours as mine. (14)

कृतकौतुकसर्वस्वा वेदिमूलमुपागता:।

मम कन्या मुनिश्रेष्ठं दीप्ता बह्नेरिवार्चिष:॥१५॥
“Having gone through all auspicious rites

connected with the wedding, my daughters,

O jewel among sages, have already arrived

at the foot of the sacrificial altar, looking like

so many blazing flames of fire. (15)

सद्योऽहं त्वत्प्रतीक्षोऽस्मि वेद्यामस्यां प्रतिष्ठित: |

अविघ्नं क्रियतां ad किमर्थं fe विलम्ब्यते॥ १६ ॥
“Firmly seated on this altar, | am just

waiting for you. Hence let everything

269

connected with the wedding be performed
without any let or hindrance. What for is the
ceremony actually being delayed?” (16)
तद् वाक्यं जनकेनोक्तं श्रुत्वा दशरथस्तदा।
प्रवेशयामास सुतान् सर्वानृषिगणानपि॥ १७॥
Hearing the aforesaid reply given by
Janaka, Dasaratha forthwith took his sons
as also all the hosts of sages into the
pavilion erected for the wedding. (17)

ततो राजा facet वसिष्ठमिदमब्रवीत्।
कारयस्व ऋषे सर्वामृषिभि: ae धार्मिक॥ १८॥
रामस्य लोकरामस्य क्रियां वैवाहिकीं प्रभो।
तथेत्युक्त्वा तु जनकं वसिष्ठो भगवानृषि: Ve i
विश्वामित्रं पुरस्कृत्य शतानन्दं च धार्मिकम्।
प्रपामध्ये तु विधिवद् वेदिं कृत्वा महातपा:॥ २०॥
अलंचकार a वेदिं गन्धपुष्पै: समन्तत:।
सुवर्णपालिकाभिश्च चित्रकुम्भैश्च साङ्कुरै: ।। २१॥
अङ्कुराढ्यै: शरावैश्च धूपपात्रै: सधूपकै:।
शङ्खपात्रै: स्रुवै: afta: पात्रैरर्घध्यादिपूजितै: ।। २२॥
लाजपूर्णैश्च पात्रीभिरक्षतैरपि संस्कृतै:।
aa: aa: समास्तीर्य विधिवन्मन्त्रपूर्वकम्॥ २३॥
अग्निमाधाय तं वेद्यां विधिमन्त्रपुरस्कृतम्।
जुहावाग्नौ महातेजा वसिष्ठो मुनिपुंगव:॥२४॥
Thereupon Janaka, the ruler of the
Videha kingdom, submitted as follows to
Vasistha: “Alongwith the other sages, O
pious seer, conduct the nuptial ceremony of
Sri Rama, the delight of the world, my lord !”
Saying “Amen !” to Janaka, and placing
Viswamitra and the pious Satananda ahead,
the holy sage Vasistha, who was a great
ascetic, prepared a sacrificial altar at the centre
of the pavilion according to the scriptural
ordinance, and decorated the said altar on all
sides with sandal-paste and flowers. He then
provided it with plates of gold and jars of
variegated colours containing sprouts as well
as with shallow earthenware cups (also) full
of sprouts, vessels for incense containing
incense, conches serving the purpose of
vessels, Sruks (large wooden ladles used
for pouring ghee on a sacrificial fire and
