« KISKINDHAKANDA +

ततो वालिनमुद्यम्य ata: शिबिकां तदा।
आरोपयत विक्रोशन्नङ्गदेन सहैव तु॥२८॥

Raising Vali’s body in conjunction with
Angada and crying loudly all the time, Sugriva
for his part thereupon placed the body on
the palanquin. (28)
आरोप्य शिबिकां चैव वालिनं गतजीवितम्।
अलंकारैश्च विविधैर्माल्यैर्वस्त्रैश्च भूषितम्॥२९॥
आज्ञापयत् तदा राजा सुग्रीव: प्लवगेश्वर:।
और्ध्वदेहिकमार्यस्य क्रियतामनुकूलत:॥ ३०॥

Nay, having laid on the palanquin the
dead Vali, who was also adorned with
ornaments of various kinds as well as with
garlands and articles of wearing apparel,
King Sugriva, the ruler of monkeys, then
issued the following command: “Let the last
rites with respect to my noble elder brother
be performed in accordance with the
scriptural ordinance. (29-30)

विश्राणयन्तो रत्नानि विविधानि बहूनि a

अग्रत: प्लवगा यान्तु शिबिका तदनन्तरम्॥ ३१॥
“Let monkeys proceed in the van

scattering jewels of every description in

profusion, and the palanquin closely follow.
(31)

राज्ञामृद्धिविशेषा fe दृश्यन्ते भुवि यादृशा:।
तादृशैरिह Goat वानरा भर्तृसत्क्रियाम्॥ ३२॥

“Let the monkeys perform the last rites
with respect to their lord on this occasion
with costly articles, the like of which are
actually seen on earth on the occasion of
obsequies of kings.” (32)

तादृशं वालिन: fat प्राकुर्वन्नौर्ध्वदेहिकम्।
अङ्गदं परिरभ्याशु तारप्रभृतयस्तदा॥ ३३॥
Embracing Angada, Tara and others
then proceeded apace with the obsequies
with respect to Vali according to that standard.
(33)

क्रोशन्त: प्रययु: सर्वे वानरा हतबान्धवा:।
aa: प्रणिहिता: सर्वा वानर्योऽस्य वशानुगा: Ut ३४॥

1025

चुक्रुशुर्वीरवीरेति wa: क्रोशन्ति ता: प्रियम्।
ताराप्रभृतय: सर्वा वानर्यो हतबान्धवा:॥ ३५॥
अनुजग्मुश्च भर्तारं क्रोशन्त्य: करुणस्वना:।
तासां रुदितशब्देन वानरीणां वनान्तरे॥ ३६॥
वनानि गिरयश्चैव विक्रोशन्तीव सर्वत:।
पुलिने गिरिनद्यास्तु विविक्ते जलसंव्रृते॥ sen
चितां चक्रु: सुबहवो वानरा वनचारिण:।
SRI Ad: स्कन्धाच्छिबिकां वानरोत्तमा: ॥ ३८ ॥
तस्थुरेकान्तमाश्रित्य सर्वे शोकपरायणा:।

ततस्तारा पतिं दृष्टवा शिबिकातलशायिनम्॥ ३९॥
आरोप्याङ्के शिरस्तस्य विललाप सुदु:खिता।
a वानरमहाराज a नाथ AA वत्सल॥ ४०॥
हा Fete महाबाहो हा मम fra पश्य माम्।
जनं न पश्यसीमं त्वं कस्माच्छोकाभिपीडितम्॥ ४१॥
All the monkeys, whose kinsman in the
person of Vali had been killed, walked in
procession weeping to the crematorium. Then
all the Vanara women who were amenable
to the control of Vali, cried loudly together,
saying “O hero, O hero!” and they further
mourned for their beloved lord. All the Vanara
women headed by Tara, whose kinsman in
the person of Vali had been killed, followed
their husband crying in a pitiful tone. Through
the cries of the Vanara women in the depths
of the forest, the woodlands as well as the
hills cried, as it were, on all sides. On a
lonely bank, surrounded by water, of a
mountain-stream good many monkeys living
in forests got a pyre ready. Taking down
the palanquin from their shoulders, the
foremost of monkeys, who bore the palanquin,
then halted on a lonely spot, all given over
to grief. Seeing her deceased husband lying
at the bottom of the palanquin, and placing
his head in her lap, Tara thereupon proceeded
to lament as follows, sore afflicted as she
was: “O eminent ruler of monkeys, O lord
fond of me and adored by the great, O
mighty-armed darling of mine, pray, look at
me. Why don’t you cast a glance on this
maid-servant of yours, sore stricken with
grief? (34—41)
