# YUDDHAKANDA #

अब्रुवन् परमप्रीता: स्तुत्वा रामं सलक्ष्मणम्।
गच्छायोध्यामितो राजन् विसर्जय च वानरान्॥ १९॥

All the onlooking monkeys felt amazed,
saying to one another: “What miracle is
this?” Seeing Sri Rama, a scion of Kakutstha,
fully accomplished of purpose, nay, extolling
Sri Rama and Laksmana, all the jewels
among the gods present on the occasion
spoke to him as follows, supremely delighted
as they were: “Return to Ayodhya from this
place, O monarch, and disband the monkeys.

(18-19)
मैथिलीं सान्त्वयस्वैनामनुरक्तां यशस्विनीम्।
भ्रातरं भरतं पश्य त्वच्छोकाद् व्रतचारिणम्॥ २०॥
शत्रुघ्नं च महात्मानं मातू: सर्वा: परंतप।
अभिषेचय चात्मानं पौरान् गत्वा प्रहर्षय॥ २१॥

Reassure this devoted and illustrious
princess of Mithila and see your younger
brother, Bharata, who is practising austerities
through grief caused by separation from
you, the lofty-minded Satrughna as well as
all your mothers, O scourge of your enemies!
Reaching Ayodhya, bring excessive delight
to the citizens and get yourself consecrated
on the throne.” (20-21)

805

एवमुक्त्वा सहस्राक्षो wt सौमित्रिणा सह।
विमानै: सूर्यसंकाशैर्ययौ हृष्ट: at: सह॥ २२॥
Having spoken as aforesaid to Sri
Rama, who was accompanied by Laksmana
(son of Sumitra), Indra (the thousand-eyed
god) joyfully returned to heaven with the
other gods in their aerial cars blazing like
the sun. (22)

अभिवाद्य च काकुत्स्थ: सर्वांस्तांस्त्रिदशोत्तमान्।
लक्ष्मणेन सह भ्रात्रा वासमाज्ञापयत् तदा॥ २३॥
Nay, greeting all the aforesaid jewels
among the gods, Sri Rama with his younger
brother, Laksmana, then ordered the
encampment of the army. (23)

ततस्तु सा लक्ष्मणरामपालिता
महाचमूर्हृष्टजना यशस्विनी |
श्रिया ज्वलन्ती विरराज सर्वतो
निशा प्रणीतेव fe शीतरश्मिना॥ २४॥

Thereupon that illustrious and mighty
army of happy troops for its part, which
was protected by Laksmana and Sri Rama
and was blazing with splendour on all sides,
shone brightly indeed like a night illumined
by the moon. (24)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणि वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये FERS विंशत्यधिकशततम: सर्ग: ॥ 220 Il
Thus ends Canto One hundred and twenty in the Yuddhakanda of the glorious
Ramayana of Valmiki, the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

Canto CXxXI

Sri Rama prepares to leave for Ayodhya and at his instance
Vibhisana orders the presence of the aerial car,
Puspaka, to take him to Ayodhya

अब्रवीत् प्राञ्ञलिर्वाक्यं जयं पृष्टवा विभीषण: ॥ १॥

Wishing victory to Sri Rama, the tamer

of his enemies, who having reposed
during the previous night, had risen fresh,
Vibhisana spoke to him with joined palms
as follows: (1)
