1128

उवाच हनुमान् वाक्यं तामनिन्दितलोचनाम्।
शरणं At प्रपन्ना: स्म: सर्वे वै धर्मचारिणीम्॥ २१॥
य: कृत: समयोऽस्मासु सुग्रीवेण महात्मना।
स तु कालो व्यतिक्रान्तो fat च परिवर्तताम्॥ २२॥
“Passing, as | am, my time with
rightousness, no object of mine will be served
by anyone here.” Spoken to in these noble
words, conformable to righteousness, by the
hermitess, Hanuman replied as follows to that
lady of irreproachable eyes: “We have all
really come for protection to you, who are
engaged in practising virtue. The time-limit
which was fixed for us by the high-souled
Sugriva clearly expired even while we were
actually roaming about in the cave. (20—22)

सा त्वमस्माद् बिलादस्मानुत्तारयितुमर्हसि।
तस्मात् सुग्रीववचनादतिक्रान्तान् गतायुष:॥ २३॥

“Situated as you are, you ought therefore
to help out of this cave us, who have
violated the command of Sugriva and are
as such doomed. (23)

त्रातुमर्हसि न: सर्वान् सुग्रीवभयशङ्कितान्।
महच्च कार्यमस्माभि: कर्तव्यं धर्मचारिणि॥ २४॥
तच्चापि न कृतं कार्यमस्माभिरिह arate: |
Wage हनुमता तापसी वाक्यमब्रवीत्॥ २५॥

“You ought to deliver us all, stricken as
we are with fear of Sugriva. Nay, a great
task had to be accomplished by us, O lady
engaged in practising virtue! While spending
our time here even that work could not be
executed by us.” Requested thus by
Hanuman, the ascetic woman replied as
follows : (24-25)

Wat get wa प्रविष्टेन निवर्तितुम्।
तपस: सुप्रभावेण नियमोपार्जितेन च॥ २६॥
सर्वानेव बिलादस्मात् तारयिष्यामि वानरान्।
निमीलयत चक्षूषि ad वानरपुङ्खवा:॥२७॥
नहि निष्क्रमितुं शक्यमनिमीलितलोचनै:।
ततो निमीलिता: Wa सुकुमाराङ्गुलै: He: Ml २८ ॥

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

सहसा पिदधुर्दृष्टिं wet गमनकांक्षया।
वानरास्तु महात्मानो हस्तरुद्भमुखास्तदा॥ २९॥
निमेषान्तरमात्रेण बिलादुत्तारितास्तया।
sara सर्वांस्तांस्तत्र तापसी धर्मचारिणी॥ ३०॥
नि:सृतान्विषमात्तस्मात्समाश्वास्येदमब्रवीत्।
we विन्ध्यो गिरि: श्रीमान् नानाद्रुमलतायुत:॥ ३१॥
UT प्रस्रवण: शैल: सागरोऽयं महोदधि:।
स्वस्ति वोऽस्तु गमिष्यामि भवनं वानरर्षभा:।
इत्युक्त्वा ae बिलं श्रीमत् प्रविवेश स्वयंप्रभा।। ३२॥

“I consider it difficult for anyone once
entered into this cave to return alive. | shall,
however, enable the monkeys one and all
to emerge from this cave by the superior
power of my asceticism duly acquired through
restraint of the mind. Pray, all close your
eyes, O bulls among the monkeys! For it
will not be possible for those whose eyes
remain unclosed to get out of the cave.”
Having closed their eyes, all the monkeys
then joyously covered them all at once with
their hands, possessed of soft fingers, with
the desire of going out of the cave. Their
faces still remaining covered with their hands,
the high souled monkeys were for their part
transported by her out of the cave in the
twinkling of an eye at that juncture. Asking
them all to take courage when they had
come out of the danger, the ascetic woman,
who was engaged in practising virtue,
spoke to them as follows on that occasion
outside the cave : “On this side stands the
glorious Vindhyan range covered with trees
and climbers of every species and there
rises the Prasravana mountain; while in
the opposite direction stretches the Indian
ocean. May good fortune attend on you! |
shall now return to my abode, O jewels
among the monkeys!” Saying _ so,
Swayamprabha penetrated deep into the
aforesaid splendid cave. (26—32)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये किष्किन्धाकाण्डे द्विपञ्चाश: सर्ग: 4? I

Thus ends Canto Fifty-two in the Kiskindhakanda of the glorious Ramayana of Valmiki,
the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

