« KISKINDHAKANDA +

Ber: समधिगच्छन्ति नलिनीं at रिरंसव:।
क्षीरोदं समतिक्रम्य तदा द्रक्ष्यथ वानरा:॥४७॥
तत्र तत्कोपजं तेज: hd हयमुखं महत्॥४८॥
“With their heads turned upwards, at
sunrise everyday they contend with the
sun-god and, scorched by the sun and slain
by the spiritual power released by the holy
Gayatri text, muttered by those invested
with the sacred thread day after day, the
aforesaid ogres drop into the water and
being brought back to life by the contact of
water get suspended (from the mountain-
peaks) again and again. Proceeding further,
you, who are difficult to overpower, will
behold the ocean looking like a white cloud
and going by the name of Ksiroda (the
ocean of milk), which, with its white waves,
appears adorned with pearl-necklaces, as it
were. In the midst of that ocean rises a
huge white mountain, Rsabha by name,
covered with trees in blossom emitting an
ethereal fragrance and growing in clusters.
There is on that mountain a lake also known
by the name of Sudarsana and adorned
with dazzling silver lotuses containing
filaments of gold and thronged with swans.
Full of delight, gods, Caranas (celestial
bards), Yaksas and Kinnaras (two species
of demigods) and bevies of celestial nymphs
seek that lotus-pond with intent to disport
themselves. Duly crossing the ocean of
milk, O monkeys, you will then soon behold
the ocean containing fresh water and causing
terror to all created beings. In that ocean of
fresh water there exists a huge (submarine)
fire, known by the name of Vadavamukha
(so-called because it is believed to emerge
from a cavity having the shape of a mare’s
mouth under the sea at the South Pole) and
sprung from the wrath of Sage Aurva and
dropped into it. (42—48)

अस्याहुस्तन्महावेगमोदनं
तत्र विक्रोशतां नादो भूतानां सागरौकसाम्।
श्रूयते चासमर्थानां दृष्ट्वाभूद् वड्वामुखम्॥४९॥

1091

“The wonderful water of that ocean
including the mobile as well as the immobile
creation supported by it and dashing against
the shores with great impetuosity serves as
its fuel. In that ocean the wail of created
beings dwelling in the ocean, crying loudly,
unable as they are to protect themselves
against the terrible fire as well as those who
are so able, stricken with fear to behold
the aforesaid submarine fire, is constantly
heard. (49)

स्वादूदस्योत्तरे तीरे योजनानि त्रयोदश।
जातरूपशिलो AT सुमहान् कनकप्रभ:॥५०॥
“At a distance of thirteen Yojanas (or
one hundred and four miles) from the northern
shore of the ocean of fresh water, there
stands a very large mountain possessing
the brilliance of gold and as such known by
the name of Jatarupasila (or consisting of
golden rocks). (50)
तत्र चन्द्रप्रतीकाशं पन्नगं धरणीधरम्।
पद्मपत्रविशालाक्ष ततो RAAT वानरा:॥५१॥

“There you will find seated, O monkeys,
in front of that mountain the thousand-headed
serpent-god, Lord Ananta (Sesa), the
supporter of the earth and the adored of all
gods, shining like the moon and clad in
blue, with eyes large as the petals of a
lotus. (51-52)

त्रिशिरा: काञ्चन: केतुस्तालस्तस्य महात्मन:।
स्थापित: पर्वतस्याग्रे विराजति सवेदिक:॥ ५३॥
“Planted in front of the mountain as an
ensign of that high-souled being, shines
brightly a golden palmyra tree with three
main boughs and a platform for its base.
(53)
wa: परं ह्रेममय: श्रीमानुदयपर्वत:॥५४॥
“The tree has been treated by gods as
a boundary post, marking the end of the
