312

निविष्टायां तु सेनायां तीरे नदनदीपते:।
पाश्वस्थं लक्ष्मणं दृष्टवा रामो वचनमब्रवीत्॥ ३॥
The army having been quartered on
the shore of the sea (the lord of all rivers
and streams), Sri Rama for his part spoke
as follows to Laksmana on seeing him
standing by his side: (3)

Wes feat कालेन गच्छता ह्यपगच्छति।
मम चापश्यत: कान्तामहन्यहनि वर्धते॥४॥

“As time passes, grief too, they
say, undoubtedly disappears; in my case,
however, even as | miss my darling, Sita, it
grows day by day. (4)

न मे दु:खं fa दूरे न मे दु:खं alfa a
`एतदेवानुशोचामि वरयोऽस्या ह्यतिवर्तते॥५॥

“My agony does not exist because my
beloved is away from me, nor is it due to the
fact that she has been borne away. | grieve
for this alone that the time allowed for her
survival is actually passing away. (5)

वाहि वात यत: कान्ता तां स्पृष्टवा मामपि स्पृश।
त्वयि मे गात्रसंस्पर्शश्चन्द्रे दृष्टिसमागम:॥६॥

“Speed, O Breeze, to the spot where
my love is; having fanned her, touch me as
well. The touch of my body with you in that
case will react in the same way as the
meeting of one’s gaze with the moon i.e.,
reliever of all pain and exhilarating. (6)

तन्मे दहति गात्राणि fat पीतमिवाशये।
a नाथेति प्रिया सा at ह्रियमाणा यदब्रवीत्॥ ७॥

“The exclamation ‘Ah, my lord!’ which
that darling addressed to me while being
borne away by the ogre, consumes my
limbs like poison swallowed by me and
continuing in my stomach. (7)

तद्वियोगेन्धनवता तच्चिन्ताविमलाचिषा।

we fet शरीरं A दह्यते मदनाग्निना॥८॥
“My body is consumed night and day

by the fire of love fed with the fuel of my

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA +

separation from her and flaring up into the
bright flame of my thought of her. (8)

अवगाह्यार्णवं स्वप्स्ये सौमित्रे भवता विना।
एवं च प्रज्वलन् कामो न मा सुप्तं जले दहेत्॥ ९॥
“Diving into the sea, without you as
my companion, O darling of Sumitra, | shall
repose there. Flaming love will not certainly
consume me lying asleep in water, as
aforesaid. (9)

बह्वेतत् कामयानस्य शक्यमेतेन जीवितुम्।
Gee सा च वामोरुरेकां धरणिमाश्रितौ॥ eon

“That the said lady of charming limbs
and myself repose on the selfsame earth is
enough consolation for me, soliciting as | do
her company (desolate that | am) and it will
be possible for me to survive on this score
alone. (10)

केदारस्येव केदार: Bene निरूदक:।

उपस्नेहेन जीवामि जीवन्तीं यच्छृणोमि ताम्॥ ११॥
“Even as the crop in a field without

water remains alive through contact with a

field underwater, | too survive because |
hear of her surviving. (11)

कदा नु खलु सुश्रोणीं शतपत्रायतेक्षणाम्।
विजित्य शत्रून् द्रक्ष्यामि सीतां स्फीतामिव श्रियम्॥ १२॥
“When on earth, having thoroughly
conquered my enemies, shall | actually
behold Sita of excellent limbs and eyes
large as a lotus, and welcome as abundant
fortune? (12)

mal सुचारुदन्तोष्ठं तस्या: पद्ममिवाननम्।
ईषदुन्नाम्य पास्यामि रसायनमिवातुर:॥ १३॥
“When, raising a bit her lotus-like face
with its extremely charming teeth and lips,
shall | kiss it even as an ailing man would
drink an elixir of life? (13)
at तस्या: सहितौ पीनौ स्तनौ तालफलोपमौ।
कदा न खलु सोत्कम्पौ श्लिष्यन्त्या At भजिष्यत: ।। १४॥

“O, when will her close, bulging and
