# YUDDHAKANDA #

591

Canto LXXI
Atikaya puts up a fierce fight and is killed by Laksmana

भ्रातॄंश्च निहतान् Gea शक्रतुल्यपराक्रमान्॥ १॥
पितृव्यौ चापि dasa समरे संनिपातितौ।
युद्धोन्मत्तं च मत्तं च भ्रातरौ राक्षसोत्तमौ॥ २॥
gaa च महातेजा ब्रह्मदत्तवरो युधि।
अतिकायोऽद्रिसंकाशो देवदानवदर्पहा॥ ३ ॥
Seeing his own army—which created
uproars in the hostile ranks and caused the
enemy’s hair to stand on end—in trouble,
nay, finding his brothers, who were equal to
Indra in prowess, killed, and also witnessing
has uncles, the two brothers Yuddhonmatta
(Mahodara) and Matta (Mahaparswa) the
foremost of ogres, struck down in combat,
Atikaya, who was endowed with extraordinary
energy and resembled a mountain (in size),
who had crushed the pride of gods and
demons alike and on whom Brahma,
the creator, had bestowed a boon of
invincibility, flew into a rage on the field of
battle. (1—8)

स भास्करसहस्रस्य संघातमिव भास्वरम्।
रथमारुह्य शक्रारिरभिदुद्राव वानरान्॥४॥
Ascending his chariot, brilliant as a
concatenation of a thousand suns, that enemy
of Indra (the ruler of gods) darted towards
the monkeys (4)
स विस्फार्य तदा are किरीटी मृष्टकुण्डल:।
नाम संश्रावयामास wie च महास्वनम्॥ ७५ ।।
Twanging his bow, Atikaya, who was
adorned with a diadem and polished earrings,
forthwith proclaimed his name and emitted a
tremendous roar. (5)
तेन सिंहप्रणादेन नामविश्रावणेन च।
ज्याशब्देन च भीमेन त्रासयामास वानरान्॥६॥

By that leonine roar, the proclamation

of his name and the terrible ringing sound
caused by the plucking of his bowstring, he
struck terror in the monkeys. (6)

ते दृष्टवा देहमाहात्म्यं कुम्भकर्णोऽयमुत्थित:।
भयार्ता वानरा: Wa संश्रयन्ते परस्परम्॥७॥

Thinking on beholding the immensity of
his proportions that it was Kumbhakarna
who had sprung into life again, and stricken
with fear, all the aforesaid monkeys sought
shelter, one with the other. (7)

a तस्य रूपमालोक्य यथा विष्णोस्तरिविक्रमे।
भयाद् वानरयोधास्ते विद्रवन्ति ततस्तत:॥८॥
Witnessing his colossal form,

resembling the form assumed by Lord Visnu
at the time of measuring the three worlds
with His strides, those celebrated monkey
warriors fled in various directions through
panic. (8)

तेऽतिकायं समासाद्य वानरा Asada: |
शरण्यं शरणं जग्मुर्लक्ष्मणाग्रजमाहवे॥९॥

Confused in mind on reaching the
presence of Atikaya, the aforesaid monkeys
sought Sri Rama (the eldest brother of
Laksmana), who was capable of affording
shelter to them, as their refuge on the field
of battle. (9)
ततोऽतिकायं काकुत्स्थो रथस्थं पर्वतोपमम्।
ददर्श धन्विनं Ge गर्जन्तं कालमेघवत्॥१०॥

Thereupon Sri Rama (a scion of
Kakutstha) beheld from afar Atikaya, who
resembled a mountain in size, seated in a
chariot, armed with a bow, and rumbling like
a cloud appearing at the time of universal
dissolution. (10)

स तं Gear महाकायं राघवस्तु सुविस्मित:।
वानरान् सान्त्वयित्वा च विभीषणमुवाच Ti ११॥
