1022

was evolved at the dawn of creation by the
Creator and people speak of the entire
creation as having been united with joy and
sorrow by the same Creator. All the three
worlds dare not overstep the bounds that have
been fixed by the said Creator inasmuch as
they are subject to His control. You will enjoy
supreme delight through Sugriva in the same
way as you did before in the presence of Vali
and your son, Angada, will attain the position
of Prince Regent. (41—43)

आश्वासिता at महात्मना तु
प्रभावयुक्तेन परंतपेन।

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

सा वीरपत्नी ध्वनता मुखेन
सुवेषरूपा विरराम तारा॥४४॥

“The course of events has been
ordained precisely that way by Providence
and the wives of heroes do not wail (as you
do).” Reassured in the foregoing words by
the high-souled and powerful Sri Rama, the
scorcher of his foes, the celebrated Tara,
the consort of a hero, for her part, who was
not only finely dressed but had a charming
exterior too and was till now marked
with a wailing countenance, became silent.

(44)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये किष्किन्धाकाण्डे चतुर्विंश: सर्ग: ॥ २४॥

Thus ends Canto Twenty-four in the Kiskindhakanda of the glorious Ramayana of
Valmiki, the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

Usage: wat:
Canto XXV
Sri Rama consoles Sugriva and others. Entrusting Sugriva with the work of
getting firewood for the cremation of Vali, Laksmana asks Tara to arrange
for a palanquin to carry Vali in state to the crematory. Placing the dead
body of Vali as commanded by Sri Rama on the palanquin brought by
Tara, Sugriva and others carry the palanquin to the riverside and,
taking it down on a sandy bank, prepare a pyre. Vanara women
comfort Tara mourning the death of Vali with his head
placed in her lap. Placing the dead body of Vali on the
pyre, Angada sets fire to it. At the end of the

cremation they all offer water to the spirit of the
deceased and return to Sri Rama’s presence

a सुग्रीवं च ant च algal सहलक्ष्मण:।
समानशोक: काकुत्स्थ: सान्त्वयन्निदमब्रवीत्॥ १॥
Comforting Sugriva and Tara too, who
was accompanied by Angada, Sri Rama, a
scion of Kakutstha, who shared their grief
and was followed by Laksmana, spoke to
them as follows : (1)

न शोकपरितापेन श्रेयसा युज्यते मृत:।
यदत्रानन्तरं कार्यं तत् समाधातुमर्हथ॥ २॥

“A departed soul is not rendered fit for
beatitude by grieving for him and giving way
to remorse. You should, therefore, attend
immediately to that which should be done
now for the welfare of the departed soul,
immediately after death. (2)
लोकवृत्तमनुष्ठेयं pd वो बाष्पमोक्षणम्।

न कालादुत्तरं किंचित् कर्मशक्यमुपासितुम्॥ ३॥

“Popular usage must also be observed
