934

कामिनामयमत्यन्तमशोक: शोकवर्धन:।
स्तबकै: पवनोत्किप्तैस्तर्जयन्निव at स्थित:॥ ५९॥

“Accentuating beyond measure the grief
of lovers, this ASoka tree (which is supposed
to rid those who approach it of their grief)
stands threatening me, as it were, through its
plumes of flowers shaken by the wind. (59)

अमी लक्ष्मण दृश्यन्ते WaT: कुसुमशालिन:।
विभ्रमोत्सिक्तमनस: साङ्गरागा AT इव॥६०॥
“Adorned with blossom, the yonder
mango trees, O Laksmana, look like human
beings anointed with cosmetics, their mind
distracted through love. (60)

सौमित्रे usa पम्पायाश्चित्रासु वनराजिषु।
किंनरा नरशार्दूल विचरन्ति यतस्तत:॥६१॥

“See, 0 Laksmana (son of Sumitra),
how Kinnaras (a species of demigods) range
hither and thither through the picturesque
rows of forest trees standing on the brink of
Pampa, O tiger among men! (61)

इमानि शुभगन्धीनि पश्य लक्ष्मण सर्वश:।
नलिनानि प्रकाशन्ते जले तरुणसूर्यवत्॥६२॥

“Behold, 0 Laksmana, how these
fragrant red lotuses shine on all sides on
the water like the rising sun reflected in
every ripple of the Pampa. (62)

एषा प्रसन्नसलिला पद्मनीलोत्पलायुता।
हंसकारण्डवाकीर्णा पम्पा सौगन्धिकायुता॥६३॥
“Here is Pampa distinguished by its
placid water, nay covered all over with
lotuses and blue water-lilies, thronged with
swans and water-fowl and overspread with
Saugandhika flowers (a species of Kalhara).
(63)

जले तरुणसूर्याभे: षट्पदाहतकेसरै:।
Ug: शोभते पम्पा समन्तादभिसंवृता॥६४॥
“Covered on all sides with lotuses
shining like the rising sun reflected in water,

their pollen having been scattered by black
bees, Pampa spreads its charm. (64)

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

चक्रवाकयुता नित्यं चित्रप्रस्थवनान्तरा।
मातङ्गमृगयूथैश्च शोभते सलिलार्थिभि:।॥६५॥
“Inhabited by Cakravakas (ruddy geese)
all the year, the woodlands about it consisting
of wonderful glades, the lake looks charming
with herds of elephants and deer seeking
its water. (65)

पवनाहतवेगाभिरूर्मिभिर्विमलेऽम्भसि ।
पङ्कजानि विराजन्ते ताड्यमानानि लक्ष्मण॥ ६६॥

“Being lashed, 0 Laksmana, by the
waves which have gained velocity through
the impact of winds, the lotuses shine brightly
on the limpid water of the lake. (66)
पद्मपत्रविशालाक्षीं सततं प्रियपङ्कजाम्।
अपश्यतो A वैदेहीं जीवितं नाभिरोचते॥६७॥

“Life no longer attracts me, unable as |
am to see Sita (a princess of the Videha
territory), who has eyes large as lotus petals
and who is ever fond of lotuses. (67)

अहो कामस्य वामत्वं यो गतामपि दुर्लभाम्।
स्मारयिष्यति कल्याणीं कल्याणतरवादिनीम्॥ ६८ ॥

“Oh, the crookedness of Cupid, who
puts me in mind of the blessed Sita, who
spoke highly agreeable words, nay, who
has disappeared and is difficult to recover.

(68)
शक्यो धारयितुं कामो भवेदभ्यागतो मया।
यदि भूयो वसन्तो मां न हन्यात् पुष्पितद्रुम: ।। ६९॥

“The longing to meet her that has
appeared in me may yet be restrained by
me if Spring, marked by blossomed trees,
were not to smite me in addition. (69)

यानि स्म रमणीयानि aa ae vata मे।
तान्येवारमणीयानि जायन्ते मे तया विना॥७०॥
“Those very things which were delightful

to me in her company have grown unattractive
to me in her absence. (70)

पद्मकोशपलाशानि x दृष्टिर्हि मन्यते।
सीताया नेत्रकोशाभ्यां सदृशानीति लक्ष्मण॥ ७१॥

“My eyes love to see the petals of
