* AYODHYAKANDA +

“What for do you view with favour the
exile, O fair-eyed lady, of Rama, who is so
pleasing to look at and is devoted to your
service? (24)

wa fe wate भूयस्तव शुश्रूषते सदा।
विशेषं त्वयि तस्मात् तु भरतस्य न लक्षये॥ २५॥

“Rama, really speaking, ever serves
you more than Bharata does. In reality | do
not perceive in Bharata any superiority to
Rama in his (filial) attitude towards you. (25)
शुश्रूषां गौरवं चैव wat वचनक्रियाम्।
कस्तु भूयस्तरं कुर्यादन्यत्र पुरुषर्षभात्॥ २६॥

“In fact, who else than Rama (the
foremost among men) could do greater
service, show greater respect, honour the
words of his superiors better and do their
bidding with greater alacrity? (26)

- ofl : 1 rash ।
परिवादोऽपवादो वा राघवे नोपपद्यते॥ २७॥

“No censure or calumny against Rama
has been heard from the mouth of any of
the many thousands of women in my
gynaeceum and numerous dependants
maintained by me. (27)

सान्त्वयन् सर्वभूतानि WA: शुद्धेन चेतसा।
Teta मनुजव्याघ्र: प्रियैर्विषयवासिन:॥ २८॥

“Reassuring all created beings (mankind)
with a guileless mind, Rama, a tiger among
men, wins over the people of his kingdom
through obligations of various kinds. (28)
सत्येन लोकाञ्जयति द्विजान् दानेन wea: |
गुरूञ्छुश्रूषया ART धनुषा युधि शात्रवान्॥ २९॥

“The valiant Sri Rama (a scion of Raghu)
conquers men by his virtue, the Brahmanas
(lit.,the twice-born) through charity, the elders
through service and his enemies on the
battlefield with his bow. (29)
सत्यं दानं तपस्त्यागो मित्रता शौचमार्जवम्।
विद्या च गुरुशुश्रूषा ध्रुवाण्येतानि waa il soll

“Truthfulness, charity, asceticism, self-
abnegation, goodwill, purity of body and

331

mind, straightforwardness, learning and
service to his elders—these are constantly
present in Rama, a scion of Raghu. (30)

तस्मिन्नार्जवसम्पन्ने eft देवोपमे कथम्।
पापमाशंससे रामे महर्षिसमतेजसि॥ ३१॥

“How do you wish harm, O queen, to
that Rama, who is rich in guilelessness, is
godlike in appearance as well as in
disposition and glorious as eminent Rsis.

(31)
न स्मराम्यप्रियं वाक्यं लोकस्य प्रियवादिन:।
स कथं त्वत्कृते रामं वक्ष्यामि प्रियमप्रियम्॥ ३२॥

“| do not remember an unkind word
spoken to anybody by Rama, who ever
speaks kind words to all. As such how shall
|, for your sake, break an unpalatable news
to dear Rama? (32)

क्षमा यस्मिंस्तपस्त्याग: सत्यं धर्म: कृतज्ञता।
अप्यहिंसा च भूतानां तमृते का गतिर्मम॥ ३३॥
“What asylum is there for me other
than Rama, in whom there exist forgiveness,
asceticism, self-denial, truthfulness, piety,

gratitude, as well as harmlessness towards
created beings? (33)

मम ager कैकेयि गतान्तस्य तपस्विन:।
दीनं लालप्यमानस्य कारुण्यं कर्तुमर्हसि॥ ३४॥
“O Kaikeyi, you ought to show mercy
to me, an old and miserable man who has
reached his end and is making piteous
entreaties to you again and again. (34)
ad सर्वं तव दास्यामि मा च त्वं मन्युमाविश॥ ३५ II
“Whatever can be had on the globe
girdled by the ocean, | shall bestow all that

on you. But head you not towards a situation
ending in death to me. (35)

अञ्जलिं कुर्मि कैकेयि पादौ चापि स्पृशामि a
शरणं भव रामस्य माधर्मो मामिह स्पृशेत्॥ Be UI
“| join my palms before you, O ।९च॥<७]],

and also touch your feet. Be a protector to
Rama and let not unrighteousness born of
