« KISKINDHAKANDA +

act fe सहाया A हनुमत्प्रमुखास्त्विमे।
अतोऽहं धारयाम्यद्य प्राणान् कृच्छ्रगतोऽपि सन्॥ ३६ Al
“These monkeys with Hanuman as their
leader for their part have in fact been my
only companions. Hence | am able to
preserve my life today, though reduced to
straits. (36)

ua fe कपय: स्निग्धा मां रक्षन्ति समन्तत:।
सह गच्छन्ति गन्तव्ये नित्यं तिष्ठन्ति चास्थिते॥ ३७॥

“These loving monkeys actually protect
me on all sides. They accompany me
wherever | have to go and ever remain by
my side when | have to stay. (37)

संक्षेपस्त्वेष A राम किमुक्त्वा विस्तरं fe ते।
स मे ज्येष्ठो fauta वाली विश्रुतपौरुष: ॥ ३८ i

“This in brief is all my story, O Rama!
Of what use is it to give you details? Vali,
that hostile elder brother of mine, is well-
known for his valour. (38)
तद्विनाशेऽपि A दु:खं प्रमृष्टं स्यादनन्तरम्।
Ga मे जीवितं चैव तद्विनाशनिबन्धनम्॥ ३९॥
“My suffering can be immediately wiped
out only after his destruction. My happiness,
nay, my life itself hinges on his destruction.
(39)
एष मे राम शोकान्त: शोकार्तेन निवेदित:।
दु:खित: सुखितो aft सख्युर्नित्यं सखा गति: It ४० I
“In this way has the means of ending
my suffering been submitted by me, stricken
as | am with grief, O Rama! Afflicted or
happy, a friend alone is the refuge of a
friend at any time.” (40)

श्रुत्वैतच्च वचो Wa: सुग्रीवमिदमब्रवीत्।

किं निमित्तमभूदू at श्रोतुमिच्छामि तत्त्वत:॥४१॥
Hearing this submission, Sri Rama once

more spoke as follows to Sugriva: “What

961

was the occasion for Vali’s hostility (with
you)? | wish to hear this truly. (41)

ae fe कारणं श्रुत्वा वैरस्य तव वानर।
आनन्तर्याद् विधास्यामि सम्प्रधार्य बलाबलम्॥ ४२॥

“After duly ascertaining the relative
strength and weakness of you both, on
hearing the cause of this antagonism, O
monkey, | shall forthwith provide relief to
you (in the shape of Valis destruction). (42)

बलवान् fe ममामर्ष: श्रुत्वा त्वामवमानितम्।
वर्धते हृदयोत्कम्पी Waser इवाम्भस:॥४३॥
“Like the onrush of water (flowing in
streams) during the monsoon, my indignation,
which is already strong and shakes my
heart, grows hearing about your being
insulted. (43)

we: कथय विस्रब्धो यावदारोप्यते धनु:।
सृष्टश्च हि मया बाणो निरस्तश्च रिपुस्तव॥४४॥

“Speak joyfully and with confidence till
the bow is strung by me. Your adversary
(Vali) will be killed as soon as an arrow is
discharged by me.” (44)

एवमुक्तस्तु सुग्रीव: काकुत्स्थेन महात्मना।
प्रहर्षमतुलं लेभे चतुर्भि: सह वानरै:॥४५॥

Reassured in these words by the high-
souled Sri Rama (a scion of Kakutstha),
Sugriva for his part derived incomparable
joy alongwith the four monkeys (who
accompanied him). (45)

Wd: प्रहृष्टवदन: सुग्रीवो लक्ष्मणाग्रजे।
वैरस्य कारणं तत्त्वमाख्यातुमुपचक्रमे॥४६॥

With his face extremely delighted,
Sugriva thereupon proceeded to relate to
Sri Rama (the eldest brother of Laksmana)
the cause of their hostility, which constituted
the reality. (46)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये किष्किन्धाकाण्डेऽष्टम: सर्ग: ॥ ८॥

Thus ends Canto Eight in the Kiskindhakanda of the glorious Ramayana of Valmiki,
the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

