# YUDDHAKANDA +

and are a son of Rksaraja. No gain
whatsoever nor any harm has accrued to
you from me; nonetheless, you are like a
brother to me O lord of monkeys! (10)
किं aa तव सुग्रीव किष्किन्धां प्रति गम्यताम्॥ ११॥
“If | bore away the consort of the
sagacious prince, what harm have | done to
you thereby, O Sugriva? Therefore, return
to Kiskindha. (11)
नहीयं हरिभिर्लङ्का wed शक्या कथंचन।
vata सगन्धर्वै: किं पुनर्नरवानरै:॥१२॥
“Surely this Lanka cannot be reached
by any means by the monkeys. It cannot be
acquired even by gods accompanied by
Gandharvas (celestial musicians), much less
by human beings and monkeys.” (12)

स तदा राक्षसेन्द्रेण संदिष्टो रजनीचर:।
शुको विहंगमो भूत्वा तूर्णमाप्लुत्य चाम्बरम्॥ १३॥

Turning into a bird when commanded
as aforesaid by Ravana, the ruler of ogres,
the ogre Suka rose apace in the air at that
moment. (13)

a गत्वा दूरमध्वानमुपर्युपरि सागरम्।
संस्थितो war वाक्यं सुग्रीवमिदमब्रवीत्॥ १४॥

Nay, having flown a long way over the
sea close to it, and remaining actually
stationed in airspace, he delivered the
aforesaid message to Sugriva. (14)

सर्वमुक्तं यथाऽऽदिष्टं रावणेन दुरात्मना।
ad प्रापयन्तं वचनं तूर्णमाप्लुत्य वानरा:॥१५॥

प्रापद्यन्त तदा क्षिप्रं लोप्तुं हन्तुं च मुष्टिभि:।
wa: प्लवंगै: wast निगृहीतो निशाचर:॥१६॥
Quickly springing up, even while the
ogre was delivering that entire message
given by the evil-minded Ravana, as directed,
the monkeys forthwith proceeded at that
moment to tear off his wings and smite
him with their fists. The ranger of the night
was violently punished by the monkeys.
(15-16)

359

गगनाद् Yet चाशु प्रतिगृह्यावतारित:।
वानरै: पीड्यमानस्तु Wat वचनमब्रवीत्॥ Voll

Nay, after seizing him he was speedily
brought down to the ground from the
airspace. While being oppressed by the
monkeys, Suka, for his part, spoke as
follows: (17)

न दूतान्घ्नन्ति काकुत्स्थ वार्यन्तां साधु वानरा: |
यस्तु हित्वा मतं भर्तु: स्वमतं सम्प्रधारयेत्।
अनुक्तवादी दूत: सन् A gat वधमर्हति॥ ec

“Kings do not kill envoys, O scion of
Kakutstha! Let, therefore, the monkeys be
effectively kept back. That envoy who, having
abandoned the path chalked out by his
master, gives utterance to his own view, is
an envoy guilty of uttering that which has
not been communicated through him, and
merits death.” (18)

शुकस्य वचनं wa: श्रुत्वा तु परिदेवितम्।
उवाच मावधिष्टेति घ्नत: शाखामृगर्षभान्॥ १९॥

Hearing the plaintive appeal of Suka,
Sri Rama for his part spoke to the monkey
leaders, who were belabouring him, saying,
“(Please) do not kill him.” (19)

स च पत्रलघुर्भूत्वा हरिभिर्दर्शितेऽभये।
अन्तरिक्षॆ स्थितो भूत्वा पुनर्वचनमब्रवीत्॥२०॥

Gaining speed with his wings on immunity
having been granted to him by the monkeys,
and remaining stationed in the airspace, Suka
now sopke again as follows: (20)

सुग्रीव wat महाबलपराक्रम।

किं मया खलु वक्तव्यो रावणो लोकरावण:॥ २१॥
“In what words has Ravana, who makes

people cry by his high-handedness, actually

to be addressed by me on your behalf, O

Sugriva, who are full of spirit and endowed

with extraordinary might and prowess?” (21)

a waa: प्लवगाधिपस्तदा
प्लवंगमानामृषभो महाबल: |
उवाच वाक्यं रजनीचरस्य
at शुकं शुद्धमदीनसत्त्व:॥२२॥
