# YUDDHAKANDA #

“You, for your part, need must be told
by me that which is proper, O lord of ogres!
Granted that this ranger of the night was full
of unrighteousness and falsity, he was all
the same energetic, mighty and always heroic
in battles. He was never heard of as
vanquished even by gods with Indra (who
is presupposed to have performed a hundred
horse-sacrifices as a condition precedent
for his attaining Indrahood) at their head.

(98-99)
महात्मा बलसम्पन्नो रावणो लोकरावण:।
मरणान्तानि वैराणि निर्वृत्तं A: प्रयोजनम्॥ १००॥

“Though he made people cry by his
tyranny, Ravana was high-minded and richly
endowed with might. Hostilities endure till
death only. Our purpose 100 stands
accomplished now. (100)
क्रियतामस्य संस्कारो ममाप्येष यथा तव।
त्वत्सकाशान्महाबाहो संस्कारं विधिपूर्वकम्॥ १०१ ॥
क्षिप्रमर्हति धर्मेण त्वं यशोभाग् भविष्यसि।
राघवस्य वच: श्रुत्वा त्वरमाणो विभीषण: ॥ १०२॥
स प्रविश्य पुरीं लङ्कां राक्षसेन्द्रो विभीषण: ॥ १०३ ॥
रावणस्याग्निहोत्रं तु निर्यापयति सत्वरम्।
WHEL दारुरूपाणि अग्नीन् वै याजकांस्तथा Ul १०४॥
तथा चन्दनकाष्ठानि काष्ठानि विविधानि च।
अगरूणि सुगन्धीनि wets सुरभरींस्तथा॥ १०५ ॥
मणिमुक्ताप्रवालानि निर्यापयति राक्षस:।
आजगाम मुहूर्तेन राक्षसै: परिवारित:॥१०६॥
ततो माल्यवता सार्धं क्रियामेव चकार a: |
सौवर्णी शिबिकां दिव्यामारोप्य क्षौमवाससम्॥ १०७॥
रावणं राक्षसाधीशमश्रुवर्णमुखा द्विजा:।
तूर्यघोषैश्च विविधै: स्तुवद्भिश्चाभिनन्दितम्॥ १०८ il

“Let his obsequies be performed. He is
as well mine as yours. He deserves to be
cremated by you with due ceremony in
accordance with the prescribed course of
conduct without delay. You will thereby
earn good repute, O mighty-armed one!”
Hearing the appeal of Sri Rama, Vibhisana
hastily proceeded to perform the obsequies

775

relating to his eldest brother, Ravana, who
had been killed in combat. Penetrating deep
into the city of Lanka, Vibhisana, the
celebrated king of ogres, for his part quickly
concluded the Agnihotra (the act of pouring
oblations into the sacred fire) carried on by
Ravana. The ogre, Vibhisana, actually
caused to be brought together carts, excellent
species of firewood, the three sacred fires
maintained by Ravana, as well as the priests
required to officiate at the obsequies, likewise
logs of sandalwood as also various other
species of firewood, pieces of fragrant aloe
wood and odorous perfumes as well as
gems, pearls and corals. Surrounded by
other ogres, he returned awhile to the field
of battle and then he initiated the obsequies
themselves in conjunction with Malyavan
(the father of his own mother). Placing the
dead body of Ravana, the suzerain lord of
ogres—who was shrouded in linen and was
hailed with the blasts of various musical
instruments as well as by panegyrists singing
his praises, Brahmanas (forming part of the
ogre race, which was apparently divided
into four grades like human beings) stood
round him with their faces bathed in tears.

(101—108)

पताकाभिश्च चित्राभि: सुमनोभिश्च चित्रिताम्।
Sheree शिबिकां at तु विभीषणपुरोगमा: 11 १०९॥
दक्षिणाभिमुखा: सर्वे Wel काष्ठानि APT |
अग्नयो दीप्यमानास्ते तदाध्वर्युसमीरिता:॥११०॥
शरणाभिगता: Aa पुरस्तात् तस्य ते ययु:।
अन्त:पुराणि सर्वाणि रुदमानानि सत्वरम्॥ १११॥
पृष्ठतोऽनुययुस्तानि प्लवमानानि सर्वत:।
रावणं Wad देशे स्थाप्य ते भृशदु:खिता:॥ ११२॥
चितां चन्दनकाष्ठैश्च पद्मकोशीरचन्दनै: |
ब्राह्मया संवर्तयामासू राङ्कवास्तरणाव्रृताम्॥ ११३॥
Lifting up that bier, which had been
decorated with picturesque pennons and
flowers too, and taking up blocks of wood,
all the ogres for their part, with Vibhisana at
their head, proceeded with their faces turned
towards the south. All the aforesaid sacred
