876

et कथंचिन्महता श्रमेण
स राक्षसोऽभून्मियमाण Wa २२॥
“This ogre, Marica, who, having seduced
me, in a form closely resembling a deer,
had gone far away, reappeared as an ogre
only while dying when killed anyhow by me
with great exertion. (22)

मनश्च मे दीनमिहाप्रहृष्टं
Gags सव्यं Hed विकारम्।

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

असंशयं लक्ष्मण नास्ति सीता
हृता मृता वा पथि वर्तते वा॥ २३॥

“My mind is distressed at this moment
and not much rejoiced as my left eye is
throbbing. Without doubt, O Laksmana, Sita
is no more in the hermitage; she has either
been borne away to some other place or is
dead or is on the way to some unknown
destination being forcibly carried away by
someone.” (23)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्येऽरण्यकाण्डे सप्तपञ्चाश: सर्ग: ॥ ५७॥

Thus ends Canto Fifty-seven in the Aranyakanda of the glorious Ramayana of Valmiki,
the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

अष्टपञ्चाश: सर्ग:
Canto LVI

Indulging in various speculations about the fate of Sita, ऽन Rama with
Laksmana arrives at his hermitage and is pained not to find Sita there

स दृष्टवा लक्ष्मणं दीनं शून्यं दशरथात्मज:।
पर्यपृच्छ्त धर्मात्मा वैदेहीमागतं विना॥१॥

Seeing Laksmana distressed and
cheerless and arrived without Sita (a princess
of the Videha territory), Sri Rama, son of
Dasaratha, whose mind was set on virtue,
anxiously questioned him as follows: (1)
प्रस्थितं दण्डकारण्यं या मामनुजगाम ह।
aa सा लक्ष्मण वैदेही यां हित्वा त्वमिहागत:॥ २॥

“Where is that Sita (a princess of the
Videha kingdom) who actually followed me
as | set out towards the Dandaka forest,
and leaving whom you have come hither?

(2)
राज्यभ्रष्टस्य दीनस्य दण्डकान् परिधावत:।
क्व सा दु:खसहाया A वैदेही तनुमध्यमा॥ ३॥

“Where is that Sita (a princess of the
Videha kingdom) of graceful limbs who shared
my sufferings as | knocked about in the
Dandaka forest, deprived of my sovereignty
and dispirited? (3)

at विना ‘ree वीर मुहूर्तमपि जीवितुम्।
क्व सा प्राणसहाया A सीता सुरसुतोपमा॥४॥

“Where is that Sita, my life’s companion,
who resembled a daughter of the gods and
without whom, O heroic Laksmana, | cannot
live even for a while? (4)

पतित्वममराणां fe पृथिव्याश्चापि लक्ष्मण।
विना at तपनीयाभां नेच्छेयं जनकात्मजाम्॥५॥
“Bereft of that daughter of Jahaka, who
possessed the lustre of gold, | do not really
seek even the lordship of gods, much less
the sovereignty of the earth, O Laksmana !
(5)

कच्चिज्जीवति वैदेही प्राणै: fant मम।
herd प्रव्राजनं att न मे मिथ्या भविष्यति॥ ६॥

सीतानिमित्तं सौमित्रे मृते मयि गते त्वयि।
कच्चित्सकामा कैकेयी सुखिता सा भविष्यति।। ७॥

“Is Sita (a princess of the Videha
territory), who is dearer to me than life, still
living? | hope my exile to the forest for a
period of fourteen years will not be rendered
