966

Each seeking to lay his hands on the
other, the two warriors, the king of monkeys
and the lord of ogres, both conceited by
reason of their might, strove diligently to
accomplish that end. (19)
हस्तग्राहं तु तं मत्वा पादशब्देन रावणम्।
पराङ्मुखोऽपि जग्राह वाली सर्पमिवाण्डज: ॥ २० ॥

Concluding from his footfalls Ravana
to be ready to catch hold of himself, Vall,
though having his back turned upon him,
caught hold of him even as Garuda (a bird)
would seize a serpent. (20)
ग्रहीतुकामं तं Wer रक्षसामीश्वरं aft:
ख्मुत्पपात वेगेन कृत्वा कक्षावलम्बिनम्॥ २१॥

Having captured the said ruler of ogres,
who sought to capture Vali, and pressing
him in his arm-pit and leaving him hanging
there, Vali, monkey-chief, sprang up with
speed in the airspace. (21)
तं च पीडयमानं तु faded नखैर्मुहु:।
Wat रावणं वाली पवनस्तोयदं यथा॥ २२॥

Even though Ravana_ repeatedly
oppressed and pinched Vali with his nails,
the latter bore away Ravana just as the
wind would sweep away a cloud. (22)

अथ ते राक्षसामात्या ह्रियमाणे दशानने।
मुमोक्षयिषवो वालिं रवमाणा अभिद्रुता:॥ २३॥
While Ravana, the ten-headed monster,
was being borne away, the said ministers of
Ravana forthwith rushed upon Vali, with a
view to securing his release, emitting loud
cries. (23)
अन्वीयमानस्तैर्वाली भ्राजतेऽम्बरमध्यग:।
अन्वीयमानो मेघौघैरम्बरस्थ इवांशुमान्॥ २४॥

Being pursued by them in mid heavens,
Vali shone like the sun being followed by
multitudes of clouds in space. (24)

तेऽशक्नुवन्त: सम्प्राप्तुं वालिनं राक्षसोत्तमा:।

Tea बाहूरुवेगेन परिश्रान्ता व्यवस्थिता:॥ २५॥
Failing to approach Vali, the aforesaid

jewels among the ogres stood exhausted

« VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

by the onrush of his hands and thighs. (25)

वालिमार्गादपाक्रामन् पर्वतेन्द्रापि गच्छत:।
fe पुनर्जीवनप्रेप्सुर्बिभ्रद् वै मांसशोणितम्॥ २६॥

Even the foremost of mountains receded
from the path of Vali as he rushed forth,
what wonder, then, that one having a body
composed of flesh and blood and seeking to
live should do so. (26)
अपक्षिगणसम्पातान् वानरेन्द्रो महाजव:।
क्रमश: सागरान् सर्वान् संध्याकालमवन्दत॥ २७॥

Vali (the ruler of monkeys), who moved
with extraordinary speed, paid homage to
the goddess presiding over the morning and
evening twilights reaching one after another
the four seas which could not be visited
even by flocks of fast-moving birds. (27)

सम्पूज्यमानो यातस्तु खचरै: खचरोत्तम:।
पश्चिमं सागरं वाली आजगाम सरावण:॥ २८॥

Being duly honoured on the way by
winged creatures, Vali, the foremost of those
moving in the air, reached the western sea
with Ravana tightly held in his armpit. (28)

तस्मिन् संध्यामुपासित्वा स्नात्वा जप्त्वा च वानर:।

उत्तरं सागरं Wale वहमानो दशाननम्॥२९॥
After taking a plunge in it, saying his

Sandhya prayers and muttering the sacred

formula, the monkey moved to the northern

sea carrying the ten-headed monster tucked

in his armpit. (29)

बहुयोजनसाहस्रं वहमानो महाहरि:।
वायुवच्च मनोवच्च जगाम सह शत्रुणा॥ ३०॥
Carrying him across many thousands
of Yojanas, the mighty monkey moved with
his adversary with the speed of the wind
and thought. (30)

sat सागरे संध्यामुपासित्वा दशाननम्।
वहमानोऽगमद् वाली Ge A स महोदधिम्॥ ३१॥
Having said his Sandhya prayers at
the northern ocean, the said Vali actually
proceeded to the eastern sea, carrying
Ravana (the ten-headed monster). (31)
