* AYODHYAKANDA +

presiding over which is the daughter of the
sun-god) after preparing a raft. (5)
ततो न्यग्रोधमासाद्य महान्तं हरितच्छदम्।
wid बहुभिर्वृक्षै: var सिद्धोपसेवितम्॥६॥
तस्मिन्सीताञ्जलिं कृत्वा प्रयुञ्जीताशिषां क्रियाम्।
समासाद्य च तं gat वसेद वातिक्रमेत वा॥७॥
“Then, approaching an_ extensive
banyan tree, full of dark green leaves and,
therefore, going by the name of Syama
(dark-green), nay, surrounded by many other
trees and visited by Siddhas, Sita should,
joining her palms, offer prayers to the deity
presiding over the tree for your safe return
to Ayodhya. Again, duly reaching the foot of
the aforesaid tree, she should halt there
awhile in the event of her feeling fatigued, or
else pass beyond it. (6-7)

क्रोशमात्रं ततो गत्वा नीलं Wet च काननम्।
सल्लकीबदरीमिश्रं wat वंशैश्च यामुनै:॥८॥
a पन्थाश्चित्रकूटस्य गतस्य बहुशो मया।
TH मार्दवयुक्तश्च दावैश्चैव विवर्जित:॥९॥

“After walking a distance of only two
miles from that tree and beholding the
Nilavana, interspersed with Sallaki and jujube
trees and charming with bamboos standing
on the bank of the Yamuna, will be found
that delightful way to Citrakuta—which has
frequently been visited by me—marked with
smoothness and devoid of forest fires.”(8-9)

इति पन्थानमादिश्य महर्षि: संन्यवर्तत।
अभिवाद्य तथेत्युक्त्वा रामेण विनिवर्तित:।॥ १०॥

Having thus pointed out the way to
Citrakuta and being urged by Sri Rama to
return, after he had greeted the sage and
said “I shall follow your instructions”, the
great seer, Bharadwaja, duly returned. (10)

उपावृत्ते मुनौ तस्मिन् रामो लक्ष्मणमब्रवीत्।
कृतपुण्या: स्म भद्रं A मुनिर्यन्नोऽनुकम्पते॥११॥
The aforesaid sage having returned,
Sri Rama said to Laksmana, “May prosperity
attend on you! We must have done

499

meritorious deeds in the past in that the
sage has been compassionate to us.” (11)

sta at पुरुषव्याघ्रौ मन्त्रयित्वा मनस्विनौ।
सीतामेवाग्रत: कृत्वा कालिन्दीं जग्मतुर्नदीम्॥ १२॥

Talking as aforesaid, and placing Sita
definitely ahead, the two high-minded tigers
among men headed towards the river
Yamuna. (12)
अथासाद्य F कालिन्दीं शीघ्रस्रोतस्विनीं नदीम्।
चिन्तामापेदिरि सद्यो नदीजलतितीर्षव:॥१३॥

Reaching the bank of the river Yamuna,
which flowed in a swift current, the princely
travellers for their part fell apondering, keen
as they were to cross speedily the waters
of the river. (13)

तौ काष्ठसंघाटमथो चक्रतु: सुमहाप्लवम्।
शुष्कैर्वशै: समाकीर्णमुशीरैश्च समावृतम्॥१४॥

The two brothers then prepared a fairly
big raft consisting of a number of wooden
logs placed side by side, overspread with
dry bamboos and covered all over with the
fragrant roots of the Usira plant (Andropogon
muricatus). (14)

ततो वैतसशाखाश्च जम्बुशाखाश्च वीर्यवान्।
चकारलक्ष्मणश्छित्त्वा सीताया: सुखमासनम्॥ १५ ॥
Then, cutting shoots of canes and twigs
of the rose-apple tree, the powerful Laksmana
made a comfortable seat for Sita. (15)

wa श्रियमिवाचिन्त्यां wat दाशरथि: प्रियाम्।
ईषत्स लज्जमानां तामध्यारोपयत प्लवम्॥१६॥

Then the celebrated Sri Rama, son of
Dasaratha, helped Sita, his beloved
consort—who vied with Sri (the goddess of
fortune) of unimaginable beauty and was
feeling a bit abashed—ascend the raft. (16)

ug तत्र च aden वसने भूषणानि च।
wid कठिनकाजं च wage समाहित:॥ १७॥

Sri Rama also carefully placed on the
aforesaid raft the pair of her garments as
well as her jewels as also the shovel and
basket beside her. (17)
