* AYODHYAKANDA +

goads is unable to look behind, Sri Rama, a
tiger among men, too was unable to bear
the distressing sight of his father and mother
(following him on foot). (42)

प्रत्यगारमिवायान्ती सवत्सा वत्सकारणात्।
बद्धवत्सा यथा धेनू राममाताभ्यधावत॥४३॥

Kausalya, Sri Rama’s mother, rushed
forth after Sri Rama as a cow that has
given birth to a calf and whose calf stands
tied at the stall, would run to meet it while
returning to its stall from the pasture. (43)
क्रोशन्तीं WA रामेति हा सीते लक्ष्मणेति च॥ ४४॥
रामलक्ष्मणसीतार्थं स्रवन्तीं वारि नेत्रजम्।
असकृत् प्रैक्षत स at नृत्यन्तीमिव मातरम्॥४५॥

Sri Rama repeatedly gazed on his
aforesaid mother, Kausalya, who was
weeping as above and following that chariot
as though dancing, crying “Rama, O Rama,
O Sita, O Laksmana!” and shedding tears
for the sake of Sri Rama, Laksmana and
sita. (44-45)

तिष्ठेति राजा चुक्रोश याहि याहीति राघव:।
सुमन्त्रस्य बभूवात्मा चक्रयोरिव चान्तरा॥४६॥

The king, on the one hand, exclaimed
saying “Stop !”, while Sri Rama, a scion of
Raghu, called out “Go on! Proceed !!” In
this way Sumantra’s mind was placed in a
dilemma as one would feel while standing
between two revolving wheels. (46)

नाश्रौषमिति राजानमुपालब्धोऽपि वक्ष्यसि।

चिरं दु:खस्य पापिष्ठमिति रामस्तमब्रवीत्॥४७॥
Sri Rama said to him, “Even when twitted

by the king on going back to Ayodhya, for not

carrying out his orders, you will say, ‘I did not

hear your call.’ Prolongation of this agony

caused by witnessing the sad plight of my

447

aged and feeble parents would prove most
calamitous.” (47)

स रामस्य वच: कुर्वन्ननुज्ञाप्य च तं जनम्।
व्रजतोऽपि हयान् शीघ्रं चोदयामास सारथि: Ut ४८ ॥

Carrying out the behest of Sri Rama
and taking leave of that crowd which was
following at his heels, the aforesaid charioteer
urged on the horses, that were already
moving ahead, to go fast. (48)

ada जनो राज्ञो रामं कृत्वा प्रदक्षिणम्।
मनसाप्याशुवेगेन न न्यवर्तत मानुषम्॥४९॥

Mentally going round Sn Rama
clockwise, the king’s men returned to the
king’s presence with their body, which could
not keep pace with the chariot, though they
accompanied Sri Rama with their mind to
the forest; the commonalty, however, did
not return even with their body as they did
not return with their mind, which was
possessed of a quick speed. (49)
यमिच्छेत् पुनरायातं नैनं दूरमनुव्रजेत्।
इत्यमात्या महाराजमूचुर्दशरथं वच:॥५०॥

On returning to the king’s presence,
the ministers submitted to Emperor
Dasaratha as follows : “One should not follow
to a long distance him whom one wishes to
see come back.” (50)

प्रस्विन्नगात्र: प्रविषण्णरूप:।
निशम्य राजा PUT: सभार्यो
व्यवस्थितस्तं सुतमीक्षमाण:॥७५१॥

Hearing their submission, the king, who
was endowed with all virtues and felt
miserable, stopped short, gazing with his
consorts, on his celebrated son, Sri Rama,
nay, perspiring all over his body and wearing
a most dejected appearance. (51)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्येऽयोध्याकाण्डे चत्वारिंश: A: ॥ ४० ॥

Thus ends Canto Forty in the Ayodhyakanda of the glorious Ramayana
of Valmiki, the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

