1132

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

Canto LIV

Seeking to divert the minds of the other monkeys from the rebellious note
struck by Tara, whose advice readily found favour with Angada and others,
Hanuman warns Angada of the dire consequences which were sure
to follow in case he chose to stay away from home and, assuring him
of Sugriva’s amiability and disarming all his fears about him,
tries to convince him that they had better return to Kiskindha
and report themselves to their king

तथा ब्रुवति ae तु ताराधिपतिवर्चसि।
aa मेने a We हनूमानङ्गदेन तत्॥१॥
While Tara, who possessed _ the
splendour of the moon (the lord of the stars),
was speaking as above, Angada not
opposing it, Hanuman accounted the well-
known sovereignty of Kiskindha as wrested

from the hands of Sugriva in no time by
Angada. (1)
बुद्ध्या ह्यष्टाङ्गया GH चतुर्बलसमन्वितम्।
चतुर्दशगुणं मेने हनूमान् वालिन: सुतम्॥ २॥
आपूर्यमाणं शश्वच्च तेजोबलपराक्रमै:।
शशिनं शुक्लपक्षादौ वर्धमानमिव श्रिया॥३॥
शुश्रूषमाणं तारस्य शुक्रस्येव पुरंदरम्॥४॥
भर्तुरर्थे परिश्रान्तं सर्वशास्त्रविशारद:।
अभिसंधातुमारेभे हनूमानङ्गदं तत:॥ ५ ॥

Hanuman looked upon Angada (the
son of Vali) as actually endowed with
intelligence distinguished by eight virtues’,
equipped with the fourfold strength? and
possessed of fourteen  excellences?.
Hanuman, who was well-versed in all the
branches of learning, thereupon proceeded
to win over to his master’s side Angada,
who was being constantly replenished with
energy, strength and valour and was waxing
in glory like the moon at the beginning of a
bright fortnight, nay, who equalled Brhaspati
(the preceptor of gods) in wisdom, vied with
his father in prowess and felt inclined to
listen to the advice of Tara, as Indra (the
destroyer of strongholds) would at times to
Sukra, the preceptor of demons, and was
feeling averse to the cause of his master,
Sugriva. (2—5)

1. The eights virtues characterizing intelligence are—(1) Inclination to hear what others say (शुश्रूषा );
(2) actually hearing what others say ( श्रवणम् ); (3) the capacity to grasp the meaning of what others say (ग्रहणम् );
(4) retentiveness ( धारणम् ); (5) reasoning in favour of a propositin ( ऊह: ); (6) reasoning against a proposition
( अपोह: ); (7) insight into the meaning of what others say ( अर्थविज्ञानम् ); and (8) true wisdom ( तत्त्वज्ञानम् ).

शुश्रूषा श्रवणं चैव ग्रहणं धारणं तथा। ऊहापोहोऽर्थविज्ञानं तत्त्वज्ञानं च धीगुणा:॥ (Kamandak Nitisastra 4)

2. The four fold strength consists in the capacity to employ four expedients viz., (1) persuasion or
conciliation (साम ); (2) gift or gratification ( दान ); (3) sowing seeds of dissension among the enemy’s ranks
(a); and (4) use of violence or force (US).

3. The fourteen excellences enumerated in our Sastras are—(1) A sense of time and place ( देशकालज्ञता );
(2) firmness (ate); (3) the capacity to endure all kinds of hardships ( सर्वक्लेशसहिष्णुता ); (4) knowledge of
all empirical subjects ( सर्वविज्ञानिता ); (5) adroitness ( दाक्ष्यम् ); (6) ardour ( ऊर्ज: ); (7) the capacity to guard ones
secrets (संवृतमन्त्रता ); (8) consistency ( अविसंवादिता ); (9) heroism (शौर्यम्); (10) consciousness of one’s own
strength as well as of the enemy ( शक्तिज्ञता ); (11) appreciation of other’s services ( aaa ); (12) fondness for

a fugitive ( शरणागतवात्सल्यम् ); (13) indignation ( अमर्षत्वम् ); and (14) steadiness ( अचापलम् ).
