« KISKINDHAKANDA +

इदं dara धर्मज्ञं कर्मणा तेन हर्षित:।
रामं सर्वास्त्रविदुषां श्रेष्ठं शूरमवस्थितम्॥७॥
Nay, delighted with that feat of Sri
Rama, he spoke as follows to the valiant Sri
Rama, the foremost of those adept in the
use of all types of missiles, who knew what
is right and stood before him : (7)

सेन्द्रानपि सुरान् सर्वांस्त्वं बाणै: पुरुषर्षभ।

समर्थ: समरे हन्तुं fe पुनर्वालिनं प्रभो॥८॥
“You are able to kill with your arrows in

an encounter all the gods including even

Indra, their ruler, O jewel among men, much
more so, Vali, my lord! (8)

at wa महासाला गिरिर्भूमिश्च दारिता:।
SOMA काकुत्स्थ स्थाता ते को TTA: te i

“Who can stand in the van of a battle
before you, by whom seven big sal trees as
well as the mountain on which the trees
stood and the earth supporting it have been
pierced with a single arrow, O scion of
Kakutstha? (9)

ata मे विगत: शोक: प्रीतिरद्य परा मम।
सुहृदं wal समासाद्य महेन्द्रवरुणोपमम्॥१०॥

“Now that | have duly met in the form
of an ally you, who are a compeer of the
mighty Indra (the ruler of gods) and Varuna
(the god of waters), my grief has totally
disappeared and my joy is supreme today.

(10)
तमद्यैव frat A after भ्रातूरूपिणम्।
वालिनं जहि काकुत्स्थ मया बद्धोऽयमञ्जलि: UL Ul

“For my pleasure, O scion of Kakutstha,
pray, make short work of Vali, my enemy in
the guise of a brother, this very day: so
have these palms been joined by me.” (11)

ततो राम: परिष्वज्य सुग्रीवं प्रियदर्शनम्।
प्रत्युवाच महाप्राज्ञो लक्ष्मणानुगतं वच:॥१२॥
Embracing Sugriva of pleasing aspect,
Sri Rama, who was exceptionally wise,
thereupon replied as follows to Sugriva,
who was dear as Laksmana to him: (12)

977

अस्माद्गच्छाम किष्किन्धां क्षिप्रं गच्छ त्वमग्रत: |
गत्वा चाह्वय सुग्रीव वालिनं भ्रातृगन्धिनम्॥ १३॥
“Let us proceed, O Sugriva, to Kiskindha
from this mountain; depart you ahead without
delay and, going there, challenge to a duel
Vali, who bears the name of a brother !”
(13)

सर्वे तेत्वरितं गत्वा किष्किन्धां वालिन: पुरीम्।
qatar ह्यतिष्ठन् Tet वने॥१४॥

Reaching with hasty steps Kiskindha,
the capital of Vali, and hiding themselves
behind trees, they all halted in a dense
forest. (14)

सुग्रीवोऽप्यनदद् Gt वालिनो ह्वानकारणात्।
गाढं परिहितो वेगान्नादैर्भिन्दन्निवाम्बरम्॥ १५॥
Tightly girded about his loins, even
Sugriva roared frightfully by way of a
challenge to Vali, rending the air, as it were,
by his shouts uttered with vehemence. (15)
तं श्रुत्वा निनदं भ्रातु: Hast वाली महाबल:।
निष्पपात सुसंरब्धो भास्करोऽस्ततटादिव॥ १६॥
Enraged to hear that roar of his (younger)
brother and highly excited, Vali, who was
possessed of extraordinary might, rushed
forth as impetuously as the sun would slide
from the edge of the western mountain (behind
which the sun is supposed to set). (16)
wa: सुतुमुलं युद्धं वालिसुग्रीवयोरभूत्।
गगने ग्रहयोर्घोरे बुधाङ्गारकयोरिव॥१७॥
Then ensued a most tumultuous and
terrible combat between Vali and Sugriva,

resembling a clash between Mercury and
Mars in the heavens. (17)

तलैरशनिकल्पैश्च वज्रकल्पैश्च मुष्टिभि:।
जघ्नतु: समरेऽन्योन्यं भ्रातरौ क्रोधमूच्छितौ॥ १८॥

Blinded with anger, the two brothers
struck each other in the course of their
encounter with their palms and soles, which
fell like lightning, and fists, which descended
like the thunderbolt. (18)
