* SUNDARAKANDA +

Hanuman surveyed that marvellous grove,
which was rendered noisy by birds, was
surrounded on all sides with golden and
silvery trees and looked variegated with
birds and herds of deer; which consisted of
lovely thickets and with its reddish flowers
appeared red like the sun just risen; nay,
which was fringed with trees of various
kinds laden with flowers and fruits, and was
ever inhabited by cuckoos and king-bees in
heat; which filled men with delight at all
times and overwhelmed deer and birds with
heat and which was made noisy by
peacocks in heat and was full of birds of
every species. (5—8)
मार्गमाणो वरारोहां राजपुत्रीमनिन्दिताम्।
सुखप्रसुप्तान् विहगान् बोधयामास वानर:॥९॥
While searching for that irreproachable

princess of excellent limbs, the monkey
woke the birds sweetly lying asleep. (9)

उत्पतद्भिद्विजगणै: पक्षैर्वातै: समाहता:।
अनेकवर्णा विविधा मुमुचु: पुष्पवृष्टय:॥१०॥
Buffeted by flocks of birds with winds
while moving on their wings, the trees in the
Asoka grove released showers of flowers
of various kinds and various colours. (10)

पुष्पावकीर्ण: शुशुभे SAM मारुतात्मज:।
अशोकवनिकामध्ये यथा पुष्पमयो Fe: ee i
Covered with those flowers, Hanuman,
sprung from the loins of the wind-god, looked
charming like a mountain of flowers in the
midst of the Asoka grove. (11)

fem: सर्वाभिधावन्तं वृक्षखण्डगतं कपिम्।

gem सर्वाणि भूतानि वसन्त इति APTN १२॥
Beholding the monkey stationed in a

cluster of trees after running in all directions,

all living beings in the ASoka garden thought
that it was Spring-incarnate. (12)

वृक्षेभ्य: पतितै: पुष्पैरवकीर्णा: पृथग्विधै:।
रराज वसुधा at waea विभूषिता॥१३॥

Strewn with flowers of various kinds

93

fallen from the trees, the earth there shone
like a young woman richly adorned. (13)

तरस्विना a तरवस्तरसा ag कम्पिता:।
कुसुमानि विचित्राणि waa: कपिना तदा॥ १४॥
Shaken with violence in diverse ways

by the impetuous monkey, the aforesaid trees
shed blooms of diverse kinds at that time.(14)

निर्धूतपत्रशिखरा: शीर्णपुष्पफलद्रुमा:।
निक्षिप्तवस्त्राभरणा धूर्तां इव पराजिता:॥ १५॥

With their tops shorn of leaves and
their blossom and fruit fallen, the trees stood
like gamblers who, having lost their game,
had staked even their raiment and ornaments.

(15)

हनूमता वेगवता कम्पितास्ते नगोत्तमा:।
पुष्पपत्रफलान्याशु मुमुचु: फलशालिन:॥१६॥

Shaken by the impetuous Hanuman,
those excellent trees, adorned with fruit,
speedily shed their blossom, leaves and
fruit. (16)

विहंगसङ्घैर्हीनास्ते स्कन्धमात्राश्रया द्रुमा:।
बभूवुरगमा: ad मारुतेन विनिर्धुता:॥१७॥

Deserted by flocks of birds and depended
upon their boughs alone, all the trees, when
violently shaken, became unworthy of being
approached. (17)

विधूतकेशी युवतिर्यथा मृदितवर्णका।
निपीतशुभदन्तोष्ठी नखैर्दन्तैश्च विक्षता॥१८॥
तथा लांगूलहस्तैस्तु चरणाभ्यां च मर्दिता।
तथैवाशोकवनिका प्रभग्नवनपादपा Ut १९॥
Battered by the tail and hands as well
as by the feet of Hanuman and with its trees
shattered, the ASoka grove looked smitten
exactly like a young woman whose locks
have been thrown into disorder, whose ‘Tilaka’
(sacred mark on the forehead) has been
effaced, whose lips illumined by her bright
teeth have been deprived of their colour (by
being kissed again and again) and who has
been dug into with nails and bitten with
teeth. (18-19)
