# YUDDHAKANDA #

प्रदक्षिणावर्तशिखस्तप्तहाटकसंनिभ: ।
हविस्तत् प्रतिजग्राह पावक: स्वयमुत्थित:॥ १०॥
Burst into view in person, the god of
fire, who was shooting out flames towards
the right and who shone brightly like refined
gold, received that offering. (10)

हुत्वाग्निं तर्पयित्वाथं देवदानवराक्षसान्।
आरुरोह रथश्रेष्ठमन्तर्धानगतं शुभम्॥११॥

Having offered oblations to the fire and
gratified the gods, devils and ogres connected
with a sacrifice carried out with a malevolent
intention, Indrajit ascended an excellent and
splendid chariot capable of going out of
sight. (11)

a वाजिभिश्चतुर्भिस्तु बाणैस्तु निशितैर्युत:।
आरोपितमहाचाप: शुशुभे स्यन्दनोत्तम:॥१२॥
Drawn by four horses, nay, provided
with whetted shafts and with a mighty bow
placed on it, that excellent chariot looked
charming. (12)
जाज्वल्यमानो वपुषा तपनीयपरिच्छद:।
मृगैश्चन्द्रार्धचन्द्रैश्च स रथ: समलंकृत:॥१३॥
With its appurtenances of gold the
aforesaid chariot glittered on account of its
frame and was decorated with carved images
of antelopes, full moons and crescents.(13)

जाम्बूनदमहाकम्बुर्दीप्तपावकसंनिभ: ।
बभूवेन्द्रजित: केतुर्वैदूर्यसमलंकृत: ॥ १४॥
Provided with large rings of gold and
adorned with cat’s-eye gems, the standard
of Indrajit shone like a flaming fire. (14)

तेन चादित्यकल्पेन ब्रह्मास्त्रेण च पालित:।

स बभूव दुराधर्षो रावणि: सुमहाबल:॥ १५॥
Nay, protected by that chariot, effulgent

as the sun, as well as by the missile

presided over by Brahma (the creator), the

aforesaid son of Ravana, who was endowed

643

with exceptional
overpower.

सोऽभिनिर्याय नगरादिन्द्रजित् समितिंजय:।
हुत्वाग्निं TAA ATTA ATA SAM १६ Al

Issuing out of the city and having
acquired the power of going out of sight by
pouring oblations into the sacred fire with
the utterance of spells sacred to Nirrti (the
progenitor of the race of ogres), the said
ogre, Indrajit, who had always been victorious
in war, bragged as follows: (16)

अद्य हत्वा रणे यौ at मिथ्या प्रव्रजितौ वने।
जयं पित्रे प्रदास्यामि रावणाय रणेऽधिकम्॥ १७॥

“Having made short work of two mortal
princes, who have passed their exile in the
forest in vain, | shall indeed secure an
eminent victory for my father, Ravana, today.

(17)

ae निर्वानरामुर्वीं हत्वा रामं च लक्ष्मणम्।
करिष्ये परमां प्रीतिमित्युक्त्वान्तरधीयत॥ १८॥
“Having rid the earth of monkeys and
dispatched Rama and Laksmana, | shall
bring supreme felicity to my father today.”
Saying so, he became invisible. (18)

आपपाताथ संक्रुद्धो दशग्रीवेण चोदित:।
तीक्ष्णकार्मुकनाराचैस्तीक्ष्णस्त्विन्द्ररिपू_ रणे॥१९॥

Directed by Ravana, the ten-headed
monster, and equipped with a fierce bow
and steel shafts, the ardent adversary of
Indra, for his part now rushed furiously into
the fray. (19)

स ददर्श महावीर्यौ नागौ त्रिशिरसाविव।
सृजन्ताविषुजालानि वीरौ वानरमध्यगौ॥ २०॥

He beheld the two heroic princes (Sri
Rama and Laksmana), who were endowed
with extraordinary prowess and resembled
two three-headed serpents* standing in the

might, was difficult to
(15)

* With the end of their bows rising above their right shoulders and that of their quivers above their left-

like two more heads, the two princes are compared here with threeheaded serpents.
