150

Some of them shone like live coal,
others were smoky in appearance, while
still others were brilliant as the sun and the
moon and were inclined forwards with their
palms joined together so as to form a
cavity. (12)

TH Wat भूत्वाब्रुवन् मधुरभाषिण:।
इमे स्म नरशार्दूल शाधि किं करवाम ते॥१३॥

Standing with their hollowed palms
joined together, they addressed Sri Rama
in sweet accents as follows : “Here we are,
O tiger among men! Pray, instruct us what
we can do for you.” (13)
गम्यतामिति तानाह यथेष्टं रघुनन्दन:।
मानसा: कार्यकालेषु साहाय्यं A करिष्यथ॥ १४॥

Sri Rama (a scion of Raghu) replied to
them saying, “Let you be gone, as you will,
for the present. Appearing in my mind
whenever | recall you, you should render
assistance to me in times of emergency.”

(14)
अथ ते राममामन्त्य Heart चापि प्रदक्षिणम्।

एवमस्त्विति काकुत्स्थमुक्त्वा जग्मुर्यथागतम्॥ १५ ॥

Taking leave of Sri Rama and also
going round him clockwise as a mark of
respect and addressing the scion of
Kakutstha in the words “Be it so!” they
withdrew even as they had come. (15)

स च तान् Weal aren विश्वामित्रं महामुनिम्।

गच्छन्नेवाथ AY श्लक्ष्णं वचनमब्रवीत्॥१६॥
Having come to know them, Sri Rama

forthwith addressed the following sweet and

delightful words to the great sage ViSwamitra
even while moving alongwith him: (16)

किमेतन्मेघसंकाशं पर्वतस्याविदूरत:।
वृक्षखण्डमितो भाति ut कौतूहलं fe मे॥१७॥

« VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

“What is this cluster of trees, that looks
from this place like a mass of clouds in
view of its dark colour and density, not very
far from the yonder mountain? Great indeed
is my curiosity in this behalf. (17)
aria मृगाकोर्णं मनोहरमतीव al
नानाप्रकारै: शकुनैर्वल्गुभाषैरलंकृतम्॥ १८ ॥

“It is so pleasing to the sight, extremely
soul-ravishing, full of deer and graced with
various species of sweetly warbling birds.

(18)

निस्सृता: स्मो मुनिश्रेष्ठ कान्ताराद् रोमहर्षणात्।
अनया त्ववगच्छामि देशस्य सुखवत्तया॥१९॥

“From the happy look as indicated above
of this tract of land, to tell you the truth, |
presume we have emerged, O jewel among
sages, from the forest haunted so long by
the ogress Tataka, which made one’s hair
stand on end by its fearful aspect. (19)
wa मे शंस भगवन् कस्याश्रमपदं त्विदम्।
सम्प्राप्ता यत्र A पापा ब्रह्मघ्ना TAT: tl २०॥
तव यज्ञस्य विघ्नाय दुरात्मानो महामुने।
भगवंस्तस्य को देश: सा AA तव याज्ञिकी।॥ २१॥
रक्षितव्या क्रिया ब्रह्मन् मया वध्याश्च राक्षसा:।

Wid सर्वं मुनिश्रेष्ठं श्रोतुमिच्छाम्यहं प्रभो॥ २२॥

“Whose hermitage does this site really
contain? What is the locality of your
hermitage, where those sinful, wicked and
evil-minded slayers of Brahmanas make
their inroads for the interruption of your
sacrificial performance, O great and glorious
sage, nay, where your sacrificial activity
requires to be guarded and the ogres deserve
to be killed by me, O holy Brahmana! |
wish to hear all this, O powerful jewel among
sages !” (20—22)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये बालकाण्डेऽष्टाविंश: सर्ग: I २८ Il

Thus ends Canto Twenty-eight in the Balakanda of the glorious Ramayana of Valmiki,
the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

