1050

“The depths of the forests were lit up,
as it were, with the presence of numerous
Priyaka (Asana) trees emitting delightful
fragrance, which were bright as gold and
were highly pleasing to the eye, and the tips
of whose branches were bent under the
excessive weight of their blossom. (34)

TAA गतयोऽद्य मन्दा:॥ 3& ॥

“The gait of the foremost of elephants—
who are accompanied by their mates, are
fond of lotus-ponds and the woods, who are
out to enjoy the blossom of Saptachhada
trees, are excited by passion and are full of
ardent longing for sexual enjoyment, affected
with rut as they are—has become slow
now. (35)
व्यक्तं नभ: शस्त्रविधौतवर्णं

कृशप्रवाहानि नदीजलानि।
कह्लारशीता: पवना: प्रवान्ति
तमो विमुक्ताश्च दिश: प्रकाशा: ।। ३६ ।।

“The sky has clearly assumed the
spotless hue of a sword sharpened on the
whetstone, the waters of the rivers are flowing
in a narrow stream, the winds are blowing
cool due to contact with Kalhara flowers and
wafting their fragrance, while the quarters look
bright, entirely free as they are from obscurity
caused by clouds. (36)

भूमिश्चिरोद्घाटितसान्द्ररेणु: ।
sare समायुताना-
मुद्योगकालोऽद्य नराधिपानाम्॥ ३७॥

“All mud having disappeared due to
contact of sunshine, the soil is now covered
with thick layers of dust come to light after
a long time. Now is the time for military
endeavour on the part of kings (lit., rulers of
men) actuated by enmity towards one
another. (37)

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

प्रहर्षिता: पांसुसमुत्थिताङ्गा:।
मदोत्कटा: सम्प्रति युद्धलुब्धा
वृषा Wat मध्यगता नदन्ति॥ ३८॥
“Overjoyed bulls—whose — graceful
comeliness of form has been heightened by
the bracing qualities of autumn, whose limbs
are powdered with dust, nay, who are excited
with passion and are now covetous of fighting
with one another—are bellowing in the midst

of cows. (38)
समन्मथा तीव्रतरानुरागा
कुलान्विता मन्दगति: HTT: |
मदान्वितं सम्परिवार्य यान्तं
वनेषु भर्तारमनुप्रयाति॥ ३९॥
“Affected with rut and as such full of
passionate love, hence walking with a slow
tread, the she-elephant of noble breed follows
her mate—also affected with rut and ranging

through the woods—encompassing him now
and then. (39)

त्यक्त्वा वराण्यात्मविभूषितानि

बर्हाणि तीरोपगता नदीनाम्।
निर्भर्त्सत्यमाना ga सारसौघै:

प्रयान्ति दीना विमना मयूरा:॥ ४० UI

“Shedding their excellent tails, which
served as their natural adornment, peacocks
arrived near the banks of rivers, come away
distressed and disconsolate, as though being
rebuffed by swarms of cranes. (40)

वित्रास्य कारण्डवचक्रवाकान्
महारवैर्भिन्नकटा गजेन्द्रा:।

सरस्सुबद्धाम्बुजभूषणेषु
विक्षोभ्य विक्षोभ्य जलं पिबन्ति।॥। ४१ ॥

“Scaring away ॥(द्राकाप्रव४वऽउ and
Cakravakas by their formidable cries, while
standing in lakes adorned with open lotuses,
lordly elephants with ichor exuding from
their temples, drink their water after stirring
it violently again and again. (41)
