1150

with the wind in speed and were capable of
changing form at will, were seen by me
before. (19)
ज्येष्ठोऽवितस्त्वं सम्पाते जटायुरनुजस्तव।
मानुषं रूपमास्थाय गृह्णीतां चरणौ AAI २०॥
“Assuming human forms, you, who
stand recognized by me as the elder of the
two, O Sampati, and Jatayu, your younger
brother, used to clasp my feet as a token

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

of respect.

किं ते व्याधिसमुत्थानं पक्षयो: पतनं कथम्।
दण्डो वायं Ya: केन सर्वमाख्याहि पृच्छ्त:॥ २१॥
“Is this a symptom of some disease
appearing in your body? How is the falling
off of your wings to be accounted for? Or
by whom has this punishment been inflicted
on you? Relate everything to me, who makes
this inquiry of you.” (21)

(20)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्राणायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये किष्किन्धाकाण्डे
षष्टितम: A: ॥ Go Il
Thus ends Canto Sixty in the Kiskindhakanda of the glorious Ramayana of Valmiki,
the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

Canto LXI
Relating to Sage Nisakara the circumstances which led to his being burnt,

Sampati takes before the sage a vow to give up the ghost by
leaping from a mountain-peak

ततस्तद् दारुणं कर्म दुष्करं सहसा कृतम्।
आचचक्षे मुने: Wa सूर्यानुगमनं तथा॥१॥
Thereupon Sampati related in the
following words to the sage Nisakara all
about that impetuous act (in the form of
discomfiting Indra), which was so hard to
accomplish and had been rashly undertaken,
as also about their wild goose chase after
the sun: (1)
भगवन् व्रणयुक्तत्वाल्लज्जया चाकुलेन्द्रिय:।
परिश्रान्तो न we वचनं परिभाषितुम्॥ २॥

“Due to my being afflicted with wounds
inflicted by the thunderbolt of Indra and my
mind being confused through shame (at my
humiliation and frustration that followed in
the wake of my chasing the sun) and
exhausted by my arduous journey to your
hermitage, | cannot narrate my story at
length. O venerable sage ! (2)

ae wa जटायुश्च संघर्षाद् गर्वमोहितौ।
आकाशं पतितौ दूराज्जिज्ञासन्तौ पराक्रमम्॥ ३॥
कैलासशिखरे बद्ध्वा मुनीनामग्रत: पणम्।
रवि: स्यादनुयातव्यो यावदस्तं महागिरिम्॥४॥

“Having taken a vow on a peak of
Mount Kailasa in the presence of hermits
that the sun must be followed till it reached
the huge Western Mountain (where the sun
is supposed to set), Jatayu, my younger
brother, and myself too, who were anxious
to test our relative strength, infatuated as
we were with pride (occasioned by our
having worsted Indra in an encounter), flew
far into the sky in a spirit of emulation. (3-4)

अप्यावां युगपत् प्राप्तावपश्याव महीतले।
रथचक्रप्रमाणानि नगराणि UTR पृथक्॥५॥

“Nay, having reached the sky together,
we distinctly perceived cities on the earth’s
