* AYODHYAKANDA +

of mine be granted, since you are a bestower
of boons, O noblest king ! (8)

धर्मस्यैवाभिकामार्थं मम चैवाभिचोदनात्।
प्रव्राजय ad रामं त्रि: we त्वां ब्रवीम्यहम्॥ ९॥
“In order to attain the coveted fruit of
righteousness as well as in compliance with
my request, send your eldest son into exile
at once. Indeed, | speak to you thrice about
it. (9)
समयं च ममार्येमं यदि त्वं न करिष्यसि।
अग्रतस्ते परित्यक्ता परित्यक्ष्यामि जीवितम्॥ १०॥
“If you do not implement this stipulation
with me, O worthy king, then, forsaken
(neglected) by you, | shall lay down my life
before you.” (10)

एवं प्रचोदितो राजा कैकेय्या निर्विशङ्कया।
नाशकत् पाशमुन्मोक्तुं बलिरिन्द्रकृतं यथा॥११॥

Importuned thus by Kaikeyi, who had
no scruple in her mind about what she was
doing, the king could not untie the cord of
plighted word that fettered him, any more
than Bali could unloose the noose placed
round his body by Indra through his younger
brother, Lord Vamana, in order to deprive
him of his sovereignty of the three worlds.

(11)
उद्भ्रान्तहृदयश्चापि विवर्णवदनोऽभवत्।
स धुर्यो वै परिस्पन्दन् युगचक्रान्तरं यथा॥१२॥

Like a bullock struggling to escape on
finding itself between the two wheels of a
cart, he got agitated at heart and his
countenance grew pale. (12)

विकलाभ्यां च नेत्राभ्यामपश्यन्निव भूमिप:।
pene धैर्येण संस्तभ्य कैकेयीमिदमब्रवीत्॥ १३॥
Unable, as it were, to see with his
bedimmed eyes, and controlling himself with
great difficulty by recourse to fortitude, the
king spoke to Kaikeyi as follows : (13)
यस्ते मन्त्रकृत: पाणिरग्नौ पापे मया धृत:।
संत्यजामि स्वजं चैव da Ut सह ATU evil

343

“| fully disown, O wicked woman, your
hand—which was once clasped by me in
the presence of the nuptial fire when it had
been consecrated by uttering the sacred
text—(qunf¥ etc., relevant to the occasion)—
as also your son, Bharata, begotten by me,
alongwith yourself. (14)

प्रयाता wet देवि सूर्यस्योदयनं प्रति।
अभिषेकाय fe जनस्त्वरयिष्यति at ध्रुवम्॥ १५॥

“The night has already fully elapsed,
O queen! Perceiving the sunrise, people
will surely urge me to expedite the projected
installation of Rama as Prince Regent.
(15)

रामाभिषेकसम्भारैस्तदर्थमुपकल्पितै: ।
राम: कारयितव्यो मे मृतस्य सलनिलक्रियाम्॥ १६ ॥

“But as | am not going to survive any
longer, Rama should be made to offer water
to me, when । have breathed my last, by
means of the requisites for the consecration
of Rama, collected for the purpose. (16)

सपुत्रया त्वया Aa कर्तव्या सलिलक्रिया।
व्याहन्तास्यशुभाचारे यदि रामाभिषेचनम्॥ १७॥

“If, aS you say, you interrupt the
installation of Rama, O woman of evil
conduct, no water should be offered to my
departed spirit by you, including your son.

(17)
न शक्तोऽद्यास्म्यहं HE दृष्टवा Ts तथामुखम्।
हतहर्षं तथानन्दं पुनर्जनमवाङ्मुखम्॥१८॥

“Having seen people with that joy writ
large on their expression before, | am unable
to see them bereft of merriment and devoid
of joy and with their face hung downward,
on the contrary, today.” (18)

at तथा ब्रुवतस्तस्य भूमिपस्य महात्मन:।
प्रभाता wet पुण्या चन्द्रनक्षत्रमालिनी॥१९॥

While that high-souled monarch was
speaking as aforesaid, the holy night with
its garland of the moon and the stars passed
and was followed by the dawn. (19)
