* AYODHYAKANDA +

दिदेश राजा रुचिरं रामाय परमासनम्।
तथाऽऽसनवरं प्राप्य व्यदीपयत राघव:॥ ३५॥
स्वयैव प्रभया मेरुमुदये विमलो रवि:।
तेन बिभ्राजिता at सा सभापि व्यरोचत॥ ३६॥
विमलग्रहनक्षत्रा शारदी द्यौरिवेन्दुना।
तं पश्यमानो नृपतिस्तुतोष प्रियमात्मजम्॥ ३७॥
अलंकृतमिवात्मानमादर्शतलसंस्थितम् ।
स तं सुस्थितमाभाष्य पुत्रं पुत्रवतां वर:॥ ३८॥
उवाचेदं Gal राजा देवेन्द्रमिव कश्यप:।
ज्येष्ठायामसि मे पत्न्यां Aga AGM: Ya: ।॥ ३९॥
उत्पन्नस्त्वं गुणज्येष्ठो मम रामात्मज: प्रिय:।
त्वया यत: प्रजाश्चेमा: स्वगुणैरनुरञ्जिता:॥४०॥
तस्मात् त्वं पुष्ययोगेन यौवराज्यमवाप्नुहि।
कामतस्त्वं प्रकृत्यैव निर्णीतो गुणवानिति॥४१॥

DaSaratha, ruler of men, did not feel
sated as he saw Rama coming in a befitting
manner. Helping Sri Rama to alight from his
excellent chariot, Sumantra for his part
followed with joined palms at his heels even
as he walked into the presence of his father,
Emperor DaSsaratha. In order to see the
Emperor, the aforesaid Rama, a scion of
Raghu, the foremost of men, went up
alongwith Sumantra straight to the well-known
palace, which looked like the peak of Mount
Kailasa (because of its white colour). Making
his way with joined palms to the presence
of his father and falling prostrate', the
celebrated Sri Rama bowed at the latter’s
feet, mentioning his own name.

Seeing him lying prostrate by his side
with joined palms, the king (lit., a ruler of
men) took him by his joined palms and, drawing
him near, hugged his beloved son. Nay, the
Emperor offered to the said Sri Rama a
splendid and excellent seat, beautifully inlaid
with gems and gold and (already) kept ready
by his servants. Mounting the princely seat,

297

Sri Rama, a scion of Raghu, illumined it by
his own effulgence in the same way as the
clear sun would illumine Mount Meru at dawn.
Illumined by him, that assembly too shone
brightly on that occasion even as the
autumnal sky, spangled with bright planets
and stars, would shine all the more brightly
when illumined by the moon. The Emperor
rejoiced to see his beloved son even as one
would rejoice to see oneself, decked with
ornaments, reflected on the surface of a mirror.
Addressing his aforesaid son, comfortably
seated, DaSaratha, the foremost of those
blessed with a son, spoke as follows even
as Sage KaSyapa would address (his eldest
son) Indra, the ruler of gods: “You have been
born of my seniormost wife, Kausalya, who
is worthy of me in every wise, as a son
equally worthy of myself. Being seniormost
in virtues as well, O Rama, you are my
favourite son. Since all these people
assembled here have been gratified by you
through your excellences, therefore, accept
you the office of Prince Regent tomorrow,
when the moon appears in conjunction with
the constellation Pusya. You have been
adjudged to be abundantly rich in excellences
by your very disposition. (30—41)

गुणवत्यपि q स्नेहात् पुत्र वक्ष्यामि a हितम्।
भूयो विनयमास्थाय va fret जितेन्द्रिय: ।। ४२॥
कामक्रोधसमुत्थानि त्यजस्व व्यसनानि च।
Waa Ada Gea प्रत्यक्षया तथा॥४३॥
अमात्यप्रभृतीर सर्वा: प्रजाश्चैवानुरञ्जय।
कोष्ठागारायुधागारै: कृत्वा संनिचयान् TTL Il ४४॥

“To you, an epitome of merits as you
are, | shall tender friendly advice, my son,
as follows out of sheer affection. Resorting
to even greater humility than before,
constantly keep your senses under control
and eschew vices? born of concupiscence

1. In the Smrti texts it is laid down that, calling on one’s father or teacher everyday, one should bow

to him lying prostrate on the ground—'qusad प्रणमेद् भूमावुपेत्य गुरुमन्वहम्।`

2. The vices born of lust and anger have been separately enumerated as below:

मृगयाक्षो दिवास्वाप: uftare: erat मद: | तौर्यत्रिकं वृथाट्यं च कामजो दशको गण:॥

(Manu., VII. 47)
