# YUDDHAKANDA #

by that ogre with the streams of his shafts,
the rock forthwith descended on the ground
like a flock of frightened vultures. (14)

at तु भिन्नां शिलां दृष्ट्वा सुग्रीव: क्रोधमूच्छित: ।
सालमुत्पाट्य चिक्षेप तं a चिच्छेद नैकधा॥ १५॥

Filled with fury on beholding that rock
broken, and tearing up a sal tree, the
celebrated Sugriva for his part flung it at his
adversary and Mahodora split it into many
pieces. (15)
शरैश्च विददारैनं शूर: परबलार्दन:।

a ददर्श तत: क्रुद्ध: परिघं पतितं भुवि॥ १६॥

The hero, who was the scourge of
hostile forces, also lacerated Sugriva with
his shafts. Provoked to anger, the latter
then beheld an iron bludgeon lying on the
ground. (16)
आविध्य q स तं दीप्तं परिघं तस्य दर्शयन्।
परिघेणोग्रवेगेन जघानास्य हयोत्तमान्॥१७॥

Brandishing that flashing bludgeon and
exhibiting his own quickness of hand to his
adversary, Sugriva for his part struck down
the formers excellent steeds with that
bludgeon of terrific velocity. (17)

तस्माद्धतहयाद् वीर: सोऽवप्लुत्य महारथात्।

Tet जग्राह संक्रुद्धो राक्षसोऽथ महोदर:॥ १८॥
Leaping down from that huge chariot,

whose team of horses had been killed,

highly provoked as he was, that valiant

ogre, Mahodara, forthwith seized hold of his

mace. (18)

गदापरिघहस्तौ dt af वीरौ समीयतु:।
नर्दन्तौ गोव्रृषप्रख्यौ घनाविव सविद्युतौ॥१९॥

Carrying a mace and an iron bludgeon
respectively in their hands, and roaring like
two bulls and resembling two clouds charged
with lightning, those two heroes closed in
an encounter. (19)

तत: क्रुद्धो Tat TH चिक्षेप रजनीचर:।
ज्वलन्तीं भास्कराभासां सुग्रीवाय महोदर:॥ २०॥

715

Provoked to anger, the night-ranger,
Mahodara, thereupon flung at the celebrated
Sugriva his flaming mace, which shone like
the sun. (20)
Tet at सुमहाघोरामापतन्तीं महाबल:।
gitar रोषताम्राक्ष: समुद्यम्य महाहवे॥ २१॥
आजघान गदां तस्य परिघेण हरीश्वर:।
पपात तरसा भिन्न: परिघस्तस्य भूतले॥ २२॥

Seeing that exceedingly terrible mace,
falling, and lifting up his bludgeon, Sugriva,
the lord of monkeys, who was endowed with
extraordinary might and whose eyes had
turned coppery through rage, struck the mace
of the ogre with his bludgeon, so that the
mace fell to the ground and his bludgeon too
yielded to the velocity of the mace. (21-22)

ततो जग्राह तेजस्वी सुग्रीवो वसुधातलात्।
आयसं मुसलं घोरं सर्वतो हेमभूषितम्॥ २३॥
The spirited Sugriva thereupon picked
up from the earth’s surface a formidable
steel club encrusted with gold on all sides.
(23)

स तमुद्यम्य चिक्षेप सोऽप्यस्य प्राक्षिपद् गदाम्।
भिन्नावन्योन्यमासाद्य पेततुस्तौ महीतले॥ २४॥

Lifting it up, Sugriva hurled it at the
ogre and the ogre too flung his mace at
Sugriva. Colliding each with the other, the
two missiles broke and fell to the ground.

(24)
ततो भिन्नप्रहरणौ मुष्टिभ्यां dt समीयतु:।
तेजोबलसमाविष्टौ दीप्ताविव हुताशनौ॥ RG II

Their weapons shattered, the two
warriors, who were fully endowed with ardour
and strength and resembled two lit fires,
now contended with their fists. (25)
जघ्नतुस्तौ तदान्योन्यं नदन्तौ च पुन: पुन:।
तलैश्चान्योन्यमासाद्य पेततुश्च महीतले॥ २६॥

Nay, roaring again and again, they then
slapped each other and, meeting each other,
rolled on the earth’s surface. (26)
