788

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

Canto XXIX
Exchange of hot words between Khara and Sri Rama

खरं तु fait रामो गदापाणिमवस्थितम्।
मृदुपूर्वं महातेजा: परुषं वाक्यमब्रवीत्॥१॥
Sri Rama, for his part, who was
possessed of exceptional glory, addressed
to Khara, who, having been deprived of his
chariot, stood below, mace in hand, the
following harsh words, though preceded by
soft words: (1)

गजाश्वरथसम्बाधे बले महति तिष्ठता।
pd a दारुणं कर्म सर्वलोकजुगुप्सितम्॥ २॥
“Presiding over a huge army crowded
with elephants, horses and chariots, a
ruthless course of action despised by all
people has been adopted by you. (2)
त्रयाणामपि लोकानामीश्वरोऽपि न तिष्ठति॥ ३॥
“He who oppresses all created beings,
is hard-hearted and perpetrates sinful deeds
does not survive, be he the ruler of all the
three worlds. (3)

कर्म लोकविरुद्धं तु कुर्वाणं क्षणदाचर।
तीक्ष्णं सर्वजनो aa ad दुष्टमिवागतम्॥४॥
“Everyone, O night-stalker, injures him
who adopts a severe course of action running
counter to the interests of the people, as
one strikes a wicked serpent arrived near.
(4)

लोभात्पापानिकुर्वाण: कामाद्वा यो न बुध्यते।
Be: Wala तस्यान्तं ब्राह्मणी करकादिव॥ ५॥

“He who does not awaken even
though committing sins through greed or
concupiscence, and feels delighted in doing
so, sees with his own eyes the end of his
sinful deeds alongwith his own as a Brahmani
(a kind of venomless lizard) perceives its
own end through the eating of hailstones.

(5)

वसतो दण्डकारण्ये तापसान् धर्मचारिण:।

किं नु हत्वा महाभागान् फलं प्राप्स्यसि राक्षस॥ ६॥
“What reward on earth will you get by

killing highly blessed ascetics living in the

Dandaka forest and practising virtue, O

ogre ! (6)

न fat पापकर्माण: HU लोकजुगुप्सिता:।
ऐश्वर्यं प्राप्य तिष्ठन्ति शीर्णमूला Sa FAT: ull

“Even on attaining lordship, cruel men
perpetrating sinful deeds and despised by
the people cannot live long any more than
trees with rotten roots. (7)

Taya लभते Hal फलं पापस्य HAUT: |
at पर्यागते काले ga: पुष्पमिवार्तवम्॥८॥

“The perpetrator of च sinful deed
inevitably reaps its terrible consequence
when the time comes, even as a tree puts
forth its blossom in the proper season. (8)
नचिरात् प्राप्यते लोके पापानां कर्मणां फलम्।
सविषाणामिवान्नानां भुक्तानां क्षणदाचर॥ ९॥

“The fruit of one’s sinful deeds, O night-
stalker, is reaped not long after like that of
poisoned foods eaten. (9)
पापमाचरतां घोरं लोकस्याप्रियमिच्छताम्।
अहमासादितो राज्ञा प्राणान् हन्तुं निशाचर॥ १०॥

“| have been deputed by the king, my
father, O night-stalker, to take the lives of
those who commit terrible sins and wish
evil to the people. (10)

अद्य भित्त्वा मया मुक्ता: शरा: काञ्चनभूषणा: |
विदार्यातिपतिष्यन्ति वल्मीकमिव पन्नगा:।॥ ११॥

“Penetrating through your body and
rending the earth, the arrows decked with
gold discharged by me today will reach
beyond the earth to the subterranean regions
like serpents entering the ant-hill. (11)
