298

and anger. Ruling according both to the
indirect* and direct methods of governance,
please your ministers and others, namely,
the army commanders and civic guards, as
well as all the people, laying-by against
future contingencies numerous stores of
useful materials such as jewellery, gold and
silver, textiles and ornaments alongwith barns
and armouries. (42—44)

इष्टानुरक्तप्रकृतिर्य: पालयति मेदिनीम्।
wet नन्दन्ति मित्राणि लब्ध्वामृतमिवामरा:॥ ४५ i
“The friends and allies of a monarch
who protects the earth with fostering care
and whose subjects are not only loved
by him as his children but are devoted
to him, in their turn exult in the same way
as the immortals did on securing nectar.(45)
तस्मात् पुत्र त्वमात्मानं नियम्यैवं समाचर।
ween सुहृदस्तस्य रामस्य प्रियकारिण:॥४६॥
त्वरिता: शीघ्रमागत्य कौसल्यायै न्यवेदयन्।
सा हिरण्यं च गाश्चैव रत्नानि विविधानि aii veo it
व्यादिदेश प्रियाख्येभ्य: कौसल्या प्रमदोत्तमा।
अथाभिवाद्य राजानं रथमारुह्य राघव:।

ययौ स्वं fare aga जनौघै: प्रतिपूजित:॥ ४८ ॥

“Disciplining your mind, therefore, my

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

son, conduct yourself well as instructed by
me.” Hearing this and hastening to mother
Kausalya, the chums of Sri Rama hastily
reported the matter to her, intent as they
were on obliging him. The said Kausalya,
the foremost of women, bestowed gold as
well as cows and jewels of various kinds on
those who broke the delightful news to her.
Then, bowing to the Emperor and mounting
the chariot, Sri Rama, a scion of Raghu,
retired to his splendid palace, greeted on
the way by multitudes of men. (46—48)

a चापि पौरा नृपतेर्वचस्त-

च्छुत्वा तदा लाभमिवेष्टमाशु।
नरेन्द्रमामन्त्य गृहाणि गत्वा

देवान् समान्चुरभिप्रहष्टा:॥४९॥

Immensely delighted to hear the said
announcement of the king, even as one
would feel on being promised a coveted
boon, and taking leave of the Emperor, the
aforesaid citizens too speedily returned
to their respective dwellings and duly
worshipped the gods in order that Sri Rama’s
installation may be concluded without any
let or hindrance. (49)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्येऽयोध्याकाण्डे
gaa: सर्ग: ॥ ३॥

Thus ends Canto Three in the Ayodhyakanda of the glorious Ramayana of Valmiki,
the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

“Hunting, playing at dice, sleeping by day, slandering others, fondness for women, vanity, love of
singing, playing on musical instruments and dancing, and strolling about idly—these are the ten vices born

of lust.”

पैशुन्यं साहसं द्रोह seatgareigauny | वाग्दण्डयोश्च पारुष्यं क्रोधजोऽपि गणोऽष्टक: ।।

(Manu., VII. 48)

“Talebearing, violence, vindictiveness, jealousy, censoriousness and squandering one’s patrimony,
abusive speech and cruelty in punishment are the eight vices born of anger.”

* As certaining the condition and loyalty of one’s own people and the relative strength and intentions

etc., of neighbouring states through a network of spies is what has been spoken of here as the indirect
method of rule; to make a tour of one’s dominions and ascertain things personally, to invite direct petitions
from one’s subjects, hear their grievances and decide their cases on their own merits is what has been
designated as the direct method of governance.
