+ UTTARAKANDA +

destruction, the celestial weapon of Yama,
stood at his side in a personal form, blazing
with effulgence like a fire. (5)
तस्य पारश्वेषु निश्छिद्रा: कालपाशा: प्रतिष्ठिता: |
पावकस्पर्शसंकाश: स्थितो मूर्तश्च Wate
On all his (four) sides were installed
the nooses of Death which had no rents or
holes and there also stood in a personal
form a mallet whose impact was like that of
fire. (6)
ततो लोकत्रयं क्षुब्धमकम्पन्तं दिवौकस:।
कालं Fea AM क्रुद्धं सर्वलोकभयावहम्॥ ७॥
Beholding the Time-Spirit, the terror of
all the three worlds, thus provoked to anger,
all the three worlds thereupon felt agitated
and the denizens of heaven began to
tremble. (7)

ततस्त्वचोदयत् सूतस्तानश्वान् रुचिरप्रभान्।
प्रययौ भीमसंनादो aa रक्ष:पति: स्थित:॥८॥

Then the charioteer urged on those
steeds which were possessed of a bright
lustre, and the chariot advanced with a
terrible noise to the spot where the king of
ogres stood. (8)
मुहूर्तेन यमं ते तु हया हरिहयोपमा:।
प्रापयन् मनसस्तुल्या यत्र तत् प्रस्तुतं रणम्॥९॥

In an instant those horses, which
resembled those of Indra and were quick as

thought, brought, Yama to the spot where
the battle was already going on. (9)

दृष्टवा तथैव fad wit मृत्युसमन्वितम्।
सचिवा राक्षसेन्द्रस्य सहसा विप्रदुद्रुवु:॥१०॥

Beholding the said chariot, which was
occupied by the god of death and was
equally hideous, the ministers of Ravana
(the king of ogres) at once took to their
heels. (10)

लघुसत्त्वतया at fe नष्टसंज्ञा भयार्दिता:।
नेह योद्धुं समर्था: स्म इत्युक्त्वा प्रययुर्दिश:॥ ११॥

Having lost their consciousness,
stricken as they were with fear, because of

915

their meagre strength, they actually fled in
different directions, unable to fight at this
juncture. (11)

स तु तं तादृशं gear wi लोकभयावहम्।

नाक्षुभ्यत दशग्रीवो न चापि भयमाविशत्॥ १२॥
Even on seeing such a chariot, which

was causing fright to the world, that ten-

headed monster, Ravana, however, did not
feel agitated nor did fear enter his mind. (12)

स तु रावणमासाद्य व्यसृजच्छक्तितोमरान्।
यमो मर्माणि संक्रुद्धो रावणस्य न्यकृन्तत॥१३॥

Approaching Ravana, full of rage, Yama
for his part hurled javelins and iron clubs
and pierced his vulnerable parts. (13)

रावणस्तु तत: स्वस्थ: शरवर्षं मुमोच ह।
तस्मिन् वैवस्वतरथे तोयवर्षमिवाम्बुद:॥ ex

Ravana, however, who was self-poised,
they say, let fly a hail of arrows on that
chariot of Yama (son of the sun-god) as a
cloud would pour a shower. (14)

ततो महाशक्तिशतै: पात्यमानैर्महोरसि।
नाशक्नोत् प्रतिकर्तुं स राक्षस: शल्यपीडित:॥ १५॥

The said ogre, who felt afflicted by the
darts while hundreds of huge javelins were
being hurled on his mighty breast, was
thereupon unable to hit back. (15)
wa नानाप्रहरणैर्यमेनामित्रकर्षिणा।
सप्तरात्रं कृत: संख्ये विसंज्ञो विमुखो fra: eg i

In this way, in the course of a conflict
which raged for seven nights continuously
the enemy was rendered unconscious and
averse to fighting by Yama, the scourge of
his foes, who fought with various weapons.

(16)
तदाऽऽसीत् तुमुलं युद्धं यमराक्षसयोर्द्वयो:।
जयमाकांक्षतोर्वीर समरेष्वनिवर्तिनो: Ut १७॥

Then ensued, O hero, a tumultuous

duel between the two warriors, Yama and

the ogre (Ravana), both seeking victory and
both not retreating in combat. (17)
