812

order to accomplish the cherished desire of
Kaikeyi as well as of King DaSaratha. (11)

न राम: कर्कशस्तात नाविद्वान् नाजितेन्द्रिय: |
अनृतं न ad चैव नैव त्वं वक्तुमर्हसि॥१२॥

“Nor is Rama hard-hearted, O dear
one, nor ignorant, nor are his senses
unsubdued. Nor has any charge of falsehood
been heard about him, nor ought you to
level any such charge against him. (12)

wa विग्रहवान् et: साधु: सत्यपराक्रम:।
राजा सर्वस्य लोकस्य देवानामिव वासव:॥ १३॥

“Rama is virtue incarnate, pious and of
unfailing prowess. He is the ruler of the
entire humanity even as Indra is the ruler of
gods. (13)
कथं नु तस्य ade रक्षितां स्वेन तेजसा।
इच्छसे प्रसभं ed प्रभामिव विवस्वत:॥१४॥

“How | wonder do you intend to bear
away by force his consort Sita, a princess
of the Videha territory, protected by her
own spiritual energy, any more than one
can take away the brilliance of the sun?

(14)
waft सहसा da न wae त्वमर्हसि॥ १५ ॥

“You ought not precipitately to enter
the inviolable fire blazing on a battlefield in
the form of Rama with arrows as its flames
and the bow and sword as fuel. (15)
eerttadctaret शरार्चिषममर्षणम्।
चापबाणधरं तीक्ष्णं शत्रुसेनापहारिणम्॥ १६॥
राज्यं TES च संत्यज्य जीवितं चेष्टमात्मन:।
नात्यासादयितुं तात रामान्तकमिहार्हसि॥ १७॥

“Relinquishing for good your throne and
happiness as well as your beloved life, O
dear one, you ought not to meet at close
quarters Death in the form of Rama, with
the bow as his wide open blazing mouth,
the arrows as his rays, wearing a stern
aspect in indignation and capable of wiping
off the enemy’s forces. (16-17)

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

अप्रमेयं fe तत्तेजो यस्य सा जनकात्मजा।
न त्वं समर्थस्तां ad रामचापाश्रयां वने॥१८॥

“Immeasurable is the glory of the prince
to whom that daughter of Janaka belongs.
You are not capable of bearing her away,
protected as she is in the forest by the bow
of Rama. (18)
तस्य a नरसिंहस्य सिंहोरस्कस्य भामिनी।
प्राणेभ्योऽपि प्रियतरा भार्या नित्यमनुव्रता॥१९॥

“The young lady is the consort of that
lion among men, who has a chest broad as
the lion’s, and is dearer to him than his very
life and ever devoted to him. (19)

न सा धर्षयितुं शक्या मैथिल्योजस्विन: प्रिया।
दीप्तस्येव हुताशस्य शिखा सीता सुमध्यमा॥ २०॥

“Sita, that princess of Mithila, who is
distinguished by a slender waist, is the
beloved wife of a powerful man and cannot
be over-powered any more than the flame
of a blazing fire. (20)
किमुद्यमं व्यर्थमिमं कृत्वा a राक्षसाधिप।
दृष्टश्चेत् त्वं रणे तेन तदन्तमुपजीवितम्॥ २१॥

“What will be gained by you by entering
on this futile endeavour, O suzerain lord of
ogres? If you are ever seen by him ona
field of battle, that will be the end of your life.

(21)
जीवितं च सुखं चैव We चैव सुदुर्लभम्।
यदीच्छसि Feat भोक्तुं मा par रामविप्रियम्॥ २२॥

“If you wish to enjoy for long life and

happiness as also the throne, which is

extremely hard to win, pray, don’t give
offence to Rama. (22)

a Wa: सचिवै: सार्धं विभीषणपुरस्कृतै: |
मन्त्रयित्वा स धर्मिष्ठै: कृत्वा निश्चयमात्मन:।
दोषाणां च गुणानां च सम्प्रधार्य बलाबलम्॥ २३॥
आत्मनश्च बलं ज्ञात्वा राघवस्य च Arad: |

fed fe aa निश्चित्य क्षमं त्वं कर्तुमर्हसि॥ २४॥

“Taking counsel with all your most
virtuous ministers headed by Vibhisana, and
