* ARANYAKANDA «

ततस्तौ देशकालज्ञौ खड्गाभ्यामेव राघवौ।
अच्छिन्दन्तां सुसंहृष्टौ बाहू तस्यांसदेशत:॥८॥
Extremely delighted, those two scions
of Raghu, who knew the proper place and
time for an action, severed his arms from
his shoulders with their swords alone. (8)

दक्षिणो दक्षिणं बाहुमसक्कतमसिना तत:।
चिच्छेद रामो वेगेन सव्यं वीरस्तु लक्ष्मण:॥ ९॥
With alacrity Sri’ Rama, who stood to
his right, severed his right arm with his
sword vehemently without any obstruction,
while the heroic Laksmana, who stood to
his left, cut off his left. (9)

a पपात महाबाहुश्छिन्नबाहुर्महास्वन:।
खं च a दिशश्लैव नादयञ्जलदो aaron

With his arms severed that mighty-
armed ogre dropped down thundering like a
cloud and making the heaven and earth as
well as the quarters resound. (10)

स निकृत्तौ भुजौ gear शोणितौघपरिप्लुत: |
दीन: पप्रच्छ तौ वीरौ कौ युवामिति दानव:॥ ११॥

Afflicted to behold his arms lopped off
and bathed in a stream of blood, the aforesaid
demon inquired of those heroes : “Who are
you?” (11)

इति तस्य ब्रुवाणस्य लक्ष्मण: PACT ATT: |
शशंस तस्य काकुस्त्थं कबन्धस्य महाबल:॥ १२॥
While the said Kabandha was inquiring
as above, Laksmana, who was endowed
with auspicious bodily marks and possessed
of great might, introduced to him Sr
Rama, a scion of Kakutstha, as below:
(12)

अयमिक्ष्वाकुदायादो रामो ATT जनै: श्रुत:।
तस्यैवावरजं विद्धि wet मां च लक्ष्मणम्॥ १३॥
“A son of Dasaratha (born in the line of
Ikswaku), he is known by the people by the
name of ‘Rama’. And know me to be
Laksmana, a younger brother of the selfsame
Sri Rama. (13)

913

मात्रा प्रतिहते राज्ये राम: प्रव्राजितो वनम्।
Ta सह MAT भार्यया च महद FTI Lvl

“Exiled to the forest when his installation
as Prince Regent on the throne of Ayodhya
had been interrupted by his step-mother,
Kaikeyi, this Rama continued to range the
great forest of Dandaka with his spouse
and myself. (14)

अस्य देवप्रभावस्य वसतो विजने att
रक्षसापहृता भार्या यामिच्छन्ताविहागतौ॥ १५ ॥

“While this prince, mighty as a god,
was dwelling in an uninhabited forest, his
consort was carried away by an ogre;
seeking her alone we have come hither.

(15)

त्वं तु को वा किमर्थं वा कबन्धसदरृशो वने।
आस्येनोरसि दीप्तेन भग्नजङ्घो विचेष्टसे॥१६॥

“As for yourself, who are you and what
for do you roll about in the forest like a
headless trunk with your shanks broken
and with a flaming mouth located in your
breast (belly)?” (16)

एवमुक्त: कबन्धस्तु लक्ष्मणेनोत्तरं वच:।
उवाच वचनं प्रीतस्तदिन्द्रवचनं स्मरन्॥१७॥
Rejoiced when spoken to in these
excellent words by Laksmana, Kabandha
for his part made the following reply, recalling
the assurance given to him by Indra as
going to be detailed in the following canto :
(17)

स्वागतं वां नरव्याघ्रौ दिष्ट्या पश्यामि वामहम्।
दिष्ट्या चेमौ Propet मे युवाभ्यां बाहुबन्धनौ Ul १८ ॥
“Welcome to you, O tigers among men !
By stroke of good luck, | am able to behold
you. And luckily enough for me these arms,
which served as a halter to me, have been
cut off by you. (18)

विरूपं यच्च मे रूपं प्राप्तं ह्यविनयाद् यथा।
तन्मे YUL नरव्याघ्र तत्त्वत: शंसतस्तव॥१९॥
“Now hear from me, even as | truthfully
