718

of Videha country, Sita, in his arms, went
afar and then said, “You two having matted
hair and wearing a bark-garment, and still
having a wife with you, with your life coming
to an end, have entered the Dandaka forest,
taking arrows, bow and sword in your hands.
Again, how are you two ascetics staying
with a woman? (4—11)
अधर्मचारिणौ पापौ कौ gat मुनिदूषकौ।
ae वनमिदं at विराधो नाम राक्षस:॥१२॥
चरामि सायुधो नित्यमृषिमांसानि भक्षयन्।
इयं नारी वरारोहा aa wat भविष्यति॥ १३॥
युवयो: पापयोश्चाहं पास्यामि रुधिरं मृधे।
तस्यैवं ब्रुवतो दुष्टं विराधस्य दुरात्मन:॥१४॥
श्रुत्वा सगर्वितं वाक्यं सम्भ्रान्ता जनकात्मजा।
सीता प्रवेपितोद्वेगात् ward कदली यथा॥१५॥
“Who are you two sinners, doing
unrighteous deeds, bringing a blot upon the
sages? Armed with weapons, I, an ogre
named Viradha, always wander in this forest,
which is difficult of access, eating the flesh
of sages. This beautiful lady will become
my wife and | shall drink the blood of you
two sinners on the battlefield.” Hearing thus
the wicked and boastful speech of that
wicked Viradha, the overawed Sita, the
daughter of Janaka, trembled with fear as
does a plantain tree in a storm. (12—15)

at दृष्टवा राघव: सीतां विराधाङ्कगतां शुभाम्।
अब्रवील्लक्ष्मणं वाक्यं मुखेन परिशुष्यता॥ १६॥
Beholding that auspicious Sita in the
lap of Viradha, Rama (a scion of Raghu)
said to Laksmana with his mouth getting
parched : (16)
पश्य सौम्य नरेन्द्रस्य जनकस्यात्मसम्भवाम्।
मम wat शुभाचारां विराधाङ्के प्रवेशिताम्॥ १७॥
अत्यन्तसुखसंवृद्धां राजपुत्रीं यशस्विनीम्।
यदभिप्रेतमस्मासु प्रियं aad च यत्॥१८॥
कैकेय्यास्तु qdad क्षिप्रमद्यैव लक्ष्मण।
या न तुष्यति राज्येन पुत्रार्थे दीर्घदर्शिनी॥१९॥
ययाहं सर्वभूतानां प्रिय: प्रस्थापितो वनम्।
अद्येदानीं सकामा सा या माता मध्यमा AA २०॥

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

“Oh dear! see this daughter of King
Janaka, my wife of good conduct, brought up
in great prosperity, a princess of renown,
having passed into the lap of Viradha. What
the far-sighted Kaikeyi—who was not satisfied
with the kingdom for her son, who has sent
me, liked by all beings, to the forest—had
fondly cherished regarding us, that for which
she had asked for two boons has well
happened quickly, today only, O Laksmana !
Today, know, that mother of mine, Kaikeyi,
has her desire fulfilled. (17—20)

परस्पर्शात् तु ada न दु:खतरमस्ति मे।
पितुर्विनाशात् सौमित्रे स्वराज्यहरणात् तथा॥ २१॥

“There is nothing more sorrowful to me
than the princess of the Videha country
being touched by another, which is more
painful even than the death of my father and
the loss of my kingdom, O son of Sumitra’”.

(21)
इति ब्रुवति काकुत्स्थे बाष्पशोकपरिप्लुत:।
अब्रवील्लक्ष्मण: क्रुद्धो रुद्धो AMT SA श्वसन्॥ २२॥

While the descendant of Kakutstha,
Rama, was thus speaking, shedding tears
of sorrow, Laksmana getting angry and
hissing like an impeded cobra, said: (22)
अनाथ Fa भूतानां नाथस्त्वं वासवोपम:।
मया प्रेष्येण काकुत्स्थ किमर्थं परितप्यसे॥ २३॥

“Why are you, the lord of all beings like
Indra, with a servant like me, grieving like
an orphan, O descendant of Kakutstha?

(23)
शरेण निहतस्याद्य मया क्रुद्धेन रक्षस:।
विराधस्य गतासोर्हि मही पास्यति शोणितम्॥ २४॥

“Today, the earth will drink the blood of
Viradha, the ogre, losing his life when killed
by my angry self with an arrow. (24)
राज्यकामे मम क्रोधो wd यो बभूव ह।

तं विराधे विमोक्ष्यामि वज्री वज्रमिवाचले॥ २५ ॥

My anger, which was directed against

Bharata, having the desire for kingdom, now
| shall ventilate against Viradha as did the
