390

shedding tears, the high-minded mother
Kausalya performed rites conducive to the
welfare of Sri Rama. (1)
न vem anfad गच्छेदानीं रघूत्तम।
vit च विनिवर्तस्व वर्तस्व च सतां क्रमे॥ २॥
She said “Since your departure cannot
be stopped, depart now, O jewel among the
Raghus ! Nay, follow in the foot-steps of the
righteous by redeeming your word of honour
and return soon after serving the term of
your exile. (2)
a पालयसि et त्वं प्रीत्या च नियमेन a
a a राघवशार्दूल धर्मस्त्वामभिरक्षतु॥ ३॥
“May that piety itself protect you on all
sides—the piety which you scrupulously
observe with love, O tiger among the scions
of Raghu ! (3)

येभ्य: wre yw देवेष्वायतनेषु च।
a च त्वामभिरक्षन्तुं at सह महर्षिभि:।॥४॥

“May those too to whom you humbly
bow at cross-roads as well as in temples,
my son, protect you on all sides alongwith
eminent Rsis. (4)

यानि दत्तानि तेऽस्त्राणि विश्वामित्रेण धीमता।
तानि त्वामभिरक्षन्तु गुणै: समुदितं सदा॥७५॥

“May those mystic missiles also that
were imparted to you by the learned
Viswamitra protect on all sides, you who
are ever illumined by your excellences. (5)

पितॄशुश्रूषया पुत्र मातृशुश्रूषया तथा।
wat च महाबाहो fat जीवाभिरक्षित:॥ ६॥
“Protected on all sides by the service
you have rendered to your father and mothers
as well as by your truthfulness, my mighty-
armed son, may you live long ! (6)

समित्कुशपवित्राणि वेद्यश्चायतनानि al
स्थण्डिलानि च विप्राणां शैला वृक्षा: AUT Sar: |
पतङ्गा: पन्नगा: सिंहास्त्वां रक्षन्तु नरोत्तम॥७॥
“May the deities presiding over wooden
sticks used for feeding the sacred fire, blades

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

of the sacred KuSa grass and rings of Kusa
grass worn on the fourth finger on sacrificial
occasions, sacrificial altars, temples and
sites selected by Brahmanas for worship of
gods, as well as mountains, trees, bushes,
large and deep pools of water, birds, reptiles
and lions protect you. O jewel among men !(7)

स्वस्ति साध्याश्च विश्वे च मरुतश्च महर्षिभि:।
स्वस्ति धाता विधाता च स्वस्ति पूषा भगोऽर्यमा ।। ८ ।।
लोकपालाश्च ते सर्वे वासवप्रमुखास्तथा।
ऋतव: षट् च ते सर्वे मासा: संवत्सरा: AAT: UF Ul
दिनानि च मुहूर्ताश्च स्वस्ति कुर्वन्तु ते सदा।
श्रुति: स्मृतिश्च धर्मश्च पातु wat पुत्र Ada: i oll

“Nay, may the Sadhyas and the
Viswedevas, two different classes of gods,
and the wind-gods alongwith eminent Rsis
ensure your happiness; may the Cosmic
Person and the creator bring happiness to
you. May the gods Pusa, Bhaga and Aryama
(three of the twelve sons of Aditi) and the
well-known guardians of the spheres with
Indra at their head, as also the deities
presiding over the six seasons, all the
months, years, nights and days and hours
always do good to you. Again, may Veda,
the Smrti texts taken as one body and piety
incarnate protect you, my son, from all
dangers. (8—10)

स्कन्दश्च War ta: Way सबृहस्पति: |
सप्तर्षयो नारदश्च ते wat रक्षन्तु सर्वत:॥११॥

“May Lord Skanda, the younger son of
Lord Siva, and the moon-god alongwith the
sage Brhaspati, the preceptor of gods, the
well-known seven Rsis as well as Sage
Narada guard you on all sides. (11)

a चापि ada: सिद्धा faster सदिगीश्वरा: |

स्तुता मया वने तस्मिन् पान्तु त्वां पुत्र नित्यश: । १२॥
“Nay, glorified by me, may the

celebrated Siddhas as well as the four quarters

alongwith the guardians of the quarters protect

you, my son, from day to day on all sides in

that forest which you are going to inhabit.(12)
