३02

Addressing the Commander-in-Chief,
Nila, he said: “O Nila, my generalissimo,
lead the army speedily by a route full of
fruits and roots as well as of honey and
abounding in woods with a cool shade and
fresh water. (10)

दूषयेयुर्दुरात्मान पथि मूलफलोदकम्।
राक्षसा: पथि रक्षेथास्तेभ्यस्त्वं नित्यमुद्यत: ।। ११॥
“Evil-minded ogres might vitiate the
roots, fruits and water along that route.
Remaining ever vigilant on the way, protect
you the aforesaid substances from them.(11)

निम्नेषु वनदुर्गेषु वनेषु च वनौकस:।
अभिप्लुत्याभिषश्येयु: परेषां निहितं बलम्॥ १२॥
“Leaping all round the monkeys should
find out the enemy’s troops lying in ambush
in ravines and thickets, nay, in parts of the
forest which are difficult of access. (12)
एतद्धि Heat घोरं नो विक्रमेण प्रयुज्यताम्॥ १३॥
“Any weak element, which may be
found, should, however, be left back at this
very place, Kiskindha; for this task of ours
is formidable. Those troops alone, which
are endowed with prowess should be utilized
in this expedition. (13)
सागरौघनिभं भीममग्रानीकं महाबला:।
कपिसिंहा: Wanted शतशोऽथ सहस्रश:॥ १४॥
“Let the lions among monkeys, who
are endowed with extraordinary might, in
their hundreds and thousands, lead the
redoubtable vanguard, resembling the tide
of a sea. (14)

Tag गिरिसंकाशो गवयश्च महाबल:।
गवाक्षश्चाग्रतो Ad Wat FA इवर्षभ:॥१५॥
“Let the monkeys Gaja, who closely
resembles a mountain, and Gavaya, who is
endowed with extraordinary might, as well
as Gavaksa march in the van even like a
proud bull at the head of cows. (15)

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA +

ad वानरवाहिन्या वानर: प्लवतां पति:।
पालयन् दक्षिणं पार्श्वमृषभो वानरर्षभ:॥ १६॥

“Let the monkey Rsabha, a leader of
monkeys, nay, who is a veritable bull among
monkeys, proceed defending the right flank
of the army of monkeys. (16)

गन्धहस्तीव दुर्धर्षस्तरस्वी गन्धमादन:।

ad वानरवाहिन्या: सव्यं पार्शर्वमधिष्ठित:॥ १७॥
“Let the impetuous Gandhamadana, who

is difficult to assail like an elephant in rut,

move along leading the left flank of the army

of monkeys. (17)

यास्यामि बलमध्येऽहं बलौघमभिहर्षयन्।
अधिरुह्य हनूमन्तमैरावतमिवेश्वर: 1 १८ UI

“Mounting the shoulders of Hanuman,
even as Indra, the ruler of all the three
worlds, would ride Airavata, the king of
elephants, and cheering the army, rushing
like a flood, | shall march in the centre of
the army. (18)

अङ्गदेनैष संयातु लक्ष्मणश्चान्तकोपम:।
सार्वभौमेन भूतेशो द्रविणाधिपतिर्यथा॥१९॥

“Nay, let Laksmana, who vies with
Death himself, march on the back of Angada
even as Kubera, the lord or controller of
riches, the ruler of spirits, would ride his
own elephant, Sarvabhauma (one of the
elephants guarding the quarters). (19)
जाम्बवांश्च सुषेणश्च वेगदर्शी च वानर:।
ऋक्षराजो महाबाहु: कुक्षिं रक्षन्तु ते त्रय:॥ Roll

“Nay, let the mighty-armed, Jambavan,
the ruler of bears, and Susena as well as

the monkey, Vegadarsi, the aforesaid three
defend the rear.” (20)

राघवस्य वच: sear सुग्रीवो वाहिनीपति:।

व्यादिदेश महावीर्यो वानरान् वानरर्षभ:॥ २१॥
Hearing the command of Sri Rama, a

scion of Raghu, Sugriva, the foremost of

monkeys and the ruler of the army, who
was endowed with extraordinary prowess,
