* AYODHYAKANDA +

joy; in fact he is the protector of us all; he

is our goal, he is our supreme asylum. (17)

aa परिचरिष्याम: सीतां यूयं च राघवम्।

इति पौरस्तियोभर्तॄन् दु:खार्तास्तत्तदब्रुवन्॥१८॥
“We shall attend on Sita, while you shall

serve Sri Rama (a scion of Raghu).” In so

many words did the citizens’ wives, stricken
with agony, address their husbands. (18)

युष्माकं राघवोऽरण्ये योगक्षेमं विधास्यति।
aa नारीजनस्यास्य योगक्षेमं करिष्यति॥१९॥

“Sri Rama (a scion of Raghu),” (they
continued,) will satisfy your needs and
safeguard your interests in the forest, while
Sita will do the same thing with regard to us,
the womenfolk. (19)

को न्वनेनाप्रतीतेन सोत्कण्ठितजनेन च।
सम्प्रीयेतामनोज्ञेन वासेन हतचेतसा॥ २०॥

“Who can possibly remain highly
pleased with residence in this city, which is
not commendable in any way—much less
agreeable to the mind, the people here being
full of longing for the return of Sri Rama—
and by which the mind gets unsettled? (20)

कैकेय्या यदि We राज्यं स्यादधर्म्यमनाथवत्।
न fe नो जीवितेनार्थ: कुत: पुत्रै:; कुतो MA: WV Ut

“If there comes to be the rule of Kaikeyi,
which will not be in consonance with
righteousness and which will be as good as
without a protector, surely no use will be left
for our life, much less for our sons and
riches. (21)
यया पुत्रश्च Vat च त्यक्तावैश्चर्यकारणात्।

कं सा Ue कैकेयी कुलपांसनी॥ २२॥

“Whom else would that Kaikeyi—who
has brought disgrace to her family and by
whom her (step-) son and husband too
have been forsaken for the sake of power—
not abandon? (22)

कैकेय्या न वयं राज्ये भृतका fe वसेमहि।
जीवन्त्या जातु जीवन्त्य: पुत्रैरपि शपामहे॥ २३॥

“We swear by our sons that so long as

469

we breathe we can under no circumstances
live in the kingdom of Kaikeyi, till she is
alive, even though we may be supported by
her. (23)
या wt पार्थिवेन्द्रस्य प्रवासयति निर्घृणा।
कस्तां प्राप्य सुखं जीवेदधर्मयां दुष्टचारिणीम्॥ २४॥
“Who can live happily on having obtained
as one’s sovereign that impious woman of
wicked conduct who has sent into exile
Prince Rama (son of DaSaratha, a ruler of
rulers), merciless as she is? (24)

उपद्रुतमिदं सर्वमनालम्भमनायकम्।
कैकेय्यास्तु कृते सर्वं विनाशमुपयास्यति॥ २५ ॥

“The whole of this kingdom is soon going
to be deprived of its ruler; it will no longer
have any sacrificial performances and will
be visited by calamities. Nay, thanks to
Kaikeyi, everything will meet with ruination.

(25)
नहि प्रव्रजिते wa जीविष्यति महीपति:।

मृते दशरथे cath विलोपस्तदनन्तरम्॥ २६॥

“For, Sri Rama having gone into exile,
the Emperor will not survive and when
DaSaratha is dead, destruction will be the
fate of the distinguished kingdom which has
run an uninterrupted course ever since the
time of Ikswaku. (26)

ते fag fracicires क्षीणपुण्या: ag: Raat: |
Tat वानुगच्छध्वमश्रुतिं वापि गच्छत॥ २७॥

“Therefore drink poison mixing it with
water, sore distressed as you are, the stock
of your merit having been exhausted; or follow
Sri Rama (a scion of Raghu) to the forest or
leave for some land where even the name of
Kaikeyi may not reach your ears. (27)

मिथ्याप्रव्राजितो wa: सभार्य: सहलक्ष्मण:।
भरते drag: TA: सौनिके पशवो यथा॥ २८॥

“Sri Rama, alongwith his consort, Sita,
and with Laksmana, his younger brother,
has been deceitfully sent into exile and we
have been tied firm to the apron-strings of
Bharata in the same way as animals are
