608

eighteen penetrating arrows, ॥6 struck
Nala too, standing some way off, with nine
others. (46)

सप्तभिस्तु महावीर्यो मैन्दं मर्मविदारणै:।
पञ्चभिर्विशिखैश्चैव mi विव्याध संयुगे॥४७॥

Indrajit who was endowed with
extraordinary prowess, for his part assailed
Mainda with seven shafts, which tore his
vital parts and pierced Gaja on the battle-
field with five. (47)
जाम्बवन्तं तु दशभिर्नीलं त्रिंशद्भिरेव च।
सुग्रीवमृषभं चैव सोऽङ्गदं द्विविदं तथा॥४८॥
चोरैर्दत्तवरैस्तीक्ष्णैर्निष्प्राणानकरोत् तदा।
अन्यानपि तथा मुख्यान् वानरान् बहुभि: शरै: ॥ ४९ ॥
अर्दयामास संक्रुद्ध: कालाग्निरिव मूच्छित:।

स शरै: सूर्यसंकाशै: सुमुक्तै: शीघ्रगामिभि: ।। ५० ॥
वानराणामनीकानि निर्ममन्थ महारणे।
आकुलां वानरीं सेनां शरजालेन पीडिताम्॥ ५१॥
Be: स परया Wien ददर्श क्षतजोक्षिताम्।
पुनरेव महातेजा राक्षसेन्द्रात्मजो बली॥५२॥

He for his part struck Jambavan with
ten and Nila with thirty arrows; and with
dreadful and sharp arrows, on which a boon
of infallibility had been bestowed by Brahma
he forthwith rendered lifeless as it were
Sugriva as well as Rsabha, Angada and
Dwivida. Infuriated like the swollen fire of
universal destruction, he tormented likewise
with many shafts other leading monkeys
too. With his swift-going arrows shot with
skill and shining brightly like the sun he
thoroughly agitated the simian ranks in that
major conflict. Feeling rejoiced, that mighty
son of the king of ogres, who was endowed
with extraordinary energy, beheld once more
with supreme gratification the army of
monkeys overwhelmed with a rain of arrows
and, therefore, agitated and bathed in blood.

(48—52)
संसृज्य बाणवर्षं च शस्त्रवर्षं च दारुणम्।
wad वानरानीकं परितस्त्विन्द्रजिद् बली॥ ५३॥

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA +

Pouring a hail of shafts and a cruel
shower of missiles, the mighty Indrajit crushed
the army of monkeys on all sides. (53)

eect wet = gut
वानरवाहिनीषु।

अदृश्यमान. शरजालमुग्रं
ववर्ष नीलाम्बुधरो यथाम्बु॥५४॥
Leaving the part of space above his
own army and moving speedily to the space
above the monkey forces in that major conflict
while remaining still invisible, Indrajit let fall
a formidable hail of shafts even as a dark

rainy cloud would pour water. (54)
a शक्रजिद्वाणविशीर्णदेहा
मायाहता विस्वरमुन्नदन्त:।
रणे निपेतुर्हरयोऽद्रिकल्पा
यथेन्द्रवज्राभिहता नगेन्द्रा: ॥ ५७५ I

Victims of his conjuring tricks, their
bodies torn into pieces by the arrows of
Indrajit, the aforesaid monkeys, who
resembled mountains in size, fell in the fray
shrieking in discordant tones like lordly
mountains struck by the thunderbolt of Indra,
the ruler of gods. (55)
a केवलं de: शिताग्रान्

बाणान् रणे वानरवाहिनीषु।
मायाविगूढं च सुरेन्द्रशत्रुं
न wat तं राक्षसमप्यपश्यन्॥५६॥

They perceived only sharp-pointed
shafts descending in the course of the conflict
on the simian ranks. They could not, however,
see there that ogre, the enemy of Indra (the
ruler of gods), who remained fully concealed
by his magical power. (56)

‘dd: a

र्विदारयामास च बानरैन्द्र।न्।।५७।।

Thereupon that gigantic ruler of ogres
thickly covered all the four quarters with
