* SUNDARAKANDA +

काननै: कृत्रिमैश्चापि ada: समलंकृताम्।
ये केचित् पादपास्तत्र पुष्पोपगफलोपगा:॥ ३५॥

सच्छत्रा: सवितर्दीका: सर्वे सौवर्णवेदिका:।
लताप्रतानैर्बहुभि: alga बहुभिर्वृताम्॥ ३६॥

काञ्चनीं शिंशपामेकां cast स महाकपि:।
gat हेममयीभिस्तु वेदिकाभि: समन्तत:॥ ३७॥
Nay, he also beheld an artificial oblong
pond full of cool water, provided with steps
made of excellent gems and enriched with
sands in the form of pearls, nay, which
looked charming with various herds of deer,
was surrounded by manifold thickets and
lined with huge mansions constructed by
ViSwakarma, the architect of gods, and which
was duly adorned on all sides with artificial
woods. Whatever trees there were, laden
with flowers and fruit, were crowned with
boughs which spread like an umbrella and
were all provided at their foot with platforms
having smaller golden platforms above. That
mighty Hanuman then sighted a singular
golden Sirhgapa (Asoka) tree intertwined
with numerous clusters of climbers and
clothed with abundant leaves, and actually
surrounded on all sides by golden daises.
(33—37)

सोऽपश्यद् भूमिभागांश्च नगप्रस्रवणानि च।
सुवर्णवृक्षानपरान् cat शिखिसंनिभान्॥ ३८॥

He also beheld stretches of open land
and mountain springs as well as other golden
trees resplendent as fire. (38)

तेषां द्रुमाणां प्रभया मेरोरिव महाकपि:।

अमन्यत der ak: काञ्चनोऽस्मीति सर्वत:॥ ३९॥
Enveloped by the effulgence of those

trees, which resembled the brilliance of Mount

Meru (the golden mountain), the hero thought
himself to be golden all round. (39)

तान्काञ्चनान् व्रृक्षगणान् मारुतेन प्रकम्पितान्।
किङ्किणीशतनिर्घोषान् दृष्ट्वा विस्मयमागमत्॥ ४० I

सुपुष्पिताग्रान् रुचिरांस्तरुणाङ्कुरपल्लवान्।
तामारुह्य महावेग: शिंशपां पर्णसंवृताम्॥४१॥

95

इतो द्रक्ष्यामि adel रामदर्शनलालसाम्।
इतश्चेतश्च दु:खार्तां सम्पतन्तीं यदृच्छया॥४२॥
Hanuman was wonderstruck to behold
the aforesaid clusters of splendid golden
trees with their crests in full blossom and
bristling with young shoots and leaves, trees
which, when violently shaken by the wind,
emitted a sound like the tinkling of hundreds
of ornaments for the waist with tiny bells
fastened to them. Climbing up that Simsapa
tree covered with leaves, Hanuman, who
was full of great impetuosity, reflected as
follows: ‘From this position | shall look out
for Sita, a princess of the Videha territory,
who is sighing for Sri Rama’s sight and
who, stricken with sorrow, must be wandering
aimlessly to and fro. (40—42)

अशोकवनिका wt दूढं रम्या दुरात्मन:।
चन्दनैश्चम्पकॆश्चापि बकुलैश्च विभूषिता॥४३॥

‘Nay, this Asoka grove of the evil-
minded Ravana is highly delightful and
is richly adorned with sandalwood and
Campaka, as well as with Bakula trees. (43)

sa च नलिनी wen द्विजसङ्घनिषेविता।
इमां सा राजमहिषी नूनमेष्यति जानकी॥४४॥

‘Here is a lovely lotus-pond, frequented
by flocks of birds. Queen Sita, daughter of
Janaka, will undoubtedly seek it. (44)

सा रामा राजमहिषी राघवस्य प्रिया सती।
वनसंचारकुशला ध्रुवमेष्यति जानकी॥४७५॥

‘Bereft of Sri Rama, the aforesaid
Queen, Sita, daughter of Janaka, ever
beloved of Sri Rama, a scion of Raghu, and
accustomed to roaming in woods, will surely
walk to this place. (45)

अथवा मृगशावाक्षी वनस्यास्य विचक्षणा।
वनमेष्यति साद्येह रामचिन्तासुकर्शिता॥४६॥

‘Or, that fawn-eyed lady, who is
conversant with the beauties of this forest,
will seek this forest at this spot today, greatly
emaciated as she is by the thought of Sri
Rama. (46)
