590

severed, the ogre suddenly fell to the ground,
bathed all over in blood. Nay, quickly seizing
hold of that formidable mace of the ogre,
which resembled the rod of Yama (the god
of retribution), the monkey, Rsabha, forthwith

roared. (60)
मुहूर्तमासीत् स गतासुकल्प:

प्रत्यागतात्मा सहसा सुरारि:।
उत्पत्य संध्याभ्रसमानवर्ण-

स्तं वारिराजात्मजमाजघान॥ ६१॥

For a while Mahaparswa remained all
but dead. Springing on his feet all of a
sudden, his lifé-breath having returned, the
enemy of gods, whose colour resembled
that of an evening cloud, struck the aforesaid
son of the lord of waters, Rsabha. (61)

a मूच्छितो भूमितले पपात
मुहूर्तमुत्पत्य पुन: ae: |
तस्याद्रिवराद्रिकल्पां
Tat समाविध्य जघान संख्ये॥६२॥
The monkey lay unconscious on the
earth’s surface awhile. Springing up, when
he was conscious again, and brandishing
that very mace of the ogre, which looked
like a rock of the foremost of mountains,
Rsabha struck him with it on the battle-field.

(62)
सा wa ta wa देहं
रौद्रस्य देवाध्वरविप्रशत्रो: |
बिभेद वक्ष: क्षतजं च भूरि
सुस्राव धात्वम्भ इवाद्रिराज:॥६३॥
Reaching the body of that ferocious

enemy of gods, sacrificial performances and
Brahmanas, that terrible mace clove his

तामेव

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA +

breast; and the ogre shed profuse blood
even as the Himalaya mountain (the lord of
mountains) lets out water charged with
minerals (like ochre). (63)

अभिदुद्राव वेगेन Wel तस्य महात्मन:।
तां गृहीत्वा गदां भीमामाविध्य च पुन: पुन:॥ ६४॥
मत्तानीकं महात्मा स जघान रणमूर्धनि।
स स्वया गदया vat विशीर्णदशनेक्षण:॥६५॥
निपपात तदा मत्तो वज्राहत इवाचल:।
विशीर्णनयने भूमौ गतसत्त्वे गतायुषि।
पतिते राक्षसे afer विद्रुतं राक्षसं बलम्॥ ६६॥

The ogre now darted towards the mace
held in the hand of that gigantic monkey,
Rsabha. Clutching that terrible mace and
brandishing it again and again, the high-
souled Rsabha struck Mahaparswa with it
in the forefront of the battle. Smashed with
his own mace, his teeth and eyes fallen
down, Matta (Mahaparswa) forthwith
dropped down like a mountain struck with
lightning. When that ogre, whose eyes had
been crushed, dropped unconcious and
lifeless on the ground, the army of ogres
fled. (64—66)

तस्मिन् हते भ्रातरि रावणस्य
तन्नैर्ऋतानां बलमर्णवाभम्।
त्यक्तायुधं केवलजीवितार्थं
दुद्राव भिन्नार्णवसंनिकाशम्॥ ६७॥
When the aforesaid younger brother of
Ravana was killed, the aforesaid army of
ogres (the scions of Nirrti), which resembled
an ocean, fled for life, casting away weapons,
and presenting the appearance of an ocean
which has burst its shores. (67)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये FERS सप्ततितम: A: ॥ Vo ॥

Thus ends Canto Seventy in the Yuddhakanda of the glorious Ramayana of
Valmiki, the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

