# YUDDHAKANDA +

The counsel of Vibhisana appealed
even to Sri Rama, who was given to
piety by nature and was capable of
affording shelter to the whole universe. In
order to do honour to Sugriva, Sri Rama,
who was endowed with extraordinary energy,
smilingly spoke as follows to Sugriva, the
ruler of monkeys, who was skilled in action,
as well as to Laksmana: “This counsel of
Vibhisana finds favour with me, too, O
Laksmana ! (34-35)
सुग्रीव: पण्डितो नित्यं wary मन्त्रविचक्षण:।
उभाभ्यां सम्प्रधार्यार्थं रोचते यत् तदुच्यताम्॥ ३६॥

“Surgiva is learned and you too
are always adept in giving counsel.
Therefore, after fully considering the matter
in hand, that which appeals to you
both, may please be communicated to me.”

(36)
एवमुक्कौ ततो वीरावुभौ सुग्रीवलक्ष्मणौ।
समुदाचारसंयुक्तमिदं वचनमूचतु: ।॥ ३७॥

Commanded thus by Sri Rama, both
the heroes, Sugriva and Laksmana, made
the following respectful reply: (37)

किमर्थं नौ नरव्याघ्र न रोचिष्यति wea
विभीषणेन यत् तूक्तमस्मिन् काले सुखावहम्॥ ३८ UI

“Wherefore, O tiger among men, will

357

the counsel, which has actually been given
by Vibhisana at this moment and which
is conducive to happiness, not find favour
with us, O scion of Raghu? (38)

अबद्ध्वा सागरे Ad घोरेऽस्मिन् वरुणालये।
लङ्का नासादितुं शक्या सेन्द्रैरपि सुरासुरै:॥ ३९॥

“Without throwing a bridge over this
dread sea, the abode of Varuna (the god of
water), Lanka will remain inaccessible even
to gods and demons, including Indra, the
ruler of gods. (39)
विभीषणस्य शूरस्य यथार्थं क्रियतां aa: |
यथा सैन्येन गच्छाम पुरीं रावणपालिताम्॥४०॥

“Let the advice of the valiant Vibhisana,
which is in consonance with facts, be carried
out. It is no use losing time; let Ocean over
there be requested to help us so that we
may reach the city protected by Ravana
with our army.” (40)

Waa: कुशास्तीर्णे तीरे नदनदीपते:।
संविवेश dat रामो वेद्यामिव हुताशन:॥४१॥
Exhorted thus, Sri Rama forthwith sat
on the shore of the ocean (the lord of rivers
and streams), overspread with blades of the
sacred KuSa grass, even as fire finds its
place on a sacrificial altar. (41)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये FERS एकोनविंश: सर्ग: ॥ १९ ॥

Thus ends Canto Nineteen in the Yuddhakanda of the glorious Ramayana of
Valmiki, the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

