848

तामकामां स कामार्त: पन्नगेन्द्रवधूमिव।
विचेष्टमानामादाय उत्पपाताथं रावण:॥ २२॥

Taking Sita, who had no desire to meet
Ravana and who was wriggling like a consort
of the king of Nagas, the aforesaid Ravana,
who was stricken with passion, presently
rose to the skies in his aerial car. (22)

aa: सा राक्षसेन्द्रेण ह्रियमाणा विहायसा।
भृशं चुक्रोश Ada भ्रान्तचित्ता यथातुरा॥ २३॥

While being borne away through the air
by Ravana, the ruler of ogres, she then
began to wail loudly as follows like one mad
and injured, her mind distracted through
grief : (23)

a लक्ष्मण महाबाहो गुरुचित्तप्रसादक।
ह्रियमाणां न जानीषे रक्षसा कामरूपिणा॥ २४॥

“O mighty-armed Laksmana, O delighter
of the mind of your elder brother, Sri Rama,
you do not perceive me being carried away
by an ogre, who is able to assume any form
at will. (24)

Wat सुखमर्थं च aed: परित्यजन्।
ह्रियमाणामधर्मेण मां राघव न पश्यसि॥ २५॥

(Addressing Sri Rama) “even though
you have fully renounced your happiness
and whatever is solicited by all, nay, staked
your very life, for the sake of virtue, O scion
of Raghu, you are not able to see me being
borne away unrighteously. (25)
ननु नामाविनीतानां विनेतासि परंतप।
कथमेवंविधं ured न त्वं शाधि fe रावणम्॥ २६॥

“Undoubtedly you are the tamer of the
unruly, O scorcher of your enemies ! How,
then, do you not punish Ravana, who is so
sinful, (26)

न तु सद्योऽविनीतस्य दृश्यते कर्मण: फलम्।

कालोऽप्यङ्गीभवत्यत्र सस्यानामिव BHT I २७॥
(Turning to Ravana, she continued :)

“Of course, the fruit of the evil deed of an

insolent man is not perceived immediately.
Time as well plays a part in the fructification

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

of an act, as it does in the ripening of
foodgrains. (27)

त्वं कर्म कृतवानेतत् कालोपहतचेतन:।
जीवितान्तकरं घोरं Ware व्यसनमाप्नुहि॥ २८॥

“Your understanding having been vitiated
by an adverse fate, you have perpetrated
this outrageous act. As such suffer terrible
misfortune, which is sure to bring your life
to an end, at the hands of Sri Rama. (28)

हन्तेदानीं सकामा तु कैकेयी बान्धवै: सह।
ह्रियेयं धर्मकामस्य धर्मपत्नी यशस्विन:॥ २९॥

“Alas, Kaikeyi with her kith and kin has
her desire fulfilled in that |, the lawful consort
of an illustrious hero, who is covetous of
virtue alone, am being borne away by a
desperado. (29)
आमन्त्रये जनस्थाने कर्णिकारांश्च पुष्पितान्।
faa रामाय शंसध्वं सीतां हरति रावण:॥ ३०॥

“Nay, | pray to the Karnikara trees in
blossom in Janasthana in the following words:
‘Kindly tell Sri Rama promptly that Ravana
is taking away Sita.’ (30)
fag ware शंस त्वं सीतां ala रावण:॥ ३१॥

“| salute the river Godavari made noisy
by swans and cranes and pray to her as
follows: ‘Please tell Sri Rama (when he
comes to you) at once that Ravana is
carrying away Sita.’ (31)
दैवतानि च यान्यस्मिन् at विविधपादपे।
नमस्करोम्यहं तेभ्यो Md: शंसत मां हृताम्॥ ३२॥

“Nay | offer salutations to all those
deities who dwell in this forest full of various
trees, and pray to them: ‘(Kindly) speak to
my husband of my having been borne away.’

(32)
यानि कानिचिदप्यत्र सत्त्वानि विविधानि च।
सर्वाणि शरणं यामि मृगपक्षिगणानि वै॥ ३३॥
ह्रियमाणां प्रियां भर्तु: प्राणेभ्योऽपि गरीयसीम्।
विवशा a am सीता रावणेनेति शंसत॥ ३४॥
