# YUDDHAKANDA +

gave detailed orders to the monkeys
accordingly. (21)
a वानरगणा: सर्वे समुत्पत्य महौजस:।
गुहाभ्य: शिखरेभ्यश्च आशु पुप्लुविरे तदा॥ २२॥
Emerging from the caves as well
as from mountain-tops, all the aforesaid
monkey hordes, who were endowed with

extraordinary might, speedily leapt forward
on that occasion. (22)

ततो वानरराजेन लक्ष्मणेन च पूजित:।
जगाम रामो धर्मात्मा ससैन्यो दक्षिणां दिशम्॥ २३॥

Placed ahead Sugriva, the ruler of
monkeys, as well as Laksmana, Sri Rama,
whose mind was set on piety, thereupon
sallied forth with his army in a southerly
direction. (23)

wed: शतसहस्रैश्च कोटिभिश्चायुतैरपि।
वारणाभैश्च हरिभिर्ययौ परिव्रृतस्तदा॥ २४॥

Surrounded by monkeys numbering
hundreds and tens of thousands, nay, lakhs
and crores, and looking like elephants, Sri
Rama then moved along. (24)
तं यान्तमनुयान्ती सा महती हरिवाहिनी।
Ber: प्रमुदिता: Aa सुग्रीवेणापि पालिता:॥ २५॥

That huge army of monkeys followed
Sri Rama, who was marching along
with them. Protected as they were by
Sugriva, all felt rejoiced and enraptured.

(25)
आप्लवन्त: प्लवन्तश्च गर्जन्तश्च प्लवंगमा:।
ede निनदन्तश्च जग्मुर्वै दक्षिणां दिशम्॥ २६॥
भक्षयन्त: सुगन्धीनि मधूनि च फलानि च।
उद्बहन्तो महावृक्षान् मञङ्जरीपुञ्जधारिण:॥ २७॥

The monkeys proceeded precisely ina
southerly direction, some leaping on all sides
in order to guard the army against any
possible danger and others springing with a
view to clearing the passage, thundering,
nay, roaring like lions and bellowing like

303

bulls, feasting on the fragrant honey and
fruits and carrying huge trees bearing
bunches of blossom. (26-27)

अन्योन्यं सहसा gar निर्वहन्ति क्षिपन्ति च।
पतन्तश्चोत्पतन्त्यन्ये पातयन्त्यपरे परान्॥ २८॥

The proud monkeys would all of a
sudden lift up and throw one another. Nay,
moving along, some would spring up in
the air, while others dashed down their
companions, springing like them. (28)

Taunt नो निहन्तव्य: ad च write: |
gta गर्जन्ति हरयो राघवस्य समीपत:॥ २९॥

“Ravana as well as all the rangers of
the night must be killed by us” thus roared
the monkeys in the presence of Sri Rama.

(29)

पुरस्तादूषभो नीलो dt: कुमुद va al
पन्थानं शोधयन्ति स्म वानरैर्बहुभि: सह॥ soll
Going ahead alongwith many other
monkeys, Rsabha, Nila and the heroic
Kumuda too cleared the way. (30)

मध्ये तु राजा सुग्रीवो रामो लक्ष्मण एव च।
बलिभिर्बहुभिर्भीमैर्वृत: शत्रुनिबर्हण: ॥ ३१॥
Surrounded by many mighty and
redoubtable monkeys for his part, Sugriva,
the exterminator of foes, marched in the
centre alongwith Sri Rama and Laksmana.
(31)

ae: शतबलिर्वीर: कोरिभिर्दशभिर्वृत:।
सर्वामेको ह्यवष्टभ्य Wa हरिवाहिनीम्॥ ३२॥
Actually controlling the entire army,
the valiant monkey, Satabali, who was
accompanied by ten crores of monkeys,
protected it single-handed. (32)

कोटीशतपरीवार: met पनसो गज:।
TAA बहुभि: पार्श्वमेकं तस्याभिरक्षति॥ ३३॥
Followed by a hundred crores of

monkeys, Kesari and Panasa protected the
right flank of that army; while Gaja and
