भृशम्॥ ३॥

“Moreover much impurity has been
caused to the land by the dry dung of
horses and elephants due to the camping,
referred to above, of the army of that high-
souled prince, Bharata. (3)

तस्मादन्यत्र गच्छाम sla संचिन्त्य waa:
प्रातिष्ठत स वैदेह्या लक्ष्मणेन च संगत:॥४॥
“We shall, therefore, move elsewhere !”
Pondering thus, the celebrated Sri Rama, a
scion of Raghu, accompanied by Sita, a
princess of the Videha kingdom, and
Laksmana, departed from Citrakuta. (4)

सोऽत्रेराश्रममासाद्य तं ववन्दे महायशा:।
तं चापि भगवानत्रि: पुत्रवत् प्रत्यपद्यत॥५॥

Having reached the hermitage of Sage
Atri, that highly illustrious prince saluted
him; and the glorious Atri too received him
as his own son. (5)

स्वयमातिथ्यमादिश्य सर्वमस्य सुसत्कृतम्।
सौमित्रिं च महाभागं सीतां च समसान्त्वयत्॥६॥
Having personally shown every
hospitality with full honours to him, he
comforted the highly blessed Laksmana and
Sita too. (6)
पत्नीं च तामनुप्राप्तां वृद्धामामन्त्य सत्कृताम्।
सान्त्वयामास धर्मज्ञ: सर्वभूतहिते रत:॥७॥
प्रतिगृह्णीष्व वैदेहीमब्रवीदूषिसत्तम: ॥ ८ ॥
Calling by name his aged and highly
blessed wife, Anasuya, who had reached

his presence and was received with
attentions by him, and who was given to

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA +

austerities and the practice of virtue, Atri,
the foremost of sages, who knew what is
right and was devoted to the good of all
created beings, spoke kindly to her, and
said, “Welcome Sita, a princess of the
Videha kingdom.” (7-8)
रामाय चाचचक्षे at तापसीं धर्मचारिणीम्।
दश वर्षाण्यनावृष्ट्या दग्धे लोके निरन्तरम्॥ ९ ॥
यया मूलफले सृष्टे जाह्नवी च प्रवर्तिता।
उग्रेण तपसा eet नियमैश्चाप्यलंकृता॥१०॥
दश वर्षसहस्राणि यया तप्तं महत् तप:।
अनसूयाव्रतैस्तात प्रत्यूहाश्च निबर्हिता:॥११॥
देवकार्यनिमित्तं च यया संत्वरमाणया।
दशरात्रं Ha रात्रि: सेयं मातेव तेऽनघ॥१२॥
He further introduced to Sri Rama as
follows the aforesaid lady, who was given
to austerities and the practice of virtue:
“Like a mother to you, O sinless prince, is
this celebrated Anasuya, distinguished by
severe asceticism and adorned with sacred
vows, by whom roots and fruits were
produced and the river Ganga, a foster-
daughter of the royal king Jahnu, was made
to flow close to my hermitage by virtue of
her asceticism at a time when the world had
been dried up by a drought continuing for
ten years without break, nay, by whom
great askesis were practised for ten thousand
years and obstacles in the way of Rsis
were done away with and by whom for the
purpose* of gods in a great hurry ten nights
were reduced to one night. (9—12)
अभिगच्छतु वैदेही वृद्धामक्रोधनां सदा॥१३॥
“Let Sita, a princess of the Videha
kingdom, meekly approach this celebrated

* We read in the Puranas how Sage Mandavya once pronounced a curse against a hermitess, Sandili
by name, who was a friend of Anasuya, that she would be widowed one morning within the next ten days.
The hermitess in her turn pronounced a counter-curse saying that there would be no dawn any more.
Alarmed at this gods approached Anasuya, who by virtue of her asceticism converted the period of ten
nights into one and in this way averted the death of the hermitess’ husband and accomplished the purpose

of gods.
