* AYODHYAKANDA +

as though he were fast asleep—on an
exquisite bier decked with various jewels,
his son, Bharata, lamented as follows, sore
distressed as he was: (4-5)
fe ते व्यवसितं राजन् प्रोषिते मय्यनागते।
विवास्य UH धर्मज्ञं लक्ष्मणं च महाबलम्॥६॥
“Having sent into exile Sri Rama as
well as Laksmana, possessed of great
strength, at a time when | was away from
home and had not yet returned, what did
you intend to do, O king, knowing as you
did what is right? (6)

क्व यास्यसि महाराज हित्वेमं ¢:fad जनम्।
ai पुरुषसिंहेन रामेणाक्लिष्टकर्मणा॥७॥

“Where will you go abandoning this
distressed servant of yours, already bereft
of Sri Rama, a veritable lion among men,
who does great deeds without the least
exertion, O great king? (7)

योगक्षेमं तु तेऽव्यग्रं कोऽस्मिन् कल्पयिता पुरे।
vata प्रयाते स्वस्तात रामे च वनमाश्रिते॥ ८॥

“Now that you have departed for
heaven, O dear father, and Sri Rama has
retired to the woods, | wonder who will
quietly meet the needs of the people and
ensure the safety of their person and property
in this capital of yours? (8)

विधवा पृथिवी राजंस्त्वया हीना न राजते।
ह्रीनचन्द्रेव रजनी नगरी प्रतिभाति माम्॥९॥

“Bereft of you and thus deprived of its
lord, the earth does not look charming any
more; nay, the city too appears to me
cheerless as a night bereft of the moon.”(9)
wa विलपमानं तं wd दीनमानसम्।
sede वचनं भूयो वसिष्ठस्तु महामुनि:॥१०॥

To Bharata, who was lamenting as
aforesaid, afflicted in mind as he was, the
eminent sage Vasistha for his part spoke
again in the following words : (10)

प्रेतकार्याणि यान्यस्य कर्तव्यानि विशाम्पते:।
तान्यव्यग्रं महाबाहो क्रियतामविचारितम्॥११॥

575

“Whatever funeral rites in relation to
the deceased monarch ought to be done
should be coolly and unhesitatingly gone
through, O mighty-armed prince !” (11)

तथेति भरतो वाक्यं वसिष्ठस्याभिपूज्य तत्।
ऋत्विक्पुरोहिताचार्यांस्त्वरयामास सर्वश:॥१२॥

Bowing to the aforesaid command of
Vasistha in the words “Let it be so!” Bharata
urged everyone, viz., the priests engaged
for sacrificial purposes, family priests and
the Acaryas to make haste. (12)

ये त्वग्नयो नरेन्द्रस्य अग्न्यगाराद् बहिष्कृता:।
ऋत्विग्भिर्याजकैश्चैव ते हूयन्ते यथाविधि॥ १३॥

The sacred fires maintained by the
king, that had been taken out of the fire-
sanctuary on the latter's death, were being
worshipped by the priests engaged for
sacrificial purposes and_ superintending
priests according to the scriptural ordinance.

(13)
शिबिकायामथारोप्य राजानं गतचेतनम्।
बाष्पकण्ठा विमनसस्तमूहु: परिचारका:॥१४॥

Having placed the king, whose
consciousness had departed days ago, on
a bier, the servants, who were feeling
disconsolate, now bore him गो their
shoulders to the cremation ground, their
throats choked with tears. (14)
हिरण्यं च सुवर्णं च वासांसि विविधानि च।
प्रकिरन्तो जना मार्गे quad ययु:॥१५॥

Scattering flowers of silver and gold
and pieces of cloth of every description on
the road, people walked ahead of the king.

(15)
चन्दनागुरुनिर्यासान् सरलं पद्मकं तथा।
देवदारूणि चाहृत्य क्षेपयन्ति तथापरे॥१६॥

While others fetching sandalwood, aloe,
bdellium, the wood of Sarala (a species of
pine) and Cerasus puddum and logs of
deodar (the Himalayan cedar), made pile.

(16)
