* AYODHYAKANDA +

disbursal of their salary are delayed and
that itself is a very great harm done to the
State. (33)
कच्चित् सर्वेऽनुरक्तास्त्वां कुलपुत्रा: प्रधानत:।
कच्चित् प्राणांस्तवार्थेषु संत्यजन्ति समाहिता: I ३४॥
“| hope all the principal members of
your race, the Ksatriyas, are devoted to

you? And do they devoutly and cheerfully
lay down their lives for your sake? (34)

कच्चिज्जानपदो विद्वान् दक्षिण: प्रतिभानवान्।
यथोक्तवादी दूतस्ते कृतो भरत पण्डित:॥ ३५॥

“Has a man of your own state, who is
learned, clever, ready-witted and capable of
delivering messages correctly, nay, who is
able to distinguish between right and wrong,
been appointed by you as an ambassador,
O Bharata? (35)

कच्चिदष्टादशान्येषु स्वपक्षे दश पञ्च च।
त्रिभिस्तिभिरविज्ञातैर्वेत्सि तीर्थानि चारकै:॥ ३६॥

“Do you keep an eye on the eighteen
functionaries* of the enemies and the fiteen
functionaries of your own side through three
unknown spies told off for each? (36)

कच्चिद् व्यपास्तानहितान् प्रतियातांश्च सर्वदा।
दुर्बलाननवज्ञाय वर्तसे रिपुसूदन॥ ३७॥

“| hope you remain ever mindful of
your enemies expelled from their home by
you and since returned, even though they
are apparently weak, O destroyer of foes !

(37)

647

कच्चिन्न लोकायतिकान् ब्राह्मणांस्तात सेवसे।
अनर्थकुशला ह्येते बाला: पण्डितमानिन:॥ ३८॥

“| hope you do not patronize atheistic
Brahmans; O dear brother: for, ignorant and
conceited as they are, they are skilled only
in perverting the mind and thereby diverting
people from the righteous path. (38)

धर्मशास्त्रेषु मुख्येषु विद्यमानेषु aden:
बुद्धिमान्वीक्षिकीं प्राप्य निरर्थं प्रवदन्ति ते॥ ३९॥

“Banking solely on their logical acumen,
these men of perverted intellect preach
nonsense even in the presence of foremost
books on Dharma (piety). (39)
वीरैरध्युषितां पूर्वमस्माकं तात ode:
सत्यनामां दृढद्वारां हस्त्यश्चरथसंकुलाम्॥४०॥
ब्राह्मणै: क्षत्रियैर्वैश्यै: स्वकर्मनिरतै: सदा।
जितेन्द्रियैर्महोत्सादैर्व्रतामार्यै: सहस्रश: ॥ ४१॥
प्रासादैर्विविधाकारैर्वृतां वैद्यजनाकुलाम्।
कच्चित् समुदितां स्फीतामयोध्यां परिरक्षसे॥४२॥

“| hope you protect on all sides the
prosperous city of Ayodhya, rightly so-called
because of its being unassailable, which
has been occupied in the past, O dear
brother, by our heroic forbears, which is
provided with strong gates and remains
crowded with elephants, horses and chariots,
which is inhabited in thousands by noble
Brahmanas (members of the priestly class),
Ksatriyas (members of the warrior class)
and Vaisyas (members of the agriculturist

* “They are: (1) the chief minister, (2) the king’s family priest, (3) the crown prince, (4) the

generalissimo, (5) the chief warder, (6) the chamberlain (अन्त:पुराध्यक्ष ), (7) the superintendent of jails
( कारागाराध्यक्ष ), (8) the chancellor of the exchequer ( धनाध्यक्ष ), (9) the herald ( राजराजाज्ञया BTATATY, AAT ), (10) the
government advocate (प्राड्विवाकसंज्ञो व्यवहारप्रष्टा ), (11) the judge ( धर्मासनाधिकृत: ), (12) the assessor ( व्यवहारनिर्णेता
सभ्याख्य: ), (13) the officer disbursing salaries to army men (सेनाया जीवनभृतिदानाध्यक्ष: ), (14) the officer drawing
money from the state exchequer to disburse the workmen’s wages (कर्मान्ते वेतनग्राही ), (15) the city Kotawala
(नगररक्षक: ), (16) the protector of the borders of a kingdom, who also performed the duties of a forester
(ert UretH: अयमेवाटविक: ), (17) the magistrate (gmt दण्डनाधिकारी ) and (18) the officer entrusted with the
conservation of waters, hills, forests and tracts difficult of access ( sebierrgtteercraret: ). Another commentator
interprets धनाध्यक्ष: to mean a revenue collector ( अर्थसंचयकृत् ), and सभ्य: to mean an officer who kept the council
chamber in good order, allotted seats to the councillors according to thier rank of precedence, maintained
order among the councillors and looked to the personal safety of the councillors while they were holding
their deliberations. The fifteen functionaries of one’s own side are the last fifteen of this very list, omitting
the first three, viz., the chief minister, the family priest and the crown prince.”
