328

aa चापि मया ca यत् त्वं समभिरक्षित:।
जाग्रत्या यतमानायास्ततो A प्रददौ वरौ॥१९॥

“Since on that occasion, O lord, you
were carefully protected by me on all sides,
keeping awake as | did the whole night,
you thereupon conferred a couple of boons
on me even while | was striving to save
you. (19)
तौ दत्तौ च at ea निक्षेपौ मृगयाम्यहम्।
तवैव पृथिवीपाल सकाशे रघुनन्दन॥ ROM

“| seek of you, O lord, the said two
boons already offered by you, O Ruler of
the globe, and kept in deposit with you
alone till now, O scion of Raghu! (20)

तत् प्रतिश्रुत्य धर्मेण न चेद दास्यसि मे वरम्।
अद्यैव fe प्रहास्यामि जीवितं त्वद्विमानिता॥ २१॥

“If, even after swearing by your virtue
that you will grant them, you do not actually
grant the boons in my favour, | shall this
very day give up the ghost, feeling insulted
by you.” (21)
वाङ्मात्रेण तदा राजा कैकेय्या TAA Gea: |
प्रचस्कन्द विनाशाय पाशं AT इवात्मन:॥२२॥

Brought under her thumb through mere
words by Kaikeyi, the king forthwith slipped
like a deer into the snare (set by her) for his
own destruction. (22)
Wd: परमुवाचेदं ad काममोहितम्।
वरौ eal त्वया ta det cet महीपते॥ २३॥

Then she spoke as follows to the king,
who was infatuated through love and was
accordingly ready to grant the boons asked
by her: “The boons offered by you then, O
ruler of the earth, must be granted by you,
O lord! (23)

तौ तावदहमद्यैव वक्ष्यामि sot A वच:।
अभिषेकसमारम्भो राघवस्योपकल्पित: i २४॥

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

अनेनैवाभिषेकेण भरतो मेऽभिषिच्यताम्।
यो द्वितीयो at ta ca: प्रीतेन मे त्वया॥ २५॥
तदा देवासुरे युद्धे तस्य कालोऽयमागत:।
नव us च वर्षाणि दण्डकारण्यमाश्रित:॥ २६॥
चीराजिनधरो धीरो wat भवतु तापस:।

Wat भजतामद्य यौवराज्यमकण्टकम्॥ २७॥

“| shall just now specify them; listen to
my request. Let my Bharata be installed as
Prince Regent with the same preparations
as have been made for the installation of
Rama, a scion of Raghu. The time has just
come for granting the second boon that was
offered by you in my favour during the
conflict of gods and demons the other day,
pleased as you were with me. Residing in
the forest of Dandaka and wearing the bark
of trees and deer-skin, let the strong-minded
Rama lead the life of a hermit for fourteen
years and let Bharata secure the office of
Prince Regent without opposition this very
day. (24—27)

एष मे We: कामो दत्तमेव at gurl
aa da fe पश्येयं ward wad वने॥ २८॥

“This is my most cherished desire. |
only ask of you a boon already granted by
you. Nay, let me behold Rama, a scion of
Raghu, proceeding to the forest this very
day. (28)
स राजराजो va सत्यसंगर:

कुलं च शीलं च हि जन्म रक्ष च।
wa aa fe वदन्त्यनुत्तमं
तपोधना: सत्यवचो fed नृणाम्॥ २९॥

“Noted as you are as the king of kings,
be true to your promise and as such redeem
your race and virtue as well as birth. Those
rich in asceticism really speaking declare
truthful speech as supremely conducive to
the welfare of men in the other world.” (29)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्येऽयोध्याकाण्डे एकादश: सर्ग: ॥ 22 ॥

Thus ends Canto Eleven in the Ayodhyakanda of the glorious Ramayana
of Valmiki, the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

