# YUDDHAKANDA #

Hearing the plea of Vibhisana, Sri Rama
forthwith made the following reply: “ am
aware, O ogre of unfailing prowess, of
the conjuring skill practised by that fierce
ogre. (17)

स हि ब्रह्मास्त्रवित् प्राज्ञो महामायो महाबल:।
करोत्यसंज्ञान् संग्रामे देवान् सवरुणानपि॥ १८॥

“Skilled in the use of the mystic missile
presided over by Brahma (the creator) and
highly intelligent, nay, a great master of
conjuring tricks and endowed _ with
extraordinary might, he can actually render
unconscious in combat even gods including
Varuna. (18)

तस्यान्तरिक्षॆ चरत: सरथस्य महायश:।
न oufaatat die सूर्यस्येवाभ्रसम्प्लवे॥१९॥

“When he drives in the air in his chariot,
his movement, O highly illustrious hero,
cannot be perceived any more than that of
the sun coursing behind a mass of clouds.”

(19)
राघवस्तु faraicat मायावीर्यं दुरात्मन:।
लक्ष्मणं कोर्तिसम्पन्नमिदं वचनमब्रवीत्॥ २०॥

Knowing, as he did, the power of the
conjuring tricks of the evil-minded enemy,
Sri Rama, a scion of Raghu, for his part
spoke as follows to the illustrious Laksmana:

(20)
aq वानरेन्द्रस्य बलं तेन सर्वेण संवृत:।
हनूमत्प्रमुखैश्चैव यूथपै: सह लक्ष्मण॥ २१॥
जाम्बवेनर्क्षषतिना we सैन्येन daa:
जहि तं राक्षससुतं मायाबलसमन्वितम्॥ २२॥

“Surrounded by the entire army
which stands at the disposal of Sugriva,
the ruler of monkeys, and also accompanied
by troop-commanders with Hanuman as
their leader and protected by Jambavan,
the lord of bears, who, too, will be
accompanied by an army, make short work,
O Laksmana, of that son of an ogre, rich

661

in the power of magic. (21-22)
अयं wat सचिवै: सार्धं महात्मा रजनीचर:।
अभिज्ञस्तस्य मायानां पृष्ठतोऽनुगमिष्यति॥ २३॥
“This high-souled night-ranger,
Vibhisana, who is fully aware of his conjuring

tricks, will follow you at your heels with his
ministers.” (23)

राघवस्य वच: श्रुत्वा लक्ष्मण: सविभीषण:।
जग्राह कार्मुकश्रेष्ठमन्यद् भीमपराक्रम:॥ २४॥
Hearing the command of Sri Rama, a
scion of Raghu, Laksmana of redoubtable
prowess, who was accompanied by

Vibhisana, took up another bow, the foremost
of bows. (24)

संनद्ध: कवची Get सशरी वामचापभृत्।
रामपादावुपस्पृश्य हृष्ट:- सौमित्रिरब्रवीत्॥ २५॥
Touching the feet of Sri Rama and
feeling delighted, Laksmana (son of Sumitra),
who was fully equipped for an encounter,
clad in armour and armed with a sword and
excellent arrows, and bore the bow in his
left hand, submitted as follows: (25)

अद्य मत्कार्मुकोन्मुक्ता: शरा निर्भिद्य रावणिम्।
लङ्कामभिषतिष्यन्ति ga: पुष्करिणीमिव॥ २६॥

“Piercing Indrajit (son of Ravana) today,
the arrows shot from my bow will drop into
Lanka even as swans descend into a lotus-
pond. (26)
विधमिष्यन्ति भित्त्वा तं महाचापगुणच्युता:॥ 219

“Splitting the body of that violent ogre
when shot from the string of my mighty
bow, my arrows will make short work of him
this very day.” (27)
a रावणिवधाकांक्षी लक्ष्मणस्त्वरितं ययौ॥ २८॥

Having made the aforesaid submission
in the presence of his eldest brother, Sri
