1162

“Your strength and wisdom, energy and
courage too, O bull among the monkeys,
distinguish you from all other created beings.
Why then do you not make yourself ready
for the adventure? (7)

अप्सराऽप्सरसां श्रेष्ठा विख्याता पुञ्जिकस्थला।
अञ्जनेति परिख्याता पत्नी केसरिणो ec
विख्याता त्रिषु लोकेषु रूपेणाप्रतिमा भुवि।
अभिशापादभूत् तात कपित्वे कामरूपिणी॥ ९॥
दुहिता वानरेन्द्रस्य कुञ्जरस्य महात्मन:।
मानुषं विग्रहं per रूपयौवनशालिनी॥१०॥
विचित्रमाल्याभरणा कदाचित् क्षौमधारिणी।
अचरत् पर्वतस्याग्रे प्रावृडम्बुदसंनिभे॥११॥

“There was a celestial nymph, the
foremost of all celestial nymphs and widely
known by the name of Pufjikasthala. Due
to a curse pronounced by a Rsi, she was
reborn as a daughter of the high-souled
Kufjara, a monkey chief, and became widely
known as Afijana. She came to be the wife
of a monkey, Kesari by name. She was
celebrated in all the three worlds and was
unparalleled on earth in beauty. Though
living in the form of a monkey she could
change her form at will. Having assumed a
human form, Anjana, who looked charming
due to her comeliness and youth, was decked
with wonderful ornaments of flowers and
was Clad in silk, was once roving on a
mountain-peak, which looked like a rainy
cloud. (8—11)
स्थिताया: पर्वतस्याग्रे मारुतोऽपाहरच्छनै:।॥। १२॥

“The wind-god gently removed the
charming red-bordered yellow covering of

that large-eyed belle standing on the mountain-
top. (12)

a cast ततस्तस्या gaa सुसंहतौ।
स्तनौ च पीनौ सहितौ Gard चारु चाननम्॥ १३॥
“He thereupon perceived her rounded
and closely united thighs and _ well-knit
swelling breasts as well as her shapely
and lovely countenance. (13)

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

at बलादायतश्रोणीं तनुमध्यां यशस्विनीम्।
दृष्टवबैव शुभसर्वाङ्गीं पवन: काममोहित:॥१४॥
“The wind-god got infatuated through
love in spite of himself the moment he saw
that glorious woman with broad hips, slender
of waist and charming of every limb. (14)

स तां भुजाभ्यां दीर्घाभ्यां पर्यष्वजत मारुत:।
मन्मथाविष्टसर्वाङ्नो गतात्मा तामनिन्दिताम्॥ १५ ॥

“The wind-god, whose mind was set
on her and all whose limbs were possessed
by love, pressed to his bosom _ that
irreproachable girl with his long arms. (15)

सा तु तत्रैव सम्भ्रान्ता सुव्रता वाक्यमब्रवीत्।
एकपत्नीव्रतमिदं को नाशयितुमिच्छति॥ १६॥

“Utterly confused, that lady of noble vows,
for her part, spoke that very moment as
follows : ‘Who seeks to violate this vow of
mine of fidelity to a single husband?’ (16)

अञ्जनाया वच: श्रुत्वा Aled: प्रत्यभाषत।
नत्वां हिंसामि सुश्रोणि मा भूत् ते मनसो भयम्॥ १७॥
“Hearing the question of Afjana, the
wind-god replied, ‘| am not going to violate
you, O lady of charming limbs ! Let there be
no fear in your mind. (17)

मनसास्मि गतो यत् cat परिष्वज्य यशस्विनि।
aan बुद्धिसम्पन्नस्तव पुत्रो भविष्यति॥ १८॥

“Since after embracing you | have
entered your being with my mind, O illustrious
lady, a son who is powerful and richly endowed
with intelligence will be born to you. (18)

महासत्त्वो महातेजा महाबलपराक्रम:।
ag प्लवने चैव भविष्यति मया सम:॥१९॥

“Full of extraordinary courage,
extraordinary energy and_ extraordinary
strength and prowess, he will prove to be
my equal in jumping and leaping.’ (19)

एवमुक्ता ततस्तुष्टा जननी ते महाकपे।
गुहायां wat महाबाहो प्रजज्ञे प्लवगर्षभ॥ २०॥

“Satisfied when spoken to in these
words, your mother, O great and mighty-
