446

Urged by Ravana, the troops of
ogres thereupon joyfully rushed forth like
the waves of the ocean which is being
swollen by clouds at the time of universal
destruction. (37)
ततो वानरसैन्येन मुक्तो नाद: समन्तत:।
मलय: पूरितो येन ससानुप्रस्थकन्दर:॥ ३८॥

A roar was then shouted on all sides
by the simian army—a roar which filled the
Malaya (Trikuta) mountain with its major
and minor peaks and caves. (38)
wgegurate: सिंहनादस्तरस्विनाम्।
पथिवीं चान्तरिक्षं च सागरं चाभ्यनादयत्॥ 38 Il
रथानां नेमिनिर्घोषै रक्षसां वदनस्वनै:॥४०॥

The blast of conches and the roll
of drums as well as the leonine roar of
monkey heroes, accompanied by the
trumpeting of elephants, the neighing of
horses, the clatter of chariot wheels and
the shout of ogres, made the earth and the
air as well as the sea resound. (39-40)

एतस्मिन्नन्तरे घोर: WI: समपद्यत।

रक्षसां वानराणां च यथा देवासुरे पुरा॥४१॥
In the meantime there ensued a terrible

fight between the ogres and the monkeys

as between the gods and the demons in the
olden days. (41)

निजघ्नुर्वानरान् सर्वान् कथयन्त: स्वविक्रमान्॥ ४२ ॥

Vaunting their own prowess, the ogres
began to strike all the monkeys with their
flaming maces as well as with javelins,
pikes and axes. (42)

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA +

तथा वृक्षैर्महाकाया: पर्वताग्रैश्च arnt: |
निजघ्नुस्तानि रक्षांसि नखैर्दन्तैश्च वेगिन:॥४३॥

Full of impetuosity the gigantic monkeys
likewise struck those ogres with trees and
mountain-tops as well as with their nails
and teeth. (43)

राजा जयति सुग्रीव इति शब्दो महानभूत्।
राजञ्जयजयेत्युक्त्वा स्वस्वनामकथां तत:॥४४॥

There arose (in the simian ranks) a
loud war-cry: “Victorious is King Sugriva!”
Shouting “Be tirumphant! Be victorious, O
king!” the ogres then proclaimed their own
respective names. (44)

राक्षसास्त्वपरे भीमा: प्राकारस्था महीं गतान्।
वानरान् भिन्दिपालैश्च शूलैश्चैव व्यदारयन्॥४५॥

Standing on the walls, other redoubtable
ogres for thier part pierced the monkeys
standing on the ground below with their
Bhindipalas (a jeveline-like weapon) as well
as with pikes. (45)

वानराश्चापि संक्रुद्धा: प्राकारस्थान् महीं गता:।
राक्षसान् पातयामासु: खमाप्लुत्य स्वबाहुभि: ।। ४६ Ul
Bounding into the air highly enraged,
the monkeys too, who stood on the ground,
dragged down the ogres stationed on the
walls with their arms. (46)
a सम्प्रहारस्तुमुलो मांसशोणितकर्दम:।
रक्षसां वानराणां च सम्बभूवाद्भुतोपम:॥४७॥
The aforesaid fight between the
ogres and the monkeys, confused as it
was, could not be easily compared to any
other conflict and left a mire of flesh and
blood. (47)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये FERS द्विचत्वारिंश: AW: ॥ ४२ ॥
Thus ends Canto Forty-two in the Yuddhakanda of the glorious Ramayana of
Valmiki, the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

