# YUDDHAKANDA +

there, thereupon immediately collected a
huge army in an unpremeditated way and

409

further reported to their bellicose lord about
the army having assembled. (44)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये युद्धकाण्डे द्वात्रिंश: सर्ग: ॥ ३२ ॥

Thus ends Canto Thirty-two in the Yuddhakanda of the glorious Ramayana of
Valmiki, the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

Canto XXxXIll

Sarama reassures Sita by telling her that the head brought before her
was not of Sri Rama, who was alive and would soon be
able to see her, and asks her not to be afraid

सीतां तु मोहितां दृष्टवा सरमा नाम राक्षसी।
आससादाथ वैदेह्रीं frat प्रणयिनी waar eu
Seeing Sita distraught, an ogress,
Sarama* by name, for her part, who was
full of love for Sita, forthwith approached the
princess of the Videha territory, her beloved
friend. (1)

मोहितां राक्षसेन्द्रेण सीतां परमदु:खिताम्।
आश्वासयामास तदा सरमा मृदुभाषिणी॥ २॥

Sarama, who was sweet of expression,
then comforted Sita, who, having been put
off the scent by Ravana (the ruler of ogres),
was feeling extremely distressed. (2)

सा fe at कृता fat सीतया रक्ष्यमाणया।
रक्षन्ती रावणादिष्टा सानुक्रोशा दृढव्रता॥३॥

Taking care, as she did, of Sita, as
enjoined by Ravana (who was afraid lest
Sita might succumb to her grief, which was
too much for her), nay, full of compassion
and firm of resolve, she had actually been
made friends with by Sita, who was being
taken care of by her. (3)

सा cat सखी dat सरमा नष्टचेतनाम्।
उपावृत्योत्थितां ध्वस्तां वडवामिव पांसुषु॥४॥

Sarama, that friendly lady, found Sita
stupefied and just risen, as it were, after
rolling in the dust and soiled like a mare. (4)

wt समाश्वासयामास सरखीस्नेहेन सुव्रताम्।
समाश्वसिहि वैदेहि मा भूत् ते मनसो व्यथा।
उक्ता Ue रावणेन त्वं प्रयुक्तश्च स्वयं त्वया॥७५॥
सखीस्नेहेन aq भीरु मया सर्वं प्रतिश्रुतम्।
लीनया Tet शून्ये भयमुत्सृज्य रावणात्।
aa हेतोर्विशालाक्षि नहि A रावणाद् भयम्॥६॥

Out of affection for her friend, Sarama
began to console that princess of noble
vows as follows: “Be fully restored to
confidence, O princess of the Videha territory!
Let there be no anguish in your mind. All
that which you were told by Ravana and
that which he was told in return by yourself
was overheard by me out of affection for
my friend, viz., yourself, while remaining
concealed in a lonely thicket for your sake,
O large-eyed lady, and shaking of all fear of
Ravana; really speaking, | have no fear of
Ravana (5-6)

स सम्भ्रान्तश्च निष्क्रान्तो यत्कृते राक्षसेश्वर:।
wa मे विदितं सर्वमभिनिष्क्रम्य मैथिलि॥७॥

* Sarama, according to the commentators, is the wife of Vibhisana. She is full of reverence for Sita.
