* SUNDARAKANDA +

आरुह्य गिरिसंकाशं were हरियूथप:।
बभौ a सुमहातेजा: प्रतिसूर्य इवोदित:॥४॥

Climbing up the edifice, which closely
resembled a mountain, that leader of monkey
hordes, Hanuman, who was endowed with
extraordinary effulgence, looked like a second
sun, just risen. (4)

waa तु दुर्धर्षश्चैत्यप्रासादमुन्नतम्।
हनूमान् प्रज्वलंल्लक्ष्म्या पारियात्रोपमोऽभवत्॥५॥

Blazing with glory on having assailed
that lofty edifice of the sanctuary, Hanuman
for his part, who was difficult to challenge,
shone like the Pariyatra mountain (one of
the seven principal mountains of India). (5)

स भूत्वा सुमहाकाय: प्रभावान् मारुतात्मज:।
धृष्टमास्फोटयामास लङ्कां शब्देन पूरयन्॥६॥

Assuming immense proportions by dint
of his glory, Hanuman, sprung from the
loins of the wind-god, boldly began to
demolish the sanctuary filling Lanka with the
crash. (6)

At the loud and deafening sound of his
act of demolition, the birds as well as the
guards of the sanctuary toppled down
senseless on the spot. (7)

अस्त्रविज्जयतां रामो लक्ष्मणश्च महाबल:।
राजा waft सुग्रीवो राघवेणाभिषालित:॥८॥

“May Sri Rama, skilled in the use of
missiles, be eminently victorious, as well as
Laksmana, endowed with extraordinary might.
Triumphant is King Sugriva, protected on all
sides by Sri Rama, a scion of Raghu. (8)

दासोऽहं कोसलेन्द्रस्य रामस्याक्लिष्टकर्मण:।
हनूमान् wate निहन्ता मारुतात्मज:॥९॥

“|, Hanuman, sprung from the loins of
the wind-god, and destroyer of hostile armies,
am a servant of Sri Rama of unwearied
action, the lord of KoSala. (9)

197

न रावणसहस्रं A युद्धे प्रतिबलं wad!
शिलाभिश्च प्रहरत: पादपैश्च सहस्रश:॥१०॥
“Not even a thousand of Ravanas can
stand my might in combat, even as | assail
them with myriad of rocks and trees. (10)

धर्षयित्वा पुरीं लङ्कामभिवाद्य च मैथिलीम्।
समृद्धार्थो गमिष्यामि मिषतां सर्वरक्षसाम्॥११॥

“Destroying the city of Lanka and
greeting Sita, the princess of Mithila, | shall
return fully accomplished of purpose, while
all the ogres stand looking on.” (11)
`एवमुक्त्वा महाकायश्चैत्यस्थो हरियूथप:।
ननाद भीमनिर्हयदो रक्षसां जनयन् भयम्॥१२॥

Having shouted thus while standing on
the sanctuary, the colossal Hanuman, a
leader of the monkey hordes, emitted a
terrible thunder-like roar, causing terror to
the ogres. (12)
तेन Wet महता चैत्यपाला: शतं ययु:।
Tate विविधानस्त्रान् War खड्गान् परश्वधान्॥ १३॥
विसृजन्तो महाकाया मारुतिं पर्यवारयन्।

a गदाभिर्विचित्राभि: परिघै: काञ्चनाङ्गदै:।॥ १४॥
आजग्मुर्वानरश्रेष्डं बाणैश्चादित्यसंनिभै:।
stad sa गङ्गायास्तोयस्य विपुलो महान्॥१५॥
परिक्षिप्य eters स बभौ रक्षसां गण:।
ततो वातात्मज: क्रुद्धो भीमरूपं समास्थित: ॥ १६॥
प्रासादस्य महांस्तस्य स्तम्भं हेमपरिष्कृतम्।
उत्पाटयित्वा वेगेन BAM मारुतात्मज:॥१७॥
ततस्तं भ्रामयामास शतधारं महाबल:।
wa चाग्नि: समभवत् प्रासादश्चाप्यदह्यत॥ १८ ll

Impelled by that great noise, a hundred
gigantic guards posted at the sanctuary
sallied forth seizing missiles of every
description, as well as spears, swords and
axes, and discharging them, surrounded
Hanuman, son of the wind-god, from all
sides. Armed with weird maces, iron clubs
plated with gold and arrows shining brightly
as the sun, they approached Hanuman, the
foremost of monkeys. Surrounding Hanuman,
that host of ogres looked like a mighty and
