* ARANYAKANDA «

of deer with which you used to sport, O
gentle Sita, are thoughtful, their eyes
bedimmed with tears. (5)
सीतया रहितोऽहं A नहि जीवामि लक्ष्मण।
ad शोकेन महता सीताहरणजेन माम्॥६॥
परलोके महाराजो नूनं द्रक्ष्यति मे पिता।
कथं प्रतिज्ञां संश्रुत्य मया त्वमभियोजित:॥ ७॥
अपूरयित्वा तं कालं मत्सकाशमिहागत:।
कामवृत्तमनार्यं वा मृषावादिनमेव acl
धिक् त्वामिति परे लोके व्यक्तं वक्ष्यति मे पिता।
विवशं शोकसंतप्तं दीनं भग्नमनोरथम्॥९॥
मामिहोत्सृज्य करुणं कीर्तिर्नरमिवानृजुम्।
क्व गच्छसि ANS मा मोत्सृज सुमध्यमे॥१०॥
“Deprived of Sita | shall certainly not
survive, O Laksmana! My father, the late
emperor, will surely find me in the other
world, overwhelmed as | am with excessive
grief sprung from abduction of Sita. ‘How,
having plighted your word to remain in exile
in the forest for fourteen years, when charged
by me to do so, have you sought my presence
here without completing the stipulated period
of fourteen years? Fie upon you, who are
licentious, ignoble as well as a liar.’ In the
foregoing words will my father reproach me
without doubt in the other world. Deserting
at this place me, helpless, tormented with
grief, afflicted and pitiable as | am, my
aspirations shattered—even as a fair name
forsakes a crooked man—where are you
going, O lady with charming limbs? Pray,
do not, O do not leave me, O lovely Sita !
(6é—10)
त्वया विरहितश्चाहं त्यक्ष्ये जीवितमात्मन:।
इतीव विलपन् राम: सीतादर्शनलालस:॥११॥
न cast सुदु:खार्तो Taal जनकात्मजाम्।
अनासादयमानं तं सीतां शोकपरायणम्॥१२॥
पङ्कमासाद्य विपुलं सीदन्तमिव कुञ्जरम्।
लक्ष्मणो राममत्यर्थमुवाच हितकाम्यया॥१३॥
“Bereft of you | shall yield up my life.”

Wailing as aforesaid, Sri Rama, who was
longing for a sight of Sita, felt sore stricken

885

with agony. Sri Rama (a scion of Raghu)
could not, however, see Janaka’s daughter
anywhere. To the said Sri Rama, who was
given over to grief, unable as he was to find
Sita, and resembled an elephant feeling
afflicted on getting stuck into a large stretch
of marshy land, Laksmana spoke as follows
out of extreme solicitude for his welfare:
(11—13)

मा विषादं महाबुद्धे He Ui मया सह।
se गिरिवरं वीर बहुकन्दरशोभितम्॥१४॥

“Don’t give way to despondency, O
prince possessed of great wisdom! Put forth
endeavour with me. The yonder crown of
mountains, O heroic prince, is adorned with
many caves. (14)

प्रियकाननसंचारा वनोन्मत्ता च मैथिली।
सा वनं वा प्रविष्टा स्यान्नलिनीं वा सुपुष्पिताम्॥ १५ ॥
सरितं वापि सम्प्राप्ता मीनवञ्जुलसेविताम्।
वित्रासयितुकामा वा लीना स्यात् कानने क्वचित्॥ १६ ॥
जिज्ञासमाना वैदेही त्वां मां च Tear
तस्या ह्यन्वेषणे श्रीमन् क्षिप्रमेव यतावहे॥ १७॥

“And Sita, a princess of Mithila, is fond
of frequenting groves and is enraptured at
the sight of a forest. As such she must
have penetrated deep into the forest or
dived into a lotus pond abounding in lotus
flowers or may have reached a river teeming
with fishes and cane. Sita, a princess of the
Videha territory, may be hiding somewhere
in a woodland with intent to alarm us and in
order to test your and mine capacity to
trace her out, O jewel among men ! Hence,
O glorious prince, let us both strive to search
for her at once. (15—17)
at ad विचिनुवो aa सा जनकात्मजा।
मन्यसेयदि काकुत्स्थ मा स्म शोके AA: FAT: ।। १८ ॥

“We shall explore the whole forest
where the said daughter of Janaka is likely
to be, if you deem fit, O scion of Kakutstha !

Pray, do not give over your mind to grief.”
(18)
