# YUDDHAKANDA #

Then with his shaft shining brightly as
the thunderbolt and Asani, Sri Rama now
struck with vehemence Ravana (the enemy
of Indra) in his broad and lovely-looking
chest (lit., the space between the arms),
even as the mighty Indra would strike the
Meru mountain with his thunderbolt. (138)
यो वज्रपाताशनिसंनिपाता-

न्न aay नापि चचाल राजा।
स रामबाणाभिहतो भृशार्त-

श्चचाल UT च मुमोच वीर:॥१३९॥
a विह्वलन्तं प्रसमीक्ष्य राम:

समाददे दीप्तमथार्धचन्द्रम्।
तेनार्कवर्णं art किरीटं

चिच्छेद रक्षोधिपतेर्महात्मा ।। १४० Il

That heroic monarch who never felt
disturbed, much less shook under the impact
of the thunderbolt of Indra or of lightning,
reeled when struck by the arrow of Sr
Rama, greatly agonized as he was and let
fall his bow. Seeing him swooning, the high-
souled Sri Rama forthwith took up a flaming
arrow with a crescent-shaped head and
hastily shattered with it the diadem of Ravana
(the suzerain lord of ogres), which was
bright as the sun. (139-140)
चच निर्बिषाशीविषसंरि .

शान्तार्चिषं सूर्यमिवाप्रकाशम्

कृत्तकिरीटकूट-

मुवाच wat युधि राक्षसेन्द्रम्॥१४१॥

Sri Rama then spoke as follows to the
ruler of ogres who closely resembled a
venomous snake rid of its poison and was
divested of his splendour like the sun whose
rays had disappeared and whose glory had
departed, his diadems having been torn
asunder: (141)

गतशथ्रियं

न त्वां शरैर्मृत्युवशं नयामि॥१४२॥

521

“A great and exceedingly terrible feat
has been accomplished by you and my
pre-eminent champions have been killed
by you. Knowing that you have been
fully exhausted thereby, | shall not put you
under the sway of Death with my shafts.

(142)

vate wef रणार्दितस्त्वं
प्रविश्य रात्रिंचरराज लङ्काम्।
आश्चस्य निर्याहि wit च et
तदा बलं प्रेक्ष्यसि A रथस्थ:॥१४३॥

“| Know you stand agonized through
continued fighting. Therefore, depart for the
present, O king of the rangers of the night!
Re-entering Lanka and resting awhile, sally
forth again, duly mounted on a chariot and
armed with a bow, then, remaining seated
in your car, you shall witness my might.”

(143)
a एवमुक्तो हतदर्पहर्षो
निकृत्तचाप स हताश्चसूत:।
शरार्दितो भग्नमहाकिरीटो
विवेश लङ्कां सहसा स्म राजा॥१४४॥

Consoled in these words, the celebrated
king—whose vanity and joy had been
crushed, whose bow had been lacerated to
pieces, whose horses and charioteer had
been killed, whose big diadem had been
shattered and who had been wounded with
arrows—hastily (re-) entered Lanka. (144)

तस्मिन् प्रविष्टे रजनीचरेन्द्र
महाबले दानवदेवशत्रौ।
हरीन् विशल्यान् we लक्ष्मणेन
चकार राम: परमाहवाग्रे॥ १४७५ il
The aforesaid lord of the prowlers of
the night, the enemy of gods and demons
alike, who was endowed with extraordinary
might, having withdrawn, Sri Rama with
Laksmana drew out the arrows from the
bodies of the monkeys in the forefront of the
vast battle-field. (145)
