30

by Hanuman dashing forward across the
sky, the blossom on the trees, consisting of
every variety, dropped on the ocean and
presented a curious sight while floating,
endowed as they were with lightness of
weight. Carpeted with them, that vast sea
looked charming like the star-spangled sky.

(53)

पुष्पौघेण सुगन्धेन नानावर्णेन वानर:।
aut मेघ इवोद्यन् a विद्युद्णविभूषित:॥५४॥

Covered with a shower of fragrant
flowers of various tints, Hanuman actually
looked charming like a rising cloud streaked
with flashes of lightning. (54)

तस्य वेगसमुद्धूतै: पुष्पैस्तोयमदूश्यत।
ताराभिरिव रामाभिरुदिताभिरिवाम्बरम्॥ ५५॥

Overspread with flowers scattered by
his impetus, the sea-water resembled the
firmament spangled with lovely stars just
risen. (55)

तस्याम्बरगतौ बाहू aged प्रसारितौ।
पर्वताग्राद् विनिष्क्रान्तौ पञ्चास्याविव पन्नगौ ।। ५६ ॥

His two arms outstretched in space
looked like a pair of five-hooded serpents
risen from a mountain-top. (56)

पिबन्निव बभौ चापि सोर्मिजालं महार्णवम्।
पिपासुरिव चाकाशं ददरृशे स महाकपि:॥ ५७॥

Nay, while looking downward the mighty
Hanuman appeared as though drinking up
the vast sea alongwith the mass of its
waves; and looking upwards, he appeared
keen to imbibe the sky. (57)

तस्य विद्युतप्रभाकारे वायुमार्गानुसारिण:।
नयने विप्रकाशेते पर्वतस्थाविवानलौ॥ ५८॥

The eyes of Hanuman, who was
following the course of the wind, blazed like
a pair of fires burning on a mountain, flashing
as they did like lightning. (58)

fag पिङ्गाक्षमुख्यस्य बृहती परिमण्डले।
चक्षुषी सम्प्रकाशेते चन्द्रसूर्याविव स्थितौ॥७५९॥

« VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

Nay, the reddish-brown large round eyes
of Hanuman, the foremost of monkeys, shed
their bright light like the moon and the sun
shining together. (59)
We नासिकया तस्य ताम्रया ताम्रमाबभौ।
संध्यया समभिस्पृष्टं यथा स्यात् सूर्यमण्डलम्॥ ६०॥

Due to the reflection of his coppery

nose, his countenance looked red as the
solar orb embraced by dusk. (60)

लाङ्गूलं च समाविद्धं प्लवमानस्य शोभते।
अम्बरे वायुपुत्रस्य शक्रध्वज sala Ge Ul
Moreover, the coiled tail of Hanuman,
son of the wind-god, darting across the sky
looked charming like a tall banner hoisted (on

the twelfth day of the bright half of Bhadrapada)
in honour of Indra, the ruler of gods. (61)

erase Saar lees ere |
Wea: परिवेषीव भास्कर:॥६२॥

With his curled tail and white teeth, the
highly intelligent Hanuman, an offspring of
the wind-god, shone brightly as the sun
encircled by a misty halo. (62)

स्फिग्देशेनातिताम्रेण रराज स महाकपि:।
Tet दारितेनेव गिरिर्मैरिकधातुना॥६३॥

With his deep-red rump, that mighty
Hanuman looked splendid like a mountain
with a large deposit of red chalk rent asunder.

(63)
तस्य वानरसिंहस्य प्लवमानस्य सागरम्।
कक्षान्तरगतो वायुर्जीमूत st गर्जति॥६४॥

The wind passing through the arm-pits

of that leonine Hanuman, bounding over the
sea, thundered like a cloud. (64)

खे यथा निपतत्युल्का उत्तरान्ताद् विनि:सृता।
दृश्यते सानुबन्धा च तथा स कपिकुञ्जर:।॥ ६५॥

That elephant among the monkeys was
seen darting much in the same way as a
meteor risen from the upper part of the
northern quarter shoots alongwith its tail-like
extremity. (65)
