888

hasten to me, O Laksmana, even though |
am wailing for her. These herds of deer with
tearful eyes inform me, as it were, of my
queen having actually been devoured by
ogres, O Laksmana! (Addressing Sita, he
continued :) Ah my worthy queen, where
have you gone? Ah, pious lady with excellent
complexion ! (7—9)
हा सकामाद्य कैकेयी देवि sa भविष्यति।
सीतया सह निर्यातो विना सीतामुपागत:॥१०॥
wma नाम प्रवेक्ष्यामि शून्यमन्त:पुरं मम।
निर्वीर्य इति creat ut निर्दयश्चेति वक्ष्यति॥ ११॥
“Alas, my queen, Kaikeyi will have her
desire fulfilled this day. Come away from
Ayodhya with Sita and returned to Ayodhya
without Sita, how, | wonder, shall | be able
to enter my gynaeceum, which will be desolate
now? People will brand me as powerless
and merciless. (10-11)
कातरत्वं प्रकाशं fe सीतापनयनेन मे।
निव्रत्तवनवासश्च जनकं मिथिलाधिपम्॥१२॥
कुशलं परिपृच्छन्तं कथं शक्ष्ये निरीक्षितुम्।
विदेहराजो नूनं at gear विरहितं तया॥१३॥
सुताविनाशसंतप्तो मोहस्य वशमेष्यति।
अथवा न गमिष्यामि पुरीं भरतपालिताम्॥ १४॥
“My cowardice too will be manifest
through the abduction of Sita. Again, how,
when my exile is over, shall | stare Janaka,
the suzerain lord of Mithila, in the face as he
lovingly inquires about my welfare? Agonized
by the death of his daughter, on seeing me
bereft of her, the ruler of the Videha kingdom
will surely fall a prey to infatuation. “Or | shall
never return to the city of Ayodhya, being
ruled over by Bharata. (12—14)

स्वर्गोऽपि fe तया हीन: शून्य एव मतो मम।
तन्मामुत्सृज्य fe वने गच्छायोध्यापुरीं शुभाम्॥ १५॥

“Devoid of her heaven too is deemed by

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

me as desolate without doubt. Therefore,
leaving me in the forest itself, O Laksmana !
return alone to the lovely city of Ayodhya.(15)
न ae तां fon at जीवेयं fe कथंचन।
गाढमाश्लिष्य भरतो वाच्यो मद्वचनात् त्वया Ul VE Il
“| for my part may not actually survive
without the said Sita in any case. Closely
embracing Bharata, he should be spoken to
by you in my name as follows : (16)

अनुज्ञातोऽसि रामेण पालयेति वसुंधराम्।
अम्बा च मम कैकेयी सुमित्रा च त्वया विभो।। १७॥
कौसल्या च यथान्यायमभिवाद्या ममाज्ञया।

रक्षणीया प्रयत्नेन भवता सूक्तचारिणा॥१८॥

“‘Rule over the earth. You have been
permitted by Sri Rama to do so.’ Again, my
brother, Kaikeyi, as well as Sumitra as also
Kausalya should be properly greeted by you
in obedience to my command, O powerful
brother, and should be protected by you with
diligence, following good counsel. (17-18)

सीतायाश्च विनाशोऽयं मम चामित्रसूदन।
विस्तरेण जनन्या मे विनिवेद्यस्त्वया भवेत्॥१९॥

“The death of Sita, which has already
taken place, as also mine, which is going to
happen very soon, should be reported in
extenso to my mother, Kausalya, by you O
destroyer of foes !” (19)

भयविकलमुखस्तु लक्ष्मणोऽपि
व्यथितमना भृशमातुरो बभूव॥ २०॥

While, having entered the forest, Sri
Rama (a scion of Raghu) was wailing as
aforesaid, feeling miserable in the absence
of that lady of lovely locks, Laksmana too
for his part, whose countenance looked
withered through fear, afflicted as he was in
mind, grew extremely sick at heart. (20)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्येऽरण्यकाण्डे द्विषष्टितम: सर्ग: ॥ ६२ I

Thus ends Canto Sixty-two in the Aranyakanda of the glorious Ramayana of Valmiki,
the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

