* ARANYAKANDA «

तांस्तु निर्धावतो gear राक्षसान् भीमदर्शनान्।
arene ta: किंचिज्जगाम तदनन्तरम्॥ २१॥
Seeing those ogres of terrible aspect
issuing forth, the chariot of Khara too
followed closely after them. (21)

ततस्ताञ्छ्बलानश्वांस्तप्तकाञ्चनभूषितान् ।
Gea मतमाज्ञाय सारथि: पर्यचोदयत्॥ २२॥

Reading the mind of Khara, the
charioteer forthwith spurred on those spotted
horses decorated with refined gold. (22)

संचोदितो wa: vitt खरस्य रिपुघातिन:।
शब्देनापूरयामास दिश: सप्रदिशस्तथा॥ २३॥

Urged on with speed, the chariot of

771

Khara, the slayer of his foes, quickly filled
with its sound the four quarters as well as
the intermediate points of the compass.

(23)

र्महाबलो AT इवाश्मवर्षवान्॥ २४॥

With his indignation risen high and
thundering like a cloud raining hail-stones,
the very mighty Khara, who was seized
with a flurry to kill the enemy and looked
like Death, urged on his charioteer once
more in a sharp tone. (24)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्येऽरण्यकाण्डे द्वाविंश: सर्ग: ॥ २२ ॥

Thus ends Canto Twenty-two in the Aranyakanda of the glorious Ramayana of
Valmiki, the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

Canto XXIII
Evil omens to Khara. The army approaches Rama’s hermitage

अभ्यवर्षन्महाघोरस्तुमुलो गर्दभारुण: ॥ १॥

As the aforesaid dreadful army marched
on, an exceptionally terrible cloud greyish in
colour like a donkey showered inauspicious
blood-red water. (1)

निपेतुस्तुरगास्तस्य रथयुक्का महाजवा:।
wt पुष्पचिते देशे राजमार्गे aT २॥
The horses possessed of great speed
yoked to his chariot fell down by accident
on the highway on the level ground strewn
with flowers. (2)

vad रुधिरपर्यन्तं बभूव परिवेषणम्।
अलातचक्रप्रतिमं प्रतिगृह्य दिवाकरम्॥३॥

Round the sun there appeared a
darkish red-edged halo looking like a

revolving firebrand.

ततो ध्वजमुपागम्य हेमदण्डं समुच्छितम्।
समाक्रम्य महाक।यस्तस्धौ Ta: सुदारुण:॥ ४॥
Approaching the standard raised high
on a golden pole, a gigantic and most frightful
vulture settled on it. (4)

जनस्थानसमीपे च समाक्रम्य खरस्वना:।
विस्वरान् विविधान् नादान् मांसादा मृगपक्षिण: ।। ५ ।।
व्याजह्रुरभिदीप्तायां दिशि a भैरवस्वनम्।
अशिवं यातुधानानां शिवा घोरा महास्वना:॥६॥
Reaching the precincts of Janasthana,
carnivorous beasts and birds uttering shrill
cries raised various discordant notes and in
the sun-lit quarter terrible jackals making a

great noise uttered a frightful yell foreboding
ill luck to the ogres. (5-6)

(3)
