* SUNDARAKANDA +

ततस्तस्मिन् महाबाहु: कोपसंवर्तितेक्षण:।
वायसे कृतवान् क्रूरां मतिं मतिमतां वर:॥ २८॥
“‘His eyes rolling through fury, the
mighty-armed prince, the foremost of the
wise, made a severe resolve with regard to
that crow. (28)

स दर्भसंस्तराद गृह्य ब्रह्मणोऽस्त्रेण योजयत्।
स दीप्त इव कालाग्निर्जज्वालाभिमुखो द्विजम्॥ २९॥

“Taking a blade of the sacred Kusa
grass from his mat, he charged it with the
potency of the mystic missile presided over
by Brahma (the creator). It burst into flames
like the blazing fire of universal destruction
before the bird. (29)
स तं प्रदीप्तं चिक्षेप of तं वायसं ofa
ततस्तु वायसं दर्भ: सोऽम्बरेऽनुजगाम ह॥ ३०॥

“‘He hurled that fiery blade of the sacred
KuSa grass at the aforesaid crow. Presently
that blade of the sacred KuSa grass for its
part actually followed the crow through the
air. (30)

अनुसृष्टस्तदा काको जगाम विविधां गतिम्।
त्राणकाम इमं लोकं wd a विचचार ह॥ ३१॥

“Seeking protection when given chase
to by the missile, the crow then sought
various asylums and thus actually ranged
this whole universe: so it is said. (31)

a पित्रा च परित्यक्त: ade परमर्षिभि:।
त्रींल्लोकान् सम्परिक्रम्य तमेव शरणं गत:॥ ३२॥

“‘Having duly traversed through all the
three worlds (the earth, heaven and the region
lying between them), nay, deserted by his
father Indra and all the greatest Rsis, he
sought Sri Rama alone as his refuge. (32)
स तं निपतितं भूमौ शरण्य: शरणागतम्।
वधार्हमपि काकुत्स्थ: कृपया पर्यपालयत्॥ ३३॥

“Out of compassion the celebrated Sri
Rama (a scion of Kakutstha), spared the
crow, who had sought pardon from him and
fallen on the ground, though deserving of
death. (33)

179

uke विवर्णं च पतमानं तमब्रवीत्।
मोघमस्त्रं न शक्यं तु ae Hd तदुच्यताम्॥ ३४॥
“‘Even as he was falling, Sri Rama
said to the crow, whose energy had
exhausted and who had grown pale through
fear : ‘The missile presided over by Brahma
cannot in any case be rendered ineffectual :
it may, therefore, be pointed out how to
make it effectual.’ (34)

ततस्तस्याक्षि काकस्य हिनस्ति स्म स दक्षिणम्।
दत्त्वा तु दक्षिणं नेत्रं प्राणेभ्य: परिरक्षित: 1 ३५॥

“‘Then Sri Rama destroyed the right eye
of the crow. Since he had actually sacrificed
his right eye, he was spared his life. (35)

स रामाय नमस्कृत्वा Ua दशरथाय a
विसृष्टस्तेन वीरेण प्रतिपेदे स्वमालयम्॥ ३६॥

“Having made obeisance to Sri Rama
and mentally to his father, King DasSaratha,
when dismissed by that hero, he returned to
his abode. (36)

मत्कृते काकमात्रेऽपि ब्रह्मास्त्रं समुदीरितम्।
कस्माद् यो माहरत् त्वत्त: क्षमसे तं महीपते॥ ३७॥
“ ‘Addressing Sri Rama again, as though
present before her, ‘a missile presided over
by Brahma was discharged by you at a
mere crow for my sake. How then, O ruler
of the earth, do you bear with him who
wrested me from you? (37)

स Hee महोत्साहां Hut मयि नरर्षभ।
त्वया नाथवती नाथ ह्यनाथा इव दूश्यते॥ ३८॥

“‘Such that you are, pray show
compassion to me with great vigour, O
jewel among men! She, who has her lord in
you, O lord, actually looks like one without
any protector. (38)

जानामि cat महावीर्यं महोत्साहं महाबलम्॥ ३९॥
अपारवारमक्षोभ्यं गाम्भीर्यात् सागरोपमम्।
भर्तारं ससमुद्राया धरण्या वासवोपमम्॥४०॥

“‘From you alone have | heard that
