530

कुम्भकर्णस्तु दुर्धर्षो भ्रातुराज्ञाय शासनम्।
Aaa महावीर्य: शयनादुत्पपात ह॥९०॥

Coming to know the behest of his elder
brother, and saying “Be it so,” Kumbhakarna
for his part, who was difficult to overcome
and was endowed with extraordinary
prowess, leapt up from his bed: so the
tradition goes. (90)
प्रक्षाल्य वदनं ge: स्नात: परमहर्षित:।
पिपासुस्त्वरयामास पानं बलसमीरणम्॥९१॥

Joyfully washing his face, and feeling
extremely delighted on having bathed, he
ordered some drink, which was calculated
to enhance his strength, to be speedily
brought to him from the palace of Ravana
as he was feeling thirsty. (91)

ततस्ते त्वरितास्तत्र राक्षसा रावणाज्ञया।
मद्यं भक्ष्यांश्च विविधान् क्षिप्रमेवोपहारयन्॥ ९२॥

Thereupon those ogres, who had gone
to summon him, hurriedly brought thither
under orders of Ravana wine and dishes of
various kinds in no time. (92)

Having quaffed two thousand pails of
wine, Kumbhakarna, who felt a bit excited
and inebriated and was replenished with
energy and strength—prepared to depart.

(93)
कुम्भकर्णो बभौ रुष्ट: कालान्तकयमोपम:।
Ud: स भवनं Wes रक्षोबलसमन्वित:।
कुम्भकर्ण: पदन्यासैरकम्पयत मेदिनीम्॥९४॥

Filled with rage, Kumbhakarna looked
like Yama (the god of retribution) bent on
destroying the creation at the time of
universal dissolution. Marching to the palace
of his elder brother, surrounded by an army
of ogres, the said Kumbhakarna shook
the earth with his strides. (94)

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA +

a राजमार्गं वपुषा प्रकाशयन्
सहस्ररश्मिर्धरणीमिवांशुभि: ।
जगाम तत्राञ्जलिमालया Ss a:
शतक्रतुर्गेहमिव स्वयंभुव: ।। ९५ UI
Illuminating the king’s highway with
the splendour of his body even as
the sun, the thousand-rayed luminary,
illumines the earth with its rays, Kumbhakarna
proceeded to the royal palace surrounded
by a circle of joined palms of the ogres
accompanying him even as Indra (who
is presupposed to have performed a hundred
horse-sacrifices in his previous life or
lives as a condition precedent to his attaining
the position of Indra) would to the abode

of Brahma (the self-born creator). (95)
तं राजमार्गस्थममित्रघातिनं
वनौकसस्ते सहसा बहि:स्थिता:।

२ मेयं गिरिश्रङ्कल्पं
वितत्रसुस्ते सह यूथपालै:॥९६॥
Beholding all of a sudden Kumbhakarna,
the destroyer of his enemies, who was
immeasurably tall and looked like the peak
of a mountain, marching along the main
road, those well-known monkeys (lit., dwellers
in the woods), standing outside the city, got
alarmed together with their troop-
commanders. (96)
व्रजन्ति केचिद् व्यथिता: पतन्ति।
केचिद् दशश्च व्यथिता: पतन्ति
केचिद् भयार्ता भुवि wed स्म॥९७॥

Some sought Sri Rama, who was
capable of affording shelter to them, as
their asylum; while others fell down, filled
with agony. Nay, still others, seized with
panic, fled in all directions; while yet others,
stricken with fear, lay down on_ the
earth. (97)
