* AYODHYAKANDA +

भूतोपहतचित्तेव मम चित्तप्रमाथिनि।
सन्ति मे कुशला वैद्यास्त्वभितुष्टाश्च AAT: il ३०॥
सुखितां त्वां करिष्यन्ति व्याधिमाचक्ष्व भामिनि ।
कस्य वापि प्रियं कार्यं केन वा विप्रियं PATI ३१॥

“| do not suspect that your anger is
directed towards me. By whom have you
been rebuked or by whom have you been
treated with disrespect, O glorious lady,
that to my great agony you are rolling in
this way in dust? Notwithstanding myself,
whose mind is ever intent on your welfare,
what for are you lying on the floor like one
whose mind is possessed by an evil spirit,
O blessed lady who are violently stirring my
mind? There are skilled physicians who are
in every way pleased with me (being gratified
by me with presents and other favours) and
will bring you relief. Only describe your
ailment, O proud lady, so that it may be
effectively tackled! Whom do you seek to
oblige or by whom have you been offended?

(28-31)

क: fot लभतामद्य को वा सुमहदप्रियम्।
मा रौत्सीर्मा च कार्षीस्त्वं देवि सम्परिशोषणम्॥ ३२॥

“Who should be rewarded today, or
who should be awarded the severest
punishment? Pray, don’t conceal what is
there in your mind nor should you torment
your body by suppressing your feelings,
O glorious lady ! (32)
अवध्यो वध्यतां को वा वध्य: को वा विमुच्यताम्।
aha: को भवेदाढ्यो द्रव्यवान् वाप्यकिंचन: ॥ ३३॥

“What man who does not deserve to
be killed may be killed or what man who
deserves to be killed may be set at full
liberty? What pauper may be made wealthy
or what wealthy man may be reduced to
penury? (33)
ae च fe मदीयाश्च ad तव वशानुगा:।

न od कंचिदभिप्रायं व्याहन्तुमहमुत्सहे॥ ३४॥
आत्मनो जीवितेनापि ब्रूहि यन्मनसि स्थितम्।
बलमात्मनि जानन्ती न मां शाङ्कितुमर्हसि॥ ३५॥

325

“Myself as well as those who are mine
are indeed subject to your control. As for
myself, | dare not thwart any purpose
whatever of yours and must achieve it even
at the cost of my life. Therefore, speak out
what exists in your mind. Knowing as you do
the strength in the form of my love that inheres
in you, you ought not to entertain any misgiving
concerning me. (34-35)

करिष्यामि dat wit सुकृतेनापि ते शपे।
यावदावर्तते चक्रं तावती A वसुंधरा॥३६॥
“| swear by the very merit earned by
me through my virtuous deeds that | shall
do what pleases you. The earth is mine
as far as the orb of the sun shines on it.(36)

द्राविडा: सिन्धुसौवीरा: सौराष्ट्रा दक्षिणापथा: |
वङ्नाङ्ममगधा AKAM: समृद्धा: काशिकोसला: Ut ३७॥
wa Wd ag Real धनधान्यमजाविकम्।
ततो वृणीष्व कैकेयि Ae यत् त्वं मनसेच्छसि॥ Be I
“The prosperous lands of Dravida
(now known by the name of Tamilnadu),
Sindhusauvira, Saurastra, Daksinapatha (the
Deccan), Vanga (Bengal), Anga (the modern
Bhagalpur), Magadha (South Bihar), Matsya
(the modern Jaipur Division in Rajasthan),
Kasi (the modern Varanasi) and Kosala
(Oudh) and the abundant wealth produced
there in the shape of riches, foodgrains,
goats and sheep etc., are all mine. Ask of
me, O Kaikeyi, whatever you seek out of it
with your mind. (37-38)
किमायासेन ते ute उत्तिष्ठोत्तिष्ठं शोभने।
ard मे ब्रूहि कैकेयि यतस्ते भयमागतम्।
ad ते व्यपनयिष्यामि नीहारमिव रश्मिवान्॥ ३९॥
“What will be gained by you through
self-torture, O timid lady? Get up, arise, O
fair one ! Tell me, O Kaikeyi, wherefrom has
fear appeared in you. | shall drive it away
even as the sun disperses mist.” (39)

तथोक्ता सा समाश्वस्ता वक्तुकामा तदप्रियम्।
परिपीडयितुं भूयो भर्तारमुपचक्रमे॥४०॥

Feeling comforted when spoken to as
