# YUDDHAKANDA #

कैकेय्या यानि चोक्तानि वाक्यानि वदतां ax
तव प्रव्राजनार्थानि स्थितानि za मम॥ १५॥

“Nay, the words which were uttered by
Kaikeyi with the motive of sending you into
exile are still imprinted on my heart, O jewel
among the eloquent ! (15)

त्वां तु दृष्टवा कुशलिनं परिष्वज्य सलक्ष्मणम्।

अद्य दु:खाद् विमुक्तोऽस्मि नीहारादिव भास्कर: ॥ १६ ॥
“I, however stand completely rid of

sorrow—even as the sun is freed from

mist—on seeing you whole with Laksmana

and hugging you today. (16)

तारितोऽहं त्वया UT सुपुत्रेण महात्मना।
अष्टावक्रेण धर्मात्मा कहोलो ब्राह्मणो यथा॥ १७॥

“| have been redeemed by you, my
worthy and high-souled son, even as the
Brahmana, Kahola, whose mind was set on
virtue, was by his son, Astavakra, O my
child! (17)
इदानीं च विजानामि यथा सौम्य सुरेश्वरै:।
वधार्थं रावणस्येह fated पुरुषोत्तमम्॥१८॥

“Il now recognize you to be the Supreme
Person, duly dispatched here in disguise by

the rulers of gods for the destruction of
Ravana, O gentle one! (18)
सिद्धार्था खलु कौसल्या या त्वां राम गृहं गतम्।
वनान्निव्रत्तं eet द्रक्ष्यते शत्रुसूदनम्॥ १९॥
“Accomplished of purpose indeed is
Kausalya, who will see you, the destroyer of

your enemies, returned home from the forest,
O Rama, and feel highly delighted. (19)

सिद्धार्था: खलु ते राम नरा ये cat पुरीं गतम्।
राज्ये चैवाभिषिक्तं च द्रक्ष्यन्ते वसुधाधिपम्॥ २०॥
“Accomplished of purpose indeed are
those men who will see you returned to the
city of Ayodhya and consecrated on the
throne as the suzerain lord of the entire
globe. (20)

अनुरक्तेन बलिना शुचिना धर्मचारिणा।
इच्छेयं त्वामहं SS भरतेन समागतम्॥ RZ Il

801

“| desire to see you reunited with the
mighty and pious Bharata, who is devoted
to you and has all along been practising
virtue. (21)

चतुर्दश समा: सौम्य at निर्यातितास्त्वया।
aaa सीतया सार्धं मत्प्रीत्या लक्ष्मणेन च॥ २२॥

“Full fourteen years have been spent
by you, O gentle one, while living in the
forest with Sita and Laksmana for my
pleasure. (22)

निव्रत्तवनवासोऽसि प्रतिज्ञा पूरिता त्वया।
रावणं च रणे हत्वा देवता: परितोषिता:॥ २३॥

“The term of your exile has now expired;
my pledge given to Kaikeyi has also been
implemented by you and the gods too have
been fully gratified by making short work of
Ravana on the field of battle. (23)
कृतं कर्म यश: श्लाघ्यं प्राप्तं ते शत्रुसूदन।
भ्रातृभि: सह राज्यस्थो दीर्घमायुरवाप्नुहि॥ २४॥

“A laudable feat has thus been
accomplished and covetable fame won by
you, O exterminator of your enemies! Getting
installed on the throne of Ayodhya, may you
attain a long life with your younger brothers.”

(24)
इति Gant राजानं wa: प्राञ्जलिरब्रवीत्।
कुरु प्रसादं wet कैकेय्या भरतस्य च॥ २५॥

To the king, who was speaking in this
strain, Sri Rama with joined palms submitted
as follows: “Be gracious to Kaikeyi and
Bharata, O knower of what is right! (25)
सपुत्रां त्वां त्यजामीति यदुक्ता कैकयी त्वया।

स शाप: कैकयीं घोर: AGA न स्पृशेत् WAT Il २६॥

“You will remember that Kaikeyi was
twitted by you in the words: | disown you
with your son (Bharata).’ May that terrible
curse not fall on mother Kaikeyi and her
son, my lord!” (26)

तथेति स महाराजो राममुक्त्वा कृताञ्जलिम्।
लक्ष्मणं च परिष्वज्य पुनर्वाक्यमुवाच ह॥ २७॥
