* ARANYAKANDA «

823

Canto XLII

Assuming the form of a golden deer, Marica reaches the hermitage
of Rama and is caught sight of by Sita

एवमुक्त्वा तु परुषं मारीचो रावणं तत:।
गच्छावेत्यब्रवीद् दीनो ware रात्रिंचरप्रभो:॥ १॥

Having spoken such harsh words to
Ravana, Marica, for his part, who felt afflicted
through fear of the king of ogres, said, “Let
us both depart. (1)

geste पुनस्तेन शरचापासिधारिणा।
मद्दधोद्यतशस्त्रेण «Fed जीवितं च मे॥२॥

“Nay, if | am seen again by Rama, the
wielder of arrows, a bow and a sword, with
his weapon raised to make short work of
me, my life is doomed. (2)

ae wi पराक्रम्य जीवन् प्रतिनिवर्तते।
वर्तते प्रतिरूपोऽसौ यमदण्डहतस्य ते॥३॥

“Showing valour against Rama nobody
can return alive. He is quite a match for
you, who stand already killed by the rod of
Death. (3)
fe aad मया शक्यमेवं त्वयि दुरात्मनि।
एष गच्छाम्यहं तात स्वस्ति तेऽस्तु निशाचर॥४॥

“When you are so evil-minded, what
on earth can be done by me to check you?
Here do | go, my dear Ravana ! May all be
well with you, O prowler of the night!” (4)

प्रहष्टस्त्वभवत् तेन वचनेन स राक्षस:।
परिष्वज्य सुसंश्लिष्टमिदं वचनमब्रवीत्॥५॥
The ogre Ravana felt highly rejoiced at

these words. Closely embracing Marica, he
spoke to him as follows : (5)

एतच्छौटीर्ययुक्तं ते मच्छन्दवशवर्तिन:।
इदानीमसि मारीच: पूर्वमन्यो हि राक्षस:॥६॥
“This utterance of yours is full of valour,

since you now follow my mind. You are now
the same Marica as you were before.

Heretofore some other
possessed you.

आरुह्यतामयं शीघ्रं खगो रत्नविभूषित:।
Ta सह रथो युक्त: पिशाचवदनै: खरै:॥७॥
“Let this aerial car tastefully decorated
with jewels and drawn by donkeys with the
head of a goblin be mounted quickly by you
with me. (7)
प्रलोभयित्वा वैदेहीं यथेष्टं गन्तुमर्हसि।
at शून्ये प्रसभं सीतामानयिष्यामि मैथिलीम्॥ ८॥
“Having fascinated Sita (the princess
of the Videha territory), you may go wherever
you please. At a time when there is none
beside her, | shall forcibly fetch Sita, the
aforesaid princess of Mithila.” (8)
ततस्तथेत्युवाचैनॆ रावणं ताटकासुत:।
ततो रावणमारीचौ विमानमिव तं रथम्॥९॥
आरुह्याययतु: शीघ्रं तस्मादाश्रममण्डलात्।
aa dt पश्यन्तौ पत्तनानि वनानि च॥१०॥
गिरींश्च सरित: सर्वा राष्ट्धाणि नगराणि च।
समेत्य दण्डकारण्यं राघवस्याश्रमं तत:॥११॥
ददर्शं सहमारीचो रावणो राक्षसाधिप:।
MAAS रथात् तस्मात् तत: काञ्चनभूषणात्॥ १२॥
Bet गृहीत्वा मारीचं रावणो वाक्यमब्रवीत्।
एतद् रामाश्रमपदं दृश्यते कदलीव्रतम्॥१३॥

Thereupon Marica (son of the ogress
Tataka) answered him saying, “Be it so !”
Mounting the aforesaid chariot looking like
an aerial car, Ravana and Marica then
departed from the circumference of that
hermitage. Beholding as before on the way
towns and forests, mountains and all the
rivers falling on the way, states and cities,
both reached the Dandaka forest together.
Accompanied by Marica, Ravana, the

unknown ogre

(6)
