1104

od fe प्रियमस्माकं राघवेण महात्मना।
wa चेत्प्रतिकारोऽस्ति सफलं जीवितं भवेत्॥ ६॥
“Indeed a kindly act was done to us by
the high-souled Sri Rama. Our life will have
borne fruit if that service is requited by us.
(6)

afm: कार्यनिर्वृत्तिमकर्तुरपि यश्चरेत्।
तस्य स्यात् सफलं जन्म किं पुन: पूर्वकारिण: ॥ ७॥
“The birth of that individual is fruitful,
who accomplishes the work of a suppliant
even though the latter has done nothing for
that individual before; how much more fruitful
is the birth of the individual who accomplishes
the work of one who has rendered good
offices to him in the past? (7)

Udi बुद्धिं समास्थाय दृश्यते जानकी यथा।
qm wate: कर्तव्यमस्मत्प्रियहितैषिभि:।॥ ८ i

“Arriving at this conclusion, an
endeavour should be made by you, who
seek to do a kindly act to us and wish well
of us, so as to ensure that Sita (daughter of
King Janaka) is found out. (8)
aa fe सर्वभूतानां मान्यस्तु नरसत्तम:।
अस्मासु च गत: प्रीतिं wa: परपुरंजय:॥९॥

“Indeed Sri Rama standing before you,
the conqueror of enemies’ cities, is worthy
of respect to all created beings, is the

foremost of men and has cultivated friendship
with us. (9)
इमानि agenifir wea: शैलान्तराणि च।
wed: परिमार्गन्तुं बुद्धिविक्रमसम्पदा॥ fo Il
“With the wealth of your acumen and
prowess explore you the following many
places difficult of access, streams and
defiles. (10)
तत्र म्लेच्छान् पुलिन्दांश्च शूरसेनांस्तथैव च।
प्रस्थलान् भरतांश्चैव कुरूंश्च सह ARH: ULI
काम्बोजयवनांश्चैव शकानां पत्तनानि च।
अन्वीक्ष्य दरदांश्चैव हिमवन्तं विचिन्वथ॥ १२॥
“Scouring the lands of the Mlecchas
(beef-eaters) and Pulindas and, even so,

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

that of the Sdrasenas (the area round about
Mathura), nay, those of the Prasthalas and
Bharatas, as also the lands of the Kurus
(about the site of the modern Delhi) and the
Madra, the Kambojas and Yavanas, also
the towns of Sakas and the lands of the
Daradas (living beyond Peshawar) there,
explore the Himalayan range. (11-12)

लोध्रपद्मकषण्डेषु देवदारुवनेषु च।
रावण: सह वैदेह्या मार्गितव्यस्ततस्तत:॥ १३॥

“Ravana alongwith Sita (a princess of
the Videha territory) should be sought for
everywhere in the thickets of Lodhra and
Padmaka trees (a species of sandalwood)
as well as in the groves of deodar in the
Himalayan region. (13)

ad: सोमाश्रमं गत्वा देवगन्धर्वसेवितम्।
कालं AA महासानुं पर्वतं तं गमिष्यथ॥ evil
‘Visiting the hermitage of the sage
Soma, which is inhabited by gods and the
Gandharvas (celestial musicians), you will
then reach the celebrated Kala mountain,
which is crowned with a high peak. (14)

महत्सु तस्य शैलेषु पर्वतेषु गुहासु च।
विचिन्वत महाभागां रामपत्नीमनिन्दिताम्॥ १५ ॥
“Search for the highly blessed Sita (the
spouse of Sri Rama), who is beyond
reproach, on the extensive offshoots, both
small and big, as well as in the caves of the
aforesaid mountain. (15)
तमतिक्रम्य शैलेन्द्रं हेमगर्भं महागिरिम्।
wa: Gast नाम पर्वतं गन्तुमर्हथ॥ १६॥
“Passing beyond the huge Kala
mountain (a ruler of mountains), containing
gold mines, you should then seek the
mountain named SudarSana. (16)

ततो देवसखो AM Uda: पतगालय:।
नानापक्षिसमाकीर्णो विविधद्रुमभूषित:॥ १७॥
“Beyond that rises च mountain,

Devasakha by name, the refuge of birds,
which is thickly crowded with every variety
