* BALAKANDA +

209

पञ्चाश: सर्ग:
Canto L

Sri Rama and others reach Mithila and are received in advance by
King Janaka, headed by his family priest, Satananda; Viswamitra
satisfies their curiosity about the two princes of Ayodhya

तत: प्रागुत्तरां गत्वा wa: सौमित्रिणा सह।
विश्चामित्रॆ पुरस्कृत्य यज्ञवाटमुपागमत्॥१॥
Proceeding in a north-easterly direction
from the said hermitage, and placing
Vigswamitra at the head of the party, Sri
Rama, accompanied by Laksmana (son of
Sumitra), reached the sacrificial enclosure
of Janaka, the king of Mithila. (1)

रामस्तु मुनिशार्दूलमुवाच सहलक्ष्मण:।
साध्वी यज्ञसमृद्धिर्हि जनकस्य महात्मन:॥ २॥

Sri Rama for his part alongwith
Laksmana remarked to ViSwamitra (a tiger
among hermits), “Excellent indeed is the
preparation made for the sacrifice undertaken
by the high-souled Janaka. (2)

aete सहस्राणि नानादेशनिवासिनाम्।
ब्राह्मणानां महाभाग वेदाध्ययनशालिनाम्॥ ३॥
ऋषिवाटाश्च दृश्यन्ते शकटीशतसंकुला:।
देशो विधीयतां ब्रह्मन् यत्र वत्स्यामहे वयम्॥४॥
“Many thousands of Brahmanas
enriched with a study of the Vedas and
living in different parts of the country can be
seen here, as well as small enclosures set
apart for Rsis and full of hundreds of carts,
carrying the requisites for their Agnihotra or
daily oblations to the sacred fire, O highly
blessed sage! Let a suitable site be
selected, where we should halt, O holy
one |” (3-4)
रामस्य वचनं श्रुत्वा विश्चामित्रो महामुनि:।
निवासमकरोद् ost विविक्ते सलिलान्विते॥ ५॥

Hearing the submission of Sri Rama,
the great sage ViSwamitra halted at a

secluded and clean spot supplied with water.
(5)
विश्चामित्रमनुप्राप्त श्रुत्वा नॄपवरस्तदा।
ware पुरस्कृत्य पुरोहितमनिन्दित:॥६॥
ऋत्विजोऽपि महात्मानस्त्वर्घ्यमादाय सत्वरम्।
Terma सहसा विनयेन समन्वित:॥७॥
विश्वामित्राय धर्मेण ददौ धर्मपुरस्कृतम्।
प्रतिगृह्य तु तां पूजां जनकस्य महात्मन:॥८॥
पप्रच्छ कुशलं राज्ञो यज्ञस्य च निरामयम्।
स तांश्चाथ मुनीन् पृष्टा सोपाध्यायपुरोधस:॥९॥
यथार्हमृषिभि: aa: समागच्छत् प्रहृष्टवत्।
अथ राजा मुनिश्रेष्ठं कृताञ्जलिरभाषत॥ १०॥

Hearing of ViSwamitra having arrived
(with his party) on that occasion, the
irreproachable Janaka, the foremost of kings,
full of humility, went forth all at once in a
hurry to meet him, placing at the head his
family priest, Satananda (son of Gautama)
and other high-souled priests officiating at
his sacrifice, and taking water to wash the
hands of the distinguished guests, and
offered it to Viswamitra alongwith other items
of hospitality such as Madhuparka* in
accordance with the scriptural ordinance.
Accepting the aforesaid hospitality of the
high-souled Janaka, ViSwamitra for his part
inquired after the welfare of Janaka as well
as about the unhampered progress of his
sacrificial performance. Inquiring after the
welfare of those hermits too that had
accompanied the king as well as that of the
priests officiating at the sacrifice and
Satananda, the family priest, he next
embraced all the Rsis in order of seniority

* A refreshing drink consisting of curds, ghee (clarified butter), water, honey and sugar-candy :
8 8 8

`दधि सपिर्जलं क्षौद्रं सिता चैतैश्च पञ्चभि:। प्रोच्यते मधुपर्क: “““““

१
”””” Ul
