1038

Kumbhinasi, the daughter of Visvavasu, was
born from Anala. (16)

तस्या: Yat महावीर्यो लवणो ATT दारुण:।
बाल्यात्प्रभृति दुष्टात्मा पापान्येव समाचरत्॥ १७॥

‘Her son, the powerful and cruel one,
Lavana by name, was wicked since childhood
and performed only evil deeds. (17)

तं पुत्रं दुर्विनीतं तु दृष्टवा क्रोधसमन्वित:।

मधु: स शोकमापेदे न at किंचिदब्रवीत्॥ १८ i
‘Seeing this son so wicked, Madhu

was enraged and grieved, but did not say to

him anything. (18)

स विहाय sa लोकं प्रविष्टो वरुणालयम्।

yet Fava लवणे at तस्मै न्यवेदयत्॥१९॥
‘He entered the ocean, leaving this world,

handing over the trident to Lavana and
conveying him the power of the boon. (19)

स प्रभावेण शूलस्य दौरात्म्येनात्मनस्तथा।
संतापयति लोकांस्त्रीन् विशेषेण च तापसान्॥ २०॥
“He (Lavana) by the power of the trident
and with his wickedness, caused much
trouble to the three worlds, especially the
ascetics. (20)
Vara लवण: Bot Wa तथाविधम्।
श्रुत्वा प्रमाणं काकुत्स्थ त्वं हि A: परमा गति: 1 २१॥

« VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

‘So mighty is Lavana and such is the
trident. O scion of Kakutstha. Now you
have heard; so it is up to you to do what is
necessary, you are our ultimate resort. (21)

aaa: पार्थिवा राम serdcefefr: पुरा।
अभयं याचिता वीर त्रातारं न च विद्महे॥ २२॥
‘Formerly many kings, O powerful one,
were approached for protection by the Rsis
frightened, but we did not find any protector.
(22)

a ad रावणं seat ad सबलवाहनम्।

त्रातारं fase तात art भुवि नराधिपम्।
ad परित्रातुमिच्छामो लवणाद् भयपीडितान्॥ २३॥

‘So now, having heard of Ravana killed
alongwith his army, O dear one, we do not
consider any other king on this earth as
protector, and thus we desire protection for
those who are persecuted by Lavana. (23)

sta wa निवेदितं तु a
भयजं कारणमुत्थितं च adi
ee तं काममहीनविक्रम॥ wi
‘Thus, we have conveyed to you, O
Rama of unfailing power, that fear and cause

of that fear. We know, you can ward off
that; do something.’ (24)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये SRPMS एकषष्टितम: AW: ॥ ६१ ॥

Thus ends Canto Sixty-one in the Uttarakanda of the glorious Ramayana of Valmiki,
the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

Canto LXII

Rama enquires of the sages regarding Lavana’s way of living and dispatches
Satrughna with a view to kill Lavana

तथोक्ते तानृषीन् Wa: प्रत्युवाच कृताञ्जलि:।

does he (Lavana) take as his food, of what

When the Rsis had thus spoken to Him, | W4t@t Ae: Areal ऋॠषय: wd एव ते।

Sri Rama with folded hands replied: ‘What

निवेदयामासुर्लवणो वव्रृधे यथा॥ २॥
