796

संहृत्य वा पुनर्लोकान् विक्रमेण महायशा:।

Wh: श्रेष्ठ: स पुरुष: BS पुनरपि प्रजा:॥ २६॥
“Or, again, dissolving the worlds by

dint of his prowess, that highly illustrious

and foremost man is capable of evolving

the creation anew. (26)

नहि wat दशग्रीव शक्यो जेतुं रणे त्वया।
रक्षसां aft लोकेन eet: पापजनैरिव॥ eon

“Rama, O Ravana, cannot in any case
be conquered in battle by you, or even by
the world of ogres any more than paradise
can be won by sinful people. (27)
न तं aa wa सर्वैर्देवासुरैरपि।
अयं तस्य वधोपायस्तन्ममैकमना: श्रृणु॥ २८॥

“| do not account him capable of being
slain even by all the gods and demons
taken together. The following is the only
means of compassing his death. Hear of it
from me with an undivided mind. (28)
भार्या तस्योत्तमा लोके सीता नाम सुमध्यमा।
var समविभक्ताङ्गी स्त्रीरत्नं रत्नभूषिता॥ २९॥

“His wife, Sita by name, is the best
woman in the world. Marked with a slender
waist and well-proportioned limbs and adorned
with jewels, she is in the full bloom of youth
and the very jewel among women. (29)

qa edt न गन्धर्वी नाप्सरा न च पन्नगी।
तुल्या सीमन्तिनी तस्या मानुषी तु Hal भवेत्॥ ३०॥

“Certainly no Goddess, nor a Gandharva
woman, nor a celestial nymph, nor a Naga
woman—in fact, no woman can be compared
with her; how, then, can a human lady
stand comparison with her? (30)
तस्यापहर भार्यां त्वं तं प्रमथ्य महावने।
सीतया रहितो war न चैव fe भविष्यति॥ seu

“Putting him off the scent in the great
forest, take you away his wife by force. And
bereft of Sita, Rama will no longer survive in
any case.” (31)

अरोचयत तद्वाक्यं रावणो राक्षसाधिप:।
चिन्तयित्वा महाबाहुरकम्पनमुवाच ह॥३२॥

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

Ravana, the suzerain lord of the ogres,
liked his suggestion. Pondering awhile, the
mighty-armed ogre, so they say, spoke as
follows to Akampana: (32)

aré कल्यं गमिष्यामि da: सारथिना सह।
आनेष्यामि च वैदेहीमिमां wet महापुरीम्॥ ३३॥
“All right! Tomorrow morning | shall
undoubtedly go alone with my charioteer
and joyfully bring Sita (a princess of the
Videha territory) to this great city.” (33)

तदेवमुक्त्वा प्रययौ खरयुक्तेन रावण:।
रथेनादित्यवर्णेन fast: सर्वा: प्रकाशयन्॥ ३४॥
Speaking as aforesaid, Ravana sallied
forth in a chariot bright as the sun and
drawn by mules, illumining all the quarters.
(34)

स tat राक्षसेन्द्रस्य नक्षत्रपथगो महान्।
चञ्चूर्यमाण: शुशुभे जलदे चन्द्रमा इव॥ ३५॥

Coursing rapidly through the heavens
(the path of the stars) that huge chariot of
Ravana, the ruler of ogres, shone like the
moon behind a cloud. (35)

स दूरे चाश्रमं गत्वा ताटकेयमुपागमत्।
मारीचेनार्चितो राजा भक्ष्यभोज्यैरमानुषै:।। ३६॥

Nay, reaching a hermitage in a distant
place, he met Marica, the son of Tataka.
The king was entertained with foods worth
masticating and those worth gulping, unknwon
to human beings. (36)

तं wa पूजयित्वा g आसनेनोदकेन च।
अर्थोपहितया वाचा मारीचो वाक्यमब्रवीत्॥ ३७॥
Honouring him personally by offering a
seat and water (to wash his hands and feet
and for rinsing his mouth with, Marica spoke
to him as follows in words full of meaning:
(37)

कच्चित् सकुशलं राजल्लोकानां राक्षसाधिप।
आशङ्के नाधिजाने त्वं यतस्तूर्णमुपागत:॥ ३८॥

“| hope all is pretty well with the
people in your kingdom, O monarch ! Since,
however, you have approached me in haste
