* BALAKANDA +

259

Canto LXX
Janaka sends for his younger brother, KuSadhwaja, from Sankasya.
Invited by him, Dasaratha meets Janaka at the latter’s palace,

where at the instance of Dasaratha, Vasistha glorifies
the race of Ikswaku

तत: Wud जनक: कृतकर्मा महर्षिभि:।
उवाच वाक्यं वाक्यज्ञ: शतानन्दं पुरोहितम्॥ १॥
Having gone through the concluding
rites connected with the sacrifice undertaken
by him with the help of eminent Rsis, the
following morning, Janaka, who knew how
to articulate, spoke to his family priest,
Satananda, as follows : (1)

wat मम महातेजा वीर्यवानतिधार्मिक:।

कुशध्वज इति ख्यात: पुरीमध्यवसच्छुभाम्॥ २॥
वार्याफलकपर्यन्तां पिबन्निक्षुमतीं नदीम्।
सांकाश्यां पुण्यसंकाशां विमानमिव पुष्पकम्॥ ३॥
“My highly glorious, valiant and
extremely pious younger brother, known by
the name of KuSadhwaja, has taken up his
abode in the blessed city of Sankasya—
vying with heaven (the reward of virtue) and
extensive as the aerial car Puspaka
(belonging to Kubera, the god of riches),
nay, whose boundaries are marked out by
a defensive wall mounted by engines—and
drinks the water of the river Iksumati. (2-3)

तमहं द्रष्टुमिच्छामि यज्ञगोप्ता स मे मत:।
प्रीतिं सोऽपि महातेजा sat भोक्का मया सह॥४॥

“He is the guardian of my sacrifice
(inasmuch as it is he who procured materials
for the sacrifice though living in Sankasya);
hence | long to see him. That highly glorious
brother of mine too will share with me this
delight of witnessing the wedding of my two
daughters.” (4)

Wah तु वचने शतानन्दस्य संनिधौ।
आगता: केचिदव्यग्रा जनकस्तान् समादिशत्॥ ५॥

When these words were uttered by

Janaka in the presence of Satananda, some
level-headed messengers turned up and
Janaka duly instructed them. (5)
शासनात् तु नरेन्द्रस्य प्रययु: शीघ्रवाजिभि:।
समानेतुं नरव्याघ्रं विष्णुमिन्द्राज्ञया यथा॥६॥
“Like Indra’s men proceeding under his
orders to bring his younger brother Upendra
or the divine Dwarf, they rode at the
king’s command on swift horses to bring
KuSadhwaja, a tiger among men.” (6)

सांकाश्यां ते समागम्य AMA कुशध्वजम्।
न्यवेदयन् यथावृत्तं जनकस्य च चिन्तितम्॥७॥

Reaching Sankasya_ they’ met
KuSadhwaja and correctly made known to
him the tidings at Mithila as well as what
was contemplated by Janaka. (7)

तद्वृत्तं नृपति: श्रुत्वा दूतश्रेष्ठैर्महाजवै:।
आज्ञया तु नरेन्द्रस्य आजगाम कुशध्वज:॥८॥

Hearing the story of Janaka as told
by the foremost of his envoys, who were
very swift-footed, KuSadhwaja turned up
immediately in obedience to the king’s
command. (8)

स ददर्श महात्मानं जनकं धर्मवत्सलम्।
सोऽभिवाद्य शतानन्दं जनकं चातिधार्मिकम्॥ ९ ॥
राजार्हं परमं दिव्यमासनं सोऽध्यरोहत।
उपविष्टावुभौ तौ तुं भ्रातरावमितद्युती॥१०॥
प्रेषयामासतुर्वीरौ मन्रिश्रेष्ठं सुदामनम्।
Tes मन्तरिपते शौघ्रमिक्ष्वाकुममितप्रभम्॥११॥
आत्मजै: सह दुर्धर्षमानयस्व watson
औषपकार्यां स गत्वा तु रघूणां कुलवर्धनम्॥१२॥
west शिरसा चैनमभिवाद्येदमब्रवीत्।
अयोध्याधिपते att वैदेहो मिथिलाधिप:॥ १३॥
