1128

He also communicated his approaching
death with his brothers. Satrughna then
consecrated his two sons. Subahu obtained
Madhura, while Satrughati, Vidiga (Bhelsa).
Having divided the army of Madhura into
two and making them possessed of wealth,
the king, Satrughna, established his two
sons there. (9-10)
सुबाहुं मधुरायां च वैदिशे शत्रुघातिनम्।
ययौ स्थाप्य तदायोध्यां रथेनैकेन राघव:॥११॥

Having established Subahu in Madhura
(Mathura) and Satrughati in Vidiga, the
descendant of Raghu, Satrughna, went to
Ayodhya by a chariot, alone. (11)

स ददर्शं महात्मानं ज्वलन्तमिव पावकम्।
सूक्ष्मक्षौमाम्बरधरं मुनिभि: सार्धमक्षयै:॥१२॥

He saw Sri Rama, the noble one, as
though the fire in flames, dressed in fine
silken garments sitting together with the
immortal sages. (12)

सोऽभिवाद्य ततो wa weate: wade: |
sara वाक्यं धर्मज्ञं धर्ममेवानुचिन्तयन्॥१३॥
Having saluted Sri Rama, with folded
hands and his’ senses_ in control,
contemplating on the law of righteousness,
he, Satrughna, spoke to him, the knower of
Dharma: (13)
कृत्वाभिषेकं सुतयोर्द्वयो राघवनन्दन।
तवानुगमने wr fats मां कृतनिश्चयम्॥ ex
‘O descendant of Raghu, know me as

one having decided to follow you after having
coronated my two sons. (14)

न चान्यदद्य वक्तव्यमतो वीर न शासनम्।
विहन्यमानमिच्छामि मद्बिधेन विशेषत:॥ १५॥

‘No word other than that of consent is
to be spoken by you, O brave one ! | do not
wish that your orders be transgressed by
one like me, in particular.’ (15)

wea at बुद्धिमक्लीबां विज्ञाय रघुनन्दन:।
aera शत्रुघ्नं रामो वाक्यमुवाच Fi Ve ll

Knowing that potent desire (of

« VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

Satrughna), the descendant of Raghu, said
‘Indeed, may it be so, O Satrughna’. (16)

तस्य वाक्यस्य वाक्यान्ते वानरा: कामरूपिण: |
ऋक्षराक्षससङ्घाश्च समापेतुरनेकश: ॥ १७॥

As he finished his sentence, the
monkeys, who could change their form
according to their will, and also the bears
and Raksasas in great number arrived there.

(17)
सुग्रीवं ते पुरस्कृत्य wd wa समागता:।
तं रामं द्रष्टुमनस: स्वर्गायाभिमुखं स्थितम्॥ ecu

Having put Sugriva at their head, came
all of them wishing to see Sri Rama on his
way to heaven. (18)

देवपुत्रा ऋषिसुता गन्धर्वाणां सुतास्तथा।
रामक्षयं विदित्वा a ad Wa समागता:॥१९॥
Knowing that the end of the earthly
sojourn of Sri Rama has arrived, the sons
of gods, the sons of sages and also the
sons of the Gandharvas came. (19)

a राममभिवाद्योचु: सर्वे वानरराक्षसा:।
तवानुगमने राजन् सम्प्राप्ता: स्म समागता:॥ २०॥
यदि wa विनास्माभिर्गच्छेस्त्वं gear
यमदण्डमिवोद्यम्य त्वया स्म विनिपातिता:॥ २१॥
एतस्मिन्नन्तरे रामं सुग्रीवोऽपि महाबल:।
प्रणम्य विधिवद् वीरं विज्ञापयितुमुद्यत:॥ २२॥

They said: ‘O King, we have come to
follow you, O Sri Rama, the best among
men, if you will go without us, then indeed
we will take it as having been killed as if by
you by the rod of Yama. In this midst, the
powerful Sugriva also having saluted the
brave one, Sri Rama, properly, became eager
to convey his wish and said: (20—22)

अभिषिच्याङ्गदं वीरमागतोऽस्मि नरेश्वर।
तवानुगमने राजन् विद्धि at कृतनिश्चयम्॥ २३॥

‘O king of men, having coronated the
brave Angada (son of Vali) on the throne, |
have come. Know me, O king, as one
having decided to follow you.’ (23)
