220

« VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

पञ्चाश: सर्ग:
Canto L
Commanded by Ravana, Prahasta inquires of Hanuman as to who he was as
also his motive in devastating the royal pleasance and killing the ogres.
In reply Hanuman says that he destroyed the grove in order that he
might be taken captive and dragged to the presence of Ravana,
whom he was eager to see, and was compelled in self-defence to
kill those who stood in his way. In the end he declares himself
to be a messenger of Sri Rama and adds that, though protected

against the missile presided over by Brahma, he submitted

to its influence only in order to be able to see Ravana

तमुद्बीक्ष्य महाबाहु: पिङ्गाक्षं ura: स्थितम्।
रोषेण महताऽऽविष्टो रावणो लोकरावण:॥१॥
The mighty-armed Ravana, who made
people cry in distress wherever he went,
was seized with violent rage to behold that
monkey (lit., a tawny-eyed one) before him.
(1)

शङ्काहतात्मा दध्यौ स Hubs तेजसा Way!
किमेष भगवान् नन्दी भवेत् साक्षादिहागत:॥ २॥

at शप्तोऽस्मि कैलासे war प्रहसिते पुरा।

सोऽयं वानरमूर्ति: स्यात्किंस्विद्बाणोऽपि वासुर: ।। ३॥

His mind overcome with apprehension,
he speculated as follows with regard to
Hanuman (a leader of monkeys), who was
invested with glory: “Is it the glorious Nandi,
a leader of the attendants of Lord Siva, who
has come here in person, by whom | was
formerly cursed on Mount Kailasa, the abode
of Lord Siva, when he was mocked by me?
Or, perhaps he may even be the celebrated
demon Bana, son of Bali, in the guise of a
monkey.” (2-3)

स राजा रोषताम्राक्ष: weet मन्त्रिसत्तमम्।
कालयुक्तमुवाचेदं वचो विपुलमर्थवत्॥४॥

His eyes bloodshot through anger, the
aforesaid king Ravana spoke to Prahasta,
the foremost of his ministers, the following
opportune, solemn and significant words :

(4)

दुरात्मा पृच्छ्यतामेष कुत: किं वास्य कारणम्।
SANS च कोऽस्यार्थो राक्षसानां च तर्जने॥७५॥
“Let this evil-minded fellow be asked
where he has come from, what is his motive
in coming here, nay, what was his object in
destroying the grove as well as in threatening
the ogres. (5)
मत्पुरीमप्रधृष्यां at गमने fe प्रयोजनम्।
आयोधने वा किं ard पृच्छ्यतामेष दुर्मति: ।। ६॥
“Let this perverse fellow be asked what
really is his purpose in actually coming over
to my city, which cannot be taken by storm
or what is his object in seeking an encounter
with our people.” (6)

रावणस्य वच: श्रुत्वा प्रहस्तो वाक्यमब्रवीत्।
समाश्वसिहि ug aa भी: कार्या त्वया कपे॥ ७॥

Hearing the command of Ravana,
Prahasta spoke to Hanuman as follows:
“Take heart, O monkey! May good betide
you. No fear need be entertained by you. (7)

ate aad त्वमिन्द्रेण प्रेषितो रावणालयम्।
तत्त्वमाख्याहि मा ते Ye भयं AMT मोक्ष्यसे॥ ८ Il
“If for that matter you have been sent
to the abode of Ravana by Indra, pray,
speak the truth, O monkey! Let no fear
haunt you. You shall be liberated. (8)
यदि वैश्रवणस्य त्वं यमस्य वरुणस्य च।

चारुरूपमिदं pen प्रविष्टो a: पुरीमिमाम्॥ ९॥
