122

इच्छतीं कामयानस्य प्रीतिर्भवति शोभना।
एवमुक्तस्तु राक्षस्या समुत्किप्तस्ततो seit |
प्रहसन् मेघसंकाशो राक्षस: स न्यवर्तत॥४३॥
Having commanded the ogresses in
these words again and again, Ravana, the
lord of ogres, whose mind was seized with
passion and anger, roared at Sita, Janaka’s
daughter. Approaching Ravana (the ten-
headed monster) speedily and embracing him
with a view to preventing him from striking
Sita, Mandodari as well as Dhanyamalini
(Ravana’s junior most consort) thereupon
spoke to him as follows: “Sport with me,
O great king ! What purpose of yours will be
served by Sita, this pale and wretched human
creature, O lord of ogres! Surely, O great
monarch, gods like Brahma and Indra, who
are the foremost of immortals, have not
assigned to her lot the exquisite luxuries that
have been won by the might of your arms.
The body of one, who loves a woman not
loving him in return, reaps suffering alone;
while extreme delight falls to the lot of the
man loving a woman who pines for him.”
Spoken to in these words and drawn away
from that place by Mandodari, that mighty ogre
Ravana, for his part, who fully resembled a

« VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

cloud, turned back heartily laughing.(88—43)
प्रस्थित: स anita: कम्पयन्निव मेदिनीम्।
ज्वलद्भास्करसंकाशं प्रविवेश निवेशनम्॥४४॥

Having left that place as though causing
the earth to shake, that ten-headed monster
duly entered his abode, fully resembling the
blazing sun. (44)

देवगन्धर्वकन्याश्च नागकन्याश्च तास्तत:।
परिवार्य दशग्रीवं प्रविशुस्ता गृहोत्तमम्॥४५॥

Surrounding Ravana, the aforesaid
daughters of gods and Gandharvas as well
as those of Nagas thereupon penetrated
deep into that excellent abode. (45)

स्वमेव वेश्म प्रविवेश रावण:॥ ४६ ॥

Having unsparingly threatened Sita, the
princess of Mithila, who was devoted to
virtue and stood rooted where she was,
though shaking from top to bottom, and
letting her alone, the aforesaid Ravana, who
made people cry in terror and was distracted
with passion, duly entered his own abode.

(46)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये सुन्दरकाण्डे द्वाविंश: सर्ग: ॥ २२॥

Thus ends Canto Twenty-two in the Sundarakanda of the glorious Ramayana of
Valmiki, the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

Canto XXIII

Extolling Ravana, Ekajata and other ogresses posted in the
ASoka grove coax her to accept his proposal

इत्युक्त्वा मैथिलीं राजा रावण: शत्रुरावण:।
संदिश्य च ad: wat राक्षसीर्निर्जगाम ह॥१॥
Having threatened Sita, a princess of
Mithila and instructing all the ogresses as
aforesaid, Ravana, who made his enemies

cry in terror, sallied forth from that grove; so
the tradition goes. (1)

निष्क्रान्ते राक्षसेन्द्रे तु पुनरन्त:पुरं गते।
राक्षस्यो भीमरूपास्ता: सीतां समभिदुद्रुवु:॥ २॥

Ravana, the king of ogres, having left
