60 « VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

rare virtues that have been described by
you. (7)

इक्ष्वाकुवंशप्रभवो WHT AT जनै: श्रुत:।
नियतात्मा महावीर्यो द्युतिमान् धृतिमान् वशी॥ ८॥

“There is one descended in the line of
Ikswaku, and known by the name of ‘Rama’.
He has fully controlled his mind, is very
powertul, radiant and resolute and has brought
his senses under control. (8)

बुद्धिमान् नीतिमान् वाग्मी श्रीमाञ्छत्रुनिबर्हण:।
विपुलांसो महाबाहु: कम्बुग्रीवो महाहनु:॥ ९॥

“He is intelligent, sagacious, eloquent,
glorious and an exterminator of foes. He is
distinguished with broad shoulders, powerful
arms, a neck shaped as a conch and a
stout chin. (9)
महोरस्को महेष्वासो गूढजत्रुररिंदम:।
आजानुबाहु: सुशिरा: सुललाट: सुविक्रम:॥ १०॥

“He is marked with a broad chest, a
mighty bow and a collar-bone covered with
flesh, and is capable of subduing his foes.
His unusually long arms extend right upto
his knees. He has a well-formed head, a
shapely forehead and a charming gait. (10)

wa: समविभक्ताङ्ग: स्निग्धवर्ण: प्रतापवान्।
पीनवक्षा विशालाक्षो लक्ष्मीवाञ्छुभलक्षण:॥ ११॥

“He is of medium stature, neither very
tall nor very short, has well-proportioned
limbs, has a shining complexion, is mighty,
has a rounded chest, large eyes, is full of
splendour and has auspicious marks on his
body. (11)
धर्मज्ञ: सत्यसंधश्च प्रजानां च fed रत:।
यशस्वी ज्ञानसम्पन्न: शुचिर्वश्य: समाधिमान्॥ १२॥

“He knows the secret of virtue, and is
true to his promise and intent on the good of
the people. He is illustrious, full of wisdom,
pure in his dealings, a man of self-control
and concentrated mind. (12)

प्रजापतिसम: श्रीमान् धाता रिपुनिषूदन:।
रक्षिता जीवलोकस्य धर्मस्य परिरक्षिता॥१३॥

“He is a supporter of the creation like
Brahma, the lord of created beings, affluent,
the slayer of his enemies, a protector of living
beings and a staunch defender of faith. (13)

रक्षिता स्वस्य धर्मस्य स्वजनस्य च रक्षिता।

वेदवेदाङ्ग॰तत्वज्ञं। धनुर्वेदे च निष्ठित:॥१४॥

“He is a vindicator of his own virtue
and the protector of his own people. He
knows the truth of the Vedas and the six
sciences (grammar etc.) auxiliary to them
and is a past master in archery. (14)

सर्वशास्त्रार्थतत्त्वज्ञ: स्मृतिमान् प्रतिभानवान्।
सर्वलोकप्रिय: साधुरदीनात्मा विचक्षण:॥ १५॥

“He knows the real meaning of all the
scriptures, is possessed of a sharp memory
and quick wit. He is popular in all the worlds,
is pious, high-minded and shrewd. (15)

सर्वदाभिगत: aha: समुद्र ga सिन्धुभि:।
amd: सर्वसमश्चैव aca प्रियदर्शन:॥ १६॥

“He is always sought by the righteous
even as the ocean is by rivers. He is noble,
nay, alike to all and always wears a pleasing
countenance. (16)

स च सर्वगुणोपेत: कौसल्यानन्दवर्धन:।
wax ga गाम्भीर्ये धैर्येण हिमवानिव॥१७॥

“He is endowed with all excellences and
enhances the delight of his mother, Kausalya.
He vies with the ocean in profundity and
compares with the Himalaya in point of
firmness. (17)

विष्णुना dest dit सोमवत्प्रियदर्शन:।
कालाग्निसदृश: क्रोधे क्षमया पृथिवीसम:॥ V2 ॥
“He is a replica of Lord Visnu in prowess
and is pleasing of aspect as the moon. In
(show of) anger, he resembles the destructive
fire at the end of creation and is a counterpart
of Mother Earth in forbearance. (18)

wet समस्त्यागे सत्ये धर्म इवापर:।
तमेवंगुणसम्पन्न WH सत्यपराक्रमम्॥१९॥

ज्येष्ठं ज्येष्ठगुणैर्युक्तं प्रियं दशरथ: सुतम्।
प्रकृतीनां हितैर्युक्तं प्रकृतिप्रियकाम्यया॥ २०॥
