636

स्नेहेनाक्रान्तहृदय: शोकेनाकुलितेन्द्रिय:।
द्रष्टुमभ्यागतो ह्येष भरतो नान्यथाऽऽगत:॥११॥

“| believe, O gallant brother, that hearing,
when back in Ayodhya, of myself having been
actually exiled with Sita (daughter of Janaka)
and yourself, and having proceeded to the
forest, wearing matted locks and clad in the
bark of trees, O jewel among men, Bharata,
who is so fond of his brothers, and is dearer
to me than life itself, must have found his
heart overwhelmed with affection and his mind
distracted through grief and has surely come
all the way to see me, bearing in mind the
usage of his race in the shape of installing
the eldest son on the throne on the death of a
king and that the said Bharata has not come
with any other motive. (9—11)

अम्बां च केकयीं रुष्य भरतश्चाप्रियं वदन्।
प्रसाद्य frat sitar राज्यं मे दातुमागत:॥ १२॥
“Nay, getting angry with mother Kaikeyi
and speaking unkind words to her and having
obtained the consent of our father, the

glorious Bharata has evidently come to offer
the throne to me. (12)

प्राप्तकालं यथैषोऽस्मान् भरतो द्रष्टुमर्हति।
अस्मासु मनसाप्येष नाहितं किंचिदाचरेत्॥१३॥

“It is but opportune that Bharata sees
us—in fact, he deserves to see us. He
would not do any harm to us even with his
mind. (13)

विप्रियं कृतपूर्वं a भरतेन कदा नु किम्।
ईदृशं वा भयं तेऽद्य भरतं aq विशाङ्कसे॥ १४॥

“| wonder when and what offence was
given to you by Bharata in the past and
when any such alarming thing was said by
him that you mistrust Bharata today. (14)

नहि a निष्ठुरं वाच्यो भरतो नाप्रियं वच:।

ae ह्यप्रियमुक्त: स्यां भरतस्याप्रिये कृते॥१५॥
“Bharata should under no circumstances

be spoken harshly to nor should unkind words

be addressed to him. If any offence is given
to Bharata, indeed it would mean that | am

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

told unpleasant things.
कथं नु Ua: fiat हन्यु: कस्यांचिदापदि।
भ्राता वा भ्रातरं हन्यात् सौमित्रे प्राणमात्मन:॥ १६॥

“How on earth can sons take the life of
their father in any trying situation or how
can a brother kill his own brother, his very
life, O son of Sumitra? (16)

ae राज्यस्य हेतोस्त्वमिमां art प्रभाषसे।
वक्ष्यामि भरतं दृष्टा राज्यमस्मै प्रदीयताम्॥१७॥
“If you utter these words, signifying
your intention to kill Bharata for the sake of
sovereignty, | shall speak to Bharata as

follows on seeing him: ‘Let the kingdom be
given away for good to Laksmana.’ (17)

उच्यमानो fe भरतो मया लक्ष्मण aga: |
राज्यमस्मै प्रयच्छेति बाढमित्येव मंस्यते॥ १८॥

“Being addressed by me in the words
‘Bestow the kingdom on Laksmana,’ Bharata,
O Laksmana, will surely accept my command
saying “amen !” (18)

तथोक्तो धर्मशीलेन भ्रात्रा तस्य fed रत:।
लक्ष्मण: प्रविवेशेव स्वानि गात्राणि लज्जया। १९॥

Admonished thus by his eldest brother,
Sri Rama, of virtuous disposition, Laksmana,
who was devoted to the interests of the
latter, hid himself in his own limbs, as it
were, out of shame. (19)

तद्वाक्यं लक्ष्मण: श्रुत्वा व्रीडित: प्रत्युवाच ह।
त्वां मन्ये द्रष्टुमायात: पिता दशरथ: TALI २०॥
Put out of countenance to hear the
aforesaid admonition, Laksmana, they say,
submitted as follows : “I believe our father,
Emperor Dasaratha himself, has come to
see you.” (20)
व्रीडितं लक्ष्मणं GBT Waa: प्रत्युवाच ह।
We मन्ये महाबाहुरिहास्मान् द्रष्टुमागत:॥ २१॥
Finding Laksmana abashed, Sri Rama,
a scion of Raghu, they say, replied as
follows : “I too believe that the mighty-armed

Emperor has personally come to see us
here. (21)

(15)
