962

resembled Indra (who is invoked by many),
thereupon entered his well-known city even

« VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

as Indra (the thousand-eyed god) entered
his city after capturing Bali. (73)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये उत्तरकाण्डे द्वात्रिंश: सर्ग: ॥ 32 1

Thus ends Canto Thirty-two in the Uttarakanda of the glorious Ramayana of Valmiki,
the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

Canto XXXIII
Pulastya secures the deliverance of Ravana from the bondage of Arjuna

रावणग्रहणं तत् तु वायुग्रहणसंनिभम्।
aa: पुलस्त्य: शुश्राव कथितं fafa cad: ॥ १॥
Pulastya thereupon heard as narrated
by the gods in heaven the story of Ravana’s
aforesaid capture, which was much like
capturing the air. (1)

Wd: पुत्रकृतस्नेहात् कम्पमानो महाधृति: |
माहिष्मतीपति द्रष्टुमाजगाम महानृषि:॥ २॥
Feeling commiseration (for Ravana) due
to affection for his son (grandson), though
highly self-possessed, the great Rsi (seer
of Vedic Mantras) came all the way to see
the ruler of Mahismatt. (2)

a वायुमार्गमास्थाय 9 araqeantatga: |
पुरीं माहिष्मतीं प्राप्तो मन:सम्पातविक्रम:॥ ३॥
Travelling by the aerial route, the
Brahmana, whose speed equalled that of
the wind, reached the city of Mahismati with
the swiftness of thought. (3)

सोऽमरावतिसंकाशां हृष्टपुष्टजनाव्रताम्।
प्रविवेश पुरीं ब्रह्मा इन्द्रस्येवामरावतीम्॥४॥
Like Brahma entering Amaravati, the
city of Indra, he penetrated deep into the
city, which was crowded with happy and
prosperous people and which closely
resembled Amaravati. (4)
पादचारमिवादित्यं Frat सुदुर्दृशम्।
ततस्ते प्रत्यभिज्ञाय अर्जुनाय न्यवेदयन्॥५॥

Recognizing the sage, who looked like

the sun-god coming on foot, extremely difficult
as he was to gaze on, even while he was
descending from the heavens, the
counsellors of Arjuna thereupon reported
his arrival to him. (5)

पुलस्त्य इति विज्ञाय वचनाद्धैहयाधिप:।
शिरस्यञ्जलिमाधाय waged तपस्विनम्॥६॥

Placing his joined palms above his head
on coming to know from their report that he
was no other than Sage Pulastya, Arjuna
(the suzerain lord of the Haihayas) went
forward to meet the ascetic. (6)

पुरोहितोऽस्य Jaret मधुपर्कं ata च।
पुरस्तात् Waal राज्ञ: शक्रस्येव बृहस्पति:।॥७॥
Taking with him Arghya (water to wash
one’s hands with) as well as Madhuparka
(a mixture of honey and curds), his family-
priest preceded the king even as Sage
Brhaspati, the preceptor of gods, would walk
ahead of Indra. (7)

ततस्तमृषिमायान्तमुद्यन्तमिव भास्करम्।
अर्जुनो दृश्य सम्भ्रान्तो ववन्देन्द्र इवेश्वरम्॥८॥

Overawed to see the aforesaid Rsi
(the seer of Vedic Mantras) coming like the
rising sun, Arjuna thereupon saluted him
even as Indra, the ruler of gods, would
salute the Supreme (Brahma). (8)
स तस्य मधुपर्कं गां पाद्यमर्घ्य निवेद्य च।
पुलस्त्यमाह राजेन्द्रो हर्षगद्गदया गिरा॥९॥

Having offered Madhuparka, a cow and
