* SUNDARAKANDA +

मां च दृष्ट्वा वने तस्मिन् समागम्य ततस्तत: ।
ता: समभ्यागता: fart रावणायाचचक्षिरे॥ ११२॥
“Nay, meeting together from every side
on seeing me in the grove, they collectively
reported the matter to Ravana without delay
in the following words : (112)
राजन् वनमिदं of तव भग्नं दुरात्मना।
arta ह्यविज्ञाय तव वीर्यं महाबल॥ ११३॥
“*`[]]13ऽ3 grove of yours, which is difficult
of access, has been destroyed by an evil-
minded monkey, who surely does not fully
know your power, O king, endowed with
extraordinary might ! (113)

तस्य दुर्बुद्धिता राजंस्तव विप्रियकारिण:।

वधमाज्ञापय faa यथासौ न पुनर्व्रजेत्॥११४॥
“`[।]1ऽ3 is no doubt his perversity, O

king ! Pray, therefore, order his death instantly

since he has given offence to you lest he
should run away unpunished.’ (114)

Teac राक्षसेन्द्रेण विसृष्टा agai: |
राक्षसा: किंकरा नाम रावणस्य मनोऽनुगा: ।। ११५ ॥
“On hearing the report, ogres, collectively
known as the Kinkaras, who were very difficult
to conquer and followed the mind of Ravana,
were sent out by the king of ogres. (115)
तेषामशीतिसाहस्रं शूलमुद्गरपाणिनाम्।
मया तस्मिन् वनोद्देशे परिघेण निषूदितम्॥ ११६॥
“Eighty thousand of them, darts and
clubs in hand, were exterminated by me in
that part of the grove with an iron bar. (116)

तेषां तु हतशिष्टा ये ते गता लघुविक्रमा:।
Fed च मया सैन्यं रावणायाचचक्षिरे॥ ११७॥

“Taking quick strides, those few for
their part, who had survived, went and broke
the news to Ravana of the army having
been wiped out by me. (117)

ततो A बुद्धिरुत्पन्ना चैत्यप्रासादमुत्तमम्।
तत्रस्थान् राक्षसान् BAT शतं स्तम्भेन वै पुन: ॥। ११८ ॥
ललामभूतो लङ्काया मया विध्वंसितो रुषा।
तत: प्रहस्तस्य Ud जम्बुमालिनमादिशत्॥११९॥

259

राक्षसैर्बहुभि: सार्धं घोररूपैर्भयानकै:।
we बलसम्पन्नं wad रणकोविदम्॥ १२०॥
परिघेणातिघोरेण सूदयामि सहानुगम्।
तच्छृत्वा राक्षसेन्द्रस्तु मन्तिपुत्रान् महाबलान्॥ १२१॥
पदाटंतेबलसम्पन्नान् प्रेषयामास रावण:।

परिघेणैव तान् सर्वान् नयामि यमसादनम्॥ १२२॥

“Next it struck my mind to demolish the
excellent edifice of a sanctuary sacred to the
tutelary deity of the ogres. After killing a
hundred ogres garrisoned there, the
sanctuary, which was the very ornament of
Lanka, was then utterly destroyed by me in
anger with a pillar of the same structure.
Thereupon Ravana dispatched Jambumali,
son of Prahasta, alongwith numerous frightful
ogres of grim aspect. | killed that mighty ogre,
though he was skilled in warfare, alongwith
his followers with a most formidable iron bar.
Hearing of it, Ravana, the ruler of ogres,
dispatched the sons of his minister, who were
endowed with extraordinary might, and were
strengthened by a regiment of infantry. |,
however, sent them to the abode of Death
with the iron bar itself. (118—122)

मन्रिपुत्रान् हतान् श्रुत्वा समरे लघुविक्रमान्।
पञ्च सेनाग्रगान् शूरान् प्रेषयामास रावण:॥ १२३॥

“Hearing of the minister's sons, who
were quick in exhibiting their valour in combat,
having been killed, Ravana dispatched five
heroic generals. (123)

तानहं सहसैन्यान् वै सर्वानेवाभ्यसूदयम्।
तत: पुनर्दशग्रीव: पुत्रमक्षॆ महाबलम्॥१२४॥
बहुभी राक्षसै: सार्धं प्रेषयामास संयुगे।
तं तु मन्दोदरीपुत्रं Hart रणपण्डितम्॥१२५॥
Wet खं समुद्यन्तं Weary गृहीतवान्।
तमासीनं शतगुणं भ्रामयित्वा व्यपेषयम्॥ १२६॥
“Il, however, destroyed them all alongwith
their troops. Thereupon Ravana, the ten-
headed monster, sent to the field of battle
his son, Aksa, who was endowed with
extraordinary might, alongwith many other
ogres. |, however, suddenly caught by the
