1138

food, Angada presently spoke to Hanuman
as follows : (6)

पश्य सीतापदेशेन साक्षाद् वैवस्वतो aa:
इमं देशमनुप्राप्तो वानराणां विपत्तये॥७॥

“For bringing destruction to the monkeys
under the pretext of Sita, Yama (the god of
retribution), son of the sun-god, has bodily
come to this region. (7)
रामस्य न Hd कार्यं न Hd राजशासनम्।
हरीणामियमज्ञाता विपनत्ति: सहसाऽऽगता॥८॥

‘The purpose of Sri Rama has not
been accomplished nor has the king’s
injunction been carried out. In the meantime,
this unforeseen calamity has overtaken the
monkeys all of a sudden. (8)
ace: प्रियकामेन pd कर्म जटायुषा।
TT यत् a yet वस्तदशेषत:॥९॥

“The service rendered at Pafncavati by
Jatayu, the king of vultures, who was keen
to oblige Sita (a princess of the Videha
territory) has been heard of by you in its
entirety. (9)
तथा सर्वाणि भूतानि तिर्यग्योनिगतान्यपि।
प्रियं कुर्वन्ति रामस्य त्यक्त्वा प्राणान्यथा वयम्॥ १०॥

“All living beings, even those born in
the sub-human species of birds and beasts
do what is pleasing to Sri Rama, even
laying down their life, if necessary, as we
are doing. (10)
अन्योन्यमुपकुर्वन्ति स्नेहकारुण्ययन्तिता:।
ततस्तस्योपकारार्थं `त्यजतात्मानमात्मना Il ११ Il
fra oad fe रामस्य धर्मज्ञेन जटायुषा।
राघवार्थे परिश्रान्ता वयं संत्यक्तजीविता:॥१२॥
कान्ताराणि प्रपन्ना: स्म न च पश्याम मैथिलीम्।

स Gat गृध्रराजस्तु रावणेन at रणे।
मुक्तश्च सुग्रीवभयाद् was परमां गतिम्॥१३॥

“Bound by love and compassion (for
him alone as manifested in the form of all
living beings) do people render good offices

to one another. Therefore, lay down your
life by yourselves for the sake of his service.

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

Indeed a kindly act was done to Sri Rama
(in the shape of laying down his life in his
service) by Jatayu, who knew what is right.
We too have ventured on difficult roads for
the sake of Sri Rama (a scion of Raghu)
and feel thoroughly exhausted; but we have
not found out Sita, even though we have
finally taken leave of our lives. Blessed is
that king of vultures in that he was slain in
an encounter by Ravana, nay, was rid once
for all of the fear of Sugriva, who was
evidently the overlord of (the entire sub-
human creation) and has attained the highest
state by the grace of Sri Rama! (11—13)

जटायुषो विनाशेन Tal दशरथस्य च।
हरणेन च वैदेह्या: संशयं Ra गता:॥१४॥
“The monkeys have fallen into danger
through the death of King DaSaratha, the
destruction of Jatayu and the abduction of
Sita (a princess of the Videha territory).(14)

रामलक्ष्मणयोर्वासमरण्ये सह सीतया।

राघवस्य च बाणेन वालिनश्च AM वध:॥१५॥
रामकोपादशेषाणां रक्षसां च तथा वधम्।
कैकेय्या वरदानेन sé च विकृतं कृतम्॥१६॥

“Know the sojourn of Sri Rama and
Laksmana in the forest with Sita, and even
so the destruction of Vali encompassed by
an arrow of Sri Rama (a scion of Raghu),
and similarly the prospective extermination
of all the ogres through the wrath of Sri
Rama—all this evil to have been brought
about by the boon granted by DaSaratha in
favour of Kaikeyi.” (15-16)
तदसुखमनुकीर्तितं वचो

भुवि पतितांश्च निरीक्ष्य वानरान्।
कृपणमुदाहृतवान् स गृध्रराज: ॥ १७ Ul

Greatly bewildered in mind to hear the
aforesaid doleful cries uttered by the
monkeys, and to perceive them tumbled
down on the ground, the highly intelligent
Sampati, the king of vultures, spoke as
follows in a piteous tone. (17)
