702

“This peril from the Raksasas threatens
the ascetics because of you, who are kindly
disposed to the latter. Alarmed by it, they
hold conversation among themselves. (10)
रावणावरज: कश्चित् खरो नामेह राक्षस:।
उत्पाट्य तापसान् सर्वाञ्जनस्थाननिवासिन:॥ ११॥
धृष्टश्च जितकाशी च नृशंस: पुरुषादक:।
अवलिप्तश्च पापश्च at च तात न मृष्यते॥१२॥

“Having uprooted all the ascetics in
Janasthana (a portion of the Dandaka
forest), a man-eating Raksasa, Khara by
name—who is a younger brother of Ravana
and is presumptuous, victorious in battle,
brutal, haughty and sinful—is intolerant of
you too, my darling ! (11-12)

त्वं यदाप्रभृति ह्यस्मिन्नाश्रमे तात ade
तदाप्रभृति रक्षांसि विप्रकुर्वन्ति तापसान्॥१३॥

“Ever since, O darling, you are in this
hermitage, the ogres continue to ill-treat the
ascetics. (13)

दर्शयन्ति fe बीभत्सै: क्रूरैर्भीषणकैरपि।
नानारूपैर्विरूपैश्च रूपैरसुखदर्शनै: | १४॥
“They reveal themselves in diverse
odious, savage, hideous and ugly forms,
whose very sight brings sorrow in its wake.
(14)

अप्रशस्तैरशुचिभि: सम्प्रयुज्य च तापसान्।
प्रतिघ्नन्त्यपरान् क्षिप्रमनार्या: पुरत: स्थितान्॥१५॥
“Nay, forcibly bringing the ascetics into
touch with forbidden and impure substances,
the ignoble fellows quickly dispose of others
standing in front of them. (15)

तेषु तेष्वाश्रमस्थानेष्वबुद्धमवलीय च।
Tad तापसांस्तत्र नाशयन्तोऽल्पचेतस:॥ १६॥
‘They incognito hide themselves in this
hermitage and killing the dull-witted and
unconscious ascetics, move about there in
glee. (16)
अवक्षिपन्ति स्रुगभाण्डानग्नीन् सिञ्चन्ति वारिणा।
कलशांश्च प्रमर्दन्ति हवने समुपस्थिते॥१७॥

“When the time of pouring oblations

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

into the sacred fire has approached, they
fling away sacrificial vessels such as the
ladle, sprinkle the fires with water and
smash the water-pots. (17)

तैर्दुरात्मभिराविष्टानाश्रमान् = Ufstarera: |
गमनायान्यदेशस्य चोदयन्त्यृषयोऽद्य माम्॥१८॥
“Desirous of leaving for good the
hermitages defiled by those evil-minded
fellows, the sages urge me to shift to another
region today. (18)

तत् पुरा राम शारीरीमुपहिंसां तपस्विषु।
दर्शयन्ति fe दुष्टास्ते त्यक्ष्याम इममाश्रमम्॥१९॥

“Therefore, O Rama, we shall certainly
abandon this hermitage before those wicked
fellows exhibit bodily violence towards the
ascetics. (19)
बहुमूलफलं चित्रमविदूरादितो वनम्।
अश्वस्याश्रममेवाहँ श्रयिष्ये सगण: पुन:॥ Roll

“| shall then resort with my followers
to the hermitage of Sage Aswa (lit., who
does not lay by anything for the morrow),
consisting of an _ excellent woodland
abounding in roots and fruits, not very far
from this place. (20)

ख्रस्त्वय्यपि चायुक्तं पुरा राम प्रवर्तते।
सहास्माभिरितो wes यदि बुद्धि: प्रवर्तते॥ २१॥

“If your mind feels so inclined, O Rama,
depart from this place alongwith us before
Khara proceeds unjustly with you as well,
O Rama! (21)
सकलत्रस्य संदेहो नित्यं युक्तस्य राघव।
समर्थस्यापि fe सतो वासो दु:खमिहाद्य ते॥ २२॥

“Your continuance too at this place, O
scion of Raghu, with your consort, although
you are ever alert and even though you are
powerful enough to put him down, is attended
with peril and conducive to misery now.” (22)
इत्युक्तवन्तं रामस्तं राजपुत्रस्तपस्विनम्।

न शशाकोत्तरैर्वाक्यैरवबद्धुं समुत्सुकम्॥ २३॥

Prince Rama could not with counter-
arguments check the said ascetic when he
