Gazing at King DaSaratha he addressed
the following words to him: “Know me, O
protector of men, to be a messenger of
Visnu (the Protector of created beings) arrived
here from His realm.” (16)

dd: Ul तदा राजा प्रत्युवाच कृताञ्जलि:।
भगवन् स्वागतं तेऽस्तु किमहं करवाणि Au Vil
Thereupon the king replied to him with
folded hands, “May my hearty welcome be
acceptable to you, O divine personage !
What shall | do for you?” (17)

BAM WARE वाक्यं प्राजापत्यो नरोऽब्रवीत्।
राजन्नर्चयता देवानद्य प्राप्तमिदं त्वया॥१८॥
The servant of Lord Visnu now spoke
the following words to him : “By worshipping
the gods by means of a horse-sacrifice and
a sacrifice performed for the sake of a male
progeny, has this reward been secured by
you today, O king! (18)
इदं तु नृपशार्दूल wae देवनिर्मितम्।
Wat गृहाण त्वं धन्यमारोग्यवर्धनम्॥१९॥
“Receive, O tiger among kings, this
Payasa prepared by the gods, which is not
only capable of procuring a son, but is also
conducive to wealth and a promoter of
health too. (19)

भार्याणामनुरूपाणामश्नीतेति प्रयच्छ a
तासु त्वं लप्स्यसे पुत्रान् यदर्थं यजसे TTI २०॥
“Give it to your wives, that are worthy
of you, i.e., belonging to your own Varna or
grade of society and sharing your virtues,
with the words ‘Eat it all of you !’ Through
them, who partake of it, you will secure
four sons, for whom you have been
performing sacrifices, O protector of men |”
(20)

तथेति नृपति: via: शिरसा प्रतिगृह्य ताम्।
पात्रीं देवान्नसम्पूर्णां देवदत्तां हिरण्मयीम्॥ २१॥

अभिवाद्य च aq भूतमद्भुतं प्रियदर्शनम्।
मुदा परमया युक्तश्चकाराभिप्रदक्षिणम्॥ २२॥
Accepting delightfully with his head bent

« VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

low and with the words “So be it!” the
aforesaid gold basin, full of heavenly food
and vouchsafed by the Lord, and greeting
that extraordinary being of delightful aspect,
the king, full of supreme joy, went round
him clock-wise as a mark of respect.

(21-22)

ततो दशरथ: प्राप्य पायसं देवनिर्मितम्।
aya परमप्रीत: प्राप्य वित्तमिवाधन:॥ २३॥

DaSaratha felt highly pleased to secure
from him the Payasa prepared by the
gods, even as a pauper would on obtaining
riches. (23)
ततस्तदद्भुतप्रख्यं भूतं परमभास्वरम्।
संवर्तयित्वा तत् कर्म तत्रैवान्तरधीयत॥ २४॥

Having disposed of that duty of handing
over the Payasa to the king, that most
effulgent being of wonderful appearance
then vanished into the fire itself. (24)

हर्षरश्मिभिरुद्योतं तस्यान्त:पुरमाबभौ |
शारदस्याभिरामस्य चन्द्रस्येव AMT STP: WRG UI

Irradiated by beams of joy playing on
his countenance, the gynaeceum, to which
he now hastened, shone bright like the
firmament illumined by the rays of the
delightful autumnal full moon. (25)

सोऽन्त:पुरं arta कौसल्यामिदमब्रवीत्।
पायसं प्रतिगृह्णीष्व पुत्रीयं त्विदमात्मन:॥ २६॥

Immediately on entering the gynaeceum
he spoke to Kausalya, his eldest wife, as
follows—“Accept this Payasa, which is indeed
calculated to procure you a son.” (26)

कौसल्यायै नरपति: पायसार्धं ददौ तदा।
अर्धादर्धं ददौ चापि सुमित्रायै नराधिप:॥ २७॥
With the object of getting them a son
each, the king then gave half of the Payasa
to Kausalya and the Emperor made over

one half of the other half to Sumitra, his
second wife, too. (27)

कैकेय्यै चावशिष्टार्धं ददौ पुत्रार्थकारणात्।
प्रददौ चावशिष्टार्धं पायसस्यामृतोपमम्॥ २८॥
