706

desired object at all places like the
imperishable fruit of one’s austerities, O
princess of the Videha kingdom ! (25)

न त्वेवमनुगच्छन्ति गुणदोषमसस्सित्रय:।
कामवक्तव्यहृदया भर्तॄनाथाश्चरन्ति या:॥ २६॥

“Those evil women, however, whose
hearts are swayed by desire, nay, who lord it
over their husband, having no sense of virtue
and vice, and move about at will, do not follow
him in the aforesaid manner. (26)

प्राप्नुवन्त्ययशश्चैव धर्मभ्रंशं च मैथिलि।
अकार्यवशमापन्ना: स्तियो at: खलु तद्विधा: ॥ २७॥

“Indeed, fallen a prey to concupiscence,
which is worth giving up, women who belong
to that category, O princess of Mithila, meet
with a fall from virtue and also reap infamy.

(27)

त्वद्बिधास्तु गुणैर्युक्ता दृष्टलोकपरावरा:।
fara: स्वर्गे चरिष्यन्ति यथा पुण्यकृतस्तथा॥ २८॥

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

“Women like you, on the other hand,
who are adorned with virtues like devotion
to their husband and have discovered what
is good and evil in the world, will hereafter
dwell in heaven in the same way as those
who have performed meritorious deeds.

(28)
तदेवमेतं त्वमनुव्रता सती
पतिप्रधाना समयानुवर्तिनी।
wa स्वभर्तु: सहधर्मचारिणी
यशश्च धर्मं च तत: समाप्स्यसि॥ २९॥

“Therefore, remaining devoted to the
service of this prince, nay, looking upon
your husband as the foremost object of
your worship and attending on him at the
proper time, practise virtue in co-operation
with your husband. Thereby you will easily
attain fame as well as religious merit.”

(29)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्येऽयोध्याकाण्डे सप्तदशाधिकशततम: सर्ग: ॥ ११७॥

Thus end Canto One hundred and seventeen in the Ayodhyakanda of the glorious
Ramayana of Valmiki, the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

Canto CX VII

At the end of her dialogue with Sita, Anasuya requests her to ask a boon
and, highly pleased with her, the hermitess bestows heavenly flowers
and ornaments on her. Urged by Anasuya, She relates to
the hermitess the story of her marriage

wager add त्वनसूयानसूयया।
aie at We प्रवक्तुमुपचक्रमे॥१॥

Applauding her speech when instructed
in the foregoing words by Anasuya, Sita, a
princess of the Videha kingdom, for her
part, who was free from the carping spirit,
actually began slowly to reply as follows:
(1)

नैतदाश्चर्यमार्यायां यन्मां त्वमनुभाषसे।
विदितं तु ममाप्येतद् यथा नार्या: alate: uz

“This instruction which you have given
to me is no matter for wonder on Your
Holiness’ part. It is, however, already known
to me as well how the husband is the
adored of a matron. (2)

यद्यप्येष wae at अनार्यो वृत्तिवर्जित:।
अद्वैधमत्र वर्तव्यं यथाप्येष wat भवेत्॥ ३॥
“Even if this husband of mine were

ignoble and without any means of livelihood,
| ought to have nonetheless conducted
