128

Wa कश्चन dee: खादतेति a वक्ष्यति।
ततस्त्वजामुखी ATT राक्षसी वाक्यमब्रवीत्॥४३॥

“Hearing this news he will say, ‘devour
her; there is no doubt about it.” Thereupon
an ogress, Ajamukhi by name, spoke as
follows : (43)
विशस्येमां तत: सर्वान् समान् hed पिण्डकान्।
विभजाम da: Gat विवादो मे न रोचते॥४४॥

“Having hacked her, make all pieces
equal then. We shall all after that divide
them among ourselves. Disputation does
not find favour with me. (44)
पेयमानीयतां fat माल्यं च विविधं ag
aa: शूर्पणखा ATT राक्षसी वाक्यमब्रवीत्॥४५॥

“Let drink also be brought speedily as

well as many garlands of various kinds.”
Then an ogress, Surpanakha by name,

« VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

spoke as follows : (45)

अजामुख्या यदुक्तं A dda मम Wad
सुरा चानीयतां fad सर्वशोकविनाशिनी॥४६॥

“That alone which has been suggested
by my friend, Ajamukhi, appeals to me as
well. Let wine too, which dispels all grief, be
brought soon. (46)

मानुषं मांसमास्वाद्य नृत्यामोऽथ निकुम्भिलाम्।
एवं Poitier सा सीता सुरसुतोपमा।
राक्षसीभिर्विरूपाभिर्धर्यमुत्सज्य रोदिति॥४७॥

“Having enjoyed human flesh, we shall
then dance in the presence of Goddess
Bhadrakali installed in the western quarter
of Lanka (known by the name of Nikumbhila).”
Losing her patience while being threatened
thus by the monstrous ogresses, the said
Sita, who resembled the daughter of a god,
began to cry. (47)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये सुन्दरकाण्डे चतुर्विंश: सर्ग: il २४॥

Thus ends Canto Twenty-four in the Sundarakanda of the glorious Ramayana of
Valmiki, the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

Canto XXV

Unable to endure the threats of the ogresses and calling aloud
Sri Rama and others, Sita bursts into a wail

अथ तासां वदन्तीनां wee दारुणं agi
राक्षसीनामसौम्यानां रुरोद जनकात्मजा॥१॥
In the midst of those repellent ogresses,
who were uttering many such unkind and
cruel remarks, the daughter of Janaka, Sita,
now fell a-weeping. (1)

wage तु वैदेही राक्षसीभिर्मनस्विनी।
उवाच परमत्रस्ता बाष्पगद्गदया गिरा॥२॥

Greatly alarmed when threatened thus
by the ogresses, Sita, a princess of the Videha
territory, of firm resolve, for her part, spoke
as follows in a voice choked with tears: (2)

न मानुषी राक्षसस्य wat भवितुमर्हति।
कामं खादत at सर्वा न करिष्यामि at aa: ३॥

“A female human being is not fit to
become the wife of an ogre. Devour me all, if
you will; | shall never follow your counsel.”(3)

सा राक्षसीमध्यगता सीता सुरसुतोपमा।
न WH लेभे शोकार्तां रावणेनेव भ्सिता॥४॥

Surrounded by ogresses, stricken with
grief, as it were, due to her having been
reproached by Ravana, the aforesaid Sita,
who resembled the daughter of a god, did
not find rest. (4)
