538

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

Canto LXVI

Resting the head of the lifeless monarch in her own lap and severely
reproaching Kaikeyi, Kausalya grievously mourns for Sri Rama and
other exiles. Holding back Kausalya—who was lamenting with
her arms placed round her deceased husband’s bosom—
and consigning the Emperor’s dead body to a trough
filled with oil, the ministers and other functionaries
return each to his own abode in the evening

तमग्निमिव संशान्तमम्बुहीनमिवार्णवम्।
गतप्रभमिवादित्यं स्वर्गस्थं प्रेक्ष्य भूमिपम्॥१॥
कौसल्या बाष्पपूर्णाक्षी विविधं शोककर्शिता।
उपगृह्य शिरो Ue: कैकेयीं प्रत्यभाषत॥ २॥

Beholding the aforesaid Emperor, whose
spirit was now in heaven, and who looked
like a fully extinguished fire, a waterless
ocean and a lustreless sun, and clasping the
king’s head, Kausalya, who was stricken
with grief in diverse ways, spoke as follows
to Kaikeyi, her eyes full of tears: (1-2)

सकामा भव कैकेयी भुङ्क्ष्व राज्यमकण्टकम्।
त्यक्त्वा राजानमेकाग्रा Wea दुष्टचारिणि॥ ३॥

“Having your desire fulfilled, O cruel
Kaikeyi, be satisfied. Having done with the
king, O woman of evil conduct, confidently
enjoy the throne, which has no more enemies.

(3)
विहाय मां गतो Wat vat च स्वर्गतो मम।

विपथे सार्थहीनेव नाहं जीवितुमुत्सहे॥४॥

“Forsaking me, Rama has departed for
the forest, while my husband has ascended
to heaven. As such । cannot live any longer
than a woman bereft of her companions on
a perilous road. (4)

wat तु परित्यज्य का स्त्री दैवतमात्मन:।
इच्छेज्जीवितुमन्यत्र कैकेय्यास्त्यक्तधर्मण:॥७५॥

“Truly speaking, what woman, other
than Kaikeyi, who has cast all piety to the
winds, would survive leaving her husband,
a veritable god to her? (5)

न लुब्धो बुध्यते दोषान् किंपाकमिव भक्षयन्।
कुब्जानिमित्तं कैकेय्या राघवाणां Hot हतम्॥ ६॥
“A greedy man does not cognize his
own faults any more than he who partakes
of a forbidden dish. The race of the Raghus
has been destroyed by Kaikeyi at the
instigation of Manthara (a hunch-backed
woman). (6)

अनियोगे नियुक्तेन wat we विवासितम्।
aur जनक: श्रुत्वा परितप्स्यत्यहं यथा॥७॥
“Hearing of Rama having been exiled
with his consort, Sita, by the king as urged
by Kaikeyi to an unbecoming act, King
Janaka too will feel greatly perturbed, as |
do. (7)

स मामनाथां विधवां arer जानाति धार्मिक:।
Wa: कमलपत्राक्षो जीवन्नाशमितो गत:॥८॥

“That pious Rama, who is possessed
of eyes resembling lotus petals and who
has disappeared from this place even though
living, does not know me to have been
deprived of my master and husband today.

(8)
विदेहराजस्य सुता तथा चारुतपस्विनी।
दु:खस्यानुचिता ga at पर्युद्दिजिष्यति॥ ९॥

“The daughter of Janaka, the ruler of
the Videha territory, who is engaged in
agreeable austerities in the shape of service
to her exiled husband living in a forest and
is undeserving of suffering, will feel sorely
afflicted in the forest. (9)
