* AYODHYAKANDA +

by me since you were born for a second
time in the shape of investiture* with the
sacred thread, keenly desiring the end of
woes, O scion of Raghu! (45)
तदक्षयं महद्दु:खं नोत्सहे सहितुं चिरात्।
विप्रकारं सपत्नीनामेवं जीर्णापि राघव॥४६॥
“Though worn out with age | am unable
to suffer for a long time that great agony, in
the shape of the contumely of my co-wives,
which knows no end, O scion of Raghu !
(46)

अपश्यन्ती da We परिपूर्णशशिप्रभम्।
कृपणा वर्तयिष्यामि कथं कृपणजीविका॥४७॥

“Unable to behold your countenance
possessing the splendour of the full moon,
and dragging a wretched existence, how
shall | survive, distressed as | already am?

(47)
उपवासैश्च योगैश्च बहुभिश्च परिश्रमै:।
दु:खसंवर्धितो art त्वं fe दुर्गतया मया॥४८॥

“In vain indeed have you been brought
up through great hardship with the help of a
number of fasts and meditations on the

various gods involving much toil, unlucky
as | am. (48)

स्थिरं नु wad wa ममेदं यन्न दीर्यते।
प्रावृषीव महानद्या: WS कूलं नवाम्भसा॥४९॥

“| conclude this heart of mine to be
hard enough inasmuch as it does not get

371

riven any more than the bank of a large
river like the holy Ganga even though washed
by the new waters in the rainy season. (49)
wa नूनं मरणं न fad
न चावकाशोऽस्ति यमक्षये मम।
यदन्तकोऽद्यैव न मां जिह्रीर्षति
Weel सिंहो रुदतीं मृगीमिव॥ ५०॥
“Surely there is no death for me nor is
there room for me in the abode of Yama
(the god of punishment), as is evident from
the fact that Death does not feel inclined to
carry me away by force as a lion would
carry away a wailing doe. (50)
न भिटद्यते ae भुवि नो विदीर्यते।
अनेन दु:खेन च देहमर्पितं
qa ह्यकाले मरणं न विद्यते॥ & il

“My hard heart is most certainly made
of steel inasmuch as it does not break
under pressure of grief nor is the body,
overcome with this anguish, torn into pieces
even on falling to the ground. Undoubtedly
death does not come out of time. (51)

इदं तु ga यदनर्थकानि a

व्रतानि दानानि च संयमाश्च fe
तपश्च तप्तं यदपत्यकाम्यया

सुनिष्फलं बीजमिवोप्तमूषरे॥ ५२॥

“This is all the more painful that my
sacred observances and gifts as well as

* A reference to I. xx 2 on p. 73-74 of Valmiki-Ramayana Number-I would reveal that according to

King Dagaratha himself Sri Rama was less than sixteen years, i.e., fifteen years of age when he accompanied
the sage ViSwamitra and was eventually married with Sita. It is mentioned in the Padma-Purana that he had
spent twelve years of his married life before the emperor proclaimed his intention of installing him on the
throne as Prince Regent—
wl द्वादश वर्षाणि waa: we dan i रमयामास धर्मात्मा नारायण इव श्रिया॥
तस्मिन् काले महाराज: WT रामस्य सद्गुणै: । ज्येष्ठं राज्येन संयोक्तुमैच्छत् सर्वनृपाज्ञया॥
(Uttara., cclxix. 181—183)
Sri Rama could not therefore be only seventeen years of age at the time of his exile. Hence the word
`जातस्य` in the above verse has been taken in the sense of ‘born for a second time’ in the form of investiture
with the sacred thread, which must have presumably taken place at the age of ten inasmuch as it is laid
down in the Smrtis that a Ksatriya boy must be invested with the sacred thread at the age of ten to eleven
years ; एकादशे वा राजन्यम् . According to the above interpretation Sri Rama can be safely concluded to be
seventeen plus ten or twenty-seven years of age at the time of his leaving for the forest.
