# YUDDHAKANDA #

तयो: स भ्राजते शब्दस्तथा समरमत्तयो:।
सुघोरयोर्निष्टनतोर्गगने मेघयोरिव॥ ६६ ॥

The aforementioned clamour of those
two warriors, who were engaged in action,
as aforesaid, resembled the rumbling of
two dreadful thundering clouds in the sky.

(66)
सुवर्णपुंखैर्नाराचैर्बलवन्तौ कृतव्रणौ |
प्रसुस्रुवाते रुधिरं कोर्तिमन्तौ wa धृतौ॥६७॥

Wounded with golden-shafted steel
arrows, the two mighty and glorious warriors,
who were determined to gain victory over one
another, were profusely giving out blood. (67)

a गात्रयोर्निपतिता रुक्मपुंखा: शरा युधि।
असृग्दिग्धा विनिष्पेतुर्विविशुर्धरणीतलम्॥ ६८॥

Struck on the bodies of each other, the
golden-shafted arrows shot by the two
warriors, dropped (through their bodies) on
the field of battle, covered with blood, and
penetrated into the earth’s surface. (68)

अन्ये सुनिशितै: शस्त्रैराकाशे संजघट्टि।
बभञ्जुश्चिच्छिदुश्चैव तयोर्बाणा: सहस्रश:॥६९॥

Other arrows of the two warriors clashed
in thousands in the air with duly whetted
weapons of the adversary and shattered
and tore them. (69)

a aya रणो घोरस्तयोर्बाणमयश्चय:।
अग्निभ्यामिव दीप्ताभ्यां सत्रे कुशमयश्चय:॥ Vo Il

That struggle between the two warriors
turned out to be formidable. The mass of
arrows strewn over the battlefield in that
struggle appeared like a mass of the sacred
KuSa grass spread on the altar by the side
of two flaming fires viz., Garhapatya and
Ahavaniya fire at a sacrifice. (70)

तयो: कृतव्रणौ देहौ शुशुभाते महात्मनो:।
सुपुष्पाविव निष्पत्रौ at किंशुकशाल्मली॥७१॥
The wounded bodies of those two

warriors, endowed with extraordinary
courage, shone like Kimsuka flowers and

675

Salmali (silk-cotton) trees in full blossom
and shorn of their leaves in a forest. (71)
इन्द्रजिल्लक्ष्मणश्चैव परस्परजयैषिणौ ॥ ७२॥
Eager to conquer each other, Indrajit
and Laksmana too carried on a tumultuous
and formidable struggle again and again.
(72)

लक्ष्मणो रावणिं युद्धे रावणिश्चापि लक्ष्मणम्।
अन्योन्यं तावभिघ्नन्तौ न श्रमं प्रतिपद्यताम्॥७३॥

Striking each other—Laksmana striking
Indrajit (son of Ravana) and Indrajit too
striking Laksmana in combat (in his turn)—
the two warriors did not experience any
fatigue. (73)

बाणजालै: IAAT SET ।
शुशुभाते महावीर्यौ प्ररूढाविव पर्वतौ॥७४॥

With multitudes of arrows dug deep
into their bodies the two mighty heroes,who
were endowed with extraordinary prowess,
shone like two mountains overgrown with
trees. (74)

तयो रुधिरसिक्तानि संव्रृतानि शारैर्भृशम्।
बभ्राजु: सर्वगात्राणि ज्वलन्त Fa पावका:॥ ७५॥
Bathed in blood and thickly covered
with arrows, all the limbs of the aforesaid
two warriors shone like blazing fires. (75)

तयोरथ महान् कालो व्यतीयाद् युध्यमानयो: |
न च तौ युद्धवैमुख्यं श्रमं चाप्यभिजग्मतु:॥ ७६॥

A considerable time elapsed in the
meanwhile past the two warriors even as
they fought with each other. They, however,
neither turned their face away from the
combat nor gave way to exhaustion. (76)

अथ समरपरिश्रमं निहन्तुं
समरमुखेष्वजितस्य लक्ष्मणस्य।
प्रियहितमुपपादयन् महात्मा

समरमुपेत्य विभीषणोऽवतस्थे॥७७॥

Reaching the battlefield in the meantime,
