794

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

Canto XXXI

Ravana goes over to take away Sita on the advice of Akampana and
returns in deference to the advice of Marica

त्वरमाणस्ततो गत्वा जनस्थानादकम्पन:।
प्रविश्य लङ्कां वेगेन रावणं वाक्यमब्रवीत्॥१॥

Then, proceeding in haste from
Janasthana and entering Lanka with speed
the ogre Akampana spoke as follows to
Ravana: (1)

जनस्थानस्थिता राजन् राक्षसा बहवो हता:।
ay निहत: संख्ये कथंचिदहमागत:॥ २॥
“O king, numerous ogres stationed in
Janasthana have been killed. Khara too is
killed in battle. | have somehow contrived to
come.” (2)

Wag दशग्रीव: क्रुद्ध: संरक्तलोचन:।
अकम्पनमुवाचेदं निर्दहन्निवं TAT BHI

Enraged when spoken to as aforesaid,
Ravana, the ten-headed monster, with blood-
red eyes spoke as follows to Akampana, as
if he would consume him with his martial
glory : (3)
को fe aay लोकेषु गतिं नाधिगमिष्यति॥४॥

“By what man, whose life has virtually
departed, has my Janasthana, which was a
source of terror to all, been devastated?
Who dares antagonize me on pain of not
getting shelter in all the worlds? (4)

न हि मे fata कृत्वा शक्यं मघवता Taq!
we वैश्रवणेनापि न यमेन च विष्णुना॥५॥
“Giving offence to me no happiness
can ever be found by Indra nor by Kubera
(son of Sage ViSrava) nor by Yama (the
god of death) nor even by Lord Visnu (the
Protector of the universe). (5)

कालस्य Uae कालो दहेयमपि पावकम्।
मृत्युं मरणधर्मेण संयोजयितुमुत्सहे॥६॥

“| am the death even of the time-spirit.
| can burn even fire. | can invest Death with
mortality. (6)

वातस्य तरसा वेगं निहन्तुमपि चोत्सहे।
दहेयमपि संक्रुद्धस्तेजसाऽऽदित्यपावकौ ।। ७॥

“When enraged, | can with my vigour
arrest the speed even of wind and can
burn with my fiery spirit the sun and the
fire.” (7)
तथा Be दशग्रीवं कृताञ्जलिरकम्पन:।
भयात् संदिग्धया Ara रावणं याचतेऽभयम्॥ ८॥

In a voice confused through fear
Akampana with joined palms begged
protection of Ravana, the ten-headed
monster, who angrily spoke as aforesaid.

(8)
दशग्रीवोऽभयं तस्मै प्रददौ रक्षसां atl
a विस्त्रब्धोऽब्रवीद् वाक्यमसंदिग्धमकम्पन:॥ ९॥

Ravana (the ten-headed monster), the
foremost of ogres, accordingly gave him an
assurance of safety, whereupon the said
Akampana confidently broke the following
news in unambiguous terms : (9)

Tat दशरथस्यास्ते सिंहसंहननो gar
TH नाम महास्कन्धो वृत्तायतमहाभुज:॥१०॥
var: पृथुयशा: श्रीमानतुल्यबलविक्रम:।
हतस्तेन जनस्थाने खरश्च सहदूषण:॥११॥

“There is a youthful son of Dasaratha,
Rama by name, well-built like a lion, broad-
shouldered, with rounded long arms, dark-
brown of hue, of wide renown, glorious and
endowed with matchless strength and valour.
By him even Khara, alongwith Dusana, has
been killed in the region known by the name
of Janasthana.” (10-11)
