* AYODHYAKANDA +

यदित्वंयास्यसि वनं त्यक्त्वा मां शोकलालसाम्।

ae प्रायमिहासिष्ये न च शक्ष्यामि जीवितुम्॥ २७॥
“If you retire to the forest leaving me

plunged in grief, | shall take up a vow of

fasting unto death; for, in that case | shall

no longer be able to survive. (27)

ततस्त्वं प्राप्स्यसे पुत्र निरयं लोकविश्रुतम्।
ब्रह्महत्यामिवाधर्मात् was: सरितां ula: uel

“As a sequel to that offence of yours,
my son, you will suffer hellish tortures well-
known in the world, even as Ocean, the
spouse of deities presiding over the rivers,
underwent hellish tortures of the kind
suffered as a result of Brahmanicide through
unrighteousness in the form of inflicting
suffering on his own mother.” (28)
विलपन्तीं तथा दीनां कौसल्यां जननीं तत:।
उवाच रामो धर्मात्मा वचनं धर्मसंहितम्॥ २९॥

Sri Rama, whose mind was given to
piety, thereupon made_ the following
submission, conformable to righteousness,
to his afflicted mother, Kausalya, who was
wailing as aforesaid : (29)
नास्ति शक्ति: पितुर्वाक्यं समतिक्रमितुं मम।
प्रसादये त्वां शिरसा गन्तुमिच्छाम्यहं वनम्॥ ३०॥

“| have no courage to flout the command
of my father and as such wish to proceed to
the forest. |, therefore, solicit your favour in

the form of leave to depart with my head
bent low. (30)

ऋषिणा च पितुर्वाक्यं कुर्वता वनचारिणा।
गौर्हता जानताधर्मं कण्डुना च विपश्चिता॥ ३१॥
“A cow was slaughtered in the past by
the learned Sage Kandu living in a forest, in
obedience to the command of his father,
even though he knew it to be a sin. (81)

अस्माकं तु कुले Ue सगरस्याज्ञया पितु:।
wate: सागरैर्भूमिमवाप्त: सुमहान् वध:॥ ३२॥
“A tragic death was met in the past
by the sons of Sagara (numbering sixty
thousand), belonging to our race, while

375

digging the earth under the command of
their father. (32)

जामदग्न्येन रामेण रेणुका जननी स्वयम्।
कृत्ता परशुनारण्ये पितुर्वचनकारणात्॥३३॥

“Mother Renuka was beheaded in a
forest by ParaSsurama, son of Sage
Jamadagni, by means of an axe with his
own hand in obedience to the command of
his father. (33)

एतैरन्यैश्च बहुभिर्देवि देवसमै: कृतम्।
पितुर्वचनमक्लीबं करिष्यामि पितुर्हितम्॥३४॥

“Their fathers behest has been
unhesitatingly carried out by these as well
as by many other godlike men, | too shall,
therefore, do a good turn to my father, O
godly mother ! (34)

न खल्वेतन्मयैकेन fad पितॄशासनम्।
एतैरपि कृतं देवि ये मया परिकीर्तिता:॥ ३५॥

“Indeed, a fathers command is not
being carried out by me alone in this case,
but it has been done by those as well that
have been mentioned by me above, O pious
lady ! (35)
नाहं धर्ममपूर्वं ते प्रतिकूलं yada
पूर्वैरयमभिप्रेतो गतो मार्गोऽनुगम्यते॥ ३६॥

“| am not introducing any new sacred
practice disagreeable to you. That path
alone is being followed by me, which was
intended and has been traversed by my
forbears. (36)

तदेतत् तु मया कार्यं क्रियते भुवि नान्यथा।
पितुर्हि वचनं कुर्वन् न कश्चिन्नाम हीयते॥ ३७॥

“That alone which is worth doing on
this globe is being done by me in this case,
not otherwise. Indeed, as is well-known,
nobody doing the bidding of his father is
forsaken by virtue.” (37)
तामेवमुक्त्वा जननीं लक्ष्मणं पुनरब्रवीत्।
वाक्यं वाक्यविदां श्रेष्ठ: श्रेष्ठ: सर्वधनुष्मताम्॥ ३८ ॥

Having submitted to his celebrated
mother as aforesaid, Sri Rama, the foremost
