174

“There is capacity in me to carry this
entire city of Lanka including its hills and
woodlands as well as its market-places,
defensive walls and arches, with its very
lord, Ravana. (39)
विशोकं qe वैदेहि wad सहलक्ष्मणम्॥४०॥

“Therefore, let your mind be settled, O
godlike lady, and have done with hesitation.
Rid Sri Rama, a scion of Raghu, alongwith
Laksmana, of grief, O princess of the Videha
territory !” (40)
तं दृष्ट्वाचलसंकाशमुवाच जनकात्मजा।
पद्मपत्रविशालाक्षी मारुतस्यौरसं सुतम्॥४१॥

Finding Hanuman of the size of a
mountain, Sita, daughter of Janaka, who
had eyes big as the petals of a lotus, replied
as follows to the son of the wind-god: (41)

wa सत्त्वं बलं da विजानामि महाकपे।
वायोरिव गतिश्चापि तेजश्चाग्नेरिवाद्भुतम्॥४२॥

“| know full well your courage and
strength, O mighty Hanuman! Your speed is
like that of the wind, while your marvellous
brilliance too is like that of fire itself. (42)

प्राकृतोऽन्य: कथं चेमां भूमिमागन्तुमर्हति।
उदधेरप्रमेयस्य पारं वानरयूथप॥ ४३॥

“How could any other ordinary monkey
actually reach this land beyond the vast
sea, O leader of hordes of monkeys? (43)

जानामि wat oh नयने चापि a मम।
अवश्यं सम्प्रधार्याशु कार्यसिद्धिरिवात्मन:॥४४॥

“| know your power of locomotion as
well as your ability to carry me on your
back. The accomplishment of my object too
must, however, be determined at once even
as yours. (44)

अयुक्तं तु कपिश्रेष्ठ मया गन्तुं त्वया सह।
वायुवेगसवेगस्य वेगो मां मोहयेत् तव॥४५॥

“My going with you, however, O jewel
among monkeys, is not proper. Your speed,

« VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

which is equal to that of the wind, may
render me unconscious. (45)

अहमाकाशमासक्का उपर्युपरि सागरम्।
प्रपतेयं fe ते पृष्ठाद् भूयो वेगेन गच्छत:॥४६॥

“Besides, stuck to space, even as you
sweep with speed all over the sea, | may
actually tumble down from your back. (46)

पतिता सागरे चाहं तिमिनक्रझषाकुले।
भवेयमाशु विवशा यादसामन्नमुत्तमम्॥४७॥

“Nay, fallen insensible into the sea,
teeming with sharks, crocodiles and giant
fish, | may become the excellent food of
aquatic creatures. (47)

न च शक्ष्ये त्वया सार्धं गन्तुं शत्रुविनाशन।
कलत्रवति संदेहस्त्वयि स्यादप्यसंशयम्॥४८॥

“For other reasons too, O destroyer of
foes, | shall not be able to go with you.
Suspicion of the ogres will undoubtedly fall
on you as you will go with a lady on your
back. (48)

ह्रियमाणां तु मां दृष्ट्वा राक्षसा भीमविक्रमा: |
अनुगच्छेयुरादिष्टा रावणेन दुरात्मना॥४९॥

“Enjoined by the evil-minded Ravana,
ogres of terrible prowess will surely pursue
you on seeing me being borne away by
you. (49)

aed परिवृत: शूरै: शूलमुद्गरपाणिभि:।
भवेस्त्वं संशयं Wal मया a कलत्रवान्॥७५०॥
“Surrounded by the heroic ogres
carrying darts and clubs in their hands, and
accompanied by a lady i.e., myself, you will
fall into danger. (50)

सायुधा बहवो व्योम्नि राक्षसास्त्वं निरायुध:।

कथं शक्ष्यसि संयातुं at चैव परिरक्षितुम्॥५१॥
“There will be numerous ogres equipped

with arms in space; how then will you be

able to fight them, as also protect me,

unarmed that you are? (51)

युध्यमानस्य रक्षोभिस्ततस्तै: क्रूरकर्मभि:।
प्रपतेयं fe a पृष्ठाद् भयार्ता कपिसत्तम॥७५२॥
