186

« VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

Canto XLIT

Armsuman and his grandson, Bhagiratha, successively practise
austerities for bringing down the Ganga to the terrestrial
plane. Brahma grants a boon to Bhagiratha and exhorts

him to propitiate Lord Siva and secure His consent
to receive the Ganga on His head

कालधर्मं गते WA सगरे प्रकृतीजना:।
Tat रोचयामासुरंशुमन्तं सुधार्मिकम्॥१॥

Sagara having met his end (which is
the law of Time, according to which one
who is born must die sooner or later when
one has played one’s allotted role), O Rama,
the people desired the highly pious Arnsuman
to be their ruler. (1)

स राजा सुमहानासीदंशुमान् रघुनन्दन।
wea पुत्रो महानासीद् दिलीप इति विश्रुत:।॥ २॥

The said Amsuman, O scion of Raghu,
proved to be a great monarch. His son,
widely known by the name of Dilipa, was
equally great. (2)

तस्मै wed समादिश्य दिलीपे रघुनन्दन।
हिमवच्छिखरे रम्ये तपस्तेपे सुदारुणम्॥३॥

Having entrusted the kingship to the
said Dilipa, O scion of Raghu, Amsuman
practised the severest form of askesis (for
bringing down the Ganga to the terrestrial
plane) on a delightful summit of the
Himalayas. (3)

द्वात्रिंशच्छतसाहस्रं वर्षाणि सुमहायशा:।
तपोवनगतो राजा wat ay तपोधन:॥४॥

Having continued for thirty-two lakhs of
years in a grove intended for austerities
alone, the highly illustrious king, rich in
asceticism, eventually attained heaven only
and not the desired grace of the holy Ganga.

(4)

दिलीपस्तु महातेजा: श्रुत्वा पैतामहं वधम्।
Guarda बुद्ध्या निश्चयं नाध्यगच्छत॥५॥

Hearing of the unnatural death of his
grand-uncles, the exceptionally glorious Dilipa
could not arrive at any decision regarding
the method of bringing the Ganga down to
the terrestrial plane due to his judgment
being clouded by sorrow. (5)
wa गङ्गावतरणं कथं aut जलक्रिया।
aad amet चैतानिति चिन्तापरोऽभवत्॥६॥

He felt anxious as to how the Ganga
should be made to descend to the terrestrial
plane, how water could be offered to them
and as to how he should be able to redeem
their departed souls. (6)

तस्य चिन्तयतो fret धर्मेण विदितात्मन:।
पुत्रो भगीरथो Aa जज्ञे परमधार्मिक:॥७॥

While the king, who was celebrated for
his righteousness, was thus plunged in
thought every moment, a most pious son,
Bhagiratha by name, was born to him. (7)

दिलीपस्तु महातेजा गयज्ञैर्बहुभिरिष्टवान्।
त्रिंशद्वर्षसहस्राणि राजा राज्यमकारयत्॥८॥
Dilipa, for his part, who ४83
exceptionally glorious, propitiated the Lord
through many sacrifices. The king reigned
for thirty thousand years. (8)

अगत्वा निश्चयं राजा तेषामुद्धरणं प्रति।
व्याधिना नरशार्दूल कालधर्ममुपेयिवान्॥९॥
Failing to arrive at any decision on the
question of deliverance of his forbears, the
king, O tiger among men, met his end, which
is the law of Time, through illness. (9)
इन्द्रलोकं Tat राजा स्वार्जितेनैव कर्मणा।
राज्ये भगीरथं पुत्रमभिषिच्य नरर्षभ:॥१०॥
