* AYODHYAKANDA +

gust विसृजत्यश्रु निष्क्रामन्तमुदीक्ष्य यम्।
अयोध्यायां जन: सर्व: शोकवेगसमाहत:॥ १८॥
“Perceiving him departing (from
Ayodhya), all the people in Ayodhya shed
tears of agony, smitten as they were with
an upsurge of grief. (18)
कुशचीरधरं at गच्छन्तमपराजितम्।
सीतेवानुगता लक्ष्मीस्तस्य किं ATT दुर्लभम्॥ १९॥
“Nay, Sita, who is a compeer of Laksmi,
followed the invincible hero even as he
departed for the forest clad in a garment of
the sacred KuSa grass. Indeed what can be
difficult to obtain for him? (19)

धनुर्ग्रहवरो यस्य बाणखड्गास्त्रभृत् स्वयम्।
लक्ष्मणो व्रजति BT तस्य किं ATT दुर्लभम्॥ Zo Il
“In fact, what can be hard to obtain for
him ahead of home indeed walks Laksmana
himself, the foremost of bowmen, wielding
a sword, arrows and other missiles?
(20)

निव्रत्तवनवासं तं द्रष्टासि पुनरागतम्।
जहि शोकं च मोहं च देवि सत्यं ब्रवीमि ते॥ २१॥

“O queen, | tell you the truth: you will
be able to see Rama come back (to
Ayodhya) on having concluded the term of
his exile in the forest. Pray, abandon grief
and infatuation. (21)

शिरसा चरणावेतौ वन्दमानमनिन्दिते।
पुनर्द्रकष्यसि कल्याणि ost चन्द्रमिवोदितम्॥ २२॥

“You will again see your son—as one
sees the rising moon, saluting these feet of
yours with his head bent low, O blessed
and irreproachable lady ! (22)
UA: प्रविष्टं gear तमभिषिक्तं महाश्रियम्।
समुत्स्रक्ष्यसि नेत्राभ्यां शीघ्रमानन्दजं जलम्॥ २३॥

“Seeing him returned to the palace
and installed on the throne and invested
with extraordinary splendour, you will
soon begin to shed tears of joy in profusion.

(23)

457

मा शोको देवि दु:खं वा न रामे दृष्यतेऽशिवम्।

faa द्रक्ष्यसि ut त्वं adit सहलक्ष्मणम्॥ २४॥
“Let there be no grief or sorrow with

regard to Rama, O queen; for no ill-luck is

seen in Rama. Nay, you will soon behold

your son accompanied by Sita and by

Laksmana. (24)

त्वयाऽशेषो जनश्चायं समाश्वास्यो TAT SATE |
किमिदानीमिदं efa करोषि efe विक्लवम्॥ २५ ॥

“Since all these people stricken with
agony caused by separation from Rama
too deserve to be comforted by you, O
sinless one, why do you harbour such grief
in your heart at this moment, O godly lady?

(25)
नार्हा त्वं शोचितुं देवि यस्यास्ते राघव: सुत:।
नहि रामात् परो लोके विद्यते सत्पथे स्थित: tt २६॥

“You, 0 queen, whose son is Rama, a
scion of Raghu, ought not to grieve; for
none is more devoted to the right path in the
world than Rama. (26)
अभिवादयमानं तं geal ससुहृदं सुतम्।
मुदाश्रु मोक्ष्यसे क्षिप्रं मेघरेखेव वार्षिकी।॥। ou

“Seeing your aforesaid son greeting
you with his friends, you will at once begin
to shed tears through joy in the same way
as a mass of monsoon clouds would pour
rain. (27)

पुत्रस्ते ate: क्षिप्रमयोध्यां पुनरागत:।
कराभ्यां मृदुपीनाभ्यां चरणौ पीडयिष्यति॥ २८॥

“Returned soon to Ayodhya, your son,
who is capable of bestowing boons, will
press your feet with his tender and fleshy
hands. (28)
मुदास्रै: प्रोक्षसे पुत्रं मेघराजिरिवाचलम्॥२९॥

“Seeing your valiant son saluting you
with his friends after accosting you with
reverence, you will bathe him in tears shed
through joy even as a mass of clouds
would drench a mountain.” (29)
