# YUDDHAKANDA #

यन्निमित्तोऽयमारम्भ: कर्मणां a: फलोदय:।

at देवीं शोकसंतप्तां द्रष्टुमर्हसि मैथिलीम्॥ २॥
“You ought to see that godlike princess

of Mithila, who is sore stricken with grief, for

whose sake this course of actions was

undertaken, which has now borne fruit. (2)

सा fe शोकसमाविष्टा बाष्पपर्याकुलेक्षणा।
मैथिली विजयं श्रुत्वा द्रष्टुं त्वामभिकांक्षति॥ ३॥

“Having heard of your consummate
victory, that princess of Mithila, who is
overwhelmed with grief, her eyes bedimmed
with tears, longs to see you. (3)

पूर्वकात् प्रत्ययाच्चाहमुक्तो विश्वस्तया तया।
द्रष्टुमिच्छामि भर्तारमिति पर्याकुलेक्षणा॥४॥

“By her, who was full of trust in me
because of the confidence which had been
inspired by me on a former occasion, | was
spoken to in these words, ‘I desire to see
my husband’, and her eyes grew wild with
emotion.” (4)

एवमुक्तो हनुमता रामो धर्मभृतां वर:।

आगच्छत् सहसा ध्यानमीषद्बाष्पपरिप्लुत:॥ ५॥
0888 to as aforesaid by Hanuman,
Sri Rama, the foremost of those who uphold
the cause of virtue, became a bit thoughtful
all of a sudden, and got bathed in tears. (5)

स दीर्घमभिनि:श्वस्य जगतीमवलोकयन्।
उवाच मेघसंकाशं विभीषणमुपस्थितम्॥६॥

Drawing a deep audible breath, and
casting his eyes on the ground, he spoke
as follows to Vibhisana, who closely
resembled a cloud in hue, standing near: (6)

se सीतां शिर:स्नातामुपस्थापय मा चिरम्॥७॥

“Bring here Sita, a princess of the
Videha territory, after she has bathed her
head, has been anointed with heavenly

cosmetics and adorned with celestial jewels,
Let there be no delay.” (7)

एवमुक्तस्तु रामेण त्वरमाणो विभीषण:।
प्रविश्यान्त:पुरं सीतां स्त्रीभि: स्वाभिरचोदयत्॥ ८ ॥

785

Hurriedly penetrating deep into the
gynaeceum, when commanded thus by Sri
Rama, Vibhisana for his part communicated
his presence to Sita in the Asoka grove
through his own women. (8)

aa: Gat महाभागां दृष्टवबोवाच विभीषण:।

मृर्कि। बद्धाञ्जलि: श्रीमान् विनीतो राक्षसेछ्व्।र; us
Forthwith beholding the blessed Sita,

the glorious Vibhisana, the ruler of ogres,

meekly submitted as follows to her with
palms joined over his head: (9)

दिव्याङ्गरागा ade दिव्याभरणभूषिता।
यानमारोह भद्रं ते भर्ता cat द्रष्टुमिच्छति॥१०॥

“Having taken your bath, nay anointed
with heavenly cosmetics and adorned with
celestial jewels, pray, mount the palanquin.
May prosperity attend you. Your husband
desires to see you, O princess of the Videha
territory!” (10)

Wat तु ada प्रत्युवाच विभीषणम्।
अस्नात्वा द्रष्टुमिच्छामि भर्तारं राक्षसेश्वर॥११॥

Requested in these words, Sita, a
princess of the Videha territory, for her part
replied to Vibhisana as follows: “Without
having bathed, O king of ogres, | wish to
see my husband immediately.” (11)

तस्यास्तद् वचनं श्रुत्वा प्रत्युवाच विभीषण:।
यथाऽऽह TA भर्ता ते तत् AM कर्तुमर्हसि॥ १२॥

Hearing her aforesaid answer, Vibhisana
submitted in reply: “You ought, to do the
bidding of your husband, Sri Rama,
precisely as he has enjoined you to do.”

(12)
तस्य तद् वचनं श्रुत्वा मैथिली पतिदेवता।
भर्तृभक्त्याव्रृता साध्वी तथेति प्रत्यभाषत॥ १३॥

Hearing the aforesaid submission of
Vibhisana, the virtuous Sita (a princess of
Mithila), who looked upon her spouse as a

god and was adorned by devotion to her
husband, said in reply, “Amen!” (13)

ad: सीतां शिर:स्नातां संयुक्तां प्रतिकर्मणा।
महार्हाभरणोपेतां महार्हाम्बरधारिणीम्॥ १४॥
