356

Making obeisance with his head bent
low on hearing the vow of the aforesaid
Sri Rama of unwearied action, Vibhisana,
whose mind was set on virtue, for his part
proceeded to submit as follows: (22)

राक्षसानां वधे wel लङ्कायाश्च प्रधर्षणे।
करिष्यामि यथाप्राणं प्रवेक्ष्यामि च वाहिनीम्॥ २३॥
“| shall with all my strength render
assistance to you in killing the ogres and
storming Lanka and shall also break through
the army of ogres.” (23)

इति ब्रुवाणं weed परिष्वज्य विभीषणम्।
अब्रवील्लक्ष्मणं प्रीत: समुद्राज्जलमानय॥ २४॥
तेन चेमं महाप्राज्ञमभिषिञ्च विभीषणम्।
राजानं रक्षसां क्षिप्रं प्रसन्ने मयि मानद॥ २५॥

Embracing Vibhisana, while he was
speaking as aforesaid, Sri Rama for his
part joyfully said to Laksmana, “Please fetch
water from the sea and consecrate at once
the highly sagacious Vibhisana with it as
the king of orges, now that | am happy
with him, O bestower of honour on others!”

(24-25)
एवमुक्तस्तु सौमित्रिरभ्यषिञ्चद् विभीषणम्।
Tea वानरमुख्यानां राजानं राजशासनात्॥ २६॥

Spoken to in these words by Sri Rama,
Laksmana (son of Sumitra) for his part
consecrated Vibhisana as the king of
ogres in the midst of the foremost of monkeys
at the command of his sovereign, Sri Rama.

(26)
तं Wald तु रामस्य दृष्टवा Ga: प्लवङ्गमा:।
प्रचुक्रुशुर्महात्मानं साधुसाध्विति चाब्रुवन्॥ २७॥

Seeing this prompt exhibition of grace
on the part of Sri Rama, the monkeys for
their part raised a shout of joy and hailed Sri
Rama in the words, “Excellent? Excellent!!”

(27)
अब्रवीच्च हनूमांश्च सुग्रीवश्च विभीषणम्।
कथं सागरमक्षोभ्यं तराम वरुणालयम्।
सैन्यै: Uae: सर्वे वानराणां महौजसाम्॥ २८॥

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA +

Nay, Hanuman and Sugriva said to
Vibhisana, “How shall we all be able to
cross the imperturbable sea, the abode of
Varuna, the god of water, surrounded as we
are by hordes of monkeys endowed with
extraordinary energy? (28)

उपायैरभिगच्छाम यथा नदनदीपतिम्।

तराम तरसा सर्वे GAM वरुणालयम्॥ २९॥
“By what means shall we approach

Ocean (the lord of rivers and streams), so

that we may cross the sea, the abode of
Varuna, speedily with our troops?” (29)

एवमुक्तस्तु धर्मात्मा प्रत्युवाच विभीषण:।
Was राघवो राजा शरणं गन्तुमर्हति॥ ३०॥
Questioned thus by Hanuman and
Sugriva, Vibhisana. whose mind was set on
virtue, replied as follows: “Prince Rama, a
scion of Raghu, ought to seek Ocean as
his refuge. (30)
खानित: सगरेणायमप्रमेयो महोदधि:।
कर्तुमर्हति रामस्य Aidt: कार्यं महोदधि:॥ ३१॥
“This immeasurable ocean was caused
to be excavated by king Sagara. Ocean

(certainly) ought to acomplish the work of
Sri Rama, one of his own race.” (31)

एवं विभीषणेनोक्तो राक्षसेन विपश्चिता।
आजगामाथ सुग्रीवो यत्र WA: सलक्ष्मण:॥ ३२॥
Exhorted thus by the sagacious ogre,
Vibhisana, Sugriva immediately arrived
where Sri Rama, with Laksmana, was. (32)

ततश्चाख्यातुमारेभे विभीषणवच: शुभम्।
सुग्रीवो विपुलग्रीव: सागरस्योपवेशनम्॥ ३३॥
The  thick-necked Sugriva_ then
proceeded to convey the salutary counsel
of Vibhisana, exhorting Sri Rama_ to
approach the sea (to allow him a passage).
(33)

प्रकृत्या धर्मशीलस्य रामस्यास्याप्यरोचत।
सलक्ष्मणं महातेजा: सुग्रीवं च हरीश्वरम्॥ ३४॥

सत्क्रियार्थं क्रियादक्षं स्मितपूर्वमभाषत।
विभीषणस्य मन्त्रोऽयं WA लक्ष्मण रोचते॥ ३५॥
