674

proceed to Gaya and perform Sraddha there.”
(13)

एवं राजर्षय: ad प्रतीता रघुनन्दन।
तस्मात् त्राहि ares frat नरकात् WaT १४॥
“So did all royal sages believe, O
powerful scion of Raghu ! Therefore, O jewel
among men, protect your father from hell. (14)

अयोध्यां गच्छ भरत प्रकृतीरुपरञ्जय।
शत्रुघ्नसहितो dit we सर्वैद्विजातिभि:॥ १५॥

“Accompanied by Satrughna and
together with all Brahmanas return, O gallant
Bharata, to Ayodhya and protect the people.

(15)
प्रवेक्ष्ये दण्डकारण्यमहमप्यविलम्बयन्।
आभ्यां तु सहितो वीर वैदेह्या लक्ष्मणेन च॥ १६॥

“| too, for my part, accompanied by
these two, viz., Sita, a princess of the
Videha kingdom, and Laksmana, shall enter
the Dandaka forest without tarrying here
any longer. (16)

वन्यानामहमपि राजराण्मृगाणाम्।
Tes त्वं पुरवरमद्य सम्प्रहृष्ट:
संहृष्टस्त्वहमपि दण्डकान् प्रवेक्ष्ये॥ Vil

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

“Be you, O Bharata, the ruler of the
people themselves. | too shall be the emperor
of wild beasts. Return you, extremely
delighted, to Ayodhya, the foremost of cities,
this very day and | too shall enter the
Dandaka forest highly rejoiced. (17)

छायां ते दिनकरभा: प्रबाधमानं
वर्षत्रं भरत करोतु A Via |
एतेषामहमपि I

काननद्रुमाणा
छायां तामतिशयिनीं शनै: श्रयिष्ये॥ १८ ॥।
“Let the royal umbrella, O Bharata,
repulsing the rays of the sun, spread a cool
shade over your head. | too shall gradually
seek that dense shade of these forest trees.

(18)
शत्रुघ्नस्त्वतुलमतिस्तु ते सहाय:
सौमित्रिर्मम विदित: प्रधानमित्रम्।
चत्वारस्तनयवरा at नरेन्द्रं
सत्यस्थं भरत चराम मा विषीद॥ १९॥
“Let Satrughna of peerless wisdom for
his part be your assistant and the well-
known Laksmana, son of Sumitra, be my
chief friend. Let us, his four worthy sons,
enable the king to adhere to truth. Do not
feel dejected.” (19)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्येऽयोध्याकाण्डे
सप्ताधिकशततम: A: ॥ १०७ Il

Thus ends Canto One hundred and seven in the Ayodhyakanda of the glorious
Ramayana of Valmiki, the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

Canto CVIII
Bharata having been silenced by Sri Rama, an eminent sage, Jabali by name,
tries to persuade Sri Rama to accept the throne by advocating the

theory of the Nastikas (non-believers) with intent to
arouse in him the lust of sovereignty

staat = Ss जाबालिरब्राह्मणोत्तम:।

right, who was comforting Bharata, Jabali,

sara रामं धर्मज्ञं धर्मापेतमिदं वच:॥१॥ | 4 jewel among Brahmanas, addressed the

To Sri Rama, the knower of what is

following words contrary to the Vedic religion :

(1)
