960

अपक्रान्तेष्वमात्येषु प्रहस्ते च निपातिते।
रावणोऽभ्यद्रवत् तूर्णमर्जुनं नृपसत्तमम्॥४९॥
The ministers having fled away and
Prahasta having been struck down, Ravana
rushed with all speed towards Arjuna, the
foremost of kings. (49)
सहस्रबाहोस्तद युद्धं विंशद्बाहोश्च दारुणम्।
नृपराक्षसयोस्तत्र आरब्धं रोमहर्षणम्॥५०॥
Then commenced a fierce fight, which
caused one’s hair to stand on end, between
the thousand-armed king and the twenty-

armed ogre. (50)
सागराविव संक्षुब्धौ चलमूलाविवाचलौ।
तेजोयुक्ताविवादित्यौ प्रदहन्ताविवानलौ॥ ५१॥

बलोद्भतौ यथा नागौ वासितार्थे यथा वृषौ।
मेघाविव विनर्दन्तौ सिंहाविव बलोत्कटौ॥ ५२॥
रुद्रकालाविव क्रुद्धौ तौ तदा राक्षसार्जुनौ।
Wet Tet गृह्य ताडयामासतुर्भृशम्॥७५३॥
Seizing hold of a mace each, the ogre
and King Arjuna, who looked at that time
like two seas which were greatly ruffled,
two mountains with moving bases, a pair of
suns full of martial ardour, a couple of blazing
fires, two elephants intoxicated with might,
two bulls contending for a cow in heat, two
thundering clouds, two lions proud of their
might, like Rudra, the god of destruction,
and Kala, the Time-Spirit, provoked to anger,
struck each other violently. (51—53)

वज्रप्रहारानचला यथा घोरान् विषेहिरे।
गदाप्रहारांस्तौ तत्र सेहाते नरराक्षसौ॥७५४॥

Even as the mountains withstood the
formidable strokes of lightning at the beginning
of creation, so did the two warriors, the
human being, Arjuna, and the ogre, Ravana,
endure the blows of each other’s mace. (54)

यथाशनिरवेभ्यस्तु जायतेऽथ प्रतिश्रुति:।
तथा तयोर्गदापोथैर्दिश: सर्वा: प्रतिश्रुता:॥ ५५॥
Even as reverberations emanate from

the peals of thunder, so did all the quarters
resound with the clashes of their maces. (55)

« VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

अर्जुनस्य गदा सा तु पात्यमानाऽहितोरसि।
काञ्चनाभं नभश्चक्रे विद्युत्सौदामनी यथा॥७५६॥

While being directed against the enemy’s
breast, the well-known mace of Arjuna for
its part rendered it golden even as a flash of
lightning makes the sky assume a golden
hue. (56)

तथैव रावणेनापि पात्यमाना मुहुर्मुहु:।
अर्जुनोरसि निर्भाति गदोल्केव FART ee il

Being repeatedly directed against the
breast of Arjuna by Ravana too, his mace
likewise shone brightly like a meteor
descending on a huge mountain. (57)

नार्जुन: खेदमायाति न राक्षसगणेश्वर:।
सममासीत् तयोर्युद्धं यथा Ys बलीन्द्रयो:।॥ ५८॥

Neither Arjuna nor the ruler of the hordes
of ogres grew weary. Well-matched was
their duel as that which took place between
Bali and Indra of yore. (58)

परस्परं विनिघ्नन्तौ rarer el

Striking each other violently with full
force, the foremost of human beings as well
as the jewel among the ogres fought even
as a pair of bulls would do with their horns,
or two elephants with their tusks. (59)

ततोऽर्जुनेन क्रुद्धेन सर्वप्राणेन सा गदा।
स्तनयोरन्तरे मुक्का रावणस्य महोरसि॥६०॥

The said mace was then hurled with all
his strength by the enraged Arjuna on the
mighty chest of Ravana. (60)

वरदानकृतत्राणे सा गदा रावणोरसि।
दुर्बलेव यथावेगं द्विधाभूतापतत् fart eeu

Though hurled with full force on the
breast of Ravana, which was protected by
the bestowal of boons by Brahma, the said
mace fell on the ground, broken in two as
though it were of meagre strength. (61)

स त्वर्जुनप्रयुक्तेन गदाघातेन रावण:।
अपासर्पद् धनुर्मात्रं निषसाद च निष्टनन्॥६२॥
