# YUDDHAKANDA #

पथिवीं चान्तरिक्षं च fests: प्रदिशस्तथा।
प्राकम्पयत् तदा शब्दो राक्षसेन्द्रस्य दारुण:॥ ५३॥
The frightful roar of Ravana, the ruler
of ogres, caused the earth as well as the
heavens as also the four quarters and the
intermediate points of the compass to shake
at that time. (53)

अतिकायस्य नादेन तेन तस्य दुरात्मन:।
सर्वभूतानि वित्रेसु: सागरश्च प्रचुक्षुभे॥५४॥

All living beings were alarmed at the
aforesaid roar of that evil-minded colossus,
and the ocean was set in commotion.

(54)
स गृहीत्वा महावीर्य: शूलं Aq रावणो Aad |
विनद्य सुमहानादं WH परुषमब्रवीत्॥५५॥

Seizing hold of that enormous dart,
and emitting a very loud roar, the aforesaid
Ravana, who was7~ endowed _ with
extraordinary valour, addressed the following
harsh words to Sri Rama: (55)

शूलोऽयं वज्रसारस्ते WA रोषान्मयोद्यत:।
तव भ्रातृसहायस्य el: प्राणान् हरिष्यति॥ ५६॥
“Raised in fury by me, O Rama, this
dart, which is as powerful as the thunderbolt,
will instantly take away your life as well as
that of your younger brother, who stands by
you as your helpmate. (56)
रक्षसामद्य शूराणां निहतानां चमूमुखे।
त्वां निहत्य रणश्लाघिन् करोमि तरसा समम्॥ GY I
“Making short work of you, I, who
always commend warfare, shall speedily
level you today with the heroic ogres who
have been killed by you at the head of the
army. (57)
तिष्ठेदानीं निहन्मि त्वामेष शूलेन weal
एवमुक्त्वा स fasta तच्छूलं राक्षसाधिप:॥ ५८॥
“Wait a bit, | shall presently strike you
down with this dart, O scion of Raghu!”

Saying so, that suzerain lord of ogres hurled
the aforesaid dart at Sri Rama. (58)

739

aq रावणकरान्मुक्त fereprenrerargyary |
अष्टघण्टं महानादं वियद्गतमशोभत॥५९॥
Discharged from the hand of Ravana,
the dart flashed in the air, wreathed as it was
in a circle of lightning, and making a loud
noise, provided as it was with eight bells. (59)

तच्छूलं राघवो दृष्टवा ज्वलन्तं घोरदर्शनम्।
ससर्ज विशिखान् रामश्चापमायम्य वीर्यवान्॥६०॥

Seeing that flaming dart, terrible to
behold, and stretching his bow, the gallant
Sri Rama shot a number of arrows. (60)

आपतन्तं शरौघेण वारयामास राघव:।
उत्पतन्तं युगान्ताग्निं जलौघैरिव वासव:॥६१॥

Sri Rama, a scion of Raghu, tried to
intercept the dart even as it came flying,
with a stream of darts just as Indra, the
ruler of gods, would endeavour to stay the
fire emerging at the end of the world-cycle
with showers. (61)

निर्ददाह स तान् बाणान् रामकार्मुकनि:सृतान्।
रावणस्य महान् शूल: पतङ्गानिव पावक:॥६२॥
That huge spear of Ravana consumed
those arrows shot from the bow of Sri
Rama even as a flame would consume
moths. (62)

तान्दृष्ट्वा भस्मसाद्भूतान्शूलसंस्पर्शचूर्णितान्।
सायकानन्तरिक्षस्थान् राघव: क्रोधमाहरत्॥६३॥

Seeing those arrows pulverized by the
impact of the dart and reduced to ashes
even in air, Sri Rama, a scion of Raghu,
gave vent to his fury. (63)
स तां मातलिना नीतां शक्तिं वासवसम्मताम्।
जग्राह परमक्रुद्धो Waal रघुनन्दन:॥६४॥

Feeling extremely enraged, that scion
of Raghu, the delight of the Raghus, seized
hold of the celebrated javelin, esteemed by
Indra (the ruler of gods) and brought by his
charioteer, Matali. (64)

सा तोलिता बलवता शक्तिर्घण्टाकृतस्वना।

AM: प्रज्वालयामास युगान्तोल्केव ATTN Il
