880

| for my part came away straight from the
hermitage.” (20)
अब्रवीद् दुष्कृतं सौम्य at विना त्वमिहागत: ॥ २१॥
Distracted with agony, Sri Rama replied
as follows to Laksmana (son of Sumitra)
when he was speaking as aforesaid: “An
unbecoming act has been done by you in
that you came hither without her. (21)
जानन्नपि समर्थं मां रक्षसामपवारणे।
अनेन क्रोधवाक्येन मैथिल्या निर्गतो भवान्॥ २२॥
“Though knowing me to be capable of
repulsing the ogres, you came away annoyed
by this angry rebuke from Sita (a princess
of Mithila) ! (22)

नहि a परितुष्यामि त्यक्त्वा यदसि मैथिलीम्।
क्रुद्धाया: परुषं श्रुत्वा स्रिया यत् त्वमिहागत: i २३॥
“Surely | am not much pleased with
you for the fact that you came hither leaving
Sita (a princess of Mithila) and that too on
hearing a harsh word uttered by an angry
woman. (23)

सर्वथा त्वपनीतं ते सीतया यत् प्रचोदित:।
क्रोधस्य वशमागम्य नाकरो: शासनं AAU evil

“It was wholly unjustifiable on your
part that, falling a prey to anger when
goaded by Sita to leave her, you did not

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

carry out my behest.

असौ fe wera: शेते शरेणाभिहतो मया।
मृगरूपेण येनाहमाश्रमादपवाहित: ।॥ २५ Ul

“Indeed, the ogre by whom, disguised
as a deer, | was lured away from our
hermitage, lies there killed, being fatally
wounded with an arrow aimed at by me.(25)
fape चापं परिधाय सायकं

सलीलबाणेन च ताडितो AAT |
मार्गी तनुं त्यज्य च विक्लवस्वरो
बभूव केयूरधर: स राक्षस:॥ २६॥

“Giving up the form of a deer when
struck by me with an arrow sportfully
discharged after pulling my bow at full length
and putting the arrow to it, the fellow appeared
as an ogre adorned with armlets and emitting
a cry of agony. (26)
शराहतेनैव तदार्तया गिरा

स्वरं ममालम्ब्य सुदूरसुश्रवम्।
त्वमागतो येन विहाय मैथिलीम्॥ २७॥

“Feigning my voice, that most poignant
cry, which could be easily heard at a long
distance, was uttered in plaintive tones by
the ogre the moment he was hit with the
shaft, led by which you came away leaving
Sita (the princess of Mithila) alone. (27)

(24)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्येऽरण्यकाण्डे
एकोनषष्टितम: सर्ग: ॥ ५९ Il
Thus ends Canto Fifty-nine in the Aranyakanda of the glorious Ramayana of Valmiki,
the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

