* AYODHYAKANDA +

coursing through the heavens by virtue of
mystic powers acquired through proficiency
in Yoga. (9)

अनुशिष्टास्मि मात्रा च पित्रा च विविधाश्रयम्।
नास्मि सम्प्रति वक्तव्या वर्तितव्यं यथा मया॥ १०॥

“| have been taught in many ways by
my mother and father how | should conduct
myself in relation to you. As such । need not
be instructed in this behalf at this juncture.

(10)
se gt गमिष्यामि at पुरुषवर्जितम्।
नानामृगगणाकोर्णं शार्दूलगणसेवितम्॥११॥

“Unattended by any male servant |
shall proceed with you to the forest of
Dandaka, which is difficult to penetrate and
teems with multitudes of beasts of various
species and is infested with herds of tigers.

(11)
Ga at निवत्स्यामि ava भवने faa: |
अचिन्तयन्ती त्रींल्लोकांश्चिन्तयन्ती पतिव्रतम्॥ १२॥

“Nay, caring not for the sovereignty of
the three worlds and concentrating my
thought on the vow of serving my husband
(yourself), | shall live happily in the forest as
| would in my paternal home. (12)

शुश्रूषमाणा ते नित्यं नियता ब्रह्मचारिणी।

we रंस्ये त्वया ak वनेषु मधुगन्धिषु॥१३॥
“Serving you everyday with self-restraint

and practising sacred vows, | shall sport

with you in woodlands fragrant with stores

of honey, O valiant prince ! (13)

त्वं fe ad वने शक्तो राम सम्परिपालनम्।
अन्यस्यापि जनस्येह fee पुनर्मम Ame ex

“As for yourself, you are indeed capable
of duly supporting in the forest even other
men, who are not related to you, much
more so myself, who am your wedded wife
and entirely dependent on you, O Rama,
who bestow honour on others ! (14)

साहं त्वया गमिष्यामि aqme न dora: |

नाहं wer महाभाग निवर्तयितुमुद्यता॥१५॥

399

“Such as | am, | shall undoubtedly
accompany you to the forest today. Bent
as | am on going, | cannot be diverted from
my purpose, O highly fortunate prince!

(15)
Pret भविष्यामि न संशय:।
न ते ga करिष्यामि निवसन्ती त्वया सदा॥ १६॥

“| shall without doubt live on fruits and
roots alone from day to day and shall not
cause any annoyance to you while living
with you. (16)
अग्रतस्ते गमिष्यामि भोक्ष्ये भुक्तवति त्वयि।
इच्छामि परत: शैलान् पल्वलानि सरांसि च॥ १७॥
we सर्वत्र निर्भीता त्वया नाथेन धीमता।
हसकारण्डबाकीर्णा पद्मिनी: साधुपुष्पिता: i १८॥

इच्छेयं सुखिनी xe त्वया वीरेण संगता।
अभिषेकं करिष्यामि aq नित्यमनुव्रता॥१९॥
सह cam विशालाक्ष Ta परमनन्दिनी।
एवं वर्षसहस्राणि wd वापि waar सह॥ २०॥
व्यतिक्रमं न वेत्स्यामि स्वर्गोऽपि fe न मे मत: ।
स्वर्गेऽपि च विना वासो भविता यदि wea
त्वया विना नरव्याघ्र नाहं तदपि रोचये॥ २१॥

“| shall walk ahead of you and shall
take my food only when you have finished
your meal. After that, | long to see mountains,
ponds and lakes, remaining fearless
everywhere with you as my wise protector.
Accompanied by you, a heroic prince, |
wish happily to see lotus-ponds teeming
with swans and water-fowls and abounding
in lotuses. Nay, remaining devoted to you |
shall daily take my bath in them and, full of
supreme joy, sport with you, in this way, O
large-eyed lord! Spending with you, say,
thousands of years or even a hundred
thousand years, | shall never experience
any sorrow. Heaven too will not be acceptable
to me otherwise. Even if an abode devoid of
you is vouchsafed to me in heaven, O
scion of Raghu, | shall never find pleasure
in it without you, O tiger among men!

(17—21)
