742

used to feed those Brahmanas according to
the injunctions laid down for Sraddha. (57)
ततो भुक्तवतां cat विप्राणामिल्वलोऽब्रवीत्।
वातापे निष्क्रमस्वेति स्वरेण महता वदन्॥५८॥
“Then, after those Brahmanas had

finished the dinner, Ilvala used to call out in
a loud voice, “O Vatapi, come out!” (58)

ततो भ्रातुर्वच: श्रुत्वा वातापिर्मेषवन्नदन्।
भित्त्वा भित्त्वा शरीराणि ब्राह्मणानां विनिष्पतत्॥ ५९ Ul

“Now, hearing the voice of his brother,
Vatapi used to come out tearing the bodies
of the Brahmanas and bleating like a ram.

(59)
ब्राह्मणानां सहस्राणि da कामरूपिभि:।
विनाशितानि dea नित्यश: पिशिताशनै: ।॥ ६०॥

“Thus thousands of Brahmanas were
killed by those flesh-eaters always coming
together and assuming forms at will. (60)

अगस्त्येन तदा ea: प्रार्थितेन महर्षिणा।
अनुभूय किल श्राद्धे भक्षित: स महासुर:॥ ६१॥
“That time, they say, that great ogre

was eaten up with taste by the great sage
Agastya as requested by gods. (61)

तत: सम्पन्नमित्युक्त्वा दत्त्वा हस्तेऽवनेजनम्।
भ्रातरं निष्क्रमस्वेति चेल्वल: समभाषत॥ ६२॥

“Thereupon, saying ‘It is finished’ and
offering water for washing the hands, Ilvala
cried out to the brother : ‘Come out !’ (62)

स तदा भाषमाणं q भ्रातरं विप्रघातिनम्।

अब्रवीत् प्रहसन् धीमानगस्त्यो मुनिसत्तम:॥ ६३॥
“Then, while he was addressing these

words to his brother, the killer of Brahmanas,

that jewel among sages, the intelligent
Agastya said laughingly : (63)
कुतो निष्क्रमितुं शक्तिर्मया जीर्णस्य tare: |
भ्रातुस्तु मेषरूपस्य गतस्य यमसादनम्॥ ६४॥
‘Where is the power to come out left in
the ogre, your brother in the form of a ram,

who stands digested by me and is gone to
the abode of Yama?’ (64)

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

अथ TA aa: श्रुत्वा भ्रातुर्निधनसंश्रितम्।
प्रधर्षयितुमारेभे मुनिं क्रोधान्निशाचर:॥६५॥
“Thereupon, hearing his words declaring
the death of his brother; the night-wanderer
started assailing the sage in anger. (65)

सोऽभ्यद्रवद् द्विजेन्द्रं तं मुनिना दीप्ततेजसा।

च्क्षुषानलकल्पेन निर्दग्धो निधनं गत:॥६६॥
“He attacked the Indra amongst the

Brahmanas and, being burnt with his fire-

like glance by that sage of blazing lustre, he
died. (66)

तस्यायमाश्रमो भ्रातुस्तटाकवनशोभित:।
विप्रानुकम्पया येन कर्मेदं दुष्करं कृतम्॥६७॥

“This is the hermitage—beautified by
lakes and forest—of the brother of that
sage who did this difficult deed out of pity
for the Brahmanas.” (67)

एवं कथयमानस्य तस्य सौमित्रिणा सह।
रामस्यास्तं Wa: सूर्य: संध्याकालोऽभ्यवर्तत॥ ६८ ॥

While the celebrated Rama was thus
talking to the son of Sumitra, the sun set and
the time of evening devotions arrived. (68)
उपास्य पश्चिमां Peat सह wat यथाविधि।
प्रविवेशाश्रमपदं तमृषिं चाभ्यवादयत्॥६९॥

Having performed his evening devotions
according to scriptural ordinance together
with his younger brother, he entered the
site of the hermitage and greeted that sage.

(69)

सम्यक्प्रतिगृहीतस्तु मुनिना तेन राघव:।
न्यवसत् at निशामेकां प्राश्य मूलफलानि च॥ ७०॥
Warmly received by the said sage,
Raghava stayed there that one night taking
roots and fruits alone. (70)
wat wat व्यतीतायामुदिते रविमण्डले।
भ्रातरं तमगस्त्यस्य आमन्त्रयत राघव:॥७१॥
When the night had passed, Raghava
at sunrise took leave of that brother of
Agastya with the following words : (71)
