* BALAKANDA +

83

Canto VI

A description of the city of Ayodhya and the prosperity of its inhabitants
during the reign of King Dasaratha

दीर्घदर्शी महातेजा: पौरजानपदप्रिय:॥१॥
While living in the city of Ayodhya,
King Dasaratha protected his subjects. He
was well-versed in the Vedas and collected
all useful things. He was farsighted and
highly glorious and was loved by the people
inhabiting the city as well as the countryside.
(1)

इक्ष्वाकूणामतिरथो यज्वा धर्मपरो वशी।
महर्षिकल्पो राजर्षिस्त्रिषु लोकेषु विश्रुत:॥ २॥

He was a_ superlative  car-hero
(Atiratha)* of Ikswaku’s race. He was fond
of performing sacrifices, devoted to virtue
and given to the control of his senses. He
was a royal sage almost as good as a
Maharsi. He enjoyed a good reputation in
all the three worlds. (2)

बलवान् निहतामित्रो मित्रवान् विजितेन्द्रिय:।
my संचयैश्चान्यै:;: शक्रवैश्रवणोपम:॥ ३॥

He was strong and devoid of foes. He
had a number of allies and was the conqueror
of his senses. In point of amassing wealth
and other things, he was a compeer of
Indra and Kubera. (3)

यथा मनुर्महातेजा लोकस्य परिरक्षिता।
aa दशरथो राजा लोकस्य परिरक्षिता॥४॥
Just as the highly glorious Manu
protected the whole world, so did King
Dasaratha. (4)

तेन सत्याभिसंधेन त्रिवर्गमनुतिष्ठता।
पालिता सा पुरी श्रेष्ठा इन्द्रेणेवामरावती॥ ५॥

That king, who was true to his word
and who was engaged in the pursuit of

wealth, religious merit and sense-enjoyment
protected the foremost city of Ayodhya, in
the same way as Indra protected Amaravati.
(5)

तस्मिन् पुरवरे हृष्टा धर्मात्मानो बहुश्रुता:।
नरास्तुष्टा धनै: स्वै: स्वैरलुब्धा: सत्यवादिन: ।। ६॥
The people of that city were happy,
virtuous, learned in sacred lore, free from
greed, truthful and contented with their own
fortune. (6)

नाल्पसंनिचय: कश्चिदासीत् तस्मिन् पुरोत्तमे।
कुटुम्बी यो ह्यसिद्धार्थोऽगवाश्वधनधान्यवान्॥७॥

There was no householder in that great
city who had not stored valuable things in
abundance and had not attained the objects
of human pursuit and who was in want of
oxen, cows, horses and other wealth and
foodgrains. (7)

कामी वा न कदर्यो वा AMA: THU: क्वचित्।
RS शक्यमयोध्यायां नाविद्वान् न च नास्तिक: Ue ॥

There was no man to be seen in
Ayodhya who was sensuous, miserly, cruel,
ignorant and unbelieving. (8)

wa नराश्च नार्यश्च धर्मशीला: सुसंयता:।

मुदिता: शीलव्रत्ताभ्यां महर्षय इवामला:॥९॥
All the men and women of that city

were by nature virtuous, well-regulated in

life, always cheerful and faultless in character
and disposition like Maharsis. (9)

नाकुण्डली नामुकुटी नास्त्रग्वी नाल्पभोगवान्।
नामृष्टो न नलिप्ताङ्गो नासुगन्धश्च विद्यते॥१०॥
There was no one in Ayodhya who
was devoid of gold ear-rings, diadem and
flower-wreaths. Nobody lacks in objects of

* An Atiratha is he who fights a number of Maharathas alone.
