« KISKINDHAKANDA +

then exploring the caves and the dense
forests of the Vindhyan range, Hanuman for
his part halted. (2)

पर्वताग्रनदीदुर्गान् सरांसि विपुलद्रुमान्।
वृक्षषण्डांश्च विविधान् पर्वतान् वनपादपान्॥ ३॥
अन्वेषमाणास्ते सर्वे वानरा: सर्वतोदिशम्।

न सीतां ददृशुर्वीरा मैथिलीं जनकात्मजाम्॥४॥

Even though scouring the mountain
peaks, rivers and places difficult of access,
lakes, huge trees as well as groves of
various kinds of trees, mountains and forest
trees on all sides, all those heroic monkeys
failed to perceive Sita, daughter of Janaka
and a princess of Mithila. (3-4)

ते भक्षयन्तो मूलानि फलानि विविधान्यपि।
अन्वेषमाणा दुर्धर्षा न्यवसंस्तत्र तत्र ह॥५॥

Subsisting on roots as well as on fruits
of various kinds, they say, while conducting
their search, the monkeys, who were difficult
to overpower, stayed wherever they could.

(5)

ag देशो दुरन्वेषो गुहागहनवान् महान्।
निर्जलं निर्जनं शून्यं गहनं घोरदर्शानम्॥६॥
That vast region round about the
Vindhyan range, however, was difficult to
explore, full of caves and dense forests as
it was, and consisting of a wilderness which
was waterless, uninhabited, desolate and
frightful to look at. (6)

तादृशान्यप्यरण्यानि विचित्य भृशपीडिता:।
स देशश्च दुरन्वेष्यो गुहागहनवान् महान्॥७॥
त्यक्त्वा तु तं ततो देशं Wa aA हरियूथपा:।
देशमन्यं दुराधर्षं विविशुश्चाकुतोभया:॥८॥
यत्र वन्ध्यफला gen विपुष्पा: पर्णवर्जिता:।
निस्तोया: सरितो यत्र मूलं aa सुदुर्लभम्॥९॥
न सन्ति महिषा यत्र न मृगा न च हस्तिन:।
शार्दूला: पक्षिणो वापि ये चान्ये वनगोचरा:॥ १०॥
Having scoured even such forests,
although that vast region was difficult to

comb, full of caves and thick forests as it
was, and presently leaving that region,

1117

severly tormented as they were with hunger
and thirst as a result of roaming in a waterless
tract, all the monkey chiefs for their part,
who had no fear from any quarter, penetrated
in a body into another region, which was
difficult to assail, and where the trees were
unfruitful, flowerless and even without leaves,
nay, where the streams were devoid of
water and where even roots were most
difficult to get, where there were no buffaloes
nor deer nor elephants nor tigers nor even
birds nor any other animals found in a
forest. (7—10)

न चात्र वृक्षा नौषध्यो न वल्लयो नापि वीरुध:।
स्निग्धपत्रा: स्थले यत्र पद्मिन्य: फुल्लपङ्कजा: ॥। ११॥
प्रेक्षणीया: सुगन्धाश्च भ्रमरैश्च विवर्जिता:।
कण्डुर्नाम महाभाग: सत्यवादी तपोधन:॥१२॥
weft: परमामर्षी नियमैर्दुष्प्रधर्षण:।
तस्य तस्मिन् वने पुत्रो बालको दशवार्षिक: 1 १३॥
प्रणष्टो जीवितान्ताय क्रुद्धस्तेन Tera: |
तेन धर्मात्मना शप्तं Het तत्र महद्बनम्॥१४॥
अशरण्यं दुराधर्षं मृगपक्षिविवर्जितम्।
तस्य ते काननान्तांस्तु गिरीणां कन्दराणि च॥ १५॥
प्रभवाणि नदीनां च विचिन्वन्ति समाहिता:।
तत्र चापि महात्मानो नापश्यञ्जनकात्मजाम्॥ BE
eat रावणं वापि सुग्रीवप्रियकारिण:।
a प्रविश्य तु तं भीमं camera १७॥
ददृशुर्भीमकर्माणमसुरं सुरनिर्भयम्।
तं Gear वानरा घोरं स्थितं शैलमिवासुरम्॥ १८॥

Here there were neither trees nor annual
plants nor climbers nor creepers nor were
there in that area lotus plants with smooth
leaves nor open lotuses charming to look at
and fragrant and frequented by bees. There
was an eminent sage, Kandu by name, who
was highly blessed and truthful of speech,
whose only wealth was his asceticism, who
was supremely irascible and was difficult to
overcome by virtue of his austerities. In that
forest there lived in the past his son, a
ten-year-old boy, who died in that he had
reached the end of his life. The great sage
felt enraged because of this mishap.
