838

“Your waist can be enclosed within the
tips of one thumb and index finger, O lady
with sleek hair and close breasts! Neither
a goddess, nor a Gandharva lady, nor a
Yaksa woman nor a Kinnara girl nor a
human lady of such passing comeliness
was seen by me ever before on the face of
the earth. Your comeliness, which is foremost
in all the three worlds, as also your
tenderness and youth, on the one hand,
and your residence in this forest, on the
other hand, agitate my mind. As such depart
from this place, may prosperity attend on
you ! You ought no longer to stay here.

(22—24)
राक्षसानामयं वासो घोराणां कामरूपिणाम्।
प्रासादाग्राणि रम्याणि नगरोपवनानि च॥ २५॥
सम्पन्नानि सुगन्धीनि युक्तान्याचरितुं त्वया।
वरं Wed वरं We at वस्त्रं च शोभने॥ २६॥
Wit च a मन्ये त्वद्युक्तमसितेक्षणे।

का त्वं भवसि रुद्राणां मरुतां वा शुचिस्मिते॥ २७॥
वसूनां वा वरारोहे देवता प्रतिभासि मे।
Ae गच्छन्ति गन्धर्वा न देवा न च किन्नरा:॥ २८॥

“This forest is the home of fierce ogres
capable of assuming any form at will. The
charming topmost storeys of palaces as
well as prosperous cities and sweet-smelling
gardens alone are fit to be occupied and
frequented by you. | consider that garland
as foremost, that fragrant substance as
excellent and that article of wearing apparel
as the best and also that husband as worth
choosing, that is united with you, O charming
lady with dark eyes! Who are you, O lady
with bright smiles? To me you appear to be
a goddess married to the (eleven) Rudras,
the (forty-nine) wind-gods or the (eight)
Vasus, O lady with charming limbs! Neither
Gandharvas nor gods nor Kinnaras visit
this forest. (25—28)

राक्षसानामयं ae: wet q त्वमिहागता।
Be शाखामृगा: सिंहा द्वीपिव्याघ्रमृगा gent: tl Ve
ऋक्षास्तरक्षव: कङ्का: कथं तेभ्यो न बिभ्यसे।
मदान्वितानां घोराणां कुञ्जराणां तरस्विनाम्॥ ३०॥

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

कथमेका महारण्ये न fade वरानने।
कासिकस्य कुतश्चत्वं किं निमित्तं च दण्डकान्॥ ३१॥
एका चरसि कल्याणि घोरान् राक्षससेवितान्।
sft प्रशस्ता Sed रावणेन महात्मना॥३२॥

द्विजातिवेषेण fe तं gear रावणमागतम्।
सर्वैरतिथिसत्कारै: पूजयामास मैथिली॥ ३३॥

“This forest is the home of ogres. How
did you come to this place at all? Here live
monkeys, lions, leopards, tigers and deer,
wolves, bears, hyenas and buzzards. How
do you not feel afraid of them? How do you
not feel afraid of dreadful elephants in rut
and full of speed, though living alone in this
huge forest, O lady with a charming
countenance? Who are you? Whose consort
are you and where do you hail from? And
for what purpose do you range alone in the
frightful Dandaka forest frequented by ogres,
O blessed one?” Eulogized as above by the
swindler Ravana and actually seeing the
aforesaid Ravana come in the garb of a
Brahmana, Sita, the princess of Mithila,
adored him with all honours due to an
unexpected guest. (29—33)

उपानीयासनं पूर्वं पाद्येनाभिनिमन्त्यं च।
अब्रवीत् सिद्धमित्येव तदा तं सौम्यदर्शनम्॥ ३४॥
Having offered him a seat first and
tended upon him with water to wash his feet
with, she then said to Ravana of gentle

aspect only this: “Cooked food is ready.”
(34)

द्विजातिवेषेण ater मैथिली

समागतं पात्रकुसुम्भधारिणम्।
अशक्यमुद्द्वेष्टुमुपायदर्शना-

न्न्यमन्त्रयद् ब्राह्मणवत् तथागतम्॥ ३५ ॥

Perceiving him arrived without previous
notice in the garb of a Brahmana, carrying
a water-pot (made of marine cocoanut-shell)
and clad in saffron-coloured robes and
unworthy of neglect because of her having
perceived the marks of a Brahmana on his
person, Sita invited him in the following
