314

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA +

Canto VI

At Lanka Ravana holds consultation with the ogres on the means of
victory in the contingency of a conflict with the monkeys

लङ्कायां तु ad कर्म घोरं geal भयावहम्।
राक्षसेन्द्रो हनुमता शक्रेणेव महात्मना।
अब्रवीद् राक्षसान् सर्वान् ह्रिया किंचिदवाङ्मुख: It १॥

Perceiving the terrible and grisly feat
accomplished in Lanka by the high-souled
Hanuman, who vied with Indra in might,
Ravana, the lord of ogres, spoke as follows
to all the ogres, his looks directed a bit
downwards from bashfulness: (1)

धर्षिता च प्रविष्टा च लङ्का दुष्प्रसहा पुरी।
wt वानरमात्रेण दृष्टा सीता च जानकी॥२॥

“The city of Lanka, which was difficult
to challenge, has been assailed and
penetrated into and Sita found out by
Hanuman, a mere monkey. (2)

rater efqasyea: YURT राक्षसा हता:।

आविला च Ut लङ्का सर्वा हनुमता Har ३॥
“The edifice used as a sanctuary has

been penetrated, the topmost ogres have

been killed and the entire city of Lanka
turned upside down by Hanuman. (3)

किं करिष्यामि भद्रं a: किं at युक्तमनन्तरम्।
saat A: समर्थं यत् Hd च सुकृतं भवेत्॥४॥
“May good betide you, what shall | do
next? What appeals to you as advisable to
do next? Please suggest what is equal to
us and what, if attempted, will be well
executed. (4)

मन्त्रमूलं च fast प्रवदन्ति मनस्विन:।

wee वै रोचये मन्त्रं रामं प्रति महाबला:॥ ५॥
“The wise declare victory as dependent

on good counsel. |, therefore, prefer to take

your counsel with regard to Rama, O ogres
of extraordinary might! (5)

त्रिविधा: geet cite उत्तमाधममध्यमा:।
तेषां तु समवेतानां गुणदोषौ वदाम्यहम्॥६॥

“There are three kinds of men in the
world—the good, the bad and the mediocre.
|, for my part, describe the good points as
well as the shortcomings of them all as
follows: (6)
मन्त्रस्तिभिर्हि dan: समर्थैर्मन्त्रनिर्णये।
मित्रैर्वापि समानार्थैर्बान्धवैरपि वाधिकै:॥७॥
सहितो मन्त्रयित्वा a: कर्मारम्भान् प्रवर्तयेत्।
दैवे च कुरुते यत्नं तमाहु: पुरुषोत्तमम्॥८॥

“The wise declare him to be the
foremost of men, whose counsel is actually
endowed with the _ following three
characteristics, and who prosecutes his
undertakings after deliberating with his
friends, who are capable of deciding a point
at issue or with relations having common
interests or even with his superiors and
exerts himself depending on Providence.

(7-8)

एकोऽर्थं विमृशेदेको धर्मे wed मन:।
एक: कार्याणि qed तमाहुर्मध्यमं नरम्॥९॥

“They call him mediocre, who ponders
his interests by himself, sets his mind on
virtue all by himself and executes his designs
single-handed. (9)

गुणदोषौ न निश्चित्य त्यक्त्वा दैवव्यपाश्रयम्।
करिष्यामीति a: कार्यमुपेक्षेत् स नराधम:॥ १०॥

“Failing to ascertain the advantages
and the disadvantages of a scheme, nay,
renouncing his dependence on Providence
and merely saying ‘Il shall do it, he
who neglects his duty is the vilest of men.

(10)
