478

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA +

एकपञ्चाश: सर्ग:

Canto LI

Hearing the tumultuous noise of the monkeys, the servants of Ravana,
detailed for the purpose, report to him how the two scions of
Raghu were freed from the bondage of arrows. Depressed
by this news, Ravana dispatches Dhumraksa to dispose
of Sri Rama. Though perturbed at the sight of evil
portents, yet unwilling to retrace his steps
on any account, Dhumraksa surveys
the army of the monkeys

तेषां तु तुमुलं Wed वानराणां महौजसाम्।
नर्दतां राक्षसै: सार्धं तदा शुश्राव रावण:॥१॥
Accompanied by ogres, Ravana for
his part heard at that moment the tumultuous
noise of those roaring monkeys, who were
endowed with extraordinary energy. (1)
स्निग्धगम्भीरनिर्घोषं stat तं fad भृशम्।
सचिवानां ततस्तेषां मध्ये वचनमब्रवीत्॥२॥
Hearing that loud noise, producing a
merry and deep sound, Ravana then spoke
as follows in the midst of the aforesaid
counsellors: (2)

यथासौ सम्प्रहृष्टानां वानराणामुपस्थित:।
बहूनां सुमहान् नादो मेघानामिव गर्जताम्॥३॥
सुव्यक्तं महती प्रीतिरेतेषां aa संशय:।
तथाहि विपुलैर्नादैश्चुक्षुभे लवणार्णव:॥४॥
“From the way in which that very great
uproar, resembling the thunder of rumbling
clouds, has arisen from the innumerable
overjoyed monkeys, it is sufficiently evident
that their joy is great: there is no doubt
about it. That is how the salt sea has been
agitated by their mighty shouts. (3-4)
तौ तु बद्धौ oteiettutet रामलक्ष्मणौ।
अयं च सुमहान् नाद: शङ्कां जनयतीव Anat
“While those two brothers, Sri Rama

and Laksmana, lie bound with sharp arrows,
this tremendous outcry gives rise to a

suspicion in my mind that the two brothers
have been freed from their bondage.” (5)

एवं च वचनं चोक्त्वा मन्तिणो राक्षसेश्चर:।
उवाच नैर्ऋतांस्तत्र समीपपरिवर्तिन:॥६॥

Having addressed the foregoing words
to his counsellors, Ravana (the lord of ogres)
spoke as follows to the ogres standing near
him on that spot: (6)
ज्ञायतां तूर्णमेतेषां सर्वेषां च वनौकसाम्।
शोककाले समुत्पन्ने हर्षकारणमुत्थितम्॥७॥

“Let the cause of rejoicing that
has sprung up for all these monkeys (lit.,
denizens of the woods) when an occasion
for grief had already arisen, be speedily
found out.” (7)

तथोक्तास्ते सुसम्भ्रान्ता: प्राकारमधिरुह्य च।
ददृशु: पालितां सेनां सुग्रीवेण महात्मना॥८॥
Scaling the defensive wall, when
commanded as above by Ravana, the ogres,
who felt somewhat depressed, beheld the
army protected by the high-souled Sugriva.
(8)

at च मुक्तौ सुघोरेण शरबन्धेन राघवौ।
समुत्थितौ महाभागौ विषेदु: सर्वराक्षसा:॥९॥

Nay, all the ogres felt despondent
on seeing those two highly fortunate scions
of Raghu, viz., Sri Rama and Laksmana
fully active, freed, as they were, from their
