« KISKINDHAKANDA +

- भीमानां af । ।
विन्ध्याद् वानरकोटीनां सहस्राण्यपतन् द्रुतम्॥ २४॥

Thousands of crores of fearful monkeys,
appearing red like the Mars and of terrible
deeds, descended in haste from the Vindhyan
range. (24)

क्षीरोदवेलानिलयास्तमालवनवासिन: ।
नारिकेलाशनाश्चैव तेषां संख्या न विद्यते॥ २५॥
वनेभ्यो Teas सरिद्भ्यश्च महाबला:।
आगच्छद् वानरी सेना पिबन्तीव दिवाकरम्॥ २६॥

The number of those which had their
abode on the shores of the Milk Ocean and
those who dwelt in the forest known by the
name of Tamalavana, living on coconuts,
and those, possessed of extraordinary might,
who came from other forests and caves
and river banks could not be ascertained.
The said monkey force came as though
gorging the sun. (25-26)

ये तु त्वरयितुं याता वानरा: सर्ववानरान्।
a वीरा हिमवच्छैले ददृशुस्तं महाद्रुमम्॥ २७॥
Those gallant monkeys, for their part,
which went forth to spur all the rest (which
had preceded them) beheld on the Himalaya
mountain the well-known’ giant tree
(located in the sacrificial grounds of Lord
Siva). (27)
afer गिरिवरे qua यज्ञो wea: पुरा।
सर्वदेवमनस्तोषो बभूव सुमनोरम:॥ २८॥

On that sacred jewel among mountains
a sacrifice intended to propitiate the great
Lord Siva, which gratified the mind of all the
gods and was very charming, was performed
in the past. (28)

अन्ननिस्यन्दजातानि मूलानि च फलानि च।
अमृतस्वादुकल्पानि ददृशुस्तत्र वानरा:॥ २९॥

The monkeys saw there roots and fruits,
too, almost as delicious as ambrosia, which
had sprung up from the streams of milk,
boiled with rice, sugar and ghee (which had
been poured into the sacred fire and
overflowed the sacrificial pits). (29)

1079

य: कश्चित् सकृदश्नाति मासं भवति तर्पित: ।॥ Bo ॥

Whoever partakes even once of the
ethereal fruits and roots sprung up from that
offering of milk boiled with rice etc., remains
sated for a whole month. (30)

तानि मूलानि दिव्यानि फलानि च फलाशना:।
औषधानि च दिव्यानि जगृहुर्हरिपुंगवा:॥ ३१॥
These jewels among the monkeys, living
as they did on fruits alone, gathered those
ethereal roots and fruits as well as the
celestial herbs while on their way to Kiskindha.
(31)

तस्माच्च यज्ञायतनात् पुष्पाणि सुरभीणि च।
आनिन्युर्वानरा गत्वा सुग्रीवप्रियकारणात्॥ ३२॥

Nay, making for the sacrificial ground,
the monkeys also brought from it fragrant
flowers to win the pleasure of Sugriva. (32)

a तु Wa हरिवरा: पृथिव्यां सर्ववानरान्।

संचोदयित्वा त्वरितं यूथानां जग्मुरग्रत:॥ ३३॥
Pressing all the monkeys on earth to

seek the presence of Sugriva, all those jewels

among the monkeys for their part returned
with all speed before those hordes. (33)

ते तु तेन मुहूर्तेन कपय: शीघ्रचारिण:।
किष्किन्धां त्वरया प्राप्ता: सुग्रीवो यत्र वानर:॥ ३४॥

The former swift-going monkeys for their
part arrived in Kiskindha with haste during
that very hour and reached the place where
Sugriva, the monkey king, was. (34)

a गृहीत्वौषधी: Gat: फलमूलं च वानरा:।
तं प्रतिग्राहयामासुर्वचनं चेदमब्रुवन्॥३५॥
Taking all the herbs as also the fruits
and roots they had brought with them, they
importuned Sugriva to accept them and
submitted as follows : (35)
ad परिसृता: शैला: सरितश्च वनानि च।
पृथिव्यां वानरा: सर्वे शासनादुपयान्ति ते॥ ३६॥

“All the mountains, river-banks and
forests too have been scoured by us; all
