# YUDDHAKANDA +

सम्पृक्तं नभसाप्यम्भ: सम्पृक्तं च नभोऽम्भसा I

तादृग्रूपे स्म दृश्येते तारारत्नसमाकुले॥११६॥

The water of the sea was linked with
the firmament and the latter with the water
of the sea. Full of stars and pearls,
respectively, the two appeared identical.

(116)

समुत्पतितमेघस्य वीचिमालाकुलस्य च।
विशेषो न द्वयोरासीत् सागरस्याम्बरस्य च॥ ११७॥

No distinction could be made between
the two, viz., the sea and the firmament, in
the latter of which (the sky) clouds had
sprung into existence, while the former was
crowded with rows of waves. (117)
अन्योन्यैरहता: सक्ता: सस्वनुर्भीमनि:स्वना: |
ऊर्मय: सिन्धुराजस्य महाभेर्य इवाम्बरे॥ ee i

Having come in close contact with and
collided against one another, the waves of
the kingly sea roared with a terrible noise
like huge kettledrums sounding in the
air. (118)

311

रत्नौघजलसंनादं विषक्कतमिव वायुना।
उत्पतन्तमिव He यादोगणसमाकुलम्॥११९॥

The monkeys saw the sea concentrated,
as it were, at one place by the wind, nay,
characterized by the noise of precious
stones scattered by it as well as by the
roaring of its waves, also infested with
aquatic creatures and rising high as though
infuriated. (119)

ददृशुस्ते महात्मानो वाताहतजलाशयम्।
अनिलोद्धूतमाकाशे प्रवलान्तमिवोर्मिभि:।॥ १२०॥

Those high-souled monkeys surveyed
the sea lashed by the winds and tossed by
them in the air, nay, dancing, as it were,
through its waves. (120)

ततो विस्मयमापन्ना हरयो age: स्थिता:।
भ्रान्तोर्मिजालसंनादं प्रलोलमिव सागरम्॥१२१॥

Standing wonderstruck at this, the
monkeys saw the sea full of noise
produced by the rolling waves, riotous, as it
were. (121)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये युद्धकाण्डे चतुर्थ: सर्ग: ॥ ¥ il
Thus ends Canto Four in the Yuddhakanda of the glorious Ramayana of
Valmiki, the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

Canto V

While talking with Laksmana, Sri Rama is reminded
of Sita and, smitten with pangs of love, gives
way to grief and lamentation

सा तु नीलेन विधिवत्स्वारक्षा सुसमाहिता।
सागरस्योत्तरे तीरे साधु सा विनिवेशिता॥१॥

Properly guarded by itself and fully
vigilant, the aforesaid army of monkeys for
its part was comfortably quartered on the
northern shore of the sea by Nila, the

Commander-in-Chief.

मैन्दश्च द्विविदश्चोभौ तत्र वानरपुङ्खवौ।

विचेरतुश्च at सेनां रक्षार्थं सर्वतोदिशम्॥ २॥
Nay, both Mainda and Dwivida, the two

bulls among monkeys, patrolled in that area
on all sides of the army for its protection. (2)

(1)
