* AYODHYAKANDA +

सोऽवतीर्य रथाच्छीघ्रं राजवेश्म प्रविश्य a

Hea: सप्ताभिचक्राम महाजनसमाकुला: ॥ १७॥
Quickly alighting from the chariot and

entering the royal palace, he crossed the

seven portals thronged with large crowds of
men (17)

हरम्यैर्विमानै: प्रासादैरवेक्ष्याथ समागतम्।
ह्राहाकारकृता नार्यो रामादर्शनकर्शिता:॥१८॥

Finding from their mansions, seven-
storied buildings and palaces that Sumantra
had duly returned from the forest without
Sri Rama, ladies, who had been emaciated
because of their not being able to see Sri
Rama all these days, burst into a loud wail.

(18)
आयतैर्विमलैर्नेत्रैरश्रुवेगपरिप्लुतै: ।
अन्योन्यमभिवीक्षन्तेऽव्यक्तमार्ततरा: fara: १९॥

Deeply distressed, the ladies gazed on
one another vacantly with their big eyes
flooded with an upsurge of tears and,
therefore, rid of their collyrium. (19)

ततो दशरथस्त्रीणां प्रासादेभ्यस्ततस्तत:।
रामशोकाभितप्तानां मन्दं शुश्राव जल्पितम्॥ २०॥
Then he heard the talk in low tones of
the consorts of Emperor Dasaratha—who
were stricken with grief caused by separation

from Sri Rama—from their palaces here
and there. (20)
we रामेण निर्यातो विना राममिहागत:।
सूत: किं नाम कौसल्यां क्रोशान्तीं प्रतिवक्ष्यति॥ २१॥
“They said to one another : “What reply
will the charioteer (Sumantra), who departed
from Ayodhya with Rama and has returned
to the capital without Rama, give to the

screaming Kausalya when questioned by
her? (21)
यथा च मन्ये दुर्जीवमेवं न सुकरं ध्रुवम्।
आच्छिद्य पुत्रे निर्याते कौसल्या यत्र जीवति॥ २२॥
“Since Kausalya continues to survive

even though her son Rama has left Ayodhya
relinquishing the throne, | am led to believe

507

that surely it is not so easy to end one’s life,
as it is hard to preserve life against odds.”
(22)
सत्यरूपं तु ag वाक्यं राजस्त्रीणां निशामयन्।
प्रदीप्त ga शोकेन विवेश सहसा गृहम्॥ २३॥
Hearing the aforesaid truthful assertion
of the King’s consorts, Sumantra for his
part entered the palace all at once as though
he were set ablaze with grief. (23)
स प्रविश्याष्टमीं Heat राजानं दीनमातुरम्।
पुत्रशोकपरिद्यूनमपश्यत् पाण्डुरे TSN २४॥
Entering the eighth gateway, he beheld
in the white chamber the afflicted and over-

anxious monarch withered through grief for
his son. (24)

अभिगम्य तमासीनं राजानमभिवाद्यं च।

सुमन्त्रो रामवचनं यथोक्तं प्रत्यवेदयत्॥ २५॥
Approaching the aforesaid king, who

was seated, and greeting him, Sumantra

delivered to him the message of Sri Rama,
as instructed by the latter. (25)

स तूष्णीमेव तच्छुत्वा राजा विद्रुतमानस:।
मूर्छितो न्यपतद् भूमौ रामशोकाभिपीडित:॥ २६ ॥

Hearing that message in perfect silence,
the aforesaid monarch felt perplexed in mind
and dropped unconscious to the ground,
tormented as he was with grief caused by
separation from Sri Rama. (26)

ततोऽन्त:पुरमाविद्धुं मूर्छिते पृथिवीपतौ।
उच्छित्य बाहू चुक्रोश Todt पतिते क्षितौ।। २७॥

The Emperor having fainted, the entire
gynaeceum now felt sore distressed. And
when the king fell to the ground, the inmates
of the gynaeceum burst into a wail raising
their arms. (27)

सुमित्रया तु सहिता कौसल्या पतितं पतिम्।
उत्थापयामास तदा वचनं चेदमब्रवीत्॥ २८॥
Assisted by Sumitra, Kausalya for her

part lifted up her fallen husband on that
occasion and submitted as follows: (28)
