+ UTTARAKANDA +

(Dharmasutras) and also experts in vocal
music and dance, and bringing all of them
together, made the two singers sit in the
assembly of all these. (4—10)
गेयं प्रचक्रतुस्तत्र तावुभौ मुनिदारकौ॥११॥
Those two sons of the sage (Lava and
KuSa) then started singing, causing more
joy to audience who were talking among
themselves. (11)
wd: Wad मधुरं गान्धर्वमतिमानुषम्।
न च qt aq: ad श्रोतारो गेयसम्पदा॥१२॥
Then continued the super-human music;
all hearing it were not satiated by its musical
culture and desired to hear more of it. (12)

eer मुनिगणा: wa पार्थिवाश्च महौजस:।
पिबन्त ga चक्षुर्भि: पश्यन्ति स्म मुहुर्मुहु:॥ १३॥
The hosts of sages were in joy and
also the mighty kings, seeing again and
again the two boys as if they would drink
them up through their eyes. (13)

By: wet ad wd wa समाहिता:।
उभौ रामस्य सदृशौ बिम्बाद् बिम्बमिवोत्थितौ 1 १४॥

They looked attentively and said to
each other: ‘Both are similar to Sri Rama as
a reflection of the original object. (14)

जटिलौ afe न carat न वल्कलधरौ यदि।
विशेषं नाधिगच्छामो गायतो राघवस्य च॥ १५॥

‘If they were not bearing matted hair or
not dressed in bark-garments, we could not
differentiate between those two singers and
the descendant of Raghu, the king, Sri Rama.

(15)
एवं प्रभाषमाणेषु पौरजानपदेषु च।
warmed: पूर्वसर्गं नारददर्शितम्॥१६॥

While the citizens and townsmen talked

in this way, the first canto attributed to
Narada was sung from the beginning. (16)

aa: प्रभृति सर्गांश्च यावद् विंशत्यगायताम्।
ततोऽपराह्णसमये राघव: समभाषत॥१७॥

1103

अष्टादश सहस्राणि सुवर्णस्य Aer: Ve i
प्रयच्छ शीघ्रं काकुत्स्थ यदन्यदभिकांक्षितम्।
Sel स शीघ्रं काकुत्स्थो बालयोर्वै पृथक TMAH i १९॥
From then on, they sang till the twenty
cantos were completed. Then in the evening
Sri Rama, the descendant of Raghu,
affectionate to his brothers after hearing the
twenty cantos, spoke to his brother: “Give
to these two noble ones soon, eighteen
thousand gold coins, and whatever else
they ask for.” The scion of Kakutstha,
Bharata, at once began to give it to those
two boys separately. (17—19)
दीयमानं सुवर्णं तु नागृह्णीतां कुशीलवौ।
ऊचतुश्च महात्मानौ किमनेनेति विस्मितौ॥ २०॥
The two—KuSa and Lava, the noble
ones, did not accept the gold coins being
given to them and they said in surprise: ‘Of
what use are these to us.’ (20)

वन्येन फलमूलेन निरतौ वनवासिनौ।
सुवर्णेन हिरण्येन fe करिष्यावहे वने॥२१॥
‘We reside in the forest and subsist

daily on fruits and roots. What shall we do
with gold and silver coins in the forest.’ (21)

तथा तयो: प्रन्रुवतो: कौतूहलसमन्विता:।
श्रोतारश्चैव was ad wa सुविस्मिता:॥ २२॥
Thus as both of them spoke, those
who heard them together with Sri Rama,
too, were surprised and filled with curiosity.
(22)

तस्य चैवागमं WH: काव्यस्य श्रोतुमुत्सुक:।
पप्रच्छ dt महातेजास्तावुभौ मुनिदारकौ॥ २३॥
Desirous to know the composer of that
poem, Sri Rama, the mighty one, asked
both of those two ascetics: (23)

किं प्रमाणमिदं काव्यं का प्रतिष्ठा महात्मन:।
कर्ता काव्यस्य महत: क्व चासौ मुनिपुङ्खव:॥ २४॥
“How long is this poem? What is the
object of the noble one, Valmiki? Where is
