* ARANYAKANDA «

917

द्विसप्ततितम: सर्ग:
Canto LXXII

Appearing in his ethereal form when cremated by Sri Rama and Laksmana,
Kabandha counsels them to make an alliance with Sugriva

wat तु dt at कबन्धेन नरेश्वरौ।
गिरिप्रदरमासाद्य = Wah विससर्जतु:॥१॥
Taking Kabandha to the hollow of a
mountain (and placing him on logs of wood
piled in the hollow), those two valiant rulers
of men, Sri Rama and Laksmana, for their
part, when spoken to as above by
Kabandha, ignited a fire. (1)

लक्ष्मणस्तु Helcchaeafera a: समन्तत:।
चितामादीपयामास सा प्रजज्वाल सर्वत:॥ २॥

With the aid of large burning brands,
Laksmana for his part lit the pyre on all sides
and lo ! it began to burn fiercely all-round. (2)
TR कबन्धस्य घृतपिण्डोपमं महत्।
मेदसा पच्यमानस्य aS दहत पावक:॥ ३॥

The fire slowly consumed the aforesaid
body of Kabandha, which, while being
cremated, looked like a huge lump of clarified
butter, plump with fat as he was. (3)

सविधूय चितामाशु विधूमोऽग्निरिवोत्थित:।
अरजे वाससी बिभ्रन्माल्यं feet महाबल:॥४॥
Throwing about the pyre, the aforesaid
Kabandha, who was possessed of great
might, speedily rose like a smokeless flame,
wearing a spotless pair of garments and a
heavenly garland. (4)
ततश्चिताया वेगेन भास्वरो विरजाम्बर:।
उत्पपाताशु संहृष्टऽ सर्वप्रत्यङ्गभूषण:॥ ५॥
Full of brilliance, clad in spotless raiment,
highly rejoiced and having all his limbs
adorned with ornaments, he promptly flew
from the pyre with impetuosity. (5)

विमाने भास्वरे तिष्ठन् हंसयुक्ते यशस्करे।
प्रभया च महातेजा दिशो दश विराजयन्॥६॥
सोऽन्तरिक्षगतो Ae कबन्धो राममब्रवीत्।
श्रृणु Tea तत्त्वेन यथा सीतामवाप्स्यसि॥७॥

Taking his seat in a splendid aerial car,
conferring glory on its occupant and drawn
by swans, and illumining all the ten directions
by his effulgence, the aforesaid Kabandha,
who was endowed with extraordinary energy,
spoke to Sri Rama as follows, while remaining
in the air: “Hear, O scion of Raghu, how in
reality you will be able to recover Sita. (6-7)

TH Ug युक्तयो लोके याभि: we विमृश्यते।
परिमृष्टो दशान्तेन दशाभागेन सेव्यते॥८॥

“There are six expedients by recourse
to which everything can be had after due
deliberation by monarchs in the worlds. One
who is overtaken by the height of misfortune
is served only by another who has met with
a similar fate. (8)

दशाभागगतो aed fe Wa सलक्ष्मण:।
यत्कृते व्यसनं Wa त्वया दारप्रधर्षणम्॥९॥

“You alongwith Laksmana are fallen in
the height of adversity, deprived as you are
of sovereignty and amenities of life. Because
of this adverse fate, a misfortune in the
shape of abduction of your wife (Sita) has
been suffered by you. (9)
तदवश्यं त्वया कार्य: स Yed सुहृदां वर।
अकृत्वा नहि ते सिद्धिमहं पश्यामि चिन्तयन्॥ १०॥

“Therefore, such an individual who has
reached the culmination of adverse fate like
you, must be made an ally, O jewel among
the kind-hearted ! Even though reflecting, |
do not anticipate success for you without
having an ally. (10)

श्रूयतां wa वक्ष्यामि सुग्रीवो नाम वानर:।
भ्रात्रा निरस्त: क्रुद्धेन वालिना शक्रसूनुना॥११॥
“Listen, O Rama! | shall point out such
an individual. There is a monkey (chief),
Sugriva by name, disowned by his enraged
brother, Vali, son of Indra. (11)
