* ARANYAKANDA «

तस्य ज्याविप्रमुक्तास्ते शरा: काञ्चनभूषणा:।
mt विधमिष्यन्ति गङ्गाकूलमिवोर्मय:॥७॥
“Shafts decked with gold, shot from his
bow-string, will tear your body to pieces as
the waters of the sacred Ganga wear away
its banks. (7)

असुरैर्वा सुरैर्वा त्वं यद्यवध्योऽसि रावण।
उत्पाद्य सुमहद् at जीवंस्तस्य न मोक्ष्यसे॥ ८॥

“In case you cannot be killed by demons
or, say, by gods (by virtue of the boon
granted in your favour by Brahma, the
creator), O Ravana, you shall not be allowed
to escape alive having set up bitter enmity,
as you have done, with him. (8)

स a जीवितशेषस्य राघवोऽन्तकरो बली।
पशोर्यूपगतस्येव जीवितं तव दुर्लभम्॥९॥

“That mighty scion of Raghu will put an
end to the remnant of your life. Your life, like
that of the animal tied to a sacrificial post, is
now difficult to save. (9)

यदि पश्येत् स रामस्त्वां रोषदीप्तेन चक्षुषा।
रक्षस्त्वमद्य निर्दग्धो यथा रुद्रेण मन्मथ:॥१०॥

“If the said Rama were to regard you
with an eye inflamed with anger, O ogre,
you will be consumed that very moment as
Love was by Lord Siva (the Destroyer of
the universe). (10)

यश्चन्द्रं नभसो yal पातयेन्नाशयेत वा।
सागरं शोषयेद् वापि स सीतां मोचयेदिह॥ ११॥

“He, who is able to bring the moon
down to the earth or destroy it or again to
dry up the ocean, is able (even) to be here
and deliver Sita. (11)

गतासुस्त्वं गतश्रीको गतसत्त्वो गतेन्द्रिय:।
लङ्का वैधव्यसंयुक्ता त्वत्कृतेन भविष्यति॥ १२॥

“Your life has all but departed; your
royal fortune too is gone; gone too is your
strength and your organs of perception and
action have also left you. Nay, Lanka too
will be endowed with widowhood through
your fault. (12)

869

न ते पापमिदं कर्म qalah भविष्यति।
याहं नीता विनाभावं पतिपाश्वात् AAT बलात्॥ १३ ॥
“This sinful act of yours will not result
in happiness inasmuch as | have been
forcibly weaned by you from the side of my
husband. (13)
a fe देवरसंयुक्तो मम भर्ता महाद्युति: |
निर्भयो वीर्यमाश्रित्य शून्ये वसति दण्डके॥ evil

“Actually depending on his own prowess
and accompanied by my brother-in-law, the
aforesaid husband of mine, possessed as
he is of extraordinary splendour, lives
fearlessly in the desolate Dandaka forest,
indeed. (14)

aa dtd बलं दर्पमुत्सेकं च तथाविधम्।
अपनेष्यति गात्रेभ्य: शरवर्षेण संयुगे॥१७५॥

“By the shower of his arrows on the
battlefield he will squeeze out of your limbs
your prowess, strength, arrogance and
impropriety of conduct of aforesaid
description. (15)

यदा विनाशो भूतानां दृश्यते कालचोदित:।
dal कार्ये प्रमाद्यन्ति नरा: कालवशं गता:॥ १६ ॥

“When the destruction of beings as
ordained by the god of death is at hand,
people under the sway of Death commit
lapses in their duty. (16)

मां प्रधृष्य स ते काल: प्राप्तोऽयं राक्षसाधम।
आत्मनो राक्षसानां च वधायान्त:पुरस्य च॥ १७॥

“Death, 0 vile ogre, has arrived at
your door consequent on your having laid
violent hands upon me—for your own
destruction as also the entire ogre race and
of the inmates of your gynaeceum. (17)

न शक्या यज्ञमध्यस्था वेदि: स्रुग्भाण्डमण्डिता।
द्विजातिमन्त्रसम्पूता चण्डालेनावमर्दितुम्॥१८॥

“An altar existing in the centre of a
sacrificial pavilion, adorned with ladies for
pouring ghee etc., on the sacred fire with and
other sacrificial vessels and consecrated with
the sacred texts uttered by Brahmanas, cannot
be trampled upon by a pariah. (18)
