692

Laksmana, the son of Sumitra, felt delighted
on that occasion. (27)

तदैव राम: प्लवगाधिपस्तथा
विभीषणश्चर्क्षपतिश्च वरीर्यवान्।

सौमित्रिमरोगमुत्थितं
Wet weet: सुचिरं जहर्षिरे॥ eeu
On that very occasion Sri Rama as well
as Sugriva, the suzerain lord of monkeys, as
also Vibhisana and the valiant Jambavan,
the lord of bears, with their troops rejoiced for
a pretty long time on beholding Laksmana,

अवेक्ष्य

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA +

sound, active and full of joy. (28)
अपूजयत् at स लक्ष्मणस्य
सुदुष्करं दाशरथिर्महात्मा ।

aya wet युधि वानरेन्द्रो
निशम्य तं शक्रजितं निपातितम्॥ eu

That high-souled son of Dagaratha, Sri
Rama, applauded the feat of Laksmana, which
was exceedingly difficult to accomplish for
others. The king of monkeys, Sugriva, too felt
delighted to hear of the notorious Indrajit having
been struck down in combat. (29)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये FERS एकनवतितम: सर्ग: ॥ ९१ ॥

Thus ends Canto Ninety-one in the Yuddhakanda of the glorious Ramayana of
Valmiki, the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

द्विनवतितम: सर्ग:
Canto XCIl

Stricken with grief at the death of Indrajit, Ravana proceeds
to kill Sita, who, he feels was the root of all trouble,
but desists from this dastardly act at the
intercession of Suparswa

ad: पौलस्त्यसचिवा: श्रुत्वा चेन्द्रजितो वधम्।
आचचक्षुरभिज्ञाय दशग्रीवाय सत्वरा:॥१॥

Hearing of Indrajit’s fall and having
directly perceived it, the ministers of Ravana
(a scion of Pulasti) reported the matter in all
haste to the ten-headed monster in the
following words: (1)

युद्धे हतो महाराज लक्ष्मणेन तवात्मज:।
विभीषणसहायेन मिषतां नो महाद्युति:।। २॥
“Your highly glorious son, Indrajit, O
great king, has been killed in combat by
Laksmana, assisted by Vibhisana, while we
stood looking on. (2)
We: शूरेण संगम्य संयुगेष्वपराजित:।
लक्ष्मणेन हत: शूर: पुत्रस्ते विबुधेन्द्रजित्॥३॥

“Closing with a hero, your heroic son,
Indrajit, the conqueror of the ruler of
gods, who had never been vanquished in
battles, has been made short work of by
Laksmana. (3)
गत: स परमाँल्लोकान् शरै: संतर्प्य लक्ष्मणम्।

स तं प्रतिभयं श्रुत्वा वधं पुत्रस्य दारुणम्॥४॥
चोरमिन्द्रजित: संख्ये कश्मलं प्राविशन्महत्।
उपलभ्य चिरात् संज्ञां राजा राक्षसपुंगव:॥५॥
पुत्रशोकाकुलो दीनो विललापाकुलेन्द्रिय:।
a राक्षसचमूमुख्य AA aa महाबल॥ ६॥
जित्वेन्द्रं कथमद्य त्वं लक्ष्मणस्य वशं गत:।
ननु त्वमिषुभि: क्रुद्धो भिन्द्या: कालान्तकावपि ti ७॥
I वैवस्वतो राजा भूयो बहुमतो AAU
