842

राज्यं दशसहस्राणि प्राप्य वर्षाणि राघव:।
शताश्वमेधानाजह्रे सदश्वान् भूरिदक्षिणान्॥ ९५॥

Having enjoyed the kingship for ten
and one* thousand years, Sri Rama, a
scion of Raghu, performed during this
period a hundred horse-sacrifices in which
excellent horses were sacrificed and liberal
fees were paid to the priests officiating at
each. (95)

आजानुलम्बिबाहु: स महावक्षा: प्रतापवान्।
लक्ष्मणानुचरो Wa: शशास पृथिवीमिमाम्॥ ee

With Laksmana as his follower, the
said Sri Rama, whose arms reached to his
knees and who was broad-chested and
glorious, ruled this earth well. (96)

राघवश्चापि धर्मात्मा प्राप्य राज्यमनुत्तमम्।
ईजे बहुविधैर्यज्ञै: ससुहृज्ञातिबान्धव:॥९७॥

Having attained sovereignty, which was
unsurpassed by any other, Sri Rama, whose
mind was set on virtue, further propitiated
the Lord through many kinds of sacrificial
performances with the co-operation of his
friends, relations and kinsfolk. (97)

न पर्यदेवन् विधवा न च व्यालकृतं भयम्।

न व्याधिजं भयं चासीद् रामे राज्यं प्रशासति॥ ९८ ॥
While Sri Rama ruled over the kingdom

of Ayodhya, there were no widows to lament

over their loss nor was there any danger

from beasts of prey or snakes nor, again,

was there any fear of diseases. (98)

निर्दस्युरभवल्लोको नानर्थं कश्चिदस्पृशत्।
न च स्म वृद्धा बालानां प्रेतकार्याणि कुर्वते॥ ९९ ॥
The world had no robbers or thieves
nor did anyone suffer harm. Nor again did
old people ever perform obsequies relating
to youngsters. (99)
ad मुदितमेवासीत् wat धर्मपरोऽभवत्।
राममेवानुपश्यन्तो नाभ्यहिंसन् परस्परम्॥१००॥

Every creature felt pleased, nay,

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA +

everyone was devoted to righteousness.
Turning their eyes towards Sri Rama alone,
creatures did not kill one another. (100)

आसन् वर्षसहस्राणि तथा पुत्रसहस्रिण:।
निरामया विशोकाश्च रामे राज्यं प्रशासति॥ १०१॥

So long as Sri Rama ruled the kingdom
of Ayodhya, people lived to an age of
thousands of years, were blessed with
thousands of sons and remained free from
diseases and grief. (101)
रामो रामो राम इति प्रजानामभवन् कथा:।
रामभूतं जगदभूद् TA राज्यं प्रशासति॥ gor

So long as Sri Rama ruled the kingdom,
the talks of the people centred round
Sri Rama, Sri Rama and Sri Rama alone;
nay, the world itself appeared to them as
transformed into Sri Rama. (102)

नित्यमूला नित्यफलास्तरवस्तत्र पुष्पिता:।
कामवर्षी च पर्जन्य: सुखस्पर्शश्च Area: ll १०३॥

Trees in Ayodhya ever remained firmly
rooted and bore fruit and flowers perpetually.
Clouds sent down rain only when desired
and the wind was ever delightful to the
touch. (103)

ब्राह्मणा: क्षत्रिया agar: शूद्रा लोभविवर्जिता:।
स्वकर्मसु प्रवर्तन्ते तुष्टा: Tata कर्मभि:॥ १०४॥

Remaining entirely free from avarice
and satisfied with their own avocations, the
Brahmanas (members of the priestly class),
the Ksatriyas (those belonging to the warrior
class), the Vaisyas (the members of the
mercantile class) and the Sudras (those
belonging to the labouring class) remained
engaged in their own duties. (104)

आसन् प्रजा धर्मपरा रामे शासति नानृता:।
सर्वे लक्षणसम्पन्ना: Wa धर्मपरायणा:॥१०५॥
So long as Sri Rama ruled, the people

remained devoted to pious observances and
never told lies. Nay, all were endowed with

* Vide verse 106 infra: ``दशवर्षसहस्राणि दशवर्षशतानि च।`` (Which means eleven thousand years).
