* AYODHYAKANDA +

“Solicited by us with our heads bent
low, heads which are covered with hair
white as the down of swans and are soiled
with dust as a result of their falling on the
ground (in the course of our prostration to
you, whom we know to be none other than
Lord Visnu)—pray, turn back, O prince
resolute of conduct ! (27)

aen वितता यज्ञा द्विजानां य serra: |

तेषां समाप्तिरायत्ता dat aa निवर्तने॥ २८॥
“Sacrifices have been started by many

of those Brahmanas that have come here,

to follow you. Their conclusion, O darling,

depends on your return. (28)

भक्तिमन्तीह भूतानि जङ्गमाजङ्गमानि च।
याचमानेषु तेषु त्वं भक्तिं भक्तेषु दर्शय॥ २९॥

“Nay, all created beings—both inanimate
and animate—here are full of devotion to
you. Pray, show your affection to such
devotees, who are imploring you to return
by acceding to their request. (29)

अनुगन्तुमशक्तास्त्वां मूलैरुद्धतवेगिन: |
उन्नता वायुवेगेन विक्रोशन्तीव पादपा:॥ ३०॥

“Tall trees, whose power of locomotion
stands completely hampered by their roots
penetrating deep into the earth and which
are, therefore, unable to follow you, are

461

crying, as it were, through the creaking
sound produced by the force of wind, and
thus asking you to return. (30)

निश्चेष्टाहारसंचारा वृक्षैकस्थाननिश्चिता:।
पक्षिणोऽपि प्रयाचन्ते सर्वभूतानुकम्पिनम्॥ ३१॥

“Birds too, which sit motionless and
are unable to go out in search of food and
which remain fixed to one spot on the
boughs of trees, solicit you to return,
compassionate as you are to all created
beings.” (31)
एवं विक्रोशतां ast द्विजातीनां निवर्तने।
ag तमसा तत्र वारयन्तीव राघवम्॥३२॥

While the aforesaid Brahmanas were
crying thus with a view to persuading Sri
Rama to return, the river Tamasa came to
view as though retarding the progress of Sri
Rama, a scion of Raghu. (32)

तत: सुमन्त्रोऽपि रथाद् विमुच्य
श्रान्तान् ह्यान् सम्परिवर्त्य शीघ्रम्।
नचारयद् वै तमसाविदूरे॥ ३३॥
Releasing the horses, fatigued as they
were, from the chariot and quickly making
them roll afterwards, Sumantra too allowed
them to graze not very far from the bank
of the Tamasa once they had drunk water

and had their body washed in the river.
(33)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्येऽयोध्याकाण्डे
पञ्चचत्वारिंश: सर्ग: ॥ ४५ Il

Thus ends Canto Forty-five in the Ayodhyakanda of the glorious Ramayana of Valmiki,
the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

