« KISKINDHAKANDA +

“Sugriva, you ought not to hold me
guilty of wrong doing in the form of having
exiled you and wrested your wife from you,
but should conclude me to have been forcibly
carried away by perversity occasioned by
that which was bound to come. (3)

araq fated ad न मन्ये सुखमावयो:।
सौहार्दं भ्रातृयुक्तं fe afed जातमन्यथा॥४॥
“| believe, O dear brother, happiness
was not ordained for us at one and the
same time. That is why the well-known
amity which ought to exist between two
brothers came to be otherwise (was
transformed into enmity). (4)

प्रतिपद्य त्वमद्यैव राज्यमेषां वनौकसाम्।
मामप्यद्यैव wert विद्धि वैवस्वतक्षयम्॥५॥

“Accept you this very day the rulership
of these monkeys (lit., denizens of the forest)
and know me as well to be ready to depart
this very day to the abode of Yama (son of
the sun-god and the god of retribution). (5)
जीवितं च fe राज्यं च श्रियं च विपुलां तथा।
wees a तूर्णमहँ चागर्हितं यश:॥६॥

“Indeed | am hereby quitting without
doubt forever soon my life as well as my
sovereignty and, even so, my extensive
fortune as well as my untarnished fame. (6)
अस्यां त्वहमवस्थायां वीर वक्ष्यामि यद् aa: |
यद्यप्यसुकरं WH कर्तुमेव त्वमर्हसि॥७॥

“You ought certainly to accomplish, O
heroic king whatever request | make to you
in this dying state, even though it may be
hard to accomplish. (7)

र : . २ रि ।
बाष्पपूर्णमुखं पश्य wat पतितमङ्गदम्॥८॥

“See fallen on the ground this Angada,
who is not only deserving of all comfort but
has actually been brought up in comfort,
nay, whose, countenance is bathed in tears
and who, though a mere boy, is not at all
childish. (8)

1011

मम प्राणै: प्रियतरं ut पुत्रमिवौरसम्।
मया हीनमहीनार्थं सर्वत: परिपालय॥९॥

“Protect in every way on all sides like
a son sprung from your own loins, my son,
Angada, who is dearer than life to me, and
is now going to be bereft of me, so that
nothing may remain lacking to him. (9)

त्वमप्यस्य frat दाता परित्राता च सर्वश:।
भयेष्वभयदश्चैव यथाहं प्लवगेश्चर॥ १०॥

“Be you his father, donor and protector
too in everyway as also his refuge in dangers
as | have been, O ruler of monkeys! (10)

एष तारात्मज: श्रीमांस्त्वया तुल्यपराक्रम:।
रक्षसां च वधे तेषामग्रतस्ते भविष्यति॥ ११॥

“This glorious son of Tara is equal to
you in prowess and will remain ahead of
you in the destruction of those ogres. (11)

अनुरूपाणि कर्माणि विक्रम्य बलवान् रणे।
करिष्यत्येष तारेयस्तेजस्वी तरुणोऽङ्घद:॥ १२॥

“Exhibiting his prowess on the field of
battle, this mighty and glorious son of Tara,
the youthful Angada, will perform deeds
worthy of me. (12)

सुषेणदुहिता चेयमर्थसूक्ष्मविनिश्चये |
औत्पातिके च विविधे ada: परिनिष्ठिता॥ १३ ॥

“Nay, this Tara (daughter of Susena)
is extremely clever in discerning the most
profound matters as well as in deciphering
the meaning of portents of various kinds as
also in all other ways. (13)
यदेषा साध्विति ब्रूयात् कार्यं तन्मुक्तसंशयम्।
af तारामतं किंचिदन्यथा परिवर्तते॥१४॥

“That which she recommends as right
should be unhesitatingly done by you. No
opinion of Tara turns out to be wrong. (14)

राघवस्य च a कार्यं कर्तव्यमविशाङ्कया।
स्यादधर्मो ह्यकरणे cat च हिंस्यादमानित:॥ १५ i
“Nay, the purpose of Sri Rama (a scion
of Raghu) should be _ unquestioningly
accomplished by you; for sin will accrue to
