* ARANYAKANDA «

अभिवादये त्वां भगवन् सुखमस्म्युषितो निशाम्।
आमन्त्रये त्वां गच्छामि Te A द्रष्टुमग्रजम्॥७२॥
“| pay obeisance to you, sir; | have stayed
happily for the night. | take leave of you. | am
going to see your revered elder brother.” (72)

गम्यतामिति तेनोक्तो जगाम रघुनन्दन:।
यथोद्दिष्टेन मार्गेण at तच्चावलोकयन्॥७३॥

Spoken to by him in the words ‘You may
go’, the delight of Raghu left along the path
pointed out to him, seeing that forest. (73)

नीवारान्पनसान्सालान्वञ्चुलांस्तिनिशांस्तथा।
चिरिबिल्वान्मधूकांश्चबिल्वानथ च तिन्दुकान्॥ ७४॥
पुष्पितान् पुष्पिताग्राभिर्ताभिरुपशोभितान्।
zest TWH: शतशस्तत्र कान्तारपाढपान्॥ ७७५ ॥
हस्तिहस्तैर्विमृदितान् वानरैरुपशोभितान्।
We: शकुनिसङ्घैश्च शतश: प्रतिनादितान्॥७६॥
Rama saw there hundreds of forest
trees—Nivara, Panasa, sal and Vafjula,
Tinisa, Ciribilva, and Madhuka, Bilva and
Tinduka too in flower and beautified by
blossoming climbers, damaged by the trunks
of elephants, adorned by monkeys and made
resonant by the noise of flocks of birds in
heat. (74—76)

ततोऽब्रवीत् समीपस्थं रामो राजीवलोचन:।
पृष्ठतोऽनुगतं वीरं लक्ष्मणं लक्षिवर्धनम्॥७७॥
Then the lotus-eyed Rama said to the

heroic Laksmana, who was closely following
behind him and added to his glory: (77)

स्निग्धपत्रा यथा Fat यथा AAT मृगद्विजा: ।
आश्रमो नातिदूरस्थो महर्षेर्भावितात्मन:॥७८॥
“As (can be seen from the fact that)
the trees are clothed with glossy leaves
and the animals and birds are docile, the
hermitage of that pure-souled great sage is
not far. (78)
अगस्त्य इति विख्यातो लोके स्वेनैव कर्मणा।
आश्रमो दृश्यते तस्य परिश्रान्तश्रमापह:॥७९॥
प्राज्यधूमाकुलवनश्चीरमालापरिष्कृत: ।
प्रशान्तमृगयूथश्च नानाशकुनिनादित: i ८०॥

743

“The hermitage, relieving the fatigue of
the tired, of him who has become famous in
the world as Agastya by his own deed, is
seen filling the forest with the smoke rising
from oblations thrown into the sacred fire,
adorned with bark-garments and garlands,
containing very peaceful herds of deer and
resounding with the cries of various birds.

(79-80)
दक्षिणा fae कृता येन शरण्या पुण्यकर्मणा ।। ८१॥
तस्येदमाश्रमपदं प्रभावाद् यस्य राक्षसै:।
दिगियं दक्षिणा त्रासाद् दृश्यते नोपभुज्यते॥८२॥

“This is the site of the hermitage of him
who, having by his might controlled death
and performing holy deeds, made the
southern quarter habitable with intent to do
good to the people, and through whose
spiritual force this southern quarter is looked
on with alarm by the ogres, and not enjoyed.

(81-82)
यदाप्रभृति चाक्रान्ता दिगियं पुण्यकर्मणा।
तदाप्रभृति निर्वैरा: प्रशान्ता रजनीचरा:॥८३॥

“No sooner had this quarter been set
foot on by this sage of holy deeds than the

night-wanderers became extremely quiet and
free from enmity. (83)

Wat aa भगवतो दक्षिणा दिक्प्रदक्षिणा।
प्रथिता त्रिषु लोकेषु दुर्धर्षा क्रूरकर्मभि:॥ ८४॥

“This southern quarter has become well-
known by the name of the revered sage as
most safe and unassailable by people of
cruel deeds. (84)
संदेशं पालयंस्तस्य विन्ध्यशैलो न वर्धते॥८५॥

“Constantly obeying his command, the
Vindhya mountain, the foremost of mountains,
is not growing up to obstruct the path of the
sun (85)

अयं दीर्घायुषस्तस्य लोके विश्रुतकर्मण:।
अगस्त्यस्याश्रम: श्रीमान् विनीतमृगसेवित:॥ ८६॥
