* SUNDARAKANDA +

49

Canto ITI

Appearing in person before Hanuman, while he was making his way into
Lanka at night, the mighty ogress, Lanka, presiding over the city, stops
him, striking him with the palm of her hand. Getting unnerved, even
though gently smitten with his left fist, she permits the monkey
to enter, repeating the words of Brahma, the creator, that
the destruction of Lanka should be concluded as
imminent when she is overpowered by a monkey

a ware wa लम्बतोयदसंनिभे।
सत्त्वमास्थाय मेधावी SAM मारुतात्मज:॥१॥
निशि लंकां महासत्त्वो विवेश कपिकुञ्जर:।
रम्यकाननतोयाढ्यां पुरीं रावणपालिताम्॥ 2 i
शारदाम्बुधरप्रख्यैर्भवनैरुपशोभिताम् ।

Standing on a towering peak of the
Lamba mountain (a synonym of Trikuta),
which looked much like a high cloud, and
relying on his own virility, the intelligent
Hanuman, son of the wind-god, who was
full of great courage and was an elephant
among the monkeys, entered by night the
city of Lanka, which was protected by
Ravana, and was rich in lovely forests and
water-bodies, which was adorned with
mansions white as autumnal clouds, which
unceasingly emitted a sound like the roaring
of the sea and was fanned by breezes from
the sea, nay, which had been rendered
sufficiently strong by well-fed forces even
like Vitapavati (a synonym of Alakapuri, the
capital of Kubera’s realm), had elephants in

rut stationed at its charming outer gates and
was provided with white gates and archways
and which was frequented by huge serpents
and guarded by them like the splendid
Bhogavati (the city of serpents, the capital
of Patilla, the nethermost subterranean
region). Delighted to reach the city—which
was ever overcast with clouds illumined with
flashes of lightning, and served by hosts of
luminaries, the planets and stars and which
ever resounded with the thunder-like sound
of violent blasts even like Amaravati, the city
of gods, the capital of heaven, nay, which
was enclosed with a defensive wall of gold
and was decorated with pennons fluttering
with the jingling of tiny bells attached to
them—Hanuman leapt up the wall. (1—7)
विस्मयाविष्टहृदय: पुरीमालोक्य add:
जाम्बूनदमयैर्दवारैर्वैदूर्यकृतवेदिकै: wen
वज्रस्फटिकमुक्ताभिर्मणिकुट्टिमभूषितै: ।
तप्तहाटकनिर्यूहै राजतामलपाण्डुरै: UF
वैदूर्यकृतसोपानै३ स्फाटिकान्तरपांसुभि:।
चारुसंजवनोपेतै: खमिवोत्पतितै: शुभै:॥१०॥
क्रौञ्चबर्हिणसंघुष्टै राजहंसनिषेवितै: |
तूर्याभरणनिर्घोषै:३ सर्वत: परिनादिताम्॥११॥
वस्वोकसारप्रतिमां समीक्ष्य नगरीं तत:।
ख्मिवोत्पतितां लंकां Set हनुमान् कपि:॥ १२॥
When he had surveyed the city on all
sides, his heart was filled with wonder.
Hanuman rejoiced to gaze on Lanka, which
was distinguished by charming golden
entrances, with platforms of cat’s-eye gems
