+ UTTARAKANDA +

his back turned at Sita langouring on the other
banks; as if she was an orphan, Laksmana
speeded on. (18—24)
चेष्टन्तीं परतीरस्थां लक्ष्मण: प्रययावथ।
दूरस्थं रथमालोक्य लक्ष्मणं च मुहुर्मुहु:।
निरीक्ष्यमाणां तूद्विग्नां सीतां शोक: समाविशत्॥ २७५ ॥

1007

wie सा बर्हिणनादिते at
महास्वनं दु:खपरायणा सती॥ २६॥

Sorrow, however, overpowered her who
saw the chariot going away, and tried to
catch a glimps of Laksmana again and again,
and was perturbed. Buried in grief the noble
one, not seeing any protector she cried in
the forest, resounded by the sound of
peacocks. (25-26)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये उत्तरकाण्डेऽष्टचत्वारिंश: AW: ॥ ४८ ॥

Thus ends Canto Forty-eight in Uttarakanda of the glorious Ramayana of Valmiki,
the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

Canto XLIX

Hearing Sita’s crying, from young ascetics sage Valmiki approaches her
and carries her to his hermitage

सीतां तु रुदतीं gear ते aa मुनिदारका:।
War यत्र भगवानास्ते वाल्मीकिरुग्रधी:॥ eu
The young sons of the ascetics there
(in the hermitage of Valmiki), beholding Sita
sobbing, ran out to where the blessed Valmiki
of great wisdom was. (1)

अभिवाद्य मुने: पादौ मुनिपुत्रा महर्षये।
wa निवेदयामासुस्तस्यास्तु रुदितस्वनम्॥२॥
Saluting the great ascetic (Valmiki) by

touching his feet, they informed as they had
heard the sound of Sita crying. (2)

अदृष्टपूर्वा भगवन् कस्याप्येषा महात्मन:।
uct sift cect, erie विकृतानना॥ 3
भगवन् साधु पश्येस्त्वं देवतामिव खाच्च्युताम्।
नद्यास्तु dit भगवन् वरस्त्री कापि दु:खिता॥४॥
दृष्टास्माभि: प्ररुदिता qe शोकपरायणा।
अनर्हा दु:खशोकाभ्यामेका दीना अनाथवत्॥५॥
न ह्येनां मानुषीं fast: सत्क्रियास्या: प्रयुज्यताम्।
आश्रमस्याविदूरे च त्वामियं शरणं गता॥६॥
त्रातारमिच्छते साध्वी भगवंस्त्रातुमर्हसि।
तेषां तु वचनं श्रुत्वा बुद्ध्या निश्चित्य धर्मवित्॥ ७॥

तपसा लब्धचक्षुष्मान् प्राद्रवद् यत्र मैथिली।
तं प्रयान्तमभिप्रेत्य शिष्या at महामतिम्॥८॥
तं तु देशमभिप्रेत्य किंचित् पद्भ्यां महामति:।
अर्घ्यमादाय रुचिरं जाह्नवीतीरमागमत्।
wast राघवस्येष्ठां सीतां पत्नीमनाथवत्॥९॥

“A noble lady, never seen by us before,
spouse of some noble one, resembling to
the Goddess of wealth (Sri), cries loudly
with distorted face in despair near the banks
of the river, she is grieved. We saw her
crying, overwhelmed by sorrow as she is.
She does not deserve so much suffering
sire, nor she should remain like an orphan.
We do not feel that she may be from humans.
Please sir, solace her in a befitting manner.
She is not far from the Asrama seeking
refuge from you, she is in need of a guardian;
behoves you to protect her.”

Hearing their words, Valmiki the
foremost of the sages, knowing already
everything by virtue of asceticism stepped
rapidly towards her and reached where Sita,
the daughter of the king Janaka was sobbing
