* BALAKANDA +

स्वस्ति प्राप्नुहि भद्रं ते गमिष्याम: स्वमालयम्।
श्राद्धकर्माणि विधिवद्विधास्य sft चाब्रवीत्॥ १९॥

“Attain happiness. May God bless you !
We shall now retire to our own lodging and
shall duly perform the Sraddha rites,” he
added. (19)
तमापृष्टवा नरपति राजा दशरथस्तदा।
मुनीन्द्रौ तौ पुरस्कृत्य जगामाशु महायशा:॥ २०॥

Taking leave of the celebrated Janaka,
a ruler of men, at that moment, the highly
illustrious King Dasaratha soon departed,

placing the aforesaid two great sages,
Vasistha and ViSwamitra, ahead. (20)

स गत्वा निलयं राजा श्राद्धं कृत्वा विधानत:।
प्रभाते काल्यमुत्थाय चक्रे गोदानमुत्तमम्॥ २१॥

Reaching his lodging and performing
the Sraddha with due ceremony, the king
rose in the morning and performed the grand
Samavartana ceremony (with respect to his
four sons, consisting in the shaving of their
hair on the head and the armspits and the
gifting of cows), appropriate to that time.(21)

Tat शतसहस्रं च ब्राह्मणेभ्यो नराधिप:।
एकैकशो ददौ राजा पुत्रानुद्दिश्य धर्मत:॥ २२॥

King Dasaratha, who loved his sons

267

very much, gave away in accordance with
the principles of righteousness a hundred
thousand cows to the Brahmanas for the
sake of each of his four sons. (22)

Tat शतसहस्राणि चत्वारि पुरुषर्षभ:॥ २३॥
वित्तमन्यच्च सुबहु द्विजेभ्यो रघुनन्दन:।
ददौ गोदानमुद्दिश्य पुत्राणां पुत्रवत्सल:॥ २४॥

In the name of the Samavartana
ceremony with respect to his four sons,
Emperor DaSaratha, a scion of Raghu, the
foremost of men, who was so fond of his
sons, bestowed (on that occasion) on the
Brahmanas four lakhs of recently calved
cows that had their horns plated with gold
and yielded ample milk, each with a milking
vessel of bell-metal, as well as abundant
riches of other description. (23-24)

स Wd: कृतगोदानैर्वृत: सन्नूपतिस्तदा।
लोकपालैरिवाभाति qa: सौम्य: प्रजापति: ।। २५॥

Surrounded on that occasion by his
sons, who had their heads shaved and had
gifted so many cows, the king shone brightly
like the delightful Brahma, the lord of created
beings, surrounded by the guardians of the
spheres. (25)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये बालकाण्डे
द्विसप्ततितम: सर्ग: ॥ 92 ॥

Thus ends of Canto Seventy-two in the Balakanda of the glorious Ramayana of
Valmiki, the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

