1102

समुत्सुकौ तौ सुखमूषतुर्निशां
यथाश्विनौ भार्गवनीतिसंहिताम्॥ १९॥

Then keeping the wonderful words of

« VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

the sage Valmiki, the two young children,
Lava and KuSa, eager to sing slept with
ease like the two Aswanikumaras having
learnt the teachings of Sukra. (19)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये उत्तरकाण्डे त्रिनवतितम: सर्ग: ॥ ९३ ॥

Thus ends Canto Ninety-three in the Uttarakanda of the glorious Ramayana of Valmiki,
the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

Canto LXXXXIV

Sri Rama hears the sweet singing of the Ramayana by
Lava and KuéSa in his assembly

तौ रजन्यां प्रभातायां स्नातौ हुतहुताशनौ।
यथोक्कमृषिणा पूर्वं ae तत्रोपगायताम्॥१॥
at स शुश्राव काकुत्स्थ: पूर्वाचार्यविनिर्मिताम्।
अपूर्वां पाठ्यजातिं च गेयेन समलंकृताम्॥२॥
As the night passed and the day
approached, both Kusa and Lava having
taken their bath and made offerings to the
fire, sang the poem there, as instructed by
the sage Valmiki. That scion of Kakutstha
heard that musical recitation accompanied
with musical notes, unheard of before,
composed as per the cadences set by former
great masters of music. (1-2)

प्रमाणैर्बहुभिर्बद्धां तन्त्रीलयसमन्विताम्।
बालाभ्यां राघव: श्रुत्वा कौतूहलपरोऽभवत्॥ ३॥
The descendant of Raghu, Sri Rama,
hearing that song, set to the proper time and
tune and accompanied by the playing of the
lute by the two boys, was amazed. (3)
अथ कर्मान्तरे राजा महामुनीन्।
पार्थिवांश्च नरव्याघ्र: पण्डितान् नैगमांस्तथा॥४॥
पौराणिकान् शब्दविदो ये वृद्धाश्च द्विजातय:।
स्वराणां लक्षणज्ञांश्च उत्सुकान् द्विजसत्तमान्॥५॥
लक्षणज्ञांश्च गन्धिंर्बान् नैगमांश्च विशेषत:।

भाषाज्ञानिङ्घितज्ञांश्च नैगमांश्चाप्यशेषत:।
हेतूपचारकुशलान् हैतुकांश्च बहुश्रुतान्॥८॥
छन्दोविद: WTA वैदिकान् द्विजसत्तमान्।

Ua सर्वान् समानीय गातारौ समवेशयत्॥ १०॥

Then in the midst of the performance
of the ASvamedha Yajiia, the king, Sri Rama,
the tiger among men, having called, the great
ascetics, the other kings and the learned
citizens, the specialists in the Puranas, and
also those aged Brahmanas who were
proficient in the knowledge of words, and
also those best among Brahmanas, who were
curious to hear the Ramayana and knew the
specialities of musical notes, the knowers of
auspicious marks, the musicians, all citizens,
the knowers of the relation between the
syllables of stanza and were proficient in
metres; those who excelled in art only, and
those well-versed in astrology, knowers
of ritual performances, and also those
specializing in the details of the ritual and
those skilled in suggesting remedial forms
of ritual, the logicians and also the erudite
ones, the verifiers and knowers of the Puranas,
the Vedas, the best among Brahmanas,
knowers of the Citra (forms of the Kavya),
knowers of the Sutras on righteous conduct
