+ UTTARAKANDA +

1053

Canto LXIX

Duel fight between Satrughna and Lavana,
Satrughna kills Lavana

were भाषितं तस्य शत्रुघ्नस्य महात्मन:।

क्रोध्॰]माहारयत् तीव्रं तिष्ठ तिष्ठेति चाब्रवीत्॥१॥

Hearing these words of the noble
Satrughna, Lavana became extremely angry
and said: ‘Wait for a moment’. (1)

पाणौ पाणिं च निष्पिष्य दन्तान् कटकटाय्य च।
लवणो रघुशार्दूलमाह्वयामास चासकृत्॥२॥

Rubbing his one hand with the other,
and making a rattling sound with his teeth,
Lavana challenged the lion among Raghus
many times. (2)
तं ब्रुवाणं तथा वाक्यं लवणं घोरदर्शनम्।
शत्रुघ्नो ea इदं वचनमब्रवीत्॥३॥

To that Lavana of fearful appearance,
speaking thus, Satrughna, the killer of the
enemies of the gods, said these words:

(3)
शत्रुघ्नो न dat जातो यदान्ये निर्जितास्त्वया।
तदद्य बाणाभिहतो at त्वं यमसादनम्॥४॥

‘Satrughna was not born, when others
were conquered by you in battle, so go to the
abode of Yama today, killed by my arrow. (4)

ऋषयोऽप्यद्य पापात्मन् मया cat निहतं रणे।
पश्यन्तु विप्रा विद्वांसस्तरिदशा sa रावणम्॥५॥
‘O sinful one, may the sages too see
you killed in encounter today, also the learned
Brahmanas, as the gods saw Ravana killed.
(5)

wafa मद्बाणनिर्दग्धे पतितेऽद्य निशाचर।
पुरे woe चापि क्षेममेव भविष्यति॥६॥

‘Today there will be peace indeed in
the city and province, as you, the demon
roaming about at night are slain by my
arrow and lie prostrate on the ground and
burnt. (6)

अद्य मद्बाहुनिष्क्रान्तत शरो वज्रनिभानन:।
प्रवेक्ष्यते ते हृदयं पद्ममंशुरिवार्कज:॥७॥

‘Today, the arrow, whose fore-point
resembles the thunderbolt, released by my
hand, shall enter your heart as the ray of
the sun enters in the lotus.’ (7)

Waal महावृक्षं लवण: क्रोधमूच्छित:।
शत्रुघ्नोरसि fasta स च तं शतधाच्छिनत्॥८॥

Being thus spoken, Lavana enraged
with anger threw a mightly tree on the breast
of Satrughna; but Satrughna cut it thousand-
fold with arrows. (8)

aq. दृष्ट्वा विफलं कर्म राक्षस: पुनरेव तु।
पादपान् सुबहून् गृह्य शत्रुघ्नायासृजद् बली॥९॥
Thus seeing his action fruitless, the
powerful Raksasa again taking hold of many
trees hurled them at Satrughna. (9)

शत्रुघ्नश्चापि तेजस्वी वृक्षानापततो बहून्।
त्रिभिश्चतुर्भिरेकैकं चिच्छेद नतपर्वभि:॥ १०॥
The brave Satrughna too, tore asunder
each one coming upon him, by three or four
arrows of flatterend ends. (10)

ततो बाणमयं at ag राक्षसोपरि।
शत्रुघ्नो वीर्यसम्पन्नो विव्यथे न स राक्षस:॥११॥

Thus, Satrughna then possessed of
great might, let loose a shower of arrows on
the Raksasa; however, the Raksasa was
not troubled. (11)

ad: प्रहस्य लवणो वृक्षमुद्यम्य वीर्यवान्।
शिरस्यभ्यहनच्छूरं Gels: स मुमोह वै॥१२॥
Then the powerful Lavana laughed,
and lifting a tree attacked the brave one,
Satrughna, on the head; Satrughna went
into a swoon with the bodily joints loosened.
(12)
