+ UTTARAKANDA +

हतेषु तेषु सर्वेषु भरत: केकयीसुत:।
निवेशयामास तदा समृद्धे द्वे पुरोत्तमे॥१०॥
तक्षं तक्षशिलायां तु पुष्कलं पुष्कलावते।
गन्धर्वदेशे रुचिरे गान्धारविषये च स:॥११॥
On all of the Gandharvas being killed,
Bharata, the son of Kaikeyi, founded there
two great and prosperous cities and he
installed Taksa on Taksasila in the Gandharva-
Desa and Puskala on Puskalavata in the
territory of Gandharas. (10-11)

धनरत्नौघसंकीर्णे काननैरुपशोभिते।
अन्योन्यसंघर्षकृते स्पर्धया गुणविस्तरै:॥१२॥

उभे सुरुचिरप्रख्ये व्यवहारैरकिल्बिषै:।
उद्यानयानसम्पूर्णे सुविभक्तान्तरापणे॥ १३॥

उभे पुरवरे रम्ये विस्तरैरुपशोभिते।
गृहमुख्यै: सुरुचिरैर्विमानैर्बहुभिर्वृते॥। १४॥

शोभिते शोभनीयैश्च देवायतनविस्तरै:।
भते ॥ १५ ॥

निवेश्य पञ्चभिर्वर्षैर्भरतो राघवानुज:।
पुनरायान्महाबाहुरयोध्यां केकयीसुत: ॥ १६ ॥
Having fully established the two above—

named cities, filled with wealth and gems,
beautified by gardens, trying each other to

1117

excel through competitive spirit, both
extremely lovely and rich with fresh business,
abounding in pleasant groves and carrier
vehicles and well-planned with markets, both
great cities, beautifully decorated with
mansions and many lovely Vimanas (palaces),
adorned with attractive temples of worship,
made lovely with the Talas, Tamalas, Tilaka
and Vakula trees. In five years, Bharata the
younger brother of Sri Rama, the descendant
of Raghus, possessed of long arms, the son
of Kaikeyi, returned to Ayodhya. (12—16)

सोऽभिवाद्य महात्मानं साक्षाद्धर्ममिवापरम्।
Tad wa: श्रीमान् ब्रह्माणमिव वासव:॥ १७॥
शशंस च यथाव्रत्तं गन्धर्ववधमुत्तमम्।
निवेशनं च देशस्य श्रुत्वा प्रीतोऽस्य राघव:॥ १८॥

Having bowed to Sri Rama, the noble
descendant of Raghu, who was as if he
were another Dharma (Law)—incarnate, as
Indra bows to Brahma, the graceful Bharata
narrated to him how the great battle with the
Gandharvas was fought and how were
founded the two cities, too. Hearing him, Sri
Rama, the descendant of Raghu, was highly
pleased. (17-18)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये उत्तरकाण्डे एकाधिकरशततम: सर्ग: ॥ १०१ ॥

Thus ends Canto One hundred and one in the Uttarakanda of the glorious
Ramayana of Valmiki, the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

द्व्यधिकशततम: at:
Canto CII

Coronation of Angada and Candraketu by Bharata, and Laksmana as per
order of Sri Rama in the territory of Karupatha

तच्छृत्वा हर्षमापेदे राघवो भ्रातृभि: सह।

वाक्यं चाद्भुतसंकाशं भ्रातॄन् प्रोवाच राघव:॥१॥
Hearing this account of Bharata, Sri

Rama, together with his brothers, was

pleased and said to Laksmana these words
of wonderful content: (1)

इमौ pant सौमित्रे तव धर्मविशारदौ।
अङ्गदश्चन्द्रकेतुश्च wart दृढविक्रमौ॥ २॥

‘O son of Sumitra, Laksmana, your
these two sons are knower of Dharma (Law
and righteousness)—named Angada and
Candraketu, possessed of firm fortitude, for
the protection of their kingdoms. (2)
