+ UTTARAKANDA +

अपरे दुर्जयं रक्षो जानन्त: प्राज्ञसम्मता:।
जिता: स्म इत्यभाषन्त राक्षसं बलदर्पितम्॥४९॥

“Others, who were recognized as

899

prudent, and who knew the Raksasa to be
difficult to conquer, submitted to the ogre,
who was proud of his strength, ‘We stand
vanquished.’ ” (49)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये उत्तरकाण्डे WEST: AW: ॥ १६ ॥

Thus ends Canto Sixteen in the Uttarakanda of the glorious Ramayana of Valmiki,
the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

सप्तदश: सर्ग:
Canto XVII

Vedavati, daughter of a Brahmarsi, insulted by Ravana, pronounces
a curse on him and enters the fire. She appears
as Sita in another birth

aa WH महाबाहुर्विचरन् पृथिवीतले।
हिमवद्वनमासाद्य परिचक्राम रावण:॥१॥

“While ranging over the earth’s surface,
the mighty-armed Ravana, O king, arrived
at a forest in the region of the Himalayas
and was roving in it. (1)

तत्रापश्यत् स वै कन्यां कृष्णाजिनजटाधराम्।
आर्षेण विधिना चैनां दीप्यन्तीं देवतामिव॥ २॥

“There he saw a maiden, wearing the
skin of a black antelope and matted locks,
rich in austerities befitting a Rsi (a seer of
Vedic Mantras) and glowing like a deity. (2)
स ged रूपसम्पन्नां कन्यां at सुमहाव्रताम्।
काममोहपरीतात्मा पप्रच्छ प्रहसन्निव॥३॥

“Seeing her, endowed with comeliness
and observing a great vow, and overpowered
by infatuation born of lust, Ravana asked
her as though laughing: (3)

किमिदं ada we faeg यौवनस्य a

नहि ager तवैतस्य रूपस्यैवं प्रतिक्रिया॥४॥
“*) blessed one, what are you doing

here? It is incompatible with your youth. Such

a conduct fits ill with one of your beauty. (4)

रूपं तेऽनुपमं भीरु कामोन्मादकरं नॄणाम्।

न युक्तं तपसि स्थातुं निर्गतो ह्येष निर्णय:॥५॥

““O Bhiru (one who easily gets afraid),
your unrivalled beauty generates madness
born of lust in the minds of men. It is not
proper for you to perform Tapas; this is the
conclusion which has emerged from my
mind. (5)

कस्यासि किमिदं ut कश्च vat वरानने।
येन सम्भुज्यसे vie स नर: पुण्यभाग् भुवि॥६॥

“‘O auspicious one, to whom do you
belong? What are you doing here? Who is
your husband, O lady with a comely face?
He who enjoys you, O timid one, is indeed
a very fortunate person in this world.

(6)
Ya: शंस मे Wd कस्य हेतो: परिश्रम:।
Wag तु सा कन्या रावणेन यशस्विनी॥७॥
अब्रवीद् विधिवत् कृत्वा तस्यातिथ्यं तपोधना।
कुशध्वजो नाम पिता ब्रह्मर्षिरमितप्रभ:॥८॥

“‘Relate everything to me, who am
inquisitive. For whose sake is all this effort?’
Questioned thus by Ravana, that illustrious
maiden, whose wealth was Tapas, played
the host according to rule and then said,
‘My father’s name is KuSadhwaja. He was
a Brahmarsi endowed with immense lustre.

(7-8)
