* SUNDARAKANDA +

his hand. The two general stood on one
side of the illustrious Hanuman, a tiger among
monkeys. (33-34)

पट्टिशेन शिताग्रेण प्रघस: प्रत्यपोथयत्।
भासकर्णश्च शूलेन राक्षस: कपिकुञ्जरम्॥ ३५॥

Praghasa pierced Hanuman, an elephant
among monkeys, with a sharp-pointed spear,
while the ogre Bhasakarna attacked him
with a dart. (35)

a ताभ्यां विक्षतैर्गात्रैरसृग्दिग्धतनूरुह:।
अभवद् वानर: क्रुद्धो बालसूर्यसमप्रभ:॥ ३६॥

With his limbs lacerated by their blows
and the coat of hair on his body smeared
with blood, that monkey, Hanuman, who
shone like the rising sun, waxed enraged.

(36)

जघान हनुमान् वीरो राक्षसौ कपिकुञ्जर:।
गिरिशृङ्गसुनिष्पिष्टौ तिलशस्तौ बभूवतु:॥ ३७॥

Breaking off the peak of a mountain
including its beasts, snakes and trees, the
heroic Hanuman, a veritable elephant among
monkeys, struck with it the two ogres. Utterly
crushed under the mountain-peak, they were
reduced to smithereens. (37)

ततस्तेष्ववसन्नेषु सेनापतिषु पञ्चसु।
act तदवशेषं तु नाशयामास वानर:॥ ३८॥
All those five generals having been

205

killed, Hanuman now began to destroy the
army which remained after them. (38)

अश्वैरश्वान् गजैर्नागान् योधैर्योधान् TA रथान्।
a कपिर्नाशयामास सहस्राक्ष इवासुरान्॥३९॥

Like Indra (the thousand eyed god)
exterminating the demons, Hanuman
destroyed the horses by striking them with
horses, the elephants with elephants, the
warriors with warriors and the chariots with
chariots. (39)

हयैर्नागैस्तुरंगैश्च भग्नाक्षैश्च महारथै:।
हतैश्च राक्षसैर्भूमी रुद्धमार्गा समन्तत:॥४०॥

The earth had its pathways on all sides
completely blocked with the horses,
elephants and swift-footed horses as well
as with the ogres who had been killed and
the big chariots that had their axles broken.

(40)

da: कपिस्तान् ध्वजिनीपतीन् रणे

निहत्य वीरान् सबलान् सवाहनान्।

तथैव dh: परिगृह्य तोरणं
कृतक्षण: काल SA प्रजाक्षये॥४१॥
Having killed in combat those valiant
generals alongwith their forces and vehicles
destroyed and taking his stand likewise on
the archway, the heroic Hanuman now stood
biding his time for a further opportunity of
showing his valour, like the Time-Spirit bent
upon the destruction of created beings. (41)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये सुन्दरकाण्डे षट्चत्वारिंश: सर्ग: ॥ ४६ ॥
Thus ends Canto Forty-six of the Sundarakanda in the glorious Ramayana of Valmiki,
the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

Canto XLVII

Prince Aksa, son of Ravana, who came to meet
Hanuman in combat, is killed

सेनापतीन् पञ्च स तु प्रमापितान्
हनूमता सानुचरान् सवाहनान्।

निशम्य राजा समरोद्धतोन्मुखं

कुमारमक्षं प्रसमैक्षताक्षम्॥ १॥
