328

that momentous action has to be taken
with regard to the enemies.” (18)

राक्षसास्तद्वच: seat लङ्कायां परिचक्रमु:।
अनुगेहमवस्थाय विहारशयनेषु च।
उद्यानेषु च रक्षांसि चोदयन्तो ह्यभीतवत्॥१९॥

Hearing his command, the ogres
coursed through Lanka, making their way
into every single house, nay, penetrating
into places of recreation and bedrooms as
well as into gardens, and actually calling
upon the ogres in an undaunted way to
proceed to the assembly hall. (19)

ते रथान्तचरा एके दृप्तानेके दृढान् हयान्।
नागानेकेऽधिरुरुहुर्जग्मुश्चैके पदातय: It २०॥

Some of the invited ogres sallied forth
in the foremost of chariots, others rode on
proud elephants, still others on sturdy horses,
while yet others proceeded on foot. (20)

सा पुरी परमाकीर्णा रथकुञ्जरवाजिभि:।
सम्पतद्धिर्विरुरुचे गरुत्मद्भिरिवाम्बरम्॥ २१॥

Fully crowded with chariots, elephants
and horses running in a line, that city looked
very charming like the sky crowded with
birds flying in a row. (21)

ते वबाहनान्यवस्थाय यानानि विविधानि a
aut ute: प्रविविशु: सिंहा गिरिगुहामिव॥ २२॥

Leaving their mounts as well as
conveyances of every description outside,
they made their way into the assembly
hall on foot as lions would enter a rocky
cave. (22)

Ua: पादौ गृहीत्वा तु Wat ते प्रतिपूजिता:।
पीठेष्वन्ये बृसरीष्वन्ये wat केचिदुपाविशन्॥ २३॥

Touching the king’s feet (as an act of
submission) and greeted in their turn by the
king, they, for their part, took their seat,
some on seats of gold, others on mats of
KuSa grass and still others on the carpeted
ground. (23)

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA +

ते समेत्य सभायां वै राक्षसा राजशासनात्।
यथार्हमुपतस्थुस्ते रावणं राक्षसाधिपम्॥ २४॥

Gathering in the assembly hall at the
king’s command, the aforesaid ogres actually
took their position round Ravana, their
suzerain lord, each according to his rank.

(24)
मन्तिणश्च यथामुख्या निश्चितार्थेषु पण्डिता:।
अमात्याश्च गुणोपेता: सर्वज्ञा बुद्धिदर्शना:॥ २५॥

समीयुस्तत्र शतश: शूराश्च बहवस्तथा।
सभायां हेमवर्णायां सर्वार्थस्य WET Ti २६॥

Counsellors foremost in their own
sphere and clever in deciding affairs and
qualified ministers, well-versed in all subjects
and capable of viewing things with their
understanding and likewise numerous
warriors too actually gathered in hundreds
in that assembly hall sparkling with gold for
discussing all matters for a happy conclusion.

(25-26)

Then arrived the high-souled and
illustrious Vibhisana in the assembly presided
over by his eldest (half-) brother, Ravana,
mounting a huge, bright and excellent chariot
drawn by peerless horses, its various parts
decked with gold. (27)

a पूर्वजायावरज: शशंस
नामाथ पश्चाच्चरणौ ववन्दे।
शुक: प्रहस्तश्च तथैव तेभ्यो

ददौ यथार्हं पृथगासनानि॥ ac

Younger as he was, he mentioned
his name by way of courtesy to his eldest
(half-) brother and then bowed at the latter’s
feet. Suka and Prahasta too did just the
same. Ravana, for his part, offered them
separate seats according to their respective
rank. (28)
