* AYODHYAKANDA +

“Large rocks of various sizes and
shapes and distinguished by different colours
such as blue, yellow, white and ruddy shine
brightly in hundreds on every side of the
mountain. (20)

Rit भान्त्यचलेन्द्रस्य हुताशनशिखा sal
ओषध्य: स्वप्रभालक्षम्या भ्राजमाना: Asst: ॥ २१ Il

“Shining with the wealth of their
splendour, herbs in their thousands sparkle
like flames of fire on the top of the mountain
at night. (21)

केचित् क्षयनिभा देशा: केचिदुद्यानसंनिभा: |
केचिदेकशिला भान्ति पर्वतस्यास्य भामिनि॥ २२॥

“Some parts of this mountain consisting
as they do of dense clusters of Palasa
trees, look like houses, while others, which
abound in flowers, appear like gardens, while
still others consist of huge single blocks of
stone, O proud lady! (22)

भित्त्वेव वसुधां भाति चित्रकूट: समुत्थित:।
चित्रकूटस्य कूटोऽयं दृश्यते Ada: BH २३॥
“Citrakuta appears as though risen,
having split the earth. Nay, this peak of
Citrakuta looks charming on all sides. (23)
कुष्ठस्थगरपुंनागभूर्जपत्रोत्तरच्छ्दान् ।
कामिनां स्वास्तरान् पश्य कुशेशयदलायुतान्॥ २४॥
“Behold the cosy beds of voluptuaries
covered with the leaves of lilies, Sthagara

trees, Punnaga trees and Bhurja trees
as counterpane and overspread_ with

629

lotus leaves. (24)

मृदिताश्चापविद्धाश्च दृश्यन्ते कमलस्त्रज:।
कामिभिर्वनिते usa फलानि विविधानि च॥ २५ ॥

“Here are seen, O darling, wreaths of
lotus flowers crushed and cast aside by
voluptuaries and also behold fruits of various
kinds enjoyed and thrown away by them.

(25)

वस्वौकसारां नलिनीमतीत्यैवोत्तरान् कुरून्।
पर्वतश्चित्रकूटोऽसौ बहुमूलफलोदक: Wl २६॥
“Having abundant roots, fruit and water,
the yonder Citrakuta mountain surpasses
even Vaswaukasara (more popularly known
by the name of Alaka, the capital of Kubera,
the god of riches), Nalini, the capital of
Indra, better known by the name of Amaravati
and the territory of the Uttarakurus in
loveliness. (26)
स्त्वया च did ae लक्ष्मणेन।
रतिं प्रपत्स्ये कुलधर्मवर्धिनीं
सतां पथि स्वैर्नियमै: ut: स्थित:॥ २७॥
If for my part, O darling, | shall be able
to spend this period of exile extending over
fourteen years merrily as though in sport
with you, O Sita and Laksmana, adhering to
the path trodden by the virtuous and
conforming to the highest discipline imposed
by myself, | shall derive joy enhancing the
piety of my race.” (27)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्येऽयोध्याकाण्डे
चतुर्नवतितम: सर्ग: ॥ ९४॥

Thus ends Canto Ninety-four in the Ayodhyakanda of the glorious Ramayana of
Valmiki, the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

