+ UTTARAKANDA +

लोध्रनीपार्जुनैर्नागै: सप्तपर्णातिमुक्तकै: |
मन्दारकदलीगुल्मलताजालसमाव्रृताम् usu

It was abounded in Lodhra, Nipa, Arjuna,
Naga, Saptaparna, Atimuktaka, Mandara,
plantain trees, bushes and a network of
creepers. (4)

प्रियङ्गुभि: कदम्बैश्च तथा च बकुलैरपि।
जम्बूभिर्दाडिमैश्चैव कोविदारैश्च शोभिताम्॥७५॥

It was rendered by splendid Priyangu,
Kadamba and also by Bakula_ and
pomegranate, Jambu (the rose-apple)and
Kovidara trees. (5)

सर्वदा कुसुमै Ta: फलवद्भिर्मनोरमै:।

दिव्यगन्धरसोपेतैस्तरुणाङ्कुरपल्लवै: ॥ ६ ॥
तथैव तरुभिर्दिव्यै: शिल्पिभि: परिकल्पितै: |
चारुपल्लवपुष्पाढ्यैर्मत्तभ्रमरसंकुलै ॥ ७॥

कोकिलैर्भृङ्गराजैश्च नानावर्णैश्च पक्षिभि:।
शोभितां शतशश्चित्रां चूतव्रक्षावतंसकै:॥८॥
It was embellished by such lovely trees
ever laden with fascinating flowers and fruits
and tender sprouts and whorl of leaves full
of celestial fragrance and juice, as were
reared with care by divine gardeners,
enriched by beautiful leaves and flowers
and thronged by intoxicated bees, and
rendered variegated by multi-coloured birds
like Kokilas and Bhrigarajas which served
as ornaments to the hundreds of the mango
trees. (6—8)
शातकुम्भनिभा: केचित् केचिदग्निशिखोपमा: |
नीलाञ्जननिभाश्चान्ये भान्ति तत्र स्म पादपा:॥९॥
There in the ASoka-grove some trees
had golden brilliance, some glistened like

the flames of fire and yet others shone with
the splendour of dark collyrium. (9)

सुरभीणि च पुष्पाणि माल्यानि विविधानि च।
aitftent विविधाकारा: पूर्णा: परमवारिणा॥ go UI
माणिक्यकृतसोपाना: स्फाटिकान्तरकुट्टिमा: ।
फुल्लपद्मोत्पलवनाश्चक्रवाकोपशोभिता: ॥११॥
दात्यूहशुकसंघुष्टा हंससारसनादिता: |
तरुभि: पुष्पशबलैस्तीरजैरुपशोभिता: ॥ १२॥

993

There were fragrant flowers, blossoms
of various kinds and also ponds of different
shapes full of excellent water, which had
flights of steps made of rubies ending in
crystal platforms under water; which had
masses of blooming lotuses and water-lilies;
which were graced by Cakravaka birds;
which resounded with the cries of water-
hens and parrots; which were resonant with
the cackling of swans and cranes and which
were adorned with trees growing on their
banks and wearing a motley appearance
due to their being laden with flowers.

(10—12)
प्राकारैर्विविधाकारै: शोभिताश्च शिलातलै:।
wa च ate वैदूर्यमणिसंनिभै:॥१३॥
Meet: परमोपेतां पुष्पितद्रुमकाननाम्।
तत्र संघर्षजातानां व्रक्षाणां पुष्पशालिनाम्॥ १४॥
प्रस्तरार पुष्पशबला नभस्तारागणैरिव।
wet fe यथेन्द्रस्य ब्राह्मं चैत्ररथं यथा॥१७५॥

They were also bedecked with fences
of various shapes and stone-slabs. Just
there in that part of the woodland the grassy
glades resembling the hue of Vaidurya (cat’s-
eye) splendidly beautified the ASokavanika
which had a multitude of trees ladden with
flowers. There the stone-slabs, which were
placed under the trees and served as
couches, looked variegated due to flowers
fallen from the trees as the sky with the
stars. The lay-out of Sri Rama’s grove was
like that of the Nandana garden of Indra and
the Caitraratha garden of Kubera raised by
Brahma. (183—15)

बह्यासनगृहोपेतां लतागृहसमाव्रृताम्॥ १६ ॥
अशोकवनिकां स्फीतां प्रविश्य रघुनन्दन:।
आसने च शुभाकारे पुष्पप्रकरभूषिते॥१७॥
कुथास्तरणसंस्तीर्णे wa: संनिषसाद Fl
सीतामादाय हस्तेन मधु मैरेयकं शुचि॥१८॥
पाययामास काकुत्स्थ: शचीमिव पुरंदर:।
मांसानि च सुमृष्टानि फलानि विविधानि च॥ १९॥
