1054

understanding with me on this score, the
perverted fellow does not give heed to it, his
object having already been accomplished.
(69)

स किष्किन्धां प्रविश्य त्वं ब्रूहि वानरपुङ्खवम्।
मूर्ख ग्राम्यसुखे uh सुग्रीवं वचनान्मम॥७०॥
“Therefore, duly entering Kiskindha,
admonish in my name the foolish Sugriva,
the foremost of monkeys, who is attached
to carnal pleasures, as follows: (70)

अर्थिनामुपपन्नानां पूर्वं चाप्युपकारिणाम्।
आशां संश्रुत्य यो हन्ति स लोके पुरुषाधम:॥ ७१॥
‘The vilest among men in this world is
he who, having pledged his word to grant
the desire of suppliants, who are themselves
endowed with strength etc., and have also
rendered good offices to him in the past,
fails to implement his promise. (71)

शुभं वा यदि वा are यो fe वाक्यमुदीरितम्।
सत्येन परिगृह्णाति a वीर: पुरुषोत्तम:॥७२॥

‘He, on the other hand, who honours
as inviolable his plighted word, be it
productive of good or evil, is a hero and the
best of men. (72)
कृतार्था ह्यकृतार्थानां मित्राणां न भवन्ति ये।
तान् मृतानपि क्रव्यादा: कृतघ्नान् नोपभुञ्जते॥ ७३ ॥

‘Even carnivore refuse to feed on the
flesh of those ungrateful beings, when they
are dead, who, though having achieved their
own end, actually fail to be of any service to
their beneficent friends whose object has
not yet been accomplished. (73)

Tt काञ्चनपृष्ठस्य विकृष्टस्य मया रणे।
द्रष्टुमिच्छसि चापस्य रूपं विद्युद्गणोपमम्॥ ox UI

‘Do you really wish to see the shining
frame, resembling a series of lightning
flashes, of my gold-backed bow stretched
at full length by me in combat? (74)
निर्घोषमिव वज्रस्य पुन: संश्रोतुमिच्छसि॥ ७५॥

‘Do you long to hear once more at close

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

quarters the terrible twang of my bowstring
resembling the crash of a thunderbolt when |
am angered on a field of battle?’ (75)

काममेवंगतेऽप्यस्य परिज्ञाते पराक्रमे।
त्वत्सहायस्य मे वीर न चिन्ता स्यान्नृपात्मज॥ ७६॥

“It is strange, O prince, that no anxious
thought that | could as well slay Sugriva, as
| did Vali, if he failed to implement his
promise should cross the mind of Sugriva
even under such circumstances when my
prowess is directly and fully known to him
and especially when | have a_ helpful
companion in you. (76)

यदर्थमयमारम्भ कृक परपुरंजय।
समयं नाभिजानाति कृतार्थ: प्लवगेश्वर:॥ ७७॥
“Sugriva (the lord of monkeys), whose
object has been accomplished, no longer
remembers the understanding which was
arrived at with him by me relating to the
purpose in the shape of conducting a search
for Sita for which this endeavour in the form
of cultivating friendship with him and killing
Vali was made by me, O conqueror of
hostile cities ! (77)

amt: समयकालं तु प्रतिज्ञाय हरीश्वर:।
व्यतीतांश्चतुरो मासान् विहरन् नावबुध्यते॥७८॥

“Having given his plighted word to the
effect that the understanding arrived at with
me will be honoured at the end of the
monsoon, Sugriva (the king of monkeys),
who is busy diverting himself by enjoying
the pleasures of sense is not aware of the
four rainy months that have already well-
nigh elapsed. (78)

सामात्यपरिषत्क्रीडन् पानमेवोपसेवते ।
शोकदीनेषु नास्मासु सुग्रीव: Hed दयाम्॥७९॥
“Amusing himself alongwith his ministers
and court, Sugriva is only enjoying drink,
and does not commiserate with us, who are
distressed through grief. (79)
उच्यतां गच्छ सुग्रीवस्त्वया dit महाबल।
मम रोषस्य यद्रूपं ब्रूयाश्चैनमिदं वच:॥८०॥
