+ UTTARAKANDA +

The white mansion that was formerly
built by Lavana, Satrughna further beautified
with pictures of various colours, looking
beautiful on all sides with rest-houses and
Viharas, and that city was adorned with human
and celestial embellishments. (12-13)
तां पुरीं दिव्यसंकाशां नानापण्योपशोभिताम्।
नानादेशगतैश्चापि वणिग्भिरुपशोभिताम्॥१४॥
तां समृद्धां समृद्धार्थ: शत्रुघ्नो भरतानुज:।
निरीक्ष्य परमप्रीतत परं हर्षमुपागमत्॥१५॥

The prosperous Satrughna, the younger
brother of Bharata, having seen the city,
divine in appearance, filled with all forms of
merchandise and inhabited by traders coming
from various countries, was much pleased.

(14-15)

1057

तस्य बुद्धि: समुत्पन्ना fava मधुरां पुरीम्।
रामपादौ निरीक्षेऽहं ad द्वादश आगते॥१६॥

Then at the commencement of the
twelfth year, having established the city
Madhura, he thought ‘I shall see the feet of
Sri Rama.’ (16)
ad: स ताममरपुरोषमां पुरीं

निवेश्य वै विविधजनाभिसंव्रृताम्।
नराधिपो रघुपतिपाददर्शने
दधे मतिं रघुकुलवंशवर्धन:॥१७॥

Then establishing that city, resembling
a celestial one, Satrughna filling it with men
of various types, the enhancer of Raghu’s
family, considered it appropriate to see Sri
Rama’s feet. (17)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये उत्तरकाण्डे सप्ततितम: सर्ग: ॥ Vo ॥

Thus ends Canto Seventy in the Uttarakanda of the glorious Ramayana of Valmiki,
the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

Canto LXXI
Satrughna, accompanied by a few soldiers, proceeds to Ayodhya, on the
way listening S11 Rama’s glory being sung at Rsi Valmiki’s Asrama
and getting pleasantly surprised

ततो द्वादशमे ad शत्रुघ्नो रामपालिताम्।
अयोध्यां चकमे गन्तुमल्पभृत्यबलानुग:॥ १॥
Then in the twelfth year Satrughna,
followed by a few attendants and the army,
desired to proceed to Ayodhya, ruled over
by Sri Rama. (1)
ततो मन्तिपुरोगांश्च बलमुख्यान् fat च।
जगाम हयमुख्येन रथानां च wat Sie
Then making the army-chiefs and
the councillors to retreat, he (Satrughna)

proceeded riding on च special horse,
accompanied by a hundred chariots. (2)

स गत्वा गणितान् वासान् सप्ताष्टौ रघुनन्दन:।
वाल्मीकाश्रममागत्य वासं चक्रे महायशा:॥ ३॥

Satrughna, the descendant of the
Raghus, possessed of fame, halting at seven
to eight places on the way, reached the
hermitage of Valmiki and dwelt there. (3)

सोऽभिवाद्य तत: पादौ वाल्मीके: पुरुषर्षभ:।
पाद्यमर्घ्य तथातिथ्यं जग्राह मुनिहस्तत:॥४॥
Having paid obeisance at the feet of
sage Valmiki, the famous Satrughna accepted
ablutions, offerings and hospitality from the
sage. (4)
age: सुमधुरा: कथास्तत्र सहस्रश:।
कथयामास स मुनि: शत्रुघ्नाय महात्मने॥५॥
The sage, Valmiki, narrated to the noble
Satrughna sweet tales of various themes. (5)
