918

ale afar निपतिते न म्रियेतैष wera: |
frat वा दशग्रीवस्तदाप्युभयतोऽनृतम्॥४७५॥

“In both cases—even if this ten-headed
ogre dies or fails to die in the event of this
rod falling on him, falsity of my boons will be
the result. (45)
तन्निवर्तय लङ्केशाद् दण्डमेतं समुद्यतम्।
सत्यं च At कुरुष्वाद्य लोकांस्त्वं यद्यवेक्षसे॥ ४६ UI

“Hence turn aside this uplifted rod from
the king of Lanka, and thereby vindicate my
truthfulness today if you have regard for the
worlds.” (46)

Wage धर्मात्मा प्रत्युवाच यमस्तदा।

We व्यावर्तितो दण्ड: प्रभविष्णुर्हि नो भवान्॥४७॥
Spoken to in these words, the pious-

minded Yama for his part then said in reply:

*The rod stands diverted hereby, since you

are our master. (47)

न मया यद्ययं Wa हन्तुं वरपुरस्कृत:॥४८॥

« VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

“If this fellow who stands protected by
your boon cannot be killed by me, what can
be accomplished by me now by continuing
on the field of battle ! (48)

Us तस्मात् प्रणश्यामि दर्शनादस्य रक्षस:।
इत्युक्त्वा सरथ: साश्वस्तत्रैवान्तरधीयत॥४९॥

“|, therefore, hereby disappear from the
view of this ogre.” Saying so he disappeared
then and there—chariot, horses and all. (49)

दशग्रीवस्तु तं जित्वा नाम faster चात्मन:।
आरुह्य पुष्पकं भूयो निष्क्रान्तो यमसादनात्॥ ५० Il
Having conquered Yama, and

proclaimed his name, and remounting the
Puspaka, Ravana (the ten-headed, monster)
emerged from the domain of Yama. (50)

aq daca ea: we ब्रह्मपुरोगमै:।
जगाम fafed wer नारदश्च महामुनि:।॥७५१॥
God Yama (son of the sun-god) for his
part, as well as the eminent sage Narada
joyously rose to heaven alongwith the gods
headed by Brahma. (51)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये उत्तरकाण्डे द्वाविंश: AW: ॥ 2211

Thus ends Canto Twenty-two in the Uttarakanda of the glorious Ramayana of Valmiki,
the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

Canto XXIII

Ravana makes friends with the Nivatakavacas, kills the Kalakeyas
and vanquishes the sons of Varuna

ततो frat दशग्रीवो ad त्रिदशपुङ्गवम्।
रावणस्तु रणश्लाघी स्वसहायान् ददर्श ह॥१॥
Having conquered Yama, the foremost
of gods, Ravana, the ten-headed monster,
for his part who boasted of his fighting, then
saw his associates in war: so the tradition
goes. (1)
ad रुधिरसिक्ताङ्घं प्रहारैर्जर्जरीकृतम्।
रावणं राक्षसा दृष्टवा विस्मयं समुपागमन्॥ २॥

Thereupon the ogres felt amazed to
see Ravana bathed all over with blood and
shattered by blows. (2)

wat वर्धयित्वा च मारीचप्रमुखास्तत:।
पुष्पकं भेजिरे ad Ulead रावणेन qual

Having felicitated him on his victory,
and reassured by him in their turn, all the
ministers headed by Marica then remounted
the Puspaka. (3)
