« KISKINDHAKANDA +

Casting his glance all-round in the forest,
the thick-necked Sugriva, who was fond of
forests, exhibited extreme anger. (2)

ततस्तु Fad Ut कृत्वा युद्धाय चाह्वयत्।
ua: परिव्रृतो नादैर्भिन्दन्निवाम्बरम्॥ ३॥
Uttering a terrible roar and rending the
air with his yells, Sugriva, for his part, who
was surrounded by his followers, then
challenged his brother to a duel. (3)

प्रतिज्ञा या pat ate त्वया वालिवधे पुरा॥ ६॥
सफलां कुरु तां क्षिप्रं लतां काल इवागत:।
Wane धर्मात्मा सुग्रीवेण स राघव:॥७॥
तमेवोवाच वचनं सुग्रीवं शत्रुसूदन:।
कृताभिज्ञानचिह्नस्त्वमनया गजसाह्वया Ul ८ ।।
लक्ष्मणेन समुत्पाट्य एषा HVS Hal तव।
शोभसेऽप्यधिकं AT लतया कण्ठसक्तया॥ ९॥

विपरीत इवाकाशे सूर्यो नक्षत्रमालया।
aa वालिसमुत्थं A भयं at च वानर॥१०॥
एकेनाहं प्रमोक्ष्यामि बाणमोक्षेण संयुगे।
मम दर्शय सुग्रीव वैरिणं भ्रातृरूपिणम्॥११॥

Thundering like a big cloud propelled
by force of the wind and looking at Sri
Rama, who was skilled in action, Sugriva,
who shone like the rising sun, and possessed
the gait of a proud lion, spoke as follows:
“We have arrived at Kiskindha, the capital
of Vali, which was surrounded by a trap in
the form of monkeys, decorated with arched
gateways of gold and endowed with flags
and instruments of war. Pray, implement
without delay the vow that was undertaken
by you the other day to kill Vali, O valiant
prince, in the same way as the season of

983

fructification, when arrived, makes a creeper
bear fruit.” Requested thus by Sugriva, the
celebrated Sri Rama (a scion of Raghu),
the destroyer of his foes, whose mind was
set on virtue, replied to the same Sugriva
as follows :

“Having duly plucked this creeper, it
has been fastened about your neck by
Laksmana. You have been provided with a
distinguishing mark by this creeper called
by the name of Gajapuspi (and hence
associated with the name of an elephant).
With this creeper fastened about your neck,
O hero, you shine all the brighter even as
the full moon adorned with a galaxy of stars
in the heavens at night*. By discharging an
arrow only once in the course of this
encounter of yours with Vali, | shall dispel
this very day the fear as well as the
feeling of animosity instilled in you by Vali,
O monkey chief! Simply point out to me
your enemy in the guise of a brother, O
Sugriva ! (4—11)
वाली विनिहतो यावद्वने पांसुषु चेष्टते।
यदि दृष्टिपथं प्राप्तो जीवन् a विनिवर्तते॥१२॥
ततो दोषेण मागच्छेत् सद्यो Meet मां भवान्।
प्रत्यक्षं सप्त ते साला मया बाणेन दारिता:॥ १३॥

“Struck down by me, Vali will presently
roll in the dust. If, having entered the range
of my sight, he returns alive, you may
justifiably hold me guilty and reproach me
then and there. As many as seven sal trees
were pierced by me with a single arrow
before your very eyes. (12-13)

wae बलेनाद्य ated fad रणे।
अनृतं नोक्तपूर्वं मे fet कृच्छ्रेऽपि तिष्ठता॥ १४॥
धर्मलोभपरीतेन न च वक्ष्ये कथंचन।
सफलां च करिष्यामि प्रतिज्ञां जहि संभ्रमम्॥ १५॥
प्रसूतं कलमक्षेत्रॆ वर्षेणेव शतक्रतु:।
तदाह्वाननिमित्तं च वालिनो हेममालिन:॥१६॥

* The words “Viparite’ occurring in this verse has been construed by some commentators to mean

‘at night’ and the word ‘Suryah’ as the full moon:

परीतं तु fear प्रोक्तं विपरीतं तु शर्वरी। पौर्णमासीगतश्चन्द्र: सूर्य इत्यभिधीयते॥
