858

the immortal Viswakarma, O jewel among
the Raghus, and said: (19)
ओजस्तेजोबलवतां महतामात्मतेजसा।
गृहकर्ता भवानेव देवानां हृदयेप्सितम्॥ Roll
“You alone build abodes, according to
their heart’s desire, for the great gods, full of

valour, lustre and strength by virtue of their
Spirituality. (20)
अस्माकमपि aad त्वं गृहं He महामते।
हिमवन्तमुपाश्रित्य मेरुं मन्दरमेव वा॥२१॥
महेश्वरगृहप्रख्यं गृहं न: क्रियतां महत्।
विश्वकर्मा ततस्तेषां राक्षसानां महाभुज:॥ २२॥
निवासं कथयामास शाक्रस्येवामरावतीम्।
दक्षिणस्योदधेस्तीरे त्रिकूटो ATA Uae: २३॥

“This time, O highly intelligent one, build
an abode for us also. On the slopes of
Mount Himavan, Meru or Mandara erect for
us a Spacious house like that of Maheswara.”
ViSwakarma, the mighty-armed, thereupon
told the said Raksasas of a residence equal
to Amaravati, the residence of Indra, as
follows: “On the shore of the southern sea
there is a hill Trikuta by name. (21—23)

gaat sft चाप्यन्यो द्वितीयो राक्षसेश्वरा:।
शिखरे तस्य शैलस्य मध्यमेऽम्बुदसंनिभे॥ २४॥
wet gaat टङ्कच्छिन्नचतुर्दिशि।
त्रिंशद्योजनविस्तीर्णा शतयोजनमायता॥ २५॥
मया लङ्केति नगरी शाक्राज्ञप्तेन निर्मिता॥ २६॥
“‘O lords of the Raksasas, there is
another hill by its side called Suvela. On the
middle peak of the former, looking like a
cloud, and inaccessible even to birds due to
all its four sides being polished by a chisel,
| built the city of Lanka at the command of
Indra. It is thirty Yojanas wide and a hundred
Yojanas long. It is surrounded by fortifications
made of gold. The portals also are made of
gold. (24—26)

तस्यां वसत geet यूयं राक्षसपुंगवा:।
अमरावतीं समासाद्य सेन्द्रा इव दिवौकस:॥ २७॥

“`“[0।, the foremost of Raksasas, who

« VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

are unassailable by others, may live there,
as do the gods alongwith Indra in Amaravati.
(27)

लङ्कादुर्गं समासाद्य राक्षसैर्बहुभिर्वृता:।
भविष्यथ दुराधर्षा: शत्रूणां शत्रुसूदना:॥ २८॥
“‘Having duly reached the fortress of
Lanka with a large following of Raksasas
you will be unassailable by enemies, O
slayers of your foes!’ (28)

विश्वकर्मवच: श्रुत्वा ततस्ते राक्षसोत्तमा:।
सहस्रानुचरा भूत्वा Meat तामवसन् पुरं।म् ।॥ २९॥
“Hearing the words of Viswakarma, those
best of Raksasas then went to that city with
thousands of followers and lived there. (29)
दृढप्राकारपरिखां हैमैर्गृहशतैर्वृताम्।
लङ्कामवाप्य ते हृष्टा न्यवसन् TENT: Il ३०॥
“The Raksasas full of delight reached
Lanka surrounded by strong fortifications and

moats and dotted with hundreds of houses
made of gold, and stayed there. (30)

एतस्मिन्नेव काले तु यथाकामं च राघव।
नर्मदा नाम गन्धर्वी बभूव रघुनन्दन॥ ३१॥
तस्या: कन्यात्रयं ह्यासीद् ह्रीश्रीकोर्तिसमद्युति।
ज्येष्ठक्रमेण सा तेषां राक्षसानामराक्षसी॥ ३२॥
कन्यास्ता: Weel Ber: पूर्णचन्द्रनिभानना:।
त्रयाणां राक्षसेन्द्राणां तिस्रो गन्धर्वकन्यका:॥ ३३॥

“At that time, 0 Sri Rama, the delight of
the Raghus, there lived a Gandharva woman
by name Narmada. She had three daughters
equal in lustre to Hr, Sri and Kirti, the
goddesses presiding over modesty, prosperity
and fame, respectively. This non-Raksasa
lady voluntarily gave all the three Gandharva
maidens, whose faces were beaming with
joy like the full moon, in the order of their
seniority in age, in marriage to the three
Raksasas. (31—33)

दत्ता मात्रा महाभागा नक्षत्रे भगदैवते।
कृतदारास्तु ते राम सुकेशतनयास्तदा॥ ३४॥
चिक्रीडु: सह भार्याभिरप्सरोभिरिवामरा:।
ततो माल्यवतो भार्या सुन्दरी ATT सुन्दरी॥ ३५॥
