# YUDDHAKANDA +

Gazing on Sugriva and those monkeys,
the aforesaid Vibhisana, highly intelligent
and great as he was, spoke as follows in a
loud voice while still remaining in the air:

(11)
रावणो नाम दुर्वृत्तो राक्षसो राक्षसेश्वर:।
तस्याहमनुजो wat विभीषण इति श्रुत:॥१२॥

“There is an ogre of evil conduct,
Ravana by name, who is the lord of ogres.
| am his youngest (half-) brother, known by
the name of Vibhisana. (12)

तेन सीता जनस्थानाद् हृता हत्वा जटायुषम्।
रुद्धा च विवशा दीना राक्षसीभि: सुरक्षिता॥ १३॥
“Carried off from Janasthana after killing
Jatayu, the poor and helpless Sita has been
detained by him and is being jealously guarded
by ogresses. (13)

we हेतुभिर्वाक्यैर्विविधैश्च न्यदर्शयम्।

साधु निर्यात्यतां सीता रामायेति पुन: पुन:॥ १४॥
“| thoroughly admonished him time and

again by recourse to various arguments in

the following words: ‘Let Sita be restored to

Rama.’ (14)

स च न प्रतिजग्राह Wau: कालचोदित:।
उच्यमानं fed art विपरीत इवौषधम्॥१५॥
“Impelled by fate, Ravana, however,
would not listen to the salutary advice which
was being tendered to him, any more than
a man who is doomed would accept a
medicine, which is calculated to do him
good. (15)
aise परुषितस्तेन दासवच्चावमानित:।
त्यक्त्वा पुत्रांश्च ANI राघवं शरणं गत:॥१६॥
Abandoning my sons and wife, when
spoken to harshly and treated with disrespect
like a slave by him, though wishing him
well, | have sought Sri Rama, a scion of
Raghu, as my refuge. (16)
निवेदयत wt fad waar महात्मने।
सर्वलोकशरण्याय विभीषणमुपस्थितम्॥१७॥

345

“Therefore, communicate to the high-
souled Sri Rama (a scion of Raghu), who is
capable of protecting all the worlds, the fact
of myself, Vibhisana, being present.” (17)

एतत्तु वचनं श्रुत्वा सुग्रीवो लघुविक्रम:।
लक्ष्मणस्याग्रतो रामं संरब्धमिदमब्रवीत्॥१८॥

Hearing this appeal, the swift-footed
Sugriva for his part ran up to the presence
of Sri Rama and indignantly submitted as
follows to Sri Rama in the presence of
Laksmana: (18)

प्रविष्ट: शत्रुसैन्यं fe we: शत्रुरतर्कित:।
निहन्यादन्तरं लब्ध्वा उलूको वायसानिव॥१९॥

“Indeed an enemy, who has belonged
to the hostile ranks, has unexpectedly
made his appearance. Finding an opportune
moment he may kill us even as an owl
would destroy crows. (19)

Wa oe नये चारे युक्तो भवितुमर्हसि।
वानराणां च भद्रं ते परेषां च WaT Roll
“For conferring benefits on the monkeys,
as well as for the subjugation of the enemy,
O scourge of your foes, you ought to remain
alert in the matter of holding deliberations
as to what ought to be done and what ought
not to be done, deployment of troops,
employing the four expedients against the
enemy in their own sphere as well as in
espionage: this will ensure your welfare.(20)

अन्तर्धानगता ह्येते राक्षसा: कामरूपिण:।
शूराश्च निकृतिज्ञाश्च तेषां जातु न विश्वसेत्॥ २१॥

“Since these ogres move about
unperceived, are able to change their form
at will and are valiant and crafty, one should
never repose trust in them. (21)

प्रणिधी राक्षसेन्द्रस्य रावणस्य भवेदयम्।

अनुप्रविश्य सोऽस्मासु भेदं कुर्यान्न संशय:॥ २२॥
“He may be a spy of Ravana, the ruler

of ogres. Finding his way in our midst,

he may doubtless sow dissension amongst
us. (22)
