714

स्वबलस्य तु घातेन विरूपाक्षवधेन च।
aya द्विगुणं क्रुद्धो रावणो राक्षसाधिप:॥ २॥

Ravana, the suzerain lord of ogres, for
his part, got doubly enraged by the destruction
of his own army and the fall of virupaksa. (2)
प्रक्षीणं स्वबलं दृष्टवा वध्यमानं वलीमुखै:।
बभूवास्य AM युद्धे दृष्टवा दैवविपर्ययम्॥ ३॥

He felt agonized to find his own army
greatly thinned while being destroyed by the

monkeys and to see the adverseness of his
fate. (3)

उवाच च समीपस्थं महोदरमनन्तरम्।
अस्मिन् काले महाबाहो जयाशा त्वयि मे स्थिता । ४॥

And he spoke as follows to Mahodara,
standing immediately beside him: “At this
juncture, O mighty armed one, the hope of
my victory is centred in you. (4)

we wary वीर दर्शयाद्य पराक्रमम्।
भर्तृपिण्डस्य कालोऽयं निर्वेष्टुं साधु युध्यताम्॥ I

“Exhibit your valour today and
exterminate the hostile army. This is the
time for you to repay the debt of your
master (in the shape of subsistence received
from him). Fight well.” (5)

एवमुक्तस्तथेत्युक्त्वा राक्षसेन्द्रो महोदर:।
प्रविवेशारिसेनां स पतङ्ग Fa पावकम्॥६॥
Saying “Amen!” when encouraged in
these words, that ogre chief, Mahodara,
penetrated deeply into the hostile army even
as a moth would rush into a flame. (6)
Wd: स het Uh वानराणां महाबल:।
Uda तेजस्वी स्वेन वीर्येण चोदित:॥७॥
Emboldened by the word of his master,
the ogre who was endowed with extraordinary
might and full of energy, then started playing
havoc among the monkeys by dint of his
own prowess. (7)

वानराश्च महासत्त्वा: wre विपुला: शिला:।
प्रविश्यारिबलं भीमं जघ्नुस्ते सर्वराक्षसान्॥८॥

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA +

Seizing hold of huge rocks and
penetrating into the redoubtable hostile
army, the aforesaid monkeys too, who were
highly courageous, started destroying all
the ogres. (8)

महोदर: Wes: mt: काञ्चनभूषणै:।
fase पाणिपादोरु वानराणां महाहवे॥९॥

Getting highly infuriated, Mahodara
severed with his arrows, decked with gold,
the hands, feet and thighs of the monkeys
in that major combat. (9)

ततस्ते वानरा: ad राक्षसैरर्दिता भृशम्।
दिशो दश gat: केचित् केचित् सुग्रीवमाश्रिता: tt १० ॥।

All the aforesaid monkeys were struck
hard by the ogres. Some of them fled into
the ten directions, while others took refuge
with Sugriva. (10)
प्रभग्नं समरे दृष्ट्वा वानराणां महाबलम्।
अभिदुद्राव सुग्रीवो महोदरमनन्तरम्॥११॥

Seeing the mighty army of the monkeys
routed in the encounter, Sugriva, rushed
towards Mahodara, who stood nearby. (11)
faa च महातेजास्तद्वधाय हरीश्वर:॥१२॥

Firmly seizing hold of a huge and a
formidable rock, which looked like a mountain,
the king of monkeys, who was endowed
with extraordinary energy, hurled it with a
view to killing the ogre. (12)
तामापतन्तीं सहसा शिलां Gear महोदर:।
असम्भ्रान्तस्ततो बाणैर्निर्बिभेद दुरासदाम्॥१३॥

Seeing that rock falling all of a sudden,
Mahodara, who was not the least agitated,
forthwith cut it to pieces with his arrows,
even though it was difficult to approach.

(13)

रक्षसा तेन बाणौघैर्निकृत्ता सा सहस्रधा।
Foard det भूमौ गृध्रचक्रमिवाकुलम्॥१४॥

Torn into a thousand and one fragments
