1106

take place tomorrow, then the descendant

of Raghu, the extirpator of foes, discharged

the assembly. (16)
vaya शपथस्य निश्चयम्।

« VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

forest मुनीन् नृपांश्च सर्वान्
स महात्मा महतो महानुभाव:॥१७॥
That lion among kings, the great and
magnanimous one, deciding the oath to take place
next day, allowed all noble ones to leave. (17)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये उत्तरकाण्डे पञ्चनवतितम: सर्ग: ॥ ९५ ॥

Thus ends Canto Ninety-five in the Uttarakanda of the glorious Ramayana of Valmiki,
the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

Canto LXXXXVI
The Sage Valmiki supports purity of Sita

तस्यां रजन्यां व्युष्टायां यज्ञवाटं गतो 7:
ऋषीन् सर्वान् महातेजा: शब्दापयति राघव:॥ १॥
वसिष्ठो वामदेवश्च जाबालिरथ काश्यप:।
विश्वामित्रो दीर्घतमा दुर्वासाश्च महातपा:॥२॥
पुलस्त्योऽपि aa शक्तिर्भार्गवश्चैव वामन:।
मार्कण्डेयश्च दीर्घायुर्मौद्गल्यश्च महायशा:॥ ३॥
Tig च्यवनश्चैव wares धर्मवित्।
Wess तेजस्वी अग्निपुत्रश्च सुप्रभ:॥४॥
are: पर्वतश्चैव गौतमश्च महायशा:।
कात्यायन: सुयज्ञश्च ह्यगस्त्यस्तपसां निधि:॥ ५॥
Wa चान्ये च seat मुनय: संशितव्रता:।
कौतूहलसमाविष्टा: सर्व Wa समागता:॥६॥
राक्षसाश्च महावीर्या antiga महाबला: |
सर्व Wa समाजग्मुर्महात्मान: कुतूहलात्॥७॥
As the night passed, the King, Sri Rama,
the powerful one, going to the place of
sacrifice, reckoned all the sages—Vasistha,
Vamadeva, Jabali and Kasyapa, ViSvamitra,
Dirghatama, the great ascetic Durvasa, also
Pulastya and Sakti, Bhargava, Vamana,
Markandeya the long-lived one, the famous
Maudgalya, Garga, Cyavana, the religious
Satananda, the splendrous Bharadvaja, the

son of Agni, the lustrous one, Narada,
Parvata, the most famous Gautama all

these sages and other ascetics of austere
vows, filled with curiosity, came, and also
the most powerful Raksasas and monkeys.
(1—7)

क्षत्रिया ये च शूद्राश्च वैश्याश्चैव सहस्रश:।
नानादेशगताश्चैव ब्राह्मणा: संशितव्रता:॥८॥
All Ksatriyas and Sudras, and thousands
of Vaisyas, noble ones, came out of curiosity.
(8)

ज्ञाननिष्ठा: कर्मनिष्ठा योगनिष्ठास्तथापरे।
सीताशपथवीक्षार्थं सर्व Wa समागता:॥९॥
Brahmanas coming from all places, well-
versed in vows came to witness the oath-
taking of Sita. (9)

तदा समागतं सर्वमश्मभूतमिवाचलम्।

श्रुत्वा मुनिवरस्तूर्णं ससीत: समुपागमत्॥१०॥
Then coming to know that all those
who came were rendered motionless as
stone, the great sage Valmiki came soon
after, accompanied by Sita. (10)

तमृषिं पृष्ठत: सीता अन्वगच्छ्दवाङ्मुखी।
कृताञ्जलिर्बाष्यकला Heat रामं मनोगतम्॥११॥
Sita followed the sage, with face

downcast and hands folded, inarticulate due
to tears, keeping Sri Rama in the heart. (11)
