* ARANYAKANDA «

अवटे ये निधीयन्ते तेषां लोका: सनातना:।
एवमुक्त्वा तु काकुत्स्थं विराध: शरपीडित:॥ २३॥
aya स्वर्गसम्प्राप्तो न्यस्तदेहो महाबल:।
AeA राघवो वाक्यं लक्ष्मणं व्यादिदेश ह॥ २४॥
कुञ्जरस्येव रौद्रस्य राक्षसस्यास्य लक्ष्मण।
वनेऽस्मिन्सुमहान् श्वभ्र: खन्यतां THAT: ॥ २५ ॥

Go happily, throwing me into the pit.
This is the time-honoured practice for the
dead ogres. Eternal worlds exist for them
who are interred in a pit.” Thus saying to the
descendant of Kakutstha, the mighty Viradha,
for his part, being tormented by arrows, left
his body and reached heaven. Hearing that
speech Rama said to Laksmana: “O
Laksmana, dig a very big pit in this forest
for this dreadful ogre of fierce activities like
an elephant.” (22—25)

इत्युक्त्वा लक्ष्मणं WA: Wat: खन्यतामिति।
तस्थौ विराधमाक्रम्य HVS पादेन वीर्यवान्॥ २६॥
Thus telling Laksmana to dig a pit, the

valorous Rama stood laying his foot on the
neck of Viradha. (26)

ad: खनित्रमादाय लक्ष्मण: इवबभ्रमुत्तमम्।
अखनत् पार्श्वतस्तस्य विराधस्य महात्मन:॥ २७॥
Then taking the pick, Laksmana dug

an excellent pit by the side of that high-
souled Viradha. (27)

तं मुक्तकण्ठमुत्क्षिप्य शङ्कुकर्णं महास्वनम्।

विराधं प्राक्षिपच्छ्वभ्रे नदन्तं भैरवस्वनम्॥ २८॥
Lifting up Viradha, who was possessed

of spike-like ears and a sonorous voice, Sri

Rama threw him into the pit while he was
crying in a fearful voice. (28)

नदन्तमुत्क्षिप्य बलेन राक्षसम्॥ 28 Il

Full of joy, Rama and Laksmana of quick
valour, both firm on the battlefield, threw that
fierce, frightening and roaring demon into the
pit after lifting him up with force. (29)

723

अवध्यतां Wet महासुरस्य at
शितेन शस्त्रेण तदा नरर्षभौ।
समर्थ्य चात्यर्थविशारदावुभौ
बिले विराधस्य वधं प्रचक्रतु: I ३० Il
Having realized that the great demon
could not be killed with a sharp weapon,
both those foremost men, highly skilled,
then killed Viradha burying him in a pit with
full justification. (30)
Weel रामेण यथार्थमीप्सित:।
न मे वध: शस्त्रकृतो भवेदिति॥ ३१॥
In fact, Viradha himself had desired his
own forcible death from Rama. Hence the
forest-wanderer himself said, “My death
cannot happen with a weapon.” (31)
तदेव रामेण निशम्य भाषितं
pat मतिस्तस्य बिलप्रवेशने।
बिलं च तेनातिबलेन रक्षसा
प्रवेश्यमानेन वनं विनादितम्॥ ३२॥
Having heard this very speech, Rama
made up his mind to throw him into a pit
and while that mighty ogre was being thrown
into the pit he made the forest resound.

(32)
प्रहृष्टरूपाविव रामलक्ष्मणौ
ferrenqent Wet निपात्य तम्।
ननन्दतुर्वीतभयौ महावने
शिलाभिरन्तर्दधतुश्च राक्षसम्॥ ३३॥
Appearing as though pleased on having
thrown that Viradha into a pit in the earth,
Rama and Laksmana rejoiced in the great
forest, their fear being removed, and covered
the ogre with rocks. (33)

ततस्तु तौ काञ्चनचित्रकार्मुकौ

निहत्य Tat: परिगृह्य मैथिलीम्।
विजह्रुतुस्तौ मुदितौ महावने

दिवि स्थितौ चन्द्रदिवाकराविव॥ ३४॥

And then, having killed the ogre and
