526

केन स्म निहता: Wd सुबालेनाकृतात्मना।
at गिरं करुणं श्रुत्वा मम धर्मानुकांक्षिण:। ३३॥
तस्याहं करुणं श्रुत्वा ऋषेर्विलपतो निशि॥ ३४॥
Wud: शोकवेगेन भृशमासं विचेतन:।
तं देशमहमागम्य दीनसत्त्व: सुदुर्मना:॥ ३५॥
अपश्यमिषुणा ait सरय्वास्तापसं हतम्।
अवकीर्णजटाभारं प्रविद्धकलशोदकम्॥ ३६॥
पांसुशोणितदिग्धाङ्गं wart शल्यवेधितम्।
स मामुद्वीक्ष्य नेत्राभ्यां त्रस्तमस्वस्थचेतनम्॥ ३७॥
इत्युवाच वच: Ht दिधक्षन्निव तेजसा।
fe तवापकृतं राजन् at निवसता मया॥ ३८॥
जिह्रीर्षुरम्भो गुर्वर्थं aad ताडितस्त्वया।
एकेन Get बाणेन मर्मण्यभिहते मयि॥ ३९॥
द्वावन्धौ निहतौ वृद्धौ माता जनयिता च मे।
at नूनं दुर्बलावन्धौ मत्प्रतीक्षौ पिपासितौ॥४०॥
चिरमाशां कृतां कष्टां तृष्णां संधारयिष्यत:।
न नूनं तपसो वास्ति फलयोग: श्रुतस्य वा॥४१॥
frat यन्मां न जानीते शयानं पतितं भुवि।
जानन्नपि च fe कुर्यादशक्तश्चापरिक्रम:।॥४२॥
भिद्यमानमिवाशाक्तस्त्रातुमन्यो नगो नगम्।
पितुस्त्वमेव A गत्वा शीघ्रमाचक्ष्व राघव॥४३॥

“‘Nowhere will anyone admire him any
more than one would admire a man seeking
the bed of his preceptor’s wife. | do not
grieve for this loss of my life so much as for
the fate of my father and mother both on my
expiry. By what means of subsistence will
this aged couple, maintained for long by me,
support themselves when | have met my
end? My aged parents as well as myself
stand killed with a single arrow. By what
ignorant fool of an uncontrolled mind have
we all been done to death?’

“The bow with an arrow which | held in
my hands at the moment dropped from my
hands to the ground, distressed as | was to
hear that plaintive cry, and sought only to
do what was right. Hearing the piteous lament
of the seer, who was wailing during the
close of the night, | lost my consciousness

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

again and again, utterly confounded as |
was due to the outburst of grief. Reaching
the place where he lay, distressed in mind
and extremely sad at heart, as | was, |
beheld the ascetic lying on the bank of the
Sarayu, struck with an arrow and pierced
with its point, the mass of matted hair on his
head put out of order, the water of his
pitcher run out and his limbs besmeared
with dust and blood. Staring at me, who
stood alarmed and sick in mind, with his
blood shot eyes as if going to consume me
with his glory of austerity, he addressed the
following harsh words to me: ‘What wrong
was done by me to you, O king, living as |
did in the forest, that while intending to take
water for my parents, | was hit by you? On
my being hit in a vital part with a single
arrow, my blind and aged mother and father
both have been virtually killed. Feeble, blind
and thirsty, they must be anxiously waiting
for me and will be cherishing since long the
hope of getting water placed in me, and
enduring their painful thirst. Surely askesis
or learning has not yet borne fruit in my
case or in the case of my father; for my
father does not know anything about myself
having fallen down, mortally wounded, and
lying on the ground. Even if he knew, what
could he do, feeble and unable as he is to
move, and in this way is incapable of
protecting me as any tree is incapable of
protecting a neighbouring tree which is
going to be rent asunder. Seeking the
presence of my father, O scion of Raghu,
speak you alone to him speedily about me.

(30—43)

न त्वामनुदहेत् क्रुद्धो वनमग्निरिवैधित:।
इयमेकपदी राजन् यतो A पितुराश्रम:॥४४॥

“`][। you take courage in both hands
and confess your guilt before him, | am sure
he will not burn you in his wrath as a
swollen fire would consume a forest. Here
is the track by which my father’s hermitage
can be reached. (44)
