264

महारोम्णस्तु धर्मात्मा स्वर्णरोमा व्यजायत।
स्वर्णरोम्णस्तु राजर्षेर्हुस्वरोमा व्यजायत॥ १२॥

“From Maharoma indeed sprang up the
pious-minded Swarnaroma and from the royal
sage Swarnaroma sprang up Hraswaroma.

(12)
तस्य पुत्रद्वयं राज्ञो धर्मज्ञस्य महात्मन:।
ज्येष्ठोऽहमनुजो भ्राता AA A: कुशध्वज:॥ १३॥

“A couple of sons were born to that

high-souled king, who knew what is right,

myself being the elder and my valiant brother,
KuSadhwaja, the younger. (13)
मां तु ज्येष्ठं पिता राज्ये सोऽभिषिच्य नराधिप: |
कुशध्वजं arava we मयि at गत:॥१४॥
“Installing me, the elder one, on the
throne and entrusting KuSadhwaja to me as

my charge, the king (my father) retired to
the forest. (14)

qa पितरि स्वर्याते धर्मेण धुरमावहम्।
भ्रातरं CATH स्नेहात् पश्यन् कुशध्वजम्॥ १५॥

“My aged father having ascended to
heaven, | bore the burden of kingship put by
him on my shoulders in conformity with the
principles of righteousness, looking after
with affection my brother KuSadhwaja, who
shines like a god. (15)

कस्यचित्त्वथ कालस्य सांकाश्यादागत: पुरात्।
सुधन्वा वीर्यवान् राजा मिथिलामवरोधक:॥ १६॥
“Some time later the powerful King
Sudhanva came all the way from the town
of Sankasya and besieged Mithila. (16)
स च मे प्रेषयामास we धनुरनुत्तमम्।
सीता च कन्या पद्माक्षी wat वै दीयतामिति॥ १७॥
“He sent word to me saying, ‘The superb
bow belonging to Lord Siva as well as your
lotus-eyed daughter, Sita, may kindly be
given away to me.’ (17)
तस्याप्रदानान्महर्षे युद्धमासीन्मया सह।
स हतोऽभिमुखो राजा सुधन्वा तु मया TT Ve ui

« VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

“On my refusal, O great seer, he fought
with me, with the result that fighting face to
face with me on the battlefield, the aforesaid
King Sudhanva was eventually killed by
me. (18)
Rea तं मुनिश्रेष्ठं सुधन्वानं afer
सांकाश्ये भ्रातरं शूरमभ्यषिञ्जं कुशध्वजम्॥१९॥

“Having got rid of the said King Sudhanva,
O jewel among sages, | enthroned my valiant
brother, KuSadhwaja, at Sankasya. (19)

कनीयानेष A भ्राता अहं ज्येष्ठो महामुने।
aa परमप्रीतो वध्वौ aA मुनिपुंगव॥ २०॥
सीतां रामाय भद्रं a ऊर्मिलां लक्ष्मणाय वै।
वीर्यशुल्कां मम सुतां सीतां सुरसुतोपमाम्॥ २१॥
द्वितीयामूर्मिलां wa त्रिर्वदामि न संशय:।
aa परमप्रीतो वध्वौ ते मुनिपुंगव॥ २२॥

“This younger brother of mine as well
as I, the elder, most delightfully offer to you
my two daughters as your daughters-in-
law, Sita for Sri Rama and Urmila for
Laksmana, O eminent sage ! May prosperity
attend on you, O jewel among sages ! |
repeat thrice: full of supreme delight | offer
as your daughters-in-law my daughter, Sita,
who resembles a daughter of the gods and
has been won by Sri Rama through personal
valour, as also Urmila, my second daughter.
There is no doubt about it, O jewel among
sages ! (20—22)

रामलक्ष्मणयो राजन् Wert कारयस्व ह।
पितृकार्यं च भद्रं ते ततो वैवाहिकं Heures
“(Turning to Dasaratha) please get (the
formality of) Samavartana (the ceremony of
returning to one’s own parents’ home after
completing one’s studies at the residence
of one’s teacher, marked with the shaving*
of one’s hair on the head as well as on the
arm-pits) gone through by Sri Rama and
Laksmana with delight, and then perform
the Nandisraddha, a ceremony intended
to propitiate one’s departed ancestors,

* The word `गोदान` in Sanskrit also means the shaving of one’s hair.
