852

fs foes दशग्रीव Wed Uva रावण।
gated फलं cat तु पातयेयं रथोत्तमात्।
युद्धातिथ्यं प्रदास्यामि यथाप्राणं निशाचर॥ २८॥
“Tarry, tarry awhile, O ten-headed
monster! See, O Ravana, how | knock you

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

down from the foremost of chariots on
which you are mounted as one would dash
down a fruit from its stalk. | shall offer
hospitality to you on the battlefield according
to my strength, O prowler of the night!”

(28)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्येऽरण्यकाण्डे पञ्चाश: सर्ग: ॥ ५० ॥

Thus ends Canto Fifty in the Aranyakanda of the glorious Ramayana of Valmiki,
the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

Canto LI
Jatayu’s encounter with Ravana; Ravana kills Jatayu

इत्युक्तर क्रोधताम्राक्षस्तप्तकाञ्चनकुण्डल:।
राक्षसेन्द्रोऽभिदुद्राव पतगेन्द्रममर्षण: ॥ १॥
When challenged in the aforesaid words,
Ravana, the ruler of ogres, who was adorned
with ear-rings of refined gold, indignantly
rushed towards Jatayu, the king of
winged creatures, his eyes red with anger.
(1)

स सम्प्रहारस्तुमुलस्तयोस्तस्मिन् महामृधे।
aya वातोद्भुतयोर्मेघयोर्गगने यथा॥२॥

The sustained exchange of blows which
ensued between the two warriors (viz.,
Jatayu and Ravana) in that great conflict
was tumultuous like a clash between two
clouds impelled by a blast in the sky. (2)

a बभूवाद्भुतं युद्धं गृध्रराक्षसयोस्तदा।
सपक्षयोर्माल्यवतोर्महापर्वतयोरिव ॥ ३॥

The said conflict between a vulture
(Jatayu) and an ogre (Ravana) at that time
was astounding like the encounter of the
two large mountains known by the name of
Malyavan (one situated in the Dandakaranya
near Kiskindha and the other near Mount
Meru) and endowed with wings. (3)

ततो नालीकनाराचैस्तीक्ष्णाग्रैश्च विकर्णिभि:।
अभ्यवर्षन्महाघोरैर्गृध्रराजं महाबलम्॥ ४॥

Thereupon Ravana assailed the king
of vultures, who was possessed of great
might, with most terrible Nalikas, Naracas
and sharp-pointed Vikarnis (three particular
varieties of arrows). (4)

स तानि शरजालानि Fa: पत्ररथेश्वर:।
जटायु: प्रतिजग्राह रावणास्त्राणि संयुगे॥ ५॥
In the encounter the celebrated vulture,
Jatayu, the king of winged creatures, put up
with those volleys of arrows discharged by
Ravana. (5)
तस्य तीक्ष्णनखाभ्यां तु चरणाभ्यां महाबल:।
चकार बहुधा गात्रे AU पतगसत्तम:॥६॥
With his feet endowed with sharp talons,
Jatayu (the foremost of birds), for his part,
who was possessed of great might, inflicted
many wounds on the person of Ravana. (6)

अथ क्रोधाद् दशग्रीवो जग्राह दश मार्गणान्।
मृत्युदण्डनिभान् घोरान् शत्रोर्निधनकांक्षया॥७॥

With intent to compass the death of his
adversary, Ravana (the ten-headed monster)
presently seized in anger ten dread arrows
resembling the rod of Death. (7)

स तैर्बाणैर्महावीर्य: र्व्य; ।
fave निशितैस्तीक्ष्णैर्गृध्रं at: शिलीमुखै:॥ ८॥

Ravana, who was_ possessed of
