* SUNDARAKANDA +

pared: प्लवगै: शाक्तैर्भवद्धिर्विजयैषिभि:।
वायुसूनोर्बलेनैव दग्धा लङ्केति न: श्रुतम्॥७॥

Hearing the aforesaid narration of
Hanuman, Angada (son of Vali) spoke as
follows : “The two mighty monkeys, Mainda
and Dwivida (sons of the Aswinikumaras,
the twin born physicians of gods), who are
endowed with great impetuosity, fell a prey
to great vanity due to haughtiness caused
by a boon granted in their favour by Brahma
(the grandfather of the entire creation). In
order to do honour to the Aswinikumaras,
Brahma (the grandfather of the whole
universe) actually bestowed on these two
monkeys (Mainda and Dwivida) on a former
occasion the incomparable boon in the shape
of incapability of being slain by anyone.
Having completely routed the mighty army
of the gods, the two heroes, who were
intoxicated with pride occasioned by this
rare boon and were endowed with
extraordinary might, quaffed the drink of
immortality. Highly enraged, these two alone
are actually able to destroy Lanka with its
horses, chariots and elephants, let alone all
the other monkeys. Even single-handed |
am capable of destroying with my might the
aforesaid city of Lanka with its hosts of
ogres and killing Ravana, who is endowed
with extraordinary might, much more so
when accompanied by you, heroic, mighty
and powerful monkeys, disciplined of mind,
skilled in the use of missiles and eager for
victory. It has just been heard by us that
Lanka was burnt by the very might of
Hanuman (son of the wind-god). (1—7)

ger eat न चानीता sia aa निवेदितुम्।

न युक्तमिव पश्यामि wate: ख्यातपौरुषै: ॥ ८॥
“| do not deem it fit to be reported there

at Kiskindha by you, whose virility is well-

known, that the godlike lady Sita has been

discovered but not recovered. (8)

नहि a: प्लवने कश्चिन्नापि कश्चित् पराक्रमे।
Ta: सामरदैत्येषु लोकेषु हरिसत्तमा:॥९॥

267

“None among the inhabitants of all the
worlds, including gods and demons, is your
match in leaping or in valour, O jewels
among the monkeys ! (9)
जित्वा cgi सरक्षौघां हत्वा तं रावणं रणे।
सीतामादाय गच्छाम: सिद्धार्था GSAT: it Qo Ui

“Conquering Lanka with its hosts of
ogres, and killing the notorious Ravana in
an encounter, and taking Sita back, we
should all return to Kiskindha, accomplished
of purpose and rejoiced at heart. (10)

तेष्वेवं हतवीरेषु राक्षसेषु हनूमता।
किमन्यदत्र कर्तव्यं गृहीत्वा याम जानकीम्॥ ११॥

“When the valiant among the ogres
have thus been killed by Hanuman, what
else remains to be done at this hour? Let
us, therefore, return taking the daughter of
Janaka with us. (11)

रामलक्ष्मणयोर्मध्ये न्यस्याम जनकात्मजाम्।
किं व्यलीकैस्तु तान् सर्वान्वानरान्वानरर्षभान्॥ १२॥

“Let us take and place the daughter of
Janaka between Sri Rama and Laksmana.
What shall we gain by unnecessarily
burdening the monkeys assembled at
Kiskindha, who are all jewels among
monkeys, with hardships involved in leaping
across the sea? (12)

वयमेव fe गत्वा तान् हत्वा राक्षसपुङ्खवान्।

Wad द्रष्टुमर्हाम: सुग्रीवं सहलक्ष्मणम्॥१३॥
“Going to Lanka and making short work

of those jewels among ogres, we ourselves

should actually see Sri Rama (a scion of

Raghu), accompanied by Laksmana, as well

as Sugriva.” (13)

sara परमप्रीतो वाक्यमर्थवदर्थवित्॥१४॥

To Angada, who had resolved as above,
Jambavan, the foremost of monkeys and
bears, who knew the truth, and felt highly
pleased, made the following significant
reply : (14)
