« KISKINDHAKANDA +

arrow, which shone brightly like a dazzling
flash of lightning, was shot by Sri Rama
(a scion of Raghu) at the breast of Vali.
(35)
ततस्तेन महातेजा वीर्ययुक्त: कपीश्वर:।
वेगेनाभिहतो वाली निपपात महीतले॥ ३६॥

Struck with vehemence by the arrow,
Vali, the mighty ruler of monkeys, who
was endowed with extraordinary energy,
thereupon fell flat on the earth’s surface.

(36)

इन्द्रध्वज इवोद्धूत: पौर्णमास्यां महीतले।
आश्वयुक्समये मासि गतश्रीको विचेतन:।
बाष्पसंरुद्धकण्ठस्तु वाली चार्तस्वर: शनै:।॥ ३७॥
Struck down on the earth’s surface on
the full moon day (at the end of summer) as
a flag hoisted in honour of Indra (the god of
rain) in the month of Aswina (corresponding
roughly to the month of September), Vali for
his part fell lustreless and unconscious,
slowly uttering a cry of pain, his throat fully
choked with tears. (37)

991

शरोत्तमं काञ्चनरूप्यभूषितम्।
ससर्ज दीप्तं तममित्रमर्दनं
सधूममग्निं मुखतो यथा हर:॥ ३८॥
Sri Rama, the foremost of men,
discharged the fiery arrow, the foremost of
arrows, decked with gold and silver at the end,
nay, capable of crushing the enemy and terrible
like the period of universal destruction, even
as Lord Siva (the Destroyer of the universe)
emited fire with smoke from the third eye on
his forehead to destroy Kamadeva. (38)
अथोक्षित: शोणिततोयविस्त्रवै:
सुपुष्पिताशोक इवानिलोद्धत: |
विचेतनो वासवसूनुराहवे
प्रभ्रंशितेन्द्रध्वजवत् क्षितिं गत: ॥ ३९॥
Nay, bathed in jets of blood and water
and looking like an Asoka tree laden with
flowers and uprooted by a storm, Vali (son
of Indra), fell unconscious to the ground like
a flag hoisted in honour of Indra* (the ruler
of gods) and then thrown down. (39)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये किष्किन्धाकाण्डे षोडश: सर्ग: ॥ १६ ॥

Thus ends Canto Sixteen in the Kiskindhakanda of the glorious Ramayana of Valmiki,
the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

सप्तदश: सर्ग:
Canto XVII

Still retaining his life and vital energy by virtue of the gold chain bestowed
on him by Indra, though pierced in the breast with a deadly arrow,
Vali indignantly reproaches Sri Rama in many ways

aa: शरेणाभिहतो रामेण रणकर्कश:।
पपात सहसा वाली निकृत्त sa पादप:॥१॥

Pierced with an arrow by Sri Rama,
Vali, who was stiff in contest, fell precipitately
like a hewn tree. (1)

a भूमौ न्यस्तसर्वाङ्गस्तप्तकाञ्चनभूषण:।
अपतद् देवराजस्य क्काश्मिस्वि ध्वज: ॥ २॥
With all his limbs laid on the ground,
Vali, who was adored with ornaments of
burnished gold, fell down like a flag hoisted

* During some festival observed on the full moon day in the month of Agwina in Bengal a flag is
hoisted in honour of Indra and then let it fall at the end of the ceremony.
