* SUNDARAKANDA +

‘Stricken with agony on the death of
their master, they will fall down with their
sons and wives as well as with their ministers
from the mountain tops on even or rugged
grounds. (35)
विषमुद्बन्धनं aft yast ज्वलनस्य वा।
उपवासमथो शस्त्रं प्रचरिष्यन्ति वानरा:॥३६॥

‘Nay, the monkeys will swallow poison,
or even hang themselves or enter the fire or
take to fasting till death or fall back upon
their own weapons to bring about their death.

(36)
च्चोरमारोदनं wat wd मयि भविष्यति।

इक्ष्वाकुकुलनाशश्च नाशश्चैव वनौकसाम्॥ ३७॥

‘| think a terrible wail will be set up on
my return to Kiskindha, nay, the destruction
of the race of Ikswaku as also the extirpation
of monkeys (lit., denizens of the forest) will
follow. (37)

सोऽहं नैव गमिष्यामि किष्किन्धां नगरीमित:।

नहि शक्ष्याम्यहं द्रष्टुं सुग्रीवं मैथिलीं विना॥ ३८॥
‘Situated as | am, | shall on no account

return to the city of Kiskindha from this

place; for | shall not be able to see Sugriva

without tracing out Sita, the princess of
Mithila. (38)

मय्यगच्छति चेहस्थे धर्मात्मानौ महारथौ।
आशया dt धरिष्येते वानराश्च तरस्विन:॥ ३९॥

‘If | do not return and continue at this
place, those two great chariot-warriors, Sri
Rama and Laksmana, who have set their
mind on virtue, will preserve their lives as
also the agile monkeys, full of hope for my
return. (39)

ह्रस्तादानो मुखादानो नियतो garters: |
वानप्रस्थो भविष्यामिह्यदृष्ट्वा जनकात्मजाम्॥ ४० I

‘Subsisting on whatever comes to my
hands or whatever comes to my mouth
through another's will, nay, self-restrained,
and resting at the foot of trees, | shall
actually live as a hermit on my not discovering
the daughter of Janaka. (40)

89

सागरानूपजे देशे बहुमूलफलोदके।
चितिं कृत्वा प्रवेक्ष्यामि समिद्धमरणीसुतम्॥४१॥

‘Or, preparing a funeral pile on a piece
of watery land adjoining the sea so that my
ashes may be washed away by the waves
of the sea and as such abounding in roots,
fruits and water, | shall enter a flaming fire
produced by rubbing two wooden sticks
together. (41)

उपविष्टस्य वा सम्यग् लिंगिनं साधयिष्यत:।
शरीरं भक्षयिष्यन्ति वायसा: श्वापदानि च॥४२॥

‘Or, crows and beasts of prey will eat
up my body when | have sat down for
fasting till death and am engaged in my
attempt to extricate the soul (encased in the
subtle body, which constitutes the Linga or
invariable concomitant of an embodied soul)
from the body. (42)

इदमप्यृषिभिर्दृष्टठं निर्याणमिति a मति:।
सम्यगाप: प्रवेक्ष्यामि न चेत् पश्यामि जानकीम्॥ ४३ ॥
‘If | do not find Sita, Janaka’s daughter,
| shall enter the waters for good; for this
way of departure from this world has also
been recognized by the seers: such is my
belief. (43)
सुजातमूला सुभगा कोर्तिमाला यशस्विनी।
प्रभग्ना चिररात्राय मम सीतामपश्यत:॥४४॥

‘Since | have not found out Sita even
after a long time, the garland of my glory,
which had a lovely beginning in the shape of
my role as Sugriva’s messenger to Sri Rama,
which paved the way for the alliance between
the two, nay, which conferred good fortune
on Sugriva and which endowed me with
fame as a confidante of Sri Rama, entrusted
with the duty of delivering his message
along with his signet ring to his beloved
spouse, separated from him—has been
snapped. (44)

तापसो वा भविष्यामि नियतो वृक्षमूलिक:।
नेत: प्रतिगमिष्यामि तामदृष्ट्वासितेक्षणाम्॥४५॥

‘Or, | shall turn out to be an ascetic
