* BALAKANDA +

157

Canto XXXI

Accompanied by Sri Rama, Laksmana and a host of Rsis, Sage
ViSwamitra proceeds northward in the direction of Mithila to
witness the bow-sacrifice of King Janaka and breaks his
journey on the bank of the Sona at sunset

अथ at wet at कृतार्थौ रामलक्ष्मणौ।
ऊषतुर्मुदितौ वीरौ प्रहृष्टेनान्तरात्मना॥१॥

Delighted on having accomplished their
purpose in the shape of protecting the
sacrifice of Viswamitra, the two heroes, Sri
Rama and Laksmana, then spent that night
with a most cheerful mind in the sacrificial
hall of ViSwamitra at Siddhasrama itself.

Having finished their morning duties at
the close of night, the two brothers for their
part sought together Viswamitra and the
other Rsis. (2)
अभिवाद्य मुनिश्रेष्ठं ज्वलन्तमिव पावकम्।
ऊचतु: Wate वाक्यं मधुरभाषिणौ॥ ३॥

Greeting ViSwamitra, the foremost of
sages, who shone as a blazing fire, the two

sweet-tongued brothers made the following
highly noble submission : (3)

इमौ स्म मुनिशार्दूल किंकरौ समुपागतौ।
आज्ञापय मुनिश्रेष्ठं शासनं करवाव किम्॥४॥
“Here are we, your servants, present
before you, O tiger among hermits ! Tell us,
O jewel among sages, what injunction of
yours we should carry out.” (4)

एवमुक्ते तयोर्वाक्ये सर्व Wa महर्षय:।

विश्चामित्रं पुरस्कृत्य we वचनमब्रुवन्॥५॥
At the aforesaid submission of the two

brothers all the great Rsis present there

made the following reply to Sri Rama with
the permission of ViSwamitra : (5)

मैथिलस्य नरश्रेष्ठं जनकस्य भविष्यति।
aa: परमधर्मिष्ठस्तत्र यास्यामहे वयम्॥६॥

“A most pious sacrifice is going to be
performed, O jewel among men, by Janaka,
the king of Mithila. We shall repair to that
place. (6)

त्वं चैव नरशार्दूल सहास्माभिर्गमिष्यसि।
अद्भुतं च धनूरत्नं at त्वं द्रष्टुमर्हसि॥७॥
“You too must accompany us, O tiger

among men! Nay, there you ought to see a
marvellous jewel among bows. (7)
तद्धि gd नरश्रेष्ठं ad सदसि cad:
अप्रमेयबलं घोरें मखे परमभास्वरम्॥८॥
“The bow, which is so terrible and
supremely effulgent and whose strength
(weight) cannot be estimated, was actually
presented in the former times, O jewel
among men, to a former king of Mithila,
Devarata by name, in a sacrificial assembly
by the gods, who had got it in their turn from
Lord Siva. (8)
नास्य cat न गन्धर्वा नासुरा न च राक्षसा:।
कर्तुमारोपणं शक्ता न कथंचन मानुषा:॥९॥
“Neither gods nor Gandharvas nor

demons nor ogres are able to bend it, much
less human beings. (9)

धनुषस्तस्य ate fe जिज्ञासन्तो महीक्षित:।
न vera राजपुत्रा महाबला:॥१०॥
“Eager to gauge its strength even very
mighty kings and princes failed to bend it.
(10)

तद्धनुर्नरशार्दूल मैथिलस्य महात्मन:।
तत्र द्रक्ष्यसि काकुत्स्थ यज्ञं च परमाद्भुतम्॥११॥
