« KISKINDHAKANDA +

undoubtedly well for you that the fellow
somehow left with that lady without doing
any harm to you. (18)

एवमुक्तस्ततोऽहं a: सिद्धै: परमशोभनै: |
aaa रावणो राजा रक्षसां प्रतिवेदित:॥१९॥

“ ‘After he had left | was spoken to as
aforesaid by those highly glorious Siddhas.
Nay, the fellow was further pointed out to
have been no other than Ravana, the king
of ogres. (19)

पश्यन् दाशरथेर्भार्यां रामस्य जनकात्मजाम्।
भ्रष्टाभरणकौशेयां शोकवेगपराजिताम्॥ २०॥
रामलक्ष्मणयोर्नाम क्रोशन्तीं मुक्तमूर्धजाम्।
एष कालात्ययस्तात sit वाक्यविदां वर:॥ २१॥
एतदर्थं समग्रं a quiet: प्रत्यवेदयत्।
तच्छुत्वापि fe मे बुद्धिर्नासीत् काचित् पराक्रमे Ut २२ ॥
अपक्षो fe कथं पक्षी कर्म किंचित् समारभेत्।
यत् तु शक्यं मया कर्तुं वाग्नुद्धिगुणवर्तिना॥ २३॥
श्रूयतां at वक्ष्यामि भवतां पौरुषाश्रयम्।
वाङ्मतिभ्यां fe सर्वेषां करिष्यामि प्रियं fe a: ।। २४॥
“ ` remained looking on the consort of
Sri Rama, son of DaSaratha, and daughter
of Janaka, whose jewels had dropped from
her person and whose silk covering had
slipped from over her head, nay, who had
been overcome with vehemence of grief
and who was calling loudly the names of
Rama and Laksmana, her hair dishevelled.
This is how the time passed, O dear father !’
So did Suparswa, the foremost of masters
of expression, convey all this information to
me. Even after actually hearing it the idea of
showing valour did not occur to me at all.
Indeed how can a bird shorn of its wings
undertake to do anything? |, however, shall
tell you something which can be done in

1147

that behalf by me, used as | am to helping
others with my speech and understanding,
but the execution of which depends entirely
on your prowess. Surely, | will do with my
word and intellect that which is really
agreeable to you. (20—24)
यद्धि दाशरथे: कार्यं मम तन्नात्र संशय:।
ag भवन्तो मतिश्रेष्ठा बलवन्तो मनस्विन:॥ २५॥
प्रहिता: कपिराजेन देवैरपि दुरासदा:।
रामलक्ष्मणबाणाश्च विहिता: कङ्कपत्रिण: WE I
त्रयाणामपि लोकानां पर्याप्तास्त्राणनिग्रहे।
कामं खलु दशग्रीवस्तेजोबलसमन्वित:।
भवतां तु समर्थानां न किंचिदपि दुष्करम्॥ २७॥
“For that which is the concern of Sri
Rama (a son of Dasaratha) is equally my
concern: there is no doubt about it. You are
pre-eminent in point of intelligence, mighty,
high-minded and difficult to assail even for
gods. Hence you have been dispatched
here by Sugriva (the ruler of monkeys). The
shafts of Sri Rama and Laksmana, which
have been evolved by the creator himself
and are furnished with the plumes of a
buzzard, are adequate to protect or subdue
all the three worlds. Granted that Ravana
(the ten-headed monster) is, truly speaking,
fully endowed with energy and bodily strength;
nothing whatsoever is, however, difficult to
accomplish for you, powerful as you are.
(25—27)

नहि कर्मसु ward बुद्धिमन्तो भवद्विधा:॥ 22

“Therefore, there should be no more
loss of time; let your mind be made up soon
to do your best to find out Sita. For, intelligent
people like you do not lag behind in their
undertakings.” (28)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये किष्किन्धाकाण्डे एकोनषष्टितम: सर्ग: ॥ ५९ ॥

Thus ends Canto Fifty-nine in the Kiskindhakanda of the glorious Ramayana of
Valmiki, the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

