240

the great ascetic, Viswamitra, spoke to his
own sons as follows, so it is said: (8)

यत्कृते पितर: पुत्राञ्नयन्ति शुभार्थिन:।
परलोकहितार्थाय तस्य कालोऽयमागत:॥९॥

“The time has just come for ensuring
our good in the other world, for which
fathers desirous of blessings beget sons.

(9)
अयं मुनिसुतो बालो मत्त: शरणमिच्छति।
अस्य जीवितमात्रेण fret कुरुत GAT: १०॥

“This son of a hermit, who is yet a
child, seeks deliverance through me. Do
him a good turn, my dear sons, by merely
parting with your own life. (10)

सर्वे सुकृतकर्माण: wd धर्मपरायणा:।
पशुभूता नरेन्द्रस्य Gad: प्रयच्छत॥११॥

“You are all engaged in virtuous acts
and are all devoted to duty. Taking the
place of a victim at the sacrificial performance
of the king Ambarisa, afford satisfaction to
the god of fire. (11)
नाथवांश्च शुन:शेषो यज्ञश्चाविघ्नतो भवेत्।
देवतास्तर्पिताश्च स्युर्मम चापि कृतं वच:॥१२॥

“In this way not only will Sunahgepa
find a protector in us and secure deliverance
from death but the sacrifice of Ambarisa will
also be completed without any let or
hindrance. Nay, the gods will have been
propitiated and my pledge of security given
to him redeemed.” (12)

मुनेस्तद् वचनं श्रुत्वा मधुच्छन्दादय: Ya: |
साभिमानं नरश्रेष्ठं सलीलमिदमब्रुवन्॥१३॥
Hearing the aforesaid exhortation of
Viswamitra, O jewel among men, his sons,
of whom Madhucchanda was the eldest,
proudly and lightly replied as follows : (13)

कथमात्मसुतान् हित्वा त्रायसेऽन्यसुतं विभो।
अकार्यमिव पश्याम: शवमांसमिव भोजने॥ ex ul
“How is it that you proceed to save

another’s son, parting with your own sons,
O almighty sage? We reckon this attempt

« VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

of yours to be almost as sacrilegious as
mixing the flesh of a dog in one’s dish.”
(14)

क्रोधसंरक्तनयनो व्याहर्तुमुपचक्रमे॥ १५ ॥
Hearing the aforesaid comment of his
above-named sons, ViSwamitra (a jewel
among sages) proceeded to curse them (as
follows), his eyes bloodshot through anger :
(15)

नि:साध्वसमिदं प्रोक्तं धर्मादपि विगर्हितम्।
अतिक्रम्य तु मद्वाक्यं दारुणं रोमहर्षणम्॥ १६॥

“This reply, given by you disregarding
my exhortation, is intrepid, nay, divorced
from piety, sharp and shocking too. (16)

शवमांसभोजिन: Ua वासिष्ठा sa जातिषु।
पूर्णं वर्षसहस्रं तु पृथिव्यामनुवत्स्यथ॥ १७॥

“Like the sons of Vasistha, therefore,
you shall be born on earth among the low-
born classes such as the Candalas and
Mustikas and, living on the flesh of dogs,
drag your wretched existence for full
thousand years.” (17)

PA शापसमायुक्तान् पुत्रान् मुनिवरस्तदा।
शुन:शेषमुवाचार्तं pea tat निरामयाम्॥१८॥
Having subjected his sons to a curse
as aforesaid, ViSwamitra, the foremost of
hermits, then spoke to the wretched
Sunahégepa as follows, ensuring protection
free from disease to him by means of mystic
spells : (18)

पवित्रपाशैराबद्धो रक्तमाल्यानुलेपन:।
वैष्णवं यूपमासाद्य वाग्भिरग्निमुदाहर॥ १९॥
इमे च गाथे द्वे दिव्ये गायेथा समुनिपुत्रक।
अम्बरीषस्य यज्ञेऽस्मिंस्तत: सिद्धिमवाप्स्यसि॥ २० ॥

“Scrambling to the sacrificial post
sacred to Lord Visnu, when you have been
bound with cords of Darbha grass and
adorned with a wreath of crimson flowers
and bedaubed with red sandal-paste for
being offered as a victim at the sacrificial
