464

unmindful of their homes as also of their
near and dear ones, lying close to the roots
of trees till this late hour, O son of Sumitra !

(19)

aaa नियमं पौरा: कुर्वन्त्यस्मन्निवर्तने।
अपि प्राणान् न्यसिष्यन्ति न तु त्यक्ष्यन्ति निश्चयम्॥ २० ॥
“From the way in which these citizens
are taking pains to take us back to Ayodhya,
it seems they will even lay down their lives
but would in no case give up their resolve.
(20)

यावदेव तु संसुप्तास्तावदेव at लघु।
रथमारुह्य गच्छाम: पन्थानमकुतोभयम्॥ २१॥

अतो भूयोऽपि नेदानीमिक्ष्वाकुपुरवासिन:।
स्वपेयुरनुरक्ता मा वृक्षमूलेषु संथ्रिता:॥ २२॥

“Therefore, while they are fast asleep
let us in the meantime quickly mount the
chariot and take a route which has no fear
of molestation from any quarter, so that the
citizens of Ayodhya, the ancient capital of
Ikswaku, who are so keenly devoted to
me, may not henceforth have to repose
leaning against the roots of trees as now.

(21-22)
पौराह्यात्मकृताद् दु:खाद् विप्रमोच्या नृपात्मजै: ।
न तु खल्वात्मना योज्या दु:खेन पुरवासिन: 23

“The residents of a city ruled over by a
king should indeed be completely and finally
rid by the sons of their rulers of suffering
brought about by the citizens themselves.
The citizens should on no account be
burdened with affliction caused by the princes
themselves, as in our case.” (23)

अब्रवील्लक्ष्मणो WA साक्षाद् धर्ममिव स्थितम्।
Wat A am wa क्षिप्रमारुह्यतामिति॥ २४॥

“Laksmana replied as follows to Sri
Rama, who was firm as virtue incarnate :
“What you say appeals to me, O wise
brother; pray, ascend the chariot quickly.”

(24)
गमिष्यामि ततोऽरण्यं गच्छ शीघ्रमित: WAT २७५॥

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

Sri Rama then said to the charioteer,
“Please get the chariot ready soon. On it |
shall proceed to the forest. Depart from this
place at once, my Revered |” (25)

सूतस्तत: संत्वरित: स्यन्दनं तैर्हयोत्तमै:।
योजयित्वा तु रामस्य प्राञ्जलि: प्रत्यवेदयत्॥ २६॥

Having got the chariot ready with those
excellent horses yoked to it with great
expedition, the charioteer for his part
thereupon submitted as follows with folded
hands to Sri Rama: (26)

art युक्तो महाबाहो रथस्ते रथिनां वर।
त्वरयाऽऽरोह UF A ससीत: सहलक्ष्मण:॥ २७॥

“Here is your chariot ready, O mighty-
armed prince! Pray, ascend it quickly
with Sita and Laksmana, O jewel among
chariot-warriors; may prosperity attend you !”

(27)

तं स्यन्दनमधिष्ठाय wea: सपरिच्छद:।
शीघ्रगामाकुलावर्तां तमसामतरन्नदीम्॥ २८ I

Mounting the aforesaid chariot with all
necessaries for travelling (viz., his bow,
armour, quiver, spade, basket and so on),
Sri Rama, a scion of Raghu, speedily crossed
thereby the swift-flowing Tamasa, thickly
set with eddies. (28)

स संतीर्य महाबाहु: श्रीमान् शिवमकण्टकम्।
प्रापद्यत महामार्गमभयं भयदर्शिनाम्॥२९॥

Having duly crossed the stream, the
glorious Sri Rama (who was possessed of
mighty arms) reached a smooth road, free
from obstacles and safe even for those who
are apprehensive of danger. (29)

उदङ्मुख: wale त्वं रथमारुह्य सारथे॥ ३०॥
मुहूर्तं त्वरितं wer निवर्तय रथं पुन:।
यथा न fae: पौरा at तथा He समाहित:॥ ३१॥
With a view to putting the citizens off
the scent, Sri Rama for his part spoke to

the charioteer as follows: “Mounting the
chariot alone, O charioteer, proceed you
