# YUDDHAKANDA #

Highly rejoiced to see him agonized,
the ranks of ogres forthwith burst into a loud
cheer; while the monkeys, who were seized
with agony and _ stricken with fear of
Kumbhakarna, fled from the battlefield. (21)

ततस्तु नीलो बलवान् पर्यवस्थापयन् बलम्।
प्रविचिक्षेप शैलाग्रं कुम्भकर्णाय धीमते॥ २२॥

Restoring his army to confidence, the
mighty Nila for his part then flung with
vehemence a mountain peak at the intelligent
Kumbhakarna. (22)

तदापतन्तं सम्प्रेक्ष्य मुष्टिनाभिजघान ह।
मुष्टिप्रहाराभिहतं तच्छैलाग्रं व्यशीर्यत।
सविस्फुलिङ्गं सज्वालं निपपात महीतले॥ २३॥
Seeing it approaching, the latter struck
it with his fist. Struck with a blow of his fist,
that mountain peak was split into pieces
and dropped on the earth’s surface emitting
sparks and flames. (23)

IU: VC नीलो गवाक्षो गन्धमादन:।

पञ्च वानरशार्दूला: कुम्भकर्णमुपाद्रवन्॥ २४॥

Five tigers among monkeys, viz.,
Rsabha, Sarabha, Nila, Gavaksa and
Gandhamadana attacked Kumbhakarna. (24)

कुम्भकर्णं महाकायं निजघ्नु: सर्वतो युधि॥ २५॥

Endowed with extraordinary might the
aforesaid monkeys struck the colossal
Kumbhakarna on all sides with crags, trees,
the palms of their hands, feet and fists on
the battlefield. (25)

स्पर्शानिव प्रहारांस्तान् वेदयानो न विव्यथे।
may तु महावेगं बाहुभ्यां परिषस्वजे॥ २६॥
Feeling the aforesaid blows as no
more than soft touches, he did not
experience any pain at all. And he encircled
Rsabha, who was full of great impetuosity,
with his arms. (26)
कुम्भकर्णभुजाभ्यां तु पीडितो वानरर्षभ:।
निषपातर्षभो भीम: प्रमुखागतशोणित:॥ २७॥

557

Pressed hard with the arms of
Kumbhakarna, however, the redoubtable
Rsabha, a veritable bull among the monkeys,
fell down, blood having oozed from his mouth
in profusion. (27)
मुष्टिना शरभं हत्वा जानुना नीलमाहवे।
आजघान गवाक्षॆ तु तलेनेन्द्ररिपुस्तदा।
पादेनाभ्यहनत् क्रुद्धस्तरसा गन्धमादनम्॥ २८॥

Striking Sarabha with his _ fist,
Kumbhakarna (the enemy of Indra) hit Nila
with his knee on the battlefield and slapped
Gavaksa. Then, filled with rage, he kicked
Gandhamadana with vehemence. (28)

दत्तप्रहारव्यथिता मुमुहु: शोणितोक्षिता:।
निपेतुस्ते तु मेदिन्यां निकृत्ता sa किंशुका:॥ २९॥

Agonized by the blows dealt by
Kumbhakarna, they all fainted and fell to the
ground, drenched in blood, like Kirnsuka
trees, bearing red blossom that have been
cut down. (29)

तेषु वानरमुख्येषु पातितेषु महात्मसु।
वानराणां सहस्राणि कुम्भकर्णं Wega: il ३०॥
The aforesaid gigantic leaders of
monkeys having been struck down,
thousands of monkeys darted towards
Kumbhakarna. (30)
तं शैलमिव शैलाभा: wea तु प्लवगर्षभा:।
समारुह्य समुत्पत्य ददशुश्च महाबला: ॥ ३१ ll
Jumping and climbing on him, even as
one would ascend a mountain, all the leaders
of monkeys for their part, who themselves
looked like mountains and were endowed
with extraordinary might, began to bite him,
too. (31)

तं नखैर्दंशनैश्चापि मुष्टिभिर्बाहुभिस्तथा।

कुम्भकर्णं महाबाहुं निजघ्नु: प्लवगर्षभा:॥ ३२॥
The foremost of monkeys attacked the

said Kumbhakarna, who was endowed with

mighty arms, with their nails and teeth as
also with their fists and arms. (32)
