# YUDDHAKANDA #

यथार्हं पूजिता: wd कामै रत्नैश्च पुष्कलै:।
Yea: wa Waa यथागतम्॥ ८६ Ul
Also Vibhisana, Sugriva, Hanuman and
Jambavan, nay, all the leaders of monkeys
were honoured according to their deserts
by Sri Rama, who was unwearied in action,
with gifts of all desired objects as well as of
abundant precious stones. And, greatly
delighted in mind, all returned to their home
even as they had come. (85-86)

ततो द्विविदमैन्दाभ्यां नीलाय च परंतप:।
सर्वान् कामगुणान् वीक्ष्य प्रददौ वसुधाधिप: ।। ८७॥

Carefully examining the _ articles
proposed to be gifted, Sri Rama, the suzerain
lord of the globe, the scourge of his enemies,
thereupon conferred on the monkeys,
Dwivida and Mainda, as also on Nila all
sorts of articles endowed with desired
excellences. (87)

दृष्टवा Wa महात्मानस्ततस्ते वानरर्षभा:।
विसृष्टा: पार्थिवेन्द्रेण किष्किन्धां समुपागमन्॥ ८८ UI
Dismissed by Sri Rama, the king of
kings, on having seen the consecration
of Sri Rama, all those high-souled jewels

among the monkeys thereupon returned to
Kiskindha. (88)

सुग्रीवो वानरश्रेष्ठो दृष्टवा रामाभिषेचनम्।
पूजितश्चैव रामेण किष्किन्धां प्राविशत् पुरीम्॥ ८९॥

Having witnessed the consecration
of Sri Rama and having been honoured by
Sri Rama, Sugriva, the foremost of monkeys,
re-entered the city of Kiskindha. (89)
विभीषणोऽपि धर्मात्मा सह तैर्नैर्ऋतर्षभे:।
लब्ध्वा कुलधनं राजा लङ्कां प्रायान्महायशा:॥ ९०॥

Having inherited the fortune of his next
of kin (in the shape of the sovereignty of
Lanka), the highly renowned King Vibhisana
too, whose mind was set on virtue, returned
to Lanka with the aforesaid jewels, among
the ogres, who had accompanied him from
that city. (90)

841

स were शासन्निहतारिर्महायशा:।
Waa: परमोदार: शशास परया मुदा।
उवाच लक्ष्मणं war धर्मज्ञं धर्मवत्सल:॥९१॥

Ruling over the entire kingdom of Kosala,
the aforesaid Sri Rama, a scion of Raghu,
who having exterminated his enemies, had
earned a great renown and was supremely
generous, reigned with supreme joy. Sri
Rama, who was a lover of piety, spoke as
follows to Laksmana, who knew what is
right: (91)
आतिष्ठ धर्मज्ञ मया सहेमां

™ पूर्वराजाध्युषितां ar
qt मया त्वं पितृभिर्धृता या
ता यौवराज्ये धुरमुद्वहस्व॥९२॥

“Rule with me, O knower of what is
right, this earth, which was protected in the
past by the former kings of Ayodhya with
the help of an army. Installed in the office of
Prince Regent, bear you like me the burden
of sovereignty, which was borne in the past

by our forbears.” (92)
सर्वात्मना पर्यनुनीयमानो

यदा न सौमित्रिरुपैति योगम्।

नियुज्यमानो भुवि यौवराज्ये
ततोऽभ्यषिञ्चदू भरतं महात्मा॥९३॥
When Laksmana, son of Sumitra, did
not give his consent even though being
repeatedly entreated with his entire soul by
Sri Rama, nay, even though being actually
appointed to the office of Prince Regent of
the entire globe, the high-souled Sri Rama
thereupon consecrated Bharata as the Prince
Regent of Ayodhya. (93)
पौण्डरीकाश्वमेधाभ्यां वाजपेयेन चासकृत्।
wag विविधैर्यज्ञैरयजत् पार्थिवात्मज:॥९४॥

Sri Rama (son of King Daésaratha)
propitiated the Lord more than once through
the performance of the Paundarika and
Aswamedha sacrifices and the Vajapeya
sacrifice as also other sacrifices of every
description. (94)
