+ UTTARAKANDA +

When the scion of Kakutstha spoke
these words, Bhargava replied: ‘O best among
men! hark! what causes fear to us and the
country. (2)

पूर्वं कृतयुगे राजन् दैतेय: सुमहामति:।
लोलापुत्रोऽभवज्ज्येष्ठो मधुर्नाम महासुर:॥ ३॥

‘Formerly, in the Krtayuga, O king ! In
Krtayuga, Madhu from the Daitya clan, the
wise and great Asura was the eldest son of
Lola. (3)
ब्रह्मण्यश्च शरण्यश्च बुद्ध्या च परिनिष्ठित:।
सुरैश्च परमोदारै: प्रीतिस्तस्यातुलाभवत्॥४॥

“He was respectful to Brahmanas and
was also a source of refuge and well-
composed of mind. His relations with the
very gracious gods were incomparably
cordial. (4)

a मधुर्वीर्यसम्पन्नो धर्मं च सुसमाहित:।
बहुमानाच्च रुद्रेण दत्तस्तस्याद्भुतो वर:॥७५॥

“That Madhu, although possessed of
might, was well-established in the path of
righteousness; and was given by Rudra,
Mahadeva, a wonderful boon, because of
his respect for the Devas. (5)

शूलं शूलाद् विनिष्कृष्य महावीर्यं महाप्रभम्।

ददौ महात्मा सुप्रीतो वाक्यं चैतदुवाच ह॥६॥
“The great Mahadeva produced a most

powerful and luminous trident from his own

trident, being excessively pleased, gave it
to him and said these words: (6)

त्वयायमतुलो धर्मो मत्प्रसादकर: कृत:।
प्रीत्या परमया युक्तो ददाम्यायुधमुत्तमम्॥७॥
“By your unparalleled right conduct, you
have earned my pleasure: so highly pleased,
I give you this excellent weapon. (7)

यावत् सुरैश्च fate: न विरुध्येर्महासुर।
तावच्छूलं तवेदं स्यादन्यथा नाशमेष्यति॥८॥

“As long as you do not oppose the
Brahmanas and the gods (Devas), this trident
of yours will retain its power, otherwise it
will perish. (8)

1037

ag त्वामभियुञ्जीत युद्धाय विगतज्वर:।

तं शूलो भस्मसात्कृत्वा पुनरेष्यति ते करम्॥९॥
“Whosoever fearlessly encounters you

in battle, the trident will reduce him to ashes

and return to your hand.” (9)

एवं रुद्राद् वरं लब्ध्वा YT एव महासुर:।
प्रणिपत्य महादेवं वाक्यमेतदुवाच ह॥१०॥
“Thus having obtained the boon from
Lord Siva, the great Asura on his part made
obeisance to Mahadeva and also said: (10)

भगवन् मम वंशस्य शूलमेतदनुत्तमम्।
भवेत् तु सततं Sa सुराणामीश्वरो AMA ee i
‘O Lord, may this unparalleled trident,
belong to my race forever. O God, You are
the Lord of the all dieties.’ (11)

तं ब्रुवाणं मधुं ea: सर्वभूतपति: fea: |
प्रत्युवाच महादेवो नैतदेवं भविष्यति॥१२॥
The Mahadeva, Siva, the Lord of all,
replied to Madhu, ‘This cannot be so. (12)
मा भूत् ते विफला वाणी मत्प्रसादकृता शुभा।
Wad: पुत्रमेकं तु शूलमेतद् भविष्यति॥१३॥

“Though the sentence uttered by me
out of pleasure, however, will not go in vain
for you: this trident will belong to one of your
sons. (13)

यावत् करस्थ: शूलोऽयं भविष्यति सुतस्य ते।
अवध्य: सर्वभूतानां शूलहस्तो भविष्यति॥ १४॥
“As long as this trident will remain in
the hand of your son, he will be unassailable
by all beings.” (14)
एवं मधुर्वरं लब्ध्वा देवात् सुमहदद्भुतम्।
Vat सोऽसुरश्रेष्ठ: कारयामास सुप्रभम्॥१५॥
“Thus having obtained the great and
wonderful boon from Mahadeva, Madhu, the

greatest among the Asuras, got a palace full
of brilliance built. (15)

तस्य पत्नी महाभागा प्रिया कुम्भीनसीति ar
विश्वावसोरपत्यं साप्यनलायां महाप्रभा॥१६॥
‘His dear wife, the famous beautiful
