254

दक्षिणं तीरमुदधेर्लङ्का at गता पुरी।
अस्तं दिनकरे याते रक्षसां निलयं पुरीम्॥४७॥
प्रविष्टोऽहमविज्ञातो रक्षोभिर्भीमविक्रमै: ।
wa प्रविशतश्चापि कल्पान्तघनसप्रभा॥४८॥
अट्ठहासं विमुञ्जन्ती Ant काप्युत्थिता पुर:।
जिघांसन्तीं ततस्तां तु ज्वलदग्निशिरोरुहाम्॥४९॥
सव्यमुष्टिप्रहारेण पराजित्य सुभैरवाम्।
प्रदोषकाले प्रविशं stra तयोदित:॥७५०॥
“‘Calling to mind once more my errand
in the shape of Sita’s discovery, which had
been delayed, after having killed her, and
traversing a long distance, | sighted the
southern shore of the sea, graced with
mountains, where stood the city of Lanka.
The sun having set, | penetrated, unnoticed
by ogres of terrible prowess, deep into the
city constituting the abode of ogres. Even
while | was making good my entry into the
city, a certain woman possessing the hue of
a cloud, appearing at the end of a world
cycle, rose in front of me, bursting into a
horse-laugh. Having vanquished with a stroke
of my left fist that exceedingly dreadful
woman, whose locks resembled a flaming
fire, and who sought to kill me, | for my part
then compassed my entry at eventide,
spoken to by her, afraid as she was, in the
following words: (46—50)

अहं लङ्कापुरी वीर निर्जिता विक्रमेण ते।
यस्मात् THATS. विजेतासि सर्वरक्षांस्यशेषत:॥ ५१॥

““[ ३7 the city of Lanka (incarnate), O
hero ! Since | have been vanquished by you
by dint of prowess, you will conquer all the
ogres in their entirety.’ (51)
तत्राहं wit तु विचरञ्जनकात्मजाम्।
रावणान्त:पुरगतो न चापश्यं सुमध्यमाम्॥७५२॥

“Though ranging over Lanka all through
the night, | did not find Janaka’s daughter of
slender waist even though | penetrated into
the gynaeceum of Ravana. (52)

aa: सीतामपश्यंस्तु रावणस्य निवेशने।
शोकसागरमासाद्य न पारमुपलक्षये॥७५३॥

« VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

“Not finding Sita even in the abode of
Ravana and thus facing an ocean of grief, |
did not perceive its end. (53)

शोचता च मया qe प्राकारेणाभिसंव्रृतम्।
काञ्चनेन विकृष्टेन गृहोपवनमुत्तमम्॥७५४॥

“Even while | was brooding, an excellent
pleasance enclosed on all sides by a lofty
wall of gold was seen by me. (54)

सप्राकारमवप्लुत्य पश्यामि बहुपादपम्।
अशोकवनिकामध्ये शिंशपापादपो महान्॥५५॥

“Having leapt across the enclosure, |
as such saw a grove consisting of numerous
trees. In the midst of that grove of Asoka
trees, there stood a huge SimSapa (Asoka)
tree. (55)
तमारुह्य च पश्यामि काञ्चनं कदलीवनम्।
अदूराच्छिशपावृक्षात् पश्यामि वरवर्णिनीम्॥ ५६॥
शयामां कमलपत्राक्षीमुपवासकृशाननाम्।
तदेकवास:संवीतां रजोध्वस्तशिरोरुहाम्॥५७॥

ङ्कु॰ज्ञङ्घा॰ग्निं॰ट्टुद्दिह्ग्निं ।
राक्षसीभिर्विरूपाभि: क्रूराभिरभिसंवृताम्॥ ५८ ॥
मांसशोणितभक्ष्याभिर्व्ययाघ्रीभिर्हरिणीं यथा।
सा मया राक्षसीमध्ये तर्ज्यमाना सुहुर्मुहु:॥५९॥
एकवेणीधरा दीना भर्तृचिन्तापरायणा।
भूमिशय्या विवर्णाङ्गी पद्मिनीव हिमागमे॥ so tt
रावणाद् विनिवृत्तार्था मर्तव्ये कृतनिश्चया।
कथंचिन्मृगशावाक्षी तूर्णमासादिता मया॥६१॥

“Ascending it, | sighted a golden thicket
of plantain trees. Not far from the Sirmsapa
tree, | beheld the youthful Sita of excellent
complexion with eyes resembling lotus petals
and a face emaciated through fasting, her
hair soiled with dust and her limbs afflicted
through grief and agony, clad in a single
piece of cloth which she had on her person
while being borne away by Ravana over
Kiskindha, devoted to the good of her lord
and surrounded on all sides by ugly and
cruel ogresses living on flesh and blood
even as a doe encircled by tigresses. The
lady, who had eyes like those of a fawn,
