* SUNDARAKANDA +

कुसुमिततरुजालसंततानि

भ्रमरयुतानि समुद्रतीरजानि।
कनकविमलहारभूषितांगी

विहर मया सह भीरु काननानि॥ ३६ ॥

115

“Your person adorned with bright gold
necklaces, range in my company, O timid
one, the groves, appearing on the seashore,
nay, covered all over with clusters of trees in
blossom and crowded with black bees.” (36)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये सुन्दरकाण्डे विंश: AAT: Il २० ॥

Thus ends Canto Twenty in the Sundarakanda of the glorious Ramayana of Valmiki,
the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

Canto XXI

Placing a blade of grass between herself and Ravana in order to avoid
direct contact with a man of evil intentions and expostulating with
him by showing him the right path, Sita praises S17 Rama and,
impressing on Ravana the consequences of the latter
befriending or antagonizing Sri Rama, advises Ravana

to make friends with Sri Rama through self-surrender

तस्य ae वचनं श्रुत्वा सीता रौद्रस्य Tere: |
आर्ता दीनस्वरा दीनं प्रत्युवाच तत: शनै:॥१॥
Hearing the aforesaid speech of that
terrible ogre, Sita, who was already afflicted,
now gently and sadly replied in piteous
tones. (1)

दु:खार्ता रुदती सीता वेपमाना तपस्विनी।
चिन्तयन्ती वरारोहा पतिमेव पतिव्रता॥२॥

तृणमन्तरत: कृत्वा प्रत्युवाच शुचिस्मिता।
निवर्तय wal मत्त: स्वजने प्रीयतां मन:॥३॥

Placing a straw between herself and
Ravana in order to avoid direct contact with
him, poor Sita of excellent limbs and bright
smiles, who was sobbing and shuddering,
stricken with sorrow as she was, and, being
devoted to her husband, was, constantly
thinking of him alone, replied in the following
words: “Withdraw your mind from me and
let it be satisfied with your own consorts
alone. (2-3)
न मां प्रार्थयितुं युक्तस्त्वं सिद्धिमिव पापकृत्।
अकार्यं न मया कार्यमेकपत्न्या विगर्हितम्॥४॥

कुलं सम्प्राप्तया पुण्यं कुले महति जातया।
`एवमुक्त्वा तु ada रावणं तं यशस्विनी॥७५॥
Want पृष्ठत: Hat भूयो वचनमब्रवीत्।
नाहमौपयिकी भार्या परभार्या सती तव॥६॥

“You are not deserving of seeking to
win me any more than a sinner deserves to
seek perfection in the form of final beatitude.
An unworthy act which is deprecated by a
devoted wife can never be done by me,
who was born in a noble house and have
joined a pious family by virtue of marriage.”
Having spoken thus to Ravana, who made
his foes cry in terror, and turning her back
on him, the illustrious Sita, a princess of the
Videha territory, once more addressed the
following words to him : “Being the virtuous
wife of another, | cannot be your lawful
consort. (4-6)

साधु धर्ममवेक्षस्व साधु साधुव्रतं चर।
यथा da तथान्येषां रक्ष्या दारा निशाचर॥७॥

“Take into account the rule of conduct
of the virtuous and duly follow the course of
