972

इन्द्र इन्द्रेति संत्रासान्मुहुर्मुहुरभाषत॥४२॥
“Looking forward to Indra as _ his
protector, Rahu (the son of Simhika) for his
part repeatedly cried out in his terror ‘Indra!’
‘Indra!’ (42)
राहोर्विक्रोशमानस्य प्रागेवालक्षितं स्वरम्।
श्रुत्वेन्द्रवाच मा Vet निषूदये॥४३॥
“Hearing the voice of the screaming
Rahu, which was already known to him,

Indra said, ‘Don’t be afraid, | shall presently
make short work of him.’ (43)

Wad ततो दृष्टवा महत्तदिदमित्यपि।

we तं हस्तिराजानमभिदुद्राव मारुति:॥४४॥
“Espying after that Airavata and taking

the king of elephants too to be some enormous

fruit, Hanuman, son of the wind-god, rushed

at him. (44)

तथास्य धावतो रूपमैरावतजिघृक्षया।
मुहूर्तमभवद् घोरमिन्द्राग्न्योरिव भास्वरम्॥४५॥
“Nay, the form of Hanuman, even as he
was rushing at Airavata with intent to catch
hold of him, turned for a while fearful and
splendid like those of Indra and the god of
fire. (45)

एवमाधावमानं तु नातिक्रुद्ध: शचीपति:।
हस्तान्तादतिमुक्तेन कुलिशेनाभ्यताडयत्॥४६॥

“Though not highly provoked, Indra (the
consort of Saci) struck Hanuman, who was
rushing towards him, with the thunderbolt
hurled from the extremities of his hand. (46)

ततो गिरौ पपातैष इन्द्रवज्राभिताडित:।
पतमानस्य चैतस्य वामा हनुरभज्यत॥४७॥
“Hit by the thunderbolt of Indra,

Hanuman thereupon fell on a mountain; and
as he fell his left jaw was broken. (47)

तस्मिस्तु पतिते चापि वज्रताडनविह्वले।
Galera wat: प्रजानामहिताय स:॥४८॥

“Nay, Hanuman for his part having fallen
and getting confused too under the stroke of

« VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

the thunderbolt, the celebrated wind-god got
angry with Indra to the detriment of created
beings. (48)
Wat स तु संगृह्य प्रजास्वन्तर्गत: प्रभु:।
Tet प्रविष्ट: स्वसुतं शिशुमादाय मारुत:॥४९॥
“Withdrawing his movement in the form
of respiration, though abiding in all living
beings, the celebrated and all-powerful wind-

god penetrated deep into a cave, taking his
infant son with him. (49)

विण्मूत्राशयमाव्रृत्य प्रजानां परमार्तिकृत्।
रुरोध सर्वभूतानि यथा वर्षाणि वासव:॥५०॥

“Causing extreme suffering to created
beings by obstructing their bowels and
bladder, the wind-god rendered all created
beings motionless even as Indra holds up
the rains. (50)

वायुप्रकोपाद् भूतानि निरुच्छ्वासानि सर्वत: |
संधिभिर्भिद्यमानैश्च काष्ठभूतानि जज्ञिरे॥७५१॥

“Due to the wrath of the wind-god living
beings everywhere felt choked and turned
stiff like wood, as it were, due to their joints
getting disrupted. (51)

नि:स्वाध्यायवषट्कारं निष्क्रियं धर्मवर्जितम्।
वायुप्रकोपात् त्रैलोक्यं निरयस्थमिवाभवत्॥ ५२॥

“Bereft of study of the Vedas and
sacrificial performances, and devoid of rituals
and the practice of virtue as a result of the
displeasure of the wind-god, all the three
worlds felt as if they had sunk into hell. (52)

ad: प्रजा: सगन्धर्वा: सदेवासुरमानुषा:।
प्रजापतिं समाधावन् दु:ख्रिताश्च सुखेच्छया॥ ५३॥
“Feeling afflicted, all created beings
including the Gandharvas (celestial
musicians), gods, demons and human beings
hurried to Brahma (the lord of creation) with
intent to obtain relief. (53)

Sa: Weert cat महोदरनिभोदरा:।
त्वया तु भगवन् सृष्टा: Wat नाथ चतुर्विधा:॥ ५४॥
“With bloated bellies resembling the
