96

रामशोकाभिसंतप्ता सा eal वामलोचना।
वनवासरता नित्यमेष्यते बवनचारिणी॥४७॥

‘Sore stricken with grief on account of
separation from Sri Rama, that fair-eyed
lady, who is ever fond of dwelling in woods
and is used to roving in forests, will turn up
this side. (47)
रामस्य दयिता चार्या जनकस्य सुता सती॥४८॥

‘Nay, the noble and virtuous daughter
of Janaka, the beloved spouse of Sri Rama,
perpetually loved heretofore the denizens of
the grove without doubt. (48)
संध्याकालमना: vara ध्रुवमेष्यति जानकी।
नदीं चेमां शुभजलां संध्यार्थे वरवर्णिनी॥४९॥

‘Intent on the devotions pertaining to
the morning and evening twilights, the fair-
complexioned daughter of Janaka, who ever
looks as though she were only sixteen years
old, will surely seek this stream of translucent
water for the sake of her morning ablutions
and devotions. (49)

« VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

तस्याश्चाप्यनुरूपेयमशोकवनिका शुभा।
शुभाया: पार्थिवेन्द्रस्य पत्नी रामस्य सम्मता॥ ५०॥

‘Nay, this magnificent ASoka grove is
also worthy of that charming lady, who is
the highly esteemed consort of Sri Rama,
the king of the rulers of the earth. (50)

afe जीवति सा cat ताराधिपनिभानना।
आगमिष्यति सावश्यमिमां शीतजलां नदीम्॥ ५१॥

‘If that godlike lady, whose countenance
resembles the moon, the suzerain lord of
stars, is surviving, she will undoubtedly visit
this stream of cool waters.’ (51)

एवं तु मत्वा हनुमान् महात्मा

प्रतीक्षमाणो मनुजेन्द्रपत्नीम्।
अवेक्षमाणश्च ददर्श सर्वं

सुपुष्पिते पर्णघने निलीन:॥५२॥

Pondering thus and expecting Sita, the
consort of a ruler of men, nay, looking all
round in search of her, while remaining
concealed on that tree in full blossom and
thick with leaves, the high-souled Hanuman
surveyed the entire grove. (52)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये सुन्दरकाण्डे चतुर्दश: सर्ग: ॥ १४॥

Thus ends Canto Fourteen in the Sundarakanda of the glorious Ramayana of Valmiki,
the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

Canto XV

Casting his eyes all round while remaining perched on the top of that
SimmSapa tree, Hanuman catches sight of Sita in a temple and
recognizes her by virtue of her characteristics and age

स वीक्षमाणस्तत्रस्थो मार्गमाणश्च मैथिलीम्।
अवेक्षमाणश्च wd सर्वां तामन्ववैक्षत॥ १॥

Glancing all round while remaining
perched on that tree, and surveying the
ground below in quest of Sita, the princess
of Mithila, Hanuman explored the entire ASoka
grove. (1)

संतानकलताभिश्च पादपैरुपशोभिताम्।
दिव्यगन्धरसोपेतां सर्वत: समलंकृताम्॥ ei
तां स नन्दनसंकाशां मृगपक्षिभिराव्ताम्।
हर्म्यप्रासादसम्बाधां कोकिलाकुलनि:स्वनाम्॥ ३॥
काञ्चनोत्पलपद्माभिर्वापीभिरुपशोभिताम् ।
बह्वासनकुथोपेतां बहुभूमिगृहायुताम्॥ ४॥
