760

रुधिराक्त: स AM शरीरान्तकर: शर:।
रावणस्य हरन् प्राणान् विवेश धरणीतलम्॥ १९॥

Taking the life of Ravana with all speed
and stained with blood, that deadly shaft
penetrated the earth’s surface. (19)

a शरो रावणं हत्वा रुधिरार्द्रकृतच्छवि:।
कृतकर्मा निभृतवत् स तूणीं पुनराविशत्॥ २०॥

Soaked in blood on having killed
Ravana, and thereby having accomplished
its mission, nay, appearing graceful, that
well-known arrow re-entered the quiver of
Sri Rama like a meek servant. (20)

तस्य हस्ताद्भतस्याशु कार्मुकं तत् ससायकम्।
निपपात सह प्राणैर्थभ्रश्यमानस्य जीवितात्॥ २१॥
The notorious bow of Ravana, when
the latter was struck, immediately dropped
down from his hand alongwith the arrow
(set to it), synchronously with his life-breath
even while he was being separated from his
life. (21)

गतासुर्भीमवेगस्तु नैरृऋतेन्द्रो महाद्युति:।
Wd Beate भूमौ GA वज्रहतो यथा॥ २२॥
His life having departed, the ruler of
ogres (lit., the progeny of the ogre Nirrti, the
deity presiding over the south-west corner)
for his part, who was (once) endowed with
terrible impetuosity and invested with
extraordinary splendour, fell from his chariot
to the ground even like the demon Vrtra
when the latter was struck down by the
thunderbolt of Indra. (22)

तं gear पतितं भूमौ हतशेषा निशाचरा:।
हतनाथा भयत्रस्ता: सर्वत: सम्प्रदुद्रुवु:॥ २३॥
Seeing him fallen on the ground,
the night-rangers, who had escaped the
carnage, ran very fast in all directions panic-
stricken, their lord having now been killed.
(23)

नर्दन्तश्चाभिषपेतुस्तान् वानरा द्रुमयोधिन:।
दशग्रीववधं दृष्टवा वानरा जितकाशिन:॥ २४॥

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA +

Nay, monkeys, who fought with trees,
fell roaring upon them. Perceiving the
destruction of Ravana (the ten-headed
monster), the monkeys had assumed a
triumphant air. (24)

अर्दिता वानरैर्हृष्टैर्लङ्कामभ्यपतन् भयात्।
हताश्रयत्वात् करुणैर्बाष्पप्रस्रवणैर्मुखै:।। २५॥

Harassed by the jubilant monkeys,
the ogres rushed back in panic towards
Lanka, with faces exciting pity and raining
tears, their mainstay having now been killed.

(25)
ततो fete: संहृष्टा वानरा जितकाशिन:।
aed राघवजयं रावणस्य च तद्बवधम्॥ २६॥

Assuming च triumphant air, highly
rejoiced as they were, and proclaiming the
victory of Sri Rama (a scion of Raghu) and
the death of Ravana at his hands, the
monkeys thereupon shouted at the top of
their voice. (26)

अथान्तरिक्षे व्यनदत् सौम्यस्तरिदशदुन्दुभि:।
दिव्यगन्धवहस्तत्र Wed: सुसुखो ववौ॥ २७॥

Presently there sounded loudly in the
air the happy drums of the gods and a
highly delightful breeze sprang up there,
wafting heavenly odours. (27)

निपपातान्तरिक्षाच्च पुष्पवृष्टिस्तदा afer
किरन्ती राघवरथं दुरावापा मनोहरा॥ २८॥

Nay, covering the chariot of Sri Rama
(a scion of Raghu), a soul-ravishing shower
of flowers, which was difficult to find
elsewhere, fell from the heavens to the
earth on that occasion. (28)

राघवस्तवसंयुक्का गगने च विशुश्रुवे।
साधुसाध्विति वागग्रूया देवतानां महात्मनाम्॥ २९॥
Nay, the excellent utterance of the high-
souled gods saying ‘Well done! Bravol!!’,
combined with a panegyric in praise of Sri
Rama (a scion of Raghu), was distinctly
heard in the heavens. (29)
