446

At that time, the father of Sri Rama,
the glorious King Dasaratha, a scion of
Kakutstha, looked lustreless indeed like the
full moon overshadowed by Rahu during a
lunar eclipse. (30)

स च श्रीमानचिन्त्यात्मा रामो दशरथात्मज:।

सूतं संचोदयामास त्वरितं वाह्यतामिति॥ ३१॥
The illustrious son of Dagaratha, Sri

Rama, on the other hand, of inconceivable

firmness, commanded the charioteer in the
words “Let the chariot be driven fast.” (31)

wat याहीति तं ad तिष्ठेति च जनस्तथा।
उभयं नाशकत् सूत: कर्तुमध्वनि चोदित:॥ ३२॥

Sri Rama commanded the celebrated
charioteer in the words “Move on!” And the
people following the chariot likewise said to
him, “Stop !” Urged both ways on the road,
the charioteer, however, could do neither.

(32)

निर्गच्छति महाबाहौ रामे पौरजनाश्रुभि:।
पतितैरभ्यवहितं प्रणनाश महीरज:॥ ३३॥
The dust raised on the road even as
the mighty-armed Sri Rama drove out of the
city for the forest settled down due to the
tears that fell from the eyes of the citizens
following at his heels. (33)
रुदिताश्रुपरिद्यूनं हाहाकृतमचेतनम्।
प्रयाणे राघवस्यासीत् पुरं परमपीडितम्॥३४॥
Full of lamentation and tears and,
therefore, doleful in appearance at the
departure of Sri Rama, the citizens of
Ayodhya, who were stricken with deep agony
and commenced wailing loudly, became
unconscious. (34)
सुस्राव नयनै: स्त्रीणामस्त्रमायाससम्भवम्।
मीनसंक्षोभचलितै:३ सलिलं पङ्कजैरिव॥ 84
Tears born of agony, caused by
separation from Sri Rama, flowed from the
eyes of women like drops of water from

lotuses shaken by the commotion of fish.
(35)

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

दृष्टवा तु नृपति: श्रीमानेकचित्तगतं पुरम्।
निपपातैव दु:खेन HAT इव द्रुम:॥ ३६॥
Seeing the city reduced to singleness
of mind, the glorious king for his part fell
down precipitately like a tree cut at the root.
(36)

ततो हलहलाशब्दो जज्ञे रामस्य पृष्ठत:।
नराणां प्रेक्ष्य राजानं सीदन्तं भृशदु:खितम्॥ ३७॥
Perceiving the king sore distressed
and suffering agony, an outcry thereupon
rose from the mouths of men in the rear of
Sri Rama. (37)

हा waft जना: केचिद् राममातेति चापरे।
अन्त:पुरसमृद्धं च क्रोशन्तं पर्यदेवयन्॥३८॥
Seeing him wailing with the inmates of
his gynaeceum some people cried out, “Oh
Rama”, while others exclaimed, “Oh Rama’s
mother |” (38)

अन्वीक्षमाणो रामस्तु विषण्णं भ्रान्तचेतसम्।
राजानं wat da ददर्शानुगतौ पथि॥ ३९॥
Looking back, Sri Rama forthwith
beheld the king, dejected and perplexed in
mind, as well as his own mother, Kausalya,
following him on the road. (39)

स ag sa पाशेन किशोरो मातरं यथा।
धर्मपाशेन संयुक्त: प्रकाशं नाभ्युदैश्षत॥४०॥
Bound by the cord of duty, he did not
openly gaze on them any more than a foal,
caught in a snare would look at its dam.
(40)

पदातिनौ च area: warel सुखोचितौ।
दृष्टवा संचोदयामास vitst aretha सारथिम्॥ ४१॥
Seeing them walking, though worthy of
a chariot, unworthy of suffering and deserving

of comfort, he commanded the charioteer in
the words “Drive fast !” (41)

नहि aq पुरुषव्याघ्रो दु:खजं दर्शनं fia: |
मातुश्च सहितुं weedeat ga द्विप:॥४२॥

Even as an elephant urged on with
