« KISKINDHAKANDA +

be able to see Sita (a princess of the
Videha territory), and my inference too points
in the same direction. Therefore, exult, O
monkeys ! (26)
मारुतस्य समो वेगे गरुडस्य समो wal
aad योजनानां तु गमिष्यामीति मे मति:॥ २७॥
“A compeer of the wind-god in speed
and the equal of Garuda (the king of birds) in
rapidity of motion, | can cover in one leap ten
thousand Yojanas (or eighty thousand miles):
such is my conviction. (27)
वासवस्य सवज्रस्य ब्रह्मणो वा स्वयम्भुव:।
विक्रम्य सहसा हस्तादमृतं तदिहानये॥ २८॥
“Showing my valour, | can forcibly bring
here the well-known nectar from the hands
of Indra, armed with his thunderbolt, or even
of the self-born Brahma (the creator). (28)

लङ्कां वापि समुत्क्षिप्य गच्छेयमिति मे ata: |
we वानरश्रेष्ठं गर्जन्तममितप्रभम्॥ २९॥
Weel हरयस्तत्र समुदैक्षन्त विस्मिता:।
तच्चास्य वचनं Aa ज्ञातीनां शोकनाशनम्॥ ३०॥
sara परिसंहृष्टो जाम्बवान् प्लवगेश्चर: |
a केसरिण: पुत्र वेगवन् मारुतात्मज॥ ३१॥
ज्ञातीनां विपुल: शोकस्त्वया तात प्रणाशित:।
qa कल्याणरुचय: कपिमुख्या: समागता:॥ ३२॥
मङ्गलान्यर्थसिद्ध्यर्थं करिष्यन्ति समाहिता:।
ऋषीणां च प्रसादेन कपिवृद्धमतेन च॥३३॥
TRU च प्रसादेन सम्प्लव त्वं महार्णवम्।
स्थास्यामश्चैकपादेन यावदागमनं तव॥ ३४॥
त्वद्गतानि च सर्वेषां जीवनानि वनौकसाम्।
wags हरिशार्दूलस्तानुवाच वनौकस:॥ ३५॥
कोऽपि लोके न मे वेगं प्लवने धारयिष्यति।
ware नगस्यास्य शिलासंकटशालिन:॥ ३६॥
शिखराणि महेन्द्रस्य स्थिराणि च महान्ति च।
ay at गमिष्यामि महेन्द्रशिखरेष्वहम्॥ ३७॥
नानाद्रुमविकीर्णेषु धातुनिष्पन्दशोभिषु ।
एतानि aa ai fe शिखराणि महान्ति च॥ ३८॥
प्लवतो धारयिष्यन्ति योजनानामित: शतम्।
ततस्तु मारुतप्रख्य: स हरिर्मारुतात्मज:।
sete TSS महेन्द्रमरिमर्दन:॥ ३९॥

1167

aq नानाविधै: पुष्पैर्मृगसेवितशाद्बलम्।
लताकुसुमसम्बाधं नित्यपुष्पफलद्रुमम्॥ ४० UI
मत्तद्विजगणोद्घुष्टं सलिलोत्पीडसंकुलम्॥४१॥
“Further, my conviction is that, uprooting
Lanka, | can even carry it to some
distance.” Highly rejoiced and amazed too,
the monkeys gathered together on that spot
looked intently on the aforesaid jewel among
the monkeys, who was possessed of
immeasurable radiance and was_ thus
proclaiming his strength in a thundering voice.
Extremely rejoiced to hear the foregoing
utterance of Hanuman, which drove away
the grief of his near and dear ones, Jambavan,
a chief of monkeys and bears, spoke as
follows : “O gallant Hanuman (sprung from
the loins of the wind-god), son of Kesari, O
dear child of commendable speed, the
enormous grief of your near and dear ones
has been completely driven away by you.
Interested in your welfare, the assembled
leaders of monkeys will with a concentrated
mind recite prayers for the accomplishment
of your purpose. By the grace of Rsis (the
seers of Vedic Mantras), nay, with the
approval of the older monkeys and through
the goodwill of your superiors as well, leap
you across the vast sea with ease. We
shall stand on one foot till your return; for
the lives of all the monkeys hang on you.”
Thereupon Hanuman (a tiger among
the monkeys) for his part spoke to those
monkeys as follows : “None in the world will
be able to sustain the pressure that will be
exerted by me just before leaping. These
peaks of the yonder mountain named
Mahendra, which looks so charming with its
compact mass of rocks, are solid and large
too. These huge peaks of Mount Mahendra,
on which | shall exert my force and which
are covered here and there with trees of
every kind and are adorned with heaps of
minerals, will undoubtedly sustain my force
even as | take a leap over a distance of a
