* BALAKANDA + 61

यौवराज्येन संयोक्तुमैच्छत् प्रीत्या महीपति: |
तस्याभिषेकसम्भारान् SET भार्याथ कैकयी ।। २१॥
yt दत्तवरा देवी वरमेनमयाचत।
विवासनं च रामस्य भरतस्याभिषेचनम्॥ २२॥

“He equals Kubera (the god of riches,
the bestower of wealth) in liberality and is
another Dharma, the god of piety, as it
were, in point of truthfulness.

“With intent to gratify the people, the
king, Emperor Dasaratha, lovingly sought to
invest with the office of Regent his beloved
son, Sri Rama, who possessed unfailing
prowess and was adorned with the aforesaid
qualities, who was not only the eldest of his
four sons in point of age, but was also
endowed with the highest virtues and devoted
to the interests of the people. Witnessing
the preparations in connection with the
installation of Sr Rama, the illustrious Queen
Kaikeyi, the youngest of the three principal
consorts of Emperor Dasaratha, who had
been granted a boon by Emperor on a
former occasion (in recognition of her
oustanding personal courage and service to
her husband on the field of battle) however,
asked of him in lieu of the promised boon
the exile of Sri Rama and the installation of
Bharata, her own son. (19—22)

स सत्यवचनाद् राजा धर्मपाशेन संयत:।

विवासयामास ad wa दशरथ: प्रियम्॥ २३॥
“Bound as he was by the tie of duty in

the form of his plighted word, due to his

ever speaking the truth, King Dasaratha
exiled his beloved son, Rama. (23)

a जगाम oat वीर: प्रतिज्ञामनुपालयन्।
पितुर्वचननिर्देशात् कैकेय्या: प्रियकारणात्॥ २४॥

“In obedience to his father’s command
in the form of the boon granted by him in
favour of Kaikeyi and with a view to pleasing
Kaikeyi (his stepmother), the heroic Rama
retired to the woods in order to implement
the pledge of his father. (24)

तं व्रजन्तं प्रियो भ्राता लक्ष्मणोऽनुजगाम FI
स्नेहाद् विनयसम्पन्न: सुमित्रानन्दवर्धन:॥ २५॥

भ्रातं दयितो भ्रातु: सौभ्रात्रमनुदर्शयन्।
रामस्य दयिता भार्या Pret प्राणसमा fear it २६॥
जनकस्य कुले wat देवमायेव निर्मिता।

सर्वलक्षणसम्पन्ना नारीणामुत्तमा वधू:॥ २७॥
सीताप्यनुगता रामं शशिनं रोहिणी यथा।
पौरैरनुगतो «oat पित्रा दशरथेन च॥ २८॥

“His loving younger brother,
Laksmana—who enhanced the delight of
his own mother, Sumitra, the younger of the
two other principal consorts of Emperor
Dasaratha and who was not only adorned
with modesty but a favourite of his brother
Sri Rama—followed his aforesaid brother
out of affection as the latter set out on his
journey to the forest, thus testifying to his
amicable relationship. Sri Rama’s wedded
spouse, Sita, (so-called because she was
unearthed from the track of a ploughshare)—
who was dear to him as life and was ever
friendly to him, who, though not born in the
ordinary way from a mother’s womb, was
taken as descended in the line of Janaka
(a king of Mithila, Siradhwaja by name,
Janaka being his family title), was endowed
with all auspicious marks on her person
and was a veritable jewel among women
and who looked like the Lord’s own wonderful
potency manifested by the Lord Himself—
also accompanied Sri Rama as Rohini (the
spouse of the moon-god, also a constellation
of that name, follows the moon-god). Nay,
he was followed afar by the citizens of
Ayodhya as well as by his aged father,
DaSaratha. (25—28)

गुहमासाद्य धर्मात्मा निषादाधिपतिं प्रियम्॥ २९॥
गुहेन सहितो रामो लक्ष्मणेन च सीतया।
ते वनेन at गत्वा नदीस्तीर्वत्वा बहूदका:॥ Bo Il
चित्रकूटमनुप्राप्य भरद्वाजस्य शासनात्।
रम्यमावसथं कृत्वा रममाणा वने त्रय:॥ ३१॥
देवगन्धर्वसंकाशास्तत्र ते न्यवसन् सुखम्।
चित्रकूटं गते रामे पुत्रशोकातुरस्तदा॥ ३२॥
राजा दशरथ: tat जगाम विलपन् सुतम्।
Ta तु तस्मिन् भरतो वसिष्ठप्रमुखैर्दविजै:।॥। ३३॥
