368

दृष्टवबैव तु dat रामं ते सर्वे समुपस्थिता:।
Wat जयतां श्रेष्ठं वर्धयन्ति स्म राघवम्॥१०॥

The moment they beheld Sri Rama, all
flocked to his side and hailed the scion of
Raghu, the foremost of the victorious, with
shouts of victory. (10)

प्रविश्य प्रथमां eat द्वितीयायां cast a: |
ब्राह्मणान्वेदसम्पन्नान् वृद्धान् राज्ञाभिसत्कृतान्॥ Bk ॥

Having passed through the first gate,
he saw at the second elderly Brahmanas
well-versed in the Vedas and highly respected
by the Emperor. (11)

प्रणम्य रामस्तान् वृद्धांस्तृतीयायां cast a: |
स्रियो बालाश्च AGIA द्वाररक्षणतत्परा:॥१२॥

Bowing low to the aforesaid elders Sri
Rama beheld at the third gate females and
girls as well as aged men intent upon guarding
the entrance. (12)
वर्धयित्वा प्रहृष्टास्ता: प्रविश्य च गृहं era: |
न्यवेदयन्त त्वरितं राममातु: fra तदा॥१३॥

Felicitating the prince on his projected
installation as Prince Regent and entering
the chamber occupied by Empress Kausalya,
the women, who felt extremely delighted to
behold Sri Rama, promptly broke the
delightful news to Sri Rama’s mother on
that occasion. (13)

कौसल्यापि तदा cat रात्रिं स्थित्वा समाहिता |
प्रभाते चाकरोत् पूजां विष्णो: पुत्रहितैषिणी ।। १४॥

Having passed the night in religious
observances, Queen Kausalya for her part
had started offering worship to Lord Visnu,
seated in the orb of the sun, at day break,
wishing well of her son. (14)

सा क्षौमवसना हृष्टा नित्यं व्रतपरायणा।
अग्निं जुहोति स्म del मन्त्रवत् कृतमङ्गला॥ १५॥
Having performed ३०8 propitious
rites, Kausalya, who was clad in silk and
was ever given to sacred observances,

was causing oblations to be poured by
the priests into the sacred fire at that time

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

with the chanting of sacred texts.

प्रविश्य तु तदा रामो मातुरन्त:पुरं शुभम्।
cast मातरं तत्र हावयन्तीं हुताशनम्॥१६॥
Entering forthwith the beautiful chamber
of Kausalya, his mother, Sri Rama actually
saw there his mother causing oblations to
be poured into the sacred fire. (16)

देवकार्यनिमित्तं च तत्रापश्यत् समुद्यतम्।
दध्यक्षतघृतं चैव मोदकान् हविषस्तथा॥ १७॥
He also saw kept ready at hand for the
worship of the gods there curds, unbroken
grains of rice and ghee as well as balls of
sweetmeat and oblations to be poured into
the sacred fire. (17)

लाजान्माल्यानि शुक्लानि पायसं HEL TAT |
समिध: पूर्णकुम्भांश्च cast रघुनन्दन:॥१८॥
Sri Rama, the delight of the Raghus,
further beheld parched grains of paddy, white
flowers, milk boiled with rice and sugar, rice
cooked with sesame _ seeds, sticks of
sacrificial wood and jars full of rice. (18)

at शुक्लक्षौमसंवीतां व्रतयोगेन कर्शिताम्।
तर्पयन्तीं ददर्शाद्भिर्देवतां वरवर्णिनीम्॥१९॥
He saw the fair-complexioned Kausalya
clad in white silk and emaciated through
persevering in fasting and gratifying the Deity
with an offering of water. (19)

सा चिरस्यात्मजं दृष्टवा मातॄनन्दनमागतम्।
अभिचक्राम संहृष्टा किशोरं agar यथा॥ २०॥

Overjoyed to behold her son, the delight
of his mother, come to her after a long time,
she went forward to meet him as a mare
would run to meet her foal. (20)

स मातरमुपक्रान्तामुपसंगृह्य राघव:।
परिष्वक्तश्च बाहुभ्यामवघ्रातश्च मूर्धनि॥२१॥
Sri Rama, a scion of Raghu, stood
clinging to his mother with his arms placed
round her neck as she approached him and
was in return folded in her arms and smelt
at the head as a token of motherly affection.
(21)

(15)
