394

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA +

Canto XXIX

Snubbing Suka and Sarana, Ravana expels them from
his court and dispatches Sardiila and other ogres for
espionage. Captured by the monkeys, the ogres
are thrashed by them and get released by
Sit Rama. Returning to Lanka, they
too speak to Ravana about
the army of monkeys

शुकेन तु समादिष्टान् दृष्टवा स हरियूथपान्।
लक्ष्मणं च महावीर्यं भुजं रामस्य दक्षिणम्॥१॥
समीपस्थं च रामस्य भ्रातरं च विभीषणम्।
सर्ववानरराजं च सुग्रीवं भीमविक्रमम्॥२॥
हनूमन्तं च विक्रान्तं जाम्बवन्तं च दुर्जयम्॥ ३॥
सुषेणं कुमुदं नीलं नलं च प्लवगर्षभम्।
Tt Tea wet मैन्दं च द्विविदं तथा॥४॥
किंचिदाविग्नह्दयो जातक्रोधश्च रावण:।
भर्त्सयामास dt वीरौ कथान्ते शुक्सारणौ॥५॥

A bit agitated at heart and enraged
to behold the monkey leaders, duly pointed
out by Suka, as also Laksmana, who
was endowed with extraordinary valour and
was the right arm of Sri Rama, as well as
his (own half-) brother Vibhisana, standing
close to Sri Rama, also Sugriva of terrific
prowess, the ruler of all the monkeys, and
the mighty Angada, sprung from the loins of
Vali (an offspring of Indra, who carries the
thunderbolt in his hand), nay, the valiant
Hanuman as well as Jambavan, who was
difficult to conquer, Susena, Kumuda, Nila,
Nala, the foremost of monkeys, and Gaja,
Gavaksa, Sarabha, Mainda and Dwivida
too, Ravana for his part rebuked the aforesaid
two heroes, Suka and Sarana, at the
conclusion of their submission. (1—5)

अधोमुखौ तौ प्रणतावब्रवीच्छुकसारणौ।
रोषगद्गदया वाचा संरब्धं परुषं तथा॥६॥

In a voice strangled with fury he spoke
indignantly and harshly as follows to the
said Suka and Sarana, who stood with their
heads bent low in supplication: (6)

न Wad west नाम सचिवैरुपजीविभि:।
विप्रियं नृपतेर्वक्तुं Poe woe wien

“Really speaking, it is not at all fitting
that unpalatable words should be uttered by
dependent ministers in the presence of a
ruler of men who has the power to mete out
punishment or reward. (7)
Root प्रतिकूलानां युद्धार्थमभिवर्तताम्।
उभाभ्यां AGM AA वक्तुमप्रस्तवे स्तवम्॥८॥

“Was it really becoming of you both to
utter out of season the praises of enemies
who are antagonistic to us and are advancing
to wage war? (8)

आचार्या Wat वृद्धा Gar at पर्युपासिता:।
a aq राजशास्त्राणामनुजीव्यं न गृह्यते॥९॥
“In vain have preceptors, parents and
elders been waited upon by you in that the
essence of scriptures on political wisdom,
which deserved to be acted upon in your
life, has not been imbibed by you. (9)

गृहीतो वा न विज्ञातो भारोऽज्ञानस्य वाह्यते।
ईदृशै: सचिवैर्युक्तो WAS धराम्यहम्॥ १०॥

“Even if it was grasped by you, it has
not been retained in memory. The load of
ignorance alone is being borne by you.
Through sheer good luck | am able to
