1010

“You should not be grieved for Maithili
on this account, O Laksmana as this was
already foreseen by the Brahmanas
(Astrologers) in the presence of your father.

(10)
भविष्यति ¢é रामो दु:खप्रायो विसौख्यभाक् |
Wert च महाबाहुर्विप्रयोगं frase ee ii

“Rama shall inevitably be engulfed in
sorrow and shall also be bereft of happiness;
He shall meet soon with separation from
His dear ones. (11)
wat चैव मैथिलीं wa शत्रुघ्नभरतौ तथा।

स त्यजिष्यति धर्मात्मा कालेन महता महान्॥ १२॥

“The pious one with nobility shall, with
the lapse of a large period, leave you, Maithill
and even Satrughna and Bharata; such was
the prediction. (12)

इदं त्वयि न amet सौमित्रे भरतेऽपि ar
राज्ञा वो व्याहृतं वाक्यं दुर्वासा यदुवाच Fi V3 il
“That which was pronounced by Durvasa

before the king, was not to be disclosed to
you (son of Sumitra) or Bharata. (13)

महाजनसमीपे च मम चैव नरर्षभ।
TROT व्याहृतं वाक्यं वसिष्ठस्य च संनिधौ॥ १४॥
“O bull among men, the words of
prediction were uttered by the Rsi Durvasa
in the hearing of the great king, DaSaratha,
and also before me and even Vasistha. (14)

Rae वचनं श्रुत्वा मामाह पुरुषर्षभ:।
Wa न क्वचिदेवं A वक्तव्यं जनसंनिधौ॥ १५॥

“Hearing the words of the Rsi Durvasa,

« VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

the foremost among men, DaSaratha, said
to me, ‘O charioteer, nowhere among
my men should this be divulged by you.”
(15)
तस्याहं लोकपालस्य वाक्यं तत्सुसमाहित:।
a जात्वनृतं कुर्यामिति A सौम्य ae Ve i
“| shall not ever falsify the statement of
the king, O courteous one, it is my firm
resolve. (16)
सर्वथैव न amet मया सौम्य तवाग्रत:।
यदि ते श्रवणे श्रद्धा saat TESTI १७॥
“In no case | should have revealed the
secret before you even if you were eager to
know. O scion of Raghu listen to me. (17)
तथाप्युदाहरिष्यामि dt fe दुरतिक्रमम्॥१८॥
“Though formerly the secret that was
not to be divulged was communicated to
me, yet | will say: ‘Fate indeed is inevitable.’
(18)
येनेदमीदृशं We ga शोकसमन्वितम्।
न त्वया भरतस्याग्रे शत्रुघ्नस्यापि संनिधौ॥ १९॥
“By that fate this pain with sorrow has

befallen : Do not mention it before Bharata
or even Satrughna.” (19)

तच्छृत्वा भाषितं तस्य गम्भीरार्थपदं महत्।

तथ्यं ब्रूहीति सौमित्रि: सूतं तं वाक्यमब्रवीत्॥ २०॥
Thus hearing this statement being

spoken in highly meaningful words, Laksmana

the son of Sumitra, said to the charioteer
“Please speak the truth.” (20)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये उत्तरकाण्डे VAT: सर्ग: ॥ ५० ll

Thus ends Canto Fifty in the Uttarakanda of the glorious Ramayana of Valmiki,
the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

