646

others through surmises or reasoning and
the deliberations of others are known (before
they materialize) by yourself or by your
ministers. (21)

कच्चित् सहस्रैर्मूर्खाणामेकमिच्छसि पण्डितम्।
पण्डितो ह्यर्थकृच्छेषु कुर्यान्नि:श्रेयसं महत्॥ २२॥

“| hope you prefer one learned man to
thousands of fools inasmuch as a learned
man is calculated to do immense good in
financial crises. (22)

सहस्राण्यपि मूर्खाणां यद्युपास्ते महीपति:।
अथवाप्ययुतान्येव नास्ति तेषु सहायता॥ २३॥

“If a king maintains thousands or even
tens of thousands of fools, no assistance
can be expected from them in times of
need. (23)

एकोऽप्यमात्यो मेधावी शूरो दक्षो विचक्षण:।

राजानं राजपुत्रं वा प्रापयेन्महतीं श्रियम्॥२४॥
“Even one minister who is talented,

valiant, clever and well-versed in politics

can bring a large fortune to a king or prince.
(24)

कच्चिन्मुख्या महत्स्वेव मध्यमेषु च मध्यमा:।
जघन्याश्च जघन्येषु भृत्यास्ते तात योजिता:॥ २७५॥

“| hope high-class servants are
entrusted by you with important duties,
middling ones with second-rate affairs and
third-grade servants with menial duties, my
darling! (25)

अमात्यानुपधातीतान् पितृपैतामहान् शुचीन्।
SEM श्रेष्ठेषु कच्चित् त्वं नियोजयसि कर्मसु॥ २६ ॥

“| hope you entrust first-rate ministers,
who are past all tests of loyalty, are hereditary
servants of the crown and honest, with the
highest duties. (26)

कच्चिन्नोग्रेण दण्डेन भृशमुद्वेजिता: प्रजा:।
Te तवावजानन्ति AAT: कैकयीसुत॥ २७॥

“| hope, sore agitated by stern rule, the
people in your state do not show disrespect
to your ministers, O son of Kaikey!? (27)

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA +

कच्चित्त्वां नावजानन्ति याजका: पतितं यथा।
उग्रप्रतिग्रहीतारं कामयानमिव स्रिय:॥ २८॥

“| hope priests conducting sacrifices
for the benefit of others do not disregard
you (by refusing to officiate at your sacrifices)
as they would a fallen man or even as
matrons would despise their own husband
who had taken to wife a lowborn woman
and was excessively fond of her. (28)
उपायकुशलं वैद्यं भृत्यसंदूषणे रतम्।
शूरमैश्चर्यकामं च यो हन्ति न स हन्यते॥२९॥

“He who does not get rid of a physician
adept in devices of aggravating a malady, a
servant intent on bringing disgrace (to his
master) and a gallant warrior seeking kingly
power is himself killed by these. (29)

कच्चिद् धृष्टश्च शूरश्च धृतिमान् मतिमान् शुचि: |
कुलीनश्चानुरक्तश्च दक्ष: सेनापति: कृत:॥३०॥
“| hope a man, who is ever pleased
and full of resolution, gallant and talented,
spotless of character and well-born, devoted
and clever, has been appointed by you as
the generalissimo? (30)

बलवन्तश्च कच्चित् ते मुख्या युद्धविशारदा:।
दृष्टापदाना विक्रान्तास्त्वया सत्कृत्य मानिता:॥ ३१॥

“Have the foremost of your heroic
warriors, who are possessed of might and
skilled in warfare, and whose prowess has
been treated with honour by you, after being
politely received? (31)

कच्चिद् बलस्य भक्तं च वेतनं च यथोचितम्।
सम्प्राप्तकालं दातव्यं ददासि न विलम्बसे॥ sei

“| hope you distribute daily provisions
and disburse the monthly salary due to
them at the opportune time in a suitable
manner and do not defer their payment. (32)

कालातिक्रमणे ह्येव भक्तवेतनयोर्भृता:।
भर्तुरप्यतिकुप्यन्ति सोऽनर्थ: सुमहान् कृत:॥ ३३॥
“Salaried servants surely and positively

get enraged even at their master when the
distribution of their provisions and the
