1014

“Surely, O lord of monkeys, the earth
is dearer to you in comparison with me as
is clear from the fact that you lie embracing
her and do not even respond to me. (3)

सुग्रीवस्य ast wet विधिरेष भवत्यहो।
सुग्रीव wa विक्रान्तो div साहसिकप्रिय॥४॥

“Oh, Fate in the form of Sri Rama has
become subservient to the will of Sugriva.
Sugriva alone is, therefore, powerful and
will rule over Kiskindha, O hero fond of
daring acts! (4)
ऋक्षवानरमुख्यास्त्वां बलिनं पर्युपासते।
तेषां विलपितं कृच्छ्रमङ्गदस्य च शोचत:॥७५॥
मम चेमा गिर: श्रुत्वा किं त्वं न प्रतिबुध्यसे।
इदं aq वीरशयनं तत्र wea ad युधि॥६॥
शायिता निहता यत्र त्वयैव रिपव: पुरा।

विशुद्धसत्त्वाभिजन प्रिययुद्ध मम frauen

“The foremost of bears and monkeys
sought shelter with you, mighty as you
were. As such why don’t you wake up even
on hearing their cries of distress, and the
utterances of wailing Angada, as also these
plaints of mine? This bed in the form of
hard, uneven and stony ground, appropriate
to a hero, is the same on which enemies
killed by you were laid in the past. On that
very bed you lie slain in combat today, O
lord, fond of war and born in a race reputed
for their immaculate strength, O my darling !

(5—7)
मामनाथां विहायैकां गतस्त्वमसि मानद।
शूराय न प्रदातव्या कन्या खलु विपश्चिता॥ ८॥

“Leaving me alone, without a protector,
for good, you have departed to the other
world, O bestower of honour ! ‘A girl should
never be given in marriage to a hero by a
wise man.’ (8)
शूरभार्यां हतां पश्य सद्यो मां विधवां कृताम्।
अवभग्नश्च मे मानो भग्ना A शाश्वती गति:॥ ९॥

“In corroboration of this statement look
at me, the wife of a hero, widowed in no
time and ruined forever. My pride of being

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

the spouse of a sovereign stands crushed
and so my everlasting happiness in this
world has been shattered. (9)
अगाधे च निमग्नास्मि विपुले शोकसागरे।
अश्मसारमयं नूनमिदं A हृदयं दृढम्॥१०॥
भर्तारं निहतं दृष्टवा यन्नाद्य शतधा कृतम्।
सुहृच्चैव च vat च प्रकृत्या च मम fra: nee
Wat च पराक्रान्त: शूर: पञ्चत्वमागत:।
पतिहीना तु या नारी कामं भवतु पुत्रिणी॥ १२॥
धनधान्यसमृद्धापि विधवेत्युच्यते जनै:।
स्वगात्रप्रभवे वीर ङशेषे रुधिरमण्डले॥१३॥
कृमिरागपरिस्तोमे स्वकीये wet यथा।
रेणुशोणितसंवीतं We At समन्तत:॥१४॥
परिरब्धुं न शक्नोमि भुजाभ्यां प्लवगर्षभ।
कृतकृत्योऽद्य सुग्रीवो वैरेऽस्मिन्नतिदारुणे॥ १५॥
यस्य रामविमुक्तेन हृतमेकेषुणा भयम्।
शरेण ge लग्नेन गात्रसंस्पर्शने तव॥१६॥
वार्यामि त्वां निरीक्षन्ती cat पञ्चत्वमागते।
उद्बबर्ह शरं नीलस्तस्य गात्रगतं तदा॥ १७॥
गिरिगह्वरसंलीनं दीप्तमाशीविषं यथा।
तस्य निष्कृष्यमाणस्य बाणस्यापि बभौ द्युति: ।। १८ Ut
अस्तमस्तकसंरुद्धरश्मेर्दिनकरादिव ।

पेतु: क्षतजधारास्तु व्रणेभ्यस्तस्य सर्वश:॥१९॥
ताम्रगैरिकसम्पृक्ता धारा इव धराधरात्।
अवकीर्णं विमार्जन्ती walt रणरेणुना॥ २०॥
aera: शूरं सिषेचास्त्रसमाहतम्।
रुधिरोक्षितसर्वाङ्गं दृष्टवा विनिहतं पतिम्॥ २१॥
उवाच तारा पिङ्गाक्षं पुत्रमङ्गदमङ्गना।
अवस्थां पश्चिमां uve fig: पुत्र सुदारुणाम्॥ २२॥
“Nay, | am completely submerged in a
fathomless and vast ocean of grief. Surely
this heart of mine, which is so stout, is
made of steel as is evident from the fact
that on seeing my husband slain it has not
been split into a hundred fragments today.
He, who was my disinterested friend and
supporter too and was beloved of me by his
very nature, nay, a hero powerful in dealing
blows, has been reduced to the five
elements. A woman who is bereft of her
husband, no matter if she is blessed with a
