* SUNDARAKANDA +

धिगस्तु मां सुदुर्बुद्धिं निर्लज्जं पापकृत्तमम्।
अचिन्तयित्वा at सीतामग्निदं स्वामिघातकम्॥ ७॥
‘Woe be to me, the greatest sinner,
utterly perverse and impudent, who, practised
incendiarism without giving any thought to
the aforesaid Sita and in this way proved
(indirectly) responsible for taking the life of
my master, Sri Rama. (7)

ae दग्धा fad wat नूनमार्यापि जानकी।
दग्धा at मया ded कार्यमजानता॥८॥

‘If this whole city for its part has been
burnt, the noble daughter of Janaka too has
surely been burnt. By doing this the purpose
of my master has unconsciously been
frustrated by me. (8)

यदर्थमयमारम्भस्तत्कार्यमवसादितम् ।
मया fe दहता cst न सीता परिरक्षिता॥९॥
‘That very cause for which this enterprise
(in the shape of my journey across the sea
and the destruction of Lanka) was undertaken
has been marred in that Sita has not been
protected by me while burning Lanka. (9)
तस्य क्रोधाभिभूतेन मया मूलक्षय: कृत:॥१०॥
‘This feat of burning Lanka has been
accomplished by me as an insignificant act:
there is no doubt about it. Overwhelmed as
| was with anger, the very root of that
achievement has, however, been cut at by
me. (10)
विनष्टा जानकी व्यक्तं न ह्यदग्ध: प्रदृश्यते।
लङ्काया: कश्चिदुद्देश: सर्वा भस्मीकृता GTN ११॥
‘Sita, the daughter of Janaka, has
obviously perished; for no part of Lanka
appears to have remained unburnt. The entire
city lies in ashes. (11)
ale तद्बिहतं ard मया प्रज्ञाविपर्ययात्।
sea प्राणसंन्यासो ममापि ह्यद्य रोचते॥१२॥
‘If that cause in the shape of Sita’s

recovery has been marred by me through
perversity of judgment, it appears agreeable

239

to me even to yield up my life at this very
spot this very day. (12)

किमग्नौ निपताम्यद्य आहोस्विद् वड्वामुखे।
शरीरमिह सत्त्वानां दद्मि सागरवासिनाम्॥१३॥
‘Shall | throw myself into the fire or into
a submarine fire or offer my body to the
denizens of the deep today? (13)

कथं नु जीवता शक्यो मया AS हरीश्वर:।
at वा पुरुषशार्दूलौ कार्यसर्वस्वघातिना॥ १४॥

‘How can Sugriva, the lord of monkeys,
or those two tigers among men, Sri Rama
and Laksmana, be faced by me while | am
alive, since the purpose has been marred
by me in its entirety? (14)

मया खलु तदेवेदं रोषदोषात् प्रदर्शितम्।
प्रथितं fry लोकेषु कपित्वमनवस्थितम्॥ eu Il

‘Through the culpability of my anger
indeed the same simian nature has been
exhibited at this juncture by me, which is
well-known in all the three worlds (heaven,
earth and the intermediate region) and has
been characterized as unsteady. (15)
धिगस्तु राजसं भावमनीशमनवस्थितम्।
ईश्वरेणापि Age रागान्मया सीता न रक्षिता॥ १६॥

‘Woe be to my movements dominated
by Rajas (passion or anger), which are
incapable of yielding desired results and are
uncertain in the matter of results, because it
was due to anger (born of Rajoguna) that
Sita was not protected by me, even though
| was capable of doing it. (16)

विनष्टायां तु सीतायां arasit विनशिष्यत:।

तयोर्विनाशे सुग्रीव: सबन्धुर्विनशिष्यति॥ १७॥
‘Sita having perished, both those princes

Sri Rama and Laksmana too will perish. On

their ceasing to exist, Sugriva too will yield
up his life with all his kinsfolk. (17)

एतदेव वच: श्रुत्वा भरतो भ्रातृवत्सल:।
धर्मात्मा सहशत्रुघ्न: HA शक्ष्यति जीवितुम्॥ १८॥

‘Even on hearing this report how will
Bharata, who is fond of his brothers and
