282

ever did in everyway all business relating
to the citizens, which was dear to them as
well as conducive to their interests. Doing
all the work of his three mothers for their
sake, Sri Rama, who was highly self-
restrained, attended from time to time the
important business of his elders. In this was
King DaSaratha, the Brahmanas as well as
the traders—in fact, all the people of the
kingdom of Ayodhya were pleased with
the disposition and conduct of Sri Rama.
Sri Rama, who was endowed with true
unfailing valour, outshone all his brothers in
reputation and, like Brahma, the self-born
creator, excelled all created beings in
merit. The high-minded Sri Rama, whose
heart was set on his spouse and who
stood enthroned in her heart, enjoyed life
with her for many months. Sita was dear
to Sri Rama as a partner made available
to him by his father. Nay, because of her
manifold virtues and comeliness of form, his
affection for her grew all the more. Her
husband too (because of his excellences
and lovely appearance) gained a doubly

« VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

secure grip in her heart. (16—27)
अन्तर्गतमपि व्यक्तमाख्याति zea हृदा।
तस्य भूयो विशेषेण मैथिली जनकात्मजा।
देवताभि: समा BA सीता श्रीरिव रूपिणी ।॥ ecu

Sita, the princess of Mithila and daughter
of Janaka, who compared with goddesses
in bodily charm and was beauty-incarnate,
as it were, could vividly read in minute detail
with her mind even that which existed in the
inmost heart of Sri Rama. (28)

तया स राजर्षिसुतोऽभिकामया
समेयिवानुत्तमराजकन्यया ।
ada wa: शुशुभे मुदान्वितो
fay: श्रिया विष्णुरिवामरेश्वर: ॥ २९॥

United in wedlock with that foremost
princess, who was the sole object of his
love and whose love was centred in him,
Sri Rama, the aforesaid son of King
Dasaratha (a royal sage), looked most
charming and full of joy, even as the all-
pervading Visnu, the suzerain Lord of
gods, in the company of Sri, the goddess of
fortune. (29)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये बालकाण्डे
सप्तसप्ततितम: सर्ग: ॥ ७७॥

Thus ends Canto Seventy-seven in the Balakanda of the glorious Ramayana of
Valmiki, the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

बालकाण्डं सम्पूर्णम्

End of Balakanda
