676

अष्टकापितृदेवत्यमित्ययं प्रसृतो जन:।
अन्नस्योपद्रवं usa मृतो fe किमशिष्यति॥ exit

“People here have taken to Sraddha
and other allied rites under the belief that
Astaka, (a Sraddha performed on the
seventh, eighth and ninth days of the dark
fortnights of the lunar months of Pausa,
Magha and Phalguna respectively) and other
Sraddhas are calculated to gratify the manes.
Look at the wanton waste of food involved
in these rites; for what will a dead man eat?

(14)
ae भुक्तमिहान्येन देहमन्यस्य गच्छति।
दद्यात् प्रवसतां श्राद्धं न तत् पथ्यशनं भवेत्॥ १५ I

“If the food eaten by one man here
reaches the body of another in the other world,
one might as well offer Sraddha to those
travelling from home; no provisions for journey
should be necessary for them. (15)
दानसंवनना ह्येते wer मेधाविभि: कृता:।
यजस्व देहि दीक्षस्व तपस्तप्यस्व संत्यज॥ १६॥

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

“Enjoining us to worship gods, make
gifts, get ourselves consecrated for a
sacrificial performance, practise austerities
and renounce our hearth and home, these
books have been written by talented men
with a view to exalting charity. (16)

स नास्ति परमित्येतत् pe बुद्धिं महामते।
yaa यत् datas परोक्षं पृष्ठत: कुरु॥१७॥
“Having known this truth, O highly
intelligent prince, arrive at the conclusion
that there is nothing beyond this visible
universe. Depend upon that which meets
the eye; discard that which is outside the
ken of your senses. (17)
सतां बुद्धिं पुरस्कृत्य सर्वलोकनिदर्शिनीम्।
Tt स त्वं निगृह्णीष्व भरतेन प्रसादित:॥१८॥
“Respecting the judgment of the wise
who believe that alone which meets the eye
to be true—which serves as an authority for
all men and propitiated by Bharata, accept
you the kingdom.” (18)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्येऽयोध्याकाण्डेऽष्टाधिकशततम: AW: ॥ १०८ Il

Thus ends Canto One hundred and eight in the Ayodhyakanda of the glorious
Ramayana of Valmiki, the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

नवाधिकशततम: सर्ग:
Canto CIX

Jabali explains the reasons for his advocating the theory of Nastikas to
Sri Rama, who exposes the hollowness of the ethics propounded
by the sage, dubbing it as the very antithesis of Dharma

जाबालेस्तु वच: श्रुत्वा WA: सत्यपराक्रम:।
उवाच परया सूक्त्या बुद्ध्याविप्रतिपन्नया॥ १॥

Hearing the speech of Jabali, Sri Rama,
for his part, who was possessed of unfailing
prowess, replied as_ follows in the
commendable phraseology of the Vedas,
armed as he was with a conviction opposed
to Jabali’s point of view: (1)

war A प्रियकामार्थं वचनं यदिहोक्तवान्।
अकार्यं कार्यसंकाशमपथ्यं पथ्य संनिभम्॥ २॥
“The advice that you have tendered on
this occasion in order to make available to
me the pleasures of sense, which are
agreeable to all, is not really worth following,
although appearing as such, and is
unwholesome, though appearing as
wholesome. (2)
