३52

excellent men present there, who followed
the mind of Sri Rama and as such were
loved by him, the charioteer arrived at the
gynaeceum. (42)

a wa शुश्राव a हर्षयुक्ता

सर्वस्य लोकस्य गिर: WaT: I ४३॥
There he heard the joyful words of
men engaged in services connected with
the installation as Prince Regent of Sri Rama,
as well as the highly delighted talks, invoking
all-round blessings on the heir apparent, of
all people. (43)
महेन्द्रसद्यप्रतिमं च वेश्म
रामस्य रम्यं मृगपक्षिजुष्टम्।
बिभ्राजमानं प्रभया सुमन्त्र:॥४४॥

Sumantra further saw the lovely palace
of Sri Rama, which vied with the palace of
the mighty Indra and was inhabited by beasts
and birds of varied descriptions and which
shone brightly with its splendour like a lofty
summit of Mount Meru. (44)
उपस्थितैरञ्जलिकारिभिश्च

सोपायनैर्जानपदैर्जनैश्च ।
कोट्या urs विमुक्तयानै:
समाकुलं द्वारपदं ददर्श॥४५॥

He beheld the passage leading to the
entrance, overcrowded with throngs of
people from the countryside, standing with
joined palms and carrying presents, their
conveyances having been left at some
distance away. (45)

ततो महामेघमहीधराभं
प्रभिन्नमत्यङ्कुशमत्यसह्यम् ।

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA +

रामोपवाह्यं रुचिरं ददर्श

शत्रुञ्जयं नागमुदग्रकायम्॥४६॥

He next saw the charming elephant in

rut that carried Sri Rama on its back, and
was tall as a mountain, crowned with a
large mass of cloud, was most formidable
and could not be controlled with a goad, and
which was capable of conquering the enemy
and was accordingly known by the name of
Satrufijaya. (46)
स्वलकृतान् साश्वरथान् सकुञ्जरा-

नमात्यमुख्यांश्च ददर्श वल्लभान्।
व्यपोह्य Ud: सहितान् समन्तत:

समृद्धमन्त:पुरमाविवेश ह॥४७॥

Sumantra also saw the foremost of the
king’s ministers, who were fully adorned
and had come either on horseback or on
the back of their elephant or had driven in
their chariot, and were beloved of the king.
Driving them into a corner, collected as
they were at one spot, he entered the
gynaeceum, which was rich on all sides: so
the tradition goes. (47)

ततोऽद्रिकूटाचलमेघसंनिभं
महाविमानोपमवेश्मसंयुतम् ।
अवार्यमाण: प्रविवेश सारथि:

प्रभूतरत्नं मकरो यथार्णवम्॥४८॥

Unchallenged by the porters, the
charioteer thereupon freely entered the
gynaeceum of Sri Rama’s palace—which
shone like a stationary cloud perched on a
mountain-peak, and consisted of mansions
resembling large aerial cars and contained
a stock of abundant precious stones—even
as an alligator would enter an ocean abounding
in precious stones. (48)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्येऽयोध्याकाण्डे TASH: सर्ग: Il १५ ॥

Thus ends Canto Fifteen in the Ayodhyakanda of the glorious Ramayana
of Valmiki, the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

