* SUNDARAKANDA +

“Having practised austerities and
observed holy vows for nothing (as they did
not prove effective in reuniting me with you), |
for myself, O Sri Rama, in whom was aroused
a longing for you and whose affection has
been fastened in you for long to my mortal
agony, | shall presently give up the ghost
now. Woe to me of scanty fortune! (15)

re नेयं
विषेण शस्त्रेण शितेन वापि।
विषस्य दाता न तु मेऽस्ति कश्चि-

च्छस्त्रस्य वा वेश्मनि राक्षसस्य॥ १६ ॥

“| would shortly part with my life through
poison or even by means of a sharpened
weapon. In the abode of Ravana, an ogre,
however, there is none to give me poison or
a weapon.” (16)

शोकाभितप्ता बहुधा विचिन्त्य
सीताथ वेणीग्रथनं गृहीत्वा।
उद्बद्ध्य वेण्युद्ग्रथनेन शीघ्र-
महं गमिष्यामि यमस्य मूलम्॥ १७॥
Reflecting on various lines and then
seizing the string that tied her hair, Sita,

141

who was tormented with grief, now thought
within herself: “Tying my neck with the fillet
that ties my braid, | shall proceed to the
presence of Yama.” (17)

उपस्थिता सा मृदुसर्वगात्री

शाखां गृहीत्वा च नगस्य तस्य।
तस्यास्तु wa परिचिन्तयन्त्या

रामानुजं स्वं च het VHT: ॥ १८ ॥
तस्या विशोकानि तदा बहूनि

धैर्यार्जितानि प्रवराणि लोके।
प्रादुर्निमित्तानि तदा बभूवु:

पुरापि सिद्धान्युपलक्षितानि॥१९॥

Taking hold of a branch of the aforesaid
Sirhsapa tree, that lady, who was delicate of
all limbs, stood near that tree. While that
lady of charming limbs was thinking deeply
of Sri Rama and Laksmana as also of her
own royal House, many omens—which were
well-known in the world as dispellers of grief
and restoring confidence, and which had
been found by her even before as predictive
of success, presently appeared on her person.

(18-19)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये सुन्दरकाण्डेऽष्टाविंश: सर्ग: Il २८॥

Thus ends Canto Twenty-eight in the Sundarakanda of the glorious Ramayana of
Valmiki, the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

Canto XXIX

The omens described. Concluding them to be auspicious, from the thrill that
ran through her body at their sight, Sita experiences great joy

तथागतां तां व्यथितामनिन्दितां
व्यतीतहर्षां परिदीनमानसाम्।
शुभां निमित्तानि शुभानि भेजिरे
नरं श्रिया जुष्टमिवोपसेविन:॥ १॥
Like willing attendants flocking round a
man favoured by the goddess of fortune,
auspicious omens appeared on the person
of the aforesaid blessed lady, who, though

beyond reproach, was _ nevertheless
agonized, utterly bereft of joy and sore
distressed in mind, and had reached the
Sirnsapa tree as aforesaid. (1)
