* AYODHYAKANDA +

लक्ष्मीश्चन्द्रादपेयाद् वा हिमवान् वा हिमं त्यजेत्।
अतीयात् सागरो वेलां न प्रतिज्ञामहं पितु:॥ १८॥
“Splendour would sooner depart from
the moon, nay, the Himalaya mountain
would sooner shed its snow and the ocean
would sooner transgress its limits than |
shall violate the plighted word of my father.
(18)

कामाद् वा तात लोभाद् वा मात्रा तुभ्यमिदं कृतम्।
न तन्मनसि कर्तव्यं वर्तितव्यं च मातूवत्॥१९॥
“No matter whether all this was wrought
by your mother in your interest from affection
for you or from greed of sovereignty through
your installation as Prince-Regent, my
darling, it should not be taken to heart by
you and you should behave towards her as
towards a mother.” (19)
एवं ब्रुवाणं wa: कौसल्यासुतमब्रवीत्।
तेजसाऽऽदित्यसंकाशं प्रतिपच्चन्द्रदर्शनम्॥ २०॥
To Sri Rama, the son of Kausalya—
who was speaking as aforesaid, nay, who
vied with the sun in glory, and who was
pleasing to the sight as the new moon
appearing on the first day of a bright
fortnight—Bharata replied as follows: (20)

अधिरोहार्य पादाभ्यां पादुके हरेमभूषिते।
Ua fe सर्वलोकस्य योगक्षेमं विधास्यत:॥ २१॥

“Pray, stand with your feet on the pair
of wooden sandals embellished with gold
placed before you, O noble brother ! Surely
these will supply the needs and ensure the
safety of men.” (21)
सोऽधिरुह्य नरव्याघ्र: पादुके व्यवमुच्य च।
प्रायच्छत् सुमहातेजा भरताय महात्मने॥ २२॥

Placing his feet on the sandals and
immediately leaving them, Sri Rama, a tiger
among men, who was endowed with
exceptional glory, gave them to the high-
souled Bharata. (22)

स पादुके सम्प्रणम्य we वचनमब्रवीत्।
चतुर्दश fe वर्षाणि जटाचीरधरो ह्यहम्॥ २३॥

691

फलमूलाशनो at wast रघुनन्दन।
तवागमनमाकांक्षन् वसन् A नगराद् बहि:॥ २४॥
तव पादुकयोर्न्यस्य राज्यतन्त्रं परंतप।
चतुर्दशे fe सम्पूर्णे वर्षेऽहनि रघूत्तम॥ २५॥
न द्रक्ष्यामि यदि त्वां तु प्रवेक्ष्यामि हुताशनम्।
तथेति च प्रतिज्ञाय तं परिष्वज्य सादरम्॥ २६॥
शत्रुघ्नं च परिष्वज्य वचनं चेदमब्रवीत्।
मातरं रक्ष कैकेयीं मा रोषं कुरु तां प्रति॥ २७॥
Reverentially bowing down to the
wooden sandals, he spoke as follows to Sri
Rama : “Indeed, having relegated the burden
of rulership to the wooden sandals, O gallant
brother, | should like to live on fruits and
roots alone for fourteen years, O delight of
the Raghus, wearing matted locks on my
head and the bark of trees on my person
and actually dwelling outside the city, longing
for your return to the capital, O scorcher of
enemies ! If, however, when the fourteenth
year of your exile has fully ended, O jewel
among the Raghus, | do not see you returned
to Ayodhya, the following day, | for my part
shall enter the fire once for all.” Giving his
approval in the words “So be it!” and
embracing Bharata with love, nay, embracing
Satrughna as well, Sri Rama spoke as
follows : “Take care of mother Kaikeyi; be
not angry with her. (23—27)

मया च सीतया चैव शप्तोऽसि रघुनन्दन।
इत्युक्त्वाश्रुपरीताक्षो भ्रातरं विससर्ज ह॥ २८॥

“You are hereby adjured to do so
by me as well as by Sita, O delight of the
Raghus !” Saying so, his eyes suffused
with tears, Sri Rama bade good-bye to
Bharata. (28)

स पादुके a भरत: स्वलंकृते
महोज्ज्वले सम्परिगृह्य धर्मवित्।
प्रदक्षिणं चैव wan wad
चकार चैवोत्तमनागमूर्धनि॥ २९॥
Receiving with reverence the aforesaid
pair of exceedingly bright-ornate wooden
sandals, the celebrated Bharata, who knew
