# YUDDHAKANDA #

जाज्वल्यमानं वपुषा सुपुङ्खं हेमभूषितम्।
तेजसा सर्वभूतानां कृतं भास्करवर्चसम्॥७॥
Provided with lovely feathers and
decked with gold, the arrow, which emitted
splendour from its body, had been made up
of the essence of all the elements and
shone like the sun. (7)

सधूममिव कालाग्निं दीप्तमाशीविषोपमम्।
नरनागाश्ववृन्दानां भेदनं क्षिप्रकारिणम्॥८॥

द्वाराणां परिघाणां च गिरीणां चापि भेदनम्।
नानारुधिरदिग्धाङ्खं मेदोदिग्धं सुदारुणम्॥९॥
Flaming like the fire of universal
dissolution enveloped in smoke, and
resembling a venomous snake, it was quick
in action and capable of splitting asunder
hosts of men, elephants and horses and
smashing gateways and iron bars and
mountains too. Smeared with the blood of
various victims and coated with their
marrow, it presented a dreadful appearance.
(8-9)

amat महानादं नानासमितिदारुणम्।

सर्ववित्रासनं भीमं yaaa पन्नगम्॥१०॥
Nay, hard as adamant and ।०पर्प-
sounding, it was capable of dispersing armies
of every kind. Terrible to behold and hissing
like a serpent, it frightened all. (10)

कङ्कगृध्रबकानां च गोमायुगणरक्षसाम्।
नित्यभक्षप्रदं युद्धे यमरूपं भयावहम्॥११॥
Providing lasting nourishment on the
battlefield to buzzards, vultures and herons
as well as to packs of jackals as also to
ogres, it assumed the aspect of Yama (the
god of retribution) and inspired terror. (11)
Tet वानरेन्द्राणां रक्षसामवसादनम्।
वाजितं विविधैर्वाजैश्चारुचित्रैर्गरुत्मत: 122 1
The delight of monkey chiefs and the
scourge of ogres, it was provided with
various kinds of lovely and picturesque
plumes of Garuda. (12)

759

Tag लोकानामिक्ष्वाकुभयनाशनम्।
द्विषतां कोर्तिहरणं प्रहर्षकरमात्मन:॥१३॥
afar ततो रामस्तं Wet महाबल:।
वेदप्रोक्तेन विधिना संदधे कार्मुके बली॥१४॥

Charged with a mystic spell in
accordance with the scriptural ordinance
that great arrow which was_ supremely
destructive, nay, capable of dispelling the
fear of all the worlds in general and the
Ikswakus in particular, taking away the glory
of the enemies and delighting one’s own
self, the mighty Sri Rama, who was endowed
with extraordinary strength, then placed it
on his bow. (13-14)

तस्मिन् संधीयमाने तु राघवेण शारोत्तमे।
सर्वभूतानि संत्रेसुश्चचाल च वसुंधरा॥१५॥

While that excellent arrow was being
set by Sri Rama (a scion of Raghu) to his
bow, all created being for their part felt
terrified and the earth shook. (15)

स रावणाय संक्रुद्धो भृशमायम्य कार्मुकम्।
चिक्षेपष परमायत्त: शरं मर्मविदारणम्॥१६॥

Stretching his bow at full length, Sri
Rama, who felt highly provoked and was
supremely active, shot at Ravana the arrow,
which was capable of tearing asunder his
vital parts. (16)

a aq ga geet वज्रिबाहुविसर्जित:।
कृतान्त इव चावार्यो न्यपतद् रावणोरसि॥ १७॥

Difficult to prevail against like the
thunderbolt hurled by the arm of Indra (the
wielder of the thunderbolt), nay, incapable
of being warded off like Death, the arrow
impinged on the breast of Ravana. (17)
स विसृष्टो महावेग: शरीरान्तकर: पर:।
बिभेद हृदयं तस्य रावणस्य दुरात्मन:॥१८॥

As soon as discharged, the arrow, which
was endowed with exceeding velocity and
was supremely capable of putting an end to

the enemy’s body, pierced the heart of the
notorious and evil-minded Ravana. (18)
