# YUDDHAKANDA +

“Even virtue, which is so exalted, was
struck at the root and evil embraced by you
while ranging the worlds for conquest. Hence
it is that our enemies, who have embraced
virtue and renounced evil, are stronger than
we. (15)

स प्रमादात् प्रवृद्धस्तेऽधर्मोऽहिर्ग्रसते fe न:।
विवर्धयति ust च सुराणां सुरभावन:॥१६॥
“Nourished through your error, the
aforesaid python in the form of evil is actually
going to swallow us up; while virtue which
is being practised by the gods is promoting
the cause of the gods in the form of the
monkeys, who are all sprung from the loins
of gods. (16)

विषयेषु प्रसक्तेन यत्किंचित्कारिणा त्वया।
ऋषीणामग्निकल्पानामुद्वेगो जनितो महान्॥१७॥

“Great molestation was caused to the
Rsis (the seers of Vedic Mantras), who
resemble the god of fire in brilliance, by
you, who are devoted to the pleasures
of sense and do whatever you please.

(17)
तेषां प्रभावो ged: welt इव पावक:।
तपसा भावितात्मानो धर्मस्यानुग्रहे रता:॥१८॥

मुख्यैर्यज्ञैर्यजन्त्येते तैस्तैर्यत्ते द्विजातय:।
जुह्वत्यग्नींश्च विधिवद् वेदांश्चोच्चैरधीयते॥१९॥

“Their power is difficult to overcome
like a blazing fire. Having purified their self
through asceticism, they are intent on
acquiring virtue, inasmuch as these afore
said Brahmanas (lit., the members of the
twice-born class) worship the Lord through
different principal sacrifices, also pour
oblations into the sacred fires with due
ceremony and read the Vedas in a loud
voice. (18-19)

अभिभूय च रक्षांसि ब्रह्मघोषानुदीरयन्।
दिशो विप्रद्रुता: wat: स्तनयित्नुरिवोष्णगे॥ २०॥

417

“Having subdued the ogres, they
continued to chant the Vedas, on hearing
which the former got scattered in all
directions as clouds during the hot season.

(20)

ऋषीणामग्निकल्पानामग्निहोत्रसमुत्थित: ।
आदत्ते रक्षसां तेजो धूमो व्याप्य दिशो दश॥ २१॥

“Enveloping the ten directions, the
smoke risen from the oblations poured into
the sacred fires by the Rsis, who resemble
the fire in brilliance, takes away the energy
of the ogres. (21)

ay ay च देशेषु पुण्येष्वेव दृढव्रतै:।
चर्यमाणं aceite संतापयति राक्षसान्॥२२॥
“The burning austerities which are being
practised in the various sacred regions by
Rsis firm of resolve are tormenting the ogres.
(22)

देवदानवयशक्षेभ्यो गृहीतश्च वरस्त्वया।
बलवन्त इहागम्य गर्जन्ति दूढविक्रमा:॥ २३॥

“Nay, a boon has been secured by
you of immunity from death at the hands of
gods, demons and Yaksas (a class of
demigods); while human beings, monkeys,
bears and Golangulas (a species of monkeys
with dark faces and tails as long as the
tail of a cow), full of might, leading a large
army and endowed with unyielding
prowess are thundering after coming here.

(23)

उत्पातान् विविधान् दृष्ट्वा घोरान् बहुविधान् TEL |
विनाशमनुपश्यामि सर्वेषां रक्षसामहम्॥ २४॥
“Beholding numerous and multifarious
dreadful portents foreboding evils of various
kinds, | foresee the extermination of all the
ogres. (24)
ख्राभिस्तनिता घोरा मेघा: प्रतिभयंकरा:।
शोणितेनाभिवर्षन्ति लङ्कामुष्णेन सर्वत:॥ २५॥

“Formidable clouds striking horror and
