1036

“Tormented with sunshine in the first
instance and eventually immersed in fresh
rain-water, the earth is radiating heat even
as Sita, who is tormented with grief, is shedding
tears profusely before my mind’s eyes. (7)

मेघोदरविनिर्मुक्ता: कर्पूरदलशीतला:।
शक्यमञ्जलिभि: पातुं वाता: केतकगन्धिन:॥ ८॥

“Released from the interior of clouds
and cool as a leaf painted with camphor-
paste and charged with the fragrance of
Ketaka flowers, the wind can, as it were, be
imbibed with the hollow of one’s palms. (8)

एष फुल्लार्जुन: Wet: केतकैरभिवासित:।
सुग्रीव इव शान्तारिर्धाराभिरभिषिच्यते॥९॥

“With its Arjuna trees in blossom, and
its enemy (in the form of wild fire) come to
an end, this (Prasravana) mountain, which
is made fragrant with Ketaka flowers is
being bathed with torrents even as Sugriva,
who is adorned with garlands of Arjuna
flowers and whose raiment is charged with
the fragrance of Ketaka flowers and whose
enemy in the form of his own elder brother
has come to an end, is being bathed with
torrents poured from pitchers. (9)

मेघकृष्णाजिनधरा धारायज्ञोपवीतिन: |
मारुतापूरितगुहा: प्राधीता sa पर्वता:॥१०॥

“Wearing a black deerskin in the form
of dark clouds and sacred threads in the
form of torrents and with their caverns filled
with winds and as such emitting a sound
like that of reciting the Vedas, the mountains
look like religious students who have
commenced their study of the Vedas. (10)

कशाभिरिव हैमीभिर्विद्युद्धिरभिताङितम्।
अन्त:स्तनितनिर्घोषं सवेदनमिवाम्बरम्॥ ११॥

“Lashed on all sides with whips of gold
in the form of lightnings and emitting groans
in the form of peals of thunder, the sky
appears full of anguish inside. (11)

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

नीलमेघाश्रिता विद्युत् स्फुरन्ती प्रतिभाति मे।
स्फुरन्ती रावणस्याङ्के adda तपस्विनी॥१२॥

“Flashing in the interior of a sombre
cloud, the lightning appears to me like the
poor Sita, a princess of the Videha territory,
struggling in the arms of Ravana. (12)

इमास्ता मन्मथवतां feat: प्रतिहता fest: |
अनुलिप्ता इव घनैर्नष्टग्रहनिशाकरा:॥१३॥

“Smeared, as it were, with clouds
and, therefore, obscured, these well-known
quarters, in which the planets including the
moon have ceased to appear, are favourably
disposed* to those who are pierced with darts
of love in the absence of their beloved. (13)

क्वचिद्बाष्पाभिसंरुद्धान् वर्षागमसमुत्सुकान्।
कुटजान् usa सौमित्रे पुष्पितान् गिरिसानुषु।
मम शोकाभिभूतस्य कामसंदीपनान् स्थितान्॥ १४॥

“Look at the Kutaja trees in blossom
(expressive of joy) standing on the mountain-
peaks—trees, which are withered at places
by the heat radiated by the earth after a
fresh shower and appear as though bathed
in tears, while at other places they look
sated through rainfall (as a lover feels on
meeting his beloved), and thus rekindle love
in me, even though | am overwhelmed with
grief, O son of Sumitra ! (14)

रज: Wied सहिमोऽद्य वायु-

र्निदाघदोषप्रसरा: प्रशान्ता:।
स्थिता fe यात्रा वसुधाधिपानां

प्रवासिनो यान्ति नरा: स्वदेशान्॥ १५ ॥

“The dust of roads has now settled
due to the recent shower, the wind is cool
and the aggravation of the evils such as
heat of hot weather has ceased. The
expeditions for conquest of the rulers of the
earth have actually come to a standstill and
people living away from their home are
returning to their own land. (15)

* The moon is supposed to accentuate the pangs of separation from one’s darling. Hence the quarters,
in which the moon and the stars are no longer visible have been spoken of as favourable to the love-sick.
