* BALAKANDA +

“When the Ganga, which is capable of
purifying the whole world, washes them,
reduced as they are to heaps of ashes, this
heap of ashes soaked by the Ganga, a
river pleasing to the world, will take the
souls of the sixty thousand princes to the
celestial plane. (20)
निर्गच्छाश्वं महाभाग ae पुरुषर्षभ।
at tame वीर निर्वर्तयितुमर्हसि॥ २१॥

“Taking the horse with you, O highly
blessed one, depart from this region, O
jewel among men! Thereby you ought to
ensure the completion of your grandfather's
sacrificial undertaking, O valiant prince !”

(21)
सुपर्णवचनं श्रुत्वा aisyamftdtaart
त्वरितॆ हयमादाय पुनरायान्महातपा:॥२२॥

Hearing the admonition of Garuda, the
celebrated ArnSuman, who was exceptionally
powerful and a great ascetic too, speedily
returned to his grandfather's capital taking
the sacrificial horse with him. (22)

ततो राजानमासाद्य दीक्षितं रघुनन्दन।
न्यवेदयद् यथा वृत्तं सुपर्णवचनं तथा॥२३॥

Then seeking the presence of the king,

185

who stood consecrated for the sacrifice yet,
O scion of Raghu, he related exactly what
had happened as well as reproduced faithfully
the utterance of Garuda. (23)

तच्छुत्वा घोरसंकाशं वाक्यमंशुमतो नृप:।
aa निर्वर्तयामास यथाकल्पं यथाविधि॥ २४॥

Hearing that apparently awe-inspiring
tale from the lips of Arnsuman, the king
Sagara concluded the sacrifice to the best
of his capacity in accordance with the
scriptural ordinance. (24)

wat त्वगमच्छीमानिष्टयज्ञो महीपति:।
गङ्गायाश्चागमे राजा निश्चयं नाध्यगच्छत॥ २५॥

Having performed the sacrifice the
glorious emperor for his part returned to his
capital. The monarch, however, could not
hit upon any plan for ensuring the descent
of the Ganga to the terrestrial plane. (25)
अगत्वा निश्चयं राजा कालेन महता महान्।
त्रिंशद्वर्षसहस्राणि राज्यं कृत्वा fed गत:॥ २६॥

Failing to reach any conclusion in the
aforesaid matter even after a considerable
time and having reigned for thirty thousand

years, the great king ascended to heaven.
(26)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये बालकाण्डे
एकचत्वारिंश: सर्ग: Il ४१ ॥

Thus ends Canto Forty-one in the Balakanda of the glorious Ramayana of Valmiki,
the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

