780

attracted the notice of Sita. He found her
without a bath and sitting cheerless at the
foot of a tree surrounded by ogresses and
looking like Rohini (the deity presiding over
a constellation of the same name and the
favourite consort of the moon-god) in anguish
(due to the evil influence exerted by a
malevolent planet). Greeting and approaching
her, Hanuman stood motionless, bent low
and meek. (2—4)
तूष्णीमास्त तदा दृष्टवा स्मृत्वा हृष्टाभवत् तदा॥ & ॥

Seeing the said Hanuman, who was
endowed with extraordinary might, duly
arrived (but failing to recognize him), the
godlike lady kept quiet in the first instance.
Looking at him again and recognizing him,
she felt rejoiced at that moment. (5)

सौम्यं तस्या मुखं दृष्टवा हनूमान् प्लवगोत्तम:।
रामस्य वचनं सर्वमाख्यातुमुपचक्रमे॥६॥

Marking her placid countenance,
Hanuman, the foremost of monkeys,
proceeded to communicate to her all that
Sri Rama had said. (6)

aefe कुशली wa: सहसुग्रीवलक्ष्मण:।
कुशलं चाह सिद्धार्थो हतशत्रुरमित्रजित्॥७॥

Hanuman said: “Sri Rama is doing
well, O princess of the Videha territory,
alongwith Sugriva, the ruler of monkeys,
and Laksmana. And Sri Rama (the conqueror
of his enemies), who stands accomplished
of purpose—now that his enemy, Ravana,
has been killed, has inquired after your
welfare. (7)

विभीषणसहायेन रामेण हरिभि: सह।
निहतो रावणो देवि लक्ष्मणेन च वीर्यवान्॥८॥
“The valiant Ravana has been killed
by Sri Rama, assisted by Vibhisana and
with the co-operation of the monkeys, O
divine lady! (8)

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA +

प्रियमाख्यामि a देवि भूयश्च cat सभाजये।

qa प्रभावाद् धर्मज्ञे महान् रामेण संयुगे॥ ९॥
लब्धोऽयं विजय: सीते स्वस्था Wa गतज्वरा।

रावणश्च ed: शत्रुर्लङ्का Wa वशीकृता॥१०॥

“| communicate this pleasant news to
you, O godlike lady, and will delight you,
further by telling you, O knower of what is
right, that this great victory in war has been
scored by Sri Rama by strength of your
devotion to your husband. Take heart, O
Sita, and be freed from anxiety, since the
enemy, Ravana, has been killed and Lanka
too has been subdued. (9-10)

मया ह्यलब्धनिद्रेण धृतेन तव निर्जये।
प्रतिज्ञैषा विनिस्तीर्णा बद्ध्वा सेतुं महोदधौ॥ ११॥
‘The following is the message of Sri
Rama: ‘By me, who have had no sleep all
these months and was resolved to win you
back, has this vow of winning you back
been actually redeemed after constructing a
bridge over the extensive sea. (11)

सम्भ्रमश्च न कर्तव्यो वर्तन्त्या रावणालये।
विभीषणविधेयं fe लङ्केश्वर्यमिदं कृतम्॥१२॥

“ “-ट्वा should no longer be entertained
by you, living as you do in the abode of
Ravana; for the dominionship of Lanka has
now been placed under the control of
Vibhisana, who is our friend. (12)
तदाश्वसिहि facet tage परिवर्तसे।
अयं चाभ्येति संहृष्टस्त्वद्दर्शनसमुत्सुक:॥१३॥

“`[#88&0182, complacently be at ease.
Feel that you are dwelling in your own abode.
Nay, Vibhisana himself, who is very keen to
see you, is coming to pay his respects to you,
he being highly rejoiced.’ ” (13)
`एवमुक्ता तु सा eat सीता शशिनिभानना।
प्रहर्षेणावरुद्धा सा व्याहर्तुं न शशाक ह॥१४॥

Spoken to in these words, the divine

Sita for her part, whose countenance shone
like the moon, felt tongue-tied due to
