244

wat सागरं भीमं भीमोरगनिषेवितम्।
स Wed इवाकाशं मारुतस्यात्मसम्भव:॥४१॥
wee हरिशार्दूलो दक्षिणादुत्तरां दिशम्।
a dar पीडितस्तेन कपिना पर्वतोत्तम:॥४२॥
wre विविधैर्भूतै: प्राविशाद् वसुधातलम्।
कम्पमानैश्च शिखरै: पतद्भिरपि च ga: uss
Having killed distinguished ogres and
thus exhibiting his surpassing strength,
Hanuman created a stir in Lanka, befooled
Ravana and displayed his terrific might and
thus made his name widely known. Having
fully consoled and greeted Sita, Hanuman
made up his mind once more to return across
the sea. Then that tiger among the monkeys,
the destroyer of his foes, eager as he was
to see his master, Sri Rama, ascended the
Arista mountain, the foremost of mountains,
which was clothed, as it were, with dark
groves, embellished with tall Padmaka trees,
and was covered with clouds hanging
between its summits as with an upper
garment; which was being awakened, as it
were, with love by the bright rays of the
sun, resembling so many hands; which was
staring as it were with so many eyes in the
form of metals scattered here and there;
which appeared to have started reciting the
Vedas on every side in the form of the deep
sound of running streams; which had
commenced singing, as it were, at a high
pitch very distinctly in the form of the
murmuring of various cascades; which stood,
as it were, with uplifted arms in the form of
towering deodars; which had started crying
loudly, as it were, on all sides in the form of
the sound of its waterfalls and seemed to
quake in the form of its waving dark clusters
of autumnal reeds; which was piping, as it
were, in the form of hollow bamboos tossed
about by the wind and whistling, and was
hissing as it were, in indignation in the form
of its terrible and most poisonous serpents;
which sat absorbed in meditation, as it were,
in the form of its caves obscured by mist

« VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

and had set about moving on all sides, as it
were, with its offshoots looking like so many
rising clouds, which with its peaks enveloped
in clouds seemed to stretch its limbs in the
air; which bristled with a number of peaks
and was adorned with numerous caves; and
which was hemmed in with many sal,
palmyra, Karna and bamboo trees and was
graced with extensive canopies of creepers
laden with blossom; which was crowded with
herds of deer of every species and decked
with streams of molten metals; which was
rich in numerous cascades and thick with
accumulations of rocks; which was
frequented by eminent Rsis, yaksas,
Gandharvas, Kinnaras and Nagas, was
impenetrable on account of creepers and
trees and whose caves were occupied by
lions; which was infested with tigers and other
carnivorous beasts and abounded in luscious
roots and trees yielding delicious fruits.
Impelled by excessive joy on having
successfully completed his mission and
impatience to see Sri Rama, Hanuman, son
of the wind-god, the foremost of monkeys,
thus ascended the aforesaid mountain.
Pressed under his soles and crushed by
his weight, rocks on the lovely peaks of the
mountain now fell to pieces with a noise.
Ascending that lord of mountains and seeking
to bound to the northern shore from the
southern shore of the brackish sea, that
mighty Hanuman grew in size. Having
ascended the mountain, the heroic Hanuman,
sprung from the loins of the wind-god, then
beheld the formidable sea infested with
dreadful serpents. Like the wind rushing
through airspace, Hanuman, a veritable tiger
among the monkeys, set out from the
southern to the northern quarter. Pressed at
that moment by Hanuman, Arista, the
foremost of mountains, shrieked under his
weight and sank into the bowels of the earth
with its various living beings and shaking
summits amid toppling trees. (23—43)
