1086

geda चासुरश्रेष्ठं देवास्त्रासमुपागमन्।
कथमेनं वधिष्याम: HA न स्यात् पराजय:॥ १२॥
On seeing the best of Asuras, gods
were frightened, and thought ‘how shall we
kill him, and how indeed we shall not be
conquered by him?’ (12)
तेषां चिन्तयतां at सहस्राक्ष: पुरंदर:।
at प्रगृह्य पाणिभ्यां प्राहिणोद वृत्रमूर्धनि॥ १३॥
While the gods were thus contemplating,
the thousand-eyed one, the destroyer of
fortress, Indra, taking hold of the thunderbolt

with both of his hands, hurled it at the head
of Vrtra. (13)

कालाग्निनेव घोरेण dada महाचिषा।

पतता Gaya जगत् त्रासमुपागमत्॥१४॥
When the head of Vrtra struck by the
thunderbolt, blazing like fire of destruction
and inflamed by its own lustre, fell down, it
simultaneously terrified the whole universe.
(14)

असम्भाव्यं वधं तस्य व्रत्रस्य विबुधाधिप:।
चिन्तयानो जगामाशु लोकस्यान्तं महायशा:॥ १५ ॥
The lord of the gods, possessed of
fame, Indra, thinking that the killing of Vrtra
was not proper, fled soon to the ends of the
earth out of fear. (15)

तमिन्द्रं ब्रह्महत्याऽऽशु गच्छन्तमनुगच्छति।
अपतच्चास्य गात्रेषु तमिन्द्रं दु:खमाविशत्॥१६॥
The slaughter of a Brahmana pursued
Indra, fleeing fast and pervaded his limbs;
sorrow came upon Indra. (16)

हतारय: प्रणष्टेन्द्रा देवा: साग्निपुरोगमा:।
विष्णुं त्रिभुवनेशानं मुहुर्मुहुरपूजयन्॥१७॥

« VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

With their foe killed, and bereft of Indra,
the gods, with Agni at their head, worshipped
Visnu, the lord of the three worlds again and
again. (17)

त्वं गति: परमेशान पूर्वजो जगत: पिता।
रक्षार्थं सर्वभूतानां विष्णुत्वमुपजग्मिवान्॥१८॥

‘O mightiest of all, you are the resort,
and being born first, the father of this earth,
you assumed the form of Visnu for the
protection of all beings. (18)

हतश्चायं त्वया GA ब्रह्महत्या च वासवम्।
बाधते सुरशार्दूल मोक्षं तस्य विनिर्दिश॥ १९॥

‘By you Vrtra is killed; the slaughter
of a Brahmana afflicts Vasava (Indra), O
lion among gods. Kindly arrange for his
deliverance.’ (19)
मामेव यजतां शक्र: पावयिष्यामि वज्रिणम्॥ २०॥

Hearing those words of the gods, Visnu
said “Let Indra worship me, | shall purify the
carrier of the thunderbolt. (20)

पुण्येन हयमेधेन मामिष्टवा पाकशासन:।
पुनरेष्यति देवानामिन्द्रत्वमकुतोभय: ॥ २१॥

“Having propitiated me through the holy
Asvamedha, the humbler of Paka, Indra,
shall again attain the position of Indra among
the gods, without fear from anywhere.” (21)
जगाम विष्णुर्देवेश: स्तूयमानस्तिविष्टपम्॥ २२॥

Thus pronouncing those nectar-like
words before the gods, the lord of the gods,
Visnu, being eulogized by the gods,
proceeded to heaven. (22)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये उत्तरकाण्डे पञ्चाशीतितम: सर्ग: ॥ ८५ ॥

Thus ends Canto Eighty-five in the Uttarakanda of the glorious Ramayana of
Valmiki, the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

