# YUDDHAKANDA #

The heart of King Sri Rama, even as
he beheld Sita, the beloved of his heart,
near him, was torn within him for fear of
public sarcasm. (11)

सीतामुत्पलपत्राक्षीं नीलकुञ्चितमूर्धजाम्।
अवदद् A वरारोहां मध्ये वानररक्षसाम्॥१२॥
In the midst of monkeys and ogres
present on the spot he actually spoke (as
follows) to Sita, whose eyes resembled the
petals of a lotus, who wore dark curly hair
on her head and was endowed with shapely
limbs: (12)
यत् कर्तव्यं मनुष्येण धर्षणां प्रतिमार्जता।
Wd Ha रावणं हत्वा मयेदं मानकांक्षिणा॥ १३॥
“That which ought to be done by a man,
revenging an insult, has been accomplished
by me by killing Ravana, seeking, as | did, to
redeem my honour. (13)

निर्जिता जीवलोकस्य acer भावितात्मना।
अगस्त्येन दुराधर्षा मुनिना दक्षिणेव fag १४॥

Though difficult to approach for the
world of mortals for fear of Ravana, you
have been won back by me whose mind
stands purified by asceticism in the same
way as the southern quarter, which was
difficult to assail (for fear of the ogres Ilvala
and Vatapi) for mortals was conquered by
Sage Agastya, who had realized his Self
through austerities. (14)
विदितश्चास्तु भद्रं a योऽयं रणपरिश्रम:।
सुतीर्ण: सुहृदां वीर्यान्न त्वदर्थं मया कृत:॥१५॥

“Let it be known to you that all this
exertion in the shape of war, which has
been successfully carried through, thanks
to the prowess of my friends (the monkeys
and Vibhisana), was not undertaken for your
sake: may prosperity attend you! (15)

रक्षता तु मया वृत्तमपवादं च सर्वत:।
प्रख्यातस्यात्मवंशस्य न्यङ्गं च परिमार्जता॥१६॥

“This was, however, done by me in
order to vindicate my good conduct and

789

wipe off the obloquy coming to me from all
sides as well as the stigma on my illustrious
House. (16)

प्राप्तचारित्रसंदेहा मम प्रतिमुखे स्थिता।
दीपो नेत्रातुरस्येव प्रतिकूलासि A दृढा॥ १७॥

“Standing unabashed before me, even
though suspicion has arisen with regard
to your character, you are extremely
disagreeable to me even as a light to one
who is suffering from sore eyes. (17)

Ae गच्छ त्वानुजानेऽद्य यथेष्टं जनकात्मजे।
wart दश दिशो भद्रे कार्यमस्ति न मे त्वया॥ १८॥

“Therefore, go wherever you like, O
Janaka’s daughter; | grant you leave to do
so this very day. All these ten directions
are open to you, O good lady! No more
purpose of mine remains to be served by
you (18)

क: पुमांस्तु Het जात: स्नियं परगृहोषिताम्।
तेजस्वी पुनरादद्यात् सुहुल्लोभेन चेतसा॥१९॥

“What man of spirit and born in a noble
family for his part would take back with an
eager mind a woman who has dwelt in
another’s house, simply because she has
been kindly disposed towards him in the
past? (19)
रावणाङ्कपरिक्लिष्टां get दुष्टेन चक्षुषा।
कथं त्वां पुनरादद्यां Het व्यपदिशन्महत्॥ २०॥

“While boasting of my lineage, how
can | accept again you, who were squeezed
into the arms of Ravana (while being borne

away by him) and regarded by him with an
evil lustful eye? (20)

यदर्थं निर्जिता मे त्वं सोऽयमासादितो wart
नास्ति मे त्वय्यभिष्वङ्गो यथेष्टं गम्यतामिति॥ २१॥

“That object, viz., the retrieval of my
lost honour for which you have been won
back by me, has been achieved by me.
There is no more attachment for you in my
heart. You may, therefore, go wherever you
like. (21)
