996

सुग्रीवप्रियकामेन ace निहतस्त्वया।
मामेव यदि yt त्वमेतदर्थमचोदय:।
मैथिलीमहमेकाह्ना तव चानीतवान् भवे:॥४९॥
Tad च दुरात्मानं aa भार्यापहारिणम्।
HIS बद्ध्वा प्रदद्यां तेऽनिहतं रावणं WT ५०॥

“| would have brought back your wife
(the princess of Mithila) to you in a single
day, had you but moved me in this behalf
before; for, it is for this that | have been
killed by you, keen as you were to oblige
Sugriva. Nay, tying round the neck the evil-
minded ogre, Ravana, who stole away your
wife, | would have handed him over to you
without his being killed in battle. (49-50)

न्यस्तां सागरतोये वा पाताले वापि मैथिलीम्।
आनयेयं तवादेशाच्छ्वेतामश्वतरीमिव। & ॥

“| could have brought back at your
command the princess of Mithila even if she
had been kept in a place surrounded by
sea-water or in the lowest subterranean
region, just as Lord Hayagriva (an Avatara
of Lord Visnu carrying on His person a
horse’s head) brought back the Vedas stolen
by the demons Madhu and Kaitabha and
kept in Patala in the form of a white female
mule. (51)

युक्तं यत्प्राप्नुयाद राज्यं सुग्रीव: स्वर्गते मयि।
अयुक्तं यदधर्मेण ata निहतो रणे॥७५२॥

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

“It is but meet that Sugriva should
inherit the kingdom when | have ascended
to heaven; it is, however, unjustifiable that |
have been unrighteously slain by you while
| was engaged otherwise on the battlefield.

(52)

काममेवंविधो लोक: कालेन विनियुज्यते।
क्षमं चेद्भवता प्राप्तमुत्तरं साधु चिन्त्यताम्॥५३॥

“Granted that people are subjected to
death at the appointed hour; for such is the
rule. (| have no grievance on this score).
But if a suitable answer to my question (as
to why you took it into your mind to make
me a target of your arrow) has been hit
upon by you, pray, let it be carefully thought
of.” (53)

शराभिघाताद् व्यथितो महात्मा।
तूष्णीं बभौ वानरराजसूनु: UG I
Having spoken as aforesaid and looking
intently on Sri Rama, who shone brightly
like the sun, the high-minded Vali (son of a
king of monkeys), who felt agonized due to
his having been pierced with an arrow and
whose mouth had become parched on all
sides (due to the exertion caused by his
speaking with emotion for a long time),
became mute. (54)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये किष्किन्धाकाण्डे
सप्तदश: सर्ग: i १७॥

Thus ends Canto Seventeen in the Kiskindhakanda of the glorious Ramayana of
Valmiki, the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

