388

replied to her beloved son as follows, her
face bathed in tears : (18)
आसां राम सपत्नीनां वस्तुं मध्ये न मे क्षमम्।
नय मामपि काकुत्स्थ at वन्यां मृगीमिव॥१९॥
यदि a wat बुद्धि: peat पितरपेक्षया।
at dat रुदतीं Wat रुदन् वचनमब्रवीत्॥ २०॥

“It is not desirable for me, O Rama, to
live in the midst of these co-wives. ॥ you
have made up your mind to depart in
deference to the wish of your father, pray,
take me as well to the forest, O scion of
Kakutstha, even as one would take a wild
female deer.” Sri Rama, however, spoke to
his mother, who was weeping as aforesaid :

(19-20)
जीवन्त्या fe स्निया sat tad प्रभुरेव च।
भवत्या मम चैवाद्य राजा प्रभवति प्रभु:॥ २१॥

“For a married woman, so long as she
is alive, her husband indeed is her deity as
well as her lord. The king, our master, holds
sway over you as well as over me today.

(21)
न ह्यनाथा at Tat लोकनाथेन धीमता।
भरतश्चापि धर्मात्मा सर्वभूतप्रियंवद:॥ २२॥
भवतीमनुवर्तेत स fe धर्मरत: सदा।
यथा मयि तु निष्क्रान्ते पुत्रशोकेन पार्थिव: i २३॥
श्रमं नावाप्नुयात् किंचिदप्रमत्ता तथा कुरु।
दारुणश्चाप्ययं शोको यथैनं न विनाशयेत्॥ २४॥
Tat वृद्धस्य सततं fed ae समाहिता।
व्रतोपवासनिरता या नारी परमोत्तमा॥ २५॥
भर्तारं नानुवर्तेत सा च पापगतिर्भवेत्।
भर्तु: शुश्रूषया नारी लभते स्वर्गमुत्तमम्॥ २६॥
aft या निर्नमस्कारा fact देवपूजनात्।
शुश्रूषामेव कुर्वीत wd: प्रियहिते रता॥ २७॥
we धर्म: frat नित्यो ae लोके श्रुत: स्मृत: |
अग्निकार्येषु च सदा सुमनोभिश्च देवता:॥ २८॥
पूज्यास्ते मत्कृते देवि ब्राह्मणाश्चैव सत्कृता:।
एवं कालं प्रतीक्षस्व ममागमनकांक्षिणी॥ २९॥
नियता नियताहारा भर्तृशुश्रूषणे रता।
प्राप्स्यसे परमं कामं मयि पर्यागते सति॥ ३०॥

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

afe धर्मभृतां श्रेष्ठो धारयिष्यति जीवितम्।
Wag तु रामेण बाष्पपर्याकुलेक्षणा॥ ३१॥
कौसल्या पुत्रशोकार्तां रामं वचनमब्रवीत्।
गमने सुकृतां बुद्धिं न ते शक्नोमि पुत्रक॥ ३२॥
विनिवर्तयितुं dit नूनं कालो दुरत्यय:।
Tes UA त्वमेकाग्रो भद्रं तेऽस्तु सदा विभो॥ ३३॥

“With the wise king continuing as the
ruler of the world, surely we are not
masterless. And Bharata too is pious-minded,
speaks kindly to all created beings and is
ever devoted to righteousness. He _ will
undoubtedly serve you. Carefully act in such
a way that when | have departed for the
woods the king may not suffer agony in the
least on account of grief caused by separation
from his son, i.e., myself. And, remaining
ever vigilant, constantly do good to the
aged king, so that this poignant grief may
not bring about his extinction. Nay, that
woman who, though extremely noble and
keenly devoted to sacred observances and
fasts, does not serve her husband, is sure
to_attain the destiny of a sinner. Through
service to one’s husband, on the other hand
even _that_woman_who_ does _not_offer
salutations to anyone other than her husband
and is averse to the worship of gods, secures

the highest heaven. Intent_on doing that

which is pleasing and good to her husband,
a_married woman_should, therefore, do

service to him alone: this is the lasting duty
enjoined on a woman in the Vedas as well
as in the Smrti texts. Nay, while offering
oblations to the fire, gods as well as
celebrated Brahmanas of noble vows should
be worshipped with flowers and other articles
for my sake, O godly lady! Leading a
regulated life and partaking of an austere
fare, nay, devoted to the service of your
husband, bide time as aforesaid, longing for
my return from the forest. In this way you
will attain the highest object of your desire
when | have duly returned from the forest,
provided, of course, the Emperor the foremost

