* AYODHYAKANDA +

सा fe राज्यमिदं प्राप्य नृपस्याश्वपते: सुता।
दु:खितानां सपत्नीनां न करिष्यति शोभनम्॥ १३॥
“Obtaining this kingdom, Kaikeyi, the
daughter of King Aswapati, will certainly not
accord good treatment to her afflicted co-
wives. (13)

न भरिष्यति कौसल्यां सुमित्रां च ag: Rear |
Wat राज्यमासाद्य कैकेय्यां पर्यवस्थित:॥ १४॥

“Having attained sovereignty Bharata
too will not maintain the extremely miserable
Kausalya and Sumitra, devoted as he will
naturally be to Kaikeyi, his own mother.

(14)

तामार्यां स्वयमेवेह राजानुग्रहणेन वा।
सौमित्रे भर कौसल्यामुक्तमर्थममुं चर॥१५॥

“By your own effort or by securing the
goodwill of the king, O son of Sumitra,
please look after here the aforesaid Kausalya,
who is worthy of the utmost respect. Pray,
accomplish this aforesaid purpose of mine.

(15)

एवं मयि च a भक्तिर्भविष्यति सुदर्शिता।
धर्मज्ञगुरुपूजायां धर्मश्चाप्यतुलो महान्॥१६॥

“On service being thus rendered to
elders, O knower of what is right, devotion
to me will have been fully demonstrated by
you and incomparably great religious merit
too will accrue to you. (16)

एवं कुरुष्व सौमित्रे मत्कृते रघुनन्दन।
अस्माभिर्विप्रहीणाया मातुर्नो न भवेत् सुखम्॥ १७॥

“For my sake, therefore, O son of
Sumitra, do as aforesaid; for there will be no
happiness for my mother bereft of us, O
scion of Raghu !” (17)

एवमुक्तस्तु रामेण लक्ष्मण: श्लक्ष्णया गिरा।
प्रत्युवाच तदा रामं वाक्यज्ञो वाक्यकोविदम्॥ १८ ॥

Spoken to thus by Sr Rama,
Laksmana, for his part, who knew how to
speak, then replied in sweet words as
follows to his eldest brother, a master of

411

expression himself :

ada तेजसा वीर भरत: पूजयिष्यति।

कौसल्यां च सुमित्रां च प्रयतो नास्ति संशय: ॥ १९॥
“Inspired by your moral lustre itself

the devout Bharata will treat with respect

Kausalya and Sumitra too: there is no doubt
about it, O valiant prince ! (19)

ate दु:स्थो न रक्षेत भरतो राज्यमुत्तमम्।
प्राप्य दुर्मनसा aie गर्वेण च विशेषत:॥ २०॥
we दुर्मतिं pt वधिष्यामि न संशय:।
तत्पक्षानपि तान् सर्वांस्त्रैलोक्यमपि किं तु ATU २१॥
कौसल्या बिभृयादार्या सहस्रं मद्बिधानपि।
यस्या: सहस्रं ग्रामाणां सम्प्राप्तमुपजीविनाम्॥ २२॥
“If led astray in consequence of having
obtained this first-rate kingdom, Bharata does
not protect his mothers through perversity
and particularly from pride, O heroic brother,
| shall make short work not only of that evil-
minded and cruel fellow but all his well-
known adherents too, nay, all the three
worlds if they side with him: there is no
doubt about it. But the celebrated Kausalya,
who is worthy of the highest respect and
even by whose dependants thousands of
villages have been duly obtained as grants,
can support thousands like me. (20—22)

तदात्मभरणे wat मम मातुस्तथैव च।
पर्याप्ता मद्बिधानां च भरणाय मनस्विनी॥ २३॥

“As such the high-minded Kausalya is
capable of maintaining herself as well as
myself and even so my mother, Sumitra,
and those like me. (23)

pea मामनुचरं वैधर्म्य नेह विद्यते।
कृतार्थोऽहं भविष्यामि तव चार्थ: प्रकल्प्यते॥ २४॥
“Therefore, kindly make me_ your
attendant : there will be no unrighteousness
in it. | shall thereby have accomplished my
object and your purpose too will be
adequately served. (24)
धनुरादाय सगुणं खनित्रपिटकाधर:।
अग्रतस्ते गमिष्यामि पन्थानं तव दर्शयन्॥ २५॥

(18)
