# YUDDHAKANDA +

gladden the parched earth with water (in the
shape of rain). (1)

ततस्तस्या fed सख्याश्चिकीर्षन्ती सखी aa: |
उवाच काले कालज्ञा स्मितपूर्वाभिभाषिणी।। २॥

Wishing to do a good turn to her friend,
Sita, Sarama (who was her friend), who
knew the time when a thing should be done
and always smiled before she opened her
lips, then spoke in time as follows: (2)

उत्सहेयमहँ गत्वा त्वद्वाक्यमसितेक्षणे।
निवेद्य कुशलं wa प्रतिच्छन्ना निवर्तितुम्॥३॥
“Going to the presence of Sri Rama
and delivering your message as well as
communicating your welfare to Sri Rama, |
can come back hidden from view, O dark-
eyed lady! (3)

af मे क्रममाणाया निरालम्बे विहायसि।
समर्थो गतिमन्वेतुं पवनो गरुडोऽपि वा॥४॥

“Neither the wind nor even Garuda
(the king of winged creatures and the carrier
of Lord Visnu) will be able to follow my
movement even as | course in the sky
extending without any support.” (4)
एवं ब्रुवाणां at सीता सरमामिदमब्रवीत्
मधुरं श्लक्ष्णया वाचा पूर्वशोकाभिपन्नया॥७५॥

To the aforesaid Sarama, who was
speaking in this strain, Sita sweetly replied
as follows in gentle tones, overcome by
former grief: (5)

समर्था गगनं गन्तुमपि च त्वं रसातलम्
अवगच्छाद्य wie कर्तव्यं A मदन्तरे॥६॥
“You are capable of ascending to the
heavens and even of descending to the
penultimate subterranean region. Know from
me today the duty which has got to be
performed by you with regard to myself. (6)

मत्प्रियं यदि कर्तव्यं यदि बुद्धि: स्थिरा तव।
ज्ञातुमिच्छामि तं गत्वा किं करोतीति रावण:॥ ७॥

“If what is pleasing to me must be
done by you, and if your resolve is firm, |

413

wish to know what Ravana is doing now.
Approaching him, let me know this. (7)

a f मायाबल: HW रावण: शत्रुरावण:।
मां मोहयति दुष्टात्मा पीतमात्रेव वारुणी॥८॥
“Ravana, who makes his enemies
cry by his tyranny, is indeed cruel and is
equipped with strength in the shape of
conjuring tricks. The evil-minded fellow has
confounded me in the same way as
spirituous liquor confounds one the moment
it is imbibed. (8)
तर्जापयति at fet acatvafa चासकृत्।
राक्षसीभि: सुघोराभिर्यो at रक्षति नित्यश:॥९॥
“He causes me to be threatened all the
time and snubbed off and on by most frightful
ogresses, and keeps watch on me everyday.
(9)
Sigurt शङ्किता चास्मि न स्वस्थं च मनो मम।
तद्भयाच्चाहमुद्बिग्ना अशोकवनिकां गता॥१०॥

“| remain perturbed and apprehensive,
and my mind is not at ease. Nay, even
though living in the Asoka grove (far from
his view), | continue to be agitated through
fear of him. (10)

ate नाम कथा तस्य निश्चितं वापि ag भवेत्।

निवेदयेथा: Wd Aq aT A स्यादनुग्रह: i ११॥
“If his talk is going on with his ministers

about releasing me or keeping me confined,

report to me all that is decided. That
would be a great act of kindness to me.”
(11)

साप्येवं gadt सीतां सरमा मृदुभाषिणी।
उवाच वदनं तस्या: स्पृशन्ती बाष्पविक्लवम्॥ १२॥

we ते यद्यभिप्रायस्तस्माद् गच्छामि जानकि।
गृह्य शत्रोरभिप्रायमुपावर्तामि मैथिलि॥१३॥
Wiping Sita’s face covered with tears,
Sarama too, who was gentle of expression,
replied as follows to the former, who was
hitherto speaking as aforesaid: “If such is
your will, | leave in that case, O daughter of
