1032

far from our cave when the pond gets flooded
with rain water, O prince ! (11)

प्रागुदक्प्रवणे देशे गुहा साधु भविष्यति।
पश्चाच्चैवोन्नता सौम्य निवातेयं भविष्यति॥ १२॥

“Located as it is in a place inclined
towards the north-east, the cave will prove
comfortable for us in that it opens to the
south-west and, being elevated in the west
alone, it will be protected from the easterly
winds and showers too, O gentle one!

(12)

Teer च सौमित्रे शिला समतला शिवा।
कृष्णा चैवायता wa भिन्नाञ्जनचयोपमा॥ १३॥

“Again, at the entrance of the cave, O
son of Sumitra, there is a level and smooth
rock, black as a heap of powdered antimony
and extensive too. (13)

भिन्नाञ्जनचयाकारमम्भोधरमिवोदितम् ॥१४॥

“Behold in the north, O dear brother,
the yonder beautiful mountain-peak,
resembling a heap of powdered antimony
and looking like a cloud risen above the
horizon. (14)

दक्षिणस्यामपि दिशि स्थितं श्वेतमिवाम्बरम्।
कैलासशिखरप्रख्यं नानाधातुविराजितम्॥१५॥

“Behold in the southern quarter too
another mountain-peak resembling a peak
of Kailasa and looking like a white cloth,
rich in varied minerals. (15)
गुहाया: we: ua त्रिकूटे जाह्नवीमिव॥ es
चन्दनैस्तिलकै: सालैस्तमालैरतिमुक्कतकै:।
पद्मकै: सरलैश्चैव अशोकैश्चैव शोभिताम्॥१७॥

“Also behold on the other side of the
cave a river resembling the Mandakini at
Trikuta (the place of our last sojourn), utterly
free from mud, flowing in an easterly direction
and fringed with sandalwood, Tilaka, sal,
Tamala, Atimukta, Padmaka and Sarala as
well as by Asoka trees. (16-17)

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

वानीरैस्तिमिदैश्चैव ape: केतकैरपि।
हिन्तालैस्तिनिशैर्नीपैर्वेतसैर३ कृतमालकै:॥ Be
ast: शोभिता भाति नानारूपैस्ततस्तत:।
वसनाभरणोपेता प्रमदेवाभ्यलंकृता।॥ १९॥

“Adorned with Vanira, Timida, Bakula,
Ketaka, Hintala, TiniSa, Nipa and Vetasa as
well as with Krtamala trees of various shapes
growing here and there on its banks, it
looks like a young woman provided with
wearing apparel and ornaments and
decorated all over her body. (18-19)

शतश: पक्षिसङ्घैश्च नानानादविनादिता।
एकैकमनुरक्तैश्च चक्रवाकैरलंकृता tt २० ॥
पुलिनैरतिरम्यैश्च हंससारससेविता।
प्रहसन्त्येव भात्येषा नानारत्नसमन्विता॥ २१॥

“It is made noisy with various notes by
hundreds of flocks of birds and is adorned
with Chakravaka birds (a species of red
geese) fond of one another, and hemmed in
with its most lovely sandy banks. Frequented
by swan and cranes and enriched with
precious stones of various kinds, the river
looks as though it were heartily laughing.

(20-21)
क्वचिन्नीलोत्पलैश्छन्ना भातिरक्तोत्पलै: क्वचित्।
क्वचिदाभाति शुक्लैश्च feet: कुमुदकुड्मलै: i २२॥

“Here it looks carpeted with blue lilies

and there with the red and at a third place

with the buds of white water-lilies useful for
sport. (22)

पारिप्लवशतैर्जुष्टा बर्हिक्रौञ्चविनादिता।
रमणीया नदी सौम्या मुनिसङ्घनिषेविता॥ २३॥

‘Visited by hundreds of ducks and
made noisy by peacocks and cranes and
frequented by multitudes of ascetics, this
placid river appears delightful, O gentle one.

(23)
Wa चन्दनवृक्षाणां पङ्क्ती: सुरुचिरा sal
ककुभानां च Wad मनसैवोदिता: समम्॥ Wil

“Behold also the most charming rows
of sandalwood trees. Rows of Kakubha
