« KISKINDHAKANDA +

1129

त्रिपञ्चाश: सर्ग:
Canto LIII

While the monkeys were feeling dejected on coming out of the cave to see the
trees covered with blossom, which led them to conclude that the latter half
of winter had approached, Prince Angada reminds them of the fierceness
of Sugriva and says that a fasting till death on their part will be
preferable to an ignominious death at the latter’s cruel hands. Another
monkey general, Tara, for his part suggests that they should
take shelter in Swayamprabha’s cave and thus escape the wrath
of Sugriva, who dare not enter the cave. The monkeys fall in
with the latter’s view and make up their mind to re-enter
the cave and take up their abode in it

ततस्ते ददृशुर्घोरे सागरं वरुणालयम्।
अपारमभिगर्जन्तं च्चोरैरूर्मिभिराकुलम्॥ १॥
“Then the monkeys beheld the
shoreless ocean, the abode of Varuna (the
god of waters), terribly roaring and wild with
angry billows. (1)
मयस्य मायाविहितं गिरिदुर्गं विचिन्वताम्।
तेषां मासो व्यतिक्रान्तो यो राज्ञा समय: Het: २॥
While they were busy ransacking the
mountain fastness brought into existence
by recourse to a miraculous craftsmanship
by the demon, Maya, the period of one
month, which had been fixed as the time-
limit for the search of Sita by Sugriva, the
king, slipped away. (2)

विन्ध्यस्य gq fie: we सम्प्रपुष्पितपादपे।
sufasa महात्मानश्चिन्तामापेदिरे तदा॥३॥

Sitting down on a hill adjacent to the
Vindhyan range, seeing the trees which had
fully blossomed, the high-minded monkeys
for their part fell a prey to anxious thought at
that juncture. (3)

aa: पुष्पातिभाराग्रांल्लताशतसमावृतान्।
द्रुमान् वासन्तिकान् gear बभूवुर्भयशङ्किता: ॥ ¥
They now felt alarmed through fear of
Sugriva to perceive the mango and other
vernal trees with their extremities bending

under the overwhelming weight of blossom
and covered with hundreds of climbers.(4)
at वसन्तमनुप्राप्तं प्रतिवेद्य परस्परम्।
नष्टसंदेशकालार्था निपेतुर्धरणीतले॥ ५ ॥
Apprising one another of spring having
approached, they sank to the ground, the
task which had been entrusted to them for
being completed within the appointed time
having been utterly destroyed. (5)

ततस्तान् कपिवृद्धांश्च शिष्टांश्चैव वनौकस:।
वाचा मधुरयाऽऽभाष्य यथावदनुमान्य च॥६॥
a तु सिंहवृषस्कन्ध: पीनायतभुज: aft:
युवराजो महाप्राज्ञ अङ्गदो वाक्यमब्रवीत्॥७॥

Addressing in a sweet tone and duly
honouring the aforesaid elderly monkeys as
well as the other monkeys, that highly
intelligent monkey, Angada, the Prince Regent
of Kiskindha, for his part, who had shoulders
like those of a lion or a bull with stout and
long arms, spoke as follows : (6-7)
शासनात् कपिराजस्य at ad विनिर्गता:।
मास: पूर्णो बिलस्थानां aa: fee न बुध्यत॥ ८॥

“We all set out in obedience to the
command of Sugriva (the lord of monkeys),
O monkeys! Don’t you know that a full

month elapsed even while we were tarrying
in the cave? (8)
