# YUDDHAKANDA #

Having overwhelmed Sri Rama of
unwearied action with a thousand arrows,
he then pierced Matali with a stream of
shafts. (28)

चिच्छेद केतुमुद्दिश्य शरेणैकेन रावण:।
पातयित्वा रथोपस्थे रथात् केतुं च काञ्चनम्॥ २९॥
ऐन्द्रानपि जघानाश्वान् शरजालेन रावण:।
विषेदुर्देवगन्धर्वचारणा ad: सह॥ ३०॥
राममार्तं det दृष्ट्वा सिद्धाश्च परमर्षय:।
व्यथिता वानरेन्द्राश्च बभूवु: सविभीषणा:॥ ३१॥
He tore the standard of Indra’s chariot
with a single arrow aimed at it, and having
felled the golden ensign from the top of the
chariot down to the seat of the chariot,
Ravana struck Indra’s horses as well with a
series of arrows. Seeing Sri Rama afflicted,
the gods, Gandharvas (celestial musicians)
and Caranas (celestial bards) alongwith the
devils as also the Siddhas (a class of
demigods endowed with mystic powers by
virtue of their very birth) and the foremost
Rsis became despondent; while monkey
chiefs alongwith Vibhisana felt troubled.
(29—31)
रामचन्द्रमसं दृष्टवा Wed रावणराहुणा।
प्राजापत्यं च नक्षत्रं रोहिणीं शशिन: प्रियाम्॥ ३२॥
समाक्रम्य बुधस्तस्थौ प्रजानामहितावह:।
सधूमपरिव्रत्तोर्मि प्रज्वलन्निवं सागर:॥३३॥
उत्पपात तदा क्रुद्ध: स्पृशन्निव दिवाकरम्।
शस्त्रवर्ण: सुपरुषो मन्दरश्मिर्दिवाकर:॥३४॥
अदरृश्यत Hangs: संसक्तो wend!
कोसलानां च नक्षत्रं व्यक्तमिन्द्राग्निदैवतम्॥ ३५॥
आहत्याङ्गारकस्तस्थौ विशाखमपि चाम्बरे।
दशास्यो विंशतिभुज: प्रगृहीतशरासन:॥ ३६॥
अदूश्यत: दशग्रीवो मैनाक ga पर्वत:।
निरस्यमानो रामस्तु दशग्रीवेण रक्षसा॥ ३७॥
नाशक्नोदभिसंधातुं सायकान् रणमूर्धनि।
सकृत्वा भ्रुकुटिं क्रुद्ध: किंचित् संरक्तलोचन: ॥ ३८ ॥
जगाम सुमहाक्रोधं निर्दहन्निव राक्षसान्।
तस्य क्रुद्धस्य वदनं दृष्टवा रामस्य धीमत:।
सर्वभूतानि वित्रेसु: प्राकम्पत च मेदिनी॥ ३९॥

737

Seeing the moon in the shape of Sri
Rama eclipsed by the planet Rahu in the
shape of Ravana, the planet Mercury stood
assailing the constellation Rohini—presided
over by the god Prajapati (the lord of creation),
the beloved of the moon, spelling disaster to
all created beings. Burning as it were in
fury, the ocean rose high at that time as
though it was going to touch the sun, its
mist-wreathed waves turning round. Looking
ashy in colour and assuming a stern aspect,
its rays grown faint, the sun appeared with
a headless trunk in its lap and united with a
comet. The planet Mars too evidently stood
assailing in the heavens the constellation
Visakha, presided over by the gods, Indra
and Agni (the god of fire), which is propitious
to the kings of Kosala. A bow held tightly in
his hands, Ravana, the ten-headed monster,
with his ten faces and twenty arms looked
like the Mainaka mountain. Being
overwhelmed by the ten-headed ogre, Sri
Rama for his part could not even set his
arrows to his bow in the forefront of the
battle. Knitting his brows, his eyes turned
slightly crimson, he gave way to a fierce
rage as though he would consume the
ogres. Casting their eyes at the countenance
of the sagacious Sri Rama, who was
provoked to anger, all created beings were
seized with terror and the earth began to
quake. (32—39)
सिंहशार्दूलवाञ्छैल: संचचाल चलद् द्रुम:।
aya चापि क्षुभित: waa: सरितां uta: ॥॥४०॥

Full of lions and tigers, Trikuta mountain
shook, its trees swaying to and fro. The
lord of rivers, the ocean too was agitated.

(40)
wg खरनिर्घोषा गगने परुषा घना:।
औत्पातिकाश्च नर्दन्त: समन्तात् परिचक्रमु:॥४१॥

Nay, looking like donkeys and emitting
a harsh sound, nay, assuming a stern aspect,
