828

“Behold the tongue, burning like a flame,
shooting forth from its mouth when it yawns,
like a flash of lightning darting from a cloud.

(28)
मसारगल्वर्कमुख: शङ्खमुक्तानिभोदर: |

कस्य नामानिरूप्योऽसौ न मनो लोभयेन्मृग: ।। २९॥

“With its mouth resembling a cup made
of sapphire and its belly shining as a conch-
shell or pearls, whose mind will that deer,
which baffles description, not lure? (29)

कस्य रूपमिदं Gea जाम्बूनदमयप्रभम्।
नानारत्नमयं feet न मनो विस्मयं व्रजेत्॥ ३०॥

“Whose mind will not be struck with
wonder to behold this celestial beauty
shedding a golden lustre and freckled with
numerous jewel-like spots? (30)

मांसहेतोरपि मृगान् विहारार्थं च धन्विन:।
घ्नन्ति लक्ष्मण राजानो मृगयायां महावने॥ ३१॥
“Even for the sake of skin and for

diversion kings wielding bows kill the deer
in sport, O Laksmana, in large forests. (31)

धनानि व्यवसायेन faded महावने।
धातवो विविधाश्चापि मणिरत्नसुवर्णिन:॥ ३२॥

“Through sporting enterprise treasures
too are laid hands on in large forests in the
form of minerals of various kinds comprising
gems, precious stones and ores of gold.

(32)
मनसा चिन्तितं Gel यथा शुक्रस्य लक्ष्मण॥ ३३॥

“Swelling their coffers, such wealth is
all valuable like all the objects of enjoyment
brought into being by the very thought of
one who has attained the realm of Brahma,
the creator, O Laksmana ! (33)

अर्थी येनार्थकृत्येन संव्रजत्यविचारयन्।
तमर्थमर्थशास्त्रज्ञा: प्राहुर्ध्य: सुलक्ष्मण॥ ३४॥

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

“People well-versed in economics and
adept in producing wealth, O brother,
endowed with auspicious bodily marks,
speak of that alone as wealth (lit., an object
of pursuit) which a seeker of wealth fondly
pursues without premeditation, through
endeavour calculated to achieve that object.

(34)

एतस्य मृगरत्नस्य परार्ध्य काञ्चनत्वचि।
उपवेक्ष्यति वैदेही War सह सुमध्यमा॥ ३५॥

“Sita, a princess of the Videha territory,
who is endowed with a slender waist, will sit
with me on the most excellent golden skin
of this jewel among the deer. (35)

न कादली न प्रियकी न प्रवेणी न चाविको।
भवेदेतस्य est स्पर्शेऽनेनेति A मति:॥ ३६॥

“Neither the skin of a Kadali (a species
of deer distinguished by soft, fine, long and
variegated hair, blue at the end) nor that of
a Priyaki* (another species of antelope
distinguished by a soft, long, sleek and
thick coat) nor that of Pravena (a particular
species of goats) nor that of a sheep can
compare with it in softness of touch: such
is my conclusion. (36)

एष चैव मृग: श्रीमान् यश्च दिव्यो नभश्चर:।
उभावेतौ मृगौ दिव्यौ तारामृगमहीमृगौ॥ ३७॥

“This splendid deer as well as its
heavenly counterpart, bearing the name of
Mrga, which courses in the heavens—both
these are divine deer, the one in the form of
a star Known by the name of Mrga and the
other moving on earth. (37)

ale वायं तथा यन्मां भवेद् वदसि लक्ष्मण।
मायैषा राक्षसस्येति कर्तव्योऽस्य वधो मया॥ ३८॥

“If, O Laksmana, this deer is such as
you tell me, it must be put an end to because
it is a phantom conjured up by an ogre. (38)

* We read in the lexicon known as Vaijayanti :

कदली तु बिले शेते मृदुसूक्ष्मोच्चकर्बुरै: | नीलाग्रैर्लोमभिर्युक्ता सा विंशत्यङ्गुलायता।

प्रियकी लोमभिर्युक्ता मृदूच्चमसृणैर्घनै:।
