* AYODHYAKANDA +

Uniting in embrace with Vasistha and
greeted by Bharata, the highly glorious sage
inferred him to be a son of DaSaratha. (5)

ताभ्यामर्घ्य च पाद्यं च दत्त्वा पश्चात् फलानि च।

आनुपूर्व्यच्च धर्मज्ञ: पप्रच्छ कुशलं कुले॥६॥
अयोध्यायां बले कोशे मित्रेष्वपि च मन्तिषु।
जानन् दशरथं वृत्तं न राजानमुदाहरत्॥७॥
Offering to the two guests in order of
seniority (one after another) water to wash
their hands and feet with and also fruits
afterwards, Bharadwaja, who knows what is
right, made inquiries concerning the welfare
of the family of each and also whether all
was well with the city of Ayodhya, the army,
the exchequer, the king’s allies and ministers.
Knowing, as he did, DaSaratha to be dead, he
made no inquiries concerning the king. (6-7)

वसिष्ठो wast पप्रच्छतुरनामयम्।
शरीरेऽग्निषु शिष्येषु gay मृगपक्षिषु॥८॥

Vasistha and Bharata in return inquired
whether all was well with his body, sacred
fires, pupils, trees, deer and birds. (8)
तथेति तु प्रतिज्ञाय भरद्वाजो महायशा:।
Wie प्रत्युवाचेदं राघवस्नेहबन्धनात्॥९॥

Having admitted that it was so, the
highly illustrious Bharadwaja for his part
replied to Bharata as follows, impelled as he

was by the ties of affection that he bore to
Sri Rama, a scion of Raghu: (9)
किमिहागमने कार्यं तव राज्यं प्रशासत:।
`एतदाचक्ष्व Ue HA हि मे शुध्यते मन:॥१०॥
“What motive could you have in coming
all the way to this place, busy as you must
have been ruling the kingdom of Ayodhya?
Please tell me all this; for my mind is not

getting cleared of doubts (about your
intentions towards Sri Rama). (10)

waa यममित्रघ्नं कौसल्याऽऽनन्दवर्धनम्।
WaT सह सभार्यो Bat प्रव्राजितो वनम्॥११॥
नियुक्त: स्त्रीनिमित्तेन पित्रा योऽसौ महायशा:।
वनवासी भवेतीह समा: किल चतुर्दश॥ १२॥

611

कच्चिन्न तस्यापापस्य पापं कर्तुमिहेच्छसि।
अकण्टकं भोक्तुंमना राज्यं तस्यानुजस्य च॥१३॥
“Seeking to enjoy the kingdom rightfully
belonging to Sri Rama without any thorn in
your side, | hope, you do not intend to do
any bodily harm in this forest to Laksmana,
his younger brother, and the highly illustrious
prince, Sri Rama Himself, the destroyer of
enemies and the promoter of joy in this
world, whom Kausalya gave birth to, and
who, having been urged, they say, by his
father through the instrumentality of the latter's
wife, Kaikeyi, in the following words : Dwell
in the forest for fourteen years, was exiled
to the forest with his younger brother,
Laksmana, and wife, Sita, to the forest for a
long term.” (11—13)

Wagan भरद्वाजं भरत: प्रत्युवाच ह।
पर्यश्रुनयनो दु:खाद् वाचा संसज्जमानया॥ १४॥
Spoken to as aforesaid, Bharata, they
say, replied as follows in a faltering tone
with tears flowing from his eyes through
agony : (14)

हतोऽस्मि यदि मामेवं भगवानपि wad
मत्तो न दोषमाशङ्के मैवं मामनुशाधि feu ey ii

“lam ruined if Your Holiness too who
is omniscient, reckons me as such. | cannot
even think of any harm having proceeded
from me to Sri Rama. Therefore, please do
not say much harsh words to me. (15)

न चैतदिष्टं wma A यदवोचन्मदन्तरे।
नाहमेतेन तुष्टश्च न तद्वचनमाददे॥१६॥

“Neither is that which my mother said
during my absence (at my _ maternal
grandfather’s) agreeable to me nor am |
pleased with that which she has done, nor
again have | even now accepted her word,
asking me to enjoy the sovereignty of
Ayodhya. (16)

a तु तं नरव्याघ्रमुपयात: Wales: |
प्रतिनेतुमयोध्यायां पादौ चास्याभिवन्दितुम्॥ १७॥

“| have, on the other hand, come to
