968

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

एकादश: सर्ग:
Canto XI

With a view to ascertaining Sri Rama’s actual strength, Sugriva expatiates on
the prowess of Vali and tells him how Mayavi’s brother, the demon Dundubhi
too challenged him to a duel and how, having made short work of him,
Vali listlessly hurled his dead body crossing over to the precincts of the
hermitage of Sage Matanga, and how the site of the hermitage having
been desecrated with blood, spattered here and there from it’s
mouth, Sage Matanga pronounced a curse forbidding the individual
who had perpetrated the sacrilege to enter the hermitage on
pain of death, thus enabling Sugriva to live unmolested in
that retreat. In order to convince Sugriva of his superior
might Sri Rama kicks the skeleton of Dundubhi away
with his toe. Belittling this feat on the ground of the
skeleton havng shrunk as a result of exposure,

Sugriva further asks Sri Rama to pierce with his
arrow one of the seven sal trees standing
there and thus demonstrate his strength

TR वचनं श्रुत्वा हर्षपौरुषवर्धनम्।
Gia: पूजयांचक्रे wad प्रशशंस च॥१॥
Hearing the assurance of Sri Rama,
that enhanced his joy and courage, Sugriva
welcomed it and applauded him in the
following words : (1)

असंशयं प्रज्वलितैस्तीक्ष्णैर्मर्मातिगै:३ शरै:।
त्वं दहे: कुपितो लोकान् युगान्त इव भास्कर:॥ २॥

“Like the sun at the end of creation,
you. can doubtless consume, when
provoked, all the worlds with your fiery and
pointed arrows that are capable of piercing
the vital parts. (2)

वालिन: Gest aig यच्च diet efter ari

Ta: श्रुत्वा विधत्स्व यदनन्तरम्॥ ३॥
“Hearing from my lips with a

concentrated mind of the prowess as well

as of the valour and fortitude that exist in
Vali, do what should be done next. (3)

समुद्रात् पश्चिमात् पूर्वं दक्षिणादपि चोत्तरम्।
क्रामत्यनुदिते सूर्ये वाली व्यपगतक्लम:॥४॥

“Getting up at the close of night Vali
strides from the western to the eastern and
(moving to the south) from the southern
to the northern ocean too, fatigue having
altogether departed from him. (4)

अग्राण्यारुह्य शैलानां शिखराणि महान्त्यपि।
ऊर्ध्वमुत्पात्य तरसा प्रतिगृह्णाति वीर्यवान्॥५॥
“Climbing up the tops of mountains,

and tossing up even gigantic peaks with
force, the mighty Vali catches them up.(5)

aed: सारवन्तश्च ary fafae द्रुमा:।
वालिना तरसा भग्ना बलं प्रथयताऽऽत्मन:॥ ६॥
“Nay, numerous solid trees of every
description in the forests were forcibly
snapped by Vali while demonstrating his
might. (6)
महिषो दुन्दुभिर्नाम कैलासशिखरप्रभ:।
बलं weer धारयामास वीर्यवान्॥७॥
“A mighty demon appearing in the form
of a buffalo, Dundubhi by name, who shone

like the peak of Kailasa, bore the strength of
a thousand elephants. (7)
