262

“Exhorted in these words by Vibhisana,
Ravana commanded those ogres present
by his side as follows : ‘Let the tail alone of
the monkey be burnt now.’ (151)
ततस्तस्य वच: Brat मम पुच्छं समन्तत:।
वेष्टितं शणवल्कैश्च Us: कार्पासकैस्तथा॥ १५२॥

“On hearing his command, my tail was
forthwith wrapped all over in the bark of
hemp as well as in rags of silk and cotton.

(152)
Tete: सिद्धसंनाहास्ततस्ते चण्डविक्रमा: |
तदादीप्यन्त मे पुच्छं हनन्त: काष्ठमुष्टिभि: ।। १५३ ॥

“Having wrapped my tail as above,
those ogres of terrible prowess then set fire
to my aforementioned tail, striking me with
their wooden staffs and fists. (153)

बद्धस्य बहुभि: पाशैर्यन्रितस्य च were: |
न मे पीडाभवत् काचिद् दिदृक्षोर्नगरीं fear १५४॥

“No pain was experienced by me even
though | was bound with many cords and
wrapped in rags, since | was eager to survey
Lanka by the day. (154)

ततस्ते राक्षसा: शूरा बद्धं मामग्निसंवृतम्।
अघोषयन् राजमार्गे नगरद्वारमागता:॥१७५५॥
“Arrived at the city gate, those gallant
ogres made me publicly known in the principal
streets, bound by cords and my tail
enveloped in flames. (155)
विमोचयित्वा तं बन्धं प्रकृतिस्थ: स्थित: TA: UW १५६ ।।
“Having contracted my gigantic form once
more and thereby unfastened my bonds, |
stood in my native form again. (156)
ततस्तन्नगरद्वारं वेगेन प्लुतवानहम्॥ १५७॥
“Seizing an iron bar | made short work
of those ogres. Then with agility | leapt up
that city gate. (157)
पुच्छेन च प्रदीप्तेन at पुरीं area
दहाम्यहमसम्भ्रान्तो युगान्ताग्निरिव प्रजा:॥ १५८ I

“Nay, with my tail inflamed | set fire to

« VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

that city with its attics and gates without
getting confused, even as the fire of universal
destruction would burn all created beings.
(158)
विनष्टा जानकी व्यक्तं न ह्यदग्ध: प्रदृश्यते।
लङ्काया: कश्चिदुद्देश: सर्वा भस्मीकृता TU १५९॥
“Evidently Sita, daughter of Janaka,
has also perished, since no part of Lanka is

seen unburnt—the whole city stands reduced
to ashes. (159)

दहता च मया लङ्कां दग्धा सीता न संशय:।

रामस्य च महत्कार्यं मयेदं विफलीकृतम्॥ १६०॥
““Even while | was setting fire to Lanka,

Sita too has been burnt; there is no doubt

about it. Nay, this great purpose of Sri
Rama has thereby been defeated by me.’

(160)
इति शोकसमाविष्टश्चिन्तामहमुपागत:।
ततोऽहं वाचमश्रौषं चारणानां शुभाक्षराम्॥ १६१॥
जानकी न च दग्धेति विस्मयोदन्तभाषिणाम्।

ततो मे बुद्धिरुत्पन्ना श्रुत्वा तामद्भुतां गिरम्॥ १६२॥

“Thoroughly possessed by grief, | began
to reflect as above. In the meantime | heard
the propitious utterance of Caranas (celestial
bards), who were narrating a tale of wonder,
saying that Janaka’s daughter had not been
burnt. When | heard that wondrous speech,
the following thought presently occurred to
me: (161-162)
अदग्धा जानकीत्येव निमित्तैश्चोपलक्षितम्।
दीप्यमाने तु लाङ्गूले न मां दहति पावक: ॥ १६३ ॥

“`आंव्, daughter of Janaka, has surely
escaped being burnt. Nay, this is indicated
by the following good omens too. In the first

place even though my tail is burning, the fire
does not burn me. (163)

wa च प्रहृष्टं A वाता: सुरभिगन्धिन:।
तैर्निमित्तैश्च दृष्टार्थै: कारणैश्च महागुणै:।॥ १६४॥
ऋषिवाक्यैश्च दृष्टार्थैरभवं हृष्टमानस:।
पुनर्दृष्टा च वैदेही विसृष्टश्च तया Tau १६५॥

“‘My heart too feels extremely rejoiced
