522

ought not to have told me unpalatable things,
greatly afflicted as | am.” (9)

तद्वाक्यं करुणं Ua: श्रुत्वा दीनस्य भाषितम्।
कौसल्या AIA बाष्पं प्रणालीव नवोदकम्॥ १०॥
Hearing that piteous appeal uttered by
the wretched king, Kausalya shed tears
even as a drain allows rain water to flow
through it. (10)

सा Oe बद्ध्वा रुदती राज्ञ: पद्ममिवाञ्जलिम्।
सम्भ्रमादब्रवीत् TET त्वरमाणाक्षरं वच:॥११॥
Interlocking on her own head the king’s
palms joined in the form of a lotus, Kausalya,
who felt dismayed with the thought of having
wronged her husband, spoke weeping in
hurried tones through confusion as follows :
(11)

प्रसीद शिरसा याचे भूमौ निपतितास्मि ते।
याचितास्मि हता देव क्षन्तव्याहं नहि त्वया॥ १२॥

“Be gracious to me: | entreat you with
bowed head and lie prostrate at your feet.
Since | have been entreated by you (my
superior,which is a matter for shame to
me), | am ruined. In any case, | do not
deserve to be pardoned by you and court
punishment at your hands for the wrong
done by me to you. (12)

नैषा fe सा स्त्री भवति शलाघनीयेन धीमता।
उभयोर्लोकयोर्लोके पत्या या सम्प्रसाद्यते॥१३॥

“Surely she is not a woman of noble
descent, who is earnestly propitiated by her
wise husband, who _ is _ praiseworthy
(adorable) for her in both the worlds. (13)

जानामि धर्मं धर्मज्ञ cat जाने सत्यवादिनम्।

पुत्रशोकार्तया तत्तु मया किमपि भाषितम्॥ १४॥
“| Know my duty towards you, O knower

of what is right, and also know you to be

veracious. Something unseemly was, how-
ever, uttered by me, stricken as | was with

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

grief caused by separation from my son. (14)
शोको नाशयते धैर्यं शोको नाशयते श्रुतम्।
शोको नाशयते Ga नास्ति शोकसमो रिपु:॥ १५॥

“Grief eradicates patience, grief effaces
learning. Grief destroys all, there is no enemy
like grief. (15)
शक्यमापतित: ae wert रिपुहस्तत:।
सोढुमापतित: शोक: सुसूक्ष्मोऽपि न शक्यते॥ १६॥

“A blow that has descended from the
hands of an enemy can be sustained. Grief,
however, that has appeared all of a sudden
cannot be endured even though it is very
minute. (16)

वनवासाय रामस्य पञ्चरात्रोऽत्र गण्यते।

a: शोकहतहर्षाया: पञ्चवर्षोपमो मम॥१७॥
“The period of five nights that has

elapsed since Rama left for sojourning in

the forest is reckoned as equal in length to

five years at this moment by me, whose joy

has been marred by grief. (17)

तं fe चिन्तयमानाया: शोकोऽयं हृदि वर्धते।
नदीनामिव a समुद्रसलिलं महत्॥१८॥

“Even as | think of Rama, this grief
born of separation from him, abiding in my
breast grows in intensity, in the same way
as the water of an ocean swells with the
rapid inflow of rivers.” (18)

एवं fe कथयन्त्यास्तु कौसल्याया: शुभं वच: |
मन्दरश्मिरभूत् सूर्यो रजनी चाभ्यवर्तत॥१९॥
While Kausalya was _ speaking

conciliatory words as aforesaid, the sun’s rays
became faint and the night prevailed. (19)

अथ प्रह्लादितो वाक्यैर्देव्या कौसल्यया Aa: |
शोकेन च समाक्रान्तो निद्राया वशमेयिवान्॥ २०॥
Cheered by Queen Kausalya in so many

words and overpowered by grief, the king
forthwith fell into the grip of slumber. (20)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्येऽयोध्याकाण्डे द्विषष्टितम: we ॥ ६२ I

Thus ends Canto Sixty-two in the Ayodhyakanda of the glorious Ramayana of Valmiki,
the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

