* SUNDARAKANDA +

been ordained in the near future by the
wicked fellow in the presence of these sinful
ogresses, who have no idea of what should
not be perpetrated. (33)

अधर्मात् तु महोत्पातो भविष्यति fe साम्प्रतम्।
aa ed विजानन्ति राक्षसा: पिशिताशना:॥ ३४॥
“A great calamity indeed will presently
follow from the injustice which is being done
to me. These flesh-eating ogres, however,
attach no value to virtue. (34)
qa मां प्रातराशार्थं राक्षस: कल्पयिष्यति।
साहं कथं करिष्यामि तं विना प्रियदर्शनम्॥ ३५॥
“The ogre will undoubtedly cut me into
slices for his morning repast. As such what
shall | do in the absence of Sri Rama of
pleasing aspect? (35)
TH रक्तान्तनयनमपश्यन्ती सुदु:खिता।
fag वैवस्वतं ead पश्येयं पतिना विना॥ ३६॥
“Unable to see Sri Rama, the corners
of whose eyes are red, and therefore sore
distressed, | shall soon see God Yama (the
god of death, son of the sun-god) in the
absence of my husband. (36)

नाजानाज्जीवतीं Wa: स At भरतपूर्वज:।
जानन्तौ तु न कुर्यातां Areat fe परिमार्गणम्॥ ३७॥

“Sri Rama, that elder brother of Bharata,
does not know me to be living, nor does
Laksmana. Had they known it, it cannot be
imagined that they would not prosecute their
search all over the globe. (37)

wa ata शोकेन स वीरो लक्ष्मणाग्रज:।
देवलोकमितो यातस्त्यक्त्वा देहं महीतले॥ ३८ Il
“Leaving his body on the earth’s surface
precisely through grief caused by separation
from me, that gallant elder brother of
Laksmana has surely departed to the
heavenly world from this globe. (38)
धन्या tat: सगन्धर्वा: सिद्धाश्च परमर्षय:।
मम पश्यन्ति ये A रामं राजीवलोचनम्॥ ३९॥
“Happy in heaven are the gods as well
as the Gandharvas, the Siddhas and the

133

eminent Rsis, who are able to look on my
husband, the heroic Sri Rama of lotus-like
eyes. (39)
staat नहि तस्यार्थो धर्मकामस्य धीमत:।

Ta रामस्य राजर्षेर्भार्यया परमात्मन:॥४०॥

“Or, that royal sage, the sagacious Sri
Rama, who seeks religious merit alone and
has become one with the Supreme Spirit,
has no longer any use for me, his wife. (40)

दृश्यमाने भवेत् प्रीति: सौहृदं नास्त्यदृश्यत:।
नाशयन्ति कृतघ्नास्तु न WaT नाशयिष्यति॥४१॥

“Love sticks to one remaining before
one’s eyes while it no longer exists for one
who is out of sight. But the ungrateful alone
spurn love; Sri Rama would never do so.

(41)

fe वा मय्यगुणा: केचित् किं वा भाग्यक्षयो fe मे।
या fe सीता वरार्हेण हीना रामेण TPT we

“Or, are there any shortcomings in me
or perhaps it is loss of fortune in my case
due to which, I, Sita, a young lady, deserving
his protection, stand separated from Sri Rama,
who is worthy of excellent possessions.

(42)
sat A जीवितान्मर्तुं विहीनाया महात्मना।
रामादक्लिष्टचारित्राच्छूराच्छत्रुनिबर्हणात् ॥४३॥

“Death is preferable to life for me, who
stand disunited from the high-souled and
heroic Sri Rama, who is unwearied in
maintaining his character and who is capable
of exterminating his foes. (43)

अथवा न्यस्तशस्त्रौ at at मूलफलाशनौ।
भ्रातरौ fe नरश्रेष्ठौ चरन्तौ वनगोचरौ॥४४॥

“Or, those two brothers, Sri Rama and
Laksmana, the foremost of men, roaming,
as they do, in the forest as dwellers of the
forest and living on roots and fruits alone
have actually given up their arms and taken
a vow of non-violence. (44)

अथवा राक्षसेन्द्रेण रावणेन दुरात्मना।
BIT घातितौ शूरौ भ्रातरौ रामलक्ष्मणौ॥४५॥
