88

किं वा वक्ष्यति सुग्रीवो हरयो वापि संगता:।
किष्किन्धामनुसम्प्राप्तं तौ वा दशरथात्मजौ॥ २२॥

‘What, | wonder, will Sugriva or the
assembled monkeys or the two sons of
DaSaratha tell me when । reach Kiskindha?

(22)

गत्वा ¢ यदि काकुत्स्थं वक्ष्यामि परुषं TA: |
न दृष्टेति मया सीता ततस्त्यक्ष्यति जीवितम्॥ २३॥

‘If, having gone there, | for my part
communicate to Sri Rama, a scion of
Kakutstha, the jarring news that Sita has
not been found by me, he will forthwith give
up his life. (23)
Ted दारुणं तीक्ष्णं क्रूरमिन्दियतापनम्।
सीतानिमित्तं दुर्वाक्यं श्रुत्वा स न भविष्यति॥ २४॥

‘Hearing the harsh, severe, piercing,
cruel, soul-agonizing and unpleasant tidings
about Sita, he will no longer survive. (24)

तं तु कृच्छ्रगतं geal पञ्चत्वगतमानसम्।
भृशानुरक्तमेधावी न भविष्यति लक्ष्मण:॥ २५॥
‘Finding him reduced to straits and
resolved upon dying, the extremely devoted
and sagacious Laksmana too will be no
more. (25)

विनष्टौ भ्रातरौ strat भरतोऽपि मरिष्यति।
Wd च मृतं दृष्ट्वा शत्रुघ्नो न भविष्यति॥ २६॥

‘Hearing of the two brothers having
perished, Bharata too will die and, hearing
of Bharata being dead, Satrughna too will
not live. (26)

पुत्रान् मृतान् समीक्ष्याथ न भविष्यन्ति ATA: |

कौसल्या च सुमित्रा च कैकेयी च न संशय: ॥ २७॥
‘Reckoning their sons to be dead,

Kausalya and Sumitra, and Kaikeyi too, will

no doubt cease to be. (27)

pda: सत्यसंधश्च ta: प्लवगाधिप:।

रामं तथागतं दृष्ट्वा ततस्त्यक्ष्यति जीवितम्॥ २८ I
‘Finding Sri Rama reduced to such a

plight, Sugriva, the suzerain lord of monkeys,
who is grateful and true to his pledge, will

« VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

forthwith yield up his life.

gaat व्यथिता दीना निरानन्दा तपस्विनी।
पीडिता भर्तृशोकेन रुमा त्यक्ष्यति जीवितम्॥ २९॥

‘Disconsolate and distressed, miserable
and cheerless, nay, stricken with grief over
the death of her husband, poor Ruma too
will surrender her life. (29)

वालिजेन तु दु:खेन पीडिता शोककर्शिता।
पञ्चत्वमागता राज्ञी तारापि न भविष्यति॥ son

‘Stricken with agony caused by the
death of Vali, nay, emaciated through grief
and resolved upon dying, Queen Tara, Vali’s
widow, either, would no longer survive. (30)

मातापित्रोर्विनाशेन सुग्रीवव्यसनेन च।
कुमारोऽप्यंगदस्तस्माद् विजहिष्यति जीवितम्॥ ३१ ॥

‘Consequent on the death of his parents
and the calamity that befalls Sugriva, Prince
Angada too will thereupon surrender his life.

(31)

भर्तृजेन तु दु:खेन अभिभूता वनौकस:।
शिरांस्यभिहनिष्यन्ति तलैर्मुष्टिभिरेव ana

‘Overwhelmed by agony caused by
the loss of their master, the monkeys (lit.,
denizens of the forest) for their part will
smite their own heads with their palms and
fists as well. (32)

सान्त्वेनानुप्रदानेन मानेन च यशस्विना।
लालिता: कपिनाथेन प्राणांस्त्यक्ष्यन्ति वानरा: ।। ३३ ॥

‘Having been cherished by the illustrious
lord of monkeys with friendly inquiries, gifts
and honour, the monkeys too will give up
the ghost. (33)

न वनेषु न शैलेषु न निरोधेषु वा पुन:।
क्रीडामनुभविष्यन्ति समेत्य कपिकुञ्जरा:॥ ३४॥
‘Coming together the foremost among
the monkeys will no longer indulge in sports
in woodlands, on mountains and in covered
places such as Caves. (34)

wae: सामात्या भर्तृव्यसनपीडिता:।
Versa: पतिष्यन्ति समेषु विषमेषु च॥ ३५॥

(28)
