222

miserable like a bird whose wings have
been clipped. Nay, with all his strength and
spirit shattered, he reached a state of
despondency. (10)

स पुत्रमेकं राज्याय पालयेति fat च।
पथिवीं क्षत्रधर्मेण वनमेवाभ्यपद्यत॥११॥

Nay, enjoining his only surviving son in
the words “Rule the earth according to the
moral code prescribed for a Ksatriya in
order to carry on the administration,” he
retired to the woods alone. (11)

a omen हिमवत्पाश्वे किंनरोरगसेवितम्।
महादेवप्रसादार्थं तपस्तेषे महातपा:॥१२॥

Repairing to a slope of the Himalayas,
resorted to by Kinnaras and Nagas,
ViSwamitra, who had now turned a great
ascetic, practised austerities for the pleasure
of Lord Siva, the Supreme Deity. (12)

केनचित् AM कालेन देवेशो वृषभध्वज:।
दर्शयामास वरदो विश्वामित्रं महामुनिम्॥१३॥

Some time later Lord Siva, whose ensign
bears the emblem of a bull, the paramount
Ruler of gods and the Bestower of boons,
actually revealed Himself before the great
sage ViSwamitra and said : (13)
किमर्थं तप्यसे राजन् ale यत् ते विवक्षितम्।
वरदोऽस्मि वरो यस्ते कांक्षित: सोऽभिधीयताम्॥ १४॥

“Wherefore do you practise austerities,
O king? Speak out what is there in your
mind. | am the Bestower of boons. The

boon which is sought by you may be made
known to Me.” (14)

एवमुक्तस्तु cad विश्वामित्रो महातपा:।
प्रणिपत्य महादेवं विश्वामित्रोऽब्रवीदिदम्॥ १५॥
When the great ascetic, ViSwamitra,
was told thus by the Lord, the former replied
to him as follows, falling prostrate before
Him : (15)
यदि तुष्टो महादेव धनुर्वेदो ममानघ।
साङ्गोपाङ्गोपनिषद: सरहस्य: प्रदीयताम्॥१६॥

“If You are pleased with me, O Supreme

« VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

Deity, the science of archery with its
inmost secrets, including the branches of
knowledge directly or distantly auxiliary to it
as also the sacred texts forming part of it
may kindly be revealed to me, O sinless
One! (16)

यानि देवेषु चास्त्राणि दानवेषु महर्षिषु।
गन्धर्वयक्षरक्ष:सु प्रतिभान्तुं ममानघ॥१७॥

“Let all the mystic missiles that are
known to gods, demons and great seers as
well as to Gandharvas, Yaksas and ogres
flash before my mind’s eye, O sinless One !

(17)
तव Waele Wad cada ममेप्सितम्।
एवमस्त्विति देवेशो वाक्यमुक्त्वा गतस्तदा॥ १८॥

“‘Let the consummation sought by me
be achieved by Your grace, O God of
gods!’ Uttering the words “Let it be so,”
Lord Siva, the Supreme Ruler of gods,
forthwith departed. (18)

प्राप्य चास्त्राणि देवेशाद् विश्वामित्रो महाबल: |

दर्पेण महता युक्तो दर्पपूर्णोऽभवत् तदा॥१९॥
विवर्धमानो वीर्येण समुद्र ga पर्वणि।

at मेने dar wa वसिष्ठमृषिसत्तमम्॥२०॥

“Receiving the mystic missiles and
weapons from Lord Siva, the paramount
Ruler of gods, the very mighty ViSwamitra,
who was already full of great pride, was
now puffed up with arrogance; and swelling
with power as the ocean on the full moon,
he took Vasistha, the foremost of seers, to
be dead at that moment, O Rama. (19-20)

ततो गत्वाऽऽश्रमपदं मुमोचास्त्राणि पार्थिव:।
यैस्तत् तपोवनं नाम निर्दग्धं चास्त्रतेजसा॥ २१॥

“Proceeding to the site of the hermitage,
the king then discharged mystic missiles
and weapons, by which the said grove in
which austerities were being practised began
to be consumed through the fire of the
missiles. (21)

उदीर्यमाणमस्त्रं तद् विश्वामित्रस्य धीमत:।
gear विप्रद्रुता भीता मुनय: शतशो दिश:॥ २२॥
