874

सुताभिलाषो मत्तस्ते मत्तमातङ्गगामिनि।
दारुणायां तु वेलायां यस्मात् त्वं ATU TAT Ut २२॥
श्रृणु तस्मात् सुतान् भद्रे यादृशाञ्जनयिष्यसि।
दारुणान् दारुणाकारान् दारुणाभिजनप्रियान्॥ २३ ॥
प्रसविष्यसि सुश्रोणि राक्षसान् क्रूरकर्मण:।
सा तु deat श्रुत्वा प्रणिपत्याब्रवीद् वच:॥ २४॥
भगवन्नीदृशान् पुत्रांस्त्वत्तोऽहं ब्रह्मवादिन:।
नेच्छामि सुदुराचारान् Ware कर्तुमर्हसि॥ २५॥
‘O lady, whose gait is like that of an
elephant in rut, you are eager to have sons
by me. But since you have approached me
at an inauspicious time, know, therefore, the
kind of sons you will give birth to; they will be
cruel-minded, fierce-looking and fond of people
equally cruel. O lady of shapely limbs, you
will bring forth Raksasas given to cruel deeds.’
Hearing these words of ViSrava, she made
obeisance and spoke as follows: ‘O revered
sir, from you, who are a Brahmavadi (one
who discourses on Brahma), | do not desire
such sons, given to heinous deeds; be
gracious to me.’ (22—25)

कन्यया त्वेवमुक्तस्तु विश्रवा मुनिपुङ्खव:।
उवाच कैकसीं भूय: पूर्णेन्दुरिव रोहिणीम्॥ २६॥

Implored thus by the maiden, Visrava,
the best of sages, who resembled the full
moon, for his part spoke again to Kaikasi,
who looked like Rohini, (a lunar asterism): (26)
पश्चिमो यस्तव सुतो भविष्यति शुभानने।
मम वंशानुरूप: स धर्मात्मा च न संशय:॥ २७॥

‘O lady with a lovely face, he who will
be your last son, will be pious-minded and
fully in accord with my family: about this
there is no doubt.’ (27)

एवमुक्ता तु सा कन्या राम कालेन केनचित्।
जनयामास बीभत्सं रक्षोरूपं सुदारुणम्॥ २८॥
ताम्रोष्ठं विंशतिभुजं महास्यं दीप्तमूर्धजम्॥२९॥
“Spoken to in these words, O Rama,
that girl in course of time brought forth a
hideous child having the form of a Raksasa,
very cruel, with ten heads, huge teeth,

« VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

resembling a heap of antimony, having
coppery lips, with twenty hands, vast mouths,
and fiery hair. (28-29)

तस्मिञ्जाते ततस्तस्मिन्सज्वालकवला: शिवा: ।
क्रव्यादाश्चापसव्यानि मण्डलानि प्रचक्रमु:॥ ३०॥
“At the time of his birth vixens emitting
flames through their mouths, and other
carnivorous animals circled from left to right.
(30)

aad रुधिरं cat मेघाश्च खरनि:स्वना:।
प्रबभौ न च सूर्यो वै महोल्काश्चापतन् भुवि॥ ३१॥
“The rain-god showered blood; clouds
thundered fiercely; the sun did not shine
brightly; and huge meteors fell on the ground.
(31)

चकम्पे जगती चैव ववुर्वाता: सुदारुणा:।
अक्षोभ्य: क्षुभितश्चैव समुद्र: सरितां ofa: 132
“Nay, the earth rocked; and fierce winds
blew; the sea, the lord of rivers, which is
incapable of being thrown into commotion,
was agitated. (32)

अथ नामाकरोत् तस्य पितामहसम: पिता।
दशग्रीव: प्रसूतोऽयं दशग्रीवो भविष्यति॥ ३३॥
“His father, equal to the creator, named
him Dasagriva, since he was born with ten
heads. (33)
तस्य त्वनन्तरं जात: कुम्भकर्णो महाबल:।
प्रमाणाद् यस्य विपुलं प्रमाणं नेह विद्यते॥ ३४॥
“After him was born the exceptionally
mighty Kumbhakarna, other than whose

dimensions no one has greater magnitude
on earth. (34)

ad: शूर्पणखा नाम संजज्ञे विकृतानना।
विभीषणश्च धर्मात्मा कैकस्या: पश्चिम: Ua: ३५॥
“Then was born Surpanakha with an
ugly face; the pious-minded Vibhisana was
the last son of Kaikasi. (35)
तस्मिन् जाते महासत्त्वे पुष्पवर्षं पपात ह।
नभ:स्थाने दुन्दुभयो देवानां प्राणदंस्तथा।
वाक्यं चैवान्तरिक्षे च साधु साध्विति तत् तदा॥ ३६ ॥
