« KISKINDHAKANDA +

should you render good offices to him who
has placed you under an obligation by killing
Vali (your mortal enemy) and getting back
your lost sovereignty to you. (20)
शक्तिमानतिविक्रान्तो वानरर्क्षगणेश्वर ।
कर्तुं दाशरथे: प्रीतिमाज्ञायां किं नु सज्जसे॥ २१॥
“Though powerful and exceptionally
gallant, O ruler of hordes of monkeys and
bears, why do you lag behind in commanding
the monkeys to get together the hordes of
monkeys and bears in order to win the
pleasure of Sri Rama, son of Emperor
Dasaratha? (21)

कामं खलु शरै: शक्त: सुरासुरमहोरगान्।
वशे ante: कर्तुं त्वत्प्रतिज्ञामवेक्षते॥ २२॥

“Though actually able to subdue by
means of his arrows gods as well as demons
as also large serpents, Sri Rama (son of
DaSaratha) is affording you an opportunity
to implement your plighted word. (22)
प्राणत्यागाविशंकेन कृतं तेन महत् प्रियम्।
तस्य मार्गाम वैदेह्रीं पृथिव्यामपि चाम्बरे॥ २३॥

“A kindly act of no small magnitude
has been done by him without entertaining
any doubt about the propriety of taking the
life of Vali, who had done no harm to him.
Let us, therefore, search for his Sita (a
princess of the Videha territory) on earth as
well as in the heavens, if need be. (23)

देवदानवगन्धर्वा असुरार समरुद्गणा:।
न च यक्षा भयं तस्य Ha: किमिव राक्षसा:॥ २४॥
“Not even gods, Danavas and
Gandharvas as also demons alongwith the
hosts of the wind-gods and Yaksas can
cause fright to him, much less ogres. (24)
तदेवं शक्तियुक्तस्य ud प्रतिकृतस्तथा।
रामस्यार्हसि पिङ्गेश ad सर्वात्मना प्रियम्॥ २५॥
“Therefore, O lord of monkeys, you
ought to oblige with your whole soul Sri

Rama, who is so powerful and has rendered
good offices to you in the recent past.(25)

1045

नाधस्तादवनौ नाप्सु गतिर्नोपरि चाम्बरे।
कस्यचित् सज्जतेऽस्माकं HAM तवाज्ञया॥ २६ Il

“At your command, 0 lord of monkeys,
the movement of any of us will not come to
a standstill either below (in the subterranean
regions) or on earth or in water or above
(in the air-space) or still higher, in the
heavens. (26)

तदाज्ञापय क: किं ते कुतो वापि व्यवस्यतु।
RN ह्यप्रधृष्यास्ते सन्ति कोट्यग्रतोऽनघ॥ २७॥

“Therefore, issue orders as to who
should do what or even at what place. Indeed,
monkeys numbering more than one crore
and incapable of being overpowered are at
your beck and call, O sinless one!” (&27)

तस्य Ag वचनं श्रुत्वा काले साधु निरूपितम्।
सुग्रीव: सत्त्वसम्पन्नश्चकार मतिमुत्तमाम्॥ २८॥

Hearing the aforesaid submission of
Hanuman, which was properly-worded and
opportune, Sugriva, who was richly endowed
with sense, arrived at a supreme decision (of
advancing the cause of Sri Rama). (28)

संदिदेशातिमतिमान् नीलं नित्यकृतोद्यमम्।
दिक्षु सर्वासु सर्वेषां सैन्यानामुपसंग्रहे॥ २९॥
Sugriva, who was very wise, duly
commanded Nila (one of his foremost
generals and counsellors), who was ever
diligent, to collect all the troops in all quarters.
(29)

यथा सेना समग्रा A यूथपालाश्च सर्वश:।
समागच्छन्त्यसङ्गेन CAAT तथा कुरु॥३०॥

He said: “Please take steps to see
that my entire army as well as all the troop-
commanders muster without delay with its
generalissimo. (30)

ये त्वन्तपाला: प्लवगा: शीघ्रगा व्यवसायिन: |

समानयन्तु ते शीघ्रं त्वरिता: शासनान्मम।

स्वयं चानन्तरं कार्यं भवानेवानुपश्यतु॥ ३१॥
“Let those swift-footed and energetic

monkeys who guard the frontiers leave
