+ UTTARAKANDA +

territory of Danda will entirely disappear
alongwith the shower of dust.” (10)

इत्युक्त्वा क्रोधताम्राक्षस्तमाश्रमनिवासिनम्।
जनं जनपदान्तेषु स्थीयतामिति चाब्रवीत्॥११॥

Thus speaking to the inhabitors of the
hermitage, he, Bhargava, possessed of red
eyes with rage said to them again, ‘stay at
the outskirts of this territory.’ (11)

श्रुत्वा तूशनसो वाक्यं सोऽऽश्रमावसथो जन:।
निष्क्रान्तो विषयात् तस्मात् स्थानं चक्रेऽथ बाह्यत: ।। १२॥

_ Hearing these words of Usana, the
Asrama-dwellers, went out of his territory
and made place for themselves elsewhere.

(12)

a तथोक्त्वा मुनिजनमरजामिदमब्रवीत्।
इहैव वस दुर्मेधे आश्रमे सुसमाहिता॥१३॥

Having thus spoken to the ascetics,
Bhargava then addressed Araja, “O dull-
witted, you will stay in this ASrama, conscious
of your duties. (13)
se anna oot: सुरुचिरप्रभम्।
अरजे विज्वरा भुङ्क्ष्व कालश्चात्र प्रतीक्ष्यताम्॥ १४॥

“O Araja, free from worry, enjoy this
lake of beautiful form and extending to a
Yojana, and also wait for some time. (14)

त्वत्समीपे च ये सत्त्वा वासमेष्यन्ति तां निशाम्।
अवध्या: पांसुवर्षेण a भविष्यन्ति नित्यदा॥ १५॥
“Those beings, who will come to stay
near you for a night, will be unassailable
forever by the shower of dust.” (15)
श्रुत्वा नियोगं wert: सारजा भार्गवी तदा।
तथेति पितरं we भार्गवं भृशदु:खिता॥१६॥

“On hearing the command of the
Brahmarsi, Araja, the daughter of Bhrgu,
despite being very much pained said to her
father “Very well.” (16)

1079

इत्युक्त्वा भार्गवो वासमन्यत्र समकारयत्।
तच्च TT नरेन्द्रस्य सभृत्यबलवाहनम्॥१७॥
Waele भस्मसाद् भूतं यथोक्तं ब्रह्मवादिना।
तस्यासौ दण्डविषयो विन्ध्यशैवलयोर्नृप॥ ec
wat ब्रह्मर्षिणा तेन वैधर्म्य सहिते pal
तत: Walt काकुत्स्थ दण्डकारण्यमुच्यते॥१९॥

“Having said this, Bhrgu took up his
abode elsewhere. That kingdom of the chief
of the kings alongwith his servants, the army
and the vehicles, was reduced to ashes within
seven days, as was declared by the
Brahmavadi Bhrgu. This kingdom of Danda
lying between the Vindhya and the Saivala
mountains, was cursed by the Brahmarsi,
since Danda had acted unrighteously. Since
then, O descendant of Kakutstha, it has been
called Dandakaranya. (17—19)

तपस्विन: स्थिता ह्यत्र जनस्थानमतोऽभवत्।

Ude ते सर्वमाख्यातं यन्मां पृच्छसि राघव॥ Ro Il
“Since ascetics came and inhabited

here it has been known as ‘Janasthana’, O

Rama! | have told you everything about

what you enquired of me. (20)

संध्यामुपासितुं odie समयो ह्यतिवर्तते।

Ud महर्षय: Wa पूर्णकुम्भा: समन्तत:॥ २१॥

कृतोदका नरव्याघ्र आदित्यं पर्युपासते।

a तैर्ब्रह्मणमभ्यस्तं सहितैर्ब्रह्मवित्तमै:।

रविरस्तंगतो राम गच्छोदकमुपस्पृश॥ २२॥

“O Valiant one! The time for the
performance of Sandhya is passing. All these
great sages, O foremost among men ! after
having finished their bath, are worshipping
the sun, with their respective pitcher filled
with water. The sun, having accepted the
worship in the form of recitation of Vedic
hymns by the knowers of Brahma, has set
in. You also go and take bath and sip water
and perform Sandhya.” (21-22)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये उत्तरकाण्डे एकाशीतितम: सर्ग: ॥ ८१ Il

Thus ends Canto Ejighty-one in the Uttarakanda of the glorious Ramayana of Valmiki,
the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

