* SUNDARAKANDA +

युष्माभि: प्रहितै: सर्वैर्मया ae विनिर्जिता:।
तैरवश्यं विधातव्यं व्यलीकं किंचिदेव न:॥९॥
“He may be some creature evolved for
our annihilation by Indra, the ruler of gods,
by virtue of his askesis. Gods, demons and
eminent Rsis alongwith Nagas, Yaksas and
Gandharvas were utterly vanquished by you
(the ogre army) under my command and
standing by me. Something unpleasant to
us need must be done by them. (8-9)

तदेव Wa संदेह: Wea परिगृह्यताम्।
aa सेनाग्रगा: ad महाबलपरिग्रहा:॥१०॥
सवाजिरथमातङ्गा: स कपि: शास्यतामिति।
नावमन्यो भवद्धिश्च कपिर्धीरपराक्रम:॥११॥

“It is precisely some such being: there
is no doubt about it. He must be taken captive
by force. March you all, O generals, taking a
large army with you and accompanied by
horses, chariots and elephants. Let that
monkey be chastised. Nay, the monkey, who
is endowed with steady prowess, should not
be disregarded by you. (10-11)

get fe wa: ud मया विपुलविक्रमा:।
वाली च सह सुग्रीवो जाम्बवांश्च महाबल:॥ १२॥
नील: सेनापतिश्चैव ये चान्ये द्विविदादय:।
नैव तेषां गतिर्भीमा न तेजो न पराक्रम:॥१३॥

न मतिर्न बलोत्साहो न रूपपरिकल्पनम्।
महत्सत्त्वमिदं ज्ञेयं कपिरूपं व्यवस्थितम्॥ ex il
“Monkeys of immense prowess have
been actually seen by me in the past, viz.,
Vali alongwith Sugriva, as well as Jambavan,
the bear, who is endowed with extraordinary
might, as also General Nila and others such
as Dwivida. Their capacity to leap, however,
is not so tremendous, nor energy, nor
prowess, nor intellect, nor strength and vigour,
nor ability to assume different forms at will.
He should be concluded to be some mighty
creature drawn up in the form of a monkey.
(12—14)

yaad महदास्थाय क्रियतामस्य निग्रह:।
कामं लोकास्त्रय: सेन्द्रा: ससुरासुरमानवा:॥ १५ Il

203

भवतामग्रत: स्थातुं न पर्याप्ता रणाजिरे।
तथापि तु नयज्ञेन जयमाकाङ्क्षता रणे॥१६॥
आत्मा रक्ष्य: प्रयत्नेन युद्धसिद्धिर्हि चञ्चला।
a स्वामिवचनं wd प्रतिगृह्य महौजस:॥१७॥
समुत्पेतुर्महावेगा हुताशसमतेजस:।
रथैश्च मत्तैर्नागैश्च वाजिभिश्च महाजवै:।॥१८॥
ततस्तु ददृशुर्वीरा दीप्यमानं महाकपिम्॥१९॥
रश्मिमन्तमिवोद्यन्तं स्वतेजोरश्मिमालिनम्।
तोरणस्थं महावेगं महासत्त्वं महाबलम्॥ oll
तं समीक्ष्यैव a ud fea सर्वास्ववस्थिता:॥ २१॥
तैस्तै: प्रहरणैर्भीमैरभिपेतुस्ततस्तत: |
शिरस्युत्पलपत्राभा दुर्धरेण निपातिता:॥ २२॥

“Putting forth extraordinary effort, let
him be taken captive. Even all the three
worlds (heaven, earth and the intermediate
region) including Indra, the ruler of the three
worlds, as well as gods, demons and human
beings are not able to stand before you on
the field of battle. Nevertheless, one’s own
self must at all events be zealously protected
by one who knows how to behave prudently
and seeks to triumph in combat; for success
in battle is uncertain indeed.”

Bowing to the command of their master,
all the generals, who were endowed with
extraordinary energy and agility and equipped
with sharp weapons of every kind and
followed by all kinds of forces, and who were
effulgent as fire, sallied forth in chariots as
well as on the back of elephants in rut and
horses of extraordinary swiftness. Thereupon
the heroes for their part caught sight of the
great monkey, Hanuman, who was endowed
with extraordinary agility, extraordinary
courage, extraordinary strength, extraordinary
intelligence, extraordinary ardour, a gigantic
body and mighty-arms, and who was blazing
like the rising sun, encircled as he was by
the rays of his glory. Immediately on perceiving
him, they all, who were stationed in all
