* AYODHYAKANDA +

All the preceptors, headed by Vasistha,
and other Brahmanas being in the forefront,
all proceeded with their face turned eastward
on the path by which Nandigrama could be
reached. (10)
at च deed गजाश्वरथसंकुलम्।
प्रययौ भरते ad सर्वे च पुरवासिन:॥११॥

When Bharata had left, the army too,
full of elephants, horses and _ chariots,
marched, though not called by Bharata, as
well as the citizens. (11)
THA: स तु धर्मात्मा भरतो भ्रातृवत्सल:।
नन्दिग्रामं ययौ तूर्णं शिरस्यादाय पादुके॥१२॥

Seated in his chariot, the celebrated
Bharata, for his part, whose mind was given
to piety and who was so lovingly devoted to
his elder brother, drove fast to Nandigrama,
taking the pair of wooden sandals on his
head. (12)

भरतस्तु तत: fat नन्दिग्रामं ufava स:।
अवतीर्य रथात् तूर्णं गुरूनिदमभाषत॥१३॥

Having speedily entered Nandigrama
and quickly alighting from his chariot, the
said Bharata for his part then submitted to
his preceptors as follows: (13)
योगक्षेमवहे चेमे Ugh हेमभूषिते॥१४॥

“This kingdom has been given to me by
my elder brother, Sri Rama, as a foremost
sacred trust, as well as these wooden sandals
decked with gold, which will supply all our
needs and bring security to us.” (14)

भरत: शिरसा pean संन्यासं पादुके तत:।
अब्रवीद् दु:खसंतप्त: सर्वं प्रकृतिमण्डलम्॥ १५ II
Having dedicated the sacred trust to
the pair of wooden sandals with his head
bent low, Bharata, who was sore stricken
with agony, then spoke as follows to the
entire body of his ministers : (15)

pa धारयत क्षिप्रमार्यपादाविमौ मतौ।
आभ्यां राज्ये स्थितो धर्म: पादुकाभ्यां TATA १६ ॥

699

“Hold the royal umbrella over these
sandals; they are considered by me to be
as good as the feet of my elder brother. By
these wooden sandals of my elder brother
will righteousness be established in the
kingdom. (16)
भ्रात्रा ¢ मयि संन्यासो निक्षिप्त: सौहृदादयम्।
तमिमं पालयिष्यामि राघवागमनं प्रति॥१७॥

“From affection alone has this sacred
trust been committed to my charge by my
elder brother. | shall keep this aforesaid
trust till the return of Sri Rama, a scion of
Raghu. (17)

fat संयोजयित्वा तु राघवस्य पुन: स्वयम्।
चरणौ at तु रामस्य द्रक्ष्यामि सहपादुकौ॥१८॥

“Having undoubtedly restored these
wooden sandals to Sri Rama’s feet
immediately on his return to the capital myself,
| for my part shall behold those feet placed
on the wooden sandals. (18)
ततो निक्षिप्तभारोऽहँ राघवेण Gari: |
निवेद्य गुरवे weet भजिष्ये गुरुवर्तिताम्॥१९॥

“Having restored the kingdom to my
elder brother, when re-united with Sri Rama,
a scion of Raghu, and thereby laid down the
burden of responsibility, | shall then assume
the role of a servant of my elder brother.

(19)
राघवाय च Ward दत्त्वेमे amiga!
राज्यं चेदमयोध्यां च धूतपापो भवाम्यहम्॥ २०॥

“Nay, having given back to Sri Rama,
a scion of Raghu, this kingdom, held as a
trust till then, as well as the city of Ayodhya
and the pair of excellent wooden sandals, |
shall have shaken off the stigma of having
been instrumental in bringing about the exile
of my elder brother. (20)

अभिषिक्ते तु काकुत्स्थे प्रहृष्टमुदिते जने।
प्रीतिर्मम aya wae राज्याच्चतुर्गुणम्॥ २१॥
“After Sri Rama, descendant of the
Kakutstha lineage, is coronated on the throne
and the subjects are blissfully happy, it will
