1030

king (due to the apprehension of royal
punishment). My officers protect the subjects
like arrows shot by Me. Even then, O long-
armed one! protect the subjects righteously.

(11—13)

एवमुक्तस्तु सौमित्रिर्निर्जगाम नृपालयात्।
अपश्यद् द्वारदेशे A Va तावदवस्थितम्॥ १४॥
तमेव वीक्षमाणं a विक्रोशन्तं मुहुर्मुहु:।
दृष्टवाथ लक्ष्मणस्तं वै स पप्रच्छाथ वीर्यवान्॥ १५ ॥
किं a are महाभाग gfe विस्त्रब्धमानस:।
लक्ष्मणस्य वच: श्रुत्वा सारमेयोऽभ्यभाषत॥ १६॥

Thus told by Sri Rama, Laksmana went
out of the royal palace and saw a dog at the
gate, which stood there looking at him and
repeatedly barking. On seeing him, then the
valiant Laksmana asked—‘O Illustrious one!
Tell me fearlessly your problem.’ On hearing
Laksmana’s words the dog replied thus:

(14—16)
सर्वभूतशरण्याय रामायाक्लिष्टकर्मणे।
भयेष्वभयदात्रे च तस्मै ah समुत्सहे॥१७॥

‘| can dare tell Sri Rama, who is a
refuge to all living beings, who is ever
unwearied in action and ensures protection
whenever there is occasion for fear.’ (17)
एतच्छुत्वा च वचनं सारमेयस्य लक्ष्मण:।
राघवाय तदाख्यातुं प्रविवेशालयं शुभम्॥१८॥
Pea रामस्य पुनर्निर्जगाम नृपालयात्।
amet यदि a किंचित् तत्त्वं ब्रूहि नृपाय au १९॥

On hearing the dog’s speech, Laksmana
entered the auspicious royal palace in order
to communicate the same to Sri Rama and
after informing Him, Laksmana came out of
the royal palace and said to the dog, “If you
have to say something, then tell the king
about it.” (18-19)
लक्ष्मणस्य वच: श्रुत्वा सारमेयोऽभ्यभाषत।
देवागारे नृपागारे द्विजवेश्मसु A तथा॥ oll
वह्नि: शतक्रतुश्चैव सूर्यो वायुश्च तिष्ठति।
नात्र योग्यास्तु सौमित्रे योनीनामधमा वयम्॥ २१॥

Having heard Laksmana’s speech the

« VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

dog said, ‘Agni (the Fire-god), Indra, Surya
(the sun-god) and Vayu (the wind-god) are
present in the temples, the royal abode and
the houses of Brahmanas. O Laksmana!
we, of the lowest origin, are unfit to go there.

(20-21)

प्रवेष्टुं नात्र शक्ष्यामि erat विग्रहवान् नृप:।
सत्यवादी «Wm: सर्वसत्त्वहिते रत:॥२२॥

‘| shall not be able to enter there (the
royal palace). King Sri Rama is ‘Dharma.’
He speaks the truth, He is adept in battle-
fighting and is devoted to doing good to all
the people. (22)
षाड्गुण्यस्य ud ata नीतिकर्ता स Wea: |
Waa: सर्वदर्शी च Wat रमयतां वर:॥२३॥

`हं Rama knows the appropriate
time for the petitioners—practice of the six
Gunas. He dispenses justice. He _ is
omniscient, He sees all things. Sri Rama is

foremost among those who delight others.
(23)

स सोम: स च मृत्युश्च स यमो धनदस्तथा।
aa शतक्रतुश्चैव सूर्यो A वरुणस्तथा॥ evil
‘He is Soma, He is Death. He is Yama
(God of Death). He is Kubera, Agni and
Indra, and He is Surya, the sun, and Varuna.
(24)

तस्य त्वं ate सौमित्रे प्रजापाल: स Wea: |
अनाज्ञप्तस्तु सौमित्रे प्रवेष्टुं नेच्छयाम्यहम्॥ २५॥
‘Sri Rama is the protector of the
subjects. O Laksmana! tell Him, “Without

permission, | do not want to enter the royal
palace.’ (25)
आनृशंस्यान्महाभाग: प्रविवेश महाद्युति:।
नृपालयं प्रविश्याथ लक्ष्मणो वाक्यमब्रवीत्॥ २६॥
On hearing this, the illustrious and
glorious Laksmana having entered the royal

abode out of compassion said the following
words: (26)

gaat wa विज्ञाप्यं कौसल्यानन्दवर्धन।
यन्मयोक्तं महाबाहो तव शासनजं विभो॥ २७॥
