966

was through fear. Nay, put to flight with
greater speed on perceiving us arrived very
near, he entered a big hole with impetuosity.
(15-16)

तं प्रविष्टं विदित्वा q सुघोरं सुमहद्बिलम्।
अयमुक्तोऽथ मे UAT मया तु क्रूरदर्शन:॥१७॥
““Knowing him to have entered a most
fearful and very large hole, this younger
brother of mine of cruel aspect for his part
was then spoken to by me as follows : (17)

अहत्वा नास्ति मे शक्ति: प्रतिगन्तुमित: पुरीम्।
बिलद्वारि प्रतीक्ष त्वं यावदेनं निहन्म्यहम्॥ १८॥
“*Power is lacking in me to return from
this place to the city of Kiskindha without
disposing of this demon. Therefore, wait
you at the mouth of the gate till | get rid of
him. (18)

स्थितोऽयमिति मत्वाहं प्रविष्टस्तु दुरासदम्।
तं मे मार्गयतस्तत्र गत: संवत्सरस्तदा॥१९॥
स तु दृष्टो मया शात्रुरनिर्वेदाद् भयावह:।
निहतश्च Wa सद्य: स Aa: सह बन्धुभि:॥ २०॥

““Presuming that my brother will remain
standing there, | for my part penetrated
deep into the cave, which was difficult of
access. While | remained hunting the demon
in that cave a whole year rolled by. Then
that dreadful enemy for his part was seen
by me without causing any despondency
(in me because of his not having been seen
for a whole year) and the demon was killed
by me then and there with all his kinsmen.

(19-20)
तस्यास्यात्तु प्रव्रत्तेन रुधिरौघेण तद्विलम्।
पूर्णमासीद् दुराक्रामं स्तनतस्तस्य भूतले॥ २१॥

“While he was thundering in the bowels
of the earth, the said cave was for its part
filled with a stream of blood which gushed
forth from his mouth and consequently
rendered difficult to pass through. (21)
सूदयित्वा तु तं wa विकान्तं तमहं सुखम्।
निष्क्रामं नैव पश्यामि बिलस्य पिहितं मुखम्॥ २२॥

“ “Having killed with ease my powerful

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

enemy, the notorious Mayavi, | would not
find my way out of the cave as its entrance
was closed. (22)

विक्रोशमानस्य तु मे सुग्रीवेति पुन: पुन:।
aa: प्रतिवचो नास्ति ततोऽहं भृशदु:खित:॥ २३॥

“‘Since no response whatever came
from outside even though | cried out loudly
‘O Sugriva! again and again, hence | felt
sore afflicted. (23)

पादप्रहारैस्तु मया बहुभि: परिपातितम्।
ततोऽहं तेन निष्क्रम्य पथा पुरमुपागत:॥ २४॥
“*The rock was, however, pushed back
by me with many a kick. Emerging through
that outlet | then returned to the city. (24)

तत्रानेनास्मि संरुद्धो राज्यं मृगयताऽऽत्मन:।
सुग्रीवेण नृशंसेन विस्मृत्य भ्रातृसौहृदम्॥ २५॥

“‘Disregarding brotherly affection, | was
thus shut up in that cave by this cruel
Sugriva, who sought rulership for himself.’

(25)
`एवमुक्त्वा तु मां तत्र वस्त्रेणैकेन वानर:।
dat निर्वासयामास वाली विगतसाध्वस:॥ २६॥

“Saying so, the monkey, Vali, for his
part, from whom all sense of shame had
departed, banished me then and there with
a single piece of cloth, stripping me of all
my possessions. (26)

तेनाहमपविद्धश्च हृतदारश्च Waa |

तद्भयाच्च महीं Pat क्रान्तवान् सवनार्णवाम्॥ २७॥

“Expelled by him and deprived of my
spouse too, O scion of Raghu, | ranged the
whole earth with its forests and oceans for
fear of him. (27)

ऋष्यमूकं गिरिवरं = uratexure: faa: |
प्रविष्टोऽस्मि दुराधर्षं वालिन: कारणान्तरे॥ २८॥

“Distressed by the usurpation of my
consort, | have retired to Rsyamuka, the
foremost of mountains, which is difficult of
access for Vali due to another reason (the
imprecation uttered by Sage Matanga). (28)
