540

रुष्टोऽयमिति विज्ञाय शनै: श्लक्ष्णमुवाच ह।
अतीव fe समालक्ष्य भ्रातरं क्षुभितेन्द्रियम्॥ २९॥
कुम्भकर्ण: शनैर्वाक्यं बभाषे परिसान्त्वयन्।
श्रृणु राजन्नवहितो मम वाक्यमरिंदम॥ ३०॥

“Nullify with your prowess the evil sprung
from my misconduct, if at all there exists love
in you for me or if you recognize your own
prowess or this purpose of mine is deemed
by you in your heart of hearts as supremely
worth accomplishing. A friend is he who
obliges an afflicted soul, whose fortune is at
stake. And a kinsman is he, who is able to
render help to those who have deviated from
the right course.” Concluding about Ravana,
who was speaking in grave and harsh tones
as above, that he was angry, Kumbhakarna
gently submitted to him in soothing words as
follows: Clearly perceiving his elder brother
exceedingly agitated in mind in reality,
Kumbhakarna slowly submitted to him as
follows, restoring him to confidence in
everyway: “Listen, O king, to my submission,
O scourge of your enemies ! (26—30)
अलं राक्षसराजेन्द्र संतापमुपपद्य ते।
रोषं च सम्परित्यज्य स्वस्थो भवितुमर्हसि॥ ३१॥

“It is no use your giving way to agony,
O suzerain lord of ogres! Nay, shaking off
anger completely, you ought to be your
normal self again. (31)

नैतन्मनसि cadet मयि जीवति पार्थिव।
wae नाशयिष्यामि यत् pd परितप्यते॥ ३२॥

“Such despondency should not be
entertained in your mind so long as | live, O
ruler of the earth! | shall exterminate him on
whose account you feel agonized. (32)
बन्धुभावादभिहितं भ्रातृस्नेहाच्च पार्थिव॥३३॥

“Salutary advice, of course, needs must
be tendered by me to you under all
circumstances. And that which is good to
you, has been spoken by me through kinship

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA +

and brotherly affection, O ruler of the earth !
(33)

Age यच्च कालेऽस्मिन् hd स्नेहेन बन्धुना।
शत्रूणां कदनं पश्य क्रियमाणं मया रणे॥ ३४॥

“Nay, see that which is fit to be done
out of affection at this juncture by a brother,
viz., the wholesale destruction of the enemy
in combat. (34)

अद्य पश्य महाबाहो war समरमूर्धनि।
हते Wa सह wat द्रवन्तीं हरिवाहिनीम्॥ ३५॥

“See today, O mighty-armed brother,
the army of monkeys fleeing, on Rama
being killed by me with his brother in the
forefront of battle. (35)

अद्य रामस्य तद् दृष्टवा मयाऽऽनीतं रणाच्छिर: ।

Gat va महाबाहो सीता भवतु दु:खिता॥ ३६॥
“Feel gratified today to see the well-

known head of Rama brought by me from

the field of battle, O mighty-armed brother !
And let Sita feel agonized in her turn. (36)

अद्य रामस्य wed निधनं सुमहत् प्रियम्।
लङ्कायां were: सर्वे ये a निहतबान्धवा:॥ ३७॥
“Let all those ogres in Lanka whose
kinsfolk have been killed in combat witness
today the death of Rama, which will be
something exceedingly welcome to them. (37)

अद्य शोकपरीतानां स्वबन्धुवधशोचिनाम्।
शत्रोर्युधि विनाशेन करोम्यश्रुप्रमार्जनम्॥ ३८॥
“Through the destruction of the enemy
in battle, | shall dry today the tears of those
who are bewailing the loss of their kinsfolk
and are overcome with grief on that account.
(38)

TI पर्वतसंकाशं ससूर्यमिव तोयदम्।
विकीर्णं पश्य समरे सुग्रीवं प्लवगेश्वरम्॥३९॥
“See today Sugriva, the lord of
monkeys, who closely resembles a mountain
(in size), thrown about, bathed in blood, on
the battlefield like a cloud illumined by the
evening sun. (39)
