1122

श्रुत्वा पितामहेनोक्तं वाक्यं कालसमीरितम्।
राघव: We वाक्यं सर्वसंहारमब्रवीत्॥१६॥
Having heard, the words of Brahma
spoken by Death, Sri Rama said laughingly
to the destroyer of all, the Death: (16)
श्रुत्वा मे देवदेवस्य वाक्यं परममद्भुतम्।
प्रीतिर्हि महती जाता तवागमनसम्भवा॥१७॥
‘Hearing the words so full of wonder, of
the god of gods (Brahma), fills me with great
pleasure born out of your visit. (17)

त्रयाणामपि लोकानां कार्यार्थं मम सम्भव:।
भद्रं तेऽस्तु गमिष्यामि यत एवाहमागत:॥१८॥

« VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

‘To carry out the work of the three
worlds is the purpose of my birth as
human being, may welfare be with you; |
will go now to heaven, wherefrom | came.

(18)
wat ह्यसि सम्प्राप्तो न A aa विचारणा।
मया हि सर्वकृत्येषु देवानां वशवर्तिना।
स्थातव्यं adda यथा wre पितामह:॥१९॥

‘You have come as my heart desired,
so there is nothing for me to ponder over. O
destroyer of all, | have to stay at will of gods

for performing all their deeds as Brahma
has said.’ (19)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये उत्तरकाण्डे चतुरधिकशततम: A: ॥ १०४॥

Thus ends Canto One hundred and four in the Uttarakanda of the glorious Ramayana
of Valmiki, the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

पञ्चाधिकशततम: सर्ग:
Canto CV

Durvasa appears before Sri Rama and desires to take food. After
eating, he departs. Sti Rama remembers the words of
Death, and is wonderstruck

तथा dat: संवदतोर्दुर्वासा भगवानृषि:।
रामस्य दर्शनाकाङ्क्षी राजद्वारमुपागमत्॥१॥
Thus while the two (Sri Rama and
Death) were conversing, the venerable sage,
Durvasa, desirous of seeing Sri Rama
appeared at the royal gate. (1)

सोऽभिगम्य तु सौमित्रिमुवाच ऋषिसत्तम:।
रामं ata A शीघ्रं go मेऽर्थोऽतिवर्तते॥ २॥
The great sage approaching Laksmana
(the son of Sumitra) said: ‘Let me see Sri
Rama at once, for, the purpose for which |
have come is being lost.’ (2)
मुनेस्तु भाषितं श्रुत्वा लक्ष्मण: परवीरहा।
अभिवाद्य महात्मानं वाक्यमेतदुवाच ह॥३॥
Laksmana the killer of the enemy heroes,
on hearing words of the ascetic, spoke after

having saluted the noble one, Durvasa: (3)

किं कार्यं ate भगवन् को ह्यर्थ: किं करोम्यहम्।
व्यग्रो fe Wael ब्रह्मन् मुहूर्तं परिपाल्यताम्॥४॥

‘Sir, what has to be done for you for
what purpose you have come? What should
| do? The descendant of Raghu is now
indeed busy, O Brahmana, wait for a
moment.’ (4)

तच्छृत्वा ऋषिशार्दूल: क्रोधेन कलुषीकृत:।
sara लक्ष्मणं वाक्यं निर्दंहन्निव चक्षुषा॥५॥
Having heard this, Durvasa, the lion

among sages, darkened by rage said to
Laksmana, as if burning all by his eyes: (5)

अस्मिन् aor at सौमित्रे ware प्रतिवेदय।
अस्मिन् क्षणे गां सौमित्रे न निवेदयसे यदि।
विषयं wat at चैव शपिष्ये wad तथा॥६॥
