472

river Gomati, which carried cool waters and
heads towards the sea through the medium
of the holy Ganga and whose banks are
adorned with cows. (11)

गोमतीं चाप्यतिक्रम्य wea: शीघ्रगैर्हयै:।
मयूरहंसाभिरुतां ततार स्यन्दिकां नदीम्॥१२॥
Having reached the other bank of the
Gomati too, Sri Rama, a scion of Raghu,
crossed with the help of swift-going horses

the river Syandika as well, made resonant
by peacocks and swans. (12)

स a मनुना Wat दत्तामिक्ष्वाकवे पुरा।
स्फीतां राष्ट्वृतां wa वैदेहीमन्वदर्शयत्॥ १३॥

The said Sri Rama now showed to Sita
(a princess of the Videha kingdom) the
prosperous land of Kosala, the southern
boundary of which was defined by the
Syandika, which was given of yore by Manu,
the king of kings, to his eldest son, Ikswaku,
and which was bounded on all sides by
other adjoining territories. (13)

सूत इत्येव चाभाष्य सारथिं तमभीक्ष्णश:।
हंसमत्तस्वर: श्रीमानुवाच पुरुषोत्तम:॥१४॥

कदाहं पुनरागम्य सरय्वा: पुष्पिते वने।
मृगयां पर्यटिष्यामि मात्रा पित्रा च संगत:॥१५॥

Repeatedly addressing the aforesaid
charioteer in the words “O charioteer,” the

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

glorious Rama, the foremost of men, whose
voice resembled the cackling of a swan in
rut, said, “When, returning back to Ayodhya
and united once more with my parents,
shall | roam hunting in the woodland bordering
on the Sarayu and laden with blossoms?
(14-15)
[मभिकांक्षागि : ने।
रतिह्यैषाऴ्। लोके राजर्षिगणसम्मता॥१६॥
“| do not hanker much after sport in the
woodland bordering on the Sarayu. In fact it
is a unique enjoyment made much of in the
world by hosts of royal sages. (16)
राजर्षीणां fe लोकेऽस्मिन् रत्यर्थं मृगया वने।
काले कृतां तां मनुजैर्धन्विनामभिकांक्षिताम्॥ १७॥
“Truly speaking, hunting in a forest
was resorted to in this world for the
gratification of royal sages. Even though it
was adopted at times by the sons of Manu
and was sought after by other bowmen, | do
not long for it excessively.” (17)
स तमध्वानमैक्ष्वाक: सूतं मधुरया गिरा।
तं तमर्थमभिप्रेत्य ययौ वाक्यमुदीरयन्॥१८॥
Conversing thus with the charioteer on
various topics in sweet words, the said Sri

Rama, a scion of Ikswaku, advanced along
that route. (18)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्येऽयोध्याकाण्डे
एकोनपञ्चाश: सर्ग: ॥ ४९ Il
Thus ends Canto Forty-nine in the Ayodhyakanda of the glorious Ramayana
of Valmiki, the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

