+ UTTARAKANDA +

1093

Canto LXXXIX
Union of Budha and [la and birth of Pururava

श्रुत्वा किंपुरुषोत्पत्तिं लक्ष्मणो भरतस्तथा।
आश्चर्यमिति च ब्रूतामुभौ रामं जनेश्वरम्॥१॥

Having heard the account of the origin
of Kimpurusas, Laksmana and Bharata said
to Sri Rama the king: ‘O Lord, how wonderful
it is!’ (1)
अथ WA: कथामेतां भूय Wa महायशा:।
कथयामास धर्मात्मा प्रजापतिसुतस्य वै॥ २॥

Then Sri Rama, the noble one, continued
to narrate the story of Ila, the son of
Prajapati: (2)
सर्वास्ता fagat दृष्टवा किन्नरीर्ऋषिसत्तम:।
उवाच रूपसम्पन्नां तां स्नियं प्रहसन्निव॥ ३॥

‘Seeing that all the female Kinnaras
(Kirnpurusas) had departed, the great sage,
Budha, said to that beautiful woman, Ila, as
if laughing: (3)
सोमस्याहं सुदयित: सुत: सुरुचिरानने।
भजस्व मां वरारोहे भक्त्या स्निग्धेन चक्षुषा॥४॥

‘O one of beautiful face, | am the beloved

son of Soma, the moon-god; kindly look at
me with love and own me.’ (4)

तस्य तद् वचनं श्रुत्वा शून्ये स्वजनवर्जिते।
इला सुरुचिरप्रख्यं प्रत्युवाच महाप्रभम्॥५॥
‘Having heard those words of Budha,

Ila, left by her friends, alone, spoke to the
beautiful and lustrous one, Budha: (5)

ae कामचरी dra aah वशवर्तिनी।
प्रशाधि मां सोमसुत यथेच्छसि तथा कुरु॥६॥

‘O son of Soma, although free to move
at will, | am now at your command, order
me and do as you like.’ (6)
a a कामी सह तया रेमे चन्द्रमस: सुत:॥७॥

Hearing these wonderful words of her,

Ila, that lover, Budha, the son of the moon,
was highly pleased and dallied with her. (7)

ara meat मासस्तामिलां रुचिराननाम्।
गतो रमयतोऽत्यर्थं क्षणवत् तस्य कामिन:॥८॥

While Budha was dallying with Ila of
beautiful face, the spring season passed
away just like a moment. (8)

अथ मासे तु सम्पूर्णे पूर्णेन्दुसदृशानन:।
प्रजापतिसुत: श्रीमान् शयने प्रत्यबुध्यत॥९॥

After the lapse of a month, Ila the
prosperous son of Prajapati, having a face
comparable to the full moon, woke up in
bed. (9)
सोऽपश्यत् सोमजं तत्र तपन्तं सलिलाशये।
ऊर्ध्वबाहुं निरालम्बं तं राजा प्रत्यभाषत॥१०॥

He saw that son of Soma was performing
penance in that lake, with his hand raised
upwards and without any support and
addressed him thus: (10)

भगवन् पर्वतं दुर्गं प्रविष्टोऽस्मि सहानुग:।

न च पश्यामि तत् सैन्यं क्व नु ते मामका TAT: ॥ ११ ॥
‘Sir, | entered the impenetrable forest

with my attendants for hunting; | do not,

however, see my army, where they have

gone, they who belonged to me.’ (11)

eo तस्य राजर्षेर्नष्टसंज्ञस्य भाषितम्।

प्रत्युवाच शुभं वाक्यं सान्त्वयन् परया गिरा॥ १२॥
Having heard those words of the bull

among Kings, who had lost his consciousness

formerly, he, Budha, replied to him in very
auspicious words, consoling him: (12)

अश्मवर्षेण महता भृत्यास्ते विनिपातिता:।
त्वं चाश्रमपदे सुप्तो वातवर्षभयार्दित:॥१३॥
‘Your servants were killed by a hail

storm; you, however, filled with fear of wind
and rain fell asleep in the hermitage. (13)
