« KISKINDHAKANDA +

said to Sugriva of pleasing aspect, “It is as
you say.” (10)
ततो रामं स्थितं दृष्टवा लक्ष्मणं च महाबलम्।
Gita: adage = लोलमपातयत्॥११॥
Seeing Sri Rama as well as Laksmana,
who was possessed of great strength,

Sugriva thereupon cast his restless eyes all
around in the forest. (11)

स cat dd: सालमविदूरे हरीश्वर:।
सुपुष्पमीषत्पत्राढ्यं भ्रमरैरुपशोभितम्॥ १२॥

Sugriva, the ruler of monkeys, presently
sighted not far from that spot a sal tree of
charming flowers, nay, clothed with a scanty
foliage and adorned with black bees. (12)
रामस्यास्तीर्य सुग्रीवो निषसाद सराघव:॥१३॥

Breaking for the sake of Sri Rama one
most lovely bough, thick with leaves, off
that tree and laying it on the ground, Sugriva
sat on it alongwith Sri Rama (a scion of
Raghu). (13)

तावासीनौ ततो Feat हनूमानपि लक्ष्मणम्।
शालशाखां समुत्पाट्यं विनीतमुपवेशयत्॥ १४॥

Seeing them seated and duly tearing
one more bough off the sal tree, Hanuman
prevailed on the meek Laksmana too to sit
on it. (14)
सुखोपविष्टं wi तु प्रसन्नमुदधिं यथा।

सालपुष्पावसंकीर्णे तस्मिन् गिरिवरोत्तमे॥१५॥
ad: प्रहष्ट: सुग्रीव: श्लक्ष्णया शुभया गिरा।
उवाच प्रणयाद् WH हर्षव्याकुलिताक्षरम्॥ १६॥
Then out of affection Sugriva for his
part most joyfully submitted in a soft and
attractive tone and in words rendered
indistinct through joy to Sri Rama, the
delighter of all, comfortably seated and calm
like an unruffled ocean on that jewel among
the best of mountains, which was strewn
with blossoms of sal. (15-16)

até विनिकृतो भ्रात्रा चराम्येष भयार्दित:।
mem गिरिवरं ature: सुदु:खित:॥ १७॥

959

“Exiled by my elder brother, Vali, and
deprived of my spouse, | range on this
Rsyamuka, the best of mountains, stricken
with fear and sore afflicted. (17)

सोऽहं त्रस्तो भये AAT वने सम्भ्रान्तचेतन:।
वालिना निकृतो wat कृतवैरश्च राघव॥ १८॥

“Having been exiled and antagonized
by my elder brother, Vali, O scion of
Raghu, | dwell in this forest alarmed and
submerged in fear, my mind being utterly
confused. (18)

वालिनो मे भयार्तस्य सर्वलोकाभयंकर।
ममापि त्वमनाथस्य प्रसादं कर्तुमर्हसि॥१९॥

“You ought to show favour to me as
well, forlorn as | am and stricken with fear
from Vali, O prince ridding all people of
fear !” (19)
`एवमुक्तस्तु तेजस्वी धर्मज्ञो धर्मवत्सल:।
प्रत्युवाच स काकुत्स्थ: सुग्रीवं प्रहसन्निव॥ २०॥

Requested thus by Sugriva, the glorious
Sri Rama, a scion of Kakutstha, for his
part, who knew what is right and was
fond of righteousness, replied to Sugriva
as follows, as though heartily laughing :

(20)
उपकारफलं मित्रमपकारोऽरिलक्षणम्।
अद्यैव तं वधिष्यामि aa भार्यापहारिणम्॥ २१॥

“Service is the fruit yielded by a friend
and an enemy is known by disservice (that
he renders). | will this very day dispose of
Vali, who has wrested your spouse. (21)

sa fe मे महाभाग पत्रिणस्तिग्मतेजस:।
कार्तिकेयवनोद्भूता: शरा हेमविभूषिता:॥ २२॥
कङ्कषपत्रपरिच्छन्ना महेन्द्राशनिसंनिभा:।
सुपर्वाण: सुतीक्ष्णाग्रा: सरोषा भुजगा इव॥ २३॥

“Here indeed are my winged shafts of
dazzling brilliance sprung from a thicket of
reeds (the birth-place of Lord Skanda),
decked with gold and adorned with the
feathers of buzzards, endowed with smooth
joints and exceptionally sharp points, nay,
