# YUDDHAKANDA #

The army of the ogres, who were looking
on Ravana, as well as of the monkeys, who
were gazing on Sri Rama with astonished
eyes, appeared as though they were
paintings. (5)

तौ तु aa निमित्तानि gear राघवरावणौ।
कृतबुद्धी स्थिरामर्षौ युयुधाते ह्यभीतवत्॥६॥

Indeed, having made up their minds to
carry the contest through and firm in their
indignation, the aforesaid Sri Rama, a scion
of Raghu, and Ravana for their part fought
fearlessly, as it were, on witnessing the
omens on the field of battle. (6)

जेतव्यमिति काकुत्स्थो मर्तव्यमिति रावण:।
धृतौ स्ववीर्यसर्वस्वं युद्धेऽदर्शयतां तदा॥७॥
Sri Rama (a scion of Kakutstha), who
was convinced that he was going to win in
combat and Ravana, who firmly believed
that he would die, exhibited their entire
prowess in the struggle on that occasion.
(7)
तत: क्रोधाद् दशग्रीव: शरान् संधाय वीर्यवान्।
मुमोच ध्वजमुद्दिश्य राघवस्य रथे स्थितम्॥८॥

Putting arrows to his bow, the valiant
Ravana (the ten-headed monster), thereupon
discharged them in his wrath at the standard
fixed on the chariot of Sri Rama (a scion of
Raghu). (8)

a शरास्तमनासाद्य पुरंदररथध्वजम्।
Te परामृश्य निपेतुर्धरणीतले॥९॥
Failing to reach the aforesaid ensign
on the chariot of Indra (a destroyer of
citadels) and glancing off the staff supporting
the banner, those arrows fell on the earth’s
surface. (9)

ततो रामोऽपि संक्रुद्धश्चापमाकृष्य वीर्यवान्।
कृतप्रतिकृतं कर्तुं मनसा सम्प्रचक्रमे॥१०॥
Stretching his bow in great fury, the
valiant, Sri Rama too duly proceeded with
his mind to return blow for blow. (10)

753

रावणध्वजमुद्दिश्य मुमोच निशितं शरम्।
महासर्पमिवासह्यं ज्वलन्तं स्वेन तेजसा॥११॥

He shot a whetted shaft, irresistible
as a great snake and splendid with its
own glory, aiming it at the banner of
Ravana. (11)

रामश्चिक्षेप तेजस्वी केतुमुद्दिश्य सायकम्।
जगाम स महीं छित्त्वा दशग्रीवध्वजं शर:॥ १२॥

The glorious Sri Rama let fly the arrow
aiming it at the standard of Ravana. Tearing
asunder the ensign of Ravana (the ten-
headed monster), that arrow entered the
earth. (12)

स निकृत्तोऽपतद् भूमौ रावणस्यन्दनध्वज:।
ध्वजस्योन्मथनं दृष्ट्वा WAT: स महाबल:॥ १३॥

सम्प्रदीप्तोऽभवत् क्रोधादमर्षात् प्रदहन्निव।
a रोषवशमापन्न: mat ववर्ष ह॥१४॥

Torn down, the flag of Ravana’s chariot
fell to the ground. The notorious Ravana,
who was endowed with extraordinary might,
was inflamed with fury on perceiving the
destruction of his standard and stood blazing,
as it were, with indignation. Fallen a prey to
anger, he discharged a hail of arrows; so
the tradition goes. (18—14)

रामस्य तुरगान् दीप्तै: शरैर्विव्याध रावण:।
a दिव्या हरयस्तत्र नास्खलन्नापि बभ्रमु:॥ १५॥
avg: स्वस्थहृदया: पद्मनालैरिवाहता:।
तेषामसम्भ्रमं दृष्टवा वाजिनां रावणस्तदा॥ १६॥
भूय Wa सुसंक्रुद्ध: शरवर्षं मुमोच ह।
गदाश्च परिघांश्चैव चक्राणि मुसलानि च॥१७॥
गिरिशृङ्गाणि वृक्षांश्च तथा शूलपरश्वधान्।
मायाविहितमेतत् तु शस्त्रवर्षमपातयत्।
सहस्ररशस्तदा ब'['ण'।नश्र'[न्तहृदयोद्यम; ।। १८॥
Nay, with his flaming arrows, Ravana
pierced the horses of the chariot of Sri
Rama. The aforesaid heavenly steeds,
however, neither staggered nor reeled, but
remained composed at heart as they would
feel when struck with lotus stalks. Infuriated
