* BALAKANDA +

you will have no progeny through your wives
must be true: there is no doubt about it; for,
Her imprecation is unobstructed. (6)
इयमाकाशगङ्गा च यस्यां Ut हुताशन:।
जनयिष्यति cart सेनापतिमरिंदमम्॥७॥
“‘Here is the heavenly Ganga, through
whom the god of fire will, by placing in her
the seed of Lord Siva, cause to be born a
son capable of subduing his enemies, who
will turn out to be the commander of the
celestial armies. (7)

ज्येष्ठा शैलेन्द्रदुहिता मानयिष्यति तं सुतम्।
उमायास्तद्बहुमतं भविष्यति न संशय:॥८॥
“`लवाएव्व, the elder daughter of the king
of mountains, will account him as her own
son and that belief of hers will be made
much of even by Uma, her younger sister:
there is no doubt about it.’ (8)

तच्छुत्वा वचनं तस्य Haat रघुनन्दन।
प्रणिपत्य सुरा: सर्वे पितामहमपूजयन्॥९॥
“Satisfied to hear the above reply of
Brahma and falling prostrate before him, O
scion of Raghu, all the gods venerated him.
(9)
a गत्वा परमं राम कैलासं धातुमण्डितम्।
अग्निं नियोजयामासु: पुत्रार्थं सर्वदेवता:॥१०॥
“Reaching the most excellent Kailasa,
rich in minerals, O Rama, all the divinities
urged the god of fire to produce a son fit to
command the celestial armies. (10)

देवकार्यमिदं देव समाधत्स्व हुताशन।
शैलपुत्र्यां महातेजो गङ्गायां तेज उत्सृज॥११॥
“They said to him, ‘Accomplish this
object of gods, O exceptionally glorious god
of fire! Place in Ganga, the daughter of
Himavan, the seed of Lord Siva borne by
you.’ (11)
देवतानां प्रतिज्ञाय गङ्गामभ्येत्य पावक:।
गर्भं aa a देवि देवतानामिदं प्रियम्॥१२॥
“Making a promise to the gods to
accomplish their aforesaid purpose and,

173

approaching the heavenly Ganga, the god
of fire prayed to her as follows : ‘Pray, place
in yourself the seed of Lord Siva, captured
and retained by me; for such is the pleasure
of gods.’ (12)
इत्येतद् वचनं श्रुत्वा feet रूपमधारयत्।
स तस्या महिमां get समन्तादवशीर्यत॥१३॥
“Hearing the aforesaid request of the
god of fire, the celestial river assumed
an ethereal living form. Beholding her
exquisiteness of form, the seed of Lord
Siva melted on all sides. (13)

समन्ततस्तदा देवीमभ्यषिञ्चत पावक:।
सर्वस्रोतांसि पूर्णानि गङ्गाया रघुनन्दन॥१४॥

“The god of fire then impregnated her
on all sides in such a way that all her veins
were saturated with the seed, O scion of
Raghu ! (14)

तमुवाच ततो गङ्गा सर्वदेवपुरोगमम्।
ST धारणे देव तेजस्तव समुद्धतम्॥१५॥
दह्यमानाग्निना तेन सम्प्रव्यथितचेतना।

अथाब्रवीदिदं गङ्गां सर्वदेवहुताशन:॥१६॥
“Burning with that fiery seed and
with her mind extremely agonized, Ganga
thereupon spoke as follows to the celebrated
god of fire, the leader of all the gods: 1 am
unable, O shining one, to bear the seed of
Lord Siva, intensified by thine own.’ The
god of fire, who consumes the offerings
intended for all gods, made the following
reply to Ganga: (15-16)
Be हैमवते ued गर्भोऽयं संनिवेश्यताम्।
श्रुत्वा त्वग्निवचो Tet तं गर्भमतिभास्वरम्॥ १७॥
उत्ससर्ज महातेजा: स्रोतोभ्यो fe तदानघ।
यदस्या निर्गतं तस्मात् तप्तजाम्बूनदप्रभम्॥१८॥
“‘This seed may kindly be discharged
on this offshoot of the Himalayas.’ Hearing
the aforesaid suggestion of the god of fire,
the exceptionally glorious Ganga for her
part expelled from her veins that very moment
that most resplendent seed, O sinless Rama !
Since it emerged from the body of Ganga, a
