152

रोदनादतिनि:श्वासाद् भूमिसंस्पर्शनादपि।

न त्वां देवीमहं मन्ये Ua: संज्ञावधारणात्॥१०॥
“From your crying, drawing deep and

audible breaths, touching the ground and

taking the name of a king, | do not consider

you to be a goddess. (10)

व्यञ्जनानि fe ते यानि लक्षणानि च लक्षये।
महिषी भूमिपालस्य राजकन्या च A मता॥११॥

“Indeed, on the strength of the limbs of
your body as well as from the marks on
your person which | perceive, you are
believed by me to be the consort of a ruler
of the earth and the daughter of a king. (11)

रावणेन जनस्थानाद् बलात् प्रमथिता यदि।
सीता त्वमसि भद्रं A तन्ममाचक्ष्व पृच्छ्त:॥१२॥

“If you are Sita, stolen away forcibly by
Ravana from Janasthana, kindly reveal it to
me, who am inquisitive about it. May
prosperity attend on you! (12)

यथा fe तव a दैन्यं रूपं चाप्यतिमानुषम्।
तपसा चान्वितो वेषस्त्वं राममहिषी ध्रुवम्॥१३॥

“Indeed, the sad plight, the ethereal
beauty and the garb marked with asceticism,
the like of which are seen in you, lead me to
conclude that you are undoubtedly the consort
of Sri Rama.” (13)
सा तस्य वचनं श्रुत्वा रामकीर्तनहर्षिता।
sara वाक्यं वैदेही हनूमन्तं द्रुमाश्रितम्॥१४॥

Delighted at the mention of Sri Rama
on hearing the utterance of the monkey, that
princess of the Videha territory spoke as
follows to Hanuman standing beneath the
tree: (14)

स्नुषा दशरथस्याहं शत्रुसैन्यप्रणाशिन:॥१५॥
“| am daughter-in-law of DaSaratha, the
foremost of lions among kings on earth,
who is a knower of the Self and the
exterminator of hostile forces. (15)
दुहिता जनकस्याहं वैदेहस्य महात्मन:।
सीतेति नाम्ना चोक्ताहं भार्या रामस्य धीमत:॥ १६॥

« VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

“Nay, | am a daughter of the high-
souled King Janaka, ruler of the Videha
territory, and the consort of the wise Sri
Rama, and | am called by the name of Sita.

(16)

समा gest dae राघवस्य निवेशने।

भुञ्जाना मानुषान् भोगान् सर्वकामसमृद्धिनी।। १७॥

“Enjoying human luxuries and endowed
with an abundance of all enjoyments, | dwelt
in the well-known abode of Sri Rama, a
scion of Raghu, for twelve years. (17)

ततस्त्रयोदशे ad राज्ये चेक्ष्वाकुनन्दनम्।
अभिषेचयितुं राजा सोपाध्याय: प्रचक्रमे॥ १८ il

“Then in the thirteenth year the king with
his preceptor Sage Vasistha proceeded to
install Sri Rama, the delight of the Ikswakus,
on the throne as Prince Regent. (18)

तस्मिन् सम्भियमाणे तु राघवस्याभिषेचने।
कैकेयी नाम vate वचनमब्रवीत्॥१९॥

‘While preparations for the said
installation as Prince Regent of Sri Rama, a
scion of Raghu, were being carried on,
Kaikeyl (a stepmother of Sri Rama), they
say, spoke as follows to her husband:

(19)
न fied न खादेयं प्रत्यहं मम भोजनम्।
एष मे जीवितस्यान्तो रामो यद्यभिषिच्यते॥ २०॥

“‘l shall no longer drink nor partake of
my repast from day to day. Nay, this
installation will prove to be the end of my
existence if Rama is installed on the throne.

(20)
तच्चेन्न वितथं कार्यं at गच्छतु Waa: 22 il

““‘If that well-known pledge which was
lovingly given by you, O jewel among the
protectors of men, is not going to be
dishonoured, let Rama, a scion of Raghu,
proceed to the forest.’ (21)

स राजा सत्यवाग् देव्या वरदानमनुस्मरन्।
मुमोह वचनं श्रुत्वा कैकेय्या: क्रूरमप्रियम्॥ २२॥
