630

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

पञ्चनवतितम: at:
Canto XCV

In order to humour Sita, Sri Rama gives a description
of the river Mandakini to her

अथ शैलाद् विनिष्क्रम्य मैथिलीं कोसलेश्वर:।
अदर्शयच्छुभजलां Tat मन्दाकिनीं नदीम्॥१॥
Then, turning away from the mountain,
Sri Rama, the prospective ruler of the
kingdom of Kosala, pointed out to Sita,
daughter of the king of Mithila, the delightful
river Mandakini, carrying holy waters. (1)
अब्रवबीच्च वरारोहां चन्द्रचारुनिभाननाम्।
विदेहराजस्य सुतां रामो राजीवलोचन:॥२॥
Nay, the lotus-eyed Sri Rama spoke as
follows to Sita, the daughter of the king of
Videhas, of charming limbs and with a lovely
countenance resembling the moon : (2)
विचित्रपलिनां : : af ।
कुसुमैरुपसम्पन्नां पश्य मन्दाकिनीं नदीम्॥ ३॥
नानाविधैस्तीररुहैर्वृतां पुष्पफलद्रुमै: |
राजन्तीं राजराजस्य नलिनीमिव सर्वत:॥४॥

“Behold the beautiful river Mandakini
with its delightful banks—a stream inhabited
by swans and cranes and rich in flowers,
nay, hemmed in with trees of various kinds
growing on its banks and laden with flowers
and fruits—and spreading its charms all
round like the lake Saugandhika of Kubera,
the ruler of Yaksas. (3-4)

TTgarratah CTC IESMIES| साम्प्रतम्।
तीर्थानि रमणीयानि रतिं संजनयन्ति Ane
“The delightful fords, even though their
waters are turbid just at present evidently
because herds of deer have drunk their fill
from them, exercise their charm on me. (5)
जटाजिनधरा: काले वल्कलोत्तरवासस:।
ऋषयस्त्ववगाहन्ते Act मन्दाकिनीं प्रिये॥६॥
“Sages, for their part, wearing matted
locks and with deerskin wrapped about their

loins and having the bark of trees for their
upper garment take a dip in the river
Mandakini at the appointed hour, my darling !
(6)

आदित्यमुपतिष्ठन्ते नियमादूर्ध्वबाहव: |
एते ut विशालाक्षि मुनय: संशितव्रता:॥७॥
“Here are other ascetics of austere
vows praying to the sun-god with uplifted
arms according to the scriptural injunctions,
O lady with big eyes ! (7)

मारुतोद्धूतशिखरै: wrt इव पर्वत:।
पादपै: पुष्पपत्राणि सृजद्भिरभितो नदीम्॥८॥

“With its trees—whose tops are shaken
by the wind—shedding flowers and leaves
all along the river, the mountain looks as if
it has started dancing. (8)
क्वचिन्मणिनिकाशोदां क्वचित् पुलिनशालिनीम्।
क्वचित्सिद्धजनाकोर्णां पश्य मन्दाकिनीं नदीम्॥ ९ ॥

“Behold the river Mandakini whose
waters are sparkling like pearls at one place,
nay, which looks charming with its sandy
banks at another and which is crowded with
Siddhas (a class of semi-divine beings
endowed with mystic powers from their very
birth) at a third place. (9)

निर्धूतान् वायुना पश्य विततान् पुष्पसंचयान्।
पोप्लूयमानानपरान् पश्य त्वं तनुमध्यमे॥१०॥

“Behold you heaps of flowers shaken
down by the wind and scattered on both the
banks of the river and other heaps
continuously floating along the current, O
lady with a slender waist! (10)

पश्यैतद्बल्गुवचसो रथाङ्गाह्वयना द्विजा:।
अधिरोहन्ति कल्याणि निष्कूजन्त: शुभा Fe: 1 ११॥

“Behold how _ these melodious
