* ARANYAKANDA «

अकम्पनवच: श्रुत्वा रावणो राक्षसाधिप:।
नागेन्द्र ga नि:श्वस्य sé वचनमब्रवीत्॥१२॥

Hearing the report of Akampana, and
hissing like a king-cobra, Ravana, the King
of ogres, spoke as follows : (12)

स Gan dawnt wa: सर्वामरै: सह।
उपयातो जनस्थानं ब्रूहि कच्चिदकम्पन॥ १३॥

“Speak, O Akampana, if that Rama has
come to Janasthana accompanied by Indra
(the ruler of gods) and all other gods.” (13)

रावणस्य पुनर्वाक्यं निशम्य तदकम्पन:।

आचचक्षे बलं तस्य विक्रमं च महात्मन:॥ १४॥
Hearing the aforesaid question of

Ravana, Akampana once more described

the strength and valour of that high-souled
prince as follows : (14)
Wa नाम महातेजा: श्रेष्ठ: सर्वधनुष्मताम्।
दिव्यास्त्रगुणसम्पन्न: परं धर्मं गतो Br १५॥
“Rama is indeed possessed _ of
exceptional glory, the foremost of all bowmen,
and richly endowed with prominence
attendant on skill in the use of celestial

weapons and has reached the highest peak
of valour in warfare. (15)

तस्यानुरूपो बलवान् रक्ताक्षो दुन्दुभिस्वन:।
कनीयाँल्लक्ष्मणो भ्राता राकाशशिनिभानन: ॥ १६॥

“His younger brother, Laksmana, is his
like in strength with reddish eyes, a voice
resembling the sound of a large drum and a
face shining bright as the full moon. (16)

स तेन We संयुक्त: पावकेनानिलो यथा।

star राजवरस्तेन जनस्थानं निपातितम्॥ १७॥
“Conjoined with him, that brilliant jewel

among princes, Rama, resembles the wind

united with fire; Janasthana has been

devastated by him alone. (17)

नैव tar महात्मानो art कार्यां विचारणा।

शरा रामेण तूत्सृष्टा रुक्मपुङ्खा: पतत्तिण:॥१८॥

सर्पा: पञ्चानना भूत्वा भक्षयन्ति स्म राक्षसान्।

येन येन च गच्छन्ति राक्षसा भयकर्षिता:॥१९॥

795

wt तेन स्म पश्यन्ति राममेवाग्रत: स्थितम्।
इत्थं विनाशितं तेन जनस्थानं तवानघ॥ २०॥
“Certainly no high-minded gods have
come with him: no anxiety should be
harboured on this score. Turning into five-
headed serpents, the golden-winged arrows,
provided with feathers of buzzards,
discharged by Rama, devoured the ogres.
Whatever way the ogres, stricken with fear,
went they beheld Rama alone standing in
front on that very way. In this manner, O
sinless one, was your Janasthana laid waste
by him.” (18—20)

अकम्पनवच: श्रुत्वा रावणो वाक्यमब्रवीत्।
गमिष्यामि जनस्थानं रामं हन्तुं सलक्ष्मणम्॥ २१॥
Hearing the statement of Akampana
Ravana replied as follows : “I shall proceed
to Janasthana to make short work of Rama
with Laksmana.” (21)

अथैवमुक्ते वचने प्रोवाचेदमकम्पन:।

श्रृणु राजन् SMS रामस्य बलपौरुषम्॥ २२॥
When these words were uttered by

Ravana, Akampana spoke as follows: “Hear

O king, of the might and valour of Rama as
it actually stands. (22)

असाध्य: कुपितो wat विक्रमेण महायशा:।
आपगायास्तु पूर्णाया वेगं परिहरेच्छरै:॥ २३॥
सताराग्रहनक्षत्रं नभश्चाप्यवसादयेत्।
असौ रामस्तु सीदन्तीं श्रीमानभ्युद्धरेन्महीम्॥ २४॥

“When enraged, the highly illustrious
Rama is incapable of being tamed. He can
with his arrows even stem the current of a
flooded river, and pull down even the vault
of heaven with its stars, planets and
constellations. That glorious Rama can even
lift up the sinking earth. (23-24)

भित्त्वा वेलां समुद्रस्य लोकानाप्लावयेद् विभु: |
वेगं aft समुद्रस्य ard वा विधमेच्छरै:।। २५॥

“Breaking the limits of the ocean the
powerful Rama can deluge the worlds or
even stem the tide of an ocean or scatter
the wind with his arrows. (25)
