* AYODHYAKANDA +

437

Canto XXXVIII

Incensed to hear the loud wailing of those present at the scene, on Sita being
dressed as a hermitess, DaSaratha reproaches Kaikeyi. While departing,
Sri Rama entreats his father to take care of his mother

प्रचुक्रोश जन: Gat धिक् cat दशरथं त्विति॥ १॥

On Sita wearing the bark of trees like
a helpless woman though protected by her
husband, all the people present there loudly
exclaimed, “Fie upon you, (the powerless)
DaSaratha, who does not stop this flagrant
injustice !” (1)

तेन dat प्रणादेन fad: स महीपति:।
चिच्छेद जीविते श्रद्धां धर्मे यशसि चात्मन:॥ २॥

Pained to hear that loud cry, the said
Emperor lost all his interest in life, religious
merit and renown. (2)

स नि:श्वस्योष्णमैक्ष्वाकस्तां भार्यामिदमब्रवीत्।
कैकेयि कुशचीरेण न सीता गन्तुमर्हति॥ ३॥

Heaving a sigh of grief, that scion of
Ikswaku spoke to his wife, Kaikeyi, as
follows: “Sita surely does not deserve to
depart in a robe made of KuSa grass, O
Kaikey! ! (3)

सुकुमारी च बाला च aad च सुखोचिता।
नेयं वनस्य योग्येति सत्यमाह गुरुर्मम॥४॥

“My preceptor, Vasistha, truly says that
delicate of body, young and ever used to
amenities of life, as she is, she is not fit for
residence in a forest. (4)

स्थिता विसंज्ञा श्रमणीव काचित्॥ & ॥

“Has this innocent daughter of Janaka,

a jewel among kings, really done any injury
to anyone whosoever, that having received
a robe of bark she stands dumbfounded

like an ordinary hermitess in the midst of
men? (5)
चीराण्यपास्याज्जनकस्य कन्या
नेयं प्रतिज्ञा मम दत्तपूर्वा।
यथासुखं rsd राजपुत्री
at समग्रा we सर्वरत्नै:॥६॥
“Let Sita, the daughter of Janaka, shed
her robes of bark. No such pledge that she
would accompany her husband in robes of
bark was given by me in the past. Let the
princess, therefore, proceed at pleasure to
the forest fully equipped with clothes and
ornaments and provided with all valuable
possessions. (6)

अजीवनार्हेण मया नॄशंसा

कृता प्रतिज्ञा नियमेन तावत्।
त्वया हि बाल्यात् प्रतिपन्नमेतत्

तन्मा cag वेणुमिवात्मपुष्पम्॥७॥

“In the first place a cruel promise was
made on oath by me, who no longer deserve
to survive; on top of it, this unjust act of
providing the robes of a hermitess to Sita
has been initiated by you through sheer
childishness. That is sure to consume me
even as the blossoming of a bamboo brings
about its own destruction. (7)

रामेण यदि a पापे किंचित्कृतमशोभनम्।
अपकार: क se a वैदेह्या दर्शितोऽधमे॥८॥

“Even supposing some offence was
given to you by Rama, what wrong on earth
was done to you by Sita, a princess of the
Videha territory, O vile woman? (8)

मृगीवोत्फुल्लनयना मृदुशीला मनस्विनी।

saan कमिब a करोति जनकात्मजा॥ ei
