* BALAKANDA +

199

षट्चत्वारिंश: सर्ग:
Canto XLVI

Disconsolate over the death of her sons, Diti embarks on a course of
austerities at KuSaplava with the permission of her husband, Sage
Kasyapa, with the object of securing a son capable of killing
Indra. The latter on coming to know of her intention
serves her during the period of her consecration and,
taking advantage of her falling asleep on one
occasion with her head in a wrong position,
and thereby transgressing the rules of purity,
enters her womb and carves the foetus

हतेषु तेषु पुत्रेषु दिति: परमदु:ख्रिता।
मारीचं कश्यपं नाम भर्तारमिदमब्रवीत्॥१॥
Sore afflicted on her aforesaid sons
having been killed in the course of their
conflict with the sons of Aditi, Diti addressed
her husband, named Kasyapa, son of Marici,
as follows : (1)

हतपुत्रास्मि भगवंस्तव पुत्रैर्महाबलै:।
शक्रहन्तारमिच्छामि पुत्रं दीर्घतपोऽर्जितम्॥२॥
“| have been deprived of my sons, O
venerable sage, by your very mighty sons,
the gods. Now | long for a son, secured, of
course, through prolonged askesis, that may
be able to kill Indra, the destroyer of my
sons. (2)
साहं तपश्चरिष्यामि mf A दातुमर्हसि।
sat शक्रहन्तारं त्वमनुज्ञातुमर्हसि॥ ३॥
“As such | shall practise austerities.
Be pleased, therefore, to favour me with a

powerful son capable of killing Indra. You
ought to grant me leave.” (3)

तस्यास्तद् वचनं श्रुत्वा मारीच: कश्यपस्तदा।

प्रत्युवाच महातेजा दितिं परमदु:ख्रिताम्॥४॥
Hearing her aforesaid submission, the

exceptionally glorious KaSyapa, son of Marici,

replied as follows to Diti, sore afflicted as
she was: (4)

एवं wad wk ते शुचिर्भव तपोधने।
जनयिष्यसि at त्वं शक्रहन्तारमाहवे॥५॥

“Let it be so. May all be well with you!
Observe purity till the birth of a son, O lady
rich in askesis ! In the ripeness of time you
will give birth to a son who should be able
to kill Indra in an encounter. (5)

wt वर्षसहस्रे तु शुचिर्यदि भविष्यसि।
पुत्रं रे मत्तस्त्वं जनयिष्यसि॥६॥
“At the end of full one thousand years,
provided of course you maintain purity, you
will bring forth through me a son capable of
killing Indra (the ruler of the three worlds).”
(6)
`एवमुक्त्वा महातेजा: पाणिना सम्ममार्ज ताम्।
तामालभ्य तत: स्वस्ति इत्युक्त्वा ATA AAT I ७॥
Saying so, the highly glorious sage
stroked her with his hand and then, touching
her person and pronouncing his benediction
on her, set out to resume his austerities.
(7)
Te तस्मिन् नरश्रेष्ठं दिति: परमहर्षिता।
कुशप्लवं समासाद्य तपस्तेपे सुदारुणम्॥८॥
Duly reaching Kusaplava when Kasyapa
had departed, O jewel among men, Diti, full
of great joy, began to practise most severe
austerities. (8)
तपस्तस्यां fe कुर्वत्यां परिचर्यां चकार ह।
सहस्राक्षो ats परया गुणसम्पदा॥९॥
While she practised austerities, Indra,
the thousand-eyed god, O jewel among men,
