* AYODHYAKANDA +

निश्चित्य मनसा pet सा सम्यगिति भामिनी।
Terma wa: सर्वमाचचक्षे विचक्षणा॥ २॥
Concluding in her mind the plan of
action (chalked out by Manthara) to be well-
conceived, that proud woman, shrewd as
she was, gradually unfolded to Manthara
everything that was intended by her. (2)

सा दीना निश्चयं कृत्वा मन्थरावाक्यमोहिता।
नागकन्येव नि:श्वस्य दीर्घमुष्णं च भामिनी॥ ३॥
मुहूर्तं चिन्तयामास मार्गमात्मसुखावहम्।
सा सुहृच्चार्थकामा च तं निशम्य विनिश्चयम्॥४॥
aya परमप्रीता fake wera मन्थरा।
अथ सा रुषिता cat सम्यक् Hew विनिश्चयम्॥ & ॥।
संविवेशाबला भूमौ निवेश्य भ्रुकुटिं मुखे।
ततश्चित्राणि माल्यानि दिव्यान्याभरणानि च॥६॥
अपविद्धानि कैकेय्या तानि भूमिं प्रपेदिरे।
तया तान्यपविद्धानि माल्यान्याभरणानि च॥७॥
अशोभयन्त वसुधां नक्षत्राणि यथा नभ:।
क्रोधागारे च पतिता सा बभौ मलिनाम्बरा॥ ८॥
एकवेणीं ger बद्ध्वा गतसत्त्वेव किंनरी।
आज्ञाप्य तु महाराजो राघवस्याभिषेचनम्॥९॥
उपस्थानमनुज्ञाप्य प्रविवेश निवेशनम्।
ater रामाभिषेको वै प्रसिद्ध इति जज्ञिवान्॥ १०॥
a कैकेय्या गृहं श्रेष्ठं प्रविवेश महायशा:॥११॥
पाण्डुराभ्रमिवाकाशं राहुक्कु निशाकर:।

लतागृहैश्चित्रगृहैश्चम्यकाशोकशोभितै: Wes
दान्तराजतसौवर्णवेदिकाभि: समायुतम्।
नित्यपुष्पफलैर्वृक्षैर्वापीभिरुपशोभितम् Nes

भक्ष्यैश्च विविधैरपि।।१५।।
उपपन्नं ees भूषणैस्तिदिवोपमम्।
स प्रविश्य महाराज: स्वमन्त:पुरमृद्धिमत्॥ १६॥
न ददर्श स्रियं राजा कैकेयीं शयनोत्तमे।
a कामबलसंयुक्तो रत्यर्थी मनुजाधिप:॥ १७॥
अपश्यन् दयितां भार्यां पप्रच्छ विषसाद च।
नहि तस्य पुरा देवी at वेलामत्यवर्तत॥१८॥

323

Having arrived at a definite conclusion
and heaving a doleful sigh like a girl of the
Nagas, that proud woman, wretched as she
was and had been deluded by the promptings
of Manthara, pondered awhile the path
leading to her own happiness. The aforesaid
Manthara, who was friendly to the queen
and sought her welfare, was highly pleased
to hear of that resolution, as though she had
attained the consummation of her desires.
Having made a firm resolve and assuming
a frowning aspect, the aforesaid angry queen
forthwith lay down on the floor, belonging as
she did to the weaker sex. Then such
wreaths of variegated flowers and wonderful
ornaments as had been taken off by Kaikeyi
were left on the floor (instead of being
consigned back to the casket). Those
garlands and ornaments taken off by her
adorned the floor even as stars adorn the
sky. Nay, lying on the floor in the sulking-
chamber with soiled clothes, having tightly
fastened her hair into a single braid, she
looked like a Kinnara woman whose energy
had departed. Having issued orders for the
installation of Sri Rama (a scion of Raghu)
and taking leave of his executive council,
the Emperor for his part retired to his private
apartments. He now thought that the
installation of Rama had been proclaimed
only that day. So in order to break the
delightful news to Kaikeyi (who deserved

affection), DaSaratha, who was a man of
self-control, made his way into the
gynaeceum.

To begin with the highly illustrious
king entered the excellent abode of Kaikeyi
even as the moon (that brings about the
night) would enter the sky overcast with
white clouds and marked with the presence
of Rahu (the shadow of the earth, which
falls on the moon and eclipses it). The
palace was crowded with parrots and
peacocks, nay characterized by the notes
of cranes and swans and rendered noisy
by the sound of musical instruments. It was
