# YUDDHAKANDA #

निदर्श . .
कुरुष्व सर्वायुधसायकव्यम्।
न लक्ष्मणस्यैत्य fe बाणगोचरं

त्वमद्य जीवन् सबलो गमिष्यसि॥ ३०॥ | army today.”

669

“Displaying your fully developed might,
exhaust all your weapons and arrows.
Reaching, however, the range of Laksmana’s
arrows, you shall not return alive with your
(30)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये FERS सप्ताशीतितम: A: Il ८७॥

Thus ends Canto Eighty-seven in the Yuddhakanda of the glorious Ramayana of
Valmiki, the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

Canto LXXXVIII

Exchange of hot words between Laksmana and
Indrajit, followed by a fierce fight

विभीषणवच: strat रावणि: क्रोधमूच्छित:।
अब्रवीत् परुषं वाक्यं क्रोधेनाभ्युत्पपात TN १॥
Filled with anger on hearing the reply
of Vibhisana, Indrajit (son of Ravana) spoke
harsh words again in fury. (1)
उद्यतायुधनिस्तरिंशो रथे सुसमलंकृते।
कालाश्वयुक्ते महति स्थित: कालान्तकोपम: ॥ २॥
महाप्रमाणमुद्यम्य विपुलं वेगवद् दूढम्।
धनुर्भीमबलो भीमं शारांश्चामित्रनाशनान्॥३॥
Lifting his enormous, strong and terrible
bow of considerable length, which was
endowed with great momentum, and arrows
which were capable of destroying the enemy,
the ogre, who was endowed with terrible
might and was seated in a huge chariot
artistically decorated and drawn by black
horses with his sword and other weapons
upraised, looked like Death, the destroyer
of all. (2-3)
तं ददर्श महेष्वासो रथस्थ: समलंकृत:।
अलंकृतममित्रघ्नो रावणस्यात्मजो बली॥४॥

हनूमत्पृष्ठमारूढमुदयस्थरविप्रभम् ।
उवाचैनं सुसंरब्ध: सौमित्रिं सविभीषणम्॥५॥

तांश्च वानरशार्दूलान् पश्यध्वं A पराक्रमम्।
TI मत्कार्मुकोत्सृष्टं शरवर्षं दुरासदम्॥६॥
मुक्तवर्षमिवाकाशे धारयिष्यथ संयुगे।
STI वो मामका बाणा महाकार्मुकनि:सृता:।
विधमिष्यन्ति गात्राणि तूलराशिमिवानल:॥७॥

The mighty Indrajit (son of Ravana),
the destroyer of his enemies, who was
armed with a large bow and was seated in
a chariot and fully adorned, beheld
Laksmana, who, mounted on the shoulders
of Hanuman and embellished by his own
splendour, shone like the sun appearing
on the eastern hill. Highly enraged, he
spoke as follows to Laksmana (son of
Sumitra), accompanied by Vibhisana, as
well as to those tigers among the monkeys:
“Behold my prowess. You will forthwith
sustain on the battlefield today a hail of
shafts discharged from my bow, which will
be difficult to approach like a shower poured
by clouds in the air. Today my arrows shot
from this mighty bow will consume your
bodies as fire would consume a pile of
cotton. (4—7)
