* SUNDARAKANDA +

a happy son in you. Be restored to
confidence, O Rama of noble vows! The
godlike lady Sita has been discovered: there
is no doubt about it. Nay, she has been
traced out by Hanuman and by none else.
(32)
नह्यन्य: कर्मणो gq: साधनेऽस्य हनूमत:।
हनूमतीह सिद्धिश्च मतिश्च मतिसत्तम॥ ३३॥
व्यवसायश्च शौर्यं च श्रुतं चापि प्रतिष्ठितम्।
Wear यत्र नेता स्यादङ्गदश्च हरीश्वर:॥ ३४॥
हनूमांश्चाप्यधिष्ठाता न तत्र गतिरन्यथा।
मा भूश्चिन्तासमायुक्त: सम्प्रत्यमितविक्रम॥ ३५॥
यदा fe दर्पितोदग्रा: संगता: काननौकस:।
नैषामकृतकार्याणामीदूश: स्यादुपक्रम: 1 ३६ Il

“Surely none else, other than Hanuman,
could be confident in accomplishing this
task. Nay, the capacity to accomplish a deed
as well as intelligence, as also strenuous
effort and valour and learning too are firmly
embeded in Hanuman, O prince foremost in
wisdom! In an army where Jambavan as
well as Angada, the lord of monkeys, is the
leader, and Hanuman a counsellor, failure is
out of the question. Do not feel worried any
longer. O prince of immeasurable prowess,
since the monkeys have come elated with
pride. Such conduct would not be possible
on the part of those who have not
accomplished their task. (33—36)

वनभङ्गेन जानामि मधूनां भक्षणेन a
तत: किलकिलाशब्दं शुश्रावासन्नमम्बरे॥ ३७॥

हनूमत्कर्मदृप्तानां नदतां काननौकसाम्।
किष्किन्धामुपयातानां सिद्धिं कथयतामिव॥ ३८॥
“From the fact of their having laid waste
Madhuvana and enjoyed the honey, |
conclude that they are successful.” Presently
Sugriva heard closeby in the sky a cry
expressing joy, of monkeys arrived in the
vicinity of Kiskindha, roaring and thereby
proclaiming their triumph, as it were, proud
as they are of the achievements of Hanuman.
(37-38)

281
da: scat निनादं तं कपीनां कपिसत्तम:।
आयताञ्चित्तलङ्गू; सोऽभवद्हृष्टमानस: ॥ ३९॥
Hearing the aforesaid clamour of the
monkeys, the celebrated Sugriva, the
foremost of monkeys, now felt delighted at

heart and stretched and curled his tail at the
end out of joy. (39)

आजग्मुस्तेऽपि हरयो रामदर्शनकाङ्क्षिण:।
अङ्गदं पुरत: Healt हनूमन्तं च वानरम्॥४०॥
Placing Angada as also the monkey
Hanuman at their head, all those monkeys
too, who were eager to have a look at Sri
Rama, arrived. (40)

तेऽङ्गदप्रमुखा ant: प्रहृष्टाश्च मुदान्विता:।
निपेतुर्हरिराजस्य समीपे राघवस्य च॥४१॥

Filled with joy, nay, thrilled, those
heroes, headed by Angada, descended from
the airspace close to Sugriva, the ruler of
monkeys, as well as to Sri Rama, a scion of
Raghu. (41)
हनूमांश्च महाबाहु: wore शिरसा aa: |
नियतामक्षतां देवीं राघवाय न्यवेदयत्॥४२॥

Nay, making respectful obeisance with
his head bent low, the mighty-armed
Hanuman then reported the godlike lady

Sita to be constant in her devotion to Sri
Rama and sound in body. (42)

दृष्टा देवीति हनुमद्वदनादमृतोपमम्।
आकर्ण्य वचनं रामो हर्षमाप सलक्ष्मण:॥४३॥

Sri Rama with Laksmana experienced
delight on hearing the nectar-like news from
the lips of Hanuman that the godlike lady
had been discovered. (43)

निश्चितार्थं ततस्तस्मिन् सुग्रीवं पवनात्मजे।
लक्ष्मण: प्रीतिमान् प्रीतं बहुमानादवैक्षत॥४४॥
Full of love, Laksmana_ thereupon
regarded with great esteem the joyful Sugriva,
who felt sure about the aforesaid Hanuman
(sprung from the loins of the wind-god) having
accomplished the object, viz., the discovery
of Sita. (44)
