294

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

Sri Rama, a_compeer of Lord Visnu, the | good to the entire universe and is resorted

adored of gods, intent as he is upon doing

to by the great.” (54)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्येऽयोध्याकाण्डे द्वितीय: सर्ग: ॥ 2

Thus ends Canto Two in the Ayodhyakanda of the glorious Ramayana
of Valmiki, the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

Canto ITI

Urged by the Emperor to solemnize the installation of Sri Rama as Prince
Regent, Vasistha enjoins in his turn DaSaratha’s ministers, Sumantra
and others, to get ready all requisites for the ceremony. Sent by
Sumantra, Sri Rama in the meantime calls on his father, who
announces his decision to install him as Prince Regent and
also tenders some opportune advice to him. Sri Rama’s
chums break the news to Sri Rama’s mother,

Kausalya; treasuring in his mind the
exhortation of his father and bowing
low to him, Sri Rama returns to
his own apartments

तेषामञ्जलिपद्मानि प्रगृहीतानि सर्वश:।
प्रतिगृह्याव्रवीद् राजा asa: प्रियहितं वच:॥ १॥

Answering the salutations of them all
(in the form of the hollow of their palms
joined together in the shape of a lotus bud
and placed on their forehead), the Emperor
(Dasaratha) addressed to them the following
agreeable and well-meaning reply : (1)

अहोऽस्मि परमप्रीत: प्रभावश्चातुलो मम।
यन्मे ज्येष्ठं प्रियं पुत्रं यौवराज्यस्थमिच्छथ।॥ २॥
“Ah, | feel supremely pleased and
incomparable is my fortune in that you all
desire my eldest and favourite son, Sri
Rama, to be installed in the office of Prince
Regent.” (2)

इति प्रत्य्चितान् राजा ब्राह्मणानिदमब्रवीत्।
वसिष्ठं वामदेवं च तेषामेवोपश्रृण्वताम्॥ ३॥

Having thus returned the honour done
by them (the citizens of Ayodhya and the

people hailing from the countryside), the
Emperor spoke as follows to Vasistha,
Vamadeva and other Brahmanas within the
very hearing of the former, the people of
Ayodhya and the countryside : (3)

aa: श्रीमानयं मास: पुण्य: पुष्पितकानन:।
यौवराज्याय रामस्य सर्वमेवोपकल्प्यताम्॥४॥

“The present is the splendid and sacred
month of Caitra (roughly corresponding to
March of the Gregorian calendar), when the
woodlands are adorned with blossoms (as
a mark of rejoicing). Let everything indeed
be got ready for the installation of Sri Rama
in the office of Prince Regent.” (4)

राज्ञस्तूपरते वाक्ये जनघोषो महानभूत्।
शनैस्तस्मिन् प्रशान्ते च जनघोषे जनाधिप:॥ ५॥
वसिष्ठं मुनिशार्दूलं राजा वचनमब्रवीत्।
अभिषेकाय रामस्य यत् कर्म सपरिच्छ्दम्॥६॥
तदद्य भगवन् सर्वमाज्ञापयितुमर्हसि।
ween भूमिपालस्य वसिष्ठो मुनिसत्तम:॥७॥

~~)
