# YUDDHAKANDA #

Walking clockwise round the chariot
and duly ascending it, the prowler of the
night urged the charioteer in the following
words: “Take the chariot with all speed to
the battlefield.” (8)

अथ AM राक्षसान् सर्वान् मकराक्षोऽब्रवीदिदम्।

qa सर्वे wasted पुरस्तान्मम राक्षसा:॥९ Il
Makaraksa then commanded all those

ogres, who marched with him, as follows:

“Fight you all vehemently, remaining ahead

of me, O ogres! (9)

Te राक्षसराजेन Wav महात्मना।
aa: WAL हन्तुं तावुभौ रामलक्ष्मणौ॥ oll
“| have been commanded by the high-
souled Ravana, the ruler of ogres, to kill
both the princes, Rama and Laksmana, in
combat. (10)
अद्य रामं वधिष्यामि लक्ष्मणं च निशाचरा:।
शाखामृगं च सुग्रीवं वानरांश्च शरोत्तमै:॥११॥
“| shall make short work with my
excellent shafts today of Rama and
Laksmana as well as of the monkey, Sugriva
and the other monkeys, O prowlers of the
night! (11)

अद्य शूलनिपातैश्च वानराणां महाचमूम्।
प्रदहिष्यामि सम्प्राप्तां शुष्केन्धनमिवानल:॥१२॥
“Nay, hurling pikes, | shall exterminate
today the huge army of monkeys the moment
it has duly arrived, even as a fire would
consume dry wood.” (12)

मकराक्षस्य तच्छुत्वा वचनं ते निशाचरा:।
wa नानायुधोपेता बलवन्त: समाहिता:॥ १३॥
ते कामरूपिण: क्रूरा दंष्रिण: पिङ्गलेक्षणा:।
मातंगा sa नर्दन्तो ध्वस्तकेशा भयावहा:॥ १४॥
परिवार्य महाकाया महाकायं खरात्मजम्।
अभिजग्मुस्ततो हृष्टाश्चालयन्तो AT ERTL १५॥
Rejoiced to hear the aforesaid
braggadocio of Makaraksa and surrounding
the colossal son of Khara, all those mighty,
cruel and gigantic rangers of the night, who

637

were armed with all sorts of weapons, were
steadfast and able to change their form at
will, had protruding teeth, reddish brown
eyes and dishevelled hair and as such
inspired terror, then joyously marched forward
roaring as elephants and shaking the earth.

(1383—15)

शङ्खभेरीसहस्राणामाहतानां समन्तत:।
श्ष्वेलितास्फोटितानां च तत्र शब्दो महानभूत्॥ १६॥
There arose on that occasion a great
tumult as thousands of conches and
kettledrums sounded on all sides, as well
as of leonine roars and the clapping of
arms. (16)

WUBISA करात् तस्य प्रतोद: सारथेस्तदा।
पपात सहसा Cae ध्वजस्तस्य तु रक्षस:॥ Vl
The long whip slipped all of a sudden
at that moment from the hands of
Makaraksa’s charioteer and the standard of
that ogre also suddenly fell down by the will
of Providence. (17)

तस्य ते रथसंयुक्ता हया विक्रमवर्जिता:।
चरणैराकुलैर्गत्वा दीना: सास्त्रमुखा ययु:॥ १८॥

Proceeding with faltering steps, the
well-known horses yoked to the chariot of
Makaraksa, who had given up their diversified
gait, trudged along dolefully with tears in
their eyes. (18)

Yaa पवनस्तस्मिन् सपांसु: खरदारुण:।
निर्याणे तस्य रौद्रस्य मकराक्षस्य aaa ee il

At the time of the aforesaid departure
of that fierce and evil-minded Makaraksa, a
violent and fearful dust-storm raged. (19)

तानि opt निमित्तानि राक्षसा वीर्यवत्तमा:।
अचिन्त्य निर्गता: ad aa dt रामलक्ष्मणौ।॥ २०॥

Seeing those portents, yet ignoring them,
all the ogres, who were exceedingly valiant,
set out to the region where the aforesaid
princes, Sri Rama and Laksmana, were.

(20)
