« KISKINDHAKANDA +

997

अष्टादश: सर्ग:
Canto XVIII

Sri Rama justifies his action by saying that the punishment meted out to Valt
in the form of taking his life was meet, having regard to the sin of depriving
his own younger brother of his wedded wife, of which Vali was guilty.
Repenting for his having reproached Sri Rama, Vali now seeks the
latter’s forgiveness and requests him to take care of his son,
Angada. Agreeing to do so, Sri Rama comforts Vali

इत्युक्त: प्रश्रितं वाक्यं धर्मार्थसहितं हितम्।
परुषं वालिना wat निहतेन विचेतसा॥१॥
तं निष्प्रभमिवादित्यं मुक्कततोयमिवाम्बुदम्।
उक्तवाक्यं हरिश्रेष्ठमुपशान्तमिवानलम्॥ २॥
धर्मार्थगुणसम्पन्नं हरीश्वरमनुत्तमम्।
अधिक्षिप्तस्तदा राम: पश्चाद् वालिनमब्रवीत्॥ ३॥

Spoken to at that time in the foregoing
harsh words, though seemingly courteous,
wholesome and conformable to
righteousness and worldly interests, and
reproached by Vali, who had been mortally
wounded and whose mind was confused,
Sri Rama afterwards replied in the following
excellent words, which were conformable to
righteousness and worldly interests and
salutary, to the aforesaid Vali, (the lord of
monkeys), the foremost of monkeys, who
resembled the sun shorn of its brilliance, a
cloud which had discharged its water and a
fire that had been extinguished and who
had had his say: (1—3)
धर्ममर्थं च कामं च समयं चापि लौकिकम्।
अविज्ञाय कथं बाल्यान्मामिहाद्य विगर्हसे॥४॥

“Without fully knowing the secret of
righteousness, worldly interests and
enjoyment as well as of worldly conduct,
how do you reproach me bitterly today on
this spot through ignorance? (4)

सौम्य वानरचापल्यात् त्वं मां वक्तुमिहेच्छसि॥ ५॥
“Nay, without consulting the elders,
who are richly endowed with wisdom and

esteemed by preceptors, O gentle one, you
have sought to condemn me through simian
frivolity. (5)
इक्ष्वाकूणामियं भूमि: सशैलवनकानना।

मृगपक्षिमनुष्याणां निग्रहानुग्रहेष्वपि।। ६ ।।

“This entire globe including mountains,
forests and woodlands belongs to the scions
of Ikswaku (having been bequeathed to
them by their progenitor, Manu). The right of
punishing and rewarding the beasts, birds
and human beings of this earth too vests in
them. (6)

at पालयति धर्मात्मा भरत: सत्यवानृजु:।
धर्मकामार्थतत्त्वज्ञो Pree रत:॥७॥

“Bharata—whose mind is set on virtue,
who is truthful and guileless, nay, who Knows
the truth about righteousness, self-gratification
and wealth and is intent on chastising the
evil-doers and recompensing the virtuous—
rules over the earth. (7)

wag विनयश्चोभौ afer सत्यं च सुस्थितम्।
विक्रमश्च यथा ge: स राजा देशकालवित्॥ ८॥

“He (Bharata) is a king in whom
prudence and humility both are present in
an equal degree, nay, in whom truthfulness
is firmly established as also valour as
ordained in the scriptures and who has an
idea of time and place. (8)

तस्य धर्मकृतादेशा वयमन्ये च पार्थिवा:।

चरामो वसुधां कृत्स्नां धर्मसंतानमिच्छ्व:॥ ९॥
“Having received his command for the

propagation of righteousness, we as well as
