156

them as they are destined to survive for some
more years.” Having made this observation,
Sri Rama, a scion of Raghu, who was full of
agility, put to his bow the most excellent and
supremely effulgent missile presided over by
Manu, and hurled it most angrily at the breast
of Marica. (15—17)
a तेन परमास्त्रेण मानवेन समाहत:।
सम्पूर्णं योजनशतं «fata: सागरसम्प्लवे॥१८॥
Forcibly hit with that highly excellent
missile presided over by Manu, the ogre was
flung in mid ocean, a distance of full one
hundred Yojanas (eight hundred miles). (18)
विचेतनं निघूर्णन्तं शीतेषुबलपीडितम्।
Pret दृश्य मारीचं wat लक्ष्मणमब्रवीत्॥१९॥
wa लक्ष्मण wilde मानवं मनुसंहितम्।
मोहयित्वा नयत्येनं न च प्राणैर्वियुज्यते॥ oil
Seeing Marica thrown away reeling and
struck senseless by the force of Sitesu, the
missile presided over by Manu, Sri Rama
said to Laksmana, “Behold, O Laksmana, the
power of Sitesu, the missile presided over
and tried by Manu ! It has removed the demon
to such a long distance having rendered him
senseless; still the fellow has not been
deprived of his life. (19-20)

इमानपि वधिष्यामि निर्घृणान् दुष्टचारिण:।
राक्षसान्पापकर्मस्थान् यज्ञघ्नान् रुधिराशनान्॥ २१॥
“| shall get rid of the other blood sucking
Raksasas too, who are merciless and wicked,
are given to sinful deeds and interfere with
the performance of sacrifices.” (21)
इत्युक्त्वा लक्ष्मणं चाशु लाघवं दर्शयन्निव।
विगृह्य सुमहच्चास्त्रमाग्नेयं रघुनन्दन:॥ २२॥
सुबाहूरसि चिक्षेप a विद्ध: प्रापतद् भुवि।
शेषान् वायव्यमादाय निजघान महायशा:।
wad: परमोदारो मुनीनां मुदमावहन्॥२३॥

« VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

Having spoken to Laksmana as
aforesaid and showing his agility as it were,
Sri Rama (a scion of Raghu) quickly invoked
the most excellent missile presided over by
the god of fire and hurled it at the breast of
Subahu and, pierced by it, the latter fell
dead on the ground. Invoking the missile
presided over by the wind-god, the highly
illustrious and extremely large-hearted Sri
Rama (a scion of Raghu) threw away the
rest at a distance, bringing joy thereby to all
the sages. (22-23)

स हत्वा राक्षसान् सर्वान् यज्ञघ्नान् रघुनन्दन:।
ऋषिभि: पूजितस्तत्र यथेन्द्रो विजये पुरा॥ २४॥

Having got rid in this way of all
the Raksasas that interfered with the
performance of sacrifices, Sri Rama was
honoured in that holy retreat by the Rsis
even as Indra was felicitated in the past on
his victory scored over demons. (24)

अथ यज्ञे समाप्ते तु विश्वामित्रो महामुनि: |
निरीतिका दिशो दृष्टा काकुत्स्थमिदमब्रवीत्॥ २५ ॥

The sacrificial proceedings having been
brought to a close, the great sage ViSwamitra
for his part forthwith spoke to Sri Rama (a
scion of Kakutstha) as follows on seeing
the quarters rid of all pests: (25)

कृतार्थोऽस्मि महाबाहो Hd गुरुवचस्त्वया।
स fe रामं प्रशस्यैवं ताभ्यां संध्यामुपागमत्॥ २६॥
“| stand accomplished of my purpose,
O mighty-armed and highly illustrious hero,
in that the bidding of your preceptor (in me)
has been carried out by you. Nay, the name
of this Siddhasrama too has been justified.”
Having applauded Sri Rama as aforesaid,
he offered prayers to the evening twilight
alongwith the two brothers. (26)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये बालकाण्डे त्रिंश: AW: ॥ ३० ॥

Thus ends Canto Thirty in the Balakanda of the glorious Ramayana of Valmiki,
the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

