8183

in my presence, if you would see me alive.
(20)

बहव: साधवो लोके युक्ता धर्ममनुष्ठिता:।
परेषामपराधेन विनष्टा: सपरिच्छ्दा:॥ २१॥

“Many innocent souls of right conduct
in the world, who practised virtue all their
life, have perished with their associates for
the fault of others. (21)

ase परापराधेन faa निशाचर।

कुरु यत् ते क्षमं तत्त्वमहं cat नानुयामि वै॥ २२॥
“As such | too am sure to perish for

the fault of another (viz., yourself), O ranger

of the night ! Therefore, do what is proper

for you, | for my part am not going to follow

you. (22)

was fe महातेजा महासत्त्वो महाबल:।

अपि राक्षसलोकस्य भवेदन्तकरोऽपि हि॥ २३॥
“For, Rama _ is possessed _ of

extraordinary prowess, great intellectual
calibre and inordinate strength. He can surely

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

prove to be the exterminator of the entire
world of ogres. (23)

ae शूर्पणखाहेतोर्जनस्थानगत: खर:।
stat हत: पूर्वं रामेणाक्लिष्टकर्मणा।
अत्र ब्रूहि यथातत्त्वं को रामस्य व्यतिक्रम:॥ २४॥

“If Khara, stationed in Janasthana, who
transgressed his limits on account of
Surpanakha, was killed in the past by Rama,
of unwearied action, tell me in truth, what
was the fault of Rama in this matter? (24)

इदं वचो बन्धुहितार्थिना मया
यथोच्यमानं ate नाभिषत्स्यसे।
सबान्धवस्त्यक्ष्यसि जीवितं रणे
हतोऽद्य रामेण शरैरजिह्मगै:।। २५॥

“If you do not accept this advice being
tendered in right earnest by me, seeking the
welfare of my relative in your person, you
will, when pierced by Rama with the straight-
going arrows today, will give up the ghost
with your kith and kin on the field of battle.”

(25)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्येऽरण्यकाण्डे एकोनचत्वारिं:सर्ग: ॥ ३९ Il

Thus ends Canto Thirty-nine in the Aranyakanda of the glorious Ramayana of Valmiki,
the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

Canto XL
Ravana reproaches Marica and commands him to help him in his mission

मारीचस्य तु तद् वाक्यं क्षमं युक्तं च WATT: |
set न प्रतिजग्राह मर्तुकाम इवौषधम्॥१॥

Though counselled by Marica, Ravana
for his part did not accept that proper and
reasonable advice of Marica, any more than
aman courting death would accept a remedy.

(1)
a पथ्यहितवक्तारु मारीचं राक्षसाधिप:।
अब्रवीत् wet वाक्यमयुक्तं कालचोदित:॥ २॥

Impelled by Death, Ravana, the suzerain

lord of ogres, spoke the following harsh and
ill-advised words to the said Marica, who
had tendered a salutary and friendly advice
to him: (2)
दुष्कुलैतदयुक्तार्थं मारीच मयि कशथ्यते।
वाक्यं निष्फलमत्यर्थं बीजमुप्तमिवोषरे॥ ३॥
“O Marica of ignoble descent, this ill-
conceived advice, which is being tendered

to me, is altogether fruitless like a seed
sown in a barren soil. (3)
