212

मम मातुर्महातेजो देवेन दुरनुष्ठितम्॥६॥

“Did you tell Sri Rama the old story of
the outrage which was done by Indra to my
mother, O exceptionally glorious sage? (6)

“May God bless you, O scion of Kusika !
Was my mother united once again with my
father, O jewel among ascetics, as a result of
Sri Rama’s sight and other factors? (7)

अपि मे गुरुणा wa: पूजित: कुशिकात्मज।
इहागतो महातेजा: पूजां Wer महात्मन:॥८॥
“Was Sri Rama honoured by my father,
O son of Kusika, and has this exceptionally
glorious prince come here after receiving
the hospitality of that exalted soul? (8)

अपि शान्तेन मनसा qed कुशिकात्मज।
इहागतेन रामेण पूजितेनाभिवादित:॥९॥

“Was my father greeted with a tranquil
mind by Sri Rama when arrived and honoured
by him in this grove, O son of Gadhi (a
scion of KuSa)?” (9)
ret वचनं तस्य विश्वामित्रो महामुनि:।
प्रत्युवाच शतानन्दं वाक्यज्ञो वाक्यकोविदम्॥ १०॥

Hearing his aforesaid questionnaire, the
great sage ViSwamitra, who was well-versed
in elocution, replied as follows to Satananda,
a master of expression himself : (10)
संगता मुनिना पत्नी भार्गवेणेव रेणुका॥११॥

“What ought to have been done was
done by me; no omission was made. Ahalya,
the wife of Gautama, has been re-united
with the sage (her husband), as Renuka,
mother of ParaSurama got re-united with
her spouse, Jamadagni, a scion of Bhrgu.”

(11)
तच्छुत्वा वचनं तस्य विश्चामित्रस्य धीमत:।
शतानन्दो महातेजा WH वचनमब्रवीत्॥१२॥

« VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

Hearing the aforesaid reply of the
celebrated ViSwamitra, a man of wisdom,
the exceptionally glorious Satananda spoke
to Sri Rama as follows : (12)

स्वागतं ते नरश्रेष्ठं दिष्ट्या प्राप्तोऽसि राघव।
विश्वामित्रं पुरस्कृत्य महर्षिमपराजितम्॥१३॥

“Welcome is your advent to this place,
O jewel among men! Placing at the head the
eminent seer, ViSwamitra, who cannot be
easily worsted, O scion of Raghu, you have
arrived here through our good luck. (13)
अचिन्त्यकर्मा तपसा ब्रह्मर्षिरमितप्रभ:।
विश्वामित्रो महातेजा वेद्म्येनं परमां गतिम्॥ १४॥

“The exceptionally glorious Viswamitra
is credited with achievements which cannot
even be conceived by others and has attained
to the rank of a Brahmana Rsi through sheer
dint of askesis. He is invested with a splendour
which is beyond measure. | know him to be
the highest resort of all. (14)

नास्ति धन्यतरो राम त्वत्तोऽन्यो भुवि कश्चन।
गोप्ता कुशिकपुत्रस्ते येन तप्तं महत्तप:॥१५॥
“None else on earth is more blessed
than you, O Rama, inasmuch as your
guardian is ViSwamitra, son of Kusika, by
whom great austerities have been performed.
(15)

श्रूयतां चाभिधास्यामि कौशिकस्य महात्मन:।
यथा बलं यथा तत्त्वं तन्मे निगदत: श्रृणु॥ १६॥

“Please listen! | shall point out to you
as it is the might as well as the reality of the
high-souled ViSwamitra, son of Kusika. Hear
it from me even as | speak to you. (16)

राजाऽऽसीदेष धर्मात्मा दीर्घकालमरिंदम:।

met: कृतविद्यश्च प्रजानां च fed रत:॥१७॥
“This sage has for a long time been a

pious king capable of subduing his enemies,

knowing what is right, learned and devoted
to the good of the people. (17)

प्रजापतिसुतस्त्वासीत् कुशो नाम महीपति:।
कुशस्य पुत्रो बलवान् कुशनाभ: सुधार्मिक: । १८ ॥
