434

संशये स्थाप्य मां चेदं बलं चेमं विभीषणम्।
we कृतमिदं de wed साहसप्रिय॥ ३॥
“Exposing to risk me as well as this
army as also Vibhisana standing here, O
hero fond of daring acts, this precipitate action
causing agony has been done by you. (3)

इदानीं मा कृथा वीर एवंविधमरिंदम।
त्वयि किंचित्समापन्ने किं कार्यं सीतया मम॥४॥
भरतेन महाबाहो लक्ष्मणेन यवीयसा।
शत्रुघ्नेन च शत्रुघ्न स्वशरीरेण वा पुन:॥५॥
“Never repeat such an act any more,
O tamer of foes! Had anything happened to
you, | would have had nothing to do with
Sita, Bharata, Laksmana and the still
younger Satrughna or even with my own
person, O mighty-armed destroyer of your
foes! (4-5)
त्वयि चानागते पूर्वमिति मे निश्चिता ata: |
जानतश्चापि a वीर्यं महेन्द्रवरुणोपम॥६॥
ale Wat Be सपुत्रबलवाहनम्।
अभिषिच्य च लङ्कायां विभीषणमथापि च॥७॥
भरते राज्यमारोप्य त्यक्ष्ये देहं महाबल।
wa वादिनं we सुग्रीव: प्रत्यभाषत॥८॥
“Even though | knew your valour, O
compeer of the mighty Indra and Varuna,
(the god of water), | had firmly resolved
earlier, while you had not yet returned, that
after making short work of Ravana, his
sons, army, chariots and all in combat, nay,
consecrating Vibhisana as the king of Lanka
and also installing Bharata on the throne of
Ayodhya, | should give up the ghost, O
monkey! endowed with extraordinary might!”
To Sri Rama, who was speaking in this
strain, Sugriva replied as follows: (6—8)
qa भार्यापहर्तारं eat Wea रावणम्।
मर्षयामि कथं वीर जानन् विक्रममात्मन:॥९॥
“Perceiving, as | did, Ravana, who had

borne away your consort, and knowing (as
| did) my own prowess, O gallant scion of

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA +

Raghu, how could | leave him just like
that?” (9)

gaa वादिनं वीरमभिनन्द्यं च waa:
लक्ष्मणं canoe वचनमब्रवीत्॥१०॥

Applauding the hero, who had submitted
as aforesaid, Sri Rama (a scion of Raghu)
spoke as follows to Laksmana, who was
richly endowed with loveliness: (10)
परिगृह्योदकं vit वनानि फलवन्ति च।
बलौघं संविभज्येमं व्यूह्य तिष्ठाम ASTI ११॥

“Occupying a region provided with fresh
water and woods, rich in fruit, nay, duly
dividing this multitude of troops into battalions
and drawing it up in battle array, we should
remain alert, O Laksmana! (11)

लोकक्षयकरं भीमं भयं पश्याम्युपस्थितम्।
निबर्हणं प्रवीराणामृक्षवानररक्षसाम्॥ १२॥

“| perceive a formidable danger imminent,
which bodes destruction to the world and
the extermination of eminent heroes among
the bears, monkeys and ogres. (12)

art fe wet वान्ति कम्पते च वसुंधरा।
पर्वताग्राणि dud नदन्ति धरणीधरा:॥१३॥

“Winds are actually blowing severely
and the earth is quaking. Mountain-peaks
are shaking and the elephants bearing the
earth (in the four quarters and the four
intermediate points) are trumpeting. (13)

RU: Ht प्रवर्षन्ते fret शोणितबिन्दुभि: i १४॥
“Fierce and unkind clouds closely
resembling carnivorous animals and emitting
a harsh sound are cruelly letting loose
showers mingled with drops of blood. (14)
रक्तचन्दनसंकाशा deat परमदारुणा।
ज्वलच्च निपतत्येतदादित्यादग्निमण्डलम्॥ १५॥
“The evening twilight, resembling red
sandalwood in colour, appears most lurid.

And from the sun is falling this blazing mass
of fire. (15)
