550

धनु:शतपरीणाह: स षट्शतसमुच्छित:।
Wa: शकटचक्राक्षो महापर्वतसंनिभ:॥४१॥
संनिपत्य च रक्षांसि दग्धशैलोपमो महान्।
कुम्भकर्णो महावक्त्र: प्रहसन्निदमब्रवीत्॥४२॥

Nay, deploying the ogres in battle-array,
the mighty Kumbhakarna, who was now a
hundred bows in breadth and six hundred in
height, was fierce with eyes resembling the
wheels of a chariot and presented the
appearance of a huge mountain (in size),
was endowed with an enormous mouth and
looked like a charred mountain in hue, spoke
as follows, laughing heartily as he spoke:

(41-42)

अद्य वानरमुख्यानां तानि यूथानि भागश:।
निर्दहिष्यामि deg: पतङ्गानिव पावक:॥४३॥

“Filled with fury, I shall severally
consume today, even as a flame would

consume moths, the battalions of the
foremost of monkeys. (43)

नापराध्यन्ति A कामं वानरा वनचारिण:।
जातिरस्मद्विधानां सा पुरोद्यानविभूषणम्॥४४॥

“The monkeys, who are wont to roam
about in the woods, have never given me
offence of their own will. The species, in
fact, serve as an ornament of the urban
gardens of people like us. (44)

पुररोधस्य मूलं तु राघव: सहलक्ष्मण:।
ad तस्मिन् ad सर्वं तं वधिष्यामि संयुगे॥ ४५ tl
“The cause of the city being besieged,
however, is Rama (a scion of Raghu)
accompanied by Laksmana? | shall, therefore,
first of all get rid of him in combat. He
being disposed of, all will be destroyed.”
(45)

Ue तस्य ब्रुवाणस्य कुम्भकर्णस्य राक्षसा:।
Ae चक्रुर्महाघोरं कम्पयन्त इवार्णवम्॥४६॥
While the bellicose Kumbhakarna was

speaking in this strain, the ogres, who
accompanied him, raised an exceedingly

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA +

terrible uproar, agitating the sea, as it were.
(46)

तस्य निष्पततस्तूर्णं कुम्भकर्णस्य धीमत:।
बभूवुर्घोररूपाणि निमित्तानि समन्तत:॥४७॥

Even as the said Kumbhakarna, who
was full of intelligence, rushed forth with
impetuosity, portents of fearful aspect
appeared on all sides. (47)

उल्काशनियुता मेघा बभूवुर्गर्दभारुणा:।

ससागरवना da वसुधा समकम्पत॥४८॥

Clouds ashy in colour like donkeys
appeared alongwith shooting stars and
strokes of lightning. And the earth too, with
its seas and forests, violently shook. (48)

area: शिवा Ag: सज्वालकवलैर्मुखै:।
मण्डलान्यपसव्यानि बबन्धुश्च विहंगमा:॥४९॥

She-jackals of hideous aspect howled
with flaming morsels in their mouths. And
birds flew in circle round from right to left. (49)

निष्पपात च गृध्रोऽस्य शूले वै पथि गच्छत:।
प्रास्फुरन्नयनं चास्य सव्यो बाहुरकम्पत॥५०॥
A vulture actually alighted on his pike
as he was marching along the road. His
left eye twitched and his left arm throbbed.
(50)

निष्पपात तदा चोल्का ज्वलन्ती भीमनि:स्वना |
आदित्यो निष्प्रभश्चासीन्न वाति च सुखोऽनिल: ।। ५१ ॥

Nay, a flaming meteor then fell with a
terrible crash. The sun too lost its brilliance
and no delightful wind blew. (51)

अचिन्तयन् महोत्पातानुदितान् रोमहर्षणान्।
निर्ययौ कुम्भकर्णस्तु कृतान्तबलचोदित:॥ ५२॥

Not minding in the least the mighty
portents, which appeared and which made
one’s hair stand on end, Kumbhakarna,
however, sallied forth, propelled as he was
by the force of destiny. (52)

स लङ्घयित्वा Went पद्भ्यां पर्वतसंनिभ:।
ददर्शाभ्रघनप्रख्यं वानरानीकमद्भुतम्॥ ५३ ॥
