# YUDDHAKANDA #

ऋॠषयो वानराश्चैव नेदुर्देवाश्च सासुरा:।
हनूमानथ तेजस्वी लक्ष्मणं रावणार्दितम्॥११८॥
वायुसूनो: erat भक्तया परमया च स:।
शत्रूणामप्यकम्प्योऽपि लघुत्वमगमत् HUA: 1 ११९॥
Ravana fainted, and as such lost his
consciousness and could not know where
he was. Seeing Ravana of redoubtable
prowess in combat, senseless, the Rsis
(seers of Vedic Mantras) as well as the
monkeys as also the gods including the
demons (invisibly present on the scene)
shouted in joy. Clasping Laksmana, wounded
by Ravana, with his arms, the courageous
Hanuman forthwith brought him to the
presence of Sri Rama (a scion of Raghu).
Due to Hanuman’s affection and extreme
devotion to him, Laksmana became light for
the former, even though he was unshakable
for his enemies. (117—119)

तं समुत्सृज्य सा शक्ति: सौमित्रिं युधि निर्जितम्।
रावणस्य रथे तस्मिन् स्थानं पुनरुषागमत्॥ १२०॥
Leaving for good Sumitra’s son, who
had been well-nigh vanquished in battle, the
aforesaid javelin returned to its allotted
position in the well-known chariot of Ravana.
(120)

रावणोऽपि महातेजा: प्राप्य संज्ञां महाहवे।

stad निशितान् बाणाञ्जग्राह च महद्धनु:॥ १२१॥
Regaining his consciousness in the

course of the major conflict, Ravana too,

who was endowed with extraordinary energy,

took up sharp arrows and further seized a

large bow. (121)

आश्वस्तश्च विशल्यश्च लक्ष्मण: शत्रुसूदन:।
विष्णोर्भागममीमांस्यमात्मानं प्रत्यनुस्मरन्॥१२२॥

Recollecting himself to be an
inconceivable part of Lord Visnu, Laksmana
too, the destroyer of his enemies, regained
his consciousness and had his wounds
healed up. (122)

519

निपातितमहावीरां वानराणां महाचमूम्।
राघवस्तु रणे दृष्टवा रावणं समभिद्रवत्॥ १२३॥
Finding that the huge army of monkeys
had its mighty heroes struck down on the
battlefield, Sri Rama (a scion of Raghu) for
his part duly assailed Ravana. (123)
मम OS समारुह्य राक्षसं शास्तुमर्हसि॥ १२४॥
विष्णुर्यथा गरुत्मन्तमारुह्यामरवैरिणम्।
तच्छुत्वा राघवो वाक्यं वायुपुत्रेण भाषितम्॥ १२५ ॥
अथारुरोह We हनूमन्तं महाकपिम्।
Tea रावणं संख्ये ददर्शं मनुजाधिप:॥ १२६॥

Approaching him, Hanuman forthwith
submitted as follows: “You should subdue
the ogre only after climbing on my shoulders
even as Lord Visnu tamed Madhu (an
enemy of gods) after mounting the back
of Garuda (the king of birds, His own
carrier).” Hearing the aforesaid prayer uttered
by Hanuman (son of the wind-god), Sri
Rama (a scion of Raghu) thereupon
precipitately climbed on the shoulders of the
great monkey, Hanuman. Sri Rama (the
suzerain lord of human beings) saw Ravana
mounted on his chariot on the field of battle.

(124—126)

तमालोक्य महातेजा: प्रदुद्राव स रावणम्।
वैरोचनमिव क्रुद्धो विष्णुरभ्युद्यतायुध:॥ १२७॥

Beholding him, Sri Rama, who was
endowed with extraordinary energy, rushed
furiously towards Ravana, even as
Visnu darted with his discus upraised
against the demon Bali, son of Virocana.

(127)

ज्याशब्दमकरोत् तीव्रं वज्रनिष्पेषनिष्ठुरम्।
गिरा गम्भीरया रामो राक्षसेन्द्रमुवाच ह॥ १२८ i

He caused the string of his bow to
make a sharp ringing sound, piercing
as a clap of thunder by drawing it and
spoke as follows to Ravana, the ruler
of ogres, in a deep voice, so the tradition
goes: (128)
