# YUDDHAKANDA #

“The coat of mail bestowed on me by
Brahma, which is effulgent like the sun,
could not be pierced in the course of my
conflicts with the gods and demons, even
by those who held the thunderbolt in their
fists. (30)
wt मामद्य dah रथस्थमिह संयुगे।
प्रतीयात् कोऽद्य मामाजौ साक्षादपि Gat: 1 ३१॥

“Who will, be it Indra, the destroyer of
strongholds, himself dare to withstand on
the battlefield today me when mounted on
my chariot on this field of battle and duly
equipped with the aforesaid armour? (31)
यत् तदाभिप्रसन्नेन सशरं कार्मुकं महत्।
देवासुरविमर्देषु मम दत्तं स्वयंभुवा॥३२॥
wa तूर्यशतैर्भीमं धनुरुत्थाप्यतां मम।
रामलक्ष्मणयोरेव वधाय परमाहवे ।। ३३॥

“Nay, let that mighty and redoubtable
bow of mine, which was bestowed at that
time on me alongwith arrows by Brahma
(the self-born creator), gratified on the
occasion of my conflicts with the gods and
demons, be transported today to the
accompaniment of hundreds of trumpets for
making short work of Rama and Laksmana
exclusively in a major encounter.” (32-33)

स पुत्रवधसंतप्त: Ht: क्रोधवशं गत:।
समीक्ष्य रावणो बुद्ध्या सीतां हन्तुं व्यवस्यत॥ ३४॥

Deeply pondering with his mind, the
cruel Ravana, who was tormented by the

death of his eldest son, Indrajit, and,
overpowered by anger, resolved to kill
Sita. (34)

प्रत्यवेक्ष्य q ताम्राक्ष: Gant घोरदर्शन:।
दीनो दीनस्वरान् सर्वांस्तानुवाच निशाचरान्॥ ३५॥

Looking fixedly with bloodshot eyes on
all the aforesaid rangers of the night, who
were making plaintive sounds, the ferocious
Ravana for his part, who had assumed a
terrible aspect, though feeling distressed,
spoke to them as follows: (35)

695

मायया मम वत्सेन aged वनौकसाम्।
किंचिदेव ad aa सीतेयमिति दर्शितम्॥ 36 1
“In order to hoodwink the monkeys (lit.,
the denizens of the forest) something which
had been killed on the field of battle was
displayed by recourse to Maya (conjuring
tricks), as Sita by my child, Indrajit. (36)
तदिदं तथ्यमेवाहँ करिष्ये प्रियमात्मन:।
वैदेहीं नाशयिष्यामि क्षत्रबन्धुमनुव्रताम्॥३७॥
“| shall presently convert that hoax into
a hard reality and thereby do that which is
pleasing to me. | shall finish Sita (a princess
of the Videha kingdom), who is devoted to
Rama, a vile Ksatriya.” (37)

इत्येवमुक्त्वा सचिवान् खड्गमाशु परामृशत्।
उद्धृत्य गुणसम्पन्नं विमलाम्बरवर्चसम्॥ ३८॥

Having spoken as aforesaid to his
ministers and drawing his excellent sword,
which was bright as the stainless sky, Ravana
instantly seized hold of it. (38)

निष्पपात स वेगेन सभार्य: सचिवैर्वृत:।
रावण: पुत्रशोकेन भृशमाकुलचेतन:॥३९॥

Nay, taking the sword, and feeling highly
enraged, the aforesaid Ravana, who was
accompanied by his principal spouse,
Mandodari, and surrounded by his ministers,
and whose understanding was_ utterly
confused through grief caused by the death
of his eldest son, precipitately rushed with
impetuosity to the place where Sita, the
princess of Mithila, was. Perceiving the ogre
marching, his ministers emitted leonine roars.
Nay, hugging one another on perceiving the
ogre infuriated, they spoke as _ follows:
“Both the aforesaid brothers, Rama and
Laksmana, will tremble to see this ogre
today. (39—41)
संक्रुद्ध: खड्गमादाय सहसा aa मैथिली।
व्रजन्तं राक्षसं प्रेक्ष्य सिंहनादं विचुक्रुशु:॥४०॥

ऊचुश्चान्योन्यमालिङ्गय संक्रुद्धं प्रेक्ष्य राक्षसम्।
अद्यैनं तावुभौ Gear भ्रातरौ प्रव्यथिष्यत:॥४१॥
