श्रीसीतारामचन्द्राभ्यां नम:

श्रीमद्वाल्मीकोयरामायणाम्
aicih Us

Srimad Valmiki-Ramayana
Book One
(Balakanda)

प्रथमस:

सर्ग:

Canto |

The celestial sage Narada narrates to Valmiki the
Story of Sri Rama in a nutshell

ॐ तप:स्वाध्यायनिरतं तपस्वी वाग्विदां वरम्।
ane परिपप्रच्छ वाल्मीकिर्मुनिपुङ्खवम्॥१॥

The ascetic Valmiki put the following
question direct to Narada, the chief of hermits,
nay, the foremost of those skilled in
expression, who remains ever engaged in
askesis and self-study—the study of the
Vedas : (1)

कोन्वस्मिन्साम्प्रतं लोके गुणवान् कश्च वीर्यवान्।
धर्मज्ञश्च कृतज्ञश्च सत्यवाक्यो ad:
“Who can possibly be full of virtues in
this world at present? Nay, who is possessed
of prowess and knows what is right? Who is
conscious of services done, truthful of speech
and firm of resolve? (2)

चारित्रेण च को am: सर्वभूतेषु को fea:
विद्वान् क: क: समर्थश्च कश्चैकप्रियदर्शन:॥ ३॥
“Who is possessed of right conduct and
who is friendly to all living beings? Who is a
man of knowledge? Nay, who is powerful and
who has a singularly lovable appearance? (3)
आत्मवान् को जितक्रोधो द्युतिमान् कोऽनसूयक: ।
we बिभ्यति देवाश्च जातरोषस्य संयुगे॥४॥

“Who has subdued his self? Who has
conquered anger? Who is possessed of
splendour and who is above fault-finding,
and whom do the very gods dread when his
wrath has been (apparently) provoked in
battle? (4)
एतदिच्छाम्यहं sit ut कौतूहलं fe a
महर्षे त्वं समर्थोऽसि ज्ञातुमेवंविधं नरम्॥५॥

“| wish to hear this; for there is a great
curiosity in my mind about it, while you are
capable of knowing such a man, O eminent
seer !” (5)
श्रुत्वा चैतत्त्रिलोकज्ञो वाल्मीकेर्नारदो aa: |
श्रूयतामिति wast प्रहृष्टो वाक्यमब्रवीत्॥६॥

Hearing this appeal of Valmiki, the
sage Narada, who possessed knowledge
of the three worlds, said, “Listen!” and

greatly delighted, addressed the following
words : (6)

बहवो दुर्लभाश्चैव ये त्वया कीर्तिता गुणा:।
WA वक्ष्याम्यहं बुद्ध्वा तैर्युक्त: श्रूयतां नर:॥७॥
“| shall duly consider and tell you of

such a hero. Be pleased to hear from me of
the man endowed with the manifold and
