# YUDDHAKANDA +

Wa परमक्रुद्धा: समुत्पत्य च राक्षसा:।
अब्रुवन् रावणं wd प्रदीप्ता sa तेजसा॥७५॥

Firmly grasping iron clubs, sharp-edged
spears, pikes, darts, javelins and axes as
also bows with excellent arrows as well as
swords shining like a vast expanse of water,
and jumping up, the ogres Nikumbha,
Rabhasa, SuryaSatru, who was endowed
with extraordinary strength, Suptaghna and
Yajhakopa, Mahaparswa and Mahodara, nay,
Agniketu, who was difficult to overpower,
and the ogre Rasmiketu, as also Indrajit,
the lusty eldest son of Ravana, who was
endowed with extraordinary energy, Prahasta
and Virupaksa, Vajradarmmstra, who was
endowed with extraordinary might, and
Dhumraksa as also Atikaya as well as the
ogre Durmukha, who were all extremely
enraged, and were flaming as it were with
glory, thereupon submitted to Ravana as
follows: (1—5)

अद्य रामं वधिष्याम: सुग्रीवं च सलक्ष्मणम्।

put च हनूमन्तं लङ्का येन प्रधर्षिता॥६॥
“Today we shall dispose of Rama and

Sugriva with Laksmana, as well as the

wretched Hanuman, by whom Lanka was
outraged.” (6)

तान्गृहीतायुधान् सर्वान् वारयित्वा विभीषण: |
अब्रवीत् प्राञ्जलिर्वाक्यं पुन: प्रत्युपवेश्य तान्॥७॥
Restraining them all, who stood seizing
hold of their weapons, and then pressing
them to resume their seats, Vibhisana
(Ravana’s youngest half-brother) submitted
as follows with joined palms: (7)

अप्युपायैस्त्रिभिस्तात योऽर्थ: प्राप्तुं न शक्यते।
तस्य विक्रमकालांस्तान् युक्तानाहुर्मनीषिण: ॥ ८॥
“The wise declare the well-known
occasions for exhibiting prowess appropriate
to that end only which cannot be attained

321

with all the other three expedients, viz.,
conciliation, gift and sowing seeds of
dissension, O dear brother! (8)

प्रमत्तेष्वभियुक्तेषु दैवेन प्रहतेषु च।
विक्रमास्तात सिद्ध्यन्ति परीक्ष्य विधिना कृता:॥ ९॥

“Deeds of valour which are performed
according to the prescribed method, after
being duly tested, O dear brother, succeed
only against those who are wanton, who
have already been attacked by another
enemy or who stand doomed by an adverse
fate. (9)
अप्रमत्तं कथं तं तु fates बले स्थितम्।
जितरोषं दुराधर्षं तं धर्षयितुमिच्छथ॥ १०॥

“How do you seek to overcome the
celebrated Rama, who is, on the contrary,
watchful, is keen to conquer, is supported
by divine power, has subdued anger and is
difficult to overpower? (10)
समुद्रं लङ्घयित्वा q ut नदनदीपतिम्।

Tht हनूमतो लोके को विद्यात् Achat वा॥११॥

“Who in the world can know or even
conceive the speed of Hanuman, who for
his part came over to Lanka, leaping
across the sea, the formidable lord of rivers
and streams? (11)

बलान्यपरिमेयानि वीर्याणि च निशाचरा:।
Wet सहसावज्ञा न कर्तव्या कथंचन॥१२॥

“Inestimable are the troops at the
disposal of Rama and so is his power, O
rangers of the night! Underestimation should
not be precipitately made in any case in
respect of enemies. (12)

fe च राक्षसराजस्य रामेणापकृतं पुरा।

आजहार WRIA यस्य ATA यशस्विन: । १३॥
“Moreover, what offence was given to

the ruler of ogres by the illustrious Rama,

whose consort the former bore away from
Janasthana? (13)
