364

wedded wife, nay, my beloved life itself.
(7)

fe पुनर्मनुजेन्द्रेण स्वयं far wetted: |

तव च प्रियकामार्थं प्रतिज्ञामनुपालयन्॥८॥

“How much more gladly shall | part
with all these when enjoined by my father,
the Emperor himself, and that too with intent
to please you and in order to honour the
pledge given by him to you? (8)
aaa मन्दमश्रूणि मुञ्चति॥९॥

“Therefore, reassure to that effect the
bashful monarch. But why should it be that
the Emperor gently sheds tears with his
eyes riveted on the ground? (9)

Ter चैवानयितुं दूता: शीघ्रजवैर्हयै:।
भरतं मातुलकुलादद्यैव नृपशासनात्॥१०॥

“Nay, let messengers proceed this very
day on horses possessing a swift speed
under orders of the king in order to bring
Bharata from his maternal uncle’s home.(10)

दण्डकारण्यमेषोऽहं गच्छाम्येव fe सत्वर:।
अविचार्य पितुर्वाक्यं समा वस्तुं चतुर्दश॥ ११॥

“Here do | actually proceed with quick
steps without fail to the Dandaka forest in
order to live there for fourteen years, without
calling in question the command of my
father.” (11)

सा RST तस्य तद्वाक्यं श्रुत्वा रामस्य कैकयी ।
प्रस्थानं श्रद्दधाना सा त्वरयामास राघवम्॥१२॥

The wicked Kaikeyi felt rejoiced to hear
that reply of Sri Rama. Confident of his
departure to the forest, she urged in the
following words Sri Rama, a scion of Raghu,
to look sharp: (12)

एवं Wad यास्यन्ति दूता: शीघ्रजवैर्हयै:।

wd मातुलकुलादिहावर्तयितुं नरा:॥१३॥
“Let it be so! Messengers and other

men shall depart on horses possessing a

swift speed to bring back Bharata here from
his maternal uncle’s abode. (13)

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

तव त्वहं ad मन्ये नोत्सुकस्य विलम्बनम्।

TH तस्मादित: vit at त्वं गन्तुमर्हसि॥ १४॥
“| do not in any case deem it advisable

for you to tarry any longer, keen as you are

to depart for the woods, O Rama! Therefore

you ought to proceed quickly to the forest

from this place. (14)

नैतत् किंचिन्नरश्रेष्ठं मन्युरेषोऽपनीयताम्॥१५॥

“That the king does not speak to you
himself, shy as he is in asking you, his pet
son, to relinquish the throne and leave
Ayodhya, matters little, O jewel among men !
So, let this compunction be banished from
your mind. (15)
यावत्त्वं न ad यात: पुरादस्मादतित्वरम्।
पिता तावन्न ते राम स्नास्यते भोक्ष्यतेऽपि aT १६ Ul

“So long as you do not depart posthaste
from this city, your father, O Rama, would
neither bathe nor have his meals.” _— (16)

धिक्कष्टमिति नि:श्वस्य राजा शोकपरिप्लुत: ।
Wrest न्यपतत् तस्मिन् पर्यङ्के हेमभूषिते॥१७॥

Drawing a deep audible breath with the
words “What a shame! How painful!” on
his lips, the king, overwhelmed with grief,
dropped down unconscious on that couch
inlaid with gold. (17)
रामोऽप्युत्थाप्य राजानं कैकेय्याभिप्रचोदित:।
कशयेव हतो वाजी at गन्तुं Haar Ve

Raising up the king, Sri Rama too,
when urged on face to face by Kaikeyi,
made haste to proceed to the forest even
as a horse lashed with a whip. (18)

तदप्रियमनार्याया वचनं दारुणोदयम्।

श्रुत्वा गतव्यथो राम: कैकेयीं वाक्यमब्रवीत्॥ १९॥
Hearing that unpalatable and poignant

remark of the impolite lady, Sri Rama, who

was unknown to anguish, spoke to Kaikeyi
as follows : (19)

नाहमर्थपरो देवि लोकमावस्तुमुत्सहे।
विद्धि मामृषिभिस्तुल्यं विमलं धर्ममास्थितम्॥ २०॥
