898

लक्ष्मणादथ चादाय Tar निष्पीड्यं कार्मुकम्।
शरमादाय संदीप्तं घोरमाशीविषोपमम्॥७४॥
संदधे धनुषि श्रीमान् we: परपुरञ्जय:।
युगान्ताग्निरिव क्रुद्ध se वचनमब्रवीत्॥७५॥

Then, taking his bow from Laksmana
and holding it tightly with his fist and snatching
from his quiver a dreadful and blazing shaft
resembling a venomous serpent, the glorious
Rama, the conqueror of the enemies’
stronghold, put it to his bow and, provoked
to anger like the fire flaring up at the time of
universal destruction, spoke as follows to
Laksmana : (74-75)

यथा जरा यथा मृत्युर्यथा कालो यथा विधि: |
नित्यं न प्रतिहन्यन्ते सर्वभूतेषु लक्ष्मण।
तथाहं क्रोधसंयुक्तो न निवार्योऽस्म्यसंशयम्॥ ७६॥

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

“Even as old age, death, the Time-
Spirit and destiny assailing all created beings
cannot be warded off, O Laksmana, so |,
when filled with wrath am without doubt
incapable of being repelled. (76)

Twa मे चारुदतीमनिन्दितां

दिशन्ति सीतां यदि नाद्य मैथिलीम्।
सदेवगन्धर्वमनुष्यपन्नगं

WT सशैलं परिवर्तयाम्यहम्॥ ७७॥

“If gods do not restore to me this very
day Sita, the princess of Mithila, who is
possessed of charming teeth and is beyond
reproach, as she was before, | will upset

the whole world consisting of gods,
Gandharvas, human beings and Nagas,
inclusive of mountains. (77)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्येऽरण्यकाण्डे चतु:षष्टितम: सर्ग: ॥ ६४॥

Thus ends Canto Sixty-four in the Aranyakanda of the glorious Ramayana of Valmiki,
the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

Canto LXV
Laksmana consoles Sri Rama

aaa तदा रामं सीताहरणकर्शितम्।
लोकानामभवे युक्तं सांवर्तकमिवानलम्॥१॥
वीक्षमाणं धनु: सज्यं नि:श्वसन्तं पुन: WA: I
दग्धुकामं जगत् We युगान्ते च यथा BANU
अदृष्टपूर्वं संक्रुद्धं दृष्टवा रामं स लक्ष्मण:।
अब्रवीत् प्राञ्जलिर्वाक्यं मुखेन परिशुष्यता॥ ३॥
Perceiving Sri Rama suffering agony
at that time, emaciated as he was due to
abduction of Sita, and intent on the annihilation
of the worlds like the fire at the time of
universal dissolution, nay, gazing on his
stringed bow, sighing again and again, and
desiring to consume the whole world like
Lord Siva (the Destroyer of the universe) at
the end of the world-cycle, enraged as he
was as never seen before, the aforesaid

Laksmana submitted as follows with joined
palms and lips getting parched : (1—3)

पुरा भूत्वा मृदुर्दान्त: सर्वभूतहिते रत:।
न क्रोधवशमापन्न: प्रकृतिं हातुमर्हसि॥४॥

“Having been mild, disciplined and
devoted to the good of all created beings
before, you should not abandon your nature,
now that you have fallen a prey to anger. (4)

चन्द्रे लक्ष्मी: Wa ga गतिर्वायौ भुवि क्षमा।
एतच्च नियतं fet त्वयि चानुत्तमं यश:॥५॥
“As loveliness dwells in the moon,
brilliance in the sun, movement in the wind
and forbearance in the earth, all these as
also unsurpassed fame ever invariably dwell
in you. (5)
