* AYODHYAKANDA +

“Bending it a little in a mere instant and
fixing the string to it, the very mighty prince,
who was full of valour, quickly drew it at full
length. (48)

तेनापूरयता वेगान्मध्ये भग्नं द्विधा धनु:।
तस्य शब्दोऽभवद् भीम: पतितस्याशनेर्यथा॥४९॥

“The bow was broken in two at the
middle by Sri Rama while he was pulling it
with force. A terrific sound like that of a
thunderbolt falling on earth rose from it. (49)

ततोऽहं aa ware पित्रा सत्याभिसंधिना।
उद्यता दातुमुद्यम्य जलभाजनमुत्तमम्॥५०॥

“| was then kept by my father—who is
true to his promise and had by his side an
excellent vessel of water in order to wash
the feet and hands of the bridegroom as a
token of respect before giving me away to
him in marriage—in readiness for being given
away on that very spot to Sri Rama. (50)

दीयमानां न तु तदा प्रतिजग्राह waa: |
अविज्ञाय पितुश्छन्दमयोध्याधिपते: प्रभो:॥ ५१॥

“Not knowing full well the mind of his
father, the paramount ruler of Ayodhya and

711

his master, Sri Rama, a scion of Raghu,
however, did not accept me as a bride while
| was being offered in marriage. (51)
तत: श्वशुरमामन्त्य age दशरथं नृपम्।
wa पित्रा wae दत्तां ware विदितात्मने॥५२॥
“Thereupon inviting to his capital my
father-in-law, the aged King DaSaratha, | for
my part was then given away in marriage to
Sri Rama, who has realized the Self. (52)

मम चैवानुजा साध्वी ऊर्मिला शुभदर्शना।
भार्यार्थे लक्ष्मणस्यापि दत्ता पित्रा मम स्वयम्॥ ५३ ॥

“My younger sister, the virtuous Urmila
of blessed appearance, was also given away
by my father of his own accord to Laksmana
for being taken to wife. (53)
एवं दत्तास्मि रामाय तथा तस्मिन् स्वयंवरे।
अनुरक्तास्मि धर्मेण पतिं वीर्यवतां वरम्॥७५४॥

“Thus | was given away in marriage to
Sri Rama in that wise on the aforesaid
occasion of election of a bridegroom by
myself. And since then | remain devoted
with piety to my husband, the foremost of
those who are possessed of valour.” (54)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्येऽयोध्याकाण्डेऽष्टादशाधिकशततम: सर्ग: ॥ ११८ il

Thus ends Canto One hundred and eighteen in the Ayodhyakanda of the glorious
Ramayana of Valmiki, the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

