686

Indrajit, a victor in combat, who was endowed
with extraordinary energy, thereupon put to
his bow a flaming missile presided over by
the god of fire, as if he was going to destroy
the world with it. (56)

सौरेणास्त्रेण तद् वीरो लक्ष्मण: पर्यवारयत्।
अस्त्रं निवारितं दृष्ट्वा रावणि: क्रोधमूच्छित: ॥ ५७॥
The gallant Laksmana, however,
diverted it with a missile presided over by
the sun-god. Seeing the missile repelled,
Indrajit, son of Ravana was filled with
anger. (57)
sree निशितं बाणमासुरं शत्रुदारणम्।
तस्माच्चापाद् विनिष्पेतुर्भास्वरा: PETRI: । ५८ ॥
शूलानि च भुशुण्ड्यश्चगदा: खड्गा: परश्वधा: |
Ae दृष्टवा लक्ष्मण: संख्ये घोरमस्त्रमथासुरम्॥ ५९॥
अवार्यं सर्वभूतानां सर्वशस्त्रविदारणम्।
माहेश्वरेण द्युतिमांस्तदस्त्रं प्रत्यवारयत्॥६०॥
He seized hold of a sharp arrow used
by demons and capable of destroying the
enemy. The moment he set it to his bow
shining Kutamudgaras (a concealed weapon
similar to a hammer), darts as well as
Bhusundis, maces, swords and axes issued
from his bow. Seeing that formidable missile,
popular among the demons, which could
not be repelled even by all created beings
taken together and was _ capable of
destroying all weapons, the glorious
Laksmana diverted it by means of a missile
presided over by Maheswara, the mighty
Lord Siva. (58—60)

wat: समभवद् युद्धमद्भुतं रोमहर्षणम्।
गगनस्थानि भूतानि लक्ष्मणं पर्यवारयन्॥६१॥

There ensued between them a wonderful
contest, which made one’s hair stand on
end. Created beings standing in the air
surrounded Laksmana in order to ensure
his protection. (61)

भैरवाभिरुते भीमे युद्धे वानररक्षसाम्।
भूतैर्बहुभिराकाशं विस्मितैराव्रतं बभौ॥६२॥

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA +

In the course of that terrible conflict
between the monkeys and ogres, which
was accompanied by frightful yells, the sky,
which was filled with numerous created
beings that stood astonished, looked
charming. (62)
ea: पितरो देवा गन्धर्वगरुडोरगा:।
Wad पुरस्कृत्य रसक्षुर्लक्ष्मणं रणे॥६३॥

Placing Indra (who is supposed to have
performed in his previous existence a
hundred horse-sacrifices as a condition
precedent for his attaining Indrahood) at
their head, Rsis (the seers of Vedic
Mantras), manes, gods, Gandharvas
(celestial musicians), eagles and serpents
protected Laksmana on the field of battle
against all evil by uttering shouts of victory.

(63)
अथान्यं मार्गणश्रेष्ठं संदधे राघवानुज:।
हुताशनसमस्पर्शं रावणात्मजदारणम्॥ ६४॥
सुपत्रमनुवृत्ताङ्गं सुपर्वाणं सुसंस्थितम्।
सुवर्णविकृतं वीर: शरीरान्तकरं शरम्॥६५॥
दुरावारं dawg राक्षसानां भयावहम्।
आशीविषविषप्रख्यं देवसंघै: समचितम्॥६६॥
येन शक्रो महातेजा दानवानजयत् प्रभु:।
पुरा देवासुरे युद्धे dam हरिवाहन:॥६७॥

In the meantime Laksmana, a younger
brother of Rama, put to his bow another
excellent arrow, whose impact was similar
to that of fire and which was capable of
destroying Indrajit, son of Ravana, was
provided with lovely feathers, well-jointed,
which consisted of rounded parts, was
skilfully fashioned and decked with gold,
which was capable of destroying the body
of enemies, and was not only difficult to
keep off but difficult even to bear, which
was a source of terror to the ogres and
deadly as the venom of poisonous snakes
and was duly honoured by hosts of gods,
and with the help of which the powerful and
valiant Indra, who has green horses yoked
