660

Cakrawakas, swans and waterfowl,
Plavas (a kind of heron), Karandavas (a
sort of duck) and other aquatic birds, male
cuckoos and cranes flew utterly confused
in various directions. (43)

तेन शब्देन वित्रस्तैराकाशं पक्षिभिर्वृतम्।
मनुष्यैरावृता भूमिरुभयं प्रबभौ तदा॥४४॥

The sky was screened with birds
terrified by that sound, while the land was
covered with men; and both looked most
charming on that occasion. (44)
ततस्तं पुरुषव्याघ्रं यशस्विनमकल्मषम्।
आसीनं स्थण्डिले रामं ददर्शं सहसा जन:॥४५॥

All of a sudden people now beheld the
illustrious and sinless Sri Rama, that tiger
among men, sitting on the altar. (45)

विगर्हमाण: कैकेयीं मन्थरासहितामपि।
अभिगम्य जनो रामं बाष्पपूर्णमुखोऽभवत्॥४६॥
Approaching Sri Rama, the people, who
had been reproaching Kaikeyi, including
Manthara too, found their own face bathed
in tears. (46)
तान् नरान् बाष्पपूर्णाक्षान् समीक्ष्याथ सुदु:खितान्।
पर्यष्वजत da: पितृवन्मातृवच्च स:॥४७॥

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

Perceiving those men sore distressed
with their eyes full of tears, Sri Rama, who
knew what is right, presently embraced them
like their father and mother. (47)

स तत्र कांश्चित् परिषस्वजे नरान्
नराश्च केचित्तु तमभ्यवादयन्।
चकार सर्वान् सवयस्यबान्धवान्
यथार्हमासाद्य AST नृपात्मज:॥४८॥
Nay, he embraced some men who
deserved it, while others on that spot hailed
him. Approaching them on that occasion,
the princes received them all including his
friends and relations according to the rank
of each. (48)
तत: स तेषां रुदतां महात्मनां
Ya च खं चानुविनादयन् स्वन:।
गुहा गिरीणां च दिशश्च संततं
मृदङ्गघोषप्रतिमो विशुश्रुवे॥४९॥

Making the earth and the heavens as
well as the mountain caves and the quarters
incessantly resound, the aforesaid cry
of those wailing high-souled men was
continuously heard far and wide like the
sound of a clay tomtom. (49)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्येऽयोध्याकाण्डे
त्र्रधिकरशततम: AA: ॥ १०३ II

Thus ends Canto One hundred and three in the Ayodhyakanda of the glorious
Ramayana of Valmiki, the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

