* AYODHYAKANDA +

577

Canto LXXVII

Having performed with the help of Satrughna all the obsequial rites relating to
his deceased father on the twelfth day after his death, Bharata gifts to the
Brahmanas abundant gold and jewels as a part of the obsequies.
Overwhelmed with grief on reaching the funeral pile in order to pick
up the principal bones of the deceased on the thirteenth day, the
prince drops to the ground. Rolling on the ground, Satrughna
for his part wails in profusion. Comforted by Vasistha and
Sumantra, the two brothers urge the ministers to

expedite the work of picking up the bones

ततो दशाहेऽतिगते कृतशौचो yore: |
द्वादशेऽहनि सम्प्राप्ते श्राद्धकर्माण्यकारयत्॥१॥

Having attained purity by performing
the obsequial rites pertaining to the eleventh
day of his fathers death when ten days
had elapsed the prince (Bharata) next
performed the obsequial rites pertaining to
the twelfth day when that day duly arrived.

(1)
ब्राह्मणेभ्यो धनं It ददावन्नं च पुष्कलम्।
वासांसि च महार्हाणि रत्नानि विविधानि च।
वास्तिकं बहु शुक्लं च गाश्चापि बहुशस्तदा॥ २॥

On that occasion he gifted to the
Brahmanas abundant gold, jewellery,
foodgrains, precious garments, various types
of gems, a large herd of white goats, silver
and good many cows, too. (2)

दासीर्दासांश्च यानानि वेश्मानि सुमहान्ति च।

ब्राह्मणेभ्यो ददौ पुत्रो राज्ञस्तस्यौर्ध्वदेहिकम्॥३॥
The prince further gave away to the

Brahmanas, for the good of the king in the

life beyond, female as well as male servants,
chariots and very big houses. (3)

तत: प्रभातसमये दिवसे च त्रयोदशे।

विललाप महाबाहुर्भरत: शोकमूच्छित:।॥४॥
Then on the thirteenth day at the time

of daybreak the mighty-armed Bharata,

overwhelmed as he was with grief, broke
into a lament. (4)

शब्दापिहितकण्ठश्च शोधनार्थमुपागत:।
चितामूले पितुर्वाक्यमिदमाह सुदु:खित:॥५॥

Nay, having reached the foot of his
father’s funeral pile in order to collect the
bones for their immersion in the holy Sarayu
river, the prince, who was sore distressed,
addressed the following words to his
deceased father, his throat being choked
through crying : (5)
तात यस्मिन् निसृष्टोऽहं त्वया भ्रातरि राघवे।
तस्मिन् वनं प्रव्रजिते शून्ये त्यक्तोऽस्म्यहं AAT ।। ६ Ul

“My celebrated elder brother, Sri Rama
(a scion of Raghu), to whose care | was
committed by you, having retired to the

forest, O dear father, | have been virtually
abandoned by you in a desolate place. (6)

यस्या गतिरनाथाया: Ga: प्रव्राजितो वनम्।
तामम्बां तात कौसल्यां त्यक्त्वा त्वं क्व गतो TT U9
“O dear father, O protector of men,
where have you gone, leaving Kausalya,
that mother of mine, whose son, the support

of that forlorn lady, has been exiled to the
forest?” (7)

दृष्टवा भस्मारुणं तच्च दग्धास्थि स्थानमण्डलम्।
पितु: शरीरनिर्वाणं निष्टनन् विषसाद ह॥८॥
Seeing that circular spot, the place
where his fathers remains had been
consigned to fire, nay, which was now
covered with ashes and red because of its
