900

बृहस्पतिसुत: श्रीमान् बुद्ध्या तुल्यो बृहस्पते: |
तस्याहं कुर्वतो नित्यं वेदाभ्यासं महात्मन:॥९॥
सम्भूता वाङ्मयी कन्या नाम्ना वेदवती स्मृता।
ततो देवा: सगन्धर्वा यक्षराक्षसपन्नगा:॥१०॥
a ata mar पितरं वरणं रोचयन्ति मे।
न च मां स पिता तेभ्यो दत्तवान् राक्षसेश्वर॥ ११॥

“*That glorious sage was a son of
Brhaspati and equal to him in respect of
intelligence. Of that magnanimous soul, who
was always engaged in reciting the Vedas,
| was born as an incarnation of the Vedas.
| am, therefore, known as Vedavati. O king
of the Raksasas, gods with Gandharvas,
Yaksas, Raksasas and Pannagas (Nagas)
approached my father and sought my hand
in marriage; but my aforesaid father did not
give me to any of them. (9—11)

कारणं dq वदिष्यामि निशामय महाभुज।
पितुस्तु मम जामाता विष्णु: किल सुरेश्वर:।॥ १२॥
अभिप्रेतस्त्रिलोकेशस्तस्मान्नान्यस्य मे पिता।
दातुमिच्छति तस्मै तु तच्छुत्वा बलदर्पित:॥१३॥
शम्भुर्नाम ततो राजा दैत्यानां कुपितोऽभवत्।
तेन रात्रौ शयानो मे पिता पापेन हिंसित:॥ १४॥

“*`) mighty-armed one, | will tell you
the reason behind it. Please listen. Visnu,
the Lord of gods and the Ruler of the three
worlds, indeed was acceptable to my father
as a son-in-law. My father would not give
me to anyone other than Him. Hearing this,
Sambhu, the king of the Daityas, who was
proud of his might, became angry. While
asleep at night, my father was killed by that
sinful one. (12—14)

ततो मे जननी दीना तच्छरीरं पितुर्मम।

परिष्वज्य महाभागा प्रविष्टा हव्यवाहनम्॥ १५॥
“*Thereupon my mother, of great merit,

who had become very depressed, entered

the fire, taking that body of my father in her
arms. (15)

करोमीति Was हृदयेन समुद्वहे॥१६॥

« VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

“*Thenceforward | have __ installed
Narayana in my heart so that | may implement
the desire of my father with regard to
Him. (16)

sta प्रतिज्ञामारुह्य चरामि faget तप:।
Wid ते सर्वमाख्यातं मया राक्षसपुङ्खव॥१७॥
“‘Having taken this vow, | am performing
severe Tapas; O best of Raksasas, | have
told you all this. (17)

नारायणो मम पतिर्न त्वन्य: पुरुषोत्तमात्।
आश्रये नियमं घोरं नारायणपरीप्सया॥१८॥

“‘Narayana is my husband and no one
other than that Purusottama. Desiring to
secure the hand of Narayana | am observing
this hard penance. (18)

विज्ञातस्त्वं हि मे राजन् गच्छ पौलस्त्यनन्दन।
जानामि तपसा ad त्रैलोक्ये यद्धि वर्तते॥१९॥

““O king, by dint of my Tapas | know
everything that exists in the three worlds. |
have come to know who you are. You may
go, O son of Visraval’ (19)

सोऽब्रवीद् रावणो भूयस्तां कन्यां सुमहाव्रताम्।
अवरुह्य विमानाग्रात् कन्दर्पशरपीडित:॥ २०॥
“Descending from the aerial car,

Ravana, who was smitten with darts of
love, spoke again to that maiden, who was
observing a great vow: (20)
अवलिप्तासि सुश्रोणि यस्यास्ते मतिरीदृशी।
ert मृगशावाक्षि भ्राजते पुण्यसंचय:॥ २१॥
““O lady of shapely limbs, you are
presumptuous in that you have made such
a resolve. Your endeavour to acquire merit
through Tapas befits only old women, O
lady possessing the eyes of a fawn ! (21)

त्वं सर्वगुणसम्पन्ना नार्हसे वक्तुमीदृशम्।
त्रैलोक्यसुन्दरी भीरु यौवनं तेऽतिवर्तते॥ २२॥

“*You, who are endowed with all good
qualities, ought not to speak like this. You
are beautiful in all the three worlds, O timid
one, your youth is passing away. (22)
