* AYODHYAKANDA +

निर्मर्यादस्तु पुरुष: पापाचारसमन्वित:।
मानं न लभते aq भिन्नचारित्रदर्शन:॥ ३॥
“A man who has transgressed the
bounds of propriety and is characterized by
a sinful conduct, and who is wedded to a
moral philosophy different from _ the
established ethical doctrines does not get
recognition among the wise. (3)
कुलीनमकुलीनं वा dt पुरुषमानिनम्।
चारित्रमेव व्याख्याति शुचिं वा ate वाशुचिम्॥ ४॥
“Conduct alone proclaims a man to be
well-born or otherwise, gallant or only
fancying himself to be gallant, honest or
dishonest. (4)

अनार्यस्त्वार्य संस्थान: शौचाद्भधीनस्तथा शुचि: |
लक्षण्यवदलक्षण्यो दु:शील: शीलवानिव॥ ५॥

“One following the way of life
propounded by you will be ignoble, though
appearing as noble, will be accepted as
clean, though devoid of cleanliness, would
pass for one endowed with auspicious bodily
marks, though lacking in such marks, will
appear as possessed of an amiable
disposition, though ill-mannered. (5)
अभिषत्स्ये शुभं हित्वा क्रियां विधिविवर्जिताम्॥ ६ ॥

“If | embrace unrighteousness, cloaked
in the garb of piety and leading to confusion
or mixture of castes, | should be giving up
the virtuous acts and taking to unauthorized
action. (6)
कश्चेतयान: Ges: कार्याकार्यविचक्षण:।
ag मन्येत at लोके gad लोकदूषणम्॥७॥

“What sensible द्यो capable of
discerning what ought to be done and what
ought not to be done would hold me in high

esteem in the world, Knowing me to be vile
of conduct and a corrupter of the people?

(7)
कस्य यास्याम्यहं Get केन वा स्वर्गमाप्नुयाम्।
अनया वर्तमानोऽहं gra ह्रीनप्रतिज्ञया॥ ८॥

677

Masada लोक: कृत्स्न: समुपवर्तते।
यद्वृत्ता: सन्ति राजानस्तद्वृत्ता: सन्ति FE प्रजा: WF
“Conducting myself according to the
mode of life recommended by you in which
my vow of remaining in exile in woods for
fourteen years has to be abandoned, whose
way Of life shall | follow as an ideal so that
| may attain heaven, since you tell me my
father was none to me? By following your
advice, | will act according to my own
inclination (disregarding the authority of the
Sastras) and, following my example, the
whole of this world too is likely to turn
licentious; for people follow the same way
of life as kings do. (8-9)
२ सं च त्तं ।
तस्मात् सत्यात्मकं राज्यं सत्ये लोक: प्रतिष्ठित: ॥ १० ॥
“Truthfulness alone, which is divorced
from cruelty, is the eternal way of life
prescribed for kings. Therefore, truthfulness
is the soul of a kingdom; nay, the world
itself is founded on truth. (10)

masa देवाश्च सत्यमेव fe मेनिरे।
सत्यवादी हि लोकेऽस्मिन् परं गच्छति चाक्षयम्॥ ११॥

“The seers of Vedic Mantras as well
as gods have respected truthfulness alone.
Indeed, a veracious man in this world attains
the highest realm, which knows no decay.

(11)
sert यथा सर्पान्नरादनृतवादिन:।
धर्म: सत्यपरो लोके मूलं सर्वस्य चोच्यते॥ Lz Il

“People turn away in fear from a man
telling lies in the same way as they do from
a serpent. Virtue has its culmination in
truthfulness; nay, it is declared to be the
root of all. (12)

सत्यमेवेश्वरो लोके सत्ये धर्म: सदाश्रित:।
सत्यमूलानि सर्वाणि सत्यान्नास्ति परं पदम्॥१३॥
“Truth alone is God in the world, piety

ever hinges on truth. All have their root in
truth; there is no goal higher than truth. (13)
