* AYODHYAKANDA +

“Indeed, it was a cruel act on your part
that, expelled by you, my near and dear
ones, who were deserving of comforts, knock
about in a wretched condition in the forest,
leaving the city ! (10)

ae पञ्चदशे at waa: पुनरेष्यति।
जह्याद् राज्यं च कोशं च भरतो नोपलक्ष्यते॥ ११॥

“Even if Rama, a scion of Raghu, returns
to Ayodhya in the fifteenth year, it is not
expected that Bharata will relinquish the
sovereignty and the exchequer. (11)

भोजयन्तिकिल श्राद्धे केचित्स्वानेव बान्धवान्।
aa: पश्चात् समीक्षन्ते कृतकार्या द्विजोत्तमान्॥ १२॥

“It is a well-known fact that some
householders feed their own relations
(daughter’s sons and others) on the occasion
of a Sraddha (a ceremony in honour and for
the benefit of dead relatives on their death
anniversary and at other times) and their
object in the shape of making special gifts
in their favour having been accomplished,
attend to the foremost of other Brahmanas
invited for the Sraddha, afterwards. (12)

wa ये गुणवन्तश्च विद्वांसश्च द्विजातय:।
न पश्चात् तेऽभिमन्यन्ते सुधामपि सुरोपमा:॥ १३॥

“Of them, such Brahmanas as are men
of character, learned and godlike do not
accept afterwards even food which is
delicious as ambrosia. (13)

ब्राह्मणेष्वपि वृत्तेषु भुक्तशेषं द्विजोत्तमा:।
नाभ्युपेतुमलं Wie: शृङ्गच्छेदमिवर्षभा:॥ १४॥

“Even though it may be Brahmanas
that have finished their meals in the first
instance, great Brahmanas, who are highly
enlightened, would not consent to partake
of what is left after others have finished
their meal, any more than bulls of excellent
breed would brook the severance of their
horns. (14)
भ्राता ज्येष्ठो वरिष्ठश्च किमर्थं नावमन्यते॥१५॥

“Why then will Rama, who is the eldest

519

and most deserving brother, not likewise
disdain a kingship already enjoyed by a
younger brother, O ruler of the people? (15)

न Wed wet व्याघ्र: खादितुमिच्छति।
एवमेव नरव्याघ्र: wee न मंस्यते॥१६॥

“A tiger would not partake of the food
brought by another; even so, Rama, a tiger
among men, would not set his heart on that
which has been enjoyed by another. (16)

हविराज्यं पुरोडाश: कुशा यूपाश्च खादिरा:।
नैतानि यातयामानि कुर्वन्ति पुनरध्वरे॥१७॥

“The wise do not use for a second time
in a sacrifice the following already used in
another sacrifice, viz., sacrificial food, ghee,
Purodasa (a mass of ground rice rounded
into a kind of cake, usually divided into
pieces placed on receptacles and offered
as an oblation in fire), blades of KuSa grass
and sacrificial posts of Khadira wood. (17)
नाभिमन्तुमलं रामो नष्टसोममिवाध्वरम्॥ १८॥

“Even so, Rama too will not be able to
accept this sovereignty already enjoyed by
Bharata, any more than one would set one’s
heart on wine deprived of its essence or
on the remnants of the beverage called
Soma, which is drunk during sacrificial
performances. (18)

नैवंविधमसत्कारं राघवो मर्षयिष्यति।
बलवानिव शार्दूलो वालधेरभिमर्शनम्॥१९॥

“Rama (a scion of Raghu) will not suffer
such indignity any more than a mighty tiger
would brook the twisting of its tail. (19)

नैतस्य सहिता लोका wa कुर्युर्महामृधे।
aad frag धर्मात्मा लोकं धर्मेण योजयेत्॥ २० I

“All the worlds combined against him
would not be able to cause terror into him
even in a major conflict. He, however, did
not wrest the throne of Ayodhya, even though
capable of doing so, because, his mind
being intent on righteousness, he is vowed
to lead even unrighteous people towards
