218

« VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

Canto XLIX
Wonderstruck to behold the splendour and glory of Ravana, Hanuman believes

that he could even rule over heaven but for his gross unrighteousness,
which dragged him down

aa: स कर्मणा तस्य विस्मितो भीमविक्रम:।
हनूमान् क्रोधताम्राक्षो रक्षोऽधिपमवैक्षत॥ १॥
भ्राजमानं महार्हेण काञ्चनेन विराजता।
मुक्काजालव्रृतेनाथ मुकुटेन महाद्युतिम्॥ २॥

।
हेमैराभरणैश्चित्रैर्मनसेव प्रकल्पितै: ।। ३॥
महार्हक्षौमसंवीतं रक्तचन्दनरूषितम्।
स्वनुलिप्तं विचित्राभिर्विविधाभिश्च भक्तिभि:।॥४॥
विचित्रं दर्शनीयैश्च रक्ताक्षैर्भीमदर्शनै:।
दीप्ततीक्ष्णमहादंष्टं प्रलम्ब दशनच्छदै: । ५ ।।

उत्तमास्तरणास्तीर्णे सूपविष्ठं वरासने॥९॥
अलंकृताभिरत्यर्थं प्रमदाभि: समन्तत:।
वालव्यजनहस्ताभिरारात्समुपसेवितम् ॥ १० ॥
दुर्धरेण प्रहस्तेन महापाश्वेन रक्षसा।
मन्तरिभिर्मन्त्रतत्त्वज्ञैर्निकुम्भेन च मन्त्रिणा॥११॥
उपोपविष्टं रक्षोभिश्चतुर्भिर्बलदर्पितम्।
pe परिव्रृतं लोकं चतुर्भिरिव सागरै:॥१२॥
मन्तिभिर्मन्त्रतत्त्वज्ञैरन्यैश्च शुभदर्शिभि: |
आश्वास्यमानं सचिवै: सुरैरिव सुरेश्वरम्॥१३॥
Astonished at the feat of Indrajit
(resulting in his own capture and his being
dragged to the presence of Ravana) and his
eyes turned coppery through rage at the
thought of his atrocious deed in the form of
Sita’s abduction, that heroic Hanuman of
redoubtable prowess looked at Ravana, the

suzerain lord of ogres, who, though endowed
with extraordinary splendour, shone further
with a glittering and precious diadem of gold
encircled with strings of pearls, as well as
with lovely gold ornaments inlaid with
diamonds and studded with costly gems,
which appeared as though evolved with the
mind; who was attired in valuable silk and
daubed with red sandal-paste and painted
with various peculiar designs; who looked
wonderful with his twenty terrible-looking,
yet shapely ruddy eyes, had brilliant, sharp,
enormous teeth and protruding lips; who
was endowed with extraordinary strength
and shone brightly with his ten heads as
Mount Mandara with its peaks infested with
snakes of every variety; who was graced
with a pearl necklace casting its splendour
on his bosom and who not only looked like
a mass of blue antimony but with his
countenance shining like the full moon also
presented the appearance of a cloud illumined
by the rising sun; who was distinguished by
twenty terrible arms adorned with Keuras (a
kind of jewel), smeared with excellent sandal-
paste and decked with shining Angadas
(another ornament) and looking like as many
five-hooded serpents with their fingers
appearing like hoods; who was comfortably
seated on a big, wonderful and excellent
throne of crystal, rendered picturesque by
being inlaid with jewels and overspread with
an exquisite covering; who was duly waited
upon at close quarters on all sides by young
women sumptuously adorned, whisk in hand;
who was proud of his might and had four
counselors, belonging to the ogre race, who
knew the secret of good counsel, viz.,
