1146

of by me here and also by whom the story
was related to me, and where the large-
eyed lady is. (6)
अहमस्मिन् गिरौ दुर्गे बहुयोजनमायते।
चिरान्निपतितो deg: क्षीणप्राणपराक्रम:॥ ७॥
“Long ago | fell on this mountain, which
is difficult of access and is many Yojanas in
extent. | am now old and find my vitality and
prowess, too, depleted. (7)
तं मामेवंगतं ga: aorat नाम नामत:।
आहारेण यथाकालं बिभर्ति पततां वर:॥८॥
“My own son, well-known by the name
of Suparswa, the foremost of birds, nourished
me with food at regular hours when | was
reduced to this plight. (8)

तीक्ष्णकामास्तु गन्धर्वास्तीक्ष्णकोपा भुजङ्घमा:।
मृगाणां तु भयं तीक्ष्णं ततस्तीक्ष्णक्षुधा वयम्॥ ९॥
“Ardent is the longing of Gandharvas
(celestial musicians) for women and violent
is the anger of serpents. Intense is the fear
of antelopes, while we, birds, are noted
more than the latter for our keen appetite.
(9)
स कदाचित् क्षुधार्तस्य ममाहाराभिकांक्षिण: |
गतसूर्येऽहनि प्राप्तो मम पुत्रो ह्यनामिष:॥१०॥
“One day, my aforesaid son came to
me actually without any flesh at an hour of
the day when the sun had actually set;
while | was tormented with hunger and was
ardently longing for food. (10)
स मयाऽऽहारसंरोधात् पीडित: प्रीतिवर्धन:।
ara यथातत्त्वमिदं वचनमब्रवीत्॥११॥
“Honouring me when stung by me with
harsh words for withholding food from me,
Suparswa, who heightened my joy on meeting
me, made the following reply, which was in
consonance with facts : (11)

अहं तात यथाकालमामिषार्थी खमाप्लुत:।
महेन्द्रस्य गिरेर्द्दरमावृत्य सुसमाश्रित:॥१२॥

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

“‘Having flown into the air in quest of
flesh in time | stationed myself blocking the
approach to the Mahendra mountain, O dear
father ! (12)

wa सत्त्वसहस्राणां सागरान्तरचारिणाम्।
पन्थानमेकोऽध्यवसं संनिरोद्भुमवाङ्मुख:॥ १३॥

“‘l stayed there alone, head downwards,
with a view to obstructing completely the
passage of thousands of creatures living in
the sea. (13)

wa कश्चिन्मया ge: सूर्योदयसमप्रभाम्।
स्नियमादाय गच्छन् a भिन्नाञ्जनचयोपम:॥ ex
“‘On that occasion was seen by me
someone looking like a mass of collyrium,
actually carrying a lady bright as the dawn.
(14)

सोऽहमभ्यवहारार्थं तौ दृष्टवा कृतनिश्चय:।
तेन साम्ना विनीतेन पन्थानमनुयाचित:॥ १५॥

“Seeing them, | resolved to seize them
for your food. By him, however, | was asked
for a passage in gentle words and in a
submissive demeanour. (15)

नहि सामोपपन्नानां प्रहर्ता विद्यते भुवि।
नीचेष्वपि जन: कश्चित् किमङ्ग ad मद्बिध:॥ १६॥

“* ‘Indeed there is no creature on earth,
even among the vile, who would strike those
armed with conciliatory words; how, then,
can a creature like myself do so, O dear
father? (16)

a यातस्तेजसा व्योम संक्षिपन्निव atta: |

some खेचरैर्भूतैरभिगम्य सभाजित:॥१७॥
“‘He hurriedly passed on enveloping

the sky as it were with splendour. Thereupon

| was met and felicitated by living beings
coursing in the air. (17)

दिष्ट्या जीवति सीतेति ह्यब्रुवन् At महर्षय:।
कथंचित् सकलत्रोऽसौ गतस्ते स्वस्त्यसंशयम्॥ १८ ॥

““Eminent sages actually said to me:
By good luck Sita is still alive; again it is
