* SUNDARAKANDA +

युक्तरूपं त्वया देवि भाषितं शुभदर्शने।
सदृशं स्त्रीस्वभावस्य साध्वीनां विनयस्य च॥ २॥
स्त्रीत्वान्न त्वं समर्थासि सागरं व्यतिवर्तितुम्।
मामधिष्ठाय विस्तीर्णं शतयोजनमायतम्॥३॥

“What has been uttered by you, O
divine lady of charming aspect, is most
proper, being in accord with Your feminine
nature and modesty, characteristic of virtuous
ladies. Mounting on my back, you will not be
able to cross the vast sea, a hundred
Yojanas (or eight hundred miles) wide,
because of your being a woman. (2-3)
fetta कारणं यच्च ब्रवीषि विनयान्विते।
रामादन्यस्य नार्हामि संसर्गमिति जानकि॥४॥
एतत् ते देवि Agel पत्न्यास्तस्य महात्मन:।

का ह्यन्या त्वामृते ea ब्रूयाद् वचनमीदृशम्॥ ५॥

“Again, the second plea which you have
given for not accepting my offer to take you
across the sea on my back to the presence
of Sri Rama, O daughter of Janaka, full of
modesty as you are, saying ‘I ought not to
touch a male other than Sri Rama’ is but
worthy of you, a consort of that exalted
soul, O godlike lady ! For what woman other
than you can put forward such a plea, O
divine lady? (4-5)
श्रोष्यते चैव काकुत्स्थ: Wa निरवशेषत:।
चेष्टितं यत् त्वया देवि भाषितं च ममाग्रत:॥ ६॥

“Nay, Sri Rama, a scion of Kakutstha,
will certainly hear fully from my lips all that

has been done and said by you in my
presence, O godlike lady ! (6)

कारणैर्बहुभिर्देवि रामप्रियचिकोर्षया।
स्नेहप्रस्कन्नमनसा मयैतत् समुदीरितम्॥७॥

“For many reasons and with intent to
do what pleases Sri Rama, this proposal
was made by me with a mind moistened
with affection, O divine lady ! (7)

लङ्काया दुष्प्रवेशत्वाद् दुस्तरत्वान्महोदधे:।
सामर्थध्यादात्मनश्चैव मयैतत् समुदीरितम्॥८॥

“This proposal was made by me because

177

Lanka is difficult to penetrate, the vast sea is
difficult to cross and because of my own
capacity to take you across the sea. (8)

इच्छामि wt समानेतुमद्यैव रघुनन्दिना।
गुरुस्नेहेन भक्त्या च नान्यथा तदुदाहृतम्॥ ९॥

“| wished to reunite you with Sri Rama,
the delight of the Raghus, this very day.
Hence that proposal was made by me out
of affection for the venerable Sri Rama and
out of devotion to you, not for any other
reason. (9)

ate नोत्सहसे ad मया सार्धमनिन्दिते।
अभिज्ञानं प्रयच्छ त्वं जानीयाद् राघवो हि ALI Yo i
“If you are unable to come with me, O
irreproachable lady, pray let me have some
token by means of which Sri Rama, scion
of Raghu, may come to know that | have for
certain met you.” (10)

Vane हनुमता सीता सुरसुतोपमा।
उवाच वचनं मन्दं बाष्पप्रग्रथिताक्षरम्॥११॥

Requested thus by Hanuman, Sita, who
resembled the daughter of a god, replied as
follows in faint accents, her voice choked
with tears: (11)
इदं श्रेष्ठमभिज्ञानं ब्रूयास्त्वं तु मम प्रियम्।
vera चित्रकूटस्य we पूर्वोत्तरे पदे॥१२॥
तापसाश्रमवासिन्या:र प्राज्यमूलफलोदके।
तस्मिन् सिद्धाश्रिते देशे मन्दाकिन्यविदूरत: 123
तस्योपवनखण्डेषु नानापुष्पसुगन्धिषु।
विहृत्य सलिले क्लिन्नो ममाङ्के समुपाविश:॥ १४॥

“Please deliver you to my darling without
fail the most excellent token in the shape
of the following message : ‘Having sported
in water in the groves, redolent with the
fragrance of various flowers, of the well-
known region inhabited by Siddhas and rich
in roots, fruits and water, not very far from
the Mandakini river, on a small hill adjacent
to the Citrakuta mountain on its north-eastern
side, you sat down dripping (being wet) on
my lap, while | was living in a hermitage fit
for ascetics. (12—14)
