906

निर्जिता: स्मेत्यभाषन्त ज्ञात्वा वरबलं रिपो:।
Gert: सुरथो गाधिर्गयो राजा पुरूरवा:॥७५॥
अथायोध्यां समासाद्य रावणो राक्षसाधिप:॥ ६॥

सुगुप्तामनरण्येन शक्रेणेवामरावतीम्।
a तं पुरुषशार्दूलं पुरंदरसमं बले॥७॥
We राजानमासाद्य युद्धं देहीति रावण:।
निर्जितोऽस्मीति वा ब्रूहि त्वमेवं मम शासनम्॥ ८॥

Consulting one another, the kings for
their part, though fearless, highly intelligent,
exceedingly mighty and pious of resolve,
and recognizing the enemy’s strength which
he had derived from boons, then admitted
that they stood defeated. Dusyanta, Suratha,
Gadhi, Gaya and King Pururava—all these
monarchs, O beloved Rama, said, ‘We are
defeated.’ Then, duly reaching Ayodhya, well-
protected by Anaranya, as Amaravati is by
Indra, and approaching the monarch, who
was a tiger among men and equal to Indra
in might, the notorious Ravana, the suzerain
lord of the Raksasas, said to him, “Give me
fight or say ‘I stand defeated.’ Such is my
mandate.” (4—8)

अयोध्याधिपतिस्तस्य श्रुत्वा पापात्मनो वच:।
अनरण्यस्तु संक्रुद्धो राक्षसेन्द्रमथाब्रवीत्॥९॥

Enraged to hear the command of that
sinful-minded fellow, Anaranya, the king of
Ayodhya, now said to the king of the
Raksasas: (9)

दीयते geste ते राक्षसाधिपते मया।
aires क्षिप्रमायत्तो wa चैवं भवाम्यहम्॥१०॥
“O king of the Raksasas, | allow you to
fight a duel with me, tarry awhile and get
ready quickly; | am also getting ready.” (10)

अथ ud श्रुतार्थेन निर्जितं सुमहद् बलम्।
निष्क्रामत् तन्नरेन्द्रस्य बलं रक्षोवधोद्यतम्॥११॥

Since /१वादचा)]/व वप्रे previous
information, he had gathered a huge force.
Intent on killing the Raksasa, the said army
of the king sallied forth. (11)

« VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

नागानां दशसाहस्रं वाजिनां fad तथा।
रथानां बहुसाहस्रं पत्तीनां च नरोत्तम॥१२॥
तत: Wat Gee युद्धं युद्धविशारद॥१३॥

अनरण्यस्य नृपते राक्षसेन्द्रस्य चाद्भुतम्।
तद् रावणबलं प्राप्य बलं तस्य महीपते: evil

प्राणश्यत det Wa हव्यं हुतमिवानले।
युद्ध्वा च सुचिरं कालं कृत्वा विक्रममुत्तमम्॥ १५ Il

wad तमासाद्य क्षिप्रमेवावशेषितम्।
प्राविशत् संकुलं AT शलभा Fa पावकम्॥ १६॥
O jewel among men, ten thousand
elephants and a lakh of horses, nay, several
thousands of chariots as well as of foot-
soldiers then came out on the battlefield,
entirely covering the land, inclusive of foot-
soldiers and chariots. Then ensued, O warrior
skilled in warfare, a very fierce battle between
King Anaranya, and the king of the Raksasas.
Encountering the forces of Ravana, and
having fought for a pretty long time and
exhibited supreme valour, the entire army of
that ruler of the earth was fully consumed
like oblations poured into a sacrificial fire.
Attenuated in no time on coming in contact
with the inflamed Ravana, the army perished
in a body like moths on entering fire.
(12—16)

सोऽपश्यत् तन्नरेन्द्रस्तु नश्यमानं महाबलम्।
महार्णवं समासाद्य वनापगशतं यथा॥१७॥
That aforesaid monarch, for his part
saw that huge army perishing like hundreds
of streams full of water disappearing on
reaching the ocean. (17)

Ad: शक्रधनु:प्रख्यं धनुर्विस्फारयन् स्वयम्।
आससाद नरेन्द्रस्तं रावणं क्रोधमूर्छित:॥ १८॥
Then beside himself with rage and
twanging his bow, resembling the bow of
Indra, the king came up to the notorious
Ravana. (18)

अनरण्येन तेऽमात्या मारीचशुकसारणा:।
प्रहस्तसहिता भग्ना व्यद्रवन्त WT इव॥१९॥
