290

sé च da मम शोकवेगं

रक्षोभिरेभि: परिभर्त्सनं a
ब्रूयास्तु रामस्य गत: समीपं

शिवश्च तेऽध्वास्तु हरिप्रवीर॥४३॥

“‘Seeking the presence of Sri Rama,
O foremost hero among monkeys, speak to
him for your part of the poignant vehemence
of my grief as also of my being threatened
by these ogres. And may your journey be

happy ` (43)

« VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

Ud तवार्या Fa संयता सा
सीता aa: we विषादपूर्वम्।
एतच्च बुद्ध्वा गदितं यथा त्वं
श्रद्धत्स्व सीतां कुशलां समग्राम्॥ ४४॥
“This is the message which that noble
and self-restrained lady, Sita, gave for you
with despondency, O protector of men!
Nay, pondering this statement of mine in its
true perspective, believe Sita, the foremost
of all devoted wives, to be well.” (44)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये सुन्दरकाण्डे सप्तषष्टितम: सर्ग: ॥ ६७॥

Thus ends Canto Sixty-seven of the Sundarakanda in the glorious Ramayana of
Valmiki, the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

Canto LXVIII

Hanuman tells Sri Rama, how Sita expressed her doubt in the first instance
about a monkey being able to leap across a vast sea and
how her doubt was resolved by him

अथाहमुत्तरं देव्या Wem: ससम्भ्रमम्।
तव स्नेहान्नरव्याघ्र सौहार्दादनुमान्य च॥१॥
एवं बहुविधं वाच्यो war दाशरथिस्त्वया।
यथा At प्राप्नुयाच्छीघ्रं हत्वा रावणमाहवे॥२॥

“Having shown her regard for me out
of native good-heartedness and affection for
you, O tiger among men, ।, who was in a
hurry to depart was then spoken to once
more as follows by the godlike lady about
the future course of action : ‘Sri Rama, son
of DaSaratha, should be appealed to by you
in many ways so impressively that making
short work of Ravana in combat, he may
promptly win me back. (1-2)

ae वा wma dt वसैकाहमरिंदम।
कस्मिंश्चित् Gad देशे विश्रान्त: श्वो गमिष्यसि॥ ३॥

““Or, if you deem fit, O gallant Hanuman,
tarry for a day in some covered place, O
tamer of foes ! Having taken rest, you may
leave on the tomorrow. (3)

मम चाप्यल्पभाग्याया: सांनिध्यात् तव वानर।
अस्य शोकविपाकस्य मुहूर्तं स्याद् विमोक्षणम्॥४॥
““Through your presence, O Hanuman,
the termination of my grief, which is a fruit
of my sinful deeds, may follow for a while,
unfortunate that | am. (4)

Ta fe त्वयि विक्रान्ते पुनरागमनाय a
प्राणानामपि संदेहो मम स्यान्नात्र संशय:॥५॥

“‘When you, O heroic Hanuman, have
actually left to come back, there will be
danger even to my life; there is no doubt
about it. (5)

तवादर्शनज: शोको भूयो मां परितापयेत्।

Gale दु:ख्पराभूतां दुर्गतां दु:खभागिनीम्॥६॥
“The grief born of your disappearance

from my view will further torment me, who

stand discomfited by one woe after another,
wretched and doomed to suffering that | am.

(6)
