# YUDDHAKANDA +

Ta तृतीयेन तथा योजनानि तु सागरे।
त्वरमाणैर्महाकायैरेकविंशतिरेव च ॥ ७०॥

Again, twenty-one Yojanas (or one
hundred and sixty-eight miles) all told (of
structure) were thrown across the sea in
the same way on the third day by the
monkeys of gigantic form, who were moving
briskly. (70)

चतुर्थेन तथा चाह्ना द्वाविंशतिरथापि art
योजनानि महावेगै: कृतानि त्वरितैस्तत:॥७१॥

Nay, on the fourth day, twenty-two
Yojanas, or one hundred and seventy six
miles, more from that point onward were
completed by the monkeys, who were
endowed with great impetuosity and seized
with flurry. (71)

पञ्चमेन तथा चाह्ना प्लवगै: क्षिप्रकारिभि:।
योजनानि त्रयोविंशत् सुवेलमधिकृत्य Aner

Again, on the fifth day twenty-three
Yojanas (or one hundred and eighty-four
miles) were covered right up to Mount Suvela
(on the opposite shore) by the monkeys,
who worked feverishly. (72)

स वानरवर: sitar विश्वकर्मात्मजो बली।
बबन्ध सागरे Ad यथा चास्य पिता तथा॥७३॥

In this way, Nala, the foremost of
monkeys and the glorious and mighty
offspring of ViSwakarma, set up a bridge
across the sea. Nay, he was as good in
workmanship as his father. (73)

स नलेन pd: Ad: सागरे मकरालये।
शुशुभे सुभग: श्रीमान् स्वातीपथ इवाम्बरे॥ ox ui
Erected by Nala across the sea, the
home of alligators, the aforesaid lovely and
glorious bridge looked charming like the
milky way in the sky. (74)
ततो tat: सगन्धर्वा: सिद्धाश्च परमर्षय:।
आगम्य गगने तस्थुर्द्रष्टुकामास्तदद्धुतम्॥७५॥

Assembling at that time, gods
accompanied by Gandharvas (celestial
musicians), Siddhas (a class of demigods

371

credited with mystical powers from their
very birth) and topmost Rsis stood in the
airspace, keen as they were to behold that
marvel. (75)

दशयोजनविस्तीर्णं शतयोजनमायतम्।
ददृशुर्देवगन्धर्वा नलसेतुं सुदुष्करम्॥७६॥

The gods and Gandharvas gazed on
the bridge constructed by Nala, which was
ten Yojanas (or eighty miles) wide and a
hundred Yojanas (or eight hundred miles)
long, and which was exceedingly diffcult to
construct for others. (76)
आप्लवन्त: प्लवन्तश्च गर्जन्तश्च प्लवंगमा:।
तमचिन्त्यमसह्यं च ह्यद्भुतं लोमहर्षणम्॥७७॥
wa: सर्वभूतानि सागरे सेतुबन्धनम्।
तानि कोटिसहस्राणि वानराणां महौजसाम्॥ ७८ II
बध्नन्त: सागरे सेतुं जग्मु: पारं Agree: |
विशाल: सुकृत: श्रीमान् सुभूमि: सुसमाहित: ॥ ७९॥
अशोभत महान् सेतु: सीमन्त sa सागरे।
ad: पारे समुद्रस्य गदापाणिर्विभीषण:॥८०॥
परेषामभिघातार्थमतिष्ठत् सचिवै: सह।
सुग्रीवस्तु ad: We रामं सत्यपराक्रमम्॥८१॥

Taking long and short leaps and
thundering, the monkeys beheld that
inconceivable, marvellous and_ thrilling

structure, which could not even be attempted
by others. Nay, all other created beings too
saw the construction of the bridge across
the sea. Even while erecting the bridge
across the sea, the aforesaid thousands of
crores of monkeys, who were endowed
with extraordinary energy, reached the
opposite shore of the vast sea. The
extensive, well-constructed, magnificent,
smooth and solidly cemented vast bridge
across the sea cast its charm like the
parting of a woman’s hair. Thereupon
Vibhisana with his ministers stood, mace in
hand, on the southern shore to repulse the
enemies in case they should try to demolish
the bridge. Sugriva for his part then spoke
as follows to Sri Rama of unfailing prowess:

(77—81)
