+ UTTARAKANDA +

since Ravana, the ruler of ogres, did not
meet with any rebuff? (3)

उताहो हतवीर्यास्ते बभूवु: पृथिवीक्षित:।
बहिष्कृता वरास्त्रैश्च बहवो निर्जिता नृपा:॥४॥

“Or, was it that the said rulers of the
earth were lacking in manliness or that they
were deprived of good weapons, so that
many rulers of men were conquered by
him?” (4)

राघवस्य वच: श्रुत्वा अगस्त्यो भगवानूषि: |
sara रामं प्रहसन् पितामह इवेश्वरम्॥५॥

Hearing the question of Sri Rama (a
scion of Raghu), the glorious Sage Agastya
laughingly replied to Sri Rama even as
Brahma would to Lord Siva: (5)

इत्येवं बाधमानस्तु पार्थिवान् पार्थिवर्षभ।
चचार रावणो wa पृथिवीं पृथिवीपते॥६॥

“In this way, O jewel among the rulers
of the earth, did Ravana range over the
world harassing the kings, O lord of the
earth! (6)
ततो माहिष्मतीं नाम पुरीं स्वर्गपुरीप्रभाम्।
सम्प्राप्तो यत्र सांनिध्यं सदासीद् वसुरेतस:॥७॥

“Thereupon he reached the city named
Mahismati, which possessed the splendour
of Amaravati (the city of Indra) where there
was the constant presence of the god of
fire. (7)
qa आसीन्नृपस्तस्य प्रभावाद् वसुरेतस:।
अर्जुनो नाम Gal: शरकुण्डेशय: सदा॥८॥

“A king, Arjuna by name, who was a
compeer of the god of fire in effulgence through
the latter’s grace, ruled in that city, where the
sacred fire remained ever enshrined in a pit
covered with sacred KuSa grass.” (8)

waa feat सोऽथ हैहयाधिपतिर्बली।
अर्जुनो नर्मदां Td गत: स्त्रीभि: सहेश्वर:॥९॥
“The same day Arjuna, that mighty
and powerful lord of the Haihayas, had just
gone to the Narmada to sport with his
womenfolk. (9)

953

ada fead सोऽथ रावणस्तत्र आगत:।
रावणो राक्षसेन्द्रस्तु तस्यामात्यानपृच्छ्त॥ १०॥

“The notorious Ravana arrived there
that very day. Ravana, the ruler of ogres,
for his part spoke to his (Arjuna’s) ministers
as follows: (10)

क्वार्जुनो नृपति: शीघ्रं सम्यगाख्यातुमर्हथ।
रावणोऽहमनुप्राप्तो युद्धेप्सुर्नृवरेण ह॥११॥

‘Where is king Arjuna? You ought to point
this out accurately without delay. I, Ravana,
have come seeking a trial of strength with
Arjuna, the foremost of human kings. (11)

ममागमनमप्यग्रे युष्माभि: संनिवेद्यताम्।
इत्येवं रावणेनोक्तास्तेऽमात्या: सुविपश्चित: eeu
अब्रुवन् राक्षसपतिमसांनिध्यं ata: |
श्रुत्वा विश्रवस: Ua: पौराणामर्जुनं गतम्॥१३॥
a तमभ्रमिवाविष्टमुद्भ्रान्तमिव मेदिनीम्॥१४॥
अपश्यद् रावणो विन्ध्यमालिखन्तमिवाम्बरम्।
सहस्रशिखरोपेतं सिंहाध्युषितकन्दरम्॥ १५॥

“Let my arrival be duly made known to
him in advance by you.’ Spoken to as
aforesaid by Ravana, the said ministers (of
Arjuna), who were all very wise, told the
ruler of ogres of the king’s absence from the
capital. Withdrawing from that place on
hearing, from the mouth of the citizens, of
Arjuna having left the city, Ravana (son of
ViSrava) sought the Vindhya mountain, which
closely resembled the Himalayas in height.
“Ravana saw the Vindhya mountain which
having penetrated into the clouds as it were
and having as though burst forth from the
earth, seemed to scrape the skies. It had
thousands of peaks, and its caves were
infested with lions. (12—15)

प्रपातपतितै: शीतै: साट्ठहासमिवाम्बुभि:।
देवदानवगन्धर्वै: साप्सरोभि: सकिंनरै:॥ १६॥
स्वस्त्रीभि: क्रीडमानैश्च स्वर्गभूतं महोच्छ्यम्।
नदीभि: स्यन्दमानाभि: स्फटिकप्रतिमं जलम्॥ १७॥
फणाभिश्चलजिह्वाभिरनन्तमिव विष्ठितम्।
उत्क्रामन्तं दरीवन्तं हितवत्संनिभं गिरिम्॥१८॥
