954

पश्यमानस्ततो विन्ध्यं Wau नर्मदां ययौ।
चलोपलजलां पुण्यां पश्चिमोदधिगामिनीम्॥१९॥
“With cool waters fallen from the hills, it
seemed to utter a horse-laugh. With gods,
Danavas and Gandharvas, accompanied by
Apsaras (celestial nymphs) and Kinnaras,
and sporting with their womenfolk, the
mountain, which was exceptionally high, had
turned into heaven. With its rivers carrying
crystal-clear waters the mountain stood
rooted like the serpent-god Sesa with his
thousand hoods distinguished by restless
tongues. Beholding the Vindhya mountain,
which was moving upwards, as it were,
which abounded in caves and closely
resembled the Himalayan range, Ravana
sought the holy river Narmada, whose waters
flowed over a bed of rocks and which ran
towards the western sea. (16—19)
उष्णाभितप्तैस्तृषितै: संक्षोभितजलाशयाम्॥ २०॥
चक्रवाकै: सकारण्डै: सहंसजलकुक्कुटै:।
सारसैश्च सदा मत्तै: Hale: सुसमावृताम्॥ 2 Il
“The ponds forming a part of the river
were ruffled by buffaloes, young deer, lions,
bears and lordly elephants scorched by
heat, and seized with thirst and the river
was thickly crowded with ruddy geese
accompanied by wild ducks, swans and

water-fowls as well as with cranes ever in
heat and screaming. (20-21)

फुल्लद्रुमकृतोत्तंसां चक्रवाकयुगस्तनीम्।
विस्तीर्णपुलिनश्रोणीं हंसावलिसुमेखलाम्॥ २२॥
“The river had trees in blossom for its
diadem, a pair of Cakrawaka birds for its
breasts, extensive sandy banks for its hips,
rows of swans for its lovely girdle. (22)
TTT फुल्लोत्पलशुभेक्षणाम्॥ २३॥
“It had its limbs powdered with the

pollen of flowers, it had the foam for its
immaculate robe; a dip into its waters

« VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

constituted its thrilling contact and it had full-
blown lotuses for its charming eyes. (23)
पुष्पकादवरुह्याशु नर्मदां सरितां वराम्।
इष्टामिव att नारीमवगाह्य दशानन:॥ evil
स तस्या: पुलिने रम्ये नानामुनिनिषेविते।
उपोपविष्ट: सचिवै: सार्धं राक्षसपुङ्खव:॥ २५॥

“Quickly alighting from the Puspaka car,
and taking a dip in the Narmada, the foremost
of rivers, which thus resembled an excellent
and agreeable woman, that ten-headed bull
among the ogres, sat down in the company
of his ministers on its lovely bank, frequented
by sages. (24-25)

wera wet asa गङ्गेयमिति रावण:।
नर्मदादर्शने हर्षमाप्तवान् स दशानन:॥२६॥

“Complimenting the Narmada in the
words ‘Here is the holy Ganga,’ the notorious
Ravana, that ten-headed monster, forthwith
experienced delight at the sight of the
Narmada. (26)
उवाच सचिवांस्तत्र सलीलं शुकसारणौ।

UH रश्मिसहस्रेण जगत् कृत्वेव काञ्चनम्॥ २७॥
तीक्ष्णतापकर: सूर्यो नभसो मध्यमास्थित:।
मामासीनं विदित्वैव चन्द्रायति दिवाकर:॥ २८॥

“He playfully said to his ministers, as
well as to Suka and Sarana ‘Having turned
the world golden-coloured as it were by its
myriad rays, the yonder sun, the maker of
the day, which should generate intense heat,
its position being located in mid heavens,
has grown cool as the moon merely on
perceiving me seated on this spot. (27-28)

नर्मदाजलशीतश्च सुगन्धि: श्रमनाशन:।

मद्धयादनिलो ह्येष वात्यसौ सुसमाहित:॥ २९॥
“Cooled by its contact with the waters

of the Narmada, fragrant and relieving fatigue,

this breeze is blowing softly indeed due to
fear of me. (29)

sa वापि सरिच्छेष्ठा नर्मदा नर्मवर्धिनी।
नक्रमीनविहंगोर्मि३ सभयेवाङ्गना स्थिता॥३०॥

“Bearing crocodiles, fishes and birds
