« KISKINDHAKANDA +

अभिवार्य प्रविष्टानि ade: प्लवगेश्वरम्।

तत: प्रकृतय: सर्वा दृष्टवा हरिगणेश्वरम्॥ २०॥
प्रणम्य yet पतिता वसुधायं समाहिता:।
सुग्रीव: प्रकृती: सर्वा: सम्भाष्योत्थाप्य वीर्यवान्॥ २१॥
भ्रातुरन्तपुरं सौम्यं प्रविवेश महाबल:।
प्रविष्टं भीमविक्रान्तं सुग्रीवं वानरर्षभम्॥ २२॥
अभ्यषिञ्चन्त Gee: सहस्राक्षमिवामरा:।
पाण्डुरमाजह्रुश्छत्रं हेमपरिष्कृतम्॥२३॥
शुवले च वालव्यजने हेमदण्डे यशस्करे।
तथा रत्नानि सर्वाणि सर्वबीजौषधानि च॥ eu
सक्षीराणां च वृक्षाणां प्ररोहान् कुसुमानि च।
शुक्लानि चैव वस्त्राणि Bet चैवानुलेपनम्॥ BG UI
सुगन्धीनि च माल्यानि स्थलजान्यम्बुजानि च।
चन्दनानि च दिव्यानि गन्धांश्च विविधान् बहून्॥ २६ Ul
aad जातरूपं च प्रियङ्गुं मधुसर्पिषी।
दधि चर्म च वैयाघ्रं weal चाप्युपानहौ॥ २७॥
“Get yourself installed on the throne
and bring extreme delight to your near and
dear ones.” Duly letting him go in these
words by Sri Rama, Sugriva, the foremost
of monkeys, entered in state the delightful
city of Kiskindha, protected so long by Vali.
Saluting the aforesaid king of monkeys when
he had entered the city, thousands of
monkeys duly entered the city keeping on
every side of Sugriva, the ruler of monkeys.
Seeing Sugriva (the ruler of hordes of
monkeys) and reverently saluting him with
their head bent low, all his subjects thereupon
fell prostrate on the ground in a body. Calling
on all his subjects to rise and speaking
politely to them, the valiant Sugriva, who
was possessed of extraordinary might, duly
entered the pleasing gynaeceum of his
brother, Vali. When Sugriva, the foremost of
monkeys, had come out of the gynaeceum
after entering it and returned to the assembly
hall, his near and dear ones consecrated
him with a ceremonial bath as a part of the
installation ceremony, even as the gods
consecrated Indra, the thousand-eyed god.

They brought him a white canopy
decorated with gold as also a pair of white

1029

whisks provided with handles of gold—which
brought him renown—nay, all kinds of jewels
and all specimens of seeds and herbs, the
fibrous offshoots of trees exuding milk, and
flowers, also white raiments as well as white
fragrant substances for smearing one’s body
with, fragrant flowers growing on land and
water, pieces of sandalwood of the Divya
class, numerous fragrant substances of
various kinds, grains of unbroken rice dyed
in turmeric (which are considered to be
auspicious) and gold, panic seeds, honey and
ghee, curds and tiger’s skin as also a pair of
costly shoes. (18—27)

समालम्भनमादाय गोरोचनं मन:शिलाम्।
आजग्मुस्तत्र मुदिता वरा: कन्याश्च VST २८॥

Taking a fragrant paste (for painting
one’s body with), Gorocana (a bright yellow
orpiment prepared from the bile of a cow)
and Manahsila (realgar), there arrived on
the spot sixteen excellent joyous maids. (28)

ततस्ते वानरश्रेष्ठमभिषेक्तुं यथाविधि।
रत्नैर्वस्तैश्च भक्ष्यैश्च तोषयित्वा द्विजर्षभान्॥ २९॥

Having propitiated the foremost of
Brahmanas with gifts of jewels and raiments,
as well as with edibles of various kinds,
they then proceeded to consecrate with a
ceremonial bath, as a part of the installation
ceremony, Sugriva, the foremost of monkeys,
in accordance with the scriptural ordinance.

(29)
तत: कुशपरिस्तीर्णं ating जातवेदसम्।
मन्त्रपूतेन हविषा हुत्वा मन्त्रविदो जना:॥ ३०॥

Then those knowing sacred texts
propitiated the sacred fire, once it had been
girdled by blades of the sacred Kusa
grass and duly ignited, with offerings
consecrated through the recitation of sacred
texts. (30)

ततो हेमप्रतिष्ठाने वरास्तरणसंव्रते।
प्रासादशिखरे रम्ये चित्रमाल्योपशोभिते॥ ३१॥
Were विधिवन्मन्त्रै: स्थापयित्वा वरासने।
नदीनदेभ्य: Gea तीर्थेभ्यश्च समन्तत:॥ ३२॥
