926

Casting herself into the fire when
spoken to as aforesaid and granted leave by
Sri Rama, Sabari, who wore matted locks on
her head and was clad in the bark of trees
and black deerskin before she leapt into the
fire, rose to the highest heaven alone, looking,
as she did, like a blazing fire : so the tradition
goes. Adorned with celestial jewels and
celestial garlands, daubed with heavenly
sandal-paste and clad in heavenly raiment,

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

she wore a pleasing aspect in that ethereal
form, illumining that region like a streak of
lightning flashing from a cloud. (32—34)

यत्र a सुकृतात्मानो विहरन्ति महर्षय:।
तत् पुण्यं शबरी स्थानं जगामात्मसमाधिना॥ ३५॥

Through deep concentration of mind
Sabari attained that holy realm where those
eminent Rsis, whose mind was set on virtue,
enjoyed life. (35)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्येऽरण्यकाण्डे चतु:सप्ततितम: सर्ग: ॥ ७४॥

Thus ends Canto Seventy-four in the Aranyakanda of the glorious Ramayana of
Valmiki, the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

Canto LXXV

Sri Rama and Laksmana seek the brink of Pampa lake conversing together

fet तु तस्यां यातायां शबर्यां स्वेन तेजसा।
लक्ष्मणेन सह भ्रात्रा चिन्तयामास राघव:॥१॥
When, illumined by her own spiritual
lustre, the aforesaid Sabari had ascended
to heaven, Sri Rama (a scion of Raghu) for
his part with his younger brother, Laksmana,
reflected on the spiritual might of the
aforesaid Rsis. (1)
चिन्तयित्वा तु धर्मात्मा प्रभावं तं महात्मनाम्।
हितकारिणमेकाग्रं लक्ष्मणं राघवोऽब्रवीत्॥ २॥
Pondering over that spiritual power of
those high-souled Rsis, Sri Rama (a scion
of Raghu) for his part whose mind was set
on virtue, spoke as follows to Laksmana of
undivided mind, who always rendered good
offices to him: (2)

दृष्टो मयाऽऽश्रम: सौम्य बह्वाश्चर्य: कृतात्मनाम्।
विश्वस्तमृगशार्दूलो नानाविहगसेवित: ।। ३॥

“The hermitage of the sages, who had
subdued their mind through contemplation
on God, which is full of many wonders and
is inhabited by birds of different species and
in which deer and tigers live confidently

together, has been seen by me, O gentle
brother ! (3)
सप्तानां च समुद्राणां तेषां तीर्थेषु लक्ष्मण।
उपस्पृष्ट च विधिवत् पितरश्चापि तर्पिता:॥४॥
“A bath has been taken with due
ceremony in the sacred water of all the
seven oceans girding the earth, drawn by
them in a miniature form, O Laksmana, and
the manes too have been propitiated with
offerings of water. (4)

प्रणष्टमशुभं यन्न: कल्याणं समुपस्थितम्।
तेन त्वेतत् Wes मे मनो लक्ष्मण सम्प्रति॥५॥
“Whatever evil Karma stood to our credit
has been nullified and good fortune in the
shape of a meeting with Sugriva and the
consequent hope of recovering Sita, is well
within reach. Consequently this mind too of
mine now feels highly rejoiced, O Laksmana !
(5)

wa मे नरव्याघ्र शुभमाविर्भविष्यति।
तदागच्छ गमिष्याव: पम्पां at प्रियदर्शनाम्॥६॥
“Joy occasioned by some welcome
event will flash in my heart, O tiger among
