804

“| desire to see all those monkeys
delighted at heart, who have been torn for
good from their sons and wife for my sake,
O bestower of honour on others! (6)

विक्रान्ताश्चापि शूराश्च न Wet गणयन्ति च।
कृतयत्ना विपन्नाश्च जीवयैतान् पुरंदर॥७॥

“Nay, they were all valiant and heroic
too and held death of no account. Utmost
exertion was put forth by them to regain my
honour, yet they fell dead on the battlefield.
Pray, bring them back to life, O destroyer of
citadels! (7)

मत्प्रियेष्वभिरक्ताश्च न ad गणयन्ति a
त्वत्प्रसादात् समेयुस्ते वरमेतमहँ वृणे॥८॥

“By your grace may those monkeys,
who were fond of doing kindly acts to me
and counted death as nothing, get reunited
with their near and dear ones! | seek this
boon of you. (8)

नीरुजो निर्व्रणांश्चैव सम्पन्नबलपौरुषान्।
गोलाङ्गूलांस्तथर्कषांश्च द्रष्टुमिच्छामि मानद॥९॥
“| wish to see all those long-tailed
monkeys and bears whole and healed of
their wounds and their former strength and
energy fully restored, O bestower of honour
on others. (9)

अकाले चापि पुष्पाणि मूलानि च फलानि च।

wag विमलास्तत्र तिष्ठेयुर्यत्र वानरा:॥१०॥
“Nay, let there be flowers and edible

roots and fruits even out of season and let

rivers with limpid waters flow wherever the
aforesaid monkeys live.” (10)

श्रुत्वा तु वचनं तस्य राघवस्य महात्मन:।
Test: प्रत्युवाचेदं वचनं प्रीतिसंयुतम्॥११॥
Hearing the foregoing prayer of that
high-souled scion of Raghu, the mighty Indra
for his part made the following affectionate
reply: (11)
महानयं वरस्तात यस्त्वयोक्तो रघूत्तम।
द्विर्मया नोक्तपूर्वं च तस्मादेतद् भविष्यति॥१२॥

“This boon, which has been sought by

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA +

you, O jewel among the Raghus, is indeed
hard to grant. No offer has, however, been
revised by me in the past. Hence this will
come to be. (12)

समुत्तिष्ठन्तु ते ud हता a युधि राक्षसै:।
ऋक्षाश्च सह गोपुच्छैर्निकृत्ताननबाहव:॥ १३॥

“Let all those monkeys as well as bears,
alongwith long-tailed monkeys, who have
been killed in combat by the ogres, and
whose heads and arms have been severed,
duly rise again. (13)

नीरुजो निर्व्रणाश्चैव सम्पन्नबलपौरुषा:।
समुत्थास्यन्ति हरय: सुप्ता निद्राक्षये यथा॥१४॥

“The monkeys will duly rise whole and
healed of their wounds, their strength and
energy fully restored, even as those fallen
asleep would do on the termination of their
sleep. (14)

सुहृद्धिर्बान्धवैश्चैव ज्ञातिभि: स्वजनेन च।

Wa Wa समेष्यन्ति संयुक्ता: WaT मुदा॥१५॥
“Full of excessive joy, all will undoubtedly

get reunited with their friends and relatives,

kinsfolk and those who are their own. (15)

अकाले पुष्पशबला: फलवन्तश्च पादपा:।
भविष्यन्ति महेष्वास नद्यश्च सलिलायुता:॥ १६॥

“The trees in the region inhabited by
the monkeys and bears will remain spotted
with blossom and laden with fruit even out
of season and the rivers will remain constantly
supplied with water, O wielder of a mighty
bow!” (16)
सव्रणै: प्रथमं गात्रैरिदानीं निर्व्रणै: aa:
ad: समुत्थिता: wa सुप्त्वेव हरिसत्तमा:॥१७॥

With all their limbs now completely
healed of wounds, though formerly covered
with wounds, all the dead monkeys who
were the foremost of their race thereupon
duly rose as though they had slept soundly.

(17)
बभूवुर्वानरा: aa किं त्वेतदिति विस्मिता:।
काकुत्स्थं परिपूर्णार्थं gaat सर्वे सुरोत्तमा:॥ १८॥
