# YUDDHAKANDA #

plumes. Laksmana, however, cut them to
pieces with his wonderful gold-shafted, sharp
pointed and sharp-headed arrows. (99)

तान् प्रेक्षमाण: wear निकृत्तान्
निकृत्तभोगानिव पन्नगेन्द्रान्।
लङ्घेश्वर: क्रोधवशं जगाम
ससर्ज चान्यान् निशितान् पृषत्कान्॥ १०० UI
Perceiving the arrows cut down like
lordly serpents, whose coils have been
hacked to pieces, Ravana (the king of Lanka)
gave way to wrath and shot other sharp
arrows. (100)

a wat gq aw dda
रामानुज: कार्मुकसम्प्रयुक्तम्।

mig चिच्छेद न चुक्षुभे च॥१०१॥
That younger brother of Sri Rama for
his part showered a piercing hail of arrows
by his bow. Nay, he cut asunder the arrows
of his enemy with his own arrows of the
varieties known by the names of Ksura,
Ardhacandra, the excellent Karni and Bhalla,
and did not feel perturbed in the least. (101)
स बाणजालान्यपि तानि arf
मोघानि पश्यंस्त्रिदशारिराज:।
विसिस्मिये लक्ष्मणलाघवेन
पुनश्च बाणान् निशितान् मुमोच॥ १०२॥
Finding all those streams of arrows
also ineffectual, the ruler of ogres (the
enemies of gods) felt astonished at
Laksmana’s skill and began to discharge
pointed arrows anew. (102)

स लक्ष्मणश्चापि शिताञ्शिताग्रान्
महेन्द्रतुल्योऽशनिभीमवेगान् ।
संधाय चापे ज्वलनप्रकाशान्
wast रक्षोधिपतेर्वधाय il 208 M1
Nay, fitting to his bow sharp arrows
with whetted points, flying with terrible velocity
of lightning and shining like fire, the celebrated
Laksmana, too, a compeer of the mighty

517

Indra, shot them for the destruction of

Ravana, the suzerain lord of ogres.
(103)
स am प्रचिच्छेद fe wares:
Preasenicctenurastayt ।
RUT कालाग्निसमप्रभेण

स्वयंभुदत्तेन ललाटदेशे॥ १०४॥

The aforesaid ruler of ogres, however,
cut to pieces those pointed arrows and
struck Laksmana in the forehead with a
shaft resplendent as the fire of Universal
Dissolution, gifted to him by Brahma, the
self-born creator. (104)

पुनश्च dat प्रतिलभ्य कृच्छा-
च्चिच्छेद चापं त्रिदशेन्द्रशत्रो:।॥ १०५॥
Grasping his bow feebly when hurt by
the arrow of Ravana, the celebrated
Laksmana reeled. Regaining his senses with
difficulty, however, he tore asunder the bow
of the enemy of Indra, the ruler of gods.

(105)
y i
बाणैस्तदा दाशरथि: शिताग्रै:।
स सायकार्तो विचचाल राजा
कृच्छ्राच्च संज्ञां पुनराससाद॥ og ll
Laksmana (son of DaSaratha) then
struck Ravana (whose bow had been cut to
pieces) with three sharp-pointed arrows.
Hurt by the shafts, the aforesaid king
swooned and recovered his consciousness
with difficulty. (106)
a कृत्तचाप: शरताडितश्च
मेद।र्द्रग्॥त्रो रुधिरावसिक्त: |
स्वयंभुदत्तां युधि देवशत्रु:॥ १०७॥
Struck with arrows and bathed in blood,
his bow having been cut, and his limbs
splattered with fat, Ravana (the enemy of
