+ UTTARAKANDA +

at दृष्टवा श्रुतिमायान्तीं ब्रह्माणमनुगामिनीम्।
वाल्मीके: पृष्ठत: सीतां साधुवादो महानभूत्॥ १२॥
Seeing Sita approaching after Valmiki
as the Sruti (Vedas) follows Brahma (creator).
There was great uproar of appreciation. (12)

ततो हलहलाशब्द: सर्वेषामेवमाबभौ।
दु:खजन्मविशालेन शोकेनाकुलितात्मनाम्॥ १३॥

Then the sound of Halahala (sighs of
sorrow) arose among all those who were
agitated by great sorrow arising out of
suffering. (13)
साधु रामेति केचित् तु साधु सीतेति चापरे।
उभावेव च AAA प्रेक्षका: सम्प्रचुक्रुशु:॥ Vv il

Some said: ‘Well done’ Sri Rama, while
others said: ‘Well done’ Sri Sita. There all
observers praised both of them, Sri Rama
and Sri Sita. (14)
ततो मध्ये जनौघस्य प्रविश्य yoga: |
सीतासहायो वाल्मीकिरिति होवाच राघवम्॥ १५ ॥

Then in the midst of that assembly of
men the great sage entering, accompanied
by Sita, spoke thus to the descendant of
Raghu: (15)

sa दाशरथे सीता gaat धर्मचारिणी।
अपवादात् परित्यक्तका ममाश्रमसमीपत:॥१६॥

‘O son of DaSaratha, this pious Sita of
righteous conduct was left by you near my
hermitage out of fear of censure by folks.

(16)
लोकापवादभीतस्य dat राम महाव्रत।
Wert दास्यते सीता तामनुज्ञातुमर्हसि॥ १७॥

‘O Rama, possessed of great vows,

Sita will give assurance of her good conduct

before you as you are afraid of public
censure, please permit her to do so. (17)

इमौ gq जानकीपुत्रावुभौ च यमजातकौ।

सुतौ daa दुर्धर्षौ सत्यमेतद् ब्रवीमि ते॥१८॥
‘These twin sons of Sita are indeed

your sons, difficult to conquer by foes, this

is the truth, | tell you. (18)

1107

प्रचेतसोऽहँ दशम: UAT राघवनन्दन।
न स्मराम्यनृतं वाक्यमिमौ तु da पुत्रकौ॥१९॥

‘O descendant of Raghu, | am the
tenth son of Praceta (Varuna). | do not
remember having spoken untruth. These
twins are verily your sons. (19)

बहुवर्षसहस्राणि तपश्चर्या wat कृता।
नोपाश्नीयां wet तस्या दुष्टेयं यदि मैथिली। २०॥
‘| have practised penances for many
thousand years—may | not obtain the fruits
thereof, if Maithili (Sita) is wicked of conduct.
(20)

मनसा कर्मणा वाचा भूतपूर्वं न किल्बिषम्।
were फलमश्नामि अपापा मैथिली यदि॥ eeu

‘No sin has been committed by me in
my earlier life through mind, speech or action;
may | gain the fruit of this sinless conduct if
Sita is sinless. (21)

ae पञ्चसु भूतेषु मन:षष्ठेषु Taal
विचिन्त्य सीता शुद्धेति जग्राह वननिर्झरे ।॥ २२॥

‘Raghava, through deep meditation |
came to the conclusion that all ingredients
like five gross elements and mind etc., subtle
elements in Sita are in their purest form.
And it is only then that | took her from the
bank of the river in the forest to my hermitage.

(22)

sa शुद्धसमाचारा अपापा पतिदेवता।
लोकापवादभीतस्य wert da दास्यति॥ २३॥

‘This sinless, pure of conduct, Sita,
looking upon her husband as the only god,
shall give assurance to you, afraid as you
are of censure by public. (23)

तस्मादियं नरवरात्मज शुद्धभावा

दिव्येन दृष्टिविषयेण मया प्रविष्टा ।
लोकापवादकलुषीकृतचेतसा या

त्यक्ता त्वया प्रियतमा विदितापि शुद्धा॥ २४॥

‘Therefore, this one O! son of king
DaSaratha, forsakan by you for fear of public
