204

किमर्थं च नरश्रेष्ठौ सम्प्राप्तौ दुर्गमे पथि।
वरायुधधरौ att श्रोतुमिच्छामि तत्त्वत:॥६॥

“| wish to hear in reality as to wherefore
the two heroes, the foremost among men,
who are replicas of each other in the size of
their body, in the outer expression of their
feelings as well as in the movements of their
body, have got on a track so difficult to tread,
gracing this land even as the moon and the
sun illumine the sky, and carrying excellent
weapons on their person.” (5-6)

तस्य aq वचनं श्रुत्वा यथावृत्तं न्यवेदयत्।
सिद्धाश्रमनिवासं च राक्षसानां वधं यथा।
विश्वामित्रवच: श्रुत्वा राजा परमविस्मित:॥७॥
अतिथी परमं wat पुत्रौ दशरथस्य तौ।
पूजयामास विधिवत् सत्कारारहौ महाबलौ॥८॥

Hearing this submission of Sumati,
Viswamitra told him everything as it had
actually come about, as also of their sojourn
at Siddhasrama and the destruction of the
ogress during that period. The king was
greatly amazed to hear the narrative of
ViSwamitra. Nay, he worshipped with due
ceremony the two mighty sons of DaSaratha,
who deserved all attentions and had called
on him as his highly distinguished guests.

(7-8)
ad: परमसत्कारं सुमते: wet राघवौ।
उष्य da निशामेकां जग्मतुर्मिथिलां तत:॥९॥

Having received the warmest hospitality
from Sumati, Sri Rama and Laksmana, the
two scions of Raghu, spent one night there
at his capital and proceeded from there to
Mithila the next day. (9)

at GBT मुनय: Ud जनकस्य पुरीं शुभाम्।

साधु साध्विति शंसन्तो मिथिलां समपूजयन्॥ १०॥
Beholding that beautiful capital of King

Janaka all the sages forming the party

of Viswamitra greatly admired Mithila,

exclaiming “Good! Excellent !!” (10)

मिथिलोपवने at आश्रमं दृश्य राघव:।
पुराणं निर्जनं रम्यं पप्रच्छ मुनिपुंगवम्॥११॥

« VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

Seeing then an old and delightful, though
desolate, hermitage in a grove on the outskirts
of Mithila, Sri Rama, a scion of Raghu,
inquired as follows of Viswamitra, the foremost
of hermits : (11)
श्रोतुमिच्छामि भगवन् कस्यायं Gel आश्रम:॥ १२॥

“What can this place possibly be, which,
though looking like a hermitage, is devoid
of hermits? | wish to hear, O venerable Sir,
whose hermitage it has been in the past.”

(12)
TATA राघवेणोक्तं वाक्यं वाक्यविशारद:।
प्रत्युवाच महातेजा विश्वामित्रो महामुनि: i १३॥

Hearing the aforesaid question asked
by Sri Rama (a scion of Raghu), the great
sage ViSwamitra, who is_ exceptionally
glorious and skilled in speech, replied as
follows : (13)

ea a कथयिष्यामि yoy तत्त्वेन weal
यस्यैतदाश्रमपदं शप्तं कोपान्महात्मन:॥१४॥
“Ah, please listen! | shall tell you in
truth, O scion of Raghu, to what great soul
this site of a past hermitage belonged and

by whose wrath it was subjected to a curse.
(14)

गौतमस्य नरश्रेष्ठं पूर्वमासीन्महात्मन:।
आश्रमो दिव्यसंकाश: सुरैरपि सुपूजित:॥१५॥
“The hermitage, which looked like a
heavenly retreat, nay, which was _ highly
honoured even by gods, formerly belonged
to the high-souled sage, Gautama, O jewel
among men ! (15)

स ma तप आतिष्ठदहल्यासहित: पुरा।
वर्षपूगान्यनेकानि राजपुत्र महायश:॥१६॥
“In this very hermitage, 0 highly
Meritorious prince, he practised austerities
with his wife, Ahalya, for many rounds of
years. (16)
wean विदित्वा च सहस्राक्ष: शचीपति: |
मुनिवेषधरो भूत्वा अहल्यामिदमब्रवीत्॥१७॥
