# YUDDHAKANDA #

(the missile presided over by Brahma) as
well as the servants of Yama, son of the

sun-god. (59)
बह्नयालयं वैश्रवणालयं च
wat सूर्यनिबन्धनं च।

wearer शङ्करकार्मुकु च
ददर्शं नाभिं च वसुन्धराया:॥६०॥
He also beheld the abode of Agni (the
god of fire), the abode of Kubera (son of
sage Visrava) shining like the sun, the spot
where the sun was tied down (for being
scrapped by ViSwakarma, the craftsman of
gods, for the satisfaction of his wife, Chaya),
the abode of the four-faced Brahma, the
creator, the abode of the bow belonging to
Lord Siva as well as the navel of the earth
(containing the hole through which one can
enter Patala, the nethermost subterranean
region). (60)

कैलासमग्रयं हिमवच्छिलां च
तं a qt काञ्चनशैलमग्रयम्।

प्रदीप्तसर्वौषधिसम्प्रदीप्तं
ददर्श सर्वौषधिपर्वतेन्द्रम्॥ ६१ ॥
He further beheld the excellent

mountain Kailasa (the abode of Lord Siva),
Ugra (the mighty Lord Siva) as well as the
rock of the Himalaya mountain (on which
Lord Siva is believed to have practised
austerities and abstract meditation), the well-
known bull (the transport of Lord Siva) and
the lofty golden mountain, Rsabha, and the
lord of mountains on which all the simples
grew and which was highly illumined by all
flaming herbs. (61)

स तं समीक्ष्यानलराशिदीप्तं
विसिस्मिये वासवदूतसूनु: |
आप्लुत्य तं चौषधिपर्वतेन्द्रं

तत्रौषधीनां विचयं चकार॥६२॥

Hanuman (son of the wind-god, a
messenger of Indra) was astonished to gaze

617

on that mountain, blazing like a collection of
fires, and bounding to that lord of mountains,
rich in medicinal herbs, began to search
for the herbs, described by Jambavan,
there. (62)

स योजनसहस्राणि wader महाकपि:।
दिव्यौषधिधरं शैलं व्यचरन्मारुतात्मज:॥६३॥
Having covered a distance of thousands
of Yojanas in order to reach the place, that
mighty monkey, Hanuman (sprung from the
loins of the wind-god) began to range the
mountain bearing celestial herbs on its
bosom. (63)

महौषध्यस्तत: सर्वास्तस्मिन् पर्वतसत्तमे।
विज्ञायार्थिनमायान्तं ततो जग्मुरदर्शनम्॥६४॥

Perceiving a seeker coming, all the
sovereign herbs growing on that prince of
mountains thereupon disappeared from the
view of Hanuman. (64)

स ता महात्मा हनुमानपश्यं-

gam रोषाच्च भृशं ननाद।
अमृष्यमाणोऽग्निसमानचक्षु-

र्महीधरेन्द्रं तमुवाच वाक्यम्॥६५॥

Not being able to identify them, the
said high-souled Hanuman grew angry and
in his wrath emitted a tremendous roar.
Unable to endure their disappearance, his
eyes burning like fire, the monkey spoke as
follows to that lord of mountains: (65)
किमेतदेवं aati ते
aq wat नासि कृतानुकम्प:।
विकोर्णमात्मानमथो नगेन्द्र॥ ६६ UI

“Since you have not shown any
compassion even for Sri Rama, a scion
of Raghu, this kind of rigidity of yours is
despicable. Overcome by the strength of
my arms, find yourself immediately shattered
to pieces today, O lord of mountains!”

(66)

पश्याद्य
