* ARANYAKANDA «

words to dinner as a Brahmana since he
had come dressed as such: (35)
इयं Te ब्राह्मण काममास्यता-
मिदं च पाद्यं प्रतिगृह्यतामिति।
इदं च fag वनजातमुत्तमं
त्वदर्थमव्यग्रमिहोपभुज्यताम् ॥ ३६॥
“Here is a seat of green grass, O
Brahmana ! Let yourself be seated at will on
it. Also let this water to wash your feet with
be accepted. And here is excellent produce
of the forest dressed for you. This may be
partaken of by you on this spot at ease.”
(36)
नरेन्द्रपत्नीं प्रसमीक्ष्य मैथिलीम्।
प्रसह्य तस्या हरणे Ge मन:
समर्पयामास वधाय रावण:॥ ३७॥

839

Being invited to dine in the aforesaid
words and closely observing Queen Sita,
the princess of Mithila, who had uttered
the full formula with which a guest is invited
to dine, Ravana fully and resolutely made
up his mind to carry her away by force
and thereby to bring about his own death.

(37)

प्रतीक्षमाणा सहलक्ष्मणं तदा।

निरीक्षमाणा हरितं cast त-

न्महद् वनं नैव तु रामलक्ष्मणौ ।। ३८ ॥
Then, looking out for her neatly dressed
husband—who had gone ahunting with
Laksmana—and casting her eyes round,
Sita only saw at that moment that vast
green forest but not Sri Rama and Laksmana.
(38)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्येऽरण्यकाण्डे षट्चत्वारिंश: सर्ग: ॥ ४६ ॥

Thus ends Canto Forty-six in the Aranyakanda of the glorious Ramayana of Valmiki,
the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

Canto XLVII

Sita tells Ravana about herself and her husband and also the reason of their
coming to the forest. Ravana expresses his desire to make her his
principal queen. Sita reproaches him

रावणेन तु वैदेही तदा ger featur
परिव्राजकरूपेण छाशंसात्मानमात्मना॥ १॥

Questioned by Ravana, who, though
disguised as a wandering recluse, intended
to carry her away, Sita, a princess of the
Videha territory, for her part, spoke to him
about herself of her own accord. (1)

ब्राह्मणश्चातिथिश्चैष अनुक्तो fe wad माम्।
इति ध्यात्वा मुहूर्तं तु सीता वचनमब्रवीत्॥ २॥
Reflecting awhile that, being a

Brahmana and an unexpected guest, he
might likely curse her if not told about herself,

Sita for her part spoke to him as follows :
(2)

दुहिता जनकस्याहुं मैथिलस्य महात्मन:।

सीता नाम्नास्मि भद्रं a रामस्य महिषी rar ३॥

“A daughter of the high-souled Janaka,
king of Mithila, Sita by name, | am the
beloved consort of Sri Rama. May all be
well with you ! (3)

उषित्वा द्वादश WAT इक्ष्वाकूणां निवेशने।
भुञ्जाना मानुषान् भोगान् सर्वकामसमृद्धिनी॥४॥

“Having lived for twelve years in the
palace of the kings of Ikswaku’s line, and
