* AYODHYAKANDA +

with beautiful flowers of every description,
endure now this burden of matted locks on
his head? (33)

यस्य यज्ञैर्यथादिष्टैर्युक्तो धर्मस्य daa: |
शरीरक्लेशसम्भूतं स धर्मं परिमार्गते॥ ३४॥

“He who deserved to acquire merit
through sacrificial performances undertaken
as enjoined by the scriptures, is striving
after merit earned through mortification of
the flesh ! (34)

wet महार्हेण यस्याङ्गमुपसेवितम्।
मलेन तस्याङ्गमिदं कथमार्यस्य सेव्यते॥ ३५॥

“How is this person of my celebrated
elder brother, which used to be adorned
with sandal-paste of great value is now
covered with dirt? (35)

मन्निमित्तमिदं दु:खं प्राप्तो wa: सुखोचित:।

धिग्जीवितं नृशंसस्य मम लोकविगर्हितम्॥ ३६॥
“Sri Rama, who deserves all kinds of

comforts, has met with this misfortune on

my account. Woe to my life, condemned by
the world, cruel as | am.” (36)

gad विलपन् दीन: प्रस्विन्नमुखपङ्कज:।
पादावप्राप्य रामस्य पपात भरतो SST ३७॥
Loudly wailing as aforesaid, Bharata,
who was feeling miserable, his lotus-like
countenance covered with perspiration, fell
down crying, unable as he was to place his
hands on the feet of Sri Rama. (37)

दु:खाभितप्तो भरतो राजपुत्रो महाबल:।
उक्त्वाऽऽर्येति सकृद् दीनं पुनर्नोवाच किंचन॥ ३८ ॥

Pitifully saying “O worshipful brother !”
but once, the very mighty prince Bharata,

643

tormented as he was with agony, said nothing
further. (38)

बाष्पै: पिहितकण्ठश्च प्रेक्ष्य रामं यशस्विनम्।

आर्येत्येवाभिसंक्रुश्य व्याहर्तुं नाशकत् तत:॥ ३९॥
Nay, crying at the top of his voice “My

noble brother!” only, on perceiving the

illustrious Sri Rama, he could not speak
further, his throat choked with tears. (39)

शत्रुघ्नश्चापि रामस्य ववन्दे चरणौ Seti
तावुभौ च समालिङ्ग्य रामोऽप्यश्रूण्यवर्तयत्॥४०॥

Shedding tears, Satrughna as well
bowed down at the feet of Sri Rama. And
closely embracing them both, Sri Rama too
began dropping tears. (40)

a: सुमन्त्रेण WA wa
समीयतू राजसुतावरण्ये।
दिवाकरश्चैव निशाकरश्च

यथाम्बरे शुक्रबृहस्पतिभ्याम्॥४१॥

The two princes, Sri Rama and
Laksmana, then embraced Sumantra as well
as Guha in the forest, even as the Sun and
the Moon conjoin with Venus and Jupiter in
the heavens. (41)

तान् पार्थिवान् वारणयूथपार्हान्
समागतांस्तत्र महत्यरण्ये।
वनौकसस्तेऽभिसमीक्ष्य सर्वे

त्वश्रूण्यमुञ्जन् प्रविहाय हर्षम्॥४२॥

Perceiving the aforesaid princes, who
deserved to ride on lordly elephants (lit., the
leaders of herds of elephants), come together
in that forest, all those dwellers in forests
for their part began to shed tears totally
giving up joy born of his blessed sight.(42)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्येऽयोध्याकाण्डे
नवनवतितम: सर्ग: ॥ ९९ ॥

Thus ends Canto Ninety-nine in the Ayodhyakanda of the glorious Ramayana of
Valmiki, the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

