* SUNDARAKANDA +

a गदाभिर्विचित्राभि: परिघै: काञ्चनाङ्गदै:।
आजग्मुर्वानरश्रेष्ठं शरैरादित्यसंनिभै: ।। २८ ॥
They assailed Hanuman, the foremost
of monkeys, with maces of different kinds,
iron bludgeons plated with gold at the head
and arrows shining brightly as the sun. (28)

Wet: पट्टिशै: शूलै: प्रासतोमरपाणय:।
Una हनूमन्ते सहसा तस्थुरग्रत:॥२९॥
Surrounding Hanuman, the Kinkaras,
who were equipped with clubs, sharp-edged
spears and iron pikes and who carried lances
and javelins in their hands, stood all of a
sudden in front of him. (29)

हनूमानपि तेजस्वी श्रीमान् पर्वतसंनिभ:।
क्षितावाविद्ध्य लाङ्गूलं ननाद च महाध्वनिम्॥ ३० ॥

Lashing his tail at the ground, the
glorious Hanuman too, who was full of energy
and looked like a mountain, uttered a loud
roar. (30)

स भूत्वा तु महाकायो SAM, मारुतात्मज:।

पुच्छ्मास्फोटयामास लङ्कां शब्देन पूरयन्॥३१॥
Assuming a gigantic form, the celebrated

Hanuman, sprung from the loins of the wind-

god, waved his tail to and fro, filling Lanka
with its sound. (31)

तस्यास्फोटितशब्देन महता चानुनादिना।
पेतुर्विहङ्गा गगनादुच्चैश्चेदमघोषयत्॥ ३२॥

At the loud and resonant sound of the
swishing of his tail, birds fell from the airspace
and he proclaimed in aloud voice: (32)

जयत्यतिबलो WAT लक्ष्मणश्च महाबल:।
राजा जयति सुग्रीवो राघवेणाभिपालित:॥ ३३॥

“Victorious is Sri Rama, who is
possessed of surpassing strength and
Laksmana, who  is~ endowed with
extraordinary might. Victorious too is King
Sugriva, protected on all sides by Sri Rama,
a scion of Raghu. (33)

दासोऽहं कोसलेन्द्रस्य रामस्याक्लिष्टकर्मण: |
हनूमान् wast निहन्ता मारुतात्मज:॥ ३४॥

195

“|, Hanuman, sprung from the loins of
the wind-god, and the destroyer of hostile
armies, am a servant of Sri Rama of
unwearied action, the lord of Kosala. (34)
न रावणसहस्रं A युद्धे प्रतिबलं wad!
शिलाभिश्च प्रहरत: पादपैश्च सहस्रश:॥ ३५॥

“Not even a thousand of Ravanas can
stand my might in combat, even as | assail
them with a myriad of rocks and trees. (35)

अर्दयित्वा पुरीं लङ्कामभिवाद्य च मैथिलीम्।
समृद्धार्थो गमिष्यामि मिषतां सर्वरक्षसाम्॥ ३६॥

“Destroying the city of Lanka and
greeting Sita, the princess of Mithila, | shall
return fully accomplished of purpose, while
all the ogres stand looking on.” (36)

तस्य संनादशब्देन तेऽभवन् भयशाङ्किता:।
CIs wad संध्यामेघमिवोन्नतम्॥ ३७॥
The Kinkaras were stricken with fear

at his roar and beheld Hanuman standing
aloft as an evening cloud. (37)

स्वामिसंदेशनि:शङ्कास्ततस्ते राक्षसा: कपिम्।

चित्रै: प्रहरणैर्भीमैरभिपेतुस्ततस्तत: ॥ ३८ ॥
Rid of all doubt as to who he was by

the mention of his master, those ogres

thereupon attacked him from every side

with various dreadful weapons. (38)

स तै: uaa: ot: ada: स महाबल:।

आससादायसं भीमं परिघं तोरणाश्रितम्॥ ३९॥
Surrounded by those valiant ogres from

all sides, the celebrated Hanuman, who was

endowed with extraordinary might, seized a
formidable iron bar lying at the archway. (39)

स तं परिघमादाय wast रजनीचरान्।
सपन्नगमिवादाय स्फुरन्तं विनतासुत:॥४०॥
Laying hold on that bar, he struck the
rangers of the night even as Garuda (son of
Vinata) would, carrying a struggling serpent.
(40)

विचचाराम्बरे dit: परिगृह्य च मारुति:।
सूदयामास वज्रेण दैत्यानिव सहस्रदूक॥४१॥
