* SUNDARAKANDA +

139

Canto XXVIII
The moment Sita, who was unable to bear the reproaches and threats of the
ogresses, endeavours after wailing a good deal to strangle herself to
death with the cord used for tying her hair, a propitious omen,
never seen before, appears on her person

सा राक्षसेन्द्रस्य वचो निशम्य
तद् रावणस्याप्रियमप्रियार्ता।
सीता वितत्रास यथा वनान्ते
सिंहाभिपन्ना गजराजकन्या॥ १॥
Recalling the aforesaid unpalatable
threat of Ravana, the lord of ogres, the
celebrated Sita, who was already afflicted
with separation from her beloved husband,
got terrified even as the female calf of a
lordly elephant fallen into the clutches of a
lion on the edge of a forest. (1)

सा राक्षसीमध्यगता च भीरु-

र्वाग्भिर्भृशं रावणतर्जिता च।
कान्तारमध्ये fast विसृष्टा

बालेव कन्या विललाप सीता॥ २॥

Encircled by the ogresses and
repeatedly intimidated with threats by Ravana,
that timid lady, Sita, began to wail as follows
like a young girl abandoned in the heart of a
lonely and thick forest: (2)

जीवामि यस्मात् क्षणमप्यपुण्या।। 3 UI
“Truly do the wise affirm that death does
not come in the world before the appointed
hour, since I, devoid of merit that | am, survive
even for amoment, though being reproached
unsparingly in this way. (3)
Gare विहीनं बहुदु:खपूर्ण-
fae तु नूनं wa स्थिरं मे।
विदीर्यते यन्न सहस्ररधाद्य
वज्राहतं श्रृंगमिवाचलस्य ।। ४॥

“Though bereft of joy and full of great
agony, my heart must be hard indeed in that
it does not break into a thousand pieces this
day like the crest of a mountain struck by
lightning. (4)
नैवास्ति Wt मम दोषमत्र

वध्याहमस्याप्रियदर्शनस्य ।
we न चास्याहमनुप्रदातु-
मलं द्विजो मन्त्रमिवाद्विजाय॥५॥

“Surely no blame whatsoever will attach
to me if | give up the ghost at this juncture;
for, | stand sentenced to death at the hands
of this ogre of odious appearance. In any
case, | am unable voluntarily to bestow my
affection on him any more than a member of
the twice-born classes would impart Vedic
knowledge to one not belonging to the twice-
born classes. (5)

गर्भस्थजन्तोरिव शल्यकृन्त:।
wre: शितैश्छेत्स्यति राक्षसेन्द्र: ।। ६ U

“Even before Sri Rama, that ruler of
the world, arrives here, the vile Ravana, the
lord of ogres, will as surely cut my limbs to
pieces in no time with his sharpened weapons
even as a surgeon would cut the limbs of
a lifeless foetus in order to facilitate its
extraction from the womb under extraordinary
circumstances when other contrivances to
force it out prove abortive. (6)
Ga ade ननु दु:खिताया

मासौ चिरायाभिगमिष्यतो द्वौ।
बद्धस्य वध्यस्य यथा निशान्ते
राजोपरोधादिव TATE I ७॥

नूनं
