Having resolved thus, Hanuman, the
heroic monkey, who was eager to discover
Sita, a princess of the Videha territory, then
longed for the sunset. (48)

सूर्ये ured गते wat देहं संक्षिप्य मारुति:।
वृषदंशकमात्रोऽथ बभूवाद्भुतदर्शन: ॥ ४९ ।

Nay, contracting his body at night, when
the sun had actually set, the son of the
wind-god assumed the size of a cat, strange
to behold. (49)
प्रदोषकाले हनुमांस्तूर्णमुत्पत्य वीर्यवान्।
प्रविवेश पुरीं रम्यां प्रविभक्तमहापथाम्॥७५०॥
प्रासादमालाविततां स्तम्भै: काञ्चनसंनिभै:।
शातकुम्भनिभैर्जालैर्गन्धर्वनगरोपमाम् ॥ ५१ ॥

Springing up quickly at eventide, the
powerful Hanuman proceeded to penetrate
deep into the lovely city, whose highways
had been symmetrically aligned, which was
filled with rows of mansions, and with its golden
pillars and golden lattice windows, it looked
like the city of the Gandharvas. (50-51)

सप्तभौमाष्टभौमैश्च स cast महापुरीम्।
तलै: स्फटिकसंकीर्णै: कार्तस्वरविभूषितै:।। ५२॥
वैदूर्यमणिचित्रैशच मुक्काजालविभूषितै:।
तैस्तै: शुशुभिरे तानि भवनान्यत्र रक्षसाम्॥७५३॥

He saw the great city from where he
stood as distinguished by seven-storeyed and
eight-storeyed mansions. Those dwellings of
the ogres in this city shone brightly with their
respective floors inlaid with crystal and gold,
nay, studded with cat’s-eye gems and
decorated with strings of pearls. (52-53)

काञ्चनानि विचित्राणि तोरणानि च रक्षसाम्।
लंकामुद्योतयामासु: सर्वत: समलंकृताम्॥५४॥
Wonderful archways of gold, erected

by the ogres, also illumined Lanka, decorated
on all sides. (54)

« VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

आसीद् विषण्णो हृष्टश्च वैदेह्या दर्शनोत्सुक: ॥ ५७ ।।

Beholding Lanka, which was beyond
all imagination and strange to look at,
Hanuman, the great monkey, felt despondent
and delighted too at the prospect of finding
out Sita, eager as he was to see Sita, a
princess of the Videha territory. (55)
स पाण्डुराविद्धविमानमालिनीं

महार्हजाम्बूनदजालतोरणाम् ।
स्विनीं लितां
क्षपाचरैर्भीमबलै: सुपालिताम्॥ ५६ ॥

Presently he entered the glorious city,
which was arrayed with rows of white interlaced
seven-storeyed mansions, and conspicuous
with gold—latticed archways of great value,
nay, which was protected by Ravana and
fully guarded by ogres of terrific might. (56)

चन्द्रोऽपि साचिव्यमिवास्य कुर्व-
स्तारागणैर्मध्यगतो विराजन्।
ज्योत्स्नावितानेन वितत्य लोका-
नुत्तिष्ठतेऽनेकसहस्ररश्मि: ॥५७॥

Rendering aid, as it were, to him and
shining brightly with hosts of stars in their
midst, nay, overspreading the worlds with the
canopy of its light, the moon with its myriad
rays made its appearance on the horizon.

(57)
Tee = व्यवभासमानम्।
ददर्श as स कपिप्रवीर:
पोप्लूयमानं सरसीव हंसम्॥५८॥

That great hero among the monkeys
gazed on the rising moon white as milk or a
lotus-fibre, which was shining brightly with
the splendour of a conch-shell and resembled
a swan swimming in a lake. (58)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये सुन्दरकाण्डे द्वितीय: सर्ग: il २॥

Thus ends Canto Two in the Sundarakanda of the glorious Ramayana of Valmiki,
the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

