592

The aforesaid Sri Rama, a scion of
Raghu, for his part felt greatly amazed to
behold that colossus and reassuring the
monkeys, they say, spoke as follows to
Vibhisana: (11)
कोऽसौ पर्वतसंकाशो धनुष्मान् हरिलोचन:।
युक्ते हयसहस्रेण विशाले स्यन्दने स्थित:॥१२॥
अर्चिष्मद्धिर्वृतो भाति भूतैरिव महेश्वर:।॥१३॥
कालजिह्वाप्रकाशाभिर्य एषोऽभिविराजते।
आव्रतो रथशक्तीभिर्विद्युद्धिरिवं dra: uel

“Who is that archer, closely resembling

a mountain, with leonine eyes, seated in a
vast chariot drawn by a thousand horses,
who in the midst of whetted pikes, very
sharp and flaming spears and lances, shines
over there like Lord Siva surrounded by
genii, and who amidst the javelins placed in
his chariot and gleaming like the tongues of
Kala (the Time-Spirit) is shining brightly like
a cloud encircled by flashes of lightning?
(12—14)

धनूंषि चास्य सज्जानि हेमपृष्ठानि सर्वश:।
शोभयन्ति TANS शक्रचापमिवाम्बरम्॥१५॥

“Nay, bows with golden backs ranged
on every side (in his chariot) adorn his
excellent chariot in the same way as rainbow
would adorn the sky. (15)

य एष रक्ष:शार्दूलो रणभूमिं विराजयन्।
अभ्येति रथिनां sear रथेनादित्यवर्चसा॥ १६॥

“This tiger among the ogres, the
foremost of car-warriors, is advancing in his
chariot resplendent as the sun, illuminating
the battle-field! (16)

ध्वजशृङ्गप्रतिष्ठेन राहुणाभिविराजते।
सूर्यरश्मिप्रभैर्बाणैर्दिशो दश विराजयन्॥१७॥
“He is distinguished by an emblem of
Rahu installed on the point of his standard
and is lighting up the ten directions with

his arrows possessing the splendour of
sunbeams. (17)

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA +

शतक्रतुधनु:प्रख्यं धनुश्चास्य विराजते॥१८॥

“Nay, his triply curved golden-backed
and ornamented bow, shining as_ the
rainbow, whose twang resembles the
thundering of a cloud, is casting its splendour
all round. (18)

सध्वज: सपताकश्च सानुकर्षो महारथ:।
चतु:सादिसमायुक्तो मेघस्तनितनि:स्वन:॥१९॥
“Provided with व standard, flags
and axle-tree, his huge chariot, which is
driven by four charioteers, his chariot is

emitting a sound resembling the thundering
of a cloud. (19)

विंशतिर्दश चाष्टौ च तूणास्य रथमास्थिता:।
कार्मुकाणि च भीमानि ज्याश्च काञ्चनपिङ्गला: tt २० ॥

“Twenty quivers, ten dreadful bows and
eight bowstrings, golden and reddish-brown
of hue, lie arranged in his chariot. (20)

द्वौ च खड्गौ च पाश्वस्थौ प्रदीप्तौ पार्श्वशोभितौ |
चतुर्हस्तत्सरुयुतौ व्यक्तहस्तदशायतौ It २१॥

“Nay, hanging on its sides, two flaming
swords, clearly ten cubits long and provided
with hilts measuring four cubits are casting
their splendour on his two sides. (21)

रक्तकण्ठगुणो धीरो महापर्वतसंनिभ:।
काल: कालमहावक्त्रो मेघस्थ ST भास्कर:॥ २२॥

“With a red garland adorning his neck,
a mouth enormous as that of Death, the
resolute ogre, resembling a huge mountain
and dark of hue, looks like the sun veiled
by a cloud. (22)
काञ्चनाङ्गदनद्धाभ्यां भुजाभ्यामेष शोभते।
शृङ्गाभ्यामिव तुङ्गाभ्यां हिमवान् पर्वतोत्तम: ॥ २३॥

“By virtue of his arms adorned with
gold armlets, the yonder ogre shines like
the Himalaya, the foremost of mountains,
with two lofty peaks. (23)

कुण्डलाभ्यामुभाभ्यां च भाति वक्त्रं सुभीषणम्।
पुनर्वस्वन्तरगतं परिपूर्णो निशाकर:॥२४॥
