३३2

my failure to keep my word lay hold on me
in this life.” (36)

इति दु:खाभिसंतप्तं विलपन्तमचेतनम्।
घूर्णमानं महाराजं शोकेन समभिप्लुतम्॥ ३७॥
Ut शोकार्णवस्याशु प्रार्थयन्तं पुन: पुन:।
प्रत्युवाचाथ कैकेयी रौद्रा रौद्रतरं वच:॥ ३८॥

To the Emperor—who was_ sore
distressed with agony and was wailing as
aforesaid, nay, who had fallen unconscious
and was helplessly tossing about,
overwhelmed as he was with grief, and was
praying again and again for being speedily
borne across the sea of grief—the fierce
Kaikeyi gave the following fiercer reply :

(37-38)

ae दत्त्वा वरौ राजन् पुन: प्रत्यनुतप्यसे।
धार्मिकत्वं कथं वीर पृथिव्यां कथयिष्यसि॥ ३९॥

“If, having once granted a couple of
boons to me, you now repent, how will you
be able to proclaim your piety any more on
earth, O valiant king? (39)

यदा समेता बहवस्त्वया wea: el
कथयिष्यन्ति aa तत्र fh प्रतिवक्ष्यसि॥४०॥

“When many an assembled royal sage
converse with you about the boons granted
by you to me, O knower of what is right,
what reply will you make to their question?

(40)

यस्या: Ware जीवामि या च मामभ्यपालयत्।
तस्या: कृता मया मिथ्या कैकेय्या इति वक्ष्यसि।॥। ४१ ॥

“Will you then admit that the promise
made by you to grant the two boons already

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA +

offered by you to Kaikeyi—by whose grace
you survive and who protected you against
the enemies by driving your chariot and
removing you from the battlefield and nursing
you—has been broken by you? (41)
किल्बिषं त्वं नरेन्द्राणां करिष्यसि नराधिप।
यो दत्त्वा वरमद्यैव पुनरन्यानि भाषसे॥४२॥
“You, who having granted boons this
very day, O ruler of men, now say contrary
things, shall bring a stigma on other kings
too of your own race. (42)

शैब्य: श्येनकपोतीये स्वमांसं पक्षिणे adh
अलर्कश्चक्षुषी दत्त्वा जगाम गतिमुत्तमाम्॥४३॥

“In the course of a dispute between a
hawk and a dove (who were no other than
Indra, the ruler of gods, and the god of fire
respectively) the ruler of the Sibis' gave
away his own flesh to the bird, which would
not be satisfied otherwise; and, parting with
his own eyes, King Alarka? attained to the
highest destiny. (43)
सागर: समयं कृत्वा न वेलामतिवर्तते।
समयं मानृतं कार्षी: पूर्वव्रत्तमनुस्मरन्॥४४॥

“Having given his word of honour to
the gods at their entreaty, Ocean never
transgresses his limits. Therefore, bearing
in mind the conduct of your forbears, do not
violate the pledge given by you to me. (44)
स त्वं at परित्यज्य रामं राज्येऽभिषिच्य च।
सह कौसल्यया नित्यं रन्तुमिच्छसि दुर्मते॥४५॥

“Now | understand that forswearing
righteousness and installing Rama on the

1. We are told in our scriptures how in order to put the large-heartedness of the king to a test Indra

(the ruler of gods) and Agni (the god of fire) once appeared in his court in the disguise of a hawk and
a dove. Being chased by the hawk, the dove, which sought the king’s protection, descended into his
lap. The hawk, which closely followed it, demanded it back from the king, contending that the bird had
been allotted to it as its food by Providence and that the king had no right to rob it of its quarry. The
king, however, was not prepared to forsake the fugitive on any account and agreed to part with his own
flesh in order to indemnify the hawk. The hawk, however, outweighed the king’s flesh every time he
chopped it from his body till at last he ascended the scale himself and thus offered himself in exchange
for the dove.

2. The royal sage Alarka parted with his own eyes in order to implement a boon granted by him
to a blind Brahmana who asked for the king’s eyes in order to have his own eyesight restored.
