* SUNDARAKANDA +

Kadamba trees) as well as Saptacchadas,
Asanas, Kovidaras and Karaviras in blossom
as also trees adorned with a load of flowers
as well as those bearing buds only, and which
were crowded with birds and whose crests
were being shaken by the wind, ponds
abounding in swans and Karandavas (a
species of duck) and carpeted with lotuses
and water-lilies, lovely pleasure-groves of
every description and lovely ponds of various
kinds overspread by trees of every species,
bearing fruit and flower in all seasons as also
delightful gardens. (9—13)

समासाद्य च लक्ष्मीवाँल्लंकां रावणपालिताम्।
परिखाभि: सपद्माभि: सोत्पलाभिरलंकृताम्॥ १४॥
सीतापहरणात् तेन रावणेन सुरक्षिताम्।
समन्ताद् विचरद्भिश्च राक्षसैरुग्रधन्वभि:॥ १५॥
काञ्चनेनावृतां Tat प्राकारेण महापुरीम्।
गृहैश्च गिरिसंकाशै: शारदाम्बुदसंनिभे:॥१६॥
पाण्डुराभि: प्रतोलीभिरुच्चाभिरभिसंव्रताम्।
अट्टालकशताकीर्णां पताकाध्वजशोभिताम्॥ १७॥
तोरणै: काञ्चनैर्दिव्यैर्लतापङ्क्तिविराजितै:।
ददर्शं हनुमाँल्लंकां देवो देवपुरीमिव॥१८॥

Duly arriving at the great and lovely
city of Lanka, which was protected by
Ravana, nay, was fringed with moats full of
lotuses and water-lilies and was strongly
guarded, ever since Sita had been abducted
and placed there, by the selfsame Ravana,
as well as by other ogres armed with
formidable bows ranging on every side; which
was enclosed with a golden boundary wall
and crowded with buildings lofty as mountains
and resembling autumnal clouds; which was
hemmed in with white-plastered and elevated
roads, was crowded with hundreds of
mansions and decorated with flags and
pennons and was distinguished by wonderful
golden archways adorned with rows of

45

climbers—the glorious Hanuman surveyed
Lanka even as a god would look at the city
of gods. (14—18)

Farad स्थितां लंकां पाण्डुरैर्भवनै: शुभै:।
ददर्श स कपि: श्रीमान् पुरीमाकाशगामिव॥ १९॥

That illustrious Hanuman saw Lanka
perched on the summit of a mountain and
distinguished by its sparkling white mansions
as though it were a city moving in the
airspace. (19)
पालितां राक्षसेन्द्रेण निर्मितां विश्वकर्मणा।
प्लवमानामिवाकाशे ददर्श STAT कपि:॥ २०॥

Nay, Hanuman beheld the city
constructed by ViSwakarma, the architect
of gods, and protected by Ravana, the king
of the ogres, as though it was sailing in the

sky. (20)
वप्रप्राकारजघनां विपुलाम्बुवनाम्बराम्।
शतघ्नीशूलकेशान्तामट्टालकावतंसकाम् ॥२१॥

मनसेव कृतां लंकां निर्मितां विश्वकर्मणा।
द्वारमुत्तरमासाद्य चिन्तयामास वानर:॥२२॥
कैलासनिलयप्रख्यमालिखन्तमिवाम्बरम् ।
ध्रियमाणमिवाकाशमुच्छितैर्भवनोत्तमै: Tea

He further conceived Lanka, the city
built by Viswakarma, as a woman evolved
with his mind, with its buttress and enclosure
as her hip and loins, the vast sea and the
woods encircling the city for her raiment,
the Sataghnis* and Silas (spikes) for her
locks and the mansions for her earrings.
Reaching the northern gate, which looked
like the gateway of the city of Alaka, the
capital of Kubera, the god of riches, perched
on Mount Kailaga, the abode of Lord Siva,
which scraped the sky, as it were, by means
of its tall mansions and supported the
firmament, as it were, on its housetops,
Hanuman fell abrooding. (21—23)

* A kind of weapon used as a missile (and described as a huge stone studded with iron spikes and

four Talas or palmyra trees in length):

शतघ्नौ च चतुस्ताला लोहकण्टकसंचिता।
अय:कण्टकसंछन्ना शतघ्नौ महतो शिला॥
