682

a राक्षसगणैर्मुख्यैर्वृतो मन्दोदरीसुत:।
निर्ययौ नगराद् वीर: कृतान्तबलचोदित:॥ ११॥
Surrounded by selected ogre battalions
and impelled by the force of destiny, that
gallant son of Mandodan, Indrajit, sallied
forth once more from the city. (11)

सोऽभिनिष्क्रम्य नगरादिन्द्रजित् परमौजसा।
अभ्ययाज्जवनैरश्वैर्लक्ष्मणं सविभीषणम्॥१२॥

Rushing out of the city in his chariot
drawn by swift horses, Indrajit assailed
Laksmana and Vibhisana with exceeding
impetuosity. (12)

ततो रथस्थमालोक्य सौमित्री रावणात्मजम्।
वानराश्च महावीर्या राक्षसश्च विभीषण:॥१३॥

Seeing Indrajit (son of Ravana) seated
in a chariot, Laksmana (son of Sumitra) as
well as the monkeys, who were endowed
with extraordinary prowess, as also the
ogre Vibhisana thereupon experienced great
wonder on recalling the agility of that
sagacious ogre. (13)
विस्मयं परमं जग्मुर्लाघवात् तस्य धीमत:।
रावणिश्चापि संक्रुद्धो Wl वानरयूथपान्॥१४॥

Filled with rage, Indrajit (son of Ravana)
too struck down with the streams of his

arrows the commanders of simian troops in
their hundreds and thousands. (14)

पातयामास बाणौघै: शतशोऽथ AST: |

स मण्डलीकृतधनू रावणि: समितिंजय:॥१५॥

हरीनभ्यहनत् क्रुद्ध: परं लाघवमास्थित:।

a वध्यमाना eat नाराचैर्भीमविक्रमा:॥१६॥

सौमित्रिं शरणं प्राप्ता: प्रजापतिमिव प्रजा:।

aa: समरकोपेन ज्वलितो रघुनन्दन:।

चिच्छेद कार्मुकं तस्य दर्शयन् पाणिलाघवम्॥ १७॥
Stretching his bow in wrath to a circle

and exhibiting supreme agility, Indrajit (son

of Ravana), victorious in combat, began to

strike down the monkeys. While being struck

with steel arrows, the aforesaid monkeys,

though endowed with redoubtable prowess,

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA +

sought Laksmana (son of Sumitra) as their
refuge even as created beings would
approach Brahma, the lord of created
beings, for protection. Inflamed with anger
roused by the struggle, Laksmana (the delight
of the Raghus), tore Indrajit’s bow, thereby
demonstrating fleetness of his hand.(15—17)

सोऽन्यत्कार्मुकमादाय सज्यं चक्रे त्वरन्निव।
तदप्यस्य त्रिभिर्बाणैर्लक्ष्मणो निरकृन्तत॥ ec it

Seizing hold of another bow, Indrajit
hastily strung it. Laksmana, however, split
that bow too with three arrows. (18)

अथैनं छिन्नधन्वानमाशीविषविषोपमै: ।
विव्याधोरसि सौमित्री रावणिं पञ्चभि: शरै:॥ १९॥

With five arrows, which were deadly as
the poison of a venomous serpent, Laksmana
(son of Sumitra) forthwith pierced in the
bosom of Indrajit (son of Ravana), who had
his bow rent. (19)

a तस्य कायं निर्भिद्य महाकार्मुकनि:सृता:।

निपेतुर्धरणीं बाणा रक्ता sa महोरगा:॥ २०॥
Penetrating through the latters body,

the aforesaid arrows, shot from the huge

bow of Laksmana, fell to the ground like
huge red serpents. (20)
स च्छिन्नधन्वा रुधिरं वमन् वक्त्रेण रावणि: |
जग्राह कार्मुकश्रेष्ठं Gerd बलवत्तरम्॥ २१॥
Ejecting blood, through his mouth, Indrajit
(son of Ravana), who had his bow split,
took hold of his excellent bow, which was

stronger than the former and had a stout
cord. (21)
स लक्ष्मणं समुद्दिश्य wt लाघवमास्थित:।
ववर्ष शरवर्षाणि वर्षाणीव पुरंदर:॥ २२॥
Aiming at Laksmana he discharged
with utmost agility hails of arrows even like

Indra (the destroyer of citadels) releasing
downpours. (22)

मुक्तमिन्द्रजिता तत्तु शरवर्षमरिंदम:।
आवारयदसम्भ्रान्तो लक्ष्मण: सुदुरासदम्॥ २३॥
