* AYODHYAKANDA +

पाण्डुरारुणवर्णानि स्रोतांसि विमलान्यपि।
सुस्रुवुर्गिरिधातुभ्य: सभस्मानि भुजंगवत्॥१९॥
“Cascades carrying transparent waters
ran in a serpentine course assuming a white,
ruddy and ashy colour on the way due to
contact with mountain-minerals of those
colours. (19)

तस्मिन्नतिसुखे काले धनुष्मानिषुमान् रथी।
व्यायामकृतसंकल्प: सरयूमन्वगां नदीम्॥ २०॥
अन्यद् वा श्वापदं किंचिज्जिघांसुरजितेन्द्रिय: ।। २१॥
“Having made up my mind to take
some exercise by way of hunting, and with
my senses uncontrolled, | drove at that
most agreeable period in a chariot to the
river SarayU, equipped with a bow and arrows
and wishing to hunt at night a wild buffalo,
an elephant or any other beast of prey or
deer, accidentally arrived at some ford in
the river. (20-21)

अथान्धकारे त्वश्रौषं जले कुम्भस्य gaa: |
अचक्षुर्विषये घोषं वारणस्येव नर्दत:॥ २२॥

“Presently in the darkness |, for my
part, heard the sound of a pitcher being
filled in with water of the river, resembling
the sound of a trumpeting elephant, at a
place which was not before my eyes. (22)

adisé शरमुद्धृत्य दीप्तमाशीविषोपमम्।
शब्दं प्रति गजप्रेप्सुरभिलक्ष्यमपातयम्॥ २३॥
“Taking out from my quiver an effulgent
arrow, resembling a snake in its deadly
effect, | then discharged it in the direction of
the sound in the hope of hitting the mark,
as | wished to bag the elephant after killing
it. (23)
अमुञ्जं निशितं बाणमहमाशीविषोपमम्।
तत्र वागुषसि व्यक्ता प्रादुरासीद् वनौकस:॥ २४॥
हा हेति पततस्तोये arog व्यथितमर्मण:।
तस्मिन्निपतिते भूमौ वागभूत् तत्र मानुषी॥ २५॥
“In the quarter where | hurled my sharp
arrow, resembling a snake in its deadly

525

effect, there emerged in the dawn the clear
wail of a dweller in the forest dropping down
in water, his vital part tormented with pain
caused by the arrow. On his having dropped
down to the ground issued forth on that
very spot a human voice saying: (24-25)
कथमस्मद्दिधे wet निपतेच्च तपस्विनि।
प्रविविक्कां नदीं रात्रावुदाहारोऽहमागत:॥ २६॥
““How could a weapon descend on an
ascetic like myself, who can have no enemy?
| came at the close of night to this exceedingly

lonely river bank with the intention of drawing
water. (26)

इषुणाभिहत: केन कस्य apd मया।
mae न्यस्तदण्डस्य वने वन्येन जीवत:॥ २७॥

“‘By whom have | been hit with an
arrow? Or, to whom could offence have
been given by me, a seer who has forsworn
every form of violence and who was living
in a forest on the produce of the forest? (27)

कथं नु शस्त्रेण वधो मद्बिधस्य विधीयते।
जटाभारधरस्यैव वबल्कलाजिनवासस: ॥ २८ ।

“‘How can the killing by means of a
weapon of an ascetic like me, wearing a
mass of matted hair on his head and clad in
the bark of trees and deerskin, be enjoined
by the scriptures? (28)
को वधेन ममार्थी स्यात् किं वास्यापकृतं AAT |
एवं निष्फलमारब्धं केवलानर्थसंहितम्॥२९॥

“‘Who can have any interest in killing
me or what offence has been given by me
to the man who has hit me with an arrow?
In this way a futile act has been done by

him, and an act which will be attended with
evil consequences alone. (29)

न क्वचित् साधु मन्येत यथैव गुरुतल्पगम्।
नेमं तथानुशोचामि जीवितक्षयमात्मन:॥ ३०॥
मातरं पितरं चोभावनुशोचामि मद्बधे।
तदेतन्मिथुनं qe चिरकालभृतं मया॥३१॥
व्रद्धौ च मातापितरावहं चैकेषुणा हत:॥ ३२॥
