264

asceticism, as also, if enraged, she can
reduce them all to ashes. (3)

सर्वथातिप्रकृष्टोऽसौ रावणो राक्षसेश्वर:।
यस्य at स्पृशतो गात्रं तपसा न विनाशितम्॥४॥

“That ruler of ogres, Ravana too, is
very rich in asceticism in everyway, in that
his body was not destroyed by her askesis
even while he laid hands on Sita. (4)

न तदग्निशिखा Hate संस्पृष्टा पाणिना सती।
जनकस्य सुता Hate यत् क्रोधकलुषीकृता॥ ५ Ui

“Even a flame, when fully touched with
one’s hand, is incapable of doing that harm
which Janaka’s daughter would if stirred by
anger. (5)

जाम्बवत्प्रमुखान् सर्वाननुज्ञाप्य महाकपीन्।
अस्मिन्नेवंगते कार्ये भवतां च निवेदिते।
न्याय्यं स्म सह वैदेह्या द्रष्टुं तौ पार्थिवात्मजौ॥ ६॥
“This work of mine in the shape of
Sita’s discovery, which has thus been
crowned with success, having been reported
to you all, it behoves us to raid the pleasance
of Ravana and after recovering Sita forcibly
from the clutches of Ravana to see those
two princes, Sri Rama and Laksmana,
alongwith Sita, a princess of the Videha
territory, after taking leave of all the great
monkeys headed by Jambavan. (6)
अहमेकोऽपि wate: सराक्षसगणां पुरीम्।
तां लङ्कां तरसा हन्तुं रावणं च महाबलम्॥७॥
fe पुन: सहितो वीरैर्बलवद्भि: कृतात्मभि:।
pat: wah: शक्तैर्भवद्धिर्विजयैषिभि:।॥ ८॥
“Even single handed, | am capable of
destroying with my prowess that city of
Lanka with its host of ogres, and killing
Ravana, who is endowed with extraordinary
might, much more so when accompanied
by you—heroic, mighty and _ powerful,
monkeys, disciplined of mind, skilled in the
use of missiles and eager for victory. (7-8)

we तु Vat Ge wast सपुर:सरम्।
सहपुत्रॆ वधिष्यामि सहोदरयुतं युधि॥९॥

« VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

“I, for my part, shall destroy in an
encounter on the field of battle Ravana with
his army, those marching before him, his
sons and his brothers. (9)
ब्राह्ममस्त्रं च रौद्रं च वायव्यं वारुणं तथा।
यदि शक्रजितोऽस्त्राणि दुर्निरीक्ष्याणि संयुगे।
तान्यहं निहनिष्यामि विधमिष्यामि राक्षसान्॥१०॥

“Even though the missiles employed
by Indrajit (Ravana’s eldest son) are e.g.,
those presided over by Brahma (the creator)
and Rudra (the god of destruction) and
Vayu (the wind-god) and Varuna (the god of
water) difficult even to discern on the
battlefield, | shall repulse them as well as
exterminate the ogres. (10)

भवतामभ्यनुज्ञातो विक्रमो A रुणद्धि AAI
मयातुला विसृष्टा fe शैलवृष्टिर्निरन्तरा॥११॥
देवानपि रणे हन्यात् किं पुनस्तान् निशाचरान्।
भवतामननुज्ञातो विक्रमो मे रुणद्धि माम्॥१२॥
सागरोऽप्यतियाद् वेलां Wet: प्रचलेदपि।
न जाम्बवन्तं wae कम्पयेदरिवाहिनी॥१३॥

“If approved by you, my prowess will
frustrate him; for an incessant and unequalled
shower of rocks discharged by me on the
field of battle is enough to destroy even
gods, much more so those rangers of the
night. So long as it is not approved by you,
| keep my vehemence under check. Even
the sea may overflow its shores; even Mount
Mandara may move from its position; but no
hostile army shall be able to stagger
Jambavan in combat. (11—13)

सर्वराक्षससङ्घानां राक्षसा A च Yast: |
अलमेकोऽपि नाशाय वीरो वालिसुत: कपि:॥ १४॥
“The heroic Angada, son of Vali, alone
is equal to the destruction of all Raksasa
hosts, nay, even of the ogres who were
their progenitors. (14)

प्लवगस्योरुवेगेन नीलस्य च महात्मन:।
मन्दरोऽप्यवशीर्येत किं पुनर्युधि राक्षसा:॥ १५॥

“Even Mount Mandara would be
shattered in an encounter by the rapid
