78

her bosom as though a passionate woman
lay clasping her most beloved husband with
passion. (40)

निद्रावशमनुप्राप्ता सहकान्तेव भामिनी॥४१॥

Another self-possessed lovely woman,
who looked graceful in a dancing mood, had
fallen asleep clasping a vina with seven
strings as though she lay with her beloved.

(41)
अन्या कनकसंकाशैर्मृदुपीनैर्मनोरमै: ।
Wet परिविद्ध्यांगै: प्रसुप्ता मत्तलोचना॥४२॥

Another woman with intoxicated eyes
lay fast asleep pressing a wooden tomtom
to her bosom with her golden, soft, fleshy
and soul-ravishing limbs. (42)

भुजपाशान्तरस्थेन कक्षगेन कृशोदरी।
पणवेन सहानिन्द्या सुप्ता मदकृतश्रमा॥४३॥
Another woman with a slender waist
and irreproachable in point of beauty, who
had been worn out through drunkenness,
was lying asleep with a tabor pressed to her
bosom (lit., the space between the two arms)
and inserted in one of her arm-pits. (43)

डिण्डिमं परिगृह्यान्या तथैवासक्तडिण्डिमा।
प्रसुप्ता तरुणं वत्समुपगुह्येव भामिनी॥४४॥

Another lovely woman lay fast asleep
hugging a drum and with another drum slung
likewise on her back as though she lay
embracing her young husband as also her
child. (44)
काचिदाडम्बरं नारी भुजसम्भोगपीडितम्।
pa कमलपत्राक्षी प्रसुप्ता मदमोहिता॥४५॥

Another woman with eyes resembling
the petals of a lotus and infatuated through
inebriety lay fast asleep pressing an
Adambara (a kind of musical instrument) in
the compass of her arms. (45)

कलशीमपविद्धयान्या प्रसुप्ता भाति भामिनी।
aed पुष्पशबला मालेव परिमार्जिता॥४६॥

Lying fast asleep having unconsciously

« VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

upturned a jug of water (and getting wetted
thereby), another lovely woman, lay like a
wreath of varied flowers sprinkled with water
in spring to keep it green. (46)

पाणिभ्यां च कुचौ काचित्सुवर्णकलशोपमौ।
उपगुह्याबला सुप्ता निद्राबलपराजिता॥४७॥

Overcome by pressure of sleep, still
another woman lay asleep pressing with her
hands her breasts resembling two golden
pitchers. (47)

अन्या कमलपत्राक्षी पूर्णेन्दुसदृशानना।
अन्यामालिंग्य सुश्रोणीं प्रसुप्ता मदविह्वला॥४८॥

Overpowered by drunkenness, a
woman with eyes resembling the petals of a
lotus and a face resembling the full moon
lay fast asleep embracing another woman
of lovely hips. (48)
आतोद्यानि विचित्राणि परिष्वज्य attra: |
निपीड्य च कुचै: सुप्ता: कामिन्य: कामुकानिव॥। ४९ ॥

Hugging musical instruments of various
kinds and pressing them with their breasts
as passionate women embrace their lovers,
a number of belles could be seen lying
there. (49)
तासामेकान्तविन्यस्ते शयानां शयने शुभे।
ददर्श रूपसम्पन्नामथ at स कपि: स्नियम्॥ ५०॥
मुक्तामणिसमायुक्तैर्भूषणै:३ सुविभूषिताम्।
विभूषयन्तीमिव च स्वथ्रिया भवनोत्तमम्॥७५१॥
गौरीं कनकवर्णाभामिष्टामन्त:पुरेश्वरीम्।
कपिर्मन्दोदरीं तत्र शयानां चारुरूपिणीम्॥५२॥
स at दृष्ट्वा महाबाहुर्भूषितां मारुतात्मज:।
तर्कयामास सीतेति रूपयौवनसम्पदा।
हर्षेण महता aT ननन्द हरियूथप:॥७५३॥

Hanuman, then saw, lying asleep there
on a magnificent couch set apart from those
of the aforesaid women, a celebrated fair-
complexioned lady, shedding a golden lustre,
Mandodari by name, beloved of Ravana
and the mistress of the women of the

gynaeceum, who was rich in comeliness
and endowed with a charming exterior, nay,
