# YUDDHAKANDA +

महाजवो वीतभयो रम्यं साल्वेयपर्वतम्।
राजन् सततमध्यास्ते शरभो नाम यूथप:॥ ३५॥

“Look, he who dilates his ears and
repeatedly yawns, who does not feel afraid
of Death and does not run after an army,
nay, who shakes violently through anger
and also looks askance, who, lashing his
tail, roars like a lion with great vigour and
constantly dwells, O king, on the lovely
Salveya mountain, is a commander of
monkey hordes, Sarabha by name, who is
endowed with extraordinary might and is
wholly devoid of fear. (33—35)

एतस्य afer: aa विहारा नाम यूथपा:।
राजन् शतसहस्राणि चत्वारिंशत्तथैव Wise ii

“Under his command there are one
lakh and forty commanders of monkey
hordes, known by the name of Viharas,
who are all full of might. (36)

यस्तु मेघ इवाकाशं महानावृत्य तिष्ठति।
मध्ये वानरवीराणां सुराणामिव वासव:॥ ३७॥
भेरीणामिव संनादो यस्यैष श्रूयते महान्।
ATS: शाखामृगेन्द्राणां संग्राममभिकाङ्क्षताम्॥ ३८ UI
we पर्वतमध्यास्ते पारियात्रमनुत्तमम्।
qe दुष्प्रसहो नित्यं पनसो नाम यूथप:॥ ३९॥

“The gigantic monkey who for his part
stands enveloping space like a cloud, in the
midst of monkey heroes, as Indra in the
midst of gods, nay, whose roar resembling
the roll of kettle-drums is heard at this
moment in the midst of leaders of monkeys
who are eager to fight, and who dwells on
the most excellent Pariyatra mountain, is a
commander of monkey hordes, Panasa
by name, who is ever difficult to resist in
combat. (37—39)
यूथपा यूथपश्रेष्ठं येषां यूथानि भागश:॥४०॥

“Troop-commanders, numbering fifty
lakhs, and commanding separate units,

385

remain at the beck and call of this leader of
troop-commanders. (40)
स्थितां dit समुद्रस्य द्वितीय ga सागर:॥४१॥
wa दर्दुरसंकाशो विनतो नाम यूथप:।

पिबंश्चरति यो वेणां नदीनामुत्तमां नदीम्॥४२॥

“He who for his part stands here like
another sea, lending charm to the formidable
army stationed on the sea-shore, bounding
for joy, is the commander, Vinata, who
resembles the Dardura mountain in size
and moves about drinking the waters of the
river Vena, the foremost of all rivers.

(41-42)
US: शतसहस्राणि बलमस्य प्लवंगमा:।
त्वामाह्वयति युद्धाय क्रोधनो ATA वानर:॥४३॥
विक्रान्ता बलवन्तश्च यथा यूथानि भागश:।
यस्तु गैरिकवर्णाभं वपु: पुष्यति वानर:॥४४॥
अवमत्य सदा सर्वान् वानरान् बलदर्पित:।
गवयो AT तेजस्वी cat क्रोधादभिवर्तते॥४५॥

“Sixty lakh monkeys constitute the unit
under his command. The monkey Krodhana,
under whose command there are valiant
and powerful troop-commanders even as
there are distinct units under their command,
is challenging you to combat. The glorious
monkey, who for his part nourishes his
body having an ochre-like hue for the sake
of war with you and, proud, as he is, of his
might, stands facing you in fury, ever holding
all the other monkeys in contempt, is Gavaya
by name. (43—45)

wi शतसहस्राणि सप्तति: पर्युपासते।
एषैवाशंसते cast स्वेनानीकेन मर्दितुम्॥४६॥
“Seventy lakh monkeys stand at his
beck and call and he too aspires to lay
Lanka in ruins with his army. (46)
Ud दुष्प्रसहा वीरा sat den न विद्यते।
यूथपा यूथपश्रेष्ठास्तेषां यूथानि भागश:॥४७॥

“The afore-mentioned troop-commanders,
