106

by her; nay, who was devoted to the good
of her husband and had fallen under the sway
of ogres, though not deserving it; who, though
living in the midst of the Asoka grove
(consisting of trees which are supposed by
their name to rid all, who live in their midst,
of all grief), was nonetheless plunged in grief
and was surrounded there by ogresses even
like the star Rohini fallen under the sway of
some unpropitious planet. Hanuman found
her there like a creeper divested of its blooms.
Nay, graced with her body, which was
clothed with a natural charm, even though
unadorned, even though her limbs were
stained with dirt, she looked charming as
well as without charm like a lotus-fibre stained
with mud. (19—25)

मलिनेन तु वस्त्रेण परिक्लिष्टेन भामिनीम्।
Raat मृगशावाक्षीं cast हनुमान् कपि:॥ २६॥

तां देवीं दीनवदनामदीनां भर्तृतेजसा।
रक्षितां स्वेन शीलेन सीतामसितलोचनाम्॥ २७॥
Hanuman saw the dark-eyed young
godlike belle, Sita, with eyes like a fawn’s
and actually covered with a soiled and tattered
cloth, wretched in appearance, though
undepressed in spirit, her confidence being
restored by the thought of her husband’s
glory and protected by her own virtue.
(26-27)

तां FLAT हनुमान् सीतां मृगशावनिभेक्षणाम्।
मृगकन्यामिव त्रस्तां वीक्षमाणां समन्तत:॥ २८॥

« VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

दहन्तीमिव नि:श्वासैर्वृक्षान् पल्लवधारिण:।
संघातमिव शोकानां दु:खस्योर्मिमिवोत्थिताम्॥ २९॥
wt क्षमां सुविभक्तांगी विनाभरणशोभिनीम्।
प्रहर्षमतुलं लेभे मारुति: wer मैथिलीम्॥ ३०॥
Hanuman, son of the wind-god, derived
immense and excessive joy on beholding
the celebrated Sita, that princess of Mithila,
who was lovely to look at, whose eyes
resembled those of a fawn and who was
looking all round timidly like a frightened
fawn, who was burning, as it were, with her
sighs the trees bearing leaves, nay, who
was a personification of griefs, as it were,
and resembled a towering wave of sorrow,
who was emaciated and had _ well-
proportioned limbs and who looked charming
even without ornaments. (28—30)

हर्षजानि च सोऽश्रूणि at दृष्ट्वा मदिरेक्षणाम्।

मुमोच हनुमांस्तत्र नमश्चक्रे च राघवम्॥३१॥
Hanuman shed tears born of joy on

beholding that lady with maddening eyes

and saluted Sri Rama, a scion of Raghu, on
that happy occasion. (31)

नमस्कृत्वाथ रामाय लक्ष्मणाय च वीर्यवान्।
सीतादर्शनसंहृष्टो हनुमान् संव्रृतोऽभवत्॥ ३२॥

Having bowed down to Sri Rama and
Laksmana, the powerful Hanuman, who
was overjoyed at the sight of Sita, then
went into hiding once more behind the
boughs. (32)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये सुन्दरकाण्डे सप्तदश: AA: ॥ १७॥

Thus ends Canto Seventeen in the Sundarakanda of the glorious Ramayana of Valmiki
the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

