* AYODHYAKANDA +

The prince, who had _ undergone
propitious rites before embarking on the
long journey, crossed speedily by his
excellent chariot the great forest lying on
the way, which was not frequented, even
as the wind sweeps through the atmosphere.

(8)
उपायाद् राघवस्तूर्णं प्राग्वटे विश्रुते पुरे॥९॥

Finding the great river Ganga
associated with the name of Emperor
Bhagiratha, who was instrumental in bringing
the stream to the terrestrial region difficult
to cross at the village of Ammsudhana, Bharata,
a scion of Raghu, hastily approached it with
a view to crossing it at the well-known town
of Pragvata, where it could be easily crossed.

(9)
सगङ्गां प्राग्वटे deat समायात्कुटिकोष्टिकाम्।
सबलस्तां स data समगाद धर्मवर्धनम्॥१०॥

Crossing the holy Ganga at Pragvata,
he reached the river Kutikostika. Again
crossing the latter alongwith the detachment
accompanying him, he duly arrived at the
village of Dnarmavardhana. (10)
तोरणं दक्षिणार्धेन जम्बूप्रस्थं समागमत्।
aed च ययौ रम्यं ग्रामं दशरथात्मज:॥११॥

Bharata, son of DaSaratha, duly reached
the village of Jambuprastha through the
southern portion of the village of Torana and
then arrived at the lovely village of Varutha.

(11)
तत्र रम्ये वने वासं कृत्वासौ प्राङ्मुखो ययौ।
उद्यानमुज्जिहानाया: प्रियका यत्र पादपा:॥१२॥

Having halted for the night in a delightful
grove adjoining that village, he drove in an
easterly direction to the garden of Ujjihana,
a city, in which existed a cluster of Kadamba
trees. (12)

Rated प्रियकान् प्राप्य शीघ्रानास्थाय वाजिन: ।
अनुज्ञाप्याथ भरतो वाहिनीं त्वरितो ययौ॥ १३॥

Having reached those Kadamba trees

553

and getting swifter horses yoked to his
chariot and allowing the army to come slowly
since he had reached his own territory,
Bharata for his part hastily proceeded further.
(13)
वासं कृत्वा सर्वतीर्थे deat चोत्तानिकां नदीम्।
अन्या नदीश्च विविधै: पार्वतीयैस्तुरङ्गमै: ।। १४॥
हस्तिपृष्ठकमासाद्य कुटिकामप्यवर्तत।
ततार च नरव्याघ्रो लोहित्ये च कपीवतीम्॥ १५॥

Having halted that night in the village
of Sarvatirtha and forded next morning the
river Uttanika and other streams on the
back of various mountain ponies and
reaching the village of Hastiprsthaka,
Bharata, a tiger among men, crossed the
river Kutika and at Lohitya (another village)
crossed the river Kapivati, too. (14-15)
एकसाले स्थाणुमतीं विनते गोमतीं नदीम्।
कलिङ्गनगरे चापि प्राप्य सालवनं तदा॥१६॥
भरत: क्षिप्रमागच्छत् सुपरिश्रान्तवाहन:।
at च समतीत्याशु शार्वर्यामरुणोदये॥१७॥
अयोध्यां मनुना wat निर्मितां स ददर्श ह।
at पुरीं पुरुषव्याघ्र: सप्तरात्रोषित: पथि॥ १८॥

He crossed the Sthanumati at the
village of Ekasala and, reaching the river
Gomati, he crossed it near the village of
Vinata. And then Bharata quickly reached a
grove of sal trees at Kalinganagara. Nay,
hurriedly driving through the grove during
the night, his horses having been completely
exhausted, the tiger among men beheld the
celebrated city of Ayodhya, founded by King
Vaivaswata Manu, at dawn, having spent
seven nights, on the way: so the tradition
goes. (16—18)

अयोध्यामग्रतो Gear सारथिं चेदमब्रवीत्।
एषा नातिप्रतीता A पुण्योद्याना यशस्विनी॥१९॥

Nay, seeing Ayodhya in front of him,
Bharata spoke as follows to the charioteer :
“This well-famed city, consisting of sacred
gardens, does not look very cheerful to me.

(19)
