272

अथ राजा facet ददौ कन्याधनं बहु।
गवां शतसहस्राणि बहूनि मिथिलेश्वर:॥ ३॥

कम्बलानां च मुख्यानां क्षौमान् कोट्यम्बराणि च।
हस्त्यश्वरथपादातं दिव्यरूपं स्वलंकृतम्॥४॥

ददौ कन्याशतं तासां दासीदासमनुत्तमम्।
हिरण्यस्य सुवर्णस्य मुक्तानां विद्रुमस्य च॥५॥
At that time the ruler of the Videha
territory gave a rich dowry. As a part of that
dowry, the king of Mithila gave away many
lakhs of cows and as many first-class
carpets, numerous silken textiles and tens
of millions of cotton pieces, elephants, horses,
chariots and foot soldiers, a hundred richly-
adorned maids endowed with supernal
beauty as companions for his daughters,
excellent servants and servant-maids and a
lot of silver, gold, pearls and coral beads.
(3—5)

ददौ राजा Gees: कन्याधनमनुत्तमम्।
दत्त्वा बहुविधं राजा समनुज्ञाप्य पार्थिवम्॥६॥
प्रविवेश स्वनिलयं मिथिलां मिथिलेश्वर:।
राजाप्ययोध्याधिपति: सह पुत्रैर्महात्मभि:॥ ७॥
ऋषीन् सर्वान् पुरस्कृत्य जगाम GATT: |
Tet तु नरव्याघ्रं सर्षिसङ्घं सराघवम्॥८॥
च्चोरास्तु पक्षिणो वाचो व्याहरन्ति समन्तत:।
भौमाश्चैव मृगा: सर्वे गच्छन्ति स्म प्रदक्षिणम्॥९॥

Extremely delighted, the king thus
gave an excellent dowry. Having given
manifold presents and duly taking leave
of Dasaratha, the ruler of the earth, the
king of Mithila returned to Mithila, his own
capital. Placing ahead all the sages, that
had accompanied him to Mithila, and
accompanied by his army and entourage,
King DaSaratha (the ruler of Ayodhya) too
departed with his high-souled sons _ for
Ayodhya. While the tiger among men was
journeying with the hosts of sages as well
as with his four sons, the scions of Raghu,
fearful birds began to cry all around him;
while, on the other hand, the deer on the
land, one and all, crossed his path from the
left. (6—9)

« VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

तान् दृष्ट्वा राजशार्दूलो वसिष्ठं पर्यपृच्छ्त।
असौम्या: पक्षिणो ANT मृगाश्चापि प्रदक्षिणा: 1 १० ॥
Seeing them, Dasaratha, a tiger among
kings, respectfully inquired of Vasistha,
saying, “Loathsome birds are screaming
on the one hand, which is an ominous
portent; and at the same time deer cross
my way from the left, which is a good
omen ! (10)

किमिदं हृदयोत्कम्पि मनो मम विषीदति।
Tal दशरथस्यैतच्छत्वा वाक्यं महानृषि:॥११॥
उवाच AMT Ao श्रूयतामस्य यत् फलम्।
उपस्थितं wa घोरं feat पक्षिमुखाच्च्युतम्॥ १२॥
“What may this be, which makes my
heart quiver? My mind is sorrowful.” Hearing
this question of King DaSaratha, the great
seer, Vasistha, replied in a sweet tone
as follows: “Hear what it portends. The
indication that comes from the screaming of
birds in the air is that a grave danger is
imminent. (11-12)
WT: प्रशमयन्त्येते संतापस्त्यज्यतामयम्।
तेषां संवदतां at वायु: प्रादुर्बभूव ह॥१३॥
कम्पयन् मेदिनीं सर्वां पातयंश्च महाद्रुमान्।
तमसा dad: सूर्य: सर्वे नावेदिषुर्दिश:॥ evil
“These deer, however, allay our fears.
Therefore, let this anxiety be given up.”
While they were conversing thus on the
road, a tempest set in, they say, shaking
the entire globe and throwing down big
trees. The sun got enveloped in darkness,
all people failed to discern the directions.
(13-14)
भस्मना wUdd सर्वं सम्मूढमिव तद्बलम्।
वसिष्ठं ऋषयश्चान्ये राजा च ससुतस्तदा॥१५॥
ससंज्ञा इव तत्रासन् सर्वमन्यद्विचेतनम्।
तस्मिस्तमसि घोरे तु भस्मच्छन्नेव सा चमू:॥ १६॥
ददर्श भीमसंकाशं जटामण्डलधारिणम्।
unig Weed राजा राजविमर्दनम्॥१७॥
कैलासमिव दुर्धर्षं कालाग्निमिव दु:सहम्।
ज्वलन्तमिव तेजोभिर्दुर्निरीक्ष्यं पृथग्जनै:॥१८॥
