# YUDDHAKANDA +

अदेशकाले सम्प्राप्त इत्ययं यद् विभीषण:।
विवक्षा aa मेऽस्तीयं at निबोध यथामति॥ ५६ ul
एष देशश्च कालश्च भवतीह यथा तथा।

पुरुषात् Fer Wer तथा दोषगुणावपि॥ ५७॥

दौरात्म्यं रावणे दृष्टवा विक्रमं च तथा त्वयि।
युक्तमागमनं ह्यत्र सदृशं तस्य बुद्धित:॥५८॥
“In regard to the observation that yonder
Vibhisana has come away without regard to
place and time, it is my desire presently to
submit according to my own poor lights how
this is the place and time fit for his arrival.
Pray, listen to my argument. Judicious indeed
and becoming of his wisdom too is his arrival
at this place at the present moment in that he
considers you superior, from the moral point
of view, to Ravana, has also found merits in
you and demerits in the latter and has duly
perceived the evil-mindedness of Ravana
and your extraordinary prowess likewise.
(56—58)

अज्ञातरूपै: Fea: स राजन् पृच्छ्यतामिति।
यदुक्तमत्र A प्रेक्षा काचिदस्ति समीक्षिता॥५९॥

“Regarding the suggestion which has
been made by Mainda that Vibhisana should
be interrogated by spies of unknown identity,
| have my own considered opinion to give,
O king! (59)

पृच्छ्यमानो विशाङ्केत सहसा बुद्धिमान् वच:।
तत्र मित्रं प्रदुष्येत मिथ्या पृष्टं सुखागतम्॥६०॥
“While being interrogated by an
unknown person, a clever man would at
once grow suspicious about the question
which was being put to him. Nay, on
coming to know that he was_ being
interrogated to no purpose, a prospective
friend arrived in search of relief, would get
upset. (60)

अशक्यं सहसा राजन् भावो बोद्धुं परस्य वै।
अन्तरेण स्वरैर्भिन्नैर्नैषुण्यं पश्यतां भृशम्॥६१॥

“Moreover, the intention of an enemy

349

cannot be found out all at once, O king! In
the meantime you should fully discover the
good intentions of Vibhisana by means of
his diversified tones. (61)

न त्वस्य Fadl जातु लक्ष्यते दुष्टभावता।
प्रसन्नं वदनं चापि तस्मान्मे नास्ति संशय:॥ ६२॥
“Even as he speaks his malevolence
is not detected in the least. His countenance
too is placid. Therefore, no doubt whatsoever
exists in my mind about him. (62)

अशङ्कितमति: स्वस्थो न शठ: परिसर्पति।
न चास्य दुष्टवागस्ति तस्मान्मे नास्ति संशय: 1&3

“A deceitful person does not come
with a mind free from misgiving and
unembarrassed. Vibhisana’s speech too is
not faulty from the point of view of language
or spirit. Hence no suspicion exists in my
mind about him. (63)

आकारश्छाद्यमानोऽपि न शक्यो विनिगूहितुम्।
बलाद्धि विवृणोत्येव भावमन्तर्गतं FMT ES UI
“Even when it is being veiled, one’s
intention cannot be fully concealed. The
facial expression of men perforce reveals
their inner feeling without doubt. (64)
देशकालोपपन्नं च ard कार्यविदां ari
सफलं ped fad प्रयोगेणाभिसंहितम्॥ ce i
“Nay, the action of Vibhisana is
conformable to place and time, O prince of
those who know how to act! An action
deliberately accomplished speedily crowns
one with success. (65)
उद्योगं तव सम्प्रेक्ष्य reread च रावणम्।
वालिनं च हतं श्रुत्वा सुग्रीवं चाभिषेचितम्॥ ६६ ॥
we प्रार्थयमानस्तु बुद्धिपूर्वमिहागत:।
एतावत् तु पुरस्कृत्य युज्यते तस्य संग्रह:॥ ६७॥
Fully considering your endeavour (to
storm Lanka, in the form of building a bridge

across the sea) and realizing Ravana to
be vainglorious and sinful of conduct, nay,
