* SUNDARAKANDA +

नखैस्तुदन्तो दशनैर्दशन्त-

स्तलैश्च पादैश्च समापयन्त:।
मदात् कपिं ते कपय: समन्ता-

न्महावनं निर्विषयं च चक्रु:॥ २४॥

Scratching Dadhimukha_ with _ their

271

claws, biting him with their teeth and taking
the life out of him, as it were, with their slaps
and kicks in their drunkenness, the aforesaid
monkeys divested that extensive grove on
all sides of all its edibles in the shape of
fruits, honey and roots etc. (24)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये सुन्दरकाण्डे
एकषष्टितम: सर्ग: ॥ ६१ ॥
Thus ends Canto Sixty-one of the Sundarakanda in the glorious Ramayana of Valmiki,
the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

Canto LXII

Having entered Madhuvana and partaken of honey, as permitted by Hanuman,
and singing and dancing like drunken people, the monkeys were forbidden
by those guarding the grove and they belaboured the latter. Repulsed by
them, the guards reported the matter to their leader, Dadhimukha,
who appeared on the scene with his entourage and on remonstrating
with the monkeys was thrashed by Angada, who dashed
him to the ground. The guards headed by Dadhimukha
then move en masse to Kiskindha to report the
matter to Sugriva and bow down at the latter’s feet

eS वानरर्षभ:।
अव्यग्रमनसो Tt मधु Aad वानरा:॥१॥
Hanuman, the foremost of monkeys
and a veritable jewel among them, spoke to
them as follows: “With an undisturbed mind
enjoy you the honey, O monkeys ! (1)

अहमावर्जयिष्यामि युष्माकं परिपन्थिन:।
श्रुत्वा हनूमतो वाक्यं हरीणां प्रवरोऽङ्गद:॥ २॥
प्रत्युवाच प्रसन्नात्मा पिबन्तु wat मधु।
अवश्यं कृतकार्यस्य वाक्यं हनुमतो मया॥३॥
अङ्गदस्य मुखाच्छृत्वा वचनं वानरर्षभा:॥४॥
साधु साध्विति संहृष्टा वानरा: प्रत्यपूजयन्।
पूजयित्वाङ्गदं सर्वे वानरा वानरर्षभम्॥५॥
जग्मुर्मधुवनं यत्र नदीवेग sat द्रुमम्।
ते प्रविष्टा मधुवनं पालानाक्रम्य शक्तित:॥६॥

अतिसर्गाच्च पटवो दृष्ट्वा श्रुत्वा च मैथिलीम्।
पपु: सर्वे मधु dal रसवत् फलमाददु:॥७॥
“| shall ward off those who hinder you.”
Delighted at heart to hear the exhortation of
Hanuman, Angada, the most eminent of
monkeys, echoed his words as follows : “Let
the monkeys drink honey. The direction of
Hanuman, who has accomplished his errand,
must be followed by me even if it is not worth
following, much more an advice of this type
which is worth following, O dear ones!”
Highly rejoiced to hear the compliment coming
from the lips of Angada, the monkeys, who
were the foremost of their class, approved it,
saying “Excellent! Bravo!! Applauding
Angada, the foremost of monkeys, all the
monkeys proceeded once more to the site
where Madhuvana was, even as the strong
