916

ततो देवा: सगन्धर्वा: सिद्धाश्च परमर्षय:।
प्रजापति पुरस्कृत्य समेतास्तद्रणाजिरे॥१८॥

Thereupon gods, accompanied by
Gandharvas, Siddhas and the highest
Rsis, assembled on that battlefield, placing
Prajapati, the creator, at their head. (18)

Pad sa लोकानां युध्यतोरभवत् तदा।
राक्षसानां च मुख्यस्य प्रेतानामीश्वरस्य च॥१९॥

While Ravana (the foremost of the
Raksasas) and Yama (the lord of the
departed) were contending with each other
on that occasion, the dissolution of the world
appeared imminent. (19)

राक्षसेन्द्रोऽपि विस्फार्य चापमिन्द्राशनिप्रभम्।
निरन्तरमिवाकाशं कुर्वन् बाणांस्ततोऽसृजत्॥ २०॥
Stretching his bow, which shone like
the thunderbolt of Indra, Ravana (the ruler
of ogres) thereupon discharged arrows, filling
the entire space, as it were. (20)
मृत्युं चतुर्भिर्विशिखै: ai सप्तभिरार्दयत्।
aa शतसहस्रेण शीघ्रं मर्मस्वताडयत्॥२१॥
He struck the god of Death with four
arrows and the charioteer with seven; with

a hundred thousand arrows he swiftly pierced
Yama in his vital parts. (21)

Wd: क्रुद्धस्य वदनाद् यमस्य समजायत।
ज्वालामाली सनिश्वास: AYA: कोपपावक: ॥ २२॥

Then arose from the mouth of the
angered Yama, the fire of anger with a
crown of flames, accompanied by breath
and smoke. (22)

तदाश्चर्यमथो geet देवदानवसंनिधौ।
प्रहर्षितौ सुसंरब्धौ मृत्युकालौ बभूवतु:॥ २३॥
Beholding that marvel in the presence
of the gods and the demons, the god of
death and Kala (the Time-Spirit), who were
highly enraged were filled with great
enthusiasm for the contest. (23)
ततो मृत्यु: क्रुद्धतरो वैवस्वतमभाषत।
मुञ्च मां समरे यावद्धन्मीमं पापराक्षसम्॥ २४॥

« VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

Feeling greatly angered, the god of
death said to Vaivaswata Yama (son of the
sun-god): “Leave me alone on the field of
battle till | make short work of this sinful
ogre. (24)

नैषा tar wae water fe निसर्गत:।
हिरण्यकशिपु: sitar नमुचि: शम्बरस्तथा॥ 24 UI
निसन्दिर्धूमकेतुश्च बलिर्वैरोचनोऽपि च।
शम्भुर्दैत्यो महाराजो Gat बाणस्तथैव च॥ २६॥
Tea: शास्त्रविदो गन्धर्वा: समहोरगा:।
WIA: पन्नगा दैत्या यक्षाश्च ह्यप्सरोगणा:॥ २७॥
युगान्तपरिवर्ते च पृथिवी समहार्णवा।
क्षयं नीता महाराज सपर्वतसरिदद्रुमा॥ २८॥

“The ogre would not survive today (on
closing with me); such is the natural law.
The glorious Hiranyakasipu, Namuci and
Sambara, Nisandi and Dhumaketu as well
as Bali, son of Virocana, the giant Sambhu,
the great king Vrtra as well as Vana, royal
sages versed in the scriptures, Gandharvas
and mighty Nagas, seers of Vedic Mantras,
serpents, (other) giants, Yaksas as well as
hosts of celestial nymphs, nay, (even) this
earth including the ocean, mountains, rivers
and trees was brought to an end by me,
O great king, at the end of the world-cycle.

(25—28)
Ud चान्ये च Wal बलवन्तो दुरासदा:।
विनिपन्ना मया दृष्टा: किमुतायं निशाचर:॥ २९॥

“These above named as well as
numerous other mighty warriors, who were
difficult to approach were utterly destroyed
as soon as seen by me, to say nothing of
this ranger of the night. (29)
मुञ्च मां साधु ata यावदेनं निहन्म्यहम्।
ae कश्चिन्मया get बलवानपि जीवति॥ ३०॥

“Leave me perfectly alone, O knower
of what is right, till | make short work of this

fellow. None who is seen by me, however
mighty he may be, can survive. (30)

at मम न खल्वेतन्मर्यादैषा निसर्गत:।
a get न मया काल मुहूर्तमपि जीवति॥ ३१॥
