# YUDDHAKANDA #

७
२
२

823

सर्ग:

Canto CXXVI

Hanuman recounts to Bharata broad details relating to the sojourn
of Sri Rama, Sita and Laksmana in the forest

बहूनि नाम वर्षाणि गतस्य सुमहद्वनम्।
श्रृणोम्यहं प्रीतिकरं मम नाथस्य कोर्तनम्॥१॥
“Indeed, | hear for the first time today
the delightful story of my lord, Sri Rama,
who proceeded to the vast forest many
years ago. (1)

कल्याणी Ad गाथेयं लौकिकी प्रतिभाति ALT |
Ua जीवन्तमानन्दो नरं वर्षशतादपि॥ २॥

“Ah, how right does this popular saying
sound to me that joy comes to a surviving
man even if it be after, say, a hundred
years! (2)
राघवस्य हरीणां च कथमासीत् warm: |
कस्मिन् देशे किमाश्रित्य तत्त्वमाख्याहि पृच्छत: ॥ ३॥

“How, at what place and on what
common ground did an alliance between Sri
Rama, a scion of Raghu, and the monkeys
come to be concluded? Pray, speak the
truth to me, inquiring as | am.” (3)

स yet राजपुत्रेण gear समुपवेशित:।
आचचक्षे तत: we रामस्य चरितं वने॥४॥
Seated comfortably on a mat of the
sacred KuSa grass meant for ascetics
and enquired as above by the prince, Bharata.
Hanuman thereupon began to recount in a
nutshell as follows, the whole story of the
sojourn of Sri Rama in the forest: (4)

यथा प्रव्राजितो wat मातुर्दत्तौ at तव।
यथा च पुत्रशोकेन राजा दशरथो मृत:॥७५॥
यथा दूतैस्त्वमानीतस्तूर्णं राजगृहात् प्रभो।
त्वयायोध्यां प्रविष्टेन यथा Wet न चेप्सितम्॥ ६॥
चित्रकूटगिरिं गत्वा राज्येनामित्रकर्शन:।
निमन्तितस्त्वया भ्राता धर्ममाचरता सताम्॥७॥

स्थितेन राज्ञो वचने यथा राज्यं विसर्जितम्।
आर्यस्य पादुके गृह्य यथासि पुनरागत:॥८॥
सर्वमेतन्महाबाहो यथावद् विदितं aa
त्वयि प्रतिप्रयाते तु यद ad तन्निबोध मे॥९॥

“How two boons were conferred on your
mother by your father, how in pursuance of
one of which Sri Rama was exiled to the
forest and how King DaSaratha breathed his
last out of grief caused by separation from
his eldest son; how you were speedily brought
back all the way from Rajagrha, the seat of
government of the Kekaya kings, by the
envoys, my lord, and how, for that matter,
sovereignty was not coveted by you when
you re-entered Ayodhya; how on your
repairing to Citrakuta, your elder brother, the
scourge of his enemies, was besought by
you, who followed the way of life of the
virtuous, to accept the kingship; how the
crown was renounced by Sri Rama, who
stood by the pledge of the deceased king,
given to Kaikeyi, and how you returned to
Ayodhya taking with you the wooden sandals
of your elder brother—all this is known aright
to you, O mighty-armed prince! Hear from
me now that which happened after you had
returned to Ayodhya. (5—9)

अपयाते त्वयि तदा समुद्भ्रान्तमृगद्विजम्।
परिद्यूनमिवात्यर्थं तद् at समपद्यत॥१०॥
“When you had gone away (back to
Ayodhya), the said forest of Citrakuta
assumed an extremely doleful appearance,
as it were, on that occasion, the beasts and
birds getting utterly bewildered. (10)
प्रविवेशाथ fast स महद् दण्डकावनम्॥११॥
