242

rested in some fully covered place, you
may leave on the morrow. (3)

मम चैवाल्पभाग्याया: सांनिध्यात् तव वानर।

शोकस्यास्याप्रमेयस्य मुहूर्तं स्यादपि क्षय:॥४॥
“Besides, due to your proximity, O

Hanuman, there will be an end of my grief,

which cannot be measured, unfortunate as
| am, at least for a while. (4)

Ta fe हरिशार्दूल wa: सम्प्राप्तये त्वयि।
प्राणेष्वपि न विश्वासो मम वानरपुङ्खव॥५॥

“For, if once you are gone, O tiger among
monkeys, there is uncertainty of your return
to this place, and there is no surety of my
survival either, O bull anong monkeys! (5)
अदर्शनं च ते वीर भूयो मां दारयिष्यति।
Gale दु:खतरं Wat दुर्मन:शोककर्शिताम्॥६॥

“Nay, your disappearance from my
presence, O hero, will further torment me,
fallen that | am out of frying-pan into the fire
and emaciated through sadness and grief.

(6)
aa च at संदेहस्तिष्ठतीव ममाग्रत:।
सुमहत्सु सहायेषु way महाबल:॥७॥
wa नु खलु दुष्पारं संतरिष्यति सागरम्।
arm weedeat dt वा नरवरात्मजौ॥८॥

“Nay, this doubt ever stands before
me, as it were, about your very mighty
associate monkeys and bears, O hero, as
to how on earth Sugriva (who is endowed
with extraordinary might) or those hordes of
monkeys and bears or those two princes
will actually be able to cross over the sea,
which is so difficult to accomplish. (7-8)

त्रयाणामेव भूतानां सागरस्यापि लङ्घने।
शक्ति: स्याद् वैनतेयस्य Aa वा मारुतस्य वा॥९॥

“The capacity to cross the sea exists in
three created beings only, viz., Garuda (son
of Vinata), the wind-god and yourself. (9)

तदत्र कार्यनिर्बन्धे समुत्पन्ने दुरासदे।
किं पश्यसि समाधानं त्वं हि कार्यविशारद:॥ १०॥

“When this obstacle, which is so difficult

« VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

to manoeuvere, in the way of accomplishing
the task has duly come up in hand, what
means do you perceive for the execution of
this work, since you are skilled in action?
(10)
काममस्य त्वमेवैक: कार्यस्य परिसाधने।
Uae: परवीरघ्न यशस्यस्ते फलोदय:॥११॥

“Although you are yourself equal to the
accomplishment of this task of rescuing
me single-handed, O destroyer of hostile
warriors, the attainment of success will
redound to your glory rather than to that of
Sri Rama. (11)

बलैस्तु संकुलां कृत्वा लङ्कां परबलार्दन:।

Ti नयेद्यदिकाकुत्स्थस्तत् तस्य AEST ATTN १२॥
“If, having overrun Lanka with his forces,

Sri Rama, a scion of Kakutstha, the scourge

of hostile forces, for his part, takes me back

from Lanka, that alone would be worthy of

him. (12)

तद् यथा तस्य विक्रान्तमनुरूपं महात्मन:।
भवत्याहवशूरस्य ‘Aaa त्वमुपपाढय Il 83 Il
“Therefore, act you in such a way that
the exalted soul, valiant in combat, may
exhibit prowess worthy of him.” (13)
तदर्थोपहितं वाक्यं प्रश्रितं हेतुसंहितम्।
निशम्य हनुमान् वीरो वाक्यमुत्तरमब्रवीत्॥१४॥
Hearing the aforesaid speech of Sita,
which was full of significance, polite and
logical, the heroic Hanuman made the
following final reply : (14)
देवि हर्यक्षसैन्यानामीश्वर: प्लवतां वर:।
Gia: सत्त्वसम्पन्नस्तवार्थे कृतनिश्चय:॥ १५॥
“The ruler of the monkey and bear
hordes, Sugriva, the foremost of monkeys,
who is richly endowed with energy, is
determined to liberate you, O godlike lady !
(15)
a वानरसहस्राणां कोटीभिरभिसंव्रत:।
क्षिप्रमेष्यति वैदेहि सुग्रीव: प्लवगाधिप:॥ १६॥

“Surrounded by crores and crores of
