* BALAKANDA +

प्रतिज्ञातश्च रामेण वध: संयति रक्षसाम्।
ऋषीणामग्निकल्पानां दण्डकारण्यवासिनाम्॥ ४५ ॥

“Entering the great forest of Dandaka
and having despatched the ogre Viradha,
the lotus-eyed Rama saw one after another
the sages Sarabhanga and Sutiksna
as well as Agastya and his_ brother
(Idhmavahana). Nay, at the instance of
Agastya himself he accepted with supreme
delight a bow, a sword, a pair of quivers
containing an inexhaustible stock of arrows,
all bestowed upon the sage by Indra, the
lord of paradise. While the aforesaid Rama
was sojourning in the forest with foresters,
all the seers dwelling in the forest called on
him with a request to make short work of
the demons and ogres haunting the forest.
In the presence of those seers dwelling in
the forest of Dandaka and glorious as fire,
Sri Rama then vowed to kill the ogres in
that forest. Nay, the destruction of the ogres
in an encounter was solemnly promised by
Rama. (41—45)
तेन तत्रैव वसता जनस्थाननिवासिनी।
विरूपिता शूर्पणखा राक्षसी कामरूपिणी it we UI

‘The ogress Surpanakha (so called
because the monstress possessed nails as
big as a winnowing fan), who dwelt in
Janasthana (a portion of the Dandaka forest)
and was capable of assuming any form at
will, was disfigured by Sri Rama (by having
her nose and ears lopped off by Laksmana)
while living in that very forest. (46)

ad: शूर्पणखावाक्यादुद्युक्तान् सर्वराक्षसान्।
wat त्रिशिरसं चैव दूषणं चैव राक्षसम्॥४७॥
निजघान रणे रामस्तेषां चैव पदानुगान्।
at तस्मिन् निवसता जनस्थाननिवासिनाम्॥ ४८ ॥।
रक्षसां निहतान्यासन् सहस्राणि चतुर्दश।
act ज्ञातिवधं श्रुत्वा रावण: क्रोधमूच्छित: ॥४९॥
सहायं वरयामास मारीचं नाम राक्षसम्।
वार्यमाण: मारीचेन स रावण:॥७५०॥
न विरोधो बलवता क्षमो रावण तेन al
अनादृत्य तु तद्वाक्यं रावण: कालचोदित:॥ ५१॥

63

जगाम सहमारीचस्तस्याश्रमपदं तदा।
तेन मायाविना दूरमपवाह्य नृपात्मजौ॥५२॥
जहार भार्यां रामस्य गृध्रं हत्वा जटायुषम्।
qa च निहतं दृष्टा eat श्रुत्वा च मैथिलीम्॥ ५३॥
waa: शोकसंतप्तो विललापाकुलेन्द्रिय:।
ततस्तेनैव शोकेन Wet दग्ध्वा जटायुषम्॥५४॥
मार्गमाणो at सीतां werd संददर्शं ह।
कबन्धं नाम रूपेण विकृतं घोरदर्शनम्॥५५॥
“Sri Rama then killed on the field of
battle all the ogres that came prepared for
an encounter at the instigation of Surpanakha,
including their leaders Khara, Trisira and
the ogre Dusana as also their followers. No
less than fourteen thousand of ogres dwelling
in Janasthana were made short work of by
Rama while sojourning in that forest.
Stupefied through anger to hear of the
destruction of his kinsmen, Ravana, the
king of Lanka, sought the help of a fellow-
ogre (one of the two sons of the ogress
Tadaka), Marica by name. Though repeatedly
discouraged by Marica saying, “It is not
advisable for you to make enemies with that
powerful prince, Sri Rama, O Ravana!” yet
turning a deaf ear to his advice and impelled
by death, the aforesaid Ravana, who made
people scream (in terror wherever he went
out on expedition) then proceeded to the
site of Rama’s hermitage alongwith Marica.
Having caused the two princes, Sri Rama
and Laksmana, to be removed afar from the
hermitage by the wily Marica, he abducted
Sri Rama’s spouse, Sita, fatally wounding
the vulture, Jatayu, who tried to intercept
him and thereby deliver Sita from his clutches.
Now tormented with grief to perceive the
vulture mortally wounded and to hear from it
of Sita (the princess of Mithila, the capital of
King Janaka) having been forcibly carried
away by Ravana, Sri Rama (a scion of
Raghu) loudly wailed, his mind agitated
through perturbation. Then, having cremated
the vulture Jatayu and hunting up Sita in the
forest in that very state of grief, Sri Rama
came across an ogre, Kabandha by name,
who was deformed of body and terrible to
look at: so the tradition goes. (47—55)
