# YUDDHAKANDA #

Seizing hold of his weapons in fury on
perceiving the army handled roughly by the
monkeys, the aforesaid Indrajit forthwith
marched against the enemies. Discharging
streams of arrows while surrounded by his
contingent, Indrajit of unyielding prowess
struck numerous tigers among the monkeys
with pikes, ASanis, swords, sharp-edged
spears and Kutamudgaras (a concealed
weapon similar to a mallet). (14—18)

ते चाप्यनुचरांस्तस्य वानरा जघ्नुराहवे।
सुस्कन्धविटपै: शैलै: शिलाभिश्च महाबल:॥ १९॥
हनूमान् कदनं चक्रे रक्षसां भीमकर्मणाम्।
संनिवार्य परानीकमब्रवीत् तान् वनौकस:॥ २०॥
हनूमान् संनिवर्तध्वं न न: साध्यमिदं बलम्।
त्यक्त्वा प्राणान् विचेष्टन्तो रामप्रियचिकीर्षव: ।। २१ ॥
यन्निमित्तं fe युध्यामो हता सा जनकात्मजा।
saad fe विज्ञाप्य wt सुग्रीवमेव च॥ २२॥
at यत् प्रतिविधास्येते aq करिष्यामहे वयम्।
इत्युक्त्वा वानरश्रेष्ठो वारयन् सर्ववानरान्॥२३॥
wa: शनैरसंत्रस्त सबल: संन्यवर्तत।

तत: Wet हनूमन्तं व्रजन्तं GT Waa: evil
स होतुकामो दुष्टात्मा गतश्चैत्यं निकुम्भिलाम्।
निकुम्भिलामधिष्ठाय पावकं जुहवेन्द्रजित्॥ २५॥

Those monkeys too killed his followers
in combat. Hanuman, on the other hand,
who was endowed with extraordinary might,
played havoc among the ogres of terrible
deeds with sal trees distinguished by
excellent trunks and boughs as well as with
rocks. Keeping the hostile army back,
Hanuman spoke as follows to those monkeys
(lit., dwellers in the woods): “Retreat! This
army need not be conquered by us any
more. That daughter of Janaka—for whom
indeed we have fought so far, risking our
lives and making a special effort to win,

651

seeking as we did to do what is pleasing to
Sri Rama—has been killed. Making this fact
known to Sri Rama as well as to Sugriva,
we shall certainly do that which they will
enjoin us to do in return.” Perceiving Hanuman
withdrawing to the place where Sri Rama (a
scion of Raghu) was, the evil-minded ogre
proceeded to the sanctuary known by the
name of Nikumbhila, seeking as he did to
pour oblations into the sacred fire. Reaching
Nikumbhila, Indrajit poured oblations into
the sacred fire. (19—25)
यज्ञभूम्यां ततो गत्वा पावकस्तेन रक्षसा।
हूयमान: प्रजज्वाल होमशोणितभुक तदा॥ २६॥
While being propitiated with oblations
by that ogre on arriving at the sacrificial
ground, the sacrificial fire blazed up on
consuming the oblations of blood on that
occasion. (26)

सार्चि:पिनद्धो ददृशे होमशोणिततर्पित:।
संध्यागत इवादित्य: सुतीव्रोऽग्नि: समुत्थित: it २७॥

Swollen up when _ propitiated with
oblations of blood, the fierce fire, which
resembled the evening sun, was seen
wrapped in flames. (27)

अथेन्द्रजिद् राक्षसभूतये तु

wera हव्यं विधिना विधानवित्।
gem व्यतिष्ठन्त च राक्षसास्ते

महासमूहेषु नयानयज्ञा: ।॥ २८ ॥

For the prosperity of the ogres in general,
Indrajit for his part, who was well-versed in
the technique pertaining to sacrifices, forthwith
poured oblations intothe sacrificial fire
according to the scriptural ordinance. Nay,
beholding this, the well-known ogres, who
knew what was right and wrongin major
conflicts, stood firm by his side. (28)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये युद्धकाण्डे द्व्यशीतितम: सर्ग: ॥ ८२॥

Thus ends Canto Ejighty-two in the Yuddhakanda of the glorious Ramayana of

Valmiki, the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

