932

“Living in flocks, birds for their part feel
highly rejoiced on this strand of Pampa.
Nay, through the notes of the water-fowls
uttered during their amorous sports as well
as through the shrill notes of male cuckoos
these trees themselves sing, fully kindling
(the fire of) love in me. Fire in the shape of
the vernal season, which has bunches of
crimson flowers of Asoka trees for its live
embers, the humming of bees for its crackle
and the fresh leaves for its coppery tongues
will undoubtedly consume me. Surely there
is no purpose in my surviving, O Laksmana,
unable as | am to see that lady, Sita, with
lovely locks, eyes having fine eye-lashes
and gentle speech. Surely the present
season, in which woodlands look charming
and their boundaries are thronged with
cuckoos, was delightful to that darling of
mine, O sinless one! This fire of grief, which
has its source in the pangs of love and
has been augmented by the charms of
Spring will forthwith consume me without
delay, as it were. This longing of my heart
to meet her will reach its climax even as |
am unable to perceive that beloved one
and look on the charming trees. Being out
of sight, Sita, a princess of the Videha
territory, intensifies my grief in this forest,
and so does Spring, which is discernible at
present and shuts out all contact with sweat
due to cool and delightful breezes. That
fawn-eyed lady, O Laksmana (son of
Sumitra), unquestionably torments me,
overpowered as | already am by worry and
grief, and so does the cruel breeze from
the woods characteristic of the month of
Caitra. Dancing here and there with their
wings, resembling crystal windows, shaken
by the wind, the yonder peacocks spread
their charm. Surrounded by peahens and
intoxicated with joy, these peacocks intensify
my longing to meet Sita, overwhelmed
as | already am with love. Behold, O
Laksmana, how this love-lorn peahen is
dancing by the side of her mate, the dancing

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

peacock, on the top of the hill. Spreading
his charming wings and mocking me, as
it were, by his cries, the peacock too is
mentally following the aforesaid beloved one.
Surely the beloved of the peacock has not
been stolen away by a demon in the forest.

(28—40)

तस्मान्नृत्यति रम्येषु वनेषु सह कान्तया।

मम wad विना वास: पुष्पमासे सुदु:सह:॥४१॥
“Hence it is that he is dancing with his

beloved peahen in the delightful groves. For

me, however, it is most unbearable to live in

desolation in this vernal month of abundant

flowers. (41)

पश्य लक्ष्मण संरागस्तिर्यग्योनिगतेष्वपि।
यदेषा शिखिनी कामाद् भर्तारमभिवर्तते॥४२॥

“See, O Laksmana, how intense love
is found even among those belonging to the
sub-human creation, as is clear from the
fact that this peahen approaches her mate
through love. (42)

ममाप्येवं विशालाक्षी जानकी जातसम्भ्रमा।
मदनेनाभिवर्तेत यदि AMET भवेत्॥४३॥

“The large-eyed Sita (daughter of
Janaka) too would approach me through
love in a flurry, had she not been borne
away by the demon. (43)

पश्य लक्ष्मण पुष्पाणि निष्फलानि भवन्ति मे।

पुष्पभारसमृद्धानां वनानां शिशिरात्यये॥४४॥
“See, 0 Laksmana, how the blossoms

of the forests, rich in their load of flowers,

are proving of no use to me in the absence
of Sita, at the close of winter. (44)

रुचिराण्यपि पुष्पाणि पादपानामतिश्रिया।
निष्फलानि महीं यान्ति समं मधुकरोत्करै:।॥४५॥
“The blossom of the trees, though lovely
due to their surpassing charm, fall to the
ground alongwith the swarms of black bees,
being of no use to me. (45)

नदन्ति कामं शकुना मुदिता: सङ्घश: कलम्।
आह्वयन्त इवान्योन्यं कामोन्मादकरा मम॥४६॥
