1122

विस्मयव्यग्रमनसो बभूवुर्वानरर्षभा:।
संजातपरिशङ्कास्ते ae बिलं प्लवगोत्तमा:॥११॥
अभ्यपद्यन्त संहृष्टास्तेजोवन्तो महाबला:।
नानासत्त्वसमाकीर्णं दैत्येन्द्रनिलयोपमम्॥१२॥
दुर्दर्शमिव घोरं च दुर्विगाह्यं च सर्वश:।
तत: पर्वतकूटाभो हनूमान् मारुतात्मज:॥१३॥
अब्रवीद् वानरान् घोरान् कान्तारवनकोविद:।
गिरिजालाव्रतान्देशान्मार्गित्वा दक्षिणां दिशम्॥ १४॥
aa ad परिश्रान्ता न च पश्याम मैथिलीम्।
अस्माच्चापि बिलाद्भधंसा: क्रौञ्चाश्च सह सारसै: ।। १५ ।।
जलारद्राश्चक्रवाकाश्च निष्पतन्ति स्म सर्वश:।
नूनं सतल्निलवानत्र Hur वा यदि वा Ba: Vai

Having explored the areas covered by
a network of mountains while combing the
southern quarter apart from one another,
yet not very far from one another, Gaja,
Gavaksa, Gavaya, Sarabha, Gandhamadana
and Mainda, as also Dwivida, Hanuman,
also Jambavan, Angada, the Prince Regent,
and the monkey Tara presently saw there a
cave, Rksabila by name, which had its
mouth open, though the cave was difficult of
access and was guarded by a demon (Maya
by name). Overcome by hunger and thirst
as they were and exhausted too, and seeking
water, they for their part cast their eyes on
the large cave, which was screened by
climbers and trees. Herons and swans and
cranes as well as Cakrawaka birds (a
species of red geese) wet with water, their
limbs reddened with the pollen of lotuses,
emerged from the cave. Reaching that cave,
which was emitting fragrance and was difficult
to enter, the aforesaid jewels among the
monkeys thereupon stood bewildered in mind
through wonder.

Hope of getting water inside the cave
having been instilled in them by the sight of
birds wet with water, the said leaders of
monkeys, who were full of spirit and
possessed of extraordinary strength and
were transported with joy at the prospect of
obtaining water, approached that cave, which

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

was crowded with every kind of creature
and resembled Patala (the abode of the
rulers of Daityas, nay, which was fearful
and difficult to behold and hard to penetrate
into in everyway. Thereupon Hanuman, son
of the wind-god, who looked like a mountain-
peak and was capable of entering forests
which were difficult to penetrate into, spoke
as follows to the redoubtable monkeys:
“Having combed the southern quarter
consisting of regions covered with a network
of mountains we all feel exhausted, yet we
are not finding Sita (a princess of Mithila).
And from this cave emerge on all sides
swans and herons with cranes as also
Cakrawaka birds (a species of red geese)
wet with water. Surely, therefore, there must
be a well of fresh water or pool in the cave.
(5—16)

तथा चेमे बिलद्वारे स्निग्धास्तिष्ठन्ति पादपा:।
इत्युक्तास्तद् fact सर्वे विविशुस्तिमिरावृतम्॥ १७॥

अचन्द्रसूर्यं ह्रयो ददृशू रोमहर्षणम्।
निशाम्य तस्मात् सिंहांश्च तांस्तांश्च मृगपक्षिण: ॥ १८ ॥

प्रविष्टा हरिशार्दूला fact fata
न तेषां सज्जते दृष्टिर्न तेजो न पराक्रम:॥१९॥
“Moreover, these trees at the entrance
of the cave are green.” Spoken to, as
aforesaid, by Hanuman, all the monkeys
entered that cave, which was enveloped in
darkness, and found it impenetrable by the
rays of the sun and the moon and as such
causing the hair to stand on end. Encouraged
by seeing lions as well as other beasts and
birds of different species emerging from
the cave those tigers among monkeys
penetrated deep into the cave veiled
by darkness. Neither did their vision fail
nor their spirit nor, again, their prowess.
(17—19)

वायोरिव गतिस्तेषां दृष्टिस्तमसि add
ते प्रविष्टास्तु वेगेन aq fact कपिकुञ्जरा:। २०॥
प्रकाशं चाभिरामं च ददृशुर्देशमुत्तमम्।
ततस्तस्मिन् fact भीमे नानापादपसंकुले॥ २१॥
