422

well as Dwivida, Gaja, Gavaksa, Kumuda
and Nala as also Panasa said to one another:
(1—3)

इयं सा लक्ष्यते लङ्का पुरी रावणपालिता।
सासुरोरगगन्धर्वैरमरैरपि दुर्जया॥ ४॥

कार्यसिद्धिं पुरस्कृत्य मन्त्रयध्वं विनिर्णये।
नित्यं संनिहितो aa रावणो राक्षसाधिप:॥५॥
“Here is to be seen the city of Lanka,
protected by Ravana, which is hard to
conquer even for the immortals accompanied
by the demons, the Nagas (serpent-demons)
and Gandharvas (celestial musicians) and
in which Ravana, the suzerain lord of ogres,
is ever present. Now take counsel for
determining our duty with a view to achieving
success in our mission (viz., the overthrow
of Ravana and the recovery of Sita).” (4-5)

अथ AZ ब्रुवाणेषु रावणावरजोऽब्रवीत्।
वाक्यमग्राम्यपदवत् पुष्कलार्थं विभीषण:॥ &

While they were speaking as aforesaid,
Vibhisana, the youngest brother of Ravana,
made the following submission, consisting
of polished words and full of ample meaning:

(6)
अनल: पनसश्चैव सम्पाति: प्रमतिस्तथा।
Tet लङ्कां ममामात्या: पुरीं पुनरिहागता:॥७॥

“Having gone to the city of Lanka, my
four ministers, Anala as well as Panasa,
Sampati and Pramati, have returned to this
place. (7)

भूत्वा शकुनय: Aa प्रविष्टाश्च रिपोर्बलम्।
विधानं fated यच्च aq दृष्ट्वा समुपस्थिता:॥ ८ u
“Nay, assuming the semblance of birds,
they all penetrated deep into the enemy’s
ranks, and have duly turned up after seeing
with their own eyes the arrangements which
have been made for the defence of Lanka.
(8)

संविधानं यथाहुस्ते रावणस्य दुरात्मन:।
TWH aq ब्रुवत: सर्वं याथातध्येन A OTUs

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA +

“Hear from me, O Rama, as | speak in
accordance with facts of all the defences
organized by the evil-minded Ravana even
as my ministers have described them to
me. (9)

Ud Weed: सबलो द्वारमासाद्य तिष्ठति।
दक्षिणं च महावीर्यौ महापाश्वमहोदरौ॥ १०॥

“Having reached the eastern gate
with a division of the army, Prahasta (the
Commander-in-Chief) stands there; while
Mahaparswa and Mahodara, who are
endowed with extraordinary virility, stand at
the southern gate. (10)

इन्द्रजित् पश्चिमं gt राक्षसैर्बहुभिर्वृत:।
पट्टिशासिधनुष्मद्भि: शूलमुद्गरपाणिभि: ।॥। ११॥
नानाप्रहरणै:३ शूरैरावृतो रावणात्मज:।
राक्षसानां सहस्रैस्तु बहुभि: शस्त्रपाणिभि:॥ १२॥
युक्त: परमसंविग्नो राक्षसै: we मन्त्रवित्।
उत्तरं नगरद्वारुं रावण: स्वयमास्थित:॥१३॥
“Surrounded by numerous’ ogres
wielding sharp-edged spears, swords and
bows and carrying darts and mallets in their
hands, nay, accompanied by champions
wielding various weapons, Indrajit, the eldest
son of Ravana, is stationed at the western
gate. Nay, accompanied by many thousands
of ogres, bearing weapons in their hands,
and extremely agitated, Ravana himself, who
is skilled in counsel, has taken up his position
at the northern gate. (11—13)

विरूपाक्षस्तु महता शूलखड्गधनुष्मता।
बलेन राक्षसै: सार्धं मध्यमं गुल्ममाश्रित:॥ १४॥

“Virupaksa for his part is stationed with
a huge force armed with pikes, swords and
bows, as well as with other ogres at the
central military post. (14)

एतानेवं विधान् गुल्माँल्लङ्कायां समुदीक्ष्य ते।
मामका मन्तरिण: सर्वे शीघ्रं पुनरिहागता:॥१५॥
“Having keenly observed these garrisons
of the aforesaid description at Lanka, all my
ministers returned apace to this place. (15)
