* SUNDARAKANDA +

211

Canto XLVI

Dispatched by Ravana, Indrajit, Ravana’s eldest son, marches against
Hanuman. On his shafts being rendered ineffective by Hanuman
through his extreme agility, Indrajit takes him captive by discharging
the unfailing missile presided over by Brahma (the creator).

Even though capable of rendering it ineffective, Hanuman
yields to its influence, eager as he was to meet
Ravana, to whose presence he is led by his son

ततस्तु रक्षोऽधिपतिर्महात्मा

हनूमताक्षे निहते कुमारे।
wT: समाधाय स देवकल्पं

समादिदेशेन्द्रजितं सरोष:॥ १॥

Filled with rage on Prince Aksa having
been killed by Hanuman, yet controlling his
mind, the high-minded Ravana, the suzerain
lord of ogres, for his part next commanded
his eldest son Indrajit*, who vied with gods,
as follows: (1)

सुरासुराणामपि शोकदाता।
ay wy च दृष्टकर्मा
पितामहाराधनसंचितास्त्र: ॥ २॥

“Proficient in the use of mystic missiles
and the foremost of those wielding arms,
you cause grief even to the gods and the
demons. Your exploits have been witnessed
even against the gods including Indra, their
ruler, and you have acquired proficiency in
the use of mystic missiles by propitiating
Brahma (the grandfather of the entire creation,
being the progenitor of Marici and others,
the lords of creation). (2)

त्वदस्त्रबलमासाद्य ससुरा:र समरुद्रणा:।
न शेकु: समरे स्थातुं सुरेश्वरसमाश्रिता:॥३॥
“Coming in conflict with the might of

your missiles, none, including gods and
the company of the forty-nine wind-gods,

dependent on Indra, the ruler of gods, could
stand on the field of battle. (3)

न कश्चित् त्रिषु लोकेषु संयुगे न गतश्रम:।
भुजवीर्याभिगुप्तश्च तपसा चाभिरक्षित:।
देशकालप्रधानश्च att मतिसत्तम:॥४॥

“There is none in the three worlds except
you who is free from fatigue even in combat.
You are protected on all sides by the might
of your arms and are further protected by
virtue of askesis. Time and place are the
main considerations with you, nay, you are
the foremost of all in intelligence. (4)

न तेऽस्त्यशक्यं समरेषु कर्मणां
न तेऽस्त्यकार्यं मतिपूर्वमन्त्रणे।
न सोऽस्ति कश्चित् त्रिषु संग्रहेषु
न वेद यस्तेऽस्त्रबलं बलं ANGI

“Nothing is incapable of achievement
by means of your exploits in contests nor is
there anything which cannot be accomplished
by you after deliberation through your
judgment. Nor is there anyone in the three
worlds, who does not know the force of
your missiles or your own physical strength.

(5)
ममानुरूपं तपसो ai च a
पराक्रमश्चास्त्रबलं च संयुगे।
न wat ware रणावमर्दे
मन: श्रमं गच्छति निश्चितार्थम्॥६॥

“The power of your austerities, nay,

* So-called because he had conquered Indra, the Lord of Gods.
