# YUDDHAKANDA #

four champions armed with various weapons
and resembling elephants, who were leaders
of their herds and looked like heaps of
collyrium. (1-2)
सोऽभिगम्य महात्मानं राघवं शोकलालसम्।
वानरांश्चापि ददरृशे बाष्पपर्याकुलेक्षणान्॥३॥
Approaching the high-souled Laksmana,
a scion of Raghu, he found him entirely

given up to grief and the monkeys too with
their eyes full of tears. (3)

wat च महात्मानमिक्र्वाकुकुलनन्दनम्।
ददर्श मोहमापन्नं लक्ष्मणस्याङ्कमाश्रितम्॥४॥
He also beheld the high-souled Sri
Rama, a scion of Raghu, the delight of
Ikswaku’s race, fallen into a swoon and
lying in the lap of Laksmana. (4)
व्रीडितं शोकसंतप्तं gear wa विभीषण:।
अन्तर्दु:खेन दीनात्मा किमेतदिति सोऽब्रवीत्॥५॥
Vibhisana felt depressed in spirits due
to mental anguish on seeing Sri Rama put
out of countenance and tormented with
grief. He said, “What is this?” (5)
विभीषणमुखं gear सुग्रीवं तांश्च वानरान्।
लक्ष्मणोवाच मन्दार्थमिदं बाष्पपरिप्लुत:॥६॥
Fixing his gaze on the face of Vibhisana
and looking at Sugriva and the celebrated

monkeys, Laksmana, who was bathed in
tears, spoke in the following terse language:

(6)
हता इन्द्रजिता सीता इति श्रुत्वैव राघव:।
हनूमद्वचनात् सौम्य ततो मोहमुपाश्रित:॥७॥

“Immediately on hearing through the
words of Hanuman that Sita has been killed
by Indrajit, Sri Rama, a scion of Raghu, O
friend, has fallen into a swoon for that reason.”

(7)
कथयन्तं तु सौमित्रिं dard विभीषण:।
पुष्कलार्थमिदं वाक्यं विसंज्ञं राममब्रवीत्॥८॥

657

Restraining the son of Sumitra even
while he was speaking, Vibhisana, for his
part, made the following submission, which
was full of ample meaning, to Sri Rama,
who was lying unconscious: (8)

मनुजेन्द्रार्तरूपेण यदुक्तस्त्वं eM |

तदयुक्तमहँ मन्ये सागरस्येव शोषणम्॥९॥
“| hold that what you have been told by

Hanuman with a sorrowful mien, O ruler of

men, to be absurd as the drying up of the
sea. (9)

अभिप्रायं तु जानामि रावणस्य दुरात्मन:।
सीतां प्रति महाबाहो न च घातं करिष्यति॥ got

“l, for my part, know the design of the
evil-minded Ravana with reference to Sita,
O mighty-armed one! He would never cause
her to be killed. (10)

याच्यमान: सुबहुशो war हितचिकीर्षुणा।
वैदेहीमुत्सृजस्वेति न च तत् कृतवान् FTA: UV A

“Nay, even though being solicited very
often by me, who wished well of him, in the
words: ‘Give up the princess of the Videha
territory!’ he would never heed that advice
of mine. (11)

नैव साम्ना न दानेन न भेदेन कुतो युधा।
सा द्रष्टुमपि शक्येत नैव चान्येन केनचित्॥ १२॥

“She cannot even be perceived in any
wise, much less killed, by anyone else by
recourse to persuasion, gift or sowing
dissension, much less by recourse to war.

(12)
वानरान् मोहयित्वा तु प्रतियात: स राक्षस:।
मायामयीं महाबाहो at विद्धि जनकात्मजाम्॥ १३॥

“That ogre, Indrajit, for his part withdrew
from the battlefield after hoodwinking the
monkeys. Know that daughter of Janaka,

who was seemingly killed by him, to be
illusory, O mighty-armed one! (13)
