746

Janaka. Repeating the words of Agastya,
the pupil modestly ushered him into the
sanctuary with due respect and ceremony
such as he deserved. Then Rama with
Sita and Laksmana actually entered the
sanctuary, seeing the hermitage crowded
with peaceful deer. He saw there the place
assigned to Brahma (the creator) and also
the place of Siva, the place of Visnu, the
place of the great Indra as also of Vivaswan
(the sun-god), the place of Soma (the moon-
god), the place of Bhaga and the place of
Kubera (the deity presiding over the northern
quarter), the place of Dhata and Vidhata
and also the place of Vayu (the wind-god)
and the place of the high-souled Varuna
distinguished by a noose in his hand, as
also the place of Gayatri (one of the consorts
of Brahma) and the place of the Vasus as
well and the place of Vasuki (the king of
the Nagas) and the place of Garuda (the
king of birds), the place of Kartikeya (the
younger son of Lord Siva) and the place
of Dharma (the god of piety). Then,
surrounded by his pupils, the sage also
came forward. (11—21)
तं ददर्शाग्रतो रामो मुनीनां दीप्ततेजसाम्।
Tae वचनं वीरो लक्ष्मणं लक्षिवर्धनम्॥ २२॥
Sri Rama saw him at the head of the
sages of bright lustre. The hero addressed
the following words to Laksmana of
increasing grandeur : (22)

बहिर्लक्ष्मण निष्क्रामत्यगस्त्यो भगवानृषि:।

औदार्येणावगच्छामि निधानं तपसामिमम्॥ २३॥
“Laksmana, the revered sage Agastya

is coming out. From his magnanimity | am

able to recognize this abode of askesis.”
(23)
एवमुक्त्वा महाबाहुरगस्त्यं सूर्यवर्चसम्।
जग्राहापततस्तस्य पादौ च रघुनन्दन:॥ २४॥
Thus saying, the mighty-armed scion

of Raghu met Agastya of sun-like lustre and
touched his feet as he came. (24)

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

अभिवाद्य तु धर्मात्मा तस्थौ राम: कृताञ्जलि: |
सीतया सह वैदेह्या तदा WA: सलक्ष्मण:॥ २५॥

Having saluted him, the righteous Rama
stood with joined palms together with Sita,
the princess of Videha, and Laksmana. (25)

प्रतिगृह्य च काकुत्स्थमर्चयित्वाऽऽसनोदकै: |
कुशलप्रश्नमुक्त्वा च आस्यतामिति सोऽब्रवीत्॥ २६ ॥

The sage welcomed Kakutstha, offered
him a seat and water (to wash his hands
and feet), inquired after his welfare and
asked him to sit down. (26)

अग्निं हुत्वा प्रदायार्घ्यमतिथीन् प्रतिपूज्य च।
वानप्रस्थेन धर्मेण स तेषां भोजनं ददौ॥ oll

He first poured oblations into the sacred
fire, then offered water to the guests,
honoured them according to the code
prescribed for anchorites and offered them
meals. (27)

yea चोपविश्याथ धर्मज्ञो मुनिपुंगव:।
sara राममासीनं प्राञ्जलिं धर्मकोविदम्॥ २८॥
Sitting down himself first, the knower
of Dharma, the foremost among sages, said
to Sri Rama, who now sat with folded hands,
well-versed as he was in the code of right
conduct : (28)
अग्निं gat प्रदायार्घ्यमतिथिं प्रतिपूजयेत्।
अन्यथा खलु काकुत्स्थ तपस्वी समुदाचरन्।
दु:साक्षीव परे लोके स्वानि मांसानि भक्षयेत्॥ २९॥

“An ascetic should pour oblations into
the sacred fire, offer water to a guest (to
wash his hands) and honour him (in other
ways). An ascetic behaving otherwise, O
Kakutstha, will, like a false-witness, have to
eat his own flesh in the other world. (29)

राजा सर्वस्य लोकस्य धर्मचारी महारथ:।

पूजनीयश्च मान्यश्च भवान् प्राप्त: प्रियातिथि: i ३०॥
“You, the king of the whole world, a

righteous and great car-warrior, an adorable

and respectable dear guest, have come.”
(30)
