* SUNDARAKANDA +

भूमीगृहांश्चैत्यगृहान् गृहातिगृहकानपि।
उत्पतन् निपतंश्चापि तिष्ठन् गच्छन् पुन: क्वचित्॥ १७५ ॥
अपवृण्वंश्च द्वाराणि कपाटान्यवघट्टयन्।
प्रविशन् निष्पतंश्चापि प्रपतन्नुत्पतन्निव॥१६॥
सर्वमप्यवकाशं स विचचार महाकपि:।
चतुरंगुलमात्रोऽपि नावकाश: स विद्यते।
रावणान्त:पुरे तस्मिन् यं कपिर्न जगाम स:॥ १७॥

‘Banquet halls have already been
explored by me and, even so, gardens.
Picture-galleries have also been ransacked
by me and pleasure houses, too; even so,
the alleys of gardens attached to houses
and also all seven-storeyed buildings.’
Reflecting thus, Hanuman further began to
explore basements, sheds on cross-roads
and also pleasure-houses built beyond
residential houses but not far from them.
Springing up and down at one place, also
tarrying awhile at another and then departing,
nay, opening doors and closing them, making
good his entry and coming out, descending
and going up, that great monkey, Hanuman,
ranged through all space, till not even the
space of four fingers was left in the aforesaid
gynaeceum of Ravana, which that monkey
did not cover. (1383—17)

प्राकारान्तरवीथ्यश्च वेदिकाश्चैत्यसंश्रया:।
शवभ्राश्च पुष्करिण्यश्च सर्वं तेनावलोकितम्॥ १८ ॥
The lanes within the defence walls, the
platforms forming the base of trees on cross-
roads, chasms as well as lotus ponds—
everything was explored by him. (18)
राक्षस्यो विविधाकारा विरूपा विकृतास्तथा।
gtr हनुमता AA न तु सा जनकात्मजा॥१९॥
Ogresses of various shapes, ugly and

deformed, were also seen by Hanuman there;
but not the aforesaid daughter of Janaka. (19)

85

रूपेणाप्रतिमा लोके परा विद्याधरस्त्रिय:।
ger हनुमता तत्र न तु राघवनन्दिनी॥ २०॥
Foremost Vidyadhara women, peerless

in beauty, were also seen there by Hanuman,
but not Sita, the delight of Sri Rama. (20)

नागकन्या वरारोहा: पूर्णचन्द्रनिभानना:।
Gel हनुमता AA न तु सा जनकात्मजा॥ २१॥

Daughters of Nagas of lovely limbs,
whose faces shone like the full moon, were
also seen by Hanuman there, but not that
offspring of Janaka, Sita. (21)

प्रमधथ्य राक्षसेन्द्रेण नागकन्या बलाद्धृता:।
दृष्टा हनुमता तत्र न सा जनकनन्दिनी॥ २२॥

Daughters of Nagas, who had been
forcibly borne away by Ravana, the ruler of
ogres, after handling them roughly, were
also seen by Hanuman there, but not Sita,
the delight of Janaka. (22)

सोऽपश्यंस्तां महाबाहु: पश्यंश्चान्या ALAA: 1
विषसाद महाबाहुर्हनूमान् मारुतात्मज:॥ २३॥
Not finding her even though gazing on
other belles, the aforesaid Hanuman, son of
the wind-god, of mighty arms gave way to
despair. (23)
उद्योगं वानरेन्द्राणां wat सागरस्य al
व्यर्थं वीक्ष्यानिलसुतश्चिन्तां पुनरुपागत:॥ २४॥
Finding the endeavour of the leaders of
monkeys and his own leaping across the sea

futile, Hanuman, the offspring of the wind-
god, gave way to anxiety once more. (24)

sada विमानाच्च हनूमान् मारुतात्मज:।
चिन्तामुपजगामाथ शोकोपहतचेतन: ॥ २५ ॥

Nay, descending from the aerial car,
Hanuman, sprung from the loins of the wind-
god, now fell abrooding, his understanding
having been clouded by grief. (25)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये सुन्दरकाण्डे द्वादश: सर्ग: il १२॥

Thus ends Canto Twelve in the Sundarakanda of the glorious Ramayana of Valmiki,
the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

