# YUDDHAKANDA #

high-souled Brahma, the grandfather of the
universe, actually gave to them all the
following momentous assurances for the
good of the gods: (32)

अद्यप्रभृति लोकांस्त्रीन् सर्वे दानवराक्षसा:।
भयेन Uae नित्यं विचरिष्यन्ति शाश्वतम्॥ ३३॥

““From this day onward all the devils
and ogres will ever range the three worlds,
constantly filled with fear.’ (33)

दैवतैस्तु समागम्य सर्वैश्चेन्द्रपुरोगमै:।
वृषध्वजस्निपुरहा महादेव: प्रतोषित:॥ ३४॥

“Nay, coming together in the meantime,
all the gods headed by Indra propitiated the
great divinity Lord Siva, the destroyer of
three cities (Tripura) built by the demon,
Maya, and whose ensign bears the device
of a bull. (34)

प्रसन्नस्तु महादेवो देवानेतद् वचोऽब्रवीत्।
उत्पत्स्यति हितार्थं ay नारी रक्ष:क्षयावहा॥ ३५॥
“Feeling gratified, Lord Siva, the great
divinity, for his part gave to the gods the
following assurance: ‘For your good will
appear a woman, who will bring about the
destruction of the ogres.’ (35)

एषा देवै: प्रयुक्ता तु AS यथा दानवान् पुरा।
भक्षयिष्यति न: सर्वान् राक्षसघ्नी सरावणान्॥ ३६॥

“Employed by the gods, this woman, for
her part, who is destined to put an end to the
ogres, will, as hunger consumed the devils in
the past, devour us all including Ravana. (36)

रावणस्यापनीतेन दुर्बिनीतस्य दुर्मते:।

अयं निष्टानको घोर: शोकेन समभिप्लुत: Be I
“Thanks to the misconduct of the evil-

minded and wicked Ravana, this terrible

705

destruction attended by grief stares us in
the face. (37)

तं न पश्यामहे लोके यो A: शरणदो भवेत्।
राघवेणोपसृष्टानां कालेनेव युगक्षये॥ ३८॥

“We do not perceive anyone in the
world who may be able to afford protection
to us, threatened as we are with destruction
by Sri Rama, a scion of Raghu, even as
created beings are threatened’ with
destruction by the Time-Spirit at the end of
the world-cycle. (38)

नास्ति न: शरणं किंचिद् भये महति तिष्ठताम्।
दावाग्निवेष्टितानां हि करेणूनां यथा वने॥३९॥

“There is no haven for us who stand in
great peril any more than there is any shelter
for female elephants encompassed by a
wild fire in a forest. (39)
प्राप्तकालं pd तेन पौलस्त्येन महात्मना।
यत Wa भयं Ge तमेव Vt गत:॥४०॥

“Something opportune was done by
the high-souled Vibhisana, a scion of sage
Pulastya, who sought as a refuge him alone
from whom danger was suspected by him.”

(40)
sia सर्वा रजनीचरस्तिय:
परस्परं सम्परिरभ्य बाहुभि:।
विषेदुरार्तातिभयाभिपीडिता
विनेदुरुच्चैश्च तदा सुदारुणम्॥४१॥

Tightly folding one another in their
arms, so did all the ogresses give way to
despondency at that moment and cried at
the top of their voice in heart-rending tones,
afflicted as they were and sore-stricken
with dismay. (41)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये युद्धकाण्डे चतुर्नवतितम: सर्ग: ॥ ९४॥

Thus ends Canto Ninety-four in the Yuddhakanda of the glorious Ramayana of
Valmiki, the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

