# YUDDHAKANDA #

प्लवंगानामनीकानि महाभ्राणीव मारुत:।
संययौ समरे afer विधमन् रावण: शरै:॥४॥
Ravana advanced in that fray destroying
the simian ranks with his arrows in the
same way as the wind would dissipate
large clouds. (4)

met तरसा Ha राक्षसेन्द्रो वनौकसाम्।
आससाद ततो युद्धे त्वरितं Wad रणे॥५॥

Having brought about with speed the
destruction of the monkeys (lit., the denizens
of the woods), Ravana, the king of ogres,
then hurriedly confronted Sri Rama, a scion
of Raghu, on the battlefield. (5)

सुग्रीवस्तान् कपीन् दृष्टवा भग्नान् विद्रावितान् रणे।
Tea सुषेणं निक्षिप्य चक्रे युद्धे Bd मन:॥६॥

Seeing the aforesaid monkeys routed
in combat and put to flight, and placing
Susena incharge of the division, Sugriva
immediately threw his mind into the fight.

(6)
आत्मन: सदृशं at a तं निक्षिप्य वानरम्।
सुग्रीवोऽभिमुखं wat प्रतस्थे पादपायुध:॥७॥

Appointing as his substitute the
aforesaid monkey, who was a hero as good
as himself, the celebrated Sugriva marched
towards the enemy, armed with a tree. (7)

पार्श्वत: पृष्ठतश्चास्य Wad वानरयूथपा:।
अनुजग्मुर्महाशैलान् विविधांश्च वनस्पतीन्॥८॥
Seizing hold of enormous rocks and
trees of various kinds, all the commanders
of monkey-troops, excepting Susena,
followed at his side as well as at his heels.
(8)

ननर्दं युधि सुग्रीव: स्वरेण महता महान्।
पोथयन् विविधांश्चान्यान् ममन्थोत्तमराक्षसान्॥ ९॥
The mighty Sugriva roared at a high
pitch on the battlefield and destroyed the
foremost ogres, annihilating various other
ogres too. (9)

711

ममर्द च महाकायो राक्षसान् वानरेश्वर:।
युगान्तसमये वायु: प्रवृद्धानगमानिव॥१०॥

Nay, the gigantic king of monkeys killed
the ogres even as the wind knocks down at
the end of a world-cycle trees which have
grown to a mammoth size. (10)

राक्षसानामनीकेषु शैलवर्षं ववर्षं ह।
अश्मवर्षं यथा मेघ: पक्षिसङ्घेषु कानने॥११॥

He let fall on the ogre troops, they say,
a shower of rocks even as a cloud would
let loose a shower of hailstones in the midst
of flocks of birds in a forest. (11)

कपिराजविमुक्तैस्तै:; शैलवर्षैस्तु राक्षसा:।
विकीर्णशिरस: पेतुर्विकीर्णा ga पर्वता:॥१२॥

Their heads smashed by those showers
of rocks let fall by the king of monkeys, the
ogres for their part toppled down like
crumbling mountains. (12)

अथ संक्षीयमाणेषु राक्षसेषु समन्तत:।
qian प्रभग्नेषु नदत्सु च पतसु च॥१३॥
विरूपाक्ष: स्वकं नाम धन्वी विश्राव्य राक्षस:।

रथादाप्लुत्य दुर्धर्षो गजस्कन्धमुपारुहत्॥१४॥

Leaping down ठि his chariot,
proclaiming his own name, while the ogres,
completely routed by Sugriva, were being
annihilated on all sides and were toppling
down roaring, the ogre, Virupaksa, who was
armed with a bow and was difficult to over-
power, forthwith mounted on the back of an
elephant. (13-14)

स तं द्विपमथारुह्य विरूपाक्षो महाबल:।
we भीमनिर्हयादं वानरानभ्यधावत॥१५॥
Ascending that elephant, Virupaksa, who
was endowed with extraordinary might,
immediately let forth a terrific roar and rushed
towards the monkeys. (15)

ata स शरान् घोरान् विससर्ज TAS |

स्थापयामास चोद्विग्र।न् राक्षसान् सप्प्रद्रुर्षयमृ ।। १६॥
He rained formidable arrows on Sugriva

in the forefront of battle and stabilized
