+ UTTARAKANDA +

of Vrtra and also the fruit of the horse-
sacrifice. (2)

gad fe पुरा सौम्य कर्दमस्य प्रजापते:।
पुत्रो बाह्लीश्वर: श्रीमानिलो नाम सुधार्मिक:॥ ३॥

“O gracious one, it is heard that in the
former days there was prosperous and pious
Ila, ruler of Bahlika and the son of the
Prajapati Kardama. (3)
स राजा पृथिवीं at वशे peat महायशा:।
Wt Wa नरव्याघ्र पुत्रवत् पर्यपालयत्॥४॥

“That King of high fame, having brought
under his sway the whole earth, protected

the kingdom like his son O tiger among
men, Laksmana. (4)

सुरैश्च परमोदारैर्दैतेयैश्च महाधनै: |
नागराक्षसगन्धर्वैर्यक्षैश्च सुमहात्मभि: ॥ ५ ।।
wed नित्यश: सौम्य ward रघुनन्दन।
अबिभ्यंश्च त्रयो लोका: सरोषस्य महात्मन:॥६॥

“He was honoured always, O gracious
one, by the liberal gods and the wealthy
sons of Diti, and also by the Nagas,
Raksasas, Gandharvas and even the noble
Yaksas, possessed of fear. The three worlds
were frightened when the powerful one was
in rage. (5-6)
स राजा तादृशोऽप्यासीद् धर्मे वीर्ये च निष्ठित:।
बुद्ध्या च परमोदारो बाह्लीकेशो महायशा:॥७॥

“That king, lord of Bahlika, of high fame,

although so proficient in righteousness and
valour, was very liberal at heart. (7)

a War महाबाहुर्मृगयां रुचिरे वने।
at TRA Wa सभृत्यबलवाहन:॥८॥

“That one of long arms went out to hunt
in a beautiful forest together with his
attendants, army and carriers in the charming
month of Caitra. (8)

प्रजघ्ने स नृपोऽरण्ये मृगान् शतसहस्ररश:।
हत्वैव तृप्तिर्नाभूच्च राज्ञस्तस्य महात्मन:॥९॥

“The King killed hundreds and
thousands of animals in the forest. Having

1089

killed them, however, the noble king was

not satisfied. (9)

नानामृगाणामयुतं वध्यमानं महात्मना।

यत्र जातो महासेनस्तं देशमुपचक्रमे॥१०॥
“By that noble one were killed ten

thousand animals of many species, he

reached the place, where Mahasena
(Kartikeya) was born. (10)

तस्मिन् west देवेश: शैलराजसुतां हर:।
रमयामास दुर्धर्ष: सर्वैरनुचरै: सह॥११॥
In that place the Lord of gods, the
unconquerable Hara (Siva), living with His
attendants dallied with the daughter of the
lord of mountains, Parvati. (11)

कृत्वा स्त्रीरूपमात्मानमुमेशो गोपतिध्वज:।
देव्या: प्रियचिकोर्षु: संस्तस्मिन् पर्वतनिर्झरे॥ १२॥

Assuming himself the form of a woman,
desiring to please the Devi Parvati, the lord,
having the bull as emblem, stayed near that
hilly stream: (12)

यत्र यत्र वनोद्देशे ara: पुरुषवादिन:।
वृक्षा: पुरुषनामानस्ते सर्वे स्त्रीजना भवन्॥१३॥

Whatever masculine beings were there
in the forest, all of them and even the trees’
masculine names were changed in the form
of female beings. (13)
यच्च किंचन ad aa नारीसंज्ञं aya ह।
एतस्मिन्नन्तरे राजा स इल: कर्दमात्मज:॥ Lv Ul
निघ्नन् मृगसहस्राणि तं देशमुपचक्रमे।

स दृष्टवा स्त्रीकृतं सर्वं सव्यालमृगपक्षिणम्॥ १५ ॥
आत्मानं स्त्रीकृतं Wa सानुगं रघुनन्दन।
तस्य दु:खं महच्चासीद् दृष्टवाऽऽत्मानं तथागतम्॥ १६ UI

Whatever there was, was rendered
feminine. In the meantime that King Ila, the
son of Kardama, killing thousands of animals
reached that place, and seeing all reptiles,
animals and birds rendered feminine, and
also himself together with his followers turned
into feminine, he felt great sorrow, specially
seeing himself in that form. (14—16)
