« KISKINDHAKANDA +

“Now that you, the leader of great
generals are reduced to the five elements, |
am bereft of all joy and hope and am deeply
plunged in a sea of grief. (9)
यन्न शोकाभिसंतप्तं स्फुटतेऽद्य सहस्रधा॥ Qo ll

“My heart is very strong in that, even
though tormented with grief to see you fallen
helpless on the ground, it does not break
into a thousand pieces today. (10)

सुग्रीवस्य त्वया भार्या et स च विवासित: |
यत् तत् तस्य त्वया व्युष्टि: प्राप्तेयं प्लवगाधिप॥ ११॥

“Since Sugriva’s wife was wrested and
he was exiled by you, this is the fruit reaped
by you of that wrongdoing of yours, O
suzerain lord of monkeys ! (11)

नि:श्रैयसपरा मोहात् त्वया चाहं विगर्हिता।
यैषाब्रुवं fed वाक्यं वानरेन्द्र हितैषिणी॥१२॥
“| too, who tendered salutary advice to
you, wishing well as | did of you, O ruler of
monkeys, and who was intent on securing
your highest good, was reproached by you
through ignorance. (12)
स्पपयौवनदृप्तानां दक्षिणानां च मानद।
नूनमप्सरसामार्य चित्तानि प्रमथिष्यसि॥ १३॥
“Blessed with an ethereal form, you
will surely churn the minds of celestial
nymphs clever at dalliance and proud of
their comeliness and lasting youth, O worthy
bestower of honour ! (13)

कालो नि:संशयो नूनं जीवितान्तकरस्तव।
ANS येनावपन्नोऽसि सुग्रीवस्यावशो वशम्॥ १४॥
“The time which will put an end to your
life and which is free from doubt, has surely
arrived. It is by that time alone that you,
who were subject to the control of none,
were forcibly brought under the sway of
Sugriva. (14)
अस्थाने वालिनं हत्वा युध्यमानं परेण च।
न संतप्यति काकुत्स्थ: कृत्वा कर्म सुगर्हितम्॥ १५ ॥

“It is not in the fitness of things that

1007

having struck Vali, fighting with another and
thus having done something _ highly
despicable, Sri Rama, a scion of Kakutstha,
should not feel sore distressed at heart.(15)
वैधव्यं शोकसंतापं कृपणाकृपणा सती।
अदु:खोपचिता पूर्वं वर्तयिष्याम्यनाथवत्॥१६॥
“Having been brought up in an
atmosphere bereft of suffering and having
never felt miserable in the past, | shall now

like one forlorn miserably suffer widowhood,
full of grief and agony. (16)

लालितश्चाङ्गदो वीर: सुकुमार: सुखोचित:।
वत्स्यते कामवस्थां A पितृव्ये क्रोधमूच्छिते॥ १७॥

“To what plight will the valiant, yet
tender Angada be reduced—Angada, who
has been tended affectionately by me and
deserves every comfort—when his uncle,
Sugriva, is beside himself with anger? (17)
pea fit ut ae धर्मवत्सलम्।
दुर्लभं att तस्य da वत्स भविष्यति॥ १८॥

“(Turning towards Angada) bring your
father, who is fond of virtue, well within your
sight, my son; henceforth his sight will
become difficult to obtain, my darling ! (18)
समाश्चासय Ut त्वं dest संदिशस्व A
aa चैनं समाघ्राय vars प्रस्थितो ह्यसि॥ ee ii

“(Turning once more to Vali) fully comfort
your son and duly smelling him at the head,
give to me your parting message, since you
have now set out on your journey to the
other world. (19)

रामेण fe महत् कर्म कृतं त्वामभिनिघ्नता।
आनृण्यं तु गतं तस्य सुग्रीवस्य प्रतिश्रवे॥ ol
“Indeed a great feat has been
accomplished by Sri Rama in killing you. In
fact acquittance has been obtained by him
thereby in the matter of his plighted word to
Sugriva to dispose of you. (20)

सकामो भव सुग्रीव wat त्वं प्रतिपत्स्यसे।
Weed राज्यमनुद्विग्न: शस्तो भ्राता रिपुस्तव॥ २१॥

“(Turning to Sugriva) be satisfied now
