808

and fishery etc.) and delivering the eminent
ascetics, Garuda (the foremost of birds),
whose mind was set on righteousness,
derived excessive joy beyond comparison.

(21—33)

स तु तेन प्रहर्षेण द्विगुणीकृतविक्रम:।
अमृतानयनार्थं a चकार मतिमान् मतिम्॥ ३४॥

Finding his prowess redoubled by that
excessive joy, the talented Garuda for his
part actually made up his mind to fetch
nectar from heaven. (34)

अयोजालानि निर्मथ्य भित्त्वा रत्नगृहं वरम्।
महेन्द्रभवनाद् गुप्तमाजहारामृतं AT HU ३५॥

Crushing the iron lattice-work and
demolishing the excellent jewelled safe, kept
protected by that lattice-work, he then
secretly bore away the nectar from the
palace of the mighty Indra. (35)
तं महर्षिगणैर्जुष्टं सुपर्णकृतलक्षणम्।
नाम्ना सुभद्रं न्यग्रोधं ददर्शं धनदानुज:॥ ३६॥

Ravana (a younger half-brother of
Kubera) beheld that banyan tree, Subhadra
by name, resorted to by hosts of eminent
Rsis (the seers of Vedic Mantras), and
which retained a vestige of the havoc in the
shape of destruction of a gigantic bough
wrought by Garuda. (36)
तं तु गत्वा wt ut समुद्रस्य नदीपते:।
ददर्शाश्रममेकान्ते पुण्ये रम्ये वनान्तरे॥ ३७॥

Reaching that other shore of the
ocean, the lord of rivers, Ravana beheld a
hermitage in a lonely, holy and charming

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

part of the forest.

wa कृष्णाजिनधरं जटामण्डलधारिणम्।

cast नियताहारं मारीचं नाम राक्षसम्॥ ३८॥
There he saw an ogre, Marica by name,

clad in a black antelope-skin and wearing a

coil of matted locks and living on a restricted

diet. (38)

स रावण: समागम्य विधिवत् तेन रक्षसा।
मारीचेनारचितो राजा सर्वकामैरमानुषै:।॥ ३९॥

Meeting that ogre with due ceremony,
the said King Ravana was entertained by
Marica with all luxuries unknown to man.

(39)
तं स्वयं पूजयित्वा च भोजनेनोदकेन च।
अर्थोपहितया वाचा मारीचो वाक्यमब्रवीत्॥४०॥

Entertaining him personally with food

and water, Marica spoke to him in the
following meaningful words : (40)

कच्चित्ते कुशलं राजन् लङ्कायां राक्षसेश्वर।

केनार्थेन पुनस्त्वं वै तूर्णमेव इहागत:॥४१॥
“| hope, O king, all is well in your

Lanka, O ruler of ogres! With what object

have you called here so quickly again?”
(41)

एवमुक्तो महातेजा मारीचेन A Wau: |
Wa: पश्चादिदं वाक्यमब्रवीद् वाक्यकोविद: ॥ ४२॥
Questioned in these words by Marica,
the celebrated Ravana, who was invested
with extraordinary glory, and was a master

of expression, then replied as follows:
(42)

(37)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्येऽरण्यकाण्डे पञ्चत्रिंश: सर्ग: ॥ 34 ॥

Thus ends Canto Thirty-five in the Aranyakanda of the glorious Ramayana of Valmiki,
the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

