1086

monkey, Tara of terrible prowess, who
possessed the brilliance of a star, followed
by five crores of monkeys. (31)

इन्द्रजानु: कविर्वीरो यूथप: waqvad!
एकादशानां कोटीनामीश्वरस्तैश्च संवृत:॥ ३२॥
There also was to be seen the wise
and gallant troop-leader, Indrajanu (or
Indrabhanu), the ruler of eleven crore
monkeys, and duly followed by them all. (32)

ततो रम्भस्त्वनुप्राप्तस्तरुणादित्यसंनिभ:।
अयुतेन वृतश्चैव सहस्रेण शतेन च ॥ ३३॥

Next arrived Rambha, who for his part
shone like the rising sun, surrounded by
eleven thousand and one hundred monkeys.

(33)
ततो यूथपतिर्वीरो दुर्मुखो नाम वानर:।
प्रत्यदूश्यत कोटीभ्यां द्वाभ्यां परिव्रृतो Act ३४॥

Then appeared the valiant and mighty
troop-leader, a monkey named Durmukha,
accompanied by two crore monkeys. (34)

कैलासशिखराकारैर्वानरैर्भीमविक्रमै: ।

qa: कोटिसहस्रेण BAM प्रत्यदृश्यत॥ ३५॥
There was to be seen Hanuman, too,

surrounded by a thousand crore monkeys

of redoubtable prowess and resembling so
many peaks of the Kailasa mountain. (35)

नलश्चापि महावीर्य: dadt द्रुमवासिभि:।
कोटीशतेन GOT: सहस्रेण Bat च॥ ३६॥

There arrived Nala, too, possessed of
great virility and surrounded by a hundred
crore and one lakh monkeys dwelling on
trees. (36)

adt दधिमुख: sitar कोटिभिर्दशभिर्वृत: |

सम्प्राप्तोऽभिनदंस्तस्य सुग्रीवस्य महात्मन:॥ ३७॥
Then arrived thundering in the presence

of the aforesaid high-minded Sugriva, the

glorious Dadhimukha, accompanied by ten
crore monkeys. (37)

शरभ: कुमुदो वह्निर्वानरो tw wa a
Ud चान्ये च Asal AMT: कामरूपिण:॥ ३८॥

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

आव्रृत्य पृथिवीं wat पर्वतांश्च वनानि a
यूथपा: समनुप्राप्ता येषां संख्या न विद्यते॥ ३९॥
Even so, Sarabha, Kumuda, Vahni and
the monkey Ramha too—these and many
other monkey troop-leaders, who were
capable of changing form at will and whose
number could not be ascertained, duly turned
up, covering the entire globe as well as the
mountains and forests. (38-39)

आगताश्च निविष्टाश्च पृथिव्यां सर्ववानरा:।
आप्लवन्त: प्लवन्तश्च गर्जन्तश्च प्लवंगमा:।
अभ्यवर्तन्त सुग्रीवं सूर्यमभ्रगणा इव॥४०॥

Nay, all the monkeys which came up
there sat down on the earth. Leaping from
one tree to another and from one bough
to another and growling, the monkeys
surrounded Sugriva as masses of clouds
would encompass the sun. (40)

कुर्वाणा बहुशब्दांश्च प्रकृष्टा बाहुशालिन:।
शिरोभिर्वानरेन्द्रय सुग्रीवाय न्यवेदयन्॥४१॥

Raising many a cry, the foremost
monkeys, distinguished for their mighty arms,
reported themselves from a distance to
Sugriva, the king of monkeys, with their
bent heads, too shy as they were to force
their way through the invulnerable crowds
to his presence. (41)

अपरे वानरश्रेष्ठा: संगम्य च यथोचितम्।
सुग्रीवेण समागम्य स्थिता: प्राञ्जलयस्तदा॥४२॥

Going near and submitting what was
called for at the moment, other jewels
among the monkeys departed; while others
having met with Sugriva stood with folded
hands where they were at the moment.

(42)
सुग्रीवस्त्वरितो wa सर्वांस्तान् वानरर्षभान्।
निवेदयित्वा aa: स्थित: प्राञ्ञलिरब्रवीत्॥४३॥

Having announced to Sri Rama all the
aforesaid monkeys, who were in a hurry to
settle down and take rest, and standing with
folded hands before Sri Rama, Sugriva,
who was full of alacrity and knew of the
