# YUDDHAKANDA +

wag योधयिष्यामि कुबेरवरुणावपि॥ ३६॥

“| shall exterminate all your foes, O
ranger of the night! | shall encounter the two
brothers in combat even if they happen to
be Indra and the sun-god or the god of fire
and the wind-god or Kubera (the god of
riches and the deity presiding over the
northern quarter) and Varuna (the god of
water and the deity presiding over the western
quarter). (36)

गिरिमात्रशरीरस्य महापरिघयोधिन:।
नर्दतस्तीक्ष्णदंष्टरस्य बिभीयाद् वै Wat: ३७॥
“Even Indra (the destroyer of strong-
holds) would be afraid of me as I, with my
body having the size of a mountain and
sharp teeth, roar while fighting with a huge
iron bludgeon. (37)

wat स द्वितीयेन शरेण निहनिष्यति।
ततोऽहं तस्य पास्यामि रुधिरं काममाश्वस॥ ३८॥

“Before Rama strikes me violently once

333

more with a second arrow | shall drink
his blood. Therefore, be fully restored
to confidence. (38)

वधेन चै दाशरथे: सुखावहं

wae तवाहर्तुमहं यतिष्ये।
हत्वा च रामं we लक्ष्मणेन

Trait सर्वान् हरियूथमुख्यान्॥३९॥

“By making short work of Rama
(son of DaSaratha) | shall try my best to
bring victory which will conduce_ to
your happiness. Nay, having killed Rama
alongwith Laksmana, | shall devour all
the leaders of monkey hordes. (39)
रमस्व कामं fra चाग्रयवारुणीं

कुरुष्व कार्याणि हितानि विज्वर:।
मया तु wa गमिते यमक्षयं
चिराय सीता वशगा भविष्यति॥४०॥

“Enjoy life fully, drink the most excellent
wine and, rid of anxiety, perform actions
which are conducive to your welfare. When
Rama for his part has been dispatched to
the abode of Death by me, Sita will submit
to your will for long.” (40)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये FERS द्वादश: AW: ॥ १२॥
Thus ends Canto Twelve in the Yuddhakanda of the glorious Ramayana of
Valmiki, the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

Wares: ait:
Canto XIll

Advised by Mahaparswa to use violence against Sita, Ravana pleads his
inability to do so because of a curse pronounced against him
in the past by Brahma, and boasts of his own valour

रावणं क्रुद्धमाज्ञाय Aeargal महाबल:।
मुहूर्तमनुसंचिन्त्य प्राञ्जलिर्वाक्यमब्रवीत्॥ १ ॥
Reflecting awhile on finding Ravana
enraged, Mahaparswa, who was endowed
with extraordinary might, submitted with

joined palms as follows:

a: खल्वपि at प्राप्य मृगव्यालनिषेवितम्।
न पिबेन्मधु सम्प्राप्य स नरो बालिशो भवेत्॥ २॥

“That man is a fool, who, even after
reaching a forest infested by wild beasts of

(1)
