398

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA +

Canto XX VII
Exhorted by Sri Rama to stay in Ayodhya to look after his parents, Sita
submits in reply that she being his counterpart, her exile is implied

in his and insists on her being taken with him since she
would not be able to bear separation from him

एवमुक्ता तु वैदेही प्रियार्हा प्रियवादिनी।
प्रणयादेव संक्रुद्धा भर्तारमिदमब्रवीत्॥१॥

Roused to indignation through sheer
love when admonished as aforesaid, Sita,
the daughter of the king of the Videhas, for
her part, who deserved kindness from her
husband and always spoke kindly to him,
replied to her husband as follows : (1)
किमिदं भाषसे wa वाक्यं लघुतया ध्रुवम्।
त्वया यदपहास्यं मे श्रुत्वा नरवरोत्तम॥ २॥

“Wherefore do you tender me this
advice, which makes me look indeed so
small, O Rama, and which | am amused to
hear, O jewel among the foremost of men!

(2)
वीराणां राजपुत्राणां शस्त्रास्त्रविदुषां नृप।
अनर्हमयशस्यं च न श्रोतव्यं त्वयेरितम्॥ ३॥

“What has been uttered by you is
unworthy of valiant princes adept in the use
of weapons and missiles, and disgraceful to
them, O ruler of men, and is not worth
listening to. (3)

आर्यपुत्र पिता माता भ्राता पुत्रस्तथा स्नुषा।
स्वानि पुण्यानि भुञ्जाना: ta स्वं भाग्यमुपासते॥ ४॥
“Father, mother, brother, son and
daughter-in-law, my darling, reap each his
or her destiny, enjoying their own merits
earned in previous lives. (4)

भर्तुर्भाग्यं q नार्येका प्राप्नोति पुरुषर्षभ।
अतश्चैवाहमादिष्टा at वस्तव्यमित्यपि॥५॥
“A wife alone actually shares the fortune

of her husband, O jewel among men! For
this very reason | too stand enjoined by my

parents-in-law that | should as well take up
my abode in the forest. (5)

न पिता नात्मजो वात्मा न माता न सखीजन:।
इह प्रेत्य च नारीणां पतिरेको गति: सदा॥६॥

“In the case of women neither father
nor son nor their own body nor mother nor
their female companions serve as an asylum
here or hereafter. The husband alone is
their refuge at all times. (6)

ae त्वं प्रस्थितो of ama wera
अग्रतस्ते गमिष्यामि मृद्गन्ती कुशकण्टकान्॥७॥

“If you depart this very day for the
forest of Dandaka which is difficult to
penetrate, O scion of Raghu, | shall walk
ahead of you crushing under my soles blades
of the sacred KuSa grass and thorns that lie
on the way. (7)
gat रोषं बहिष्कृत्य भुक्तशेषमिवोदकम्।
wa ut ate विस्त्रब्ध: पापं मयि न विद्यते॥८॥

“Casting away envy at my courage in
voluntarily offering to accompany you to the
forest and wrath at my insolence in flouting
your command to stay in Ayodhya,
confidently take me with you as one would
take water remaining in one’s pot after one
has drunk it once, O valiant prince ! No sin
that may deter you from taking me with you
abides in me. (8)

प्रासादाग्रे विमानैर्वा aeaand ar
सर्वावस्थागता oad: पादच्छाया विशिष्यते॥९॥

“Protection under the feet of one’s
husband under all circumstances is
preferable for a woman to residence at the
top of a palace, or living in aerial cars or
