* BALAKANDA +

भोक्तुमारब्धवानन्नं तस्मिन् काले रघूत्तम।
इन्द्रो द्विजातिर्भूत्वा तं सिद्धमन्नमयाचत॥५॥

“Even at the end of full one thousand
years anger did not overpower the great sage,
who remained stiff as wood (not even making
any signs or gestures), even though he was
in the meantime buffeted by many obstacles;
for he had embarked on this course of
austerities after making an _ unalterable
resolution, O Rama ! On his vow of prosecuting
the austerities for a thousand years being
completed, Viswamitra, who had taken that
great vow, proceeded to take his food.
Appearing at the nick of time in the guise of a
Brahmana, O scion of Raghu, Indra begged
of him the cooked food that had been served
before him. (8—5)
तस्मै दत्त्वा तदा सिद्धं we विप्राय निश्चित: |
नि:शेषितेऽन्ने भगवानभुक्त्वैव महातपा:॥६॥
न किंचिदवदद् fat मौनव्रतमुपास्थित:।
तथैवासीत् पुनर्मौनमनुच्छ्वासं चकार ह॥७॥

“Having unhesitatingly given all the
cooked food to the Brahmana, and remaining
without food, the whole stock having been
exhausted, the great ascetic, possessed
as he was of extraordinary power, did not
speak a word to the Brahmana, firm as he
was in his vow of silence. He became silent
once more even as before and also
suspended his breath: so the tradition goes.

(6-7)
अथ वर्षसहस्रं च नोच्छ्वसन् मुनिपुंगव:।
तस्यानुच्छ्वसमानस्य AT धूमो व्यजायत॥ ८ ॥
त्रैलोक्यं येन सम्भ्रान्तमातापितमिवाभवत्।
ततो देवर्षिगन्धर्वा: पन्नगोरगराक्षसा:॥ ९ ॥
मोहितास्तपसा तस्य तेजसा मन्दरश्मय:।
कश्मलोपहता: सर्वे पितामहमथाब्रुवन्॥१०॥

‘“Viswamitra, the foremost of ascetics,
did not resume his respiration for another
thousand years. While he kept his respiration

suspended, there issued from his head a
smoke by which all the three worlds were

247

thrown into confusion and felt heated as it
were. Bewildered by his askesis and
overshadowed by his glory, nay, stricken
with agony, all the gods, Rsis and
Gandharvas as well as the Nagas, serpents
and ogres thereupon sought the presence
of and prayed to Brahma, the creator, as
follows : (8—10)

aga: कारणैर्देव विश्वामित्रो महामुनि:।
लोभित: क्रोधितश्चैव ager चाभिवर्धते॥११॥

“Though tempted and provoked to anger
through many causes, O lord, the great
sage ViSwamitra is rising more and more by
virtue of his asceticism. (11)

न dad यदि त्वस्य मनसा यदभीप्सितम्॥१२॥
विनाशयति त्रैलोक्यं तपसा सचराचरम्।
व्याकुलाश्च दिश: सर्वा न च किंचित् प्रकाशते॥ १३॥
“Not even a minute flaw of any
description can be seen in him. If, however,
that which is keenly sought after by his
mind is not granted to him, he is sure to
destroy all the three worlds including the
animate and inanimate creation by the fire
of his askesis. Nay, all the quarters are
enveloped in darkness and nothing is clearly
visible. (12-13)
सागरा: क्षुभिता: सर्वे विशीर्यन्ते च पर्वता:।
प्रकम्पते च वसुधा वायुर्वातीह संकुल:॥१४॥

“All the oceans are turbulent and
mountains are being riven. The earth is
quaking and the wind is blowing violently at
this time. (14)
ब्रह्मन् न प्रतिजानीमो नास्तिको जायते जन:।

सम्मूढमिव त्रैलोक्यं सम्प्रक्नुभितमानसम्॥१५॥

“We are at a loss to discover its
remedy, O holy Sir ! Like unbelievers people
are giving up their sacred duties. With their
mind deeply agitated all the three worlds are
puzzled. (15)

भास्करो निष्प्रभश्चैव महर्षेस्तस्य तेजसा।
बुद्धिं न Hed यावन्नाशे ca महामुनि:॥१६॥
