+ UTTARAKANDA +

अहं लङ्कापतिर्भद्रे दशग्रीव sft श्रुत:।
तस्य मे भव भार्या त्वं भुङ्क्ष्व भोगान् यथासुखम्॥ २३ ॥

“‘O blessed one, | am the king of
Lanka, known as DaSsagriva. Become my
wife and enjoy all sense-delights as it suits
your pleasure. (23)

कश्च तावदसौ यं त्वं विष्णुरित्यभिभाषसे।
वीर्येण तपसा चैव भोगेन च बलेन च॥ २४॥
स मया नो समो भद्रे यं त्वं कामयसेऽङ्गने।
इत्युक्तवति Ase वेदवत्यथ साब्रवीत्॥ २५॥
मा मैवमिति सा कन्या तमुवाच निशाचरम्।
त्रैलोक्याधिपतिं विष्णुं सर्वलोकनमस्कृतम्॥ २६॥
त्वदृते राक्षसेन्द्रान्य: कोऽवमन्येत बुद्धिमान्।
एवमुक्तस्तया at वेदवत्या निशाचर:॥ २७॥
मूर्धजेषु तदा कन्यां कराग्रेण परामृशत्।
ततो वेदवती क्रुद्धा HIP हस्तेन साच्छिनत्॥ २८ I

“By the way, who is that whom you
speak of as Visnu? He whom you wish to
secure, O good lady, is not equal to me in
valour, Tapas, enjoyment and _ strength.’
When he had spoken thus, the aforesaid
Vedavati for her part thereupon replied as
follows: ‘Don’t speak thus, don’t speak thus!’
She told the ranger of the night, ‘What
sensible man, other than you, O king of the
Raksasas, will speak thus disparagingly of
Visnu, who is the lord of the three worlds
and who is universally respected.’ Spoken
to in these words on that spot by the aforesaid
Vedavati, the Raksasa then seized hold of
the maiden by her hair with his hand.
Provoked to anger, Vedavati cut off her hair
with her hand. (24—28)

असिर्भूत्वा करस्तस्या: केशांश्छिन्नांस्तदाकरोत्।

सा ज्वलन्तीव रोषेण दहन्तीव निशाचरम्॥ २९॥

उवाचाग्निं समाधाय मरणाय कृतत्वरा।

धर्षितायास्त्वयानार्य न A जीवितमिष्यते॥ ३०॥
“Getting transformed her hand _ into

sword, she then cut off her hair. Hastening

to put an end to her life, she kindled a fire.
Burning, as it were, with anger, she spoke

901

to the Raksasa as if she would burn him:
‘Insulted by you, O ignoble man, | no longer
desire to live. (29-30)

रक्षस्तस्मात् प्रवेक्ष्यामि पश्यतस्ते हुताशनम्।
यस्मात् तु धर्षिता AS त्वया पापात्मना वने॥ ३१॥
तस्मात् aa वधार्थं fe समुत्पत्स्ये ह्यहं TA: |
नहि शक्य: frat हन्तुं पुरुष: पापनिश्चय: 32 1
“‘l will, therefore, enter the fire before
your very eyes, O ogre ! As | have been
insulted in this forest by you, O sinner,
therefore, | will be born again for your
destruction. It is not possible for a woman to
kill a man of sinful resolve. (31-32)

शापे त्वयि मयोत्सृष्टे तपसश्च व्ययो भवेत्।
ate त्वस्ति मया किंचित् कृतं दत्तं हुतं तथा॥ ३३ ॥
AAT त्वयोनिजा साध्वी भवेयं धर्मिण: AAT |
एवमुक्त्वा प्रविष्टा सा ज्वलितं जातवेदसम्॥ ३४॥

“‘And if | pronounce a curse on you,
my reserve of Tapas will be lost. If | have
done anything meritorious or have given
gifts or tended the sacred fire, | will surely
appear as Ayonija (not born of the womb),
the pious daughter of a virtuous man.’ Having
said thus, she entered the kindled fire.

(33-34)
पपात च feat दिव्या पुष्पवृष्टि: समन्तत:।
पुनरेव समुद्भूता पद्मे पद्मसमप्रभा॥ ३५॥

“Nay, a rain of celestial flowers fell
from the heaven on all sides. She appeared
again from a lotus with the radiance of a
lotus. (35)
तस्मादपि UA: प्राप्ता पूर्ववत् तेन रक्षसा।
कन्यां कमलगर्भाभां प्रगृह्य स्वगृहं ययौ॥ ३६॥

“As on the previous occasion, she was
again taken hold of by the Raksasa from
her birth-place. Taking hold of the maiden,

who had the lustre of the interior of a lotus,
he went home. (36)

We रावणस्त्वेतां दर्शयामास मन्तिणे।
लक्षणज्ञो निरीक्ष्यैव रावणं चैवमब्रवीत्॥ ३७॥

“Taking her by the hand, Ravana
