* SUNDARAKANDA +

was somehow quickly found by me miserable
in the midst of ogresses, intimidated as she
was by them again and again, wearing a
single pleat as a mark of desolation, given
to the thought of her lord, having the bare
ground for her bed, pale-limbed like a lotus
plant at the advent of winter, nay, deprived
of the object of her desire viz., the service
of Sri Rama, because of Ravana and
resolved upon dying. (56—61)
तां दृष्ट्वा तादृशीं नारीं रामपत्नीं यशस्विनीम्।
तत्रैव शिंशपाव्रृक्षे पश्यन्नहमवस्थित:॥६२॥
“Perceiving that illustrious lady, the
consort of Sri Rama, in such a condition, |
remained perched on the same Simsapa
tree, looking at her. (62)

ततो हलहलाशब्दं काञ्चीनूपुरमिश्रितम्।
श्रृणोम्यधिकगम्भीरं रावणस्य निवेशने॥६३॥
“Then | heard in the abode of Ravana
an unusually deep sound of hallooing, mixed
with the jingling of girdles and anklets. (63)
ततोऽहं परमोद्विग्न: स्वरूपं प्रत्यसंहरम्।
अहं च शिंशपाव्क्षे पक्षीव गहने स्थित:॥६४॥
“Feeling supremely anxious, | thereupon
contracted my form and remained crouched
like a bird on the SimSapa tree thick with
foliage. (64)
ततो रावणदाराश्च रावणश्च महाबल:।
तं देशमनुसम्प्राप्तो aa सीताभवत् स्थिता॥६५॥
“Then arrived the consorts of Ravana
as well as Ravana himself, who is endowed,

with extraordinary might, in that place where
Sita was ensconced. (65)

तं दृष्ट्वाथ वरारोहा सीता रक्षोगणेश्वरम्।
संकुच्योरू स्तनौ पीनौ बाहुभ्यां परिरभ्य च॥ ६६॥
“Seeing that lord of ogre hordes, Sita of
lovely hips sat compressing her thighs and
enclosing her high breasts with her arms.
(66)

वित्रस्तां परमोद्बिग्नां वीक्ष्यमाणामितस्तत:।
त्राणं कंचिदपश्यन्तीं वेपमानां तपस्विनीम्॥६७॥

255

तामुवाच anita: सीतां परमदु:खिताम्।
अवाक्शिरा: प्रपतितो बहुमन्यस्व मामिति॥६८॥

“Fallen flat at her feet, head downward,
Ravana, the ten-headed monster, said to
the aforesaid Sita, who felt greatly frightened
and highly confused, and was glancing round
in the hope of finding an asylum, but, finding
no saviour, was trembling helpless and
supremely distressed as she was; ‘Pray,
regard me with favour. (67-68)

ae ard तु at दर्पान्नाभिनन्दसि गर्विते।
द्विमासानन्तरं सीते पास्यामि रुधिरं तव॥६९॥

“`]।, however, you do not welcome me
through vanity. O proud Sita, | shall drink
your blood after two months.’ (99)

एतच्छृत्वा वचस्तस्य रावणस्य दुरात्मन:।
उवाच परमक्रुद्धा सीता वचनमुत्तमम्॥७०॥
“Highly incensed to hear this request

of that evil-minded Ravana, Sita made the
following excellent reply : (70)

राक्षसाधम रामस्य भार्याममिततेजस:।

इक्ष्वाकुवंशनाथस्य स्नुषां दशरथस्य च॥७१॥
अवाच्यं वदतो fret wat न पतिता तव।

किंस्विद्वीर्य तवानार्य यो at भर्तुरसंनिधौ॥ ७२॥
अपहृत्यागत: पाप तेनादृष्टो महात्मना।
न त्वं रामस्य Age दास्येऽप्यस्य न युज्यसे॥ ७३॥

““How did your tongue not fall off, O vile
ogre, even as you made a proposal which
should not be made to the consort of Sri Rama,
who is endowed with immeasurable strength
and daughter-in-law of Emperor Dasaratha,
the protector of Ikswaku’s line? Of what
account is your valour, O ignoble soul, when
you came away abducting me stealthily, in
the absence of my lord and unperceived by
that exalted soul, O sinful one? You are not
equal in any respect to Sri Rama; nay, you
are not fit even to be his slave. (71—73)

अजेय: सत्यवाक् शूरो रणश्लाघी च राघव:।
जानक्या परुषं वाक्यमेवमुक्तो दशानन:॥७४॥
जज्वाल सहसा कोपाच्चितास्थ sat पावक:।
विव्रत्य नयने क्रूरे मुष्टिमुद्यम्य दक्षिणम्॥७५॥
