* AYODHYAKANDA +

other luminaries assumed a stern aspect.
(11)

नक्षत्राणि Taree ग्रहाश्च गततेजस:।

विशाखाश्च सधूमाश्च नभसि प्रचकाशिरे॥१२॥

The lunar mansions lost their brilliance
and the planets their splendour. Proceeding
on a wrong course they cast a hazy lustre
in the heavens. (12)

कालिकानिलवेगेन महोदधिरिवोत्थित:।
TH at प्रव्रजिते नगरं प्रचचाल तत्॥१३॥

Driven by a blast of wind, a mass of
clouds rose in the sky like a turbulent ocean.
Nay, Sri Rama having departed for the
forest, the city of Ayodhya rocked to and
fro. (13)

दिश: पर्याकुला: सर्वास्तिमिरेणेव teat: |
न ग्रहो नापि नक्षत्रं प्रचकाशे न किंचन॥ १४॥

All the four quarters became obscure
as though enveloped in darkness. No planet
nor any lunar mansion emitted the faintest
(14)

onat ar feet ata atyaadrara: ॥ १५ ॥

All of a sudden all the people of Ayodhya
were reduced to a wretched plight. None
could give his or her mind to food or
recreation. (15)
शोकपर्यायसंतप्तर सततं दीर्घमुच्छ्वसन्।
अयोध्यायां जन: सर्वश्चुक्रोश जगतीपतिम्॥ १६॥

Tormented with recurrence of grief and
sighing heavily all the time, all the people of
Ayodhya cursed the Emperor. (16)

बाष्पपर्याकुलमुखो राजमार्गगतो जन:।
न हृष्टो लभ्यते कश्चित् सर्व: शोकपरायण:॥ १७॥

449

Men walking on the public road had
their face soiled with tears. None was found
merry, all were plunged in grief. (17)

न alfa पवन: शीतो न शशी सौम्यदर्शन:।

न सूर्यस्तपते लोकं Ud पर्याकुलं जगत्॥१८॥
No cool breeze blew nor did the moon

present a placid appearance, nor again did

the sun warm the people with its rays. The
whole world was disturbed in mind. (18)

अनर्थिन: Yat: स्त्रीणां भर्तारो भ्रातरस्तथा।
सर्वे सर्वं परित्यज्य राममेवान्वचिन्तयन्॥१९॥

Sons were indifferent to their mothers,
husbands were of no use to their wives and
brothers had no use for their brothers.
Abandoning everything else, all focussed
their thought on Sri Rama alone. (19)

aq रामस्य सुहृद: wd ते मूढचेतस:।
शोकभारेण चाक्रान्ता: Wet Aa भेजिरे॥ Roll

All those, however, who were friends
of Sri Rama were perplexed in mind and
had no sleep, overwhelmed as they were
with excess of grief. (20)

सनागयोधाश्वगणा AAS च॥ २१॥

Agitated through fear and grief, the city
of Ayodhya, bereft of Sri Rama, the high-
souled prince, was thereupon violently
disturbed—even as the earth alongwith its
mountains rocks to and fro when bereft of
Indra (the destroyer of strongholds)—and
cried with its elephants, warriors and horses.

(21)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्येऽयोध्याकाण्डे
एकचत्वारिंश: सर्ग: Il ४१ ॥

Thus ends Canto Forty-one in the Ayodhyakanda of the glorious Ramayana of Valmiki,
the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

