« KISKINDHAKANDA +

नियम्य कोपं परिपाल्यतां शरत्

क्षमस्व मासांश्चतुरो मया सह।
वसाचलेऽस्मिन् मृगराजसेविते

संवर्तयञ्शत्रुवधे समर्थ: ॥ ४८ ॥

“Restraining your anger, let the autumn

1035

be awaited and bear the delay of four
months in my company. Pray, dwell on this
mountain abounding with lions (lit., the kings
of beasts), passing the interval here, even
though you are capable of destroying the
enemy.” (48)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये किष्किन्धाकाण्डे सप्तविंश: सर्ग: ॥ २७॥

Thus ends Canto Twenty-seven in the Kiskindhakanda of the glorious Ramayana of
Valmiki the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

Canto XXVIII
Even though unable to bear the cool weather during the monsoon, emaciated
as he was due to the agony of his separation from Sita, and chatting
with Laksmana on the unbearability of his said separation from
Sita, Sri Rama describes the rainy season

स तदा वालिनं हत्वा सुग्रीवमभिषिच्य च।
ae माल्यवत: पृष्ठे WH लक्ष्मणमब्रवीत्॥१॥

Having made short work of Vali and
installed Sugriva on the throne of Kiskindha,
and dwelling on the table-land of Mount
Malyavan (Prasravana), Sri Rama now
spoke as follows to Laksmana: (1)
अयं स काल: सम्प्राप्त: समयोऽद्य जलागम:।
सम्पश्य त्वं नभो मेघै: dad frat: ue

“The well-known rainy season which
was mutually fixed upon as an interval during
which no endeavour for the search of Sita
was to be made has duly commenced today.

Perceive you the sky overcast with clouds
resembling mountains in size. (2)

नवमासधृतं गर्भं भास्करस्य गभस्तिभि:।
पीत्वा Ta समुद्राणां द्यौ: Wad रसायनम्॥३॥
“Having sucked up the water of the
oceans through the sun’s rays, the sky is
giving birth to life-giving showers as a foetus

carried in the womb for nine months (viz.,
from October to June). (3)

शझक्यमम्बरमारुह्य मेघसोपानपंक्तिभि: |
कुटजार्जुनमालाभिरलंकर्तुं दिवाकर:॥४॥

“Ascending to the heavens by the
stairway of the clouds, it is possible to
adorn the sun with garlands of Kutaja and
Arjuna flowers so commonly found during
the rainy season. (4)

संध्यारागोत्थितैस्ताम्रैरन्तेष्वपि च पाण्डुभि:।
स्निग्धैरभ्रपटच्छेदैर्बद्धव्रणमिवाम्बरम् ॥ ५ ।।

“The sky appears as though it’s wounds
have been dressed with moisture-laden white
rags of clouds, red in the border, tinged as
they were with the glow of twilight. (5)

मन्दमारुतनि:श्चासं संध्याचन्दनरञ्जितम्।
आपाण्डुजलदं भाति कामातुरमिवाम्बरम्॥६॥
“With the gentle winds for its sighs and
its ashen clouds, which are suggestive of a
pale face, the sky, which is painted with red
sandal-paste in the form of the glow of
twilight, appears love-sick, as it were. (6)

wat घर्मपरिक्लिष्टा नववारिपरिप्लुता।
सीतेव शोकसंतप्ता मही बाष्पं विमुञ्चति॥७॥
