* AYODHYAKANDA +

535

Canto LXV

When the Emperor did not wake up even though roused by means of
panegyrics sung by bards, accompanied by musical instruments played
upon for the same purpose, the ladies of the gynaeceum conclude
by other means that the king is dead; and soon after commences
the loud wail of Kausalya, Sumitra and other queens

अथ wet व्यतीतायां प्रातरेवापरेऽहनि।
वन्दिन: पर्युपातिष्ठंस्तत्पार्थिवनिवेशनम्॥ १ ॥
Get: परमसंस्कारा मागधाश्चोत्तमश्रुता:।
गायका: श्रुतिशीलाश्च निगदन्त: पृथक्पृथक्॥ २॥

When the night had ended, there arrived
forthwith at the residence of the aforesaid
Emperor early next morning panegyrists,
highly cultured minstrels and bards whose
information (about genealogical tables etc..,)
was of a superior kind, as well as singers
capable of distinguishing the difference in
the tones of a Vina etc., and singing
according to their different styles. (1-2)
राजानं Wad तेषामुदात्ताभिहिताशिषाम्।
प्रासादाभोगविस्तीर्ण: स्तुतिशब्दो ह्यवर्तत॥ ३॥

The sound of the praises uttered by
the aforesaid bards and others, who were
glorifying the king and by whom benedictions
were pronounced in a loud voice, actually
pervaded the interior of the palaces in the
form of echo. (3)

While the aforesaid minstrels for their
part were engaged in uttering praises, those
who sang with the clapping of hands
thereupon clapped their hands recounting
the marvellous feats of the rulers of Ayodhya.

(4)
तेन शब्देन विहगा: प्रतिबुद्धाश्च सस्वनु:।
VSM: पञ्जरस्थाश्च A राजकुलगोचरा:॥ ५॥

Nay, roused by that sound of clapping,
birds appearing in the royal palace and

perched on the boughs of trees as well as
confined in a cage uttered forth their notes.
(5)

व्याहृता:पुण्यशब्दाश्च वीणानां चापि नि:स्वना: ।
आशीर्गेयं च गाथानां पूरयामास AVA तत्॥६॥
The holy words uttered by the
Brahmanas and parrots etc., as well as the
notes of Vina and the benedictory portion,
set to music, of epic verses composed by
Brahmanas in praise of the king filled that
palace. (6)

तत: शुचिसमाचारा: पर्युपस्थानकोविदा:।
स्त्रीवर्षवरभूयिष्ठा उपतस्थुर्यथापुरा ।॥ ७॥

Then attendants, mostly consisting of
women and eunuchs, of unimpeachable
conduct and proficient in service, stood ready
to serve as usual. (7)

हरिचन्दनसम्पृक्तमुदकं काञ्चनैर्घटै:।
आनिन्यु: स्नानशिक्षाज्ञा यथाकालं यथाविधि॥ ८ ॥

Servants who knew how to conduct
the bath of Emperors brought at the
appropriate hour and in the prescribed
manner water scented with sandal-paste in
pitchers of gold. (8)

मङ्गलालम्भनीयानि प्राशनीयान्युपस्करान्।
उपानिन्युस्तथा पुण्या: कुमारीबहुला: fers: ie

Virtuous women, largely consisting of
virgins, whose very sight is believed to
be propitious, likewise brought cows etc.,
whose very touch is considered to be
auspicious, articles worth sipping the first
thing viz., the water of the holy Ganga,
water in which the feet of a deity have been
