« KISKINDHAKANDA +

ततोऽथ तं वालिनमग्रूयपौरुषं
प्रकाशमिक्ष्वाकुवरेषुणा हतम्।
प्रदीप्य दीप्ताग्निसमौजसं तदा
सलक्ष्मणं राममुपेयिवान् हरि: Way
Having cremated at that moment
according to the scriptural ordinance the
aforesaid Vali of highest virility, who was

1027

universally noted and had been got killed
with the arrow of Sri Rama (the foremost of
Ikswakus), Sugriva, the monkey-chief, then
forthwith sought the presence of Sri Rama,
who was present there with Laksmana and
whose splendour resembled that of a blazing
fire. (54)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये किष्किन्धाकाण्डे पञ्चविंश: सर्ग: ॥ २५ ॥

Thus ends Canto Twenty-five in the Kiskindhakanda of the glorious Ramayana of
Valmiki, the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

Canto XXVI

Requested by Hanuman to visit Kiskindha, $11 Rama declines to do so on the
ground of his having been prohibited by his father to enter the limits of
a village or town and, directing that Sugriva may be installed on the
throne of Kiskindha and Angada may assume the office of
Prince Regent, he himself takes a vow to live in a cave till
the end of the monsoon and leaves instructions to
initiate a search for Sita after the monsoon

Surrounding Sugriva, who was
tormented with grief and stood in wet clothes,
having just finished his bath after cremation,
those at the top of the Vanara army then
stood near him. (1)

अभिगम्य महाबाहुं राममक्लिष्टकारिणम्।
स्थिता: प्राञ्लय: सर्वे पितामहमिवर्षय:॥ २॥
Approaching the mighty-armed Sr
Rama, who was unwearied in action, all
stood with joined palms as so many Rsis
by the side of Brahma, the father of the
Prajapatis, the progenitors of the universe.

(2)
aa: काञ्चनशैलाभस्तरुणार्कनिभानन: |
अब्रवीत् प्राञ्जलिर्वाक्यं हनूमान् मारुतात्मज:॥ 3

Thereupon Hanuman, son of the wind-

god, who looked like Sumeru (the golden
mountain), and whose countenance shone
like the rising sun, submitted as follows with
joined palms : (3)
भवत्प्रसादात् काकुत्स्थ पितृपैतामहं महत्।
वानराणां सुदंष्द्राणां सम्पन्नबलशालिनाम्॥४॥
भवता समनुज्ञात: प्रविश्य नगरं शुभम्॥५॥
संविधास्यति कार्याणि सर्वाणि ससुहृद्गण:।
स्नातोऽयं विविधैर्गन्थैरौषधैश्च यथाविधि॥ ६॥
अर्चयिष्यति माल्यैश्च wis cat विशेषत:।
sa गिरिगुहां रम्यामभिगन्तुं त्वमर्हसि॥७॥
“By your grace, O scion of Kakutstha,
has this great ancestral kingdom which was
most difficult to acquire, of the high-minded
monkeys endowed with sharp teeth and

rich in consummate strength, been acquired
by Sugriva, O lord! Entering in state the
