642

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA +

Canto LXXX

Indrajit puts up a formidable fight under orders of Ravana and
Sit Rama and Laksmana discuss the ways and
means of putting an end to him

रोषेण महताविष्टो दन्तान् कटकटाय्य च॥१॥
कुपितश्च तदा तत्र किं कार्यमिति चिन्तयन्।
आदिदेशाथ संक्रुद्धो रणायेन्द्रजितं सुतम्॥ २॥
Possessed with violent anger, on
hearing of Makaraksa having been killed,
and grinding his teeth in rage, reflecting as
to what should be done on that occasion
and in that situation, Ravana, who had
(always) been victorious in war, and was
filled with fury, forthwith enjoined in the
following words his eldest son, Indrajit, to
take the field: (1-2)

we dt महावीर्यौ wat रामलक्ष्मणौ।
अदृश्यो दृश्यमानो वा सर्वथा त्वं बलाधिक: ॥ ३॥

“Remaining invisible or visible (as you
please), make short work, O heroic prince,
of the two brothers, Rama and Laksmana,
who are endowed with extraordinary
prowess; for you are in every way superior
to them in might. (3)
त्वमप्रतिमकर्माणमिन्द्रं जयसि संयुगे।
fe पुनर्मानुषौ qeat न वधिष्यसि संयुगे॥४॥

“You have conquered in combat even
Indra, the ruler of gods, of incomparable
deeds. Will you not then be able to kill two
mortals on seeing them on the battlefield?”

(4)
तथोक्तो राक्षसेन्द्रेण प्रतिगृह्य पितुर्वच:।
यज्ञभूमौ स विधिवत् पावकं जुहुवेन्द्रजित्॥५॥

Bowing to the command of his father
when enjoined as aforesaid by Ravana, the

ruler of ogres, the said Indrajit poured oblations
into the sacred fire with due ceremony on
the sacrificial ground. (5)
जुह्वतश्चापि तत्राग्निं रक्तोष्णीषधरा: fea: |
आजग्मुस्तत्र सम्भ्रान्ता राक्षस्यो यत्र रावणि:। ६॥
Even as he was pouring oblations into
the sacred fire, ogresses working as female
attendants at the sacrifice and carrying red
turbans (for the use of the priests), nay,
seized with a flurry, arrived on the spot
where the son of Ravana was. (6)

शस्त्राणि शरपत्राणि समिधोऽथ बिभीतका:।
लोहितानि च वासांसि aa areata तथा॥७॥

Weapons such as a lance served as
blades of Sara grass for being spread around
the sacrificial fire, chips of wood of the
Bibhitaka tree (a species of myrobalan tree)
which serve as wooden sticks to feed the
sacrificial fire, in its place red robes and iron
ladles were used in that sacrifice. (7)
सर्वतोऽग्निं समास्तीर्य yeaa: सतोमरै:।
छागस्य सर्वकृष्णस्य Wi We जीवत:॥८॥

Having strewn the ground on all sides
of the fire with other weapons accompanied
by lances, the ogre seized hold with reeds
of the neck of a live goat entirely black and
consigned it to the fire. (8)

सकृद्धोमसमिद्धस्य विधूमस्य महाचिष:।
बभूवुस्तानि लिङ्गानि fara दर्शयन्ति च॥९॥

Such omens as betokened triumph,
appeared in the smokeless fire which burst
into mighty flames when it was fully aroused
by that single offering. (9)
