808

with lotuses of gold; which was hung with
networks of tiny bells and contained eye-
holes set with pearls and was surrounded
on all sides with rows of bells giving forth a
melodious sound. (23—26)
तं मेरुशिखराकारं निर्मितं विश्वकर्मणा।
र्व्य PATA: ॥। २७ ॥
स्फटिकचित्राङ्गैर्वैदूर्यैश्च वरासनै:।
महार्हास्तरणोग्रेतैरूपपन महाधनै: ।। २८ ॥
निवेदयित्वा रामाय तस्थौ aa विभीषण:॥ २९॥
Announcing to Sri Rama that the said
aerial car—which resembled a summit of
Mount Meru (the golden mountain) and was
the workmanship of Viswakarma (the architect
of gods); which was graced with stately
palaces decked with pearls and silver and

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA +

provided with pavements in-laid with crystal
and furnished with excellent and costly seats
of cat’s-eye gems upholstered with highly
valuable coverings; and which could not be
assailed and was swift as thought—was
ready, Vibhisana stood there awaiting Sri
Rama’s further command. (27—29)
ad yam कामगमं विमान-
मुपस्थितं भूधरसंनिकाशम्।
दृष्टवा तदा विस्मयमाजगाम
राम: ससौमित्रिरुदारसत्त्व: | ३०॥
The lofty-minded Sri Rama with
Laksmana (son of Sumitra) felt astonished to
see the aforesaid aerial car, Puspaka, which
could go everywhere at will and closely
resembled a mountain, present on that
occasion. (30)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये FERS एकविंशत्यधिकशततम: सर्ग: ॥ १२१ ॥
Thus ends Canto One hundred and twenty-one in the Yuddhakanda of the glorious
Ramayana of Valmiki, the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

Canto CXxXIl

In obedience to the command of Sri Rama, Vibhisana heaps special
honours on the monkeys and taking Sugriva, Vibhisana
and other monkeys with them, Sri Rama, Sita
and Laksmana start on their aerial
journey by Puspaka

उपस्थितं तु तं कृत्वा पुष्पकं पुष्पभूषितम्।
stage स्थितो राममित्युवाच विभीषण:॥ १॥
Having placed at hand the said aerial
car, Puspaka, which was adorned with
flowers, Vibhisana for his part, standing not
very far, submitted as follows to Sri Rama.
(1)

ad बद्धाञ्जलिपुटो विनीतो waravar: |
अब्रवीत् त्वरयोपेत: किं करोमीति राघवम्॥ २॥

Full of reverence, the said ruler of
ogres for his part humbly said with joined
palms to Sri Rama (a scion of Raghu),
“What shall | do next?” (2)

तमब्रवीन्महातेजा लक्ष्मणस्योपश्वृण्वत: |
विमृश्य राघवो वाक्यमिदं स्नेहपुरस्कृतम्॥३॥
After some deliberation, Sri Rama (a

scion of Raghu), who was endowed with
extraordinary energy, made the following
