716

shone like the residence of Lord Brahma
resounding with the chanting to Vedic hymns.

(2—8)
ब्रह्मविद्धिर्महाभागैर्ब्रह्मणैरुपशोभितम् ।
Aq दृष्टवा राघव: श्रीमांस्तापसाश्रममण्डलम्॥ ९॥
अभ्यगच्छन्महातेजा विज्यं कृत्वा महद् धनु:।
दिव्यज्ञानोपपन्नास्ते रामं geal महर्षय:॥१०॥
अभिजग्मुस्तदा viet वैदेहीं च यशस्विनीम्।

ते तु सोममिवोद्यन्तं gear वै धर्मचारिणम्॥ ११॥
लक्ष्मणं चैव Gea तु वैदेहीं च यशस्विनीम्।

मङ्गलानि प्रयुञ्जाना: प्रत्यगृह्णन् दृढव्रता:॥१२॥
ददृशुर्विस्मिताकारा रामस्य वनवासिन:॥१३॥
Seeing that group of hermitages of
sages, adorned with highly blessed
Brahmanas, knowers of Brahma, the glorious
and highly lustrous Rama removed the string
of his great bow and entered into the
hermitages. Then, beholding Rama, those
great sages possessed of divine knowledge
approached him and the renowned Vaidehi
with pleasure. They saw him given to the
practice of virtue and charming like the
rising moon and also Laksmana and Vaidehi
of renown and, being firm observers of
vows, welcomed them performing auspicious
rites. The  forest-dwellers saw _ with
amazement the handsome build of the body,
grandeur, tenderness and ascetic dress of
Rama. (9—13)
वैदेहीं लक्ष्मणं रामं नेत्रैरनिमिषैरिव।
आश्चर्यभूतान् ee: सर्वे ते वनवासिन:॥१४॥
All those forest dwellers saw Vaidehi,
the princess of Videha country, Laksmana
and Rama as a wonder with eyes as though
steady. (14)
अत्रैनं fe महाभागा: सर्वभूतहिते रता:।
अतिथिं पर्णशालायां राघवं संन्यवेशयन्॥१७५॥
Here, indeed, the highly fortunate sages,
taking delight in the good of all beings,

lodged the scion of Raghu as a guest in a
hut made of leaves. (15)

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

ततो रामस्य सत्कृत्य विधिना पावकोपमा:।
आजहुस्तै महाभागा: सलिलं धर्मचारिण:॥ १६॥

Then, honouring Rama with traditional
rites, the fire-like righteous sages of great
fortune offered water. (16)

मङ्गलानि प्रयुञ्जाना Yet परमया युता:।
मूलं पुष्पं wet सर्वमाश्रमं च महात्मन:॥१७॥
निवेदयित्वा धर्मज्ञास्ते तु प्राञ्जलयोऽब्रुवन्।
धर्मपालो जनस्यास्य शरण्यश्च महायशा:॥१८॥
पूजनीयश्च मान्यश्च राजा दण्डधरो We:
इन्द्रस्यैव चतुर्भाग: प्रजा waft राघव॥१९॥

Performing auspicious rites with great
delight the magnanimous sages offered roots,
flowers, fruits and even the whole hermitage
and those knowers of the righteous customs,
with joined palms, said, “The king being the
protector of righteousness and also the resort
for these people, famous, revered and
respectable holder of the staff of justice,
worshipful and the fourth part of Indra himself,
protects the subjects, O scion of Raghu !

(17—19)

राजा तस्माद् वरान् भोगान् रम्यान् भुङ्क्ते नमस्कृत: |
a aa भवता रक्ष्या भवद्विषयवासिन:।
नगरस्थो वनस्थो वा त्वं नो राजा जनेश्वर:।॥ २०॥

“It is hence that the king, who is saluted
by all, enjoys the foremost, delightful
pleasures. We being the residents of your
kingdom deserve protection by you. Whether
staying in the city or in the forest, you, the
lord of the people, are our king. (20)
न्यस्तदण्डा वयं राजञ्जितक्रोधा जितेन्द्रिया:।
रक्षणीयास्त्वया श्वद् गर्भभूतास्तपोधना:॥ २१॥

“Having given up punishment, controlled
anger and conquered the senses and having
the wealth of asceticism, we should always

be protected by you as a foetus by the
mother.” (21)

`एवमुक्त्वा फलैर्मूलै: पुष्पैरन्यैश्च राघवम्।
वन्यैश्च विविधाहारै: सलक्ष्मणमपूजयन्॥२२॥
Thus speaking, they entertained the
