1098

सर्वमेतत् समालोक्य यच्चान्यदपि दृश्यते।
wht विदित्वा aden: संनिवर्तितुमर्हथ॥४६॥
“Ransacking all this area and whatever
else can be seen, and finding out the
whereabouts of Sita (a princess of the Videha
territory), you ought duly to retrace your
steps. (46)
ag मासान्निवृत्तोऽग्रे ger सीतेति वक्ष्यति।
मत्तुल्यविभवो भोगै: ge a विहरिष्यति॥४७॥

“He who having returned before a month
will say that Sita has been discovered will
pass his time happily in luxuries, enjoying a
prosperity equal to mine. (47)
aa: प्रियतरो नास्ति मम प्राणाद् विशेषत:।
कृतापराधो बहुशो मम बन्धुर्भविष्यति॥४८॥

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

“None will be dearer to me than he;
nay, he will be dearer to me than life. Even
though he may have perpetrated many an
offence, he will be my friend. (48)

अमितबलपराक्रमा भवन्तो
विपुलगुणेषु कुलेषु च प्रसूता:।
मनुजपतिसुतां यथा लभध्वं
तदधिगुणं पुरुषार्थमारभध्वम्॥४९॥
“Endowed as you~ are with
immeasurable strength and prowess and
born in families adorned with ample virtues,
initiate your valuable effort in that direction

in such a way that you may find out Sita
(daughter of a ruler of men).” (49)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये किष्किन्धाकाण्डे एकचत्वारिंश: सर्ग: ॥ ४१ ॥
Thus ends Canto Forty-one in the Kiskindhakanda of the glorious Ramayana of
Valmiki, the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

Canto XLII

Fixing a time-limit of one month, Sugriva dispatches Susena and others to
conduct a search for Sita in the western quarter

अथ प्रस्थाप्य स हरीन् सुग्रीवो दक्षिणां दिशम्।
अब्रवीन्मेघसंकाशं सुषेणं नाम वानरम्॥१॥
ताराया: पितरं राजा ast भीमविक्रमम्।
अब्रवीत् प्राञ्जलिर्वाक्यमभिगम्य Worst च॥ २॥

Having sent away monkeys to the
southern quarter, and approaching and
respectfully bowing down to a monkey,
Susena by name, Tara’s father, who looked
like a cloud and was possessed of terrific
prowess, King Sugriva spoke to his father-
in-law with folded hands as follows: (1-2)
महर्षिपुत्रं मारीचमर्चिष्मन्तं महाकपिम्।
qt कपिबरै:२ शूरैर्महेन्द्रसदृशद्युतिम्॥ ३॥
वुद्धिविक्रमसम्पन वैनतेयसमद्युतिम्।
मरीचिपुत्रान् मारीचानर्चिर्माल्यान् महाबलान्॥४॥
ऋषिपुत्रांश्च aM सर्वान् प्रतीचीमादिशद दिशम्।
द्वाभ्यां शतसहस्राभ्यां HUT कपिसत्तमा:॥ ५॥

सुषेणप्रमुखा यूयं वैदेहीं परिमार्गथ।
सौराष्टान् सहबाह्लीकांश्चन्द्रचित्रांस्तथैव च॥६॥
स्फीताञ्जनपदान् रम्यान् विपुलानि पुराणि च।
पुंनागगहनं कुक्षिं बकुलोद्दालकाकुलम्॥७॥
तथा केतकषण्डांश्च मार्गध्वं हरिपुङ्खवा:।
प्रत्यक्स्रोतोवहाश्चैव नद्य: शीतजला: शिवा:॥८॥
तापसानामरण्यानि कान्तारगिरयश्च ये।
तत्र स्थलीर्मरुप्राया अत्युच्चशिशिरा: शिला:॥ ९॥
He also spoke to the great monkey
Arcisman, son of an eminent sage Marici by
name and, therefore, nicknamed Marica (son
of Marici)—who was surrounded by gallant
monkey chiefs, was possessed of an
effulgence resembling that of the mighty
Indra, was richly endowed with intelligence
and prowess and was clothed with a
splendour which equalled that of Garuda
