* AYODHYAKANDA +

७
ad
a

367

सर्ग:

Canto XX

Even as Sri Rama issued forth from the palace of Queen Kaikeyi, the inmates
of the gynaeceum burst into a piteous wail, extolling the prince’s virtues.
Mother Kausalya embraces and pronounces her benedictions on Sri
Rama as the latter approaches her and falls at her feet. On being
apprised of the circumstances that had brought him there, she
falls to the ground overwhelmed with grief, and weeps
bitterly expressing her deep sorrow

तस्मिंस्तु पुरुषव्याघ्रे निष्क्रामति कृताञ्जलौ।
आर्तशब्दो महान् जज्ञे स्त्रीणामन्त:पुरे तदा॥१॥

The moment Sri Rama, a veritable
tiger among men, issued forth from the
gynaeceum, with joined palms, a loud and
pathetic lament arose from the mouth of the
ladies of the gynaeceum: (1)

कृत्येष्वचोदित: fiat सर्वस्यान्त:पुरस्य च।
गतिश्च शरणं चासीत् स रामोऽद्य प्रवत्स्यति॥ २॥

“The same Sri Rama who used to
attend to all the affairs of the gynaeceum
unenjoined by his father and who was our
resort and protector till now will go into exile
today ! (2)

कौसल्यायां यथा युक्तो जनन्यां add सदा।
wa वर्ततेऽस्मासु जन्मप्रभृति राघव:॥ ३॥

“Sri Rama, a scion of Raghu, has since
his very birth ever been attentive to us
precisely to the same degree as he is to his
mother, Kausalya. (3)

न क्रुध्यत्यभिशप्तोऽपि क्रोधनीयानि वर्जयन्।
क्रुद्धान् प्रसादयन् सर्वान् स इतोऽद्य प्रवत्स्यति॥ ४॥

“He who did not feel angry even though
spoken harshly to, avoided words provoking
anger in others and appeased all who were
angry with him, will go into exile from this
place today ! (4)

अबुद्धिर्बत नो राजा जीवलोकं चरत्ययम्।
यो गतिं सर्वभूतानां परित्यजति राघवम्॥५॥

“Alas ! This foolish king of ours, who is

forgoing Sri Rama, the support of all living
beings, is bringing destruction to the entire
living creation.” (5)

इति wat महिष्यस्ता विवत्सा sa धेनव:।
पतिमाचुक्रुशुश्चापि सस्वनं चापि चुक्रुशु:॥६॥

In this way all those queens not only
decried their husband but also wailed loudly
like cows bereft of their calves. (6)

agenda: श्रुत्वा व्यालीयतासने॥७॥
Hearing the frightful and piteous wail in
the gynaeceum, the king, who was sore
stricken with grief over the impending
separation from his eldest son, actually hid
himself under the bed-sheets in the couch
for sheer shame and woe. (7)
रामस्तु भृशमायस्तो नि:श्वसन्निव Hat: |
जगाम सहितो भ्रात्रा मातुरन्त:पुरं वशी॥८॥
Deeply afflicted to find his near and dear
ones plunged in grief, Sri Rama, who was
noted for his self-control, proceeded, for his
part, to his mother’s apartments alongwith
his younger brother, Laksmana, drawing a
deep audible breath like an elephant. (8)
सोऽपश्यत् Get at qe परमपूजितम्।
उपविष्टं गृहद्वारि तिष्ठतश्चापरान् बहून्॥९॥
He saw seated at the entrance of the
section of the gynaeceum, reserved for
Kausalya, the aged and most respected
chief of porters and many other porters
standing. (9)
