1042

सृष्ट: शरोऽयं काकुत्स्थ यदा Wa महार्णवे।
स्वयंभूरजितो दिव्यो यं नापश्यन् सुरासुरा:॥ Ro Il
‘This arrow was created O scion of
Kakutstha, when the self-born unconquerable
God, Visnu, was reclining in the great ocean,
whom the gods and the demons could not
see. (20)

अदृश्य: सर्वभूतानां cara fe शरोत्तम:।
सृष्ट: क्रोधाभिभूतेन विनाशार्थं दुरात्मनो:॥ २१॥
मधुकैटभयोर्वीर विघाते सर्वरक्षसाम्।
Sea लोकांस्त्रींस्तौ चानेन हतौ afer २२॥
at हत्वा जनभोगार्थे est तु मधुं तथा।
अनेन शरमुख्येन ततो लोकांश्चकार स:॥ २३॥
‘Therefore, this one, the best among
arrows, is invisible to all beings, this was
created by angry Visnu, desirous of the
destruction of the two wicked ones, Madhu
and Kaitabha, and creation of the three
worlds after the two and the other Raksasas
were killed with this arrow. (21—23)
नायं मया शर: Ga रावणस्य वधार्थिना।
मुक्त: शत्रुघ्न भूतानां महान् ह्रासो भवेदिति॥ २४॥
‘This arrow was not shot by me formerly
even to kill Ravana (the king of the
Raksasas), O Satrughna, for that would
have caused the great destruction of other
beings too. (24)
यच्च तस्य महच्छूलं त्र्यम्बकेण महात्मना।
दत्तं शत्रुविनाशाय मधोरायुधमुत्तमम्॥ २५॥
ad, संनिक्षिप्य भवने पूज्यमानं पुन: पुन:।
दिश: Gat: समासाद्य प्राप्नोत्याहारमुत्तमम्॥ २६॥
‘The great trident, the best among

weapons, that was given to Madhu by the
mighty three-eyed Lord Siva for the purpose

« VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

of destroying the foes; placing that honourable
weapon at home, Lavana proceeding to all
quarters repeatedly acquires the best of his
food. (25-26)

यदा तु युद्धमाकाङ्क्षन् कश्चिदेनं समाह्वयेत्।

तदा Vet गृहीत्वा तु भस्म रक्ष: करोति feu २७॥
‘Whenever, desirous of struggle one

per chance challanges him, then the

Raksasa, Lavana, taking hold of this trident

reduces him indeed to ashes. (27)

a त्वं पुरुषशार्दूल तमायुधविनाकृतम्।
अप्रविष्टं पुरं ud git तिष्ठ vara ue
‘So you, O lion among’ men,
accompanied with the weapon (arrow), stay
at the eastern gate, and fight with him,
dispossessed of the weapon (trident) and
unable to enter the city. (28)

अप्रविष्टं च भवनं युद्धाय पुरुषर्षभ।
आह्वयेथा महाबाहो ततो हन्तासि राक्षसम्॥२९॥
‘O one of long arms ! Challenge him to

fight before he has entered his residence;
then you shall kill the Raksasa. (29)

अन्यथा क्रियमाणे तु ह्यवध्य: स भविष्यति।
ae waa gpd ate विनाशमुपयास्यति॥ ३०॥
‘If it is not so done, then, indeed, he
will be unassailable, but if this is so done,
then, O brave one, Lavana will be destroyed.
(30)

Wad ते सर्वमाख्यातं शूलस्य च विपर्यय:।
श्रीमत: शितिकण्ठस्य pet fe दुरतिक्रमम्॥ ३१॥
‘Thus, all has been narrated to you,
and also the warding off of the trident, the

doings of the blue-throated Siva are indeed
difficult to overcome.’ (31)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये उत्तरकाण्डे त्रिषष्टितम: AW: ॥ ६३ ॥

Thus ends Canto Sixty-three in the Uttarakanda of the glorious Ramayana of Valmiki,
the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

