* BALAKANDA +

“Thereupon the gods as well as the
demons all proceeded once more to churn
the ocean of milk, O delighter of the Raghus,
and immediately Mount Mandara, the
foremost of mountains, that served as their
churning-rod, sank into Patala, the lowest of
the subterranean regions. (27)

wait देवा: सगन्धर्वास्तुष्टुवुर्मधुसूदनम्।
त्वं गति: सर्वभूतानां विशेषेण दिवौकसाम्॥ २८ ॥

“Then the gods including the Gandharvas
extolled as follows Lord Visnu, the Destroyer
of the demon Madhu : ‘You are the resort of
all created beings, particularly of gods, the
denizens of heaven. (28)

पालयास्मान् महाबाहो गिरिमुद्धर्तुमर्हसि।
इति seat हृषीकेश: कामठं रूपमास्थित:॥ २९॥
पर्वतं Usd: कृत्वा rea तत्रोदधौ हरि:।
पर्वताग्रं तु लोकात्मा हस्तेनाक्रम्य केशव:॥ ३०॥
देवानां मध्यत: स्थित्वा ममन्थ पुरुषोत्तम:।
अथ वर्षसहस्रेण आयुर्वेदमय: पुमान्॥ ३१॥
उदतिष्ठत् सुधर्मात्मा सदण्ड: सकमण्डलु:।
पूर्वं धन्वन्तरिर्नाम अप्सराश्च सुवर्चस:॥३२॥

‘Protect us, O mighty-armed one, and
be pleased to lift up the mountain from the
depths of Patala.’ Hearing this, Lord Visnu,
the Ruler of the senses of all, assumed the
form of the divine Tortoise and, supporting
the mountain on His back, lay down at the
bottom of that ocean. Nay, holding fast with
one hand the top of the mountain, and
taking up His position in the midst of the
gods, Lord Sri Hari (the Ruler even of
Brahma and Lord Siva), the Supreme Person
and the Soul of the universe, took part in
the churning. Then after a thousand years
emerged with a staff and a Kamandalu in
hand first of all a male personage,
Dhanvantari by name, the very embodiment
of Ayurveda, the science of medicine, whose
mind was given to extreme piety and then a
bevy of celestial nymphs possessed of great
splendour. (29—32)

197

अप्सु निर्मथनादेव रसात् तस्माद् वरस्त्रिय:।
उत्पेतुर्मनुजश्रेष्ठ तस्मादप्सरसोऽभवन्॥ ३३॥
“From the very cream (रस) produced
as a result of that famous churning done in
the water (or ‘3’ in the form of milk of that
ocean) emerged those excellent damsels,
O Jewel among men; therefore they became
known as the Apsaras. (33)

षष्टि: कोट्योऽभवंस्तासामप्सराणां सुवर्चसाम्।
असंख्येयास्तु काकुत्स्थ यास्तासां परिचारिका: ।। ३४॥

“Six hundred million was the number of
those exceptionally effulgent nymphs; while
those who served as their female attendants
were innumerable, O scion of Kakutstha !

(34)
न ता: स्म प्रतिगृह्णन्ति ad ते देवदानवा:।
अप्रतिग्रहणादेव ता A साधारणा: स्मृता:॥ ३५॥

“All those gods and demons refused to

accept them as wife. Due to their non-

acceptance alone they came to be known
as public women. (35)

वरुणस्य dd: कन्या वारुणी रघुनन्दन।
उत्पपात महाभागा मार्गमाणा परिग्रहम्॥ ३६॥

“Then emerged from the ocean of
milk, O scion of Raghu, the highly blessed
Varuni (the deity presiding over spirituous
liquor), a daughter of Varuna (the god
presiding over the waters), seeking for a
husband. (36)

fad: Gat न at wa जगृहुर्वरुणात्मजाम्।
अदितेस्तु सुता ak जगृहुस्तामनिन्दिताम्॥ ३७॥

“The demons (sons of Diti), O Rama,
did not take to wife the said Varuni; but the
gods, the sons of Aditi, O valiant one,
accepted her, irreproachable as she was.
(37)

असुरास्तेन दैतेया: सुरास्तेनादिते: सुता:।
हृष्टा: प्रमुदिताश्चासन् वारुणीग्रहणात् सुरा:॥ ३८ ॥
“For that reason the sons of Diti came

to be known as Asuras (those who did not
accept Sura or wine), while for the same
