* AYODHYAKANDA +

कथं प्रकृतिसम्पन्ना राजपुत्री तथागुणा।
ब्रूयात् सा प्राकृतेव tat मत्पीड्यं भर्तृसंनिधौ।। १९॥

“How else could she, a princess of
gentle disposition and possessing such rare
qualities of head and heart utter like an
uncouth woman in the presence of her
husband words intended to torment me?(19)

यदचिन्त्यं तु aa da भूतेष्वपि न हन्यते।
व्यक्तं मयि च तस्यां च पतितो fe विपर्यय: ॥ २०॥

“That which cannot be foreseen is surely
a decree of Providence and it cannot be set
aside by any among created beings.
Evidently, therefore, it is by the will of
Providence that the unexpected has befallen
me as well as her. (20)

कश्च दैवेन सौमित्रे योद्धुमुत्सहते पुमान्।

यस्य नु ग्रहणं किंचित् कर्मणोऽन्यन्न दृश्यते॥ २१॥
“Again, what man can dare contend, O

son of Sumitra, with destiny, of which no

indication can be found other than the

consequence of an act? (21)

सुखदु:खे भयक्रोधौ लाभालाभौ भवाभवौ।

यस्य किंचित् तथाभूतं ननु दैवस्य कर्म तत्॥ २२॥
“Joy and sorrow, fear and anger, gain

and loss, birth and death and whatever

similar experience comes to a particular

individual, that is unquestionably the work
of Providence. (22)

ऋषयोऽप्युग्रतपसो दैवेनाभिप्रचोदिता: |
उत्सृज्य नियमांस्तीव्रान् भ्रश्यन्ते काममन्युभि: ।। २३ ॥

“Strongly impelled by destiny, even
sages practising severe austerities are led
astray by concupiscence and anger etc.,
abandoning their strict observance. (23)
असंकल्पितमेवेह यदकस्मात् vad
निवर्त्यरब्धमारम्भैर्ननु da कर्म तत्॥ २४॥

“Setting aside an undertaking already
commenced with the help of requisite
materials, that which’ takes _ place
unexpectedly without any ostensible cause,
is undoubtedly the doing of Providence.(24)

381

Uda तत्त्वया बुद्ध्या संस्तभ्यात्मानमात्मना।
व्याहतेऽप्यभिषेके मे परितापो न विद्यते॥ eeu

“In spite of my installation having been
interrupted, no agony is experienced by me,
who have fully steadied my mind by recourse
to this true wisdom. (25)

तस्मादपरिताप: संस्त्वमप्यनुविधाय माम्।
प्रतिसंहारय क्षिप्रमाभिषेचनिकों क्रियाम्॥ २६॥
“Therefore, rid of agony and following my

line of thought, cause you the proceedings of
installation to be stopped at once. (26)

ura घटै: सर्वैरभिषेचनसम्भृतै:।
मम लक्ष्मण तापस्ये व्रतस्नानं भविष्यति॥ २७॥

“With all these jars containing sacred
waters, brought together for my consecration,
O Laksmana, will be accomplished by my
bath at the inauguration of my vow of
asceticism. (27)
अथवा fe मयैतेन राज्यद्रव्यमयेन a
sgt मे स्वयं तोयं व्रतादेशं करिष्यति॥ eu

“Or, what have | to do in reality with
this water accompanied in abundance by
auspicious articles collected for the
installation? Water drawn by me personally
will serve to inaugurate my vow of asceticism.

(28)
मा च लक्ष्मण संतापं कार्षीर्लक्ष्म्या विपर्यये।
राज्यं वा वनवासो वा वनवासो महोदय:॥ २९॥

“Moreover, O Laksmana, do not give
way to remorse over the loss of fortune. To
me it matters little whether sovereignty falls
to my lot or exile, the latter being of greater
consequence (in that it will be free from
worries and favourable for asceticism and
will afford me an opportunity to redeem
father’s pledge given to Kaikeyi). (29)
न लक्ष्मणास्मिन् मम राज्यविघ्ने

माता यवीयस्यभिशाङ्कितव्या।
दैवाभिपन्ना न पिता कथंचि-
ज्जानासि दैवं fe तथाप्रभावम्॥ ३०॥

“Our youngest mother, Kaikeyi, ought
