# YUDDHAKANDA #

who having no knowledge of the scriptures,
are equally ignorant of the science of wealth
and seek immense wealth ought not to be
followed. (15)
अहितं च हिताकारं धाष्ट्याज्जल्पन्ति ये नरा: ।
अवश्यं मन्त्रबाह्यास्ते कर्तव्या: कृत्यदूषका: ll १६ ॥
“Men who tender unwholesome advice
in a salutary garb through sheer impudence
should be excluded from deliberation as

they mar the very purpose of the deliberation.
(16)

विनाशयन्तो भर्तारं सहिता: शत्रुभिर्बुधै:।
विपरीतानि कृत्यानि कारयन्तीह मन्त्रिण:॥ १७॥
“Getting united with shrewd enemies,
evil-minded counsellors in this world prevail
upon their master to undertake wrong actions
in order to bring him to ruin. (17)

तान् भर्ता मित्रसंकाशानमित्रान् मन्त्रनिर्णये।
व्यवहारेण जानीयात् सचिवानुपसंहितान्॥ १८॥

“A ruler should make out the reality of
those ministers who have been won over
by the enemy to their side through bribe
etc., and as such are enemies, though
appearing as friends, through their actual
behaviour when a final decision is being
taken after deliberation. (18)

चपलस्येह कृत्यानि सहसानुप्रधावत:।
छिद्रमन्ये प्रपद्यन्ते क्रौञ्चस्य खमिव द्विजा:॥१९॥

“Aliens find out the weakness of a ruler
who is (easily) led away by false appearances
and rushes headlong into actions, even as
birds discover the hole made by the lance
of Skanda, the Commander-in-Chief of the
gods, in the Kraufca mountain. (19)

यो fe शत्रुमवज्ञाय आत्मानं नाभिरक्षति।
अवाप्नोति हि सोऽनर्थान् स्थानाच्च व्यवरोप्यते॥ २० ॥

“A king who, disregarding the enemy,
does not actually protect himself, undoubtedly
meets with reverses and is dragged down
from his position. (20)

539

agate a ud प्रियया मेऽनुजेन च।
ada नो fed वाक्यं यथेच्छसि तथा Hei २१॥

“The advice alone which was tendered
to you on a previous occasion by your
beloved consort, Mandodari, as well as by
my younger brother, Vibhisana, is salutary
to us. However, do as you will.” (21)

तत् तु श्रुत्वा दशग्रीव: कुम्भकर्णस्य भाषितम्।
भ्रुकुटिं चैव संचक्रे क्रुद्धश्चैनमभाषत॥ २२॥

Hearing the aforesaid speech of
Kumbhakarna, Ravana (the ten-headed
monster) for his part frowned and filled with
rage spoke to him as follows: (22)
मान्यो गुरुरिवाचार्य: किं at त्वमनुशाससे।
किमेवं वाक्श्रमं कृत्वा ag युक्तं तद् विधीयताम्॥ २३॥

“Why do you instruct me like a father
or a teacher worthy of respect? What avail
is it to weary your tongue as you have
done? Let that which is meet be done. (23)
बिभ्रमाच्चित्तमोहाद् वा बलवीर्याश्रयेण वा।
नाभिपन्नमिदानीं aq व्यर्था तस्य पुन: HAT Ul २४॥

“It is futile at this hour to repeat that
counsel which was not accepted by me at
that time through misconception, obtuseness
of understanding or through dependence on
my strength and prowess. (24)

अस्मिन् काले तु यद् युक्तं तदिदानीं विचिन्त्यताम्।

गतं तु नानुशोचन्ति गतं तु गतमेव हि॥ २५॥
“Let that alone which is advisable at

this moment may now be_ thoroughly

investigated. The wise do not at all grieve

for the bygone. The bygone is after all

irretrievably bygone, no doubt. (25)

ममापनयजं दोषं विक्रमेण समीकुरु।

ate खल्वस्ति मे स्नेहो विक्रमं वाधिगच्छसि॥ २६ ॥

यदि कार्यं ममैतत्ते हृदि कार्यतमं मतम्।

a Ge यो विपन्नार्थं dead ii २७॥

स बन्धुर्योऽपनीतेषु साहाय्यायोपकल्पते।

तमथैवं ब्रुवाणं स वचनं धीरदारुणम्॥ २८॥
