+ UTTARAKANDA +

Varuna for his part said to the swan,
swimming about in the waters of the Ganga:
“O ruler of birds, listen to my words full of
love. (30)
at मनोरम: सौम्यश्चन्द्रमण्डलसंनिभ:।
भविष्यति तवोदग्र: शुद्धफेनसमप्रभ:॥ ३१॥

‘Your colour will be pleasing to the
mind and delightful like that of the orb of the
pure moon. It will be white as foam and it
will be unique to you. (31)
मच्छरीरं समासाद्य कान्तो Pret भविष्यसि।
प्राप्स्यसे चातुलां प्रीतिमेतन्मे प्रीतिलक्षणम्॥ ३२॥

‘Coming into contact with water (which
constitutes my body), you will ever look

charming and enjoy unequalled delight. This
will be a mark of my pleasure.’ (32)

हंसानां fe पुरा wa न aul: सर्वपाण्डुर:।
पक्षा नीलाग्रसंवीता: क्रोडा: शष्पाग्रनिर्मला: ॥ ३३॥
“O Rama, in the past the colour of

swans was not white all over the body; their
wings were dark at the tips, while their

905

breasts were dark-brown like the tips of the
panic grass.” (33)

अथाब्रवीद् AMAT: कृकलासं गिरौ स्थितम्।
हैरण्यं सम्प्रयच्छामि वर्णं प्रीतस्तवाप्यहम्॥ ३४॥
‘Then Kubera (son of ViSrava) said to
the chameleon, which was resting on a
rock: “Pleased with you too, | will confer on
you a golden hue. (34)

सद्रव्यं च fort Fret भविष्यति तवाक्षयम्।
एष काञ्चनको वर्णो मत्प्रीत्या ते भविष्यति॥ ३५ ॥

‘Your head will always have the
imperishable golden colour. Due to my
pleasure, your dark colour will be transformed
into a golden hue.’ (35)

एवं दत्त्वा वरांस्तेभ्यस्तस्मिन् यज्ञोत्सवे सुरा: ।
Fad सह राज्ञा ते पुन: स्वभवनं गता:॥ ३६॥

Having granted boons in this manner
to the aforesaid animals, the gods, at the
completion of the sacrificial ceremony,
returned each to his abode alongwith their
king, Indra. (36)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये उत्तरकाण्डेऽष्टादश: सर्ग: ॥ १८॥

Thus ends Canto Eighteen in the Uttarakanda of the glorious Ramayana of Valmiki,
the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

Canto XIX
Ravana kills Anaranya and receives a curse from him

aq frat wed स Waal राक्षसाधिप:।
नगराणि नरेन्द्राणां युद्धकाङ्क्षी दशानन:॥१॥
Having conquered Marutta, and thirsting
for combat, the notorious Dasanana, the
suzerain lord of the Raksasas, now sought
the capital cities of kings. (1)

समासाद्य तु राजेन्द्रान् महेन्द्रवरुणोपमान्।
अब्रवीद् राक्षसेन्द्रस्तु Ge A दीयतामिति॥ २॥
निर्जिता: स्मेति वा ga wa मे fe सुनिश्चय:।
अन्यथा कुर्वतामेवं मोक्षो नैवोपपद्यते॥ ३॥

Approaching the King of kings, who
compared with the mighty Indra (the ruler of
gods) and Varuna (the god presiding over
the waters), Ravana (the ruler of ogres)
actually said to them: “Give me battle or
declare that you are defeated. This is my
ultimatum to you. No escape is possible for
those who act otherwise.” (2-3)

ततस्त्वभीरव: प्राज्ञा: पार्थिवा धर्मनिश्चया:।
मन्त्रयित्वा ततोऽन्योन्यं राजान: सुमहाबला:॥४॥
