* ARANYAKANDA «

stalkers possessed of terrible might hurled
at Sri Rama barbed missiles, iron pikes and
axes. (27)

तेषां बाणैर्महाबाहु: शस्त्राण्यावार्यं वीर्यवान्।
We समरे प्राणांश्चिच्छेद च शिरोधरान्॥ २८॥

Intercepting their weapons with his
arrows, the valiant and mighty-armed Sri
Rama severed their necks and took away
their lives in the encounter. (28)

a छिन्नशिरस: पेतुश्छिन्नचर्मशरासना:।
सुपर्णवातविक्षिप्ता जगत्यां पादपा यथा॥२९॥
With their heads lopped off and their
shields and bows pierced, they toppled on
the ground like trees (in the Nandana garden
in heaven) knocked down by the blast raised
by the flight of Garuda, the king of birds.
(29)
अवशिष्टाश्च ये at विषण्णास्ते निशाचरा:।
ख्वरमेवाभ्यधावन्त शरणार्थं शराहता: ॥ ३० i
Wounded with the arrows and feeling
dejected, those ogres who were left alive
there, flew for protection towards Khara
alone. (30)
तान् सर्वान् धनुरादाय समाश्वास्य च दूषण: ।
अभ्यधावत् सुसंक्रुद्ध: क्रुद्धं क्रुद्ध SAAR: I ३१॥
Consoling them all and taking his bow,
Dusana, who felt extremely enraged, rushed
towards the infuriated Rama like the angry
Yama. (31)
निव्त्तास्तु पुन: aa दूषणाश्रयनिर्भया:।
राममेवाभ्यधावन्त सालतालशिलायुधा:॥ ३२॥
Rendered fearless by the backing of
Dusana, all returned once more and rushed
towards Rama alone using sal and palmyra
trees and slabs of stone for weapons. (32)

शूलमुद्गरहस्ताश्च पाशहस्ता महाबला:।
wrt: शरवर्षाणि शस्त्रवर्षाणि संयुगे॥ ३३॥
द्रुमवर्षाणि मुञ्चन्त: शिलावर्षाणि राक्षसा:।
तद् बभूवाद्भुतं GR तुमुलं रोमहर्षणम्॥३४॥
रामस्यास्य महाघोरं पुनस्तेषां च रक्षसाम्।
a समन्तादभिक्रुद्धा राघवं पुनरार्दयन्॥३५॥

779

Nay, holding iron pikes and clubs as
well as nooses in their hands, the ogres,
who were possessed of great might, began
to rain on the field of battle showers of
arrows and weapons, as well as volleys of
trees and slabs of stones. That encounter
between the celebrated Sri Rama and the
aforesaid ogres was indeed wonderful,
tumultuous and most dreadful and caused
one’s hair to stand on end. Waving in wrath,
they tormented Sri Rama once more on all
sides. (833—35)
aa: Gat दिशो दृष्टवा प्रदिशश्च Wagar: |
Tada: ada: wa: शरवर्षाभिरावृत:॥ ३६॥
a peo भैरवं नादमस्त्रं परमभास्वरम्।
समयोजयद् गान्धर्वं राक्षसेषु महाबल:॥ ३७॥

Seeing all the quarters as well as the
intermediate points encompassed by the
ogres arrived from all sides, and uttering
a terrible roar, Sri Rama, who was now
covered with showers of shafts and who
was possessed of extraordinary might,
discharged the most resplendent missile
presided over by the Gandharvas against
the ogres. (36-37)

wa: शरसहस्राणि निर्ययुश्चापमण्डलात्।
wat दश fest बाणैरापूर्यन्त समागतै:॥ ३८॥

Then from his circular bow sped
thousands of arrows. All the ten directions
were fully covered by those arrows. (38)
नाददानं शरान् घोरान् विमुञ्चन्तं शरोत्तमान्।
विकर्षमाणं पश्यन्ति राक्षसास्ते शरार्दिता:॥ ३९॥

Tormented by the arrows, the said ogres
did not perceive Sri Rama picking up the
dreadful and excellent arrows or discharging
them. They only saw him pulling his bow-
string alone. (39)

INT AH ATH ITA सदिवाकरम्।
बभूवावस्थितो wa: प्रक्षिपन्निव तान् शरान्॥४०॥
The darkness spread by the arrows
enveloped the sky including the sun. And
Sri Rama simply stood sending forth those
