* SUNDARAKANDA +

aad स्माधिकं सीता विशन्तीवांगमात्मन:।

at यूथपरिभ्रष्टा wih कोकैरिवार्दिता॥५॥
Shrinking into her own person, as it

were, through fear, Sita shook violently as a

doe which has strayed away from its herd

and is tormented by wolves in a forest. (5)

सात्वशोकस्य विपुलां शाखामालम्ब्य पुष्पिताम्।
चिन्तयामास शोकेन भर्तारुं भग्नमानसा॥६॥

Laying hold of a big bough of an ASoka
tree, which was rich in blossom, frustrated
as she was in mind through grief, Sita, for
her part, thought of her lord. (6)

सा स्नापयन्ती विपुलौ स्तनौ नेत्रजलस्त्रवै:।
चिन्तयन्ती न शोकस्य तदान्तमधिगच्छति॥ ७॥

Bathing her large breasts with the
streams of her tears and brooding over her
miserable plight, she saw no end to her grief
at that moment. (7)

सा वेपमाना पतिता ward कदली यथा।
राक्षसीनां भयत्रस्ता विवर्णवदनाभवत्॥८॥

Shaking like a plantain tree exposed to
a stormy wind, seized as she was with the
fear of the ogresses, Sita looked palefaced.
(8)

तस्या: सा दीर्घबहुला वेपन्त्या: सीतया तदा।
ag कम्पिता वेणी व्यालीवब परिसर्पती॥९॥

That swinging braid of Sita, long and
thick, while she was shaking from head to
foot, looked like a gliding serpent at that
time. (9)
सा नि:श्वसन्ती शोकार्तां कोपोपहतचेतना।
आर्ता व्यसृजदश्रूणि मैथिली विललाप a got
हा रामेति च दु:खार्ता at पुनर्लक्ष्मणेति च।

हा श्वश्रूर्मम कौसल्ये at सुमित्रेति भामिनी॥ ११॥

Drawing deep audible breaths, miserable
and stricken with grief as she was, that lovely
young lady, the princess of Mithila, whose
understanding had been clouded through

anger and who was afflicted with agony, began
to shed tears and wailed—“O Rama,” and

129

again, “O Laksmana, O Kausalya, my mother-
in-law, O Sumitra ! (10-11)

लोकप्रवाद: सत्योऽयं पण्डितै: समुदाहृत:।
अकाले दुर्लभो मृत्यु: स्निया वा पुरुषस्य वा॥ १२॥
यत्राहमाभि: क्रूराभी राक्षसीभिरिहार्दिता।
जीवामि हीना रामेण मुहूर्तमपि दु:ख्रिता॥१३॥

“There is this popular saying uttered by
the wise that the death of a woman or of a
man is difficult to occur before time inasmuch
as, even though | am tormented by these
fierce ogresses here and stand separated
from Sri Rama, and afflicted, | am able to
survive even for a while. (12-13)

एषाल्पपुण्या कृपणा विनशिष्याम्यनाथवत्।
समुद्रमध्ये नौ: got वायुवेगैरिवाहता॥१४॥

“Of poor merit and wretched that | am,
| shall perish like a forlorn creature, even as
a bark fully loaded and buffeted by the
blasts of a tempest would flounder in the
ocean. (14)

wat तमपश्यन्ती राक्षसीवशमागता।
सीदामि खलु शोकेन कूलं तोयहतं यथा॥ १५॥

“Unable to see my celebrated husband
and fallen into the clutches of ogresses, |
am wasting away through grief even as a
river bank undermined by the current. (15)
तं पद्मदलपत्राक्षॆ सिंहविक्रान्तगामिनम्।
धन्या: पश्यन्ति A नाथं कृतज्ञं प्रियवादिनम्॥ १६॥

“Only the fortunate are able to look on
my aforesaid lord, who has eyes resembling
the petals of an expanded lotus and walks
with the gait of a lion, who is alive to the
services rendered to him and speaks kind
words to all. (16)

सर्वथा at हीनाया रामेण विदितात्मना।
तीक्ष्णं विषमिवास्वाद्य geist मम जीवनम्॥ १७॥
“My life, now that | have been separated
from the aforesaid Sri Rama, a knower of
the Self, is hard to sustain even as for one
who has swallowed a deadly poison. (17)
