« KISKINDHAKANDA +

and the same has been done by you in the
form of shedding tears for the deceased.
And, no religious duty to a departed soul
can be performed after the appointed time,
which is now passing. (3)
नियति: कारणं cite नियति: कर्मसाधनम्।
नियति: सर्वभूतानां नियोगेष्विह कारणम्॥४॥
“The all-controlling Time-Spirit is the
cause of all in the world. The Time-spirit again

determines all duties and Time-Spirit again is
the factor prompting all to action. (4)

न कर्ता Heated कश्चिन्नियोगे नापि car: |
स्वभावे add लोकस्तस्य काल: परायणम्॥५॥

“There is no independent doer of any
action nor is anyone competent to prompt
anyone to action. The whole world follows
its own nature and the Time-Spirit is the
substratum of Nature. (5)

न काल: कालमत्येति न काल: परिहीयते।
स्वभावं च समासाद्य न कश्चिदतिवर्तते॥६॥

“The Time-Spirit does not overstep Its
own bounds nor does It suffer diminution.
Nay, coming face to face with Nature in the
form of Destiny, no living being can
transgress It. (6)

न कालस्यास्ति बन्धुत्वं न हेतुर्न पराक्रम:।
न मित्रज्ञातिसम्बन्ध: कारणं AAT वश:॥७॥
किं तु कालपरीणामो द्रष्टव्य: साधु पश्यता।
धर्मश्चार्थश्च कामश्च कालक्रमसमाहिता:॥८॥

“The Time-Spirit has no_ kinship,
friendship or affinity with anyone nor is there
any means of bringing It under control nor
again can one’s prowess prevail against It.
Nor is God, who is the Cause of all, subject
to the control of an individual soul. By a
discerning man everything should be looked
upon as an evolute of the Time-Spirit. Nay,
even religious merit, and worldly prosperity
and sensuous enjoyment are attained in
process of Time. (7-8)

इत: Tat प्रकृतिं वाली गत: प्राप्त: क्रियाफलम्।
सामदानार्थसंयोगैर३ पवित्रं eT Ue I

1023

“Having attained in this world the
immaculate fruit of his actions in the form of
enjoyment through conciliation, gifts and
proper use of wealth, Vali, the ruler of
monkeys, has now, departing from this world,
regained his own spiritual nature. (9)

स्वधर्मस्य च संयोगाज्जितस्तेन महात्मना।
स्वर्गग परिगृहीतश्च प्राणानपरिरक्षता॥१०॥

“The highest heaven, which was earned
by him through steadfastness to his duty,
has now been actually attained by that high-
souled monkey by not preserving his life. (10)
wat a नियति: श्रेष्ठा at गतो हरियूथप:।
तदलं परितापेन प्राप्तकालमुपास्यताम्॥११॥

“This destiny which Vali (the leader of
monkey hordes) has attained, is indeed the
highest. Therefore, have done with grief and

let that which is appropriate to the occasion
be attended to.” (11)

वचनान्ते तु रामस्य लक्ष्मण: परवीरहा।
अवदत् प्रश्रितं वाक्यं सुग्रीवं गतचेतसम्॥१२॥
After Sri Rama had finished speaking,
Laksmana, the slayer of hostile warriors,
addressed the following polite words to
Sugriva, who had lost his balance of mind :
(12)

ee त्वमस्य सुग्रीव प्रेतकार्यमनन्तरम्।
ताराङ्गदाभ्यां सहितो वालिनो दहनं प्रति॥१३॥

“Perform you in conjunction with Tara
and Angada, O Sugriva, without delay, the
rites relating to the disposal of the dead
body of Vali and make arrangements for his
cremation. (13)

समाज्ञापय काष्ठानि शुष्काणि च बहूनि च।

चन्दनानि च दिव्यानि वालिसंस्कारकारणात्॥ १४॥
“Please command some responsible

Official to get together numerous logs of dry

wood as well as excellent pieces of sandal-
wood for the cremation of Vali. (14)

मा भूर्बालिशबुद्धिस्त्वं त्वदधीनमिदं पुरम्॥१५॥
