108

दीपिका: काञ्चनी: काश्चिज्जगृहुस्तत्र योषित: |
ATI तालवृन्तानि चापरा:॥११॥
Some women among them bore torches
with gold handles, others carried chowries
in their hands, while still others bore fans of
palmyra leaves. (11)

काञ्चनैश्चैव भंगारैर्जह्र:: सलिलमग्रत:।
मण्डलाग्रा बसरीश्चैव गृह्यान्या: पृष्ठतो ययु:। १२॥
Some carried water in golden ewers
ahead, while others followed in the rear
taking cushions with circular ends. (12)
दक्षिणा दक्षिणेनैव der wore पाणिना॥१३॥
Some compliant woman held in her
right hand alone on that occasion a shining
pitcher made of jewels and filled with wine.
(13)
सौवर्णदण्डमपरा गृहीत्वा पृष्ठतो satu evil
Yet another followed in the rear taking
a canopy resembling a swan and shining

brightly like the full moon, with a handle of
gold. (14)
निद्रामदपरीताक्ष्यो रावणस्योत्तमस्तिय:।
अनुजग्मु: पतिं a घनं विद्युल्लता san eal
Their eyes overcome with sleep and
intoxication, the excellent consort of Ravana

followed their valiant lord as flashes of lightning
following a cloud. (15)

व्याविद्धहारकेयूरा: समामृदितवर्णका: |
समागलितकेशान्ता: सस्वेदवदनास्तथा॥ १६ ॥

Their necklaces and armlets got slightly
displaced, their coat of sandal-paste got
effaced, their looks got dishevelled and their
faces got moistened with sweat. (16)

घूर्णन्त्यो मदशेषेण निद्रया च शुभानना:।
स्वेदक्लिष्टांगकुसुमा: समाल्याकुलमूर्धजा:॥ १७॥

Those women with lovely faces were
staggering under the surviving traces of
intoxication and sleep. The flowers on their

« VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

person had got shrivelled by perspiration
and their locks shook along with the wreaths
that decorated them. (17)

Ward नैर्ऋतपतिं नार्यो मदिरलोचना:।
बहुमानाच्च कामाच्च प्रियभार्यास्तमन्वयु:॥ १८॥

Actuated by great regard for their
husband as well as by longing to behold
Sita, the ladies, who were his beloved
consorts, and who had intoxicating eyes,
followed the aforesaid lord of ogres, who
was going out to meet Sita. (18)

स च कामपराधीन: पतिस्तासां महाबल:।
सीतासक्तमना मन्दो मन्दाञ्चितगतिर्बभौ॥१९॥

And the evil-minded lord of theirs, who
was the slave of his passion, though
endowed with extraordinary might, and whose
mind was attached to Sita, looked charming
as he proceeded in a slow-moving gait. (19)

तत: काञ्चीनिनादं च नूपुराणां च नि:स्वनम्।
शुश्राव परमस्त्रीणां कपिर्मारुतनन्दन:॥ २०॥
At that time, Hanuman, the delight of
the wind-god, heard the tinkling of the
ornaments worn round the waist as well as
of the anklets of those excellent women.
(20)
तं चाप्रतिमकर्माणमचिन्त्यबलपौरुषम्।
द्वारदेशमनुप्राप्तं ददर्शं हनुमान् कपि:॥२१॥
दीपिकाभिरनेकाभि: समन्तादवभासितम्।
गन्धतैलावसिक्ताभिध्रियमाणाभिरग्रत: WRU
कामदर्पमदैर्युक्तं जिह्मताम्रायतेक्षणम्।
समक्षमिव कंदर्पमपविद्धशरासनम्॥ २३॥
मथितामृतफेनाभमरजोवस्त्रमुत्तमम् ।
सपुष्पमवकर्षन्तं fag सत्तमंगदे॥ २४॥
Hanuman also found arrived near the
gate of the ASoka grove Ravana—who had
accomplished unparalleled deeds and was
endowed with inconceivable might and virility,
who was illumined on all sides with numerous
torches, fed with fragrant oil and being borne
ahead, who was full of passion and vanity
and intoxicated too, who had large, oblique
