* AYODHYAKANDA +

यदसौ मातुलकुले दत्तराज्य: परं सुखी।
भरतो वसति wat शत्रुघ्नेन मुदान्वित:॥ २॥
तच्छीघ्रं जवना दूता गच्छन्तु त्वरितं हयै:।
आनेतुं भ्रातरौ वीरौ fe समीक्षामहे वयम्॥३॥

“Since the celebrated Bharata, on whom
kingship has been bestowed by the Emperor,
as urged by Kaikeyi, is leading a most
happy and joyous life at his maternal uncle’s
with his younger brother Satrughna; therefore,
let swift messengers proceed quickly on
horses to bring the two gallant brothers.
What else can we thoughtfully consider?”

(2-3)
गच्छन्तिति ad: Wd वसिष्ठं वाक्यमब्रुवन्।
तेषां तद् वचनं श्रुत्वा वसिष्ठो वाक्यमब्रवीत्॥४॥

Then all submitted to Vasistha as
follows : “Let the messengers depart.” Hearing
that reply of the counsellors, Vasistha again
spoke as follows: (4)

we सिद्धार्थं fava जयन्ताशोकनन्दन।
श्रूयतामितिकर्तव्यं data walt व:॥५॥

“Come along, O Siddhartha, Vijaya,
Jayanta, ASoka and Nandana! Please hear
what has got to be done by you : | speak to
you all. (5)
त्यक्तशोकैरिदं वाच्य: शासनाद् भरतो मम॥६॥

“Reaching the city of Rajagrha quickly
on (the back of) horses galloping at a swift
speed, and shaking off grief, you should
speak to Bharata under my orders as
follows : (6)

पुरोहितस्त्वां कुशलं We Aa च मन्तरिण:।
त्वरमाणश्च निर्याहि कृत्यमात्ययिकं त्वया॥७॥
‘The family-priest as well as all the
counsellors have told you that all is well.
Pray, depart hence hastily; there is some
most urgent business awaiting you.’ (7)
मा चास्मै प्रोषितं रामं मा चास्मै पितरं मृतम्।
Ved: शंसिषुर्गत्वा राघवाणामित: क्षयम्॥८॥

“Going there, pray, do not inform him

545

of Rama having gone into exile or of his
father having demised or of the threatened
destruction of the scions of Raghu as a
result of these incidents. (8)

कौशेयानि च वस्त्राणि भूषणानि वराणि च।
क्षिप्रमादाय राज्ञश्च भरतस्य च गच्छत॥९॥

“Taking with you silken robes as well
as excellent ornaments for the king, Bharata’s
maternal grandfather, and for Bharata as a
present from the king of Ayodhya, depart at
once.” (9)

दत्तपथ्यशना दूता जग्मु: ta ta निवेशनम्।
केकयांस्ते गमिष्यन्तो हयानारुह्य सम्मतान्॥१०॥
Having been furnished with the
wherewithals to purchase provisions for the
journey and while about to leave for the
Kekaya kingdom mounting horses thought
highly of for their swiftness, the messengers
proceeded each to his own house to take
leave of his own people. (10)

तत: प्रास्थानिकं कृत्वा कार्यशेषमनन्तरम्।
वसिष्ठेनाभ्यनुज्ञाता दूता: संत्वरितं ययु:॥११॥
Having immediately finished _ all
preparations that remained to be made for
the journey, and duly permitted by Vasistha,
the messengers proceeded post haste to
their destination. (11)

न्यन्तेनापरतालस्य प्रलम्बस्योत्तरं प्रति।

निषेवमाणास्ते जग्मुर्नदीं मध्येन मालिनीम्॥१२॥
They moved on touching Malini river

flowing between the extreme southern end

of Aparatala mountain and the northern end
of Pralamba mountain. (12)

a हास्तिनपुरे Wet drat प्रत्यङ्मुखा ययु:।
पाञ्चालदेशमासाद्य मध्येन कुरुजाङ्गलम्॥१३॥
सरांसि च सुफुल्लानि नदीश्च विमलोदका:।
निरीक्षमाणा जग्मुस्ते दूता: कार्यवशाद्द्रुतम्॥ १४॥

Crossing the Ganga at Hastinapura
they proceeded westward and, reaching the
territory of Paficala through Kurujangala and
