* SUNDARAKANDA +

withdraw your mind from Rama; for, if you
continue to love Rama, you will never survive.

(3)
त्रैलोक्यवसुभोक्कारं रावणं राक्षसेश्वरम्।
भर्तारमुपसंगम्य विहरस्व यथासुखम्॥४॥

“Approaching for union as a husband,
Ravana, the lord of ogres, who enjoys the

riches of all the three worlds, sport happily
with him. (4)

मानुषी मानुषं तं तु राममिच्छसि शोभने।
Tere भ्रष्टमसिद्धार्थं विक्लवन्तमनिन्दिते॥ ५॥

“Merely because you are a human
being, O good lady of irreproachable charm,
you pant for Rama, who has been deprived
of his kingdom, whose object has not been
accomplished and as such who remains
ever agitated in mind |” (5)

राक्षसीनां वच: seat सीता पद्मनिभेक्षणा।
नेत्राभ्यामश्रुपूर्णाभ्यामिदं वचनमब्रवीत्॥ ६ I

Hearing the exhortation of the ogresses,
Sita of lotus-like eyes replied as follows with
eyes full of tears : (6)
aed लोकविद्विष्टमुदाहरत संगता:।
नैतन्मनसि art मे किल्बिषं प्रतितिष्ठति॥ en

“This cheap and sinful advice, which
you have jointly tendered and which is

repugnant in the eyes of the world, does not
hold in my mind even for a moment. (7)

न मानुषी राक्षसस्य wat भवितुमर्हति।
कामं खादत मां सर्वा न करिष्यामि at वच:॥ ८॥

“A human lady ought not to become
the wife of an ogre. Devour me all if you will;
| will never follow your advice. (8)

दीनो वा राज्यहीनो at यो मे भर्ता स मे Te:

तं नित्यमनुरक्तास्मि यथा सूर्यं सुवर्चला॥९॥
“Destitute or deprived of his kingdom,

he who is my husband is my adorable deity.

| am ever devoted to him even as Suvarcala
(consort of the sun-god) is to the sun-god.

(9)

125

यथा Wet महाभागा we समुपतिष्ठति।
अरुन्धती वसिष्ठं च रोहिणी शशिनं यथा॥१०॥
लोपामुद्रा यथागस्त्यं सुकन्या च्यवनं यथा।
सावित्री सत्यवन्तं च कपिलं श्रीमती यथा॥११॥
सौदासं मदयन्तीव केशिनी सगरं यथा।
नैषधं दमयन्तीव भैमी पतिमनुव्रता॥१२॥
तथाहमिक्ष्वाकुवरं wut पतिमनुव्रता।
सीताया वचनं श्रुत्वा राक्षस्य: क्रोधमूच्छिता:।
भर्त्सयन्ति स्म परुषैर्वाक्यै रावणचोदिता:॥ १३॥

“| am devoted to my husband, Sri Rama,
the foremost of the Ikswakus, in the same
way as the highly blessed Saci waits upon
Indra (the ruler of gods), as does Arundhati
upon Sage Vasistha and Rohini (the foremost
of the twenty-seven spouses of the moon-
god, presiding over the same number of
constellations appearing in the heavens) on
the moon-god, as does Lopamudra upon
Sage Agastya and Sukanya did upon Sage
Cyavana, as Savitri did upon Satyavan and
Srimati upon Lord Kapila, as Madayanti did
upon King Saudasa and KeSsini upon King
Sagara, and as Damayanti, daughter of
Bhima, was devoted to her husband, Nala,
a king of the Nisadhas.”

Filled with anger on hearing the reply of
Sita, the ogresses began to intimidate her
with harsh words, as ordered by Ravana
while he left their presence: (10-13)

अवलीन: स निर्वाक्यो हनुमान् शिंशपाद्रुमे।

सीतां संतर्जयन्तीस्ता राक्षसीरश्रृणोत् ara: uw १४॥
Remaining hidden in the Asoka tree

without uttering a word, Hanuman listened

to those ogresses threatening Sita. (14)

तामभिक्रम्य संरब्धा वेपमानां समन्तत:।

भृशं संलिलिहुर्दीप्तान् प्रलम्बान् दशनच्छदान्॥ १५ ॥
Assailing on all sides Sita, who was

trembling with fear, enraged as they were,

they licked their protruding and glowing lips

again and again. (15)

ऊचुश्च परमक्रुद्धा: प्रगृह्याशु परश्वथान्।
नेयमर्हति भर्तारं रावणं राक्षसाधिपम्॥१६॥
