* BALAKANDA +

221

पञ्चपञ्चाश: at:
Canto LV

His entire army having been exterminated by the warriors produced by Sabala
and his hundred sons reduced to ashes by the very roar of Vasistha
even as they assailed him, Viswamitra retires to the Himalayas
for austerities and, receiving a number of missiles from
Lord Siva, tries them on the inmates of Vasistha’s
hermitage; Vasistha meets him with a mere staff
appropriate to a Brahmana

ततस्तानाकुलान् दृष्टवा विश्वामित्रास्त्रमोहितान्।
वसिष्ठश्चोदयामास कामधुक सृज योगत:॥१॥

Seeing the warriors created by Sabala
stupefied by the missiles of Viswamitra and
fleeing from the battlefield helter-skelter,
Vasistha commanded Sabala as follows:
“Evolve more and more warriors, O wish-
yeilding cow, by dint of your yogic power,
power of concentration.” (1)

TEM EHNA जाता: काम्बोजा रविसंनिभा: |
ऊधसश्चाथ सम्भूता AAT: शस्त्रपाणय:॥ २॥

From her roar sprang up the Kambojas,
brilliant as the sun. And, again, from her
udders were produced the Barbaras carrying
weapons in their hands. (2)

योनिदेशाच्च यवना: शकृद्देशाच्छका: ATA: |
रोमकूपेषु म्लेच्छाश्च हारीता: सकिरातका:॥ ३॥

From her genitals came forth the
Yavanas; while those that issued from her
anus were known as the Sakas. From the
pores of her skin originated the Mlecchas
and the Haritas alongwith the Kiratas. (3)

By them was wiped out instantly the
entire army of ViSwamitra including the foot
soldiers and elephants, horses and chariots,
O scion of Raghu! (4)

दृष्टवा निषूदितं सैन्यं वसिष्ठेन महात्मना।
विश्वामित्रसुतानां तु wd नानाविधायुधम्॥५॥

क्रद्धं वसिष्ठं । ।
हुंकारेणैव aM सर्वान् निर्ददाह महानृषि:।॥ ६॥

Seeing the army of their father
exterminated by the mighty Vasistha,
ViSwamitra’s hundred sons rushed most
furiously towards Vasistha, the foremost of
ascetics, carrying weapons of various kinds.
The great Rsi, Vasistha, however, reduced
them all to ashes by his very roar. (5-6)

a साश्वरथपादाता वसिष्ठेन महात्मना।
भस्मीकृता मुहूर्तेन विश्वामित्रसुतास्तथा॥७॥

The sons of ViSwamitra were reduced
to ashes in an instant with their horses,
chariots and foot soldiers by the mighty
Vasistha. (7)
दृष्टवा विनाशितान् सर्वान् बलं च सुमहायशा: ।
सव्रीडं चिन्तयाविष्टो विश्वामित्रोऽभवत् तदा॥ ८॥

Seeing them all as well as his army
annihilated the exceptionally — illustrious
ViSwamitra was forthwith filled with anxiety
mixed with shame. (8)

wax इव निर्वेगो ste इवोरग:।
wa इवादित्य: सद्यो निष्प्रभतां गत:॥९॥
He resembled the ocean that has lost
its fury and the snake whose fangs have
been broken, and suddenly became
lustreless like the eclipsed sun. (9)

हतपुत्रबलो दीनो लूनपक्ष इव द्विज:।
हतसर्वबलोत्साहो निर्वेदं समपद्यत॥ Qo

Having lost his sons and army, he felt
