906

स निक्षिप्य शिरौ भूमौ wert चरणौ तथा।
विक्षिप्य च शरीरं स्वं पपात धरणीतले॥ १८॥

Dropping his head on the ground, nay,
stretching his legs and throwing his bodyback,
Jatayu sank on the earth’s surface. (18)

तं गृध्रं Wea amet गतासुमचलोपमम्।

राम: सुबहुभिर्दु:खैर्दीन: सौमित्रिमब्रवीत्॥१९॥
Gazing on the aforesaid vulture with

coppery eyes, who looked like a mountain,

his life having departed, Sri Rama, who was

weighed down by numerous misfortunes,

spoke as follows to Laksmana, son of

Sumitra : (19)

बहूनि रक्षसां ara वर्षाणि वसता सुखम्।

अनेन दण्डकारण्ये विशीर्णमिह पक्षिणा॥ २०॥

“His body has been shed here by this
bird, who lived happily in the Dandaka forest,
the home of ogres, for many years. (20)

अनेकवार्षिको यस्तु चिरकालसमुत्थित:।
सोऽयमद्य हत: Bet कालो हि दुरतिक्रम:॥ २१॥

“This vulture, for his part, who lived
many years and thrived for a long period, is
lying killed today. Indeed the Time-Spirit is
difficult to overcome. (21)

पश्य लक्ष्मण गृध्रोऽयमुपकारी हतश्च Al
सीतामभ्यवपन्नो हि रावणेन वलीयसा॥ २२॥

“Behold, O Laksmana, how this vulture,
who rendered good offices to me and rushed
to the succour of Sita, has actually been
killed by Ravana of superior strength. (22)

गृध्रराज्यं परित्यज्य पितृपैतामहं महत्।

मम हेतोरयं प्राणान् मुमोच पतगेश्वर:।॥ २३॥
“Having renounced the mighty rulership

of vultures, inherited by him from his

forefathers, this king of birds has laid down
his life for my sake! (23)

Wat खलु Gad साधवो धर्मचारिण:।
शूरा: शरण्या: सौमित्रे तिर्यग्योनिगतेष्वपि॥ २४॥

“Indeed pious and valiant souls
practising virtue and worth approaching for

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

protection are found everywhere—even
amongst those belonging to the sub-human
species, O Laksmana (son of Sumitra) ! (24)

सीताहरणजं ga न मे सौम्य तथागतम्।
यथा विनाशो गृध्रस्य मत्कृते च परंतप॥ A Il

“Nay, agony caused by the abduction
of Sita does not pinch me so much, O gentle
brother, as the death of this vulture and that
too for my sake, O scorcher of foes! (25)

राजा दशरथ: श्रीमान् यथा AA महायशा:।
पूजनीयश्च मान्यश्च तथायं पतगेश्वर:॥ २६॥

“This ruler of the feathered kingdom is
worthy of adoration and honour too in the
same way as the glorious and highly illustrious
King DaSaratha, our own father. (26)

सौमित्रे at काष्ठानि निर्मथिष्यामि पावकम्।

गृध्रराजं दिधक्ष्यामि मत्कृते निधनं गतम्॥ २७॥
“Fetch logs of wood, O darling of Sumitra,

so that | shall produce fire by attrition, as |

intend to cremate the king of vultures, who
has suffered death for my sake. (27)

Ta पतगलोकस्य चितिमारोपयाम्यहम्।

इमं धक्ष्यामि सौमित्रे ed रौद्रेण रक्षसा॥ २८॥
“| will place the lord of the feathered

kingdom on a funeral pile and will then set

fire to this bird killed by the fierce ogre,

O darling of Sumitra ! (28)

या गतिर्यज्ञशीलानामाहिताग्नेश्च या गति:।
अपरावर्तिनां या च या च भूमिप्रदायिनाम्॥ २९॥
मया त्वं समनुज्ञातो Wes लोकाननुत्तमान्।
गृध्रराज महासत्त्व संस्कृतश्च AA ATI ३०॥

(Turning to the vulture,) “duly permitted
by me, ascend you to unsurpassed realms,
O king of vultures of extraordinary energy !
Nay, cremated by me, attain the destiny which
is the lot of those given to the performance of
sacrifices and which is attained by him who
has maintained the sacred fire all his life, nay,
which is reserved for those who never retreat
on the battle-field and which is intended for
those who make gifts of land.” (29-30)
