834

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA +

Canto CXXVIII

Bharata renders back the kingdom of Ayodhya to Sri Rama,
who drives in a procession to the city; his consecration
on the throne of Ayodhya; His farewell to the
monkeys and the glory of the epic

शिरस्यञ्जलिमाधाय कैकेयीनन्दिवर्धन: |
बभाषे भरतो ज्येष्ठं UH सत्यपराक्रमम्॥१॥

Placing his joined palms on his head
as a token of submission, Bharata, the
enhancer of Kaikeyis joy, submitted
as follows to his elder brother, Sri Rama, of
unfailling prowess: (1)

पूजिता मामिका माता दत्तं राज्यमिदं मम।
तद्ददामि पुनस्तुभ्यं यथा त्वमददा मम॥ २॥
“This kingdom of Ayodhya was
bestowed on me by you; my mother too
was honoured by you. I, for my part, hereby
give it back to you just as you conferred it
on me. (2)

धुरमेकाकिना न्यस्तां qeyor बलीयसा।
किशोरवद् Te Wt न वोढुमहमुत्सहे॥ 3 il
“lam unable to bear the heavy burden
any more than a young ox would sustain
a load borne on its shoulders by an
exceptionally strong bull all alone. (3)
वारिवेगेन महता faa: सेतुरिव act
दुर्बन्धनमिदं मन्ये राज्यच्छिद्रमसंवृतम्॥४॥
“| believe this vulnerable point in the
form of administration is difficult to protect,
particularly when exposed, even as a dam
which is leaking when breached by a strong
onrush of water. (4)

Tht खर इवाश्वस्य हंसस्येव च aaa: |
wedge «= वीर तव मार्गमरिंदम॥५॥

“lam unable to follow in your footsteps
any more than a donkey would follow the

gallop of a horse or a crow would imitate the
flight of a swan, O valiant scourge of your
enemies! (5)

यथा चारोपितो get जातश्चान्तर्निवेशने।

महानपि दुरारोहो महास्कन्ध: प्रशाखवान्॥६॥
शीर्येत पुष्पितो भूत्वा न फलानि प्रदर्शयन्।
Ta नानुभवेदर्थं यस्य हेतो: स रोपित:॥७॥
एषोपमा महाबाहो त्वमर्थं वेत्तुमर्हसि।
यद्यस्मान् मनुजेन्द्र त्वं भर्ता भृत्यान् न शाधि हि।। ८ ।।

“Nay, if, for example, a fruit tree planted
in an orchard forming part of one’s own
house and grows immensely and difficult to
climb with a huge trunk and large boughs,
dries up after flowering, without yielding fruit,
he who planted it would not realize the
object for which it was planted. This analogy
would apply to you, O mighty-armed ruler of
men, if you, our master, would not actually
rule over us, your servants. You can easily
understand what | mean. (6—8)

जगदद्याभिषिक्तं त्वामनुपश्यतु राघव।
प्रतपन्तमिवादित्यं मध्याह्ने दीप्ततेजसम्॥९॥

“Let the entire world see you engulfed
with a dazzling brilliance like the sun at
midday when consecrated on the throne of
Ayodhya today, O scion of Raghu! (9)

तूर्यसंघातनिर्घोषै: काञ्चीनूपुरनि:स्वनै: |
मधुरैर्गीतशब्दैश्च प्रतिबुध्यस्व शेष्व च॥१०॥

“May you repose and wake too to the
sounds of musical instruments, the tinkling
of ornaments strung with tiny bells and
worn round the waist and anklets and the
dulcet strains of singing. (10)
