1040

Cakravaka birds borne on their surface (like
a pair of heaving breasts) rush to meet their
lord (the sea) chosen for full enjoyment with
offerings in the shape of flowers etc. (39)

नीलेषु नीला नववारिपूर्णा

मेघेषु मेघा: प्रतिभान्ति AAT: ।
दवाग्निदग्धेषु दवाग्निदग्धा:

शैलेषु शैला इव बद्भमूला:॥४०॥

“Clinging to other dark clouds, sombre

clouds charged with fresh water, appear
like rocks scorched with a forest conflagration
cohering with other such rocks with their
bases firmly rooted. (40)
प्रमत्तसंनादितबर्हिणानि

गजा: सुरम्याणि वनान्तराणि॥४१॥

“Elephants range over exceptionally
delightful woodlands, in which the cries of
peafowls fully in heat are heard, in which plots
of grass are speckled with insects called by
the name of Indragopa and which are rendered
fragrant by Nipa and Arjuna trees. (41)

नवाम्बुधाराहतकेसराणि

ga परित्यज्य सरोरुहाणि।
कदम्बपुष्पाणि सकेसराणि

नवानि wet भ्रमरा: पिबन्ति॥४२॥

“Definitely ignoring the lotus flowers,
whose filaments have been destroyed by
recent showers, black bees full of joy suck
the honey of fresh Kadamba flowers whose
filaments are intact. (42)

मत्ता गजेन्द्रा मुदिता गवेन्द्रा

वनेषु विक्रान्ततरा मृगेन्द्रा:।
रम्या नगेन्द्रा निभृता नरेन्द्रा:

प्रक्रीडितो वारिधरै: सुरेन्द्र:॥४३॥

“Lordly elephants roam about in rut, bulls
feel rejoiced, the kings of beasts exhibit greater
prowess in forests, the foremost of mountains
have assumed a lovely look, kings are quiet
(having put off their plans of conquest), while

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

Indra, the ruler of gods, is engaged in his

brisk sport with the clouds. (43)
मेघा: समुद्भूतसमुद्रनादा
महाजलौघैर्गगनावलम्बा: ।

नदीस्तटाकानि सरांसि वापी-
Hat च कृत्स्नामपवाहयन्ति॥४४॥
“With their big torrents, clouds hanging
over the sky and drowning the roar of the
seas make the rivers, ponds, lakes and tanks
overflow and flood the whole land. (44)

वर्षप्रवेगा विपुला: पतन्ति
प्रवान्ति वाता: समुदीर्णवेगा:।
नद्यो जलं विप्रतिपन्नमार्गा:।॥ ४५ i

“Abundant downpours descend on earth,
winds blow with redoubled violence, while
rivers with their banks entirely washed away
carry their waters swiftly, rendering the roads
impassable. (45)

सुरेन्द्रदत्तै: पवनोपनीतै: |
घनाम्बुकुम्भैरभिषिच्यमाना
रूपं श्रियं स्वामिव दर्शयन्ति॥ ४६ ॥

“Being bathed, as rulers of men are by
men, with water carried in pitchers in the
form of clouds by the wind-god as a gift
from Indra (the ruler of gods), the foremost
of mountains exhibit their beauty and
splendour, as it were. (46)
चनोपगूढं Tt A ANT

न भास्करो दर्शनमभ्युपैति।
नवैर्जलौघैर्धरणी वितृप्ता
तमोविलिप्ता न दिश: प्रकाशा:॥४७॥

“The sky being overcast with clouds,
neither a star nor the sun comes to view.
The earth is saturated with the recent
downpours and, shrouded in darkness, the
quarters too are not discernible. (47)

महान्ति कूटानि महीधराणां
धाराविधौतान्यधिकं विभान्ति।
