962

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

नवम: wet:
Canto IX

Sugriva tells Sri Rama how challenged to a duel at dead of night by a demon,
Mayavi by name, who owed him a grudge on the score of a woman, Vali
sallied forth with Sugriva and following at the heels of the demon, who
ran away on seeing him, and reaching the mouth of a cave, asked
Sugriva on oath to stay out, himself entering the cave. Since Vali did
not come out for a whole year and as from a confused din coming
out of the cave as well as from a stream of blood issuing from
it, it was concluded that Vali had met his death at the hands
of the demon, Sugriva closed the mouth of the cave with
a rock and, offering water to the spirit of his deceased
elder brother, returned to Kiskindha, where the
ministers of Vali installed him on the latter’s
throne in his absence. In the meantime Vali
returned from the cave and reprimanded
Sugriva for his having usurped Vali’s throne

वाली नाम मम भ्राता ज्येष्ठ: शत्रुनिषूदन:।
पितुर्बहुमतो fret wa चापि तथा पुरा॥१॥

‘Vali by name is my elder brother,
capable of exterminating his foes. He was
held in great esteem by our father and
likewise made much of by me too in the
past. (1)

पितर्युपरते तस्मिन् ज्येष्ठोऽयमिति मन्तिभि:।
कपीनामीश्वरो राज्ये कृत: परमसम्मत:॥ २॥

“Our aforesaid father having died, Vali,
who was supremely honoured by all, was
installed by the ministers on the throne of
Kiskindha as the ruler of monkeys, on the
ground of his being the elder prince. (2)
we प्रशासतस्तस्य पितॄपैतामहं महत्।
अहं सर्वेषु कालेषु प्रणत: प्रेष्यवत् स्थित:॥ ३॥

“While he justly ruled over his big
ancestral kingdom, | remained submissive
to him at all times and stood like his servant.

(3)
मायावी नाम तेजस्वी पूर्वजो दुन्दुभे: सुत:।
तेन तस्य est वालिन: स्त्रीकृतं पुरा॥४॥

“There was a glorious son of the demon
Maya, elder than Dundubhi. The said Vali
formerly had a bitter enmity with him on
account of a woman. (4)

स तु सुप्ते जने wat किष्किन्धाद्वारमागत:।
नर्दति स्म सुसंरब्धो वालिनं चाह्वयद् Weil

“Arrived at the gates of Kiskindha at
dead of night, when people were asleep, he
for his part thundered and challenged Vali to
a duel, highly enraged as he was. (5)

प्रसुप्तस्तु मम भ्राता नर्दतो भैरवस्वनम्।
श्रुत्वा न ममृषे वाली निष्पपात Ward तदा॥ il

“Hearing the frightful roar of the
thundering Mayavi, my brother, Vali, who
was fast asleep, did not brook his challenge
and briskly sallied forth at once. (6)

स तु वै नि:सृत: क्रोधात् तं हन्तुमसुरोत्तमम्।
वार्यमाणस्तत: स्त्रीभिर्मया च प्रणतात्मना॥७॥

Emerged in fury to kill Mayavi, the
foremost of demons, Vali for his part was
actually restrained from that daring act by
the women of his gynaeceum as well as by
