# YUDDHAKANDA #

excessive joy and could not speak; so the
tradition goes. (14)

ततोऽब्रवीद्धरिवर:र सीतामप्रतिजल्पतीम्।
किं त्वं चिन्तयसे देवि किं च at नाभिभाषसे। १७५ ॥

Thereupon Hanuman, the foremost of
monkeys, spoke as follows to Sita, who
was not making any answer: “What are you
thinking of, O godlike lady? And why don’t
you speak to me?” (15)

एवमुक्ता हनुमता सीता धर्मपथे स्थिता।
अब्रवीत् परमप्रीता बाष्पगद्गदया गिरा॥१६॥

Thus pleaded by Hanuman, Sita, who
was devoted to the path of virtue and felt
supremely delighted, replied as follows in a
voice choked with tears of emotions: (16)

प्रियमेतदुपश्रुत्य भर्तुर्विजयसंश्रितम्।
प्रहर्षवशमापन्ना निर्वाक्यास्मि क्षणान्तरम्॥ १७॥

“Overpowered by excessive joy on
hearing this pleasant tidings bearing on the
victory of my husband, | turned speechless
for a while. (17)
नहि पश्यामि wast चिन्तयन्ती प्लवंगम।
आख्यानकस्य भवतो दातुं प्रत्यभिनन्दनम्॥ १८॥

“Though taxing my brain, | really
conceive no gift equal (in value) to the news
conveyed by you, O valiant monkey! (18)
न fe पश्यामि aq सौम्य पृथिव्यामपि वानर।

Ag यत्प्रियाख्याने तव STAT भवेत् सुखम्॥ १९॥

“Nay, | can think of nothing on earth
or even in the other worlds which is worthy
of you or commensurate to the act of
communicating this most agreeable news
to me, and bestowing of which on you
satisfaction may come to me, O good
monkey. (19)

हिरण्यं वा सुवर्णं वा रत्नानि विविधानि च।
राज्यं वा त्रिषु लोकेषु एतन्नार्हति भाषितम्॥ २०॥

“Neither silver nor gold nor even precious
stones of various kinds, nor again sovereignty

781

of all the three worlds can be equal in value
to this message.” (20)

`एवमुक्तस्तु वैदेह्या प्रत्युवाच प्लवंगम:।
प्रगृहीताञ्जलिर्हर्षात् सीताया: प्रमुखे स्थित:॥ २१॥
Spoken to in these words by Sita
(a princess of the Videha territory), the
monkey, Hanuman, for his part, who stood
in front of Sita with joined palms, joyfully
submitted as follows: (21)

ud: प्रियहिते युक्ते भर्तुर्विजयकांक्षिणि।
स्निग्धमेवंविधं वाक्यं त्वमेवार्हस्यनिन्दिते॥ २२॥

“You alone can utter such kind words,
O irreproachable lady, devoted as you are
to that which is pleasing and conducive to
the good of your spouse, and solicitous of
your husband’s victory! (22)

Wade वचनं सौम्ये सारवत् स्निग्धमेव च।
रत्नौघाद्विविधाच्चापि देवराज्याद् विशिष्यते॥ 23 ॥

“This speech of yours, O gentle lady,
which is full of substance and affectionate
too, is superior in value to a heterogeneous
collection of precious stones and even to
the rulership of gods. (23)

अर्थतश्च मया प्राप्ता देवराज्यादयो गुणा:।
हतशत्रुं विजयिनं wa पश्यामि सुस्थितम्॥ २४॥
“Nay, all blessings like the rulership of
gods have been truly attained by me in that |
see Sri Rama victorious and happy, now that
his enemy, Ravana, has been killed.” (24)
तस्य तद् वचनं श्रुत्वा मैथिली जनकात्मजा।
Wd: शुभतरं वाक्यमुवाच पवनात्मजम्॥ २५॥
Hearing his foregoing submission, Sita
(a princess of Mithila), daughter of Janaka,
paid the following still more agreeable
compliment to Hanuman, sprung from the
loins of the wind-god: (25)

अतिलक्षणसम्पन्नं माधुर्यगुणभूषणम्।

बुद्ध्या ह्यष्टाङ्गया युक्तं त्वमेवार्हसि भाषितुम्॥ २६ ॥
“You alone can actually utter words

which are endowed with rare characteristics
