३60

Bowing first at his father’s feet with a
modest demeanour, he then laid himself low
at Kaikeyi’s feet, fully composed in mind.(2)

रामेत्युक्त्वा तु वचनं बाष्पपर्याकुलेक्षण:।
शशाक नृपतिर्दीनो नेक्षितुं नाभिभाषितुम्॥ ३॥
Having barely uttered the word “Rama”,
the afflicted monarch could neither cast a
look at him nor speak, his eyes blinded with
tears. (3)
तदपूर्वं नरपतेर्दृष्टवा रूपं भयावहम्।
रामोऽपि भयमापन्न: पदा स्पृष्टवेव पन्नगम्॥४॥
Seeing that unusual appearance of the
monarch, which gave rise to apprehension,
Sri Rama too was seized with dismay, even
as he would on touching a serpent with his
foot. (4)
न्दियैरप्रहृष्टैस्तं रोकसं Sra |
नि:श्वसन्तं महाराजं व्यथिताकुलचेतसम्॥५॥
ऊर्मिमालिनमक्षोभ्यं क्षुभ्यन्तमिव सागरम्।
उपप्लुतमिवादित्यमुक्तानृतमृषिं यथा ॥ ६॥

He saw the monarch emaciated through
grief and agony, with his senses divested of
joy, sighing with a distressed and perturbed
mind and looking like an unruffled ocean
getting turbulent with a succession of waves,
the sun obscured by an eclipse and a sage
that has told a lie. (5-6)
अचिन्त्यकल्पं नृपतेस्तं शोकमुपधारयन्।
aya संरब्धतर: wx ga पर्वणि॥७॥

Bestowing his thought on the said
grief of the monarch, which was almost
inconceivable, Sri Rama grew extremely
agitated as the ocean is on the full moon.

(7)
चिन्तयामास चतुरो राम: पितृहिते रत:।
किंस्विदद्यैव नृपतिर्न मां प्रत्यभिनन्दति॥८॥

The shrewd Sri Rama, devoted as he
was to the welfare of his father, said to
himself, ‘How on this day alone the Emperor
does not joyfully respond to my greeting?

(8)

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

अन्यदा मां पिता दृष्टवा कुपितोऽपि प्रसीदति।
wea मामद्य सम्प्रेक्ष्य किमायास: प्रवर्तते॥९॥

‘On other days my royal father would
be propitious, even though angry, on seeing
me. How is it that he feels agonized to
behold me today?’ (9)

a दीन ga शोकार्तो विषण्णवदनद्युति:।
कैकेयीमभिवाद्यैव Wa वचनमब्रवीत्॥१०॥

Like one distressed and stricken with
grief and with the lustre of his face
overshadowed with melancholy, Sri Rama
saluted Kaikeyi and spoke to her alone as
follows : (10)

कच्चिन्मया नापराद्धमज्ञानाद् येन A पिता।
कुपितस्तन्ममाचक्ष्व त्वमेवैनं प्रसादय॥११॥

“| hope no offence has been unwittingly
committed by me against my father. Pray,
tell me the reason why father is angry with
me. You alone can propitiate him on my
behalf.” (11)
अप्रसन्नमना: किं नु सदा At प्रति वत्सल:।

विषण्णवदनो दीन: afe at प्रति भाषते॥ eeu

“How, | wonder, is he not cheerful of
mind, though ever fond of me? With his face
downcast, he does not even speak to me,
afflicted as he is. (12)

शारीरो मानसो वापि कच्चिदेनं न बाधते।
संतापो वाभितापो वा दुर्लभं हि सदा सुखम्॥ १३॥
“| hope no agony caused by bodily
distemper or mental anguish afflicts him;
really speaking, everlasting happiness is
hard to secure. (13)
कच्चिन्न किंचिद् भरते कुमारे प्रियदर्शने।
शत्रुघ्ने वा महासत्त्वे AU वा ममाशुभम्॥ १४॥
“| hope no offence has been committed
by me against Prince Bharata of pleasing

aspect or Satrughna possessing great valour
or against my mothers. (14)

अतोषयन् महाराजमकुर्वन् वा पितुर्वच:।
मुहूर्तमपि नेच्छेयं जीवितुं कुपिते नृपे॥१५॥

“Unable to please the Emperor or failing
