224

लक्षितेयं war सीता तथा शोकपरायणा।
गृहे यां नाभिजानासि पञ्चास्यामिव पन्नगीम्॥ २३॥

“The aforesaid Sita, whom you do not
recognize as a five-hooded female serpent
in your abode, has been found by me,
indescribably given over to grief. (23)

wa जरयितुं शक्या सासुरैरमरैरपि।
विषसंस्पृष्टमत्यर्थं भुक्तमन्नमिवौजसा It २४॥

“She is incapable of being absorbed
with one’s might even by gods, including
demons, any more than food mixed with
poison in an excessive degree could be
digested with one’s natural digestive power,
if partaken of. (24)
तप:संतापलब्धस्ते सोऽयं धर्मपरिग्रह:।

न स नाशयितुं न्याय्य आत्मप्राणपरिग्रह:॥ २५॥

“It is not right for you to forfeit this vast
fortune, which is an outcome of virtue alone,
or the capacity to preserve your life for an
inordinately long period of time, both of which
have been acquired by you through the
observance of austerities. (25)

अवध्यतां तपोभिर्यां war समनुपश्यति।
आत्मन: सासुरैर्देवैर्हेतुस्तत्राप्ययं महान्॥२६॥
“The aforesaid extraordinary virtue
alone is responsible even for your immunity,
which you perceive, from death at the hands
of gods including demons, acquired by
austerities. (26)

सुग्रीवो न च देवोऽयं न यक्षो न च राक्षस:।
मानुषो weal राजन् सुग्रीवश्च हरीश्वर:।
तस्मात् प्राणपरित्राणं कथं राजन् करिष्यसि॥ २७॥
“Sugriva or Sri Rama is neither a god,
nor a Yaksa, nor an ogre. Sri Rama is a
human being; while Sugriva, O king, is the
lord of monkeys. How then will you be able
to preserve your life against the latter? (27)
न तु धर्मोषसंहारमधर्मफलसंहितम्।
तदेव फलमन्वेति धर्मश्चाधर्मनाशन:॥२८॥

« VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

“The fruit of virtue does not follow
one who has reached the culmination
of unrighteousness, even though he
practises virtue; the fruit of unrighteousness
alone follows him. And exceeding virtue
(following an unrighteous act) atones for
unrighteousness.* (28)
फलमस्याप्यधर्मस्य क्षिप्रमेव प्रपत्स्यसे॥ २९॥

“The fruit of virtue practised by you in
the past has already been attained and
enjoyed by you; there is no doubt about it.
You will reap the fruit of this unrighteousness
in the shape of abduction and detention of
Sita too very soon. (29)

जनस्थानवधं बुद्ध्वा वालिनश्च वधं तथा।
रामसुग्रीवसख्यं च बुद्ध्यस्व हितमात्मन:॥ ३०॥

“Recalling the extermination of the ogres
of Janasthana as well as the destruction of
Vali as also the alliance of Sri Rama with
Sugriva, ponder over your own interest.

(30)
कामं खल्वहमप्येक: सवाजिरथकुञ्जराम्।
लङ्कां नाशयितुं शक्तस्तस्यैष तु न निश्चय:॥ ३१॥

“Even though | am undoubtedly capable

of destroying Lanka with its horses, chariots

and elephants single-handed, such, however,
is not the resolve of Sri Rama. (31)

want fe प्रतिज्ञातं eden
उत्सादनममित्राणां सीता यैस्तु प्रधर्षिता॥३२॥
“Indeed in the presence of hordes of
monkeys and bears the extermination of his
enemies, by whom Sita was actually laid

violent hands upon, was vowed by Sri Rama.
(32)

अपकुर्वन् fe weet साक्षादपि पुरंदर:।
न सुखं प्राप्नुयादन्य: fe पुनस्त्वद्दिधो जन:॥ ३३॥
“Assuredly, doing wrong to Sri Rama,
not even Indra himself can attain happiness,

* This is corroborated by the Sruti text `धर्मेण पापमपनुदति` one is able to drive away sin through
righteousness. Expiatory acts recommended in Smrti texts also point to the same fact.
