* BALAKANDA +

77

ade : सर्ग:
Canto IV

After his ascension to the throne of Ayodhya, Sri Rama listens to his
own story as sung by his sons (KuSa and Lava)

प्राप्तराज्यस्य रामस्य वाल्मीकिर्भगवानृषि:।
चकार चरितं pet विचित्रपदमर्थवत्॥१॥
The glorious sage Valmiki composed a
poem, consisting of marvellous expressions
and full of excellent topics, depicting the
whole life-story of Sri Rama, who had since
regained his kingdom after returning from
the woods. (1)

चतुर्विंशत्सहस्राणि श्लोकानामुक्तवानृषि:।
तथा सर्गशतान् पञ्च षट् काण्डानि तथोत्तरम्॥ २॥

The sage uttered twenty-four thousand
verses and made out of them six Kandas,
consisting of five hundred (and odd) cantos,
and an Uttarakanda, the epilogue. (2)

Pa तु तन्महाप्राज्: सभविष्यं सहोत्तरम्।
चिन्तयामास को न्वेतत् प्रयुञ्जीयादिति way: ३॥

Having duly completed it alongwith the
Uttarakanda, dealing with the future events
of Sri Rama’s life, the highly intelligent Valmiki
contemplated as to what man endowed with
a powerful memory could possibly recite it
before audiences. (3)

तस्य चिन्तयमानस्य महर्षेर्भावितात्मन:।
अगृह्णीतां तत: पादौ मुनिवेषौ कुशीलवौ॥४॥

While that great seer of purified mind
was pondering as aforesaid, Kusa and
Lava, the two sons of Sri Rama, brought
forth by Sita during her exile at the hermitage
of Valmiki, by whom she had been given
shelter and who had thus been the godfather
of the two boys, presently appeared in the
garb of hermits and caught hold of his feet
as a mark of respect. (4)

कुशीलवौ तु धर्मज्ञौ राजपुत्रौ यशस्विनौ।
wet स्वरसम्पन्नौ ददर्शाश्रमवासिनौ॥ ५॥

Valmiki cast a glance at Kusa and
Lava, the two co-uterine princes, who had
been living since their very birth in his own
hermitage as his godsons and pupils, who
knew their duty towards their godfather and
teacher and had actually acquired great
fame by virtue of their devotion to the sage
and were, besides, gifted with a musical
voice and adepts in the science of music.

(5)
a तु मेधाविनौ apr वेदेषु परिनिष्ठितौ।
वेदोपबृंहणार्थाय तावग्राहयत प्प्रभु:॥६॥
काव्यं रामायणं कृत्स्नं सीतायाश्चरितं महत्।
पौलस्त्यवधमित्येवं dnt चरितव्रत:॥७॥

Seeing the two boys endowed with
exceptional talent and well-versed in the
Vedas, the glorious sage, who had observed
sacred vows all his life and had thereby
acquired the capacity to undertake this
stupendous task, taught them, with the object
of enlightening them on the meaning of the
Vedas, the whole of the great poem of the
Ramayana, (mainly) consisting of the story
of Sita and entitled “Paulastya Vadha”, an

account of the death of Ravana, the
grandson of Pulasti, a mind-born son of
Brahma. (6-7)

Wet Wa च मधुरं प्रमाणैस्तरिभिरन्वितम्।

जातिळ्ळिभ सप्तभिर्युक्तं तन्त्रीलयसमन्वितम्॥८॥
भयानकै: |

शृङ्गारकरुणहास्यरौद्र
वीरादिंभी रसैर्युक्तं काव्यमेतदगायताम्॥९॥

The two boys chanted this poem,
which was delightful to read and chant,
could be adapted to the three measures of
time (slow, medium and quick), could be
sung to the lute with proper rhythm and in
the seven notes of the gamut and was
