# YUDDHAKANDA +

गजानां दशसाहस्रं रथानामयुतं तथा।
हयानामयुते द्वे च साग्रकोटिश्च रक्षसाम्॥१६॥

“The strength of elephants in the army
of Ravana is ten thousand, that of chariots
is also ten thousand; nay, that of horses is
twenty thousand, while that of ogre-foot
soldiers is over one crore. (16)

विक्रान्ता बलवन्तश्च संयुगेष्वाततायिन:।
seer राक्षसराजस्य नित्यमेते निशाचरा:॥१७॥
“These rangers of the night, viz.,
Prahasta and others, are all valiant and
mighty, cruel on the field of battle and are
ever beloved of Ravana, the ruler of ogres.
(17)

`एकैकस्यात्र युद्धार्थे राक्षसस्य विशाम्पते।
war: सहस्राणां सहस्रमुपतिष्ठते॥ ei
“A body of adherents consisting of ten
lakhs stands at the beck and call of each
ogre of the afore-mentioned generals, O
protector of the people!” (18)
`एवमुक्त्वा महाबाहू राक्षसांस्तानदर्शयत्॥१९॥
रामं कमलपत्राक्षमिदमुत्तरमब्रवीत्॥ २० ॥

रावणावरज: श्रीमान् रामप्रियचिकोर्षया।
कुबेरं तु यदा wa रावण: प्रतियुद्ध्यति॥ २१॥

षष्टि: शतसहस्राणि तदा निर्यान्ति राक्षसा:।

पराक्रमेण वीर्येण तेजसा सत्त्वगौरवात्।
Ae ह्यत्र दर्पेण रावणस्य दुरात्मन:॥ २२॥
Having conveyed as above the
aforesaid information concerning Lanka,
furnished by his ministers, the mighty-armed
Vibhisana produced the said ogres before
Sri Rama and caused everything concerning
Lanka to be made known to Sri Rama by
his ministers themselves. With intent to please
Sri Rama, the glorious Vibhisana (the
youngest half-brother of Ravana) further
submitted as follows to Sri Rama, whose

423

eyes resembled the petals of a lotus:
“When Ravana for his part, O Rama,
launched an offensive against (his own half-
brother) Kubera (the god of riches), sixty
lakh ogres sallied forth with him at that
time—ogres who were actually compeers
of the evil-minded Ravana in prowess,
virility, energy, abundance of courage and
steadfastness in battle. (19—22)

अत्र मन्युर्न कर्तव्य: कोपये त्वां न भीषये।
समर्थो ह्यसि वीर्येण सुराणामपि निग्रहे॥ २३॥

“No depression or indignation should
be resorted to by you on this report. | do not
mean to terrify you but am simply rousing
your wrath; for, | know, you are capable of
subduing even gods by virtue of your valour.

(23)

THATT GT बलेन महता वृतम्।
ae वानरानीकं निर्मथिष्यसि रावणम्॥ २४॥
“Disposing the yonder simian army in
battle array in the same way as has been
done by Ravana, you shall be able to
crush Ravana who is surrounded by a
huge army consisting of four limbs
viz., elephants, chariots, cavalry and foot
soldiers.” (24)

रावणावरजे वाक्यमेवं gala राघव:।
शत्रूणां प्रतिघातार्थमिदं वचनमब्रवीत्॥ २५॥

When Vibhisana (the youngest वा
brother of Ravana) made the foregoing
speech, Sri Rama (a scion of Raghu)
issued orders as follows for attacking the
enemy: (25)

wert तु लङ्काया नीलो वानरपुङ्खव:।
प्रहस्तं प्रतियोद्धा स्याद् वानरैर्बहुभिर्वृत:।॥ २६॥
“Making his way to the eastern gate,
surrounded by numerous monkeys, Nila,
a veritable bull among the monkeys,
for his part should fight against Prahasta.
(26)
