872

time to time to destroy the barbarians
(Dasyus) who violate all the bounds of
Dharma. (27)

एषा मया तव नराधिप राक्षसाना-

जन्मप्रभावमतुलं ससुतस्य AAAI २८॥

“O king, | have thus related in detail to
you today all about the origin of the Raksasas.
Learn from me further, O jewel among the
Raghus, the origin of Ravana and his son,

« VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

as also all about their immeasurable powers.

(28)
चिरात् सुमाली व्यचरद् रसातलं
स राक्षसो विष्णुभयार्दितस्तदा।
पुत्रैश्च पौत्रैश्च समन्वितो बली

ततस्तु लङ्कामवसद् धनेश्वर:।॥ २९॥

“Tormented by the fear of Visnu, that
mighty ogre, Sumali wandered for long in
the nether world with his sons and grandsons.
Meanwhile, VaiSravana took up his abode in
Lanka.” (29)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये उत्तरकाण्डेऽष्टम: सर्ग: ॥ ८ ॥

Thus ends Canto Eight in the Uttarakanda of the glorious Ramayana of Valmiki,
the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

नवम: wet:
Canto IX

The origin of Ravana and others, their stay in Gokarna
to perform Tapas (askesis)

कस्यचित् AM कालस्य सुमाली AMT Were: |
रसातलान्मर्त्यलोकं ad a विचचार sie

“After sometime the Raksasa known
as Sumali, emerged from the nether world
and actually wandered, they say, all over
the world of mortals. (1)
नीलजीमूतसंकाशस्तप्तकाञ्चनकुण्डल: ।
कन्यां दुहितरं गृह्य far पद्ममिव श्रियम्॥ २॥

“Resembling a dark cloud and wearing
earrings made of pure gold, he was holding
by the hand his daughter, who resembled
Laksmi without the lotus. (2)

राक्षसेन्द्र: स तु तदा विचरन् a महीतले।
तदापश्यत् स गच्छन्तं पुष्पकेण धनेश्वरम्॥ ३॥
गच्छन्तं पितरं xe पुलस्त्यतनयं विभुम्।
तं दृष्टवामरसंकाशं गच्छन्तं पावकोपमम्॥४॥
रसातलं प्रविष्ट: सन्मर्त्यलोकात् सविस्मय:।
इत्येवं चिन्तयामास राक्षसानां महामति:॥५॥

“While that Raksasa chieftain was thus

actually wandering on the earth, he happened
to see Kubera proceeding in the aerial car,
Puspaka, to see his powerful father, Visarwa,
the son of Pulastya. Filled with wonder to see
him, who was godlike and resplendent like
fire, flying, the highly intelligent Sumall, left
the world of human beings, went to the nether
world and thought as follows: (3—5)

fe कृत्वा va saa वर्धेमहि कथं वयम्।
अथाब्रवीत् Yat Ta: कैकसीं नाम नामत:॥६॥
‘What has to be done to ensure the
permanent good of the ogres! How shall we
prosper?’ “Then the Raksasa told his daughter
by name Kaikas!: (6)
पुत्रि प्रदानकालोऽयं यौवनं व्यतिवर्तते।
प्रत्याख्यानाच्च भीतैस्त्वं न at: प्रतिगृह्यसे॥७॥
‘My child, you are passing beyond the
period of youth, this is the time to give you

away in marriage; suitors hold back for fear
of rejection. (7)
