* AYODHYAKANDA +

“This territory is but a pleasure-grove
attached to your palace and we have been
taken in by our unwariness in failing to
know of your visit beforehand (and thus
being deprived of an opportunity to receive
you in advance). We hereby offer you all
that we have; pray, dwell in the house of a
ferryman, which is your own. (16)

अस्ति मूलफलं चैतन्निषादै: स्वयमर्जितम्।
आर्द्र शुष्कं AM मांसं वन्यं चोच्चावचं तथा॥ १७॥

“Here are roots and fruits, both green

597

and dried, procured by the Nisadas (a tribe
of fishermen, Guha’s own clansmen)
themselves as well as the pulp of fruits and
wild cereals of various kinds. (17)

आशंसे स्वाशिता सेना वत्स्यत्येनां विभावरीम्।
अर्चितो विविधै: कामै: श्व: ससैन्यो गमिष्यसि ।। १८ ॥
“| hope the army, being well fed by
us, will stay here tonight. Entertained with
various objects of enjoyment, you too, |

hope, will leave with your army only
tomorrow.” (18)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्येऽयोध्याकाण्डे चतुरशीतितम: सर्ग: ॥ ८४॥

Thus ends Canto Eighty-four in the Ayodhyakanda of the glorious Ramayana of
Valmiki, the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

Canto LXXXV

Highly praising Guha, Bharata, while departing, inquires of him the way
to the hermitage of Bharadwaja. Promising to follow the prince as
a guide with his servants and placing his misgivings before
him, Guha seeks to know his intentions about Sri Rama
and consoles the prince, who was constantly
bewailing till dusk

एवमुक्तस्तु भरतो निषादाधिपतिं गुहम्।
प्रत्युवाच महाप्राज्ञो वाक्यं हेत्वर्थसंहितम्॥१॥

Spoken to as above, Bharata, for his
part, who was exceedingly wise, gave to
Guha, the ruler of the Nisadas, the following
reply, which was consonant with reason
and purposeful : (1)
ऊर्जित: Gel a काम: Hal मम गुरो: Wal
यो मे त्वमीदृशीं सेनामभ्यर्चयितुमिच्छसि॥ २॥

“Indeed your great object of according
a right royal reception to me has been
accomplished in that you seek to entertain
my army of such magnitude, O friend of my
elder brother!” (2)

इत्युक्त्वा स महातेजा गुहं वचनमुत्तमम्।
अब्रवीद् भरत: sitar wert दर्शयन् पुन:॥ ३॥

Having spoken as above, the said
illustrious Bharata, who was possessed of
great splendour, once more addressed the
following excellently-worded question to
Guha, about the way ahead : (3)
कतरेण गमिष्यामि भरद्वाजाश्रमुं यथा।
गहनोऽयं yet देशो गङ्गानूपो दुरत्यय:॥४॥

“By which of the two routes appearing
before me shall | proceed to the hermitage
of Rsi Bharadwaja? This tract of land drained
by the Ganga is most thickly set with trees
etc., and as such difficult to cross.” (4)

wa dq वचनं श्रुत्वा राजपुत्रस्य धीमत:।
अब्रवीत् प्राञ्जलिर्भूत्वा गुहो गहनगोचर:॥ ५॥

Hearing the aforesaid question of that
intelligent prince, Bharata, Guha, who used
