* BALAKANDA +

It was crowded with horses of excellent
breed born in the territories of Kamboja,
Bahlika (Balkh) as well as in Vanayu, river-
horses (born in the Indus valley), horses
that vied with the horse of god, Indra, known
by the name of Uccaihsrava. (22)

विन्ध्यपर्वतजैर्मत्तै: पूर्णां हैमवतैरपि।
मदान्वितैरतिबलैर्मातङ्गै: पर्वतोपमै: ।। २३ ॥

It was full of elephants in heat and
mighty as mountains, born in the Vindhya
and the Himalayan regions. (23)

ऐरावतकुलीनैश्च महापद्मकुलैस्तथा |
अञ्जनादपि निष्क्रान्तैर्वामनादपि च द्विपै:॥ २४॥
भद्रैर्मद्रैर्मृगैश्चैव भद्रमन्द्रमृगैस्तथा |
भद्रमन्दरैर्भद्रमृगैर्मृगमन्दैश्च सा पुरी॥२५॥
नित्यमत्तै: सदा got नागैरचलसंनिभै:।
सा योजने द्वे च भूय: सत्यनामा प्रकाशते।
Te दशरथो राजा वसञ्जगदपालयत्॥ २६॥
The city was also ever crowded with
elephants belonging to the races of Airavata,
Mahapadma, Afijana and Vamana and those
of the Bhadra, Mandra and Mrga species
(born on the Himalayas and Sahya range
respectively), as well as with those of cross-
breeds known by the names of Bhadra-

85

Mandra-Mrgas, Bhadra-Mandras, Bhadra-
Mrgas and Mrga-Mandras, ever in rut and
huge as _ mountains. Ayodhya (lit.
unassailable) bears a really significant name,
particularly to a width of two Yojanas or
sixteen miles out of its total width of three
Yojanas, twenty-four miles. While residing
in this part of the city, King Dasaratha
protected the Kingdom. (24—26)

at Ot स महातेजा राजा दशरथो महान्।
शशास शमितामित्रो नक्षत्राणीव चन्द्रमा:॥ २७॥
Just as the moon holds sway over the
starry regions, similarly the said King
DaSaratha, who was possessed of great
glory and had destroyed all his enemies,
ruled over the aforesaid city. (27)
at : १ लां
गृहैर्विचित्रैरुपशोभितां शिवाम्।
पुरीमयोध्यां नृसहस्रसंकुलां शशास वै शक्रसमो महीपति: ।। २८ ।।

In this way the king, who vied with
Indra, ruled over this blessed city of Ayodhya,
which bore a significant name, was protected
with strong gates and bars and was graced
with houses of various designs and teemed
with thousands of men. (28)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये बालकाण्डे YS: सर्ग: ॥ ६ ॥

Thus ends Canto Six in the Balakanda of the glorious Ramayana of Valmiki,
the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

Waa:

सर्ग:

Canto VII

The virtue and upright conduct of the eight ministers
of Emperor DaSaratha

तस्यामात्या गुणैरासन्निक्ष्वाको: सुमहात्मन:।
मन्त्रज्ञाश्चेङ्गितज्ञाश्च नित्यं प्रियहिते रता:॥१॥

The ministers of the exceptionally
high-souled King DaSaratha, a scion of
Ikswaku, knew how to weigh the pros and
cons of a problem, could read the mind of

others and were ever devoted to the welfare
of their beloved master. In short, they were
endowed with all virtues appropriate to a
minister. (1)

अष्टौ बभूवुर्वीरस्य तस्यामात्या यशस्विन:।
शुचयश्चानुरक्ताश्च राजकृत्येषु नित्यश:॥ २॥
