272

current of a river would rush towards a tree
standing on its bank. Having penetrated deep
into Madhuvana after overpowering the
guards by dint of their superior might, all the
monkeys—who felt exceptionally strong due
to the permission granted by Angada to enjoy
the produce of the grove and because
Hanuman had seen Sita, princess of Mithila,
and others had heard of her being present in
Lanka, drank honey on that happy occasion
and gathered the delicious fruits to enjoy
them. (2—7)

उत्पत्य च ad: Ad वनपालान् समागतान्।
a ताडयन्त: शतश: WaT मधुवने तदा॥८॥

Jumping up and thrashing the guards
of the grove, who had come together to
hinder them, all the monkeys then became
engaged in hundreds in gathering the fruit
etc., in Madhuvana on that occasion. (8)

मधूनि द्रोणमात्राणि बाहुभि: परिगृह्य ते।
पिबन्ति कपय: केचित् सङ्घशस्तत्र Bead ९॥
Holding with their arms honeycombs
weighing a Drona (approx. 30 Kg.) each,
some monkeys in that grove quaffed the
honey in groups to their heart’s content. (9)

ura स्म सहिता: ad भक्षयन्ति तथापरे।
केचित् पीत्वापविध्यन्ति मधूनि मधुपिङ्गला:॥ १०॥

All the monkeys, who were reddish
brown like honey, broke the honeycombs
together, while others partook of the honey
contained in those combs, while still others
threw away the combs after drinking the
honey. (10)
मधूच्छिष्टेन केचिच्च जघ्नुरन्योन्यमुत्कटा:।
अपरे वृक्षमूलेषु शाखा Wel व्यवस्थिता:॥११॥

Others, who were intoxicated, pelted
one another with balls of wax, while still
others stood rooted at the foot of trees,
seizing the boughs. (11)
अत्यर्थं च मदग्लाना: पर्णान्यास्तीर्य शेरते।
उन्मत्तवेगा: प्लवगा मधुमत्ताश्च हृष्टवत्॥१२॥

« VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

Feeling utterly languid through inebriety,
monkeys, who were drunk with honey and
possessed the impetuosity of a madman,
lay down, full of joy, spreading leaves on
the ground. (12)

श्षिपन्त्यपि तथान्योन्यं स्खलन्ति च तथापरे।
केचित् श्र्वेडान् प्रकुर्वन्ति केचित् कूजन्ति हृष्टवत्॥ १३ ॥

Others, likewise, insulted one another,
while others stumbled down. Some roared
like lions, while others, full of joy, whistled
like birds. (13)

हरयो मधुना मत्ता: केचित् AAT महीतले।
धृष्टा: केचिद्धसन्त्यन्ये केचित् कुर्वन्ति चेतरत्॥ १४॥

Drunk with honey, some monkeys lay
down to repose on the earth’s surface, while
other impudent monkeys laughed, while still
others did the reverse, i.e., wept. (14)

en केचिद्वदन्त्यन्ये केचिद् बुध्यन्ति चेतरत्।
येऽप्यत्र मधुपाला: स्यु: WT दधिमुखस्य तु॥ १५ ॥

Having done one thing, some monkeys
pretended to have done something else,
while still others construed their acts in a
different way. (15)

ast तैर्वानरैर्भीमै: Ufafacst fest Tel: |
जानुभिश्च प्रघृष्टाश्च देवमार्गं च दर्शिता:॥१६॥
Hindered in their duty by those terrible
monkeys, even the aforesaid servants of
Dadhimukha, who for their part guarded the
honey in this grove, fled in all directions.
Nay, they were dragged by their knees and,
further seized by their feet, were tossed up
in the air. (16)

अब्रुवन् परमोद्विग्ना गत्वा दधिमुखं aa:
हनूमता दत्तवरैर्हतं मधुवनं बलात्।
ad च जानुभिर्घृष्टा देवमार्गं च दर्शिता:॥१७॥
Approaching Dadhimukha, greatly
alarmed as they were, they submitted as
follows : “Madhuvana has been forcibly laid
waste by the monkeys, who had been
granted by Hanuman, the privilege to enjoy
the fruits etc., of the grove. Nay, we too
