126

Nay, quickly holding up their axes,
highly enraged, as they were, they said,
“She does not deserve to have Ravana, the
suzerain lord of ogres, for her husband.”

(16)

सा veda भीमाभी राक्षसीभिर्वरांगना।

सा बाष्पमपमार्जन्ती शिंशपां तामुपागमत्॥१७॥
While that lovely lady was being
overawed by the terrible ogresses, she
approached that Asoka tree, wiping away
her tears. (17)
ततस्तां शिंशपां सीता राक्षसीभि: समावृता।
अभिगम्य विशालाक्षी तस्थौ शोकपरिप्लुता॥ १८॥
Reaching the foot of that Sirngapa tree,
the large-eyed Sita then stood overwhelmed
with grief, surrounded as she was by the
ogresses. (18)
at कृशां दीनवदनां मलिनाम्बरवासिनीम्।
भर्त्सयाञ्चक्रिरे भीमा राक्षस्यस्ता: समन्तत:॥ १९॥
Standing around her, the hideous
ogresses reproached the emaciated Sita,
who wore a wretched appearance and was
clad in a soiled garment. (19)

ततस्तु विनता नाम wert भीमदर्शना।
अब्रवीत् कुपिताकारा कराला निर्णतोदरी।॥ २०॥

Thereupon a fearful and grim-visaged
ogress, Vinata by name, who wore angry
looks and had a sunken belly, spoke as
follows: (20)

सीते पर्याप्तमेतावद् wd: स्नेह: प्रदर्शित:।
सर्वत्रातिकृतं भद्रे व्यसनायोपकल्पते॥ २१॥

“This much of affection which has been
shown by you for your husband is enough,
O Sita! But anything carried to excess
leads to adversity everywhere, O good lady !

(21)
परितुष्टास्मि भद्रं a मानुषस्ते कृतो विधि:।
ममापि तु aa: पथ्यं ब्रुवन्त्या: कुरु मैथिलि॥ २२॥

“lam highly pleased with you, O
princess of Mithila ! May good betide you !
The rule of conduct enjoined upon human
beings has been followed by you. Now

« VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

please also carry out the advice tendered
by me, who speak only that which is
wholesome to you. (22)
विक्रान्तमापतन्तं च सुरेशमिव वासवम्॥ २३॥
“Take for your husband Ravana, the
protector of all ogres, who is valiant and
possessed of a comely exterior like Indra,
the ruler of gods. (23)
दक्षिणं त्यागशीलं च सर्वस्य प्रियवादिनम्।
मानुषं कृपणं WA त्यक्त्वा रावणमाश्रय॥ २४॥
“Leaving the mortal and wretched Rama,
betake yourself to Ravana, who is clever
and munificent and speaks kindly to all. (24)
दिव्यांगरागा वैदेहि दिव्याभरणभूषिता।
अद्यप्रभृति लोकानां सर्वेषामीश्वरी भव॥ २५॥
अग्ने: स्वाहा यथा Sat शची वेन्द्रस्य शोभने।
fe a रामेण वैदेहि कृपणेन गतायुषा॥ २६॥

“Using celestial cosmetics and adorned
with excellent ornaments, O princess of the
Videha territory, become you from this day
the sovereign of all the three worlds like
Swaha, the consort of the god of fire, or like
Goddess Saci, the spouse of Indra, O
charming lady ! What purpose of yours will
be served by the wretched Rama, whose
life has now ebbed, O princess of the Videha
territory ! (25-26)
एतदुक्तं च मे वाक्यं यदि त्वं न करिष्यसि।
अस्मिन् मुहूर्ते सर्वास्त्वां भक्षयिष्यामहे वयम्॥ २७॥

“If, on the other hand, you will not act
upon this advice tendered by me, we shall
all devour you at this very hour.” (27)

अन्या तु विकटा नाम लम्बमानपयोधरा।
अब्रवीत् कुपिता सीतां मुष्टिमुद्यम्य तर्जती। २८॥

Then clenching her fist and menacing
Sita, another ogress with hanging breasts,
Vikata by name, angrily spoke as follows :

(28)
बहून्यप्रतिरूपाणि वचनानि सुदुर्मते।
अनुक्रोशान्मृदुत्वाच्च सोढानि aa मैथिलि॥ २९॥
