168

known as the Aghamarsana-Sukta—vide
Rgveda X. 190), duly propitiated the manes
and gods (including Rsis) with libations of
water and also poured oblations into the
sacred fire and partaken of the remnants of
the sacrifice, which have been likened* to
ambrosia in the Sastras, the blessed Rsis
sat down on the bank of the Ganga with a
cheerful mind surrounding the high-souled
Viswamitra on all sides. When they were all
comfortably seated in order of seniority as
also Sri Rama and Laksmana (the two
scions of Raghu) according to their position,
Sri Rama presently addressed Viswamitra
as follows with an overjoyed mind:
(10-11)

त्रैलोक्यं कथमाक्रम्य गता नदनदीपतिम्॥ १२॥
“| wish to hear, O venerable Sir, about

the holy river Ganga, which takes a threefold
course, flowing as it does through heaven,
the earth and the subterranean regions,
how having coursed through the three worlds,
viz., heaven and earth and the space
intervening the two, it meets the ocean (the
ruler of rivers, both big and small).” (12)

चोदितो रामवाक्येन विश्वामित्रो महामुनि:।
qe WI च WEA वक्तुमेवोपचक्रमे॥१३॥

Impelled by the inquiry of Sri Rama,
the great sage ViSwamitra started discoursing
on the origin as well as on the expansion of
the holy Ganga, as follows : (13)

शैलेन्द्रो हिमवान् Wa धातूनामाकरो महान्।
Ta कन्याद्वयं WH रूपेणाप्रतिमं भुवि॥१४॥

“There stands (on the extreme north of
India) O Rama, the great Himalaya, the
king of mountains and a storehouse of
minerals. A couple of daughters, matchless
in beauty on earth, were born to the deity
presiding over the said mountain, O Rama!

(14)

« VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

या wegeat wa तयोर्माता सुमध्यमा।
नाम्ना मेना मनोज्ञा वै पत्नी हिमवत: प्रिया॥ १५॥

“The charming and beloved consort of
Himavan, the deity presiding over the
Himalayas, Mena by name, who was marked
by a slender waist and was the daughter of
Mount Meru, was their mother, O Rama!

(15)
wat गङ्गेयमभवज्येष्ठा हिमवत: सुता।
उमा नाम द्वितीयाभूत् कन्या तस्यैव WTI १६॥

“The elder daughter of Himavan, born
through her, was this Ganga. A second
daughter, Uma by name, was born to the
selfsame Himavan, O scion of Raghu ! (16)
अथ ज्येष्ठां सुरा: Ud देवकार्यचिकोर्षया।
west वरयामासुर्गङ्गां त्रिपथगां नदीम्॥१७॥

“With the intention of accomplishing
through her the purpose of gods, all the
gods presently asked Himavan, the king of
mountains, for the elder of the two, viz.,
Ganga, who later turned into a river that
follows a threefold course. (17)

ददौ धर्मेण हिमवांस्तनयां लोकपावनीम्।
स्वच्छन्दपथगां Wet त्रैलोक्यहितकाम्यया॥ Ve

“From considerations of piety (according
to which the solicitation of a supplicant is
not to be rejected) and out of solicitude for
the welfare of the three worlds, Himavan
gave in adoption to gods his daughter,
Ganga, who is capable of purifying the world
and who could carve her way even through
the airspace and the subterranean regions
according to her own free will. (18)

प्रतिगृह्य त्रिलोकार्थं त्रिलोकहितकाङ्क्षिण:।

गङ्गामादाय तेऽगच्छन् क्तार्थेनान्तरात्मना ॥ १९॥
“Accepting the gift so readily given by

the pious Himavan in the interest of the

three worlds and taking the Ganga with
them, the gods, who wished well of the

* Vide Bhagavadgita : यज्ञशिष्टामृतभुजो यान्ति ब्रह्म सनातनम्। (IV. 31)

“Those partaking of ambrosia in the form of the remnants of a sacrifice attain the everlasting Brahma.”
