882

back to him who is asking for it in a peaceful
manner.’ (30)

प्रहस्तादपि संश्रुत्य tal वैश्रवणो aa:
प्रत्युवाच Weed तं वाक्यं वाक्यविदां वर:॥ ३१॥
“Hearing these words from Prahasta,
god Vaisravana, the best of speakers, replied
as follows to Prahasta: (31)

दत्ता ममेयं frat तु लङ्का शून्या निशाचरै:।
निवेशिता च मे रक्षो दानमानादिभिर्गुणै:॥ ३२॥

“This city of Lanka evacuated by the
Raksasas, was given to me by my father. It
then came to be peopled by me by
inducements of gifts and honour etc. (32)
ate गच्छ दशग्रीवं wt wt च यन्मम।
तत्राप्येतन्महाबाहो भुङ्छ्ष्व राज्यमकण्टकम्॥ ३३॥
अविभक्तं त्वया सार्धं राज्यं यच्चापि मे वसु।
एवमुक्त्वा धनाध्यक्षो जगाम पितुरन्तिकम्॥ ३४॥

“Go and tell DaSagriva, “my city and
kingdom as well belong to you. My kingdom
as well as all my wealth stands undivided
with you. Enjoy it (with me) without any fear
of rivalry.” Having spoken thus, the lord of
wealth sought the presence of his father.

(33-34)
अभिवाद्य गुरुं we रावणस्य यदीप्सितम्।
WH ad दशग्रीवो qd प्रेषितवान् मम॥ ३५॥
मयात्र यदनुष्ठैय तन्ममाचक्ष्व सुन्रत॥ ३६॥

Paying respects to his father, he
conveyed DaSagriva’s desire in the following
words: ‘Father, DaSagriva has just sent an
emissary to me saying: “Let Lanka, which
was previously occupied by the Raksasas,
be given back to me. Please tell me, O
pious one, what | should do in this
connection.” (35-36)

ब्रह्मर्षिस्त्वेवमुक्तोऽसौ विश्रवा मुनिपुङ्खव:।
Watt धनदं We A पुत्र वचो मम॥ ३७॥
“Being addressed thus, Visrava, the

Brahmarsi, the best of sages, told the lord
of wealth, who was standing with joined

« VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

palms, ‘My son, listen to my words.
दशग्रीवो महाबाहुरुक्तवान् मम संनिधौ।
मया निर्भत्सितश्चासीद् बहुशोक्त: gaa: u ३८॥
स क्रोधेन मया चोक्तो ध्वंससे च पुन: TA: |
श्रेयोऽभियुक्तं धर्म्य च श्रृणु पुत्र वचो AAU ३९॥

‘DaSagriva, the mighty-armed, said the
same thing in my presence also. | rebuked
him and exhorted that highly evil-minded
fellow in several ways. In anger | repeatedly
said, You shall be destroyed. Son, listen to
my words which will do you good and which
are consonant with Dharma. (38-39)

वरप्रदानसम्मूढो मान्यामान्यं सुदुर्मति:।
न वेत्ति मम शापाच्च प्रकृतिं दारुणां गत: ॥४०॥

‘This most evil-minded fellow, deluded
as he is by the boons that have been
granted to him, does not distinguish between
people to be respected and those not to be
respected. Again, by my curse he is evil-
minded by nature. (40)

तस्माद् गच्छ महाबाहो कैलासं धरणीधरम्।

निवेशय निवासार्थं त्यक्त्वा लङ्कां सहानुग:॥४१॥
‘Hence, O mighty-armed one, leave

Lanka and proceed to Mount Kailasa with

your followers and people it for your
residence. (41)

wa मन्दाकिनी war नदीनामुत्तमा नदी।
काञ्चनै: सूर्यसंकाशै: पङ्कजै: संवृतोदका॥४२॥
कुमुदैरुत्पलैश्चैव अन्यैश्चैव सुगन्धिभि:।
wa देवा: सगन्धर्वा: साप्सरोरगकिंनरा:॥४३॥
ae ad तवानेन at धनद रक्षसा॥४४॥
जानीषे fe यथानेन लब्ध: परमको वर:॥४५॥

‘The Mandakini, the best of rivers, whose
waters are covered all over with lotus flowers
of golden hue and bright like the sun, as also
with white water-lilies, blue lotuses and other
flowers of sweet fragrance, flows there. Gods
with Gandharvas, Apsaras, Nagas and
Kinnaras, all of a sportive nature, always resort
to that place and constantly revel there. Since

(37)
