* ARANYAKANDA «

a देश: श्लाघनीयश्च नातिदूरे च राघव।
गोदावर्या: समीपे च मैथिली तत्र रंस्यते॥१८॥

“That region is commendable and also
not very far off from this place, O Raghava,
and stands near the Godavari. The princess
of Mithila will feel delighted there. (18)

प्राज्यमूलफलैश्चैव नानाद्बिजगणैर्युत: |
विविक्तश्च महाबाहो पुण्यो रम्यस्तथैव च॥१९॥

“Having abundant roots and fruits and
full of diverse flocks of birds. O mighty-
armed one, it is solitary, holy and charming
as well. (19)

भवानपि सदाचार: wy परिरक्षणे।
अपि चात्र वसन् राम तापसान् पालयिष्यसि॥ २०॥

“You too are of good conduct and
capable of protecting the weak. Nay, staying
there, O Rama, you will protect the ascetics.

(20)
एतदालक्ष्यते वीर मधूकानां महावनम्।
उत्तरेणास्य गन्तव्यं न्यग्रोधमपि गच्छता॥ २१॥

“O hero, here is seen the great forest

of Madhuka trees; from there you have to

proceed along the northern route leading to
a banyan tree. (21)

ad: स्थलमुपारुह्य पर्वतस्याविदूरत:।
ख्यात: पञ्चवटीत्येव नित्यपुष्पितकानन:॥ २२॥

749

“Then, moving up a plateau, will be
reached by you not far away from a
mountain, a region full of woodlands, ever
laden with blossoms and known by the
name of Paficavati.” (22)

अगस्त्येनैवमुक्तस्तु राम: सौमित्रिणा सह।
सत्कृत्यामन्त्रयामास तमृषिं सत्यवादिनम्॥ २३॥

Thus spoken to by Agastya, Rama
together with the son of Sumitra honoured
and took leave of that sage, who always
spoke the truth. (23)

at तु तेनाभ्यनुज्ञातौ कृतपादाभिवन्दनौ।
wad पञ्चवटीं जग्मतु: सह सीतया॥ २४॥

Permitted by him and having bowed
down at his feet in reverence, the two
brothers moved with Sita towards the
Pafncavati hermitage. (24)

गृहीतचापौ तु नराधिपात्मजौ
विषक्कततूणी समरेष्वकातरौ।
यथोपदिष्टेन पथा महर्षिणा
प्रजग्मतु: पञ्चवटीं समाहितौ॥ २५॥
With their quivers fastened at the
back and wielding their bows, the two
princes, who were of concentrated mind
and fearless in battle, proceeded to Paficavati
along the path as directed by the great
sage. (25)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्येऽरण्यकाण्डे त्रयोदश: AWA: ॥ 23 ॥

Thus ends Canto Thirteen in the Aranyakanda of the glorious Ramayana of Valmiki,
the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

Canto XIV
Meeting with Jatayu

अथ पञ्चवटीं गच्छन्नन्तरा रघुनन्दन:।

आससाद महाकायं गृध्रं भीमपराक्रमम्॥ १॥ | Prowess.

with a gigantic body and possessed of terrific

(1)

Now, while going to Pafcavati, the | तं दृष्टवा at werent वनस्थं रामलक्ष्मणौ।
scion of Raghu met on the way a vulture | मेनाते राक्षसं पक्षिं ब्रुवाणौ को भवानिति॥ २॥
