# YUDDHAKANDA #

Wes महात्मानो Patt युद्धदुर्मदा:।
श्ष्वेडितास्फोटितानां a संचचालेव मेदिनी॥ ३८॥
रक्षसां सिंहनादैश्च संस्फोटितमिवाम्बरम्।
तेऽभिनिष्क्रम्य मुदिता राक्षसेन्द्रा महाबला:॥ ३९॥
ददृशुर्वानरानीकं समुद्यतशिलानगम्।
RaSh महात्मानो sq Wad बलम्॥४०॥
हस्त्यश्चरथसम्बाधं किङ्किणीशतनादितम्।
नीलजीमूतसंकाशं समुद्यतमहायुधम्॥ ४१॥

The aforesaid colossi sallied forth (from
Lanka) as did gods from Amaravati (the city
of immortals, the capital of heaven). Gigantic
ogres armed with superb weapons rushed
at their heels on the back of elephants and
horses as well as in chariots, thundering
like clouds. Wearing diadems on their heads,
nay, resplendent as the sun and endowed
with splendour, those colossal princes shone
brightly like planets glowing in the heavens.
The white row of weapons lightly grasped
by them shone like a flock of cranes shining
like autumnal clouds in the sky. Making up
their mind either to embrace death positively
or to rout the enemies, the champions
proceeded in search of an encounter. While
sallying forth, the colossi, who were fierce
in combat, thundered and roared and seized
arrows and also discharged them. The earth
for its part violently shook as it were, thanks
to their roars and their clapping of arms.
Nay, the sky got breached as it were by the
leonine roars of the ogres. Sallying forth
with joy, those leaders of ogres, who were
endowed with extraordinary might, beheld
the simian army standing with uplifted rocks
and trees. The gigantic monkeys too saw
the army of ogres crowded with elephants,
horses and chariots and rendered noisy by
hundreds of circlets of tiny bells worn by
their animals as well as by the ogres
themselves, nay, resembling a mass of dark
clouds and carrying huge uplifted weapons.

(33—41)

579

दीप्तानलरविप्रख्यैर्नैर्ऋतै:३ सर्वतो वृतम्।
Ae दृष्टवा बलमायातं लब्धलक्षा: प्लवङ्गमा: WSR
समुद्यतमहाशैला: सम्प्रणेदुर्मुहुर्मुहु:।
अमृष्यमाणा रक्षांसि प्रतिनर्दन्त वानरा:॥४३॥
Seeing that army—flanked as it was
on all sides by ogres, brilliant as a flaming
fire or the sun—arrived, the monkeys, who
had found an objective for their attack,
thundered again and again with huge uplifted
rocks in their hands. Intolerant of the roars
of the ogres, the monkeys roared in return.

(42-43)
तत: समुत्कृष्टरवं निशम्य
रक्षोगणा वानरयूथपानाम्।

महाबला भीमतरं WUT USI
Hearing the exceptionally loud roar of
the leaders of monkey troops, the ogre
ranks, who were endowed with extraordinary
might and could not brook the riotous festivity
of their enemies, roared all the more
fiercely. (44)
a राक्षसबलं oat vaya हरियूथपा:।
विचेरुरुद्यतै: शैलैर्नगा: शिखरिणो यथा॥४५॥

Penetrating deep into the formidable
army of ogres, the leaders of monkey troops
ranged with uplifted crags like mountains
crowned with peaks. (45)

केचिदाकाशमाविश्य caret प्लवङ्गमा: |
रक्षस्सैन्येषु संक्रुद्धा: केचिद् द्रुमशिलायुधा:॥ ४६॥

Springing in the air, armed with trees
and rocks, and feeling enraged at the
ogre troops, some monkeys reconnoitred
there, while seizing trees with huge stems,
other bulls among monkeys ranged on the
earth. The ferocious fight which ensued
between the ogres and the monkeys was
terrible. (46-47)

द्रुमांश्च विपुलस्कन्धान् Tel वानरपुङ्खवा:।
qe युद्धमभवद् घोरं रक्षोवानरसंकुलम्॥४७॥
