* BALAKANDA +

plane including the five preceding ones viz.,
Atala, Vitala, Sutala, Talatala and Mahatala).
(66)

da: प्रीतमनास्तेन feared: स महाकपि:।
किष्किन्धां रामसहितो जगाम च Wet तदा॥ ६७॥
“Reassured by the latter feat and
accompanied by Sri Rama, that great
monkey, Sugriva, then marched at once
with a mind full of delight to Kiskindha (the
capital of Vali), situated cave-like in the
midst of mountains. (67)

ततोऽगर्जद्धरिवर: सुग्रीवो हेमपिङ्गल:।
wt नादेन महता निर्जगाम हरीश्वर:॥६८॥

“Then roared Sugriva, the monkey chief,
who was tawny as gold in appearance.
Distracted by that great unusual roar, Vali,
the king of the monkeys, sallied forth to
meet Sugriva. (68)

अनुमान्य det ant सुग्रीवेण समागत:।
निजघान च तत्रैनं शरेणैकेन राघव:॥६९॥

“Reassuring Tara, his devoted and
sagacious wife, who discouraged him by
pleading that Sugriva had since secured the
alliance of Sri Rama and as such could no
longer be conquered, he then closed with
Sugriva and in the course of that very
encounter Sri Rama (the celebrated scion
of Raghu) disposed of Vali with a single
arrow. (69)

wa: सुग्रीववचनाद्भत्वा वालिनमाहवे।
सुग्रीवमेव तद्राज्ये राघव: प्रत्यपादयत्॥७०॥

“Having thus killed Vali on the field of
battle at the instance of Sugriva, Sri Rama
(a scion of Raghu) then installed Sugriva
himself on Vali’s throne. (70)

स च सर्वान् समानीय वानरान् वानरर्षभ:।
fest: प्रस्थापयामास दिदृक्षुर्जनकात्मजाम्॥७१॥

“Bringing together all the monkeys, the
said Sugriva, the jewel among the monkeys,
too despatched them in all directions, keen
as he was to have Sita (the daughter of
Janaka) traced out. (71)

65

ततो गृध्रस्य वचनात् सम्पातेर्हनुमान् बली।
शतयोजनविस्तीर्णं पुप्लुवे लवणार्णवम्॥७२॥

“Then, according to the counsel of
Sampati, the vulture king, who could see
Sita in Lanka from that distance, the mighty
Hanuman leapt across the brackish sea,
eight hundred miles broad, that parted the
mainland of India from Lanka. (72)

east सीतां ध्यायन्तीमशोकवनिकां गताम्॥ ७३॥
“Duly reaching the city of Lanka, ruled
over by the demon king, Ravana, he found
there Sita confined in a grove of Asoka
trees, contemplating on the feet of Sri Rama.
(73)

निवेदयित्वाभिज्ञानं watt fatter ai
समाश्वास्य च वैदेहीं मर्दयामास तोरणम्॥७४॥
“Presenting to her the souvenir in the
shape of a signet-ring handed over to him
by Sri Rama and relating the news about
Sri Rama’s alliance with Sugriva and the
latter’s installation on the throne of Kiskindha
after Vali, his elder brother and mortal enemy,
had been got rid of by Sri Rama and having
consoled Sita, the daughter of King Janaka,
with the assurance that her consort would
shortly come and rescue her after disposing

of the tyrannical Ravana, Hanuman
demolished the outer gate of the orchard.
(74)

पञ्च सेनाग्रगान् हत्वा सप्त मन्तिसुतानपि।
शूरमक्षं च निष्पिष्य ग्रहणं समुपागमत्॥७५॥
“Having made short work of five army-
commanders (Pingalanetra and others) as
also seven sons of ministers (Jambumali
and so on), and crushed the gallant Aksa (a
son of Ravana), he allowed himself to be
bound under the spell of a Brahmastra or
missile presided over by Brahma, the creator,
and discharged by Ravana’s heir-apparent,
Meghanada. (75)

अस्त्रेणोन्मुक्तमात्मानं ज्ञात्वा पैतामहाद् वरात्।
मर्षयन् राक्षसान् वीरो यन्तरिणस्तान् AGATA It ७६ ॥
