238

boy on any account, O jewel among men!”
Hearing the answer of Rcika (her husband),
the mother of those high-minded boys
addressed the following words to Ambarisa,
a tiger among men: “The venerable Rcika
(a scion of Sage Bhrgu) declares our eldest
son as too precious to be sold. (16-17)
तस्मात् कनीयसं Ut न दास्ये तव पार्थिव॥ १८॥

“Know Sunaka too, the youngest, to be
my favourite, O lord! Therefore, | shall not
hand over my youngest son to you, O ruler
of the earth! (18)

प्रायेण fe नरश्रेष्ठ ज्येष्ठा: पितृषु वल्लभा:।
मातूणां च कनीयांसस्तस्माद् रक्ष्ये कनीयसम्॥ १९॥

“For, aS a general rule, O jewel among
men, eldest sons are the pets of their fathers;
while the youngest are the darlings of their
mothers. Hence | shall retain the youngest.”

(19)

उक्तवाक्ये मुनौ तस्मिन् मुनिपत्न्यां तथैव च।
WANA: स्वयं WA मध्यमो वाक्यमब्रवीत्॥ २०॥

The sage having replied as above and
his wife too having spoken even as she had
done, O Rama, Sunahgepa, the middle
one, uttered the following words of his own
accord : (20)

« VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

पिता ज्येष्ठमविक्रेयं माता चाह कनीयसम्।
faa मध्यमं मन्ये राजपुत्र नयस्व माम्॥२१॥
“Father pronounces the eldest to be
unsaleable and mother speaks of the
youngest as such. | thereby conclude the
middle one, i.e., myself, to be worthy of
being disposed of. Take me away, therefore,
O king (a king’s son yourself) !” (21)

अथ राजा महाबाहो वाक्यान्ते ब्रह्मवादिन: |
हिरण्यस्य सुवर्णस्य कोटिभी रत्नराशिभि:।॥ २२॥
गवां शतसहस्रेण शुन:शेषं नरेश्वर:।
गृहीत्वा परमप्रीतो जगाम रघुनन्दन॥ २३॥
Taking Sunahsepa at once with him in
exchange for tens of millions of silver and
gold coins, heaps of precious stones and a
lakh of cows at the end of the aforesaid
utterance of the Brahmana boy, who was
an expositor of the Vedas, O mighty-armed
Rama (a scion of Raghu), King Ambarisa,
a ruler of men, departed, highly pleased.
(22-23)
अम्बरीषस्तु राजर्षी रथमारोप्य सत्वर:।
WANT महातेजा जगामाशु महायशा:॥ २४॥
Quickly placing Sunahgepa in_ his
chariot, the exceedingly glorious and highly

illustrious Ambarisa, a royal sage, hurriedly
left for his capital. (24)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये बालकाण्डे
एकषट्टितम: सर्ग: ॥ ६१ Il

Thus ends Canto Sixty-one in the Balakanda of the glorious Ramayana of Valmiki,
the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

