210

with great delight. The king then submitted
to Viswamitra, the foremost of hermits with
folded hands as follows : (6—10)

आसने भगवानास्तां सहैभिर्मुनिपुंगवै:।
जनकस्य aa: श्रुत्वा निषसाद महामुनि:॥११॥
“Let Your Holiness be seated on the
seat offered by me alongwith these jewels
among ascetics.” Hearing the request of
Janaka, the great sage ViSwamitra sat down.
(11)

पुरोधा ऋत्विजश्चैव राजा च सहमन्तिभि:।
आसनेषु यथान्यायमुपविष्टा: समन्तत:॥१२॥

Satananda, Janaka’s family priest, as
well as the priests officiating at the sacrifice
and the king himself with his ministers sat
down on their seats in order of seniority on
all sides of Viswamitra at his request. (12)

get a Walaa विश्चामित्रमथाब्रवीत्।
अद्य यज्ञसमृद्धिर्मे सफला cad: Haru esi
Turning his eyes towards ViSwamitra,
the said king then spoke to him as follows
in that assembly : “The preparations made
for my sacrificial performance have been
fulfilled by the gods today. (13)
TI यज्ञफलं We भगवद्दर्शनान्मया।
धन्योऽस्म्यनुगृहीतोऽस्मि यस्य A APTA: i १४॥
यज्ञोपसदनं ब्रह्मन् प्राप्तोऽसि मुनिभि: सह।
द्वादशाहं तु ब्रह्मर्षे दीक्षामाहुर्मनीषिण:॥ eu ti
ततो भागार्थिनो देवान् द्रष्टुमर्हसि कौशिक।
इत्युक्त्वा मुनिशार्दूलं प्रहृष्टवदनस्तदा॥ १६॥
पुनस्तं परिपप्रच्छ प्राञ्जलि: प्रयतो नृप:।
इमौ कुमारौ ws ते देवतुल्यपराक्रमौ॥ voll
गजतुल्यगती वीरौ शार्दूलवृषभोपषमौ।
पद्मपत्रविशालाक्षौ ख्ड्गतूणीधनुर्धरौ |
अश्विनाविव रूपेण समुपस्थितयौवनौ॥ १८॥

“Nay, the fruit of my sacrifice has been
attained by me this very day through Your
Holiness’ sight alone. | feel blessed and
indebted to you, in that you, the foremost of
ascetics, have arrived at my sacrificial

« VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

grounds alongwith a number of sages. The
wise among the priests, O Brahmana Rsi,
declare that my sacrificial vow is to continue
for twelve more days only. After that, O scion
of Kusa, you will see (with your clairvoyant
vision) the gods who appear in person
seeking their share of the sacrificial offerings.”
Having submitted to ViSwamitra, a veritable
tiger among sages, as aforesaid on that
occasion, the king, piously disposed as he
was, questioned him once more with a cheerful
countenance and folded-hands as follows :
“May God bless you ! These two valiant lads
who are equal in prowess to the gods and
whose gait resembles that of an elephant,
look like a tiger and a bull, respectively. Having
eyes as large as the petals of a lotus and
carrying as they do on their person a sword,
quiver and bow each, they vie with the ASwins
(the twin-born physicians of gods, celebrated
for their physical charm) in their comeliness
of form and stand at the threshold of youth.

(14—18)

यदृच्छयेव गां wel देवलोकादिवामरौ।
कथं पद्भ्यामिह प्राप्तौ किमर्थं कस्य वा मुने॥ १९॥

“Nay, they look like a pair of gods
descended on earth from the celestial plane
of their own will. How and what for or for
whose sake have they travelled on foot to
this place, O sage? (19)

वरायुधधरौ वीरौ कस्य पुत्रौ महामुने।
भूषयन्ताविमं देशं चन्द्रसूर्याविवाम्बरम्॥ २०॥
परस्परस्य सदृशौ प्रमाणेङ्नितचेष्टितै:।
काकपक्षधरौ ART श्रोतुमिच्छामि तत्त्वत:॥ २१॥

“Whose sons, O great sage, may be
the two heroes wielding excellent weapons?
| wish to hear in reality about the two gallant
youths, who are gracing this land even as
the moon and the sun illumine the sky, who
are replicas of each other in the size of their
body, in the outer expression of their feelings,
as well as in the movements of their body,
and who wear side-locks on their head.”

(20-21)
