310

of Sri Rama’s installation, and decked with
rows of tall flags. (6)
सा हर्षोत्फुल्लनयनां पाण्डुरक्षौमवासिनीम्।
stage स्थितां दृष्टवा धात्रीं पप्रच्छ ARTI UI
Seeing Sri Rama’s former nurse
standing not very far from her, dressed in

white silk, her eyes blooming with joy, the
said Manthara inquired of her: (7)

उत्तमेनाभिसंयुक्ता हर्षेणार्थपरा सती।
राममाता धनं किं नु जनेभ्य: सम्प्रयच्छति॥८॥

“How is it that Empress Kausalya (Sri
Rama’s mother), full of supreme joy, is
freely giving away riches to men, though
devoted to wealth herself? (8)
अतिमात्रं wed: fe जनस्यास्य च wre मे।
कारयिष्यति fe वापि weet महीपति:।॥ ९॥

“Please also tell me wherefore such
excessive rapture is being felt by these
people of Ayodhya? And what is the overjoyed
Emperor going to get done?” (9)

विदीर्यमाणा हर्षेण धात्री तु परया मुदा।
आचचक्षेऽथ कुब्जायै भूयसीं राघवे श्रियम्॥ १०॥

Bursting with joy the nurse for her part
forthwith spoke to the hunchbacked maid-
servant with supreme delight of immense
fortune in the shape of sovereignty being
conferred by the Emperor on Sri Rama, a
scion of Raghu. (10)
va: पुष्येण जितक्रोधं यौवराज्येन चानघम्।
राजा दशरथो राममभिषेक्ता fe राघवम्॥११॥

“Tomorrow under the asterism Pusya,
(she added) will Emperor DaSaratha positively
install in the office of Prince Regent the
sinless Rama (a scion of Raghu), who has
conquered wrath.” (11)

धात्र्यास्तु वचनं श्रुत्वा कुब्जा क्षिप्रममर्षित:।
कैलासशिखराकारात् प्रासादादवरोहत॥ १२॥
Filled with indignation to hear the report
of the nurse, the hunchbacked maid-servant
for her part got down at once from the roof

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

of the palace, which resembled in shape a
peak of Kailasa. (12)

सा दह्यमाना क्रोधेन went पापदर्शिनी।
शयानामेव कैकेयीमिदं वचनमब्रवीत्॥१३॥

Burning with anger, Manthara, who
scented foul play in the move of the Emperor,
spoke as follows to Kaikeyi even while she
was reposing in bed: (13)
उत्तिष्ठं ye fe we wa त्वामभिवर्तते।
उपप्लुतमघौघेन नात्मानमवबुध्यसे। १४॥

“Get up, O deluded one! How can you
keep lying down? Peril stares you in the

face! You do not perceive yourself threatened
by a flood of misery ! (14)

अनिष्टे सुभगाकारे सौभाग्येन विकत्थसे।
चलं fe तव सौभाग्यं नद्या: स्रोत इवोष्णगे॥ १५ ॥

“Though loathed by the king, you boast
of your good luck in the shape of the goodwill
of your husband, endowed as you are with
a graceful appearance ! Like the current of
a river in hot weather, your good luck is but
evanescent.” (15)

`एवमुक्ता तु कैकेयी रुष्टया परुषं वच:।
कुब्जया पापदर्शिन्या विषादमगमत् परम्॥१६॥

Addressed in a harsh language as
aforesaid by the enraged hunchback, who
suspected foul play in the installation of Sri
Rama as Prince Regent, Kaikeyi for her
part gave way to great sorrow. (16)

कैकेयीत्वब्रवीत् कुब्जां कच्चित् क्षेमं न मन्थरे।
विषण्णवदनां fe त्वां लक्षये भृशदु:खिताम्॥ १७॥
Kaikeyi in her turn replied to the
hunchback as follows: “Is not all well, O
Manthara? For | find you dejected in
appearance and sore afflicted.” (17)

THOT तु वच: श्रुत्वा कैकेय्या मधुराक्षरम्।

उवाच क्रोधसंयुक्ता ATT वाक्यविशारदा॥ १८॥
Incensed to hear the question of Kaikeyi,

which was couched in sweet accents,

Manthara, for her part, who was a master of
expression, spoke as follows: (18)
