* AYODHYAKANDA +

“The great confusion that ensued,
on (the occasion of) your exile, among the
people of Ayodhya, whose mind was
depressed through grief on your account,
was witnessed by you with your own eyes,
O Rama! (43)

आर्तनादो fe a: पौरैरुन्मुक्तस्त्वत्प्रवासने।
सरथं at निशाम्यैव कुर्यु: शतगुणं तत:॥४४॥
“Nay, perceiving me alone with the
chariot, the people of Ayodhya will raise a
cry of distress a hundred times louder than
that which was actually raised by them at
the time of your banishment. (44)
até किं चापि वक्ष्यामि eat तव सुतो मया।
नीतोऽसौ मातुलकुलं संतापं मा कृथा इति॥ ४५ Ui
“Again, shall | falsely submit to the
queen, Kausalya, as follows: ‘Your son,
Rama, has been conveyed to his maternal
uncle’s; pray, do not give way to agony’.
(45)
असत्यमपि नैवाहं gat वचनमीदृशम्।
कथमप्रियमेवाहं a सत्यमिदं वच:॥४६॥
“| dare not make such a false report,
even though it is pleasing to the ear, and
save her from agony for sometime. On the
other hand, how can | make a correct yet
unpalatable report that Rama has proceeded
to the forest? (46)

मम तावन्नियोगस्थास्त्वद्बन्धुजनवाहिन:।
कथं रथं त्वया हीनं प्रवाह्यन्ति हयोत्तमा:॥४७॥

“Even if you insist on my returning to
Ayodhya at all events, how will the excellent
horses drawing the chariot, which are subject
to my control, and transport only your kindred
and yourself, draw the chariot without you?

(47)

तन्न शक्ष्याम्यहं गन्तुमयोध्यां त्वदूतेऽनघ।
वनवासानुयानाय मामनुज्ञातुमर्हसि।॥ ४८ UI

“Therefore, O sinless prince, | shall not
be able to return to Ayodhya even if | try to
do so without you. You ought under such
circumstances to allow me to follow you to

485

share your exile in the forest.

यदि मे याचमानस्य arma करिष्यसि।
सरथोऽग्निं प्रवेक्ष्यामि HAA इह त्वया॥४९॥

“If you still insist on leaving me, even
though | solicit you to take me with you, |
shall enter a fire, chariot and all, on this spot
the moment | am forsaken by you. (49)

भविष्यन्ति at यानि तपोविघ्नकराणि a1
रथेन प्रतिबाधिष्ये तानि सर्वाणि wagon

“With the help of the chariot, O scion of
Raghu, | shall repel all those creatures that
cause interruption in your austerities in the
forest. (50)
त्वत्कृतेन मया Wa रथचर्याकृतं सुखम्।
आशंसे eps वनवासकृतं सुखम्॥५१॥

“By your kind offices the pleasure of
driving your chariot was secured by me. By
your grace alone | hope this time to enjoy
the pleasure of dwelling with you in the
forest. (51)

प्रसीदेच्छामि तेऽरण्ये भवितुं प्रत्यनन्तर:।
प्रीत्याभिहितमिच्छामि भव A प्रत्यनन्तर:।॥५२॥

“Be gracious to me by allowing me to
follow you to the forest. | long to be your
close associate in the forest. | wish to hear
your loving assent in the words ‘Be my
close associate !’ (52)

इमेऽपि च हया ate यदि ते वनवासिन:।
परिचर्यां करिष्यन्ति प्राप्स्यन्ति परमां गतिम्॥ ५३॥

“These horses too, O heroic prince, if
they get an opportunity to serve you while
you dwell in the forest, will attain the highest
destiny by serving their beloved master.

(53)
तव शुश्रूषणं yet करिष्यामि at वसन्।
अयोध्यां देवलोकं वा सर्वथा प्रजहाम्यहम्॥ GY I

“Dwelling in the forest with you | shall
render service to you with my head bent
low, and in order to be allowed this privilege
| quit for good in everyway Ayodhya and
even heaven, the realm of gods. (54)

(48)
