+ UTTARAKANDA +

and Kuga as the sons of Sita, Sri Rama
spoke in that assembly of sages, kings and
monkeys. (2)

दूतान् शुद्धसमाचारानाहूयात्ममनीषया I
Aq aa ad गच्छध्वमितो भगवतोऽन्तिके॥ ३॥

Having called envoys of pure conduct,
and contemplating inwardly, said to them:
“Go to the venerable Rsi Valmiki and convey
to him my words ! (3)

ae शुद्धसमाचारा यदि वा वीतकल्मषा।
करोत्विहात्मन: शुद्धिमनुमान्य महामुनिम्॥४॥

“If she (Sita) is pure of conduct, if any
of the sins do not dwell in her, then may she
prove her purity here at the bidding of the
great sage Valmiki. (4)
we Wig faa सीतायाश्च मनोगतम्।
प्रत्ययं दातुकामायास्तत: wad A लघु॥५॥

“Having known the wish of the sage

and Sita’s willingness to give proof of her
purity, let me know at once. (5)

Va: Ward तु शपथं मैथिली जनकात्मजा।
करोतु परिषन्मध्ये शोधनार्थं ममैव च॥६॥

“Let Maithili (Sita), the daughter of
Janaka, take oath in front of this assembly
to remove blemishes from me also tomorrow
morning.” (6)

श्रुत्वा q राघवस्यैतद् aa: परममद्भुतम्।
दूता: सम्प्रययुर्बाढं यत्र a मुनिपुङ्खव:॥७॥
Hearing these wonderful words of Sri
Rama, the descendant of Raghu, envoys
nodding ascent, went to the place where the
great sage Valmiki stayed. (7)

ते wore महात्मानं ज्वलन्तममितप्रभम्।
ऊचुस्ते रामवाक्यानि मृदूनि मधुराणि च॥८॥

Having saluted the noble one of
inimitable lustre and resplendent, they
spoke the words of Sri Rama, soft and
sweet. (8)

तेषां तद् भाषितं श्रुत्वा रामस्य च मनोगतम्।
विज्ञाय सुमहातेजा मुनिर्वाक्यमथाब्रवीत्॥९॥

1105

Having heard their words, and knowing
the intention of Sri Rama, the very powerful
sage spoke thus: (9)

एवं Yad VR at यथा वदति wea: |
तथा करिष्यते सीता cad fe पति: fara: १०॥

“So be it, welfare be with you, Sita will
do as desired by Sri Rama, as husband is
indeed a god for the wife.” (10)

तथोक्ता मुनिना ad राजदूता महौजसम्।
प्रत्येत्य wad सर्वं मुनिवाक्यं बभाषिरे॥११॥
Thus spoken to by the sage, all the
royal envoys, coming back, repeated all
that the sage had said, to mighty Rama.
(11)
तत: WEEE: काकुत्स्थ: श्रुत्वा वाक्यं महात्मन: |
weer समेतांश्च राज्ञश्चैवाभ्यभाषत॥१२॥
Then Sri Rama, the scion of Kakutstha,
highly pleased on hearing the words of
Valmiki, the noble one, addressed the sages
and also the kings assembled there: (12)

भगवन्त: सशिष्या वै सानुगाश्च नराधिपा:।
wad सीताशपथं यश्चैवान्योऽपि कांक्षते॥१३॥
‘Venerable sages, with pupils and
kings with attendants or anyone else, so
desiring, may witness the oath-taking of
Sita. (13)
तस्य dq वचनं श्रुत्वा WAAC महात्मन: |
सर्वेषामृषिमुख्यानां साधुवादो महानभूत्॥१४॥
Hearing those words of the noble
descendant of Raghu, all the chief sages
exclaimed ‘well done.’ (14)
राजानश्च महात्मानं प्रशंसन्ति स्म राघवम्।
उपपन्नं नरश्रेष्ठं त्वय्येव भुवि नान्यत:॥१७५॥
The noble kings praised indeed the
descendant of Raghu thus: ‘O best among
men, this behoves you only, and no one
else.’ (15)

एवं विनिश्चयं कृत्वा श्वोभूत इति राघव:।
विसर्जयामास तदा सर्वास्ताञ्छत्रुसूदन:॥१६॥

Thus deciding that the oath-taking shall
