* SUNDARAKANDA +

हेमजालैरविच्छिन्नास्तरुणादित्यसंनिभा: ।
cast राक्षसेन्द्रस्य रावणस्य निवेशने॥ ३५॥

He observed in that palace elephants
of superior breed, vanquishers of hostile
tuskers and destroyers of hostile forces,
which were endowed with grace and had
been trained in the methods of warfare carried
on with elephants, which were equal in
combat to Airavata, the elephant who carries
on its back Indra, the ruler of paradise, and
discharged fluid from their temples like raining
clouds and mountains sending forth rills
and springs etc., nay, whose trumpeting
resembled the thundering of clouds and which
were hard to assail for the foes. Hanuman
also beheld in the abode of Ravana, the
ruler of ogres, thousands of garrisons adorned
with jewels of pure gold (found in the bed of
the Jammu river), nay, fully protected with
armours of gold and, therefore, shining
brightly like the morning sun. (32—35)
शिबिका विविधाकारा: स कपिर्मारुतात्मज:।
लतागृहाणि चित्राणि चित्रशालागृहाणि च॥ ३६॥
क्रीडागृहाणि चान्यानि दारुपर्वतकानि च।
कामस्य गृहकं wa दिवागृहकमेव च॥ ३७॥
cet राक्षसेन्द्रस्य रावणस्य far
स मन्दरसमप्रख्यं मयूरस्थानसंकुलम्॥३८॥
ध्वजयष्टिभिराकीर्णं ददर्श भवनोत्तमम्।
अनन्तरत्ननिचयं निधिजालं समन्तत:।
धीरनिष्ठितकर्माङ्गं गृहं भूतपतेरिव॥ ३९॥

The aforesaid Hanuman, son of the wind-
god, further observed in the palace of Ravana,
the lord of ogres, palanquins of various shapes,
wonderful bowers and buildings with picture
galleries duly provided in them as also other
pleasure-houses with wooden mountains, a
lovely house for sexual delights and a diurnal
pleasure-house as well. He found the
excellent palace having an appearance like
that of Mount Mandara and crowded with pens

63

for peacocks, thickly set with flagstaffs, and
enriched with heaps of endless precious
stones and collections of treasures on all
sides. Sacrifices forming part of the ritual were
performed there for the preservation of those
treasures by fearless and resolute priests,
so that the palace looked like the mansion of
Kubera (the ruler of riches). (836—39)

अरचिर्भिश्चापि tart तेजसा रावणस्य च।
विरराज च ag वेश्म रश्मिवानिव रश्मिभि: ।। ४०॥

Due to the rays of its precious stones
and the splendour of Ravana, the aforesaid
palace shone brightly like the sun encircled
by its myriad rays. (40)

जाम्बूनदमयान्येव शयनान्यासनानि च।
भाजनानि च शुभ्राणि cast हरियूथप:॥४१॥

Hanuman, a leader of monkey hordes,
beheld in that palace couches and seats
and glittering vessels all made of gold. (41)

मध्वासवकृतक्लेदं मणिभाजनसंकुलम्।

मनोरममसम्बाधं कुबेरभवनं यथा॥४२॥
नूपुराणां च घोषेण काञ्चीनां नि:स्वनेन च।
मृदङ्गतलनिर्घोषैर्घोषवद्भिर्विनादितम् ॥ ४३॥

प्रासादसंघातयुतं स्त्रीरत्नशतसंकुलम्।
सुव्यूढकक्ष्यं हनुमान् प्रविवेश महागृहम्॥४४॥
Hanuman penetrated deep into the huge,
beautiful and commodious edifice, whose
floors remained wet with wines and liquors
(spilt now and then), which was full of vessels
made of gems and looked like the mansion
of Kubera, nay, which was resonant with
the tinkling of anklets, the jingling of girdles,
the sound of clapping and the crash of
wooden tomtoms and other deep-sounding
musical instruments of percussion, which
consisted of multitudes of lofty mansions
and was crowded with hundreds of excellent
women and encircled by a number of
spacious concentric enclosures. (42—44)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये सुन्दरकाण्डे WS: सर्ग: ॥ ६ Il

Thus ends Canto Six in the Sundarakanda of the glorious Ramayana of Valmiki,
the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

