* ARANYAKANDA «

Rama, the knower of the Self ! Wonderful is
his prowess. Oh, his firmness too looks like
that of Lord Visnu |” (32)

इत्येवमुक्त्वा ते Ud ययुर्देवा यथागतम्।
ततो राजर्षय: सर्वे संगता: परमर्षय:॥ ३३॥
सभाज्य मुदिता रामं सागस्त्या इदमब्रुवन्।
एतदर्थं महातेजा महेन्द्र: पाकशासन:॥ ३४॥
शरभङ्गाश्रम पुण्यमाजगाम Trak: |
आनीतस्त्वमिमं देशमुपायेन महर्षिभि:॥ ३५॥
एषां वधार्थं शत्रूणां रक्षसां पापकर्मणाम्।
तदिदं A: Hd कार्यं त्वया दशरथात्मज॥ ३६॥
Speaking as aforesaid, all those gods
went as they had come. Hailing Sri Rama
then, all the royal sages and great sages
assembled, including Sage Agastya, who all
felt rejoiced, spoke as follows : “For this very
purpose of bringing about your sojourn in this
area the great Indra, the subduer of the demon
Paka and the smasher of enemies’ fortresses,
who is possessed of exceptional glory, visited
the holy hermitage of Sage Sarabharnga. You
were brought to the region tactfully by great
sages for compassing the extermination of
their sworn enemies, the ogres of sinful deeds.
This aforesaid purpose of ours has been
accomplished by you O son of DaSaratha !
(33—36)
स्वधर्मं प्रचरिष्यन्ति दण्डकेषु महर्षय:।
एतस्मिन्नन्तरे ART लक्ष्मण: ae सीतया।
गिरिदुर्गाद् विनिष्क्रम्य संविवेशाश्रमे सुखी it ३७॥
ततो Weed विजयी पूज्यमानो महर्षिभि:।॥। ३८ ॥

793

प्रविवेशाश्रमं वीरो लक्ष्मणेनाभिपूजित:।
तं दृष्टवा शत्रुहन्तारं महर्षीणां सुखावहम्॥ ३९॥
बभूव हृष्टा ade walt परिषस्वजे।

मुदा परमया युक्ता दृष्टवा रक्षोगणान् हतान्।
TWH चैवाव्ययं दृष्ट्वा तुतोष जनकात्मजा॥४०॥

“The great sages will henceforward
vigorously practise their devotions in the
Dandaka forest.” In the meantime, issuing
forth from the mountain cavern, which was
difficult of access, with Sita, the valiant
Laksmana sat down in an easy posture in
the hermitage. Being glorified by great sages
and honoured in every way by Laksmana,
the victorious and heroic Sri Rama duly
entered the hermitage. Seeing her husband,
who had made short work of his enemies
and brought happiness to the great sages,
Sita, a princess of the Videha territory, felt
rejoiced and embraced him. Nay, transported
with supreme felicity to see the hordes of
ogres killed, the daughter of Janaka, Sita, felt
gratified to find Sri Rama all well. (37—40)

AYA हृष्टा जनकात्मजा तदा॥ ४१॥

Then closely embracing once more that
destroyer of the ogre-hordes, who was being
highly extolled by exalted souls full of delight,
the daughter of Janaka, Sita, felt rejoiced,
her countenance lit with joy. (41)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्येऽरण्यकाण्डे त्रिंश: AW: ॥ 30 ॥

Thus ends Canto Thirty in the Aranyakanda of the glorious Ramayana of Valmiki,
the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

