1137

« KISKINDHAKANDA +

षट्पञ्चाश: सर्ग:
Canto LVI

Praising Providence out of joy at the prospect of deriving sustenance for a
long time on seeing a band of monkeys even as it emerged from a cave of
the Vindhyan range on hearing their noise, the vulture king, Sampati (the
elder brother of Jatayu), expresses his determination to eat them all up
one after another. Depressed to hear the vow and declaring Jatayu,
who had met his death at the hands of Ravana in the service of
Sri Rama, while trying to deliver Sita from the former’s clutches,
as more fortunate than any of them, who were threatened
with death even before accomplishing the purpose of Sri
Rama, Angada reproaches Kaikeyi who was at the root
of the whole mischief. Distressed to hear these words
of Angada and telling Angada that he was the
elder brother of Jatayu, and at the same time
inquiring about the death of his younger
brother, Sampati requests Angada to help
him slide down from his high post
adding that, his wings having been
burnt, he was unable to fly

उपविष्टास्तु ते सर्वे यस्मिन् प्रायं गिरिस्थले।
wat गृध्रराजश्च तं देशमुपचक्रमे॥१॥

The king of vultures too approached
the same plateau on which all the aforesaid
monkeys for their part had sat down to
starve themselves to death. (1)

सम्पातिर्नाम नाम्ना तुं चिरजीवी विहंगम:।
भ्राता जटायुष: sitar विख्यातबलपौरुष:॥ २॥
He was no other than a long lived
and glorious bird, the brother of Jatayu,
known by the name of Sampati, whose
strength and prowess were widely known.
(2)

कन्दरादभिनिष्क्रम्य स विन्ध्यस्य महागिरे:।
उपविष्टान् हरीन् gear हृष्टात्मा गिरमब्रवीत्॥ ३॥

Emerging all of a sudden from a cave
of the great Vindhyan range and delighted in
mind to observe the monkeys seated there,
he spoke as follows : (3)

fafa: किल at लोके विधानेनानुवर्तते।
aaa) विहितो भक्ष्यश्चिरान्मह्यमुपागत:॥४॥
“Even as in this world the fruit of a
man’s past actions accrues to him according
to the Law of Karma, this food in the shape
of so many monkeys, which was ordained
for me, has come of its own accord after a
long time. (4)
परम्पराणां भक्षिष्ये वानराणां मृतं मृतम्।
उवाचैतद् Ta: पक्षी तान् निरीक्ष्य प्लवंगमान्॥ ५ ॥
“| shall successively eat up one after
the other all these monkeys seated in a
line even as they fall dead successively due
to starvation.” The bird uttered the foregoing
words on perceiving the monkeys. (5)

तस्य ag वचनं श्रुत्वा भक्ष्यलुब्धस्य पक्षिण:।
Bee: परमायस्तो हनूमन्तमथाब्रवीत्॥६॥

Greatly perturbed to hear the aforesaid
utterance of that bird, who was covetous of
