1120

should remain in constant dread of him as
well as of the high-souled Sri Rama. (9)

हितार्थमेतदुक्तं a: क्रियतां यदि रोचते।
उच्यतां हि क्षमं यत् तत् सर्वेषामेव AMT: Il Qo Il

“This advice of mine, intended as it is
for your good, may be followed if it pleases
you. And if it does not appeal to you, that
which is really advisable for one and all
may kindly be pointed out to me, O
monkeys !” (10)

अङ्गदस्य Ad: श्रुत्वा वचनं गन्धमादन:।
उवाच hat वाचा पिपासाश्रमखिन्नया॥ ११॥
Hearing the advice of Angada,
Gandhamadana (another leader of monkeys)
replied as follows in a clear voice faint from
thirst and exhaustion : (11)

सदृशं खलु al वाक्यमङ्गदो यदुवाच ह।

fed चैवानुकूलं च क्रियतामस्य भाषितम्॥ १२॥
“The advice which Angada has tendered

to you is indeed worthy of him, and conducive

to your interests and agreeable to you; his
advice may, therefore, be followed. (12)

पुनर्मार्गामहे शैलान् कन्दरांश्च शिलांस्तथा।
काननानि च शून्यानि गिरिप्रस्रवणानि च॥१३॥
यथोद्दिष्टानि सर्वाणि सुग्रीवेण महात्मना।
विचिन्वन्तु at aa गिरिदुर्गाणि संगता:॥१४॥

“Let us ransack once more the
mountains and caves as also the rocks and
all the desolate forests and mountain
cascades specified by the high-souled
Sugriva. Let all the monkeys scour in a
body the forest as well as the mountain
defiles.” (13-14)

ad: समुत्थाय पुनर्वानरास्ते महाबला:।
विन्ध्यकाननसंकोर्णां विचेरुर्दक्षिणां दिशम्॥ १५॥

Rising up together, the aforesaid
monkeys, who were all possessed of
extraordinary strength, thereupon ranged
once more the southern quarter dense with
the Vindhyan forest. (15)

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

a शारदाभ्रप्रतिमं श्रीमद्रजतपर्वतम्।
शृङ्गवन्तं दरीवन्तमधिरुह्य च वानरा:॥१६॥
wa लोध्रवनं रम्यं सप्तपर्णवनानि al
विचिन्वन्तो हरिवरा: सीतादर्शनकांक्षिण:॥ gion
Scaling the glorious Silver Mountain,
which resembled an autumnal cloud and
abounded in peaks and caverns, the
aforesaid monkeys, the foremost of their
species who longed for a sight of Sita,
began to comb the lovely grove of Lodhra
trees and the clumps of Saptaparna trees
on that mountain. (16-17)
तस्याग्रमधिरूढास्ते श्रान्ता विपुलविक्रमा:।
न पश्यन्ति स्म वैदेहीं रामस्य महिषीं प्रियाम्॥ १८॥
Having climbed up a summit of that
mountain, the monkeys, who were endowed
with extraordinary prowess, felt exhausted,
but they could not find Sita (a princess of
the Videha territory), the beloved consort of
Sri Rama. (18)
ते तु दृष्टिगतं gear तं शैलं बहुकन्दरम्।
अध्यारोहन्त हरयो वीक्षमाणा: समन्तत:॥१९॥
Having explored that mountain, which
had many caves, so far as it came within
the range of their sight, the said monkeys
for their part climbed down, casting their
eyes all round even then. (19)

अवरुह्य ततो भूमिं श्रान्ता विगतचेतस:।
स्थिता मुहूर्तं तत्राथ वृक्षमूलमुपाश्रिता:॥ २०॥
Descending to the base, the monkeys,
who were fatigued and perplexed, then sought
the foot of a tree and halted there awhile.
(20)
a ded समाश्वस्ता: किंचिद्धग्नपरिश्रमा:।
पुनरेवोद्यता: कृत्स्नां मार्गितुं दक्षिणां दिशम्॥ २१॥
Having rested awhile and their fatigue
relieved a bit, they got ready to explore the
whole of the southern quarter over again.
(21)
हनुमत्प्रमुखास्तावत् प्रस्थिता: प्लवगर्षभा:।
विन्ध्यमेवादित: कृत्वा विचेरुश्च समन्तत:॥ २२॥
