940

Provoked to anger on seeing Sumali killed
and reduced to ashes by the Vasu, and on
perceiving his army, too, put to flight when
hard-pressed by the gods, nay, rallying all
the ogres, the notorious Meghanada, the
mighty son of Ravana, firmly thereupon took
his stand on the battlefield at that time. (1-2)
a रथेनाग्निवर्णेन कामगेन महारथ:।
अभिदुद्राव सेनां at वनान्यग्निरिव ज्वलन्॥३॥

Seated in his chariot which shone like
fire and which coursed according to his will,
that great car-warrior darted towards that
army of gods as a blazing fire would rush
towards forests. (3)

aa: प्रविशतस्तस्य विविधायुधधारिण:।
विदुद्रुवुर्दिश: Wal दर्शनादेव देवता:॥४॥
At his very sight, as he entered the
field carrying every kind of weapon on his
person, the gods then fled in all directions.
(4)

न aya da कश्चिद् युयुत्सोरस्य सम्मुखे।
सर्वानाविद्ध्य वित्रस्तांस्तत: शक्रोऽब्रवीत् सुरान्॥ ५ ॥

None could stand before him at that
time, pugnacious as he was. Admonishing
all the terrified gods, Indra then said to
them: (5)
न भेतव्यं न weet निवर्तध्वं रणे सुरा:।
wa गच्छति पुत्रो A युद्धार्थमपराजित:॥६॥

“You should not be afraid, nor should
you run away; return to the battlefield, O

gods! Here goes my son, who is invincible,
for an encounter.” (6)

तत: शक्रसुतो eat weed इति fasta:
रथेनाद्भुतकल्पेन संग्रामे सोऽभ्यवर्तत॥७॥

The celebrated son of Indra, the god
widely known by the name of Jayanta,
thereupon appeared on the battlefield in a
chariot of marvellous workmanship. (7)

ततस्ते fram: ad परिवार्य शचीसुतम्।
Tara Ud Ge wea प्रजघ्निरे॥८॥

Surrounding Jayanta (Saci’s son) and

« VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

duly approaching Meghanada (son of
Ravana) on the battlefield, all the aforesaid
gods thereupon began to strike him with
violence. (8)
तेषां युद्धं समभवत् सदृशं देवरक्षसाम्।
महेन्द्रस्य च पुत्रस्य राक्षसेन्द्रसुतस्य च॥९॥
A well-matched contest now ensued
between the aforesaid gods and ogres as
well as between the son of the mighty Indra
and the son of Ravana, the ruler of ogres.

(9)
ततो मातलिपुत्रस्य गोमुखस्य स रावणि:।
ANA: पातयामास शरान् कनकभूषणान्॥१०॥

Thereupon the said son of Ravana
shot shafts decked with gold on the
charioteer, Gomukha, son of Matali, Indra’s
charioteer. (10)

शचीसुतश्चापि तथा जयन्तस्तस्य सारथिम्।
तं चापि रावणि: क्रुद्ध: समन्तात् प्रत्यविध्यत॥ ११॥

Nay, the son of Saci, Jayanta, too
likewise wounded the charioteer of
Meghanada and, provoked to anger, the
son of Ravana too wounded Jayanta on
every side. (11)

स fe क्रोधसमाविष्टो बली विस्फारितेक्षण: ।
रावणि३ शक्रतनयं शरवर्षैरवाकिरत्॥१२॥

Possessed with anger, that mighty son
of Ravana, with dilated eyes actually covered
the son of Indra with showers of shafts. (12)

ततो नानाप्रहरणाञ्छितधारान् सहस्रश:।
पातयामास संक्रुद्ध: सुरसैन्येषु रावणि:॥१३॥
Filled with rage, the son of Ravana

then let fly on the celestial troops every kind
of sharp-edged weapon in thousands. (13)

शतघ्नीमुसलप्रासगदाखड्गपरश्वधान् ।
महान्ति गिरिशृङ्गाणि पातयामास रावणि:।॥१४॥

The son of Ravana 80 hurled
Sataghnis, pestles, spears, clubs, swords
and battle-axes and huge crags on the
celestial army. (14)
