* ARANYAKANDA «

स च पावकसंकाश: HAN: समपद्यत।
उत्थायाग्निचयात् तस्माच्छरभङ्गो व्यरोचत॥४१॥
And he appeared as a boy glowing like
fire. Rising from that heap of fire, Sarabhanga
shone bright. (41)
स लोकानाहिताग्नीनामृषीणां च महात्मनाम्।
देवानां च व्यतिक्रम्य ब्रह्मलोकं व्यरोहत॥४२॥

He crossed the worlds of fire-
worshippers, high-souled sages and gods
and rose to the Brahmaloka. (42)

727

स पुण्यकर्मा भुवने द्विजर्षभ:
frame सानुचरं ददर्शं ह।
पितामहश्चापि समीक्ष्य तं द्विजं
Tre सुस्वागतमित्युवाच ह॥४३॥
That meritorious jewel among the twice-
born, Sarabhanga, in the world saw the
grandfather, Brahma, with his attendants;
the grandfather also was delighted to see
that Brahmana and said “You are fully
welcome.” (43)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्येऽरण्यकाण्डे पञ्चम: सर्ग: ॥ ५ ॥

Thus ends Canto Five in the Aranyakanda of the glorious Ramayana of Valmiki,
the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic

Canto VI

The sages request Rama for protection from the molestations of the
ogres and Rama assures them of it

अभ्यगच्छन्त काकुत्स्थं WA ज्वलिततेजसम्॥ १॥

Sarabhanga having risen to heaven,
the hosts of sages assembled there
approached Kakutstha Rama of burning
lustre. (1)

वैखानसा वालखिल्या: सम्प्रक्षाला मरीचिपा:।
अश्मकुट्टाश्च बहव: पत्राहाराश्च तापसा:॥ २॥
दन्तोलूखलिनश्चैव तथैवोन्मज्जका: परे।
गात्रशय्या अशय्याश्च तथैवानवकाशिका:॥ ३॥
Wa: सलिलाहारा वायुभक्षास्तथापरे।
आकाशनिलयाश्चैव तथा स्थण्डिलशायिन: xi
तथोर्ध्ववासिनो दान्तास्तथाऽऽर्द्रपटवासस:।
सजपाश्च तपोनिष्ठास्तथा पञ्चतपोऽन्विता:॥५॥
wa ब्राह्मया श्रिया युक्ता दृढयोगसमाहिता:।
शरभङ्गाश्रमे राममभिजग्मुश्च तापसा:॥६॥
The Vaikhanasas (a class of ascetics

born of the nails of Brahma), the Valakhilyas
(another class of sages born of Brahma’s

hair), sages who washed the utensils after
their meals (keeping nothing for another
time), those who lived on the sun’s or moon’s
rays, those who powdered grains by stones,
many ascetics living on leaves, those using
teeth as the mortar and pestle, others doing
penance in neck-deep water, those using
limbs of the body alone for bed, those without
bed, those enjoying no respite from their
religious observances, sages living on water
alone, others on air alone, those having sky
as the only roof, those sleeping on the alter,
those dwelling on high altitudes, those who
controlled their senses, those who used to
wear wet clothes, those doing Japa, those
devoted to penance, those doing the penance
of sitting in the middle of four fires, with the
sun (the fifth) overhead, all possessed of
Brahmic lustre, and with their mind
concentrated through steadfast practice of
yoga—these ascetics approached Rama in
the hermitage of Sarabhanga. (2—6)
