+ UTTARAKANDA +

911

Canto XXI
Ravana invades the domain of Yama and destroys the forces of Yama

wa संचिन्त्य faust जगाम लघुविक्रम:।
आख्यातुं aq यथाव्रृत्तं यमस्य सदनं प्रति॥१॥
Having contemplated thus, Narada (the
foremost of Brahmanas), swift of pace,
proceeded towards the domain of Yama in
order to relate the story as it came to be. (1)

अपश्यत् स यमं aa देवमग्निपुरस्कृतम्।
विधानमनुतिष्ठन्तं प्राणिनो यस्य यादृशम्॥ २॥

There he saw god Yama, with the (all-
witnessing) fire placed before him and dealing
out justice to every living being according to
the nature of its doing. (2)

स तु Gea यम: wa महर्षि aq नारदम्।
अब्रवीत् सुखमासीनमर्घ्यमावेद्य धर्मत:॥३॥
Offering water to wash his hands with
according to the rules of conduct on seeing
the eminent Sage Narada arrived there, Yama

for his part said to him when he was seated
comfortably: (3)

कच्चित् क्षेमं नु देवर्षे कच्चिद् emit न नश्यति।
किमागमनकृत्यं ते देवगन्धर्वसेवित॥४॥

“O celestial sage, waited upon by gods
and Gandharvas, | hope all is well (with
you). | hope righteousness is not wanting.
What may be the object of your visit?” (4)

अब्रवीत् तु तदा वाक्यं नारदो भगवानृषि:।
श्रूयतामभिधास्यामि विधानं च विधीयताम्॥५॥
The revered Sage Narada for his part
then replied as follows: “Listen, | shall
presently tell you the object of my visit. And
let the necessary remedial measures be
taken. (5)
एष नाम्ना दशग्रीव: पितूराज निशाचर:।
उपयाति ast Ad विक्रमैस्त्वां सुदुर्जयम्॥६॥
“O King of the Manes, the ranger of the
night, Dasagriva by name, is presently

coming here to subdue you, even though
you are hard to vanquish, by his exploits.
(6)
एतेन कारणेनाहं त्वरितो ह्यागत: wit
दण्डप्रहरणस्याद्य da fe नु भविष्यति॥७॥

“For this very reason | have come here
with all speed, my lord ! | wonder what is
going to happen to you now, who hold the
rod of punishment for your weapon.” (7)
एतस्मिन्नन्तरे दूरादंशुमन्तमिवोदितम्।
ददृशुर्दीप्तमायान्ते विमानं तस्य रक्षस:॥८॥

In the meantime they saw from a
distance the aerial car of that ogre, bright
like the rising sun, approaching. (8)

तं देशं प्रभया तस्य पुष्पकस्य महाबल:।
pea वितिमिरं ad समीपमभ्यवर्तत॥ u
Dispelling the darkness of that entire
region by the brilliance of the aforesaid
Puspaka, that very mighty ogre (Ravana)
arrived near. (9)

सोऽपश्यत् स महाबाहुर्दशग्रीवस्ततस्तत:।
प्राणिन: Grd चैव भुञ्जानांश्चैव दुष्कृतम्॥१०॥
That mighty-armed ogre, DaSsagriva,
saw everywhere living beings reaping the
fruit of their good as well as of their evil
deeds. (10)

अपश्यत् सैनिकांश्चास्य यमस्यानुचरै: सह।
यमस्य पुरुषैरुग्रैर्घोररूपैर्भयानकै: 1 ११॥
wat वध्यमानांश्च क्लिश्यमानांश्च देहिन:।
क्रोशतश्च महानादं तीव्रनिष्टनतत्परान्॥१२॥

He also saw the soldiers of Yama
alongwith his attendants. He also perceived
embodied souls being struck and tortured by
Yama’s violent and fierce servants of hideous
aspect, and screaming with a bellowing sound
and emitting shrill cries. (11-12)
