704

to disregard, and his beloved son, Indrajit,
having been made short work of by Laksmana
the other day. (21)

मम पुत्रो मम भ्राता मम Mat रणे हत:।
इत्येष श्रूयते शब्दो राक्षसीनां Ho Hou el

“‘My son, my own brother, my husband
has been killed in action!’ : such is the cry
heard from the lips of the ogresses in every
family. (22)
रथाश्वनागाश्च हतास्तत्र dA Ase: |
TW रामेण शूरेण हताश्चापि पदातय:॥ २३॥

“Chariots, horses and elephants and

foot-soldiers too have been struck down in
their thousands everywhere on the battlefield

by the heroic Rama. (23)

eal वा यदि वा विष्णुर्महेन्द्रो वा शतक्रतु:।

Bet नो रामरूपेण यदि वा स्वयमन्तक:॥ २४॥
“Either it is Rudra (the god of

destruction) or Lord Visnu (the Protector of
the three worlds) or the great Indra (the
ruler of the three worlds), who is presupposed
to have performed a hundred horse sacrifices
in his past existences as च condition
precedent to his attaining Indrahood, or it is
Death himself who is destroying us in the
disguise of Rama. (24)

हतप्रवीरा रामेण निराशा जीविते वयम्।
अपश्यन्त्यो भयस्यान्तमनाथा विलपामहे॥ २५ ॥

“Our pre-eminent heroes having been
killed, we have lost all hope of life. Failing to
perceive the end of our fear, we are wailing
our lot, deprived as we are of our protectors.

(25)
रामहस्ताद् anita: शूरो दत्तमहावर:।
इदं Wa महाघोरं समुत्पन्नं न बुद्ध्यते॥ २६॥

“Ravana (the ten-headed monster), who
is heroic and on whom a great boon has
been conferred by Brahma, the creator,
does not perceive this appalling peril which
has cropped up at the hands of Rama. (26)

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA +

तं न देवा न गन्धर्वा न पिशाचा न राक्षसा:।
sage परित्रातुं शक्तका रामेण संयुगे॥ २७॥
“Neither gods nor Gandharvas (celestial
musicians) nor Pisacas (fiends) nor ogres
will be able to protect Ravana when he is
attacked in combat by Rama. (27)

उत्पाताश्चापि दृश्यन्ते रावणस्य WT रणे।
कथयन्ति fe रामेण रावणस्य निबर्हणम्॥ २८॥

“Evil portents too are perceived in the
course of every encounter of Ravana with
his enemies. They unmistakably foreshadow
the destruction of Ravana by Rama. (28)

पितामहेन प्रीतेन देवदानवराक्षसै:।
रावणस्याभयं दत्तं मनुष्येभ्यो न याचितम्॥ २९॥
“Fearlessness against gods, devils and
ogres has been vouchsafed to Ravana by
Brahma, the grandfather of the universe,
which was actually created by his mind-
born sons, the ten Prajapatis or lords of
creation, when the latter was gratified by his
austerities. No such security against human
beings was, however, sought by him. (29)
जीवितान्तकरं at रक्षसां रावणस्य Ail soll
“Therefore, since no _ fearlessness
against human beings has been secured by
Ravana, | account this impending and
formidable peril from human beings as
undoubtedly fatal to the ogres as well as to
Ravana himself. (30)

पीड्यमानास्तु बलिना वरदानेन रक्षसा।
दीप्तैस्तपोभिर्विबुधा: पितामहमपूजयन्॥ ३१॥
“While being oppressed by the mighty
ogre, Ravana, by virtue of the bestowal of a
boon by Brahma, as well as of his severe
austerities, the gods for their part worshipped
Brahma, the grandfather of the universe.(31)

देवतानां हितार्थाय महात्मा a पितामह:।
sara देवतास्तुष्ट इदं सर्वा महद्वच:॥ ३२॥
“Feeling gratified by their worship, the
