* AYODHYAKANDA +

as well as this kingdom, which is free from

trouble, is dependent on you. (53)
तत् Ua शीघ्रं विधिना विधिज्ञै-
र्वसिष्ठमुख्यै: सहितो fess: |
संकाल्य राजानमदीनसत्त्व-
मात्मानमुरव्यामभिषेचयस्व ॥७५४॥

561

“Therefore, speedily performing with due
ceremony the funeral rites with respect to
the king (your deceased father) with the help
of the foremost of Brahmanas well-versed in
the scriptural ordinance, get yourself installed,
my son, as the ruler of the entire globe,
undepressed in spirits.” (54)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्येऽयोध्याकाण्डे द्विसप्ततितम: सर्ग: ॥ ७२॥

Thus ends Canto Seventy-two in the Ayodhyakanda of the glorious Ramayana of
Valmiki, the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

त्रिसप्ततितम: at:
Canto LXXIII

Bitterly reproaching Kaikeyi in many ways, and cutting her to the quick
by his caustic remarks, Bharata takes a vow before her to bring
back Sri Rama from the forest, install him on the throne
of Ayodhya and wait upon him as
an attendant to offend her

श्रुत्वा च स पितुर्वृत्तं भ्रातरौ च विवासितौ।
wit Gea इदं वचनमब्रवीत्॥१॥

Sore stricken with sorrow to hear the
unwelcome news about his father, as well
as of his brothers, Sri Rama and Laksmana,
having been sent into exile, Bharata replied
as follows : (1)

fe 4 कार्यं adele मम राज्येन शोचत:।
विहीनस्याथ पित्रा च भ्रात्रा पितृसमेन च॥२॥

“What object on earth will possibly be
gained through sovereignty by me, a
wretched being, deprived of his father and
elder brother—who was as good as a
father—and, therefore, grieving? (2)

Ga A दु:खमकरोर्व्रणे क्षारमिवाददा:।
राजानं प्रेतभावस्थं pat TH च तापसम्॥ ३॥
“Reducing the king to the state of a
departed soul and turning Sri Rama an
ascetic on top of it, you have brought calamity
after calamity to me—rubbed salt, as it
were, into my wound. (3)

era त्वमभावाय कालरात्रिरिवागता।
अङ्गारमुपगूह्य स्म fiat A नावबुद्धवान्॥४॥

“Like the night of universal dissolution
(or Goddess Kalaratri, one of the nine Durgas
or manifestations of the Divine Energy
associated with the dissolution of the
universe), you made your appearance in
my father’s house for the extermination of
my race! Even on clasping a live coal to
his bosom, my father did not recognize it as
such. (4)

मृत्युमापादितो राजा त्वया A पापदर्शिनि।
सुखं परिहृतं मोहात् कुलेऽस्मिन् कुलपांसनि॥ ti

“The king, my father, has been
consigned to death by you, O woman, who
perceive evil even where there is none and
have brought disgrace to your family!
Through infatuation the joy of this family has
been taken away by you. (5)

vat प्राप्य fe पिता Ase सत्यसंधो महायशा:।
तीव्रदु:खाभिसंतप्तो व्त्तो दशरथो TN I
