276

of the royal sage Devarata born in the line
of the Videha kings. Lord Visnu, on the other
hand, O Rama, made over this superb bow
of His own, capable of subduing the enemy’s
stronghold, as a trust to Rcika, a scion of
sage Bhrgu. The highly glorious Rcika in
his turn bestowed the heavenly gift on his
own son, the high-souled Jamadagni, my
father, who was too good to retaliate a wrong
and had therefore no use for it. Reckoning
my father, who had given up the use of arms
and was richly endowed with spiritual energy
earned through his austerities, as a common
man, Arjuna (more popularly known by the
name of Sahasrabahu because of his
thousand arms) caused his death. Hearing
of my father’s most cruel and unmerited
death, | for my part uprooted more than once
(as many as twenty-one times) out of
indignation the Ksatriyas even as they were

born. (14—24)
पथिवीं चाखिलां प्राप्य कश्यपाय महात्मने।

यज्ञस्यान्तेऽददं WA दक्षिणां पुण्यकर्मणे॥ २५॥

“Having acquired dominion over the
entire globe in this way, | gifted it, O Rama, to
the high-souled sage Kasyapa of meritorious
deeds by way of sacrificial fee at the end
of a sacrifice which | performed in atonement

« VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

for the great bath of blood. (25)
दत्त्वा महेन्द्रनिलयस्तपोबलसमन्वित: ।
श्रुत्वा तु धनुषो भेदं ततोऽहं द्रुतमागत:॥ २६॥
“Nay, having made the gift, | took up
my abode on Mount Mahendra. Richly
endowed with spiritual energy earned through
austerities in the meantime, however, |
expeditiously arrived here from that distant
place on hearing of the breaking of the bow.
(26)

तदेवं aed wa पितृपैतामहं महत्।
क्षत्रधर्मं पुरस्कृत्य गृह्णीष्व धनुरुत्तमम्॥२७॥
Placing above all else the noble duty of
a Ksatriya (which consists in accepting the
challenge of a warrior to a duel in a righteous
cause), O Rama, take in your hand the
celebrated and superb bow belonging to
Lord Visnu, inherited by me through my
father from my grandfather. (27)

योजयस्व धनु:श्रेष्ठे शरे परपुरंजयम्।
यदि शक्तोऽसि काकुत्स्थ Ss दास्यामि ते तत: ॥ २८ I
“And fit the arrow, capable of reducing
the stronghold of an enemy, to this foremost
of bows provided you are equal to it, O
scion of Kakutstha ! Then alone | shall offer
a single combat to you.” (28)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये बालकाण्डे
पञ्चसप्ततितम: सर्ग: il ७५ ॥

Thus ends Canto Seventy-five in the Balakanda of the glorious Ramayana of Valmiki,
the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

