* ARANYAKANDA «

अहो रूपमहो लक्ष्मी: स्वरसम्पच्च शोभना।
मृगोऽद्भुतो विचित्राङ्गो wat हरतीव मे॥१५॥

“Wonderful is its colour and marvellous
its splendour. The richness of its sound is
also lovely. Endowed with spotted limbs,
this wonderful deer captivates my heart, as
it were. (15)

ae ग्रहणमभ्येति जीवन्नेव मृगस्तव।
आश्चर्यभूतं भवति विस्मयं जनयिष्यति॥ १६॥

“If the deer is caught by you alive, it
will be a miraculous feat on your part and
will cause wonder. (16)

समाप्तवनवासानां राज्यस्थानां च न: पुन:।
अन्त:पुरे विभूषार्थो aT wa भविष्यति॥ eo

“When we have concluded the term of
our exile and are installed on the throne
again, this deer will serve as an adornment
to our gynaeceum. (17)

भरतस्यार्यपुत्रस्य श्वश्रूणां मम च प्रभो।
मृगरूपमिदं feat विस्मयं जनयिष्यति॥ १८॥

“This weird and excellent deer will
cause wonder, my lord, to Prince Bharata,
to yourself, to my mothers-in-law as well as
to myself. (18)

Wet यदि तेऽभ्येति veut मृगसत्तम:।
अजिनं नरशार्दूल eft तु भविष्यति॥१९॥

“If, on the other hand, the jewel among
the deer does not allow itself to be captured
by you alive, its skin itself will afford delight,
O tiger among men! (19)

निहतस्यास्य सत्त्वस्य जाम्बूनदमयत्वचि।
शष्पबृस्यां विनीतायामिच्छाम्यहमुपासितुम्॥ २०॥
“When this animal has been killed by
you, | long to sit with you on its golden skin
spread on a mat of young grass. (20)
वपुषा त्वस्य सत्त्वस्य विस्मयो जनितो मम॥ २१॥
“This conduct of mine (in the shape of
urging my husband to comply with my
wishes), actuated as it is by desire, is

827

indecorous and is deemed unworthy on the
part of women. Curiosity has, however, been
aroused in me by the weird form of this
animal.” (21)

तेन काञ्चनरोम्णा तु मणिप्रवरशृङ्खिणा।
तरुणादित्यवर्णेन नक्षत्रपथवर्चसा ॥ २२॥
aya राघवस्यापि wat विस्मयमागतम्।
इति सीतावच: श्रुत्वा GMa च मृगमद्भुतम्॥ २३॥
लोभितस्तेन रूपेण सीतया च प्रचोदित:।
उवाच Weal Bet भ्रातरं लक्ष्मणं वच:॥ evi

The mind of Sri Rama (a scion of
Raghu) too was, however, filled with curiosity
by that deer with its golden coat and horns
of sapphire, nay, shining like the rising sun
and possessing the splendour of the starry
region. Rejoiced to hear the aforesaid
request of Sita and beholding the wonderful
deer, nay, allured by that weird form and
importuned by Sita, Sri Rama, a scion of
Raghu, spoke to his brother, Laksmana, in
the following words : (22—24)

पश्य लक्ष्मण वैदेह्या: स्पृहामुल्लसितामिमाम्।
रूपश्रेष्ठतया ह्येष मृगोऽद्य न भविष्यति॥ eu il

“Mark, O Laksmana, this burning desire
of Sita (a princess of the Videha territory).
Surely because of its surpassing beauty
this deer will not survive today. (25)

न at नन्दनोद्देशे न चैत्ररथसंश्रये।

Spa: पृथिव्यां सौमित्रे योऽस्य कश्चित् समो मृग: ।। २६ II
“No deer whatsoever which is similar

to it exists in the grove bearing the appellation

of Nandana, nor in that going by the name

of Caitraratha; how then could it exist on the
earth? (26)
प्रतिलोमानुलोमाश्च रुचिरा रोमराजय:।
शोभन्ते मृगमाश्रित्य चित्रा: कनकबिन्दुभि: ।। २७॥
“The glossy rows of hair, both horizontal

and vertical, and freckled with golden spots,
look charming on the body of the deer. (27)

पश्यास्य जृम्भमाणस्य दीप्तामग्निशिखोपमाम्।
जिह्वां मुखान्नि:सरन्तीं मेघादिव शतह्रदाम्॥ २८॥
