* ARANYAKANDA «

bathed in blood, with dishevelled hair on the
battlefield. (33)

तत्क्षणे तु महाघोरं at निहतराक्षसम्।

aya निरयप्रख्यं मांसशोणितकर्दमम्॥३४॥
Covered with corpses of the slain ogres,

the forest, which had been rendered muddy

with blood and flesh, appeared most ghastly
like a veritable hell. (34)

चतुर्दशसहस्राणि रक्षसां भीमकर्मणाम्।
हतान्येकेन रामेण मानुषेण पदातिना॥ ३५॥
Fourteen thousand ogres of terrible
deeds were killed by Rama, a human being,
fighting on foot, single-handed. (35)
तस्य सैन्यस्य सर्वस्य खर: शेषो महारथ:।
Takamiya was रिपुसूदन:॥ ३६॥
Out of that entire army, the great car-
warrior Khara as also the ogre Trisira and
(its exterminator) Sri Rama, the slayer of

783

his foes, survived.

शेषा हता महावीर्या राक्षसा रणमूर्धनि।
at दुर्विषहा: सर्वे लक्ष्मणस्याग्रजेन ते॥ ३७॥
The other ogres, who were well-known,
possessed of great prowess, fierce and
hard to encounter, were all killed by the
elder brother of Laksmana in the van of the
fight. (37)
ततस्तु तद्भीमबलं महाहवे
समीक्ष्य रामेण हतं बलीयसा।
समाससादेन्द्र इवोद्यताशनि: 1 ३८ ।।

Then, perceiving that terrible army killed
in a major conflict by Sri Rama, who proved
superior in strength (when matched with the
entire host), Khara then rode in a large
chariot like Indra with his thunderbolt uplifted,
and attacked Sri Rama from where he was.

(38)

(36)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्येऽरण्यकाण्डे षड्विंश: AA: ॥ २६ ॥

Thus ends Canto Twenty-six in the Aranyakanda of the glorious Ramayana of
Valmiki, the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

Canto XXVII
Rama kills Trisira

राक्षसस्निशिरा नाम संनिपत्येदमब्रवीत्॥१॥
Approaching Khara who was marching
to meet Sri Rama, his other general, the
ogre Trisira, for his part, spoke as follows :
(1)
मां नियोजय विक्रान्तं त्वं निवर्तस्व साहसात्।
wa रामं महाबाहुं संयुगे विनिपातितम्॥२॥
“Command me, your valiant general, to
take the field and cease you from the daring
act. See the mighty-armed Rama thrown
down in an encounter. (2)

प्रतिजानामि ते सत्यमायुधं चाहमालभे।
यथा रामं वधिष्यामि वधार्हं सर्वरक्षसाम्॥ ३॥

“| take an unfailing vow before you and
swear by my weapon that | shall surely kill
Rama, who deserves death at the hands of
all the ogres. (3)

अहं वास्य Wl मृत्युरेष वा wat मम।
विनिवर्त्य रणोत्साहं ded प्राश्रिको भव॥४॥

“Either | shall prove to be his death on
the battlefield or he will be my death in
battle. Therefore, curbing your martial ardour
stand aloof as a judge awhile. (4)
