1058

उवाच च मुनिर्वाक्यं लवणस्य वधाश्रितम्।
सुदुष्करं pd ad लवणं निघ्नता त्वया॥६॥

Referring to the killing of Lavana, the
sage said: ‘By killing Lavana, a difficult task
has been accomplished by you. (6)

aed: पार्थिवा: सौम्य हता: सबलवाहना:।
लवणेन महाबाहो युध्यमाना महाबला:॥७॥

‘O gracious one, of long-arms, many
powerful kings, together with their army and
carriers had been killed by Lavana, when
they came in encounter with him. (7)

a त्वया fed: पापो लीलया पुरुषर्षभ।
Wags We तत्र प्रशान्तं aa तेजसा॥८॥

‘O Bull among men, that evil one has
been killed by you with ease, and by your
prowess, the fright of worlds due to him has
been dispelled. (8)

रावणस्य वधो घोरो Act महता a: |

इदं च सुमहत्कर्म त्वया कृतमयत्नत:॥९॥
‘The dreadful killing of Ravana by Sri

Rama was achieved with great effort; this

great task of killing Lavana was performed
by you without effort. (9)

प्रीतिश्चास्मिन् परा जाता देवानां लवणे हते।

भूतानां चैव सर्वेषां जगतश्च fret कृतम्॥१०॥
‘On Lavana being killed, the gods are

highly pleased. This admirable deed for all

beings and the world has been performed
by you. (10)

तच्च Gg मया Ge यथावत् पुरुषर्षभ।
सभायां वासवस्याथ उपविष्टेन राघव॥११॥

‘That encounter with Lavana was indeed
seen by me, as it ensued, while | was sitting
in the assembly of Vasava (Indra), O bull
among men. (11)

ममापि परमा प्रीतिर्हृदि शत्रुघ्न add
उपाघ्रास्यामि ते मूर्धि स्नेहस्यैषा परा गति:॥ १२॥
‘My heart too, 0 Satrughna, is filled with
joy; | shall smell the crown of your head as
this is the highest course of affection.’ (12)

« VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

इत्युक्त्वा afer शत्रुघ्नमुपाघ्राय महामति:।
आतिथ्यमकरोत् तस्य ये च तस्य पदानुगा: 1 १३॥

Thus saying and smelling the crown of
the head of Satrughna, the wise one, Valmiki,
offered hospitality to him and all those who
followed him. (13)

स भुक्तवान् नरश्रेष्ठो गीतमाधुर्यमुत्तमम्।
शुश्राव रामचरितं तस्मिन् काले यथाक्रमम्॥ १४॥
तन्त्रीलयसमायुक्तं त्रिस्थानकरणान्वितम्।
संस्कृतं लक्षणोपेतं समतालसमन्वितम्॥१७५॥
That jewel among men, Satrughna,
took the food offered by Valmiki; then heard
the deeds of Sri Rama, as they were
performed by Him at that time melodiously,
accompanied with the sound of the lute with
proper beats and the three musical tunes
manifested at proper beats, and at proper
places, in Sanskrit, and according to the
rules of music and also with the beat of
drums at proper intervals. (14-15)

शुश्राव रामचरितं तस्मिन् काले पुरा कृतम्।
तान्यक्षराणि सत्यानि aaah पूर्वश:॥ १६॥

Satrughna heard the deeds of Sri Rama
as they were performed formerly, those
words (comprising the song) were true and
narrated as per the deeds performed in
sequence. (16)

श्रुत्वा पुरुषशार्दूलो विसंज्ञो बाष्पलोचन:।

a मुहूर्तमिवासंज्ञो विनि:श्वस्य मुहुर्मुहु:॥ १७॥
Having heard the story duly sung, the

lion among men, Satrughna, with tears in

his eyes, was rendered unconscious, and

fell into a swoon immediately taking deep

sighs repeatedly. (17)

तस्मिन् गीते यथावृत्तं वर्तमानमिवाशृणोत्।
पदानुगाश्च ये राज्ञस्तां श्रुत्वा गीतिसम्पदम्॥ १८॥
अवाङ्मुखाश्च दीनाश्च ह्याश्चर्यमिति चाब्रुवन्।
परस्परं च a तत्र सैनिका: सम्बभाषिरे॥१९॥

Satrughna heard the deeds sung as if
they were performed in the present. The
warriors, who followed him, on hearing the
