# YUDDHAKANDA #

Having crossed the defensive wall
with his feet alone, the ogre, who
closely resembled a mountain in height,
surveyed the wonderful army of the
monkeys, which looked like a mass of clouds.

(53)

ते दृष्ट्वा राक्षसश्रेष्ठं वानरा: पर्वतोपमम्।
वायुनुन्ना इव घना ययु: at दिशस्तदा॥ ५४॥
Beholding the foremost of ogres, who
resembled a mountain, the monkeys
immediately dispersed in all directions even
like clouds propelled by wind. (54)
ag. वानरानीकमतिप्रचण्डं
दिशो द्रवद्भिन्नमिवाभ्रजालम्।
a कुम्भकर्ण: समवेक्ष्य हर्षा-
न्ननाद भूयो घनवद्घनाभ:॥५५॥
Perceiving that most powerful army of
monkeys scattered to the four quarters,
like a mass of clouds, melting away, the
notorious Kumbhakarna who also looked
like a cloud, repeatedly emitted a roar like
thunder. (55)

551

इव शालव्रृक्षा:॥ ५६॥

Hearing his terrible roar, which
resembled the rumbling of a cloud in the sky,
numerous monkeys fell to the ground like sal
trees whose roots have been severed. (56)

विपुलपरिघवान् स कुम्भकर्णो
रिपुनिधनाय विनि:सृतो महात्मा।
कपिगणभयमाददत् सुभीमं
प्रभुरिव किंकरदण्डवान् युगान्ते॥ ५७॥

Armed with a huge iron club in addition
to a pike, and causing tremendous fear to
the simian ranks, that colossal Kumbhakarna
rushed forth for the destruction of the enemy,
even like Lord Kalarudra (the god of
destruction appearing in a dark form at the
time of universal dissolution) armed with his
rod of punishment waiting upon him in a
living form like a servant, at the end of the
world cycle. (57)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये युद्धकाण्डे पञ्चषष्टितम: सर्ग: ॥ ६५ ॥

Thus ends Canto Sixty-five in the Yuddhakanda of the glorious Ramayana of

Valmiki, the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

Canto LXVI

Angada reassures and rallies the monkeys scared away by Kumbhakarna;
their carnage at the hands of Kumbhakarna puts them
to flight again and Angada restores them
to confidence once more

a लङ्घयित्वा wert गिरिकूटोपमो महान्।
Peat नगरात् तूर्णं कुम्भकर्णो महाबल:॥१॥
ननाद च महानादं समुद्रमभिनादयन्।
विजयन्निव निर्घातान् विधमन्निव पर्वतान्॥२॥

Stepping across the defensive wall,
the gigantic Kumbhakarna, who resembled
the peak of a mountain and was endowed
with extraordinary might, rapidly issued
out of the city and emitted a tremendous
