268

नैषा बुद्धिर्महाबुद्धे यद् ब्रवीषि महाकपे।
विचेतुं वयमाज्ञप्ता दक्षिणां दिशमुत्तमाम्॥१५॥
amd कपिराजेन नैव रामेण धीमता।
कथंचिन्निर्जितां सीतामस्माभिर्नाभिरोचयेत्॥ १६॥
राघवो नृपशार्दूल: Het व्यपदिशन् स्वकम्।
प्रतिज्ञाय स्वयं राजा सीताविजयमग्रत:॥१७॥
सर्वेषां कपिमुख्यानां कथं मिथ्या करिष्यति।
विफलं कर्म च pd भवेत् तुष्टिर्न तस्य च॥ १८॥
qa च दर्शितं वीर्यं भवेद् वानरपुङ्खवा:।
तस्माद् गच्छाम वै सर्वे यत्र WA: सलक्ष्मण:।
सुग्रीवश्च महातेजा: कार्यस्यास्य निवेदने॥१९॥

“What you say, O mighty monkey of
great understanding, is not wisdom. We
were enjoined only to explore the excellent
southern quarter, and not to bring back Sita
either by Sugriva, the ruler of monkeys, or
by the sagacious Sri Rama. In the name of
his own race Sri Rama, a scion of Raghu,
a veritable tiger among kings, may not like
Sita having anyhow been won by us. Having
taken a vow before all the leading monkeys

« VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

that he would win back Sita himself, how
will he falsify his vow? The work
accomplished by Hanuman will then have
been rendered fruitless nor will his pleasure
be won and the valour exhibited in winning
back Sita will also prove infructuous, O
bulls among monkeys! Therefore, in order
to report this achievement of Hanuman, let
us all actually return to where Sri Rama,
accompanied by Laksmana, and Sugriva,
who is endowed with extraordinary energy,
are. (15—19)

न तावदेषा मतिरक्षमा नो

यथा भवान् पश्यति राजपुत्र।
यथा तु रामस्य मतिर्निविष्टा
AM भवान् पश्यतु कार्यसिद्धिम्॥ २०॥
“This suggestion of yours, the way in
which you are thinking, O prince, is not at
all such as we may not be able to carry out.
But devise you the means to accomplish
our purpose according to the decision arrived
at by Sri Rama.” (20)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये सुन्दरकाण्डे षष्टितम: AW: ॥ ६० ॥

Thus ends Canto Sixty of the Sundarakanda in the glorious Ramayana of Valmiki,
the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

एकषष्टितम: सर्ग:
Canto LXI
Set out from the Mahendra mountain in the direction of Kiskindha, the
monkeys halt at Madhuvana, a grove guarded by the monkey Dadhimukha,
and most beloved of Sugriva, which falls on their way. When the
monkeys began to enjoy the fruits of the grove with the
permission of Prince Angada, Dadhimukha, comes in
their way and is lacerated with their claws and teeth

ततो जाम्बवतो वाक्यमगृह्णत वनौकस:।
अङ्गदप्रमुखा वीरा हनूमांश्च महाकपि:॥१॥
The heroic monkeys headed by

Angada, as well as the great monkey,
Hanuman, thereupon accepted the

advice of Jambavan.

प्रीतिमन्तस्तत सर्वे वायुपुत्रपुर:सरा:।
महेन्द्राग्रात् समुत्पत्य पुप्लुवु: प्लवगर्षभा:॥ २॥
मेरुमन्दरसंकाशा Wat sa महागजा:।
छादयन्त इवाकाशं महाकाया महाबला:॥ ३॥

(1)
