« KISKINDHAKANDA +

duties of a king, spoke as follows to the
monkey chiefs : (43)

यथासुखं पर्वतनिर्झरेषु

वनेषु सर्वेषु च वानरेन्द्रा:।
निवेशयित्वा विधिवद् बलानि

at बलज्ञ: प्रतिपत्तुमीष्टे। ४४॥

1087

“Having duly stationed the forces
according to their convenience by the side
of mountain rills in all the woods, O monkey
chiefs, the general who knows their strength
should be able to ascertain their exact
number.” (44)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये किष्किन्धाकाण्डे एकोनचत्वारिंश: सर्ग: ॥ ३९ ॥

Thus ends Canto Thirty-nine in the Kiskindhakanda of the glorious Ramayana of
Valmiki, the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

Canto XL

Pointing out in pursuance of SH Rama’s command to one of his generals,
Vinata by name, the regions in the east which could be penetrated into
by monkeys, detailing the tracts worthy of note, and entrusting him
with the task of conducting a search for Sita in those regions,

Sugriva enjoins the general to return within a month
after the work, adding that anyone returning
after a month will be punished

अथ राजा समृद्धार्थ: सुग्रीव: प्लवगेश्चर:।
उवाच नरशार्दूलं रामं परबलार्दनम्॥१॥
King Sugriva, the ruler of monkeys,
whose wealth had considerably grown,
submitted as follows to Sri Rama, a veritable
tiger among men, the exterminator of hostile
forces : (1)

आगता विनिविष्टाश्च afer: कामरूपिण:।
वानरेन्द्रा wes ये मद्बिषयवासिन:॥ २॥

“The mighty monkey chiefs, living in
my dominion and shining like the great Indra,
the lord of paradise, nay, capable of changing
form at will, have duly arrived and have
been lodged with care. (2)

a इमे बहुविक्रान्तैर्बलिभिर्भीमविक्रमै: |
आगता वानरा घोरा दैत्यदानवसंनिभा:॥ 3
“These aforesaid monkeys, ferocious
as they are and greatly resemble giants and
demons, have arrived with their mighty

followers, who have exhibited their valour at
many places and are of terrific prowess.
(3)
ख्यातकर्मापदानाश्च बलवन्तो जितक्लमा:।
पराक्रमेषु विख्याता व्यवसायेषु चोत्तमा:॥४॥

“The mighty monkey chiefs are noted
for their valour in fighting and have conquered
fatigue. They are well-known for their exploits
and are pre-eminent in their enterprises. (4)

पृथिव्यम्बुचरा राम नानानगनिवासिन:।
कोट्योघाश्च इमे प्राप्ता वानरास्तव feet: wy il
“These monkeys, that have arrived
here, O Rama, can move both on land
and water, have their abode on different

mountains, number many crores and are all
your servants. (5)

निदेशवर्तिन: ad ad गुरुहिते स्थिता:।
अभिप्रेतमनुष्ठातुं तव शक्ष्यन्त्यरिंदम॥६॥

“They all will stand at your beck and
