* BALAKANDA +

Krttikas, and growing six-faced, the babe
sucked the milk flowing from the breasts of
all the six together. Having sucked their
milk only for a day the boy, though tender of
body, grew so powerful even then that he
gradually conquered by sheer dint of his
might several divisions of the demon army.
Meeting together all the gods, headed by
the god of fire, then installed with due
ceremony that exceptionally glorious boy
as the commander of the celestial forces.
(28—30)
wa a wa गङ्गायां विस्तरोऽभिहितो मया।
कुमारसम्भवश्चैव धन्य: पुण्यस्तथैव च॥३१॥

175

“In this way has been told by me, O
Rama, a detailed narrative of the Ganga as
also the story of the advent of Kumara (son
of Lord Siva), which confers wealth as well
as religious merit (on the hearer as well as
on the reader). (31)

WH य: कार्तिकेये काकुत्स्थ भुवि AMT: |
आयुष्मान् पुत्रपौत्रैश्च स्कन्दसालोक्यतां व्रजेत्॥ ३२॥

“Nay, a man on earth who is devoted
to Kartikeya, O scion of Kakutstha, bids fair
to attain longevity and an abode in the
divine realm of Skanda alongwith his sons
and grandsons.” (32)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये बालकाण्डे सप्तत्रिंश: A: ॥ 301

Thus ends Canto Thirty-seven in the Balakanda of the glorious Ramayana of Valmiki,
the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

Canto XXXVIII

The narrative of King Sagara, a former king of Ayodhya
and a forefather of Sri Rama

at कथां कौशिको wa निवेद्य मधुराक्षराम्।
पुनरेवापरॆ वाक्यं काकुत्स्थमिदमब्रवीत्॥१॥
Having narrated to Sri Rama in sweet
accents the aforesaid story, Viswamitra, a
scion of KuSa, further related the following
other narrative to the scion of Kakutstha.
(1)
अयोध्याधिपतिर्वीर पूर्वमासीन्नराधिप: ।
सगरो नाम धर्मात्मा प्रजाकाम: स चाप्रज:॥ २॥
“In the days of old, O heroic Rama,
there was a king, Sagara by name, who
ruled over Ayodhya, and whose mind was
given to piety. And being issueless he longed
for progeny. (2)
वैदर्भदुहिता wa केशिनी नाम नामत:।
ज्येष्ठा सगरपत्नी सा धर्मिष्ठा सत्यवादिनी॥ ३॥

“A daughter of the king of Vidarbha,

known by the name of Kesini, O Rama,
was the eldest wife of Sagara. She was
extremely pious and truthful. (3)

अरिष्टनेमेर्दुहिता सुपर्णभगिनी gq atl
द्वितीया सगरस्यासीत् पत्नी सुमतिसंज्ञिता॥४॥

“The second wife of Sagara was named
as Sumati. She was really speaking a
daughter of the sage Aristanemi (nicknamed
Kasyapa) and a sister of Suparna (another
name of Garuda, the king of birds and the
carrier of Lord Visnu). (4)
ताभ्यां सह महाराज: पत्नीभ्यां तप्तवांस्तप:।
हिमवन्तं समासाद्य भृगुप्रस्नरवणे गिरौ॥५॥

“Having reached the Himalaya mountain,
the great king practised asceticism on an

offshoot of the Himalayas, Bhrgu-Prasravana
by name, alongwith his aforesaid two wives.

(5)
