* AYODHYAKANDA +

tarrying, my son? Pray,

immediately.

यन्निमित्तमिदं ada सलिले क्रीडितं त्वया।

उत्कण्ठिता a मातेयं प्रविश क्षिप्रमाश्रमम्॥८॥
“Your mother here is seized with

anxiety because, O dear son, you have

sported in water so long; pray, enter the
hermitage without delay. (8)

aq व्यलीकं Het UT मात्रा ते यदि वा मया।

न ame ada त्वया aa तपस्विना॥ ९॥
““[#28 offence, if any, that may have

been given to you by your mother or myself,

my son, should not be taken to heart
by you, my child, an ascetic that you are.

(9)

bring water

(7)

त्वं गतिस्त्वगतीनां च चक्षुस्त्वं हीनचक्षुषाम्।
समासक्तास्त्वयि WOT: कथं त्वं नाभिभाषसे॥ १०॥
“You are our support, supportless as
we are; nay, you are our eyesight, sightless
as we are. Our senses are focussed on
you. How then do you not speak to me?’
(10)

मुनिमव्यक्कतया ara dae सज्जमानया।
ह्रीनव्यञ्जनया wea भीतचित्त इवाब्रुवम्॥११॥

“As though frightened in mind to
behold the sage, | replied to him in faltering
and inarticulate words, lacking in certain
consonants. (11)
THE: कर्म चेष्टाभिरभिसंस्तभ्य वाग्बलम्।
आचचक्षे ae तस्मै पुत्रव्यसनजं भयम्॥१२॥

“Fully controlling fear (which is an action
of the mind) by means of outward signs
(showing fearlessness) and acquiring the
power of expression, | for my part told him
(in the following words) of the fear that
awaited him as a result of his son’s death.

(12)
क्षत्रियोऽहं दशरथो नाहं gal महात्मन:।
सज्जनावमतं gas Wa स्वकर्मजम्॥१३॥

“`[ च a Ksatriya named DaSaratha,
and not the son of your exalted self. As a

529

result of my own action this agony, which is
despised by noble men, has been reaped
by me. (13)
भगवंश्चापहस्तोऽहं सरयूतीरमागत: ।
जिघांसु: श्वापदं किंचिन्निपाने वागतं गजम्॥ १४॥
“‘Desirous of killing any beast of prey
or elephant arrived in a ford for drinking
water, | sought the bank of the Sarayu, bow
in hand, O holy sage ! (14)

ad: श्रुतो मया शब्दो जले कुम्भस्य Tela: |
द्विपोऽयमिति arate बाणेनाभिहतो मया॥ १५॥

“Presently was heard by me the sound
of a pitcher being filled in water. | stood
unsuspecting, believing that it was an
elephant that was making the sound and
the living being (responsible for the sound)
was hit by me with an arrow. (15)

Tet तस्यास्ततस्तीरमपश्यमिषुणा हदि।
विनिर्भिन्नं गतप्राणं wart भुवि तापसम्॥ १६॥
““Proceeding to the bank of the river
immediately | found an ascetic lying on the
ground with his life well-nigh extinct, pierced
as he was with the arrow in the heart. (16)

ततस्तस्यैव वचनादुपेत्य परितप्यत:।

स मया Weal बाण उद्धृतो मर्मतस्तदा॥ १७॥
“‘Then, drawing near, at the instance

of the ascetic himself, who had been suffering

intense pain, the said arrow was immediately
extracted from his vital part by me. (17)

स चोद्धृतेन बाणेन सहसा स्वर्गमास्थित:।
भगवन्तावुभौ शोचन्नन्धाविति विलप्य च॥ १८॥

“With the arrow extracted from his
bosom, the ascetic forthwith ascended to
heaven, grieving for you both, and lamenting
on the ground that you were blind. (18)

अज्ञानाद् Wad: Ua: सहसाभिहतो मया।

शेषमेवं गते यत् स्यात् Ad प्रसीदतु A APA: eeu
“*Through ignorance your son has been

rashly killed by me. Such being the case,

may Your Holiness be pleased to direct
what remains to be done.’ (19)
