596

person because here is seen that towering
banner bearing the device of a Kovidara
tree on the chariot—has evil intent, he will
either cause us to be bound with chains or
kill us, who are devoted to Sri Rama, the
eldest son of Dasaratha, exiled from his
kingdom by his father. (3-4)

सम्पन्नां श्रियमन्विच्छंस्तस्य Ua: सुदुर्लभाम्।
We: कैकयीपुत्रो et समधिगच्छति॥५॥

“Seeking to possess the entire fortune
of that monarch, Sri Rama, which is
otherwise most difficult to get, Bharata, the
son of Kaikeyi, has taken it into his head to
kill him. (5)

wat da wat wa wat दाशरथिर्मम।
तस्यार्थकामा: संनद्धा गङ्गानूपेऽत्र तिष्ठत॥६॥

“Sri Rama, son of Daégaratha, is my
lord and friend, too. Therefore, seeking to
advance his interests, remain stationed on
this bank of the Ganga, clothed with mail.

(6)
तिष्ठन्तु सर्वदाशाश्च गङ्गामन्वाश्रिता नदीम्।
बलयुक्का नदीरक्षा मांसमूलफलाशना:॥७॥

Let all my ferrymen, accompanied by
troops, remain rooted to the bank of the
river Ganga, guarding access to the river
and living on meat, roots and fruits stored in
the boats. (7)
संनद्धानां तथा यूनां तिष्ठन्त्वित्यभ्यचोदयत्॥ ¢

“And let one hundred each youthful
fishermen, clothed with mail occupy all of
the five hundred boats,” so did Guha issue
his commands. (8)

ae तुष्टस्तु भरतो रामस्येह भविष्यति।
इयं स्वस्तिमती सेना गङ्गामद्य तरिष्यति॥ ९॥

“If, however, Bharata proves to be
favourably disposed towards Sri Rama at
this moment, this army will be allowed to
cross safely the Ganga today.” (9)

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA +

इत्युक्त्वोपायनं गृह्य मत्स्यमांसमधूनि al
अभिचक्राम भरतं निषादाधिपतिर्गुह:॥ १०॥
Saying so and taking sugar-candy, the
pulp of fruits and honey as an offering,
Guha, the chief of the Nisadas, proceeded
to meet Bharata. (10)

तमायान्तं तु सम्प्रेक्ष्य सूतपुत्र: प्रतापवान्।
भरतायाचचक्षेऽथ समयज्ञो बविनीतवत्॥११॥
Vividly perceiving him coming, the
glorious Sumantra (the son of a charioteer)
for his part, who knew what is called for at
a particular time, forthwith spoke to Bharata
as follows like a humble servant : (11)
we ज्ञातिसहस्रेण स्थपति: परिवारित:।
कुशलो दण्डकारण्ये वृद्धो UGA ते सखा॥ १२॥
तस्मात् पश्यतु काकुत्स्थं cat निषादाधिपो गुह: |
असंशयं विजानीते यत्र dl रामलक्ष्मणौ॥१३॥
“Attended by a thousand of his kinsmen,
here comes Guha, the sovereign lord of the
Nisadas, who is a senior friend of your
elder brother, Sri Rama, and is closely
acquainted with the Dandaka forest.
Therefore, allow him to see you, O scion of
Kakutstha ! Doubtless he knows well where
the celebrated Sri Rama and Laksmana
may be.” (12-13)

Vdd tan श्रुत्वा सुमन्त्राद् भरत: WHA |
sara वचनं vit We: पश्यतु मामिति॥१४॥
Hearing this pleasing report from the
lips of Sumantra, Bharata for his part made
the following reply: “Let Guha see me at
once.” (14)

लब्ध्वानुज्ञां सम्प्रहष्टो ज्ञातिभि: परिवारित:।
आगम्य भरतं प्रह्वो गुहो वचनमब्रवीत्॥१५॥
Immensely rejoiced to receive
permission to see the prince and approaching
Bharata, Guha, who was surrounded by
his kinsmen, meekly submitted as follows :
(15)

निष्कुटश्चैव देशोऽयं वञ्चिताश्चापि a वयम्।
निवेदयाम ते सर्वं स्वके दाशगृहे वस॥ १६॥
