864

Clouds rained bones and hot blood;
the oceans transgressed their limits and
mountains rocked. (54)

अट्ठहासान् विमुञ्जन्तो घननादसमस्वना:।
वाश्यन्त्यश्च शिवास्तत्र दारुणं घोरदर्शना:॥ ५५ ॥

Creatures roaring like thunder raised
yells resembling a horse-laugh and fierce-
looking she-jackals, emitted piercing howls.

(55)

सम्पतन्त्यथ भूतानि दृश्यन्ते च यथाक्रमम्।
गृध्रचक्रं महच्चात्र प्रज्वालोद्गारिभिर्मुखै:॥ ५६॥
रक्षोगणस्योपरिष्टात् परिभ्रमति कालवत्।
कपोता रक्तपादाश्च सारिका fagar ययु:॥ ५७॥

The elements appeared to be dissolving
as it were one after another, and a huge
circle of vultures spitting forth flames through
their mouths, were hovering like Death over
the Raksasa hordes. Red-footed pigeons
and mynas flew with speed. (56-57)

काका वाश्यन्ति aaa विडाला वै द्विपादय:।
उत्पातांस्ताननादृत्य राक्षसा बलदर्पिता:॥७५८॥
यान्त्येव न निवर्तन्ते मृत्युपाशावपाशिता:।
माल्यवांश्च सुमाली च माली च सुमहाबल:॥ ५९॥
पुरस्सरा राक्षसानां ज्वलिता Fa पावका:।
माल्यवन्तं तु ते सर्वे माल्यवन्तमिवाचलम्॥६०॥
निशाचरा आश्रयन्ति धातारमिव देवता:।
तद् बलं राक्षसेन्द्राणां महाभ्रघननादितम्॥६१॥
जयेप्सया देवलोकं ययौ मालिवशे स्थितम्।
राक्षसानां समुद्योगं तं तु नारायण: प्रभु:॥६२॥
देवदूतादुपश्रुत्य चक्रे युद्धे तदा मन:।
a सज्जायुधतूणीरो वैनतेयोपरि स्थित:॥६३॥

The crows cawed aloud, the cats
growled and the elephants etc., too trumpeted
at that very spot. “Not minding these evil
forebodings, the Raksasas, arrogant as they
were by reason of their strength, did not
retrace their steps, but proceeded drawn by
the noose of Yama. Malyavan and Sumali,
as well as Mali, of great strength, marched
like blazing fires at the head of the Raksasas.
On Malyavan, unshakable like Mount

« VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

Malyavan, the Raksasas relied even as the
gods relied on Brahma. The aforesaid army
of the leaders of ogres under the command
of Mali, and producing a noise resembling
the peal of thunder, proceeded to the realm
of gods with a view to conquering it.
“Hearing of the aforesaid endeavour of
the Raksasas from the envoy of the gods,
Lord Visnu, for His part made up His mind
to fight, and equipped with a quiver full of
arrows rode on Garuda. (58—63)
आसाद्य कवचं दिव्यं सहस्रार्कसमद्युति।
आबद्ध्य शरसम्पूर्णे इषुधी विमले तदा॥६४॥
श्रोणिसूत्रं च खड्गं च विमलं कमलेक्षण:।
शङ्खचक्रगदाशार्ङ्गखड्गांश्चैव वरायुधान्॥६५॥
राक्षसानामभावाय ययौ तूर्णतरं प्रभु:॥६६॥
Mounted on the beautiful-feathered
Garuda, who looked like a hill, equipped
with a pair of immaculate quivers full of
arrows, putting on His celestial armour shining
like a thousand suns, arming Himself with
His excellent weapons—the conch, the
discus, the mace, the Sarnga bow and the
sword, and fastening His belt as well as His
splendid sword, the lotus-eyed Lord set out
at once to bring about the destruction of the
Raksasas. (64—66)
सुपर्णपृष्ठे स बभौ vara: पीताम्बरो eh: |
काञ्चनस्य fr: शृङ्गे सतडित्तोयदो यथा॥६७॥
Mounting on the back of Garuda, the
most handsome Lord Hari, clad in yellow,
shone like a cloud with a streak of lightning

on a peak of Mount Meru. (67)
a सिद्धदेवर्षिमहोरगैश्च
गन्धर्वयक्षैरुपगीयमान: ।
धशङ्खपाणि:॥ ॥६८॥

Holding the discus, the sword, the bow
and the conch in His hands, the Lord, the
enemy of Asura hordes, duly arrived, His
praises being sung by Siddhas, gods, Rsis,
