626

look till now, now appears to me like
Ayodhya. (14)

खुरैरुदीरितो रेणुर्दिवं प्रच्छाद्य fasta
तं वहत्यनिल: शीघ्रं कुर्वन्निव मम प्रियम्॥१५॥
“The dust raised by the hoofs of the
horses and other animals hangs over the
sky. The wind blows it away quickly as
though doing a kindly act to me by making
the landscape visible to me. (15)
स्यन्दनांस्तुरगोपेतान् सूतमुख्यैरधिष्ठितान्।
Wa सम्पतत: शीघ्रं पश्य MAW कानने॥१६॥
“Behold these chariots, drawn by horses
and controlled by the best of charioteers,
advancing rapidly through the forest eager
as their occupants are to see Sri Rama,
O Satrughna ! (16)

एतान् वित्रासितान् पश्य बर्हिण: प्रियदर्शनान्।
एवमापतत: शैलमधिवासं पतत्तरिण:॥१७॥
“Behold these peacocks—which are
so delightful to look at and are greatly
frightened by the sight of the army—
hastening thus towards the mountain, the
abode of birds. (17)

अतिमात्रमयं देशो मनोज्ञ: प्रतिभाति मे।
तापसानां निवासोऽयं व्यक्तं स्वर्गपथोऽनघ॥ १८॥
“This region appears most enchanting

to me. This home of ascetics is clearly a
road to heaven, O sinless one ! (18)

मृगा wife: सहिता बहव: पृषता वने।
मनोज्ञरूपा लक्ष्यन्ते कुसुमैरिव चित्रिता:॥१९॥

“Many spotted deer accompanied by
their hinds and endowed with enchanting
forms appear as though decorated with
flowers. (19)

साधु सैन्या: प्रतिष्ठन्तां विचिन्वन्तु च काननम्।
यथा dt पुरुषव्याघ्रौ दृश्येते रामलक्ष्मणौ।। २०॥

“Let troops go forward in an unobtrusive
manner and examine the forest, so that
those two tigers among men, Sri Rama and
Laksmana, may be found out.” (20)

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

भरतस्य Ad: Acal FORT: शस्त्रपाणय: |
विविशुस्तद्वनं शूरा धूमाग्रं ददृशुस्तत:॥२१॥
Hearing Bharata’s command, gallant
troops with arms in their hands entered that
forest and presently saw a column of smoke
rising at some distance. (21)

ते समालोक्य धूमाग्रमूचुर्भरतमागता:।
नामनुष्ये भवत्यग्निर्व्यक्तमत्रैव राघवौ॥ २२॥

Clearly perceiving a column of smoke
they approached Bharata and submitted,
“There can be no fire in a place uninhabited
by human beings. Evidently Sri Rama and
Laksmana, the two scions of Raghu, dwell
on this very spot. (22)

अथ Wa नरव्याघ्रौ राजपुत्रौ परंतपौ।
अन्ये रामोपमा: सन्ति व्यक्तमत्र तपस्विन:॥ २३॥

“If the two princes, who are veritable
tigers among men and the scorchers of
their enemy, are not here, obviously there
are other ascetics like Sri Rama on this
spot.” (23)
तच्छुत्वा भरतस्तेषां वचनं साधुसम्मतम्।
सैन्यानुवाच सर्वांस्तानमित्रबलमर्दन: ॥ २४॥

Hearing the aforesaid submission of
the soldiers, which was esteemed even by
pious men, Bharata, who was capable of
crushing a hostile army, spoke to all those
troops as follows : (24)

यत्ता भवन्तस्तिष्ठनतु नेतो गन्तव्यमग्रत:।
अहमेव गमिष्यामि सुमन्त्रो धृतिरेव च॥ २५॥

“Let you remain vigilant where you are;
you should not proceed farther than this
place. | shall go myself to meet Sri Rama,
as also Sumantra and Dhrti, two trusted
ministers of King Dasaratha.” (25)

`एवमुक्तास्तत: सैन्यास्तत्र तस्थु: समन्तत:।
weit यत्र धूमाग्रं तत्र दृष्टिं समादधत्॥ २६॥
Commanded thus by Bharata, the
troops thereupon remained stationed all round
on that very spot; while Bharata fixed his
