512

ते वानरेन्द्रास्त्रिदशारिबाणै-
भिन्ना निपेतुर्भुवि भीमकाया:।
ततस्तु a. वानरसैन्यमुग्रं

प्रच्छादयामास A बाणजालै:॥४४॥

With hundreds of sharp-pointed arrows
that overlord of ogres rendered their blows
ineffectual. He also pierced those monkey-
chiefs with streams of arrows endowed with
lovely golden shafts. Pierced by the arrows
of Ravana (the enemy of gods), the aforesaid
monkey-chiefs of terrifying proportions,
however, fell to the ground. Then Ravana
for his part covered that formidable army of
monkeys with streams of arrows. (43-44)
a वध्यमाना: पतिताश्च वीरा

नानद्यमाना भयशल्यविद्धा: |
शाखामृगा रावणसायकार्ता
जग्मु: शरण्यं शरणं A रामम्॥४५॥

And, pierced with the darts of terror,
while being struck by Ravana, the aforesaid
heroes fell down shrieking. Hard pressed
by the arrows of Ravana, the monkeys
sought Sri Rama, who is capable of affording
shelter to all, as their refuge. (45)

ततो महात्मा स धनुर्धनुष्मा-
नादाय WH: सहसा जगाम।
तं लक्ष्मण: प्राञ्ञलिरभ्युपेत्य
उवाच रामं परमार्थयुक्तम्॥४६॥
Seizing his bow, the said high-souled
Sri Rama, who was armed with an excellent
bow, went forth all at once. Approaching
him with joined palms, Laksmana addressed
to Rama the following words consonant
with truth: (46)

काममार्य सुपर्याप्तो वधायास्य दुरात्मन:।
विधमिष्याम्यहं चैतमनुजानीहि at विभो॥४७॥

“| am fully equal to the destruction of
this evil-minded fellow, O noble brother and |
shall certainly exterminate him. Pray, grant
me leave to do this, O mighty prince!” (47)

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA +

तमब्रवीन्महातेजा Wa: सत्यपराक्रम:।
Tes यत्नपरश्चापि भव लक्ष्मण ATT sel

Sri Rama of unfailing prowess, who
was endowed with extraordinary energy,

replied to him as_ follows: “Go, O
Laksmana, and also be strenuous in conflict.
(48)

want fe महावीर्यो रणेऽद्भुतपराक्रम:।
त्रैलोक्येनापि संक्रुद्धो दुष्प्रसह्यो न संशय:॥४९॥
“Indeed, Ravana is endowed with
extraordinary valour and exhibits marvellous
prowess in combat. When enraged, he is
difficult to withstand even for all the three
worlds. (49)

तस्यच्छिद्राणि मार्गस्व स्वच्छिद्राणि च लक्षय।
AT धनुषाऽऽत्मानं गोपायस्व समाहित:॥ ५०॥
“Seek out his vulnerable points and
keep an eye on your own weak points.
And remaining wide awake, defend yourself
with your eyes as well as with your bow.”
(50)

Wada वच: श्रुत्वा सम्परिष्वज्य पूज्य aI
अभिवाद्य च wart ययौ सौमित्रिराहवे॥५१॥

Hearing the advice of Sri Rama,
a scion of Raghu, nay, closely embracing
and honouring and greeting him, Laksmana
(son of Sumitra) sallied forth for an encounter
with the ogres. (51)

a रावणं वारणहस्तबाहुं

स्तान् वानरान् भिनविक्रीण्दिहान्॥ ५२॥

He beheld Ravana with arms resembling
the trunks of elephants and his dread and
fiery bow uplifted, covering the monkeys
with showers of arrows, their bodies torn
into pieces thereby. (52)

तमालोक्य महातेजा SAM मारुतात्मज:।
Fart शरजालानि विदुद्राव स रावणम्॥५३॥
