« KISKINDHAKANDA +

whose countenance resembled the moon,
replied as follows : (1)

qa लक्ष्मण ame aad परुषमर्हति।

हरीणामीश्वर: श्रोतुं तव aerate विशेषत:॥ २॥
“Sugriva, the lord of monkeys, ought

not to be spoken to in this strain, O

Laksmana! He does not deserve to hear
harsh words, particularly from your lips.(2)

नैवाकृतज्ञ: सुग्रीवो न शठो नापि erect: |
नैवानृतकथो dit न जिह्मश्च कपीश्चर:।। ३॥

“Sugriva, the ruler of monkeys, is not
at all ungrateful nor perfidious nor even
hard-hearted nor again a liar nor crooked,
O gallant prince ! (3)

wa वीर सुग्रीवो यदन्यैर्दुष्करं रणे॥४॥

“Nor has this gallant monkey, Sugriva,
forgotten the service rendered to him by Sri
Rama, which was difficult for others to render
on the field of battle, O heroic prince! (4)
रामप्रसादात् कीर्तिं च कपिराज्यं च शाश्वतम्।
प्राप्तवानिह सुग्रीवो wat a च परंतप॥५॥

“Nay, through the goodwill of Sri Rama,
O scourge of your enemies, Sugriva
regained his lost glory as well as the lasting
rulership of monkeys as also his own
spouse, Ruma, and myself too. (5)

सुदु:खशयित: yt wad सुखमुत्तमम्।
प्राप्तकालं न जानीते विश्वामित्रो यथा ar ।॥। ६॥

“Having secured this summit of
happiness, Sugriva, who had slept most
uneasily in the past, did not, like Sage
Viswamitra, recollect what was called for at
a particular moment. (6)

घृताच्यां किल संसक्तो दश वर्षाणि लक्ष्मण।
अहोऽमन्यत धर्मात्मा विश्चामित्रो wear: eu

“Deeply attached to the celestial nymph,
Ghrtaci, O Laksmana, the eminent sage,
ViSwamitra, whose mind was set on virtue,
thought of, they say, a period of ten years
as a day. (7)

1073

a fe wa 4 जानीते कालं कालविदां az: |
विश्वामित्रो महातेजा: किं grad: पृथग्जन:॥८॥
“Indeed the said ViSwamitra, the

foremost of those having a sense of time,
who was possessed of great ardour, did not
come to know of the time that had stolen
over him, to say nothing of ordinary people.
(8)
देहधर्मगतस्यास्य परिश्रान्तस्य लक्ष्मण।
अवितृप्तस्य कामेषु राम: क्षन्तुमिहार्हति॥९॥

“Sri Rama, 0 Laksmana, ought to grant
pardon to Sugriva, who is subject to the
peculiarities of a body (viz., hunger, sleep,
fear and sexual appetite), is fully exhausted
and is not sated with enjoyments. (9)

न च रोषवशं तात गन्तुमर्हसि लक्ष्मण।
निश्चयार्थमविज्ञाय सहसा प्राकृतो यथा॥१०॥

“And without ascertaining the conclusive
truth you ought not unconsciously to give
way to anger like an ordinary man, O dear
Laksmana ! (10)

wage fe पुरुषास्त्वद्बिधा: पुरुषर्षभ।
अविमृश्य न रोषस्य सहसा यान्ति वश्यताम्॥ ११॥

“Indeed men who are endowed with
goodness like you, O jewel among men, do
not precipitately fall a prey to anger without
due deliberation. (11)

प्रसादये wat धर्मज्ञ सुग्रीवार्थं समाहिता।
महान् रोषसमुत्पन्न: संरम्भस्त्यज्यतामयम्॥१२॥
“| devoutly seek to propitiate you on
behalf of Sugriva, O knower of what is
right ! Let this great excitement born of anger
be given up. (12)
eat मां चाङ्गदं राज्यं धनधान्यपशूनि च।
रामप्रियार्थं सुग्रीवस्त्यजेदिति मतिर्मम॥१३॥
“For the pleasure of Sri Rama, Sugriva
will renounce Ruma, myself, nay, even
Angada, his throne, fortune, stock of food-
grain and cattle: such is my conviction.(13)

समानेष्यति सुग्रीव: सीतया सह राघवम्।
शशाङ्कमिव रोहिण्या हत्वा तं राक्षसाधमम्॥ १४॥
