+ UTTARAKANDA +

‘In the primeval form, O brave one,
destroyer of the forts of enemies, at the time
of creation | was your son, in the form of
Time brought forth by your Maya (the illusory
power), and the destroyer of all. (2)

पितामहश्च भगवानाह लोकपति: प्रभु:।

समयस्ते कृत: सौम्य लोकान् सम्परिरक्षितुम्॥ ३॥
‘Our lord, the master of all worlds, the

venerable Brahma has said: ‘O gracious one,

you have promised formerly for the protection
of the worlds and that has been fulfilled. (3)

संक्षिप्य fe पुरा लोकान् मायया स्वयमेव हि।
महार्णवे शयानोऽप्सु at त्वं पूर्वमजीजन:॥४॥
‘Prior to creation, you yourself by your
Maya having merged all the worlds in you
reposing on the great ocean, had created
me (Brahma) first. (4)
भोगवन्तं ततो नागमनन्तमुदकेशयम्।
मायया जनयित्वा त्वं द्वौ च सत्त्वौ महाबलौ॥ ५॥
मधुं च कैटभं wa ययोरस्थिचयैर्वृता।
इयं पर्वतसम्बाधा मेदिनी चाभवत् तदा॥६॥

‘Then having created by your Maya the
thousand-hooded Ananta (serpent) lying on
the waters, you created the two powerful
beings, Madhu and Kaitabha by the heaps
of bones of whom this earth was crowded
and covered with mountains, and then became
the earth, Medini, (having fatness-fertility).

(5-6)
wal दिव्येऽर्कसंकाशे नाभ्यामुत्पाद्य मामपि।
प्राजापत्यं त्वया कर्म मयि ad निवेशितम्॥७॥

‘Creating from Your navel, two divine
lotus, having the lustre of the sun, and from
it myself, the work ordained for Prajapati
(creator) was entrusted to me. (7)

aise संन्यस्तभारो fe त्वामुपास्य जगत्पतिम्।
Tat विधत्स्व भूतेषु मम तेजस्करो भवान्॥८॥

‘So I, having been entrusted with the
task of creation, by worshipping you, |
request you: Lord! protect all creatures as
you only bestow power upon me. (8)

1121

ततस्त्वमसि दुर्धर्षात् तस्माद् भावात् सनातनात्।
Tat विधास्यन् भूतानां विष्णुत्वमुपजग्मिवान्॥ i
‘Due to that prayer for the protection of
the beings on earth, you took the form of
Visnu, from that ethereal eternal form. (9)

अदित्यां वीर्यवान् पुत्रो भ्रातॄणां वीर्यवर्धन:।
समुत्पन्नेषु कृत्येषु तेषां साह्याय कल्पसे॥१०॥

‘From Aditi (the mother of the gods),
you were born as the brave son, Vamana,
the Divine Dwarf adding to the valour of
your brothers (the gods) and extended help
to them whenever the occasion demanded.

(10)
स त्वं वित्रास्यमानासु प्रजासु जगतां वर।
रावणस्य वधाकाङ्क्षी मानुषेषु मनोऽदधा:॥ ११॥
दशवर्षसहस्राणि दशवर्षशतानि च।
कृत्वा वासस्य नियमं स्वयमेवात्मना पुरा॥१२॥

‘O best in the world, You had set your
mind on having a human form, desirous to kill
Ravana, when the human beings were being
extirpated, you yourself fixed the span of your
stay among the mortals for ten thousand and
ten hundred years formerly. (11-12)

स त्वं मनोमय: uw: पूर्णायुर्मानुषेष्विह।

कालोऽयं ते नरश्रेष्ठं समीपमुपवर्तितुम्॥१३॥
‘You were thus a mind-born son of

DaSaratha. The span of your stay on earth

as human being is complete and now it is
time for you to come back to us. (13)

यदि भूयो महाराज प्रजा इच्छस्युपासितुम्।

वस वा at us a एवमाह पितामह:॥१४॥
‘If, O brave one, you desire again to serve

men, then dwell as you wish, may welfare be

with Thee, thus Brahma said.’ (14)

अथ at विजिगीषा a सुरलोकाय waa

सनाथा विष्णुना देवा भवन्तु विगतज्वरा:॥ १५॥

‘If, however, O descendant of Raghu,
there is the desire in you to protect the
gods, then let the gods have Visnu as their
Lord.’ (15)
