1038

गात्रानुपृक्तेन शुकप्रभेण
नारीव लाक्षोक्षितकम्बलेन॥ २४॥

“With its carpet of fresh grass speckled
here and there with young Indragopa insects,
the earth looks charming like a woman with
a blanket of parrot-like green hue sprinkled
with the cochineal’s red sap closely wrapped
about her limbs. (24)

gt नदी सागरमभ्युषैति।
Be बलाका घनमभ्युपैति
कान्ता सकामा प्रियमभ्युषैति॥ २५॥

“Sleep slowly steals over Lord Visnu;
the river runs swiftly to the sea; the female
heron joyously moves on her wings to the
cloud; while a loved woman full of longing
approaches her darling. (25)

WaT मही सस्यवनाभिरामा॥ २६॥

“The forest regions have become gay
due to the charming and joyous dance of
peacocks; the Kadamba trees have exhibited
flowers of their boughs; the bulls have
become eager for union with cows, which
are equally so; the earth has assumed an
attractive appearance by its cornfields and
woodlands. (26)

वहन्ति atta नदन्ति भान्ति
ध्यायन्ति Aaa समाश्वसन्ति।
नद्यो घना मत्तगजा AAT:
प्रियाविहीना: शिखिन: प्लवंगमा: ॥ २७॥
“Rivers rush onwards, clouds discharge
their water, elephants in rut trumpet, the forest
regions assume a charming look, lovers bereft
of their loved ones remain immersed in their
thought, peacocks dance and monkeys feel
reassured due to abundance of fruit. (27)

wetfat: केतकिपुष्पगन्ध-
माघ्राय मत्ता वननिर्झरेषु।

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

प्रपातशब्दाकुलिता गजेन्द्रा:
सार्धं Wat: समदा नदन्ति॥ २८॥

“Feeling overjoyed in the midst of sylvan
cascades and getting intoxicated on inhaling
the fragrance of Ketaki flowers, nay,
bewildered to hear the sound of waterfalls,
the lordly elephants in rut emit a shrill cry
alongwith the peacocks. (28)

शनैर्मदं षट्चरणास्त्यजन्ति॥ २९॥

“Being smitten with showers, the black
bees resting on the branches of a Kadamba
tree gradually shed their inebriety developed
in amoment and heightened by sucking the
honey of flowers. (29)

wet: सुपर्याप्तरसै: समृद्धै:।
जम्बूद्रुमाणां प्रविभान्ति VIET

निपीयमाना इव षट्पदौघै:।॥ ३०॥

“With their full-grown fruits looking like

balls of powdered coal and containing copious
juice, the branches of Jambu (rose-apple)
trees appear as though being sucked to
their heart's content by swarms of black
bees. (30)
तडित्पताकाभिरलंकृताना-

मुदीर्णगम्भीरमहारवाणाम् ।
विभान्ति रूपाणि बलाहकानां

रणोत्सुकानामिव वारणानाम्॥ ३१॥

“The forms of clouds decorated with
flags in the shape of flashes of lightning and
emitting deep and loud peals look charming
like those of elephants eager for a combat.

(31)
मार्गानुग: जैलवनानुसारी
सम्प्रस्थितो मेघरवं निशम्य।
युद्धाभिकाम: प्रतिनादशङ्की
Tat गजेन्द्र: प्रतिसंनिव्त्त:।॥ ३२॥
