1072

with expensive chowries with gold-handles
and the lustre comparable with the rays of
the moon; Then raising himself up from the
throne, as the sun rises on the summits of
Meru mountain, he, the denizen of heaven
getting down from the chariot ate up the
corpse, while | looked on, O descendant of
Raghu. (9—15)

ततो भुक्त्वा यथाकामं मांसं बहु सुपीवरम्।
अवतीर्य सर: स्वर्गी संस्प्रष्टुमुपचक्रमे॥१६॥
“Then having consumed 10 his
satisfaction, the flesh rich in fat, the celestial
being, going down the lake performed
ablutions. (16)

उपस्पृश्य यथान्यायं स स्वर्गी रघुनन्दन।
आरोढुमुपचक्राम विमानवरमुत्तमम्॥ १७॥

“Having sipped water (in ablution) in
the prescribed way that celestial being, O
descendant of Raghu, got ready to ascend
the excellent chariot. (17)
we देवसंकाशमारोहन्तमुदीक्ष्य वै।
अथाहमब्रुवं वाक्यं तमेव पुरुषर्षभ॥ १८॥

“Seeing him, who was like a god,

« VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

ascending the chariot, ।, on my part, spoke to
him these words: ‘O bull among men ! Who
are you? O god-like one, O gracious one, You
should tell me why you ate this loathsome food,
looked down upon by others. (18)

को भवान् देवसंकाश आहारश्च विगर्हित:।
त्वयेदं भुज्यते सौम्य किमर्थं वक्तुमर्हसि॥१९॥
HA स्यादीदृशो भाव आहारो देवसम्मत:।
आश्चर्यं add सौम्य श्रोतुमिच्छामि तत्त्वत:।
नाहमौपयिकं मन्ये da भक्ष्यमिमं शवम्॥ Roll
“You possess ethereal beauty. Sir,
whose food could be this; therefore, O
gracious one, | am wonder-struck. | wish to
know the facts. | do not consider this corpse
as your food in expediency.’ (19-20)
yaa: A AK नाकी
कौतूहलात् सूनृतया गिरा a
श्रुत्वा च वाक्यं मम सर्वमेतत्
सर्वं तथा चाकथयन्ममेति॥ २१॥

“Thus spoken to out of curiosity and
also in well-chosen words, the celestial one,
O King, having heard me, narrated all that |
had enquired.” (21)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये उत्तरकाण्डे सप्तसप्ततितम: सर्ग: ॥ ७७॥

Thus ends Canto Seventy-seven in the Uttarakanda of the glorious Ramayana of
Valmiki, the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

Canto LXXVIII
King Sveta tells Agastya the reason as to why he had to eat the
condemned food and recounts his conversation with
Brahma, He gives Agastya a divine ornament
and gets freed from hunger and thirst

श्रुत्वा तु भाषितं वाक्यं मम राम शुभाक्षरम्।
Watt: प्रत्युवाचेदं स स्वर्गी रघुनन्दन॥१॥

Hearing the words comprised of holy
syllables spoken by me, O descendant of
Raghu, Sri Rama, the celestial being, with

folded hands replied thus:
श्रृणु ब्रह्मन् पुरा at ममैतत् सुखदु:खयो:।
अनतिक्रमणीयं च यथा पृच्छसि at द्विज॥ २॥

“O Brahmana |! listen to what happened
formerly, that could not be resisted and

(1)
