# YUDDHAKANDA #

as they tore up trees and seized hold of
heavy rocks. (41)

नदतां राक्षसानां च वानराणां च गर्जताम्।
उभे प्रमुदिते सैन्ये रक्षोगणवनौकसाम्॥४२॥
वेगितानां समर्थानामन्योन्यवधकाङ्क्षिणाम्।
Wet चाह्वयतां निनाद: sad महान्॥४३॥
The loud noise of the yelling ogres and
the roaring monkeys, who were both seized
with impetuosity, and were powerful, nay,
who sought the destruction of one another

and challenged one another, was being heard.
Both the armies, namely, those of the ogres

501

and the monkeys (lit., dwellers in the woods)
felt highly rejoiced. (42-43)
aa: | West: कपिराजवाहिनी-
मभिप्रतस्थे विजयाय दुर्मति:।
faqgat च विवेश at at
यथा मुमूर्ष: शलभो विभावसुम्॥४४॥
Then Prahasta, whose mind was
perverted, advanced towards the army of
Sugriva (the ruler of monkeys) for conquest
and tried to force his way into that army,
whose tempo had immensely grown, even
as a moth would enter a flame. (44)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये FERS सप्तपञ्चाश: सर्ग: ॥ ५७॥
Thus ends Canto Fifty-seven in the Yuddhakanda of the glorious Ramayana of
Valmiki, the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

अष्टपञ्चाश: सर्ग:
Canto LVIII
Nila kills Prahasta

तत: Veet निर्यान्तं gear रणकृतोद्यमम्।
उवाच ee रामो विभीषणमरिंदम:॥१॥

Seeing Prahasta sallying forth, duly
prepared for war, Sri Rama, the tamer of his
enemies, forthwith spoke with a smile to
Vibhisana as follows: (1)

क Wl सुमहाकायो बलेन महता qd:
आगच्छति महावेग: किंरूपबलपौरुष:॥ २॥

“Who comes this colossus, surrounded
by a huge army and endowed with great
impetuosity? What are his might and
manliness like? (2)

आचक्ष्व A महाबाहो वीर्यवन्तं निशाचरम्।
राघवस्य ad: ster प्रत्युवाच विभीषण:॥ ३॥

“Make known to me this powerful ranger
of the night, 0 mighty-armed ogre
(Vibhisana).” Hearing the question of Sri
Rama, Vibhisana replied as follows: (3)

we सेनापतिस्तस्य Weed) ATT राक्षस:।
agra राक्षसेन्द्रस्य त्रिभागबलसंवृत:।
वरीर्यवानस्त्रविच्छूर: सुप्रख्यातपराक्रम: I ४॥
“He is an ogre, Prahasta by name, the
Commander-in-Chief of Ravana’s army.
Surrounded by a third of the army of Ravana
(the ruler of ogres), in Lanka, he is powerful,
conversant with the use of mystic weapons
and valiant. His prowess is very widely
known.” (4)
तत: Weet Pratt भीमं भीमपराक्रमम्।
Tit |= सुमहाकायं राक्षसैरभिसंवृतम्॥५॥
cast महती सेना वानराणां बलीयसाम्।
अभिसंजातघोषाणां प्रहस्तमभिगर्जताम्॥ ६ UI

The huge army of the exeedingly mighty
monkeys, thereupon saw the terrible and
gigantic Prahasta of redoubtable prowess
