102

sacrificial session, artists, carpenters, those
entrusted with the work of digging the
sacrificial pits, astronomers and artisans,
nay, even to actors and dancers and likewise
to pure-minded men well-versed in sacred
lore and to those whose knowledge extended
over a very wide range of subjects:
“Undertake you your respective duties
connected with the sacrifice under orders of
His Majesty. (6—8)
इष्टका बहुसाहस्री शीघ्रमानीयतामिति।
उपकार्या: क्रियन्तां च राज्ञो बहुगुणान्विता:॥ ९॥
“Let bricks be speedily brought in many
thousands and palaces befitting a monarch

and equipped with many articles of food
and drink etc., built. (9)

ब्राह्मणावसथाश्चैव कर्तव्या: YAM: VAT: |

भक्ष्यान्नपानैर्बहुभि:; समुपेता: सुनिष्ठिता:॥ १०॥
“And good houses for the Brahmanas,

strongly built and well provided with manifold

edibles (such as fruits) and articles of food
and drink be provided in abundance. (10)
तथा पौरजनस्यापि कर्तव्याश्च सुविस्तरा:।
आगतानां सुदूराच्च पार्थिवानां पृथक पृथक॥ ११॥
“Similarly, spacious dwellings and wells
etc., should be constructed for the citizens
too and mansions should be built separately

for feudatory princes expected to arrive
from long distances. (11)

वाजिवारणशालाश्च तथा शय्यागृहाणि च।
भटानां महदावासा वैदेशिकनिवासिनाम्॥१२॥

“Similarly, stables should be erected
for the horses and stalls for the elephants of
royal visitors and dormitories for the public
and big houses for warriors belonging to
other states as well as for those of our own
territory. (12)

आवासा बहुभक्ष्या वै सर्वकामैरुपस्थिता:।
तथा पौरजनस्यापि जनस्य बहुशोभनम्॥१३॥
दातव्यमन्नं विधिवत् सत्कृत्य न तु लीलया।
सर्वे वर्णा यथा पूजां प्राप्नुवन्ति सुसत्कृता:॥ Vv il

« VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

“The houses should all be provided
with abundant edibles and equipped with all
desired objects and excellent food should be
provided to the citizens as well as to those
hailling from the countryside, respectfully in
accordance with the scriptural ordinance,
but never in a wanton way, so that members
of all the grades of society may receive
hospitality with due honour. (13-14)
न चावज्ञा Warman कामक्रोधवशादपि।
यज्ञकर्मसु ये व्यग्रा: पुरुषा: शिल्पिनस्तथा॥ १५॥
तेषामपि विशेषेण पूजा कार्या यथाक्रमम्।

ये स्यु: सम्पूजिता: सर्वे वसुभिर्भोजनेन Wi १६॥
यथा ad सुविहितं न किंचित् परिह्रीयते।
तथा भवन्त: कुर्वन्तु प्रीतियुक्तेन चेतसा॥१७॥

“And no disrespect should be shown
to anyone even under the impulse of passion
and anger. Nay, hospitality should be shown
in a special degree in order of seniority to
those men and artisans who may remain
engrossed with their duties connected with
the sacrifice. See that everything connected
with all those who are duly honoured with
riches (gifts of money) and food is fully
accomplished and nothing remains undone.
Therefore, with a mind full of love, act
you all in such a way as to ensure this.”

(15—17)
ad: सर्वे समागम्य वसिष्ठमिदमब्रुवन्।
यथेष्टं ad सुविहितं न किंचित् परिहीयते॥ १८॥

Approaching Vasistha, they all thereupon

spoke to him as follows : “Everything will be

duly executed as desired by you; nothing
will remain undone. (18)

यथोक्तं तत् करिष्यामो न किंचित् परिहास्यते।
तत: सुमन्त्रमाहूय वसिष्ठो वाक्यमब्रवीत्॥१९॥

“We shall do it as enjoined by you
and nothing will be wanting.” Summoning
Sumantra, Vasistha then spoke to him as
follows : (19)

निमन्त्रयस्व नृपतीन् पृथिव्यां ये च धार्मिका:।
ब्राह्मणान् क्षत्रियान् वैश्याञ्शूद्रांश्चैव HSE: ।। २० I
