414

Janaka! Discovering the enemy’s mind, |
shall presently return, O princess of Mithila!”
(12-13)
एवमुक्त्वा ततो गत्वा समीपं तस्य रक्षस:।
शुश्राव कथितं तस्य रावणस्य समन्त्रिण:॥ १४॥

Saying so, and then moving to the
presence of that ogre, she overheard the
talk of the said Ravana as well as of his
ministers. (14)

सा श्रुत्वा निश्चयं तस्य निश्चयज्ञा दुरात्मन:।
पुनरेवागमत् क्षिप्रमशोकवनिकां शुभाम्॥१५॥
Having overheard the decision of that
evil-minded fellow and understood it, she
hastened once more to the charming Asoka
grove. (15)

सा प्रविष्टा ततस्तत्र cael जनकात्मजाम्।
प्रतीक्षमाणां स्वामेव भ्रष्टपद्मामिव श्रियम्॥ १६॥

Having made good her entry in that
grove, she then saw the daughter of Janaka
waiting for her alone like Laksmi (the goddess
of fortune and the spouse of Lord Visnu)
without the lotus. (16)

तां तु सीता पुन: प्राप्तां सरमां प्रियभाषिणीम्।
परिष्वज्य च सुस्निग्धं ददौ च स्वयमासनम्॥ १७॥
Embracing Sarama, who always
spoke kindly to Sita, and who had just
come back, Sita for her part personally
and most tenderly offered her seat, saying:
(17)

इहासीना सुखं सर्वमाख्याहि मम ara: |
क्रूरस्य निश्चयं तस्य रावणस्य दुरात्मन:॥१८॥
“Seated here at ease, communicate to

me accurately in toto the decision of
that cruel and evil-minded Ravana.” (18)

एवमुक्का तु सरमा सीतया वेपमानया।
कथितं सर्वमाचष्ट रावणस्य समन्त्रिण:॥१९॥
Requested in these words by Sita,

who was trembling all the while, Sarama for
her part reproduced to her all the talk of

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA +

Ravana as well as of his ministers in the
following words: (19)

जनन्या राक्षसेन्द्रो वै त्वन्मोक्षार्थं बृहद्वच:।
अतिस्निग्धेन वैदेहि मन्तिवृद्धेन चोदित:॥ २०॥
“Ravana, the ruler of ogres, O princess
of the Videha territory, was actually tendered
a lengthy advice in favour of discharging
you by his own mother, Kaikasi, as well as
by an exceedingly affectionate and aged
counsellor. (20)

दीयतामभिसत्कृत्य मनुजेन्द्राय मैथिली।
निदर्शनं ते walt जनस्थाने यदद्भुतम्॥ २१॥
(They said) ‘Let Sita, a princess of
Mithila, be restored to Rama (a ruler of
men) after receiving him hospitably. The
astonishing exploit which was performed
by him in Janasthana (in the shape of
exterminating fourteen thousand ogres led
by such great warriors as Khara and Dusana)
should serve as a sufficient eye-opener to
you. (21)

लङ्घनं च समुद्रस्य att च हनूमत:।

ad च रक्षसां युद्धे क: कुर्यान्मानुषो युधि॥ २२॥
‘What mortal could leap across the

sea, discover Sita and destroy the ogres

in combat, which was accomplished by

Hanuman?’ (22)

एवं स मन्तिवृद्धैश्च मात्रा च बहुबोधित:।
न त्वामुत्सहते मोक्तुमर्थमर्थपरो यथा॥ २३॥

Even though exhorted at length in the
foregoing words by elderly counsellors as
well as by his own mother, Ravana is not
inclined to set you free any more than a
miser would leave his hold on his treasure.

(23)
नोत्सहत्यमृतो मोक्तुं युद्धे त्वामिति मैथिलि।
सामात्यस्य नृशंसस्य निश्चयो ह्येष ada evil

“Ravana is not prepared to leave you
unless he gives up his ghost in combat, O
princess of Mithila! Such indeed is the resolve
