# YUDDHAKANDA +

oblige Sri Rama, forthwith expressed each
his own opinion politely as follows: (34)

अज्ञातं नास्ति ते किंचित् त्रिषु लोकेषु राघव।
STAM पूजयन् राम पृच्छस्यस्मान् सुहृत्तया।। ३५ I
“Nothing is unknown to you in all the
three worlds, O scion of Raghu! You consult
us all the same because of your goodwill
towards us, thereby bestowing honour on
us, who are your very selves, O Rama!
(35)

त्वं fe सत्यव्रत: शूरो धार्मिको दूढविक्रम:।
परीक्ष्यकारी स्मृतिमान् निसृष्टात्मा सुहृत्सु च॥ ३६॥

“Indeed, you are a man of unfailing
vows, gallant, pious, endowed with unyielding
prowess and discreet; you take action after
full investigation, and have offered your
very self to your near and dear ones.

(36)

तस्मादेकैकशस्तावद् ब्रुवन्तुं सचिवास्तव।
हेतुतो मतिसम्पन्ना: समर्थाश्च WA: पुन:॥ ३७॥
“Therefore, let your counsellors, who
are all richly endowed with intelligence and
capable of judgment, too, likewise argue
with reason, one after another, first of all.
(37)

इत्युक्ते राघवायाथ मतिमानड्गदोऽग्रत:।
विभीषणपरीक्षार्थमुवाच वचनं हरि:॥ ३८॥

This having been said, the sagacious
monkey, Angada, to begin with, immediately
tendered to Sri Rama (a scion of Raghu)
the following advice, which suggested the
means of testing the bona fides of
Vibhisana: (38)
शत्रो: सकाशात् सम्प्राप्त: सर्वथा तर्क्य एव हि।
विश्वासनीय: सहसा न कर्तव्यो विभीषण:॥ ३९॥

“Vibhisana should not be dealt with as
trustworthy all at once inasmuch as, having
arrived direct from the enemy’s presence,
he yet deserves to be viewed with suspicion
in every way. (39)

347

छादयित्वाऽऽत्मभावं fe चरन्ति शठबुद्धय:।
प्रहरन्ति च रन्ध्रेषु सोऽनर्थ: सुमहान् भवेत्॥४०॥

“For, people of perfidious mind move
about concealing their motive and direct
their blow at one’s weak points: that may
prove to be a disaster of no small magnitude.

(40)

अर्थानर्थौ विनिश्चित्य व्यवसायं भजेत ह।
गुणत: संग्रहं Hale दोषतस्तु विसर्जयेत्॥४१॥

“Definitely ascertaining the advantages
and disadvantages, which are likely to follow
from a certain course of action, one should
actually take one’s decision in the matter.
One should adopt a course of action if
advantages are likely to follow from it, and
should reject it if it is thought to be
disadvantageous. (41)

गुणान् वापि बहून् ज्ञात्वा संग्रह: क्रियतां TA 2

“If there is great harm in accepting him,
let him be boldly rejected. Or, let him be
accepted, on the other hand, on coming to
know of the many benefits that are likely to
accrue from him, O protector of men!”(42)

शरभस्त्वथ निश्चित्य uel वचनमब्रवीत्।
क्षिप्रमस्मिन् नरव्याघ्र चार: प्रतिविधीयताम्॥ ४३ ॥

Having duly made up his mind, Sarabha
for his part now tendered the following advice,
which was full of meaning: “Let a spy be
immediately dispatched to shadow him, O
tiger among men! (43)

प्रणिधाय fe चारेण यथावत् सूक्ष्मबुद्धिना।
परीक्ष्य च dd: कार्यो यथान्यायं परिग्रह:॥४४॥

“After sending out spies and thoroughly
testing Vibhisana through such a one of
penetrating judgment, welcome should then
be actually extended to him according to his
deserts.” (44)

जाम्बवांस्त्वथ सम्प्रेक्ष्य शास्त्रबुद्ध्या विचक्षण:।
वाक्यं विज्ञापयामास गुणवद् दोषवर्जितम्॥४५॥
