* SUNDARAKANDA +

“To consign this monkey to death, O
king, is contrary to righteousness, nay
deprecable from the point of worldly usage
and as such unbecoming of you, O Lord!

(6)
धर्मज्ञश्च कृतज्ञश्च राजधर्मविशारद:।
परावरज्ञो भूतानां ata परमार्थवित्॥७॥

“You know what is right; you recognize
a service done to you, and are conversant
with the duties of a king; you can distinguish
between high and low among created beings
and you alone know the ultimate purpose of
life. (7)

Teed यदि रोषेण त्वादूशोऽपि विचक्षणा:।
तत: शास्त्रविपश्चित्त्वं श्रम wa fe Hare il
“If even those who are learned like you
are seized with anger, then the mastery of
the scriptures is indeed mere fruitless labour.
(8)

तस्मात् Wate शत्रुघ्न राक्षसेन्द्र दुरासद।
युक्तायुक्तं विनिश्चित्य दूतदण्डो विधीयताम्॥९॥

“Be propitiated, therefore, O destroyer
of foes, O ruler of ogres, who are difficult to
approach ! Let punishment be meted out to
a messenger only after carefully determining
what is meet and what is improper.” (9)

विभीषणवच: श्रुत्वा रावणो राक्षसेशर्वर:।
कोपेन महताऽऽविष्टो वाक्यमुत्तरमब्रवीत्॥ १० Il
Filled with violent anger on hearing the
submission of Vibhisana, Ravana, the lord
of ogres, spoke in reply as follows: (10)
न पापानां वधे पापं विद्यते शत्रुसूदन।
तस्मादिमं वधिष्यामि art पापकारिणम्॥११॥
“No sin lies in the act of killing the
sinful, O destroyer of foes ! | shall, therefore,

make an end of this monkey, a perpetrator
of sin.” (11)

अधर्ममूलं

विभीषणो बुद्धिमतां वरिष्ठ:॥१२॥

227

Hearing the aforesaid reply of Ravana,
which was rooted in unrighteousness, full of
many faults and unbecoming of noble souls,
Vibhisana, the foremost of those endowed
with wisdom, made the following submission,
which enabled one to ascertain the highest

truth: (12)
Wate लङ्घेश्वर राक्षसेन्द्र
धर्मार्थतत्त्वं वचनं श्रृणुष्व।
दूता न वध्या: समयेषु राजन्
सर्वेषु Aaa वदन्ति सन्त:॥१३॥
“Be propitiated, O lord of Lanka, O
ruler of ogres! Pray, listen to my appeal
embodying the essence of righteousness
and worldly fortune. Messengers, O king,
are undeserving of death at all times and at
all places—so declare the virtuous. (13)
कृतं ह्यनेनाप्रियमप्रमेयम्।
न दूतवध्यां प्रवदन्ति सन्तो
दूतस्य दृष्टा बहवो हि दण्डा:॥ १४॥
“Undoubtedly this monkey is a
formidable adversary. Indeed incalculable
harm has been done by him. Nevertheless
the wise do not sanction the killing of a
messenger; for numerous other punishments
are found recommended in the scriptures
with regard to a messenger. (14)

वैरूप्यमङ्गेषु कशाभिघातो
मौण्ड्यं तथा लक्षणसंनिपात:।
एतान् fe qa प्रवदन्ति दण्डान्
वधस्तु दूतस्य न न: श्रुतोऽस्ति॥ १७५ ॥
“Mutilation of any of his limbs, flogging,
shaving of the head and _ branding—
indeed the wise recommend any of these
punishments with regard to a messenger;
the killing of a messenger has, however,
never been heard of by us. (15)
कथं च धर्मार्थविनीतबुद्धि:
परावरप्रत्ययनिश्चितार्थ: ।
भवद्विध: कोपवशे fe तिष्ठेत्
कोपं न गच्छन्ति हि सत्त्ववन्त: ।॥। १६ Ul
