« KISKINDHAKANDA +

व्यपेतपङ्कासु संवालुकासु
प्रसन्नतोयासु सगोकुलासु।

नदीषु gar निपतन्ति हृष्टा:॥४२॥
“Swans full of joy descend into rivers
from which mud has altogether disappeared,
which are now fringed with sands, whose
waters have become clear, which are
frequented by herds of cows and flocked
with cranes and are rendered noisy with
their cries. (42)
नदीघनप्रस्रवणोदकाना-
मतिप्रवृद्धानिलबर्हिणानाम् ।
: । च व .
Jat रवा: सम्प्रति सम्प्रणष्टा: 1 ४३॥
“The sound of the water flowing in
rivers, the water discharged by clouds and
the murmur of the water gushing from
springs, the sound of furious winds, the
cries of peacocks and the croaks of frogs,
that are bereft of joy, have completely
vanished now, to be sure. (43)

अनेकवर्णा: सुविनष्टकाया
नवोदितेष्वम्बु

क्षुधार्दिता घोरविषा बिलेभ्य-
श्चिरोषिता विप्रसरन्ति सर्पा:॥४४॥

“Serpents of many colours carrying
terrible poison in their fangs, which remained
shut up for a long time in holes for fear of
rains ever since the time clouds newly made
their appearance in the sky and which were
all but dead, their means of sustenance
having been completely cut off, are now
emerging freely from their holes, tormented
as they are with hunger. (44)

चञ्चच्चन्द्रकरस्पर्शहर्षोन्मीलिततारका ।
Sal रागवती संध्या जहाति स्वयमम्बरम्॥४५॥

“Full of passion in the form of roseate
hue (in the western horizon) and the pupils
of her eyes in the form of stars, brightened
through joy at the touch of the hands of the
charming moon in the form of moonbeams,

नष्टा: |

1051

the lady in the form of evening twilight
automatically abandons herself the covering
in the form of the sky. (45)
तारागणोन्मीलितचारुनेत्रा ।
ज्योत्स्नांशुकप्रावरणा विभाति
नारीव शुक्लांशुकसंवृताङ्गी॥४६॥
“With her pleasing countenance in the
form of the moon perceptible and her lovely
eyes in the form of the hosts of stars
opened and with her mantle of moonshine
wrapped round her body, the night looks
like a woman who has her limbs covered
with a white cloth. (46)
विपक्वशालिप्रसवानि भुक्त्वा
प्रहर्षिता सारसचारुपङ्क्ति:।
नभ: समाक्रामति vite
वातावधूता ग्रथितेव माला॥४७॥
“Overjoyed to eat ears of fully ripe
paddy and holding them in their beaks, a
charming row of cranes takes its flight across
the sky with a dashing speed like a knotted
garland carried by the wind. (47)
महाहरुदस्थं सलिलं विभाति।
चनैर्विमुक्तं fit पूर्णचन्द्रं
तारागणाकोर्णमिवान्तरिक्षम् ॥४८॥
“Adorned with water-lilies, the water in
the big pond with a solitary swan lying
asleep on it, looks delightful like the sky
completely bereft of clouds, nay, illumined
by the full moon and spangled with a host of
stars at night. (48)

nafs २ -
प्रबुद्धपद्मोत्पलमालिनीनाम् ।
वाप्युत्तमानामधिकाद्य लक्ष्मी-
र्वराङ्मनानामिव भूषितानाम्॥४९॥

“The loveliness of the best of tanks
with their broken girdle of swans scattered
here and there and their wreaths of full-
blown lotuses, and, therefore, looking like
