* SUNDARAKANDA +

and a virtuous daughter-in-law of Emperor
DaSaratha. In fact, a fearful dream has been
seen by me, which makes my hair stand on
end and presages the destruction of ogres
and the triumph of her lord. She alone is
competent to protect us, the entire host of
ogresses from the wrath of Rama, the scion
of Raghu. (86—88)

अभियाचाम वैदेह्रीमेतद्धि मम रोचते।
ate ह्येवंविध: स्वप्नो दु:ख्रिताया: WEVA ८९॥

सा दु:खैर्विविधैर्मुक्ता सुखमाप्नोत्यनुत्तमम्।
प्रणिपातप्रसन्ना हि मैथिली जनकात्मजा॥९०॥

“‘Let us, therefore, solicit the grace of
Sita, a princess of the Videha territory; for
this alone finds favour with me. For, if such
a dream is vividly seen about an afflicted
lady, she is freed from woes of various
kinds and attains unsurpassed felicity. Sita,
daughter of Janaka, will surely be propitiated
through mere prostration at her feet. (89-90)

अलमेषा Uftard राक्षस्यो महतो भयात्।
aa: सा ह्रीमती aren भर्तुर्विजयहर्षिता॥९१॥
अवोचद् यदि तत् तथ्यं भवेयं शरणं हि a: |
तां चाहंतादृशीं दृष्ट्वा सीताया दारुणां दशाम्॥ ९२ ॥
चिन्तयामास विश्रान्तो न च मे निर्वृतं मन:।
सम्भाषणार्थे च मया जानक्याश्चिन्तितो विधि: । ९३ ॥

“She alone is competent to deliver the
ogresses from the great peril.’ Hanuman
rejoiced at the prospect of her lord’s triumph
on hearing of the dream related to her by
Trijata, that youthful lady, Sita, who was full
of modesty, thereupon said, ‘If the dream
seen by Trijata comes out to be true, | shall
surely afford protection to you all.’ Witnessing
such a hard plight of Sita, ।, who had taken
some rest in the meantime became
thoughtful; my mind, however, was not at
rest. A method was also contrived by me to
enter into conversation with the daughter of
Janaka. (91—93)

इक्ष्वाकुकुलवंशस्तु स्तुतो AA पुरस्कृत:।
श्रुत्वा तु गदितां वाचं राजर्षिगणभूषिताम्॥ ९४॥

257

प्रत्यभाषत मां gat area: पिहितलोचना।
कस्त्वं केन कथं चेह Wa वानरपुङ्खव॥ ९५॥

“The pedigree of the House of Ikswakus,
which was placed in the forefront by all
even in the past began to be extolled by me.
Hearing the speech uttered by me, which
was enriched with the praises of a royal
sage viz., King Dasaratha, the godlike lady,
Sita, for her part, spoke in return to me as
follows, her eyes full of tears: “Who are
you? Dispatched by whom and how have
you arrived here, O bull among monkeys?

(94-95)
का च रामेण a प्रीतिस्तन्मे शंसितुमर्हसि।
तस्यास्तद् वचनं श्रुत्वा अहमप्यब्रुवं वच:॥ ९६॥

“‘Nay, what kind of love is cherished
by you for Sri Rama? You ought to relate
all that to me.” Hearing her aforesaid

questionnaire, | too made the following reply :
(96)

देवि रामस्य uded सहायो भीमविक्रम:।

सुग्रीवो नाम विक्रान्तो वानरेन्द्रो महाबल:॥ ९७॥

“`[]#818 is a valiant ally of terrific prowess
of your lord, Sugriva by name, the valiant
ruler of monkeys, who is endowed with
extraordinary might, O godlike lady! (97)
wea मां विद्धि yet त्वं हनूमन्तमिहागतम्।
wal सम्प्रहितस्तुभ्यं रामेणाक्लिष्टकर्मणा॥ ९८॥

“ ८0४ me to be his servant, Hanuman
by name, arrived here. | have been duly
dispatched by your husband, Sri Rama, of
unwearied action. (98)

इदं तु पुरुषव्याघ्र: श्रीमान् दाशरथि: स्वयम्।

अङ्गुलीयमभिज्ञानमदात् तुभ्यं यशस्विनि॥९९॥
“‘Nay, the glorious Sri Rama, son of
DaSaratha, a tiger among men, has personally
handed over as a token this ring for you,
O illustrious lady ! (99)
तदिच्छामि त्वयाज्ञप्तं देवि किं करवाण्यहम्।
रामलक्ष्मणयो: पार्श्व नयामि cat किमुत्तरम्॥ १०० ॥

“‘Therefore, | seek your command,
