484

salutations at her feet on behalf of Sita as
well as myself, the elder brother, and of
Laksmana. (30-31)
ब्रूयाश्चापि wernt भरतं क्षिप्रमानय।
आगतश्चापि भरत: स्थाप्यो FUT पदे॥ ३२॥
“Also submit to the Emperor, my father,
‘Pray, get Bharata soon. And when returned
from his maternal uncle’s, Bharata should
be installed in the office intended for him by
Your Majesty. (32)
wd च परिष्वज्य यौवराज्येऽभिषिच्य a
अस्मत्संतापजं ga न त्वामभिभविष्यति॥ ३३॥
“When you have met and embraced
Bharata and installed him in the office of
Prince Regent, the agony caused by the

remorse felt by you on our account will no
longer be able to overpower you.’ (33)

भरतश्चापि वक्तव्यो यथा watt ade
तथा मातृषु वर्तेथा: सर्वास्वेवाविशेषत:॥ ३४॥

“Bharata too should be exhorted in the
following words : ‘You should behave towards
all your mothers without distinction in the
same way as you do towards the king (your
father). (34)

यथा च तव कैकेयी सुमित्रा चाविशेषत:।
तथैव edt कौसल्या wa माता fasted: ३५॥

““Even as Kaikeyl and Sumitra too are
equally worthy of respect to you, more so is
my mother, Queen Kausalya, who is senior
to all. (35)
तातस्य प्रियकामेन यौवराज्यमवेक्षता।
लोकयोरुभयो: weet नित्यदा सुखमेधितुम्॥ ३६ ॥

“‘If you accept the office of Prince
Regent with intent to please our father, it will
be possible for you to thrive happily in both
the worlds (this world and the next).’ ” (36)
निवर्त्यमानो रामेण सुमन्त्र: प्रतिबोधित:।
Aa वचनं श्रुत्वा स्नेहात् काकुत्स्थमब्रवीत्॥ ३७॥

Hearing the whole of the aforesaid

discourse when instructed (as above) by
Sri Rama with a view to his being sent back

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA +

to Ayodhya, Sumantra lovingly replied to
him as follows : (37)
ae नोपचारेण gat स्नेहादविक्लवम्।
भक्तिमानिति तत् तावद् वाक्यं त्वं क्षन्तुमर्हसि॥ ३८ I
“If | speak to you in an unfaltering tone
due to affection and do not speak with
reverence (which is due to you as my
master), you ought in fact to forgive my
mode of speech, considering me as full of
devotion to you. (38)
कथं हि त्वद्विहीनोऽहं प्रतियास्यामि at पुरीम्।
qa तात वियोगेन पुत्रशोकातुरामिव॥ ३९॥
“Bereft of you, how shall | actually
return to that city of Ayodhya, which through
separation from you has been reduced to
the state of a mother stricken with grief due
to separation from her son, O dear child?
(39)

सराममपि तावन्मे रथं geal तदा जन:।

fort रामं रथं दृष्ट्वा विदीर्येतापि सा THI ४० Il

“The people of Ayodhya were really
torn with grief even to see this chariot with
Sri Rama (yourself) at the time of your
departure from Ayodhya. On seeing it without
Sri Rama this time that city itself may be
riven in two. (40)

दैन्यं fe नगरी गच्छेद दृष्टवा शून्यमिमं रथम्।
सूतावशेषं स्वं सैन्यं हतवीरमिवाहवे॥४१॥
“The city will be reduced to a sad plight
on seeing this chariot without you, even as
the army of a hero on seeing his chariot
with the charioteer alone surviving, the warrior
having been killed in battle. (41)
दूरेऽपि निवसन्तं cat मानसेनाग्रत: स्थितम्।
चिन्तयन्तोऽद्य नूनं wat निराहारा: Hat: प्रजा: ॥ ४२॥
“Thinking of you, who though dwelling
afar, are ever mentally present before them,
the people of Ayodhya must have gone
without their food and drink today. (42)

qe तद् a त्वया राम यादृशं त्वत्प्रवासने।
प्रजानां संकुलं वृत्तं त्वच्छोकक्लान्तचेतसाम्॥ ४३॥
