468

(spread by them) look charming. Nor, again,
did the householders cook their food at their
home. (4)
We दृष्टवा नाभ्यनन्दन् विपुलं वा धनागमम्।
पुत्रं प्रथमजं लब्ध्वा जननी नाप्यनन्दत॥ il
The people of Ayodhya did not rejoice
to recover their lost property or to receive a
large (additional) fortune. Nor did a mother
rejoice to meet her first-born male issue. (5)

Te ye रुदत्यश्च walt गृहमागतम्।
व्यगर्हयन्त दु:खार्तां वाग्भिस्तोत्तैरिव द्विपान्॥६॥

Stricken with sorrow not to find Sri
Rama back in Ayodhya and shedding tears,
women in every house sharply reproached
(in the following words) their husband
returned home without Sri Rama even as
the drivers of elephants would prick them
with goads : (6)
किं नु तेषां We: कार्यं किं ait: किं धनेन वा।
पुत्रैर्वापि सुखैर्वापि ये न पश्यन्ति राघवम्॥७॥

“What purpose of theirs who do not
behold Sri Rama will be served by their

dwellings, wife or even riches or even sons
or even pleasures? (7)

Um: सत्पुरुषो लोके लक्ष्मण: सह सीतया।
योऽनुगच्छति काकुत्स्थं रामं परिचरन् वने॥८॥

“The only virtuous man in this world is
Laksmana, who with Sita has followed Sri
Rama, rendering service to him in the forest.

(8)
आपगा: कृतपुण्यास्ता: पद्मिन्यश्च सरांसि च।
ay areata काकुत्स्थो विगाह्य सलिलं शुचि॥ ९॥

“Fortunate too are those rivers, lotus-
ponds and lakes, bathing in whose sacred
waters Sri Rama, a scion of Kakutstha, will
proceed further ! (9)

शोभयिष्यन्ति काकुत्स्थमटव्यो रम्यकानना:।
आपगाश्च महानूपा: सानुमन्तश्च पर्वता:॥१०॥
“Forests with delightful rows of trees,

as well as rivers, tracts of land abounding in
water and mountains with beautiful peaks

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

will adorn the presence of Sri Rama. (10)

काननं aft शैलं वा यं रामोऽनुगमिष्यति।

प्रियातिथिमिव प्राप्तं नैनं शक्ष्यन्त्यनर्चितुम्॥११॥
“The forest or mountain which Sri Rama

will visit will not fail to honour him like a
beloved guest arrived near. (11)

विचित्रकुसुमापीडा ब्हुमञ्जरिधारिण:।
wad दर्शयिष्यन्ति नगा भ्रमरशालिन:॥१२॥

“Trees crowned with flowers of various
kinds and bearing numerous bunches of
flowers and adorned with black bees will
appear before Sri Rama (a scion of Raghu).

(12)

अकाले चापि मुख्यानि पुष्पाणि च फलानि च।
दर्शयिष्यन्त्यनुक्रोशाद् Frat राममागतम्॥१३॥

“Out of regard mountains will display
before Sri Rama as he visits them excellent
blossoms and fruits, too, even out of season.

(13)
प्रस्रविष्यन्ति तोयानि विमलानि महीधरा:।

विदर्शयन्तो विविधान् भूयश्चित्रांश्च निर्झरान्॥ १४॥

“Bringing to light picturesque cascades
of various kinds, mountains will further
release crystal clear waters. (14)

पादपा: पर्वताग्रेषु रमयिष्यन्ति राघवम्।
यत्र war भयं नात्र नास्ति तत्र पराभव:॥ १५॥

“Trees standing on mountain-tops will
afford delight to Sri Rama. And there is no
cause for fear where Sri Rama is, nor is
there any occasion for humiliation. (15)

a fe शूरो महाबाहु: Gal दशरथस्य al

पुरा भवति नोऽदूरादनुगच्छाम राघवम्॥१६॥
“That heroic and mighty-armed son of

DaSaratha will surely come to our view not

far from this place. Let us once more follow

Sri Rama, a scion of Raghu. (16)

पादच्छाया UE भर्तुस्तादृशस्य महात्मन:।
स हि नाथो जनस्यास्य स गति: स परायणम्॥ १७॥

“The shelter of the feet of such a high-
souled master, as Sri Rama is, is our only
