526

Repulsed by the wind in the form of the
outgoing breath of the celebrated ogre,
Kumbhakarna, however, the ogres could
not stand before him. (41)

aad: परिहिता गाढं राक्षसा भीमविक्रमा:।

मृदङ्गपणवान् भेरी: शङ्खकुम्भगणांस्तथा॥४२॥
Tightly dressed (in order to be able to

stand firmly) the aforesaid ogres of terrible

prowess began to beat clay tomtoms and
drums, kettledrums and pails as well. (42)

दश 86 Uae युगपत्पर्यवारयत्।
नीलाञ्जनचयाकारं ते तु तं प्रत्यबोधयन्॥४३॥
अभिघ्नन्तो नदन्तश्च न च सम्बुबुधे तदा।
यदा चैनं न शेकुस्ते प्रतिबोधयितुं तदा॥४४॥
अश्चानुष्टान् खरान् नागाञ्जघ्नुर्दण्डकशाङ्कुशै: Ul ४५ ।।
भेरीशङ्खमृदङ्गांश्च सर्वप्राणैरवादयन्।
निजघ्नुश्चास्य गात्राणि महाकाष्ठकटंकरै:॥ ४६॥
मुद्गरैर्मुसलैश्चापि सर्वप्राणसमुद्यतै: |
तेन नादेन महता लङ्का wat प्रपूरिता।
सपर्वतवना wat सोऽपि Aa प्रबुध्यते॥४७॥

Ten thousand ogres surrounded at a
time Kumbhakarna, who resembled a mass
of black coal. Striking him on all sides and
roaring, they for their part tried to rouse him;
nevertheless he did not wake fully then. Nay,
when they could not waken him at that time,
they initiated a more effective and violent
method (of rousing him) than before. They
struck horses, camels, donkeys and
elephants with staffs, whips and goads and
urged them to tread on him. They also sounded
kettledrums, conches and clay tomtoms with
all their might—and pounded his limbs with
bundles of heavy logs, mallets and pestles
too lifted with all their strength. The entire
Lanka, mountains, woods and all, was filled
with that noise; yet Kumbhakarna too did not
wake at all. (48—47)

at Wet तु युगपत् समहन्यत।
मृष्टकाञ्चनकोणानामसक्कानां समन्तत:॥४८॥

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA +

Then was sounded all at once a
thousand of kettledrums ceaselessly beaten
with sticks of polished gold on all sides.

(48)
एवमप्यतिनिद्रस्तु यदा Aa प्रबुध्यते।
शापस्य वशमापन्नस्तत: क्रुद्धा निशाचरा:॥४९॥

When, however, the ogre, who was
wrapt in excessive slumber under the spell
of a curse uttered by Brahma, could not
be wakened at all in the aforesaid manner,
the prowlers of the night were filled with
rage. (49)

aa: कोपसमाविष्टा: सर्वे भीमपराक्रमा:।
तद् रक्षो बोधयिष्यन्तश्चक्रुरन्ये WALI GO I

Completely dominated by anger, all
other ogres (of terrible prowess) tried their
strength to rouse that ogre. (50)

अन्ये भेरी: समाजघ्नुरन्ये चक्रुर्महास्वनम्।
केशानन्ये प्रलुलुपु: कर्णानन्ये दशन्ति च॥५१॥

Some beat kettledrums with full force,
others raised a shout, still others tore out
his hair, while yet others bit his ears. (51)

उदकुम्भशतानन्ये समसिञ्चन्तं कर्णयो:।

न कुम्भकर्ण: पस्पन्दे महानिद्रावशं Wa: Wee Ul
Some more poured hundreds of pails

of water into them. Kumbhakarna, however,

who had fallen under the sway of deep
slumber, did not stir. (52)

अन्ये च बलिनस्तस्य कूटमुद्गरपाणय:।

West वक्षसि गात्रेषु पातयन् कूटमुद्गरान्॥५३॥
Other mighty ogres too, who had mallets

studded with nails, in their hands, let their

mallets too fall on his head, chest and other
limbs. (53)

रज्जुबन्धनबद्धाभि: शतघ्नीभिश्च सर्वत:।

वध्यमानो महाकायो न प्राबुध्यत राक्षस:॥५४॥
Nay, the colossal ogre did not wake,

though being struck on all sides with

Sataghnis (a kind of mace) fastened with
cords and thongs. (54)
