342

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

चतुर्दश: सर्ग:
Canto XIV

Citing other instances of the Emperor’s fidelity to truth and threatening to lay
down her life in the event of his not carrying out her wishes, Kaikeyi
insists on his sending Sri Rama into exile at once and does not
desist from her purpose even when railed at by her husband.

In the meantime Sumantra makes his appearance in the
gynaeceum and, extolling the Emperor, reminds him of
his intention to install Sri Rama as Prince Regent
and eventually leaves the gynaeceum in
order to summon Sri Rama at the
instance of the Emperor

विचेष्टमानमुत्प्रेक्ष्य ऐकश्र्वाकमिदमब्रवीत्॥ १॥
Perceiving Dasaratha (descended in
the line of Ikswaku) fallen unconscious and
tossing about on the floor, afflicted as he
was with grief caused by the thought of the
impending separation from his eldest son,
the wicked Kaikeyi spoke as follows: (1)
पापं pad fate an संश्रुत्य संश्रवम्।
शेषे क्षितितले सन्न: स्थित्यां स्थातुं त्वमर्हसि॥ २॥
“Having promised a boon to me as
though you had perpetrated a sin, why are
you lying dejected on the floor? You ought
to keep to the bounds of morality set up by
your forefathers. (2)

amg: सत्यं fe परमं धर्मं धर्मविदो जना:।
सत्यमाश्रित्य च मया त्वं edt प्रतिचोदित:॥ ३॥

“For, men knowing what is right speak
of truthfulness as the highest virtue. Nay,
you have been urged by me to your duty
because | take my stand on truthfulness
alone. (3)

संश्रुत्य शैब्य: श्येनाय wat तनुं जगतीपति:।
प्रदाय पक्षिणे राजा जगाम गतिमुत्तमाम्॥४॥

“Having made a promise to a hawk
that he would part with his own flesh equal
in weight to the dove that had sought his
protection against the hawk, and offering

his body to the bird in exchange for the
dove, King Saibya, a ruler of the whole
world, attained the highest destiny. (4)

तथा ह्यलर्कस्तेजस्वी ब्राह्मणे वेदपारगे।
याचमाने स्वके नेत्रे उद्भृत्याविमना ददौ॥५॥

“Plucking out his own eyes, the
glorious King Alarka likewise gave them
remorselessly to a Brahmana, who had
mastered the Vedas and had asked for
them. (5)

सरितां तु पति: स्वल्पां मर्यादां सत्यमन्वित:।
सत्यानुरोधात् समये वेलां स्वां नातिवर्तते॥६॥

“Wedded to the vow of truthfulness,
the ocean (the lord of the rivers) for its part
does not, even at the time of flow-tide,
transgress its limits even to a small extent
because of its respect for truth. (6)

सत्यमेकपदं ae सत्ये ad: ufaftea: 1
सत्यमेवाक्षया वेदा: सत्येनावाप्यते परम्॥७॥

“Truth is Brahma denoted by the
monosyllabic OM; virtue is rooted in Truth.
The immortal Vedas represent Truth alone;
nay, the Supreme is attained through
truthfulness. (7)

wa समनुवर्तस्व ale at gat मति:।
स वर: Wael Ast ater ala सत्तम॥८॥

“Firmly adhere to truthfulness, if your
mind is set on piety. Let the aforesaid prayer
