« KISKINDHAKANDA +

दिव्यगन्धरसस्पर्शा: सर्वकामान्स्रवन्ति च॥ ४४॥
नानाकाराणि वासांसि फलन्त्यन्ये नगोत्तमा:।

मुक्तावैदूर्यचित्राणि भूषणानि तथैव a
स्त्रीणां यान्यनुरूपाणि पुरुषाणां तथैव च॥४५॥

“Lakes possessing the hue of the rising
sun and adorned with clumps of red golden
lotuses spread their charm in this land. The
said land (of the Uttara Kurus) is covered
on all sides with wonderful clumps of blue
lotuses with petals of precious gems and
filaments shining as gold. Nay, the rivers
there have their sandy banks strewn with
round pearls and gems of great value as
also with pieces of gold, and are hemmed in
with marvellous and excellent mountains of
all kinds of jewels as well as of gold effulgent
as fire. The trees there are thronged with
birds and are ever full of flowers and fruits,
possess an ethereal fragrance, taste and
touch and yield all one’s desires. Other
excellent trees yield costumes of every shape
and size and even so ornaments set with
pearls and cat’s-eye jewels—costumes and
ornaments which are fit for women and,
even so, for men. (40—45)

सर्वर्तुसुखसेव्यानि फलन्त्यन्ये नगोत्तमा:।
महार्हमणिचित्राणि फलन्त्यन्ये नगोत्तमा:॥४६॥

“Other excellent trees bear fruit which
can be gladly partaken of in all seasons; while
still other excellent trees bring forth wonderful
fruits looking like precious gems. (46)

शयनानि प्रसूयन्ते चित्रास्तरणवन्ति च।
मन:कान्तानि माल्यानि फलन्त्यत्रापरे FAT: Ut ४७॥
पानानि च महार्हाणि भक्ष्याणि विविधानि च।
Faas गुणसम्पन्ना रूपयौवनलक्षिता:॥४८॥
“Other trees in this land yield beds
provided with variegated coverlets and
garlands which are pleasing to the mind,
costly drinks and viands of various kinds
as well as women possessed of every

1107

accomplishment and distinguished for their
comeliness and youth. (47-48)

Treat: किन्नरा: सिद्धा नागा विद्याधरास्तथा |
रमन्ते सततं तत्र नारीभिर्भास्वरप्रभा:॥४९॥

“Gandharvas_ (celestial musicians),
Kinnaras (another class of demigods credited
with a human figure and the head of a horse
or with a horse’s body and the head of a
man), Siddhas, Nagas (serpent-demons with
a human face and serpent-like body) and
Vidyadharas (celestial artists) of dazzling
splendour revel with their women. (49)

सर्वे सुकृतकर्माण: wal रतिपरायणा:।
aa कामार्थसहिता वसन्ति ae योषित:॥ ७५०॥

“All beings living there have performed
meritorious deeds in their past lives, all are
given over to amorous enjoyment, all are
endowed with wealth and luxuries and all
live with young women. (50)

TWeaatearrare: सोत्कृष्टहसितस्वन:।
Tat Add तत्र सर्वभूतमनोरम:॥७५१॥
“The sound of singing and musical
instruments, blended with peals of sweet
laughter and pleasing to the mind of all

created beings is constantly heard there.
(51)
wa नामुदित: कश्चिन्नात्र कश्चिदसत्प्रिय:।
अहन्यहनि वर्धन्ते गुणास्तत्र मनोरमा:॥५२॥
“None is unhappy there nor is anyone
fond of evil deeds. Virtues which are delightful
to the mind develop there from day to day.
(52)
समतिक्रम्य तं देशमुत्तर: पयसां निधि:।
तत्र सोमगिरिर्नाम मध्ये हेममयो महान्॥५३॥
“Beyond the aforesaid region (viz., the
land of the Uttara Kurus) stretches the
Northern Sea. There in the middle rises a
huge mountain of gold, Somagiri by name.
(53)
इन्द्रलोकगता ये च ब्रह्मलोकगताश्च ये।
देवास्तं समवेक्षन्ते गिरिराजं fed गता:॥५४॥
