* ARANYAKANDA «

means of gold-feathered arrows with level
nodes. (22)

स दर्शनीयो ager विच्छिन्न: काञ्चनो ध्वज:।
जगाम धरणीं सूर्यो देवतानामिवाज्ञया॥ २३॥

Split into many parts, that attractive gold
ensign fell down on the earth like the sun at
the command (imprecation) of gods. (23)

तं चतुर्भि: खर: क्रुद्धो WH गात्रेषु मार्गणै: |
विव्याध हृदि मर्मज्ञो मातङ्गमिव तोमरै:। २४॥

With four arrows the angry Khara, who
was aware of the vulnerable parts in a
body, hit Rama in his various limbs and
particularly in his heart even as one would
strike an elephant with javelins. (24)

a रामो बहुभिर्बाणै: खरकार्मुकनि:सृतै: |
विद्धो रुधिरसिक्ताङ्गो aya रुषितो भृशम्॥ २५॥
The aforesaid Sri Rama felt highly
enraged when pierced with many arrows
released from the bow of Khara and bathed
in blood all over his body. (25)
a धनुर्धन्विनां श्रेष्ठ: We परमाहवे।
मुमोच परमेष्वास: षट् शरानभिलक्षितान्॥ २६॥
Grasping firmly his bow in that great
battle, Sri Rama, the foremost of bowmen,
who wielded a great bow, discharged six
well-aimed arrows. (26)

शिरस्येकेन बाणेन द्वाभ्यां बाह्वोरथार्पयत्।

त्रिभिश्चन्द्रार्धवक्त्रैश्च वक्षस्यभिजघान ह॥ २७॥
They say he pierced Khara in the head

with one arrow, with two more the arms,

and with three crescent-headed arrows hit
him hard in the chest. (27)

तत: पश्चान्महातेजा नाराचान् भास्करोपमान्।
Wat राक्षसं क्रुद्धस्त्रयोदश शिलाशितान्॥ २८॥

After that Sri Rama, who was
exceptionally glorious, discharged at the

787

ogre thirteen arrows whetted on the stone
and blazing like the sun. (28)

रथस्य युगमेकेन चतुर्भि: शबलान् हयान्।
षष्ठेन च fr: संख्ये चिच्छेद खरसारथे:॥ २९॥

With one arrow he cut down the yoke
of the chariot; with four, the spotted horses;
and with the sixth he cut off the head of
Khara’s charioteer on the battle-field. (29)

त्रिभिस्तिवेणून् बलवान् द्वाभ्यामक्षं महाबल:।
Best तु बाणेन खरस्य सशरं धनु:॥ ३०॥
छित्त्वा वज्रनिकाशेन waa: प्रहसन्निव।
त्रयोदशेनेन्द्रसमो fate समरे खरम्॥ ३१॥

Having cut down with three arrows the
three shafts supporting the yoke, with two
the axle and with the twelfth, which shone
brightly like a thunderbolt, the bow and the
arrow of Khara, Sri Rama (a scion of Raghu)
for his part, who was possessed of
exceptional might and looked like Indra,
pierced Khara in the heart as though
laughing on the battle-field with the thirteenth.

(30-31)

प्रभग्नधन्वा विरथो हताश्वो हतसारथि:।
गदापाणिरवप्लुत्य तस्थौ भूमौ खरस्तदा॥ ३२॥

Then, jumping down, Khara, who was
deprived of his chariot and had his bow
shattered, horses killed and charioteer slain,
stood on the ground mace in hand. (82)

ad wet रामस्य महारथस्य
समेत्य देवाश्च महर्षयश्च।
अपूजयन् प्राञलय: प्रहृष्टा-
स्तदा विमानाग्रगता: समेता:॥ ३३॥
Collecting in the fore-part of their aerial
cars at that time, gods and eminent Rsis
too, who felt highly rejoiced, applauded in a
body with joined palms that feat of Sri Rama,
the great car-warrior. (33)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्येऽरण्यकाण्डेऽष्टाविंश: सर्ग: ॥ २८ Il

Thus ends Canto Twenty-eight in the Aranyakanda of the glorious Ramayana of
Valmiki, the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

