# YUDDHAKANDA #

however, struck it down with a missile
presided over by the wind-god. (93)

अथैनं शरधाराभिर्धाराभिरिव तोयद:।
अभ्यवर्षत संक्रुद्धो लक्ष्मणो रावणात्मजम्॥ ९४॥

Seized with fury, Laksmana now
covered this son of Ravana with hails of
arrows even as a rainy cloud would cover
one with torrents. (94)

तेऽतिकायं समासाद्य wat वज्रभूषिते।
WIM: सहसा पेतुर्बाणा महीतले॥९५॥

Duly reaching Atikaya, those arrows,
however, had their points at the uppper end
shattered against his coat of mail, which
was encrusted with diamonds, and
precipitately fell to the earth’s surface. (95)

तान्मोघानभिसम्प्रेक्ष्य लक्ष्मण: परवीरहा।
अभ्यवर्षत AUT सहस्रेण Alas: ues ul

Perceiving them infructuous, the
illustrious Laksmana, the destroyer of hostile
champions, covered him with a thousand
arrows. (96)

स वृष्यमाणो बाणौघैरतिकायो महाबल:।
अवध्यकवच: संख्ये राक्षसो Aa विव्यथे॥ ९७॥

Though being covered with volleys of
arrows on the battle-field, the aforesaid ogre,
Atikaya, who was endowed with extraordinary
might and whose cuirass was invulnerable,
did not feel tormented at all. (97)

शरं चाशीविषाकारं लक्ष्मणाय व्यपासृजत्।
a a fag: सौमित्रिर्मर्मदेशे शरेण ह॥ ९८ ॥
मुहूर्तमात्रं नि:संज्ञो ह्यभवच्छत्रुतापन:।
aa: संज्ञामुपालभ्य चतुर्भि: सायकोत्तमै:॥ ९९ ॥
निजघान हयान् संख्ये सारथिं च महाबल:।
ध्वजस्योन्मथनं कृत्वा शरवर्षैररिंदम:॥१००॥
Nay, he discharged an arrow resembling
a venomous serpent at Laksmana. Pierced
in a vital part by that arrow, the said son of
Sumitra, the tormentor of his enemies,
actually fainted awhile: so the tradition goes.
Tearing off the standard of his enemy with

599

hails of his arrows on regaining his
consciousness, Laksmana, the tamer of his
adversaries, who was endowed with
extraordinary might, struck down on the
battle-field the horses as well as the
charioteer of Atikaya with four excellent

arrows. (98—100)

असम्भ्रान्त:स सौमित्रिस्ताञ्शरानभिलक्षितान्।

मुमोच लक्ष्मणो बाणान् वधार्थं TET TATA: ॥ १०१॥
Remaining unconfounded, the

celebrated Laksmana, son of Sumitra,
discharged some well-known and selected
arrows for the destruction of that ogre. (101)

न शशाक रुजं कर्तुं युधि तस्य नरोत्तम:।
अथैनमभ्युपागम्य वायुर्वाक्यमुवाच SN ORI

Laksmana, the foremost of men, could
not, however, inflict any injury on his person
in combat. Approaching him, the wind-god
presently spoke to him as follows, so the
tradition goes: (102)

ब्रह्मदत्तवरो ह्येष अवध्यकवचावृत:।
ब्राह्मेणास्त्रेण भिन्ध्येनमेष वध्यो हि नान्यथा |
अवध्य UT ह्यन्येषामस्त्राणां कवची Aci i १०३॥

“This ogre, on whom a boon having
been conferred by Brahma, the creator, is
actually clad in impenetrable armour.
Therefore, pierce him with a missile presided
over by Brahma; for the cannot be killed
otherwise. Protected with armour and full of
might as he is, he is incapable of being
killed with other missiles.” (103)
ar वायोर्वचनं निशम्य
सौमित्रिरिन्द्रप्रतिमानवीर्य: ।

BOTA Tet
तद्बाह्ममस्त्रं सहसा PART १०४॥

Hearing the admonition of the wind-god
and pressing into service the well-known
missile presided over by Brahma (the creator),
the son of Sumitra for his part, who was a
compeer of Indra (the ruler of gods) in

समादधे
