928

एहीदानीं कृतं यद्धि apd at संशय:।
आगच्छ सौम्य गच्छाम: स्वमेव भवनं प्रति॥ १५ ॥

“Come now; that which has actually
been done, has been done well: there is no
doubt about it. Come, O my good child ! let
us return to our abode.” (15)

ततो गत्वा दशग्रीव: सपुत्र: सविभीषण:।
स्नियोऽवतारयामास सर्वास्ता बाष्पगद्गदा:॥ १६॥

लक्षिण्यो रत्नभूताश्च देवदानवरक्षसाम्।
तस्य तासु मतिं ज्ञात्वा धर्मात्मा वाक्यमब्रवीत्॥ १७॥
Moving from that place with his son
(Meghanada) and Vibhisana, Ravana (the
ten-headed monster) caused to descend
from the Pushpak all those women whose
throats were choked with tears, nay, who
were endowed with propitious bodily marks
and were veritable jewels among the ladies
of gods, Danavas and ogres. Coming to
know the mind of Ravana with regard to
them, Vibhisana, whose mind was set on
virtue, spoke to him as follows: (16-17)

ईदृशैस्त्वं समाचारैर्यशोऽर्थकुलनाशनै:।
धर्षणं प्राणिनां ज्ञात्वा स्वमतेन विचेष्टसे॥ १८ ॥

“Acting according to your own sweet
will, you Knowingly commit offence against
living beings through such practices, which
ruin your fame and fortune and bring a blot
on your family. (18)
ज्ञातींस्तान् धर्षयित्वेमास्त्वयाऽऽनीता वराङ्गना: ।
त्वामतिक्रम्य मधुना राजन् कुम्भीनसी Eat १९॥

“Having overpowered their relations,
these excellent women have been borne
away by you; nay, disregarding you, O
king, your own cousin Kumbhinasi has been
borne away by Madhu.” (19)
रावणस्त्वब्रवीद्वाक्यं नावगच्छामि किं त्विदम्।
कोऽयं यस्तु त्वयाऽऽख्यातो मधुरित्येव नामत: ॥ २०॥

Ravana, however, observed as follows:
“| am not aware as to how this happened.
Who actually is this fellow who has been
spoken of by you by the name of Madhu?”

(20)

« VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

विभीषणस्तु संक्रुद्धो wat वाक्यमब्रवीत्।
श्रूयतामस्य पापस्य कर्मण: फलमागतम्॥ २१॥
Filled with rage, Vibhisana for his part
replied as follows to his (eldest) brother:
“Listen, the fruit of your present sinful deed
has appeared in the shape of the abduction
of your own cousin. (21)

मातामहस्य योऽस्माकं ज्येष्ठो UTAT सुमालिन: |
माल्यवानिति विख्यातो Teg: प्राज्ञो निशाचर: ।॥ २२॥
पिताज्येष्ठो जनन्या नो ह्यस्माकं चार्यकोऽभवत्।

wma कुम्भीनसी am दुहितुर्दुहिताभवत्॥ २३॥

“The aged and sagacious ranger of the
night, widely known by the name of Malyavan,
who is the eldest brother of our maternal
grandfather, Sumali, is the eldest uncle of
our mother, Kaikasi, and as such worthy of
our respect. He had a daughter’s daughter,
Kumbhinasi by name. (22-23)

मातृष्वसुरथास्माकं सा च कन्यानलोद्भवा।
भवत्यस्माकमेवैषा भ्रातॄणां धर्मत: स्वसा॥ २४॥

“Nay, being daughter of our mother’s
sister, born as she is of Anala (our mother’s
own younger sister), she no doubt stands
virtually and rightly in the relation of a sister
to us all brothers. (24)

सा हृता मधुना राजन् राक्षसेन बलीयसा।
aad Ut तु मयि चान्तर्जलोषिते॥ २५॥
कुम्भकर्णो महाराज निद्रामनुभवत्यथ।
निहत्य राक्षसश्रेष्ठानमात्यानिह सम्मतान्॥ २६॥

“While your son, Meghanada, for his
part was engaged in a sacrifice, Your Majesty,
and | lay submerged in water doing Tapas,
while Kumbhakarna was enjoying sleep, O
great king, she was borne away by the ogre
Madhu of superior might, after killing our
ministers, the foremost of ogres, who were
held in high esteem here, O king ! (25-26)

धर्षयित्वा eat सा तु गुप्ताप्यन्त:पुरे dal
श्रुत्वापि तन्महाराज क्षान्तमेव हतो न स:॥ २७॥
यस्मादवश्यं दातव्या कन्या wat हि भ्रातृभि: ।
तदेतत् कर्मणो ह्यस्य eet पापस्य GHA: ue i
