* BALAKANDA +

patron. God bless you, O sages rich in
askesis !” Highly enraged to hear the
aforesaid submission, revealing as it did his
terrible design of disregarding Vasistha and
thereby courting disaster, Vasistha’s sons
for their part cursed him in the following
words : “You shall descend to the state of a
Candala (an outcaste of the lowest grade) !”
Saying so, those exalted souls retired each
to his own hermitage. (6—9)
अथ WAM व्यतीतायां राजा चण्डालतां गत:।
नीलवस्त्रधरो नील: पुरुषो ध्वस्तमूर्धज:॥१०॥
चित्यमाल्यांगरागश्च आयसाभरणोऽभवत्।
तं दृष्टवा मन्त्रिण: सर्वे त्यज्य चण्डालरूपिणम्॥ ११ Il
प्राद्रवन् सहिता राम पौरा येऽस्यानुगामिन:।
Weal हि राजा काकुत्स्थ जगाम परमात्मवान्॥ १२॥
दह्यमानो दिवारात्रं विश्वामित्रं तपोधनम्।
विश्वामित्रस्तु तं दृष्ट्वा tat विफलीकृतम्॥ १३॥
चण्डालरूपिणं Wa मुनि: कारुण्यमागत:।
कारुण्यात् स महातेजा वाक्यं परमधार्मिक: Vv
इदं जगाद भद्रं ते राजानं घोरदर्शनम्।
किमागमनकार्यं ते राजपुत्र महाबल॥१५॥
अयोध्याधिपते वीर शापाच्चण्डालतां गत:।
अथतद्बावयमाक्रर्ण्यराजग्चण्डालतग्क्त ।। १६॥
अब्रवीत् प्राञ्जलिर्वाक्यं वाक्यज्ञो वाक्यकोविदम्।
प्रत्याख्यातोऽस्मि गुरुणा गुरुपुत्रैस्तथैव Wii oil

As soon as the night passed, the king
was reduced to the state of a Candala.
Turning black in complexion, he found himself
clad in black (the very yellow silk wrapped
round his loins having turned black) and his
long hair fallen off, the garland decking his
person having turned into garlands of flowers
grown in a crematorium and the cosmetics
with which it was anointed into a coat of
ashes from the same unholy place, and the

229

gold and be-jewelled ornaments on his
person having turned into those of iron*.
Seeing him changed into the form of a
Candala, all his counsellors as well as the
citizens that had followed him to the
hermitages of his preceptor’s sons, O Rama,
ran away in a body deserting him. Extremely
self-possessed, though burning with agony
day and night, O scion of Kakutstha, the
king went all alone to ViSwamitra, whose
only wealth now was his asceticism.
ViSwamitra, who was now living as a hermit,
O Rama, was moved to pity at the very
sight of the king, who had not only been
frustrated but transformed into a Candala.
Out of compassion the exceptionally glorious
and supremely pious ViSwamitra spoke to
the king, who had assumed a frightful aspect,
as follows : “May all be well with you ! What
is the object of your visit, O mighty prince,
O valiant ruler of Ayodhya, reduced as you
are to the state of a Candala through a
curse?”

Hearing the question of Viswamitra, the
king, who knew the art of speaking, even
though reduced to the state of a Candala,
forthwith spoke as follows with folded hands
to ViSwamitra, who was a master of
expression: “Il have been repulsed by my
preceptor, Sage Vasistha, and even so, by
my preceptor’s sons. (10—17)

अनवाप्यैव तं कामं war war विपर्यय:।

सशरीरो fea यायामिति a सौम्यदर्शन॥ १८॥

मया चेष्टं क्रतुशतं तच्च नावाप्यते फलम्।

अनृतं Arg मे न च वक्ष्ये कदाचन॥१९॥
“Even without attaining that object of

my desire a contrary result has been met
with by me. In fact, a hundred sacrifices

* This shows that the Varna or grade of society in which one is born cannot be altered by mere change
of avocation as is now alleged by some modern critics. The change is brought about only by one’s good or
evil Karma or by the will of another powerful soul ordinarily in a future life but in exceptional circumstances
even in one’s current life as in the present case or in the case of ViSwamitra as will be shown hereafter. It
further shows that such a change transforms not only one’s appearances but the very constituents of one’s
body. This was, however, clearly evidenced only at a time when the rules of Vamasrama were strictly

followed and enforced by the ruling authority.
