* BALAKANDA +

Devarata. This bow, O venerable sage,
was deposited as a trust in the hands of
that exalted soul by the gods. (8)

दक्षयज्ञवधे पूर्वं धनुरायम्य वीर्यवान्।
eae त्रिदशान् रोषात् सलीलमिदमब्रवीत्॥९॥

“Pulling the string of this bow in sport
with the purpose of wrecking the sacrifice
of Daksa in the olden days, the valiant Lord
Rudra (the god of destruction) for his part
angrily spoke to the gods as follows: (9)

यस्माद् भागार्थिनो भागं नाकल्पयत A सुरा: |
वराङ्मानि महार्हाणि धनुषा शातयामि व:॥१०॥
“Since you have not set apart a share
of the sacrificial offerings for me, even though
| desired it, O gods, | shall just sever your

most adorable heads with this bow (and
arrow).” (10)
ad विमनस: wd car a मुनिपुङ्खव।
प्रसादयन्त देवेशं तेषां प्रीतोऽभवद् भव:॥११॥
“Getting discomposed, all the gods
thereupon conciliated Lord Sankara, the
suzerain Ruler of gods, O jewel among
sages, and Siva (the Source of the universe)
got eventually pleased with them. (11)
प्रीतियुक्तस्तु सर्वेषां ददौ तेषां महात्मनाम्।
तदेतद् देवदेवस्य धनूरत्नं महात्मन:॥१२॥
न्यासभूतं तदा न्यस्तमस्माकं पूर्वजे विभौ।
AA A कृषत: Aa लांगलादुत्थिता तत:॥१३॥
क्षेत्रं शोधयता लब्धा नाम्ना सीतेति विश्रुता।
भूतलादुत्थिता सा तु व्यवर्धत ममात्मजा॥१४॥

“Full of grace, He bestowed the bow
upon all those high-souled gods. Then that
celebrated jewel among bows was deposited
by them as a trust with our powerful
forefather, Devarata. Immediately after that
there arose from the track of the ploughshare,
even as | was ploughing the plot set apart
for a sacrifice, a female baby, who, was
discovered while | was dressing the field
and as such was widely known by the

251

name of Sita*. That daughter of mine,
who had emerged from the soil, gradually
grew at an extraordinary pace in my care.
(12—14)
वीर्यशुल्केति A कन्या स्थापितेयमयोनिजा।
भूतलादुत्थितां at तु वर्धमानां ममात्मजाम्॥ १५॥
वरयामासुरागत्य राजानो मुनिपुंगव।
तेषां वरयतां कन्यां सर्वेषां पृथिवीक्षिताम्॥ १६॥
वीर्यशुल्केति भगवन् न ददामि सुतामहम्।
ad: सर्वे Wada: समेत्य मुनिपुंगव॥१७॥
मिथिलामप्युपागम्य वीर्यं जिज्ञासवस्तदा।
तेषां जिज्ञासमानानां शैवं धनुरुपाहृतम्॥ १८॥
“This daughter of mine, who was not
born (in the ordinary way) from the mother’s
womb, was kept by me for being given in
marriage to a suitor who would win her by
his valour. Rulers of lands approached me
and sued for the hand of my aforesaid
daughter, who had appeared from the soil
and was growing at an unusual pace, O
jewel among sages! I, however, did not
give away my daughter to any, telling all the
kings who sued for the hand of my girl that
she could only be won through personal
valour. Thereupon all the kings (lit., rulers of
men) came to Mithila in a body and inquired
of the standard by which their prowess was
going to be judged, O jewel among sages !
Then the bow of Lord Siva was brought
before the inquisitive princes. (15—18)

न शेकुर्ग्रहणे तस्य धनुषस्तोलनेऽपि ari
तेषां वीर्यवतां वीर्यमल्पं ज्ञात्वा महामुने॥१९॥
प्रत्याख्याता नृपतयस्तन्निबोधं तपोधन।
तत: परमकोपेन राजानो मुनिपुंगव॥ २०॥
अरुन्धन् मिथिलां सर्वे वीर्यसंदेहमागता:।
आत्मानमवधूतं मे विज्ञाय नृपपुंगवा:॥ २१॥
रोषेण महताऽऽविष्टा: पीडयन् मिथिलां पुरीम्।
तत: संवत्सरे पूर्णे क्षयं यातानि सर्वश:॥ २२॥
साधनानि मुनिश्रेष्ठं ततोऽहं भृशदु:खित:।
ततो देवगणान् सर्वांस्तपसाहं प्रसादयम्॥ 23 II

* The word ‘Sita’ in Sanskrit originally conveyed the sense of the furrow of a ploughshare.
