* ARANYAKANDA «

showing the path to the Rsyamuka Hill,

923

body was full of glow, presently said to Sri

nay, gazing on Sri Rama, Kabandha, who | Rama, while remaining in the air, ‘Do enter

was enveloped in glory and whose entire

into an alliance with Sugriva !’” (46)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्येऽरण्यकाण्डे त्रिसप्ततितम: सर्ग: ॥ ७३ ॥

Thus ends Canto Seventy-three in the Aranyakanda of the glorious Ramayana of
Valmiki, the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

Canto LXXIV
न Rama and Laksmana visit the hermitage of Sabari on the brink of the
Pampa in the forest named Matangavana, receive her hospitality
and go round the forest with her. Casting her body into the
sacred fire, Sabarl ascends to the heavenly world

तौ कबन्धेन तं art पम्पाया दर्शितं at
आतस्थतुर्दिशं Tea प्रतीचीं नॄवरात्मजौ॥१॥
Taking up the route through the forest
to the Pampa lake, as shown by Kabandha,
the aforesaid two sons of DaSsaratha (the
foremost among men) proceeded towards
the west. (1)

at शैलेष्वाचितानेकान् क्षौद्रपुष्पफलद्रुमान्।
जग्मतुर्द्रष्टुं सुग्रीवं रामलक्ष्मणौ॥ २॥

Gazing on the numerous trees collected
in the form of a cluster on the mountain
rocks and laden with flowers and fruits and
dripping honey, the two princes, Sri Rama
and Laksmana, marched on their mission to
see Sugriva. (2)

कृत्वा तु शैलपृष्ठे तु तौ वासं रघुनन्दनौ।
पम्पाया: पश्चिमं तीरं राघवावुपतस्थतु:॥ ३॥
Staying for the night on a plateau, those
two scions of Raghu, the delights of Raghu’s
race, for their part approached the western
edge of Pampa. (3)

तौ पुष्करिण्या: पम्पायास्तीरमासाद्य पश्चिमम्।
अपश्यतां ततस्तत्र शबर्या रम्यमाश्रमम्॥४॥

Having reached the western brink of
the lotus pond, Pampa, the two princes then
sighted the lovely hermitage of Sabari on

the aforesaid brink of Pampa.

at तमाश्रममासाद्य द्रुमैर्बहुभिरावृतम्।
सुरम्यमभिवीक्षन्तौ शबरीमभ्युपेयतु: ॥ ५ ॥

Reaching that most delightful hermitage,
hemmed in with many trees, and looking all-
round, the two princes met Sabari. (5)

तौ दृष्टवा तु तदा सिद्धा समुत्थाय कृताञजलि:।
पादौ जग्राह रामस्य लक्ष्मणस्य च धीमत:॥६॥
पाद्यमाचमनीयं च ad प्रादाद् यथाविधि।
तामुवाच ततो wa: श्रमणीं धर्मसंस्थिताम्॥७॥
Rising respectfully with joined palms
on seeing the two princes, Sabari (who
had attained perfection through Yoga or
abstraction) for her part presently clasped
the feet of Sri Rama and the prudent Laksmana
and offered her honoured guests with due
ceremony water to bathe their feet and rinse
their mouth with and every other form of
hospitality. Sri Rama then spoke as follows
to the aforesaid ascetic woman, who was
intent upon virtue: (6-7)
कच्चित्ते निर्जिता विघ्ना: कच्चित्ते वर्धते तप:।
कच्चित्ते fad: कोप आहारश्च तपोधने॥८॥
“Have all impediments to the practice

of your austerities been thoroughly overcome
by you? Is your asceticism steadily growing?

(4)
