पुरीं महेन्द्रप्त्य यथामरावतीम्।।५७।।

Thereupon did the monkeys for their

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA +

part alongwith the ogres survey that city,
which was adorned with rows of yellowish
white mansions, intersected with wide streets
and crowded with elephants and horses,
which vied with Amaravati, the city of the
mighty Indra, the ruler of heaven. (57)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये युद्धकाण्डे त्रयोविंशत्यधिकशततम: AWA: ॥ 223 Il

Thus ends Canto One hundred and twenty-three in the Yuddhakanda of the glorious

Ramayana of Valmiki, the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

Canto CXXIV

Landing the aerial car at the hermitage of Sage
Bharadwaja, Sri Rama sees the great Rsi
and receives boons from him

पूर्णे चतुर्दशे at पञ्चम्यां लक्ष्मणाग्रज:।
भरद्वाजाश्रमं wea are नियतो मुनिम्॥१॥
Reaching the hermitage of Sage
Bharadwaja on the fifth day (of the bright
half) of the lunar month of Aswina (roughly
corresponding to the month of September)
when the fourteenth year of his exile had
been completed, Sri Rama, the eldest
brother of Laksmana), who was disciplined
even now, bowed down to the anchorite.
(1)

सोऽपृच्छ्दभिवाद्यैनं wet तपोधनम्।

श्रृणोषि कच्चिद् भगवन् सुभिक्षानामयं पुरे।
कच्चित् स युक्तो भरतो जीवन्त्यपि च मातर:॥ २॥

Having greeted the aforesaid
Bharadwaja, who had asceticism for his
sole possession, he enquired of him: “Have
you heard, O glorious sage, that there
has been a good harvest and there
is absence of disease in the city,
Ayodhya? | hope Bharata is still active in
ruling over the people and my mothers still
survive?” (2)

Wage, रामेण भरद्वाजो महामुनि:।
प्रत्युवाच रघुश्रेष्ठं स्मितपूर्वं प्रहृष्टवत्॥३॥
Questioned by Sri Rama ॥ the
foregoing words, the great Sage,
Bharadwaja, smilingly replied as follows to
Sri Rama (the foremost of the Raghus) like
one greatly rejoiced: (3)
आज्ञावशत्वे भरतो जटिलस्त्वां प्रतीक्षते।
Ugh ते पुरस्कृत्य Wa च कुशलं गृहे॥४॥
“Wearing matted locks on his head
and placing your wooden sandals constantly
before him, Bharata, who is steadfast in
obedience to your commands, expects you
back every moment. Nay, all is well at your
home as well as in the city. (4)
त्वां पुरा चीरवसनं waged महावनम्।
स्त्रीतृतीयं wat राज्याद् धर्मकामं च केवलम्॥ ५॥
पदातिं त्यक्तसर्वस्वं पितॄनिर्देशकारिणम्।
wat: परित्यक्तं स्वर्गच्युतमिवामरम्॥६॥
geal तु करुणापूर्वं ममासीत् समितिंजय।
कैकेयीवचने ah वन्यमूलफलाशिनम्॥७॥

“Pity actually arose in my mind last
