* AYODHYAKANDA +

Tae कालं निवत्स्यामि qa a

तत् प्रतिश्रुतमार्यस्य नैव मिथ्या भविष्यति॥ २७॥
“| shall comfortably dwell in the forest

for the rest of the period of Sri Rama’s exile

as his representative. In that way, the well-

known vow of my elder brother will not be

belied. (27)

वसन्तं भ्रातुरर्थाय wag मानुवत्स्यति।
लक्ष्मणेन सहायोध्यामार्यो A पालयिष्यति॥ २८ i
“Satrughna will dwel with me when |
live in the forest on behalf of my elder
brother; while the latter with Laksmana will
protect Ayodhya. (28)

अभिषेक्ष्यन्ति काकुत्स्थमयोध्यायां द्विजातय:।
अपि a देवता: कुर्युरिमं सत्यं मनोरथम्॥ २९॥

607

“The Brahmanas will install Sri Rama
(a scion of Kakutstha) on the throne of
Ayodhya. May the gods fulfil this desire of
mine. (29)

बहुप्रकारं यदि न प्रपत्स्यते।
ततोऽनुवत्स्यामि चिराय wee
वनेचरं नार्हति मामुपेक्षितुम्॥ ३०
“If he does not agree to return to
Ayodhya even when being solicited by me
personally in many ways with my head bent
low, in that case | shall dwell with Sri Rama
(a scion of Raghu) for any length of time so
long as he roams about in the forest. He
ought not to disregard me, | think. (30)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्येऽयोध्याकाण्डेऽष्टाशीतितम: सर्ग: ॥ ८८ Il

Thus ends Canto Ejighty-eight in the Ayodhyakanda of the glorious Ramayana of
Valmiki, the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

Canto LXXXIX

Having encamped his followers including the army, that were ferried
across the Ganga by the fishermen enjoined by Guha, Bharata
sets out with Sage Vasistha and others to the hermitage of
Sage Bharadwaja with intent to see the latter

व्युष्य रात्रिं तु तत्रैव गङ्गाकूले स waa: |
काल्यमुत्थाय शत्रुघ्नमिदं वचनमब्रवीत्॥१॥

Having spent the night at that very
spot where Sri Rama had rested not long
ago on the bank of the Ganga and rising at
daybreak, the said Bharata for his part spoke
to Satrughna as follows : (1)

शत्रुघ्नोत्तिष्ठ fe शेषे निषादाधिपतिं गुहम्।

शीघ्रमानय भद्रं ते तारयिष्यति वाहिनीम्॥ २॥
“How do you continue to sleep till

now? Get up, O Satrughna, and fetch Guha,

the ruler of the Nisadas, quickly; so that
he will convey the army to the other bank.

May all be well with you.”
जागर्मि नाहं स्वपिमि तथैवार्यं विचिन्तयन्।
इत्येवमब्रवीद् भ्राता शत्रुघ्नो विप्रचोदित:॥ ३॥
“Contemplating on Sri Rama, my eldest
brother, even as you are, | am keeping
awake, not sleeping.” In these very words
did Satrughna, Bharata’s younger brother,
reply when admonished as above by Bharata.
(3)
sta agitate wheal: ।
आगम्य Urea: काले गुहो वचनमब्रवीत्॥४॥
“Arriving at an opportune moment while
Bharata and Satrughna, the two lions among

(2)
