# YUDDHAKANDA #

आविवेश महान् eat देवानां चारणै: सह।
wast निहते रौद्रे सर्वलोकभयंकरे॥ ३०॥

The fierce Ravana, the terror of all the
worlds, having been killed, a great joy filled
the heart of the gods, including the Caranas,
the celestial bards. (30)

ad: सकामं सुग्रीवमङ्गदं च विभीषणम्।
चकार राघव: प्रीतो हत्वा राक्षसपुंगवम्॥ ३१॥
Rejoiced on having dispatched the
foremost of the ogres, Sri Rama (a scion
of Raghu) then fulfilled the desire of
Sugriva, Angada and Vibhisana by seeing
and felicitating them on the fall of Ravana.
(31)
Wd: प्रजग्मु: प्रशमं मरुद्गरणा
दिश: प्रसेदुर्विमलं नभोऽभवत्।
मही चकम्पे न च मारुतो ववौ
स्थिरप्रभश्चाप्यभवद् दिवाकर:॥ ३२॥
Thereupon the hosts of gods attained
great peace of mind, all the four quarters
brightened up and the sky too became
clear. The earth no longer shook, the wind
blew gently and the sun shed a steady light.
(32)

761

सुहृद्विशिष्टा: सहलक्ष्मणस्तदा।
समेत्य हृष्टा विजयेन राघवं
रणेऽभिरामं विधिनाभ्यपूजयन्॥ ३३॥

Coming together, rejoiced as they
were by the victory of Sri Rama, Sugriva,
Vibhisana and Angada for their part, who
were supplemented by their friends and
accompanied by Laksmana, then paid their
homage with due ceremony to Sri Rama (a
scion of Raghu) who looked charming on
the battlefield. (33)

a तु freaky: स्थिरप्रतिज्ञ:
स्वजनबलाभिव्रतो रणे aval
रघुकुलनृपनन्दनो महौजा-
स्तिदशगणैरभिसंवृतो महेन्द्र: ।। ३४॥
Sri Rama, the delight of Dagaratha (the
king of Raghu’s race), for his part, who had
just killed his adversary, Ravana, and was
thus steadfast in his vows, and who was
endowed with extraordinary might, stood
encompassed on the battlefield by his own
people as well as by his army, even like the
mighty Indra, the ruler of gods, surrounded
by the celestial hosts. (34)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये युद्धकाण्डेऽष्टाधिकशततम: AA: ॥ 20 Il

Thus ends Canto One hundred and eight in the Yuddhakanda of the glorious
Ramayana of Valmiki, the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

नवाधिकशततम: eat:
Canto CIX

Vibhisana bursts into a lament and Sri Rama comforts
him and asks him to perform the obsequies in
relation to his deceased eldest brother

Mreranataen विललाप विभीषण:॥१॥

Seeing his eldest brother, Ravana, lying

vanquished and killed on the battlefield,
Vibhisana began to lament as _ follows,
his mind overcome with an outburst of
grief: (1)
