432

to Kaikeyi as follows: so the _ tradition
goes : (18)
असमञङ्जो गृहीत्वा तु क्रीडत: पथि दारकान्।
सरय्वां प्रक्षिपन्नप्सु रमते तेन दुर्मति:॥१९॥
“Catching hold of children playing in
the street, Asamanja just used to throw

them in the waters of the Sarayu and the
evil-minded fellow took delight in it. (19)

तं दृष्टवा नागरा: Ud Hal राजानमब्रुवन्।
असमञ्जं वृणीष्वैकमस्मान् वा राष्ट्वर्धन॥ २०॥
“Enraged to see that murderous prank
of the Crown prince, all the citizens submitted
to the king, ‘Keep to yourself Asamanija
alone allowing us to leave the city or preserve
us, sending away the prince, O promoter of
the State ! (20)

तानुवाच ततो राजा किंनिमित्तमिदं भयम्।

ताश्चापि राज्ञा सम्पृष्टा ATT प्रकृतयोऽब्रुवन्॥ २१॥
“Thereupon the king said to them,

‘What is the occasion for this fear?’ Duly

interrorgated by the king, those people too
replied to the king. (21)

क्रीडतस्त्वेष A: पुत्रान् बालानुद्भ्रान्तचेतस:।
सरय्वां प्रक्षिपन्मौरख्यादतुलां प्रीतिमश्नुते॥२२॥
“* 182 experiences incomparable joy
while throwing through folly in the Sarayu
our juvenile sons playing in an excited state
of mind !’ (22)

स तासां वचनं श्रुत्वा प्रकृतीनां नराधिप:।
तं तत्याजाहितं पुत्रं तासां प्रियचिकोर्षया॥ २३॥
“Hearing the complaint of those people,
the said king abandoned his son, malevolent
to his subjects, with intent to oblige them.
(23)

तं यानं शीघ्रमारोप्य सभार्यं सपरिच्छ्दम्।
यावज्जीवं विवास्योऽयमिति तानन्वशात् पिता WU २४॥
“Quickly placing him alongwith his wife
and accessories (viz., a spade, basket and
so on, necessary adjuncts to a forest life),
he instructed those in authority in the following
words: ‘He should be exiled for life.’ (24)

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

a फालपिटकं Te गिरिदुर्गाण्यलोकयत्।
दिश: सर्वास्त्वनुचरन् स यथा पापकर्मकृत्॥ २५॥
इत्येनमत्यजद् राजा सगरो वै सुधार्मिक:।
wa: किमकरोत् पापं येनैवमुपरुध्यते॥ २६॥

“Taking a basket and a spade and
roaming about in all directions in search of
roots and fruits etc., he ransacked mountain
passes in quest of an abode. The highly
pious King Sagara obviously abandoned
Asamafnija on the plea of his perpetrating
sinful deeds as mentioned above. What sin
has Sri Rama committed, for which he is
being debarred from the throne in this way?

(25-26)
ae कंचन पश्यामो राघवस्यागुणं वयम्।
दुर्लभो ह्यस्य निरय: शशाङ्कस्येव कल्मषम्॥ २७॥
_ “Surely we do not detect any fault in
Sri Rama, a scion of Raghu. It is as difficult
to find a taint in him as in the new moon.(27)
अथवा देवि त्वं कंचिद् दोषं पश्यसि राघवे।
wea gfe तत्त्वेन dat रामो विवास्यते॥ २८॥

“Or, if you perceive any fault in Sri
Rama, a scion of Raghu, O queen, please
point it out correctly today. Then Sri Rama
will be sent into exile. (28)

अदुष्टस्य fe dam: wat निरतस्य च।
निर्दंहेदपि शक्रस्य afd धर्मविरोधवान्॥२९॥

“Indeed, it is repugnant to all canons of
righteousness to abandon one who is not
only not guilty but also devoted to the straight
path. It would destroy the splendour even of
Indra, the ruler of gods. (29)

तदलं efa रामस्य श्रिया fagaar waar
लोकतोऽपि fe a tea: परिवाद: शुभानने॥ 30 Il

“Therefore, O queen, it is no use your
withholding the royal fortune of Sri Rama.
Censure coming from the public too should
be guarded against by you, O lady with a
charming countenance !” (30)

श्रुत्वा तु सिद्धार्थवचो राजा श्रान्ततरस्वर:।
शोकोपहतया वाचा कैकेयीमिदमब्रवीत्॥ ३१॥
