1134

तस्मिन् येऽपि समापन्ना ऋक्षवानरराक्षसा:।
asta tert प्रविविशुर्देहान् निक्षिप्य चाम्भसि॥ २७॥

‘Those bears, monkeys, and Raksasas,
who took their bath in that Sarayu, they also
attained heaven, casting their bodies in the
waters of Sarayu. (27)

« VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

तत: समागतान् सर्वान् स्थाप्य लोकगुरुर्दिवि।
we: प्रमुदितैर्देवैर्जगाम त्रिदिवं महत्॥ २८॥

‘Then the preceptor of all worlds,
Brahma, established all of them who came
to heaven and then went to the highest
heaven with the extremely happy gods. ’(28)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये उत्तरकाण्डे दश्शाधिकशततम: सर्ग: ॥ 220 ॥

Thus ends Canto One hundred and ten in the Uttarakanda of the glorious Ramayana
of Valmiki, the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

एकादशाधिकशततम: सर्ग:
Canto CXI

Mention of the consequences of listening to and
reading of the Ramayana

एतावदेतदाख्यानं सोत्तरं ब्रह्मपूजितम्।
रामायणमिति wad मुख्यं वाल्मीकिना कृतम्॥ १॥
This much is the account together with
the Uttarakanda, recognised by even Brahma,
known as the Ramayana and composed by
the sage, Valmiki. (1)
ad: प्रतिष्ठितो विष्णु: स्वर्गलोके यथा पुरा।
at व्याप्तमिदं wd त्रैलोक्यं सचराचरम्॥२॥
Then, after all had gone to heaven, Sri
Rama established in heaven as Visnu as
before, and by whom these three worlds,
with the moving and the stationary bodies
are pervaded. (2)

ततो eat: सगन्धर्वा: सिद्धाश्च परमर्षय:।

Pret श्रृण्वन्ति संहृष्टा: काव्यं रामायणं दिवि॥ ३॥
Therefore, the gods, with the

Gandharvas, the Siddhas and great sages

listen to the epic Ramayana in heaven always,
with pleasure. (3)

इदमाख्यानमायुष्यं सौभाग्यं पापनाशनम्।
रामायणं वेदसमं श्राद्धेषु श्रावयेद् बुध:॥४॥

This legend, the Ramayana, is the giver
of longevity, the enhancer of fortune and the

dispeller of sins and is equal to the Vedas
and the wise should cause it to be heard in
the funeral rites. (4)

अपुत्रो लभते पुत्रमधनो लभते धनम्।
सर्वपापै: प्रमुच्येत पादमप्यस्य य: पठेत्॥५॥
The sonless one obtains a son, the
poor gets wealth by hearing it. He who
reads even a quarter of this Ramayana is
freed from all sins. (5)

पापान्यपि च a: कुर्यादहन्यहनि मानव:।
पठत्येकमपि yet पापात् स परिमुच्यते॥ Il
The man, who commits sins everyday,
is also freed from sins if he reads even one
Sloka (verse) of the Ramayana daily. (6)
वाचकाय च दातव्यं वस्त्रं धेनुहिरण्यकम्।
वाचके परितुष्टे तु तुष्टा: स्यु: सर्वदेवता:॥७॥
Cloth, cow and gold should be offered to
one who recites Ramayana; if the reciter is
satisfied, all the gods would be pleased. (7)
एतदाख्यानमायुष्यं पठन् रामायणं नर:।
सपुत्रपौत्रो लोकेऽस्मिन् wea चेह महीयते॥८॥
The man reading this life-giving legend
enjoys pleasures with sons and grandsons
