# YUDDHAKANDA #

611

चतु:सप्ततितम: सर्ग:
Canto LXXIV

Under instructions from Jambavan, the lord of bears,
Hanuman fetched a hillock covered with celestial
herbs; and inhaling the odour of those herbs,
Sri Rama, Laksmana and all the monkeys
regained their normal health

तयोस्तदासादितयो Tra
we a हरियूथपानाम्।

न चापि किंचित् प्रतिपेदिरे ते॥१॥

On the two brothers having been
knocked down senseless in the forefront of
battle, the army of the monkey troop-
commarders got nonplussed. Nor could the
celebrated Sugriva, Nila, Angada and
Jambavan do anything. (1)
ततो विषण्णं wander ad

विभीषणो बुद्धिमतां वरिष्ठ:।

उवाच शाखामृगराजवीरा-
नाश्वासयन्नप्रतिमैर्वचोभि: ॥ २॥
Observing everyone  despondent,

Vibhisana, the foremost of the wise,

thereupon spoke as follows, reassuring the
champions of Sugriva, the ruler of monkeys,
with his incomparable words: (2)

स्वयंभुवो वाक्यमथोद्बहन्तौ
यत्सादिताविन्द्रजितास्त्रजालै: Nan
“Do not be afraid, there is no

occasion for despondency at this moment;
because the two sons of DaSaratha are
actually feeling helpless and afflicted and
have allowed themselves to be overwhelmed
by the missiles of Indrajit, honouring as
they did the spell sacred to the self-born
creator, with which the missile presided
over by him has been invoked. (3)

तस्मै तु दत्तं परमास्त्रमेतत्
स्वयंभुवा ब्राह्मममोघवीर्यम्।
तन्मानयन्तौ युधि राजपुत्रौ
निपातितौ कोऽत्र विषादकाल:॥४॥

“This supreme missile of unfailing
potency presided over by Brahma has for
its part been bestowed on him (Indrajit) by
the self-born creator himself and the two
princes have been overthrown in combat,
honouring as they did the aforesaid missile.
What occasion is there for despondency in
this event?” (4)

ब्राह्ममस्त्रं ततो धीमान् मानयित्वा तु Arete: |
विभीषणवच: श्रुत्वा हनूमानिदमब्रवीत्॥५॥

Hearing the speech of Vibhisana and
paying honour to the missile presided over
by Brahma, the creator, the sagacious
Hanuman, son of the wind-god, for his part
then spoke as follows: (5)

अस्मिन्नस्त्रहते सैन्ये वानराणां तरस्विनाम्।
यो यो aad प्राणांस्तं तमाश्वासयावहे॥६॥

“Let us two restore to confidence
whosoever is still breathing in this army of
powerful monkeys, which has been struck
down by the missile shot by Indrajit.” (6)

तावुभौ युगपद् वीरौ हनूमद्राक्षसोत्तमौ।
उल्काहस्तौ तदा रात्रौ रणशीर्षे विचेरतु:॥७॥

Torch in hand, both the aforesaid
heroes, Hanuman alongwith Vibhisana, the
foremost ogre, then began to range the
battlefield together at night. (7)
