518

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

Canto LXI
Apprehending danger to the king from his inability to bear the grief caused

by separation from Sri Rama, Kausalya, though foremost among
devoted wives, twits Dasaratha

at गते धर्मरते रामे wad ati
कौसल्या रुदती चार्ता भर्तारमिदमब्रवीत्॥१॥

Sri Rama, who was devoted to
righteousness and was the foremost among
those who bring delight to the people, having
departed for the forest, Kausalya, who was
feeling distressed due to separation from
her son spoke weeping to her husband as
follows : (1)

यद्यपि fry लोकेषु प्रथितं a महद् यश:।
सानुक्रोशो वदान्यश्च प्रियवादी च राघव:॥२॥
कथं Aarts पुत्रौ तौ ae सीतया।
दु:खितौ सुखसंवृद्धौ at ga सहिष्यत:॥ ३॥
“Although your great glory is extended
through all the three worlds, and it is well-
known that you, a scion of Raghu, are full of
compassion and generous and speak kindly
to all, you never paused to think how your
aforesaid two sons, Rama and Laksmana,
with Sita, who have been brought up in
ease, will endure suffering in the forest
when faced with hardships, O jewel among
the foremost of men ! (2-3)

सा नूनं तरुणी श्यामा सुकुमारी सुखोचिता।
कथमुष्णं च vit च मैथिली विसहिष्यते॥४॥

“Indeed, how will that young and delicate-
bodied princess of Mithila, who is still about
sixteen years of age and is deserving of
comforts, bear heat and cold? (4)

भुक्त्वाशनं विशालाक्षी सूपदंशान्वितं शुभम्।
वन्यं नैवारमाहारॆ कथं सीतोपभोक्ष्यते॥७५॥
“How, having partaken of a rich diet
with delicious sauces and other seasoned
articles, will the large-eyed Sita live on meals
consisting of wild rice? (5)

गीतवादित्रनिर्घोषं श्रुत्वा शुभसमन्विता।
कथं क्रव्यादसिंहानां शब्दं श्रोष्यत्यशोभनम्॥ ६॥
“How, having listened to the sweet
strains of vocal and instrumental music, will
Sita, who is richly endowed with auspicious
qualities, bear to hear the unpleasant roar of
lions, animals that feed on flesh? (6)
महेन्द्रध्वजसंकाश: क्व नु शेते महाभुज:।
भुजं परिघसंकाशमुपाधाय महाबल:॥७॥
“Where does the mighty-armed prince,
Rama—who is possessed of great might
and (in delighting all) resembles the banner
raised in honour of the mighty Indra on the
12th of the bright half of Bhadrapada as a
mark of festivities—repose placing his arm,
stout as an iron club, under his head for
support? (7)
पद्मवर्णं सुकेशान्तं पद्मनि:श्चासमुत्तमम्।
कदा द्रक्ष्यामि रामस्य वदनं पुष्करेक्षणम्॥८॥
“When shall | behold again the exquisite
countenance of Rama, which possesses
the hue of a lotus leaf and is decked with
lovely locks, nay, whose breath emits the
fragrance of a lotus and which is possessed
of lotus-like eyes? (8)
वज्रसारमयं Tt wet A न संशय:।
अपश्यन्त्या न तं यद् A फलतीदं सहस्रधा॥ ९॥
“Surely my heart is made of a substance
as hard as adamant: there is no doubt
about it, as is clear from the fact that it does
not break into a thousand pieces even while
| do not behold him ! (9)

यत् त्वया करुणं कर्म व्यपोह्य AA बान्धवा:।
निरस्ता: परिधावन्ति सुखार्हा: कृपणा वने॥१०॥
