616

son of the wind-god, who vied with Garuda
(an enemy of serpents) in prowess, made
for the Himalaya mountain, the king of
mountains, the highest mountain, drawing
away the four quarters, as it were. (51)
a amt घूर्णितवीचिमालं

तदम्भसा भ्रामितसर्वसत्त्वम्।
समीक्षमाण: सहसा जगाम

चक्रं यथा विष्णुकराग्रमुक्तम्॥५२॥

Gazing on the sea, whose waves
alongwith its water were made to revolve
and all whose creatures were caused
to whirl round by the wind generated by
his movement), Hanuman shot forth like the
discus discharged by the fingers of Lord
Visnu. (52)

जगाम वेगात् पितृतुल्यवेग:॥५३॥

Surveying mountains, flocks of birds,
lakes, rivers, ponds, the foremost of cities
as also the well-known and _ prosperous
territories, the monkey, who vied with
his father in swiftness, sped forth with all
speed. (53)
आदित्यपथमाश्रित्य जगाम स गतश्रम:।
हनूमांस्त्वरितो वीर: पितुस्तुल्यपराक्रम:॥ ५४॥

The celebrated and heroic Hanuman,
who was a match for his father, the wind-
god, in prowess, coursed hastily and
unweariedly through the heavens (lit., the
orbit of the sun). (54)

Wat महता युक्तो मारुतिर्वातरंहसा।
जगाम हरिशार्दूलो दिश: शब्देन नादयन्॥५५॥

Full of great speed, Hanuman, son
of the wind-god, a tiger among the
monkeys, proceeded with the speed of the
wind-god, making the quarters resound with
his roar. (55)

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA +

स्मरञ्जाम्बवतो वाक्यं मारुतिर्भीमविक्रम:।
ददर्शं wear चापि हिमवन्तं महाकपि:॥ ५६॥

Recollecting the admonition of
Jambavan, the great monkey, Hanuman,
son of the wind-god, of redoubtable prowess
suddenly sighted the Himalaya mountain
too. (56)
नानाप्रस्रवणोपेतं AEH aA
शवेताभ्रचयसंकाशै: शिखरैश्चारुदर्शनै: |
शोभितं विविधैर्वृक्षैरगमत् पर्वतोत्तमम्॥५७॥

He forthwith reached the foremost of
mountains, which was adorned with springs
of every description, consisted of many
caves and cascades and was graced with
peaks which were lovely to behold and
looked like masses of white clouds, as well

as with trees of every species. (57)

a तं ware महानगेन्द्र-
मतिप्रवृद्धोत्तमहेमशृङ्गम् ।

ददर्श पुण्यानि महाश्रमाणि
सुरर्षिसङ्घोत्तमसेवितानि ॥ ५८ UI

Duly reaching that mighty lord of
mountains with much elevated excellent
golden peaks, the monkey beheld holy and
extensive hermitages frequented by eminent
hosts of celestial sages. (58)
a ब्रह्मकोशं wad च

शक्रालयं रुद्रशरप्रमोक्षम्।
हयाननं ब्रह्मशिरश्च दीप्तं
ददर्श वैवस्वतकिंकरांश्च॥ ५९॥

He saw there the seat of Hiranyagarbha
(Brahma) as well as the abode of
Rajatanabha (another form of Brahma), the
abode of Indra (the ruler of gods), the spot
from which Rudra (the god of destruction) is
believed to have discharged an arrow (at
the city of Tripura), the abode of Lord
Hayagriva (a manifestation of Lord Visnu
with the neck of a horse) as also the blazing
abode of the deity presiding over Brahmastra
