894

conflict, but, O Rama, neither of them felt
afflicted or exhausted. (30)

आग्नेयमस्त्रं तस्मै स मुमोच धनदस्तदा।
राक्षसेन्द्रो ASU तदस्त्रं प्रत्यवारयत्॥ 32 il
“The lord of wealth then shot at Ravana
an Agneyastra (a missile presided over by
the god of fire), which missile the king of the
Raksasas countered with a Varunastra, a
missile presided over by Varuna, the god of
water. (31)

ततो मायां प्रविष्टोऽसौ राक्षसीं राक्षसेश्वर:।

रूपाणां शतसाहस्रं विनाशाय चकार च॥ ३२॥
“Then the king of the Raksasas fell

back upon conjuring tricks natural to ogres

and assumed myriads of forms to bring
about the destruction of the Yaksas. (32)

व्याघ्रो वराहो जीमूत: Uda: सागरो FA: I
यक्षो दैत्यस्वरूपी च सोऽदृश्यत दशानन:॥ ३३॥

“He, DaSanana, appeared as a tiger, a
boar, a cloud, a hill, a sea, a tree, a Yaksa

and a Daitya. (33)
बहूनि च करोति स्म दृश्यन्ते न त्वसौ तत:।
प्रतिगृह्य ततो Wa महदस्त्रं दशानन:॥३४॥
wart Wet धनदं व्याविद्ध्य महतीं गदाम्।

एवं स तेनाभिहतो विह्वल: शोणितोक्षित:॥ ३५॥
कृत्तमूल इवाशोको निपपात धनाधिप:।
ad: पद्मादिभिस्तत्र निधिभि: स तदा व्रत:॥ ३६॥
धनदोच्छ्वासितस्तैस्तु वनमानीय नन्दनम्।
fet राक्षसेन्द्रस्तं धनदं हृष्टमानस:॥ ३७॥
पुष्पकं तस्य जग्राह विमानं जयलक्षणम्।
काञ्चनस्तम्भसंवीतं वैदूर्यमणितोरणम्॥ ३८ I
मुक्काजालप्रतिच्छन्नं सर्वकालफलद्रुमम्।
win कामगमं कामरूपं fae ३९॥
मणिकाञ्चनसोपानं तप्तकाञ्चनवेदिकम्।
देवोपवाह्यमक्षय्यं सदा दृष्टिमन:सुखम्॥४०॥
बह्वाश्चर्यं भक्तिचित्रं ब्रह्मणा परिनिर्मितम्।
Fatt सर्वकामैस्तु मनोहरमनुत्तमम्॥४१॥
न तु शीतं न चोष्णं च सर्वर्तुसुखदं शुभम्।
स तं राजा समारुह्य कामगं वीर्यनिर्जितम्॥४२॥

« VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

fad fayet मेने दर्पोत्सेकात् सुदुर्मति:।
जित्वा वैश्रवणं देवं कैलासात् समवातरत्॥४३॥

“Nay, he appeared in many guises but
he could not be seen. Then seizing hold of
a mighty weapon, a huge club, and whirling
it, DaSanana struck the lord of wealth on the
head, O Rama ! Knocked senseless when
struck by him in this way and bathed in
blood, the lord of wealth fell on the ground
like an Asoka tree cut at the root. Surrounded
there at that time by the deities presiding
over the treasures like Padma and others,
the aforesaid lord of riches was brought to
the Nandana grove and restored to his
senses. Having vanquished the said lord of
wealth, the king of the Raksasas, pleased
at heart, seized his aerial car, the Puspaka,
as a token of his victory.

“The aerial car was furnished with pillars
made of gold; its portals were made of
cat’s-eye gems; it was hung with nets of
pearls and planted with trees bearing fruit in
all the seasons; it had the speed of the
mind; it could go wherever one wanted to
go; it could assume any form as desired; it
had stairways of gems and gold and daises
of refined gold; it was a celestial vehicle and
was not subject to wear and tear; it was a
perpetual joy to the eyes and the mind; it
contained numerous curios of art; it looked
picturesque with its compartments and
had been constructed by ViSwakarma, the
architect of gods; it was provided with all
objects of desire, was soul-captivating and
unsurpassed in charm; it was neither too
cool nor too hot; it was comfortable in all
seasons and was splendid. Ascending the
car, which had been won by his prowess
and which could go wherever he wanted to
go, that most evil-minded king thought in the
height of his arrogance that he had conquered
all the three worlds. Having vanquished God
VaiSravana (Kubera), he descended from
Kailasa. (34—43)
