* SUNDARAKANDA +

राक्षसा: क्रूरकर्माणश्चारयन्ति स्म at पुरीम्।
अन्वीयमानो रक्षोभिर्ययौ सुखमरिंदम:॥१८॥
हनूमांश्चारयामास राक्षसानां महापुरीम्।
अथापश्यद् विमानानि विचित्राणि महाकपि: 1 १९॥
Paar भूमिभागांश्च सुविभक्तांश्च चत्वरान्।
रथ्याश्च गृहसम्बाधा: कपि: शृङ्गाटकानि च॥ २०॥
तथा रथ्योपरथ्याश्च तथैव च गृहान्तरान्।

चत्वरेषु चतुष्केषु राजमार्गे तथैव च॥२१॥
areata कपिं सर्वे चार इत्येव राक्षसा:।
acta निर्जग्मुस्तत्र at कुतूहलात्॥ २२॥
तं प्रदीपितलाङ्गूलं हनूमन्तं दिदृक्षव:।
दीप्यमाने ततस्तस्य { हनूमत:॥ २३॥
राक्षस्यस्ता विरूपाक्ष्य: शं ।
यस्त्वया कृतसंवाद: सीते ताम्रमुख: Ha Wait
लाङ्गूलेन weet a wa परिणीयते।
श्रुत्वा तद् वचनं क्रूरमात्मापहरणोपमम्॥ २५॥
वैदेही शोकसंतप्ता हुताशनमुपागमत्।
मङ्गलाभिमुखी तस्य सा तदासीन्महाकपे:॥ २६॥
उपतस्थे विशालाक्षी प्रयता हव्यवाहनम्।
यद्यस्ति पतिशुश्रूषा यद्यस्ति चरितं तप:।
aig वा त्वेकपत्नीत्वं शीतो भव हनूमत:॥ २७॥

“Lanka, therefore, needs must be seen
by me at the close of the night. Let the
ogres freely bind me anew and cause pain
to me by setting my tail on fire; there will be
no strain on my mind.” Taking hold of the
gigantic monkey, Hanuman, an elephant
among monkeys, who, though full of courage
had suppressed the expression of his face
(which might betray his feelings), the ogres
then advanced joyfully. Nay, making him
publicly known through his own exploits by
means of the blasts of conches and the
beating of kettledrums, the ogres of cruel
deeds dragged him through that city. Followed
closely by the ogres, Hanuman, the tamer
of his foes, marched happily and the gigantic
monkey ranged the big city of ogres. Nay,
Hanuman duly surveyed the marvellous
seven-storied mansions, as _ well as
sequestered tracts of land, as also well-
defined quadrangles, nay, streets thickly

231

lined with buildings and cross-roads and
even so streets and lanes and likewise the
spaces between two houses. In _ the
quadrangles as also at cross-roads, as well
as on the main road all the ogres announced
the monkey precisely as a spy. Desirous of
seeing the celebrated Hanuman with his tail
set ablaze, womenfolk, children and aged
people came out at every place out of
curiosity.

While the tail of the said Hanuman was
being set fire to, the aforementioned ogresses
with misshapen eyes presently conveyed
that unpleasant tidings to the godlike lady,
Sita, in the following words : “That monkey
with a coppery countenance, who held
conversation with you, O Sita, is being
taken round through the streets over there
with his tail set ablaze.” Tormented with
grief to hear the aforesaid report, which was
as cruel as the story of her own abduction,
Sita, a princess of the Videha territory,
approached with her mind the god of fire
(lit., the consumer of oblations). At that time
she became solicitous for the welfare of that
great monkey. The devout Sita (who had
large eyes) approached the god of fire with
the following prayer: “If service rendered to
one’s husband has any value, if austerities
have ever been practised by me or if there
is exclusive devotion in me to my husband,
please prove cool to Hanuman, O fire!

(15—27)

यदि किंचिदनुक्रोशस्तस्य मय्यस्ति धीमत:।
यदि वा भाग्यशेषो A शीतो भव हनूमत:॥ २८॥

“If there is any compassion for me in
the heart of that sagacious prince, or if any
residue of good luck still exists in me, prove
cool to Hanuman. (28)
ae मां वृत्तसम्पन्नां तत्समागमलालसाम्।

स विजानाति धर्मात्मा शीतो भव हनूमत:॥ २९॥

“If Sri Rama, whose mind is set on
piety, fully knows me to be richly endowed
with morality and ardently keen on being
