226

« VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

सप्तपञ्चाश: सर्ग:
Canto LVII
ViSwamitra embarks on a severe course of austerities with a view
to attaining Brahmanhood. In the meantime, King TriSanku of
Ayodhya requests Vasistha to conduct for him a sacrifice
which may enable him bodily to ascend to heaven and,
on Vasistha declining to comply with his request,
approaches his sons for the same purpose

aa: संतप्तहृदय: स्मरन्निग्रहमात्मन: |
विनि:श्वस्य विनि:श्वस्य कृतवैरो महात्मना॥ १॥
स दक्षिणां दिशं गत्वा महिष्या सह राघव।
aaa परमं घोरे विश्वामित्रो महातपा:॥ २॥

Sighing deeply again and again, his
heart being distressed at the thought of his
discomfiture at the hands of Vasistha, the
celebrated ViSwamitra, who had made
enemies with an exalted soul like Vasistha
then proceeded to the southern quarter with
his principal queen and embarked as a
great ascetic on a course of most severe
austerities, O scion of Raghu ! (1-2)

फलमूलाशनो दान्तश्चचार परमं तप:।
अथास्य जज्ञिरे पुत्रा:; सत्यधर्मपरायणा:॥ ३॥
हविष्पन्दो मधुष्पन्दो दृढनेत्रो महारथ:।
पूर्णे वर्षसहस्रे तु ae लोकपितामह:॥४॥
जिता राजर्षिलोकास्ते तपसा कुशिकात्मज॥५॥
Living on fruits and roots alone and
with his mind and senses fully controlled,
he practised austerities of a high order.
Immediately after his commencing the course
of his austerities were born to him four sons
devoted to truthfulness and virtue—
Havispanda, Madhuspanda, Drdhanetra and
Maharatha by name. On the completion of a
thousand years Brahma (the progenitor of
the universe) actually appeared and
addressed the following sweet words to
Viswamitra, who was rich in asceticism:
“The worlds attained by royal sages have

been won by you through askesis, O son of
Kusika (Gadhi) ! (83—5)
अनेन तपसा cat fe राजर्षिरिति faa
`एवमुक्त्वा महातेजा जगाम ae cad: ugi
त्रिविष्टपं ब्रह्मलोकं लोकानां परमेश्वर:।
विश्वामित्रोऽपि तच्छुत्वा ह्रिया किंचिदवाङ्मुख: ॥ ७॥
Gat edhe: समन्युरिदमब्रवीत्।
wag सुमहत् at राजर्षिरिति मां विदु:॥ ८॥
देवा: सर्षिगणा: सर्वे नास्ति मन्ये तप: फलम्।
एवं निश्चित्य मनसा भूय Wa महातपा:॥९॥

तपश्चचार धर्मात्मा काकुत्स्थ परमात्मवान्।
एतस्मिन्नेव काले तु सत्यवादी जितेन्द्रिय:।॥ १० tt
त्रिशङ्कुरिति विख्यात इक्ष्वाकुकुलवर्धन:।
wa बुद्धि: समुत्पन्ना यजेयमिति wean evil
वसिष्ठं स समाहूय कथयामास चिन्तितम्॥ १२॥

“Through these askesis we undoubtedly
recognize you as a royal sage.” Saying
so, the exceptionally glorious Brahma, the
suzerain lord of all the worlds, returned
alongwith the gods (that had accompanied
him) to paradise (Indra’s heaven) en route
to Brahmaloka, the highest heaven, his own
realm.

Filled with great agony to hear the
aforesaid compliment and with his face
downcast a bit through shame, ViSwamitra
too spoke to himself in a mood of dejection
as follows: ‘Even though most severe
austerities have been practised by me, all
the gods including the hosts of Rsis recognize
