854

« VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

Canto IV
A description of the race of Raksasas and the origin of Heti,

Vidyutkesa
श्रुत्वागस्त्येरितं वाक्यं war विस्मयमागत:।
कथमासीत् तु लङ्कायां सम्भवो रक्षसां पुरा॥१॥

Rama was struck with surprise on
hearing the words spoken by Agastya. ‘How

did it happen that the Raksasas lived in
Lanka even before Visrava?’ (1)

wa: for: कम्पयित्वा त्रेताग्निसमविग्रहम्।
तमगस्त्यं मुहुर्दृष्टवा स्मयमानोऽभ्यभाषत॥ २॥

Shaking his head and repeatedly looking
at Agastya, whose lustre was equal to that
of the three fires (Daksinagni, Garhapatya
and Ahavaniya), Sri Rama spoke the following
words smilingly: (2)

weer Tora orgs Seite Faferert rae |
sad भगवद्बाक्यं जातो A विस्मय: पर:॥ ३॥
‘Revered Sir, hearing Your Holiness’
words that Lanka belonged to the demons
even before, | am greatly surprised. (3)

पुलस्त्यवंशादुद्भूता राक्षसा sit A: श्रुतम्।
इदानीमन्यतश्चापि सम्भव: कीर्तितस्त्वया॥४॥
“We have heard it said that the origin of
the Raksasas was from the progeny of
Pulastya. But now their descent is traced
by you to another source. (4)

रावणात् कुम्भकर्णाश्च प्रहस्ताद् विकटादपि।
रावणस्य च पुत्रेभ्य: fee नु ते बलवत्तरा:॥७५॥
“Were they more powerful than Ravana,
Kumbhakarna, Prahasta, Vikata and Ravana’s
sons? (5)
क एषां पूर्वको ब्रह्मन् किं नामा च बलोत्कट:।
अपराधं च कं प्राप्य विष्णुना द्राविता: कथम्॥ ६॥
“Who was their ancestor, O Brahmana,
what was the name of that powerful being?

For what offence and how were they driven
out by Lord Visnu? (6)

and Sukesa

एतद् विस्तरत: wd कथयस्व ममानघ।
कुतूहलमिदं wa नुद भानुर्यथा तम:॥७॥
“O sinless one, tell me all about this in

detail and remove this curiosity of mine as
the sun dispels darkness.” (7)

अथ विस्मयमानस्तमगस्त्य: We राघवम्॥८॥

“Hearing these beautiful and polished
words of Raghava, Agastya, feeling rather
surprised, addressed the following words to
him: (8)
प्रजापति: पुरा सृष्टवा अप: सलिलसम्भव:।
तासां गोपायने सत्त्वानसृजत् पद्मसम्भव:॥ ९॥

“Prajapati, born of the causal water
and of the lotus (sprung from the navel of
Lord Visnu), created the waters of the ocean
in the days of yore and then created living
beings for their protection. (9)

a सत्त्वा: सत्त्वकर्तारं विनीतवदुपस्थिता:।

किं कुर्म इति भाषन्त: क्षुत्पिपासाभयार्दिता:॥ १०॥
“Tormented by fear born of hunger and

thirst, these living beings approached the

creator in all humility and asked: ‘What shall

we do?’ (10)

प्रजापतिस्तु तान् सर्वान् प्रत्याह प्रहसन्निव।
आभाष्य वाचा यत्नेन रक्षध्वमिति मानद॥ ११॥

Addressing them in so many words, O
bestower of honour, Prajapati said as though
laughing: ‘Protect the waters with all effort.’

(11)
Tama sft तत्रान्यैर्यक्षाम sft चापरै:।
भुक्षिताभुक्षितैरुक्तस्ततस्तानाह भूतकृत्॥१२॥
Tam इति यैरुक्तं राक्षसास्ते भवन्तु व:।
यक्षाम sft यैरुक्तं aa Wa भवन्तु व:॥१३॥

“Of those who were hungry and thirsty,
