496

taken his seat after accepting the aforesaid
hospitality offered by the sage: (19-20)

चिरस्य खलु काकुत्स्थ पश्याम्यहमुपागतम्।
ait qa मया चैव विवासनमकारणम्॥२१॥

“In fact, | have since long been expecting
your arrival, O scion of Kakutstha! And
your gratuitous exile has also been heard of
by me. (21)

अवकाशो विविक्तोऽयं महानद्यो: समागमे।
पुण्यश्च रमणीयश्च वसत्विह भवान् सुखम्॥ २२॥

“This open stretch of land at the
confluence of the two great rivers is not
only secluded but sacred and lovely too.
Dwell you here comfortably.” (22)

एवमुक्तस्तु वचनं भरद्वाजेन राघव:।
प्रत्युवाच शुभं वाक्यं Wa: सर्वहिते Ta: २३॥
Addressed in these ॥0०653 by
Bharadwaja, Sri Rama, a scion of Raghu,
for his part, who was devoted to the good
of all, replied in the following agreeable
words : (23)

भगवन्नित आसन्न: पौरजानपदो जन:।
सुदर्शमिह मां Wea मन्येऽहमिममाश्रमम्॥ २४॥
आगमिष्यति वैदेहीं मां चापि प्रेक्षको जन:।
अनेन कारणेनाहमिह वासं न रोचये॥ GI

“The people of the city as well as of
the state of Ayodhya, O venerable sir, are
proximate to this place. Finding me easy to
behold at this place, people keen to gaze on
Sita, a princess of the Videha kingdom, as
well as on myself, | presume, will frequent
this hermitage. For this reason | do not
relish my sojourn here. (24-25)

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

Ward पश्य भगवन्नाश्रमस्थानमुत्तमम्।
रमते यत्र वैदेही सुखार्हा जनकात्मजा॥ २६॥

“Pray, therefore, look for some excellent
site for a hermitage in some lonely place,
O venerable sir, where Sita (a princess of
the Videha dynasty), daughter of King
Janaka, who deserves every comfort, may
find delight.” (26)

एतच्छृत्वा शुभं वाक्यं भरद्वाजो महामुनि:।
arene q तद् वाक्यमर्थग्राहकमब्रवीत्॥ 29

Hearing this pious submission of Sri
Rama, the great sage Bharadwaja for his
part made the following answer pointing out
the place sought by Sri Rama, a scion of
Raghu : (27)

दशक्रोश इतस्तात गिरिर्यस्मिन् निवत्स्यसि।
महर्षिसेवित: पुण्य: पर्वत: शुभदर्शन:॥ २८॥
“Sixty* miles from this place, O dear
son, lies a sacred mountain, on which you
take up your abode, which is inhabited by
great Rsis and is charming to look at, and
has a number of offshoots. (28)

THeAMgeIT atta वानरर्क्षनिषेवित: |
farpe sft ख्यातो गन्धमादनसंनिभ:॥ २९॥

“It is infested by the black species of
monkeys with a long tail (of the size of a
cow-tail), is haunted by apes and bears, is
known by the name of Citrakuta and closely
resembles the Gandhamadana mountain in
beauty. (29)

यावता चित्रकूटस्य नर: शृङ्खाण्यवेक्षते।
कल्याणानि समाधनत्ते न पापे Hed मन:॥ ३०॥

“So long as a man beholds the peaks

क The author of the Commentary known by the name of “Ramayana-Siromani’”construes the word `दश`
in the sense of thirty, treating it as an example of the compound Waste द्वन्द, in which only one member

of the compound is retained, the other being left out as in ``वृक्षा:``

(which is split up as वृक्षश्च वृक्षश्च वृक्षश्च).

Here too the word `दश` will have to be split up as दश U, दश A, दश च (meaning three times ten or thirty).
The distance of Citraktta from Prayaga is reckoned as 28 Kosas or 56 miles and thus approximate to the
figure worked out by the said commentator. According to the latest measurements the distance is calculated
as eighty miles. Making allowance for the difference in the standards of measurement obtaining in those
days the figure arrived at by the learned commentator appears to be fairly correct.
