170

Pret ध्यानपरो wat Pret शोकपरायण:।
नान्यच्चिन्तयते किंचित् स तु कामवशं गत:॥ ४३॥
“Sri Ramais ever given to contemplation
and ever given over to grief. He for his part
does not think of anything else, other than you
fallen as he is under the sway of love. (43)

अनिद्र: aad Wa: सुप्तोऽपि च नरोत्तम:।
सीतेति मधुरां वाणीं व्याहरन् प्रतिबुध्यते॥४४॥

“Sri Rama remains ever awake. Even
when asleep, that jewel among men starts
up, uttering the name of Sita in sweet accents.

(44)

दृष्ट्वा फलं वा पुष्पं वा यच्चान्यत् स्त्रीमनोहरम्।
agen हा प्रियेत्येवं श्वसंस्त्वामभिभाषते॥ ४५ ॥
“Heaving a sigh on beholding a fruit or
flower or whatever else is likely to captivate
the mind of women, he often calls on you,
saying ‘Ah, darling !’ (45)

a ea fea परितप्यमान--
स्त्वामेव सीतेत्यभिभाषमाण:।

« VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

yaad राजसुतो महात्मा
aaa लाभाय कृतप्रयत्न: ।॥ ४६॥
“Suffering extreme agony caused by
separation from you and calling on you
alone by the name of Sita, that magnanimous
prince, who has undertaken sacred vows,
is solely engaged in efforts for your recovery.”
(46)

रामसंकीर्तनवीतशोका

रामस्य शोकेन समानशोका।

निशेव वैदेहसुता बभूव॥४७॥

That daughter of Janaka, a ruler of the
Videha territory, whose grief (over the
imagined apathy of Sri Rama) was now
completely gone at the detailed description of
the condition of Sri Rama, yet who felt equally
grieved on hearing of Sri Rama’s grief—
resembled a night, partly bright and partly dark,
at the commencement of autumn with the moon
obscured by the remnants of clouds. (47)

सा

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये सुन्दरकाण्डे षट्त्रिंश: AW: ॥ ३६ Il

Thus ends Canto Thirty-six of the Sundarakanda in the glorious Ramayana of Valmiki,
the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

Canto XXXVII

Sita, who was distressed to hear of Sri Rama’s excessive grief caused by his
separation from her, implores Hanuman to bring Sri Rama at once to her.
Hanuman, who could not bear to see Sita’s sad plight, offers to carry
her on his back to the presence of Sri Rama and girds up his loins
to do so. In order to inspire confidence in Sita, who doubts
his capacity to do it looking to his small size, Hanuman
assumes a gigantic form; Sita, however, declines to go
with him and urges Hanuman to bring Sri Rama to her

सा सीता वचनं श्रुत्वा पूर्णचन्द्रनिभानना।

Hearing the speech of Hanuman, the

Aa: ।। १॥

aforesaid Sita, whose face resembled the
full moon, made the following reply in
consonance with righteousness and material
good : (I)
