826

आसेदतुर्महारण्ये कबन्धं AM राक्षसम्।
तत: कबन्धवचनाद् WA: सत्यपराक्रम:॥ ३५॥
ऋष्यमूकगिरिं गत्वा सुग्रीवेण समागत:।
तयो: समागम: Ue प्रीत्या हार्दो व्यजायत॥ ३६॥

“The two princes met in a vast forest
an ogre, Kabandha by name, and killed
him. Repairing to the Rsyamuka mountain
according to the advice of Kabandha, Sri
Rama of unfailing prowess thereupon came
into contact with Sugriva. A meeting of
hearts through affinity had taken place
between them even before they met.(35-36)

भ्रात्रा निरस्त: क्रुद्धेन सुग्रीवो वालिना पुरा।
इतरेतरसंवादात् प्रगाढ: प्रणयस्तयो:॥ ३७॥

“Sugriva had been banished in the past
by his angry brother, Vali, and as a result of
mutual talks a deep affection arose between
Sri Rama and Sugriva. (37)

TH: स्वबाहुवीर्येण स्वराज्यं प्रत्यपादयत्।
alert समरे हत्वा महाकायं महाबलम्॥ ३८॥
“Killing by the might of his arms on the
field of battle the gigantic Vali, even though
he was endowed with extraordinary might,
Sri Rama caused his kingship to be restored
to Sugriva. (38)
Gita: स्थापितो wet सहित: Waar: |
रामाय प्रतिजानीते राजपुत्र्यास्तु मार्गणम्॥३९॥
“Sugriva was thus established in his
kingdom alongwith all the monkeys. Sugriva,

in his turn, had given his pledge to institute
a search for the princess of Mithila. (39)

आदिष्टा वानरेन्द्रेण सुग्रीवेण महात्मना।
दश कोट्य: प्लवङ्गानां सर्वा: प्रस्थापिता दिश: ॥ ४० ॥

“Ten crores of monkeys’ were
accordingly assigned this work and
dispatched to all the four quarters. (40)

तेषां नो विप्रकृष्टानां विन्ध्ये पर्वतसत्तमे।
भृशं शोकाभितप्तानां महान् कालोऽत्यवर्तत॥४१॥

“A long time slipped past us (monkeys)
as we had lost our way in the Vindhya

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA +

mountain, the foremost of mountains and
felt sore stricken with grief. (41)

भ्राता तु गृध्रराजस्य सम्पातिर्नाम वीर्यवान्।
समाख्याति स्म वसतीं सीतां रावणमन्दिरे॥४२॥

“In the meantime, the powerful brother
of Jatayu, the king of vultures, Sampati by
name, definitely told us of Sita dwelling in
the manson of Ravana. (42)
सोऽहं दु:ख्परीतानां GE तज्ञातिनां नुदन्।
तत्राहमेकामद्राक्षमशोकवनिकां गताम्॥४३॥
तया समेत्य विधिवत् पृष्टवा सर्वमनिन्दिताम्॥ ४४॥
अभिज्ञानं मणिं लब्ध्वा चरितार्थोऽहमागत: ॥ ४५ ॥

“Dispelling the aforesaid despondency
of my kinsfolk, who were all seized with
despair, and resorting to my own energy, |
as such leapt across a sea extending over
a hundred Yojanas (or eight hundred miles).
There | beheld Sita living alone in a grove of
Asoka trees, clad in silk, unclean and
cheerless, yet unflinching in her vow of
conjugal fidelity. After meeting that
irreproachable lady and duly inquiring
everything of her, a ring with the name
of Sri Rama engraved on it was handed
over to her by me as a token. And receiving
as a token from her in return a jewel of her
head, | returned to the northern seashore,
accomplished of purpose. (48—45)

मया च पुनरागम्य रामस्याक्लिष्टकर्मण:।
अभिज्ञानं मया दत्तमचिष्मान् स महामणि:।॥ ४६ ॥
“Nay, returning to the presence of
Sri Rama at Kiskindha alongwith my
companions, that brilliant and valuable jewel
was delivered by me as a token to Sri
Rama, who was unwearied in action. (46)
श्रुत्वा तां मैथिलीं रामस्त्वाशशंसे च जीवितम्।
जीवितान्तमनुप्राप्त: पीत्वामृतमिवातुर: ॥ ४७॥
