+ UTTARAKANDA +

taken to Lanka, first, who went into the
Asoka grove and remained under the control
of the Raksasas. Such conduct of our wives
shall have to be suffered by us also, since
whatever a king does, the subjects follow.’

(17—19)

एवं बहुविधा ara वदन्ति पुरवासिन:।
TRY च सर्वेषु राजन् WAIT Ail Roll

“Thus, O King, the citizens of all the
towns and the countryside pass remarks in
sO many ways.” (20)

तस्यैवं भाषितं श्रुत्वा राघव: परमार्तवत्।
उवाच सुहृद: सर्वान् कथमेतद् वदन्तु माम्॥ २१॥

Having heard this statement of his, Sri
Rama (a scion of Raghu) as if stricken with

997

grief spoke to all the friends, “Tell me how it
is.” (21)
wa तु शिरसा भूमावभिवाद्य yore च।
प्रत्यूचू राघवं दीनमेवमेतन्न संशय:॥ २२॥
“Bending respectfully so low as to touch
the ground by the head, and saluting, all of
them—each a picture of pity—replied, on
their part, to Sri Rama (a scion of Raghu),
‘No doubt, this is so.’” (22)

TA तु वाक्यं काकुत्स्थ: AAT समुदीरितम्।
विसर्जयामास del वयस्यान् शत्रुसूदन:॥ २३॥
Having heard then the words spoken
by all of them, Sri Rama (a scion of Kakutstha),
the exterminator of enemies dismissed the
friends at that time. (23)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये उत्तरकाण्डे त्रिचत्वारिंश: TW: ॥ ¥3 il

Thus ends Canto Forty-three in the Uttarakanda of the glorious Ramayana of Valmiki,
the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

Canto XLIV

On being sent for by Him all the brothers present
themselves before Sri Rama

विसृज्य तु dest बुद्ध्या निश्चित्य wea:
समीपे द्वा:स्थमासीनमिदं वचनमब्रवीत्॥१॥

Then, having sent away the group of
friends and having made up His mind through
intellect, Sri Rama (a scion of Raghu) spoke
these words to the door-keeper seated
nearby: (1)
शीघ्रमानय सौमित्रिं लक्ष्मणं शुभलक्षणम्।
wd च Beart शात्रुघ्नमपराजितम्॥२॥

“Bring immediately Sumitra’s — son,
Laksmana, endowed with auspicious marks,
the highly illustrious Bharata and the
unconquered Satrughna.” (2)

THA वचनं श्रुत्वा द्वा:स्थो मूर्धि कृताञ्जलि: |
लक्ष्मणस्य गृहं गत्वा प्रविवेशानिवारित:॥ ३॥

Having heard Sri Rama’s order the
door-keeper placed his hands with palms
joined together on the forehead (as a mark
of respect) and having set forth to
Laksmana’s residence entered the same
unhindered. (3)

sara सुमहात्मानं वर्धयित्वा कृताञ्जलि:।

द्रष्टुमिच्छति राजा cat गम्यतां तत्र मा चिरम्॥४॥
Wishing prosperity to the eminently high-

souled Laksmana and with his palms joined

together he said, “The King desires to see
you. Go there, do not delay.” (4)

बाढमित्येव सौमित्रि: कृत्वा राघवशासनम्।
प्राद्रवद् रथमारुह्य राघवस्य निवेशनम्॥५॥

“Very well !” Having said so and having
