802

“Even his own people kill in adversity a
man or a ruler of men excessively vain,
worth disowning and egotistic. (16)

नानुतिष्ठति कार्याणि भयेषु न बिभेति च।
क्षिप्रं राज्याच्च्युतो दीनस्तृणैस्तुल्यो भवेदिह॥ १७॥

“A king who does not perform his duties
and is not apprehensive even in the face of
dangers is soon deprived of his kingdom
and reduced to a wretched condition, and
becomes of no more worth than straw in
this world. (17)

शुष्ककाष्ठैर्भवेत् कार्यं लोष्ठैरपि च पांसुभि: |
नतु स्थानात्परिभ्रष्टै: कार्यं स्याद्वसुधाधिपै: ॥ १८ ॥

“Some purpose may be served by dry
pieces of wood, even clods and dust, but
no purpose can be served by monarchs
fallen from their position. (18)

उपभुक्तं यथा are: स्रजो वा मृदिता यथा।
एवं राज्यात् परिभ्रष्ट: समर्थोऽपि निरर्थक:॥ १९॥

“Just as a used garment or a squeezed
garland becomes useless for others, so
even a powerful king deprived of his kingdom
becomes useless. (19)

अप्रमत्तश्च यो राजा सर्वज्ञो विजितेन्द्रिय:।
कृतज्ञो धर्मशीलश्च स राजा तिष्ठते चिरम्॥ २०॥

“That king who is vigilant, knows
everything about himself and his enemy,
whose senses are fully controlled, who
recognizes the services of others, and is
pious by disposition continues on his throne
for long. (20)

नयनाभ्यां प्रसुप्तो वा जागर्ति नयचक्षुषा।
व्यक्तक्रोधप्रसादश्च स राजा पूज्यते जनै:॥ २१॥

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

“That king who, though fast asleep
with his eyes closed remains awake with
his eye of prudence wide open and whose
frown and favour are manifest in the form of
punishment and reward is honoured by the
people. (21)

त्वं तु रावण दुर्बुद्धिर्गुणैरेतैर्विव्जित:।

यस्य तेऽविदितश्चारै रक्षसां सुमहान् वध:॥ २२॥
“You, however, O Ravana, are silly

and utterly destitute of all these virtues

inasmuch as the great slaughter of ogres

has remained unknown to your spies. (22)

परावमन्ता विषयेषु सङ्घवान्
न देशकालप्रविभागतत्त्ववित्।

अयुक्तबुद्धिर्गुणदोषनिश्चये
विपन्नराज्यो न Ferre विपत्स्यसे॥ २३॥

“Showing disrespect to others, full of
attachment to the pleasures of sense, not
knowing in reality the right division of time
and place, and having never applied your
mind to the task of determining the merits
and demerits of a thing or proposition, you
will find your sovereignty endangered and
perish soon.” (23)

इति स्वदोषान् परिकीर्तितांस्तथा
समीक्ष्य बुद्ध्या क्षणदाचरेश्वर: |
धनेन दर्पेण बलेन चान्वितो
विचिन्तयामास Fat स रावण: ॥ २४॥
Examining with his mind his own
weaknesses recounted by her, _ the
celebrated Ravana, the lord of night-stalkers,

possessed as he was of opulence, vanity
and might, reflected for long. (24)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्येऽरण्यकाण्डे त्रयस्तिंश: सर्ग: ॥ 33 ॥

Thus ends Canto Thirty-three in the Aranyakanda of the glorious Ramayana of
Valmiki, the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

