776

Speaking thus, royal sages and Siddhas
accompanied by their entourage, as also
gods, the foremost of Brahmanas seated in
their aerial cars stood filled with curiosity. (24)
दृष्टवा सर्वाणि भूतानि भयाद् विव्यथिरे तदा॥ 2 ॥
॥ All living beings, who were ignorant of
Sri Rama’s greatness, felt stricken with fear
at that time to behold Rama invested with
martial glory, standing in the van of fight.
(25)

सूपमप्रतिमं तस्य रामस्याक्लिष्टकर्मण:।
aya रूपं क्रुद्धस्य रुद्रस्येव महात्मन:॥ २६॥
The peerless form of the celebrated
Rama, who was unwearied in action,
resembled the form of the high-minded
Rudra in fury. (26)

इति सम्भाष्यमाणे तु देवगन्धर्वचारणै:।
ततो गम्भीरनिर्हयादं घोरचर्मायुधध्वजम्॥ २७॥
अनीकं यातुधानानां समन्तात् प्रत्यपद्यत।
वरीरालापान् विसृजतामन्योन्यमभिगच्छताम्॥ २८ I
विप्रघुष्टस्वनानां च दुन्दुभीश्चापि निघ्नताम्॥ २९॥
तेषां सुतुमुल: शब्द: पूरयामास aq वनम्।
तेन शब्देन वित्रस्ता: शवापदा वनचारिण:॥ ३०॥
दुद्रुवुर्यत्र नि:शब्दं पृष्ठतो नावलोकयन्।
तच्चानीकं महावेगं we समनुवर्तत॥ ३१॥
धृतनानाप्रहरणं wi सागरोपमम्।
रामोऽपि चारयंश्चक्चु: सर्वतो रणपण्डित:॥ ३२॥
ददर्शं खरसैन्यं aa युद्धायाभिमुखो गत:।
वितत्य च धनुर्भीमं तूण्याश्चोद्धूत्य सायकान्॥ ३३॥
क्रोधमाहारयत् तीव्रं वधार्थं सर्वरक्षसाम्।
दुष्प्रेक्ष्यश्चाभवत् क्रुद्धो युगान्ताग्निरिव ज्वलन्॥ ३४॥

While the foregoing words (vide verses
21—23) were being sympathetically uttered
by the gods, Gandharvas and Caranas, the
army of the ogres, armed with fearful shields
and weapons and distinguished by equally

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

fearful ensigns, closed in on all sides, making
a deep roar. The highly tumultuous noise of
those ogres—who were uttering heroic
slogans, approaching one another to give
instructions in tactics of war, twanging their
bows and bounding again and again in their
drunkenness, making clamorous sounds and
also beating their drums—filled that forest.
Terribly frightened by that noise, the wild beasts
of prey ran away to a far-off place where the
sound could not be heard, and did not look
behind. Nay, wielding various weapons, that
army of great impetuosity, deep like the ocean,
headed towards Rama. Casting his eyes on
all sides, and moving forward to give battle,
Sri Rama too, who was skilled in warfare,
surveyed that army of Khara. Nay, drawing
at full length his terrible bow and pulling out
arrows from his quiver, he summoned (to his
aid) violent anger for the destruction of the
ogres; and burning with anger, he was dreadful
to look at like fire at the time of universal
dissolution. (27—34)
तं दृष्टवा तेजसाऽऽविष्टं प्राव्यथन् वनदेवता: |
तस्य रुष्टस्य रूपं तु रामस्य ददूशे तदा।
दक्षस्येव क्रतुं हन्तुमुद्यतस्य पिनाकिन:॥ ३५॥
Seeing him invested with martial glory,
the sylvan deities felt sore distressed. The
form of angry Sri Rama then looked like that
of Lord Rudra (the Wielder of the Pinaka bow)
out to wreck the sacrificial performance of
Daksa. (35)

तत्कार्मुकैराभरणै Wa
तद्वर्मभिश्चाग्निसमानवर्णै: ।
aya सैन्यं पिशिताशनानां
सूर्योदये नीलमिवाभ्रजालम्॥ ३६॥
With their bows, ornaments and chariots,
as well as with their coats of mail shining like
fire, the army of the flesh-eating ogres looked
like a blue mass of clouds at sunrise. (36)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्येऽरण्यकाण्डे चतुर्विंश: AA: ॥ २४॥
Thus ends Canto Twenty-four in the Aranyakanda of the glorious Ramayana of
Valmiki, the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

