+ UTTARAKANDA +

1043

Canto LXIV

Satrughna dispatches his army in compliance with Sri Rama’s order in
advance and he himself proceedes after a month

एवमुक्त्वा च काकुत्स्थं प्रशस्य च पुन: पुन:।
पुनरेवापरं वाक्यमुवाच रघुनन्दन: ॥ १॥
Having thus spoken to the scion of
Kakutstha and eulogizing him again and
again, the descendant of the Raghus, Sri
Rama, spoke again to him: (1)

इमान्यश्वसहस्राणि चत्वारि पुरुषर्षभ।
रथानां द्वे WS च गजानां शतमुत्तमम्॥२॥
अन्तरापणवीथ्यश्च नानापण्योपशोभिता:।

अनुगच्छन्तु काकुत्स्थं तथैव नटनर्तका:॥ ३॥

‘These four thousand of horses, two
thousand chariots and a hundred of the best
elephants, the rows of stalls (inside the city),
laden with goods for sale and purchase, may
follow you O Satrughna, the scion of Kakutstha
and so also the actors and dancers. O
Satrughna, O bull among men, having taken
a lac of pure gold-coins well-equipped with
wealth and carriers (elephants and horses),
you proceed to Madhura. (2-3)

हिरण्यस्य सुवर्णस्य fad पुरुषर्षभ।
आदाय गच्छ शत्रुघ्न पर्याप्तथनवाहन:॥४॥
at च सुभृतं dk हृष्टतुष्टमनुद्धतम्।
सम्भाषासम्प्रदानेन रञ्जयस्व नरोत्तम॥५॥
‘O brave one, keep the army that is
well-formed, in such good cheer that its
constituents are happy and satisfied, and
not arrogant, with your good words. (4-5)

नह्यर्थास्तत्र तिष्ठन्ति न दारा न च बान्धवा:।
सुप्रीतो भृत्यवर्गस्तु यत्र तिष्ठति राघव॥६॥

‘There (at the encounter) neither wealth
nor spouse, nor even relatives are at your
side, as the servants when kept happy. (6)
अतो हृष्टजनाकीर्णां प्रस्थाप्य महतीं चमूम्।
एक एव धनुष्पाणिर्गच्छ त्वं मधुनो वनम्॥७॥

‘Thus, having dispatched the mighty army
full of happy men, you alone, with bow in your
hand, can go to the forest of Madhu. (7)

यथा त्वां न प्रजानाति गच्छन्तं युद्धकाङ्क्षिणम्।
लवणस्तु मधो: पुत्रस्तथा गच्छेरशङ्कितम्॥८॥
‘You should go in a manner in which the

son of Madhu, Lavana does not know that
you are going to him for an encounter. (8)

न तस्य मृत्युरन्योऽस्ति कश्चिद्धि पुरुषर्षभ।
दर्शनं योऽभिगच्छेत a ast लवणेन हि॥९॥

‘O bull among men, there is indeed no
other way in which Lavana would die,
whosoever goes to attack him, is killed by
Lavana, indeed. (9)
a We अपयाते तु वर्षारात्र उपागते।
हन्यास्त्वं लवणं सौम्य स fe कालोऽस्य THA: UW १० ॥

‘Thus when summer is passed, and
the rainy season comes, you should kill
Lavana. O graceful one, that is the time of
death for this wicked one. (10)

महर्षीस्तु पुरस्कृत्य War तव सैनिका:।

यथा ग्रीष्मावशेषेण तरेयुर्जाह्नवीजलम्॥११॥
‘Your warriors may proceed with the great

Rsis at their head, so that by the end of the

summer season, they may cross the Ganga,

the daughter of Jahnu. (11)

wa स्थाप्य बलं ad नदीतीरे समाहित:।
अग्रतो धनुषा सार्धं गच्छ त्वं लघुविक्रम॥ १२॥
‘Then having stationed your army at the

banks there, O one of speedy steps, you go
ahead carefully alone with the bow.’ (12)

एवमुक्तस्तु रामेण WAAAY महाबलान्।
सेनामुख्यान् समानीय ततो वाक्यमुवाच ह॥१३॥

_ Thus being spoken to by Sri Rama,
Satrughna, having gathered together the
