818

their person! Pray, accept this offering of
water to wash your hands with. You shall
go to Ayodhya tomorrow.” (17)

तस्य तच्छिरसा वाक्यं प्रतिगृह्य नृपात्मज:।
area संहृष्ट: श्रीमान् वरमयाचत॥ १८॥

Bowing to his aforesaid command with
his head bent low, highly pleased as he
was, and saying “Amen!”, the glorious prince,
Sri Rama, asked of him the following boon:

(18)
अकालफलिनो Fat: Wa चापि मधुस्ररवा:।
फलान्यमृतगन्धीनि बहूनि विविधानि anes
भवन्तु मार्गे भगवन्नयोध्यां प्रति गच्छत:।
तथेति च प्रतिज्ञाते वचनात् समनन्तरम्॥ २०॥
अभवन् पादपास्तत्र स्वर्गपादपसंनिभा:।
निष्फला: फलिनश्चासन् विपुष्पा: पुष्पशालिन: tt २१ ॥

“Let all the trees on the way, even
as | fly to Ayodhya, bear fruits and flow
with honey and let abundant fruits of
various kinds, emitting the fragrance of
nectar, appear on them, O venerable Sir!”
Immediately after his consent, once it was
given in the words “Be it so!”, all the trees
in that region grew to be closely similar to

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA +

heavenly trees in their virtues. For three
Yojanas (twenty-four miles) on all sides, in
the interest of those travelling to Ayodhya,
trees that no longer bore fruit were laden
with fruit; those which had even ceased to
blossom, looked charming with blossom
again. (19—21)

शुष्का: समग्रपत्रास्ते नगाश्चैव मधुस्त्रवा:।
सर्वतो योजनास्तिस्रो गच्छतामभवंस्तदा॥ २२॥

Trees that had withered were fully
clothed with foliage once more and further
began to flow with honey on that occasion.

(22)

‘ad:

मुदान्विता: स्वर्गजितो यथैव॥ २३॥

Leaping down from the aerial car on
reaching the outskirts of Ayodhya, highly
rejoiced and full of joy even as those who
had won their place in heaven, the aforesaid
jewels among the monkeys in their thousands
thereupon feasted at will on the numerous
ethereal fruits. (23)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये युद्धकाण्डे चतुर्विंशत्यधिकशततम: AT: ॥ १२४॥

Thus ends Canto One hundred and twenty-four in the Yuddhakanda of the glorious
Ramayana of Valmiki, the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

Canto CXXV

Preceding Sri Rama to Srigaverapura and Nandigrama, Hanuman apprises
Guha and Bharata of Sri Rama’s impending return soon and Bharata
offers him a number of valuable gifts in recompense
for the delightful news

अयोध्यां तु समालोक्य चिन्तयामास राघव:।
प्रियकाम: fot रामस्ततस्त्वरितविक्रम: eu

air, before landing at the hermitage of
Bharadwaja, Sri Rama (a scion of Raghu)
for his part, who wished to do a kindly act,

Gazing on Ayodhya while still in the | and who was quick in exhibiting prowess,
