« Procedure of reading the full Valmiki-Ramayana in nine days « 19

सीतामुदारचरितां विधिसाम्बविष्णु-

oat त्रिलोकजननीं शतकल्पवल्लीम्।
हैमैरनेकमणिरञ्जितकोटिभागै-

र्भूषाचयैरनुदिनं सहितां नमामि॥

“| bow to Sita of noble conduct, worthy of being saluted (even) by Brahma (the
creator) as well as by Lords Siva and Visnu, the Mother of all the three worlds (heaven,
earth and the intermediate region), who embodies in Herself hundreds of heavenly
creepers capable of granting the desires of those seeking their shade, and remains
adorned all day long with heaps of gold ornaments whose edges are rendered picturesque
with numerous gems.”

The special procedure recommended for reading the Sundarakanda is that, starting
with the first canto on the first day, one should go on increasing the number of cantos
to be read by one every day and stop reading on the eleventh day. On the twelfth day
the reader should read the first ten cantos over again after finishing the last two cantos
left unread the previous day; on the 13" day he should read 13 cantos more and so on.
In this way by going through the text thrice in the course of 20 days one can expect to
achieve one’s desired end. According to another scheme one should read five cantos
daily. On the 14" day one should finish the last three cantos left on the previous day and
the first two cantos over again and so on. The Mantra to be repeated before and after
every single verse is `` श्रीसीतायै नम:``.*

THE VINIYOGA AND RSYADINYASA ETC., PERTAINING
TO THE YUDDHAKANDA

ॐ अस्य श्रीयुद्धकाण्डमहामन्त्रस्य विभीषण ऋषि: | अनुष्टुप् छन्द: | विधाता देवता । बं बीजम्। नम: शक्ति: ।
विधातेति कीलकम्। श्रीधातृप्रसादसिद्ध्यर्थ युद्धकाण्डपारायणे विनियोग:। ॐ विभीषणकऋषये नम: शिरसि। ॐ
अनुष्टप्छन्दसे नम:मुखे। ॐ विधातृदेवतायै नम: eel ॐ बं बीजाय नम: गुह्ये। ॐ नम: शक्तये नम: पादयो: | ॐ
विधातेति कीलकाय नम: सर्वाङ्गे।

KARANYASA
ॐ विधात्रे अङ्गुष्ठाभ्यां AA: | ॐ महादेवाय तर्जनीभ्यां नम:। ॐ भक्तानामभयप्रदाय मध्यमाभ्यां नम:। ॐ
सर्वदेवप्रीतिकराय अनामिकाभ्यां AA: | ॐ भगवत्प्रियाय कनिष्ठिकाभ्यां AA: | So SANTA करतलकरपृष्ठाभ्यां नम: ।
After going through Hrdayadinyasa with the same Mantras one should meditate
according to the following verse:

देवं विधातारमनन्तवीर्यं

भक्ताभयं श्रीपरमादिदेवम्।
सर्वामरप्रीतिकरं प्रशान्तं

वन्दे सदा भूतपतिं सुभूतिम्॥

“| salute everyday the god Brahma (the creator), the glorious and the highest primal

* As an alternative the following verse can also be repeated at the beginning as well as at the end
of every verse:
रामभद्र महेष्वास रघुवीर नृपोत्तम। भो दशास्यान्तकास्माकं रक्षां देहि fee च ते॥
“O blessed Sri Rama, wielding a mighty bow, O Hero of Raghu’s race, O Jewel among kings, O Destroyer of Ravana
(the ten-headed monster), (pray) grant us Your protection as well as Your fortune.”
