* ARANYAKANDA «

ददर्श भूमौ निष्क्रान्तं राक्षसस्य Us महत्।
त्रस्ताया रामकांक्षिण्या: प्रधावन्त्या इतस्तत:॥ ३६॥

राक्षसेनानुसृप्ताया बैदेह्याश्च पदानि a
स समीक्ष्य परिक्रान्तं सीताया राक्षसस्य A ३७॥

भग्नं धनुश्च तूणी च विकोर्णं बहुधा रथम्।
सम्भ्रान्तहृदयो राम: शशंस भ्रातरं प्रियम्॥ ३८ ॥

In the meantime he saw imprinted on
the ground the enormous foot of an ogre. Nay,
he also beheld the footprints of Sita (a princess
of the Videha territory) running fast terrified
hither and thither, when chased by the ogre,
and longing to meet Sri Rama. Perplexed at
heart to observe the foot-prints of Sita as
well as of an ogre as also a shattered bow
and a quiver and a chariot thrown about in
parts, Sri Rama spoke as follows to his
beloved brother, Laksmana: (836—38)

Usa लक्ष्मण वैदेह्या कीर्णा: कनकबिन्दव: |
भूषणानां हि सौमित्रे माल्यानि विविधानि च॥ ३९॥

“See, 0 Laksmana, that particles of
gold forming parts of ornaments of Sita (a
princess of the Videha kingdom) as also
flowers of various kinds are lying scattered
on the ground, O son of Sumitra ! (39)

तप्तबिन्दुनिकाशैश्च Fat: क्षतजबिन्दुभि:।
ad पश्य सौमित्रे सर्वतो धरणीतलम्॥४०॥

“Also behold, O darling of Sumitra, the
earth’s surface covered on all sides with
drops of blood of a varying size, shining
brightly like particles of gold. (40)

मन्ये लक्ष्मण वैदेही ward: कामरूपिभि:।
भित्त्वा भित्त्वा विभक्ता वा भक्षिता वा भविष्यति॥ ४१ ॥
“| presume, O Laksmana, that Sita, a
princess of the Videha territory, was divided
among themselves at this place by ogres
capable of assuming any form at will after
splitting her into pieces, and then devoured.
(41)

wen निमित्तं सीताया द्वयोर्विवदमानयो:।
aya ae सौमित्रे घोरं राक्षसयोरिह॥४२॥
“At this place, O darling of Sumitra,

895

has ensued a terrible conflict between two
ogres contending for the sake of the aforesaid
Sita. (42)
fnfad ad रीयं सि f ।
धरण्यां पतितं सौम्य कस्य भग्नं Aes धनु:॥४३॥
“Here lies broken and fallen on the
ground this lovely and large bow encrusted
with pearls and gems and richly adorned, O
gentle brother! Whose may this be? (43)

राक्षसानामिदं वत्स सुराणामथवापि ari
तरुणादित्यसंकाशं वैदूर्यगुलिकाचितम्॥४४॥
BA शतशलाकं च दिव्यमाल्योपशोभितम्॥४५॥
भग्नदण्डमिदं सौम्य wat कस्य निपातितम्।
काञ्चनोरश्छदाश्चेमे पिशाचवदना: खरा:।॥४६॥
भीमरूपा महाकाया: कस्य वा निहता रणे।
दीप्तपावकसंकाशो द्युतिमान् समरध्वज:॥४७॥
अपविद्धश्च भग्नश्च कस्य साङ्ग्रामिको रथ:।

रथाक्षमात्रा विशिखास्तपनीयविभूषणा:॥ ४८ ॥।
कस्येमे निहता बाणा: प्रकोर्णा घोरदर्शना:।
शरावरौ Vit: पूर्णौ विध्वस्तौ पश्य लक्ष्मण ॥४९॥

“This belongs either to ogres or to gods,
my darling! Whose is this armour of gold,
shining brightly as the morning sun and
encrusted with cats’-eye gems and lying
shattered on the ground? Again, whose is
this canopy spread on a hundred ribs and
adorned with celestial wreaths and dashed
to the ground with its handle broken, O gentle
brother? Nay, whose are these mules of grim
aspect and gigantic bodies endowed with
the heads of goblins and provided with
breastplates of gold, lying slain on the
battlefield? Whose may be this brilliant chariot
of war, shining brightly as a flame and bearing
a distinct ensign on the field of battle, lying
overturned and broken? Whose are these
shafts of terrifying appearance, thick and long
as the axle of a chariot, lying broken and
scattered with their heads detached? Also
behold, O Laksmana, a pair of quivers full of
arrows lying smashed. (44—49)
