188

इयं हैमवती ज्येष्ठा गङ्गा हिमवत: सुता।
at a धारयितुं राजन् हरस्तत्र नियुज्यताम्॥ २३॥

“Here is the river Ganga, the elder
daughter of Himavan, the deity presiding
over the Himalayas, which emanates from
the Himalayas. Let Lord Siva alone be
invoked to support the Ganga when it
descends on earth, O king! (23)

गङ्गाया: पतनं राजन् पृथिवी न सहिष्यते।
at वै धारयितुं राजन् नान्यं पश्यामि शूलिन:॥ २४॥

“The earth, O monarch, will not be able

« VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

to sustain the velocity of the descent of the
Ganga. And | do not perceive, O king,
anyone, other than Lord Siva, the Wielder of
a trident, capable of sustaining it’. (24)
तमेवमुक्त्वा राजानं Wet चाभाष्यलोककृत्।

जगाम त्रिदिवं ead: ad: ae मरुद्गणै:।॥ २५॥

Having thus spoken to the aforesaid
king and instructed Ganga as well to oblige
Bhagiratha when the time comes, Brahma,
the maker of the universe, rose to
Brahmaloka with all the gods including the
(forty-nine) wind-gods. (25)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये बालकाण्डे
द्विचत्वारिंश: सर्ग: ॥ ४२ ॥
Thus ends Canto Forty-two in the Balakanda of the glorious Ramayana of Valmiki,
the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

Canto XLIII
Pleased with the asceticism of Bhagiratha, Lord Siva receives the Ganga
on His head and discharges it into Bindusarovara. Branching forth

into seven streams it then accompanies Bhagiratha to Rasatala
and liberates his forbears on the way

देवदेवे गते तस्मिन् सोऽङ्गुष्ठाग्रनिपीडिताम्।
pa aad We वत्सरं समुपासत॥१॥
“When the celebrated Brahma (the
adored even of gods) had left, O Rama,
Bhagiratha waited upon Lord Siva for a
year remaining standing on the tip of one of
his great toes stamped on the ground. (1)

अथ संवत्सरे पूर्णे सर्वलोकनमस्कृत:।
sarafa: पशुपती राजानमिदमब्रवीत्॥ २॥

On a year being completed, Lord Siva
(the Spouse of Uma, who evidently appeared
with Him), Protector of the Jiva (who has
been likened to an animal because of its
bondage), the adored of all the worlds,
forthwith addressed the following words to
the king: (2)

प्रीतस्तेऽहं नरश्रेष्ठ करिष्यामि aa प्रियम्।
शिरसा धारयिष्यामि शैलराजसुतामहम्॥ ३॥

“lam pleased with you, O jewel among
men, and shall do that which is pleasing to
you. | shall receive the Ganga, the daughter
of Himavan, the king of mountains, on My
head even as it descends on earth. (3)

ततो ह्रैमवती ज्येष्ठा सर्वलोकनमस्कृता।
तदा सातिमहद्रूपं कृत्वा at च दुस्सहम्॥४॥
आकाशादपतद् राम शिवे शिवशिरस्युत।
अचिन्तयच्च सा देवी गङ्गा परमदुर्धरा॥७५॥
तस्यावलेपनं ज्ञात्वा क्रुद्धस्तु भगवान् हर:॥६॥
तिरोभावयितुं बुद्धिं चक्रे त्रिनयनस्तदा।
सा तस्मिन् पतिता पुण्या पुण्ये रुद्रस्य मूर्धनि॥ ७॥
