666

workmanship, capable of repulsing the
enemy and putting an end to one’s life.” (34)

इत्येवमुक्तस्तु तदा महात्मा
विभीषणेनारिविभीषणेन ।
रथस्थितं भीमबलं दुरासदम्॥ ३५॥

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA +

Spoken to in these words at that
time by Vibhisana, the terror of his
enemies, the high-souled Laksmana for his
part gazed on that ogre of terrific
might, who, seated in his chariot, closely
looked like a mountain and was difficult to
approach. (35)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये FERS षडशीतितम: सर्ग: ॥ ८६ Il
Thus ends Canto Eighty-six in the Yuddhakanda of the glorious Ramayana of
Valmiki, the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

Canto LXXXVII

Exchange of hot words between Indrajit and Vibhisana

`एवमुक्त्वा तु सौमित्रिं जातहर्षो विभीषण:।
peter तमादाय त्वरमाणो जगाम स:॥१॥
Taking Laksmana (son of Sumitra),
who bore a bow in his hand, after having
spoken to him as aforesaid, Vibhisana,
who felt rejoiced, hastened away. (1)

अविदूरं ततो गत्वा प्रविश्य तु महद् वनम्।
अदर्शयत तत्कर्म लक्ष्मणाय विभीषण:॥ २॥

Moving not very far from that place
and penetrating deep into an extensive
thicket, Vibhisana for his part showed to
Laksmana the place where Indrajit was
going to pour oblations into the sacred fire.

(2)
नीलजीमूतसंकाशं न्यग्रोधं भीमदर्शनम्।
तेजस्वी रावणभ्राता लक्ष्मणाय न्यवेदयत्॥ ३॥

The glorious brother of Ravana showed
to Laksmana a banyan tree of fearful aspect,
resembling a dark cloud and spoke as
follows: (3)
इहोपहारं भूतानां बलवान् रावणात्मज:।
उपहृत्य तत: पश्चात् संग्राममभिवर्तते॥४॥

“Having offered oblations to the spirits

at this place, the mighty Indrajit (sprung
from the loins of Ravana) proceeds to the
battlefield after that. (4)

अदृश्य: सर्वभूतानां ततो भवति राक्षस:।
निहन्ति समरे शत्रून् बध्नाति च PRA NG I
“The ogre then becomes invisible to all
created beings and in that state destroys
his enemies in combat and, also ensnares
them, be means of his excellent arrows. (5)
तमप्रविष्टं न्यग्रोधं बलिनं रावणात्मजम्।
विध्वंसय शरैर्दीप्तै: सरथं साश्वसारथिम्॥६॥
“Destroy with your flaming shafts the
mighty Indrajit (sprung from the loins of
Ravana) with his chariot, horses and
charioteer while he has not yet reached the
banyan tree.” (6)

तथेत्युक्त्वा महातेजा: सौमित्रिर्मित्रनन्दन:।
बभूवावस्थितस्तत्र fat विस्फारयन् धनु:॥७॥
Saying “Amen!”, Laksmana (son of
Sumitra), the delight of his friends, who was
endowed with extraordinary energy, took
his stand there, twanging his marvellous
bow at full length. (7)
