546

एतत् सुनीतं मम दर्शनेन
we fe geaa waar:
sea ते सेत्स्यति मोत्सुको भू-
र्महानयुद्धेन सुखस्य लाभ:॥ ३५॥

“This will be the best course to my
mind. Disaster in the shape of death is sure
to come to you as soon as you behold
Rama. Therefore, don’t be eager for an
encounter. Great enjoyment of bliss will
accrue to you in Lanka itself without a
struggle. (35)

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA +

अनष्टसैन्यो ह्यनवाप्तसंशयो

Rg त्वयुद्धेन जयजञ्जनाधिप:।
wg qa च महान्महीपते

श्रियं च कीर्तिं च Fat समश्नुते॥ ३६॥

“Conquering his enemies without a
contest, a mighty ruler of the earth for his
part fully enjoys for long renown and
religious merit too, as also prosperity and
placidity, without meeting with danger, O
overlord of the people, his army too remaining
intact.” (36)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये FERS चतु:षष्टितम: सर्ग: ॥ ६४॥
Thus ends Canto Sixty-four in the Yuddhakanda of the glorious Ramayana of
Valmiki, the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

पञ्चषष्टितम: at:
Canto LXV

Kumbhakarna’s sally for an encounter

स darned निर्भर्त्सत्य कुम्भकर्णो महोदरम्।
अब्रबीद् राक्षसश्रेष्ठं भ्रातरं रावणं तत:॥१॥
Upbraiding Mahodara, when spoken to
as aforesaid, Kumbhakarna for his part then
submitted as follows to his elder brother,
Ravana, the foremost of ogres: (1)
Rss तव Wa घोरं वधात् तस्य दुरात्मन:।
रामस्याद्य प्रमार्जामि निर्वैरो fe सुखी wane
“For what | am, | shall without doubt
dispel today your formidable fear by killing
that evil-minded fellow, Rama. Rid of
animosity, be happy. (2)
गर्जन्ति न gat शूरा निर्जला ga तोयदा:।
wa सम्पद्यमानं तु गर्जितं युधि कर्मणा॥३॥

“Heroes do not thunder in vain like
clouds bereft of water. Note for your part
the roar which is going to be emitted by me
on the battlefield through action. (3)

न मर्षयन्ति चात्मानं सम्भावयितुमात्मना।
अदर्शयित्वा शूरास्तु कर्म कुर्वन्ति दुष्करम्॥४॥

“Warriors do not seek 10 glorify
themselves with their own lips. On the other
hand, they accomplish deeds which are hard
to accomplish, without displaying them. (4)
Wad त्वद्वचो नित्यं कथ्यमानं महोदर॥५॥

“Your advice, even while it is being
tendered, would undoubtedly appeal at all
times to kings who are cowardly and devoid
of intellect and account themselves wise, O
Mahodara! (5)

qe कापुरुषैर्नित्यं wate: प्रियवादिभि:।
राजानमनुगच्छद्भि: सर्वं pet विनाशितम्॥६॥
“All undertakings have always been
marred by you people, who are cowards in
combat, utter pleasing words and say ditto
to the king during deliberations. (6)
