402

यथालब्धेन कर्तव्य: संतोषस्तेन मैथिलि।
यताहारैर्वनचरै: सीते दु:खमतो वनम्॥१७॥
“Eating sparingly, dwellers in forests
have to appease their hunger with fruits etc.
obtained according to season, O Sita,

princess of Mithila ! Hence a forest is full of
hardships. (17)

अतीव वातस्तिमिरं बुभुक्षा चाति नित्यश:।
भयानि च महान्त्यत्र ततो दु:खतरं वनम्॥१८॥

“The wind blows furiously everyday,
thick darkness prevails and hunger too is
rapacious. Besides there are great perils in
the forest. Hence a forest is a source of
great hardships. (18)

सरीसृपाश्च sat बहुरूपाश्च भामिनि।

ated पथि a दर्पात् ततो दु:खतरं वनम्॥१९॥
“Well-known serpents of various kinds

proudly creep on the tracks in large numbers,

O proud lady! A forest, therefore, is a
source of great miseries. (19)

नदीनिलयना: wat नदीकुटिलगामिन:।
तिष्ठन्त्यावृत्य पन्थानमतो gaat वनम्॥२०॥
“Serpents having their home in rivers
and moving tortuously like rivers lie blocking
the way. Hence a forest is full of great
suffering. (20)
पतङ्मा वृश्चिका: कीटा दंशाश्च मशकै: सह।
aed नित्यमबले सर्वं दु:खमतो SALI RI
“Moths, scorpions, worms and gnats
alongwith mosquitoes harass everyone daily,
O frail princess । Hence a forest is full of
suffering. (21)
द्रुमा: कण्टकिनश्चैव कुशा: काशाश्च भामिनि |
वने व्याकुलशाखाग्रास्तेन दु:खमतो वनम्॥ २२॥

“Thorny trees, blades of the sacred

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

KuSa grass and gnarled shrubs known by
the name of KasSas are seen with the ends
of their limbs spreading on all sides in the
forest, O proud lady! Hence a forest is
thickly beset with hardships. (22)

कायक्लेशाश्च seat भयानि विविधानि च।
अरण्यवासे वसतो दु:खमेव सदा वनम्॥ २३॥

“Manifold bodily sufferings torment and
perils of various kinds threaten a person
taking up his abode in a forest dwelling. A
forest is thus a perennial source of suffering.

(23)
क्रोधलोभौ विमोक्तव्यौ कर्तव्या तपसे ata: |
न भेतव्यं च भेतव्ये दु:खं नित्यमतो वनम्॥ २४॥

“Anger and greed have to be completely
abandoned, one’s heart has to be set on
asceticism and one must not dread even
that which deserves to be dreaded. Hence
a forest is a perpetual source of suffering.

(24)
deat a at गत्वा ad नहि at aa
विमृशन्निव पश्यामि बहुदोषकरं वनम्॥ R&I

“Therefore, have done with the idea of
proceeding to the forest. A forest is not
secure for you. Bestowing my thought on
the subject | perceive the forest as fraught
with many evils, as it were.” (25)
at तु Ad न कृता मतिर्यदा

aya रामेण तदा महात्मना।
न तस्य सीता वचनं चकार तं
ततोऽब्रवीद् राममिदं सुदु:खिता॥ २६ ॥

When the high-souled Sri Rama did
not agree to take Sita to the forest, the latter
for her part did not concur with his verdict.
Sore afflicted, she then spoke as follows to
the illustrious Sri Rama. (26)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्येऽयोध्याकाण्डेऽष्टाविंश: सर्ग: ॥ २८ Il

Thus ends Canto Twenty-eight in the Ayodhyakanda of the glorious Ramayana of
Valmiki, the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

