« VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

नवम: wet:
Canto IX

Leaping up the Puspaka in the course of his quest for Sita in the palace of
Ravana, Hanuman gazes from that vantage-ground on the hosts of
women lying asleep in the women’s apartments in diverse states

तस्यालयवरिष्ठस्य मध्ये विमलमायतम्।
cast भवनश्रेष्ठं हनुमान् मारुतात्मज:॥१॥
अर्धयोजनविस्तीर्णमायतं amt महत्।
Vet राक्षसेन्द्रस्य बहुप्रासादसंकुलम्॥२॥
In the centre of that palace, the most
excellent of all edifices, Hanuman, sprung
from the loins of the wind-god, espied the
huge, spotless and spacious mansion of
Ravana, the lord of ogres, the foremost of
all buildings, half a Yojana (or four miles)
wide and a Yojana (or eight miles) long and
crowded with numerous edifices. (1-2)

मार्गमाणस्तु वैदेहीं सीतामायतलोचनाम्।
सर्वत: परिचक्राम हनूमानरिसूदन: ॥ ३॥
Looking about for the large-eyed Sita,

a princess of the Vedeha territory, Hanuman,
the slayer of his foes, ranged all over in that

palace. (3)
राक्षसावासं हनुमानवलोकयन्।

उत्तमं
आससादाथ लक्ष्मीवान् राक्षसेन्द्रनिवेशनम्॥४॥

Gazing on the excellent abode of the
ogres, Hanuman, who was full of riches in
the form of strength and valour, presently
approached the mansion of Ravana, the
ruler of ogres. (4)

चतुर्विषाणैर्दविरदैस्त्रिविषाणैस्तथैव च।
परिक्षिप्तमसम्बाधं रक्ष्यमाणमुदायुधै: ॥। ५ ॥।
The |= commodious edifice was

surrounded by elephants with four, two and
three tusks respectively and was being
guarded by ogres with uplifted weapons. (5)

राक्षसीभिश्च पत्नीभी रावणस्य निवेशनम्।
आहुताभिश्च fart राजकन्याभिरावृतम्॥ ६॥

The mansion was thronged_ with

ogresses, who were wives of Ravana as
well as by princesses who had been brought
away by him after showing valour. (6)

तन्नक्रमकराकोर्णं तिमिंगिलझषाकुलम्।
वायुवेगसमाधूतं पन्नगैरिव सागरम्॥७॥
It looked like a sea infested with
crocodiles and alligators, crowded with
whales and other fishes, tossed by the
force of winds and teeming with serpents.
(7)

या fe asratt लक्ष्मीर्यां ae हरिवाहने।
सा रावणगृहे wr नित्यमेवानपायिनी॥८॥

The lovely splendour that hangs about
Kubera (son of Sage Visrava), the moon
and Indra (who has a greenish mount) ever
existed in the abode of Ravana and never
departed from it. (8)

या च Ua: कुबेरस्य यमस्य वरुणस्य च।
तादृशी तद्विशिष्टा वा ऋद्धी रक्षोगृहेष्विह॥ ९॥

In the dwellings of the ogres in Lanka
was found the same prosperity or even
greater than that which reigned in the
residences of King Kubera (the ruler of
Yaksas and other demigods), Yama (the
god of retribution) and Varuna (the god of
waters). (9)

तस्य हर्म्यस्य मध्यस्थवेश्म चान्यत् सुनिर्मितम्।
बहुनिर्यूहसंयुक्तं ददर्श पवनात्मज:॥१०॥

Hanuman, sprung from the loins of the
wind-god, beheld another edifice in the centre
of the aforesaid mansion, which was
beautifully constructed and marked with the
presence of numerous elephants in rut. (10)

ब्रह्मणोऽर्थे कृतं feet feta ae विश्वकर्मणा।
विमानं पुष्पकं नाम सर्वरत्नविभूषितम्॥११॥
