1084

जहारात्मविनाशाय मैथिलीं राक्षसाधम:।
वञ्जयित्वा तु पौलोमीमनुह्लादो यथा शचीम्॥६॥

“For his own destruction Ravana, the
disgrace of ogres, bore away Sita (a princess
of Mithila) by practising fraud against her in
the same way as Anuhlada (a son of the
demon Hiranyakasipu, and a real brother of
the celebrated devotee Prahlada) for his
part took away Saci, daughter of the demon
Puloma (who was sought after by Indra).(6)
नचिरात् तं वधिष्यामि रावणं निशितै: vit:
पौलोम्या: पितरं gt शतक्रतुरिवारिहा॥७॥

“| shall before long kill the said Ravana
with my sharp arrows even as Indra (who is
said to have performed a hundred horse-
sacrifices in his previous birth as a condition
precedent for attaining this position), the
destroyer of his foes, killed the arrogant
Puloma (father of Saci, who played into the
hands of Anuhlada and countenanced her
abduction by Anuhlada).” (7)

एतस्मिन्नन्तरे da ww: समभिवर्तत।

उष्णतीव्रां सहस्रांशोशछादयद् TH प्रभाम्॥८॥
In the meantime there rose a cloud of

dust veiling the fiery and scorching brilliance

of the sun with its numberless rays in the
sky. (8)

दिश: पर्याकुलाश्चासंस्तमसा तेन दूषिता:।
चचाल च मही सर्वा सशैलवनकानना॥९॥

The quarters were obscured and
enveloped by the darkness occasioned by
that dust and the entire earth shook with its
mountains, forests and woodlands. (9)

ततो नगेन्द्रसंकाशैस्तीक्ष्णदंष्टैर्महाबलै:।

Pen संछादिता भूमिरसंख्येयै: प्लवंगमै: ।। १०॥
Thereupon the whole earth was thickly

covered with innumerable monkeys

possessed of extraordinary might and sharp
teeth and looking like lordly mountains. (10)

निमेषान्तरमात्रेण ततस्तैर्हरियूथपै: |
कोटीशतपरीवारैर्वानरैर्हरियूथपै: ॥ ११॥

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

नादेयै: पार्वतेयैश्च सामुद्रैश्च महाबलै: ।
हरिभिर्मेघनिर्हादैरन्यैश्च वनवासिभि: ।। १२॥

In the mere twinkling of an eye after that
the earth was overrun by celebrated leaders
of Vanara hordes followed by hundreds of
crores of monkeys, nay, capable of changing
their form at will and possessed of
extraordinary might and living on river banks,
mountains and seashores and was further
overrun by other monkeys dwelling in forests
and thundering like clouds. (11-12)

तरुणादित्यवर्णैश्च शशिगौरैश्च वानरै:।
पद्मकेसरवर्णैश्च श्चेतैर्हमकृतालयै: 11 १३॥

Their colour resembled in some cases
the hue of the rising sun; others were
yellowish as the moon; still others possessed
the hue of the filaments of a lotus and
others were white and had taken up their
abode on the Hema mountain. (13)

कोटीसहस्रैर्दशभि: श्रीमान् परिव्रृतस्तदा।

a: शतबलिर्नाम वानर: प्रत्यदृश्यत॥ १४॥
Presently there appeared a glorious and

gallant monkey, Satabali by name, followed

by ten thousand crores of monkeys. (14)

तत: काञ्चनशैलाभस्ताराया वीर्यवान् पिता।
अनेकैर्बहुसाहस्रै: कोटिभि: प्रत्यदृश्यत॥ १५॥
Next came to view the powerful father
of Tara (Susena by name), looking like a
golden mountain and followed by many
myriads of monkeys. (15)
तथापरेण कोटीनां सहस्रेण समन्वित:।
frat रुमाया: सम्प्राप्त: सुग्रीवश्वशुरो विभु:॥ १६॥
Accompanied by another thousand
crores, again, arrived Tara, the mighty father
of Ruma and father-in-law of Sugriva. (16)
पद्मकेसरसंकाशस्तरुणार्कनिभानन: ।
बुद्धिमान् वानरश्रेष्ठ:उ सर्ववानरसत्तम:॥१७॥
अनेकैर्बहुसास्रैर्वानराणां समन्वित:।
पिता हनुमत: श्रीमान् केसरी प्रत्यदृश्यत॥ १८॥
Also accompanied by many thousands
of monkeys there appeared the wise and
