* SUNDARAKANDA +

भर्तारमतित्वरेण
Tra वीर: प्रतिपन्नबुद्धि:॥ १५॥

Hearing that exhortation of his father,
the hero Indrajit, who was powerful as a god
(a son of Daksa*, a lord of created beings),
and had made up his mind to seek the field
of battle with all speed, then went round his
lord, Ravana, clockwise. (15)

deed: स्वगणैरिष्टैरिन्द्रजित् प्रतिपूजित:।
युद्धोद्धतकृतोत्साह: CNT सम्प्रपद्यत॥१६॥

Honoured by some beloved people of
his own class present in the royal assembly,
Indrajit, who was terrific in combat and was
full of martial ardour, proceeded towards the
field of battle. (16)

श्रीमान् पद्मविशालाक्षो राक्षसाधिपते: सुत:।
निर्जगाम महातेजा: समुद्र ga पर्वणि॥१७॥

The glorious son of Ravana, the suzerain
lord of ogres, who had eyes big as a lotus,
and was endowed with extraordinary
energy, rushed forth like a sea on a full-
moon day. (17)

a पक्षिराजोपमतुल्यवेगै-
aaah: स तु तीक्ष्णदंष्टै: |
समायुक्तमसह्यवेग:
समारुरोहेन्द्रजिदिन्द्रकल्प: ॥१८॥

The notorious Indrajit of irresistible
vigour, for his part who compared with
Indra, duly ascended his chariot, yoked to
four sharp-toothed tigers, vying with Garuda
in speed and well-matched in swiftness.

(18)

स tat धन्विनां sg: शस्त्रज्ञोऽस्त्रविदां वर:।
रथेनाभिययौ fad हनूमान् यत्र सोऽभवत्॥१९॥

That chariot-warrior, the foremost of
bowmen, skilled in the use of weapons and
a jewel among those proficient in the use of

ART

रथं

213

missiles, drove rapidly in his chariot to where
the celebrated Hanuman was. (19)
स तस्य रथनिर्घोषं ज्यास्वनं कार्मुकस्य च।
निशम्य हरिवीरोऽसौ सम्प्रहष्टतरोऽभवत्॥ २०॥
That famous hero among the monkeys
felt extremely rejoiced to hear the rattling of
Indrajit’s chariot and the twang of his
bowstring. (20)

इन्द्रजिच्चापमादाय शितशल्यांश्च सायकान्।
हनूमन्तमभिप्रेत्य जगाम रणपण्डित:॥ २१॥
Taking his bow and_ sharp-pointed
arrows, Indrajit, skilled in the art of warfare,
proceeded towards Hanuman. (21)
रणाय निर्गच्छति बाणपाणौ।
दिशश्च vat: कलुषा बभूवु-
र्मृगाश्च रौद्रा बहुधा विनेदु:॥ ee

Nay, as Indrajit sallied forth from that
place for a contest, arrow in hand and full of
passion for war, all the four quarters became
gloomy and hideous beasts such as jackals
began to howl in various ways. (22)

समागतास्तत्र तु नागयक्षा
महर्षयश्चक्रचराश्च

नभ: Wager च पक्षिसङ्घा
विनेदुरुच्चै:३ परमप्रहृष्टा:॥ २३॥

Thickly covering the sky, Nagas and
Yaksas, eminent Rsis and Siddhas moving
in multitudes, gathered there; and flocks of

birds began to emit shrill cries, supremely
rejoiced as they were. (23)

आयान्तं स रथं दृष्ट्वा तूर्णमिन्द्रध्वजं कपि: |
ननाद च महानादं व्यवर्धत च वेगवान्॥ evil

Perceiving the chariot bearing the
standard of Indra (seized by him as a token
of his having conquered Indra) coming rapidly

सिद्धा:।

* We read in the Visnu-Purana—

मनसा त्वेव भूतानि Ys दक्षोसृजत्तथा। देवानृषीन् सगन्धर्वानुरगान् पक्षिणस्तथा॥

“Of yore Daksa evolved with his mind alone created beings, viz., gods, and Rsis alongwith

Gandharvas, serpents and birds.”
