« KISKINDHAKANDA +

city, Pragjyotisapura by name; in it dwells
the vile-minded demon named Naraka. (31)

wa सानुषु way विशालासु We च।
Wat: Ge ace मार्गितव्यस्ततस्तत:॥ ३२॥

“Ravana with Sita, a princess of the
Videha_ territory, should be sought for
everywhere, on the lovely peaks as well as
in the extensive caves of that mountain.

(32)
तमतिक्रम्य शैलेन्द्रं काञ्चनान्तरदर्शनम्।
पर्वत:र सर्वसौवर्णो धाराप्रस्रवणायुत:॥ ३३॥

“Beyond the aforesaid Varaha, a ruler
of mountains, in the depths of which gold
can be perceived, rises a mountain, which

is entirely of gold and contains as many as
ten thousand cascades. (33)

तं गजाश्च वराहाश्च सिंहा व्याघ्राश्च ada: |
अभिगर्जन्ति सततं तेन शब्देन दर्पिता:॥३४॥

“Reaching the aforesaid mountain,
elephants and boars as well as lions and
tigers incessantly emit a deep cry in all
directions, made defiant by their own cry,
coming back, as it were, in the form of an
echo. (34)

afer हरिहय: sitar महेन्द्र: पाकशासन:।
अभिषिक्त: सुरॆ राजा Aa AMT स पर्वत:॥ ३५॥

“The said mountain, on which the glorious
and mighty Indra (the ruler of gods), the
tamer of the demon Paka, who is distinguished
by his green horse, was crowned king by
the gods, is called by the name of Megha.

(35)
तमतिक्रम्य शैलेन्द्रं महेन्द्रपरिपालितम्।
ure गिरिसहस्राणि काञ्चनानि गमिष्यथ॥ ३६॥
तरुणादित्यवर्णानि भ्राजमानानि सर्वत:।
जातरूपमयैर्वृक्ष; शोभितानि सुपुष्पितै:॥। ३७॥

“Passing beyond that king of mountains,
protected on all sides by the mighty Indra,
you will reach a range of sixty thousand
golden hills, possessing the hue of the rising
sun and embellished with golden trees in full

1101

blossom and as such shedding their light on
all sides. (36-37)

तेषां मध्ये स्थितो राजा मेरुरुत्तमपर्वत:।
आदित्येन प्रसन्नेन शैलो दत्तवर: पुरा॥ ३८॥

“In their middle stands Mount Meru
(Savarni), the foremost mountain, a veritable
king among mountains, who was granted
a boon in former days by the sun-god
when the latter got pleased with the former.

(38)

तेनैवमुक्त: Wes: Wd एव त्वदाश्रया:।
मत्प्रसादाद् भविष्यन्ति दिवा Wal च काञ्चना: ॥ ३९ U

“The king of mountains was spoken to
as follows by the sun-god: ‘By my grace all
those who seek your protection by day and
by night will come to be of gold. (39)

vata a चापि वत्स्यन्ति देवगन्धर्वदानवा:।
a भविष्यन्ति भक्ताश्च प्रभया HATH: Ul Xo Il

“‘Nay, gods, Gandharvas (celestial
musicians) and demons, whosoever will dwell
on you shall become my devotee and will
shine like gold in point of brilliance.’ (40)

विश्चेदेवाश्च वसवो weds दिवौकस:।
आगत्य पश्चिमां संध्यां मेरुमुत्तमपर्वतम्॥४१॥
आदित्यमुपतिष्ठन्ति तैश्च सूर्योऽभिपूजित:।
अदूश्य: सर्वभूतानामस्तं गच्छति पर्वतम्॥४२॥

“Seeking Meru, the foremost mountain,
at the time of the evening twilight as seen in
the west, the gods ViSwedevas, Vasus and
Maruts (the wind-gods) wait upon the sun-
god and, duly worshipped by them, the sun-
god seeks the western mountain behind
which the sun is supposed to disappear
and becomes invisible to all living beings.

(41-42)
योजनानां सहस्राणि दश att दिवाकर:।
मुहूर्तार्धेन तं शीघ्रमभियाति शिलोच्चयम्॥४३॥

“In less than half an hour the sun
rapidly reaches the said western mountain

lying at a distance of ten thousand Yojanas
(or eighty thousand miles). (43)
