994

रामस्याभ्यवहारार्थं किंकरास्तूर्णमाहरन्।
उपानृत्यंश्च राजानं नॄत्यगीतविशारदा:॥ २०॥
Having entered the large ASokavanika,
which had dwellings provided with a number
of seats and was surrounded by bowers,
Sri Rama, the delight of Raghus, seated
Himself on a fine-shaped couch decorated
with clusters of flowers and over which a
carpet was spread out. Taking in his hand
the pure nectar of flowers as intoxicating as
the ‘Maireyaka’ wine, Sri Rama (a descendant
of Kakutstha) made Sri Sita drink it, just as
Indra does Saci. Attendants speedily brought
well-cooked edibles (fit for the royalty) and
a variety of fruits for Sri Rama’s repast.
A troupe of celestial nymphs and Naga
damsels adept in singing and dancing and
surrounded by Kinnaris danced before the
king. (16—20)
अप्सरोरगसंघाश्च किंनरीपरिवारिता:।
दक्षिणा रूपवत्यश्च Pera: पानवशं गता:॥ २१॥
मनोऽभिरामा रामास्ता WAT रमयतां वर:॥२२॥
रमयामास धर्मात्मा नित्यं परमभूषिता:।
स तया सीतया सार्धमासीनो विरराज ह॥ २३॥
अरुन्धत्या इवासीनो वसिष्ठं ga तेजसा।
एवं Wa मुदा युक्त: सीतां सुरसुतोपमाम्॥ २४॥

Under the influence of intoxicating drinks
courteous and beautiful women, who were
expert in dancing and singing danced before
Sri Rama (a scion of Kakutstha). These
mind-fascinating belles were always adorned
with ornaments. Pious-souled Sri Rama, the
foremost among those who delighted others,
made them rejoice. Seated in the company
of the celebrated Sita, He shone with
splendour like Vasistha seated alongwith
Arundhati. (21—24)

रमयामास वैदेहीमहन्यहनि देववत्।
तथा तयोर्विहरतो: सीताराघवयोश्चिरम्॥ २५॥

« VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

अत्यक्रामच्छुभ: काल: शैशिरो भोगद: सदा।
प्राप्तयोर्विविधान् भोगानतीत: शिशिरागम:॥ २६॥
Sri Rama, steeped in joy like gods,
afforded delight thus day after day to the
daughter of Videha (Janaka) Sri Sita, who
resembled a divine damsel. In this way,
while both Sri Sita and Sri Rama (a scion of
Raghus) revelled for long, the auspicious
winter season which always provides
enjoyment came to an end. When the Couple
had relished a variety of enjoyments, the
advent of another* winter became an event
of the past. (25-26)

Yate धर्मकार्याणि creat धर्मेण धर्मवित्।
we दिवसभागार्धमन्त:पुरगतोऽभवत्॥ २७॥
सीतापि देवकार्याणि कृत्वा पौर्वाह्लिकानि वै।
श्वश्रूणामकरोत् पूजां सर्वासामविशेषत:॥ २८॥

Having performed the religious duties
as enjoined by Virtue in the first half of the
day, Sri Rama (the knower of Virtue) remained
in the gynaeceum for the remaining half of
the day. Sri Sita too, having performed all
duties relating to gods, enjoined to be done
in the forepart of the day, respectfully waited
upon all the mothers-in-law without any
distinction. (27-28)
अभ्यगच्छत् ततो रामं विचित्राभरणाम्बरा।
त्रिविष्टपे सहस्राक्षमुपविष्टं यथा शची॥ २९॥

Afterwards, wearing multicoloured
ornaments and garments, she would visit

Sri Rama, even as Saci did Indra (the
thousand-eyed god) seated in heaven. (29)

दृष्टवा तु राघव: पत्नीं कल्याणेन समन्विताम्।
प्रहर्षमतुलं लेभे साधुसाध्विति चाब्रवीत्॥ ३०॥
अब्रवीच्च वरारोहां सीतां सुरसुतोपमाम्।
अपत्यलाभो dele त्वय्ययं समुपस्थित:॥ ३१॥
On seeing His Consort bearing

auspicious marks of pregnancy, Sri Rama
(a scion of Raghus) became immeasurably

* $17 Govindaraja in his commentary states that winter season is indication of one year end, thus two

years were spent in enjoyment after coronation.
