726

splendid javelin, which shone like a flaming
thunderbolt, gave out a lurid gleam. (23)
एतस्मिन्नन्तरे वीरो लक्ष्मणस्तं विभीषणम्।
प्राणसंशयमापन्नं तूर्णमभ्यवपद्यत॥ २४॥
In the meantime, the heroic Laksmana
speedily came to the rescue of the aforesaid
Vibhisana, who had reached a stage in
which his life was in danger. (24)

तं विमोक्षयितुं वीरश्चापमायम्य लक्ष्मण:।

रावणं शक्तिहस्तं वै शरवर्षैरवाकिरत्॥२५॥
Stretching his bow, the gallant

Laksmana, in order to save Vibhisana,

actually overwhelmed with volleys of arrows
Ravana, who stood, javelin in hand. (25)

कोर्यमाण: शरौघेण विसृष्टेन महात्मना।
न Wed मनश्चक्रे विमुखीकृतविक्रम:॥ २६॥

Being covered, as aforesaid, with a
stream of shafts discharged by the high-
souled Laksmana, Ravana, whose prowess
stood balked in this way, no longer felt
spirited to strike. (26)
मोक्षितं भ्रातरं geal लक्ष्मणेन स WATT: |
लक्ष्मणाभिमुखस्तिष्ठन्निदं वचनमब्रवीत्॥ २७॥

Standing with his face turned towards
Laksmana, on seeing his younger brother,
Vibhisana, rescued by Laksmana, the
notorious Ravana spoke as follows: (27)

मोक्षितस्ते बलश्लाघिन् यस्मादेवं विभीषण:।
विमुच्य राक्षसं शक्तिस्त्वयीयं विनिपात्यते॥ २८॥

“Letting off the ogre, Vibhisana, this
javelin is being violently hurled on you
inasmuch as Vibhisana has thus been rescued
by you, O vaunter of your strength!” (28)

wa a wa भित्त्वा शक्तिर्लोहितलक्षणा।
मद्बाहुपरिघोत्सृष्टा प्राणानादाय यास्यति॥ २९॥

“Piercing your heart, as soon as hurled
by my bludgeon-like arm, and stained with
your blood, this javelin will depart only after
taking your life.” (29)

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA +

इत्येवमुक्त्वा तां शक्तिमष्टघण्टां महास्वनाम्।
मयेन मायाविहिताममोघां शत्रुघातिनीम्॥ ३०॥
लक्ष्मणाय समुद्दिश्य ज्वलन्तीमिव तेजसा।
रावण: परमक्रुद्धश्चिक्षेपण च we च॥३१॥
Saying so and aiming at Laksmana
that infallible javelin, which was adorned
with eight bells and made a loud noise in the
course of its flight, nay, which had been
designed by the domon Maya by dint of
magic, was capable of destroying the enemy
and shone, as it were, with splendour,
Ravana, who was extremely enraged, hurled
it and roared. (30-31)

सा fae भीमवेगेन वज्राशनिसमस्वना।
शक्तिरभ्यपतद् वेगाल्लक्ष्मणं रणमूर्धनि॥ ३२॥

Flung with terrible impetuosity and
cracking like a thunderbolt, that javelin flew
with force towards Laksmana in the forefront
of the battle. (32)

तामनुव्याहरच्छक्तिमापतन्तीं स Waa: |
स्वस्त्यस्तु लक्ष्मणायेति मोघा भव हतोद्यमा॥ 33 Ul

Addressing that javelin even as it was
striking at Laksmana, that scion of Raghu,
Sri Rama imprecated it as follows: “May all
be well with Laksmana! May you prove
ineffectual! May your attempt to kill Laksmana
be frustrated!!” (33)

रावणेन Wr शक्ति: क्रुद्धेनाशीविषोपमा।
मुक्ताऽऽशूरस्यभीतस्य लक्ष्मणस्य ममज्ज सा॥ ३४॥
Released by the enraged Ravana on the
battlefield, that javelin, which was deadly as
a venomous snake, struck at once at the
bosom of Laksmana, who stood fearless. (34)

न्यपतत् सा महावेगा लक्ष्मणस्य महोरसि।
जिह्वेवोरगराजस्य दीप्यमाना महाद्युति:।। ३५॥

Flying with great violence and flaming
like the tongue of Vasuki (the lord of serpents),
the javelin, which was full of extraordinary
splendour, descended on the broad chest
of Laksmana. (35)
