84

my eye even though | continue to look for
her. (2)
सा राक्षसानां प्रवरेण जानकी
स्वशीलसंरक्षणतत्परा सती।
अनेन नूनं प्रति दुष्टकर्मणा
हता भवेदार्यपथे परे स्थिता॥३॥
‘That virtuous lady, Sita, Janaka’s
daughter, who was intent on scrupulously
guarding her chastity and adhered to the
exalted path of noble women, has surely
been disposed of by this foremost leader of
the ogres, who has perpetrated most wicked
deeds. (3)

विरूपरूपा विकृता विवर्चसो

महानना दीर्घविरूपदर्शना:।
समीक्ष्य ता राक्षसराजयोषितो

WATS विनष्टा HAVANT Ut ४॥

‘Or, the daughter of the lord of the
Janakas perished from fear on seeing those
servant-maids of Ravana (the ruler of ogres)
of hideous looks, monstrous faces and large
ugly eyes, deformed and lustreless. (4)

सीतामदृष्ट्वा ह्यनवाप्य पौरुषं
विहृत्य कालं सह वानरैश्चिरम्।

न मेऽस्ति सुग्रीवसमीपगा गति:
सुतीक्ष्णदण्डो बलवांशच ATT: ॥ & Ul

‘Now that | have not been able to discover
Sita and win the prize of my valour and have
diverted myself for a long time in the company
of monkeys, there is no longer any possibility
of my reaching the presence of Sugriva; for
the aforesaid monkey King is mighty and
metes out most severe punishment. (5)
दृष्टमन्त:पुरं ad दृष्टा रावणयोषित:।
न सीता दृश्यते साध्वी व्रृथा जातो WA sa: Wg I

‘The entire gynaeceum has_ been
explored, all the womenfolk of Ravana have
also been seen; the virtuous Sita, however,
is not to be seen and my exertion has
proved of no avail. (6)
किं नु मां वानरा: सर्वे गतं वक्ष्यन्ति संगता:।
गत्वा तत्र त्वया at किं Hed Aq वदस्व न:॥ il

« VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

‘What, | wonder, will all the monkeys
come together say to me when । have gone
to them? They will say, “Going there, what
did you accomplish, O gallant one? Please
make it known to us.” (7)
अदृष्ट्वा किं प्रवक्ष्यामि तामहं जनकात्मजाम्।
qt प्रायमुपासिष्ये कालस्य व्यतिवर्तने॥८॥

‘Not having seen the celebrated
daughter of Janaka, what reply shall | give?
The time-limit fixed by Sugriva having been
exceeded, | shall surely await death by
abstaining from food and drink. (8)

किं वा वक्ष्यति व्रद्धश्च जाम्बवानंगदश्च स:।

Td UN समुद्रस्य वानराश्च समागता:॥९॥
‘What, again, will the aged Jambavan

and the celebrated Prince Angada as well

as the assembled monkeys say to me when

| reach the other end of the sea? (9)

aide: श्रियो मूलमनिर्वेद: wt सुखम्।
भूयस्तत्र विचेष्यामि न यत्र विचय: aa: oll

‘Indefatigability is the root of prosperity;
indefatigability constitutes supreme happiness.
| shall, therefore, resume my search for Sita
in those places where no search has so far
been conducted by me. (10)

अनिर्वेदो fe wad सर्वार्थेषु vader: |
करोति सफलं जन्तो: HY यच्च करोति स:।॥ ११॥

‘Indeed indefatigability constantly impels
one to pursue all objects. Nay, it rewards
with success the action of a living being,
who performs it. (11)
तस्मादनिर्वेदकरं यत्नं चेष्टेऽहमुत्तमम्।
अदृष्टांश्च विचेष्यामि देशान् रावणपालितान्॥ १२॥

‘| shall, therefore, put forth supreme
effort which may restore self-reliance, and
shall explore the unexplored regions protected
by Ravana. (12)
आपानशाला विचितास्तथा पुष्पगृहाणि च।
चित्रशालाश्च विचिता भूय: क्रीडागृहाणि च॥ १३॥
निष्कुटान्तररथ्याश्च विमानानि च सर्वश:।
इति संचिन्त्य भूयोऽपि विचेतुमुपचक्रमे॥ १४॥
