* AYODHYAKANDA +

427

Canto XXX ।

Hoping that by being provoked to anger Kaikeyi might come round and
relax her insistence on sending Sri Rama into exile, Sumantra
harshly reproaches her, reminding her of her mother’s
misbehaviour towards her husband (Kaikeyi’s father).

Kaikeyi, however, remains adamant and does not
budge even an inch from her purpose

ततो निधूय सहसा शिरो नि:श्वस्य चासकृत्।
पाणिं पाणौ विनिष्पिष्य दन्तान् कटकटाय्य च॥ १॥
कोपाभिभूत: सहसा संतापमशुभं AAU २॥
मन: समीक्षमाणश्च सूतो दशरथस्य च।
कम्पयन्निव कैकेय्या हृदयं वाकशरै: fA: ३॥
वाक्यवज्रैरनुपमैर्निर्भिन्दन्निव चाशुभै: ।
कैकेय्या: सर्वमर्माणि सुमन्त्र: प्रत्यभाषत॥४॥

Beating his head all of a sudden and
sighing again and again, pressing his hand
against the other and grinding his teeth,
turning his eyes crimson with wrath, shedding
his former (normal) colour, overwhelmed as
he was with anger, and, suddenly falling a
prey to bitter agony, nay, carefully reading
the mind of DaSaratha, Sumantra spoke as
follows, shaking Kaikeyi’s heart, as it were,
with sharp arrows in the form of words and
as though piercing all her vitals with his
acrimonious words resembling so many
peerless thunderbolts : (1—4)

यस्यास्तव पतिस्त्यक्तो राजा दशरथ: स्वयम्।
भर्ता सर्वस्य जगत: स्थावरस्य चरस्य च॥५॥
नह्यकार्यतमं किंचित्तव देवीह विद्यते।
पतिघ्नीं came मन्ये कुलघ्नीमपि चान्तत:॥६॥
यन्महेन्द्रमिवाजय्यं दुष्प्रकम्प्यमिवाचलम्।
महोदधिमिवाक्षोभ्यं संतापयसि कर्मभि:॥७॥
“Surely there is nothing on earth most
undesirable for you, by whom your husband,
King Dasaratha himself, the supporter of

the entire creation, both immobile and mobile,
stands betrayed, O queen! | consider you

to be the murderess of your husband and
ultimately the exterminator of your race too,
in that you torment with your actions your
husband, who is invincible as the great
Indra, unshakable as a mountain and
imperturbable as an ocean. (5—7).
भर्तुरिच्छा fe नारीणां पुत्रकोट्या विशिष्यते॥ ¢ ॥
“Do not despise DaSaratha, your
husband and lord, the bestower of boons,
as the will of a husband is superior to that
of ten millions of sons. (8)
यथावयो fe राज्यानि प्राप्नुवन्ति नृपक्षये।
इक्ष्वाकुकुलनाथेऽस्मिस्तं लोपयितुमिच्छसि॥ ९॥
“Indeed, on the death of a king his
sons inherit the sovereign rights according
to seniority of age. You seek to violate this

time-honoured practice even in the presence
(life-time) of this ruler of the Ikswakus!

(9)
राजा भवतु ते Yat भरत: शास्तु मेदिनीम्।
वयं तत्र गमिष्यामो यत्र wat गमिष्यति॥१०॥

“Let your son, Bharata, be crowned
king and rule over the earth. We, for our
part, shall go wheresoever Rama goes.

(10)
न च ते विषये कश्चिद् ब्राह्मणो वस्तुमर्हति।
तादृशं त्वममर्यादमद्य ad करिष्यसि॥११॥
नूनं ad गमिष्यामो ant रामनिषेवितम्।
त्यक्ता या बान्धवै: सर्वैर्ब्रह्मणै: साधुभि: TANT Ul १२॥
का प्रीती राज्यलाभेन aa देवि भविष्यति।
तादृशं त्वममर्यादं कर्म ad चिकीर्षसि॥१३॥
