* AYODHYAKANDA +

afflicted as they were, like female elephants
in a forest, the leader of whose herd had
strayed away from their abode. (20)

तासामाक्रन्दशब्देन सहसोद्गतचेतने।
HAM च सुमित्रा च त्यक्तनिद्रे बभूवतु:।॥ २१॥

Roused all of a sudden by the noise of
their wailing, Kausalya and Sumitra too shook
off their slumber. (21)

कौसल्या च सुमित्रा च दृष्टवा स्पृष्टवा च पार्थिवम्।
a नाथेति परिक्रुश्य पेततुर्धरणीतले॥ २२॥

Looking at the Emperor and touching
him and crying loudly “Ah my lord !” Kausalya
and Sumitra too dropped to the ground. (22)

सा कोसलेन्द्रदुहिता चेष्टमाना महीतले।
न भ्राजते रजोध्वस्ता aa गगनच्युता॥ २३॥

Tossing on the floor and covered with
dust, that daughter of the ruler of Kosala (a
principality of that name to the south of the
kingdom of Kosala and later merged in it)
did not look charming any more than a
shooting star fallen from the heavens. (23)

अपश्यंस्ता: स्निय: Pat eat नागवधूमिव॥ २४॥

The king having expired, all those ladies
beheld Kausalya fallen on the ground like
the dead wife of a Naga (a semi-divine
being credited with a human face with
serpent-like lower extremities). (24)

ad: Wat नरेन्द्रस्य कैकेयीप्रमुखा: fers: |
eed: शोकसंतप्ता निपेतुर्गतचेतना:॥ २५॥
Then the king’s wives, Kaikeyi and

others, who were all weeping, sore stricken
with grief as they were, fell down,

537

consciousness having departed from them.
(25)

ताभि: स बलवान् नाद: क्रोशन्तीभिरनुद्रुत:।
at स्फीतीकृतो भूयस्तद् गृहं समनादयत्॥ २६॥
That tremendous noise already heard
in the gynaeceum was supplemented by
those wailing ladies by means of their own
lamentation, swollen by which it rendered
the house all the more noisy. (26)

तत् परित्रस्तसम्भ्रान्तपर्युत्सुकजनाकुलम्।
सर्वतस्तुमुलाक्रन्दं परितापार्तबान्धवम्॥ २७॥

सद्योनिपतितानन्दं दीनं विक्लवदर्शनम्।
aya नरदेवस्य wa दिष्टान्तमीयुष:॥ २८॥
That gynaeceum of the king, who had
now met his appointed end, was thronged
with men and women who felt greatly alarmed,
flurried and over-excited, was filled with a
tumultuous wail on all sides and crowded
with the king’s relations who were stricken
with deep agony. Joy had _ suddenly
disappeared from it and it wore a miserable

aspect and presented च perplexed
appearance. (27-28)
अतीतमाज्ञाय तुं पार्थिवर्षभं

यशस्विनं तं परिवार्य पत्नय:।

प्रगृह्य We व्यलपन्ननाथवत्॥ २९॥

Concluding the illustrious Dasaratha,
the foremost of kings, to be deceased and
surrounding him on all sides, his consorts,
for their part, who were profusely shedding
tears, greatly afflicted as they were, piteously
wailed like helpless women, clasping his
arms. (29)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्येऽयोध्याकाण्डे
पञ्चषष्टितम: सर्ग: ॥ ६५ Il

Thus ends Canto Sixty-five in the Ayodhyakanda of the glorious Ramayana of Valmiki,
the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

