456

युध्यमानमनालक्ष्यं शक्रोऽपि त्रिदशेश्वर:।
द्रष्टुमासादितुं वापि न शक्त: किं पुनर्युवाम्॥११॥

“Even Indra, the ruler of gods, will not
be able even to discern me, much less
approach me, while | am fighting imperceptibly,
how much less you two! (11)

प्रापिताविषुजालेन राघवौ कङ्कपत्रिणा।
wa रोषपरीतात्मा नयामि यमसादनम्॥१२॥

“My mind seized with anger, | hereby
dispatch to the abode of Yama you two
scions of Raghu, who have been enmeshed
in a network of darts provided with the
plumes of buzzards.” (12)

एवमुक्त्वा तु धर्मज्ञौ भ्रातरौ रामलक्ष्मणौ।
निर्बिभेद शितैर्बाणै: wed ननाद च॥१३॥

Having spoken as aforesaid, Indrajit,
for his part, was exulted and roared and
began to pierce with his pointed arrows the
two brothers, Sri Rama and Laksman, who
knew what is right. (13)

भिन्नाञ्जनचयश्यामो विस्फार्य विपुलं धनु:।

Wa Wa MM घोरान् विससर्ज महामृधे॥१४॥
Stretching his huge bow, Indrajit, who

was dark as a mass of collyrium, let fly

once more formidable arrows in that major
conflict. (14)

ततो मर्मसु मर्मज्ञो मज्जयन् निशितान् शरान्।
रामलक्ष्मणयोर्वीरो ननाद च मुहुर्मुहु:॥ १५॥

Nay, digging sharp arrows into the vital
parts of Sri Rama and Laksman, roared
again and again. (15)

बद्धौ q शरबन्धेन ताव्रुभौ रणमूर्धनि।
निमेषान्तरमात्रेण न शेकतुरवेक्षितुम्॥१६॥

Enmeshed in a net of arrows in the
forefront of battle, both the princes for their
part became incapable, in the mere twinkling
of an eye, even of looking up. (16)

ad विभिन्नसर्वाङ्गौ शरशल्याचितौ कृतौ।
ध्वजाविव महेन्द्रस्य रज्जुमुक्तौ प्रकम्पितौ॥ १७॥

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA +

Pierced in all their limbs and covered
all over with the heads of arrows (transfixed
in their bodies). the two princes then began
to shake violently like a pair of banners
raised in honour of the mighty Indra
(the ruler of gods) and freed from their
cords. (17)

तौ सम्प्रचलितौ वीरौ मर्मभेदेन कर्शितौ।
निपेततुर्महेष्वासौ जगत्यां जगतीपती॥१८॥

Staggered and enfeebled on account
of being pierced in their vital parts, the two
gallant princes, who were sovereigns of the
globe and wielded mighty bows, fell to the
ground. (18)

at वीरशयने वीरौ शयानौ रुधिरोक्षितौ।
शरवेष्टितसर्वाङ्गावार्तौ परमपीडितौ ।। १९॥

Laying on the heroes’ bed (in the form
of the battle-ground), bathed in blood with
all their limbs enmeshed by arrows (in the
form of serpents) the aforesaid two heroes,
Sri Rama and Laksmana, felt distressed
and exceedingly afflicted. (19)
नह्यविद्धं तयोर्गात्रे बभूवाङ्गुलमन्तरम्।
नानिर्विण्णं न चाध्वस्तमाकराग्रादजिह्मगै: It २० I

Not a fingers breadth of space was
left on their person, which was not actually
pierced: and there was no organ from the
tips of their fingers which remained
unlacerated and unshaken by arrows. (20)

at तु क्रूरेण निहतौ रक्षसा कामरूपिणा।
असृक सुस्रुवतुस्तीव्रं जलं प्रस्रवणाविव॥ २१॥

Struck down by that cruel ogre, who
was able to change his form at will, the two
princes for their part emitted blood copiously
even as a pair of springs would pour forth
water. (21)

पपात प्रथमं रामो विद्धो मर्मसु मार्गणै:।
क्रोधादिन्द्रजिता येन UT शक्रो विनिर्जित:।॥ २२॥

Sri Rama fell first, pierced as he was
in his vital parts with shafts discharged in
