+ UTTARAKANDA +

1087

Canto LXXXVI

Indra is freed from the sin of Brahmahatya as a result
of performing AsSvamedha

तदा वृत्रवधं सर्वमखिलेन स लक्ष्मण:।
कथयित्वा नरश्रेष्ठ: कथाशेषं प्रचक्रमे॥१॥
ततो हते महावीर्ये «qt देवभयंकरे।
ब्रह्महत्याव्रृत: wor: संज्ञां लेभे न Ganz
That Laksmana, having narrated the
whole episode of the slaying of Vrtra,
proceeded to describe the remaining part of
the story. On, Vrtra of mighty power, a terror
to the gods, being killed, Indra, the killer of
Vrira, afflicted by the sin of Brahmana-
slaughter, became unconscious. (1-2)

सोऽन्तमाश्रित्य लोकानां नष्टसंज्ञो विचेतन:।
कालं तत्रावसत् कंचिद् वेष्टमान इवोरग:॥ ३॥
Deprived of consciousness, he (Indra)
went beyond the border of the world, where
he remained for sometime as if writhing like
a snake. (3)

अथ we सहस्राक्षे उद्विग्नमभवज्जगत्।
भूमिश्च ध्वस्तसंकाशा नि:स्नेहा शुष्ककानना॥४॥
नि:स्रोतसस्ते सर्वे तु Baa सरितस्तथा।
संक्षोभश्चैव सत्त्वानामनावृष्टिकृतोऽभवत्॥५॥
The thousand-eyed one, Indra, having
disappeared, the world was agitated, and
the earth lost its form, moisture and the
forestations, all lakes and rivulets dried up,
commotion prevailed among beings due to
draught. (4-5)
क्षीयमाणे तु लोकेऽस्मिन् सम्भ्रान्तमनस: सुरा: |
यदुक्तं विष्णुना ut तं यज्ञं समुपानयन्॥६॥
When the world was tottering, the gods
agitated in mind, started the sacrifice that
had been mentioned by Visnu formerly. (6)

aa: सर्वे सुरगणा: सोपाध्याया: सहर्षिभि:।
तं देशं समुपाजग्मुर्यत्रेन्द्रो भयमोहित:॥७॥

Then all hosts of gods, together with

the preceptors and the sages, approached
the place where Indra was hiding, quite
unconscious due to fear. (7)

at तु Gea सहस्राक्षमाव्रतं ब्रह्महत्यया।
तं पुरस्कृत्य देवेशमश्वमेधं प्रचक्रिरे॥८॥

Having seen the thousand-eyed one
possessed by the sin of Brahmana-slaughter,
the gods performed the ASvamedha with
their Lord, Indra, at their head. (8)

ततोऽश्वमेध: सुमहान् महेन्द्रस्य महात्मन:।
aga ब्रह्महत्याया: पावनार्थं नरेश्वर॥९॥

Then, 0 lord of men, Sri Rama, the
mighty Asvamedha yajfa came to be
performed for the purification of the noble
Mahendra (Indra) from the Brahma-hatya. (9)

ततो at समाप्ते तु ब्रह्महत्या महात्मन:।
अभिगम्याब्रवीद्वाक्यं क्व मे स्थानं विधास्यथ It १० ॥

Then as the sacrifice, Asvamedha, came
to an end, Brahma hatya (in person) of the
noble Indra approached the gods and said :
‘Where would you give me place?’ (10)

a तामूचुस्ततो देवास्तुष्टा: प्रीतिसमन्विता:।
चतुर्धा विभजात्मानमात्मनैव दुरासदे॥११॥
Then the gods satisfied, happily said to
her (the Brahma-hatya), ‘O one difficult to
reach, divide yourself four-fold.’ (11)
cart भाषितं श्रुत्वा ब्रह्महत्या महात्मनाम्।
संदधौ स्थानमन्यत्र वरयामास दुर्वसा॥१२॥
Having heard the words of the noble
gods, Brahma-hatya (in person) split itself,
and staying with difficulty in Indra’s person,
chose shelter elsewhere. (12)

Teast वत्स्यामि पूर्णोदासु नदीषु al
चतुरो वार्षिकान् मासान् दर्पघ्नी कामचारिणी ।॥ १३॥

‘By one part, | shall stay for four months
