1074

a त्वं सुपुष्टमाहारै: स्वशरीरमनुत्तमम्।
भक्षयित्वामृतरसं तेन व्रृत्तिर्भविष्यति॥ १७॥

“As you eat your own body, well-
nourished by edibles, full of the flavour of
nectar; therefore, by that (eating flesh) you
will live. (17)

यदा तु तद्वनं vad अगस्त्य: स महानृषि: |
आगमिष्यति दुर्धर्षस्तदा कृच्छ्राद् विमोक्ष्यसे॥ १८ ॥।
“When the great and unconquerable sage

Agastya will come to that forest, O Sweta,
you will be delivered of this trouble. (18)

a fe anfad सौम्य शक्त: सुरगणानपि।

किं Great महाबाहो क्षुत्पिपासावशं गतम्॥१९॥
“O gracious one, Agastya is capable of

delivering even the host of gods, what to

say of you, afflicted with hunger and thirst,

O long-armed one! (19)

सोऽहं भगवत: श्रुत्वा देवदेवस्य निश्चयम्।
set गर्हितं कुर्मि स्वशरीरं द्विजोत्तम॥ २०॥
“Thus having learnt of the decision of

the god of the gods, Brahma, O best among
men, | make food of my own body. (20)

बहून् वर्षगणान् ब्रह्मन् भुज्यमानमिदं मया।

क्षयं नाभ्येति ब्रह्मर्षे तृप्तिश्चापि ममोत्तमा॥ २१॥
“O Brahmana, this body does not

exhaust, although enjoyed by me for many

years, and O Rsi! | am fully quenched too. (21)

तस्य मे कृच्छ्रभूतस्य कृच्छादस्माद् विमोक्षय।
अन्येषां न गतिर्ह्यत्र कुम्भयोनिमृते द्विजम्॥ २२॥
“So deliver me—troubled one, from the
difficulty. None other than Agastya, the pitcher-
born ascetic, has power to do so. (22)

सौम्य तारणार्थं द्विजोत्तम।
प्रतिगृह्णीष्व भद्रं ते Ware कर्तुमर्हसि॥ २३॥

« VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

“O gracious one, best among
Brahmanas, accept this ornament for
wearing, may welfare be with you. Please
favour me by accepting this. (23)
इदं Mad सुवर्णं च धनं वस्त्राणि च द्विज।

Vet भोज्यं च aes ददात्याभरणानि Au evi

“All this gold, wealth, apparel, edibles
and enjoyables, O Rsi among Brahmanas, |
offer you as also the ornaments. (24)

सर्वान् कामान् प्रयच्छामि भोगांश्च मुनिपुङ्खव।
तारणे भगवन् मह्यं Wale कर्तुमर्हसि॥ २५॥
“All desirables and enjoyables also |
surrender to you. | deserve to be favoured
by you by releasing me of troubles.” (25)

तस्याहं स्वर्गिणो वाक्यं श्रुत्वा दु:खसमन्वितम्।
तारणायोपजग्राह तदाभरणमुत्तमम्॥ २६ ॥
‘Having heard these words full of sorrow
from the celestial one, | accepted this
wonderful ornament for releaving him. (26)
मया प्रतिगृहीते तु तस्मिन्नाभरणे शुभे।
: पूर्वको देहो राजर्षेर्विननाश TN २७॥
wore तु शरीरेऽसौ wate: war मुदा।
तृप्त: प्रमुदितो राजा जगाम त्रिदिवं सुखम्॥ २८॥
‘As soon as | accepted that auspicious
ornament, the former body of the Rsi among
kings (Sweta) vanished and the Rsi among
kings, extremely happy and satisfied, went
to the heaven. (27-28)
wid शक्रतुल्येन दिव्यमाभरणं मम।
तस्मिन्निमित्ते काकुत्स्थ दत्तमद्भुतदर्शनम्॥ २९॥
‘By him (Sweta) equal to Indra, this
divine ornament, of wonderful form, was
given to me, O scion of Kakutstha, for that
purpose.’ (29)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये उत्तरकाण्डेऽष्टसप्ततितम: सर्ग: ॥ ७८ Il

Thus ends Canto Seventy-eight in the Uttarakanda of the glorious Ramayana of
Valmiki, the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

