* BALAKANDA +

समाप्तदीक्षानियम: पत्नीगणसमन्वित: |
प्रविवेश पुरीं राजा सभृत्यबलवाहन:॥२॥
Having completed the sacred vow
of chastity etc., taken at the time of
consecration, the king proceeded towards
his capital accompanied by his wives
and alongwith his servants, army and
conveyances. (2)

यथार्हं पूजितास्तेन wat च पृथिवीश्वरा:।
मुदिता: प्रययुर्देशान् प्रणम्य मुनिपुंगवम्॥ 3
Having been honoured according to
their respective rank by the Emperor,
who had just concluded his sacrificial
performances, the kings too that had
assembled for the sacrifice, returned full of
delight to their territories bowing low to
Vasistha, Rsyasrnga, Vamadeva and others
(the foremost of sages). (3)
staat गच्छतां तेषां स्वगृहाणि पुरात् Aa: |
बलानि राज्ञां शुभ्राणि प्रहृष्टानि चकाशिरे॥४॥
Clad in a white uniform (presented by
the Emperor) and greatly delighted, the troops
of those glorious kings, even as the latter
proceeded to their respective homes from
that city of Ayodhya, shone brightly. (4)

गतेषु पृथिवीशेषु राजा दशरथ: पुन:।
प्रविवेश पुरीं श्रीमान् पुरस्कृत्य द्विजोत्तमान्॥५॥
The kings having dispersed, the glorious
King Dasaratha, who had gone out in state
to see them off, entered the city once more,
placing the foremost of Brahmanas, Vasistha
and others, ahead of all. (5)

शान्तया प्रययौ सार्धमृष्यशृङ्ग: सुपूजित:।
अनुगम्यमानो Wat च सानुयात्रेण धीमता॥६॥
Duly honoured and being followed (to
some distance) by the wise king with his
entourage, Rsyasrnga too departed with his
wife, Santa. (6)
एवं विसृज्य तान् सर्वान् राजा सम्पूर्णमानस:।
sara सुखितस्तत्र पुत्रोत्पत्तिं विचिन्तयन्॥७॥

Having thus sent away all of them, and

121

fully realized his ambition of performing a
horse-sacrifice, the king dwelt happily in his
own capital, eagerly awaiting the birth of
sons (to him). (7)

ततो ast समाप्ते तु ऋतूनां we समत्ययु:।
ततश्च द्वादशे मासे चैत्रे नावमिके तिथौ॥८॥
नक्षत्रेऽदितिदैवत्ये स्वोच्चसंस्थेषु पञ्चसु।
Wy whe लग्ने वाक्पताविन्दुना सह॥९॥
प्रोद्यमाने जगन्नाथं सर्वलोकनमस्कृतम्।
कौसल्याजनयद् रामं दिव्यलक्षणसंयुतम्॥१०॥
विष्णोरर्धं महाभागं पुत्रमैश्र्वाकुनन्दनम्।
लोहिताक्षं महाबाहुं रक्तोष्ठं दुन्दुभिस्वनम्॥११॥
In the meantime six seasons, each
consisting of two months, rolled away after
the sacrifice was over. Then on the ninth
lunar day of the bright fortnight of Caitra, the
twelfth month after the conclusion of the
sacrifices when the asterism Punarvasu
(presided over by Aditi) was in the ascendant
and as many as five planets (viz., the
Sun, Mars, Saturn, Jupiter and Venus)
happened to be exalted (appeared in the
zodiacal signs of Mesa or Aries, Makara or
Capricornus, Tula or Libra, Karka or Cancer
and Mina or Pisces respectively) and Jupiter
in conjunction with the Moon appeared in
the zodiacal sign of Karka, mother Kausalya,
the eldest wife of DaSaratha, gave birth to a
highly blessed son, named Sri Rama, who
was no other than the Lord of the universe,
the adored of all the three worlds, the
delight of Ikswaku’s race, who represented
one-half of Lord Visnu and was endowed
with auspicious divine marks in that he
had eyes tinged with red, possessed
exceptionally long arms and ruddy lips and
a voice resembling the sound of a kettledrum.
(8—11)
कौसल्या शुशुभे तेन पुत्रेणामिततेजसा।
यथा वरेण देवानामदितिर्वज्रपाणिना॥१२॥
Kausalya shone brightly with that

son possessed of immense glory even as
Aditi, the mother of gods, with Indra, the
