740

sages and passing time happily and
comfortably, ten years passed. Having thus
wandered, Raghava, the knower of Dharma,
together with Sita came again, they say, to
the site of Sutiksna’s hermitage. Coming to
that hermitage, and honoured by the sages,
the said Rama, the vanquisher of foes, stayed
there also for some time. Then, while sitting
in the hermitage modestly beside the great
sage, the said Kakutstha on one occasion
spoke as follows to Sutiksna: “Sir, | have
heard from those talking among themselves
that Agastya, the foremost of sages,
permanently dwells in this forest. However,
due to the vastness of this forest, | do not
know that place. (22—30)

वसतीति मया fet कथा: कथयतां श्रुतम्।
न तु जानामि तं देशं वनस्यास्य महत्तया॥ ३१॥
कुत्राश्रमपदं रम्यं महर्षेस्तस्य धीमत:।
प्रसादार्थं भगवत: सानुज: सह सीतया॥ ३२॥
अगस्त्यमधिगच्छेयमभिवादयितुं मुनिम्।
मनोरथो महानेष de सम्परिवर्तते॥ ३३॥
ace तं मुनिवरं शुश्रूषेयमपि स्वयम्।
इति रामस्य स मुनि: श्रुत्वा धर्मात्मनो वच:॥ ३४॥
सुतीक्ष्ण: प्रत्युवाचेदं प्रीतो दशरथात्मजम्।
अहमप्येतदेव A वक्तुकाम: सलक्ष्मणम्॥ ३५॥
अगस्त्यमभिगच्छेति सीतया सह राघव।
दिष्ट्या त्विदानीमर्थेऽस्मिन् स्वयमेव ब्रवीषि माम्॥ ३६॥

“Where is the lovely site of the hermitage
of that wise and eminent sage? There exists
a great desire in my heart that | should get
an opportunity to pay my obeisance to Sage
Agastya alongwith my younger brother and
Sita for obtaining his grace, so that | may
personally do some service also to that
great sage.” Pleased to hear this submission
of the righteous Rama, the aforesaid Sage
Sutiksna replied as follows to the son of
DaSaratha: “I too wanted to tell you as well
as Laksmana the same thing, viz., that you
should go to Agastya with Sita, O Raghava!
It is good that you are speaking to me about
it yourself. (31—36)

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

अयमाख्यामि a राम यत्रागस्त्यो महामुनि:।
योजनान्याश्रमात् तात याहि चत्वारि वै तत:।
दक्षिणेन महान् श्रीमानगस्त्यभ्रातुराश्रम:॥ ३७॥
स्थलीप्रायवनोद्देशे पिप्पलीवनशोभिते।
बहुपुष्पफले रम्ये नानाविहगनादिते॥ ३८॥
“lam just telling you, O Rama, where
the great Sage Agastya lives. Proceed, O
dear son, southward to a distance of four
Yojanas from this hermitage; there lies in a
well-nigh flat portion of the forest the great
and grand hermitage of Agastya’s brother,
adorned with a grove of Pippali (long pepper)
trees, nay, having many flowers and fruits,
and charming and resonant with the chirping
of various birds. (37-38)

पद्मिन्यो विविधास्तत्र प्रसन्नसलिलाशया:।
हंसकारण्डवाकीर्णाश्चक्रवाकोपशोभिता: ॥३९॥
“There are several lotus-ponds and
lakes with limpid water, crowded with
swans and Karandavas and adorned with
Cakravaka birds. (39)
तत्रैकां रजनीं व्युष्य प्रभाते राम गम्यताम्।
दक्षिणां दिशमास्थाय वनखण्डस्य पार्श्वत:॥४०॥
“Staying there for a night, Rama, you

may proceed in the morning in a southerly
direction along side the grove. (40)

तत्रागस्त्याश्रमपदं गत्वा योजनमन्तरम्।
रमणीये वनोद्देशे बहुपादपशोभिते॥४१॥
“Covering a distance of eight miles you
will reach the site of Agastya’s hermitage in
a delightful part of the forest, adorned with
many trees. (41)

रंस्यते aa वैदेही लक्ष्मणश्च त्वया सह।
a fe रम्यो वनोद्देशो बहुपादपसंयुत:॥४२॥
“There Vaidehi and Laksmana will dwell

happily with you. For, that is a charming
part of the forest with many trees. (42)

ale akg: कृता द्रष्टुमगस्त्यं तं महामुनिम्।

अद्यैव गमने बुद्धिं रोचयस्व महामते॥४३॥
“If you have made up your mind to

see that great sage, Agastya, O highly
