* AYODHYAKANDA +

in everyway, bow in hand, my beloved friend,
Sri Rama, reposing with Sita. (6)
न मेऽस्त्यविदितं किंचिद् वनेऽस्मिंश्चरत: सदा।
चतुरङ्गं ह्यतिबलं सुमहत् संतरेमहि॥७॥
“Nothing in this woodland is unknown
to me, wandering as | do all the time in it.
We can also undoubtedly get the better of a
surpassingly huge and exceptionally mighty
army consisting of the four limbs viz.,
elephants, chariots, horsemen and _ foot
soldiers.” (7)

लक्ष्मणस्तु तदोवाच रक्ष्यमाणास्त्वयानघ।
aa भीता ad सर्वे धर्ममेवानुपश्यता॥८॥

Thereupon Laksmana for his part replied
as follows: “Being protected by you, who
keep your duty alone in view, O sinless
Guha, we all are not the least afraid of any
in this land. (8)

कथं दाशरथौ wit warm we सीतया।
शक्या निद्रा मया लब्धुं जीवितं वा सुखानि aT 8
“But so long as Sri Rama, son of
DaSaratha, remains lying down on the ground
with Sita, how can sleep be had by me,
much less nourishment intended to keep

the body and soul together or amenities of
life? (9)

यो न carat: wd: waa: प्रसहितुं युधि।

तं पश्य सुखसंसुप्तं qa we सीतया॥१०॥
“Behold him, who cannot be withstood

in battle by all the gods and demons put

together, fast asleep with comfort on a bed

of straw with Sita ! (10)

यो मन्त्रतपसा लब्धो विविधैश्च पराक्रमै:।
एको दशरथस्यैष UA: सदृशलक्षण:॥११॥
अस्मिन् प्रव्रजिते राजा न चिरं वर्तयिष्यति।
विधवा मेदिनी नूनं क्षिप्रमेव भविष्यति॥१२॥
“When Sri Rama—who was secured
as a foremost (eldest both in age and virtues)
son, endowed with characteristics similar to
his own, by Dasaratha by virtue of his
chanting of sacred texts and austerities as

479

well as through various undertakings in the
form of sacrificial performances etc.—has
gone into exile, the king (DaSaratha) will not
live long and the earth will surely be widowed
forthwith (by the demise of Dasaratha).
(11-12)
fatal सुमहानादं श्रमेणोपरता: स्निय:।
निर्घोषोपरतं तात मन्ये राजनिवेशनम्॥१३॥

“Having uttered forth a shrill cry, the
women in the city must have ceased weeping
through exhaustion by this time. | believe
the royal palace too has by now become
silent after a loud wail. (13)

कौसल्या da राजा च ada जननी मम।
नाशंसे यदि जीवन्ति wt ते शर्वरीमिमाम्॥ १४॥

“| do not expect that the great queen
Kausalya (Sri Rama’s mother) and the king
and even so my mother (Sumitra)—all these
will outlive this night. (14)

जीवेदपि fe A माता शात्रुघ्नस्यान्ववेक्षया।
a दु:खं यदि कौसल्या वीरसूर्विनशिष्यति॥ १५॥

“My mother might even survive due to
her expecting to meet Satrughna. But it will
be painful if Kausalya, who has given birth
to a heroic son, dies. (15)

अनुरक्तजनाकीर्णा सुखालोकप्रियावहा।
राजव्यसनसंसृष्टा सा पुरी विनशिष्यति॥ १६॥
“That city of Ayodhya, which has till
now been crowded with men and women
full of love for Sri Rama, nay, which has
been a source of joy to all and brought
pleasure to the world, will perish when seized
with agony over the king’s death. (16)
कथं Ut महात्मानं ज्येष्ठपुत्रमपश्यत:।
शरीरं धारयिष्यन्ति प्राणा राज्ञो महात्मन:॥ १७॥
“How will the life-breath of the high-
souled king retain its hold on his body when
he is no longer able to behold the high-
souled Sri Rama, his eldest son? (17)

fare नृपतौ पश्चात् कौसल्या विनशिष्यति।
अनन्तरं च मातापि मम नाशमुपैष्यति॥१८॥
