168

सुखानामुचितो नित्यमसुखानामनूचित: |
दु:खमुत्तरमासाद्य कच्चिद् wat न सीदति॥ २१॥

“| hope Sri Rama, who is ever deserving
of delights and is undeserving of woes, has
not sunk into despondency on meeting with
the greatest misfortune of his life in the form
of my loss? (21)

कौसल्यायास्तथा कच्चित् सुमित्रायास्तथैव च।
अभीक्ष्णं sad कच्चित् कुशलं भरतस्य च॥ २२॥

“| hope news about the welfare of
Kausalya and likewise of Sumitra as well as
of Bharata is frequently brought to his ears.

(22)
मन्निमित्तेन मानार्ह: कच्चिच्छोकेन Wea: |
कच्चिन्नान्यमना Wa: कच्चिन्मां तारयिष्यति॥ २३॥

“Does Sri Rama, who is deserving of
honour, feel stricken with grief occasioned
by my absence? | hope he has not become
indifferent to me. And will he rescue me?

(23)
कच्चिदक्षौहिणीं भीमां भरतो भ्रातृवत्सल:।
ध्वजिनीं मन्रिभिर्गुप्तां प्रेषयिष्यति मत्कृते॥ २४॥

“Will Bharata, who is fond of his brother,
send out for my sake a formidable army,
consisting of one Aksauhini, protected by
ministers? (24)

वानराधिपति: श्रीमान् सुग्रीव: कच्चिदेष्यति।
मत्कृते हरिभिर्वीरैर्वृतो दन्तनखायुधै:॥ २५॥

“Will the glorious Sugriva, the suzerain
lord of monkeys, come to my succour,
followed by gallant monkeys using their teeth
and nails for weapons? (25)

कच्चिच्च लक्ष्मण: शूर: सुमित्रानन्दवर्धन:।
अस्त्रविच्छरजालेन राक्षसान् विधमिष्यति॥ २६॥

“Nay, will the heroic Laksmana, who
enhances the joy of Sumitra, his mother,
and is skilled in the use of mystic missiles,
exterminate the ogres with his volley of
arrows? (26)

रौद्रेण कच्चिदस्त्रेण रामेण ed रणे।
द्रक्ष्याम्यल्पेन कालेन रावणं ससुहृज्जनम्॥ २७॥

« VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

“| hope | shall see Ravana killed at no
distant date with his near and dear ones in
combat by Sri Rama with an infallible and
devastating missile? (27)

कच्चिन्न तद्भेमसमानवर्णं

तस्याननं पद्मसमानगन्धि |
मया विना शुष्यति शोकदीनं

जलक्षये पद्ममिवातपेन॥ २८॥

“| hope that golden countenance of his,
melancholy with grief and fragrant like a
lotus, has not withered like a lotus blasted
under the sun when the water in a pond has
dried up. (28)

मां चाप्यरण्यं नयत: Weld: |
नासीद् यथा यस्य न भीर्न शोक:
कच्चित् स fe हृदये करोति॥ २९॥

“| hope Sri Rama, whom neither fear
nor grief could flinch from his purpose, when
he renounced his sovereignty in the name
of righteousness and led me on foot to the
forest, still retains firmness in his heart. (29)

न चास्य माता न पिता न चान्य:
स्नेहाद् विशिष्टोऽस्ति मया समो वा।

तावद्ध्यहं दूत जिजीविषेयं
aad प्रव्रत्तिं श्रृणुयां प्रियस्य॥ ३०॥
“No one, not even his own mother,
Kausalya, or his father, Emperor DaSaratha,
or any other relation, has had the privilege
of receiving as abundant affection from Sri
Rama as he has bestowed on me, not to
speak of anyone getting more than me. | too
wish to survive only so long as | continue to
hear the news of my beloved lord.” (30)

इतीव देवी वचनं महार्थं
तं वानरेन्द्रं मधुरार्थमुक्त्वा।
श्रोतुं पुनस्तस्य वचोऽभिरामं
रामार्थयुक्तं विरराम रामा॥३१॥
Having addressed these words of sweet

content and full of great import to that leader
of monkeys, Hanuman, the charming lady
