280

« VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

Canto LXXVII

On the departure of Paragurama, Sri Rama hands over the bow of Lord Visnu
to Varuna (the god of water) and, sending his army ahead, King DasSaratha
enters Ayodhya. After some days Prince Yudhajit, Bharata’s maternal
uncle takes away Bharata and Satrughna to his father’s capital

Tet WA प्रशान्तात्मा रामो दाशरथिर्धनु:।
वरुणायाप्रमेयाय ददौ हस्ते महायशा:॥१॥

Parasurama having left, the highly
illustrious Sri Rama (son of Dagaratha),
whose mind was completely at rest, made
over as a trust the bow in his hand to
Varuna, the god of water, of immeasurable
strength. (1)

अभिवाद्य ततो wa वसिष्ठप्रमुखानृषीन्।
fart विकलं दृष्टवा प्रोवाच रघुनन्दन:॥ २॥
Greeting the sages headed by Vasistha
and seeing his father (who had apparently
failed to notice the discomfiture and departure
of ParaSurama) perturbed over the menacing
attitude of Paragurama, Sri Rama (a scion
of Raghu) then submitted to his father as
follows : (2)

जामदग्न्यो गतो WH: Yard चतुरंगिणी।
अयोध्याभिमुखी सेना त्वया नाथेन पालिता॥ ३॥

“ParaSurama, son of Jamadagni, has
departed. Let the army consisting of four
limbs (viz., elephants, chariots, horsemen
and foot soldiers) and protected by you, its
master, therefore, march in the direction of
Ayodhya.” (3)
रामस्य वचनं श्रुत्वा राजा दशरथ: सुतम्।
बाहुभ्यां सम्परिष्वज्य मूर्ध्यपाघ्राय राघवम्॥४॥

Hearing the request of Sri Rama, King
Dasaratha closely folded in his arms his
son, the foremost of Raghu’s race, and
smelt his head as a gesture of affection.

(4)
गतो राम इति श्रुत्वा हृष्ट: प्रमुदितो FU:
पुनर्जातं da A पुत्रमात्मानमेव च ॥५॥

Delighted, nay, overjoyed to hear that
Parasurama had already left, the king thought
his son as well as himself reborn on that
occasion. (5)

चोदयामास at सेनां जगामाशु तत: पुरीम्।
पताकाध्वजिनीं Tat तूर्योद्घुष्टनिनादिताम्॥ ६॥
सिक्तराजपथारम्यां प्प्रकीर्णकुसुमोत्कराम्।
राजप्रवेशसुमुखै: पौरैर्मङ्गलपाणिभि: U1 ७॥
सम्पूर्णां प्राविशद् राजा जनौघै: समलंकृताम्।
wt: प्रत्युद्गतो gt द्विजैश्च पुरवासिभि:॥८॥
पुत्रैरनुगत: श्रीमान् श्रीमद्भिश्च महायशा:।
प्रविवेश गृहं राजा हिमवत्सदृशं प्रियम्॥९॥

He urged his army forward and then
speedily reached his delightful capital. The
king presently entered in state the city
decorated with flags and buntings and
rendered noisy by fanfares of trumpeters. It
looked charming with its highways sprinkled
with water and was strewn with heaps of
flowers. It was brimful with citizens with
their faces blooming over the return of their
king and carrying auspicious articles in their
hands, and was fully graced with multitudes
of men. Met far in advance by the citizens
as well as by Brahmanas inhabiting the
capital, and followed by his glorious sons,
the glorious and highly illustrious king now
entered his beloved palace vying with the
Himalaya mountain (in whiteness and height).

(6—9)

कौसल्या च सुमित्रा च कैकेयी च सुमध्यमा॥ १०॥
वधूप्रतिग्रहे युक्ता agra राजयोषित:।
aa: सीतां महाभागामूर्मिलां च यशस्विनीम्॥ ११॥
