# YUDDHAKANDA #

जाम्बवानृषभ: स्कन्धो रम्भ: शतबलि: पृथु:।
व्यूढानीकाश्च यत्ताश्च द्रुमानादाय Ada: ३॥
Encompassing Sri Rama (a_ scion
of Raghu), now that the aforesaid son
of Ravana had gone far into Lanka, his
purpose accomplished, (nay) having drawn
up their ranks in battle array and seizing
trees, the foremost among the monkeys
and bears, viz., Hanuman, Angada. Nila,
Susena, Kumuda, Nala, Gaja, Gavaksa,
Sarabha, Gandhamadana, Jambavan,
Rsabha, Skandha, Ramabha, Satabali and
Prthu, who were always alert, now guarded
Sri Rama on all sides (lest some harm
might come to him). (1—3)

वीक्षमाणा fest: सर्वास्तिर्यगूर्ध्व च वानरा:।
तृणेष्वपि च चेष्टत्सु राक्षसा sit मेनिरे॥४॥
Surveying all the quarters, nay, looking
up as well on either side, the monkeys
thought that ogres had come even when
blades of grass stirred. (4)
Tangy deer विसृज्येन्द्रजितं सुतम्।
आजुहाव तत: सीतारक्षणी राक्षसीस्तदा॥५॥
Having dismissed his son, who had
conquered Indra (the ruler of gods), Ravana
too, who felt highly rejoiced, thereupon
summoned the ogresses guarding Sita. (5)

Taahastet चापि शासनात् तमुपस्थिता:।
ता Sara ततो wet राक्षसी राक्षसाधिप:।॥ ६॥

The ogresses (in question) as also
Trijata waited upon him in response to his
command. Full of joy, Ravana, the suzerain
lord of ogres, thereupon spoke as follows to
the aforesaid ogresses: (6)

हताविन्द्रजिताख्यात वैदेह्या रामलक्ष्मणौ।
पुष्पकं तत्समारोप्य दर्शयध्वं रणे हतौ॥७॥

“Speak to Sita (the princess of the
Videha territory) about Rama and Laksmana
having been killed by Indrajit. Placing her in
the aerial car, Puspaka, then show to her

463

the two princes killed in battle.

यदाश्रयादवष्टब्धा As मामुपतिष्ठते।
सोऽस्या vat we भ्रात्रा निहतो रणमूर्धनि॥ ८॥

“That husband of hers, being proud of
whose support she does not submit to me,
has been killed alongwith his younger brother
in the van of a battle. (8)

निर्विशङ्का निरुद्विग्ना निरपेक्षा च मैथिली।
मामुपस्थास्यते सीता सर्वाभरणभूषिता॥९॥

“Rid of fear, free from perturbation and
having lost all hope of meeting her husband,
nay, adorned with all her jewels, Sita, a
princess of Mithila, shall now wait upon me.

(9)

(7)

अद्य कालवशं Wa रणे Wa सलक्ष्मणम्।
अवेक्ष्य fatter सा चान्यां गतिमपश्यती।॥। १०॥
अनपेक्षा विशालाक्षी मामुपस्थास्यते स्वयम्।
तस्य Ag वचनं Mra रावणस्य दुरात्मन:॥११॥
राक्षस्यस्तास्तथेत्युक्त्वा जग्मुर्वै यत्र पुष्पकम्।
तत: पुष्पकमादाय राक्षस्यो रावणाज्ञया॥१२॥
अशोकवनिकास्थां at मैथिलीं समुपानयन्।
तामादाय तु राक्षस्यो भर्तॄशोकपराजिताम्॥१३॥
सीतामारोपयामासुर्विमानं पुष्पकं तदा।
तत: पुष्पकमारोप्य सीतां त्रिजटया सह॥ १४॥
जग्मुर्दर्शयितुं तस्यै राक्षस्यो रामलक्ष्मणौ।
रावणश्चारयामास पताकाध्वजमालिनीम्॥ १५॥

“Having turned back (to the Asoka
grove) on seeing Rama fallen under the
sway of Death with Laksmana on the field
of battle, and finding no other haven, nay,
rid of all hope, the large eyed lady will seek
me of her own accord today.” Saying “Amen!”
on hearing the aforesaid command of that
evil-minded Ravna, the ogresses in question
moved to the place where Puspaka (the
aerial car) was. Then, taking Puspaka, the
ogresses conducted the car under orders
of Ravana to the presence of the celebrated
princess of Mithila, staying in the Asoka
grove. Taking Sita, who had been over-
