784

adept in expression, then replied as follows
to Sita, the irreproachable consort of Sri
Rama: (47)

aa रामस्य भवती धर्मपत्नी गुणान्विता।
प्रतिसंदिश at देवि गमिष्ये यत्र राघव:॥४८॥

“You are the lawfully wedded spouse
of Sri Rama, full of excellences and worthy
of him in all respects. Pray, give me a
message in return. | shall proceed to the
place where Sri Rama (a scion of Raghu)
is, O godlike lady!” (48)

Wag हनुमता वैदेही जनकात्मजा।
Made द्रष्टुमिच्छामि भर्तारं भक्तवत्सलम्॥ ४९ ॥

Requested thus by Hanuman, Sita (a
princess of the Videha territory), the
celebrated daughter of Janaka, said, “I long
to see my husband, who is so fond of his
devotees.” (49)

तस्यास्तद् वचनं श्रुत्वा हनूमान् मारुतात्मज:।
हर्षयन् मैथिलीं वाक्यमुवाचेदं महामति: yo i

Hearing her aforesaid reply, the highly
intelligent Hanuman, an offspring of the wind-
god, submitted to the princess of Mithila as
follows, bringing delight to her: (50)

पूर्णचन्द्रमुखं WH द्रक्ष्यस्यद्य सलक्ष्मणम्।
स्थितमित्रं हतामित्रं writers Gage il

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA +

“You shall see this very day Sri Rama—
whose countenance resembles the full moon,
whose friends (such as Sugriva and
Vibhisana) are alive, nay, whose enemies
have been got rid of—accompanied by
Laksmana, even as Saci, the consort of
Indra, would see Indra, the ruler of gods.” (51)

तामेवमुक्त्वा भ्राजन्तीं सीतां साक्षादिव श्रियम्।
आजगाम महातेजा हनूमान् यत्र राघव:॥५२॥

Assuring in the foregoing words Sita,
who shone like Sri, the goddess of prosperity,
i.e., Herself, Hanuman, who was endowed
with extraordinary energy, came back to
the place where Sri Rama (a scion of Raghu)
was awaiting his return. (52)

सपदि हरिवरस्ततो हनूमान्
प्रतिवचनं जनकेश्वरात्मजाया:।
कथितमकथयद् यथाक्रमेण
त्रिदशवरप्रतिमाय राघवाय॥ ५३ ॥

Hanuman, the prince of monkeys then
speedily repeated in order of sequence to
Sri Rama (a scion of Raghu), who vied with
Indra (the foremost of gods) the message
which had been delivered in return by Sita
(daughter of the ruler of the Janakas).

(53)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये FERS त्रयोदशाधिकशततम: सर्ग: Il 223 Il

Thus ends Canto One hundred and thirteen in the Yuddhakanda of the glorious
Ramayana of Valmiki, the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

Canto CXIV
At the command of S1i Rama, Vibhisana escorts Sita to the

former’s presence and she feasts her eyes on the
moon-like countenance of her darling

तमुवाच vera: सोऽभिवाद्य प्लवङ्गम:।
TH कमलपत्राक्षॆ at सर्वधनुष्मताम्॥१॥
Having greeted the foremost of all

archers, Sri Rama, whose eyes resembled
the petals of a lotus, that highly intelligent
monkey, Hanuman, submitted to him as
follows: (1)
