# YUDDHAKANDA #

killed by Indrajit, who remained invisible on
the field of battle through a conjuring trick.
(17)
नहि दृष्टिपथं प्राप्य राघवस्य रणे रिपु:।
जीवन् प्रतिनिवर्तेत यद्यपि स्यान्मनोजव:॥ १८॥

“Having come within the range of sight
of Sri Rama (a scion of Raghu) in an
encounter, no enemy could return alive,
even though he were endowed with the
swiftness of thought. (18)

न कालस्यातिभारोऽस्ति कृतान्तश्च सुदुर्जय: |
aa Wa: सह wat शेते युधि निपातित:॥ १९॥

“Since Sri Rama lies struck down on
the field of battle with his younger brother,
Laksmana, no burden is too heavy to
shoulder for Providence (in the form of the
Time-Spirit, who is capable of doing anything).
Even ‘Death’ (which brings about the end of
all) is not very difficult to conquer for Him.

(19)
न शोचामि तथा Wa लक्ष्मणं च महारथम्।
नात्मानं जननीं चापि यथा श्वश्रूं तपस्विनीम्॥ २०॥

“| do not grieve so much for Sri Rama

and the great car-warrior Laksmana nor for

myself nor even for my own mother as for
my unfortunate mother-in-law, Kausalya. (20)

सा तु चिन्तयते नित्यं समाप्तव्रतमागतम्।
कदा द्रक्ष्यामि सीतां च लक्ष्मणं च सराघवम्॥ २१॥
“She, for her part, always remains
absorbed in the thought ‘O, when shall | be
able to see Laksmana returned to Ayodhya
with Sri Rama, a scion of Raghu, having
completed his vow of remaining in exile in
the woods for fourteen years, as also Sita?’ ”
(21)

परिदेवयमानां at राक्षसी त्रिजटाब्रवीत्।
मा विषादं कृथा देवि भर्तायं aa जीवति॥ २२॥
The ogress Trijata spoke as follows to
her while Sita was wailing as aforesaid: “Do
not despair, O godlike lady! Your yonder
lord is living. (22)

467

कारणानि च वक्ष्यामि महान्ति AT च।
यथेमौ जीवतो देवि भ्रातरौ रामलक्ष्मणौ॥ २३॥

“| shall presently adduce mighty and
cogent reasons which lead me to believe
that these two brothers, Sri Rama and
Laksmana, are still surviving, O godlike
lady! (23)

afte कोपपरीतानि हर्षपर्युत्सुकानि च।
भवन्ति युधि योधानां मुखानि निहते पतौ॥ २४॥
“The ruler having been killed, the faces
of the warriors operating on the field of
battle are never seized by wrath nor are
they animated with joy. (24)
दिव्यं wat धारयेन्नेदं यद्येतौ गतजीवितौ॥ 24 i
“Had these two brothers been dead, O
princess of the Videha territory, this aerial
car, Puspaka by name, celestial as it is,
would not in any case have borne you (a
widowed lady). (25)

हतवीरप्रधाना fe गतोत्साहा निरुद्यमा।
सेना waft संख्येषु हतकर्णेव नौर्जले॥ २६॥

“Having lost its ardour and devoid of
effort, an army, whose heroic leader is dead,
actually moves to and fro on the field of
battle like a vessel which has lost its
helmsman. (26)

va पुनरसम्भ्रान्ता निरुद्बिग्ना तपस्विनि।
सेना रक्षति काकुत्स्थौ मया प्रीत्या निवेदितौ it २७॥

“Not at all confused or perturbed, this
army of monkeys, however, is guarding Sri
Rama and Laksmana, the two scions of
Kakutstha, who have just now been
proclaimed by me out of love as alive, O
lady given to austerities! (27)

सा त्वं भव सुविस्त्रब्धा अनुमानै: सुखोदयै: |
अहतौ पश्य काकुत्स्थौ स्नेहादेतद् ब्रवीमि ते॥ २८ ॥
“As such be you completely reassured
on the strength of inferences resulting in
joy and find the two scions of Kakutstha
