+ UTTARAKANDA +

ground; while still others remained stuck to
their mounts on the field of battle. (39)

रथान् नागान् खरानुष्टान् पन्नगांस्तुरगांस्तथा |
शिशुमारान् वराहांश्च पिशाचवदनानपि॥४०॥
तान् समालिङ्ग्य बाहुभ्यां विष्टब्धा: केचिदुत्थिता:।
देवैस्तु शस्त्रसंभिन्ना मम्रिरे च निशाचरा:॥४१॥

Some rangers of the night lay motionless
clasping firmly with their arms their respective
chariots, elephants, donkeys, camels,
serpents and horses, dolphins and boars as
well as other animals with heads of goblins;
while others, who had recovered from their
unconsciousness, were torn asunder by the
gods and died. (40-41)

fared इवाभाति adet रणसम्प्लव:।
Peart waar राक्षसानां महीतले॥४२॥
The slaughter on the battlefield of all

the ogres who lay killed on the earth’s
surface, appeared like a marvel. (42)

शोणितोदकनिष्पन्दा काकगृध्रसमाकुला।
प्रवृत्ता संयुगमुखे शस्त्रग्राहवती नदी॥४३॥

At the forefront of the battle flowed a river
which carried blood for water, was crowded
with crows and vultures and had weapons
which had the appearance of alligators. (43)

एतस्मिन्नन्तरे क्रुद्धो दशग्रीव: प्रतापवान्।
निरीक्ष्य तु act wa दैवतैर्विनिपातितम्॥४४॥

In the meantime the glorious Ravana
(the ten-headed monster) for his part was
provoked to anger on perceiving his entire
army destroyed by the gods. (44)

943

a तं प्रतिविगाह्याशु wag सैन्यसागरम्।
त्रिदशान् समरे निघ्नन् शक्रमेवाभ्यवर्तत॥ ४५॥
Diving deep in no time into that swollen
sea of the army of the gods, he ran up to
Indra himself, killing the gods in combat on
the way. (45)
तत: शक्रो महच्चापं विस्फार्य सुमहास्वनम्।
यस्य विस्फारनिर्घोषै: स्तनन्ति स्म दिशो दश ॥ ४६ ॥
Indra thereupon stood pulling the string
of his mighty bow, which gave forth a

thunderous sound and with the twang of
which resounded all the ten directions. (46)

aq विकृष्य महच्चापमिन्द्रो रावणमूर्धनि।
पातयामास स MM पावकादित्यवर्चस:॥४७॥

Bending that great bow, the aforesaid
Indra let fall on the head of Ravana arrows
vying with fire and the sun in respect of
brilliance. (47)

तथैव च महाबाहुर्दशग्रीवो निशाचर:।
शक्रं कार्मुकबिभ्रष्टै: शरवर्षैरवाकिरत्॥४८॥

The mighty-armed ogre, Ravana, the
ten-headed monster, too covered Indra with
showers of arrows shot from his bow. (48)
प्रयुध्यतोरथ तयोर्बाणवर्षै: समन्तत:।
नाज्ञायत cat किंचित् ae fe तमसा व्रृतम्॥४९॥

When the two warriors were fighting
hard in this manner, raining arrows on all
sides, everything was actually enveloped in
darkness forthwith and nothing could be
seen at that moment. (49)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये उत्तरकाण्डेऽष्टाविंश: सर्ग: ॥ २८ il

Thus ends Canto Twenty-eight in the Uttarakanda of the glorious Ramayana of
Valmiki, the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

