* SUNDARAKANDA +

151

Canto वा

Keen to hear of Sita’s identity from her own lips, even though he had
identified her, Hanuman inquires of her whether she was a goddess or
anyone else and asks her to disclose her identity in case she was
Sita. In reply to this query Sita narrates to him her whole life-
story ending with her abduction by Ravana and tells him
how Ravana was going to kill her two months later,
and how in the event of her not being delivered
from his clutches before that, she has
resolved to end her life by herself

सोऽवतीर्य द्रुमात् तस्माद् विद्रुमप्रतिमानन:।
विनीतवेष: poo: प्रणिपत्योपसृत्य ane
तामब्रवीन्महातेजा हनूमान् मारुतात्मज:।
शिरस्यञ्जलिमाधाय dat मधुरया Frei

Slipping down from the aforesaid
Sirngapa tree, bowing down and approaching
Sita, nay, placing his folded hands on his
head, Hanuman, son of the wind-god, whose
face resembled coral in hue, who was attired
in a humble guise, was endowed with
extraordinary energy and appeared distressed
at the sight of Sita’s sad plight, spoke to her
as follows in gentle tones: (1-2)

का नु पद्मपलाशाक्षि क्लिष्टकौशेयवासिनि।
द्रुमस्य शाखामालम्ब्य तिष्ठसि त्वमनिन्दिते॥ ३॥
“Who are you, 0 irreproachable lady
with eyes resembling a lotus petal and clad
in a worn silken garment, who stand holding
a branch of this tree? (3)
किमर्थं तव नेत्राभ्यां aft eafa शोकजम्।
पुण्डरीकपलाशाभ्यां विप्रकीर्णमिवोदकम्॥४॥
“Wherefore are tears born of grief trickling
from your eyes like drops of water falling
from a pair of lotus leaves? (4)
सुराणामसुराणां च नागगन्धर्वरक्षसाम्।
aaron किंनराणां च का त्वं भवसि शोभने॥ ७५ ॥
“Who are you among the gods and
demons, the Nagas, Gandharvas and ogres,

the Yaksas or the Kinnaras, O charming
one? (5)
का त्वं भवसि रुद्राणां मरुतां वा वरानने।
वसूनां वा ame देवता प्रतिभासि मे॥६॥
“Who are you among the eleven Rudras
(the gods of destruction), the forty-nine wind-
gods and the eight Vasus, O lady of exquisite
features? For, to me you appear to be a
goddess, a lady of excellent limbs ! (6)

fe नु चन्द्रमसा हीना पतिता विबुधालयात्।
रोहिणी ज्योतिषां श्रेष्ठा श्रेष्ठा सर्वगुणाधिका॥ ७॥

“Or, are you Rohini, the foremost of
lunar mansions and superior in all excellent
virtues, separated from the moon and fallen
from heaven, the abode of celestials? (7)

कोपाद् वा यदि वा मोहाद् भर्तारमसितेक्षणे।
वसिष्ठं कोपयित्वा त्वं वासि कल्याण्यरुन्धती it ८ ॥

“Or, are you, 0 dark-eyed one, the
blessed Arundhati, fallen from the heavenly
world on having angered your husband,
Sage Vasistha, through resentment or error?

(8)
को नु Ua: पिता भ्राता भर्ता वा a सुमध्यमे।
अस्माल्लोकादमुं लोकं Wd त्वमनुशोचसि॥ Il

“Who is it, your son, father, brother or
husband, O lady with slender waist, for
whom, departed from this world, to the other
you are grieving? (9)
