492

मन्ये दशरथान्ताय मम प्रव्राजनाय a
hat सौम्य सम्प्राप्ता राज्याय भरतस्य च॥ १४॥

“| believe, O good brother, that Kaikeyi
came to this house to bring about the end of
DaSaratha, to send me into exile and to
secure kingship for Bharata. (14)

अपीदानीं तु कैकेयी सौभाग्यमदमोहिता।
कौसल्यां च सुमित्रां च सा प्रबाधेत मत्कृते॥ १५॥

“Blinded by pride of good fortune, | am
afraid, the aforesaid Kaikeyi may even now
persecute Kausalya and Sumitra too because
of their relation with me and you. (15)

मातास्मत्कारणाद् देवी सुमित्रा दु:खमावसेत्।
अयोध्यामित Wa त्वं काले प्रविश लक्ष्मण I १६॥

“Your mother, Queen Sumitra, is likely
to suffer hardship because of her affinity to
us. From this very place, therefore, O
Laksmana, proceed you to Ayodhya next
morning. (16)

अहमेको गमिष्यामि सीतया सह दण्डकान्।
अनाथाया हि नाथस्त्वं कौसल्याया भविष्यसि॥ १७॥

“I shall proceed to the Dandaka forest
alone with Sita, while you will be a protector
to Kausalya, who will be left without a protector
after the death of King DaSaratha. (17)

क्षुद्रकर्मा fe कैकेयी द्वेषादन्यायमाचरेत्।
परिदद्याद्धि wit गरं ते AA मातरम्॥१८॥
“Kaikeyi of vile deeds may undoubtedly
resort to unfair means due to malice and
even administer poison to your mother and
mine, O knower of what is right ! (18)

नूनं जात्यन्तरे तात fea: पुत्रैर्वियोजिता:।
जनन्या मम सौमित्रे तदद्यैतदुपस्थितम्॥१९॥

“In some other past birth, O dear brother,
women must have been deprived of their
sons by my mother, Kausalya. That act of
hers alone, O Laksmana, has recoiled on
her in the form of this visitation. (19)

var fe चिरपुष्टेन दु:खसंवर्धितेन च।
विप्रयुज्यत कौसल्या फलकाले धिगस्तु माम्॥ २०॥

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA +

“At a time when Kausalya, my mother,
should have found her labours repaid by
me, she has been deprived of my company
by me, who was nurtured by her for long
years and brought up with great pains. Woe
to me! (20)

मा स्म सीमन्तिनी काचिज्जनयेत् पुत्रमीदृशम्।
सौमित्रे योऽहमम्बाया दद्मि शोकमनन्तकम्॥ २१॥

“Let no matron give birth to such a son
as myself, who, O Laksmana, have inflicted
endless sorrow on my mother ! (21)

मन्ये प्रीतिविशिष्टा सा मत्तो लक्ष्मण सारिका।
यत्तस्या: श्रूयते वाक्यं शुक पादमरेर्दश॥ Wil

“| believe that myna, which is kept as
a pet by mother Kausalya, O Laksmana, is
more affectionate towards my mother than
|, since from her are heard the words ‘Bite,
O parrot, the foot of the enemy of our
master and thereby render him incapable of
marching against our master.’ (22)

शोचन्त्याश्चाल्पभाग्याया न किंचिदुपकुर्वता।
पुत्रेण किमपुत्राया मया कार्यमरिदम॥ २३॥

“What purpose of my grieving mother
of poor luck, who is as good as issueless,
can be served by me, her son, who does
no good to her, O chastiser of foes? (23)

अल्पभाग्या हि मे माता कौसल्या रहिता मया |
शेते परमदु:खार्ता पतिता शोकसागरे॥ २४॥

“Of poor luck indeed is my mother,
Kausalya, who, bereft as she is of me, is
stricken with great agony and lies plunged
in a sea of grief. (24)

एको ह्यहमयोध्यां च पृथिवीं चापि लक्ष्मण।
तरेयमिषुभि: क्रुद्धो AT वीर्यमकारणम्॥ २५॥

“When enraged I can surely subdue with
my arrows single-handed not only the
kingdom of Ayodhya but the earth as well, O
Laksmana ! But show of valour is not always
conducive to good in the other world. (25)

अधर्मभयभीतश्च परलोकस्य चानघ।
तेन लक्ष्मण नाद्याहमात्मानमभिषेचये॥ २६ ॥
