* SUNDARAKANDA +

॥ ३४॥

Hanuman (who was the target of
Indrajit’s arrows) remaining unscathed, even
though Indrajit’s infallible shafts were raining
on him, the high-minded ogre, whose mind
was focussed on directing his arrows against
his target, gave way to great anxiety. (34)

ततो मतिं राक्षसराजसूनु-
श्चकार तस्मिन् हरिवीरमुख्ये।
कथं निगच्छेदिति निग्रहार्थम्॥ ३५॥

Realizing the fact of the monkey in
question incapable of being slain, Indrajit
(son of the ruler of ogres) began to consider
the question of capturing that leader of monkey
heroes and thought how he could fall into
bondage. (35)
aa: पैतामहं dk: सोऽस्त्रमस्त्रविदां वर:।
संदधे सुमहातेजास्तं हरिप्रवरं प्रति॥ ३६॥

Thereupon that hero, the foremost of
those well-versed in the use of missiles,
and endowed with exceptional energy, put
to his bow the missile presided over by
Brahma (the creator), aiming it at that jewel
among monkeys. (36)

अवध्योऽयमिति ज्ञात्वा तमस्त्रेणास्त्रतत्त्ववित्।
निजग्राह महाबाहुं मारुतात्मजमिन्द्रजित्॥ ३७॥

Concluding that he was incapable of
being killed even with that missile, Indrajit,
who knew how to use a missile correctly,
bound that mighty-armed offspring of the
wind-god by means of the missile. (37)

तेन बद्धस्ततोऽस्त्रेण राक्षसेन स वानर:।
अभवन्निर्विचेष्टश्च ud च महीतले॥ ३८॥
Bound by that ogre with the help of that

missile, the aforesaid monkey became
unconscious and fell on the ground. (38)

215
ततोऽथ बुद्ध्वा स तदस्त्रबन्धं
प्रभो: प्रभावाद् विगताल्पवेग: |
पितामहानुग्रहमात्मनश्च
विचिन्तयामास हरिप्रवीर:॥ ३९॥

Realizing at once that he had been bound
with the help of a missile presided over by
Brahma, and yet free from the least pain due
to a boon granted by the latter, that pre-eminent
hero among the monkeys considered it to be
a favour done to him by Brahma. (39)

तत: स्वायम्भुवैर्मन्रैर्ब्रह्मास्त्रं चाभिमन्तितम्।
हनूमांश्चिन्तयामास वरदानं पितामहात्॥४०॥

Recognizing it to be a missile presided
over by Brahma and consecrated by means
of spells sacred to Brahma (the self-born
creator), Hanuman recalled a boon received
by him from the grandfather of the entire
creation to the effect that he would be freed

from its effect after an hour or so. (40)
न मेऽस्य बन्धस्य च शाक्तिरस्ति
विमोक्षणे लोकगुरो: प्रभावात्।
इत्येवमेवं विहितोऽस्त्रबन्धो
मयाऽऽत्मयोनेरनुवर्तितव्य: ॥४१॥

He said to himself: ‘Due to the power
of Brahma (operating through the missile)
the capacity to loosen this bondage does
not lie in me. Therefore, the bondage through
the missile presided over by Brahma (the
self born creator), imposed on me by Indrajit
as above must be borne by me.’ (41)

a वीर्यमस्त्रस्य afufaad

पितामहानुग्रहमात्मनश्च ।
विमोक्षशक्तिं परिचिन्तयित्वा
पितामहाज्ञामनुवर्तते PAU SM
Reflecting on the potency of the missile,
the grace of Brahma enjoyed by him and
pondering his capacity to undo it (which
was going to descend on him after a while),
Hanuman submitted to the ordinance of
Brahma (the grandfather of the entire
creation). (42)
