# YUDDHAKANDA #

unfaithful in act, thought and speech to Sri
Rama (a scion of Raghu) who knows the
secret of all virtues, let the god of fire in that
case afford protection to me. (27)

आदित्यो भगवान् वायुर्दिशश्चन्द्रस्तथैव च।
अहश्चापि तथा संध्ये रात्रिश्च पृथिवी तथा।
यथान्येऽपि विजानन्ति तथा चारित्रसंयुताम्॥ २८ ॥

“Since the glorious sun-god, the wind-
god, the deities presiding over the four
quarters, and even so the moon-god, as
also the deity presiding over the daytime
and the morning and evening twilights and
the night as also Mother Earth and others
too likewise know me to be richly endowed
with good character, let the god of fire
protect me.” (28)

एवमुक्त्वा तु वैदेही परिक्रम्य हुताशनम्।
विवेश ज्वलनं दीप्तं नि:शङ्खेनान्तरात्मना॥२९॥
Saying so, and going clockwise round
the fire as a mark of respect, Sita (a
princess of the Videha territory), for her
part entered the blazing fire with a fearless
mind. (29)

जनश्च सुमहांस्तत्र बालवृद्धसमाकुल:।
cast मैथिलीं dat प्रविशन्तीं हुताशनम्॥ ३०॥
Nay, the huge gathering present there,
teeming, as it was, with children and old
people, witnessed the resplendent princess
of Mithila enterning the fire. (30)

सा तप्तनवहेमाभा तप्तकाञ्चनभूषणा।
पपात ज्वलनं दीप्तं सर्वलोकस्य संनिधौ॥ ३१॥

The lady, who shone like fresh refined
gold and was decked with ornaments of
refined gold, rushed into the blazing fire in
the presence of all the people. (31)

793

सीतां सर्वाणि रूपाणि रुक्मवेदिनिभां तदा॥ 32

All created beings beheld that large-
eyed lady, Sita, who shone like a golden
altar, descending into the fire (lit., the bearer
of sacrificial offerings) on that occasion.(32)
mI देवगन्धर्वा यज्ञे पूर्णाहुतीमिव॥ ३३॥

Rsis (the seers of Vedic Mantras),
gods and the Gandharvas saw that highly
blessed lady penetrating deep into the fire
(lit., the consumer of oblations) like the
consummating offering of ghee. (33)

प्रचुक्रुशु: Raa: सर्वास्तां दृष्टवा हव्यवाहने।
पतन्तीं संस्कृतां मन्रैर्वसोर्धारामिवाध्वरे॥ ३४॥

All the women present on the occasion
screamed on perceiving her, adorned as
she was, falling into the fire like an unbroken
stream of ghee, duly consecrated by the
recitation of Mantras, falling into a sacrificial
fire. (34)

ददरृशुस्तां त्रयो लोका देवगन्धर्वदानवा:।
शप्तां पतन्तीं निरये त्रिदिवाद् देवतामिव॥ ३५॥

The denizens of all the three worlds,
including gods, the Gandharvas (celestial
musicians) and Danavas (the (demons),
witnessed her jumping into the fire like a
goddess, subjected to a curse, falling from
heaven into hell. (35)

तस्यामग्निं विशन्त्यां तु हाहेति विपुल: स्वन:।

रक्षसां वानराणां च सम्बभूवाद्भुतोपम:॥ ३६॥
While she was entering into the

flames, a loud cry, which appeared strange,

rose from the ogres and the monkeys
alike. (36)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये JERVIS षोडशाधिकशततम: AWA: ॥ ११६ il

Thus ends Canto One hundred and sixteen in the Yuddhakanda of the glorious
Ramayana of Valmiki, the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

