# YUDDHAKANDA +

॥ रि :
सुवाससां संसदि राक्षसानाम्।
तेषां । ।
स्रजां च गन्धा: Wad: समन्तात्॥ २९॥
The fragrance of most excellent aloe
and sandal-paste painted on the persons,
and garlands worn round the necks of
those ogres adorned with ornaments

of gold as well as of various gems and attired
in excellent robes, spread all round. (29)

न चुक्रुशुर्नानृतमाह कश्चित्
सभासदो नापि जजल्पुरुच्चै:।
ud: सर्वे ददृशुश्चाननं ते॥३०॥

Those present in the assembly did not

329

make noise nor did they talk loudly nor
(again) did any of them tell a lie. They were
all fully accomplished of purpose and
endowed with terrible prowess and all gazed
on the face of their ruler. (30)

a wan: शस्त्रभृतां मनस्विनां

महाबलानां समितौ मनस्वी।

तस्यां सभायां प्रभया चकाशे
मध्ये वसूनामिव वज्रहस्त:॥ ३१॥
In the gathering of armed heroes, who
were endowed with extraordinary might, in
that assembly hall, the aforesaid heroic
Ravana shone with his lustre like Indra,
who holds the thunderbolt in his hand, in the
midst of the Vasus (a class of gods).
(31)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये FERS एकादश: सर्ग: ॥ 22 ॥
Thus ends Canto Eleven in the Yuddhakanda of the glorious Ramayana of
Valmiki, the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

Canto XIl

Ravana orders his Commander-in-Chief, Prahasta, to make adequate
arrangements for the defence of the city and to apprise
Kumbhakarna of the whole situation now that he
had woken from his long slumber

स oat परिषदं कृत्स्नां ater समितिंजय:।
प्रचोदयामास तदा प्रहस्तं वाहिनीपतिम्॥१॥
Surveying the entire assembly
mentioned above, Ravana, who came out
victorious in battle, presently ordered
Prahasta, the Commander-in-Chief of his
forces as follows: (1)

सेनापते यथा ते स्यु: कृतविद्याश्चतुर्विधा:।
योधा नगररक्षायां तथा व्यादेष्टुमर्हसि॥ २॥

“You ought to issue special order,
O  generalissimo, to see that troops

belonging to the four divisions of the
army (viz., cavalry, infantry, chariots and
elephants), who are trained warriors,
are entrusted with the defence of the city.”

(2)

स West: प्रणीतात्मा चिकीर्षन् राजशासनम्।
विनिक्षिपद् act wd बहिरन्तश्च मन्दिरे॥ ३॥

Keen to carry out the royal
command, the celebrated Prahasta, who
had disciplined his mind, posted the entire
army outside as well as inside the city.

(3)
