544

यथा ge: शरीरस्य नित्यमेव प्रवर्तते।
तथा नरेन्द्रो राष्ट्स्य प्रभव: सत्यधर्मयो:॥ ३३॥

“Just as the eye ever strives for the
good of the body by serving as a guide to
it and showing it the right path, so does the
king, who is the fountain of truth and
righteousness, ever strive for the good of
the state. (33)

राजा सत्यं च धर्मश्च राजा कुलवतां कुलम्।
राजा माता पिता चैव राजा हितकरो नॄणाम्॥ ३४॥

“The king is truthfulness and virtue
incarnate; the king constitutes the nobility
of birth in men of a high pedigree. The king
is the mother as well as the father; the king
is the benefactor of men. (34)

यमो AMAT: शक्रो वरुणश्च महाबल:।
विशिष्यन्ते नरेन्द्रेण Git महता aa: i sail

“Even Yama, the god of retribution,
Kubera (son of ViSrava, the god of riches),
Indra (the ruler of gods) and the very mighty
Varuna (the deity presiding over water) are
outstripped by a king of excellent conduct
by virtue of such conduct inasmuch as he
combines in himself the virtues of all the
above-named deities. (35)

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

अहो तम sad स्यान्न प्रज्ञायेत किंचन।
राजा चेन्न भवेल्लोके विभजन् साध्वसाधुनी Ul ३६ Ul

“If there is no king demarcating good
and evil in the world, oh, this world will be
reduced to utter darkness, as it were, and
nothing can be clearly perceived. (36)

जीवत्यपि महाराजे dda वचनं वयम्।
नातिक्रमामहे ad बेलां प्राप्येव सागर:॥ ३७॥

“Even while the Emperor was alive, we
all never violated, O sage Vasistha, your
command, any more than the oceans
overstep the coastline on reaching it. (37)

स न: समीक्ष्य द्विजवर्य ad
नृपं विना राष्ट्मरण्यभूतम्।
कुमारमिक्ष्वाकुसुतं तथान्यं
त्वमेव राजानमिहाभिषेचय॥ ३८॥
“Therefore, fully considering our past
conduct, which has ever been loyal to the
king and devoted to the best interests of the
state and looking on the state, which has
been converted into a veritable jungle for
want of a king, crown you alone as king on
this throne any prince who is a scion of
Ikswaku, or anyone else, O jewel among
the Brahmanas !” (38)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्येऽयोध्याकाण्डे सप्तषष्टितम: a7: ॥ ६७॥

Thus ends Canto Sixty-seven in the Ayodhyakanda of the glorious Ramayana of
Valmiki, the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

Canto LXVIII

With the concurrence of Markandeya and other sages, Vasistha despatches
messengers to call back Bharata and Satrughna from their maternal
grandfather’s. They leave forthwith for the capital of Kekaya
and quickly enter that city

तेषां तद् वचनं seat वसिष्ठ: प्रत्युवाच ह।

Vasistha, they say, addressed the following

मित्रामात्यजनान् सर्वान् ब्राह्मणांस्तानिदं aa: 11g | words to the king’s friends, the ministers as

Hearing the aforesaid speech of the well as to all the Brahmanas assembled

counsellors, Markandeya and_ others,

there on that occasion :

(1)
