# YUDDHAKANDA #

energy, intelligence and other virtues for its
radiance and the power of his mystic missiles
for its edge. (29-30)
अष्टादश सहस्राणि कुञ्जराणां तरस्विनाम्॥ ३१॥

चतुर्दश सहस्राणि सारोहाणां च वाजिनाम्।
पूर्णे शतसहस्रे द्वे राक्षसानां पदातिनाम्॥ ३२॥

दिवसस्याष्टभागेन शरैरग्निशिखोपमै: ।
हतान्येकेन रामेण रक्षसां कामरूपिणाम्॥ ३३॥
In the eighth part of a day (one hour
and a half) an army of ogres capable of
changing their form at will, nay, consisting
of a myriad chariots possessing the swiftness
of the wind, also eighteen thousand
fleet-footed elephants, fourteen thousand
horses with their riders, and full two
lakhs of ogres fighting on foot, was
exterminated by Sri Rama single-handed
with his arrows resembling tongues of fire.
(31—33)

a हताश्वा हतरथा: शान्ता विमथितध्वजा:।
अभिपेतु: पुरीं लङ्कां हतशेषा निशाचरा:॥ ३४॥
Their horses killed, chariots destroyed
and standards broken, those rangers of the

night who had escaped the carnage quietly
ran away to the city of Lanka. (34)

हतैर्गजपदात्यश्वैस्तद् aya रणाजिरम्।
आक्रीडभूमि: क्रुद्धस्य रुद्रस्येव महात्मन:॥ ३५॥
With the elephants, foot-soldiers and
horses that had been killed, that battlefield
resembled the ground where the mighty
Rudra (the god of destruction) disports
himself in fury. (35)

701

ततो tat: सगन्धर्वा: सिद्धाश्च परमर्षय:।
साधु साध्विति रामस्य तत् कर्म समपूजयन्॥ ३६॥
Thereupon gods accompanied by
Gandharvas (celestial musicians) Siddhas
(a class of demigods endowed with mystic
power from their very birth) and eminent
Rsis (the seers of Vedic Mantras) applauded
that achievement of Sri Rama, saying “Well
done! Bravo!!” (36)

अब्रवीच्च तदा राम: सुग्रीवं प्रत्यनन्तरम्।
विभीषणं च धर्मात्मा हनूमन्तं च वानरम्॥ ३७॥
जाम्बवन्तं हरिश्रेष्ठं we द्विविदमेव ai
एतदस्त्रबलं दिव्यं मम वा त्र्यम्बकस्य वा॥ ३८॥
On that occasion Sri Rama too, whose
mind was set on virtue, remarked to Sugriva,
who stood close by, as also to Vibhisana
and to the monkey, Hanuman, Jambavan,
the king of bears, Mainda, the foremost of
monkeys, and Dwivida too: “Such wonderful
power of using the mystic missiles exists
either in me, who am no other than Lord
Visnu, or in Lord Siva, (the three-eyed

Divinity).” (37-38)
Fea oat राक्षसराजवाहिनीं

रामस्तदा शक्रसमो महात्मा।
अस्त्रेषु weg जितक्लमश्च

संस्तूयते देवगणै: We NBR

Having destroyed that army of Ravana,
the king of ogres, the high-souled Sri Rama,
a compeer of Indra (the ruler of gods), who
had conquered fatigue incidental to the use
of missiles and weapons, began to be extolled
by the celestial hosts, who were feeling
exceedingly jubilant. (39)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये युद्धकाण्डे त्रिनवतितम: AWA: ॥ ९३ Il

Thus ends Canto Ninety-three in the Yuddhakanda of the glorious Ramayana of
Valmiki, the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

