* BALAKANDA +

277

षट्सप्ततितम: सर्ग:

Canto LXXVI

Fitting the arrow to the bow of Lord Visnu and declaring it as unfailing,
Sri Rama asks Parasurama to point out at whom it may be
discharged, and at the instance of the latter puts an
end to his title to the (ethereal) worlds earned
by him through his austerities. Recognizing
Sri Rama to be no other than Lord Visnu
and taking leave of him, ParaSurama
withdraws to Mount Mahendra
in order to resume
his austerities

श्रुत्वा तु जामदग्न्यस्य वाक्यं दाशरथिस्तदा।
गौरवाद् यन्त्रितकथ: पितू राममथाब्रवीत्॥१॥

Hearing the challenge of Jamadagni’s
son, Sri Rama (son of Daégaratha), of course,
who remained tongue-tied on that occasion
out of regard for his father, now spoke to
Parasurama as follows: (1)

कृतवानसि यत् wd श्रुतवानस्मि भार्गव।
अनुरुध्यामहे ब्रह्मन् पितुरानृण्यमास्थित:॥ २॥
“| have heard, O scion of Bhrgu, of the
work that you have done, intent on repaying
the debt you owed to your father by avenging

his death. We approve of it, O holy
Brahmana ! (2)
वीर्यहीनमिवाशक्तं क्षत्रधर्मेण भार्गव।

अवजानासि A तेज: पश्य AST पराक्रमम्॥ ३॥

“Since, however, you despise me—
devoted as | am to the duty of a Ksatriya
and, therefore, chary of speech in the
presence of a holy Brahmana like you—as
powerless, as though lacking in virility, O
scion of Bhrgu, pray, witness my glory and
prowess today.” (3)

इत्युक्त्वा राघव: क्रुद्धो भार्गवस्य वरायुधम्।
mw च प्रतिजग्राह हस्ताल्लघुपराक्रम:॥४॥
Saying so and growing indignant, Sri
Rama, a scion of Raghu, of swift prowess
seized the excellent weapon (bow) as well
as the arrow from his hand and further
withdrew the divine energy* of ParaSurama
(a scion of the sage Bhrgu). (4)

आरोप्य स धनू राम: शरं सज्यं चकार ह।
जामदग्न्यं ततो रामं Wa: क्रुद्धोऽब्रवीदिदम्॥ ५॥

Stringing the bow, the celebrated Sri
Rama set the arrow to the string: so the
tradition goes. Getting angry, Sri Rama then
spoke to Parasurama (son of Jamadagni)
as follows : (5)

ब्राह्मणोऽसीति पूज्यो मे विश्वामित्रकृतेन a
तस्माच्छक्तो न ते राम मोक्तुं प्राणहरं शरम्॥६॥
“You are worthy of respect to me in
that you are a Brahmana and also because
of your kinship with Viswamitra, who is the
maternal uncle of your father. Therefore, |
dare not hurl the deadly arrow at you, O
Rama ! (6)

* We read in the Padma-Purana—

`इत्युक्त्वा देवि वैष्णव्या शक्त्या तद्गतया सह।जग्राह वैष्णवं चापं विनयेन च लीलया॥`
‘Saying so, Sri Rama seized in sport, yet with modesty, the bow of Lord Visnu alongwith the divine
energy of the same Lord, that had existed in him so far, O Parvatt !’
This is also borne out by verse 11 of this very Canto.
