924

शोकदु:खभयत्रस्ता faeces सुमध्यमा:।
तासां नि:श्वासवातेन सर्वत: सम्प्रदीपितम्॥ ९ ॥
अग्निहोत्रमिवाभाति संनिरुद्धाग्नि पुष्पकम्।
दशग्रीववशं प्राप्तास्तास्तु शोकाकुला: FATA: Ut १० It
दीनवक्त्रेक्षणा: vara मृग्य: सिंहवशा इव।
काचिच्चिन्तयती तत्र किं नु मां भक्षयिष्यति॥ ११॥
काचिद् दध्यौ सुदु:खार्ता अपि मां मारयेदयम्।
इति arg: पितॄन् स्मृत्वा भर्तॄन् भ्रातॄंस्तथैव च॥ १२॥
दु:खशोकसमाविष्टा विलेपु: सहिता: स्निय: |
कथं नु खलु मे पुत्रो भविष्यति मया विना॥ १३॥

The women had long tresses and
exceptionally graceful limbs; their faces
shone like the full moon; having fully
developed breasts, they gleamed at their
waist like an altar made of diamonds; they
captivated the mind by means of their hips
resembling the pole of a chariot, looked like
celestial ladies, possessed the brilliance of
refined gold, had elegant waists, were
stricken with grief, sorrow and fear and
were distracted. Set ablaze on all sides by
their sighs, the Puspaka looked like a
sacrificial pit in which the sacred fire has
been deposited. Fallen under the sway of
Ravana (the ten-headed monster), the
aforesaid youthful women for their part, who
were stricken with grief and looked dejected
from their countenance and eyes, resembled
a female deer fallen into the clutches of a
lion. One of them thought, “Will this fellow
actually devour me?” Sore stricken with
sorrow, another thought, “Will this fellow kill
me?” Thinking of their mothers, fathers,
husbands and even so of their brothers,
overpowered as they were by sorrow and
grief, the women lamented in a body as
follows: “How, | wonder, will my son actually
fare without me? (7—13)

कथं माता कथं भ्राता निमग्ना: शोकसागरे।
a कथं नु करिष्यामि भर्तुस्तस्मादहं विना॥ १४॥
“How will my mother and _ brother,

completely submerged in an ocean of grief
get on? Oh, how shall | do without that

« VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

husband of mine?
मृत्यो प्रसादयामि cat नय At दु:खभागिनीम्।
fe नु ae दुष्कृतं कर्म पुरा देहान्तरे कृतम्॥ १५॥
एवं स्म दु:ख्रिता: Gat: पतिता: शोकसागरे।
न खल्विदानीं पश्यामो दु:ख्स्यास्यान्तमात्मन: ॥ १६ UI
“Death, | seek your favour; pray, bear
me away whose lot is ‘affliction’. What |
wonder, may be the misdeed which was
perpetrated by me in some_ previous
existence in another body, due to which we
have all sunk into an ocean of grief, stricken
with sorrow. Indeed, we see no end to our
misery any more. (15-16)
stat धिङ्मानुषं लोकं नास्ति खल्वधम: पर:।
ae दुर्बला बलवता Wa रावणेन न:॥१७॥
सूर्येणोदयता काले नक्षत्राणीव नाशिता:।
a सुबलवद् रक्षो वधोपायेषु रज्यते॥१८॥
“Oh, fie on this human world; surely,
there is no other world viler than this, in that
our imbecile husbands were destroyed by
the mighty Ravana even as stars are made
to disappear by the sun rising in time. Ah,
the exceedingly mighty ogre takes delight
in contriving the means of destruction.
(17-18)
Ba दुर्वृत्तमास्थाय नात्मानं A जुगुप्सते।
सर्वथा सदृशस्तावद् विक्रमोऽस्य दुरात्मन:॥ १९॥
“Ah, though holding fast to evil conduct,
he does not feel disgusted with himself; the

prowess of this evil-minded fellow is for that
matter entirely becoming of him. (19)

इदं wag ad परदाराभिमर्शनम्।
यस्मादेष परक्यासु रमते राक्षसाधम:॥ २०॥
तस्माद् वै स्त्रीकृतेनैव वधं प्राप्स्यति दुर्मति: ।
सतीभिर्वरनारीभिरेवं वाक्येऽभ्युदीरिते॥ २१॥
नेदुर्दुन्दुभय: खस्था: quate: पपात च।
शप्त: स्त्रीभि: स तु समं हतौजा ga निष्प्रभ:॥ २२॥
पतिव्रताभि: साध्वीभिर्बभूव विमना gal
एवं विलपितं तासां quay राक्षसपुङ्खव:॥ २३॥
एतस्मिन्नन्तरे घोरा राक्षसी कामरूपिणी॥ ex i

(14)
