112

भगवंस्त्वत्प्रसादेन रावणो नाम राक्षस:।
सर्वान् नो बाधते वीर्याच्छासितुं तं न Mera: ue
“By dint of the prowess acquired through
your grace, O lord, the ogre named Ravana
is molesting us all. We cannot subdue him.
(6)

त्वया तस्मै वरो दत्त: प्रीतेन भगवंस्तदा।
मानयन्तश्च तं नित्यं ad तस्य क्षमामहे॥७॥

“A boon was conferred on him by you
while he was practising austerities, O lord,
pleased as you were with him. And
respecting it, as we do, we have always
brooked all his wrong doings. (7)

उद्वेजयति लोकांस्त्रीनुच्छितान् द्वेष्टि gta: |
शक्रं त्रिदशराजानं प्प्रधर्षयितुमिच्छति॥८॥
“The evil-minded fellow is harassing
all the three worlds, hates the exalted
(prosperous) and seeks to overpower even
Indra, the lord of paradise. (8)

ऋषीन् यक्षान् सगन्धर्वान् ब्राह्मणानसुरांस्तथा।
अतिक्रामति दुर्धर्षो वरदानेन मोहित:॥९॥
“Infatuated by the boon conferred by
you and hard to subdue, he treats profanely
Rsis, Yaksas (a class of demigods) including
Gandharvas, the Brahmanas and demons.
(9)
नैनं सूर्य: प्रतपति ued वाति न मारुत:।
चलोर्मिमाली तं दृष्टा समुद्रोऽपि न कम्पते॥ Lot

“The sun does not scorch him in
midsummer, the wind does not blow furiously
past him. Seeing him, the ocean does not
get agitated, though naturally consisting of
turbulent waves. (10)

तन्महन्नो भयं तस्माद् राक्षसाद घोरदर्शनात्।
वधार्थं तस्य भगवन्नुपायं कर्तुमर्हसि॥११॥
“Therefore we are much afraid of that
ogre of frightful aspect. Be pleased, O lord,
to devise some means of putting an end to
him.” (11)
Wa: Ut: सर्वैश्चिन्तयित्वा ततोऽब्रवीत्।
हन्तायं विदितस्तस्य वधोपायो दुरात्मन:॥१२॥

« VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

Pondering a while when prayed to thus
by all the gods, Brahma now said, “Il am
glad the means of despatching that evil-
minded fellow has come to my mind. (12)

तेन गन्धर्वयक्षाणां देवतानां च रक्षसाम्।
अवध्योऽस्मीति वागुक्ता तथेत्युक्तं च तन्मया ।। १३॥

“‘Let me prove incapable of being killed
by the Gandharvas and Yaksas, gods and
ogres!’ This was the prayer addressed by
him (to me) and ‘So be it! were the words
uttered by me then. (13)

नाकोर्तयदवज्ञानात् तद् रक्षो मानुषांस्तदा।
तस्मात्स मानुषाद् वध्यो मृत्युर्नान्योऽस्य विद्यते॥ १४॥

“The said ogre did not mention human
beings on that occasion out of contempt for
them. Therefore, he is doomed to being
killed by a human being alone; otherwise
there is no death for him.” (14)

एतच्छरत्वा प्रियं वाक्यं ब्रह्मणा समुदाहृतम्।
Sa महर्षय: सर्वे प्रहृष्टास्तेऽभवंस्तदा॥१५॥
All the divinities and great Rsis
mentioned above felt supremely delighted
at that moment to hear this happy revelation
communicated by Brahma. (15)

Cetera विष्णुरुपयातो महाद्युति:।
> पीतवासा जगत्पति:।॥ १६॥

वैनतेय समारुह्य भास्करस्तोयदं यथा।
तप्तहाटककेयूरो ae: सुरोत्तमै:॥१७॥

In the meantime arrived there, riding on
the back of Guruda (the king of birds) as
the sun on a cloud, the extremely resplendent
Visnu, the Lord of the universe, clad in
yellow and wielding a conch, discus and
mace in His hands, nay, decked with a pair
of armlets of refined gold and being glorified
by the foremost of gods. (16-17)

ब्रह्मणा च समागत्य aa तस्थौ समाहित:।
war सुरा: सर्वे समभिष्टूय संनता:॥१८॥
Nay, meeting Brahma, He took His

position there (in that assembly), composed
in mind. Duly extolling Him and bent low
