* AYODHYAKANDA +

“May Rsis, the seven oceans, the same
number of Dwipas (principal divisions of the
globe girdled by them), the four Vedas, the
three spheres and the well-known four
quarters confer blessings, nay, the blessing
of all blessings on you, O mighty-armed
prince !” (36)

इति पुत्रस्य शेषाश्च कृत्वा शिरसि भामिनी।
गन्धैश्चापि समालभ्य राममायतलोचना॥ ३७॥
steel च सुसिद्धार्थां विशल्यकरणीं शुभाम्।
चकार tat कौसल्या मन्त्रैरभिजजाप च॥ ३८॥
Saying so and fixing unbroken grains
of rice on Sri Rama’s forehead as a form of
benediction, and also daubing him with
sandal-pastes of various kinds, the large-
eyed Kausalya, a proud woman, fastened
about his wrist by way of an amulet a herb
known by the name of ViSalyakarani (so-
called because it helps in _ painlessly
extracting an arrow stuck into one’s body),
whose efficacy had been amply proved,
with the recitation of sacred texts and further
muttered the Mantras in order to heighten
its virtue. (37-38)

उवाचापि प्रहृष्टेव सा दु:खवशवर्तिनी।
वाङ्मात्रेण न भावेन वाचा संसज्जमानया॥ ३९॥

Nay, she also spoke the Mantras aloud
like one overjoyed, anxious as she was not
to mar the joy and damp the enthusiasm of
Sri Rama, although she was in the grip of
sorrow and repeated the Mantras only
mechanically in a faltering voice and not
with her heart. (39)

आनम्य मूर्धि चाघ्राय परिष्वज्य यशस्विनी।
अवदत् पुत्रमिष्टार्थो Was राम यथासुखम्॥४०॥

Bending low and smelling the head of
Sri Rama and embracing him, the illustrious
lady, Kausalya, said to Sri Rama, “Depart
at ease, O Rama, accomplished of purpose
as you are. (40)
अरोगं सर्वसिद्धार्थमयोध्यां पुनरागतम्।
पश्यामि त्वां Ga वत्स संधितं राजवर्त्मसु॥४१॥

393

“| shall happily see you come back in
sound health to Ayodhya having all your
objects accomplished and moving at peace
with all on the main roads of Ayodhya.

(41)

प्रणष्टदु:खसंकल्पा हर्षविद्योतितानना।
द्रक्ष्यामि cat वनात् प्राप्तं पूर्णचन्द्रमिवोदितम्॥४२॥

“All my thoughts of sorrow completely
vanished and my face illumined with joy |
shall behold you returned from the forest
like the full moon become visible on the
horizon. (42)

भद्रासनगतं राम वनवासादिहागतम्।

द्रक्ष्यामि च पुनस्त्वां तु तीर्णवन्तं पितुर्वच: ॥४३॥
“| shall undoubtedly see you returned

here from your sojourn in the forest, having

implemented the word of your father, and
installed on the throne, O Rama! (43)

मङ्गलैरुपसम्पन्नो वनवासादिहागत:।
वध्वाश्च मम नित्यं त्वं कामान् संवर्ध याहि UT: Mt ४४॥

“Having returned here from the forest
and clad in festal robes and adorned with
festal ornaments, ever fulfil the desires of
my daughter-in-law. Depart now, O Rama!

(44)
मयार्चिता देवगणा: शिवादयो
महर्षयो भूतगणा: सुरोरगा:।
अभिप्रयातस्य at चिराय a
हितानि कांक्षन्तु दिशश्च राघव॥ ४५ I

“Worshipped by me, let the hosts of
gods headed by Lord Siva, the eminent
Rsis, the multitudes of spirits, the celestial
serpents and the deities presiding over the
four quarters wish well for a long time of
you when you have set out for the forest,
O scion of Raghu !” (45)

अतीव चाश्रुप्रतिपूर्णलोचना

समाप्य च स्वस्त्ययनं यथाविधि।
प्रदक्षिणं चापि चकार wad

UA: पुनश्चापि निरीक्ष्य सस्वजे॥४६॥
