356

वचोभिरग्र्यैर्हर्म्यस्था: क्षितिस्थाश्च ववन्दिरे।
नूनं नन्दति ते माता कौसल्या ASTI ३९॥
पश्यन्ती सिद्धयात्रं cat पित्र्यं राज्यमुपस्थितम्।
सर्वसीमन्तिनीभ्यश्च सीतां सीमन्तिनीं वराम्॥४०॥
अमन्यन्त हि ता नार्यो रामस्य हृदयप्रियाम्।

तया सुचरितं देव्या पुरा नूनं महत् तप:॥४१॥
रोहिणीव शशाङ्केन रामसंयोगमाप या।
इति प्रासादशृङ्गेषु प्रमदाभिर्नरोत्तम:।
शुश्राव राजमार्गस्थ: प्रिया वाच उदाहृता:॥४२॥

Riding his chariot, which moved rapidly
with a sound as of thunder and was
commodious, was inlaid with gems and gold,
nay, which shone like Mount Meru (the gold
mountain) and blinded one’s eyes with its
splendour as it were, which was driven by
super-excellent horses almost as big as
young elephants—even as _ Indra, the
thousand-eyed god, does his own chariot,
driven by green horses—Sri Rama, a scion
of Raghu, irradiated with his glory, quickly
departed. Thundering like a cloud in the sky
and making the quarters resound with its
rattle, that glorious chariot proceeded from
the palace as the moon emerges from a
large cloud. Taking his seat in the chariot
behind Sri Rama, with a wonderful chowrie
in his hand, Laksmana, younger brother of
Sri Rama, a scion of Raghu, for his part
guarded his elder brother, a brother in the
true sense of the word as he was. Thereupon
an uproarious shout of applause rose from
the concourse of men that had gathered all
round, even as the chariot departed on its
course. Then excellent horses and, even,
so the foremost of elephants looking like
mountains followed Sri Rama in hundreds
and thousands. In front of Sri Rama, again,
marched mailed warriors daubed with paste
of sandalwood and aloe and wielding a sword
and bow each and men invoking blessings
on Sri Rama. Then were heard on the road
along which Sri Rama drove in his chariot
the notes of musical instruments as well as
the words of praise uttered by the panegyrists
and afterwards the shouts of warriors

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

resembling the roaring of lions. Sri Rama
(the subduer of his enemies) drove along
while being covered on all siders with showers
of excellent flowers rained by women decked
with jewels and standing at the windows of
their mansions. With intent to please Sri
Rama, women who were faultless of every
limb and stood in their mansions or on the
ground along the road, extolled him in
excellent words as follows : “Your mother,
Kausalya, O delighter of your mother, will
rejoice to see you installed on the throne of
your father and the object of your visit to
your father accomplished.” Nay, those
women indeed looked upon Sita, beloved of
the heart of Sri Rama as the foremost matron
of all matrons and observed: “Surely great
asceticism has been duly practised by that
lady in her past lives in that she has in her
present birth attained union with Sri Rama
even as Rohini (wife of the moon-god, the
goddess presiding over an asterism of
the same name) got united with the moon-
god.” So did Sri Rama, the foremost among
men, hear, on the public road, the delightful
words uttered by young ladies on the
tops of mansions as well as on the road.

(29—42)

a राघवस्तत्र तदा Wella
शुश्राव लोकस्य समागतस्य।
आत्माधिकारा विविधाश्च वाच:
प्रहष्टरूपस्य Ut जनस्य॥४३॥
There on the road Sri Rama (a scion
of Raghu) heard on that occasion the talks
of visitors from outside, on various topics
connected with the line of Raghu as well
as the diverse observations concerning
himself, of the people of Ayodhya itself,
who wore a highly delighted appearance :
(43)
wea fea गच्छति राघवोऽद्य
राजप्रसादाद् विपुलां गमिष्यन्।
एते at सर्वसमृद्धकामा
येषामयं नो भविता प्रशास्ता॥४४॥
