* ARANYAKANDA «

अनागतविधानं तु कर्तव्यं शुभमिच्छता।
आपदं शङ्कमानेन पुरुषेण विपश्चिता॥११॥

“A calamity that has not yet arrived
must at all events be provided against by
a wise man seeking his welfare and
apprehending danger. (11)
तस्माद् गृहीत्वा वैदेहीं शरपाणिर्धनुर्धर:।
गुहामाश्रय sera oat पादपसंकुलाम्॥ १२ ॥

“Therefore, taking Sita (a princess of the
Videha territory) and carrying your bow, arrow

in hand, take cover in a mountain cave, difficult
of access and surrounded by trees. (12)

प्रतिकूलितुमिच्छामि न fe वाक्यमिदं त्वया।
शापितो मम पादाभ्यां गम्यतां वत्स मा चिरम्॥ १३॥
“Surely | don’t want this command of
mine to be opposed by you. Conjured by
me in the name of my feet, let you be gone
without delay, my darling ! (13)

त्वं हि शूरश्च बलवान् हन्या एतान् न संशय:।

स्वयं निहन्तुमिच्छामि सर्वानेव निशाचरान्॥१४॥
“You are valiant and mighty indeed and

can kill these : there is no doubt about it. ।,

however, wish to kill all the ogres myself.”(14)

एवमुक्तस्तु WATT लक्ष्मण: सह सीतया।
शरानादाय चापं च गुहां दुर्गां समाश्रयत्॥१५॥
Seizing his arrows and bow, when
commanded thus by Rama, Laksmana with
Sita sought for protection a cave which was
difficult of access. (15)

तस्मिन् प्रविष्टे तु Wet लक्ष्मणे सह सीतया।
हन्त निर्युक्तमित्युक्त्वा Wa: कवचमाविशत्॥ १६॥
Saying “Il am glad my command has
been promptly carried out’, when the said
Laksmana had duly entered the cave with
Sita, Sri Rama for his part donned his coat
of mail. (16)
a तेनाग्निनिकाशेन कवचेन विभूषित:।
aya रामस्तिमिरे महानग्निरिवोत्थित:॥१७॥
Highly adorned with that armour,
resplendent as fire, Sri Rama looked like a

775

great flame appeared suddenly in darkness.
(17)

a चापमुद्यम्य महच्छरानादाय वीर्यवान्।

सम्बभूवास्थितस्तत्र ज्यास्वनै: पूरयन् दिश:॥ १८ ॥

Lifting his great bow and picking up
arrows, the valiant Sri Rama stood rooted
there filling the quarters with the twangs of
his bow-string. (18)

समेयुश्च महात्मानो युद्धदर्शनकांक्षया॥१९॥

Then high-souled gods accompanied
by Gandharvas, as well as Siddhas with
Caranas too gathered together with intent to
witness the combat. (19)

ऋषयश्च महात्मानो लोके ब्रह्मर्षिसत्तमा:।
समेत्य चोचु: सहितास्तेऽन्योन्यं पुण्यकर्मण: It २०॥
Coming together, high-souled Rsis too,
as well as those recognized as the foremost
of Brahman sages in the world, who had
performed virtuous deeds, said to one another
in a body : (20)
स्वस्तिगोब्राह्मणानां च लोकानां चेति संस्थिता: ।
जयतां राघवो युद्धे पौलस्त्यान् रजनीचरान्॥ २१॥
चक्रहस्तो यथा ag सर्वानसुरपुंगवान्।
एवमुक्त्वा पुन: प्रोचुरालोक्य च परस्परम्॥ २२॥
“Good luck to the cows and the
Brahmanas, as well as to people who are
well-established ! May Raghava conquer the
night-stalkers, born in the line of Sage
Pulastya, as did Visnu, discus in hand,
conquer the foremost of all demons on the
battlefield’. Saying so and looking at one
another, they exclaimed again : (21-22)

चतुर्दश सहस्राणि रक्षसां भीमकर्मणाम्।
Wes रामो धर्मात्मा Het युद्धं भविष्यति॥ २३॥
“Here are fourteen thousand ogres of

terrible deeds, while the pious-minded Rama
is alone. How will there be a conflict under

such circumstances?” (23)
इति राजर्षय: सिद्धा: सगणाश्च द्विजर्षभा:।
जातकौतूहलास्तस्थुर्विमानस्थाश्च देवता:॥ २४॥
