मयसकाङ्कृथइतिप्रजज्ञे।।२८॥

The fawn-eyed lady recognized that
lovely-eyed jewel among men, whom she
had never seen before and who was richly
endowed with the bodily marks of a
sovereign, to be the same scion of Kakutstha
of whom she had heard from the mouth of
Angada. (28)

तस्येन्द्रकल्पस्य दुरासदस्य
महानुभावस्य समीपमार्या।
आर्तातितूर्णं व्यसनं प्रपन्ना
जगाम तारा परिविह्वलन्ती॥ २९॥
The noble Tara, who had fallen in
adversity and, therefore, felt miserable,
sought, tottering with very quick paces, the
presence of Sri Rama, who vied with Indra,
was difficult to approach and bore an exalted
demeanour. (29)

तं सा समासाद्य विशुद्धसत्त्वं

शोकेन सम्भ्रान्तशरीरभावा।
मनस्विनी वाक्यमुवाच ant

TWH रणोत्कर्षणलब्धलक्ष्यम्॥ ३०॥

Duly approaching Sri Rama, who was
endowed with an utterly pure mind and who
ever hit the target by virtue of his excelling all
in combat, that high-minded Tara, who had
lost all consciousness of her body through
grief, spoke to him as follows : (30)

त्वमप्रमेयश्च दुरासदश्च
जितेन्द्रियश्चोत्तमधर्मकश्च ।
अक्षीणकीर्तिश्च विचक्षणश्च

क्षितिक्षमावान् क्षतजोपमाक्ष:॥ ३१॥

“You are immeasurable in point of time,
space and substance, nay, difficult to
approach even for Yogis and have mastered
your senses; you are possessed of the
highest virtue and enjoy undecaying fame;
you are wise and endowed with forbearance

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

like the earth, and are distinguished by
blood-red eyes. (31)
त्वमात्तबाणासनबाणपाणि-

र्महाबल: संहननोपपन्न: |
मनुष्यदेहाभ्युदयं विहाय

दिव्येन देहाभ्युदयेन FM: ३२॥

“You are carrying a bow and hold an

arrow in your hand, are possessed of
extraordinary might and endowed with strong
limbs. Having renounced the happiness
enjoyable through a human form, you are
still endowed with bodily happiness of an
unearthly character. (32)

aa बाणेन हत: प्रियो a

wa बाणेन हि मां जहीहि।
za गमिष्यामि समीपमस्य

न मां विना at Wa वाली॥ ३३॥

“Pray, actually kill me with that very
arrow with which my darling has surely
been killed by you. When killed by you, |
shall reach his presence; Vali may not feel

happy without me. (33)
स्वर्गेऽपि पद्मामलपत्रनेत्र
समेत्य Ws च मामपश्यन्।

न ह्येष उच्चावचताम्रचूडा
विचित्रवेषाप्सरसोऽभजिष्यत् ॥ ३४॥

“Even on coming in contact with celestial
nymphs and gazing on them with curiosity
he would certainly not love those nymphs
though adorned with a chaplet of red flowers
of every description and clad in a many-
coloured costume, unless he sees me there,
O prince, possessed of eyes resembling
stainless lotus-petals ! (34)
स्वर्गेऽपि शोकं च विवर्णतां च

Ten विना प्राप्स्यति वीर वाली।
रम्ये नगेन्द्रस्य तटावकाशे
विदेहकन्यारहितो यथा त्वम्॥ ३५॥

“Without me, O heroic prince, Vali will
only experience grief and loss of colour
even in heaven, even as bereft of Sita
