922

Wart: पुरुषो wa तस्य शैलस्य मूर्धनि।
यत् स्वप्नं लभते वित्तं तत् प्रबुद्धोऽधिगच्छति॥ ३३॥
“A man who, reposing on the top of
that mountain, lays his hands on a treasure
in a dream, attains it even when awake
(after sleep), O Rama! (33)
weet विषमाचार: पापकर्माधिरोहति।
तत्रैव Wet सुप्तमादाय राक्षसा:॥३४॥
“Seizing, on the other hand, even while
he is asleep, him who climbs up this mountain
though partial in his conduct and engaged in
sinful acts, ogres strike him. (34)

तत्रापि शिशुनागानामाक्रन्द: श्रूयते महान्।
क्रीडतां WH पम्पायां मतङ्गाश्रमवासिनाम्॥ ३५॥
“The loud trumpeting of young elephants,
inhabiting the forest surrounding the hermitage
of Sage Matanga and disporting in the
Pampa lake, O Rama, is heard even on that
mountain. (35)

सक्का रुधिरधाराभि: संहत्य परमद्विपा:।
प्रचरन्ति पृथक्कोर्णा मेघवर्णास्तरस्विन:॥ ३६॥
“Wet with streams of reddish ichor,
huge elephants possessing the dark hue of
clouds and full of ardour roam there in a
herd, remaining distinct from other herds.
(36)
a aa पीत्वा पानीयं विमलं ore शोभनम्।
अत्यन्तसुखसंस्पर्शं सर्वगन्धसमन्वितम्॥ ३७॥
Peat: संविगाहन्ते वनानि वनगोचरा:।
ऋक्षांश्च द्वीपिनश्चैव नीलकोमलकप्रभान्॥३८॥
रुरूनपेतानजयान् दृष्टवा शोकं प्रहास्यसि।
WA तस्य तु शैलस्य महती शोभते गुहा॥ ३९॥
शिलापिधाना काकुत्स्थ दु:खं चास्या: प्रवेशनम्।
तस्या गुहाया: प्राग्रे महान् शीतोदको हरुद:।॥॥४०
बहुमूलफलो रम्यो नानानगसमाकुल:।
तस्यां वसति धर्मात्मा सुग्रीव: WE at: i ४१॥
कदाचिच्छिखरे तस्य पर्वतस्यापि तिष्ठति।
कबन्धस्त्वनुशास्यैवं तावुभौ रामलक्ष्मणौ॥४२॥
at भास्करवर्णाभ: खे व्यरोचत वीर्यवान्।
तं तु खस्थं महाभागं तावुभौ रामलक्ष्मणौ॥४३॥

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

प्रस्थितौ त्वं व्रजस्वेति वाक्यमूचतुरन्तिके।
गम्यतां कार्यसिद्ध्यर्थमिति तावब्रवीत् A च॥४४॥

“Gratified after drinking the limpid,
agreeable and lovely water of the lake,
which is most delightful to touch and fragrant
with all kinds of odours, the wild elephants
penetrate into the woodlands again. Beholding
the bears possessed of a blue and soft
shining coat and leopards as well as the
Rurus (a species of deer) unconquered by
man and arrived near without fear, you will
shed grief altogether. Spreading its charm
on that mountain, O Rama, there is a big
cave which has its mouth blocked with a
rock and as such is difficult to enter, O
scion of Kakutstha ! At the eastern entrance
of that cave there is a large lovely deep
pool of cool water abounding in roots and
fruits and surrounded by trees of various
species. Sugriva, whose mind is set on
virtue, dwells in that cave with other
monkeys. Sometimes he resides even on
the top of that mountain.” Having instructed
as aforesaid both the princes, Sri Rama
and Laksmana, the powerful Kabandha for
his part, who was adorned with a garland
and possessed a splendour resembling the
sun’s, shone brightly in the air. To the highly
blessed Kabandha, who remained standing
in the air for sometime to take leave of the
two princes, both the princes, Sri Rama and
Laksmana, for their part, already set out on
their journey, spoke as follows standing
near the ogre : “Depart you !” He too said to
them, “Proceed on your journey for
accomplishing your purpose.” (37—44)

सुप्रीतौ तावनुज्ञाप्य कबन्ध: प्रस्थितस्तदा॥४५॥

Taking leave of the two princes, who
felt highly pleased, Kabandha departed
forthwith. (45)
स ad कबन्ध: प्रतिपद्य रूपं

qa: श्रिया भास्वरसर्वदेह:।
निदर्शयन् राममवेक्ष्य खस्थ:
सख्यं कुरुष्वेति तदाभ्युवाच॥ VE Il

Having regained his pristine form, and
