926

भ्रातुरेश्वर्ययुक्तस्य खरस्य वस पार्श्वत:।
चतुर्दशानां भ्राता ते सहस्राणां भविष्यति॥ ३६॥
प्रभु: प्रयाणे दाने च राक्षसानां महाबल:।
तत्र मातृष्वसेयस्ते भ्रातायं वै GT: प्रभु:॥ ३७॥
भविष्यति तवादेशं सदा कुर्वन् निशाचर:।
शीघ्रं गच्छत्वयं वीरो दण्डकान् परिरक्षितुम्॥ ३८ II
“Live under the protection of your cousin,
Khara, who has been endowed with rulership.
Your aforesaid exceptionally mighty cousin
will have the power to dispatch at will and
provide subsistence to fourteen thousand
ogres. Your aforesaid cousin (born of your
mother’s own sister), Khara, is competent to
do this and will ever continue to do your bidding.
Let this hero proceed with all speed to guard
the Dandaka forest closely. (836—38)

दूषणोऽस्य बलाध्यक्षो भविष्यति महाबल:।
wa a वचनं शूर: करिष्यति सदा खर:॥ ३९॥

“The exceptionally mighty Dusana will
be the commander of his forces. Living

« VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

there, the valiant Khara will ever do your
bidding. (39)
रक्षसां कामरूपाणां प्रभुरेष भविष्यति।
एवमुक्त्वा दशग्रीव: सैन्यमस्यादिदेश ह॥४०॥
wade सहस्राणि रक्षसां वीर्यशालिनाम्।
aoa: परिव्रत: wd राक्षसैर्घोरदर्शनै:॥४१॥
आगच्छत खर: vit दण्डकानकुतोभय:।
a तत्र कारयामास we निहतकण्टकम्।
सा च शूर्पणखा तत्र न्यवसद् दण्डके वने॥४२॥

“He will be the ruler of ogres capable of
changing their form at will.” Having spoken
as aforesaid, Ravana (the ten-headed
monster), ordered fourteen thousand of
valiant ogres to form the army of Khara, so
the tradition goes. Surrounded by all those
fierce-looking ogres, the notorious Khara,
who had no fear from any quarter, arrived
with all speed in the Dandaka forest. There
he established his undisputed rulership. The
said Surpanakha too lived in the same
Dandaka forest. (40—42)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये उत्तरकाण्डे चतुर्विंश: AW: il २४॥

Thus ends Canto Twenty-four in the Uttarakanda of the glorious Ramayana of Valmiki,
the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

Canto XXV

Meghanada attains success through sacrifices; Vibhisana describes to Ravana the
evil consequences of bearing away others’ wives; after consoling Kumbhinasi,
Ravana, accompanied by Madhu, invades the realm of the gods

स तु दत्त्वा दशग्रीवो act घोरं खरस्य तत्।
भगिनीं स समाश्वास्य BE: स्वस्थतरोऽभवत्॥ १॥
Having handed over to Khara the
command of that formidable army and having
consoled his sister, Ravana, the ten-headed
monster, for his part felt rejoiced and at
ease. (1)

ततो निकुम्भिला नाम लङ्कोपवनमुत्तमम्।
ag राक्षसेन्द्रो बलवान् प्रविवेश सहानुग:॥ २॥

There was an excellent grove in Lanka,
Nikumbhila by name. Accompanied by his
followers, the mighty ruler of ogres penetrated
deep into it. (2)
ततो यूपशताकोर्णं सौम्यचैत्योपशोभितम्।
ददर्श विष्ठितं यज्ञं श्रिया सम्प्रज्वलन्निव॥ ३॥

Flaming, as it were, with splendour,

he saw standing there a sacrificial hall,
closely set with hundreds of sacrificial posts
