472

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA +

पञ्चाश: सर्ग:
Canto L

Beholding Vibhisana, Sugriva asks Jambavan to restore the fleeing
monkeys to confidence and himself reassures Vibhisana.
In the meantime, Garuda, the king of birds, makes
his appearance on the scene and liberates
Sri Rama and Laksmana from
their bondage

अथोवाच महातेजा हरिराजो महाबल:।
किमियं व्यथिता सेना मूढवातेव नौर्जले॥१॥

Now Sugriva, the ruler of monkeys,
who was endowed with extraordinary energy
and possessed of great might, inquired
saying: “What for is this army disquieted
like a bark caught in a whirlwind at
sea?” (1)

सुग्रीवस्य aa: scat वालिपुत्रोऽङ्गदोऽब्रवीत्।
न त्वं पश्यसि WA च लक्ष्मणं च महारथम्॥ २॥
शरजालाचितौ वीरावुभौ दशरथात्मजौ।
शरतल्पे महात्मानौ शयानौ रुधिरोक्षितौ॥ ३॥

Hearing the question of Sugriva,
Angada, son of Vali, said, “Don’t you see
the two high-souled heroic sons of Emperor
Dasaratha, Sri Rama and the great car-
warrior, Laksmana, lying on a bed of arrows,
covered all over with darts and bathed in
blood?” (2-3)

अथाब्रवीद् वानरेन्द्र: सुग्रीव: पुत्रमङ्गदम्।
नानिमित्तमिदं मन्ये भवितव्यं भयेन तु॥४॥
Thereupon Sugriva, the lord of monkeys,
spoke as follows to his son (nephew) Angada:
“| do not account this stampede, among the
monkeys without any immediate reason,
other than the bondage of Sri Rama and
Laksmana. There needs must be some
danger ahead. (4)

विषण्णवदना ह्येते त्यक्तप्रहरणा fest:
पलायन्तेऽत्र हरयस्त्रासादुत्फुल्ललोचना: ॥ ५ ॥

“Their faces downcast and eyes
distressed with terror, these monkeys are
actually fleeing at his juncture in all directions,
abandoning their arms. (5)

अन्योन्यस्य न लज्जन्ते न निरीक्षन्ति पृष्ठत:।
विप्रकर्षन्ति चान्योन्यं पतितं agra च॥६॥

“While doing so they do not blush
at the sight of one another nor do they
look behind. Nay, they drag one another
(when interrupted) and leap over a fallen
companion (without pausing to pick him
up).” (6)
एतस्मिन्नन्तरे वीरो गदापाणिर्बिभीषण:।
सुग्रीवं वर्धयामास wat च जयाशिषा॥७॥

In the meantime, mace in hand, the
heroic Vibhisana appeared on the scence
and cheered Sugriva and Sri Rama, a scion
of Raghu, with benedictions of victory. (7)

विभीषणं च सुग्रीवो great वानरभीषणम्।
ऋक्षराजं महात्मानं समीपस्थमुवाच ह॥८॥

Beholding Vibhisana, who had caused
panic among the monkeys, Sugriva, they
say, spoke as follows to the high-souled
Jambavan, the king of bears, who stood
near: (8)

विभीषणोऽयं सम्प्राप्तो यं दृष्ट्वा वानरर्षभा:।
द्रवन्त्यायतसंत्रासा रावणात्मजशाङ्कया Ul ९ ॥

“Here is Vibhisana duly arrived, seeing
whom the foremost of monkeys are fleeing
under the suspicion that he is Indrajit (son
