* AYODHYAKANDA +

Viet: सर्वे समुद्राश्च राजा वरुण Wa al
areata पृथिवी वायुश्च सचराचर:॥१३॥
नक्षत्राणि च सर्वाणि ग्रहाश्च ae cad: |
अहोरात्रे तथा संध्ये पान्तु cat वनमाश्रितम्॥ १४॥
“May all the seven principal mountains
and oceans as well as the king of the
oceans, Varuna (the god presiding over the
waters), heaven, earth, the region intervening
them, the atmosphere as well as the animate
and inanimate creation, nay, all the lunar
mansions as well as the sun and the planets
alongwith the gods presiding over them, the
deities presiding over day and night and the
morning and evening twilights protect you
while you remain in the forest. (13-14)
ऋतवश्चापि षट् चान्ये मासा: संवत्सरास्तथा।
HUT काष्ठाश्च AM तव Ws दिशन्तु ते॥१५॥
महावनेऽपि चरतो मुनिवेषस्य धीमत:।
aM देवाश्च दैत्याश्च भवन्तु सुखदा: सदा॥ १६॥
“Again, may the deities presiding over
the six seasons, the intercalary months and
the years containing such months and even
so measures of time known by the names
of Kala (equivalent to one minute) and
Kastha (1/30 of a Kala or two seconds)
grant you happiness. And may the gods
and the Daityas (demons) too ever bestow
happiness on you while you roam about in
a large forest, clad as a hermit and full of
wisdom. (15-16)
राक्षसानां पिशाचानां रौद्राणां क्रूरकर्मणाम्।
क्रव्यादानां च सर्वेषां मा भूत् पुत्रक ते भयम्॥ १७॥
“Let there be no fear to you, my dear
son, from the fierce ogres, fiends of cruel
deeds and all carnivorous animals. (17)

प्लवगा वृश्चिका दंशा मशकाश्चैव कानने।
सरीसृपाश्च कीटाश्च मा Yat Wet तव॥ १८॥

“Let there be no monkeys, scorpions,
gnats and mosquitoes, reptiles and insects
in the impenetrable forest occupied by you.

(18)

391

महाद्विपाश्च सिंहाश्च व्याघ्रा ऋक्षाश्च efor: |
महिषा: शृङ्खिणो रौद्रा न ते द्रुह्यन्तु पुत्रक॥१९॥

“Let not lordly elephants, lions, tigers,
bears and other carnivorous animals and
fierce buffaloes with prominent horns be
hostile to you, my dear son! (19)

नृमांसभोजना रौद्रा ये चान्ये सर्वजातय:।
मा च त्वां हिंसिषु: पुत्र मया सम्पूजितास्त्विह॥ २०॥
“And let not other ferocious man-eaters,
belonging to all species of living beings and
propitiated by me here, kill you, my son!
(20)
आगमास्ते शिवा: सन्तु सिध्यन्तु च पराक्रमा: |
सर्वसम्पत्तयो WH स्वस्तिमान् गच्छ TAH I २१॥

“May your pathways be propitious and
let your undertaking meet with success.
May all kinds of wealth of the forest be at
your disposal, O Rama! Depart you happily,
my beloved son! (21)

स्वस्तितेऽस्त्वान्तरिक्षेभ्य: पार्थिवेभ्य: पुन: OA: |
सर्वेभ्यश्चैव देवेभ्यो ये च a परिपन्थिन:॥ २२॥

“May you enjoy security time and again
against aerial beings and earthly creatures
as well as against all the gods as also against
those who are your adversaries. (22)

शुक्र: Wag सूर्यश्च धनदोऽथ यमस्तथा।
Ut CAPA WH दण्डकारण्यवासिनम्॥ २३॥

“Worshipped by me, O Rama, may the
deities presiding over the planets Venus
and the moon as also the sun and Kubera
(the god of riches) and Yama (the god of
retribution) protect you while you dwell in
the forest of Dandaka. (23)

अग्निर्वायुस्तथा धूमो मन्त्राश्चर्षिमुखच्युता:।
उपस्पर्शनकाले तु पान्तु त्वां रघुनन्दन॥ २४॥

May the gods presiding over fire, the
air and smoke as well as the sacred texts
that have escaped from the lips of Rsis and
that will be uttered by you, actually protect
you at the time of sipping water and bathing,
O scion of Raghu ! (24)
