* AYODHYAKANDA +

my tears. The words of Manthara are so
many mighty alligators infesting its waters.
The couple of boons granted by me in
favour of Kaikeyi represent its coastline and
the term of Rama’s exile marks its extent.

(29—32)

अशोभनं योऽहमिहाद्य राघवं

पपाततूर्णंशयनेसमूच्छित ।॥ ३३॥

“It is most unfortunate that | am unable
to clasp on Rama, a scion of Raghu,
alongwith Laksmana on this spot today,

515

even though | long to see them.” Lamenting
thus, that highly illustrious monarch
immediately dropped senseless, as it were,
on the couch. (33)

sta विलपति पार्थिवे wore
करुणतरं द्विगुणं च रामहेतो: |

वचनमनुनिशम्य तस्य देवी
भयमगमत् पुनरेव राममाता॥ ३४॥

When the Emperor fainted while
lamenting most piteously for Rama as
aforesaid, Queen Kausalya, Sri Rama’s
mother, once more fell a prey to twofold fear
on hearing his wail. (34)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्येऽयोध्याकाण्डे एकोनषष्टितम: सर्ग: ॥ ५९ ॥

Thus ends Canto Fifty-nine in the Ayodhyakanda of the glorious Ramayana of Valmiki,
the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

एष्टितम: at:
Canto LX

Sumantra does not succeed in soothing the agony of Kausalya, who tossed
about on the floor due to excess of grief over her separation from
Sri Rama, even though he consoles her by telling her that
Sri Rama, being resolute and high-minded, was
living in the forest free from agony

ततो भूतोपसृष्टेव वेपमाना पुन: पुन:।
धरण्यां गतसत्त्वेव कौसल्या सूतमब्रवीत्॥१॥

Trembling again and again as though
possessed by a spirit, and lying on the floor
as though life had departed from her,
Kausalya thereupon spoke to Sumantra as
follows : (1)

नय At यत्र काकुत्स्थ: सीता AA च AAT: |

ar विना क्षणमप्यद्य जीवितुं नोत्सहे ह्यहम्॥ २॥
“Take me to the place where Rama (a

scion of Kakutstha), Sita and Laksmana

happen to be; for without them | cannot
bear to live even for a moment longer today.

(2)

Rada wt शीघ्रं दण्डकान् नय मामपि।

अथ तान् नानुगच्छामि गमिष्यामि यमक्षयम्॥ ३॥
“Quickly take the chariot back and

convey me too to the Dandaka forest. In

case | do not follow them, | will proceed to
the abode of Death.” (3)

बाष्पवेगोपहतया स वाचा सज्जमानया।
इदमाश्वासयन् देवीं wa: प्राञ्जलिरब्रवीत्॥४॥
Seeking to comfort the queen, the
aforesaid charioteer submitted to her with
folded hands as follows in a faltering voice
choked with an upsurge of tears: (4)
त्यज शोकं च मोहं च सम्भ्रमं दु:खजं तथा।
व्यवधूय च संतापं at वत्स्यति राघव:॥५॥
