* AYODHYAKANDA +

Bharata, who was speaking again in that
strain : (1)
उपपन्नमिदं वाक्यं यस्त्वमेवमभाषथा:।
जात: पुत्रो दशरथात् कैकेय्यां राजसत्तमात्॥ २॥
“The assertion that you—a son born of
DaSaratha, the foremost of kings, through

Kaikeyi—have made just now, as above, is
reasonable. (2)
पुरा भ्रात: पिता a: स मातरं ते समुद्बहन्।
मातामहे समाश्रौषीद् राज्यशुल्कमनुत्तमम्॥ 3
“In the past, while marrying Kaikeyi
your mother, O brother, our celebrated father
promised to your maternal grandfather the
kingdom of Ayodhya in favour of her issue
as the best price for the marriage. (3)

देवासुरे च संग्रामे जनन्यै तव पार्थिव:।
wrest ददौ राजा वरमाराधित: प्रभु:॥४॥
“Nay, propitiated by standing him in
goodstead in a conflict between the gods
and the demons, and immensely delighted,
the powerful king, who held sway over the
entire globe, granted a boon to your mother.
(4)

तत: सा सम्प्रतिश्राव्य तव माता यशस्विनी।
अयाचत नरश्रेष्ठं gt oat वरवर्णिनी॥५॥

qa wet नरव्याघ्र मम प्रव्राजनं तथा।
तच्च राजा तथा तस्यै नियुक्त: प्रददौ ATG I

“Then, binding him with a solemn oath
your aforesaid illustrious mother, who was
endowed with an excellent complexion,
sought the following two boons of DaSaratha,
the foremost of men, viz., (1) rulership for
you, O tiger among men, and (2) exile for
me; and urged thus, the king granted the
aforesaid boons to her. (5-6)

तेन पित्राहमप्यत्र नियुक्त: पुरुषर्षभ।
चतुर्दश at वासं वर्षाणि वरदानिकम्॥७॥

“|, too, O jewel among men, have been
enjoined by our aforesaid father to dwell
here in the forest for fourteen years in
consequence of the boon granted by our
father to your mother. (7)

673

सोऽयं वनमिदं wat निर्जनं लक्ष्मणान्वित:।
सीतया चाप्रतिद्वन्द्व: सत्यवादे स्थित: पितु:॥ ८॥

“As such I, who have no rival in this
world and stand by the veracity of my
father, have come to this lonely forest
accompanied by Laksmana and Sita. (8)

भवानपि dima fiat सत्यवादिनम्।
कर्तुमर्हसि राजेन्द्र क्षिप्रमेवाभिषिञ्चनात्॥९॥

“You too, 0 ruler of kings, ought
likewise, as enjoined by our father, to vindicate
the truthfulness of our father by getting
yourself consecrated on the throne of
Ayodhya immediately. (9)

ऋणान्मोचय राजानं मत्कृते भरत WIA!
पितरं ate धर्मज्ञ मातरं चाभिनन्दय॥१०॥

“For my sake, O Bharata, exonerate
the powerful king from the debt he owes to
Kaikeyi. Save our father by redeeming his
promise and delight your mother, O knower
of what is right! (10)

श्रूयते धीमता तात श्रुतिर्गीता यशस्विना।
गयेन यजमानेन गयेष्वेव पितॄन् प्रति॥११॥
पुन्नाम्नो नरकाद् यस्मात् frat त्रायते a: |
तस्मात् पुत्र इति प्रोक्त: पितॄन् a: पाति सर्वत: ।। १२॥

“The following utterance, which is held
sacred as a Sruti text, is heard to have
been addressed to the manes by the wise
and illustrious king named Gaya, who is
believed to have founded the city of Gaya,
while performing sacrifices in the territory of
Gaya (the region which is now covered by
the district of Gaya) : ‘Since a son delivers
his father from the hell named ‘Put’ he is
designated as Putra. According to another
interpretation, a son is he who protects his
father in all possible ways. (11-12)

एष्टव्या बहव: UAT गुणवन्तो बहुश्रुता:।
तेषां a समवेतानामपि कश्चिद् गयां व्रजेत्॥ १३॥
“A number of sons, endowed with virtues

and versed in many Sastras, should be
desired so that at least one of them may
