744

त्वयाद्य fe ward चिरकालमुपार्जितम्।
यशो dtd च तेजश्च wera विनाशित:॥७५॥

“By you, O unworthy soul, have my
glory, which was earned through a long
period, nay, my valour, dignity and peoples’
faith in my bravery too been wiped out. (5)
शत्रो: प्रख्यातवीर्यस्य रञ्जनीयस्य fad:
पश्यतो युद्धलुब्धोऽहं Hd: कापुरुषस्त्वया॥ ६॥

“While my adversary, whose prowess
is widely known, and who deserved to be
gratified through feats of valour, stood looking
on, myself, who was covetous of fighting,
was made a coward of by you! (6)

यत् त्वं कथमिदं मोहान्न ae वहसि दुर्मते।
सत्योऽयं प्रतितर्को A परेण त्वमुपस्कृत:॥७॥

“In case you do not through perversity
drive the chariot at any event against the
enemy, O evil-minded fellow, my suspicion
that you stand corrupted by the enemy will
be justified. (7)

नहि aq fad कर्म geet हितकांक्षिण:।
रिपूणां सदृशं त्वेतद् यत् त्वयैतदनुष्ठितम्॥८॥

“This act which has been done by you
in the shape of removing me from the
battlefield, is worthy of an enemy alone.
Surely it cannot be the work of a well-
wisher wishing well of his well-wisher. (8)

Fada wi शीघ्रं यावन्नापैति a रिपु:।
यदि वाध्युषितोऽसि त्वं स्मर्यते यदि मे गुण:॥ ९॥
“Speedily drive the chariot back to the
battlefield till my enemy does not withdraw,
if you have lived with me long enough and
if the benefits received from me are still
remembered by you.” (9)
एवं परुषमुक्तस्तु हितबुद्धिरबुद्धिना।
sade रावणं सूतो fed सानुनयं aa: lo
Spoken to in these harsh words by the
insensate Ravana, the charioteer for his part,
who thought well of him, made to Ravana the
following friendly and courteous reply: (10)

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA +

न भीतोऽस्मि नमूढोऽस्मि नोपजप्तोऽस्मि शत्रुभि: |
न प्रमत्तो न नि:स्नेहो विस्मृता न च सत्क्रिया॥ ११॥

“| was neither afraid nor perplexed, nor
was | won over by the enemies, nor was |
negligent, nor disloyal, nor (again) have the
benefits conferred by you been forgotten by
me. (11)

मया तु हितकामेन यशश्च परिरक्षता।
स्नेहप्रसन्नमनसा हितमित्यप्रियं कृतम्॥१२॥

“An act which was not to your taste
was nevertheless done by me as something
conducive to your interest with a mind
affectionately disposed towards you through
attachment, desiring, as | did, to be of
service to you, safeguarding your glory.

(12)

नास्मिन्नर्थे महाराज त्वं मां प्रियहिते रतम्।
कश्चिल्लघुरिवानार्यो दोषतो गन्तुमर्हसि॥१३॥

“Like a petty-minded and unworthy man,
you ought not to hold me, devoted as | am
to your pleasure and good, guilty in this
matter of taking you away from the field of
battle, O monarch! (13)

श्रूयतां प्रति दास्यामि यन्निमित्तं मया रथ:।
नदीवेग इवाम्भोभि: dant विनिवर्तित:॥१४॥

“Kindly listen: | will make answer to
your query as to why your chariot was
taken back by me from the battlefield, even
as the onrush of a stream disgorging itself
into a sea is pushed back by a tide. (14)

sq तवावगच्छामि महता रणकर्मणा।

नहि ते वीर्यसौमुख्यं प्रकर्षं नोपधारये॥१५॥
“| took note of the exhaustion occasioned

by your strenuous fighting. Indeed, there

was no exhibition of valour on your part, nor

did | notice any superiority to your adversary

in you. (15)

रथोद्बहनखिन्नाश्च war मे रथवाजिन:।

दीना घर्मपरिश्रान्ता गावो वर्षहता इव॥१६॥

“The steeds of my chariot too, which
