* AYODHYAKANDA +

hope the glorious mother Kaikeyi too is
rejoicing (because of my exile and Your
ascension to the throne of Ayodhya). (10)

कच्चिद् विनयसम्पन्न: कुलपुत्रो बहुश्रुत:।
अनसूयुरनुद्रष्टा सत्कृतस्ते पुरोहित:॥११॥

“Is your personal priest a son of
Vasistha, who is rich in humility, born of a
noble pedigree, a man of extensive learning,
free from spite and skilled in all pious and
sacred rites—treated with honour by you?

(11)

कच्चिदग्निषु ते युक्तो विधिज्ञो मतिमानृजु:।
हुतं च होष्यमाणं च काले वेदयते सदा॥१२॥

“Does the priest, employed by you to
look after the sacred fires, who is well-
versed in the procedure of conducting
sacrificial performances, is endowed with
intelligence and guileless of disposition,
invariably inform you in time about a sacred
fire having already been or going to be fed
with oblations? (12)

वृद्धांश्च तात वैद्यांश्च ब्राह्मणांश्चाभिमन्यसे॥ 83

“Do you hold in high esteem gods and
manes, dependants, elders, kinsmen of your
father’s age, the aged, the physicians as
well as the Brahmanas, my darling? (13)

इष्वस्त्रवरसम्पन्नमर्थशास्त्रविशारदम् ।
सुधन्वानमुपाध्यायं कच्चित् त्वं तात मन्यसे॥ १४॥
“Do you respect Sudhanva, your
teacher of the science of archery, who is
equipped with knowledge relating to the use
of excellent arrows discharged without uttering
spells and missiles propelled with the
utterance of spells and well-versed in political
economy? (14)
कच्चिदात्मसमा: शूरा: श्रुतवन्तो जितेन्द्रिया: 1
कुलीनाश्चेङ्गितज्ञाश्च कृतास्ते तात AAT: i १५॥
“| hope counsellors who are valiant like

you and full of learning, have controlled their
senses, are born of a high pedigree and

645

know the meaning of signs, have been
secured by you, my darling! (15)
wat विजयमूलं fe ust vata weal
सुसंव्रतो मन्तिधुरैरमात्यै: शास्त्रकोविदै:।॥ १६॥
“A secret well-guarded by ministers
who are the foremost counsellors and well-

versed in politics is the root of victory of
kings, O scion of Raghu ! (16)

कच्चिन्निद्रावशं नैषि कच्चित् कालेऽवबुध्यसे।
कच्चिच्चापररात्रेषु चिन्तयस्यर्थनैषुणम्॥ १७॥

“| hope you do not fall a prey to excess
of sleep and wake betimes. And do you
contemplate during the late hours of the
night on the methods of acquiring wealth?(17)

कच्चिन्मन्त्रयसे नैक: कच्चिन्न बहुभि: सह।
कच्चित् ते मन्तरितो मन्त्रो राष्ट्रं न परिधावति॥ १८ ॥

“| hope you do not deliberate alone
without consulting anyone nor do you take
counsel with many. | hope the decision
arrived at by you through deliberation with
your counsellors does not reach the public
before it is carried out. (18)

कच्चिदर्थं विनिश्चित्य लघुमूलं महोदयम्।
क्षिप्रमारभसे कर्म न दीर्घयसि राघव॥१९॥
“| hope, considering your interest fully,
you launch an enterprise betimes with a
modest beginning but pregnant with great
potentialities, and do not defer it, O scion of
Raghu? (19)

कच्चिन्नु सुकृतान्येव कृतरूपाणि वा पुन:।
विदुस्ते सर्वकार्याणि न कर्तव्यानि पार्थिवा: tt २०॥

“| hope your vassals actually know of
all your projects only when they have been
duly carried out or at least well-nigh carried
out and not so long as they are yet to be
carried out. (20)

कच्चिन्न Achaea वा ये चाप्यपरिकीर्तिता: |
त्वया वा तव वामात्यैर्बुध्यते तात मन्त्रितम्॥ २१॥

“| hope your deliberations, which have
not been proclaimed are not known to
