430

The said queen, however, was neither
excited nor agonized nor was any change

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

observed at that time in the colour of her
face. (37)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्येऽयोध्याकाण्डे पञ्चत्रिंश: सर्ग: ॥ 34 ॥

Thus ends Canto Thirty-five in the Ayodhyakanda of the glorious Ramayana of
Valmiki, the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

Canto XXXVI

DaSaratha instructs Sumantra to take a detachment of the army and the
exchequer alongwith Sri Rama, to which Kaikeyi objects and insists
on his being sent into exile without any resources on the analogy
of Asamafija, son of the king’s forefather, Sagara. Another minister
of the king, Siddhartha by name, who was present there, opposes
Kaikeyi and urges that the analogy of Asamafja, who was a
perverse lad, could not be applied in the case of Sri Rama,
who possessed an ideal character and deserved in every
way to be installed in the office of Prince Regent. In
the event of Kaikeyi vetoing the proposal, the king
threatens to accompany the heir-apparent

तत: सुमन्त्रमैश्ष्वाक: पीडितोऽत्र प्रतिज्ञया।
सबाष्पमतिनि:श्वस्य जगादेदं पुनर्वच:॥१॥
Sighing deeply with tears in his eyes,
DaSaratha, a scion of Ikswaku, who was
bound by the pledge given by him to Kaikeyi
in the matter of sending Sri Rama into exile,
then spoke to Sumantra again as follows:
(1)

Gt सरत्नसुसम्पूर्णा चतुर्विधबला चमू:।
राघवस्यानुयात्रार्थं क्षिप्रं प्रतिविधीयताम्॥ २॥

“Let a detachment consisting of all the
four limbs of the army and richly provided
with jewels be detailed at once to accompany
Sri Rama, a scion of Raghu, O Sumantra ! (2)

रूपाजीवाश्च वादिन्यो वणिजश्च महाधना:।
शोभयन्तु कुमारस्य वाहिनी: सुप्रसारिता:॥ ३॥

“Nay, let courtesans adept in speaking,
as well as merchants possessing enormous
wealth and clever in efficiently spreading a

network of shops dealing in provisions and
other goods lend charm to the forces
accompanying the prince. (3)

a चैनमुपजीवन्ति wa ag वीर्यत:।
तेषां बहुविधं aa तानप्यत्र नियोजय॥४॥

“Further tell off in his service those
wrestlers too who depend on him and in
whom he takes delight by testing their
comparative strength, bestowing various gifts
on them. (4)

आयुधानि च मुख्यानि ARNT: शकटानि च।
अनुगच्छन्तु काकुत्स्थं व्याधाश्चारण्यकोविदा: । ५ ॥
“Let the principal weapons, courteous
and well-bred men and bullock-carts too
as well as hunters knowing the secrets
of forests accompany Rama, a scion of
Kakutstha. (5)
निघ्नन् मृगान् कुञ्जरांश्च पिबंश्चारण्यकं मधु।
नदीश्च विविधा: पश्यन् न राज्यं संस्मरिष्यति॥ ६ ॥।
