228

“And indeed how can one like you,
whose mind has penetrated into the realms
of righteousness and worldly prosperity and
who has determined his duty by discriminating
between what is noble and what is ignoble,
remain swayed by anger? For, the powerful
never give way to anger. (16)

न धर्मवादे न च लोकवृत्ते

न शास्त्रबुद्धिग्रहणेषु वापि।
विद्येत कश्चित्तव वीर तुल्य-
स्त्वं ह्युत्तम: सर्वसुरासुराणाम्॥ १७॥
“No one is your equal in discussing
virtue, nor in observing the worldly usage,
nor even in grasping the import of scriptures
by means of your intellect, O hero! Indeed
you are the foremost of the gods and the
demons. (17)
पराक्रमोत्साहमनस्विनां च
सुरासुराणामपि दुर्जयेन।
त्वयाप्रमेयेण सुरेन्द्रसङ्घा
जिताश्च युद्धेष्वसकृन्नरेन्द्रा:।। १८ UI

“Nay, by you, who are difficult to conquer
even for high-minded gods and demons
endowed with prowess and martial ardour and
are immeasurable in strength etc., hosts of
leaders of gods and rulers of men have been
conquered in combats more than once. (18)
इत्थंविधस्यामरदैत्यशत्रो:

शूरस्य वीरस्य तवाजितस्य।
कुर्वन्ति वीरा मनसाप्यलीकं

प्राणैर्विमुक्ता न तु भो: पुरा AU १९॥

“In the past heroes have never given
offence even with their mind to you, who are
so valiant and heroic and inimical even to
gods and demons and have never been
conquered by anyone, O King! Those who
raised their head, were immediately deprived
of their life. (19)
न चाप्यस्य कपेर्घाते कंचित् पश्याम्यहं गुणम्।
तेष्वयं पात्यतां दण्डो यैरयं प्रेषित: कपि:॥ २०॥

“Nor do | perceive any good whatsoever

« VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

in taking the life of this monkey. Let this
punishment in the form of death descend on
them by whom this monkey has been sent.
(20)

साधुर्वा यदि arg: wee समर्पित:।
ar परार्थं War न दूतो वधमर्हति॥ eit
“Whether he is good or bad, he has
been sent by our enemies. Advocating others’

interests, dependent as he is on them, an
envoy does not merit death. (21)

अपि चास्मिन् हते नान्यं राजन् पश्यामि खेचरम्।

इह य: पुनरागच्छेत् परं पारं महोदधे:॥ २२॥
“Moreover, once this monkey is killed,

O king, | see no other sky-ranger who can

come once more to the opposite shore of

the vast sea on this side. (22)

तस्मान्नास्य वधे यत्न: कार्य: परपुरंजय।
Wa सेन्द्रेषु देवेषु यत्नमास्थातुमर्हति॥ २३॥
“Therefore, O conqueror of hostile
citadels, no attempt should be made to take
the life of this monkey. On the other hand,

you should direct your efforts against the
gods including Indra, their ruler. (23)

अस्मिन् fare afe भूतमन्यं
पश्यामि यस्तौ नरराजपुत्रौ।
युद्धाय युद्धप्रिय दुर्विनीता-
वुद्योजयेद a भवता विरुद्धौ॥ २४॥

“If this monkey is put to death, | do not
really perceive any other created being who
can incite those two insolent human princes,
who are hostile to you, to wage war against
you, O bellicose king ! (24)
पराक्रमोत्साहमनस्विनां च

सुरासुराणामपि दुर्जयेन।
त्वया मनोनन्दन AT
युद्धाय निर्नाशयितुं न युक्तम्॥ २५॥

“For you, who are difficult to conquer

even for high-minded gods and demons

endowed with prowess and martial ardour,
O delight of ogres, it is not meet to crush
