* AYODHYAKANDA +

Supporting him in their arms and crying,
both the princes, Sri Rama and Laksmana
alongwith Sita laid him on the couch. (20)

अथ Wa मुहूर्तस्य लब्धसंज्ञं महीपतिम्।
उवाच प्राञ्जलिर्बाष्पशोकार्णवपरिप्लुतम्॥ २१॥
With folded hands Sri Rama then
spoke as follows to the Emperor, who had
soon regained his consciousness and was
plunged in an ocean of grief, shedding tears :
(21)

आपृच्छे A महाराज सर्वेषामीश्वरोऽसि न:।
प्रस्थितं दण्डकारण्यं पश्य त्वं कुशलेन माम्॥ २२॥
“| take leave of you, O Emperor, since
you are the master of us all. Pray, regard
me, who am about to leave for the Dandaka
forest, with favour. (22)

लक्ष्मणं चानुजानीहि सीता चान्वेतु At वनम्।
कारणैर्बहुभिस्तथ्यैर्वार्यमाणौ न चेच्छत:॥ २३॥

“Grant leave to Laksmana and let Sita
too accompany me to the forest. Though
being forbidden by me on numerous valid
grounds, they do not wish to stay behind.

(23)
अनुजानीहि सर्वान् न: शोकमुत्सृज्य मानद।
लक्ष्मणं मां च सीतां च प्रजापतिरिवात्मजान्॥ २४॥

“Giving up grief, O bestower of honour
on all, grant leave to us all, viz., Laksmana,
Sita and myself, even as Brahma, the lord
of created beings, did to his sons, Sanaka
and his three brothers, who were intent on
practising austerities in the forest.” (24)

प्रतीक्षमाणमव्यग्रमनुज्ञां जगतीपते: |
Sad राजा सग्ग्रैक्ष्य वनवासाय राघवम्॥ VE Il
Fixing his gaze on Sri Rama, a scion
of Raghu, who was coolly awaiting His
Majesty’s permission to dwell in the forest,
the king said : (25)
ae Waa कैकेय्या वरदानेन मोहित:।
अयोध्यायां त्वमेवाद्य भव राजा निगृह्य माम्॥ २६॥

“| have been deprived of my senses
by Kaikeyi through a boon granted by me in

423

her favour, O scion of Raghu! Taking me
captive, therefore, be you the king of
Ayodhya.” (26)

एवमुक्तो नृपतिना wat धर्मभृतां वर:।
प्रत्युवाचाञ्जलिं कृत्वा पितरं वाक्यकोविद:॥ २७॥
Joining his palms when told thus by
the king, Sri Rama, the foremost of the
champions of righteousness, who was a
master of expression, replied as follows to
his father : (27)

भवान् वर्षसहस्राय पृथिव्या aad पति:।
अहं त्वरण्ये वत्स्यामि न मे राज्यस्य कांक्षिता Ul २८ ॥

“Be you the ruler of the globe for another
thousand years, O king! | for my part shall
live in the forest, since there is no ambition
for sovereignty in me. (28)

नव पञ्च च वर्षाणि वनवासे faea ai
UA: पादौ ग्रहीष्यामि प्रतिज्ञान्ते नराधिप॥ २९॥

“Having diverted myself in the course
of my sojourn in the forest for nine years
and five, | shall clasp your feet once more
after redeeming my pledge, O ruler of men !”

(29)
कैकेय्या चोद्यमानस्तु मिथो राजा तमब्रवीत्॥ Bo

Being urged in secret by Kaikeyi, the
afflicted monarch, who was held fast in the

fetters of truth, then said weeping to his
aforesaid beloved son: (30)

श्रेयसे qa ad पुनरागमनाय al
गच्छस्वारिष्टमव्यग्रर पन्थानमकुतोभयम्॥ ३१॥

“Proceed, my _ darling, with an
undisturbed mind on a happy and safe
journey, which may bring you happiness
hereafter and prosperity in this world and
bring you back to Ayodhya. (31)

न f€ सत्यात्मनस्तात धर्माभिमनसस्तव।
संनिवर्तयितुं ahs: शक्यते रघुनन्दन॥ ३२॥

“Your decision to dwell in the forest, O
the delight of the Raghus, truthful as you
