638

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

Canto XCVHII

Telling off Guha and Satrughna with their followers to find out the hermitage of
Sri Rama, Bharata himself, who was keen to see Sri Rama, goes out in
search of his hermitage with the ministers, walking all the way and
envying the good fortune of Sita and Laksmana, who were living with
Sri Rama; and reaching the foot of a sala tree and concluding the
place from the presence of smoke nearby to be a human
habitation and ruling out the possibility of any other human
being living in that lonely forest, he eagerly hastens
forward in the hope of meeting Sri Rama

निवेश्य सेनां तु fay: पद्भ्यां पादवतां az: |
अभिगन्तुं स काकुत्स्थमियेष गुरुवर्तकम्॥१॥
Having encamped the army by the
side of Citrakuta, the powerful Bharata, for
his part, who was the foremost of those
endowed with feet, desired to approach on
foot Sri Rama (a scion of Kakutstha), who
was implementing the words of his father. (1)

निविष्टमात्रे सैन्ये q यथोद्देशं विनीतवत्।
भरतो भ्रातरं वाक्यं शत्रुघ्नमिदमब्रवीत्॥२॥

The army having barely encamped ina
well-behaved manner according to Bharata’s
directions, Bharata for his part spoke the
following words to his younger brother,
Satrughna : (2)

fag वनमिदं dra ae: समन्तत:।
लुब्धैश्च सहितैरेभिस्त्वमन्वेषितुमर्हसि॥ ३॥

“With these multitudes of men forming
your retinue, accompanied by the Nisadas,
the followers of Guha, O gentle brother, you
ought quickly to search this forest all round.

(3)
Tet ज्ञातिसहस्रेण शरचापासिपाणिना।
समन्वेषतु काकुत्स्थावस्मिन् uted: स्वयम्॥४॥

“Let Guha, surrounded by a thousand
of his clansmen, carrying each arrows, a
bow and a sword in their hands, personally
search for Sri! Rama and Laksmana, the
two scions of Kakutstha, in this forest. (4)

अमात्यै:; सह पौरैश्च गुरुभिश्च द्विजातिभि:।

We सर्वं चरिष्यामि पद्भ्यां uaa: स्वयम्॥५॥
“In the company of and surrounded by

ministers and citizens, preceptors and other

Brahmanas, | shall personally go round the

whole forest on foot. (5)

यावन्न रामं द्रक्ष्यामि लक्ष्मणं वा महाबलम्।

aed वा महाभागां न मे शान्तिर्भविष्यति॥ ६॥
“There will be no peace to me until |

see Sri Rama or the very mighty Laksmana

or the highly fortunate Sita, a princess of
the Videha territory. (6)

यावन्न चन्द्रसंकाशं Ad द्रक्ष्यामि शुभाननम्।
भ्रातु: पद्मविशालाक्षं न A शान्तिर्भविष्यति॥७॥

“There will be no peace of mind to me
until | look on the well-known blessed
countenance of my elder brother, shining
brightly like the full moon and distinguished
by eyes big as the lotus. (7)
सिद्धार्थं: wa सौमित्रिर्यश्चन्द्रविमलोपमम्।
मुखं पश्यति रामस्य राजीवाक्षं महाद्युतिम्॥८॥

“Accomplished of purpose, indeed, is
Laksmana, son of Sumitra, who beholds
the highly resplendent face of Sri Rama,
resembling the clear moon and marked with
lotus-like eyes. (8)
यावन्न चरणौ wd: पार्थिवव्यञ्जनान्वितौ।
शिरसा प्रग्रहीष्यामि न मे शान्तिर्भविष्यति॥ ९॥

“There will be no peace of mind for me
