+ UTTARAKANDA +

daises and the portals of the Puspaka. Though
being demolished in combat, that aerial car,
the Puspaka, which was the seat of gods
remained intact by the power of Brahma,
imperishable as it was. The army of that
high-souled god was a very huge one; it was
past counting; of the heroes who formed the
advance guard there were hundreds and
thousands. Thereupon the aforesaid ministers
of Ravana, who were all great heroes, as
well as the notorious King Ravana, fought
each according to his will and strength with
trees and mountains as well as with hundreds
of house-tops. (19—30)

ते तु शोणितदिग्धाङ्मा: सर्वशस्त्रसमाहता:।
अमात्या राक्षसेन्द्रस्य चक्रुरायोधनं महत्॥३१॥

Though all their limbs were smeared
with blood, and lacerated by all kinds of
weapons, the ministers of Ravana put forth
a major conflict. (31)

अन्योन्यं ते महाभागा जघ्नु: प्रहरणैर्भृशम्।
यमस्य च महाबाहो रावणस्य च मन्त्रिण:॥ ३२॥

Those glorious ministers of Yama as
well as those of Ravana, O mighty-armed
one, struck each of the other party violently
with weapons. (32)

अमात्यांस्तांस्तु संत्यज्य यमयोधा महाबला:।

तमेव चाभ्यधावन्त शूलबर्षैर्दशाननम्।। ३३॥
Leaving alone the said ministers, the

exceptionally mighty soldiers of Yama for

their part attacked the notorious Ravana
himself with a shower of arrows. (33)

तत: शोणितदिग्धाङ्ग: प्रहारैर्जर्जरीकृत:।
फुल्लाशोक इवाभाति पुष्पके राक्षसाधिप:।॥ ३४॥
Shattered by the adversaries’ blows
and his limbs smeared with blood, the
suzerain lord of the Raksasas in the Puspaka

thereupon looked like an Asoka tree in flower.
(34)

स तु शूलगदाप्रासाञ्छक्तितोमरसायकान्।

मुसलानि शिलाव्रृक्षान् मुमोचास्त्रबलाद् बली ।। ३५ I

That mighty warrior for his part hurled

913

pikes, clubs and spears, javelins, iron clubs
and arrows, pestles, rocks and trees by dint
of his knowledge of mystic missiles. (35)
तरूणां च शिलानां च शस्त्राणां चातिदारुणम्।
यमसैन्येषु तद् at पपात धरणीतले॥ ३६॥
That most formidable shower of trees

and rocks and weapons too fell on the
troops of Yama standing on the ground. (36)
तांस्तु watt विनिर्भिद्य तदस्त्रमपहत्य च।
जघ्नुस्ते राक्षसं घोरमेकं शतसहस्रश:॥ ३७॥
Having destroyed all those weapons
and repelled the mystic missile itself, they
(the soldiers of Yama) struck that redoubtable

single warrior, Ravana, in their hundreds of
thousands. (37)

ukart च तं ad set मेघोत्करा gal
भिन्दिपालैश्च शूलैश्च निरुछ्वासमपोथयन्॥ ३८॥

Surrounding him even as masses of
clouds would encircle a hill, they assailed
him with Bhindipalas and darts so as to
suffocate him. (38)

विमुक्तकवच: gag: सिक्त: शोणितविस्त्रवै: |

तत: स Uh त्यक्त्वा पृथिव्यामवतिष्ठत॥ ३९॥
His armour having been severed, nay,

bathed in streams of blood and, leaving the

Puspaka, Ravana, who was provoked to
anger, stood on the ground. (39)

ad: स कार्मुकी बाणी समरे चाभिवर्धत।
लब्धसंज्ञो मुहूर्तेन क्रुद्धस्तस्थौ यथान्तक:॥४०॥

Regaining his consciousness in a short
while, and furnished with his bow and arrows,
he thereupon rose in spirit on the battlefield
and stood enraged like Death. (40)
ad: पाशुपतं दिव्यमस्त्रं संधाय कार्मुके।
तिष्ठ तिष्ठेति तानुक्त्वा तच्चापं व्यपकर्षत॥ ४१॥

Then fitting the divine missile presided
over by Lord Siva to his bow, and saying:
“Wait, wait!”, he stretched the bow-string. (41)

आकर्णात् स विकृष्याथ चापमिन्द्रारिराहवे।
मुमोच तं शरं क्रुद्धस्तरिषुरे शंकरो यथा॥४२॥
