+ UTTARAKANDA +

some said, ‘We shall protect’ and the others
said, ‘We shall adore.’ Then the creator told
them, ‘Let those of you who said, ‘We shall
protect’ become Raksasas and those of
you who said, ‘We shall adore’ become
Yaksas.’ (12-13)
aa हेति: प्रहेतिश्च भ्रातरौ राक्षसाधिपौ।
मधुकैटभसंकाशौ बभूवतुररिंदमौ ।। १४॥
“There were two brothers, Heti and
Praheti, leaders of the Raksasas and the

scourge of their enemies, compeers of Madhu
and Kaitabha. (14)

प्रहेतिर्धार्मिकस्तत्र तपोवनगतस्तदा।
हेतिर्दारक्रियार्थे तु परं यत्नमथाकरोत्॥१५॥
“Of them, Praheti, given to the practice
of Dharma, then repaired to a forest retreat
used as a place for performing Tapas. Heti
made great efforts to secure a wife. (15)
स कालभगिनीं Heat भयां नाम महाभयाम्।
उदावहदमेयात्मा स्वयमेव महामति:॥१६॥
“Highly intelligent and indefatigable, he
married on his own initiative the sister of
Yama, Bhaya by name, who inspired great
terror (because of her being a sister of
Kala). (16)
स det जनयामास हेती राक्षसपुंगव:।
पुत्रं पुत्रवतां श्रेष्ठो विद्युत्केशमिति sa go it

“Heti, the best of Raksasas begot of
her a son known as Vidyutkesa, and came
to be recognized as the foremost of those
blessed with sons. (17)

विद्युत्केशो हेतिपुत्र: स दीप्तार्कसमप्रभ:।
व्यवर्धत महातेजास्तोयमध्य इवाम्बुजम्॥१८॥

“VidyutkeSa, the son of Heti, who was
of great lustre like the blazing sun, grew up
as a lotus in the midst of water. (18)

a यदा यौवनं भद्रमनुप्राप्तो निशाचर:।

ततो दारक्रियां तस्य कर्तुं व्यवसित: पिता॥१९॥
“When that Raksasa attained blooming

youth, his father exerted himself for getting

him married. (19)

855

संध्यादुहितरं सोऽथ संध्यातुल्यां प्रभावत:।
वरयामास पुत्रार्थं हेती राक्षसपुंगव:॥ २०॥
“Heti, the best of Raksasas, forthwith
selected for his son, the daughter of Sandhya,
equal in majesty to Sandhya herself. (20)

अवश्यमेव दातव्या परस्मै सेति संध्यया।
चिन्तयित्वा सुता दत्ता विद्युत्केशाय राघव॥ २१॥

“Thinking that her daughter had
necessarily to be given to another, Sandhya
gave her away in marriage to VidyutkeSa,
O Raghava ! (21)

संध्यायास्तनयां लब्ध्वा विद्युत्केशो निशाचर: |
Ta स तया सार्धं पौलोम्या मघवानिव॥ २२॥

“Having secured (Salakatankata) the
daughter of Sandhya, VidyutkeSa, the said
Raksasa, revelled with her as Indra does
with Paulomi. (22)

केनचित्त्वथं कालेन राम सालकटङ्कटा।
विद्युत्केशाद् गर्भमाप घनराजिरिवार्णवात्॥ २३॥

“In course of time, 0 Sri Rama,
Salakatankata thereupon conceived a child
through Vidyutkesa even as a mass of
clouds would draw water from the ocean.

(23)

तत: सा राक्षसी गर्भं घनगर्भसमप्रभम्।
प्रसूता Wet गत्वा गङ्गा गर्भमिवाग्निजम्।
समुत्सृज्य तु सा गर्भं विद्युत्केशरतार्थिनी॥ ex ii
रेमे तु सार्धं पतिना विस्मृत्य सुतमात्मजम्।
उत्सृष्टस्तु तदा गर्भो घनशब्दसमस्वन:॥ २५॥
“The Raksasi repaired to the slopes of
Mount Mandara and gave birth to a son,
brilliant like lightning, even as Goddess Ganga
delivered the offspring (of Lord Siva) released
by Agni. Desiring to revel with VidyutkeSa,
she delivered the child and revelled with her
husband, forgetting all about her own child.
Deserted by her, the baby then rumbled like
a cloud. (24-25)

तयोत्सृष्ट: स a शिशु: शरदर्कसमद्युति: |
निधायास्ये स्वयं मुष्टिं रुरोद शनकैस्तदा॥ २६॥
