* AYODHYAKANDA +

आयस्ते विपुल: कच्चित् कच्चिदल्पतरो व्यय: |
अपात्रेषु न ते कच्चित् कोषो गच्छति राघव॥ ५४॥

“Is your income sufficiently large to
meet your expenses and your expenditure
comparatively less? | hope your wealth does
not go to undeserving men, O scion of
Raghu! (54)
देवतार्थे च frat ब्राह्मणाभ्यागतेषु च।
aay मित्रवर्गेषु कच्चिद् गच्छति ते व्यय:॥ ५७५ Il

“| further hope your wealth is expended
exclusively in the cause of gods and manes
as well as over the Brahmanas and
unexpected visitors, warriors and hosts of
friends. (55)
कच्चिदार्योऽपि शुद्धात्मा क्षारितश्चापकर्मणा।
VET: शास्त्रकुशलैर्न लोभाद् बध्यते शुचि: UW ५६ I

“| hope no pious soul, who is pure of
mind and sinless, is convicted from greed,
when charged with some offence, though
not found guilty by those well-versed in law-
books. (56)

गृहीतश्चैव yes काले gv: सकारण:।
कच्चिन्न मुच्यते चोरो धनलोभान्नरर्षभ॥ ५७॥

“| hope no thief who has been detected
at the time of theft and apprehended on
sufficient ground and also questioned and
found guilty is released on account of greed
of wealth, O jewel among men! (57)

व्यसने कच्चिदाढ्यस्य दुर्बलस्य च राघव।

अर्थं विरागा: पश्यन्ति तवामात्या ACMA: US I
“In an unhappy contention between an

affluent and a financially feeble man, O

scion of Raghu, do your ministers of vast

learning judge the case impartially? (58)

यानि मिथ्याभिशस्तानां पतन्त्यश्रूणि राघव।
तानि पुत्रपशून् घ्नन्ति प्रीत्यर्थमनुशासत:॥७५९॥

“The tears that drop from the eyes of
men falsely convicted, O scion of Raghu,
destroy the sons and cattle of a king who

649

rules the people merely for the sake of
pleasure, caring little for equity and justice.
(59)

कच्चिद्वृद्धांश्च बालांश्च वैद्यान् मुख्यांश्च राघव।
दानेन मनसा वाचा त्रिभिरेतैर्बुभूषसे॥६०॥

“Do you seek, O scion of Raghu, to
win over the elders, children and foremost
physicians by the following three means,
viz., gifts, a loving mind and polite words?

(60)

कच्चिद् Tes वृद्धांश्च तापसान् देवतातिथीन्।
चैत्यांश्च सर्वान् सिद्धार्थान् ब्राह्मणांश्च नमस्यसि ।। ६१ ॥

“Do you greet your teachers and elders,
ascetics, deities and unexpected visitors as
well as all the trees standing at crossroads
and believed to be the abode of gods and
Brahmanas who have achieved the object
of their life through their learning, character
and austerities? (61)

कच्चिदर्थेन at धर्ममर्थं धर्मेण वा पुन:।
उभौ वा प्रीतिलोभेन ama न विबाधसे॥ ६२॥

“| hope you do not cause interruption in
your religious practices by your excessive
devotion to wealth and devoting the morning
hours and forenoon to the pursuit of wealth
and other secular interests, nor do you mar
your earthly interests by your over-emphasis
on religion (and allowing your religious duties
to encroach upon the midday hours and
afternoon reserved for the pursuit of wealth
and other secular interests) nor do you mar
both your religious and secular interests by
your self-indulgence in the form of avidity
for gratification of the senses. (62)
कच्चिदर्थं च कामं च at च जयतां वर।
विभज्य काले कालज्ञ Waly वरद सेवसे॥ ६३॥

“Do you pursue all the three objects of
human pursuit, viz., wealth and the delights
of sense and religion only during the hours
allotted to each,* O bestower of boons,

* Our Smrti texts enjoin the pursuit of religion during the morning hours and forenoon, the pursuit
of wealth during the daytime and the pursuit of pleasure during the first quarter of the night.
