* BALAKANDA +

O scion of Ikswaku! | know you to be
exceedingly pious, my child! | shall afford
shelter to you; don’t be afraid, O jewel
among kings ! (2)

अहमामन्त्रये सर्वान् महर्षीन् पुण्यकर्मण:।
यज्ञसाह्यकरान् राजंस्ततो यक्ष्यसि निर्वृत:॥ ३॥

“| shall presently send word to all great
Rsis of virtuous deeds, who will help you in
the performance of a sacrifice intended to
be undertaken by you, O king! Then you
will prosecute your sacrificial undertaking at
ease. (3)
अनेन सह रूपेण सशरीरो गमिष्यसि॥४॥

“You will bodily ascend to heaven in
this very form, which now stands inflicted
on you by the curse of your preceptor in the
form of his sons. (4)
हस्तप्राप्तमहं मन्ये स्वर्गं तव नराधिप।
यस्त्वं कौशिकमागम्य शरण्यं शरणागत:॥७५॥

“| consider heaven as already attained
by you, O ruler of men, in that having
sought the presence of ViSwamitra, son of
Kusika, i.e., myself, you have come for
protection to one who is capable of affording
shelter to those who need it.” (5)

`एवमुक्त्वा महातेजा: Gar परमधार्मिकान्।
व्यादिदेश महाप्राज्ञान् यज्ञसम्भारकारणात्॥६॥
Saying so, the exceptionally glorious
ViSwamitra commanded his supremely pious
and highly intelligent sons to make
preparations for a sacrifice. (6)

सर्वान् शिष्यान् समाहूय वाक्यमेतदुवाच ह।
सर्वानृषीन् सवासिष्ठानानयध्वं ममाज्ञया॥७॥
सशिष्यान् सुहृदश्चैव alas: सुबहुश्रुतान्।
यदन्यो वचनं ब्रूयान्मद्वाक्यबलचोदित:॥ ८॥
aq सर्वमखिलेनोक्तं ममाख्येयमनादृतम्।
तस्य तद् वचनं श्रुत्वा दिशो जग्मुस्तदाज्ञया॥ ९॥
Summoning all his dependents, so the
tradition goes, he gave the following
instructions to them : “Under my orders bring

231

here all the Rsis, including the sons of
Vasistha, as well as their relations well-
versed in a good many subjects, alongwith
their pupils and priests capable of officiating
at a sacrifice. If anyone who is summoned
on the strength of my word or anyone else
makes any disparaging observation, all
those remarks should be reproduced to
me in their entirety.” Hearing the aforesaid
order of ViSwamitra, his followers proceeded
in various directions under his command.
(7—9)
आजग्मुरथ देशेभ्य: सर्वेभ्यो ब्रह्मवादिन:।
ते च शिष्या: समागम्य मुनिं ज्वलिततेजसम्॥ १०॥
wag वचनं wd सर्वेषां ब्रह्मवादिनाम्।
श्रुत्वा ते वचनं सर्वे समायान्ति द्विजातय:॥ ११॥
सर्वदेशेषु चागच्छन् वर्जयित्वा महोदयम्।
वासिष्ठं यच्छतं सर्वं क्रोधपर्याकुलाक्षरम्॥१२॥
यथाह वचनं wa yo त्वं मुनिपुंगव।
क्षत्रियो याजको यस्य चण्डालस्य विशेषत: ॥ १३॥
कथं सदसि भोक्तारो हविस्तस्य सुरर्षय:।
ब्राह्मणा वा महात्मानो भुक्त्वा चाण्डालभोजनम्॥ १४॥
कथं स्वर्गं गमिष्यन्ति विश्वामित्रेण पालिता: |
एतद् वचननैष्ठुर्यमूचु: संरक्तलोचना:॥१५॥
वासिष्ठा मुनिशार्दूल सर्वे सहमहोदया:।
तेषां तद् वचनं श्रुत्वा सर्वेषां मुनिपुंगव:॥१६॥
क्रोधसंरक्तनयन: सरोषमिदमब्रवीत्।
Aq दूषयन्त्यदुष्टं मां तप उग्रं समास्थितम्॥ १७॥
भस्मीभूता दुरात्मानो भविष्यन्ति न संशय:।
TI A कालपाशेन नीता वैवस्वतक्षयम्॥१८॥

In due course exponents of the Vedas
began to pour from all lands. Nay, returning
to ViSwamitra (who was now living as a
hermit) of flaming glory, all his dependents
too repeated to him the remarks of all the
exponents of the Vedas whom they had
approached. The followers said, “Hearing
your call all learned Brahmanas belonging
to all lands are duly coming, while some
have already arrived, barring, of course,
Mahodaya and all the hundred sons of
Vasistha. Hear you now, O jewel among
