+ UTTARAKANDA +

an eclipse) sought to seize the sun the
same day on which Hanuman actually sprang
in the sky to catch hold of the sun. (81)

“Nay, Rahu was laid hands on by
Hanuman on the solar chariot. Thereupon
Rahu, the scourge of the sun-god and the
moon-god, slipped away from that place,
frightened. (32)

इन्द्रस्य भवनं गत्वा सरोष: सिंहिकासुत:।
अब्रवीद् भ्रुकुटिं कृत्वा देवं देवगणैर्वृतम्॥ ३३॥

“Knitting his eyebrows after proceeding
to the abode of Indra, Rahu (son of Simhika)
angrily spoke as follows to the deity
surrounded by hosts of gods: (33)

बुभुक्षापनयं दत्त्वा dart मम areal
किमिदं ad त्वया दत्तमन्यस्य AAAS I ३४॥
“Having allotted to me the moon and
the sun as a means of appeasing my hunger,
O Indra, how is it that my aforesaid share
has been given over by you to another, O
destroyer of the demons Bala and Vrtra?
(34)
अद्याहं पर्वकाले तु जिघृक्षु: सूर्यमागत:।
अथान्यो राहुरासाद्य जग्राह सहसा रविम्॥ ३५॥
“*Today at the conjunction of the
moonless night and the new moon day | for
my part came to lay hold of the sun.
Meanwhile, approaching the sun, another
Rahu seized it all at once.’ (35)
स राहोर्वचनं श्रुत्वा वासव: सम्भ्रमान्वित:।
उत्पपातासनं हित्वा उद्बहन् काञ्चनीं स्रजम्॥ ३६॥
“Leaving his seat on hearing the
grievance of Rahu, Indra, full of awe, sprang

971

on his feet, holding up his gold necklace.
(36)

तत: कैलासकूटाभं wddx मदस्त्रवम्।
Terao प्रांशुं स्वर्णघण्टाट्ठहासिनम्॥ ३७॥

इन्द्र: करीन्द्रमारुह्य UE Hal Wal
Ware यत्राभवत् Ba: सहानेन हनूमता॥ ३८॥
“Mounting Airavata (the king of
elephants), who was tall like a peak of Mount
Kailasa, was distinguished by four tusks, nay,
who (being in heat) was exuding temple-juice,
was richly decorated, and was uttering a
horse-laugh in the form of the ringing of a
gold bell, and placing Rahu before him, Indra
marched to the spot where the sun-god was
with the yonder Hanuman. (37-38)

अथातिरभसेनागाद् राहुरुत्सृज्य वासवम्।
अनेन च स वै GS: प्रधावन् शैलकूटवत्॥ ३९॥

“Meanwhile, leaving Indra behind, Rahu
advanced with great speed and he was
actually seen by Hanuman running fast like
a mountain-peak in motion. (39)

तत: Ga समुत्सृज्य WE फलमवेक्ष्य al
उत्पपात Ueita weld = सिंहिकासुतम्॥४०॥

“Leaving the sun and visualizing Rahu
to be a fruit, Hanuman thereupon again
bounded in the skies to take hold of the son
of Simhika. (40)
उत्सृज्यार्कमिमं राम प्रधावन्तं प्लवङ्गमम्।
अवेक्ष्यैवं UGA मुखशेष: पराङ्मुख:॥४१॥

“Clearly perceiving this monkey,
Hanuman, running with all speed towards
him leaving the sun alone, O Rama, Rahu,
who had such huge proportions and of
whom the head alone remained* retraced
his steps with his face turned in the opposite
direction. (41)

* We are told in VIII. ix of Srimad Bhagavata how the demon Rahu had surreptitiously placed himself

between the sun-god and the moon-god in the row of gods while nectar was being doled out to the latter

by the Lord in the form of an enchanting damsel and the sun-god and the moon-god pointed this out to

the Lord, who lopped off the head of the demon with His discus. The head, however, was immortalised by

quaffing nectar and assails the sun-god and the moon-god, bearing enmity towards them (verse 24—26).
