420

truth of the scriptures would address harsh
words to a mighty man still in power?
(7)
आनीय च वनात् सीतां पद्महीनामिव श्रियम्।
किमर्थं प्रतिदास्यामि राघवस्य भयादहम्॥८॥

“Nay, having borne away from the forest
Sita, who is like Laksmi (the goddess of
fortune) without the lotus, wherefore shall |
give her back through fear of Rama (a
scion of Raghu)? (8)

ad वानरकोटीभि: wate सलक्ष्मणम्।
usa कैश्चिदहोभिश्च wad Pred मया॥९॥

“Nay, see Rama (a scion of Raghu)
killed by me in a few days alongwith Sugriva
and Laksmana in the midst of crores of
monkeys. (9)

we यस्य न तिष्ठन्ति दैवतान्यपि संयुगे।

स Hee Wau युद्धे भयमाहारयिष्यति॥ १०॥
“Of whom will Ravana entertain fear in

an encounter—Ravana, whom even gods

dare not withstand in a duel? (10)

द्विधा भज्येयमप्येवं न नमेयं तु कस्यचित्।

एष मे सहजो दोष: स्वभावो दुरतिक्रम:॥११॥
“| would fain break into two but would

never bend before anyone. This is my

inherent weakness. Nature is hard to
overcome. (11)

यदि तावत् समुद्रे तु सेतुर्बद्धो यदृच्छया।
रामेण विस्मय: कोऽत्र येन A भयमागतम्॥ १२॥

“If at all by chance a bridge has been
thrown over the sea by Rama, what marvel
is there in it due to which fear has taken
possession of you ? (12)

स तु dated wa: we वानरसेनया।
प्रतिजानामि a सत्यं न जीवन् प्रतियास्यति॥ १३॥

“Having crossed the sea alongwith an
army of monkeys, Rama, however, will not
be able to return alive: | truly promise to
you.” (13)

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA +

व्रीडितो माल्यवान् वाक्यं नोत्तरं प्रत्यपद्यत॥ १४॥

Abashed to find Ravana full of keenness
for war and offended while speaking, as
aforesaid, Malyavan made no reply. (14)

जयाशिषा तु राजानं वर्धयित्वा यथोचितम्।
माल्यवानभ्यनुज्ञातो जगाम स्वं निवेशनम्॥१५॥

Having cheered the’ king’ with
benedictions of triumph in accordance with
the rules of propriety, and duly permitted by
him, Malyavan for his part withdrew to his
own residence. (15)

रावणस्तु सहामात्यो मन्त्रयित्वा विमृश्य च।
लङ्कायास्तु तदा गुप्तिं कारयामास राक्षस:॥१६॥
Having deliberated with his ministers
and reflected awhile, the ogre Ravana
for his part then actually made adequate
arrangements for the defence of Lanka.
(16)

व्यादिदेश च पूर्वस्यां Weed द्वारि राक्षसम्।
दक्षिणस्यां महावीर्यौ महापार्श्वमहोदरौ॥ १७॥

पश्चिमायामथ द्वारि पुत्रमिन्द्रजितं तदा।
व्यादिदेश महामायं राक्षसैर्बहुभिर्वृतम्॥१८॥

He then posted the ogre Prahasta
at the eastern gate, Mahaparswa and
Mahodara, who were both endowed with
extraordinary virility, at the southern and
posted his eldest son, Indrajit, who was a
great conjurer and was surrounded by
numerous ogres, at the western gate at that
juncture. (17-18)

उत्तरस्यां पुरद्वारि व्यादिश्य शुकसारणौ।
wa ora गमिष्यामि मन्तिणस्तानुवाच ह॥१९॥

Nay, having placed Suka and Sarana
at the northern gate of the city, he said to
the aforesaid counsellors, “I shall personally
visit and take up my position at the northern
gate. (19)
Tad तु विरूपाक्षॆ महावीर्यपराक्रमम्।
मध्यमेऽस्थापयद गल्मे बहभि: As Ward: il २०॥
