* SUNDARAKANDA +

“At no distant date you shall also see
gathered together valiant monkeys endowed
with the prowess of lions and tigers, nay
looking like lordly elephants and using their
nails and teeth as weapons. (49)
शैलाम्बुदनिकाशानां लङ्कामलयसानुषु।
नर्दतां कपिमुख्यानामार्ये यूथान्यनेकश:॥७५०॥

“You shall see, O noble lady, numerous
companies of the foremost of monkeys,
looking like mountains or clouds and
thundering on the peaks of the Malaya
mountain in Lanka. (50)

स gq मर्मणि घोरेण ताडितो मन्मथेषुणा।

न wad लभते wa: सिंहार्दित sa द्विप:॥५१॥
“Hit in his vulnerable parts by the

formidable darts of Love, the aforesaid Sri

Rama for his part knows no more rest than
an elephant hurt by a lion. (51)

रुद मा देवि शोकेन मा भूत् A मनसो भयम्।
शचीव wat शक्रेण सङ्गमेष्यसि शोभने॥५२॥

187

“Weep no more, O godlike lady! Let
there be no fear from grief to your mind. You
shall be re-united with your husband in the
same way as Saci, the consort of Indra,
was with Indra, O charming lady ! (52)

रामाद् विशिष्ट: कोऽन्योऽस्ति कश्चित् सौमित्रिणा AA: |
अग्निमारुतकल्पौ dt भ्रातरौ तव संश्रयौ॥ ५३॥

“Who else is superior to Sri Rama and
who is a match for Laksmana, son of
Sumitra? Those two brothers, who resemble
fire and the wind, are your support. (53)

नास्मिंश्चिरं वत्स्यसि देवि देशे
रक्षोगणैरध्युषितेऽतिरौद्रे ।
न oa चिरादागमनं fre
AA मत्संगमकालमात्रम्॥ ५४॥
“You shall not stay long in this most
fearful land inhabited by ogres, O godlike
lady! The advent of your darling will not

take long. Pray, have patience only till the
moment of my meeting with Sri Rama.”(54)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये सुन्दरकाण्डे एकोनचत्वारिंश: सर्ग: ॥ ३९ ॥

Thus ends Canto Thirty-nine of the Sundarakanda in the glorious Ramayana of
Valmiki, the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

Canto XL

Asking Hanuman, who was ready to depart, to remind Sri Rama of his
having once painted a decorative mark on her cheek with red realgar,
and also of how he threw a reed at the crow assailing her, destroying
his right eye thereby, as further tokens of Hanuman having met
her, and urging him to apprise Sri Rama of her wretched
plight, Sita grants him leave to depart with her blessings

Ta तु वचनं तस्य वायुसूनोर्महात्मन:।
उवाचात्महितं वाक्यं सीता सुरसुतोपमा॥१॥

Hearing the assurance of that high-souled
son of the wind-god, Sita, who resembled the
daughter of a god, made for her part, the
following reply, which was calculated to

advance her own interests :

wat gear प्रियवक्तारं सम्प्रहष्यामि वानर।

अर्धसंजातसस्येव वृष्टिं प्राप्य TMNT UN २॥
“| feel thrilled to see you speaking kind

words, O Hanuman, even as the earth with

its crops half ripe is enlivened on having a

shower. (2)

(1)
