* SUNDARAKANDA +

the moon (marked with the figure of a hare).
(26)

कथयन्तीव शशिना संगमिष्यसि रोहिणी।
मत्पृष्ठमधिरोह त्वं तराकाशं महार्णवम्॥२७॥

“You will be united with Sri Rama as
Rohini with the moon-god, the very moment,
as it were, you say that you wish to be so
united. Pray, climb up my back and reach
beyond the vast sea through space the
very next moment, as it were. (27)

afe मे सम्प्रयातस्य त्वामितो नयतोऽङ्गने।
अनुगन्तुं गतिं शक्ता: सर्वे लङ्कानिवासिन:॥ २८॥

“Surely all the dwellers in Lanka will
not be able to follow my speed even as |
depart from this place bearing you on my
back, O fair one! (28)

यथैवाहमिह प्राप्तस्तथैवाहमसंशयम्।
यास्यामि usa वैदेहि त्वामुद्यम्य विहायसम्॥ २९॥

“Lo, bearing you on my back, O princess
of the Videha territory, | shall undoubtedly
return through airspace precisely as | came
here.” (29)

मैथिली तु हरिंश्नेष्ठाच्छत्वा वचनमद्भुतम्।
हर्षंविस्मित्तसर्वाङ्गीं हनूमन्तमथाब्रवीत्॥ ३०॥

हनूमन् दूरमध्वानं कथं मां नेतुमिच्छसि।
aa खलु a wea कपित्वं हरियूथप॥ ३१॥

Thrilled all over with joy to hear the
aforesaid wonderful proposal from Hanuman,
the foremost of monkeys, Sita, a princess
of Mithila, for her part forthwith replied as
follows to Hanuman : “How do you intend to
take me, O Hanuman, to such a long distance
from this place? Indeed, | look upon the
aforesaid proposal of yours to be precisely
monkey-like, O leader of monkey hordes !

(30-31)
कथं चाल्पशरीरस्त्वं मामितो नेतुमिच्छसि।
सकाशं मानवेन्द्रस्य भर्तुर्मे प्लवगर्षभ॥ ३२॥

“How do you intend to take me from
this place, diminutive of form that you are, to
the presence of my royal husband, O jewel
among monkeys?” (32)

173

सीतायास्तु वच: श्रुत्वा हनूमान् मारुतात्मज:।
चिन्तयामास लक्ष्मीवान् नवं परिभवं कृतम्॥ ३३॥
Hearing the query of Sita, the glorious
Hanuman, son of the wind-god, thought it to
be the first affront of its kind offered to him.
(33)

न मे जानाति Gra वा Wares वासितेक्षणा।
तस्मात् Uva वैदेही Ae रूपं AA कामत:॥ ३४॥
He said to himself: ‘The dark-eyed lady
does not know my strength nor my power.
Let the princess of the Videha territory,
therefore, behold the form that | can assume
at will.’ (34)

इति संचिन्त्य हनुमांस्तदा प्लवगसत्तम:।
दर्शयामास सीताया: स्वरूपमरिमर्दन:॥ BG II
Thinking thus, Hanuman, the foremost
of monkeys and the destroyer of his enemies,
revealed his form to Sita on that occasion.
(35)

स तस्मात् पादपाद् धीमानाप्लुत्य प्लवगर्षभ: |
ततो वर्धितुमारेभे सीताप्रत्ययकारणात्॥ ३६॥

Leaping down from that tree (beneath
which she stood), that wise leader of
monkeys then began to grow in size in
order to inspire confidence in Sita. = (36)

मेरुमन्दरसंकाशो बभौ दीप्तानलप्रभ:।
अग्रतो व्यवतस्थे च सीताया वानरर्षभ:॥ ३७॥

Hanuman, the foremost of monkeys,
looked like Mount Meru or Mount Mandara
and stood in front of Sita, shining brightly
like a blazing fire. (37)

BR: पर्वतसंकाशस्ताम्रवक्त्रो महाबल:।
वज्रदंष्ट्रनखो भीमो वैदेहीमिदमब्रवीत्॥ ३८॥

The redoubtable Hanuman, who
resembled a mountain and had a coppery
countenance with adamantine teeth and nails
and was endowed with extraordinary might,
submitted as follows to Sita, a princess of
the Videha Kingdom : (38)
सपर्वतवनोद्देशां साट्टप्राकारतोरणाम्।
लङ्कामिमां सनाथां वा नयितुं शक्तिरस्ति A ३९॥
