* SUNDARAKANDA +

यस्याहं हरिण: क्षेत्रे जातो वातेन मैथिलि।
हनूमानिति विख्यातो लोके स्वेनैव कर्मणा॥ ८३॥

“Begotten by the wind-god, O princess
of Mithila, through the consort of that monkey,
| am called Hanuman and known all over
the world for my own exploits. (83)

विश्वासार्थं तु वैदेहि भर्तुरुक्ता मया गुणा:।
अचिरात् त्वामितो देवि राघवो नयिता ध्रुवम्॥ ८४॥

“Indeed to inspire you with confidence,
O princess of the Videha territory, the
excellences of your lord have been recounted
by me. Before long, O godlike lady, will Sri
Rama, a scion of Raghu, take you without
doubt from this place.” (84)
ue विश्वासिता सीता हेतुभि: शोककर्शिता।
उपपन्नैरभिज्ञानैर्दूतं तमधिगच्छति। ८५ ॥
अतुलं च गता et प्रहर्षेण तु जानकी।
नेत्राभ्यां वक्रपक्ष्माभ्यां मुमोचानन्दजं जलम्॥ ८६॥

Reassured thus by cogent proofs and
the identification marks described by
Hanuman, Sita, who was emaciated through
grief, believed him to be a messenger of her
husband and was moved to incomparable
joy. Nay, due to excessive joy the daughter
of Janaka shed tears of joy from her eyes
fringed with curved lashes. (85-86)

चारु Aq वदनं तस्यास्ताम्रशुक्लायतेक्षणम्।
अशोभत विशालाक्ष्या राहुमुक्त इवोडुराट्॥८७॥

The charming countenance of that large-

165

eyed lady with coppery, white and big eyes
shone at that time like the moon (lit., the lord
of stars), disengaged from the hold of Rahu.
(87)

हनूमन्तं कपिं व्यक्तं wad नान्यथेति सा।
अथोवाच हनूमांस्तामुत्तरं प्रियदर्शनाम्॥८८॥
She now thought Hanuman
unmistakably to be a monkey, and not
otherwise. Hanuman now addressed the
following excellent words to Sita of pleasing
aspect: (88)

Wad ते सर्वमाख्यातं समाश्वसिहि मैथिलि।
किं करोमि कथं वा ते trad प्रतियाम्यहम्॥ ८९॥

“Everything that | wished to say has
thus been told by me. Be reassured, O
princess of Mithila ! What more can | do for
you and what would please you? | should
like to return if you allow me to go. (89)

हतेऽसुरे संयति शम्बसादने
कपिप्रवीरेण महर्षिचोदनात्।
ततोऽस्मि वायुप्रभवो हि मैथिलि
प्रभावतस्तत्प्रतिमश्च वानर:॥९०॥

“After the demon Sambasadana had
been killed in combat by Kesari, a
distinguished hero among the monkeys, at
the command of an eminent sage, | was
then born of the loins of the wind-god, O
princess of Mithila, and am a monkey equal
to him in might.” (90)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये सुन्दरकाण्डे पञ्चत्रिंश: सर्ग: ॥ 34 ॥

Thus ends Canto Thirty-five of the Sundarakanda in the glorious Ramayana of Valmiki,
the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

