# YUDDHAKANDA #

the commander of the army of bears,
applauded him too. (90)
श्ष्वेडन्तश्च प्लवन्तश्च गर्जन्तश्च प्लवंगमा:।

लब्धलक्षा रघुसुतं परिवार्योपतस्थिरे॥९१॥

Nay, roaring, bounding for joy and
thundering, the monkeys, who had found an
occasion for rejoicing, stood surrounding
Laksmana, a scion of Raghu. (91)

प्रविध्यन्त: स्फोटयन्तश्च वानरा: |
लक्ष्मणो जयतीत्येव वाक्यं विश्रावयंस्तदा॥ ९२॥
Wagging their tails and lashing them,

the monkeys then gave forth the slogan
‘Victorious is Laksmana !” (92)

अन्योन्यं च समाश्लिष्य हरयो हष्टमानसा:।
चक्रुरुच्चावचगुणा राघवाश्रयसत्कथा:॥९३॥

689

Nay, embracing one another, the
monkeys, who felt delighted in mind and
were endowed with manifold virtues, indulged
in a charming talk about Sri Rama, a scion

of Raghu. (93)
तदसुकरमथाभिवीक्ष्य ह्रुष्टा:

प्रियसुहृदो aft लक्ष्मणस्य कर्म।
परममुपलभन्मन:प्रहर्षं

विनिहतमिन्द्ररिपुं निशम्य देवा:॥९४॥

The monkeys (the beloved friends of
Laksmana) now felt rejoiced to witness his
aforesaid feat on the field of battle, which
was not easy to accomplish for others,
while the gods too experienced supreme
delight of mind on perceiving Indrajit (Indra’s
adversary) killed. (94)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये युद्धकाण्डे नवतितम: AWA: ॥ ९० ॥

Thus ends Canto Ninety in the Yuddhakanda of the glorious Ramayana of
Valmiki, the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

एकनवतितम: सर्ग:
Canto XCl

Laksmana, Vibhisana and others approach Sri Rama with the
news of Indrajit’s fall. Delighted with the news, Sr Rama
embraces Laksmana and applauds him and gets
Laksmana and others treated by Susena

रुधिरक्लिन्नगात्रस्तु लक्ष्मण: शुभलक्षण:।
ays weet हत्वा शत्रुजेतारमाहवे॥१॥
Graced with auspicious bodily marks,
Laksmana for his part, whose limbs were
bathed in blood, felt rejoiced on having killed
in combat Indrajit, the conqueror of his
enemies. (1)
ad: स जाम्बवन्तं च हनूमन्तं च वीर्यवान्।
संनिपत्य महातेजास्तांश्च सर्वान् वनौकस:॥ २॥
आजगाम तत: शीघ्रं यत्र सुग्रीवराघवौ।
विभीषणमवष्टभ्य हनूमन्तं च लक्ष्मण:॥ ३॥

Taking with him Jambavan and
Hanuman too, as well as all the aforesaid
monkeys (lit., the denizens of the woods),
the celebrated and valiant Laksmana, who
was endowed with extraordinary energy,
thereupon speedily returned from the field
of battle to the spot where Sugriva and Sri
Rama (a scion of Raghu) were, leaning on
Vibhisana and Hanuman. (2-3)

ad राममभिक्रम्य सौमित्रिरभिवाद्य =a
तस्थौ भ्रातृसमीपस्थ: शाक्रस्येन्द्रानुजो यथा॥४॥

Going clockwise round Sri Rama and
