382

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

not on any account be suspected of having | are subject to the control of Providence; for,

brought about this interruption
installation nor our father, both of whom

in my | you know Providence to be possessed of

unfailing power.” (30)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्येऽयोध्याकाण्डे SAT: सर्ग: ॥ 22 ॥

Thus ends Canto Twenty-two in the Ayodhyakanda of the glorious Ramayana of
Valmiki, the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

Canto XXIII

Enraged to hear the exhortation of Sri Rama, Laksmana urges in reply that
the word of their father was worth ignoring inasmuch as it was divorced
from righteousness and, further emphasizing the predominance
of personal effort over destiny, persuades Sri Rama to take
up arms against those who interfere with his installation
and occupy the throne of Ayodhya by force. Sri Rama,
however, pacifies Laksmana and impresses on him
the imperative necessity of their carrying out
the command of their father

इति ब्रुवति wa तु लक्ष्मणोऽवाक् शिरा इव।
ध्यात्वा मध्यं जगामाशु सहसा दैन्यहर्षयो:॥१॥
Pondering with his head bent low, as it
were, while Sri Rama spoke as aforesaid,
Laksmana for his part quickly and suddenly
began to swing between dejection at the
interruption of Sri Rama’s installation and
delight over the latter's steadfast devotion
to righteousness. (1)

तदा तु बद्ध्वा भ्रुकुटीं भ्रुवोर्मध्ये नरर्षभ:।
निशश्वास महासर्पो बिलस्थ ga रोषित:॥ २॥

Nay, knitting his brows at the space
between his eyebrows, at that time,
Laksmana, a jewel among men, hissed like
an enraged cobra in a hole. (2)

तस्य दुष्प्रतिवीक्ष्यं aq भ्रुकुटीसहितं तदा।
बभौ क्रुद्धस्य सिंहस्य मुखस्य Ae TSAI ३॥
That frowning aspect of his, which was

difficult to gaze on, appeared at that moment
like the face of an infuriated lion. (3)

अग्रहस्तं विधुन्वंस्तु हस्ती हस्तमिवात्मन:।
तिर्यगूर्ध्व शरीरे च पातयित्वा शिरोधराम्॥४॥
अग्राक्ष्णा वीक्षमाणस्तु तिर्यग्भ्रातरमब्रवीत्।
अस्थाने सम्भ्रमो यस्य जातो वै सुमहानयम्॥ ५॥
धर्मदोषप्रसङ्गेन लोकस्यानतिशाङ्कया।
कथं ह्येतदसम्भ्रान्तस्त्वद्विधो वक्तुमर्हति॥६॥
यथा ह्येवमशौण्डीरं शौण्डीर: क्षत्रियर्षभ:।
fe wa कृपणं दैवमशक्तमभिशंससि॥७॥
Violently shaking his forearm precisely
as an elephant would shake its proboscis, and
flinging his neck horizontally as well as
upwards on his body, and gazing obliquely
with a corner of his eye, Laksmana for his
part spoke as follows to his brother, SriRama :
“At an inopportune moment indeed has this
inordinate flurry appeared in you for fear of
lapsing from the path of duty and with a view
to disarming the grave suspicion in the mind
of the people (that a prince who is disloyal to
his father could not be expected to rule his
subjects righteously). Indeed, how cana man
