« KISKINDHAKANDA +

985

Canto XV

Angrily issuing forth for an encounter on hearing the roar of Sugriva,
Vali is discouraged with cogent reasons by his wife, Tara

अथ तस्य निनादं तं सुग्रीवस्य महात्मन:।
शुश्रावान्त:पुरगतो वाली भ्रातुरमर्षण:॥१॥

Vali, who was intolerant by nature, and
who happened to be in his gynaeceum at
the time, forthwith heard the aforesaid roar
of the celebrated Sugriva, who was noted
for his extraordinary fortitude. (1)

Tat तु wa निनदं सर्वभूतप्रकम्पनम्।
मदश्चैकपदे Ae: क्रोधश्चापादितो महान्॥२॥

On hearing his roar, which caused all
created beings to tremble with fear, Vali’s
vanity vanished all at once and a violent
rage was aroused in him. (2)

ततो रोषपरीताङ्गो वाली स कनकप्रभ:।
wa इवादित्य: Gat निष्प्रभतां गत:॥३॥

The notorious Vali, who possessed the
splendour of gold, thereupon lost his brilliance
at once as the sun under eclipse, all his
limbs seized with anger. (3)
वाली दंष्ट्वाकरालस्तु क्रोधाद दीप्ताग्निलोचन:।
भात्युत्पतितपद्माभ: समृणाल sa ह्रद:॥४॥

Vali, for his part, who looked fierce
with his teeth and whose eyes shone like a
blazing fire through anger, looked like a
pond from which the splendour of lotuses

has disappeared and in which the fibrous
roots alone float. (4)

शब्दं दुर्मर्षणं श्रुत्वा निष्पपात ततो हरि:।
am च पदन्यासैर्दारयन्निव मेदिनीम्॥५॥

Hearing the roar, which was difficult to
endure, the monkey (Vall) issued forth from
his palace with impetuosity, rending the earth,
as it were, with his strides. (5)
तं तु ant परिष्वज्य स्नेहाद् दर्शितसौहृदा।

उवाच त्रस्तसम्भ्रान्ता हितोदर्कमिदं वच:॥६॥

Embracing him through affection, Tara,
his wife, for her part, who felt frightened and
agitated and exhibited her friendliness,
tendered the following advice which was
wholesome in consequence : (6)

साधु क्रोधमिमं वीर नदीवेगमिवागतम्।
शयनादुत्थित: काल्यं त्यज भुक्तामिव SSN ७॥
“Completely shake off this anger, which
is occasional like a river-flood, even as one
risen from bed in the morning discards a
garland that has been enjoyed at night. (7)

काल्यमेतेन de करिष्यसि च art

ak ते शत्रुबाहुल्यं फल्गुता वा न विद्यते॥ ८॥
सहसा da निष्क्रामो मम तावन्न रोचते।

श्रूयतामभिधास्यामि यन्निमित्तं निवार्यते॥९॥

“You should enter into combat with
Sugriva in the morning. Although there is no
multiplicity of enemies nor is there lack of
strength in you, O gallant monkey-king,
somehow your sallying forth precipitately
does not appeal to me. Please listen: | shall
presently disclose to you wherefore you are
being discouraged by me. (8-9)

पूर्वमापतित: क्रोधात् स त्वामाह्वयते युधि।
निष्पत्य च निरस्तस्ते हन्यमानो दिशो गत:॥ १०॥

“Latterly arrived in anger, he challenged
you to a duel; but, even as you sallied forth
he was vanquished and, being repeatedly
struck by you, he fled. (10)

त्वया तस्य निरस्तस्य पीडितस्य विशेषत:।

इहैत्य Tat शङ्कां जनयतीव मे॥११॥
“His coming here and challenging you

once more, even though he was repulsed

and tormented in particular by you rouses
my suspicion, as it were. (11)
