# YUDDHAKANDA #

प्रजाभि: सह शक्रश्च ययौ स्थानं स्वयंभुव:।
कुम्भकर्णस्य दौरात्म्यं Veet प्रजापते: 11 १९॥
“Accompanied by कॐ0०568 created
beings, Indra sought the realm of Brahma.
They complained to Brahma (the lord of
created beings) about the wickedness of
Kumbhakarna. (19)
प्रजानां भक्षणं चापि देवानां चापि धर्षणम्।
आश्रमध्वंसनं चापि परस्त्रीहरणं भृशम्॥२०॥
“They also told him how he devoured
created beings, assailed gods, laid waste
the hermitages of sages and repeatedly
carried off others’ wives. (20)

एवं wat यदि त्वेष भक्षयिष्यति नित्यश:।
अचिरेणैव कालेन शून्यो लोको भविष्यति॥ २१॥

“‘If he for his part consumes created
beings in this way from day to day’, they
continued, ‘the world will turn desolate at no
distant date.’ (21)
वासवस्य वच: श्रुत्वा सर्वलोकपितामह:।
रक्षांस्यावाहयामास कुम्भकर्णं ददर्शं ह॥ २२॥

“Hearing the complaint of Indra and
others, Brahma (the grandfather of the entire
creation, which owes its origin to his ten
mind-born sons) conjured the ogres and
saw Kumbhakarna too alongwith them: so
the tradition goes. (22)

कुम्भकर्णं समीक्ष्यैव वितत्रास प्रजापति:।
कुम्भकर्णमथाश्वास्त स्वयंभूरिदमब्रवीत्॥ २३॥

“Brahma (the lord of created beings),
got alarmed merely’ on _ beholding
Kumbhakarna. Restored to confidence in
the meantime, however, Brahma (the self-
born creator) spoke to him as follows:(23)

qa लोकविनाशाय पौलस्त्येनासि निर्मित:।
तस्मात् त्वमद्यप्रभृति मृतकल्प: शयिष्यसे॥ २४॥
“Surely you have been begotten by

Visrava (son of Pulasti, one of my mind-
born sons) to the destruction of the world.

533

Therefore, from this day onward you shall
remain buried in sleep like one dead.’ (24)

ब्रह्मशापाभिभूतोऽथ निपपाताग्रत: wet: |
तत: परमसम्भ्रान्तो रावणो वाक्यमब्रवीत्॥ २५॥

“Overpowered by the curse pronounced
by Brahma, Kumbhakarna forthwith fell
down before the king, Ravana. Exceedingly
perturbed, Ravana thereupon submitted to
Brahma as follows: (25)
Wag: काञ्चनो Fa: फलकाले निकृत्यते।

न OFAN स्वकं न्याय्यं शप्तुमेवं प्रजापते॥ २५॥

““A tree yielding gold (as its fruit) is
never hewed down at the time of fructification.
It is not equitable on your part to curse your
own great grandson as you have done, O
lord of created beings! (26)

न मिथ्यावचनश्च त्वं स्वप्स्यत्येव न संशय:।
कालस्तु क्रियतामस्य शयने जागरे तथा॥ २७॥

““And your words can never prove to
be false, so that sleep he must: there is no
doubt about it. A period of time may kindly
be fixed for his sleep as well as for his
waking.’ (27)

रावणस्य वच: श्रुत्वा स्वयंभूरिदमब्रवीत्।
शयिता ह्येष षण्मासमेकाहं जागरिष्यति॥ ec
“Hearing Ravana’s appeal, Brahma (the
self-born creator) spoke as follows: ‘He
shall sleep continuously for six months and
shall keep awake only for a day. (28)

एकेनाह्ना त्वसौ वीरश्चरन् भूमिं बुभुक्षित:।
व्यात्तास्यो भक्षयेल्लोकान् May Sa पावक: ॥ २९॥

“*[३द05]]]5 the earth with his mouth wide
open, when hungry, the said hero for his part
may consume the world like a swollen fire in
the course of a single day.’ (29)

सोऽसौ व्यसनमापन्न: कुम्भकर्णमबोधयत्।
त्वत्पराक्रमभीतश्च राजा सम्प्रति रावण:॥ ३०॥

“Fallen in adversity and afraid of
your prowess, this aforesaid king, Ravana,
has just awakened Kumbhakarna. (30)
