* BALAKANDA +

“So long as you continue to repeat
Bala as well as Atibala, hunger and thirst, O
Rama, will never be felt by you, O jewel
among men ! (18)
गृहाण सर्वलोकस्य Wa रघुनन्दन।
विद्याद्वयमधीयाने arts भवेद् भुवि।
पितामहसुते oda विद्ये तेजस्समन्विते॥१९॥

“So long as you go on muttering the
two spells your renown will spread over the
entire globe; for these two spells are the

daughters of Brahma (the creator) and are
full of efficacy. (19)

ward da काकुत्स्थ सदृशस्त्वं fe पार्थिव।
कामं बहुगुणा: सर्वे त्वय्येते ATA संशय:॥ Roll
तपसा सम्भृते चैते aged भविष्यत:।
ततो Wa जलं VIET प्रहृष्टवदन: शुचि:।॥ २१॥
प्रतिजग्राह ते विद्ये महर्षेर्भावितात्मन:।
विद्यासमुदितो wa: शुशुभे भीमविक्रम:॥ २२॥
सहस्तररश्मिर्भगवान् शरदीव दिवाकर:।
गुरुकार्याणि सर्वाणि नियुज्य कुशिकात्मजे।
ऊषुस्तां रजनीं तत्र सरय्वां ससुखं Fai २३॥
“| feel inclined to impart the knowledge

of these spells to you, O scion of Kakutstha;
for you are fit to receive them, O prince!

135

Even though all the manifold virtues referred
to (in verses 13 to 19) above already exist in
you—there is no doubt about it, the two spells
mentioned above will grow many times more
efficacious when duly grasped by you, who
are asceticism personified, being the goal of
all austerities.” Sipping water, Sri Rama, who
is all-pure by nature, received with a most
cheerful countenance initiation in the
aforesaid two spells from that great sage,
Viswamitra, of purified mind. Equipped with
the knowledge of the aforesaid spells, Sri
Rama of supreme prowess shone like the
glorious sun, casting innumerable rays, in
autumn. Sri Rama and Laksmana performed
all the duties that one owes to a teacher and
all the three spent the night with ease on the
bank of the Sarayu there. (20—23)

कुशिकसुतवचोऽनुलालिताभ्यां सुखमिव सा विबभौ विभावरी च ।। २४॥

To Sri Rama and Laksmana, the two
jewels among the sons of King DaSaratha,
who, even though they lay there on a bed of
straw, unworthy of princes, were bestowed
with love all along by ViSwamitra (son of
Gadhi), that night appeared delightful indeed.

(24)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये बालकाण्डे द्वाविंश: AW: ॥ २२ ॥

Thus ends Canto Twenty-two in the Balakanda of the glorious Ramayana of Valmiki,
the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

Canto XXIII

Night-long sojourn of Sri Rama and Laksmana with Vigwamitra in a holy
hermitage at the confluence of the Ganga and the Sarayu

प्रभातायां तु waat विश्वामित्रो महामुनि: |
अभ्यभाषत काकुत्स्थौ Wart पर्णसंस्तरे॥१॥
The night having all but culminated in

dawn, the great sage ViSwamitra spoke as
follows to Sri Rama and Laksmana (the two

scions of Kakutstha), lying on a bed of dry
leaves mixed with straw : (1)

कौसल्या सुप्रजा राम Yat संध्या प्रवर्तते।
उत्तिष्ठं नरशार्दूल कर्तव्यं दैवमाह्निकम्॥२॥

“Kausalya is blessed with a worthy son
