* ARANYAKANDA «

all kinds of coveted fruits and is beautified
by gardens. (12)

wa त्वं वस हे सीते राजपुत्रि मया सह।
न स्मरिष्यसि नारीणां मानुषीणां मनस्विनि॥ १३॥

“Dwell you there with me, O princess
Sita! There you will no longer remember
mortal women, O proud lady ! (13)

भुञ्जाना मानुषान् भोगान् दिव्यांश्च वरवर्णिनि।
न स्मरिष्यसि रामस्य मानुषस्य गतायुष:॥ १४॥

“Enjoying human as well as celestial
delights, you will no longer think of the
mortal Rama, whose life has now well-nigh
departed, O lady of excellent complexion !

(14)

स्थापयित्वा प्रियं at राज्ये दशरथो TW: |
मन्दवीर्यस्ततो ज्येष्ठ: सुत: प्रस्थापितो वनम्॥ १५॥
wt fe भ्रष्टराज्येन Wau गतचेतसा।
करिष्यसि विशालाक्षि तापसेन तपस्विना॥१६॥

“What use can you have for the
aforesaid Rama, an ascetic practising
austerities, who has lost his sovereignty
and consequently been deprived of his
reasoning faculty, and who, possessed as
he was of negligible prowess, though the
eldest son of his father, was consequently
sent into exile to the forest by King Dasaratha
after installing on the throne as Prince Regent
his pet son, Bharata, O large-eyed lady?

(15-16)

Ta राक्षसभर्तारं कामय स्वयमागतम्।

न मन्मथशराविष्टं प्रत्याख्यातुं त्वमर्हसि॥१७॥
“Save the lord of ogres, i.e., myself,

who has sought you in person, and love

him. You ought not to spurn me, overpowered

as | am by shafts of love. (17)

प्रत्याख्याय fe at site पश्चात्तापं गमिष्यसि।
चरणेनाभिहत्येव पुरूरवसमुर्वशी ।॥ १८ ॥
“Spurning me, O timid one, you will
surely suffer contrition as did Urvasi on
having kicked King Pururava. (18)

845

अङ्गुल्या न समो TAT मम युद्धे स ATT: |
तव भाग्येन ward wma वरवर्णिनि॥१९॥

“The mortal Rama is not equal even to
my finger on the field of battle. Therefore,
accept me, who have sought you by your
good luck, O lady with an_ excellent
complexion !” (19)
एवमुक्ता तु वैदेही क्रुद्धा संरक्तलोचना।
अब्रवीत् परुषं वाक्यं ted राक्षसाधिपम्॥ २०॥

Enraged when spoken to as aforesaid,
Sita, a princess of the Videha territory, for
her part with blood-red eyes addressed the
following harsh words to Ravana, the suzerain
lord of ogres, in that lonely place : (20)
कथं वैश्रवणं td सर्वदेवनमस्कृतम्।
भ्रातरं व्यपदिश्य त्वमशुभं कर्तुमिच्छसि॥ २१॥

“How after calling god Kubera (son of
ViSrava), who is hailed by all gods, your
(half-) brother, do you seek to perpetrate a
foul deed? (21)
अवश्यं विनशिष्यन्ति aed रावण were: |
येषां त्वं कर्कशो राजा दुर्बुद्धिरजितेन्द्रिय: ।। २२॥

“All ogres, O Ravana, will inevitably
perish inasmuch as you, who are so hard-
hearted and evil-minded and have not been
able to subdue your senses, are their ruler.

(22)
अपहृत्य शचीं भार्यां शक्यमिन्द्रस्य जीवितुम्।
नहि रामस्य भार्यां मामानीय स्वस्तिमान् भवेत्॥ २३॥

“It may be possible to survive on
abducting Saci, the consort of Indra, the
lord of paradise; but none can _ survive
peacefully after carrying away me, the
consort of Sri Rama. (23)

जीवेच्चिरं वज्रधरस्य पश्चा-
wa प्रधृष्याप्रतिरूपरूपाम्।
न मादूशीं wera धर्षयित्वा
पीतामृतस्यापि तवास्ति Arar: ॥ २४॥
“Having laid one’s hands on Saci, the

consort of Indra, the wielder of the
thunderbolt, of peerless beauty, one might
