# YUDDHAKANDA #

क्रुद्धस्विशीर्षा निशितास्त्रमुग्रं
ववर्ष नीलोरसि बाणवर्षम्॥ २७॥
When that enemy of gods, the foremost
of ogre-warriors, who was endowed with
extraordinary might, was killed in the
encounter with the monkeys, the furious
Trisira discharged on the breast of Nila a
fearful shower of whetted arrows. (27)
महोदरस्तु संक्रुद्ध: get पर्वतोपमम्।
wa: समधिरुह्याशु wet रश्मिवानिव॥ २८॥
ततो बाणमयं वर्षं नीलस्योपर्यपातयत्।
गिरौ at तडिच्चक्रचापवानिव तोयद:॥ २९॥
Quickly mounting once more an
elephant resembling a mountain, even as
the sun would ascend the Mandara mountain,
the infuriated Mahodara for his part thereupon
let fall a hail of arrows on Nila even as a
rainy cloud distinguished by a circle of lightning
and a rainbow would pour a shower on a

mountain. (28-29)
aa: शरौघैरभिवृष्यमाणो
विभिन्नगात्र: कपिसैन्यपाल: |
नीलो बभूवाथ विसृष्टगात्रो
विष्टम्भितस्तेन महाबलेन॥ Bo I

While being covered on all sides with
volleys of arrows, Nila, the commander-in-
Chief of the simian army, whose limbs were
pierced by said arrows forthwith found his
body inert, rendered powerless as he was
by the ogre, who was endowed with
extraordinary might. (30)

wei समुत्पाट्य सवृक्षखण्डम्।

aa: समुत्पत्य महोग्रवेगो
महोदरं तेन जघान ofS ३१॥
Tearing up a crag covered with a

thicket, and then springing up, Nila for his part,
who had now regained his consciousness,
and who was endowed with terrific impetuosity,
struck Mahodara with iton the head, (81)

587
wa: स शैलाभिनिपातभग्नो
महोदरस्तेन महाद्विपेन।
व्यामोहितो भूमितले गतासु:
ud वज्राभिहतो यथाद्रि:।॥ ३२॥

Smashed by the impact of the crag
alongwith the aforesaid huge elephant, and
rendered unconscious, the said Mahodara
fell dead on the earth’s surface like a
mountain struck by lightning. (32)
हनूमन्तं च संक्रुद्धो विव्याध निशितै: vit: 33 ul

Enraged to see his uncle, Mahodara,
killed, Trisira seized his bow and pierced
Hanuman with his whetted shafts. (33)

त्रिशिरास्तच्छैस्तीक्ष्णैर्बिभेद ager बली॥ ३४॥

Full of fury the aforesaid son of the
wind-god flung a mountain-peak at the ogre.
The mighty Trisira, however, split it with his
sharp arrows into several pieces. (34)

forest रणे afer रावणस्य ad प्रति॥ ३५॥
Finding the aforesaid mountain-peak
ineffectual, the monkey, Hanuman, then
hurled a shower of trees on the son of
Ravana, Trisira, in that combat. (35)
तमापतन्तमाकाशे द्रुमवर्षं प्रतापवान्।
त्रिशिरा निशितैर्बाणैश्चिच्छेद च ननाद च॥ ३६॥
The powerful Trisira, however, tore with
his whetted shafts that shower of trees falling
oni the airspace, and roared too. (36)

समुत्पत्य हयं त्रिशिरसस्तदा।
बिदद।र नखै: क्रुद्धो नागेन्द्रं मृगराड्व॥ ३७॥
Springing up in fury, Hanuman for his
part then tore the horse of Trisira with his
nails even as a lion (lit., the king of beasts)
would claw a lordly elephant. (37)

अथ शक्तिं समासाद्य कालरात्रिमिवान्तक: |
चिक्षेपानिलपुत्राय त्रिशिरा रावणात्मज:॥ ३८॥
