# YUDDHAKANDA #

भ्रातृव्यसनसंतप्तस्तदा देवान्तको = Ait |
आदाय परिघं घोरमङ्गदं समभिद्रवत्॥३॥
Seizing a formidable club tipped with
iron, the mighty Devantaka, who felt
distressed on account of the fall of his
brother, Narantaka, forthwith rushed straight
towards Angada. (3)

रथमादित्यसंकाशं युक्तँ परमवाजिभि:।
आस्थाय त्रिशिरा वीरो वालिपुत्रमथाभ्यगात्॥४॥
Taking his seat in a chariot effulgent
as the sun and drawn by excellent horses,
the valiant Trisira too marched against
Angada (son of Vali). (4)
स त्रिभिर्देवदर्पघ्लै राक्षसेन्दरैरभिद्रुत:।
व्क्षमुत्पाटयामास महाविटपमङ्गद: ॥ ५ ॥

Attacked by the three ogre-chiefs, who
were capable of crushing the pride of gods,
the aforesaid Angada pulled up a tree with
mighty boughs. (5)
देवान्तकाय तं वीरश्चिक्षेपष सहसाङ्गद:।
महावृक्षं महाशाखं शक्रो दीप्तामिवाशनिम्॥६॥

The gallant Angada precipitately hurled
that huge tree with immense branches at

Devantaka even as Indra would hurl his
flaming thunderbolt. (6)

त्रिशिरास्तं प्रचिच्छेद शरैराशीविषोपमै:।
a gat कृत्तमालोक्य उत्पपात तदाङ्गद:॥७॥
Trisira tore the tree into pieces with his
arrows resembling venomous serpents.
Seeing the tree severed, the said Angada
forthwith sprang up. (7)
स aad ततो genfeerna कपिकुञ्जर:।
aM प्रचिच्छेद संक्रुद्धस्त्रिशिरा निशितै: शरै:।। ८॥
That elephant among the monkeys
thereupon showered trees and rocks. Getting

enraged, Trisira tore them into pieces with
his whetted shafts. (8)

परिघाग्रेण तान् aa बभञ्ज स महोदर:।
त्रिशिराश्चाङ्गदं वीरमभिदुद्राव सायकै:॥९॥

585

The notorious Mahodara_ shattered
those trees with the head of his club, while
Trisira attacked the heroic Angada with his
arrows. (9)

गजेन समभिद्रुत्य वालिपुत्रं महोदर:।
जघानोरसि संक्रुद्धस्तोमरैर्वज्रसंनिभै: 1 १० ॥

Hotly pursuing, on the back of his
elephant, the son of Vali, Mahodara struck
him in the breast with clubs, which flashed
as lightning, enraged as he was. (10)

देवान्तकश्च dpe: परिघेण तदाङ्गदम्।
उपगम्याभिहत्याशु व्यपचक्राम वेगवान्॥११
Approaching Angada and striking him

with his club, infuriated as he was, the agile
Devantaka quickly retreated. (11)

स त्रिभिर्नैर्ऋतश्रेष्ठैर्युगपत् समभिद्रुत:।
न विव्यथे महातेजा वालिपुत्र: प्रतापवान्॥१२॥

Simultaneously attacked by the three
jewels among ogres, the mighty son of Vali,
who was endowed with extraordinary energy,
did not feel the least alarmed. (12)

a वेगवान् महावेगं कृत्वा परमदुर्जय:।
तलेन समभिद्रुत्य जघानास्य महागजम्॥१३॥

Exhibiting extraordinary impetuosity
and duly assaulting the huge elephant of
Mahodara, the agile Angada, who was
exceedingly difficult to conquer, struck it
with his palm. (13)
तस्य तेन प्रहारेण नागराजस्य संयुगे।
पेततुर्नयने तस्य विननाश स कुञ्जर:॥१४॥

As a result of that blow dealt by Angada
on the field of battle, the eyes of that lordly

elephant fell down and the said elephant
perished. (14)

विषाणं चास्य निष्कृष्य वालिपुत्रो महाबल:।
देवान्तकमभिद्रुत्य ताडयामास ATT UN १५॥
Pulling out a tusk of the elephant and
darting agairst Devantaka, the son of
Vali, Angada, who was endowed with
