« KISKINDHAKANDA +

Laksmana for his part replied as follows:
“Neither do | recognize the armlets nor do |
know the earrings, | only recognize the
anklets due to my bowing at her feet
everyday.” Thereupon Sri Rama (a scion of
Raghu) for his part spoke as follows to
Sugriva : (22-23)
ale ita कं देशं ह्रियन्ती लक्षिता त्वया।
रक्षसा रौद्ररूपेण मम प्राणप्रिया हृता॥ २४॥
“Pray, point out, O Sugriva, to which
land Sita (who is dearer to me than my life)
was borne away by the ogre of terrible
aspect as she was perceived by you while
being carried off. (24)
क्व वा वसति ag tal Wed व्यसनदं मम।
यन्निमित्तमहं सर्वान् नाशयिष्यामि राक्षसान्॥ २५॥
aa मैथिलीं येन मां च रोषयता ध्रुवम्।
आत्मनो जीवितान्ताय मृत्युद्वारमपाव्रतम्॥ २६॥

955

“Also, let me know where dwells that
ogre, who has inflicted enormous suffering
on me and on whose account | shall
exterminate all the ogres, and by whom the
portals of Death have undoubtedly been
opened for the termination of his own life,
carrying off (as he did) Sita (the princess of
Mithila) and provoking me. (25-26)

मम दयिततमा हृता वनाद्
रजनिचरेण विमथ्य येन सा।
कथय wm it तमद्य a
प्लवगपते यमसंनिधिं नयामि॥ 29

“Point out to me, O lord of monkeys,
the ranger of the night, my enemy, by whom
my most beloved spouse was borne away
from the forest after being put off the scent.
| shall surely despatch him to the presence
of Death today.” (27)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये किष्किन्धाकाण्डे षष्ठ: सर्ग: ॥ ६ ॥

Thus ends Canto Six in the Kiskindhakanda of the glorious Ramayana of Valmiki,
the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

Canto VII
Consoled by Sugriva with the assurance that, even though ignorant of the
abode of that vile ogre who bore away Sita, he would see that
Sri Rama is reunited with her; Sri Rama compliments
him and promises to kill Vali

एवमुक्तस्तु सुग्रीवो रामेणार्तेन वानर:।
अब्रवीत् प्राञञलिर्वाक्यं सबाष्पं बाष्पगद्गद: 1 १॥
Spoken to as aforesaid by Sri Rama in
distress, the monkey chief, Sugriva, for
his part, replied as follows to Sri Rama
(who had tears in his eyes) with joined
palms and in a voice choked with tears:
(1)

न जाने निलयं तस्य सर्वथा पापरक्षस:।
सामर्थ्य विक्रमं वापि दौष्कुलेयस्य वा कुलम्॥ २॥

“[ do not know at all the abode or

strength or prowess or even the pedigree of
that sinful ogre of vile birth. (2)

wa तु प्रतिजानामि त्यज शोकमरिदम।
करिष्यामि तथा यत्नं यथा प्राप्स्यसि मैथिलीम्॥ ३॥

“Cast away grief, O tamer of foes! |
for my part make an unfailing promise to
you : | will strive in such a way that you will
be able to recover Sita (a princess of Mithila).

(3)
Tat सगणं हत्वा परितोष्यात्मपौरुषम्।
तथास्मि hat नचिराद् यथा प्रीतो भविष्यसि॥ ४॥
