# YUDDHAKANDA #

the two asterisms known by the name of
Vigakha. (15)
अङ्गदं परिरक्षन्तौ मैन्दो द्विविद va al

तस्य तस्थतुरभ्याशे परस्परदिदूक्षया॥१६॥

Protecting Angada on all sides, Mainda
and Dwivida too (maternal uncles of the
prince) took up their position by his side
with intent to exhibit each his own martial
skill. (16)
अभिपेतुर्महाकाया: प्रतियत्ता महाबला:।
राक्षसा वानरान् रोषादसिबाणगदाधरा:॥ १७॥

Bearing swords, arrows and maces,
gigantic ogres, who were vigilant and were
endowed with extraordinary might, assailed
the monkeys on all sides in fury. (17)
त्रयाणां वानरेन्द्राणां त्रिभी राक्षसपुंगवै:।
संसक्तानां Ae युद्धमभवद् रोमहर्षणम्॥१८॥

A momentous conflict, causing the hair
to stand on end, was waged by the three
monkey chiefs, who found themselves
embroiled with the three bulls among the
ogres. (18)

ते तु qa समादाय सम्प्रचिक्षिपुराहवे।
Gen प्रतिचिक्षेप तान् प्रजङ्घो महाबल:॥१९॥

Seizing hold of trees, the monkeys for
their part steadily and violently hurled them
against the ogre chiefs on the battlefield.
Prajangha, however, who was endowed with
extraordinary might, cut them down with his
sword. (19)

रथानश्वान् द्रुमाञ्छैलान् प्रतिचिक्षिपुराहवे।
शरौघै: प्रतिचिच्छेद A यूपाक्षो महाबल:॥ २०॥
The monkeys hurled trees and crags
against the chariots and horses of the
enemy in the course of the encounter.
Yupaksa, however, who was endowed with
extraordinary might, tore them off with volleys
of his arrows. (20)

wer द्विविदमैन्दाभ्यां द्रुमानुत्पाट्य वीर्यवान्।
ave गदया मध्ये शोणिताक्ष: प्रतापवान्॥ २१॥

627

The valiant and powerful Sonitaksa
smashed midway with his mace the trees
which were hurled by Dwivida and Mainda
after tearing them up. (21)
उद्यम्य विपुलं wet परमर्मविदारणम्।
प्रजङ्घो वालिपुत्राय अभिदुद्राव वेगित:॥ २२॥

Raising his huge sword, which was
capable of splitting asunder the vital parts
of the enemies, and seized with impetuosity,
Prajangha rushed towards the son of
Vali. (22)

तमभ्याशगतं Feat वानरेन्द्रो महाबल:।
आजघानाश्वकर्णेन द्रुमेणातिबलस्तदा॥ २३॥
ag चास्य सनिस्तिंशमाजघान स मुष्टिना।
वालिपुत्रस्य घातेन स पपात झक्षितावसि:॥ २४॥
Seeing him arrived near, Angada (the
ruler of monkeys), who was endowed with
extraordinary strength and was exceedingly
mighty, then struck him with an ASwakarna
tree. He further struck with his fist the arm
of his adversary, holding a sword, and the
latter dropped on the ground under the
impact of Angada’s blow. (23-24)
तं दृष्टवा पतितं भूमौ Gert मुसलसंनिभम्।
मुष्टिं संवर्तयामास वज्रकल्पं महाबल:॥ २५॥
Seeing his aforesaid sword, which
closely resembled a pestle in shape, fallen
on the ground, Prajangha, who was endowed
with extraordinary might, clenched his fist,
which was hard as adamant, (25)

a ललाटे महावीर्यमङ्गदं वानरर्षभम्।
आजघान महातेजा: स मुहूर्तं चचाल ह॥ २६॥
Sonitaksa (who was endowed with
extraordinary energy) struck in the forehead
Angada, the foremost of monkeys, who
was endowed with extraordinary valour; and
the latter staggered for a while; they
say. (26)

स Gat प्राप्य तेजस्वी वालिपुत्र: प्रतापवान्।
प्रजङ्घस्य शिर: कायात् पातयामास मुष्टिना॥ २७॥
