# YUDDHAKANDA #

वज्रप्रहाराभिहतो विकीर्णं ga ada:
हा स्वप्न: सत्यमेवेदं त्वं रामेण HA हत:॥४७॥
“Though it will be difficult for me to
touch it again, it is no longer possible to
embrace it. It has tendons cut to pieces by
arrows (discharged by Sri Rama) dug deep
into your vital parts and closely transfixed
like the spines of a porcupine. Though dark
of complexion, it is now transformed, O
king, into the colour of blood and lies fallen
on the ground like a mountain broken into
pieces when hit by a stroke of lightning.
Alas, that which seemed a dream has turned
a stark reality. But how could you be killed
by Rama? (45—47)
त्वं मृत्योरपि मृत्यु: स्या: कथं मृत्युवशं गत:।
त्रैलोक्यवसुभोक्तारं त्रैलोक्योद्वेगदं महत्॥४८॥
Wat लोकपालानां क्षेप्तारुं शंकरस्य a
दृप्तानां निग्रहीतारमाविष्कृतपराक्रमम्॥ ४९ ॥
लोकक्षोभयितारं च साधुभूतविदारणम्।
ओजसा दृप्तवाक्यानां वक्तारं रिपुसंनिधौ॥ ५०॥
स्वयूथभृत्यगोप्तारं eat भीमकर्मणाम्।
हन्तारं दानवेन्द्राणां यक्षाणां च सहस्रश:॥ ५१॥
निवातकवचानां तु निग्रहीतारमाहवे।
नैकयज्ञविलोप्तारं at स्वजनस्य च॥५२॥
धर्मव्यवस्थाभेत्तारं मायास्त्रष्टारमाहवे।
देवासुरनृकन्यानामाहर्तारं ततस्तत: ॥ ५३ ॥
शत्रुस्रीशोकदातारं नेतारं स्वजनस्य च।
लङ्काद्बीपस्य गोप्तारं Halt भीमकर्मणाम्॥५४॥
अस्माकं कामभोगानां दातारं रथिनां वरम्।
`एवंप्रभावं भर्तारं geal रामेण पातितम्॥५५॥
स्थिरास्मि या देहमिमं धारयामि हतप्रिया।
शयनेषु महार्हेषु शयित्वा राक्षसेश्वर॥ ५६॥
इह कस्मात् प्रसुप्तोऽसि धरण्यां रेणुगुण्ठित:।
यदा मे तनय: शस्तो लक्ष्मणेनेन्द्रजिद् युधि॥ ५७॥
dat त्वभिहता तीव्रमद्य त्वस्मिन् निपातिता।
साहं बन्धुजनैर्हीना GAT नाथेन च त्वया॥५८॥
विहीना कामभोगैश्च शोचिष्ये शाश्वती: समा: |
प्रपन्नो दीर्घमध्वानं राजन्नद्य सुदुर्गमम्॥५९॥
नय मामपि दु:खार्तां न वर्तिष्ये त्वया विना।
कस्मात् त्वं at विहायेह कृपणां गन्तुमिच्छसि॥ ६०॥

771

“You were death to Death himself; how
did you fall under his sway? Stony indeed
am |, who, though having lost my darling,
still retain this body of mine even on seeing
struck down by Rama, my husband, who
enjoyed treasures of all the three worlds
and proved to be a great source of annoyance
to all the three worlds; who was able to
conquer even the guardians of the worlds
and lifted up Lord Siva alongwith his seat,
Mount Kailasa; who manifested his prowess
by subduing the arrogant, threw into disorder
all the worlds by oppressing them, and
tormented pious men; who by virtue of his
might uttered insolent words in the presence
of his enemy, protected his own band as
well as his dependants and killed those who
indulged in terrible deeds; who made short
work of devil chiefs and Yaksas (a class of
demigods) in thousands, subdued the
Nivatakavacas (a class of Danavas) in
combat, put an end to a number of sacrificial
performances and protected his own people;
who violated the moral order, employed
conjuring tricks on the battlefield and bore
away from various places the virgin
daughters of gods, demons and human
beings; who brought mourning to his enemys’
wives, was the leader of his own people
and protected the island of Lanka, who
perpetrated terrible deeds, provided sense-
enjoyments to us and was the foremost of
car-warriors—in other words, who was
endowed with such unique power. Having
reposed on sumptuous couches, O ruler of
ogres, wherefore are you lying buried in
deep slumber on the bare ground and
shrouded in dust? | was really hard hit on
the occasion when my eldest son, Indrajit,
was killed in combat by Laksmana. Today,
of course, | am undone. Disunited from my
kinsfolk, nay, forsaken by you, my lord, and
deprived of sense-enjoymenis, | shall grieve
for innumerable years. Having embarked
