* AYODHYAKANDA +

river

(2)

on mountains as_ well
banks.
स सम्प्रतस्थे धर्मात्मा प्रीतो दशरथात्मज:।
qa महत्या नादिन्या सेनया चतुरङ्घया॥३॥
Followed by a huge army consisting of
four limbs, viz., chariots, horsemen, elephants
and foot soldiers and full of noise (caused
by the rattling of chariot wheels, the neighing
of horses and the trumpeting of elephants)
Bharata (son of Dasaratha), whose mind
was given to piety, delightfully proceeded
alongwith others in the hope of meeting Sri
Rama. (3)
सागरौघनिभा सेना भरतस्य महात्मन:।
महीं संछादयामास «wate द्यामिवाम्बुद:॥४॥
The army of the high-souled Bharata,
which resembled the high-tide of an ocean,

overran the land even as a cloud over-
spreads the sky during the monsoon. (4)

तुरंगौघैरवतता वारणैश्च महाबलै: |
अनालक्ष्या Fat कालं तस्मिन् काले बभूव AT & ॥
Covered all over by hosts of horses
and very mighty elephants, the ground at
that time became invisible for a long period.
(5)

स गत्वा दूरमध्वानं सम्परिश्रान्तवाहन:।
उवाच वचनं श्रीमान् वसिष्ठं मन्त्रिणां वरम्॥६॥
Having covered a long distance, the
glorious Bharata, whose animals were now
fully exhausted, submitted as follows to
Vasistha, the foremost of his counsellors :
(6)

यादृशं लक्ष्यते रूपं यथा चैव मया श्रुतम्।
व्यक्तं प्राप्ता: स्म तं देशं भरद्वाजो यमब्रवीत्॥ ७॥
“From the topography of this region as
it is observed by us as well as from what
has been heard by me about it, it is clear
that we have reached that area of which
Sage Bharadwaja spoke to us. (7)

अयं गिरिश्चित्रकूटस्तथा मन्दाकिनी नदी।
Wad प्रकाशते दूरान्नीलमेघनिभं वनम्॥८॥

as along

625

“Here is the Citrakuta hill and there is
the river Mandakini. And here comes into
view the forest looking like a blue cloud
from a distance. (8)

fir: सानूनि रम्याणि चित्रकूटस्य सम्प्रति।
वारणैरवमृद्यन्ते मामकै: पर्वतोपमै:॥९॥

“The lovely peaks of the Citrakuta
mountain are being trampled at present
by my elephants resembling so many hills.

(9)
मुञ्चन्ति कुसुमान्येते नगा: पर्वतसानुषु।
नीला इवातपापाये तोयं तोयधरा घना:॥१०॥

“Shaken by the elephants, the yonder
trees shed flowers on the hill-tops even as
dark rain-bearing clouds pour water at the
end of summer.” (10)
wa: समन्तादाकीर्णं मकरैरिव सागरम्॥११॥

Turning to Satrughna, Bharata
continued : “Behold, O Satrughna, the region
on the upper part of the mountain, frequented
till now by Kinnaras, now overrun on all
sides by horses even as a sea is infested
by alligators. (11)

Ud मृगगणा भान्ति शीघ्रवेगा: प्रचोदिता:।
वायुप्रविद्धा: शरदि मेघजाला इवाम्बरे॥ ei

“Running with quick speed as urged
forward by the troops, these herds of deer
look charming like masses of clouds sailing
in the sky when driven by the wind in
autumn. (12)

कुर्वन्ति कुसुमापीडान् शिर:सु सुरभीनमी।
मेघप्रकाशै: फलकैर्दाक्षिणात्या AT Baru १३॥

“Like men of the south, these troops
distinguished by shields resembling clouds
in hue wear fragrant floral ornaments on
their heads. (13)
निष्कूजमिव wd at घोरप्रदर्शनम्।
अयोध्येव जनाकोर्णा सम्प्रति प्रतिभाति Au १४॥

“Getting crowded with men, this forest,
which was noiseless and wore a terrifying
