# YUDDHAKANDA #

Their shields and armours broken, the
ogres struck by the monkeys shed blood
profusely on the field of battle even as trees
exude their sap. (60)

रथेन च wt चापि वारणेनापि वारणम्।
हयेन च wt केचिन्निर्जघ्नुर्वानरा रणे॥६१॥

Nay, some monkeys struck down on
the battle-field a chariot with another chariot,
an elephant too with another elephant, and
a horse with another horse. (61)

राक्षसा वानरेन्द्राणां बिभिदु: पादपान् शिला:॥ ६२॥

By means of their sharp arrows with a
sharp horse-shoe-shaped head, those with
a crescent-shaped head and those with a
spear-like head, the ogres shattered the
trees and rocks of monkey chiefs. (62)

विकीर्णा: पर्वतास्तैश्च द्रुमच्छिन्नैश्च संयुगे।
हतैश्च कपिरक्षोभिर्दुर्गमा वसुधाभवत्॥६३॥

The earth became difficult to tread on,
strewn as it was with mountains which had
been thrown as also with trees which had
been cut down and with the monkeys and
ogres that had been killed. (63)

a वानरा गर्बितहृष्टचेष्टा:

ues

Reaching the field of battle and leaving
behind all fear, all the aforesaid monkeys,
whose demeanour was full of pride and
martial ardour, nay, who were armed _ with
various weapons snatched from the ogres
and their own in the shape of trees, rocks,
teeth and nails and were ever undepressed
in spirit, waged war with the ogres. (64)

तस्मिन् प्रवृत्ते तुमुले विमर्दे
प्रहष्यमाणेषु वलीमुखेषु।
निपात्यमानेषु च राक्षसेषु
महर्षयो देवगणाश्च नेदु:॥६५॥

581

While that tumultuous conflict going on,
the monkeys were feeling exultant and the
ogres were being struck down, the great
Rsis and hosts of gods shouted joyously.

(65)
हयं मारुततुल्यवेग-
मारुह्य wih निशितां wre
नरान्तको वानरसैन्यमुग्रं
महार्णवं मीन इवाविवेश॥६६॥
Mounting his horse, swift as the wind,
and tightly grasping his sharpened javelin,
Narantaka thereupon plunged into the
formidable simian army even as a fish would
enter the ocean. (66)

a am wa शतानि ate:

wet दीप्तेन विनिर्बिभेद।
क्षणेनेन्द्ररिपुर्महात्मा

जघान सैन्यं हरिपुङ्खवानाम्॥६७॥

That gigantic champion pierced single-
handed seven hundred monkeys with his
effulgent spear. In this way that enemy of
Indra (the ruler of gods) exterminated the
army of the monkey chiefs in a trice. (67)

ददृशुश्च महात्मानं हयपृष्ठप्रतिष्ठितम्।
at हरिसैन्येषु विद्याधरमहर्षय:॥६८॥

Nay, Vidyadharas (heavenly artists)
and great Rsis saw the colossus moving in
the midst of monkey troops, seated on
horseback. (68)

स तस्य ददरृशे मार्गो मांसशोणितकर्दम:।
पतितै: पर्वताकारैर्वानरैरभिसंवृत: ॥ ६९ ॥

The pathway carved out by him was
found full of mire in the form of flesh and
blood and covered with monkeys, resembling
mountains that had fallen. (69)

तावदेतानतिक्रम्य निर्बिभेद नरान्तक:॥७०॥
Slipping past the monkey chiefs even

as they thought of displaying their valour,
Narantaka clove their ranks. (70)

ततो

Uh:
