+ UTTARAKANDA +

जानन्त ऋषय: Ta सहन्ते तस्य शक्तित:।
तथा केसरिणा त्वेष वायुना सोऽङ्जनीसुत:॥ ३२॥
प्रतिषिद्धोऽपि मर्यादां लङ्घयत्येव वानर:।
ततो महर्षय: क्रुद्धा भृग्वङ्गिरसवंशजा:॥३३॥
wat रघुश्रेष्ठ नातिक्रुद्धातिमन्यव:।
बाधसे यत् समाश्रित्य बलमस्मान् प्लवङ्घम॥ ३४॥
aq दीर्घकालं वेत्तासि नास्माकं शापमोहित:।
यदा ते स्मार्यते कीर्तिस्तदा ते वर्धते बलम्॥ ३५॥

“Hanuman, who was endowed with
extraordinary might, freely indulged in such
pranks. Knowing that he had been rendered
immune by Brahma (the source of happiness)
from death caused by all kinds of curses
pronounced by Brahmanas, all those Rsis
(seers of Vedic Mantras), put up with them
because of the power derived from the
boons. Even though prohibited by Kesari
(Afijana’s husband and Hanuman’s foster-
father) as well as by the wind-god, the
yonder monkey, the son of Afjana, for his
part continued to exceed the bounds of
propriety. Provoked to anger, the eminent
sages, born in the line of Bhrgu and Angira
(the mind-born sons of Brahma), who were
really speaking neither enraged nor highly
indignant, thereupon cursed him as follows,
O jewel among Raghus:

“‘Bewitched by our imprecation, you
will remain unconscious for a long time of
the power, banking on which you are
harassing us, O monkey! You will become
aware of your mighty prowess when someone
reminds you of your glory.’ (31—35)

ततस्तु हततेजौजा महर्षिवचनौजसा।
एषोऽऽश्रमाणि तान्येव मृदुभावं गतोऽचरत्॥ ३६॥

“Deprived of the knowledge of his
energy and vigour by the strength of the
execration pronounced by the eminent sages,
Hanuman, for his part, thereupon ranged
over those very hermitages in a placid mood.

(36)
अथर्क्षरजसो नाम वालिसुग्रीवयो: पिता।
सर्ववानरराजासीत् तेजसा इव भास्कर:॥ ३७॥

977

“At that time, the father of Vali and
Sugriva, Rksaraja by name, who resembled
the sun in splendour, was the ruler of all the
monkeys. (37)
स तु राज्यं fat कृत्वा वानराणां महेश्वर:।
aaa नाम कालधर्मेण योजित:॥ ३८॥

“Having ruled for a long time, that
suzerain lord of the monkeys, Rksaraja by
name, for his part, was subjected to the
natural law of Time. (38)

तस्मिन्नस्तमिते चाथ मन्तिभिर्मन्त्रकोविदै:।

fra ue Hat वाली सुग्रीवो वालिन: पदे॥ ३९॥
“He having met his death, Vali was

forthwith installed in the position of his father

and Sugriva in the position of Vali (the

Crown prince) by his counsellors, who were

expert in counselling. (39)

सुग्रीवेण wi wer sige छिद्रवर्जितम्।

आबाल्यं सख्यमभवदनिलस्याग्निना यथा ॥४०॥
“From his very boyhood Vali developed

with Sugriva an unwarying and unbroken

brotherhood, similar to that of the wind with
fire. (40)

एष शापवशादेव A ag बलमात्मन:।

वालिसुग्रीवयोर्वैरॆ यदा राम समुत्थितम्॥४१॥
न ह्येष राम सुग्रीवो भ्राम्यमाणोऽपि वालिना।
देव जानाति न ह्येष बलमात्मनि मारुति: xe

“By reason of that very curse, Hanuman
was not conscious of his might. When hostility
arose between Vali and Sugriva, O Rama,
neither the yonder Sugriva, even while he
was being forced to wander from place to
place, O Lord Rama, nor this son of the
wind-god, Hanuman, was actually aware of
the strength which existed in him. (41-42)

ऋषिशापाहृतबलस्तदैव कपिसत्तम:।

सिंह: कुञ्जररुद्धो वा आस्थित: सहितो रणे॥४३॥
“Deprived of the knowledge of his own

might by the curse of the sages, Hanuman,

the foremost of monkeys, remained standing
by the side of Sugriva during that very
