* BALAKANDA +

दैवं च मानुषं da ad a साध्वनुष्ठितम्।
वसिष्ठं च समागम्य कुशलं मुनिपुंगव:॥४७॥
RA तान् यथान्यायं महाभाग उवाच ह।
ते सर्वे हृष्टमनसस्तस्य राज्ञो निवेशनम्॥४८॥
aa हृष्टमना राजा विश्वामित्रं महामुनिम्॥४९॥
उवाच परमोदारो हृष्टस्तमभिपूजयन्।
यथामृतस्य सम्प्राप्तिर्यथा वर्षमनूदके॥५०॥
यथा सदृशदारेषु पुत्रजन्माप्रजस्य वै।
प्रणष्टस्य यथा लाभो यथा हर्षो महोदय:॥ ५१॥
तथैवागमनं wt स्वागतं a महामुने।
क च ते परमं कामं करोमि किमु हर्षित:॥५२॥
And are your duties like pouring
oblations into the fire in relation to gods and
human beings (newcomers) duly discharged?”
Nay, meeting (embracing) in the proper order
of sequence Vasistha and those other seers,
Vamadeva and so on, who were present there,
he inquired after their welfare: so the tradition
goes. Delighted in mind, they all then entered
the court of the celebrated king (DaSaratha)
and, received with attentions by him, took
their seat according to their respective rank.
Thrilled with joy the highly magnanimous
king then spoke with a delighted mind to the
great sage Viswamitra, glorifying him as
follows : “I consider your advent precisely as
welcome as securing nectar in one’s own
hands, as rainfall in a waterless tract, as
the actual birth of a son, through a wife
becoming oneself, to one without a child, as
the recovery of a treasure irretrievably lost,
or joy proceeding from a festive occasion,
O great sage ! | wonder what supreme object
of your desire | can delightfully accomplish
and how ! (47—52)

पात्रभूतोऽसि A ब्रह्मन् दिष्ट्या प्राप्तोऽसि मानद।
TI मे सफलं जन्म जीवितं च सुजीवितम्॥ ५३॥

“You are deserving of every service
from me and have called at my place through
my good luck, O bestower of honour! My
birth stands fulfilled and my life is blessed
today. (53)

125

यस्माद् विप्रेन्द्रमद्राक्षं सुप्रभाता निशा मम।
पूर्वं राजार्षिशब्देन तपसा द्योतितप्रभ:॥५४॥
ब्रह्मर्षित्वमनुप्राप्तर wash age मया।
तदद्भुतमभूद fay ufat परमं मम॥५५॥

“My night has culminated in a propitious
sunrise in that | have seen the foremost of
Brahmanas in you. Formerly distinguished
by the appellation ‘Rajarsi’ (a royal sage),
you have since earned the status of a
Brahmarsi (Brahmana sage), your splendour
having been brightened by your asceticism.
You are thus worthy of adoration to me in
many ways. Your visit to me has been
wonderful in that it has proved to be highly
purifying for me, O Brahmana sage ! (54-55)

शुभक्षेत्रगतश्चाहं dt संदर्शनात् प्रभो।
ate यत् प्रार्थितं तुभ्यं कार्यमागमनं प्रति॥ ५६॥
इच्छाम्यनुगृहीतोऽहं wef परिवृद्धये।
कार्यस्य न विमर्शं च गन्तुमर्हसि सुव्रत॥७५७॥
“Nay, by virtue of your very sight, O
lord, | have visited all sacred places. Pray,
tell me what object is sought to be
accomplished by you through your advent
to my capital. Favoured by you, | wish to
promote your cause. You need not entertain
any doubt about the success of your mission,
O sage of noble vows! (56-57)

कर्ता चाहमशेषेण cad fe भवान् मम।
मम चायमनुप्राप्तो महानभ्युदयो द्विज।
तवागमनज: कृत्स्नो धर्मश्चानुत्तमो द्विज॥७५८॥

“| shall fully accomplish your object; for
being an honoured guest, you are a veritable
god to me. This is an occasion for great
rejoicing come to me, as well as to my family
O Brahmana sage, and the highest religious
merit proceeding from your visit has fallen to
my lot in its entirety, O holy one !” (58)

इति हृदयसुखं निशम्य वाक्यं श्रुतिसुखमात्मवता विनीतमुक्तम्।
प्रथितगुणयशा गुणैर्विशिष्ट: परमकऋषि: परमं जगाम हर्षम्॥ ७५९ ।।
The great sage ViSwamitra, whose

renown occasioned by his excellences
had spread far and wide and who was
