470

bound tightly together (for being slaughtered)
in a shambles. (28)

पूर्णचन्द्रानन: श्यामो गूढजन्रुररिंदम:।
आजानुबाहु: पद्माक्षो रामो लक्ष्मणपूर्वज:॥ २९॥
पूर्वाभिभाषी मधुर: सत्यवादी महाबल:।
सौम्यश्च सर्वलोकस्य चन्द्रवत् प्रियदर्शन:॥ ३०॥
Tt पुरुषशार्दूलो मत्तमातङ्गविक्रम:।
शोभयिष्यत्यरण्यानि विचरन् स महारथ:॥ ३१॥
That lotus-eyed great chariot-warrior,
Sri Rama, elder brother of Laksmana—a
tiger among men and a subduer of foes—
who is dark-brown of complexion and has a
countenance resembling the full moon, nay
whose collar-bone is invisible (because of
its being covered with flesh), whose arms
extend up to the knees, who takes the
initiative in speaking, is sweet of expression,
truthful of speech and possessed of
extraordinary might, is easy of address to
all people and is delightful of aspect as the
moon, and whose gait resembles that of an
elephant in rut, will surely adorn the woods
while roaming through them.” (29—31)

तास्तथा विलपन्त्यस्तु नगरे नागरस्तिय:।
चुक्रुशुर्दु:खसंतप्ता yeaa भयागमे॥३२॥
Lamenting thus in the city of Ayodhya,
the aforesaid wives of citizens, for their
part, cried as one would do at the approach
of some danger foreboding death, tormented
as they were with agony. (32)
जगामास्तं दिनकरो रजनी चाभ्यवर्तत॥ ३३॥
The sun sank below the horizon past
these women,who had been mourning as
aforesaid in their homes for Sri Rama (a
scion of Raghu), and the night fell. (33)

नष्टज्वलनसंतापा प्रशान्ताध्यायसत्कथा ।

तिमिरेणानुलिप्तेव deat सा नगरी बभौ॥ ३४॥

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

The city of Ayodhya in which the
kindling of fires even for the purposes of
Agnihotra had ceased and the chanting of
the Vedas and the narration of sacred stories
relating to the Puranas died out, looked as
though coated with darkness at that time.

(34)

उपशान्तवणिक्पण्या नष्टहर्षा निराश्रया।
अयोध्या नगरी चासीन्नष्टतारमिवाम्बरम्॥ ३५॥

The city of Ayodhya—in which the
business of the trading class had been
brought to a standstill and whose joy had
gone, nay, which had now become
supportless, looked dark as the sky in which
the stars had disappeared. (35)

तदा स्वियो रामनिमित्तमातुरा
यथा सुते भ्रातरि वा विवासिते।

विलप्य दीना रुरुदुर्विचेतस:
सुतैर्हि तासामधिकोऽपि सोऽभवत्॥ ३६ ॥
Giving expression to their grief in
various ways on that occasion, the women
of Ayodhya, who were sick of mind on
account of Sri Rama, as one would feel on
one’s own son or brother having been
sent into exile, cried miserably and fell
unconscious; for Sri Rama was dearer to
them than their very sons. (36)

प्रशान्तगीतोत्सवनृत्यवादना

बिभ्रष्टहर्षा पिहितापणोदया।
dal ह्ययोध्या नगरी aya सा

महार्णव: संक्षपितोदको यथा ॥ ३७॥

The celebrated city of Ayodhya—in

which all singing, rejoicing, dancing and
instrumental music had been completely set
at rest, whose delight had fled forever and
the steady rise of whose trade had been
hampered—looked at that time like an ocean
whose waters had dried up. (37)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्येऽयोध्याकाण्डेऽष्टचत्वारिंश: AA: ॥ ४८ il

Thus ends Canto Forty-eight in the Ayodhyakanda of the glorious Ramayana of
Valmiki, the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

