* AYODHYAKANDA +

आर्यकस्ते सुकुशली युधाजिन्मातुलस्तव।
प्रवासाच्च सुखं पुत्र wa A वक्तुमर्हसि॥६॥

“Is your maternal grandfather as well
as your maternal uncle, Yudhajit, enjoying
perfect health? And has everything been
well with you ever since you left home, my
son? You should tell me everything.” (6)

एवं पृष्टस्तु कैकेय्या प्रियं पार्थिवनन्दन:।
आचष्ट भरत: सर्वं AA राजीवलोचन:॥ ७॥

Questioned thus in endearing terms by
Kaikeyi, the lotus-eyed Prince Bharata, for
his part, related to his mother everything
concerning himself. (7)

अद्य A सप्तमी रात्रिश्च्युतस्यार्यकवेश्मन:।
अम्बाया: कुशली तातो युधाजिन्मातुलश्च Ai ८॥

He said “Today has elapsed the seventh
night since | departed from the abode of my
maternal grandfather. My maternal grandfather
as well as my maternal uncle, Yudhajit, are
enjoying good health. (8)
यन्मे धनं च wa च edt राजा wa!
Usd पथ्यभवत् ततोऽहं पूर्वमागत:॥९॥

“The animals carrying the wealth (gold)
and jewels that King ASwapati (a tormentor

of his enemies) gave to me, got fatigued on
the way; hence | came away first. (9)

राजवाक्यहरैर्दूतैस्त्वर्यमाणोऽहमागत: ।
यदहं प्रष्टुमिच्छामि dar वक्तुमर्हति॥१०॥
“Being urged by the messengers,
carrying the royal message, to hurry up, |
came away in advance. Be pleased, O
mother, to tell me now what | intend to ask.
(10)

न चायमिक्ष्वाकुजन: wee: प्रतिभाति मे॥११॥

“This couch of yours, fit for reposing
on and plated with gold as it is, is unoccupied
by the king, who used to grace it every now
and then. These attendants of DaSaratha (a
scion of Ikswaku) do not appear much
delighted to me either. (11)

557

राजा भवति भूयिष्ठमिहाम्बाया निवेशने।
wae नाद्य पश्यामि द्रष्टुमिच्छन्निहागत:॥१२॥

“The king used mostly to be present
here in your apartments. Though | have
come here longing to see him, | do not see
him today. (12)

पितुर्ग्रहीष्ये पादौ च तं ममाख्याहि पृच्छत:।
आहोस्विदम्बाज्येष्ठाया: कौसल्याया निवेशने 1 १३॥

“Nay, | shall clasp the feet of my father:
pray, tell me, even as | ask you, where he
may be. Is he in the apartments of Kausalya,
the seniormost of my mothers?” (13)

तं प्रत्युवाच कैकेयी प्रियवद् घोरमप्रियम्।
अजानन्तं प्रजानन्ती राज्यलोभेन मोहिता॥ ex

Infatuated by greed of sovereignty,
Kaikeyi, who knew everything in detail,
related to Bharata, who knew nothing about
it, the whole event, which was so terrible
and unpleasant, as though it were agreeable
to hear : (14)

या गति: सर्वभूतानां at गतिं ते पिता गत:।

राजा महात्मा तेजस्वी यायजूक: सतां Aa: iW १५॥
“The high-souled and glorious king, your

father, who was given to the performance of

sacrifices and was the haven of the virtuous,

has met the same fate as is the destined
end of all created beings.” (15)

तच्छुत्वा भरतो वाक्यं धर्माभिजनवाञ्छुचि: |
wd सहसा भूमौ पितॄशोकबलार्दित:॥१६॥

Hearing the aforesaid reply from the
lips of Kaikeyi, the guileless Bharata, who
came of a pious family, fell to the ground all
at once, hard smitten with grief caused by
the death of his father. (16)

a हतोऽस्मीति कृपणां दीनां वाचमुदीरयन्।
निपपात महाबाहुर्बाहू विक्षिप्य वीर्यवान्॥१७॥
Uttering in piteous tones the plaintive
words “Alas, | am ruined!” and striking his
arms against the floor, the heroic Bharata,

who possessed long arms, fell prostrate.
(17)
