# YUDDHAKANDA #

“Nay, with both ear-rings, his most
dreadful countenance shines like the full
moon appearing between the two stars
constituting the constellation Punarvasu. (24)

आचक्ष्व मे महाबाहो त्वमेनं राक्षसोत्तमम्।

यं दृष्टवा वानरा: सर्वे भयार्ता विद्रुता दिश: ॥ २५ ॥
“Introduce you to me, O mighty-armed

one, this jewel among the ogres, seeing

whom the monkeys have all fled panic-

stricken in all directions.” (25)

स पृष्टो राजपुत्रेण रामेणामिततेजसा।
आचचक्षे महातेजा राघवाय विभीषण:॥ २६॥

Questioned as aforesaid by Prince Sri
Rama of immense energy, Vibhisana, who
too was endowed with extraordinary energy,
submitted as follows to Sri Rama, a scion of
Raghu: (26)

दशग्रीवो महातेजा राजा वैश्रवणानुज:।
भीमकर्मा महात्मा fe रावणो राक्षसेश्वर:॥ २७॥

“The ten-headed and gigantic King
Ravana, a younger (half-) brother of Kubera,
son of Visrava, the lord of ogres, who is
endowed with extraordinary energy, is well
known for his terrific exploits. (27)

तस्यासीद् वीर्यवान् Gat रावणप्रतिमो बले।
वृद्धसेवी श्रुतिधर: सर्वास्त्रविदुषां वर:॥ २८॥

“To him was born a valiant son, who is
a compeer of Ravana in might, has waited
upon his elders, has mastered the Vedas
and is the foremost of all those well-versed
in the use of mystic missiles. (28)

अश्वपृष्ठे नागपृष्ठे खड्गे धनुषि कर्षणे।
Ve सान्त्वे च दाने च नये A च सम्मत:॥ २९॥

“He is highly esteemed in_ riding
on horse-back as well as on the back of
an elephant, in the use of a sword, as well
as of a bow, in pulling the string of a
bow, in sowing dissension in the enemy’s
ranks and making peace, as also in making
gifts, in political wisdom as well as in counsel.

(29)

593

यस्य ae समाश्रित्य लङ्का vata निर्भया।

wat धान्यमालिन्या अतिकायमिमं fag: i300
“People know this warrior as Atikaya,

son of Dhanyamalini (another consort of

Ravana) resting on whose arm Lanka feels

secure. (30)

एतेनाराधितो ब्रह्मा तपसा भावितात्मना।
अस्त्राणि चाप्यवाप्तानि रिपवश्च पराजिता:॥ ३१॥

“Brahma, the creator, was propitiated
by this ogre of purified intellect through
askesis; nay, mystic missiles of various
kinds were acquired from the aforesaid
god by way of boons and enemies subdued.

(31)
सुरासुरैरवध्यत्वं am स्वयंभुवा।
एतच्च mad दिव्यं रथश्च रविभास्वर:॥ ३२॥

“Exemption from death at the hands of
gods and demons alike has been granted in
his favour by Brahma (the self-born creator)
as well as this heavenly armour as also this
chariot, bright as the sun. (32)

एतेन शतशो eat दानवाश्च पराजिता:।
रक्षितानि च रक्षांसि यक्षाश्चापि निषूदिता:॥ ३३॥
“Gods and devils too have been
overcome by him in hundreds, nay, ogres
have been protected and Yaksas (a class
of demigods), too, have been exterminated.
(33)

ad विष्टम्भितं a बाणैरिन्द्रस्य धीमता।
पाश: सलिलराजस्य युद्धे प्रतिहतस्तथा॥ ३४॥

एषोऽतिकायो बलवान् राक्षसानामथर्षभ:।
a रावणसुतो धीमान् देवदानवदर्पहा॥ ३५॥

Here is the notorious Atikaya, the
mighty and intelligent son of Ravana, a
veritable bull among the ogres and the queller
of the pride of gods and devils, by whom,
wise as he is, was the thunderbolt of Indra
stayed with his arrows and the noose of
Varuna, the lord of waters, was repelled in
combat. (34-35)
