* SUNDARAKANDA +

direction, he entered a dry lake even without
mud. Tying the ten-headed monster round
his neck, a dark young woman clad in red,
her limbs besmeared with mud, was dragging
him in a southerly direction. Ravana’s younger
brother Kumbhakarna of extraordinary might
was likewise seen by me in that dream.

(29-30)

रावणस्य Yat: Aa मुण्डास्तैलसमुक्षिता:।
वराहेण दशग्रीव: शिशुमारेण चेन्द्रजित्॥३१॥

उष्टेण कुम्भकर्णश्च प्रयातो दक्षिणां दिशम्।
एकस्तत्र मया qe: श्वेतच्छत्रो विभीषण:॥ ३२॥

शुक्लमाल्याम्बरधर: शुक्लगन्धानुलेपन:।
शङ्खदुन्दुभिनिर्घोषैर्नृत्तगीतैरलंकृत: ॥ ३३ ॥

आरुह्य शैलसंकाशं मेघस्तनितनि:स्वनम्।
ded गजं दिव्यमास्ते तत्र विभीषण:॥ ३४॥
चतुर्भि:; सचिवै: सार्धं वैहायसमुपस्थित:॥ ३५॥
“All the sons of Ravana too were seen
by me with shaven heads and bathed in oil.
Nay, Ravana, the ten-headed monster,
departed in a southerly direction on the
back of a boar, his eldest son Meghanada
(the conqueror of Indra) too on the back of
a dolphin and Kumbhakarna on the back of
a camel. In that dream Vibhisana, Ravana’s
youngest brother, alone was seen by me
shaded with a white canopy, dressed in
white and wearing a white garland, nay,
smeared with white sandal-paste. Hailed
with blasts of conch-shells and the beating
of kettledrums as well as with dances and
songs, Vibhisana stood there in the air
mounted on a four-tusked celestial elephant
closely resembling a hill and trumpeting like
thunder, with four ministers. (31—35)

समाजश्च महान् Fa गीतवादित्रनि:स्वन:।
पिबतां रक्तमाल्यानां रक्षसां रक्तवाससाम्॥ ३६॥
“A large assemblage, distinguished by
the sound of vocal and instrumental music,
of ogres, clad in red and adorned with red
garlands and drinking oil, had also collected.
(36)

wag चेयं wt war सवाजिरथकुञ्जरा।
सागरे पतिता दृष्टा भग्नगोपुरतोरणा॥ ३७॥

137

“Nay, this enchanting city of Lanka,
horses, chariots and elephants and all, was
seen by me fallen into the sea, its gateways
and arches shattered. (37)

लङ्का दृष्टा मया स्वप्ने रावणेनाभिरक्षिता।
दग्धा रामस्य दूतेन वानरेण तरस्विना॥ ३८॥

“Though protected on all sides by
Ravana, Lanka was further seen by me in a
different dream burnt up by an agile monkey,
acting as an envoy of Sri Rama. (38)

पीत्वा तैलं प्रमत्ताश्च प्रहसन्त्यो महास्वना:।
लङ्कायां भस्मरूक्षायां सर्वा राक्षसयोषित:॥ ३९॥
“All the ogresses in Lanka, now arid

with ashes, were seen drunk with oil and
laughing heartily with great noise. (39)

कुम्भकर्णादयश्चेमे Ad राक्षसपुंगवा:।
wh निवसनं गृह्य प्रविष्टा गोमयहुदम्॥४०॥
“Putting on a red attire of inferior quality,
all these jewels among the ogres,
Kumbhakarna and others, disappeared into
a pool of cowdung. (40)
अपगच्छत Used सीतामाप्नोति राघव:।
घातयेत् परमामर्षी युष्मान् सार्धं हि Tara: wwe
“Therefore, get away from this place
and watch how Sri Rama, a scion of Raghu,
recovers Sita. Supremely intolerant by nature,
he will undoubtedly kill you all alongwith the
ogres. (41)
भत्सितां तर्जितां वापि नानुमंस्यति राघव:॥४२॥
“Sri Rama, a scion of Raghu, would
never tolerate his beloved and_ highly
esteemed wife, who had followed him in his
exile, to be reproached or threatened by
you. (42)
तदलं क्रूरवाक्यैश्च सान्त्वमेवाभिधीयताम्।
अभियाचाम वैदेहीमेतद्भधि मम रोचते॥४३॥

“Therefore, have done with cruel words
and let conciliatory words alone be spoken
to her. Let us crave her forgiveness; for,
this alone appeals to me. (43)
