504

for its fish and fingers etc., (parts of limbs of
the body) for the grass growing on its banks;
which was crowded with the foremost of
swans in the shape of vultures, and
frequented by cranes in the shape of
buzzards; which was overspread with foam
in the shape of fat, and had the groans of
the wounded for its murmur, and which was
difficult to cross for cowards—even as they
would cross a river frequented by swans
and cranes at the end of the monsoon,
when they become fordable. Nay, they swam
across that river, even though it was difficult
to cross as easily as leaders ofherds of
elephants would cross a lotus-pond covered
with the pollen of lotuses. (29—33)
Ad: सृजन्तं बाणौघान् प्रहस्तं स्यन्दने स्थितम्।
cast तरसा नीलो विधमन्तं प्लवंगमान्॥ ३४॥
Presently Nila (the Commander-in-Chief
of the simian army) saw Prahasta discharging
volleys of shafts and exterminating the
monkeys with impetuosity while seated in
his chariot. He, therefore, began to
exterminate with vehemence the army of
the ogres even as a tempestuous wind
would blow away a huge mass of clouds in
the sky. (34)
उद्धूत इव वायु: खे महदभ्रबलं बलात्।
समीक्ष्याभिद्रुतं युद्धे प्रहस्तो वाहिनीपति:।॥ ३५॥
रथेनादित्यवर्णेन नीलमेवाभिदुद्रुवे।
a धनुर्धन्विनां श्रेष्ठो विकृष्य परमाहवे॥ ३६॥
नीलाय व्यसृजदू बाणान् प्रहस्तो वाहिनीपति: |
a प्राप्य विशिखा नीलं विनिर्भिद्य समाहिता:॥ ३७॥
Tal जग्मुर्महावेगा रोषिता sa पन्नगा:।
नील: शरैरभिहतो निशितैर्ज्जलनोपमै:।॥ ३८॥
a तं परमदुर्धर्षमापतन्तं महाकपि:।
Weed ताडयामास वृक्षमुत्पाट्यं वीर्यवान्॥३९॥

Perceiving Nila rushing with violence
towards him for an engagement, Prahasta,
the Commander-in-Chief, darted towards Nila
alone in his chariot, bright as the sun. Stretching

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA +

his bow fully in that supreme struggle, that
prince of archers, General Prahasta, began
to aim arrows a Nila. Reaching Nila and
piercing him right through, the aforesaid arrows
went straight into the earth with great rapidity
like infuriated serpents. Uprooting a tree,
when wounded by the pointed arrows,
resembling tongues of fire, that mighty and
valiant monkey struck the said Prahasta,
who was most difficult to overpower, and
was rushing towards him. (35—39)

a तेनाभिहत: क्रुद्धो नर्दन् राक्षसपुंगव:।
ववर्ष शरवर्षाणि प्लवंगानां चमूपतौ॥४०॥

Roaring when struck by Nila, that furious
bull among the ogres began to rain down
showers of arrows on the Commander-in-
Chief of the monkeys. (40)
तस्य बाणगणानेव राक्षसस्य दुरात्मन: |
यथैव Wes at शारदं शीघ्रमागतम्॥४१॥
एवमेव प्रहस्तस्य शरवर्षान् दुरासदान्।
निमीलिताक्ष: deat नील: AS दुरासदान्॥४२॥

Not being able to check the streams of
arrows of that evil-minded ogre, Nila received
them with closed eyes. Even as a bull
would receive an autumnal shower come all
of a sudden, precisely in the same way Nila
suffered with closed eyes the shower of
shafts discharged by Prahasta, which were
difficult to endure, nay, difficult to meet.

(41-42)
रोषित: शरवर्षेण सालेन Hed महान्।
प्रजघधान हयान्र्नील; प्रहस्तस्य महाबल: ॥ ४३ Il

Provoked by that hail of arrows, the

great Nila, who was endowed with

extraordinary might, struck down the horses
of Prahasta with a huge sal tree. (43)

ततो रोषपरीतात्मा धनुस्तस्य दुरात्मन:।
बभञ्ज तरसा नीलो ननाद च पुन: पुन:॥४४॥

With a mind seized with anger, Nila
then shattered with violence the bow of that
