« KISKINDHAKANDA +

glorious father of Hanuman, Kesar, a jewel
among the monkeys, nay, the foremost of
all monkeys, who resembled in hue the
filaments of a lotus and whose countenance
shone like the rising sun. (17-18)

TAT TAERTS गवाक्षो भीमविक्रम:।

qa: कोटिसहस्रेण वानराणामदृश्यत॥१९॥
Surrounded by a thousand crore

monkeys, came to view the suzerain lord of

baboons, Gavaksa, possessed of redoubtable

prowess. (19)

ऋक्षाणां भीमवेगानां ga: शत्रुनिबर्हण:।

qa: कोटिसहस्राभ्यां grat समभिवर्तत॥ २०॥
Accompanied by two thousand crores

of bears of terrible speed, turned up

Dhumra, the exterminator of his foes. (20)

Tercera: पनसो नाम यूथप:।

आजगाम महावीर्यस्तिसृभि: कोटिभिर्वृत: u २१॥
Surrounded by dreadful monkeys

looking like huge mountains and numbering

three crores, there came the troop-leader
Panasa by name. (21)

नीलाञ्जनचयाकारो नीलो नामैष यूथप:।

अदरृश्यत महाकाय: कोटिभिर्दशभिर्वृत:॥ २२॥
Accompanied by ten crore monkeys

appeared next the troop-commander, Nila

by name, who was possessed of a gigantic
form and looked like a heap of antimony.(22)

ad: काञ्चनशैलाभो गवयो नाम ger: |
आजगाम महावीर्य: कोटिभि: पञ्चभिर्वृत: ।॥। २३॥

Then came the troop-leader named
Gavaya, who shone like a mountain of gold,
was possessed of extraordinary prowess
and who was surrounded by five crores of
monkeys. (23)

दरीमुखश्च बलवान् यूथपोऽभ्याययौ तदा।
qa: कोटिसहस्रेण सुग्रीवं समवस्थित:॥ २४॥
Then arrived the mighty troop-leader
Darimukha and stood in the presence of
Sugriva with a thousand crore monkeys.
(24)

1085

मैन्दश्च द्विविदश्चोभावश्चिपुत्रौ महाबलौ।
कोटिकोटिसहस्रेण वानराणामदूश्यताम्॥ २५॥
There also appeared Mainda and
Dwivida, both sons of the Aswinikumaras
(the twin-born physicians of gods), and
possessed of extraordinary strength, with
one thousand crore monkeys, each. (25)

Tag बलवान् वीरस्तिसृभि: कोटिभिर्वृत: |
आजगाम महातेजा: सुग्रीवस्य समीपत:॥ २६॥
Accompanied by three crores of
monkeys, the mighty hero, Gaja, too, who
was endowed with great vital power, sought
the presence of Sugriva. (26)

RN महातेजा जाम्बवान्नाम नामत:।
कोटिभिर्दशभिर्व्यप्त: सुग्रीवस्य ast स्थित:॥ २७॥

The king of bears, Jambavan by name,
who was possessed of great energy, came
surrounded, they say, by ten crores of bears
and stood at the disposal of Sugriva. (27)

रुमणो नाम तेजस्वी विक्रान्तैर्वानरैर्वृत:।
आगतो बलवांस्तूर्णं कोटीशतसमावृत:॥ २८॥
Surrounded by valiant monkeys, the
mighty and glorious monkey, named Rumana
(Rumanwan), came hurriedly, followed by
hundreds of crores of Vanaras. (28)

तत: कोटिसहस्राणां सहस्रेण शतेन al
पृष्ठतोऽनुगत: प्राप्तो हरिभिर्गन्धमादन:॥२९॥

Then arrived Gandhamadana followed
at his back by a billion monkeys. (29)

ad: पद्मसहस्रेण qd: शङ्कुशतेन Al
युवराजोऽङ्घद: We: पितुस्तुल्यपराक्रम:॥ ३०॥
Then arrived the Prince Regent,
Angada, who equalled his father, Vali, in
prowess, accompanied by one thousand
Padma and a hundred Sanku monkeys.
(30)

ततस्ताराद्युतिस्तारो हरिभिर्भीमविक्रमै: |
पञ्चभिर्हरिकोटीभिर्दूरत: Tava ll ३१ ॥

Then came to view from a distance the
