# YUDDHAKANDA #

ag वो वितथं Hata तत्र तत्राप्युपस्थित:।
स हन्तव्योऽभिसम्प्लुत्य राजशासनदूषक:॥४३॥

“Nay, even though present on the scene
of fighting, he among you who makes good
his escape without fighting should be
overtaken and made short work of in that
he will be guilty of flouting the royal
command.” (43)

तेषु वानरमुख्येषु दीप्तोल्कोज्ज्जलपाणिषु।
स्थितेषु द्वारमाश्रित्य रावणं क्रोध आविशत्॥४४॥

When the aforesaid leaders of monkeys
had taken up their position at the gate, their
hands bright with burning torches, fury took
possession of Ravana. (44)

तस्य जृम्भितविक्षेपाद् व्यामिश्रा वै दिशो दश।
Sudha रुद्रस्य मन्युर्गात्रेष्वदूश्यत॥४५॥

All the ten directions were actually
thrown into confusion as a result of the
violent disturbance of the atmosphere
occasioned by his yawning (through fear
and wrath) and he looked like the wrath
manifest in the limbs of Lord Rudra, endowed
with a form. (45)

स कुम्भं च निकुम्भं च कुम्भकर्णात्मजावुभौ।
प्रेषयामास संक्रुद्धो राक्षसैर्बहुभि: Ae veil

Seized with fury he sent out both
Kumbha and Nikumbha, sprung from the
loins of Kumbhakarna, alongwith many other
ogres. (46)
यूपाक्ष: शोणिताक्षश्च प्रजङ्घ: कम्पनस्तथा।
निर्ययु: कौम्भकर्णिभ्यां सह रावणशासनात्॥४७॥

Ydpaksa and Sonitaksa, Prajangha and
Kampana set out with the two sons of

Kumbhakarna under the order of Ravana.
(47)

शशासचैव तान् सर्वान् राक्षसान् स महाबलान्।

राक्षसा गच्छताद्यैव सिंहनादं च नादयन्॥४८॥

Nay, roaring like a loin, he further
commanded as follows all the aforesaid

623

ogres, who were endowed with extraordinary
might: “Proceed, O ogres, this very instant.”
(48)

ततस्तु चोदितास्तेन राक्षसा ज्वलितायुधा:।
लङ्काया निर्ययुर्वीरा: प्रणदन्त: पुन: पुन:॥४९॥
Goaded by him, the gallant ogres for
their part thereupon—sallied forth with their
shining weapons, roaring again and again.
(49)

रक्षसां भूषणस्थाभिर्भाभि: स्वाभिश्च सर्वश:।
चक्रुस्ते सप्रभं व्योम हरयश्चाग्निभि: सह।॥ ५०॥

The ogres fully illumined the firmament
over their heads with the splendour of their
jewels as well as with their own, while the
monkeys did the same with their torches. (50)

aa ताराधिपस्याभा ताराणां भा ada a
तयोराभरणाभा च ज्वलिता द्यामभासयत्॥ ५१॥

The light of the moon (the suzerain
lord of the stars) and even so the light of
the stars as also the brilliant splendour of
the ornaments of the two armies irradiated
the heavens. (51)

चन्द्राभा भूषणाभा च ग्रहाणां ज्वलतां च भा।
हरिराक्षससैन्यानि भ्राजयामास सर्वत:॥५२॥

The moonlight as well as the splendour
of the ornaments as also the light of the
shining planets lit up the ranks of the
monkeys and the ogres on all sides. (52)

तत्र चार्धप्रदीप्तानां गृहाणां सागर: पुन:।
भाभि: संसक्तसलिलश्चलोर्मि: शुशुभेऽधिकम्॥ ५३ ॥
Nay, the sea with its rolling waves
shone all the more brightly on its waters
getting united (in the form of their reflection)
with the flames of the half-burnt houses

standing in Lanka. (53)
पताकाध्वजसंयुक्तमुत्तमासिपरश्वधम् ।
भीमाश्वरथमातङ्गं ॥। ५४ ॥

दीप्तशूलगदाखड्गप्रासतोमरकार्मुकम्
aq राक्षसबलं भीमं घोरविक्रमपौरुषम्॥५५॥
