90 « VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

“Let propitiatory rites intended to avert
evils be elaborately gone through in the
proper order of sequence and in accordance
with the scriptural ordinance. This horse-
sacrifice is capable of being accomplished
by any and every monarch provided there
is no grievous transgression in the shape of
omission of certain essential rites made in
the course of this pre-eminent sacrificial
performance; for Brahmanas that have
attained the form of an ogre (due to omission
of Mantras and rites), though well-versed in
the science of ritual acts are on the lookout
for minor transgressions (in order to get an
opportunity to spoil the sacrifice and thereby
get the share of the gods). (16-17)

विधिह्रीनस्य यज्ञस्य Ga: at विनश्यति।
तद्यथा विधिपूर्वं मे क्रतुरेष समाप्यते॥१८॥
तथा विधानं क्रियतां समर्था: साधनेष्विति।
aaa चाब्रुवन् सर्वे मन्त्रिण: प्रतिपूजिता:॥१९॥
पार्थिवेन्द्रस्य aq वाक्यं यथापूर्वं निशम्य ते।
तथा द्विजास्ते धर्मज्ञा वर्धयन्तो नृपोत्तमम्॥ Ro Il
अनुज्ञातास्तत: सर्वे पुनर्जग्मुर्यथागतम्।
विसर्जयित्वा तान् विप्रान् सचिवानिदमब्रवीत्॥ २१॥
ऋत्विग्भिरुपसंदिष्टो यथावत् क्रतुराप्यताम्।
इत्युक्त्वा नृपशार्दूल: सचिवान् समुपस्थितान्॥ २२॥
विसर्जयित्वा स्वं aya प्रविवेश महामति:।
तत: स गत्वा ता: पत्नीर्नरेन्द्रो हृदयंगमा:॥ २३॥
sara दीक्षां विशत यशक्ष्येऽहं सुतकारणात्।
तासां तेनातिकान्तेन वचनेन सुवर्चसाम्।
मुखपद्मान्यशोभन्त write हिमात्यये॥ २४॥

“He who undertakes च sacrificial
performance bereft of the prescribed
procedure forthwith perishes. Therefore,
steps may be taken to ensure that this
sacrificial undertaking of mine is concluded
in accordance with the prescribed procedure;
for you are capable of doing all this.” Hearing
the aforesaid instructions of DaSaratha, the
king of kings, in order of sequence, and
treated with honour by the Emperor, all those
counsellors said “Amen!” Likewise did the
aforesaid Brahmanas too, including the family
and other priests, who knew what is right,
said “Amen !”, felicitating DaSaratha, a jewel
among the kings, and, then, permitted by him,
all withdrew even as they had come. Having
sent away the aforesaid Brahmanas, the
emperor spoke to the ministers as follows :
“Let the sacrifice recommended by the priests
be duly brought to a successful conclusion.”
Having said so and sent away the ministers
present in the assembly, the highly intelligent
DaSaratha, a lion among the rulers of men,
retired to his gynaeceum. Seeking his
favourite consorts mentioned above, entitled
as they were to participate in the sacrifice,
the aforesaid monarch then said to them, “I
shall perform a sacrifice for the sake of a son;
be prepared to undergo consecration for the
said ceremony alongwith me.” At the
aforesaid utterance of their husband, which
was most pleasing to hear, the lotus-like
faces of the glorious queens brightened like
lotus flowers at the expiry of the cold season.

(18—24)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये बालकाण्डेऽष्टम: सर्ग: ॥ ८ ॥

Thus ends Canto Eight in the Balakanda of the glorious Ramayana of Valmiki,
the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

