1088

of the rainy season, shattering the pride of
sinful ones and moving at will in the rivers
swollen with water. (13)
भूम्यामहं सर्वकालमेकेनांशेन सर्वदा।
वसिष्यामि न संदेह: सत्येनैतद् ब्रवीमि au १४॥
By another part, | shall stay for all
times on earth, there is no doubt, | speak
out the truth to you all. (14)

योऽयमंशस्तृतीयो A स्त्रीषु यौवनशालिषु।
fret दर्षपूर्णासु वसिष्ये दर्पघातिनी॥१५॥
By the part which is my third one, | shall
stay for three nights every month in the proud
and youthful women, destroying their pride. (15)
हन्तारो ब्राह्मणान् A तु मृषापूर्वमदूषकान्।
तांश्चतुर्थेन भागेन संश्रयिष्ये सुरर्षभा:॥१६॥
Those who kill innocent Brahmanas on
false pleas, them | shall attack by the fourth
part, O bulls among gods.’ (16)

प्रत्यूचुस्तां ततो cat यथा वदसि दुर्वसे।

तथा भवतु Ad सर्वं साधयस्व यदीप्सितम्॥ १७॥
Then the gods replied : ‘O one of painful

stay, may all that be as you say, do as you
like.’ (17)
तत: प्रीत्यान्विता cat: सहस्राक्षं ववन्दिरे।

विज्वर: पूतपाप्मा च aaa: समपद्यत॥ १८ ॥

« VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

Then the gods fully pleased saluted the
thousand-eyed one, Vasava (Indra), since
he was now carefree and purified from sin.

(18)
Wit च जगत् सर्वं सहस्राक्षे प्रतिष्ठिते।
यज्ञं चाद्भुतसंकाशं तदा शक्रोऽभ्यपूजयत्॥१९॥

On Indra being established again, the

whole world was rendered calm, then Indra

worshipped through the wonderful sacrifice,
Asvamedha. (19)

ईदृशो ह्यश्वमेधस्य प्रभावो रघुनन्दन।
ara सुमहाभाग हयमेधेन पार्थिव॥ Roll
O descendant of Raghu, this is the

results from Asvamedha. So, O fortunate
one, O King, perform the Asvamedha

sacrifice. (20)
इति लक्ष्मणवाक्यमुत्तमं

नृपतिरतीव मनोहरं महात्मा।
परितोषमवाप ह्रुष्टचेता:

स निशम्येन्द्रसमानविक्रमौजा:॥ २१॥

Having heard the beautiful and charming
words of Laksmana, the king Sri Ramacanara,
a great soul and equal to Indra in might and
valour, was very much pleased and fully
satisfied. (21)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये उत्तरकाण्डे षडशीतितम: सर्ग: i CE Il

Thus ends Canto Eighty-six in the Uttarakanda of the glorious Ramayana of Valmiki,
the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

Canto LXXXVII
Sri Rama narrates to Laksmana the story of King Ila

तच्छृत्वा लक्ष्मणेनोक्तं वाक्यं वाक्यविशारद:।
प्रत्युवाच महातेजा: प्रहसन् राघवो वच:॥१॥
Having heard the words spoken by

Laksmana, the mighty scion of Raghu,
knower of the import of words, replied

smilingly to him: (1)
wanda AS यथा वदसि लक्ष्मण।
व्रत्रघातमशेषेण वाजिमेधफलं च यत्॥२॥
“O best among men, Laksmana, it is
as you Say, all that you say about the killing
