672

kinsfolk even as Lord Siva, the Supreme
Deity, does on all created beings. (31)

अथवा Usd: कृत्वा वनमेव भवानित:।
गमिष्यति गमिष्यामि भवता सार्धमप्यहम्॥ ३२॥
“Else, if setting aside my request, you

proceed from this place to a forest alone, |
too shall depart with you.” (32)
तथाभिरामो भरतेन ताम्यता
प्रसाद्यमान: शिरसा महीपति:।
न चैव चक्रे गमनाय सत्त्ववान्
मतिं पितुस्तद् वचने प्रतिष्ठित: ।। ३३ ॥
Even while being propitiated as above
with bowed head by Bharata, who was
sinking in spirit, the graceful Sri Rama, the
ruler of the globe, who had a strong will and
clung fast to the word of his father giving
consent to his exile, did not feel inclined to
proceed to Ayodhya. (33)
तदद्भुतं स्थैर्यमवेक्ष्य राघवे
समं जनो हर्षमवाप दु:खित:।

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

न यात्ययोध्यामिति ¢:Radts tad.
स्थिरप्रतिज्ञत्वमवेक्ष्य हर्षित:॥ ३४॥

Perceiving such wonderful firmness in
Sri Rama, a scion of Raghu, the people
of Ayodhya experienced joy and _ felt
disconsolate at the same time. They were
distressed to find that he was not going to
Ayodhya and felt rejoiced to note his firmness
of resolve. (34)

तमृत्विजो नैगमयूथवल्लभा-
स्तथा विसंज्ञाश्रुकलाश्च ATA: |
प्रणम्य रामं च ययाचिरे Geli ३५॥
The priests, the citizens and the leaders
of different bodies of men as well as the
mothers of Sri Rama and others, who had all
been rendered senseless, as it were, and
had tear-drops in their eyes, complimented
Bharata, who was speaking in that strain,
and bowing down low to Sri Rama, joined
Bharata in his supplication to Sri Rama. (35)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्येऽयोध्याकाण्डे षडधिकशततम: Wh: ॥ १०६ ॥

Thus ends Canto One hundred and six in the Ayodhyakanda of the glorious
Ramayana of Valmiki, the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

Canto CVII

Sri Rama tries to impress upon Bharata, who believed that Dasaratha was
prompted by lustful attachment to his mother in making over the kingdom
to him, that DaSaratha was compelled to do so because, in the first
place, he had promised to Kaikeyi’s father while marrying her that
the latters son alone would succeed to the throne after
DaSaratha’s death, and secondly he was keen to repay the
debt he owed to her for having come to his rescue in
his encounter with the demons, and accordingly
urges Bharata to assume the rulership of Ayodhya

Uta gat तं भरतं लक्ष्मणाग्रज:।

प्रत्युवाच ad: श्रीमान् ज्ञातिमध्ये सुसत्कृत:॥१॥

Thereupon the glorious Sri Rama, eldest
brother of Laksmana, highly respected
among his clansmen, replied to the said
