# YUDDHAKANDA #

Vitardana and myself—these five are going
forth to kill Rama. (22)

ततो गत्वा वयं युद्धं दास्यामस्तस्य यत्नत:।

जेष्यामो यदि ते शत्रून् नोपायै: कार्यमस्ति न:। २३॥
“Sallying forth, we shall then give battle

to him with zeal. If we are able to conquer

your enemies, no purpose of ours will be
served by other expedients. (23)

अथ जीवति न: शत्रुर्वयं च कृतसंयुगा:।
तत: समभिपत्स्यामो मनसा यत् समीक्षितम्॥ २४॥

“If, however, our enemy survives the
encounter and we too survive after we have
fought a battle with him, then we shall fall
back upon the plan which has been revolved
by us in the mind. (24)

aa युद्धादिहैष्यामो रुधिरेण समुक्षिता:।
विदार्य स्वतनुं बाणै रामनामाङ्कितै: Te २५॥
“Bathed in blood on having our body
cruelly torn with deadly darts marked with
the name of Rama (engraved on them),
we shall return from the battlefield to this
place. (25)

भक्षितो राघवोऽस्माभिर्लक्ष्मणश्चेति artes: |

ad: पादौ ग्रहीष्यामस्त्वं A: कामं प्रपूरय॥ २६॥
“Then we shall clasp your feet saying,

‘Rama (a scion of Raghu) as well as

Laksmana have been devoured by us.’ Pray,
fully grant you our desire. (26)

ततोऽवघोषय Ut गजस्कन्धेन पार्थिव।
हतो राम: सह wat Beet इति सर्वत:॥ २७॥

“Then have it proclaimed by beat of
drum on all sides on the back of an elephant
O ruler of the earth, that Rama has
been got rid of alongwith Laksmana and his
army. (27)
Wat नाम ततो भूत्वा भृत्यानां त्वमरिंदम।
भोगांश्च परिवारांश्च HAM A च दापय॥ २८ ॥

“Getting pleased, as it were, O tamer

of your enemies, cause you to be bestowed
on your servants objects of enjoyment and

545

other desired objects as well as slaves and
gold. (28)

ततो माल्यानि वासांसि वीराणामनुलेपनम्।
पेयं च बहु योधेभ्य: स्वयं च मुदित: पिब॥ ee
“Then confer garlands, garments,
cosmetics and drink on champions and
abundant gifts to other warriors and also
drink yourself joyfully. (29)
ततोऽस्मिन् बहुलीभूते कौलीने सर्वतो गते।
भक्षित: ससुहृद् war राक्षसैरिति विश्रुते॥ ३०॥
प्रविश्याश्चास्य चापित्वं सीतां रहसि सान्त्वयन्।
धनधान्यैश्च कामैश्च रत्नैश्चैनां प्रलोभय॥ ३१॥

“Approaching Sita in private and also
restoring her to confidence, nay, conciliating
her, when the thick rumour that Rama, with
his brother and accomplices has been
devoured by the ogres reaches everywhere
and is clearly heard even by Sita, tempt her
with offers of gold and grain as also luxuries
and precious stones. (30-31)

अनयोपधया राजन् भूय: शोकानुबन्धया।
अकामा त्वद्वशं सीता नष्टनाथा गमिष्यति॥ ३२॥

“Imposed upon by means of this trick,
which will further intensify her grief, Sita,
though lacking in love for you, will submit to
your will because of her having lost her
protector, O king! (32)
रमणीयं fe wat विनष्टमधिगम्य सा।
नैराश्यात् स्त्रीलघुत्वाच्च त्वद्वशं प्रतिपत्स्यते॥ ३३ Ut

“Actually believing her lovely husband
to have perished, she will in despair accept
dependence on you due to womanly frailty.

(33)
सा पुरा सुखसंवृद्धा सुखार्हा दु:खकर्शिता।
त्वय्यधीनं सुखं ज्ञात्वा सर्वथैव गमिष्यति॥ svi

“Realizing her happiness as depending
on you alone, Sita, who has been brought
up in (the lap of) prosperity in the past, is
deserving of felicity and is already tormented
with agony, will completely submit to your
will. (34)
