650

dividing them according to time, 0 jewel
among the victorious, Knowing as you do
the time appropriate for each? (63)

कच्चित्ते ब्राह्मणा: शर्म सर्वशास्त्रार्थकोविदा: |
आशंसन्ते महाप्राज्ञ पौरजानपदै: सह॥ ६४॥

“Do the Brahmanas that have thoroughly
grasped the meaning of all the scriptures
pray for your welfare alongwith the citizens
of Ayodhya and the people of the countryside,
O exceptionally wise prince? (64)
नास्तिक्यमनृतं क्रोधं ward दीर्घसूत्रताम्।
अदर्शनं ज्ञानवतामालस्यं पञ्चव्रत्तिताम्॥६५॥
एकचिन्तनमर्थानामनर्थज्ञैश्च मन्त्रणम्।
निश्चितानामनारम्भं मन्त्रस्यापरिरक्षणम्॥ ६६ ।।
मङ्गलाद्यप्रयोगं च प्रत्युत्थानं च add
कच्चित् त्वं वर्जयस्येतान् राजदोषांश्चतुर्दश Il ६७॥

“Do you abjure the following fourteen
failings of kings, viz., disbelief in the other
world, mendacity (through greed etc.,) anger,
neglect of kingly duties, procrastination,
shunning the wise, sloth, thraldom of the
five senses, devoting thought to the affairs
of the State without seeking the advice of
others (ministers etc.,) taking counsel with
those of perverted insight, failure to launch
projects already decided upon, failure to
keep secrets, failure to utter auspicious
words at the beginning of every undertaking
and rising from one’s seat indiscriminately
to receive all who happen to approach him?

(65—67)
दशपञ्चचतुर्वर्गान् wart च Arad
अष्टवर्गं frat च fafa राघव॥६८॥
इन्द्रियाणां जयं बुद्ध्वा षाड्गुण्यं दैवमानुषम्।
pea विंशतिवर्गं च der प्रकृतिमण्डलम्॥६९॥
यात्रादण्डविधानं च द्वियोनी संधिविग्रहौ।
कच्चिदेतान् महाप्राज्ञ यथावदनुमन्यसे॥७०॥

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA +

“| hope you deal properly after knowing
them in reality with the well-known ten
evils born of concupiscence, the five kinds
of fortifications, the four expedients
recommended for kings, the seven important
limbs of a state, the eight evils born of anger
or the eight measures conducive to the
welfare of a state, the three worldly objects
of human pursuit, viz., religious merit, material
wealth and sensuous enjoyment, or the three
kinds of power (viz., energy or उत्साहशक्ति, the
power of dominion or प्रभुशक्ति and the power
of counsel or मन्त्रनाशक्ति), the three branches
of learning (viz., the three Vedas or wa, the
knowledge relating to agriculture, commerce
and other vocational pursuits or atat and
political science or दण्डनीति), subjugation of
the senses, the six strategic expedients (viz.,
coming to terms with the enemy—#fa, waging
war against him—fage, marching against
him—ara, biding one’s time to seek
a favourable opportunity—sirera, causing
dissension in the enemy’s ranks—ge and
seeking the protection of a powerful ally—
आश्रय`, adversity brought about by divine
agencies such as fire, water in the shape of
excessive rains or floods, epidemic or
endemic diseases, famine and pestilence,
and by human agencies such as officials,
thieves, enemies, a king’s favourites and the
king himself when actuated by greed’; the
stern duty of a king as dictated by policy,
such as to win over enemy’s men whose
emoluments have been withheld, who are
greedy or haughty, who have suffered
indignity at his hands, who are irate or have
been provoked by him for no reason, who
are afraid or have been intimidated,* the
following twenty types of monarchs who
are not worth negotiating with, viz., 1. a king
who is yet a child, or 2. aged, 3. who has

1. संधिर्ना विग्रहो यानमासनं द्वैधमाश्रय: |

2. हुताशनो जलं व्याधिर्दुर्भिक्षो मरकस्तथा । इत्येतद्दैवम्।मानुषं तु--
आयुक्तकेभ्यश्चोरेभ्य: परेभ्यो राजवल्लभात् । पृथ्वीपतिलोभाच्च व्यसनं मानुषं त्विदम्॥
3. अलब्धवेतनो लुब्धो मानी चाप्यवमानित: । क्रुद्धश्च क्रोधितोऽकस्मात्तथा भीतश्च भीषित:॥

भेद्या: शत्रौ तु चत्वारो नृपकृत्यमिदं स्मृतम् |
