# YUDDHAKANDA #

With their faces downcast, nay, feeling
miserable and exhausted with blows, many
of them burst into a loud wail in discordant
tone. (113)
ततस्तत्परितं याता निरपेक्षा निशाचरा:।
पुरीमभिमुखा भीता द्रवन्तो नायके हते॥११४॥

Their leader having been killed, the
rangers of the night, who had now become
listless, hastily withdrew running from that
place, frightened as they were, with their
faces turned towards the city. (114)

प्रहर्षयुक्ता बहवस्तु arn:
प्रफुल्लपद्मप्रतिमाननास्तदा ।
हते रिपौ भीमबले दुरासदे॥११५॥

Filled with extreme delight on their

601

enemy, who was endowed with terrible might
and was difficult to approach, having been
killed, numerous monkeys for their part,
whose faces resembled full-blown lotuses,
forthwith paid their homage to Laksmana,
who had secured victory for them. (115)

अतिबलमतिकायमभ्रकल्पं
afar विनिपात्य स लक्ष्मण: Wate: |
त्वरितमथ तदा स रामपार्श्व
कपिनिवहैश्च सुपूजितो जगाम॥११६॥

Greatly rejoiced and highly honoured
by hosts of monkeys on having struck down
in a duel Atikaya, who was endowed with
surpassing might and looked like a mass of
cloud, the aforesaid celebrated Laksmana
forthwith hastily sought the presence of Sri
Rama on that occasion. (116)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये FERS एकसप्ततितम: सर्ग: ॥ ७१ ॥

Thus ends Canto Seventy-one in the Yuddhakanda of the glorious Ramayana of
Valmiki, the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

Canto LXXIl

Ravana feels anxious for the safety of Lanka and enjoins
the ogres to guard the city jealously

अतिकायं ed श्रुत्वा लक्ष्मणेन महात्मना।
उद्वेगमगमद् राजा वचनं चेदमब्रवीत्॥१॥
On hearing of Atikaya having been
killed by the high-souled Laksmana, the
king of Lanka gave way to anxiety and
spoke as follows: (1)
धूम्राक्ष परमामर्षी सर्वशस्त्रभृतां वर:।
अकम्पन: प्रहस्तश्च कुम्भकर्णस्तथैव च॥२॥
Ud महाबला वीरा राक्षसा युद्धकाङ्क्षिण:।
Bare: परसैन्यानां परैर्नित्यापराजिता:॥ ३॥

“Dhumraksa, who was_ supremely

intolerant, as well as Akampana, the
foremost of all those skilled in the use of
arms, as also Prahasta and, even so,
Kumbhakarna—these gallant ogres, the
conquerors of hostile forces, were endowed
with extraordinary might, nay, longed for
combat and remained ever unconquered by
their enemies. (2-3)

ससैन्यास्ते हता वीरा रामेणाक्लिष्टकर्मणा।
राक्षसा: सुमहाकाया नानाशस्त्रविशारदा:॥४॥

The aforesaid valiant ogres of tremendous
proportions, who were well-versed in the
