1056

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

Canto XXXI

Concluding from the angry words of Sri Rama that he was wroth against
Sugriva, Laksmana gets ready to kill the latter. Pacifying Laksmana, Sri
Rama, however, sends him to Sugriva with instructions to adopt a
conciliatory attitude towards him. Reaching Kiskindha with a bow and
arrow in hand and assuming an angry demeanour, Laksmana asks
Angada to announce his arrival to Sugriva. Even when apprised
of Laksmana’s arrival by Angada, Sugriva, who was drunk
with wine, is unable to follow Angada and comes to realize
the gravity of the situation only on hearing the clamour
of the alarmed monkeys and on being awakened
to the reality by two of his foremost ministers
and implored by them to pacify Laksmana

a कामिनं दीनमदीनसत्त्वं

शोकाभिपन्नं समुदीर्णकोपम्।
नरेन्द्रसूनुर्नरदेवपुत्रं

रामानुज: पूर्वजमित्युवाच॥ १॥

Prince Laksmana, younger brother of
Sri Rama, submitted as follows to his eldest
brother (Sri Rama), the son of a king, who,
though noble-minded, was feeling distressed,
overcome as he was with grief and full of
longing for his lost consort, his wrath having
grown intense: (1)

न वानर: स्थास्यति wget
न मन्यते कर्मफलानुषङ्गान्।
न भोक्ष्यते वानरराज्यलक्ष्मीं
तथा fe नातिक्रमतेऽस्य aes: २॥

“Since Sugriva, who is a monkey after
all, would not stick to the conduct of the
virtuous, who are constant in their friendship
and love, nor does he recognize the relation
of cause and effect between his virtuous
action (in the shape of cultivating friendship
with you and solemnizing it in the presence
of fire) and its reward (in the shape of regaining
his lost sovereignty and his wife), it is therefore
clear that he is not going to enjoy long the

fortune in the shape of the kingdom of the
monkeys. Hence his mind does not take
rapid strides on the path of discharging one’s
obligations towards a friend. (2)

मतिक्षयाद् ग्राम्यसुखेषु सक्त-

स्तव प्रसादात् प्रतिकारबुद्धि: |
हतोऽग्रजं पश्यतु वीरवालिनं

न राज्यमेवं विगुणस्य देयम्॥ ३॥

“He has got addicted to the vulgar
pleasures due to loss of reason and the
inclination to repay one’s debt, springs up in
one only as a result of your grace (which
has evidently not descended on him). Let
him, therefore, see, on his being killed, his
elder brother, the heroic Vali; rulership should
not be conferred on an individual who is so
destitute of virtues as he is. (3)

न धारये कोपमुदीर्णवेगं
निहन्मि सुग्रीवमसत्यमद्य।
wea | विचयं करोतु॥४॥

“lam unable to contain my wrath, whose
vehemence has been intensified, and shall
get rid of the faithless Sugriva this very day.
Let the son of Vali, on being installed on the
