* AYODHYAKANDA +

of those upholding the cause of righteousness
retains his life.” Spoken to in these words
by Sri Rama, however, Kausalya, who was
stricken with grief caused by the thought of
the impending separation from her son,
spoke as follows to Sri Rama, her eyes
blinded with tears: “Il cannot change your
resolution to depart, which has been
deliberately made, O dear and heroic son!
Surely destiny is hard to supersede.
Therefore, depart you, my son, with an
unwavering mind. Let good betide you at all
times, O mighty son! (22—33)

पुनस्त्वयि Pat तु भविष्यामि गतक्लमा।
प्रत्यागते महाभागे कृतार्थे चरितव्रते।

पितुरानृण्यतां प्राप्ते स्वपिष्ये परमं सुखम्॥ ३४॥

“| shall be rid of affliction once more
only when you have returned to Ayodhya. |
shall sleep most soundly only when you,
my highly blessed son, return having
accomplished your object and concluded
your vow of leading a forest life for fourteen
long years and thereby get square with i.e.,
cleared the debt of your father. (34)

कृतान्तस्य गति: Ga दुर्विभाव्या सदा भुवि।
यस्त्वां संचोदयति A aa आवबिध्य राघवब॥ sui

“The course of destiny in this world is

389

always hard to perceive, my son—the destiny
which is urging you to depart setting aside
my protest, O scion of Raghu ! (35)

गच्छेदानीं महाबाहो क्षेमेण पुनरागत:।

नन्दयिष्यसि मां पुत्र साम्ना श्लक्ष्णेन चारुणा॥ ३६ ॥
“Depart now, O mighty-armed prince !

When you safely come back, you shall

delight me, my son, with delightful and sweet
words of consolation. (36)

अपीदानीं स काल: स्याद् वनात् प्रत्यागतं TA: |

यत् त्वां पुत्रक पश्येयं जटावल्कलधारिणम्॥ ३७॥
“Would that be the time when | see you

once more, my dear son, come back from

the forest, wearing matted locks and the bark
of trees, turned this very moment!” (ॐ7)
तथा fe wa वनवासनिश्चितं
cast देवी परमेण चेतसा।
उवाच रामं शुभलक्षणं वचो
AYA च स्वस्त्ययनाभिकांक्षिणी ।। ३८ ।
Inasmuch as the pious lady, Kausalya,
perceived with her penetrating mind that Sri
Rama was resolved to take up his abode in
the forest, she spoke benedictory words to
him and got inclined to perform rites of
averting evil through recitation of sacred
texts. (38)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्येऽयोध्याकाण्डे चतुर्विंश: सर्ग: ॥ २४॥

Thus ends Canto Twenty-four in the Ayodhyakanda of the glorious Ramayana of
Valmiki, the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

Canto XXV

Having received the mother’s benedictions for the journey,
Sri Rama falls at her feet and proceeds to the
apartments of Sita in order to see her

सा fata तमायासमुपस्पृश्य जलं शुचि।
चकार माता रामस्य मङ्गलानि मनस्विनी॥१॥

Getting over through ratiocination the

aforesaid agony caused by the thought of
the impending separation from Sri Rama
and sipping a little pure water in order to
counteract the impurity occasioned by
