* ARANYAKANDA «

स्त्रीत्वाद् दुष्टस्वभावेन गुरुवाक्ये व्यवस्थितम्।
गच्छामि यत्र काकुत्स्थ: स्वस्ति तेऽस्तु वरानने॥ ३३॥

“Since |, who have spoken what is
right, have been castigated by you in harsh
words, fie upon you, who are going to perish
inasmuch as you distrust in this way, through
feminine nature and a wicked disposition,
me, who firmly abide by the words of my
elder brother. | leave for the spot where
Sri Rama (a scion of Kakutstha) is. May all
be well with you, O lady of charming
countenance । (32-33)
रक्षन्तु cat विशालाक्षि समग्रा वनदेवता:।
निमित्तानि fe घोराणि art प्रादुर्भवन्ति मे।
अपि cat Ge रामेण पश्येयं पुनरागत:॥ ३४॥

“Let all the sylvan deities protect you,
O large-eyed lady ! The fearful evil protents
which appear before my eyes indeed make
me doubtful whether when come back with
Sri Rama, | shall be able to see you.” (34)

लक्ष्मणेनैवमुक्ता तु रुदती जनकात्मजा।
प्रत्युवाच ततो वाक्यं तीव्रबाष्पपरिप्लुता॥ ३५॥

Crying and bathed in a gushing stream
of tears, when spoken to in these words,
Sita (the daughter of Janaka) forthwith replied
as follows: (35)

गोदावरीं प्रवेक्ष्यामि हीना रामेण लक्ष्मण।
आबन्धिष्येऽथवा त्यक्ष्ये विषमे देहमात्मन:॥ ३६॥

“Bereft of Sri Rama, 0 Laksmana, |
shall take a plunge into the Godavari or
hang myself or cast off my body by climbing
up a precipice and falling from it. (36)

835

पिबामि वा fas तीक्र्णं प्रवेक्ष्यामि हुताशनम्।
न we राघवादन्यं कदापि पुरुषं स्पृशे॥ ३७॥
“Or | shall drink a strong poison or
enter the fire. But | shall never touch any
male other than Sri Rama (a scion of Raghu).”
(37)
इति लक्ष्मणमाश्रुत्य सीता शोकसमन्विता।
पाणिभ्यां रुदती दु:खादुदरं प्रजघान ह॥ ३८॥
Having taken this vow before Laksmana,
Sita, who was overwhelmed with grief, beat
her abdomen with her hands, crying through
agony: so the tradition goes. (38)
तामार्तरूपां विमना रुदन्तीं
सौमित्रिरालोक्य विशालनेत्राम्।
आश्वासयामास न चैव भर्तु-
स्तं भ्रातरं किंचिदुवाच सीता॥ ३९॥
Depressed in spirit to perceive her
weeping with a distressed air, Laksmana,
son of Sumitra, consoled the large-eyed

lady. Sita, however, did not utter even a
word to her aforesaid brother-in-law. (39)

ततस्तु सीतामभिवाद्य लक्ष्मण:

कृताञ्जलि: किंचिदभिप्रणम्य।
अवेक्षमाणो बहुश: A मैथिलीं

जगाम रामस्य समीपमात्मवान्॥ ४० UI

Then, greeting Sita with joined palms
and respectfully bowing down a little, nay,
looking at the princess of Mithila again and
again, the celebrated Laksmana, who had
mastered his self, sought the presence of
Sri Rama. (40)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्येऽरण्यकाण्डे पञ्चचत्वारिंश: सर्ग: ॥ ४५ ॥

Thus ends Canto Forty-five in the Aranyakanda of the glorious Ramayana of Valmiki,
the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

