* AYODHYAKANDA +

289

Canto II

DaSaratha apprises the assembly of his intention to retire from active rule after
relegating the power to Sri Rama’s able hands and the councillors with one
voice ditto the proposal and urge the Emperor to expedite matters

ad: परिषदं सर्वामामन्त्य वसुधाधिप:।
हितमुद्धर्षणं चैवमुवाच प्रथितं वच:॥१॥
दुन्दुभिस्वरकल्पेन गम्भीरेणानुनादिना।
स्वरेण महता राजा जीमूत sa नादयन्॥२॥
राजलक्षणयुक्तेन कान्तेनानुपमेन Al
उवाच रसयुक्तेन स्वरेण नॄपतिर्नृपान्॥३॥

Addressing the whole assembly and
resounding the air like a thundering cloud
with his deep, sonorous and loud voice
resembling the sound of a kettledrum,
DaSaratha, the suzerain lord of the entire
globe, then uttered the following wholesome,
exhilarating and unambiguous words. In a
pleasing, melodious and incomparable voice
endowed with the characteristics of a king’s
voice, the Emperor spoke to the kings in
particular as follows : (1—3)

fated भवतामेतद् यथा A राज्यमुत्तमम्।
पूर्वकैर्मम राजेन्द्रै: सुतवत् परिपालितम्॥४॥

“It is well known to you all how this
foremost kingdom of mine was protected in
every way, as one’s own son, by Emperors
that have preceded me. (4)

श्रेयसा योक्तुमिच्छामि सुखार्हमखिलं जगत्॥५॥

“As such | wish to endow the whole
world, ruled over in the past by the various
Ikswaku kings and, therefore, deserving
happiness even in the days to come, with
unique good luck in the form of Sri Rama’s
rule. (5)

मयाप्याचरितं = oad: पन्थानमनुगच्छता।
प्रजा नित्यमनिद्रेण यथाशक्त्यभिरक्षिता:॥६॥

“The people have always’ been

protected on all sides to the best of my
ability even by me regardless of personal
comforts, traversing as | did the path trodden
by my forbears. (6)

इदं शरीरं कृत्स्नस्य लोकस्य चरता हितम्।
पाण्डुरस्यातपत्रस्यच्छायायां Wet मया॥७॥

“This body has been worn out in the
shade of a white umbrella by me while
working for the good of the whole world. (7)

wea वर्षसहस्राणि agai जीवत:।
जीर्णस्यास्य शरीरस्य विश्रान्तिमभिरोचये॥ ८॥

“| desire to give rest to this worn-out
body, which has now run many rounds of a
human span of life (measuring a hundred
years on an average), having attained an
age of thousands of (sixty thousand) years.

(8)
राजप्रभावजुष्ठां च दुर्वहामजितेन्द्रियै:।
परिश्रान्तोऽस्मि लोकस्य Tat धर्मधुरं वहन्॥९॥

“Carrying on my shoulders as | have
done all these long years the great burden
of governing the people with righteousness,
a burden which can be borne only by virtue
of kingly power and is hard to bear for those
of uncontrolled mind—I now feel exhausted.

(9)
सोऽहं विश्राममिच्छामि at कृत्वा wanted |
संनिकृष्टानिमान् सर्वाननुमान्य द्विजर्षभान्॥१०॥

“Placing my eldest son, Sri Rama, in
charge of the welfare of the people and
securing the concurrence of all these jewels
among the Brahmanas sitting close to me
(and belonging to my inner circle and
therefore deeply interested in my welfare), |
as such long for rest. (10)
