* SUNDARAKANDA +

दक्षिणस्य समुद्रस्य तीरे वसति दक्षिणे।
तत्र सीता Wat GBT रावणान्त:पुरे सती॥११॥
त्वयि संन्यस्य जीवन्ती रामा राम मनोरथम्।
दृष्टा A राक्षसीमध्ये तर्ज्यमाना मुहुर्मुहु:॥ १२॥
राक्षसीभिर्विरूपाभी रक्षिता प्रमदावने।
दु:खमापद्यते edt त्वया ate सुखोचिता॥ १३॥
रावणान्त:पुरे रुद्धा राक्षसीभि: सुरक्षिता।
एकवेणीधरा दीना त्वयि चिन्तापरायणा॥ १४॥

Hearing their request and offering
salutations with his head bent low to the
southern quarter and thereby to the godlike
lady Sita, Hanuman, an offspring of the
wind-god, who knew the art of expression,
made the following statement describing how
he was able to see Sita. Having delivered to
Sri Rama the wonderful golden jewel glowing
in its own splendour, Hanuman then submitted
with joined palms as follows:

“Having leapt across the sea, a hundred
Yojanas (or eight hundred miles) wide, |
reached its southern shore looking about for
Sita, Janaka’s daughter, with intent to see
her. There on the southern shore of the
southern sea is situated the city ruled over
by the evil-minded Ravana, known by the
name of Lanka. The virtuous and lovely Sita
was seen by me living in the pleasance of
Ravana in that city, having centred her
heart on you, O Rama ! Nay, she was seen
by me in the midst of ogresses, guarded in
a pleasance by ugly ogresses and being
threatened again and again. Detained in the
pleasance of Ravana and closely guarded
by ogresses, the godlike lady, who deserves
to live happily with you, O valiant prince,
has been reduced to straits. She wears a
single pleat of hair (as a mark of desolation),
is forlorn and remains absorbed in your
thought alone. (7—14)

अध:शय्या विवर्णाङ्गी पद्मिनीव हिमागमे।
रावणाद् विनिव्रत्तार्था मर्तव्यकृतनिश्चया॥ १५॥
“She stretches herself on the bare

ground, is pale of limbs like a lotus plant at
the approach of winter, has utterly refused

283

to have anything to do with Ravana, and is
determined to die rather than submit to
Ravana. (15)
देवी कथंचित् काकुत्स्थ त्वन्मना मार्गिता AAT |

इक्ष्वाकुवंशविख्यातिं शनै: कीर्तयतानघ॥ १६॥
सा मया नरशार्दूल शनैर्विश्वासिता तदा।

aa: सम्भाषिता देवी सर्वमर्थं च दर्शिता॥१७॥

“The godlike lady, whose mind is set
on you, O scion of Kakutstha, was somehow
traced out by me. She was then inspired by
me, by degrees with confidence, O tiger
among men, by gradually recounting the
glory of Ikswaku’s race. She was later on
accosted by me and apprised of all the
facts, including your alliance with Sugriva.

(16-17)

रामसुग्रीवसख्यं च श्रुत्वा हर्षमुपागता।
नियत: समुदाचारो भक्तिश्चास्या: सदा त्वयि॥ १८॥

“Nay, she experienced delight on
hearing of the alliance between you and
king Sugriva. Constant is her morality and
abiding is her devotion to you. (18)

एवं मया महाभाग get जनकनन्दिनी।
उग्रेण तपसा युक्ता त्वद्भक्त्या पुरुषर्षभ॥१९॥

“In this way, O highly blessed one,
was the delight of Janaka, Sita, found by
me, endowed with severe asceticism and
devotion to you, O jewel among men! (19)
अभिज्ञानं च मे ad aaad तवान्तिके।
चित्रकूटे महाप्राज्ञ वायसं प्रति राघव॥ roll

“The way in which an incident connected
with a crow took place in your presence at
Citrakuta was also related by her by way of

atoken, O Sri Rama, exceptionally sagacious
scion of Raghu ! (20)

विज्ञाप्य: पुनरप्येष Wa वायुसुत त्वया।
अखिलेन यथा दृष्टमिति arate जानकी॥ २१॥

“The daughter of Janaka said to me,
‘Sri Rama enshrined in my memory, O son
of the wind-god, should further be told by
you in every detail what has been witnessed
by you here. (21)
