160

breasts, nails, the hands and the feet"), ten
ample limbs, viz., the chest, the head, the
forehead, the neck, the arms, the shoulders,
the navel, the feet, the back and the ears’, is
spread through by reason of three, (viz.,
splendour, renown and glory), has two white
limbs, viz., the teeth and the eyes, is elevated
in six limbs viz., the flanks, the abdomen, the
breast, the nose, the shoulders and the
forehead’; fine or sharp in nine, viz., the
hair, the moustaches and the beard, nails,
the hair on the body, the skin, the finger-joints,
the membrum virile acumen and
perception’ and pursues religious merit,
worldly riches and sensual delight in three
periods, viz., the forenoon, midday and
afternoon. (20)

सत्यधर्मरत: श्रीमान् संग्रहानुग्रहे रत:।
देशकालविभागज्ञ: सर्वलोकप्रियंवद: ॥ २१॥
“He is devoted to truth and
righteousness and glorious and remains intent
on accumulating wealth and power and
showering favour on the people. He knows
the right use of time and place and speaks
kindly to all people. (21)
भ्राता चास्य च aera: सौमित्रिरमितप्रभ:।
अनुरागेण रूपेण गुणैश्चापि तथाविध:॥२२॥
“His brother, Laksmana, son of Sumitra,
too, of immeasurable splendour, is a replica
of Sri Rama in affection, charm and
excellences. (22)

ससुवर्णच्छवि: श्रीमान् राम: श्यामो महायशा: |
तावुभौ नरशार्दूलौ त्वद्दर्शनकृतोत्सवौ॥ २३॥
विचिन्वन्तौ महीं कृत्स्नामस्माभि: सह संगतौ ।
त्वामेव मार्गमाणौ तौ विचरन्तौ वसुन्धराम्॥ २४॥
ददर्शतुर्मृगपतिं पूर्वजेनावरोपितम्।
ऋष्यमूकस्य मूले तु बहुपादपसंकुले॥ २५॥
भ्रातुर्भयार्तमासीनं सुग्रीवं प्रियदर्शनम्।
aa च हरिराजं तं सुग्रीवं सत्यसङ्घरम्॥ २६॥

« VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

परिचर्यामह्रे राज्यात् पूर्वजेनावरोपितम्।
ततस्तौ चीरवसनौ धनु:प्रवरपाणिनौ॥ २७॥
mea शैलस्य रम्यं देशमुपागतौ।
स तौ Gear नरव्याघ्रौ धन्विनौ वानरर्षभ:॥ २८ ॥
अभिप्लुतो गिरेस्तस्य शिखरं भयमोहित:।
aa: स forex तस्मिन् वानरेन्द्रो व्यवस्थित:॥ २९॥
तयो: समीपं मामेव प्रेषयामास सत्वरम्।
Was पुरुषव्याघ्रौ सुग्रीववचनात् प्रभू॥ ३०॥
रूपलक्षणसम्पन्नौ कृताञ्जलिरुपस्थित: |
तौ परिज्ञाततत्त्वार्थौ war प्रीतिसमन्वितौ॥ ३१॥
पृष्ठमारोप्य तं देशं प्रापितौ पुरुषर्षभौ।
निवेदितौ च तत्त्वेन सुग्रीवाय महात्मने॥ ३२॥

“He is endowed with a golden lustre,
while the glorious and highly illustrious Sri
Rama is dark-brown of hue. Scouring the
entire globe, eager as they are for your
sight, both the aforesaid tigers among men
got united with us. Ranging the earth looking
about for you only, they for their part saw
sitting at the foot of Mount Rsyamtka, thick
with numerous trees, Sugriva of pleasing
aspect, the lord of monkeys, dethroned by
his elder brother, Vali, and stricken with the
fear of his aforesaid brother. Nay, we waited
upon the aforesaid Sugriva, the ruler of
monkeys, who was free from deceit in combat
and had been deposed from his throne by
his elder brother, Vali. Thereupon the two
princes, who were clad in tatters and carried
most excellent bows in their hands, sought
the lovely region of Mount Rsyamuka.
Distracted with fear to behold the aforesaid
tigers among men, armed each with a bow,
that jewel among monkeys leapt up the
summit of the aforesaid mountain.

Ensconced on that peak, that ruler of
monkeys despatched me alone with
expedition to their presence. At Sugriva’s
command, | approached with folded hands

1. मुखनेत्रास्यजिह्वोष्ठतालुस्तननखं करौ।
Tet च दशपद्मानि पद्माकाराणि यस्य च।
2. उर: शिरो ललाटं च ग्रीवा ae सनाभय:।
पादौ पृष्ठं श्रुती चैव विशालास्ते सुखप्रदा:॥

३. wea: कुक्षिश्च वक्षश्च घ्राणं स्कन्धो ललाटिका।
सर्वभूतेषु निर्दिष्टां उन्नतास्तु सुखप्रदा:॥

4. केशश्मश्रुनखलोमत्वगङ्गुलिपर्वशेफोबुद्धिदर्शनानि ।
