* AYODHYAKANDA +

“Killing the deer and elephants and
drinking wild honey and seeing various rivers
he would not miss his sovereignty. (6)

धान्यकोशश्च य: HE धनकोशश्च AH: |
at राममनुगच्छेतां वसन्तं निर्जने वने॥७॥

“Let that which constitutes my granary
and that which comprises my exchequer
both accompany Rama going to dwell in an
uninhabited forest. (7)

यजन् पुण्येषु देशेषु विसृजंश्चाप्तदक्षिणा:।
ऋषिभिश्चापि संगम्य प्रवत्स्यति qa वने॥८॥

“Performing sacrifices in holy regions
and bestowing adequate gifts on the officiating
priests and meeting sages too he will live
away happily in the forest. (8)

सर्वकामै: पुन: श्रीमान् राम: संसाध्यतामिति॥ ९॥

“And the mighty-armed Bharata will rule
over Ayodhya. Let the glorious Rama,
therefore, be sent out with all objects of
enjoyment.” (9)

एवं Galt काकुत्स्थे कैकेय्या भयमागतम्।
Fe चाप्यगमच्छोषं स्वरश्चापि व्यरुध्यत॥१०॥

While DaSaratha, a scion of Kakutstha,
was speaking as aforesaid, fear seized
Kaikeyi. Nay, her mouth too got parched
and voice as well got choked. (10)

सा विषण्णा च संत्रस्ता मुखेन परिशुष्यता।
राजानमेवाभिमुखी कैकेयी वाक्यमब्रवीत्॥११॥

Feeling dejected and dismayed, with
her mouth getting parched, and her face
turned exclusively towards the king, she
replied as follows : (11)
Te गतधनं साधो पीतमण्डां सुरामिव।
निरास्वाद्यतमं शून्यं भरतो नाभिपत्स्यते॥१२॥

“Bharata will not accept a kingdom that
has been stripped of its wealth and resembles
wine divested of its spirituous part, and
which is thus absolutely unenjoyable and
unsubstantial, O pious soul !” (12)

431

कैकेय्यां मुक्तलज्जायां वदन्त्यामतिदारुणम्।
राजा दशरथो वाक्यमुवाचायतलोचनाम्॥१३॥
When _ Kaikeyi, who was_ thus
shamelessly uttering most cruel words, King
Dasaratha spoke as follows to that lady
with large eyes : (13)
वहन्तं fe तुदसि at नियुज्य aft माहिते।
अनार्ये कृत्यमारब्धं किं न पूर्वमुपारुध:॥१४॥
“Having charged me with a burden
(viz., that of sending Rama into exile, which
is so hard to bear), O hostile and vulgar
woman, why do you lash me while | am
carrying it? Why did you not check before
(while asking the two boons, by laying down
that Rama should not be allowed to take
anything with him) the proceedings now
taken in hand of sending troops etc., with
Rama?” (14)

तस्यैतत् क्रोधसंयुक्तमुक्तं श्रुत्वा वराङ्मना।
कैकेयी द्विगुणं क्रुद्धा राजानमिदमब्रवीत्॥१५॥
Doubly incensed to hear the angry
words of DaSaratha, Kaikeyi, the lovely
women, replied to the king as follows : (15)

तवैव ast सगरो ज्येष्ठपुत्रमुपारुधत्।
sana sft ख्यातं तथायं गन्तुमर्हति॥१६॥
“In your very dynasty Emperor Sagara
cast away his eldest son known by the
name of Asamanja. Rama too should depart
likewise without anything to depend upon.”
(16)

एवमुक्तो धिगित्येव राजा दशरथोऽब्रवीत्।
व्रीडितश्च जन: सर्व: सा च तन्नावबुध्यत॥ १७॥
Spoken to as above, King Dasaratha
simply said, “Shame!” Everyone present

there too felt ashamed. She, however, did
not mind it. (17)

तत्र वृद्धो महामात्र: सिद्धार्थो नाम नामत:।
शुचिर्बहुमतो Ua: कैकेयीमिदमब्रवीत्॥ ve

On that occasion the aged and upright
chief minister, Siddhartha by name, who
was highly esteemed by the king, spoke
