154

dawn next morning, the two lads, who
resembled Skanda and Visakha, the two
sons of Lord Siva, and were exceedingly
pure by nature offered prayer to the morning
twilight after getting purified through bath

« VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

etc., and having finished the Japa (recitation)
of the holy Gayatri, the foremost of Mantras,
according to rules, greeted ViSwamitra, who
was sitting at ease having mentally* poured
oblations into the sacred fire. (31-32)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये बालकाण्डे एकोनत्रिंश: सर्ग: ll २९ ॥

Thus ends Canto Twenty-nine in the Balakanda of the glorious Ramayana of Valmiki,
the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

७
२
२

सर्ग:

Canto XXX

Sri Rama protects the sacrifice of Viswamitra against the onslaught
of the Raksasas and gets rid of them

अथ तौ देशकालज्ञौ राजपुत्रावरिंदमौ।
देशे काले च वाक्यज्ञावन्रूतां कौशिकं वच:॥ १॥
Now the two princes, who knew what
is appropriate at a particular time and place
and were also aware of the kind of words
that should be spoken at a particular time
and place and who were capable of subduing
the enemy, addressed the following words
to ViSwamitra, a scion of KuSa: (1)

भगवञ्छोतुमिच्छावो यस्मिन् काले निशाचरौ।
संरक्षणीयौ dt gfe नातिवर्तेत तत्क्षणम्॥ २॥

“O venerable sage, we both should like
to hear at what particular moment of time
the two ogres, Marica and Subahu, have to
be guarded against by us. That moment
should not escape unnoticed.” (2)

Ue ब्रुवाणौ काकुत्स्थौ त्वरमाणौ युयुत्सया।
wa ते मुनय: प्रीता: प्रशशंसुर्नृपात्मजौ॥ ३॥
Full of delight, all those hermits who
were present there on that occasion
applauded the two princes, descended in
the line of Kakutstha, who spoke as

their
(3)

aforesaid, impatient because of
eagerness to fight with the demons.
अद्यप्रभृति षड्वात्रं रक्षतां राघवौ युवाम्।
दीक्षां गतो ह्येष मुनिर्मौनित्वं च गमिष्यति॥४॥
They replied on behalf of the Resi:
“From this day onward keep you vigil for six
days and nights continuously, O scions of
Raghu ! We tell you this because this sage,
ViSwamitra, has already gone through the
rite of consecration and will observe strict
silence all these days as he is doing even
now.” (4)

तौ तु तद्वचनं श्रुत्वा राजपुत्रौ यशस्विनौ।
age षडहोरात्रॆ तपोवनमरक्षताम्॥५॥
Hearing the aforesaid answer made
by the hermits the two illustrious princes
for their part guarded the grove hallowed
by austerities for six days and nights
continuously without even a wink of sleep.

(5)

उपासांचक्रतुर्वीरौ यत्तौ परमधन्विनौ।
ररक्षतुर्मुनिवरं विश्वामित्रमरिंदमौ ti ६ i

* Tt is laid down in the scriptures that having gone through the ceremony of consecration for a

sacrificial performance one should no longer pour daily oblations (chiefly consisting of milk, oil and sour
gruel) into the sacred fire, nor perform the half-monthly sacrifices performed on the new moon and the full

moon and known by the names of DarSa and Pirnamasa respectively —alaraed नाग्निहोत्रं न दर्शपूर्णमासाभ्यां यजेत.
