224

| shall crush your pride as well as the pride
of your weapons today, O son of Gadhi !
(3)
क्व च ते क्षत्रियबलं क्व च ब्रह्मबलं महत्।
पश्य ब्रह्मबलं feat मम क्षत्रियपांसन॥४॥
“Of what account is your martial strength
when compared to the great power of a
Brahmana? Behold my divine Brahmanical
power, O disgrace to the Ksatriyas!” (4)
तस्यास्त्रं गाधिपुत्रस्य घोरमाग्नेयमुत्तमम्।
ब्रह्मदण्डेन तच्छान्तमग्नेर्वेग इवाम्भसा॥७५॥
That terrible and excellent missile
presided over by the god of fire and hurled
by the celebrated son of Gadhi was neutralized
by the Brahmanical staff of Vasistha, as the
fury of a fire is counteracted by water. (5)
वारुणं da रौद्रं च Use पाशुपतं तथा।
ऐषीकं चापि चिक्षेप कुपितो गाधिनन्दन:॥६॥
The enraged son of Gadhi discharged a
missile presided over by Varuna, the god of
water, as well as another presided over by
Rudra (the god of destruction), nay, a third
presided over by Indra (the ruler of gods)
and a fourth presided over by Lord Siva (the
Protector of the Jiva, which has been likened
to a beast because of its bondage) as also
the one made of a reed. (6)
मानवं Wet da गान्धर्वं स्वापनं तथा।
wat मादनं चैव संतापनविलापने॥७॥
ब्रह्मपाशं कालपाशं वारुणं पाशमेव च॥ ci
पिनाकमस्त्रं दयितं wens अशनी तथा।
दण्डास्त्रमथ पैशाचं क्रौञ्चमस्त्रं ada च॥९॥
धर्मचक्रं कालचक्रं विष्णुचक्रं तथैव च।
वायव्यं मथनं da अस्त्रं हयशिरस्तथा॥१०॥
शक्तिद्वयं च चिक्षेप कङ्कालं मुसलं तथा।
वैद्याधरं महास्त्रं च कालास्त्रमथ दारुणम्॥११॥
त्रिशूलमस्त्रं घोरं च कापालमथ कङ्कणम्।
एतान्यस्त्राणि fasta सर्वाणि रघुनन्दन॥१२॥
वसिष्ठे जपतां ses तदद्भुतमिवाभवत्।
तानि सर्वाणि दण्डेन Wad ब्रह्मण: सुत:॥१३॥

« VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

He then hurled, O scion of Raghu, at
Vasistha, the foremost of ascetics, all the
following missiles—the one presided over
by Swayambhuva Manu, as also another
possessing the virtue of stupefying the person
aimed at, another presided over by
Gandharvas, even so, a missile inducing
sleep, another that induces yawning, still
another that inebriates the person against
whom it is directed, as well as a couple of
missiles that severally torment by heating
and melt the object aimed at, still another
that dries up (by sucking its moisture), as
well as a missile that rends the object
aimed at, a missile presided over by Indra’s
thunderbolt—a missile which is so very
difficult to prevail against—a missile presided
over by Brahma’s noose, another presided
over by the noose of Kala, the god of death,
as well as a missile presided over by the
noose of Varuna, the missile known by the
name of Pinaka, beloved of Lord Siva, also
the two kinds of Indra’s thunderbolts, dry as
well as wet, a missile presided over by
Yama (the god of punishment), another
presided over by Pisacas (fiends) as well
as a missile presided over by Kraufica (the
name of a mountain), the missiles presided
over by the discuses of Dharma, the god of
virtue, Kala (the Time-Spirit), as well as of
Visnu, as also a missile presided over by
the wind-god, another that kills by churning,
and the one presided over by Lord Hayagriva,
a manifestation of Lord Visnu credited with
the head of a horse, the two kinds of javelins,
the missiles known by the names of Kankala
and Musala, the great missile presided over
by Vidyadharas (heavenly artistes) and then
the terrible missile presided over by Kala
(the god of death), nay, the fearful missile
popularly known as the trident and the
missiles known by the names of Kapala
and Kankana. The wonder of it, however,
was that Vasistha (a son of Brahma)
neutralized them all by means of his staff
alone. (7—13)

तेषु शान्तेषु ब्रह्मास्त्रं क्षिप्तवान् गाधिनन्दन:।
तदस्त्रमुद्यतं दृष्टवा cat: साग्निपुरोगमा:॥ १४॥
