708

नियमैर्विविधैराप्तं तपो fe महदस्ति मे।
ad area act dit wea cat शुचिव्रते॥ १४॥
“Indeed there exists to my credit ample
spiritual energy earned through religious
observances of various kinds; banking on
that energy, O Sita of holy vows, | request
you to ask a boon of me. (14)
उपपन्नं च ah च वचनं aa मैथिलि।
प्रीता चास्म्युचितां सीते करवाणि प्रियं च किम्॥ १५ ॥
“What you have said, O princess of
Mithila, is reasonable and just; and | am
pleased to hear it. Tell me, O Sita, what
kindly act can | do for you?” (15)

तस्यास्तद् वचनं श्रुत्वा विस्मिता मन्दविस्मया।
कृतमित्यब्रवीत् सीता तपोबलसमन्विताम्॥ १६॥

Astonished to hear the aforesaid
utterance of Anasuya, Sita, gently smiling,
replied to the lady, who was_ richly
endowed with spiritual energy earned
through askesis—“Everything stands already
accomplished by Your Holiness’s grace
alone.” (16)

सा त्वेवमुक्ता wat तया प्रीततराभवत्।
सफलं च प्रहर्षं aA हन्त सीते करोम्यहम्॥१७॥

Spoken to in these words by Sita,
Anasuya for her part who knew what is
right felt all the more gratified and said, “Ha
ha! | make your extreme gratification born
of contentment fruitful by offering loving gifts
to you. (17)
इदं feat at माल्यं वस्त्रमाभरणानि al
अङ्गरागं च adhe महार्हमनुलेपनम्॥१८॥

“Here are an excellent celestial garland,
garment and ornaments, cosmetics and a
precious unguent, O princess of the Videha
kingdom |! (18)

मया दत्तमिदं सीते तव गात्राणि शोभयेत्।
अनुरूपमसंक्लिष्टं नित्यमेव भविष्यति॥१९॥

“Let this gift, bestowed by me, O Sita,
beautify your limbs. It will prove worthy of
you and will remain intact for all time to

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA +

come even after constant use.

अङ्गरागेण दिव्येन feast जनकात्मजे।
शोभयिष्यसि भर्तारं यथा श्रीर्विष्णुमव्ययम्॥ २०॥

“Your limbs smeared with the celestial
cosmetic, O daughter of Janaka, you will
adorn your husband as Laksmi (the goddess
of fortune and beauty) does the imperishable
Lord Visnu.” (20)

सा वस्त्रमङ्गरागं च भूषणानि स्रजस्तथा।
मैथिली प्रतिजग्राह प्रीतिदानमनुत्तमम्॥ २१॥
The aforesaid princess of Mithila
accepted the garment as well as the
cosmetic, jewels and wreaths of flowers as
an unsurpassed gift of love. (21)

प्रतिगृह्य च तत् सीता प्रीतिदानं यशस्विनी।
श्लिष्टाञ्जलिपुटा धीरा समुपास्त तपोधनाम्॥ २२॥

Accepting that gift of love, the illustrious
and wise Sita remained sitting with folded
hands by the side of that lady, whose sole
wealth was her asceticism. (22)

तथा सीतामुपासीनामनसूया दृढव्रता।
वचनं प्रष्टुमारेभे कथां कांचिदनुप्रियाम्॥ २३॥
Anasuya of steadfast vows next
proceeded to speak as follows to Sita,
sitting beside her as aforesaid, in order to
draw out from her a pleasing narrative :
(23)

स्वयंवरे किल प्राप्ता त्वमनेन यशस्विना।
राघवेणेति A सीते कथा श्रुतिमुपागता॥ २४॥

“The story has actually reached my
ears, O Sita, that you were secured by this
illustrious prince, Sri Rama, a scion of Raghu,
in a bow-stringing event. (24)

at कथां श्रोतुमिच्छामि विस्तरेण च मैथिलि।
यथाभूतं च HT तन्मे त्वं वक्तुमर्हसि॥ २५॥

“| long to hear that story in extenso
too, O princess of Mithila! You should
therefore tell me in full how it happened.”(25)

एवमुक्ता तु सा सीता तापसीं धर्मचारिणीम्।
श्रूयतामिति चोक्त्वा वै कथयामास तां कथाम्॥ २६ ॥

(19)
