64

तं निहत्य महाबाहुर्ददाह स्वर्गतश्च स:।
स चास्य कथयामास शबरीं धर्मचारिणीम्॥ ५६॥
श्रमणां धर्मनिपुणामभिगच्छेति राघव।
सोऽभ्यगच्छन्महातेजा: शबरीं शत्रुसूदन:॥५७॥
“Having made short work of him, the
mighty-armed prince cremated him too
and the demon regained his original form of
a Gandharva and ascended to heaven.
Nay, while rising to heaven he said to Sri
Rama, ‘Seek, O Rama (a scion of Raghu),
Sabari, a pious hermitess, who is well-
versed in the principles of righteousness.’
The highly glorious Rama, the destroyer of
his foes, accordingly approached Sabari.
(56-57)

शबर्या पूजित: सम्यग् रामो दशरथात्मज:।
पम्पातीरे हनुमता सङ्गतो वानरेण ह॥५८॥

“Duly worshipped by Sabari, Sri Rama,
son of Dasaratha, came into contact with
the monkey chief, Hanuman, on the bank of
the Pampa lake : so the tradition goes.(58)

हनुमद्वचनाच्चैव सुग्रीवेण समागत:।
सुग्रीवाय च तत्सर्वं शंसद्रामो महाबल:॥५९॥
आदितस्तद् यथा वरृत्तं सीतायाश्च विशेषत:।
सुग्रीवश्चापि aed श्रुत्वा WAT AMT Igo ll
चकार wet रामेण प्रीतश्चैवाग्निसाक्षिकम्।
ततो वानरराजेन वैरानुकथनं प्रति॥६१॥
रामायावेदितं wd प्रणयाद् ¢:fact a
प्रतिज्ञातं च रामेण तदा वालिवधं प्रति॥६२॥

“At the intercession of Hanuman
specifically, he further made friends with
Sugriva. Nay, to Sugriva the exceedingly
powerful Rama duly narrated from the very
beginning (his very birth) the whole of his
popular story and the well-known story of
Sita, his consort, in particular. Pleased to
hear the whole narrative of Sri Rama, the
monkey chief, Sugriva, too made friendship
with Sri Rama in the presence of the sacred
fire as a witness*. Nay, in response to an
inquiry made by Sri Rama with regard to his

« VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

enmity with his own elder brother, Vali, the
whole incident was then related by Sugriva,
the ruler of the monkeys, afflicted as he
was, to Sri Rama and lovingly by made an
alliance with him based on mutual trust. A
vow was taken by Sr Rama that very
moment to the effect that Vali would be
killed by him. (59—62)
वालिनश्च बलं तत्र कथयामास वानर:।
सुग्रीव: शाङ्कितश्चासीन्नित्यं वीर्येण राघवे॥६३॥
“And, there on Mount Rsyamuka the
monkey chief described to Sri Rama the
unique strength of Vali, his elder brother,
since Sugriva was full of misgivings
concerning Sri Rama (a scion of Raghu) in
the matter of prowess vis-a-vis his opponent,
Vali. (63)

राघवप्रत्ययार्थं तु दुन्दुभे: कायमुत्तमम्।
दर्शयामास सुग्रीवो महापर्वतसंनिभम्॥६४॥

“In order to make Sri Rama aware of
Vali’s strength, Sugriva actually showed to
him the exceptionally tall skeleton of the
demon, Dundubhi, killed by Vali, which
looked like a big mountain and which had
been disdainfully kicked away to a long
distance by Vali. (64)

उत्स्मयित्वा महाबाहु: प्रेक्ष्य चास्थि महाबल:।
पादाङ्गुष्ठेन चिक्षेप सम्पूर्णं दशयोजनम्॥६५॥

“Smiling at this and gazing on the
skeleton, the mighty-armed Sri Rama, who
possessed extraordinary strength, hurled it
with his toe to a distance of full eighty miles.

(65)
fave च पुनस्तालान् सप्तैकेन महेषुणा।
far रसातलं चैव जनयन् प्रत्ययं तदा॥६६॥

“Nay, in order to inspire confidence in
the mind of Sugriva, Sri Rama further pierced
on that very occasion with a single mighty
shaft one after another as many as seven
palmyra trees standing in a line adjacent
to one another, a hillock standing by as
well as Rasatala (the sixth subterranean

* Tt has been customary among the Hindus to contract friendships—more especially matrimonial
alliances—in the presence of the sacred fire as a witness with a view to solemnizing them.
