# YUDDHAKANDA +

यथेमे पुरुषा नित्यमुत्तमाधममध्यमा:।
एवं मन्त्रोऽपि विज्ञेय उत्तमाधममध्यम:॥११॥

“Even as the aforementioned people
are either ever good, bad or mediocre, so
the conclusion arrived at by them is also
good, bad or mediocre. (11)

ऐकमत्यमुपागम्य शास्त्रदूष्टेन चक्षुषा।
मन्त्रिणो यत्र निरतास्तमाहुर्मन्त्रमुत्तमम्॥१२॥

“The wise declare that conclusion to
be excellent in which the counsellors feel
specially interested, after reaching an
agreement based on a point of view
supported by the scriptures. (12)

aera मतीर्गत्वा मन्तिणामर्थनिर्णय:।
पुनर्यत्रैकतां WA: स मन्त्रो मध्यम: स्मृत:॥१३॥

“That conclusion is declared to be
mediocre in arriving at which the judgment
of the counsellors with regard to the
point at issue reaches unanimity only after
meeting with different angles of views. (13)

अन्योन्यमतिमास्थाय यत्र सम्प्रतिभाष्यते।
न चैकमत्ये श्रेयोऽस्ति मन्त्र: सोऽधम उच्यते॥ १४॥

“That conclusion, again, is declared
to be third-rate, in arriving at which
speeches and counter-speeches are made
emphasising different points of view and
from which good fortune does not follow
even in the event of unanimity being arrived
at somehow. (14)

315

तस्मात् सुमन्त्रितं साधु भवन्तो मतिसत्तमा:।
wre सम्प्रतिपद्यन्तमेतत् कृत्यं Ad मम॥१५॥

“Therefore, determine you, who are
foremost in point of intelligence, a course of
conduct which is well-deliberated and,
therefore, right. This alone is reckoned by
me as worth adopting. (15)

वानराणां fe धीराणां wea: परिवारित:।
रामोऽभ्येति पुरीं लङ्कामस्माकमुपरोधक:॥१६॥

“Surrounded by thousands of heroic
monkeys, Rama is actually advancing towards
the city of Lanka in order to besiege us. (16)

तरिष्यति च सुव्यक्तं waa: सागरं Far
तरसा युक्तरूपेण सानुज: सबलानुग:॥ १७॥
“Clearly enough, by virtue of his might,
which is worthy of him, Rama (a scion of
Raghu) will cross the sea with ease alongwith

his younger brother as well as with his
forces and entourage. (17)

समुद्रमुच्छोषयति वीर्येणान्यत्करोति वा।
तस्मिन्नेवंविधे कार्ये विरुद्धे amt: सह।
fed पुरे च सैन्ये च सर्वं Wea मम॥ १८॥

“He will either dry up the sea by dint of
his prowess or do something else to bridge
the sea. The aforesaid work of invading
Lanka having commenced in this way and
antagonism with the monkeys having been
set on foot, advice may be tendered to me
on whatever is good for the city and the
army.” (18)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये युद्धकाण्डे ष्ठ: सर्ग: ॥ ६॥

Thus ends Canto Six in the Yuddhakanda of the glorious Ramayana of

Valmiki, the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

