* AYODHYAKANDA +

was unconsciousness in the army including
even horses and elephants as well as among
the people visiting Ayodhya from the districts.

(18)

तत् समाकुलसम्भ्रान्तं मत्तसंकुपितद्विपम्।
हयसिञ्जितनिर्घोषं पुरमासीन्महास्वनम्॥ १९॥

Confounded and द् ।।।।- । with its
elephants in rut highly excited, and resonant
with the tinkling of the ornaments of its
horses, the aforesaid city of Ayodhya was
filled with great noise. (19)

तत: Paes सा at परमपीडिता।
राममेवाभिदुद्राव wid: सलिलं यथा॥ २०॥

Sore stricken with agony, that city
including the youngsters as well as the old
people rushed towards Sri Rama in the
same way as one oppressed with the sun
would rush towards water. (20)

Uda: पृष्ठतश्चापि लम्बमानास्तदुन्मुखा:।
बाष्पपूर्णमुखा: सर्वे तमूचुर्भृशनि:स्वना:॥ २१॥
Clinging to the sides and back of the
chariot with their faces turned towards him
and bathed with tears, all submitted to
Sumantra in a loud voice: (21)

संयच्छ वाजिनां रश्मीन् सूत याहि शनै: शनै: |
मुखं द्रक्ष्याम रामस्य दुर्दर्शं नो भविष्यति॥ २२॥

“Hold in the reins of the horses, O
charioteer, and drive slowly and slowly. We
would behold the countenance of Sri Rama,
which would henceforth be difficult to
behold. (22)
ae देवगर्भप्रतिमे at याति न भिद्यते॥ २३॥

‘The heart of Kausalya (Sri Rama’s
mother) is surely and undoubtedly made of
steel in that it does not get riven even when
her son, who resembles an offspring of
gods, is departing for the forest ! (23)

कृतकृत्या हि वैदेही छायेवानुगता पतिम्।
न Welt रता धर्मे मेरुमर्कप्रभा यथा॥ २४॥

445

“Sita, a princess of the Videha kingdom,
has done what ought to be done inasmuch
as she follows her husband like a shadow
and, devoted to her duty, does not leave
him any more than the light of the sun
forsakes Mount Meru. (24)

अहो लक्ष्मण सिद्धार्थ: wad प्रियवादिनम्।
भ्रातरं देवसंकाशं यस्त्वं परिचरिष्यसि॥ २५॥

“O Laksmana, you are accomplished
of purpose in that you are going to serve
your godlike brother, who is ever disposed
to speak kind words to all. (25)

महत्येषा fe ते बुद्धिरेष चाभ्युदयो महान्।
wa स्वर्गस्य मार्गश्च यदेनमनुगच्छसि॥ २६॥

“Indeed this constitutes your great
wisdom; nay, this is your great good fortune
and this is the way to heaven for you that
you are following Sri Rama!” (26)
एवं वदन्तस्ते सोढुं न शेकुर्बाष्पमागतम्।
नरास्तमनुगच्छन्ति प्रियमिक्ष्वाकुनन्दनम्॥ २७॥

Saying so, those men could not restrain
their tears, that had already welled up in
their eyes, and followed their beloved Sri
Rama, the delight of the Ikswakus. (27)

अथ राजा Ga: स्त्रीभिर्दीनाभिर्दीनचेतन:।
निर्जगाम प्रियं ot द्रक्ष्यामीति ब्रुवन् गृहात्॥ २८॥

Meanwhile, surrounded’ by his
consorts—who were all feeling miserable—
and distressed in mind, the king sallied forth
from his palace, saying “Il shall see my
beloved son.” (28)
शुश्रुवे चाग्रत: स्त्रीणां रुदतीनां महास्वन:।
यथा नाद: करेणूनां Ag महति HARI

In front of him was heard the great
noise of crying women, resembling the
trumpeting of she-elephants on a lordly
elephant, the leader of their herd, having
been bound with chains. (29)

पिता fe राजा काकुत्स्थ: श्रीमान् सन्नस्तदा बभौ ।
परिपूर्ण: शशी काले ग्रहेणोपप्लुतो यथा॥ ३०॥
