* AYODHYAKANDA +

695

चतुर्दशाधिकशततम: सर्ग:
Canto CXIV

Valmiki portrays the gloomy appearance of Ayodhya with the help
of a number of similes. Bharata enters his father’s palace
with a heavy heart, speaking to Sumantra about the
sorry spectacle which Ayodhya presented
at the moment

स्निग्धगम्भीरघोषेण स्यन्दनेनोपयान् WY:
अयोध्यां भरत: क्षिप्रं प्रविवेश महायशा:॥ १॥
Journeying forth in a chariot which
produced an agreeable deep sound, the
powerful and highly illustrious Bharata duly
entered Ayodhya in no time. (1)

बिडालोलूकचरितामालीननरवारणाम् ।
तिमिराभ्याहतां कालीमप्रकाशां निशामिव॥ २॥
Haunted by cats and owls, obscured
by darkness and devoid of light, with the
house doors of its men closed, the city
presented the appearance of a dark night.
(2)

राहुशत्रो: frat पत्नीं श्रिया प्रज्वलितप्रभाम्।
ग्रहेणाभ्युदितेनैकां रोहिणीमिव पीडिताम्॥ ३॥

It looked desolate like Rohini, the
beloved consort of the moon-god (treated
as an enemy by the demon Rahu*), tormented
in the form of her spouse whose better half
she is by the planet Rahu in the ascendant,
though ordinarily invested with an
exceedingly bright splendour by virtue of
her glory. (3)
अल्पोष्णक्षुब्धसलिलां घर्मतप्तविहंगमाम्।
लीनमीनझषग्राहां कृशां गिरिनदीमिव॥४॥

It further looked attenuated like a
mountain-stream whose scanty waters had
become hot and agitated due to the rays of
the sun, birds living in which were scorched

by the sun and whose fish, small and big,
and alligators had disappeared into the mire.
(4)

विधूमामिव हेमाभां शिखामग्ने; समुत्थिताम्।
हविरभ्युक्षितां पश्चाच्छिखां विप्रलयं गताम्॥५॥
It resembled a fully developed tongue
of fire, devoid of smoke and bright as gold,
later reduced to extinction when sprinkled
all over with milk. (5)

विध्वस्तकवचां रुग्णगजवाजिरथध्वजाम्।
हतप्रवीरामापन्नां चमूमिव महाहवे॥ ६ I
It looked like an army which had met
with reverses in a major conflict—whose
armours had been shattered, whose ensigns
borne on elephants, horses and chariots
had been torn and whose foremost heroes
had been killed. (6)
सफेनां सस्वनां भूत्वा सागरस्य समुत्थिताम्।
प्रशान्तमारुतोद्धूतां जलोर्मिमिव नि:स्वनाम्॥७॥
It presented the appearance of an
oceanic wave which, though tossed very
high by a strong gale with foam and a roar,
is rendered noiseless when stirred by a
quiet wind. (7)
त्यक्तां यज्ञायुधै: सर्वैरभिरूपैश्च याजकै:।
सुत्याकाले सुनिर्वृत्ते वेदिं गतरवामिव॥८॥
It resembled an altar which, when the

period of offering oblations into the sacred
fire has completely expired, has been cleared

* The demon presiding over a planet of the same name figuring in Indian astronomy and identified
by modern astronomy with the shadow of the earth cast on the orb of the moon during what is known as

a lunar eclipse.
