419

# YUDDHAKANDA +

suzerain lord of ogres), once more, the | among the foremost of his counsellors,

mighty Malyavan, who was foremost in virility

became silent after eyeing him. (37)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये FERS पञ्चत्रिंश: सर्ग: ॥ 34 Il
Thus ends Canto Thirty-five in the Yuddhakanda of the glorious Ramayana of
Valmiki, the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

Canto XXXVI

Deriding the exhortation of Malyavan, even though conducive
to his good, nay, holding consultation with his ministers
and detailing Prahasta (the Commander-in-Chief)
and others to guard the four main gates
against the inroads of the enemy,

Ravana complacently retires
into his gynaeceum

तत् तु माल्यवतो वाक्यं हितमुक्तं दशानन:।
न मर्षयति दुष्टात्मा कालस्य वशमागत:॥१॥

The evil-minded Ravana (the ten-
headed monster), who had fallen under
the sway of Death could not for his part
brook the salutary advice tendered by
Malyavan. (1)

स बद्ध्वा भ्रुकुटिं वक्ते क्रोधस्य वशमागत:।
अमर्षात् UR माल्यवन्तमथाब्रवीत्॥ २॥

Knitting his brows on his face, Ravana,
who had fallen a prey to anger, presently
spoke as follows to Malyavan, his eyes
rolling through anger: (2)

agent यदहितं aa: परुषमुच्यते।
uae waste नैतच्छोत्रगतं मम॥३॥

“This noxious and harsh utterance,
which has been made by you, taking it to be
salutary for me and taking sides with the
enemy, has not caught my ears. (3)
समर्थं मन्यसे केन त्यक्तं पित्रा वनाश्रयम्॥४॥

रक्षसामीश्वरं मां च देवानां च भयंकरम्।
at at मन्यसे केन अहीनं सर्वविक्रमै:॥ ५॥
“On what grounds do you hold as
powerful Rama, a forlorn, wretched human
being, who, having been forsaken by
his father, has sought the protection of
monkeys and has found his asylum in the
forest? And how do you consider as deficient

me, the ruler of ogres, the terror of
gods, and endowed with all kinds of
prowess? (4-5)

वीरद्वेषेण वा we पक्षपातेन वा रिपो:।
wae परुषाण्युक्तो परप्रोत्साहनेन वा॥६॥
“| fear | have been told such harsh
words by you either because of spitefulness
to me, an illustrious warrior, or because of
your predilection to the foe or because you
were incited by the enemy to do so. (6)
प्रभवन्तं पदस्थं fe wed कोऽभिभाषते।
पण्डित: शास्त्रतत्त्वज्ञो विना प्रोत्साहनेन वा॥७॥
“Indeed without such instigation what
learned man, who has_ grasped the
