+ UTTARAKANDA +

bellies of those suffering from the disease of
dropsy, the gods submitted with joined palms:
‘By you, indeed, O lord! our master, the four
types of created beings 1. viviparous, 2.
Oviparous, 3. the sweat-born and 4. those
sprouting from the earth were evolved. (54)
त्वया दत्तोऽयमस्माकमायुष: पवन: Ute: |
सोऽस्मान् प्राणेश्वरो भूत्वा कस्मादेषोऽद्य सत्तम ।। ५५ UI
eta GG जनयन्नन्त:पुर sa fea:
तस्मात् त्वां शरणं WAT वायुनोपहता वयम्॥ GE Il
“The wind-god was bestowed on us
by you as the lord of our lives. Wherefore,
O prince of the virtuous, has he, even
though being the controller of our vital breaths,
suffocated us today, even as a king would
confine his womenfolk in a gynaeceum,
thereby causing affliction to us? Afflicted by
the wind-god, we have accordingly sought
you as our shelter. (55-56)

वायुसंरोधजं grate नो नुद दु:खहन्।
एतत् प्रजानां श्रुत्वा तु प्रजानाथ: प्रजापति: ।। ५७॥
कारणादिति चोक्त्वासौ प्रजा: पुनरभाषत।
यस्मिंश्च कारणे वायुश्चुक्रोध च रुरोध AUS
पुत्रस्तस्यामरेशेन इन्द्रेणाद्य निपातित:॥७५९॥
राहोर्वचनमास्थाय dd: स कुपितोऽनिल:।
अशरीर: शरीरेषु वायुश्चरति पालयन्॥६०॥

“Pray, relieve this suffering of ours
caused by the obstruction of the wind, O
allayer of suffering!’

“Hearing this petition of the created
beings, and saying, ‘This has happened due
to some reason’, the lord of creation, the
protector of all created beings, for his part
continued as follows: ‘Hear, O created
beings, for what reason the wind-god got
angry and held up his movement; all that
deserves to be listened to by you and is
justifiable too. In response to the appeal of
Rahu, the son of the wind-god has been
struck down today by Indra, the ruler of
gods; hence the said wind-god got angry.
Going without a body, the wind-god moves

973

in all bodies preserving them. (57—60)

शरीरं fe विना are समतां याति दारुभि:।

वायु: प्राण: GE वायुर्वायु: सर्वमिदं जगत्॥६१॥
“Devoid of the wind, a body attains

similarity to blocks of wood. Air is life, air is

happiness, the air constitutes all this universe.
(61)

वायुना सम्परित्यक्तं न सुखं frat जगत्।
अद्यैव च परित्यक्तं वायुना जगदायुषा॥६२॥
“Entirely devoid of the air, the world
does not attain happiness. The world has
just now been forsaken by the wind, which
is its very life. (62)

अद्यैव ते निरुच्छ्वासा: काष्ठकुड्योपमा: स्थिता: ।
aq यामस्तत्र यत्रास्ते मारुतो रुक्प्रदो हि A: 1
मा विनाशं गमिष्याम अप्रसाद्यादिते: Gat: ।॥ ६३॥
“Being unable to breathe, all created
beings stand no better than the blocks of wood
or walls. Therefore, we shall actually proceed
to that place where the wind-god who is
causing pain to us, is present; let us not go to
ruin by not placating him, O sons of Aditi!’ (63)
da: प्रजाभि: सहित: प्रजापति:
सदेवगन्धर्वभुजङ्गगुह्यकै: ।
जगाम तत्रास्यति यत्र मारुत:
सुतं सुरेन्द्राभिहतं wre स:॥६४॥
“Accompanied by all created beings
including gods, the Gandharvas (celestial
musicians), serpents and  Guhyakas
(Yaksas), Brahma (the lord of creation)
thereupon moved to the place where the
said wind-god sat, taking hold of his son
who had been struck down by Indra. (64)

ततोऽर्कवैश्वानरकाञ्चनप्रभं
चतुर्मुखो वीक्ष्य कृपामथाकरोत्
सदेवगन्धर्वऋषियक्षराक्षसै: ॥ ६५ ॥
“Perceiving at that time the son of the
wind-god (who is perpetually in motion),
radiant as the sun, fire and gold, in his lap,
Brahma (the four-faced god) accompanied
