* BALAKANDA +

on me, my lord: there is no doubt about it,
O ruler of gods ! (3)
ततो fe मे भयं देव vers कर्तुमर्हसि।
एवमुक्तस्तया राम सभयं भीतया तदा॥४॥
तामुवाच सहस्राक्षो वेपमानां कृताञ्जलिम्।
मा भैषी रम्भे भद्रं ते कुरुष्व मम MATING II
“Since great fear on this score lurks in
my mind, be pleased to take pity on me,
and excuse me, my lord !” Requested thus
with a mind full of fear by the frightened
nymph on that occasion, O Rama, Indra
(the thousand-eyed god) spoke as follows
to her, who stood trembling before him with
folded hands: “Do not be afraid, Rambha;
may all be well with you! Please do my
bidding. (4-5)

कोकिलो हृदयग्राही माधवे रुचिरद्रुमे।
अहं कन्दर्पसहित: स्थास्यामि da पार्श्वत:॥६॥

“Accompanied by the god of love, | too
shall remain by your side in the form of a
cuckoo, that captivates the heart by its
enthralling notes in the vernal season when
the trees assume a delightful appearance
with their green foliage and fragrant blossoms.

(6)
त्वं हि रूपं बहुगुणं कृत्वा परमभास्वरम्।
तमृषिं कौशिकं भद्रे भेदयस्व तपस्विनम्॥७॥

“Wearing an exceedingly smart
appearance full of manifold charms, do divert
the mind of the celebrated sage ViSwamitra
(son of Kusika), who is given to austerities,
O good lady!” (7)
सा श्रुत्वा वचनं तस्य Hea रूपमनुत्तमम्।
लोभयामास ललिता विश्वामित्रं शुचिस्मिता॥ ८॥

Hearing his command and assuming
looks which could not be excelled by another,
the belle, who wore a bright smile on her
lips proceeded to lure ViSwamitra. (8)
कोकिलस्य तु शुश्राव वल्गु व्याहरत: स्वनम्।
weet मनसा स चैनामन्ववैक्षत॥९॥

Viswamitra heard the notes of the

245

warbling cuckoo and with an overjoyed mind
looked at Rambha too. (9)
अथ तस्य च wert गीतेनाप्रतिमेन च।
दर्शनेन च रम्भाया मुनि: संदेहमागत:॥१०॥
Attracted by the notes of the cuckoo
as well as by the unique song and sight of
Rambha, the sage now fell a-doubting
(whether the nymph had come of her own
accord or had been sent by Indra to interfere
with his austerities). (10)

सहस्राक्षस्य तत्सर्वं विज्ञाय मुनिपुंगव:।
रम्भां क्रोधसमाविष्ट: शशाप कुशिकात्मज:॥ ११॥

Concluding the whole mischief to be
the doing of Indra (the thousand-eyed god),
Viswamitra (son of Kusika), the foremost of
ascetics, was filled with rage and cursed
Rambha as follows : (11)

यन्मां लोभयसे रम्भे कामक्रोधजयैषिणम्।
दशवर्षसहस्राणि शैली स्थास्यसि दुर्भगे॥१२॥
ब्राह्मण: सुमहातेजास्तपोबलसमन्वित:।
उद्घधरिष्यति रम्भे cat मत्क्रोधकलुषीकृताम्॥ १३॥

“Since you have tried to seduce me,
who seeks to conquer lust and anger, O
Rambha, you shall continue to stand as a
stone image for ten thousand years, O
hapless woman! An exceptionally glorious
Brahmana (viz., Vasistha, a mind-born son
of Brahma) richly endowed with spiritual
energy acquired through austerities, O
Rambha, will redeem you, who have been
punished for your foul deed through my
anger.” (12-13)
एवमुक्त्वा महातेजा विश्वामित्रो महामुनि: |
अशक्नुवन् धारयितुं कोपं संतापमात्मन:॥ १४॥

Having spoken thus, unable as he was
to control his anger, the highly glorious and
eminent sage, ViSwamitra, fell a prey to
remorse on his having exhausted the stock
of merits, earned through his austerities, by
cursing the nymph. (14)

तस्य शापेन महता रम्भा शैली तदाभवत्।
aa: श्रुत्वा च कन्दर्पो महर्षे: स च निर्गत:॥ १५॥
