* ARANYAKANDA + 865
पञ्चपञ्चाश: सर्ग:
Canto LV
Ravana shows his gynaeceum to Sita and coaxes her to become his wife
संदिश्य राक्षसान् घोरान् रावणोऽष्टौ महाबलान्। resembling an abode of gods. (3—6)

आत्मानं वुद्धिवैवलव्य।न् कृत्कृत्यममन्यत॥ १॥

Having given instruction to the eight
fierce ogres of inordinate strength to leave
for Janasthana, Ravana thought, due to
perversity of intellect, that he had
accomplished his object. (1)

a चिन्तयानो वैदेहीं कामबाणै: प्रपीडित:।
प्रविवेश गृहं wet सीतां द्रष्टुमभित्वरन्॥ २॥
Thinking of Sita (a princess of the
Videha territory), sore stricken as he was
with darts of love, and being in a great hurry
to see Sita, he directly entered his delightful
gynaeceum. (2)

स Wasa तु तद्वेश्मं रावणो राक्षसाधिप:।
अपश्यद् राक्षसीमध्ये सीतां दु:खपरायणाम्॥ ३॥
अश्रुपूर्णमुखीं दीनां शोकभारावपीडिताम्।
वायुवेगैरिवाक्रान्तां मज्जन्तीं नावमर्णवे॥४॥
अधोगतमुखीं सीतां तामभ्येत्य निशाचर:॥५॥
at तु शोकवशाद् दीनामवशां राक्षसाधिप:।
सबलाद् दर्शयामास गृहं देवगृहोपमम्॥६॥

Having duly entered that palace,
Ravana, the suzerain lord of ogres, for his
part saw Sita given over to woe in the mind
of ogresses, her face bathed in tears,
distressed as she was, nay, weighed down
by the load of grief (she carried in her heart)
and resembling a bark buffeted by blasts of
wind and foundering in the ocean or a female
deer strayed from the herd of deer and
beset by hounds. Approaching the aforesaid
Sita, who sat with her face bent down
(through humiliation and shame), afflicted
as she was through grief, the night-stalker,
Ravana, the ruler of ogres, for his part,
forcibly showed her, even though she
was unwilling to see it, his palace

हर्म्यप्रासादसम्बाधं स्त्रीसहस्त्रनिषेवितम्।
नानापक्षिगणैर्जुष्टं नानारत्नसमन्वितम्॥ ७॥

The palace was thickly set with
mansions and seven-storeyed buildings, was
occupied by thousands of women, inhabited
by flocks of birds of every description and
full of jewels of various kinds. (7)

दान्तकैस्तापनीयैश्च स्फाटिकॆ राजतैस्तथा।
वज्रवैदूर्यचित्रैश्च स्तम्भैर्दृष्टिमनोरमै: ।। ८ ॥

It was supported on pillars of ivory, gold,
crystal and silver, and studded with diamonds
and cat’s-eye jewels and was pleasing to the
sight as well as to the mind. (8)

दिव्यदुन्दुभिनिर्घोषं तप्तकाञ्चनभूषणम्।
सोपानं काञ्चनं चित्रमारुरोह तया सह॥९॥
The palace resounded with the crash
of large kettledrums and was decked with
ornaments of refined gold. (In order to show

her the palace) he ascended with her the
magnificent stairway of gold. (9)

दान्तका राजताश्चैव गवाक्षा: प्रियदर्शना:।

हेमजालाव्रताश्चासंस्तत्र प्रासादपङ्क्तय:॥१०॥
Along the stairway there were air-holes

of ivory as well as of silver and above them

ranged rows of palaces pleasing to look at
and covered with trellises of gold. (10)

सुधामणिविचित्राणि भूमिभागानि सर्वश:।
दशग्रीव: स्वभवने प्रादर्शयत मैथिलीम्॥११॥

Ravana (the ten-headed monster)
showed Sita (the princess of Mithila) the
floors in his palace paved with mortar and
inlaid with gems and hence _ looking
picturesque on all sides. (11)

dite: पुष्करिण्यश्च नानापुष्पसमाव्रता:।
रावणो दर्शयामास सीतां शोकपरायणाम्॥१२॥
