* BALAKANDA +

गवां शतसहस्रेण दीयतां शबला मम।
wi हि भगवन्नेतद् रत्नहारी च पार्थिव:॥९॥
“Sabala may kindly be handed over to
me in exchange for a hundred thousand
cows, as she is a jewel and a king is the
proper person who ought to receive a jewel.
(9)
तस्मान्मे शबलां देहि ममैषा धर्मतो द्विज।
Wane भगवान् वसिष्ठो मुनिपुंगव:॥१०॥
विश्वामित्रेण धर्मात्मा प्रत्युवाच महीपतिम्।
नाहं शतसहस्रेण नापि कोटिशतैर्गवाम्॥११॥
राजन् दास्यामि शबलां राशिभी रजतस्य वा।
न परित्यागमर्हेयँ मत्सकाशादरिंदम॥ १२॥

“Therefore, make over Sabala to me;
she is rightfully mine, O holy Brahmana !”
Thus addressed by ViSwamitra, the almighty
Vasistha, the foremost among ascetics,
whose mind was given to piety, replied to
the king as follows : “I shall never part with
Sabala even in exchange for a thousand
million cows, much less for a hundred
thousand, nay, not even for heaps of silver
coins. She does not deserve to be weaned
from my presence, O subduer of foes!

(10—12)

शाश्वती शबला मह्यं कीर्तिरात्मवतो यथा।
अस्यां हव्यं च कव्यं च प्राणयात्रा तथैव च॥ १३॥
आयत्तमग्निहोत्रं च बलिर्होमस्तथैव a
स्वाहाकारवषट्कारौ विद्याश्च विविधास्तथा॥ १४॥
आयत्तमत्र राजर्षे सर्वमेतन्न संशय:।
सर्वस्वमेतत् सत्येन मम तुष्टिकरी तथा॥१५॥

“Sabala is inalienable from me even as
glory is inalienable from a man practising
Rajayoga (the methods of mind-control).
Moreover, an offering made to the gods in
sacrifices and that to the manes in the
course of a Sraddha, as well as the
sustenance of my life depends on her. Nay,
Agnihotra (daily oblations to the sacred fire),
as well as Bali (the offering of a portion of
the daily meal to all creatures, also known
as Bhuta-Yajna, which consists in throwing

217

up into the air, near the house-door, morsels
of food before taking one’s meals), and
even so VaiSwadeva (an offering made to
all deities by presenting oblations to the
kitchen fire before meals), sacrifices
(characterized by the repetition of the
indeclinables Swaha and Vasat at the end
of the name of the deity to whom an offering
is made) and even so, the uttering of the
various Mantras inasmuch as the capacity
to utter them, rooted as it is in the satisfaction
of hunger and bodily strength etc., is derived
from the milk of this cow—all this no doubt
rests on this cow alone, O royal sage!
She is my all as also the source of my
delight (through her sight etc.), | say on
oath. (183—15)

कारणैर्बहुभी राजन् न दास्ये शबलां तव।
वसिष्ठेनैवमुक्तस्तु विश्वामित्रोऽब्रवीत् qari १६॥
हैरण्यकक्षग्रैवेयान् सुवर्णाङ्कुशभूषितान्॥ १७॥
ददामि कुञ्जराणां a सहस्राणि wader
हैरण्यानां रथानां च श्वेताश्वानां चतुर्युजाम्॥ १८ ॥
ददामि ते शतान्यष्टौ किंकिणीकविभूषितान्।
सहस्रमेकं at च ददामि aa सुव्रत॥१९॥
नानावर्णविभक्तानां वय:स्थानां तथैव च।
ददाम्येकां Tat कोटिं शबला दीयतां मम॥ oll
“For these numerous reasons | shall
not give Sabala to you.” Thus addressed by
Vasistha, Viswamitra, who was an expert in
making out the meaning of words, then
made the following reply in a really most
importunate tone: “I offer to you fourteen
thousand elephants equipped with girths and
chains of gold and decked with goads, also
of gold. | further offer to you eight hundred
gold chariots driven by four white horses
each and decorated with small tinkling
bells. | shall also give you, O sage of
noble vows, eleven thousand highly-spirited
horses of excellent breed and born in
territories noted for their horses. Over and
