* SUNDARAKANDA +

“Stricken with agony caused by
separation from you, he has made inquiries
of you about your welfare. Greeting you, the
mighty-armed and celebrated Laksmana, the
enhancer of Sumitra’s joy, who is endowed
with extraordinary energy, has also made
inquiries of you about your welfare. Sri Rama’s
friend, the celebrated monkey, named
Sugriva, the ruler of the foremost of monkeys,
has also made inquiries of you about your
welfare, O godlike lady! Sri Rama, along
with Sugriva and Laksmana, always
remember you. (34—36)

दिष्ट्या जीवसि वैदेहि राक्षसीवशमागता।

नचिराद् द्रक्ष्यसे WH लक्ष्मणं च महारथम्॥ ३७॥

Ta वानरकोटीनां सुग्रीवं चामितौजसम्।

ae सुग्रीवसचिवो हनूमान् AA वानर:॥३८॥
“By good luck, O princess of the Videha

territory, you survive, though fallen into the
clutches of ogresses. Before long you will

157

see Sri Rama and the great chariot-warrior,
Laksmana, as also Sugriva of immeasurable
strength in the midst of crores of other
monkeys. | am a monkey named Hanuman,
a minister of Sugriva. (37-38)
कृत्वा Wt पदन्यासं रावणस्य दुरात्मन:॥ ३९॥

“Having leapt across the vast sea
dividing the mainland from Lanka, | penetrated
deep into the city of Lanka, setting my foot,
as it were, on the head of the evil-minded
Ravana. (39)

wat द्रष्टुमुपयातोऽहं समाश्रित्य पराक्रमम्।
नाहमस्मि तथा देवि यथा मामवगच्छसि।
विशङ्का त्यज्यतामेषा श्रद्धत्स्व वदतो मम॥४०॥

“Relying on my own prowess | have
come to see you. | am not what you suppose
me to be, O godlike lady ! Let this misgiving
be shaken off and, pray, believe my words
as | speak.” (40)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये सुन्दरकाण्डे चतुस्त्रिंश: सर्ग: ॥ ३४॥

Thus ends Canto Thirty-four of the Sundarakanda in the glorious Ramayana of Valmiki,
the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

Canto XXX V

Questioned by Sita, who was anxious to ascertain the bonafides of the
monkey, Hanuman, after cataloguing the marks on the person of
न Rama and Laksmana, narrates his own life-story from
his birth onwards including his role as a minister

of Sugriva, and ending with his seeing of Sita

Hearing the aforesaid story of Sr
Rama from the lips of Hanuman, the
foremost of monkeys, Sita, a princess of
the Videha territory, for her part spoke
the following reassuring words in sweet
accents: (1)

at तु रामकथां श्रुत्वा aedt वानरर्षभात्।
sara वचनं सान्त्वमिदं मधुरया गिरा॥१॥

क्व ते रामेण संसर्ग: Het जानासि लक्ष्मणम्।
वानराणां नराणां च कथमासीत् समागम:॥ २॥
“Where did your contact with Sri Rama
come about and how do you know Laksmana?
And how did a meeting take place between
monkeys and human beings? (2)
am wae चिह्नानि लक्ष्मणस्य च वानर।
तानि भूय: समाचक्ष्व न मां शोक: समाविशेत्॥ ३॥
