* AYODHYAKANDA +

extended by the sage, approached
Bharadwaja to take leave of him to proceed
to Citrakuta: so the tradition goes. (1)

तमृषि: पुरुषव्याघ्रं wer प्राञ्ञजलिमागतम्।
हुताग्निहोत्रो भरतं भरद्वाजोऽभ्यभाषत॥ २॥

Perceiving that tiger among men
arrived with folded hands and having
poured oblations into the sacred fire, Sage
Bharadwaja spoke to Bharata as follows:

(2)
कच्चिदत्र सुखा रात्रिस्तवास्मद्विषये गता।
समग्रस्ते जन: कच्चिदातिथ्ये शंस मेऽनघ॥ I

“Tell me, O sinless one, was your
night happily spent here in this hermitage of
ours? Were all your men fully gratified with
the hospitality shown to them?” (3)

तमुवाचाञ्जलिं pear भरतोऽभिप्रणम्य च।
आश्रमादुपनिष्क्रान्तमृषिमुत्तमतेजसम् usu

Folding his hands, and bowing down
low before him, Bharata replied as follows
to the sage, who was invested with the
highest glory, and had come out of the
hermitage to meet him: (4)

सुखोषितोऽस्मि भगवन् समग्रबलवाहन:।
बलवत्तर्पितश्चाहं बलवान् भगवंस्त्वया॥५॥
“| spent the night comfortably with my
entire army and all my animals. And | with
my army was fully sated by you, O venerable
Sir. (5)
अपेतक्लमसंतापा: सुभिक्षा: सुप्रतिश्रया:।
अपि प्रेष्यानुपादाय सर्वे स्म सुसुखोषिता:॥६॥
“Including even servants we have all

spent our time most happily, relieved of our
fatigue and discomfort, richly supplied with

621

food and drink and lodge in excellent houses.
(6)

आमन्त्रयेऽहं भगवन् कामं त्वामृषिसत्तम।
समीपं प्रस्थितं भ्रातुर्मैत्रेणेक्षस्व चक्षुषा॥७॥
“| fervently entreat you, O venerable
Sir: pray, regard me, set out towards the

presence of my elder brother, with a benign
look, O jewel among sages ! (7)

आश्रमं तस्य ada धार्मिकस्य महात्मन:।
आचक्ष्व कतमो मार्ग: कियानिति च we मे॥ ८॥

“Tell me the location of the hermitage
of that pious and high-souled prince, O
knower of what is right, and also let me
know which route leads to it and how long
it is.” (8)
इति पृष्टस्तुं भरतं भ्रातुर्दर्शनलालसम्।
प्रत्युवाच महातेजा भरद्वाजो महातपा:॥९॥

Questioned thus, Bharadwaja, for his
part, who is endowed with exceptional glory
and noted for his great asceticism, replied
as follows to Bharata, who was eager to
secure the blessed sight of his elder brother :

(9)

“At a distance of two and a half Yojanas*
or twenty miles from here in the midst of a
forest uninhabited by men other than ascetics,
there stands a well-known mountain named
Citrakuta, abounding in lovely caves and
groves. (10)

उत्तरं पार्श्वमासाद्य तस्य मन्दाकिनी नदी।
पुष्पितद्रुमसंछन्ना रम्यपुष्पितकानना॥ ११ ॥

“Touching its northern side flows the

* Jt has already been pointed out in a footnote below the translation of II. liv. 28 on p. 441 of
Valmiki-Ramayana Number-III that by trebling the figure mentioned in the text according to the rules
governing the compound Ekasesa Dwandva or according to what is known as the Kapifjaladhikarana-
Nyaya in the Purva-Mimarmsa-Philosophy the learned author of the commentary known by the name of
“Ramayana-Siromani” takes the figure of two and half Yojanas or ten Kosas to mean thirty Kosas or sixty
miles, and making allowance for the difference in the standards of measurement obtaining in those days
the distance of Citrakuta from Prayaga works out to be approximately the same as it is now calculated, to

be, viz., eighty miles.
