1026

‘O mother, we shall enter the fire
together, may the King enjoy himself with
the daughter of the son of Diti for many
nights. (13)

ae वा सहनीयं a मामनुज्ञातुमर्हसि।

क्षम त्वं न क्षमिष्येऽहं मरिष्यामि न संशय:॥ १४॥
‘If, however, you consider it as

endurable by you, allow me to depart. You

may bear up with it, but | cannot bear. | shall

die without hesitation.’ (14)

पुत्रस्य भाषितं श्रुत्वा परमार्तस्य रोदत:।
देवयानी तु संक्रुद्धा सस्मार पितरं तदा॥ eal
Hearing the words of her son, who

was full in tears due to great agony, Devayani
in rage remembered her Father. (15)

Stet «= तदभिज्ञाय दुहितुर्भार्गवस्तदा।
आगतस्त्वरितं at देवयानी स्म यत्र सा॥१६॥

Knowing the feelings of his daughter, the
son of Bhrgu (Acarya Sukra) came in haste
there where Devayani was staying. (16)

दृष्टवा चाप्रकृतिस्थां तामप्रहष्टामचेतनाम्।
पिता दुहितरं वाक्यं किमेतदिति चाब्रवीत्॥ १७॥
Finding Devayani not in her normal
state and almost unconscious with pain
and unhappy, the father (Bhargava) Sukra
enquired the daughter as to what had caused
her such grief. (17)
पृच्छन्तमसकृत् तं a भार्गवं दीप्ततेजसम्।
देवयानी तु संक्रुद्धा पितरं वाक्यमब्रवीत्॥ १८॥
अहमग्निं विषं तीक्ष्णमपो वा मुनिसत्तम।
भक्षयिष्ये प्रवेक्ष्ये वा न तु शक्ष्यामि जीवितुम्॥ १९॥
Devayani in anger said thus to her
father, the son of Bhrgu who was mentally
roused and had asked her several times the
cause of her anger. ‘O Best among the
ascetics, | shall indeed enter fire or water or
take strong poison. It is indeed not possible
for me to live. (18-19)

« VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

न मां त्वमवजानीषे दु:खितामवमानिताम्।
वृक्षस्यावज्ञया ब्रह्मंश्छिद्यनते व्रृक्षजीविन:॥ २०॥

‘You do not know how | am pained and
insulted, O Brahmana. Having no tender
feelings for the tree, its leaves and flowers
are cut and destroyed. (20)

अवज्ञया च wate: परिभूय च भार्गव।
मय्यवज्ञां प्रयुङ्क्ते हि न च मां ag मन्यते॥ २१॥
‘The Rsi among Kings, causing insult
to me, ignores me and does not look upon
me as one worthy of consideration.’ (21)

तस्यास्तद् वचनं श्रुत्वा कोपेनाभिपरीव्रत:।

व्याहर्तुमुपचक्राम भार्गवो नहुषात्मजम्॥ २२॥
Hearing these words of Devayani,

before himself, the son of Bhrgu was highly

enraged and he uttered curse to the son of
Nahusa: (22)
यस्मान्मामवजानीषे नाहुष त्वं दुरात्मवान्।
वयसा जरया जीर्ण: शैथिल्यमुपयास्यसि॥ २३॥
‘O son of Nahusa, O ignoble one, as
you insult me, so you shall lose all your
organ power, and become weakened by old
age.’ (23)
एवमुक्त्वा दुहितरं समाश्वास्य A भार्गव:।
पुनर्जगाम ब्रह्मर्षिर्भवनं स्वं महायशा:॥२४॥
Thus having uttered the curse and
consoled his daughter, that son of Bhrgu,
the Brahmana Rsi, the famous one, departed
to his abode. (24)

aat ampere = daarita
दत्त्वा च शापं नहुषात्मजाय॥ २५॥

The best among the twice-born, thus
said and consoled Devayani, he with sunlike
lustre, repaired pronouncing curse on Yayati,
the son of Nahusa. (25)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये उत्तरकाण्डेऽष्टपञ्चाश: सर्ग: ॥ ५८ ॥

Thus ends Canto Fifty-eight in the Uttarakanda of the glorious Ramayana of Valmiki,
the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

