* ARANYAKANDA «

निराशस्तु तया नद्या सीताया दर्शने qa: |
sara राम: सौमित्रिं सीतादर्शनकर्शित:॥१०॥
Disappointed by that river with regard
to the sight of Sita, Sri Rama for his
part, who looked emaciated due to the
disappearance of Sita, spoke as follows to
Laksmana (son of Sumitra) : (10)
wet गोदावरी dha किंचिन्न प्रतिभाषते।
किं नु लक्ष्मण वक्ष्यामि समेत्य जनकं वच:॥ ११॥
मातरं चैव वैदेह्या विना तामहमप्रियम्।
या मे wear at वन्येन vlad: eeu
ad व्यपानयच्छोकं वैदेही क्व नु सा गता।
ज्ञातिवर्गविहीनस्य वैदेहीमप्यपश्यत: 1 १३॥
wa cat भविष्यन्ति रात्रयो मम जाग्रत:।
मन्दाकिनीं जनस्थानमिमं प्रस्रवणं गिरिम्॥ १४॥
सर्वाण्यनुचरिष्यामि यदि सीता हि लभ्यते।
Ut महामृगा ae मामीक्षन्ते पुन: Tu eal
वक्तुकामा इह fe मे इड्नितान्युपलक्षये।
तांस्तु दृष्टवा नरव्याघ्रो Wea: प्रत्युवाच TI Ve Il
aa सीतेति निरीक्षन् a बाष्पसंरुद्धया गिरा।
एवमुक्ता नरेन्द्रेण A मृगा: सहसोत्थिता:॥ Vit
दक्षिणाभिमुखा: सर्वे दर्शयन्तो नभ:स्थलम्।
मैथिली ह्रियमाणा सा fast यामभ्यपद्यत॥ १८॥
तेन मार्गेण गच्छन्तो निरीक्षन्ते नराधिपम्।
येन ant च भूमिं च निरीक्षन्ते स्म ते ET: ee tl
पुनर्नदन्तो गच्छन्ति लक्ष्मणेनोपलक्षिता:।
तेषां वचनसर्वस्वं लक्षयामास चेङ्गितम्॥२०॥
“This Godavari does not (choose to)
make any reply to me, O gentle brother ! |
wonder how | shall be able to break, O
Laksmana, the unpalatable news of Sita’s
death to King Janaka (my father in-law) on
meeting him as well as the mother of Sita
(a Princess of the Videha kingdom), without
Sita? | wonder where has that princess of
the Videha territory gone, who beguiled all
my grief, deprived as | was of sovereignty
and was living in the forest on the produce
of the forest. | presume nights will be
unusually long for me as | shall have to
keep awake (during them) due to my not

893

being able to see Sita (a princess of the
Videha kingdom) apart from the fact that
| was already bereft of all my kinsfolk.
Indeed, | shall attend (as a servant) on
the Mandakini, a river of that name in
Janasthana, on the tract known by the
name of Janasthana as well as on this
Prasravana hill if Sita is found in any of
these places. Actually desirous of speaking
to me, these large deer, O heroic Laksmana,
look at me again and again on this spot. |
observe indications to this effect in their
glances.” Perceiving them eager to speak,
Sri Rama (a scion of Raghu), a tiger among
men, for his part, said to them, they say, in
a voice choked with tears, “Where is Sita?”
and kept looking intently with a view to
reading their mind through their eyes.
Questioned thus by Sri Rama (a ruler of
men), the aforesaid deer sprang on their
feet all of a sudden and, pointing towards
the vault of heaven with their eyes, all
turned their heads towards the south thereby
indicating that the princess had been borne
away in a southerly direction by air. Moving
in the direction in which the aforesaid Sita
(a princess of Mithila) had left while being
carried away by Ravana, they continued to
look at Sri Rama (the suzerain lord of men).
Since they cast their eyes towards the
aerial route as also towards the ground,
and then moved along lowing, they were
correctly understood by Laksmana. The latter
also understood their gesture, which
conveyed everything that words could
express. (11—20)

उवाच लक्ष्मणो धीमान् ज्येष्ठं भ्रातरमार्तवत्।
क्व सीतेति त्वया पृष्टा यथेमे सहसोत्थिता:॥ २१॥
दर्शयन्ति क्षितिं चैव दक्षिणां च fest om: |
साधु गच्छावहे देव दिशमेतां च नैर्ऋतीम्॥ २२॥

Like one distressed, the wise Laksmana
submitted to his eldest brother, Sri Rama,
as follows: “Inasmuch as, having sprung
on their feet all at once when accosted by
you in the words: ‘Where is Sita?’ These
