* AYODHYAKANDA +

सा राज्यफलमप्राप्य विधवा शोककर्शिता।
पतिष्यति महाघोरे नरके wet मम॥७॥

“Failing to gain the prize in the shape
of sovereignty, my widowed mother,
emaciated as she is with grief, will descend
into a most frightful hell. (7)

तस्य A दासभूतस्य wad कर्तुमर्हसि।
अभिषिञ्जस्व चाद्यैव राज्येन मघवानिव॥८॥

“Be pleased to bestow this favour on
me, your notorious slave, and have yourself
consecrated like Indra, the ruler of gods, for
the kingship of Ayodhya. (8)
इमा: प्रकृतय: at विधवा मातरश्च या:।
त्वत्सकाशमनुप्राप्ता प्रसादं कर्तुमर्हसि॥९॥

“You ought to be gracious to these
people as well as to my widowed mothers,

who have sought your presence to propitiate
you. (9)

aaa युक्तश्च युक्तं चात्मनि मानद।
राज्यं प्राप्नुहि धर्मेण सकामान् सुहृद: HEI Vo ll
“You are fitted for sovereignty by virtue
of primogeniture and as such assume you
the sovereignty, which is your due,
conformably with the principles of
righteousness and thereby enable your
relations and friends to realize their ambition
of seeing you installed on the throne of
Ayodhya, O respecter of others ! (10)

भवत्वविधवा भूमि: समग्रा पतिना त्वया।
vist विमलेनेव शारदी wet यथा॥११॥

“With you as its lord, let the entire
globe cease to be without a master even as
and autumnal night ceases to be dismal
when united with a bright moon. (11)

एभिश्च सचिवै: सार्धं शिरसा याचितो मया।
भ्रातु: शिष्यस्य दासस्य प्रसादं कर्तुमर्हसि॥ १२॥

“Solicited by me with bent head in
conjunction with these ministers, be pleased
to show grace to this servant, who is at the
same time your younger brother and pupil.

(12)

653

तदिदं wad पित्र्यं ad सचिवमण्डलम्।
पूजितं पुरुषव्याघ्र नातिक्रमितुमर्हसि॥ १३॥
“You ought not to disregard the
solicitation of this entire body of your father’s
ministers, who are not only well-known but
have continued through many past
generations and are adored by you, O tiger
among men !” (13)

`एवमुक्त्वा महाबाहु: सबाष्प: कैकयीसुत:।
रामस्य शिरसा पादौ जग्राह भरत: पुन:॥१४॥
Saying so, full of tears, the mighty
armed Bharata, son of Kaikeyi, clasped the
feet of Sri Rama once more, touching them
with his head. (14)
तं मत्तमिव mag नि:श्चसन्तं पुन: पुन:।
भ्रातरं भरतं राम: परिष्वज्येदमब्रवीत्॥१५॥
Embracing his younger brother, Bharata,
who was sighing again and again like an
elephant in rut, Sri Rama spoke to him as
follows : (15)

eam: सत्त्वसम्पन्नस्तेजस्वी चरितव्रत:।
Weoed: mat पापमाचरेन्मद्विधो जन:॥१६॥

“How can a man of noble descent, rich
in Sattva goodness and dignified, and who
has observed sacred vows like myself,
perpetrate a sinful act for the sake of
sovereignty? (16)

न दोषं त्वयि पश्यामि सूक्ष्ममप्यरिसूदन।
न चापि जननीं बाल्यात् त्वं विगर्हितुमर्हसि॥ १७॥

“| do not discover even a minute fault in
you, O destroyer of foes! Nor should you
reproach your mother through ignorance. (17)

कामकारो महाप्राज्ञ WANT सर्वदानघ।
उपपन्नेषु दारेषु पुत्रेषु च विधीयते॥१८॥

“Freedom of action on the part of elders
with reference to their esteemed wife and
progeny is always permitted by the
scriptures, O sinless and highly intelligent
brother. (18)
वयमस्य यथा लोके संख्याता: सौम्य साधुभि: ।
भार्या: पुत्राश्च शिष्याश्च त्वमपि ज्ञातुमर्हसि॥ १९॥
