* AYODHYAKANDA +

Seeing on the way thousands of
minerals of every description, which were
charming too, Bharata, accompanied by his
army, now proceeded along the (northern)
side of the aforesaid mountain. (4)

अदूराच्चित्रकूटस्य ददर्श भरतस्तदा।
आश्रमं यत्र स मुनिर्भरद्वाज: कृतालय:॥७५॥
Not far from Citrakuta. Bharata now
beheld the hermitage in which Sage
Bharadwaja had taken up his abode.* (5)

a तमाश्रममागम्य भरद्वाजस्य वीर्यवान्।
अवतीर्य रथात् Wel ववन्दे कुलनन्दन:॥६॥
Reaching the said hermitage of
Bharadwaja and alighting from his chariot,
the valiant Bharata, the delight of his race,
saluted the sage’s feet. (6)

ततो हृष्टो भरद्वाजो भरतं वाक्यमब्रवीत्।
अपि कृत्यं कृतं तात रामेण च समागतम्॥७॥
Full of delight, Bharadwaja thereupon
spoke to Bharata as follows : “Did you meet
Sri Rama, my darling, and has your purpose
been accomplished?” (7)

Wan: स q ad भरद्वाजेन धीमता।
प्रत्युवाच भरद्वाजं भरतो धर्मवत्सल:॥८॥

Questioned thus by the’ wise
Bharadwaja, the celebrated Bharata for
his part, who was lovingly devoted to
righteousness, then replied to Bharadwaja
as follows : (8)

स याच्यमानो गुरुणा मया च दृढविक्रम:।
waa: परमप्रीतो वसिष्ठं वाक्यमब्रवीत्॥९॥

“Supremely delighted on being solicited
by my preceptor and myself to return to
Ayodhya, the celebrated Sri Rama, a
scion of Raghu, of unrelenting prowess

693

replied to Vasistha as follows :
faq: प्रतिज्ञां तामेव पालयिष्यामि aad: |
चतुर्दश fe वर्षाणि या प्रतिज्ञा पितुर्मम॥ eon

८ shall without doubt unequivocally
implement that pledge of my father given to
my mother Kaikeyi, which was to the effect
that | should actually remain in exile for
fourteen years.’ (10)

एवमुक्तो महाप्राज्ञो वसिष्ठ: प्रत्युवाच ह।
वाक्यज्ञो वाक्यकुशलं Wat वचनं महत्॥११॥
“Spoken to as aforesaid, the highly
enlightened Vasistha, who knows how to
speak, actually addressed the following
momentous words to Sri Rama, a scion
of Raghu, who is an adept in expression :

(11)

Ud Woes Wee: wen हेमभूषिते।
अयोध्यायां महाप्राज्ञ योगक्षेमकरो भव॥१२॥

“Full of great delight, please gift these
wooden sandals decked with gold to Bharata.
Existing in the form of these sandals, supply
the needs of the people in Ayodhya and
safeguard their interests, O highly intelligent
prince !’ (12)

एवमुक्तो वसिष्ठेन wea: प्राङ्मुख: स्थित:।
पादुके हेमविकृते मम राज्याय a adres

“Requested in these words by Vasistha,
Sri Rama (a scion of Raghu) stood on the
sandals facing the east and allowed me to
take the aforesaid pair of wooden sandals,
adorned with gold, for carrying on the rule
(on his behalf). (13)

निव्रत्तोऽहमनुज्ञातो रामेण सुमहात्मना।
अयोध्यामेव गच्छामि गृहीत्वा पादुके BATU १४॥

(9)

* From the above verse it transpires that there existed in those times a hermitage of Sage Bharadwaja
on the southern bank of the Yamuna as well, not far away from Citrakuta. The hermitage existing between
the Ganga and Yamuna rivers, where Sri Rama and his party halted and where Bharata and his entourage
were sumptuously entertained appears to be different from that referred to here. The fact of Bharata and his
followers having crossed the Yamuna after taking leave of Bharadwaja (mentioned in verse 21 below) seems
to warrant this conclusion. The sage must in all probability have shifted since to the former place in order
to keep himself in touch with what was going on at Citrakuta.
