* SUNDARAKANDA +

श्रान्तो दूरादनुप्राप्तो भक्षयस्व स्वकं मधु।
युवराजस्त्वमीशश्च वनस्यास्य महाबल॥७॥

“Come from afar and exhausted as
you are, partake of the honey, which is
yours in that you are the Crown prince and
as such the owner of this wood, O prince !
endowed with extraordinary might ! (7)

tieata oe कृतो रोषस्तद् भवान् क्षन्तुमर्हति।
यथैव fe पिता तेऽभूत् पूर्वं हरिगणेश्वर:॥८॥
aa त्वमपि सुग्रीवो नान्यस्तु हरिसत्तम।
आख्यातं fe मया गत्वा पितृव्यस्य तवानघ॥ ९॥
इहोपयानं सर्वेषामेतेषां वनचारिणाम्।
भवदागमनं श्रुत्वा सहैभिर्वनचारिभि:॥ १०॥
Weel न तु रुष्टोऽसौ वनं श्रुत्वा प्रधर्षितम्।
Geet मां पितृव्यस्ते सुग्रीवो वानरेश्वर:॥११॥
शीघ्रं प्रेषय सर्वांस्तानिति होवाच पार्थिव:।
Te दधिमुखस्यैतद् वचनं श्लक्ष्णमङ्गद:॥ १२॥
अब्रवीत् तान् हरिश्रेष्ठो वाक्यं वाक्यविशारद: |
शङ्के श्रुतोऽयं Gard रामेण हरियूथपा:॥१३॥

“You ought to pardon us for the wrath
which was vented by us earlier due to
foolishness. Sugriva is now the lord of
monkey hordes precisely in the same way
as your father, Vali, formerly was. You too
are the same and none else, O jewel among
monkeys! The arrival here of all these
monkeys including yourself was actually
reported to your uncle by me after going
there, O sinless one ! He felt greatly rejoiced
to hear of your arrival alongwith all these
monkeys. He did not get angry even on
hearing of the grove having been devastated.
Highly pleased, your uncle, King Sugriva,
the lord of monkeys, commanded me as
follows : “Please send them all without delay.”
Hearing the aforesaid refined submission
of Dadhimukha, Angada, the foremost of
monkeys, who was a master of expression,
spoke to them as follows: “I presume this
news of our arrival has been heard by
Sri Rama, O leaders of monkey hordes !

(8—13)

279

अयं च हर्षादाख्याति तेन जानामि हेतुना।
ad क्षमं Ae न: स्थातुं Ha कार्ये परंतपा:॥ १४॥
“| conclude this also from the fact that
this monkey, Dadhimukha, is narrating the
event joyfully. Hence it does not behove us
to tarry here any longer now that our work
has been accomplished, O tormentors of
foes ! (14)
पीत्वा मधु यथाकामं विक्रान्ता वनचारिण:।
fe शेषं गमनं तत्र सुग्रीवो यत्र वानर:॥१५॥
“You, valiant monkeys, have drunk
honey to your heart’s content. Nothing remains
for you to do. It is, therefore, advisable for
us to proceed to Kiskindha where the monkey
king Sugriva is. (15)

wa यथा at वक्ष्यन्ति समेत्य हरिपुङ्खवा:।
तथास्मि कर्ता कर्तव्ये भवद्भि: परवानहम्॥ १६॥

“I shall act as you all will conjointly ask
me, O bulls among monkeys; for | depend
on you in the matter of deciding what should
be done by me. (16)

नाज्ञापयितुमीशोऽहं युवराजोऽस्मि यद्यपि।
अयुक्तं कृतकर्माणो यूयं धर्षयितुं बलात्॥१७॥
“Even though | am the Crown prince, |
am not competent to issue orders to you.
Since you have performed your duty, it will
be unjustified on my part to play the lord
over you by force.” (17)

ब्रुवतश्चाङ्गदस्यैवं श्रुत्वा वचनमुत्तमम्।
प्रहृष्टमनसो वाक्यमिदमूचुर्वनौकस: ।। १८ ॥
Greatly delighted at heart to hear the
aforesaid excellent speech of Angada, even
while he was speaking, the monkeys
submitted as follows : (18)

Ue वक्ष्यति को राजन् WY: सन् वानरर्षभ।
ऐश्वर्यमदमत्तो fe सर्वोऽहमिति मन्यते॥१९॥

“Who, O king, while being a master,
would speak in this strain, O jewel among
monkeys? Drunk with the pride of power,
everyone as a rule is self-conceited. (19)
