+ UTTARAKANDA +

Sarana, however, began to exterminate the
army of Arjuna (son of Krtavirya) with their
might. (36)

अर्जुनाय तु तत्कर्म रावणस्य समन्त्रिण:।
क्रीडमानाय कथितं पुरुषैर्भयविह्वलै:॥ ३७॥

The aforesaid doing of Ravana
accompanied by his ministers was, however,
reported to the sporting Arjuna by his men,
who were beside themselves through fear.

(37)

श्रुत्वा न भेतव्यमिति स्त्रीजनं स तदार्जुन:।
उत्ततार जलात् ASN, गङ्गातोयादिवाञ्जन:॥ ३८॥

Saying to the womenfolk, “You need
not be afraid,” on hearing the report, the
celebrated Arjuna then emerged from the
waters of the Narmada even as Afjana
(one of the elephants guarding the quarters)
would emerge from waters of the Ganga.

(38)
क्रोधदूषितनेत्रस्तुं स तदार्जुनपावक:।
प्रजज्वाल महाघोरो युगान्त Fa पावक:॥ ३९॥

His eyes coloured through anger, the

fiery Arjuna flared up like the most dreadful
fire at the end of a world-cycle. (39)

स तूर्णतरमादाय वरहेमाङ्गदो गदाम्।
अभिदुद्राव रक्षांसि तमांसीव दिवाकर:॥४०॥
Seizing hold with all speed of a mace,
Arjuna, who was adorned with a pair of
excellent golden armlets, drove away the
ogres even as the sun would dispel darkness.
(40)

बाहुविक्षेपकरणां समुद्यम्य महागदाम्।
गारुडं वेगमास्थाय आपपातैव सोऽर्जुन:॥४१॥

Holding up his huge mace, which could
be spun with one’s arms, and assuming the
speed of Garuda (the king of birds), the
celebrated Arjuna immediately rushed on
the ogres. (41)

तस्य ant समारुद्भ्य विन्ध्योऽर्कस्येव पर्वत: |
स्थितो विन्ध्य इवाकम्प्य: प्रहस्तो मुसलायुध: ॥ ४२॥
Barring his path, even as the Vindhya

959

mountain intercepted the orbit of the sun of
yore, Prahasta stood unshakable like the
Vindhya, pestle in hand. (42)
प्रहस्त: प्रेषयन् Heal ररास च यथान्तक:॥४३॥

Inflated with arrogance and provoked
to anger, Prahasta thereupon hurled the
dreadful copper-bound pestle at Arjuna and
roared like Death. (43)

तस्याग्रे मुसलस्याग्निरशोकापीडसंनिभ:।
प्रहस्तकरमुक्तस्य बभूव प्रदहन्निव॥४४॥
At the tip of the pestle shot by the hand
of Prahasta appeared a fire resembling the
point of an Asoka flower, which seemed to
consume its Target. (44)
आधावमानं मुसलं कार्तवीर्यस्तदार्जुन:।
निपुणं वञ्चयामास गदया गतविक्लव:॥४५॥
Not the least perplexed, Arjuna, son of
Krtavirya, at that time completely confronted
the pestle, which was coming with great
speed, by means of his mace. (45)

ततस्तमभिदुद्राव सगदो हैहयाधिप:।
भ्रामयाणो गदां Wet पञ्चबाहुशतोच्छ्वयाम्॥४६॥

Whirling his massive mace, which was
thrown with five hundred arms, the king of
the Haihayas, who was still armed with a
mace, thereupon rushed on Prahasta. (46)

ततो हतोऽतिवेगेन weet Weal तदा।
निपपात स्थित: viet वज्रिवज्रहतो यथा॥४७॥

Struck with great vehemence by the
mace at that time, Prahasta, who stood
erect, thereupon fell prostrate like a hill struck
by the thunderbolt of Indra, the wielder of
the thunderbolt. (47)

West पतितं gear मारीचशुकसारणा:।
समहोदरधूम्राक्षा अपसृष्टा रणाजिरात्॥४८॥

Seeing Prahasta fallen, Marica, Suka
and Sarana alongwith Mahodara and
Dhumraksa slipped away from the field of
battle. (48)
