274

all the misconduct of Angada. Full of
indignation he will cause the offending
monkeys to be put to death on hearing our
complaint. (30)

se मधुवनं Pad सुग्रीवस्य महात्मन:।
पितृपैतामहं feet देवैरपि दुरासदम्॥३१॥

“For, this wonderful Madhuvana, which
has been inherited by him from his forefathers
and is difficult to approach even for gods, is
dear to the high-souled Sugriva. (31)

स वानरानिमान् सर्वान् मधुलुब्धान् गतायुष:।
चातयिष्यति दण्डेन सुग्रीव: ससुहृज्जनान्॥ ३२॥
“The celebrated Sugriva will cause to
be killed by way of punishment all these
monkeys—avid for honey, whose sands of
life have already run out—alongwith their
near and dear ones. (32)

वध्या ह्येते दुरात्मानो नृपाज्ञापरिपन्थिन:।
अमर्षप्रभवो we: सफलो A भविष्यति॥ ३३॥
“These evil-minded monkeys, deserve

to be killed because they have flouted the
royal command. Born of indignation, my

wrath will bear fruit only then.” (33)
एवमुक्त्वा दधिमुखो वनपालान् महाबल:।
जगाम सहसोत्पत्य वनपालै: समन्वित:॥ ३४॥

Having spoken as aforesaid to the
guards of the grove, and springing up all at

« VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

once, Dadhimukha, who was endowed with
extraordinary might, departed for Kiskindha,
duly accompanied by the guards of the
grove. (34)

निमेषान्तरमात्रेण स हि Wal वनालय:।
सहस्रांशुसुतो धीमान् सुग्रीवो यत्र वानर:॥ ३५॥

In the mere twinkling of an eye the
aforesaid monkey actually reached the place
where the sagacious monkey, Sugriva, son
of the sun god, was. (35)

TH च लक्ष्मणं चैव दृष्ट्वा सुग्रीवमेव च।
समप्रतिष्ठां जगतीमाकाशान्निपपात ह॥ BK UI
Beholding from a distance Sri Rama
and Laksmana too, as well as Sugriva, he
descended to a level ground from the
airspace: so the tradition goes. (36)

a निपत्य महावीर: सर्वैस्तै: परिवारित:।
हरिर्दधिमुख: पालै: पालानां परमेश्वर:॥ ३७॥
a दीनवदनो भूत्वा कृत्वा शिरसि चाञ्जलिम्।
सुग्रीवस्याशु तौ qeat ail प्रत्यपीडयत्॥ ३८॥

Coming down, surrounded by all the
aforesaid guards, nay, wearing a miserable
aspect and placing his joined palms over
his head, that monkey, Dadhimukha, the
paramount leader of those guards, who was
a great hero, forthwith pressed the well-
known feet of Sugriva with his head. (37-38)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये
सुन्दरकाण्डे द्विषष्टितम: सर्ग: ॥ ६२ Il
Thus ends Canto Sixty-two of the Sundarakanda in the glorious Ramayana of Valmiki,
the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

