+ UTTARAKANDA +

Sri Rama paid obeisance to the noble
sage, effulgent with the Tapa of austerity
and having received the best hospitality,
took his seat. (24)

तमुवाच महातेजा: कुम्भयोनिर्महातपा:।
स्वागतं ते arses दिष्ट्या प्राप्तोऽसि राघव॥ २५॥

Agastya, the sage of great penances,
said to Sri Rama: ‘Welcome to you, best
among men, O descendant of Raghu, it is my
fortune that you have come. (25)

त्वं मे बहुमतो राम गुणैर्बहुभिरुत्तमै:।
stata: पूजनीयश्च मम राजन् हृदि स्थित:॥ २६॥

“By your excellent virtues you are worthy
of adoration as my honoured guest, O king,
you always dwell in my heart. (26)

ga fe कथयन्ति त्वामागतं शूद्रघातिनम्।
ब्राह्मणस्य तु धर्मेण त्वया जीवापित: सुत:॥ २७॥
“The gods say that You have come
here after killing the Sudra and by your
righteous act, (of killing the Sudra) You
have thus restored to life the son of the
Brahmana. (27)
sad चेह Ge सकाशे मम weal
प्रभाते पुष्पकेण त्वं गन्तासि पुरमेव हि॥ २८॥
त्वं fe नारायण: श्रीमांस्त्वयि ud प्रतिष्ठितम्।
त्वं WY: सर्वदेवानां पुरुषस्त्वं सनातन:॥२९॥
“Stay one night with me, O descendant
of Raghu, You are Narayana (the abode of
all souls), and all is established in You. You
are lord of all the gods, the eternal Purusa,
You may, indeed, go back to your city at
dawn. (28-29)
feet दिव्येन ager दीप्यमानं स्वतेजसा॥ 30
“This divine ornament glowing with its
own divine lusture, O gracious one, has been
made by ViSvakarma (the divine artisan). (30)

प्रतिगृह्णीष्व काकुत्स्थ मत्प्रियं pe राघव।
ama fe पुनर्दाने सुमहत् फलमुच्यते॥३१॥

“Please accept this, O scion of

1069

Kakutstha, for my pleasure, a gift when
offered again constitutes great merit. (31)
भरणे fe भवाञ्शक्त: फलानां महतामपि।
त्वं fe शक्तस्तारयितुं सेन्द्रानपि दिवौकस:॥ ३२॥
तस्मात् प्रदास्ये विधिवत् तत् प्रतीच्छ नराधिप।
अथोवाच महात्मानमिक्र्वाकूणां महारथ:॥ ३३॥
wa मतिमतां श्रेष्ठ: क्षत्रधर्ममनुस्मरन्।
प्रतिग्रहोऽयं भगवन् ब्राह्मणस्याविगर्हित:॥ ३४॥

“You are worthy of wearing this
ornament. You indeed are capable of giving
precious gifts, and also protecting the gods
together with Indra. Therefore, duly | give
this to you, please accept it.”

The wisest among the wise, the great
charioteer of Iksvaku dynasty, Sri Rama
while aware of his Ksatriya duties, asked
the Mahatma: “Sir, accepting donation is not
prohibited only for Brahmanas. (32—34)
क्षत्रियेण कथं faa प्रतिग्राह्यं भवेत् तत:।
प्रतिग्रहो fe विप्रेन्द्र क्षत्रियाणां सुगर्हित:॥ ३५॥
ब्राह्मणेन विशेषेण ad dq वक्तुमर्हसि।
Wage रामेण प्रत्युवाच महानृषि: ।। ३६॥

“O best among the Brahmanas, it is
strictly prohibited for the Ksatriya to accept
any charitable gift. It is more so in case a
Brahmana is the donor. Kindly explain.”
Having been thus enquired by Sri Rama,
the great sage Agastya said in reply:

(35-36)
आसन् कृतयुगे WH ब्रह्मभूते पुरायुगे।
अपार्थिवा: प्रजा: सर्वा: सुराणां तु शतक्रतु:॥ ३७॥

“O Sri Rama! In the times during the
Satyayuga, an age of Brahma, all the
subjects were without a king. Later on Indra
was declared as king of gods. (37)

ता: Wat देवदेवेशं राजार्थं समुपाद्रवन्।
सुराणां स्थापितो राजा त्वया देव शतक्रतु: Ul ३८ ॥
प्रयच्छास्मासु लोकेश पार्थिवं नरपुङ्खवम्।
यस्मै पूजां प्रयुञ्जाना धूतपापाश्चरेमहि॥ ३९॥

Then people went to god Brahma in
order to have a king and prayed to him, ‘O
