# YUDDHAKANDA +

Car-warriors of a superior order* also
rushed apace in the wake of Ravana (the
ten-headed monster) in chariots as well as
on excellent elephants in rut as also on (the
back of) horses sportively following in different
gaits. (7)
गदापरिघहस्ताश्च शक्तितोमरपाणय: |
परश्वधधराश्चान्ये तथान्ये शूलपाणय:।
ततस्तूर्यसहस्राणां संजज्ञे नि:स्वनो महान्॥८॥

Some had maces and iron bars in their
hands, while others followed with javelins
and iron clubs. Nay, still others carried
axes, while some had darts in their hands.
Then broke forth a loud blare of thousands
of trumpets. (8)
तुमुल: शङ्खशब्दश्च सभां गच्छति रावणे।

a नेमिघोषेण महान् सहसाभिनिनादयन्॥९॥
राजमार्गं श्रिया जुष्टं प्रतिपेदे महारथ:।
विमलं चातपत्रं च प्रगृहीतमशोभत॥१०॥
पाण्डुरं राक्षसेन्द्रस्य पूर्णस्ताराधिपो यथा।
हेममञ्जरिगर्भे च शुद्धस्फटिकविग्रहे॥११॥
चामरव्यजने तस्य wid: सव्यदक्षिणे।
a कृताञ्जलय: सर्वे रथस्थं पृथिवीस्थिता:॥ १२॥
राक्षसा राक्षसश्रेष्ठं शिरोभिस्तं ववन्दिरे।
Tara: स्तूयमान: सञ्जयाशीर्भिररिंदम:॥ १३॥
आससाद महातेजा: सभां विरचितां तदा।
सुवर्णरजतास्तीर्णां विशुद्धस्फटिकान्तराम्॥ १४॥
विराजमानो वपुषा रुक्मपट्टोत्तरच्छदाम्।
at पिशाचशतै: षड्भिरभिगुप्तां सदाप्रभाम्॥ १५॥
प्रविवेश महातेजा: सुकृतां विश्वकर्मणा।
तस्यां तु वैदूर्यमयं प्रियकाजिनसंवृतम्॥१६॥
महत्सोपाश्रयं भेजे रावण: परमासनम्।
तत:र शशासेश्वरवद्दूताँल्लघुपराक्रमान्॥१७॥

As Ravana drove to the assembly hall,

a tumultuous blast of conches also followed.

327

That eminent and great car-warrior presently
reached the splendid highway, causing it to
echo with the rattling of the felloes of his
chariot. Nay, held over the head of Ravana
(the ruler of ogres), a spotless white canopy
shone like the full moon (lit., the suzerain
lord of stars). On his left and right shone a
pair of whisks with handles of pure crystal
and having bunches of golden threads in
the middle. Standing on the ground (on the
way) with joined palms, all the aforesaid
ogres saluted Ravana, the foremost of ogres,
with their heads bent low. Being hailed by
ogres by means of shouts of victory and
benedictions, Ravana (the scourge of his
foes), who was endowed with extraordinary
energy, presently reached the assembly
hall constructed by Viswakarma (the architect
of gods). With his body shining brightly,
Ravana, who was7~ endowed _ with
extraordinary splendour, made his solemn
entry into that assembly hall, which was
paved with gold and silver, whose interior
was wrought in pure crystal, whose floor
was carpeted with silk, interwoven with
threads of gold, and which was guarded on
all sides by six hundred fiends, was full of
perennial splendour and had been beautifully
constructed by ViSwakarma. Ravana _ for
his part occupied in that hall a big and
excellent throne made of cat’s-eye, nay,
covered with the skin of Priyakas (a species
of deer) and provided with cushions, and
forthwith authoritatively commanded fleet-
footed messengers as follows: (9—17)

समानयत मे क्षिप्रमिहैतान् राक्षसानिति।
कृत्यमस्ति महज्जाने कर्तव्यमिति शत्रुभि: ।। १८॥

“Duly bring hither with all speed the
well-known ogres to my presence. | know

* An Atiratha has been defined thus:
अमितान् योधयेद् यस्तु सम्प्रोक्तोऽतिरथस्तु स:।

“He who fights numberless adversaries is spoken of as an Atiratha.”
