# YUDDHAKANDA +

of the ruthless ogre made in consultation
with his ministers. (24)

तदेषा सुस्थिरा बुद्धिर्मृत्युलोभादुपस्थिता।
भयान्न शक्तस्त्वां मोक्तुमनिरस्त: स संयुगे॥ २५॥
राक्षसानां च सर्वेषामात्मनश्च am हि।
प्रतिनेष्यति रामस्त्वामयोध्यामसितेक्षणे Ut २६ ॥

“Therefore, due to infatuation caused
by his impending death, his aforesaid
determination is very steady. Unless and
until he is actually frustrated in combat through
the extermination of all the ogres as well as
of himself, he will not be able to leave you
through sheer fear. Wiping out Ravana with
his sharp arrows in combat, Sri Rama will
take you back to Ayodhya, O dark-eyed
lady!” (25-26)

415

एतस्मिन्नन्तरे शब्दो भेरीशङ्खसमाकुल:।
Ta A सर्वसैन्यानां कम्पयन् धरणीतलम्॥ २७॥

In the meantime was actually heard
the clamour of all the monkey troops,
blended with the roll of kettledrums and the
blast of conches, causing the earth to shake.

(27)
Tr तु तं वानरसैन्यनादं
लङ्कागता राक्षसराजभृत्या:।
हतौजसो दैन्यपरीतचेष्टा

श्रेयो न पश्यन्ति नृपरय॰दोषात्॥२८।।

Hearing the tumult of the monkey forces,
the servants of Ravana (the ruler of ogres)
present in Lanka felt debilitated and their
movements were overcome by depression.
Owing to the folly of their ruler they did not
see any prospect of prosperity. (28)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये FERS चतुस्तिंश: AW: ॥ ३४॥

Thus ends Canto Thirty-four in the Yuddhakanda of the glorious Ramayana of
Valmiki, the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

Canto XXXV

Observing in Lanka evil portents and startling phenomena
foreboding the destruction of ogres, Malyavan
exhorts Ravana to make peace
with Sri Rama

तेन शङ्खविमिश्रेण भेरीशब्देन नादिना।
उपयाति महाबाहू राम: परफूजय ।॥। १॥
With the resonant roll of kettledrums
blended with the blast of conches the mighty-
armed Sri Rama, the conqueror of hostile
cities, sallied forth against Lanka. (1)
a निनादं निशम्याथं रावणो राक्षसेश्वर:।
मुहूर्तं ध्यानमास्थाय सचिवानभ्युदैक्षत॥ २॥

Reflecting awhile on hearing that tumult,

Ravana, the ruler of ogres, now looked at
his ministers. (2)
अथ तान् सचिवांस्तत्र सर्वानाभाष्य रावण:।
सभां संनादयन् सर्वामित्युवाच महाबल:॥ ३॥
जगत्संतापन: क्रूरोऽगर्हयन् राक्षसेश्वर:।
तरणं सागरस्यास्य विक्रमं बलपौरुषम्॥४॥
यदुक्तवन्तो रामस्य भवन्तस्तन्मया श्रुतम्।
भवतश्चाप्यहं वेद्मि युद्धे सत्यपराक्रमान्।
तूष्णीकानीक्षतोऽन्योन्यं विदित्वा रामविक्रमम्॥ ५॥
