« KISKINDHAKANDA +

1077

Canto XXXVII

Sugriva commands Hanuman to dispatch messengers for collecting troops
from all the four quarters. Receiving the message of Sugriva, monkeys
flock from all sides into his presence. Giving presents of fruits and
roots etc., to their king, the messengers sent in advance by Nila,
announce to him the arrival of all the monkey hordes

एवमुक्तस्तु सुग्रीवो लक्ष्मणेन महात्मना।
हनूमन्तं स्थितं ue वचनं चेदमब्रवीत्॥१॥
Spoken to as aforesaid by the high-
souled Laksmana, Sugriva for his part spoke
as follows to Hanuman standing by his
side : (1)
महेन्द्रहिमवद्विन्ध्यकैलासशिखरेषु al
मन्दरे पाण्डुशिखरे पञ्चशैलेषु ये frat uz
तरुणादित्यवर्णेषु भ्राजमानेषु नित्यश:।
पर्वतेषु समुद्रान्ते पश्चिमस्यां तु ये दिशि॥ ३॥
आदित्यभवने da गिरौ संध्याभ्रसंनिभे।
पद्माचलवनं भीमा: संथ्रिता हरिपुंगवा:॥४॥
अञ्जनाम्बुदसंकाशा: कुञ्जरेन्द्रमहौजस: |
अञ्जने पर्वते da ये वसन्ति प्लवंगमा:॥५॥
महाशैलगुहावासा वानरा: कनकप्रभा:।
मेरुपार्श्वगताश्चैव ये च धूम्रगिरिं श्रिता:॥६॥
तरुणादित्यवर्णाश्च पर्वते ये महारुणे।
पिबन्तो मधु मैरेयं भीमवेगा: प्लवंगमा:॥७॥
वनेषु च सुरम्येषु सुगन्धिषु महत्सु च।
तापसाश्रमरम्येषु वनान्तेषु समन्तत:॥८॥
तांस्तांस्त्वमानय fad पृथिव्यां सर्ववानरान्।
सामदानादिभि: कल्पैर्वानरैर्वेगवत्तरै: ie i
“Summon quickly by recourse to
expedients such as persuasion, gifts etc.,
through monkeys possessed of superior
agility the different hordes of monkeys on
earth which are stationed on the heights of
the following five mountain ranges, viz., the
Mahendra, Himalaya, Vindhya, Kailasa and
Mandara mountains, the last-named of which
is distinguished by yellowish white peaks;
those which dwell on the ever resplendent

mountains presenting the hue of the rising
sun and standing on the other side of the
ocean in the western quarter, those which
live on the eastern and western mountains
(the so-called abode of the sun-god), bright
as the evening clouds; the terrible-looking
leaders of monkeys which have taken up
their abode in the forest on the Padma
mountain, as also the monkeys possessing
the hue of collyrium and sombre clouds and
endowed with the superior strength of lordly
elephants which live on the Afjana mountain,
the monkeys possessing the splendour of
gold and having their abode in the caves of
the MahaSaila mountain and those living on
the slopes of Mount Meru, those who have
taken up their abode on the Dhumra
mountain, the monkeys of terrible agility
possessing the hue of the rising sun, which
live on the Maharuna mountain drinking the
intoxicating beverage known by the name
of Maireya, as also those living on all sides
in exceedingly lovely, fragrant and vast
forests and their neighbourhood charming
with the hermitages of ascetics. (2—9)

प्रेषिता: प्रथमं ये च मयाऽऽज्ञाता महाजवा:।

त्वरणार्थं तु भूयस्त्वं सम्प्रेषय ANTI oll
“The monkeys of extraordinary agility

already sent are known to me; yet, in order

to goad them duly, send you leaders of
monkeys once more. (10)

ये yang कामेषु दीर्घसूत्राश्च वानरा:।
इहानयस्व ताञ्शीघ्रं Pata कपीश्वरान्॥११॥

“Nay, bring here to my presence with
