552

roar, making the sea reverberate, nay,
causing mountains to quake and drowning
thunder-claps, as it were. (1-2)

तमवध्यं wad यमेन वरुणेन atl
Yea भीमाक्षमायान्तं वानरा विप्रदुद्रुवु:॥ ३॥
Perceiving that ogre of fierce eyes—
who could not be killed by Indra (the ruler
of gods), Yama (the god of retribution) or
even by Varuna (the god of water)—
approaching, the monkeys’ stampeded.
(3)

तांस्तु विप्रद्रुतान् Gear राजपुत्रोऽङ्गदोऽब्रवीत्।
नलं नीलं गवाक्षं च कुमुदं च महाबलम्॥४॥
Seeing them put to flight, Prince Angada
for his part spoke as follows to Nala, Nila
and Gavaksa, as also to Kumuda, who was
endowed with extraordinary might: (4)

आत्मनस्तानि विस्मृत्य वीर्याण्यभिजनानि च।
क्व West भयत्रस्ता: प्राकृता Bat यथा॥५॥
“Forgetting your well-known exploits

and high pedigree, where are you fleeing
panic-stricken like ordinary monkeys?

(5)
साधु सौम्या निवर्तध्वं किं प्राणान् परिरक्षथ।
नालं युद्धाय वै रक्षो महतीयं विभीषिका॥६॥

“Enough, O good fellows ! Please return.
Why do you defend your lives? Surely this
ogre is not capable of contending with us;
he is a great bugbear. (6)
महतीमुत्थितामेनां राक्षसानां विभीषिकाम्।
विक्रमाद् विधमिष्यामो निवर्तध्वं प्लवङ्गमा:॥७॥

“We shall dispel by our prowess this

colossal nightmare of the ogres, come into
being. Therefore, come back, O monkeys!”

(7)
कृच्छ्रेण तु समाश्वस्य संगम्य च ततस्तत:।
gar गृहीत्वा हरय: सम्प्रतस्थू रणाजिरे॥८॥

Regaining confidence somehow and
getting together once more from here and

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA +

there, and seizing hold of trees, the monkeys
for their part duly proceeded to the battlefield.
(8)
a निवर्त्य तु संरब्धा: कुम्भकर्णं वनौकस:।

निजघ्नु: परमक्रुद्धा: समदा FA कुञ्जरा:॥९॥

प्रांशुभिर्गिरिशृङ्गैश्च शिलाभिश्च महाबला:।
पादपै: पुष्पिताग्रैश्च हन्यमानो न कम्पते॥१०॥
Turning back extremely enraged and
determined to fight, the aforesaid monkeys
(lit., dwellers in the woods), who were
endowed with extraordinary might and
looked like elephants in rut, hit him with lofty
mountain peaks and rocks as_ well
as with trees whose crests were covered
with blossom. Though being hit (as above),
Kumbhakarna, however, was not shaken.
(9-10)

तस्य गात्रेषु पतिता भिद्यन्ते बहव: शिला:।
पादपा: पुष्पिताग्राश्च भग्ना: पेतुर्महीतले॥११॥
Fallen on his limbs, numerous rocks

got split asunder, and trees with blossomed
crests fell shattered on the earth’s surface.
(11)

सोऽपि सैन्यानि संक्रुद्धौ वानराणां महौजसाम्।
ममन्थ परमायत्तो वनान्यग्निरिवोत्थित:॥ 22
Highly enraged and supremely active,
Kumbhakarna too began to destroy the ranks
of the monkeys, although they were endowed
with extraordinary vigour, even as a forest
fire burst into flames would consume forests.
(12)

cifeasre «aed: शेरते वानरर्षभा:।
निरस्ता: पतिता भूमौ ताम्रपुष्पा इव FAT: UVB I
Fallen like trees with coppery blossom
when tossed up by the ogre, numerous

bulls among monkeys lay senseless on the
ground, bespattered with blood. (13)

लङ्घयन्त: प्रधावन्तो वानरा नावलोकयन्।
केचित् समुद्रे पतिता: केचिद् गगनमास्थिता: ॥ १४॥

Leaping while running fast, the monkeys
