+ UTTARAKANDA +

good his exit from the domain of Varuna,
shouting through joy. (53)

आगतस्तु पथा येन तेनैव विनिवृत्य स:।

लङ्कामभिमुखो रक्षो नभस्तलगतो ययौ॥ ५४॥ । Lanka.*

923

Returning by the same route by
which he had come, the said ogre rose
into the heavens and proceeded towards
(54)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये उत्तरकाण्डे त्रयोविंश: Wr ॥ 23 ॥

Thus ends Canto Twenty-three in the Uttarakanda of the glorious Ramayana of
Valmiki, the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

Canto XXIV

Lament of the celestial damsels and other ladies forcibly carried off by Ravana
and the curse pronounced by them; Ravana consoles his wailing sister,
Strpanakha and sends her to the Dandaka forest with Khara

निवर्तमान: Weel रावण: स दुरात्मवान्।
WS पथि नरेन्द्र्षिदेवदानवकन्यका:॥१॥
While returning home, highly rejoiced,
the said Ravana of perverse soul bore away
on the way the virgin daughters of kings,
Rsis (the seers of Vedic Mantras), gods
and Danavas. (1)
दर्शनीयां हि at ta: कन्यां स्त्रीं वाथ पश्यति।
हत्वा बन्धुजनं तस्या विमाने at रुरोध स:॥२॥
Killing the kinsfolk of the maiden or
woman whom he actually found to be comely,
the ogre would forthwith shut her up in his
aerial car. (2)

एवं पन्नगकन्याश्च राक्षसासुरमानुषी:।
यक्षदानवकन्याश्च विमाने सोऽध्यरोपयत्॥ ३॥
In this manner he lifted into his aerial
car virgin daughters of Nagas, nay, those of
ogres, demons and human beings as well
as those of Yaksas and Danavas. (3)

ता fe dat: समं दु:खान्मुमुचुर्बाष्पजं जलम्।
तुल्यमग्न्यचिषां तत्र शोकाग्निभयसम्भवम्॥४॥

Full of agony they all synchronously
shed tears, which, springing as they did
from the fire of grief and born as they were
of fear, compared with the sparks of fire on
that occasion. (4)

af: सर्वानवद्याभिर्नदीभिरिव सागर:।

आपूरितं विमानं aq भयशोकाशिवाश्रुभि: ।। ५॥
Even as an ocean is filled on all sides

with streams, that aerial car was filled by all

those irreproachable girls with their
inauspicious tears born of fear and grief. (5)

नागगन्धर्वकन्याश्च महर्षितनयाश्च या:।
दैत्यदानवकन्याश्च विमाने शतशोऽरुदन्॥६॥
Virgin daughters of Nagas, Gandharvas,
as also the daughters of eminent Rsis as
well as the Daitya and Danava maidens

who had collected in the aerial car wailed in
their hundreds. (6)

दीर्घकेश्य: सुचार्वङ्ग्य: पूर्णचन्द्रनिभानना:।
पीनस्तनतटा मध्ये वज्रवेदिसमप्रभा:॥७॥
रथकूबरसंकाशै: श्रोणिदेशैर्मनोहरा: |
fra: सुराङ्गनाप्रख्या निष्टप्तकनकप्रभा:॥८॥

* Some recensions of the Ramayana contain five interpolated cantos after canto XXIII, giving a detail
description of Ravana’s expedition culminating in the conquest of the four quarters. To avoid prolixity the

cantos have not been incorporated in our text.
