३02

प्रागेव चागता तत्र सुमित्रा लक्ष्मणस्तथा।
सीता चानयिता श्रुत्वा प्रियं रामाभिषेचनम्॥ ३१॥

Hearing of Sr Rama’s welcome
installation, Sumitra too had already arrived
there as well as her son, Laksmana; and
Sita too had been sent for there. (31)

तस्मिन् कालेऽपि कौसल्या तस्थावामीलितेक्षणा।

सुमित्रयान्वास्यमाना सीतया लक्ष्मणेन AN ३२॥
श्रुत्वा TA च पुत्रस्य यौवराज्येऽभिषेचनम्।
प्राणायामेन पुरुषं ध्यायमाना जनार्दनम्॥ ३३॥
At that moment too when Sri Rama
called on her, Kausalya remained sitting
with her eyes half closed and waited upon
by Sumitra and Laksmana, and contemplating
with suspended breath on the Supreme
Person, Lord Narayana (who is solicited by
all men), having heard that her son was
going to be installed in the office of Prince
Regent when the asterism Pusya was in
the ascendant. (32-33)

तथा सनियमामेव सोऽभिगम्याभिवाद्य च।
sara वचनं रामो हर्षयंस्तामिदं वरम्॥३४॥
Approaching her even while she was
observing her daily routine as aforesaid,
and greeting her, Sri Rama addressed to
her the following excellent submission,
bringing joy to her thereby : (34)
अम्ब fiat नियुक्तोऽस्मि प्रजापालनकर्मणि।
भविता श्वोऽभिषेको मे यथा A शासनं पितु: ।। ३५ Ul
सीतयाप्युपवस्तव्या wit मया सह।
एवमुक्तमुपाध्यायै: a fe मामुक्तवान् पिता॥ ३६॥
“Mother, | have been entrusted by father
with the duty of ruling over the people. My
installation will, therefore, take place tomorrow
as enjoined by father. A fast is to be kept
tonight by Sita too alongwith me. Such is
the injunction of my teachers, Vasistha and
others, and father too has instructed me
accordingly. (35-36)
यानि यान्यत्र योग्यानि शवोभाविन्यभिषेचने।
तानि मे मङ्गलान्यद्य वैदेह्याश्चैव कारय॥ ३७॥

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

“Please, therefore, have all such
propitious rites gone through this very day
as are desirable on this occasion for me as
well as for Sita (a princess of the Videha
country) in connection with the installation
that is going to take place on the morrow.”(37)
एतच्छुत्वा तु कौसल्या चिरकालाभिकांक्षितम्।
हर्षबाष्पाकुलं वाक्यमिदं राममभाषत॥ ३८॥

Hearing of this consummation, which
had been coveted for a long time, Kausalya
for her part addressed to Rama the following
reply, which was rendered indistinct by tears
of joy: (38)
act wa fat जीव हतास्ते परिपन्थिन:।
ज्ञातीन् मे त्वं श्रिया युक्त: सुमित्रायाश्च नन्दय॥ ३९॥

“Child Rama, may you live long! Let
those inimically disposed to you be wiped
off. Invested with royal glory may you bring
joy to my relations as well as to those of
Sumitra. (39)

कल्याणे Ad Aaa मया जातोऽसि पुत्रक।
at wear amet गुणैराराधित: पिता॥४०॥

“| am glad to think, O darling, that you
were given birth to by me under a propitious
star, thanks to which your father, Emperor
DaSaratha, has been propitiated by you by
means of your excellences. (40)

अमोघं ad मे क्षान्तं Fea पुष्करेक्षणे।
येयमिक्ष्वाकुराजश्री: पुत्र cat संश्रयिष्यति॥४१॥
“ am gratified to note that the hardship
borne by me in the shape of austerities and
fasting etc., for the sake of pleasing the
lotus-eyed Lord Visnu, the Supreme Person,
has not gone in vain. It is by virtue of it that
the royal fortune enjoyed by the race of
Ikswaku is going to embrace you.” (41)

इत्येवमुक्तो AAT तु Wat भ्रातरमब्रवीत्।
Watt प्रह्वमासीनमभिवीक्ष्य स्मयन्निव॥४२॥
Addressed thus by his mother, Sri
Rama for his part looked at his brother,
Laksmana, who sat bent low with humility
