558

a वानरसहस्रैस्तु विचित: पर्वतोपम:।
Tt राक्षसव्याघ्रो गिरिरात्मरुहैरिव॥ ३३॥

Covered by thousands of monkeys that
mountain-like tiger among ogres looked
charming like a mountain overgrown with
trees. (33)

बाहुभ्यां वानरान् सर्वान् Weal स महाबल:।
भक्षयामास संक्रुद्धो Wes: पन्नगानिव॥ ३४॥
Tightly seizing hold of all the monkeys
with his arms, highly enraged as he was,
Kumbhakarna, who was endowed with
extraordinary might, began to devour them
even as Garuda would devour serpents.
(34)

प्रक्षिप्ता: कुम्भकर्णेन aed पातालसंनिभे।
नासापुटाभ्यां संजग्मु: कर्णाभ्यां चैव AAT: ।। ३५ ॥
Thrust into his mouth, which closely
resembled Patala (the nethermost
subterranean region), by Kumbhakarna, the

monkeys issued forth through his nostrils
as well as through his ears. (35)

भक्षयन् भृशसंक्रुद्धो हरीन् पर्वतसंनिभ:।
बभञ्ज वानरान् सर्वान् संक्रुद्धो राक्षसोत्तम:॥ ३६ ॥

While devouring the monkeys, highly
enraged as he was, the prince of ogres,
who looked like a mountain and repeatedly
mutilated the monkeys. (36)

मांसशोणितसंक्लेदां कुर्वन् भूमिं स राक्षस:।
चचार हरिसैन्येषु कालाग्निरिव मूच्छित:॥ ३७॥

Covering the earth with flesh and blood,
the said ogre ranged through the simian
ranks like the augmented fire of universal
dissolution. (37)

वज्रहस्तो यथा शक्र: पाशहस्त इवान्तक:।
Wee बभौ युद्धे कुम्भकर्णो महाबल:॥ ३८॥

Pike in hand, Kumbhakarna, who was
endowed with extraordinary might, shone
like Indra (the ruler of gods) holding the
thunderbolt in his hand, or like Death, bearing
a noose in his hand. (38)

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA +

यथा शुष्काण्यरण्यानि ग्रीष्मे दहति पावक:।
AM वानरसैन्यानि कुम्भकर्णो ददाह A: i ३९॥

The ill-famed Kumbhakarna consumed
the simian ranks even as a forest fire would
consume dry forests in summer. (39)

ततस्ते वध्यमानास्तु हतयूथा: प्लवंगमा:।
arma भयसंविग्ना विनेदुर्विकृतै: tat: i voll
Wild with terror, the aforesaid monkeys
for their part, who moved about leaping, and
who had lost many of their battalions, yelled
in unnatural tones while being destroyed as
above by Kumbhakarna. (40)

अनेकशो वध्यमाना: कुम्भकर्णेन AMT: |
राघवं शरणं जग्मुर्व्यथिता भिन्नचेतस:॥४१॥

Agonized and dispirited while being
exterminated in large numbers by
Kumbhakarna, the monkeys sought Sri Rama,
a scion of Raghu, as their refuge. (41)

प्रभग्नान् वानरान् दृष्ट्वा वज्रहस्तात्मजात्मज: |
अभ्यधावत वेगेन कुम्भकर्णं महाहवे॥४२॥

Seeing the monkeys completely routed,
the son of Vali (sprung from the loins of
Indra, the wielder of the thunderbolt) rushed
with impetuosity at Kumbhakarna in the great
struggle. (42)

शैलशृङ्गं महद् Tar विनदन् स मुहुर्मुहु:।
त्रासयन् राक्षसान् सर्वान् कुम्भकर्णपदानुगान्॥ ४३ ॥
चिक्षेप शैलशिखरं कुम्भकर्णस्य मूर्धनि।
स तेनाभिहतो at शैलेनेन्द्ररिपुस्तदा॥४४॥
कुम्भकर्ण: प्रजज्वाल क्रोधेन महता तदा।

सोऽभ्यधावत वेगेन वालिपुत्रममर्षण:॥४५॥

Seizing hold of a huge mountain peak,
roaring again and again and frightening all
the ogres who followed the footsteps of
Kumbhakarna, he flung the mountain top on
Kumbhakarna’s head. Struck on the head
with that crag, Kumbhakarna, the well-known
enemy of Indra, burnt up with great rage.
The intolerant ogre then rushed at Angada
(son of Vall) with vehemence. (43—45)
