# YUDDHAKANDA #

ततो tat: सगन्धर्वा: सिद्धाश्च परमर्षय:।
wage द्रष्टुं रावणक्षयकांक्षिण:॥१९॥
Thereupon gods accompanied by
Gandharvas (celestial musicians), Siddhas
(a class of demigods endowed with mystic
powers from their very birth) and great Rsis
too assembled to witness the duel, longing
as they did for the destruction of Ravana.
(19)

समुत्पेतुरथोत्पाता दारुणा रोमहर्षणा:।
रावणस्य विनाशाय राघवस्योदयाय च ॥ २०॥

Then burst into view fearful portents
that caused one’s hair to stand on end,
giving a warning of doom to Ravana and
prosperity to the scion of Raghu. (20)

aad efit cat रावणस्य रथोपरि।

वाता मण्डलिनस्तीव्रा व्यपसव्यं प्रचक्रमु:।॥ २१॥
The god of rain rained blood on the

chariot of Ravana, while violent whirlwinds

blew from left to right. (21)

महद्गृध्रकुलं चास्य भ्रममाणं नभस्थले।

at येन wat याति तेन तेन प्रधावति॥ eeu

Hovering in the aerial region, a large
flock of vultures followed the evolutions of
his chariot. (22)
संध्यया चाव्रता लङ्का जपापुष्पनिकाशया।
दृश्यते सम्प्रदीप्तेव दिवसेऽपि agent २३॥

Nay, Lanka looked enshrouded in dusk,
hued like a red Japa flower even in the

daytime and the region round about appeared
aglow with it. (23)
सनिर्घाता महोल्काश्च सम्प्रपेतुर्महास्वना:।
विषादयंस्ते रक्षांसि रावणस्य तदाहिता:॥ २४॥
Huge meteors accompanied by thunder
fell with a great sound at that time.
Foreboding evil to Ravana, they filled the
ogres with despondency at that time. (24)
रक्षसां च प्रहरतां गृहीता इव Tea २५॥

751

Nay, the earth shook in whichever
direction Ravana moved and the arms of
the ogres were clasped as it were even as
they struck. (25)

gad रावणस्याग्रे पर्वतस्येव धातव:॥ २६॥

Fallen before Ravana, the rays of the
sun appeared coppery, yellow, white and
dark like ores on a mountain. (26)

गृध्रैरनुगताश्चास्य वमन्त्यो ज्वलनं मुखै:।
प्रणेदुर्मुखमीक्षन्त्यर संरब्धमशिवं शिवा:॥ २७॥

Nay, beholding the angry mien of
Ravana and vomiting fire from their mouths,
she-jackals, followed by vultures, uttered
sinister howls. (27)

प्रतिकूलं ववौ are रणे पांसून् समुत्किरन्।

तस्य राक्षसराजस्य कुर्वन् दृष्टिविलोपनम्॥ २८॥
Raising the clouds of dust over the

battlefield and clouding the vision of that

king of ogres, the wind blew in a direction
unfavourable to him. (28)

निपेतुरिन्द्राशनय: सैन्ये चास्य समन्तत:।
दुर्विषह्यस्वरा घोरा विना जलधरोदयम्॥ २९॥

Nay, without the appearance of any
cloud fearful thunderbolts of Indra, the god
of rain, fell on his army, on all sides with a
noise which was hard to endure. (29)

दिशश्च प्रदिश: wat avyaftafinrga: |
पांसुवर्षेण महता दुर्दर्शं च नभोऽभवत्॥३०॥
All the quarters as well as_ the
intermediate points of the compass were
shrouded in darkness; and due to a shower
of dust the sky became obscure. (30)
had: hee घोरं सारिकास्तद्रथं प्रति।
निपेतु: शतशस्तत्र दारुणा दारुणारुता:॥ ३१॥
Carrying on a desperate fight among
themselves and emitting sharp cries fearful

minas fell in hundreds on his chariot on that
battlefield. (31)
