« Procedure of reading the full Valmiki-Ramayana in nine days « 9

ब्रह्मा स्वयम्भूर्भगवान् देवाश्चैव तपस्विन:।
fats दिशन्तु A wd cat: सर्षिगणास्त्विह॥
—sfe दिग्बन्ध:।
One should then meditate on Sri Rama and His entourage seated on a lotus
according to the following verse—

वामे भूमिसुता पुरस्तु हनुमान् पश्चात् सुमित्रासुत:
शत्रुघ्नो way पार्श्वदलयोर्वाय्वादिकोणेषु च।
सुग्रीवश्च विभीषणश्च युवराट् तारासुतो जाम्बवान्
मध्ये नीलसरोजकोमलरुचिं WA भजे VATA II
* * *
आपदामपहर्तार दातारं सर्वसम्पदाम्।
लोकाभिरामं srt भूयो भूयो नमाम्यहम्॥

“Sita (Daughter of Goddess Earth) is seated to the left (of Sri Rama), Hanuman in
front, Laksmana (son of Sumitra) at the back, Satrughna and Bharata on the petals on the
two sides (to the left and right), Sugriva, Vibhisana, Crown prince Angada (son of Tara)
and Jambavan at the four intermediate points (viz., north-west, north-east, south-east and
south-west) respectively; while in the centre (of the lotus) | worship Sri Rama of a
cerulean hue, possessing the soft lustre of a blue lotus.”

The following couplet is used as a Samputa-Mantra and repeated at the beginning as
well as at the end of every single verse of the Ramayana for achieving all one’s desired

ends—
आपदामपहर्तारं दातारं सर्वसम्पदाम्।
लोकाभिरामं sit भूयो भूयो नमाम्यहम्॥
“| salute again and again Sri Rama, the Delight of the whole world, the Reliever of
sufferings and the Bestower of all riches.”

After uttering the following Mangalacarana* (prayers by way of an auspicious
introduction for the attainment of success) one should start reading the Ramayana—
MEDITATION ON LORD GANESA
प्रसन्नवदनं ध्यायेत् सर्वविघ्नोपशान्तये॥१॥
वागीशाद्या:॥ सुमनस: सर्वार्थानामुपक्रमे।

यं नत्वा कृतकृत्या: स्युस्तं नमामि गजाननम्॥२॥

* According to the Brhaddharma-Purana the following ‘Kavaca’ (the reading of which serves as a
protective armour against all evils) should be read before the Mangalacarana. The Kavaca must be read at
least on the first day if not everyday—

3% नमोऽष्टादशतत्त्वरूपाय रामायणाय महामन्त्रस्वरूपाय। मा निषादेति मूलं शिरोऽवतु। अनुक्रमिणकाबीजं मुखमवतु। ऋष्यशृङ्गोपाख्यानं
ऋषि: जिह्वामवतु। जानकीलाभोऽनुष्टुप्छन्दोऽवतु गलम्। केकय्याज्ञा देवता हृदयमवतु। सीतालक्ष्मणानुगमनश्रीरामहर्षा: WAM जठरमवतु।
भगवद्भक्ति: शक्तिरवतु मे मध्यम्। शक्तिमान् धर्मो मुनीनां पालनं ममोरू रक्षतु। मारीचवचनं प्रतिपालनमवतु पादौ। सुग्रीवमैत्रमर्थोऽवतु स्तनौ।
निर्णयो हनुमच्चेष्टावतु बाहू। Hal सम्पातिपक्षोद्गमोऽवतु स्कन्धौ। प्रयोजनं विभीषणराज्यं ग्रीवां ममावतु। रावणवध: स्वरूपमवतु कर्णौ। सीतोद्धारो
लक्ष्मणमवतु नासिके। अमोघस्तवसंस्तवोऽवतु जीवात्मानम्। नय: काललक्ष्मणसंवादोऽवतु नाभिम्। आचरणीयं श्रीरामादिधर्मं aly ममावतु।
इति रामायणकवचम्।

(बृहद्धर्मपुराणम्, पूर्वखण्डम्, wat अध्याय)
