412

आगतस्य fe रामस्य क्षिप्रमङ्कागतां सतीम्।
अहं द्रक्ष्यामि सिद्धार्थां त्वां शत्रौ विनिपातिते॥ ३२॥
“On the enemy being killed, | shall
soon behold you, a virtuous lady, mounted
on the lap of Sri Rama, actually arrived,
your object being thus accomplished.
(32)

अस्त्राण्यानन्दजानि त्वं वर्तयिष्यसि जानकि।
समागम्य परिष्वक्ता तस्योरसि महोरस:॥ ३३॥

“Hugged by him on getting united with
him, you will shed tears of joy, O daughter
of Janaka, on the bosom of that broad-
chested prince. (33)
अचिरान्मोक्ष्यते सीते देवि a जघनं गताम्।
धृतामेकां बहून् मासान् वेणीं रामो महाबल: ॥ ३४॥

“Sri Rama, who is endowed with
extraordinary might, will before long
disentangle your single plait, which has
been worn by you for many months past
and has reached your very hinder part, O
godlike Sita! (34)

तस्य gear मुखं देवि पूर्णचन्द्रमिवोदितम्।
मोक्ष्यसे शोकजं ak निर्मोकमिव writ sen

“Beholding his countenance resembling
the full moon just risen, O godlike lady, you

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA +

will bid adieu to tears of grief even as the
female snake casts off its slough. (35)

रावणं समरे ear नचिरादेव मैथिलि।
त्वया समग्र: प्रियया सुखार्हो लप्स्यते सुखम्॥ ३६॥

“Killing Ravana in combat before long,
O princess of Mithila, Sri Rama, who
deserves felicity, will enjoy happiness in the
company of his darling, viz., yourself, his
desire being fulfilled. (36)

सभाजिता त्वं रामेण मोदिष्यसि महात्मना।
सुवर्षेण समायुक्का यथा सस्येन मेदिनी॥ ३७॥

“Honoured by the high-souled Sri Rama,
you will rejoice in the same way as the
earth becomes green with crops when
blessed with a copious downpour. _— (37)

गिरिवरमभितो विवर्तमानो

हय इव मण्डलमाशु य: करोति।
तमिह शरणमभ्युपैहि ea
दिवसकरं प्रभवो Wa WITLI ३८॥
“Seek at this juncture as your refuge
the well-known sun-god (lit., he who brings
the day), who, while coursing round the
Meru (the foremost of mountains), revolves
quickly like a horse, for he is the source of
joy and suffering of all created beings.” (38)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये FERS ACA: सर्ग: ॥ ३३ ॥

Thus ends Canto Thirty-three in the Yuddhakanda of the glorious Ramayana of

Valmiki, the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

Canto XXXIV

Urged by Sita, Sarama discloses to her the definite plans of Ravana
devised by him in consultation with his ministers

अथ a जातसंतापां तेन वाक्येन मोहिताम्।

who had been put off the scent by the

सरमा ह्लादयामास महीं दग्धामिवाम्भसा॥१॥ | aforesaid speech of Ravana and had felt

In this way Sarama gladdened Sita,

agonized, even as the monsoon would
