944

prowess, are capable of destroying the foes,
are full of glory and splendour and rich in
comeliness, who are distinguished by the noble
gait of a bull and arms resembling the
proboscis of an elephant, who are worthy of
sovereignty and shine brightly like gods? The
yonder Rsyamuka (a king of mountains)
stands illumined by your effulgence. (9—11)

पद्मपत्रेक्षणौ वीरौ जटामण्डलधारिणौ।
अन्योन्यसदृशौ वीरौ देवलोकादिहागतौ॥ १२॥

“Having eyes resembling the petals of
a lotus and wearing a rounded mass of
matted locks, you two gallant men match
each other and are heroes come down to
this earth from the celestial world. (12)

यदृच्छयेव सम्प्राप्तौ चन्द्रसूर्यौ वसुंधराम्।
विशालवक्षसौ वीरौ मानुषौ देवरूपिणौ॥ १३॥
“Endowed with a broad chest, you two
heroic men possess the exterior of gods. It
appears as if the moon-god and the sun-
god have duly reached the earth by the will
of Providence. (13)

सिंहस्कन्धौ महोत्साहौ समदाविव गोवृषौ।
आयताश्च As बाहव: परिघोपमा:॥१४॥
सर्वभूषणभूषार्हा: किमर्थं न विभूषिता:।
sul योग्यावहं मन्ये रक्षितुं पृथिवीमिमाम्॥ १५॥
ससागरवनां कृत्स्नां विन्ध्यमेरुविभूषिताम्।
इमे च धनुषी चित्रे श्लक्ष्णे चित्रानुलेपने॥१६॥
प्रकाशेते यथेन्द्रस्य aq हेमविभूषिते।
सम्पूर्णाश्च शितैर्बाणैस्तूणाश्च शुभदर्शना:॥ १७॥
जीवितान्तकरैर्घोरैरज्वलद्भिरिव पन्नगै: |
महाप्रमाणौ विपुलौ तप्तहाटकभूषणौ॥१८॥
ख्ड्गावेतौ विराजेते निर्मुक्तभुजगाविव।
एवं मां परिभाषन्तं कस्माद् वै नाभिभाषत:॥ १९॥
“Having shoulders resembling those of
a lion and, possessed of extraordinary vigour,
you look like a pair of bulls in heat. Wherefore
have these arms of yours, long and perfectly
round and resembling a pair of clubs, have
not been artistically adorned, even though
they deserve to be embellished with all
kinds of jewels? | consider you both as fit to

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

protect this entire earth with its oceans and
forests and richly adorned with the Vindhya
and Meru mountains. Nay, these wonderful,
charming and strangely gilded bows of yours
shine like Indra’s thunderbolts decorated
with gold. Besides, filled to capacity with
blazing sharp-pointed shafts, capable of
ending one’s life and dreadful like serpents,
these quivers of yours look so charming.
These swords of considerable length and
enormous size and decorated with refined
gold, shine brightly like a pair of serpents
that have shed their slough. But wherefore
do you not answer me even though |
am uttering your praises, as | have done?

(14—19)

gitar नाम धर्मात्मा कश्चिद् वानरपुङ्खव:।
ant विनिकृतो भ्रात्रा जगद्भ्रमति ¢:faa: tt २०॥
“A gallant jewel among monkeys,
Sugriva by name, whose mind is set on
virtue, roams the earth, afflicted as he is,
having been banished by his elder brother.
(20)

प्राप्तोऽहं प्रेषितस्तेन सुग्रीवेण महात्मना।
राज्ञा वानरमुख्यानां SAM ATA वानर:॥ २१॥
“Sent by that high-minded Sugriva, king

of the leaders of monkeys, ।, a monkey,
Hanuman by name, have sought you. (21)
युवाभ्यां a fe धर्मात्मा सुग्रीव: सख्यमिच्छति।
wea मां सचिवं वित्तं वानरं पवनात्मजम्॥ २२॥
भिक्षुरूपप्रतिच्छन्नं सुग्रीवप्रियकारणात्।
ऋष्यमूकादिह Wa कामगं कामचारिणम्॥ २३॥
“The said pious-minded Sugriva actually
seeks your friendship. Know me to be his
minister, a monkey sprung from the loins
of the wind-god and arrived here from
Rsyamuka in order to serve the cause of
Sugriva and disguised in the form of a recluse,
capable as | am of going wherever | please
and assuming any form as | please.”(22-23)

एवमुक्त्वा तु हनुमांस्तौ वीरौ रामलक्ष्मणौ।
वाक्यज्ञो वाक्यकुशल: पुनर्नोवाच किंचन॥ २४॥
