478

the time in the interest of Sri Rama.
तथा शयानस्य ततो यशस्विनो

मनस्विनो दाशरथेर्महात्मन:।
अदृष्टदु:खस्य सुखोचितस्य सा

तदा व्यतीता सुचिरेण शर्वरी॥ ५१॥

(50)

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA +

While the illustrious, lofty-minded and
high-souled Sri Rama (son of Dagaratha),
who had never undergone suffering and
who was used to all comforts, remained
lying after that on the ground as aforesaid,
that night eventually lingered away. (51)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्येऽयोध्याकाण्डे TAT: WE ॥ ५० ॥

Thus ends Canto Fifty in the Ayodhyakanda of the glorious Ramayana of Valmiki,
the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

एकपञ्चाश: सर्ग:
Canto LI

Expressing his readiness to guard the Crown prince and his consort,
keeping awake the whole night, Guha importunes Laksmana to repose.
Reminding Guha of Sri Rama’s greatness, Laksmana, however, tells
him that even though the duty of guarding his princely brother and
his consort could as well be entrusted to Guha, he felt that he
did not deserve to lie down in the presence of his elder
brother and sister-in-law and preferred to remain awake.
Expressing grief for his royal father and loving mothers
he therefore spends the night talking with Guha

तं जाग्रतमदम्भेन भ्रातुरर्थाय लक्ष्मणम्।
Te: संतापसंतप्तो wad वाक्यमब्रवीत्॥१॥
Distressed with agony to see the
princely couple lying on the ground, Guha
spoke as follows to the celebrated Laksmana
(a scion of Raghu), who was keeping
awake, through sincere love, for the
protection of his elder brother, Sri Rama:

(1)
sa तात Gar wen त्वदर्थमुपकल्पिता।
प्रत्याश्चसिहि साध्वस्यां राजपुत्र यथासुखम्॥ २॥

“Here is a cosy bed nicely prepared
for you, dear brother; pray, repose
comfortably on it, O prince ! (2)

उचितोऽयं जन: सर्व: क्लेशानां त्वं सुखोचित: |
गुप्त्यर्थं जागरिष्याम: काकुत्स्थस्य वयं निशाम्॥ ३॥

“We are all inured to hardships, while

you are deserving of comforts. We shall
keep vigil for the night for the protection of
Sri Rama, a scion of Kakutstha. (3)

नहि ward प्रियतमो ward fa कश्चन।
ब्रवीम्येव च ते ad सत्येनैव च ते शपे॥४॥
“For, none on earth is more beloved of
me than Sri Rama: | tell you the bare truth
and swear to you by truth. (4)
अस्य प्रसादादाशंसे लोकेऽस्मिन् सुमहद् यश:।
धर्मावाप्तिं च विपुलामर्थकामौ च gency i
“By his grace alone | hope to earn very
great renown in this world as also to acquire
religious merit as well as abundant riches
and sense-enjoyment. (5)
aise प्रियसखं we शयानं we सीतया।
रक्षिष्यामि धनुष्पाणि: सर्वथा ज्ञातिभि: सह॥ u

“As such, | shall with my kindred guard
