* BALAKANDA +

to meet Goddess Parvati, and Love was
thereupon snubbed with a roar in the form
of the sound ‘hum’ by the high-souled Lord.

(10-11)

अवध्यातश्च रुद्रेण चक्षुषा रघुनन्दन।
व्यशीर्यन्त शरीरात् स्वात् सर्वगात्राणि THA: ।॥ १२॥

“He was further reproached by Lord
Rudra (the god of destruction) with His third
eye, O scion of Raghu, and lo! all the limbs
of the evil-minded fellow dropped off from
his body. (12)
wa Wat हतं तस्य निर्दग्धस्य महात्मन:।
अशरीर: Hd: HA: Blase देवेश्वरेण ह॥ १३॥

“It was on that occasion that the limbs
of the haughty fellow, consumed through
the wrath of Lord Siva, the suzerain Lord of
gods, disappeared and it was in this way
that Kama was rendered bodiless. (13)

amg sia विख्यातस्तदाप्रभृति weal
स चाङ्गविषय: श्रीमान् यत्राङ्गं स मुमोच ह॥ १४॥

“Thenceforward he came to be widely
known by the name of Ananga (bodiless),
O scion of Raghu, and the tract of land
where that glorious being shed his embodied
state became known as the Anga territory:
so the tradition goes. (14)

तस्यायमाश्रम: पुण्यस्तस्येमे मुनय: पुरा।
शिष्या aur ait तेषां पापं न विद्यते॥ १५ ॥

“This holy hermitage belongs to Him
and these sages (practising austerities here
at present) have been His disciples in the
past. As such they are devoted to piety and
no sin exists in them, O Rama! (15)

इहाद्य रजनीं राम वसेम शुभदर्शन।

पुण्ययो: सरितोर्मध्ये श्वस्तरिष्यामहे वयम्॥१६॥
“Let us halt for this night in this

hermitage, hemmed in by the two holy

streams, O Rama of handsome _ looks;
tomorrow we shall cross the Ganga. (16)

137

अभिगच्छामहे Wd शुचय: पुण्यमाश्रमम्।
Be वास: परोऽस्माकं सुखं वत्स्यामहे निशाम्॥ १७॥
स्नाताश्च कृतजप्याश्च हुतहव्या नरोत्तम।
तेषां संवदतां aa तपोदीर्घेण चक्षुषा॥१८॥
विज्ञाय परमप्रीता मुनयो हर्षमागमन्।
अर्घ्य पाद्यं तथाऽऽतिथ्यं निवेद्य कुशिकात्मजे। १९ ॥

was: पश्चाद्कुर्वन्नतिथिक्रियाम्।
सत्कारॆ समनुप्राप्य कथाभिरभिरञ्जयन्॥ 20 UI

“Let us all enter the holy hermitage
when we are purified by bath etc. Our
sojourn here will be most welcome and we
shall happily spend the night here after we
have bathed, muttered our prayers and
poured oblations into the sacred fire; O
jewel among men!” While they were talking
together (as aforesaid) there (outside the
hermitage), the sages dwelling in the
hermitage, felt supremely delighted to
discover their presence with their eyes that
had attained a long range (clairvoyance)
through askesis, and experienced a thrill of
joy. Having offered to Viswamitra water to
wash his hands and feet with and extending
their hospitality to him, they subsequently
offered hospitality to Sri Rama and
Laksmana, too. Having received attentions
in return from ViSwamitra as well as from
Sri Rama and Laksmana, they regaled them
with anecdotes, etc. (17—20)

यथार्हमजपन् संध्यामृषयस्ते समाहिता:।
wa वासिभिरानीता मुनिभि: सुव्रतै: सह॥ २१॥
न्यवसन् सुसुखं at कामाश्रमपदे तथा।
कथाभिरभिरामाभिरभिरामौ नृपात्मजौ |

रमयामास धर्मात्मा कौशिको मुनिपुंगव:॥ २२॥

At dusk when day and night meet, the
aforesaid Rsis (including ViSwamitra and
his pupils, Sr’ Rama and Laksmana) muttered
the Gayatri-Mantra according to their ability*
with a calm and collected mind. Taken by
the sages of holy vows dwelling in that

* The maximum Japa that one is expected to do after his Sandhya prayers is one thousand repetitions,
the moderate number is one hundred, while ten is the irreducible minimum—#eaaeat Cat शतमध्यां दशावराम्।
