882

वृक्षाद व्रक्षं प्रधावन् स गिरींश्चापि नदीनदम्।
बभ्राम विलपन् Wa: शोकपङ्कार्णवप्लुत: 1 ११॥

Running fast from tree to tree the said
Sri Rama roamed about along the slopes of
mountains as well as on the banks of rivers
and streams wailing and accosting trees as
below, plunged as he was in an ocean of
bog in the form of grief : (11)

अस्ति कच्चित्त्वया दृष्टा सा कदम्बप्रिया TAT

कदम्ब यदि जानीषे शंस सीतां शुभाननाम्॥ १२॥
“Was my celebrated darling, who is so

fond of Kadamba flowers, seen by you, O

Kadamba? If you know anything about Sita
of charming countenance, pray, tell me. (12)

स्निग्धपल्लवसंकाशां पीतकौशेयवासिनीम्।
शंसस्व यदि सा get बिल्व बिल्वोपमस्तनी ।। १३॥
“If Sita, whose breasts resemble a Bilva
fruit in shape, O Bilva, was seen by you,
please tell me the whereabouts of that lady,
who is tender as a soft shoot and is clad in
yellow silk. (13)
अथवार्जुन शंस त्वं frat तामर्जुनप्रियाम्।
जनकस्य सुता तन्वी Ale sata वा न वा॥ १४॥
“Else, O Arjuna, give you me the news
of my aforesaid darling, who is fond of
Arjuna flowers. Tell me if the frail daughter
of Janaka is still alive or not. (14)
ककुभ: ककुभोरुं तां व्यक्तं जानाति मैथिलीम्।
लतापल्लवपुष्पाढ्यो भाति ह्येष areata: Vk i
“The Kakubha tree evidently knows
the aforesaid princess of Mithila, whose
thighs are smooth as the boughs of a
Kakubha tree. Enriched with climbers, shoots
and blossoms this tree looks charming
indeed. (15)
भ्रमरैरुपगीतश्च यथा द्रुमवरो ह्यसि।
एष ah विजानाति तिलकस्तिलकप्रियाम्॥ १६॥

“As you are no doubt the foremost of
trees, O Tilaka, whose praises are sung by
bees humming close by, you the Tilaka
tree, evidently know the truth about her,

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

who is fond of Tilaka flowers.

अशोक शोकापनुद शोकोपहतचेतनम्।
त्वन्नामानं कुरु क्षिप्रं प्रियासंदर्शनेन माम्॥१७॥
“O Asoka tree, the dispeller of grief by
bringing my darling clearly to my view, make
me, whose understanding has been clouded
by grief, your namesake soon by ridding me
of my grief. (17)

ale ताल त्वया Gel पक्वतालोपमस्तनी।
कथयस्व वरारोहां कारुण्यं ae a मयि॥ १८॥

“O palmyra, if Sita, whose breasts
resemble a ripe palmyra fruit, has been
seen by you, pray, give me the news about
that lady of excellent limbs, if there is any
compassion in your heart for me. (18)

यदि Fel त्वया जम्बो जाम्बूनदसमप्रभा।
प्रियां यदि विजानासि नि:शङ्कं कथयस्व मे॥१९॥

“If, O Jambu (a rose-apple tree), Sita,
who possesses the splendour of gold, has
been seen by you or if you know the truth
about my darling, pray, let me know without
fear. (19)

अहो त्वं कर्णिकाराद्य पुष्पित: शोभसे भृशम्।
कर्णिकारप्रियां साध्वीं शंस दृष्टा यदि प्रिया॥ २०॥

“Laden with flowers, O Karnikara tree,
you look most charming today. Tell me the
whereabouts of the virtuous Sita, who is
fond of Karnikara flowers, if my darling has
been seen by you.” (20)

SCRIBE TACIGIEE पनसान् HIATT AAT |
दाडिमानपि तान् गत्वा दृष्टवा रामो महायशा: It २१॥
बकुलानथ पुन्नागांश्चन्दनान् केतकांस्तथा।
Tar रामो वने Ud उन्मत्त Sa लक्ष्यते॥ २२॥
Seeing the familiar mango and Nipa
trees, gigantic sal trees, jack-fruit and Kurava
and Dhava trees as also pomegranate trees,
the highly illustrious Sri Rama went up to
them. Nay, addressing questions to Bakula,
Punnaga, sandalwood and Ketaka trees,
while roaming about in the forest, Sri Rama
looked hysterical, as it were. (21-22)

(16)
