* AYODHYAKANDA +

309

Canto VII

Beholding the festivities and finding Kausalya bestowing large gifts of
money on the Brahmanas, Manthara, a hunchback hereditary maid-
servant of Queen Kaikeyi, who had accidentally ascended the roof
of the palace, inquires of Sri Rama’s erstwhile nurse the occasion

for the festivities and, on being told of Sri Rama’s forthcoming
installation, feels enraged and, approaching Kaikeyi,
instigates her to stop the installation. Kaikeyi,
on the other hand, feels rejoiced over the
news and gifts her a jewel as a
token of her pleasure

ज्ञातिदासी यतो जाता कैकेय्या तु सहोषिता।
Wag चन्द्रसंकाशमारुरोह यदृच्छया॥१॥

A maid-servant of Kaikeyis parents*,
of unknown birth, who had actually lived
with her ever since she came to Ayodhya,
ascended by chance the roof of her palace,
which shone like the moon because of its
white colour. (1)
सिक्तराजपथां कृत्स्नां प्रकोर्णकमलोत्पलाम्।
अयोध्यां मन्थरा तस्मात् प्रासादादन्ववैक्षत॥ २॥

From that palace Manthara, as the maid-
servant was called, looked round the whole
of Ayodhya, whose main road had been
watered, nay, which had been strewn with
lotuses and lilies here and there. (2)

पताकाभिर्वरार्हाभिर्ध्वजैश्च समलंकृताम्।
fart चन्दनतोयैश्च शिर:स्नातजनैर्युताम्॥३॥
It had been fully decorated with costly
buntings and flags and sprinkled with sandal-
water and was crowded with men that had
gone through a ceremonial bath (by washing
their head as well, which was ordinarily left
out apparently because of their growing
long hair). (3)

The city was rendered noisy on all
sides by the chief of the Brahmanas moving
hither and thither with flowers and balls of
sweets (for being offered as an auspicious
present to Sri Rama on the occasion of his
installation) in their hands. It contained
temples with white doorways made of crystal
and was resonant with the sound of all
sorts of musical instruments. (4)
सम्प्रहृष्टजनाकोर्णां ब्रह्मघोषनिनादिताम्।
प्रहृष्टवरहस्त्यश्वां सम्प्रणर्दितगोवृषाम्॥ ५ A

Nay, Ayodhya was thronged with
excessively delighted men, echoed with the
loud chanting of the Vedas and was
distinguished by excellent and overjoyed
elephants and horses as well as by roaring
bulls and cows. (5)

हृष्टप्रमुदितै: पौरैरुच्छितध्वजमालिनीम्।
अयोध्यां मन्थरा दृष्टवा Ut विस्मयमागता॥६॥
Manthara’ ७25 seized with great

wonder to see Ayodhya brimming over with
citizens thrilled and overjoyed at the news

* We read in the Padma-Purana :

मन्थरा नाम कार्यार्थमप्सरा प्रेषिता GE: | दासी काचन कैकेय्यै TAT केकयभूभृता॥
“ A celestial nymph, Manthara by name, was deputed by the gods to carry out their mission (in the
shape of sending Sri Rama into exile and thereby bringing about the destruction of Ravana). She was given
away by the king of the Kekaya territory as a maid-servant to Kaikey?’.
