+ UTTARAKANDA +

1011

एकपञ्चाश: सर्ग:
Canto LI
On his way to Ayodhya Sumantra narrates the account of Bhrgu’s curse
which he heard from Durvasa and tells Laksmana some
future events to console him

तथा संचोदित: सूतो लक्ष्मणेन महात्मना।
तद् वाक्यमृषिणा प्रोक्तं व्याहर्तुमुपचक्रमे॥ १॥

Thus instigated by noble Laksmana,
the charioteer set himself to speak out
what had been uttered by the Rsi, Durvasa:

(1)

पुरा नाम्ना fe gatat sta: Gar महामुनि: |
वसिष्ठस्याश्रमे पुण्ये वार्षिक्यं समुवास ह॥ २॥

“In former days, a great ascetic by
name Durvasa, the son of Atri, stayed at
the hermitage of Vasistha in the four months
of the rainy season. (2)
तमाश्रमं महातेजा: frat a सुमहायशा:।
पुरोहितं महात्मानं दिदृक्षुरगमत् स्वयम्॥३॥

“Your father, possessed of great power
and mighty fame, came in person to that
hermitage to see the noble priest, Vasistha.

(3)
स दृष्टवा सूर्यसंकाशं ज्वलन्तमिव तेजसा।
उपविष्टं वसिष्ठस्य weed महामुनिम्॥४॥
at मुनी तापसश्रेष्ठौ विनीतो ह्यभ्यवादयत्।
स ताभ्यां पूजितो राजा स्वागतेनासनेन च॥५॥
पाद्येन फलमूलैश्च उवास मुनिभि: सह।
तेषां तत्रोपविष्टानां AAT: सुमधुरा: HAM: is I

“Having seen the great ascetic,
Durvasa, radiant with brilliance as the sun
glowing with effulgence, seated on the left
side of Vasistha, he performed salutation
courteously to the two great ascetics, who
excelled all other ascetics in penance. The
King, on the other hand, was honoured by
them with words, of welcome, the offering of
seat, ablution to wash the feet and also
fruits and roots, and thus he stayed with
them for some time. At mid-day, when the

great Rsis assembled together, sweet tales
were narrated. (4—6)

ayg: परमर्षीणां मध्यादित्यगतेऽहनि।
तत: कथायां कस्यांचित् प्राञ्ञलि: Wael नृप:॥ ७॥
sara तं महात्मानमत्रे:; पुत्रं तपोधनम्।
भगवन् किंप्रमाणेन wa वंशो भविष्यति॥ ८॥
किमायुश्च fe awa: पुत्राश्चान्ये किमायुष:।
रामस्य च सुता ये स्युस्तेषामायु: कियद् भवेत्॥ ९॥
काम्यया भगवन् ब्रूहि वंशस्यास्य गतिं मम।
तच्छुत्वा Met AKT Wal दशरथस्य Til Lol
gare: सुमहातेजा व्याहर्तुमुपचक्रमे।
TT राजन् पुरा वृत्तं तदा देवासुरे युधि॥११॥
दैत्या: सुरैर्भरतस्यमाना भृगुपत्नीं समाश्रिता:।
तया दत्ताभयास्तत्र न्यवसन्नभयास्तदा॥१२॥

“Then in course of conversation, the
king with his hands folded spoke thus to
that great son of Atri, rich in penances: ‘Sir,
for how long will my family continue, to what
age will Rama reach and how long will the
other sons live? So also, what shall be the
duration of the life of the son of Rama? Sir,
| wish you may predict the future course of
my family.’

“Thus hearing words spoken by the
king, DaSaratha, the mighty Durvasa began
to speak. ‘Listen to me, O king. In the
ancient times, it so happened that the sons
of Diti (the Daityas) conquered by the gods,
approached the wife of Bhrgu and having
been granted security by her, dwelt there
(at the hermitage of Bhrgu) fearlessly.

(7—12)

तया परिगृहीतांस्तान् दृष्टवा क्रुद्ध: सुरेश्वर:।
चक्रेण शितधारेण भृगुपत्न्या: शिरोऽहरत्॥१३॥

“The Lord of the Devas, Visnu, angered
