* AYODHYAKANDA +

allow you to attain your desired end—you,

who covet sovereignty for your son, i.e.,

myself. (17)

न मे विकांक्षा जायेत त्यक्तुं cat पापनिश्चयाम्।

यदि रामस्य AAA त्वयि स्यान्मातृवत् सदा॥ १८॥
“No disinclination would be felt by me

even in deserting you, a woman of sinful

resolve, if Sri Rama did not regard you as
a mother at all times. (18)

उत्पन्ना तु कथं बुद्धिस्तवेयं पापदर्शिनी।
साधुचारित्रविभ्रष्टे पूर्वेषां नो विगर्हिता॥१९॥

“How did this idea of securing the
kingdom for a younger’ brother in
supersession of the eldest—an idea which
contemplates evil in relation to others and
which has been severely condemned by
our forbears—enter your mind at all, O
woman fallen from virtuous conduct? (19)

अस्मिन् कुले fe सर्वेषां ज्येष्ठो राज्येऽभिषिच्यते।

अपरे भ्रातरस्तस्मिन् प्रवर्तन्ते समाहिता:॥ २०॥
“Indeed in our house the eldest* of all

brothers is installed on the throne. The other

brothers devoutly obey him. (20)

न हि wa wea त्वं राजधर्ममवेक्षसे।
गतिं वा न विजानासि राजव्रत्तस्य शाश्वतीम्॥ २१॥

“| believe you do not at all respect the
moral code prescribed for kings, nor do you
know the eternal way of life of kings, O
cruel woman ! (21)

wad राजपुत्रेषु ज्येष्ठो राजाभिषिच्यते।
राज्ञामेतत् समं तत् स्यादिक्ष्वाकूणां विशेषत: i २२॥

“Among the sons of a king the eldest
alone is invariably crowned king. This is a
common practice among all kings, and it is
particularly true of the Ikswakus. (22)
तेषां धर्मैकरक्षाणां कुलचारित्रशोभिनाम्।
अद्य चारित्रशौटीर्यं cat प्राप्य विनिवर्तितम्॥ २३॥

563

“The self-esteem, born of loftiness of
character, cherished by the aforesaid kings—
who were protected by their righteousness
alone and who shone by virtue of a mode of
life befitting their race—has disappeared
today on coming to be associated with you.

(23)

तवापि सुमहाभागे जनेन्द्रकुलपूर्वके।
बुद्धिमोह: कथमयं सम्भूतस्त्वयि Wed: i २४॥
“How has this perversity of reason,
contemptible for you, appeared in you too,
O exceptionally blessed lady, born of a
royal lineage ! (24)
न तु कामं करिष्यामि तवाहं पापनिश्चये।
यया व्यसनमारब्धं जीवितान्तकरं AT २५॥
“| will not in any case accomplish your
desired object, O woman of sinful resolve,
since a calamity which may eventually prove
fatal to me, has been set on foot by you. (25)

w त्विदानीमेवाहमप्रियार्थं तवानघम्।
निवर्तयिष्यामि are भ्रातरं स्वजनप्रियम्॥ २६॥
“In order to give offence to you, | shall,
however, forthwith cause to return from the
forest my sinless elder brother, Sri Rama,
the beloved of his people. (26)
निवर्तयित्वा रामं च तस्याहं दीप्ततेजस:।
दासभूतो भविष्यामि सुस्थितेनान्तरात्मना॥ २७॥
“Nay, having caused Sri Rama to return
from the forest, | shall settle down in life

with a composed mind, turning a servant of
the aforesaid prince of effulgent glory.” (27)

इत्येवमुक्त्वा भरतो महात्मा
प्रियेतरैर्वाक्यगणैस्तुदंस्ताम् ।
शोकार्दितश्चापि ननाद भूय:
Feet यथा मन्दरकन्दरस्थ:॥ २८॥
Having spoken as aforesaid to his
mother, pricking her once more with volleys

* This is fully supported by Manu, who says :

WE एव तु गृह्णीयात्सकलं पैतृकं धनम्। अन्ये तमनुजीवेयुर्यथैव frat तथा॥

“The eldest son alone should inherit the entire property of his father. Others should depend on him

as they did on their father (heretofore).”
