588

Seizing hold of his javelin, even as
Death would take in his service Kalaratri
(a sister of Kala, the deity presiding over
the night of destruction at the end of the
world cycle), Trisira, sprung from the lions
of Ravana, hurled it at the son of the wind-
god. (38)
fea: क्षिप्तामिवोल्कां at शक्तिं क्षिप्तामसङ्घताम्।
गृहीत्वा हरिशार्दूलो बभञ्ज च ननाद च॥३९॥

Catching that javelin flung by Trisira,
which came unobstructed like a meteor shot
from the heavens, Hanuman (a tiger among
the monkeys) snapped it and roared, too.

(39)
Weer वानरगणा विनेदुर्जलदा यथा॥४०॥

Seeing that javelin of formidable aspect
destroyed by Hanuman, the simian hosts
felt overjoyed and thundered like rainy
clouds. (40)

wa: Get समुद्यम्य त्रिशिरा राक्षसोत्तम:।
निचखान del Get वानरेन्द्रस्य वक्षसि॥४१॥
Lifting up his sword, Trisira, the foremost
of ogres, thereupon immediately hit with
vehemence the breast of the monkey-chief,
Hanuman. (41)

ख्ड्गप्रहाराभिहतो हनूमान् मारुतात्मज:।
आजघान त्रिमूर्धानं तलेनोरसि वीर्यवान्॥४२॥
Wounded by the thrust of his sword,
the valiant Hanuman, sprung from the loins
of the wind-god, struck the ogre, Trisira, with
his palm on the breast. (42)

स तलाभिहतस्तेन स्रस्तहस्तायुधो भुवि।
निपपात महातेजास्त्रिशिरास्त्यक्तचेतन: ॥ ४३ ॥
Slapped by him, though endowed with
extraordinary energy, Trisira) dropped
unconscious to the ground, the weapon in
his hand having slipped. (43)
स तस्य Uda: Gest तमाच्छिद्य महाकपि:।
ननाद गिरिसंकाशस्त्रासयन् सर्वराक्षसान्॥४४॥

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA +

Snatching away that sword of the ogre
even as he was falling down, the mighty
monkey, Hanuman, who looked like a
mountain, let out a roar, striking terror in all
the ogres. (44)

अमृष्यमाणस्तं घोषमुत्पपात निशाचर:।
उत्पत्य च हनूमन्तं ताडयामास मुष्टिना॥४५॥
Unable to bear that roar, the prowler of
the night sprang on his feet; and, jumping
up, he struck Hanuman with his fist. (45)

तेन मुष्टिप्रहारेण संचुकोप महाकपि:।
कुपितश्च frome किरीटे राक्षसर्षभम्॥४६॥

The great monkey flew into a rage at
the aforesaid blow to Trisira’s fist and, full of
fury, seized hold of Trisira (the foremost of
ogres) by his head covered with a diadem.

(46)
a तस्य शीर्षाण्यसिना शितेन
किरीटजुष्टानि सकुण्डलानि।
ee: प्रचिच्छेद सुतोऽनिलस्य
त्वष्टु: सुतस्येव शिरांसि yw: ive
Getting enraged, that son of the wind-
god completely severed with his sharp sword
all the three heads of Trisira, covered with
diadems and adorned with ear-rings, in the
same way as Indra, the ruler of gods, lopped
off in in the past the three heads of ViSwarupa,
son of Twasta. (47)
तान्यायताक्षाण्यगसंनिभानि
प्रदीप्तवैश्वानरलोचनानि ।
ज्योतींषि मुक्तानि यथार्कमार्गात्॥४८॥

The aforesaid heads of Trisira (an
enemy of Indra), which were distinguished
by enormous sense-organs (appertures of
the eyes, ears and nose) were huge as
rocks and had eyes glowing like a flaming
fire—fell to the ground like stars fallen down
from the sky (lit., the orbit of the sun). (48)

तस्मिन् हते देवरिपौ त्रिशीर्षे
हनूमता शक्रपराक्रमेण।
