426

“Fallen in the grip of the noose of
Death, a single individual actually perpetrates
a sin; while the entire race perishes on
account of that vile fellow due to his wrong
doing.” (7)
एवं सम्मन्त्रयन्नेव सक्रोधो wast प्रति।
राम: सुवेलं वासाय चित्रसानुमुपारुहत्॥८॥

Talking as aforesaid, full of wrath
as he was towards Ravana, Sri Rama
ascended the Suvela mountain, distinguished
by its lovely peaks, with a view to halting
there. (8)

पृष्ठतो लक्ष्मणश्चैनमन्वगच्छत् समाहित:।

सशरं चापमुद्यम्य सुमहद्विक्रमे रत:॥९॥
Lifting his bow alongwith an arrow,

Laksmana, who was fully alert and fond of

showing extraordinary prowess, followed him
at his back. (9)

तमन्वारोहत् Gita: सामात्य: सविभीषण:।
हनुमानङ्गदो नीलो मैन्दो द्विविद एव च॥१०॥
गजो गवाक्षो गवय: शरभो गन्धमादन:।
we: कुमुदश्चैव Bl रम्भश्च यूथप:॥११॥
जाम्बवांश्च सुषेणश्च ऋषभश्च महामति:।
दुर्मुखश्च महातेजास्तथा शतवलि: HP: eeu
Ut चान्ये च बहवो वानरा: शीघ्रगामिन:।
a वायुवेगप्रवणास्तं गिरिं गिरिचारिण:॥१३॥
अध्यारोहन्त शतश: सुवेलं aA राघव:।
a त्वदीर्घेण कालेन गिरिमारुह्य ada: ev
ददृशु: शिखरे तस्य विषक्तामिव खे पुरीम्।
at शुभां प्रवरद्वारां प्राकारवरशोभिताम्॥१५॥
लङ्कां राक्षससम्पूर्णां ददृशुर्हरियूथपा:।
प्राकारवरसंस्थैश्च तथा नीलैश्च राक्षसै:॥१६॥
Seed हरिश्रेष्ठा: प्राकारमपरं कृतम्॥१७॥

Following him, Sugriva with his ministers
and Vibhisana, nay, Hanuman, Angada, Nila,
Mainda as well as Dwivida, Gaja, Gavaksa,
Gavaya, Sarabha, Gandhamadana, Panasa
and Kumuda as well, Hara and the troop-

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA +

commander, Rambha, as also Jambavan
and Susena as well as the highly intelligent
Rsabha, as also Durmukha, who was
endowed with extraordinary energy, and the
monkey Satabali—these as well as many
other well-known swift-footed monkeys, who
moved with the speed of the wind and used
to range on hills, scaled the Suvela mountain
in hundreds, reaching the spot where Sri
Rama, a scion of Raghu, was. Climbing up
the mountain in a short time on all sides,
and taking their stand on the top of that
mountain, they, for their part, beheld the city
suspended as it were in the air. The leaders
of monkey-troops saw the splendid Lanka
provided with most excellent gates, graced
with an excellent defensive wall and packed
with ogres. Nay, the aforesaid jewels among
the monkeys noticed another wall formed
(as it were on the original one) by the
dark-hued ogres ranged in compact rows
for defence on the excellent defensive
walls. (10—17)

ते दृष्ट्वा वानरा: Ad राक्षसान् युद्धकाङ्क्षिण:।
मुमुचुर्विविधान् नादांस्तस्य रामस्य पश्यत:॥ १८॥
Beholding the ogres burning to fight, all
the aforesaid monkeys raised clamours of
various kinds while Sri Rama stood looking
on. (18)
ततोऽस्तमगमत् we: संध्यया प्रतिरञ्जित:।
पूर्णचन्द्रप्रदीप्ता च क्षपा समतिवर्तत॥१९॥
Reddened by the evening twilight, the
sun presently sank below the horizon, and,
illumined by the full moon, the night duly set
in. (19)
at: स wat हरिवाहिनीपति-
र्विभीषणेन प्रतिनन्द्य सत्कृत:।
सलक्ष्मणो यूथपयूथसंयुत:
सुवेलपृष्ठे न्यवसद् यथासुखम्॥ २०॥

Honoured by Vibhisana after greeting
him joyfully, nay, accompanied by Laksmana
