« KISKINDHAKANDA +

स चतुर्णामुपायानां तृतीयमुपवर्णयन्।
भेदयामास तान् सर्वान् वानरान् वाक्यसम्पदा॥ ६ ॥

Employing the third (in order) of the
four expedients (of winning over an enemy
or dissenter), Hanuman set all the aforesaid
monkeys at variance with one another by
dint of his eloquence. (6)

तेषु सर्वेषु भिन्नेषु ततोऽभीषयदङ्गदम्।
भीषणैर्विविधैर्वाक्यै:३ कोपोपायसमन्वितै:। ७॥

All of them having been set at variance
with one another, he then proceeded to
intimidate Angada by means of various
frightening words coupled with threats : (7)

त्वं समर्थतर: पित्रा युद्धे तारेय a ध्रुवम्।

दृढं धारयितुं शक्त: कपिराज्यं यथा पिता॥८॥
“You are undoubtedly more powerful in

combat even than your uncle (Sugriva) and

are capable of firmly retaining the sovereignty

of the monkeys as efficiently as your father,

O Angada ! (8)

नित्यमस्थिरचित्ता fe कपयो हरिपुंगव।
नाज्ञाप्यं विषहिष्यन्ति पुत्रदारं विना त्वया॥९॥

“The monkeys are indeed ever fickle-
minded, O bull among the monkeys ! In the
absence of their progeny and wife they
would not brook your authority. (9)

त्वां Aa ह्यनुरञ्जेयु: प्रत्यक्षं प्रवदामि a
यथायं जाम्बवान् नील: सुहोत्रश्च महाकपि:।॥ १०॥
we ते st सर्वे सामदानादिभिर्गुणै:।
दण्डेन न त्वया शबक्या: सुग्रीवादपकर्षितुम्॥ Ve il

“| tell you clearly: these monkeys will
certainly not get devoted to you. As is the
case with this Jambavan (the king of bears),
Nila and the mighty monkey Suhotra, so,
neither |, nor all these monkeys standing
before you can be estranged by you from
Sugriva by means of persuasion, gift and
other expedients, much less through violence.

(10-11)
बलीयसा।

आत्मरक्षाकरस्तस्मान्न विगृह्णीत दुर्बल:॥१२॥

1133

“They say it is possible to remain at
ease on entering into hostilities with one
who is weak (and not otherwise). Hence a
weakling seeking self-protection should not
make enemies with a stronger person.(12)

यां चेमां मन्यसे धात्रीमेतद् बिलमिति श्रुतम्।
एतल्लक्ष्मणबाणानामीषत् कार्यं विदारणम्॥ १३॥

“To tear asunder this cave, which has
been heard of by you as impregnable (from
the mouth of Tara) and which you regard as
capable of affording protection to you (against
the wrath of Indra and others), is easy for
the arrows of Laksmana. (13)

raced fe कृतमिन्द्रेण क्षिपता ह्यशनिं पुरा।
लक्ष्मणो निशितैर्बाणैर्भिन्द्यात् पत्रपुटं यथा॥ evil

“Indeed a very small opening was made
into this cave in the past by Indra (the ruler
of gods) while hurling his thunderbolt (which
only succeeded in getting rid of the demon
Maya, who had taken shelter in it); Laksmana,
however, can really tear it asunder as a
vessel of leaves by means of his sharpened
arrows. (14)

लक्ष्मणस्य च नाराचा aga: सन्ति तद्विधा:।
वज्राशनिसमस्पर्शा गिरीणामपि दारका:॥ १५॥

“Laksmana has in his possession many
such steel arrows as have an impact similar
to that of a thunderbolt (hurled by Indra) or
lightning discharged by a cloud and are
capable even of rending mountains. (15)
अवस्थानं यदैव त्वमासिष्यसि परंतप।
तदैव wa: ad त्यक्ष्यन्ति कृतनिश्चया:॥ १६॥

“The moment you take up your abode
in the cave, O scourge of your foes, the
monkeys will all forsake you since they are
already determined to do so. (16)

स्मरन्त: पुत्रदाराणां नित्योद्विग्ना बुभुक्षिता:।
fen दु:खशय्याभिस्त्वां aera पृष्ठत: it १७॥
“Thinking of their progeny and wife,
ever afraid (of Sri Rama, Laksmana and
Sugriva), nay, famished and weary of their
