1090

उमापतेश्च तत् कर्म ज्ञात्वा त्रासमुपागमत्।
ततो देवं महात्मानं शितिकण्ठं कपर्दिनम्॥१७॥
जगाम शरणं राजा सभृत्यबलवाहन:।
ad: प्रहस्य वरद: सह देव्या महेश्वर:॥१८॥
प्रजापतिसुतं वाक्यमुवाच वरद: स्वयम्।
उत्तिष्ठोत्तिष्ठं राजर्षे कार्दमेय महाबल॥१९॥
पुरुषत्वमृते सौम्य at वरय सुव्रत।
Aa: स राजा शोकार्त: प्रत्याख्यातो महात्मना॥ २०॥

Knowing that it was wrought by the
lord of Uma, Siva, he was afraid. Then the
King together with the army and carriers
sought refuge in the mighty lord, the blue-
throated and skull-adorned one; the great
lord Siva, giver of boons, together with
goddess Parvati, himself spoke to the son
of Prajapati: ‘Arise, O Rsi among Kings, O
mighty one, son of Kardama, performer of
vows, gracious one, barring manhood ask
for any boon’. Then that King being thus
rebuffed, was afflicted by sorrow. (17—20)
स्त्रीभूतोऽसौ न जग्राह वरमन्यं सुरोत्तमात्।
ad: शोकेन महता शैलराजसुतां Tui
प्रणिपत्य उमां देवीं सर्वेणैवान्तरात्मना।
ईशे वराणां वरदे लोकानामसि भामिनी॥ २२॥
अमोघदर्शने देवि भज सौम्येन चक्षुषा।
wed तस्य राजर्षेर्विज्ञाय हरसंनिधौ॥ २३॥
प्रत्युवाच शुभं वाक्यं देवी रुद्रस्य सम्मता।
अर्धस्य देवो वरदो वरार्धस्य तव ह्यहम्॥ २४॥

Having become a woman, he did not
ask for any other boon from the Lord of the
gods, Siva. Then in great sorrow, the King
paying obeisance to the daughter of the lord
of mountains, Parvati, with all his heart,
said: ‘O goddess of boons, giver of boons,
you are the loveliest woman of the worlds.

« VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

O goddess whose vision is fruitful, with your
benevolent eye favour me. Knowing what was
in the mind of the Rsi among kings, Ila, She
spoke these auspicious words approved by
Lord Siva in his presence: ‘The giver of one
half of the boon is the Lord and that of the
other half | am the giver. (21—24)

तस्मादर्धं गृहाण त्वं स्त्रीपुंसोर्यावदिच्छसि।
तदद्भुततरं श्रुत्वा देव्या वरमनुत्तमम्॥ २५॥
सम्प्रहष्टमना भूत्वा राजा वाक्यमथाब्रवीत्।
यदि देवि weet मे रूपेणाप्रतिमा भुवि॥ २६॥
मासं स्त्रीत्वमुपासित्वा मासं स्यां पुरुष: पुन:।
ईप्सितं तस्य विज्ञाय eat सुरुचिरानना॥ २७॥
प्रत्युवाच शुभं वाक्यमेवमेव भविष्यति।
राजन् पुरुषभूतस्त्वं स्त्रीभावं न स्मरिष्यसि॥ २८ ॥
स्त्रीभूतश्च परं मासं न स्मरिष्यसि पौरुषम्।
एवं स राजा पुरुषो मासं भूत्वाथ crate: |
त्रैलोक्यसुन्दरी नारी मासमेकमिलाभवत्॥ २९॥

‘Therefore, accept half of the period as
a woman and the other half as man for as
long as you desire.’ Hearing this most
wonderful and excellent boon being granted
by the goddess, highly pleased the king then
said: ‘O goddess, possessed of loveliness,
uncomparable on this earth, if thou art pleased
with me, | may remain as man for a month,
and a woman for the other,’ The goddess of
lovely face, having known the desire of the
king, replied in these auspicious words : ‘Thus
will it be; O king, becoming a man you shall
not remember your woman-hood. Becoming
a woman too you shall not remember your
manhood’. Thus that King, son of Kardama,
became a man for one month and a most
beautiful lady in the next, i.e., one month Ila
and one month Ila). (25—29)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये उत्तरकाण्डे सप्ताशीतितम: AW: ॥ ८७॥

Thus ends Canto Eighty-seven in the Uttarakanda of the glorious Ramayana of
Valmiki, the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

