* AYODHYAKANDA +

helter-skelter in various directions as though
scared by lions? (8)

राजा वा राजपुत्रो वा मृगयामटते वने।
sagt श्वापदं किंचित् सौमित्रे ज्ञातुमर्हसि॥ ९॥
“Is any king or prince going about hunting
in the forest? Or has any other beast of
prey appeared here? You ought to find this
out, O son of Sumitra ! (9)

सुदुश्चरो गिरिश्चायं पक्षिणामपि लक्ष्मण।
सर्वमेतद् यथातत्त्वमभिज्ञातुमिहार्हसि ।। १० ॥

“Moreover this mountain, O Laksmana,
is most difficult of access even to birds of
other parts. You ought, therefore, to ascertain
all this correctly here.” (10)

स लक्ष्मण: संत्वरित: सालमारुह्य पुष्पितम्।

प्रेक्षमाणो fast: wat: gat दिशमवैक्षत॥ ee it
Enjoined thus, the celebrated Laksmana

climbed up with great expedition a sal tree

in blossom and, surveying all the quarters,
fixed his gaze on the eastern quarter. (11)

उदड्मुख: प्रेक्षमाणो ददर्शं महतीं चमूम्।
गजाश्वरथसम्बाधां यत्तैर्युक्तां पदातिभि:॥ १२॥
Looking intently with his face now turned
northward he espied a large army thick with
elephants, horses and chariots and conjoined
with vigilant foot-soldiers. (12)

तामश्वरथसम्पूर्णां रथध्वजविभूषिताम्।
शशंस सेनां रामाय वचनं चेदमब्रवीत्॥१३॥
He announced to Sn Rama 8
approach of that army abounding in horses
and chariots and adorned with ensigns
borne on chariots, and made the following
submission : (13)
aft संशमयत्वार्य: सीता च भजतां गुहाम्।
सज्यं कुरुष्व चापं च शरांश्च कवचं तथा॥ evil
“Let your worthy self fully extinguish
the fire lest the smoke issuing from it should
attract the army to this spot and let Sita
seek a cave. Nay, keep ready your bow, as
well as arrows and armour.” (14)

633

तं राम: पुरुषव्याघ्रो लक्ष्मणं प्रत्युवाच ह।
अङ्गावेक्षस्व सौमित्रे कस्येमां मन्यसे चमूम्॥ १५॥
To the said Laksmana, they say, Sri
Rama, a veritable tiger among men, replied
as follows: “Dear Laksmana, please look
carefully at the device of the ensign and
tell me whose army you consider it to be.”
(15)

एवमुक्तस्तु WATT लक्ष्मणो वाक्यमब्रवीत्।
दिधक्षन्निव at सेनां रुषित: पावको यथा॥ १६॥
Commanded thus by Sri Rama,
Laksmana for his part submitted as follows,
gazing at the army as though keen to
consume it like an angry fire : (16)
आवां हन्तुं समभ्येति कैकेय्या भरत: सुत:॥ १७॥
“Evidently having secured consecration
on the throne of Ayodhya and keen to attain
undisputed sovereignty, Bharata, son of
Kaikeyi, for his part, comes fully prepared
to kill us both. (17)

we वै सुमहान् श्रीमान् विटपी सम्प्रकाशते।
विराजत्युज्ज्वलस्कन्ध: कोविदारध्वजो रथे॥ १८॥

“An ensign bearing the device of a
Kovidara tree with a white trunk really shines
prominently over there on a chariot standing
where that gigantic tree, rich in flowers and
fruits etc., is clearly visible. (18)

भजन्त्येते यथाकाममश्वानारुह्य शीघ्रगान्।
Ta भ्राजन्ति संहृष्टा गजानारुह्य सादिन:॥ १९॥

“Mounting swift-going horses as they
would, these horsemen are heading towards
this spot. Mounting elephants, these riders
on elephants too appear highly rejoiced while
marching towards this place. (19)

paieiclall fie वीर श्रयावहे।
fasta: संनद्धावुद्यतायुधौ॥ २०॥
“'।'31(…9 up our bows let us both station
ourselves on the summit of the mountain, O
heroic prince! Or clothed with mail, let us
continue on this very spot with uplifted
weapons. (20)
