208

the suzerain lord of monkeys, now rejoiced
and grew in size on perceiving that offspring
of Ravana with his marvellous weapons and
picturesque bow raised upward on the field
of battle, inclined as he was to fighting. (16)

a मन्दराग्रस्थ इवांशुमाली
विवृद्धकोपो बलवीर्यसंव्रत:।
ददाह नेत्राग्निमरीचिभिस्तदा॥ १७॥
Infuriated and full of strength and virility,
Hanuman, who resembled the sun appearing
on a peak of Mount Mandara, began at that
moment to burn Prince Aksa alongwith his
forces and vehicles by the rays of fire
emanating from his eyes. (17)

aa: स बाणासनशक्रकार्मुक:

शरप्रवर्षो युधि राक्षसाम्बुद:।
शरान् मुमोचाशु हरीश्वराचले

बलाहको वृष्टिमिवाचलोत्तमे॥ १८॥

Bearing a rainbow in the shape of a
bow and pouring a shower of arrows on the
field of battle, the cloud in the form of the
ogre Aksa began to discharge arrows rapidly
on a mountain in the shape of Hanuman, a
leader of monkeys, even as a cloud would
pour a shower on the foremost of mountains.

(18)
कपिस्ततस्तं रणचण्डविक्रमं
प्रवृद्धतेजोबलवीर्यसायकम् ।
कुमारमक्षं प्रसमीक्ष्य संयुगे
ननाद हर्षाद् घनतुल्यनि:स्वन: ॥ १९॥

“Observing on the field of battle the
aforesaid Prince Aksa, whose prowess was
formidable in combat, nay, whose energy,
strength, prowess and force of arrows had
considerably grown, Hanuman thereupon
shouted in sheer joy, his roar resembling a
clap of thunder. (19)

गजो महाकूपमिवावृतं qt: २०॥

« VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

Proud of his valour on the field of battle
as a result of ignorance (characteristic of
children), and with blood-shot eyes, his fury
having grown beyond measure, Aksa
approached Hanuman, who had no rival in
combat, even as an elephant would approach

a big well covered with grass. (20)
स तेन बाणै: wast निपातितै-
JR नादं घननादनि:स्वन:।
समुत्सहेनाशु नभ: समारुजन्
भुजोरुविक्षेपणघोरदर्शन: ॥२१॥

Struck with arrows shot with violence
by Aksa, Hanuman forthwith shouted with
great vigour in a voice resembling thunder,
rending the air, as it were, and assuming a
terrible aspect by stretching out his arms
and thighs. (21)

तमुत्पतन्तं समभिद्रवद् act
स राक्षसानां प्रवर: प्रतापवान्।
रथी रथश्रेष्ठतर: किरन् vit:
पयोधर: शैलमिवाश्मवृष्टिभि: ।। २२॥

Mounted on a chariot, the mighty and
glorious Aksa, the most distinguished of ogres
and the most eminent of chariot-warriors,
closely followed Hanuman even as the latter
sprang up in the sky, covering him with shafts,
even as a cloud would cover a mountain with
showers of hailstones. (22)

मनोजव: data भीमविक्रम: 23

Darting like the wind between the arrows

and thereby escaping those arrows of Aksa,

the heroic Hanuman, who was swift as thought

and exhibited terrific prowess on the field of

battle, began to range the airspace. (23)
खमास्तृणन्तं विविधै: शरोत्तमै: |

बलहुमानचक्षुषा
जगाम चिन्तां स च मारुतात्मज: ॥ २४॥

अवैक्षताक्षं
