* AYODHYAKANDA +

gulped without mastication, nay those that
can be sucked and those that require to be
licked, and also lovely garlands dropped
straight from trees, also drinks such as
wine and meats of various kinds.” (20-21)

एवं समाधिना युक्तस्तेजसाप्रतिमेन च।
शिक्षास्वरसमायुक्तं सुव्रतश्चान्रवीन्मुनि:॥ २२॥
So did the sage of noble vows, who is
rich in concentration of mind and endowed
with matchless glory too, utter words of
invocation pronounced according to the rules
of phonetics and accented according to the
rules of grammar. (22)

मनसा ध्यायतस्तस्य प्राङ्मुखस्य कृताञ्जले: |
आजग्मुस्तानि सर्वाणि दैवतानि पृथक् पृथक्॥ २३॥

Even as the sage invoked the aforesaid
gods with his mind, sitting with his face
turned towards the east, his palms joined
together in supplication, all those deities
that had been invoked by the sage came
one by one before him. (23)

मलयं edt Wa तत: स्वेदनुदोऽनिल:।
उपस्पृश्य ववौ युक्त्या सुप्रियात्मा BE शिव: th २४॥

Thereupon a cool breeze, which was
most delightful to the touch and which wiped
one’s sweat through mere contact blew gently
touching the Malaya and Dardura mountains,
clothed with forests of sandalwood trees.

(24)
ततोऽभ्यवर्षन्त घना दिव्या: HaAgya: |
देवदुन्दुभिघोषश्च दिक्षु सर्वासु शुश्रुवे॥२५॥

Then fell down thick showers of
heavenly flowers and the sound of celestial
kettledrums was heard in all the quarters.

(25)
प्रववुश्चोत्तमा वाता ननृतुश्चाप्सरोगणा:।

प्रजगुर्देवगन्धर्वा वीणा: प्रमुमुचु: स्वरान्॥ २६॥

Nay, excellent breezes began
incessantly to blow and bevies of celestial
nymphs began to dance. Heavenly

Gandharvas beautifully sang and Vinas gave
forth melodies. (26)

615

स शब्दो द्यां च भूमिं च प्राणिनां श्रवणानि च।
विवेशोच्चावच: श्लक्ष्ण: समो लयगुणान्वित: Ut २७॥
That sound of vocal and instrumental
music—which rose and fell at intervals, was
soft and of a moderate pitch and endowed
with the virtue of a uniform measure of
time—penetrated into heaven, earth and the
ears of living beings. (27)

तस्मिन्नेवंगते शब्दे दिव्ये श्रोत्रसुखे नृणाम्।

cast und सैन्यं विधानं विश्वकर्मण:॥ २८॥
While that heavenly melody, agreeable

to the ears of men, came in that way, the

army of Bharata beheld the handiwork of

ViSwakarma. (28)

aya fe समा भूमि: समन्तात् पञ्चयोजनम्।
शाब्वलैर्बहुभिश्छन्ना नीलवैदूर्यसंनिभै: ।। २९॥

The entire stretch of land within a radius
of forty miles not only turned even but was
also carpeted with many patches of fresh
grass resembling blue cat’s-eye gems in
hue. (29)

तस्मिन्बिल्वा: कपित्थाश्च पनसा बीजपूरका: |
आमलक्यो बभूवुश्च चूताश्च फलभूषिता:॥ ३०॥
In that land sprang up Bel, Kapittha
(lit., on which monkeys dwell), Panasa (the
bread-fruit), Bijapuraka (citron), Amalaki
(emblic myrobalan) and mango trees adorned
with fruits. (30)

उत्तरेभ्य: कुरुभ्यश्च at दिव्योपभोगवत्।
आजगाम नदी सौम्या तीरजैर्बहुभिर्वृता॥ ३१॥

Nay, from the territory of the Uttara
Kuru’s came the grove (presided over by
Kubera, the god of riches, and known by
the name of Caitraratha) rich in products
worthy of being enjoyed by heavenly beings,
as well as a delightful stream hemmed in
with a number of trees growing on its banks.

(31)
चतु:शालानि शुभ्राणि शालाश्च गजवाजिनाम्।
हर्म्यप्रासादसंयुक्ततोरणानि शुभानि च ॥३२॥

There stood up white mansions each
