508

इमं तस्य महाभाग दूतं दुष्करकारिण:।
वनवासादनुप्राप्तं कस्मान्न प्रतिभाषसे॥ २९॥

“Wherefore, O highly blessed king, do
you not make answer to the messenger of
Rama—who has accomplished a difficult
task—returned from his recent trip to the
forest? (29)
अद्येममनयं कृत्वा व्यपत्रपसि राघव।
उत्तिष्ठ सुकृतं तेऽस्तु शोके न स्यात् सहायता॥ ३०॥

“Having perpetrated this unseemly act
in the shape of banishing your eldest and
worthiest son, do you feel abashed today,
O scion of Raghu? Kindly get up ! Let your
virtue resulting from your devotion to truth
abide. In the event of your giving way to
grief, your associates too may cease to be.

(30)

देव यस्या Wag रामं नानुपृच्छ्सि सारथिम्।
नेह तिष्ठति कैकेयी fasret प्रतिभाष्यताम्॥ ३१॥

“Kaikeyi, for fear of whom you do not
address inquiries concerning Rama to the
charioteer (Sumantra), O lord, is not present
here. Therefore, reply may be given to

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

Sumantra with confidence.”
Ol तथोक्त्वा महाराजं कौसल्या शोकलालसा |
धरण्यां निपपाताशु बाष्पविप्लुतभाषिणी॥ ३२॥

Having submitted to the Emperor as
aforesaid, the celebrated Kausalya, who was
wholly given up to grief, and was faltering
through tears, forthwith dropped to the
ground. (32)
विलपन्तीं तथा दृष्टवा कौसल्यां पतितां भुवि।

Ufe चावेक्ष्य ता: सर्वा: समन्ताद् रुरुदु: स्रिय: ।। ३३ Ul

Seeing Kausalya fallen to the ground,
wailing as aforesaid, and gazing on their
husband lying senseless, all those ladies
around her wept. (33)

समीक्ष्य वृद्धास्तरुणाश्च मानवा:।
स्नियश्च Wal रुरुदु: समन्तत:
Ut तदासीत् पुनरेव संकुलम्॥ ३४॥

Perceiving that plaintive cry raised in
the gynaeceum, men, both aged and young,
and all women flocked around weeping and
the city of Ayodhya was agitated once more.

(34)

(31)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्येऽयोध्याकाण्डे TATA: सर्ग: ॥ ५७॥

Thus ends Canto Fifty-seven in the Ayodhyakanda of the glorious Ramayana of
Valmiki, the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

अष्टपञ्चाश: सर्ग:
Canto LVIII
Bewailing the lot of Sri Rama, Sita and Laksmana, who did not in anyway
deserve the hardships they were undergoing in the forest, the Emperor

urges Sumantra to deliver their parting message and the charioteer
proceeds to tell him what they said

प्रत्याश्चस्तो यदा राजा मोहात् प्रत्यागतस्मृति: |
तदाजुहाव तं सूतं रामव्रृत्तान्तकारणात्॥१॥
When the king woke from his swoon,
consciousness having returned to him, he
confidently summoned to his presence the
charioteer, Sumantra, in order to hear the

news about Sri Rama.

Tey
विनि:श्चसन्तं ध्यायन्तमस्वस्थमिव कुञ्जरम्॥ ३॥
