500

आरोप्य सीतां wert संघाटं परिगृह्य तौ।
aa: प्रतेरतुर्यत्तौ प्रीतौ दशरथात्मजौ॥१८॥

Having first enabled Sita to ascend the
raft, holding the structure themselves, the
two sons of DaSaratha, full of delight, now
cautiously began to row the raft. (18)

कालिन्दीमध्यमायाता सीता त्वेनामवन्दत।
स्वस्ति देवि तरामि cat पारयेन्मे पतिर्व्रतम्॥ Le UI

Arrived in mid stream, Sita for her part
saluted the deity presiding over the stream
and prayed to her as follows : “May | safely
cross your waters (with my husband and
brother-in-law), O glorious lady; and let my
husband fulfil his vow of spending fourteen
years in exile in the forest. (19)

यक्ष्ये cat गोसहस्रेण सुराघटशतेन च।
स्वस्ति प्रत्यागते wa पुरीमिक्ष्वाकुपालिताम्॥ २० ॥

“When Sri Rama safely returns to the
city of Ayodhya, ruled over by the Ikswakus,
| shall propitiate you by offering a thousand
cows and a hundred and one articles of
worship which cannot be procured even by
gods.” (20)

कालिन्दीमथ सीता तु याचमाना कृताञ्जलि: |
तीरमेवाभिसम्प्राप्ता दक्षिणं बवरवर्णीनी॥२१॥

Even while praying to the river Kalindi
in the aforesaid words with folded hands,
Sita, for her part, who was possessed of
a most excellent complexion, forthwith
approached the southern bank of the
Yamuna itself. (21)

ad: प्लवेनांशुमतीं शीघ्रगामूर्मिमालिनीम्।
तीरजैर्बहुभिर्वृक्षै२ संतेरुर्यमुनां नदीम्॥२२॥
Thus they duly crossed by means of a
raft the rippling and swift-going Yamuna
river, daughter of the sun-god, fringed with
numerous trees sprung on its banks. (22)

ते तीर्णा: प्लवमुत्सृज्य प्रस्थाय यमुनावनात्।

var न्यग्रोधमासेदु: शीतलं हरितच्छदम्॥ २३॥
Leaving the raft in the midst of those

trees and departing from the forest on the

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

bank of the Yamuna, they reached the cool
banyan tree, covered with green leaves
and accordingly bearing the name of Syama.
(23)
न्यग्रोधं समुपागम्य वैदेही चाभ्यवन्दत।
नमस्तेऽस्तु महावृक्ष पारयेन्मे पतिर्व्रतम्॥ २४॥
कौसल्यां wa पश्येम सुमित्रां च यशस्विनीम्।
इति सीताञ्जलिं कृत्वा पर्यगच्छन्मनस्विनी॥ २५॥

Nay, going very near the banyan tree,
Sita (a princess of the Videha dynasty)
bowed low to it and said, “Hail to you, O
gigantic tree! Let my husband fulfil his vow
of forest life and let us see once more
mother Kausalya as well as the illustrious
Sumitra.” So saying and joining her palms,
the high-minded Sita went round the banyan
tree clockwise. (24-25)

अवलोक्य dd: सीतामायाचन्तीमनिन्दिताम्।
दयितां च विधेयां च रामो लक्ष्मणमब्रवीत्॥ २६॥
सीतामादाय गच्छ त्वमग्रतो भरतानुज।
पृष्ठतोऽनुगमिष्यामि सायुधो द्विपदां वर॥ २७॥

Seeing his beloved and agreeable
consort, Sita, of unimpeachable conduct,
offering prayers to the deity presiding over
the banyan tree, Sri Rama now said to
Laksmana, “Taking Sita with you, walk you
in the van, O Laksmana, younger brother of
Bharata ! Equipped with arms, | shall follow
in the rear, O jewel among men! (26-27)

यद् यत् फलं प्रार्थयते पुष्पं वा जनकात्मजा।
Ad तत् प्रयच्छ वैदेह्या यत्रास्या रमते मन:॥ २८॥
“Offer to Sita, a princess of the Videha
clan, whatever fruit or flower the daughter of
Janaka asks for and in which her mind
finds delight.” (28)
Veh पादपं गुल्मं लतां वा पुष्पशालिनीम्।
अदृष्टरूपां पश्यन्ती रामं पप्रच्छ साऽबला॥ २९॥
Beholding every single tree, shrub or
creeper, charming with blossoms, that she
had never seen before, that lady questioned
Sri Rama about it. (29)
