* AYODHYAKANDA +

in moonlight is seen clearly risen in the
sky. (9)

गम्यतामनुजानामि रामस्यानुचरी भव।
कथयन्त्या fe मधुरं त्वयाहमपि तोषिता॥१०॥
“You may go now, | permit you to
depart. Wait you as a maid-servant on Sri
Rama. | too have undoubtedly been pleased
by you, speaking as you did sweet words
to me. (10)
अलंकुरु च Mad त्वं प्रत्यक्षं मम मैथिलि।
Wht जनय A वत्से दिव्यालंकारशोभिनी i ११॥
“Adorn yourself in the meantime with
the garment and ornaments gifted by me
before my eyes, O princess of Mithila!
Heightening the charm of the heavenly jewels
with your personal charm, cause delight to
me, my darling !” (11)

सा dat समलंकृत्य सीता सुरसुतोपमा।
प्रणम्य शिरसा पादौ रामं त्वभिमुखी ययौ॥ १२॥

Having duly adorned herself and
saluting with reverence the feet of Anasuya
with her head bent low, Sita for her part,
who looked like a daughter of gods, went
forward to meet Sri Rama on that occasion.

(12)
तथा तु भूषितां dat cast वदतां वर:।
waa: प्रीतिदानेन तपस्विन्या Wet च॥१३॥

Sri Rama, a scion of Raghu, the
foremost of speakers, for his part beheld
Sita adorned as aforesaid and felt delighted
with the gift made out of love by the hermitess.

(13)
न्यवेदयत् तत: Wa सीता रामाय मैथिली।
प्रीतिदानं तपस्विन्या वसनाभरणस्त्रजाम्॥१४॥

Sita, the princess of Mithila, then related
to Sri Rama all about the loving gift made by
the hermitess of a garment, ornaments and
garland. (14)
प्रहृष्टस्त्वभवद् WA लक्ष्मणश्च महारथ:।
मैथिल्या: Alsat Tart मानुषेषु सुदुर्लभाम्॥ १५ ॥

713

Sri Rama, for his part, as well as
Laksmana, the great chariot-warrior, felt highly
rejoiced to see the reception of Sita (the
princess of Mithila), which was extremely
rare among human beings. (15)

तत: स शर्वरीं प्रीत: पुण्यां शशिनिभाननाम्।
अर्चितस्तापसै३ सर्वैरुवास रघुनन्दन:॥१६॥
Beholding Sita, whose countenance
shone like the moon, consecrated by the
sacred gift of the holy lady, the celebrated
Sri Rama (the delight of the Raghus) who
was received with honour by the hermits,
then spent the night with all. (16)
तस्यां teat व्यतीतायामभिषिच्य हुताग्निकान्।
आपृच्छेतां नरव्याघ्रौ तापसान् वनगोचरान्॥ १७॥
Having finished their ablutions when
that night had fully expired, Sri Rama and
Laksmana, who were tiger among men,
took leave of the ascetics dwelling in the
forest, who had just offered oblations into
the sacred fire. (17)

तावूचुस्ते वनचरास्तापसा धर्मचारिण:।
वनस्य तस्य संचारं राक्षसै: समभिप्लुतम्॥ १८॥
The aforesaid ascetics dwelling in the
forest and practising virtue there told the
two princes about the region of that forest
infested by ogres. (18)

Tai पुरुषादानि नानारूपाणि weal
वसन्त्यस्मिन् महारण्ये व्यालाश्च रुधिराशना:॥ १९॥

“Ogres feeding upon the human flesh
and appearing in various guises, as well as
blood-sucking beasts of prey live in this
great forest, O scion of Raghu! (19)
उच्छिष्टं वा wad वा तापसं ब्रह्मचारिणम्।
अदन्त्यस्मिन् महारण्ये तान् निवारय राघव॥ २०॥

“They devour an ascetic or celibate
who has not rinsed his mouth after partaking
of some solid or liquid food or who is
delinquent in this great forest; pray, ward
them off, O scion of Raghu ! (20)
