+ UTTARAKANDA +

1025

अष्ट पञ्चाश: at:
Canto LVIII
Sukracarya curses king Yayati

एवं galt WH तु लक्ष्मण: परवीरहा।
प्रत्युवाच महात्मानं ज्वलन्तमिव तेजसा॥१॥
महदद्भुतमाश्चर्यं विदेहस्य पुरातनम्।
निर्वृत्तं राजशार्दूल वसिष्ठस्य मुनेश्च FNRI
Thus spoken to by Sn Rama,
Laksmana, the destroyer of the heroes
among foes, spoke thus to the noble one,
Sri Rama, lustrous with vigour: ‘O Lion among
kings, that which took place to Vasistha,
Videha, who had no mortal frame in ancient
times, was indeed surprising and caused
great wonder. (1-2)

निमिस्तु ara: शूरो विशेषेण च difara: |
न at कृतवान् राजा वसिष्ठस्य महात्मन: ॥ ३॥
“The Ksatriya king Nimi, the brave and
well-initiated one, on his part did not behave
properly, by not forgiving the noble Vasistha.”
(3)

एवमुक्तस्तु तेनायं wa: क्षत्रियपुङ्खव:।
उवाच लक्ष्मणं वाक्यं सर्वशास्त्रविशारदम्॥४॥
Thus addressed to by him (Laksmana),
the foremost among the Ksatriyas, Sri Rama
uttered the following words to Laksmana,
who was well-versed in all the Sastras. (4)

Ta रमयतां श्रेष्ठो भ्रातरं दीप्ततेजसम्।
न Wat am dit पुरुषेषु प्रदृश्यते॥५॥
Sri Rama the best among those who
cause pleasure to others, spoke to his brother
illuminated with vigour: “O brave one,
forgiveness is not found among all kinds of
men. (5)

सौमित्रे दु:सहो WaT यथा क्षान्तो ययातिना।
सत्त्वानुगं पुरस्कृत्य तन्निबोध समाहित:॥६॥
“O son of Sumitra, listen with attention
as to how the unbearable rage was mitigated

by Yayati, resorting to a device, where the
Sativa Guna was predominant. (6)

नहुषस्य सुतो राजा ययाति: पौरवर्धन:।
wa wage सौम्य रूपेणाप्रतिमं भुवि॥७॥

“There was a king Yayati, the son of
Nahusa, the bringer of prosperity to the
citizens. His two spouses were paragons of
unequal beauty, indeed. (7)

Wet तु तस्य राजर्षेर्नाहुषस्य पुरस्कृता।
शर्मिष्ठा नाम दैतेयी दुहिता quadu: uc
“One of these, the daughter of
Vrsaparva, the grand-daughter of Diti,
Sarmistha by name was held in great esteem
by the Rsi among Kings, Nahusa. (8)

अन्या तूशनस: पत्नी ययाते: पुरुषर्षभ।
न तु सा दयिता wal देवयानी सुमध्यमा॥ es il

“The other, the daughter of USana, the
wife of Yayati, Devayani by name. O bull
among men, was not loved by the King,
although she possessed a beautiful form.

(9)
wat: Uat तु सम्भूतौ रूपवन्तौ समाहितौ।
शर्मिष्ठाजनयत् पूरुं देवयानी ad तदा॥१०॥

“Two sons were born to them, who were
handsome and devoted. Sarmistha begot
Puru; while Devayani gave birth to Yadu. (10)

पूरुस्तु दयितो राज्ञो गुणैर्मातृकृतेन च।
ततो दु:खसमाविष्टो यदुर्मातरमब्रवीत्॥११॥
भार्गवस्य कुले जाता देवस्याक्लिष्टकर्मण:।
Wea हृद्गतं दु:खमवमानं च दु:सहम्॥१२॥
“Puru was the beloved of the King, by
his own merits and also due to being the
progeny of his mother. Consequently, Yadu
being in grief addressed his mother thus: ‘Born
in the family of the Bhargava (son of Bhrgu),
the lord of unwearied action, you bear up with
mental sorrow and unbearable insult. (11-12)

stat च सहितौ efa प्रविशाव हुताशनम्।
राजा तु Wat सार्धं दैत्यपुत्र्या बहुक्षपा:॥१३॥
