982

कुरु प्रणामं धर्मात्मंस्तेषामुद्दिश्य राघव।
लक्ष्मणेन सह UAT Wad: संहताञ्जलि:॥ २५ i
“Piously disposed alongwith your
brother, Laksmana, make obeisance, O pious-
minded scion of Raghu, with joined palms
with a view to the pleasure of the aforesaid
sages. (25)

प्रणमन्ति fe ये तेषामृषीणां भावितात्मनाम्।
न तेषामशुभं किंचिच्छरीरे राम विद्यते॥ २६॥

“Indeed no evil of any kind, O Rama,
stays in the body of those who bow down
with reverence to the aforesaid Rsis, who
contemplated on the Self.” (26)

ततो Wa: सह भ्रात्रा लक्ष्मणेन कृताञ्जलि:।
समुद्दिश्य महात्मानस्तानृषीनभ्यवादयत्॥ २७॥

“With joined palms alongwith his
brother, Laksmana, Sri Rama thereupon
offered salutations to the memory of those
high-souled Rsis. (27)
अभिवाद्य च धर्मात्मा रामो UTA च लक्ष्मण: |
सुग्रीवो वानराश्चैव जम्मु: संहृष्टमानसा:॥ २८॥

“Having made obeisance to the memory
of those sages alongwith his brother,

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

Laksmana, Sri Rama, whose mind was set
on virtue, Sugriva as well as the other
monkeys walked on with a highly rejoiced
mind. (28)

ते गत्वा दूरमध्वानं तस्मात् सप्तजनाश्रमात्।
ददृशुस्तां दुराधर्षां किष्किन्धां वालिपालिताम्॥ २९॥
“Having covered a long distance from
that hermitage of the Saptajanas, they sighted
the celebrated Kiskindha, which stood
protected by Vali and was difficult to assail.
(29)

वधाय शत्रो: पुनरागतास्त्विह॥ ३०॥

Taking up their weapons, Laksmana
(the younger brother of Sri Rama), Sri Rama
as well as the monkeys, for their part, whose
terrific energy had become visible, came
once more to the city of Kiskindha, which
was protected by the valour of Vali (sprung
from the loins of Indra) with a view to the
destruction of the enemy in the person of Vali
at this very place. (30)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये किष्किन्धाकाण्डे त्रयोदश: सर्ग: ॥ 23 ॥

Thus ends Canto Thirteen in the Kiskindhakanda of the glorious Ramayana of Valmiki,
the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

चतुर्दश: सर्ग:
Canto XIV

Sri Rama and others remain hiding behind the trees of a grove in the vicinity
of Kiskindha, Sugriva implores Sri Rama to implement his vow of killing
Vali. Assuring Sugriva that this will be done, Sri Rama encourages
the latter to go and challenge his elder brother and
Sugriva does accordingly

सर्वे ते त्वरितं गत्वा किष्किन्धां वालिन: पुरीम्।

वृक्षैरात्मानमावृत्य व्यतिष्ठन् गहने वने॥१॥ | forest.

Reaching Kiskindha, the capital of Vali,
expeditiously, and concealing themselves

behind trees, they all halted in a dense
(1)
विसार्य सर्वतो ef कानने काननप्रिय:।

gitar विपुलग्रीव: क्रोधमाहारयद् wer eu
