634

अपि नौ वशमागच्छेत् कोविदारध्वजो रणे।
aia द्रक्ष्यामि भरतं यत्कृते व्यसनं Ae २१॥
त्वया राघव सम्प्राप्तं सीतया च मया तथा।

यन्निमित्तं भवान् राज्याच्च्युतो राघव शाश्वतात्॥ २२॥

“The ensign bearing the device of a
Kovidara tree will surely be brought under
our control, and | am glad | shall be able to
see face to face Bharata, on whose account
great suffering has been undergone by you,
O scion of Raghu, as well as by Sita and
myself, and for whose sake, O Rama, you
have been deprived of a kingdom which
was ever yours. (21-22)

सम्प्राप्तोऽयमरिर्वीर भरतो वध्य wa fe
भरतस्य वधे दोषं नाहं पश्यामि waa २३॥

“Bharata over there, who has arrived
in state as an adversary, surely deserves
to be killed outright, O heroic prince ! | see
no wrong in killing Bharata, O scion of
Raghu ! (23)

पूर्वापकारिणं ear न ह्यधर्मेण युज्यते।
पूर्वापकारी भरतस्त्यागेऽधर्मश्च राघव॥ २४॥

“Killing a man who has wronged one
earlier, one surely does not get contaminated
with sin. Bharata has wronged you
heretofore; hence there is sin only in leaving
him alive, O scion of Raghu ! (24)

एतस्मिन् निहते कृत्स्नामनुशाधि वसुंधराम्।
अद्य Ut हतं संख्ये कैकेयी राज्यकामुका॥ 24 Il
मया पश्येत् सुदु:खार्ता हस्तिभिन्नमिव द्रुमम्।
कैकेयीं च वधिष्यामि सानुबन्धां सबान्धवाम्॥ २६ ॥

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

“When Bharata has been killed, rule
over the entire globe. Sore stricken with
sorrow, Kaikeyi, who is covetous of
sovereignty, will find her son killed in battle
by me like a tree uprooted by an elephant.
| shall kill Kaikeyi too with her dependants
and relations. (25-26)

कलुषेणाद्य महता मेदिनी परिमुच्यताम्।
अद्येमं संयतं क्रोधमसत्कारं च मानद॥ २७॥

मोक्ष्यामि शात्रुसैन्येषु कक्षेष्विव हुताशनम्।
अद्यैव चित्रकूटस्य काननं निशितै: wit: eeu
छिन्दन् शत्रुशरीराणि करिष्ये शोणितोक्षितम्।
शरैर्निभिन्नहृदयान् कुञ्जरांस्तुरगांस्तथा ।। २९ ॥
gra: परिकर्षन्तु नरांश्च निहतान् मया।
शराणां धनुषश्चाहमनृणोऽस्मिन् महावने।
ससैन्यं भरतं ear भविष्यामि न संशय:॥ ३०॥
“Let the earth be purged of this sin in
the shape of Kaikeyi. Today | shall release
my repressed fury and scorn in the shape
of arrows against the enemy’s forces even
as one would spit fire on dried bushes, O
bestower of honour! Tearing to pieces the
bodies of the enemies with sharp-pointed
arrows, | shall this very day drench the
forest of Citrakuta with blood. Let beasts of
prey drag hither and thither the elephants
and horses, whose heart is pierced through
with arrows, as well as the men that will be
slain by me. Having killed Bharata with his
army in this great forest | shall get square
with my arrows and bow by supplying them
with abundant food: there is no doubt about
it.” (27—30)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्येऽयोध्याकाण्डे
षण्णनवतितम: AA il ९६ Il

Thus ends Canto Ninety-six in the Ayodhyakanda of the glorious Ramayana of
Valmiki, the work of Rsi and the oldest epic.

