1070

Lord, you have appointed Indra as king of
gods. Similarly, for us also provide a worthy
man as our king, so that worshipping him
we could move about in the world, becoming
free of sins. (38-39)

न वसामो विना wat we नो निश्चय: पर:।

ततो TAT सुरश्रेष्ठो लोकपालान् सवासवान्॥४०॥
समाहूयाब्रवीत् सर्वांस्तेजोभागान् प्रयच्छत।
ततो ददुर्लोकपाला: सर्वे भागान् स्वतेजस:॥४१॥
‘We shall not live without a king, This is
our supreme decision.’ Then Brahma, the
highest god, after calling the guardians of
regions alongwith Indra, said: ‘All of you
give me a portion of your authority.’ Then all
the guardians gave away a portion of their
power. (40-41)
अक्षुपच्च ततो ब्रह्मा यतो जात: क्षुपो FU: |
तं ब्रह्मा लोकपालानां समांशै: समयोजयत्॥४२॥
‘Then Brahma sneezed, whence was
born king Ksupa. Brahma invested him with
the entire might of the guardians (of regions
given away by them). (42)
aaa च भागेन महीमाज्ञापयन्नृप:॥४३॥
Then he made Ksupa the ruling king of
the people. Ksupa after becoming king ruled

the earth by virtue of the portion of the might
given by Indra. (43)

वारुणेन तु भागेन aq: पुष्यति पार्थिव:।
कौबेरेण तु भागेन वित्तपाभां ददौ तदा॥४४॥
यस्तुयाम्योऽभवद्भागस्तेन शास्ति स्म स प्रजा: ।
aaa नरश्रेष्ठ भागेन रघुनन्दन॥४५॥

« VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

प्रतिगृह्णीष्व भद्रं A तारणार्थं मम wit
aq राम: प्रतिजग्राह मुनेस्तस्य महात्मन:॥४६॥
दिव्यमाभरणं fat प्रदीप्तमिव भास्करम्।
प्रतिगृह्य ततो रामस्तदाभरणमुत्तमम्॥४७॥
आगमं तस्य दीप्तस्य प्रष्टुमेवोपचक्रमे।

अत्यद्धुतमिदं feat वपुषा युक्तमद्भुतम्॥४८॥

HA वा भवता प्राप्तं Hal वा HA वाऽऽहतम्।
कौतूहलतया ब्रह्मन् पृच्छामि cat महायश:॥४९॥
आश्चर्याणां बहूनां fe fafa: परमको भवान्।
Wa ब्रुवति काकुत्स्थे मुनिर्वाक्यमथाब्रवीत्॥ ५० ॥
श्रृणु WA aaa पुरा त्रेतायुगे BUG

The king nourished the people by the
portion of power given to him by Varuna. By
the portion of the mighty Kubera, he then,
lent to the people the glory of Kubera, the
Lord of riches. By the portion of Yama he
devised punishment to the people as and
when they committed sin(s).

‘O Sri Rama, the foremost among men!
(as king, you are also invested with the might
of the guardians of regions). For my
deliverance accept this ornament through
the portion (of the might) of Indra, O Lord !
Prosperity be unto you! Then Sri Rama
accepted the divine ornament, bright like the
sun, given by the high-souled hermit, and
asked about his acquisition of the ornament.
‘O Eminent Brahmana ! How and from where
did you acquire this divine and wonderful
ornament? | am asking this out of curiosity,
as you are a great repository of wonders.’
After Sri Rama enquired of, the sage said to
Sri Rama, ‘Listen, O Sri Rama, what happened
in the old Treta age.’ (44—51)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये उत्तरकाण्डे षट्सप्ततितम: AAT: ॥ ७६ ॥

Thus ends Canto Seventy-six in the Uttarakanda of the glorious Ramayana of Valmiki,
the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

