1164

alone amongst us are endowed with skill
and prowess and are another Sugriva, the
ruler of monkeys, as it were. (31)

त्रिविक्रमे war तात सशैलवनकानना।
त्रि:सप्तकृत्व: पृथिवी परिक्रान्ता प्रदक्षिणम्॥ ३२॥

“During the descent of the Lord as
Trivikrama (who measured the entire universe
in three strides), O dear child, the entire globe
with its mountains, forests and woodlands
was gone round clockwise by me as many
as one and twenty times. (32)

तथा चौषधयोऽस्माभि: संचिता देवशासनात्।
निर्मथ्यममृतं याभिस्तदानीं नो महद्बलम्॥ ३३॥
“Nay, that time, in obedience to the
command of the gods, the herbs with the
help of which nectar was to be churned out
of the ocean of milk were gathered by
me _ single-handed, since at that time
extraordinary strength existed in me. (33)

a saree ag: परिहीनपराक्रम:।
साम्प्रतं कालमस्माकं भवान् सर्वगुणान्वित: it ३४॥
“lam now old and destitute of prowess.

You alone amongst us are endowed with all
virtues at the present moment. (34)

aq विजृम्भस्व विक्रान्त प्लवतामुत्तमो ह्यसि।

त्वद्वीर्यं द्रष्टुकामा fe सर्वा वानरवाहिनी॥ ३५॥
Therefore exhibit your immense

strength, O hero, since you are the foremost

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

of monkeys. Indeed the entire Vanara force
is keen to witness your virility. (35)

Sirs हरिशार्दूल लङ्घयस्व महार्णवम्।
परा fe सर्वभूतानां हनुमन् या गतिस्तव॥ ३६॥
“Get up, O tiger among the monkeys,
and leap over the vast sea; for the leaping
capacity that exists in you, O Hanuman, is
greater than that of all other created beings.
(36)

विषण्णा wa: aa हनुमन् किमुपेक्षसे।
विक्रमस्व महावेग विष्णुस्त्रीन् विक्रमानिव॥ ३७॥
“All the monkeys have = grown
despondent, O Hanuman ! How do you ignore
them? Show your courage, O monkey of
extraordinary speed, as did Lord Visnu in
His descent as Trivikrama take three strides
in order to measure the universe.” (37)

wa: कपीनामृषभेण चोदित:
प्रतीतवेग: पवनात्मज: कपि:।

यंस्तां रिवीरवाहिनीं
चकार रूपं महदात्मनस्तदा॥ ३८॥
Encouraged by Jambavan, the foremost
of monkeys and bears, and convinced of
his capacity for vigorous action, the monkey
chief, Hanuman, son of the wind-god, now
expanded his form that very moment, thereby
bringing excessive joy to that army of monkey
heroes. (38)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये किष्किन्धाकाण्डे षट्षष्टितम: सर्ग: ॥ ६६ ॥

Thus ends Canto Sixty-six in the Kiskindhakanda of the glorious Ramayana of Valmiki,
the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

सप्तषष्टितम: at:
Canto LXVII

Proclaiming his own glory in order to dispel the fears of the monkeys after assuming
enormous proportions with a view to leaping across the sea, and climbing up
Mount Mahendra, Hanuman prepares to take a leap across the sea

तं दृष्टवा जृम्भमाणं ते क्रमितुं शतयोजनम्।

सहसा शोकमुत्सृज्य प्रहर्षेण समन्विता:।

वेगेनापूर्यमाणं च सहसा वानरोत्तमम्॥१॥ | विनेदुस्तुष्टुवुश्चापि हनूमन्तं महाबलम्॥२॥
