* SUNDARAKANDA +

इदं ते चारु संजातं यौवनं ह्यतिवर्तते।
यदतीतं पुनर्नैति स्रोत: स्रोतस्विनामिव॥१२॥
“This charming youth of yours, which
is now fully developed, is actually passing
away. What has actually passed never

returns any more than the current of streams.
(12)

त्वां कृत्वोपरतो Wat रूपकर्ता स विश्वकृत्।
नहि रूपोपमा ह्यन्या तवास्ति शुभदर्शने॥१३॥

“Having created you as the paragon of
beauty, | believe, the celebrated maker of
the universe, who designed your form, has
retired from his duty of designing forms, for
indeed there is no other women who can
compare in comeliness with you, O lady of
charming aspect ! (13)

wat समासाद्य वैदेहि रूपयौवनशालिनीम्।
क: पुनर्नातिवर्तेत साक्षादपि पितामह:॥ १४॥

“Who, having come across you, O
princess of the Videha territory, adorned as
you are with comeliness and exuberant youth,
would not lose his balance of mind, even if
he is Brahma (the grandfather of the universe)
himself? (14)
यद् यत् पश्यामि ते गात्रं शीतांशुसदृशानने।
तस्मिस्तस्मिन् पृथुश्रोणि aera निबध्यते॥ १५॥

“My eye gets riveted, O lady of
broad hips, on each of your limbs which |

behold, O lady endowed with a moonlike
countenance! (15)

भव मैथिलि भार्या a मोहमेतं विसर्जय।
बह्वीनामुत्तमस्त्रीणां ममाग्रमहिषी भव॥१६॥

“Give up this folly in the form of fidelity
to your husband and become my consort,
O princess of Mithila! Become the foremost
queen of my numerous excellent wives.

(16)
लोकेभ्यो यानि रत्नानि Gees मे।
तानि a भीरु सर्वाणि राज्यं da ददामि an gen

“| offer you all the well-known jewels
which have been brought by me by way of

113

booty from the various kingdoms, as well as
my own, O timid one! (17)
विजित्य पृथिवीं gat नानानगरमालिनीम्।
जनकाय प्रदास्यामि aa हेतोर्विलासिनि॥ ecu
“Having fully subjugated the entire globe
with its chain of cities, O sportive lady, | will
offer it to Janaka, your father, for your sake.
(18)
नेह पश्यामि लोकेऽन्यं यो मे प्रतिबलो भवेत्।
wa मे सुमहद्वीर्यमप्रतिद्वन्द्वमाहवे॥१९॥

“| do not find in the universe anyone
else who may be my equal in might. You will
behold my extraordinary vitality which knows
no rival in combat. (19)
असकृत् संयुगे भग्ना मया विमृदितध्वजा:।
अशक्ता: प्रत्यनीकेषु स्थातुं AA ATT: il २०॥

“Unable to stand in ranks hostile to me,
the gods as well as the demons were more

than once utterly routed in battle by me,
their standards having been smashed. (20)

इच्छ मां क्रियतामद्य प्रतिकर्म तवोत्तमम्।
सुप्रभाण्यवसज्जन्तां तवांगे भूषणानि FEU २१॥
“Therefore, be favourably disposed to
me. Let you be exquisitely decorated today.
Let exceptionally brilliant jewels be worn on
your limbs. (21)
साधु पश्यामि a रूपं सुयुक्तं प्रतिकर्मणा।
प्रतिकर्माभिसंयुक्ता दाक्षिण्येन वरानने॥२२॥
“Let me behold your excellent form
profusely adorned with decoration. Be

decorated by way of courtesy to me, O lady
endowed with a charming countenance ! (22)

भुङ्क्ष्व भोगान् यथाकामं पिब भीरु रमस्व च।
यथेष्टं च प्रयच्छ त्वं पृथिवीं वा धनानि च॥ २३॥
“Enjoy luxuries according to your
pleasure; drink and revel, O timid one ! And
gift you land as well as riches to others as
you wish. (23)
ललस्व मयि विस्त्रब्धा धृष्टमाज्ञापयस्व च।
मत्प्रासादाल्ललन्त्याश्च ललतां बान्धवस्तव॥ २४॥
