804

“Nay, his mighty brother, Laksmana by
name, who is possessed of exceptional glory
and equally valorous, is attached and devoted
to him because of his (rare) virtues. (13)

अमर्षी दुर्जयो जेता विक्रान्तो बुद्धिमान् बली।
रामस्य दक्षिणो बाहुर्नित्यं प्राणो safest: ues

“Intolerant, hard to conquer, victorious
in battle, heroic, talented and strong, he is
always the right hand of Rama, nay, his
very life exteriorized. (14)

रामस्य तु विशालाक्षी पूर्णेन्दुसदृशानना।
धर्मपत्नी frat fret wd: प्रियहिते रता॥१५॥

“Rama’s beloved’ wife, wedded
according to religious rites, has large eyes
and a countenance resembling the full moon.
She is ever intent on doing what is pleasing
and beneficial to her lord. (15)

सा सुकेशी सुनासोस्: सुरूपा च यशस्विनी।
देवतेव वनस्यास्य राजते श्रीरिवापरा॥१६॥

“Having charming hair, a shapely nose
and thighs and a comely appearance and
illustrious as she is, she is, as it were, the
presiding deity of this forest and shines like
another Laksmi, the goddess of beauty and

fortune. (16)
तप्तकाञ्चनवर्णाभा रक्ततुङ्गनखी शुभा।
सीता ATT वरारोहा वैदेही तनुमध्यमा॥१७॥
नैव edt न गन्धर्वी न यक्षी न च किंनरी।
तथारूपा मया ART दृष्टपूर्वा महीतले॥१८॥

“Possessing the hue and lustre of
molten gold, prominent ruddy nails, shapely
hips and a slender waist, the blessed lady is
a daughter of Janaka (the ruler of the Videha
territory), Sita by name. No woman of such
comeliness—neither a goddess, nor a
Gandharva woman nor a Yaksa woman nor
again a Kinnara woman was seen by me on
the earth’s surface ever before. (17-18)

यस्य सीता भवेद भार्या यं च हृष्टा परिष्वजेत्।
अभिजीवेत् स सर्वेषु लोकेष्वपि पुरंदरात्॥१९॥

“He with whom Sita lives as a wife and

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

whom she embraces with delight is sure to
live more happily in all the worlds even than
Indra. (19)

सा सुशीला वपु:श्लाघ्या रूपेणाप्रतिमा भुवि।
तवानुरूपा भार्या सा त्वं च तस्या: पतिर्वर: Ut २०॥

“She is a woman of good disposition,
praiseworthy of form and peerless on earth
in point of comeliness. She will be a consort
worthy of you and you will be her excellent
husband. (20)
at तु विस्तीर्णजघनां पीनोत्तुङ्गपयोधराम्।
भार्यार्थे तु तवानेतुमुद्यताहं वराननाम्॥२१॥
विरूपितास्मि क्रूरेण लक्ष्मणेन महाभुज।
at तु दृष्ट्वाद्य aed पूर्णचन्द्रनिभाननाम्॥ 22
मन्मथस्य शराणां च त्वं विधेयो भविष्यसि।
यदि तस्यामभिप्रायो भार्यात्वे aa जायते।
शीघ्रमुद्ध्रियतां पादो जयार्थमिह दक्षिण:॥ २३॥

“| for my part was intent on bringing that
lady of broad hips and rounded and prominent
breasts in order that she may be a wife to
you; but | was deformed by the cruel
Laksmana. O mighty-armed brother ! Nay, if
you behold today the aforesaid princess of
the Videha territory with her face shining
brightly as the full moon, you will undoubtedly
become a target of the shafts of love. If your
mind feels inclined to take her to wife, your
right foot may soon be raised at this very
place to conquer Rama. (21—23)

रोचते यदि a वाक्यं ममैतद् राक्षसेश्वर।
क्रियतां निर्विशङ्केन वचनं मम WaT esi

“If this counsel of mine finds favour
with you, let my advice be fearlessly followed
by you, O Ravana, the lord of Raksasas !

(24)
विज्ञायैषामशक्तिं च क्रियतां च महाबल।
सीता तवानवद्याङ्गी भार्यात्वे राक्षसेश्वर॥ 2G UI

“Realizing the weakness of these
people, Rama and others, and your own
superior strength, O ruler of ogres, let Sita
of faultless limbs be taken to wife, O my
brother of extraordinary might ! (25)
