806

of the foremost among ascetics—who was
being fanned with a white whisk, and had a
white canopy spread over him, who shone
brightly like a glossy cat’s-eye gem and
was adorned with ornaments of refined gold,
and who was distinguished by ten necks
and twenty arms and attractive parapharnalia
and looked like a great mountain with ten
peaks—cast his splendour like a cloud in
the sky encircled with lightning and
accompanied by a flock of herons. (8B—10)
सशैलसागरानूपं वीर्यवानवलोकयन्।
नानापुष्पफलैर्वृक्षैरनुकीर्णं सहस्रश: WL
The mighty ogre moved on surveying
the sea-coast crested with mountains and
crowded with trees, thousands in number,
bearing varieties of flowers and fruits. (11)

शीतमङ्गलतोयाभि: पद्मिनीभि: समन्तत:।
विशालैराश्रमपदैर्वेदिमद्भिरलंकृतम् ॥ १२॥

The coast-line was adorned on all sides
with lotus-ponds full of cool and auspicious
water and with spacious grounds of
hermitages scattered with sacrificial altars.

(12)
कदल्यटविसंशोभं नारिकेलोपशोभितम्।
सालैस्तालैस्तमालैश्च तरुभिश्च सुपुष्पितै: ॥ १३॥

It looked most charming with its plantain
groves and was embellished with coconut,
sal, palmyra and Tamala trees as also with
other trees in full blossom. (13)
अत्यन्तनियताहार:३ शोभितं परमर्षिभि:।
नागै: सुपणैर्गन्धर्वै: किंनरैश्च सहस्रश:॥१४॥

It was graced with foremost Rsis (seers
of Vedic Mantras), living on an exceedingly
restricted diet, Nagas (a species of semi-
divine being having the head and trunk of a
human being and the lower extremities of a
serpent), Suparnas (a class of bird-like beings
of a semi divine character), Gandharvas

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

and Kinnaras (another species of semi-
divine beings having a human figure with
the head of a horse) in thousands. (14)

जितकामैश्च सिद्धैश्च चारणैश्चोपशोभितम्।
आजैर्वैखानसैर्माषैर्वालखिल्यैर्मरीचिपै: ॥ १५ ॥

The coast-line was further graced by
the presence of Siddhas, who had subdued
their passion, and Caranas, as well as by
the mind born sons of Brahma (the creator),
Vaikhanasas (an order of ascetics born of
Brahma’s nails’ and endowed with the mystic
power of assuming many forms), Masas
(another class of ascetics), Valakhilyas? (a
special order of ascetics born of the hair of
Brahma and possessing the size of a human
thumb), and Maricipas (another order of
ascetics living on the sun’s rays alone).

(15)

दिव्याभरणमाल्याभिर्दिव्यरूपाभिरावृतम् ।
क्रीडारतविधिज्ञाभिरप्सरोभि: सहस्रश: ॥ १६ I

It was thronged in thousands with
celestial nymphs adorned with heavenly
jewels and garlands and endowed with
ethereal forms and conversant with the
technique of amorous sports and sexual
enjoyment. (16)
सेवितं देवपत्नीभि: श्रीमतीभिरुपासितम्।
देवदानवसङ्घैश्च चरितं त्वमृताशिभि:॥ १७॥

Again it was resorted to and visited by
graceful consorts of heavenly beings and
frequented by hosts of gods and demons

subsisting on nectar (the drink of heavenly
beings). (17)
हंसक्रौञ्चप्लवाकीर्णं सारसै: सम्प्रसादितम्।
वैदूर्यप्रस्तरं स्निग्धं at सागरतेजसा॥१८॥
The coast-line was crowded with
swans, herons and frogs and graced with

cranes. It was strewn with Vaidurya-like
stones of a dark hue and was alluvial and

1. Vide the Sruti text : & नखास्ते वैखानसा:.

2. Vide the Sruti text ; & बालास्ते वालखिल्या:. The Valakhilyas are said to walk in a procession in front
of the chariot of the sun-god with their faces turned towards the sun-god in prayer.
