* BALAKANDA +

glory, placed all the three worlds once more
under the lordship of Indra. (20-21)

तेनैव पूर्वमाक्रान्तं आश्रम: श्रमनाशन:।
मयापि भक्त्या तस्यैव वामनस्योपभुज्यते॥ २२॥

“By that very Lord was this hermitage
trodden in the remote past and is
accordingly capable of ending the toils of
transmigration. It is through devotion to the
aforesaid Lord Vamana alone that this
hermitage is being occupied by me too.

(22)

एनमाश्रममायान्ति राक्षसा विघ्नकारिण:।
अत्र ते पुरुषव्याघ्र हन्तव्या दुष्टचारिण:॥ २३॥

“Ogres interfering with our religious
observances make inroads into this hermitage
and at this very juncture, O tiger among
men, the aforesaid Raksasas of wicked
conduct deserve to be killed by you. (23)

TI Teme wa सिद्धाश्रममनुत्तमम्।
तदाश्रमपदं तात तवाप्येतद् यथा मम॥ २४॥

“Now let us make our way, O Rama,
to the said Siddhasrama, unsurpassed by
others. The site of this hermitage, my darling,
is aS much yours, too, as mine since you
are none else than Lord Visnu, to whom it
originally belonged.” (24)

इत्युक्त्वा परमप्रीतो गृह्य Wa सलक्ष्मणम्।
प्रविशन्नाश्रमपदं व्यरोचत महामुनि:।
शशीव गतनीहार: पुनर्वसुसमन्वित:॥ २५॥

Having said so and taking Sri Rama
alongwith Laksmana by the hand, the great
sage, ViSwamitra, entered the limits of the
hermitage, full of great delight. While doing
so, he shone brightly as the moon free
from fog, accompanied by the two stars
constituting the constellation Punarvasu.

(25)

तं gat मुनय: wd सिद्धाश्रमनिवासिन:।
उत्पत्योत्पत्य सहसा विश्वामित्रमपूजयन्॥ २६॥

Seeing him come after a long time,
with the two distinguished guests, all the

153

hermits dwelling in the hermitage sprang up
in a flurry one after another and paid their
homage to ViSwamitra. (26)
Gate चक्रिरे ust विश्वामित्राय धीमते।
awa राजपुत्राभ्यामकुर्वन्नतिथिक्रियाम्॥ २७॥
They offered worship to the wise
ViSwamitra according to his deserts and
likewise offered hospitality to the two princes,
Sri Rama and Laksmana. (27)

मुहूर्तमथ विश्रान्तौ राजपुत्रावरिंदमौ।
Wat मुनिशार्दूलमूचतू रघुनन्दनौ॥ २८॥

Having rested a while, the two princes,
the scions of Raghu, who were capable of
subduing the enemy, forthwith submitted to
ViSwamitra, a tiger among sages, with folded
hands as follows : (28)
अद्यैव दीक्षां प्रविश भद्रं ते मुनिपुंगव।
सिद्धाश्रमोऽयं सिद्ध: स्यात् सत्यमस्तु TASTE Ul २९॥

“God bless you! Go through the
ceremony of consecration for the sacrificial
performance this very day, O jewel among
sages! Let this Siddhasrama prove to be
an abode of success and thereby justify its
name and let your word that the ogres
deserve to be killed by me (vide verse 23
above) come true.” (29)

एवमुक्तो महातेजा विश्वामित्रो महानृषि: |
प्रविवेश तदा dat नियतो नियतेन्द्रिय:।॥ ३०॥

Addressed in these words by the two
brothers, the highly glorious and eminent
Rsi, Viswamitra, who had curbed his senses
and mind and was observing sacred vows,
forthwith went through the ceremony of
consecration for the sacrificial performance
going to be undertaken by him. (30)

कुमाराविव at रात्रिमुषित्वा सुसमाहितौ।
प्रभातकाले चोत्थाय Yat संध्यामुपास्य च॥ ३१॥
प्रशुची परमं जाप्यं समाप्य नियमेन च।
हुताग्निहोत्रमासीनं विश्वामित्रमवन्दताम्॥ ३२॥

Having reposed during that night with a
calm and composed mind and rising at
