* AYODHYAKANDA +

421

Canto XXXIV

Apprised of Sri Rama’s arrival by Sumantra, Dasaratha commands him to
usher in Sri Rama with his consort. Seeing the Emperor fall unconscious
at the very sight of the heir-apparent, the ladies of the royal household
start wailing piteously. On Sri Rama’s soliciting his permission to
retire to the woods, the king enjoins him to take his father
captive and ascend the throne. Sri Rama in his turn
consoles his father by assuring him that he has no
hankering for royal fortune and that to him
obedience to his father’s command is of
utmost importance. DaSaratha, however,
falls unconscious again at the very thought
of his separation from Sri Rama and
Sumantra as well as all the ladies of
the gynaeceum follow suit

तत: कमलपत्राक्ष: श्यामो निरुपमो महान्।
sara रामस्तं सूतं पितुराख्याहि मामिति॥ eu

Then the lotus-eyed Sri Rama, who
was dark-brown of complexion and great
beyond compare, spoke as follows to the
said charioteer-minister: “Please announce
me to father.” (1)

स रामप्रेषित: fat संतापकलुषेन्द्रियम्।
प्रविश्य नृपतिं gat नि:श्वसन्तं cast ह॥ २॥
Promptly going inside, when despatched
by Sri Rama, the charioteer found the king
heaving sighs, his mind distracted with
agony: so the tradition goes. (2)
उपरक्तमिवादित्यं भस्मच्छन्नमिवानलम्।
तटाकमिव निस्तोयमपश्यज्जगतीपतिम्॥ ३ ॥
He regarded the Emperor as one would
view the sun obscured by intervention of the
earth between it and the eye (i.e., during
solar eclipse) or a fire covered with ashes or
a pond without water. (3)

आबोध्य च महाप्राज्: परमाकुलचेतनम्।
राममेवानुशोचन्तं da: प्राञ्ञलिरब्रवीत्॥४॥

Accosting the king, whose mind was

extremely agitated and who was grieving for
Sri Rama alone, the highly enlightened
charioteer, spoke with joined palms to him. (4)
तं वर्धयित्वा राजानं yet सूतो जयाशिषा।
भयविक्लवया वाचा मन्दया श्लक्ष्णयाब्रवीत्॥ & Ul
Encouraging Dasaratha first with
benedictions wishing him triumph, the
charioteer addressed him in a low, soft and
sweet tone faltering with fear: (5)

aa स पुरुषव्याघ्रो git तिष्ठति a सुत:।

ब्राह्मणेभ्यो धनं दत्त्वा ae चैवोपजीविनाम्॥ ६॥
“Having given away all his wealth to

the Brahmanas as well as to his dependants,

Sri Rama illustrious son of yours, a veritable
tiger among men, stands at the door. (6)

स wat पश्यतु We A WA: सत्यपराक्रम:।

सर्वान् Get आपृच्छ्य cat ert दिदृक्षते॥ ७॥
“Let that Rama of unfailing prowess

see you: may good betide you; for, having

taken leave of all his near and dear ones,
he now desires to see Your Majesty. (7)

गमिष्यति महारण्यं तं पश्य जगतीपते।
qt राजगुणै: सर्वैरादित्यमिव रश्मिभि:॥८॥
