702

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA +

चतुर्नवतितम: सर्ग:
Canto XCIV

Lament of the ogresses

तानि नागसहस्राणि सारोहाणि च वाजिनाम्।
रथानां त्वग्निवर्णानां सध्वजानां सहस्रश:॥१॥
राक्षसानां सहस्राणि गदापरिघयोधिनाम्।
काञ्चनध्वजचित्राणां शूराणां कामरूपिणाम्॥ २॥
निहतानि शारैर्दीप्तैस्तप्तकाञ्चनभूषणै: |
रावणेन प्रयुक्तानि रामेणाक्लिष्टकर्मणा॥ 3 Il

Dispatched by Ravana, the aforesaid
thousands of elephants and thousands of
horses with their riders, nay, thousands of
chariots bright as fire and bearing ensigns
as also thousands of valiant ogres able to
change their form at will, nay, fighting with
maces and iron bludgeons and conspicuous
with their golden banners, were destroyed
by Sri Rama of unwearied action with his
flaming arrows decorated with refined
gold. (1-3)

दृष्टवा श्रुत्वा च सम्भ्रान्ता हतशेषा निशाचरा:।
राक्षस्यश्च समागम्य दीनाश्चिन्तापरिप्लुता:॥४॥

Meeting together on beholding this and
hearing of this from others, the prowlers of
the night who had escaped the carnage, as
well as the ogresses felt nonplussed and
miserable and were overwhelmed with
anxiety. (4)
विधवा हतपुत्राश्च क्रोशन्त्यो हतबान्धवा:।
राक्षस्य: सह संगम्य दु:खार्ता: पर्यदेवयन्॥५॥

Coming together in groups and crying,
ogresses, who had lost their husband, sons

and kinsfolk wailed as follows, stricken as
they were with sorrow: (5)

कथं शूर्पणखा got कराला निर्णतोदरी।

आससाद वने रामं कंदर्पसमरूपिणम्॥६॥
“Alas, how did the old and hideous

Surpanakha of sunken belly dare to approach

in the forest Rama, who is charming like the
god of love? (6)
सुकुमारं महासत्त्वं सर्वभूतहिते रतम्।
तं दृष्टवा लोकवध्या सा हीनरूपा प्रकामिता॥ ७ ॥
“How strange that beholding that tender
youth, endowed with extraordinary might,
and devoted to the good of all created
beings, that ugly woman, who deserves to
be killed by the people, was stung with
ardent love ! (7)
कथं सर्वगुणैर्हीना गुणवन्तं महौजसम्।
सुमुखं दुर्मुखी we कामयामास राक्षसी॥८॥
“How did that hideous ogress, who is
devoid of all excellences, dare to make love
to Rama, who is full of excellences, endowed
with great bodily strength and is possessed
of comely features? (8)

जनस्यास्याल्पभाग्यत्वाद् वलिनी श्वेतमूर्धजा।
अकार्यमपहास्यं च सर्वलोकविगर्हितम्॥९॥
Tatar विनाशाय दूषणस्य खरस्य al
चकाराप्रतिरूपा सा राघवस्य प्रधर्षणम्॥१०॥

“Because of our bad luck and to the
destruction of the ogre race in general and
of Dusana and Khara, in particular, that
grey-haired misshapen woman, who had
developed wrinkles on her person tried to
profane by her unholy touch Rama, a scion
of Raghu, a misdeed which was worth
ridiculing and condemnation by the whole
world. (9-10)
तन्निमित्तमिदं at रावणेन ad महत्।
वधाय सीता साऽऽनीता दशग्रीवेण रक्षसा॥ ११॥

“It was on account of Surpanakha that
this bitter enmity has been conceived by
Ravana and the reputed Sita was borne
