* SUNDARAKANDA +

much less an ordinary individual like you.
(33)

यां सीतेत्यभिजानासि ad तिष्ठति a गृहे।
कालरात्रीति at विद्धि सर्वलङ्काविनाशिनीम्॥ ३४॥

“Know her, whom you recognize by
the name of Sita and who stays in your
abode, to be none else than Kalaratri (the
goddess presiding over and responsible for
universal dissolution), bent upon destroying
the whole of Lanka. (34)

det कालपाशेन सीताविग्रहरूपिणा।
स्वयं स्कन्धावसक्तेन क्षेममात्मनि चिन्त्यताम्॥ ३५ UI

“Therefore, have done with the noose
of death in the form of Sita’s personality,
which has been placed by yourself about
your neck. And let the means of your own
safety be devised. (35)
सीतायास्तेजसा दग्धां रामकोपप्रदीपिताम्।
दह्यमानामिमां पश्य पुरीं साट्टप्रतोलिकाम्॥ ३६॥

“Behold (in the immediate future) this
city of Lanka, which has already been
consumed by the moral power of Sita, and
set on fire by the wrath of Sri Rama, burning
with its palaces and streets. (36)

स्वानि मित्राणि मन्तरंश्च ज्ञातीन् भ्रातॄन् सुतान् हितान्।
भोगान् दारांश्च लङ्कां च मा विनाशमुपानय॥ ३७॥
“Pray, don’t lead to annihilation your
own allies, counsellors, relations, brothers,
sons, friends and consorts as well as your
luxuries, and Lanka itself. (37)

सत्यं राक्षसराजेन्द्र AU वचनं AAI

रामदासस्य दूतस्य वानरस्य विशेषत:॥ ३८॥
“Listen, 0 suzerain lord of ogres, to my

truthful assertion, coming as it is from the

lips of a servant of Sri Rama, an envoy and
particularly a monkey. (38)

सर्वाल्लोकान् सुसंहृत्य सभूतान् सचराचरान्।
Ua तथा SS, शक्तो WAT महायशा:॥ ३९॥

“Annihilating all the worlds including the
elements (which have entered into their

225

constitution), their created beings, as well
as the entire mobile and immobile creation,
the highly illustrious Sri Rama is capable of
creating them over again in the same way.

(39)
देवासुरनरेन्द्रषु यक्षरक्षोरगेषु

al

विद्याधरेषु नागेषु गन्धर्वेषु Wy च॥४०॥
fey किंनरेन्द्रेषु uae च सर्वत:।
सर्वत्र सर्वभूतेषु सर्वकालेषु नास्ति स:॥४१॥
यो रामं प्रति युध्येत विष्णुतुल्यपराक्रमम्।
सर्वलोकेश्वरस्येह pea विप्रियमीदृशम्।
रामस्य राजसिंहस्य दुर्लभं तव जीवितम्॥४२॥
“Among gods, demons and the rulers
of men as well as among the Yaksas, ogres
and serpents as also among the Vidyadharas
(celestial artistes), Nagas, Gandharvas
(celestial musicians), and beasts, Siddhas
and the rulers of Kinnaras, nay, even among
the birds in all places: in short, among all
created beings at all places and times there
is none who can fight against Sri Rama, the
equal of Visnu in prowess. Since you have
given such offence to Sri Rama, a lion
among kings and the ruler of the worlds, it
is difficult for you to preserve your life here.
(40—42)

देवाश्च दैत्याश्च निशाचरेन्द्र
गन्धर्वविद्याधरनागयक्षा: ।
रामस्य लोकत्रयनायकस्य
TA न शक्ता: समरेषु सर्वे॥४३॥
“Gods and demons, nay, Gandharvas,
Vidyadharas, Nagas and Yaksas are all
unable to stand in front of Sri Rama, the
ruler of all the three worlds (heaven, earth
and the intermediate region) in combat,
O ruler of ogres ! (43)

ब्रह्मा स्वयम्भूश्चतुराननो वा
रुद्रस्तिनेत्रस्तिपुरान्तको वा।
इन्द्रो Wes: सुरनायको वा
स्थातुं न शक्ता युधि राघवस्य।। ४४॥
“Even the self-born and four-headed
