* ARANYAKANDA «

लक्ष्मणो नाम तस्याहं भ्राता त्ववरजो fea:
अनुकूलश्च भक्तश्च यदि a श्रोत्रमागत:॥ ३॥

“It is possible You may have heard the
name. | am his younger brother, Laksmana,
rendering service to him, favourably disposed
and devoted to him. (3)
a aa वनमत्युग्रं प्रविष्टा: पितॄशासनात्।
द्रष्टुमिच्छामहे सर्वे भगवन्तं निवेद्यताम्॥४॥

“We have entered a very frightful forest
at the command of our father and all of us
desire to see the revered sage. May this
please be reported to him.” (4)

तस्य Ag वचनं श्रुत्वा लक्ष्मणस्य तपोधन:।

तथेत्युक्त्वाग्निशरणं प्रविवेश निवेदितुम्॥५॥
Hearing the aforesaid words of the

celebrated Laksmana, the ascetic said, ‘Well’,

and entered the fire-sanctuary to make a
report. (5)

wt aereett mh mer wa aon
प्रविष्टावाश्रमपदं सीतया सह भार्यया।

द्रष्टुं भवन्तमायातौ शुश्रूषार्थमरिंदमौ॥८॥

Entering the sanctuary and joining his
palms, that favourite disciple of Agastya
reported at once the arrival of Rama, exactly
as requested by Laksmana, to the foremost
sage, unassailable through askesis: “The
yonder two sons of DaSaratha, Rama and
Laksmana, have entered the site of our
hermitage with Sita, the former’s wife. Those
vanquishers of foes have come to see
you in order to be of some service to you.

(6—8)
यदत्रानन्तं तत् त्वमाज्ञापयितुमर्हसि।
तत: शिष्यादुपश्रुत्य wa रामं सलक्ष्मणम्॥९॥
वैदेहीं च महाभागामिदं वचनमब्रवीत्।
दिष्ट्या रामश्चिरस्याद्य द्रष्टुं मां समुपागत:॥१०॥

“You may be pleased to order what to

745

do next.” Then, hearing from his pupil that
Rama and Vaidehi of great fortune had
arrived with Laksmana, he spoke as follows :
“It is good that after a long time today Sri
Rama has come to see me. (9-10)
गम्यतां सत्कृतो WA: सभार्य: सहलक्ष्मण:॥११॥
प्रवेश्यतां समीपं मे किमसौ न प्रवेशित:।
एवमुक्तस्तु मुनिना धर्मज्ञेन महात्मना॥१२॥
अभिवाद्यान्रवीच्छिष्यस्तथेति नियताञ्जलि:।
तदा निष्क्रम्य सम्भ्रान्त: शिष्यो लक्ष्मणमब्रवीत्॥ १३ ॥
कोऽसौ रामो मुनिं द्रष्टुमेतु प्रविशतु स्वयम्।
ततो गत्वाऽऽश्रमपदं शिष्येण सह AAT: १४॥
दर्शयामास काकुत्स्थं सीतां च जनकात्मजाम्।
तं fre: प्रश्रितं वाक्यमगस्त्यवचनं FIT १५॥
प्रावेशयद् यथान्यायं सत्कारार्हं सुसत्कृतम्।
प्रविवेश ततो Wa: सीतया सह लक्ष्मण:॥ १६॥
प्रशान्तहरिणाकीर्णमाश्रमं ह्यवलोकयन्।
स तत्र ब्रह्मण: LAA: wart तथैव च॥ vil
सोमस्थानं भगस्थानं स्थानं कौबेरमेव AN १८॥
धातुर्विधातु: स्थानं च वायो: स्थानं तथैव च।
स्थानं च पाशहस्तस्य वरुणस्य महात्मन:॥१९॥
स्थानं तथैव गायत्र्या agi स्थानमेव च।
Wt च नागराजस्य गरुडस्थानमेव च॥ २०॥
कार्तिकेयस्य च स्थानं धर्मस्थानं च पश्यति।
aa: शिष्यै: परिव्रतो मुनिरप्यभिनिष्पतत्॥ २१॥

“| too had longed in my mind for his
arrival. You may go and escort Rama
respectfully together with his wife and
Laksmana in my presence. Wherefore was
he not allowed to enter?” Thus told by the
high-souled sage, the knower of Dharma,
the pupil prostrated to him and said ‘Amen’
with joined palms. Then, hurriedly coming
out, the pupil said to Laksmana, “Who is
that Rama? Let him enter the ASrama and
go to see the sage. Let him enter the
sanctuary.” Moving to the entrance of the
hermitage with the pupil, Laksmana showed
to him Kakutstha and Sita, the daughter of
