214

towards him, Hanuman, who was full of
ardour, raised a great shout and grew to
immense proportions. (24)

इन्द्रजित् स wat दिव्यमाश्रितश्चित्रकार्मुक:।
धनुर्विस्फारयामास तडिदूर्जितनि:स्वनम्॥ २५॥

Seated in a celestial chariot, that
conqueror of Indra, who was armed with a
marvellous bow, pulled his bow string, which
emitted a harsh sound like that accompanying
a stroke of lightning. (25)

तत: समेतावतितीक्ष्णवेगौ
महाबलौ तौ रणनिर्विशङ्कौ।
सुरासुरेन्द्राविव बद्धवैरौ ।। २६ A
Thereupon the two warriors, viz.,

Hanuman and Indrajit, who were endowed
with a fiery spirit and extraordinary might,
were intrepid in war and had conceived
confirmed hostility towards each other like
Indra (the ruler of gods) and Bali (the ruler
of demons), closed with each other. (26)

a तस्य वीरस्य महारथस्य
धनुष्मत: संयति सम्मतस्य।

most व्यहनत् = Wa
श्चचार मार्गे पितुरप्रमेय:॥ २७॥
Hanuman, who had grown to huge
proportions and was immeasurable in
strength, wheeled about in the path of his
father, the wind-god, and evaded the
extraordinary vehemence of the shafts of
that valiant bowman, Indrajit, a great chariot-
warrior, highly esteemed on the field of battle.
(27)

तत: शरानायततीक्ष्णशल्यान्

सुपत्रिण: काञ्चनचित्रपुङ्खान्।
मुमोच वीर: परवीरहन्ता

सुसंततान् वज्रसमानवेगान्॥ २८ ॥

Thereupon the hero, Indrajit, the slayer
of hostile warriors, began to discharge
long and sharp-pointed beautifully-feathered
arrows, provided with picturesque golden

« VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

shafts, swift as lightning and discharged
continuously, one after the other. (28)

ad: स तत्स्यन्दननि:स्वनं च
मृदङ्गभेरीपटहस्वनं
विकृष्यमाणस्य च
निशम्य घोषं पुनरुत्पपात॥ २९॥

Hearing the rumbling of his chariot as
well as the crash of wooden tomtoms, kettle
drums and war-drums accompanying him
as also the sound of his bowstring being
pulled, Hanuman forthwith sprang up once
more. (29)
शराणामन्तरेष्वाशु व्यावर्तत महाकपि:।
हरिस्तस्याभिलक्ष्यस्य मोक्षयँल्लक्ष्यसंग्रहम्॥ Bo I

Baffling the marksmanship of Indrajit,
who was well-known for his hitting the target,
Hanuman, the great monkey, swiftly wheeled
about between the arrows. (30)

शराणामग्रतस्तस्य पुन: समभिवर्तत।
प्रसार्य हस्तौ हनुमानुत्पपातानिलात्मज:॥ ३१॥

Hanuman, sprung from the loins of the
wind-god, stood once more facing his arrows
and forthwith leapt up stretching his arms to
escape his arrows. (31)

wat वेगसम्पन्नौ रणकर्मविशारदौ।
सर्वभूतमनोग्राहि चक्रतुर्युद्धमुत्तमम्॥ ३२॥

Both the aforesaid warriors, who were
richly endowed with swiftness and skilled in
warfare, carried on an excellent fight, which
captivated the mind of all created beings.(32)

हनूमतो ag न राक्षसोऽन्तरं
न मारुतिस्तस्य महात्मनोऽन्तरम्।
समेत्य a देवसमानविक्रमौ i ३३॥
The ogre found no opportunity to hit
Hanuman nor did the son of the wind-god
find any opportunity to catch hold of and
overpower that high-minded ogre. Closing
with one another, the two warriors, who
were equal in prowess to gods, grew
unbearable to each other. (33)

al
