666

नात्मन: कामकारो fe पुरुषोऽयमनीश्वर:।
sass =o at: परिकर्षति॥ १५॥

“Freedom of action does not belong to
the embodied soul, since this soul is
powerless (unlike God). Providence alone
forcibly drags the soul hither and thither.

(15)
सर्वे क्षयान्ता निचया: पतनान्ता: ATT: |
संयोगा विप्रयोगान्ता मरणान्तं च जीवितम्॥ १६॥

“All accumulations end in attenuation;
all elevations end in degradation; all unions
end in separation; all life has its end in
death. (16)
यथा फलानां पक्वानां नान्यत्र पतनाद् भयम्।
एवं नरस्य जातस्य नान्यत्र मरणाद् भयम्॥ १७॥

“As no fear from any quarter other than
a fall awaits ripe fruits, so no fear from any
quarter other than death awaits a man come
into the world. (17)
यथाऽऽगारं दृढस्थूणं जीर्णं भूत्वोपसीदति।
तथावसीदन्ति नरा जरामृत्युवशंगता:॥१८॥

“Even as a house though supported by
stout pillars collapses on getting old, so
men fallen into the clutches of old age and
death breathe their last. (18)

अत्येति रजनी या तु सा न प्रतिनिवर्तते।
यात्येव यमुना पूर्णं समुद्रमुदकार्णवम्॥१९॥

“The night that passes away does not
return in any case; the Yamuna (river) meets
without fail the all-sufficient ocean, abounding
in water. (19)

अहोरात्राणि गच्छन्ति सर्वेषां प्राणिनामिह।
safe क्षपयन्त्याशु ग्रीष्मे जलमिवांशव:॥ २०॥
“Passing days and nights quickly end
the life-span of all living beings in this world,
even as sunbeams suck up water in summer.
(20)

आत्मानमनुशोच त्वं किमन्यमनुशोचसि।
आयुस्तु हीयते यस्य स्थितस्यास्य गतस्य च॥ २१॥

“Grieve for yourself alone, why do you

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

grieve for another? In fact, the life-span of
each and every creature, whether staying
at home or departed for another place, gets
shortened every moment. (21)

wea मृत्युर्व्रजति सह मृत्युर्निषीदति।
गत्वा सुदीर्घमध्वानं सह मृत्युर्निवर्तते॥२२॥

“Death ever walks with us when we
are walking and remains seated with us
while we are sitting. Nay, having travelled a
very long distance with us death returns
with us on our return. (22)

गात्रेषु वलय: wet: श्वेताश्चैव शिरोरुहा:।
जरया पुरुषो जीर्ण: किं हि कृत्वा प्रभावयेत्॥ २३॥

“When folds have appeared on the
skin of the limbs and the hair have turned
grey, by what expedient will a man, worn
out with age, be able to control them? (23)

नन्दन्त्युदित आदित्ये नन्दन्त्यस्तमितेऽहनि।
आत्मनो नावबुध्यन्ते मनुष्या जीवितक्षयम्॥ २४॥
“Men rejoice when the sun has risen
and also rejoice when the day has ended,
but do not perceive the ebbing of their life.
(24)
ऋतूनां परिवर्तेन प्राणिनां प्राणसंक्षय:॥ २५॥
“People rejoice to see the approach of
a season (say, the vernal season or the
monsoon) as though it had appeared for the
first time. But they forget that with a change
of season comes about the gradual waning
of life of living beings. (25)
यथा काष्ठं च काष्ठं च समेयातां महार्णवे।
समेत्य तु व्यपेयातां कालमासाद्य कंचन॥ २६॥
एवं भार्याश्च पुत्राश्च ज्ञातयश्च वसूनि च।
समेत्य व्यवधावन्ति ध्रुवो ह्येषां विनाभव:॥ २७॥

“Even as two pieces of drift-wood come
together on the surface of an ocean at a
particular moment of time and, having come
together in this way, drift apart on reaching
a particular moment, so wives and sons as
well as relations and riches part company
