822

living as he was in the Dandaka forest,
wearing the bark of trees on his person and
matted locks on his head, has asked you
about your welfare. | hereby break a delightful
news to you, my lord! Pray, abandon your
poignant grief. (26—37)

अस्मिन् मुहूर्ते भ्रात्रा त्वं रामेण सह संगत:।
Fret रावणं wa: प्रतिलभ्य च मैथिलीम्॥ ३८॥
उपयाति समृद्धार्थ: we fader: |
लक्ष्मणश्च महातेजा aed च यशस्विनी।
सीता समग्रा रामेण महेन्द्रेण शची यथा॥३९॥

“You will be reunited with your elder
brother, Sri Rama, very soon. Having killed
Ravana, the king of ogres, and recovered
Sita, a princess of Mithila, Sri Rama is coming
back with his numerous friends endowed
with extraordinary might, his purpose fully
accomplished. Laksmana too, who is endowed
with extraordinary energy, is coming, as also
Sita, the illustrious princess of the Videha
territory, who has her desires fulfilled, with
Sri Rama, even as Saci, the consort of Indra,
would with the mighty Indra, the ruler of
gods.” (38-39)

Wat हनुमता भरत: कैकयीसुत:।
पपात सहसा हृष्टो हर्षान्मोहमुपागमत्॥४०॥

Feeling delighted when spoken to as
aforesaid by Hanuman, Bharata, son of
Kaikeyi, sank all at once to the ground and
fainted through joy. (40)
ततो मुहूर्तादुत्थाय प्रत्याश्वस्य च Wea: |
हनूमन्तमुवाचेदं भरत: प्रियवादिनम्॥४१॥

Regaining his consciousness and rising
awhile, Bharata, a scion of Raghu, replied

as follows to Hanuman, who had brought
the pleasant tidings to him: (41)

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA +

अशोकजै: प्रीतिमयै: कपिमालिङ्ग्य सम्भ्रमात्।
सिषेच ora: sitar विपुलैरश्रुबिन्दुभि: we it

Embracing the monkey in a flurry, the
glorious Bharata bathed him with copious
tear-drops out of joy and as such other than
those born of grief. (42)

देवो वा मानुषो वा त्वमनुक्रोशादिहागत:।
प्रियाख्यानस्य ते सौम्य ददामि gaa: प्रियम्॥४३॥
Tat शतसहस्रं च ग्रामाणां च शतं परम्।
सकुण्डला: शुभाचारा भार्या: कन्यास्तु TST ।। ४४॥
सर्वाभरणसम्पन्ना: सम्पन्ना: कुलजातिभि: It ४५॥

“Whether you are a god or a human
being, you have come here through
compassion. To you, who have broken this
agreeable news to me, O gentle one, | shall
give you, in return for the pleasant tidings, a
hundred thousand cows, excellent one
hundred villages and for wives sixteen
golden-complexioned virgin girls of good
conduct, adorned with earrings, nay, decked
with all kinds of jewels and distinguished
by a shapely nose and thighs and a
countenance delightful as the moon, and
rich in lineage and birth.” (43—45)

कपिप्रवीरस्य तदाद्भुतोपमम्।
प्रहर्षितो रामदिदृक्षयाभवत्
पुनश्च हर्षादिदमब्रवीद् वच:॥४६॥
Hearing from the mouth of Hanuman, a
principal hero among the monkeys, the
glorious return of Sri Rama on that occasion,
prince Bharata was thrown into ecstatic joy
by a desire to behold Sri Rama, and joyfully
spoke once more as follows: (46)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये FERS पञ्चविंशत्यधिकशततम: सर्ग: ॥ १२५ ॥

Thus ends Canto One hundred and twenty-five in the Yuddhakanda of the glorious
Ramayana of Valmiki, the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

