358

नानामाल्योपगन्धैश्च सदाभ्यर्चितचत्वरम्।
आशीर्वादान् बहून् YT सुहृद्धि: समुदीरितान्॥ ७॥
ame चापि सम्पूज्य सर्वानेव नरान् ययौ।
पितामहैराचरितं तथैव प्रपितामहै: ।। ८ ।।
अद्योपादाय तं मार्गमभिषिक्तोऽनुपालय।
यथा स्म पोषिता: frat यथा aa: पितामहै: |
ad: सुखतरं सर्वे रामे वत्स्याम राजनि॥९॥

Mounting his chariot, the glorious Sri
Rama, who brought immense joy to his
friends and relations, wherever he went,
beheld from his chariot the city of Ayodhya,
which was richly provided with buntings
and flags, nay, fumigated with the incense
of precious aloe-wood and was crowded
with various types of men. In this way Sri
Rama drove through the middle of the
road, which was adorned with white houses
looking like so many clouds and was
fumigated with the incense of aloe-wood.
Like Indra, the ruler of gods, in heaven, he
also saw that excellent road, the right royal
road, which was uninfested with thieves
and robbers and looked charming with
shops containing heaps of superb sandal-
wood and aloe-wood and other fragrant
substances as well as of linen and silk,
unpierced pearls and excellent crystals too,
nay, which was heaped on the margin with
flowers and edibles of various kinds, and
whose crossings were ever adorned with
curds, grains of unbroken rice, materials
worth offering as oblation to the sacred fire,
parched grains of paddy, incense of various
kinds and paste of sandal-wood and aloe-
wood and various kinds of flowers and
perfumes. Hearing the numerous blessings
invoked by friends and duly honouring all
men, who invoked such blessings according
to their respective position, Sri Rama drove
along. Addressing Sri Rama, they said:
“Resorting to the well-known path of
righteousness trodden by your father and
grandfather and great grandfather, when
installed in the office of Prince Regent
today, keep to it.” Again, they said to one

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

another : “When Sri Rama is crowned king,
we shall all live even more happily than we
did when we were sustained by his father,
King Dasaratha, and by all his forefathers.
(1—9)

अलमद्य हि भुक्तेन परमार्थैरलं च न:।
ate पश्याम निर्यान्तं रामं राज्ये प्रतिष्ठितम्॥ १०॥
“Indeed we shall have no use for
enjoyment of any sort nor for the varieties
of Moksa (final beatitude), only if we see Sri
Rama coming out of the palace of King
Dasaratha after being installed as Prince
Regent today. (10)

ततो fe न: प्रियतरं नान्यत् किंचिद् भविष्यति।
यथाभिषेको रामस्य राज्येनामिततेजस:॥११॥

“For, nothing else will be dearer to us
than the installation on the throne of Sri Rama,
who is invested with immense glory.” (11)

एताश्चान्याश्च सुहृदामुदासीन: शुभा: HA: |
आत्मसम्पूजनी: श्रृण्वन् ययौ WAT महापथम्॥ १२॥
Sri Rama drove along the main road
hearing unconcernedly the aforesaid and
other favourable talks of his friends and
relations, eulogizing himself. (12)

न हि तस्मान्मन: कश्चिच्चक्षुषी वा नरोत्तमात्।
नर: शाक्नोत्यपाक्रष्टुमतिक्रान्तेऽपि राघवे॥१३॥

Even when Sri Rama (a scion of Raghu)
had passed by, no man (much less woman)
could turn his mind or eyes away from that
jewel among men. (13)

यश्च Wa न पश्येत्तु यं च रामो न पश्यति।

निन्दित: सर्वलोकेषु स्वात्माप्येनं विगर्हते॥१४॥
He who did not behold Sri Rama and

whom Sri Rama did not notice was indeed

despised in the eyes of all men; even his
own self would reproach him. (14)

way स fe धर्मात्मा वर्णानां qed दयाम्।

चतुर्णां fe वय:स्थानां at A तमनुव्रता:॥ १७५॥
Since that pious-minded prince would

show compassion, commensurate, of course,
