228

“The family priest, in the person of
Vasistha, indeed has been the supreme

« VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

resort to all the scions of Ikswaku. Next to
him you all are a deity to me.” (22)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये बालकाण्डे सप्तपञ्चाश: सर्ग: ॥ ५७॥

Thus ends Canto Fifty-seven in the Balakanda of the glorious Ramayana of Valmiki,
the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

अष्टपञ्चाश: सर्ग:
Canto LVIII
Having been repulsed by Vasistha’s sons as well, Trisanku gets ready
to seek another priest, whereupon he is degraded by the curse of

Vasistha’s sons to the position of a Candala and approaches
Viswamitra with the same request

Filled with rage to hear the submission
of Trisanku, O Rama, the hundred sons of
sage Vasistha forthwith replied to the king
as follows: (1)

प्रत्याख्यातोऽसि दुर्मेधो गुरुणा सत्यवादिना।
तं wat समतिक्रम्य शाखान्तरमुपेयिवान्॥२॥
“When you have been repulsed by
your preceptor, Sage Vasistha, who always
speaks the truth, O foolish king how have
you sought another patron, ignoring him?
(2)
न चातिक्रमितुं wet वचनं सत्यवादिन:॥ ३॥
“The family priest, Sage Vasistha, has
been the greatest support of all the scions
of Ikswaku and the word of that veracious
sage cannot be set aside with impunity.
(3)
अशक्यमिति सोवाच वसिष्ठो भगवानृषि:।
तं ad a समाहर्तुं wd शक्ता: कथंचन॥४॥
“How can we really venture to conduct
a sacrifice which the celebrated and almighty

sage Vasistha has declared as something
which cannot be undertaken? (4)

बालिशस्त्वं नरश्रेष्ठं गम्यतां स्वपुरं पुन:।
याजने भगवान् शाक्तस्त्रैलोक्यस्यापि पार्थिव॥५॥
“You are yet puerile of understanding,
O jewel among men! Return, therefore, to
your capital. The supremely glorious Vasistha
is even capable of conducting the sacrifices
of all the three worlds, O ruler of the earth !
(5)

अवमानं कथं ad तस्य शक्ष्यामहे वयम्।
तेषां तद् वचनं श्रुत्वा क्रोधपर्याकुलाक्षरम्॥ ६॥

a राजा पुनरेवैतानिदं वचनमब्रवीत्।
प्रत्याख्यातो भगवता गुरुपुत्रैस्तथैव हि॥७॥

अन्यां गतिं गमिष्यामि स्वस्ति वोऽस्तु तपोधना: |
ऋषिपुत्रास्तु तच्छुत्वा वाक्यं घोराभिसंहितम्॥८॥

wy: परमसंक्रुद्धाश्चण्डालत्वं गमिष्यसि।
इत्युक्त्वा ते महात्मानो विविशु: स्वं स्वमाश्रमम्॥ ९ ॥
“How shall we be able to offer indignity
to him by embarking on a venture which
has been declared by him as something
which cannot be taken in hand?” Hearing
the aforesaid admonition of Vasistha’s sons,
couched as it was in words full of anger,
the said king, however, once more made
the following submission to them: “I have
actually been repulsed by the venerable
Vasistha and even so by you, my preceptor’s
sons. | shall accordingly approach another
