+ UTTARAKANDA +

you know how he (DaSgagriva) has obtained
an excellent boon, it is not advisable for you
to antagonize him.’ (42—45)

एवमुक्तो गृहीत्वा तु तद्वच: पितृगौरवात्।
Panga: सामात्य: सवाहनधनो गत:॥४६॥
Told thus and following his advice out
of respect for his father, Kubera left the
place with his wife and sons, his ministers,
his vehicles and his wealth. (46)

प्रहस्तोऽथ दशग्रीवं गत्वा वचनमब्रवीत्।
प्रहष्टात्मा महात्मानं सहामात्यं सहानुजम्॥४७॥
शून्या सा नगरी लङ्का त्यक्त्वैनां धनदो गत:।
प्रविश्य at सहास्माभि: स्वधर्मं तत्र पालय॥ ४८ ॥

“Prahasta, overjoyed, sought the mighty
Dasagriva, who was being attended by his
ministers and brothers and said, ‘Kubera has
left the city of Lahka and has gone away. It is
now vacant. Entering it now in our company,
discharge your duty there.’ ” (47-48)

Waal दशग्रीव: Weert महाबल:।
facet नगरीं लङ्कां भ्रातृभि: सबलानुगै:॥४९॥
Told thus by Prahasta, Ravana of great

strength entered Lanka alongwith his brothers,
forces and other followers. (49)

883

धनदेन परित्यक्कां सुविभक्तमहापथाम्।
आरुरोह स देवारि: स्वर्गं देवाधिपो यथा॥७५०॥

That enemy of the gods stepped into
Lanka—whose main streets were well laid
out, and which had been evacuated by the
god of riches—just as Indra ascended heaven.

(50)
स चाभिषिक्त: क्षणदाचरैस्तदा
निवेशयामास पुरीं दशानन:।
निकामपूर्णा च बभूव सा पुरी
निशाचरैर्नीलबलाहकोपमै: ॥ ५१ ॥

Consecrated by the Raksasas as its
ruler, DaSagriva peopled that city. It was
soon filled to capacity with Raksasas, dark
as clouds. (51)

धनेश्र्वरस्त्वथ पितॄवाक्यगौरवा-
न्न्यवेशयच्छशिविमले गिरौ पुरीम्।
स्वलंकृतैर्भवनवरैर्विभूषितां
पुरंदरस्येव तदाऽमरावतीम्॥ ५२ ॥
Out of respect for his fathers word,
Kubera built on the hill, white as the moon,
a city adorned with well-decorated mansions

even as Indra laid out Amaravati in heaven.
(52)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये उत्तरकाण्डे एकादश: सर्ग: ॥ 22 ॥

Thus ends Canto Eleven in the Uttarakanda of the glorious Ramayana of Valmiki,
the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

Canto XII

The marriage of Sirpanakha, of Ravana and his brothers
and the birth of Meghanada

राक्षसेन्द्रोऽभिषिक्तस्तु भ्रातृभि: सहितस्तदा।
ad: Wert राक्षस्या भगिन्या: समचिन्तयत्॥ १॥
“After his consecration as the ruler of
Lanka, Ravana took counsel with his brothers
regarding the marriage of his sister, a
Raksasi. (1)

स्वसारं कालकेयाय दानवेन्द्राय राक्षसीम्।
ददौ शूर्पणखां aa विद्युज्जिह्वाय राक्षस:॥ २॥

“The Raksasa gave away his sister,
the ogress Surpanakha in marriage to
Vidyujjinva, chief of the Danavas and son of
Kalaka. (2)
