58

character are sleeping with their husbands.
Nay, rangers of the night too of very strange
and violent behaviour have likewise started
disporting themselves. (9)

मत्तप्रमत्तानि समाकुलानि
रथाश्वभद्रासनसंकुलानि ।
वीरश्रिया चापि समाकुलानि
ददर्श धीमान् स कपि: कुलानि॥ १०॥

The sagacious Hanuman beheld there
mansions of arrogant and intoxicated ogres
connected together, nay, crowded with
chariots, horses and seats of gold and also
full of fortune enjoyed by heroes. (10)

परस्परं चाधिकमाक्षिपन्ति

भुजांश्च पीनानधिविक्षिपन्ति।
मत्तप्रलापानधिविक्षिपन्ति

मत्तानि चान्योन्यमधिक्षिपन्ति॥ ११॥

The proud ogres railed at one another
in profusion and even threw about their
stout arms too in a bellicose spirit, uttered
wild and incoherent words and insulted one
another. (11)
रक्षांसि aaifa च विक्षिपन्ति

गात्राणि कान्तासु च विक्षिपन्ति।
रूपाणि चित्राणि च विक्षिपन्ति
दृढानि चापानि च विक्षिपन्ति॥ १२॥

Nay, the ogres smote their breasts as
a form of exercise and lovingly placed their
hands and other limbs on the person of their
beloved ones. They also put on various
garbs to please their wives and drew their
strong bows by way of practice. (12)

ददर्शं कान्ताश्च समालभन्त्य-

स्तथापरास्तत्र पुन: EAU: |
सुरूपवक्त्राश्च dat हसन्त्य:

क्रुद्धा: पराश्चापि विनि:श्चसन्त्य: ।। १३॥

Hanuman further observed that lovely
women were applying sandal-paste on their
bodies, while others in those mansions were
lying asleep. Some with a lovely exterior and
countenance were laughing whereas still

« VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

others, who had been angered through love
were hissing like an angry serpent. (13)

महागजैश्चापि तथा नदद्धि:
सुपूजितैश्चापि तथा wate: |
रराज ditva विनि:श्चसद्भि-
ea भुजंगैरिव नि:श्चसद्भि:॥ १४॥

Nay, with its trumpeting huge elephants,
and likewise with its highly virtuous souls
like Vibhisana greatly adored as well as
with its hissing heroes, the city of Lanka
looked charming like lakes infested, inter
alia, with hissing serpents. (14)

बुद्धिप्रधानान् रुचिराभिधानान्
संश्रद्दधानाञ्जगत: प्रधानान्।
ददर्श तस्यां पुरि यातुधानान्॥१५॥
Hanuman beheld in that city
Yatudhanas, who were predominantly
intellectual, who were sweet of expression,
fully devout and pre-eminent in the world,
nay, who were dressed in various garbs
and were called by charming names. (15)

ननन्द GT स च तान् सुरूपान्
नानागुणानात्मगुणानुरूपान् ।
विद्योतमानान् स च तान् सुरूपान्
ददर्श कांश्चिच्च पुनर्विरूपान्॥ १६ ॥

He rejoiced to see the latter, who were
comely of form and endowed with many
virtues and who behaved in consonance
with their virtues. Nay, he found those who
were comely of form, even though some
were misshapen, shining brightly. (16)

ततो वरार्हा: सुविशुद्धभावा-
स्तेषां स्नियस्तत्र महानुभावा:।
प्रियेषु पानेषु च सतक्तभावा
ददर्श ART इव सुस्वभावा:॥ Vil
He then saw their womenfolk, who were
deserving of excellent attire and ornaments,
were exceedingly pure-hearted and dignified,
whose mind was enamoured of their beloved
ones as well as of beverages, who shone
