214

« VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

द्विपञ्चाश: सर्ग:
Canto LIT

Vasistha enjoins his cow of plenty, Sabala by name, to yield
necessary articles for entertaining Viswamitra

तं get परमप्रीतो विश्वामित्रो महाबल:।
प्रणतो विनयाद् वीरो वसिष्ठं जपतां are i
स्वागतं तव चेत्युक्तो वसिष्ठेन महात्मना।
आसनं चास्य भगवान् वसिष्ठो व्यादिदेश ह॥ २॥
उपविष्टाय च da विश्चामित्राय धीमते।
यथान्यायं मुनिवर: फलमूलमुपाहरत्॥३॥
“Supremely delighted to behold the
celebrated Vasistha, the foremost of those
engaged in muttering prayers, the very mighty
hero, ViSswamitra, bowed low to him out of
modesty and was greeted by the high-
souled Vasistha in the words “Welcome is
your advent to this hermitage!” Nay the
almighty Vasistha, it is said, offered him a
seat; and, when he had taken his seat, the
great sage then placed before the learned
ViSwamitra fruits and roots according to the
rules of propriety. (1—3)
प्रतिगृह्य तु at पूजां वसिष्ठाद् राजसत्तम:।
तपोऽग्निहोत्रशिष्येषु कुशलं पर्यपृच्छत॥४॥
विश्वामित्रो महातेजा वनस्पतिगणे तदा।
सर्वत्र कुशलं We वसिष्ठो राजसत्तमम्॥५॥
“Accepting the hospitality mentioned
above from Vasistha, the exceptionally
glorious ViSwamitra, the foremost of kings,
for his part then inquired whether everything
was well with his austerities and Agnihotra
(worship of the sacred fire) as well as
with his pupils and the plant kingdom, the
means of their sustenance. In reply to
his inquiry Vasistha told ViSwamitra, the
foremost of kings, that everything was going
on well. (4-5)
पप्रच्छ जपतां seat वसिष्ठो ब्रह्मण: Aa: ie il
“The great ascetic Vasistha, son of

Brahma (the creator), the foremost of
ascetics, questioned the king as follows
when he had been comfortably seated :

(6)

कच्चित्ते कुशलं राजन् कच्चिद धर्मेण रञ्जयन्।
प्रजा: पालयसे राजन् Wat धार्मिक॥७॥

“‘Ig everything well with you, O
monarch? Do you rule over the people, O
pious king, according to the fourfold course
of conduct prescribed for a king, delighting
them with your love of righteousness? (7)

कच्चित्ते सम्भृता भृत्या: कच्चित् तिष्ठन्ति शासने।
कच्चित्ते विजिता: ad Roar रिपुसूदन॥८॥

“Are servants duly maintained by you
and do they ever stand at your beck and
call? Have all your enemies been fully
conquered, O destroyer of foes? (8)

कच्चिद् बलेषु कोशेषु मित्रेषु च परंतप।
कुशलं ते Were पुत्रपौत्रे तथानघ॥९॥
“‘Is all well with your forces, treasuries
and allies, O destroyer of foes, no less than
with your sons and grandsons, O tiger among
men, divorced from sin as you are?’ (9)
सर्वत्र कुशलं राजा वसिष्ठं प्रत्युदाहरत्।
विश्वामित्रो महातेजा वसिष्ठं विनयान्वितम्॥ १०॥
“In reply, the exceptionally glorious King
Viswamitra told Vasistha, the noblest of all
and rich in culture, of his allround welfare.
(10)
कृत्वा तौ सुचिरं कालं धर्मिष्ठौ ता: कथास्तदा।
मुदा परमया युक्तौ प्रीयेतां तौ परस्परम्॥११॥
“Having carried on all such talks for a
very long time on that occasion, and full of

supreme joy, the two celebrated and most
pious souls felt pleased with each other. (11)
