176

ay वर्षशते पूर्णे तपसाऽऽराधितो मुनि:।
सगराय वरं Weld भृगु: सत्यवतां वर:॥६॥
“Propitiated by his askesis, the sage
Bhrgu (a mind-born son of Brahma), the
foremost of the votaries of truth, conferred
a boon on Sagara when a hundred years
had been completed. (6)

अपत्यलाभ: सुमहान् भविष्यति तवानघ।
कीर्तिं चाप्रतिमां लोके प्राप्स्यसे पुरुषर्षभ॥७॥

“He said, ‘good many sons will be born
to you, O sinless one, and you will attain
unequalled fame in the world, O jewel among
men! (7)

Vet जनयिता ad Wt वंशकरं तव।
ure पुत्रसहस्राणि अपरा जनयिष्यति॥८]॥

“One wife of yours will bear you a son
that will perpetuate your race, O dear one;
while the other will give birth to sixty thousand
sons.’ (8)
भाषमाणं महात्मानं राजपुत्र्यौ Wael तम्।
wad: परमप्रीते कृताञ्जलिपुटे तदा॥९॥

“Propitiating that exalted soul, the sage
Bhrgu, while he was speaking as aforesaid,
the two princesses, the daughters of the
king of Vidarbha and the sage KaSyapa, a
king of sages, respectively, who were
supremely delighted to hear of the boon
granted by him, submitted on that occasion
with folded hands as follows : (9)

Uh: HEM: सुतो ब्रह्मन् का बहूञ्जनयिष्यति।
श्रोतुमिच्छावहे ब्रह्मन् सत्यमस्तु वचस्तव॥१०॥
“We wish to hear by which of us will be
borne a single son and which, O holy one,
will give birth to many. Let your prediction
be true, O sage!” (10)

तयोस्तद् वचनं श्रुत्वा भृगु: परमधार्मिक:।
sara परमां वाणीं स्वच्छन्दोऽत्र विधीयताम्॥ ११॥

“Hearing that question of theirs, the
supremely pious Bhrgu gave the following
excellent reply : ‘Let your own will be enforced
in this matter. (11)

« VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

एको वंशकरो वास्तु बहवो वा महाबला:।
कीर्तिमन्तो महोत्साहा: का वा कं वरमिच्छति॥ १२॥

“‘In one case there will be a single son
that will perpetuate the race and in the other
many mighty and renowned sons full of
great daring. Which of you would have which
boon?’ (12)

मुनेस्तु वचनं श्रुत्वा केशिनी रघुनन्दन।
Ut वंशकरं wa woe नृपसंनिधौ॥ १३॥
“Hearing the sage’s reply, KeSini, the
senior queen, for her part, O scion of
Raghu, preferred in the presence of the
king a son that would perpetuate the line,
O Rama. (13)
ure पुत्रसहस्राणि सुपर्णभगिनी तदा।
महोत्साहान् कोर्तिमतो जग्राह सुमति: सुतान्॥ १४॥
“Thereupon Sumati, Garuda’s sister,

sought sixty thousand renowned sons full
of great daring. (14)

प्रदक्षिणमृषिं कृत्वा शिरसाभिप्रणम्य तम्।
जगाम raat राजा सभार्यो रघुनन्दन॥ १७५ Il
“Going round the sage clockwise and
saluting him with his head bent low, the king
returned to his capital with his wives,
O Rama! (15)
अथ काले गते तस्य ज्येष्ठा पुत्रं व्यजायत।
असमञ्ज इति ख्यातं केशिनी सगरात्मजम्॥ १६॥
“Now, when the time was ripe, the
senior queen, Kesini, bore Sagara a son,
known by the name of Asamafja, sprung
from his loins. (16)

सुमतिस्तु नरव्याघ्र गर्भतुम्बं व्यजायत।
षष्टि: पुत्रसहस्राणि तुम्बभेदाद् विनिस्सृता:॥ १७॥
“Sumati, on the other hand, O tiger among
men, brought forth a foetus shaped like a
bitter gourd. On the gourd being split up sixty
thousand male issues emerged from it. (17)

घृतपूर्णेषु कुम्भेषु धात्र्यस्तान् समवर्धयन्।
कालेन महता सर्वे यौवनं प्रतिपेदिरे॥ १८॥

“The nurses nurtured them placing them
