* AYODHYAKANDA +

not available even to gods as well as with

lands free from revenue, raiment and cooked

rice*. Be pleased with me, O goddess!
(89)

यानि त्वत्तीरवासीनि दैवतानि च ata fr
atm सर्वाणि यक्ष्यामि तीर्थान्यायतनानि च॥ ९०॥

“Nay, | shall without doubt offer worship
to all the deities that have their abode on
your banks as well as to all sacred spots
and sites on your banks. (90)

Uta महाबाहुर्मया wat च संगत:।
अयोध्यां वनवासात् तु प्रविशत्वनघोऽनघे॥९१॥

“May the sinless Rama, who is
possessed of mighty arms for his part re-
enter Ayodhya from the forest alongwith
Laksmana and myself, O sinless goddess !”

(91)

तथा सम्भाषमाणा सा सीता गङ्गामनिन्दिता।
दक्षिणा दक्षिणं तीरं क्षिप्रमेवाभ्युपागमत्॥९२॥

Praying to Ganga as aforesaid, the
celebrated Sita, who was irreproachable in
everyway and devoted to her husband,
speedily reached the southern bank. (92)

तीरं तु समनुप्राप्य नावं हित्वा नरर्षभ:।
प्रातिष्ठत सह WaT वैदेह्या च परंतप:॥९३॥
Having safely reached the aforesaid
bank and leaving the boat, Sri Rama, a
jewel among men, the chastiser of his foes,
for his part, proceeded further with his
younger brother, Laksmana and Sita, a
princess of the Videha kingdom. (93)

अथाब्रवीन्महाबाहु: सुमित्रानन्दवर्धनम्।
wa संरक्षणार्थाय waa विजनेऽपि वा॥ ९४॥

The mighty-armed prince now said to
Laksmana (who heightened the joy of

489

Sumitra). “Be prepared for the protection of
Sita in the inhabited as well as in the
uninhabited areas. (94)
अवश्यं taut are मद्बिधैर्विजने वने।
अग्रतो गच्छ सौमित्रे सीता त्वामनुगच्छतु॥ ९५॥
“Protection needs must be afforded in
an uninhabited forest to the weaker sex by
men like me, who maintain the moral order.
Therefore, lead the way, O son of Sumitra,
and let Sita follow you. (95)
अन्योन्यस्य fe नो रक्षा कर्तव्या पुरुषर्षभ॥ ९६॥

“l, for my part, shall follow in the rear,
protecting Sita as well as yourself from
behind; for protection must be vouchsafed
by us to one another, O jewel among men!

(96)

न fe तावदतिक्रान्तासुकरा काचन क्रिया।
WI Ga तु ada वनवासस्य वेत्स्यति॥ ९७॥

“In fact, no severe trial has gone out of
possibility as yet. On the other hand, Sita,
a princess of the Videha kingdom, will
experience only today, the suffering entailed
by a sojourn in the forest. (97)
प्रणष्टजनसम्बाधं क्षेत्रारामविवर्जितम्।
विषमं च प्रपातं च ama प्रवेक्ष्यति॥९८॥

“She will enter today a forest in which
traces of blades of grass etc., having been
crushed under the feet of men are no longer
visible, there being no traffic of men, which
is utterly devoid of fields and gardens, has
a rugged surface and is full of yawning
chasms etc.” (98)

TM रामस्य वचनं प्रतस्थे लक्ष्मणोऽग्रत:।
अनन्तरं च सीताया राघवो रघुनन्दन:॥९९॥

* According to the interpretation given above, which commands the support of a famous commentator
of the Valmiki-Ramayana, the author of the gloss going by the name of “Ramayana Siromani”, the
compound `सुराघटसहस्रेण` will have to be split up as `सुरेषु देवेषु न घटन्ते न सन्तीत्यर्थ:, तेषां Gee तेन`. The other
compound `मांसभूतौदनेन` too should be split up as ‘At नास्ति stat राजभागो यस्यां सा Wa भू: पृथ्वी च sd वस्त्रं च
ated a, Was AAEM, aa’. Like ‘Arsa’, the word ‘Arisa’ too bears the sense of ‘share’ (revenue) according

to Sanskrit lexicons.
