* AYODHYAKANDA +

439

Canto XXXIX

Sent away by Dagaratha, Sumantra gets a chariot ready to take Sri Rama
and his party to the forest and Sita adorns herself with jewels
brought by the Chancellor of the Exchequer. Kausalya
tenders opportune advice to her daughter-in-law and
the latter bows to it. Sri Rama comforts Kausalya
and offers apology to his other mothers,
who burst into a wail

रामस्य I aa: श्रुत्वा मुनिवेषधरं च तम्।
समीक्ष्य सह भार्याभी राजा विगतचेतन:॥१॥
Hearing the intercession of Sri Rama
and perceiving him clad in the garb of a
hermit, the king for his part with his consorts
fell unconscious. (1)

wt दु:खेन संतप्त: प्रत्यवैश्षत राघवम्।

न चैनमभिसम्प्रेकष्य प्रत्यभाषत दुर्मना:॥ २॥
Sore stricken with agony he could neither

regale his eyes on Sri Rama (a scion of

Raghu) nor could he accost him even on

casting a look at him awhile, disconsolate

as he was. (2)

a Wadhrarcstt AEC ES महीपति: |
विललाप महाबाहू राममेवानुचिन्तयन्॥३॥
Remaining senseless, as it were, for
an hour or so and feeling distressed, the
mighty-armed monarch repented in various
ways, thinking all the time of Sri Rama
alone: (3)

मन्ये खलु मया ud विवत्सा aga: कृता:।
प्राणिनो हिंसिता वापि तन्मामिदमुपस्थितम्॥४॥

“| think in my past life many a cow
indeed was robbed of its calf or in any case
many living beings were destroyed by me.
Hence this calamity has befallen me. (4)

न त्वेवानागते काले देहाच्च्यवति जीवितम्।
कैकेय्या क्लिश्यमानस्य मृत्युर्मम न विद्यते॥ i
योऽहं पावकसंकाशं पश्यामि पुरत: स्थितम्।
विहाय वसने सूक्ष्मे तापसाच्छादमात्मजम्॥६॥

“Surely life does not depart from the
body until the appointed hour has arrived. It
is, therefore, that death does not claim me
even though | am being tormented by Kaikeyi
and even though | behold my son, effulgent
as fire, standing before me clad in the robes
of an ascetic, having shed garments of fine
fabric. (5-6)
एकस्या: खलु कैकेय्या: कृतेऽयं Raed जन:।
स्वार्थे प्रयतमानाया: संथश्रित्य निकृतिं त्विमाम्॥ ७॥

“Indeed all these people have to suffer
on account of Kaikeyi alone, who, having
resorted to this roguery, is striving hard to
gain her object.” (7)
एवमुक्त्वा तु aad बाष्पेण विहतेन्द्रिय:।
रामेति सकृदेवोक्त्वा व्याहर्तुं न शशाक स:॥८॥
Gat तु प्रतिलभ्यैव मुहूर्तात् स महीपति:।
नेत्राभ्यामश्रुपूर्णाभ्यां सुमन्त्रमिदमब्रवीत्॥ ९॥

Having uttered these words and saying
“O Rama!” only once, the Emperor, however,
whose vocal organs had been choked by
tears, could not speak any more. Just
regaining his consciousness after an hour
or so, the said Emperor for his part spoke
to Sumantra with his eyes flooded with
tears as follows: (8-9)

औषपवाह्यं tet युक्त्वा त्वमायाहि हयोत्तमै: |
प्रापयैनं महाभागमितो जनपदात् परम्॥१०॥
“Fitting with the best of horses a chariot
used for pleasure-drives, return you soon
and take this highly blessed prince beyond
this territory. (10)
