372

courses of self-discipline are of no use and
the asceticism practised with intent to do
good to my child has proved utterly
unfructuous like a seed sown in barren soil.

(52)
ale ह्यकाले मरणं यदृच्छया
लभेत कश्चिद् गुरुदु:खकर्शित:।

fern त्वया धेनुरिवात्मजेन वै॥ ५३॥

“If anyone afflicted with great suffering
could meet with death at one’s sweet will
even before time, | would certainly, like a
cow bereft of its calf, depart to the court of
Yama in your absence this very day. (53)

अथापि किं जीवितमद्य मे gar

त्वया विना चन्द्रनिभाननप्रभ।
अनुव्रजिष्यामि वनं त्वयैव गौ:

सुदुर्बला वत्समिवाभिकांक्षया। ५४॥

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

“Even if there is no death, life without
you is of no consequence and, therefore,
useless, O Rama (wearing a moon-like
splendour on your countenance) ! Though
very feeble, | shall, like a cow following its
calf through ardent longing, definitely proceed
with you to the forest.” (54)

भृशमसुखममर्षिता Wer

ag विललाप समीक्ष्य राघवम्।
व्यसनमुपनिशाम्य सा महत्

सुतमिव बद्धमवेक्ष्य किंनरी॥ ५५॥

Pondering over the terrible calamity
that was going to befall her as a result of
her son’s exile and perceiving Sri Rama, a
scion of Raghu, bound by a sense of duty
to his father, Kausalya, who was unable to
bear the intense suffering, wailed a lot even
as a Kinnara woman would on finding her
son made captive. (55)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्येऽयोध्याकाण्डे fas: सर्ग: Il 20 ॥

Thus ends Canto Twenty in the Ayodhyakanda of the glorious Ramayana
of Valmiki, the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

Canto XXI

Consoling Kausalya in her grief over the impending exile of Sri Rama, Prince
Laksmana opposes the idea of Sri Rama’s leaving for the forest and,
censuring Dasaratha, makes up his mind to accompany his
eldest brother. Kausalya too deters Sri Rama from going
into exile, branding Kaikeyi’s command as unjust.

Sri Rama, however, justifies the command on the
ground of its being countenanced by the
Emperor and requests his mother to grant
him leave and perform auspicious
rites connected with his departure

तथा तु विलपन्तीं at कौसल्यां राममातरम्।
sara लक्ष्मणो दीनस्तत्कालसदृशं वच:॥१॥

Feeling miserable over the situation,

Laksmana for his part made the following
submission, suited to that occasion, to
Kausalya, mother of Sri Rama, who was
wailing as aforesaid : (1)
