1168

hundred Yojanas (or eight hundred miles)
from this place.” Then the celebrated monkey
chief, Hanuman (son of the wind-god), the
destroyer of his foes, for his part, who was
a compeer of the wind-god, climbed up
Mount Mahendra, the foremost of mountains,
which was carpeted with flowers (shed by
the trees standing on it), was thick with
creepers and flowers growing on them, was
covered with trees ever laden with flowers
and fruit and infested with lions and tigers,
nay, which was frequented by elephants in
rut, and rendered noisy by flocks of birds in
heat and again which abounded in cascades
and whose swards were ranged by deer.
(29—41)

महद्भिरुच्छितं शृङ्गैर्महेनद्रं स महाबल:।
विचचार हरिश्रेष्ठो महेन्द्रसमविक्रम:॥४२॥

Hanuman (the foremost of monkeys),
who was endowed with extraordinary might
and equalled the mighty Indra (the ruler of
the three worlds) in prowess, ranged Mount
Mahendra, which rose high with its huge
peaks. (42)
पादाभ्यां पीडितस्तेन महाशैलो महात्मना।
wre सिंहाभिहतो महान् मत्त ga द्विप:॥४३॥

Pressed under the feet by that exalted
soul, the huge mountain screamed (in the
shape of the animals inhabiting it) like a mighty
elephant in rut and attacked by alion. (48)

मुमोच सलिलोत्पीडान् विप्रकोर्णशिलोच्चय: |
वित्रस्तमृगमातङ्ग: प्रकम्पितमहाद्रुम: It ४४॥
That huge mountain released new
springs of water, its masses of rocks getting
disintegrated. The deer and _ elephants
inhabiting it got alarmed and the giant trees
standing on it violently shook. (44)

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

नानागन्धर्वमिथुनै: पानसंसर्गकर्कशै: ।
उत्पतद्धिर्विहंगैश्च विद्याधरगणैरपि । ४५ ॥
त्यज्यमानमहासानु: संनिलीनमहोरग: |
शैलशृङ्गशिलोत्पातस्तदाभूत् स AAA: ॥४६॥
Its gigantic peaks began to be deserted
by many Gandharva couples, who were
excessively addicted to drink and copulation,
as well as by flying birds and even by
bands of Vidyadharas (heavenly artists).
Huge serpents living there hid themselves
in holes, while rocks fell from the summits
of the mountain. (45-46)

सपताक इवाभाति स तदा धरणीधर:॥४७॥

With the aforesaid serpents, half-
emerged from their holes and hissing, the
said mountain for its part looked at that time
as though adorned with flags. (47)

ऋषिभिस्त्राससम्भ्रान्तैस्त्यज्यमान: शिलोच्चय: |
सीदन् महति कान्तारे सार्थहीन इवाध्वग:॥४८॥

Being deserted by Rsis, who got agitated
through fear, the mountain looked at that time
forlorn like a wayfarer forsaken by his
companions in a large wilderness. (48)
स वेगवान् वेगसमाहितात्मा

हरिप्रवीर: परवीरहन्ता।
मन: समाधाय महानुभावो
जगाम लङ्कां मनसा मनस्वी॥४९॥

Having composed his mind, the high-
spirited Hanuman, a distinguished hero among
the monkeys, the slayer of hostile warriors,
who was endowed with extraordinary speed
and had focussed his mind on speed alone,
and who was possessed of great might,
betook himself to Lanka in thought. (49)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये किष्किन्धाकाण्डे सप्तषष्टितम: सर्ग: ॥ ६७॥

Thus ends Canto Sixty-seven in the Kiskindhakanda of the glorious Ramayana of
Valmiki, the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

U किष्किन्धाकाण्डं सम्पूर्णम्॥
END OF KISKINDHAKANDA

