* SUNDARAKANDA +

aa च Oa संदेहस्तिष्ठतीव ममाग्रत:।
सुमहांस्त्वत्सहायेषु way हरीश्वर।॥ ७॥
कथं नु खलु दुष्पारं तरिष्यन्ति महोदधिम्।
arm weedeat dt वा नरवरात्मजौ॥८॥

“Moreover, O valiant chief of monkeys,
this very grave doubt precisely stands before
me as to how on earth, in spite of the
monkeys and bears having you for their
helper, all those armies of monkeys and
bears or even those two princes, Sri Rama
and Laksmana, will actually be able to leap
across the ocean, which is so difficult to
cross. (7-8)

त्रयाणामेव भूतानां सागरस्यास्य लङ्घने।
शक्ति: Ce वैनतेयस्य वायोर्वा Ta चानघ॥९॥

““O sinless Hanuman! the capacity to
cross this sea lies in the following three created
beings alone, viz., in Garurda (son of Vinata),
the wind-god and you, O sinless one! (9)

तदस्मिन् कार्यनिर्योगे ditt दुरतिक्रमे।

fe पश्यसि समाधानं gfe कार्यविदां वर॥ १०॥
“Therefore, the accomplishment of this

task being so difficult, O gallant monkey,

what expedient do you perceive? Speak

out, O jewel among those who know how to

accomplish an act! (10)

काममस्य त्वमेवैक: कार्यस्य परिसाधने।
uate: परवीरघ्न यशस्यस्ते बलोदय:॥११॥

“‘Although you are unquestionably
capable of accomplishing this task single-
handed, O destroyer of hostile warriors,
such display of strength on your part will
conduce to your own renown. (11)

aa: समग्रैर्यदि at eat रावणमाहवे।
विजयी स्वपुरीं रामो नयेत् तत् स्याद्यशस्करम्॥ १२॥

“‘If, making short work of Ravana in
combat in co-operation with all his forces, Sri
Rama takes me in triumph to his own city,
Ayodhya, that would redound to his glory.(12)

यथाहं तस्य वीरस्य वनादुपधिना हता।
रक्षसा तद्भयादेव AM नार्हति राघव:॥१३॥

291

“Sri Rama, a scion of Raghu, ought
not to take me back in the same surreptitious
way as | was borne away from the forest of
Janasthana by recourse to an artifice by the
ogre Ravana precisely for fear of Sri Rama,
in his absence. (13)

बलैस्तु संकुलां कृत्वा लङ्कां परबलार्दन:।

मां नयेद्यदिकाकुत्स्थस्तत् तस्य AEST भवेत्॥ १४॥
* ‘If, having overrun Lanka with his forces,

Sri Rama, a scion of Kakutstha, the destroyer

of hostile warriors, for his part takes me back

to Ayodhya that would be worthy of him. (14)

aq यथा तस्य विक्रान्तमनुरूपं महात्मन:।
भवत्याहवशूरस्य ‘Aaa त्वमुपपाढय Il १७५ ॥
“*Therefore, work out things in such a
way that valour worthy of that exalted soul,
valiant in combat, may come into play.’ (15)
तदर्थोपहितं वाक्यं प्रश्रितं हेतुसंहितम्।
Perens dd: शेषं वाक्यमुत्तरमब्रवम्॥१६॥
“Hearing the aforesaid appeal of Sita,
which was full of meaning, polite and

reasonable, | then made the following
concluding submission : (16)

देवि हर्युक्षसैन्यानामीश्चर: wad वर:।

Gia: सत्त्वसम्पन्नस्त्वदर्थे कृतनिश्चय:॥ १७॥
“‘Sugriva, the foremost of monkeys and

the lord of hordes of monkeys and bears,

who is richly endowed with strength, has
resolved to rescue you, O godlike lady ! (17)

तस्य विक्रमसम्पन्ना: सत्त्ववन्तो महाबला:।
मन:संकल्पसदरृशा fest हरय: स्थिता:॥१८॥
येषां नोपरि नाधस्तान्न fren सज्जते गति: |
न च कर्मसु सीदन्ति महत्स्वमिततेजस:॥१९॥

“At his beck and call stand monkeys
rich in prowess, full of courage and endowed
with extraordinary might, swift as thought
and possessed of immense energy, whose
movement is not hampered upward or
downward, right or left, and who do not lose
heart even when faced with great formidable
tasks. (18-19)
