632

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

quurafada: सर्ग:
Canto XCVI

While recreating himself in the company of Sita on the lovely hills of Citrakuta,
Sri Rama beholds all of a sudden a large cloud of dust screening the sun
and hears a loud noise and despatches Laksmana to ascertain the
cause. Laksmana thereupon climbs up the top of a lofty tree and
catching sight of an army with the chariot of its leader distinguished
by an ensign bearing the device of a Kovidara tree, hastily
concludes that Bharata has come all the way to dispose of Sri

Rama and thereby to make himself secure on the throne of
Ayodhya. Returning apace to the presence of Sri Rama he
disburdens himself of his suspicions and speaks angrily
about Bharata, swearing that he will kill the intruder

at तदा दर्शयित्वा तु मैथिलीं गिरिनिम्नगाम्।
निषसाद गिरिप्रस्थे सीतां मांसेन छन्दयन्॥१॥

Having shown on that occasion the
hilly stream, Mandakini, to the aforesaid
Sita, the princess of Mithila, Sri Rama for
his part sat down on a single flat rock
humouring Sita with a description of the
pulp of fruits fit for the consumption of
ascetics as follows: (1)
इदं मेध्यमिदं स्वादु निष्टप्तमिदमग्निना।
एवमास्ते स धर्मात्मा सीतया सह Waa zi

“This fruit is fit for being offered as an
oblation into the sacred fire, this is luscious
and this bulb has been roasted well in fire.”
In this way the celebrated Sri Rama, a
scion of Raghu, whose mind was devoted
to righteousness, spent his time with Sita.

(2)
तथा तत्रासतस्तस्य भरतस्योपयायिन:।

सैन्यरेणुश्च शब्दश्च प्रादुरास्तां नभस्पृशौ॥ ३॥

While he remained sitting there as
aforesaid, the dust raised by the army of
Bharata, who was approaching Sri Rama,
as well as their tramp, rose to the skies. (3)

एतस्मिन्नन्तरे AEM: शब्देन महता तत:।
अर्दिता यूथपा Wat: सयूथाद दुद्रुवुर्दिश:॥४॥

In the meantime alarmed and agitated

by that great noise, the lordly elephants in
rut ran away from their herd in various
directions. (4)

स तं सैन्यसमुद्धूतं शब्दं शुश्राव राघव:।

aig विप्रद्रुतान् सर्वान् यूथपानन्ववैक्षत॥५॥
The aforesaid Sri Rama heard that

noise caused by the army and also perceived

all those leaders of herds of elephants that
had taken flight from their herd. (5)

तांश्च विप्रद्रुतान् दृष्टा तं च श्रुत्वा महास्वनम्।
sara राम: सौमित्रिं लक्ष्मणं दीप्ततेजसम्॥६॥
Seeing them run away and also hearing
that great noise, Sri Rama spoke as follows
to Laksmana, son of Sumitra, of resplendent
glory : (6)

Bd लक्ष्मण पश्येह सुमित्रा सुप्रजास्त्वया।
भीमस्तनितगम्भीरं तुमुल: श्रूयते स्वन:॥७॥
“Hullo Laksmana, Sumitra in this world
is blessed with a worthy son in you. See
how this confused noise is being heard,
deep as a terrible crash of thunder. (7)

गजयूथानि ara महिषा वा महावने।
वित्रासिता मृगा: सिंहै: सहसा weet दिश:॥८॥
“How is it that herds of elephants in the

forest or wild buffaloes in the great forest or
deer have all of a sudden taken to flight
