166

« VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

Canto XXXVI

Hanuman delivers Sri Rama’s signet ring to Sita in order to strengthen her
confidence in him. Applauding Hanuman, Sita, who was rejoiced to
receive the token, inquires about the health of Sri Rama and others.
In order to appease the lady, who felt indignant at the thought that
Sri Rama did not care to come to her rescue so far, which led
her to suspect that he had ceased to love her, Hanuman
attributes his non-appearance to his ignorance about her
whereabouts. Describing Sri Rama’s desolation in order
to betoken his excessive love for her, he consoles
her with the assurance that Sri Rama is sparing
no pains to rescue her from her confinement

Wa महातेजा हनूमान् पवनात्मज:।
अव्।वीत्प्रश्रितबावयसीताप्रत्ययकारणात्॥शा।

In order to inspire confidence in Sita,
Hanuman, son of the wind-god, who was
endowed with extraordinary energy, once
more addressed the following courteous
words to her: (1)

वानरोऽहं महाभागे gat रामस्य धीमत:।

रत्मनम्पाङ्कित्तचेदपश्यदेव्यङ्खागैयकम्॥शा।
yee तवानीतं तेन ad महात्मना।

समाश्वसिहि भद्रं a क्षीणदु:खफला ह्यसि॥ ३॥

“ am a monkey and a messenger of
the wise Sri Rama, O highly blessed one!
Also behold, O godlike lady, this ring marked
with the name of Sri Rama, handed over by
that exalted soul and brought by me to gain
your confidence. Be reassured, may good
betide you. The fruit of your past deeds
which you have been reaping in the form
suffering all these days has certainly come
to an end.” (2-3)

गृहीत्वा प्रेक्षमाणा सा भर्तु: करविभूषितम्।
भर्तारमिव word जानकी मुदिताभवत्॥४॥

Taking the jewel which had adorned so
long the hand of her lord and gazing on it,
as though her own husband had duly arrived
in the form of that ring, Sita, Janaka’s

daughter, felt rejoiced.

ae तद् वदनं तस्यास्ताम्रशुक्लायतेक्षणम्।
बभूव हर्षोदग्रं च राहुमुक्त इवोडुराट्॥५॥

Her charming countenance with large
coppery and white eyes bloomed with joy
and shone like the moon (lit., the lord of
stars) released by Rahu. (5)

तत: सा stadt aren wd: संदेशहर्षिता।
परितुष्टा fut कृत्वा wera महाकपिम्॥६॥
Treating Hanuman with regard, that
youthful lady, who was delighted to receive
the message of her lord, felt so very happy
to see the token of her husband and fully
satisfied, then paid a tribute to the great
monkey in the following words : (6)
ae राक्षसपदं त्वयैकेन प्रधर्षितम्॥७॥
“You are valiant, you are full of address
and you are learned, a jewel among the
monkeys, in that this abode of ogres has
been assailed by you alone. (7)

शतयोजनविस्तीर्ण: सागरो मकरालय:।
विक्रमश्लाघनीयेन क्रमता गोष्पदीकृत:॥८॥

“Nay, the sea which extends to a
distance of one hundred Yojanas (or eight
hundred miles) and is an abode of alligators,

(4)
