902

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

सप्तषष्टितम: सर्ग:
Canto LXVII

Sri Rama and Laksmana meet Jatayu and, embracing the vulture,
Sri Rama bursts into a wail

पूर्वजोऽप्युक्तमात्रस्तु लक्ष्मणेन सुभाषितम्।
सारग्राही महासारं प्रतिजग्राह राघव:॥१॥

Though elder, Sri Rama (a scion of
Raghu) for his part, who was capable of
picking up the best part of everything,
accepted, when exhorted in the aforesaid
words by Laksmana, his beautifully-worded
and highly valuable advice. (1)

a निगृह्य महाबाहु: was रोषमात्मन:।
अवष्टभ्य धनुश्चित्रॆ wat लक्ष्मणमब्रवीत्॥२॥

Controlling his highly intensified anger
and leaning on his wonderful bow, the mighty-
armed Sri Rama spoke to Laksmana as
follows : (2)

fe करिष्यावहरे वत्स क्व वा गच्छाव लक्ष्मण।
केनोपायेन पश्याव: सीतामिह विचिन्तय॥ ३॥

“What shall we do, my darling? And
whither shall we go, O Laksmana? By what
expedient shall we be able to see Sita in
this forest? Ponder over this.” (3)
तं तथा परितापार्तं लक्ष्मणो वाक्यमब्रवीत्।
इदमेव जनस्थानं त्वमन्वेषितुमर्हसि। ४॥
Tae: alot नानाद्रुमलतायुतम्।
सन्तीह गिरिदुर्गाणि feu: कन्दराणि च॥५॥
गुहाश्च विविधा घोरा नानामृगगणाकुला:।
आवासा: किंनराणां च गन्धर्वभवनानि च॥६॥

To Sri Rama,who was stricken with
agony as aforesaid, Laksmana replied as
follows: “You would do well to search this
region of Janasthana alone, which is full of
numerous ogres and covered with trees
and climbers of every description. There
are many mountain-gorges, chasms and
valleys, as well as fearful caves of various
kinds crowded with herds of beasts of different
species, nay, habitats of Kinnaras and
dwellings of Gandharvas. (4—6)

तानि oat मया सार्धं समन्वेषितुमर्हसि।
त्वद्विधा बुद्धिसम्पन्ना महात्मानो नरर्षभा:॥ ७॥
आपत्सु न प्रकम्पन्ते वायुवेगैरिवाचला:।
इत्युक्तस्तद् वनं Wa विचचार सलक्ष्मण:॥८॥
क्रुद्धो राम: शरं घोरं संधाय धनुषि क्षुरम्।
तत: पर्वतकूटाभं महाभागं द्विजोत्तमम्॥९॥
ददर्श पतितं भूमौ aa जटायुषम्।
तं दृष्टवा गिरिशृङ्गाभं रामो लक्ष्मणमब्रवीत्॥ १०॥
“You would do well to ransack these
strenuously with me. Richly endowed with
intelligence, high-souled jewels among men
like you are never shaken by calamities
any more than mountains by blasts.” Angrily
setting to his bow a dreadful arrow known
by the name of Ksura (so-called because it
was sharp-edged as a razor), when exhorted
thus by Laksmana, Sri Rama, accompanied
by Laksmana, ranged the whole of that
forest. Thereupon he saw fallen on the
ground, drenched with blood, the highly
blessed Jatayu, the foremost of birds, who
looked like a mountain-peak. Seeing the
vulture, which looked like a mountain-peak,
Sri Rama spoke as follows to Laksmana:
(7—10)
अनेन सीता वैदेही भक्षिता नात्र संशय:।
गृध्रसूपमिदं व्यक्तं tat भ्रमति काननम्॥११॥
“Sita, a princess of the Videha territory,
has been devoured by this bird : there is no
doubt about it. Evidently it is an ogre ranging
the forest in the guise of a vulture. (11)

भक्षयित्वा विशालाक्षीमास्ते सीतां यथासुखम्।

wt afer dart: शारैर्घोरैरजिह्मगै:॥ १२॥
“Having eaten up the large-eyed Sita, it

is lying at ease. | shall make short work of

it by means of straight-going dreaded arrows

with fiery heads.” (12)
