# YUDDHAKANDA +

सुषेण: पश्चिमद्वारं गत्वा तारापिता बली।
TI बलवांस्तस्थौ कोटिकोटिभिरावृत: ।। २६ ॥
Seeking the western gate (while
remaining stationed in the south-west),
Susena, the mighty father of Tara (Vals wife),
who was surrounded by crores and crores
of monkeys, stood besieging that gate. (26)

उत्तरद्वारमागम्य राम: सौमित्रिणा सह।
Ta बलवांस्तस्थौ सुग्रीवश्च हरीश्वर:।॥ Vil

Making his way to the northern gate
alongwith Laksmana (son of Sumitra),
(while remaining stationed in the north-west)
the mighty Sri Rama as also Sugriva, the
king of monkeys, stood blockading that
gate. (27)

गोलाङ्गूलो महाकायो गवाक्षो भीमदर्शना।
qa: कोट्या महावीर्यस्तस्थौ रामस्य Ura: ॥ २८ ॥

Surrounded by a crore of monkeys,
Gavaksa of gigantic proportions and grim
aspect, who belonged to the Golangula
species of monkeys and was endowed with
extraordinary virility, stood by the side of Sri
Rama. (28)
ऋक्षाणां भीमकोपानां धूम्र: शत्रुनिबर्हण:।

Ga: कोट्या महावीर्यस्तस्थौ रामस्य Ursa: २९॥

Accompanied by a crore of bears
of redoubtable fury, Dhumra, brother of
Jambavan, the king of bears, the exterminator
of his foes, nay, who was endowed with
extraordinary valour, also took up his position
by the side of Sri Rama. (29)

संनद्धस्तु महावीर्यो गदापाणिर्विभीषण:।
adt यत्तैस्तु सचिवैस्तस्थौ यत्र महाबल:॥ 30

Clad in defensive armour and
accompanied by his watchful ministers,
Vibhisana for his part, who was endowed
with extraordinary virility, stood, mace in
hand, where Sri Rama, who was possessed
of great might, had taken up his position. (30)

445

गजो गवाक्षो गवय: शरभो गन्धमादन:।
समन्तात् परिधावन्तो ररक्षुर्हरिवाहिनीम्॥ ३१॥

Rushing on all sides, Gaja, Gavaksa,
Gavaya, Sarabha and Gandhamadana
defended the simian army. (31)

तत: कोपपरीतात्मा रावणो राक्षसेश्चर:।

निर्याणं सर्वसैन्यानां द्रुतमाज्ञापयत् तदा॥ ३२॥
With a mind possessed by anger on

that score, Ravana the ruler of ogres,

forthwith ordered a quick sally of all his
forces. (32)

एतच्छरत्वा तदा वाक्यं रावणस्य मुखेरितम्।

सहसा भीमनिर्घोषमुद्घुष्टं रजनीचरै:॥ ३३॥
Hearing this command issued from the

lips of Ravana, a clamour was raised all of

a sudden by the rangers of the night with a
terrible roar. (33)

तत: प्रबोधिता भेर्यश्चन्द्रपाण्डुरपुष्करा:।
हेमकोणैरभिहता राक्षसानां समन्तत:॥ ३४॥
Beaten with sticks of gold then sounded
on every side the kettledrums of the ogres,
with discs white as the moon. (34)

विनेदुश्च महाघोषा: शङ्खा: शतसहस्रश:।

राक्षसानां सुघोराणां मुखमारुतपूरिता:॥ ३५॥
Blown with the wind from the mouth

of most hideous ogres, sonorous conches

also blared forth in their hundreds and
thousands. (35)

ते ay: शुभनीलाङ्गा: सशङ्खा रजनीचरा:।
विद्युन्मण्डलसंनद्धा: सबलाका इवाम्बुदा:।॥ ३६॥
With their brilliant dark limbs decked
with jewels, the aforesaid rangers of the
night, who were equipped with conches,
shone like dark clouds provided with
armour in the shape of flashes of lightning
and accompanied by rows of herons.
(36)

निष्पतन्ति ad: सैन्या wet रावणचोदिता:।
wa पूर्यमाणस्य वेगा इव महोदधे:॥ ३७॥
