+ UTTARAKANDA +

were cut by the sword, and others were
injured by arrows. (48-49)

यथाशनीभि: सतडिन्महाभ्र: I Ko tl

By means of sharp arrows shot from
his bow like so many strokes of lightning,
Narayana tore the Raksasas with their hair
dishevelled and tossed about, even a
lightning-bearing huge cloud would disperse
mountains with strokes of lightning. (50)

भिन्नातपत्रं पतमानशस्त्रं

बलं तदुन्मत्ततरं बभूव॥५१॥

With their parasols broken, their
weapons slipping from their hands, their
plain costumes rendered threadbare by
arrows, their entrails ripped open and their
eyes restless through fear, that army stood
completely distracted. (51)

निशाचराणां सह कुञ्जराणाम्।
रवाश्च वेगाश्च समं aya:
पुराणसिंहेन विमर्दितानाम्॥ ५२ ॥
The cries as well as the stampede of
the Raksasas utterly routed by Lord Visnu
(who appeared as a man-lion of yore) with

869

those of their elephants followed all at once
like those of elephants chased by a lion. (52)

a वार्यमाणा हरिबाणजालै:
स्वबाणजालानि समुत्सृजन्त:।
धावन्ति नक्तंचरकालमेघा
वायुप्रणुना इव HIATT: UGB UI
Being checked by the volleys of arrows
shot by Sri Hari, and shooting their own
arrows, in large numbers, those clouds in
the form of Raksasa, sped like sombre
clouds propelled by the wind. (53)

संचूर्णिताङ्गाश्च गदाप्रहारै: |
असि॰प्रहारै॰द्बिविधा'विभिनग्;
पतन्ति शैला Sa राक्षसेन्द्रा:॥ ५४॥
With their heads cut off by the strokes
of the discus, their limbs pounded by blows
of the club, and cut into two by the strokes
of the sword, the Raksasa chieftains fell like
mountains struck by the thunderbolt. (54)
विलम्बमानैर्मणिहारकुण्डलै-
र्निशाचरैर्नीलबलाहकोपमै: ।
निपात्यमानैर्दंदृशे निरन्तरं
निपात्यमानैरिव नीलपर्वतै:॥ ५५॥
With the Raksasas, resembling black
clouds, being thrown to the ground with their
pendent necklaces and earrings of gold, the
earth looked fully covered as though with
blue mountains dashed to the ground. (55)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये उत्तरकाण्डे GAA: सर्ग: ॥ ७॥

Thus ends Canto Seven in the Uttarakanda of the glorious Ramayana of Valmiki,
the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

अष्टम: सर्ग:
Canto VIII

Malyavan’s fight and his defeat; retreat of Sumali and other
Raksasas into the nether world

हन्यमाने बले तस्मिन् पद्मनाभेन पृष्ठत:।
माल्यवान् संनिवृत्तोऽथ वेलामेत्य इवार्णव:॥ १॥

“When the aforesaid forces were fleeing
and were being chased and destroyed from
