* BALAKANDA +

सुयज्ञं वामदेवं च जाबालिमथ काश्यपम्।
पुरोहितं वसिष्ठं च ये चाप्यन्ये द्विजोत्तमा:॥६॥
तान् पूजयित्वा धर्मात्मा राजा दशरथस्तदा।
इदं धर्मार्थसहितं श्लक्ष्णं वचनमब्रवीत्॥७॥
Treating with honour Suyajfia and
Vamadeva, Jabali and Kasyapa, the sage
Vasistha, his family priest, and whoever
other jewels among Brahmanas were present
there, the pious-minded King Dasaratha then
spoke to them the following sweet words
full of righteousness and purpose: (6-7)

मम लालप्यमानस्य सुतार्थं नास्ति वै सुखम्।
तदर्थं हयमेधेन यक्ष्यामीति मतिर्मम॥ ८॥

“Indeed there has been no joy for me,
as | have been always wailing for a son all
these years. In order to be blessed with a
son | shall propitiate the Lord through a
horse-sacrifice : such is my intention. (8)

तदहं यष्टुमिच्छामि शास्त्रदृष्टेन कर्मणा।
कथं प्राप्स्याम्यहं कामं बुद्धिरत्र विचिन्त्यताम्॥ ९॥
“|, therefore, wish to perform the aforesaid
sacrifice according to the rites prescribed in
the scriptures. How shall | be able to attain

the object of my desire? A plan towards this
end may kindly be devised by you.” (9)
तत: साध्विति तद्वाक्यं ब्राह्मणा: प्रत्यपूजयन्।
वसिष्ठप्रमुखा: सर्वे पार्थिवस्य मुखेरितम्॥१०॥
Thereupon all the Brahmanas headed
by the sage Vasistha acclaimed the aforesaid
proposal put forth by the king with his

own mouth, in the words “Well conceived !”
“Excellent !!” (10)

Sag परमप्रीता: wd दशरथं aa
सम्भारा: सम्भियन्तां ते तुरगश्च विमुच्यताम् ॥११॥

Nay, highly pleased, they all tendered
the following advice to DaSaratha : “The well-

89

known requisites for the performance of a
horse-sacrifice may be got together and the
horse (to be sacrificed) be released. (11)

सरय्वाश्चोत्तरे dit यज्ञ भूमिर्विधीयताम्।
सर्वथा were पुत्रानभिप्रेतांश्च पार्थिव॥१२॥

यस्य ते धार्मिकी बुद्धिरियं पुत्रार्थमागता।
ततस्तुष्टोऽभवद् राजा siete द्विजभाषितम्॥ १३॥
अमात्यानब्रवीद् राजा हर्षव्याकुललोचन:।
सम्भारा: सम्भियन्तां A गुरूणां वचनादिह॥ १४॥

“Also let a sacrificial ground be prepared
on the northern bank of the holy Sarayu.
Through the contemplated sacrifice you will
at all events get sons' desired by you, O
ruler of the earth—you, to whom such a
pious idea for getting a son has occurred.”
The king was pleased to hear the aforesaid
utterance of the Brahmanas. With eyes rolling
through delight, the king then said to the
ministers, “Under orders of my preceptors,
let the requisite materials for the sacrifice
be got ready now. (12—14)

समर्थाधिष्ठितश्चाश्व: सोपाध्यायो विमुच्यताम्।
सरय्वाश्चोत्तरे तीरे यज्ञभूमिर्विधीयताम्॥१५॥

“Let the sacrificial horse be released
under the superintendence of (four hundred?
Ksatriya) princes capable of guarding and
controlling it, alongwith the arch priest
(who is required to pour oblations into the
sacrificial fire at every stride the horse takes
in the course of its wanderings over the
globe).2 And let a sacrificial ground be
prepared on the northern bank of the holy
Sarayu. (15)*
शान्तयश्चापि वर्धन्तां यथाकल्पं यथाविधि।
शक्य: प्राप्तुमयं aa: सर्वेणापि महीक्षिता॥ १६॥
नापराधो भवेत् कष्टो यद्यस्मिन् क्रतुसत्तमे।
fos fe मृगयन्ते स्म विद्वांसो ब्रह्मराक्षसा:॥ १७॥

1. This is in accordance with the popular saying : `एष्टव्या aga: पुत्रा:` (One should covet many sons).
2. We read in the Brahmanas : ` चतुश्शता रक्षन्ति यज्ञस्याघाताय`` (For avoiding interruption in the horse-

sacrifice four hundred warriors guard the horse).

3. The Brahmanas further declare : `अश्वस्य मेध्यस्य Ue ue जुहोति.`
4. Verses 15 to 19 of this canto have been repeated almost verbatim in canto XII under the same

numbers.
