* BALAKANDA +

performance of King Ambarisa, glorify through
the sacred fire Indra and Lord Visnu by
means of glories addressed to them and
then you would do well to chant the two
excellent psalms invoking the two afore-
mentioned deities, which | am _ presently
going to teach you, O dear son of Sage
Rcika! Thereby you will attain your object
in the shape of deliverance from death at
the projected sacrificial performance of King
Ambarisa.” (19-20)

शुन:शेषो गृहीत्वा A द्वे MA सुसमाहित:।
त्वरया राजसिंहं तमम्बरीषमुवाच ह॥ २१॥

Learning the aforementioned couple of
psalms, as taught by ViSwamitra, with a
fully concentrated mind, Sunahgepa hastily
spoke to the said King Ambarisa, a lion
among kings, as follows : (21)
राजसिंह महाबुद्धे शीघ्रं गच्छावहे वयम्।
निवर्तयस्व राजेन्द्र दीक्षां च समुदाहर॥ २२॥

“O highly intelligent monarch, O lion
among kings, let us both quickly proceed to
our destination. Go through the ceremony
of consecration for the sacrifice, O king of
kings, and conclude the sacrifice without
any hitch or rub.” (22)

तद् वाक्यमृषिपुत्रस्य श्रुत्वा हर्षसमन्वित:।
जगाम Ufa: शीघ्रं यज्ञवाटमतन्दित:।॥ २३॥
Filled with joy to hear the aforesaid
request of the sage’s son, Sunahgepa, the
king Ambarisa quickly reached the sacrificial
enclosure, shaking off all lethargy. (23)

सदस्यानुमते राजा पवित्रकृतलक्षणम्।
पशुं रक्ताम्बरं Ha यूपे तं समबन्धयत्॥ २४॥

241

Having bound Sunahéepa, the sacrificial
victim, with a cord of Darbha grass and
thereby providing him with the distinctive
mark of a victim and dressing him in a red
attire, the king, who acted upon the advice
of the superintending priest, firmly tied him
to the sacrificial post. (24)

a बद्धो वाग्भिरग्रूयाभिरभितुष्टाव वै सुरौ।
इन्द्रमिन्द्रानुजं चैव यथावन्मुनिपुत्रक:॥ २५॥

While remaining bound, the young
hermit boy duly glorified indeed the two
divinities, Indra and his younger brother
Lord Visnu, manifested as the divine Dwarf,
by means of excellent hymns. (25)

wa: Uta: सहस्राक्षो रहस्यस्तुतितोषित:।
दीर्घमायुस्तदा प्रादाच्छुन:शेषाय वासव:॥ २६॥

Propitiated through the mystic psalms
and filled with delight, Indra, the thousand-
eyed divinity, thereupon granted the boon of
a long life to Sunahsepa that very moment.

(26)
स च राजा नरश्रेष्ठं यज्ञस्य च समाप्तवान्।
met बहुगुणं WH सहस्राक्षप्रसादजम्॥ २७॥

Nay, the said king Ambarisa* too, O
jewel among men, duly attained, O Rama,
the manifold fruit of the sacrifice, yielded by
the grace of Indra. (27)

विश्वामित्रोऽपि धर्मात्मा भूयस्तेपे महातपा:।
पुष्करेषु ANS दशवर्षशतानि च ॥ २८॥

The great ascetic, Viswamitra, too, who
is piety incarnate, began his austerities anew
in the vicinity of the three lakes going by the
name of Puskara for another thousand years,
O jewel among men! (28)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये बालकाण्डे द्विषट्टितम: WT: ॥ ६२॥

Thus ends Canto Sixty-two in the Balakanda of the glorious Ramayana of Valmiki,
the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

* According to Govindaraja, an esteemed commentator of the Ramayana, Ambarisa is no other than
King Hariscandra, of whom a similar story is told in the Bahvrca-Brahmana.
