# YUDDHAKANDA +

and is endowed with extraordinary powess,
is a match only for Indra, the ruler of gods,
in combat. (10)

राम सेनापतिस्तस्य प्रहस्तो यदि ते श्रुत:।
कैलासे at समरे मणिभद्र: पराजित:॥११॥

“His commander-in-chief, O Rama, is
Prahasta, by whom Manibhadra, the
commander of Kubera’s forces, was
vanquished in an encouner on Mount Kailasa.
May be you have heard about him. (11)

बद्धगोधाङ्गुलित्राणस्त्ववध्यकवचो युधि।
धनुरादाय यस्तिष्ठन्नदृश्यो भवतीन्द्रजित्॥१२॥

“Indrajit, Ravana’s eldest son, who
remains furnished with gloves made of the
skin of an Iguana (to prevent injury from the
bowstring) and protected with an invulnerable
armour on the field of battle, goes out of
sight while standing with a bow in hand.

(12)
संग्रामे सुमहद्व्यूहे तर्पयित्वा हुताशनम्।
अन्तर्धानगत: श्रीमानिन्द्रजिद्धन्ति राघव॥१३॥

“Having propitiated the god of fire (the
consumer of oblations), O scion of Raghu,
the glorious Indrajit strikes the enemy while
remaining invisible on the field of battle with
a huge military array (on both sides). (13)

महोदरमहापाश्वौ राक्षसश्चाप्यकम्पन: |
अनीकपास्तु तस्यैते लोकपालसमा युधि॥ १४॥

“Mahodara and Mahaparswa and the
ogre Akampana, who vie with the guardians
of the world in combat—they are
commarders of his army. (14)
दशकोटिसहस्राणि रक्षसां कामरूपिणाम्।
मांसशोणितभक्ष्याणां लङ्कापुरनिवासिनाम्॥ १५॥

“Ten thousand crores (a hundred
thousand millions ogres, able to change
their form at will, living on flesh and blood,
inhabit the city of Lanka. (15)
स तैस्तु सहितो राजा लोकपालानयोधयत्।
सह देवैस्तु ते भग्ना रावणेन दुरात्मना॥१६॥

355

“Accompanied by them, their sovereign,
Ravana, for his part gave battle to the
guardians of the world. Alongwith the
celestials the former for their part were
routed by the evil-minded Ravana.” (16)

विभीषणस्य तु वचस्तच्छुत्वा रघुसत्तम:।

अन्वीक्ष्य मनसा सर्वमिदं वचनमब्रवीत्॥१७॥
Having heard the foregoing report of

Vibhisana and revolved everything in his

mind, Sri Rama, the foremost of the Raghus,
for his part observed as follows: (17)

यानि कर्मापदानानि रावणस्य विभीषण।
आख्यातानि च तत्त्वेन ह्यवगच्छामि तान्यहम्॥ १८ ॥

“Indeed | know, O Vibhisana, of the
exploits which stand to the credit of Ravana
and which have been recounted in their
reality by you. (18)
राजानं wat करिष्यामि सत्यमेतच्छुणोतु मे॥१९॥

“Hark! Killing Ravana the ten-headed
monster along with Prahasta, his
commander-in-chief, and the former’s sons.
| shall crown you king of Lanka; hear this
truth from me. (19)
रसातलं वा प्रविशेत् पातालं वापि रावण:।
पितामहसकाशं वा न मे जीवन् विमोक्ष्यते॥ २०॥

“Ravana may well enter Rasatala, the
penultimate subterranean region, or seek
the presence of Brahma (the grandfather of
the entire creation, which owes its existence
to the ten Prajapatis or lords of creation, his
mind-born sons), he would not be allowed
to escape from me alive. (20)
अहत्वा रावणं संख्ये सपुत्रजनबान्धवम्।
अयोध्यां न प्रवेक्ष्यामि त्रिभिस्तैरभ्रातृभि: शपे॥ २१॥

“| swear by my three well-known
brothers that | shall not return to Ayodhya
without killing Ravana with his sons, people
and kinsfolk in combat.” (21)

श्रुत्वा तु वचनं तस्य रामस्याक्लिष्टकर्मण:।
शिरसाऽऽवन्द्य धर्मात्मा वक्तुमेवं प्रचक्रमे॥ २२॥
