34

also the exertion of Hanuman, a leader of
monkeys, you ought to rise up.” (100)

हिरण्यगर्भो मैनाको निशम्य लवणाम्भस:।
उत्पपात जलात् तूर्णं महाद्रुमलतावृत:॥१०१॥
Hearing the aforesaid words of Varuna,
the deity presiding over the salty sea, Mount
Mainaka, which contained deposits of gold
in its bowels and was covered by large
trees and creepers, instantly emerged from
under the water. (101)

स सागरजलं भित्त्वा बभूवात्युच्छितस्तदा।
यथा werent भित्त्वा दीप्तरश्मिर्दिवाकर:॥ १०२॥

Dividing the sea-water, Mainaka rose
very high at that moment even as the sun
with its brilliant rays would, tearing the veil
of a cloud. (102)

स महात्मा मुहूर्तेन ude: सलिलावृत:।
दर्शयामास शृङ्गाणि सागरेण नियोजित:॥ १०३॥
Enjoined by the deity presiding over
the ocean, the aforesaid mountain of vast
proportions, which had heretofore been
covered with water, revealed its peaks in an
instant. (103)

शातकुम्भमयै: शृङ्गै: सकिंनरमहोरगै:।
आदित्योदयसंकाशैरुल्लिखद्भिरिवाम्बरम् ॥ १०४॥

The mountain looked charming with its
peaks of gold, which were inhabited by
Kinnaras (a class of demigods with a human
figure and the head of a horse) and huge
serpents, and shimmered like the sun at
dawn, and which were scraping the skies,
as it were. (104)

तस्य जाम्बूनदै: शृङ्गै: पर्वतस्य समुत्थितै: |
BAM शस्त्रसंकाशमभवत् काञ्चनप्रभम्॥ १०५ ॥
Due to the towering peaks of that
mountain, consisting of gold, the blue sky
which shone like a sword, now shed the
lustre of gold. (105)

जातरूपमयै: शृङ्गैभ्राजमानैर्महाप्रभै: |
आदित्यशतसंकाश: सोऽभवद् गिरिसत्तम: ॥ १०६ ॥

« VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

With its shining peaks of gold, emitting
a dazzling splendour, that jewel among
mountains shone brightly like a hundred
suns. (106)

समुत्थितमसङ्घेन हनूमानग्रत: स्थितम्।
मध्ये लवणतोयस्य विघ्नोऽयमिति निश्चित: Ugo ti

Hanuman positively considered the
mountain, which instantly stood very high
before him in the midst of the salty sea, to
be a stumbling block in his journey. (107)

a तमुच्छितमत्यर्थं महावेगो महाकपि:।
उरसा पातयामास जीमूतमिव मारुत:॥ १०८ ॥

Hanuman, the mighty monkey, who was
possessed of great impetuosity, felled with
his breast the exceedingly lofty mountain
even as the wind would strike down a cloud.

(108)
स तदासादितस्तेन कपिना पर्वतोत्तम:।
बुद्ध्वा तस्य हरेर्वेगं Tat च ननाद च॥१०९॥

Worsted on that occasion by the

aforesaid Hanuman and recognizing his

impetuosity, Mainaka, the foremost of
mountains, felt rejoiced and roared too. (109)

तमाकाशगतं वीरमाकाशे समुपस्थित:।
प्रीतो हृष्टमना वाक्यमब्रवीत् Uda: कपिम्॥ ११०॥
मानुषं धारयन् रूपमात्मन: शिखरे स्थित:।
दुष्करं कृतवान् कर्म त्वमिदं वानरोत्तम॥१११॥

Assuming the form of a human being
and standing on his own summit, the
mountain, which stood very high once more
in the sky, glad at heart, lovingly spoke as
follows to Hanuman, the heroic monkey,
who still remained in the sky: “You have
undertaken this task, which is hard to
accomplish, O jewel among monkeys!

(110-111)

निपत्य मम शृङ्गेषु सुखं विश्रम्य गम्यताम्।
राघवस्य कुले जातैरुदधि: परिवर्धित:॥११२॥
“Alighting on my peaks and having
comfortably rested awhile, resume your
journey with renewed vigour. The ocean
