# YUDDHAKANDA +

365

Canto XxXIl

Seized with terror to see a missile presided over by Brahma
(the creator) fitted to his bow by Sri Rama in fury, and
appearing in person with joined palms, the sea-
god undertakes to sustain on his bosom a
bridge to be constructed by Nala, and
goes out of sight. Nala accordingly
builds a bridge across the sea

अथोवाच रघुश्रेष्ठ: सागरं दारुणं aa:
sta त्वां शोषयिष्यामि सपातालं महार्णव॥ ei

Sri Rama (the foremost of the Raghus)
then administered the following formidable
threat to the god presiding over the sea:
“| shall dry you up today with Patala
(the nethermost subterranean region), O
Ocean! (1)

शरनिर्दग्धतोयस्य परिशुष्कस्य सागर।
मया निहतसत्त्वस्य पांसुरुत्पद्यते महान्॥२॥

“A vast stretch of sand will appear
where you are when your water has been
dried by my shaft, nay you have turned
completely dry and the creatures inhabiting
you have been wiped out by me, O Ocean!

(2)

मत्कार्मुकविसृष्टेन शरवर्षेण सागर।

परं at गमिष्यन्ति पद्भिरेव प्लवंगमा:॥ ३॥
“When you are reduced to this plight

by a shower of shafts discharged from my

bow, the monkeys shall cross to the other

shore on foot, O Ocean! (3)

विचिन्वन्नाभिजानासि पौरुषं नापि विक्रमम्।
दानवालय aad मत्तो नाम गमिष्यसि॥४॥

“Storing, as you do, water disgorged
by rivers, you are neither aware of my
virility nor of my prowess, O abode of the
Danavas! As such you shall undoubtedly
suffer agony at my hands.” (4)

ब्राह्मेणास्त्रेण संयोज्य ब्रह्मदण्डनिभं शरम्।
संयोज्य धनुषि sed faced महाबल:॥५॥
Fitting to his excellent bow an arrow,
which resembled in severity the rod of Brahma
(the creator), after charging it with the potency
of a missile presided over by Brahma, Sri
Rama, who was endowed with extraordinary
might, stretched it with vehemence. (5)

तस्मिन् विकृष्टे सहसा राघवेण शरासने।
रोदसी सम्पफालेव पर्वताश्च चकम्पिरे॥६॥

When that bow was stretched with full
force all at once, heaven and earth seemed
to be riven and the mountains shook. (6)

wag लोकमावव्रे दिशश्च न चकाशिरे।
प्रतिचुक्षुभिरे चाशु सरांसि सरितस्तथा॥७॥

Nay, darkness enveloped the world,
and the quarters could not be distinguished.
Nay, the lakes as well as the rivers felt
agitated at once. (7)
तिर्यक च सह aaa: संगतौ चन्द्रभास्करौ।
भास्करांशुभिरादीप्तं तमसा च समाव्रृतम्॥८॥

Nay, the moon and the sun alongwith
the lunar mansions moved obliquely from
south to north instead of from east to west.
And, though lit by the rays of the sun, the
sky was fully enveloped in darkness. (8)

प्रचकाशे तदाऽऽकाशमुल्काशतविदीपितम्।
अन्तरिक्षाच्च निर्घाता निर्जग्मुरतुलस्वना:॥९॥

Illumined by hundreds of meteors
