* AYODHYAKANDA +

until | hold firmly on my head the lotus-like
feet of my elder brother, adorned with the
marks of royalty (viz., the figures of a thunder-
bolt, flag, lotus, umbrella and so on), (9)

यावन्न राज्ये राज्यार्ह: पितृपैतामहे स्थित:।
अभिषिक्तो जलक्लिन्नो न मे शान्तिर्भविष्यति॥ १०॥

“There will be no peace of mind to me
until Sri Rama, who deserves the kingship,
is installed on the ancestral throne, duly
consecrated and wet with water after a
ceremonial bath forming part of the
consecration. (10)
PAPA महाभागा Acs जनकात्मजा।
भर्तारं सागरान्ताया: पृथिव्या यानुगच्छति॥ ११॥

“The highly blessed Sita, a princess of
the Videha territory, the daughter of Janaka,
who follows in the footsteps of her husband,
the protector of the earth extending up to the
ocean, has accomplished her object. (11)

सुशुभश्चित्रकूटोऽसौ गिरिराजसमो गिरि:।
यस्मिन् वसति काकुत्स्थ: HAT FA नन्दने॥ VI

“Highly blessed is this mountain
Citrakuta, ranking with the Himalayan range,
on which dwells Sr Rama (a scion of
Kakutstha) as does Kubera, the god of
riches, in the Caitraratha garden, which
delights him. (12)
कृतकार्यमिदं cet व्यालनिषेवितम्।
यदध्यास्ते महाराजो WA: शस्त्रभृतां वर:॥१३॥

“This forest, which is difficult of access
and is infested with beasts of prey, and
which the great king Rama, the foremost of
those wielding arms, is occupying at present
is surely accomplished of purpose.” (13)

`एवमुक्त्वा महाबाहुर्भरत: पुरुषर्षभ:।
पद्भ्यामेव महातेजा: प्रविवेश महद् वनम्॥ १४॥

639

Saying so, the mighty-armed Bharata,
a jewel among men, who was endowed with
exceptional glory, entered the great forest
only on foot. (14)

स तानि द्रुमजालानि जातानि गिरिसानुषु।
पुष्पिताग्राणि मध्येन जगाम वदतां वर:॥१५॥

That jewel among the eloquent passed
through clusters of trees grown on mountain-
peaks—trees whose tops were full of
blossom. (15)

a गिरेश्चित्रकूटस्य सालमारुह्य सत्वरम्।
रामाश्रमगतस्याग्नेर्ददर्शं ध्वजमुच्छितम्॥ १६॥

Hastily climbing up a sala tree standing
on the Citrakuta mountain, he saw a towering
column of smoke issuing from fire in Sri
Rama’s hermitage. (16)

तं get भरत: श्रीमान् मुमोद Weare: |
अत्र WA sta ज्ञात्वा गत: पारमिवाम्भस:॥ १७॥

Perceiving the smoke and concluding
that Sri Rama was there, the glorious Bharata
with his kinsman, Satrughna, rejoiced like
one who had reached the end of an expanse
of water. (17)

a चित्रकूटे तु गिरौ निशम्य
रामाश्रमं पुण्यजनोपपन्नम्।
Tet सार्धं त्वरितो जगाम
पुनर्निवेश्यैव चमूं महात्मा॥१८॥

Seeing on the Citrakuta mountain the
hermitage of Sri Rama, frequented by holy
men, and sending back to the camps the
troops that had been sent by him in search
of Sri Rama, the high-souled Bharata for his
part proceeded with quick steps alongwith
Guha to meet Sri Rama. (18)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्येऽयोध्याकाण्डेऽष्टवतितम: सर्ग: ॥ ९८ ॥

Thus ends Canto Ninety-eight in the Ayodhyakanda of the glorious Ramayana of
Valmiki, the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

