506

न शेकु: समवस्थातुं Pea वाहिनीपतौ।
सेतुबन्धं समासाद्य विशीर्णं सलिलं sarc i

Their Commander-in-Chief having been
killed, the troops could not remain stationary
any more than water on reaching a breached
dam. (58)
ed तस्मिंश्चमूमुख्ये राक्षसास्ते निरुद्यमा:।
रक्ष:पतिगृहं गत्वा ध्यानमूकत्वमागता:॥५९॥

Marching to the abode of Ravana,
the lord of ogres, devoid of all effort,
the commander of their army having been

killed, the aforesaid ogres were reduced
to speechlessness due to worry. (59)

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA +

प्राप्ता: शोकार्णवं तीव्रं विसंज्ञा इव तेऽभवन्॥ ६०॥
Nay, fallen into a burning ocean of grief,
they became unconscious, as it were. (60)

ततस्तु नीलो विजयी महाबल:
प्रशस्यमान: सुकृतेन कर्मणा।
समेत्य रामेण सलक्ष्मणेन
प्रहष्ट रूपस्तु लभूव CULE ६१ ।
Getting (re-) united with Sri Rama
and Laksmana, while being acclaimed for
his well-accomplished deed, the victorious
commarder, Nila, for his part, who was
endowed with extraordinary might, thereupon
actually felt highly exultant. (61)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये युद्धकाण्डेऽष्टपञ्चाश: सर्ग: ॥ ५८ Il

Thus ends Canto Fifty-eight in the Yuddhakanda of the glorious Ramayana of

Valmiki, the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

एकोनषष्टितम: सर्ग:
Canto LIX

Disconsolate at the death of Prahasta, Ravana himself appears
on the battle-field for an encounter. After a tough fight
with Sugriva, Laksmana, Hanuman and Nila,

Ravana meets Sri Rama and, sustaining
an ignominious defeat at the latter’s
hands and escaping with
his life, withdraws
to Lanka

तस्मिन् हते राक्षससैन्यपाले
प्लवंगमानामृषभेण युद्धे।
भीमायुधं सागरवेगतुल्यं
विदुद्रुवे राक्षसराजसैन्यम्॥ १॥
Prahasta, the Commander-in-Chief of
the army of ogres, having been made short
work of in the encounter with Nila, the
foremost of monkeys, the army of Ravana
(the king of ogres), which was armed with

dreadful weapons and vied with the sea in
fury, took to flight. (1)

Tet तु रक्षोधिपते: शशंसु:
सेनापतिं पावकसूनुशस्तम्।
तच्चापि at वचनं निशम्य
रक्षोधिफप क्रोधवशं जगाम॥ २॥
Seeking the presence of Ravana (the

suzerain lord of ogres), the survivors told
him of Prahasta, their Commander-in-Chief,
