+ UTTARAKANDA +

aq भवान् स्वपुरं यातु रत्नान्यादाय पार्थिव।
Was सहायार्थं पृष्ठतश्चानुयास्यति॥५॥

“Accepting the valuable presents, which
are being respectfully offered by me,
therefore, proceed you to your own city, O
king Bharata and alongwith him Satrughna
too will follow at your heels for escorting
you.” (5)

स ada ad: Hear wad वाक्यमब्रवीत्।
प्रीतोऽस्मि भवता राजन् दर्शनेन नयेन च॥६॥

Saying ‘Amen’, King Janaka thereupon
made the following reply to Sri Rama, a
scion of Raghu: “I feel gratified, O king, with
your sight and polity. (6)

यान्येतानि तु रत्नानि मदर्थं संचितानि ai
दुहित्रे तान्यहं राजन् सर्वाण्येव ददामि ann

“| for my part hereby bestow all these
valuable presents which have been actually
got together for my sake, O king, on my
daughter, Empress Sita.” (7)

एवमुक्त्वा तु काकुत्स्थं जनको हृष्टमानस:।
प्रययौ मिथिलां श्रीमांस्तमनुज्ञाय राघवम्॥८॥

Having spoken as above to Sri Rama
(a scion of Kakutstha) and taking leave of
the said scion of Raghu, the glorious King
Janaka proceeded to Mithila, delighted in
mind. (8)

तत: Wald जनके केकयं मातुलं प्रभुम्।
राघव: प्राञ्जलिर्भूत्वा विनयाद् वाक्यमब्रवीत्॥ ९॥

Janaka having departed, Sri Rama with
joined palms submitted in all humility as
follows to his maternal uncle, the Kekaya
king, Yudhajjt: (9)
इदं wang Wa way सलक्ष्मण:।
आयत्तस्त्वं हि नो राजन् गतिश्च पुरुषर्षभ॥ १०॥

“This kingdom of Ayodhya, myself, as
also Bharata and Satrughna, including
Laksmana, are at your disposal; nay,you
are our very mainstay, O king, a jewel
among men! (10)

983

राजा fe qe: संतापं त्वदर्थमुपयास्यति।
तस्माद् गमनमद्यैव रोचते aa पार्थिव॥११॥

“The king, being aged, will feel afflicted
on your account; hence, O king, your leaving
this very day for your city finds favour with
me (11)

लक्ष्मणेनानुयात्रेण पृष्ठतोऽनुगमिष्यते।
धनमादाय बहुलं रत्नानि विविधानि च॥१२॥

“You will be followed by Laksmana
marching at your heels, taking with him
abundant wealth and precious stones of
various kinds for you.” (12)

युधाजित् तु तथेत्याह गमनं ult wea
रत्नानि च धनं चैव त्वय्येवाक्षय्यमस्त्विति॥ १३॥

Yudhajit for his part said, “Be it so!”
with reference to his departure, adding, “O
scion of Raghu, let the precious stones as
well as the gold remain eternally with you.”

(13)

प्रदक्षिणं च राजानं कृत्वा केकयवर्धन:।
Tat च pa: पूर्वमभिवाद्य प्रदक्षिणम्॥१४॥
लक्ष्मणेन सहायेन Wald: केकयेश्वर:।

हतेऽसुरे यथा qt विष्णुना We aaa: ue il

Nay, having walked clockwise as a
mark of respect around the king, Sri Rama,
the king of the Kekayas, who was also the
promoter of the Kekayas, nay, who had
already been circumambulated clockwise
by Sri Rama after greeting him, departed
with Laksmana as his escort, even as
Indra did (for Amaravati) on the demon
Vrtra having been killed, with Lord Visnu
descended as _ his younger brother.

(14-15)

तं विसृज्य ततो wat वयस्यमकुतोभयम्।
Waet काशिपतिं परिष्वज्येदमब्रवीत्॥१६॥

Having sent him away and embraced
his friend Pratardana, the ruler of Kasi, who
was a friend and who entertained no fear
from any quarter, Sri Rama then spoke as
follows to him: (16)
