132

यदि मामिह जानीयाद् वर्तमानां fe राघव:।
TT बाणैरभिक्रुद्ध: कुर्याल्लोकमराक्षसम्॥ २०॥

“lf Sri Rama really knew me to be
present here, he would in fury rid the world
of ogres with his shafts today. (20)

निर्दंहेच्च पुरीं cgi निर्दंहेच्च महोदधिम्।
रावणस्य च नीचस्य कीर्तिं ATT च नाशयेत्॥ २१॥

“Nay, he would reduce the city of Lanka
to ashes and burn up the ocean. He would
also blot out the fame as well as the name
of the despicable Ravana. (21)
ad निहतनाथानां राक्षसीनां We Wi
यथाहमेवं रुदती तथा भूयो न संशय:॥ २२॥

“Then, even as | stand weeping thus,
more so would be heard in every house
wails of the ogresses, whose lords would

have been slain: there is no doubt about it.
(22)

नहि ताभ्यां रिपुर्दृष्टो मुहूर्तमपि जीवति॥ esi
“Having searched out Lanka, he with
Laksmana will encompass the destruction

of ogres. An enemy seen by them would not
survive even for a while. (23)

चिताधूमाकुलपथा गृध्रमण्डलमण्डिता।
अचिरेणैव कालेन श्मशानसदृशी भवेत्॥२४॥

“With its streets obscured by the smoke
of funeral piles and graced with wreaths of
vultures, Lanka will at no distant date look
like a crematorium. (24)

अचिरिणैव कालेन प्राप्स्याम्येनं मनोरथम्।
दुष्प्रस्थानोऽयमाभाति सर्वेषां at विपर्यय:॥ २५ ॥

“| shall at no distant time attain the
object of my desire; for this evil conduct of
you all in the shape of my abduction and
oppression means your annihilation. (25)

यादृशानि तु दृश्यन्ते लङ्कायामशुभानि तु।
अचिरिणैव कालेन भविष्यति हतप्रभा॥ २६॥

“The type of ill-omens, which are
actually seen here in Lanka lead one to

« VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

conclude that the city will at no distant date
be shorn of its splendour. (26)

Ti cst हते पापे रावणे राक्षसाधिपे।
शोषमेष्यति दुर्धर्षा प्रमदा विधवा gar २७॥

“Surely when the sinful Ravana, the
suzerain ruler of ogres, is slain, Lanka,
which appears difficult to storm now, will
wither up like a young widow. (27)

पुण्योत्सवसमृद्धा च नष्टभतत्री सराक्षसा।
भविष्यति पुरी लङ्का Tews यथांगना॥ २८॥

“Abounding in festive ceremonies at
present, the city of Lanka, when its ruler is
dead and gone with the ogres inhabiting it,
will look like a widow. (28)
Tt राक्षसकन्यानां रुदतीनां We Wl
श्रोष्यामि नचिरादेव दु:खार्तानामिह ध्वनिम्॥ २९॥

“| shall assuredly hear before long the
cry of distress of ogre maids stricken with
sorrow and weeping in every dwelling here.

(29)

सान्धकारा हतद्योता हतराक्षसपुंगवा।
भविष्यति att लङ्का निर्दग्धा रामसायकै:॥ ३०॥
यदि नाम स शूरो मां रामो रक्तान्तलोचन:।
जानीयाद् वर्तमानां यां राक्षसस्य निवेशने॥ ३१॥

“Consumed by Sri Rama’s shafts, Lanka,
with its principal ogres slain and its splendour
dissipated, will look gloomy, if only that heroic
Sri Rama, the corners of whose eyes are
red, comes to know of my being present in
the abode of Ravana. (30-31)

अनेन तु नृशंसेन रावणेनाधमेन मे।
समयो यस्तु निर्दिष्टस्तस्य कालोऽयमागत:॥ ३२॥
“The expiry of that time-limit of twelve
months which was actually fixed by this
cruel and vile Ravana for my death, has

well-nigh arrived, as it is coming only two
months hence. (32)

स च मे fated मृत्युरस्मिन् दुष्टेन addi
अकार्यं ये न जानन्ति नैर्ऋता: पापकारिण: 33

“Again, the aforesaid death of mine has
