120

Wd शतसहस्राणि यूथपानां महात्मनाम्।
ते प्रधानेषु यूथेषु हरीणां हरियूथपा:॥ ३०॥
बभूवुर्यूथपश्रेष्ठान् वीरांश्चाजनयन् हरीन्।
अन्ये ऋक्षवत: प्रस्थानुपतस्थु: सहस्रश:॥ ३१॥
अन्ये नानाविधाञ्छैलान् काननानि च भेजिरे।
सूर्यपुत्रं च सुग्रीवं शक्रपुत्रं च वालिनम्॥३२॥
भ्रातरावुपतस्थुस्ते सर्वे च हरियूथपा:।
नलं नीलं हनूमन्तमन्यांश्च हरियूथपान्॥३३॥
Nay, they could dash down with their
yell crying birds. A crore of such high-
souled monkeys, capable of assuming any
form at will and able to lead herds of their
kind, came to light. They turned out to be
the leaders of separate herds of monkeys
among their principal troops and begot other
valiant monkeys who proved to be the
foremost of generals. Others in_ their
thousands resorted to the peaks of Mount
Rksavan; still others sought various
mountains and forests. All those monkey
chiefs flocked round the two _ brothers,
Sugriva, son of the sun-god, and Vali, son
of Indra, too; while others stood by the side
of Nala, Nila, Hanuman and other monkey
chiefs. (29—33)

a mMedactamat: Ue युद्धविशारदा:।
विचरन्तोऽर्दयन् सर्वान् सिंहव्याघ्रमहोरगान्॥ ३४॥

« VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

Endowed with the might of Garuda,
they were all skilled in warfare and, while
roaming about, killed all lions, tigers and big
snakes and other wild animals (that
confronted them). (34)

महाबलो महाबाहुर्वाली विपुलविक्रम:।
जुगोप भुजवीर्येण ऋक्षगोपुच्छवानरान्॥ ३५॥

The mighty and stout-armed Vali, who
possessed extraordinary prowess, protected
with the might of his arms the aforesaid bears,
monkeys and long-tailed monkeys. (35)

aha पृथिवी mt: सपर्वतवनार्णवा।
कीर्णा विविधसंस्थानैर्नानाव्यञ्जनलक्षणै: 1 ३६ 11

This globe with all its mountains,
forests and oceans was overrun by the
above-mentioned heroes of diverse bodily
structures and distinguished by various
characteristic marks. (36)

तैर्मेघव्रन्दाचलकूटसंनिभैर्महाबलैर्वानरयूथपाधिपै: ।
ae भूर्भीमशरीररूपै: समाव्रता रामसहायहेतो: ।। ३७॥

The earth was filled with those mighty
leaders of monkey chiefs, who looked like a
mass of clouds or like mountain-peaks and
were endowed with a fearful body and aspect
and had been born only to assist Sri Rama.

(37)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये बालकाण्डे सप्तदश: सर्ग: ॥ १७॥

Thus ends Canto Seventeen in the Balakanda of the glorious Ramayana of Valmiki,
the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

अष्टादश: सर्ग:
Canto XVHI

Advent of Sri Rama, Bharata and others; festivities in heaven as well as in
Ayodhya; their investiture with the sacred thread; the arrival of Viswamitra

निर्वृत्ते तु क्रतौ तस्मिन् हयमेधे महात्मन:।
प्रतिगृह्यामरा भागान् प्रतिजग्मुर्यथागतम्॥१॥
The celebrated ASwamedha sacrifice,
as well as that intended to procure male
progeny, performed by the high-souled

Emperor, having been concluded, the
immortals, who personally attended it,
returned even as they had come, after
receiving their respective shares of the
offerings made in the sacrifices. (1)
