+ UTTARAKANDA +

उवाच जातिं |S JUN Fara
यत्कारणं चैव तप:प्रयत्न:॥ १९॥
Thus enquired by the King, the son of

1067

DaSaratha, King of Kings, that ascetic spoke
of his own caste and reason for practising
the penances.’ (19)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये उत्तरकाण्डे पञ्चसप्ततितम: सर्ग: ॥ ७५ ॥

Thus ends Canto Seventy-five in the Uttarakanda of the glorious Ramayana of Valmiki,
the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

षट्सप्ततितम: सर्ग:
Canto LXXVI

Sit Rama kills Sambika for which gods laud Him. Sage Agastya
welcomes Sri Rama and presents a celestial ornament to Him

तस्य तद् वचनं श्रुत्वा रामस्याक्लिष्टकर्मण:।
अवाक्शिरास्तथाभूतो वाक्यमेतदुवाच ह॥१॥

Hearing those words of Sri Rama
capable of doing anything with ease,
remaining with the head downwards, he (the
ascetic) replied: (1)
Weare प्रजातोऽस्मि तप उग्रं समास्थित:।
देवत्वं प्रार्थये राम सशरीरो महायश:॥ २॥

‘O famous one, | am born in the line of
the Sudra caste, and have resorted to great
penance. | desire godhood, O Sri Rama,
with this body. (2)
न fae वदे wa देवलोकजिगीषया।
शूद्रं मां विद्धि काकुत्स्थ शम्बूकं नाम नामत:॥ ३॥

‘| do not speak untruth as | wish to
conquer the world of the gods, know me as
Sudra, Sambuka by name, O scion of the
Kakutsthas, Sri Rama.’ (3)
भाषतस्तस्यव शूद्रस्य खड्ग सुरुचिरप्रभम्।
निष्कृष्य कोशाद् विमलं शिरश्चिच्छेद राघव:॥४॥

On this the descendant of Raghu, taking
out dazling sword from its sheath, chopped
off the head of the Sudra, while he was
speaking thus. (4)

तस्मिञ्शूद्रे हते cat: सेन्द्रा: साग्निपुरोगमा:।
साधुसाध्विति काकुत्स्थं ते शशंसुर्मुहुर्मुहु:॥५॥

On the Sudra being killed, the gods

headed by Agni together with Indra repeatedly
praised the scion of the Kakutsthas saying:
‘Well done.’ (5)
पुष्पवृष्टिर्महत्यासीद् दिव्यानां सुसुगन्धिनाम्।
पुष्पाणां वायुमुक्तानां सर्वत: प्रपपात ह॥६॥
A shower of very fragrant divine flowers,
carried by the wind, fell from all sides. (6)

The gods highly pleased said to Sri
Rama of true valour: ‘O king, O wise one,
you have done this wonderful job for gods.

(7)
गृहाण च at सौम्य यं त्वमिच्छस्यरिंदम।
स्वर्गभाङ् नहि शूद्रोऽयं त्वत्कृते रघुनन्दन॥८॥

‘Take whatever boon you desire, O
Subjugator of foes, due to your good deed
this Stdra will not attain heaven, O
descendant of Raghu’. (8)
cart भाषितं श्रुत्वा WA: सत्यपराक्रम:।
उवाच प्राञ्जलिर्वाक्यं सहस्राक्षे पुरंदरम्॥९॥

Hearing the words of the gods, Sr
Rama of true valour spoke to Indra the
destroyer of enemy fortresses thus: (9)
यदि cat: प्रसन्ना मे द्विजपुत्र: a जीवतु।
दिशन्तु amd मे ईप्सितं wt मम॥१०॥

“If the gods are pleased, may that son
