968

« VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

ministers who had come and who were
desirous of exterminating the three worlds.
(44)
Watt पुरा at वालिना रावण: प्रभो।
धर्षितश्च वृतश्चापि भ्राता पावकसंनिधौ॥४५॥

This is how it happened in the past,
how Ravana, my lord, was overpowered by

Vali and was then accepted as a brother in
the presence of fire. (45)
बलमप्रतिमं राम वालिनोऽभवदुत्तमम्।
सोऽपि त्वया विनिर्दग्ध: शलभो वह्निना यथा ॥ ४६ ॥
Matchless and unsurpassed was the

strength of Vali. Even he was consumed by
You as a moth is consumed by fire. (46)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये उत्तरकाण्डे चतुस्तिंश: AW: il ३४॥

Thus ends Canto Thirty-four in the Uttarakanda of the glorious Ramayana of Valmiki,
the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

Canto XXX V

The descent of Hanuman; he rushes against the sun, the planet Rahu
and Airavata (the mount of Indra) even as an infant; he is rendered
unconscious as the result of a stroke of lightning by Indra; the
entire creation gets suffocated due to the displeasure of the
wind-god; the gods under the leadership of Brahma
seek the presence of the wind-god to pacify him

ssa तदा रामो दक्षिणाशाश्रयं मुनिम्।
प्राञ्जलिर्विनयोपेत इदमाह वचोऽर्थवत्॥१॥
Sri Rama then questioned the sage
having his abode in the southern quarter;
and full of humility, with joined palms, He
addressed the following significant words to
him: (1)
अतुलं बलमेतद् a वालिनो रावणस्य च।
न त्वेताभ्यां हनुमता aa त्विति मतिर्मम॥ २॥

“Incomparable indeed was the aforesaid
might of Vali and Ravana. The might of the
aforesaid two warriors was, however, not
equal to the strength of Hanuman: such
indeed is my opinion. (2)
शौर्यं cet act धैर्यं प्राज्ञता नयसाधनम्।
विक्रमश्च प्रभावश्च eft कृतालया:॥३॥

“Heroism, deligence, strength, firmness,
sagacity, prudence and prowess and power
have taken up their abode in Hanuman. (3)

qeda सागरं dea सीदन्तीं कपिवाहिनीम्।
समाश्वास्य महाबाहुर्योजनानां शतं प्लुत:॥४॥
“Perceiving the army of the monkeys
sinking into despondency at the very sight
of the sea, and reassuring it, the mighty-
armed Hanuman leapt across the sea
covering a hundred Yojanas (or eight hundred
miles). (4)
दृष्टा सम्भाषिता चापि सीता ह्याश्वासिता TMT । ५ ॥
“After overpowering the ogress presiding
over the city of Lanka and stealing into the
gynaeceum of Ravana, Sita was discovered
and spoken to as well and actually comforted
by him. (5)

सेनाग्रगा मन्तिसुता: किंकरा रावणात्मज:।
एते हनुमता तत्र एकेन विनिपातिता:॥६॥

The leaders of Ravana’s army the sons
of his counsellors, his own servants and his
