# YUDDHAKANDA +

“The wise speak of a hundred thousand
multiplied by hundred as a crore, while a
lakh of such crores is called a Sanku. (33)

महाशङ्कुसहस्राणां शतं वृन्दमिहोच्यते॥ ३४॥
“A lakh of Sankus is known as a

Mahasanku. A lakh of Mahasankus is
spoken of as a Vrnda in this context. (34)

wd वृन्दसहस्राणां महावृन्दमिति स्मृतम्।
महावृन्दसहस्राणां शतं पद्ममिहोच्यते॥ Bu Il
“A lakh of Vrndas is known as a
Mahavrnda. A lakh of Mahavrndas is spoken
of in this context as a Padma. (35)
wd पद्मसहस्राणां महापद्ममिति स्मृतम्।
महापद्मसहस्राणां शतं खर्वमिहोच्यते॥ ३६॥
“A lakh of Padmas is known as a

Mahapadma. A lakh of Mahapadmas is
spoken of in this context as a Kharva. (36)

wd समुद्रसाहस्रमोघ इत्यभिधीयते॥ ३७॥

A lakh of Kharvas is known as a
Mahakharva. A lakh of Mahakharvas is called
a Samudra. A lakh of Samudras is called an
Ogha. (37)
शतमोघसहस्राणां महौघा इति विश्रुत:।
एवं कोटिसहस्रेण शङ्कूनां च शतेन च।
महाशङ्कुसहस्रेण तथा वृन्दशतेन च॥ ३८॥
महावृन्दसहस्रेण तथा पद्मशतेन च।
महापद्मसहस्रेण तथा खर्वशतेन च॥३९॥

393

समुद्रेण च wa महौघेन तथैव च

एष कोटिमहौघेन समुद्रसदृशेन च॥४०॥
विभीषणेन वीरेण सचिवै: परिवारित:।
सुग्रीवो वानरेन्द्रस्त्वां युद्धार्थमनुवर्तते।
महाबलवृतो नित्यं महाबलपराक्रम:॥४१॥
“A lakh of Oghas is popularly known
as a Mahaugha. Surrounded according to
this computation by a thousand crore and
one hundred Sankus and a_ thousand
Mahasankus and likewise by a hundred
Vrndas, even so, by a thousand Mahavrndas
and a hundred Padmas, in the same manner
by a thousand Mahapadmas and a hundred
Kharvas, nay, by a hundred Samudras and
similarly by a hundred Mahaughas and by
a hundred crore Mahaughas of monkey
warriors, as well as by the gallant Vibhisana
and his own ministers. Sugriva, the ruler
of monkeys, is following you for waging
war—Sugriva, who is thus surrounded
by a huge army and ever endowed with
extraordinary might and prowess. (38—41)

इमां महाराज समीक्ष्य वाहिनी-

मुपस्थितां प्रज्वलितग्रहोपमाम्।
ad: प्रयत्न: परमो fasted

यथा Wa: स्यान्न परै: पराभव:॥४२॥

“Carefully observing, O great king, this
army ranged like a blazing planet, a supreme
effort may now be put forth so that your
victory may be ensured and no discomfiture
may follow at the hands of the enemies.”

(42)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये युद्धकाण्डेऽष्टाविंश: सर्ग: ॥ २८ Il
Thus ends Canto Twenty-eight in the Yuddhakanda of the glorious Ramayana of
Valmiki, the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

