70

a loved belle, had stairways of gems
constructed with extra care and was adorned
with lattice windows of gold; whose floors
were covered with slabs of crystal inlaid
with figures of ivory, pearls, diamonds and
corals as well as of silver and gold; which
was embellished with pillars of gems, uniform,
straight and very tall and highly ornamented
as well as with numerous other pillars; which,
supported, as it was, on very lofty pillars
looking like so many wings, had duly set
out, as it were, on its flight to heaven;
whose floor was covered with a large carpet
with designs of mountains, trees and rivers
etc., the features of the earth’s surface
executed on it; which was extensive like the
earth and looked charming with mural
representations of various countries and
dwellings; which was rendered noisy by
birds in heat and ever remained scented
with celestial odours; which was hung with
excellent tapestries and was inhabited by
Ravana, the suzerain ruler of ogres; which
remained smoky with fumes of incense made
of agallocum, though spotless and white as
a swan; nay, which, with its offerings of
leaves and flowers, looked variegated, as it
were, was full of great effulgence and soul-
ravishing and served as an adornment even
to splendour; which banished all grief and
gave birth to prosperity, as it were. Like a
mother, the chamber protected by Ravana
gratified on that occasion all the five senses
of Hanuman with the excellent five objects
of those senses. Hanuman, son of the wind-
god, speculated that the place where he
stood might indeed be paradise or that it
might be the realm of the principal gods, the
city of Indra, the ruler of gods, or that it
might be the realm of Brahma, the attainment
of which constitutes the highest achievement
on the material plane. (13—30)

प्रध्यायत इवापश्यत् प्रदीपांस्तत्र काञ्चनान्।
gaia महाधूर्तर्देवनेन पराजितान्॥३१॥

Hanuman found the lights burning

« VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

steadily inside lamps of gold mounted on
lamp posts also of gold and bedimmed, as
it were, by the splendour of Ravana in that
chamber as though they were in deep
contemplation like gamblers worsted in
gambling by expert gamblers. (31)

दीपानां च प्रकाशेन तेजसा रावणस्य च।
अर्चिरभिर्भूषणानां च प्रदीप्तेत्यभ्यमन्यत॥ ३२॥

He thought that the chamber was ablaze
with the brilliance of the lights and the glory
of Ravana as also with the splendour of the
ornaments. (32)

TASTE Sarat नानावर्णाम्बरस्ररजम्।

क्रीडित्वोपरतं रात्रौ प्रसुप्तं बलवत् तदा॥ ३४॥

Next he found lying on the carpet at
that moment thousands of belles wearing
clothes and garlands of diverse hues and
clad in various attires, nay, fallen dead asleep
at night under the influence of drink and
slumber, having retired after sport, half of
the night having already passed. (83-34)

तत् wat विरुरुचे नि:शब्दान्तरभूषितम्।
नि:शब्दहंसभ्रमरं यथा पद्मवनं महत्॥ ३५॥
Fast asleep and adorned with jewels
such as girdle and anklets which did not
make their peculiar tinkling sound, that bevy
shone brightly like a large bed of lotuses
with the swans and bees sitting calm and
quiet without any noise. (35)

अपश्यत् पद्मगन्धीनि वदनानि सुयोषिताम्॥ ३६॥

Hanuman, son of the wind-god, saw
the faces of those belles with their teeth
concealed by their sealed lips and their

eyes closed and emitting a fragrance akin
to that of a lotus. (36)

प्रबुद्धानीव पद्मानि तासां भूत्वा क्षपाक्षये।
पुन: संव्रृतपत्राणि waar बभुस्तदा॥ ३७॥

Assuming the shape of full-blown lotuses
