584

एवं सम्भाषमाणं तं रामहेतोर्नृपात्मजम्।
प्रत्युवाच जन: सर्व: श्रीमद् वाक्यमनुत्तमम्॥ १४॥
To the above mentioned prince,
Bharata, who was talking as aforesaid in
the interest of Sri Rama, all the counsellors
made the following agreeable and excellent
reply : (14)
एवं ते भाषमाणस्य wan श्रीरुपतिष्ठताम्।
यस्त्वं ज्येष्ठे नृपसुते पृथिवीं दातुमिच्छसि॥ १५॥

“Let the Goddess of Fortune, known
by the name of Padma (so-called because
She has Her abode in a bed of lotuses),
ever be with you, who are speaking in this
strain and seek to restore the sovereignty
of the globe to the eldest prince, Sri Rama |”

(15)
STH dagat TAA:
प्रभाषितं संश्रवणे निशम्य च।
प्रहर्षजास्तं प्रति बाष्पबिन्दवो
निपेतुरार्यानननेत्रसम्भवा: ॥१६॥

The prince, Bharata, rejoiced to hear

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

the excellent benediction poured by the
counsellors into his ears. Nay, teardrops
born of excessive delight and gratitude
towards them flowed from the eyes of
Bharata, whose countenance too was lit up
with joy. (16)

सामात्या: सपरिषदो वियातशोका: |
पन्थानं नरवरभक्तिमान् जनश्च

व्यादिष्टस्तव वचनाच्च शिल्पिवर्ग: ॥। १७॥

Rejoiced to hear the aforesaid proposal
of Bharata to proceed to the forest to bring
back Sri Rama to Ayodhya after consecrating
him as king in the forest itself, the counsellors
including the ministers as well as those
invited to take part in the assembly, found
their grief altogether vanished and said, “In
obedience to your command, O jewel among
men, engineers as well as guards, who are
full of devotion to you as well as to Sri
Rama, have been told off to prepare the
way.” (17)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्येऽयोध्याकाण्डे एकोनाशीतितम: सर्ग: ॥ ७९ ॥

Thus ends Canto Seventy-nine in the Ayodhyakanda of the glorious Ramayana of
Valmiki, the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

अशीतितम: सर्ग:
Canto LXXX

The engineers detailed by Bharata’s ministers construct a broad passage from
Ayodhya to the bank of the Ganga and render it easy to tread by erecting
pavilions and digging wells here and there on the roadside

अथ भूमिप्रदेशज्ञा:: सूत्रकर्मविशारदा:।
स्वकर्माभिरता: शूरा: खनका यन्त्रकास्तथा॥ १॥
कर्मान्तिका: स्थपतय: पुरुषा यन्त्रकोविदा:।
तथा वर्धकयश्चैव मार्गिणो वृक्षतक्षका:॥२॥
Wart: सुधाकारा वंशचर्मकृतस्तथा।
समर्था ये च द्रष्टार: Wags प्रतस्थिरे॥ si
Now men expert in divining the
presence of subterranean water in a given

plot of land, those adept in designing
buildings, pavilions etc., gallant men vigilant
in their duty (of guarding the roadways),
workmen expert in sinking wells and digging
tunnels etc., mechanics contriving devices
for crossing streams etc., or obstructing the
flow of water, paid labourers, architects,
men expert in making catapults etc., even
so Carpenters, those entrusted with the duty
