192

« VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

Canto XLIV

Applauding Bhagiratha, Brahma urges him to gratify the souls of his
departed great grand-uncles by offering them the water of the
Ganga, and after doing his bidding, Bhagiratha returns to
his capital; the glory of hearing and reading
the story of Ganga’s descent on earth

a गत्वा सागरं राजा गङ्गयानुगतस्तदा।
प्रविवेश act भूमेर्यत्र ते भस्मसात्कृता:॥१॥
Reaching the excavation made by
Sagara’s sons, followed by the Ganga, the
king Bhagiratha then entered the lowest
stratum of the bowels of the earth, where
his great grand-uncles lay reduced to ashes.
(1)

भस्मन्यथाप्लुते WH Weta: सलिलेन al
सर्वलोकप्रभुर्ब्रह्मा राजानमिदमब्रवीत्॥ २॥

When their ashes had been thoroughly
washed by the water of the Ganga, Brahma,
the overlord of the whole universe, called
on and spoke to the king as follows: (2)

तारिता नरशार्दूल fet याताश्च देववत्।
षष्ठि पुत्रसहस्राणि सगरस्य महात्मन:॥ ३॥

“The sixty thousand sons of the high-
souled Sagara have all been delivered from
damnation, O tiger among men, and have
ascended to heaven like gods. (3)

सागरस्य जलं लोके यावत् स्थास्यति पार्थिव।
सगरस्यात्मजा: सर्वे दिवि स्थास्यन्ति देववत्॥४॥

“Like the very gods all the sons of
Sagara will abide in heaven so long as the
water of the ocean continues to exist on
earth, O prince ! (4)

Ba च दुहिता ज्येष्ठा aa wet भविष्यति।
त्वत्कृतेन च नाम्नाथ लोके स्थास्यति विश्रुता॥ ५॥

“Nay, this Ganga will be your eldest
daughter and will now be widely known in
the world by the name Bhagirathi, derived
from you. (5)

Tet त्रिपथगा नाम दिव्या भागीरथीति च।
त्रीन् पथो भावयन्तीति तस्मात् त्रिपथगा स्मृता।। ६ ॥

“The Ganga will also be called
Tripathaga, following a threefold path, Divya
(a heavenly stream) and Bhagirathi (daughter
of Bhagiratha). Because it carves its way
through the three spheres, viz., heaven,
earth and the subterranean region, hence it
is designated as ‘Tripathaga’. (6)
पितामहानां सर्वेषां त्वमत्र मनुजाधिप।
कुरुष्व सलिलं राजन् प्रतिज्ञामपवर्जय॥७॥

“Offer water here on the bank of the
Ganga to all your great grand-uncles, O
ruler of men, and implement the vow
undertaken by your forefathers and yourself,
viz., of redeeming the sons of Sagara by
offering them the water of the Ganga, O
king! (7)

पूर्वकेण fe a राजंस्तेनातियशसा तदा।
धर्मिणां प्रवरेणाथ नैष wal मनोरथ:॥८॥

“This ambition of bringing down the
Ganga to the mortal plane was not at all
realized in those days by that celebrated
ancestor of yours, viz., Sagara, who enjoyed
exceptional glory and was the foremost of
pious souls. (8)

तथैवांशुमता वत्स लोकेऽप्रतिमतेजसा।
Tet प्रार्थयता Ad प्रतिज्ञा नापवर्जिता॥९॥
राजर्षिणा गुणवता महर्षिसमतेजसा।
मत्तुल्यतपसा चैव क्षत्रधर्मस्थितेन च॥१०॥
“Even so, the vow could not be

redeemed, O dear child, even by the royal
sage Amsuman, who was invested with a
