94

महालतानां दामानि व्यधमत् तरसा कपि:।

यथा wate वेगेन मेघजालानि wed: २०॥
The monkey in his impetuosity snapped

the clusters of thick climbers even as the

wind scatters masses of clouds in its onrush

during the rains. (20)

स at मणिभूमीश्च राजतीश्च मनोरमा:।
तथा काञ्चनभूमीश्च विचरन् ager कपि:॥ २१॥

Ranging in that grove, the monkey
beheld soul-ravishing grounds paved with
gems and plated with silver and gold. (21)

वापीश्च विविधाकारा: got: परमवारिणा।

महार्हर्मणिसोपानैरुपपन्नास्ततस्तत: ॥ २२॥
मुक्ताप्रवालसिकता: स्फाटिकान्तरकुट्टिमा:।
काञ्चनैस्तरुभिश्चित्रैस्तीरजैरुपशोभिता: ॥२३॥

बुद्धपद्मोत्पलवनाश्चक्रवाकोपशोभिता: ।
नत्यूहरुतसंघुष्टा हंससारसनादिता: WY Ul
dratfugnaity: सरिद्धिश्च समन्तत:।
अमृतोपमतोयाभि: शिवाभिरुपसंस्कृता:॥ २५॥
लताशतैरवतता: संतानकुसुमाव्रता:।
नानागुल्माव्रृतवना: LAHAT: Il २६ ॥
He also beheld at different places ponds
of different shapes, which were full of
excellent water and provided with costly
steps of gems; which were distinguished by
sands of pearls and corals and bottoms of
crystals and were embellished with lovely
golden trees growing on their margin; which
contained beds of open lotuses and lilies,
were adorned with Cakrawakas (red geese),
and resonant with the notes of Cataka birds
and were made noisy by swans and cranes;
which were fed on all sides with broad and
delightful streams containing nectar-like water
and bordered by trees; which were screened
by hundreds of creepers and covered with
flowers of Santana (a species of celestial
wish-yielding trees); whose water was
surrounded with shrubs of various kinds
and which could be peeped into through
Karavira trees, which served as air-holes.
(22—26)

« VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

विचित्रकूटं eva ada: परिवारितम्॥ २७॥
शिलागृहैरवततं नानावृक्षसमाव्रृतम्।
cast कपिशार्दूलो wet जगति पर्वतम्॥ २८॥

Then Hanuman, a tiger among monkeys,
sighted a mountain closely resembling a
cloud laden with moisture, with elevated and
charming peaks and surrounded on all sides
with other mountain-tops, which was dotted
with caves and covered with trees of every
species and was reckoned as a lovely
mountain on earth. (27-28)
ददर्शं च नगात् तस्मान्नदीं निपतितां कपि:।
अंकादिव समुत्पत्य प्रियस्य पतितां प्रियाम्॥ २९॥
जले निपतिताग्रैश्च पादपैरुपशोभिताम्।
वार्यमाणामिव क्रुद्धां प्रमदां प्रियबन्धुभि:। ३०॥

Hanuman further beheld a stream fallen
from that mountain like a beloved wife fallen
(in rage) with a bound from the lap of her
loved one, and adorned with trees, whose
boughs had bent down to the level of water,
and thus looking like an enraged young
woman, leaving her loved one, being detained
by her near and dear ones. (29-30)

पुनरावृत्ततोयां च cast स महाकपि:।
प्रसन्नामिव कान्तस्य कान्तां पुनरुपस्थिताम्॥ ३१॥

Again the great monkey saw the stream
of the river turned back due to its being impeded
in its course by the aforesaid boughs, showing
as if the beloved wife had returned duly
reconciled to her loved one. (31)

तस्यादूरात् स पद्मिन्यो नानाद्बिजगणायुता:।

cast कपिशार्दूलो हनूमान् मारुतात्मज:॥ ३२॥
Not far from that mountain, the aforesaid

Hanuman, an offspring of the wind-god and

a tiger among monkeys, sighted lotus-ponds

crowded with birds of every species. (32)

कृत्रिमां difient चापि पूर्णां शीतेन वारिणा।
मणिप्रवरसोपानां मुक्कासिकतशोभिताम्॥ ३३॥
विविधैर्मृगसङ्घैशच विचित्रां चित्रकाननाम्।
were: सुमहद्भिश्च निर्मितैर्विश्वकर्मणा॥ ax ii
