1034

the dog said as follows: “If you are pleased
with me, O Rama, and if you are to bestow
on me a boon, then listen to me, O Valiant
One! You asked me what you should do for
me, and promised (to do what | would request
you to do). So make him O King! a ‘Kulapati’
as promised by you. Your Majesty! make
him ‘Kulapati’ of Kalanjara.” On hearing this
Sri Rama consecrated him as a Kulapati.
(37—39)
प्रययौ ब्राह्मणो हृष्टो गजस्कन्धेन सोऽर्चित:।
अथ A रामसचिवा: स्मयमाना वचोऽब्रुवन्॥४०॥
वरोऽयं दत्त एतस्य नायं शापो महाद्युते।
एवमुक्तस्तु सचिवै Wa वचनमब्रवीत्॥४१॥
न यूयं गतितत्त्वज्ञा: श्वा वै जानाति कारणम्।
HA पृष्टस्तु रामेण सारमेयोऽब्रवीदिदम्॥४२॥
अहं कुलपतिस्तत्र आसं शिष्टान्नभोजन:।
देवद्विजातिपूजायां दासीदासेषु राघव॥४३॥
संविभागी शुभरतिर्देवद्रव्यस्य रक्षिता।
विनीत: शीलसम्पन्न: सर्वसत्त्वहिते रत:॥४४॥
सोऽहं Wa sat घोरामवस्थामधमां गतिम्।
एवं क्रोधान्वितो विप्रस्त्यक्तधर्माहिते Tt ve il
क्रुद्धो Wea: Tey अविद्वांश्चाप्यधार्मिक:।
Sat पातयत्येव WA सप्त च राघव॥४६॥

Thus honoured, the happy Brahmana
went away riding on elephant-back. Then
the ministers smilingly with astonishment,
said to Sri Rama, “He has been given a
boon. O resplendent one. This is not a
curse.” Thus told by the ministers Sri Rama
said: “You do not know the truth about the
course of actions. The dog knows the reason
(and will tell why the Brahmana has been
made Kulapati).” On being asked thus by
Sri Rama, the dog addressed the following
speech: “I, In my previous birth, was the
Kulapati of the same place, Kalafjara Matha.
Partaking of the remains of sacrificial food,
O Rama ! | would be engaged in worshipping
gods and Brahmanas and gave to the male
and maid-servants their due. | had a love for
good things. | would protect the property
dedicated to gods. | was modest and well-

« VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

behaved and was engaged in doing good to
all living beings. Even then | have been
reduced to this wretched state and the
lowest position. O Rama! therefore such a
Brahmana, who is irasible, who has given
up his ‘Dharma’ and who is engaged in
harming others, who is hot-tempered, ruthless,
harsh, foolish (ignorant) and irreligious will
lead to the downfall of fourteen generations.

(40—46)

तस्मात् सर्वास्ववस्थासु कौलपत्यं न कारयेत्।
atest नेतुं सपुत्रपशुबान्धवम्॥४७॥
देवेष्वधिष्ठितं Haig We च ब्राह्मणेषु च।
ब्रह्मस्वं देवताद्रव्यं स्त्रीणां बालधनं च यत्॥४८॥
ad हरति यो ya इष्टै: we विनश्यति।
ब्राह्मणद्रव्यमादत्ते देवानां wa Weave
wa: पतति at a नरकेऽवीचिसंज्ञके।
मनसापि fe tart werd च हरेत्तु य:।॥५०॥
निरयान्निरयं da पतत्येव नराधम:।
तच्छुत्वा वचनं TAT विस्मयोत्फुल्ललोचन: ॥ ५१॥
शवाप्यगच्छन्महातेजा यत एवागतस्तत:।
मनस्वी पूर्वजात्या स जातिमात्रोऽपदूषित:।
वाराणस्यां महाभाग: Wet चोपविवेश FU
“Therefore, one should not in any
circumstances become a Kulapati. Only, he
should be made to look after gods, cows
and the Brahmanas, whom one would wish
to condemn to go to hell alongwith sons,
cattle and relatives. One who takes away
the property of the Brahmanas, gods, women
and children and takes back again what has
been given away in charity, perishes alongwith
one’s all dear ones. O Sri Rama! One who
takes away the property belonging to the
Brahmanas and the gods, soon goes to the
fearful hell known as ‘Avici’ one who takes
away even mentally the property belonging
to the gods and the Brahmanas, goes down
from one hell to another.” On hearing the
speech of the dog, the eyes of Sri Rama
opened widely due to wonder, the dog, too
possessed of lustre, went to place from
where it had come. It was a high minded
