* AYODHYAKANDA +

with their age, to all people belonging to the
four grades of society and even outside
their pale, they were accordingly devoted to
him in thought, word and deed. (15)
चतुष्पथान् देवपथांश्चैत्यांश्चायतनानि च।
प्रदक्षिणं परिहरज्जगाम yu: सुत:॥१६॥
The heir apparent drove along leaving
cross-roads, temples, places sacred to the
tutelary deities of a village and schools to
his right as a token of respect. (16)

तत् पृथिव्यां गृहवरं महेन्द्रसदनोपमम्।
राजपुत्र: पितुर्वेश्म प्रविवेश श्रिया ज्वलन्॥१९॥
Reaching the royal palace with its
beautiful attics of various patterns resembling
masses of clouds and vying with the peak
of Kailasa as well as with its snow-white
pleasure-houses adorned with bunches of
precious stones and rising above the sky
like So many aerial cars, the heir apparent,
who was glowing with his native splendour,
entered the well-known palace of his father,
the foremost of all mansions on the globe

359

and resembling the palace of the mighty
Indra. (17-19 )

सकशक्ष्या धन्विभिर्गुप्तास्तिस्रोऽतिक्रम्य वाजिभि: ।
पदातिरपरे कक्ष्ये द्वे WTA AAA Roll

Having passed through the first three
gates, guarded, as they were, by bowmen,
in a chariot drawn by horses, that jewel
among men walked through the other two
gates on foot. (20)

स Pal: समतिक्रम्य कक्ष्या दशरथात्मज:।
संनिवर्त्य जनं सर्वं शुद्धान्त:पुरमत्यगात्॥२१॥
Passing through all the five gates
and politely sending back all men who
accompanied him, Sri Rama, son of
DaSaratha, entered the sacred gynaeceum.

(21)
तस्मिन् प्रविष्टे पितुरन्तिकं तदा
जन: स सर्वो मुदितो नृपात्मजे।
प्रतीक्षते तस्य पुन: स्म निर्गमं
यथोदयं चन्द्रमस: सरित्पति:।। २२॥

The aforesaid prince having made his
way into the presence of his royal father on
that occasion, the whole crowd, full of joy,
awaited his coming back from the palace
even as the ocean awaits the rising of the
moon. (22)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्येऽयोध्याकाण्डे FAT: सर्ग: il १७॥

Thus ends Canto Seventeen in the Ayodhyakanda of the glorious Ramayana of
Valmiki, the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

अष्टादश: सर्ग:
Canto XVHI

Questioned by Sri Rama as to what preyed on his father’s mind, Kaikeyi
tells him all that had happened in the meantime and sternly
urges him to depart for the woods

a ददर्शासने रामो विषण्णं frat शुभे।

कैकेय्या सहितं दीनं मुखेन परिशुष्यता॥ १॥ | withering face.

dejected and distressd and marked with a

(1)

The said Sri Rama beheld his father |W पितुश्चरणौ पूर्वमभिवाद्य विनीतवत्।
seated on a lovely couch with Kaikeyi, | dal ववन्दे चरणौ कैकेय्या: सुसमाहित:॥ २॥
