* ARANYAKANDA «

extraordinary prowess, pierced the vulture
with those straight-going, sharp and terrible
barbed arrows whetted on a stone and
discharged with full force. (8)

स राक्षसरथे पश्यञ्जानकीं बाष्पलोचनाम्।
अचिन्तयित्वा बाणांस्तान् राक्षसं समभिद्रवत्॥ ९॥
Beholding Sita (daughter of Janaka) in
the ogre’s chariot with tears in her eyes,
and not minding those arrows, Jatayu darted
towards the ogre. (9)
ततोऽस्य सशरं चापं मुक्कामणिविभूषितम्।
चरणाभ्यां महातेजा बभञ्ज पतगोत्तम:॥१०॥
Then Jatayu (the foremost of birds), who
was possessed of great energy, broke with
his talons the bow, fitted with an arrow, of
Ravana, artistically decked with pearls. (10)

ततोऽन्यद् धनुरादाय रावण: क्रोधमूच्छित:।

ववर्ष शरवर्षाणि शतशोऽथ सहस्रश:॥११॥
Thereupon, seizing another bow,

Ravana, who was beside himself with anger,

rained showers of arrows in hundreds and

thousands. (11)

शरैरावारितस्तस्य संयुगे UAT:

कुलायमभिसम्प्राप्त: पक्षिवच्च बभौ तदा॥१२॥
Enclosed by the arrows of Ravana on

the field of battle at that time, Jatayu (the

king of birds) looked like a bird having found
shelter in a nest. (12)

स तानि शरजालानि पक्षाभ्यां तु विधूय ह।
चरणाभ्यां महातेजा बभञ्जास्य महद् धनु:॥ १३॥
Having shaken off that network of
arrows with his wings, Jatayu (who was
endowed with great energy) for his part
snapped the mighty bow of Ravana with his
feet. (13)
तच्चाग्निसदृशं dit रावणस्य शरावरम्।
पक्षाभ्यां च महातेजा SAA पतगेश्वर:॥ १४॥
The king of birds, who was endowed
with great energy, also broke his coat of
mail, blazing like fire. (14)

853

काञ्चनोरश्छदान्दिव्यान् पिशाचवदनान् खरान्।

तांश्चास्य जवसम्पन्नाञ्जघान समरे बली॥ १५॥

The mighty bird further killed in the
course of the encounter the celebrated swift-
going heavenly mules of Ravana, endowed
with the heads of fiends and protected by
breast-plates of gold. (15)
अथ त्रिवेणुसम्पन्नं कामगं पावकार्चिषम्।
मणिसोपानचित्राङ्गं बभञ्ज च महारथम्॥१६॥

Jatayu presently smashed the huge
chariot as well (of Ravana) provided with a
pole to which the yoke is fixed and flaming
like fire, which could go wherever one liked
and whose frame looked charming with its
steps of gems. (16)

पूर्णचन्द्रप्रतीकाशं wt च SMM: सह।
पातयामास वेगेन ग्राहिभी wed: सह॥ een

Jatayu) also knocked down with
vehemence the canopy (over the seat of
Ravana) shining as the full moon, alongwith
the whisks as also the ogres holding them.

(17)

सारथेश्चास्य वेगेन तुण्डेन च महच्छिर:।
पुनर्व्यपहनच्छीमान् पक्षिराजो महाबल:॥१८॥

Nay, the glorious Jatayu (the king of
birds), who was possessed of great might,
then vehemently struck off with his bill the
big head of the charioteer of Ravana. (18)

स भग्नधन्वा विरथो हताश्वो हतसारथि:।
अङ्केनादाय ade पपात भुवि रावण:॥१९॥
Clasping in his arms Sita (a princess
of the Videha territory), Ravana, whose bow
had been broken, nay, who was left without

a chariot and whose horses and charioteer
had been killed—fell to the ground. (19)

दृष्ट्वा निपतितं भूमौ रावणं भग्नवाहनम्।

साधु साध्विति भूतानि गृध्रराजमपूजयन्॥ २०॥
Seeing Ravana dashed to the ground,

his chariot smashed, all beings applauded

the king of vultures in the words “Well done,
bravo !” (20)
