* BALAKANDA +

being permitted by the Emperor, all returned
as they had come. (21)

गतेषु तेषु विप्रेषु मन्त्रिणस्तान् नराधिप:।
विसर्जयित्वा ta aya प्रविवेश महामति:।। २२॥

101

Sending away the said counsellors when
those Brahmanas had dispersed, the highly
intelligent monarch entered his gynaeceum.

(22)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये बालकाण्डे द्वादश: सर्ग: ॥ १२॥

Thus ends Canto Twelve in the Balakanda of the glorious Ramayana of Valmiki,
the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

त्रयोदश: wat:
Canto XIII

Feudatory chiefs called under orders of the Emperor and charged
with the duty of setting up stables etc.

पुन: Wa वसन्ते तु Wl: संवत्सरोऽभवत्।
प्रसवार्थं गतो यष्टुं हयमेधेन वीर्यवान्॥१॥
The vernal season having appeared
again, one year* got completed and the
powerful monarch Dasaratha called on
Visistha with a view to commencing the
horse-sacrifice for the sake of a male
progeny. (1)
अभिवाद्य वसिष्ठं च न्यायत: प्रतिपूज्य च।
अब्रवीत् प्रश्रितं वाक्यं प्रसवार्थं द्विजोत्तमम्॥ २॥
Having greeted Vasistha and his wife,
Arundhati, and offering homage to them
according to the scriptural ordinance, he
addressed the following humble prayer to
Vasistha, the foremost of the Brahmanas,
with the object of obtaining a son: (2)
यज्ञो मे क्रियतां ब्रह्मन् यथोक्तं मुनिपुंगव।
यथा न विघ्ना: क्रियन्ते यज्ञाङ्गेषु विधीयताम्॥ ३॥
“Let the sacrifice intended to be
performed by me, O holy one, be commenced
as enjoined by the scriptures, O jewel among
sages, and steps may be taken to ensure
that no obstacles may be thrown by the
ogres etc., in the way of items forming part
of the sacrifice. (3)

var स्निग्ध: सुहृन्मह्यं गुरुश्च परमो महान्।
वोढव्यो भवता da unt यज्ञस्य चोद्यत:॥४॥
“You are my selfless well-wisher as
well as my supreme preceptor and an
exalted soul too. The whole burden of the
sacrifice that has come to me is to be borne
by you alone.” (4)

waft च a राजानमब्रवीद् द्विजसत्तम:।
करिष्ये सर्वमेवैतद् भवता यत् समर्थितम्॥५॥

“Amen!” said that jewel among the
Brahmanas to the emperor, and added, “l
shall undoubtedly do all that, which has
been sought for by you.” (5)

ततोऽब्रवीद् द्विजान् वृद्धान् यज्ञकर्मसुनिष्ठितान्।
स्थापत्ये नि।ष्ठेत।श्चैव्। व्रद्धान् पस्मध।।मेक।न् ।। ६ Ul
कम।न्तिकाङिछ्।ल्पक।र।न् बधंर्क।न् ख्नकानपि।
गणकाञ्शिल्पिनश्चैव aa नटनर्तकान्॥७॥
तथा शुचीञ्शास्त्रविद: पुरुषान् सुबहुश्रुतान्।
यज्ञकर्म समीहन्तां भवन्तो राजशासनात्॥८॥
The sage Vasistha then spoke to elderly
Brahmanas well-versed in ritual acts as
well as to elderly and most pious Brahmanas,
skilled in architecture relating to sacrifices,
as also to servants engaged for the whole

* In the Kalpa-Sitras we read : `संवत्सरान्ते दीक्षेत` (One should consecrate oneself for a horse-sacrifice at
the end of a year (after the letting loose of the sacrificial horse).
