# YUDDHAKANDA #

न गृहाणि न वस्त्राणि न प्राकारस्तिरस्किया।
Ae राजसत्कारा व्त्तमावरणं feat: २७॥
“Neither apartments nor costumes nor
a protective wall nor again royal honours
constitute a veil for a woman. Her character
alone is her shield. (27)

व्यसनेषु न pee न युद्धेषु स्वयंवरे।
न क्रतौ नो विवाहे वा दर्शनं दूष्यते स्निया:।॥ २८॥

“The appearance of a woman in public
is not condemned in times of adversity, in
straits, in conflicts, during the selection of a
husband (by a princess or daughter of a
Ksatriya at a public assembly of suitors), at
a sacrificial performance or at the nuptial
ceremony. (28)

सैषा विपद्गता wa कृच्छ्रेण च समन्विता।

दर्शने नास्ति दोषोऽस्या मत्समीपे विशेषत:॥ २९॥
“The yonder Sita is in distress and

beset with difficulty. Hence there is no

objection to her appearing in public,
particularly in my presence. (29)
विसृज्य शिबिकां तस्मात् पद्भ्यामेवापसर्पतु।

ada मम aed पश्यन्त्वेते वनौकस:॥ ३०॥

“Therefore, leaving the palanquin, let
Sita seek my presence on foot alone. Let
these monkeys (lit., denizens of the forest)
have a look at the princess of the Videha
kingdom.” (30)
`एवमुक्तस्तु रामेण सविमर्शो विभीषण:।
रामस्योपानयत् सीतां संनिकर्षं विनीतवत्॥ ३१॥

Becoming thoughtful wnen commanded
as aforesaid by Sr Rama, Vibhisana
reverently conducted Sita to the former's
presence. (31)

787

ततो लक्ष्मणसुग्रीवौ हनूमांश्च प्लवङ्गम:।
निशम्य वाक्यं रामस्य बभूवुर्व्यथिता भृशम्॥ ३२॥

Laksmana and Sugriva as well as the
monkey chief, Hanuman, thereupon felt
greatly distressed to hear the order of Sri

Rama. (32)
कलत्रनिरपेक्षैश्च इङ्नितैरस्य दारुणै:।

अप्रीतमिव सीतायां तर्कयन्ति स्म राघवम्॥ ३३॥

From his stern gestures, which were
lacking in regard for his consort, they
concluded Sri Rama (a scion of Raghu) to
be displeased with Sita. (33)

लज्जया त्ववलीयन्ती स्वेषु गात्रेषु मैथिली।
विभीषणेनानुगता wat साभ्यवर्तत॥ svi

Shrinking into her limbs out of modesty,
and followed by Vibhisana, the said princess
of Mithila, for her part, approached her
husband. (34)

विस्मयाच्च प्रहर्षाच्च area पतिदेवता।
उदैक्षत मुखं wd: सौम्यं सौम्यतरानना॥ ३५॥

Sita, who looked upon her spouse as a
god, of still more gracious aspect regarded
the agreeable countenance of her husband
with a mixed feeling of astonishment,
excessive delight and affection. (35)

अथ Wea सा
सुचिरमदृष्टमुदीक्ष्य a प्रियस्य।
वदनमुदितपूर्णचन्द्रकान्तं
विमलशशाङ्कनिभानना तदाऽऽसीत्॥ ३६॥

Gazing on the face of her darling, which
had not been seen by her for long and
which was lovely like the full moon just
risen, she forthwith actually dispelled the
fatigue of her mind and her face shone at
that time as the cloudless full moon. (36)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये FERS चतुर्दशाधिकशततम: AA: ॥११४॥

Thus ends Canto One hundred and fourteen in the Yuddhakanda of the glorious
Ramayana of Valmiki, the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

