+ UTTARAKANDA +

Then the holy and pure wind-god blew
emitting divine fragrance, caused joy to all
on all sides. (11)

तदद्भुतमिवाचिन्त्यं निरैक्षन्त समाहिता:।
मानवा: Wares: पूर्वं कृतयुगे यथा॥१२॥

That wonderful दाप unconceivable
happening as used to be in Krtayuga was
seen by all men coming from various
countries. (12)

सर्वान् समागतान् दृष्टवा सीता काषायवासिनी ।
अब्रवीत् प्राञ्जलिर्वाक्यमधोदृष्टिरवाङ्मुखी 1 १३॥

Sita wearing a brown garment, having
seen all of them arrived, with folded hands,
keeping her gaze downwards and face cast
down, said: (13)
ame राघवादन्यं मनसापि न चिन्तये।
तथा मे meet देवी विवरं दातुमर्हति॥१४॥

‘As | have not contemplated about
anyone other than the scion of Raghu even
in mind, so the goddess Madhavi, the earth-
goddess, may provide space to me to enter.

(14)
मनसा HAUT वाचा यथा Wt समर्चये।
तथा A माधवी eat विवरं दातुमर्हति॥ १५॥

‘As | worship Sri Rama, in mind, speech
and action, so the spouse of Madhava (the
earth-goddess Madhavi) may grant space
to me to enter. (15)

यथैतत् सत्यमुक्तं मे वेद्मि रामात् परं न च।
तथा मे meet देवी विवरं दातुमर्हति॥१६॥

‘As | have spoken the truth that | do
not know anyone except Sri Rama, so the
earth-goddess may grant space to me.’ (16)

ध्रियमाणं शिरोभिस्तु नागैरमितविक्रमै:।
feat fea ager दिव्यरत्नविभूषितै:॥ १८॥

Then, while Sita, the daughter of Videha,
was taking oath, a divine throne, of wonderful
beauty arose from the earth, borne on the

1109

head by very powerful Nagas (serpents)
adorned with divine ornaments, and looking
divine in form sprang up. (17-18)

स्वागतेनाभिनन्द्यैनामासने चोपवेशयत्॥ १९॥

On that throne, the earth-goddess,
welcoming her with words of welcome, and
taking her by her hands made Sita be seated
on the seat. (19)
तामासनगतां gear प्रविशन्तीं रसातलम्।
पुष्पवृष्टिरविच्छिन्ना दिव्या सीतामवाकिरत्॥ २०॥

Seeing Sita thus seated, entering the
netherworld, a divine shower of flowers in
succession covered Sita. (20)

साधुकारश्च सुमहान् cart सहसोत्थित:।
साधुसाध्विति वै सीते यस्यास्ते शीलमीदृशम्॥ २१॥
एवं बहुविधा वाचो ह्यन्तरिक्षगता: सुरा:।
व्याजह्रुर्हृष्टमनसो दृष्टवा सीताप्रवेशनम्॥२२॥

All of a sudden loud shouts of ‘well-
done’ arose from the gods “Well done,” Well
done, O Sita, who are of such conduct-—
thus and other words of approbation were
uttered by the gods, happy in mind seeing
Sita’s entry into the netherworld. (21-22)

यज्ञवाटगताश्चापि qa: सर्व wa al
राजानश्च wer विस्मयान्नोपरेमिरे॥ २३॥

All ascetics and kings, tigers among
men, that had come to the place of great
event, continued to acclaim Sita out of
amazement. (23)

अन्तरिक्षे च भूमौ च सर्वे स्थावरजङ्घमा:।

दानवाश्च महाकाया: पाताले पन्नगाधिपा:॥ २४॥
In the firmament, on earth all movable

and stationary beings, the mighty sons of

Danu (devils) and overlords of serpents
acclaimed. (24)

केचिद्विनेदु: संहृष्टा: केचिद् ध्यानपरायणा: |
केचिद् रामं निरीक्षन्ते केचित् सीतामचेतस: ॥ २५ ॥

Some uttered hurrahs of joy, other fixed
