# YUDDHAKANDA #

ogre, the aforesaid monkey sought an
opportunity to strike the said Virupaksa.
(30)

ततोऽन्यं पातयत् क्रोधाच्छङ्खदेशे महातलम्।
महेन्द्राशनिकल्पेन तलेनाभिहत: «= fart ३१॥
पपात रुधिरक्लिन्न: शोणितं fe समुद्गिरन्।
स्रोतोभ्यस्तु विरूपाक्षो जलं प्रस्रवणादिव॥ ३२॥
Sugriva then angrily brought down on
the region of his temple-bone a violent blow
with his palm. Struck with the palm, which
descended like the thunderbolt of the mighty
Indra, Virupaksa, for his part, fell to the
ground bathed in blood, emitting blood as he
did from all the nine apertures of his body,
viz, the two eyes, the two nostrils, the two
ears, the mouth, the penis and the anus, as
water flows from a spring. (31-32)

विव्रत्तनयनं क्रोधात् सफेनं रुधिराप्लुतम्।

aged विरूपाक्षॆ विरूपाक्षतरं कृतम्॥ ३३॥
The monkeys saw Virupaksa bathed

in foaming blood, his eyes rolling through

anger, and as such rendered all the more
monstrous. * (33)

स्फुरन्तं परिवर्तन्तं ueda रुधिरोक्षितम्।
करुणं च विनर्दन्तं ददृशु: कपयो रिपुम्॥ ३४॥

713

Nay, the monkeys beheld their enemy
bathed in blood, tossing about, changing
sides and bellowing piteously. (34)

तथा तु dt Gala सम्प्रयुक्तौ
तरस्विनौ वानरराक्षसानाम्।
बलार्णवौ सस्वनतुश्च भीमौ
महार्णवौ द्वाविव भिन्नसेतू॥३५॥

Closely united for a hand-to-hand fight
on the battlefield in that way, the two
redoubtable armies, the army of the monkeys
and that of the ogres, for their part, which
were extensive as seas and full of
impetuosity, roared like two oceans, which
had burst their strands. (35)
विनाशितं ver विरूपनेत्रं

महाबलं तं हरिपार्थिवेन।
at aad कपिराक्षसाना-
मुद्व्त्तगङ्गाप्रतिमं बभूव॥ ३६ ॥

Perceiving the notorious Virupaksa,
who was endowed with extrordinary might,
made short work of by Sugriva, the king
of monkeys, the united army of the
monkeys and the ogres looked like the
holy Ganga in spate. (36)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये युद्धकाण्डे षण्णवतितम: AW: ॥ ९६ Il

Thus ends Canto Ninety-six in the Yuddhakanda of the glorious Ramayana of
Valmiki, the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

सप्तनवतितम: सर्ग:
Canto XCVII

The fearful encounter of Mahodara with Surgiva
and his fall at the latter’s hands

हन्यमाने बले तूर्णमन्योन्यं a महामृधे।
सरसीव महाघर्मे सूपक्षीणे बभूवतु:॥१॥
Being destroyed by each other in that

major conflict, the aforesaid two armies
were soon considerably attenuated like two
lakes in midsummer when sunshine is the
brightest. (1)

* There is a pun here on the word Virupaksa which means one with mis-shapen eyes.
