216

accompanied by sweetmeats, drinks of
various kinds and dishes that can be licked,

« VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

such as honey, or sucked, such as the
juice of a mango.” (22-23)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये बालकाण्डे (ETAT: Wl: ॥ ५२॥

Thus ends Canto Fifty-two in the Balakanda of the glorious Ramayana of Valmiki,
the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

त्रिपञ्चाश: सर्ग:
Canto LIII

Heartily entertained alongwith his army by Vasistha with delicious foods and
drinks yielded by his cow of plenty, Viswamitra asks of him the cow,
which Vasistha declines to part with

एवमुक्का वसिष्ठेन शबला शत्रुसूदन।
विदधे कामधुक कामान् यस्य यस्येप्सितं यथा॥ १॥
इक्षून् मधूंस्तथा लाजान् मैरेयांश्च वरासवान्।
पानानि च महार्हाणि भक्ष्यांश्चोच्चावचानपि॥ २॥

“Thus instructed by Vasistha, O
destroyer of foes, Sabala, a cow of plenty,
as she was, yielded all luxuries as desired
by each particular individual of Viswamitra’s
camp—sugar-canes (including all their
products—sugar etc.), honeys of various
kinds, even so fried grains of paddy, Maireya
(a kind of wine, made of jaggery and other
substances) and excellent spirituous liquors
distilled from boiled or unboiled sap of sugar-
cane, as well as other costly drinks and
foods of various kinds, especially those
requiring mastication also. (1-2)
उष्णाढ्यस्यौदनस्यात्र राशय: पर्वतोपमा:।
मृष्टान्यन्नानि wis दधिकुल्यास्तथैव च॥३॥
नानास्वादुरसानां च खाण्डवानां तथैव a
भोजनानि सुपूर्णानि गौडानि च सहस्रश:॥४॥

“In this feast could be seen heaps, as
high as mountains, of steaming rice, varieties
of sweet rice boiled in milk, nay, pulses
boiled into a liquid form with salt and
condiments, and even so, streams of
curds (as also of milk and ghee), and also
silver plates in thousands brimful with
delicious fruit juices of various kinds as

well as with sweetmeats. (3-4)

सर्वमासीत् सुसंतुष्टं हृष्टपुष्टजनायुतम्।
विश्वामित्रबलं wa वसिष्ठेन सुतर्पितम्॥५॥

“Fully entertained by Vasistha, O Rama,
the entire army of ViSwamitra, wholly
composed, as it was, of joyous and well-fed
men, felt highly gratified. (5)

विश्वामित्रो fe राजर्षिर्हृष्टपुष्टस्तदाभवत्।
सान्त:पुरवरो राजा सब्राह्मणपुरोहित:॥६॥
सामात्यो मन्त्रिसहित: सभृत्य: पूजितस्तदा।
युक्त परमहर्षेण वसिष्ठमिदमब्रवीत्॥७॥

“Entertained on that occasion alongwith
the foremost inmates of his gynaeceum as
well as with the Brahmanas (that had
accompanied him) including his family priest,
and even so with his ministers and
counsellors and dependents too, King
Viswamitra, a veritable sage among kings,
felt rejoiced and strong.” Full of supreme
delight he spoke to Vasistha as follows:

(6-7)

पूजितोऽहं त्वया ब्रह्मन् पूजार्हेण सुसत्कृत:।
श्रूयतामभिधास्यामि वाक्यं वाक्यविशारद॥ ८॥

“| have been honoured and sumptuously
entertained by you, who are deserving of
honour yourself, O holy one! | shall now
prefer a request to you, O master of
expression; pray, listen ! (8)
