* BALAKANDA +

to ViSwamitra, whose only wealth was his
asceticism and who had just finished his
daily routine of devotions : (5)
गता भगवती रात्रि: श्रोतव्यं परमं श्रुतम्।
तराम सरितां श्रेष्ठां पुण्यां त्रिपथगां नदीम्॥६॥
“The sacred night hallowed by the
narration of the story of Ganga’s descent
has passed. That which was most worthy of
hearing has been heard. Now let us cross
the holy river Ganga (which follows a
three-fold course, the foremost of all rivers.

(6)

नौरेषा fe सुखास्तीर्णा ऋषीणां पुण्यकर्मणाम्।
भगवन्तमिह Wa ज्ञात्वा त्वरितमागता॥७॥

“Here indeed is a boat furnished with
an agreeable matting to sit on and sent by
Rsis of meritorious deeds, which has
expeditiously appeared on coming to know
of Your Holiness having arrived here.” (7)

तस्य aq वचनं श्रुत्वा राघवस्य महात्मन:।
संतारॆ कारयामास सर्षिसंघस्य कौशिक:॥८॥

Hearing the aforesaid submission of
the celebrated and high-souled Sri Rama, a
scion of Emperor Raghu, ViSwamitra (a
scion of King Kusa) caused Sri Rama
alongwith Laksmana and the whole host of
seers accompanying the sage, including
himself, to be ferried across the river. (8)
उत्तरॆ तीरमासाद्य सम्पूज्यर्षिगणं तत:।
गङ्गाकूले निविष्टास्ते विशालां cet: पुरीम्॥९॥

Then, having reached the opposite
bank of the Ganga and duly greeted the
host of Rsis waiting there to receive the
distinguished party, they (ViSwamitra and
his followers) saw the city of ViSala in the
distance while seated on the bank of the
Ganga. (9)
ततो मुनिवरस्तूर्णं जगाम सहराघव:।
विशालां नगरीं रम्यां दिव्यां स्वर्गोपमां तदा॥ १०॥

Accompanied by the two scions of
Raghu, Viswamitra, the foremost of hermits,

195

then hastily proceeded from that place to
the delightful and heavenly city of Visala,
which vied with paradise. (10)

अथ Wa महाप्राज्ञो विश्वामित्रं महामुनिम्।
पप्रच्छ प्राञ्जलिर्भूत्वा विशालामुत्तमां पुरीम्॥११॥

With folded-hands, as a mark of respect,
the exceptionally wise Sri Rama, forthwith
made the following inquiries of the eminent
sage, ViSwamitra, concerning the foremost
city of Visala : (11)
श्रोतुमिच्छामि ws a ut कौतूहलं fe Aner

“| wish to hear, O great sage, what
celebrated dynasty of kings is ruling at
present in Visala; for great is my curiosity in
this behalf. God bless you !” (12)

तस्य तद् वचनं श्रुत्वा रामस्य मुनिपुंगव:।
आख्यातुं AL समारेभे विशालाया: पुरातनम्॥ १३॥
Hearing the aforesaid request of Sri
Rama, ViSwamitra, a jewel among sages,
proceeded to relate in the following words a
well-known old legend relating to the
foundation of Visala. (13)

श्रूयतां WA शक्रस्य कथां कथयत: श्रुताम्।
afar देशे fe ae वृत्तं श्रृणु तत्त्वेन Waa १४॥

“Hear, from me, O Rama, even as |
narrate it, the story of Indra, throwing light
on the glory of Visala, as heard by me.
Hear, O scion of Raghu, in reality what
actually happened in this region. (14)

ud कृतयुगे wa fad: Gat महाबला:।
अदितेश्च महाभागा वीर्यवन्त: सुधार्मिका:॥ १५॥
“In a Satyayuga of old, very mighty
sons were born of Diti and highly blessed
ones of Aditi, who were powerful and
exceptionally pious. (15)
ततस्तेषां नरव्याघ्र बुद्धिरासीन्महात्मनाम्।
अमरा विजराश्चैव कथं स्यामो निरामया:॥ १६॥
“In course of time even as they grew
up, O tiger among men, the following
