* ARANYAKANDA «

त्वद्वाक्यैर्न तु मां शक्यं भेत्तुं रामस्य संयुगे।
मूर्खस्य पापशीलस्य मानुषस्य विशेषत:॥४॥
“It is not possible by your words to
deter me from my resolve to enter into
hostility through abduction of Sita with Rama,
who is stupid, addicted to sin and, above
all, a human being. (4)
यस्त्यक्त्वा सुहृदो Wet मातरं पितरं तथा।
स्त्रीवाक्यं प्राकृतं seat वनमेकपदे गत:॥५॥
अवश्यं तु मया तस्य संयुगे खरघातिन:।
wot: प्रियतरा सीता हर्तव्या aa संनिधौ॥ ६॥

“| need must at all events bear away in
your presence Sita, who is dearer than life to
him who, having heard the valueless words
of a woman (viz., his stepmother, Kaikey!)
departed at once for the forest, renouncing
his near and dear ones, sovereignty and
parents, and who killed Khara in battle. (5-6)

wa मे निश्चिता afeefe मारीच विद्यते।
न व्यावर्तयितुं weer सेन्द्रैरपि सुरासुरै:॥७॥

“This resolute determination exists in
my mind, O Marica ! It cannot be altered
even by gods and demons including Indra,
the lord of paradise. (7)
ae गुणं वा सम्पृष्टस्त्वमेवं वक्तुमर्हसि।
अपायं वा उपायं वा कार्यस्यास्य विनिश्चये॥ ८ ॥
सम्पृष्टेन तु ame सचिवेन विपश्चिता।
उद्यताञ्जलिना राज्ञो य इच्छेद् भूतिमात्मन:॥ ९॥

“When asked about the merits and
demerits or about the means of accomplishing
a thing or the risks involved in it, while
finally deciding upon a particular course of
action, you ought to have said like this. By
a wise counsellor, who seeks his own
prosperity from a king, counsel should be
given with uplifted and joined palms only
when he is duly asked for it. (8-9)
वाक्यमप्रतिकूलं तु मृदुपूर्वं शुभं fear
उपचारेण amet Bh च वसुधाधिप:॥ १०॥

“A monarch should be spoken to in
words which are not repugnant but pleasing,

819

yet wholesome, and are uttered with
politeness and in soft accents. (10)

wand तु यद्वाक्यमथवा हितमुच्यते।

नाभिनन्देत तद् राजा मानार्थी मानवर्जितम्॥११॥
“A king seeking honour would not

welcome that counsel which is uttered in an

insulting tone, and is lacking in respect,
even though it is wholesome. (11)

पञ्च रूपाणि राजानो धारयन्त्यमितौजस:।
अग्नेरिन्द्रस्य सोमस्य यमस्य वरुणस्य च॥१२॥

“Kings possessed of unlimited prowess
assume five roles, viz., those of the god of
fire, Indra (the ruler of gods), the moon-god,
Yama (the god of retribution) and Varuna
(the god of water). (12)
औष्ण्यं तथा विक्रमं च सौम्यं दण्डं प्रसन्नताम्।
धारयन्ति महात्मानो USA: क्षणदाचर॥ १३॥
तस्मात्सर्वास्ववस्थासु मान्या: पूज्याश्च नित्यदा।
त्वं तु धर्ममविज्ञाय केवलं मोहमाश्रित:॥ १४॥
अभ्यागतं तु दौरात्म्यात् परुषं वदसीदृशम्।
गुणदोषौ न पृच्छामि क्षेमं चात्मनि राक्षस॥ १५॥

“High-souled kings, O prowler of the
night, embody ardour and_ prowess,
gentleness, violence and grace (the virtues
of the above-noted deities) and are, therefore,
worthy of honour and respect at all times.
Not knowing your duty, you, on the other
hand, have clung to infatuation alone and
due to evil-mindedness address such harsh
words to me, your guest ! | do not ask you
about the merits and demerits of what |
propose to do, nor what is advisable for me,
O ogre! (13-15)
मयोक्कतमपि चैतावत् cat प्रत्यमितविक्रम।
SR स भवान् Hel साहाय्यं कर्तुमर्हसि॥ १६ ॥

“On the other hand, my request to you
is only this, O ogre of unlimited prowess:

urged by me, you ought at all events to render
help in this mission of abducting Sita. (16)

श्रृणु तत्कर्म साहाय्ये यत्कार्यं वचनान्मम।
सौवर्णस्त्वं मृगो भूत्वा चित्रो रजतबिन्दुभि:।। १७॥
