# YUDDHAKANDA #

volleys of his sharp-pointed shafts, shining
like the sun, and destroyed the monkey
chiefs. (57)
a शूलनिस्निंशपरश्वधानि
व्याविद्भधदीप्तानलसप्रभाणि ।

at तीव्रे प्लवगेन्द्रसैन्ये॥ ५८॥

He let fall on the army of monkey
chiefs a violent shower of pikes, swords
and axes, shining like a swollen and flaming
fire and shooting forth incandescent flames
with sparks. (58)
wat ज्वलनसंकाशैर्बाणैर्वानरयूथपा: |
ताडिता: शक्रजिद्वाणै: प्रफुल्ला इव किंशुका: ॥। ५९ ॥

Struck with the arrows of Indrajit—
arrows which shone brightly as fire—the

monkey generals thereupon looked like
Kirnsuka trees bearing crimson flowers. (59)
तेऽन्योन्यमभिसर्पन्तो निनदन्तश्च विस्वरम्।
राक्षसेन्द्रास्त्रनिर्भिन्ना निपेतुर्वानरर्षभा: ॥ ६०॥
Gliding towards one another when
pierced by the missiles of Indrajit, the ruler
of ogres, the aforesaid bulls among monkeys
fell down screaming in discordant tones.
(60)
उदीक्षमाणा गगनं केचिन्नेत्रेषु ताडिता:।
शरैर्विविशुरन्योन्यं पेतुश्च जगतीतले॥६१॥
Struck with arrows in their eyes while
looking up towards the sky, some monkeys
clasped one another and fell down on the
earth’s surface. (61)
हनूमन्तं च सुग्रीवमङ्गदं गन्धमादनम्।
जाम्बवन्तं सुषेणं च वेगदर्शिनमेव च॥६२॥
मैन्दं च द्विविदं नीलं गवाक्षं wad तथा।
केसरिं हरिलोमानं विद्युद्दंष्टुं च वानरम्॥६३॥
Wane नलं Ua कुमुदं Wa वानरम्॥६४॥
विव्याध हरिशार्दूलान् सर्वांस्तान् राक्षसोत्तम: ॥ ६५ I

609

With lances, pikes and sharp arrows
charged with sacred formula (Mantras),
Indrajit, the foremost of ogres, pierced all
the well-known tigers among monkeys,
viz, Hanuman and Sugriva, Angada,
Gandhamadana, Jambavan and Susena as
well as Vegadarsi and Mainda, Dwivida,
Nila, Gavaksa, Gavaya and Kesari, Hariloma
and the monkey Vidyuddamstra, Suryanana,
Jyotirmukha, and the monkey Dadhimukha,
Pavakaksa as also Nala as well as the
monkey Kumuda. (62—65)

a a गदाभिर्हरियूथमुख्यान्

निर्भिद्य बाणैस्तपनीयवर्णै: ।

सलक्ष्मणं भास्कररश्मिकल्पै: ॥। ६६ I
Having wounded the leaders of monkey
hosts with his maces and arrows of a golden
hue, he actually covered Sri Rama as well
as Laksmana with showers of shafts shining
like sunbeams. (66)

a बाणवर्षैरभिव्रष्यमाणो
धारानिपातानिव तानचिन्त्य।
समीक्षमाण: परमाद्भुतश्री-
रामस्तदा लक्ष्मणमित्युवाच॥ ६७॥
Not minding the arrows any more than
torrents of rain, while being covered with
showers of shafts, and gazing on Laksmana,
the celebrated Sri Rama, who was shining
with a prodigious splendour, spoke as follows

aad

to him at that moment: (67)
असौ पुनर्लक्ष्मण राक्षसेन्द्रो
ब्रह्मास्त्रमाश्रित्य सुरेन्द्रशत्रु: |

निपातयित्वा हरिसैन्यमस्मान्-
fort: शरैरर्दयति प्रसक्तम्॥६८॥

“Falling back upon the missile presided
over by Brahma (the creator), which has
been secured by him, O Laksmana, and
striking down the army of monkeys, the
yonder prince of ogres, an avowed enemy
