# YUDDHAKANDA #

evil-minded Prahasta and roared again and
again. (44)

faq: स कृतस्तेन प्रहस्तो वाहिनीपति:।
We मुसलं at स्यन्दनादवपुप्लुवे॥४५॥

Firmly seizing hold of a formidable
mallet, when rendered bowless by him, the
said Prahasta, the Commander-in-Chief,
leapt down from his chariot. (45)

तावुभौ वाहिनीमुख्यौ जातवैरौ तरस्विनौ।
स्थितौ क्षतजसिक्ताङ्गौ प्रभिन्नाविव Gert ii ४६ ॥

Both the Commanders-in-Chief, who
were full of impetuosity and in whom enmity
had sprung up for each other, stood bathed
all over in blood like two elephants in rut. (46)

Tearing each other with _ their
exceedingly sharp teeth they looked like
a lion and an elephant and also behaved
like a lion and an elephant, respectively.

(47)
विक्रान्तविजयौ dkt समरेष्वनिवर्तिनौ।
काङ्क्षमाणौ यश: we वृत्रवासवयोरिव॥ ४८ i

The two heroes had well-nigh scored a
victory, they never turned their back on the
field of battle and sought to attain the glory
which had fallen to the lot of the demon
Vrtra and Indra, the ruler of gods. (48)

आजघान तदा नीलं ललाटे मुसलेन स:।

प्रहस्त: परमायत्तस्तत: सुस्राव शोणितम्॥४९॥
At that time Prahasta, who was

supremely active, struck Nila with a mallet

on the forehead, from which blood began to
flow. (49)

ad: शोणितदिग्धाङ्म: प्रगृह्य च महातरुम्।
प्रहस्तस्योरसि क्रुद्धो विससर्ज महाकपि:।॥ ५०॥
Firmly seizing hold of a huge tree, the
great monkey, Nila, his limbs covered with
gore, angrily flung it on Prahasta chest.
(50)

505

तमचिन्त्यप्रहारॆ स Wet मुसलं महत्।
अभिदुद्राव बलिनं बलान्नीलं प्लवङ्गमम्॥५१॥
Not minding that blow and firmly grasping
an enormous mallet, the latter violently rushed
towards the mighty monkey, Nila. (51)
तत: सम्प्रेक्ष्य जग्राह महावेगो महाशिलाम्॥ ५२॥
Perceiving the furious ogre advancing
with terrible rapidity towards him, the great
monkey, Nila, who was endowed with
extraordinary impetuosity, then pulled up a
mighty rock. (52)

तस्य युद्धाभिकामस्य मृधे मुसलयोधिन:।
प्रहस्तस्य शिलां नीलो मूर्नि तूर्णमपातयत्॥ ५३॥

Nila quickly flung the rock on the head
of Prahasta, who courted war and fought
with a mallet on the field of battle. (53)

नीलेन कपिमुख्येन विमुक्ता महती शिला।
बिभेद agen घोरा प्रहस्तस्य शिरस्तदा॥५४॥

Hurled at that moment by Nila, the
foremost of monkeys, the huge and formidable
rock broke the head of Prahasta into many
pieces. (54)
स गतासुर्गतश्रीको गतसत्त्वो गतेन्द्रिय:।
पपात सहसा भूमौ छिन्नमूल sa द्रुम:॥५५॥

His life as well as his splendour, strength
and senses having departed, he _ fell
precipitately to the ground like a tree cut at
the root. (55)

शरीरादपि Gera fir: प्रस्रवणं यथा॥५६॥

Like a spring from a mountain, blood
flowed copiously from his shattered head
as also from his body. (56)

ed Weed नीलेन तदकम्प्यं महाबलम्।
राक्षसानामहृष्टानां लङ्कामभिजगाम ह॥५७॥
Prahasta having been made short work
of by Nila, that huge and unshakable army
of ogres, who had grown cheerless, withdrew
to Lanka: so the tradition goes. (57)
