924

Has anger been fully controlled by you as
well as your diet, O lady! with asceticism
alone as your wealth? (8)

कच्चित्ते नियमा: प्राप्ता: कच्चित्ते मनस: सुखम्।
कच्चित्ते गुरुशुश्रूषा सफला चारुभाषिणि॥९॥

“Are all your religious vows _ fully
observed and has satisfaction come to your
mind? Has your attendance on your preceptor
borne fruit, O lady of pleasing speech?” (9)

रामेण तापसी geet सा सिद्धा सिद्धसम्मता।
शशंस Wt Fel रामाय प्रत्यवस्थिता॥१०॥

Stationed before Sri Rama when
enquired as above by the latter, the aforesaid
ascetic woman, the aged Sabari, who had
not only attained perfection through Yoga,
but was esteemed by perfect souls, submitted
as follows to Sri Rama: (10)

अद्य wear तप:सिद्धिस्तव संदर्शनान्मया।

अद्य मे सफलं जन्म Wag सुपूजिता:॥११॥
“Today has the fruition of my austerities

been attained by me through your blessed

sight. Today my birth as a human being has

borne fruit and my elders have been duly

adored. (11)

अद्य मे सफलं ad स्वर्गश्चैव भविष्यति।
त्वयि देववरे राम पूजिते पुरुषर्षभ॥ १२॥

“My asceticism too has become fruitful
today and the highest heaven too will definitely
fall to my lot, now that you, the foremost of
gods, have been worshipped by me, O
Rama, the flower of humanity. (12)

तवाहं चक्षुषा सौम्य पूता सौम्येन मानद।

गमिष्याम्यक्षयाँल्लोकांस्त्वत्प्रसादादरिंदम ॥९१३॥
“Hallowed by your gracious look, O

gentle one, bestowing honour on others, |

shall by your grace ascend to realms knowing
no decay, O subduer of foes ! (13)

farpe त्वयि प्राप्ते विमानैरतुलप्रभै:।

इतस्ते दिवमारूढा ame पर्यचारिषम्॥१४॥
“When you reached Citrakuta, the sages

whom | served, viz., the pupils of Sage

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

Matanga, ascended to heaven from this
place in aerial cars of incomparable
splendour. (14)

तैश्चाहमुक्ता धर्मज्ञैर्महाभागैर्महर्षिभि: ।
आगमिष्यति ते राम: सुपुण्यमिममाश्रमम्॥ १५॥

“Nay, | was reassured in the following
words by those eminent and highly blessed
seers of Vedic Mantras, who knew what
is right: ‘Sri Rama will visit this highly
sacrosanct hermitage of yours. (15)

a a प्रतिग्रहीतव्य: सौमित्रिसहितोऽतिथि:।
तं च दृष्टवा atiectrenmeraieed गमिष्यसि॥ 26 1

““Alongwith Laksmana (son of Sumitra),
Sri Rama should be hospitably received by
you as a guest. Having seen him (before
casting off your body) you will ascend to
realms that know no decay.’ (16)

Want महाभागैस्तदाहं पुरुषर्षभ।
Ta तु संचितं at विविधं पुरुषर्षभ॥ १७॥
तवार्थे पुरुषव्याघ्र पम्पायास्तीरसम्भवम्।
Waa: स धर्मात्मा शबर्या शबरीमिदम्॥ ve il
राघव: प्राह विज्ञाने तां नित्यमबहिष्कृताम्।
दनो: सकाशात् तत्त्वेन प्रभावं ते महात्मनाम्॥ १९॥
Ud वचनं seat रामवक्त्रविनि:सृतम्॥ २०॥
wet दर्शयामास mat agi महत्।
wa मेघघनप्रख्यं मृगपक्षिसमाकुलम्॥२१॥
मतङ्गवनमित्येव विश्रुतं रघुनन्दन।
इह ते भावितात्मानो गुरवो मे महाद्युते।
जुहवाञ्चक्रिरे नीडं मन्त्रवन्मन्त्रपूजितम्॥ 22 1

“| was reassured by those highly blessed
souls in these words on that occasion, O
jewel among men! Produce of the forest of
every description growing on the brink of
Pampa has, therefore, been gathered by me
for you, O tiger among men, the flower of
humanity !” Spoken to, as aforesaid, by Sabari,
the said Sri Rama (a scion of Raghu), whose
mind was set on virtue, lovingly spoke as
follows to Sabari, who had been eternally
admitted into the portals of divine wisdom :
“If you deem fit, | wish to perceive with my
