194

य: श्रृणोति च काकुत्स्थ सर्वान् कामानवाप्नुयात्।
सर्वे पापा: प्रणश्यन्ति आयु: कीर्तिश्च वर्धते॥ २३॥

The departed forbears of the man who
narrates to the Brahmanas, the Ksatriyas
and others this story—which fetches wealth
and renown, is conducive to longevity and
ensures the birth of a male issue and also

« VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

residence in heaven—feel gratified and gods
too get propitiated thereby. He who listens,
O scion of Kakutstha, to this blessed story
of the descent of the Ganga to the mortal
plane, which is conducive to longevity, bids
fair to attain all his desired objects. All his
sins totally disappear and the span of his
life as well as his fame extends.” (21—23)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये बालकाण्डे चतुश्चत्वारिंश: सर्ग: ॥ ४४॥

Thus ends Canto Forty-four in the Balakanda of the glorious Ramayana of Valmiki,
the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

Canto XLV

Vigwamitra tells Sri Rama how in the remote past the gods and the demons
conjointly churned the ocean of milk, using Mount Mandara as the
churning rod, how Lord Siva drank off the deadly poison skimmed
out of it, how as a result of that churning appeared Lord
Dhanvantari, a bevy of Apsaras, the beverage known
by the name of Varuni, the horse UccaihSrava, the
Kaustubha gem and nectar, and how the conflict
of gods and the Daityas ended in the
destruction of the latter

विश्वामित्रवच: scat Waa: सहलक्ष्मण:।
विस्मयं परमं गत्वा विश्चामित्रमथाब्रवीत्॥१॥
Struck with great wonder to hear the
speech of ViSwamitra, Sri Rama (a scion of
Emperor Raghu) alongwith Laksmana forth-
with spoke to ViSwamitra as follows : (1)
गङ्गावतरणं पुण्यं सागरस्यापि पूरणम्॥२॥
“Most wonderful, O holy Brahmana, is
this charming and sacred story, told by you,
of the descent of the Ganga to the terrestrial
plane as well as of how the excavation
made by the sons of Sagara came to be
filled by it. (2)

क्षणभूतेव नौ uf: wade परंतप।
sat चिन्तयतो: wat निखिलेन कथां तव॥ ३॥

“This night has slipped past us, the
two brothers, like an instant, O tormentor of
internal enemies in the shape of lust, anger
and so on, even as we pondered on your
entire story in detail. (3)

तस्य सा शार्वरी wat मम सौमित्रिणा सह।
जगाम चिन्तयानस्य विश्वामित्र कथां शुभाम्॥४॥

“The whole night, O friend of the
universe, slipped past me as well as
Laksmana (the son of Sumitra) as | pondered
with him the charming story.” (4)

wa: प्रभाते विमले विश्चामित्रं तपोधनम्।
उवाच राघवो वाक्यं कृताह्निकमरिंदम:॥५॥
Then, on the day having clearly dawned,

Sri Rama, a scion of Emperor Raghu, the
subduer of his enemy, submitted as follows
