« KISKINDHAKANDA +

(son of Vinata)—as well as to the class of
monkeys known as Arcirmalyas, also sons
of Marici and nicknamed Maricas, who were
possessed of extraordinary might, and to
the sons of other sages, and assigned the
western quarter to them all. He said:
“Followed by a couple of lakhs of monkeys,
O jewels among monkeys, and with Susena
as your leader, search you carefully for Sita
(a princess of the Videha territory). Explore,
O bulls among the monkeys, the territory of
Saurastra’ and even’ so_ Candracitra
(comprising the modern district of Mathura),
Bahlika (the modern Balkh), as also the
prosperous and lovely rural districts and big
towns, the principality of Kuksi (comprised
in Madhya Pradesh), thick with Punnaga
trees and thronged with Bakula and Uddalaka
trees, as well as the thickets of Ketaka
shrubs. Scour the auspicious streams flowing
in a westerly direction and carrying cool
waters, the groves of ascetics and whatever
mountains covered with forests exist there
as also uncultivated lands, consisting mostly
of deserts, and very high and cold cliffs.
(3—9)
गिरिजालाव्रतां ent मार्गित्वा पश्चिमां दिशम्।
ad: पश्चिममागम्य समुद्रं द्रष्टुमर्हथ॥ oll
तिमिनक्राकुलजलं गत्वा Feat वानरा:।
तत: केतकषण्डेषु तमालगहनेषु च॥११॥
कपयो विहरिष्यन्ति नारिकेलवनेषु च।
तत्र सीतां च मार्गध्वं निलयं रावणस्य च॥१२॥

वेलातलनिविष्टेषु पर्वतेषु ay च।
मुरवीपत्तनं चैव रम्यं चैव जटापुरम्॥१३॥
अवन्तीमङ्गलेपां च तथा चालक्षितं वनम्।
राष्टाणि च विशालानि पत्तनानि ततस्तत:॥ १४॥

“Having scoured the western quarter,
covered with a network of mountains, which
is difficult of access and going further west,
you ought to visit the sea, now known as
the Arabian Sea, whose water is stirred
by Timis (fishes of enormous size) and
crocodiles. Reaching there you will surely
behold the sea, O monkeys ! On seeing the

1099

sea the monkeys will disport themselves in
clusters of Ketaka shrubs and thickets of
Tamala trees as well as in groves of coconut
trees. Search for Sita as well as for the
abode of Ravana in all these as well as on
the hills and in forests located on the
seashore. Also explore the town of Muravi
(Morvi) as well as the lovely town of
Jatapura, the cities of Avanti and Angalepa,
the forest of Alaksita as also the extensive
kingdoms and towns here and _ there.
(10—14)

सिन्धुसागरयोश्चैव संगमे तत्र पर्वत:।
महान् सोमगिरिर्नाम शतशृङ्गो महाद्रुम:॥ १५॥
“Nay, at the well-known meeting-place
of the river Sindhu (Indus) and the sea
there is a large mountain, Somagiri by name,
consisting of a hundred peaks and covered
with giant trees. (15)

तत्र प्रस्थेषु रम्येषु सिंहा: पक्षगमा: स्थिता:।
तिमिमत्स्यगजांश्चैव नीडान्यारोपयन्ति ते॥१६॥

“On the lovely plateaus of that mountain
dwell winged lions. They carry Timis, alligators
and elephants to their nests. (16)

तानि नीडानि सिंहानां गिरिशृङ्गगताश्च ये।

दृप्तास्तृप्ताश्च मातङ्गास्तोयदस्वननि:स्वना:॥ १७॥
विचरन्ति विशालेऽस्मिस्तोयपूर्णे समन्तत:।
तस्य Tg दिवस्पर्शं काञ्चनं चित्रपादपम्॥१८॥
“Full of pride on the honour of being
carried on the back of these winged lions
and gratified with the nourishment they get
there, the elephants, who thus reach the
mountain-peaks, range about the aforesaid
nests on this extensive plateau, full of water
on every side, emitting a cry resembling the
rumbling of clouds. The said golden peak of
Somagiri touches the heavens and is
covered with lovely trees. (17-18)

सर्वमाशु विचेतव्यं कपिभि: कामरूपिभि:।
wile तत्र समुद्रस्य काञ्चनीं शतयोजनाम्॥१९॥
Geol पारियात्रस्य गत्वा द्रक्ष्यथ वानरा:।
कोट्यस्तत्र चतुर्विंशद् गन्धर्वाणां तरस्विनाम्॥ २०॥
