+ UTTARAKANDA +

“This being so, there is no cause to
despair about Sita and Rama, the scion of
Raghu, O best among men, be firm.” (28)

श्रुत्वा तु aed वाक्यं सूतस्य परमाद्भुतम्।
प्रहर्षमतुलं लेभे साधु साध्विति चाब्रवीत्॥२९॥
Laksmana felt great relief and was

pleased to hear the charioteer speak such
wonderful things. He cried out. “Excellent !

1013

You have said well”.

Wa: संवदतोरेवं सूतलक्ष्मणयो: पथि।
अस्तमर्के गते वासं केशिन्यां तावथोषतु:॥ ३०॥
Then, the setting sun descended on
the mountain, while the charioteer and
Laksmana were thus conversing; they
prepared for night halt on the banks of the
Kesini river. (30)

(29)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये उत्तरकाण्डे एकपञ्चाश: सर्ग: ॥ ५१ ॥

Thus ends Canto Fifty-one in the Uttarakanda of the glorious Ramayana of Valmiki,
the work of a Rsi, and the oldest epic.

Canto LII
Laksmana meets Sri Rama in the Royal chamber and comforts Him

wa तां रजनीमुष्य केशिन्यां रघुनन्दन:।
प्रभाते पुनरुत्थाय लक्ष्मण: प्रययौ तदा॥१॥
Laksmana the descendant of Raghu,
having spent the night on the banks of the
Kesini river, awoke at break of dawn and
proceeded on his way to Ayodhya. (1)

ततोऽर्धदिवसे प्राप्ते प्रविवेश महारथ:।
अयोध्यां रत्नसम्पूर्णां हृष्टपुष्टजनावृताम्॥ २॥
When half the day was elapsed (lit., at

noon) the great warrior Laksmana entered
the city. (2)

सौमित्रिस्तु परं et जगाम सुमहामति:।
रामपादौ समासाद्य वक्ष्यामि fens गत:॥ ३॥

‘What shall | say when | approach and
touch Sri Rama’s feet—contemplating thus
Laksmana was much agitated. (3)
रामस्य परमोदारं Wend समदरृश्यत॥४॥

While he (Laksmana) was thus thinking,
the apartment of Sri Rama soothing to the
(Laksmana’s) eye as the moon, came in
sight. (4)

राज्ञस्तु भवनद्वारि सोऽवतीर्य नरोत्तम:।
अवाङ्मुखो दीनमना: प्रविवेशानिवारित:॥५॥
That best of the men alighting from the
chariot at the doorway of the apartment of
Sri Rama, entered unobstructed, highly
agitated and with the face downcast. (5)
a gem wad दीनमासीनं warn
नेत्राभ्यामश्रुपूर्णाभ्यां ददर्शाग्रजमग्रत: ।॥ ६ ॥
With eyes full of tears, he (Laksmana)
saw Sri Rama, the scion of Raghu, his elder
brother, downcast and seated on the throne
before him. (6)
जग्राह चरणौ तस्य लक्ष्मणो दीनचेतन:।
sara दीनया वाचा प्राञ्ञलि: सुसमाहित:॥ ७॥
Mentally agitated Laksmana touched
the feet of his elder brother; somehow being

composed he spoke woefully with folded
hands thus: (7)

आर्यस्याज्ञां पुरस्कृत्य विसृज्य जनकात्मजाम्।
Teta यथोद्दिष्टे वाल्मीकेराश्रमे शुभे॥८॥
तत्र तां च शुभाचारामाश्रमान्ते यशस्विनीम्।
पुनरप्यागतो वीर पादमूलमुपासितुम्॥९॥

“Keeping foremost the order of Your
