+ UTTARAKANDA +

‘Therefore, select a holy place for me
where no injury may be caused to any living
creature.’ (24)

एवमुक्तस्तु पुत्रेण fasrat मुनिपुंगव:।
वचनं We wa श्रूयतामिति सत्तम॥ २५॥
दक्षिणस्योदधेस्तीरे त्रिकूटो ATA पर्वत:।
तस्याग्रे तु विशाला सा महेन्द्रस्य पुरी यथा॥ २६॥
लङ्का नाम पुरी रम्या निर्मिता विश्वकर्मणा।
Tart निवासार्थं यथेन्द्रस्यामरावती॥ २७॥

“Thus addressed by his son, ViSrava,
the best of sages, spoke as follows: ‘Listen,
O knower of Dharma and the noblest of
beings, there is a mountain by name Trikuta
on the shores of the southern ocean; on its
summit there is a charming city called Lanka,
spacious like the city of the great Indra; it
was constructed by ViSwakarma for the
residence of the Raksasas as Amaravati
was for the residence of Indra. (25—27)
तत्र त्वं वस VR ते लङ्कायां नात्र संशय:।
हेमप्राकारपरिखा यन्त्रशस्त्रसमावृता॥ २८ ॥
रमणीया पुरी सा हि रुक्मवैदूर्यतोरणा।
राक्षसै: सा परित्यक्ता पुरा विष्णुभयार्दितै:।॥ २९॥

‘Let all be well with you, my son. You
may live there in Lanka without any misgiving.
That charming city has golden fortifications
and is surrounded by moats; it is well-
equipped on all sides with mechanical devices
and weapons; its portals are made of gold
and cat’s-eye gems; long ago it was deserted
by the Raksasas, who were afflicted with
the fear of Visnu. (28-29)

शून्या रक्षोगणै: wad रसातलतलं गतै:।

शून्या सम्प्रति लङ्का सा प्रभुस्तस्या न विद्यते॥ ३० ॥
‘It is now free of the Raksasas they

having fled to the nether world, known as

Rasatala. That city of Lanka is now vacant
and is without a ruler. (30)

853

स त्वं तत्र निवासाय गच्छ पुत्र यथासुखम्।
निर्दोषस्तत्र ते वासो न बाधस्तत्र कस्यचित्॥ ३१॥

‘You may go there, my son, and live
there, as it suits your pleasure. Your stay
there will be quite happy and no harm will
result to anybody.’ (31)

एतच्छुत्वा स धर्मात्मा धर्मिष्ठं वचनं पितु:।
निवासयामास तदा लङ्कां पर्वतमूर्धनि॥३२॥

“Hearing these most righteous words of
his father, that Dharmatma then lived in Lanka,
situated upon the crest of the mountain. (32)

नैर्ऋतानां सहस्रैस्तु हृष्टै: प्रमुदितै: सदा।
अचिरिणैव कालेन सम्पूर्णा तस्य शासनात्॥ ३३॥

“Soon, thanks to his wise administration,
that city became full of thousands of ever
contented and elated Nairrtas. (33)

स तु तत्रावसत् प्रीतो धर्मात्मा नैर्ऋतर्षभ:।
समुद्रपरिखायां स लङ्कायां विश्रवात्मज:॥ ३४॥
“The son of Visrava, the pious-minded

lord of the Nairrtas, lived happily there in
Lanka, which had the sea as its moat. (34)

काले काले तु धर्मात्मा पुष्पकेण धनेश्वर:।
अभ्यागच्छद् विनीतात्मा पितरं मातरं च feu se i
“From time to time the pious-minded

lord of wealth, full of humility, went to his
father and mother, on the Puspaka. (35)

स देवगन्धर्वगणैरभिष्टुत-
स्तथाप्सरोनृत्यविभूषितालय: ।
गभस्तिभि: सूर्य इवावभासयन्
पितु: समीपं weet स वित्तप:॥ ३६॥

“Praised by hosts of gods and
Gandharvas and with his abode adorned by
the dance of celestial damsels, and himself
glowing like the sun by its rays, the celebrated
lord of wealth repaired to the presence of
his father.” (36)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये उत्तरकाण्डे तृतीय: सर्ग: ॥ 3 ॥

Thus ends Canto Three in the Uttarakanda of the glorious Ramayana of Valmiki,
the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

