158

“There, O Rama (a scion of Kakutstha),
you will be able to see that bow of the high-
souled king of Mithila as well as his most
wonderful sacrifice, O tiger among men!

(11)
तद्धि यज्ञफलं तेन मैथिलेनोत्तमं धनु:।
याचितं नरशार्दूल सुनाभं सर्वदैवतै:॥१२॥

“That excellent bow, well-formed at the
centre where it is held by the fist, was indeed
solicited by the aforesaid king of Mithila as
a reward for the sacrifice and gifted as such
by all gods.* (12)

आयागभूतं नृपतेस्तस्य वेश्मनि राघव।
अर्चितं विविधैग्न्धिंर्धूपैश्चागुरुंगन्धिभि ॥ १३॥

“Worshipped with sandal-pastes of
various kinds and incenses emitting the
smell of aloe-wood, it stands enshrined in
the palace of that king as an object of
worship, O scion of Raghu !” (13)

एवमुक्त्वा मुनिवर: प्रस्थानमकरोत् तदा।
सर्षिसंघ: सकाकुत्स्थ seat aad: i Vv il
Saying so (through the other sages),
ViSwamitra, the foremost of sages, presently
set out on the journey accompanied by a
host of Rsis as well as by Sri Rama and
Laksmana, the two scions of Kakutstha,
taking leave of the sylvan deities in the
following words : (14)

स्वस्ति वोऽस्तु गमिष्यामि सिद्ध: सिद्धाश्रमादहम्।
उत्तरे जाह्नवीतीरे हिमवन्तं शिलोच्चयम्॥१५॥
“May फ००प obetide you _ all!

Accomplished of purpose | shall proceed

from Siddhasrama to the Himalaya mountain

on the northern bank of the holy Ganga.”
(15)

इत्युक्त्वा मुनिशार्दूल: कौशिक: स तपोधन:।
उत्तरां दिशमुद्दिश्य प्रस्थातुमुपचक्रमे॥१६॥

Having observed thus, the celebrated
sage ViSwamitra, a scion of KuSa, a

« VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

tiger among hermits and rich in askesis,
made ready to depart in a northerly direction.
(16)
तं we मुनिवरमन्वगादनुसारिणाम्।
शकटीशतमात्रं तु प्रयाणे ब्रह्मवादिनाम्॥ eeu
No less than a hundred carts, full of
load consisting mostly of requisites of a
sacrifice, belonging to his followers, who
were all exponents of the Vedas,
accompanied Viswamitra, the foremost of
sages, as he proceeded on his journey.
(17)
मृगपक्षिगणाश्चैव सिद्धाश्रमनिवासिन:।
अनुजग्मुर्महात्मानं विश्वामित्रं तपोधनम्॥१८॥
Even herds of beasts and flocks of
birds dwelling in the Siddhasrama followed

the high-souled ViSwamitra, whose only
wealth was his asceticism. (18)

निवर्तयामास ad: सर्षिसंघ: स पक्षिण:।
ते गत्वा दूरमध्वानं लम्बमाने दिवाकरे॥१९॥
वासं चक्रुर्मुनिगणा: शोणाकूले समाहिता:।
तेऽस्तं गते दिनकरे स्नात्वा हुतहुताशना:॥ २०॥
विश्वामित्रं पुरस्कृत्य निषेदुरमितौजस:।
रामोऽपि सहसौमित्रिर्मुनींस्तानभिपूज्य च॥ २१॥
stadt निषसादाथ विश्वामित्रस्य धीमत:।
अथ Tat महातेजा विश्वामित्रं तपोधनम्॥ २२॥
wes मुनिशार्दूलं कौतूहलसमन्वितम्।
भगवन् को न्वयं देश: समृद्धवनशोभित:॥ २३॥
श्रोतुमिच्छामि भद्रं ते वक्तुमर्हसि तत्त्वत:।
नोदितो रामवाक्येन कथयामास सुव्रत:।
wea देशस्य निखिलमृषिमध्ये महातपा:॥ २४॥
Thereupon Viswamitra, accompanied
by the host of seers, persuaded the birds
as well as the beasts to return. Having
covered a long distance, the hosts of hermits,
accompanying ViSwamitra, concentrated and
the sun now declining, broke their journey

on the bank of the Sona. Having bathed in
the river and having worshipped the sacred

* Elsewhere it is stated that the bow was vouchsafed to a king of Mithila by Lord Siva Himself. The

Padma-Purana, for instance, says :

`चापं शम्भोर्दयादत्तम्`, In the Kiirma-Purana too we read :

Was भगवानीशस्तरिशूली नीललोहित: । प्रददौ शत्रुनाशार्थं जनकायाद्भुतं धनु: ॥
