682

इक्ष्वाकोस्तु सुत: श्रीमान् कुक्षिरित्येव विश्रुत:।
कुक्षेरथात्मजो वीरो विकुक्षिरुदपद्यत॥८॥

“Ikswaku’s glorious son for his part
became known simply by the name of Kuksi;
and from the loins of Kuksi, O prince, sprang
up gallant Vikuksi. (8)

विकुक्षेस्तु महातेजा: बाण: UA: प्रतापवान्।
arg च महाबाहुरनरण्यो महातपा:॥९॥

“Vikuksi’s son, on the other hand, was
the mighty Bana, who was endowed with
exceptional glory; and Bana’s son was the
mighty-armed Anaranya, who practised great
austerities. (9)

नानावृष्टिर्बभूवास्मिन् न दुर्भिक्ष: सतां वरे।
अनरण्ये महाराजे तस्करो वापि कश्चन॥१०॥

“So long as this Anaranya, who was a
jewel among the virtuous, continued to be
the Emperor, there was neither a drought
nor famine nor was a thief to be seen in
Ayodhya. (10)
अनरण्यान्महाराज YU राजा Aya Fl

तस्मात् पृथोर्महातेजास्त्रिशङ्कुरुदपद्यत॥ ११॥

“From the loins of Anaranya, O great
king, they say, appeared King Prthu; from
the said Prthu was descended TriSanku,
who was possessed of great splendour.

(11)
a सत्यवचनाद् वीर: सशरीरो fed गत:।
त्रिशङ्कोरभवत् सूनुर्धुन्धुमारो महायशा:॥१२॥

“Due to the unfailing vow of Viswamitra
the aforesaid hero bodily ascended to heaven.
Trisanku’s son was the highly illustrious
Dhundhumara. (12)

धुन्धुमारान्महातेजा युवनाश्वो व्यजायत।
Geta: star मान्धाता समपद्यत॥ १३॥
“From the loins of Dhundhumara sprang
up Yuvanaswa, who was endowed with
exceptional glory; the glorious Mandhata
was born as the son of Yuvanaswa. (13)
मान्धातुस्तु महातेजा: सुसंधिरुदपद्यत।
सुसंधेरपि पुत्रौ द्वौ ध्रुवसंधि: प्रसेनजित्॥१४॥

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA +

“Of Mandhata, again, was born the
highly glorious Susandhi; of Susandhi too
there were two sons, Dhruvasandhi and
Prasenajit. (14)

यशस्वी ध्रुवसंधेस्तु भरतो रिपुसूदन:।
भरतात् तु महाबाहोरसितो नाम जायत॥ eal
यस्यैते प्रतिराजान seu शत्रव:।

हैहयास्तालजङ्घाश्च शूराश्च faa: Ve il

“Bharata, for his part, a destroyer of
foes, was the illustrious son of Dhruvasandhi;
and of the mighty-armed Bharata was born
one Asita by name, of whom the following
tributary chiefs, viz., the rulers of the
Haihayas and the Talajanghas and the gallant
ruler of the Sagabindus, came to be the
enemies. (15-16)

तांस्तु सर्वान् प्रतिव्यूह्य युद्धे राजा प्रवासित:।
a च शैलवरे रम्ये बभूवाभिरतो AP: १७॥

“In spite of his having arrayed his army
against all these, the king was routed and
exiled. He, therefore, gladly took up his
abode as an ascetic on a delightful and
excellent mountain. (17)

द्वे चास्य भार्ये गर्भिण्यौ बभूवतुरिति श्रुति: |
तत्र चैका महाभागा भार्गवं देववर्चसम्॥१८॥
ववन्दे पद्मपत्राक्षी कांक्षिणी पुत्रमुत्तमम्।
wet गर्भविनाशाय aot गरलं ददौ॥१९॥

“In course of time his two consorts
came to be in the family way: so the tradition
goes. Desiring to have an excellent son,
one of them, who was highly fortunate and
had eyes resembling the petals of a lotus,
sought the presence of and bowed down
to Sage Cyavana, son of Bhrgu, who
possessed the splendour of gods; while the
other administered poison to her co-wife in
order to destroy her foetus. (18-19)

भार्गवश्च्यवनो नाम हिमवन्तमुपाश्रित:।
तमृषिं साभ्युपागम्य कालिन्दी त्वभ्यवादयत्॥ २०॥

“The sage named Cyavana, son of
Bhrgu, had betaken himself to the Himalayas.
