918

meme गिरिवरे पम्पापर्यन्तशोभिते।
निवसत्यात्मवान् वीरश्चतुर्भि:; सह amt nee

“With four other monkeys the high-
minded hero lives on Rsyamuka, the
foremost of mountains, adorned with the
catchment of the Pampa lake. (12)

वानरेन्द्रो महावीर्यस्तेजोवानमितप्रभ:।
सत्यसंधो विनीतश्च धृतिमान् मतिमान् महान्॥ १३॥
दक्ष: प्रगल्भो द्युतिमान् महाबलपराक्रम:।
uit विवासितो ait राज्यहेतोर्महात्मना॥१४॥

“That monkey-chief—who is possessed
of extraordinary prowess, is full of energy
and endowed with unbounded effulgence,
true to his promise, cultured, resolute and
highly talented, clever, intrepid, glorious and
possessed of extraordinary might and
valour—has been exiled by his high-minded
brother for the sake of sovereignty. (13-14)

स ते सहायो ft च सीताया: परिमार्गणे।
भविष्यति fe ते राम मा च शोके मन: कृथा: ॥ १५ Ul

“He will surely prove to be your helper
in your quest for Sita as well as your friend,
O Rama; therefore, do not give over your
mind to grief. (15)

भवितव्यं fe तच्चापि न तच्छक्यमिहान्यथा।
कर्तुमिक्ष्वाकुशार्दूल कालो fe दुरतिक्रम:॥ १६॥

“That which is destined to happen in
this world can never be altered in any case,
O tiger among the Ikswakus ! For the Time-
Spirit cannot be easily overstepped. (16)

Tes शीघ्रमितो वीर सुग्रीवं तं महाबलम्।
वयस्यं तं कुरु क्षिप्रमितो गत्वाद्य राघव॥ १७॥
“Depart with all speed from this place
to the presence of the said Sugriva, who is
possessed of great might. Nay, departing

from this place today, O heroic scion of
Raghu, quickly make him your friend. (17)

अद्रोहाय समागम्य दीप्यमाने विभावसौ।
न च ते सोऽवमन्तव्य: सुग्रीवो वानराधिप: i १८ ॥

“Get united with him as a friend when
a fire is blazing, with a view to remaining

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

free from enmity ever afterwards. And the
said chief of monkeys, Sugriva, should never
be disregarded by you. (18)

कृतज्ञ: कामरूपी च सहायार्थी च वीर्यवान्।
शक्तौ ह्यद्य युवां कर्तुं कार्यं तस्य चिकीर्षितम्॥ १९॥

“He is grateful and capable of assuming
any form at will; he seeks to get an ally
and is powerful. And indeed you two are
capable even now of accomplishing the
purpose sought to be accomplished by him.

(19)

कृतार्थो वाकृतार्थो वा तव Heat करिष्यति।
स ऋक्षरजस: Ua: पम्पामटति visa: i Roll
भास्करस्यौरस: Tat वालिना कृतकिल्बिष:।
संनिधायायुधं क्षिप्रमृष्यमूकालयं कपिम्॥ २१॥
ee राघव सत्येन वयस्यं वनचारिणम्।
स हि स्थानानि कात्स्न्येन सर्वाणि कपिकुञ्जर: It २२॥
नरमांसाशिनां लोके नैपुण्यादधिगच्छति।
न तस्याविदितं लोके किंचिदस्ति fe राघव॥ २३॥
“Irrespective of whether his object is
accomplished or not, he _ will surely
accomplish your purpose. Sprung from the
loins of the sun-god, the aforesaid son of
Rksaraja’s consort, roams about on the
brink of the Pampa lake, full of apprehension
of an attack from Vali, since he has entered
into hostilities with his elder brother, Vall.
Laying aside your weapons as a token of
your friendly attitude, quickly make the
monkey-chief, who has taken up his abode
on the Rsyamtka hill and wanders in the
forest, your friend on oath, O scion of Raghu !
Indeed that elephant among the monkeys
thoroughly knows all the haunts of ogres
(feeding on the human flesh) in the world by
virtue of his cleverness. Really speaking,
nothing is unknown to him in the world,
O scion of Raghu! (20—23)

यावत् ga: प्रतपति सहस्रांशु: परंतप।
स नदीर्विपुलान् शैलान् गिरिदुर्गाणि कन्दरान्॥ २४॥
अन्विष्य वानरै: सार्धं पत्नीं तेऽधिगमिष्यति।
वानरांश्च महाकायान् प्रेषयिष्यति राघव॥ २५॥
