162

« VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

Canto XXXII

KuSanabha applauds the forbearance and forgiveness of his daughters;
the story of the birth of Brahmadatta and his marriage
with KuSanabha’s daughters

तस्य Ag वचनं श्रुत्वा कुशनाभस्य धीमत:।
शिरोभिश्चरणौ स्पृष्टा कन्याशतमभाषत॥१॥

Hearing the aforesaid question of the
celebrated and wise KuSanabha, all the
hundred maidens touched his feet with their
heads and replied as follows : (1)

ay: सर्वात्मको राजन् प्रधर्षयितुमिच्छति।
अशुभं मार्गमास्थाय न धर्मं प्रत्यवेक्षते॥२॥

“Resorting to the evil path, the all-
pervading wind-god, Your Majesty, sought
to violate us and did not respect our righteous
conduct. (2)
पितृमत्य: स्म भद्रं ते स्वच्छन्दे न वयं स्थिता:।
पितरं नो व्रृणीष्व त्वं यदि नो दास्यते तव॥ ३॥
तेन पापानुबन्धेन वचनं न प्रतीच्छता।
एवं ब्रुवन्त्य: सर्वा: स्म वायुनाभिहता भृशम्॥४॥

“We said to him, ‘May good betide you,
we are dependent on our father and as
such are not masters of our own will. Ask
you us of our father; we shall certainly
accept you as our husband if he gives us
away to you.’ Pleading thus we were hit
hard (deformed) by him of wicked intent,
who did not heed our remonstrance.” (3-4)

तासां तु वचनं seat राजा परमधार्मिक:।
प्रत्युवाच महातेजा: कन्याशतमनुत्तमम्॥ & Ul
ऐकमत्यमुपागम्य कुलं चावेक्षितं मम॥६॥
“The act of forbearance done by you,
which can be done only by those given to
forgiveness, my daughters, was extremely
noble on your part. And the fact that the honour
of my race was vindicated by you by resorting
to unanimity on this point was also a unique
achievement on your part. (5-6)

अलंकारो fe नारीणां क्षमा तु पुरुषस्य वा।
दुष्करं तच्च a क्षान्तं त्रिदशेषु विशेषत:॥७॥
यादृशी व: क्षमा पुत्र्य: सर्वासामविशेषत:।
क्षमा दानं क्षमा सत्यं क्षमा यज्ञाश्च पुत्रिका:॥ ८॥
“For forbearance is the ornament indeed
of womankind as well as of man. And such
forbearance particularly with reference to
gods as exists in you all without distinction,
O my daughters, is difficult to practise.
Forbearance is really charity, forbearance

is devotion to truth, and forbearance
constitutes all sacrifices, my beloved
daughters ! (7-8)

क्षमा यश: क्षमा धर्म: क्षमायां विष्ठितं जगत्।
विसृज्य कन्या: काकुत्स्थ राजा त्रिदशविक्रम: ।। ९॥
मन्त्रज्ञो मन्त्रयामास wert सह मन्तिभि:।
देशे काले च कर्तव्यं Age प्रतिपादनम्॥ Lo ll

(Hearing their complaint, the king, for
his part, who was exceedingly pious and
exceptionally glorious, replied as follows to
his hundred daughters, excelled by none :)
“Forbearance is fame, forbearance is piety;
nay, the entire creation is established in
forbearance, crystallized in the form of the
earth.”

Having sent away the girls to the
gynaeceum, O scion of Kakutstha, the king
(KuSanabha), who possessed the prowess
of gods and was adept in deliberation,
discussed the question of their marriage
with his counsellors since it was necessary
to give them away to a worthy man at the
proper place and time. (9-10)

एतस्मिन्नेव काले तु चूली नाम महाद्युति:।
ऊर्ध्वरेता: शुभाचारो ब्राह्मं तप उपागमत्॥११॥

At this very time च Brahmacari
