562

freedom back himself, even if he is captured
by gods including demons and Nagas
(serpent-demons having the face of a man
and the tail of a serpent). (76)

Wa न तावदात्मानं gerd वानराधिप:।
शैलप्रहाराभिहत: कुम्भकर्णेन ATT veil
‘Struck with the blow of a crag by
Kumbhakarna on the battlefield, the overlord
of monkeys, | presume, is not yet conscious
of his self. (77)
अयं मुहूर्तात् सुग्रीवो लब्धसंज्ञो महाहवे।
आत्मनो वानराणां च यत् पथ्यं तत् करिष्यति॥ ७८ I
‘Having regained his senses in a short
while, in this major conflict, this Sugriva will
do what is good for himself as well as for
the monkeys. (78)

मया तु मोक्षितस्यास्य सुग्रीवस्य महात्मन:।
अप्रीतिश्च भवेत् कष्टा कीर्तिनाशश्च शाश्वत: ॥ ७९॥
‘Grievous displeasure will certainly be
caused to the high-souled Sugriva on his
being delivered by me, nay, his reputation
will be lost forever. (79)
तस्मान्मुहूर्तं काङ्क्षिष्ये विक्रमं मोक्षितस्य तु।
भिन्नं च वानरानीकं तावदाश्वासयाम्यहम्॥ ८०॥
‘| shall for my part, therefore, await
awhile the exhibition of prowess on his part
on his being restored to freedom. Till then
| shall restore to confidence the scattered
army of the monkeys.’ (80)

इत्येवं चिन्तयित्वाथ हनूमान् मारुतात्मज:।
भूय: संस्तम्भयामास वानराणां महाचमूम्॥८१॥
Pondering thus, Hanuman, sprung from
the loins of the wind-god, once more brought
firmness to the huge army of the monkeys.
(81)

a कुम्भकर्णोऽथ fads लङ्कां

स्फुरन्तमादाय महाहरिं ALI

पुष्पाग्र्यवर्षैरभिपूज्यमान:

॥। ८ २॥

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA +

Bearing the great monkey, Sugriva,
who had now begun to shake, the notorious
Kumbhakarna now entered Lanka, being
hailed on all sides by people dwelling in
seven-storeyed mansions, houses lining the
roads and the gates of buildings with showers
of excellent flowers. (82)

लाजगन्धोदवर्षैस्तु सेच्यमान: शनै: शनै:।
राजवीथ्यास्तु शीतत्वात् संज्ञां प्राप महाबल:॥ ८३॥

Being gently sprinkled with showers of
fried grains of paddy and scented water and
due to the coolness of the king’s highway,
Sugriva, who was endowed with extraordinary
might, gradually regained consciousness.

(83)

Wd: स संज्ञामुपलभ्य Hae
बलीयसस्तस्य भुजान्तरस्थ: |
विचिन्तयामास मुहुर्महात्मा ।। ८४॥

Having regained consciousness with
difficulty, while yet in the arms of
Kumbhakarna, who was endowed with
exceeding might, and gazing on the king’s
highway in the city, Sugriva, the high-souled
monkey, then repeatedly pondered as
follows: (84)

एवं ttt at नु नाम
wet मया सम्प्रतिकर्तुमद्य।
तथा करिष्यामि यथा हरीणां
भविष्यतीष्टं च fed च कार्यम्॥८५॥

‘How on earth can it at all be possible
to retaliate at this moment for me, who have
been taken captive in this way? Therefore,
| shall take action in such a way as may
prove agreeable and advantageous to the

monkeys.’ (85)
राजा हरीणाममरेन्द्रशत्रो: ।
खरैश्च कर्णौ amy नासां
ददंश पादैर्विददार cau
