# YUDDHAKANDA #

flew straight to their target, got stained
with blood and looked like huge red
serpents. (45)

a faqera dee इन्द्रजिच्छरमाददे।
उत्तमं रक्षसां मध्ये यमदत्तं महाबल:॥४६॥
Infuriated at his uncle, Indrajit, who
was endowed with extraordinary might, and
stood in the midst of ogres, seized hold of
an excellent arrow gifted to him by Yama
(the god of retribution). (46)
तं समीक्ष्य महातेजा weg तेन संहितम्।
लक्ष्मणोऽप्याददे बाणमन्यद् भीमपराक्रम:॥४७॥
कुबेरेण स्वयं स्वप्ने aq दत्तममितात्मना।
दुर्जयं dav च सेन्द्रैरपि सुरासुरै:॥४८॥

Perceiving that mighty arrow set by
him to his bow, Laksmana too of terrific
prowess, who व endowed with
extraordinary energy, took hold of another
arrow, the know-how of which had been
gifted to him in the course of a dream by
Kubera (the god of riches) of immense glory
himself, nay, which was difficult to resist
and much more difficult to get the better of
even for gods and demons including Indra,
the ruler of gods. (47-48)

तयोस्तु धनुषी श्रेष्ठे बाहुभि: परिघोपमै:।
विकृष्यमाणे बलवत् क्रौञ्चाविव चुकूजतु:॥४९॥

While being stretched at full length
with violence by their arms, which resembled
a pair of iron bludgeons, the excellent bows,
of the two warriors for their part emitted a
piercing sound like a pair of cranes. (49)

ताभ्यां तु धनुषि sted संहितौ सायकोत्तमौ।
विकृष्यमाणौ वीराभ्यां set जज्वलतु: श्रिया॥ Ko ॥
The two excellent arrows fitted by the
aforesaid heroes on their pre-eminent bows,
shone brightly with splendour while being
pulled with the bow-string. (50)
at भासयन्तावाकाशं rqeat faforat च्युतौ ।
मुखेन मुखमाहत्य संनिपेततुरोजसा॥५१॥

685

Hitting the head of the other with their
own, when shot from the bows, the two
arrows collided with each other with
violence lighting up the heavens as they did
so. (51)

संनिपातस्तयोश्चासीच्छरयोर्घोररूपयो: ।
सधूमविस्फुलिङ्गश्च तज्जोऽग्निर्दारुणोऽभवत्॥ ५२ ॥

Nay, born of the impact which was
thus brought about between the two arrows
of formidable aspect, there broke out a
fierce fire accompanied by smoke and
sparks. (52)
तौ महाग्रहसंकाशावन्योन्यं संनिपत्य a
संग्रामे शतधा यातौ मेदिन्यां Wa Waa: wes

Hitting each other like two major
planets, the two arrows flew into a hundred
pieces in their encounter and fell on the
ground. (53)

शरौ प्रतिहतौ दृष्टवा तावुभौ रणमूर्धनि।
व्रीडितौ जातरोषौ च लक्ष्मणेन्द्रजितौ तदा॥ ५४॥

Finding their arrows brought to nought
in the forefront of battle, both the aforesaid
warriors, Laksmana and Indrajit, felt abashed
and provoked at that moment. (54)
सुसंरब्धस्तु सौमित्रिरस्त्रं वारुणमाददे।
रौद्रं महेन्द्रजिद् युद्धेऽप्यसृजद् युधि निष्ठित: ।। ५५ ॥

Feeling enraged, Laksmana (son of
Sumitra) for his part took hold of a missile
presided over by Varuna, the god of water.
Nay, skilled in warfare, the great Indrajit too
shot a missile presided over by Rudra (the
god of destruction) in the encounter with
Laksmana. (55)
तेन तद्बिहितं शस्त्रं वारुणं परमाद्भुतम्।
ad: क्रुद्धो महातेजा इन्द्रजित् समितिंजय:।
आग्नेयं dee दीप्तं a लोकं संक्षिपन्निव॥ ५६॥

That most wonderful weapon presided
over by Varuna was rendered ineffectual by
the missile presided over by Rudra (the god
of destruction). Feeling provoked, the said
