942

The suzerain lord of the gods sallied
forth, surrounded by the eleven Rudras, the
eight Vasus, the twelve sons of Aditi,
accompanied by the hosts of the wind-
gods, equipped with all kinds of weapons,
and the two Aéswins. (27)

Priore] शक्रस्य परुष: पवनो adil
भास्करो निष्प्रभश्चैव महोल्काश्च प्रपेदिरे॥ २८॥

As Indra set out, a piercing wind began
to blow, the sun too was shorn of its splendour
and huge meteors fell. (28)

एतस्मिन्नन्तरे शूरो दशग्रीव: प्रतापवान्।
आरुरोह wa feet निर्मितं विश्वकर्मणा॥ २९॥
Ut: सुमहाकायैर्वेष्टितॆ लोमहर्षणै: ।
येषां नि:श्वासवातेन प्रदीप्तमिव dati soll
In the meantime the heroic and mighty
Ravana, the ten-headed monster, ascended
his heavenly chariot, fashioned by
VisSwakarma (the artisan of heaven) and
hung about by exceptionally gigantic serpents
which caused one’s hair to stand on end
and due to the wind of whose exhalations
the chariot appeared on the battlefield to be
in flames. (29-30)

दैत्यैर्निशाचरैश्चैव स wa: परिवारित:।
समराभिमुखो दिव्यो महेन्द्रं सोऽभ्यवर्तत॥ ३१॥

The chariot in question was surrounded
by Daityas and night-stalkers. Advancing
towards the battlefield, that celestial car stood
in front of the mighty Indra. (31)

Ut तं वारयित्वा तु स्वयमेव crafter: |
aisha युद्धाद्विनिष्क्रम्य रावणि: समुपाविशत्॥ ३२॥
Keeping back his notorious son, Ravana
for his part firmly took his stand on the field
of battle himself. Issuing out of the battlefield,

the said son of Ravana too sat quietly in his
chariot. (32)

ततो युद्धं WaT तु सुराणां राक्षसै: सह।
शस्त्राणि वर्षतां तेषां मेघानामिव संयुगे॥ ३३॥

Then started anew the struggle with

« VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

the ogres of the aforesaid gods, raining
weapons on the battlefield like clouds pouring
rain. (33)

कुम्भकर्णस्तु दुष्टात्मा नानाप्रहरणोद्यत:।
नाज्ञायत del राजन् युद्धं केनाभ्यपद्यत॥ ३४॥

The evil-minded Kumbhakarna for his
part, who carried various uplifted weapons,
did not know at that moment with whom he
entered into combat, O king! (34)

at wa संक्रुद्धस्ताडयामास देवता:॥ ३५॥

Full of rage he struck the gods with
any weapon that came to hand—with his
teeth, feet, arms, hands, javelins, iron clubs
and mallets. (35)

स oq este: संगम्याथं निशाचर:।
प्रयुद्धस्तैश्च संग्रामे क्षत: शस्तरैर्निरन्तरम्॥ ३६॥

Standing at close quarters with the
fierce Rudras, the said ogre, Kumbhakarna,
forthwith entered into a hard struggle with
them on the battlefield and was wounded by
them with weapons so as to leave no space
intact. (36)

बभौ शस्त्राचिततनु: कुम्भकर्ण: क्षरन्नसृक्।
विद्युत्स्तनितनिर्घोषो धारावानिव तोयद:॥ ३७॥

Covered all over with arrows and
dripping with blood, Kumbhakarna shone
like a cloud accompanied by lightning and
thunder and raining torrentially. (37)
ततस्तद् राक्षसं सैन्यं Was समरुद्गरणै:।
wr fasted सर्वं नानाप्रहरणैस्तदा॥ ३८॥

Engaged in a hard struggle with the
gods armed with all kinds of weapons and
assisted by the wind-gods, the whole of that
army of the ogres was put to flight on the
battlefield. (38)

केचिद् विनिहता: कृत्ताश्चेष्टन्ति स्म महीतले।
वाहनेष्ववसक्ताश्च स्थिता एवापरे रणे॥३९॥

Some were killed, while others, who
had been cut down, rolled about on the
