+ UTTARAKANDA +

1095

Canto LXXXX
[la attains manhood as a result of performing ASvamedha

तथोक्कतवति WA तु तस्य जन्म तदद्भुतम्।
उवाच लक्ष्मणो भूयो भरतश्च महायशा:॥१॥

इला सा सोमपुत्रस्य संवत्सरमथोषिता।
अकरोत् fee नरश्रेष्ठं तत्त्वं शंसितुमर्हसि॥ २॥
On Sri Rama describing Pururava’s
wonderful birth, Laksmana and Bharata, the
famous one, said again: ‘O best among
men, please tell us what Ila did after
staying a year with the son of Soma (Budha).’
(1-2)

तयोस्तद् वाक्यमाधुर्यं निशम्य परिपृच्छतो:।
राम: पुनरुवाचेमां प्रजापतिसुते कथाम्॥३॥
Hearing those sweet words of those
two, Laksmana and Bharata, who eagerly
asked him, Sri Rama again described the
story of the son of Prajapati, Ila. (3)

Gerd Wd we बुध: परमबुद्धिमान्।
संवर्तं परमोदारमाजुहाव महायशा:॥४॥
When Ila, had regained manhood for a
month, the very wise one and possessed of
fame, Budha, invited the very noble Sarnvarta
Rsi. (4)
च्यवनं wt च मुनिं चारिष्टनेमिनम्।
प्रमोदनं Want ततो दुर्वाससं मुनिम्॥५॥
He also invited Cyavana, the son of
Bhrgu, and the sage Aristanemi, the
humorous Pramodana, Modakara and also
the sage Durvasa. (5)

Ua सर्वान् समानीय वाक्यज्ञस्तत्त्वदर्शन:।
sara सर्वान् सुहृदो धैर्येण सुसमाहितान्॥६॥

Budha, skilled in conversation and
truthful, addressed them all, who were friendly
to him and were full of patience. (6)
अयं राजा महाबाहु: कर्दमस्य इल: Aa: |
जानीतैनं यथाभूतं sat ह्यत्र विधीयताम्॥७॥

That king of long arms is Ila, the son of

Kardama : know what happened to him, do
whatever is good for him here.’ (7)

amt संवदतामेव fest: ae महात्मभि:।
कर्दमस्तु महातेजास्तदाश्रममुपागमत्॥ ८ ।।
While the Brahmanas conversed with

the sages, Kardama, the mighty one, came
to that hermitage. (8)

पुलस्त्यश्च क्रतुश्चैव वषट्कारस्तथैव a
ओङ्कारश्च महातेजास्तमाश्रममुपागमन्॥ ९॥
Pulastya, Kratu and also Vasatkara,
Omkara, the mighty one, too entered the
hermitage. (9)
a सर्वे wea: परस्परसमागमे।
हितैषिणो बाह्लिपते: पृथग्वाक्यान्यथाब्रुवन्॥ १०॥
All those, happy at meeting each other,
desirous of doing good to the lord of Bahlika,
then spoke separately. (10)
fest: श्रृणुत मद्वाक्यं यच्छेय: पार्थिवस्य हि॥ ११॥
Kardama, on his part, said that was
best for his son, ‘O Brahmanas, listen to
me, which shall be for the welfare of the
King. (11)
नान्यं पश्यामि भैषज्यमन्तरा वृषभध्वजम्।
नाश्वमेधात् परो aa: प्रियश्चैव महात्मन:॥१२॥
‘| do not see any other cure except the
pleasure of Rudra with the bull as emblem

and no sacrifice other than the ASvamedha
is dearer to Siva, the noble one. (12)

तस्माद् यजामहे सर्वे पार्थिवार्थे दुरासदम्।
कर्दमेनैवमुक्तास्तु सर्व एव द्विजर्षभा:॥१३॥

‘Therefore, all of us, bulls among
Brahmanas, will perform a Yajfha for the
sake of the king’. (13)
रोचयन्ति स्म तं at रुद्रस्याराधनं प्रति।
संवर्तस्य तु राजर्षि: शिष्य: परपुरंजय:॥१४॥
