* ARANYAKANDA «

811

Canto XXXVII
Marica tries to dissuade Ravana from his purpose

Te UA aa aT: |
प्रत्युवाच महातेजा मारीचो राक्षसेश्वरम्॥ 8 I

Hearing the aforesaid proposal of
Ravana, the ruler of ogres, Marica, who
was possessed of exceptional glory and
was a master of expression, replied as
follows to the king of Raksasas : (1)

सुलभा: Tea राजन् Aad प्रियवादिन:।
अप्रियस्य च पथ्यस्य वक्ता श्रोता च दुर्लभ:॥ २॥
“People speaking agreeable words are
always easy to find. He, however, who
speaks words which, though unpalatable,
are yet wholesome, is difficult to find. (2)
न नूनं बुध्यसे wa महावीर्यगुणोन्नतम्।
अयुक्तचारश्चपलो महेन्द्रवरुणोपमम्॥ ३॥
“Having not employed spies to find out
the real state of affairs in your kingdom and
being fidgety yourself, you surely do not
know Rama, who is elevated in point of
excellences going together with exceptional
valour and is a compeer of the mighty Indra
and Varuna, the god of water. (3)

aft स्वस्ति भवेत् तात सर्वेषामपि रक्षसाम्।
aft रामो न संक्रुद्ध: कुर्याल्लोकानराक्षसान्॥४॥

“May all be well with all the ogres, O
dear Ravana! Let not the infuriated Rama
render the worlds empty of ogres. (4)

अपि a जीवितान्ताय नोत्पन्ना जनकात्मजा।
अपि सीतानिमित्तं च न wae व्यसनं महत्॥ ५॥
‘Would that Sita, the daughter of
Janaka, were not born to compass the end
of your life. Would that no great calamity
befell you on account of Sita. (5)

अपि त्वामीश्वरं प्राप्य कामवृत्तं निरङ्कुशम्।
न विनश्येत् पुरी लङ्का त्वया सह सराक्षसा॥६॥
‘Would that, having obtained you,

licentious and unbridled as you are, as its
master, the city of Lanka did not perish
alongwith you as also with the ogres inhabiting
it (6)
wage: armada fe दु:शील: पापमन्तरित:।
आत्मानं स्वजनं WS स राजा हन्ति दुर्मति:।॥ ७॥
“A king who is licentious and evil
minded, is of evil conduct and is counselled

by sinful men surely ruins himself, his own
kith and kin as well as his state. (7)

न च faa परित्यक्तो नामर्याद: कथंचन।

न लुब्धो न च दु:शीलो न च क्षत्रियपांसन:॥ ८॥
“Rama has not been disowned by his

father nor has he transgressed the bounds

of morality in anyway; nor is he greedy, nor

of evil conduct, nor again has he brought

disgrace to the Ksatriyas. (8)

न च धर्मगुणैर्हीन: कौसल्यानन्दवर्धन:।
न च तीक्ष्णो fe wart सर्वभूतहिते wae tl

“Nor is he devoid of piety and virtues,
enhancing as he does the joy of Kausalya,
his mother. Nor again is he severe to living
beings, devoted as he is to the good of all
created beings. (9)
वञ्चितं पितरं geet कैकेय्या सत्यवादिनम्।
करिष्यामीति धर्मात्मा dd: प्रव्रजितो वनम्॥१०॥

“Seeing his father, who always spoke
the truth, hoodwinked by Kaikeyi (his
stepmother), Rama, whose mind is set on
virtue, departed for the forest from Ayodhya,
saying ‘I will prove him to be truthful of
speech.’ (10)
कैकेय्या: प्रियकामार्थं पितुर्दशरथस्य च।
हित्वा राज्यं च भोगांश्च प्रविष्टो दण्डकावनम्॥ ११॥

“Renouncing the throne of Ayodhya as

well as the enjoyments of sense, he
penetrated into the forest of Dandaka in
