* SUNDARAKANDA +

यथा नगाग्रं बहुधातुचित्रं
यथा नभश्च ग्रहचन्द्रचित्रम्।
ददर्श युक्तीकृतचारुमेघ-
fat विमानं बहुरत्नचित्रम्॥८॥
Hanuman also beheld in that palace an
aerial car decked with numerous precious
stones and charming like a beautiful cloud
endowed with many hues by the rays of the
sun, which resembled a mountain-peak,
looking picturesque with numerous minerals,
and the firmament illumined by planets
including the moon. (8)

wat कृता पर्वतराजिपूर्णा
ven: pat वृक्षवितानपूर्णा:।
वृक्षा: कृता: पुष्पवितानपूर्णा:
Tt pdt केसरपत्रपूर्णम्॥९॥
The ground on which those intending
to board the aerial car stood had been
provided with rows of artificial hills of gems,
gold, etc., the latter in their turn were covered
with clusters of trees, also artificial, the
trees were clothed with bunches of artificial
flowers, while the flowers were made full
with filaments and petals. (9)

कृतानि AV च पाण्डुराणि

तथा सुपुष्पाण्यपि पुष्कराणि।
wa पद्मानि सकेसराणि

वनानि चित्राणि सरोवराणि॥ १०॥

White mansions had been erected in it
and likewise pools, with lovely flowers; again,
lotuses with filaments had been planted and
charming groves grown and lakes too had
been constructed. (10)

Goer नाम विराजमानं

रत्नप्रभाभिश्च विघूर्णमानम्।
वेश्मोत्तमानामपि चोच्चमानं

महाकपिस्तत्र महाविमानम्॥११॥

Thus, Hanuman, the great monkey, saw
there the vast aerial car bearing the name
of Puspaka, derived from the word ‘Puspa’
(a flower), capable of travelling long distances

65

and shining brightly with the rays of precious
stones, nay, enjoying an exalted rank among
the foremost of aerial cars, serving as the
residence of gods. (11)

कृताश्च वैदूर्यमया विहङ्गा
Baas तथा विहङ्गा: |
चित्राश्च नानावसुभिर्भुजङ्गा
जात्यानुरूपास्तुरगा: शुभाङ्गा:॥ १२॥
Birds of cat’s-eye gems as well as
those fashioned of silver and corals, nay,
lovely serpents made of various jewels and
also horses of beautiful limbs, resembling
steeds of a noble breed, figured there. (12)

प्रवालजाम्बूनदपुष्पपक्षा:

सलीलमावर्जितजिह्मपक्षा: ।
कामस्य साक्षादिव भान्ति पक्षा:

कृता fag: सुमुखा: सुपक्षा: ।। १३ ॥

Birds of charming beaks and lovely

wings had been carved, which bore on their
wings flowers of corals and sterling gold,
which had playfully contracted their slanting
wings and which looked like allies of Cupid
himself. (13)

नियुज्यमानाश्च गजा: सुहस्ता:
सकेसराश्चोत्पलपत्रहस्ता: ।

aya देवी च कृतासुहस्ता
लक्ष्मीस्तथा पद्मिनि पद्महस्ता॥ १४॥

In a lotus-pool within the Puspaka could
be seen artificial elephants with shapely
trunks and covered with filaments of lotuses
engaged in offering worship to Goddess
Laksmi (the goddess of fortune and Consort
of Lord Visnu) with lotus-petals held in their
trunks, and an image of Goddess Laksmi
too had been fashioned with four graceful
hands and holding a lotus in Her hand. (14)

हिमात्यये नगमिव चारुकन्दरम्॥ १५ I

Hanuman was thus filled with wonder on
