538

aspects* of the threefoldt duties with
reference to hostile kings, moves along the
right path. (7)

यथागमं च यो राजा wad च चिकोर्षति।

बुध्यते सचिवैर्बुद्ध्या सुहृदश्चानुपश्यति॥८॥

“A king who seeks to determine his
duty in accordance with the science of
polity and perceives his friends too alongwith
the ministers understands aright. (8)
धर्ममर्थं fe कामं वा सर्वान् वा रक्षसां पते।
भजेत पुरुष: काले त्रीणि sat वा पुन:॥९॥

“Indeed a man should pursue virtue,
worldly gain or sensuous pleasure or all
the three combined, or, again, two of them
at a time at the appointed time, O lord of
ogres ! (9)
fry चैतेषु यच्छेष्ठं श्रुत्वा तन्नावबुध्यते।
राजा वा राजमात्रो वा व्यर्थं TAT बहुश्रुतम्॥ Yo

“Extensive learning on the part of a
sovereign or a crown prince, who, having
heard of that viz., virtue, which is the foremost
of the above-named three, does not recognize
it as such, is in vain. (10)
उपप्रदानं सान्त्वं च भेदं काले च विक्रमम्।
योगं च रक्षसां ses तावुभौ च नयानयौ॥ ११॥
काले धर्मार्थकामान् य: Aa सचिवै: TE |
निषेवेतात्मवाँल्लोके न स व्यसनमाप्नुयात्॥१२॥

“The self-controlled king who, having

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA +

duly deliberated with his ministers, bestows
gifts, takes to (expedients of) conciliation
and, sowing dissension among the hostile
ranks, exhibits prowess, O prince of ogres,
or resorts to them (all) together and takes
recourse both to right action and the reverse
of it at the right time and pursues virtue,
worldly gain and sensuous pleasure at the
proper time never meets with disaster in the
world. (11-12)

हितानुबन्धमालोक्य कुर्यात् कार्यमिहात्मन:।
राजा सहार्थतत्त्वज्ञै: सचिवैर्बुद्धिजीविभि: ।। १३॥

“A king should take action only after
considering what is salutary in consequence
to him, in consultation with his ministers,
who make their living by their intelligence
and know the reality of things. (13)

अनभिज्ञाय शास्त्रार्थान् पुरुषा: पशुबुद्धय:।
प्रागल्भ्याद्वक्तुमिच्छन्ति मन्तिष्वभ्यन्तरीकृता: I १४॥
“People whose mental level is in no
way higher than that of beasts and yet
who have been allowed to take their seat
among the counsellors, desire all the same
to express their views through sheer
impudence, without fully knowing the import
of the scriptures. (14)
अर्थशास्त्रानभिज्ञानां विपुलां श्रियमिच्छताम्॥ १५ ॥

“The advice tendered by such people,

* The five aspects of an action are: (1) The method of initiating an action, (2) personality and material
to be worked upon, (3) The time and place of action, (4) provision against mischance, and (5) the chances

of success.

T The threefold duties of a king with reference to his enemies are: (1) conclusion of peace through

conciliation (साम), (2) acceptance of allegiance (समाश्रयण) through gift (4M), and (3) invasion (aM), as a
method of coercion (qs). The first of these courses of action is resorted to when one’s own strength and
that of the enemy are equally matched; the second is adopted when one’s own power is declining, while
the enemy is in a thriving state; and the third course is advised when one finds oneself in a flourishing
condition while the enemy is declining in power.

+ The scriptures lay down that virtue should be pursued in the morning, worldly gain in the after-
noon and sensuous pleasure at night. As an alternative, one is called upon to pursue virtue and worldly
gain in the morning, worldly gain and virtue in the afternoon and sensuous pleasure and worldly gain at
night. He who pursues sensuous pleasure alone throughout the day is the worst of all.
