* AYODHYAKANDA +

353

Wes: सर्ग:
Canto XVI

Seeking the presence of Sri Rama, Sumantra communicates to him the
Emperor's command asking Sumantra to bring Rama with him,
and departs. Mounting his gold chariot and accompanied by
Laksmana, who holds an umbrella over the former's head
and waves a pair of chowries in order to fan him,
and followed by a number of elephants and
horses, Sri Rama drives in state to see
DaSaratha, listening en route
to his own glory sung
by jubilant men
and women

स तदन्त:पुरद्वारं समतीत्य जनाकुलम्।

प्रविविक्तां da: कक्ष्यामाससाद पुराणवित्॥ १॥
प्रासकार्मुकबिभ्रद्धिर्युवभिर्मृष्टकुण्डलै: ।
अप्रमादिभिरेकाग्रै: स्वानुरक्तैरधिष्ठिताम्॥ २॥

Passing through the said outermost
gate of the gynaeceum, which was crowded
with men, Sumantra (who knew many old
legends) next reached the other inner gate,
which was very lonely and was guarded by
young men wielding a Prasa (a barbed
missile) and a bow and adorned with ear-
rings of burnished gold, unfailing in their
duty and single-minded of purpose and fully
devoted to their master. (1-2)

तत्र काषायिणो वृद्धान् वेत्रपाणीन् स्वलंकृतान्।
ददर्श विष्ठितान् द्वारि स्त्र्यध्यक्षान् सुसमाहितान्॥ ३॥

Here he saw stationed at the gate,
staff in hand, aged men clad in ochre-
coloured liveries and richly adorned, most
attentive to their duty and guarding the inmates
of the gynaeceum. (3)

a समीक्ष्य समायान्तं रामप्रियचिकीर्षव:।

सहसोत्पतिता: सर्वे ह्यासनेभ्य: ससम्भ्रमा:॥४॥
Perceiving him coming near they all

sprang up from their seats, full of awe,

eager as they all were to do loving service
to Sri Rama. (4)

तानुवाच विनीतात्मा सूतपुत्र: प्रदक्षिण:।
क्षिप्रमाख्यात रामाय सुमन्त्रो द्वारि तिष्ठति॥ ५॥
Sumantra, the son of a bard, who had
a disciplined mind and was highly expert in
deliberation etc., said to them, “Please say
at once to Prince Rama, Sumantra waits at
the door.” (5)

a राममुपसङ्गम्य od: प्रियचिकीर्षव:।
सहभार्याय रामाय क्षिप्रमेवाचचक्षिरे॥६॥
प्रतिवेदितमाज्ञाय सूतमभ्यन्तुं पितु:।
तत्रैवानाययामास राघव: प्रियकाम्यया॥७॥
Approaching Sri Rama, they speedily
reported the matter to the heir apparent,
who was closeted with his spouse. Receiving
the information, Sri Rama, a scion of Raghu,
caused the bard, who was a confidant of
his father (Emperor DaSaratha), to be brought
in the same room where he was closeted
with his spouse, prompted as he was with
a desire to please Sumantra. (6-7)
तं वैश्रवणसंकाशमुपविष्टं स्वलंकृतम्।
wast सूत: पर्यङ्के सौवर्णे सोत्तरच्छदे॥८॥
वराहरुधिराभेण शुचिना च सुगन्धिना।
अनुलिप्तं परार्घ्यन चन्दनेन परंतपम्॥ ९ ॥
स्थितया पार्श्वतश्चापि वालव्यजनहस्तया।
sad सीतया भूयश्चित्रया शशिनं यथा॥१०॥
