846

personages with splendour like that of fire,
versed in the Vedas and the Vedangas,
deeply learned in the various Sastras, arrived
at the mansion of Sri Rama and waited for
being announced by the door-keeper.
Agastya, the soul of righteousness and the
best of sages, told the door-keeper : “Inform
Rama that we, seers, have arrived.” Soon
after hearing the words of Agastya, the
door-keeper, well-versed in the laws of right
conduct, skilled in reading the minds of
people, of good conduct, clever and
courageous, rushed to the presence of Sri
Rama, the great soul. (2—10)

स रामं qa सहसा पूर्णचन्द्रसमद्युतिम्।
अगस्त्यं कथयामास सम्प्राप्तमृषिसत्तमम्॥११॥
Seeing Sri Rama, whose lustre was
equal to that of the full moon, he informed
him immediately of the arrival of sage Agastya
alongwith several other sages. (11)

श्रुत्वा प्राप्तान् मुनींस्तांस्तु बालसूर्यसमप्रभान्।

प्रत्युवाच ततो द्वा:स्थं प्रवेशय यथासुखम्॥ १२॥
Having heard of the arrival of those

sages, whose lustre was equal to that of the

rising sun, Sri Rama asked the door-keeper
to bring them in honourably. (12)

पाद्यार्घ्ययादिभिरानर्च गां निवेद्य च सादरम्॥१३॥
रामोऽभिवाद्य Wad आसनान्यादिदेश ह।
तेषु काञ्चनचित्रेषु महत्सु च वरेषु च॥१४॥
कुशान्तर्धानदत्तेषु मृगचर्मयुतेषु च।
यथार्हमुपविष्टास्ते आसनेष्वृषिपुङ्खवा: ॥ १५ ।।
रामेण कुशलं पृष्टा: सशिष्या: सपुरोगमा:।
महर्षयो वेदविदो we वचनमब्रुवन्।
कुशलं नो महाबाहो सर्वत्र रघुनन्दन॥१६॥
Seeing the arrival of the aforesaid
sages, Sri Rama stood up with folded hands,
piously did obeisance to them, respectfully
offered Padya and Arghya (water to wash
their feet and hands with), etc., as well as a
cow, and ordered that seats should be

« VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

arranged for them. When these best of sages
were seated, as befitted them, on the excellent
seats made of sacred grass, embroidered
with gold lace and covered with deerskin,
and when Sri Rama had made kind inquiries
regarding their own welfare and of their
disciples and elders, those eminent sages,
learned in the Vedas, spoke the following
words to Sri Rama: “O mighty-armed, delight
of the line of Raghu, we are quite well
everywhere. (183—16)
wat तु दिष्ट्या कुशलिनं पश्यामो हतशात्रवम्।

दिष्ट्या त्वया हतो राजन् रावणो लोकरावण: ॥ १७॥

“Fortunately we see you quite safe
after destroying your enemies; it was our
good fortune that Ravana, the tormentor of
the world, was killed by you. (17)

afe भार: स a राम रावण: पुत्रपौत्रवान्।
सधनुस्त्वं हि लोकांस्त्रीन् विजयेथा न संशय: ॥ १८ ॥

“To you, who could with your bow
conquer the three worlds without doubt,
Ravana, with his sons and grandsons, was
no problem. (18)

दिष्ट्या त्वया हतो WA रावणो राक्षसेश्वर:।
दिष्ट्या विजयिनं त्वाद्य पश्याम: Ge Attar १९॥
लक्ष्मणेन च धर्मात्मन् भ्रात्रा त्वद्भितकारिणा।
मातृभिर्थभ्रातृसहितं पश्यामोऽद्य at नृप॥ २०॥

“It is really great good luck that Ravana,
the king of the Raksasas, was killed by you
and we are able to see you victorious in the
company of Sita and of Laksmana, your
brother, who always promotes your interests;
now we see you also, O virtuous king, in
the company of your mothers and other
brothers today. (19-20)

दिष्ट्या प्रहस्तो विकटो विरूपाक्षो महोदर:।

अकम्पनश्च दुर्धर्षो निहतास्ते निशाचरा:॥२१॥
“The night-wanderers, Prahasta, Vikata,

Virupaksa, Mahodara, Akampana, the man

hard to quell, were all killed by you by good
fortune. (21)
