+ UTTARAKANDA +

happy and exclaimed as follows: ‘Very fine!
Very fine!!” and he said to Sri Sita of beautiful
hips and resembling a heavenly damsel, “O
Sita, Princess of Videha, now the time of
having a child has arrived. (30-31)
किमिच्छसि वरारोहे काम: किं क्रियतां तव।
स्मितं कृत्वा तु वैदेही WH वाक्यमथाब्रवीत्॥ ३२॥
तपोवनानि पुण्यानि द्रष्टुमिच्छामि राघव।
गङ्गातीरोपविष्टानामृषीणामुग्रतेजसाम् ॥ ३३ ॥
फलमूलाशिनां el पादमूलेषु वर्तितुम्।
एष मे परम: कामो यन्मूलफलभोजिनाम्॥ ३४॥
अप्येकरात्रिं काकुत्स्थ निवसेयं तपोवने।
तथेति च प्रतिज्ञातं रामेणाक्लिष्टकर्मणा।
विस्त्रब्धा sta वैदेहि श्वो गमिष्यस्यसंशयम्॥ ३५॥
“O lovely lady, which desire of yours
should be fulfilled.” Then, with a smile, Vaidehi
replied to Sri Rama in the following words:
“O Raghava ! | wish to visit the holy penance-

995

groves and to stay O Lord! at the feet
of sages, endowed with an overwhelming
effulgence living on the banks of the Ganga,
and living only on fruits and edible roots.
This is my greatest wish that | should stay
even for one night in the penance-grove of
those who live only on fruits and edible
roots, O scion of Kakutstha!” “Be it so’,
thus it was promised by Sri Rama, who was
unwearied in action. He further said, “O
Vaidehi, rest assured, you will undoubtedly
go tomorrow.” (832—35)

`एवमुक्त्वा तु काकुत्स्थो मैथिलीं जनकात्मजाम्।
मध्यकक्षान्तरं रामो निर्जगाम सुहृद्वृत:।॥ ३६॥

Having addressed these words to the
Princess of Mithila, the daughter of King
Janaka, Sri Rama, a scion of Kakutstha,
surrounded by friends went inside the middle
chamber. (36)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये उत्तरकाण्डे द्विचत्वारिंश: TW: il ४२॥

Thus ends Canto Forty-two in the Uttarakanda of the glorious Ramayana of Valmiki,
the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

Canto XLII

Bhadra apprises Sri Rama of the ugly remarks made by
the citizens about Sri Sita

तत्रोपविष्टं राजानमुपासन्ते विचक्षणा:।
कथानां बहुरूपाणां हास्यकारा: समन्तत:॥१॥
Wise and witty narrators used to sit
around the king reciting various kinds of
stories. (1)
विजयो मधुमत्तश्च काश्यपो Ase: Het: |
सुराजि: कालियो भद्रो दन्तवक्त्र: सुमागध:॥ २॥
Ud कथा बहुविधा: परिहाससमन्विता:।
कथयन्ति स्म संहृष्टा राघवस्य महात्मन:॥ ३॥
Vijaya, Madhumatta, Kasyapa, Mangala,
Kula, Suraji, Kaliya, Bhadra, Dantavaktra
and Sumagadha used to narrate with great

delight various kinds of humorous stories to
the high-souled Rama. (2-3)

तत: कथायां कस्यांचिद् wea: समभाषत।
का: कथा नगरे भद्र वर्तन्ते विषयेषु च॥४॥
After sometime, during the course of the
narration of a certain story, Sri Rama (a scion
of Raghu) enquired: “Bhadra ! What are the
talks of the town and the kingdom? (4)
मामाश्रितानि कान्याहु: पौरजानपदा SAT: |
किं च सीतां समाश्रित्य भरतं किं च लक्ष्मणम्॥ ५ ॥
किं नु शत्रुघ्नमुद्दिश्य कैकेयीं किं नु मातरम्।
वक्तव्यतां च राजानो at राज्ये व्रजन्ति ANE Il
