920

blossom, O scion of Kakutstha, you will
reach another woodland resembling the
Nandana grove in paradise, the trees in
which bear fruit during all the seasons and
drip honey all the time as is the case with
the territory of the Uttarakurus (one of the
nine divisions of the world). (83—7)

Wa च ऋतवस्तत्र at wart यथा।
फलभारनतास्तत्र महाविटपधारिण: ॥ ८ ॥
शोभन्ते सर्वतस्तत्र मेघपर्वतसंनिभा:।
तानारुह्याथवा भूमौ पातयित्वाथवा सुखम्॥९॥
फलान्यमृतकल्पानि लक्ष्मणस्ते प्रदास्यति।
चङ्क्रमन्तौ वरान् शैलान् शैलाच्छैलं SATS वनम्॥ १०॥
ad: पुष्करिणीं वीरौ पम्पां नाम गमिष्यथ:।
अशर्करामबिभ्रंशां समतीर्थामशैवलाम्॥११॥

“All the seasons are represented
simultaneously in that woodland as in the
Caitraratha grove (belonging to Kubera, the
deity presiding over the northern quarter).
Carrying large boughs, the trees in that
forest ever remain bent under the weight of
their fruits. Resembling clouds and mountains,
they spread their charm on all sides in that
forest. Climbing them or bending their
branches to the ground at ease, Laksmana
will offer you their nectar-like fruits. Ranging
over the loveliest mountains and wandering
from hill to hill and from wood to wood, O
valiant princes, you will then proceed to the
lotus-pond, Pampa by name, which is free
from gravel and has no slime etc., (which
may cause one treading on them to slip), is
provided with level banks and free from
duck-weeds. (8—11)

TH संजातवालूकां कमलोत्पलशोभिताम्।
wa हंसा: Wat: क्रौञ्चा: कुरराश्चैव राघव॥ LI
वल्गुस्वरा Pasta पम्पासलिलगोचरा:।
नोद्विजन्ते नरान् दृष्टवा वधस्याकोविदा: शुभा: UVB Ul
“Its rocky bed causes sand to be formed
on it and it remains ever adorned with lotuses
and lilies, O Rama ! Swimming on the water
of Pampa, lovely swans, ducks, Krauficas
and ospreys call in sweet tones there, O

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

scion of Raghu! Having not known
destruction before, they are not frightened
to see human beings. (12-13)

घृतपिण्डोपमान् स्थूलांस्तान् द्विजान् भक्षयिष्यथ:।
रोहितान् वक्रतुण्डांश्च नलमीनांश्च राघव॥१४॥
पम्पायामिषुभिर्मत्स्यांस्तत्र राम वरान् हतान्।
निस्त्वक्पक्षानयस्तप्तानकृशानैककण्टकान् ॥१५॥
Wa भक्त्या समायुक्तो लक्ष्मण: सम्प्रदास्यति।
YT AM खादतो मत्स्यान् पम्पाया: पुष्पसंचये tl १६ UI
पद्मगन्धि शिवं वारि सुखशीतमनामयम्।
उद्धृत्य स तदाक्लिष्टं रूप्यस्फटिकसंनिभम्॥ १७॥
अथ पुष्करपर्णेन लक्ष्मण: पाययिष्यति।
स्थूलान् गिरिगुहाशय्यान् वानरान् वनचारिण: ॥ १८ ॥
सायाह्ने विचरन् राम दर्शयिष्यति लक्ष्मण:।
अपां लोभादुपाव्रत्तान् वृषभानिव नर्दत:॥१९॥
स्थूलान् पीतांश्च पम्पायां द्रक्ष्यसि त्वं नरोत्तम।
सायाह्ने विचरन् wa विटपी माल्यधारिण:॥ २०॥
शिवोदकं च पम्पायां दृष्ट्वा शोकं विहास्यसि।
सुमनोभिश्चितास्तत्र तिलका नक्कमालका:॥ २१॥

उत्पलानि च फुल्लानि पङ्कजानि च राघव।
न तानि कश्चिन्माल्यानि तत्रारोपयिता नर:॥ २२॥

“You two should feed there on the edge
of the said Pampa, O scion of Raghu, those
plump birds as well as the beautiful fishes
well-known by the names of Rohita,
Vakratunda and Nalamina on fresh edibles
(in the form of bulbs and roots) stripped of
their rind and other coverings with the heads
of your arrows with not a single thorn left in
them and looking like balls of clarified butter
and roasted on the steel heads of those very
arrows, which Laksmana, who is richly
adorned with devotion, will lovingly offer you.
Then, taking out in the leaves (formed into a
hollow) of a lotus the delightful, pleasantly
cool, wholesome and limpid water of the
Pampa, fragrant with the scent of lotuses
and sparkling like silver and crystal, the said
Laksmana will forthwith give it to you to drink
while you are busy feeding again and again
those fishes in the midst of the collection of
flowers in the Pampa. Rambling at dusk, O
