746

प्रचोदयामास हयान् स सारथि:।
a राक्षसेन्द्रस्य ततो महारथ:
क्षणेन रामस्य रणाग्रतोऽभवत्॥ २७॥

Urged on by the command of Ravana,

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA +

the aforesaid charioteer then immediately
drove the horses forward and that huge
chariot of Ravana (the ruler of ogres)
thereupon stood in an instant before Sri
Rama on the battlefield. (27)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये FERS चतुरधिकशततम: सर्ग: Il १०४॥

Thus ends Canto One hundred and four in the Yuddhakanda of the glorious
Ramayana of Valmiki, the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

पञ्चाधिकशततम: eat:
Canto CV

Sage Agastya advises Sri Rama to recite the ‘Aditya-Hrdaya’, a
collection of verses in praise of the sun-god,
with a view to gaining victory

ततो युद्धपरिश्रान्तं समरे चिन्तया स्थितम्।
रावणं चाग्रतो दृष्टवा युद्धाय समुपस्थितम्॥१॥
दैवतैश्च समागम्य द्रष्टुमभ्यागतो रणम्।
उपगम्याब्रवीद् राममगस्त्यो भगवांस्तदा॥ २॥

Beholding Sri Rama, standing absorbed
in thought on the battlefield, exhausted
(as he was) by the fight, and Ravana facing
him, duly prepared for an encounter, and
approaching Sri Rama, the glorious sage
Agastya, who had come in the company of
gods to witness the epoch-making encounter
of Sri Rama with Ravana now spoke as
follows: (1-2)

TH WH महाबाहो AO गुह्यं सनातनम्।
at सर्वानरीन् वत्स समरे विजयिष्यसे॥ ३॥
आदित्यहृदयं पुण्यं सर्वशत्रुविनाशनम्।
wae wa नित्यमक्षयं परमं शिवम्॥४॥
सर्वमङ्गलमाङ्गल्यं सर्वपापप्रणाशनम्।
चिन्ताशोकप्रशमनमायुर्वर्धनमुत्तमम् Tea
“Rama, O mighty-armed Sri Rama,
hearken to the following eternal secret—in
the form of a holy, eternal, immortal and

supremely blessed and excellent encomium,
entitled “Aditya-Hrdaya”, which is intended
to propitiate Brahma, installed in the heart of
the orb of the sun, the blessing of all
blessings, by means of which, my child,
you will be able to conquer once for all your
adversaries on the battlefield, and which is
calculated to bring victory, root out all sins,
allay all anxiety and grief once for all and
prolong life. (83—5)
teat = समुद्यन्तं देवासुरनमस्कृतम्।
पूजयस्व विवस्वन्तं भास्करं भुवनेश्वरम्॥६॥
“Worship you the sun-god, the ruler of
the worlds, who is crowned with rays, nay,
who appears at the horizon everyday without
fail, who is greeted by gods and demons
alike and brings light to the world. (6)

सर्वदेवात्मको ह्येष तेजस्वी रश्मिभावन:।
WH देवासुरगणांल्लोकान् पाति गभस्तिभि: ॥ ७॥

“Indeed, he is the embodiment of all
gods and full of glory and creates and
sustains the gods and the demons as well
as their worlds by his rays. (7)
