986

दर्पश्च व्यवसायश्च यादृशस्तस्य Ada: |
निनादस्य च संरम्भो नैतदल्पं fe कारणम्॥१२॥

“There is no paltry ground for the insolent
way in which he is roaring and the kind of
determination which is evinced by him as
also for the excited way in which he is
roaring. (12)
Werte wt Pita तमिहागतम्।
अवष्टब्धसहायश्च यमाश्रित्यैष गर्जति॥१३॥

“| do not consider the aforesaid Sugriva
to have come here without an ally. He has
surely fallen back upon some ally, depending
on whom he roars. (13)

wear निपुणश्चैव बुद्धिमांश्चैव वानर:।
नापरीक्षितवीर्येण सुग्रीव: सख्यमेष्यति॥१४॥
“Moreover, the monkey, Sugriva, is
clever by his very nature and intelligent
too. Sugriva, | am sure, will not enter into
friendship with one whose valour has not
been tested. (14)
पूर्वमेव मया वीर st कथयतो वच:।
अङ्गदस्य कुमारस्य वक्ष्याम्यद्य fed वच:॥ eau
“| shall communicate to you today the
useful report which has already been heard
by me from the mouth of Prince Angada
speaking (on one occasion), O gallant one !

(15)
अङ्गदस्तु कुमारोऽयं वनान्तमुपनिर्गत:।
प्रवृत्तिस्तेन कथिता चारैरासीन्निवेदिता॥१६॥

“The aforesaid Prince Angada for his part
had once gone to the interior of the forest.
The following news which was broken to him
by spies, was conveyed by him to me: (16)

अयोध्याधिपते:; oat शूरौ समरदुर्जयौ।
इक्ष्वाकूणां Hot जातौ प्रथितौ रामलक्ष्मणौ॥ १७॥
सुग्रीवप्रियकामार्थं प्राप्तौ at दुरासदौ।
स ते भ्रातुर्हि विख्यात: सहायो रणकर्मणि।॥ १८॥
राम: परबलामर्दी युगान्ताग्निरिवोत्थित:।
Parga: साधूनामापन्नानां परा गति:॥१९॥

“Two valiant sons of the emperor of

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

Ayodhya, Rama and Laksmana by name,
born in the line of the Ikswakus and difficult
even to approach, much more to conquer in
battle, who were already on a journey, arrived
there for fulfilling the cherished object of
Sugriva’s desire. Indeed he who is the
associate of your younger brother, Sugriva,
in fighting is widely known by the name of
Rama. He is capable of crushing the enemy’s
ranks and resembles the fire that flared up
at the end of the world cycle. He is a tree
affording shelter to all virtuous souls and
the ultimate resort of those in the grip of a
calamity. (17-19)
आर्तानां संश्रयश्चैव यशसश्चैकभाजनम्।
ज्ञानविज्ञानसम्पन्नो fest fra: पितु:॥ २०॥
“He is the refuge of the afflicted and
the unique repository of glory. Richly endowed
with worldly and spiritual wisdom, he is

fully devoted to the command of his father.
(20)

धातूनामिव शैलेन्द्रो गुणानामाकरो महान्।
तत् क्षमो न विरोधस्ते Ge तेन महात्मना॥ २१॥
दुर्जयेनाप्रमेयेण रामेण रणकर्मसु।
शूर वक्ष्यामि ते किंचिन्न चेच्छाम्यभ्यसूयितुम्॥ २२॥

“As the Himalaya mountain (the king of
mountains) is a large storehouse of minerals,
he is a great repertory of virtues. Therefore,
your antagonism is not desirable with that
high-souled Rama, who is difficult to excel
in martial exploits and is immeasurable in
greatness. | shall tell you something for
your good, O heroic king, even though | do
not wish to find fault with you. (21-22)

श्रूयतां क्रियतां wa तव वक्ष्यामि यद्भितम्।
यौवराज्येन सुग्रीवं तूर्णं साध्वभिषेचय॥ २३॥

“Let the salutary advice that | am going
to give you be heeded and acted upon:
pray, invest Sugriva speedily with the office
of Prince Regent with due ceremony. (23)

fang मा कृथा वीर भ्रात्रा राजन् यवीयसा।
अहं fe a क्षमं मन्ये तेन WATT सौहृदम्॥ २४॥
