* BALAKANDA +

in reverence, all the gods prayed to Him as
follows : (18)

त्वां नियोक्ष्यामहे विष्णो लोकानां हितकाम्यया ।
राज्ञो दशरथस्य त्वमयोध्याधिपतेर्विभो॥१९॥
धर्मज्ञस्य वदान्यस्य महर्षिसमतेजस:।
अस्य भार्यासु तिसृषु ह्रीश्रीकीर्त्यपमासु च॥ २०॥
विष्णो पुत्रत्वमागच्छ कृत्वाऽऽत्मानं चतुर्विधम्।
तत्र त्वं मानुषो भ॰ऽच्।ग्प्रबृद्धंलोक्काटकम्।।२१॥
अवध्यं दैवतैर्विष्णो war जहि रावणम्।
a fe देवान्सगन्धर्वान् सिद्धांश्च ऋषिसत्तमान्॥ २२॥
राक्षसो रावणो wat वीर्योद्रेकेण बाधते।
II ततस्तेन गन्धर्वाप्सरसस्तथा॥ २३॥
क्रोडन्तो नन्दनवने रौद्रेण विनिपातिता:।
वधार्थं वयमायातास्तस्य वै मुनिभि: Pen २४॥
सिद्धगन्धर्वयक्षाश्च ततस्त्वां शरणं गता:।
त्वं गति: परमा ta सर्वेषां A: परंतप॥ २५॥
“With intent to ensure the good of the
worlds, O Visnu, we are going to lay a
burden on you. Yourself taking the form of
four personalities, O all-pervading Lord,
play You the role of a son to the munificent
King DaSaratha, the ruler of Ayodhya—who
knows what is right and is possessed of
splendour equivalent to that of great Rsis—
through his three wives (Kausalya, Sumitra
and Kaikeyl), who are akin to Hri, Sri and
Kirti* (daughters of Daksa). Appearing in a
human semblance through them, O Visnu,
pray, make short work, in an encounter, of
Ravana, the scourge of the world, who has
grown very strong and is incapable of being
killed by other gods. Through excess of
prowess that fool of a Ravana, who has
developed the disposition of an ogre, is
actually oppressing the gods including the
Gandharvas, the Siddhas as well as the
noblest of Rsis. Nay, because of such a
disposition, Rsis as well as Gandharvas
and Apsaras (celestial nymphs) sporting
in the Nandana Vana (the pleasure-garden
of Indra) were knocked down from heaven

113

by that fierce ogre. For getting rid of him,
we as well as Siddhas, Gandharvas and
Yaksas have come here alongwith hermits
and have sought You as our protector for
the same purpose, O lord! You are the
supreme resort of us all, O Chastiser of
foes ! (19—25)

ae CATT TOE eile TA: Hel
एवं स्तुतस्तु देवेशो विष्णुस्तरिदशपुंगव:॥ २६॥

पितामहपुरोगांस्तान् सर्वलोकनमस्कृत:।

अब्रवीत् त्रिदशान् सर्वान् समेतान् धर्मसंहितान् ॥ २७॥

“Therefore, resolve to descend into the
mortal plane for the destruction of the
enemies of gods.” Thus extolled by the
gods and others, Lord Visnu, the Ruler of
gods and the foremost among them, the
adored of all the worlds, addressed (as
follows) the assembled gods, headed by
Brahma (the progenitor of the entire creation),
who were all given to piety : (26-27)

भयं त्यजत ws at हितार्थं afer रावणम्।
सपुत्रपौत्रं सामात्यं समन्तिज्ञातिबान्धवम्॥ २८॥
दशवर्षसहस्राणि दशवर्षशतानि च॥२९॥
वत्स्यामि मानुषे लोके पालयन् पृथिवीमिमाम्।
एवं दत्त्वा at cal देवानां विष्णुरात्मवान्॥ ३०॥
मानुष्ये चिन्तयामास जन्मभूमिमथात्मन:।
Aa: पद्मपलाशाक्ष: कृत्वाऽऽत्मानं चतुर्विधम्॥ ३१॥
ततो देवर्षिगन्धर्वा: सरुद्रा: साप्सरोगणा:।
स्तुतिभिर्दिव्यरूपाभिस्तुष्टुवुर्मधुसूदनम् ॥३२॥

“Give up all fear. May good betide
you! Despatching on the field of battle in
your interests the cruel and formidable
Ravana—who is difficult to overpower and
is the terror of gods and Rsis—alongwith
his sons and grandsons, including his
ministers and counsellors, kinsmen and
relations, | shall remain on the mortal plane
ruling over this globe for eleven thousand

* The female deities presiding over modesty, fortune and fame.
