« Procedure of reading the full Valmiki-Ramayana in nine days « 17

श्रीरामपादद्वयपादुकान्त-
संसक्तचित्तं कमलायताक्षम्।
vat प्रसन्नवदनं कमलावदात-

शत्रुघ्नयुक्तमनिशं भरतं नमामि॥

“| ever bow down to Bharata, who has his mind fixed on the edges of the pair of
wooden sandals used by Sri Rama, who has eyes large as a pair of lotuses, who is dark-
brown of complexion and wears a cheerful aspect and is accompanied by Satrughna, who
is white as a lotus.”

भरताय नमस्तस्मै सारज्ञाय महात्मने।
तापसायातिशान्ताय शत्रुघ्सहिताय च॥

“Hail to that high-souled ascetic, Bharata, who knows what is essential, is extremely
quiet and is (ever) accompanied by Satrughna.” One should offer worship to Bharata with
the usual five articles of worship (viz.,) sandal-paste, flowers, incense, light and food)
while uttering the foregoing Mantra. A seeker of riches may read the Balakanda while
uttering the foregoing Mantra before as well as at the end of each single verse of this
book.

THE VINIYOGA AND RSYADINYASA ETC.,
PERTAINING TO THE ARANYAKA NDA

ॐ अस्य श्रीमदरण्यकाण्डमहामन्त्रस्य भगवानृषि: | अनुष्टुप् छन्द: | महेन्द्रो देवता । ईं बीजम्। नम: शक्ति: ।
इन्द्रायेति कीलकम्। इन्द्रप्रसादसिद्ध्यर्थे अरण्यकाण्डपारायणे we विनियोग:। ॐ भगवदरूषये नम: शिरसि। ॐ
अनुष्टप्छन्दसे नम: मुखे। ॐ महेन्द्रदेवतायै नम: हृदि। so ईं Shara नम: Wel So नम:शक्तये नम: पादयो: | ॐ
इन्द्राय कीलकाय AA: Tas |

KARANYASA
ॐ सहस्त्रनयनाय अङ्गुष्ठाभ्यां AA: | ॐ देवाय तर्जनीभ्यां नम:। ॐ सर्वदेवनमस्कृताय मध्यमाभ्यां नम:।
ॐ दिव्यवज्रधराय अनामिकाभ्यां AA: | ॐ महेन्द्राय कनिष्ठिकाभ्यां AA: | So शचीपतये करतलकरपृष्ठाभ्यां AA: |
After going through the Hrdayadinyasa with this very Mantra one should meditate
according to the following verse:

rae [सुरेशवन्दं
सर्वार्तिहन्तारमचिन्त्यशक्तिम् ।
श्रीरामसेवानिरतं Herd

at महेन्द्रं धृतवज्रमीडन्यम्॥

“| salute the exalted and mighty Indra (the lord of paradise) of inconceivable energy,
the spouse of Saci and the dispeller of all afflictions, who is worth extolling and worthy
of adoration for all the rulers of gods, who is (ever) devoted to the service of Sri Rama
and wields the thunderbolt.” Then, while uttering the following Mantra, one should offer
worship to Indra and may read the Aranyakanda uttering it before as well as the end of
every single verse of this book for recovery of lost property and other such purposes:

. देवं दे ।
दिव्यवज्रधरं at wes च शाचीपतिम्॥

“| salute the mighty god, Indra, the spouse of Sacl, who is endowed with a thousand
eyes, is adored by all gods and wields the heavenly thunderbolt.”
