* BALAKANDA +

141

Canto XXV

Questioned by Sri Rama, Viswamitra tells him more about the birth of Tataka,
of her marriage with Sunda, as well as about the birth of Marica as a result
of their union, and how the latter was subjected to an execration by sage
Agastya, and finally urges Sri Rama to despatch the ogress

अथ तस्याप्रमेयस्य मुनेर्वचनमुत्तमम्।
Ta पुरुषशार्दूल: प्रत्युवाच wat गिरम्॥१॥

Hearing the noble utterance of the
celebrated ViSwamitra, possessed _ of
immeasurable glory, Sri Rama, a tiger among
men, forthwith asked the following sweetly-
worded question : (1)

अल्पवीर्या यदा यक्षी श्रूयते मुनिपुंगव।
कथं नागसहस्रस्य धारयत्यबला AHN २॥

“When Tataka, the Yaksa woman, is
known, from what you say, to be a female
(proverbially lacking in strength), O jewel
among hermits, she must presumably be of
poor might. How then does she wield the
strength of a thousand elephants?” (2)
इत्युक्तं वचनं श्रुत्वा राघवस्यामितौजस:।
हर्षयञ्श्लक्ष्णया वाचा सलक्ष्मणमरिंदमम्॥ ३॥
विश्चामित्रोऽब्रवीद् वाक्यं श्रृणु येन बलोत्कटा।
वरदानकृतं dd धारयत्यबला बलम्॥४॥

Hearing the aforesaid question of Sri
Rama, a scion of Raghu, possessed of
infinite strength, Viswamitra addressed the
following reply to the former, who was capable
of chastising the enemy, gladdening him
alongwith Laksmana by his bland speech :
“Hear the reason why she is richly endowed
with strength. Though a frail woman by
birth, she wields extraordinary strength
conferred by a boon granted in her favour.

(3-4)
पूर्वमासीन्महायक्ष: सुकेतुर्नाम वीर्यवान्।
अनपत्य: शुभाचार: स च तेपे महत्तप:॥५॥

पितामहस्तु सुप्रीतस्तस्य यक्षपतेस्तदा।

कन्यारत्नं ददौ Wa deat am नामत:॥६॥

“Formerly there was a great and powerful
Yaksa, Suketu by name, who was issuless,
though of virtuous conduct. He, therefore,
practised great austerities with intent to
please Brahma. Highly gratified even in the
course of his austerities, Brahma (the
progenitor of the entire creation, which sprang
from his mind-born sons) gave him an
excellent daughter, Tataka by name : so the
tradition goes. (5-6)
ददौ नागसहस्रस्य बलं चास्या: frame: |
न त्वेव Ut यक्षाय ददौ चासौ महायशा:॥७॥

“Brahma further vouchsafed to her the
strength of a thousand elephants. The
illustrious Brahma, however, did not
deliberately grant a son to the Yaksa
(obviously thinking that a son of the kind
desired by him would prove a great scourge
to the world). (7)
तां तु wet विवर्धन्तीं रूपयौवनशालिनीम्।
जम्भपुत्राय Wart ददौ wat यशस्विनीम्॥८॥

“Suketu for his part gave away as wife
that glorious girl, rich in comeliness of form
and exuberance of youth, even while she
was growing apace to womanhood, to
Sunda, son of Jambha, who, being a demon,
was qualified to marry a Yaksa girl, both
being demigods. (8)

कस्यचित् TAM कालस्य यक्षी पुत्रं व्यजायत।
मारीचं नाम दुर्धर्षं य: शापाद् राक्षसोऽभवत्॥ ९॥
“Now after some time Tataka, the
Yaksa girl, actually gave birth to a son,
Marica by name, who was hard to overcome
and who turned to be an ogre (living on raw
flesh) under a curse. (9)
