* BALAKANDA +

263

Canto LXXI

Recounting his own pedigree, Janaka offers the hand of his
two daughters, Sita and Urmila, to Sri Rama
and Laksmana, respectively

एवं ब्रुवाणं जनक: प्रत्युवाच कृताञ्जलि:।
श्रोतुमर्हसि us a pet a: परिकीर्तितम्॥१॥
प्रदाने fe मुनिश्रेष्ठं कुलं निरवशेषत:।
apnea कुलजातेन तन्निबोधं महामते॥ २॥

To Vasistha, who was speaking as
aforesaid, Janaka with folded hands replied
as follows: “Be pleased to hear our
genealogy, which is going to be recounted
by us. May God bless you.” On the eve
of giving away one’s daughter to a
bridegroom, O jewel among sages, one’s
pedigree needs must be exhaustively recited
by one coming of a respectable family.
Therefore, hear my pedigree as is being
narrated by us, O Brahmana of great
wisdom ! (1-2)

राजाभूत् fry लोकेषु fasta: स्वेन कर्मणा।
ff: परमधर्मात्मा सर्वसत्त्ववतां वर:॥३॥

“There was a most pious-minded king,
Nimi by name, who was the foremost of all
powerful men and celebrated in all the three
worlds for his deeds. (3)

तस्य पुत्रो मिथिर्नाम जनको मिथिपुत्रक:।
प्रथमो जनको राजा जनकादप्युदावसु:॥४॥

“His son was Mithi by name; Mithi’s
son was Janaka, the first ruler bearing the
title of Janaka. From Janaka, again, sprang
up Udavasu. (4)
उदावसोस्तु धर्मात्मा जातो a नन्दिवर्धन:।
नन्दिवर्धसुत: शूर: सुकेतुर्नाम नामत:॥५॥

“From Udavasu indeed sprang up
Nandivardhana, whose mind was really given

to piety. Nandivardhana’s gallant son, as is
well known, was Suketu by name. (5)

Geant धर्मात्मा देवरातो महाबल:।
देवरातस्य राजर्षेर्वृहद्रथं इति स्मृत:॥६॥
“From Suketu, again, sprang up the
pious-minded and very mighty Devarata;
the son of the royal sage Devarata was
known as Brhadratha. (6)

बृहद्रथस्य शूरोऽभून्महावीर: प्रतापवान्।
महावीरस्य धृतिमान् सुधृति: सत्यविक्रम:॥ ७॥
“The gallant and glorious Mahavira was
the son of Brhadratha. Mahavira’s steadfast
and truly valiant son was Sudhrti. (7)

ayaa धर्मात्मा धृष्टकेतु: सुधार्मिक:।
धृष्ट केतोश्च राजर्षेर्हर्यश्व sta विश्रुत:॥८॥
“Sudhrti’s son, again, was the highly
pious Dhrstaketu, whose mind was given to
righteousness; and the son of the royal

sage Dhrstaketu was widely known by the
name of Haryaswa. (8)

हर्यश्वस्य We: Yat मरो: Ua: प्रतीन्धक:।
प्रतीन्धकस्य धर्मात्मा राजा कोर्तिरथ: a ue il
“HaryaSwa’s son was Maru, Maru’s

son was Pratindhaka and Pratindhaka’s
pious-minded son was King Kirtiratha. (9)

Ua: कीर्तिरथस्यापि देवमीढ इति स्मृत:।
देवमीढस्य विबुधो विबुधस्य महीध्रक:॥१०॥
“Kirtiratha’s son, again, was known as

Devamidha. Devamidha’s son was Vibudha
and Vibudha’s Mahidhraka. (10)

महीध्रकसुतो राजा कोर्तिरातो महाबल:।
कोर्तिरातस्य राजर्षेर्महारोमा व्यजायत॥११॥
“Mahidhraka’s son was very mighty
King Kirtirata. Maharoma was born as the
son of the royal sage Kirtirata. (11)
