+ UTTARAKANDA +

1023

सप्तपञ्चाश: सर्ग:
Canto LVIT

Sage Vasistha is re-incarnated and king Nimi resides in the
eye-lids of living beings

at श्रुत्वा दिव्यसंकाशां कथामद्भुतदर्शनाम्।
लक्ष्मण: परमप्रीतो Wet वाक्यमब्रवीत्॥१॥
On hearing that charming and wonderful
story, Laksmana became very happy and
addressed the following words to Sri Rama,
a descendant of Raghu: (1)

निक्षिप्तदेहौ काकुत्स्थ कथं तौ द्विजपार्थिवौ।
पुनर्देहेन संयोगं जग्मतुर्देवसम्मतौ Ut २॥
“O Descendant of Kakutstha! How is it
that the Brahmana Vasistha and the king
Nimi, who were revered even by the gods,
again became embodied after having left
their body?” (2)

तस्य तद् भाषितं श्रुत्वा राम: सत्यपराक्रम:।
तां Hot कथयामास वसिष्ठस्य महात्मन:॥ ३॥
; On hearing the speech of Laksmana,
Sri Rama, who was endowed with true valour,
narrated the story of the high-souled Vasistha.
(3)

a: स कुम्भो रघुश्रेष्ठं तेज:पूर्णो महात्मनो: |
तस्मिस्तेजोमयौ विप्रौ सम्भूताव्रषिसत्तमौ॥४॥

“O best among the Raghus! the two
brilliant Brahmanas were born from the pitcher
which was filled with the lustre (semen) of
those two high-souled ones (viz., Mitra and
Varuna). They were the most eminent sages.

(4)
पूर्वं समभवत् aa अगस्त्यो भगवानृषि:।
नाहं सुतस्तवेत्युक्त्वा ft तस्मादपाक्रमत्॥५॥

“Out of pitcher the first to be born was

the illustrious sage Agastya, । am not only
your son,’ thus addressing Mitra he left. (5)

akg तेजस्तु मित्रस्य उर्वश्या: पूर्वमाहितम्।
तस्मिन् समभवत् कुम्भे तत्तेजो यत्र वारुणम्॥ ६॥

‘It was Mitra’s lustre which was

deposited first in the presence of Urvasi.
There in that pitcher Varuna’s lustre was
also added to it. (6)

कस्यचित् त्वथ कालस्य मित्रावरुणसम्भव:।
वसिष्ठस्तेजसा युक्तो जज्ञे इक्ष्वाकुदैवतम्॥७॥

“After sometime from the luster of
Mitra and Varuna was born the majestic
Vasistha, who became the family-priest of
the Iksvakus. (7)

तमिक्ष्वाकुर्महातेजा जातमात्रमनिन्दितम्।
aa पुरोधसं सौम्य वंशस्यास्य हिताय न:॥८॥
“O gentle one! No sooner was the
blameless Vasistha born than the most
brilliant Iksvaku chose him as priest for the
welfare of our (the line of Sun or Raghus)
family. (8)

एवं त्वपूर्वदेहस्य वसिष्ठस्य महात्मन:।
कथितो Fria: सौम्य Fa: श्रृणु यथाभवत्॥९॥

“O gentle one! Thus | have narrated
the account of the birth of the high-souled
Vasistha embodied anew. Now listen to what
happened to Nimi. (9)

gear face राजानमृषय: Wd Wa al

तं च a याजयामासुर्यज्ञदीक्षां मनीषिण:॥१०॥
“On seeing that the king was dead, all

the wise sages took the initiation for the

sacrifice and concluded the sacrifice. (10)

तं च देहं नरेन्द्रस्य रक्षन्ति स्म द्विजोत्तमा:।
गन्धैर्माल्यैश्च aes पौरभृत्यसमन्विता:॥११॥

“The eminent Brahmanas or Brahmarsis
alongwith the citizens and_ servants
preserved the body of the king, together
with perfumes, garlands and garments. (11)

ततो at समाप्ते तु भृगुस्तत्रेदमब्रवीत्।
आनयिष्यामि ते चेतस्तुष्टोऽस्मि तव पार्थिव॥ १२॥
