232

sages, all the observations they made in an
angry tone. How would gods, they said,
partake of the offerings and how would Rsis
eat the remains of those offerings in the
sacrificial assembly of a sacrificer whose
sacrifice is being conducted by a Ksatriya,
much less of a Candala? And how, on
eating the food offered by a Candala, would
the high-souled Brahmanas patronized by
Viswamitra attain to heaven after death?
Such harshness of language did all the
sons of Vasistha alongwith Mahodaya use
with bloodshot eyes, O tiger among sages !”
Hearing the aforesaid comment of all those
sages, ViSwamitra (a jewel among ascetics)
indignantly spoke as follows with eyes blood-
red through anger : “Since they speak ill of
me, even though engaged in severe
austerities and as such irreproachable, the
evil-minded fellows will be reduced to ashes,
and conveyed to the abode of Yama (son of
the sun-god) this very day by the noose of
Kala, the god of death: there is no doubt
about it. (10—18)

सप्तजातिशतान्येव मृतपा: सम्भवन्तु ते।
शवमांसनियताहारा मुष्टिका नाम निर्घृणा:॥१९॥
विकृताश्च विरूपाश्च लोकाननुचरन्तिमान्।
महोदयश्च दुर्बुद्धिर्मामदूष्यं ह्यदूषयत्॥२०॥

« VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

दूषित: सर्वलोकेषु निषादत्वं गमिष्यति।
प्राणातिपातनिरतो निरनुक्रोशतां गत:॥ २१॥
दीर्घकालं wa क्रोधाद् दुर्गतिं वर्तयिष्यति।
एतावदुक्त्वा वचनं विश्वामित्रो महातपा:।
विरराम महातेजा ऋषिमध्ये महामुनि:॥ २२॥

“Let them be born for seven hundred
successive births as ruthless Mustikas (a
sub-caste of the Candalas, now known as
Domas) who take away the shroud of dead
bodies and feed as a rule on the flesh of
dogs, and let them roam about these
terrestrial regions following loathsome
pursuits and misshapen in form. The
misguided Mahodaya, too, since he has
spoken ill of me, though irreproachable, shall
be condemned in all the lands and reduced
to the state of a Nisada (an outcaste race
born of a Brahmana through a Sudra woman
and), remaining engaged in destroying the
lives of others and thereby acquiring a
merciless disposition, shall drag a wretched
existence for a long time because of my
wrath.” Uttering this long curse in the midst
of Rsis assembled for the sacrifice, the
highly glorious and eminent sage and
great ascetic Viswamitra stopped speaking.

(19—22)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये बालकाण्डे
एकोनषष्टितम: सर्ग: ॥ ५९ ॥

Thus ends Canto Fifty-nine in the Balakanda of the glorious Ramayana of Valmiki,
the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

