900

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

षट्षष्टितम: सर्ग:
Canto LXVI
Laksmana seeks to inspire Sri Rama with courage

a तथा शोकसंतप्तं विलपन्तमनाथवत्।
मोहेन महता ah परिद्यूनमचेतसम्॥१॥
ad: सौमित्रिराश्वस्य मुहूर्तादिव लक्ष्मण:।
TH सम्बोधयामास चरणौ चाभिपीडयन्॥ २॥

Having comforted awhile Sri Rama,
who was tormented as aforesaid with grief
and was wailing like one without a protector,
nay, who was seized with great infatuation
and was feeling sorrowful and sick at heart,
Laksmana, son of Sumitra, exhorted him in
the following words, lovingly pressing his
feet: (1-2)

महता तपसा चापि महता चापि कर्मणा।
राज्ञा दशरथेनासील्लब्धोऽमृतमिवामरै: ।। ३ ॥
“You were obtained by King DaSaratha
(our father) by means of great austerities in
the form of religious vows and fasts and
great pious acts such as the performance
of a Putresti sacrifice, as nectar was obtained
by gods. (3)

wt da गुणैर्बद्धस्त्वद्वियोगान्महीपति:।
राजा देवत्वमापन्नो भरतस्य यथा श्रुतम्॥४॥

“The king, who was the ruler of the
entire globe, and was bound to this world by
your virtues alone, attained the heavenly
state due to separation from you, as was
heard from the lips of Bharata. (4)

यदि दु:खमिदं wet arpa न सहिष्यसे।
प्राकृतश्चाल्पसत्त्वश्च इतर: क: सहिष्यति॥ ५॥
“If, O scion of Kakutstha, you are not
able to endure this suffering that has
befallen you, what other man, who is of the
common run and of meagre strength, will
bear it? (5)
आश्वसिहि नरश्रेष्ठं प्राणिन: कस्य नापद:।
संस्पृशन्त्यग्निवद् राजन् क्षणेन व्यपयान्ति च॥ ६॥

Take heart, O flower of men ! Whatliving
being do calamities not visit? They impinge
on aman like fire and recede in an instant.(6)

a:Ract fe भवाँल्लोकांस्तेजसा afe धक्ष्यते।
आर्ता: प्रजा नरव्याघ्र क्व नु यास्यन्ति निर्वृतिम्॥ 9

“If, when afflicted, you actually consume
all the worlds with your heroic lustre, where
will, O tiger among men, created beings in
distress get relief? (7)

लोकस्वभाव एवैष ययातिर्नहुषात्मज:।
गत: शक्रेण सालोक्यमनयस्तं समस्पृशत्॥८॥

“This impact of suffering is but natural
with human beings. King Yayati, son of
Nahusa, attained by his meritorious deeds
residence in the same heaven with Indra
(the lord of paradise); but even there
misfortune in the shape of fall from heaven
brought about by indiscretion visited him.

(8)
महर्षिर्यो वसिष्ठस्तु a: fat: पुरोहित:।
अह्ना पुत्रशतं We तथैवास्य पुनर्हतम्॥९॥

“To Vasistha, who is an eminent seer
of Vedic Mantras and who has been the
family priest of our father (King Dasaratha),
a hundred sons were born in the course of
a day and again in the course of a day they
were all killed by King ViSwamitra. (9)

या चेयं जगतो माता सर्वलोकनमस्कृता।
अस्याश्च चलनं भूमेर्दृश्यते कोसलेश्वर॥१०॥
“Nay, volcanic convulsion is seen even
on the surface of this Earth, who is the
mother of the mobile creation and is greeted
by all people. O lord of Kosala ! (10)

at eat जगतो Fat aa ad प्रतिष्ठितम्।
आदित्यचन्द्रौ ग्रहणमभ्युपेतौ महाबलौ॥११॥

“Even the sun and the moon endowed
