+ UTTARAKANDA +

“Like an elephant at play, the Raksasa
dissipated the waters of rivers, broke trees
as a tempest, and cleaved mountains like
the thunderbolt of Indra. (10)

aang तु विज्ञाय दशग्रीवं धनेश्वर:।
कुलानुरूपं धर्मज्ञो qt संस्मृत्य चात्मन:॥११॥
सौभ्रात्रदर्शनार्थं तु दूतं वैश्रवणस्तदा।
लङ्कां सम्प्रेषयामास दशग्रीवस्य वै हितम्॥१२॥

“Coming to know of the misdeeds of
DaSagriva, and bearing in mind the conduct
befitting his family, VaiSravana, who knew
what is right, sent a messenger to Lanka to
show his brotherly love and specially to
promote the good of Ravana. (11-12)

स गत्वा नगरीं लङ्कामाससाद विभीषणम्।
मानितस्तेन धर्मेण पृष्टश्चागमनं प्रति॥१३॥
पृष्टवा च कुशलं राज्ञो ज्ञातीनां च विभीषण: |
सभायां दर्शयामास तमासीनं दशाननम्॥१४॥
“Reaching the city of Lanka, he (the
messenger) went up to Vibhisana, who
welcomed him according to the rules of
propriety, made inquiries regarding his visit,
the king (Kubera) and his kinsfolk, asked
him the reason for his coming and then
showed him Dasanana who was sitting in
the assembly. (13-14)

स दृष्टवा a राजानं dem स्वतेजसा।
waft वाचा सम्पूज्य तूष्णीं समभिवर्तत॥ १५॥
“Seeing the king there, effulgent in his

own lustre, he greeted him in the words ‘Be
victorious!’ and then stood silent. (15)

स त्त्रोत्तमपर्यङ्के वरास्तरणशोभिते।

उपविष्टं दशग्रीवं gal वाक्यमथाब्रवीत्॥१६॥
“Then addressing Dasagriva, who was

seated on an excellent couch overspread

with beautiful bedsheets, the messenger
spoke the following words: (16)

राजन् वदामि a ad wat तव यदब्रवीत्।

उभयो: सदृशं वीर FAT च कुलस्य च॥ Vol
““O king, | will tell you all that your

brother has said. It is in keeping with good

887

conduct and the traditions of the family. (17)

साधु पर्याप्तमेतावत् कृत्यश्चारित्रसंग्रह:।
साधु धर्मे व्यवस्थानं क्रियतां यदि शक्यते॥ १८॥

“we

Quite enough of what you have done
so long; establish yourself fully, if possible,
in better ways. (18)

ge मे नन्दनं भग्नमृषयो निहता: श्रुता:।
देवतानां समुद्योगस्त्वत्तो राजन् मया श्रुत:॥१९॥

“`] have seen the Nandana grove, the
pleasure-garden of Indra, laid waste by you.
| have heard of the Rsis who were killed by
you. | have also heard of the preparations of
the gods against you. (19)

निराकृतश्च बहुशस्त्वयाहं राक्षसाधिप।
सापराधोऽपि are fe रक्षितव्य: स्वबान्धवै: ।॥। २० ॥

“‘O leader of the Raksasas, you have
repeatedly disregarded me; still it is the duty
of relations to save the youngsters even
though they misbehave. (20)
अहं तु हिमवत्पृष्ठं गतो धर्ममुपासितुम्।
रौद्रं ad समास्थाय नियतो नियतेन्द्रिय:।। २१॥

“‘Having undertaken to observe in
pursuance of Dharma, a rather fierce vow,
| once went to the slopes of the Himalayas
with my mind and senses fully under control.

(21)
wa cal मया ge उमया सहित: WY: I
सव्यं चक्षुर्मया gard तत्र teat निपातितम्॥ २२॥
का न्वेषेति महाराज न खल्वन्येन हेतुना।
रूपं चानुपमं कृत्वा रुद्राणी तत्र तिष्ठति॥ २३॥

“There | happened to see the almighty
Lord Siva in the company of Uma. Rudrani
(the consort of Rudra) stood there, in her
incomparable charm. By chance | cast my
left eye on the Devi; my object, O monarch,
was just to know who she was and nothing
else. (22-23)

देव्या दिव्यप्रभावेण दग्धं सव्यं ममेक्षणम्।
रेणुध्वस्तामिव ज्योति: पिङ्गलत्वमुपागतम्॥ २४॥

“‘My left eye got scorched, while the
