696

of all sacrificial implements and deserted by
the learned priests, and where all sound
has consequently ceased. (8)
गोष्ठमध्ये स्थितामार्तामचरन्तीं At तृणम्।
MWe परित्यक्तां Tat पत्नीमिवोत्सुकाम्॥९॥
It looked like a cow fit to be coveted by
bulls and longing for copulation but bereft of
an excellent bull and standing disconsolate
in a cow-pen, refusing to feed on fresh

It further resembled a new necklace of
pearls stripped of its highly polished, dazzling,
excellent rubies and other gems of superior
quality. (10)
सहसाचरितां स्थानान्महीं पुण्यक्षयाद् गताम्।
संहृतद्युतिविस्तारां तारामिव दिवश्च्युताम्॥११॥

Again, it presented the appearance of
a meteor suddenly shifted from its position

and fallen from the heavens, and
consequently shorn of its expanse of light
when descended on earth through

exhaustion of its merit.
पुष्पनद्धां वसन्तान्ते मत्तभ्रमरशालिनीम्।
द्रुतदावाग्निविप्लुष्टां क्लान्तां वनलतामिव॥ १२॥
It further looked blighted in appearance
like a forest creeper laden with blossom at
the close of spring and appearing lovely
with drunken bees surrounding it but later
on scorched by a raging wild fire. (12)
प्रच्छन्नशशिनक्षत्रां द्यामिवाम्बुधरैर्युताम्॥१३॥
The entire city with its trafficless streets
and markets carrying on a dull business

resembled a cloudy sky with the moon and
other stars obscured. (13)

क्लषीणपानोत्तमैर्भग्नै: शरावैरभिसंवृताम्।
हतशौण्डामिव ध्वस्तां पानभूमिमसंस्कृताम्॥ १४॥

With its streets and lanes unswept and
full of rubbish, Ayodhya presented the

(11)

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA +

appearance of a deserted and uncleaned
tavern strewn with broken vessels devoid
of any excellent liquor, the wine-drinkers
having been killed. (14)

उपयुक्तोदकां भग्नां प्रपां निपतितामिव॥ १५॥
Again it looked like a shed erected

for storage and distribution of water, but
now broken and collapsed with its platform
razed and sunk, and covered with broken
vessels, its water having been used up.
(15)

भूमौ बाणैर्विनिष्कृत्तां पतितां ज्यामिवायुधात्॥ १६ ॥
It further resembled a bow-string, broad

and long (extended over the entire length of
a bow) with a noose at both ends in order
to fasten it to the bow, severed from the
bow by the arrows of heroes and fallen to
the ground. (16)

सहसा युद्धशौण्डेन हयारोहेण वाहिताम्।
निहतां प्रतिसैन्येन वडवामिव पातिताम्॥१७॥

It further resembled a mare spurred on
precipitately by a horseman, skilled in warfare,
and fallen down when killed by the opposite
army. (17)

भरतस्तु रथस्थ: सन् श्रीमान् दशरथात्मज:।
वाहयन्तं रथश्रेष्ठं सारथिं वाक्यमब्रवीत्॥१८॥
Seated in his chariot, the glorious
Bharata, son of Dasaratha, for his part,
spoke as follows to the charioteer, Sumantra,
who was driving the foremost of the king’s
chariot : (18)

किं नु खल्वद्य गम्भीरो मूर्छितो न निशाम्यते।
यथापुरमयोध्यायां गीतवादित्रनि:स्वन: ॥ १९॥

“How is it, | wonder, that the deep and
resonant sound of vocal and instrumental
music is not heard as before in Ayodhya
today? (19)

वारुणीमदगन्धश्च माल्यगन्धश्च मूर्छित:।
चन्दनागुरुगन्धश्च न प्रवाति समन्तत:॥ oll
