316

दर्पान्निराकृता Ge त्वया सौभाग्यवत्तया।
राममाता सपत्नी ते कथं At न यापयेत्॥ ३७॥
“It is improbable that your co-wife,
Kausalya, mother of Rama, who has been
slighted by you in the past out of pride born
of your being loved by your husband, will
not repay her grudge to you. (37)

यदा च wa: पृथिवीमवाप्स्यते
प्रभूतरत्नाकरशैलसंयुताम् ।
तदा गमिष्यस्यशुभं पराभवं
सहैव दीना भरतेन भामिनि॥ ३८॥

“Nay, when Rama secures dominion
of the earth with its seas and mountains

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

containing abundant jewels, you will at that
time helplessly suffer unwelcome ignominy
alone in the shape of servitude alongwith
Bharata, O proud lady ! (38)
यदा fe wa: पृथिवीमवाप्स्यते
ध्रुवं प्रणष्टो भरतो भविष्यति।
अतो हि संचिन्तय राज्यमात्मजे
परस्य चैवास्य विवासकारणम्॥ ३९॥
“As soon as Rama attains sovereignty
of the globe, Bharata will surely meet his
doom. Therefore, actually devise some
means of securing sovereignty in favour of
your son, Bharata, as well as an excuse for
banishing Rama, his (born) enemy.” (39)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्येऽयोध्याकाण्डेऽष्टम: सर्ग: ॥ ८ ॥

Thus ends Canto Eight in the Ayodhyakanda of the glorious Ramayana
of Valmiki, the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

Ada:

सर्ग:

Canto IX

Kaikeyi, whose heart was poisoned by the malicious gossip of Manthara as
aforesaid, takes a vow to see that Rama is sent into exile and Bharata
installed as Prince Regent, and asks Manthara herself how to
secure that consummation. Manthara tells her how in the
course of a conflict between gods and demons, in which
DaSaratha’s help was enlisted by the gods, the queen,
who had accompanied her husband to the field of
operations and had rendered valuable assistance
to him at a critical juncture, was offered a couple
of boons, which she had kept in abeyance.

Manthara now asks Kaikeyi to demand the
banishment of Rama and the installation of
Bharata against the two promised boons.

Kaikeyi accordingly throws away her
ornaments and lies down on the bare
floor in the sulking-room in
a sullen mood

Wage तु कैकेयी क्रोधेन ज्वलितानना।

thus, Kaikeyi, for her part, whose face was

दीर्घमुष्णं विनि:श्वस्य मन्थरामिदमब्रवीत्॥ १॥ | flushed with anger, spoke to Manthara as

Heaving a doleful sigh, when told

(1)

follows :
