* SUNDARAKANDA +

107

अष्टादश: सर्ग:
Canto XVIII

Perceiving Ravana surrounded by hundreds of young women and approaching
Sita towards the close of night, swayed by passion as he was, Hanuman,
who was perched on the top of the SitnSapa tree, silently comes
down in order to scan the figure of Ravana and hides

himself in the boughs in order to avoid observation

तथा विप्रेक्षमाणस्य at पुष्पितपादपम्।
विचिन्वतश्च वैदेहीं किञ्चिच्छेषा Premera १॥

While Hanuman was _ thus_ keenly
observing the grove with its trees in blossom
and looking for an opportunity to see more
closely Sita, a princess of the Videha territory,
the night was well-nigh spent. (1)
षडंगवेदविदुषां क्रतुप्रवरयाजिनाम्।
शुश्राव ब्रह्मघोषान् स विरात्रे ब्रह्मरक्षसाम्॥ २॥

Towards the close of the night he heard
the chanting of the Vedas in the dwellings of
Brahmana-ogres well-versed in the Vedas,
including the six auxiliary sciences, viz.,
grammar, prosody, etymology, phonetics,
astronomy and the science of rituals and
conducting big sacrifices. (2)

अथ मंगलवादित्रैर३ शब्दै: श्रोत्रमनोहरै:।
प्राबोध्यत महाबाहुर्दशग्रीवो महाबल:॥३॥

Presently the mighty-armed Ravana, the
ten-headed monster, who was endowed with
extraordinary strength, was awakened by
means of musical instruments played upon
on festive occasions as well as by means
of praises ravishing the ears and mind. (3)

विबुध्य तु महाभागो राक्षसेन्द्र: प्रतापवान्।
स्रस्तमाल्याम्बरधरो वैदेह्रीमन्वचिन्तयत्॥ ४॥

Waking up, the glorious Ravana, the
ruler of ogres, for his part, who was highly
blessed and whose garlands and raiment
were in disarray, thought of Sita, a princess
of the Videha territory. (4)

भृशं नियुक्तस्तस्यां च मदनेन मदोत्कट:।
न तु तं राक्षस: कामं शशाकात्मनि गूहितुम्॥५॥

Nay, irresistibly drawn towards her by
passion, the ogre, who was intoxicated with
drink, could not, however, suppress that
passion in his mind. (5)

स सर्वाभरणैर्युक्तो बिभ्रच्छियमनुत्तमाम्।
तां नगैर्विविधैर्जुष्ठां सर्वपुष्पफलोपगै:॥६॥
qa पुष्करिणीभिश्च नानापुष्पोपशोभिताम्।
wat मत्तैश्च विहगैर्विचित्रां परमाद्भुतै:॥७॥
ईहामृगैश्च विविधैर्वृतां दृष्टिमनोहरै:।
tet: सम्प्रेक्षमाणश्च मणिकाञ्चनतोरणाम्॥८॥
नानामृगगणाकीर्णां फलै: प्रपतितैर्वृताम्।
अशोकवनिकामेव प्राविशत् संततद्रुमाम्॥९॥

Adorned with every kind of ornament and
bearing an unsurpassed splendour, nay,
duly observing the avenues leading to the
Asoka grove, he deeply penetrated into the
Asoka grove itself, which was adorned with
trees of all species, bearing all kinds of flowers
and fruit and was surrounded by lotus-pools;
nay, which was graced with various flowers
and rendered picturesque by most wonderful
birds ever in heat, which was crowded with
artificial deer ravishing the eyes and mind;
which was decorated with archways of gold
and gems, was filled with herds of deer of
every species and carpeted with the fruit fallen
from above and was ever full of trees. (6é—9)
अंगना: शतमात्रं तु तं व्रजन्तमनुव्रजन्।
महेन्द्रमिव पौलस्त्यं देवगन्धर्वयोषित:॥१०॥

Only a hundred belles for their part
followed that grandson of Pulastya as he
walked to the Asoka grove, even as celestial
and Gandharva women follow the mighty
Indra wherever he goes. (10)
