672

fixed at their end and looked like flaming
serpents, shone in the ogre’s breast like the
rays of the sun. (31)

स शरैराहतस्तेन सरोषो रावणात्मज:।
सुप्रयुक्तैस्तिभिर्बाणै: प्रतिविव्याध लक्ष्मणम्॥ ३२॥

Roused to anger when struck with
arrows by Laksmana, Indrajit, sprung from
the loins of Ravana, pierced Laksmana in
return with three well-aimed arrows. (32)

a aya महाभीमो नरराक्षससिंहयो:।
विमर्दस्तुमुलो युद्धे परस्परजयैषिणो:॥ ३३॥

The aforesaid struggle between
Laksmana, a lion among men, and Indrajit,
a lion among ogres, who sought to gain a
victory over the other in combat, was most
dreadful and tumultuous. (33)

विक्रान्तौ बलसम्पन्नावुभौ विक्रमशालिनौ।
उभौ परमदुर्जेयावतुल्यबलतेजसौ ।। ३४॥

Valiant and richly endowed with strength,
both were distinguished for their prowess.
Nay, peerless in might and courage, both
were exceedingly difficult to conquer.

(34)

युयुधाते dat वीरौ ग्रहाविव नभोगतौ।
बलव्त्राविव fe तौ aft वै दुष्प्रधर्षणौ॥ ३५॥

The two heroes strove at that moment
like two planets figuring in the heavens.
Indeed, the two were actually difficult to
overcome in combat like Indra and the
demon Vrtra. (35)

युयुधाते महात्मानौ dat केसरिणाविव।
बहूनवसृजन्तौ हि मार्गणौघानवस्थितौ।
नरराक्षसमुख्यौ तौ प्रहृष्टावभ्ययुध्यताम्॥ ३६॥
The two warriors, who were endowed
with extraordinary courage, fought at that
time like two lions. Standing firmly while
discharging numerous streams of arrows,
the aforesaid jewels among human beings
and ogres, respectively, actually strove with
extreme ardour. (36)

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA +

ad: शरान् दाशरथि: संधायामित्रकर्षण:।
ससर्ज राक्षसेन्द्राय क्रुद्ध: Ul FA VALI Bll

Putting arrows to his bow, nay hissing
like an enraged serpent, Laksmana (son of
DaSaratha), the scourge of his enemies,
thereupon shot arrows aiming at Indrajit, a
ruler of the ogres. (37)

तस्य ज्यातलनिर्घोषं स श्रुत्वा राक्षसाधिप:।
विवर्णवदनो भूत्वा लक्ष्मणं समुदैक्षत॥ ३८॥

Growing pale-faced on hearing the
twang of the bowstring of Laksmana
produced by the action of his palm, Indrajit,
the aforesaid ruler of ogres, fixed his gaze
on Laksmana. (38)
विवर्णवदनं GBT Wad रावणात्मजम्।
सौमित्रिं युद्धसंयुक्तं प्रत्युवाच विभीषण:॥ ३९॥

Seeing the ogre sprung from the loins
of Ravana pale-faced, Vibhisana spoke as
follows to Sumitra’s son, fully engaged in
combat: (39)

निमित्तान्युपपश्यामि यान्यस्मिन् रावणात्मजे।
TR तेन महाबाहो WT UT न संशय:॥४०॥
“| conclude on the strength of the
indications, such as pallor on the face,
which | perceive in this offspring of Ravana
that he is already reduced to despair: there
is no doubt about it. Therefore, make haste
to dispatch him, O mighty-armed prince!”
(40)

ad: संधाय सौमित्रि: शरानाशीविषोपमान्।
मुमोचविशिखांस्तस्मिन् सर्पानिव विषोल्बणान्॥ ४१ ॥
Fitting to his bow arrows resembling
venomous snakes, the son of Sumitra
thereupon shot those shafts, which
resembled serpents full of venom, aiming at
Indrajit. (41)
Senora leerted: We: |
मुहूर्तमभवन्मूढ: सर्वसंक्षुभितेन्द्रिय: UY? Ul
Struck by Laksmana with arrows, which
impinged on the body like Indra’s thunderbolt,
