* AYODHYAKANDA +

throne of Ayodhya, you seek to enjoy life
with Kausalya eternally, O foolish king !
(45)
भवत्वधर्मो धर्मो वा सत्यं वा यदि वानृतम्।
यत्त्वया संश्रुतं मह्यं तस्य नास्ति atten: tt ४६॥

“Whether that which has been promised
by you to me is unrighteous or righteous,
and whether the promise has been made in
good faith or it is a mere hoax, there is no
going back on it. (46)

até fe विषमद्यैव पीत्वा ag तवाग्रत:।
पश्यतस्ते मरिष्यामि रामो यद्यभिषिच्यते॥४७॥

“If Rama is installed as Prince Regent,
| shall positively die this very day before
your eyes, drinking copious poison in your
presence. (47)
एकाहमपि पश्येयं seas राममातरम्।
अञ्जलिं प्रतिगृह्णन्तीं stat ननु मृतिर्मम॥४८॥

“If | behold Kausalya accepting
greetings with joined palms from the people
of Ayodhya as the Prince Regents own
mother even for a single day, death will be
surely preferable to me than such an eyesore.

(48)

भरतेनात्मना Us wa aA मनुजाधिप।
यथा नान्येन तुष्येयमृते रामविवासनात्॥४९॥

“| swear to you by Bharata as well
as by my own self that | am not going to
be satisfied by anything else than the
banishment of Rama.” (49)

एतावदुक्त्वा वचनं कैकेयी विरराम ह।
विलपन्तं च राजानं न प्रतिव्याजहार ATION
Having uttered this threat, Kaikeyi
became silent; so the tradition goes. She
made no reply whatsoever to the wailing
monarch. (50)
श्रुत्वा तु राजा कैकेय्या वाक्यं परमशोभनम्।
रामस्य च at वासमैश्वर्यं भरतस्य च॥५१॥
नाभ्यभाषत कैकेयीं Wed व्याकुलेन्द्रिय:।
प्रैक्षतानिमिषो देवीं प्रियामप्रियवादिनीम्॥५२॥

333

Perturbed in mind to hear the most
unwelcome proposal of Kaikeyi, demanding
the exile of Rama to the forest and
sovereignty for Bharata, the king for his
part did not open his lips before Kaikeyi for
a while; he kept gazing with unwinking eyes
on his beloved queen, who uttered such
unpleasant words. (51-52)
wt fe वज्रसमां वाचमाकर्ण्य हृदयाप्रियाम्।
दु:खशोकमयीं श्रुत्वा राजा न सुखितोऽभवत्॥ ७५३ Ul

The king’s joy vanished to hear that
terrible proposal, which was so unwelcome
to the heart, causing agony and grief, and,
therefore, resembling the thunderbolt. (53)
स देव्या व्यवसायं च घोरं च शपथं कृतम्।
ध्यात्वा रामेति नि:श्वस्यच्छिन्नस्तरुरिवापतत्॥ ५४॥

Reflecting on the queen’s firm resolve
to see Rama exiled to the forest and Bharata
installed as Prince Regent and the terrible
oath taken by him and heaving a sigh of
despair, he dropped to the ground like a
felled tree, uttering the name of Rama. (54)

नष्टचित्तो यथोन्मत्तो विपरीतो यथातुर:।

ett यथा सर्पो aya जगतीपति:॥७५७५॥
Having lost his mental equilibrium like

a madman, and getting upset like an ailing

man, the Emperor lay motionless like a
hypnotized serpent. (55)

दीनयाऽऽतुरया वाचा इति होवाच कैकयीम्।
अनर्थमिममर्थाभं केन त्वमुपदेशिता॥७५६॥
In an afflicted and impatient tone, they
say, he spoke to Kaikeyi as follows: “By
whom have you been taught to pursue this
evil, which appears to you as worth striving
for? (56)
भूतोपहतचित्तेव ब्रुवन्ती at न लज्जसे।
शीलव्यसनमेतत् ते नाभिजानाम्यहं पुरा॥५७॥
बालायास्तत् त्विदानीं a लक्षये विपरीतवत्।
Hal वा ते भयं जातं या त्वमेवंविधं वरम्॥ ५८ I
we भरतमासीनं वृणीषे wad वने।
विरमैतेन भावेन त्वमेतेनानृतेन च ॥५९॥
