576

एवमेव महावीर्यो हतो नस्तातमध्यम:।
न तु सत्पुरुषा wer विलपन्ति यथा भवान्॥ २॥

“It is quite true that Kumbhakarna (the
middle of our father and uncles), who was
endowed with extraordinary prowess, has
been killed. Good men, however, do not
wail as you are doing, O king! (2)

नूनं त्रिभुवनस्यापि पर्याप्तस्त्वमसि wir
स कस्मात् प्राकृत इव शोचस्यात्मानमीदृशम्॥ ३॥

“Surely you are capable of conquering
even the three worlds. O lord! As such
why do you, like a common man, allow
yourself to be overwhelmed with grief in this
way? (3)
ब्रह्मदत्तास्ति ते शक्ति: कवचं सायको धनु:।
सहस्रखरसंयुक्तो रथो मेघसमस्वन:॥४॥

“A javelin bestowed on you by Brahma
(the creator), nay, a coat of mail, an
arrow, a bow, all gifted by Brahma as well
as a chariot provided with a thousand
donkeys and emitting a sound resembling
the rumbling of a cloud, still continue in your
possession. (4)

त्वयासकृद्धि शस्त्रेण विशस्ता देवदानवा:।
a सर्वायुधसम्पन्नो wad शास्तुमर्हसि॥५॥

“Gods and Danavas (giants) have
actually been killed by you with a single
weapon more than once. As such you can
chastise Rama when equipped with all sorts
of weapons. (5)
कामं fas महाराज निर्गमिष्याम्यहं रणे।
उद्घधरिष्यामि ते शत्रून् Wes: पन्नगानिव॥६॥

“Stay on in Lanka if you will, O
great king! | will sally forth to the field of
battle and root out your enemies, even as
Garuda, the king of birds, would uproot
serpents. (6)

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA +

शम्बरो देवराजेन नरको विष्णुना यथा।
तथाद्य शयिता war war युधि निपातित:॥ ७॥

“Struck down by me on the battle-field,
Rama shall fall this day in the same way as
did the demon, Sambara, overthrown by
Indra (the ruler of gods) and Naraka* by
Lord Visnu.” (7)

श्रुत्वा त्रिशिरसो वाक्यं रावणो राक्षसाधिप:।
पुनर्जातमिवात्मानं मन्यते कालचोदित:॥८॥

Hearing the assurance of Trisira,
Ravana, the suzerain lord of ogres, as
impelled by Destiny, thought himself as
though born anew. (8)

श्रुत्वा त्रिशिरसो वाक्यं देवान्तकनरान्तकौ।
अतिकायश्च तेजस्वी बभूवुर्युद्धहर्षिता:॥९॥

Hearing the speech of Trisira, Devantaka
and Narantaka as also Atikaya, who was
full of martial ardour, got impatient for an
encounter. (9)
ततोऽहमहमित्येवं गर्जन्तो नैर्ऋतर्षभा:।
रावणस्य सुता ANT: शक्रतुल्यपराक्रमा:॥ Qo UI

Thereupon the valiant sons of Ravana,
who were veritable bulls among the ogres
and equalled Indra, the ruler of gods, in

prowess, stood roaring with the words “I will
lead! | will take the lead!!” (10)

अन्तरिक्षगता: Wa Aa मायाविशारदा:।
wa त्रिदशदर्पघ्ना: aa समरदुर्मदा:॥११॥
All were capable of coursing in the air,
all were adept in conjuring tricks, all were
able to crush the pride of gods and all were
fierce in combat. (11)
सर्वे सुबलसम्पन्ना: सर्वे विस्तीर्णकीर्तय:।
सर्वे समरमासाद्य न श्रूयन्ते स्म निर्जिता:॥१२॥
देवैरपि सगन्धर्वै: सकिंनरमहोरगै:।

* Naraka mentioned in this verse was procreated by the Danava Vipracitti through Simhika His six
brothers were Vatapi, Namuci, IIwala, Srmara, Andhaka and Kalanabha. Naraka, son of Mother Earth, who
met with his death at the hands of Lord Sri Krsna in the Dwapara Age was different from the demon
mentioned here. The former did not even see the light during the lifetime of Ravana.
