1144

ज्ञानेन खलु पश्यामि दृष्टवा प्रत्यागमिष्यथ।
आद्य: पन्था: कुलिङ्गानां ये चान्ये धान्यजीविन: ॥ २६ U

“| perceive through intuition that you
will indeed be able to return after seeing
Sita. The first shortest flight in point of
height is that of sparrows and other birds
who live on grain. (26)
द्वितीयो बलिभोजानां ये च व्क्षफलाशना:।
भासास्तृतीयं गच्छन्ति क्रौञ्चाश्च Ht: सह॥ २७॥

“The second, in order of height, is that
of birds such as crows living on fragments
of food left at a meal and those such as
parrots that subsist on the fruits of trees.
Bhasas and herons as well as ospreys

take a flight which is third in order of height.
(27)

श्येनाश्चतुर्थं गच्छन्ति गृध्रा गच्छन्ति पञ्चमम्।
बलवीर्योपपन्नानां रूपयौवनशालिनाम्॥ २८ I
षष्ठस्तु war हंसानां वैनतेयगति: परा।
वैनतेयाच्च नो जन्म सर्वेषां वानरर्षभा:॥२९॥

“Hawks take a flight which is fourth in
order of height; while vultures take a flight
which is fifth in order of height. The sixth in
order of height is the flight of swans endowed
with strength and virility and graced with
comeliness and youth; while the flight of
Garuda (son of Vinata) is the highest. We
all vultures claim our descent from Aruna,
the younger son of Vinata, O leaders of
monkeys ! (28-29)
गर्हितं तु pd कर्म येन स्म पिशिताशिन:।
प्रतिकार्यं च मे तस्य वैरं भ्रातृकृतं भवेत्॥ ३०॥

“The enmity shown towards my brother,
Jatayu, by that ogre (lit., one who feeds on
raw flesh), by whom the execrable act in
the shape of Sita’s abduction was actually
perpetrated, remains to be repaid by me,
which will be automatically done through
your agency. (30)
इहस्थोऽहं प्रपश्यामि रावणं wat तथा।
अस्माकमपि सौपर्णं feet चक्षुर्बलं तथा॥ ३१॥

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

“Standing here | vividly perceive Ravana
and Sita (daughter of Janaka). We also
possess the supersensuous vision of
Garuda of charming wings. (31)

तस्मादाहारवीर्येण निसर्गेण च वानरा:।
आयोजनशतात् साग्राद् वयं पश्याम नित्यश: ॥ ३२॥

“Therefore, through the potency of our
food and by virtue of our nature (as
descendants of Vinata) we can always see
to a distance of more than one hundred
Yojanas (or eight hundred miles), O
monkeys ! (32)

अस्माकं विहिता वृत्तिर्निसर्गेण च दूरत:।
विहिता व्रृक्षमूले तु व्रृत्तिश्चरणयोधिनाम्॥ ३३॥
“Moreover, our sustenance has been
ordained by Nature with food seen at a
distance, while that of cocks (lit., birds
contending with their claws) has been
ordained with food obtained at the foot of a
tree. (33)

उपायो दृश्यतां कश्चिल्लङ्घने लवणाम्भस:।
अभिगम्य तु aed समृद्धार्थां गमिष्यथ॥ ३४॥

“Some means may be found out to
cross the sea (of brackish waters). Having
met Sita (a princess of the Videha territory)
you will surely return to Kiskindha, fully
accomplished of purpose. (34)
प्रदास्याम्युदकं भ्रातु: स्वर्गतस्य महात्मन:॥ ३५॥

“| wish myself to be taken by you to
the sea, the abode of Varuna (the god of
water). | will duly offer water to the spirit of
my high-souled younger brother, Jatayu,
who has ascended to heaven.” (35)
ततो नीत्वा तु तं देशं dit नदनदीपते:।
निर्दग्धपक्षं सम्पातिं वानरा: सुमहौजस:॥ ३६॥
तं पुन: प्रापयित्वा च तं देशं पतगेश्वरम्।
बभूवुर्वानरा हृष्टा: प्रव्त्तिमुपलभ्य ते॥३७॥

Actually taking Sampati, whose wings

had been completely burnt, to the aforesaid
region lying on the shore of the ocean (the
