468

alive: | speak this to you out of affection
for you. (28)

atid नोक्तपूर्वं A न च वक्ष्यामि मैथिलि।
चारित्रसुखशीलत्वात् प्रविष्टासि मनो मम॥ २९॥

“No falsehood has ever been uttered
by me in the past nor shall | ever tell a lie,
O princess of Mithila! You have found your
way into my mind due to your amiable
disposition which has proved to be a source
of delight because of your spotless character.

(29)
नेमौ शक्यौ रणे Sd सेन्द्रैरपि सुरासुरै:।
तादृशं दर्शनं gear मया चोदीरितं तव॥ ३०॥

“These two princes are not vulnerable
to being conquered even by gods and
demons combined, including Indra, the ruler
of gods. Nay, after observing such indications
on the face of the two brothers as also on
the face of the warriors guarding them, has
the fact of the princes being alive been
made known by me to you. (30)

इदं तु सुमहच्चित्रं शरै: पश्यस्व मैथिलि।
विसंज्ञौ पतितावेतौ Aa लक्ष्मीर्विमुञ्चति॥ se i

“Also see for yourself this very great
wonder, O princess of Mithila that bodily
splendour does not completely desert these
two princes, even though they have fallen
unconscious on the ground hit by the arrows.

(31)
प्रायेण गतसत्त्वानां पुरुषाणां गतायुषाम्।
दृश्यमानेषु वक्त्रेषु परं भवति वैकृतम्॥३२॥

“An appalling change generally appears
on the features, when being observed,
of men whose sands of life have run

out and whose life-breath has departed
for good. (32)

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA +

त्यज शोकं च दु:खं च मोहं च जनकात्मजे।
रामलक्ष्मणयोरर्थे नाद्य शक्यमजीवितुम्॥ ३३॥

“Banish grief and sorrow as well as
infatuation on account of Sri Rama and
Laksmana, O Janaka’s daughter! It is not
possible that they be not living at this
moment.” (33)

श्रुत्वा I वचनं तस्या: सीता सुरसुतोपमा।
कृताञ्जलिरुवाचेमामेवमस्तिति मैथिली॥ ३४॥

Hearing her assurance, the princess of
Mithila, Sita, for her part, who resembled a
daughter of gods, replied with joined palms
to her, “May it be so!” (34)
दीना त्रिजटया dat लङ्कामेव प्रवेशिता॥ ३५॥

After duly sending back the aforesaid
aerial car, Puspaka, which was swift as
thought, the mournful Sita was caused by
Trijata to enter Lanka once more. (35)

ततस्तरिजटया सार्धं पुष्पकादवरुह्य सा।
अशोकवनिकामेव राक्षसीभि: प्रवेशिता॥ ३६॥

Descending from Puspaka with Trijata,
she was then urged by the ogresses to
enter the Asoka grove again. (36)
प्रविश्य सीता बहुवृक्षखण्डां

तां राक्षसेन्द्रस्य विहारभूमिम्।
we संचिन्त्य च राजपुत्रौ
uw विषादं समुपाजगाम॥ ३७॥

Having gone far into and _ keenly
observing that pleasure ground of Ravana,
the ruler of ogres, planted with numerous
clusters of trees, nay, having keenly
observed and pondered deeply on the two
princes, she gave way to extreme
despair. (37)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये युद्धकाण्डेऽष्टचत्वारिंश: AWA: ॥ ४८ Il

Thus ends Canto Forty-eight in the Yuddhakanda of the glorious Ramayana of
Valmiki, the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

