74

nor devoid of beauty, nor clumsy, nor
unadorned, nor feeble, nor repulsive to her
husband. (71)

यदीदृशी राघवधर्मपत्नी।
इमा महाराक्षसराजभार्या:
सुजातमस्येति fe साधुबुद्धे:॥ ७२॥

The following thought actually entered
the mind of the pious-minded Hanuman, the
leader of monkeys, that if Sita, the lawful
wife of Sri Rama, had been allowed by
Ravana to remain as happy with her husband
as those consorts of the mighty Ravana

« VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

were, the birth of Ravana would indeed
have been blessed. (72)

पुनश्च सोऽचिन्तयदात्तरूपो
श्रुवं विशिष्टा गुणतो fe सीता।
अथायमस्यां कृतवान् महात्मा
ASI: कष्टमनार्यकर्म॥७३॥
Nay, Hanuman thought a second time
that surely Sita was superior to all these in
point of excellences; that having assumed a
deceptive form, this mighty ruler of Lanka
perpetrated a painful and ignoble deed (in
the shape of her abduction) with reference
to her. (73)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये सुन्दरकाण्डे TAA: सर्ग: ॥ ९ ॥

Thus ends Canto Nine in the Sundarakanda of the glorious Ramayana of Valmiki,
the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

Canto X
Hanuman catches sight of Ravana reposing on an excellent couch decked
with various ornaments, himself adorned with jewels of every description.
Perceiving Mandodari graced with bright jewels and lying asleep on a
wonderful couch not far from her husband in the midst of dancing
girls lying in a disorderly state with diverse musical instruments
clasped to their bosom, and taking her to be Sita, Hanuman
gets enraptured and exhibits his joy through various
simian gestures such as kissing the end of his tail

wa दिव्योपमं मुख्यं स्फाटिकं रत्नभूषितम्।
अवेक्षमाणो हनुमान् ददर्श शयनासनम्॥१॥
Looking round, Hanuman observed in
that chamber a prominent dais made of
crystal and decked with precious stones
and appearing like a celestial structure, with
a couch placed on it. (1)

दान्तकाञ्चनचित्रांगैर्वैदूर्यैश्च वरासनै: ।
महार्हास्तरणोपेतैरुपपन्नं महाधनै: ।। २॥

It was furnished with excellent couches
of great value, made of cat’s-eye gems and

fitted with component parts made of ivory
and gold and with various figures painted on
them and covered with precious beds. (2)

तस्य चैकतमे देशे दिव्यमालोपशोभितम्।
cast Ut छत्रं ताराधिपतिसंनिभम्॥ ३॥
In a portion of the dais Hanuman further
beheld a white canopy decked with heavenly
wreaths and shining brightly like the moon,
the lord of stars. (3)
जातरूपपरिक्षिप्तं Fara: समप्रभम्।
अशोकमालाविततं ददर्श परमासनम्॥४॥
