# YUDDHAKANDA +

Again at the central military post he
placed the ogre Virupaksa, who was endowed
with extraordinary virility and prowess,
alongwith numerous other ogres. (20)
एवं विधानं लङ्कायां कृत्वा राक्षसपुंगव:।
कृतकृत्यमिवात्मानं मन्यते कालचोदित:॥ २१॥

Having made arrangements as aforesaid
in Lanka, Ravana (a bull among the ogres),
under the sway of destiny, deemed his
purpose accomplished, as it were. (21)

421

विसर्जयामास तत: स मन्तिणो
विधानमाज्ञाप्य पुरस्य पुष्कलम्।
जयाशिषा मन्त्रिगणेन पूजितो
विवेश सोऽन्त:पुरमृद्धिमन्महत्॥ २२॥

Having ordered adequate arrangements
for the defence of the city of Lanka,
he then let his counsellors depart. Nay,
acclaimed by the body of counsellors with
benedictions of triumph, he entered his
sumptuous and extensive gynaeceum. (22)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये युद्धकाण्डे
षट्त्रिंश: GF: ॥ ३६ Il
Thus ends Canto Thirty-six in the Yuddhakanda of the glorious Ramayana of
Valmiki, the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

Canto XXXVII

While, on reaching the precincts of Lanka, Sri Rama and Sugriva as well
as other monkeys headed by Hanuman were deliberating as to how
to achieve success in their expedition, Vibhisana apprises them
of the arrangements made by Ravana at the four gates
for the defence of Lanka, as reported to him by his
four ministers, who had entered Lanka in the
disguise of birds and witnessed everything
with their own eyes. Sri Rama too
after detailing monkeys to storm
the four gates climbs up
the Suvela mountain
with his army

नरवानरराजानौ स gq वायुसुत: कपि:।
जाम्बवानृक्षराजश्च राक्षसश्च विभीषण:॥१॥
सुषेण: सहदायादो Wet द्विविद wa च॥ २॥
गजो गवाक्ष: कुमुदो नलोऽथ पनसस्तथा।
अमित्रविषयं wet: समवेता: समर्थयन्॥३॥

Arrived in the enemy’s territory and

gathered together, Sri Rama and Sugriva,
the rulers of men and monkeys, respectively
as also the celebrated monkey, Hanuman,
son of the wind-god, also Jambavan, the
king of bears, as well as the ogre Vibhisana,
nay, Angada, son of Vali, Laksmana (son of
Sumitra), the monkey Sarabha, Susena
accompanied by his kinsfolk, Mainda as
