866

Ravana also showed Sita, who was
given over to grief, spacious wells with
staircases and ponds hemmed in with flowers
of various kinds. (12)
दर्शयित्वा तु add pet तद्भवनोत्तमम्।
उवाच वाक्यं पापात्मा सीतां लोभितुमिच्छया ।। १३ ॥

Having shown Sita (a princess of the
Videha territory) the whole of that excellent
palace, Ravana (whose mind was set on
sin) for his part spoke as follows to Sita
with intent to enamour her : (13)

दश राक्षसकोट्यश्च द्वाविंशतिरथापरा:।
वर्जयित्वा जरावृद्धान् ATA रजनीचरान्॥१४॥

“Barring the aged ones and _ infant
rangers of the night, there are other ten and
twenty-two crores of ogres in my kingdom.

(14)
तेषां wate dit wader भीमकर्मणाम्।
सहस्रमेकमेकस्य मम कार्यपुर:सरम्॥१५॥

“lam the lord, O Sita, of all the aforesaid
ogres of terrible deeds. One thousand of
them remain at my beck and call for doing
my work alone. (15)
aed राज्यतन्त्रं मे त्वयि ad प्रतिष्ठितम्।
जीवितं च विशालाक्षि त्वं मे प्राणैर्गरीयसी ।। १६॥

“The entire administration of this state
of mine as well as my life, O large-eyed
lady, stands consecrated to you. You are
more valuable to me even than my life. (16)

बह्वीनामुत्तमस्त्रीणां मम योऽसौ परिग्रह:।
aa त्वमीश्वरी da aa भार्या wa प्रिये॥ १७॥

“Be my wife, O beloved Sita, and as
such the queen of all the numerous excellent
women, who are my wives. (17)
साधु किं तेऽन्यथाबुद्ध्या रोचयस्व वचो मम।
भजस्व माभितप्तस्य प्रसादं कर्तुमर्हसि॥१८॥

“Accept my wholesome advice; what
will you gain by thinking otherwise (fixing
your mind on Rama)? Therefore, look

favourably on me; you ought to show grace
to me, who am sore stricken with love. (18)

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

परिक्षिप्ता समुद्रेण लङ्घेयं शतयोजना।
नेयं धर्षयितुं शक्या सेन्द्रैरपि सुरासुरै:॥१९॥
“This city of Lanka surrounded by the
ocean, covers an area of eight hundred
miles. It cannot be taken by storm even by
gods and demons (taken together) including
Indra, the ruler of gods. (19)

न cay न aay न गन्धर्वेषु नर्षिषु
अहं पश्यामि लोकेषु यो A वीर्यसमो भवेत्॥ ol

“| do not perceive in all the three
worlds anyone, among the gods or the
Yaksas or the Gandharvas or the seers of
Vedic Mantras, who may prove my equal in
prowess. (20)

राज्यभ्रष्टेन दीनेन तापसेन पदातिना।
fee करिष्यसि रामेण मानुषेणाल्पतेजसा॥ २१॥

“What will you do with the human Rama
of scant energy, who has been deprived
of his sovereignty, is a pauper given to
austerities and travels on foot? (21)

भजस्व Ud मामेव wdie सदूशस्तव।
यौवनं त्वध्रुवं भीरु रमस्वेह मया सह॥ २२॥
“Accept me alone, O Sita; | am a consort
worthy of you. Youth is but fleeting, O timid
lady; enjoy life with me here in Lanka. (22)
दर्शने मा कृथा बुद्धि राघवस्य वरानने।
कास्य शक्तिरिहागन्तुमपि सीते मनोरथै:॥ २३॥
“Do not harbour even the thought of
beholding again in this life Rama, a scion of
Raghu, O lady of charming countenance !
What power has he to reach this place
even in thought, O Sita? (23)
न VIR वायुराकाशे पाशैर्बद्धुं महाजव:।
दीप्यमानस्य वाप्यग्नेर्ग्रहीतुं विमला: शिखा:॥ २४॥
“A very powerful wind cannot be bound

with ropes in the sky nor can the smokeless
flames of a blazing fire be seized. (24)

त्रयाणामपि लोकानां न तं पश्यामि शोभने।
विक्रमेण नयेद् यस्त्वां मद्बाहुपरिपालिताम्॥ २५॥

“In all the three worlds, viz., heaven
