+ UTTARAKANDA +

“Seen by me, O Time-Spirit, this fellow
will not survive even for a short while. This
indeed is no power of mine; such, however,
is the natural law.” (31)

तस्यैवं वचनं श्रुत्वा धर्मराज: प्रतापवान्।

अब्रवीत् aa तं मृत्युं त्वं तिष्ठैनं निहन्म्यहम्॥ ३२॥
Hearing this utterance of Death, the

glorious Yama (the Lord of Justice), on that

occasion said to the celebrated god of death,
“You stand alone, | will kill this fellow.” (32)
तत: संरक्तनयन: Bel वैवस्वत: प्रभु:।
कालदण्डममोघं तु तोलयामास पाणिना॥ ३३॥
यस्य पारश्वेषु निहिता: कालपाशा: प्रतिष्ठिता: ।
पावकाशनिसंकाशो मुद्गरो मूर्तिमान् स्थित:॥ ३४॥
दर्शनादेव य: प्राणान् प्राणिनामपि कर्षति।
किं UA: स्पृशमानस्य पात्यमानस्य वा पुन:॥ ३५॥
Thereupon Lord Yama (son of the sun-
god) for his part, his eyes blood-red with
anger, lifted with his hand his unfailing rod of
punishment, on the four sides of which were
installed the snares of destruction and there
also stood in a personal form a mallet brilliant
as a fire and the thunderbolt, and which
extracts the life out of living beings by its
very sight, much more of the one who is
touched or dashed down by it. (33—35)

a ज्वालापरिवारस्तु deta राक्षसम्।
तेन स्पृष्टो बलवता महाप्रहरणोऽस्फुरत्॥ ३६॥
Touched by that mighty god, Yama,
that great weapon for its part with its circle
of flames shone as if it were going to consume
the ogre. (36)
ततो विदुद्रुवु: सर्वे तस्मात् AEM रणाजिरे।
सुराश्च क्षुभिता: सर्वे gear दण्डोद्यतं यमम्॥ ३७॥
Afraid of him, all the ogres on the
battlefield fled from that place. Seeing Yama
with his rod of punishment uplifted, all the
gods too felt disturbed through fear. (37)

तस्मिन् प्रहर्तुकामे तु aA दण्डेन रावणम्।
aa पितामह: साक्षाद् दर्शयित्वेदमब्रवीत्॥ ३८ i

Manifesting himself personally when

917

Yama for his part was inclined to smite
Ravana with his rod, Brahma (the grandfather
of the entire creation) spoke to him as
follows: (38)

aad महाबाहो न खल्वमितविक्रम।
न हन्तव्यस्त्वयैतेन दण्डेनैष निशाचर:॥ ३९॥

“O mighty-armed son of the sun-god,
O god with immeasurable prowess, surely
this ranger of the night is not to be killed by
you with this rod. (39)

mR: खलु मयैतस्मै दत्तस्तिदशपुङ्गव।

स त्वया नानृत: कार्यो यन्मया व्याहृतं वच:॥४०॥

“Indeed, a boon has been conferred on
this ogre by me, O bull among the gods!
That boon, the pledge which has been given
by me, ought not to be rendered void. (40)
यो fe मामनृतं Hate देवो वा मानुषोऽपि वा।
त्रैलोक्यमनृतं तेन pd स्यान्नात्र संशय:॥४१॥

“By him, be he a man or a god, who
proved me to be a liar, all the three worlds
indeed would be accused of lying; there is
no doubt about it. (41)
क्रुद्धेन विप्रमुक्तोऽयं निर्विशेषं प्रियाप्रिये।
wa: «Gerd रौद्रो लोकत्रयभयावह:॥४२॥

If discharged by you in anger, this
terrible weapon, which is the terror of all the
three worlds will destroy all created beings,

regardless of those who are dear to you or
otherwise. (42)

अमोघो ह्येष सर्वेषां प्राणिनाममितप्रभ:।

कालदण्डो मया सृष्ट: Us मृत्युपुरस्कृत:॥४३॥
“Indeed, this rod of destruction of

immeasurable splendour, which is unfailing

in relation to all beings, and is attended with
death, was created by me of yore. (48)

wat खल्वेष a सौम्य पात्यो रावणमूर्धनि।
नह्यस्मिन् पतिते कश्चिन्मुहूर्तमपि जीवति॥४४॥

“Therefore, O gentle one, this rod must
not be hurled on Ravana’s head by you; for,
in the event of its falling, none will survive
even for a little while. (44)
