* AYODHYAKANDA +

speaking, suffers from many a handicap:
please know them from me. (4)

सीते विमुच्यतामेषा वनवासकृता मति:।
agate हि art वनमित्यभिधीयते॥५॥

“Let this idea of living in a forest be
finally relinquished, O Sita; for a dense
forest is spoken of as fraught with manifold
dangers. (5)
हितबुद्ध्या Ga वचो मयैतदभिधीयते।
सदा TE न जानामि दु:खमेव सदा वनम्॥६॥

“This advice is tendered by me with an
eye to your welfare alone and not because
you will prove a burden to me. Not only there
is no joy in a forest at all times; | rather know
itto be an abode of perpetual misery. (6)

गिरिनिर्झरसम्भूता गिरिनिर्दरिवासिनाम्।
सिंहानां निनदा दु:खा: श्रोतुं दु:खमतो वनम्॥ ७॥
“Intensified by the noise of hill-streams,
the roars of lions dwelling in mountain caves
are unpleasant to hear. Hence a forest is
full of misery. (7)

क्रीडमानाश्च विस्तरब्धा मत्ता: शून्ये तथा ATM: |
दृष्टवा समभिवर्तन्ते सीते दु:ख्मतो वनम्॥८॥

“Again, on seeing a human being, wild
beasts in rut, sporting fearlessly in a lonely
retreat, attack him on all sides. Hence a
forest is full of suffering. (8)

we: सरितश्चैव पङ्कवत्यस्तु दुस्तरा:।
मत्तैरपि गजैर्नित्यमतो दु:खतरं वनम्॥९॥
“Rivers are full of alligators and marshy
too and as such difficult to cross even for
elephants in rut. Hence a forest is ever
exceedingly unpleasant. (9)
लताकण्टकसंकोर्णा: कृकवाकूपनादिता:।
निरपाश्च सुदु:खाश्च AMT दु:खमतो TALI Lo ll
“The paths are waterless and extremely
rugged, covered with creepers and thorns
and rendered noisy by wild cocks. A forest
is, therefore, full of misery. (10)

सुप्यते पर्णशय्यासु स्वयंभग्नासु भूतले।
रात्रिषु श्रमखिन्नेन तस्माद् दु:खमतो SALI? UI

401

“Exhausted through toil entailed by
search for food in the shape of fruits etc.,
one has to lie down during nights on beds of
dry leaves fallen of themselves. Hence a
forest is a source of great suffering. (11)
अहोरात्रं च संतोष: aden नियतात्मना।
फलैर्वृक्षावपतितै: सीते दु:खमतो वनम्॥१२॥

“By day and by night hunger has to be
appeased with one’s mind fully controlled
by means of fruits fallen of themselves from
trees, O Sita! Hence a forest is full of
privations. (12)

उपवासश्च कर्तव्यो यथा wor मैथिलि।
जटाभारश्च कर्तव्यो वल्कलाम्बरधारणम्॥१३॥

“Fasting has to be observed according
to one’s stamina, O princess of Mithila!
Nay, a mass of matted hair has to be worn
on the head and one has to remain clad in
the bark of trees. (13)
देवतानां पितॄणां च कर्तव्यं विधिपूर्वकम्।
प्राप्तानामतिथीनां च नित्यश: प्रतिपूजनम्॥१४॥

“Worship must be offered everyday to
the gods and the manes according to the
scriptural ordinance and hospitality shown
to unexpected guests arrived at his door.

(14)
कार्यस्तिरभिषेकश्च काले काले च नित्यश:।
चरतां नियमेनैव तस्माद् दु:खतरं वनम्॥१५॥

“By those living strictly in accordance
with the scriptural ordinance ablutions must
be performed thrice at the appointed time,
viz., in the morning and evening as well as
at midday, everyday. Hence a forest is full
of great hardships. (15)

उपहारश्च कर्तव्य: कुसुमै: स्वयमाहतै:।
आर्षेण विधिना वेद्यां सीते दु:खमतो वनम्॥ १६॥

“Worship must be offered according to
the ordinance laid down by sages at the
altar, prepared with one’s own hands by
means of flowers gathered by oneself, O
Sita! Hence a forest is a source of suffering.

(16)
