# YUDDHAKANDA #

actually took possession of Ravana on the
battlefield. A very high-pitched roar rose
among the monkeys, who felt greatly rejoiced.

(1—24)

स्फोटयन्निव शब्देन लङ्कां साट्टालगोपुराम्।
सहेन्द्रेणेव देवानां Ale: समभवन्महान्॥ २५॥
A loud clamour, which resembled the
noise of gods, accompanied by their ruler,
Indra, followed, rendering asunder, as it were,
with its vibrations the city of Lanka, including
its attics and ornamental gates. (25)

719

अथेन्द्रशत्रुस्त्रिदशालयानां

वनौकसां चैव महाप्रणादम्।
श्रुत्वा सरोषं युधि राक्षसेन्द्र:

पुनश्च युद्धाभिमुखोऽवतस्थे lt २६ I

Nay, hearing to his rage the loud
uproar of the gods (lit, the dwellers in
heaven) as well as of the monkeys (the
denizens of the forest), Ravana, the lord of
ogres, the avowed enemy of Indra, stood
on the battlefield once more, prepared for a
conflict. (26)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये युद्धकाण्डेऽष्टनवतितम: सर्ग: ॥ ९८ Il

Thus ends Canto Ninety-eight in the Yuddhakanda of the glorious Ramayana of
Valmiki, the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

एकोनशततम: सर्ग:
Canto XCIX

Sri Rama’s encounter with Ravana

महोदरमहापाश्वौ हतौ दृष्टवा स रावण:।
तस्मिंश्च fread dit विरूपाक्षे महाबले॥ १॥
आविवेश महान् क्रोधो रावणं तु महामृधे।
सूतं संचोदयामास वाक्यं चेदमुवाच ह॥२॥
On seeing Mahodara and Mahaparswa
killed, nay, the notorious champion
Virupaksa, who was endowed with extra-
ordinary might, having already been struck
down, a great rage actually seized Ravana
in the course of the great conflict. Nay, he
urged on his charioteer and addressed to
him the following words: so the tradition
goes: (1-2)
निहतानाममात्यानां रुद्धस्य नगरस्य च।
दु:ख्मेवापनेष्यामि हत्वा dt रामलक्ष्मणौ॥ ३॥
“Killing the two princes, Rama and

Laksmana, | shall certainly get rid of the
suffering caused to me on account of the

ministers who have been killed and the city
which has been laid siege to by the monkeys.
(3)
wage रणे हन्मि सीतापुष्पफलप्रदम्।
प्रशाखा यस्य सुग्रीवो जाम्बवान् कुमुदो नल:॥४॥
द्विविदश्चैव मैन्दश्च अङ्गदो गन्धमादन:।
हनूमांश्च सुषेणश्च wd च हरियूथपा:॥७५॥

“In the fight, | shall cut down the tree in
the shape of Rama, which is going to yield
fruit through its blossom in the form of Sita,
nay, whose principal boughs are Sugriva,
Jambavan, Kumuda, Nala, as well as
Dwivida and Mainda, Angada,
Gandhamadana as also Hanuman and
Susena and all the other commanders of
monkey troops.” (4-5)

a दिशो दश घोषेण रथस्यातिरथो महान्।
नादयन् Waal तूर्णं wad चाभ्यधावत॥६॥
