460

endowed with great agility, pierced Gavaksa
as well as Sarabha too, the two monkeys of
immeasurable prowess, with two arrows
each on the field of battle. (20)
विव्याध बहुभिर्बाणैस्त्वरमाणोऽथ रावणि:॥ २१॥

Nay, coursing swiftly, Indrajit pierced
once more with numerous darts Gavaksa,
the ruler of Golangulas, and then Afigada
(son of Vali) too. (21)

तान् वानरवरान् भित्त्वा शरैरग्निशिखोपमै: |

Wie बलवांस्तत्र महासत्त्व: A रावणि:॥ २२॥
Having transfixed the aforesaid jewels

among monkeys with his arrows resembling

the tongues of fire, that mighty son of

Ravana, who was endowed with great

courage, began to roar in triumph. (22)

तानर्दयित्वा बाणौघैस्त्रासयित्वा च वानरान्।
प्रजहास महाबाहुर्वचनं चेदमब्रवीत्॥२३॥

Having hurt the monkeys with hails of
arrows and struck terror into them, the
mighty-armed ogre heartily laughed and
exclaimed as follows: (23)

शरबन्धेन घोरेण मया बद्धौ चमूमुखे।
सहितौ भ्रातरावेतौ निशामयत राक्षसा:॥ २४॥

“Behold, O ogres, these two brothers
bound by me together in a formidable net of
arrows in the forefront of battle.” (24)

`एवमुक्तास्तु ते सर्वे राक्षसा: कूटयोधिन:।
परं विस्मयमापन्ना: कर्मणा तेन हर्षिता:॥ २५॥

Spoken to as aforesaid, all those ogres
for their part, who fought treacherously, were
seized with great wonder and felt delighted
by that exploit of his. (25)

विनेदुश्च महानादान् aad a जलदोपमा:।

Bat Wa इति ज्ञात्वा रावणिं समपूजयन्॥ २६॥
They all thudered like clouds, emitting

loud shouts. Knowing that Sri Rama had

been killed, they acclaimed Indrajit, son of

Ravana. (26)

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA +

निष्पन्दौ तु तदा दृष्ट्वा भ्रातरौ रामलक्ष्मणौ।
वसुधायां निरुच्छ्रवासौ हतावित्यन्वमन्यत॥ २७॥

Beholding Sri Rama and Laksmana
lying on the ground without movement or
breath at that time, Indrajit for his part
concluded the two brothers to be dead. (27)

हर्षेण q समाविष्ट इन्द्रजित् समितिञ्जय:।
प्रविवेश पुरीं लङ्कां हर्षयन् सर्वनैर्ऋतान्॥२८॥

Filled with joy, Indrajit, for his part, who
was victorious in battles, entered in state
the city of Lanka, bringing joy to all ogres.

(28)
रामलक्ष्मणयोर्दृष्टवा शरीरे सायकैश्चिते।
सर्वाणि चाङ्गोपाङ्गानि सुग्रीवं भयमाविशत्॥ २९॥

Fear took possession of Sugriva on
beholding the bodies as well as all the limbs
and minor limbs of Sri Rama and Laksmana
riddled with arrows. (29)

तमुवाच परित्रस्तं वानरेन्द्रं विभीषण:।

सबाष्पवदनं दीनं शोकव्याकुललोचनम्॥ ३०॥
Vibhisana spoke as follows to Sugriva

(the ruler of monkeys), whose face was

bathed in tears, alarmed and afflicted as he
was, his eyes bewildered with grief: (30)

अलं त्रासेन Gita बाष्पवेगो निगृह्यताम्।
एवं प्रायाणि युद्धानि विजयो नास्ति नैष्ठिक: ।। ३१॥

“Have done with fear, O Sugriva! Let
the gush of tears be controlled. Conflicts
are mostly of this nature (uncertain in their
issue). Victory is never certain. (31)

सभाग्यशेषतास्माकं यदि di भविष्यति।
मोहमेतौ प्रहास्येते महात्मानौ महाबलौ॥ ३२॥

“If the stock of our good fortune is
not yet exhausted, these two high-souled
princes, who are endowed with extraordinary
might, shall shake off their swoon, O gallant
monkey-king! (32)
पर्यवस्थापयात्मानमनाथं मां च वानर।
सत्यधर्माभिरक्तानां नास्ति मृत्युकृतं भयम्॥३३॥
