742

“Indeed, a laudable, momentous and
glorious act has been performed by you, a
heroic brother of Kubera (the god of wealth),
rich in might? (15)
उत्सेकेनाभिपन्नस्य गर्हितस्याहितस्य च।
कर्मण: प्राप्नुहीदानीं तस्याद्य सुमहत् फलम्॥ १६॥

“Reap today and this very moment the

rich fruit of that detested and pernicious act
perpetrated through sheer vanity. (16)

शूरोऽहमिति चात्मानमवगच्छसि दुर्मते।
नैव लज्जास्ति ते सीतां dag व्यपकर्षत:॥ १७॥

“Although, O evil-minded one, you think
yourself: ‘| am a hero’, shame did not stand
in your way at all when you were bearing
Sita away like a thief. (17)
यदिमत्संनिधौ सीता धर्षिता स्यात् त्वया बलात्।
भ्रातरं तु खरं पश्येस्तदा मत्सायकैर्हत:॥१८॥

“Had Sita been forcibly laid hands
upon by you in my presence, you would
have surely joined your cousin, Khara, that

very moment, when struck with my shafts.
(18)

दिष्ट्यासि मम मन्दात्मंश्चक्षुर्विषयमागत:।
अद्य wat सायकैस्तीक्ष्णैर्नयामि यमसादनम्॥ १९॥

“By good fortune, O dull-witted one,
you have fallen within the range of my sight.
| shall dispatch you to the abode of Death
with my sharp arrows today. (19)

अद्य ते मच्छरैश्छिन्नं शिरो ज्वलितकुण्डलम्।
क्रव्यादा व्यपकर्षन्तु विकीर्णं रणपांसुषु॥ २०॥

“Let carnivorous birds and beasts drag
away here and there today your head
severed by my arrows and lying scattered
in the dust of the battlefield with its dazzling
earrings. (20)

निपत्योरसि गृध्रास्ते क्षितौ क्षिप्तस्य रावण।
पिबन्तु रुधिरं तर्षाद् बाणशल्यान्तरोत्थितम्॥ २१॥

“Let vultures, swooping on your breast
when you have been thrown down on the

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA +

ground, O Ravana, quaff with avidity your
blood gushing forth from the outlet made by
the head of my arrow. (21)

अद्य मद्बाणभिन्नस्य गतासो: पतितस्य ते।
कर्षन् त्वन्त्राणि पतगा गरुत्मन्त इवोरगान्॥ २२॥

“Let birds such as crows and vultures
tear out your entrails as eagles would pluck
off snakes when you fall dead pierced by
my arrows today.” (22)

इत्येवं स वदन् वीरो राम: शत्रुनिबर्हण:।
Tas समीपस्थं शरवर्षैरवाकिरत्॥२३॥

Saying so, the valiant Sri Rama, the
well-known exterminator of his enemies,
covered Ravana (the ruler of ogres), who
stood near, with showers of arrows. (23)
aya द्विगुणं dtd बलं हर्षश्च संयुगे।
रामस्यास्त्रबलं चैव शत्रोर्निधनकांक्षिण:॥ २४॥

The prowess, might and martial ardour
as well as the force of the missiles of Sri
Rama, who sought the destruction of his
enemy, was redoubled. (24)

प्रादुर्बभूवुरस्त्राणि सर्वाणि विदितात्मन:।
प्रहर्षाच्च महातेजा: शीघ्रहस्ततरोऽभवत्॥ २५॥

All the mystic missiles appeared before
Sri Rama, who was rich in self-knowledge.
Nay, in his excessive joy, born of his martial
ardour, the prince, who was endowed with
extraordinary energy, became more nimble-
handed in discharging arrows. (25)

शुभान्येतानि चिह्नानि विज्ञायात्मगतानि a: |
भूय एवार्दयद् WAT रावणं राक्षसान्तकृत्॥ २६॥
Perceiving these auspicious
prognostications in himself, the aforesaid
Sri Rama, the exterminator of ogres, began
to strike Ravana even more vehemently.
(26)

हरीणां चाश्मनिकरै: शरवर्षैश्च राघवात्।
हन्यमानो दशग्रीवो विघूर्णहृदयोऽभवत्॥ 201

While being struck with volleys of stones
