250

Laksmana, ViSwamitra, whose mind is ever
given to piety, retired to his camp, being

« VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

extolled even as he went by the exalted
souls (that had followed him). (40)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये बालकाण्डे पञ्चषट्टितम: सर्ग: ॥ ६५ ॥

Thus ends Canto Sixty-five in the Balakanda of the glorious Ramayana of Valmiki,
the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

Canto LX VI

On Viswamitra apprising Janaka of the eagerness of Sri Rama and
Laksmana to see his famous bow, Janaka reveals to him its
glory and tells him how he got it as well as Sita and
also of his pledge to give her in marriage to
Sri Rama if he would string it

aa: प्रभाते विमले कृतकर्मा नराधिप:।
विश्वामित्रं महात्मानमाजुहाव सराघवम्॥१॥
Having concluded his religious rites for
the morning, Janaka, a ruler of men, sent
for the high-souled Vigwamitra alongwith Sri
Rama and Laksmana, the two scions of
Raghu, the next day when the day had
clearly dawned. (1)

तमर्चयित्वा धर्मात्मा शास्त्रदृष्टेन कर्मणा।
राघवौ च महात्मानौ तदा वाक्यमुवाच Fu zl
Having honoured him as well as the
high-souled Sri Rama and Laksmana, the
two scions of Raghu, by means of rites
prescribed in our sacred books, the pious
soul then spoke to him as follows: so the
tradition goes : (2)
भगवन् स्वागतं तेऽस्तु किं करोमि तवानघ।
भवानाज्ञापयतु मामाज्ञा'णो भवता ह्यहम्॥ ३॥
“Hail to you, O venerable Sir ! Instruct

me what | can do for you, O sinless one,
since | deserve to be commanded by you.”

(3)
Wag: स धर्मात्मा जनकेन महात्मना।
प्रत्युवाच मुनिश्रेष्ठो वाक्यं वाक्यविशारद:॥४॥

Addressed in these words by the high-

souled Janaka, the pious and celebrated
ViSwamitra, a jewel among sages and a
master of expression, replied as follows:
(4)
git दशरथस्येमौ aft लोकविश्रुतौ।
द्रष्टुकामौ धनु:श्रेष्ठं यदेतत्त्वयि तिष्ठति॥५॥

“These two Ksatriya princes, sons of
Emperor Dasaratha, who are well-known
throughout the world, are eager to see the
superb bow which is now with you. (5)

Wie दर्शय we aA कृतकामौ नृपात्मजौ।
दर्शनादस्य धनुषो यथेष्टं प्रतियास्यत:॥६॥
“Please show it to them; may good
betide you ! With their desire fulfilled through
the sight of this bow the two princes will
return as they would.” (6)

एवमुक्तस्तु जनक: प्रत्युवाच महामुनिम्।
श्रूयतामस्य धनुषो यदर्थमिह तिष्ठति॥७॥
Urged in these words, Janaka for his
part replied as follows to ViSwamitra, the
eminent sage: “Hear the tale of this bow,
wherefore it lies here in my charge. (7)

देवरात sta ख्यातो Paster महीपति:।
न्यासोऽयं तस्य भगवन् हस्ते दत्तो महात्मन:॥ ८॥

“Nimi’s eldest son was known as King
