598

Putting that arrow to his bow,
Atikaya, who was endowed with extraordinary
energy, precipitately shot it. With that
he struck Laksmana (son of Sumitra), as
he was aiming at his breast. (81)

अतिकायेन सौमित्रिस्ताडितो afr वक्षसि।
सुस्राव रुधिरं did ud we ga द्विप:॥८२॥
Hit in the breast by Atikaya on the
battlefield, Laksmana (son of Sumitra) began
to bleed profusely even as an elephant
in rut would discharge ichor. (82)
स चकार तदात्मानं विशल्यं सहसा fey: |
We च wt तीक्ष्णमस्त्रेणापि समाददे॥ ८३॥
The all-powerful Laksmana (who was
a part manifestation of Lord Visnu) then
speedily rid himself of the shaft, seized hold
of a sharp arrow and also charged it with
a mystic spell. (83)
आग्नेयेन तदास्त्रेण योजयामास सायकम्।
सजन्वालतदाबाणो धनुष्यस्य महात्मन: CV Il
On that occasion he charged his
arrow with the missile presided over by
the god of fire. Placed on the bow of the
high-souled prince, that arrow shot forth
flames. (84)

अतिकायोऽतितेजस्वी रौद्रमस्त्रं समाददे।
तेन बाणं YaST हेमपुङ्खमयोजयत्॥८५॥
Atikaya, who was endowed with
surpassing energy, pressed into service a
fearful mystic missile and charged a serpent-
like golden-feathered arrow with it. (85)
तदस्त्रं ज्वलितं at लक्ष्मण: शरमाहितम्।
अतिकायाय चिक्षेप कालदण्डमिवान्तक:॥ ८६॥
In the meantime, Laksmana shot at
Atikaya that flaming and formidable arrow in
the form of a mystic missile charged with
occult power, even as Death would hurl his
rod of destruction. (86)

उत्ससर्ज तदा बाणं We सूर्यास्त्रयोजितम्॥ co

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA +

Seeing the arrow charged with a missile
presided over by the god of fire, the prowler
of the night, Atikaya, forthwith discharged
an arrow charged with a missile presided
over by the sun-god. (87)

तावुभावम्बरे बाणावन्योन्यमभिजघ्नतु:।
तेजसा सम्प्रदीप्ताग्रौ क्रुद्धाविव भुजङ्घमौ॥ ८८॥

Both the aforesaid arrows, whose heads
were flaming with fire, struck each other in
space like two furious serpents. (88)

तावन्योन्यं विनिर्दह्य tad: पृथिवीतले॥८९॥

Having burnt each other, they fell to
the earth’s surface. (89)

निरर्चिषौ भस्मकृतौ न भ्राजेते शरोत्तमौ।
तावुभौ दीप्यमानौ स्म न भ्राजेते महीतले॥९०॥

The two excellent arrows, even though
they were both glowing, did not shine forth
any longer on the earth’s surface, in that
they had ceased to emit flames and had
been reduced to ashes. (90)

ततोऽतिकाय: संक्रुद्धस्त्वाष्ट्मैषीकमुत्सृजत्।
ततश्चिच्छेद सौमित्रिरस्त्रमैन्द्रेण वीर्यवान्॥९१॥

Seized with fury, Atikaya thereupon
discharged an arrow of reed charged with a
missile presided over by Twasta (the architect
of gods). The valiant son of Sumitra,
Laksmana, thereupon split it with a missile
presided over by Indra, ruler of gods. (91)

ऐषीकं निहतं geal HAN रावणात्मज:।
याम्येनास्त्रेण संक्रुद्धो योजयामास सायकम्॥ ९२॥

Enraged to find his arrow of reed struck
down by Laksmana, Prince Atikaya, sprung
from the loins of Ravana, charged an arrow
with a missile presided over by Yama (the
god of retribution). (92)

ततस्तदस्त्रं fata लक्ष्मणाय निशाचर:।
aaa तदस्त्रेण निजघान स लक्ष्मण:॥९३॥

The ranger of the night then shot it
at Laksmana. The celebrated Laksmana,
