246

« VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

सप्तपञ्चाश: सर्ग:
Canto LVIT

Having leapt from the coast of Lanka and touching the Mainaka mountain,
which he came across in the way, nay, advancing further, Hanuman roars
at the top of his voice at the sight of the Mahendra mountain in order
to bring joy to the monkeys awaiting his return there. Jambavan tells
the monkeys, who got up impetuously on hearing the roar, that
Hanuman has returned successful from his expedition as was
evident from his jubilant roar. Having greeted Jambavan and
others on alighting on the summit of the Mahendra mountain,
Hanuman narrates to them in a nutshell the story of his
discovery of Sita. Applauding Hanuman, Prince
Angada, who was eager to hear the story, sits down
to do so on an extensive flat rock alongwith all

आप्लुत्य च महावेग: पक्षवानिव पर्वत:।

भुजङ्घयक्षगन्धर्वप्रबुद्धकमलोत्पलम् ॥ १॥
स चन्द्रकुमुदं रम्यं सार्ककारण्डवं शुभम्।
तिष्यश्रवणकादम्बमभ्रशैवलशाब्बलम् Teal

पुनर्वसुमहामीनं लोहिताङ्गमहाग्रहम्।
ऐरावतमहाद्वीपं स्वातीहंसविलासितम्॥ ३॥
॥ र्मिचन्द्रांशशिरि |

हनूमानपरिश्रान्त पुप्लुवे गगनार्णवम्॥४॥

Bounding with great impetuosity,
Hanuman, who looked like a winged mountain,
and never felt exhausted, sailed across the
firmament, which presented the appearance
of a delightful and charming ocean graced
with a swan in the form of the constellation
Swati, with the Nagas, Yaksas and
Gandharvas gathered together there for its
full-blown lotuses and water-lilies, the moon
for a white water-lily, the sun for a water-
fowl, the constellations known by the names
of Pusya and Sravana for swans, the clouds
for its duck-weeds and grassy spots
adjoining the shores, the twin constellations,
the Punarvasus, for its large fish, the planet
Mars for a large alligator, Airavata (the
elephant carrying Indra on its back) for a
large island, the gales for its billows and the
moonbeams for its cool water. (1—4)

ग्रसमान इवाकाशं ताराधिपमिवोल्लिखन्।
हरन्निवं wat WH सार्कमण्डलम्॥५॥
अपारमपरिश्रान्तश्चाम्बुधिं समगाहत।
हनूमान् मेघजालानि विकर्षन्निव गच्छति॥६॥

As though swallowing up the space,
scratching the moon (the lord of stars),
seizing the heavens alongwith their lunar
mansions and the solar orb and drawing the
masses of clouds apart, Hanuman
unweariedly sailed over the boundless sea.

(5-6)

Huge clouds, white, roseate, blue,
madder like, green and dark in colour made
their appearance in the sky. (7)

प्रविशन्नभ्रजालानि निष्क्रमंश्च पुन: पुन:।
प्रकाशश्चाप्रकाशश्च चन्द्रमा sa दूश्यते॥८॥

Penetrating deep into the masses of
clouds and emerging from them again and

again, Hanuman looked like the moon
becoming invisible and visible again. (8)
विविधाभ्रघनापन्नगोचरो धवलाम्बर: |

दृश्यादृश्यतनुर्वीरस्तथा चन्द्रायतेऽम्बरे ।। ९ ।।

Having found his way into the various
