298

this sea, either by strength of will acquired
by virtue of my asceticism, or by throwing a
bridge across it or even by drying up the
sea by use of mystic missiles. (2)

कति दुर्गाणि दुर्गाया लङ्कायास्तद् ब्रवीष्व मे।
ज्ञातुमिच्छामि aq ad दर्शनादिव arc sil

“How many fortifications are there in
Lanka, which is so difficult of access? Please
point it out to me. | wish to know all that as
through sight, O Hanuman! (3)

ara परिमाणं च द्वारदुर्गक्रियामपि।
गुप्तिकर्म च लङ्काया रक्षसां सदनानि च॥४॥
यथासुखं यथावच्च लङ्कायामसि दृष्टवान्।
सर्वमाचक्ष्व तत्त्वेन सर्वथा कुशलो AAU il
“You have seen according to your
convenience the strength of the army as also
the process by which the entrances have
been rendered difficult of access, nay, the
way in which Lanka is guarded, as well as
the mansions of the ogres. Please relate
everything in accordance with factual situation;
for you are clever in everyway.” (4-5)

श्रुत्वा रामस्य वचनं हनूमान् मारुतात्मज:।
वाक्यं वाक्यविदां श्रेष्ठो WA पुनरथाब्रवीत्॥६॥
Hearing the command of Sri Rama,
Hanuman, sprung from the loins of the wind-
god and the foremost among those adept in

the art of expression, forthwith made the
following submission to Sri Rama once more:

(6)
श्रूयतां सर्वमाख्यास्ये दुर्गकर्म विधानत:।
Tat Ut यथा लङ्का रक्षिता च यथा बलै:।॥ ७॥
राक्षसाश्च यथा स्निग्धा रावणस्य च तेजसा।
परां समृद्धिं लङ्काया: सागरस्य च भीमताम्॥ ८॥
विभागं च बलौघस्य निर्देशं वाहनस्य च।
एवमुक्त्वा कपिश्रेष्ठ: कथयामास तत्त्वत:॥९॥

“Please listen, my Lord! | shall relate to
you everything—how the city of Lanka has

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA +

been defended according to the technique
of fortification and how it has been protected
by troops and how the ogres are devoted to
their king, and shall also describe the extreme
prosperity of Lanka occasioned by Ravana’s
glory, the dreadfulness of the sea, the division
of the body of his forces into regiments and
the strength of the animals carrying his
forces other than the infantry.” Saying so,
Hanuman, the foremost of monkeys, who
knew the facts about Lanka, began as

follows: (7—9)
हृष्टप्रमुदिता लङ्का मत्तद्विपसमाकुला।
महती रथसम्पूर्णा रक्षोगणनिषेविता॥१०॥

“The extensive city of Lanka is gay
and in raptures and remains crowded
with elephants in rut; nay, it is packed
with chariots and is inhabited by hordes of
ogres. (10)

दृढबद्धकपाटानि महापरिघवन्ति al
चत्वारि विपुलान्यस्या द्वाराणि सुमहान्ति AU ११॥

“There are four extensive and huge
gates in it, which have been provided with
strong doors closed with massive bars. (11)

तत्रेषूपलयन्त्राणि बलवन्ति महान्ति च ।
आगतं प्रतिसैन्यं तैस्तत्र प्रतिनिवार्यते॥१२॥

“Powerful and enormous catapults
discharging darts and stones have been
attached to them; by them a hostile army
arrived there is repulsed at the very gates.

(12)

द्वारेषु संस्कृता भीमा: कालायसमया: शिता:।
शतशो रचिता ait: शतघ्न्यो रक्षसां गणै:।॥ १३॥

“Formidable sharp-edged steel clubs,
known by the name of Sataghnis*, which
are four cubits long and bristle with iron
spikes and are so-called because they are
supposed to kill hundreds at a time, forged
by the heroic hordes of ogres, have been
kept in readiness in hundreds at the gates.

(13)

* शतघ्नी च चतुर्हस्ता लोहकण्टकिनी गदा--इति वैजयन्ती।
