1126

भरतश्च विसंज्ञोऽभूच्छुत्वा राघवभाषितम्।
we विगर्हयामास वचनं चेदमब्रवीत्॥५॥
Bharata too became almost unconscious
on hearing the words of the descendant of
Raghu, Sri Rama, and spoke ill of kingship
and then said: (5)

सत्येनाहं शपे राजन् स्वर्गभोगेन da हि।

न कामये यथा राज्यं cat विना रघुनन्दन॥६॥
‘| swear, by the truth and heavenly

enjoyments, O descendant of Raghu, | do

not desire kingship without you. (6)

इमौ कुशीलवौ राजन्नभिषिच्य नराधिप।
कोशलेषु pet वीरमुत्तरेषु aM लवम्॥७॥

‘O King, consecrate KuSa in the territory
of south Kosala and Lava in the Uttara
Kosala territory. (7)

शत्रुघ्नस्य च गच्छन्तु दूतास्त्वरितविक्रमा:।

इदं गमनमस्माकं शीघ्रमाख्यातु मा चिरम्॥८॥
‘May messengers of speedy gait go to

Satrughna, and convey soon the news of

our departure, may there be no delay’. (8)

तच्छुत्वा भरतेनोक्तं दृष्टवा चापि ह्यधोमुखान्।
पौरान् दु:खेन संतप्तान् वसिष्ठो वाक्यमब्रवीत्॥ ९॥
Having heard the words spoken by
Bharata and also seen the citizens with
faces downcast and afflicted by pain, Vasistha
said: (9)
वत्स राम इमा: पश्य धरणिं प्रकृतीर्गता:।
ज्ञात्वैषामीप्सितं caret मा चैषां विप्रियं कृथा:॥ १०॥
‘O Child Sri Rama, see the subjects
lying prostrate on the ground, you should
act after knowing their desire; do not do
something disliked by them.’ (10)

वसिष्ठस्य तु वाक्येन उत्थाप्य प्रकृतीजनम्।
किं करोमीति काकुत्स्थ: सर्वान् वचनमब्रवीत्॥ ११ ॥
Impelled by the words of Vasistha, the

descendant of Kakutstha made the subjects
rise, and said to all of them ‘What may | do.(11)

तत: at: प्रकृतयो WH वचनमब्रुवन्।
गच्छन्तमनुगच्छामो यत्र राम गमिष्यसि॥१२॥

« VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

Then all the subjects said to Sri Rama:
‘O Sri Rama, we shall follow you wherever
yOu go. (12)
पौरेषु यदि a प्रीतिर्यदि स्नेहो ह्यनुत्तम:।
सपुत्रदारा: काक्कासमंगच्छ।मसत्पथम्।।१३।।

‘If you are pleased with the citizens
and do bear great affection for them, then,
O descendant of Kakutstha, we shall proceed
on the right path simultaneously (the way
to heaven), together with our progeny and
spouses. (13)
तपोवनं वा gt वा नदीमम्भोनिधिं तथा।
ad a यदि न त्याज्या: सर्वान्नो नय svar १४॥

‘Take all of us to the forest, unnavigable
land or river or the ocean, O lord, if we are
not to be deserted by you. (14)

एषा A: परमा प्रीतिरेष A: परमो वर:।
mt न: सदा प्रीतिस्तवानुगमने नृप॥१५॥

‘This is what we most desire, O King,
in following you lies the pleasure of our life.’
(15)

पौराणां दृढभक्तिं च बाढमित्येव सोऽब्रवीत्।
स्वकृतान्तं चान्ववेक्ष्य तस्मिन्नहनि राघव:॥१६॥
कोशलेषु Be वीरमुत्तरेषु तथा लवम्।
अभिषिच्य महात्मानावुभौ Wa: कुशीलवौ॥ १७॥
अभिषिक्तौ सुतावङ्के प्रतिष्ठाप्य पुरे तत:।
परिष्वज्य महाबाहुर्मूर्ध्यपाघ्राय चासकृत्॥१८॥
रथानां तु सहस्राणि नागानामयुतानि च।
दशायुतानि चाश्वानामेकैकस्य धनं ददौ॥१९॥

Seeing the firm devotion of the citizens,
He, Sri Rama, said, ‘so be it. Visualizing the
end of his earthly sojourn that very day, the
descendant of Raghu, Sri Rama, having
coronated both the noble ones KuSa in the
south KoSala territory and Lava in the Uttara
Kosala territory, then seating them in his
lap, embracing them, smelling their heads
more than once and establishing them as
kings, gave to each a thousand chariots,
ten thousand elephants and _ hundred
thousand horses. (16—19)
