+ UTTARAKANDA +

well-known in the three worlds, rich as he
was in righteousness and fame. (30—33)

श्रुतिमान् समदर्शी च व्रताचाररतस्तथा।
fata तपसा युक्तो ह्यभवद् विश्रवा APA: ३४॥

851

Visrava, the seer, spent his time in
Tapas like his father. He was well-read in
the Vedas. He treated all living creatures
alike. He was devoted to the observance of
holy vows and good conduct. (34)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये उत्तरकाण्डे द्वितीय: AA: ॥ २॥

Thus ends Canto Two in the Uttarakanda of the glorious Ramayana of Valmiki,
the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

Canto ITI

Vaisravana’s birth from the loins of Visrava; his obtaining boons through
Tapas and his residence in Lanka

अथ Ua: पुलस्त्यस्य विश्रवा मुनिपुङ्खव:।
अचिरेणैव कालेन पितेव तपसि स्थित:॥१॥

“The son of Pulastya, ViSrava, the best
of sages, was soon engaged in Tapas like
his father. (1)

सत्यवाञ्शीलवान् दान्त: स्वाध्यायनिरत: शुचि: |
सर्वभोगेष्वसंसक्को नित्यं धर्मपरायण:॥२॥
He was always bent on treading the
path of righteousness and speaking the truth:
he was of good conduct, self-controlled,
given to studying the Vedas, pure and
unattached to every kind of sensual pleasure.
(2)

ज्ञात्वा तस्य I ae ad भरद्वाजो महामुनि: |
ददौ विश्रवसे भार्यां स्वसुतां देववर्णिनीम्॥ 3 i

Learning his way of life, Bharadwaja
the great sage, gave his daughter,
Devavarnini (beautiful like a divine damsel)
to ViSrava in marriage. (3)

प्रतिगृह्य तु धर्मेण भरद्वाजसुतां तदा।
प्रजान्वेषिकया agar श्रेयो ह्यस्य विचिन्तयन्॥४॥
Accepting Bharadwaja’s daughter in the
prescribed way he began to think of
begetting a son with a mind seeking the
welfare of the people as well as with a view
to promoting his spiritual welfare. (4)

Wat परमया ant विश्रवा मुनिपुङ्खव:।
स तस्यां वीर्यसम्पन्नमपत्यं परमाद्भुतम्॥५॥
जनयामास a: सर्वैर्ब्रह्मगुणैर्वृतम्।
तस्मिञ्जाते तु dee: a aya पितामह:॥६॥
दृष्टवा श्रेयस्करीं बुद्धिं धनाध्यक्षो भविष्यति।
नाम चास्याकरोत् प्रीत: सार्धं देवर्षिभिस्तदा॥ ७॥
Filled with highest joy, ViSrava, the best
of sages, who knew what is right, begot of
her a most wonderful son, possessed of valour
and all the virtues of a Brahmana. Divining on
his birth his inclination to do good to the world
and seeing that he would become the lord of
wealth, the sage was highly pleased and then
gave him a name in consultation with other
celestial sages. (5—7)

यस्माद् विश्रवसोऽपत्यं सादृश्याद् विश्रवा इव।
तस्माद् वैश्रवणो नाम भविष्यत्येष fasta: ue i

They said, ‘since he is a son of `1ऽ]8४वव
and resembles his father in every respect,
he would be known (in course of time), as
VaiSravana.’ (8)
a G वैश्रवणस्तत्र तपोवनगतस्तदा।
अवर्धताहुतिहुतो महातेजा यथानल:॥९॥

‘VaiSravana, of great lustre, then

repaired to a forest retreat (Tapovana) and
grew up like fire fed by offerings. (9)
