* AYODHYAKANDA +

“ ‘Whose heart-captivating voice shall |
hear now in the latter half of the night,
reading in particularly sweet tones from any
scripture or other sacred book? (32)

को मां संध्यामुपास्यैव स्नात्वा हुतहुताशन:।
शलाघयिष्यत्युपासीन: पुत्रशोकभर्यादितम्॥ ३३॥

“Who, having bathed, worshipped
Sandhya (the goddess presiding over the
morning twilight) and offered oblations to the
sacred fire, and seated by my side, will
console me, tormented with grief and fear

caused by the death of my son? (33)
कन्दमूलफलं हृत्वा यो at प्रियमिवातिथिम्।
भोजयिष्यत्यकर्मण्यमप्रग्रहमनायकम् ॥ ३४॥

“Who, having fetched bulbs, roots and
fruits, will feed me as one would entertain a
beloved guest, unfit as | am for work,
resourceless and guideless? (34)
इमामन्धां च वृद्धां च मातरं A तपस्विनीम्।
कथं पुत्र भरिष्यामि कृपणां पुत्रगर्धिनीम्॥ ३५॥

“‘How, my son, shall | be able to
support this mother of yours, who is not
only blind, aged and given to austerities, but
also miserable and full of longing for her
son? (35)
तिष्ठं मा मा गम: पुत्र यमस्य सदनं प्रति।
श्चो मया सह गन्तासि जनन्या च समेधित:॥ ३६॥

“*Tarry, my son, pray, do not, O do not
yet proceed to the abode of Yama (the
god of death). Tomorrow you will go with
me and accompanied by your mother too.

(36)
उभावपि च शोकार्तावनाथौ कृपणौ वने।
क्षिप्रमेव गमिष्यावस्त्वया हीनौ यमक्षयम्॥ ३७॥

“Stricken with grief, devoid of a
supporter and leading a wretched life in the
forest, we shall both proceed to Yama’s abode
without delay, bereft as we are of you. (37)

ततो वैवस्वतं दृष्टवा तं प्रवक्ष्यामि भारतीम्।
क्षमतां धर्मराजो मे बिभृयात् पितरावयम्॥ ३८॥

‘Seeing Yama (son of Vivaswan, the

531

sun-god) | shall then address the following
prayer to him: ‘May King Dharma (the god
of piety) be pleased to condone my fault.
Let this son of mine continue to support us,
his parents, as heretofore. (38)

दातुमर्हति धर्मात्मा लोकपालो महायशा:।
ईदृशस्य ममाक्षय्यामेकामभयदक्षिणाम्॥ ३९॥

““A pious-minded and highly illustrious
guardian of the world, you ought to vouchsafe
in my favour this one imperishable boon
and make me fearless for ever, reduced as
| am to this plight, (39)

अपापोऽसि यथा ua fred: पापकर्मणा।
तेन सत्येन गच्छाशु ये लोकास्त्वस्त्रयोधिनाम्॥ Yo ॥

““Though killed as a result of some
sinful act committed in some _ previous
existence, you are really sinless. Therefore,
endowed as you are with truthfulness,
speedily ascend, my son, to the realms
which are attained by those who die fighting
with weapons. (40)
at fe शूरा गतिं यान्ति संग्रामेष्वनिर्वितन:।
हतास्त्वभिमुखा: पुत्र Mit तां परमां व्रज॥४१॥

“‘Reach, my son, that highest destiny
to which actually attain heroic warriors never
retreating from the fields of battle and killed
while facing the enemy. (41)

at गतिं सगर: shear दिलीपो जनमेजय:।

नहुषो धुन्धुमारश्च प्राप्तास्तां गच्छ पुत्रक॥४२॥
“Reach, my dear child, the same

goal to which attained Emperors Sagara,

Saibya, Dillpa, Janamejaya, Nahusa and

Dhundhumara. (42)

या गति: सर्वभूतानां स्वाध्यायात् तपसश्च या।
भूमिदस्याहिताग्नेश्च एकपत्नीव्रतस्य च ॥४३॥
गोसहस्रप्रदातॄणां गुरुसेवाभृतामपि।
देहन्यासकृतां या च at Wet Wes पुत्रक॥४४॥
““Get merged, my dear son, in the
same Brahma which is the goal of all living
beings, attainable through study of the Vedas
and asceticism, and attain that destiny which
