* ARANYAKANDA «

“Kill the two princes in a combat, or get
away quickly with your kinsmen from
Janasthana, O fool ! If, on the other hand, O
disgrace of your race, you cannot really
dispose of those two human _ beings,
Rama and Laksmana, how shameful
indeed is your residence in this forest, lacking
in strength and scanty of valour, as you
are! (18-19)
रामतेजोऽभिभूतो fe त्वं क्षिप्रं विनशिष्यसि।

स fe तेज:समायुक्तो WAT दशरथात्मज:॥ २०॥
भ्राता चास्य महावीर्यो येन चास्मि विरूपिता।
एवं विलप्य बहुशो राक्षसी प्रदरोदरी॥ २१॥

769

Ud: समीपे शोकार्ता नष्टसंज्ञा बभूव ह।
कराभ्यामुदरं हत्वा रुरोद भृशदु:खिता॥ २२॥

“Humbled by his energy, you will surely
perish in no time. Richly endowed with energy
is the aforesaid Rama, son of DaSaratha,
as also his’ brother, possessed _ of
extraordinary prowess, by whom | stand
mutilated.” Wailing in many ways as above,
the ogress of sunken belly fell unconscious
beside her brother, stricken with grief, so
the tradition goes; and, beating her belly
with her hands, highly afflicted as she was,
burst into tears. (20—22)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्येऽरण्यकाण्डे एकविंश: सर्ग: ॥ २१ ॥

Thus ends Canto Twenty-one in the Aranyakanda of the glorious Ramayana of
Valmiki, the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

Canto XXII

Khara and Dusana march towards Pancavati with an army
of fourteen thousand ogres

`एवमाधर्षित: शूर: शूर्पणख्या खरस्तत:।
उवाच रक्षसां मध्ये खर: GAT वच:॥१॥

Thus reproached by Surpanakha, the
valiant and cruel Khara then uttered the
following very sharp words in the midst of
other ogres: (1)

तवापमानप्रभव: क्रोधोऽयमतुलो मम।
न शक्यते धारयितुं लवणाम्भ इवोल्बणम्॥ २॥

“This immeasurable anger of mine,
arising from your insult, cannot be held in
check like a powerful wave of the ocean. (2)
न रामं गणये वीर्यान्मानुषं क्षीणजीवितम्।
आत्मदुश्चरितै: प्राणान् हतो Ase विमोक्ष्यते॥ ३॥

“By virtue of my prowess | hold of no
account the human Rama, whose life is
already worn away and who will be
deprived of his life today, being killed by

his own misdeeds.

arma: संधार्यतामेष सम्भ्रमश्च विमुच्यताम्।

a WA सह wat नयामि यमसादनम्॥४॥
“Restrain these tears and completely

shed your fear. | am despatching Rama
with his brother to the abode of Yama. (4)

परश्वधहतस्याद्य मन्दप्राणस्य भूतले।
रामस्य रुधिरं रक्तमुष्णं पास्यसि राक्षसि॥७५॥
“O ogress, you will drink today the red
and hot blood of Rama fallen on the ground,
struck dead with my axe.” (5)

सम्प्रहष्टा वच: Aral खरस्य वदनाच्च्युतम्।
प्रशशंस Gade भ्रातरं रक्षसां वरम्॥६॥
Extremely delighted to hear the words
fallen from the lips of Khara, she once again
extolled in her folly her brother, a giant
among ogres. (6)

(3)
