1046

years and was comparable with the sacrifice
of the gods being performed with great pomp.
(19)

अथावसाने यज्ञस्य पूर्ववैरमनुस्मरन्।
वसिष्ठरूपी राजानमिति होवाच राक्षस:॥ २०॥

Now at the end of this sacrifice, the
Raksasa in the form of Vasistha remembering
the former enmity spoke to the king. (20)
TI यज्ञावसानान्ते सामिषं भोजनं मम।
दीयतामतिशीघ्रं वै art कार्या विचारणा॥ २१॥

‘At the conclusion of the last part of the
sacrifice, give me immediately my food
consisting of flesh, and do not ponder over
this.’ (21)
तच्छृत्वा Aled वाक्यं रक्षसा ब्रह्मरूपिणा।
सूदान् संस्कारकुशलानुवाच पृथिवीपति:।॥ २२॥

Hearing those words, spoken by

Raksasa in the form of Brahmana Vasistha,
the king spoke to the expert cooks: (22)

हविष्यं सामिषं स्वादु यथा vata भोजनम्।
aM Hed vit a परितुष्येद् यथा गुरु:॥ २३॥
‘Prepare soon such food possessed of

flesh, fatty and worthy of offering, so that

our preceptor, Vasistha, is satisfied.’ (23)

शासनात् पार्थिवेन्द्रस्य सूद: सम्भ्रान्तमानस:।

Wet रक्ष: पुनस्तत्र सूदवेषमथाकरोत्॥ २४॥
The chief of the cooks was perturbed in

mind at the orders of the king; then that
Raksasa soon took the form of the cook. (24)

स मानुषमथो मांसं पार्थिवाय न्यवेदयत्।

Be स्वादु हविष्यं च सामिषं चान्नमाहृतम्॥ २५॥
He brought human flesh to the king and

said: “This tasteful food, possessed of flesh,

has been brought by me.’ (25)

a भोजनं वसिष्ठाय ues सार्धमुपाहरत्।

मदयन्त्या नरश्रेष्ठं सामिषं रक्षसा SALI २६॥
That best among men (Virasaha)

together with his wife Madayanti offered this

food possessed of flesh brought by the
Raksasa to Vasistha. (26)

« VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

क्रोधेन महताविष्टो व्याहर्तुमुपचक्रमे॥ २७॥
यस्मात् त्वं भोजनं राजन् ममैतद् दातुमिच्छसि।
तस्माद् भोजनमेतत् ते भविष्यति न संशय: ॥ २८ ॥

Knowing human flesh to have been
brought as food, the Brahmana (Vasistha)
possessed of great anger ventured to speak
thus: ‘O king as you desire to give such
food to me, so no doubt this shall be your
food’. (27-28)

ad: क्रुद्धस्तु सौदासस्तोयं जग्राह पाणिना।
वसिष्ठं शप्तुमारेभे भार्या चैनमवारयत्॥ २९॥

Then Saudasa enraged by this, took
up a hand-full of water and was on the point
of cursing Vasistha; his wife, however,
checked him. (29)

राजन् प्रभुर्यतोऽस्माकं वसिष्ठो भगवानृषि: 1
प्रतिशप्तुं न शक्तस्त्वं देवतुल्यं पुरोधसम्॥ ३०॥

‘As the holy Rsi Vasistha is our
venerable preceptor and a chief priest
comparable to the gods, O king! so you
cannot curse him in return.’ (30)
तत: क्रोधमयं तोयं तेजोबलसमन्वितम्।
व्यसर्जयत धर्मात्मा ad: पादौ सिषेच च॥ ३१॥

Then the pious Saudasa employed the
water held in his hand, which was infused
with anger and his spiritual power and
sprinkled his feet with it. (31)
तेनास्य राज्ञस्तौ पादौ तदा कल्माषतां गतौ।
तदाप्रभृति राजासौ सौदास: सुमहायशा:॥ ३२॥
कल्माषपाद: Ud: ख्यातश्चैव तथा नृप:।

स राजा सह पत्न्या a प्रणिपत्य मुहुर्मुहु:।
पुनर्वसिष्ठं प्रोवाच यदुक्तं ब्रह्मरूपिणा॥ ३३॥

By it (this sprinkling) the feet of the king
became variegated in colour, and thence the
king by name Saudasa, became famous as
Kalmasapada (with feet of dark-variegated
colour), and was so known. That King with

his wife falling at the feet of Vasistha again
and again repeated to Vasistha what was
