+ UTTARAKANDA +

three worlds relying on the strength of my
arms. (38)

Ueda तस्यैकस्य q A कृते।
चतुरो लोकपालांस्तान् नयिष्यामि यमक्षयम्॥ ३९॥
“*`[]]1]3ऽ3 very moment | will send the four
Dikpalas (guardians of the four directions)
to the abode of Yama just on his account.’
(39)

एवमुक्त्वा तु लङ्केशो दूतं खड्गेन जघ्निवान्।
ददौ भक्षयितुं ह्येनं राक्षसानां दुरात्मनाम्॥४०॥

889

“Saying this, the lord of Lanka struck
down the messenger with his sword and
gave the corpse to be eaten by evil-minded
Raksasas. (40)

तत: कृतस्वस्त्ययनो रथमारुह्य रावण:।
त्रैलोक्यविजयाकांक्षी ययौ यत्र धनेश्वर:॥४१॥

“Then, after getting Brahmanas to read
out benedictory hymns after presentation of
offerings with a view to conquering the three
worlds, Ravana ascended his chariot and
drove to the abode of the lord of wealth.” (41)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये SRPMS त्रयोदश: सर्ग: ॥ 23 ॥

Thus ends Canto Thirteen in the Uttarakanda of the glorious Ramayana of Valmiki,
the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

Canto XIV
An attack by Ravana and his ministers on the Yaksas and the defeat (of the latter)

aa: स सचिवै: सार्धं षड्भिर्नित्यबलोद्धत:।
महोदरप्रहस्ताभ्यां मारीचशुकसारणै: tt १॥
धूम्राक्षेण च वीरेण नित्यं समरगद्दिना।
qa: सम्प्रययौ श्रीमान् क्रोधाल्लोकान् दहन्निव॥ २॥
“Accompanied and surrounded by his
six ministers—Mahodara and Prahasta,
Marica, Suka, Sarana and the hero
Dhumraksa, who ever thirsted for battle the
glorious Ravana, who was always proud of
his might, set out as if to consume the
worlds with his anger. (1-2)

पुराणि स नदी: Sear वनान्युपवनानि च।
अतिक्रम्य मुहूर्तेन कैलासं गिरिमागमत्॥३॥
“Marching across cities, rivers, hills,
forests and groves, he reached Mount Kailasa
in an hour or so. (3)

संनिविष्टं गिरौ afer राक्षसेन्द्रं निशम्य तु।
युद्धेप्सुं तं कृतोत्साहं दुरात्मानं समन्त्रिणम्॥४॥
यक्षा न शेकु: संस्थातुं Wa तस्य रक्षस:।
Tat भ्रातेति विज्ञाय Wat यत्र धनेश्वर:॥७५॥

“Hearing of the wicked king of the
Raksasas encamped on the mountain with
his ministers, eager for battle and active,
the Yaksas were unable to make a stand
against the ogre, knowing that he was a
brother of the lord of wealth, they sought the
abode of the latter. (4-5)

a गत्वा सर्वमाचख्युरभ्रातुस्तस्य चिकोर्षितम्।

अनुज्ञाता ययुर्हृष्टा युद्धाय धनदेन ते॥६॥

“Going to him, they told him all about
the intentions of his brother. Permitted by
the lord of wealth, they set out joyously to
give battle. (6)

ततो बलानां संक्षोभो व्यवर्धत saree: |

तस्य नैर्ऋतराजस्य शैलं संचालयन्निव॥७॥
“Then there arose an excitement in the

forces of the king of the Nairrtas. It was like

the agitation of the sea and it seemed to
shake the hill. (7)

ततो Ge समभवद् यक्षराक्षससंकुलम्।
व्यथिताश्चाभवंस्तत्र सचिवा राक्षसस्य ते॥८॥
