296

“These leaders of monkey troops are
gallant and powerful in everyway; they are
ready even to enter fire in order to oblige
you. | conclude this from their joy on the
proposal of an expedition against Lanka
being made to them, and my reason
in favour of this conclusion is also strong.

(7)
विक्रमेण समानेष्ये सीतां हत्वा यथा रिपुम्।
रावणं पापकर्माणं am त्वं कर्तुमर्हसि॥८॥

“You ought to manipulate things in such
a way that | may after disposing of the
enemy, Ravana of sinful deeds, be able to
recover Sita. (8)

सेतुरत्र यथा ae यथा पश्येम at पुरीम्।
Ta राक्षसराजस्य तथा त्वं He राघव॥९॥
“Take steps, O scion of Raghu, to see
that a bridge is constructed across the
intervening sea and we behold that city of
the aforesaid king of ogres. (9)
दृष्टवा ai fe पुरीं लङ्कां त्रिकूटशिखरे स्थिताम्।
at च रावणं Ag दर्शनादवधारय॥१०॥
“Know Ravana as killed as soon as he
is seen in combat and immediately on our
beholding that city of Lanka standing on a
peak of the Trikuta mountain. (10)
अबद्ध्वा सागरे Ad घोरे च वरुणालये।
लङ्कां न मर्दितुं शक्या सेन्द्रैरपि सुरासुरै:॥११॥
“Nay, without throwing a bridge over
the sea, the formidable abode of Varuna
(the god of water), Lanka cannot be
overcome even by gods and demons,
including Indra. (11)

सेतुबन्ध: समुद्रे च यावल्लङ्कासमीपत:।

wa dof च a सैन्यं जितमित्युपधारय।

इमे fe समरे वीरा wa: कामरूपिण:॥१२॥
“Nay, know that the whole of my army

will be borne across the sea and come out

victorious the moment a bridge is built upto

the vicinity of Lanka; for, the monkeys, who

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA +

are capable of assuming any form at will,
are all heroic in battle. (12)
पुरुषस्य fe लोकेऽस्मिन् शोक: शौर्यापकर्षण: 1 १३॥

“Therefore, have done with a timid mind,
which defeats all purpose; for, grief in this
world takes away the valour of a man, O
king! (13)

यत् तु कार्यं मनुष्येण शौटीर्यमवलम्ब्यताम्।
तदलंकरणायैव कर्तुर्भवति सत्वरम्॥१४॥

“Heroism alone, which is worth resorting
to, ought to be taken recourse to by a man.
It is capable of bringing success without
doubt to a doer quickly. (14)

अस्मिन् काले महाप्राज्ञ सत्त्वमातिष्ठ ASAT |
विनष्टे वा प्रणष्टे वा शोक: सर्वार्थनाशन: ॥ १५ UI
“Have recourse to courage, O highly
sagacious prince, at this moment, endowed
that you already are with valour. Grief for
something lost or utterly destroyed defeats
all the purposes even of heroic and high-
souled personages like you. (15)
ard बुद्धिमतां श्रेष्ठ: सर्वशास्त्रार्थकोविद: |
मद्बिधै: सचिवै: सार्धमरिं ad समर्हसि॥१६॥
“Hence you are perfectly able to
conquer your enemy in conjunction with
your friends like me, foremost that you are
among those endowed with wisdom and
well-versed in the teachings of all sacred
books. (16)
नहि पश्याम्यहं कंचित् fry लोकेषु राघव।
गृहीतधनुषो यस्ते तिष्ठेदभिमुखो रणे॥१७॥
“| do not actually see anyone in all the
three worlds (the earth, heaven and the
intermediate region), who can stand face to
face with you on a field of battle when you

have seized a bow, O scion of Raghu!
(17)
