100

wa यान्यवहीनानि ase नोपलक्षये।
यान्यस्या नावहीनानि तानीमानि न संशय:॥४४॥
‘| don’t find on her person those which
she had dropped on the Rsyamuka mountain.
No doubt the existing ornaments are the same
which did not drop from her person. (44)
Wd कनकपट्टाभं Get age शुभम्।
उत्तरीयं नगासक्तं तदा दृष्टं प्लवंगमै:॥४५॥
भूषणानि च मुख्यानि geht धरणीतले।
अनयैवापविद्धानि स्वनवन्ति महान्ति च॥४६॥

‘That shining yellow upper garment,
which looked like a sheet of gold (due to its
texture of gold) and which, when dropped,
was seen by the monkeys caught in a tree
at that time, as also the principal ornaments
found lying on the earth’s surface, which
were valuable and made a tinkling sound,
were dropped by her alone. (45-46)
तथाप्यनूनं तद्वर्णं तथा श्रीमद्यथेतरत्॥४७॥

‘Although the existing garment on her
person is exceedingly worn, having been
used by her for a long time, its colour is yet
unfaded and the piece is as bright as the
other one. (47)
sa कनकवर्णांगी रामस्य महिषी fra
प्रणष्टापि सती यस्य मनसो न प्रणश्यति॥४८॥

‘She is no other than the beloved and
virtuous spouse of Sri Rama with golden
limbs, who though out of his sight has not
disappeared from his mind. (48)

sa सा यत्कृते रामश्चतुर्भिरिह तप्यते।
कारुण्येनानृशंस्येन Wet मदनेन च॥४९॥
Tat प्रणष्टेति कारुण्यादाश्रितेत्यानृशंस्यत:।
पत्नी नष्टेति शोकेन प्रियेति मदनेन च॥७५०॥

‘Here is the one for whom Sri Rama is

« VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

suffering torment through the following four,
viz., pity, tenderness, grief and love—through
pity for a helpless woman deserving
protection having disappeared; through
tenderness for one who was dependent on
him, through grief at the thought of his own
spouse having been lost and through love
for one who was beloved of him. (49-50)

अस्या देव्या यथारूपमंगप्रत्यंगसौष्ठवम्।
रामस्य च यथारूपं तस्येयमसितेक्षणा॥७५१॥

‘The comeliness of Sri Rama and the
elegance of each of his major and minor
limbs are analogous to those of this godlike
lady and the comeliness of this lady is
similar to that of Sri Rama; hence this dark-
eyed woman must be his consort. (51)
अस्या देव्या मनस्तस्मिंस्तस्य चास्यां प्रतिष्ठितम्।
तेनेयं स च धर्मात्मा मुहूर्तमपि जीवति॥७५२॥

‘The mind of this godlike lady is set on
him, while his mind is set on her. For this
reason alone does she, as also that pious-
minded soul, survive even for a short while.

(52)

दुष्करं Haar wa हीनो यदनया WH: |
धारयत्यात्मनो देहं न शोकेनावसीदति॥ ५३॥
‘Lord Sri Rama has done what was
hard to accomplish for him in that he has
been able to preserve his life even though
disunited from her and does not perish through
grief.’ (53)
एवं सीतां तथा geal We: पवनसम्भव:।
जगाम मनसा रामं प्रशशंस च तं प्रभुम्॥७५४॥
Delighted in this way to behold Sita as
mentioned above, Hanuman, sprung from
the loins of the wind-god, sought the presence

of Sri Rama with his mind and admired the
aforesaid lord. (54)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये सुन्दरकाण्डे TAT: AT Il १५ ॥

Thus ends Canto Fifteen in the Sundarakanda of the glorious Ramayana of Valmiki,
the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

