+ UTTARAKANDA +

His abode in all the three worlds, and who
is worshipped by all the gods (lit., those
who pass through only three stages in life,
viz., infancy, boyhood and prime of youth)
spoke as follows to the gods with intent to
oblige the wind-god: (7)

भो महेन्द्राग्निवरुणा महेश्वरधनेश्वरा:।
जानतामपि a: aa वक्ष्यामि श्रूयतां हितम्॥८॥
“*O mighty Indra, Agni (the god of fire),
Varuna (the god presiding over the waters),
Lord Siva (the Supreme Ruler) and Kubera
(the god of riches) to you, even though you
know everything, | will tell you what is
conducive to your good; please listen. (8)
अनेन शिशुना कार्यं कर्तव्यं at भविष्यति।
तद् ददध्वं वरान् सर्वे मारुतस्यास्य तुष्टये॥९॥
“Your purpose shall be accomplished
by this infant. Therefore, grant him boons all

of you with a view to the appeasement of
the wind-god.’ (9)
तत: सहस्रनयन: प्रीतियुक्त: शुभानन:।
कुशेशयमयीं मालामुत्षेप्येदं वचोऽब्रवीत्॥१०॥
“Taking off his wreath of lotus flowers
and placing it round the neck of Hanuman,
Indra (the thousand-eyed god), who had a
charming countenance, uttered the following
words: (10)

मत्करोत्सृष्टवज्रेण हनुरस्य यथा हत:।
नाम्ना a कपिशार्दूलो भविता हनुमानिति॥११॥

“‘Inasmuch as the chin of this infant
was broken by the thunderbolt hurled from
my hand, this tiger among the monkeys will
surely go by the name of Hanuman. (11)

अहमस्य प्रदास्यामि परमं वरमद्भुतम्।
इत: प्रभृति वज्रस्य ममावध्यो भविष्यति॥ १२॥
“| hereby grant him the supreme and

wonderful boon that from this day onwards
he will be invulnerable to my thunderbolt.’ (12)

मार्तण्डस्त्वब्रवीत् at भगवांस्तिमिरापह:।
तेजसोऽस्य मदीयस्य ददामि शतिकां कलाम्॥ १३॥

“The glorious sun-god, the dispeller of

975

darkness, for his part said on that occasion,
‘| bestow upon him a hundredth part of my
brilliance. (13)

यदा च शास्त्राण्यध्येतुं शक्तिरस्य भविष्यति।
तदास्य शास्त्रं दास्यामि येन वाग्मी भविष्यति।
न चास्य भविता कश्चित् Age: शास्त्रदर्शने॥ १४॥

“Again, when the ability to study the
Sastras (the various branches of learning)
appears in him, then | shall impart to him the
knowledge of the Sastras, whereby he will
become a good speaker. Nay, none shall
vie with him in the knowledge of the Sastras.’

(14)

वरुणश्च a प्रादान्नास्य मृत्युर्भविष्यति।

वर्षायुतशतेनापि मत्पाशादुदकादपि॥ १५ UI

“Nay, Varuna conferred on him the
boon that his death will not occur even in
millions of years from his noose or from
water either. (15)
यमो दण्डादवध्यत्वमरोगत्वं च दत्तवान्।
वरं ददामि संतुष्ट अविषादं च संयुगे॥१६॥
गदेयं मामिका नैनं संयुगेषु वधिष्यति।
इत्येवं धनद: We dat ह्येकाक्षिपिङ्गल:॥ १७॥

“Yama granted him invulnerability to
his rod and freedom from ailment. Then
Kubera (the bestower of riches), who was
brown of one eye, actually said, ‘Highly
pleased, | grant him the boon that this mace
of mine shall not cause his death in conflicts
and further vouchsafe him unweariness in
war.’ (16-17)
मत्तो मदायुधानां च अवध्योऽयं भविष्यति।
इत्येवं शङ्करेणापि दत्तोऽस्य परमो वर:॥१८॥

“The supreme boon that ‘This child
shall be immune from death at My hands as
well as from death caused by My weapons’
was bestowed on him by Lord Sankara, the
Bestower of happiness. (18)
विश्वकर्मा च दृष्टवेमं बालसूर्योपमं शिशुम्।
शिल्पिनां wer: प्रादाद् वरमस्य aerate: i १९॥

“Nay, beholding that infant, who vied
