344

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA +

सप्तदश: at:
Canto XVII

Vibhisana seeks the protection of Sri Rama and the latter
holds consultation with his counsellors on the
question of giving him shelter

आजगाम मुहूर्तेन GT WH: सलक्ष्मण:॥१॥
Addressing the aforesaid harsh words
to Ravana, Vibhisana, (the youngest half-
brother of Ravana) arrived in less than an
hour where Sri Rama was with Laksmana
(on the opposite shore). (1)
तं मेरुशिखराकारं दीप्तामिव शतह्रुदाम्।
गगनस्थं महीस्थास्ते ददृशुर्वानराधिपा:॥ २॥
Stationed on the ground (below), the
celebrated leaders of monkeys espied
Vibhisana, who looked like a peak of Mount
Meru in size and stood in the air like a
dazzling flash of lightning. (2)

ते चाप्यनुचरास्तस्य चत्वारो भीमविक्रमा:।
तेऽपि वर्मायुधोपेता भूषणोत्तमभूषिता:॥ ३॥

His four well-known attendants too
were endowed with redoubtable prowess.
They too were furnished with armour and
weapons and adorned with the foremost of
jewels. (3)
स च मेघाचलप्रख्यो वज्रायुधसमप्रभ:।
वरायुधधरो वीरो दिव्याभरणभूषित:॥४॥

The valiant Vibhisana resembled a
cloud and a mountain, vied with Indra (who
wields the thunderbolt) in splendour, bore
excellent arms and was adorned with
heavenly jewels. (4)

तमात्मपञ्चमं दृष्टवा सुग्रीवो वानराधिप:।
arm: सह दुर्धर्षश्चिन्तयामास बुद्धिमान्॥५॥
Finding him to be the fifth (besides

four others), the wise Sugriva, the suzerain
lord of monkeys, who was difficult to

overpower and
became thoughtful.
चिन्तयित्वा dg तु वानरांस्तानुवाच ह।
हनुमत्प्रमुखान् सर्वानिदं वचनमुत्तमम्॥६॥
Reflecting a while, he, for his part, they
say, addressed the following excellent words
to all those monkeys with Hanuman at their
head: (6)

wa सर्वायुधोपेतश्चतुर्भि:॥ we राक्षसै:।
राक्षसोभ्येति पश्यध्वमस्मान् हन्तुं न संशय:॥ ७॥
“Lo, armed with all kinds of weapons
and accompanied by four of his kind, this
ogre is undoubtedly approaching to kill us.”(7)

सुग्रीवस्य aa: श्रुत्वा Aa ते वानरोत्तमा:।
सालानुद्यम्य शैलांश्च इद वचनमब्रुवन्॥ ८ ।।
Lifting up sal trees and rocks on hearing
the words of Sugriva, all those jewels among
monkeys submitted as follows: (8)
शीघ्रं व्यादिश नो राजन् वधायैषां दुरात्मनाम्।
निपतन्ति हता यावद् धरण्यामल्पचेतना:॥९॥

“Command us at once, O king, to kill
these evil-minded ones, so that on being
killed, they may fall down on earth, endowed
as they are with poor vitality.” (9)
तेषां सम्भाषमाणानामन्योन्यं स विभीषण:।
उत्तरं तीरमासाद्य wer wa व्यतिष्ठत॥ gol

Reaching the northern shore even as
they were talking with one another in this
strain, the aforesaid Vibhisana stopped short
while he was yet in the air. (10)

स उवाच महाप्राज्ञ: स्वरेण महता महान्।
सुग्रीवं तांश्च ater खस्थ va विभीषण:॥ ११॥

stood with monkeys,

(5)
