# YUDDHAKANDA +

425

his foes, that high-souled Sri Rama for his | then sallied forth towards Lanka with an

part, who was endowed with great firmness,

exultant air. (37)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये युद्धकाण्डे सप्तत्रिंश: सर्ग: Il 3 ॥
Thus ends Canto Thirty-seven in the Yuddhakanda of the glorious Ramayana of
Valmiki, the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

Canto XXXVIII

Climbing up the Suvela mountain in consultation with and in the
company of Laksmana and Vibhisana as well as of Sugriva
and others, Sri Rama surveys the city from that
vantage-ground. The eminent heroes among
the monkeys too, who were eager to fight,
roar at the top of their voice and
spend the night on the mountain
itself with Sri Rama

ad Ha सुवेलस्य मतिमारोहणं प्रति।
लक्ष्मणानुगतो राम: सुग्रीवमिदमब्रवीत्॥१॥

विभीषणं च धर्मज्ञमनुरक्तं निशाचरम्।
wad च विधिज्ञं च श्लक्ष्णया परया गिरा॥ २॥
Having made up his mind to climb up
the Suvela mountain, Sri Rama for his part,
who was followed by Laksmana, spoke as
follows in soft and excellent tone to Sugriva,
as well as to the devoted night-ranger,
Vibhisana, who knew what is right, was
experienced in counsel and learned in ritual:
(1-2)

सुवेलं साधु शैलेन्द्रमिमं धातुशतैश्चितम्।
अध्यारोहामहे सर्वे वत्स्यामोऽत्र निशामिमाम्॥ ३॥
“Let us all duly ascend this ruler of
mountains, Suvela, which is covered with
hundreds of minerals. We shall spend this
night on it. (3)

लङ्कां चालोकयिष्यामो निलयं तस्य रक्षस:।
येन मे मरणान्ताय हता भार्या दुरात्मना॥4॥

“We shall also be able to survey from
its top Lanka, the abode of that ogre, Ravana,
by whom, evil-minded as he is, was my
consort borne away to his own destruction,
the inevitable result of his action. (4)

येन धर्मो न विज्ञातो न ad न कुलं तथा।
राक्षस्या नीचया बुद्ध्या येन Ae गर्हितं कृतम्॥ ५॥
तस्मिन् A add रोष: कोर्तिते राक्षसाधमे।
यस्यापराधान्नीचस्य वधं द्रक्ष्यामि रक्षसाम्॥६॥

“The moment his name is mentioned,
my wrath is aroused towards that vile ogre,
Ravana, by whom neither was virtue rightly
understood, nor morality, nor was pedigree
taken into consideration, but by whom the
aforesaid reproachful act was perpetrated
as prompted by his mean ogre-like mentality.
| shall perceive with my own eyes the
extermination of all the ogres due to the
crime of that mean fellow. (5-6)

Wet fe Hed पापं कालपाशवशं गत:।
नीचेनात्मापचारेण कुलं तेन विनश्यति॥ ७॥
