504

sharp! The current is a propitious hour and
this day too bears the name of ‘Dhruva’!
(undying).” (24-25)

स लक्ष्मण: कृष्णमृगं हत्वा मेध्यं प्रतापवान्।

अथ चिक्षेप सौमित्रि: समिद्धे जातवेदसि॥ २६॥
Unearthing the bulb, which has a black

peel and is fit for being offered as an oblation

to gods, the aforesaid Laksmana, son of

Sumitra, full of glory as he was, forthwith

cast it into the blazing fire. (26)

ad तु पक्वं समाज्ञाय निष्टप्तं छिन्नशोणितम्।
लक्ष्मण: पुरुषव्याघ्रमथ राघबमब्।वीत्।। २७॥
Having definitely come to know that its
pulp had been fully roasted and dressed
and divested of its ruddy colour, Laksmana

now submitted as follows to Sri Rama, a
tiger among men: (27)

देवता देवसंकाश यजस्व कुशलो ह्यसि॥ २८॥

“This bulb, known by the name of
Gajakanda and endowed with a black peel,
and by which all? disordered limbs are put
right, has been fully dressed by me. Pray,
propitiate the gods presiding over the hut by
offering it as an oblation to them, inasmuch
as you are well-versed in the rite, O brother,
vying with gods in glory !” (28)

राम: स्नात्वा तु नियतो गुणवाञ्जपकोविद:।
संग्रहेणाकरोत् सर्वान् मन्त्रान् सत्रावसानिकान्॥ २९॥

Having finished his bath दापे fully
disciplined as he was, Sri Rama, for his
part, who was full of virtues and well-versed
in the sacred texts to be muttered on the
occasion, went through, in brief, the
ceremony of Vastu-Santi, reciting the sacred
texts bearing on the conclusion of a sacrificial
performance. (29)

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA +

इष्टवा देवगणान् सर्वान् विवेशावसथं शुचि: |
aya च मनोह्लादो रामस्यामिततेजस:॥ ३०॥

Having propitiated all the hosts of gods
presiding over the newly-erected hut and
thus purified, Sri Rama entered the hut.
Nay, great satisfaction of mind was caused
thereby to Sri Rama, who was possessed
of immense glory. (30)

वैश्वदेवबलिं कृत्वा रौद्रं वैष्णवमेव a
वास्तुसंशमनीयानि मङ्गलानि प्रवर्तयन्॥३१॥

जपं च न्यायत: कृत्वा स्नात्वा नद्यां यथाविधि।
पापसंशमनं रामश्चकारॊ बलिमुत्तमम्॥३२॥
Having bathed in the river Mandakini
according to the procedure laid down in the
scriptures and muttering sacred texts such
as the Gayatri in the right way, and intending
as he did to perform solemn rites calculated
to ward off the evils attendant on a new
construction, Sri Rama offered excellent
oblations to Lord Rudra and Lord Visnu too
after performing the VaiSwadeva (a religious
ceremony which ought to be performed every
morning and evening and especially before
the midday meal and consists in homage
paid to the Viswedevas, followed by
Baliharana or offering of small portions of
cooked food to the gods who give the food
and especially to the god of fire, who cooks
the food for us and bears the offering to
heaven). (31-32)

वेदिस्थलविधानानि चैत्यान्यायतनानि च।
आश्रमस्यानुरूपाणि स्थापयामास राघव:॥ ३३॥

Sri Rama, a scion of Raghu, erected
and consecrated altars of a size proportionate
to the hut for offering oblations to the eight
guardians of the quarters and the intermediate
points and Caityas (places of worship for
Ganega and other gods) and Ayatanas,

1. According to the popular astrological work ‘Muhurta-Cintamani’ the three lunar mansions bearing
the part name of Uttara, viz., Uttara Phalguni, Uttarasadha and Uttara Bhadrapada, and Rohini, as well as
Sunday are spoken of as ‘Dhruva’ and ‘Sthira’. They are looked upon as auspicious for Graha-Santi, Vastu-

Santi etc.

2. The compound word `समस्ताङ्ग:` should be split up as `सम्यग् भवन्ति अस्तानि अङ्गानि येन a: |
