240

whose mind is set on virtue, be able to
survive with his younger brother, Satrughna?
(18)

इक्ष्वाकुवंशे धर्मिष्ठे गते नाशमसंशयम्।
भविष्यन्ति प्रजा: सर्वा: शोकसंतापपीडिता:॥ १९॥
‘Of the most pious race of Ikswaku
having met with extinction, all created beings
will undoubtedly be tormented with grief and
agony. (19)

ace भाग्यरहितो तलुप्तधर्मार्थसंग्रह:।
रोषदोषपरीतात्मा ah लोकविनाशन:॥ २०॥

‘Having thus forfeited my stock of
religious merit and earthly good, and hence
devoid of good luck, my mind dominated by
evil in the form of anger, | am evidently
guilty of having compassed the destruction
of the world.’ (20)

While he was pondering thus, good
omens appeared to him, whose welcome
results had already been directly experienced
by him. He pondered again as follows : (21)

अथ वा चारुसर्वाङ्गी रक्षिता स्वेन तेजसा।
न नशिष्यति कल्याणी नाग्निरग्नौ प्रवर्तते॥ २२॥

‘Or, it is possible the lady, who is
charming of all limbs, has been protected by
her own glory. The blessed lady would not
perish; for fire does not burn fire. (22)

नहि धर्मात्मनस्तस्य भार्याममिततेजस:।
स्वचरित्राभिगुप्तां तां स्प्रष्टुमर्हति पावक:॥ २३॥
‘Surely fire would not dare to touch the
consort, protected on all sides by her own
immaculate character, of that pious-minded

prince Sri Rama, who is endowed with
immeasurable energy. (23)

wt रामप्रभावेण वैदेह्या: सुकृतेन al
wat दहनकर्मायं नादहद्भव्यवाहन:॥ २४॥
‘Surely it was because of Sri Rama’s

glory and the virtue of Sita, a princess of the
Videha territory, that this fire (lit., the bearer

« VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

of sacrificial offerings), whose natural function
it is to consume whatever comes into touch
with it, could not burn me. (24)
त्रयाणां भरतादीनां भ्रातॄणां देवता च या।
रामस्य च मन:कान्ता सा कथं विनशिष्यति॥ २५ ॥
‘How could she, who is an object of
adoration to the three brothers of Sri Rama,
Bharata and others, and is beloved of Sri
Rama’s heart, perish? (25)
aq वा दहनकर्मायं ada प्रभुरव्यय:।
न मे दहति लाङ्गूलं कथमार्यां प्रधक्ष्यति॥ २६॥
‘Or, how should this fire, whose, natural
function it is to burn whatever comes into
contact with it and has power over all, yet
which could not burn even my tail, consume
the noble lady because of whom this miracle
has happened?’ (26)

पुनश्चाचिन्तयत् तत्र हनूमान् विस्मितस्तदा।
हिरण्यनाभस्य गिरेर्जलमध्ये vest een

Hanuman then recalled once more with
wonder on that spot the appearance in the
midst of sea-water of the hill Mainaka having
gold in its cavities. (27)

तपसा सत्यवाक्येन अनन्यत्वाच्च भर्तरि।
असौ विनिर्दहेदग्निं न तामग्नि: प्रधक्ष्यति॥ २८॥

He said to himself: ‘By virtue of her
asceticism, truthful speech and exclusive
devotion to her husband, she can consume
fire itself; fire, on the other hand, cannot
consume her.’ (28)

स तथा चिन्तयंस्तत्र can धर्मपरिग्रहम्।
शुश्राव हनुमांस्तत्र चारणानां महात्मनाम्॥ २९॥
While pondering as aforesaid at that
time the steadfastness of Sita, a godlike
lady in the path of virtue, Hanuman heard
on that spot the following words of the high-
souled Caranas (heavenly bards): (29)
अग्निं विसृजता तीक्ष्णं भीमं राक्षससद्मनि॥ 30 1
“Indeed a marvellous and difficult feat
has been accomplished by Hanuman in
