# YUDDHAKANDA +

on all. Sri Rama (a scion of Kakutstha) of
unfailing prowess smiled and actually for
his part spoke as follows, they say, to
Laksmana of saintly characteristics: (6-7)

अनधीत्य च शास्त्राणि वृद्धाननुपसेव्य च।

न शबक्यमीदृशं ab यदुवाच हरीश्वर:॥८॥
“Without studying scriptures and serving

one’s elders it is not possible to utter like

what Sugriva, the ruler of monkeys, has
said. (8)

अस्ति सूक्ष्मतरं किंचिद् aera प्रतिभाति मा।
प्रत्यक्षॆ लौकिकं चापि add सर्वराजसु॥९॥

“Something which is very subtle, nay,
which is patent in all rulers and well known
to all, vividly strikes me as present in
Vibhisana. (9)

अमित्रास्तत्कुलीनाश्च प्रातिदेश्याश्च कीर्तिता:।
व्यसनेषु प्रहर्तारस्तस्मादयमिहागत: il १० ॥
“One’s own kindred and the rulers of
adjoining territories have been declared to
be enemies and they strike in times of
adversity. Therefore, he has come here.(10)

अपापास्तत्कुलीनाश्च मानयन्ति स्वकान् हितान्।
एष प्रायो नरेन्द्राणां शङ्कनीयस्तु शोभन:॥११॥

“Nay, relatives who are not malevolent
look upon their own people as friend. In the
case of kings (lit., rules of men), however,
a kinsman is often worth suspecting, even
though virtuous. (11)

यस्तु दोषस्त्वया प्रोक्तो ह्यादानेऽरिबलस्य च।
तत्र ते कीर्तयिष्यामि यथाशास्त्रमिदं sop ez

“As regards the disadvantage which
has actually been pointed out by you in
accepting as one’s own an individual of the
hostile party, | shall presently make a reply
in conformity with the scriptures; please listen
to it. (12)

न वयं तत्कुलीनाश्च राज्यकाङ्क्षी च राक्षस:।
पण्डिता fe भविष्यन्ति तस्माद्ग्राह्यो विभीषण: ।। १३॥

“We are not his relatives for that matter,

351

while the ogre is covetous of sovereignty.
Ogres are learned too sometimes; hence
Vibhisana is worth accepting. (13)

अव्यग्राश्च प्रहृष्टाश्च a भविष्यन्ति संगता:।
प्रणादश्च महानेषोऽन्योन्यस्य भयमागतम्।
इति भेदं गमिष्यन्ति तस्माद् ग्राह्यो विभीषण: i १४॥
“When united with us, they (Vibhisana
and others) will feel free from anxiety and
highly rejoiced. Nay, this loud appeal of
theirs for protection shows that fear of one
another has seized the orges. In this way
they will fall a prey to dissension. Hence
Vibhisana is deserving of acceptance. (14)

न aad भ्रातरस्तात waa भरतोपमा:।
मद्दिधा वा पितु: पुत्रा: सुहृदो वा भवद्विधा:॥ १५ ॥
“All brothers, O dear Sugriva, are not

like Bharata, nor are all sons of a father like
me, nor again are all friends like you.” (15)

एवमुक्तस्तु रामेण सुग्रीव: सहलक्ष्मण:।
उत्थायेदं AMAA: प्रणतो वाक्यमब्रवीत्॥१६॥
“Getting up alongwith Laksmana, when
told as aforesaid by Sri Rama, Sugriva, for
his part, who was exceptionally sagacious,
meekly submitted as follows: (16)

रावणेन प्रणिहितं arate निशाचरम्।

wee निग्रहं मन्ये क्षमं क्षमवतां ariel
“Know this ranger of the night to have

been dispatched by Ravana. I, therefore,

consider it advisable to take him captive, O
prince of the righteous actions! (17)

राक्षसो जिह्मया बुद्ध्या संदिष्टोऽयमिहागत:।
Wed त्वयि विश्वस्ते विश्वस्ते मयि वानघ॥ १८॥
लक्ष्मणे वा महाबाहो स वध्य: सचिवै: Gel
रावणस्य नृशंसस्य भ्राता ह्येष विभीषण:॥१९॥

“Prompted by a perfidious motive, this
ogre has come here as directed by Ravana
to deliver a blow at you when you are
unsuspecting or at me when | stand inspired
with confidence in him, or even at Laksmana,
O sinless one! He, therefore, deserves to be
killed with his ministers. Yonder Vibhisana
