# YUDDHAKANDA #

Sri Rama (a scion of Raghu) with arrows in
the same way as a rainy cloud would fill a
pond with thousands of arrow-like torrents
falling from the heavens. (3)

Ua: शरजालेन धनुर्मुक्तेन संयुगे।
महागिरिरिवाकम्प्य: काकुत्स्थो न प्रकम्पते॥४॥

Sri Rama (a scion of Kakutstha), who
was unshakable like a big mountain, did not
flinch even though covered with a stream of
arrows discharged from the bow of Ravana
on the field of battle. (4)

स ot: शरजालानि वारयन् wax स्थित:।
गभस्तीनिव सूर्यस्य प्रतिजग्राह वीर्यवान्॥५॥

The heroic prince stood intercepting
the streams of arrows discharged by Ravana
with his own arrows on the battlefield and
bore them like the rays of the sun. (5)

ad: शरसहस्राणि क्षिप्रहस्तो निशाचर:।
निजघानोरसि क्रुद्धो राघवस्य महात्मन:॥६॥

Provoked to anger, the quick-handed
night-stalker then dug thousands of arrows
into the breast of the high-souled scion of
Raghu. (6)
स शोणितसमादिग्ध: समरे लक्ष्मणाग्रज:।
Ge: फुल्ल इवारण्ये सुमहान् किंशुकद्रुम:॥ ७॥

Covered with blood on the battlefield,
that eldest brother of Laksmana was seen

like a huge Kimsuka tree with flowers in a
forest. (7)

शराभिघातसंरब्ध: सोऽभिजग्राह सायकान्।
काकुत्स्थ: सुमहातेजा युगान्तादित्यवर्चस:॥८॥
Angered by the impact of the arrows of
Ravana, that scion of Kakutstha, endowed
as he was with immense energy, took up
arrows which shone like the sun blazing at
the end of the world-cycle. (8)
ततोऽन्योन्यं सुसंरब्धौ तावुभौ रामरावणौ।
werd समरे नोपलशक्षयतां तदा॥९॥
Though greatly enraged, both the

741

aforesaid warriors, Sri Rama and Ravana,
could not thereupon see each other at that
time on the battlefield, which was shrouded
in darkness by the hail of arrows. (9)

ad: क्रोधसमाविष्टो रामो दशरथात्मज:।

उवाच रावणं वीर: प्रहस्य परुषं वच:॥१०॥
Laughing heartily, though filled with

anger, the valiant Sri Rama, son of Emperor

DaSaratha, then administered the following
harsh rebuke to Ravana: (10)

मम भार्या जनस्थानादज्ञानाद् राक्षसाधम।
eM ते विवशा यस्मात् तस्मात् त्वं नासि वीर्यवान्॥ ११ ॥

“Since my consort was borne away
by you from Janasthana, helpless as she
was, through unawareness about my real
strength, O vile ogre, hence you are not
heroic. (11)
aed wast ear शूरोऽहमिति मन्यसे॥१२॥

“Having carried away by force the
miserable Sita (a princess of the Videha
territory), while she was in the great forest
away from me, you think: ‘| am a hero’. (12)

weary शूर विनाथासु परदाराभिमर्शनम्।
Pa कापुरुषं कर्म शूरोऽहमिति मन्यसे॥१३॥

“Having perpetrated the cowardly act
of laying your hands on another's wife, O
ogre, posing as a champion in relation to
ladies without a protector, you think: ‘lama
hero’. (13)

भिन्नमर्याद निर्लज्ज चारित्रेष्वनवस्थित।
दर्पान्मृत्युमुपादाय शूरोऽहमिति मन्यसे॥१४॥

“O shameless creature, who have
transgressed the bounds of morality and
are unstable of character, having laid hold
through vanity of death in the form of Sita,
you think: ‘| am a hero’. (14)

शूरेण wea बलै: समुदितेन च।
शलाघनीयं महत्कर्म यशस्यं च कृतं त्वया॥ १५ Il
