750

fully equipped with implements of war and
adorned with rows of flags and pennons,
which was swallowing space as it were and
was making the earth resound with its sound,
nay, which was the doom of the enemy’s
forces and brought immense joy to its owner.
Sri Rama, the ruler of men, they say, saw
advancing precipitately towards him the
aforesaid chariot of Ravana, the king of
ogres, which bore a huge standard and was
noisy, nay, which was drawn by sombre
steeds and clothed with a dreadful lustre
and was shining in space like an aerial car,
bright as the sun, and which, crowded as it
was with pennons that flashed like lightning
and displaying as it did the splendours of a
rainbow because of its decorations, looked
like a cloud holding streams of water and
releasing torrents in the shape of arrows.
Beholding the enemy’s chariot advancing
like a cloud and making noise like a mountain
bursting asunder when struck with lightning,
and stretching with impetuosity his bow,
which, when bent, looked like the crescent
moon, Sri Rama spoke as follows to Matali,
the charioteer of Indra (the god with a
thousand eyes): “From the way in which he
is darting forward from left to right with great
impetuosity once more it appears that his
heart has been set by him upon destroying
himself in combat. (1—10)

“Therefore, take care and advance
towards the enemy’s chariot. | wish to destroy
it completely even as the wind would blow
away an engulfing cloud. (11)
अविक्लवमसम्भ्रान्तमव्यग्रहृदयेक्षणम् ।
रश्मिसंचारनियतं प्रचोदय रथं द्रुतम्॥१२॥

Without confusion or getting flurried
and with a steady heart and vision and the

movement of the reins fully controlled, drive
the chariot swiftly. (12)

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA +

कामं न त्वं समाधेय: पुरंदररथोचित:।
युयुत्सुरहमेकाग्र: स्मारये त्वां न शिक्षये॥१३॥
“True, you need not be instructed by
me accustomed as you are to drive the
chariot of Indra, the destroyer of strongholds.
Keen as | am to fight with one-pointed
attention, | just refresh your memory and do
not admonish you.” (13)

परितुष्ट: स रामस्य तेन वाक्येन मातलि:।
प्रचोदयामास रथं सुरसारथिरुत्तम:॥१४॥

Extremely gratified with the foregoing
apology of Sri Rama, Matali, the excellent
charioteer of gods, drove the chariot on. (14)

अपसव्यं dd: कुर्वन् रावणस्य महारथम्।
चक्रसम्भूतरजसा रावणं व्यवधूनयत्॥१५॥
Passing the huge chariot of Ravana on
the right, Sri Rama then set Ravana a-
trembling by the dust risen from the wheels
of his own chariot. (15)

तत: क्रुद्धो दशग्रीवस्ताम्रविस्फारितेक्षण:।
Ture रामं सायकैरवधूनयत्॥१६॥

With his coppery eyes wide open,
angered as he was, Ravana thereupon
struck Sri Rama, who stood facing his
chariot, with arrows. (16)

धर्षणामर्षितो रामो धैर्यं रोषेण लम्भयन्।
जग्राह सुमहावेगमैन्द्रं युधि शरासनम्॥१७॥
Mig सुमहावेगान् सूर्यरश्मिसमप्रभान्।
तदुपोढं महद् युद्धमन्योन्यवधकांक्षिणो:।
परस्पराभिमुखयोर्दृप्तयोरिव सिंहयो: । १८ ॥

Joining patience with anger, though
provoked by the assault, Sri Rama seized
hold on the battlefield of Indra’s bow, which
was possessed of extraordinary impulse,
as also arrows of exceeding swiftness, which
were brilliant like sunbeams. Then ensued a
major conflict between the two warriors, Sri
Rama and Ravana, who stood facing each
other like two proud lions, desirous of killing
each other. (17-18)
