+ UTTARAKANDA +

श्रिया वृता धर्मपुरे च संस्थिता:।
wa: समिद्धाहुतिदीप्ततेजसो

Baa: साधुमहाध्वरे त्रय:॥ १७॥ | well poured.

1119

With desires all fulfilled, established in
the city of virtue, full of prosperity, the three
brothers radiated effulgence like the three
great sacrificial fires, inflamed by oblations
(17)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये उत्तरकाण्डे द्व्यधिकशततम: सर्ग: ॥ 202 II

Thus ends Canto One hundred and two in the Uttarakanda of the glorious Ramayana
of Valmiki, the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

Canto CII
ऽत Rama’s virtuous rule. An ascetic approaches Him for a private talk

कस्यचित् त्वथ कालस्य WA धर्मपरे स्थिते।
कालस्तापसरूपेण राजद्वारमुपागमत्॥ १॥
After sometime, while Sri Rama was

engaged in virtuous deeds, Death in the form
of an ascetic appeared at the royal gate. (1)

सोऽब्रवील्लक्ष्मणं वाक्यं धृतिमन्तं यशस्विनम्।

मां निवेदय रामाय सम्प्राप्तं कार्यगौरवात्॥२॥
He spoke to courageous and glorious

Laksmana, who was standing at the door

thus: ‘I have come here for a great purpose,
you report my arrival to Sri Rama. (2)

दूतो ह्यतिबलस्याहुं Meester: |
wa दिदृक्षुरायात: कार्येण हि महाबल॥ ३॥
‘1am the messenger of the sage Atibala,
possessed of great power and have come
desiring to see Sri Rama with a purpose, O
mighty one.’ (3)
तस्य तद् वचनं श्रुत्वा सौमित्रिस्त्वरयान्वित:।
न्यवेदयत रामाय तापसं तं समागतम्॥४॥
Having heard the words of the ascetic,
the son of Sumitra, Laksmana, at once
reported the arrival of that ascetic to Sri
Rama ! (4)
जयस्व राजधर्मेण उभौ लोकौ महाद्युते।
दूतस्त्वां द्रष्टुमायातस्तपसा भास्करप्रभ:॥७५॥

‘O one possessed of great power, be
victorious over both the worlds: a messenger,
who is as lustrous as the sun, due to
austerities, has come to see you.’ (5)

तद् वाक्यं लक्ष्मणोक्तं वै श्रुत्वा WA उवाच Fl
प्रवेश्यतां मुनिस्तात महौजास्तस्य वाक्यधूक॥६॥

Sri Rama on his part hearing the
words of Laksmana said: ‘O dear, let the
messenger possessed of great vigour, who
carries the message of his patron, enter.’

(6)
सौमित्रिस्तु तथेत्युक्त्वा प्रावेशयत तं मुनिम्।
ज्वलन्तमेव तेजोभि: प्रदहन्तमिवांशुभि:॥ ७॥

Then the son of Sumitra, Laksmana,
also having said, ‘It shall be as you say’, He
presented before Rama, the great ascetic
as if enveloped with effulgence and burning
others with his beams. (7)

सोऽभिगम्य रघुश्रेष्ठं दीप्यमानं स्वतेजसा।
ऋषिर्मधुरया वाचा वर्धस्वेत्याह राघवम्॥८॥

That sage having approached the best
among the descendants of Raghus, glowing
with his splendour said in a sweet voice,
‘Hail to Thee.’ (8)

तस्मै रामो महातेजा: पूजामर्घ्यपुरोगमाम्।
ad कुशलमव्यग्रं we चैवोपचक्रमे॥९॥
