« KISKINDHAKANDA +

cities of DaSarna (a territory to the south-
east of Madhyade§a), the cities of Abravanti
and Avanti (the modern Ujjain in Madhya
Pradesh and all. Exploring on all sides the
territories of Vidarbha (now forming part of
the State of Maharastra) and Rstika as well
as the delightful Mahisaka, as also the
territories of Vanga (the modern Bengal)
and Kalinga (Utkala) and Kausika, and
scouring the entire forest of Dandaka with
its mountains, rivers and caves, ransack
the section of the river Godavari (washing
the Dandaka forest) and even so the
territories of Andhra and Pundra, Cola,
Pandya and Kerala. (8—12)

अयोमुखश्च गन्तव्य: पर्वतो धातुमण्डित:।
विचित्रशिखर: श्रीमांश्चित्रपुष्पितकानन:॥१३॥
“The glorious Ayomukha (Malaya)
mountain too—adorned with minerals of
various kinds, nay, consisting of wonderful

peaks and clothed with lovely forests in
blossom, ought to be visited. (13)

सुचन्दनवनोद्देशो मार्गितव्यो महागिरि:।
ततस्तामापगां दिव्यां प्रसन्नसलिलाशयाम्॥ १४॥
तत्र seam कावेरीं = faeces: |
तस्यासीनं नगस्याग्रे मलयस्य महौजसम्॥१५॥
द्रक्ष्यथादित्यसंकाशमगस्त्यमृषिसत्तमम् ।
ततस्तेनाभ्यनुज्ञाता: प्रसन्नेन महात्मना॥१६॥
ताम्रपर्णी ग्राहजुष्टां ater महानदीम्।
सा चन्दनवनैश्चित्रै: प्रच्छन्नद्वीपवारिणी॥ १७॥
कान्तेव युवती कान्तं समुद्रमवगाहते।
ततो gana feat मुक्तामणिविभूषितम्॥ ec i
Gh Hale पाण्ड्यानां गता द्रक्ष्यथ वानरा:।
तत: समुद्रमासाद्य सम्प्रधार्यार्थनिश्चयम्॥१९॥

The aforesaid extensive mountain,
consisting as it does of parts which are
covered with beautiful groves of sandalwood

1095

trees, should be combed. Then you will see
there that blessed heavenly river, Kaveri,
carrying pellucid waters and sported in by
bevies of celestial nymphs. “Seated in front
of the aforesaid Malaya mountain (referred
to in verse 13 above by the name of
Ayomukha), you will see Sage Agastya,*
the foremost of Rsis, endowed with great
splendour and shining brightly like the sun.
Duly permitted by that kindly disposed
exalted soul, you will cross the great river
Tamraparni, infested with alligators. With its
islands and water covered with lovely
sandalwood trees, the river enters the sea
even as a beloved youthful woman would
meet her darling. Gone from there, O
monkeys, you will see the wonderful golden
gate of the city of the Pandyas (identified
with modern Madurai), fitted into the
fortification wall and studded with pearls
and gems. Then, reaching the sea (the Bay
of Bengal) and duly arriving at a decision
about the matter in hand (viz., your capacity
to cross the sea), you will act accordingly.
(14—19)
अगस्त्येनान्तरे तत्र सागरे विनिवेशित:।

चित्रसानुनग: श्रीमान् महेन्द्र: पर्वतोत्तम:॥ २०॥
जातरूपमय: श्रीमानवगाढो महार्णवम्।
नानाविधैर्नगै: फुल्लैर्लताभिश्चोपशोभितम्॥ २१॥
देवर्षियक्षप्रवरैरप्सरोभिश्च शोभितम्।
सिद्धचारणसङ्घैश्च प्रकोर्णं सुमनोरमम्॥२२॥
तमुपैति सहस्राक्ष: wer पर्वसु पर्वसु।
द्वीपस्तस्यापरे पारे शतयोजनविस्तृत:॥ २३॥
अगम्यो मानुषैर्दीप्तस्तं मार्गध्वं समन्तत:।
तत्र सर्वात्मना सीता मार्गितव्या विशेषत:॥ २४॥
“Between the moat of the city and the
sea was set up by Agastya the glorious and
splendid Mahendra mountain, the foremost
of the mountains, made of gold and crowned

* A reference has already been made to a hermitage of Sage Agastya located in the north of Pancavati.
Even as Sage Valmiki is believed to have had a number of hermitages at different places, it can be easily
understood that besides the one located north of Pancavatt, he had another hermitage at the spot mentioned.
Others are of opinion that the sage Agastya referred to here is different from the well-known Sage Agastya

of Puranic fame.
