350

winters old and belonging as he did to the
bard class, returned to the entrance of the
gynaeceum. (17-18)

सदा Uh च ag ayy सुमन्त्र: प्रविवेश ह।
तुष्टावास्य deat वंशं प्रविश्य a विशाम्पते: i १९॥

Nay, Sumantra, it is said, once more
entered the gynaeceum, which had its doors
always open to him. Entering it, he then
glorified the lineage of the aforesaid king. (19)

शयनीयं नरेन्द्रस्य तदासाद्य व्यतिष्ठत।
सोऽत्यासाद्य तु aq वेश्म तिरस्करणिमन्तरा॥ २०॥
आशीर्भिर्गुणयुक्ताभिरभितुष्टाव राघवम्।
सोमसूर्यौ च काकुत्स्थ शिववैश्रवणावपि॥ २१॥
वरुणश्चाग्निरिन्द्रश्च fast प्रदिशन्तु ते।
Tat भगवती रात्रिरह: शिवमुपस्थितम्॥ २२॥

Reaching the well-known royal bed-
chamber, he paused awhile. Then going
very near that room behind the arras he
extolled Dasaratha (a scion of Raghu) through
benedictions accompanied with praises as
follows : “May the moon-god and the sun-
god as well as Lord Siva and Kubera, son
of ViSrava and the god of riches, as also
Varuna, the god of water, Agni, the god of
fire, and Indra, the lord of paradise, grant
you victory. The glorious night has passed,
and the blessed daytime has arrived.

(20—22)
बुद्ध्यस्व राजशार्दूल He कार्यमनन्तरम्।
ब्राह्मणा ललमुख्याश्च नैगम'।'श्चागता'स्निह॥२३ ।।
दर्शनं तेऽभिकांक्षन्ते प्रतिबुद्ध्यस्व राघव।
स्तुवन्तं तं dat ad सुमन्त्रं मन्त्रकोविदम्॥ evil
प्रतिबुद्ध्य ततो राजा इदं वचनमब्रवीत्।
राममानय ada यदस्यभिहितो मया॥ eeu
किमिदं कारणं येन ममाज्ञा प्रतिवाह्यते।

न चैव सम्प्रसुप्तोऽहमानयेहाशु राघवम्॥ २६॥

“Wake up, O tiger among the rulers of
men, pray, accomplish what ought to be
done next. Arrived here, Brahmanas,
commanders of the army and merchants for
their part long to see you. Pray, awake, O

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

scion of Raghu!” Recognizing him by his
voice, the king then spoke as follows to
Sumantra, the charioteer, who was expert
in giving advice: “Since you have been
commanded by me in the following words:
‘Bring Rama to me, O bard!’ what is the
reason due to which my command is being
acted against? Nor am | fast asleep as you
think me to be. Therefore, speedily bring
Rama here.” (23—26)

इति राजा दशरथ: सूतं तत्रान्वशात् पुन:।
a राजवचनं श्रुत्वा शिरसा प्रतिपूज्य तम्॥ २७॥
निर्जगाम नृपावासान्मन्यमान: प्रियं महत्।
प्रपन्नो राजमार्गं च पताकाध्वजशोभितम्॥ २८॥
हृष्ट: प्रमुदित: सूतो जगामाशु विलोकयन्।

स सूतस्तत्र शुश्राव रामाधिकरणा: कथा:॥ २९॥
अभिषेचनसंयुक्ता: सर्वलोकस्य हृष्टवत्।
ततो cast रुचिरं कैलाससदृशप्रभम्॥ ३०॥
रामवेश्म सुमन्त्रस्तु शक्रवेश्मसमप्रभम्।
महाकपाटपिहितं वितर्दिशतशोभितम्॥ ३१॥
So did King DaSaratha instruct the bard
once more in the said gynaeceum. Hearing
the king’s command and saluting him with
his head bent low, Sumantra issued forth
from the king’s palace, holding the command
most welcome to his heart. Having reached
the main road, which was decorated with
buntings and flags, the charioteer, who felt
delighted, nay, overjoyed over the prospect
of seeing Sri Rama installed as Prince
Regent, quickly proceeded further, casting
his glances all round. On the way the said
bard heard joyfully the talks bearing on Sri
Rama and connected with his installation
from the lips of all men. Sumantra for his
part then caught sight of the charming palace
of Sri Rama, whose splendour vied with
that of Mount Kailasa, nay, which shone like
Indra’s own palace in paradise and was
secured with massive doors and embellished
with hundreds of balconies. (27-31)
काञ्चनप्रतिमैकाग्रं मणिविद्रुमतोरणम्।
शारदाभ्रघनप्रख्यं दीप्तं मेरुगुहासमम्॥ ३२॥
