720

तत: सज्यं धनु: कृत्वा Wa: सुनिशितान् शरान्।
सुशीघ्रमभिसंधाय राक्षसं निजघान ह॥१०॥
Then promptly stringing his bow and
fitting very sharp arrows to it, Rama struck
at the ogre. (10)

धनुषा ज्यागुणवता AA बाणान् मुमोच ह।
रुक्मपुङ्खान् महावेगान् सुपर्णानिलतुल्यगान्॥११॥

He discharged, they say, seven arrows
with golden feathers, of terrific speed, equal
to that of Garuda and the wind, with his bow
fitted with the string. (11)

a शरीरं विराधस्य भित्त्वा बर्हिणवासस:।
निपेतु: शोणितादिग्धा धरण्यां पावकोपमा:॥ १२॥
Decorated with peacock feathers, they
pierced the body of Viradha who fell on the
earth drenched with blood and looking like
fire. (12)
स विद्धो न्यस्य वैदेहीं शूलमुद्यम्य राक्षस:।
अभ्यद्रवत् सुसंक्रुद्धस्तदा WA सलक्ष्मणम्॥ १३॥
When hurt, that ogre put down the
princess of the Videha territory and, then,
holding up the lance, ran in great fury towards
Rama and Laksmana. (13)
स विनद्य महानादं शूलं शक्रध्वजोपमम्।
प्रगृह्यज्ञीभत dal व्यात्तानन इवान्तक: ll १४॥
Making a great roar and holding the
lance resembling the banner of Indra, he

then appeared like the god of Death with
open mouth. (14)

अथ तौ भ्रातरौ दीप्तं शरवर्षं aaa: |
विराधे राक्षसे तस्मिन् कालान्तकयमोपमे॥ १५॥

Then, those two brothers rained a shining
shower of arrows on that ogre, Viradha,
who looked like the Time-Spirit, death and
Yama. (15)

स Weer vents: स्थित्वाजृम्भत were: |
जृम्भमाणस्य ते बाणा: कायान्निष्पेतुराशुगा: I 2G Ul

That most terrible ogre laughed, stopped
and yawned. While he was yawning, those
speedy arrows fell down from his body. (16)

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

स्पर्शात् तु वरदानेन प्राणान् संरोध्य राक्षस:।
विराध: शूलमुद्यम्य राघवावभ्यधावत॥ १७॥

By virtue of the boon, the ogre Viradha
held up the vital airs and, lifting up the
lance, attacked the two scions of Raghu.

(17)
द्वाभ्यां शराभ्यां चिच्छेद WA: शस्त्रभृतां AT: १८॥

Rama, the foremost of warriors, broke
with two arrows that lance looking like the
thunderbolt and a fire while still in the air.(18)
ae रामविशिखैश्छिन्नं शूलं तस्यापतद् भुवि।
पपाताशनिना छिन्नं मेरोरिव शिलातलम्॥१९॥

That lance of his, broken by the arrows
of Rama, fell on the earth like the rocky
ledge of Mount Meru split by the thunderbolt.

(19)
तौ Gert क्षिप्रमुद्यम्य कृष्णसर्पाविवोद्यतौ।
तूर्णमापेततुस्तस्य तदा प्रहरतां बलात्॥२०॥

They two raised their swords like two

black snakes getting up, and quickly fell upon
him and then struck him with force. (20)

स वध्यमान: सुभृशं भुजाभ्यां परिगृह्य तौ।
अप्रकम्प्यौ नरव्याघ्रौ रौद्र: प्रस्थातुमैच्छत॥ २१॥
That terrible one, being violently hurt,
took those two unshakable tiger-men by the
arms and wanted to move. (21)

तस्याभिप्रायमाज्ञाय रामो लक्ष्मणमब्रवीत्।
वहत्वयमलं तावत् पथानेन तु राक्षस:॥२२॥

यथा चेच्छति सौमित्रे aM aed राक्षस:।
sana fe a: wer येन याति निशाचर:॥ २३॥
Reading his mind, Rama said to
Laksmana—‘Let this ogre gladly carry us
by this way, O son of Sumitra ! Let the ogre
carry us as he will. Indeed this is the path
of ours by which the night-wanderer is going.”
(22-23)

स तुं स्वबलवीर्येण wafers निशाचर:।
बालाविव स्कन्धगतौ चकारातिबलोद्धत:॥ २४॥

That night-wanderer, for his part, proud
