# YUDDHAKANDA #

455

Canto XLV

Distressed to perceive the two scions of Raghu bound by Indrajit
in a network of arrows and pierced with other fierce arrows,
the monkeys give way to utter despondency

स तस्य गतिमन्विच्छन् राजपुत्र: प्रतापवान्।
दिदेशातिबलो रामो aT वानरयूथपान्॥१॥
Seeking to find out the whereabouts of
Indrajit, that glorious prince, Sri Rama, who
was endowed with exceeding might, detailed
ten monkey generals for the prupose. (1)

gt सुषेणस्य दायादौ नीलं च प्लवगाधिपम्।
अङ्गदं वालिपुत्रं च शरभं च तरस्विनम्॥२॥
Sire a : : ।
wa चर्षभस्कन्धमादिदेश परंतप:॥ ३॥
Sri Rama (the scourge of his enemies)
deputed on this errand the two sons of
Susena and the monkey chief, Nila, as also
Angada, son of Vali, as well as the agile
Sarabha, also Dwivida and Hanuman,

Sanuprastha, who was endowed with
extraordinary might, Rsabha and
Rsabhaskandha. (2-3)

a सम्प्रहष्टा हरयो भीमानुद्यम्य पादपान्।
आकाशं विविशु: aa मार्गमाणा दिशो दश॥४॥

Lifting up formidable trees, all the
aforesaid monkeys, who were feeling
excessively rejoiced, sprang in the air,
exploring all the ten directions. (4)

तेषां वेगवतां वेगमिषुभिर्वेगवत्तरै:।
अस्त्रवित् परमास्त्रस्तु वारयामास रावणि:॥५॥

Indrajit, son of Ravana, however, who
was skilled in the use of mystic weapons,
arrested the onrush of those impetuous
monkeys by means of his very swift
arrows charged with the potency of the
supreme mystic weapon (presided over by
Brahma). (5)

ad भीमवेगा eat ana: क्षतविक्षता:।
aria न ददृशुर्मेघै:; सूर्यमिवावृतम्॥६॥

Even though pierced and lacerated by
steel arrows, the monkeys, who were
endowed with terrific impetuosity, could
not discern him in the darkness any more
than one would perceive the sun veiled by
clouds. (6)

रामलक्ष्मणयोरेव सर्वदेहभिद: शरान्।
भृशमावेशयामास रावणि: समितिंजय:॥७॥
Indrajit (Son of Ravana), who held the
field of battle, repeatedly dug into the person
of Sri Rama and Laksmana alone shafts
which pierced the whole body. (7)

निरन्तरशरीरौ तु तावुभौ रामलक्ष्मणौ।
क्रुद्धेनेन्द्रजिता वीरौ पन्नगै: शरतां गतै:॥ ८॥
Both the aforesaid gallant princes, Sri
Rama and Laksmana, were, for their part,
pierced by the furious Indrajit with serpents
used as arrows in such a way that no part
of their bodies remained unpierced. (8)

wat: क्षतजमार्गेण qera weet agi
तावुभौ च प्रकाशेते पुष्पिताविव किंशुकौ॥९॥

Blood flowed profusely from their wounds
and they both appeared like two Kimsuka
trees in flower. (9)

ad: पर्यन्तरक्ताक्षो भिन्नाञ्जनचयोपम:।
रावणिरभ्रातरौ वाक्यमन्तर्धानगतोऽब्रवीत्॥१०॥

Thereupon Indrajit (son of Ravana), the
outer corners of whose eyes had turned red
through rage and looked like a mass of
collyrium, spoke as follows to the two
brothers, while remaining still invisible: (10)
