* AYODHYAKANDA +

“| do not desire to live in the world as
a slave to material gains. Know me to be
devoted to immaculate righteousness like
the Rsis. (20)
प्राणानपि परित्यज्य सर्वथा कृतमेव तत्॥२१॥

“Whatever is agreeable to my adorable
father and capable of being accomplished by
me even at the cost of my life has veritably
been accomplished in everyway. (21)
न ad धर्मचरणं किंचिदस्ति महत्तरम्।
यथा frat शुश्रूषा तस्य वा वचनक्रिया॥ २२॥

“Indeed there is no greater piety than
or even as good as service to one’s father
or doing his bidding. (22)

अनुक्तोऽप्यत्रभवता भवत्या वचनादहम्।
at वत्स्यामि विजने वर्षाणीह चतुर्दश॥ २३॥

“At your command, though not directly
enjoined by my revered father, | shall live in
a lonely forest on this globe for fourteen
years. (23)

न नूनं मयि कैकेयि किंचिदाशंससे गुणान्।
aq राजानमवोचस्त्वं ममेश्वरतरा सती॥ evil

“Surely you do not cognize any good
point in me since you had to speak to my
father about such a trivial thing, though you
have greater authority’ over me even than
my father, O princess of Kekaya ! (24)
यावन्मातरमापृच्छे सीतां चानुनयाम्यहम्।
ततोऽद्यैव गमिष्यामि दण्डकानां महद् वनम्॥ २५ Il

“Pray, bear with me till | take leave of
my mother, Kausalya, and win Sita to
consent. Then | shall proceed to the great
forest of Dandaka? this very day. (25)

365

Wa: पालयेद् Wet शुश्रूषेच्च पितुर्यथा।

तथा भवत्या cadet स fe a: सनातन:॥ २६॥

“An attempt should be made by you to
see that Bharata protects the kingdom from
internal disorder and foreign aggression and
serves his aged father; for such is the
eternal code of morality.” (26)
रामस्य तु वच: श्रुत्वा yet दु:खगत: पिता।
शोकादशक्नुवन् Ah Wels महास्वनम्॥ २७॥

Sore distressed to hear Sri Rama's
utterance, and unable to speak because of
grief, his father for his part wept bitterly at
the pitch of his voice. (27)

वन्दित्वा चरणौ राज्ञो विसंज्ञस्य पितुस्तदा।
कैकेय्याश्चाप्यनार्याया निष्पपात महाद्युति:।। २८ i

Bowing at the feet of his royal father,
who was lying unconscious even then, as
well as of the ignoble Kaikeyi, Sri Rama,
who was possessed of immense glory,
departed. (28)
स राम: पितरं कृत्वा कैकेयीं च प्रदक्षिणम्।
निष्क्रम्यान्त:पुरात्तस्मात् स्वं ददर्श सुहृज्जनम्॥ २९॥

Going clockwise round his father as
well as Kaikeyi and coming out of the said
gynaeceum, the celebrated Sri Rama saw
his friends standing at the gate. (29)

तं बाष्पपरिपूर्णाक्ष: पृष्ठतोऽनुजगाम ह।
लक्ष्मण: परमक्रुद्ध: सुमित्रानन्दवर्धन:॥ ३०॥
Highly enraged, Laksmana, who
enhanced the joy of his mother Sumitra,
followed at his heels, so the tradition goes,
his eyes brimful with tears. (30)
आभिषेचनिकं भाण्डं कृत्वा राम: प्रदक्षिणम्।
शनैर्जगाम सापेक्षो दृष्टिं तत्राविचालयन्॥ ३१॥

Going clockwise round the vessel

1. Here Sri Rama evidently has the following dictum of Manu in mind :
पितुर्दशगुणा माता गौरवेणातिरिच्यते।

“A mother is ten times superior to one’s father in respectability.”

2. What then went by the name of the Dandaka forest was at one time a principality ruled over by
a Ksatriya clan known by the name of the Dandakas, who claimed their descent from Danda, son of Ikswaku.
The tract, which was bounded on the north by the Narmada and on the south by the Godavari, was laid
waste through a shower of dust under a curse pronounced by Sage Sukra.
