958

तं weed भीममाजगामाञ्जनप्रभ:।
a aa chatted वासिताभिरिव द्विपम्॥ exit
नरेन्द्रं पश्यते राजा राक्षसानां तदार्जुनम्।
स We रक्तनयनो राक्षसेन्द्रो बलोद्धत:॥ २५॥
इत्येवमर्जुनामात्यानाह गम्भीरया गिरा।
अमात्या: क्षिप्रमाख्यात हैहयस्य नृपस्य वै॥ २६॥
युद्धार्थं समनुप्राप्तो रावणो नाम नामत:।
रावणस्य वच: श्रुत्वा मन्त्रिणोऽथार्जुनस्य ते॥ २७॥
उत्तस्थु: सायुधास्तं च रावणं वाक्यमब्रुवन्।
युद्धस्य कालो विज्ञात: साधु भो साधु रावण॥ २८॥
a: क्षीबं स्त्रीगतं चैव योद्भुमुत्सहसे नृपम्।
स्त्रीसमक्षगतं यत् त्वं योद्भुमुत्सहसे FTN Il
वासितामध्यगं मत्तं शार्दूल इव कुञ्जरम्।
क्षमस्वाद्य दशग्रीव set रजनी त्वया।
युद्धे श्रद्धा तु यद्यस्ति VARMA समरेऽर्जुनम्॥ ३०॥

A peal of thunder was emitted by the
clouds with drops of blood. Nay, protected
by Mahodara, Mahaparswa, Dhumraksa,
Suka and Sarana, the ruler of ogres for his
part arrived at the place where Arjuna was
sporting. In a short time that mighty ogre,
who shone as antimony, reached the frightful
pool forming part of the Narmada. There the
king of ogres saw at that moment King
Arjuna surrounded by women as an elephant
by she-elephants. His eyes red through
anger, that ruler of ogres, who was arrogant
by reason of his might, spoke as follows to
the ministers of Arjuna in a deep tone: “O
ministers, make it known quickly to the king
of the Haihayas that a warrior, Ravana by
name, has actually come to him for an
encounter.” Hearing the challenge of Ravana,
the aforesaid ministers of Arjuna forthwith
sprang on their feet, armed with weapons,
and submitted as follows to the notorious
Ravana: “Well! The time suitable for a trial
of strength is indeed well-known to you, O
Ravana, in that you feel inclined to enter
into a combat with a prince who is drunk
and in the company of women! Since, O
king, you seek to fight with one who stands
in the presence of womenfolk, even as a

« VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

tiger would seek to fight with an elephant in
rut standing in the midst of she-elephants.
Have patience today, O ten-headed monster,
and let the night be spent here by you; if
there is keenness in you for a combat, fight
Arjuna tomorrow, O dear friend! (22—30)

ae aft त्वरा तुभ्यं युद्धतृष्णासमाव्रृता।
निपात्यास्मान् रणे युद्धमर्जुनेनोपयास्यसि॥ ३१॥

“If, however, you are in a hurry, O warrior
seized with a thirst for combat, you will have
an opportunity for an encounter with Arjuna
only after overthrowing us in combat.” (31)

ततस्तै रावणामात्यैरमात्यास्ते नृपस्य तु।
सूदिताश्चापि ते ae भक्षिताश्च बुभुक्षितै: ।। ३२॥

The aforesaid ministers of King Arjuna
for their part were thereupon killed in combat
and devoured by the said ministers of Ravana
who were all seized with hunger. (32)

ततो हलहलाशब्दो नर्मदातीरगो बभौ।
अर्जुनस्यानुयात्राणां रावणस्य च मन्त्रिणाम्॥ ३३॥

An uproar then arose on the bank of
the Narmada among the followers of King
Arjuna and the ministers of Ravana. (33)

इषुभिस्तोमरै: प्रासैस्त्रिशूलैर्वज्रकर्षणै: |
WIAA: समन्तात् समभिद्रुता:॥ ३४॥
The ministers of Arjuna rushed on all
sides hitting the intruders including Ravana
with arrows, iron-clubs, lances and tridents
which tore up the skin like the thunderbolt.
(34)

हैहयाधिपयोधानां वेग आसीत् सुदारुण:।
सनक्रमीनमकरसमुद्रस्येव नि:स्वन: ॥ ३५ I
The onrush of the warriors of the king
of the Haihayas was fierce like the roar of a
sea infested with crocodiles, fishes and
alligators. (35)

रावणस्य तु तेऽमात्या: प्रहस्तशुकसारणा:।
कार्तवीर्यबलं क्रुद्धा निहन्ति स्म स्वतेजसा॥ ३६॥

Provoked to anger, the aforesaid
ministers of Ravana—Prahasta, Suka and
