120

anywhere you will not escape the
consequences of the sinful proposal you
have made to the consort of Sri Rama, who
is endowed with immense energy, O vile
ogre! (14-15)
यथा दृप्तश्च मातंग: शशश्च सहितौ वने।
तथा द्विरदवद् रामस्त्वं नीच शशवत् स्मृत:।॥ १६॥
“Sri Rama is like an elephant, while
you, O mean fellow, have been declared to
be like a hare. If you two ever encounter
each other in a combat, the picture will be of
a proud elephant and a hare come to grips
in a forest. (16)

स त्वमिक्ष्वाकुनाथं a क्षिपन्निह न लज्जसे।
चक्षुषो विषये तस्य न यावदुपगच्छसि॥ १७॥

“As such you do not evidently feel
abashed while railing here (when he is not
before you) at Sri Rama, the protector of the
Ikswakus. You blab like this only so long as
you do not fall within the range of his sight.

(17)
इमे ते नयने gt विकृते कृष्णपिंगले।
क्षितौ न पतिते कस्मान्मामनार्य निरीक्षत:॥१८॥

“| wonder how these cruel, evil, dark-
yellow eyes of yours did not drop on the
ground even as you gazed on me lustfully,
O ignoble creature ! (18)

तस्य धर्मात्मन: पत्नी स्नुषा दशरथस्य च।
कथं व्याहरतो at a न जिह्वा पाप शीर्यति॥ १९॥

“Why did your tongue not fall off even
as you were talking as you did to me, the
spouse of the aforesaid pious minded soul
and daughter-in-law of King Dasaratha?

(19)
sTaeyIrd रामस्य तपसश्चानुपालनात्।
न त्वां कुर्मि दशग्रीव भस्म भस्मार्हतेजसा॥ Ro II

“| do not reduce you to ashes by dint of
my glory, which alone is enough to reduce
you to ashes, only because | do not have
the mandate of Sri Rama to do so and also

because | seek to preserve the power of
my asceticism, O ten-headed monster ! (20)

« VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

नापहर्तुमहँ शबक्या तस्य रामस्य धीमत:।
विधिस्तव वधार्थाय विहितो art संशय:॥ २१॥

“Being the consort of that wise Sri
Rama, | was not capable of being wrested by
you. My abduction is only a device ordained
by Providence for bringing about your
destruction: there is no doubt about it. (21)

शूरेण धनदभ्रात्रा बलै: समुदितेन al
अपोह्य रामं कस्माच्चिद् दारचौर्यं त्वया PALM २२॥
“Wherefore was Sri Rama’s consort,
myself, stolen away by you after luring away
Sri Rama from the hermitage, heroic as you
claim yourself, nay, a (half-) brother of Kubera,
the bestower of riches, and well-equipped
with forces?” (22)

सीताया वचनं श्रुत्वा रावणो राक्षसाधिप:।
विव्रत्य नयने क्रूरे जानकीमन्ववैक्षत॥ २३॥
नीलजीमूतसंकाशो महाभुजशिरोधर:।
सिंहसत्त्वगति: sitar दीप्तजिह्वोग्रलोचन:॥ २४॥
चलाग्रमुकुटप्रांशुश्चित्रमाल्यानुलेपन: ।
रक्तमाल्याम्बरधरस्तप्तांगदविभूषण: WRK
श्रोणीसूत्रेण wed मेचकेन dad: |
अमृतोत्पादने नद्धो भुजंगेनेव मन्दर:॥ २६॥

Turning his cruel eyes round in anger
on hearing the reply of Sita, the glorious
Ravana, the suzerain lord of ogres, looked
askance at the daughter of Janaka—Ravana,
who resembled a dark cloud had enormous
arms and neck, possessed the courage
and gait of a lion, had a flaming tongue and
frightful eyes, who looked very tall with the
crest of his diadem shaking as a result of
his anger, who was adorned with excellent
garlands and smeared with exquisite sandal-
paste and who wore a garland of red flowers
and a red costume, was decked with brilliant
armlets and encircled at his waist with a
costly dark-blue girdle, obviously made of
sapphires, thus presenting the appearance
of Mount Mandara encompassed by the
serpent Vasuki at the time of the churning of
the ocean for extracting nectar. (23—26)
