* SUNDARAKANDA + 51

spoke as follows to Hanuman, sprung from
the loins of the wind-god: (22)

कस्त्वं केन च कार्येण se Wal वनालय।
कथयस्वेह यत् Ara यावत् प्राणा धरन्ति ते॥ २३॥
“Who are you and for what purpose
have you come hither, O dweller of the
forest? Speak out what the truth is so long
as life has its hold on you. (23)
न शक्यं खल्वियं लंका प्रवेष्टुं वानर त्वया।
रक्षिता रावणबलैरभिगुप्ता समन्तत:॥ २४॥
“Protected by the forces of Ravana
and strongly guarded on all sides, this Lanka

can never be penetrated by you, O monkey |”
(24)

अथ तामब्रवीद् वीरो हनुमानग्रत: स्थिताम्।
कथयिष्यामि तत् तत्त्वं यन्मां त्वं परिपृच्छ्से॥ २५ ॥
The valiant Hanuman then replied to
the ogress standing before him: “I shall
presently give out that truth which you have
just questioned me about. (25)

का त्वं विरूपनयना पुरद्वारेऽवतिष्ठसे।
किमर्थं चापि at क्रोधानिर्भर्त्सयसि दारुणे॥ २६॥

“Who are you with hideous eyes
standing at the city gate? And what for do
you angrily threaten me, O cruel one!”(26)

हनुमद्वचनं श्रुत्वा लंका सा कामरूपिणी।
उवाच वचनं क्रुद्धा परुषं पवनात्मजम्॥ २७॥
Irritated to hear the counter-question of
Hanuman, the aforesaid Lanka, who was
able to change her form at will, spoke harshly
as follows to the offspring of the wind-god:
(27)

Te राक्षसराजस्य रावणस्य महात्मन:।
आज्ञाप्रतीक्षा दुर्धर्षा रक्षामि नगरीमिमाम्॥ २८॥
“Always remaining at the beck and call
of the high-souled Ravana—the ruler of
ogres—and difficult to overpower, | guard
this city. (28)

न wet मामवज्ञाय was नगरीमिमाम्।
अद्य प्राणै: परित्यक्त: स्वप्स्यसे निहतो मया॥ २९॥

“It is not possible to make one’s way
into this city disregarding me. Overthrown
by me and deprived of your life-breath, you
will lie down in eternal sleep today. (29)
ada: परिरक्षामि अतस्ते कथितं मया॥ ३०॥

“In truth | am the city of Lanka in
person, O monkey, and guard it on all sides;
hence such harsh words have been spoken
to you by me.” (30)
लंकाया वचनं श्रुत्वा हनुमान् मारुतात्मज:।
यत्नवान् स हरिश्रेष्ठ: स्थित: Set इवापर:॥ ३१॥

Hearing the words of Lanka, that jewel
among the monkeys, Hanuman, sprung from
the loins of the wind-god, stood like another
mountain (standing on the Trikuta mountain),
full of agility to give her a sound thrashing if
she dared to assail him. (31)

स तां स्त्रीरूपविकृतां ger वानरपुङ्खव:।
आबभाषेऽथ मेधावी सत्त्ववान् WERTH: ॥ ३२॥
Seeing that monster in the form of a
woman, that bull among the monkeys, a
veritable jewel among monkeys, who was
full of intelligence and courage, then spoke
to her as follows : (32)
seat नगरीं लंकां साट्टप्राकारतोरणाम्।
इत्यर्थमिह ware: ut कौतूहलं fe मे॥ ३३॥
“| should like to see the city of Lanka
with its palaces, defensive wall and archways.
| have come here for this very purpose; for
great is my curiosity in this behalf. (33)

वनान्युपवनानीह लंकाया: काननानि a
सर्वतो गृहमुख्यानि द्रष्टुमागमनं fe मे॥३४॥
“Indeed, my visit to this place is
purported to explore the forests, gardens
and groves of Lanka and to see the foremost
of its mansions on all sides.” (34)
तस्य Ag वचनं श्रुत्वा लंका सा कामरूपिणी।
YI एव पुनर्वाक्यं बभाषे परुषाक्षरम्॥ ३५॥

Hearing the aforesaid reply of Hanuman,
