* ARANYAKANDA «

from abrasions caused by the tusks of
Airavata. (7)
विशालवक्षस वीरं राजलक्षणलक्षितम्॥८॥

The hero had twenty arms, ten heads,
attractive royal paraphernalia, a broad chest

and was distinguished by bodily marks found
on the person of a king. (8)

नद्धवैदूर्यसंकाशं तप्तकाञ्चनभूषणम्।
सुभुजं शुक्लदशनं महास्यं पर्वतोपमम्॥९॥
He wore the hue of Vaiduryas (cat’s-
eye jewels) fastened on his person, was
adorned with ornaments of refined gold, had
shapely arms, white teeth, an enormous
mouth and looked like a mountain. (9)

विष्णुचक्रनिपातैश्च sagt देवसंयुगे।

अन्यै: शस्त्रै: प्रहारैश्च महायुद्धेषु ताडितम्॥१०॥
He was struck hundreds of times during

the wars with gods with the blows of Visnu’s

discus as also with the strokes of other

weapons in great conflicts. (10)

sere: समस्तैस्तं देवप्रहरणैस्तदा।
अक्षोभ्याणां समुद्राणां क्षोभणं क्षिप्रकारिणम्॥ ११॥
With all his limbs that could not be
injured even with the weapons of gods, he
churned up the seas, which could not be
churned up by others and was prompt in
action. (11)

क्षेप्तारं पर्वताग्राणां सुराणां च प्रमर्दनम्।
उच्छेत्तारं च धर्माणां परदाराभिमर्शनम्॥१२॥
He hurled peaks of mountains by way
of missiles and crushed the gods. He uprooted
the moral laws and enjoyed others’ wives.
(12)

सर्वदिव्यास्त्रयोक्तारं यज्ञविघ्नकरं सदा।
पुरीं भोगवतीं गत्वा पराजित्य च वासुकिम्॥ १३॥

तक्षकस्य frat भार्यां पराजित्य जहार य:।
कैलासं पर्वतं गत्वा विजित्य नरवाहनम्॥ १४॥

विमानं पुष्पकं तस्य कामगं वै जहार य:।
at चैत्ररथं feet नलिनीं tet वनम्॥१५॥

799

विनाशयति य: क्रोधाद् देवोद्यानानि वीर्यवान्।
चन्द्रसूर्यौ महाभागावुत्तिष्ठन्तौ परंतपौ॥१६॥
निवारयति बाहुभ्यां a: शैलशिखरोपम:।
दशवर्षसहस्राणि तपस्तप्त्वा महावने॥१७॥
पुरा ways धीर: शिरांस्युपजहार य:।
देवदानवगन्धर्वपिशाचपतगोरगै: ॥ १८ ॥
अभयं यस्य संग्रामे मृत्युतो मानुषादूते।
मन्रैरभिष्टुतं पुण्यमध्वरेषु द्विजातिभि:॥१९॥
हविर्धानेषु य: सोममुपहन्ति महाबल:।
प्राप्तयज्ञहरं दुष्टं ब्रह्मघ्नं क्रूरकारिणम्॥२०॥
कर्कशं निरनुक्रोशं प्रजानामहिते रतम्।
रावणं सर्वभूतानां सर्वलोकभयावहम्॥ २१॥
राक्षसी भ्रातरं Ht सा cael महाबलम्।
तं दिव्यवस्त्राभरणं दिव्यमाल्योपशोभितम्॥ २२॥
आसने सूपविष्टं तं काले कालमिवोद्यतम्।
राक्षसेन्द्रं महाभागं पौलस्त्यकुलनन्दनम्॥ २३॥
उपगम्याब्रवीद् वाक्यं राक्षसी भयविह्वला।
रावणं शत्रुहन्तारं abate: परिवारितम्॥ evil

He knew the use of all celestial missiles
and even caused interruption in sacrifices.
Proceeding to the city of Bhogavati (the
capital of the Nagas), vanquishing Vasuki
(the ruler of the Nagas) and routing Taksaka
(a leader of Nagas), he took away the
latter's dear wife. Reaching Mount Kailasa
and fully conquering Kubera (who usually
moves on a palanquin carried by men), he
took away his aerial car, Puspaka, which
could go wherever its master liked, the
valiant Ravana in his anger laid waste the
celestial garden Caitraratha (of Kubera) and
the lake Nalini (situated in the centre of
Caitraratha), the garden Nandana (of Indra,
the lord of paradise) as well as the other
gardens of gods. Resembling a mountain-
peak in size, he intercepted with his arms
the highly blessed moon and sun, the
tormentors of their enemies, appearing at
the horizon.

Having practised austerities in a large
forest for ten thousand years, the strong-
minded man offered to Brahma (the self-
