श्वश्रूणामविशेषेण प्राञ्जलिप्रग्रहेण च।
शिरसा वन्द्य चरणौ कुशलं ब्रूहि पार्थिवम्॥ Qo ti

“Ask after the welfare of the mothers-
in-law, without discrimination and also of the
king with folded hands and courteously.

(10)

शिरसाभिनतो ga: सर्वासामेव लक्ष्मण।
वक्तव्यश्चापि नृपतिर्धर्मेषु सुसमाहित:॥११॥

“Speak to all of them O Laksmana,
with your head bent downwards and indeed
communicate this to the king, who is so
well-placed in righteousness. (11)

जानासि च यथा शुद्धा सीता तत्त्वेन राघव।
भक्त्या च परया युक्ता feat च तव नित्यश: ॥ १२॥

‘O scion of the Raghu, you know full
well, how, in fact, Sita is pure and full of
devotion and always concerned about your
welfare. (12)

अहं त्यक्तका च ते aA अयशोभीरुणा जने।
यच्च a वचनीयं स्यादपवाद: समुत्थित:॥ १३॥
Tat च परिहर्तव्यं त्वं fe A परमा ala:
वक्तव्यश्चैव नॄपतिर्धर्मेण सुसमाहित:॥१४॥

‘By you, afraid of infamy, am | forsaken,
O powerful one. That censure of yours and
the curse that befalls you, shall indeed be
averted by me, as you are my only resort.’
“The following should be communicated to
the king embeded in righteousness. (13-14)

यथा भ्रातृषु वर्तेथास्तथा पौरेषु नित्यदा।
परमो ह्येष धर्मस्ते तस्मात् कीर्तिरनुत्तमा॥१५॥

“‘Treat citizens like your brothers
always. This is the greatest Dharma. It will
provide you the unparalleled fame. (15)

aq पौरजने Wr धर्मेण समवाप्नुयात्।
अहं तु नानुशोचामि स्वशरीरं नरर्षभ॥१६॥

“What can you achieve through the
impartial and rightful treatment to the citizens
will be the best fruit for you. | am not
bothered about my body, O best among
men. (16)

« VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

यथापवादं पौराणां तथैव रघुनन्दन।
पतिर्हि देवता नार्या: पतिर्बन्धु: पतिर्गुरु:॥ १७॥
“Just as it was necessary for you to
rectify the public censure, in the same way
wives also have some duties; husband is
everything to a wife—a god, the family, the
preceptor. (17)

प्राणैरपि fret तस्माद् भर्तु: कार्यं विशेषत:।
इति मद्वचनाद् WAT वक्तव्यो AA MWS: Ve i
निरीक्ष्य माद्य गच्छ त्वमृतुकालातिवर्तिनीम्।
एवं Yarn सीतायां लक्ष्मणो दीनचेतन:॥१९॥
शिरसा वन्द्य धरणीं व्याहर्तुं न शशाक ह।
प्रदक्षिणं च at कृत्वा रुदन्नेव महास्वन:॥ २०॥
ध्यात्वा Hed तामाह किं मां वक्ष्यसि शोभने।
दृष्टपूर्वं Aa रूपं पादौ Gel aaa २१॥
कथमत्र हि पश्यामि रामेण रहितां वने।
इत्युक्त्वा तां नमस्कृत्य पुनर्नावमुपारुहत्॥ 22
आरुरोह पुनर्नावं नाविकं चाभ्यचोदयत्।
स गत्वा चोत्तरं dit शोकभारसमन्वित:॥ २३॥
सम्मूढ इव GUT रथमध्यारुहद् द्रुतम्।
मुहुर्मुहु: Wat दृष्टवा सीतामनाथवत्॥ evil

“Therefore, a wife has to propitiate her
husband even at the cost of her life.’ All this
you must tell briefly what | have said. You
have seen with your own eyes that | am in
the family way.”

The dejected, Laksmana on hearing
Sita having said so paid homage to the earth
by his head and failed to speak, and going
round her, loudly crying, contemplated for a
moment, (and with great effort) addressed
her thus : “O auspicious one, O faultless one,
your body is not seen by me, as your feet
alone were the object of my vision till now.
Oh how shall | behold you, separated from
Rama, dwelling in this forest.” Thus saying
to her and bowing to her, Laksmana,
approached and ascended the boat and urged
the ferryman to steer the boat, then having
reached the Northern banks, burdened by
the weight of sorrow, went up the chariot in
haste, bewildered as he was, and looking with
