612

तुं ` धरै: \
wate: क्षतजं ma: प्रस्रवद्भि: समन्तत:॥८॥
पतितै: पर्वताकारैर्वानरैरभिसंवृताम्।
शस्त्रैश्च पतितैर्दीप्तैर्ददृशाते वसुंधराम्॥९॥

The two warriors saw the earth
covered all over with monkeys resembling
mountains—who lay fallen on earth, letting
out blood from their bodies whose tails,
hands, thighs, feet, fingers and necks had
been severed, and who were discharging
urine all round—as well as with flaming
weapons that had fallen. (8-9)
Ward qt च वेगदर्शिनमेव Ail oll
विभीषणो हनूमांश्च ददृशाते हतान् रणे॥११॥

Vibhisana and Hanuman saw struck
down on the battlefield Sugriva, Angada,
Nila, Sarabha, Gandhamadana, Jambavan
and Susena as well as Vegadarsi, Mainda,
Nala, Jyotirmukha and the monkey Dwivida
too. (10-11)
सप्तषष्टिर्हता: कोट्यो वानराणां तरस्विनाम्।
अह्न: पञ्चमशेषेण वल्लभेन स्वयंभुव:॥१२॥

By the fifth and last* period of the day
(viz., evening) sixty-seven crores of powerful
monkeys were laid prostrate by the missile
cherished by Brahma (the self-born creator).

(12)
मार्गते जाम्बवन्तं च हनूमान् सविभीषण:॥१३॥

Looking on the formidable army—which
resembled the tide of a sea—overwhelmed
by the shafts of Indrajit, Hanuman,
accompanied by Vibhisana, began to search
for Jambavan. (13)

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA +

स्वभावजरया युक्तं ase शरशतैश्चितम्।
प्रजापतिसुतं att शाम्यन्तमिव पावकम्॥१४॥
दृष्टवा समभिसंक्रम्य पौलस्त्यो वाक्यमब्रवीत्।
कच्चिदार्य शरैस्तीक्ष्णैर्न प्राणा ध्वंसितास्तव॥ १५ ॥

Seeing the heroic Jambavan, a son of
Brahma, the lord of creation—who
was naturally weighed down by age and
was advanced in wisdom, too, nay, who
was covered with hundreds of shafts and
looked like a dying fire—and duly
approaching him, Vibhisana (a scion of
Pulasti, one of the mind-born sons of
Brahma), spoke to him as follows: “I hope,
O venerable Sir, that your life has not been
put an end to by the penetrating shafts shot
by Indrajit.” (14-15)
विभीषणवच: श्रुत्वा जाम्बवानृक्षपुङ्खव:।
कृच्छरादभ्युद्गिरन् वाक्यमिदं वचनमब्रवीत्॥ १६॥

Hearing the question of Vibhisana
and uttering words with difficulty, Jambavan,

the foremost of the bears, replied as follows:
(16)

नैर्ऋतेन्द्र महावीर्य स्वरेण त्वाभिलक्षये।

विद्धगात्र: शितैर्बाणैर्न cat पश्यामि चक्षुषा॥ १७॥

“O Vibhisana (a ruler of ogres), who
are endowed with extraordinary prowess, |
recognize you by your voice alone. Pierced
all over with sharp arrows, | no longer see
you with my eyes. (17)

अञ्जना सुप्रजा येन मातरिश्वा च Wad
हनूमान् वानरश्रेष्ठ: प्राणान् धारयते क्वचित्॥ १८ ॥

“Does Hanuman, the foremost of
monkeys, because of whom Ajijana, his
mother, and the wind-god, his procreator,
are recognized as blessed parents, still
survive anywhere, O pious, one?” (18)

* The twelve hours of the day were commonly divided into five parts consisting of six Ghatikas (or two

hours and twenty-four minutes) each. They were known by the names of Pratah (morning), Sangave (forenoon),

Madhyahna (Midday), Aparahna (afternoon) and Sayahna (evening).
