480

धूम्राक्षवचनं seat बलाध्यक्षो बलानुग:।
बलमुद्योजयामास रावणस्याज्ञया भृशम्॥ २२॥
Hearing the call of Dhumraksa, the
Commander-in-Chief, who was followed by
a large contingent, quickly mobilized a
battalion in obedience to the command of
Ravana. (22)
a बद्धघण्टा बलिनो घोररूपा निशाचरा:।
विनद्यमाना: संहृष्टा धूम्राक्षं पर्यवारयन्॥ २३॥
Roaring exultantly, those mighty
ogres of terrible aspet with girdles of bells

fastened round their waist, ranged round
Dhumraksa. (23)

विविधायुधहस्ताश्च शूलमुद्गरपाणय:।
गदाभि: पट्टिशैर्दण्डैरायसैर्मुसलैरपि It २४॥
निर्ययू राक्षसा घोरा नर्दन्तो जलदा यथा॥ २५॥

Carrying weapons of every description
such as pikes and mallets in their hands
and armed with maces, sharp-edged spears,
iron cudgels as well as with clubs, iron
bars, Bhindipalas (a kind of sling for forcefully
throwing stones), lances, nooses and axes,
the redoubtable ogres sallied forth, thundering
like clouds. (24-25)

रथै: कवचिनस्त्वन्ये ध्वजैश्च समलंकृतै:।
सुवर्णजालविहितैर३ खरैश्च विविधाननै:।॥ २६॥

Patera व्याघ्रा इव दुरासदा:॥ २७॥

Clad in mail, other tigers among
ogres issued forth, like tigers which are
difficult to approach, in chariots magnificently
dressed with flags and covered with a
lattice-work of gold as well as on the
back of donkeys with heads of every
description as also exceedingly fleet
horses and elephants maddened with
ichor. (26-27)

आरुरोह tah दिव्यं धूम्राक्ष: खरनि:स्वन:॥ २८ ॥

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA +

Dhumraksa, whose voice resembled
the braying of a donkey, mounted a wonderful
chariot driven by donkeys with harness
of gold and heads resembling those of a
wolf and a lion. (28)

स निर्यातो महावीर्यो धूम्राक्षो राक्षसैर्वृत:।
ert a पश्चिमद्वाराद्धनूमान् aa तिष्ठति॥ २९॥

Surrounded by ogres, the notorious
Dhumraksa, who was’ endowed with
extraordinary prowess, actually set forth
laughing through the western gate, where
Hanuman had taken up his stand. (29)

° + । ।
Ward तु महाघोरं राक्षसं भीमदर्शनम्॥३०॥
अन्तरिक्षगता: क्रूरा: शकुना: प्रत्यषेधयन्।
रथशीर्षे महाभीमो गृध्रश्च निपपात su ३१॥

Ferocious birds appearing in the air
for their part deterred that exceedingly
formidable ogre of terrible aspect, whose
voice resembled the braying of a donkey,
while he was sallying forth taking his seat in
a highly excellent chariot driven by donkeys.
Nay, an exceedingly terrible vulture alighted
on the top of his chariot; so the tradition
goes. (30-31)
ध्वजाग्रे ग्रथिताश्चैव निपेतु: कुणपाशना:।
रुधिरारद्रो महान् श्चेत: कबन्ध: पतितो भुवि॥ ३२॥

Birds feasting on dead bodies and
interlocked with one another in combat
also descended on the point of his standard.
A huge headless lurid trunk, wet with
blood, also fell on the ground before him.

(32)
विस्वरं चोत्सृजन्नादान् धूम्राक्षस्य निपातित:।
aat रुधिरं देव: संचचाल च मेदिनी॥ ३३॥

The trunk hurled by someone in front

of Dhumraksa lay emitting cries discordantly.

The rain-god poured down blood and the
earth shook. (33)

प्रतिलोमं ववौ वायुर्निर्घातसमनि:स्वन:।
तिमिरौघाव्रृतास्तत्र दिशश्च न चकाशिरे॥ ३४॥
