598

to roam about in the woods, replied with
folded hands as follows : (5)

दाशास्त्वनुगमिष्यन्ति देशज्ञा: सुसमाहिता:।
ae चानुगमिष्यामि राजपुत्र महाबल॥६॥
“Ferrymen who are familiar with the
region and very attentive will undoubtedly
accompany you. | too shall follow you in
person, O exceptionally mighty prince ! (6)

कच्चिन्न दुष्टो व्रजसि रामस्याक्लिष्टकर्मण: |
इयं ते महती सेना vsti जनयतीव मे॥७॥

“| hope you are not going with evil
intent towards Sri Rama, who does great
deeds without any exertion? This huge army
of yours gives rise to apprehension in my
mind, as it were.” (7)

तमेवमभिभाषन्तमाकाश इव निर्मल:।

Wa: श्लक्ष्णया वाचा गुहं वचनमब्रवीत्॥८॥
To the aforesaid Guha, who was talking

as above, Bharata, whose heart was

absolutely taintless as the sky, replied in
sweet words as follows : (8)

मा भूत् स कालो यत् कष्टं न मां शङ्कितुमर्हसि।
waa: स fe मे भ्राता ज्येष्ठ: पितृसमो Aa: ९॥

“May that time never come when such
wickedness appears in me. You ought not
to entertain any misgiving about me; for that
scion of Raghu is my elder brother and is
esteemed by me as equal to my father. (9)
तं निवर्तयितुं aft काकुत्स्थं वनवासिनम्।
बुद्धिरन्या न मे कार्या We सत्यं Ta ते॥१०॥

“| go to bring back Sri Rama (a scion
of Kakutstha), who is dwelling in the woods.
| tell you the bare truth, O Guha! No other
motive should be imputed to me.” (10)

स तु संहृष्टवदन: seat भरतभाषितम्।
पुनरेवाब्रवीद् वाक्यं भरतं प्रति हर्षित:॥११॥
With his face rendered extremely bright
with joy on hearing Bharata’s reply, Guha
for his part joyfully spoke once more to
Bharata as follows : (11)

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

धन्यस्त्वं न त्वया तुल्यं पश्यामि जगतीतले।
अयत्नादागतं राज्यं यस्त्वं त्यक्तुमिहेच्छसि॥ १२॥
“Blessed are you. | find none on the
surface of this globe equal to you who seek
to relinquish a kingdom come to you without
any effort on your part! (12)

शाश्वती खलु ते alfacitery चरिष्यति।
यस्त्वं कृच्छ्रगतं wa प्रत्यानयितुमिच्छसि॥ १३॥
“Surely your lasting fame will extend to
the spheres inasmuch as you wish to bring
back to Ayodhya Sri Rama, who has fallen
in adversity.” (13)
एवं सम्भाषमाणस्य गुहस्य Wd तदा।
बभौ नष्टप्रभ: सूर्यो wrt चाभ्यवर्तत॥१४॥
While Guha was conversing thus with
Bharata, the sun lost its splendour and night
fell. (14)
arava स oat सेनां गुहेन परितोषित:।
शत्रुघ्नेन समं श्रीमाञ्छ्यनं पुनरागमत्॥१५॥
Lodging the said army in camps, and
soothed by Guha, the glorious Bharata then
went to bed with Satrughna. (15)

रामचिन्तामय: शोको भरतस्य महात्मन:।
उपस्थितो ह्यनर्हस्य धर्मप्रेक्षस्य तादूश:॥ १६॥

Grief born of anxiety for Sri Rama and
unique of its kind now overtook the high-
souled Bharata, whose eyes were fixed on
righteousness and who surely did not
deserve this mental torture. (16)
अन्तर्दाहेन दहन: संतापयति राघवम्।
वनदाहाग्निसंतप्तं गूढोऽग्निरिवं पादपम्॥१७॥

Even as a fire hidden in the hollow of
a tree burns a tree already scorched by a
forest-consuming fire, so did the fire of anxiety
for Sri Rama inwardly begin to consume
Bharata (a scion of Raghu), who was already
scorched by the fire of grief caused by his
father’s death. (17)

Waa: सर्वगात्रेभ्य: स्वेदं शोकाग्निसम्भवम्।
यथा सूर्यांशुसंतप्तो हिमवान् प्रसृतो हिमम्॥ १८॥
