488

The glorious Rama (elder brother of
Laksmana) himself got into the boat last;
and after that Guha, the ruler of the Nisadas,
commanded his kinsmen to row the boat
across the stream. (77)

राघवोऽपि महातेजा नावमारुह्य at तत:।
ब्रह्मवत्क्षत्रवच्चैव जजाप हितमात्मन:॥७८॥

Having got into the aforesaid boat,

Sri Rama, a scion of Raghu, for his part,
who was possessed of unique splendour,
then recited a sacred text (edt नावम् etc.,)
fit for the Brahmanas and _ Ksatriyas
alike and conducive to his own good.
(78)

आचम्य च यथाशास्त्रं नदीं at सह सीतया।

प्रणमत्प्रीतिसंतुष्टो लक्ष्मणश्च महारथ:॥७९॥

Nay, sipping the water of the Ganga
according to the scriptural ordinance and
feeling highly gratified, Sri Rama with sita
bowed low to that river and Laksmana, the
great car-warrior, followed suit. (79)
अनुज्ञाय सुमन्त्रं च सबलं wa तं गुहम्।
आस्थाय नावं रामस्तु चोदयामास नाविकान्॥ ८०॥

Further, bidding farewell to Sumantra
as well as to the celebrated Guha and his
army and, occupying his seat in the boat,
Sri Rama for his part urged the boatmen to
row the boat. (80)

ततस्तैश्चालिता नौका कर्णधारसमाहिता।
शुभस्फ्यवेगाभिहता शीघ्रं सलिलमत्यगात्॥८१॥
Rowed by the boatmen and directed
by the helmsman, the boat, propelled by the
swift movement of the beautiful oars, moved
swiftly across the water. (81)

मध्यं तु समनुप्राप्य भागीरथ्यास्त्वनिन्दिता।
aed प्राञ्जलिर्भूत्वा at नदीमिदमब्रवीत्॥८२॥

Having duly reached the middle of the
Ganga, Sita, a princess of the Videha
kingdom, for her part, who was irreproachable
in everyway, spoke as follows with joined
palms to the said river : (82)

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA +

Wat दशरथस्यायं महाराजस्य धीमत:।
Fest पालयत्वेनं गङ्गे त्वदभिरक्षित:।॥ ८३॥
“Protected on all sides by you, O mother
Ganga, may this son of the wise Emperor
Dasaratha execute this decree of the
Emperor to remain in exile for fourteen years.
(83)

ade fe वर्षाणि समग्राण्युष्य कानने।
भ्रात्रा सह मया चैव पुन: प्रत्यागमिष्यति॥ ८४॥

ततस्त्वां देवि सुभगे क्षेमेण पुनरागता।
यक्ष्ये प्रमुदिता me सर्वकामसमृद्धिनी॥ ८५॥

“When, having sojourned in the forest
for full fourteen years, he arrives at your
bank once more with his younger brother,
Laksmana, and myself, then, returned in
safety, O blessed goddess, with all my
desires fulfilled, O Ganga, | shall worship
you with great delight. (84-85)

त्वं fe त्रिपथगे efa ब्रह्मलोकं समशक्षसे।
भार्या चोदधिराजस्य लोकेऽस्मिन् सम्प्रदूश्यसे॥ ८६ ॥
सा त्वां देवि नमस्यामि प्रशंसामि च शोभने।
प्राप्तराज्ये नरव्याघ्रे शिवेन पुनरागते॥८७॥
Tat शतसहस्रं च वस्त्राण्यन्नं च पेशलम्।
ब्राह्मणेभ्य: प्रदास्यामि तव प्रियचिकोर्षया॥ ८८॥
“Since you, O goddess, flowing through
heaven, earth and the subterranean regions,
include in your basin the realm of Brahma
(the outermost of the six soheres enveloping
the earth) and are vividly seen on this
terrestrial plane as a consort of the Ocean-
king, the deity presiding over the oceans, l,
Sita, greet and extol you, O charming
goddess! When Sri Rama, a tiger among
men, has safely returned and regained his
throne, | shall give away a lakh of cows as
well as articles of wearing apparel and food-
stuffs of excellent quality to the Brahmans
with intent to please you. (86—88)

सुराघटसहस्रेण मांसभूतौदनेन a
यक्ष्ये cat प्रीयतां देवि पुरीं पुनरुपागता॥८९॥

“Having returned to Ayodhya, | shall
worship you with thousand and one articles
