* BALAKANDA +

तस्य Ad वचनं श्रुत्वा जनकस्य महात्मन:।
न्यवेदयदमेयात्मा पुत्रौ दशरथस्य तौ॥२२॥
Hearing the aforesaid inquiry of King
Janaka, who was well-known to be an
exalted soul, Sage ViSwamitra, who wields
immense spiritual power, declared them to
be sons of Emperor DaSsaratha. (22)
सिद्धाश्रमनिवासं च राक्षसानां वधं तथा।
तत्रागमनमव्यग्रं विशालायाश्च दर्शनम्॥२३॥
अहरल्यादर्शनं da गौतमेन समागमम्।
महाधनुषि जिज्ञासां कर्तुमागमनं तथा॥ २४॥
He also told Janaka of their intrepid
journey to and sojourn at Siddhasrama, as

211

well as about the destruction of ogres at
their hands, nay, of their visit to Visala and
calling on Ahalya as well as of their meeting
with Sage Gautama and finally of their visit
to Mithila in order to know about the great
bow (kept by Janaka for testing the valour
of those suing the hand of his daughter).
(23-24)
एतत् We महातेजा जनकाय महात्मने।
fea विररामाथ विश्वामित्रो महामुनि:।॥ २५॥

Having related all this to the high-
souled Janaka, the great sage ViSwamitra,
who was exceptionally glorious, forthwith
paused. (25)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये बालकाण्डे पञ्चाश: सर्ग: ॥ ५० ll

Thus ends Canto Fifty in the Balakanda of the glorious Ramayana of Valmiki,
the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

एकपञ्चाश: सर्ग:
Canto LI

At the request of Satananda, Viswamitra tells him how Ahalya was redeemed
by Sri Rama and entertained him with the help of her husband. And Satananda
in his turn commences narrating to Sri Rama the story of Viswamitra

wea aq वचनं श्रुत्वा विश्चामित्रस्य धीमत:।
Baa महातेजा: शतानन्दो महातपा:॥१॥
गौतमस्य सुतो ज्येष्ठस्तपसा द्योतितप्रभ:।
रामसंदर्शनादेव परॆ विस्मयमागत:॥ २॥

Hearing the aforesaid story told by the
celebrated ViSwamitra, who was a repository
of wisdom, the exceptionally glorious
Satananda, the eldest son of Gautama—
who was a great ascetic (like his father),
nay, whose brilliance stood heightened by
his asceticism—was thrilled with joy and
felt greatly astonished at the very sight of
Sri Rama. (1-2)

`एतौ निषण्णौ सम्प्रेक्ष्य शतानन्दो नृपात्मजौ।
सुखासीनौ मुनिश्रेष्ठं विश्वामित्रमथाब्रवीत्॥ ३॥

Beholding these two princes, Sri Rama

and Laksmana, seated and comfortably
ensconced, the celebrated Satananda now
spoke to ViSwamitra, the foremost of hermits
as follows : (3)

aft a मुनिशार्दूल मम माता यशस्विनी।
दर्शिता राजपुत्राय तपो दीर्घमुपागता॥४॥

“Was my illustrious mother, who had
been going through a long course of
austerities, shown by you to Sri Rama, son
of King DaSaratha, O tiger among sages?(4)

अपि wa महातेजा मम माता यशस्विनी।
वन्यैरुपाहरत् पूजां पूजार्हे सर्वदेहिनाम्॥५॥

“Did my exceptionally glorious and
illustrious mother offer hospitality with wild
fruits etc., to Sri Rama, who deserves to be
honoured by all embodied souls? (5)
