+ UTTARAKANDA +

तदेतत् कथितं सर्वं यन्मां त्वं परिपृच्छसि।
हनूमतो बालभावे कर्मैतत् कथितं मया॥५१॥
“All that you asked me has hereby
been related by me. The feats performed by
Hanuman in his childhood have also been
recounted by me.” (51)

श्रुत्वागस्त्यस्य कथितं wa: सौमित्रिरेव च।
विस्मयं परमं जग्मुर्वानरा राक्षसै: सह॥५२॥
Hearing the tale of Agastya, Sri Rama
as well as Laksmana, as also the monkeys
alongwith the ogres experienced great
wonder. (52)
अगस्त्यस्त्वब्रवीद् WH सर्वमेतच्छुतं त्वया।
ge: सम्भाषितश्चासि राम गच्छामहे वयम्॥ ५३॥
Agastya for his part said to Sri Rama,
“All this has been listened to by You. You

have also been seen and spoken to by us,
O Rama! We now depart.” (53)

श्रुत्वैतद् राघवो वाक्यमगस्त्यस्योग्रतेजस:।
Wate: प्रणतश्चापि महर्षिमिदमब्रवीत्॥५४॥

Hearing this statement of Agastya of
formidable lustre, Sri Rama (a scion of Raghu)
submissively replied as follows with joined
palms to the great sage: (54)
अद्य A देवतास्तुष्टा: पितर: प्रपितामहा:।
युष्माकं दर्शनादेव नित्यं तुष्टा: सबान्धवा:॥ ५५॥

“The gods, the eternal manes as well
as the souls of My departed ancestors are
pleased with Me today. As for ourselves we

stand ever gratified with our kinsfolk through
your very sight. (55)

विज्ञाप्यं q ममैतद्धि ae वदाम्यागतस्पृह:।
तद् भवद्धिर्मम pa कर्तव्यमनुकम्पया॥७५६॥
“Here is something actually worth
bringing to your notice. Seized with a longing,
that which | submit to you must be carried
out by you out of compassion to Me.
(56)

पौरजानपदान् स्थाप्य स्वकार्येष्वहमागत:।
क्रतूनहं करिष्यामि प्रभावाद् भवतां सताम्॥ ५७॥

979

“After appointing the citizens as well as
the people of the countryside to their
respective duties, now that | have returned
from My exile in the forest, | intend to
perform sacrifices through the goodwill of
saintly persons like you. (57)
सदस्या मम यज्ञेषु भवन्तो नित्यमेव तु।
भविष्यथ महावीर्या ममानुग्रहकांक्षिण:॥ ५८ ul

“Longing, as you do, to bless Me, you,
for your part, who are endowed with
extraordinary prowess born of asceticism,
should constantly act as superintending
priests at My _ sacrificial performances.

(58)

अहं युष्मान् समाश्रित्य तपं।निळ्ळिषान्।
area: पितृभिर्भविष्यामि सुनिर्वृत:॥७५९॥

“Fully depending on you, who have
shaken off all sins through asceticism, |
shall be blessed by My ancestors and feel
exceedingly happy. (59)
तदागन्तव्यमनिशं भवद्धिरिह संगतै:।
अगस्त्याद्यास्तु Tea WIA: संशितव्रता: Ul ६०॥
एवमस्त्विति तं प्रोच्य प्रयातुमुपचक्रमु:।
एवमुक्त्वा गता: सर्वे ऋॠषयस्ते यथागतम्॥६१॥

“You all should always come here in a
body at the time when the sacrifice has
commenced.”

Hearing the aforesaid request and saying
“Amen” to Him, the sages of rigid vows, the
foremost of whom was Agastya, began to
depart. Saying so, all the aforesaid sages
left as they came. (60-61)

राघवश्च तमेवार्थं चिन्तयामास विस्मित:।
ततोऽस्तं भास्करे याते विसृज्य नृपवानरान्॥६२॥
संध्यामुपास्य विधिवत् det नरवरोत्तम:।
प्रवृत्तायां रजन्यां तु सोऽन्त:पुरचरोऽभवत्॥६३॥
Sri Rama too pondered in amazement
over that very subject of performing
sacrifices. Having seen off the assembled

kings and monkeys on the sun having set,
and performed the Sandhya devotions with
