* ARANYAKANDA «

(of immeasurable prowess) struck off the three
heads of that ogre with three swift arrows.
Spurting steaming blood when thus mortally
hurt by the shafts of Rama, that night-stalker
fell down where he stood on the field of battle,
joining the company of his heads already
fallen. Feeling disheartened the surviving

785

ogres, who had taken shelter under the banner
of Khara, took to their heels and did not tarry
any more than the deer scared away by a
tiger. Enraged to see them running away, and
rallying them, Khara hurriedly rushed towards
Rama alone as the planet Rahu assails the
moon. (16—20)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्येऽरण्यकाण्डे सप्तविंश: सर्ग: I २७॥

Thus ends Canto Twenty-seven in the Aranyakanda of the glorious Ramayana of
Valmiki, the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

Canto XXVIII
Sri Rama’s encounter with Khara

Ped quot qeat रणे त्रिशिरसा सह।
ख्रस्याप्यभवत् त्रासो दृष्टवा रामस्य विक्रमम्॥ १॥
Seeing Dusana killed in battle together
with Trisira, fear entered the mind of Khara
too when he witnessed the prowess of Sri
Rama. (1)
स gear wad सैन्यमविषह्यं महाबलम्।
हतमेकेन रामेण दूषणस्तिशिरा अपि॥२॥
तद्बलं हतभूयिष्ठं विमना: Wer राक्षस:।
आससाद TG wa नमुचिर्वासवं यथा॥३॥
Bewildered to see the very mighty and
irresistible army of ogres as also Dusana and
Trisira killed by Rama single-handed, and also
perceiving most of the troops wiped out, the

ogre Khara attacked Sri Rama as did the
demon Namuci attack Indra. (2-3)

विकृष्य बलवच्चापं नाराचान् रक्तभोजनान्।
खरश्चिक्षषण waa क्रुद्धानाशीविषानिव॥४॥
Pulling at full length his mighty bow,
Khara discharged at Sri Rama blood-sucking
arrows known by the name of Naracas and
resembling angry serpents. (4)

ज्यां विधुन्वन् सुबहुश: शिक्षयास्त्राणि दर्शयन्।
चचार समरे मार्गान् Mt रथगत: खर:॥५॥

Shaking the string of his bow in
numerous ways and displaying (the use of)
mystic missiles by virtue of his military
practice, Khara in his chariot rode on the
battlefield employing devices with his arrows.

(5)
स wats fest बाणै: प्रदिशश्च महारथ:।
पूरयामास तं gear रामोऽपि सुमहद् धनु:॥ ६॥

That great chariot-warrior filled all the
quarters as also the intermediate points
with arrows. Seeing him, Sri Rama also
took up his very mighty bow. (6)
a सायकैर्दुर्विषहैर्विस्फुलिङ्गैरिवाग्निभि:।
नभश्चकाराविवरं wit ga वृष्टिभि:॥७॥

He covered the entire sky with his

formidable arrows resembling sparks of fire
as does the god of rain with showers. (7)

aya शितैर्बाणै: खररामविसर्जितै:।
पयक्रि।शमनाकाश add: शरसंकुलम्॥८॥
Thickly set with arrows on all sides
because of the sharp arrows discharged both
by Khara and Sri Rama, the sky round about
them was left without any empty space. (8)

शरजालाव्रृत: Fat A तदा स्म प्रकाशते।
अन्योन्यवधसंरम्भादुभयो: सम्प्रयुध्यतो: ।। ९ ॥
