# YUDDHAKANDA #

trumpeting resembles the pealing of bells,
roars in harsh tones and is endowed with
extraordinary courage, is Mahodara by name.
(17)
योऽसौ wt काञ्चनचित्रभाण्ड-
मारुह्य संध्याभ्रगिरिप्रकाशम्।
wre समुद्यम्य मरीचिनद्धं
पिशाच एषोऽशनितुल्यवेग: ॥ १८ I

“He who comes riding a horse decked
with golden jewels of various kinds and,
therefore, shining as a mountain crowned
with an evening cloud (tinged with the sun’s
rays), and uplifting a dart clothed with lustre,
is PiSaca, who vies with the thunderbolt in
velocity. (18)

as शूलं निशितं प्रगृह्य

विद्युत्प्रभं किंकरवज्रवेगम्।
वृषेन्द्रमास्थाय शशिप्रकाश-

मायाति योऽसौ त्रिशिरा यशस्वी॥१९॥

“Again, he who comes over there firmly
seizing a pointed pike shining like lightning
and surpassing the thunderbolt in velocity,
and riding a lordly bull, bright as the moon,
is the illustrious Trisira. (19)

असौ च जीमूतनिकाशरूप:
कुम्भ: पृथुव्यूढसुजातवक्षा: |
समाहित: पन्नगराजकेतु-

र्विस्फारयन् ofa धनुर्बिधुन्वन्॥२०॥

“There comes Kumbha, endowed with
a form resembling a cloud, who has a fleshy,
broad and shapely chest, who is distinguished
by a standard bearing the ensign of Vasuki
(the king of serpents) and who is coming
fully prepared, stretching and brandishing
his bow. (20)

यश्चैष जाम्बूनदवज्रजुष्टं
रक्षोबलकेतुभूतो
योऽसौ निकुम्भोऽद्भुतघोरकर्मा॥ २१॥

आयाति

509

“Again, he who comes over there firmly
seizing an iron club studded with gold and
diamonds and as such radiant as fire and
also smoky, studded with sapphires, and
who is the principal figure in the army of
ogres, is Nikumbha* of prodigious and terrible

deeds. (21)
यश्चैष चापासिशरौघजुष्टं

पताकिनं पावकदीप्तरूपम्।
रथं समास्थाय विभात्युदग्रो

नरान्तकोऽसौ नगश्रृङ्खयोधी ।॥। २२॥

“Again the tall fellow who shines brightly

over there, occupying a chariot equipped
with a multitude of bows, swords and arrows,
nay, distinguished by a flag and blazing like
fire is Narantaka, who fights with mountain
tops. (22)
यश्चैष नानाविधघोररूपै-
व्याघ्रोष्ट्नागेन्द्रमृगाश्ववक्त्रै: ।
भूतैर्वृतो भाति विवृत्तनेत्रै-

र्योऽसौ सुराणामपि दर्पहन्ता॥ २३॥

यत्रैतदिन्दुप्रतिमं विभाति
छत्रं सितं सूक्ष्मशलाकमग्रयम्।
अत्रैष रक्षोधिपतिर्महात्मा

भूतैर्वृततो रुद्र इवावभाति॥ २४॥

“Surrounded by ghosts of various
hideous forms with rolling eyes and heads
of tigers, camels, lordly elephants, deer and
horses, even as Rudra (the god of
destruction) is by genii, stands over there
that suzerain lord of ogres, who humbles
the pride even of gods and is endowed with
extraordinary courage, and over whom shines
brightly an excellent white canopy resembling
the moon and endowed with slender ribs.

(23-24)
असौ किरीटी चलकुण्डलास्यो
नगेन्द्रविन्ध्योपमभीमकाय: ।
महेन्द्रवैवस्वतदर्पहन्ता
tafe: सूर्य इवावभाति॥ au

* Vide verse 14 footnote.
