964

concluded my elder brother to have been
killed. Nay, blocking up the mouth of the
hole with a rock as big as a hillock, and
offering water to the spirit of the deceased,
stricken as | was with grief, | returned to
Kiskindha, O friend! Although | concealed
the truth, the secret was learnt by the
ministers with effort. (19-20)
ततोऽहं a: समागम्य समेतैरभिषेचित:।
TR प्रशासतस्तस्य न्यायतो मम राघव॥ RV Il
आजगाम रिपुं हत्वा दानवं A तु वानर:।
अभिषिक्तं तु At दृष्टवा क्रोधात् संरक्तलोचन: ॥ २२॥
“Having met together and deliberated
with one another, | was thereupon installed
on the throne of Kiskindha by the ministers
in a body. Having got rid of his adversary,
the demon (Mayavi), the aforesaid monkey,
my elder brother, Vali, for his part came
home while | was ruling his kingdom with
justice, O scion of Raghu! Seeing me installed
on the throne he had his eyes actually
turned crimson due to anger. (21-22)

मदीयान्मन्तरिणो बद्ध्वा परुषं वाक्यमब्रवीत्।
निग्रहे च समर्थस्य तं पापं प्रति wean २३॥

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

न Wadd मे afguigivaatad
हत्वा Wa स मे भ्राता प्रविवेश Ww तदा॥ evil
“Nay, binding my ministers in chains,
he spoke harsh words to them. Even
though | was capable of restraining that
sinful monkey, Vali, O scion of Raghu, my
mind, which was weighed down by a feeling
of reverence for my elder brother, did not
feel inclined to do so. Having killed his
adversary, the said brother of mine
forthwith entered the capital in due course.
(23-24)

मानयंस्तं महात्मानं यथावच्चाभिवादयम्।
उक्ताश्च नाशिषस्तेन प्रहृष्टेनान्तरात्मना॥ RG II
“Holding as | did the high-minded Vali
in esteem, | greeted him with due reverence:
benedictions, however, were not pronounced
by him with a highly rejoiced mind. (25)

नत्वा पादावहं तस्य मुकुटेनास्पृशं Wir
aft वाली मम क्रोधान्न प्रसादं चकार स:॥ २६॥
“Bowing down to him | touched his feet
with my crown, O lord! Due to anger,
however, the said Vali did not relent.” (26)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये किष्किन्धाकाण्डे Taq: सर्ग: ॥ ९ ॥

Thus ends Canto Nine in the Kiskindhakanda of the glorious Ramayana of Valmiki,
the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

Canto X

While giving out the reasons of his hostility with Vali, Sugriva tells S7 Rama
how in spite of his trying to pacify his elder brother, the latter exiled him

तत: क्रोधसमाविष्टं संरब्धं तमुपागतम्।
ae प्रसादयांचक्रे wat हितकाम्यया॥१॥
“With intent to do him good | then
sought to placate in the following words my
elder brother Vali, who came possessed of
anger and was excited: (1)

दिष्ट्यासि कुशली प्राप्तो निहतश्च त्वया fra: |
अनाथस्य हि मे नाथस्त्वमेकोऽनाथनन्दन॥ २॥

“By good luck you have returned home
safe and the enemy has been killed by you.
You are my only protector, protectorless as
| was, O the delight of the forlorn ! (2)
se बहुशलाकं ते पूर्णचन्द्रमिवोदितम्।

BA सवालव्यजनं प्रतीच्छस्व मया धृतम्॥३॥

“‘Here is your canopy supported on
many ribs and resembling the full moon
