990

तेनोरसि fast हारेण deat कपि:।
रराज हेमशैलेन्द्रश्चन्द्रेणाक्रान्तमस्तक: ।। २६ UI

With that big necklace fastened on his
breast, the monkey shone as the lordly
Mount Meru (the golden mountain) with its
summit topped over by the moon. (26)

श्रुत्वा तु राघवस्यैतदुत्थायोत्थाय वानरा:।
प्रणम्य शिरसा पादौ निर्जग्मुस्ते महाबला:॥ २७॥

Rising one after another on hearing
this speech of Sri Rama, and bowing down
at his feet with their heads bent low, the
aforesaid monkeys of extraordinary might
for their part departed. (27)

gia: स च wan निरन्तरमुरोगत:।
विभीषणश्च धर्मात्मा aa a बाष्पविक्लवा:। २८ ॥

The celebrated Sugriva as well as the
pious-minded Vibhisana were tightly clasped
to his bosom by Sri Rama; all the monkeys
were overcome with emotions and shed
tears. (28)

aa च ते बाष्पकला: साश्रुनेत्रा विचेतस:।
सम्मूढा इव दु:खेन त्यजन्तो Wes तदा॥ २९॥

« VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

While leaving Sri Rama at that time,
they all spoke indistinctly, their throats being
choked with tears; nay, their eyes too were
full of tears, they felt confused and stupefied
as it were through agony. (29)

कृतप्रसादास्तेनैवं राघवेण महात्मना।

जग्मु: स्वं स्वं गृहं सर्वे देही देहमिव त्यजन्॥ ३०॥
Having been favoured with gifts as

aforesaid by that high-souled scion of Raghu,

they returned each to his home, (feeling

agonized) even as an embodied soul would,

while leaving the body (tenanted by it). (30)

ततस्तु ते राक्षसऋक्षवानरा:

प्रणम्य रामं रघुवंशवर्धनम्।
वियोगजाश्रुप्रतिपूर्णलोचना:

प्रतिप्रयातास्तु यथा निवासिन:॥ ३१॥

Having respectfully bowed down to Sri
Rama, the promoter of Raghu’s race, the
said ogres, bears and monkeys for their
part returned to their respective abodes with
their eyes full of tears (born of their separation
from Sri Rama). (31)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये उत्तरकाण्डे चत्वारिंश: Wl: ॥ ४० ॥

Thus ends Canto Forty in the Uttarakanda of the glorious Ramayana of Valmiki,
the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

Canto XLI
The arrival in Ayodhya of the aerial car Puspaka sent by Kubera; its
disappearance after receiving honours and blessings from

Sri Rama; Bharata’s description of the unique glory
of Sri Rama’s rule

विसृज्य च महाबाहुरऋक्षवानरराक्षसान्।
भ्रातृभि: सहितो wa: प्रमुमोद सुखं सुखी॥ १॥
After sending away the bears, the
monkeys and the ogres, the mighty-armed
Sri Rama, who was ever happy, intrinsically
felt highly rejoiced alongwith his brothers.

(1)

अथापराह्णसमये भ्रातृभि: सह राघव:।
शुश्राव मधुरां वाणीमन्तरिक्षान्महाप्रभु:॥ २॥
सौम्य राम निरीक्षस्व सौम्येन वदनेन माम्।
कुबेरभवनात् we विद्धि at पुष्पकं प्रभो॥ ३॥
After sometime in the afternoon the
mighty Lord Sri Rama (a scion of Raghu),
heard, alongwith his brothers, a sweet voice
