628

Regaining his consciousness, that
energetic and powerful son of Vali dashed
the head of Prajangha off his trunk with his
fist. (27)

स यूपाक्षोऽश्रुपूर्णाक्ष: faqer निहते रणे।
अवरुह्य tard क्षिप्रं क्षीणेषु: खड्गमाददे॥ २८॥
Quickly alighting from his chariot, his
eyes full of tears, on his uncle having been
killed in an encounter, the notorious Yupaksa
took up his sword, his stock of arrows
having been exhausted. (28)
तमापतन्तं सम्प्रेक्ष्य amet द्विविदस्त्वरन्।
आजघानोरसि क्रुद्धो जग्राह च बलाद् बली VF I
Perceiving Yupaksa rushing towards
him and marching quickly, the mighty Dwivida
struck him in the bosom with fury and caught
hold of him with force. (29)
आजघान महातेजा वक्षसि द्विविदं तत:॥ ३०॥
Seeing his brother made captive,
Sonitaksa, who was endowed with
extraordinary might and was exceptionally
energetic, thereupon struck Dwivida in the
chest with his mace. (30)

स ततोऽभिहतस्तेन चचाल च महाबल:।
saat च पुनस्तस्य जहार द्विविदो गदाम्॥ ३१॥
Though endowed with extraordinary
strength, Dwivida forthwith reeled when struck
by Sonitaksa. He, however, snatched the
latter's mace when uplifted again. (31)

Waar मैन्दो द्विविदाभ्याशमागमत्।
amet ताडयामास तलेनोरसि वीर्यवान्॥३२॥
Meanwhile the valiant Mainda arrived

by the side of Dwivida and struck Yupaksa
in the breast with his palm. (32)

तौ शोणिताक्षयूपाक्षौ प्लवंगाभ्यां तरस्विनौ।
चक्रतु: समरे तीव्रमाकर्षोत्पाटनं भृशम्॥३३॥

The aforesaid Sonitaksa and Yupaksa,
who were full of impetuosity, carried on with

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA +

the two monkeys a keen contest on the
battlefield in the form of violently pulling and
overthrowing one another. (33)

द्विविद: शोणिताक्षं q विददार नखैर्मुखे।
निष्पिपेष स वीर्येण क्षितावाविध्य वीर्यवान्॥ ३४॥

The valiant Dwivida for his part tore
Sonitaksa in the face with his nails and,
dashing him against the ground, crushed
him. (34)

यूपाक्षमभिसंक्रुद्धो मैन्दो वानरपुङ्खव:।
पीडयामास बाहुभ्यां पपात स हत: fad ३५॥

Getting highly enraged, Mainda, a
veritable bull among the monkeys, pressed
Yupaksa in his arms so that the latter fell
down dead on the ground. (35)

हतप्रवीरा व्यथिता राक्षसेन्द्रचमूस्तथा।
जगामाभिमुखी सा तु कुम्भकर्णात्मजो यत:॥ ३६॥

Feeling distressed on account of its
principal heroes having been killed in the
aforesaid manner, the said army of Ravana
(the ruler of ogres) for its part moved with
its face turned towards the region where
Kumbha (son of Kumbhakarna) was fighting.

(36)
आपतन्तीं च वेगेन कुम्भस्तां सान्त्वयच्चमूम्।
अथोत्कृष्टं महावीर्यैर्लब्धलक्षै: we: i ३७॥
निपातितमहावीरां दृष्टवा tart तदा।
कुम्भ: प्रचक्रे तेजस्वी TW HA सुदुष्करम्॥ ३८ Il

Kumbha, however, restored to
confidence that army advancing with all
speed towards him. Nay, seeing the army,
whose eminent heroes had been struck
down by monkeys who were endowed with
extraordinary valour and had found a
favourable opportunity, Kumbha, the eminent
ogre, who was full of martial ardour,
performed at that time a feat which was
extremely difficult for others to perform on
the battlefield. (37-38)

a धनुर्धन्विनां श्रेष्ठ: wre सुसमाहित:।
मुमोचाशीविषप्रख्याञ्छरान् देहविदारणान्॥ ३९॥
