+ UTTARAKANDA +

Sage Brhaspati himself and a knower of
Dharma, was conducting the sacrifice. (3)

दृष्टवा देवास्तु तद् रक्षो वरदानेन दुर्जयम्।
तिर्यग्योनिं समाविष्टास्तस्य धर्षणभीरव:॥४॥

“Seeing that Raksasa, who was hard
to vanquish on account of the boons (granted
to him), the gods, afraid of his attack, took
cover in the bodies of animals. (4)

sal मयूर: संव्रत्तो धर्मराजस्तु वायस:।
कृकलासो धनाध्यक्षो हंसश्च वरुणोऽभवत्॥५॥

“Indra became a peacock; Yama, a
crow; Kubera, a chameleon and Varuna, a
swan. (5)

अन्वेष्वपि waded देवेष्वरिनिषूदन।

रावण: प्राविशद् यज्ञं सारमेय इवाशुचि:॥ ६॥
“In this manner when the other gods

too had transformed themselves, O scourge

of Your foes, Ravana entered the sacrificial
ground like an unclean dog. (6)

तं च राजानमासाद्य रावणो राक्षसाधिप:।
We युद्धं प्रयच्छेति निर्जितोऽस्मीति at aqui

“Approaching the king, Ravana, the
suzerain lord of the Raksasas, said, ‘Give
battle to me or admit that you stand
vanquished.’ (7)

ततो मरुत्तो Fala: को भवानित्युवाच तम्।
अवहासं ततो मुक्त्वा रावणो वाक्यमब्रवीत्॥ ८॥
“Thereupon King Marutta said to him:
‘Who are you?’ Uttering a derisive laugh,
Ravana then spoke the following words:
(8)
अकुतूहलभावेन whist तव पार्थिव।
धनदस्यानुजं यो At नावगच्छसि रावणम्॥९॥
“lam pleased with your equanimity, O
king, who do not know me as Ravana, a
younger (half-) brother of Kubera. (9)

fay लोकेषु कोऽन्योऽस्ति यो न जानाति मे बलम्।
art येन निर्जित्य विमानमिदमाहृतम्॥१०॥

‘Who else is there in the three worlds,
who does not know my might who snatched

903

away this aerial car, after vanquishing my
said brother?’ (10)

ततो wed: स Wed रावणमथाब्रवीत्।
धन्य: खलु भवान् येन ज्येष्ठो भ्राता TUT जित: ।॥ ११॥
“Thereupon the aforesaid King Marutta
forthwith answered Ravana (as _ follows):
‘You are praiseworthy, indeed, in that you
conquered in combat your own elder brother.

(11)

न त्वया सदूश: श्लाघ्यस्तरिषु लोकेषु विद्यते।
कंत्वं Wich केवलं धर्मं चरित्वा लब्धवान् वरम्॥ १२॥
“‘In all the three worlds there is no one
who is as praiseworthy as you. Practising
what unique virtue did you secure boons in
the past? (12)

श्रुतपूर्वं fe न मया भाषसे यादृशं स्वयम्।
तिष्ठेदानीं न मे जीवन् प्रतियास्यसि दुर्मते॥१३॥
“‘Nothing like what you say has been
heard of by me before. O evil-minded one,
tarry awhile; now you will not get back alive.
(13)

अद्य wat निशितैर्बाणै: प्रेषयामि यमक्षयम्।
ad: शरासनं Wel सायकांश्च नराधिप:॥१४॥

रणाय निर्ययौ क्रुद्ध: संवर्तो मार्गमावृणोत्।
सोऽब्रवीत् स्नेहसंयुक्तं मरुत्तं तं Werte: wey
“With my sharp arrows | will dispatch
you to the abode of Yama, the god of death.’
Seizing hold of his bow and arrows, the king
thereupon rushed in anger for combat, but
Samvarta blocked his way. That great sage
addressed the following loving words to the
said Marutta: (14-15)

श्रोतव्यं यदि मद्वाक्यं सम्प्रहारो न ते क्षम:।

माहेश्वरमिदं सत्रमसमाप्तं कुलं दहेत्॥१६॥
“‘If you heed my advice, an encounter

is not advisable for you. If left unfinished,

this sacrifice, which is intended to propitiate
MaheSswara, will consume your race. (16)

दीक्षितस्य कुतो युद्धं क्रोधित्वं दीक्षिते कुत: ।
संशयश्च wa fret राक्षसश्च सुदुर्जय:॥ een
