638

समरमुखेष्वसकृद्गदासिभिन्ना: ।
अहमहमिति युद्धकौशलास्ते
रजनिचरा:परिबभ्रमुर्मुहुस्ते ॥। २१॥

Saying again and again: “I shall take

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA +

the lead!”, those notorious prowlers of the
night, who resembled clouds, elephants and
buffaloes in hue, and who had been wounded
more than once by maces and swords in
the forefront of battle and who were skilled
in fighting, moved to and fro on the battlefield.

(21)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये युद्धकाण्डेऽष्टसप्ततितम: सर्ग: ॥ ७८ Il

Thus ends Canto Seventy-eight in the Yuddhakanda of the glorious Ramayana of
Valmiki, the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

Canto LXXIX
Death of Makaraksa at the hands of Sri Rama

Fett मकराक्षं ते geet वानरपुंगवा:।
आप्लुत्य सहसा सर्वे योद्भुकामा व्यवस्थिता:॥ १॥
Leaping all at once on_ seeing
Makaraksa come out, all the celebrated
monkey chiefs stood arrayed with intent to
give battle. (1)

तत: Vad सुमहत् Ae युद्धं लोमहर्षणम्।
From: प्लवंगानां देवानां दानवबैरिव॥ २॥
Then there ensued the well-known and
desperate encounter of the monkeys with
the rangers of the night, which caused
one’s hair to stand on end like the encounter
of the gods with the devils. (2)

वृक्षशूलनिपातैश्च गदापरिघपातनै: ।
अन्योन्यं मर्दयन्ति स्म तदा कपिनिशाचरा:॥ ३॥
The monkeys as well as the night-
stalkers each began to crush his opponent
on that occasion by hurling trees and pikes,
respectively and bringing down maces and
clubs on their adversaries. (3)

शक्तिखड्गगदाकुन्तैस्तोमरैश्च निशाचरा:।
पट्टिशैर्भिन्दिपालैश्च बाणपातै: समन्तत:॥४॥
पाशमुद्गरदण्डैश्च निर्घातैश्चापरैस्तथा।
wet कपिसिंहानां चक्रुस्ते रजनीचरा:॥५॥

The aforesaid prowlers of the night
made havoc of the lions among the monkeys
by means of their javelins and swords,
maces, spears and lances, sharp-edged
spears and Bhindipalas (slings for throwing
stones), nooses, mallets and staffs, ASanis
and other weapons, and by discharging
arrows on all sides. (4-5)

बाणौघैरर्दिताश्चापि खरपुत्रेण वानरा:।

सम्भ्रान्तमनस: सर्वे दुद्रुवुर्भयपीडिता:॥६॥
Nay, wounded with volleys of shafts by

the son of Khara and stricken with fear, all

the monkeys fled, bewildered as they were
in mind. (6)

तान् दृष्ट्वा राक्षसा: सर्वे द्रवमाणान् वनौकस:।
नेदुस्ते सिंहवद gat राक्षसा जितकाशिन:॥ ७॥

Seeing those monkeys (lit., dwellers in
the woods) fleeing, those arrogant ogres,
who were followed by many more ogres
and had assumed a triumphant air, roared
like lions. (7)

faxa तदा तेषु वानरेषु समन्तत:।
रामस्तान् वारयामास शरवर्षेण राक्षसान्॥८॥

While the well-known monkeys were
