« KISKINDHAKANDA +

queen of his elder brother—while he was
still alive. (2-3)
wa स धर्मं जानीते येन wat दुरात्मना।

युद्धायाभिनियुक्तेन बिलस्य पिहितं मुखम्॥४॥

“How does he know what is right, by
whom, evil-minded as he is, the opening of
the cave was closed even though he had
been enjoined by his brother—while the
latter was going to meet his enemy for an
encounter to guard the entrance? (4)

सत्यात् पाणिगृहीतश्च कृतकर्मा महायशा:।
विस्मृतो राघवो येन स कस्य सुकृतं स्मरेत्॥५॥

“Whose good offices will he remember
with gratitude, by whom even the highly
illustrious Sri! Rama—(a scion of Raghu)—
who had been accepted as a friend by
clasping the hand in the name of truth and
who had rendered good offices to him—
was put out of the mind? (5)

लक्ष्मणस्य भयेनेह नाधर्मभयभीरुणा।
आदिष्टा मार्गितुं सीता धर्मस्तस्मिन् कथं भवेत्॥ ६ ॥

“How can piety exist in him, by whom
Sita was ordered to be searched for on this
occasion from fear of Laksmana and not
because he was seized with the fear of
incurring sin (accruing from infidelity to a
beneficent friend)? (6)

तस्मिन् पापे कृतघ्ने तु स्मृतिभिन्ने चलात्मनि।
आर्य: को विश्वसेज्जातु तत्कुलीनो विशेषत:॥ ७॥

“What noble soul, particularly one born
in his own race will ever repose trust in that
sinful, ungrateful and fickle monkey, who has
cast to the winds all moral codes? (7)

राज्ये Ua: प्रतिष्ठाप्य: सगुणो निर्गुणोऽपि वा।
कथं शत्रुकुलीनं मां सुग्रीवो जीवयिष्यति॥८॥

“How can Sugriva suffer me to live
after installing on the throne (as Prince
Regent) me, his (adopted) son, sprung from
the loins of his mortal foe, no matter whether
he (Sugriva) is full of virtues or devoid of
them? (8)

1135

भिन्नमन्त्रोऽपराद्धश्च भिन्नशक्ति: कथं ह्यहम्।
किष्किन्धां प्राप्य जीवेयमनाथ ga दुर्बल:॥९॥

“Reaching Kiskindha back how shall |
actually survive like a forlorn and weak
creature, |, whose rebellious plans have
leaked out, nay, who has committed an
offence of treason and whose strength has
been shattered by sowing dissension among
my followers? (9)
उपांशुदण्डेन fe ai बन्धनेनोपपादयेत्।
शठ: PU Was सुग्रीवो राज्यकारणात्॥१०॥

“Sugriva—who is wily, fierce and
merciless, will surely sentence me if not to
death, at least to some secret punishment,
such as putting me in chains for the sake of
retaining his sovereignty. (10)
बन्धनाच्चावसादान्मे श्रेय: प्रायोपवेशनम्।
अनुजानन्तु मां सर्वे गृहं गच्छन्तु वानरा:॥११॥

“Fasting till death is preferable in my
eyes to confinement and frustration caused

by it. Hence let all the monkeys present
here bid adieu to me and return home.(11)

अहं a: प्रतिजानामि न गमिष्याम्यहं पुरीम्।
इहैव प्रायमासिष्ये श्रेयो मरणमेव मे॥१२॥

“| solemnly declare to you that | will not
return to the capital (Kiskindha) but will
observe a fast till death at this very place.
Death is certainly best for me. (12)

अभिवादनपूर्वं तु राजा कुशलमेव al
अभिवादनपूर्वं तु राघवौ बलशालिनौ॥१३॥

“After salutation, of course, the king
(Sugriva) should be apprised of my welfare
only and even so the two mighty scions of
Raghu too should be apprised of my welfare
after salutation. (13)

वाच्यस्तातो यवीयान् मे सुग्रीवो वानरेश्वर:।

आरोग्यपूर्वं कुशलं वाच्या माता रुमा च मे॥ evi
“My younger father, Sugriva, the lord

of monkeys, as well as my younger mother,

Ruma, should be told of my welfare after
apprising them of my health. (14)
