३82

of fighting. Therefore, have done with
antagonism. Let peace be concluded with

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA +

Rama and let Sita, a princess of Mithila, be
restored to Rama (son of DaSaratha).” (33)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये युद्धकाण्डे पञ्चविंश: सर्ग: ॥ २५ ॥

Thus ends Canto Twenty-five in the Yuddhakanda of the glorious Ramayana of

Valmiki, the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic

Canto XXVI

Climbing up the roof of his palace on hearing the submission
of Sarana and surveying the entire army of monkeys,
Ravana inquires about the monkey leaders
and Sarana shows to him Hanuman
and others alongwith their
distinguishing marks

Wea: सत्यमक्लीबं सारणेनाभिभाषितम्।
निशम्य रावणो राजा प्रत्यभाषत सारणम्॥१॥

Hearing the aforesaid truthful and intrepid
submission made by Sarana, King Ravana
replied to Sarana as follows: (1)

ae मामभियुञ्जीरन् देवगन्धर्वदानवा:।
नैव सीतामहँ दद्यां सर्वलोकभयादपि॥ २॥

“Even if the gods, Gandharvas (celestial
musicians) and demons should unitedly
attack me, | would not, in any case, surrender
Sita, nay, not even for fear of the whole
world. (2)
त्वं तु सौम्य परित्रस्तो हरिभि: पीडितो भृशम्।
प्रतिप्रदानमद्यैव सीताया: साधु मन्यसे॥३॥

“Having been vehemently persecuted
by the monkeys and, therefore, greatly
alarmed, O gentle one, you, on the other
hand, deem it proper to restore Sita to
Rama this very day. (3)
को fe नाम सपत्नो मां समरे जेतुमर्हति।
इत्युक्त्वा परुषं वाक्यं रावणो राक्षसाधिप:॥४॥

आरुरोह da: श्रीमान् प्रासादं हिमपाण्डुरम्।
बहुतालसमुत्सेधं रावणोऽथ दिदृक्षया॥५॥

“What adversary, however, can really
conquer me in war?” Having made this
unkind observation, the glorious Ravana,
the suzerain lord of ogres, who made people
cry by his tyranny, thereupon presently
climbed up his snow-white palace, which
had the height of many Palmyra trees, with
intent to survey the army of monkeys.

(4—5)
ताभ्यां चराभ्यां सहितो रावण: क्रोधमूच्छित:।
पश्यमान: समुद्रं तं पर्वतांश्च वनानि च॥६॥
cast पृथिवीदेशं सुसम्पूर्णं प्लवंगमै:।
तदपारमसह्यं च वानराणां महाबलम्॥७॥
आलोक्य रावणो राजा परिपप्रच्छ सारणम्।
Wat के वानरा मुख्या: के शूरा: के महाबला: ॥ ८ I

Surveying the sea as well as the
mountains and forests with the aforesaid
spies (Suka and Sarana), Ravana, who
was excited with anger, saw the terrestrial
region fully crowded with monkeys. Beholding
