+ UTTARAKANDA +

Sita as she was on this earth, | shall put
you to ruin, with the mountains and forests
ruined entirely; | shall destroy the whole
earth—may the waters flood over the entire
earth.’ (9-10)
एवं ब्रुवाणे काकुत्स्थे क्रोधशोकसमन्विते।

ब्रह्मा क्तुंगणै'; सार्धंङ्कृच रघुनन्दनम्॥ ११ Ul

On being thus spoken by the scion of
Kakutstha, overtaken by anger and sorrow,
Brahma together with the gods spoke to the
descendant of Raghu: (11)

TH TA न संतापं कर्तुमर्हसि ad

स्मर त्वं पूर्वकं भावं मन्त्रं चामित्रकर्शन॥ eel
‘O Rama, 0 Sri Rama, possessor of

good vows, please do not be grieved, recall

your previous form and advice to the gods,

O destroyer of foes. (12)

न खलु त्वां महाबाहो स्मारयेयमनुत्तमम्।
इमं मुहूर्तं दुर्धर्ष स्मर त्वं जन्म वैष्णवम्॥१३॥

‘| do not dare remind you of your former
form, O one of long arms, but pray to you
to remember at this moment, O one, difficult
to conquer, your incarnation pertaining to
Visnu. (13)

सीता fe विमला साध्वी तव पूर्वपरायणा।
नागलोकं GA प्रायात् त्वदाश्रयतपोबलात्॥ १४॥

‘The pure and noble Sita, devoted to
yourself as before, has gone to the
netherworld (Nagaloka both netherworld and
also the world of Visnu) by the power of
penances in the form of complete surrender
to you. (14)
स्वर्गे ते संगमो भूयो भविष्यति न संशय:।
अस्यास्तु परिषन्मध्ये Ae ब्रवीमि निबोध तत्॥ १५ ॥

‘Your union with her will again take

place in heaven, listen to what | say in the
midst of this assembly. (15)

एतदेव fe काव्यं ते काव्यानामुत्तमं श्रुतम्।
ad विस्तरतो wa व्याख्यास्यति न संशय:॥ १६॥

‘This poem, Ramayana, dedicated to
you, that you have heard is the best among

1111

all poems, O Rama; it shall describe
everything in detail, there is no doubt. (16)

जन्मप्रभृति ते at सुखदु:खोपसेवनम्।
भविष्यदुत्तरं we सर्वं वाल्मीकिना Haq voi
‘In this poem all has been described
by Valmiki, all happiness and sorrow that
you have experienced from your birth,
and also what you will experience in future.
(17)

आदिकाव्यमिदं राम cata ad प्रतिष्ठितम्।
नह्यन्योऽर्हति HAMA यशोभाग् राघवादृते॥ १८ ॥
‘This first and foremost poem, O Rama,
is entirely based on you. No one other than
you will be possessed of fame to be described
as hero by the poem. (18)

श्रुतं a पूर्वमेतद्धि war wd at: सह।
दिव्यमद्भुतरूपं च सत्यवाक्यमनाव्रतम्॥१९॥
‘| have heard all this formerly, together

with the gods, all wonderful and possessed
of true statements with nothing concealed. (19)

स त्वं पुरुषशार्दूल धर्मेण सुसमाहित:।

शेषं भविष्यं काकुत्स्थ काव्यं रामायणं SUT २०॥
‘So you, O lion among men, scion of

Kakutsthas should carefully listen to the

remaining portion of the poem, Ramayana

dealing with happenings of the future. (20)

उत्तरं नाम काव्यस्य शेषमत्र महायश:।
तच्छृणुष्व महातेज ऋषिभि: सार्धमुत्तमम्॥ २१॥

‘The remaining part of this poem, O
famous one, is known as Uttarakanda; O
powerful one, listen to it, possessed of
excellence, with the sages. (21)

न खल्वन्येन काकुत्स्थ श्रोतव्यमिदमुत्तमम्।
परम ऋषिणा वीर त्वयैव रघुनन्दन॥ २२॥

O Scion of Kakutstha, this best portion
is indeed not to be heard by anyone else,
composed by the great great sage, O brave,
it is to be heard only by you.’ (22)

एतावदुक्त्वा वचनं ब्रह्मा त्रिभुवनेश्वर:।
जगाम त्रिदिवं edt देवै: Ge सबान्धवै: 231
