944

« VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

Canto XXIX
Ravana carves his way through the army of the gods; the gods try to capture

him; Meghanada captures Indra by employing conjuring tricks and
coming out victorious returns to Lanka with his army

ततस्तमसि संजाते सर्वे ते देवराक्षसा:।
अयुद्ध्यन्त बलोन्मत्ता: सूदयन्त: परस्परम्॥१॥
When darkness supervened, all the
aforesaid gods and ogres, intoxicated as
they were with their might, still continued to
fight, killing one another. (1)

ततस्तु देवसैन्येन राक्षसानां बृहद् बलम्।
दशांशं स्थापितं युद्धे शेषं नीतं यमक्षयम्॥ २॥
Barely one-tenth of the huge army of
the ogres was, however, eventually allowed
by the celestial host to stand on the battlefield;
the rest was dispatched by the gods to the
abode of Death. (2)

तस्मिस्तु तामसे युद्धे सर्वे ते देवराक्षसा:।

अन्योन्यं नाभ्यजानन्त युद्ध्यमाना: परस्परम्॥ ३॥
In that battle which was actually fought

in darkness, none of the gods and the ogres,

who took part in it, recognized one another
while contending one with the other. (3)

इन्द्रश्च रावणश्चैव रावणिश्च महाबल:।
तस्मिस्तमोजालवृते मोहमीयुर्न ते त्रय:॥४॥

In that battlefield shrouded in a mass of
darkness, Indra and Ravana as well as the
exceedingly mighty Meghanada (son of
Ravana) the aforesaid three alone did not
fall a prey to delusion. (4)

स तु Gea act aa रावणो Ped क्षणात्।

क्रोधमभ्यगमत् तीव्रं महानादं च मुक्तवान्॥५॥
Beholding his whole army destroyed in

an instant, the aforesaid Ravana for his part

flew into violent anger and emitted a great
roar. (5)

क्रोधात् सूतं च दुर्धर्ष: स्यन्दनस्थमुवाच ह।
परसैन्यस्य मध्येन यावदन्तो नयस्व माम्॥६॥

In his fury, they say, the ogre, who
was so difficult to overcome, spoke as
follows to his charioteer, who was still on
the chariot: “Take me through the enemy
ranks to the place where the other end
exists. (6)

sTelary] त्रिदशान् wary विक्रमै: समरे स्वयम् |
नानाशस्त्रमहासारैर्नयामि यमसादनम्॥ ७॥
“This very day through feats of valour
| shall myself dispatch in combat all the
gods to the abode of Death by thick showers
of all kinds of weapons. (7)
त्रिदशान् विनिहत्याशु स्वयं स्थास्याम्यथोपरि॥ 2
“| shall kill Indra, Kubera (the bestower
of riches), Varuna (the god of water) and
Yama (the god of retribution): nay, having
destroyed the aforesaid gods in no time, |
shall then abide in heaven myself. (8)

विषादो Aa कर्तव्य: vit वाहय A रथम्।

द्वि: खलु त्वां ब्रवीम्यद्य यावदन्तं नयस्व माम्॥ ९॥
“Despondency should not be had

recourse to in any case; drive my chariot

without loss of time; indeed | repeat it to you
today, take me to the other end of the army.

(9)
अयं स नन्दनोद्देशो यत्र वर्तावहे वयम्।
नय मामद्य at त्वमुदयो यत्र पर्वत:॥१०॥

“The place where we stand just now
is a part of the Nandana grove, Indra’s
pleasure-garden; take me today to the place
where the Udaya (eastern) mountain is.
(The celestial host extended from the
Nandana grove to the Udaya mountain).”

(10)
