# YUDDHAKANDA +

अक्षया बलवन्तश्च शूरा AMAT: TA: |
त्वया संवत्सरं युद्ध्वा समरे दानवा विभो॥ got
स्वबलं समुपाश्रित्य नीता वशमरिंदम।
मायाश्चाधिगतास्तत्र बह्वयो A राक्षसाधिप॥ ११॥
“After carrying on a struggle for a whole
year on the field of battle, O powerful
suzerain lord of ogres, Danavas (sons of
Kalaka) who were beyond destruction, mighty
and valiant and had obtained boons (of
immortality), were reduced to submission
by you by resorting to your own strength, O
tamer of foes, and many conjuring tricks
were learnt from them. (10-11)
शूराश्च बलवन्तश्च वरुणस्य सुता रणे।
निर्जितास्ते महाभाग चतुर्विधबलानुगा:॥१२॥
Those heroic and mighty sons of
Varuna, who were followed by an army
consisting of four limbs, viz., elephants,
chariots, cavalry and_ infantry, were
completely subdued by you, O highly blessed
one! (12)

मृत्युदण्डमहाग्राहं शाल्मलीद्रुममण्डितम्।
कालपाशमहावीचिं यमकिंकरपन्नगम्॥ १३ ॥
महाज्वरेण दुर्धर्षं यमलोकमहार्णवम्।
अवगाह्य त्वया राजन् यमस्य बलसागरम्॥ १४॥
wag विपुल: प्राप्तो मृत्युश्च प्रतिषेधित:।

सुयुद्धेन च ते सर्वे लोकस्तत्र सुतोषिता:॥१५॥

“After plunging into the ocean in the
shape of Yama’s realm with an enormous
alligator in the form of Death’s rod of
punishment, nay, adorned with Salmali
(silk cotton) trees (bristling with thorns to
tear the bodies of damned sinners with),
turbulent with a huge billow in the shape of
the noose of Kala (the Time-Spirit) infested
with serpents in the form of Yama’s servants
and difficult to overcome on account of
the mighty Jwara (the spirit presiding over
fevers), and churning the sea in the shape
of Yama’s forces, a momentous victory
was scored and Death repulsed by you;

317

nay, all those people there were highly
gratified through your excellent fighting skill.
(1383—15)

arfaerctefirahe: WAATCTRTH: |
आसीद् वसुमती got महद्भिरिव ured: १६॥

“The earth was formerly filled with
numerous Ksatriya heroes, equal in prowess
to Indra (the ruler of gods), as with gigantic
trees. (16)

तेषां वीर्यगुणोत्साहैर्न war wear रणे।
प्रसह्य ते त्वया राजन् हता: समरदुर्जया:॥ १७॥
“Rama, a scion of Raghu, is not equal
to them on the battlefield in point of prowess,
martial qualities and bellicose spirit. Even
though difficult to conquer in an encounter,
they were violently made short work of by
you at once. (17)

तिष्ठं वा किं महाराज श्रमेण तव वानरान्।
अयमेको महाबाहुरिन्द्रजित् क्षपयिष्यति॥ १८॥

“Or, remain where you are, O king!
What is the use of your exerting yourself?
This mighty-armed Indrajit, your eldest son,
will extirpate all the monkeys, single-handed.

(18)
अनेन च महाराज माहेश्वरमनुत्तमम्।
SST यज्ञं वरो लब्धो लोके परमदुर्लभ:॥ १९॥

“Nay, after performing a_ sacrifice
intended to propitiate Lord Siva (the Supreme
Lord), a boon, which was supremely difficult
to win in the world, was secured by him
from Lord Siva, O mighty sovereign! (19)

शक्तितोमरमीनं च विनिकीर्णान्त्रशैवलम्।

गजकच्छपसम्बाधमश्वमण्डूकसंकुलम् ॥ Roll
रुद्रादित्यमहाग्राहं मरुद्वसुमहोरगम्।
रथाश्वगजतोयौघं पदातिपुलिनं महत्॥ २१॥

अनेन fe समासाद्य cami बलसागरम्।
गृहीतो दैवतपतिर्लङ्कां चापि प्रवेशित:॥२२॥
“After assailing the sea in the form of
the celestial army with javelins and spears
for its fish and entrails thrown asunder for
