# YUDDHAKANDA #

those carrying javelins in their hands, with
javelins; those armed with sharp-edged
spears, with spears; and others with iron
bludgeons and maces as also with bright-
looking spears and Sataghnis (stones or
cylindrical pieces of wood studded with iron
spikes and used as a missile) in their
hundreds, as also with steel hammers and
even so with formidable axes and
Bhindipalas (a kind of sling for throwing
stones) as also with their fists, which
descended like lightning, and slaps, which
fell like the thunderbolt. Seized with a fury,
Hanuman played great havoc even among
them. (21—24)

a ददर्श कपिश्रेष्ठमचलोपममिन्द्रजित्।
सूदमानमसंत्रस्तममित्रान् पवनात्मजम्॥ २५ ॥

The ॥00॥0183 Indrajit beheld
Hanuman (sprung from the loins of the
wind-god), the foremost of the monkeys,
who resembled a mountain, fearlessly
destroying his adversaries. (25)

a सारथिमुवाचेदं याहि यत्रैष वानर:।
क्षयमेव fe A: Hale राक्षसानामुपेक्षित: ।॥ २६॥

He spoke to his charioteer as follows:
“Drive to the spot where the yonder monkey
is seen. If ignored, he will undoubtedly
compass the destruction of all of us,
ogres.” (26)

इत्युक्त: सारथिस्तेन ययौ at स Aref: |
वहन् परमदुर्धर्षं स्थितमिन्द्रजितं रथे॥ २७॥

Transporting Indrajit who was
exceedingly difficult to overcome, seated as
he was in the chariot, when commanded as
aforesaid by him, the charioteer drove in his
chariot to the place where that son of the
wind-god was. (27)

सोऽभ्युपेत्य शरान् खड्गान् पट्टिशांश्च परश्वधान्।
अभ्यवर्षत दुर्धर्ष: कपिमूर्धनि राक्षस:॥ २८॥

Going near, that ogre, who was difficult
to overpower, let fall arrows, swords, sharp-

665

edged spears and axes on the head of the
monkey, Hanuman. (28)

तानि शस्त्राणि घोराणि प्रतिगृह्य स Arete: |
रोषेण महताविष्टो वाक्यं चेदमुवाच ह॥ २९॥

Being attacked with those deadly
weapons on his own head, they say, that
son of the wind-god was seized with great
fury and spoke as follows: (29)

युध्यस्व यदि शूरोऽसि रावणात्मज gad!
वायुपुत्रं समासाद्य न जीवन् प्रतियास्यसि॥ ३०॥

“Fight if you are a hero, O evil-minded
Indrajit (sprung from the loins of Ravana)!
Having met the son of the wind-god in me,
you shall not be able to return alive. (30)

बाहुभ्यां सम्प्रयुध्यस्व ale मे द्वन्द्वमाहवे।
at सहस्व दुर्बुद्धे ततस्त्वं रक्षसां वर:॥३१॥
“Strive with me with your arms, if you
enter into a duel with me on the field of
battle. Withstand my impetuosity, O evil-
minded one! Then only will you be accounted
as the foremost of the ogres.” (31)
: जिघांसन्तं ।
रावणात्मजमाचष्टे लक्ष्मणाय विभीषण:॥ ३२॥
Vibhisana pointed out Indrajit (sprung
from the loins of Ravana) to Laksmana in
the following words, while, with bow upraised,
Indrajit was seeking to make short work of
Hanuman. (32)

a: स वासवनिर्जेता रावणस्यात्मसम्भव:।
स एष रथमास्थाय हनूमन्तं जिघांसति॥ ३३॥
“Having taken his seat in a chariot, the
yonder son of Ravana, Indrajit, who is the
reputed conqueror of Indra (the ruler of
gods), seeks to kill Hanuman. (33)
तमप्रतिमसंस्थानै:३ MR: शत्रुनिवारणै:।
जीवितान्तकरैर्घोरे: सौमित्रे रावणिं जहि॥ ३४॥

“Pray, make short work, O son of
Sumitra, of that son of Ravana with
your formidable arrows of incomparable
