76

शशक्षतजकल्पेन सुशीतेन सुगन्धिना।
चन्दनेन परार्घ्यन स्वनुलिप्तौ स्वलंकृतौ॥१९॥
उत्तमस्त्रीविमृदितौ गन्धोत्तमनिषेवितौ।
यक्षपन्नगगन्धर्वदेवदानवराविणौ ॥ २०॥

He also observed the two outstretched
arms of the gigantic lord of ogres, which
were adorned with armlets of gold and
resembled a pair of flags raised in honour of
Indra (on the 12" day of the bright half of
Bhadrapada); which bore scars of wounds
sustained in combat with the ends of the
tusks of Airavata, the carrier of Indra, nay,
whose fleshy shoulders had been lacerated
by the thunderbolt of Indra and which had
been injured by the discus of Lord Visnu;
which were fleshy and culminated in uniform
and well-formed shoulders, were tough-jointed
and powerful, bore auspicious marks on
their nails and thumbs and were characterized
by shapely fingers and palms; which were
compact and rounded, resembled a pair of
iron clubs and were shaped like the tapering
proboscis of an elephant and which, while
outstretched on the white bed, looked like a
pair of five-hooded serpents; which had been
artistically smeared with exceptionally
excellent, very cool and fragrant sandal-
paste of the colour of a hare’s blood and
profusely adorned; which were strenuously
kneaded by belles and had been anointed
with excellent perfumes and which made
Yaksas, Nagas, Gandharvas, gods and
demons cry in terror when they dared to
oppose him. (15—20)

cat स कपिस्तस्य बाहू शयनसंस्थितौ।
मन्दरस्यान्तरे सुप्तौ महाही रुषिताविव॥ २१॥

Hanuman gazed on his two arms placed
on the couch as though they were two large
angry serpents lying asleep in a cave of
Mount Mandara (21)

« VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

ताभ्यां स परिपूर्णाभ्यामुभाभ्यां राक्षसेश्वर:।
शुशुभेऽचलसंकाश: श्रृंगाभ्यामिव Wee Ue
With both those fully developed arms,
Ravana, the lord of ogres, who closely
resembled a mountain, looked charming like
Mount Mandara with two* peaks. (22)

चूतपुंनागसुरभिर्बकुलोत्तमसंयुत: ।
मृष्टान्नरससंयुक्त: पानगन्धपुर:सर: ॥ २३॥

तस्य राक्षसराजस्य निश्चक्राम महामुखात्।
शयानस्य विनि:श्वास: पूरयन्निव Ae गृहम्॥ २४॥
Pervading, as it were, the whole of that
chamber, issued from the huge mouth of the
aforesaid ruler of ogres, even as he lay
asleep, breaths carrying the fragrance of
the mango and the nutmeg and united with
the odour of excellent Bakula flowers, nay,
scented with the fragrance of excellent
dishes and preceded by the odour of drinks.
(23-24)

वक्षसाभिविराजिता।॥ २६ ॥
पाण्डुरेणापविद्धेन क्षौमेण क्षतजेक्षणम्।
महार्हेण सुसंवीतं पीतेनोत्तरवाससा॥ २७॥
माषराशिप्रतीकाशं नि:श्वसन्तं भुजंगवत्।
गांगे महति तोयान्ते प्रसुप्तमिव कुञ्जरम्॥ २८॥
ada: काञ्चनैर्दीपैर्दीप्यमानं चतुर्दिशम्।
प्रकाशीकृतसर्वांगं मेघं विद्युद्गणैरिव॥ २९॥
पादमूलगताश्चापि cast सुमहात्मन:।
uct: स प्रियभार्यस्य तस्य रक्ष:पतेर्गृहे॥ ३०॥
In the palace of that gigantic lord of
ogres, the lover of his wives, Hanuman saw
Ravana, whose face was lit up with earrings
and who was adorned with a diadem of
gold, which was rendered picturesque by
pearls and was shining brightly though it
had receded a bit from its position; who was

* Tn these verses Ravana has been spoken of as having only one head and two arms. This shows that
in ordinary circumstances he was endowed with only one head and two arms and that in conflicts only he
voluntarily assumed as many as ten heads and twenty-arms.
