462

Indrajit, on the other side, who was
a great conjuer, entered the city of Lanka,
accompanied by all his troops, and
approached his father. (45)

aa रावणमासाद्य अभिवाद्य patente: |
आचचक्षे fra for निहतौ रामलक्ष्मणौ।॥४६॥

Reaching the presence of Ravana there,
and greeting him with joined palms, he
broke to his father the delightful news that
Rama and Laksmana had been killed.(46)

उत्पपात ततो we: पुत्रं च परिषस्वजे।
Tau रक्षसां मध्ये श्रुत्वा शत्रू निपातितौ॥४७॥

Rejoiced to hear of his two enemies
(Sri Rama and Laksmana) having been
thrown down, Ravana forthwith sprang on
his feet in the midst of other ogres and
hugged his son, Indrajit. (47)

उपाघ्राय च तं At पप्रच्छ प्रीतमानस:।
Tet च saad पित्रे तस्मै न्यवेदयत्॥४८॥

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA +

यथा at शरबन्धेन निश्चेष्टौ निष्प्रभौ aati +e

Nay, smelling him on the head, Ravana
made inquiries in the matter with a delighted
mind. And to his inquisitive father, Ravana,
Indrajit submitted, in accordance with facts,
how the two princes (Sri Rama and
Laksmana) had been deprived of all
movement and splendour by being entwined
with arrows in the form of sankes. (48-49)

a हर्षवेगानुगतान्तरात्मा
sor गिरं तस्य महारथस्य।
प्रहृष्टवाचाभिननन्द पुत्रम्॥ ५० ॥
His inmost being flooded with a
gush of joy on hearing the report of that
great car-warrior, Ravana shed his agony
caused on account of Sri Rama (son of
DaSaratha) and acclaimed his son, Indrajit,
with words full of excessive joy. (50)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये युद्धकाण्डे षट्चत्वारिंश: सर्ग: ॥ ४६ ॥
Thus ends Canto Forty-six in the Yuddhakanda of the glorious Ramayana of
Valmiki, the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

Canto XLVII

Indrajit having re-entered Lanka, Hanuman and other monkeys encompass Sri
Rama and Laksmana and guard their bodies. Having dismissed Indrajit,
Ravana commands the ogresses guarding Sita to take her to the field
of battle and show her the plight of Sri Rama and Laksmana.

The ogresses, headed by Trijata, accordingly take her in
the aerial car, known by the name of Puspaka, and show
her the two princes lying unconscious and motionless
on the ground. Sita bursts into a piteous wail on
seeing her husband and brother-in-law
in that plight

तस्मिन् प्रविष्टे लङ्कायां कृतार्थे रावणात्मजे।
राघवं परिवार्याथ

हनुमानङ्गदो नील: सुषेण: कुमुदो नल:।

ररक्षुर्वानरर्षभा:॥१॥ | गजो गवाक्षो गवय: शरभो गन्धमादन:॥२॥
