* BALAKANDA +

stepmother, Indra thereupon emerged from
her womb. (21)

प्राञ्जलिर्वज्रसहितो दितिं शक्रोऽभ्यभाषत।
अशुचिर्देवि सुप्तासि पादयो: कृतमूर्धजा॥ २२॥

Appearing with his thunderbolt, Indra
spoke to Diti with folded-hands as
follows: “You lay asleep, O venerable
lady, in an impure posture with your hair

201

touching the feet.
तदन्तरमहँ लब्ध्वा शक्रहन्तारमाहवे।
अभिन्दं want देवि तन्मे त्वं क्षन्तुमर्हसि॥ २३॥

“Seizing that vulnerable point | carved
into seven the foetus that was designed to
kill Indra (myself) in an encounter. You
ought to pardon this offence of mine, O
worshipful lady !” (23)

(22)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये बालकाण्डे FAA: सर्ग: ॥ ४६ ॥

Thus ends Canto Forty-six in the Balakanda of the glorious Ramayana of Valmiki,
the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

Canto XLVII

Vigwamitra tells Sri Rama how on the very site of the grove where
Diti practised her austerities, Visala, a son of Ikswaku, built
the city of Visala. Sumati, the contemporary ruler
of Visala, receives Viswamitra and his party
as his distinguished guests

waa तु pa गर्भे fafa: परमदु:खिता।
सहस्राक्षं दुराधर्षं वाक्यं सानुनयाब्रवीत्॥१॥

Sore afflicted on her foetus having been
split into seven (batches of seven each),
Diti for her part spoke as follows in a
conciliatory tone to Indra (the thousand-
eyed god), who was difficult to overpower
by force: (1)

ममापराधाद् गर्भोऽयं सप्तधा शकलीकृत:।
नापराधो हि देवेश तवात्र बलसूदन॥ २॥
“This foetus has been split into seven
through my fault, O ruler of gods ! No blame
in this behalf attaches to you, O destroyer
of the demon Bala ! (2)

fra त्वत्कृतमिच्छामि मम गर्भविपर्यये।
मरुतां Ga सप्तानां स्थानपाला भवन्तु ते॥३॥
“| wish to see your attempt at destroying

my foetus turned favourable to both of us.
Let these seven into seven (7x7=49) parts

of my foetus fill the place of the seven
batches of wind-gods (each consisting of
seven and evidently killed in their conflict
with the demons). (3)
वातस्कन्धा st aa Utd दिवि पुत्रक।

मारुता sft विख्याता दिव्यरूपा ममात्मजा:॥४॥

“Widely known as the forty-nine wind-
gods (Maruts, so-called because they were
addressed by you in the words ‘at «a:'—do
not cry—and assuming ethereal forms let
these seven into seven sons of mine move
in the aerial region in the form of the seven
belts of air (bearing the names of Avaha,
Pravaha, Samvaha, Udvaha,  Vivaha,
Parivaha and Paravaha), O dear child! (4)

ब्रह्मलोकं चरत्वेक इन्द्रलोकं तथापर:।
दिव्यवायुरिति ख्यातस्तृतीयोऽपि महायशा:॥५॥
“Let one of these batches blow in

Brahmaloka, the realm of Brahma, another
in the realm of Indra, and a third, known as
