670

कथं दशरथाज्जात: शुभाभिजनकर्मण:।
जानन् धर्ममधर्मं च pat कर्म जुगुप्सितम्॥१०॥

How can I, sprung as | am from the
loins of Dasaratha of noble birth and deeds,
and knowing as | do right and wrong,
perpetrate an odious act like killing my own
mother? (10)
Te: क्रियावान् वृद्धश्च राजा wa: पितेति च।
ad न परिगर्हेऽहं tad चेति संसदि॥११॥

“| do not wish to denounce my father in
an open assembly because he had a number
of sacrificial performances to his credit, was
aged and worthy of respect, has joined the
majority and was my father and a deity to

me. (11)
को fe धर्मार्थयोर्हीनमीदृशं कर्म किल्बिषम्।
स्रिय: प्रियचिकीर्षु: सन् pate धर्मज्ञ धर्मवित्॥ १२॥

“Indeed, what man, who knows the
principles of morality, would perpetrate such
a sinful act, unproductive of religious merit
and worldly prosperity, with intent to
please a woman, O knower of what is right?

(12)

अन्तकाले fe भूतानि मुह्यन्तीति पुरा श्रुति:।
राज्ञैवं कुर्वता लोके प्रत्यक्षा सा श्रुति: Par १३॥
“There is an old adage saying that
living beings invariably get infatuated at the
hour of death. That saying has been
illustrated to the world by the king while
acting as he has done. (13)

साध्वर्थमभिसंधाय क्रोधान्मोहाच्च साहसात्।
तातस्य यदतिक्रान्तं प्रत्याहरतु तद् भवान्॥१४॥
“Keeping in mind a noble purpose, nullify
the transgression that has been committed
by father for fear of wrath of Kaikeyi or
through infatuation and precipitance. (14)
पितुर्हि समतिक्रान्तं Gat a: साधु मन्यते।
तदपत्यं मतं लोके विपरीतमतोऽन्यथा॥ १५॥

“A son who mends_ the arrant

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

transgression of his father is accounted a
son in the real acceptance of the term* in
the world; he who acts otherwise than this
is quite the reverse of a son. (15)

तदपत्यं भवानस्तु मा भवान् दुष्कृतं fea:
अति यत् तत् कृतं कर्म लोके धीरविगर्हितम्॥ १६ ॥
“Therefore be you a true son; do not
countenance the sinful act of our father by
implementing his word. The act which has
been perpetrated by him is in contravention
of all principles of morality and is, therefore,
utterly condemned in the world by the wise.
(16)

कैकेयीं At च तातं च सुहृदो बान्धवांश्च A: |
पौरजानपदान् सर्वास्त्रातुं सर्वमिदं भवान्॥१७॥
“Be pleased to grant all this prayer of
mine in order to save Kaikeyi, myself, father,
nay, our friends and relations as well as all
the citizens and people of the country-side.
(17)

क्व चारण्यं क्व च क्षात्रं क्व जटा: क्व च पालनम्।
ईदृशं व्याहतं कर्म न भवान् कर्तुमर्हति॥ Vc

“What congruity is there between forest
life, on the one hand, and the duty of a
Ksatriya, on the other, between wearing
matted locks on one’s head and protection
of the people? You ought not to perpetrate
such an incongruous act as may stand in
the way of your discharging the duty of a
Ksatriya, viz., protection of the people. (18)

we fe yest ad: क्षत्रियस्याभिषेचनम्।

येन शक्यं महाप्राज्ञ प्रजानां परिपालनम्॥१९॥
“Indeed, it is the foremost duty of a

Ksatriya to get himself consecrated as a

king, through which act alone it is possible

to protect the people, O highly enlightened

brother ! (19)

कश्च प्रत्यक्षमुत्सज्य संशयस्थमलक्षणम्।

आयतिस्थं चरेद् धर्मं क्षत्रबन्धुरनिश्चितम्॥ २०॥

* The word `अपत्यम्` (Offspring) has been etymologically explained as meaning one who prevents his
father from falling down into the depth of hell (`पितुरपतनात्` ).
