“This glorious son of the wind-god,
Hanuman by name, is leaping across the
sea. Assuming the exceedingly hideous form
of an ogress, gigantic as a mountain, and
revealing a head looking fearful with its
tusks and red-brown eyes and reaching up
to the sky, pray, you interrupt him awhile.

(145-146)

बलमिच्छामहे ज्ञातुं भूयश्चास्य पराक्रमम्।

त्वां विजेष्यत्युपायेन विषादं वा गमिष्यति॥ eve it
“We seek to ascertain his strength and

more so his prowess whether he will conquer

you with expediency or give way to

despondency.” (147)

wage तु सा eat दैवतैरभिसत्कृता।
समुद्रमध्ये सुरसा बिभ्रती ward aq: exci
विकृतं च विरूपं च सर्वस्य च भयावहम्।
पल्लवमानं हनूमन्तमाव्रृत्येदमुवाच ह॥१४९॥

Assuming in mid-sea, when spoken to
and honoured by the gods, the form of an
ogress, which was deformed and ugly too,
nay, inspiring fear to all and encompassing
Hanuman, who was leaping forward, Surasa
for her part spoke to him, they say, as
follows : (148-149)

मम भक्ष्य: प्रदिष्टस्त्वमीश्चरैर्वानरर्षभ।

अहं त्वां भक्षयिष्यामि प्रविशेदं ममाननम्॥ १५०॥
“You have been destined by the lords

of the universe to serve as my food, O,

jewel among the monkeys ! | shall accordingly

eat you up; pray! enter for good this mouth

of mine. (150)

at एष पुरा दत्तो मम धात्रेति सत्वरा।
व्यादाय वक्त्रं विपुलं स्थिता सा मारुते: पुर: ॥। १५१ ॥

“A boon to this effect that | shall be
able to catch up and devour whosoever
comes up before me was granted in my
favour by the creator, Brahma.” Opening
her vast mouth with these words, she
speedily stood up before Hanuman, son of
the wind-god. (151)

« VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

wag: सुरसया प्रहृष्टवदनोऽब्रवीत्।
रामो दाशरथिर्नाम प्रविष्टो दण्डकावनम्।
लक्ष्मणेन सह भ्रात्रा वैदेह्या चापि भार्यया॥ १५२॥

Accosted thus by Surasa, Hanuman
with his face lit up with excessive joy,
replied as follows: “A son of Emperor
Daégaratha, Sri Rama by name, entered deep
into the Dandaka forest with his younger
brother, Laksmana, as well as his consort,
Sita, a princess of the Videha territory.

(152)

अन्यकार्यविषक्तस्य बद्धवैरस्य राक्षसै:।
तस्य सीता eat भार्या रावणेन यशस्विनी।॥ १५३ ॥

“Sita, the illustrious consort of Sri Rama,
was carried off by Ravana while Sri Rama
was engaged in chasing and killing the
demon, Marica, since the ogres bore deep-
rooted enmity to him. (153)

“At the command of Sri Rama, | am
going to seek her presence as _ his
messenger. You ought to render assistance
to Sri Rama, O ogress inhabiting his
dominion, which extends over the whole
earth ! (154)

अथवा मैथिलीं दृष्टा रामं चाक्लिष्टकारिणम्।
आगमिष्यामि ते वक्त्रं सत्यं प्रतिश्रृणोमि ते॥ १५७५ UI
“Or, if you are bent on devouring me at
all costs, | promise you in good faith: having
seen Sita, a princess of Mithila, as well as
reporting to Sri Rama, who is unwearied in
action, | shall seek your mouth.” (155)

एवमुक्का हनुमता सुरसा कामरूपिणी।
अब्रवीन्नातिवर्तेन्मां कश्चिदेष वरो मम॥ १५६॥

Spoken to as aforesaid, Surasa, who
was capable of assuming any form at will,
rejoined : “None dare elude me: such is the
boon granted in my favour.” (156)

तं Ward समुद्बीक्ष्य सुरसा वाक्यमब्रवीत्।
बलं जिज्ञासमाना सा नागमाता हनूमत:॥ १५७॥

Perceiving him १ the journey
nevertheless, that mother of the Nagas,
