* ARANYAKANDA «

पांसुरूषितसर्वाङ्ग: स्रस्तन्यस्तभुजद्वय: |
स्वप्स्यसे Tt समाश्लिष्य दुर्लभां प्रमदामिव॥७॥
“Closely embracing the earth like a
young woman hard to win, you will lie
asleep forever covered with dust all over
the body, with both of your arms severed.
(7)

Wass शयिते त्वयि राक्षसपांसने।
भविष्यन्ति शरण्यानां शरण्या दण्डका इमे॥८॥

“When you, the disgrace of the ogres,
are laid in protracted slumber, this Dandaka
forest will turn out to be a place of resort for
sages, who afford shelter to all. (8)

जनस्थाने हतस्थाने da wad मच्छरै:।
निर्भया विचरिष्यन्ति सर्वतो मुनयो वने॥९॥

“When your abode in Janasthana has
been destroyed by my arrows, O ogre,
ascetics will roam about fearlessly
everywhere in the forest. (9)

ata विप्रसरिष्यन्ति राक्षस्यो हतबान्धवा:।
लाष्पार्द्रवदना दीना भयादन्यभयावहा:॥ १०॥

“Ogresses who caused terror in others,
will run away, afflicted through fear, from
the Dandaka forest today, their faces wet
with tears, their kith and kin having been
killed by me. (10)

अद्य शोकरसज्ञास्ता भविष्यन्ति निरर्धिका:।
अनुरूपकुला: पत्न्यो यासां त्वं पतिरीदूश:॥ ११॥
“Your wives, whose husband is of
such immoral conduct as you and who are
born of like families will taste the sentiment

of pathos today, being deprived of all
enjoyments coveted by all. (11)
त्वत्कृते शङ्कितैरग्नौ मुनिभि: पात्यते ea: nee

“O ogre of cruel disposition and mean
mentality, a standing thorn in the side of
Brahmana, oblations are poured into the fire

by ascetics full of apprehension on account
of you.” (12)

791

ख्रो निर्भर्त्सयामास रोषात् खरतरस्वर:॥१३॥
Khara, whose voice waxed sterner due
to wrath, censured in the following words
Sri Rama, a scion of Raghu, who was
uttering such angry words in the forest :
(13)
ge खल्ववलिप्तोऽसि भयेष्वपि च निर्भय:।
वाच्यावाच्यं ततो fe त्वं मृत्योर्वश्यो न बुध्यसे॥ १४॥
कालपाशपरिक्षिप्ता भवन्ति पुरुषा fe a
कार्याकार्यं न जानन्ति ते निरस्तषडिन्दिया:॥ १५॥

“Surely you are excessively vainglorious
and fearless even in the face of dangers.
Evidently you are in the grip of death; that is
why you cannot judge what should be
spoken and what should not be spoken.
Indeed men who are caught in the noose of
Death can no longer distinguish what ought
to be done and what ought not to be done,
their senses and mind having been thrown
out of order.” (14-15)

एवमुक्त्वा ततो रामं deer भृकुटिं aa: |
a cast महासालमविदूरे निशाचर:॥१६॥
रणे प्रहरणस्यार्थे सर्वतो ह्यवलोकयन्।
स तमुत्पाटयामास संदष्टदशनच्छदम्॥ १७॥
Speaking as aforesaid to Sri Rama
and then knitting his eyebrows and further
eagerly casting his eyes all round for some
weapon to be used in the encounter, the
said ogre saw a big sal tree not far off; and
sharply biting his lips he uprooted it. (16-17)
तं समुत्क्षिप्य बाहुभ्यां विनर्दित्वा महाबल:।
राममुद्दिश्य चिक्षेप हतस्त्वमिति चाब्रवीत्॥१८॥
Whirling it with his arms and loudly
roaring, the ogre, who was possessed of

extraordinary might, hurled it at Sri Rama
and said, “You are killed.” (18)

तमापतन्तं बाणौघैश्छित्त्वा WA: प्रतापवान्।
रोषमाहारयत् तीव्रं निहन्तुं war खरम्॥१९॥

Cutting down with his volleys of arrows
the approaching tree, the glorious Sri Rama
