+ UTTARAKANDA +

यस्य प्रमाणाद् विपुलं warot नेह विद्यते।
दिष्ट्या ते समरे राम कुम्भकर्णो निपातित:॥ २२॥

“Kumbhakarna, other than whom no
one had greater dimensions, was by good
luck killed by you in battle, O Rama ! (22)

त्रिशिराश्चातिकायश्च देवान्तकनरान्तकौ ।

दिष्ट्या a निहता wa महावीर्या निशाचरा:।॥ 23 ॥
“Trisira, Atikaya, Devantaka and

Narantaka, those very powerful night-

wanderers were also fortunately killed by
you, O Rama. (23)

कुम्भश्चैव निकुम्भश्च राक्षसौ भीमदर्शनौ।
दिष्ट्या तौ निहतौ राम कुम्भकर्णसुतौ मृधे॥ २४॥

“Kumbha and Nikumbha, the fierce-
looking sons of Kumbhakarna, were also
fortunately slain by you in battle, O Rama.

(24)
युद्धोन्मत्तश्च मत्तश्च कालान्तकयमोपमौ।
यज्ञकोपश्च बलवान् धूम्राक्षो नाम राक्षस:॥ २५॥
कुर्वन्तत कदनं घोरमेते शस्त्रास्त्रपारगा:।
अन्तकप्रतिमैर्बाणैर्दिष्ट्या विनिहतास्त्वया॥ २६ ॥

“Yuddhonmatta and Matta, comparable
to Yama, the great slayer, the mighty
Yajnakopa and the Raksasa named
Dhumraksa, these well-practised in Sastra
and Astra (short and long range weapons),
who were doing ghastly slaughter with arrows
dreadful like Yama, were killed by you by
good luck. (25-26)

दिष्ट्या त्वं राक्षसेन्द्रेण द्वन्द्वयुद्धमुपागत:।
देवतानामवध्येन विजयं प्राप्तवानसि॥ २७॥
“It was by good fortune that you came
out victorious in the duel with the king of the
Raksasas, who could not be killed even by
gods. (27)

संख्ये तस्य न किंचित् तु रावणस्य पराभव:।
द्वन्द्वयुद्धमनुप्राप्तो दिष्ट्या ते रावणिर्हत:॥ २८॥

“That Ravana suffered defeat at your
hands, is no great matter for surprise; but
it is a matter for gratification that his son,

847

who fought a duel with you, was killed by
you. (28)

दिष्ट्या तस्य महाबाहो कालस्येवाभिधावत:।

WH: सुररिपोर्वीर प्राप्तश्च विजयस्त्वया॥ २९॥

“That you, O mighty-armed hero, obtained
release from the Nagapasa (noose of
snakes) of Indrajit, the enemy of gods, and
rushed at him like Yama, and got the better of
him, is really due to our good luck. (29)

अभिनन्दाम ते सर्वे संश्रुत्येन्द्रजितो वधम्।
अवध्य: सर्वभूतानां महामायाधरो युधि॥ ३०॥
विस्मयस्त्वेष चास्माकं तं श्रुत्वेन्द्रजितं हतम्।
Ud चान्ये च बहवो राक्षसा: कामरूपिण:॥ ३१॥
दिष्ट्या त्वया हता वीरा रघूणां कुलवर्धन।
दत्त्वा पुण्यामिमां वीर सौम्यामभयदक्षिणाम्॥ ३२॥
दिष्ट्या वर्धसि काकुत्स्थ जयेनामित्रकर्शान।
TM तु वचनं तेषां मुनीनां भावितात्मनाम्॥ ३३॥
विस्मयं परमं गत्वा Wa: प्राञ्जञलिरब्रवीत्।
भगवन्त: कुम्भकर्णं रावणं च निशाचरम्॥ ३४॥
अतिक्रम्य महावीर्यौ किं प्रशंसथ रावणिम्।
महोदरं प्रहस्तं च विरूपाक्षं च राक्षसम्॥ ३५॥
मत्तोन्मत्तौ च दुर्धर्षौ देवान्तकनरान्तकौ।
अतिक्रम्य महावीरान् किं प्रशंसथ रावणिम्॥ ३६॥
“All of us offer our felicitations to you
on hearing of Indrajit’s death. We were indeed
agreeably surprised to hear that Indrajit who
employed great conjuring tricks, and who
could not be slain by any being, was killed
by you. We are so fortunate, O glorifier of
Raghu dynasty, that you killed these and
many other ogre-warriors capable of
assuming any form they wished. This is
indeed our good fortune, O hero, O scion of
the line of Kakutstha, O destroyer of your
foes, that you have given us the gift of
Abhaya (freedom from fear), which is both
auspicious and kind, and have acquired
fame through your victory.” Hearing these
words of the sages, who had realized the
true nature of their Self, Sri Rama became
greatly surprised and spoke with folded
hands: “Overleaping the very powerful
