564

blood, began to devour ogres, monkeys,
fiends and bears (alike) on the battlefield
through infatuation. Nay, he ate up, among
others, the principal monkeys in the same
way as Death sweeps away living beings at
the end of the world-cycle. (94)

एकं द्वौ त्रीन् बहून् क्रुद्धो वानरान् सह राक्षसै: |
समादायैकहस्तेन प्रचिक्षेप त्वरन् मुखे॥९५॥

Seizing together with one hand, one,
two, three or more monkeys alongwith ogres,
the ogre hastily thrust them into his mouth.

(95)
सम्प्रस्रवंस्तदा Aa: शोणितं च महाबल:।
वध्यमानो नगेन्द्राग्रैर्भक्षयामास वानरान्॥९६॥

Pouring forth in streams fat and blood
from the corners of his mouth at that time,
the ogre feasted on the monkeys even
while being struck with peaks of the foremost
of mountains. (96)

ते भक्ष्यमाणा हरयो WA जग्मुस्तदा गतिम्।
कुम्भकर्णो YM क्रुद्ध: कपीन् GIST प्रधावति।। ९७॥

While being devoured by the ogre, the
aforesaid monkeys sought Sri Rama as
their refuge at that time. Kumbhakarna, on
the other hand, who was highly enraged,
ran about with all speed devouring the
monkeys. (97)

शतानि सप्त चाष्टौ च विंशत्त्रिंशत् तथैव च।
सम्परिष्वज्य बाहुभ्यां खादन् विपरिधावति॥ ९८॥

Tightly enfolding with his arms as many
as seven and eight, nay, twenty, thirty and
even so hundreds at a time, he ran fast
devouring them on all sides. (98)

मेदोवसाशोणितदिग्धगात्र:
कर्णावसक्तग्रथितान्त्रमाल: ।
कालो युगान्तस्थ इव Wa eeu

His limbs besmeared with fat, marrow

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA +

and blood and wreaths of tangled entrails
hung over his ears, the ogre, who was
endowed with exceptionally sharp teeth,
rained darts (on the monkeys) even like
Kala, the Time-Spirit, grown immensely
(in size) at the end of the world-cycle.

(99)

तस्मिन् काले सुमित्राया: Ua: परबलार्दन:।

चकार लक्ष्मण: Heal युद्धं परपुरंजय:॥१००॥
At that juncture, Laksmana, son of

Sumitra, the scourage of hostile forces and

the conqueror of hostile citadels commenced

fighting in rage. (100)

स कुम्भकर्णस्य शरान् शरीरे सप्त वीर्यवान्।
निचखानाददे चान्यान् विससर्ज च लक्ष्मण: ॥ १०१ ॥
The valliant Laksmana, dug seven
arrows into the person of Kumbhakarna. He
took up more and discharged them too.
(101)

पीड्यमानस्तदस्त्रं तु विशेषं तत् स राक्षस:।
ततश्चुकोप बलवान् सुमित्रानन्दवर्धन:॥१०२॥

Being tormented (by the arrows), the
aforesaid ogre for his part put an end to
these missiles of Laksmana with his own.
Thereupon the mighty Laksmana (who
enhanced the joy of Sumitra, his mother)
flew into a rage. (102)
अथास्य कवचं WU जाम्बूनदमयं शुभम्।
प्रच्छादयामास शरै: संध्याभ्रमिव मारुत:॥१०३॥

He then completely covered the
glittering and charming golden armour of
Kumbhakarna with his arrows even as the
wind would make an evening cloud
completely disappear by dispersing it. (103)

नीलाञ्जनचयप्रख्य: शरै: काञ्चनभूषणै: |
आपीड्यमान: शुशुभे मेघै: Ga इवांशुमान्॥ १०४॥

Being covered by arrows decked with
gold, the ogre, who resembled a mass of
collyrium, shone like the sun with its rays
being screened by clouds. (104)
