152

by his wife, Aditi, as though glowing with his
incarnate glory. (10)

देवीसहायो भगवान् feet वर्षसहस्रकम्।
ad समाप्य वरदं तुष्टाव मधुसूदनम्॥११॥
Having concluded his _ sacred
observance extending over a thousand
celestial years (equivalent to three hundred
and sixty thousand human years), in the
company of his wife, the glorious sage
eulogized Lord Visnu, the Destroyer of the
demon Madhu, who was disposed to confer
a boon on him as follows : (11)
तपसा wat सुतमतेन पश्यामि पुरुषोत्तमम्॥१२॥
‘By virtue of my asceticism duly
practised | am able to behold the Supreme
Person in You, endowed as You are with
abundant asceticism, a _ repository of
asceticism, nay, asceticism incarnate and
consisting of asceticism itself. (12)

शरीरे da पश्यामि जगत् सर्वमिदं प्रभो।
त्वमनादिरनिर्देश्यस्त्वामहं शरणं गत:॥१३॥
| perceive this entire creation consisting
of animate and inanimate beings in Your
body, O Lord! You are without beginning
and indescribable. | have sought You as my
refuge. (13)

तमुवाच हरि: wa: कश्यपं धूतकल्मषम्।
वरं aa we a वरार्होऽसि मतो मम॥ १४॥
Full of joy Sri Hari replied as follows
to the sage Kasyapa, who had shaken off
all impurities: ‘Ask of Me a boon of your
choice, may good betide you; for you are
considered by Me as deserving of favour.’
(14)

Toe वचनं तस्य मारीच: कश्यपोऽब्रवीत्।
अदित्या देवतानां च मम चैवानुयाचितम्॥ १५॥

at me सुप्रीतो दातुमर्हसि सुव्रत।
पुत्रत्वं Tes भगवन्नदित्या मम चानघ॥१६॥
Hearing the aforesaid reply of the Lord,
Kasyapa, the son of Marici, submitted, ‘Highly

« VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

satisfied as You are, and disposed to confer
a boon, O Lord of noble vows, be pleased
to grant the favour solicited by Aditi, my
wife, and gods as well as by myself. Assume
the role of a son to me as also to Aditi, O
sinless Lord! (15-16)

भ्राता भव यवीयांस्त्वं शक्रस्यासुरसूदन।

शोकार्तानां तु देवानां साहाय्यं कर्तुमर्हसि॥ १७॥
‘Be a younger brother to Indra, O

Destroyer of demons! You ought in reality

to render help to gods who are stricken with
grief at the loss of their kingdom. (17)

अयं सिद्धाश्रमो नाम प्रसादात् ते भविष्यति।
सिद्धे कर्मणि देवेश stag भगवन्नित:॥१८॥

‘By Your grace in the form of Your holy
presence here this place will be known by
the name of Siddhasrama. Your undertaking
in the form of austerities having been
successfully concluded, O Ruler of gods,
shift Yourself to our abode from this place,
O Lord!’ (18)

ay विष्णुर्महातेजा अदित्यां समजायत।
art रूपमास्थाय वैरोचनिमुपागमत्॥१९॥

“Now the exceptionally glorious Lord
Visnu took His descent through Aditi and,
assuming the form of the divine Dwarf,
sought the presence of Bali (the son of
Virocana, Prahlada’s son). (19)

त्रीन् पदानथ भिक्षित्वा प्रतिगृह्य च मेदिनीम्।
आक्रम्य लोकाल्लोकार्थी सर्वलोकहिते रत:॥ २०॥
महेन्द्राय पुन: प्रादान्नियम्य बलिमोजसा।
त्रैलोक्यं स महातेजाश्चक्रे शक्रवशं पुन:॥ २१॥

“Asking of him ground which could be
covered by three strides and accepting
the offer of land granted by him, the Lord,
who sought to have all the three worlds,
devoted as He was to the good of the entire
creation, covered all the three worlds in
three strides, by His all-pervading form and,
taming Bali by His divine might, restored
them to the great Indra. In this way, the
Lord, who is possessed of exceptional
