1088

call, are intent on doing good to their master
and shall be able to carry out your plans, O
tamer of foes ! (6)

a इमे बहुसाहस्रैरनीकैर्भीमविक्रमै:।
आगता वानरा घोरा दैत्यदानवसंनिभा:॥७॥

“These aforesaid monkeys, who are
ferocious and resemble giants and demons
to a great extent, have arrived with many
thousands of contingents of terrible prowess.

(7)
यन्मन्यसे नरव्याघ्र प्राप्तकालं तदुच्यताम्।
ae त्वद्वशे युक्तमाज्ञापयितुमर्हसि॥ cl

“Whatever you regard as opportune
may kindly be pointed out, O tiger among
men! You ought to give orders to your
army, which is alert under your control. (8)

तथापि तु यथायुक्तमाज्ञापयितुमर्हसि॥९॥

“Even though the work in hand, viz.,
that of conducting a search for Sita, is
known in truth to these monkeys as well as
to me, nevertheless you ought to give proper
orders.” (9)

तथा ब्रुवाणं सुग्रीवं रामो दशरथात्मज:।
बाहुभ्यां सम्परिष्वज्य इदं वचनमब्रवीत्॥१०॥
Folding tight in his arms Sugriva, who
was speaking as aforesaid, Sri Rama, sprung
from DaSaratha’s loins, spoke as follows :
(10)

ज्ञायतां सौम्य वैदेही afe जीवति वा न ar
स च देशो महाप्राज्ञ यस्मिन् वसति रावण:॥ ११॥

“Let it be ascertained, O gentle one,
whether Sita, a princess of the Videha
territory, is still living or not and let the land
where Ravana lives be found out, O highly
intelligent one ! (11)

अधिगम्य तु ade निलयं रावणस्य a
प्राप्तकालं विधास्यामि तस्मिन् काले सहत्वया ।॥। १२॥

“Having found out Sita, a princess of
the Videha territory, as well as the abode of

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

Ravana, | shall do in conjunction with you
what is opportune at that moment. (12)

नाहमस्मिन् WY: कार्ये वानरेन्द्र न लक्ष्मण:।
त्वमस्य हेतु: कार्यस्य प्रभुश्च प्लवगेश्वर॥ १३॥

“| am not equal to this task of sending
out Vanaras, O ruler of monkeys, nor is
Laksmana up to it. You alone can prove
instrumental in accomplishing this work and
are equal to it, O lord of monkeys! (13)

त्वमेवाज्ञापय fast मम कार्यविनिश्चयम्।

त्वं fe जानासि मे कार्यं मम वीर न संशय:॥ १४॥
“Fully ascertaining how my work is to

be proceeded with, give you definite orders

in the matter. Surely you know my work:

no doubt is lurking in my mind in this behalf,

O powerful hero ! (14)

सुहृदद्वितीयो विक्रान्त: Wat: कालविशेषवित्।
भवानस्मद्धिते Bh: सुहृदाप्तोऽर्थवित्तम:॥१५॥
“You are my second near and dear
one here, Laksmana being the foremost,
are valiant and wise in all matters; you
know the particular time when a thing ought
to be done, are intent on doing good to us,
benevolent, trustworthy and the foremost of
those knowing my purpose.” (15)

एवमुक्तस्तु सुग्रीवो fart नाम यूथपम्।
अब्रवीद् रामसांनिध्ये लक्ष्मणस्य च धीमत:॥ १६ ॥
Ser मेघनिर्घोषमूर्जितं प्लवगेश्वरम्।
aaa: सार्धं वानरैर्वानरोत्तम॥ १७॥
देशकालनयैर्युक्तो faq: कार्यविनिश्चये।
qd: शतसहस्रेण वानराणां तरस्विनाम्॥१८॥
अधिगच्छ दिशं vat सशैलवनकाननाम्।
wa सीतां च वैदेहीं निलयं रावणस्य च॥१९॥
मार्गध्वं गिरिदुर्गेषु वनेषु च नदीषु च।
नदीं ante रम्यां ae कौशिकीं तथा॥ २०॥
कालिन्दीं यमुनां रम्यां यामुनं च महागिरिम्।
सरस्वतीं च सिन्धुं च शोणं मणिनिभोदकम्॥ २१॥
महीं कालमहीं चापि शैलकाननशोभिताम्।
ब्रह्ममालान् विदेहांश्चमालवान् काशिकोसलान्॥ २२ ॥
मागधांश्च महाग्रामान् पुण्ड्धांस्त्वङ्गांस्तथैव च।
भूमिं च कोशकाराणां भूमिं च रजताकराम्॥ २३॥
