* BALAKANDA +

पतत्तरिणस्तस्य वपामुद्धृत्य नियतेन्द्रिय:।
ऋत्विक परमसम्पन्न: श्रपयामास शास्त्रत:॥ ३६॥

Taking out the edible part of the tuber
known by the name of Aswakanda (or
Aswagandha, the plant Phys lis flexuosa),
the chief priest, who had duly controlled
his senses and possessed great skill
in performing sacrificial rites, cooked it
according to the scriptural ordinance. (36)
धूमगन्धं वपायास्तु जिघ्रति स्म नराधिप:।
यथाकालं यथान्यायं निर्णुदन् पापमात्मन:॥ ३७॥

The king smelt at the proper time
according to the scriptural ordinance the
odour of the steam of the tuber, driving
away thereby his sin, standing in the way of
his getting a son. (37)
हयस्य यानि SST तानि सर्वाणि ब्राह्मणा: ।
अग्नौ प्रास्यन्ति विधिवत् समस्ता: षोडशत्विज: 11 ३८ ॥

All the sixteen Brahmana priests taking
part in the sacrificial performances in a
body cast into the sacrificial fire with due
ceremony all the articles worth consigning
into the fire as parts of a horse-sacrifice.(38)

प्लक्षशाखासु यज्ञानामन्येषां fad aa: |
अश्चमेधस्य यज्ञस्य वैतसो भाग इष्यते॥ ३९॥

Whereas the offering to be made at
other sacrifices is placed on the boughs of
a Plaksa tree, that to be made at an
Aswamedha sacrifice is required to be placed
on mats of cane. (39)

त्र्यहोऽश्वमेध: संख्यात: कल्पसूत्रेण ब्राह्मणै: ।
चतुष्टोममहस्तस्य प्रथमं परिकल्पितम्॥४०॥

A horse-sacrifice has been declared in
the Kalpa-Sutras as well as in the Brahmanas
as having its three days allotted to Savana
(the rite of pressing out the Soma juice).
Catustoma (Jyotistoma) has been mentioned
to be the name of the Savana to be
performed on the first of these three days.

(40)
seen द्वितीयं संख्यातमतिरात्रं तथोत्तरम्।
कारितास्तत्र बहवो विहिता: शास्त्रदर्शनात्॥४१॥

109

The second day’s Savana has been
named as Ukthya, while that to be performed
the next (third) day has been designated as
Atiratra. Many other secondary sacrifices
too as enjoined from the Sastrika point of
view were performed by King Dasaratha on
that occasion towards the conclusion of the
horse-sacrifice. (41)

ज्योतिष्टोमायुषी चैवमतिरात्रौ च निर्मितौ।
अभिजिद्विश्वजिच्चैवमाप्तोर्यामौ महाक्रतु:॥४२॥

Jyotistoma and Ayustoma, two rounds
of Atiratra, Abhijit and Viswajit and two
rounds of Aptoryama—these were the eight
great sacrifices performed on the said
occasion. (42)

प्राचीं eta ददौ राजा fast स्वकुलवर्धन:।
अध्वर्यवे प्रतीचीं तु ब्रह्मणे दक्षिणां दिशम्॥४३॥
उद्गात्रे तु तथोदीचीं दक्षिणैषा विनिर्मिता।
saad महायज्ञे स्वयम्भूविहिते पुरा॥४४॥

At the conclusion of the sacrifice the
Emperor, the promoter of his race, gave
away as Daksina or sacrificial fee the
eastern quarter of the globe to the Hota, the
western to the Adhwaryu, the southern
quarter to the Brahma and the northern to
the Udgata. Such is the Daksina prescribed
for the great sacrifice of ASwamedha, which
was performed for the first time by Brahma,
the self-born creator of the universe.

(43-44)

ed समाप्य तु तदा न्यायत: पुरुषर्षभ:।
ऋत्विग्भ्यो fe ददौ राजा धरां तां कुलवर्धन:॥ ४५ ॥

Having concluded the great sacrifice
according to the scriptural ordinance, the
Emperor, a jewel among men and the
promoter of his race, actually gave away to
the priests, who officiated at the sacrifice
the earth itself (as specified above) on the
said occasion. (45)

Ud दत्त्वा प्रहृष्टोऽभूच्छीमानिक्ष्वाकुनन्दन:।
ऋत्विजस्त्वन्रुवन् सर्वे राजानं गतकिल्बिषम्॥ ४६ I

Having made the aforesaid gifts, the
