« KISKINDHAKANDA +

of winged creatures and is graced by trees
of every species. (17)

तस्य काननषण्डेषु निर्झरेषु गुहासु al
Way: As ace APTA eaa: 1S
“Ravana alongwith Sita (a princess of
the Videha territory) should be sought for
everywhere in the thickets of the woods,
near the cascades as well as in the caves
of that mountain. (18)

तमतिक्रम्य चाकाशं Uda: शतयोजनम्।
अपर्वतनदीवरृक्षं सर्वसत्त्वविवर्जितम्॥ १९॥

“Beyond that stretches a desolate
expanse, a hundred Yojanas (or eight hundred
miles) in extent on each side, which is
devoid of mountains, rivers and trees and is
entirely without any living being. (19)
तत्तु शीघ्रमतिक्रम्य कान्तारं रोमहर्षणम्।
कैलासं पाण्डुरं प्राप्य हृष्टा यूयं भविष्यथ॥ २०॥

“Speedily crossing the said wilderness,
which makes one’s hair stand on end, you
will be delighted to reach the white Kailasa
mountain. (20)
wa पाण्डुरमेघाभं जाम्बूनदपरिष्कृतम्।
कुबेरभवनं wat निर्मितं विश्चकर्मणा॥ २१॥
विशाला नलिनी यत्र प्रभूतकमलोत्पला।
हंसकारण्डवाकोर्णा अप्सरोगणसेविता ।। २२॥

“On the aforesaid mountain stands the
lovely palace of Kubera (the god of riches
and the deity presiding over the northern
quarter), resembling a white cloud and
embellished with gold, which was constructed
by Viswakarma (the architect of gods), and
where exists an extensive lotus-pond,
abounding in lotuses and water-lilies, crowded
with swans and Karandavas (a species of
ducks) and frequented by bevies of celestial
nymphs. (21-22)
तत्र वैश्रवणो राजा सर्वलोकनमस्कृत:।
धनदो रमते श्रीमान् गुह्यकै: सह यक्षराट्॥ २३॥

“The glorious King Kubera (the bestower

of riches), son of Sage ViSrava and the
ruler of Yaksas (a class of demigods), who

1105

is greeted by the whole world, disports
himself on that mountain with Guhyakas
(Yaksas). (23)

Ta चन्द्रनिकाशेषु पर्वतेषु गुहासु च।
Wat: Ge ace मार्गितव्यस्ततस्तत:॥ evil

“On the offshoots, shining brightly as
the moon, as well as in the caves of that
mountain should Ravana alongwith Sita (a
princess of the Videha territory) be sought
for everywhere. (24)
क्रौञ्चं तु गिरिमासाद्य fact तस्य सुदुर्गमम्।
अप्रमत्तै: प्रवेष्टव्यं दुष्प्रवेशं fe तत् स्मृतम्॥ २५॥

“Reaching the Kraufca mountain, its
cave, which is, however, most difficult of
access, should be penetrated into by you,
remaining vigilant all the time, as the cave is
said to be difficult to enter into. (25)

वसन्ति fe महात्मानस्तत्र सूर्यसमप्रभा:।
देवैरभ्यर्थिता: सम्यग् देवरूपा महर्षय:॥ २६॥

“Invited by the gods, high-souled
eminent sages, who are effulgent as the
sun and are truly god-like, actually dwell in
that cave. (26)

क्रौञ्चस्य तु गुहाश्चान्या: सानूनि शिखराणि च।
निर्दराश्च नितम्बाश्च विचेतव्यास्ततस्तत:॥ २७॥

“Other caves too, plateaus and peaks
as also caverns and slopes too of the
Kraufica mountain should be explored here
and there. (27)
aga कामशैलं च ued विहगालयम्।

न गतिस्तत्र भूतानां देवानां न च रक्षसाम्॥ २८॥

“The treeless peak (of the same
mountain), Manasa, which grants the desires
of all by its very sight and which is beyond
the reach of birds, should also be ransacked.
There is no attraction there for genii and
gods nor for ogres. (28)

स च सर्वैर्विचेतव्य: ससानुप्रस्थभूधर:।
क्रौञ्चं गिरिमतिक्रम्य मैनाको नाम पर्वत:॥ २९॥

“The said Kraufca mountain should be
scoured with its peaks, plateaus and offshoots
