130

कोदूशं तु महापापं war देहान्तरे HAA!

तेनेदं प्राप्यते घोरं महादु:खं सुदारुणम्॥१८॥
“What kind of heinous sin was actually

perpetrated by me in another body in a

previous existence? Due to that, this terrible

and most cruel major sorrow is being

experienced by me. (18)

जीवितं त्यक्तुमिच्छामि शोकेन महता qari
राक्षसीभिश्च रक्षन्त्या WAT नासाद्यते AAT १९॥

« VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

“Beset that | am with this intense grief,
| long to give up the ghost; for Sri Rama can
never be reached by me so long as | am
being guarded by the ogresses. (19)
धिगस्तु खलु मानुष्यं धिगस्तु परवश्यताम्।

न शबक्यं यत् परित्यक्तुमात्मच्छन्देन जीवितम्॥ २०॥

“Shame indeed be upon the human
state and shame be upon dependence on
others, due to which it is not possible for me
even to yield up life of my own free will !” (20)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये सुन्दरकाण्डे पञ्चविंश: सर्ग: ॥ २५ ॥

Thus ends Canto Twenty-five in the Sundarakanda of the glorious Ramayana of
Valmiki, the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

Canto XXVI
Making up her mind not to submit to the advances of Ravana even on
pain of death, when menaced by the ogresses, and indulging in

speculation as to why Sri Rama was not turning up to
rescue her, Sita wails in various ways

प्रसक्ताश्रुमुखी त्वेवं ब्रुवती जनकात्मजा।

अधोगतमुखी बाला विलप्तुमुपचक्रमे॥ १॥
उन्मत्तेव प्रमत्तेव भ्रान्तचित्तेव शोचती।
saree किशोरीव विचेष्टन्ती महीतले॥ २॥

While speaking as aforesaid and
grieving, tears rolling down her face, her
head bent low, as though she were
possessed, distracted or bewildered in mind,
and wallowing on the earth’s surface like a
colt which rolls habitually about in order to
shake off its fatigue, the youthful daughter
of Janaka for her part began to wail as
follows: (1-2)

राघवस्य प्रमत्तस्य रक्षसा कामरूपिणा।

रावणेन प्रमथ्याहमानीता क्रोशती बलात्॥३॥
“Though living under the protection of

Sri Rama, a scion of Raghu, who having

been lured away from my presence by
Marica, had grown heedless about me, |

was forcibly borne away, screaming after
being overpowered by the ogre, Ravana,
who is able to change his form at will. (3)

राक्षसीवशमापन्ना AAMT च दारुणम्।
चिन्तयन्ती सुदु:खार्ता नाहं जीवितुमुत्सहे॥४॥
“Fallen that | am into the clutches of
ogresses and am being ruthlessly threatened
by them, and remain constantly brooding
and sore stricken with sorrow, | dare not
survive any longer. (4)
नहि a जीवितेनार्थो नैवार्थैर्न च भूषणै:।
aera राक्षसीमध्ये विना रामं महारथम्॥७५॥
“| have no use whatsoever for life, nor
even for riches, nor for jewels, as long as |
am living in the midst of ogresses apart
from Sri Rama, a great chariot-warrior. (5)
अश्मसारमिदं नूनमथवाप्यजरामरम्।
wa मम येनेदं न ga विशीर्यते॥६॥

“This heart of mine is surely like iron or
