* AYODHYAKANDA +

613

एकनवतितम: सर्ग:
Canto XCI

The hospitality shown by Sage Bharadwaja, who had acquired rare mystic
powers by virtue of his austerities, to Bharata, his army and
entourage, the kind of which could not be shown even
by a ruler of the entire globe

कृतबुद्धिं निवासाय aa स मुनिस्तदा।
wi केकयीपुत्रमातिथ्येन न्यमन्त्रयत्॥१॥
The celebrated sage then invited to a
hospitable reception Bharata, the son of
Kaikeyil, who had made up his mind (as
shown before) to stay in that very hermitage
for the night. (1)
sade भरतस्त्वेनं नन्विदं भवता कृतम्।
पाद्यमर्घ्यमथातिथ्यं a यदुपपद्यते॥ 2
Bharata for his part said to Bharadwaja,
“Sure enough the kind of hospitality which
could possibly be arranged in a forest has
already been shown by you to us just now
in the form of water to wash our feet and
hands with and fruit and roots.” (2)
अथोवाच भरद्वाजो भरतं Weert
जाने cat प्रीतिसंयुक्तं तुष्येस्त्वं येन केनचित्॥ ३॥
Bharadwaja forthwith replied to Bharata
as follows, laughing heartily as it were: “I
know you to be full of affection to me. As
such you are likely to be pleased with
anything and everything that is offered to
you. (3)

सेनायास्तु तवैवास्या: कर्तुमिच्छामि भोजनम्।
मम प्रीतिर्यथारूपा त्वमर्हो मनुजर्षभ॥४॥

“|, however, only wish to feed this army
of yours. And you ought to do that in which
my pleasure lies, O jewel among men! (4)

feast चापि निक्षिप्य gt बलमिहागत:।

कस्मान्नेहोपयातोऽसि सबल: पुरुषर्षभ॥ ५॥
“Moreover, wherefore did you come here

encamping the army at a distance from my

hermitage? Why did you not turn up here,
army and all, O jewel among men?” (5)

Wa: प्रत्युवाचेदं प्राञ्ञलिस्तं तपोधनम्।

न सैन्येनोपयातोऽस्मि भगवन् भगवद्भयात्॥६॥
Bharata with folded hands replied as

follows to the sage, whose only wealth was

his asceticism : “I did not turn up with the

army for fear of displeasing you; O venerable

sage ! (6)

Tat fe भगवन् नित्यं राजपुत्रेण वा तथा।
यत्नत: परिहर्तव्या विषयेषु तपस्विन:॥७॥

“In fact, distance should always be
maintained from ascetics (lest they be
disturbed) in their own lands by a King ora
King’s son under similar circumstances, Your
Holiness ! (7)

वाजिमुख्या मनुष्याश्च मत्ताश्च वरवारणा:।
प्रच्छाद्य भगवन् भूमिं महतीमनुयान्ति auc

“Best specimens of horses as well as
men and excellent elephants in rut are following
in my wake occupying a large area. (8)

at वृक्षानुदकं भूमिमाश्रमेषूटजांस्तथा।
न हिंस्युरिति तेनाहमेक एवागतस्तत:॥९॥

“| came away from that place where
the troops have been encamped all alone,
accompanied by Sage Vasistha, lest they
should destroy the trees, foul the waters
and land as well as the huts in the hermitage.”

(9)
आनीयतामित: सेनेत्याज्ञप्त परमर्षिणा।
तथानुचक्रे भरत: सेनाया: समुपागमम्॥१०॥

Commanded by the eminent sage in
the following words : “Let the army be brought
hither !” Bharata forthwith caused the army
to be duly brought all the way to the hermitage
accordingly. (10)
