+ UTTARAKANDA +

soul in its former birth but on being born as
a dog it has been spoiled. The illustrious

1035

One sought death by abstaining from taking
food in Varanasi. (47—52)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये उत्तरकाण्डे Were: सर्ग: ॥ २॥

Thus ends Interpolated Canto Two in the Uttarakanda of the glorious
Ramayana of Valmiki, the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

षष्टितम: सर्ग:
Canto LX

Sages, living on the bank of Yamuna, terrorised by Asura Lavana approach
Sit Rama, in order to make a complaint. Sri Rama receives them
with honour and enquires about the cause of their arrival

at: संवदतोरेवॆ रामलक्ष्मणयोस्तदा।
वासन्तिकी From प्राप्ता न शीता न च घर्मदा॥ १॥

Thus, as the day passed by with Sri
Rama and Laksmana conversing among
themselves, the vernal night appeared, which
was neither cold nor hot. (1)

aa: ward विमले कृतपूर्वाह्लिकक्रिय:।
अभिचक्राम काकुत्स्थो दर्शनं पौरकार्यवित्॥ २॥

After dawn in the morning, which was
a clear one, having performed the morning
duties, Sri Rama the scion of Kakutstha
approached the place where he could see
his subjects, desirous to know the activities
of the citizens. (2)

Wd: सुमन्त्रस्त्वागम्य wad वाक्यमब्रवीत्।
Wa प्रतिहता राजन् द्वारि तिष्ठन्ति तापसा:॥ ३॥
Then Sumantra, the charioteer, having
come near Sri Rama, the scion of Raghus,
spoke thus: ‘O King! Some ascetics, not
permited to enter, stand in need at the
entrance door, (3)

unit wat wa पुरस्कृत्य महर्षय:।
दर्शनं a महाराज चोदयन्ति कृतत्वरा:॥४॥
प्रीयमाणा नरव्याघ्र यमुनातीरवासिन:।
Wea तद् वचनं श्रुत्वा राम: प्रोवाच धर्मवित्॥ ५ ॥
प्रवेश्यन्तां महाभागा भार्गवप्रमुखा द्विजा:।
राज्ञस्त्वाज्ञां पुरस्कृत्य द्वा:स्थो Bat कृताञ्जलि: ।॥। ६ ॥

प्रवेशयामास तदा तापसान् सुदुरासदान्।
wd समधिकं at दीप्यमानं स्वतेजसा॥७॥
a द्विजा: पूर्णकलशै: सर्वतीर्थाम्बुसत्कृतै:॥ ८॥
गृहीत्वा फलमूलं च रामस्याभ्याहरन् बहु।
प्रतिगृह्य तु तत् सर्वं राम: प्रीतिपुरस्कृत:॥९॥
तीर्थोदकानि सर्वाणि फलानि विविधानि च।

उवाच च महाबाहु: सर्वानेव महामुनीन्॥१०॥

‘O Tiger among men, Sri Rama, great
Rsis, who dwell at the banks of the Yamuna,
and rejoice among themselves, placing
Cyavana, the Bhargava (son of Bhrgu) at
their head, implore us in haste for your
audience’.

Hearing him say so, Sri Rama the
righteous one spoke: ‘Please let the
Brahmanas, headed by Bhargava, enter.’
The charioteer then went near the door.
Accepting the orders of the King, made the
ascetics, who were unapproachable, enter:
More than a hundred holy ascetics, glowing
with their own lustre, entered the palace.
Those Brahmanas accompanied with pitchers
full and sanctified with the waters of all the
Tirthas (pilgrimages), and with many fruits
and roots offered them to Sri Rama.
Accepting them, Sri Rama was pleased
excessively getting the sacred waters
of the Tirthas and all kinds of fruits, He,
