386

who are the foremost among generals and
who cannot be numbered, are formidable

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA +

heroes. They have distinct units under their
command.” (47)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये FERS षड्विंश: सर्ग: ॥ २६ ॥

Thus ends Canto Twenty-six in the Yuddhakanda of the glorious Ramayana
of Valmiki, the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic

Canto XXVII

Mentioning the names of other monkey-generals, Sarana
proceeds to describe their individual valour

तांस्तु ते सम्प्रवक्ष्यामि प्रेक्षमाणस्य यूथपान्।
राघवार्थे पराक्रान्ता ये न रक्षन्ति जीवितम्॥१॥

“| for my part shall describe in detail to
you, who are keenly observant, the monkey-
generals who, being ready to show their
valour in the cause of Rama (a scion of
Raghu), do not care even for their lives.

(1)
ferent यस्य बहुव्यामा नलमाश्रिता: |
ताम्रा: पीता: सिता: श्वेता: प्रकीर्णा घोरकर्मण: ॥ २॥
Wet: प्रकाशन्ते सूर्यस्येव मरीचय:।
पृथिव्यां चानुकृष्यन्ते हरो AAT वानर:॥३॥

“This monkey of terrible deeds is known
by the name of Hara. The glossy hairs
adhering to his long tail, which are coppery,
yellow, brown and white and of great length,
shine brightly like the sun’s rays, standing
erect as they do, and, being thrown about,
are dragged along the ground in his train.

(2-3)
यं पृष्ठतोऽनुगच्छन्ति शतशोऽथ सहस्ररश:।
qaqa eat TASNIUTAAT: Us i
यूथपा हरिराजस्य किंकरा: समुपस्थिता:।
नीलानिव महामेघांस्तिष्ठतो यांस्तु पश्यसि॥५॥
असिताञ्जनसंकाशान् युद्धे सत्यपराक्रमान्।
असंख्येयाननिर्देशान् परं पारमिवोदधे:॥६॥

पर्वतेषु च a केचिद् विषयेषु नदीषु च।
Wa त्वामभिवर्तन्ते राजन्नृक्षा: सुदारुणा:॥७॥

“Lifting up trees and intent on storming
Lanka, troop-commanders, numbering
hundreds and thousands, who stand at the
beck and call of Sugriva (the king of
monkeys), follow him close at hand. These
warriors, again, whom you perceive ranging
like huge sombre clouds, nay, who possess
the hue of black collyrium and who are
endowed with unfailing prowess on the field
of battle, who cannot be numbered any
more than the sands on the other sea-
shore, much less mentioned by name, and
who lived on mountains and some in plains,
as also on river-banks, O king, are extremely
ferocious bears, who are advancing towards
you. (4—7)
wet मध्ये स्थितो राजन् भीमाक्षो भीमदर्शान:।
पर्जन्य ga जीमूतै: समन्तात् परिवारित:॥८॥
ऋक्षवन्तं गिरिश्रेष्ठमध्यास्ते wet पिबन्।
सर्वक्षाणामधिपतिर्धूम्रो नामैष यूथप:॥९॥

“This warrior of dreadful eyes and fearful
aspect standing in their midst, who is
surrounded on all sides by bears as
Parjanya, the god of rain, is by clouds, and
who dwells on Rksavan, the foremost of
mountains, drinking the water of the
