520

righteousness by setting a noble example
before them. (20)

नन्वसौ काञ्चनैर्बाणैर्महावीर्यो महाभुज:।
युगान्त sat भूतानि सागरानपि Pda २१॥

“That mighty-armed prince, possessed
as he is of extraordinary might, can, if he so
wills, even dry up the oceans by his shafts
with gilded feathers even as the god of
destruction dissolves the elements at the
time of universal dissolution. (21)

स ae: सिंहबलो वृषभाक्षो नरर्षभ:।
स्वयमेव ga: पित्रा जलजेनात्मजो यथा॥ २२॥

“That jewel among men, who is so
powerful as indicated above, nay, who,
possesses the strength of a lion and has
eyes big as those of a bull, has been ruined
by his own father even as the brood of a
fish are devoured by the fish itself. (22)

द्विजातिचरितो ert: शास्त्रे दृष्ट: सनातनै:।
ae a धर्मनिरते त्वया ya विवासिते॥ २३॥

“A son, who is deeply devoted to
righteousness, having been exiled by you, it
is problematic whether the path of virtue
discovered by the ancient sages and
followed by the twice-born really exists in
your eyes. (23)

गतिरेका पतिर्नार्या द्वितीया गतिरात्मज:।
तृतीया wear राजंश्चतुर्थी Aa विद्यते॥ २४॥

“The main support of a woman is her
husband, the second is her son, the third is
her kindred; there is no fourth support at all,
O king! (24)

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

तत्र त्वं मम vat wag वनमाहित:।
न वनं गन्तुमिच्छामि सर्वथा at हता त्वया॥ २५॥

“Of the aforementioned three supports,
you, my husband, are surely no support for
me inasmuch as you are under the thumb
of my co-wife; while Rama has been sent
away to the forest. | do not wish to proceed
to the forest since | cannot live apart from
you. In this way, alas! | have been utterly
destroyed by you. (25)

हता: स्म Gat: सह मन्तरिभिश्च।
हता सपुत्रास्मि हताश्च पौरा:
सुतश्च wat च तव प्रहृष्टौ॥ २६॥

“This kingdom of Kosala, alongwith other
neighbouring kingdoms, has been ruined by
you. Nay, we all (your people) alongwith the
counsellors have been destroyed by you. |
stand doomed with my son, Rama. The
citizens too have been ruined. Only your
son, Bharata, and wife, Kaikeyi, feel greatly
delighted.” (26)

निशम्य रामेति मुमोह ¢:faa: |
aa: स शोकं प्रविवेश पार्थिव:
स्वदुष्कृतं चापि पुनस्तथास्मरत्॥ २७॥

Distressed to hear this condemnation
of himself by Kausalya, couched in harsh
words, the Emperor fell into a swoon, crying
“O Rama!” He then got plunged in grief and
also vividly recalled once more his past
misdeed responsible for his present calamity.

(27)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्येऽयोध्याकाण्डे
एकषष्टितम: सर्ग: ॥ ६१ il

Thus ends Canto Sixty-one in the Ayodhyakanda of the glorious Ramayana of Valmiki,
the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

