1018

by him, only wrath, lust and frivolity, the
characteristics of a monkey, have been
shown by me. (12)
अचिन्तनीयं परिवर्जनीय-

मनीप्सनीयं स्वनवेक्षणीयम्।
प्राप्तोऽस्मि पाप्मानमिदं वयस्य

भ्रातुर्वधात् त्वाष्ट्वधादिवेन्द्र: il १३॥

“As a sequel to my planning the death
of my own elder brother, | have reaped, as
Indra (the ruler of gods) from the death of
ViSwarupa* (son of Twasta, one of the
twelve sons of Aditi presiding over the sun,
one after another, month by month), this
fruit in the form of sin, which is inconceivable,
worth eschewing, undesirable and _ utterly
unthinkable, my friend ! (13)

पाप्मानमिन्द्रस्य मही जलं च
वृक्षाश्च कामं जगृहु: स्नियश्च।

को नाम पाप्मानमिमं सहेत
शाखामृगस्य प्रतिपत्तुमिच्छेत्॥ १४॥

“While the earth and water as also the
trees and the womenkind voluntarily took
on their head the aforesaid sin of Indra, who
would actually take on his own head this sin
of a monkey and who would endure it (even
if one undertakes to do so)? (14)
नार्हामि सम्मानमिमं प्रजानां

न यौवराज्यं Ha एव राज्यम्।
अधर्मयुक्तं कुलनाशयुक्त-
मेवंविधं Wear कर्म कृत्वा॥१५॥

“Having perpetrated such a sinful deed,
attended with the destruction of one’s own
race, O scion of Raghu, | do not deserve
this great honour from the people and not
even the office of Prince Regent, much less
the throne of Kiskindha. (15)

पापस्य कर्तास्मि विगर्हितस्य

AR लोकापकृतस्य लोके।
शोको महान् मामभिवर्ततेऽयं

वृष्टेर्यथा निम्नमिवाम्बुवेग: 11 १६॥

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

“| am the perpetrator of an abject sin
which is severely condemned in the world
and constitutes an injury to the whole
world. An overwhelming grief is therefore
engulfing me even as the onrush of water
following a shower makes towards a
depression. (16)

सोदर्यघातापरगात्रवाल:

i श्लशिरोविषाण: ।
एनोमयो मामभिहन्ति हस्ती

gat नदीकूलमिव Wag: ull

“The mad and fully grown elephant of
sin, whose hind part and tail represent the
destruction of a co-uterine brother and whose
proboscis, eyes, head and tusks are made
up of remorse, is striking me even as it
would strike the bank of a river. (17)

निवर्तते मे हृदि areas
अग्नौ विवर्णं परितप्यमानं
बिग्ट्टं यथा राघव जातरूपम्॥ १८ Il

“Alas, coming in contact with this
intolerable sin, O jewel among men, the
stock of virtue too existing in my heart
is fast disappearing even as the dross
existing in gold, whose presence cannot
be brooked long by gold, gets separated
through contact with impure gold in the
process of being heated at a stretch on fire.

(18)
महाबलानां हरियूथपाना-
मिदं कुलं राघव मन्निमित्तम्।
अस्याङ्गदस्यापि च शोकतापा-
दर्धस्थितप्राणमितीव मन्ये॥१९॥

“Since | have been instrumental in
the destruction of Vali, as also due to the
burning caused by grief of separation from
his beloved father in the heart of Angada, |
consider this race of very mighty monkey
chiefs as only half living and half dead, as
it were. (19)

* For the story of Viswariipa’s death at the hands of Indra see Srimad Bhagavata VI. ix.
