1066

Laksmana, the scion of the Kakutsthas, Sri
Rama summoned mentally Puspaka: ‘Come
O famous one.’ (5)

इङ्गितं स तु विज्ञाय पुष्पको हेमभूषित:।
आजगाम मुहूर्तेन समीपे राघवस्य SN I

Puspaka, adorned with gold, taking the
hint came at once near the descendant of
Raghu, Sri Rama. (6)
सोऽब्रवीत् प्रणतो भूत्वा अयमस्मि नराधिप।
वश्यस्तव महाबाहो किंकर: समुपस्थित:॥७॥

The Puspaka spoke bending down, to

Sri Rama: ‘O King of long arms, here | am,
your servant, at your command.’ (7)

भाषितं «fat श्रुत्वा पुष्पकस्य नराधिप:।
अभिवाद्य महर्षीन् a विमानं सोऽध्यरोहत॥८॥

Hearing these appealing words of the
Puspaka, the king, Sri Rama, having saluted
the great sages, ascended the plane. (8)

धनुर्गृहीत्वा तूणी च wet च रुचिरप्रभम्।
निक्षिप्य नगरे चैतौ सौमित्रिभरतावुभौ॥ ९॥
Ward, प्रतीचीं हरितं विचिन्वंश्च ततस्तत:।
उत्तरामगमच्छीमान् दिशं हिमवतावृताम्॥१०॥
Taking His bow and quiver and a
dazzling sword, and leaving both Laksmana
and Bharata in the city, He went looking
here and there to the western direction full
of greenery and then proceeded to the
northern direction covered by the snow-clad
mountain, Himalaya. (9-10)
अपश्यमानस्तत्रापि स्वल्पमप्यथ दुष्कृतम्।
पूर्वामपि दिशं सर्वामथापश्यन्नराधिप:॥११॥
Seeing not the slightest unrighteous

thing done there, then He, Sri Rama, scanned
also the whole eastern region. (11)

पुष्पकस्थो महाबाहुस्तदापश्यन्नराधिप:॥ १२॥
दक्षिणां दिशमाक्रामत् ततो राजर्षिनन्दन:।
शैवलस्योत्तरे पार्श्व ददर्शं सुमहत्सर:॥१३॥
The King, Sri Rama, then seated on
the Puspaka, saw the southern quarter,

« VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

where conduct was the purest, and which
was as Clear as the base of mirror, He saw
on the northern side of the Saivala mountain
a great lake. (12-13)

तस्मिन् सरसि तप्यन्तं तापसं सुमहत्तप:।
east राघव: श्रीमाँल्लम्बमानमधोमुखम्॥ १४॥
In that lake the descendant of Raghu,
the noble one, saw an ascetic performing
great penances, while suspended with head
turned downward. (14)

राघवस्तमुपागम्य det तप उत्तमम्।

उवाच च नृपो वाक्यं धन्यस्त्वमसि सुव्रत॥ १५॥
The son of Raghu, the kind one, Sri

Rama, having approached that ascetic,

performing great penances, said to him: ‘O
performer of vows, you are great. (15)

कौतूहलात् त्वां Teoh रामो दाशरथिर्ह्यहम्॥ LG ॥

‘O powerful one, aged through penances,
to which caste do you belong, | ask you out

of curiosity. | am Rama, son of King
DaSaratha. (16)
कोऽर्थो मनीषितस्तुभ्यं स्वर्गलाभोऽपरोऽथवा।

वराश्रयो यदर्थं त्वं तपस्यन्यै: सुदुश्चरम्॥१७॥

‘What object is desired by you to be
obtained as boon, is it the attainment of the
heaven or some other object, for which you
perform penances, difficult to be performed
by others? (17)
यमाश्रित्य तपस्तप्तं श्रोतुमिच्छामि तापस।
ब्राह्मणो वासि भद्रं ते क्षत्रियो वासि दुर्जय:।
वैश्यस्तृतीयो वर्णो वा शूद्रो वा सत्यवाग् भव॥ १८ ॥

‘For which object have you practised
penances, that | want to hear, O ascetic?
Are you a Brahmana? O good man, may
welfare be with you, are you a Ksatriya
difficult to overcome, or belonging to the
third caste, a Vaisya, or a Sudra? Please
speak out the truth.’ (18)

इत्येवमुक्तर a नराधिपेन
अवाक्शिरा दाशरथाय तस्मै।
