# YUDDHAKANDA #

has disappeared due to the sin perpetrated
by you in the shape of Sita’s abduction,
which had sprung from concupiscence and
wrath and was attended with deep
attachment. Hence this major disaster, which
has destroyed our very root. This entire
race of ogres has been deprived of its
protector by you. (70—73)

नहि त्वं शोचितव्यो मे प्रख्यातबलपौरुष:।
Maura तु मे बुद्धि: कारुण्ये परिवर्तते॥ ७४॥
“You, who were far famed for your

strength and valour, do not deserve to be
mourned for by me. Due to feminine nature,

however, my mind is leaning towards
sadness. (74)
Ged दुष्कृतं च त्वं गृहीत्वा tat गतिं गत:।

आत्मानमनुशोचामि त्वद्विनाशेन दु:खिताम्॥ ७५॥

“Taking with you the stock of your
merit and sin, you have gone to the place
for which you were destined. I, however,
mourn for my own self, afflicted as | am by
your loss. (75)
Get हितकामानां न ad वचनं त्वया।
भ्रातॄणां चैव कात्स्न्येन हितमुक्तं दशानन॥ ७६॥

“The absolutely salutary advice tendered
by your friends, who wished well of you, as
well as by your brothers, was not heeded
by you, O ten-headed ogre! 76)

हेत्वर्थयुक्तं विधिवच्छेयस्करमदारुणम्।
विभीषणेनाभिहितं न pd हेतुमत् त्वया॥ ७७॥

“The counsel duly offered by Vibhisana,
which was full of reason and pregnant with
meaning, wholesome and agreeable, was
not put into effect by you. (77)

मारीचकुम्भकर्णाभ्यां वाक्यं मम पितुस्तथा।

न pd वीर्यमत्तेन dead फलमीदृशम्॥७८॥
“The advice given by Marica, your

maternal uncle and Kumbhakarna, your own

brother as also the counsel of my father

(the demon Maya) was not followed by you,

drunk as you were with power. What has

773

followed is the bitter consequence of your
perversity. (78)
नीलजीमूतसंकाश पीताम्बर शुभाङ्गद।
स्वगात्राणि विनिक्षिप्य किं शेषे रुधिराव्रृत: ॥ ७९॥
“My lord, resembling a dark cloud in
hue, nay, clad in yellow and adorned with
brilliant armlets, why having thrown about
your limbs are you lying covered with blood?
(79)
Waa sa शोकार्तां किं at न प्रतिभाषसे।
महावीर्यस्य दक्षस्य संयुगेष्वपलायिन:॥८०)॥
यातुधानस्य दौहित्रीं किं मां न प्रतिभाषसे।
उत्तिष्ठोत्तिष्ठं किं शेषे aa परिभवे कृते॥८१॥
“As though fast asleep, why do you not
answer me, stricken with grief as | am?
Why do you not vouchsafe a reply to me,
the grand-daughter (daughter’s daughter) of
an ogre (Sumali by name), who was clever
and endowed with extraordinary prowess,
and never retreated in battles. Get up! Rise!!
How are you lying down even though
subjected to a fresh insult? (80-81)
अद्य वै निर्भया लङ्कां प्रविष्टा: weer: |
येन सूदयसे wa समरे सूर्यवर्चसा॥८२॥
वज्रं वज्रधरस्येव ast a सततार्चित:।
रणे बहुप्रहरणो हेमजालपरिष्कृत:॥८३॥
परिघो व्यवकीर्णस्ते बाणैश्छिन्न: Tee |
प्रियामिवोपसंगृह्य किं शेषे रणमेदिनीम्॥८४॥
“Rid of all fear, the sun’s rays have
actually penetrated deep into Lanka today.
Torn into a thousand splinters, that very iron
bludgeon of yours, which was brilliant as
the sun and resembled the thunderbolt of
Indra (lit, the wielder of the thunderbolt),
with which you exterminated your enemies
on the battlefield, and which was constantly
honoured by you, which had struck many in
combat and which was adorned with a net
of gold, lies scattered. Why do you lie
embracing the battleground as one would
embrace a loved one? (82—84)
