+ UTTARAKANDA +

सोऽहं द्वितीयं काकुत्स्थ न वक्ष्यामीति चोत्तरम्।
मा द्वितीयेन दण्डो a निपतेन्मयि मानद॥७॥

‘When the elder one says something,
the younger should not make a reply. Violation
would be against the norms of Dharma and
spoil the other world. Therefore, O Kakutstha,
| will not speak anything again. O giver of
respect, may | not be importuned for the
punishment second time. (6-7)
कामकारो ge राजंस्तवास्मि पुरुषर्षभ।
अधर्मं जहि काकुत्स्थ मत्कृते रघुनन्दन॥८॥

‘O king, the best among persons and
delighter of Raghus, | will follow your wishes
but whatever wrongful happens in it from
me, you please destroy it. | shall act
according to your desire, O bull among
men. Please leave out for my sake that
which is unlawful, O scion of Kakutstha,
descendant of the Raghus!’ (8)

`एवमुक्ते तु शूरेण शात्रुघ्नेन महात्मना।
उवाच राम: Geet wd लक्ष्मणं तथा॥९॥
After these words being uttered by the
wise and the brave Satrughna, Sri Rama
was pleased and He spoke to Bharata and
Laksmana: (9)

सम्भारानभिषेकस्य आनयध्वं समाहिता:।
अद्यैव पुरुषव्याघ्रमभिषेक्ष्यामि राघवम्॥१०॥

‘Bring forth all the requisites of
consecration, this very day. | shall consecrate
the scion of the Raghus, the tiger among
men, Satrughna. (10)

पुरोधसं च काकुत्स्थ नैगमानृत्विजस्तथा।
मन्तरिणश्चैव am सर्वानानयध्वं ममाज्ञया॥११॥

‘By my orders, call all of them, the
chief priest, Vasistha, the townsmen, and
other priests and also the councillors.’ (11)

Ua: शासनमाज्ञाय AMPA: |
अभिषेकसमारम्भं पुरस्कृत्य पुरोधसम्॥१२॥
Following the orders of the king, the
great warriors, brought the necessary puja
materials for the consecration, making the

1041

chief priest Vasistha play the prominent
role. (12)

प्रविष्टा राजभवनं राजानो ब्राह्मणास्तथा।
ततोऽभिषेको age शत्रुघ्नस्य महात्मन:॥१३॥
The Kings and the Brahmanas entered

the royal palace; thus the consecration of
the noble Satrughna went on. (13)

सम्प्रहर्षकर: श्रीमान् राघवस्य पुरस्य च।
अभिषिक्तस्तु काकुत्स्थो बभौ चादित्यसंनिभ: । १४॥
अभिषिक्त: पुरा स्कन्द: सेन्द्रैरिव दिवौकसै:।
अभिषिक्ते तु शत्रुघ्ने रामेणाक्लिष्टकर्मणा॥ १५॥
पौरा: प्रमुदिताश्चासन् ब्राह्मणाश्च बहुश्रुता:।
कौसल्या च सुमित्रा च मङ्गलं केकयी तथा॥ १६॥
चक्रुस्ता राजभवने याश्चान्या राजयोषित:।

RII महात्मानो यमुनातीरवासिन:॥१७॥
dt लवणमाशंसु: शत्रुघ्नस्याभिषेचनात्।
ततोऽभिषिक्तं शत्रुघ्नमङ्कमारोप्य Weal: |
sara मधुरां वाणीं तेजस्तस्याभिपूरयन्॥१८॥
The venerable scion of Kakutstha, when
consecrated, shown as the sun and brought
great joy to the descendant of Raghu (Rama)
and also to the citizens, as Skanda
(Kartikeya) when consecrated in the old
days by the gods together with Indra. As
Satrughna was consecrated by Sri Rama,
the citizens were happy and so also the
learned Brahmanas. Kausalya, Sumitra,
Kaikeyi and all other king mothers performed
auspicious acts in the royal palace. The
noble Rsis dwelling on the banks of the
Yamuna were confident that Lavana was as
if dead due to the consecration of Satrughna.
Then the scion of the Raghus, Sr
Rama, placing Satrughna on His lap uttered
these sweet words enhancing his power.
(14—18)
अयं शरस्त्वमोघस्ते दिव्य: परपुरंजय:।
अनेन लवणं सौम्य हन्तासि रघुनन्दन॥१९॥
‘| give you this divine arrow, which
is unfailing and conquers the foes, O

descendant of Raghu. O handsome one,
you will kill Lavana with this arrow. (19)
