* AYODHYAKANDA +

Ta at ae जननीं प्रदक्षिणम्॥ ६४॥

Thus trying to please his mother and
having fully taught Laksmana, his younger
brother, his own philosophy of morality, that

379

jewel among men, positively inclined as he
was to proceed to the Dandaka forest by
way of an enterprise, mentally went round
his aforesaid mother clockwise as a mark
of respect. (64)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्येऽयोध्याकाण्डे एकविंश: सर्ग: ॥ 22 ॥

Thus ends Canto Twenty-one in the Ayodhyakanda of the glorious Ramayana of
Valmiki, the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

Canto XXII

Sri Rama pacifies Laksmana, who was angry with Kaikeyi, by
denying the instrumentality of Kaikeyi in his banishment
and laying the entire blame on his own fate

अथ तं व्यथया de सविशेषममर्षितम्।
सरोषमिव नागेन्द्रं रोषविस्फारितेक्षणम्॥१॥
उवाचेदं स धैर्येण धारयन् सत्त्वमात्मवान्॥ २॥
Approaching the celebrated Laksmana
(son of Sumitra), his beloved brother and
well-wisher, who felt distressed through agony
and was greatly indignant and was looking
with eyes wide open through rage like an
infuriated elephant, the said Sri Rama, who
had mastered his self, spoke to him as
follows, restraining his mind with firmness :
(1-2)

निगृह्य रोषं शोकं च धैर्यमाश्रित्य केवलम्।
अवमानं निरस्यैनं गृहीत्वा हर्षमुत्तमम्॥ ३॥

उपक्लृप्तं यदैतन्मे अभिषेकार्थमुत्तमम्।
wa निवर्तय fag कुरु ae निरव्ययम्॥४॥
“Curbing your anger against our father
and Kaikeyi and grief over my impending
exile and embracing uncommon fortitude,
nay, ignoring this affront in the form of
banishing me and deriving the highest joy
from the idea of having helped our father in
implementing his plighted word and thereby
ensuring his place in the highest heaven,

pray, cause to be sent back all the exquisite
material that has been got ready for my
consecration as Prince Regent and quickly
and uninterruptedly accomplish what requires
to be done now in the shape of preparations
for the journey. (3-4)

सौमित्रे योऽभिषेकार्थे मम सम्भारसम्भ्रम:।
अभिषेकनिव्रृत्त्यर्थे सोऽस्तु सम्भारसम्भ्रम:॥७५॥

“Let the same zeal be evinced in
preparing for the exile, which implies the
cessation of the consecration as was shown
in collecting materials for my installation, O
darling of Sumitra ! (5)

यस्या मदभिषेकार्थे amd परितप्यते।
माता A: सा यथा न स्यात् सविशङ्का TAT HS Ul ६ ॥

“Take steps to ensure that that mother
of ours viz., Kaikeyi, whose mind is greatly
troubled over the question of my installation,
is not filled with apprehension (that | may
assume a revolting attitude and refuse to
leave the capital). (6)

तस्या: शङ्कामयं ga मुहूर्तमपि नोत्सहे।
मनसि प्रतिसंजातं सौमित्रेऽहमुपेक्षितुम्॥७॥

“| cannot afford to ignore even for a
