248

सर्वथा कृतकार्योऽसौ SAM नात्र संशय:।
न ह्यस्याकृतकार्यस्य नाद एवंविधो भवेत्॥ २३॥

“The yonder Hanuman has been wholly
successful, there is no doubt about it; for
had he been unsuccessful, his roar would
not have been of this type.” (23)

तस्य बाहूरुवेगं च निनादं च महात्मन:।
निशम्य हरयो हृष्टा: समुत्पेतुर्यतस्तत:॥ २४॥

Rejoiced to hear the sound of the
dashing movement of the arms and thighs,
as well as the roar of that exalted soul, the
monkeys leapt up here and there. (24)

ते नगाग्रान्नगाग्राणि शिखराच्छिखराणि च।
प्रहष्टा: समपद्यन्त हत्रूमन्त दिदृक्षव; ॥ २७५ ॥
Feeling overjoyed, they sprang from
tree-top to tree-top and from peak to peak,
eager as they were to behold Hanuman.
(25)
ते प्रीता: पादपाग्रेषु गृह्य शाखामवस्थिता:।
वासांसि च प्रकाशानि समाविध्यन्त AMAT: 1 २६॥
Standing on tree-tops seizing the boughs
(lest they should topple down while gazing

upwards), they joyously waved their splendid
raiment. (26)

गिरिगह्वरसंलीनो यथा गर्जति area:
एवं Wet बलवान् हनूमान् मारुतात्मज:॥ २७॥
The mighty Hanuman, sprung from the
loins of the wind-god, roared even as the
wind pent up in a mountain cavern would.
(27)

तमभ्रघनसंकाशमापतन्तं महाकपिम्।
geal a वानरा: ad `तस्थु: प्राञ्ञलयस्तदा॥ २८ I
Seeing that huge monkey rushing like
a mass of clouds at that moment all the
aforesaid monkeys stood with joined palms.
(28)

ततस्तु वेगवान् वीरो गिरेर्गिरिनिभ: कपि:।
निपपात गिरेस्तस्य शिखरे पादपाकुले॥२९॥
Having leapt from the Arista mountain
in Lanka, the heroic Hanuman, for his part,

« VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

who was full of impetuosity and looked like
a mountain himself, descended on the top of
that mountain, Mahendra, thick with trees.

(29)

हर्षेणापूर्यमाणोऽसौ रम्ये पर्वतनिर्झरे।
छिन्नपक्ष इवाकाशात् पपात धरणीधर:॥ ३०॥
Overflowing with joy he alighted on the
brink of a lovely fountain, like a mountain
whose pinions have been clipped descending
from the heavens. (30)

ततस्ते प्रीतमनस: wd वानरपुङ्खवा:।
हनूमन्ते महात्मानं परिवार्योपतस्थिरे॥ ३१॥

Delighted at heart, all those jewels
among the monkeys thereupon stood
encircling the high-souled Hanuman. (31)

परिवार्य च a aa परां प्रीतिमुपागता:।

प्रहष्टवदना: सर्वे तमागतमुपागमन्॥३२॥
Gathering round him they all derived

supreme joy. Nay, with an exceedingly

cheerful countenance they all approached
Hanuman, who had just arrived. (32)

उपायनानि चादाय मूलानि च फलानि च।
प्रत्यर्चयन् हरिश्रेष्ठं हरयो मारुतात्मजम्॥३३॥

Taking presents in the form of roots
and fruits, the monkeys honoured Hanuman,
the foremost among monkeys. (33)

विनेदुर्मुदिता: केचित्केचित्किलकिलां तथा।
Ber: पादपशाखाश्च आनिन्युर्वानरर्षभा:॥ ३४॥
Some roared in sheer delight, others
likewise raised shouts of felicity; full of joy,
other jewels among the monkeys brought
boughs of trees for Hanuman to sit on. (34)
हनूमांस्तु गुरून् वृद्धाञ्जाम्बवत्प्रमुखांस्तदा।
कुमारमङ्गदं चैव सोऽवन्दत महाकपि:॥ ३५॥
That great monkey, Hanuman, for his
part saluted at that moment his elders as
well as the aged, the foremost of whom was
Jambavan, as also Prince Angada. (35)

स ताभ्यां पूजित: पूज्य: कपिभिश्च प्रसादित: |
Ger देवीति विक्रान्त: संक्षेपेण न्यवेदयत्॥ ३६॥
