190

« VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

Canto XLI

Accounting his purpose not fully accomplished till he had ascertained the
strength of the ogres, even though he had received the message of
Sita, and making up his mind to lay waste the royal
pleasure-garden as a means of ascertaining
the strength of the enemy, Hanuman
proceeds to do it

स च वाग्भि: प्रशस्ताभिर्गमिष्यन् पूजितस्तया।
तस्माद् देशादपाक्रम्य चिन्तयामास वानर:॥१॥

Moving from that place, when he had
been honoured by Sita with excellent words
while he was about to depart, the aforesaid
monkey, Hanuman, now thought within
himself: (1)
अल्पशेषमिदं कार्यं दृष्टेयमसितेक्षणा।
त्रीनुपायानतिक्रम्य चतुर्थं se दृश्यते॥२॥

‘This dark-eyed lady Sita has been
seen, which was the principal object of my
visit to this place. Only a small portion of my
present duty still remains to be performed.
Leaving out of consideration three out of the
four means to success (viz., negotiation,
gift and sowing seeds of dissension) the
fourth, viz., punishment appears to be called
for at this juncture. (2)

पराक्रमस्त्वेष wae Wad v3

‘Negotiation does not conduce to good
results with ogres; gift too is not enjoined in
favour of those richly endowed with wealth;
people who are intoxicated with power cannot
be tamed by sowing seeds of dissension in
their ranks. Hence show of valour alone
appeals to me on this occasion. (3)

न चास्य कार्यस्य पराक्रमादृते
विनिश्चय: कश्चिदिहोपपद्यते।
हतप्रवीराश्च रणे तु राक्षसा:
कथंचिदीयुर्यदिहाद्य मार्दवम्॥४॥

‘Barring show of valour no infallible
means of accomplishing this task of
ascertaining the strength of the ogres is
practicable in these circumstances; for the
ogres can adopt a meek attitude in the
ensuing conflict only if their foremost heroes
are somehow killed at the present moment.

(4)
कार्ये कर्मणि निर्वृत्ते at agate साधयेत्।
पूर्वकार्याविरोधेन स कार्यं कर्तुमर्हति॥७५॥

‘He alone can successfully accomplish
his purpose, who compasses numerous
secondary tasks even after the main
business has been carried through, without
marring the previous achievement. (5)

न ह्येक: साधको हेतु: स्वल्पस्यापीह HAT: |
यो ह्यर्थं बहुधा dq स समर्थोऽर्थसाधने॥६॥

‘Surely there cannot be an exclusive
means of accomplishing a purpose in this
world, however insignificant it may be. On
the other hand, he alone is capable of
accomplishing a purpose, who knows to do
a thing in many ways.

इहैव तावत्कृतनिश्चयो ह्यहं

‘If | return to the abode of Sugriva (the
lord of monkeys) today, having ascertained
the truth as to who will predominate in an
encounter between the enemy and ourselves,
and also having determined the future course
of action in this very journey, then only will
