* SUNDARAKANDA +

“Many unseemly remarks of yours,
uttered with reference to Ravana, have been
endured by us out of compassion and
tenderness, O grossly stupid princess of
Mithila ! (29)
न च न: Her वाक्यं fed कालपुरस्कृतम्।
आनीतासि समुद्रस्य पारमन्यैर्दुरासदम्॥३०॥

“It is a pity that you do not even then
abide by our wholesome and opportune advice.
You must remember that you have been
transported to the other shore of the sea,
which is difficult of access to others. (30)

रावणान्त:पुरे घोरे प्रविष्टा चासि मैथिलि।
रावणस्य Te रुद्धा अस्माभिस्त्वभिरक्षिता॥ ३१॥

“Again you have found your way into
the dreadful gynaeceum of Ravana, O
princess of Mithila! Nay, you have been
detained in the abode of Ravana and are
guarded on all sides by us. (31)

न cat शक्त: परित्रातुमपि साक्षात् Wer: |
कुरुष्व हितवादिन्या वचनं मम मैथिलि॥ ३२॥
“Not even Indra (the destroyer of
strongholds) himself is capable of rescuing
you. Therefore, act upon the advice of mine,
who am tendering friendly counsel to you, O
princess of Mithila ! (32)

अलमश्रुनिपातेन त्यज शोकमनर्थकम्।

भज प्रीतिं प्रहर्षं च त्यजन्ती नित्यदैन्यताम्॥ ३३॥
“Cease shedding tears. Give up grief,

which is of no avail. Shaking off perpetual

depression, embrace cheerfulness and

experience excessive delight. (33)

सीते राक्षसराजेन परिक्रीड यथासुखम्।
जानीमहे यथा ite स्त्रीणां यौवनमध्रुवम्॥ ३४॥
“Sport with Ravana happily, O Sita,
since we all know the youth of all women to
be transitory, O timid lady ! (34)

यावन्न ते व्यतिक्रामेत् तावत् सुखमवाप्नुहि।
उद्यानानि च रम्याणि पर्वतोपवनानि च॥ ३५॥

सह राक्षसराजेन चर त्वं मदिरिक्षणे।
स्त्रीसहस्राणि a देवि ast स्थास्यन्ति सुन्दरि॥ ३६॥

127

“Enjoy happiness as long as your youth
does not pass. Nay, range you the lovely
gardens as well as mountains and groves
along with Ravana, the king of ogres, O
lady with maddening eyes! Thousands of
women will remain at your beck and call,
O charming lady ! (35-36)
उत्पाट्य वा a हृदयं भक्षयिष्यामि मैथिलि॥ ३७॥
aig मे ated वाक्यं न यथावत् करिष्यसि।
ततश्चण्डोदरी नाम राक्षसी क्रूरदर्शना॥३८॥
भ्रामयन्ती महच्छूलमिदं वचनमब्रवीत्।
इमां हरिणशावाक्षीं त्रासोत्कम्पपयोधराम्॥ ३९॥
रावणेन ei दृष्ट्वा दौर्हृदो A महानयम्।
यकृत्प्लीहं महत् क्रोडं हृदयं च सबन्धनम्॥४०॥
गात्राण्यपि तथा vit खादेयमिति मे uta: |

ततस्तु प्रघसा नाम राक्षसी वाक्यमब्रवीत्॥४१॥

“Accept as your consort Ravana, the
lord of all ogres. Tearing out your heart, on
the other hand, | shall feast on it, O princess
of Mithila, if you will not duly follow the
advice tendered by me.” Brandishing a huge
dart, an ogress of ferocious looks, Candodari
by name, then spoke as follows: “At the
sight of this woman with eyes resembling
those of a fawn and with her breasts shaking
through fear, borne away to Lanka by Ravana,
this great longing sprang up in my heart that
| should feast on her liver and spleen, her
swollen breast as well as her heart including
its stem (consisting of veins and arteries),
nay, all her limbs and head too. Such is my
mind even now.” Then an ogress, Praghasa
by name, for her part spoke as follows :

(37—41)

कण्ठमस्या नृशंसाया: पीडयाम: किमास्यते।
निवेद्यतां ततो राज्ञे मानुषी सा मृतेति ह॥४२॥
“We shall presently squeeze the neck
of this heartless woman; why do we tarry?
Let it then be reported to the king that the

‘human lady in question has breathed her
last’, they say. (42)
