# YUDDHAKANDA +

miles) long*, the said city looked charming
with its towering gates, closely resembling
white clouds and its gold and _ silver
fortifications. (20)

wees विमानैश्च लङ्का परमभूषिता।
घनैरिवातपापाये मध्यमं awe पदम्॥ २१॥

Highly embellished with palaces and
seven-storeyed mansions too, Lanka looked
like the sky (the region covered by the
middle or second stride of Lord Visnu in His
descent as Trivikrama) graced with clouds
at the end of summer, when the monsoon
sets in. (21)

यस्यां स्तम्भसहस्रेण प्रासाद: समलंक्रृत:।

कैलासशिखराकारो FAT खमिवोल्लिखन्॥ २२॥
In that city there existed a palace duly

graced with a thousand pillars, which looked

like a peak of Mount Kailasa and appeared
to scrape the skies. (22)

चैत्य: स राक्षसेन्द्रस्य बभूव पुरभूषणम्।
wet रक्षसां fet a: समग्रेण Tea २३॥
The aforesaid palace of Ravana, the
king of ogres, which was guarded at all
times by a hundred fully armoured ogres,
was an ornament of the city. (23)
मनोज्ञां काञ्चनवतीं पर्वतैरुपशोभिताम्।
नानाधातुविचित्रैश्च उद्यानैरुपशोभिताम्॥ २४॥
नानाविहगसंघुष्टां नानामृगनिषेविताम्।
नानाकुसुमसम्पन्नां नानाराक्षससेविताम्॥ २५॥

429

at समृद्धां समृद्धार्थां लक्ष्मीवाँल्लक्ष्मणाग्रज: |
रावणस्य पुरीं Wat ददर्शं सह वानरै:॥ २६॥
Alongwith the monkeys, who remained
with him, the glorious Rama, the eldest
brother of Laksmana, beheld that prosperous
golden city ruled over by Ravana, which
was delightful to the mind and full of abundant
resources, was graced with pleasure-
mountains picturesque with various minerals,
as well as with gardens, which was
rendered noisy by birds of all species,
frequented by varieties of deer, richly
endowed with flowers of various kinds
and inhabited by ogres of all classes.
(24—26)

तां महागृहसम्बाधां दृष्ट्वा लक्ष्मणपूर्वज:।
नगरीं त्रिदिवप्रख्यां विस्मयं प्राप वीर्यवान्॥ २७॥
The valiant Sri Rama, the eldest
brother of Laksmana, felt amazed to
see the city, which was crammed with
huge mansions and looked like paradise.
(27)
तां रत्नपूर्णां बहुसंविधानां ` च।
पुरीं महायन्त्रकवाटमुख्यां ददर्श रामो महता बलेन॥ २८॥
Accompanied by his large army, Sri
Rama contemplated that city full of jewels,
abounding in products of creative genius,
adorned with its main rows of palaces and
endowed with strong gates fitted with huge
devices. (28)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये JERVIS एकोनचत्वारिंश: AW: ॥ ३९ ॥

Thus ends Canto Thirty-nine in the Yuddhakanda of the glorious Ramayana
of Valmiki, the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

* The length and breadth of the city as given here varies from that given elsewhere—which is a
hundred Yojanas wide and thirty Yojanas 107६---शतयोजनविस्तीर्णा त्रिंशद्योजनमायता. This anomaly is reconciled
by commentators by explaining the present verse as referring to the length and breadth of Lanka proper,

which comprised the residence of Ravana.
