182

mighty princes beheld the great elephant
guarding that quarter, Saumanasa by name,
that resembled a mountain in size. = (20)

ते तं प्रदक्षिणं कृत्वा पृष्टा चापि निरामयम्।
Gt: समुपाक्रान्ता fest सोमवतीं तदा॥ २१॥
Walking round the elephant clockwise
and enquiring after his welfare, they then
dug their way into the northern quarter,
presided over by the moon-god. (21)

sat «= TINE ददृशुर्हिमपाण्डुरम्।
Us भद्रेण वपुषा धारयन्तं महीमिमाम्॥ २२॥
In the north, O chief of the Raghus,
they saw Bhadra, the elephant guarding
that quarter, white as snow, supporting this
globe on his beautiful body. (22)
समालभ्य तत: Ha कृत्वा चैनं प्रदक्षिणम्।
षष्टि पुत्रसहस्राणिं बिभिदुर्वसुधातलम्॥ २३॥
Touching the elephant and walking round
him from left to right, all the sixty thousand
princes set about digging the earth once
more. (23)
तत: प्रागुत्तरां गत्वा सागरा: प्रथितां दिशम्।
रोषादभ्यखनन् सर्वे पृथिवीं सगरात्मजा:॥ २४॥
Proceeding in the celebrated north-
easterly direction, presided over by Lord
Siva and as such held sacred for all holy
undertakings, all the sons of Sagara
continued digging the earth in an agitated
mood. (24)

ते तु Wa महात्मानो भीमवेगा महाबला:।
Cem: कपिलं तत्र वासुदेवं सनातनम्॥ २५॥
wa च तस्य देवस्य चरन्तमविदूरत:।
प्रहर्षमतुलं Wat: सर्वे ते रघुनन्दन॥ २६॥

« VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

All those high-minded and exceedingly
mighty princes, possessed of tremendous
speed, actually beheld there the eternal Lord
Visnu manifested in the form of Sage Kapila,
as well as a horse grazing not very far from
that glorious sage, on which they all
experienced incomparable joy, O scion of

Raghu ! (25-26)
ते तं यज्ञहनं ज्ञात्वा क्रोधपर्याकुलेक्षणा:।
खनित्रलाङ्गलधरा नानावृक्षशिलाधरा: It २७॥
अभ्यधावन्त संक्रुद्धास्तिष्ठ तिष्ठेति चाब्रुवन्।

अस्माकं त्वं fe तुरगं यज्ञियं हृतवानसि॥ २८॥

Thoughtlessly suspecting him to be
the man who had interrupted the sacrificial
performance by stealing away the sacrificial
horse, they felt enraged and rushed towards
him with their eyes bedimmed through
anger, carrying spades and ploughs and
various kinds of trees and rocks, and said,
“Stop! Stop !! You alone have stolen our
sacrificial horse. (27-28)

दुर्मेधस्त्वं हि सम्प्राप्तान् fates न: सगरात्मजान्।
श्रुत्वा aq वचनं तेषां कपिलो रघुनन्दन॥ २९॥
रोषेण महताऽऽविष्टो हुंकारमकरोत् तदा।
ततस्तेनाप्रमेयेण कपिलेन महात्मना।

भस्मराशीकृता: सर्वे काकुत्स्थ सगरात्मजा:॥ Bo Il

“Indeed, you know us to be the sons of
Sagara arrived in a body, O evil-minded
one !” Seized with fury to hear that threat of
theirs, O scion of Raghu, Kapila forthwith
uttered the sound ‘hum’, expressive of
contempt. The very next moment the sons
of Sagara were all burnt and reduced to a
heap of ashes by that high-souled Sage
Kapila of immeasurable glory. (29-30)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये बालकाण्डे
WaT: सर्ग: ॥ ४० ॥

Thus ends Canto Forty in the Balakanda of the glorious Ramayana of Valmiki,
the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

