1140

themselves to death, entertained the horrid
idea that he would eat them all up. (2)

सर्वथा प्रायमासीनान् यदि नो भक्षयिष्यति।
कृतकृत्या भविष्याम: fad सिद्धिमितो गता:॥ ३॥
“If he eats up us, who have sat down
to fast till death, we shall have thoroughly
accomplished our purpose, having attained
speedy success (in the form of death) through
this act of his.” (3)
Wat बुद्धिं ततश्चक्रु: Wa a हरियूथपा:।
अवतार्य गिरे: शरृङ्गाद् गृध्रमाहाङ्गदस्तदा॥४॥
All those monkey leaders subsequently
arrived at this latter conclusion. Having
helped the vulture to descend from the

mountain-peak, Angada then spoke to the
vulture as follows : (4)

बभूवर्क्षरजो WH ats: प्रतापवान्।
ममार्य: पार्थिव: पक्षिन् धार्मिकौ तस्य चात्मजौ ।। ५ ॥

सुग्रीवश्चैव वाली च uit घनबलावुभौ।
लोके विश्रुतकर्माभूद् राजा वाली पिता मम॥ ६॥

“There was a glorious lord of monkeys,
King Rksraja by name, my grandfather, O
bird! And he had two pious sons, Vali and
Sugriva, sprung from his own loins, both
possessed of great strength. My father,
King Vali, was well-known for his exploits in
the world. (5-6)

राजा HAT Wit इक्ष्वाकूणां महारथ:।
Ta दाशरथि: star प्रविष्टो दण्डकावनम्॥ ७॥
लक्ष्मणेन सह Wat वैदेह्या सह भार्यया।
पितुर्निदेशनिरतो धर्मं पन्थानमाश्रित:॥८॥

“The sovereign of the whole earth and

a great chariot warrior born in the line of the
Ikswakus, and son of the late King
DaSaratha, the glorious Rama, who was
wholly intent upon carrying out the command
of his father and had taken to the path of
virtue, entered the forest of Dandaka with
his younger brother, Laksmana, and consort,
Sita (a princess of the Videha territory).
(7-8)

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

तस्य भार्या जनस्थानाद् रावणेन हृता बलात्।
रामस्य तु पितुर्मित्रं जटायुर्नाम गृध्रराट्॥९॥
रावणं विरथं कृत्वा स्थापयित्वा च मैथिलीम्।
परिश्रान्तश्च वृद्धश्च रावणेन हतो रणे॥१०॥

“His consort, Sita, was forcibly borne
away from Janasthana by Ravana. The
king of vultures, Jatayu by name, for his
part, who was a friend of Sri Rama’s father
(Emperor DasSaratha), observed Sita, a
princess of the Videha territory, being borne
away in an aerial car through the airspace.
Having deprived Ravana of his aerial car by
shattering it and placed Sita (a princess of
Mithila) on the ground, Jatayu, who had
been completely exhausted and was aged
too, was slain by Ravana in combat.(9-10)

एवं Jat हतस्तेन रावणेन बलीयसा।
संस्कृतश्चापि रामेण जगाम गतिमुत्तमाम्॥११॥

“In this way the vulture, Jatayu, was
killed by the said Ravana, who was superior
in might, and, having been cremated by Sri
Rama, attained the highest destiny. (11)

ततो मम पितृव्येण सुग्रीवेण महात्मना।
चकार राघव: सख्यं सोऽवधीत् frat मम॥ १२॥
‘Then the celebrated Sr Rama
contracted an alliance with my uncle, the
high-souled Sugriva, and killed my father
(as a token of his friendship). (12)

मम पित्रा निरुद्धो fe ata: सचिवै: सह।
निहत्य वालिनं रामस्ततस्तमभिषेचयत्॥१३॥

“Since Sugriva had been banished with
his ministers by my father, Sri Rama forthwith
installed him on the throne after killing Vall.

(13)
स we स्थापितस्तेन सुग्रीवो arta |
राजा वानरमुख्यानां तेन प्रस्थापिता वयम्॥ १४॥
एवं रामप्रयुक्तास्तु मार्गमाणास्ततस्तत:।
वैदेहीं नाधिगच्छामो wat सूर्यप्रभामिव॥१५॥

“Installed on the throne as the lord of
monkeys by Sri Rama, the aforesaid Sugriva
