136

in you, 0 Rama! The morning twilight has
set in. Therefore, get up, O tiger among men !
Contemplation on the Deity and the daily
routine of duties making for the purification of
the body have to be gone through.” (2)

तस्यर्षे; परमोदारं ada: श्रुत्वा नरोत्तमौ।
स्नात्वा कृतोदकौ वीरौ जेपतु: परमं जपम्॥ ३॥

Hearing the exceedingly gentle
admonition of the celebrated sage,
Viswamitra, the two heroes, Sri Rama and
Laksmana, the foremost among men,
performed their ablutions and, having offered
oblations of water to the sun-god, muttered
the most sacred text, the Gayatri*, other
than which there is no holier text. (3)

Having concluded their morning
devotions (viz., the Sandhya prayers,
Brahma-Yajna or recitation of portions of
the Vedas and other sacred texts as an
offering to Rsis, forming part of the five
major Yajnas, fetching pieces of wood for
being offered to the sacred fire, and so on)
and saluting Viswamitra, rich in asceticism,
the two exceptionally valiant princes, Sri
Rama and Laksmana, felt extremely delighted
and stood before the latter, ready to proceed
further. (4)
तौ प्रयान्तौ महावीर्यौ दिव्यां त्रिपथगां नदीम्।
agit ततस्तत्र सरय्वा: ST शुभे॥५॥

While moving onward from that spot
where they had broken their journey
overnight, the two very mighty princes sighted
the divine river Ganga, which (flows through
heaven, earth and the subterranean regions
and thus) takes a threefold course near its
well-known and blessed confluence with
the Sarayu. (5)
तत्राश्रमपदं पुण्यमृषीणां भावितात्मनाम्।
बहुवर्षसहस्राणि तप्यतां परमं तप:॥६॥

« VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

There they further beheld the holy site
of the hermitages of Rsis of purified mind,
that had been practising the highest form of
asceticism for the past many thousand years.

(6)
तं GBT परमप्रीतौ राघवौ पुण्यमाश्रमम्।
ऊचतुस्तं महात्मानं fama वच:॥७॥

Supremely delighted to behold that
sacred abode of hermits, Sri Rama and
Laksmana, the two scions of Raghu,
addressed the following prayer to the
celebrated ViSwamitra of noble mind: (7)

कस्यायमाश्रम: पुण्य: को न्वस्मिन् वसते पुमान्।
भगवञ्छोतुमिच्छाव: परं कौतूहलं fe नौ॥८॥

“Whose holy hermitage is this? What
personage, we ask you, dwells in it? We
both desire to hear this; for great is our
curiosity in this behalf, O venerable Sir !” (8)
तयोस्तद् वचनं श्रुत्वा weet मुनिपुंगव:।
अब्रवीच्छूयतां wa यस्यायं ya आश्रम:॥९॥

Hearing the aforesaid submission of
the two brothers, ViSwamitra, the foremost
of hermits, heartily laughed and said, “Hear,
O Rama, of him whose former residence
this is. (9)
कंदर्पो मूर्तिमानासीत् काम इत्युच्यते बुधै:।
तपस्यन्तमिह स्थाणुं नियमेन समाहितम्॥१०॥
Pag तु देवेशं गच्छन्तं समसरद्गणम्।
धर्षयामास दुर्मेधा हुंकृतश्च महात्मना॥११॥

“Kandarpa (the god of love), who is
also spoken of by the wise as Kama
(Cupid), was endowed with a living form
in the past. On one occasion the foolish
fellow was bold enough to assail with shafts
of love Lord Siva, the suzerain Lord of
gods—who had been performing austerities
in this very hermitage and remained
uninterruptedly absorbed in deep
meditation—while He was after having
married going out alongwith the entire
host of the forty-nine wind-gods in order

* The scripture tells us: न गायत्र्या: W Wen,
