142

The charming left eye alone, of that
lady of lovely locks—which was screened
with rows of slanting eyelashes, was dark
in the middle, large and white all round and
coppery at the edge—began repeatedly to
throb like a lotus struck gently by a fish. (2)

भुजश्च चार्वञ्चितवृत्तपीन:

अनुत्तमेनाघ्युषित: प्रियेण
चिरिण वाम: समवेपताशु॥ ३॥

Her charming, graceful, rounded and
fleshy left arm too, which deserved to be
painted with excellent black aloe and
sandalwood paste and had been used for
long before this as a pillow by her most
excellent darling, Sri Rama, at once began
to palpitate. (3)
गजेन्द्रहस्तप्रतिमश्च पीन-

स्तयोर्द्वयो: संहतयोस्तु जात:।
प्रस्पन्दमान: पुनरूरुरस्या
रामं पुरस्तात् स्थितमाचचक्षे॥४॥

Again, of her well-knit thighs, the left
one, which was fleshy and beautiful, nay,
which resembled the proboscis of a lordly
elephant and was visibly throbbing—
announced, as it were, the presence of Sri
Rama standing in front of her. (4)
शुभं पुनर्हेमसमानवर्ण-

मीषद्रजोध्वस्तमिवातुलाक्ष्या:; ।
ara: स्थिताया: शिखराग्रदन्त्या:
किंचित् परिस्रंसत चारुगात्र्या:॥ ५ ॥
Moreover, the covering of Sita standing

there, of matchless eyes and charming limbs,
whose teeth resembled the ends of the

« VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

seeds of a pomegranate—which was of
golden hue and was slightly soiled, as it
were, with dust-slipped a bit from her person
in a way which augered well for her. (5)

एतैर्निमित्तैरपरैश्च ay:

संचोदिता प्रागपि साधुसिद्धै:।
वातातपक्लान्तमिव प्प्रणष्टं

वर्षेण बीजं प्रतिसंजहर्ष॥६॥

Reassured by these and other omens
as well, which had come out perfectly true
even before, Sita, of shapely eyelashes,
greatly rejoiced even as a seed blighted by
the wind and the sun comes back of life
through a shower. (6)

स्वक्षिभ्रुकेशान्तमरालपक्ष्म ।
ae बभासे सितशुक्लदंष्टं
राहोर्मुखाच्चन्द्र इव प्रमुक्त:॥७॥

Again, her countenance with its lips
resembling a ripe Bimba fruit in colour and
its beautiful eyes, shapely brows, lovely
locks, curved eyelashes and set white teeth
shone like the full moon released from the
mouth of the demon Rahu. (7)

सा वीतशोका व्यपनीततन्द्रा

शान्तज्वरा हर्षविबुद्धसत्त्वा।
अशोभतार्या वदनेन शुक्ले

शीतांशुना रात्रिरिवोदितेन ।। ८ i

Completely rid of grief, her exhaustion
fully relieved, her fever allayed and her mind
illumined through joy, the noble lady Sita
looked charming with her countenance as a
night with the moon having risen during the
bright fortnight. (8)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये सुन्दरकाण्डे एकोनत्रिंश: सर्ग: ॥ २९ ॥

Thus ends Canto Twenty-nine in the Sundarakanda of the glorious Ramayana of
Valmiki, the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

