1130

Speaking thus to them, Sri Rama
addressed the rest of bears and monkeys

« VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

and said: ‘All right, you all accompany me
as stipulated’. (38)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये उत्तरकाण्डेऽष्टाधिकशततम: A: ॥ १०८ ॥

Thus ends Canto One hundred and eight in the Uttarakanda of the glorious
Ramayana of Valmiki, the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

Canto CIX
Sri Rama ascends heaven with the citizens of Kosala

प्रभातायां तु weal पृथुवक्षा महायशा:।
Ta: कमलपत्राक्ष: पुरोधसमथाब्रवीत्॥१॥
अग्निहोत्रं व्रजत्वग्रे दीप्यमानं wae द्विजै:।
वाजपेयातपत्रं च शोभमानं महापथे॥ २॥

When the night passed and the morning
appeared, the  broad-breasted Rama
possessed of fame and having lotus-like
eyes, then spoke to the chief-priest: ‘May
the Agnihotra (performed by me) go in front,
enkindled with the Brahmanas, and the
Vajapeya umbrella too, with all its beauty on
this final journey.’ (1-2)
ततो वसिष्ठस्तेजस्वी ud निरवशेषत:।
चकार विधिवद् धर्मं महाप्रास्थानिकं विधिम्॥ ३॥

Then the effulgent Vasistha performed

all the rites connected with the final departure
as enjoined by the Sastras. (3)

तत: सूक्ष्माम्बरधरो ब्रह्ममावर्तयन् परम्।
कुशान् गृहीत्वा पाणिभ्यां aa प्रययावथ॥४॥
Then, donning fine garments, and reciting
the chants connected with the Supreme
Brahma, taking the Kusa grass in his hands,
he, Sri Rama, went to Sarayd. (4)

अव्याहरन्क्वचित् किंचिन्निश्चेष्टो नि:सुख: पथि।
निर्जगाम गृहात् तस्माद् दीप्यमानो यथांशुमान्॥ ५॥
Not speaking any word anywhere,
devoid of all action, without comfort, he
went out of the mansion, lustrous as the
sun. (5)

रामस्य दक्षिणे used सपद्मा श्रीरुपाश्रिता।
सव्येऽपि च मही देवी व्यवसायस्तथाग्रत:॥ ६॥
शरा नानाविधाश्चापि धनुरायत्तमुत्तमम्।
तथायुधाश्च a ad aq: पुरुषविग्रहा:॥७॥

On the right side of Sri Rama, was the
lotus-seated Sri and on the left was the
goddess Earth, and the Power of resolutions
personified went ahead. Many types of
arrows, the wonderful well-strong bow and
all his other weapons went in human forms.

(6-7)
वेदा ब्राह्मणरूपेण गायत्री सर्वरक्षिणी।
ओङ्कारोऽथ वषट्कार: Wa राममनुव्रता:॥८॥

The Vedas in the form of Brahmanas,
the (prayer) Gayatri, protector of all the

Omkara, and the Vasatkara, all followed Sri
Rama. (8)
ऋषयश्च महात्मान: सर्व Wa महीसुरा:।
अन्वगच्छन् महात्मानं स्वर्गद्वारमपावरतम्॥९॥
The noble sages and all Brahmanas

followed the noble one to the gates of heaven
which were held open. (9)

तं यान्तमनुगच्छन्ति ह्यन्त:पुरचरा: fea:
सवृद्धबालदासीका: सवर्षवरकिंकरा: ॥ १० ॥
The women residing in female
apartments, together with the old men and
young boys and also the eunuchs and
servants followed him as he went on.
(10)
