« KISKINDHAKANDA +

the commonalty, O
hordes !

न च ते मर्षये पापं क्षत्रियोऽहं कुलोद्गत:।
औरसीं भगिनीं वापि भार्यां वाप्यनुजस्य य:॥ २२॥
Waa नर: कामात् तस्य दण्डो वध: स्मृत:।
भरतस्तु महीपालो वयं त्वादेशवर्तिन:॥ २३॥
“And |, a Ksatriya born of a high
pedigree, cannot brook your sin. Death is
the punishment ordained for a man who
approaches carnally through lust a girl sorung
from his own loins, a sister or a wife of his
own younger brother. In fact, Bharata is the
ruler of the earth, while our duty is to carry
out his behests. (22-23)

त्वं च धर्मादतिक्रान्त: कथं शबक्यमुपेक्षितुम्।
गुरुधर्मव्यतिक्रान्तं प्राज्ञो धर्मेण पालयन्॥ २४॥
भरत: कामयुक्तानां निग्रहे पर्यवस्थित:।
aa तु भरतादेशावधिं peat हरीश्वर।
त्वद्विधान् भिन्नमर्यादान् निग्रहीतुं व्यवस्थिता: ॥ २५ ॥

“And how can you, who have strayed
from the path of virtue, be let go unpunished?
Punishing him who has clearly deviated
from a major duty and cherishing according
to the principles of righteousness a man
scrupulously following his duty, the wise
Bharata is intent upon punishing those who
are swayed by lust. Taking the behests of
Bharata as our authority, O lord of monkeys,
we are bent upon punishing people like you
who have transgressed the bounds of
morality. (24-25)
सुग्रीवेण च मे सख्यं लक्ष्मणेन यथा तथा।
दारराज्यनिमित्तं च नि:श्रेयस्कर: स मे॥ २६॥

“My friendship with Sugriva is as
indissolvable as that with Laksmana. Nay, it
has the recovery of his wife and kingdom
for its motive. And in return he is expected
to do the greatest good to me in the shape
of getting back my lost spouse. (26)
प्रतिज्ञा च मया eat तदा वानरसंनिधौ।
प्रतिज्ञा च He wre मद्बिधेनानवेक्षितुम्॥ २७॥

“Again, at that time (when my friendship

leader of monkey
(21)

999

with Sugriva was solemnized) a plighted
word was given by me in the presence of
other monkeys to get back for him his wife
and sovereignty. And how can a plighted
word be allowed by a man like me to remain
unhonoured? (27)

शासनं तव यद् Gh तद् भवाननुमन्यताम्॥ Re Wl

“Therefore, for these mighty reasons,
which are all broad-based on morality, you
too should approve of your punishment,
which was justified. (28)

सर्वथा ad saa द्रष्टव्यस्तव निग्रह:।
वयस्यस्योपकर्तव्यं धर्ममेवानुपश्यता ।। २९ ॥

“Your punishment should be viewed
by you as wholly in consonance with
righteousness and good offices needs must
be rendered to a friend by one recognizing
one’s duty. (29)
wet त्वयापि तत्कार्यं धर्ममेवानुवर्तता।
श्रूयते मनुना गीतौ श्लोकौ चारित्रवत्सलौ।
गृहीतौ धर्मकुशलैस्तथा तच्चरितं मया॥ ३०॥

“By you too, had you followed the
principle of righteousness, the same course
of action should have been taken by way of
expiation. The following two couplets, devoted
to ideal kingly conduct and accepted as
authoritative by those well-versed in ethics,
are traditionally known to have been sung
by Manu (the earliest and most respected
law-giver). The principle enunciated in them
has been acted upon by me in the way
indicated in them. (30)

राजभिर्धृतदण्डाश्च Heat पापानि मानवा:।
निर्मला: स्वर्गमायान्ति सन्त: सुकृतिनो यथा॥ ३१॥

“They are reproduced below: ‘Men who,
having perpetrated sins, have been subjected
to punishment by kings become stainless
and ascend to heaven like those who have
performed meritorious deeds. (31)

शासनाद्वापि मोक्षाद्वा स्तेन: पापात् प्रमुच्यते।
राजात्वशासन् पापस्य तदवाप्नोति किल्बिषम्॥ ३२॥
