948

assuming any form at will. That ogre,
however, by whom his consort has been
stolen away is not known. (13-14)

दनुर्नाम fed: Ga: शापाद् राक्षसतां गत:।
आख्यातस्तेन सुग्रीव: समर्थो वानराधिप:॥ १५॥

“There was च son of Diti, Danu
(Kabandha) by name, who had by virtue of
an imprecation assumed the state of an
ogre. Sugriva, the powerful overlord of
monkeys, was mentioned to us by him. (15)

a areata महावीर्यस्तव भार्यापहारिणम्।
`एवमुक्त्वा दनु: स्वर्गं भ्राजमानो fest गत:॥ १६॥
“*That exceptionally powerful monkey
will find out the ogre who stole away your
consort!’ Saying so, and emitting light (all-
round), Danu rose to the skies on his way
to heaven. (16)

`एतत् ते सर्वमाख्यातं याथातथ्येन पृच्छत:।
अहं चैव च UAT सुग्रीवं शरणं Adu gol

“All this has been narrated in all sincerity
to you, who inquired about it. Now Sri Rama
as well as myself have sought Sugriva as
our refuge. (17)

we दत्त्वा च वित्तानि प्राप्य चानुत्तमं यश:।
लोकनाथ: पुरा भूत्वा सुग्रीवं नाथमिच्छति॥ १८॥

“Having given away all his riches to
beggars while leaving Ayodhya for the forest
and earned unsurpassed glory, and having
been in the past the protector of the world,
Sri Rama desires to have Sugriva as his
benefactor. (18)
सीता यस्य स्नुषा चासीच्छरण्यो धर्मवत्सल:।
तस्य UA: शरण्यश्च सुग्रीवं शरणं गत:॥१९॥

“Himself affording shelter to others and
fond of virtues, the son of King DaSaratha,
(who was fit to protect others and), whose
daughter-in-law was Sita, has sought Sugriva
as his refuge. (19)

सर्वलोकस्य धर्मात्मा शरण्य: शरणं पुरा।
गुरुर्मे Waa: सोऽयं सुग्रीवं शरणं Wa: it Roll

‘The selfsame Sri Rama (a scion of

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

Raghu), my eldest brother, whose mind is
set on virtue and who was once not only fit
to protect, but the actual protector of the
whole world, has sought Sugriva as his
asylum. (20)

यस्य Wale aad प्रसीदेयुरिमा: प्रजा:।
a रामो वानरेन्द्रस्य प्रसादमभिकांक्षते॥ २१॥

“That Rama, on whose being propitious
all these created beings remain constantly
pleased, seeks the favour of Sugriva, king
of monkeys ! (21)

येन सर्वगुणोपेता: पृथिव्यां सर्वपार्थिवा:।
मानिता: सततं राज्ञा सदा दशरथेन Aue
तस्यायं पूर्वज: पुत्रस्तिषु लोकेषु fasta: |
सुग्रीवं aes तु राम: शरणमागत:॥ २३॥
“Sri Rama, the first-born son, well-known
through all the three worlds, of King
Dasaratha—by whom in reality all the kings
on earth, endowed with all kinds of virtues,
were unceasingly honoured everyday, has
for his part sought Sugriva, the lord of
monkeys, as his refuge. (22-23)

शोकाभिभूते WH तु शोकार्ते शरणं गते।
कर्तुमर्हति सुग्रीव: Ward सह यूथपै:॥ २४॥

“Sugriva alongwith his troop-leaders
ought in his turn to show his grace to Sri
Rama, who is overwhelmed and stricken
with grief and has sought Sugriva as his
refuge.” (24)
एवं ब्रुवाणं सौमित्रिं करुणं साश्रुपातनम्।
हनूमान् प्रत्युवाचेदं वाक्यं वाक्यविशारद:॥ २५॥

To Laksmana (son of Sumitra), speaking
as aforesaid in a pathetic tone accompanied
by a flow of tears, Hanuman, who was
an adept in expression, replied as follows :

(25)
ईदृशा बुद्धिसम्पन्ना जितक्रोधा जितेन्द्रिया:।
RSM वानरेन्द्रेण दिष्ट्या दर्शनमागता:॥ २६॥

“Through good luck people like you,

who are rich in wisdom, have subdued their
anger and mastered their senses, and who
