146

भूताश्चार्था विरुध्यन्ति देशकालविरोधिता: |
विक्लवं दूतमासाद्य तम: सूर्योदये यथा॥ ३७॥
‘Even as darkness disappears वां
sunrise, objects which are all but
accomplished are completely lost at the
hands of a timid or thoughtless messenger
when they are set in opposition to time and
place. (37)

अर्थानर्थान्तरे बुद्धिर्निश्चितापि न शोभते।
चातयन्ति fe कार्याणि gat: पण्डितमानिन: ।॥ ३८ ॥

‘Even a decision duly arrived at by a
ruler in consultation with his ministers
regarding what should be done and what
should be refrained from, does not yield
good results when implemented by a
thoughtless messenger. Indeed messengers
fancying themselves clever but really not
so, bring to nought all undertakings on such
occasions. (38)
न विनश्येत् कथं कार्यं वैक्लव्यं न कथं मम।
लङ्घनं च समुद्रस्य HA नु न qa भवेत्॥३९॥

‘How should | act to ensure that the
purpose may not be frustrated? How should
| guard against thoughtlessness? And how,

| wonder, should | ensure that my leaping
across the sea does not go in vain? (39)

कथं नु खलु वाक्यं मे श्रृणुयान्नोद्विजेत च।
इति संचिन्त्य हनुमांश्चकार मतिमान् मतिम्॥४०॥

‘How indeed should | ensure that Sita
listens to my speech and does not get

« VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

perturbed?’ Pondering thus, the wise
Hanuman made the following resolve: (40)

नैनामुद्वेजयिष्यामि तद्बन्धुगतचेतनाम्॥ ४१॥

‘Singing the praises of her praiseworthy
spouse, Sri Rama of unwearied action, |
shall take care not to frighten her, her mind
being absorbed in her aforesaid lord. (41)

इक्ष्वाकूणां वरिष्ठस्य रामस्य विदितात्मन:।
शुभानि धर्मयुक्तानि वचनानि समर्पयन्॥४२॥
श्रावयिष्यामि सर्वाणि मधुरां waa गिरम्।
श्रद्धास्यति यथा सीता तथा ad समादधे॥४३॥

‘Delivering to her the beautiful message,
conformable to righteousness, of Sri Rama,
the foremost of the Ikswakus and a knower
of the Self, | shall convey it fully, uttering
sweet words, and shall make everything so
intelligible that Sita will give credence to it.’

(42-43)
sta स बहुविधं महाप्रभावो
जगतिपते: प्रमदामवेक्षमाण:।
मधुरमवितथं जगाद वाक्यं
द्रुमविटपान्तरमास्थितो हनूमान्॥ ४४॥

Addressing himself to the young wife
of Sri Rama and remaining seated in the
midst of the boughs of the tree occupied by
him, the celebrated Hanuman, who was
possessed of great valour, made the following

variously-worded sweet and truthful speech.
(44)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये सुन्दरकाण्डे त्रिंश: AWA: ॥ ३० ॥

Thus ends Canto Thirty in the Sundarakanda of the glorious Ramayana of Valmiki,
the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

