380

while, O darling of Sumitra, the agony in the
form of apprehension aroused in her mind.
(7)

न बुद्धिपूर्वं नाबुद्धं स्मरामीह कदाचन।
मातूणां वा पितुर्वाहं कृतमल्पं च विप्रियम्॥८॥
“| do not remember the least offence
ever given by me consciously or unwittingly
to my mothers or to my father in this life. (8)

सत्य: सत्याभिसंधश्च et सत्यपराक्रम:।
परलोकभयाद् भीतो निर्भयोऽस्तु frat मम॥ ९॥

“Let my father—who is ever truthful,
true to his promise, truly valiant and afraid
of falsehood, which brings disaster in the
other world—be rid of fear in the other world
by my redeeming the promise made by him
to Kaikeyi. (9)

तस्यापि fe भवेदस्मिन् कर्मण्यप्रतिसंहृते।
सत्यं नेति मनस्तापस्तस्य तापस्तपेच्च माम्॥१०॥

“Indeed, so long as this business of
installation, is not liquidated, the painful
consciousness that his veracity has not
been vindicated will lurk in his (father’s)
mind too and his agony is sure to distress
me as well. (10)

अभिषेकविधानं तु तस्मात् संहृत्य लक्ष्मण।
अन्वगेवाहमिच्छामि at गन्तुमित: पुर:॥११॥
“Therefore, having done away with this
ceremony of installation, O Laksmana, | for
my part wish to proceed from this city to the
forest soon. (11)

मम प्रव्राजनादद्य कृतकृत्या नृपात्मजा।
Gt भरतमव्यग्रमभिषेचयतां तत:॥१२॥

“Accomplished of purpose as a result
of my banishment, let Kaikeyi (the daughter
of King Aswapati) then install her son,
Bharata, this very day, without any distraction
of mind. (12)

मयि चीराजिनधरे जटामण्डलधारिणि।
गतेऽरण्यं च कैकेय्या भविष्यति मन: सुखम्॥ १३॥

“On my having proceeded to the forest,
clad in the bark of trees and deerskin and

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

wearing a coil of matted locks, the mind of
Kaikeyi will be gratified. (13)

arg: प्रणीता aa मनश्च सुसमाहितम्।
तं नु नार्हामि संक्लेष्टुं प्रव्रजिष्यामि मा चिरम्॥ १४॥
“Surely | ought not to give offence to
Providence by crossing His purpose, as it
is by him that this idea of sending me
away into exile to the forest has been infused
into the mind of Kaikeyi through the
machination of Manthara and her mind
fully set at rest on the question. | shall
accordingly go into exile, let there be no
delay. (14)
Pat Ua सौमित्रे द्रष्टव्यो मत्प्रवासने।
राज्यस्य च वितीर्णस्य gta निवर्तने॥१५॥

“Providence alone should be regarded,
O son of Sumitra, as responsible for sending
me into exile as well as for taking back from
me the sovereignty of Ayodhya offered to
me (15)

— प्रतिपत्तिर्हि कथं स्यान्मम वेदने।
यदि तस्या न भावोऽयं कृतान्तविहितो भवेत्॥ १६ ॥

“How could the resolution of persecuting
me by way of sending me into exile enter
the mind of Kaikey! (my own mother) if this

idea of hers were not prompted by
Providence? (16)
जानासि fe यथा सौम्य न मातृषु ममान्तरम्।

भूतपूर्वं विशेषो at तस्या मयि सुतेऽपि वा॥ १७॥

“For, you already know, O gentle
brother, that no discrimination was ever
made by me between my mothers in the
past nor was any distinction made even by
her between her son and myself. (17)

सोऽभिषेकनिवृत्त्यर्थै: प्रवासार्थैश्च ede:
उग्रैर्वाक्यैरहं तस्या नान्यद् दैवात् समर्थये॥१८॥

“As such | cannot hold anything other
than the will of Providence responsible for
her galling the king with pungent words,
hard to utter (even for any other), urging
him to stop my installation and sending me
into exile. (18)
