* AYODHYAKANDA +

“| am afraid of sin that will be incurred
by me if | fail to help my father in implementing
the boons conferred by him on Kaikeyi as
well as of ruining my prospects in the other
world, O sinless Laksmana ! Hence | do not
install myself in the office of Prince Regent
(by force) today.” (26)

एतदन्यच्च करुणं fara fast agi
अश्रुपूर्णमुखो दीनो निशि तूष्णीमुपाविशत्॥ २७॥

Having wailed piteously as aforesaid
and in many other ways in that lonely forest,
Sri Rama sat quiet during the night, afflicted
as he was, his face bathed in tears. (27)
विलापोपरतं रामं गतार्चिषमिवानलम्।
समुद्रमिव निर्वेगमाश्वासयत लक्ष्मण:॥ २८॥

Laksmana comforted Sri Rama as follows
when the latter had ceased lamenting and
looked like a fire whose flames had gone out
and a sea that had lost its vehemence : (28)

ध्रुवमद्य ut wa अयोध्याऽऽयुधिनां वर।
निष्प्रभा त्वयि निष्क्रान्ते गतचन्द्रेव शर्वरी॥ २९॥

“The city of Ayodhya, O Rama, now
that you have come away from it, has
undoubtedly been divested of its splendour
and resembles a night without the moon, O
jewel among armed warriors ! (29)
नैतदौपयिकं राम यदिदं परितप्यसे।
विषादयसि सीतां च At चैव पुरुषर्षभ॥ ३०॥

“It is not desirable, O Rama, that you
should grieve in this way. You make Sita
and myself too sad thereby, O jewel among
men! (30)

न च सीता त्वया हीना न arent wea
मुहूर्तमपि जीवावो जलान्मत्स्याविवोद्धृतौ॥ ३१॥

“Bereft of you, O scion of Raghu,
neither Sita nor | myself can survive
even for a shortwhile any more than

493

fish taken out of water.

ae ad न wad न सुमित्रां परंतप।
द्रष्टुमिच्छेयमद्याहं स्वर्गं चापि त्वया विना॥ sz il
_ “Today | wish to see neither father nor
Satrughna (my younger brother) nor Sumitra

(my own mother) nor even heaven without
you, O tormentor of foes !” (32)

ततस्तत्र समासीनौ नातिदूरे निरीक्ष्य ताम्।
न्यग्रोधे सुकृतां शय्यां भेजाते धर्मवत्सलौ॥ ३३॥

Perceiving a bed decently prepared by
Laksmana at the foot of the banyan tree not
very far from the place occupied by them,
while they were comfortably seated there,
Sri Rama and Sita, who were tenderly alive
to their duty, then sought the bed. (33)

(31)

प्रपद्य धर्मं सुचिराय राघव:॥ ३४॥

Hearing attentively the excellently-
worded and comprehensive submission of
Laksmana, reproduced above, and
embracing for a fairly lengthy period the
course of conduct prescribed for hermits,
Sri Rama, a scion of Raghu, the tormentor
of foes, resolved to spend all the years of
his exile with Laksmana. (34)

ततस्तु तस्मिन् विजने महाबलौ
महावने राघववंशवर्धनौ |
न तौ wa सम्भ्रममभ्युपेयतु-
ada सिंहौ गिरिसानुगोचरौ॥ ३५॥

Thenceforward the two exceptionally
mighty princes, Sri Rama and Laksmana, the
promoters of the race of Raghu, never
experienced fear or agitation while dwelling
in that great lonely forest any more than a
couple of lions living on a mountain-peak. (35)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्येऽयोध्याकाण्डे तत्रिपञ्चाश: सर्ग: ॥ 43 ॥

Thus ends Canto Fifty-three in the Ayodhyakanda of the glorious Ramayana of
Valmiki, the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

