1034

समुन्मूलय शोकं त्वं व्यवसायं स्थिरीकुरु।

wa: सपरिवारॆ तं राक्षसं हन्तुमर्हसि॥ ३७॥
“Root you out grief once for all and

make your determination firm. Then only

you ought to be able to kill that ogre with his

family. (37)

पथिवीमपि काकुत्स्थ ससागरवनाचलाम्।
परिवर्तयितुं शक्त: fa पुनस्तं fe रावणम्॥ ३८॥
“You are capable, O scion of Kakutstha,
of turning upside down even the earth with
its oceans, forests and mountains, much
more surely you can overthrow the notorious
Ravana. (38)

शरत्कालं प्रतीक्षस्व प्राव्रृट्कालोऽयमागत:।
तत: GTS सगणं रावणं तं वधिष्यसि॥ ३९॥
“Await the autumnal season, the rainy
season has just commenced. Then you will
destroy that Ravana with his kingdom and
army. (39)
अहं I Ua a ate was प्रतिबोधये।
दीप्तैराहुतिभि: काले भस्मच्छन्नमिवानलम्॥४०॥
“| for my part simply rouse by means
of stimulating words your dormant manliness
as one would rekindle a fire covered with

ashes by pouring oblations into it at the
proper time.” (40)

लक्ष्मणस्य fe ag वाक्यं प्रतिपूज्य हितं शुभम्।
waa: सुहृदं स्निग्धमिदं वचनमब्रवीत्॥४१॥

Acclaiming the aforesaid advice of
Laksmana, which was undoubtedly friendly
and salutary too, Sri Rama addressed to
his affectionate brother the following loving
words : (41)

वाच्यं यदनुरक्तेन स्निग्धेन च हितेन al
सत्यविक्रमयुक्तेन तदुक्तं लक्ष्मण त्वया॥४२॥

“Only such advice has been tendered
by you, O Laksmana, as ought to be tendered
by one who is devoted, loving and benevolent
as well as by one who is endowed with
unfailing prowess. (42)

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

एष शोक: परित्यक्त: सर्वकार्यावसादक:।
विक्रमेष्वप्रतिहतं तेज: प्रोत्साहयाम्यहम्॥४३॥
“Grief, which mars all one’s business,
has now been completely shaken off by
me. | shall stimulate my energy, which is
unimpeded on occasions of valour. (43)

शारत्कालं प्रतीक्षिष्ये स्थितोऽस्मि वचने aa
सुग्रीवस्य नदीनां च प्रसादमनुपालयन्॥४४॥

“| shall await the autumnal season and
abide by your counsel, looking forward to
the goodwill of Sugriva and the pellucidity of
the rivers. (44)

उपकारेण वीरस्तु प्रतिकारेण युज्यते।
अकृतज्ञोऽप्रतिकृतो हन्ति सत्त्ववतां मन:॥४५॥

“A heroic soul who has been placed
under an obligation by a friend is invariably
seized with an inclination to repay his debt.
An ungrateful man, who does not repay his
debt, hurts the feelings of those endowed
with goodness.” (45)
ada Gh प्रणिधाय लक्ष्मण:

कृताञ्जलिस्तत् प्रतिपूज्य भाषितम्।
उवाच रामं स्वभिरामदर्शनं
प्रदर्शयन् दर्शनमात्मन: शुभम्॥४६॥

Acclaiming the aforesaid observation
of Sri Rama and concluding that alone to be
just, Laksmana with joined palms replied as
follows to Sri Rama of extremely pleasing
aspect, thereby demonstrating his blessed
judgment : (46)

यथोक्तमेतत् तव सर्वमीप्सितं
नरेन्द्र hat नचिरात् तु AMT: |
जलप्रपातं रिपुनिग्रहे sa: vou

“The monkey-King, Sugriva, will before
long surely accomplish all this desired object
of yours according to your instructions, O
ruler of men! Awaiting the autumn, put you
up with the obstruction caused by the rains,
remaining intent on the destruction of the
enemy. (47)
