* BALAKANDA +

well as the missile called Brahmasira and
even the Aisika (that employed through the
medium of a reed, rush or stem of grass),
O scion of Raghu ! (4—6)
ददामि ते महाबाहो ब्राह्ममस्त्रमनुत्तमम्।
Te द्वे चैव काकुत्स्थ मोदकी rat शुभे॥ oi
प्रदीप्ते नरशार्दूल प्रयच्छामि नॄपात्मज।
धर्मपाशमहँ राम कालपाशं तथैव ane
वारुणं पाशमस्त्रं च ददाम्यहमनुत्तमम्।
अशनी द्वे प्रयच्छामि शुष्कार्दरे रघुनन्दन॥९॥
“lam going to deliver to you, O mighty-
armed prince, the missile presided over by
Brahma, which is excelled by no other missile,
and hand over to you, O tiger among men,
a pair of blessed maces, Modaki and Sikhari
by name, shining brightly, O scion of
Kakutstha ! | also deliver to you, O Rama,
the noose possessed by Dharma, the god of
piety, as well as that wielded by Kala, the
Time-Spirit and the superb missile in the form
of the noose employed by Varuna, the god
presiding over the waters. | further deliver to
you, O scion of Raghu, a pair of ASanis, one
dry and the other moist. (7—9)
ददामि चास्त्रं पैनाकमस्त्रं नारायणं तथा।
आग्नेयमस्त्रं दयितं frat नाम AA: oll
“| also deliver to you the missile
presided over by Lord Siva, the Wielder of
the bow named Pinaka and the missile
presided over by Lord Narayana as well as
the well-known missile Sikhara by name,
presided over by and beloved of Agni, the god
of fire. (10)

वायव्यं wat am ददामि aa ara
अस्त्रं हयशिरो नाम क्रौञ्चमस्त्रं ada च॥११॥

“| further deliver to you, O sinless one,
the missile par excellence presided over by
the wind-god, the missile named Hayasiras,
presided over by Lord Hayagriva, who bears
the head of a horse, as well as the missile
called Kraufica. (11)

शक्तिद्वयं च काकुत्स्थ ददामि aa waa
कङ्कालं मुसलं at कापालमथ किङ्किणीम्॥ १२॥

147

वधार्थं रक्षसां यानि ददाम्येतानि सर्वश:।
वैद्याधरं महास्त्रं च नन्दनं A नामत:॥१३॥
असिरत्नं महाबाहो ददामि = Jarret
गन्धर्वमस्त्रं dad wet AM नामत:॥१४॥
प्रस्वापनं प्रशमनं cf सौम्यं च waa
वर्षणं शोषणं चैव संतापनविलापने॥ १५॥
met wa git कंदर्पदयितं तथा।
गान्धर्वमस्त्रं dad amd नाम नामत:॥१६॥

“| hand over to you, O Rama, a scion
of Kakutstha, a pair of Saktis (javelins—the
one presided over by Lord Visnu and the
other by Lord Siva) as also Kankala, the
dreadful Musala, the Kapala and Kinkini,
missiles wielded by the demons. | deliver to
you all these missiles, which are capable of
destroying the ogres. | hand over to you, O
mighty-armed son of Dasaratha (a jewel
among men), a great missile used by the
Vidyadharas, viz., the well-known excellent
sword, Nandana by name. | further deliver
to you, O scion of Raghu, the celebrated
missile beloved of the Gandharvas, Mohana
by name (so-called because it is capable of
stupefying the enemy), the soporific missile,
Praswapana, the gentle missile PraSamana,
which possesses the virtue of pacifying the
anger of the enemy, as well as the missiles
Varsana, Sosana, Santapana and Vilapana,
which possess the virtues of discharging
showers, sucking up moisture, releasing
excessive heat and making the enemy wail,
respectively, as well as the formidable missile
Madana, which inebriates the enemy, beloved
of Kandarpa, the god of love, and the well-
known missile beloved of the Gandharvas,
Manava by name. (12—16)
प्रतीच्छ नरशार्दूल राजपुत्र महायश ॥ १७॥

तामसं नरशार्दूल सौमनं च महाबलम्।
सवर्त wat दुर्धर्षं मौसलं च नृपात्मज॥१८॥
सत्यमस्त्रं महाबाहो aa मायामयं परम्।
At तेज:प्रभं नाम परतेजोऽपकर्षणम्॥१९॥
दारुणं च भगस्यापि शीतेषुमथ AMATI Ro I
