488

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA +

Canto LIV

An encounter between Vajradarhstra and
Angada, who kills the former

स्वबलस्य च घातेन अङ्गदस्य बलेन च।
Tara: क्रोधमाविष्टो वज्रदंष्दो महाबल:॥१॥
The ogre Vajradamstra, who was
endowed with extraordinary might, gave
way to anger at the destruction of his army
and the display of might on the part of
Angada. (1)

विस्फार्यं च धनुर्घोरं शक्राशनिसमप्रभम्।
वानराणामनीकानि प्राकिरच्छरवृष्टिभि: ।। २॥

Nay, stretching his formidable bow,
which cast its splendour like the thunderbolt
of Indra, the ruler of gods, he assailed the
simian ranks with showers of shafts. (2)

राक्षसाश्चापि मुख्यास्ते we समवस्थिता:।
नानाप्रहरणा: शूरा: WaT तदा रणे॥३॥
Firmly seated in chariots and armed
with weapons of every kind, the other
well-known and valiant principal ogres too
fought steadily at that juncture on the field of
battle. (3)
वानराणां च शूरास्तु ते Wa प्लवगर्षभा:।
अयुध्यन्त शिलाहस्ता: समवेता: समन्तत:॥४॥
Gathered together on all sides, all the
foremost of monkeys for their part, those

who were gallant among them contended,
rocks in hand. (4)

तत्रायुधसहस्राणि तस्मिन्नायोधने भृशम्।
राक्षसा: कपिमुख्येषु पातयांचक्रिरे तदा॥५॥
In that famous battle the ogres
repeatedly hurled on the foremost of monkeys
thousands of missiles at that time. (5)

वानराश्चैव रक्ष:सु गिरिव्रक्षान् महाशिला:।
Want: पातयामासुर्मत्तवारणसंनिभा: It ६ ॥

Nay, the most heroic monkeys too,

who closely resembled elephants in rut,
showered down hillocks and trees as well
as huge rocks on the ogres. (6)
शूराणां युध्यमानानां समरेष्वनिवर्तिनाम्।
तद् राक्षसगणानां च सुयुद्धुं समवर्तत॥७॥
A furious struggle raged between the
belligerent troops of monkeys and ogres,
who were all valiant and never retreated in
battle. (7)
प्रभिन्नशिरस: केचिच्छिन्नै: पादैश्च बाहुभि:।
शस्तैर्दितदेहास्तु रुधिरेण समुक्षिता:॥८॥
Some had their heads severed, while
others were seen with their arms and feet
lopped off. Still others, whose bodies were
mangled with weapons, were bathed in blood.
(8)
wat राक्षसाश्चैव sea गां समाश्रिता:।
कङ्कगृध्रबलाढ्याश्च गोमायुकुलसंकुला: teu
Monkeys and ogres too lay stretched
on the ground, a prey to buzzards, vultures
and crows and surrounded by troops of
jackals. (9)
कबन्धानि समुत्पेतुर्भीरूणां भीषणानि वै।
भुजपाणिशिरश्छिन्नाश्छिन्नकायाश्च भूतले॥ १०॥
Headless trunks leapt up, actually
causing fear to the pusillanimous. Ogres
whose arms, hands and heads had been
severed and those whose trunks had been

hacked to pieces lay on the earth’s surface.
(10)
वानरा राक्षसाश्चापि निपेतुस्तत्र भूतले।
ततो वानरसैन्येन wet निशाचरम्॥११॥
प्राभज्यत बलं सर्वं वज्रदंष्ट्रस्य पश्यत:।
राक्षसान् भयवित्रस्तान् हन्यमानान् प्लवंगमै: ।। १२॥
