# YUDDHAKANDA #

“Restore yourself to confidence, as well
as me, forlorn as | am, O monkey! Fear of
death does not haunt those who are devoted
to truthfulness and piety.” (33)

एवमुक्त्वा ततस्तस्य जलक्लिन्नेन पाणिना।
सुग्रीवस्य शुभे नेत्रे प्रममार्ज विभीषण:॥ ३४॥

Having spoken as aforesaid, Vibhisana
then wiped clean with his hand dipped in
water the beautiful eyes of the celebrated
Sugriva. (34)

aa: सलिलमादाय विद्यया परिजप्य a
सुग्रीवनेत्रे धर्मात्मा प्रममार्ज विभीषण:॥ ३५॥

Taking water in his hand दाप
consecrating it with the utterance of a sacred
text, Vibhisana, whose mind was set on
virtue, then washed with it the eyes of
Sugriva. (35)

विमृज्य act तस्य कपिराजस्य धीमत:।
अब्रवीत् कालसम्प्राप्तमसम्भ्रान्तमिदं वच:॥ ३६॥

Having wiped clean the face of that
sagacious ruler of monkeys, Vibhisana
addressed to him the following opportune
words, which were free from perplexity:

(36)

न काल: कपिराजेन्द्र वैक्लव्यमवलम्बितुम्।
अतिस्नेहोऽपि कालेऽस्मिन् मरणायोपकल्पते॥ ३७॥

“This is not the moment to give way
to faint-heartedness, O suzerain lord of
monkeys! Excessive emotion too at this
juncture will lead to destruction. (37)

तस्मादुत्सृज्य वैक्लव्यं सर्वकार्यविनाशनम्।

fet रामपुरोगाणां सैन्यानामनुचिन्तय॥ ३८॥
“Therefore, shaking off __ faint-

heartedness, which frustrates all one’s ends,

contemplate the good of the troops, which
have Sri Rama for their leader. (38)

अथ वा रक्ष्यतां Wal यावत्संज्ञाविपर्यय:।
लब्धसंज्ञौ fe काकुत्स्थौ wet नौ व्यपनेष्यत: 138 I

“Or, let Sri Rama be protected till his

461

unconsciousness lasts. Having regained
their consciousness, the two scions of
Kakutstha will undoubtedly dispel our fear
once for all. (39)

नैतत् किंचन रामस्य न च रामो मुमूर्षति।
नह्येनं हास्यते लक्ष्मीर्दुर्लभा या गतायुषाम्॥४०॥
“This calamity is nothing to Sri Rama
nor is Sri Rama going to die; for bodily
splendour, which is difficult to retain for
those whose sands of life have run out, is
not abandoning him. (40)

तस्मादाश्वासयात्मानं बलं चाश्वासय स्वकम्।
यावत्सैन्यानिसर्वाणिफू; संस्थापयाम्यहम्॥ ४१॥
“Therefore, reassure yourself and

steady your life-breath till | restore all the
ranks to confidence. (41)

Ua हि फुल्लनयनास्त्रासादागतसाध्वसा:।
कर्णे aut प्रकथिता हरयो हरिसत्तम॥४२॥

“Their eyes dilated through fear, the
monkeys, who are seized with consternation,
are actually carrying the news about Sri
Rama’s swoon from ear to ear, O jewel
among monkeys! (42)

मां तु दृष्ट्वा प्रधावन्तमनीकं सम्प्रहर्षितम्।
त्यजन्तु हरयस्त्रासं भुक्तपूर्वामिव स्रजम्॥४३॥
“Let the monkeys for their part shed all
fear, even as one would discard a garland
already enjoyed, on seeing me running about
to reassure the ranks and beholding the
army overjoyed on being reassured by me”.
(43)

समाश्चास्य तु सुग्रीवं राक्षसेन्द्रो विभीषण:।
fagd वानरानीकं तत् समाश्वासयत् पुन:॥४४॥
Having restored Sugriva to confidence,
Vibhisana the prospective ruler of ogres, for
his part reassured once again the afore
said army of monkeys, which had taken to
its heels. (44)

इन्द्रजित् तु महामाय: सर्वसैन्यसमावृत:।
विवेश नगरीं लङ्कां पितरं चाभ्युपागमत्॥४५॥
