556

see that city, which had shone at one time
like Amaravati, the capital of Indra in paradise,
with its crossroads, houses and streets
desolate and its doors and bolts soiled with
dust. (45)

aya पश्यन् मनसोऽप्रियाणि
यान्यन्यदा नास्य पुरे बभूवु:।

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

अवाक्शिरा दीनमना न Be:
पितुर्महात्मा प्रविवेश वेश्म॥४६॥

Beholding things distasteful to the mind,
things which had never come to pass in his
city before, the high-souled Bharata became
cheerless and entered his father’s apartments
distressed in mind, his head hung down. (46)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्येऽयोध्याकाण्डे एकसप्ततितम: सर्ग: ॥ ७१ ॥

Thus ends Canto Seventy-one in the Ayodhyakanda of the glorious Ramayana of
Valmiki, the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

Canto LXXII

Entering his father’s apartments and not finding him there, Bharata moves to his
mother’s apartments and, having communicated to her the welfare of his
maternal grandfather and others on being questioned by her, inquires of
her the whereabouts of his father. Kaikeyi then breaks to him the
news of his father’s death, attributing it to Sri Rama’s exile and
holding herself responsible for the latter, and after comforting
him calls upon him to get himself installed on the
throne after finishing his father’s obsequies

अपश्यंस्तु ततस्तत्र पितरं पितुरालये।
जगाम भरतो द्रष्टुं मातरं मातुरालये॥१॥
Not finding his father in the latter's
apartments in the palace, Bharata for his
part then proceeded to see his mother in
her apartments. (1)
अनुप्राप्तं तु तं gear कैकेयी प्रोषितं सुतम्।
उत्पपात तदा हृष्टा त्यक्त्वा सौवर्णमासनम्॥ २॥
Rejoiced to see her aforesaid son, who
had long been absent from home, returned,
Kaikeyi for her part sprang on her feet at
once, quitting her seat of gold. (2)

a प्रविश्यैव धर्मात्मा स्वगृहं श्रीविवर्जितम्।
भरत: प्रेक्ष्य जग्राह जनन्याश्चरणौ शुभौ॥ ३॥
Immediately on entering his mother’s

apartments and observing them completely
shorn of splendour, the celebrated Bharata,

whose mind was given to piety, clasped his
mother’s lovable feet. (3)

तं offs समुपाघ्राय परिष्वज्य यशस्विनम्।
अङ्के भरतमारोप्य we समुपचक्रमे॥४॥
Duly smelling his head as a token of
motherly affection and embracing the
illustrious Bharata and seating him on her
lap, she coolly proceeded to question him
as follows : (4)

अद्य ते कतिचिद् रात्र्यश्च्युतस्यार्यकवेश्मन:।
अपि नाध्वश्रम: शीघ्रं रथेनापततस्तव॥५॥

“How many nights have elapsed today
since you departed from your maternal
grandfathers abode and was not fatigue
experienced by you in the course of the
long and tedious journey while you rode fast
in your chariot? (5)
