« KISKINDHAKANDA +

Hearing the submission of Hanuman
and appearing most good-looking, Sugriva,
the overlord of monkeys, lovingly approached
and submitted as follows to Sri Rama (a
scion of Raghu) : (8)
भवान् धर्मविनीतश्च सुतपा: सर्ववत्सल:।
आख्याता वायुपुत्रेण Arad A भवद्गुणा:॥ ९॥

“You have been trained in the practice
of righteousness, and are highly ascetic
and fond of all; your virtues have already
been recounted by Hanuman, son of the
wind-god, in their reality. (9)
तन्ममैवैष सत्कारो लाभश्चैवोत्तम: will
यत्त्वमिच्छसि सौहार्दं वानरेण Wat सह॥ १०॥

“It is an honour to myself and my
foremost gain too, my lord, that you seek
amity with me, a monkey. (10)
wad यदि A सख्यं बाहुरेष प्रसारित:।
गृह्यतां पाणिना पाणिर्मर्यादा बध्यतां ध्रुवा॥११॥

“If my friendship is acceptable to you,
here is my hand extended before you. Let
this hand be clasped with yours and an
abiding pact entered into with me.” — (11)

एतत् तु वचनं श्ला सुग्रीवस्य सुभाषितम्।

सम्प्रहष्टमना sed पीडयामास पाणिना॥१२॥
Extremely delighted at heart to hear

this beautifully-worded submission of Sugriva,

Sri Rama for his part pressed his hand with
his own. (12)

Be: सौहृदमालम्ब्य पर्यष्वजत पीडितम्।
ततो हनूमान् संत्यज्य भिक्षुरूपमरिदम:॥ १३॥
काष्ठयो: स्वेन रूपेण जनयामास पावकम्।
दीप्यमानं ततो वह्निं पुष्पैरभ्यर्च्य सत्कृतम्॥१४॥
तयोर्मध्ये तु सुप्रीतो निदधौ सुसमाहित:।
ततोऽग्निं दीप्यमानं तौ चक्रतुश्च प्रदक्षिणम्॥ १५॥
सुग्रीवो राघवश्चैव वयस्यत्वमुपागतौ।
ad: सुप्रीतमनसौ तावुभौ हरिराघवौ॥१६॥
अन्योन्यमभिवीक्षन्तौ न तृप्तिमभिजग्मतु:।
त्वं वयस्योऽसि हृद्यो मे ह्येकं दु:खं TS च नौ ।। ou
Gia wad वाक्यमित्युवाच प्रहृष्टवत्।
Ad: सुपर्णबहुलां भङ्क्त्वा शाखां सुपुष्पिताम्॥ १८ ॥

951

सालस्यास्तीर्य सुग्रीवो निषसाद सराघव:।
लक्ष्मणायाथ सहृष्टो STAT मारूतात्मज: ॥ १९॥

शाखां चन्दनवृक्षस्य ददौ परमपुष्पिताम्।
ad: We: सुग्रीव: श्लक्ष्णं मधुरया गिरा॥ २०॥

प्रत्युवाच तदा रामं हर्षव्याकुललोचन:।
ae विनिकृतो wa चरामीह भयार्दित:॥ २१॥
Nay, adopting a friendly attitude, he
joyously embraced Sugriva, who had been
subjected to oppression. Giving up the form
of a mendicant (recluse), and appearing in
his own native form, Hanuman, the tamer of
his foes, thereupon lighted a fire out of a pair
of logs of wood. Highly pleased and fully
composed, Hanuman for his part thereupon
placed the fire, after it had been honoured by
being worshipped with flowers, between
Sri Rama and Sugriva. Having contracted
friendship (with each other), the aforesaid
Sugriva and Sri Rama (a scion of Raghu) too
then went round the inflamed fire clockwise.
Highly delighted in mind, both the aforesaid
friends, Sugriva (a monkey) and Sri Rama (a
scion of Raghu) did not experience satiety
while gazing on each other. Full of excessive
joy, Sugriva spoke as follows to Sri Rama (a
scion of Raghu) : “Since you are now a friend
beloved of my heart, our woe and joy are
one.” Breaking a bough of a sal tree, laden
with flowers and thick with beautiful leaves,
and laying it down, Sugriva then sat down on
it with Sri Rama (a scion of Raghu). Highly
rejoiced, Hanuman, son of the wind-god, now
offered to Laksmana a fully blossomed bough
of a sandalwood tree. Highly rejoiced, Sugriva
thereupon gently submitted forthwith in a
sweet tone as follows to Sri Rama, his eyes
bedimmed with joy : “Having been exiled (by
my elder brother, Vali), | move about in this
forest, oppressed as | am with fear, O Rama !
(13—21)

हृतभार्यो वने त्रस्तो दुर्गमेतदुपाश्रित:।
सोऽहं त्रस्तो वने भीतो वसाम्युद्भ्रान्तचेतन:॥ २२॥

वालिना निकृतो wrt कृतवैरश्च राघव।
वालिनो मे महाभाग भयार्तस्याभयं HS I २३॥
