428

दात्यूहकोयष्टिकैर्नृत्यमानैश्च बर्हिणै:।
et परभृतानां च शुश्रुवे वननिर्झरे॥९॥
Vying with Caitraratha (the garden of
Kubera, the god of riches) and resembling
Nandana (the garden of Indra, the ruler of
gods), the principal garden of Lahka—which
was lovely and delightful to the mind, green
in all seasons and full of bees—looked
charming with gallinules, lapwings, herons
and dancing peacocks. The warbling of
cuckoos was also heard in that garden
abounding in cascades. (8-9)

नित्यमत्तविहंगानि भ्रमराचरितानि a
कोक्खिग्ङ्कृखण्डानिबिहगाभिक्तानि च॥ १०॥

विविशुस्ते ततस्तानि वनान्युपवनानि च॥११॥
Ber: प्रमुदिता वीरा eta: कामरूपिण:।
तेषां प्रविशतां तत्र वानराणां महौजसाम्॥१२॥
पुष्पसंसर्गसुरभिर्ववौ घ्राणसुखोऽनिल:।
ara तु हरिवीराणां यूथान्निष्क्रम्य ae: |
सुग्रीवेणाभ्यनुज्ञाता लङ्कां जग्मु: पताकिनीम्॥ १३॥
वित्रासयन्तो विहगान् ग्लापयन्तो मृगद्विपान्।
कम्पयन्तश्च at लङ्कां Ae: स्वैर्नदतां AT: evil
कुर्वन्तस्ते महावेगा महीं चरणपीडिताम्।
रजश्च Aedated जगाम चरणोत्थितम्॥१५॥

Moving from that mountain-top the valiant
monkeys, who were able to change their
form at will and felt highly rejoiced and
thrilled with joy, entered the aforesaid groves
and gardens, which were inhabited by birds
constantly in heat and frequented by bees,
whose clusters of trees were crowded with
cuckoos, nay, which were rendered noisy
by birds and filled with the music of fork-
tailed drongoes and the cries of ospreys,
and which resounded with the noise of
wagtails and the cries of cranes. As the
monkeys, who were all endowed with
extraordinary energy, penetrated deep into
that grove, a breeze redolent through contact

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA +

with flowers and gentle as breath, blew.
Breaking away from the company of monkey
heroes, as permitted by Sugriva, other
well-known monkey leaders, however, the
foremost of those capable of roaring sought
Lanka, dressed with pennons, terrifying the
birds, dispiriting the deer and elephants
and shaking the aforesaid Lanka with their
roars, nay, trampling down the earth in
their great impetuosity. Nay, the dust
raised by their footfalls rose upwards all at
once. (10—15)

ऋक्षा: सिंहाश्च महिषा वारणाश्च मृगा: TT: |
तेन शब्देन वित्रस्ता जग्मुर्भीता दिशो दश॥ १६॥
Alarmed by that roar, bears and lions,

buffaloes, elephants, deer and birds ran in
panic in all the ten directions. (16)

forat तु त्रिकूटस्य प्रांशु चैकं दिविस्पृशम्।
समन्तात् पुष्पसंछन्नं महारजतसंनिभम्॥ १७॥
शतयोजनविस्तीर्णं विमलं चारुदर्शनम्।
vee श्रीमन्महच्चैव दुष्प्रापं शकुनैरपि॥ १८ I
मनसापि दुरारोहं किं पुन: कर्मणा जनै:।
निविष्टा तस्य शिखरे लङ्का रावणपालिता॥१९॥

There was a lofty peak of the Trikuta
mountain, which seemed to touch the skies,
which was thickly covered with blossom on
all sides and sparkled like gold, which
extended over an area of one hundred
Yojanas (or eight hundred miles), which
was Stainless, graceful to behold, smooth,
splendid and vast too, difficult of access
even to birds and hard to scale even in
thought, much less in action, for men. Lanka,
which was ruled over by Ravana, was
situated on this peak of the aforesaid
mountain. (17—19)
दशयोजनविस्तीर्णा विंशद्योजनमायता।

सा पुरी गोपुरैरुच्चै: पाण्डुराम्बुदसंनिभै:।
काञ्चनेन च शालेन राजतेन च शोभते॥ oll

Ten Yojanas (or eighty miles) wide and
twenty Yojanas (or one hundred and sixty
