* AYODHYAKANDA +

delightful to the touch and the base of whose
fingers was exceptionally soft, those large-
eyed ladies wiped the dust off Sri Rama’s
back. (19)
सौमित्रिरपि ता: wat मातृ: सम्प्रेक्ष्य दु:खित:।
अभ्यवादयदासक्तं ST रामादनन्तरम्॥ २०॥
Distressed to perceive all the aforesaid
mothers, Laksmana (son of Sumitra) too
fondly greeted them immediately after Sri
Rama. (20)
यथा Wa तथा तस्मिन् Bat वव्रृतिरे fara: |
att दशरथाज्जाते लक्ष्मणे शुभलक्षणे॥ २१॥
All the ladies behaved towards the
celebrated Laksmana, sprung from the loins
of Dasaratha, who was endowed with
auspicious bodily marks, in the same way
as they did towards Sri Rama. (21)

सीतापि चरणांस्तासामुपसंगृह्य दु:खिता।
श्रश्रूणामश्रुपूर्णाक्षी सम्बभूवाग्रत: स्थिता॥ २२॥
Holding firmly the feet of the said
mothers-in-law, Sita too stood agonized
before them with her eyes full of tears. (22)
तां परिष्वज्य दु:खार्ता माता दुहितरं यथा।
वनवासकृतां दीनां कौसल्या वाक्यमब्रतीत्॥ २३॥
Embracing her, as a mother would
embrace her own daughter, the sorrow-
stricken Kausalya spoke as follows to Sita,
who looked withered through exile in the
forest : (23)

वैदेहराजन्यसुता स्नुषा दशरथस्य च।
रामपत्नी कथं ga सम्प्राप्ता fast वने॥ २४॥

“| wonder how the consort of Rama,
daughter of Janaka (a royal personage of
the Videha clan) and daughter-in-law of
Emperor DaSaratha, has undergone suffering
in a lonely forest. (24)
पद्ममातपसंतप्तं परिक्लिष्टमिवोत्पलम्।
काञ्चनं रजसा ध्वस्तं क्लिष्टं चन्द्रमिवाम्बुदै: 1 २५ ॥
मुखं ते प्रेक्ष्य मां शोको दहत्यग्निरिवाश्रयम्।
yet मनसि वैदेहि व्यसनारणिसम्भव:॥ २६॥

“The fire of grief produced by the

663

firewood of adversity and existing in my
mind, O princess of the Videha kingdom,
burns me to the core even as the element
of fire consumes the very substance that
sustains it, when | gaze on your countenance
resembling a lotus scorched by the sun, a
crushed lily, gold soiled with dust and the
moon obscured by clouds.” (25-26)
त्रुवन्त्यामेवमार्तायां जनन्यां भरताग्रज:।
पादावासाद्य जग्राह वसिष्ठस्य च राघव:॥ २७॥
Reaching the feet of Vasistha, while
his distressed mother was speaking as
aforesaid, Sri Rama, a scion of Raghu, the
elder brother of Bharata, clasped them. (27)

पुरोहितस्याग्निसमस्य तस्य वै

बृहस्पतेरिन्द्र इवामराधिप:।
We पादौ सुसमृद्धतेजस:

सहैव तेनोपविवेश राघव:॥ २८॥

Holding the feet of the said priest—
who was possessed of very great splendour
and resembled the fire-god—even as Indra,
the ruler of gods, would clasp the feet of
Brhaspati, the preceptor of gods, Sri Rama
(a scion of Raghu) took his seat with Vasistha
himself. (28)

dat जघन्यं सहितै: स्वमन्तिभि:

पुरप्रधानैश्च तथैव सैनिकै:।
जनेन धर्मज्ञतमेन धर्मवा-

नुपोपविष्टो भरतस्तदाग्रजम्॥ २९॥

Thereupon alongwith his __ friends,
counsellors and the foremost of citizens as
well as with the troops and men who knew
best what is right, the celebrated Bharata,
who was full of piety, sat down on that
occasion close to his elder brother, Sri
Rama, at his back. (29)

उपोपविष्टस्तु तदातिवीर्यवां-
स्तपस्विवेषेण समीक्ष्य राघवम्।
श्रिया ज्वलन्तं भरत: कृताञ्जलि-
GOT महेन्द्र: प्रयत: प्रजापतिम्॥ ३०॥

Perceiving Sri Rama, a scion of Raghu,
