+ UTTARAKANDA +

Hearing these words of Sri Rama, all
those Rsis then conveyed to Him how Lavana
fared. (2)
आहार: adarat विशेषेण च तापसा:।
sant रौद्रता fet वासो मधुवने qa sil

His food comprises all beings, specially
ascetics. His conduct is full of cruelty, every
moment. His residence is in Madhuvana.

(3)
हत्वा बहुसहस्राणि सिंहव्याघ्रमृगाण्डजान्।
मानुषांश्चैव कुरुते नित्यमाहारमाह्निकम्॥४॥

Having killed many thousands of lions,
tigers, deers and birds and also human beings,
he makes his daily meals of them. (4)
ततोऽन्तराणि सत्त्वानि Glad स महाबल:।
dat समनुप्राप्ते व्यादितास्य इवान्तक:॥५॥

Then all other types of beings too, the

mighty Lavana devoures as if he was Death,
with open mouth at the time. (5)

तच्छुत्वा राघवो वाक्यमुवाच स महामुनीन्।
चातयिष्यामि aq रक्षो व्यपगच्छतु वो भयम्॥६॥
Hearing this, the scion of Raghu (Sri
Rama) said to the great ascetics: ‘I shall kill
that Raksasa, may your fears be dispelled.’
(6)

प्रतिज्ञाय तथा तेषां मुनीनामुग्रतेजसाम्।
स wd सहितान् सर्वानुवाच रघुनन्दन:॥७॥
Thus having promised to the ascetics,
possessed of great vigour, that descendant
of the Raghus, Sri Rama, spoke to his
brothers altogether. (7)

को हन्ता लवणं वीर: कस्यांश: स विधीयताम्।
भरतस्य महाबाहो: शत्रुघ्नस्य च धीमत:॥८॥
“Who the brave shall kill Lavana, to
whom shall Lavana be assigned, to long-
armed Bharata or Satrughna, the wise one?’
(8)

राघवेणैवमुक्तस्तु भरतो वाक्यमब्रवीत्।
अहमेनं वधिष्यामि ममांश: a विधीयताम्॥९॥

When Sri Rama spoke thus, Bharata

1039

said: ‘I shall kill him. Kindly assign him to
me’. (9)

भरतस्य वच: श्रुत्वा धैर्यशौर्यसमन्वितम्।
लक्ष्मणावरजस्तस्थौ हित्वा सौवर्णमासनम्॥१०॥
शत्रुघ्नस्त्वब्रवीद् वाक्यं प्रणिपत्य नराधिपम्।
कृतकर्मा महाबाहुर्मध्यमो रघुनन्दन॥११॥

Hearing the words. of Bharata,
(Satrughna) younger brother of Laksmana,
stood up leaving his golden seat. Having
bowed to the King, Sri Rama, Satrughna
said: The middle one, Bharata, among us,
possessed of long arms, O descendant of
Raghu, has already performed his share.

(10-11)

आर्येण fe पुरा शून्या त्वयोध्या परिपालिता।
संतापं wa Ha आर्यस्यागमनं प्रति॥१२॥

‘He protected Ayodhya in your absence
undergoing so much mental agony, awaiting
your arrival. (12)

Gam च apie अनुभूतानि पार्थिव।
शयानो दु:खशय्यासु नन्दिग्रामे महायशा:॥१३॥
फलमूलाशनो भूत्वा जटी चीरधरस्तथा।
अनुभूयेदृशं दु:खमेष राघवनन्दन:॥१४॥
‘Here many sufferings were endured by
him, O king: sleeping on uncomfortable bed
in the Nandigrama, this noble one consuming
only fruits and roots, with matted hair, and dress
of bark, has greatly experienced sorrow, O
descendant of the Raghus. (13-14)

प्रेष्ये मयि स्थिते राजन् न भूय: क्लेशमाप्नुयात्।
तथा ब्रुवति शत्रुघ्ने Waa: पुनरब्रवीत्॥१७५॥

‘While I, the servant, वा available,
Bharata should not again be put to trouble.
After Satrughna said so, Sri Rama, the scion
of the Raghus again spoke these words: (15)
एवं Vad काकुत्स्थ क्रियतां मम शासनम्।
राज्ये त्वामभिषेक्ष्यामि मधोस्तु ANT शुभे॥१६॥
निवेशय महाबाहो भरतं यद्यवेक्षसे।
weed कृतविद्यश्च समर्थश्च निवेशने॥१७॥
नगरं यमुनाजुष्टं तथा जनपदान् शुभान्।

यो fe वंशं समुत्पाट्य पार्थिवस्य निवेशने॥ १८ ॥
