1078

अरजापि रुदन्ती सा आश्रमस्याविदूरत:।

« VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

near the hermitage, and in great fright

प्रतीक्षते सुसंत्रस्ता पितरं देवसंनिभम्॥ १८ ॥ | waited for her father, who was just like a

That Araja too,

remained weeping | god.

(18)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये उत्तरकाण्डेऽशीतितम: FW: ॥ ८० il

Thus ends Canto Eighty in the Uttarakanda of the glorious Ramayana of Valmiki,
the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

Canto LXXXI

End of king Danda, his family and kingdom,
as a result of Sukra’s curse

a मुहूर्तादुपश्रुत्य देवर्षिरमितप्रभ:।
स्वमाश्रमं शिष्यवृत: क्षुधार्त: संन्यवर्तत॥ १॥
Having heard the account of Araja that
gracious divine Rsi Bhargava came back at
once to his hermitage surrounded by his
pupils, although bitten by hunger. (1)
सोऽपश्यदरजां dat wer समभिप्लुताम्।
ज्योत्स्नामिव ग्रहग्रस्तां weet न विराजतीम्॥ २॥
He saw the pitiable Araja covered with
semen, as the full-moon at dawn faded out
due to being eclipsed. (2)
तस्य रोष: समभवत् क्षुधार्तस्य विशेषत:।
निर्दहन्निव लोकांस्त्रीन् शिष्यांश्चैतदुवाच ह॥ ३॥
Anger flared up in him, specially as he

was bitten by hunger, as if to burn the three
worlds, and he said to his pupils: (3)

पश्यध्वं विपरीतस्य दण्डस्याविदितात्मन:।
विपत्तिं घोरसंकाशां क्रुद्धादग्निशिखामिव॥४॥
“See how this performer of action
contrary to good conduct, and ignorant one
meets with severe calamities produced by

me in anger, and comparable with the flames
of fire. (4)

क्षयोऽस्य CHa: Wa: सानुगस्य दुरात्मन:।
a: प्रदीप्तां हुताशस्य शिखां वै स्प्रष्टुमर्हति॥५॥

“Destruction is the fate of that dull-

witted one who wishes to touch the flames
of the kindled fire. (5)

यस्मात् स Hadar पापमीदूशं घोरसंहितम्।
तस्मात् प्राप्स्यति THM: फलं पापस्य HAUT: ॥ ६ ॥
“As he has committed this heinous
crime, so this dull-witted one will get the fruit
of his sin. (6)
सप्तरात्रेण राजासौ सपुत्रबलवाहन:।
पापकर्मसमाचारो वधं प्राप्स्यति दुर्मति:॥७॥
“In seven nights, this king, the dull-witted

one, with his sons, army and carriers, and of
sinful conduct, shall meet with death. (7)

समन्ताद् योजनशतं विषयं चास्य दुर्मते:।
धक्ष्यते पांसुवर्षेण महता पाकशासन:॥८॥

“For a hundred Yojanas all round, the
territory of this dull-witted one, the extirpator
of Paka, Indra shall burn up with a shower
of dust. (8)
सर्वसत्त्वानि यानीह स्थावराणि चराणि च।
महता पांसुवर्षेण विलयं सर्वतोऽगमन्॥९॥

“All beings, stationary and moving, that
are here, will perish due to this heavy shower
of dust. (9)

दण्डस्य विषयो यावत् तावत् सर्वं समुच्छ्रयम्।
पांसुवर्षमिवालक्ष्यं सप्तरात्रॆ भविष्यति॥१०॥

“After seven nights, the prosperous
