1102

प्रासादगणसम्बाधं fated विश्वकर्मणा॥४४॥
शोभितं तरुभिश्चित्रैर्नानापक्षिसमाकुलै:।
निकेतं पाशहस्तस्य वरुणस्य महात्मन:॥४५॥
“On the summit of that mountain
(Merusavarni) there is a huge ethereal edifice,
glorious as the sun and constructed by
ViSwakarma, the architect of gods, which is
thick with a multitude of palaces, is graced
by various trees thronged with birds of various
species and is the abode of the high-souled
Varuna (the god of water), who bears a
noose in his hand. (44-45)
अन्तरा मेरुमस्तं च तालो दशशिरा महान्।
जातरूपमय: sitar भ्राजते चित्रवेदिक: i ४६॥
“Between Mount Merusavarni and the
western mountain shines a giant glorious
palmyra tree of gold, consisting of ten

principal boughs and supported by a
wonderful base. (46)

तेषु सर्वेषु दुर्गेषु सरस्सु च aka च।
रावण: सह ace मार्गितव्यस्ततस्तत:॥४७॥

“Ravana, alongwith Sita, a princess of
the Videha territory, should be sought for
everywhere in all the well-known lakes,
which are difficult of access, and rivers in
this region. (47)
aa तिष्ठति धर्मज्ञस्तपसा स्वेन भावित:।
मेरुसावर्णिरित्येष ख्यातो वै ब्रह्मणा सम:॥४८॥
Wear मेरुसावर्णिर्महर्षि: सूर्यसंनिभ:।
प्रणम्य शिरसा भूमौ watt मैथिलीं प्रति॥४९॥

“On the said mountain (Merusavarni)
dwells the eminent sage known by the name
of Merusavarni, who knows what is right, is
illumined by his own asceticism and vies
with Brahma, the creator. Respectfully
bowing down to him with your head placed
on the ground, the said Merusavarni, who
shines brightly as the sun, should be
approached with an inquiry concerning the
news of Sita (a princess of Mithila). (48-49)

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

एतावज्जीवलोकस्य भास्करो रजनीक्षये।
pen वितिमिरं सर्वमस्तं गच्छति पर्वतम्॥५०॥
“Ridding this whole extent of the mortal
world from the eastern to the western
mountain of darkness at the close of night,
the sun retires to the western mountain.
(50)

अभास्करममर्यादं न जानीमस्तत: परम्॥५१॥
“Only thus far is it possible for monkeys
to proceed, O bulls among the monkeys !
We have no knowledge of the region lying
beyond the aforesaid extent, which is devoid
of the sun and without limits. (51)
अवगम्य तु adel निलयं रावणस्य al
अस्तं पर्वतमासाद्य पूर्णे मासे निवर्तत॥५२॥
“Reaching the western mountain and
finding out Sita as well as the abode of
Ravana retrace your steps as soon as a
month is complete. (52)

ऊर्ध्व मासान्न वस्तव्यं वसन् वध्यो भवेन्मम।
सहैव शूरो युष्माभि: श्वशुरो मे गमिष्यति॥ ५३॥

“You should not tarry beyond a month;
anyone so tarrying will be liable to be killed
by me. My valiant father-in-law too will go
with you. (53)

श्रोतव्यं सर्वमेतस्य भवद्भिर्दिष्टकारिभि:।
गुरुरेष महाबाहु: श्वशुरो A महाबल:॥५४॥

“All his words should be listened to by
you, obeying his commands. This mighty-
armed father-in-law of mine is possessed of
extraordinary might and is worthy of my
adoration and, therefore, worthy of respect
for you too. (54)

भवन्तश्चापि विक्रान्ता: wart wd wa fel

प्रमाणमेनं संस्थाप्य पश्यध्वं पश्चिमां दिशम्॥ ५५॥
“You too are powerful and indeed you

have the initiative, all and sundry. Yet explore

the western quarter establishing him as the
sole authority in all matters. (55)
