568

स्रवन्तं रुधिरं agate वर्षमेघमिवोत्थितम्॥ १३९॥

Adorned with armlets of gold, he
resembled the Vindhya or the Mandara
mountain (in size) and was sprouting blood
from his mouth even like a towering cloud
pouring down rain. (139)

जिह्वया परिलिह्यन्तं सृक्किणी शोणितोक्षिते |
Wed वानरानीकं कालान्तकयमोपमम्॥ १४० Il

With his tongue he was licking the
corners of his mouth, which were wet with
blood, and was crushing the army of
monkeys even like Yama (the god of
retribution) figuring as Death at the time of
universal dissolution. (140)

तं दृष्ट्वा राक्षसश्रेष्ठं प्रदीप्तानलवर्चसम्।
विस्फारयामास तदा कार्मुकं पुरुषर्षभ:॥१४१॥
Seeing that prince of ogres, who shone
like inflamed fire, Sri Rama, the foremost of
men, forthwith pulled the string of his bow.
(141)

स तस्य चापनिर्घोषात् कुपितो राक्षसर्षभ:।
अमृष्यमाणस्तं घोषमभिदुद्राव राघवम्॥१४२॥
Enraged to hear the twang of his bow,
and unable to bear that sound, that bull
among the ogres rushed towards Sri Rama
(a scion of Raghu).* (142)

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA +

| —_ .
भुजंगराजोत्तमभोगबाहु: ।
तमापतन्तं धरणीधराभ-

मुवाच रामो युधि कुम्भकर्णम्॥१४३॥

Thereupon Sri Rama for his part, whose
arms resembled in thickness and length the
coils of Vasuki (the king of serpents) spoke
on the battle-field as follows to the said
Kumbhakarna, who came rushing like a
cloud driven by the wind and resembled a
mountain (in size): (143)
आगच्छ रक्षोऽधिप मा विषाद-
मवस्थितोऽहं प्रगृहीतचाप: |

मा राक्षसवंशनाशनं
aed मुहूर्ताद् भविता विचेता:॥ १४४॥

“Come, 0 lord of ogres! Don’t give
way to despondency. | stand with my bow
held firmly in my hand. Know me to be the
destroyer of the ogre race. You too would
be deprived of your life after a short while.”

(144)

arate

रामोऽयमिति विज्ञाय were विकृतस्वनम्।
अभ्यधावत संक्रुद्धो हरीन् विद्रावयन् रणे॥ १४५ ॥

Coming to know that he was Sri Rama,
the ogre laughed in an unnatural tone and

* Verse 142 above is followed in certain editions by a few verses, which are reproduced below

followed by their translation :
पुरस्ताद् राघवस्यार्थे गदायुक्ता
विभीषणं पुरो दृष्टा कुम्भकर्णोऽब्रवीदिदम्
भ्रातृस्नेहं परित्यज्य राघवस्य fri ge
त्वमेको रक्षसां लोके सत्यधर्माभिरक्षिता
संतानार्थं as: कुलस्यास्य भविष्यसि
प्रकृत्या मम दुर्धर्ष शीघ्रं मार्गादपक्रम
न वेद्मि संयुगे सक्त: स्वान् परान् वा निशाचर
`एवमुक्तो वचस्तेन कुम्भकर्णेन धीमता

गदितं मे कुलस्यास्य रक्षणार्थमरिंदम
ed तु तन्महाभाग
एवमुक्त्वाश्रुपूर्णाक्षो गदापाणिर्विभीषण:

विभीषण: । अभिदुद्राव वेगेन

भ्राता भ्रातरमाहवे ॥

। प्रहरस्व रणे शीघ्रं क्षत्रधर्मे स्थिरो भव॥
| अस्मत्कार्यं कृतं वत्स यस्त्वं राममुपागत:॥
। नास्ति धर्माभिरक्तानां व्यसनं तु कदाचन॥
। राघवस्य प्रसादात् त्वं रक्षसां राज्यमाप्स्यसि॥
। न स्थातव्यं पुरस्तान्मे सम्भ्रमान्नष्टचेतस:॥
| रक्षणीयोऽसि मे वत्स सत्यमेतद् ब्रवीमि ते॥
| विभीषणो महाबाहु: कुम्भकर्णमुवाच ह॥
। न श्रुतं सर्वरक्षोभिस्ततोऽहं राममागत: II
सुकृतं दुष्कृतं तु वा।
| एकान्तमाश्रितो भूत्वा चिन्तयामास संस्थित:॥

[Armed with a mace, Vibhisana, Kumbhakarna’s (younger) brother darted with violence towards his
(own elder) brother on the battlefield, ahead of Sri Rama, to fight on his behalf. Seeing Vibhisana in
front, Kumbhakarna spoke as follows: ‘Strike at once on the battlefield and remain firmly devoted to
