236

among men, all the gods as well as the
high-souled Rsis, whose only wealth was

« VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

their asceticism, returned even as they had
come. (31—34)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये बालकाण्डे षष्टितम: सर्ग: ॥ ६० ॥

Thus ends Canto Sixty in the Balakanda of the glorious Ramayana of Valmiki,
the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

एकषष्टितम: सर्ग:
Canto LXI

The animal to be sacrificed at the sacrificial performance of King Ambarisa
having been stolen away by Indra appearing in disguise, the arch-priest
enjoined the king to secure a human beast as a substitute. Wandering

in search of such a beast, Ambarisa saw the sage Rcika at
Bhrgutunga and requested him to hand over his juvenile
son in exchange for a hundred thousand cows. On the
parents declining to part with their eldest and youngest
sons, the middle one, Sunahsepa by name, voluntarily
offered himself for being sold and the king
returned with him to his capital

विश्वामित्रो महातेजा: प्रस्थितान् वीक्ष्य तानृषीन्।
अब्रवीन्नरशार्दूल wale वनवासिन:॥१॥

“Perceiving the aforesaid Rsis, who
dwelt in woods, about to depart, the highly
glorious Viswamitra, O Rama (a tiger among
men), now spoke to them all in the following
words : (1)

महाविघ्न: प्रवृत्तोऽयं दक्षिणामास्थितो दिशम्।
दिशमन्यां प्रपत्स्यामस्तत्र तप्स्यामहे तप:।॥ २॥

“This great impediment in the shape of
Trisanku has come over the southern
quarter. Hence we shall seek another quarter
and practise askesis there. (2)

पश्चिमायां विशालायां पुष्करेषु महात्मन:।
ae तपश्चरिष्याम: qa तद्भि तपोवनम्॥३॥

“We shall smoothly practise asceticism
in the woods by the side of the Puskara
lakes in the extensive western region, O
high-souled ones; for delightful is that forest
meant for austerities.” (3)

एवमुक्त्वा महातेजा: पुष्करेषु महामुनि:।
a उग्रं दुराधर्षं तेपे मूलफलाशन:॥४॥
Having spoken thus, the great sage,
ViSwamitra, who was highly glorious, began
to practise severe asceticism, which was
difficult to put down, living on roots and
fruits alone. (4)
एतस्मिन्नेव काले तु अयोध्याधिपतिर्महान्।
अम्बरीष sit ख्यातो यष्टुं समुपचक्रमे॥५॥
At this very time the great king of
Ayodhya, known by the name of Ambarisa,
for his part began to perform a horse-
sacrifice. (5)
तस्य वै यजमानस्य पशुमिन्द्रो जहार ह।
प्रणष्टे तु पशौ विप्रो राजानमिदमब्रवीत्॥६॥

Even while he was carrying on his
sacrificial performance, Indra stole away the
sacrificial animal: so it is said. The animal
having mysteriously disappeared, the arch-
priest officiating at the sacrifice, addressed
the following words to the king : (6)
