« KISKINDHAKANDA +

Having spoken thus to the aforesaid
heroes, Sri Rama and Laksmana, Hanuman,
for his part, who understood the true meaning
of words and was an adept in expression,
said nothing further. (24)

Uta वचस्तस्य Wal लक्ष्मणमब्रवीत्।
प्रहष्टवदन: श्रीमान् भ्रातरं पार्श्वत: स्थितम्॥ २५॥
Hearing the foregoing speech of
Hanuman, the glorious Rama, who wore a
most cheerful countenance, spoke as follows
to his brother, Laksmana, standing by his
side : (25)

सचिवोऽयं कपीन्द्रस्य सुग्रीवस्य महात्मन:।
तमेव कांक्षमाणस्य ममान्तिकमिहागत:॥ २६॥

“He who has arrived here in my
presence is a minister of Sugriva, the high-
minded chief of monkeys, whom alone |
was seeking. (26)
तमभ्यभाष सौमित्रे सुग्रीवसचिवं कपिम्।
वाक्यज्ञं मधुरैर्वाक्यै:; स्नेहयुक्तमरिदमम्॥ २७॥

“Answer in sweet words with affection
the aforesaid monkey, who is a minister of
Sugriva, knows how to speak and is a
tamer of foes, O Laksmana ! (27)

नानृग्वेदविनीतस्य नायजुर्वेदधारिण:।
नासामवेदविदुष: शक्यमेवं विभाषितुम्॥ २८॥
“To speak in the way he has done is
not possible for one who has not studied
Rgveda with an eye to its meaning, not
memorized Yajurveda and has no knowledge
of Samaveda either. (28)
Tt व्याकरणं कृत्स्नमनेन बहुधा श्रुतम्।
ag व्याहरतानेन न किंचिदपशब्दितम्॥ २९॥
“Surely the entire range of Sanskrit
grammar has been studied by him in many
ways, as is clear from the fact that nothing
has been wrongly worded by him even
though speaking a good deal. (29)

न मुखे नेत्रयोश्चापि ललाटे च भ्रुवोस्तथा।
अन्येष्वपि च सर्वेषु दोष: संविदित: क्वचित्॥ ३०॥

“No fault of expression was noticed

945

anywhere in his face nor even in his eyes,
nor again in his forehead nor in his eyebrows
nor in anyone of his other limbs. (30)
अविस्तरमसंदिग्धमविलम्बितमव्यथम् ।
उर:स्थं कण्ठगं वाक्यं add मध्यमस्वरम्॥ ३१॥
“The speech emanating from his bosom
and articulated by his throat is marked by
absence of prolixity, is unambiguous and
unfaltering and does not make a grating
impression on one’s ears, uttered as it is in
a modulated tone. (31)

संस्कारक्रमसम्पन्नामद्भुतामविलम्बिताम् ।
उच्चारयति कल्याणीं वाचं हृदयहर्षिणीम्॥ ३२॥
“He utters a wholesome, distinct and
remarkable speech, which is grammatically
correct, fluent and delightful to the mind.
(32)
अनया चित्रया aren त्रिस्थानव्यञ्जनस्थया।
कस्य नाराध्यते चित्तमुद्यतासेररेरपि॥ ३३॥

“Whose mind will not be rendered
favourable by this wonderful speech, which
has its seat in three articulating organs,
viz., the bosom, throat and head. To say
nothing of others, the mind even of an
enemy with his sword uplifted will be made
friendly thereby. (33)

एवंविधो यस्य gat न भवेत् पार्थिवस्य तु।
सिद्ध्यन्ति fe कथं तस्य कार्याणां गतयोऽनघ ॥ ३४॥

“How can the progress of undertakings
of a king in whose service no such envoy
exists actually meet with success, O sinless
brother? (34)

VATU यस्य स्यु: कार्यसाधका:।
wee सिद्ध्यन्ति सर्वेऽर्था दूतवाक्यप्रचोदिता: । ३५ ॥

“By the very pleading of an envoy, all
the objects of a sovereign in whose service
there happen to be agents adorned with
hosts of such virtues are _ surely
accomplished.” (35)

`एवमुक्तस्तु सौमित्रि: सुग्रीवसचिवं कपिम्।
अभ्यभाषत वाक्यज्ञो वाक्यज्ञं पवनात्मजम्॥ ३६॥
