« KISKINDHAKANDA +

तत: परमसंहृष्टो हनूमान् प्लवगोत्तम:।
प्रत्युवाच ततो वाक्यं WA वाक्यविशारद:॥ ३॥
Supremely rejoiced at the thought,
Hanuman, the foremost of monkeys,
thereupon replied as follows to Sri Rama,
who was an adept in expression : (3)
feat त्वं at घोरं पम्पाकाननमण्डितम्।
आगत: सानुजो दुर्गं नानाव्यालमृगायुतम्॥४॥
“What for have you come with your
younger brother to this dreadful forest of
Dandaka, which is so difficult of access
and is infested with birds of prey and deer
of every description, though adorned with
the woodland encompassing Pampa?” (4)
तस्य तद् वचनं श्रुत्वा लक्ष्मणो रामचोदित:।
आचचक्षे महात्मानं रामं दशरथात्मजम्॥५॥
Hearing the aforesaid question of
Hanuman, Laksmana, as urged by Sri Rama
(by means of gestures), spoke as follows
about the high-souled Sri Rama, son of
Emperor DaSaratha : (5)

राजा दशरथो AT द्युतिमान् धर्मवत्सल:।
चातुर्वर्ण्य स्वधर्मेण नित्यमेवाभिपालयन्॥६॥

“Ruling all the four grades of society
from day to day according to the code of
conduct prescribed for himself, there was a
king, DaSaratha by name, who was full of
splendour and fond of virtue. (6)

न द्वेष्टा fad तस्य स तु द्वेष्टि न कंचन।
a तुं aay भूतेषु पितामह इवापर:॥७॥

“None was inimical to him nor did he
for his part hate anyone. He was in fact
another Brahma (the grandfather of the entire
creation) to all created beings. (7)
अग्निष्टोमादिभिर्यज्ञैरिष्टवानाप्तदक्षिणै: ।
तस्यायं पूर्वज: पुत्रो रामो नाम जनै: ota

“He propitiated the Lord by means of
sacrificial performances such as Agnistoma,
in which handsome fees were paid to the
priests officiating in them. This prince is his
first-born son, called by the people by the
name of Sri Rama. (8)

947

mua: सर्वभूतानां पितुर्निर्देशपारग:।
ज्येष्ठो दशरथस्यायं पुत्राणां गुणवत्तर:॥९॥
“Fit to protect all created beings, he
has fully carried out the commands of his
father. He is the eldest of all DaSaratha’s
sons and is more qualified than all of them.
(9)
राजलक्षणसंयुक्तर संयुक्तो राज्यसम्पदा।
Wag Wel मया aed वने सार्धमिहागत: it १० ॥
भार्यया च महाभाग सीतयानुगतो वशी।
दिनक्षये महातेजा: प्रभयेव दिवाकर:॥११॥

“Endowed with the bodily marks of a
king, he was just going to be invested by
his father with royal fortune (in the shape of
the office of Prince Regent) when he was
suddenly disinherited of his sovereignty and
came here to live in the forest with me,
followed by his consort, Sita too—even as
the sun sinks below horizon with its splendour
at the close of the day—possessed as he
was of extraordinary brilliance and had fully
controlled himself. (10-11)

अहमस्यावरो भ्राता गुणैर्दास्यमुपागत:।
कृतज्ञस्य बहुज्ञस्य लक्ष्मणो नाम नामत:॥१२॥
“lam his younger brother, Laksmana by
name, who was lovingly drawn by his virtues
to become his servant, appreciating as he
does the services, rendered to him and making
much of even small services. (12)

सुखार्हस्य महार्हस्य सर्वभूतहितात्मन:।
ऐश्वर्येण विहीनस्य वनवासे रतस्य च॥१३॥
Tae भार्या रहिते कामरूपिणा।
तच्च न Wad Ta: पत्नी येनास्य वा FAT ex

“The spouse of my aforesaid brother,
who is worthy of all comforts, who deserves
to be adored even by the trio adored by all
(viz., Brahma, Visnu and Siva) and whose
mind is set on the good of all created
beings, nay, who is now totally bereft of all
lordship and is devoted to a forest life, was
carried off at a place where none was
beside her, by an ogre who is capable of
