330

ततो विनिक्षिप्य act ad नगरगुप्तये।
प्रहस्त: प्रमुखे wat निषसाद जगाद च॥४॥
Having told off the entire army for the
defence of the city, Prahasta presently
resumed his seat in front of the king and
submitted as follows: (4)
fafed बहिरन्तश्च बलं बलवतस्तव।
कुरुष्वाविमना: fad यदभिप्रेतमस्ति ane
“Your army, powerful as you are, has
been stationed outside as well as inside
the city. Therefore, accomplish at once with
an undistracted mind what is intended by
you.” (5)
प्रहस्तस्य वच: श्रुत्वा राजा राज्यहितैषिण:।
सुखेप्सु: सुहृदां मध्ये व्याजहार स रावण:॥६॥
Hearing the submission of Prahasta, a
well-wisher of the State, the celebrated
Ravana, who aspired for happiness, spoke
as follows in the midst of his near and dear
ones: (6)

प्रियाप्रिये सुखे ga लाभालाभे हिताहिते।
धर्मकामार्थकृच्छरषु यूयमर्हथ वेदितुम्॥७॥

“You ought to know your duty in the
face of that which is agreeable and that
which is not, as also in the midst of happiness
and misery, gain and loss, what is
wholesome and otherwise and when virtue,
pleasure and self-interest are at stake. (7)

सर्वकृत्यानि युष्माभि: समारब्धानि सर्वदा।
मन्त्रकर्मनियुक्तानि न जातु विफलानि मे॥८॥

“My undertakings of all kinds, duly set
afoot by you, have never proved futile,
planned as they have always been according
to deliberations. (8)

ससोमग्रहनक्षत्रैर्मरुद्भिरिव वासव:।
भवद्भिरहमत्यर्थं da: श्रियमवाप्नुयाम्॥९॥
“Accompanied by you even as Indra is
by deities presiding over the planets and
lunar mansions including the moon-god as
well as the forty-nine wind-gods, | wish to
enjoy royal fortune excessively. (9)

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA +

अहं I खलु walt a: समर्थयितुमुद्यत:।
कुम्भकर्णस्य तु स्वप्नान्नेममर्थमचोदयम्॥१०॥

“| was, on my part, actually ready to
apprise you all of what | have done; but due
to Kumbhakarna’s slumber | did not broach
the matter. (10)
अयं fe GA: षण्मासान् कुम्भकर्णो महाबल: |
सर्वशस्त्रभृतां मुख्य: स इदानीं समुत्थित:॥११॥

“The said Kumbhakarna, the foremost
of all those who bear arms, who is endowed
with extraordinary might, remained actually
asleep for six long months. He is now fully
awake. (11)

इयं च दण्डकारण्याद् रामस्य महिषी प्रिया।
रक्षोभिश्चरितोद्देशादानीता जनकात्मजा।॥ १२॥
“Moreover, Sita (Janaka’s daughter),
the beloved consort of Rama, has been
borne away by me from the Dandaka forest,
a region frequented by ogres. (12)

सा मे न शय्यामारोढुमिच्छत्यलसगामिनी।
त्रिषु लोकेषु चान्या मे न सीतासदरृशी तथा॥ १३॥

“That lady of languid pace does not,
however, feel inclined to lay her foot on my
bed; and no other woman in the three
worlds is charming in my eyes as Sita. (13)

तनुमध्या पृथुश्रोणी शरदिन्दुनिभानना।
हेमबिम्बनिभा der aaa मयनिर्मिता॥१४॥

“Slender-waisted with well developed
hips and a countenance resembling the
autumnal full moon, the gentle lady looks
like an image of gold. It appears as though
she were an enchantment conjured by the
demon Maya, a past master in conjuring
tricks. (14)

सुलोहिततलौ श्लक्ष्णौ चरणौ सुप्रतिष्ठितौ।
दृष्टवा ताम्रनखौ तस्या दीप्यते A शरीरज:॥ १५॥
“On seeing her feet, soft and well
set, with deep red soles and coppery nails,
love is kindled in my heart. (15)
