586

extraordinary might, dealt him a blow with it
on the battlefield. (15)

a विह्वलस्तु तेजस्वी वातोद्धूत इव द्रुम:।
लाक्षारससवर्णं च Geta रुधिरं महत्॥१६॥
Thrown into disorder like a tree shaken
by the wind, the heroic ogre for his part
shed profuse blood which had a colour
resembling that of lacquer. (16)

अथाश्वास्य महातेजा: कृच्छ्राद् देवान्तको AT |
आविध्य परिघं वेगादाजघान तदाङ्गदम्॥ १७॥
Recovering his breath with difficulty
and brandishing his club with impetuosity,
the mighty Devantaka, who was endowed
with extraordinary energy, then struck
Angada with it. (17)

परिघाभिहतश्चापि वानरेन्द्रात्मजस्तदा।
जानुभ्यां पतितो भूमौ पुनरेवोत्पपात ह॥१८॥

Though struck with the club and fallen
on his knees to the ground, Angada (son of
the king of monkeys), they say, forthwith
sprang up once more. (18)

तमुत्पतन्तं त्रिशिरास्तरिभिर्बाणैरजिह्मगै: |
चघोरैर्हरिपते: Ut ललाटेऽभिजघान ह॥१९॥

While he was doing so, Trisira struck
Angada (son of the Lord of the monkeys)
with three formidable straight-going arrows
on the brow; so the legend goes. (19)

ema fasta नीलश्चापि weed: २०॥

Finding him surrounded by three of

the foremost of ogres, Hanuman as well
as Nila then set out at once to help him.
(20)

ततश्चिक्षेप शैलाग्रं नीलस्तिशिरसे तदा।
ag रावणसुतो धीमान् बिभेद निशितै: शरै:।॥ २१॥

Thereupon Nila forthwith hurled a
mountain-peak at Trisira. The sagacious
son of Ravana, however, shattered it with
his whetted shafts. (21)

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA +

तद्बाणशतनिर्भिन्नं विदारितशिलातलम्।
सविस्फुलिङ्गं सज्वालं निपपात गिरे: शिर:॥ २२॥
Smashed by hundreds of arrows
discharged by Trisira, the mountain-peak,
which had all its rocky bases split up, fell
down with sparks and flames that rose from

it. (22)
स विजृम्भितमालोक्य gate देवान्तको बली |
परिघेणाभिदुद्राव मारुतात्मजमाहवे।॥ २३ ॥

Witnessing with joy the exploit
of Trisira in the form of smashing the
mountain-peak, the mighty Devantaka
assaulted Hanuman (son of the wind-god)
with a club on the battle-field. (23)

तमापतन्तमुत्पत्य हनूमान् कपिकुञ्जर:।
आजघान तदा मूर्छि वज्रकल्पेन मुष्टिना॥ २४॥
Springing up, Hanuman, an elephant
among the monkeys, forthwith struck on the
head Devantaka even as he was rushing
forward, with his fist, which was hard as
adamant. (24)

शिरसि wee वीरस्तदा वायुसुतो बली।
नादेनाकम्पयच्चैव राक्षसान् स महाकपि:॥ २५॥

The valiant and mighty son of the
wind-god, Hanuman, then dealt a blow on
Devantaka head once more and by means
of his roar that great monkey positively
caused the ogres to tremble. (25)

a मुष्टिनिष्पिष्टविभिन्नमूर्धा
निर्वान्तदन्ताक्षिविलम्बिजिह्व: ।
देवान्तको राक्षसराजसूनु-
Taree = सहसा पपात॥ २६॥
His skull shattered by the blow of
Hanuman’s fist, nay, his teeth, eyes and
lolling tongue forced out, Devantaka, son of
Ravana (the ruler of ogres) precipitately fell
dead on the ground. (26)

तस्मिन् हते राक्षसयोधमुख्ये
महाबले संयति देवशत्रौ।
