850

said, ‘How does it happen that your body
looks unlike itself?’ (19)

सा तु कृत्वाञ्जलिं दीना कन्योवाच तपोधनम्।
न जाने GRU तात येन A रूपमीदूशम्॥ Voll

“That maiden, very dispirited, spoke
with folded hands to the repository of Tapas:
‘Father | do not know the reason for this
change in my body. (20)
fe q ya गतास्म्येका महर्षेर्भावितात्मन:।
पुलस्त्यस्याश्रमं दिव्यमन्वेष्टुं स्वसखीजनम्॥ 22 II

‘Prior to this | went alone to the charming
Asrama of the great seer, Pulastya, the

knower of the Self, in search of my
companions. (21)

न च पश्याम्यहं तत्र कांचिदभ्यागतां सखीम्।
सूपस्य तु विपर्यासं दृष्टवा त्रासादिहागता॥ २२॥

‘But | did not see anyone of them in
that place. |, however, noticed this change
in my bodily form and have come here in
trepidation.’ (22)
तृणबिन्दुस्तु राजर्षिस्तपसा द्योतितप्रभ:।
cart विवेश तच्चापि अपश्यदूषिकर्मजम्॥ २३॥

Trnabindu, the royal sage, glowing with
lustre arising from his Tapas, went into

meditation and discovered that it was the
work of the seer. (23)

aq विज्ञाय तं शापं महर्षेर्भावितात्मन:।
गृहीत्वा तनयां गत्वा पुलस्त्यमिदमब्रवीत्॥ २४॥
Learning of the curse of Pulastya, the
great seer, who had realized his Self, and
taking hold of his daughter, he went to him
and said: (24)
भगवंस्तनयां मे त्वं गुणै: स्वैरेव भूषिताम्।
भिक्षां प्रतिगृहाणेमां महर्षे स्वयमुद्यताम्॥ २५॥
“‘O venerable sir, O great seer, deign
to accept, as a gift, my daughter, adorned
by her own qualities, who has come to you
of her own accord. (25)
तपश्चरणयुक्तस्य श्रम्यमाणेन्द्रियस्य ते।
शुश्रूषणपरा नित्यं भविष्यति न संशय:॥ २६॥

« VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

“There is no doubt that she will always
do service to you, your limbs being fatigued
due to the practice of Tapas.’ (26)
तं ब्रुवाणं तु ag वाक्यं राजर्षि धार्मिकं तदा।
जिघृक्षुरब्रवीत् कन्यां बाढमित्येव स fea: २७॥

“Desiring to accept her, that Brahmana
said, ‘Yes’, to the virtuous royal sage who
spoke as above. (27)

दत्त्वा तु तनयां राजा स्वमाश्रमपदं गत:।
सापि तत्रावसत् कन्या तोषयन्ती पतिं गुणै:। २८॥

“After giving his daughter to the sage,
the Rajarsi returned to his Asrama. That
maiden stayed there, pleasing her husband
by her service. (28)

तस्यास्तु शीलवृत्ताभ्यां तुतोष मुनिपुङ्खव:।
Wit: स तु महातेजा वाक्यमेतदुवाच ह॥ २९॥

“That best of seers, of great lustre,
was pleased with her conduct and character
and out of love, spoke the following words
to her: (29)

परितुष्टोऽस्मि सुश्रोणि गुणानां सम्पदा भृशम्।
तस्माद् देवि ददाम्यद्य पुत्रमात्मसमं तव॥ ३०॥
उभयोर्वंशकर्तारं पौलस्त्य इति विश्रुतम्।
यस्मात् तु विश्रुतो वेदस्त्वयेहाध्ययतो मम॥ ३१॥
werd स विश्रवा नाम भविष्यति न संशय:।
एवमुक्का तु सा देवी प्रहृष्टेनान्तरात्मना॥ ३२॥
afta कालेनासूत विश्रवसं सुतम्।
त्रिषु लोकेषु विख्यातं यशोधर्मसमन्वितम्॥ ३३॥

“O lady of shapely limbs, | am highly
pleased with the wealth of your excellent
qualities; therefore, O Devi, | shall give you
today a son equal to me in every respect,
who will continue my line as well as yours
and who will become known as Pulastya.
Since you listened to the Vedas as | was
reciting them, he will, without doubt be known
as ViSrava.”

“Hearing these words that lady was
inwardly highly pleased, and soon gave birth
to a son, ViSsrava by name. He became
