532

Questioned in these words by Prince
Sri Rama of unwearied action, the highly
sagacious Vibhisana replied to Sri Rama, a
scion of Kakutstha, as follows: (8)
a वैवस्वतो ae वासवश्च पराजित:।
सैष विश्रवस: पुत्र: कुम्भकर्ण: प्रतापवान्।
अस्य प्रमाणसदरृशो राक्षसोऽन्यो न ferent ९॥

“He is the well-known son of sage
Visrava, the fiery Kumbhakarna, by whom
Yama (son of the sun-god) as well as Indra
were vanquished. There is no other ogre
vying with him in size. (9)

एतेन eat युधि दानवाश्च
यक्षा भुजंगा: पिशिताशनाश्च।
गन्धर्वविद्याधरकिंनराश्च
सहस्रशो राघव सम्प्रभग्ना:॥१०॥
“By him were completely routed in their
thousands in combat Danavas (demons)
and Yaksas (a class of demigods), serpents
and ogres (lit., flesh-eaters), Gandharvas
(celestial musicians), Vidyadharas (celestial
artistes) and Kinnaras (semi-divine beings
with a human figure and the head of a
horse), O scion of Raghu! (10)
हन्तुं न शेकुस्त्रिदशा: कालोऽयमिति मोहिता:॥ ११॥
“Deluded to think that he was Death
personified, the gods could not Kill
Kumbhakarna, who is endowed with
extraordinary might and hideous eyes and
stood pike in hand. (11)

प्रकृत्या ह्येष तेजस्वी कुम्भकर्णो महाबल:।
अन्येषां राक्षसेन्द्राणां वरदानकृतं बलम्॥१२॥
“The yonder Kumbhakarna is daring
and endowed with extraordinary might by
nature. The strength of other ogre chiefs,
however, is attributable to boons (conferred
on them by gods). (12)

बालेन जातमात्रेण क्षुधार्तेन महात्मना।
भक्षितानि सहस्राणि प्रजानां सुबहून्यपि॥ १३॥

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA +

“Very many thousands of created
beings were devoured by the colossus,
oppressed with hunger, while he was yet a
new-born babe. (13)
तेषु सम्भक्ष्यमाणेषु wet भयनिपीडिता:।
यान्ति स्म शरणं शक्रं तमप्यर्थं न्यवेदयन्॥१४॥

“Sore-stricken with fear on their being
devoured by the monster, the created beings

sought Indra as their refuge and reported
that matter to him. (14)

a कुम्भकर्णं कुपितो महेन्द्रो

wat वज्रेण शितेन वज्री।
स शक्रवज्राभिहतो महात्मा

चचाल कोपाच्च Yt ननाद॥१५॥

“Moved to anger, the mighty Indra, who
was armed with a _ thunderbolt, struck
Kumbhakarna with his sharp thunderbolt.
Struck with Indra’s thunderbolt, the colossus
reeled and emitted a tremendous roar. (15)

तस्य नानद्यमानस्य कुम्भकर्णस्य रक्षस:।
श्रुत्वा निनादं वित्रस्ता: प्रजा भूयो वितत्रसु:॥ १६॥
“Hearing the roar of the ogre,
Kumbhakarna, who was repeatedly roaring,
the created beings, who were already
greatly afraid, felt frightened all the
more. (16)

तत: Hal महेन्द्रस्य कुम्भकर्णो महाबल:।
निष्कृष्यैरावताद् दन्तं जघानोरसि वासवम्॥ १७॥

“Tearing out a tusk from the mouth of
Airavata, carrying Indra on its back, the
enraged Kumbhakarna, who was endowed
with extraordinary might, then struck Indra
in the breast with it. (17)

कुम्भकर्णप्रहारार्तो विजज्वाल स area: |
ततो विषेदु: wear cat ब्रह्मर्षिदानवा:॥१८॥

“Agonized by the blow of Kumbhakarna,
the aforesaid Indra felt tormented. Thereupon
the gods, the Brahmana Rsis and the
demons grew despondent all at once. (18)
