# YUDDHAKANDA +

accomplished by your safe and happy
return. | perceive good omens of great
moment, which all prognosticate the
accomplishment of your purpose, O scion
of Raghu! A benign, gentle, favourable, cool
and agreeable, fragrant breeze is blowing in
the same direction as the army is proceeding.

(37—46)

पूर्णवल्गुस्वराश्चेमे प्रवदन्ति मृगद्बिजा:।
प्रसन्नाश्च fest: wat विमलश्च दिवाकर:॥४७॥

“Nay, these beasts and birds are emitting
unbroken and agreeable sounds. Moreover
the quarters are all serene and the sun is
shining brightly. (47)

अर्चिष्मन्त: प्रकाशन्ते ध्रुवं सर्वे प्रदक्षिणम्॥४८॥
“With its bright light, the planet Venus
too, sprung from the Sage Bhrgu (a mind-
born son of Brahma, the creator) has risen
at your back, in the north. The very bright
pole-star (which is distinguishable by the
contiguity of the stars presided over by the
seven Brahmana Rsis or the Great Bear)
as well as the stars presided over by the
seven foremost Rsis (and bearing the name
of the Great Bear) are all shining clearly
and brightly in the northern sky, while
coursing clockwise round the _ pole-star.
(48)

त्रिशङ्कुर्विमलो भाति राजर्षि: सपुरोहित:।
पितामह: पुरोऽस्माकमिक्ष्वाकूणां महात्मनाम्॥४९॥
“A star presided over by the royal
sage TriSanku, a forbear of the high-souled
Ikswakus, is also shining brightly before us
in the southern sky, accompanied by another
star presided over by his family priest, Sage
Vasistha. (49)

विमले च प्रकाशेते fase निरुपद्रवे।
नक्षत्रॆ परमस्माकमिक्ष्वाकूणां महात्मनाम्॥५०॥
“The two bright stars, the VisSakhas,

305

the foremost constellation in the eyes of the
Ikswakus (being their tutelary constellation),
are also gleaming over there, free from
the evil influence of malevolent planets
(Mars etc.,). (50)
नैर्ऋतं नैर्ऋतानां च नक्षत्रमतिपीड्यते।
मूलो मूलवता स्पृष्टो धूप्यते धूमकेतुना॥५१॥
“The constellation Mula, presided over
by the ogre Nirrti (the deity presiding over
the south-west) and as such ruling the
destinies of the ogres, is badly aspected, in
that it is touched by a comet risen with a tail
of light and tormenting it. (51)

wa चैतद् विनाशाय राक्षसानामुपस्थितम्।
काले कालगृहीतानां नक्षत्रं ग्रहपीडितम्॥५२॥

“And all this has come about for the
extermination of ogres; for the star ruling
the destiny of those caught in the grip of
Death is oppressed by a malevolent planet
at the hour of death. (52)

प्रसन्ना: सुरसाश्चापो वनानि फलवन्ति च।
प्रवान्ति नाधिका गन्धा यथर्तुकुसुमा द्रुमा:॥ ५३॥

“The water of lakes etc., is pellucid
and sweet and the woodlands are laden
with fruit; fragrant breezes do not blow
violently, while trees bear blossom according
to season. (53)

व्यूढानि कपिसैन्यानि प्रकाशान्तेऽधिकं प्रभो।
देवानामिव सैन्यानि संग्रामे तारकामये।
wan समीक्ष्यैतत् viet भवितुमर्हसि॥५४॥

“Disposed like the forces of gods
arrayed in the battle, which brought
destruction to the demon Taraka (at the
hands of Kartikeya, son of Lord Siva, the
Commander-in-Chief of the celestial army),
the forces of the monkeys shine brightly, O
lord! Observing this fully, you ought to be
pleased, O noble prince!” (54)

इति भ्रातरमाश्वास्य हृष्ट: सौमित्रिरब्रवीत्।
अथावृत्य महीं कृत्स्नां जगाम हरिवाहिनी॥ ५५॥
