* AYODHYAKANDA +

तमुवाच दुराधर्षं राघवं सुतमात्मन:।
कौसल्या पुत्रवात्सल्यादिदं प्रियहितं aa: २२॥
Out of affection for her son, Kausalya
addressed the following delightful and at the
same time wholesome words (a rare
combination) to her son, the celebrated Sri
Rama, a scion of Raghu, who was hard to
assail : (22)
प्राप्नुह्यायुश्च कीर्तिं च धर्मं चाप्युचितं कुले॥ २३॥
“May you attain the age and renown of
ancient royal sages of virtuous conduct and
possessing a noble soul, and acquire virtue
worthy of your race ! (23)
अद्यैव wat स धर्मात्मा यौवराज्येऽभिषेक्ष्यति॥ २४॥
“Please go and see, O scion of Raghu,
your royal father, who is true to his promise.
That pious soul is going to install you in the
office of Prince Regent this very day.”(24)

दत्तमासनमालभ्य भोजनेन aaa: |

मातरं wea: किंचित् प्रसार्याञ्जलिमब्रवीत्॥ २५॥
a स्वभावविनीतश्च गौरवाच्च तथानत:।

प्रस्थितो दण्डकारण्यमाप्रष्टुमुपचक्रमे Il २६ ॥
देवि नूनं न जानीषे महद् भयमुपस्थितम्।
इदं तव च दु:खाय वैदेह्या लक्ष्मणस्य Ail Il
Merely touching the seat offered by the
Empress, when invited to breakfast, and
distending a bit the hollow of his joined
palms, Sri Rama (a scion of Raghu) began
to speak as follows. Nay, about to start
on his long journey to the Dandaka forest,
Sri Rama who was modest by nature and
was likewise bent low with reverence,
proceeded to take leave of his mother in
the following words: “Surely you do not
know, O godly lady, that a great calamity
is imminent. What | am going to reveal to

369

you will cause you agony no less than to
Sita, a princess of Videha, and to Laksmana.
(25—27)
गमिष्ये दण्डकारण्यं किमनेनासनेन Fl
विष्टरासनयोग्यो fe कालोऽयं मामुपस्थित: ॥ २८ ॥

“१ am just going to proceed to the
Dandaka forest; what shall | do with this
bejewelled seat? Time has now arrived for
me to occupy a mat of KuSa grass'. (28)

चतुर्दश fe वर्षाणि वत्स्यामि विजने वने।
कन्दमूलफलैर्जीवन् हित्वा मुनिवदामिषम्॥ २९॥

“Indeed for fourteen years | shall actually
live in a lonely forest, subsisting like ascetics
on bulbs, roots and fruits and giving up
royal fare.” (29)

भरताय महाराजो यौवराज्यं प्रयच्छति।
मां पुनर्दण्डकारण्यं विवासयति तापसम्॥ ३०॥

“The Emperor is conferring the office
of Prince Regent on Bharata and exiling me
to the Dandaka forest as an ascetic, on the
other hand. (30)

स षट् चाष्टौ च वर्षाणि वत्स्यामि विजने वने।
आसेवमानो वन्यानि फलमूलैश्च ade 32

“As such | shall live in a lonely forest
for six years and eight, wearing the barks of
wild trees and living on fruits and roots.”

(31)

सा निकृत्तेव सालस्य afte: परशुना वने।
पपात सहसा cat cada दिवश्च्युता॥ ३२॥
Hearing this unpalatable news, the
said queen fell all at once to the ground
like a bough of a fir tree in the forest
severed with an axe, and lying unconscious
shone like a goddess fallen from heaven.
(32)
तामदु:खोचितां gear पतितां कदलीमिव।
रामस्तूत्थापयामास मातरं गतचेतसम्॥ ३३॥

1. According to Smrti texts a mat made of twenty-five blades of KuSa grass is called a ‘Vistara’ :

पञ्चाशद्भिर्भवेद् ब्रह्मा तदर्धेन तु विष्टर:।
2. आकर्षणेऽपि पुंसि स्यादामिषं पुंनपुंसकम्। भोग्यवस्तुनि सम्भोगेऽप्युत्कोचे पललेऽपि च ।।--इति मेदिनी
