994

Emblems too such as matted hair and the
bark of trees for clothing, conformable to
righteousness exist and are seen on your
person, O prince ! (26)
क: क्षत्रियकुले जात: श्रुतवान् नष्टसंशय:।
धर्मलिङ्गप्रतिच्छन्न: क्रूरं कर्म समाचरेत्॥२७॥
“Who, born in the Ksatriya race and
possessed of sacred knowledge, whose
doubts regarding right and wrong have been
resolved through such knowledge and
who is furnished with emblems of piety, will
perpetrate a cruel deed (like the one
perpetrated by you)? (27)

त्वं राघवकुले जातो धर्मवानिति fasta: |
sven भव्यरूपेण किमर्थं परिधावसे॥ २८॥

“Though born in the race of Raghu and
widely known as a man of virtue, you are
nevertheless cruel. Why then should you
roam about in a gentle guise? (28)

साम दानं क्षमा ad: सत्यं धृतिपराक्रमौ।
पार्थिवानां गुणा Ws दण्डश्चाप्यपकारिषु॥ २९॥

“The art of persuasion, liberality,
forgiveness, righteousness, truthfulness,
fortitude and valour and punishing the evil-
doers are the virtues of rulers, O king ! (29)

aad वनचरा राम मृगा मूलफलाशिन:।
एषा प्रकृतिरस्माकं पुरुषस्त्वं नरेश्वर॥ ३०॥

“We, O Rama, are beasts living in the
forest and subsisting on roots and fruit alone;
for such is our nature, while you are a man
living in urban areas and subsisting on cooked
food of various kinds, O ruler of men!
(Hence there was no cause for any
contention between us). (30)

भूमिर्हिरण्यं रूपं च विग्रहे कारणानि a
तत्र कस्ते at लोभो मदीयेषु फलेषु वा॥ ३१॥

“Land, gold and silver are the only
occasions for chastisement. In the aforesaid
forest what attraction could there possibly
be in you for the fruits which belong to me?

(31)

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

wag विनयश्चोभौ निग्रहानुग्रहावपि।
राजवृत्तिरसंकोर्णा न नृपा: HMA: UW ३२॥

“Both administration and mildness,
punishment and conferring benefits on the
people, are the duties of a king, having
different occasions for their exercise. Kings
ought not to behave just as they please.

(32)
त्वं तु कामप्रधानश्च कोपनश्चानवस्थित:।
राजवृत्तेषु संकोर्ण: शरासनपरायण:॥ ३३॥

“You, on the other hand, are dominated
by desire, irascible and fickle; you act
indiscriminately in the sphere of kingly duties
and have made it your prime object to
discharge arrows wherever you please. (33)

न तेऽस्त्यपचितिर्धर्मे नार्थे बुद्धिरवस्थिता।
Shae: HMA: सन् PMA मनुजेश्वर॥ ३४॥

“You have no respect for virtue, nor is
your mind fixed so far as the pursuit of
wealth is concerned. Acting according to
your sweet will, you are carried away by
your senses, O ruler of men! (34)

हत्वा बाणेन काकुत्स्थ मामिहानपराधिनम्।
किं वक्ष्यसि सतां मध्ये कर्म कृत्वा जुगुप्सितम्॥ ३५ ॥
“Having killed me here with an arrow,
even though | had not committed any offence,
and thus perpetrated an abominable act, O
scion of Kakutstha, what will you say (in
your defence) in the midst of holy men?
(35)
Wael ब्रह्महा गोघ्नश्चोर: प्राणिवधे Ta: 1
नास्तिक: परिवेत्ता च wad निरयगामिन:॥ ३६॥

“The regicide, the Brahminicide, the
slaughterer of a cow, the thief, he who
takes delight in the destruction of life, the
unbeliever and he who weds before an
elder brother, all go to hell. (36)

Gangs कदर्यश्च मित्रघ्नो गुरुतल्पग:।
Meh पापात्मनामेते गच्छन्ते ATT संशय:॥ ३७॥

“The informer, the miser, the slayer of
one’s own friend and he who violates the
