# YUDDHAKANDA +

and joined by a company of troop-
commanders, the celebrated Sri Rama

427

thenceforward sojourned happily on the top
of the Suvela mountain. (20)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये युद्धकाण्डेऽष्टात्रिंश: सर्ग: Il ३८॥
Thus ends Canto Thirty-eight in the Yuddhakanda of the glorious Ramayana of
Valmiki, the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

Canto XXXIX

Having passed the night on the summit of the Suvela mountain, the
commanders of simian troops entered the parks and gardens in
the outskirts of Lanka, which were laden with blossom
etc., while others make their way into Lanka
itself. Sr1 Rama, however, feels amazed
to behold from the mountain-top
Lanka, which was charming
in every respect

at रात्रिमुषितास्तत्र सुवेले हरियूथपा:।
लङ्कायां ददृशुर्वीरा वनान्युपवनानि च॥१॥

Having passed that night on the said
Suvela mountain, the valiant monkey
generals surveyed the woods and groves
of Lanka. (1)

समसौम्यानि रम्याणि विशालान्यायतानि च।
दृष्टिरम्याणि ते geal बभूवुर्जातविस्मया:॥ २॥

They were amazed to find them level
and free from molestation by beasts of
prey, lovely, long, extensive and agreeable
to behold. (2)

चम्पकाशोकबकुलशालतालसमाकुला ।
तमालवनसंछ्न्ना नागमालासमावृता॥ ३॥
तिलकै: कर्णिकारैश्च पाटलैश्च समन्तत:॥४॥
शुशुभे पुष्पिताग्रैश्च लतापरिगतैर्द्रमै:।
लङ्का बहुविधैर्दिव्यैर्यथेन्द्रस्यामरावती tt ५ ।।
विचित्रकुसुमोपेतै रक्तकोमलपल्लवै: |
शाब्बलैश्च तथा नीलैश्चित्राभिर्वनराजिभि:।। ६॥
Thick with Campaka, Asoka, Bakula,

sal and palmyra trees, nay, covered with
groves of Tamala trees and surrounded
with rows of Nagakesara trees, Lanka looked
charming on all sides like the city of Amaravati
ruled over by Indra, the ruler of gods, with
green grassy spots and charming avenues
as well as with beautiful trees of various
kinds, viz., Hintala, Arjuna, Nipa and
Saptaparna in full blossom, Tilaka, Karnikara
and Patala whose crests were laden with
flowers and which were intertwined with
climbers, nay, which were laden with diverse
flowers and clothed with red tender leaves.
(3—6)
गन्धाढ्यान्यतिरम्याणि पुष्पाणि च फलानि च।
धारयन्त्यगमास्तत्र भूषणानीव मानवा:॥७॥

The trees in that city bore fragrant and
most lovely flowers and fruits in the same
way as human beings wear ornaments.

(7)
at सर्वर्तुकं TH शुशुभे षट्पदायुतम्॥८॥
