130

स त्वं प्रसादं wa कुरुष्व मम पुत्रके।
मम चैवाल्पभाग्यस्य दैवतं हि भवान् Te: VV

“Celebrated as you are, O knower of
what is right, show you your favour to my
juvenile son as well as to myself, of poor
luck as | am in not being able to carry out
your behest; for you are a veritable god as
well as worthy of adoration to me. (21)

देवदानवगन्धर्वा यशक्षा: पतगपन्नगा:।
न शक्ता रावणं सोढुं किं पुनर्मानवा युधि॥ २२॥
“Not even gods, demons_ and
Gandharvas (celestial musicians), Yaksas,
birds and reptiles are able to withstand
Ravana on the battlefield; how then can
men do so? (22)
स तु वीर्यवतां वीर्यमादत्ते युधि रावण:।
तेन चाहं न शक्तोऽस्मि संयोद्धुं तस्य वा बलै: ।। २३॥
Rae वा मुनिश्रेष्ठ सहितो वा ममात्मजै:।
कथमप्यमरप्रख्यं संग्रामाणामकोविदम्॥ २४॥
बालं मे तनयं ब्रह्मन् Aa दास्यामि पुत्रकम्।
अथ कालोपमौ युद्धे सुतौ सुन्दोपसुन्दयो: tt २५॥
यज्ञविघ्नकरौ तौ ते नैव दास्यामि पुत्रकम्।
मारीचश्च सुबाहुश्च वीर्यवन्तौ सुशिक्षितौ॥ २६॥
“The said Ravana, truly speaking, takes
away the prowess of the valiant on the
battlefield. | am, therefore, not capable of
contending with him or with his forces, even
though accompanied by my troops or united
with my sons, O jewel among sages!

« VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

| shall not, therefore, part in any case
whatsoever with my juvenile and favourite
son, Rama, who looks like a god and is
altogether unacquainted with wars, O holy
Brahmana ! If Marica and Subahu, the two
notorious sons of Sunda and Upasunda
respectively—who are full of prowess and
highly trained as well and appear as Death
on the battlefield—interfere with your
sacrificial performance, | shall under no
circumstance hand over my pet son Rama
to you. (23—26)
तयोरन्यतरं योद्धुं यास्यामि ससुहृद्गण:।
अन्यथा त्वनुनेष्यामि भवन्तं सहबान्धव:॥ २७॥
“| shall personally proceed with hosts
of my relations to give battle to either of the
two. Otherwise, with my relations | shall
crave your indulgence for my inability to
comply with your behest.” (27)

इति नरपतिजत्यनाद् fears कुशिकसुतं सुमहान् विवेश मन्यु:।
सुहुत इव मखेऽग्निराज्यसिक्त: समभवदुज्वलितो महर्षिवह्नि: ।। २८ ।।

A fierce rage possessed the mind of
Viswamitra (son of Gadhi, a scion of KuSa),
the foremost of Brahmanas, as a sequel to
the above incoherent talk of Dasaratha,
a ruler of men. Like a fire well-fed with
oblations and sprinkled over with ghee in
the course of a sacrifice, the fire of anger
thus kindled in the mind of ViSwamitra,
the eminent seer, grew fierce in no time.

(28)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये बालकाण्डे विंश: सर्ग: ॥ २० ॥

Thus ends Canto Twenty in the Balakanda of the glorious Ramayana of Valmiki,
the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

