# YUDDHAKANDA #

drew out the arrows from their quiver, selected
or separated them, put them to the bow,
stretched the bow at full length, discharged
the arrows and hit the mark. The sky having
been covered on all sides with streams of
arrows discharged with force exerted by
the bows, no object could be distinguished.
Meeting Indrajit (son of Ravana), Laksmana
fought with him, and meeting Laksmana (in
his turn), Indrajit (son of Ravana) too took
the offensive. As they contended with each
other, a terrible confusion ensued in both
the contending armies as a sequel to the
destruction of their followers, who did not
take active part in the struggle. The sky
was thickly covered, as it were, with the
sharp arrows shot with impetuosity by them
both leaving no empty space and was
consequently shrouded in darkness. Nay,
even the four quarters as well as the
intermediate points were overspread with
shafts on account of those sharp arrows of
the two warriors speeding in many hundreds.
Everything was enveloped in darkness
and presented an exceedingly dreadful
appearance. (25—35)
अस्तं Wa सहस्रांशौ Wad तमसा च al
रुधिरौघा महानद्य: प्रावर्तन्तं सहस्रश:॥ ३६॥
When the orb of thousand rays sank
below the horizon and everything was entirely
enveloped in shadow, large streams carrying
a flood of blood actually began to flow in
thousands. (36)

क्रव्यादा दारुणा वाग्भिश्चिक्षिपुर्भीमनि:स्वनान्।
न तदानीं ववौ वायुर्न च जज्वाल पावक:॥ ३७॥
Hideous carnivorous birds such as
vultures and jackals emitted frightful cries
with their tongues. No wind blew at that time
nor did fire burn. (37)
स्वस्त्यस्तु लोकेभ्य इति जजल्पुस्ते महर्षय:।
सम्पेतुश्चात्र संतप्ता गन्धर्वा: We चारणै:॥ ३८॥

679

“May all be well with the worlds !”
murmured the eminent sages present on
the occasion. Nay, feeling distressed, the
Gandharvas, who happened to be there,
fled away alongwith the caranas (celestial
bards). (38)

अथ राक्षससिंहस्य कृष्णान् कनकभूषणान्।
शरैश्चतुर्भि: सौमित्रिर्विव्याध चतुरो हयान्॥३९॥
Meanwhile Laksmana (son of Sumitra)
pierced with four arrows the four black horses
yoked to the chariot of Indrajit (a lion among
the ogres), decked with ornaments of gold.
(39)
ततोऽपरेण भल्लेन पीतेन निशितेन च।

सम्पूर्णायतमुक्तेन सुपत्रेण सुवर्चसा॥४०॥

महेन्द्राशनिकल्पेन सूतस्य विचरिष्यत:।
स तेन बाणाशनिना तलशब्दानुनादिना॥४१॥

लाघवाद् राघव: श्रीमान् शिर: कायादपाहरत्।
स यन्तरि महातेजा हते मन्दोदरीसुत:॥४२॥

स्वयं सारथ्यमकरोत् पुनश्च धनुरस्पृशत्।
तदद्भुतमभूत् तत्र सारथ्यं पश्यतां युधि॥४३॥
Then, with another gilded, sharp and
splendid arrow of the variety known by the
name of Bhalla, which was shot with full
force, was furnished with beautiful plumes
and was deadly as the thunderbolt and
vied with Indra’s own weapon and which
resounded with the clang of the gauntlet,
the celebrated and glorious Laksmana
(a scion of Raghu) severed the head of the
charioteer of Indrajit, even as he was circling
round, from his shoulders with alacrity. The
charioteer having been killed, Indrajit (son
of Mandodari), who was endowed with
extraordinary energy, played up the role of a
charioteer himself and also wielded the bow.
It was marvellous on his part to play the
additional role of a charioteer in the course
of the struggle in the eyes of the onlookers.
(40—43)

हयेषु व्यग्रहस्तं तं विव्याध निशितै: शरै:।
धनुष्यथ Wet हयेषु मुमुचे शरान्॥४४॥
