* AYODHYAKANDA +

like yourself speak as you are doing, unless
he is agitated? | wonder how you regularly
glorify in this way fate—which is indeed
ineffectual, pitiable and impotent—powerful and
foremost among the Ksatriyas as you are?
(4—7)

पापयोस्ते कथं नाम dat: शङ्का न विद्यते।
सन्ति धर्मोपधासक्ता धर्मात्मन् किं न बुध्यसे॥ ८॥

“It is a matter of surprise how there is
no suspicion in your mind about that wicked
couple (DaSaratha and Kaikeyl). Don’t you
know, O pious Rama, that there are men
devoted to a semblance of piety? (8)

तयो: सुचरितं स्वार्थं youre, परिजिहीर्षतो:।
यदि Ad व्यवसितं स्याद्धि प्रागेव weal
तयो: Uta दत्तश्च स्याद् वर:प्रकृतश्च स:॥९॥

“Had this not actually been at the very
outset the intention, O scion of Raghu, of
the couple, who seek through fraud for their
own selfish end, to forsake you, the one
who have such a noble conduct, the
installation would not have been undertaken
at all. Nay, if the story of the boon granted
by the one and received by the other had
been real, it would have been granted even
before the preparations for the installation
were taken in hand. (9)
लोकविद्विष्टमारब्धं त्वदन्यस्याभिषेचनम्।
नोत्सहे सहितुं वीर am a क्षन्तुमर्हसि॥१०॥

“What has now been commenced is
disliked by the people. | cannot brook, O
heroic Rama, the installation of anyone other
than you. Be pleased to forgive my
intolerance in this matter. (10)

येनैवमागता gat तव बुद्धिर्महामते।
सोऽपि धर्मो मम द्वेष्यो यत्प्रसङ्गाद् विमुह्यसि॥ ११॥

“Repellent to me is that piety too by the
thought of which your mind, which was
once inclined to accept the office of Prince
Regent, has thus been diverted from the
purpose, O noble-minded brother, and
through devotion to which you are falling

383

a prey to infatuation. (11)
कथं त्वं कर्मणा शक्त: कैकेयीवशवर्तिन:।
करिष्यसि पिक्तूक्विमधर्मिष्ठ बिगर्हित्तम्॥ १२॥

“Had it not been so how are you going
to redeem the most unrighteous and
reproachful pledge of your father who is under
the thumb of Kaikeyi, even though you are
able to set things right by recourse to action?

(12)

यदयं किल्बिषाद् ve: कृतोऽप्येवं न गृह्यते।
Wat तत्र मे दु:खं maga गर्हित:॥१३॥
“Since this interruption in your installation,
though brought about through machination
in the shape of connecting the story of a
boon granted by the Emperor, is not being
recognized by you as such, agony is caused
to me on that account and partiality to such
false piety is reprehensible in my view. (13)
तवायं धर्मसंयोगो लोकस्यास्य विगर्हित:।
मनसापि कथं कामं कुर्यात् cat HATTA: |
तयोस्त्वहितयोर्नित्यं शत्र्वो: पित्रभिधानयो:।। १४॥
“This adherence of yours to piety is
condemned in the eyes of the people of
Ayodhya. How can anyone other than you
fulfil, even in thought, the desire of the
aforesaid two enemies, bearing the name of
parents, who follow their own pleasure and
are ever hostile to you? (14)

यद्यपि प्रतिपत्तिस्ते cat चापि तयोर्मतम्।
तथाप्युपेक्षणीयं a न मे तदपि रोचते॥१५॥

“Although it is your belief that even the
decision of your parents to stop your
installation is inspired by fate, it nonetheless
deserves to be ignored by yourself. Such a
decree even of fate does not please me.(15)

विक्लवो वीर्यहीनो a: स दैवमनुवर्तते।
वीरा: सम्भावितात्मानो न दैवं पर्युपासते॥१६॥

“He alone who is cowardly and
powerless trusts in fate. The valiant, who
are possessed of a strong mind, never
seek shelter in fate. (16)
