* SUNDARAKANDA + 31

पतत्पतङ्गसंकाशो व्यायत: शुशुभे कपि:।
Wag SA Udy: कक्ष्यया लध्यमानया॥ ६६॥
The enormous monkey, Hanuman, who
resembled the moving sun, looked charming
with his tail entwined round his waist as a
fully developed elephant with a girth tied
round its waist. (66)

उपरिष्टाच्छरीरेण च्छायया चावगाढ्या।
सागरे मारुताविष्टा नौरिवासीत् तदा कपि:॥६७॥

Coursing above with his body and with
his reflection immersed in water, Hanuman
looked at that time like a vessel propelled
by the wind above and sailing on the sea
below. (67)

यं यं देशं समुद्रस्य जगाम स महाकपि:।

स तु तस्याङ्गवेगेन सोन्माद sa लक्ष्यते॥६८॥
Whichever part of the sea that enormous

Hanuman passed over, it looked actually

riotous, as it were, due to the impetus of his
body and terrific speed. (68)

सागरस्योर्मिजालानामुरसा sterasfore
अभिध्नंस्तु महावेग: पुप्लुवे स महाकपि:॥६९॥
Full of extraordinary vehemence, that
huge monkey, Hanuman, dashed forward
actually smashing with his breast the rows
of waves of the sea, rising as high as
mountains. (69)

कपिवातश्च बलवान् मेघवातश्च Feta: |
सागरं भीमनिर्हयदं कम्पयामासतुर्भृशम्॥७०॥

The mighty wind generated by the
impetus of Hanuman as well as the wind set
in motion by clouds, when adrift, violently
agitated the sea, which began to roar terribly.

(70)

विकर्षन्नूर्मिजालानि बृहन्ति लवणाम्भसि।
पुप्लुवे कपिशार्दूलो विकिरन्निव रोदसी॥ ७१॥

Forcibly drawing series of huge billows
in the salt sea, Hanuman, a tiger among
monkeys, sped along agitating the earth
and heaven both, as it were. (71)

मेरुमन्दरसंकाशानुद्गतान् सुमहार्णवे।
अत्यक्रामन्महावेगस्तरङ्गान् गणयन्निव॥ ७२॥
Hanuman, who was rushing alongwith
great speed, moved on counting, as it were,
the billows resembling Mounts Meru and
Mandara in size, raised in the vast sea.
(72)
अम्बरस्थं विबभ्राजे शरदभ्रमिवाततम्॥७३॥
The water raised by his onrush and
hanging in the air alongwith clouds looked
exceptionally charming at that time like an
outstretched mass of autumnal clouds. (73)

तिमिनक्रझषा: put दृश्यन्ते विव्रृतास्तदा।
वस्त्रापकर्षणेनेव शरीराणि शरीरिणाम्॥७४॥

Exposed at that time on account of the
sea-water being raised by the onrush of
Hanuman, whales, crocodiles, alligators and
turtles became visible even like the limbs of
men uncovered by drawing the covering off.

(74)

क्रममाणं समीक्ष्याथं भुजगा: सागरंगमा:।
व्योम्नि तं कपिशार्दूलं सुपर्णमिव Ari ou I

Keenly observing that tiger among the
monkeys coursing through space, the
serpents moving in the sea forthwith took
him to be Garuda endowed with lovely wings.

(75)
दशयोजनविस्तीर्णा त्रिंशद्योजनमायता।
छाया वानरसिंहस्य जवे चारुतराभवत्॥७६॥

The shadow of that lion among
monkeys, Hanuman, which was ten Yojanas
(or eighty miles) wide and thirty Yojanas (or
two hundred forty miles) long, appeared
lovelier due to the rapidity of his movement.

(76)
श्चेताभ्रघनराजीव वायुपुत्रानुगामिनी |
TET सा शुशुभे छाया पतिता लवणाम्भसि॥ ७७॥

Falling on the salt sea and following
Hanuman, an offspring of the wind-god, that
