1110

their gaze on Sita, while others looked at
Sri Rama, although in meditation. (25)
सीताप्रवेशनं दृष्टवा तेषामासीत् समागम:।

तन्मुहूर्तमिवात्यर्थं wh सम्मोहितं जगत्॥ २६॥

« VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

All had assembled to witness the
submersion of Sita into the netherworld;
that moment all the world was as if stupefied.

(26)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये उत्तरकाण्डे सप्ततवतितम: AWA: ॥ ९७॥

Thus ends Canto Ninety-seven in the Uttarakanda of the glorious Ramayana of
Valmiki, the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

Canto LXXXXVIII

Sri Rama becomes enveloped by grief at Sita’s departure.
Brahma informs Him that Sita will again be
reunited with Him in the Heaven

चुक्रुशु: साधुसाध्वीति मुनयो रामसंनिधौ॥ १॥
When Sita had entered the netherworld,
all the monkeys and the ascetics exclaimed
‘well-done’ in the presence of Sri Rama.
(1)

दण्डकाष्ठमवष्टभ्य बाष्पव्याकुलितेक्षण:।
अवाक्शिरा दीनमना रामो ह्यासीत् Ae: faa: U2
Propping himself on the wooden stick,
with his eyes afflicted by tears, head
downcast in mental agony, Sri Rama was
indeed very much grieved. (2)

a रुदित्वा fat कालं बहुशो बाष्पमुत्सृजन्।
क्रोधशोकसमाविष्टो रामो वचनमब्रवीत्॥३॥
Weeping long and shedding tears in
profusion, possessed of both anger and
sorrow, he said: (3)
अभूतपूर्वं शोकं A मन: स्प्रष्टुमिवेच्छति।
पश्यतो मे यथा नष्टा सीता श्रीरिव रूपिणी॥४॥

‘A sorrow unexperienced before, is about
to overpower mind as Sita the goddess of
wealth—incarnate disappeared just before
my eyes. (4)
ततश्चापि मयाऽऽनीता किं पुनर्वसुधातलात्॥५॥

Sita disappeared formerly, being carried

to Lanka across the ocean; | brought her
back from there; what to say of bringing her
back from the Earth. He spoke: (5)
aaa efa vata dat निर्यात्यतां मम।

दर्शयिष्यामि वा रोषं यथा ATS ६॥

‘O goddess of Earth, venerable one,
please return to me Sita or else | shall
show my anger as you know me (my might).

(6)
कामं श्वश्रूर्ममैव त्वं त्वत्सकाशात् तु मैथिली।
कर्षता फालहस्तेन जनकेनोद्धूता पुरा॥७॥

‘You indeed are my mother-in-law;
Maithill (Sita) was taken out of you formerly
by Janaka while ploughing field with a golden
plough. (7)
तस्मान्निर्यात्यतां सीता frat वा प्रयच्छ मे।
Uae नाकपृष्ठे वा वसेयं सहितस्तया॥८॥

‘Therefore, either return Sita or else
grant space to me. | will stay with her in the
netherworld or in heaven. (8)

आनय त्वं fe तां सीतां मत्तोऽहं मैथिलीकृते।
न मे दास्यसि चेत् सीतां यथारूपां महीतले॥ ९ ॥
सपर्वतवनां कृत्स्नां विधमिष्यामि ते स्थितिम्।
नाशयिष्याम्यहं भूमिं सर्वमापो wale ot

‘Please bring that Sita; | have gone
mad for her; if you will not give back to me
