576

गन्धानुच्चावचांश्चान्यांस्तत्र गत्वाथ भूमिषम्।

तत्र संवेशयामासुश्चितामध्ये तमृत्विज:॥१७॥
Nay, throwing other fragrant substances

of various kinds into the funeral pile, the

priests officiating at the obsequies laid the

deceased emperor in the middle of the pyre

at the cremation ground. (17)

तदा हुताशनं हुत्वा जेपुस्तस्य तदृत्विज:।
जगुश्च ते यथाशास्त्रं तत्र सामानि सामगा:॥ १८॥

Pouring oblations into the fire, the
aforesaid priests engaged for the benefit of
the emperor then recited sacred texts relevant
to the funeral rites; while those among the
Officiating priests who could recite the hymns
of Samaveda, chanted them according to
the rules. (18)

शिबिकाभिश्च यानैश्च यथार्हं तस्य योषित:।
नगरान्निर्ययुस्तत्र ag: परिव्रृतास्तथा॥१९॥
Attended by elderly guards the king’s
consorts likewise went out of the city to the
cremation ground in palanquins and chariots
according to their rank. (19)
प्रसव्यं चापि तं चक्रुर्ऋत्विजोऽग्निचितं नृपम्।
स्नियश्च शोकसंतप्ता: कौसल्याप्रमुखास्तदा॥ २०॥
Then the priests officiating at the
obsequies too as well as the ladies led by

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

Kausalya who were sore stricken with grief,
went clockwise round the said monarch,
who had performed sacrifices culminating in
Aswamedha. (20)

क्रौञ्चीनामिव नारीणां निनादस्तत्र शुश्रुवे।
आर्तानां करुणं काले क्रोशन्तीनां ASST: ॥ २१॥
There was heard on that occasion the

noise of afflicted women wailing piteously in
thousands like so many female cranes. (21)

ततो रुदन्त्यो विवशा विलप्य च पुन: TA: |
यानेभ्य: सरयूतीरमवतेरुर्नृपाङ्गना: ॥ २२॥

Having lamented again and again and
crying helplessly, the king’s consorts got
down from their chariots at the bank of the
Sarayu. (22)
कृत्वोदकं ते भरतेन सार्धं

qe मन्तिपुरोहिताश्च।

प्रविश्याश्रुपरीतनेत्रा

भूमौ दशाहं व्यनयन्त SALI २३॥
Having offered water to the spirit of the
deceased alongwith Bharata and entering
the city once more, the king’s consorts as
well as the counsellors and family priests
spent the following ten days of their impurity
caused by the emperors death in agony,
reposing on the ground, their eyes filled with
tears. (23)

पुरं

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्येऽयोध्याकाण्डे
षट्सप्ततितम: सर्ग: ॥ ७६ I
Thus ends Canto Seventy-six in the Ayodhyakanda of the glorious Ramayana of
Valmiki, the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

