# YUDDHAKANDA #

यावदावर्तते Uh यावती च वसुंधरा।
Wad त्वमिह लोकस्य स्वामित्वमनुवर्तय॥ ११॥

“Enjoy you the rulership of the world
while living here in Ayodhya as long as the
stellar sphere revolves and so far as the
earth exists.” (11)

भरतस्य वच: श्रुत्वा Wa: परपुरञ्जय:।
तथेति प्रतिजग्राह निषसादासने शुभे॥१२॥

Hearing the submission of Bharata, Sri
Rama, the conqueror of hostile cities, granted
his request in the words: “Be it so!” and
took his place on a charming seat. (12)

तत: शत्रुघ्नवचनान्निपुणा: श्मश्रुवर्धना:।
सुखहस्ता: सुशीघ्राश्च राघवं पर्यवारयन्॥१३॥
At the command of Satrughna skilled
barbers, who were soft-handed and very
nimble too, thereupon surrounded Sri Rama,
a scion of Raghu. (13)

ua तु भरते स्नाते लक्ष्मणे च महाबले।
aia वानरेन्द्रे च राक्षसेन्द्रे विभीषणे॥१४॥
विशोधितजट: स्नातश्चित्रमाल्यानुलेपन:।
महार्हवसनोपेतस्तस्थौ तत्र श्रिया ज्वलन्॥१५॥

Bharata having bathed first of all as
also the exceptionally mighty Laksmana as
well as Sugriva, the ruler of monkeys, and
Vibhisana, the king of ogres, Sri Rama had
his matted locks disentangled, took his bath,
was adorned with picturesque garlands and
daubed with sandal-pastes etc., of various
colours, was clothed in costly raiment and
stood blazing in effulgence. (14-15)

प्रतिकर्म च रामस्य कारयामास वीर्यवान्।

लक्ष्मणस्य च लक्ष्मीवानिक्ष्वाकुकुलवर्धन:॥ १६॥
_ Nay, the powerful and the glorious
Satrughna, the promoter of the race of
Ikswaku, caused Sri Rama as well as
Laksmana to be adorned with jewels. (16)

प्रतिकर्म च सीताया: wat दशरथस्तरिय:।
आत्मनैव dal चक्रुर्मनस्विन्यो मनोहरम्॥ १७॥

And all the noble-minded widows of
Emperor Dasaratha themselves adorned

835

Sita in a soul-captivating style on that
occasion. (17)
ad वानरपत्नीनां सर्वासामेव शोभनम्।
चकार यत्नात् कौसल्या WEST पुत्रवत्सला॥ १८॥
Later, Kausalya, Sri Rama’s own
mother, who felt highly rejoiced on the return
of her sons and daughter-in-law and was so
fond of her sons, adorned with care all the
wives of the monkeys without exception in
a splendid way. (18)

तत: शत्रुघ्नवचनात् सुमन्त्रो नाम सारथि:।
योजयित्वाभिचक्राम रथं सर्वाङ्गशोभनम्॥१९॥

Yoking horses to a chariot, charming
in all parts, in obedience to the command of
Satrughna, the king’s charioteer-minister,
Sumantra by name, then made _ his
appearance before Sri Rama. (19)
आरुरोह महाबाहू राम: परपुरंजय:॥ २०॥

Seeing the heavenly chariot, which cast
an immaculate splendour like fire and the
sun, standing before him, the mighty-armed
Sri Rama, the conqueror of hostile cities,
ascended it. (20)

सुग्रीवो हनुमांश्चैव महेन्द्रसदृशद्युती।
स्नातौ दिव्यनिभैर्वस्तैर्जग्मतु: शुभकुण्डलौ॥ २१॥

Attired in robes of ethereal splendour
and adorned with sparkling earrings on having
bathed, Sugriva as well as Hanuman, who
vied with the mighty Indra (the ruler of gods)
in splendour, started towards the city. (21)

सर्वाभरणजुष्टाश्च ययुस्ता: शुभकुण्डला:।
सुग्रीवपत्न्य: सीता च द्रष्टुं नगरमुत्सुका:॥ २२॥
Adorned with all sorts of jewels as well
as with brilliant earrings, the celebrated
consorts of Sugriva as also Sita advanced,
eager as they were to behold the city of
Ayodhya. (22)

अयोध्यायां च सचिवा Wal दशरथस्य च।
पुरोहितं पुरस्कृत्य मन्त्रयामासुरर्थवत्॥२३॥
