* SUNDARAKANDA + 91

of Ikswaku’s race, to Sri Rama even as
success is conferred on an ascetic by a
goddess pleased with his austerities.’ (57)

स मुहूर्तमिव ध्यात्वा चिन्ताविग्रथितेन्द्रिय: |
उदतिष्ठन् महाबाहुर्हनूमान् मारुतात्मज:॥७५८॥

Having reflected a while, as it were,
celebrated Hanuman, that mighty armed son
of the wind-god, whose senses had been
enfeebled through anxiety, got up and said :

(58)

नमोऽस्तु रामाय सलक्ष्मणाय

देव्यै च तस्यै जनकात्मजायै।
नमोऽस्तु रुद्रेन्द्रयमानिलेभ्यो

नमोऽस्तु चन्द्राग्निमरुद्गणेभ्य: ।। ५९ ॥

‘Hail to Sri Rama accompanied by
Laksmana, as well as to that godlike lady
an offspring of King Janaka! Salutations to
Rudra (the god of destruction), Indra (the
ruler of gods), Yama (the god of retribution)
and the wind-god (my father) and hail to the
moon-god, the god of fire, and the forty-nine
wind-gods ! (59)

स तेभ्यस्तु नमस्कृत्वा सुग्रीवाय च मारुति: ।
दिश: सर्वा: समालोक्य सोऽशोकवनिकां प्रति।॥ ६० ॥

Having paid reverence to the aforesaid
as well as to Sugriva, his master, and
surveying all the quarters, Hanuman, that
son of the wind-god, for his part mentally
proceeded towards the Asoka grove. (60)

स गत्वा मनसा पूर्वमशोकवनिकां शुभाम्।
उत्तरं चिन्तयामास वानरो मारुतात्मज:॥६१॥

Having mentally reached the splendid
Asoka grove in the first instance, Hanuman,
an offspring of the wind-god, envisaged the
future as follows : (61)

qa तु रक्षोबहुला भविष्यति वनाकुला।
अशोकवनिका पुण्या सर्वसंस्कारसंस्कृता॥६२॥

‘Surely the Asoka grove must be
guarded by many ogres and surrounded
by forests, and must be sacred and also
cultured with all cultivating processes such

as breaking up the ground and uprooting
weeds. (62)

रक्षिणश्चात्र विहिता नूनं रक्षन्ति पादपान्।
भगवानपि विश्वात्मा नातिक्षोभं प्रवायति॥ ६३॥

‘Nay, the guards posted _ there
undoubtedly protect the trees, so that the
all-pervading and powerful wind too does
not blow freely with unusual velocity. (63)

संक्षिप्तोऽयं मयाऽऽत्मा च WATS रावणस्य च।
सिद्धिं दिशन्तु मे सर्वे car: सर्षिगणास्त्विह॥ ६४॥

‘In the interests of Sri Rama and also
in order to avoid the gaze of Ravana, this
body has been contracted by me; let all the
gods alongwith hosts of Rsis, the seers of
Vedic Mantras, for their part grant success
to me in this undertaking. (64)

ब्रह्मा स्वयम्भूर्भगवान् देवाश्चैव तपस्विन:।
सिद्धिमग्निश्च वायुश्च पुरुहूतश्च वज्रभृत्॥६५॥
‘May the glorious self-born Brahma,
the creator, as well as other gods and
ascetics, nay, the god of fire and the wind-
god and Indra, the wielder of the thunderbolt,
grant success to me! (65)

वरुण: पाशहस्तश्च सोमादित्यौ तथैव च।
अश्विनौ च महात्मानौ Wed: सर्व Wa च॥६६॥
सिद्धिं सर्वाणि भूतानि भूतानां चैव य: प्रभु:।
दास्यन्ति मम ये चान्येऽप्यदृष्टा: UT गोचरा: ।॥। ६७॥

‘Varuna, the god of water, who carries
a noose in his hand, and even so the moon-
god and the sun-god, and likewise the two
high-souled Aswins and all the forty-nine
wind-gods, all created beings as well as
Lord Visnu, who is the Lord of all created
beings, and also other gods who may fall on
the way, whether seen or even unseen, will
bestow success on me. (66—67)
तदुन्नसं पाण्डुरदन्तमव्रण
शुचिस्मितं पद्मपलाशलोचनम्।
द्रक्ष्ये तदार्यावदनं कदा न्वहं
प्रसन्नताराधिपतुल्यवर्चसम् ॥६८॥

‘lL wonder when | shall be able to behold
