* AYODHYAKANDA +

There also came twenty thousand
women decked with ornaments of gold,
gems and pearls and coral sent by Kubera.
There also arrived from the Nandana grove
in paradise twenty thousand celestial
nymphs, embraced by whom a man looked
as though seized with a fit of insanity.*

(44-45)
नारदस्तुम्बुरुर्गोपप प्रभया सूर्यवर्चस:।

Ud गन्धर्वराजानो भरतस्याग्रतो जगु:॥४६॥

The following chiefs of Gandharvas—
Narada, Tumburu and Gopa—who shone
like the sun because of their splendour,
began to sing before Bharata. (46)

अलम्बुषा मिश्रकेशी पुण्डरीकाथ वामना।
Sad भरतं भरद्वाजस्य शासनात्॥४७॥
Alambusa, Misrakesi, Pundarika and
Vamana started dancing in the presence of
Bharata under orders of Bharadwaja. (47)

यानि माल्यानि देवेषु यानि चैत्ररथे वने।
प्रयागे तान्यदृश्यन्तं भरद्वाजस्य तेजसा॥४८॥

Those celestial flowers which are found
solely among gods and those which exist in
the grove named Caitraratha, belonging to
Kubera, the god of riches, were seen at
Prayaga, thanks to the spiritual might of
Bharadwaja. (48)

बिल्वा मार्दङ्खिका आसन् शम्याग्राहा बिभीतका: |
AMM नर्तकाश्चासन् भरद्वाजस्य तेजसा॥४९॥

Bel trees assumed the role of playing
on clay tomtoms, Vibhitaka trees picked up
a pair of cymbals known by the name of
Samya in order to strike them so as to keep
time and Peepul trees played the role of
dancers thanks to the spiritual might of

Bharadwaja. (49)
ad: सरलतालाश्च तिलका: सतमालका:।
प्रहृष्टास्तत्र सम्पेतु: कुब्जा भूत्वाथ वामना:॥५०॥

Then deodars, palmyra and Tilaka trees

617

alongwith Tamala trees arrived there highly
rejoiced, assuming the forms of hunchbacks
and dwarfs to render services to Bharata.
(50)

शिंशपाऽऽमलकी जम्बूर्याश्चान्या: कानने लता: ।

मालती मल्लिका जातिर्याश्चान्या: कानने CTT: |
प्रमदाविग्रहं कृत्वा भरद्वाजाश्रमेऽवसन्॥५१॥
Simsapas (Asoka trees), Amalakis
(emblic myrobalan), Jambus (rose-apple
trees); Malati, Mallika and Jati and whatever
other trees bearing female names and
creepers there were in the forest took up
their abode in the hermitage of Bharadwaja
assuming the form of young women in order
to be able to serve Bharata. (51)

सुरां सुरापा: पिबत पायसं च बुभुक्षिता:।
मांसानि च सुमेध्यानि भक्ष्यन्तां यो यदिच्छति॥ ७५२ ॥
They said to the troops: “Drink wine, O
soldiers addicted to drinking, and drink milk
thickened with rice, O troops stricken with
hunger! Let meats also, eminently fit for
sacrifice, be eaten, as you will. One will get
whatever one seeks.” (52)

उच्छोद्य स्नापयन्ति स्म नदीतीरेषु वल्गुषु।
अप्येकमेकं पुरुषं Wiel: सप्त AMT च॥५३॥

A batch of seven or eight young women
bathed every single man on the charming
river-banks after first daubing his body with
a fragrant paste of oil-seeds and then rubbing
off the dirt. (53)

संवाहन्त्य: समापेतुर्नार्यो विपुललोचना:।
परिमृज्य तदान्योन्यं पाययन्ति वराङ्गना:॥५४॥
There also appeared on the scene
women with big eyes, kneading the feet of
men; nay, wiping off the moisture on their
body, the lovely women gave them delicious
beverages to drink in seclusion. (54)

ह्यान् गजान् खरानुष्ट्रांस्तथैव सुरभे: सुतान्।
अभोजयन् वाहनपास्तेषां भोज्यं यथाविधि॥ ५५ ॥

* What has been stated above is corroborated by the following Sruti :

गन्धर्वाप्सरसो वा एतमुन्मादयन्ति य उन्माद्यतीति।
