# YUDDHAKANDA +

अद्यप्रभृति यामन्यां बलान्नारीं गमिष्यसि।
तदा a शतधा मूर्धा फलिष्यति न संशय:॥ १४॥
“‘If you happen to violate any other
woman henceforward, your head will be
forthwith split into a hundred pieces; there is
no doubt about it’. (14)
इत्यहं तस्य शापस्य भीत: प्रसभमेव ताम्।
नारोहये बलात् सीतां वैदेहीं शयने शुभे॥ Va
“Hence, afraid, as | am, of his curse, |
do not violently put Sita, a princess of the

Videha territory, on my charming bed by
force. (15)

सागरस्येव मे am मारुतस्येव A ata:
नैतद् दाशरथिर्वेद ह्यासादयति तेन माम्॥१६॥

“My fury resembles that of the sea,
and my speed resembles the speed of the
wind. Surely Rama (son of DaSaratha) does
not know of it, hence he is attacking me.

(16)
को fe सिंहमिवासीनं aa गिरिगुहाशये।
ee मृत्युमिवासीनं प्रबोधयितुमिच्छति॥ ou

“Otherwise, who will actually seek to
arouse me to martial activity as one would
awaken a lion asleep in a sitting posture
in its abode in the shape of a mountain
cavern or arouse into activity Death sitting
in rage? (17)

335
नमत्तो निर्गतान् बाणान् द्विजिह्वान् पन्नगानिव।
wa: पश्यति संग्रामे तेन मामभिगच्छति॥ ecu

“Rama has not seen arrows like

serpents with forked tongues shot in a combat
from my bow. Hence he is marching against
me. (18)

fad वज्रसमैर्बाणै: शतधा कार्मुकच्युतै:।
राममादीपयिष्यामि उल्काभिरिव कुञ्जरम्॥१९॥

“| shall consume Rama in no time with
my arrows shot in hundreds like the
thunderbolt from my bow even as one would
torment an elephant with firebrands. (19)

तच्चास्य बलमादास्ये बलेन महता a:
उदित: सविता काले नक्षत्राणां प्रभामिव॥ २०॥

“Nay, surrounded by a huge army, | shall
split up his army even as, risen in the morning,
the sun disperses the light of the stars. (20)

न वासवेनापि सहस्रचक्रुषा
युधास्मि शक्यो वरुणेन वा पुन:।
मया त्वियं बाहुबलेन निर्जिता
पुरा पुरी वैश्रवणेन पालिता॥२१॥

“lam not capable of being conquered
in an encounter even by the thousand-
eyed Indra, the ruler of gods, nor, again,
by Varuna, the god of water. Again, this city
of Lanka, which was formerly ruled by Kubera
(son of Sage ViSrava), was won by me on
the strength of my arms.” (21)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये युद्धकाण्डे त्रयोदश: AWA: ॥ 23 Il

Thus ends Canto Thirteen in the Yuddhakanda of the glorious Ramayana of

Valmiki, the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

