# YUDDHAKANDA #

ततो रावणवेगेन सुदूरमवगाढया।
शक्त्या विभिन्नहृदय: पपात भुवि लक्ष्मण: ॥ ३६॥
Pierced grievously by the javelin, which
had penetrated very deep due to the
tremendous force exerted by Ravana,
Laksmana thereupon fell to the ground.
(36)

तदवस्थं समीपस्थो लक्ष्मणं Wet Wea: |
भ्रातृस्नेहान्महातेजा विषण्णहृदयोऽभवत्॥ 39
Observing Laksmana reduced to that
predicament, Sri Rama (a scion of Raghu),
who stood near, felt despondent at heart
because of brotherly affection, even though
he was endowed with extraordinary courage.
(37)

स मुहूर्तमिव ध्यात्वा बाष्पपर्याकुलेक्षण:।
बभूव संरब्धतरो Bit sat पावक:॥ ३८॥

Reflecting awhile as it were, his eyes
bedimmed with tears, he felt all the more
enraged even like the fire at the end of a
world-cycle. (38)

न विषादस्य कालोऽयमिति संचिन्त्य राघव:।

am सुतुमुलं Ge रावणस्य वधे धृत:।
सर्वयत्नेन महता लक्ष्मणं परिवीक्ष्य च॥३९॥
Realizing that it was not the time
for feeling disconsolate, and gazing on
Laksmana, Sri Rama, a scion of Raghu,
resumed the fierce struggle with a mighty
and whole-hearted endeavour, resolved as
he was upon the destruction of Ravana.
(39)

स ददर्श ततो Wa: शक्त्या भिन्नं महाहवे।
लक्ष्मणं रुधिरादिग्धं सपन्नगमिवाचलम्॥४०॥
The aforesaid Sri Rama then beheld
Laksmana pierced with a javelin in the great
struggle and bathed in blood, and resembling
a mountain with a snake penetrating its
centre. (40)

तामपि प्रहितां शक्तिं रावणेन बलीयसा।
यत्नतस्ते हरिश्रेष्ठा न शेकुरवमर्दितुम्॥४१॥

727

अर्दिताश्चैव बाणौघैस्ते प्रवेकेण रक्षसाम्।
ita: सा विनिर्भिद्य प्रविष्टा धरणीतलम्॥४२॥

The jewels among the monkeys could
not extract even with effort that javelin,
propelled as it was by the exceedingly mighty
Ravana and also because they were
overwhelmed by the stream of arrows
discharged by the king of ogres. Nay,
passing through the body of Laksmana (son
of Sumitra), it had penetrated into the surface
of the earth. (41-42)
तां कराभ्यां परामृश्य राम: शक्तिं भयावहाम्।
ava समरे Hal बलवान् विचकर्ष च॥४३॥

Seizing hold of the terrible javelin with
his hands, the mighty Rama drew it out
and, getting enraged, snapped it in the
course of the struggle. (43)

we निष्कर्षत: oh रावणेन बलीयसा।
शरा: सर्वेषु गात्रेषु पातिता मर्मभेदिन:॥४४॥

While he was busy extracting the javelin,
arrows which pierced his vital parts were
hurled by the exceedingly mighty Ravana
on all his limbs. (44)

अचिन्तयित्वा तान् बाणान् समाश्लिष्य च लक्ष्मणम्।
अब्रवीच्च हनूमन्तं सुग्रीवं च महाकपिम्॥४५॥
Not minding those arrows, and
embracing Laksmana, he spoke as follows to
Hanuman and the great monkey, Sugriva: (45)
लक्ष्मणं परिवार्यैवं तिष्ठध्वं वानरोत्तमा:।
पराक्रमस्य कालोऽयं सम्प्राप्तो A चिरेप्सित:॥ ४६ ॥
पापात्मायं दशग्रीवो वध्यतां पापनिश्चय:।
कांक्षितं चातकस्येव घर्मान्ते मेघदर्शनम्॥४७॥

“Remain encompassing Laksmana as
you are doing, O princes of monkeys. The
occasion, long sought by me to manifest
my prowess, has come. Let this ten-headed
monster of sinful mind and sinful resolve be
made short work of. His death is sought by
me as the sight of a cloud by a Cataka bird
at the end of summer. (46-47)
