766

the gods or even from reptiles for that
matter! (14)

अवध्यो देवतानां यस्तथा दानवरक्षसाम्।

Ba: सोऽयं रणे Ma मानुषेण पदातिना॥१५॥
“Here lies killed in combat by a mortal

come walking all the way from Ayodhya, a

warrior who was incapable of being killed

by gods, and even so, by devils and ogres

too! (15)

यो न wera: Beat न यक्षैर्नासुरैस्तथा।
सोऽयं कश्चिदिवासत्त्वो मृत्युं AeA लम्भित:॥ १६॥

“Here lies, conveyed by a mortal to the
region of death, like one devoid of strength,
he who could not be disposed of by gods,
Yaksas and demons alike.” (16)

एवं वदन्त्यो रुरुदुस्तस्य ता दु:खिता: स्निय: |

भूय एव च दु:खार्ता विलेपुश्च पुन: पुन:॥ १७॥
Wailing as aforesaid, those wretched

consorts of Ravana burst into tears. Nay,

stricken with agony, they repeatedly lamented
once more in the following words: (17)

अश्रृण्वता तु Peat Aad हितवादिनाम्।
मरणायाहृता सीता राक्षसाश्च निपातिता:।
Um: सममिदानीं a वयमात्मा च पातित:॥ १८॥

“To your own destruction was Sita
borne away by you, who did not listen to
the remonstrances of your near and dear
ones, who always offered friendly counsel
to you. Nay, ogres too have been struck-
down and here stand we, your consorts, as
well as your ownself destroyed all at once.

(18)
ब्रुवाणोऽपि हितं वाक्यमिष्टो भ्राता विभीषण: |
Ge परुषितो मोहात् त्वयाऽऽत्मवधकांक्षिणा।। १९॥

“Though tendering salutary advice to
you, your beloved younger _ brother,
Vibhisana, was harshly treated through
ignorance by you, who evidently sought
your own destruction; and the result has
been seen by us. (19)

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA +

यदि निर्यातिता ते स्यात् सीता रामाय मैथिली ।

न न: स्याद् व्यसनं घोरमिदं मूलहरं महत्॥ २०॥
“Had Sita, a princess of Mithila, been

restored by you to Rama, this appalling and

major calamity, which has robbed us of our

very root, would not have befallen us. (20)

व्त्तकामो wae भ्राता रामो मित्रकुलं भवेत्।

aa चाविधवा: Gat: सकामा न च शत्रव: ॥ २१॥

“Your brother, Vibhisana, would have
in that case had his desire fulfilled, Rama
would have turned our ally; nay, we all
would have been spared the curse of
widowhood and our enemies would not have
realized their ambition. (21)
राक्षसा वयमात्मा च at तुल्यं निपातितम्॥ २२॥

“By you, however, who, hard-hearted
as you were, was forcibly kept Sita under
detention, the ogres, we, your consorts, as
well as your ownself—all the three have
been ruined all at once. (22)
न कामकार: कामं वा da राक्षसपुंगव।
दैवं चेष्टयते ud हतं दैवेन wean

“Your acting according to your own
will, however, was not sufficient to ruin you,
O bull among the ogres! For, Providence
alone prompts all to action. He alone is
killed who is killed by destiny. (23)
वानराणां विनाशोऽयं राक्षसानां च ते रणे।
तव da महाबाहो दैवयोगादुपागत:॥ २४॥

“This destruction of the monkeys as
also of the ogres as well as yours in the
conflict courted by you has come about as
an act of destiny alone, O mighty-armed
one! (24)

नैवार्थेन च कामेन विक्रमेण न चाज्ञया।
शक्या दैवगतिर्लोके निवर्तयितुमुद्यता॥ 24 I

“The course of destiny, when about to
bear fruit, cannot be diverted by money,
wish, valour or even by command.” (25)
