288

lodged in quarters and presented with various
ornaments according to their respective rank,
even as Brahma, the lord of created beings,
would see his progeny. (47)

न तु केकयराजानं जनकं वा नराधिप:।
TRA चानयामास पश्चात्तौ श्रोष्यत: प्रियम्॥४८॥

In a hurry, however, DaSaratha, the
ruler of men, invited neither the king of the
Kekayas nor King Janaka and consoled
himself with the thought that the two
monarchs would hear the delightful news
afterwards. ' (48)

अथोपविष्टे नृपतौ तस्मिन् परपुरार्दने।
तत: प्रविविशु: शेषा राजानो लोकसम्मता:॥४९॥

Now that the aforesaid monarch,
Emperor DaSsaratha, who was capable of
destroying the enemy’s stronghold, had taken
his seat in the assembly called by him, the
other kings, who were esteemed of the

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA +

अथ राजवितीर्णेषु विविधेष्वासनेषु च।
राजानमेवाभिमुखा निषेदुर्नियता नृपा:॥५०॥
The kings then sat down in a disciplined
way facing the Emperor alone on the different
seats allotted to them by the Emperor.

(50)
a +
पुरालयैर्जानपदैश्च मानवै:।
उपोपविष्टैर्नृपतिर्वृतो बभौ
सहस्ररचक्षुर्भगवानिवामरे३ WALI

Surrounded by kings that had received
attentions from the Emperor and were full of
modesty, as well as by prominent men who
had their residence in the city of Ayodhya
or belonged to the other parts of the country,
and who all sat close to the Emperor in
order to be able to hear distinctly what he
said, the aforesaid monarch shone like the
glorious Indra (the thousand-eyed god)? in

people, forthwith entered the assembly. (49) | the midst of other gods. (51)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्येऽयोध्याकाण्डे
प्रथम: सर्ग: il १ il

Thus ends Canto One in the Ayodhyakanda of the glorious Ramayana of Valmiki,
the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

1. In the event of the king of the Kekayas and King Janaka being invited to attend the installation
ceremony, Bharata and Satrughna would have naturally accompanied their maternal grandfather and the
presence of all these would have confirmed the installation of Sri Rama and the whole course of history
would have altogether changed. Sri Rama would not have proceeded to the forest then, so that the very
purpose of his advent would have been defeated. In order to avert this contingency the gods changed the
mind of Daégaratha and deterred him from inviting the king of the Kekayas and King Janaka, two of his
nearest relations, to the installation ceremony.

2. There is a pun on the word “Sahasra-Caksu” in the above verse. A king is also credited with a
thousand eyes in the shape of a network of spies employed by him in order to ascertain the loyalty of his
subjects and to detect the presence of any fifth columnists within his kingdom, as also to hunt up gangs
of robbers and thieves. It is on account of these spies that a king has also been designated in our works
on political science as a Cara-Caksus (one having spies for one’s eyes).
