688

ogres, panic stricken, as they were fled in
various directions in their hundreds. (78)

केचिल्लङ्कां परित्रस्ता: प्रविष्टा वानरार्दिता:।
समुद्रे पतिता: केचित् केचित् पर्वतमाश्रिता:॥ ७९॥

Harried by the monkeys, some, who
were greatly alarmed, penetrated deep into
Lanka; others dropped into the sea; while
still others took refuge on the Trikuta mountain.

(79)
हतमिन्द्रजितं दृष्टवा wart च रणक्षितौ।
राक्षसानां सहस्रेषु न कश्चित् प्रत्यदृश्यत॥८०॥

Finding Indrajit killed and lying on the

battlefield, not one among the thousands of
ogres was to be seen. (80)

यथास्तं Wa आदित्ये नावतिष्ठन्ति waa: |

तथा तस्मिन् निपतिते राक्षसास्ते गता दिश:॥ ८१॥
Even as sunbeams stay no longer when

the sun has sunk below the horizon, so the

said ogres fled in all directions when Indrajit
had fallen. (81)

शान्तरश्मिरिवादित्यो निर्वाण sa ura:
aya स महाबाहुर्व्यपास्तगतजीवित:॥८२॥

Thrown asunder and shorn of life, that
mighty-armed warrior, Indrajit, looked like
the sun whose rays have cooled down and
a fire which has gone out. (82)

प्रशान्तपीडाबहुलो विनष्टारि: प्रहर्षवान्।
aya लोक: पतिते राक्षसेन्द्रसुते तदा॥८३॥
Indrajit, son of the ruler of ogres, having
fallen, the world had its suffering allayed in
a large measure now that its enemy had
been destroyed and it experienced a thrill of
delight. (83)

wi च wal war we सर्वैर्महर्षिभि:।
जगाम निहते तस्मिन् राक्षसे पापकर्मणि॥८४॥

That ogre of sinful deeds having been
made short work of, the glorious Indra,
the ruler of gods, too rejoiced with all
eminent Rsis (the seers of Vedic Mantras).

(84)

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA +

आकाशे चापि देवानां शुश्रुवे दुन्दुभिस्वन:।
नृत्यद्भिरप्सरोभिश्च गन्धर्वैश्च महात्मभि:॥ ८५॥

In the heavens too the roll of large
drums played upon by gods could be heard
alongwith the melody produced by dancing
celestial nymphs and the songs of high-
souled Gandharvas. (85)

aay: पुष्पवर्षाणि तदद्भुतमिवाभवत्।
प्रशशाम हते तस्मिन् राक्षसे क्रूरकर्मणि॥८६॥

Gods sent down showers of flowers;
for the death of Indrajit came as a marvel to
them. Nay, the dust, which was hanging on
the battlefield settled, now that the aforesaid
ogre of cruel deeds had been killed and the
fighting had forthwith ceased as a matter of
course. (86)

Wat आपो नभश्चैव जह्षुर्देवदानवा:।
आजग्मु: पतिते तस्मिन् सर्वलोकभयावहे॥ ८७॥
ऊचुश्च सहितास्तुष्टा देवगन्धर्वदानवा:।
विज्वरा: शान्तकलुषा ब्राह्मणा विचरन्तिति॥ ८८ i

The waters became limpid and the sky
too became clear; nay, gods and demons
alike rejoiced since that ogre, who was the
terror of all the worlds, had now fallen.
Feeling gratified, gods, Gandharvas (celestial
musicians) and Danavas (devils), arrived
on the scene in a body and said, “Let the
Brahmanas move about free from anxiety
now that their torment had ceased.” (87-88)

ततोऽभ्यनन्दन् संहृष्टा: समरे हरियूथपा:।
तमप्रतिबलं दृष्टवा हतं नैर्ऋतपुङ्खवम्॥८९॥
Feeling overjoyed to see that bull among
the ogres, who was unrivalled in combat,
made short work of, the commanders of
monkey troops exulted over their victory.
(89)

विभीषणो हनूमांश्च wraatsyetze: |
विजयेनाभिनन्दन्तस्तुष्टुवुश्चापि लक्ष्मणम्॥९०॥
Felicitating Laksmana on his victory,
Vibhisana and Hanuman as also Jambavan,
