286

Tot शास्त्रसमूहेषु Wat व्यामिश्रकेषु च।
अर्थधर्मौ च संगृह्य सुखतन्त्रो न चालस:॥ २७॥

He had acquired proficiency in the
Sastras (the various departments of
knowledge) as well as in works (such as
dramas) written in a mixed tongue (viz.,
Samskrta mixed with a Prakrta dialect) and
enjoyed the pleasures of sense, keeping
inviolate the principles of rigthteousness and
maintaining the soundness of his finances;
nay, he never remained inactive. (27)
वैहारिकाणां शिल्पानां विज्ञातार्थविभागवित्।
aie विनये चैव युक्तो वारणवाजिनाम्॥ २८॥

He was a connoisseur of arts (Such as
vocal and instrumental music, drawing etc.)
intended to entertain oneself and knew how
to allocate funds to various items of
expenditure.' He was an expert in riding on
and taming elephants and horses. (28)

धनुर्वेदविदां श्रेष्ठो लोकेऽतिरथसम्मत:।
अभियाता veal च सेनानयविशारद:॥ २९॥

He was the foremost of those knowing
the science of archery and was esteemed
in the world even by Atirathas (those who
fight a number of Maharathas? alone). He
not only knew how to make an inroad into
an enemy’s stronghold, but also how to
take the offensive in a war and was skilled
in disposing the army in a particular battle-
array. (29)

अप्रधृष्यश्च संग्रामे क्रुद्धैरपि सुरासुरै:।
अनसूयो जितक्रोधो न gal न च मत्सरी॥ ३०॥

He could not be overpowered in an
encounter even by the gods and demons in
rage. He was devoid of a carping spirit, had
conquered wrath, was never elated and

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA +

never gave way to jealousy.

नावज्ञेयश्च भूतानां न च कालवशानुग:।
एवं श्रेष्ठैर्गुणैर्युक्त: wart पार्थिवात्मज:॥ ३१॥
सम्मतस्तिषु लोकेषु वसुधाया: क्षमागुणै:।
Gem बृहस्पतेस्तुल्यो वीर्ये चापि शचीपते: ।। ३२॥

He could not be disregarded with
impunity by created beings and was not
subject to the control of Time. Endowed
with the foregoing noblest virtues, Sri Rama,
son of Emperor Dasaratha, was esteemed
not only by the people of Ayodhya but in all
the three worlds (viz., heaven, earth and
the intermediate region). He was a compeer
of Mother Earth (the repository of all riches)
in forbearance and other allied virtues and
vied with the sage Brhaspati, the preceptor
of gods, in wisdom and with Indra, the
consort of Saci, in valour. (31-32)

गुणैर्विरुरुचे war da: सूर्य इवांशुभि:॥ ३३॥

Nay, like the sun-god resplendent with
his rays, Sri Rama shone brightly by virtue
of his aforesaid excellences, was loved by
all the people of Ayodhya, affording delight
to his father, Emperor DaSaratha. (33)
तमेवंव्त्तसम्पन्नमप्रधृष्यपराक्रमम् ।
लोकनाथोपमं नाथमकामयत मेदिनी॥ ३४॥

Goddess Earth herself sought for her
protector the aforesaid prince, who was
endowed with such a lofty character, was
possessed of valour that could not be
subdued and who vied with the guardians of
the spheres in might and splendour. (34)

एतैस्तु बहुभिर्युक्तं गुणैरनुपमै: सुतम्।
दृष्टवा दशरथो राजा चक्रे चिन्तां परंतप:॥ ३५॥

(30)

1. We read in Srimad Bhagavata :

धर्माय यशसेऽर्थाय कामाय स्वजनाय च। पञ्चधा विभजन् वित्तमिहामुत्र च मोदते॥

(VIII. xix. 37)

“A householder dividing his income into five parts (and utilizing it) for the purpose of 1. acquiring
religious merit, 2. celebrity, 3. (earning more) wealth, 4. enjoying pleasures and 5. maintaining his own
people; rejoices in this as well as in the life beyond.”

2. For the definition of a Maharatha (a great car-warrior) vide foot-note below I. v. 20 on P. 82 of

Valmiki-Ramayana Vol.-I.
