880

सुमाली सचिवै: सार्धं व्रृतो राक्षसपुङ्खवै:।
अभिगम्य दशग्रीवं परिष्वज्येदमब्रवीत्॥३॥

Sumali accompanied by his ministers
and surrounded by other Raksasa chieftains,
came to DaSsagriva and, embracing him,
spoke as follows: (3)

दिष्ट्या ते वत्स सम्प्राप्तश्चिन्तितोऽयं मनोरथ:।
यस्त्वं त्रिभुवनश्रेष्ठाल्लब्धवान् वरमुत्तमम्॥४॥

‘Child, since you have secured from
the great personality of the three worlds,
Brahma, the best of boons, you have
fortunately obtained what you were cherishing
in your mind. (4)
यत्कृते च वयं लङ्कां त्यक्त्वा याता रसातलम्।
aed नो महाबाहो महद्विष्णुकृतं भयम्॥५॥

‘The great fear inspired in us by Visnu,
for which we had to leave Lanka and enter

the netherworld is now gone, O mighty-
armed one! (5)

असकृत् तद्भयाद भग्ना: परित्यज्य स्वमालयम्।
विद्रुता: सहिता: सर्वे प्रविष्टा: स्म रसातलम्॥ ६॥
‘Dispirited and scared away by fear of
Visnu, we all had on many occasions to
leave our home, Lanka, and enter the
netherworld alongwith our followers. (6)

अस्मदीया च लङ्घेयं नगरी राक्षसोषिता।
निवेशिता aa भ्रात्रा धनाध्यक्षेण धीमता॥७॥

‘The city of Lanka which has been
occupied by your intelligent half-brother,
Kubera, the lord of wealth, really belongs to
us and was inhabited by ogres. (7)

यदि नामात्र शक्यं स्यात् साम्ना दानेन वानघ।

तरसा वा महाबाहो प्रत्यानेतुं कृतं भवेत्॥८॥
‘If, O sinless and mighty-armed one,

it could be taken back by’ sweet

reasonableness or by gift or by force, our
work will have been accomplished. (8)

त्वं च लङ्केश्वरस्तात भविष्यसि न संशय:।
त्वया राक्षसवंशोऽयं निमग्नोऽपि समुद्धृत:॥९॥

‘Nay, without doubt you will be the ruler

« VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

of Lanka, O dear one! The line of Raksasas
which had sunk to the grove, has again
been lifted up by you. (9)

सर्वेषां न: प्रभुश्चैव भविष्यसि महाबल।
अथाब्रवीद् दशग्रीवो मातामहमुपस्थितम्॥१०॥

‘O ogre of extraordinary might, you will
become the overlord of all of us.’ DaSagriva
then said to his maternal grandfather, who
had come in person: (10)

वित्तेशो गुरुरस्माकं नार्हसे वक्तुमीदृशम्।
साम्ना fe राक्षसेन्द्रेण प्रत्याख्यातो गरीयसा॥ ११॥
किंचिन्नाह तदा रक्षो ज्ञात्वा तस्य चिकीर्षितम्।
कस्यचित् त्वथ कालस्य वसन्तं रावणं तत:॥ १२॥
उक्तवन्तं AM वाक्यं दशग्रीवं निशाचर:।
प्रहस्त: प्रश्रितं वाक्यमिदमाह सकारणम्॥१३॥
‘You ought not to speak in this strain;
for the lord of wealth is our elder brother.’
“The great Raksasa, being rebuked in gentle
words by the ruler of the ogres, did not say
anything further, knowing his (DaSagriva’s)
intention. After sometime the ogre Prahasta
addressed the following humble and well-
reasoned words to Ravana, who was still
there and who had spoken in the aforesaid
manner: (11—13)

दशग्रीव महाबाहो नार्हसे वक्तुमीदृशम्।
सौभ्रात्रं नास्ति शूराणां श्रृणु चेदं वचो मम॥ १४॥
‘O mighty-armed DaSagriva, you ought
not to speak like this; there is no such thing
as brotherly feeling among heroes. Nay,
listen to my following words: (14)

अदितिश्च दितिश्चैव भगिन्यौ सहिते fe ते।
we परमरूपिण्यौ कश्यपस्य Wed: १५॥

‘The sisters, Aditi and Diti, both highly
beautiful, are the mutually loving wives of
Kasyapa, a lord of creation. (15)
अदितिर्जनयामास देवांस्त्रिभुवनेश्वरान्।
दितिस्त्वजनयद् दैत्य|न् कश्यपस्यात्मसम्भवान्॥ १६ Ul

‘Aditi bore the gods, the lords of the
worlds; Diti gave birth to the Daityas, both
being the progeny of Kasyapa. (16)
