510

“There shines like the sun the overlord
of ogres, who is decked with a diadem,
whose countenance is graced with swinging
earrings, whose terrible form resembles the
Himalaya (the ruler of mountains) and the
Vindhya mountains in size and who has
humbled the pride of the mighty Indra and
Yama (son of the sun-god).” (25)

प्रत्युवाच ततो wat विभीषणमरिंदम:।
अहो दीप्तमहातेजा रावणो राक्षसेश्वर:॥ २६॥

Thereupon Sri Rama, the scourge of
his enemies, spoke as follows to Vibhisana:
“Oh! Ravana, the lord of ogres, is invested
with an extraordinary luminous glory! (26)

आदित्य ga दुष्प्रेक्यो रश्मिभिर्भाति रावण:।
न व्यक्तं लक्षये ह्यस्य रूपं तेज:समाव्रृतम्॥ २७॥
“Like the sun, Ravana is difficult to
gaze on because of his rays of light. | do
not actually discern his form, fully endowed
as it is with effulgence. (27)
दे — नेवंविधं xa ।
यादृशं राक्षसेन्द्रस्य वपुरेतद् विराजते॥ २८॥
“The body even of celestial and demon
heroes may not be so bright as the body of
the king of ogres is shining brightly. (28)
Wa पर्वतसंकाशा: we पर्वतयोधिन:।
सर्वे दीप्तायुधधरा योधास्तस्य महात्मन:॥ 29

“The warriors fighting on the side of
Ravana, who is endowed with extraordinary
courage, are all mountain-like in size, all
fight with tops of mountains and all wield
fiery weapons. (29)
विभाति रक्षोराजोऽसौ प्रदीप्तैर्भीमदर्शनै:।
भूतै: परिवृतस्तीक्ष्णैर्देहवद्भिरिवान्तक: ॥ ३० I

“Surrounded by fiery ghosts of terrible
aspect, the yonder ruler of ogres looks like

Death surrounded by furious genii endowed
with hideous forms. (30)

दिष्ट्यायमद्य पापात्मा मम दृष्टिपथं गत:।
अद्य क्रोधं विमोक्ष्यामि सीताहरणसम्भवम्॥ ३१॥

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA +

“By good luck this sinful-minded fellow
has come within the range of my sight
today. | shall give free vent to my wrath
born of Sita’s abduction today.” (31)

एवमुक्त्वा ततो Wa धनुरादाय वीर्यवान्।
लक्ष्मणानुचरस्तस्थौ समुद्धृत्य शरोत्तमम्॥ ३२॥

Saying so, nay, taking up his bow and
drawing out an excellent arrow from his
quiver, the powerful Sri Rama, stood with
Laksmana as his follower. (32)

तत: स रक्षोधिपतिर्महात्मा

रक्षांसि तान्याह महाबलानि।
द्वारेषु च्र्यागृहगोपुरेषु
सुनिर्वृतास्तिष्ठत निर्विशङ्का: 33 1

Thereupon that overlord of ogres, who
was endowed with great courage, spoke
as follows to the aforesaid ogres, who
accompanied him and, who were endowed
with extraordinary might: “Fully confident and
free from apprehension, remain stationed at
the main city gates as well as at the gates of
the buildings on the principal streets. (33)
इहागतं मां सहितं भवद्धि-

र्वनौकसश्छिद्रमिदं विदित्वा।
शून्यां पुरीं दुष्प्रसहां प्रमथ्य
प्रधर्षयेयु सहसा समेता:॥३४॥

“Coming to know of my having come
this side with you, nay, taking this to be a
weak point, and storming the desolate city,
which is otherwise difficult to overpower, the
monkeys (lit., dwellers in the woods) may,
when united, devastate it all of a sudden.”

(34)
विसर्जयित्वा सचिवांस्ततस्तान्
गतेषु रक्ष:सु यथानियोगम्।
महाझष: पूर्णमिवार्णवौघम्॥ ३५ ॥
Having dismissed his well-known
counsellors, and the ogres, who accompanied
him, having departed as directed, Ravana
