354

The bard saw Sri Rama, the chastiser
of his foes, resplendent as Kubera (son of
ViSrava), seated, richly adorned, on a gold
couch overspread with a bed-cover, nay,
besmeared with holy and fragrant sandal-
paste of superb excellence and crimson as
the blood of a boar, and further accompanied
by Princess Sita too, standing by his side,
chowrie in hand, even as the moon-god
is accompanied by Citra, (the goddess
presiding over an asterism of the same
name). (8—10)
तं तपन्तमिवादित्यमुपपन्नं स्वतेजसा।
ववन्दे वरदं वन्दी विनयज्ञो विनीतवत्॥११॥

Like a humble petitioner, the bard, who
knew the rules of decorum, greeted Sri
Rama, a bestower of boons, who was
invested with his native glory and was glowing
like the sun. (11)

Wate: सुमुखं gear विहारशयनासने।
राजपुत्रमुवाचेदं सुमन्त्रो राजसत्कृत:॥१२॥

Seeing the heir apparent with a cheerful
countenance on his couch intended for repose
at the time of recreation, Sumantra, who
was honoured by the king, spoke to him
with joined palms as follows : (12)

कौसल्या सुप्रजा राम पिता cat द्रष्टुमिच्छति।
महिष्यापि हि कैकेय्या गम्यतां तत्र मा चिरम्॥ १३॥

“Kausalya is blessed in having you for
a son! Alongwith Queen Kaikeyi too your
father, Emperor DaSaratha, desires to see
you. Be pleased to go there: let there be no
delay.” (13)
एवमुक्तस्तु संहृष्टो नरसिंहो महाद्युति:।
तत: सम्मानयामास सीतामिदमुवाच ह॥१४॥

Highly pleased, Sri Rama (a lion among
men), who was possessed of great
splendour, thereupon showed his great
regard for Sita—so the tradition goes—and
spoke to her as follows: (14)

देवि देवश्च edt च समागम्य मदन्तरे।
मन्त्रयेते ध्रुवं किंचिदभिषेचनसंहितम्॥ १५॥

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

“Meeting together, O godly lady, the
king (my father) and the queen (mother
Kaikeyi) too are surely having some talk
concerning me on the topic of my installation
as Prince Regent. (15)

लक्षयित्वा ह्यभिप्रायं प्रियकामा सुदक्षिणा।
संचोदयति wm मदर्थमसितेक्षणा॥१६॥

सा प्रहृष्टा महाराजं हितकामानुवर्तिनी।
जननी चार्थकामा A केकयाधिपते: ari Vil

“Reading his mind and desirous of
pleasing him, that dark-eyed mother of mine,
the daughter of the king of the Kekayas, who
is very clever and favourite of the king, nay,
who wishes well of him and is obedient to
him and is my well-wisher too, is surely
pressing the king, who is the king of kings,
on my behalf, highly delighted as she is over
the prospect of my installation. (16-17)

दिष्ट्या खलु महाराजो महिष्या प्रियया सह।
सुमन्त्रं प्राहिणोद् दूतमर्थकामकरं मम॥१८॥

“Luckily enough for me _ has_ the
Emperor (my father) with his beloved queen
(mother Kaikeyl) sent as his messenger
Sumantra, who advances my earthly interests
and accomplishes the objects of my desire.

(18)
यादरृशी परिषत् तत्र तादृशो दूत आगत:।
भ्रुवमद्यैव मां राजा यौवराज्येऽभिषेक्ष्यति॥१९॥

“A messenger of the same type as the
council which is in session in the royal
gynaeceum has come to me. From this |
conclude that the king will surely install me
in the office of Prince Regent this very day.

(19)
हन्त शीघ्रमितो गत्वा द्रक्ष्यामि च महीपतिम्।
सह त्वं परिवारेण सुखमास्स्व WT च॥ २०॥

“Ah, departing from this place soon, |
shall see the Emperor (lit., the ruler of the
earth). Abide you comfortably with your
female companions here and rejoice.” (20)

पतिसम्मानिता सीता भर्तारमसितेक्षणा।
आ द्वारमनुवव्राज मङ्गलान्यभिदध्युषी।॥ २१॥
