1104

the composer of this poem, the best among
ascetics.” (24)

are चरितं तुभ्यमशेषं सम्प्रदर्शितम्॥२५॥
The two sons of ascetic said to the
scion of Raghu, ‘The venerable sage Valmiki
is the composer who has come to this place
of performance. By this poem he has revealed
the whole life’s account to you. (25)
‘Prat हि vel . विं ।
उपाख्यानशतं चैव भार्गवेण तपस्विना॥ २६॥
‘Twenty-four thousand Slokas (verses)
with a hundred legends have been composed
by the ascetic, Bhargava Valmiki, the brother
of Bhrgu. (26)
आदिप्रभृति a राजन् पञ्चसर्गशतानि च।
काण्डानि षट्कृतानीह सोत्तराणि महात्मना॥ २७॥
कृतानि गुरुणास्माकमृषिणा चरितं तव।
प्रतिष्ठा जीवितं यावत् तावत् सर्वस्य वर्तते॥ २८ I

‘From the beginning, O King, five hundred
cantos with six Kandas (parts) together
with the Uttara (best Kanda) have been
composed by the noble one, our preceptor,
sage Valmiki, keeping in mind your life’s deeds
which will continue till all beings live. (27-28)

« VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

ate akg: Hat राजन् श्रवणाय महारथ।
कर्मान्तरे क्षणीभूतस्तच्छृणुष्व सहानुज:॥ २९॥
‘O king, the great chariot-warrior, if you
have a mind to hear it, then in between this
performance of Yajna, listen joyfully together
with your brothers.’ (29)

aetiearrate Tae चानुज्ञाप्य TAA |
Weel जग्मतु: स्थानं यत्रास्ते मुनिपुङ्खव:॥ ३०॥
“Be it so” said Sri Rama, and the two
taking leave (of Sri Rama), went cheerfully to
the place where the great sage was staying.
(30)

रामोऽपि मुनिभि: सार्धं पार्थिवैश्च महात्मभि:।
श्रुत्वा ag गीतिमाधुर्यं कर्मशालामुपागमत्॥ ३१॥

Sri Rama too with the ascetics and the
noble kings, having heard the sweet song,
approached the place of performance. (31)
शुश्राव तत्ताललयोपपन्नं

सर्गान्वितॆ सुस्वरशब्दयुक्तम्।
कुशीलवाभ्यां परिगीयमानम्॥ ३२॥

The song set into Chandas with proper
words, embettered by proper beats and time,
sung by KuSa and Lava with lute in harmony,

was heard by the scion of the Kakutsthas,
Sri Rama. (32)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये उत्तरकाण्डे चतुर्नवतितम: AWA: ॥ ९४॥

Thus ends Canto Ninety-four in the Uttarakanda of the glorious Ramayana of Valmiki,
the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

Canto LXXXXV

S11 Rama despatches an envoy to sage Valmiki. The envoy meets the sage.
Sri Sita takes an oath of absolute purification

TH बहून्यहान्येव aq गीतं परमं शुभम्।

(1)

that wonderful song of holy content.

शुश्राव मुनिभि: सार्धं पार्थिवै: सह art: ।। १॥ | afer गीते तु विज्ञाय सीतापुत्रौ कुशीलवौ।
For many days Sri Rama, together | तस्या: परिषदो wet Wa वचनमब्रवीत्॥ २॥

with the ascetics, kings and monkeys, heard

Having known through that song, Lava
