* ARANYAKANDA «

755

Canto XVI
Laksmana describes the early winter. Bath in Godavari

वसतस्तस्य तु Ga राघवस्य महात्मन:।
शरद्व्यपाये हेमन्त ऋतुरिष्ट: प्रवर्तत॥१॥
While the magnanimous Raghava was

staying happily, the desired winter set in at
the expiry of autumn. (1)

स कदाचित् प्रभातायां wear रघुनन्दन:।
प्रययावभिषेकार्थं wat गोदावरीं नदीम्॥ २॥
Once that delight of the Raghus, Sri
Rama, at the break of day went to the
beautiful Godavari river for a bath. (2)

We: कलशहस्तस्तु सीतया we वीर्यवान्।
पृष्ठतोऽनुव्रजन् भ्राता सौमित्रिरिदमब्रवीत्॥३॥
Following at the heels of Sri Rama, his
brave brother, the son of Sumitra, alongwith
Sita, and with a vessel for water in his
hand, spoke as follows : (3)

अयं स काल: सम्प्राप्त: प्रियो यस्ते प्रियंबद।
अलंकृत इवाभाति येन संवत्सर: WA vil
“Now has arrived that season which is
dear to you, O polite brother, with which the
blessed year appears as though ornamented.
(4)

नीहारपरुषो लोक: पृथिवी सस्यमालिनी।
जलान्यनुपभोग्यानि सुभगो हव्यवाहन:॥७५॥

“The people feel dry with cold, the
earth is rich with crops; the waters are
unenjoyable, the fire is agreeable. (5)

नवाग्रयणपूजाभिरभ्यर्च्य पितृदेवता:।
कृताग्रयणका: काले सन्तो विगतकल्मषा:॥ ६॥
“Having propitiated the manes and gods
with offerings of the first fruits of the preceding
harvest and partaken of them themselves,
virtuous people have been rid of sin. (6)
प्राज्यकामा जनपदा: सम्पन्नतरगोरसा: |
विचरन्ति महीपाला यात्रार्थं विजिगीषव:॥७॥

“The people of the countryside have
their desires for foodgrains abandantly fulfilled
and have richer supply of cow’s milk etc.
The kings are moving on their expedition
with the desire for conquest. (7)

सेवमाने दृढं सूर्ये दिशमन्तकसेविताम्।
विह्रीनतिलकेव eat नोत्तरा fee प्रकाशते॥ it

“As the sun firmly adheres to the quarter
inhabited by the god of Death (viz., the
south), the northern quarter looks no more
charming than a lady without Tilaka (an
auspicious mark on the forehead). (8)

प्रकृत्या हिमकोशाढ्यो दूरसूर्यश्च साम्प्रतम्।
यथार्थनामा सुव्यक्तं हिमवान् हिमवान् PR: ue u

“Rich in its treasure of snow by nature,
and abounding in snow at present, the sun
being away (in the southern hemisphere),
the Himalaya mountain more perceptibly
justifies its name. (9)

अत्यन्तसुखसंचारा मध्याह्ने स्पर्शत: AT: |
दिवसा: सुभगादित्याश्छायासलिलदुर्भगा: It १०॥
“At noontide the days are exceedingly
pleasant for a walk, and afford delight by
the touch of the sun’s rays; the sun is
agreeable, while shade and water are
disagreeable. (10)

Wega: सुनीहारा: पटुशीता: समारुता:।
शून्यारण्या हिमध्वस्ता दिवसा भान्ति साम्प्रतम्॥ ११॥
“With an unoppressive sun, beautiful
thick fog, bitter cold and wind and desolate
woodlands blighted by frost, the days look
calm (devoid of activity and bustle). (11)

“The nights now preclude repose in
open air, are marked with the presence of
