1134

wretched plight etc., they will turn their back
on you. (17)

स त्वं हीन: ates हितकामैश्च बन्धुभि:।
तृणादपि भृशोद्विग्न: स्पन्दमानाद् भविष्यसि॥ १८ i

“Separated from your near and dear
ones and friends seeking your welfare, you
will be terribly afraid even of a trembling
blade of grass. (18)

न च जातु न हिंस्युस्त्वां घोरा लक्ष्मणसायका: |
अपव्रत्तं जिघांसन्तो महावेगा दुरासदा:॥१९॥
“Flying with extraordinary speed and
difficult to approach, the fearful arrows of
Laksmana, which are ever disposed to kill a
reactionary, will on no account spare you.
(19)

अस्माभिस्तु गतं सार्धं विनीतवदुपस्थितम्।
SATAN सुग्रीवो राज्ये cat स्थापयिष्यति॥ २०॥

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

Sugriva will, however, install you on
the throne of Kiskindha in due course if, on
the other hand, you return with us and
present yourself before him in a submissive
demeanour. (20)

धर्मराज: पितृव्यस्ते प्रीतिकामो ged: |
शुचि: सत्यप्रतिज्ञश्च स त्वां जातु न नाशयेत्॥ २१॥

“Your uncle, Sugriva, is a virtuous ruler,
firm of vows, good-intentioned, true to his
promise and seeks your love. He would
never kill you. (21)

प्रियकामश्च ते मातुस्तदर्थं चास्य जीवितम्।
तस्यापत्यं च नास्त्यन्यत् तस्मादङ्गद गम्यताम्॥ २२॥
“Again, he is keen to oblige your mother;
nay, he lives for her (alone). And he has no
other progeny; therefore, Angada, let us
return to Kiskindha.” (22)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये किष्किन्धाकाण्डे चतु:पञ्चाश: सर्ग: ॥ ५४॥

Thus ends Canto Fifty-four in the Kiskindhakanda of the glorious Ramayana of
Valmiki, the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

पञ्चपञ्चाश: सर्ग:
Canto LV

Sick of hearing the praises of Sugriva uttered by Hanuman and pointing out the
faults of Sugriva and denouncing him, Angada proclaims to the monkeys his
decision to undertake a fast unto death and actually sits down to fast.
Condemning Sugriva with tears in their eyes and making the mountain
caverns resound with their tale of woe commencing from the appearance
of Sit Rama on the scene and ending with their determination
to observe a fast till death, the other monkeys too follow suit

श्रुत्वा हनुमतो वाक्यं प्रश्रितं धर्मसंहितम्।
स्वामिसत्कारसंयुक्तमङ्गदो वाक्यमब्रवीत्॥१॥
Hearing the utterance of Hanuman,
which was courteous and conformable to
righteousness and was full of deference to
his master, Angada replied as follows : (1)
स्थैर्यमात्ममन:शौचमानृशंस्यमथार्जवम् ।
विक्रमश्चैव धैर्यं च सुग्रीवे नोपपद्यते॥ २॥

भ्रातुर्ज्यष्ठस्य यो भार्यां जीवतो महिषीं प्रियाम्।
धर्मेण मातरं यस्तु स्वीकरोति जुगुप्सित:॥३॥
“Stability, purity of body and mind,
absence of cruelty and guilelessness, nay,
valour and fortitude too are out of the
question in Sugriva, who for his part took to
wife, detested as he is, his veritable mother
from the moral point of view, the beloved
