514

“Well done, O monkey! You are an
adversary worthy of my praise in point of
valour.” Applauded in these words, Hanuman
(son of the wind-god), however, replied as
follows: (65)

धिगस्तु मम वीर्यस्य यत् त्वं जीवसि रावण।
सकृत् तु प्रहरेदानीं ade fe विकत्थसे॥ ६६॥

“Woe be to my valour in that you still
survive, O Ravana! Strike now only once,
O evil-minded fellow! Why do you brag?

(66)

ततस्त्वां मामको मुष्टिर्नयिष्यति यमक्षयम्।
ततो मारुतिवाक्येन कोपस्तस्य प्रजज्वले॥६७॥

“My fist will then dispatch you to the
abode of Yama, the god of retribution.”
Ravana’s wrath blazed up as a result of
Hanuman’s threat. (67)

संरक्तनयनो यत्नान्मुष्टिमाव्रत्य दक्षिणम्।
पातयामास वेगेन वानरोरसि वीर्यवान्॥६८॥

Strenuously clenching his right fist, the
powerful ogre, his eyes inflamed with anger,
struck it with great velocity at the monkey’s
chest. (68)

हनूमान् वक्षसि ae संचचाल पुन: पुन:।
विह्वलं तु तदा Gear हनूमन्तं महाबलम्॥६९॥
रथेनातिरथ: शीघ्रं नीलं प्रति समभ्यगात्।
राक्षसानामधिपतिर्दशग्रीव: प्रतापवान्॥ ७० I

Struck on his broad chest, Hanuman
reeled again and again. Seeing Hanuman,
who was endowed with extraordinary might,
beside himself with anguish at that time, the
fiery Ravana, a ten-headed monster, a car-
warrior of a superior order and the suzerain
lord of ogres, however, speedily drove in
his chariot towards Nila. (69-70)

पन्नगप्रतिमैर्भीमै: परमर्माभिभेदनै: |
medicare नीलं हरिचमूपतिम्॥७१॥
With his dreaded arrows, resembling

serpents and capable of piercing the vital
parts of his enemies, he began to torment

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA +

the
(71)

Nila, the Commander-in-Chief of
monkeys.

a शरौघसमायस्तो नीलो हरिचमूपति:।
करेणैकेन शैलाग्रं रक्षोधिपतयेऽसृजत्॥७२॥

Tearing up the top of a mountain with
one hand, Nila, the Commander-in-Chief of
the monkeys, who was hard pressed with
streams of arrows, hurled it at Ravana, the
overlord of ogres. (72)
हनूमानपि तेजस्वी समाश्वस्तो महामना:।
विप्रेक्षमाणो युद्धेप्सु:: सरोषमिदमब्रवीत्॥७३॥
नीलेन सह संयुक्तं रावणं राक्षसेश्वरम्।
अन्येन युध्यमानस्य न युक्तमभिधावनम्॥७४॥

Gazing on Ravana, seeking, as he did,
an encounter with him, the brilliant high-
minded Hanuman too, who felt fully refreshed
by now, angrily spoke as follows to
Ravana, the lord of ogres, already come to
grips with Nila: “It would not be meet and
proper to attack one contending with another.”

(73-74)
रावणोऽथ महातेजास्तं शृङ्गं सप्तभि: शरै:।
आजघान सुतीक्ष्णाग्रैस्तद् विकीर्णं पपात TU ७५॥

Ravana, who was endowed with
extraordinary energy, forthwith struck the
said mountain-top with seven exceedingly
sharp-pointed arrows and the crag, they
say, fell in pieces. (75)

कालाग्निरिव wart कोपेन परवीरहा॥७६॥

Seeing the aforesaid peak shattered,
Nila, the Commander-in-Chief of the
monkeys, the destroyer of hostile champions,
glowed with wrath like the fire at the time of
universal destruction. (76)

सोऽश्चकर्णद्रुमान् शालांश्चूतांश्चापि सुपुष्पितान्।
अन्यांश्च विविधान् व्क्षान् नीलश्चिक्षेप संयुगे॥ ७७॥
The said Nila began to fling aswakarna

and sal as well as mango trees, fully in
blossom as also other trees of various
