* ARANYAKANDA «

The said Ravana spoke as follows to
that princess of Mithila, who with her dark
ends of hair was duly dressed and adorned
with jewels and shone like the radiance of
the sun: (10)
fry लोकेषु विख्यातं यदि भर्तारमिच्छसि।
मामाश्रय वरारोहे «date Geet: पति:॥११॥

“If you desire a husband well-known
throughout the three worlds (heaven, earth
and the intermediate region), betake yourself
to me, O lady with charming limbs ! | ama
husband worthy of you. (11)

मां भजस्व चिराय त्वमहं श्लाघ्य: पतिस्तव।
नैव चाहं क्वचिद् भद्रे करिष्ये तव विप्रियम्॥ १२॥

“Serve me for a long time! | am a
husband worthy of praise for you. | shall
certainly never do anything unpalatable to
you, O good lady! (12)

त्यज्यतां मानुषो भावो मयि भाव: प्रणीयताम्।
राज्याच्च्युतमसिद्धार्थं रामं परिमितायुषम्॥१३॥
कैर्गुणैरनुरक्कासि मूढे पण्डितमानिनि।
य: frat वचनाद् राज्यं विहाय ससुहृज्जनम्॥ १४॥
अस्मिन् व्यालानुचरिते at वसति gata: |
इत्युक्त्वा मैथिलीं वाक्यं प्रियार्हा प्रियवादिनीम्॥ १७५ ।।
अभिगम्य सुदुष्टात्मा राक्षस: काममोहित:।
जग्राह रावण: सीतां बुध: खे रोहिणीमिव॥ १६॥

“Let your affection for a human being
be given up and let it be placed on me. Due
to what virtues do you feel attached to the
silly Rama, who has been banished from
his kingdom, nay, who has failed to achieve
his object and whose days are numbered,
O deluded woman accounting yourself wise,
and who, having given up the throne of
Ayodhya as well as his kith and kin at the
instance of a woman, is dwelling in this
forest frequented by beasts of prey?” Having
spoken as aforesaid to Sita, the princess
of Mithila, who spoke kindly to all and
deserved kind words from all, and
approaching her, the ogre, Ravana, who
was extremely vile of disposition and was

847

infatuated with passion, caught hold of Sita
(who was like a mother to him) as Budha
(the deity presiding over the planet Mercury
and son of the moon-god) would seize Rohini
(the principal consort of the moon-god and
the deity presiding over a constellation of
that name). (183—16)

वामेन सीतां पद्माक्षीं मूर्धजेषु करेण a: |
ऊर्वोस्तु दक्षिणेनैव परिजग्राह पाणिना॥१७॥

With his left hand he caught hold of the
lotus-eyed Sita by her locks, while with his
right hand he clasped her by her thighs.

(17)

तं दृष्टवा गिरिशृङ्गाभं तीक्ष्णदंष्ट्रं महाभुजम्।
प्राद्रवन् मृत्युसंकाशं भयार्ता वनदेवता:॥१८॥
Stricken with fear to see him looking
like a mountain-peak in stature and
resembling Death himself, endowed as he
was with sharp teeth and mighty arms, the
sylvan deities ran away. (18)
स च मायामयो दिव्य: खरयुक्त: खरस्वन:।
प्रत्यदृश्यत हेमाङ्गो रावणस्य महारथ:॥१९॥
And there appeared close by at that
very moment the well-known, enchanted,
huge celestial car of Ravana, which was
drawn by mules, made a jarring sound, and
was made of gold. (19)

ततस्तां परुषैर्वाक्यैरभितर्ज्य महास्वन:।
अंकेनादाय वैदेहीं रथमारोपयत् तदा॥ २०॥

Then, overawing Sita, the princess of
the Videha territory, with harsh words, and
taking her in his arms, Ravana, who uttered
a loud roar, forthwith placed her in the car.

(20)

सा गृहीतातिचुक्रोश रावणेन यशस्विनी।
रामेति सीता दु:खार्ता WH दूरं गतं वने॥२१॥
Stricken with agony when seized by
Ravana, the illustrious and well-known Sita
cried at the top of her voice ‘O Rama’,
addressing Sri Rama, who had penetrated
deep into the forest. (21)
