524

disadvantages accruing from them is surely
dubbed as a fool. (7)

कश्चिदाम्रवणं छित्त्वा पलाशांश्च निषिञ्चति।
पुष्पं geal फले गृध्नु: स शोचति फलागमे॥ ८ ॥

“Anyone who, cutting down a whole
mango grove (because of its unattractive
and tiny blossoms) nourishes a cluster of
Palasa trees expecting large and luscious
fruits on seeing their charming and big
flowers repents at the time of their fruition.

(8)
अविज्ञाय फलं at fe कर्म त्वेवानुधावति।
स शोचेत् फलवेलायां यथा किंशुकसेचक:॥ ९॥

“Indeed, like the man who nourishes a
Kimsuka tree, he who embarks on action
alone, not minding the consequences, is sure
to repent when the action bears fruit. (9)

सोऽहमाम्रवणं छित्त्वा पलाशांश्च न्यषेचयम्।
TH फलागमे त्यक्त्वा पश्चाच्छोचामि दुर्मति: i १०॥

“Cutting down a mango grove, | have
accordingly watered PalaSa trees and
sending away Rama to the forest at a time
when the said mango grove was going to
bear fruit, | repent, a fool that | am! (10)

लब्धशब्देन कौसल्ये कुमारेण धनुष्मता।
कुमार: शब्दवेधीति war पापमिदं कृतम्॥११॥
“The sin which | am going to describe
now was perpetrated by me, O Kausalya,
while | was yet a prince wielding a bow and
arrows and had won the title of a prince
expert in hitting an invisible mark with the
help of the sound made by it. (11)
तदिदं मेऽनुसम्प्राप्तं देवि दु:खं स्वयंकृतम्।
सम्मोहादिह बालेन यथा Care भक्षितं विषम्॥ १२॥
“This disaster, which was earned by
myself, has been reaped by me, O godly
lady, in the same way as poison may be
swallowed by a child through excessive
folly. (12)

यथान्य: Gea: कश्चित् पलाशैर्मोहितो भवेत्।
एवं मयाप्यविज्ञातं शब्दवेध्यमिदं फलम्॥१३॥

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

“Even aS a common man would be
deluded by the charming red blossoms of a
Palasa tree and misled to think that it would
yield equally large and delicious fruits, so it
was never suspected by me that the dexterity
acquired by me in hitting an invisible mark
with the help of its sound would yield such
a disastrous result. (13)

देव्यनूढा त्वमभवो युवराजो भवाम्यहम्।
ad: Westra wa कामविवर्धिनी॥१४॥

“You were not married with me till then,
O pious lady, and | was only Prince Regent
at that time. Then set in the monsoon,
which keenly enhanced my passion for
hunting. (14)
अपास्य fe रसान् भौमांस्तप्त्वा च जगदंशुभि: ।
परेताचरितां भीमां रविराचरते दिशम्॥१५॥

“Sucking the moisture of the earth and
scorching the world with its rays, the sun
had begun to course through the southern
quarter haunted by spirits and, therefore,
exciting fear. (15)

उष्णमन्तर्दधे सद्य: स्निग्धा ददृशिरे घना:।
ततो wafer सर्वे भेकसारङ्गबर्हिण:॥१६॥

“Clouds laden with moisture appeared
in the sky and the heat vanished all of a
sudden. Frogs, the Cataka birds and
peacocks all rejoiced in consequence. (16)

क्लिन्नपक्षोत्तरा: स्नाता: कृच्छ्रादिव Wahaus: |
वृष्टिवातावधूताग्रान् पादपानभिपेदिरे ।। १७॥

“Birds, which had the upper part of
their wings drenched and which, therefore,
looked as though bathed, could reach with
difficulty the trees on which they had nestled
and, whose ends were shaken by rain and
the winds. (17)

पतितेनाम्भसाऽऽच्छन्न: पतमानेन चासकृत्।
आबभौ मत्तसारङ्गस्तोयराशिरिवाचल:॥१८॥

“Covered by the rain water already fallen
and still repeatedly falling on it, the mountain
with elephants in rut looked like a waveless
ocean and a drenched mountain. (18)
