514

the destruction of this race, O charioteer !
(20)

सूत यद्यस्ति ते किंचिन्मयापि qed कृतम्।
त्वं प्रापयाशु मां रामं प्राणा: संत्वरयन्ति माम्॥ २१॥
“If at all, O charioteer, any good turn
has been done to you by me, take you me
at once to Rama; for my senses are
importunately hastening me to catch a last
glimpse of Rama. (21)

यद्यद्यापि ममैवाज्ञा निवर्तयतु राघवम्।
न शक्ष्यामि विना रामं मुहूर्तमपि जीवितुम्॥ २२॥

“If my authority alone prevails even
today, let anyone fetch Rama back to
Ayodhya; for | shall not be able to survive
without Rama even for an hour or so. (22)

अथवापि महाबाहुर्गतो at भविष्यति।
ama रथमारोप्य शीघ्रं रामाय दर्शय॥ २३॥

“Or, may be the mighty-armed prince
might have gone afar by now. In that case
helping me on to a chariot, promptly show
me to Rama. (23)

वृत्तदंष्द्रो महेष्वास: क्वासौ लक्ष्मणपूर्वज:।
ate जीवामि साध्वेनं पश्येयं सीतया सह॥ २४॥

“Where is that Rama (the eldest brother
of Laksmana) who has pearl-like teeth and
is possessed of a mighty bow? | can survive
only if | am properly able to see him with
sita. (24)
लोहिताक्षं महाबाहुमामुक्तमणिकुण्डलम्।
we यदि न पश्येयं गमिष्यामि यमक्षयम्॥ Ru II

“If | am not able to see the mighty-
armed Rama with reddish eyes and adorned
with earrings made of gems, | shall surely
reach the abode of Yama, the god of death.

(25)
अतो नु किं दु:खतरं योऽहमिक्ष्वाकुनन्दनम्।
इमामवस्थामापन्नो नेह पश्यामि राघवम्॥ २६॥

“What can possibly be more painful

to me than the fact that | do not behold

Rama, a scion of Raghu, the delight of the
Ikswakus, at this juncture, when | am

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

reduced to this wretched plight?

a राम रामानुज a हा ade तपस्विनि।

न मां जानीत दु:खेन म्रियमाणमनाथवत्॥ २७॥
“Ah Rama, Ah Laksmana (younger

brother of Rama), Ah Sita (a princess of the

Videha clan), who are engaged in austerities,

you do not know that | am dying through

agony like a forlorn creature.” (27)

स तेन राजा दु:खेन भृशमर्पितचेतन:।
अवगाढ: YUN शोकसागरमब्रवीत्॥ २८॥

His mind being overwhelmed with that
unbearable agony, and plunged as he was
in that ocean of grief, which was most
difficult to cross, the aforesaid king spoke
of his grief in terms of an ocean in the
following words : (28)

रामशोकमहावेग: सीताविरहपारग: |
श्चसितोर्मिमहावर्तो बाष्पवेगजलाविल: ॥ २९॥
बाहुविक्षेपमीनोऽसौ विक्रन्दितमहास्वन:।
प्रकीर्णकेशशैवाल: कैकेयीवडवामुख:॥ ३०॥
ममाश्रुवेगप्रभव: कुब्जावाक्यमहाग्रह: |
वरवेलो नृशंसाया रामप्रव्राजनायत:॥३१॥
यस्मिन् ad निमग्नोऽहं कौसल्ये wad विना।
gent जीवता देवि मयायं शोकसागर:॥ ३२॥

“This ocean of grief, in which, alas! |
am plunged, O Kausalya, bereft as | am of
Rama, is difficult for me to cross while | am
living, O godly lady! Consciousness of
Rama’s grief caused by his separation from
his parents, relations and friends etc., is its
tremendous force. Severance from Sita is
the other shore to which it extends. Outgoing
and ingoing breaths are the waves and
whirlpools. It is rendered turbid by the water
of rivers flowing into it in the shape of the
upsurge of tears of Kausalya and others.
The throwing about of arms in agony
represents the leaping of fishes. The loud
wailings represent its roaring. Dishevelled
hair are the sea-weeds. Kaikeyi represents
the submarine fire. It is the source of
showers in the form of the welling up of

(26)
