876

« VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

Canto X

Ravana and his younger brothers perform
Tapas and obtain boons

अथाब्रवीन्मुनिं wa: कथं ते भ्रातरो वने।
कीदृशं तु तदा ब्रह्मंस्तपस्तेपुर्महाबला:॥१॥

“Sri Rama then said to the sage, ‘How
and in what manner did those brothers of
extraordinary might perform Tapas in the
forest, O Brahmana?’” (1)

अगस्त्यस्त्वब्रवीत् तत्र रामं सुप्रीतमानसम्।
तांस्तान् fatter भ्रातरस्ते समाविशन्॥२॥
Agastya for his part told on that occasion
Sri Rama, who was well-pleased at heart,
that the said brothers adopted the religious
practices which suited them severally. (2)

कुम्भकर्णस्ततो यत्तो नित्यं धर्मपथे स्थित:।
तताप ग्रीष्मकाले तु पञ्चाग्नीन् परित: स्थित:॥ ३॥

“Ever steadfast in the path of rectitude
and striving hard, Kumbhakarna performed
Tapas in summer standing in the midst of
fires on all the four sides and the sun
shining overhead. (3)

मेघाम्बुसिक्को वर्षासु वीरासनमसेवत।
नित्यं च शिशिरे काले जलमध्यप्रतिश्रय:।॥ ४॥

“In the rainy season, he sat kneeling
on one leg, drenched all over with rainwater
and in the winter season he remained always
standing in water. (4)

एवं वर्षसहस्राणि दश तस्यापचक्रमु:।
at प्रयतमानस्य सत्पथे निष्ठितस्य aie
“Standing firm in the right path and
ever striving for righteousness, he spent ten
thousand years. (5)

विभीषणस्तु धर्मात्मा fret धर्मपर: शुचि:।
पञ्चवर्षसहस्राणि पादेनैकेन तस्थिवान्॥६॥
“The pious-minded Vibhisana, pure and
always intent on rectitude, for his part stood
on one leg for five thousand years. (6)

समाप्ते नियमे तस्य ननृतुश्चाप्सरोगणा:।
wd पुष्पवर्षं च तुष्टुवुश्चापि देवता:॥७॥
“When his austerities were over, troupes
of Apsaras (celestial nymphs) danced,
flowers fell in showers and the gods hymned
his praises. (7)

पञ्चवर्षसहस्राणि सूर्यं चैवान्ववर्तत।
तस्थौ चोर्ध्वशिरोबाहु: स्वाध्याये धृतमानस:॥८॥

“Intent on studying the Vedas, he spent
another five thousand years with his arms
and head raised and worshipped the sun.

(8)
एवं विभीषणस्यापि स्वर्गस्थस्येव नन्दने।
दशवर्षसहस्राणि गतानि नियतात्मन:॥९॥

“In this manner, Vibhisana, the disciplined
soul, spent ten thousand years as though
he stayed in the Nandana Vana (Indra’s
pleasure-garden). (9)

दशवर्षसहस्रं तु निराहारो दशानन:।
पूर्णे वर्षसहस्रे तु शिरश्चाग्नौ aga स:॥१०॥
“DaSagriva for his part went without
food for ten thousand years and at the end
of every thousand years offered one of his
heads as a sacrifice into the fire. (10)
wa वर्षसहस्राणि नव तस्यातिचक्रमु:।
शिरांसि नव चाप्यस्य प्रविष्टानि हुताशनम्॥ ११॥
“Thus he spent nine thousand years
and nine of his heads went into the fire. (11)

अथ वर्षसहस्रे तु दशमे दशमं शिर:।
छेत्तुकामे दशग्रीवे प्राप्तस्तत्र पितामह:॥१२॥
“At the end of ten thousand years when

DaSagriva was about to cut off his tenth
head, Brahma appeared before him. (12)

पितामहस्तु सुप्रीत: सार्धं देवैरुपस्थित:।
तव Wag दशग्रीव प्रीतोऽस्मीत्यभ्यभाषत॥ १३॥
