* BALAKANDA +

पशुरभ्याहृतो राजन् प्रणष्टस्तव दुर्नयात्।
ania राजानं घ्नन्ति दोषा नरेश्वर॥७॥

“The sacrificial animal brought here,
O king, has disappeared through your
negligence. Sins accruing from such
negligence destroy the king who fails to
guard his sacrifice, O ruler of men! (7)

प्रायश्चित्तं महद्ध्येतन्नरे वा पुरुषर्षभ।
आनयस्व पशुं शीघ्रं यावत् कर्म प्रवर्तते॥८॥

“(Hunt out and) quickly bring (back), O
jewel among men, the lost animal or a
human beast as a substitute before the
sacrifice actually commences’; for such is
the principal atonement? (prescribed by the
scriptures) for the sin incurred by you through
the loss of the consecrated animal.” (8)
उपाध्यायवच: श्रुत्वा स राजा पुरुषर्षभ:।
अन्वियेष महाबुद्धि: पशुं गोभि: सहस्रश:॥ ९॥
देशाञ्जनपदांस्तांस्तान् नगराणि वनानि च।
आश्रमाणि च पुण्यानि मार्गमाणो महीपति: ।। १० ॥
स पुत्रसहितं तात सभार्यं रघुनन्दन।
wie समासीनमृचीकं dat ह॥११॥

Hearing the injunction of the family priest,
and taking with him thousands of cows for
being given in exchange on demand, that
highly intelligent king, a veritable jewel among
men, searched for a human beast to be
sacrificed in place of the sacrificial horse.
Carrying on his search for the stolen horse
as well as for a human substitute through
different principalities and their subdivisions,
cities, woodlands and holy hermitages, the
aforesaid king, O dear Rama (a scion of
Raghu), saw at close quarters, on Mount
Bhrgutunga (a mountain-peak associated
with Sage Bhrgu, one of the nine mind-born

237

sons of Brahma), the sage Rcika sitting at
ease with his sons and wife : so the tradition
goes. (9—11)

तमुवाच महातेजा: प्रणम्याभिप्रसाद्य च।
महर्षि तपसा दीप्तं राजर्षिरमितप्रभ:॥१२॥
Tat शतसहस्रेण विक्रीणीषे qd यदि॥१३॥
पशोरर्थे महाभाग कृतकृत्योऽस्मि भार्गव।
सर्वे परिगता देशा यज्ञियं न लभे UTA evil

Bowing low to him and_ thereby
securing his goodwill and also inquiring after
his all-round welfare, the highly glorious
Ambarisa, a royal sage, who was possessed
of infinite splendour, addressed the following
submission to that sage Rcika, aglow with
spiritual energy acquired through askesis :
“If for a lakh of cows you agree to sell one
of your sons in my favour for being used as
a sacrificial animal, O highly blessed one, |
shall feel accomplished of purpose, O scion
of Bhrgu ! All territories have been ransacked
by me, but | have not yet recovered the
sacrificial horse. (12—14)

दातुमर्हसि मूल्येन सुतमेकमितो मम।
एवमुक्तो महातेजा ऋचीकस्त्वब्रवीद् वच:॥१५॥

“Be pleased, therefore, to deliver one
of these sons to me for consideration.”
Requested thus by the king, the highly
glorious sage Rcika for his part spoke as
follows : (15)
नाहं ज्येष्ठं नरश्रेष्ठं विक्रीणीयां कथंचन।
ऋचीकस्य Ta: श्रुत्वा तेषां माता महात्मनाम्॥ १६ UI
उवाच नरशार्दूलमम्बरीषमिदं ae
अविक्रेयं सुतं ज्येष्ठं भगवानाह भार्गव:॥ १७॥

“| am not prepared to sell my eldest

1. The period intervening the release and the return of the sacrificial horse from its wanderings is
considered to be a sort of respite when the sacrificial proceedings are held in abeyance.
2. The compound word “Prayascitta” is composed of two parts ‘Prayas’ and ‘Citta’, whose meaning

is tersely given in the following Sanskrit half-verse :

“One should understand the word ‘Prayas’ to mean ‘sin’, while ‘Citta’ has been recognized as

१ ११

conveying the sense of its ‘atonement’.
