# YUDDHAKANDA #

in an instant by inhaling the fragrance of
these most excellent herbs even as those
who are asleep would feel when fully awake
at the close of night. (74)

यदाप्रभृति लङ्कायां युध्यन्ते हरिराक्षसा:।
तदाप्रभृति मानार्थमाज्ञया रावणस्य च॥७५॥
a हन्यन्ते रणे त्त्र राक्षसा: कपिकुञ्जरै:।
हता हतास्तु क्षिप्यन्ते ad Va तु सागरे॥७६॥

From the time the monkeys and ogres
began to fight in Lanka, the ogres, for their
part, who were killed in combat there by the
foremost of monkeys, were all without
exception cast away into the sea as soon
as killed under orders of Ravana so that

619

their number may not be known to the
monkeys. (75-76)

ततो हरिर्गन्धवहात्मजस्तु
तमो॰षधी॰शैलक्काबेग; \
निनाय वेगाद्धिमवन्तमेव

Ws WaT समाजगाम॥७७॥

Thereupon the monkey, Hanuman,
sprung from the loins of the wind-god (lit.,
the wafter of odour) for his part, who was
endowed with tremendous speed, bore the
aforesaid mountain, full of medicinal simples,
with all speed right to the Himalaya mountain,
and joined Sri Rama once more. (77)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये FERS चतु:सप्ततितम: AWA: ॥ ७४॥

Thus ends Canto Seventy-four in the Yuddhakanda of the glorious Ramayana of
Valmiki, the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

Canto LXXV

Lanka is set fire to by the monkeys, on which a terrible conflict
ensues between the ogres and the monkeys

ततोऽब्रवीन्महातेजा: सुग्रीवो TVA: |
aa विज्ञापयंश्चापि हनूमन्तमिदं वच:॥१॥
Nay, in order to make known to
Hanuman what they should do next, Sugriva,
the lord of monkeys, who was endowed
with extraordinary energy, thereupon spoke
as follows: (1)

यतो हत: कुळं'-भक्रर्णं; कुमाराश्च निषूदिता:।
नेदानीमुपनिर्हारं रावणो दातुमर्हति॥ २॥

“Inasmuch as Kumbhakarna has been
killed and the youthful princes (the sons of
Ravana other than Indrajit) have been
destroyed, Ravana can no longer put up
any defence. (2)

ये ये महाबला: सन्ति लघवश्च प्लवंगमा:।
लङ्कामभिपतन्त्वाशु गृह्योल्का: प्लवगर्षभा:॥ ३॥

“Therefore, taking torches in_ their
hands, the foremost of monkeys viz., all
the monkeys, who are endowed with
extraordinary might and are agile, should
speedily invade Lanka.” (3)
ततोऽस्तं गत आदित्ये रौद्रे तस्मिन् निशामुखे।
लङ्कामभिमुखा: सोल्का जग्मुस्ते प्लवगर्षभा: ॥४॥

The sun having set, the aforesaid bulls
among the monkeys marched with their

faces turned towards Lanka in the course
of that dreadful evening. (4)
