« KISKINDHAKANDA +

ad च ae विचेतव्यं मार्गयद्भिस्ततस्तत:।
रामस्य दयितां भार्यां सीतां दशरथस्नुषाम्॥ २४॥
Replied to in these words by Sri Rama,
Sugriva for his part spoke as follows in the
presence of Sri Rama as also the wise
Laksmana to a powerful troop-leader, Vinata
by name, who looked like a mountain and
thundered like a cloud, nay, who was a
ruler of monkeys and had arrived with
monkeys which shone like the sun and the
moon: “You are endowed with political wisdom
suited to a particular place and time and
skilled in determining your duty, O jewel
among monkeys! Followed by a hundred
thousand of energetic monkeys, explore the
eastern quarter with its mountains, forests
and woods, and make a search there for
Sita, a princess of the Videha territory, and
the abode of Ravana in mountain fastnesses,
in forests and on river-banks. Nay, reaching
the river Bhagirathi, the holy Ganga, the
delightful SarayU and Kausiki (the modern
Kosi), the lovely Yamuna, having its source
in the Kalinda mountain, as well as the huge
mountain Kalinda (the source of Yamuna)
as also the Saraswati and Sindhu (the modern
Indus) and the Sona, whose waters sparkle
as a gem, the rivers Mahi and Kalamahi,
graced with mountains and forests, the
territories of Brahmamala and Videha,
Malawa, Kasi and Kosala, the large villages
of Magadha as well as the territories of
Pundra and Anga (roughly corresponding to
the modern district of Bhagalpur) as also
the land of silkworms and the land abounding
in silver mines, this entire zone should be
scoured while looking about in all the aforesaid
regions for Sita, the beloved consort of Sri
Rama and the daughter-in-law of the late
Emperor DaSaratha. (16—24)

समुद्रमवगाढांश्च पर्वतान् पत्तनानि च।
मन्दरस्य च ये कोटिं संश्रिता: केचिदालया:॥ २५॥
कर्णप्रावरणाश्चैव तथा चाप्योष्ठकर्णंका:।
ances जवनाश्चैकपादका: 2G ॥

1089

अक्षया बलवन्तश्च तथैव पुरुषादका:।
किरातास्तीक्ष्णचूडाश्च हेमाभा: प्रियदर्शना:॥ २७॥
आममीनाशनाश्चापि किराता द्वीपवासिन:।
अन्तर्जलचरा घोरा नरव्याघ्रा इति स्मृता:॥ २८॥
एतेषामाश्रया: सर्वे विचेया: काननौकस:।
गिरिभिर्ये च गम्यन्ते प्लवनेन GAT च॥ २९॥

“Nay, the towns built गो  sea-girt
mountains and whatever villages are situated
on the summit of Mount Mandara as well as
all the abodes of the following, viz., those
whose ears are so long and extensive as
to serve as their covering and also those
whose ears reach up to their lips, those
whose faces are black and hard like iron
and, therefore, dreadful as also those who
though onefooted are fleet specially, those
who are homeless (or whose line never
meets with extinction) and are full of
extraordinary strength, even so ogres (or
cannibals) and  golden-hued  Kiratas
possessed of sharp needle-like tufts and
pleasing to look at and also fearful Kiratas
subsisting on raw fish, dwelling on islands,
moving in water and referred to as tiger-
men (possessing as they do the shape of a
human being below the waist and that of a
tiger above), O denizens of the forest, regions
which can be reached by crossing hills and
leaping across them as also those which
are accessible by means of a boat should
be explored. (25—29)

यत्नवन्तो यवद्वीपं सप्तराजोपशोभितम्।

सुवर्णरूप्यकद्वीपं सुवर्णाकरमण्डितम्॥ ३०॥
“Full of endeavour, you should also

scour Yavadwipa (the island of Java), graced

with seven kingdoms as also the gold and
silver islands adorned with gold mines. (30)

यवद्वीपमतिक्रम्य शिशिरो नाम Uda:

fet स्पृशति शृङ्खेण देवदानवसेवित:॥ ३१॥
; “Beyond Yavadwipa lies a mountain,
Sisira by name, inhabited by gods and
demons, which kisses the sky with its
summit. (31)
