896

प्रतोदाभीषुहस्तोऽयं mea वा सारथिर्हत:।
पदवी पुरुषस्यैषा व्यक्तं कस्यापि रक्षस:॥५०॥
“And whose is this charioteer lying
slain with the lash and reins still in his
hands? Clearly these are the footprints of
some male ogre. (50)
at शतगुणं पश्य मम तैर्जीवितान्तकम्।
सुघोरहृदयै: सौम्य राक्षसै: कामरूपिभि:॥ ५१॥
“Know that my enmity with these ogres
possessed of fierce heart and capable of
assuming any form at will has been intensified
a hundredfold and will end with their life
only, O gentle brother ! (51)

हृता मृता वा वैदेही भक्षिता वा तपस्विनी।
न धर्मस्त्रायते सीतां ह्रियमाणां महावने॥५२॥

“Poor Sita (a princess of the Videha
territory) has been killed or devoured
by ogres or is dead through agony of
separation from me. Even virtue was not
able to protect Sita while she was being
carried away by ogres in the great forest !

(52)

भक्षितायां fe वैदेह्यां हृतायामपि लक्ष्मण।
के fe लोके प्रियं कर्तुं शक्ता: सौम्य AAT: ।। ५३ ॥
“When even Sita (a princess of the
Videha kingdom) has been devoured or
borne away for that matter, what powerful
beings in this world are really capable of
rendering good offices to me, O gentle
Laksmana? (53)
कर्तारमपि लोकानां wt करुणवेदिनम्।
अज्ञानादवमन्येरन् सर्वभूतानि ATTN I
“All living beings, O Laksmana, would
through ignorance of His power hold in
contempt even Lord Siva, the maker,
protector and destroyer of the worlds, though
valiant in the extreme, if He remains looking
on with compassion without meddling with
the affairs of the world. (54)
rata sft मन्यन्ते नूनं मां त्रिदशेश्वरा:॥ ५५॥

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

“Surely the rulers of gods (Such as
Brahma and Indra) take me—mild, intent on
the welfare of the world, disciplined and
compassionate of outlook as | am—to be
powerless. (55)

मां प्राप्य fe गुणो दोष: AeA: पश्य लक्ष्मण।
अद्यैव सर्वभूतानां रक्षसामभवाय TN I
संहृत्यैव गुणान् सर्वान् मम तेज: प्रकाशते॥ ५७॥

“See, 0 Laksmana, how the aforesaid
virtues have turned into vices on reaching
me and how, having definitely thrown into
the background all the aforesaid virtues, my
glory shines forth this very day for the
annihilation of all living beings including
ogres, even as the exceptionally glorious
sun risen at the time of universal dessolution

blazes forth, decidedly eclipsing the
moonshine. (56-57)
नैव यक्षा न गन्धर्वा न पिशाचा न राक्षसा:।

किं नरा वा मनुष्या वा सुखं प्राप्स्यन्ति लक्ष्मण ।। ५८ UI

“Neither Yaksas nor Gandharvas nor
fiends nor ogres nor Kinnaras nor human
beings will find happiness any longer, O
Laksmana ! (58)
ममास्त्रवबाणसम्पूर्णमाकाशं पश्य लक्ष्मण।
असम्पातं करिष्यामि ह्यद्य त्रैलोक्यचारिणाम्॥ ५९ ॥

“Behold, 0 Laksmana, the space filled
before long with mystic missiles and arrows
discharged by me. Today by filling the space
with my arrows | will arrest the motion of all
those moving about in all the three worlds.

(59)
संनिरुद्धग्रहगणमावारितनिशाकरम् ।
विप्रणष्टानलमरुद्भास्करद्युतिसंव्रतम् ॥ ६० ॥
विनिर्मथितशैलाग्रं शुष्यमाणजलाशयम्।
ध्वस्तद्रुमलतागुल्मं विप्रणाशितसागरम्॥ ६१ ॥
त्रैलोक्यं तु करिष्यामि संयुक्तं कालकर्मणा।

न ते कुशलिनीं dat प्रदास्यन्ति ममेश्वरा:।॥ ६२॥
अस्मिन् मुहूर्ते सौमित्रे मम द्रक्ष्यन्ति विक्रमम्।
नाकाशमुत्पतिष्यन्ति सर्वभूतानि AAT ६३॥
