1010

अङ्गदप्रतिरूपाणां पुत्राणामेकत: शतम्।
हतस्याप्यस्य AT गात्रसंश्लेषणं वरम्॥१३॥
“Let there be on one side full one
hundred of sons like Angada. Clasping to
the bosom the limbs of this hero, even
though he has been killed, is, however,
preferable to them in my eyes. (13)

न चाहं हरिराज्यस्य प्रभवाम्यङ्घदस्य वा।

पितृव्यस्तस्य सुग्रीव: सर्वकार्येष्वनन्तर:॥१४॥
“| have no power over the kingdom of

monkeys nor over the installation of Angada.

His uncle, Sugriva, is the authority in all
matters and proximate to him. (14)

न ह्येषा बुद्धिरास्थेया हनूमन्नङ्गदं प्रति।
frat fe बन्धु: पुत्रस्य न माता हरिसत्तम॥ १५॥

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

“This conclusion of yours with regard
to Angada (viz., that he is to be installed on
the throne by me) is not worth maintaining;
for, the father and in his absence an uncle
is the friend (helper) of a son, and not the
mother, O jewel among the monkeys! (15)
ae मम हरिराजसंश्रयात्

क्षमतरमस्ति Wa de वा।
अभिमुखहतवीरसेवितं
शयनमिदं मम सेवितुं क्षमम्॥ १६॥

“Indeed nothing is more advisable for
me in this world or the next than to follow
Vali, the king of monkeys. This bed, in the
form of the bare ground, used by the heroic
Vali, slain facing his enemy, is fit to be
shared by me.” (16)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये किष्किन्धाकाण्डे एकविंश: सर्ग: ॥ 22 ॥

Thus ends Canto Twenty-one in the Kiskindhakanda of the glorious Ramayana of
Valmiki, the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

Canto XXII

Craving the forgiveness of Sugriva, though he was younger than he, and
applauding the resolve of Tara (to follow her husband), nay, urging Sugriva
to follow the advice of Tara, look after Angada affectionately and
accomplish the purpose of Sri Rama, Vali asks Sugriva to take off
the gold chain from the former’s neck, and gives up the ghost
while tendering wholesome advice to Angada. Extolling the
wonderful exploits of Vali, hordes of monkeys lament in
many ways. Stricken with agony caused by separation

from Vali, Tara falls to the ground, embracing Vali

वरीक्षमाणस्तु मन्दासु: Addl मन्दमुच्छ्वसन्।
आदावेव तुं सुग्रीवं ददर्शानुजमग्रत:॥१॥

Casting his eyes all-round and slowly
breathing, Vali for his part, whose vitality
was now very low, beheld in the first instance
his younger brother, Sugriva, alone standing
in front of him. (1)

तं प्राप्तविजयं वाली सुग्रीवं प्लवगेश्वरम्।
आभाष्य Aha ar सस्नेहमिदमब्रवीत्॥ २॥
Accosting Sugriva, who had scored a
victory over him and was now the ruler of
monkeys, Vali lovingly spoke to him in distinct
accents as follows : (2)

सुग्रीव दोषेण न मां गन्तुमर्हसि किल्बिषात्।
कृष्यमाणं भविष्येण बुद्धिमोहेन मां बलात्॥ ३॥
