* AYODHYAKANDA +

Its main facade, was adorned with gold
images and it was provided with an outer
gateway of gems and corals. Resplendent
like a cave of Mount Meru, it cast a splendour
compact as an autumnal cloud. (32)
ainda सुमहद्भिरलंकृतम्।
मुक्कामणिभिराकीर्णं चन्दनागुरुभूषितम्॥ 33 Il

It was decorated with very large gems
forming part of wreaths of gold flowers, was
full of pearls and was adorned with sandal
trees and aloes. (33)

गन्धान् मनोज्ञान् विसृजद् दार्दुरं शिखरं यथा।
सारसैश्च मयूरैश्च विनदद्भिर्विराजितम्॥ ax

It emitted pleasing odours like a summit
of Mount Dardura (a mountain abounding in
sandalwood in the vicinity of the Malayagiri
mountain) and was graced with crying cranes
and peacocks. (34)

सुकृतेहामृगाकीर्णमुत्कोर्णं भक्तिभिस्तथा।
मनश्चक्षुश्च भूतानामाददत् तिग्मतेजसा॥ ३५॥
It was full of beautifully designed images
of wolves and decked with fine wooden
carvings and attracted the mind and eyes of
men by its bright splendour. (35)

चन्द्रभास्करसंकाशं कुबेरभवनोपमम्।
महेन्द्रधामप्रतिमं नानापक्षिसमाकुलम्॥ ३६ Ul

It shone like the moon and the sun and
vied with the palace of Kubera, the god of
riches, was a replica of the abode of the
mighty Indra and abounded in birds of various
kinds. (36)
मेरुशृङ्गसमं सूतो रामवेश्म ददर्शं ह।
उपस्थितै: समाकीर्णं जनैरञ्जलिकारिभि:॥ ३७॥

The bard thus beheld the palace of Sri
Rama resembling Mount Meru (in height)
and thronged with men arrived there and
standing with joined palms. (37)
उपादाय समाक्रान्तैस्तदा जानपदैर्जनै:।
रामाभिषेकसुमुखैरुन्मुखै: समलंकृतम्॥ ३८ I

It was fully graced with men from the
countryside arrived on that occasion taking

351

presents with them, eager to behold, and
cheerful over his installation. (38)
महामेघसमप्रख्यमुदग्रं सुविराजितम्।
नानारत्नसमाकीर्णं कुब्जकैरपि चाव्रृतम्॥३९॥
Stately and highly resplendent, it shone
like a large cloud; nay, it was full of precious

stones of numerous descriptions and was
also crowded with servants. (39)

a वाजियुक्तेन रथेन ante:

समाकुलं राजकुलं विराजयन्।
वसूथिना राजगृहाभिपातिना

पुरस्य सर्वस्य मनांसि हर्षयन्॥४०॥

Irradiating the overcrowded main road
with his chariot drawn by four horses and
provided with a fender or protecting plank
(with a view to avoiding collision) and heading
towards the royal palace (of which Sri Rama’s
palace obviously formed an integral part),
and delighting the mind of the people of the
whole city, the charioteer arrived at the
entrance of Sri Rama’s palace. (40)

ad: समासाद्य महाधनं महत्
प्रहष्टरोमा स aya सारथि:।

मृगैर्मयूरैश्च समाकुलोल्बणं

Te वरार्हस्य शचीपतेरिव॥४१॥

The said charioteer was thrilled all
over with joy to reach the great palace of
Sri Rama (who deserved all excellent
possessions), full of abundant riches and
thickly crowded with deer and peacocks,
and resembling the palace of Indra, the
spouse of Saci. (41)

स aa कैलासनिभा: स्वलंकृता:

प्रविश्य कक्ष्यास्त्रिदशालयोपमा:।
प्रियान् वरान् राममते स्थितान् बहून्

व्यपोह्य शुद्धान्तमुपस्थितौ रथी॥४२॥

Entering one after another the three
gates of the palace—which were all richly
decorated and shone like Mount Kailasa in
height and which vied with the realm of
gods in beauty—and over-passing the many
