832

मारीचस्य तु मायैषा पूर्वोक्तं लक्ष्मणेन तु।
ae AM ह्यभवच्चाद्य मारीचोऽयं AA FA: २३॥
(He said to himself) : ‘Indeed this was
a conjuring trick played by Marica, which
had already been pointed out by Laksmana.
Indeed, what he said has come to be true
and it is Marica who has been killed by me
today. (23)

A सीते लक्ष्मणेत्येवमाक्रुश्य तु महास्वनम्।
ममार राक्षस: सोऽयं श्रुत्वा सीता कथं भवेत्॥ २४॥
‘Since this notorious ogre has breathed
his last uttering a loud wail: ‘Alas Sita ! Ah
Laksmana | how will Sita feel on hearing it?
(24)

लक्ष्मणश्च महाबाहु: कामवस्थां गमिष्यति।
इति संचिन्त्य धर्मात्मा Wat हृष्टतनूरुह:॥ २५॥

‘And what moods will the mighty armed

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

Laksmana pass through?’ Reflecting thus,
Sri Rama, whose mind was set on virtue,
found his hair standing on end (through
apprehension about the future of Sita). (25)
wa wa wa तीव्रमाविवेश विषादजम्।
राक्षसं मृगरूपं तं हत्वा श्रुत्वा च तत्स्वनम्॥ २६॥
A poignant fear, born of dejection, seized
Sri Rama on his having slain that ogre
appearing in the form of a deer and hearing
his cry. (26)
त्वरमाणो जनस्थानं ससाराभिमुखं तदा॥ २७॥
Having made short work of that
uncommon spotted deer and taking fruits
etc., fit for the consumption of ascetics, Sri
Rama, a scion of Raghu, then hastily
proceeded towards his hermitage in
Janasthana. (27)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्येऽरण्यकाण्डे चतुश्चत्वारिंश: सर्ग: ॥ ४४॥

Thus ends Canto Forty-four in the Aranyakanda of the glorious Ramayana of Valmiki,
the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

Canto XLV
Lashed with castigating remarks, Laksmana seeks the presence of Sri Rama

आर्तस्वरं तु तं भर्तुर्विज्ञाय aget वने।
उवाच लक्ष्मणं सीता गच्छ जानीहि राघवम्॥१॥
Recognizing the piteous cry heard in
the forest as akin to the voice of her lord,
Sita spoke to Laksmana (as follows) : “Go
and ascertain the truth about Sri Rama (the
scion of Raghu). (1)
नहि मे जीवितं wart हृदयं वावतिष्ठते।
क्रोशत: परमार्तस्य श्रुत: शब्दो मया भृशम्॥ २॥
“Neither my life-breath nor my heart is
functioning properly. | have heard the voice

of someone like him crying for help at a high
pitch in great distress. (2)

आक्रन्दमानं तु at wat त्रातुमर्हसि।
तं क्षिप्रमभिधाव त्वं भ्रातरं शरणैषिणम्॥ 3

रक्षसां वशमापन्नं सिंहानामिव गोवृषम्।
न जगाम तथोक्तस्तु भ्रातुराज्ञाय शासनम्॥४॥
“Surely, you ought to rescue your elder
brother, crying piteously in the forest. Rush
you at once to the side of your brother fallen
into the hands of ogres as a bull into the
clutches of lions and as such seeking
your protection.” Recalling as he did the
command of his brother not to leave her
alone, Laksmana, however, did not stir
even though urged in the foregoing words.
(3-4)
