438

ata: स गिरि: सर्वैस्तै: समन्तात् प्लवङ्गमै: |
अयुतानां सहस्रं च पुरीं तामभ्यवर्तत॥५२॥
The said mountain (the Trikuta mountain,
on which Lanka had been built) was
surrounded on all sides by all the aforesaid
monkeys; while a crore of them ranged
round that city in order to collect information
about the monkeys assembled at the
gates. (52)

वानरैर्बलवद्भिश्च बभूव द्रुमपाणिभि:।
सर्वत: Gad लङ्का दुष्प्रवेशापि वायुना॥ ५३॥

Nay, surrounded on all sides by mighty
monkeys with uprooted trees in their hands,
Lanka was difficult to penetrate even for the
wind. (53)

राक्षसा विस्मयं जग्मु: सहसाभिनिपीडिता:।
वानरैर्मेघसंकाशै: शक्रतुल्यपराक्रमै: WEY I

Besieged all of a sudden by monkeys,
who resembled clouds in colour and equalled
Indra (the ruler of gods) in prowess, the
ogres gave way to wonder. (54)

महाञ्छब्दोऽभवत् तत्र बलौघस्याभिवर्तत:।
सागरस्येव भिन्नस्य यथा स्यात् सलिलस्वन:॥ ७५७५ Ul

Even as the stream in the form of the
monkey troops was advancing towards
Lanka, there arose from it on the summit of
Mount Trikuta a noise just like a roar in the
water when an ocean transgresses its
bounds. (55)

तेन शब्देन महता सप्राकारा सतोरणा।
लङ्का प्रचलिता Wal सशैलवनकानना॥७५६॥

At this tumult, the entire Lanka with its
defensive walls, archways, mountains, woods
and forests violently shook. (56)

रामलक्ष्मणगुप्ता सा सुग्रीवेण च वाहिनी।
aya दुर्धर्षतरा सर्वैरपि सुरासुरै:॥५७॥

Protected by Sri Rama and Laksmana
and directed by Sugriva, the aforesaid army
of monkeys was exceedingly difficult to

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA +

assail even for all the gods and the demons
combined. (57)
waa: संनिवेश्यैवं स्वसैन्यं रक्षसां वधे।
waa abate: सार्धं निश्चित्य च पुन: TA: ॥ ५८ ।।
आनन्तर्यमभिप्रेप्सुर क्रमयोगार्थतत्त्ववित्।
राजधर्ममनुस्मरन्॥ ५९॥
Treat सौम्य ania ब्रूहि Aged कपे॥६०॥
भ्रष्टश्रीकं गतैश्चर्यं मुमूर्षानष्टचेतनम्॥६१॥
Having thus drawn up his army in
battle array with a view to the destruction of
ogres, repeatedly deliberated at length with
his counsellors and arrived at a decision,
nay, calling to mind the duty of kings and
duly summoning Angada, the son of Vali.
Sri Rama, a scion of Raghu, who was
eager to undertake what was to be done
next, nay, who knew the truth about the
consequences of the four expedients to be
used against an enemy in the shape of
conciliation, gift, sowing dissension and
punishment, employed in succession, and
who acted in concurrence with Vibhisana,
spoke as follows: “Crossing over the walls
to the city of Lanka, and approaching Ravana
(the ten-headed monster), who has fallen
from fortune, has lost his sovereignty and
has been deprived of his wit because of his
inclination to die, nay, shaking off fear and
free from perturbation, admonish him on my
behalf, O gentle monkey, in the following
words: (58—61)
RANT देवतानां च गन्धर्वाप्सरसां तथा।
नागानामथ यक्षाणां राज्ञां च रजनीचर॥६२॥
यच्च UG hd मोहादवलिप्तेन राक्षस।
Tt oa विगतो दर्प: स्वयंभूवरदानज:।
तस्य पापस्य सम्प्राप्ता व्युष्टिरद्य दुरासदा॥६३॥
“The period of retribution, which is
dangerous to approach, has now duly arrived
