* AYODHYAKANDA +

Dejected and distressed, Satrughna and
Bharata both now began to roll on the ground
like a pair of bulls whose horns have been
broken. (20)

wa: प्रकृतिमान् aa: पितुरेषां पुरोहित:।
वसिष्ठो भरतं वाक्यमुत्थाप्य तमुवाच ह॥ २१॥
Raising Bharata up, the omniscient
Vasistha, the family priest of their father as
well as of them all, endowed as he was with
an amiable disposition, spoke to him as
follows, so the tradition goes : (21)

त्रयोदशोऽयं दिवस: पितुर्वृत्तस्य a विभो।
सावशेषास्थिनिचये किमिह त्वं विलम्बसे॥ २२॥

“Today is the thirteenth day since your
father was cremated, my lord ! Why then do
you lag behind now in winding up the
remaining part of the ceremony of collecting
the bones, viz., cleaning and washing the
ground on which the king’s body had been
cremated and consigning the ashes to the
river? (22)

तेषु चापरिहार्येषु नैवं भवितुमर्हसि॥ २३॥

“Three pairs of opposites (life and
death, joy and sorrow, gain and loss) prevail

579

alike in all living beings. And they being
unavoidable, you ought not to behave like
this.” (23)

सुमन्त्रश्चापि शात्रुघ्नमुत्थाप्याभिप्रसाद्य च।
श्रावयामास aaa: सर्वभूतभवाभवौ॥ २४॥
Raising up and pacifying Satrughna,
Sumantra too, a knower of the Truth, told
him how birth and death were inevitable for
all created beings. (24)

उत्थितौ dt नरव्याघ्रौ प्रकाशेते यशस्विनौ।
वर्षातपपरिग्लानौ पृथगिन्द्रध्वजाविव॥ २५ ॥

The two illustrious princes, who were
veritable tigers among men and had now
got up, shone like two banners, severally
raised in honour of Indra, the god of rain,
and soiled through rain and the sun. (25)

अश्रूणि परिमृद्गन्तौ रक्ताक्षौ दीनभाषिणौ।
अमात्यास्त्वरयन्ति स्म तनयौ चापरा: क्रिया: ॥ २६ ॥

The ministers now urged the two
princes—who were wiping their tears and
speaking in a piteous tone, their eyes
reddened through excessive grief—to
expedite the other rites pertaining to the
thirteenth day, viz., lifting the ashes and
immersing them into the river and so on.(26)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्येऽयोध्याकाण्डे
सप्तसप्ततितम: FA: ॥ ७७॥

Thus ends Canto Seventy-seven in the Ayodhyakanda of the glorious Ramayana of
Valmiki, the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

