184

नित्यमुत्साहयुक्तस्य वाच: श्रुत्वा मयेरिता:।
वर्धिष्यते दाशरथे: पौरुषं मदवाप्तये॥११॥

‘The effort of Sri Rama (son of
DaSaratha), who is ever full of determination
to recover me, will be intensified on hearing
the words uttered by me. (11)

मत्संदेशयुता वाचस्त्वत्त: श्रुत्वैव Waa: |
पराक्रमे मतिं वीरो विधिवत् संविधास्यति॥ १२॥

“Only after hearing from you the words
conveying my message, the heroic Sri Rama
will duly set his heart on exhibiting his valour.”

(12)

सीतायास्तद् वच: श्रुत्वा STAM मारुतात्मज: ।
शिरस्यञ्जलिमाधाय वाक्यमुत्तरमब्रवीत्॥१३॥
Placing his joined palms above his head
on hearing the aforesaid appeal of Sita,
Hanuman, sprung from the loins of the wind-
god, made the following reply: (13)

क्षिप्रमेष्यति काकुत्स्थो हर्यक्षप्रवरैर्वृत:।
यस्ते ofa विजित्यारीन् शोकं व्यपनयिष्यति॥ १४॥

“Surrounded by the foremost of monkeys
and bears, Sri Rama (a scion of Kakutstha),
who, having conquered his enemies on the
field of battle, will completely drive away
your grief, will soon make his appearance
here. (14)

नहि पश्यामि मर्त्यषु नासुरेषु सुरेषु वा।
यस्तस्य वमतो बाणान् स्थातुमुत्सहतेऽग्रत:॥ १५॥

“| know of none among mortals, demons
or gods, who would dare stand before him
while he is shooting arrows. (15)

अप्यर्कमपि पर्जन्यमपि dard यमम्।

a fe ae TW wea हेतोर्विशेषत:॥१६॥
“Indeed he would be able to withstand

in combat even the sun-god, Indra (the rain-

god), Yama (the god of retribution), son of
the sun-god, particularly for your sake. (16)

a fe सागरपर्यन्तां महीं साधितुमर्हति।
त्वन्निमित्तो fe रामस्य जयो जनकनन्दिनि॥ १७॥

“Sri Rama can conquer the earth

« VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

bounded by the ocean. Hence Sri Rama’s
victory in your cause is certain, O daughter
of Janaka !” (17)

तस्य तद्वचनं श्रुत्वा सम्यक सत्यं सुभाषितम्।
जानकी ag मेने तं aad चेदमब्रवीत्॥१८॥
Hearing the aforesaid reply of Hanuman,
which was reasonable, truthful and beautifully
worded, the daughter of Janaka held him in
great estimation and proceeded to speak as
follows : (18)

ततस्तं प्रस्थितं सीता वीक्षमाणा पुन: पुन:।
भर्तृस्नेहान्वितं art सौहार्दादनुमानयत्॥१९॥

Gazing again and again on Hanuman,
who had then made ready to depart, Sita
uttered the following respectful words,
expressive of her husband’s affection for
her, actuated as she was with goodwill for
him: (19)
ae वा मन्यसे dk वसैकाहमरिंदम।
कस्मिंश्चित् cae देशे विश्रान्त: श्वो गमिष्यसि।। २० ॥

“If you deem fit, O hero, halt for a day,
O tamer of foes! Resting in some covered
place, you may leave tomorrow. (20)
मम चैवाल्पभाग्याया: सांनिध्यात् तव वानर।
अस्य शोकस्य महतो मुहूर्तं मोक्षणं भवेत्॥ २१॥

“Due to your presence, O Hanuman, |

shall be rid for a while, unfortunate as | am,
of this violent grief. (21)

at fe हरिशार्दूल पुनरागमनाय तु।
प्राणानामपि संदेहो AA स्यान्नात्र संशय:॥ २२॥

“For, if after that there is any doubt
about your return, O tiger among monkeys,
there is uncertainty of my survival too: there
is no doubt about it. (22)

तवादर्शनज: शोको भूयो at परितापयेत्।

दु:खादु:खपरामृष्टां दीपयन्निव वानर॥ २३॥
“Grief born of your absence, O monkey,

will torment me further, burning me, as it

were, seized as | already am with agony
after agony. (23)
