+ UTTARAKANDA +

rich song, were overwhelmed and
speechless, indeed, and exclaimed to each
other—‘How wonderful it is’. (18-19)

किमिदं क्व च वर्ताम: किमेतत् स्वप्नदर्शनम्।
अर्थो यो A: पुरा दृष्टस्तमाश्रमपदे पुन:॥ २०॥
‘What is this, where are we, have we
been in a dream, that thing, which we had
seen formerly, we see again in the hermitage.
(20)

soya: किमिदं स्वप्ने गीतबन्धनमुत्तमम्।
विस्मयं ते परं गत्वा शत्रुघ्नमिदमब्रुवन्॥ २१॥
‘Do we hear in dream this beautifully
composed song’ filled with great surprise,
they said to Satrughna: (21)

साधु पृच्छ नरश्रेष्ठं वाल्मीकिं मुनिपुङ्खवम्।
शत्रुघ्नस्त्वब्रवीत् सर्वान् कौतूहलसमन्वितान्॥ २२॥

1059

सैनिका न क्षमोऽस्माकं परिप्रष्टुमिहेदृश:।
आश्चर्याणि बहूनीह भवन्त्यस्याश्रमे मुने:।॥ २३॥
नतुकौत्तळूहलाद्क्कास्रेष्टुंतंमहामुनिम्।
एवं ag वाक्यमुक्त्वा तु सैनिकान् रघुनन्दन:।
अभिवाद्य महरषिं तं स्वं निवेशं ययौ तदा॥ २४॥

‘Please ask Valmiki, O best among
men, who composed this song? Satrughna
on his part, told all the warriors filled with
surprise: ‘Here | am not able to ask Valmiki
in this manner, many wonders exist here in
this hermitage of the sage, it is not proper to
go and question the great sage out of
curiosity.’ Thus having spoken to the warriors,
the scion of the Raghus then having saluted
the great sage, started for his apartment.

(22—24)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये उत्तरकाण्डे एकसप्ततितम: सर्ग: ॥ ७१ ॥

Thus ends Canto Seventy-one in the Uttarakanda of the glorious Ramayana of
Valmiki, the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

द्विसप्ततितम: सर्ग:
Canto LXXII

After taking leave from Valmiki, Satrughna meets Sa Rama
and others at Ayodhya and after staying there
for a week, leaves again for Madhupuri

तं शयानं नरव्याघ्रं निद्रा नाभ्यागमत् तदा।
चिन्तयानमनेकार्थं रामगीतमनुत्तमम्॥ १॥
Satrughna, a tiger among men, could
not sleep in the night ruminating over the
song of Rama’s deeds, full of meaning. (1)

Night passed away for the noble
Satrughna quickly, hearing the melodious
sound of the song accompanied with that of
the Vina (lute) with proper beats. (2)
उवाच प्राञ्जलिर्वाक्यं शत्रुघ्नो मुनिपुङ्खवम्॥३॥

After the night had ended, Satrughna
with folded hands said to Valmiki, the best
among sages, having performed the morning
duties: (3)

भगवन् द्रष्टुमिच्छामि wad रघुनन्दनम्।
त्वयानुज्ञातुमिच्छामि सहैभि: संशितव्रतै:।॥४॥

‘Sir, | wish to see Sri Rama, the scion
of the Raghus, with your permission and
also that of these sages, firmly adhering to
their vowes.’ (4)
gad वादिनं तं तु शत्रुघ्नं शत्रुसूदनम्।
वाल्मीकि: सम्परिष्वज्य विससर्ज स राघवम्॥५॥

Thus talking, Valmiki embraced
