# YUDDHAKANDA #

had been exhausted by drawing the chariot
and broken down and, being worn out with
sunshine, felt miserable like cows lashed by
a downpour. (16)

निमित्तानि च भूयिष्ठं यानि प्रादुर्भवन्ति न:।
तेषु तेष्वभिपन्नेषु लक्षयाम्यप्रदक्षिणम्॥१७॥

“Moreover in the event of those
portents, which appear in large numbers
before our eyes today proving true, |
foresee only that which is unpropitious to
us (17)

देशकालौ च विज्ञेयौ लक्षणानीडङ्गितानि च।
i wig खेदश्च रथिनश्च बलाबलम्॥१८॥
(Propitious and unpropitious) time and
place as well as (good and evil) omens,
facial expressions, depression and liveliness,
the measure of fatigue as also the strength
and weakness of the warrior occupying the
chariot, must be ascertained by a charioteer.
(18)

स्थलनिम्नानि भूमेश्च समानि विषमाणि च।
युद्धकालश्च विज्ञेय: परस्यान्तरदर्शनम्॥१९॥

“Nay, the eminences and depressions
of the earth’s surface, as well as the parts
which are level and rugged, the time
opportune for combat and the visible weak
points of the enemy too must be known by
a charioteer. (19)

उपयानापयाने च स्थानं प्रत्यपसर्पणम्।
सर्वमेतद् रथस्थेन ज्ञेयं रथकुटुम्बिना॥२०॥

“How to advance towards the enemy
and how to recede, how to hold one’s position
and how to make good a retreat—all this
must be known by a charioteer seated in
his chariot. (20)

wa विश्रामहेतोस्तु तथैषां रथवाजिनाम्।
Wk वर्जयता खेदं क्षमं कृतमिदं मया॥ २१॥
“This meet action of removing you from

the battlefield was evidently taken by me in
order to give rest to you as well as to these

745

steeds of the chariot and to relieve your
terrible fatigue. (21)

स्वेच्छ्या न मया वीर रथोऽयमपवाहित:।
ud: स्नेहपरीतेन wad यत् Hd प्रभो॥ २२॥

“Your chariot was not wilfully removed
by me, O gallant warrior. What was
done by me was done because | was
overwhelmed with affection for my master,
O lord! (22)

आज्ञापय यथातत्त्वं वक्ष्यस्यरिनिषूदन।
ad करिष्याम्यहं ae गतानृण्येन चेतसा॥ २३॥
“Command me with an eye to the reality
of things, O valiant exterminator of your
enemies! Now with a mind which feels
relieved of all obligations on having come
to your rescue on the field of battle, |
shall do that which you will enjoin me to do.”
(23)

संतुष्टस्तेन वाक्येन रावणस्तस्य सारथे:।
Wer बहुविधं युद्धलुब्धोऽब्रवीदिदम्॥ २४॥

Satisfied with the foregoing explanation
of the aforesaid charioteer, nay, applauding
him in many ways, Ravana, who was
covetous of fighting, replied as follows: (24)
नाहत्वा समरे शत्रून् निवर्तिष्यति रावण:॥ २५॥

“Speedily drive this chariot, O charioteer,
towards Rama (a scion of Raghu). Ravana
would not turn back without killing his
enemies in combat.” (25)

एवमुक्त्वा रथस्थस्य रावणो राक्षसेश्वर:।
ददौ तस्य शुभं ह्येकं हस्ताभरणमुत्तमम्।
श्रुत्वा रावणवाक्यानि सारथि: संन्यवर्तत॥ २६॥
Saying so, Ravana, the lord of ogres,
actually bestowed on the charioteer, even
while the latter remained seated in the
chariot, an excellent and brilliant ornament
for the hand. Hearing the instructions of
Ravana, the charioteer drove the chariot
back to the battlefield. (26)
