1040

न fart qa तत्र ah a fe गच्छति।
स त्वं हत्वा मधुसुतं लवणं पापनिश्चयम्॥१९॥
राज्यं प्रशाधि धर्मेण वाक्यं A यद्यवेक्षसे।
उत्तरं च न वक्तव्यं शूर वाक्यान्तरे AAI Roll

“Be it so, 0 Satrughna (descendant of
Kakutstha), carry out my orders, | shall
consecrate you on the holy kingdom of Madhu.
Establish the throne. Bharata be here. O one
of long arms, if you consider it proper, You
are brave and proficient, and also have the
ability to establish a new city. Founding a city
close to Yamuna, and many provinces of
auspicious fame, one who having reduced a
royal house in that very city, does not install
a king there, indeed goes to hell. Therefore,

« VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

you, having killed Lavana, the son of Madhu,
possessed of evil designs, rule over that
kingdom. If you follow my words, then, O brave
one, carry on the administration righteously,
without making any argument or disobeying
me.’ (16—20)

बालेन पूर्वजस्याज्ञा कर्तव्या ATA संशय:।
अभिषेकं च काकुत्स्थ प्रतीच्छस्व ममोद्यतम्।
वसिष्ठप्रमुखैर्विप्रैर्विधिमन्त्रपुरस्कृतम् ॥ २१॥

The elders must be obeyed by youngers
there is no doubt about it. Please approve of
the consecration, to be performed by me,
accompained by the Mantras, sacred chants
of the Brahmanas headed by Sri Vasistha,
in prescribed manner. (21)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये उत्तरकाण्डे द्विषष्टितम: AW: ॥ 2

Thus ends Canto Sixty-two in the Uttarakanda of the glorious Ramayana of Valmiki,
the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

त्रिषष्टितम: ai:
Canto LXIII

Rama coronates Satrughna as a king and explains to him the way to
safeguard himself against Lavana’s lance

एवमुक्तस्तु रामेण परां व्रीडामुपागमत्।
शत्रुघ्नो वीर्यसम्पन्नो मन्दं मन्दमुवाच ह॥१॥
After Sri Rama said so, the mighty
Satrughna felt very much ashamed and
spoke gently: (1)
अधर्मं for काकुत्स्थ अस्मिन्नर्थे नरेश्वर।
कथं तिष्ठत्सु ज्येष्ठेषु कनीयानभिषिच्यते॥ २॥
‘O king, the descendent of Kakutstha,
this transaction seems to me as against
Dharma, how can a junior be consecrated
on the throne, superseding the elders? (2)
अवश्यं करणीयं च शासनं पुरुषर्षभ।
तव चैव महाभाग शासनं दुरतिक्रमम्॥३॥
‘On the other hand, your orders must
be carried out at any cost as it is impossible

to supersede them.
त्वत्तो मया श्रुतं वीर श्रुतिभ्यश्च मया श्रुतम्।
नोत्तरं fe मया वाच्यं मध्यमे प्रतिजानति॥४॥
‘| have heard from you, as well as from
the Srutis, O brave one! that | should not
have said anything after the middle brother,
Bharata, had already taken a vow. (4)
tet दुर्वचो at हन्तास्मि लवणं मृधे।
तस्यैवं मे दुरुक्तस्य दुर्गति: पुरुषर्षभ॥५॥
‘It is most unfortunate that | have said
something improper: ‘I will kill Lavana in battle’.
| think | have been put in this unenviable
position as a result of my saying so. (5)

sm नहि ana ज्येष्ठेनाभिहिते पुन:।
अधर्मसहितं da परलोकविवर्जितम्॥६॥

(3)
