528

vision was still clouded, looked at the rangers
of the night. (65)

स aly सान्त्वयामास नैर्ऋतान् नैर्ऋतर्षभ:।
aera विस्मितश्चापि राक्षसानिदमब्रवीत्॥ ६६॥

That bull among the ogres (lit., scions
of Nirrti, the ogre presiding over the south-
west) soothed all the ogres. And, also
astonished at being wakened prematurely,
he questioned the ogres as follows: (66)

किमर्थमहमादृत्य wate: प्रतिबोधित:।
कच्चित् सुकुशलं राज्ञो भयं वा Ae किंचन॥ ६७॥

“What for have | been roused by you
with effort? | hope all is well with the king
and no danger has arisen here. (67)

अथवा ध्रुवमन्येभ्यो भयं परमुपस्थितम्।
यदर्थमेव त्वरितैर्भवद्भि: प्रतिबोधित:॥ ६८॥

“Or, without doubt a great peril has come
from the enemies, for warding off which |
have been hastily woken by you. (68)

TI राक्षसराजस्य भयमुत्पाटयाम्यहम्।
दारयिष्ये Hest वा शीतयिष्ये तथानलम्॥६९॥
“| shall uproot the fear of Ravana, the
king of ogres, today. | shall tear asunder the
Mahendra mountain or shall freeze fire, if
necessary. (69)
न ह्यल्पकारणे Et बोधयिष्यति मादृशम्।
तदाख्यातार्थतत्त्वेन मत्प्रबोधनकारणम्॥७०॥
“Surely he would not rouse me, when
asleep, for a trivial reason. Therefore, point

out to me in reality the cause of waking
me.” (70)
एवं i संरब्धं ae मिरिं ।
यूपाक्ष: सचिवो Ua: कृताञ्जलिरभाषत॥ oe ti
To Kumbhakarna, the tamer of his
enemies, who was speaking as aforesaid,

full of rage, YUpaksa, a minister of the king,
replied as follows with joined palms: (71)

न नो capd किंचिद् भयमस्ति कदाचन।
मानुषान्नो भयं राजंस्तुमुलं सम्प्रबाधते॥७२॥

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA +

“No danger can ever be brought upon
us by gods. A formidable danger from a
mortal is, however, pressing hard upon us,
O prince! (72)

न दैत्यदानवेभ्यो वा भयमस्ति न न: क्वचित्।
यादृशं मानुषं राजन् भयमस्मानुपस्थितम्॥७३॥

“The kind of danger which has come
upon us, O prince, has never come even
from the Daityas (giants) and Danavas
(demons). (73)

art: uUddrattciga परिवारिता।
सीताहरणसंतप्ताद् रामान्नस्तुमुलं भयम्॥७४॥

“This city of Lanka has been laid siege
to by monkeys resembling mountains in
size and formidable is the danger to us from
Rama, who is distressed on account of the
abduction of his wife, Sita. (74)
एकेन वानरेणेयं ya दग्धा महापुरी।
कुमारो निहतश्चाक्ष: सानुयात्र: सकुञ्जर:॥७५॥

“Latterly this large city was set fire to
and Prince Aksa was made short work of,
with his elephant and followers, by a single
monkey. (75)
स्वयं रक्षोधिपश्चापि पौलस्त्यो देवकण्टक:।
व्रजेति संयुगे मुक्तो रामेणादित्यवर्चसा॥ ७६॥

“Nay, even Ravana himself, a scion of
Sage Pulasti, the suzerain lord of ogres and
a thorn in the side of gods, was let go in an
encounter with the word ‘Depart!’ by Rama,
possessing the splendour of the sun. (76)
यन्न ea: कृतो राजा नापि दैत्यैर्न दानवै:।

a: स इह रामेण विमुक्त: प्राणसंशयात्॥ ७७॥

“The king was this time reduced to a
plight to which he had never been reduced
either by the Daityas or even by Danavas,
and just escaped from a peril to his life.”

(77)

स यूपाक्षवच: श्रुत्वा भ्रातुर्युधि पराभवम्।
कुम्भकर्णो विव्रत्ताक्षो यूपाक्षमिदमब्रवीत्॥७८॥
