318

“Quickly carrying off from their beds at
night the warriors injured and grievously
wounded in the course of that great conflict
and lying fast asleep, the ogre-like demons
used to make short work of them. (14)

तत्राकरोन्महायुद्धुं राजा दशरथस्तदा।
असुरैश्च महाबाहु: शस्त्रैश्च शकलीकृत:॥१५॥

“There Emperor Dasaratha fought a
great battle with the demons and the mighty-
armed hero was lacerated with weapons
and missiles on that occasion. (15)

अपवाह्य त्वया देवि संग्रामान्नष्टचेतन:।
carta faera: शस्त्रै: पतिस्ते रक्षितस्त्वया॥ १६॥

“Having been removed in= an
unconscious state from the field of battle by
you, O glorious lady, your husband, King
Dasaratha, was mangled with weapons even
there and saved by you by being taken to a
still safer retreat. (16)

qea तेन adit a gt at शुभदर्शने।
स warn: पतिर्देवि यदेच्छेयं तदा ATI १७॥
गृह्णीयां तु तदा भर्तस्तथेत्युक्तं महात्मना।
अनभिज्ञा ह्यहं देवि त्वयैव कथितं पुरा॥१८॥
“A couple of boons were offered to you
by him, pleased as he was with your
invaluable services on two occasions one
after another, O lady with charming looks !
The said DaSaratha, your husband, O queen,
was, however, told by you as follows: ‘I
shall certainly claim them when | will, O
lord!’ ‘Amen!’ was the answer then given
by the high-souled monarch. | was of course
unaware of it, O queen! It was by you
alone that the episode was narrated in the
days gone by. (17-18)

कथैषा तव q स्नेहान्मनसा धार्यते मया।
रामाभिषेकसम्भारान्निगृह्य विनिवर्तय॥ १९॥

“Out of affection for you, however, this
incident is treasured by me in my mind.
Binding your husband with a promise, put a
stop to the preparations, already in hand,
for Rama’s installation. (19)

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

at च याचस्व waht भरतस्याभिषेचनम्।
Vast च रामस्य वर्षाणि च चतुर्दश॥ २०॥

“Nay, ask of your husband the aforesaid
two boons in the shape of Bharata’s
installation as Prince Regent and the
banishment of Rama for fourteen years, for
the second. (20)

चतुर्दश fe वर्षाणि wa प्रव्राजिते वनम्।
प्रजाभावगतस्नेह: fer: पुत्रो भविष्यति॥ २१॥

“Surely when Rama has been sent into
exile for fourteen years, your son, Bharata,
will have sown the seeds of affection for
himself in the heart of his subjects and will
have been established on the throne. (21)

क्रोधागारं प्रविश्याद्य क्रुद्धेवाश्वपते: Adi
शेष्वानन्तर्हितायां त्वं भूमौ मलिनवासिनी॥ २२॥

“As though indignant, enter the sulking-
room this very day, O daughter of ASwapati,
and, clad in soiled garments, you lie down
on the bare floor. (22)

मा स्मैनं प्रत्युदीक्षेया मा चैनमभिभाषथा:।
रुदन्ती पार्थिवं दृष्टवा जगत्यां शोकलालसा॥ २३॥
“Start weeping the moment you see
the king and lying on the ground plunged in
grief, neither look at him nor speak to him.
(23)
दयिता त्वं सदा भर्तुरत्र मे नास्ति संशय:।
त्वत्कृते च महाराजो विशेदपि हुताशनम्॥ २४॥
“You are ever beloved of your spouse:
| have no doubt about it. Nay, for your sake
the Emperor can even enter fire. (24)
न त्वां क्रोधयितुं शक्तो न क्रुद्धां प्रत्युदीक्षितुम्।
aa प्रियार्थं राजा तु प्राणानपि परित्यजेत्॥ २५॥
“The king dare not provoke you nor
can he bear to see you angry. For your
pleasure the king can literally lay down his
very life. (25)
नह्यतिक्रमितुं शक्तस्तव वाक्यं महीपति:।
मन्दस्वभावे बुध्यस्व सौभाग्यबलमात्मन:॥ २६॥

“The monarch dare not in any case
