+ UTTARAKANDA +

तत्रापि संध्यामन्वास्य वासवि: स हरीश्वर:।
किष्किन्धामभितो Wer रावणं पुनरागमत्॥ ३२॥

Having said his Sandhya prayers there
also, the aforesaid Vali (sprung from the
loins of Indra), the ruler of monkeys, returned
to the precincts of Kiskindha, taking with
him Ravana held in his armpit. (32)

ade समुद्रेषु संध्यामन्वास्य AMT |
रावणोद्बहनश्रान्त किष्किन्धोपवनेऽपतत्॥ 33 I
Having said his Sandhya prayers at all
the four seas, the monkey chief (Vall), who
had been worn out on account of carrying
Ravana all the way, landed in a park adjoining
Kiskindha. (33)

रावणं तु मुमोचाथ स्वकक्षात् कपिसत्तम:।
कुतस्त्वमिति चोवाच प्रहसन् रावणं मुहु:॥ ३४॥

Vali (the foremost of monkeys) for his
part disengaged Ravana from his armpit,
and loudly laughing again and again,
questioned Ravana as follows: “Whence
are you?” (34)
विस्मयं तु महद् गत्वा श्रमलोलनिरीक्षण:।
राक्षसेन्द्रो हरीन्द्रं afte वचनमब्रवीत्॥३५॥

Feeling great surprise, his eyes rolling
on account of weariness, the ruler of ogres

replied as follows to the aforesaid ruler of
monkeys: (35)

वानरेन्द्र महेन्द्राभ राक्षसेन्द्रोऽस्मि want: |
युद्धेप्सुरिह सम्प्राप्त: स चाद्यासादितस्त्वया॥ ३६॥

“|! am Ravana, the ruler of ogres, O
king of monkeys, a compeer of the mighty
Indra, come here seeking an encounter with
you and | was consequently captured by
you today. (36)

aa बलमहो वीर्यमहो गाम्भीर्यमेव ai
येनाहं Wa Ta भ्रामितश्चतुरोऽर्णवान्॥ ३७॥

“Astounding is the strength, marvellous
is the prowess and wonderful is the profundity
too in you, by whom, after seizing me | was
taken like an animal round the four seas!

(37)

967

एवमश्रान्तवद् a शीघ्रमेव च वानर।
Ti चैवोद्बहमानस्तु कोऽन्यो वीरो भविष्यति॥ ३८॥

“What other hero would carry me so
unweariedly and fast as you did, O valiant
monkey? (38)
त्रयाणामेव भूतानां गतिरेषा प्लवङ्गम।
मनोऽनिलसुपर्णानां तव चात्र न संशय:॥ ३९॥

“Such a marvellous speed exists in
three created entities alone—the mind, the
wind-god and Garuda (lit., the bird with

beautiful wings) as well as in you: there is
no doubt about it, O monkey! (39)

Ws दृष्टबलस्तुभ्यमिच्छामि हरिपुङ्खव।

waa सह fat सख्यं सुस्निग्धं पावकाग्रत: i Xo I
“Having witnessed your might, O jewel

among the monkeys, | seek to enter into an

enduring and exceedingly loving friendship

with you in the presence of fire. (40)

दारा: पुत्रा: पुरं We भोगाच्छादनभोजनम्।
सर्वमेवाविभक्तं नौ भविष्यति हरीश्वर॥४१॥
“Our consorts, sons, cities, kingdoms,

luxuries, raiment and food—all will be jointly
held by us two, O lord of monkeys!” (41)

तत: प्रज्वालयित्वाग्निं तावुभौ हरिराक्षसौ।
भ्रातृत्वमुपसम्पन्नौ परिष्वज्य परस्परम्॥४२॥

Then, lighting a fire, both the said
warriors, the monkey chief and the lord of
ogres, entered into fraternity, after embracing
each other. (42)

अन्योन्यं लम्बितकरौ ततस्तौ हरिराक्षसौ।

किष्किन्धां विशातुर्हृष्टौ सिंहौ गिरिगुहामिव॥ ४३॥
With their hands clasped together, the

two warriors, the monkey chief and the

king of ogres, thereupon joyously entered
Kiskindha like two lions entering a rock

cavern. (43)
स तत्र मासमुषित: qa sa Want:
अमात्यैरागतैर्नीतस्त्रैलोक्योत्सादनार्थिभि:३ ॥४४॥

Ravana lived there for a month like
Sugriva. He was then led away by his
