502

sallying forth roaring, surrounded on all sides
by ogres. An uproar arose among them and
they began to roar at Prahasta. (5-6)

ख्ड्गशक्त्यृष्टिशूलाश्च बाणानि मुसलानि च।
गदाश्च परिघा: प्रासा विविधाश्च परश्वधा:॥७॥
ete च विचित्राणि राक्षसानां जयैषिणाम्।
प्रगृहीतान्यराजन्त वानरानभिधावताम्॥ ८ ॥
Swords, javelins, double-edged swords
and pikes, arrows and mallets, nay, maces,
iron bars, sharp-edged spears, axes of
various kinds and bows of every variety, borne
by the ogres rushing towards the monkeys
and seeking victory, shone brightly. (7-8)
we: पादपांश्चापि पुष्पितांस्तु गिरींस्तथा।
शिलाश्च विपुला drat योद्भुकामा: प्लवंगमा:।॥ ९॥
The monkeys for their part, who were
burning to fight, seized trees in flower as
well as peaks of mountains as also huge
and lofty rocks. (9)

तेषामन्योन्यमासाद्य संग्राम: सुमहानभूत्।

बहूनामश्मवृष्टिं च शरवर्षं च वर्षताम्॥१०॥
A major conflict ensued between the

vast number of monkeys and ogres, who,

approaching each other, showered down a
hail of stones and shafts. (10)

बहवो राक्षसा युद्धे TEL वानरपुङ्गवान्।
वानरा राक्षसांश्चापि निजघ्नुर्हवो बहून्॥११॥
In the course of the struggle numerous
ogres exterminated numerous bulls among
monkeys and many monkeys killed many
ogres too. (11)

Ver: प्रमथिता: केचित् केचित् तु परमायुधै: |
परिघैराहता: केचित् केचिच्छिन्ना: oral: ॥। १२॥
Some monkeys were exterminated with
pikes, while others were cut down with
discuses. Others were smashed with iron
bars, while still others were hacked with
axes. (12)

निरुच्छ्वासा: UA: केचित् पतिता जगतीतले।
विभिन्नहृदया:॥ केचिदिषुसंधानसाधिता:॥ १३॥

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA +

Deprived of their life and breath, some
fell down to the ground; while others who
were struck down with the discharge of
arrows, had their heart split into pieces.

(13)

केचिद्द्विधा कृता: खड्गै: स्फुरन्त: पतिता भुवि।
वानरा राक्षसै: शूरै: पार्श्वतश्च विदारिता:॥१४॥
Cut into two with swords, some

monkeys fell bounding to the ground, while
others were cleft in their sides by valiant
ogres. (14)
वानरैश्चापि संक्रुद्धै राक्षसौघा: समन्तत:।

पादपैर्गिरिशृङ्गैश्च सम्पिष्टा वसुधातले॥१७५॥

Nay, multitudes of ogres too were
completely crushed on all sides against the
earth’s surface by the infuriated monkeys
with trees and mountain tops. (15)

वज्रस्पर्शतलैर्हस्तैर्मुष्टिभिश्च हता भृशम्।
वमन् शोणितमास्येभ्यो विशीर्णदशनेक्षणा:॥ १६॥

Struck again and again with hands,
whose palms had the impact of the
thunderbolt, as well as with fists, the ogres
vomited blood from their mouths, their teeth
and eyes having been smashed. (16)
आर्तस्वनं च स्वनतां सिंहनादं च Adar
aya तुमुल: शब्दो हरीणां रक्षसामपि॥ vou

A tumultuous clamour arose among
the monkeys and ogres too while they emitted
cries of distress or roared like lions. (17)

वानरा राक्षसा: mel वीरमार्गमनुव्रता:।
विव्रत्तवदना: क्रूराश्चक्रु: कर्माण्यभीतवत्॥ १८॥
Following the path of heroes, their
mouths distended, the infuriated and
hard-hearted monkeys and ogres alike
accomplished deeds of valour fearlessly.
(18)

नरान्तक: कुम्भहनुर्महानाद: समुन्नत:।
Ud प्रहस्तसचिवा: wd जघ्नुर्वनौकस:॥१९॥

Narantaka, Kumbhahanu, Mahanada
