624

अथ यानप्रवेकैस्तु कौसल्याप्रमुखा: स्निय:।
रामदर्शनकांक्षिण्य: प्रययुर्मुदितास्तदा il ३६ I

Then departed full of joy in excellent
vehicles ladies headed by Kausalya, desirous
as they were of seeing Sri Rama at that
moment. (36)
आस्थाय प्रययौ श्रीमान् भरत: सपरिच्छ्द:॥ ३७॥

Ascending a_ lovely — palanquin
possessing the splendour of the midday
sun and the full moon and borne by four
men, proceeded the glorious Bharata with
the outfit for travelling. (37)

सा प्रयाता महासेना गजवाजिसमाकुला।
दक्षिणां दिशमाव्रृत्य महामेघ इवोत्थित:॥ ३८॥
Full of elephants and horses, that
huge army on its march looked like a
vast cloud burst upon the view, enveloping

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

the southern quarter.

वनानि च व्यतिक्रम्य जुष्टानि मृगपक्षिभि:।
गङ्गाया: परवेलायां गिरिष्वथ नदीष्वपि॥ ३९॥

Traversing woodlands inhabited by deer
and birds and hemming mountains as well
as rivers beyond the western bank of the
Ganga flowing in a southerly direction, the
army moved along. (39)

सा

(38)

वित्रासयन्ती मृगपक्षिसंघान्।
Wet ad प्रविगाहमाना
रराज CT भरतस्य तत्र॥४०॥
Striking the hosts of deer and birds
inhabiting that region with terror, while
penetrating through that extensive forest in
the precincts of Citrakuta, the said army of
Bharata, consisting as it did of overjoyed
elephants and horses,looked charming on
that spot. (40)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्येऽयोध्याकाण्डे

द्विनवतितम:

सर्ग: ॥ ९२॥

Thus ends Canto Ninety-two in the Ayodhyakanda of the glorious Ramayana of
Valmiki, the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

त्रिनवतितम: at:
Canto XCHI

Setting his foot on the soil of CitrakUta with his army and camp-followers, and
identifying the place with the help of the features pointed out by Bharadwaja,
Bharata commands the army men to look out for the hermitage of Sri
Rama. Pursuing their search they perceive smoke at some distance
and concluding the site to be the hermitage of Sri Rama,
Bharata enjoins his army to halt and makes up his mind to
walk with Vasistha and others to that place

तया महत्या यायिन्या ध्वजिन्या वनवासिन:।

अर्दिता यूथपा मत्ता: सयूथा: सम्प्रदुद्रुवु:॥१॥
Hard pressed by that huge moving

army, the leaders of herds of wild elephants

and so on in rut ran away helter-skelter
alongwith their herds. (1)

ऋक्षा: पृषतमुख्याश्च रुरवश्च समन्तत:।
दृश्यन्ते वनवाटेषु गिरिष्वपि नदीषु च॥ २॥

Bears, the leaders of spotted deer as
well as the deer without spots known by
the name of Rurus, were seen running
everywhere on the tracks of the forest,
