1068

sight of the acquisition of religious merit
and wordly riches, O lady charged with the
duty of looking after the interests of your
husband! Why don’t you admonish him?

(43)

न चिन्तयति राज्यार्थं सोऽस्माञ्शोकपरायणान्।
सामात्यपरिषत् तारे काममेवोपसेवते॥४४॥

“He does not bestow his thought on
the affairs of the state nor does he think of
us, who are given over to grief. Alongwith
his ministers and entourage he pursues
pleasures alone, O Tara! (44)

स मासांश्चतुर: Heat WOT प्लवगेश्चर:।
व्यतीतांस्तान् मदोदग्रो विहरन् नावबुध्यते॥४५॥

“Having fixed four months as the limit
for inactivity before starting the operations
relating to the search for Sita, Sugriva, the
lord of monkeys, who remains heavily drunk
with wine and is busy enjoying himself, is
not aware that those four months have
already passed. (45)

afe धर्मार्थसिद्ध्यर्थं पानमेवं प्रशस्यते।
पानादर्थश्च कामश्च धर्मश्च परिहीयते॥४६॥

“Drinking to this extent is not spoken
highly of for those who are endeavouring to
acquire religious merit and earthly riches.
Worldly prosperity and enjoyment and
religious merit too are lost through drinking.

(46)

धर्मलोपो महांस्तावत् ha ह्यप्रतिकुर्वत:।
अर्थलोपश्च मित्रस्य नाशे गुणवतो महान्॥४७॥

“Serious loss of religious merit is
undoubtedly incurred in the first instance by
him who fails to requite a service rendered
to him: while grave injury to one’s mundane
interests follows on the loss of friendship of
a virtuous friend. (47)

fat ह्यर्थगुणश्रेष्ठं सत्यधर्मपरायणम्।

तद्द्वयं तु परित्यक्तं न तु धर्मे व्यवस्थितम्॥४८॥
“Indeed a friend is, on the one hand,

foremost in the virtue of promoting the

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

interests of a friend; while, on the other, he
is devoted to truthfulness and virtue. Really
speaking, both the aforesaid virtues have
been neglected by your husband; in any
case, no steadfastness to the path of virtue
is seen in him. (48)

add Wed कार्ये कार्यमस्माभिरुत्तरम्।
ad कार्यं कार्यतत्त्वज्ञे त्वमुदाहर्तुमर्हसि॥४९॥

“Therefore, O lady! knowing the true
nature of duty, you ought to point out to
us that duty which should be performed by
us next in the existing circumstances for
achieving the purpose lying before us.” (49)

सा तस्य धर्मार्थसमाधियुक्तं
निशम्य वाक्यं मधुरस्वभावम्।
तारा गतार्थे मनुजेन्द्रकार्ये
विश्वासयुक्तं तमुवाच भूय:॥७५०॥
Hearing the reply of Laksmana, which
contained his conclusion about virtue and
earthly prosperity and which revealed his
sweet disposition, Tara addressed to him
once more the following rejoinder, which
showed her faith in the success of the
cause of Sri Rama, the ruler of human
beings, the implications of which were known
to her: (50)
न कोपकाल: क्षितिपालपुत्र
न चापि कोप: स्वजने विधेय: |
त्वदर्थकामस्य जनस्य तस्य
प्रमादमप्यर्हसि वीर सोढुम्॥५१॥
“This is not the time for resentment, O
prince! Nor should displeasure be shown
to a friend. You ought to put up even with
the negligence on the part of Sugriva, who
seeks to accomplish your purpose, O gallant
prince ! (51)

सत्त्वावरुद्धस्तपस: प्रसूति:।॥ ५२॥
“How can a man who is pre-eminent in
