290

अनुजातो fe at सर्वैर्गुणै: श्रेष्ठो ममात्मज:।
पुरन्दरसमो वीर्ये राम: परपुरंजय:॥११॥

For, my eldest son, Sri Rama, has
taken after me in all qualities, is a compeer
of Indra in valour and a conqueror of the
enemy’s stronghold. (11)
तं चन्द्रमिव पुष्येण ah धर्मभृतां वरम्।
यौवराज्ये नियोक्तास्मि प्रात: पुरुषपुङ्खवम्॥१२॥

“Next morning (when the asterism
Pusya will be in the ascendant) | am going
to install as Prince Regent that jewel among
men, the foremost of those upholding the
cause of righteousness, who resembles in
splendour and propitiousness the moon in
conjunction with the constellation, Pusya.(12)

अनुरूप: स वो नाथो लक्ष्मीवाँल्लक्ष्मणाग्रज: |
त्रैलोक्यमपि नाथेन येन स्यान्नाथवत्तरम्॥१३॥
“The aforesaid Rama, the eldest brother
of Laksmana, endowed as he is with unique
splendour, is your worthy protector. With
him as its protector the very universe
(consisting of heaven, earth and the
intermediate region) will be better ruled than
it is today. (13)

अनेन श्रेयसा सद्य: संयोक्ष्येऽहमिमां महीम्।
गतक्लेशो भविष्यामि सुते तस्मिन् निवेश्य वै॥ १४॥

“| shall endow this earth with this good
fortune immediately and, placing the burden
of administration on the aforesaid son of
mine, shall indeed become care-free. (14)

aed मेऽनुरूपार्थं मया साधु सुमन्तितम्।

भवन्तो मेऽनुमन्यन्तां कथं वा करवाण्यहम्॥ १५॥
“If this step of mine has a worthy end

in view and is perfectly well-thought of, give

you your consent to me or tell me how |
should proceed otherwise? (15)

यद्यप्येषा मम प्रीतिर्हितमन्यद् विचिन्त्यताम्।
अन्या मध्यस्थचिन्ता तु विमर्दाभ्यधिकोदया ul १६ ॥
“Although such is my pleasure, let any
other salutary course be contemplated if
this does not find favour with you. The

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

view-point of the dispassionate is, however,
unique and is of much greater value, being
an outcome of contention of two conflicting
views.” (16)

इति ब्रुवन्तं मुदिता: प्रत्यनन्दन् नृपा नृपम्।
वृष्टिमन्तं महामेघं नर्दन्तं इव बर्हिण:॥१७॥
Full of delight the kings assembled in
the council applauded the Emperor while
he was speaking as aforesaid, even as
peacocks cheer a big rainy cloud, spreading
their wings in joy. (17)
स्निग्धोऽनुनाद: संजज्ञे ततो हर्षसमीरित:।
जनौघोद्घुष्टसंनादो मेदिनीं कम्पयन्निव॥१८॥

Thereupon burst forth च fond
acclamation, prompted with joy and raised
by the concourse of men present in the
assembly, resounding and shaking the earth
as it were. (18)

तस्य धर्मार्थविदुषो भावमाज्ञाय सर्वश:।
ब्राह्मणा बलमुख्याश्च पौरजानपदै: सह॥१९॥
समेत्य ते मन्त्रयितुं समतागतबुद्धय:।
ऊचुश्च मनसा ज्ञात्वा वृद्धं दशरथं FAI oll
Fully perceiving the intention of
Dasaratha, who knew the principles of
righteousness as well as the secular interests
of his people, nay, sitting together in conclave
with the citizens of Ayodhya and the
people of other territories for deliberation,
and arriving at a decision with their mind,
all the Brahmanas as well as the army
generals spoke as follows to the aged King
DaSaratha when their mind had reached an
agreement : (19-20)

अनेकवर्षसाहस्रो वृद्धस्त्वमसि पार्थिव।
स रामं युवराजानमभिषिञ्चस्व पार्थिवम्॥ 22

“You have ruled for many thousands of
years and have grown old, O ruler of the
earth! Such that you are, pray! install as
Prince Regent Sri Rama, who is fit to rule
the earth. (21)
इच्छामो fe महाबाहुं रघुवीरं महाबलम्।
गजेन महता यान्तं WA छत्राव्रताननम्॥२२॥
