200

rendered personal service to her through
his exuberant wealth of virtues: so the
tradition goes. (9)
अग्निं कुशान् काष्ठमप: फलं मूलं तथैव च।

न्यवेदयत् सहस्राक्षो यच्चान्यदपि काङ्क्षितम्॥ १० ॥

Indra brought for her use fire, blades of
KuSa grass, firewood, water, fruits as well
as roots and whatever else was desired by
her. (10)

गात्रसंवाहनैश्चैव श्रमापनयनैस्तथा |
शक्र: सर्वेषु कालेषु दितिं परिचचार ह॥११॥

Indra, it is said, served Diti at all times
by massaging her wearied limbs and thus
relieving her fatigue. (11)

पूर्णे वर्षसहस्रे सा दशोने रघुनन्दन।

fefa: परमसंहृष्टा सहस्राक्षमथाब्रवीत्॥१२॥
Full one thousand years but ten having

elapsed, O Rama, the celebrated Diti, who

felt immensely delighted, forthwith spoke to

Indra as follows : (12)

तपश्चरन्त्या वर्षाणि et वीर्यवतां az
अवशिष्टानि Us A भ्रातरं द्रक्ष्यसे तत:॥१३॥

“Only ten years have yet to be spent
by me in practising austerities, O jewel
among the powerful ! May prosperity attend
on you! You will after that behold a half-
brother by your side. (13)

यमहं त्वत्कृते UA तमाधास्ये जयोत्सुकम्।
त्रैलोक्यविजयं पुत्र we भोक्ष्यसि fara evi

“| shall place on friendly terms with you
my future son—whom | sought for your
destruction’s sake, my son, and who is
consequently expected to be ever eager to
conquer you—so that free from all anxiety
you will enjoy with him, my son, the conquest
of all the three worlds that will be vanquished
by him. (14)

याचितेन सुरश्रेष्ठं fiat da महात्मना।
at वर्षसहस्रान्ते मम ad: ad प्रति॥१५॥

“A boon to the effect that | should have
a son at the end of a thousand years was

« VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

granted in my favour, O jewel among gods,
by your high-souled father, Sage Kasyapa,
when implored by me.” (15)

इत्युक्त्वा च दितिस्तत्र प्राप्ते मध्यं दिनेश्वरे।
निद्रयापहृता देवी पादौ कृत्वाथ शीर्षत:॥१६॥

Saying so, as the sun had just reached
the meridian, the glorious Diti was overtaken
by sleep and forthwith lay down placing her
feet where her head ought to have lain. (16)

gel तामशुचिं शक्र: पादयो: कृतमूर्धजाम्।
शिर:स्थाने कृतौ पादौ जहास च मुमोद Ai १७॥
Indra laughed and rejoiced to see her
in an impure posture having unconsciously
allowed her hair to touch her feet, and to
behold her feet placed where her head
ought to have lain. (17)

गर्भं च सप्तधा राम चिच्छेद परमात्मवान्॥१८॥
Indra entered the orifice of her genitals
by dint of his yogic power, O Rama, and
carved the foetus into seven, fully alert as
he was. (18)
भिद्यमानस्ततो गर्भो वज्रेण शतपर्वणा।
ete Ger wa ततो दितिरबुध्यत॥१९॥

The foetus thereupon cried in a shrill
voice while being cut with his thunderbolt, a
weapon with a hundred edges, O Rama,
and Diti then woke up. (19)

मा रुदो मा रुदश्चेति गर्भं शक्रोऽभ्यभाषत।
fave च महातेजा रुदन्तमपि वासव:॥ २०॥

Indra went on saying to the foetus,
“Pray, do not cry, do not cry!” Nay, the
exceptionally glorious Vasava (a name of
Indra) continued to carve the foetus again
and again till each part was subdivided into
seven, even though it remained crying.(20)
न हन्तव्यं न हन्तव्यमित्येवं दितिरब्रवीत्।
निष्पपात तत: शक्रो मातुर्वचनगौरवात्॥ २१॥

Diti only said, “The foetus should not
be killed, it should not be killed.” Out of
deference to the remonstrance of his
