764

“Today | shall take the offender's life
with my deadly arrows, even as a swan
drains off the milk mixed up in water, while
heartily drinking it. (8)
निहतस्य मया संख्ये शरसंकृत्तमर्मण:।
wet रुधिरं कस्य मेदिनी पातुमिच्छति॥९॥

“Whose foaming blood does the earth
seek to suck when he has been slain by

me on the battlefield, his vital parts having
been cut through with my arrows? (9)

कस्य पत्ररथा: कायान्मांसमुत्कृत्य संगता:।
Weer भक्षयिष्यन्ति निहतस्य मया रणे॥१०॥
“Whose flesh will the birds, come
together, most delightedly swallow tearing it
off from his body when he has been killed
by me on the battlefield? (10)
तं न देवा न गन्धर्वा न पिशाचा न राक्षसा:।
मयापकृष्टं कृपणं YHA महाहवे॥११॥
“Neither gods nor Gandharvas, nor
fiends nor ogres shall be able to save the
wretch dragged by me on the battlefield.
(11)
उपलभ्य शनै: Gat तं मे शंसितुमर्हसि।
येन त्वं दुर्विनीतेन at विक्रम्य Pitan eeu
“Gradually recovering consciousness,
please tell me the name of the unruly fellow

by whom you were assailed and subdued in
the forest.” (12)

इति भ्रातुर्वच: strat Saget च विशेषत:।
ad: शूर्पणखा वाक्यं सबाष्पमिदमब्रवीत्॥१३॥
Hearing these words of her brother,
Khara, especially when he was seized with
fury, Surpanakha now made the following
reply with tears in her eyes: (13)
तरुणौ रूपसम्पन्नौ सुकुमारौ महाबलौ।
पुण्डरीकविशालाक्षौ चीरकृष्णाजिनाम्बरौ।॥ १४॥
फलमूलाशनौ दान्तौ तापसौ ब्रह्मचारिणौ।
पुत्रौ दशरथस्यास्तां भ्रातरौ रामलक्ष्मणौ॥ १५ ॥
“Young and richly endowed with
comeliness, tender yet possessed of
extraordinary might, having large lotus-like

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

eyes and clad in the bark of trees and black
antelope skin, living on fruits and roots,
self-controlled, practising austerities and
continence, there are two brothers, Rama
and Laksmana, sons of DaSaratha. (14-15)

गन्धर्वराजप्रतिमौ पार्थिवव्यञ्जनान्वितौ ।
देवौ वा दानवावेतौ न तर्कयितुमुत्सहे॥१६॥

“They look like the king of Gandharvas
and are endowed with the bodily marks of
kings. | am unable to guess whether they
are gods or demons. (16)

तरुणी रूपसम्पन्ना सर्वाभरणभूषिता।
ger तत्र मया नारी तयोर्मध्ये सुमध्यमा॥ १७॥

“In their midst was seen by me there a
young lady with a slender waist, richly
endowed with bodily charm and adorned
with all kinds of ornaments. (17)

ताभ्यामुभाभ्यां सम्भूय प्रमदामधिकृत्य ताम्।
samara «state यथानाथासती तथा॥१८॥

“| was reduced to this plight by both
the aforesaid brothers together on account
of that young lady, in the same way as
an unprotected and vile woman would be.

(18)
तस्याश्चानृजुवृत्तायास्तयोश्च हतयोरहम्।

सफेनं पातुमिच्छामि रुधिरं रणमूर्धनि॥१९॥

“| long to drink the foaming blood of
that woman of crooked ways as well as of
those two brothers, killed in the van of a
combat. (19)
एष मे प्रथम: काम: कृतस्तत्र त्वया भवेत्।
तस्यास्तयोश्च रुधिरुं पिबेयमहमाहवे॥ २०॥

“This foremost desire of mine may be
accomplished by you there, viz., that | may
drink on the battlefield the blood of that lady
as well as of those two brothers.” (20)
इति तस्यां ब्रुवाणायां चतुर्दश महाबलान्।
व्यादिदेश खर: क्रुद्धो राक्षसानन्तकोपमान्॥ २१॥

Even while she was speaking thus,

the infuriated Khara commanded (as
follows) fourteen ogres, who were possessed
