76

ग्रहणं वायुसूनोश्च लङ्कादाहाभिगर्जनम्।
प्रतिप्लवनमेवाथ मधूनां हरणं तथा॥३३॥
the apprehension by Ravana of
Hanuman, son of the wind-god, and how he
roared while setting Lanka on fire, how he
leapt back across the sea and he and the
other monkeys forcibly partook, in exultation
over the success of their mission, of the
honey collected in Madhuvana, setting at
nought the guards of Sugriva, to whom the
garden belonged; (33)
राघवाश्वासनं da मणिनिर्यातनं तथा।
संगमं च समुद्रेण नलसेतोशच बन्धनम्॥३४॥
how Hanuman brought solace to Sri
Rama by telling him of his having seen Sita
and handed over to him the jewel given to
him by Sita; How Sri Rama set out on an
expedition to Lanka alongwith Sugriva and
his huge army of monkeys to recover Sita;
how they met the god presiding over the
oceans in person at the sea-shore and
(with his assurance to help) how a bridge
was built across the sea by the monkey
chief, Nala; (34)

Wat च समुद्रस्य wal लङ्कावरोधनम्।
विभीषणेन संसर्गं वधोपायनिवेदनम्॥ ३५॥
how the army crossed the sea (over
the bridge so built) and besieged Lanka at
night; the contact of Sri Rama with Vibhisana
(Ravana’s youngest brother and a great
devotee of Sri Rama) and how he told Sri
Rama of the ways and means of killing
Ravana and others; (35)

कुम्भकर्णस्य निधनं मेघनादनिबर्हणम्।
रावणस्य विनाशं च सीतावाप्तिमरे: पुरे॥ ३६॥

« VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

The death of Kumbhakarna, the
younger brother of Ravana; the destruction
of Meghanada, the eldest son of Ravana
and the crown-prince of Lanka; the disposal
of Ravana and the recovery of Sita at the
enemy’s capital; (36)
विभीषणाभिषेकं च पुष्पकस्य च दर्शनम्।
अयोध्यायाश्च गमनं भरद्वाजसमागमम्॥ ३७॥

the installation of Vibhisana on the
throne of Lanka; how Sri Rama saw
Puspaka, the aerial car belonging to Ravana,
and flew in it towards Ayodhya; his landing
at Prayaga and meeting with the sage,
Bharadwaja; (37)

प्रेषणं वायुपुत्रस्य भरतेन समागमम्।

रामाभिषेकाभ्युदयं सर्वसैन्यविसर्जनम्।
स्वराष्ट्रञ्जनं dt वैदेह्याश्च विसर्जनम्॥ ३८॥
how Hanuman, son of the wind-god,
was despatched in advance to Ayodhya to
meet Bharata and apprise him of Sri Rama’s
return and the subsequent meeting of Sri
Rama with Bharata; the festivities connected
with the coronation of Sri Rama and how
the whole host of monkeys was disbanded
and sent away to their respective homes;
how Sri Rama won the heart of his people
by his loving rule and exiled Sita, the
daughter of King Janaka, also called Videha.
(38)

अनागतं च यत् किंचिद् रामस्य वसुधातले।
तच्चकारोत्तरे काव्ये वाल्मीकिर्भगवानृषि: i ३९॥
Nay, Valmiki, the glorious sage, also
described in his superb poem whatever

deeds were yet to be performed on earth by
Sri Rama. (39)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये बालकाण्डे तृतीय: सर्ग: ॥ 3 ॥

Thus ends Canto Three in the Balakanda of the glorious Ramayana of Valmiki,
the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

