* ARANYAKANDA «

down all those fourteen darts with as many
arrows decked with gold. Possessed of
tremendous energy and highly enraged, Sri
Rama after that took out fourteen pointless
arrows sharpened on a stone and shining
brightly as the sun and, stretching his bow,
discharged the arrows aiming them at the
ogres as the target, as Indra would hurl
thunderbolts. Having pierced the chests of
the ogres and being soaked in blood, they
then dashed against the ground like serpents
rushing out of an ant-hill. With their hearts
rent by them, and bathed in blood, the ogres
fell down on the ground, maimed and dead,
like uprooted trees. Blinded with rage to see
them fallen on the ground and approaching
Khara, that ogress, for her part, the blood
on her person having now somewhat dried

767

up, once again fell agonized like a climber
with resin sticking to it. (17—23)

Ud: समीपे शोकार्तां ससर्ज निनदं महत्।
सस्वरं मुमुचे बाष्पं विवर्णवदना तदा॥ २४॥

Veta ad भगिनी खरस्य AT २५ II

Palefaced and stricken with grief, she
raised a great alarm in the presence of her
brother and shed tears accompanied with
sobs. On seeing the ogres killed in battle,
Surpanakha for her part darted once more
from that place and the said sister of Khara
reported to him the wholesale destruction of
all those ogres and everything connected
with it. (24-25)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्येऽरण्यकाण्डे विंश: सर्ग: ॥ २० ॥

Thus ends Canto Twenty in the Aranyakanda of the glorious Ramayana of Valmiki,
the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

Canto XXI
Siirpanakha again goes to Khara

स पुन: पतितां दृष्ट्वा क्रोधाच्छूर्पणखां पुन:।
उवाच SAHA वाचा तामनर्थार्थमागताम्॥१॥

Seeing SUrpanakha, who had come to
bring disaster to her brothers’ family in her
wake, fallen again, Khara spoke to her once
more in anger in the following clear words :

(1)
मया त्विदानीं शूरास्ते राक्षसा: पिशिताशना:।
त्वत्प्रियार्थं विनिर्दिष्टा: किमर्थं रुद्यते पुन:॥ २॥

“Those brave flesh-eating ogres have
just now been despatched by me to oblige
you. Why are you crying again? (2)

भक्ताश्चैवानुरक्ताश्च हिताश्च मम नित्यश:।
हन्यमाना न हन्यन्ते न न कुर्युर्वचो मम॥३॥

“They are devoted to me, attached to
me and are ever friendly to me. They cannot
be killed even though being attacked; nor is
it possible that they will fail to do my bidding.

(3)

किमेतच्छोतुमिच्छामि कारणं यत्कृते पुन:।
हा नाथेति विनर्दन्ती सर्पवच्चेष्टसे क्षितौ॥४॥
“What is the reason on account of
which you are tossing about on the ground
like a serpent again, crying ‘O lord!’ | wish
to hear this. (4)
अनाथवद् विलपसि किं नु नाथे afer स्थिते।
उत्तिष्ठोत्तिष्ठं मा मैवं वैक्लव्यं त्यज्यतामिति॥ ५॥
“With me standing as your protector,
why on earth should you wail like a forlorn
