1126

तयादत्तवरा चास्मि रक्षामि wat महत्।
किं ret कस्य वा Sal: कान्ताराणि प्रपद्यथ॥ १८ ॥

“And |, from whom a boon has been
secured by her for the protection of her
house, guard the huge building on her behalf.
What is your purpose in coming over here
and for whose sake do you tread these
difficult paths? (18)

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

कथं चेदं at qt युष्माभिरुपलक्षितम्।
शुचीन्यभ्यवहाराणि मूलानि च फलानि च।
भुक्त्वा पीत्वा च पानीयं ae A वक्तुमर्हसि॥ १९॥
“Again, how has this grove, which is
difficult of access, been found by you?
Having partaken of these pure foods as
well as of the roots and fruits and drunk the
water which are being offered by me, you
ought to tell me everything.” (19)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये किष्किन्धाकाण्डे एकपञ्चाश: सर्ग: ॥ ५१ ॥

Thus ends Canto Fifty-one in the Kiskindhakanda of the glorious Ramayana of Valmiki,
the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

द्विपञ्चाश: सर्ग:
Canto LIT

Narrating the whole story from the entry of Sri Rama into the forest round
about the Pampa lake down to the entry of the monkeys into the cave, and
complimenting Swayamprabha on the hospitality shown by her and
wishing to repay her hospitality, Hanuman inquires of her if he
can be of any service to her. Swayamprabha, however, declines
his offer saying that, being engaged in the practice of
virtue, she has no purpose to achieve through another

अथ तानब्रवीत् सर्वान् विश्रान्तान् हरियूथपान्।
इदं वचनमेकाग्रा तापसी धर्मचारिणी॥१॥

To all those leaders of monkey bands,
when they had rested awhile after accepting
her hospitality, the ascetic woman, who
was engaged in practising virtue and had
focussed her attention on that one object,
now spoke the following words : (1)

वानरा यदि a: We: Wore: फलभक्षणात्।

यदि चैतन्मया श्राव्यं श्रोतुमिच्छामि at कथाम्॥ २॥
“If, O monkeys, your fatigue has been

fully relieved by partaking of the fruits offered

by me and if your story admits of being listened
to by me, | long to hear that story.” (2)

तस्यास्तद् वचनं श्रुत्वा हनूमान् मारुतात्मज:।
आर्जवेन यथातत्त्वमाख्यातुमुपचक्रमे॥ ३॥

Hearing the aforesaid request of
Swayamprabha, Hanuman, son of the wind-
god, proceeded with perfect candour to
narrate his story correctly. (3)
राजा सर्वस्य लोकस्य महेन्द्रवरुणोपम:।
Ta दाशरथि: श्रीमान् प्रविष्टो दण्डकावनम्॥४॥
लक्ष्मणेन सह भ्रात्रा aca we भार्यया।
तस्य भार्या जनस्थानाद् रावणेन हृता बलात्॥५॥

‘The glorious son of Dasaratha, Sri
Rama, the sovereign of the whole world and
a compeer of the mighty Indra (the ruler of
gods) and Varuna (the god of water), entered
the Dandaka forest alongwith his younger
brother, Laksmana, as well as with his
spouse, Sita (a princess of the Videha
territory). His consort was forcibly carried
away from Janasthana by Ravana (while
she was all alone in the cottage). (4-5)
