380

not, however, know at that time how to
count from that place that simian army,
whose number could not even be conceived,
much less correctly known and which made
one’s hair stand on end. (10)

तत् स्थितं पर्वताग्रेषु निर्झरेषु गुहासु च।
समुद्रस्य च तीरेषु वनेषूपवनेषु च।
तरमाणं च dot च तर्तुकामं च सर्वश:॥११॥
It was stationed on the summits of
mountains, round about waterfalls as well
as in caves, as also on the seashores as
well as in woodlands and gardens. It was
either in the process of traversing the sea
or had traversed it or was intending to
traverse it in its entirety. (11)
निविष्टं निविशच्चैव भीमनादं महाबलम्।
तद्बलार्णवमक्षोभ्यं agama निशाचरौ॥१२॥
Emitting a terrible roar, that huge army
had either encamped or was still encamping.
The two ogres beheld that imperturbable
sea of an army. (12)

at ददर्श महातेजा: प्रतिच्छन्नौ विभीषण:।
आचचक्षे A रामाय गृहीत्वा शुकसारणौ॥१३॥

Vibhisana, who was endowed with
extraordinary energy, saw Suka and Sarana
in disguise and, capturing them, he submitted
as follows to Sri Rama: (13)

तस्यैतौ राक्षसेन्द्रस्य मन्त्रिणौ शुकसारणौ।
लङ्काया: समनुप्राप्तौ चारौ परपुरंजय॥१४॥
“Here are two ministers of Ravana
the ruler of ogres, Suka and Sarana, duly
arrived from Lanka as spies, O conqueror
of hostile citadels!” (14)

तौ दृष्टवा व्यथितौ रामं निराशौ जीविते तथा।

कृताञ्जलिपुटौ भीतौ वचनं चेदमूचतु:॥ १५॥
Having joined their palms, the two ogres,

who were perturbed to see Sri Rama and

had lost hope about their life, nay, who were
seized with fear, spoke as follows: (15)

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA +

आवामिहागतौ सौम्य रावणप्रहितावुभौ।
परिज्ञातुं act सर्वं तदिदं रघुनन्दन॥ १६॥
“Sent by Ravana, O good Sir, we both
have come here to know everything about
the whole army of yours, O delight of the
Raghus!” (16)
तयोस्तद् वचनं श्रुत्वा WAT दशरथात्मज:।
अब्रवीत् प्रहसन् वाक्यं सर्वभूतहिते रत:॥ १७॥
Laughing heartily to hear the aforesaid
submission of the two ogres, Sri Rama, an
offspring of Emperor DaSaratha, replied as
follows, devoted as he was to the welfare of
all created beings: (17)
यदि ge बलं ad ad at सुसमाहिता:।
यथोक्तं वा pd कार्यं छन्दत: प्रतिगम्यताम्॥ १८॥
“If the entire army has been seen by
you, if we too have been carefully observed
and if your mission has been accomplished,

as directed by your master, you may return
according to your sweet will. (18)

अथ किंचिददृष्टं वा भूयस्तद् द्रष्टुमर्हथ:।
विभीषणो वा कात्सर्न्यन पुन: संदर्शयिष्यति॥ १९॥

“If, however, anything has remained
uninvestigated, you ought to see it over
again. Vibhisana will once more show it to
you fully. (19)
न चेदं ग्रहणं प्राप्य भेतव्यं जीवितं प्रति।
न्यस्तशस्त्रौ गृहीतौ च न दूतौ वधमर्हथ:॥ २०॥

“Nor, having suffered this arrest, should
you have any apprehension about your life.
Having laid aside your arms, having been
taken captive, and you two, envoys that
you are, do not merit death. (20)

प्रच्छन्नौ च विमुञ्जेमौ ant रात्रिंचरावुभौ।
शत्रुपक्षस्य सततं विभीषण विकर्षिणौ॥ २१॥

(Turning to the monkeys) nay, fully set
free both these rangers of the night, who
have come in disguise as spies, even though
they have been constantly seeking to create
dissidence in the hostile (opposite) ranks. (21)
