188

यथा तं पुरुषव्याघ्रं ma: शोकाभिकर्शितै:।
संस्पृशेयं सकामाहं तथा कुरु cat मयि॥ ३॥
“Show compassion to me_ by
manipulating things in such a way that, full
of longing, | may be able to embrace that
tiger among men with my limbs utterly
emaciated through grief. (3)

अभिज्ञानं च wet ca हरिगणोत्तम।
क्षिप्तामिषीकां काकस्य कोपादेकाक्षिशातनीम्॥ ४॥

“Again, remind Sri Rama, 0 jewel among
hordes of monkeys, as a token of your having
met me, of the reed hurled by him in anger,
which destroyed one eye of the son of Indra,
who came disguised as a crow. (4)

मन:शिलायास्तिलको गण्डपाश्वे निवेशित:।
त्वया प्रणष्टे तिलके तं fect स्मर्तुमर्हसि॥ ५॥

“Further say to him, ‘You ought surely to
recall the decoration which was painted by
you on my (Sita’s) cheek with realgar when
my former decoration had got effaced. (5)
a वीर्यवान् कथं dat et समनुमन्यसे।
वसन्तीं रक्षसां मध्ये महेन्द्रवरुणोपम॥ ६॥

“*Though powerful, how do you wink at
Sita (myself) having been borne away and
living in the midst of ogres, O lord vying with
Indra, the ruler of gods, and Varuna, the god
of waters? (6)
we चूडामणिर्दिव्यो war सुपरिरक्षित:।

Ud दृष्ट्वा प्रहृष्यामि व्यसने त्वामिवानघ॥७॥

“‘This celestial jewel for the head was
preserved by me with special care, | used
to feel overjoyed in adversity to see it as |
did on seeing you, O sinless one! (7)

we निर्यातित: star मया ते वारिसम्भव:।
अत: परं न शक्ष्यामि जीवितुं शोकलालसा॥८॥
“‘This splendid jewel, having its origin in
sea-water, has been sent by me to you (Sri
Rama). Absorbed in grief that | am, | shall no
longer be able to survive beyond a month. (8)
असह्यानि च दु:खानि वाचश्च हृदयच्छिद:।
Tad: We संवासं त्वत्कृते मर्षयाम्यहम्॥९॥

« VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

“Only for your sake have | endured
so long unbearable woes, words which
pierced my heart and living surrounded by
ogresses. (9)
धारयिष्यामि मासं gq जीवितं शत्रुसूदन।
मासादूर्ध्व न जीविष्ये त्वया SAT नृपात्मज॥ १०॥

““Anyhow | shall continue to live for a
month more, O destroyer of foes ! Beyond a
month, of course, | am not going to survive
in your absence, O prince ! (10)

at राक्षसराजोऽयं ghes न सुखा मयि।
त्वां च श्रुत्वा विषज्जन्तं न जीवेयमपि क्षणम्॥ ११॥
““Frightful is this ruler of ogres; his attitude
towards me is also not favourable. On hearing
of you (Sri Rama) tarrying, on top of all this, |
may not survive even a moment longer.’ ” (11)

वैदेह्या वचनं श्रुत्वा करुणं साश्रुभाषितम्।
अथाब्रवीन्महातेजा हनूमान् मारुतात्मज:॥१२॥

Hearing the aforesaid plaintive message
of Sita, uttered with tears in her eyes,
Hanuman, sprung from the loins of the wind-
god, who was endowed with extraordinary
energy, forthwith submitted as follows:

(12)

त्वच्छोकविमुखो wat देवि सत्येन ते शपे।
TWA शोकाभिभूते तु लक्ष्मण: परितप्यते॥१३॥

“| swear to you by truth, O godlike
lady, that Sri Rama has grown averse to
everything else through grief caused by
your absence. And Laksmana too suffers
agony due to Sri Rama being overwhelmed
with sorrow. (13)

Gel कथंचिद् भवती न काल: परिदेवितुम्।
इमं det दु:खानामन्तं द्रक्ष्यसि भामिनि॥१४॥
“Somehow you have been discovered
by me; hence this is not the time for grieving.
From this very hour you will see the end
of your woes drawing near, O noble lady !
(14)

तावुभौ पुरुषव्याघ्रौ राजपुत्रावनिन्दितौ।
त्वद्दर्शनकृतोत्साहौ लङ्कां भस्मीकरिष्यत:॥ eu I
