758

दशरथसुतराक्षसेन्द्रयोस्तयो-

र्जयमनवेक्ष्य रणे a राघवस्य।
सुरवररथसारथिर्महात्मा

रणरतराममुवाच वाक्यमाशु ॥ ६७॥

Not perceiving the victory of Sri Rama

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA +

in the duel between the aforesaid two, the
son of Dasaratha and the king of ogres, that
high-souled charioteer of Indra (the foremost
of gods) quickly spoke as follows to Sri
Rama, while he was still engaged in fighting.

(67)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये FERS सप्ताधिकरशततम: AW: ॥ 20 II

Thus ends Canto One hundred and seven in the Yuddhakanda of the glorious
Ramayana of Valmiki, the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

Canto CVIII

Ravana’s death at Sri Rama’s hands

aq संस्मारयामास मातली Wad तदा।
अजानन्निव किं वीर त्वमेनमनुवर्तसे॥१॥
Matali forthwith refreshed the memory
of Sri Rama (a scion of Raghu) on that
occasion and said, “How do you merely do
as Ravana does (by acting on the defensive)
as though you did not know how to dispose
him of, O gallant prince? (1)
विसृजास्मै वधाय त्वमस्त्रं पैतामहं प्रभो।
विनाशकाल: कथितो य: सुरै: सोऽद्य वर्तते॥ २॥
“With a view to his destruction discharge
you on him the mystic missile presided over
by Brahma (the grandfather of the universe,
which was created by the ten Prajapatis or
lords of creation, who were all his mind-
born sons), my lord. The hour of his doom,
which was foretold by the gods, has now
arrived.” (2)

ad: संस्मारितो रामस्तेन वाक्येन मातले:।

जग्राह स wt दीप्तं नि:श्वसन्तमिवोरगम्॥ ३॥
Reminded of that missile by the aforesaid

suggestion of Matali, Sri Rama then seized

hold of a flaming arrow, which flew like a
hissing serpent. (3)

a तस्मै प्रथमं प्रादादगस्त्यो भगवानृषि:।
ब्रह्मदत्तं महद् बाणममोघं युधि वीर्यवान्॥४॥

The glorious and powerful Sage
Agastya had already bestowed on him (while
he was moving in the Dandaka forest) that
enormous arrow, gifted to him by Brahma,
the creator, which never missed its target.

(4)
ब्रह्मणा निर्मितं पूर्वमिन्द्रार्थममितौजसा।
ad सुरपते: ya त्रिलोकजयकांक्षिण:॥ ५॥

Having been created of yore for
the use of Indra, the ruler of gods, by
Brahma (the creator), whose strength was
immeasurable, it was bestowed in the past
on the ruler of gods, who was eager to
conquer the three worlds. (5)

यस्य वाजेषु पवन: फले पावकभास्करौ।
शारीरमाकाशमयं Tia मेरुमन्दरौ i ६ ।।

The wind-god presided over its feathers;
the god of fire (lit., the purifier) and the sun-
god (the source of light) over its head; its
shaft was made up of ether; while the
Mandara and Meru mountains presided over
its weight. (6)
