212

your prowess as well as the might of your
missiles in combat is equal to mine. Finding
you in the thick of fight, my mind does not
give way to despair, being assured of victory.
(6)
निहता: किंकरा: सर्वे जम्बुमाली च राक्षस:।
अमात्यपुत्रा वीराश्च पञ्च सेनाग्रगामिन:॥७॥

“All the Kinkaras have been destroyed
as also the ogre, Jambumali. Even the seven
heroic sons of my chief minister as well as
the five generals have been killed. (7)

बलानि सुसमृद्धानि साश्वनागरथानि च।
सहोदरस्ते दयित: कुमारोऽक्षश्च सूदित:।
न तु तेष्वेव मे सारो यस्त्वय्यरिनिषूदन॥ ८॥

“Nay, forces fully equipped with strength
and arms and accompanied by horses,
elephants and chariots, as well as your
beloved uterine brother, Prince Aksa, have
been destroyed. The strength, however,
which exists in me, O destroyer of foes,
hinges on you alone, and did not hinge on
them. (8)
इदं च दृष्ट्वा Med महद् बलं

कपे: प्रभावं च पराक्रमं च।
त्वमात्मनश्चापि निरीक्ष्य at
कुरुष्व At स्वबलानुरूपम्॥९॥

“Seeing this large army destroyed by
the monkey and considering the influence
as well as the prowess of the monkey and
weighing your own strength, exhibit your
valour according to your might. (9)
बलावमर्दस्त्वयि संनिकृष्टे

यथा We शाम्यति शान्तशत्रौ।
qa समीक्ष्यात्मबलं परं च
समारभस्वास्त्रभृतां वरिष्ठ॥१०॥

“Fully weighing your own strength as
well as of the enemy, exert yourself in such
a way, O jewel among those employing
missiles, that the further destruction of our
army may stop the moment you, whose
enemies have ceased, have arrived near
Hanuman. (10)

« VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

न चाग्निकल्प: करणेन हन्तुम्॥ ११॥

“Forces should not be led by you against
the enemy; for they flee en masse before a
powerful enemy or perish all together. Nor
should you march against him taking a
weapon exceedingly sharp-edged and hard
like the thunderbolt; for there is no limit to
the strength of Hanuman. Nay, resembling
fire, as he does, he cannot be destroyed by
means of any weapon. (11)
तमेवमर्थं प्रसमीक्ष्य सम्यक्
स्वकर्मसाम्याद्भि समाहितात्मा।
स्मरंश्च दिव्यं धनुषोऽस्य वीर्यं
व्रजाक्षतं कर्म समारभस्व॥१२॥
“Concluding what has been stated by
me to be precisely true, and with your mind
composed by the thought that success can
be achieved by your own effort, nay, bearing
in mind the wonderful potency of this bow,
sally forth and duly proceed with your work
of subduing the enemy intact. (12)
न ulead मतिश्रेष्ठ यत्त्वां सम्प्रेषयाम्यहम्।
इयं च राजधर्माणां क्षत्रस्य च मतिर्मता॥१३॥

“Indeed, the thought is not well-advised
that | should willingly send you to face this
danger. O darling of excellent judgment !
But you know this decision is in accord with
the duties of a king and is approved of by
the warrior class. (13)
नानाशस्त्रेषु संग्रामे वैशारद्यमरिंदम।
अवश्यमेव बोद्धव्यं काम्यश्च विजयो Wri ev

“Proficiency in the various branches of
learning (such as ethics, economics and
political science) as well as in military
operations should be acquired by a king
and triumph in war should also be sought,
O tamer of enemies |” (14)
wa: पितुस्तद्वचनं निशम्य

प्रदक्षिणं दक्षसुतप्रभाव:।
