* AYODHYAKANDA +

In this way Sita entreated him in
many ways to let her accompany him.
Nevertheless Sri Rama, the mighty-armed
prince, did not consent to take her to
the forest, which was destitute of friends.

(22)
`एवमुक्ता तु सा चिन्तां मैथिली समुपागता।
स्नापयन्तीव गामुष्णैरश्रुभिर्नयनच्युतै: I २३ ॥

Discouraged thus, the celebrated Sita,

the princess of Mithila, for her part, fell a
prey to anxiety, moistening the earth as it

405

were with burning tears dropped from her
eyes. (23)
चिन्तयन्तीं तदा at तु निवर्तयितुमात्मवान्।
क्रोधाविष्टां तु ACE काकुत्स्थो बह्वसान्त्वयत्॥ २४॥
In order, however, to divert her from
her resolve, the self-possessed Sri Rama,
a scion of Kakutstha, for his part then
pacified in many ways the said princess of
the Videha kingdom, who was overwhelmed
with indignation roused by love and fell
abrooding. (24)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्येऽयोध्याकाण्डे एकोनत्रिंश: सर्ग: ॥ २९ ॥

Thus ends Canto Twenty-nine in the Ayodhyakanda of the glorious Ramayana of
Valmiki, the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

७
ad
a

सर्ग:

Canto XXX

Though consoled by Sri Rama in many ways, Sita did not change her mind
and seeing her insistent on accompanying him, Sri Rama agrees to
take her to the forest and asks her to prepare for the
journey and to give away all her personal
belongings in charity

सान्त्व्यमाना तु रामेण मैथिली जनकात्मजा।

वनवासनिमित्तार्थं भर्तारमिदमब्रवीत्॥ १॥

Being consoled by Sri Rama, Sita,
Janaka’s daughter, the princess of Mithila,
for her part, replied thus to her husband in
order to obtain his permission to live with
him in the forest. (1)

सा तमुत्तमसंविग्ना सीता विपुलवक्षसम्।
प्रणयाच्चाभिमानाच्च परिचिक्षेप राघवम्॥२॥

Highly agitated at the thought of her
separation from Sri Rama, the said Sita
taunted Sri Rama (a scion of Raghu), who
was distinguished by a broad chest, from
affection and pride in the following words:

(2)
fee त्वामन्यत ace: पिता मे मिथिलाधिप:।
राम जामातरं wea fed पुरुषविग्रहम्॥ ३॥

“Securing you as his son-in-law, O
Rama, did my father, Janaka (descended in
the line of the Videhas), the king of Mithila,
recognise you to be a woman in the form of
aman? (3)

अनृतं ad लोकोऽयमज्ञानाद् यदि agate
wt नास्ति wt wa तपतीव दिवाकरे॥४॥

“It would be a matter for pity to me if in
the event of your not taking me with you the
people of Ayodhya utter through ignorance
the falsehood that ‘Supreme valour is lacking
in Sri Rama, even though he blazes like the
sun.’ (4)
किं fe कृत्वा विषण्णस्त्वं कुतो वा भयमस्ति ते।
यत् परित्यक्तुकामस्त्वं मामनन्यपरायणाम्॥५॥

“On what ground are you cast down or
whence the fear in you for which you are
