* SUNDARAKANDA +

पीड्यमानस्तु बलिना महेन्द्रस्तेन पर्वत:।
रीतीर्निर्वर्तयामास काञ्चनाञ्जनराजती: ।॥ १७५ ॥

Being pressed by that mighty monkey,
the Mahendra mountain for its part let loose
streams possessing the hues of gold,
antimony and silver, flowing, as they did,
through beds containing the ore of these
metals. (15)

मुमोचच शिला: शैलो विशाला: समन:शिला: 1
मध्यमेनार्चिषा जुष्टो धूमराजीरिवानल:॥१६॥

The mountain also discharged from its
flanks massive boulders containing realgar
even as a fire burning with a mild flame
would release columns of smoke. (16)

हरिणा पीड्यमानेन पीड्यमानानि ada:
Tears सत्त्वानि विनेदुर्विकृतै: cat: gon

Being tormented by the squeezing, the
mountain, which was being hard pressed by
Hanuman, the creatures took to caverns
and shrieked in unnatural tones. (17)
स महान् सत्त्वसन्नाद: शैलपीडानिमित्तज:।
पृथिवीं पूरयामास दिशश्चोपवनानि च॥१८॥

That loud clamour of the creatures
inhabiting the mountain, occasioned by the
circumstance of pressure exerted on the
mountain by Hanuman, filled the earth as
well as the four quarters and the groves.

(18)
शिरोभि: पृथुभिर्नागा व्यक्तस्वस्तिकलक्षणै: |
वमन्त: पावकं घोरं ददंशुर्दशनै: शिला:॥१९॥

Vomiting a terrible fire through their
large heads (mouths,) which revealed the
marks of Swastika on them, snakes bit the
rocks with their fangs. (19)

तास्तदा सविषैर्दष्टा: कुपितैस्तैर्महाशिला:।
Wael: पावकोद्दीप्ता बिभिदुश्च सहस्रधा॥ २०॥
Bitten by those venomous serpents
provoked to anger, the aforesaid huge rocks
burst into flames as though lighted by fire,
and got split up into thousands of fragments.
(20)

27

यानि त्वौषधजालानि तस्मिञ्जातानि पर्वते।
विषघ्नान्यपि नागानां न शेकु: शमितुं विषम्॥ २१॥
Even the bunches of medicinal herbs,
capable of counteracting poison, which had
sprung up on that mountain, could not
neutralize the poison of the snakes. (21)

भिद्यतेऽयं गिरिर्भूतैरिति मत्वा तपस्विन:।
wen विद्याधरास्तस्मादुत्पेतु: स्त्रीगणै: सह॥ २२॥

Alarmed to think that the mountain in
question was being riven by genii, ascetics
practising austerities on it as well as the
Vidyadharas enjoying life there with the hosts
of their womenfolk rose in the air from that
mountain. (22)

पानभूमिगतं fear हैममासवभाजनम्
पात्राणि च महार्हाणि करकांश्च हिरण्मयान्॥ २३॥
लेह्यानुच्चावचान् भक्ष्यान् मांसानि विविधानि च।
आर्षभाणि च चर्माणि खड्गांश्च कनकत्सरून्॥ २४॥
कृतकण्ठगुणा: क्षीबा रक्तमाल्यानुलेपना:।
रक्ताक्षा: पुष्कराक्षाश्च गगनं प्रतिपेदिरे॥ २५॥
Leaving their gold jug of wine lying in the
liquor-house as well as their precious utensils
and gold vases for carrying water as also
sauces of every description capable of being
licked and articles of food that could be easily
gulped, fruit pulps of various kinds, shields
made of the hides of oxen and swords with
gold hilts, the intoxicated Vidyadharas with
reddish lotus-like eyes, who had put garlands
around their neck, and were decorated with
red flowers and daubed with red sandal-paste,
rose to the heavens. (23—25)

हारनूपुरकेयूरपारिहार्यधरा: fara: |
विस्मिता: सस्मितास्तस्थुराकाशे रमणै: सह॥ २६॥
Wearing pearl necklaces, anklets,
armlets and bangles, the Vidyadhara women
stood astonished and full of smiles with their
husbands in the airspace. (26)

दर्शयन्तो महाविद्यां विद्याधरमहर्षय:
सहितास्तस्थुराकाशे वीक्षांचक्रुश्च पर्वतम्॥ २७॥

Revealing their great skill in the form of
