762

on human ladies, O charming lady with an
excellent complexion?” (12)

इति सा लक्ष्मणेनोक्ता कराला निर्णतोदरी।
मन्यते तद्वच: सत्यं परिहासाविचक्षणा॥१३॥
Spoken to in these words by Laksmana,
that hideous woman with a prominent belly,
who was too naive to catch the jest, took
his words to be true. (13)
सा wa पर्णशालायामुपविष्टं परंतपम्।
सीतया सह दुर्धर्षमब्रवीत् काममोहिता॥१४॥
Infatuated through love, she spoke once
more to Rama, the tormentor of his foes,
who was hard to overpower, and was sitting
in the hut thatched with leaves in the company
of Sita: (14)
aa भार्यामवष्टभ्य न मां त्वं बहु मन्यसे॥ १५॥
“Clinging to this old, deformed, vile,
hideous and aged wife with a sunken belly,
you do not make much of me. (15)

अद्येमां भक्षयिष्यामि पश्यतस्तव मानुषीम्।
त्वया सह चरिष्यामि नि:सपत्ना यथासुखम्॥ १६॥

“Today | shall devour this human lady
even while you are looking on. Having been
rid of a rival, | shall roam with you at ease.”

(16)
इत्युक्त्वा मृगशावाक्षीमलातसदृशेक्षणा।
अभ्यगच्छत् सुसंक्रुद्धा महोल्का रोहिणीमिव॥ १७॥

Saying so, the woman, whose eyes
shone like live embers, highly enraged as
she was, rushed upon the fawn-eyed Sita,
even as a large meteor would descend on
the constellation known by the name of
Rohini. (17)
at मृत्युपाशप्रतिमामापतन्तीं महाबल:।
विगृह्य wa: कुपितस्ततो लक्ष्मणमब्रवीत्॥१८॥

Checking by his very menacing sound
the woman, who was rushing towards Sita
like the noose of Death, Sri Rama, who was
possessed of extraordinary might, now
angrily said to Laksmana : (18)

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

क्रूरैरनार्यै: सौमित्रे परिहास: कथंचन।
न कार्य: पश्य वैदेहीं कथंचित् सौम्य जीवतीम्॥ १९ ॥
“You should in no case jest, O son of
Sumitra, with cruel and unworthy people.
See the princess of Videha surviving with
great difficulty (having narrowly escaped
being devoured by the ogress), O gentle
brother ! (19)
sa विरूपामसतीमतिमत्तां महोदरीम्।
राक्षसीं पुरुषव्याघ्र विरूपयितुमर्हसि॥ २०॥
“You ought to mutilate, O tiger among
men, this ugly, vile, highly wanton and big-
bellied woman.” (20)

इत्युक्तो लक्ष्मणस्तस्या: क्रुद्धो WAT पश्यत: |
उद्धृत्य Gent चिच्छेद कर्णनासे महाबल:॥ २१॥
Drawing his sword, when spoken to in
these words, the angry Laksmana, who was
possessed of great might, lopped off her ears
and nose while Sri Rama looked on. (21)

निकृत्तकर्णनासा ¢ fact सा fare च।
यथागतं प्रदुद्राव घोरा शूर्पणखा वनम्॥२२॥
With her ears and nose severed, that
fierce Surpanakha for her part ran away
into the forest, as she had come, yelling
dissonantly. (22)

सा विरूपा महाघोरा राक्षसी शोणितोक्षिता।
ननाद विविधान् नादान् यथा Wars तोयद: i २३॥
Bathed in blood, that ugly and

extraordinarily fierce ogress roared in various
ways like a cloud in the monsoon. (23)

सा विक्षरन्ती रुधिरं ager घोरदर्शना।

Wel बाहू गर्जन्ती प्रविवेश महावनम्॥ wil
Dropping profusely blood on the way,

raising her arms and roaring in various

ways, that woman of fierce looks entered
the heart of the great forest. (24)

ततस्तु सा राक्षससङ्घसंव्रृतं

Gt जनस्थानगतं विरूपिता।
भ्रातरमुग्रतेजसं

पपात भूमौ गगनाद्यथाशनि: ।॥। २५ UI

उपेत्य तं
