594

तदस्मिन् क्रियतां ae: fad पुरुषपुङ्खव।
पुरा वानरसैन्यानि क्षयं नयति सायकै:॥ ३६॥

“Therefore, O bull among men, let your
efforts be speedily directed towards him
before he brings the monkey troops to an
end with his arrows.” (36)

ततोऽतिकायो बलवान् प्रविश्य हरिवाहिनीम्।
विस्फारयामास धनुर्ननाद च पुन: पुन:॥ ३७॥
Penetrating deep into the simian ranks,
the mighty Atikaya thereupon twanged his
bow and roared again and again. (37)
तं भीमवपुषं दृष्टवा रथस्थं रथिनां वरम्।
अभिपेतुर्महात्मान: wert ये वनौकस:॥ ३८॥
Beholding that ogre of fearful proportions,
the foremost of car-warriors, seated in his

chariot, those gigantic monkeys, who ranked
foremost, rushed to meet him. (38)

कुमुदो द्विविदो Wet नील: शरभ एव च।
पादपैर्गिरिशृङ्गैश्च युगपत् समभिद्रवन्॥३९॥

Kumuda, Dwivida, Mainda, Nila and
Sarabha too assailed him all at once with
trees and mountain-peaks. (39)

तेषां gates शैलांश्च wt: कनकभूषणै:।
अतिकायो महातेजाश्चिच्छेदास्त्रविदां वर:॥४०॥

Atikaya, however, the foremost of those
well versed in the use of mystic missiles,
who was endowed with extraordinary
energy, tore the trees and crags hurled
by monkeys with his shafts decked with
gold. (40)
तांश्चैव war स हरीन् शरै: सर्वायसैर्बली।
विव्याधाभिमुखान्संख्ये भीमकायो निशाचर: Ut ४१ ॥

That mighty ogre (lit., a prowler of the
night) of tremendous proportions also pierced
all those monkeys, who stood facing him on
the battle-field, with his arrows entirely made
of iron. (41)
तेऽर्दिता बाणवर्षेण भिन्नगात्रा: पराजिता:।

न शेकुरतिकायस्य प्रतिकर्तुं महाहवे॥४२॥

Hard pressed by his hail of arrows and

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA +

worsted, their limbs broken, they could not
resist Atikaya in that major conflict. (42)

aq Sat हरिवीराणां त्रासयामास wera: |
मृगयूथमिव क्रुद्धो हरिर्यौवनदर्पित:॥४३॥
The ogre struck terror in that army of
monkey champions even as a furious lion,
puffed up with pride of youth, would strike
terror in a flock of deer. (43)
a राक्षसेन्द्रो हरियूथमध्ये
नायुध्यमानॆ निजघान कंचित्।
उत्पत्य रामं स धनु:कलापी
wiad वाक्यमिदं बभाषे॥४४॥
That ruler of ogres would not strike
anyone among the simian ranks who was
not fighting. Rushing towards Sri Rama, the
ogre, who was armed with a bow and quiver,
addressed the following proud challenge to
him: (44)
wy स्थितोऽहँ शरचापपाणि-
र्न Wad कंचन योधयामि।
यस्यास्ति शक्तिर्व्यवसाययुक्तो
ददातु मे शीघ्रमिहाद्य युद्धम्॥४५॥
“Seated in a chariot with an arrow and
a bow in my hands, | would not give battle
to a common warrior. Let him, who has
strength and is endowed with martial ardour,
speedily give fight to me on this field of
battle today.” (45)
ad तस्य वाक्यं gad निशम्य
ant सौमित्रिरमित्रहन्ता।
अमृष्यमाणश्च समुत्पपात
जग्राह Ud च ad: स्मयित्वा॥४६॥
Hearing the aforeesaid challenge of
Atikaya, even as he was uttering it,
Laksmana (son of Sumitra), the destroyer
of his enemies, flew into a rage. Nay, not
enduring his utterance, he darted forward,
and then seized his bow disdainfully. (46)

Se: सौमित्रिरुत्पत्य तूणादाक्षिप्य सायकम्।
पुरस्तादतिकायस्य विचकर्ष महद्धनु:॥४७॥
