« KISKINDHAKANDA +

सुग्रीवेण च सम्प्रीतिं वैरमुत्सृज्य दूरत:।
लालनीयो fe a भ्राता यवीयानेष वानर:॥ २५ ॥

“Do not enter into a conflict with your
younger brother, O valiant monarch: for |
consider friendship with the aforesaid Rama
and affection towards Sugriva desirable for
you. For, relegating animosity to a distance,
this monkey, Sugriva, your younger brother,
deserves to be lovingly cherished by you.

(24-25)
wa वा सन्निहस्थो वा सर्वथा बन्धुरेव ते।
नहि तेन समं बन्धुं भुवि पश्यामि कंचन॥ २६॥

“Whether living on Rsyamuka or staying
here in Kiskindha, he is your unqualified
friend in everyway. | do not see any friend
equal to him on earth. (26)

दानमानादिसत्कारै: कुरुष्व प्रत्यनन्तरम्।
वैरमेतत् समुत्सृज्य तव Ud स तिष्ठतु॥ २७॥

“Draw him close to you through gifts,
honour and other attentions. Let him stay by
your side, entirely giving up the present
animosity. (27)
gitar विपुलग्रीवो महाबन्धुर्मतस्तव।
भ्रातृसौहृदमालम्ब्य नान्या गतिरिहास्ति ते॥ eu

“The — thick-necked Sugriva is
considered by me as your great friend. You
can thrive only by banking on the goodwill
of your younger brother, Sugriva: there is

987

no other way to happiness for you.
ate a मत्प्रियं कार्यं यदि चावैषि मां हिताम्।
याच्यमान: प्रियत्वेन साधु वाक्यं कुरुष्व Ail २९॥
“If that which is pleasing to me is
intended to be done by you and if you
recognize me as friendly to you, pray, follow

my advice fully, as solicited by me, due to
your being dear to me. (29)

न रोषमेवानुविधातुमर्हसि।
क्षमो हि ते कोशलराजसूनुना
न विग्रह: शक्रसमानतेजसा॥ ३०॥

“Be pleased with me and hear my
wholesome advice; you should certainly not
give way to anger. Indeed your conflict with
the Prince of Kosala, whose might is equal
to Indra’s, is not desirable.” (30)

तदा fe ant fata वाक्यं
तं वालिनं पथ्यमिदं बभाषे।
न रोचते तद् वचनं हि तस्य
कालाभिपन्नस्य विनाशकाले॥ ३१॥

Indeed, at that time Tara tendered to
the said Vali the aforesaid advice, which
was friendly in everyway and wholesome
too. That advice, however, did not find favour
with him, which spelt destruction for him,
seized as he was by Death. (31)

(28)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये किष्किन्धाकाण्डे
पञ्चदश: सर्ग: ॥ १५ ॥

Thus ends Canto Fifteen in the Kiskindhakanda of the glorious Ramayana of Valmiki,
the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

