324

पूजितान् दधिपात्रैश्च सर्पिभि: सुमनोऽक्षतै:।
मन्त्रवेदविदो विप्रान् ददर्श स महाबल:॥९॥
Vibhisana, who was endowed with
extraordinary might, beheld Brahmanas
versed in Mantras (sacred texts) as well as
in the Brahmanas (the portion of the Vedas
containing rules for the recitation of the
Mantras at various’ sacrifices) and
worshipped with ghee, flowers and unbroken
grains of rice as well as with vessels full of
curds. (9)
स पूज्यमानो रक्षोभिर्दीप्यमानं स्वतेजसा।
आसनस्थं महाबाहुर्ववन्दे धनदानुजम्॥१०॥
While being glorified by ogres, the
mighty-armed Vibhisana saluted Ravana (a
younger half-brother of Kubera, the bestower
of riches), seated on a throne, and shining
with native splendour. (10)

a राजदृष्टिसम्पन्नमासनं हेमभूषितम्।
जगाम समुदाचारं प्रयुज्याचारकोविद:॥११॥
Going through the customary formalities,
Vibhisana, who was well-versed in the
code of conduct, made for a seat decked
with gold and blessed by a glance from the
king. (11)
स रावणं महात्मानं विजने मन्तरिसंनिधौ।
उवाच हितमत्यर्थं वचनं हेतुनिश्चितम्॥१२॥
प्रसाद्य भ्रातरं ज्येष्ठं सान्त्वेनोपस्थितक्रम:।
देशकालार्थसंवादि दृष्टलोकपरावर: 11 १३॥
Having sought the favour of his eldest
(half-) brother by means of soothing words,
Vibhisana, who knew what is good and bad
in the world and had observed the customary
rites (in the form of salutations etc.), tendered
to the eminent Ravana in the presence
of the latters ministers in seclusion the
following advice, which was exceedingly
wholesome and based on logical grounds
and was in consonance with place, time
and purpose: (12-13)

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA +

यदाप्रभृति वैदेही सम्प्राप्तेहे परंतप।
तदाप्रभृति दृश्यन्ते निमित्तान्यशुभानि न:॥१४॥

“Ever since Sita (a princess of the
Videha territory) arrived here, evil portents
are being observed by us. (14)

सस्फुलिङ्ग: सधूमार्चि: सधूमकलुषोदय:।
मन्त्रसंधुक्षितोऽप्यग्निर्न सम्यगभिवर्धते॥ १५ ॥

“The sacrificial fire emits sparks, its
flames are enveloped in smoke, _ its
manifestation (as a result of rubbing two
pieces of wood against each other) is also
obscure, accompanied as it is by smoke,
and it does not flare up properly even when
fed with oblations while uttering sacred
formulas. (15)

अग्निष्टेष्वग्रिशालासु तथा ब्रह्मस्थलीषु च।
सरीसृपाणि qed हव्येषु च पिपीलिका:॥ १६॥

“Reptiles are observed in kitchens and
fire-sanctuaries and, likewise, in the places
where the Vedas are taught, and ants are
discovered in the substances to be offered
as oblations into the sacrificial fire. (16)
Tat पयांसि स्कन्नानि विमदा वरकुञ्जरा:।
दीनमश्वा: प्रहेषन्ते नवग्रासाभिनन्दिन:॥ १७॥

“The milk of cows has dried up, ichor
no longer flows from the temples of the best
of elephants; while horses, though feeling
satisfied with their fresh supply of fodder,
neigh dolefully. (17)

खरोष्टाश्वतरा राजन् भिन्नरोमा: Gara च।
न स्वभावेऽवतिष्ठन्ते विधानैरपि चिन्तिता:॥ १८ i

“Nay, donkeys, camels and mules, O
king, shed tears, their hair standing on end.
Even though treated with care according to
medical directions, they do not return to
normalcy. (18)

वायसा: संघश: PU व्याहरन्ति समन्तत:।
समवेताश्च दृश्यन्ते विमानाग्रेषु संघश:॥१९॥

“Crows in flock utter harsh cries on
all sides and are seen gathered in
