* ARANYAKANDA «

men! Therefore, come, let us proceed to
the celebrated Pampa lake, which is so
pleasing to look at. (6)

ऋष्यमूको गिरिर्यत्र नातिदूरे प्रकाशते।
यस्मिन् वसति धर्मात्मा सुग्रीवोऽशुमत: Fa: uw tl
Fret वालिभयात् त्रस्तश्चतुर्भि: ae art: |
अहं त्वरे च तं RS सुग्रीवं वानरर्षभम्॥८॥
तदधीनं fe मे ard dara: परिमार्गणम्।
इति ब्रुवाणं तं वीरं सौमित्रिरिदमब्रवीत्॥९॥
“Not very far from it appears the
Rsyamuka Hill, on which dwells the high-
souled Sugriva, son of the sun-god, with
four other monkeys, seized with constant
dread of Vali. And | am in a hurry to see the
aforesaid Sugriva, a flower of the monkey
race. For my mission of seeking Sita hinges
on him.” Laksmana (son of Sumitra) replied
as follows to the aforesaid hero, Sri Rama,
who was speaking as above : (7—9)

गच्छावस्त्वरितं at ममापि त्वरते मन:।
आश्रमात्तु ततस्तस्मान्निष्क्रम्य स विशाम्पति: ॥ १० Mt
आजगाम तत: पम्पां लक्ष्मणेन सह प्रभु:।
समीक्षमाण: पुष्पाढ्यं सर्वतो विपुलद्रुमम्॥११॥

“Let us repair thither quickly; my mind
too is getting impatient to reach there.”
Thereupon issuing from that hermitage, that
powerful prince, the ruler of men, then arrived
on the brink of Pampa with Laksmana,
surveying the forest, which consisted of big
trees enriched with flowers on all sides.

(10-11)
कोयष्टिभिश्चार्जुनकै: शतपत्रैश्च कीरकै:।
was बहुभिर्नादितं qq at महत्॥१२॥

That big forest was rendered noisy by
lapwings and peacocks as well as by wood-
peckers and parrots as also by many other
birds. (12)
स रामो विविधान् gar सरांसि विविधानि च।
पश्यन् कामाभिसंतप्तो जगाम परमं BEAN Vs Il

Beholding trees of every description

as well as lakes of various kinds, the
aforesaid Sri Rama, who was tormented

927

with pangs of love for Sita, sought that
excellent lake. (13)

स तामासाद्य वै रामो दूरात् पानीयवाहिनीम्।
मतङ्गसरसं नाम ह्रदं समवगाहत॥१४॥
Having actually reached that lake, which
drew its waters from afar, Sri Rama bathed
in a pool forming part of Pampa, Matangasara
by name. (14)

तत्र जग्मतुरव्यग्रौ राघवौ fe समाहितौ।
स तुं शोकसमाविष्टो WAT दशरथात्मज:॥ १५॥
विवेश नलिनीं teat पंकजैश्च समाव्रृताम्।
तिलकाशोकपुंनागबकुलोद्दालकाशिनीम् ॥१६॥
The two scions of Raghu reached there
actually unruffled and composed. The
celebrated Sri Rama, son of Dagaratha,
however, was overwhelmed with grief
(caused by separation from Sita) when he
entered the lotus-pond, which was covered
with lotuses and appeared delightful. It looked
charming with the Tilaka, ASoka, Punnaga,
Bakula and Uddala trees by which it was
surrounded. (15-16)

रम्योपवनसम्बाधां पद्मसम्पीडितोदकाम्।
स्फटिकोपमतोयां at श्लक्ष्णवालुकसंतताम्॥ १७॥
It had become narrow on account of
lovely groves that had encroached upon it;
its crystalline water was fully covered with
lotuses and its bed was spread over with
soft sand. (17)

मत्स्यकच्छपसम्बाधां तीरस्थद्रुमशोभिताम्।

सखीभिरिव dant लताभिरनुवेष्टिताम्॥ १८॥
It was crowded with alligators and turtles

and adorned with the trees that stood on its

margin. Surrounded with creepers, it looked
as if united with its female companions. (18)

किंनरोरगगन्धर्वयक्षराक्षससेविताम् ।
नानाद्रुमलताकोर्णां शीतवारिनिधिं शुभाम्॥१९॥

Frequented by Kinnaras, Nagas,
Gandharvas, Yaksas and ogres and hemmed
in with trees and creepers of various kinds, it
was a beautiful reservoir of cool water. (19)
