+ UTTARAKANDA +

pronounced by me.’ This is what he said to
you at that time. (35)

तां तु भार्यां Arse सोऽब्रवीत् सुमहातपा: ।
दुर्विनीते विनिध्वंस ममाश्रमसमीपत:॥ ३६॥

“Severely reproaching his aforesaid wife,
the sage for his part, who was practising
rigorous austerities, said, ‘O impudent woman,
live unseen in the precincts of my hermitage.

(36)
स्पपयौवनसम्पन्ना यस्मात् त्वमनवस्थिता।
Teg रूपवती लोके न त्वमेका भविष्यति॥ ३७॥

‘Since you have proved inconstant,
though rich in comeliness and youth, you
will accordingly no longer be the only comely
woman. (37)
रूपं च a प्रजा: Gat गमिष्यन्ति न संशय:।
यत् तदेकं समाश्रित्य बिभ्रमोऽयमुपस्थित:॥ ३८॥

‘Nay, all created beings shall henceforth
undoubtedly share your comeliness
inasmuch as this perversity (occasioned by
concupiscence) appeared in the mind of
Indra due to that singular comeliness of
yours.’ (38)

तदाप्रभृति भूयिष्ठं प्रजा रूपसमन्विता।
सा तं प्रसादयामास महर्षि गौतमं तदा॥ ३९॥
From that time onwards the creation
was mostly endowed with comeliness.
Ahalya at that time sought to propitiate that
eminent seer of Vedic Mantras as follows:
(39)

अज्ञानाद् धर्षिता fag त्वद्रूपेण दिवौकसा।
न कामकाराद् विप्रर्षे प्रसादं कर्तुमर्हसि॥४०॥
‘| was unwittingly violated by the god
(lit., a denizen of heaven) appearing in your
guise, and not according to my own free
will, O Brahmarsi; you ought, therefore, to
extend your grace to me.’ (40)

अहल्यया त्वेवमुक्त: प्रत्युवाच स गौतम:।
उत्पत्स्यति महातेजा इक्ष्वाकूणां महारथ:॥४१॥
TH नाम श्रुतो लोके at चाप्युपयास्यति।
ब्राह्मणार्थे महाबाहुर्विष्णुर्मानुषविग्रह: ॥ ४२॥

951

Supplicated in these words by Ahalya,
the celebrated Gautama for his part replied
as follows: ‘Among the scions of Ikswaku
will be born a mighty-armed great car-warrior,
endowed with extraordinary energy, known
in the world by the name of Rama, and he
will proceed to the forest for the sake of a
Brahmana (Sage ViSwamitra). He will be no
other than Lord Visnu in human semblance.

(41-42)
तं द्रक्ष्यसि यदा भद्रे तत: पूता भविष्यसि।
स fe पावयितुं शक्तस्त्वया ag दुष्कृतं कृतम्॥ ४३ Il

‘When you will see him, O blessed
one, then you will get purified; for he alone

is able to eradicate the misdeed that has
been done by you. (43)

तस्यातिथ्यं च कृत्वा a मत्समीपं गमिष्यसि।
वत्स्यसि त्वं मया सार्धं तदा fe वरवर्णिनि॥४४॥

‘Nay, after offering hospitality to him,
you shall surely return to my presence.
Then only, O lady of fair complexion, you
will continue to live with me.’ (44)
एवमुक्त्वा तु विप्रर्षिराजगाम स्वमाश्रमम्।
तपश्चचार सुमहत् सा पत्नी ब्रह्मवादिन:॥४७५॥

Having spoken as _ aforesaid, that
Brahmarsi (a seer of Vedic Mantras) re-
entered his hermitage, while the said consort

of that teacher of the Vedas practised
exceptionally rigid austerities. (45)

शापोत्सर्गाद्धि Tae AI: सर्वमुपस्थितम्।

AL स्मर त्वं महाबाहो दुष्कृतं यत् त्वया कृतम्॥ ४६ ॥
“All this has followed in consequence

of the utterance of a curse by that sage.

Recall (now), O mighty-armed one, the

misdeed which was committed by you. (46)

तेन त्वं ग्रहणं शत्रोर्यातो नान्येन areal
शीघ्रं वै यज यज्ञं त्वं वैष्णवं सुसमाहित:॥४७॥
“Through that curse alone and for no
other reason, O Indra, did you fall into the
clutches of your enemy. Therefore, perform

you with full attention without delay the sacrifice
intended to propitiate Lord Visnu. (47)
