486

नहि शक्या प्रवेष्टुं सा मयायोध्या त्वया विना।
राजधानी महेन्द्रस्य यथा दुष्कृतकर्मणा॥५५॥

“Bereft of you, Ayodhya is incapable of
being entered by me much in the same way
as Amaravati, the capital of the mighty Indra,
is inaccessible to a man of sinful deeds. (55)

वनवासे क्षयं प्राप्ते ममैष हि मनोरथ:।

यदनेन रथेनैव wt वहरेयं पुरीं पुन:॥७५६॥
“Indeed this is my ambition that when

your exile in the forest has come to an end,

| may convey you back to Ayodhya in this
very chariot. (56)

aden fe वर्षाणि सहितस्य त्वया वने।
क्षणभूतानि यास्यन्ति शतसंख्यानि चान्यथा॥ ५७॥

“So long as | remain with you in the
forest, fourteen years will undoubtedly slip
away past me as though reduced to as
many moments; whereas if | stay away
from you they will multiply a hundredfold.

(57)
भृत्यवत्सल तिष्ठन्तं भर्तृपुत्रगते पथि।
भक्तं भृत्यं स्थितं स्थित्या न मा त्वं हातुमर्हसि॥ ५८ UI

“O prince, who are so fond of your
dependants, you ought not to desert me,
your devoted servant, standing resolved to
tread on the path chosen by the son of his
master and ever keeping within bounds.”

(58)
wa बहुविधं दीनं याचमानं wa: पुन:।
TH भृत्यानुकम्पी तु सुमन्त्रमिदमब्रवीत्॥५९॥

Sri Rama, for his part, compassionate
as he was towards his dependants, replied
as follows to Sumantra, who was piteously
supplicating again and again in many ways
as aforesaid : (59)
जानामि परमां uaa ते भर्तृवत्सल।
soy चापि यदर्थं cat प्रेषयामि पुरीमित:॥६०॥

“| know your supreme devotion to me,
O charioteer, so fond of your master!
Nevertheless, pray, hear wherefore | send
you back to Ayodhya from here. (60)

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA +

नगरीं cat गतं Gear जननी A यवीयसी।

कैकेयी was गच्छेदिति रामो at गत:॥६१॥
“Seeing you returned to the capital,

my youngest mother, Kaikeyi, should feel

convinced that ।, Rama, have left for the
forest. (61)

विपरीते तुष्टिहीना वनवासं गते मयि।
राजानं नातिशाङ्केत मिथ्यावादीति धार्मिकम्॥ ६२॥

“Otherwise in the event of your remaining
with me, let not Kaikeyi—who is not going to
derive satisfaction otherwise even on my
having gone into exile in the forest—suspect
the pious king to be a liar. (62)

एष A प्रथम: कल्पो यदम्बा A यवीयसी।
भरतारक्षितं स्फीतं पुत्रराज्यमवाप्स्यते॥६३॥

“This is my foremost intention in
sending you back to Ayodhya that my
youngest mother, Kaikeyi, should secure
the kingdom of Ayodhya, protected by
Bharata and thus ruled by her own son, in
good condition and this will be possible only
on your returning to Ayodhya; for till then
the possibility of my returning to Ayodhya
will not be completely ruled out and till then
Bharata too will not be called back to
Ayodhya and everyone will remain in a
state of suspense. (63)
मम प्रियार्थं राज्ञश्च सुमन्त्र त्वं पुरीं व्रज।
संदिष्टश्चापि यानर्थांस्तांस्तान् ब्रूयास्तथा TAT UW ६४॥

“For my pleasure and for the pleasure
of the Emperor, therefore, O Sumantra, return
you to the capital and deliver all the messages
that you have been asked to deliver, each
in the way you have been asked to do.”

(64)

इत्युक्त्वा वचनं सूतं सान्त्वयित्वा पुन: TA: |

गुहं वचनमक्लीबो wat हेतुमदब्रवीत्॥६५॥
Having offered explanation to the

charioteer as aforesaid and consoling him

again and again, Sri Rama, who was not

feeling the least timorous, gave the following

reasoned instructions to Guha: (65)
