* ARANYAKANDA «

wit fe Wea मारीचेनाकृतात्मना।
at विचरता ye हिंसिता मुनिपुंगवा:॥३९॥
“Surely many jewels among ascetics
have been killed in the past by this cruel
Marica of evil mind while roaming about in
the forest. (39)
उत्थाय बहवोऽनेन मृगयायां जनाधिपा:।
निहता: परमेष्वासास्तस्माद् वध्यस्त्वयं WT: I ४० Ul
“Many monarchs wielding large bows
have been killed by him, suddenly appearing
in his real form; hence this deer deserves to
be made short work of. (40)

पुरस्तादिह arate: परिभूय तपस्विन:।
उदरस्थो द्विजान् हन्ति स्वगर्भोऽश्वतरीमिव॥ ४१ ॥

“Practising deception on ascetics in
this forest in the past and entering their
abdomen, the ogre Vatapi used to kill
Brahmanas (by splitting open their bellies
from within) as the embryo of a she-mule
causes the death of the she-mule (in that it
does not emerge from its womb unless the
belly of the mother is cut open). (41)

स कदाचिच्चिराल्लोभादाससाद महामुनिम्।
अगस्त्यं ATA युक्तं भक्ष्यस्तस्य बभूव ह॥४२॥
“After a long time, out of greed, they
say, the ogre once met the eminent Sage
Agastya, endowed with spiritual power, and
entering his stomach by fraud was consumed
by him as food. (42)

समुत्थाने च तद्रूपं कर्तुकामं समीक्ष्य तम्।
उत्स्मयित्वा तु भगवान् वातापिमिदमब्रवीत्॥४३॥

“Smiling to see him eager to resume
his original form of an ogre at the conclusion
of the Sraddha ceremony, the revered sage
spoke to Vatapi as follows : (43)

त्वयाविगण्य वातापे परिभूताश्च तेजसा।

जीवलोके द्विजश्रेष्ठास्तस्मादसि जरां गत:॥४४॥
“‘Not minding the consequences, O

Vatapi, the foremost of Brahmanas in this

world of mortals were made short work of
by you through your might; hence by way of

829

retribution for this sin you have been digested
by me.’ (44)

aq tat न भवेदेव वातापिरिव लक्ष्मण।
मद्दिधं योऽतिमन्येत धर्मनित्यं जितेन्द्रियम्॥४५॥

“The yonder ogre too, who dares
despise one like me, constantly devoted to
virtue and a master of his senses, will
cease to be as Vatapi did, O Laksmana !

(45)
भवेद्भधतोऽयं वातापिरगस्त्येनेव मा गत:।
Be त्वं भव संनद्धो यन्तरितो tat मैथिलीम्॥४६॥

“Having met me in a hostile manner,
this ogre too is sure to be killed by me as
Vatapi by Agastya. Stay you protected with
armour and, remaining confined to this
place, guard Sita (a princess of Mithila).

(46)
अहमेनं वधिष्यामि ग्रहीष्याम्यथवा मृगम्॥४७॥

“Whatever is to be done by us hereafter
depends on her, O delight of the race of
Raghu ! | shall dispose of this deer or capture
it alive. (47)

यावद् गच्छामि सौमित्रे मृगमानयितुं द्रुतम्।

पश्य लक्ष्मण वैदेह्या मृगत्वचि Wat स्पृहाम्॥ ४८ I
“In the meantime, O darling of Sumitra,

| proceed apace to bring the deer. Mark, O

Laksmana, the craving of Sita (a princess

of the Videha territory) directed towards the

skin of this deer. (48)

त्वचा प्रधानया ह्येष मृगोऽद्य न भविष्यति।
अप्रमत्तेन ते भाव्यमाश्रमस्थेन सीतया॥४९॥

aad, पृषतमेकेन सायकेन निहन्म्यहम्।
हत्वैतच्चर्म चादाय शीघ्रमेष्यामि लक्ष्मण॥ ५०॥

“Indeed this deer will perish today
because of its superb skin. You must remain
wide awake in the hermitage with Sita till |
dispose of this spotted deer with a single
arrow. Having made short work of it and
taking its skin, | shall forthwith return, O
Laksmana ! (49-50)
