+ UTTARAKANDA +

त्वत्कृते च ad wa यन्तिता धर्मबुद्धय:।
त्वं fe सर्वगुणोपेता sit: साक्षादिव पुत्रिके॥८॥

‘Pious-minded as we are, we have all
exerted ourselves to see you married.
Daughter, you are endowed with all good
qualities and almost the same as Laksmi.

(8)
कन्यापितृत्वं दु:खं fe सर्वेषां मानकांक्षिणाम्।
न ज्ञायते च क: कन्यां वरयेदिति कन्यके॥ ९॥

‘To be the father of an unmarried girl is
a source of anxiety to all who care for their
honour; for they do not know who will accept
their daughter, O child! (9)

Wd: कुलं पितृकुलं at चैव च दीयते।
कुलत्रयं सदा Ha संशये स्थाप्य तिष्ठति॥ go ti
‘An unmarried girl ever exposes to risk
the reputation of three families, the family of
her mother, of her father and that to which
she is gifted. (10)
सा त्वं मुनिवरं श्रेष्ठं प्रजापतिकुलोद्भवम्।
ust विश्रवसं पुत्रि पौलस्त्यं वरय स्वयम्॥११॥
‘Hence, O daughter, you had better
choose yourself and accept as your husband
the excellent sage Visrava, the best of sages,
born in the family of Prajapati (Brahma) and
the son of Pulastya. (11)
ईदृशास्ते भविष्यन्ति Gat: पुत्रि न संशय:।
तेजसा भास्करसमो तादृशोऽयं धनेश्वर:॥१२॥
‘O daughter, sons will be born to you
equal to the lord of riches, whose lustre is
like that of the sun: about this there is no
doubt.’ (12)
सा तुतद्व्।चनं श्रुत्वा कन्यका पितॄगौरबान्।
तत्र गत्वा च सा तस्थौ विश्रवा aa तप्यते॥ १३॥
“Hearing these words, that girl, out of
respect for her father, went to the spot

where ViSrava was doing Tapas and stood
there. (13)

एतस्मिन्नन्तरे राम पुलस्त्यतनयो द्विज:।
अग्निहोत्रमुपातिष्ठच्चतुर्थं st पावक:॥१४॥

873

“In the meantime, O Rama, that
Brahmana, the son of Pulastya, resembling
a fourth fire, was performing Agnihotra
(sacrificial feeding of fire). (14)

अविचिन्त्य तु at det दारुणां पितृगौरवात्।
उपसृत्याग्रतस्तस्य चरणाधोमुखी स्थिता॥१५॥
विलिखन्ती भामिनी ।

स तु तां वीक्ष्य सुश्रोणीं पूर्णचन्द्रनिभाननाम्॥ १६॥
अब्रवीत् परमोदारो दीप्यमानां स्वतेजसा।

भद्रे कस्यासि दुहिता Hat वा त्वमिहागता॥ १७॥
किं कार्यं कस्य वा हेतोस्तत्त्वतो ब्रूहि शोभने॥ १८ ॥

“Not realizing that the time was
inauspicious, out of respect for her father’s
words, the young girl went near him and
stood in front of him with her face bent
downwards and eyes fixed on her feet and
repeatedly scratching the ground with the
tip of her great toe. Seeing that girl of shapely
limbs, whose face resembled the full moon
and who was brilliant with her own lustre,
that supremely magnanimous sage said:
‘Blessed girl, whose daughter are you,
wherefrom and with what motive have you
come here and what is your purpose? Tell
me the truth, O beautiful one!’ (15—18)

एवमुक्ता तु सा कन्या कृताञ्जलिरथाब्रवीत्।
आत्मप्रभावेण मुने ज्ञातुमर्हसि मे मतम्॥१९॥
“Addressed thus, that girl forthwith said
with folded hands: ‘O sage, you should read
my mind by your spiritual insight. (19)

किं तु मां विद्धि ब्रह्मर्षे शासनात् पितुरागताम्।
कैकसी नाम नाम्नाहं शेषं त्वं ज्ञातुमर्हसि॥ २०॥
‘O Brahmarsi, | am Kaikasi by name;
know me to have come at the behest of my
father; the rest you should comprehend for
yourself.’ (20)

aq गत्वा yet वाक्यमेतदुवाच ह।
विज्ञातं ते मया भद्रे कारणं यन्मनोगतम्॥ २१॥
The sage went into meditation and said,
‘O auspicious one, | have divined the intention
in your mind. (21)
