« KISKINDHAKANDA +

germ तु नरेन्द्रस्य पत्न्याममिततेजस:।
कृतकृत्या भविष्याम: कृतस्य प्रतिकर्मणा॥ ५६॥

We shall have accomplished our
purpose through requital of the service
rendered (to us by Sri Rama) only when the
consort of Sri Rama (a ruler of men), who is
endowed with immeasurable energy, has
been seen. (56)

अतोऽन्यदपि यत्कार्यं कार्यस्यास्य प्रियं भवेत्।
सम्प्रधार्य भवद्धिश्च देशकालार्थसंहितम्॥५७॥
Duly ascertaining whatever work other

than the business in hand (viz., the discovery
of Sita) is contributory to this should be

1103

accomplished by you conformably with the
place, time and purpose.” (57)

ad: सुषेणप्रमुखा: प्लवङ्गा:
सुग्रीववाक्यं निपुणं निशम्य।

आमन्त्य ad प्लवगाधिपं a
जग्मुर्दिशं At वरुणाभिगुप्ताम्॥ ५८ UI

Having carefully listened to the
command of Sugriva and taking leave of
the suzerain lord of monkeys, all the
aforesaid monkeys headed by Susena
then proceeded to the wellknown western
quarter guarded by Varuna, the god of waters.

(58)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये किष्किन्धाकाण्डे द्विचत्वारिंश: सर्ग: ॥ ४२ I

Thus ends Canto Forty-two in the Kiskindhakanda of the glorious Ramayana of
Valmiki, the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

Canto XLII

Sugriva dispatches a contingent of monkeys under the leadership of Satabali
in order to seek for Sita in the northern quarter

wa: संदिश्य ata: श्वशुरं पश्चिमां दिशम्।
at शतबलिं am वानरं वानरेश्चर:॥१॥
उवाच राजा Ss Ada: सर्ववानरसत्तम:।
वाक्यमात्महितं da wea च fed तदा॥ २॥

Having duly directed his father-in-law,
Susena, to the western quarter, King Sugriva,
the lord of monkeys and the foremost of all
monkeys, who knew everything connected
with his work, then delivered to the valiant
monkey, Satabali by name, the following
message, which was conducive to his own
good as well as to the good of Sri Rama at
that time : (1-2)

qd: शतसहस्रेण त्वद्विधानां वनौकसाम्।
वैवस्वतसुतै: सार्धं प्रविष्ट: सर्वमन्तिभि:॥ ३॥
सर्वत: परिमार्गध्वं रामपत्नीं यशस्विनीम्॥४॥

“Indeed, having penetrated into the
northern quarter, adorned by the Himalaya
mountain, with all your counsellors, sons of
God Yama (son of the sun-god), and
accompanied by a lakh of monkeys like
you, search all round for the illustrious
Sita, the spouse of Sri Rama, 0 powerful
monkey ! (3-4)

ऋॠणान्मुक्ता भविष्याम: कृतार्थार्थविदां वरा:॥५॥

“When this task of conducting a search
for Sita has been fully accomplished and
what is pleasing to Sri Rama (son of Emperor
DaSaratha) done, we shall have been
released from a debt and shall have
accomplished our purpose, O jewel among
those knowing their purpose ! (5)
