260

feet the aforesaid prince, son of Mandodari,
who was a past master in warfare and was
springing in the sky. Nay, whirling him round
a hundred times as soon as he was down,
| crushed him.” (124—126)

तमक्षमागतं भग्नं निशम्य स दशानन:।
ततश्चेन्द्रजितं नाम द्वितीयं रावण: सुतम्॥ १२७॥
व्यादिदेश सुसंक्रुद्धो बलिनं युद्धदुर्मदम्।
तच्चाप्यहं बलं Wa तं च राक्षसपुङ्खवम्॥ १२८ Il
नष्टौजसं रणे कृत्वा परं हर्षमुपागत:।
महतापि महाबाहु: प्रत्ययेन महाबल:॥१२९॥
प्रहितो रावणेनैष सह वीरैर्मदोद्धतै:।
सोऽविषह्यं हि at asa स्वसैन्यं चावमर्दितम्॥ १३० ॥
ब्रह्मणोऽस्त्रेण स तु मां प्रबद्ध्वा चातिवेगिन: ।
रज्जुभिश्चापि बध्नन्ति ततो मां तत्र राक्षसा:॥ १३१॥

“Highly enraged to hear of the celebrated
Prince Aksa having been killed as soon as
arrived, that ten-headed monster, Ravana,
thereupon dispatched his other mighty son,
Indrajit by name, fierce in combat, with a
large army. Having crushed in combat the
spirit of that entire force as well as of that
bull among ogres, | experienced supreme
felicity. Alongwith heroes who were insolent
with arrogance, this mighty-armed prince,
who was endowed with extraordinary might,
had been sent by Ravana with great
confidence. Perceiving his army crushed
and consequently realizing me to be
irresistible, Indrajit for his part made me
captive by means of a missile presided over
by Brahma (the creator) and, having bound
me, handed me over to the ogres. Ogres full
of excessive agility then began to bind me
further with cords on that spot. (127—131)

रावणस्य समीपं च गृहीत्वा मामुपागमन्।
Fe सम्भाषितश्चाहं रावणेन दुरात्मना॥१३२॥
पृष्टश्च लङ्कागमनं राक्षसानां च तं वधम्।
तत्सर्वं च रणे तत्र सीतार्थमुपजल्पितम्॥१३३॥

“Holding me by the hand, they sought
the presence of Ravana. On seeing me, |
was spoken to by the evil-minded Ravana

« VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

and questioned about the motive of my visit
to Lanka and my said destruction of the
ogres. ‘All that was done by me in combat
for the sake of Sita !’ was the reply made by
me. (132-133)

तस्यास्तु दर्शनाकाङ्क्षी प्राप्तस्त्वद्भवनं विभो।
मारुतस्यौरस: पुत्रो वानरो हनुमानहम्॥१३४॥
| continued: “ ‘| am a monkey, Hanuman,
an offspring of the wind-god, arrived in your
palace with a longing to see Sita. (134)

Wed च मां विद्धि सुग्रीवसचिवं कपिम्।
सोऽहं दौत्येन रामस्य त्वत्सकाशमिहागत:॥ १३७५ I
“‘Further know me to be a monkey,
envoy of Sri Rama and a minister of Sugriva.
As such | have sought your presence here
in the capacity of a messenger of Sri Rama.
(135)

so, चापि समादेशं यदहं प्रब्रवीमि ते।
THAT हरीशस्त्वां वाक्यमाह समाहितम्॥ १३६॥

“` hereby deliver to you, O lord of
ogres, the friendly message which Sugriva,
the lord of monkeys, has sent to you. Pray,
listen to his advice too. (136)

सुग्रीवश्च महाभाग: स cat कौशलमब्रवीत्।
धर्मार्थकामसहितं fed पथ्यमुवाच ह॥ १३७॥
“‘Nay, the celebrated and highly blessed
Sugriva has inquired after your welfare and
has tendered this friendly and salutary advice,
which is in consonance with righteousness,
your worldly interests and enjoyment too.
(137)
वसतो ऋष्यमूके A udd विपुलद्रुमे।
राघवो रणविक्रान्तो मित्रत्वं समुपागत:॥ १३८॥

“While | was sojourning on the
Rsyamuka mountain, covered with numerous
trees, Sri Rama, a scion of Raghu, who is
valiant in combat, entered into an alliance with

me. (138)

तेन मे कथितं राजन् भार्या A रक्षसा हृता।

तत्र साहाय्यहेतोर्मे समयं कर्तुमर्हसि॥१३९॥
““The following exhortation was
