232

re-united with him, please prove cool to
Hanuman. (29)

ae मां तारयेदार्य: सुग्रीव: सत्यसंगर:।
TH दु:खाम्बुसंरोधाच्छीतो भव हनूमत:॥ ३०॥

“If the noble Sugriva, who is true to his
promise, should be able to take me across
this ocean of agony, please prove cool to
Hanuman.” (30)

ततस्तीक्ष्णाचिरव्यग्र: प्रदक्षिणशिखोऽनल:।
जज्वाल मृगशावाक्ष्या: शंसन्निव शुभं HA: 1 ३१॥
Thereupon the fire, which had burst
into leaping flames, began to burn mildly
with its flames rising to his right (as a token
of propitiousness), announcing, as it were,
to the fawn-eyed lady the welfare of the
monkey. (31)

हनूमज्जनकश्चैव पुच्छानलयुतोऽनिल: ।
ववौ स्वास्थ्यकरो देव्या: प्रालेयानिलशीतल: 132 1

Though brought into contact with the
fire at the tail, the wind too, the procreator of
Hanuman, blew ice-cold, causing satisfaction
to the godlike lady. (32)

दह्यमाने च ले चिन्तयामास वानर:।
प्रदीप्तोऽग्निरयं कस्मान्न at दहति सर्वत:॥ ३३॥

While the tail was burning, Hanuman
thought to himself, “How does this fire, ablaze
on all sides, not burn me? (33)

दृश्यते च महाज्वाल: करोति च न मे रुजम्।
शिशिरस्येव सम्पातो लाङ्गूलाग्रे प्रतिष्ठित:॥३४॥

“It appears as having burst into big
flames, yet it does not cause pain to me any
more than a mass of ice placed at the end
of my tail. (34)
अथ वा तदिदं व्यक्तं Aq TS प्लवता मया।
रामप्रभावादाश्चर्यं Uda: सरितां पतौ॥ ३५॥

“Or, this cold touch of fire has come to
be felt due to the same inscrutable power of
Sri Rama as a result of which a marvel in
the form of a mountain in the sea was seen
by me while leaping across it. (35)

« VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

यदि तावत् समुद्रस्य मैनाकस्य च धीमत:।
रामार्थं सम्भ्रमस्तादूक किमग्निर्न करिष्यति॥ ३६॥

“If there was such a flurry to be seen
in the mind of the sea and the sagacious
Mount Mainaka in the cause of Sri Rama,
will not fire show the same degree of flurry
in making its touch cool? (36)

सीतायाश्चानृशंस्येन तेजसा राघवस्य च।
पितुश्च मम सख्येन न Ut दहति पावक:॥ ३७॥

“The fire does not burn me because of
Sita’s mercy for those depending on her, the
glory of Sri Rama, a scion of Raghu, and the
friendship of my father with the god of fire.”(37)

wa: स चिन्तयामास ded कपिकुञ्जर:।
कथमस्मद्विधस्येह बन्धनं राक्षसाधमै:॥ ३८॥
प्रतिक्रियास्य युक्ता स्यात् सति मह्यं पराक्रमे।
ततश्छित्त्वा च तान्पाशान्वेगवान् वै महाकपि: ।। ३९ ॥
उत्पपाताथ वेगेन ननाद च महाकपि:।
Wek dd: श्रीमान् शैलशृङ्गमिवोन्नतम्॥४०॥
विभक्तरक्ष:सम्बाधमाससादानिलात्मज: ।
स भूत्वा शैलसंकाश: क्षणेन पुनरात्मवान्॥४१॥
Bat परमां प्राप्तो बन्धनान्यवशातयत्।
विमुक्तश्चाभवच्छीमान् पुन: पर्वतसंनिभ:॥४२॥
Once more did that elephant among
the monkeys reflect awhile as_ follows:
“How could the bondage of one like me at
the hands of the vile ogres be congruous?
The reprisal of this outrage should be justified
on my part so long as there is prowess in
me.” Nay, having severed those bonds,
Hanuman, the great monkey, who was full
of impetuosity, thereupon sprang up in the
air with vehemence and the gigantic Hanuman
gave a shout. The glorious Hanuman, sprung
from the loins of the wind-god, then reached
the city gate, which was lofty as a hill-top
and from which throngs of ogres had turned
away. Having once more assumed in an
instant an exceedingly diminutive form, the
self-possessed Hanuman, who looked like
a mountain in size, cast off his bonds. And
becoming completely free, the glorious
