68

इदं पवित्रं पापघ्नं पुण्यं वेदैश्च सम्मितम्।

a: Use रामचरितं सर्वपापै: प्रमुच्यते॥९८॥
He who reads this sacred narrative of

Sri Rama, which is capable of purifying the

mind and wiping out sins and is treated on

a par with the Vedas, is completely absolved

from all sins. (98)

एतदाख्यानमायुष्यं पठन् रामायणं नर:।
waa: सगण: प्रेत्य स्वर्गे महीयते॥९९॥

_ Reading this narrative centring round
Sri Rama and conducive to longevity, a

« VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

man shall, on departing from this world, be
honoured in heaven alongwith his sons and
grandsons as well as his followers and
attendants. (99)

पठन् द्विजो वागृषभत्वमीयात् स्यात् क्षत्रियो भूमिपतित्वमीयात्।
वणिग्जन: पण्यफलत्वमीयाज्नश्च शूद्रोऽपि महत्त्वमीयात्॥१००॥

Reading ita Brahmana bids fair to attain
eminence in eloquence; if he is a Ksatriya,
he is sure to attain lordship over the earth; a
man belonging to the mercantile community
is sure to secure profit in trade and a man
belonging to the Sudra class can hope to attain
superiority. (100)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये बालकाण्डे प्रथम: सर्ग: ॥ १ ॥

Thus ends Canto One in the Balakanda of the glorious Ramayana of Valmiki,
the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

Canto II

Brahma’s visit

नारदस्य I Ag वाक्यं श्रुत्वा वाक्यविशारद:।
पूजयामास धर्मात्मा सहशिष्यो महामुनिम्॥१॥
Hearing the aforesaid discourse of
Narada, the pious sage Valmiki, a past master
in expression, worshipped the most prominent
sage Narada with his own pupils. (1)

यथावत् पूजितस्तेन देवर्षिर्नारदस्तथा।
आपृच्छ्यैवाभ्यनुज्ञात A जगाम विहायसम्॥ २॥

Duly worshipped and permitted by him
on asking leave, the aforesaid celestial seer,
Narada, forthwith rose to his abode in the
heavens. (2)
स ded गते afer देवलोकं मुनिस्तदा।
जगाम तमसातीरॆ जाह्नव्यास्त्वविदूरत:॥ ३॥

Having tarried in his hermitage awhile
(lit., for less than an hour) on the seer
having left for heaven, the sage then repaired
to the bank of the Tamasa, not very far from
the holy Ganga (obviously for his midday
bath and devotions). (3)

aq dt समासाद्य तमसाया मुनिस्तदा।
शिष्यमाह स्थितं ured दृष्टा तीर्थमकर्दमम्॥४॥
Duly reaching the bank of the Tamasa
and finding the descent to the river free
from mud, the sage then spoke to his pupil
standing by his side as follows: (4)
अकर्दममिदं तीर्थं भरद्वाज निशामय।
रमणीयं Wears सन्मनुष्यमनो यथा॥५॥
“Look at this descent, O Bharadwaja,
which is free from mud and pleasant, its
water being transparent as the mind of a
righteous man. (5)
इदमेवावगाहिष्ये तमसातीर्थमुत्तमम्॥ ६ ॥
“Let your pitcher be laid on the bank,
O dear one! and the bark be handed over
to me for being wrapped about my loins
when | have bathed. | shall take my dip at
this very descent of the Tamasa, excellent
as it is.” (6)
