* BALAKANDA +

167

Canto XXX ।

Crossing the Sona, Viswamitra and party reach the bank of the holy Ganga
and spend the night there. Requested by Sri Rama, he narrates
the story of the origin of the Ganga

उपास्य रात्रिशेषं तु शोणाकूले महर्षिभि:।
निशायां सुप्रभातायां विश्वामित्रोऽभ्यभाषत॥ १॥
Having reposed for the rest of the night
on the bank of the Sona alongwith the great
Rsis, who accompanied him on the journey,
Viswamitra spoke as follows on the night
having culminated in a beautiful sunrise:
(1)

सुप्रभाता निशा wa vat संध्या प्रवर्तते।
उत्तिष्ठोत्तिष्ठं भद्रं ते गमनायाभिरोचय॥ २॥

“The night has ended in a lovely dawn,
O Rama! The morning twilight has set in.
Get up, arise and make yourself ready to
proceed further. May happiness and well-
being attend you |” (2)

wre वचनं तस्य कृतपूर्वाह्लिकक्रिय:।
गमनं रोचयामास वाक्यं चेदमुवाच ह॥३॥
Hearing his instruction as aforesaid
and having finished his morning duties
(Sandhya etc.,) Sri Rama made himself
ready to leave for the journey and spoke
the following words: so the tradition goes :
(3)

अयं शोण: शुभजलोगाध: पुलिनमण्डित:।
कतरेण पथा ae संतरिष्यामहे वयम्॥४॥

“The river Sona, whose waters are so
holy, is fordable here and as such adorned
with sandy banks. By which of the two fords
(appearing before us) shall we wade through
it, O holy Sir?” (4)

एवमुक्तस्तु रामेण विश्वामित्रोऽब्रवीदिदम्।
we wet मयोद्दिष्टो येन यान्ति महर्षय:॥५॥

Questioned thus by Sri Rama,
VisSwamitra indeed replied as follows : “Here

is the ford already pointed out by me, through
which the great Rsis over there are wading.”
(5)
एवमुक्ता महर्षयो विश्वामित्रेण धीमता।
Wak प्रयाता a वनानि विविधानि च॥६॥

After wise ViSwamitra said so, the
Maharsis enjoying the beautiful sceneries of
the forest departed. (6)
a गत्वा दूरमध्वानं गतेऽर्धदिवसे तदा।
जाह्नवीं सरितां stat ददृशुर्मुनिसेविताम्॥७॥

Then having crossed the Sona at the
spot mentioned by Viswamitra and traversed
a long way further, the party sighted the
Ganga, the foremost of all rivers, resorted
to by sages, in the afternoon. (7)
तां दृष्टा पुण्यसलिलां हंससारससेविताम्।
बभूवुर्मुनय: dad मुदिता: सहराघवा:॥८॥
तस्यास्तीरे dat सर्वे चक्रुर्वासपरिग्रहम्।
Wa: स्नात्वा यथान्यायं संतर्प्य पितृदेवता:॥९॥

The sages, including Sri Rama and
Laksmana, the two scions of Raghu, were
all rejoiced to see the celebrated river,
whose waters confer merit (on those who

resort to them) and which was frequented
by swans and cranes. (8-9)

हुत्वा चैवाग्निहोत्राणि प्राश्य चामृतवद्भधवि:।
विविशुर्जाह्नवीतीरे शुभा मुदितमानसा:॥१०॥
विश्वामित्रं महात्मानं परिवार्यं समन्तत:।
विष्ठिताश्च यथान्यायं weal च यथार्हत:।
wae रामो विश्वामित्रमथाब्रवीत्॥११॥
On the bank of that river all of them
forthwith broke their journey. Having then

bathed in the river according to the scriptural
ordinance, (i.e., after reciting a Vedic hymn
