* SUNDARAKANDA +

counsellor, failure is out of the question.
Madhuvana, they say, has been laid waste
by the heroic jewels among monkeys,
headed by Angada, who have returned after
exploring the southern quarter. Nay, the
celebrated Madhuvana, which could not be
laid violent hands upon by anyone, has
actually been devastated by them as soon
as they returned from Lanka. (20—23)
afd च at कृत्स्नमुपयुक्तं तु amt:
पातिता वनपालास्ते तदा जानुभिराहता:॥ २४॥
“The wood was not only laid violent
hands upon but was wholly consumed by
the monkeys. The aforesaid monkeys
guarding the grove were knocked down by
them and then rubbed with their knees. (24)
एतदर्थमयं Wal ad मधुरवागिह।
नाम्ना दधिमुखो नाम हरि: प्रख्यातविक्रम:॥ २५॥
“This monkey, Dadhimukha by name,
who is sweet of expression and whose
prowess is widely known, came here to

report this matter. (25)

ger सीता महाबाहो सौमित्रे पश्य Arad: |

अभिगम्य यथा सर्वे पिबन्ति मधु वानरा:॥ २६॥
“Since reaching Madhuvana, the

monkeys are all drinking honey; know it
correctly, O mighty-armed son of Sumitra,
that Sita has been discovered. (26)

न चाप्यदृष्ट्वा add विश्रुता: पुरुषर्षभ।
at दत्तवरं दिव्यं धर्षयेयुर्वनौकस:॥ २७॥
“Without having found Sita, a princess
of the Videha territory, O jewel among men,
the renowned monkeys would not have laid
violent hands on the heavenly wood which
was bestowed upon one of our ancestors
as a boon by the gods.” (27)

ad: Wesel धर्मात्मा लक्ष्मण: सहराघव:।
श्रुत्वा कर्णसुखां वाणीं सुग्रीववदनाच्च्युताम्॥ २८ ॥

Laksmana, whose mind was set on
virtue, alongwith Sri Rama, a scion of Raghu,
thereupon felt highly rejoiced to hear the

277

aforesaid speech, so agreeable to the ear,
which had come from the lips of Sugriva.
(28)
Weta Wet रामो लक्ष्मणश्च महायशा:।
श्रुत्वा दधिमुखस्यैवं सुग्रीवस्तु weet च॥ २९॥
वनपालं पुनर्वाक्यं सुग्रीव: प्रत्यभाषत।
प्रीतोऽस्मि सोऽहं aaah वनं तै: कृतकर्मभि: । ३०॥
Sri Rama as well as the highly illustrious
Laksmana were filled with ecstatic delight.
Nay, feeling excessively delighted to hear
the aforesaid report of Dadhimukha, Sugriva,
for his part who was distinguished by his
well-built neck, once more addressed the
following words to Dadhimukha, the guardian
of the wood: “I am gratified to learn that the
produce of the grove has been consumed
by the monkeys who have accomplished
their work. (29-30)
धर्षितं मर्षणीयं च चेष्टितं कृतकर्मणाम्।
Tes vit मधुवनं dara त्वमेव हि।
शीघ्रं प्रेषय सर्वांस्तान् हनूमत्प्रमुखान् कपीन्॥ ३१॥
“The violence as well as the vagaries
of those who have done their duty must be
tolerated by us. Return apace to Madhuvana;
nay, you alone must guard it jealously as
before. Dispatch without delay all those
monkeys with Hanuman at their head. (31)

इच्छामि vit हनुमत्प्रधानान्-
शाखामृगांस्तान् मृगराजदर्पान्।
प्रष्टुं कृतार्थान् सह राघवाभ्यां
श्रोतुं च सीताधिगमे प्रयत्नम्॥ ३२॥
“With the two scions of Raghu, |
immediately wish to talk to those monkeys
headed by Hanuman, who _ having
accomplished their purpose, are proud as
lions, as well as to hear of their endeavour
in the cause of finding out Sita.” (32)

प्रीतिस्फीताक्षौ सम्प्रहृष्टौ कुमारौ
दृष्टवा सिद्धार्थौ वानराणां च राजा।
ब्राह्वोरासन्नामतिमात्रं ननन्द॥ ३३॥
