1046

their post hurriedly and muster soon in
obedience to my command. And you alone
should personally see what should be done
next. (31)

त्रिपञ्चरात्रादूर्ध्व a: प्राप्नुयादिह वानर:।
तस्य प्राणान्तिको दण्डो नात्र कार्याविचारणा ।। ३२॥

“Capital punishment will be awarded to
the monkeys, who arrive here after fifteen
nights from now: no reconsideration should
be allowed on this point. (32)

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

भवान् ममाज्ञामधिक्रृत्य निश्चितम्।
Ba व्यवस्थां हरिपुङ्खवेश्वरो
विधाय वेश्म प्रविवेश वीर्यवान्॥ ३३ ॥
“Nay, accompanied by Angada, you
should positively approach the elderly
monkeys personally with reference to my
command.” Having made this arrangement,
the mighty Sugriva, the lord of monkey
chiefs, retired to his palace. (33)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये किष्किन्धाकाण्डे एकोनत्रिंश: सर्ग: ॥ २९ ॥

Thus ends Canto Twenty-nine in the Kiskindhakanda of the glorious Ramayana of
Valmiki, the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

७
ad
a

सर्ग:

Canto XXX

Glorifying Sri Rama as a hero, Laksmana comforts his brother who was wailing
in many ways at the thought of Sita, his agony of separation from her
having been accentuated by the sight of the autumnal full moon and the
water-lilies opening their petals during the night, His heart being
captured by the wealth of beauties of autumn, Sri Rama extols
the autumnal season and seeing Sugriva inactive even during
this season, sends Laksmana to whip the latter into activity

गृहं प्रविष्टे aia विमुक्ते गगने घनै:।
asta स्थितो wa: कामशोकाभिपीडित:॥ १॥

Sugriva having retired into his palace
and the sky being completely free from
clouds, Sri Rama, who had halted on Mount
Prasravana for the rainy nights only, felt
agonized through love for Sita and grief
caused by separation from her. (1)
शारदीं रजनीं चैव दृष्टवा ज्योत्स्नानुलेपनाम्॥ २॥
कामव्रत्तं च सुग्रीवं नष्टां च जनकात्मजाम्।
दृष्टवा कालमतीतं च मुमोह UATE ३॥

Sore afflicted to see the sky pale and
the orb of the moon free from clouds and
to perceive the autumnal night too illumined

with moonlight and also to find Sugriva
leading a life of sensuality and Sita (the
daughter of Janaka) lost for ever and to
perceive the time fixed for taking up the
search for Sita having already elapsed, Sri
Rama felt perplexed. (2-3)

स तुं संज्ञामुपागम्य मुहूर्तान्मतिमान् नृप:।
मन:स्थामपि वैदेहीं चिन्तयामास राघव:॥४॥

Regaining his balance of mind after a
while, the wise Sri Rama (a scion of Raghu),
a protector of men, for his part, thought
deeply of Sita, even though she ever existed
in his mind. (4)

दृष्टवा च विमलं aim गतविद्युद्बलाहकम्।
सारसारावसंघुष्टं विललापार्तया गिरा॥५॥
