340

unconscious, as it were, for an hour or so
and then angrily replied as follows : (4)

मृते मयि गते रामे वनं मनुजपुङ्खवे।
हन्तानार्ये ममामित्रे सकामा सुखिनी भव॥५॥

“Alas, when | have breathed my last
on Rama, a jewel among men, having left
for the woods, rejoice with your wish fulfilled,
O unworthy woman inimical to me. (5)

स्वर्गेऽपि खलु रामस्य कुशलं दैवतैरहम्।
प्रत्यादेशादभिहितं धारयिष्ये कथं बत॥६॥

“Actually inquired after the welfare of
Rama by the gods even in heaven, alas,
how shall | bear to hear the words that will
be uttered by them by way of reproach on
being told that he was banished by me? (6)

कैकेय्या: प्रियकामेन wa: प्रव्राजितो वनम्।
ae सत्यं ब्रवीम्येतत् तदसत्यं भविष्यति॥ en

“If | tell them this fact that Rama was
exiled by me to the forest, eager as | was
to oblige Kaikeyi (yourself), the other
announcement (made by me about installing
Rama as Prince Regent) will turn out to be
false. In any case, | cannot escape being
censured by the gods for falling back upon
my word. (7)
अपुत्रेण मया UA: श्रमेण महता महान्।
रामो लब्धो महातेजा: स कथं त्यज्यते मया॥ ८॥

“In the person of the highly glorious
Rama, an eminent son was procured with
great exertion by me, issueless as | was.
How can he be forsaken by me? (8)
शूरश्च कृतविद्यश्च जितक्रोध: क्षमापर:।
wa कमलपत्राक्षो मया war विवास्यते॥९॥

“How can the lotus-eyed Rama, who is
valiant and learned, has conquered anger
and is given to forgiveness—be sent into
exile by me? (9)
कथमिन्दीवरश्यामं दीर्घबाहुं महाबलम्।
अभिराममहं रामं स्थापयिष्यामि दण्डकान्॥१०॥

“How shall | send to the Dandaka forest
the long-armed Rama, who is cerulean as a

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

blue lotus, is endowed with extraordinary
might and is so lovely? (10)

सुखानामुचितस्यैव दु:खैरनुचितस्य च।

Ga नामानुपश्येयं wet रामस्य धीमत:॥११॥
“How shall | bear to see the sad plight

in the form of exile of the talented Rama,

who deserves all comforts and is unworthy

of suffering? (11)

ae दु:खमकृत्वा तु मम संक्रमणं भवेत्।
अदु:खार्हस्य रामस्य ad: सुखमवाप्नुयाम्॥१२॥
“If my demise were possible in any
way without inflicting suffering on Rama,
who is unworthy of suffering, | should derive
joy thereby. (12)
fe विप्रियेण कैकेयि frst योजयसे मम॥ १३॥
“O hard-hearted Kaikeyi of sinful resolve,
why do you place my darling Rama in an
unwelcome predicament? (13)

अकीर्तिरतुला लोके ध्रुवं परिभविष्यति।
तथा विलपतस्तस्य परिभ्रमितचेतस:॥१४॥
अस्तमभ्यागमत् सूर्यो रजनी चाभ्यवर्तत।
सा त्रियामा तदार्तस्य चन्द्रमण्डलमण्डिता॥ १५॥
Tat विलपमानस्य न व्यभासत शार्वरी।
सदैवोष्णं विनि:श्वस्य वृद्धो दशरथो FT: Vg I
विललापार्तवद् ga गगनासक्तलोचन:।
न प्रभातं त्वयेच्छामि निशे नक्षत्रभूषिते॥१७॥

“Disrepute which has no_ parallel
anywhere will surely encompass you on all
sides.” While he was wailing as aforesaid,
his mind being utterly confused, the sun sank
below the horizon and the night set in. That
night, graced as it was with the orb of the
moon, did not at that moment illumine the
heart of the distressed and wailing monarch,
hurtful* as it was by. Sighing dolefully all
through the night, the aged King Dasaratha
piteously wailed like an ailing man, his eyes
directed towards the heavens. He said:
“O night embellished with stars, | do not wish

=

* The word “Sarvari”, used in this verse as a qualification for the night, is derived from the root ज

(to hurt or destroy).
