580

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

Canto LXXVII

While Bharata is contemplating to undertake a journey to meet Sri Rama,
Satrughna blames Laksmana for failing to restrain his father and forcibly
prevent Sri Rama’s exile. In the meantime Bharata catches sight of
Manthara standing at the door decked with ornaments and points
to her as the root of all mischief. Satrughna thereupon pounces
upon the maidservant standing in the midst of her
companions and, seizing her by her locks, drags her
on the floor and reproaches Kaikeyi too. On the
latter pleading for mercy on Manthara’s behalf,

Bharata intervenes and Satrughna lets her go

अथ Wat समीहन्तं शत्रुघ्नो लक्ष्मणानुज:।
wd शोकसंतप्तमिदं वचनमब्रवीत्॥१॥
To Bharata, who was sore stricken
with grief and was _ contemplating to
undertake a journey to meet Sri Rama,
Satrughna, the younger brother of
Laksmana—spoke as follows : (1)

गतिर्य: सर्वभूतानां ga fe पुनरात्मन:।
स राम: सत्त्वसम्पन्न: frat प्रव्राजितो वनम्॥ २॥
“How strange that the same Sri Rama
who is possessed of extraordinary might
and is the support of all created beings in
distress, much more of himself and his
own, was exiled into the forest by a woman !
(2)

बलवान् वीर्यसम्पन्नो लक्ष्मणो नाम योऽप्यसौ।
fe न मोचयते we कृत्वापि पितॄनिग्रहम्॥ ३॥

“What a pity that even Laksmana, who
is full of might and rich in prowess, did not
deliver Sri Rama from distress, going the
length, even if necessary, of restraining his
father ! (3)

पूर्वमेव तु fame: wader नयानयौ।
उत्पथं य: समारूढो नार्या राजा agi गत:॥४॥
“In fact, fully considering what is just

and what is unjust, the king, who had adopted
a wrong course, having fallen into the clutches

of a woman, ought to have been restrained
even before matters came to ahead.” (4)

इति सम्भाषमाणे तु शात्रुघ्ने लक्ष्मणानुजे।
प्राग्दवारेऽभूत् तदा Hom सर्वाभरणभूषिता॥५॥
Even while Satrughna, the younger
brother of Laksmana, was speaking as
aforesaid, Manthara, the hunchbacked
maidservant of Kaikeyi, appeared at that
very moment decked with all sorts of
ornaments at the eastern door. (5)

faa चन्दनसारेण राजवस्त्राणि बिभ्रती।
विविधं विविधैस्तैस्तैर्भूषणैश्च विभूषिता॥६॥

Smeared all over with excellent sandal-
paste and wearing royal costumes she was
adorned in various ways with ornaments of
every description pertaining to all limbs. (6)

मेखलादामभिश्चित्रैरन्यैश्च वरभूषणै: |
बभासे बहुभिर्बद्धा रज्जुबद्धेव वानरी॥७॥

Adorned with lovely girdles and other
excellent ornaments worn round the waist,
she looked like a female monkey bound
with a number of strings. (7)

तां समीक्ष्य तदा द्वा:स्थो भृशं पापस्य कारिणीम्।
गृहीत्वाकरुणं कुब्जां शत्रुघ्नाय न्यवेदयत्॥८॥
Gazing on that humpback, who was

responsible for the sinful deed in the form
of banishment of Sri Rama and others,
