200

Hanuman, whose body was covered with
darts and who was now overcome with
violent anger, spun it with impetuosity. (15)

अतिवेगोऽतिवेगेन भ्रामयित्वा बलोत्कट:।
परिघं पातयामास जम्बुमालेर्महोरसि॥ १६॥

Whirling the club with extreme
velocity, full of great impetuosity as he was,
Hanuman, who was superior in strength
directed it against the broad chest of
Jambumali. (16)

तस्य चैव शिरो नास्ति न बाहू जानुनी न च।

न धनुर्न Ta नाश्वास्तत्रादृश्यन्त नेषव:॥१७॥
Neither could his head be discerned any

more nor his arms nor his knees nor his bow

nor his chariot nor the donkeys yoked to it
nor the arrows placed in his quiver. (17)

स हतस्तरसा तेन जम्बुमाली महारथ:।
uaa निहतो भूमौ चूर्णिताङ्ग sa द्रुम:॥१८॥
Struck with violence by that club,

Jambumali, who was an eminent chariot-
warrior, dropped dead on the ground like a

« VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

tree with its boughs and trunk etc., smashed.
(18)

जम्बुमालिं ued किंकरांश्च महाबलान्।
चुक्रोध रावण: श्रुत्वा क्रोधसंरक्तलोचन:॥१९॥
Ravana waxed wroth on hearing of
Jambumali as well as of the Kinkaras, who
were endowed with extraordinary might,
having been easily killed, his eyes blood-
shot through anger. (19)

a रोषसंवर्तितताम्रलोचन:
प्रहस्तपुत्रे निहते

अमात्यपुत्रानतिवीर्यविक्रमान्
समादिदेशाशु निशाचरेश्वर: tt २०॥

On Jambumali (son of Prahasta), who
was endowed with extraordinary might, having
been killed, the notorious Ravana (the lord
of ogres), whose coppery eyes began to roll
rapidly through anger, promptly commanded
the sons of his chief minister, who were
endowed with surpassing virility and
prowess, to march against Hanuman. (20)

महाबले।

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये सुन्दरकाण्डे चतुश्चत्वारिंश: सर्ग: ॥ ४४॥

Thus ends Canto Forty-four of the Sundarakanda in the glorious Ramayana of Valmiki,
the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

पञ्चचत्वारिंश: सर्ग:
Canto XLV

Having made short work of the seven sons of Ravana’s chief minister too,
Hanuman climbs up the archway again and takes up his position there

ततस्ते राक्षसेन्द्रेण चोदिता मन्तरिण: at: |
निर्ययुर्भवनात् तस्मात् aa सप्तार्चिवर्चस:॥१॥
महद्बलपरीवारा धनुष्मन्तो महाबला:।
कृतास्त्रास्त्रविदां श्रेष्ठा:: परस्परजयैषिण:॥ २॥
हेमजालपरिक्षिप्तैर्ध्वजवद्धि: पताकिभि: |
तोयदस्वननिर्घोषैर्वाजियुक्तैर्महारथै: ॥ ३॥
तप्तकाञ्चनचित्राणि चापान्यमितविक्रमा: ।
विस्फारयन्तत संहृष्टास्तडिद्वन्त इवाम्बुदा:॥४॥

Commanded by Ravana, the ruler of
ogres, the aforesaid seven sons of his chief
minister—who were splendid as fire—were
followed by a large army, armed with bows
and endowed with extraordinary might and
immeasurable prowess, and were the
foremost of those trained in the science of
arms and skilled in the use of missiles and
were eager to excel one another in fighting,
sallied forth, highly delighted, from that palace
