# YUDDHAKANDA #

enemies, | shall avenge the death of Khara,
Kumbhakarna, Prahasta and Indrajit today.
(11)

नैवान्तरिक्षं न दिशो न च द्यौर्नापि arm: |
प्रकाशत्वं गमिष्यन्ति मद्बाणजलदाव्रृता:॥१२॥
“Overcast with clouds in the shape of
my arrows, neither airspace nor the four
quarters nor again heaven, nor even the
seas will come to view. (12)

अद्य वानरमुख्यानां तानि यूथानि भागश:।
धनुषा शरजालेन वधिष्यामि afar esi
“With a succession of plumed arrows
joined with my bow | shall wipe out by turns
the well-known battalions of the foremost of
monkeys today. (13)

अद्य वानरसैन्यानि रथेन पवनौजसा।
धनु:समुद्रादुद्धूतैर्मथिष्यामि शरोर्मिभि: ।। १४॥

“Mounted on my chariot, swift as the
wind, | shall knock down the simian ranks
with waves in the shape of arrows arisen
from the ocean of my bow. (14)

व्याकोशपद्मवक्त्राणि पद्मयकेसरवर्चसाम्।

SI यूथतटाकानि गजवत् प्रमथाम्यहम्॥ १५॥
“Like an elephant | shall lay waste

today ponds in the form of battalions of the

monkeys shining like the filaments of

a lotus with their faces resembling open

lotuses. (15)

सशरैरद्य at: Wet वानरयूथपा:।
मण्डयिष्यन्ति वसुधां सनालैरिव पङ्कजै:॥ १६॥
“With their heads transfixed with arrows,
the commanders of monkey troops lying on
the battlefield will adorn the earth as with
lotuses accompanied by stalks. (16)

TI यूथप्रचण्डानां हरीणां द्रुमयोधिनाम्।
मुक्तेनैकेषुणा युद्धे भेत्स्यामि च शतं शतम्॥ १७॥

“With each one arrow discharged in
the course of the combat, | shall pierce
today full one hundred of monkeys fighting

707

with trees and the most violent of their
division. (17)
gat Wat च येषां वै येषां च तनयो za:

वधेनाद्य रिपोस्तेषां करोम्यश्रुप्रमार्जनम्॥१८॥

“Through the destruction of my adversary
today, | shall fully wipe the tears of those
whose brother has actually been killed and
whose son has been struck down. (18)

अद्य मद्बाणनिर्भिन्नै: प्रस्तीर्णैर्गतचेतनै: |
करोमि वानरैर्युद्धे यत्नावेक्ष्यतलां महीम्॥१९॥

“With the monkeys pierced with my
shafts and lying scattered on the battlefield
deprived of life, | shall carpet the earth so
fully that it would be possible to discern its
surface only with effort. (19)

अद्य काकाश्च गृध्राश्च ये च मांसाशिनोऽपरे।
सर्वांस्तांस्तर्पयिष्यामि शात्रुमांसै: शराहतै: Ul २०॥

“Whatever crows and vultures and other
carnivorous animals or birds there are, |
shall sate them all with the flesh of my
enemies killed by my arrows. (20)

कल्प्यतां मे रथ: vit क्षिप्रमानीयतां धनु:।
अनुप्रयान्तु At युद्धे येऽत्र शिष्टा निशाचरा:॥ २१॥

“Let my chariot be got ready with all
speed and let my bow be brought without
delay. Let the rangers of the night, who
have survived, this time follow me to the
battlefield.” (21)

तस्य तद्वचनं श्रुत्वा महापाश्वोऽब्रवीद् वच: |
बलाध्यक्षान् स्थितांस्तत्र बलं संत्वर्यतामिति॥ २२॥
Hearing the foregoing speech of
Ravana, Mahaparswa enjoined the troop-
commanders standing there as follows: “Let
the army be mobilized with all speed.” (22)

बलाध्यक्षास्तु संयुक्ता राक्षसांस्तान् We गृहे।
चोदयन्तर परिययुर्लङ्कां लघुपराक्रमा:॥२३॥
When enjoined as aforesaid, the
troop-commanders for their part went round
Lanka at a swift pace, urging on the well-
