724

received Maithill, those two princes,
possessed of lovely golden bows, happily

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

moved about in the great forest, like the
moon and the sun in the sky. (34)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्येऽरण्यकाण्डे चतुर्थ: सर्ग: ॥ ४॥

Thus ends Canto Four in the Aranyakanda of the glorious Ramayana of Valmiki,
the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

Canto V

Rama, Laksmana and Sita visit the hermitage of Sarabhanga, see the deities,
and are honoured by the sage. Sage Sarabhanga ascends to Brahmaloka

हत्वा तु तं भीमबलं विराधं राक्षसं वने।
ad: सीतां परिष्वज्य समाश्वास्य च वीर्यवान्॥ १॥
अब्रवीद् भ्रातरं wa लक्ष्मणं दीप्ततेजसम्।
कष्टं वनमिदं ot न च स्मो वनगोचरा:॥२॥
Killing in the forest that ogre Viradha of
terrible might and then embracing and
consoling Sita, the heroic Rama spoke to
brother Laksmana of shining lustre—“This
is a very dangerous forest, difficult of access,
and we are not accustomed to it. (1-2)

अभिगच्छामहे शौघ्रं तपोधनम्।
आश्रमं शरभङ्गस्य राघवोऽभिजगाम ह॥३॥
“We will quickly visit the ascetic
Sarabhanga.” Raghava then went towards
the hermitage of Sarabhanga. (3)
तस्य देवप्रभावस्य तपसा भावितात्मन:।
wat शरभङ्गस्य ददर्श महदद्भुतम्॥४॥

In the vicinity of the said Sarabhanga,
possessing divine power and purified with
penance, he saw a great wonder. (4)

faust वपुषा सूर्यवैश्वानरप्रभम्।
रथप्रवरमारूढमाकाशे विबुधानुगम्॥ ५ ॥
असंस्पृशन्तं वसुधां cast विबुधेश्वरम्।
सम्प्रभाभरणं देवं विरजोऽम्बरधारिणम्॥६॥
aga agi: पूज्यमानं महात्मभि:।
हरितैर्वाजिभिर्युक्तमन्तरिक्षगतं TATUM
ददर्शादूरतस्तस्य तरुणादित्यसंनिभम्।
पाण्डुराभ्रघनप्रख्यं चन्द्रमण्डलसंनिभम्॥ ८ I

अपश्यद् विमलं wat चित्रमाल्योपशोभितम्।
चामरव्यजने UR रुक्मदण्डे महाधने॥९॥
Tad वरनारीभ्यां gam च मूर्धनि।
गन्धर्वामरसिद्धाश्च बहव: परमर्षय:॥१०॥
अन्तरिक्षगतं देवं गीर्भिरग्रयाभिरैडयन्।
सह सम्भाषमाणे तु शरभङ्गेन वासवे॥११॥
He saw the lord of the gods, shining
with his body, possessing a lustre like the
sun and the fire, seated in a fine chariot in
the sky not touching the earth, followed by
gods, wearing shining ornaments and clean
garments, being worshipped by many high-
souled beings of the same type. Not far
from him, he saw a chariot in the sky drawn
by green horses, looking like the midday
sun. He saw an immaculate canopy
resembling a white cloud and possessing
the lustre of the orb of the moon and
decorated with magnificent garlands. He also
saw excellent and very precious whisks
having gold handles, held by two beautiful
women and being waved over the head.
Gandharvas, gods, Siddhas and many great
sages praised the god in the sky with
excellent verses, while Indra was conversing
with Sarabhanga. (5—11)

Gea शतक्रतुं तत्र रामो लक्ष्मणमब्रवीत्।
Wasa रथमुद्दिश्य भ्रातुर्दर्शयताद्भुतम्॥१२॥

Seeing Indra there, Rama addressed
