* ARANYAKANDA «

ये त्वया दण्डकारण्ये भक्षिता धर्मचारिण:।

तानद्य fea: संख्ये ससैन्योऽनुगमिष्यसि॥ १२॥
“Killed in battle today, you will follow

with your army those ascetics of pious

deeds who have been eaten by you in the
Dandaka forest. (12)

अद्य wat निहतं बाणै: पश्यन्तु परमर्षय:।
निरयस्थं विमानस्था ये त्वया निहता: पुरा॥१३॥
“Let those great sages who were killed
by you in the past see you from their aerial
cars killed with my arrows and rotting in
hell. (13)

प्रहरस्व यथाकामं pe act कुलाधम।
Ta ते पातयिष्यामि शिरस्तालफलं यथा॥ १४॥
“Strike as you will and do your best, O
the disgrace of your race ! | shall this very
day strike down your head like a palm fruit.”
(14)

एवमुक्तस्तु रामेण क्रुद्ध: संरक्कलोचन:।
प्रत्युवाच ततो WH प्रहसन् क्रोधमूच्छित:॥१५॥
Enraged when spoken to as aforesaid,
and laughing heartily, Knara, who was beside

himself with anger, then replied as follows
with blood-red eyes to Sri Rama: (15)

प्राकृतान् राक्षसान् SA युद्धे दशरथात्मज।
आत्मना कथमात्मानमप्रशस्यं प्रशंससि॥ ee

“Having killed ordinary ogres on the
battle-field, O son of Dasaratha, how are
you extolling yourself, though unworthy of
praise? (16)

विक्रान्ता बलवन्तो वा ये भवन्ति नरर्षभा:।
कथयन्ति न ते किंचित् तेजसा चातिगर्बिता: tt १७॥

“Those jewels among men, who are
brave or mighty, do not speak anything
about themselves, puffed up with pride of
valour. (17)

प्राकृतास्त्वकृतात्मानो लोके क्षत्रियपांसना:।
निरर्थकं विकत्थन्ते यथा wa विकत्थसे॥१८॥

“Only the vulgar, who have not subdued
the self and are a disgrace to the Ksatriyas

789

in the world, brag in vain as you do, O
Rama ! (18)

कुलं व्यपदिशन् at: समरे कोऽभिधास्यति।
मृत्युकाले तु सम्प्राप्ते स्वयमप्रस्तवे स्तवम्॥१९॥

“In the course of a battle when the
hour of death is at hand what heroic man
indeed will utter his own praise without any
occasion for it, mentioning his own race?(19)

सर्वथा तु लघुत्वं ते कत्थनेन विदर्शितम्।
सुवर्णप्रतिरूपेण तप्तेनेव कुशाग्निना॥ Ro I

“Through self-praise baseness alone
has been exhibited by you in every way, as
is done by brass (bearing the semblance of
gold) when heated in fire lighted for the
purpose of refining gold. (20)

न तु मामिह तिष्ठन्तं पश्यसि त्वं गदाधरम्।
धराधरमिवाकम्प्यं पर्वतं धातुभिश्चितम्॥२१॥
“You do not see me wielding a mace
and standing immovable like a_ principal
mountain holding the earth in balance and
enriched with minerals ! (21)
पर्याप्तोऽहं गदापाणिर्हन्तुं प्राणान् रणे तव।
त्रयाणामपि लोकानां पाशहस्त इवान्तक:॥ २२॥

“Like Yama (the god of death) standing
noose in hand, I, who hold a mace in hand,
am strong enough to take your life as also
the life of the inhabitants of all the three
worlds. (22)

कामं बह्वपि amet त्वयि वक्ष्यामि न त्वहम्।

अस्तं प्राप्नोति सविता युद्धविघ्नस्ततो भवेत्॥ २३॥
“Even though there is much to be said

about you, | shall not speak more; for the

sun is setting and interruption may be caused
thereby in the combat. (23)

चतुर्दश सहस्राणि राक्षसानां हतानि a

त्वद्विनाशात् करोम्यद्य तेषामश्रुप्रमार्जनम्॥ २४॥
“Fourteen thousand ogres stand killed

by you. By bringing about your destruction

| shall avenge their death and wipe away
the tears of their dear ones.” (24)
