508

राक्षसानीकमतिप्रचण्ड-
मालोक्य रामो भुजगेन्द्रबाहु:।
विभीषणं शस्त्रभृतां वरिष्ठ-
मुवाच सेनानुगत: पृथुश्री:॥११॥
Seeing that exceedingly furious army
of ogres, Sri Rama, whose arms resembled
the king of serpents in their tenacity and
smoothness, nay, who was followed by an
army and was endowed with abundant
splendour, spoke as follows to Vibhisana,
the foremost of the wielders of the weapons:

(11)

तद्

नानापताकाध्वजछत्रजुष्टं

प्रासासिशूलायु`
कस्येदमक्षोभ्यमभीरुजुष्टं
सैन्यं महेन्द्रोपमनागजुष्टम्॥ १२॥
“Under whose command stands this
unshakable army, furnished with pennants
and standards and canopies of every kind,
nay, armed with missiles and weapons like
darts, swords and spikes, made up of intrepid
soldiers and elephants resembling the
Mahendra mountain in size?” (12)
ततस्तु रामस्य निशम्य वाक्यं
विभीषण: `क्रसमानवीर्य: |
शशंस रामस्य बलप्रवेकं
महात्मनां राक्षसपुंगवानाम्॥ १३॥
Hearing the question of Sri Rama,
Vibhisana, the equal of Indra in valour,
pointed out to Sri Rama the superior strength

of the foremost of ogres, who were endowed
with extraordinary firmness: (13)

योऽसौ गजस्कन्धगतो महात्मा
नवोदितार्कोपमताम्रवक्त्र: ।
संकम्पयन्नागशिरोऽभ्युषैति
meat त्वेनमवेहि राजन्॥१४॥
“Know for certain that gigantic ogre, to
be none else than Akampana* whose

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA +

coppery countenance resembles the newly
risen sun in splendour and who comes
mounted on the back of an elephant, and is
causing by his weight the head of the elephant
to sway, O prince! (14)

योऽसौ रथस्थो मृगराजकेतु-
र्धुन्वन् धनु: शक्रधनु:प्रकाशम्।
भात्युग्रविव्रत्तदंष्टु:

स इन्द्रजिन्नाम वरप्रधान: ॥ १५ ॥

“That celebrated ogre—who is mounted
on a chariot, is distinguished by a standard
bearing the ensign of a lion (the king of
beasts) and is brandishing his bow, splendid
as the bow of Indra (the ruler of gods) who
with his exposed fearful teeth, looks like an
elephant, and has become pre-eminent by
virtue of boons (conferred on him by
Brahma)—is Indrajit by name. (15)

करीव

यश्चैष विन्ध्यास्तमहेन्द्रकल्पो
धन्वी रथस्थोऽतिरथोऽतिवीर:।
रि . .
नाम्नातिकायोऽतिविव्रद्धकाय: ॥ १६॥
“Again, the yonder archer, who

resembles the Vindhya hill, the western
mountain (behind which the sun is supposed
to withdraw at sunset) and the Mahendra
mountain in size, is mounted on a chariot,
is a superior car-warrior and is a great
champion, who is stretching his bow,
unequalled in size, and is distinguished by a
huge body, is Atikaya by name. (16)
योऽसौ नवार्कोदितताम्रचक्षु-
Weel च्ण्टानिनदप्रणादम्।
Tt wt गर्जति a महात्मा
महोदरो AA स एष वीर:॥१७॥
The yonder well-known hero, whose

eyes are coppery like the newly risen
sun, and who, riding an elephant whose

* This Akampana as also Nikumbha mentioned in verse 21 are evidenty different from their
namesakes: killed by Hanuman and Nila respectively (vide verse 31 of Canto LVI and verse 31 of

canto XLIII above.
