416

Addressing all the aforesaid ministers
present there and causing the entire council-
chamber to resound, Ravana, the cruel ruler
of ogres and the scourge of the entire world,
who was endowed with extraordinary might,
spoke as follows, reproaching none: “That
which you have said about Rama’s crossing
the yonder sea, his prowess, might and
virility has been heard by me. Nay, | know
you too—who on coming to know of Rama’s
prowess, stand mute, looking at one
another—to be of unfailing prowess on the
field of battle.” (3—5)

ततस्तु सुमहाप्राज्ञो माल्यवान् ATA राक्षस:।
रावणस्य वच: seat इति मातामहोऽब्रवीत्॥ &
Hearing the speech of Ravana, an
ogre Malyavan by name, his maternal
grandfather, for his part, who was
exceptionally sagacious, then submitted as
follows: (6)

विद्यास्वभिविनीतो यो राजा राजन् नयानुग:।
a शास्ति चिरमैश्वर्यमरींश्च कुरुते वशे॥७॥

“That monarch, O king, who is well-
versed in the fourteen sciences and follows
the path of prudence, enjoys sovereignty
for a long time and brings his enemies
under subjection. (7)

raat वर्धनं कुर्वन्महदैश्वर्यमश्नुते॥८॥

“Concluding peace or contending with
his enemies as occasion demands, and
strengthening his own party, a ruler enjoys
great power. (8)

ह्रीयमानेन कर्तव्यो wat संधि: समेन al
न शत्रुमवमन्येत ज्यायान् कुर्वीत विग्रहम्॥९॥

“Peace should be concluded by a ruler
who is losing strength as well as by him
who is equally matched in strength with his
enemy. He should in no case under-
rate his enemy and should wage war

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA +

against him if he is superior in strength to
his enemy. (9)
waa tad संधि: we रामेण रावण।

यदर्थमभियुक्तोऽसि सीता तस्मै प्रदीयताम्॥१०॥

“Therefore, O Ravana, alliance with
Rama finds favour with me. Let Sita, for
whose sake you have been attacked by
him, be restored to him. (10)

तस्य देवर्षय: wa गन्धर्वाश्च जयैषिण:।
विरोधं मा गमस्तेन संधिस्ते तेन रोचताम्॥११॥

“Celestial sages as well as Gandharvas
(heavenly musicians) all wish him victory.
Therefore, do not antagonize him; let an
alliance with him find favour with you.

(11)

असृजद् भगवान् पक्षौ द्वावेव fe frase:
सुराणामसुराणां च धर्माधर्मौ तदाश्रयौ॥१२॥
“Indeed, the glorious Brahma, the

grandfather of the universe, which owes its
existence to his mind-born sons, the ten
Prajapatis, evolved only two orders of
creation, the celestial order and the devilish
order. They take their stand on virtue and
vice respectively. (12)

धर्मो fe श्रूयते Ua अमराणां महात्मनाम्।
अधर्मो रक्षसां पक्षो ह्यसुराणां च राक्षस॥१३॥
‘Virtue is actually known to be the
sheet-anchor of the high-souled immortals;
while unrighteousness indeed is the sheet-
anchor of ogres as well as of demons,
O ogre! (13)
धर्मो वै ग्रसतेऽधर्मं यदा कृतमभूद युगम्।
seat wad at यदा तिष्य: प्रवर्तते॥१४॥
“When Satya Yuga prevails, virtue
actually eclipses evil. When, on the other
hand, the Kali age prevails, evil swallows
up virtue. (14)
तत्त्वया चरतालोकान् धर्मोऽपि निहतो महान्।
अधर्म: प्रगृहीतश्च तेनास्मद् बलिन: परे॥१५॥
