* ARANYAKANDA «

आयसै: शङ्कुभिस्तीक्ष्णै: कीर्णं परवसोक्षितम्।
वज्राशनिसमस्पर्शं परगोपुरदारणम्॥ ११॥

Seeing his army being wiped out, the
mighty-armed Dusana urged five thousand
ogres of terrible impetuosity, who were hard
to approach and never turned their back on
the battlefield, to march on. They incessantly
assailed Rama on all sides with iron pikes,
scimitars, swords, showers of slabs of stone,
as also with trees and volleys of arrows. The
pious-minded Sri Rama (a scion of Raghu)
intercepted that great and deadly shower of
trees and slabs of stone with his sharp arrows.
Having intercepted that volley standing
(fearlessly) like a bull with eyes closed, Sri
Rama summoned extreme wrath for the
extermination of all the ogres. Possessed by
anger as though burning with glory, he
thereupon covered on all sides the army
including Dusana, with his arrows. Getting
angry, General Dusana, the belittler of
enemies, effectively intercepted the celebrated
Sri Rama (a scion of Raghu) with his arrows
that vied with thunderbolts. Extremely
enraged, the heroic Sri Rama then split his
mighty bow with a razor-like arrow and with
four other arrows pierced the four horses of
his chariot. Nay, having killed the horses with
his sharp arrows, he severed the head of
Dusana’s charioteer with an arrow having a
crescent-shaped head and with three more
arrows pierced that ogre in the chest. With
his bow broken, as well as horses and
charioteer killed, Dusana, who was now left
without a chariot, seized an iron-capped club
looking like a mountain-peak, which was
plated with belts of gold, studded with sharp
iron pikes and soaked with the fat of enemies,
which was hard to the touch like a thunderbolt
and caused the hair to stand on its end, and
which was capable of crushing the celestial
army and smashing the gates of the enemies’
citadels. (1—11)

दूषणोऽभ्यपतद् WH क्रूरकर्मा निशाचर:॥१२॥

781

Tightly grasping that club, which
appeared like a large serpent, Dusana, an
ogre of cruel deeds, rushed at Sri Rama on
the field of battle. (12)

तस्याभिपतमानस्य दूषणस्य च Ta: |
द्वाभ्यां शराभ्यां चिच्छेद सहस्ताभरणौ भुजौ।। १३॥
While Dusana was darting at him, Sri
Rama (a scion of Raghu) lopped off with a
pair of arrows both his arms with ornaments
on the hands. (13)
भ्रष्टस्तस्य महाकाय: पपात रणमूर्धनि।
परिघश्छिन्नहस्तस्य शक्रध्वज इवाग्रत:॥१४॥
Loosed from his grasp, the colossal
club of DUsana, whose arms had been
severed (from his body), dropped in the van
of the fight like a banner raised in honour of
Indra. (14)
कराभ्यां च विकोर्णाभ्यां पपात भुवि दूषण: |
विषाणाभ्यां विशीर्णाभ्यां मनस्वीव महागज: ॥ १५ ॥
Alongwith his severed arms Dusana
fell on the ground like a proud lordly elephant
with up-rooted tusks. (15)
दृष्टवा तं पतितं भूमौ दूषणं निहतं रणे।
साधु साध्विति काकुत्स्थं सर्वभूतान्यपूजयन्॥ १६॥
Seeing the celebrated Dusana killed in
battle and fallen on the ground, all beings
present there acclaimed Sri Rama (a scion
of Kakutstha) saying “Well-done ! Bravo !”
(16)
एतस्मिन्नन्तरे क्रुद्धास्त्रय: सेनाग्रयायिन:।
संहत्याभ्यद्रवन् रामं मृत्युपाशावपाशिता:॥१७॥
महाकपाल: स्थूलाक्ष: प्रमाथी च महाबल:।
महाकपालो विपुलं शूलमुद्यम्य राक्षस:॥१८॥
स्थूलाक्ष: पट्टिशं गृह्य प्रमाथी च परश्वधम्।
दृष्टवैवापततस्तांस्तु राघव: सायकै: PTA: ues
तीक्ष्णाग्रै:; प्रतिजग्राह सम्प्राप्तानतिथीनिव।
महाकपालस्य शिरश्चिच्छेद रघुनन्दन:॥२०॥
असंख्येयैस्तु बाणौघै: प्रममाथ प्रमाथिनम्।
स्थूलाक्षस्याक्षिणी स्थूले पूरयामास ATA: Ut २१॥

In the meanwhile, three generals (who
