662

दक्षिणाग्रेषु दर्भेषु सा दर्दश महीतले।
पित्तुरिङ्गुदिपिण्यक्क॰ न्यस्तमायतलोचना ॥ ८ ॥

The large-eyed Kausalya presently
saw the crushed pulp of Ingudi fruits placed
by Sri Rama on blades of Kuga grass
spread on the earth’s surface with their
ends pointing to the south as an offering
intended for the gratification of his deceased
father. (8)

तं भूमौ पितुरार्तेन न्यस्तं रामेण diet सा।
उवाच eat कौसल्या wal दशरथस्तिय:॥ ९॥

Observing the said pulp placed on the
ground by the afflicted Sri Rama for the
gratification of his deceased father, the
aforesaid Queen Kausalya spoke as
follows to all the other consorts of King
DaSaratha : (9)

इदमिक्ष्वाकुनाथस्य राघवस्य महात्मन:।
राघवेण पितुर्दत्तं पश्यतैतद् यथाविधि॥१०॥

“Behold here this offering made in
accordance with the scriptural ordinance by
Rama, a scion of Raghu, for the gratification
of his high-souled father, the late King
DaSaratha, also a scion of Raghu, the lord
of the Ikswakus. (10)

wma देवसमानस्य पार्थिवस्य महात्मन:।
नैतदौपयिकं A भुक्तभोगस्य भोजनम्॥११॥
“| do not consider this food (viz., the
pulp of the Ingudi-fruit) to be fit for the
consumption of that high-souled monarch,
who vied with gods and had enjoyed all the
luxuries of life. (11)

चतुरन्तां महीं भुक्त्वा महेन्द्रसदृशो भुवि।
कथमिङ्गुदिपिण्याकं स भुङ्के वसुधाधिप: ॥१२॥
“Having ruled over the globe bounded
by the four oceans, how will the emperor,
who was a compeer on earth of the great
Indra, be able to partake of the crushed
pulp of Ingudi fruits? (12)
अतो दु:खतरं लोके न किंचित् प्रतिभाति मे।
wa राम: पितुर्दद्यादिङ्गुदीक्षोदमृद्धिमान्॥१३॥

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

“Nothing in the world appears more
painful to me than the occasion when Rama,
who is full of riches of every description,
should feel constrained to offer the crushed
pulp of Ingudi fruits to the spirit of his
deceased father. (13)
रामेणेङ्गुदिपिण्याकं पितुर्दत्तं समीक्ष्य मे।
कथं दु:खेन हृदयं न स्फोटति Bee evil

“Why does my heart not get split into a
thousand fragments through agony perceiving
the crushed pulp of Ingudi fruits offered by
Rama to the spirit of his deceased father?”

(14)
श्रुतिस्तु खल्वियं सत्या लौकिकी प्रतिभाति मे।

यदन्न: पुरुषो भवति तदन्नास्तस्य देवता:॥ १५॥

“The popular saying that the deities of
a man partake of the same food on which a
man subsists, appears undoubtedly true to
us.” (15)
`एवमार्तां सपत्न्यस्ता जग्मुराश्वास्य at तदा।
ददरृशुश्चाश्रमे रामं स्वर्गच्युतमिवामरम्॥१६॥

Comforting the afflicted Kausalya in
the foregoing words on that occassion, her
aforesaid co-wives departed with Kausalya
and beheld Sri Rama seated in his hermitage
like an immortal fallen from heaven. (16)

तं भोगै: सम्परित्यक्तं we सम्प्रेक्ष्य मातर:।
आर्ता मुमुचुरश्रूणि सस्वरं शोककर्शिता:॥१७॥
Distressed to observe the celebrated
Sri Rama shorn of all luxuries, his mothers
wept loudly, emaciated as they were through
grief. (17)
तासां राम: समुत्थाय जग्राह चरणाम्बुजान्।
मातॄ॰णग् मनुजव्याघ्र: सर्वासां क्खि;।।१८।।
Duly rising from his seat, Sri Rama, a
veritable tiger among men, who was true to
his promise, clasped the lotus-like feet of all
his aforesaid mothers. (18)

ता: पाणिभि: qaeiggiedtct: शुभे:।

प्रममार्जू रज: पृष्ठाद् रामस्यायतलोचना:॥१९॥

With their lovely hands, which were
