444

“To practise charity, to consecrate
oneself for sacrificial performances and to
drop one’s body on the field of battle alone—
these indeed constitute the conduct
appropriate to this race of the Raghus for all
time.” (7)
लक्ष्मणं त्वेवमुक्त्वासौ संसिद्धं प्रियराघवम्।
सुमित्रा wes गच्छेति पुन: पुनरुवाच तम्॥८॥

“Having exhorted Laksmana_ as
aforesaid, the said Sumitra repeatedly said
to the celebrated Sri Rama, a scion of
Raghu, who was loved by all and was bent
on leaving for the forest, “Fare forth! Fare
forth !! May all be well with you.” (8)
wa दशरथं fats at विद्धि जनकात्मजाम्।
अयोध्यामटवीं विद्धि गच्छ तात यथासुखम्॥ ९॥

She said to Laksmana again, “Know
Rama to be DaSaratha as your father, look
upon Sita (the daughter of Janaka) as myself
(your mother) and esteem the forest as
Ayodhya (your home) and depart, dear son,
happily.” (9)

ad: सुमन्त्र: काकुत्स्थं प्राञ्जलिर्वाक्यमब्रवीत्।
विनीतो विनयज्ञश्च मातलिर्वासवं यथा॥१०॥

Then Sumantra, who was meek and
knew how to behave politely, submitted with
folded hands as follows to Sri Rama (a
scion of Kakutstha) even as Matali (the
charioteer of Indra) would to Indra (the ruler
of gods) : (10)

रथमारोह wk ते राजपुत्र महायश:।

fag cat प्रापयिष्यामि यत्र at राम aera eeu
“Mount the chariot, O highly illustrious

prince; may all be well with you. | shall

speedily take you to whatever place you

will direct me to go. (11)

aden fe वर्षाणि वस्तव्यानि at त्वया।
तान्युपक्रमितव्यानि यानि देव्या प्रचोदित:॥ १२॥

“Indeed those fourteen years that have
to be spent by you in the forest as directed
by the queen (Kaikeyl) are to be considered
as having commenced this very day.” (12)

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

तं रथं सूर्यसंकाशं सीता हृष्टेन चेतसा।
आरुरोह वरारोहा कृत्वालंकारमात्मन:॥ १३॥
Having decked herself with the articles
of wearing apparel and ornaments bestowed
on her by her father-in-law, Sita, who had
comely limbs, mounted with a delighted mind
that chariot, which was resplendent like the
sun. (13)
वनवासं fe संख्याय वासांस्याभरणानि च।
भर्तारमनुगच्छन्त्यै सीतायै श्वशुरो ददौ॥१४॥
तथैवायुधजातानि भ्रातृभ्यां कवचानि च।
रथोपस्थे प्रविन्यस्य सचर्म कठिनं च यत्॥१५॥
अथो ज्वलनसंकाशं चामीकरविभूषितम्।
तमारुरुहतुस्तूर्णं भ्रातरौ रामलक्ष्मणौ॥१६॥

Having carefully arranged in the hinder
part of the chariot the raiments and jewels
which her father-in-law, duly taking into
account the period of her exile in the forest,
had bestowed on Sita, while she was ready
to accompany her husband to the forest,
and even so the sets of weapons and the
pieces of armour he had given to the two
brothers, as well as the basket, covered
with leather, and the spade, the two brothers,
Sri Rama and Laksmana, then quickly
mounted the aforesaid chariot, which was
decked in gold and shone like fire.

(14—16)

सीतातृतीयानारूढान् Gea रथमचोदयत्।
Waa: सम्मतानश्वान् वायुवेगसमाञ्जवे॥ १७॥
Seeing the three exiles, of whom Sita
constituted the third, mounted on the chariot,
Sumantra drove the horses, which were
thought highly of and wied in speed with the
velocity of the wind. (17)

प्रयाते तु महारण्यं चिररात्राय wed
aya नगरे tet बलमूरच्छा जनस्य Ail

Sri Rama, a scion of Raghu, having
departed for the great forest of Dandaka for
a long term, unconsciousness, however,
prevailed among the people in the city; there
