* ARANYAKANDA «

Forma रामेण शरैरजिह्मगै-
र्हताञ्जनस्थानगतान् निशाचरान्।

Gt च gee निहतं च दूषणं
त्वमद्य कृत्यं प्रतिपत्तुमर्हसि॥ २६॥

805

“Hearing of the night-stalkers stationed
in Janasthana having been killed with his
straight-going arrows, and knowing Khara
as well as Dusana slain by Rama, you
ought to realize your duty today.” (26)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्येऽरण्यकाण्डे चतुस्तिंश: AWA: ॥ ३४॥

Thus ends Canto Thirty-four in the Aranyakanda of the glorious Ramayana of Valmiki,
the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

Canto XXXV
Ravana calls on Marica once more

तत: शूर्पणखावाक्यं तच्छुत्वा रोमहर्षणम्।
सचिवानभ्यनुज्ञाय are बुद्ध्वा जगाम ह॥१॥

Hearing that nerve-racking report of
Surpanakha, nay, determining his duty and
granting leave to disperse to his ministers,
Ravana forthwith departed from his palace :
so it is said. (1)

तत् कार्यमनुगम्यान्तर्यथावदुपलभ्य च।
दोषाणां च गुणानां च सम्प्रधार्य बलाबलम्॥ २॥
sta कर्तव्यमित्येव pear निश्चयमात्मन:।
स्थिरबुद्धिस्ततो Tat यानशालां जगाम ह॥३॥
Pursuing that object in mind and viewing
it properly, nay, fully weighing the merits
and demerits of the question and ascertaining
his own strength and weakness and finally
making up his mind to launch on that
undertaking of abducting Sita positively,
Ravana with a resolute mind next proceeded
to his charming carriage-shed : so the tradition
goes. (2-3)
यानशालां ततो गत्वा West राक्षसाधिप:।
at संचोदयामास रथ: संयुज्यतामिति॥४॥
Covertly reaching the carriage-shed,
Ravana, the ruler of ogres, commanded the

charioteer in the following words: “Let my
chariot be got ready.” (4)

way: क्षणेनैव सारथिर्लघुविक्रम:।
रथं संयोजयामास तस्याभिमतमुत्तमम्॥५॥

Commanded thus, the charioteer, who
took quick strides, got fully ready in a trice
an excellent chariot liked by him. (5)
कामगं रथमास्थाय काञ्चनं रत्नभूषितम्।
पिशाचवदनैर्युक्तं खरै: कनकभूषणै:॥६॥
मेघप्रतिमनादेन स तेन धनदानुज:।
राक्षसाधिपति: श्रीमान् ययौ नदनदीपतिम्॥ ७॥

Mounting the golden car decked with
jewels, which could go wherever one liked
and was drawn by mules with heads
resembling those of fiends, adorned with
ornaments of gold and the glorious Ravana,
a younger (half)-brother of Kubera, the lord
of riches, and the suzerain lord of ogres,
drove in that chariot, which made a sound
like thunder towards the ocean (the lord of

rivers and streams). (6-7)
स श्वेतवालव्यजन: श्वेतच्छत्रो दशानन:।
स्निग्धवैदूर्यसंकाशस्तप्तकाञ्चनभूषण: ॥ ८॥

दशग्रीवो विंशतिभुजो दर्शनीयपरिच्छ्द:।
त्रिदशारिर्मुनीन्द्रघ्नो दशशीर्ष इवाद्रिराट्॥९॥
कामगं रथमास्थाय शुशुभे राक्षसाधिप:।
विद्युन्मण्डलवान् मेघ: सबलाक इवाम्बरे॥ Qo tl
Having taken his seat in that chariot,
which could go wherever one liked, the ten-
headed Ravana, the suzerain ruler of ogres,
the avowed enemy of gods and the slayer
