# YUDDHAKANDA +

Indeed he is as good an architect as his
father.” (46)

`एवमुक्त्वोदधिर्नष्ट समुत्थाय नलस्तत:।
अब्रवीद् वानरश्रेष्ठो AT WA महाबलम्॥४७॥
Having spoken ३ aforesaid, the
sea-god went out of sight. Springing on his
feet, Nala, the foremost of the monkeys,
thereupon submitted as follows to Sri Rama,
who was endowed with extraordinary
might: (47)
3 Od करिष्यामि विस्तीर्णे मकरालये।
पितु: सामर्थ्यमासाद्य तत्त्वमाह महोदधि:॥ ४८ Il
“Acquiring the skill of my father by
virtue of the boon granted by him, | shall
build a bridge over the extensive deep (the

abode of alligators). Ocean has spoken the
bare truth. (48)

दण्ड एव वरो लोके पुरुषस्येति मे ata: |
fare क्षमामकृतज्ञेषु सान्त्वं दानमथापि वा॥४९॥

“Punishment is the best course open
to a man in the world in relation to the
ungrateful; such is my mind. A plague on
forbearance and conciliation and even so
on gift in relation to such people! (49)

aa fe arnt sia: सेतुकर्मदिदूक्षया।
ददौ दण्डभयाद् गाधं राघवाय महोदधि:॥ ५०॥

“This formidable Ocean, excavated and
expanded by Sagara (a forbear of yours),
has actually allowed a passage to Sri Rama
(yourself) in fear of punishment rather than
from gratitude, actuated as he was by a
desire to witness the construction of a bridge
across it. (50)

मम मातुर्वरो adit wer विश्वकर्मणा।

मया तु Age: पुत्रस्तव देवि भविष्यति॥ ५१॥
“A boon was granted by ViSwakarma

to my mother on Mount Mandara; ‘A son

actually like me will be born to you (through
me), O godlike lady!’ (51)

369

औरसस्तस्य पुत्रोऽहं सदृशो विश्वकर्मणा।
स्मारितोऽस्म्यहमेतेन तत्त्वमाह महोदधि:।
न चाप्यहमनुक्तो A: प्रब्रूयामात्मनो गुणान्॥५२॥

“| am ViSwakarma’s son, sprung from
his own loins, and am just like him in
workmanship. | have been put in mind of all
this by Ocean; he has spoken the bare
truth. And | could not speak at length of
my virtues unless questioned by someone.

(52)
समर्थश्चाप्यहं Ad ad a वरुणालये।
तस्मादद्यैव बध्नन्तु Ad वानरपुङ्खवा:॥५३॥

“Nay, | am also undoubtedly capable
of constructing a bridge over the sea (lit.,
the abode of Varuna, the god of water).
Therefore, let the bulls among the monkeys
collect the material for the bridge this very
day.” (53)
ततो विसृष्टा रामेण सर्वतो हरिपुङ्खवा:।
उत्पेततुर्महारण्यं हृष्टा: शतसहस्रश:॥५४॥

Directed by Sri Rama, the leaders of
monkeys, full of joy, thereupon sprang into

the extensive forest in hundreds of
thousands on every side. (54)

ते नगान् नगसंकाशा: शाखामृगगणार्षभा:।
aug: पादपांस्तत्र प्रचकर्षुश्च सागरम्॥५५॥
The aforesaid leaders of simian hordes,
who resembled mountains in size, tore up
rocks and trees in that forest and dragged

them away to the sea. (55)
a सालैश्चाश्वकर्णैश्च धवैर्वंशैश्च वानरा:।
कुटजैरर्जुनैस्तालैस्तिलकैस्तिनिशैरपि W&M

बिल्वकै: सप्तपर्णैश्च कर्णिकारैश्च पुष्पितै:।
चूतैश्चाशोकवृक्षैश्च सागरं समपूरयन्॥५७॥

Those monkeys filled the sea with sal
and Aswakarna, as well as with Dhava and
bamboo, Kutaja, Arjuna, Palmyra, Tilaka as
also TiniSa, Bilva and Saptaparna, as well
as with Karnikara trees in blossom as also
with mango and Asoka trees. (56-57)
