274

« VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

पञ्चसप्ततितम: सर्ग:
Canto LXXV
Turning a deaf ear to DaSaratha’s prayer, Parasurama relates the
history of the bows belonging to Lords Siva and Visnu

and challenges Sri Rama to string the bow of
Lord Visnu in his possession

TH दाशरथे de dt a श्रूयतेऽद्भुतम्।
धनुषो Yet wa निखिलेन मया श्रुतम्॥१॥

“O Rama, O valiant son of Dasaratha,
your prowess is reported to be marvellous
and your feat in the shape of breaking the
bow of Lord Siva has also been heard of by
me in all its details. (1)
तदद्भुतमचिन्त्यं च भेदनं धनुषस्तथा।
तच्छुत्वाहमनुप्राप्तो धनुर्गृह्यापं शुभम्॥२॥

“Breaking the bow in the way you have
done is indeed marvellous and cannot even
be conceived by others. Hearing of it, |
have arrived here, taking another sacred
bow. (2)
पूरयस्व शरेणैव wat दर्शयस्व च॥३॥

“Therefore, fitting this great and terrible-
looking bow, received by me from Jamadagni,
my father, with an arrow, simply draw it to
its full length and demonstrate your might
thereby. (3)

Wee ते बलं Gea धनुषोऽप्यस्य पूरणे।
wears प्रदास्यामि वीर्यश्लाघ्यमहं तव॥४॥

“Having witnessed that strength of yours
in drawing this bow too at full length, | shall
offer you a single combat which will bring
credit to your valour.” (4)

तस्य de वचनं श्रुत्वा राजा दशरथस्तदा।

विषण्णवदनो दीन: प्राञ्ञलिर्वाक्यमब्रवीत्॥५॥
Hearing that challenge of ParaSurama,

King DaSaratha felt miserable and, pulling a

long face, forthwith spoke with folded hands
as follows : (5)

क्षत्ररोषात् प्रशान्तस्त्वं ब्राह्मणश्च महातपा:।
बालानां मम पुत्राणामभयं दातुमर्हसि॥६॥
“Having given up your anger towards
the Ksatriyas, you have since grown very
calm and, being a Brahmana and a great
ascetic too, you ought to give assurance of
safety to my juvenile sons. (6)

भार्गवाणां Het जात: स्वाध्यायव्रतशालिनाम्।
सहस्राक्षे प्रतिज्ञाय wet प्रक्षिप्तवानसि॥७॥

“Born in the line of the Bhargavas (the
scions of Bhrgu), distinguished for their study
of the Vedas and sacred vows, you have
relinquished the arms, giving your word of
honour in this behalf to Indra. (7)

स त्वं धर्मपरो भूत्वा कश्यपाय वसुंधराम्।

दत्त्वा वरनमुपागम्य महेन्द्रकृतकेतन:॥८॥
“As such you set your mind on piety

and gave away the dominion of the earth to

Sage Kasyapa and, retiring to the woods,
took up your abode on Mount Mahenara. (8)

मम सर्वविनाशाय सम्प्राप्तस्त्वं महामुने।
न चैकस्मिन् हते रामे wd जीवामहे aa ei

“For my total annihilation, however, you
have appeared here, O great sage ! And we
shall all cease to live even if Rama alone is
killed by you.” (9)

ब्रुवत्येवं दशरथे जामदग्न्य: प्रतापवान्।
SIGs तु तद्वाक्यं राममेवाभ्यभाषत॥ १०॥
Turning a deaf ear to his entreaty,
however, even though DaSaratha prayed as
aforesaid, the glorious Parasurama (son of
Jamadagni) continued to address Sri Rama
alone and said : (10)
