* ARANYAKANDA «

as follows to Sri Rama (a scion of Raghu) :
“Look at me helplessly fallen into the clutches
of the ogre. (38)

मयैकेन तु निर्युक्त: परिमुच्यस्व wea
मां fe भूतबलिं दत्त्वा पलायस्व यथासुखम्॥ ३९॥
“Having offered sacrifice to this ogre
with me alone (as a victim), manage to
escape from the clutches of this monster,
O scion of Raghu ! Offering me as a sacrifice
to the devil in the form of this ogre run away
at your convenience. (39)

अधिगन्तासि वैदेहीमचिरेणेति मे मति:।
प्रतिलभ्य च काकुत्स्थ पितृपैतामहीं महीम्॥४०॥
wa At राम राज्यस्थ: स्मर्तुमर्हसि सर्वदा।
लक्ष्मणेनैवमुक्तस्तु राम: सौमित्रिमब्रवीत्॥४१॥

“You will recover Sita (a princess of
the Videha territory) before long: such is my
conviction. Nay, getting back the rulership
of the earth inherited from your forefathers,
and installed on the throne, O Rama, you
should always remember me there.” Spoken
to as aforesaid by Laksmana, Sri Rama for
his part replied to him as follows: (40-41)
मा स्म are gar वीर नहि त्वादृग् विषीदति।
एतस्मिन्नन्तरे क्रूरो भ्रातरौ रामलक्ष्मणौ॥४२॥
तावुवाच महाबाहु: कबन्धो दानवोत्तम:।

कौ युवां वृषभस्कन्धौ महाखड्गधनुर्धरौ॥४३॥
at देशमिमं weal दैवेन मम चाक्षुषौ।
aad कार्यमिह वां किमर्थं चागतौ युवाम्॥४४॥

“Pray, do not give way to fear, O
valiant Laksmana! A man like you would
never feel dejected.” In the meanwhile the
cruel and mighty-armed Kabandha, the
foremost of demons, spoke as follows to
the aforesaid two brothers, Sri Rama and
Laksmana: “Who are you with shoulders
like those of a bull and wielding large swords
and bows? Having reached this dreadful
region, you have fallen within the range of
my sight by will of Providence. Reveal the
purpose of your visit here and declare what
for you have come here. (42—44)

911

इमं देशमनुप्राप्तौ क्षुधार्तस्येह तिष्ठत:।
सबाणचापखड्गौ च तीक्ष्णशृङ्गाविवर्षभौ।॥ ४५ ॥
मां तूर्णमनुसम्प्राप्तौ दुर्लभं जीवितं fe वाम्।
तस्य तद् वचनं श्रुत्वा कबन्धस्य दुरात्मन:॥ ४६ I
sara लक्ष्मणं रामो मुखेन परिशुष्यता।
PML Het प्राप्य दारुणं सत्यविक्रम॥ vy il
व्यसनं जीवितान्ताय प्राप्तमप्राप्य at प्रियाम्।
कालस्य सुमहद् वीर्यं सर्वभूतेषु लक्ष्मण॥४८॥
“You have reached this region while |
stood oppressed with hunger. Since, armed
with bows, swords and arrows and as such
appearing like a pair of bulls with pointed
horns, you have speedily approached me,
your life is now difficult to get back (now
that it is my hands).” Hearing the aforesaid
challenge of that evil-minded Kabandha, Sri
Rama spoke as follows to Laksmana, whose
mouth was getting parched: “A calamity
which threatens to terminate our life has
befallen us without our being able to recover
the aforesaid darling, while we had already
suffered a terrible disaster in the shape of
the loss of Sita, which was more painful
than the one we had already undergone in
the shape of loss of sovereignty and exile
to the forest, O Laksmana of unfailing
prowess! Very great is the power of the
Time-Spirit over all living beings, O
Laksmana ! (45—48)
त्वां च मां च नरव्याघ्र व्यसनै: पश्य मोहितौ ।
नहि भारोऽस्ति दैवस्य सर्वभूतेषु लक्ष्मण॥४९॥
“Look at yourself and me too, O tiger
among men, distracted by misfortunes. Surely
the control of Destiny on all living beings, O
Laksmana, does not constitute a burden
to it. (49)
MIs बलवन्तश्च कृतास्त्राश्च रणाजिरे।
कालाभिपन्ना: सीदन्ति यथा वालुकसेतव:॥ ५० ॥
“Caught in the grip of the Time-Spirit,
even valiant and mighty souls, nay, even

those who have practised archery on the
field of battle perish like dams of sand.” (50)
