92

that unscarred face of the aforesaid noble
lady, with a prominent nose, white teeth,
bright smiles and eyes resembling lotus-
petals and vying in splendour with a cloudless
moon, the lord of stars? (68)

क्षुद्रेण हीनेन नृशंसमूर्तिना
सुदारुणालंकृतवेषधारिणा ।

« VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

बलाभिभूता ह्यबला तपस्विनी
wma नु मे दृष्टिपथेऽद्य सा भवेत्॥ ६९॥

‘How on earth will that helpless and
pitiable lady, overpowered with might by the
mean and vile Ravana of noxious form, who,
though savage, assumes an ornamented form,
fall within the range of my sight today?’ (69)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये सुन्दरकाण्डे त्रयोदश: AT: ॥ 23 Il

Thus ends Canto Thirteen in the Sundarakanda of the glorious Ramayana of Valmiki,
the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

Aaa: at:
Canto XIV
Leaping down to the enclosure of the ASoka grove and watching the loveliness
of the grove from the top of the wall, Hanuman enters the grove and,
leaping from tree to tree in the course of his search for Sita, catches
sight of an Asoka tree. Espying a stream running beside it and
expecting that Sita might turn up on the bank of the stream to
say her Sandhya prayers, he takes up his position on that
ASoka tree, hiding himself behind its leafy boughs

स मुहूर्तमिव ध्यात्वा मनसा चाधिगम्य ताम्।
अवप्लुतो महातेजा: Wert तस्य AVA Il
Reflecting awhile as to how he should
reach the Asoka grove and reaching Sita
mentally, Hanuman, who was endowed with
extraordinary energy, leapt from the defence
wall of the palace on to the enclosure of the
Asoka grove. (1)

स तु संहृष्टसर्वांग: प्राकारस्थो महाकपि:।
पुष्पिताग्रान् वसन्तादौ ददर्श विविधान् द्रुमान्॥ २॥
सालानशोकान् भव्यांश्च चम्पकांश्च सुपुष्पितान्।
उद्दालकान् नागवृक्षांश्चूतान् कपिमुखानपि॥ ३॥
तथाऽऽम्रवणसम्पन्नांल्लताशतसमन्वितान् ।
ज्यामुक्त इव नाराच: पुप्लुवे वृक्षवाटिकाम्॥४॥

Stationed on the said enclosure, with
all his limbs thrilled with joy at the prospect
of finding Sita in the grove, that great monkey
for his part found the various trees, viz., sal,

Asoka, Bhavya and Campaka, which were
in full blossom, as well as Uddalaka,
NagakeSara and mango trees with their fruits
crimson as the snout of a monkey—
surrounded with clumps of mango trees and
intertwined with hundreds of climbers, and
covered at the extremities with flowers, it
being the beginning of spring. Nay, like an
arrow shot from a bow-string by Sri Rama,
he leapt into the grove. (2-4)
स प्रविश्य विचित्रां at विहगैरभिनादिताम्।
Tad: काञ्चनैश्चैव पादपै: सर्वतो FALUN Il
विहगैर्मृगसङ्घेशच विचित्रां चित्रकाननाम्।
उदितादित्यसंकाशां cast हनुमान् बली॥६॥
aa नानाविधैर्वृक्षै: पुष्पोपगफलोपगै:।
कोब्रिढौर्भृङ्गराजैश्च मत्तैर्नित्यनिषेविताम्॥ ७॥
काले मृगपक्षिमदाकुलाम्।
मत्तबर्हिणसघुष्टा नानाद्बिजगणायुताम्॥ ८ A

Penetrating deep into it, the mighty
