458

आश्वासयन्ती विविधैश्च वाक्यै-
र्वाक्योपचारे कुशलानवद्या।
रामस्य तां मातरमेवमुक्त्वा
देवी सुमित्रा विरराम रामा॥ ३०॥
Having spoken to Sri Rama’s celebrated
mother as aforesaid, the charming and
faultless Queen Sumitra, who was a
pastmaster in eloquence and was busy
consoling her through various modes of
expression, became silent. (30)

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

निशम्य तल्लक्ष्मणमातृवाक्यं

रामस्य मातुर्नरदेवपत्न्या:।
सद्य: शरीरे विननाश शोक:

शरद्गतो AT इवाल्पतोय:॥ ३१॥

On hearing that speech of Sumitra,
Laksmana’s mother, the grief that had
emaciated the body of Queen Kausalya, the
mother of Sri Rama, quickly disappeared
like an autumnal cloud containing meagre
water. (31)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्येऽयोध्याकाण्डे
चतुश्चत्वारिंश: सर्ग: il ४४॥

Thus ends Canto Forty-four in the Ayodhyakanda of the glorious Ramayana of
Valmiki, the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

पञ्चचत्वारिश: सर्ग:
Canto XLV

When the citizens that followed Sri Rama in his journey to the forest
refuse to return even when pleaded by Sri Rama in many ways,
unable as they were to bear separation from him, Sri Rama, with

Sita and Laksmana, gets down from his chariot and begins to
walk. The citizens try to deflect him from his course and
persuade him to return, but in vain. At the close of
the day they all reach the bank of the Tamasa

अनुरक्ता महात्मानं we सत्यपराक्रमम्।
अनुजग्मु: Ward तं वनवासाय मानवा:॥१॥
People devoted to the high-souled Sri
Rama of unfailing prowess followed him on
his way to the forest for exile. (1)

निवर्तितेऽतीव बलात् सुहृद्धर्मेण राजनि।

Wat ते संन्यवर्तन्त रामस्यानुगता रथम्॥ २॥
अयोध्यानिलयानां हि पुरुषाणां महायशा:।
aya गुणसम्पन्न: पूर्णचन्द्र ga प्रिय:॥३॥
Even when the king was made to return
much against his will, governed as he was
by the code of conduct prescribed for friends
and relations (accompanying a departing
friend to some distance only), they would

not return on any account and continued to
follow the chariot; for Sri Rama, who enjoyed
great celebrity and was richly endowed with
excellences, had become the favourite like
the full moon of the people residing in
Ayodhya. (2-3)
स याच्यमान: काकुत्स्थस्ताभि: प्रकृतिभिस्तदा।
कुर्वाण: पितरं at वनमेवान्वपद्यत॥४॥
Even though being implored by those
devoted people to return, the said Sri Rama,
a scion of Kakutstha, pressed on to the

forest only, thereby proving his father to be
true to his word. (4)

अवेक्षमाण: «wee चक्षुषा प्रपिबन्निव।
Jara WA: सस्नेहं ता: प्रजा: स्वा: प्रजा इव॥ ५॥
