370

समूलांश्च विमूलांश्च पादपान् हरिसत्तमा:।
इन्द्रकेतूनिवोद्यम्य प्रजह्रुर्वानरास्तरून्॥ ५८ ।।
तालान् दाडिमगुल्मांश्च नारिकेलविभीतकान्।
करीरान् बकुलान् निम्बान् समाजह्रुरितस्तत:॥ ७५९ ॥

Lifting up trees, roots and all, and
even without roots, like so many flag-staffs
raised in honour of Indra (the rain-god), the
monkeys, who were the foremost of their
class, hurled them (into the sea). They
brought together from all quarters palmyra
trees and pomegranate shrubs, cocount and
Vibhitaka, Karira, Bakula and Nimba trees.

(58-59)
हस्तिमात्रान् महाकाया: पाषाणांश्च महाबला:।
पर्वतांश्च Water aa: परिवहन्ति च॥६०॥

Digging up rocks as big as elephants,
as also mountains, the colossal monkeys,
who were all endowsed with extraordinary

might, transported them to sea-coast by
means of various devices. (60)

प्रक्षिप्यमाणैरचलै:र सहसा जलमुद्भृतम्।
समुत्ससर्प चाकाशमवासर्पत् तत: पुन:॥६१॥

The water thrown up all of a sudden by
the rocks even as they were hurled into the
sea rose to the skies and then fell down
again. (61)

समुद्रं क्षोभयामासुर्निपतन्तर समन्तत:।
सूत्राण्यन्ये प्रगृह्णन्ति Mad शतयोजनम्॥६२॥
नलश्चक्रे महासेतुं मध्ये नदनदीपते:।
a तदा क्रियते सेतुर्वानरैर्घोरकर्मभि:॥ ६३॥

Hurling (as they did) rocks which fell
down on all sides, the monkeys actually
stirred up the sea. Others drew up strings
in order to keep the rocks in a straight
line. Nala, for his part, constructed the
extensive bridge, a hundred Yojanas
long, in the heart of the sea, the lord of
rivers and streams. The aforesaid bridge
was at that time being built in co-operation
with other monkeys of formidable exploits.

(62-63)

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA +

दण्डानन्ये Wed विचिन्वन्ति तथापरे।
are: शतशस्तत्र रामस्याज्ञापुर:सरै:।॥ ६४॥
पुष्पिताग्रैश्च तरुभि: Ad get वानरा:॥६५॥

Some seized hold of staffs for measuring
the length and breadth of the bridge, while
others collected the material. Parts of the
bridge over that sea were thus erected by
means of reeds and logs by monkeys
following the command of Sri Rama, nay,
looking like clouds and mountains and
numbering hundreds. Nay, the monkeys
also erected the bridge by means of trees
covered at the top of boughs with blossom.

(64-65)
पाषाणांश्च गिरिप्रख्यान्गिरीणां शिखराणि च।
gad परिधावन्तो Ta दानवसंनिभा:॥ ६६॥

Rushing hither and thither seizing blocks

of stones resembling mountains, as well as

mountain-tops, they looked much like giants
(lit., sons of Danu), (66)

शिलानां क्षिप्यमाणानां शैलानां तत्र पात्यताम्।
aya तुमुल: शब्दस्तदा तस्मिन् महोदधौ॥ ६७॥
A tumultuous sound arose from rocks

being hurled and mountains being thrown
into that extensive sea at that time. (67)

कृतानि प्रथमेनाह्ना योजनानि चतुर्दंश।
प्रहृष्टैर्गजसंकाशैस्त्वरमाणै: HASH: UES ॥

The very first day fourteen Yojanas or
one hundred and twelve miles of masonry
were set up by the monkeys, who felt
exceedingly merry and were moving with
speed, and who closely resembled
elephants. (68)

द्वितीयेन तथैवाह्ना योजनानि तु विंशति:।
कृतानि प्लवगैस्तूर्णं भीमकायैर्महाबलै: 11 ६९॥

The second day, twenty Yojanas, or
one hundred and sixty miles, and all were
likewise set up quickly by the monkeys,
who were formidable in size and endowed
with extraordinary might. (69)
