* ARANYAKANDA «

scion of Raghu, Sri Rama and Sita, together
with Laksmana, with fruits, roots, flowers
and several other forest-products. (22)

dara ame: facet wa वैश्वानरोपमा:।
न्यायव्त्ता यथान्यायं तर्पयामासुरीश्वरम्॥ 23 1

717

Similarly, other hermits, well-
accomplished, comparable with fire and
following a just tradition honoured Lord
Rama in accordance with the custom.

(23)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्येऽरण्यकाण्डे प्रथम: सर्ग: ॥ १ ॥

Thus ends Canto One in the Aranyakanda of the glorious Ramayana of Valmiki,
the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

Canto II
Viradha’s attack on Rama, Laksmana and Sita in the forest

कृतातिथ्योऽथ रामस्तु सूर्यस्योदयनं प्रति।
आमन्त्य स मुनीन् सर्वान् वनमेवान्वगाहत॥ १॥

Then, Rama after receiving the
hospitality, took leave of all the sages at
sunrise and plunged into the depths of the
forest. (1)

लक्ष्मणानुचरो रामो वनमध्यं ददर्शं ह॥३॥

Rama, with Laksmana as his follower,
saw the heart of the forest crowded with herds
of various deer, resorted to by boars and
tigers; the shrubs, trees and creepers in which
had been destroyed, the water-reservoirs in
which were not visible, in which the birds were
not singing and which was made noisy by
swarms of crickets. (2-3)

सीतया we काकुत्स्थस्तस्मिन् घोरमृगायुते।
wast गिरिशृङ्गाभं पुरुषादं महास्वनम्॥४॥
बरीभत्सं विषमं दीर्घं विकृतं घोरदर्शनम्॥५॥
वसानं at dart वसार्द्र रुधिरोक्षितम्।
त्रासनं सर्वभूतानां व्यादितास्यमिवान्तकम्॥६॥
त्रीन् सिंहांश्चतुरो व्याघ्रान् at gent पृषतान् दश।
सविषाणं वसादिग्धं गजस्य च शिरो महत्॥७॥

अवसज्यायसे शूले विनदन्तं महास्वनम्।
स रामं लक्ष्मणं चैव सीतां दृष्टवा च मैथिलीम्।
अभ्यधावत् सुसंक्रुद्ध: WA: काल इवान्तक:॥ ८ I
a कृत्वा We नादं चालयन्निव मेदिनीम्॥९॥
अङ्केनादाय वैदेहीमपक्रम्य तदान्रवीत्।
युवां जटाचीरधरौ सभार्यौ क्षीणजीवितौ॥ go i
प्रविष्टौ दण्डकारण्यं शरचापासिपाणिनौ।
कथं तापसयोर्वां च वास: प्रमदया सह॥११॥

Rama (a descendant of Kakutstha)
together with Sita saw in that forest, full of
wild animals, a dreadful man-eating ogre of
terrific voice, looking like a mountain-peak,
having deep eyes, a huge mouth, a fierce
belly, despicable, uneven, tall, abnormal,
presenting a terrible sight, wearing a tiger's
skin wet with fat and sprinkled with blood,
molesting all beings, resembling the god of
death with his mouth wide open, tying three
lions, four tigers, two wolves, ten spotted
deer and the big head of an elephant with
tusks, and wet with fat, to an iron lance, and
roaring in a terrific voice. He saw Rama,
Laksmana and also Sita, the princess of
Mithila, and attacked them with great anger
as Kala, the destroyer of people, attacks
them. He made a terrific sound as though
making the earth tremble, took the princess
