148

जनस्थानवधं श्रुत्वा निहतौ खरदूषणौ।
ततस्त्वमर्षापहृता जानकी रावणेन तु॥१०॥
agit at रामं मृगरूपेण मायया।
स मार्गमाणस्तां देवीं राम: सीतामनिन्दिताम्॥ ११॥
आससाद वने मित्रं aid नाम वानरम्।
तत: स वालिनं हत्वा WH: परपुरंजय:॥१२॥
आयच्छत् कपिराज्यं तु सुग्रीवाय महात्मने।
सुग्रीवेणाभिसंदिष्टा हरय: कामरूपिण:॥१३॥
दिक्षु सर्वासु ai देवीं विचिन्वन्त: सहस्रश:।
अहं सम्पातिवचनाच्छतयोजनमायतम्॥ १४॥
तस्या हेतोर्बिशालाक्ष्या: समुद्रं वेगवान् प्लुत: ।
यथारूपां यथावर्णां यथालक्ष्मवतीं च ताम्॥ १५॥
अश्रौषं राघवस्याहं सेयमासादिता मया।
विररामैवमुक्त्वा स art वानरपुंगव:॥१६॥
“Having put Sri Rama off the scent in
the forest through one disguised as a deer by
recourse to a conjuring trick on hearing of the
destruction of Janasthana (a part of the
Dandaka forest inhabited by ogres) as well
as of the death of his younger half-brothers,
Khara and Dusana, Sita, Janaka’s daughter,
for her part was then borne away in indignation
by Ravana. While searching for that godlike
and irreproachable lady, Sita, he found in the
forest a friend in a monkey named Sugriva.
Having made short work of Vali, Sugriva’s
elder brother, Sri Rama, capable of conquering
hostile cities, for his part thereupon bestowed
the kingship of monkeys on the high-souled
Sugriva. Commanded by Sugriva, monkeys,
capable of changing their form at will, set out
in thousands in all the four quarters, searching
for that godlike lady, Sita. Full of impetuosity
| took a leap across the sea (streching
between the island of Lanka and the mainland
and), extending to a distance of a hundred
Yojanas (or eight hundred miles) at the
instance of Sampati, the king of birds and the

« VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

elder brother of Jatayu, for the sake of that
large-eyed lady. She has been found by me
here endowed with a comeliness, complexion
and bodily marks similar to those of which |
had heard from the mouth of Sri Rama, a
scion of Raghu.” Having delivered the
aforesaid speech, that bull among monkeys
fell silent. (10—16)
जानकी चापि तच्छुत्वा विस्मयं परमं गता।
ad: सा वक्रकेशान्ता सुकेशी केशसंव्रृतम्।
उन्नम्य वदनं भीरु: शिंशपामन्ववैक्षत॥ १७॥
Sita, Janaka’s daughter, herself was
struck with supreme wonder to hear that
speech. Raising her face screened with
dishevelled hair, that timid lady with charming
curly locks thereupon looked up into the
Simsgapa tree on which Hanuman was
perched. (17)

निशम्य dit वचनं कपेश्च
दिशश्च सर्वा: प्रदिशश्च वीक्ष्य।
सर्वात्मना राममनुस्मरन्ती Ul १८ ॥
Hearing the monkey’s speech and
looking inquiringly into all the four quarters
as well as into the “intermediate points, Sita

experienced supreme rapture thinking all
the time of Sri Rama with all her being. (18)

वातात्मजं सूर्यमिवोदयस्थम्॥१९॥

Glancing from side to side as well as up
and down, she espied the aforesaid Hanuman,
son of the wind-god, of inconceivable
intelligence, a minister of Sugriva, the
suzerain ruler of monkeys, and resembling
the sun risen on the eastern sky. (19)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये सुन्दरकाण्डे एकत्रिंश: AW: ॥ ३१ ॥

Thus ends Canto Thirty-one of the Sundarakanda in the glorious Ramayana
of Valmiki, the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

