1074

“Having killed that vile ogre, Ravana,
Sugriva will be able to re-unite Sri Rama
(a scion of Raghu) with Sita, as one would
re-unite the moon-god with Rohini, his
principal spouse. (14)

शतकोटिसहस्राणि लङ्कायां किल रक्षसाम्।
अयुतानि च षट्त्रिंशत्सहस्राणि शतानि TN १५॥

“In Lanka, they say, there are a hundred
thousand crore three lakh, ninety-nine
thousand and six hundred ogres. (15)

अहत्वा तांश्च दुर्धर्षान् राक्षसान् कामरूपिण: |
न शक्यो रावणो हन्तुं येन सा मैथिली SATU १६॥

“Without getting rid of those aforesaid
ogres, who are difficult to overcome and are
capable of assuming any form, it is
impossible to kill Ravana, by whom the
celebrated princess of Mithila has been borne
away. (16)
ते न शक्या रणे हन्तुमसहायेन लक्ष्मण।
रावण: क्रूरकर्मा च सुग्रीवेण विशेषत:॥१७॥

“They as well as Ravana of cruel deeds
are incapable of being killed in an encounter
by anyone, unaided, particularly by Sugriva,
O Laksmana ! (17)
एवमाख्यातवान् वाली स ह्यभिज्ञो हरीश्वर: |
आगमस्तु न मे व्यक्त: MAT तस्य TAAL १८ ॥

“So did Vali say; for the said lord of
monkeys had versatile knowledge. How all
this number of ogres came to Ravana is
not, however, known to me. | speak only on
the basis of what | had heard from him. (18)

त्वत्सहायनिमित्तं fe प्रेषिता हरिपुङ्खवा:।
आनेतुं वानरान् युद्धे सुबहून् हरिपुङ्खवान्॥१९॥

“For your knowledge the best of monkeys
have been dispatched to all the four quarters

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

to bring numerous monkeys, who are the
foremost of their race in combat. (19)

तांश्च प्रतीक्षमाणोऽयं विक्रान्तान् सुमहाबलान्।
राघवस्यार्थसिद्ध्यर्थं न निर्याति हरीश्वर:। २०॥

“Nay, awaiting the arrival of those
valiant monkeys, who are possessed of
extraordinary might, Sugriva, the lord of
monkeys, is not moving out for accomplishing
the object of Sri Rama, a scion of Raghu.

(20)

pa सुसंस्था सौमित्रे सुग्रीवेण पुरा यथा।

ag dat: सर्वैरागन्तव्यं महाबलै:।॥ २१॥
“All those monkeys of extraordinary

might must come today according to the

time-limit already fixed for their welcome

arrival by Sugriva, O son of Sumitra! (21)

ऋक्षकोटिसहस्राणि गोलाङ्गूलशतानि च।
अद्य त्वामुपयास्यन्ति wie कोपमरिंदम।
कोट्योऽनेकास्तु काकुत्स्थ कपीनां दीप्ततेजसाम्॥ २२॥

“Thousands of crores of bears,
hundreds of crores of baboons and many
crores of monkeys of a fiery spirit will meet
you today. Pray, get rid of your anger, O
tamer of foes ! (22)

aa fe मुखमिदं निरीक्ष्य कोपात्
क्षतजसमे नयने निरीक्षमाणा:।
हरिवरवनिता न यान्ति शान्तिं
प्रथमभयस्य हि शङ्किता: स्म सर्वा: ।। २३ ॥

“Observing this countenance of yours’
and further perceiving your eyes blood-red
through anger, the wives of the foremost of
monkeys do not find peace, apprehensive
as they all are of a repetition of the danger
which overtook them earlier (in the form of
Vali’s death).” (23)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये किष्किन्धाकाण्डे पञ्चत्रिंश: सर्ग: ॥ 34 ॥

Thus ends Canto Thirty-five in the Kiskindhakanda of the glorious Ramayana of
Valmiki, the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

