928

नीलां कुवलयोद्घाटैर्बहुवर्णां कुथामिव॥ २०॥
Looking coppery with its rosy lotuses,
white with its clusters of water-lilies and blue
with its bunches of blue lotuses, it presented
the appearance of a multi-coloured carpet. (20)
अरविन्दोत्पलवतीं पद्मसौगन्धिकायुताम्।
पुष्पिताम्रवणोपेतां बर्हिणोद्घुष्टनादिताम्॥ २१॥
Full of blue lotuses and water-lilies, it
was adorned with white lotuses and
‘Saugandhika’ flowers, encompassed with
mango groves in blossom and made noisy
with the cries of peacocks. (21)

स तां दृष्टवा aa: पम्पां राम: सौमित्रिणा सह।
विललाप च तेजस्वी WAT दशरथात्मज:॥ २२॥
तिलकैर्बीजपूरैश्च ad: शुक्लब्रुमैस्तथा।
पुष्पितै: करवीरैश्च पुंनागैश्च सुपुष्पितै:।॥ २३॥
मालतीकुन्दगुल्मैश्च भण्डीरैर्निचुलैस्तथा।
अशोकै: सप्तपर्णैश्च कतकैरतिमुक्तकै:।॥ २४॥
अन्यैश्च विविधैर्वृक्षै: प्रमदामिव शोभिताम्।
अस्यास्तीरे तु पूर्वोक्त: पर्वतो धातुमण्डित:॥ २५॥
meme इति ख्यातश्चित्रपुष्पितपादप:।
SRA: पुत्रस्तस्य महात्मन:॥ २६॥
अध्यास्ते तु महावीर्य: सुग्रीव इति विश्रुत: |
सुग्रीवमभिगच्छ त्वं at नरर्षभ॥ २७॥

Seeing with Laksmana (son of Sumitra)
the aforesaid Pampa lake, which was
adorned with Tilaka and Bijapura, banyan
and Sukla trees, as well as with the Karavira
trees in blossom and Punnaga trees in full
blossom, nay, with shrubs of Malati and
Kunda as well as with the Bhandira and
Nicula trees, the ASoka, Saptaparna, Kataka
and Atimukta trees and other trees of different
species, and looked like a decorated young
lady, the glorious Sri Rama, son of Daégaratha,

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

wailed. On the brink of this lake stood the
aforementioned mountain known by the name
of Rsyamuka, which was enriched with
minerals of every description and crowned
with various trees in blossom. The highly
valiant monkey, widely known by the name
of Sugriva and a son of the high-souled
Rksaraja, for his part, lived on this mountain.
“Seek you the monkey-chief, Sugriva, flower
of humanity !” (22—27)

इत्युवाच पुनर्वाक्यं लक्ष्मणं सत्यविक्रम:।

कथं मया विना सीतां शक्यं लक्ष्मण जीवितुम्॥ २८ Ul
Thus spoke Sri Rama of unfailing

prowess to Laksmana, adding : “How will it

be possible for me to live without Sita, O

Laksmana?” (28)

इत्येवमुक्त्वा मदनाभिपीडित:

स लक्ष्मणं वाक्यमनन्यचेतन:।
विवे रं नलिनीमनोरमां

aaa Brew ASAT: ।। २९॥

Having spoken in these words to
Laksmana and giving vent to that foremost
grief of his, Sri Rama, who was deeply
tormented with love and whose mind was
exclusively fixed on her, entered Pampa,
which ravished the soul by its lotuses. (29)
HAUT गत्वा प्रविलोकयन् at
॥ i ॥ ।

अनेकनानाविधपक्षिसंकुलां

विवेश राम: Ge लक्ष्मणेन॥ ३०॥

Proceeding by stages and gazing on

the forest, Sri Rama beheld Pampa,
surrounded with groves which were lovely
to look at, and thronged with numerous
birds of every description, and entered it
with Laksmana. (30)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायाणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्येऽरण्यकाण्डे पञ्चसप्ततितम: सर्ग: ॥ ७५ ॥

Thus ends Canto Seventy-five in the Aranyakanda of the glorious Ramayana of
Valmiki, the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

॥ अरण्यकाण्डं सम्पूर्णम्॥

THE END OF ARANYAKANDA
