* SUNDARAKANDA + 81

easily gulped, along with Ragas* and
Khandavas of every description seasoned
with sour and salty sauces. (16—18)

महानूपुरकेयूरैरपविद्धैर्महाधनै: ।
पानभाजनविक्षिप्तै:; फलैश्च विविधैरपि॥१९॥
कृतपुष्पोपहारा भूरधिकां पुष्यति श्रियम्।
तत्र तत्र च विन्यस्तै: सुश्लिष्टशयनासनै:॥ २०॥
पानभूमिर्विना वह्निं प्रदीप्तेवोपलक्ष्यते।
बहुप्रकारैर्विविधैर्वरसंस्कारसंस्कृतै: UI
मांसै: कुशलसंयुक्तै: पानभूमिगतै: पृथक्।
दिव्या: प्रसन्ना विविधा: सुरा: कृतसुरा अपि॥ २२॥
शर्करासवमाध्वीका: पुष्पासवफलासवा:।
वासचूर्णैश्च विविधैर्मृष्टास्तैस्तै: पृथक पृथक् ॥ २३ ॥

With large anklets and armlets of great
value thrown away and drinking vessels
scattered about, as also with fruits of various
kinds scattered here and there, the floor of
the banquet hall, on which flowers had been
offered to gods, spread its charm profusely.
Nay, with couches and seats set of gold
and precious stones arranged in order at
various places close to one another
appeared inflamed, as it were, even without
fire. Transparent beverages of various kinds
that had trickled down from Kadamba and
other trees as well as artificial liquors lying
separately on the floor of the banquet hall
alongside meats of various kinds and different
tastes, dressed by expert cooks and
flavoured with diverse excellent ingredients,
as also beverages distilled from sugar, honey,
flowers and fruits (such as vine and date-
palms) and impregnated with aromatic
powders of various kinds separately were
seen by Hanuman. (19—23)

संतता शुशुभे भूमिर्माल्यैश्च बहुसंस्थितै:।
हिरण्मयैशच कलशैर्भाजनै: स्फाटिकैरपि॥ २४॥
जाम्बूनदमयैश्चान्यै: करकैरभिसंवृता।
राजतेषु च कुम्भेषु जाम्बूनदमयेषु Ai २५॥

पानश्रेष्ठां तथा भूमिं कपिस्तत्र ददर्शं a: |
सोऽपश्यच्छातकुम्भानि सीधोर्मणिमयानि च॥ २६॥
तानि तानि च पूर्णानि भाजनानि महाकपि:।
क्वचिदर्धावशेषाणि क्वचित् पीतान्यशेषत:॥ २७॥
क्वचिन्नैव प्रपीतानि पानानि स ददर्श ह।

क्वचिद् भक्ष्यांश्च विविधान् क्वचित् पानानि भागश: ।। २८ ।।
क्वचिदर्धावशेषाणि पश्यन् a विचचार ह।
शयनान्यत्र नारीणां शून्यानि बहुधा पुन:।
परस्परं समाश्लिष्य काश्चित् सुप्ता वरांगना: ॥ २९॥
Strewn with flowers collected at various
places and covered with pitchers of gold,
also vessels of crystal and pots of gold and
other substances with two outlets, the floor
of the banquet hall looked charming.
Hanuman likewise saw the floor of that hall
with excellent beverages collected in pitchers
of silver as well as of gold. Hanuman also
beheld different vessels of gold as well as
of gems, full of wine. Here he saw wine jars
which were half-full, and there he saw them
wholly drained; while elsewhere he found
them quite full: so the tradition goes.
Hanuman, they say, roamed about beholding
at one place foods of various kinds requiring
mastication and beverages kept separately
elsewhere; and drinks half exhausted at a
third place. Here the beds of many women
were lying unoccupied, while elsewhere some
belles lay asleep embracing one another.
(24—29)
काचिच्च वस्त्रमन्यस्या अपहृत्योपगुह्य च।
उपगम्याबला सुप्ता निद्राबलपराजिता॥ ३०॥
Moving to the bed of another, snatching
away her covering and wrapping herself
in it, a certain woman, who had been

overpowered by pressure of slumber, lay
asleep embracing her. (30)

तासामुच्छ्वासवातेन वस्त्रं माल्यं च गात्रजम्।
नात्यर्थं स्पन्दते चित्रं प्राप्य मन्दमिवानिलम्॥ ३१॥

* The juice of grapes and pomegranates sweetened with sugarcandy, honey etc., is known by the
name of Raga in the fluid state and is called Khandava when thickened—

सितामध्वादिमधुरो द्राक्षादाडिमयो La: | विरलश्चेत्कृतो राग: सान्द्रश्चेत् खाण्डव: स्मृत:॥
