* BALAKANDA +

अनुचिन्त्य सुमित्रायै पुनरेव महामति:।
Ue तासां ददौ राजा भार्याणां पायसं पृथक्॥ २९॥
Again he gave half of the rest to Kaikeyi
and, reflecting awhile, the highly intelligent
DaSaratha gave the other half of the nectar-
like Payasa once more to Sumitra. In this
way the monarch apportioned the Payasa
separately to all his aforementioned wives.
(28-29)

ताश्चैवं पायसं wa नरेन्द्रस्योत्तमस्तरिय:।
wart मेनिरे सर्वा: प्रहर्षोदितचेतस:॥ ३०॥
All the aforesaid noble wives of the
Emperor deemed this apportionment as a
unique honour, their mind enlivened through
excessive joy on receiving the Payasa.(30)

ततस्तु ता: प्राश्य तदुत्तमस्नरियो महीपतेरुत्तमपायसं पृथक् ।
हुताशनादित्यसमानतेजसोऽचिरेण गर्भान् प्रतिपेदिरे तदा।। ३१ Ut

117

Partaking of the excellent Payasa
separately the same moment, those noble
wives of the Emperor actually felt before
long by virtue of it the presence in their
womb of offspring vying in splendour with
the fire and the sun. (31)

ततस्तु राजा प्रतिवीक्ष्य ता: स्रिय: प्ररूढगर्भा: प्रतिलब्धमानस:।
aya हृष्टस्विदिवे यथा eft: सुरेन्द्रसिद्धर्षिगणाभिपूजित: ।। ३२ ॥

Perceiving the aforesaid queens
with offspring in their womb, quickened
immediately afterwards, the Emperor, who
had attained his desired object and was
adored by Indra, the ruler of gods, and
hosts of Siddhas and Rsis (as_ the
future father of the divine Sri Rama), felt
delighted even as Indra does in heaven.

(32)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये बालकाण्डे षोडश: AW: ॥ १६ ॥

Thus ends Canto Sixteen in the Balakanda of the glorious Ramayana of Valmiki,
the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

सप्तदश: wat:
Canto XVII

Birth of monkey chiefs from the loins of different gods
under the directions of Brahma

Yat तु गते विष्णौ राज्ञस्तस्य महात्मन:।
sara देवता: सर्वा: स्वयम्भूर्भगवानिदम्॥ १॥
Lord Visnu having all but assumed the
role of sons to that high-souled monarch,
King Dasaratha, the almighty Brahma (the
self-born) commanded all the gods as
follows : (1)

सत्यसंधस्य वीरस्य सर्वेषां नो हितैषिण:।
विष्णो: सहायान् बलिन: सृजध्वं कामरूपिण: tt २॥
“Beget mighty part manifestations of
yourselves, capable of assuming any form
at will and able to assist the valiant Lord

Visnu, who is true to His promise and wishes
well of us all. (2)

मायाविदश्च शूरांश्च वायुवेगसमाञ्जवे।
नयज्ञान् बुद्धिसम्पन्नान् विष्णुतुल्यपराक्रमान्॥ ३॥

बहार्या दिव्यसं मि ।
।। ४॥

अप्सरस्सु च मुख्यासु गन्धर्वीणां तनूषु च।
यक्षपन्नगकन्यासु ऋऋक्षविद्याधरीषु TN I

किंनरीणां च गात्रेषु वानरीणां तनूषु a
सृजध्वं हरिरूपेण पुत्रांस्तुल्यपराक्रमान्॥६॥
“Through the principal Apsaras (celestial
nymphs), the wombs of Gandharva women,
maidens of Yaksas (a class of demigods,
ruled over by Kubera) and Nagas (serpent-
demons credited with a human face and
serpent-like lower body), she-bears and
