1108

censure, | have known her through divine
vision to be of pure conduct and devoted to

« VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

you even though you already knew that she
was chaste.’ (24)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये उत्तरकाण्डे षण्णवतितम: AWA: ॥ ९६ ॥

Thus ends Canto Ninety-six in the Uttarakanda of the glorious Ramayana of Valmiki,
the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

Canto LXXXXVII
Sita takes oath and enters in netherworld

वाल्मीकिनैवमुक्तस्तु राघव: प्रत्यभाषत।
प्राञ्जलिर्जगतो मध्ये दृष्टवा at वरवर्णिनीम्॥१॥

Thus spoken to by Valmiki, the scion
of Raghu, replied with folded hands, seeing
the beautiful complexioned one, Sita, within
the sight of everybody: (1)

`एवमेतन्महाभाग यथा वदसि धर्मवित्।
प्रत्ययस्तु मम ब्रह्मंस्तव वाक्यैरकल्मषै:॥ २॥
‘O holy one, this is as you say, O
knower of law, O Brahmana, by your guiltless
words, | am assured. (2)

was पुरा qt adem: सुरसंनिधौ।
wary कृतस्तत्र तेन वेश्म प्रवेशिता॥३॥

‘Sita, the daughter of Videha, has already
assured us of her pure conduct in front of
the gods, and taken oath and then she was
allowed to enter the apartment. (3)

लोकापवादो बलवान् येन त्यक्ता हि मैथिली।
we लोकभयाद् ब्रह्मन्नपापेत्यभिजानता।
परित्यक्ता मया सीता तद् भवान् क्षन्तुमर्हति॥४॥

‘The censure by people is great, due to
which Maithili (Sita) was forsaken. This Sita,
O Brahmana, was forsaken by me due to
fear of censure, although knowing that she
was sinless, so please forgive me. (4)

जानामि चेमौ gat मे यमजातौ कुशीलवौ।
शुद्धायां जगतो मध्ये मैथिल्यां प्रीतिरस्तु मे॥५॥

‘| know these two are my sons, the
twins, KuSa and Lava, and yet let her chastity

be acknowledged by the world and my love
in her reinstated.’ (5)

अभिप्रायं तु fama रामस्य सुरसत्तमा:।
सीताया: शपथे तस्मिन् महेन्द्राद्या महौजस:॥ ६॥
Knowing the intention of Sri Rama, the

great gods, all of them came in connection
with the oath-taking of Sita. (6)

frame पुरस्कृत्य सर्व Wa समागता:।
आदित्या वसवो रुद्रा विश्वेदेवा मरुद्गणा:॥७॥
साध्याश्च देवा: सर्वे ते सर्वे च परमर्षय:।
arm: सुपर्णा: सिद्धाश्च ते सर्वे हृष्टमानसा:॥ ८॥

Having Brahma at their head, the
Adityas, Vasus, Rudras, ViSvadevas, the
hosts of Maruts, all the Sadhya gods, all
great sages, the Nagas, Suparnas and the
Siddhas, all came joyfully. (7-8)
सीताशपथसम्भ्रान्ता: Wt Wa समागता:।
दृष्टवा देवानृषींश्चैव waa: पुनरब्रवीत्॥९॥

Seeing all the gods and sages, who
came out of respect for the scion of Raghu,
again said: ‘O best among men, my faith is
gained by the guiltless words of the sage,
Valmiki’. (9)
प्रत्ययो मे सुरश्रेष्ठं ऋषिवाक्यैरकल्मषै:।
शुद्धायां जगतो मध्ये वैदेह्यां प्रीतिरस्तु मे॥१०॥

‘May my love for Sita, sinless in the
eyes of all, be all out.’ (10)

wat arg: शुभ: पुण्यो दिव्यगन्धो मनोरम:।
तं जनौघं सुरश्रेष्ठो ह्लादयामास सर्वत:॥११॥
