110

glorious Dasaratha, a scion of Ikswaku,
felt extremely delighted. All the priests,
however, spoke as follows to the sinless
king : (46)
भवानेव Wel कृत्स्नामेको रक्षितुमर्हति।
न भूम्या कार्यमस्माकं नहि शक्ता: स्म पालने॥ ४७॥
“You alone are able to protect the entire
globe. We have nothing to do with the earth
nor are we able to maintain it. (47)
रता: स्वाध्यायकरणे ad नित्यं fe भूमिप।
निष्क्रयं किंचिदेवेह प्रयच्छतु भवानिति॥४८॥
“As we are constantly devoted to the
prosecution of the study of the Vedas, O
protector of the earth, give you anything,
whatsoever by way of consideration at this
moment. (48)

मणिरत्नं सुवर्णं वा गावो Aq वा समुद्यतम्।

Wd प्रयच्छ TATE धरण्या न प्रयोजनम्॥४९॥
“Bestow on us some superb gem, gold

or cows or whatever may be available, O

jewel among the protectors of men! We

have no use for the earth.” (49)

एवमुक्तो नरपतिर्ब्रहह्मणैर्वेदपारगै: |
Tat शतसहस्राणि दश तेभ्यो ददौ नृप:॥ ५०॥
दशकोटिं सुवर्णस्य रजतस्य चतुर्गुणम्।
ऋत्विजस्तु तत: सर्वे प्रददु: सहिता वसु॥५१॥
ऋष्यशृङ्गाय मुनये वसिष्ठाय च धीमते।
ततस्ते न्यायत: Heat प्रविभागं द्विजोत्तमा:॥ ५२॥
सुप्रीतमनस: सर्वे प्रत्यूचुर्मुदिता भृशम्।
ad: प्रसर्पकेभ्यस्तु हिरण्यं सुसमाहित:॥५३॥
दरिद्राय द्विजायाथ हस्ताभरणमुत्तमम्॥५४॥
कस्मैचिद् याचमानाय ददौ राघवनन्दन:।
तत: प्रीतेषु विधिवद् द्विजेषु द्विजवत्सल:॥ ५५ Il
प्रणाममकरोत् तेषां हर्षव्याकुलितेन्द्रिय:।
तस्याशिषोऽथ विविधा ब्राह्मणै: समुदाहृता: ॥ ५६॥
उदारस्य नृवीरस्य धरण्यां पतितस्य च।
तत: प्रीतमना राजा प्राप्य यज्ञमनुत्तमम्॥५७॥
uae स्वर्नयनं दुस्तरं पार्थिवर्षभै:।
ततोऽब्रवीदृष्यशृङ्खं राजा दशरथस्तदा॥५८॥

« VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

Told thus by the Brahmanas, who were
all masters of the Vedas, the king, who
acknowledged none other as his own ruler,
bestowed on them ten lakhs of cows, a
hundred million gold coins and four times as
many silver coins (rupees). Thereupon all
the priests combined handed over the entire
wealth to the sage Rsyasrnga and the wise
Vasistha for equitable distribution. Having
had the whole wealth equitably divided
through Rsyasrnga and Vasistha, all those
eminent Brahmanas now felt much delighted
at heart and said, “We are highly pleased.”
Fully composed in mind, the king then gave
away on that very occasion ten million gold
coins to Brahmanas that had come from
outside to witness the sacrifice. When no
money was left on hand for distribution,
Dasaratha (the delight of Raghu’s race)
promptly gave away one of his excellent
bangles to a certain unknown _ indigent
Brahmana who asked for a gift. The
Brahmanas having been duly propitiated,
the king, who was so fond of the Brahmanas
and whose senses were all excited through
joy, offered salutation to them. On that
magnanimous soul, a hero among men,
lying prostrate on the ground, benedictions
of various kinds were forthwith pronounced
in suitable words by the Brahmanas. The
king now felt delighted at heart to have
succeeded in completing the sacrifice,
unsurpassed by any other, capable of
dispelling sins (that stood in the way of his
getting a male progeny) and transporting
him to heaven and was hard to carry through
even for the foremost of kings. King Dasaratha
then said to Rsyasrnga on that very
occasion : (50—58)

कुलस्य वर्धनं तत् तु कर्तुमर्हसि सुव्रत।
तथेति च a राजानमुवाच द्विजसत्तम:।
भविष्यन्ति Yat राजंश्चत्वारस्ते कुलोद्बहा:॥ ५९॥
“Be pleased, O sage of auspicious
vows, to do further that which may tend to
promote my race.” “I shall do accordingly,”
