* AYODHYAKANDA +

Sri Rama, whose mind was given to piety,
addressed the following words, consistent
with righteousness, to Bharata : (7)
किं करिष्याम्ययोध्यायां art fest गतिं गते।
कस्तां राजवराद्भीनामयोध्यां पालयिष्यति॥८॥
“Father having reached the end of his
life (the destiny assigned by Providence),
what shall | do at Ayodhya? Who will look
after the said city of Ayodhya, bereft of
DaSaratha, the foremost of kings? (8)

fe नु तस्य मया ar दुर्जातेन महात्मन:।
यो मृतो मम शोकेन स मया न च संस्कृत:॥९॥

“What purpose on earth of that high-
souled monarch—who died of grief caused
by separation from me, and who was not
even cremated by me—was served by me,
his hapless child? (9)

stat ond सिद्धार्थो येन राजा त्वयानघ।
शत्रुघ्नेन च सर्वेषु प्रेतकृत्येषु सत्कृत:॥१०॥

“Oh sinless Bharata, accomplished of
purpose are you, by whom, as well as by
Satrughna the king was paid homage to in
all obsequial rites! (10)

निष्प्रधानामनेकाग्रां नरेन्द्रेण faa कृताम्।
निव्रत्तवनवासोऽपि नायोध्यां गन्तुमुत्सहे॥११॥

“Even when the term of my exile has
expired, | shall have no heart to return to
Ayodhya, which has been rendered destitute
of its ruler and is, therefore, without a leader
and agitated. (11)
कोऽनुशासिष्यति पुनस्ताते लोकान्तरं गते॥१२॥

“Father having departed 10 the
otherworld, O scorcher of enemies, who will
give instructions to me hereafter about my
duty when | am back in Ayodhya, having
completed the term of my exile in the forest?

(12)
पुरा प्रेक्ष्य Gad मां पिता यान्याह सान्त्वयन्।
वाक्यानि तानि श्रोष्यामि Sha: कर्णसुखान्यहम्॥ १३ ॥

“From whom shall | hear those words,

657

pleasing to the ear, which father addressed
to me in the past, speaking kindly to me, on
seeing me of good conduct?” (13)

एवमुक्त्वाथ भरतं भार्यामभ्येत्य राघव:।
उवाच शोकसंतप्त: पूर्णचन्द्रनिभाननाम्॥१४॥

Having spoken to Bharata as aforesaid,
and turning to his consort, whose
countenance resembled the full moon, as
well as to Laksmana, Sri Rama, a scion of
Raghu, who was tormented with grief, said
to her: (14)

सीते मृतस्ते श्वशुर: पितृहीनोऽसि लक्ष्मण।
भरतो दु:खमाचष्टे स्वर्गतिं पृथिवीपते:।॥ १५॥
“Your father-in-law is no more, O Sita !
You are fatherless, O Laksmana! Bharata
sorrowfully relates the emperor's ascent to
heaven.” (15)
तथा Fata काकुत्स्थे कुमाराणां यशस्विनाम्॥ १६ ॥
When Sri Rama (a scion of Kakutstha)
spoke as above, copious tears welled up in
consequence in the eyes of those illustrious
princes. (16)
ततस्ते भ्रातर: सर्वे भृशमाश्वास्य दु:खितम्।
अब्रुवञ्जगतीभर्तुर क्रियतामुदकं पितु:॥ १७॥
Having consoled their afflicted brother
to the best of their ability, all the aforesaid
brothers then said to him, “Let water be
offered to the spirit of our imperial father.”
(17)
सा सीता स्वर्गतं श्रुत्वा श्वशुरं तं महानृपम्।
नेत्राभ्यामश्रुपूर्णाभ्यां न शशाकेक्षितुं प्रियम्॥ १८॥
Hearing of the celebrated emperor, her
father-in-law, having ascended to heaven,
the renowned Sita with her eyes full of tears
was not able to look at her beloved lord.
(18)
सान्त्वयित्वा तु तां रामो रुदतीं जनकात्मजाम्।
sara लक्ष्मणं तत्र दु:ख्रितो दु:खितं aa: eeu
Consoling the aforesaid Sita (daughter
of Janaka), who was weeping, the afficted
