+ UTTARAKANDA +

and adorned with a sanctuary of good
omen. (3)

wa: कृष्णाजिनधरं कमण्डलुशिखाध्वजम्।
cat स्वसुतं तत्र मेघनादं भयावहम्॥४॥
Then he beheld there 8 son,
Meghanada, wearing a black deerskin and a
tuft of hair on his crown and holding a
Kamandalu (a pot made of the shell of a
poisonous coconut) and a staff and inspiring
fear. (4)

तं समासाद्य लङ्केश: परिष्वज्याथ बाहुभि:।
अब्रवीत् किमिदं ara ada gfe तत्त्वत:॥५॥
Approaching him and folding him in his
arms, the ruler of Lanka, forthwith said to
him, “Child, what is it you are doing? Speak
truly.” (5)

उशना त्वब्रवीत् at यज्ञसम्पत्समृद्धये।
Want राक्षसश्रेष्ठं द्विजश्रेष्ठो महातपा:॥६॥

In order to ensure the success of the
sacrificial performance (which would have
been jeopardized if the sacrificer broke his
vow of silence), USana (the preceptor of the
demons and Daityas, who was evidently
conducting the sacrifice), the foremost of
the twice-born and a great ascetic, for his
part spoke as follows to Ravana, the foremost
of ogres, on that occasion: (6)

अहमाख्यामि ते राजन् श्रूयतां सर्वमेव तत्।

यज्ञास्ते GA पुत्रेण प्राप्तास्ते बहुविस्तरा:॥७॥
“| shall tell you everything, Your Majesty,

please listen to it. Seven well-known

sacrifices rich in numerous details have
been performed by your son. (7)

अग्निष्टोमोऽश्वमेधश्च यज्ञो बहुसुवर्णक:।
राजसूयस्तथा यज्ञो गोमेधो वैष्णवस्तथा॥८॥
माहेश्वरे Wad तु यज्ञे पुम्भि: सुदुर्लभे।
वरांस्ते लब्धवान् Ua: साक्षात् पशुपतेरिह॥९॥
“Six sacrifices named Agnistoma and
Aswamedha, the Bahusuvarnaka sacrifice,
Rajasuya, Gomedha and the _ sacrifice
intended to propitiate Lord Visnu, had been

927

performed; and when the sacrifice intended
to propitiate Lord Maheswara, which is
exceedingly difficult for the mortals to
accomplish, commenced, your son received
boons personally from Lord Siva (the ruler
of embodied souls in bondage, who are no
better than beasts) here, on this very ground.
(8-9)

Wat च तामसीं नाम यया सम्पद्यते तम:॥१०॥
“He also received from Him a lasting
heavenly car which could course in the air
according to the will of its master, as well as
a conjuring trick named Tamasi Maya by
which darkness could be occasioned in the
enemy’s ranks. (10)

ura feat संग्रामे मायया राक्षसेश्वर।

प्रयुक्तया Wa: शक्या नहि ज्ञातुं सुरासुरै:॥ ११॥
“By means of this conjuring trick, when

employed in a conflict, O ruler of ogres, the

movement of the employer cannot be known
either by the gods or the demons. (11)

अक्षयाविषुधी बाणैश्चापं चापि सुदुर्जयम्।

अस्त्रं च बलवद् राजन् शत्रुविध्वंसनं TT १२॥
“A pair of inexhaustible quivers full of

arrows, as also a bow exceedingly difficult

to resist and a powerful missile capable of

exterminating the foe have also been secured

by him, O king ! (12)

एतान् सर्वान् CHEM पुत्रस्तेऽयं दशानन।

अद्य यज्ञसमाप्तौ च cat दिदृक्षन् स्थितो ह्यहम्॥ १३॥
“Having secured all these boons, indeed,

O Ravana, this son of yours, stands here

eager to see you at the completion of his

sacrificial performance, and so do I.” (13)

ततोऽब्रवीद् दशग्रीवो न शोभनमिदं कृतम्।

पूजिता: शत्रवो Tene द्रव्यैरिन्द्रपुरोगमा:॥ १४॥
Thereupon Ravana (the ten-headed

monster) said, “This was not done well in that

my enemies, whose leader is Indra, have been
worshipped by means of offerings. (14)
