* BALAKANDA + 71

grief once more at the thought of his having
unconsciously subjected the fowler to a
curse and thereby depleted the stock
of his askesis. Brahma then laughingly
said to Valmiki, the chief of the hermits :

(27—30)
Veith एवास्त्वयं बद्धो नात्र कार्या विचारणा।
मच्छन्दादेव A ब्रह्मन् Ward सरस्वती।। ३१॥

“Let this metrical composition be
conducive to your glory. You need not brood
over this any more. Through my will alone
has this speech flowed from your lips, O
Brahmana sage ! (31)
रामस्य चरितं pet ge त्वमृषिसत्तम।
धर्मात्मनो भगवतो लोके रामस्य धीमत:॥ ३२॥

“Describe, O jewel among seers, the
whole life on this earth of Lord Sri Rama,
whose mind is ever given to piety and who
is full of wisdom. (32)
qt कथय धीरस्य यथा ते नारदाच्छुतम्।
we च प्रकाशं च ae ad तस्य धीमत:॥ ३३॥
रामस्य सहसौमित्रे राक्षसानां च सर्वश:।
वैदेह्याश्चैव ae वृत्तं प्रकाशं यदि वा रह:॥ ३४॥
तच्चाप्यविदितं ad विदितं a भविष्यति।

न ते ama काव्ये काचिदत्र भविष्यति॥ ३५॥

“Tell the story of that hero as heard by
you from the lips of Narada. Whatever
account, known or unknown, there is of the
all-wise Sri Rama, as well as of Laksmana,
the son of Sumitra, nay, of all the Raksasas,
who fought with and were killed by him
and whatever account, known or unknown,
there is of Sita (the foster-daughter of
Janaka), all that will be revealed to you
even though unknown at present. No
description of yours in this poem that will
be composed by you will prove false.

(33—35)
यावत् स्थास्यन्ति गिरय: सरितश्च महीतले॥ ३६॥
तावद् रामायणकथा लोकेषु प्रचरिष्यति।
Wag रामस्य च HM त्वत्कृता प्रचरिष्यति॥ ३७॥

तावदूर्ध्वमधश्च त्वं मल्लोकेषु निवत्स्यसि।
इत्युक्त्वा भगवान् Ta तत्रैवान्तरधीयत।
ad: सशिष्यो भगवान् मुनिर्विस्मयमाययौ॥ ३८॥

“Render the sacred and soul-ravishing
story of Sri Rama into similar verses. The
theme of the Ramayana will continue to be
popular in all the three worlds so long as
mountains and rivers will remain on the
surface of the earth. And you will abide
both higher up in the heavenly regions and
below on earth, according to your choice, in
the worlds of my creation so long as the
narrative of Sri Rama composed by you will
remain current.” Saying so, the almighty
Brahma went out of sight on the very spot.
Thereupon the glorious sage, Valmiki, was
filled with wonder alongwith his pupils,
Bharadwaja and others. (836—38)

तस्य शिष्यास्तत: सर्वे जगु: श्लोकमिमं TA: |
मुहुर्मुहु: प्रीयमाणा: wes भृशविस्मिता:॥ ३९॥

Then all his pupils repeated the
aforesaid verse uttered by their teacher
and, getting delighted again and again, spoke
to one another as follows, greatly astonished
at the honour conferred on their teacher by
the creator himself by calling on him of his
own accord : (39)

समाक्षैरश्चतुर्भिर्य:२ पादैर्गीतो महर्षिणा।
सोऽनुव्याहरणाद YA: शोक: श्लोकत्वमागत: ॥ ४० ॥
“What was uttered by the great sage,
Valmiki, in four feet consisting of an equal
number of syllables was nothing but his
grief converted into a verse because of its
being voiced by him.” (40)
तस्य बुद्धिरियं जाता महर्षेर्भावितात्मन:।
कृत्स्नं रामायणं काव्यमीदृशै: करवाण्यहम्॥४१॥
The thought occurred to the great sage
of purified mind that he should compose the
entire poem of the Ramayana in such verse
(similar to the one already uttered by him
out of grief). (41)

उदारवृत्तार्थपदैर्मनोरमैस्तदास्य रामस्य चकार कीर्तिमान्।
PTA: श्लोकशतैर्यशस्विनो यशस्करं काव्यमुदारदर्शन:॥ ४२॥
