814

“Duly permitted by King Sugriva, hasten
to proceed to Ayodhya with all the monkeys
(your spouses). Nay, a kindly act will also
be undoubtedly done to me by you through
the sight of Ayodhya which is so dear to
me. (34)
vast da रामस्य पौरजानपदै: wel
विभूतिं चैव सर्वासां स्त्रीणां दशरथस्य च॥ ३५॥

“We shall also witness the entry of Sri
Rama into Ayodhya alongwith the people of
that city as well as of the outlying countryside,
as also the affluence of all the widows of
Emperor DaSaratha.” (35)
तारया चाभ्यनुज्ञाता: Hat वानरयोषित:।
नेपथ्यविधिपूर्वं तु कृत्वा चापि प्रदक्षिणम्॥ ३६॥
अध्यारोहन् विमानं तत् सीतादर्शनकाङ्क्षया।
ताभि: सहोत्थितं शीघ्रं विमानं प्रेक्ष्य राघव:॥ ३७॥
ऋष्यमूकसमीपे तु add Gad
दृश्यतेऽसौ महान् सीते सविद्युदिव तोयद:॥ ३८ ॥
अत्राहं वानरेन्द्रेण सुग्रीवेण समागत:॥३९॥
समयश्च ha: सीते वधार्थं वालिनो मया।
एषा सा दृश्यते पम्पा नलिनी चित्रकानना॥४०॥
त्वया fad यत्राहं विललाप सुदु:खित:।
अस्यास्तीरे मया दृष्टा शबरी धर्मचारिणी॥४१॥
अत्र योजनबाहुश्च कबन्धो निहतो मया।
दृश्यतेऽसौ जनस्थाने श्रीमान् सीते वनस्पति: i ४२॥
जटायुश्च महातेजास्तव हेतोर्विलासिनि।
रावणेन हतो aa पक्षिणां प्रवरो बली॥४३॥

Also going round that aerial car
clockwise (as a mark of respect) when duly
permitted by Queen Tara, after decorating
themselves, all the wives of the monkeys
for their part* ascended it with a desire to
have a look at Sita. Perceiving the aerial
car risen (in the air) in no time with the
aforesaid women (who had taken their seats
in it), Sri Rama (a scion of Raghu) for his

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA +

part spoke once more to Sita (a princess of
the Videha territory) in the vicinity of Mount
Rsyamuka: “There is seen, O Sita, Mount
Rsyamuka, the foremost of mountains,
covered by veins of golden minerals and as
such resembling a huge cloud accompanied
by flashes of lightning. Here did | come in
contact with Sugriva, who is now the ruler
of monkeys, and an agreement was made
by me to make short work of his elder
brother, Vali, O Sita! Here is seen the well-
known Pampa lake, abounding in lotuses
and hemmed in with lovely woods, on the
brink of which | lamented, sore afflicted as
| was, having been separated from you. On
the strand of this lake was Sabari, who was
practising virtue, seen by me. And here
was killed by me the demon Kabandha,
whose arms were eight miles long. And
over there is seen in Janasthana, O Sita,
that magnificent tree under which the mighty
vulture, Jatayu, the foremost of birds, who
was endowed with extraordinary energy,
was dispatched by Ravana on your account,
O sportive lady! (836—43)

wg निहतो aq दूषणश्च निपातित:।
त्रिशिराश्च महावीर्यो मया बाणैरजिह्मगै:॥४४॥

And there is the region known by the
name of Paficavati, so called because it
consisted of five banyan trees, where the
ogre Khara (a half-brother of Ravana) was
disposed of by me with straight-going arrows,
as well as his brothers, Dusana and Trisira,
the latter of whom was endowed with
extraordinary prowess. (44)

Ud तदाश्रमपदमस्माकं वरवर्णिनि।
पर्णशाला तथा चित्रा दृश्यते शुभदर्शने॥४५॥
यत्र त्वं राक्षसेन्द्रेण रावणेन EA बलात्।
एषा गोदावरी Tat प्रसन्नसलिला शुभा॥४६॥

* According to one of the well-known commentators of the Ramayana of Valmiki, the party travelling in
the aerial car, Puspaka, halted at Kiskindha for a day. According to the testimony of the Mahabharata (vide ITI.
CCXCI. 58-59), Sri Rama caused Angada to be formally installed as the Prince Regent of Kiskindha that day.
