+ UTTARAKANDA +

एतत् ia os ससे |
प्रशंसार्ह न जानीम: प्रशंसां वक्तुमीदृशीम्॥३०॥

“Nay, it is but proper for you that you
compliment us, O king worthy of tribute!
We, however, do not know how to pay such
a compliment. (30)

आपृच्छामो गमिष्यामो हृदिस्थो A: सदा भवान्।

वर्तामहे महाबाहो प्रीत्यात्र महता qa: seu
“We now take leave of you and shall

depart. Even as you ever remain enshrined

in our heart, so filled with great devotion to
you, we too may abide in the heart of yours,

985

O mighty-armed one!

भवेच्च ते महाराज प्रीतिरस्मासु नित्यदा।
बाढमित्येव राजानो हर्षेण परमान्विता:॥ ३२॥
ऊचु: Weta: सर्वे राघवं गमनोत्सुका:।
पूजितास्ते च रामेण जग्मुर्देशान्स्वकान् स्वकान्॥ ३३॥

“And let your affection ever be for us,
O monarch!” Answered by Sri Rama in the
words “All right!”, all the kings, transported
with joy and ready to depart, said to Sri
Rama (a scion of Raghu) with joined palms,
“We are leaving’. Nay, honoured by Sri
Rama, they all returned to their respective
territories. (32-33)

(31)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये उत्तरकाण्डे अष्टात्रिंश: सर्ग: Il ३८ I

Thus ends Canto Thirty-eight in the Uttarakanda of the glorious Ramayana of Valmiki,
the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

Canto XXXIX
The princes send presents to Sri Rama, who after accepting them distributes

them to His friends, the monkeys, the bears and the ogres; and they
all sojourn happily with Him

a प्रयाता महात्मान: पार्थिवास्ते प्रहृष्टवत्।
गजवाजिसहस्रौघै:र कम्पयन्तो वसुंधराम्॥१॥
Those well-known and_ high-souled
princes joyously departed, shaking the earth
with their contingents consisting of thousands
of elephants and horses. (1)

अक्षौहिण्यो fe तत्रासन् राघवार्थे समुद्यता:।
भरतस्याज्ञयानेका: प्रहष्टबलवाहना: ॥ २॥

More than one Aksauhini (or units of
army, consisting of 21,870 elephants, the
same number of chariots, 65,610 horses
and 109,350 infantry) stood garrisoned there
under the orders of Bharata, fully equipped
for the sake of Sri Rama (in his conflict with
Ravana, if need be) and full of highly delighted
troops and mounts. (2)

ऊचुस्ते च महीपाला बलदर्पसमन्विता:।
न राम रावणं युद्धे पश्याम: पुरत: स्थितम्॥ ३॥
Nay, fully possessed with pride of
might, the aforesaid kings said to one
another, “We do not see Sri Rama and
Ravana standing face to face on the field
of battle. (3)
भरतेन at usd समानीता निरर्थकम्।
eet fe राक्षसा: क्षिप्रं पार्थिवै: स्युर्न संशय:॥४॥
“We were uselessly brought together
by Bharata when the war was over. The
ogres would have surely been killed in no

time by the kings had they been summoned
in time; there is no doubt about it. (4)

रामस्य बाहुवीर्येण रक्षिता लक्ष्मणस्य च।
Ga ut समुद्रस्य युध्येम विगतज्वरा:॥५॥
