254

Having set the string to the bow, the
highly illustrious Sri Rama, a jewel among
men, bent the said bow and lo! the bow
broke into two at the middle. (17)

तस्य शब्दो महानासीन्निर्घातसमनि:स्वन:।
भूमिकम्पश्च सुमहान् पर्वतस्येव दीर्यत:॥१८॥

A great noise reverberating like a crash
of thunder issued from it even as it broke
and a violent earthquake followed in its
wake as it would in the event of a mountain
cracking. (18)
निपेतुश्च नरा: Wa तेन शब्देन मोहिता:।
वर्जयित्वा मुनिवरं राजानं at च राघवौ॥१९॥

Nay, stunned by that crash all men
(present there) toppled down, barring, of
course, ViSwamitra, the foremost of sages,
the king and the two celebrated scions of
Raghu. (19)
प्रत्याश्वस्ते जने तस्मिन् राजा विगतसाध्वस:।
उवाच प्राञ्जलिर्वाक्यं वाक्यज्ञो मुनिपुंगवम्॥ २०॥

On the people there recovering from
the shock and feeling reassured, the king,
whose misgivings had now been set at rest,
and who knew how to speak, submitted
with joined palms to ViSwamitra, the foremost
of sages, as follows: (20)

भगवन् दृष्टवीर्यो A रामो दशरथात्मज:।
अत्यद्भुतमचिन्त्यं च अतर्कितमिदं war २१॥
‘The prowess of Sri Rama, son of
DaSaratha, has been witnessed by me. The
feat performed by him is most marvellous,
inconceivable and was never thought of by
me. (21)
जनकानां कुले कीर्तिमाहरिष्यति मे सुता।
सीता भर्तारमासाद्य रामं दशरथात्मजम्॥ २२॥
“Having secured Sri Rama, son of
Emperor DaSaratha, for her husband, my

« VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

daughter, Sita, will fetch renown to the race
of the Janakas. (22)

मम सत्या प्रतिज्ञा सा वीर्यशुल्केति कौशिक।
सीता प्राणैर्बहुमता देया रामाय मे सुता॥२३॥

“My pledge that Sita can be won only
through valour stands redeemed today, O
son of Kusika! My daughter, Sita, who is
dearer to me than life, now remains to be
given away. (23)

भवतोऽनुमते ब्रह्मन् शीघ्रं गच्छन्तु मन्त्रिण:।
मम कौशिक भद्रं ते अयोध्यां त्वरिता TW: il २४॥
“With your permission, O holy Brahmana,
let my counsellors quickly proceed, O son of
Kusika, to Ayodhya in chariots with expedition;
may god bless you ! (24)
राजानं प्रश्रितैर्वाक्यैरानयन्तु Gt मम।
प्रदानं वीर्यशुल्काया: कथयन्तु च सर्वश:॥ २७५॥
“Let them with polite words bring the
Emperor to my capital and tell him exhaustively
how Sita having been won through valour is
going to be married to Sri Rama. (25)

मुनिगुप्तौ च काकुत्स्थौ कथयन्तु नृपाय वै।
प्रीतियुक्तं तु राजानमानयन्तु सुशीघ्रगा:।॥ २६॥

“Let them also speak of the two scions
of Kakutstha being well looked after by the
sage (yourself) and let them bring the Emperor,
full of delight, poste-haste to Mithila.” (26)

कौशिकस्तु तथेत्याह राजा चाभाष्य मन्त्रिण: |
अयोध्यां प्रेषयामास धर्मात्मा कृतशासनान्।
यथावृत्तं समाख्यातुमानेतुं च नृपं तथा॥ २७॥

The son of Kusika, ViSwamitra, for his
part said, “Amen!” And, summoning his
counsellors, the pious king despatched
them with instructions to narrate at length
everything precisely as it had happened, as
well as to bring the Emperor to Mithila. (27)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये बालकाण्डे सप्तषट्टितम:सर्ग: ॥ ६७॥

Thus ends Canto Sixty-seven in the Balakanda of the glorious Ramayana of Valmiki,
the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

