« KISKINDHAKANDA +

peak, which cannot be easily assailed, stands
a mountain, Suryavan by name, at a distance
of fourteen Yojanas or one hundred and
twelve miles from Puspitaka and accessible
through a path which is difficult to tread.
Then passing beyond it can be reached
another mountain, Vaidyuta by name,
covered with trees bearing fruits which yield
all one’s desires, and ever pleasing to the
mind. Partaking of roots and fruits which
are worthy of the best, and drinking honeys
which are worth eating, proceed further, O
monkeys ! In that very region rises another
mountain, Kunjara by name, delightful to the
eyes and the mind and on which there
stands a dwelling of Sage Agastya,
constructed by ViSwakarma, the architect
of gods. The heavenly edifice standing there
extends to a distance of one Yojana or eight
miles, is ten Yojanas high and is made of
gold and adorned with jewels of various
kinds. On that very mountain stands the
city of Bhogavati, a replica of the city of
the same name in Rasatala, the sixth
subterranean region, the home of serpents,
with spacious streets, which is difficult to
assail and is strongly fortified on all sides
and guarded by highly poisonous and terrible
snakes with sharp fangs. (31—37)

सर्पराजो महाघोरो यस्यां वसति arate: |
निर्याय मार्गितव्या च सा च भोगवती TH ३८॥

“The most dreadful king of serpents,
Vasuki, lives in this city in another form.
Particularly making your way into it the said
city of Bhogavati too should be explored. (38)
wa चानन्तरोद्देशा ये केचन समाव्रता:।

तं च देशमतिक्रम्य महानृषभसंस्थिति:॥ ३९॥
सर्वरत्नमय: श्रीमानृषभो नाम पर्वत:।
गोशीर्षकं Walch च BVA च चन्दनम्॥४०॥
दिव्यमुत्पद्यते यत्र तच्चैवाग्निसमप्रभम्।
न तु तच्चन्दनं दृष्टवा स्प्रष्टव्यं I कदाचन॥४१॥
“Whatever other places adjoining the

city and hidden from view exist in that
region should also be scoured. Nay, beyond

1097

the aforesaid region there rises a glorious
and huge mountain, Rsabha by name,
which has the shape of a bull and is full of
all kinds of jewels, and where Gosirsaka
(having the colour of Gorocana), Padmaka
(resembling a lotus in hue), HariSyama
(possessing the hue of a Tamala tree) and
also Agnisamaprabha (possessing a brilliance
equal to that of fire) species of celestial
sandalwood trees grow. Seeing those
species of sandalwood, however, you should
never touch them on any account. (89—41)

रोहिता नाम Weal at रक्षन्ति तद्बनम्।
तत्र गन्धर्वपतय: Us सूर्यसमप्रभा:॥४२॥
शैलूषो ग्रामणी: शिक्ष: शुको बभ्रुस्तथैव च।
रविसोमाग्निवपुषां निवास: पुण्यकर्मणाम्॥४३॥
art पृथिव्या दुर्धर्षास्तत: स्वर्गजित: स्थिता: |
तत: परं न a: Gea: पितॄलोक: सुदारुण:॥४४॥
“A class of Gandharvas (celestial
musicians), Rohitas by name, guard that
dreaded forest. Among them there are five
Gandharva chiefs, whose brilliance equals
that of the sun, viz., Sailasa, Gramani, Siksa,
Suka and even so Babhru. At the end of the
earth beyond the Rsabha mountain there is
the abode of those who have performed
meritorious deeds and are possessed of
bodies shining like the sun, the moon and
fire. Only those who have earned the
heavenly regions and are difficult to overcome
live there. The most fearful realm of the
manes lying beyond that ought not to be
visited by you. (42—44)

राजधानी यमस्यैषा Het तमसाऽऽव्रृता।
एतावदेव युष्माभिर्वीरा वानरपुंगवा:।
शक्यं विचेतुं गन्तुं वा नातो गतिमतां गति: ।। ४५॥
“This capital of Yama (the god of
retribution) is enveloped in a gloom which
causes discomfort. Only thus far, O jewels
among heroic monkeys, will it be possible for
you to carry on your search or advance.
Beyond that there is no access for earthly
beings (lit., those possessed of motion). (45)
