840

सीतायै प्रददौ रामश्चन्द्ररश्मिसमप्रभम्।
अरजे वाससी feet शुभान्याभरणानि च॥ ७८॥

Satrughna held over him the hereditary
charming parasol and Sugriva, the lord of
monkeys, the white whisk to fan him with;
and Vibhisana, the ruler of ogres, held another
whisk shining brightly as the moon. Prompted
by Indra, the wind-god presented to Sri Rama,
ascion of Raghu, a golden garland consisting
of a hundred lotuses of gold and casting a
splendour with its body. Nay, urged by Indra,
he further presented to Sri Rama, the ruler of
men, a necklace of pearls interspersed with
jewels of every variety and enriched with
gems as well. Gandharvas (celestial
musicians) from among the gods themselves
beautifully sang and troupes of apsaras
(celestial nymphs) danced on that occasion
at the consecration of the sagacious Sri Rama,
who deserved that honour. Nay, the earth
was covered with crops and the trees too
bore fruits, while the flowers emitted their
fragrance of the festive occasion of the
consecration of Sri Rama. Sri Rama, the
foremost of men, first gave away to the
Brahmanas (lit., the twice-born) a hundred
thousand of horses and cows that had lately
calved as also a hundred bulls. The scion of
Raghu gave away later thirty crores of gold
coins and every variety of costly jewels and
raiment. Sri Rama, the suzerain lord of men,
conferred on his friend, Sugriva, the ruler of
monkeys, a heavenly garland consisting of
gold and gems and shining like the sun’s
rays. Sri Rama, who was full of love, gifted to
Angada, son of Vali, a pair of lovely armlets
made of cat’s-eye gems and encrusted with
diamonds and other precious stones. Sri Rama
further bestowed on Sita, his consort, the
aforesaid pearl necklace (conferred on him
by the wind-god), which was enriched with
the foremost of gems, was unsurpassed by
any other in splendour and shone brightly
like moonbeams, a pair of immaculate celestial
robes and other charming jewels. (68—78)

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA +

अवेक्षमाणा वैदेही प्रददौ वायुसूनवे।
अवमुच्यात्मन: कण्ठाद्धारं जनकनन्दिनी॥७९॥
अवैक्षत हरीन् सर्वान् भर्तारं च मुहुर्मुहु:।
तामिङ्घितज्ञ: सम्प्रेक्ष्य बभाषे जनकात्मजाम्॥ ८०॥
प्रदेहि सुभगे et ae तुष्टासि भामिनि।
अथ सा वायुपुत्राय तं हारमसितेक्षणा॥८१॥
तेजो धृतिर्यशो दाक्ष्यं सामर्थ्य विनयो नय:।
पौरुषं विक्रमो बुद्धिर्यस्मिन्नेतानि नित्यदा॥ ८२॥

Looking to his invaluable services, the
princess of the Videha territory felt inclined
to bestow a gift on Hanuman, son of the
wind-god. Taking the pearl necklace,
conferred on her by her husband from her
neck, Janaka’s daughter, cast a look at all
the monkeys present in the assembly as
well as at her husband again and again.
Looking intently on her, Sri Rama, who could
read the mind of another through his or her
gestures, said to Janaka’s daughter, “Gladly
bestow the pearl necklace on him with whom
you are pleased, O blessed young lady.”
The dark-eyed lady forthwith conferred that
necklace on the son of the wind-god, in whom
the following, viz., energy, firmness, renown,
dexterity, competence, modesty, prudence,
virility, prowess and intelligence are ever to
be found. (79—82)

हनूमांस्तेन हारेण शुशुभे वानरर्षभ:।
AAMT श्वेताभ्रेण यथाचल:॥८३॥

Adorned with that jewel, Hanuman the
foremost of monkeys, shone like a mountain
silvered by a cloud, white as an aureole of
moonbeams. (83)

wd वानरव्रद्धाश्च ये चान्ये वानरोत्तमा:।
वासोभिर्भूषणैश्चैव यथार्हं प्रतिपूजिता:॥८४॥

All the senior ones among the monkeys
as also others who were the foremost among
them were honoured with raiment and
ornaments according to their deserts. (84)

विभीषणोऽथ सुग्रीवो हनूमाञ्जाम्बवांस्तथा।
सर्वे वानरमुख्याश्च रामेणाक्लिष्टकर्मणा॥ ८५॥
