732

सुखोषिता: स्म भगवंस्त्वया पूज्येन पूजिता:।
आपृच्छाम: प्रयास्यामो मुनयस्त्वरयन्ति न:॥५॥
“Sir, happily have we stayed, honoured
by Your Holiness. We now take leave of
you and shall depart. The sages are
hastening us. (5)
त्वरामहे वयं RS कृत्स्नमाश्रममण्डलम्।
ऋषीणां पुण्यशीलानां दण्डकारण्यवासिनाम्॥ ६॥
“We shall hasten to see the whole circle
of hermitages of the sages of meritorious
deeds, staying in the Dandaka forest. (6)

अभ्यनुज्ञातुमिच्छाम: सहैभिर्मुनिपुंगवै: ।
पावकै: ॥ ७॥

“We desire to take leave of you together
with these jewels among foremost sages,
always persistent in virtue and self-restraint
through penance, looking like a fire without
smoke. (7)

अविषदह्यातपो यावत् सूर्यो नातिविराजते।
अमार्गेणागतां लक्ष्मीं प्राप्येवान्वयवर्जित:॥८॥
तावदिच्छामहे गन्तुमित्युक्त्वा चरणौ AA: I
ववन्दे Gena: सीतया सह राघव:॥९॥
“Before the sun starts shining brightly
with unbearable heat, just as a man from a
low family becomes unbearable after getting
wealth earned through unfair means, we
desire to go.” Saying this, Raghava bowed
down at the feet of the sage, together with
Laksmana and Sita. (8-9)
तौ संस्पृशन्तौ चरणावुत्थाप्य मुनिपुंगव:।
गाढमाश्लिष्य सस्नेहमिदं वचनमब्रवीत्॥१०॥
The great sage lifted the two princes
touching his feet and, closely embracing
them, uttered these affectionate words :
(10)
अरिष्टं गच्छ Tart wa सौमित्रिणा सह।
सीतया चानया सार्धं छाययेवानुव्रत्तया॥११॥
“Rama, proceed on your journey devoid
of any danger together with the son of

Sumitra and with Sita, who is following you
like a shadow. (11)

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

पश्याश्रमपदं रम्यं दण्डकारण्यवासिनाम्।

wet तपस्विनां ate तपसा भावितात्मनाम्॥१२॥
“O hero, see the charming site of the

hermitages of these ascetics, dwelling in

the Dandaka forest, their soul purified with

penance. (12)

सुप्राज्यफलमूलानि पुष्पितानि वनानि a
प्रशस्तमृगयूथानि शान्तपक्षिगणानि च॥१३॥

फुल्लपङ्कजखण्डानि प्रसन्नसलिलानि a
कारण्डवविकोर्णानि तटाकानि सरांसि च॥ १४॥

द्रक्ष्यसे दृष्टिरम्याणि गिरिप्रस्रवणानि a
रमणीयान्यरण्यानि मयूराभिरुतानि च॥१५॥

“You will see beautiful forests abounding
in fruits and roots and full of flowers with
excellent herds of deer and peaceful flocks
of birds, lakes and ponds containing cluster
of blossoming lotuses with crystal waters
and thronged with water-fowls, springs on
mountains, charming to the eye, and beautiful
forests resounding with the noise of
peacocks. (183—15)

गम्यतां aa सौमित्रे भवानपि च गच्छतु।

आगन्तव्यं च ते दृष्ट्वा पुनरेवाश्रमं Ura १६॥
“Go, dear Rama; you too may go, O

son of Sumitra । You should come back to

this very hermitage after seeing these things.”
(16)

एवमुक्तस्तथेत्युक्त्वा काकुत्स्थ: सहलक्ष्मण:।
प्रदक्षिणं मुनिं कृत्वा प्रस्थातुमुपचक्रमे॥१७॥
Thus addressed, Kakutstha, together
with Laksmana, said, “So be it !” and going
round the sage keeping him to the right,
started on his journey. (17)

aa: शुभतरे तूणी धनुषी चायतेक्षणा।
ददौ सीता तयोरभ्रात्रो; खड्गौ च विमलौ Ta: ॥ १८ ॥

Then Sita, possessed of large eyes,
handed to those two brothers highly superb
quivers, bows and polished swords. (18)

आबध्य च शुभे तूणी चापे चादाय सस्वने।
निष्क्रान्तावाश्रमाद् गन्तुमुभौ at रामलक्ष्मणौ tl १९॥
