* BALAKANDA +

“The fellow indeed practised for a long
time, O Chastiser of foes, severe austerities
by which Brahma, the maker of the universe
and the progenitor of all created beings, got
much pleased. (4)

age: प्रददौ aH राक्षसाय at प्रभु:।
नानाविधेभ्यो भूतेभ्यो भयं नान्यत्र मानुषात्॥५॥
“Highly gratified, Brahma conferred on
that ogre a boon to the effect that he would
have no fear from the different species of
created beings other than man. (5)

अवज्ञाता: पुरा dt वरदाने fe मानवा:।
एवं पितामहात् तस्माद् वरदानेन Aaa: ug il
उत्सादयति लोकांस्त्रीन् स्नियश्चाप्युपकर्षति।
तस्मात् तस्य वधो दृष्टो मानुषेभ्य: WAT Il
“At the time of receiving the boon of
yore, really speaking, men were treated as
of no account and were left out of
consideration by him. Elated thus by the
boon received from the aforesaid Brahma,
the progenitor of the entire creation, he is
oppressing all the three worlds and carries
off womenfolk. Hence his death has been
ordained at the hands of man, O Chastiser
of foes !” (6-7)
इत्येतद् वचनं श्रुत्वा सुराणां विष्णुरात्मवान्।
fort रोचयामास तदा दशरथं नृपम्॥८॥
Hearing the aforesaid submission of
the gods, the high-souled Lord Visnu then
desired King DaSaratha to be His father. (8)

स चाप्यपुत्रो नृपतिस्तस्मिन् काले महाद्युति:।
अयजत् पुत्रियामिष्टि पुत्रेप्सुररिसूदन:॥९॥
Desirous of getting a son, since he
had no male issue, the aforesaid monarch
too, who was possessed of great splendour
and was capable of destroying his foes,
performed at that very time a sacrifice
calculated to procure him a son. (9)

स कृत्वा निश्चयं विष्णुरामन्त्य च पितामहम्।
अन्तर्धानं गतो देवै: पूज्यमानो महर्षिभि:॥ १०॥

Having made up His mind accordingly,

115

and saying good-bye to Brahma, the progenitor
of the entire creation, the said Lord Visnu
disappeared even while He was _ being
worshipped by the gods and great Rsis. (10)

ततो वै यजमानस्य पावकादतुलप्रभम्।
प्रादुर्भूतं महद भूतं महावीर्यं महाबलम्॥११॥
Then, indeed, there arose from the fire
(known as the Ahavaniya) of the sacrificer
an extraordinary being, possessed of
matchless splendour and endowed with

exceptional prowess and uncommon

strength. (11)
: : : रि ।

स्निग्धहर्यक्षतनुजश्मश्रुप्रवरमूर्धजम् ॥ १२॥

Dark-complexioned with a_ ruddy
countenance and a voice resembling the
sound of a large kettledrum, he was clad in
red and had soft and excellent hair
resembling a lion’s all over his body, about
his lower face and on his upper lip as well
as on his head. (12)

शुभलक्षणसम्पन्नं दिव्याभरणभूषितम्।
शैलश्रृङ्गसमुत्सेधं दृप्तशार्दूलविक्रमम्॥ १३॥
Invested with auspicious marks on his
body and decked with celestial jewels, he
possessed the height of a mountain-peak
and strode like a proud tiger. (13)

FeaTeReTATCRTE दीप्तानलशिखोपमम्।

प्रगृह्य विपुलां deat स्वयं मायामयीमिव॥ १५॥

His figure shone like the sun and he
looked like a flame of blazing fire and
personally carried in both his arms a large
basin of refined gold—full of ethereal Payasa
(milk boiled with rice and sugar) and covered
with a silver lid, as though a product of
magic—even as one would carry one’s
beloved spouse. (14-15)
प्राजापत्यं नरं विद्धि मामिहाभ्यागतं नृप॥१६॥
