998

other rulers of the world range the entire
globe, keen as we are to promote virtue. (9)

तस्मिन् नृपतिशार्दूले भरते धर्मवत्सले।
पालयत्यखिलां पृथ्वीं Hate धर्मविप्रियम्॥ १० ॥

“So long as the said Bharata, a veritable
tiger among the rulers of men, who is fond
of virtue, rules over the entire globe, who
can dare do something repugnant to
righteousness? (10)

a aa मार्गविभ्रष्टं स्वधर्मे परमे स्थिता:।
भरताज्ञां पुरस्कृत्य निगृह्णीमो यथाविधि॥११॥

“Keeping before us the command of
Bharata, we, who are devoted to our
paramount duty of upholding virtue, duly
punish him who has strayed away from the
path of virtue. (11)

त्वं तु संक्लिष्टधर्मश्च कर्मणा च विगर्हित: |
कामतन्त्रप्रधानश्च न fer राजवर्त्मनि॥१२॥

“As for yourself you have put down
virtue and stand condemned for your doings.
Nay, you top those who are slaves of lust
and do not adhere to the path trodden by
good kings. (12)

ज्येष्ठो भ्राता पिता वापि यश्च विद्यां प्रयच्छति।
त्रयस्ते पितरो ज्ञेया धर्मे च पथि वर्तिन:॥१३॥

“By him who follows the path of virtue,
an elder brother, father and even he who
imparts learning—all the aforesaid three
should be equally regarded as fathers.(13)

यवीयानात्मन: a: शिष्यश्चापि गुणोदित:।
पुत्रवत्ते त्रयश्चिन्त्या धर्मश्चैवात्र कारणम्॥१४॥

“Similarly, a younger brother, one’s own
son and a virtuous pupil too, the aforesaid
three should be accounted as good as a
son and morality alone is the authority in
this matter. (14)

Wen: Wedd: wat ad: प्लवङ्गम।
हृदिस्थ: सर्वभूतानामात्मा वेद शुभाशुभम्॥१५॥
“The principle governing the conduct of

the virtuous is subtle and altogether
unknowable, O monkey! Installed in the

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

heart of all created beings, the Self alone
knows what is good and what is evil. (15)

चपलश्चपलै:३ सार्धं वानरैरकृतात्मभि:।
जात्यन्ध इव जात्यन्धैर्मन्त्रयन् प्रेक्षसे नु किम्॥ १६॥

“Deliberating as you do with monkeys,
who are all frivolous and are of uncontrolled
mind, like a man born blind deliberating with
those who are likewise blind by birth, what
can you, who are frivolous yourself, know
about Dharma? (16)

अहं तु व्यक्ततामस्य वचनस्य ब्रवीमि a

नहि at केवलं रोषात् त्वं विगर्हितुमर्हसि॥ १७॥
“As for myself | presently tell you the

evident meaning of this assertion of mine.

You should in no case bitterly condemn me

as you have done out of sheer wrath. (17)

तदेतत् कारणं पश्य यदर्थं त्वं मया हत:।

भ्रातुर्वर्तसि भार्यायां त्यक्त्वा धर्मं सनातनम्॥ Ve Il
“Now know the obvious reason why

you have been struck down by me: casting

to the wind the eternal law, you cohabit with
your younger brother's wife. (18)
अस्य त्वं धरमाणस्य सुग्रीवस्य महात्मन:।
रुमायां ACA कामात् स्नुषायां पापकर्मकृत्॥१९॥
“You cohabit through lust with Ruma,
the wedded wife of the high-souled Sugriva,
who is your virtual daughter-in-law, even
while Sugriva is alive; you have thus
perpetrated a sinful deed. (19)

ag व्यतीतस्य ते धर्मात् TAA वानर।

भ्रातृभार्याभिमर्शोऽस्मिन् दण्डोऽयं प्रतिपादित: ॥ २० ॥
“This punishment has been meted out

to you, who strayed from righteousness

and acted as you liked, for embracing
younger brother’s wife, O monkey! (20)

ate लोकविरुद्धस्य लोकवृत्तादपेयुष:।
दण्डादन्यत्र पश्यामि fa हरियूथप॥ २१॥

“For, other than punishment | do not
see any way of restraining him who is
opposed to public interests and has departed
from the code of conduct prescribed for
