+ UTTARAKANDA +

tara :

1029

At: 2

Interpolated Canto 1

A dog arrives at the Royal palace-gate with a request,
Sri Rama orders for ushering

aa: प्रभाते विमले कृत्वा पौर्वाह्लिकीं क्रियाम्।
धर्मासनगतो राजा रामो राजीवलोचन:॥१॥
राजधर्मानवेक्षन् बै ब्राह्मणैर्नैगमै: सह।
पुरोधसा वसिष्ठेन ऋषिणा कश्यपेन ANI

Thereafter in the bright morning Sri
Rama, of lotus-like eye having performed
forenoon rites, took his seat in the Royal
Council-chamber alongwith the Brahmanas,
who were masters of the Vedas, the priest
Vasistha and the sage KaSsyapa, in order to
look into the royal business. (1-2)

मन्तिभिर्व्यवहारज्ञैस्तथान्यैर्धर्मपाठकै: ।
नीतिज्ञैरथ सभ्यैश्च राजभि: सा सभा Tau ३॥

The royal council (assembly) consisted
of ministers, knowers of common practices,
legal procedures and other teachers of laws
who recite scriptures, diplomats (statesmen),
kings and other members of the council. (3)

सभा यथा महेन्द्रस्य यमस्य वरुणस्य Al
शुशुभे राजसिंहस्य रामस्याक्लिष्टकर्मण:॥४॥

The assembly of Sri Rama, the chief of
kings and unwearied in actions looked
graceful like the assembly of Indra, Yama
and Varuna. (4)

अथ रामोऽब्रवीत् aT लक्ष्मणं शुभलक्षणम्।
निर्गच्छ त्वं महाबाहो सुमित्रानन्दवर्धन॥५॥
कार्यार्थिनश्च सौमित्रे ened त्वमुपाक्रम।
रामस्य भाषितं श्रुत्वा लक्ष्मण: शुभलक्षण:॥६॥
द्वारदेशमुपागम्य कारयिणश्चाह्वयत् स्वयम्।
न कश्चिदब्रवीत् at मम कार्यमिहाद्य वै॥७॥

Then Sri Rama said to Laksmana, who
was seated there and who was characterised
by auspicious marks, ‘O Long-armed
Laksmana! go out and call by turn those,
who have come with some business’. Having
listened to Sri Rama’s order, Laksmana

endowed with auspicious marks, going to
the palace-gate himself called those who
had come with some request. None there
came forward saying that he had some
request to make. (5—7)

नाधयो व्याधयश्चैव wt wet प्रशासति।
पक्वसस्या वसुमती सर्वौषधिसमन्विता॥८॥
न बालो म्रियते तत्र न युवा न च मध्यम:।
धर्मेण शासितं ad न च बाधा विधीयते॥ ९॥
दृश्यते न च कार्यार्थी WA Wet प्रशासति।

लक्ष्मण: प्राञ्जलिर्भूत्वा रामायैवं न्यवेदयत्॥१०॥

During the reign of Sri Rama no one
was offended by either physical or mental
ailment. The earth abounded in all kinds of
plants and fully ripe agricultural produce.
Thus in His kingdom neither any child nor
any young man nor any middle-aged person
died. Everything was administered according
to ‘Dharma’ (moral law). No hindrance was
ever put. While Sri Rama ruled over the
kingdom no one was seen coming with any
request with folded hands, Laksmana
communicated all this to Him. (8—10)

अथ राम: प्रसन्नात्मा सौमित्रिमिदमब्रवीत्।
भूय Ua तु गच्छ त्वं कार्यरिण: प्रविचारय॥ ११॥
सम्यक्प्रणीतया नीत्या नाधर्मो विद्यते क्वचित्।

WATS राजभयात् सर्वे रक्षन्तीह परस्परम्॥ १२॥
ao Sa मया WHT इह रक्षन्ति मे प्रजा:।
तथापि त्वं महाबाहो प्रजा रक्षस्व तत्पर:।॥ १३॥

Then the gracious-minded Sri Rama
addressed the following words to Laksmana,
“Go again and find out about those who
have come with some request.” When the
state policy is formulated properly and
executed well, unrighteousness does not
prevail anywhere. Therefore all persons
protect one another due to the fear from the
