* SUNDARAKANDA +

Surasa, who was keen to ascertain the
strength of Hanuman, said: (157)
निविश्य वदनं Asad गन्तव्यं वानरोत्तम।
वर एष पुरा दत्तो AM धात्रेति सत्वरा॥ १५८ il
व्यादाय विपुलं वक्त्रं स्थिता सा मारुते: Te: |
एवमुक्त: सुरसया क्रुद्धो वानरपुंगव:॥१७५९॥
अब्रवीत् He वै वक्त्रं येन मां विषहिष्यसि।
इत्युक्त्वा सुरसां क्रुद्धो दशयोजनमायताम्॥ १६०॥
दशयोजनविस्तारो हनूमानभवत् तदा।
तं दृष्टा मेघसंकाशं दशयोजनमायतम्।
चकार सुरसाप्यास्यं विंशद् योजनमायतम्॥ १६१॥
“You must proceed only after entering
my mouth for once today, O jewel among
the monkeys! Such is the boon granted in
my favour by the creator, Brahma, in the
past.” Saying so and opening her enormous
mouth, she hastily stood in front of Hanuman,
son of the wind-god. Provoked to anger
when spoken to in these words by Surasa,
Hanuman, the foremost of monkeys, said,
“Extend your mouth so that you may be
able to sustain me.” Saying so to Surasa,
whose mouth was ten Yojanas (or eighty
miles) wide, Hanuman then angrily assumed
a height of ten Yojanas. Seeing him ten
Yojanas high and resembling a cloud, Surasa
too made her mouth twenty Yojanas (or one
hundred and sixty, miles) wide. (158—161)
हनूमांस्तु da: क्रुद्धस्निंशद् योजनमायत:।
चकार सुरसा वक्त्रं चत्वारिंशत् तथोच्छितम्॥ १६२॥
Enraged at this, Hanuman for his part
became thirty Yojanas (or two hundred and
forty miles) high. Surasa, likewise, made
her mouth forty Yojanas (or three hundred
and twenty miles) wide. (162)

aya हनुमान् वीर: पञ्चाशद् योजनोच्छित: |
चकार सुरसा वक्त्रं षष्टिं योजनमुच्छितम्॥ १६३ ॥

Thereupon the gallant Hanuman became

39

fifty Yojanas (or four hundred miles) high,
while Surasa made her mouth sixty Yojanas
(or four hundred and eighty miles) wide.(163)

तदैव हनुमान् वीर: watt योजनोच्छित:।
चकार सुरसा वक्त्रमशीतिं योजनोच्छितम्॥ १६४॥

That very moment the valiant Hanuman
became seventy Yojanas (or five hundred
and sixty miles) high and Surasa too made
her mouth eighty Yojanas (or six hundred
and forty miles) wide. (164)

हनूमाननलप्रख्यो नवतिं योजनोच्छित:।
चकार सुरसा वक्त्रं शतयोजनमायतम्॥ १६७५॥

Hanuman, who was blazing like fire,
thereupon became ninety Yojanas (or seven
hundred and twenty miles) high and Surasa
widened her mouth to a hundred Yojanas
(or eight hundred miles). (165)*

तद्दृष्टा व्यादितं त्वास्यं वायुपुत्र: स बुद्धिमान्।
atte सुरसया सुभीमं नरकोपमम्॥१६६॥
स संक्षिप्यात्मन: कायं जीमूत ga मारुति: |
तस्मिन् मुहूर्ते हनुमान् बभूवाङ्गुष्ठमात्रक:॥ १६७॥
Seeing the aforesaid mouth opened by
Surasa, which with its long tongue was
extremely terrible to look at and was a
replica of hell, and contracting his body like
a cloud, Hanuman, son of the wind-god,
was reduced to the breadth of a thumb the
same moment. (166-167)

सोऽभिपद्याथ aged निष्पत्य च महाबल:।

अन्तरिक्षे स्थित: श्रीमानिदं वचनमब्रवीत्॥ १६८ it
Having entered her mouth and coming

out forthwith, the glorious Hanuman, who

was endowed with extraordinary might, spoke
to her as follows standing in airspace : (168)

प्रविष्टोऽस्मि हि ते वक्त्रं दाक्षायणि नमोऽस्तु ते।
गमिष्ये यत्र वैदेही सत्यश्चासीद् वरस्तव॥ १६९॥

“Indeed, | have entered your mouth and
the boon granted to you has been honoured.

* Verses 162 to 165 above have been rejected as interpolated by some commentators. The author of
the commentary known by the name of “Ramayana-Siromani” has, however commented on them and we

have therefore incorporated them into the text.
