# YUDDHAKANDA #

from his army, which resembled a huge
cloud, even as the sun would break away
from a cloud. (83)

रराजाङ्घदसंनद्ध:र सधातुरिव पर्वत:॥८४॥
Adorned with armlets of gold, Angada,
the foremost of monkeys, who closely

resembled a mass of rocks, glittered like a
mountain with its metallic veins. (84)

निरायुधो महातेजा: केवलं नखदंष्ट्वान्।
नरान्तकमभिक्रम्य वालिपुत्रोऽब्रवीद् वच:॥ ८५॥

Approaching Narantaka, Angada (son
of Vall), who, though endowed with
extraordinary energy, was wholly unarmed
except for his nails and teeth, spoke to him
as follows: (85)

तिष्ठ किं प्राकृतैरेभिर्हरिभिस्त्वं करिष्यसि।
अस्मिन् वज्रसमस्पर्शं urd क्षिप्र ममोरसि॥ ce

“Tarry! What will you do with these
common monkeys? Throw your spear, whose
impact is hard to bear like that of lightning,
at this breast of mine.” (86)

अङ्गदस्य वच: Aca प्रचुक्रोध नरान्तक:।
संदश्य दशनैरोष्ठं नि:श्चस्य च भुजंगवत्।
अभिगम्याङ्गदं क्रुद्धो वालिपुत्रं नरान्तक:॥८७॥
Hearing the challenge of Angada,
Narantaka flew into a rage. Biting his lip
with his teeth and hissing like a serpent, the
furious Narantaka stood facing Angada, son
of Vali. (87)

a प्रासमाविध्य तदाङ्गदाय

बभूव भग्नो न्यपतच्च भूमौ॥८८॥

Brandishing his flaming lance, he hurled
it all of a sudden at Angada. The spear,
however, broke against the breast of Angada
(son of Vali), which was hard as adamant,
and fell to the ground. (88)

583

तं प्रासमालोक्य तदा faut
सुपर्णकृत्तोरगभोगकल्पम् ।
at wet स वालिपुत्र-
स्तुरंगमस्याभिजघान WT ८९॥
Seeing that lance shattered at that
moment like the coils of a serpent sundered
by Garuda of beautiful wings, and duly raising
his palm, the aforesaid son of Vali violently
struck with it at the head of Narantaka’s
horse. (89)

निमग्नपाद: स्फुटिताक्षितारो
निष्क्रान्तजिह्वोऽचलसंनिकाश: ।

a तस्य anit निपपात wt
तलप्रहारेण विकीर्णमूर्धा ।॥ ९० Ul

lts feet having sunk deep into the earth,
the pupils of its eyes burst asunder, its
tongue hung out and its skull smashed by
the stroke of his palm, the said horse of
Narantaka, which looked like a mountain,
fell to the ground. (90)

नरान्तक: क्रोधवशं जगाम
स मुष्टिमुद्यम्य महाप्रभावो
जघान शीर्षे युधि वालिपुत्रम्॥९१॥

Gazing on his horse fallen dead,
Narantaka flew into a rage. Raising his
fist, the ogre, who was endowed with
extraordinary might, struck Angada (son
of Vali) on his head on the field of
battle. (91)

अथाङ्मदो मुष्टिविशीर्णमूर्धा
सुस्राव dat रुधिरं भृशोष्णम्।
मुहुर्विजज्वाल मुमोह चापि

संज्ञां समासाद्य विसिस्मिये च॥९२॥

His skull having been smashed by the
blow of the ogre’s fist, Angada forthwith
shed exceedingly hot blood profusely. He
felt a burning sensation and also swooned
now and again and, on_ regaining
consciousness, felt wonder-struck. (92)
