« KISKINDHAKANDA +

Duly set out with a keen desire to fight
and already on its way, the lordly elephant
in rut, roaming about in forests of mountains,
definitely turns back on hearing the rumbling
of clouds behind its back and suspecting it
to be a summon to a contest from a rival
elephant. (32)

विभान्त्यनेकाश्रयिणो वनान्ता: ॥ ३३ ॥

“Singing melodiously as it were at one
place through swarms of bees and dancing
gaily, as it were, at another through peacocks
(lit., the blue-necked birds) and as though
getting furious elsewhere through lordly
elephants, the forest regions appear endowed
with different characteristics at one and the
same time. (33)

वनान्तभूमिर्मधुवारिपूर्णा ।
मयूरमत्ताभिरुतप्रनृत्तै-
रापानभूमिप्रतिमा विभाति॥ ३४॥

“Abounding in Kadamba, Sarja, Arjuna
and Kandala trees, full of water sweet as
honey and characterized by the joyous cries
and dance of peacocks, the land of the
forest regions looks charming like a land
reserved for drinking, where Kadamba, Sarja,
Arjuna and Kandala flowers are had in
abundance, wine is stored in large quantities
and drunken men sing and dance merrily.(34)
मुक्तासमाभं सलिलं wa a

सुनिर्मलं पत्रपुटेषु लग्नम्।
सुरेन्द्रदत्तं den: पिबन्ति॥ acu

“Thirsty birds actually drink with joy
the crystal clear water poured by Indra, the
ruler of gods, and resting in the first instance
on the cup-like leaves and then dripping
from them like pearls, their wings getting
discoloured due to their being drenched.

(35)

1039

षट्पादतन्त्रीमधुराभिधानं

प्लवंगमोदीरितकण्ठतालम् ।
आविष्कृतं मेघमृदङ्गनादै-

ary संगीतमिव प्रव्रत्तम्॥ ३६॥

“Concerted music produced by the

sound of wooden tomtoms in the form of the
rumbling of clouds and accompanied by the
sweet melody of Vinas in the form of the
humming of bees and the sound of beating
time with the throat in the form of the croaking
of frogs, has started, as it were, in the
woodlands. (36)

क्वचिच्च वृक्षाग्रनिषण्णकायै: |
व्यालम्बबर्हाभरणैर्मयूरै-
र्वनेषु संगीतमिव प्रव्त्तम्॥३७॥

“Nay, music with dancing has been set
in operation as it were in the woodlands by
peacocks merrily dancing at one place,
singing loudly (like singers) at another and
resting elsewhere with their bodies supported
on tree-tops as though witnessing the dancing
and listening to the music and with their
jewel-like tails hanging loose. (37)

fear निद्रां चिरसंनिरुद्धाम्।
नवाम्बुधाराभिहता नदन्ति॥ ३८ ॥
“Shaking off their protracted slumber
(in the form of hibernation) when roused by
the repeated rumbling of clouds, frogs of
different forms and shapes and colours and
uttering various sounds, croak on being
whipped by the fresh showers. (38)
Wa: समुद्बाहितचक्रवाका-
स्तटानि शीर्णान्यपवाहयित्वा।
नवप्रावृतपूर्णभोगा-
qt स्वभर्तारमुपोपयान्ति॥३९॥

“Washing away their broken banks
(impeding their motion towards the sea), the
proud rivers (like young women) with the

gat
