1090

एतेषां गिरिदुर्गेषु प्रपातेषु वनेषु च।
मार्गध्वं सहिता: सर्वे रामपत्नीं यशस्विनीम्॥ ३२॥

“In the mountain fastnesses and forests
and by the side of waterfalls of the aforesaid
islands seek you all in a body for the
illustrious consort of Sri Rama. (32)

ततो रक्तजलं प्राप्य शोणाख्यं शीघ्रवाहिनम्।
Tet ut समुद्रस्य सिद्धचारणसेवितम्॥३३॥

wa तीर्थेषु way विचित्रेषु वनेषु च।
रावण: सह वैदेह्या मार्गितव्यस्ततस्तत:॥ ३४॥

“Then, moving to the opposite shore of
the sea, ‘inhabited by Siddhas (a class of
demigods endowed with mystic powers from
their very birth) and Caranas (celestial bards)
and reaching the swiftly flowing river named
Sona, which is so-called because it carries
reddish waters, Ravana alongwith Sita (a
princess of the Videha territory) should be
sought for everywhere at the delightful
descents into the river as also in the
charming forests along its banks. (33-34)

पर्वतप्रभवा नद्य: सुभीमबहुनिष्कुटा:।
मार्गितव्या ated: पर्वताश्च वनानि च॥ ३५॥

“Streams having their source in
mountains and hemmed in with numerous
exceedingly dreadful gardens, as well as
cavernous heights and forests should be
explored. (35)

तत: समुद्रद्वीपांश्च सुभीमान् द्रष्टुमर्हथ।
ऊर्मिमन्तं महारौद्रं क्रोशन्तमनिलोद्धतम्॥ ३६॥

“Then you ought to scour the most
dreadful islands comprising Iksudwipa,
surrounded by an ocean known as
Iksusamudra as also that most frightful ocean
tossed by the winds and, therefore, roaring.

(36)
तत्रासुरा महाकायाश्छायां गृह्णन्ति नित्यश:।
ब्रह्मणा समनुज्ञाता दीर्घकालं बुभुक्षिता:॥ ३७॥

“Having remained hungry for a long

time and, therefore, duly permitted by
Brahma (the creator), demons of huge

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

proportions in that ocean seize birds etc.,
flying over the ocean through their shadow
everyday. (37)
तं कालमेघप्रतिमं महोरगनिषेवितम्।
अभिगम्य महानादं तीर्थेनैव महोदधिम्॥ ३८॥
गत्वा प्रेक्ष्यथ at चैव बृहतीं कूटशाल्मलीम्॥ ३९॥
“Crossing by sheer devices that ocean
looking like a dark cloud and making a loud
noise and infested with huge serpents, and
then reaching the shore of the dreadful sea
containing red water and consequently going
by the name of Red Sea, you will behold
that giant Kutasalmali tree (which has given
the name of Salmali to the island containing
it). (38-39)
Te च वैनतेयस्य नानारत्नविभूषितम्।
wa कैलाससंकाशं विहितं विश्वकर्मणा॥४०॥
“There you will also see the abode of
Garuda (son of Vinata), decorated with
various jewels, constructed by Viswakarma
(the architect of gods) and resembling Mount
Kailasa. (40)
aa शैलनिभा भीमा मन्देहा ATA राक्षसा:।
शैलशृङ्गेषु लम्बन्ते नानारूपा भयावहा:॥४१॥
“In that island formidable ogres of
diverse forms, looking like mountains and
going by the class-name of Mandehas, and
inspiring fear, remain suspended, head
downwards, from the peaks of mountains
enclosed by the ocean of wine. (41)

a पतन्ति we fret सूर्यस्योदयनं प्रति।
अभितप्ता: स्म सूर्येण लम्बन्ते स्म पुन: पुन:॥४२॥
निहता ब्रह्मतेजोभिरहन्यहनि राक्षसा:।
तत: पाण्डुरमेघाभं are नाम सागरम्॥४३॥
गत्वा द्रक्ष्यथ दुर्धर्षा मुक्ताहारमिवोर्मिभि:।
तस्य मध्ये महाञ्श्चेतो ऋषभो ATA पर्वत:॥४४॥
feerra: कुसुमितैराचितैश्च नगैर्वृत:।
सरश्च राजतै: पद्मैर्ज्जलितैर्हेमकेसरै:॥४५॥
नाम्ना सुदर्शनं नाम राजहंसै: समाकुलम्।
विबुधाश्चारणा aa: किंनराश्चाप्सरोगणा:॥४६॥
