+ UTTARAKANDA +

1075

Canto LXXIX
Reign of king Danda, a son of Iksvaku

तदद्भुततमं वाक्यं श्रुत्वागस्त्यस्य राघव:।
गौरवाद् विस्मयाच्चैव भूय: WS प्रचक्रमे॥१॥
Hearing that most wonderful and
marvellous story, narrated by Agastya, Sri
Rama asked him again, full of dismay and
reverence. (1)
भगवंस्तद् at at तपस्तप्यति at स:।
vad वैदर्भको राजा कथं तदमृगद्विजम्॥२॥
“Sir, how was that fearful forest, where
the Vaidarbhaka king Sweta was performing
penances, devoid of animals and birds. (2)
aq at स कथं राजा शून्यं मनुजवर्जितम्।
तपश्चर्तुं प्रविष्ट: स श्रोतुमिच्छामि तत्त्वत:॥ ३॥
“| wish to know in detail how that king

entered that forest, which was barren and
uninhabited by men, to perform penances.”

(3)
रामस्य वचनं श्रुत्वा कौतूहलसमन्वितम्।
वाक्यं परमतेजस्वी वक्तुमेवोपचक्रमे॥४॥

Hearing the words of Sri Rama uttered

out of curiosity, the highly powerful one,
Agastya, spoke thus: (4)

पुरा pat we मनुर्दण्डधर: प्रभु:।
तस्य पुत्रो महानासीदिक्ष्वाकु: कुलनन्दन:॥५॥
“In the former Krtayuga, Manu
(Vaivasvata) was the king. His son, a joy to
his family, was the famous Iksvaku. (5)

तं ut पूर्वकं wea निक्षिप्य भुवि दुर्जयम्।

पृथिव्यां राजवंशानां भव कर्तेत्युवाच तम्॥६॥
“Placing the first son, Iksvaku,

unconquerable on the earth, incharge of the

kingdom, Manu said to him: ‘Be the progenitor
of all royal families.’ (6)

ada च प्रतिज्ञातं पितु: पुत्रेण wea
Wd: परमसंतुष्टो मनु: पुत्रमुवाच ह॥७॥

“Then, O descendant of Raghu, the
son promised to do so and being fully satisfied
Manu addressed him thus. (7)

प्रीतोऽस्मि परमोदार eat चासि न संशय:।
दण्डेन च प्रजा Ta मा च दण्डमकारणे॥ ८॥

“O noble one, | am pleased, you will be
the forerunner of all royal families, there is
no doubt. By punishment as a sign of authority
protect the subjects; do not mete out
unnecessary punishments. (8)
अपराधिषु यो दण्ड: पात्यते मानवेषु a1
a दण्डो विधिवन्मुक्त: स्वर्गं नयति पार्थिवम्॥ ९॥

“That form of punishment, which is
meted out to the guilty men, being given in
proper manner, leads the king to heaven.

(9)
WAT दण्डे महाबाहो यत्नवान् भव TAH |
धर्मो fe परमो लोके कुर्वतस्ते भविष्यति॥ oll

“Therefore, O dear son of long arms,
make efforts to mete out punishment
according to prescriptions in the Sastras.
Resorting to just punishment properly, you
will attain great righteousness.” (10)
sta तं ag dfeva aq: at समाधिना।
जगाम त्रिदिवं हृष्टो ब्रह्मलोकं सनातनम्॥११॥

Thus, having instructed him, Manu,
pleased with himself, went to the eternal
abode of Brahma through Samadhi (trance).

(11)
प्रयाते त्रिदिवं तस्मिन्निश्ष्वाकुरमितप्रभ:।
जनयिष्ये कथं पुत्रानिति चिन्तापरोऽभवत्॥१२॥

When Manu had left for heaven, Iksvaku
of unlimited brilliance, fell to thinking, ‘How
shall | produce sons?’ (12)

कर्मभिर्बहुरूपैश्च तैस्तैर्मनुसुतस्तदा।
जनयामास धर्मात्मा शतं देवसुतोपमान्॥१३॥
