* AYODHYAKANDA +

547

Canto LXIX

Finding Bharata oppressed and sad, his friends try to beguile him by means of
music and narration of stories. But when the prince does not return to his
normal mood even then, they inquire of him as to what makes
him pensive and Bharata tells them how he saw
a bad dream the previous night

यामेव रात्रिं ते gat: प्रविशन्ति स्म at पुरीम्।
भरतेनापि at रात्रिं स्वप्नो दृष्टोऽयमप्रिय:॥१॥
The very night the aforesaid messengers
entered that city of Girivraja an unpleasant
dream, which is being described as follows,
was seen by Bharata. (1)
व्युष्टामेव तु तां रात्रिं gear तं स्वप्नमप्रियम्।
पुत्रो राजाधिराजस्य सुभृशं पर्यतप्यत॥ २॥
Seeing that unpleasant dream at an
hour® when the night had well-nigh ended,
Bharata, the emperor's son, felt extremely
perturbed. (2)

तप्यमानं daa agen: प्रियवादिन:।

आयासं विनयिष्यन्त: सभायां afer कथा:॥ ३॥
Finding him disconsolate, his friends,

who ever spoke kindly to him, commenced

chatting in a coterie, seeking, as they did, to
relieve his agony. (3)

वादयन्ति तदा शान्तिं लासयन्त्यपि चापरे।
नाटकान्यपरे स्माहुर्हास्यानि विविधानि च॥४॥

Some friends played upon musical
instruments at that time, while others indulged
in gentle dance accompanied with vocal
and instrumental music, with a view to
relieving his anxiety; while still others read
out to him dramas of various kinds having
mirth for their dominant sentiment. (4)

स ade भरत: सखिभि: fraarfets:
गोष्ठीहास्यानि कुर्वद्भिर्न weet Waa: kil
The aforesaid Bharata, a scion of

Raghu and an exalted soul as he was, did
not, however, feel much delighted in the

company of those friends, who spoke kindly
to him and indulged in jokes worthy of an
assembly. (5)

तमब्रवीत् प्रियसखो ard सखिभिर्वृतम्।
सुहृद्धि: पर्युपासीन: fe we नानुमोदसे॥६॥
A beloved friend of Bharata spoke as
follows to the said Bharata, who was
surrounded by many friends : “Why, O friend,
do you not join us in rejoicing, sitting as you
are in the midst of friends?” (6)
एवं ब्रुवाणं Ye Wa: Was ह।
श्रृणु त्वं यन्निमित्तं A दैन्यमेतदुपागतम्॥७॥
To the friend speaking as aforesaid,
Bharata replied as follows: “Hear you the
circumstances due to which this depression
has overtaken me. (7)

स्वप्ने पितरमद्राक्षॆ मलिनं मुक्तमूर्धजम्।
पतन्तमद्रिशिखरात् कलुषे गोमये Buel
“In a dream | saw father dejected and

falling from a mountain-peak, his hair dis-
hevelled, into a dirty pool full of cow-dung. (8)

प्लवमानश्च मे ge: स afer गोमये Fel
पिबन्नञ्जलिना act हसन्निव मुहुर्मुहु:॥ ९॥
“He was further seen by me swimming
in that pool of cow-dung, drinking oil from
the hollow of his palms and laughing as it
were, again and again. (9)
ततस्तिलोदनं भुक्त्वा UA: पुनरध:शिरा:।
तैलेनाभ्यक्तसर्वाङ्गस्तैलमेवान्वगाहत ॥ १०॥
“Then, partaking of rice cooked with
sesame seeds and himself smeared all over

* A dream seen at the close of night is believed to come true in a majority of cases.
