« KISKINDHAKANDA +

highly adored even by gods, in which dwelt
a Rsi (a seer of Vedic Mantras) named
Nisakara, noted for his rigorous austerities.
(8)
अष्टौ वर्षसहस्राणि तेनास्मिन्नृषिणा गिरौ।
वसतो wa धर्मज्ञे स्वर्गते तु निशाकरे॥९॥

“Even after Sage NiSakara, who knew
what is right, had ascended to heaven,
eight thousand years slipped past me as |
lived on this mountain without this Rsi. (9)

अवतीर्य च विन्ध्याग्रात् कृच्छ्रेण विषमाच्छनै: |
तीक्ष्णदर्भा वसुमतीं दु:खेन पुनरागत:॥१०॥
“Descending slowly and painfully from
the rugged peak of the Vindhya mountain
(on regaining consciousness after my fall
from the sky) | then reached with difficulty a
plain bristling with sharp-pointed blades of
the sacred KuSa grass. (10)

तमृषिं द्रष्टुकामोऽस्मि दु:खेनाभ्यागतो भृशम्।
जटायुषा मया चैव बहुशोऽधिगतो हि स:॥११॥

“Eager to see the aforesaid Rsi | arrived
there with great hardship; for he had been
visited by Jatayu and myself on many an
occasion in the past. (11)

तस्याश्रमपदाभ्याशे ववरुर्वाता: सुगन्धिन:।
gat नापुष्पित: कश्चिदफलो वा न GAT १२॥

“In the neighbourhood of the site of that
hermitage fragrant breezes blew. No tree
without blossom or fruit could be seen there.

(12)

उपेत्य चाश्रमं पुण्यं व्रृक्षमूलमुपाश्रित:।
द्रष्टुकाम: प्रतीक्षे च भगवन्तं निशाकरम्॥१३॥

“Nay, approaching the holy hermitage |
took shelter at the foot of a tree and waited
there, keen as | was to see the venerable
Sage, Nisakara. (13)

अथ पश्यामि दूरस्थमृषिं ज्वलिततेजसम्।
pats दुर्धर्षमुपावृत्तमुदङ्मुखम्॥१४॥

1149

“Presently | beheld at a distance the
sage of dazzling brilliance, who could not
easily be disregarded, returning with his
face turned towards the north having taken
his bath in the sea. (14)
तमृक्षा: TART व्याघ्रा: सिंहा नानासरीसृपा:।
परिवार्योपगच्छन्ति दातारं प्राणिनो यथा॥१५॥

“Bears, Srmaras (a species of deer),
tigers, lions and serpents of various kinds
followed, surrounding him on all sides as
supplicants would follow a donor. (15)
तत: प्राप्तमृषिं ज्ञात्वा तानि सत्त्वानि वै ययु:।
प्रविष्टे राजनि यथा सर्वं सामात्यकं बलम्॥ LE Il

“Then finding the sage having reached
the hermitage, the aforesaid animals left
immediately for their dens, even as on a
king retiring into his palace the whole army
escorting him, alongwith the ministers,
disperses. (16)

ऋषिस्तु दृष्टवा मां तुष्ट: प्रविष्टश्चाश्रमं पुन:।
मुहूर्तमात्रान्निर्गम्य तत: कार्यमपृच्छत॥१७॥
“The Rsi was pleased to behold me
and retired into his hermitage. Coming out,
however, once more after an hour or so, he
then inquired of me the purpose of my visit.
(17)

सौम्य वैकल्यतां दृष्टवा रोम्णां ते नावगम्यते।
अग्निदग्धाविमौ पक्षौ प्राणाश्चापि शरीरके॥१८॥
“He said: ‘Seeing the disappearance of
your feathers | could not recognize you, O
gentle one! These wings of yours have
also been burnt with fire and even so the
vitality as well as the strength and prowess
too in your frail frame stand well-nigh
consumed. (18)

गृध्रौ gt दृष्टपूर्वौ मे मातरिश्चसमौ जवे।
गृध्राणां चैव राजानौ भ्रातरौ कामरूपिणौ i १९॥

“Two vultures, related as brothers to
each other, the rulers of vultures, who vied
