* ARANYAKANDA «

resembled
(21)

of extraordinary might and

Death :

मानुषौ शस्त्रसम्पन्नौ चीरकृष्णाजिनाम्बरौ।

प्रविष्टौ दण्डकारण्यं घोरं प्रमदया सह॥ २२॥
“Two human beings, fully equipped with

arms, clad in bark and black antelope skin,

and accompanied by a young woman, have

entered the frightful Dandaka forest. (22)

तौ हत्वा at च दुर्वृत्तामुपावर्तितुमर्हथ।

इयं च भगिनी तेषां रुधिरं मम पास्यति॥ २३॥
“Having made short work of the two

brothers, you should also kill that vile woman.

This sister of mine will drink their blood. (23)

मनोरथोऽयमिष्टोऽस्या भगिन्या मम Were: |
शीघ्रं सम्पाद्यतां गत्वा di प्रमथ्य स्वतेजसा॥ २४॥

765

“Proceeding quickly and killing those
two brothers with your own might, accomplish
this cherished longing of this sister of mine,
O ogres! (24)

युष्माभिर्निहतौ gear तावुभौ भ्रातरौ रणे।

इयं प्रहृष्टा मुदिता रुधिरं युधि पास्यति॥ eu
“Highly delighted to see those two

brothers killed on the battlefield by you, this

lady will drink their blood on the battlefield

with joy.” (25)

sta प्रतिसमादिष्टा राक्षसास्ते चतुर्दश।

wa जग्मुस्तया सार्धं घना वातेरिता इव॥ २६॥
Commanded in these words by Khara,

those fourteen ogres went there with her
like clouds driven by a blast. (26)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्येऽरण्यकाण्डे एकोनविंश: AW: ॥ 2¢ ॥

Thus ends Canto Nineteen in the Aranyakanda of the glorious Ramayana of Valmiki,
the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

७
ad
a

सर्ग:

Canto XX
Rama kills the fourteen ogres

तत: शूर्पणखा घोरा राघवाश्रममागता।
राक्षसानाचचक्षॆ dt wet ae सीतया॥१॥
Having reached the hermitage of
Raghava, the dreadful Surpanakha then
pointed out to the ogres the two brothers
with Sita. (1)

a wa पर्णशालायामुपविष्टं महाबलम्।
aq: सीतया सार्धं लक्ष्मणेनापि सेवितम्॥ २॥
They saw the exceptionally mighty Sri
Rama seated with Sita in his hut thatched
with leaves and waited upon by Laksmana.
(2)

तां दृष्टवा Waa: श्रीमानागतांस्तांश्च राक्षसान्।
अब्रवीद् भ्रातरं wa लक्ष्मणं दीप्ततेजसम्॥ ३॥
Seeing her as well as those ogres
come, the glorious Rama, a scion of Raghu,

said to his brother, Laksmana of resplendent
lustre: (3)

Ted wa सौमित्रे सीताया: प्रत्यनन्तर:।
इमानस्या वधिष्यामि पदवीमागतानिह॥४॥

“Remain, O son of Sumitra, by the side
of Sita for a while. | shall make short work
of these ogres, who have come here to
back the ogress”. (4)

वाक्यमेतत् ad: श्रुत्वा रामस्य विदितात्मन:।
तथेति लक्ष्मणो वाक्यं राघवस्य प्रपूजयन्॥५॥
Hearing these words of Rama, the
knower of his own Self, and bowing his
head to the utterance of Raghava, Laksmana
said ‘Amen !’ (5)
राघवोऽपि महच्चापं चामीकरविभूषितम्।
चकार सज्यं धर्मात्मा तानि रक्षांसि चाब्रवीत्॥ ६॥
