# YUDDHAKANDA #

तं तु मायाप्रतिच्छन्नं माययैव विभीषण:।
वीक्षमाणो ददर्शाग्रे भ्रातु: पुत्रमवस्थितम्।
तमप्रतिमकर्माणमप्रतिद्वन्द्वमाहवे ॥ ९॥

Looking round with an occult eye
(capable of discerning hidden objects) itself,
Vibhisana for his part beheld standing near-
by his aforesaid nephew of incomparable
exploits, unrivalled in combat, and veiled by
his own occult power. (9)

ददर्शान्तर्हितं ait वरदानाद् विभीषण:।
तेजसा यशसा wa विक्रमेण च संयुत:॥१०॥

Vibhisana who was richly endowed with
energy, as well as with glory and prowess,
perceived the champion, who was hidden
from view by virtue of a boon (conferred on
him by Brahma). (10)

इन्द्रजित् त्वात्मन: कर्म at शयानौ समीक्ष्य च।
sara परमप्रीतो हर्षयन् सर्वराक्षसान्॥११॥

Nay, supremely rejoiced to observe
the two princes lying on the battlefied, Indrajit
for his part proclaimed as follows his own
feat, thereby bringing delight to all the ogres:

(11)
दूषणस्य च हन्तारौ GRE च महाबलौ।
सादितौ मामकैर्बाणैरभ्रातरौ रामलक्ष्मणौ॥ १२॥

“The two brothers, Rama_ and
Laksmana, the slayers of DUusana as well
as of Khara, who were endowed with
extraordinary might, have been struck down
by my darts! (12)

नेमौ मोक्षयितुं शक्यावेतस्मादिषुबन्धनात्।
सर्वैरपि समागम्य सर्षिसङ्घै: सुरासुरै:॥१३॥
“They cannot be disengaged from this
network of arrows even by all the gods,
demons, including hosts of Rsis (the seers
of Vedic Mantras), exerting together. (13)
यत्कृते चिन्तयानस्य शोकार्तस्य पितुर्मम।
अस्पृष्ट्वा शयनं गात्रैस्त्रयामा याति TAT Ut १४॥
कृत्स्नेयं यत्कृते लङ्का नदी वर्षास्विवाकुला।
सोऽयं मूलहरोऽनर्थ: सर्वेषां शमितो मया॥१५॥

459

“This well-known pest,—which was
wearing away the very roots of us all,
nay, on whose account the whole night
(consisting of three watches of three hours
each) slipped past my father, who remains
absorbed in this thought and stricken with
grief, so much so that he is unable even to
touch his couch with his restless limbs—
and because of whom the entire city of
Lanka remains agitated like a river during
rains—has at last been got rid of by me!

(14-15)

रामस्य लक्ष्मणस्यैव सर्वेषां च वनौकसाम्।
विक्रमा निष्फला: aa यथा शरदि तोयदा:॥ १६ ॥

“All the exploits of Rama and Laksmana
as also of all the monkeys (lit., the dwellers
of the woods) have been rendered void like
the clouds in autumn.” (16)

एवमुक्त्वा तु तान् सर्वान् राक्षसान् परिपश्यत: ।
यूथपानपि तान् सर्वांस्ताडयत् स च रावणि:। १७॥
Nay, having spoken as aforesaid to
all the ogres, who were looking at him, the
aforesaid son of Ravana began to strike all
the well-known monkey generals too. (17)
नीलं नवभिराहत्य मैन्दं सद्बिविदं तथा।
त्रिभिस्तिभिरमित्रघ्नस्तताप परमेषुभि: USI
Hitting Nila, the commander-in-Chief of
the monkey forces, with nine excellent shafts,
Indrajit (the slayer of his foes) tormented
Mainda as well as Dwivida with three darts
each. (18)

जाम्बवन्तं महेष्वासो विद्ध्वा बाणेन वक्षसि।
हनूमतो वेगवतो विससर्ज MM दश॥१९॥
Having pierced Jambavan with an arrow
in the breast, the ogre (who wielded a mighty
bow) discharged ten shafts on the impetuous
Hanuman. (19)

Taeat wet wa तावप्यमितविक्रमौ।
द्वाभ्यां द्वाभ्यां महावेगो विव्याध युधि रावणि: i Ro At

Indrajit (son of Ravana), who was
