# YUDDHAKANDA #

469

एकोनपञ्चाश: सर्ग:
Canto XLIX

Returning to consciousness, Sri Rama wails over the lot of Laksmana
and the monkeys too fall a prey to extreme despondency on
seeing Sri Rama wailing as aforesaid. Seeing Vibhisana
approach Sri Rama in the meantime, they
all take to their heels, mistaking
him for Indrajit

aot शरबन्धेन sel दशरथात्मजौ।
नि:श्चसन्तौ यथा anit शयानौ रुधिरोक्षितौ॥ १॥
wa ते वानरश्रेष्ठा: ससुग्रीवमहाबला:।
परिवार्य महात्मानौ तस्थु: शोकपरिप्लुता:॥ २॥

All the aforesaid jewels among monkeys
(mentioned in verses 2-3 of Canto XLVII
above) including Sugriva (their ruler), who
were endowed with extraordinary might,
stood plunged in grief surrounding the two
high-souled sons of Emperor DaSaratha,
who were lying bathed in blood, hissing like
a pair of serpents, bound, as they were, in
a formidable network of arrows. (1-2)

एतस्मिन्नन्तरे राम: प्रत्यबुध्यत वीर्यवान्।
स्थिरत्वात्सत्त्वयोगाच्च शरै: संदानितोऽपि सन्॥ ३ ॥
In the meantime, by virtue of his
hardinood and being endowed with
exceptional courage, the powerful Sri Rama,
though bound by arrows, regained his
consciousness. (3)

ततो qeat weet निषण्णं गाढमर्पितम्।
भ्रातरं दीनवदनं पर्यदेवयदातुर: UN ४॥

Beholding his younger _ brother,
Laksmana, lying tightly bound with arrows,
bathed in blood, his face downcast, Sri
Rama thereupon lamented as_ follows,
distressed as he was: (4)

fe नु मे सीतया art cern जीवितेन वा।
wart योऽद्य पश्यामि भ्रातरं afer निर्जितम्॥ ५॥

“What purpose of mine on earth will
be accomplished through Sita, if recovered,

or even through my life if preserved when |

perceive my younger brother, Laksmana,

lying utterly vanquished in combat today?
(5)

शक्या सीतासमा नारी मर्त्यलोके विचिन्वता।

न लक्ष्मणसमो भ्राता सचिव: साम्परायिक:॥ ६॥

“A consort on a par with Sita can be
found in this world of mortals by me if | were
to look for her. But a helpful and warlike
brother like Laksmana cannot be had. (6)

परित्यक्ष्याम्यहं प्राणान् वानराणां तु पश्यताम्।
यदि पञ्चत्वमापन्न सुमित्रानन्दवर्धन:॥ ७॥
“| for my part shall yield up my life while
the monkeys stand looking on, if Laksmana
(who enhances the joy of Sumitra) meets with
dissolution (lit. the disintegration of the five
elements). (7)
किं नु वक्ष्यामि कौसल्यां मातरं किं नु कैकयीम्।
कथमम्बां सुमित्रां च पुत्रदर्शनलालसाम्॥८॥
विवत्सां वेपमानां च वेपन्तीं कुररीमिव।
कथमाश्वासयिष्यामि यदि यास्यामि तं विना ei
“What on earth shall | say to mother
Kausalya and what on earth to Kaikeyi?
And how, in what words shall | console
mother Sumitra, bereft of her darling,
Laksmana, nay, sighing for the sight of her
son, trembling from agitation and crying like
a female osprey, if | return to Ayodhya
without Laksmana? (8-9)
कथं वक्ष्यामि wast भरतं च यशस्विनम्।
मया सह at यातो विना तेनाहमागत:॥१०॥
