450

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

Canto XLII

Sri Rama having departed for the forest in an exceptionally swift-going
chariot, DaSaratha vainly seeks to cover the intervening distance on foot.
The very dust raised by the chariot having disappeared after a while,
the Emperor feels doubly disconsolate and drops to the ground.
When Kaikeyi comes forward to support him, he scolds her and
asks her not to touch his person. Kausalya then lifts him up
and persuades him to return. His personal attendants
take him to the latter’s apartments and, seeing him
plunged in grief, Kausalya seats herself beside
him and begins to lament in various ways

यावत् तुं निर्यतस्तस्य रजोरूपमदृश्यत।
नैवेक्ष्वाकुवरस्तावत् संजहारात्मचक्षुषी ।। १ A
So long, however, as the clouds of the
dust that followed Sri Rama even as he
was going out to the forest could be seen,
DaSaratha, the foremost of the Ikswakus,
did not turn his eyes away from them. (1)

mag राजा प्रियं पुत्रं पश्यत्यत्यन्तधार्मिकम्।
तावद् व्यवर्धतेवास्य धरण्यां पुत्रदर्शने॥ २॥
So long as the king saw his beloved
and most virtuous son (in the form of the
dust raised by his chariot) his body stood
on the ground growing in size as it were to
be able to catch a glimpse of his gradually
receding son. (2)

न पश्यति रजोऽप्यस्य यदा रामस्य भूमिप:।
तदाऽऽतश्च निषण्णश्च पपात धरणीतले॥ ३॥

The moment, however, the king ceased
to behold even the dust of the chariot of the
said Sri Rama, he dropped to the ground
afflicted and dejected. (3)

तस्य दक्षिणमन्वागात् कौसल्या बाहुमङ्गना।

Ut चास्यान्वगात् पार्श्व कैकेयी सा सुमध्यमा॥ ४॥
His seniormost wife, Kausalya,

approached his right arm in order to lift him

up by that arm, while the notorious Kaikeyi

of charming limbs went up to his other (left)

side. (4)

aw नयेन च सम्पन्नो ado विनयेन a
उवाच राजा कैकेयीं समीक्ष्य व्यथितेन्द्रिय: ।। ५॥

Distressed in mind to behold Kaikeyi,
the king, who was richly endowed with
prudence, as well as with piety and culture,
spoke to her as follows : (5)

कैकेयि मामकाङ्मानि मा स्प्राक्षी: पापनिश्चये।
नहि cat द्रष्टुमिच्छामि न भार्या न च बान्धवी।। ६॥

“O Kaikeyi of sinful resolve, pray, do
not touch my limbs, really | do not wish to
see you; you are neither my wedded wife
nor my relation. (6)

ये च त्वामनुजीवन्ति नाहं तेषां न ते मम।
केवलार्थपरां fe त्वां त्यक्तधर्मां त्यजाम्यहम्॥ ७॥
“Nay, | am no longer the master of
those who depend for their subsistence on
you nor are they my servants any more. |
disown you, who are solely devoted to your
selfish ends and have forsaken virtue. (7)
अगृह्णां यच्च a पाणिमग्निं पर्यणयं च यत्।
अनुजानामि ad, सर्वमस्मिल्लोके WT च॥८॥
“| hereby disclaim all the benefits that
will accrue to me hereafter in this world and
the next from the fact that | clasped your
hand in marriage and took you round the
fire with me. (8)

भरतश्चेत् प्रतीत: स्याद् राज्यं प्राप्यैतदव्ययम्।
aa स दद्यात् पित्रर्थं मा मां तद्दत्तमागमत्॥९॥
