# YUDDHAKANDA +

करिष्यामि यथार्थं तु कण्डोर्वचनमुत्तमम्।
धर्मिष्ठं च यशस्यं च स्वर्ग्य स्यात् तु फलोदये॥ ३२॥

“| shall follow the excellent counsel of
Kandu, which is in accordance with facts, is
exceedingly righteous and is conducive to
fame in this world and actually leads to
heaven (after death) at the time of reward.

(32)
सकृदेव प्रपन्नाय तवास्मीति च याचते।
अभयं सर्वभूतेभ्यो ददाम्येतद् ad मम॥ ३३॥

“| vouchsafe security against all living
beings to him who comes to me only once
and seeks protection from me, saying ‘lam
yours’: such is my vow. (33)
आनयैनं afters दत्तमस्याभयं मया।
विभीषणो वा सुग्रीव यदि वा रावण: स्वयम्॥ ३४॥

“Bring him hither, O Jewel among
monkeys, be he Vibhisana or Ravana himself,
O Sugriva! Security has already been
granted in his favour by me.” (34)
रामस्य I वच: श्रुत्वा सुग्रीव: प्लवगेश्वर:।
प्रत्यभाषत काकुत्स्थं सौहार्देनाभिपूरित:॥ ३५॥

Filled with love to hear the speech of
Sri Rama, Sugriva, the ruler of monkeys,
for his part replied as follows to Sri Rama,
a scion of Kakutstha: (35)
किमत्र fat eda लोकनाथशिखामणे।
यत्त्वमार्य प्रभाषेथा: सत्त्ववान् सत्पथे स्थित: BE UU

“What wonder, O crest-jewel of kings

353

(lit., protectors of the world), the knower of
what is right, that you have spoken aright at
this moment, full of goodness as you are and
devoted to the path of the virtuous. (36)
मम चाप्यन्तरात्मायं शुद्धं वेत्ति विभीषणम्।
अनुमानाच्च भावाच्च सर्वत: सुपरीक्षित:।॥ ३७॥
“This inner mind of mine too knows
Vibhisana to be sincere; moreover, he has
also been fully tested in every way by
Hanuman by recourse to inference based
on his expression revealing the unperturbed
state of his mind, by recourse to inference
based on his expression revealing the
unperturbed state of his mind. (37)

तस्मात् क्षिप्रं सहास्माभिस्तुल्यो भवतु राघव।
विभीषणो weet: सखित्वं चाभ्युषैतु न:॥ ३८॥

“Therefore, let the highly sagacious
Vibhisana soon be in our company on equal
terms with us. O scion of Raghu, and enjoy

our friendship.” (38)
ततस्तु सुग्रीववचो निशम्य a-
द्धरीश्वरेणाभिहितं AAT: |
विभीषणेनाशु जगाम संगमं
पतत्रिराजेन यथा पुरंदर:॥ BQ UI

Hearing the aforesaid submission of
Sugriva, Sri Rama, a ruler of men, for his
part thereupon speedily arranged a meeting
with Vibhisana as suggested by the lord of
monkeys, even as Indra (a destroyer of
strongholds) contrived a meeting with
Garuda, the king of birds. (39)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये युद्धकाण्डेऽष्टादश: सर्ग: ॥ १८ Il

Thus ends Canto Eighteen in the Yuddhakanda of the glorious Ramayana of
Valmiki, the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

