1068

of the Brahmana come back to life, grant
me this boon, this is the best and most
coveted boon for me. (10)

ममापचाराद् बालोऽसौ ब्राह्मणस्यैकपुत्रक:।
अप्राप्तकाल: कालेन नीतो वैवस्वतक्षयम्॥११॥

“The only child of the Brahmana was
taken to the abode of Yama, the son of
Vivasvan, untimely due to my some wrongful
doing. (11)
तं जीवयत ws at ard कर्तुमर्हथ।
द्विजस्य संश्रुतोऽर्थो A जीवयिष्यामि ते सुतम्॥ १२॥

“So please bring the child to life again,
may welfare be with you. ‘I shall bring your
child back to life,’ thus | have promised to
the Brahmana. May my words not be untrue.”

(12)

राघवस्य तु Ag वाक्यं श्रुत्वा विबुधसत्तमा:।
प्रत्यूचू राघवं प्रीता car: प्रीतिसमन्वितम्॥ १३॥
Hearing these words of Sri Rama, the
best among the gods, highly pleased, replied
to the descendant of Raghu: (13)

निर्वृतो भव काकुत्स्थ सोऽस्मिन्नहनि ATCT: ।
जीवितं प्राप्तवान् भूय: समेतश्चापि बन्धुभि: 1 १४॥
‘Be contended, O Scion of Kakutstha,

that child has come back to life and joined
his kinsmen. (14)

यस्मिन् मुहूर्ते काकुत्स्थ शूद्रोऽयं विनिपातित: |
तस्मिन् मुहूर्ते बालोऽसौ जीवेन समयुज्यत॥ १५॥

‘The moment the Sidra was killed, that
very moment this child came to life. (15)

स्वस्ति प्राप्नुहि भद्रं ते साधु याम नरर्षभ।

अगस्त्यस्याश्रमपदं द्राटुमिच्छ।म राघव॥ VE Il
‘Hail to Thee, we wish your welfare;

now we may proceed, O bull among men, O

descendant of Raghu, we wish to see the
hermitage of Agastya. (16)

तस्य दीक्षा समाप्ता fe ब्रह्मर्षे: सुमहाद्युते: |

द्वादशं fe गतं वर्षं जलशय्यां समासत:॥१७॥
‘The brilliant one, the initiation (vow) of

that Rsi (sage) among Brahmanas, Agastya,

« VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

has come to an end, twelfth year he has
passed observing the vow of sleeping on the
water. (17)

काकुत्स्थ de गमिष्यामो मुनिं समभिनन्दितुम्।
त्वं चापि गच्छ भद्रं A द्रष्टुं तमृषिसत्तमम्॥१८॥

‘Therefore, O scion of Kakutstha, we shall
go to applaud the sage, you too should go to
see that great sage; we wish your welfare!’ (18)

a adit प्रतिज्ञाय cart रघुनन्दन:।

sete fart तं पुष्पकं हेमभूषितम्॥१९॥
‘The descendant of the Raghus, Sri

Rama, having promised to do so, ascended

the chariot, Puspaka, ornamented with gold.
(19)

ततो देवा: प्रयातास्ते विमानैर्बहुविस्तरै:।
रामोऽप्यनुजगामाशु कुम्भयोनेस्तपोवनम्॥ Ro Il

Then the gods proceeded on spacious
Vimanas, planes: Sri Rama too followed
them soon to the hermitage of the pitcher-
born, Agastya. (20)

दृष्टवा तु देवान् सम्प्राप्तानगस्त्यस्तपसां निधि: ।
अर्चयामास धर्मात्मा सर्वांस्तानविशेषत:॥ २१॥

Seeing the gods arrived, Agastya, the
repository of penances, the holy one,
worshipped all of them without discrimination.

(21)
प्रतिगृह्य तत: पूजां सम्पूज्य च महामुनिम्।
जग्मुस्ते त्रिदशा WET नाकपृष्ठं सहानुगा:।॥ २२॥

Accepting the worship and adoring the
great sage, Agastya, the gods highly pleased
went away to the upper-most heaven together
with their followers. (22)

गतेषु AY काकुत्स्थ: पुष्पकादवरुह्य Al
ततोऽभिवादयामास अगस्त्यमृषिसत्तमम्॥ २३॥

After the gods had departed, the scion
of Kakutstha descending from Puspaka,
made obeisance to the great sage, Agastya.

(23)
सोऽभिवाद्य महात्मानं ज्वलन्तमिव तेजसा।
आतिथ्यं परमं प्राप्य निषसाद नराधिप:॥ २४॥
