* BALAKANDA +

“Formerly there was a king, Kusa by
name, a son of Brahma, the lord of created
beings; while Kusa’s son was the mighty
and highly pious Kusanabha. (18)

गाधिरित्येव fasta: |
गाधे: Gat महातेजा विश्वामित्रो Aaah: eeu

“The son of KuSanabha was widely
known by the simple name of Gadhi, while
Gadhi’s exceptionally glorious son is the
great sage Viswamitra. (19)

विश्वामित्रो महातेजा: पालयामास मेदिनीम्।
बहुवर्षसहस्राणि राजा राज्यमकारयत्॥ २०॥

“The highly glorious King ViSwamitra
carried on his administration and ruled over
the earth for many thousands of years. (20)

कदाचित् तु महातेजा योजयित्वा वरूथिनीम्।
अक्षौहिणीपरिव्रृत:र परिचक्राम मेदिनीम्॥ २१॥
“Collecting an army and accompanied
by an Aksauhini (a division consisting of
21,870 elephants, an equal number of
chariots, 65,610 horse and 1,09,350 foot),
the exceptionally glorious king once went
round the globe. (21)
नगराणि च राष्ट्राणि सरितश्च महागिरीन्।
आश्रमान् HAM राजा विचरन्नाजगाम ह॥ २२॥
वसिष्ठस्याश्रमपदं नानापुष्पलताद्रुमम्।
नानामृगगणाकोर्णं सिद्धचारणसेवितम्॥ २३॥
“Marching successively across cities
and states, rivers and great mountains and
hermitages, the king, they say, came to the
site of Vasistha’s hermitage, rich in flowers,
creepers and trees of various kinds, infested
with hordes of wild animals of every
description, and frequented by Siddhas and
Caranas. (22-23)

देवदानवगन्धर्वै: किंनरैरुपशोभितम्।
प्रशान्तहरिणाकोर्णं द्विजसंघनिषेवितम्॥ २४॥

213

“It was graced by the presence of
gods, demons, Gandharvas and Kinnaras,
abounded in most peaceful deer and was

resorted to by flocks of birds. (24)
ब्रह्मर्षिगणसंकीर्णं देवर्षिगणसेवितम्।
तपश्चरणसंसिद्धैरग्निकल्पैर्महात्मभि: ॥ २५॥
सततं संकुलं श्रीमद्ब्रह्मकल्पैर्महात्मभि:।
अन्भक्षैर्वायुभक्षैश्च शीर्णपर्णाशनैस्तथा॥ २६॥
: ।
ऋषिभिर्वालखिल्यैश्च जपहोमपरायणै: ।॥ २७॥

cast जयतां श्रेष्ठो विश्वामित्रो महाबल:॥ २८ i

“Nay, it was crowded with multitudes
of Brahmana Rsis, visited by batches of
celestial sages and incessantly thronged
with noble souls accomplished of purpose
through the performance of austerities and
resplendent as fire, and adorned on all
sides with exalted souls vying with the
glorious Brahma (the creator), Rsis living
(in some cases) on water or air and (in
other cases) on leaves fallen on earth or on
fruits and roots alone, nay, who had
controlled not only their external senses but
their inner sense, the mind, as well and
conquered all their weaknesses as well as
with the class of Rsis known as the
Valakhilyas (so-called because they took
their descent from the hair of Brahma),
intent on Japa (the muttering of prayers)
and Homa (pouring oblations into the sacred
fire), and others, called the Vaikhanasas,
who are said to have sprung up from the
nails* of Brahma. The mighty Viswamitra,
the foremost of the victorious, beheld the
aforesaid site of the hermitage of Vasistha,
which was a second Brahmaloka (the realm
of Brahma) as it were. (25—28)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये बालकाण्डे एकपञ्चाश: सर्ग: ॥ ५१ ॥

Thus ends Canto Fifty-one in the Balakanda of the glorious Ramayana of Valmiki,
the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

* The Sruti says: 4 नखास्ते वैखानसा ये वालास्ते वालखिल्या:।
