652

and administering justice to the people quite
in consonance with righteousness surely

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

ascends to heaven when detached from
this mortal body.” (76)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्येऽयोध्याकाण्डे शततम: AA: ॥ 200 ॥

Thus ends Canto One hundred in the Ayodhyakanda of the glorious Ramayana of
Valmiki, the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

एकाधिकशततम: सर्ग:
Canto CI

Questioned as to what made him give up the sovereignty of Ayodhya and
enter the forest in the garb of an ascetic, Bharata reproaches his
mother and implores his elder brother to accept the kingship and
return to Ayodhya. Sri Rama, however, pleads that the
command of their father is supreme and must be implicitly
obeyed by both of them, the first part of it enjoining the
exile of the elder brother being binding on him and
the second part bequeathing the kingdom to
Bharata being binding on the latter

तं तु Wa: समाज्ञाय भ्रातरं गुरुवत्सलम्।
लक्ष्मणेन सह भ्रात्रा We समुपचक्रमे॥१॥
Concluding from his ascetic garb, the
aforesaid Bharata to be full of love to himself
(his elder brother), Sri Rama for his part
alongwith Laksmana duly started questioning
Bharata as follows : (1)
यस्मात् त्वमागतो देशमिमं चीरजटाजिनी॥ २॥
“| wish to hear explained by you
wherefore it is that you have come all the
way to this region, clad in the bark of trees
and deerskin and wearing matted locks on
your head. (2)
यन्निमित्तमिमं देशं कृष्णाजिनजटाधर:।
हित्वा Wet प्रविष्टस्त्वं aq We वक्तुमर्हसि॥ ३॥
“What for have you entered this region,
wearing the skin of a black buck on your
person and matted locks on your head,
relinquishing the sovereignty? Please state
all this clearly.” (3)

इत्युक्त: केकयीपुत्र: काकुत्स्थेन महात्मना।
Wea wad wa: प्राञ्जलिर्वाक्यमब्रवीत्॥४॥

Addressed in the aforesaid words once
again by the high-souled Sri Rama (a scion
of Kakutstha) closely embracing him,
Bharata (the son of Kaikeyi) made the
following submission with folded hands : (4)

आर्य तात: परित्यज्य कृत्वा कर्म सुदुष्करम्।
Ta: स्वर्गं महाबाहु: पुत्रशोकाभिपीडित:॥५॥
fern from: कैकेय्या मम मात्रा परंतप।
चकार सा महत्पापमिदमात्मयशोहरम्॥६॥

“Having performed a deed in the shape
of disinheriting and exiling his own eldest son,
most difficult to perform, as urged by his
favourite spouse and my mother, Kaikeyi, and
abandoning us all, our mighty-armed father
ascended to heaven, sore stricken as he was
with grief caused by separation from his most
beloved son, O tormentor of foes! In this
way she perpetrated this great sin, that has
taken away her own reputation, O noble
brother ! (5-6)
