# YUDDHAKANDA #

soul-captivating and

presence.’

ततो रामो धनुष्पाणिर्मृगं तमनुधावति।
aod जघान wad शरेणानतपर्वणा॥ २४॥

“Bow in hand, Sri Rama thereupon
chased that weird deer. Nay, he killed it
with an arrow of curved joints even while it
was running. (24)

अथ सौम्य दशग्रीवो wt याति तु राघवे।
लक्ष्मणे चापि निष्क्रान्ते प्रविवेशाश्रमं तदा॥ २५ ॥

“When, however, Sri Rama (a scion of
Raghu) had left in pursuit of the aforesaid,
deer and Laksmana too had issued forth
(from the hermitage on being pressed by
Sita to leave immediately to help his eldest
brother, who seemed to be in ‘trouble’,
Ravana, the ten-headed monster, forthwith
entered the hermitage during that interval,
O gentle Sir! (25)
woe ava dat we: खे रोहिणीमिव।
त्रातुकामं ततो युद्धे हत्वा Tat जटायुषम्॥ २६॥
प्रगृह्य सहसा सीतां जगामाशु स राक्षस:।
ततस्त्वद्धुतसंकाशा: स्थिता: पर्वतमूर्धनि॥ २७॥
सीतां गृहीत्वा गच्छन्तं वानरा: पर्वतोपमा:।
ददृशुर्विस्मिताकारा रावणं राक्षसाधिपम्॥ २८॥
aa: शीघ्रतरं गत्वा aq विमानं मनोजवम्।
Med We ACM पुष्पकं स महाबल:॥ २९॥
प्रविवेश तदा लङ्कां रावणो राक्षसेश्वर:।
at सुवर्णपरिष्कारे शुभे महति वेश्मनि॥ ३०॥
Wave मैथिलीं वाक्यै: सान्त्वयामास WATT: |
तृणवद् भाषितं तस्य तं च नैर्ऋतपुङ्खवम्॥ ३१॥
अचिन्तयन्ती वैदेही ह्यशोकवनिकां गता।
न्यवर्तत तदा Wat मृगं हत्वा तदा वने॥३२॥

“He forcibly laid his hands on Sita
even as a planet like Mars would obscure
the constellation Rohini by interposing itself
between the moon and the lunar mansion.
Fatally wounding in an encounter, the
vulture-king, Jatayu, who sought to deliver
her, and seizing hold of Sita by force, the

lovely with its
(23)

825

said ogre thereupon departed in haste.
Perched on a mountain-top some strange-
looking monkeys (Sugriva and others) for
their part, who appeared like mountains and
had amazement writ large on their faces,
presently saw Ravana the suzerain lord of
ogres, passing that way, taking Sita in his
arms. Then, coursing with great speed in
the air and mounting with the princess of
the Videha territory, the well-known aerial
car, Puspaka, which was swift as thought
(and stood waiting for him somewhere
according to his directions), that ruler of
ogres, Ravana, who was endowed with
extraordinary might, presently made good
his entry into Lanka. Lodging the princess
of Mithila in a charming stately mansion
enclosed with a gold wall, Ravana sought
to console her with blandishing words.
Caring a straw for his speech and ignoring
that prince of ogres, however, Sita, a
princess of the Videha territory, actually
remained in the Asoka grove (attached to
that palace estate). “Having presently killed
the ogre disguised as a deer in the forest,
Sri Rama then retraced his steps to his
hermitage. (26—32)
निवर्तमान: काकुत्स्थो दृष्टवा Tet स विव्यथे।

गृध्रं हतं dat gear wa: प्रियतरं पितु:।॥ ३३॥
मार्गमाणस्तु वैदेहीं राघव: सहलक्ष्मण:।

गोदावरीमनुचरन् वनोद्देशांश्च पुष्पितान्॥३४॥

“Missing Sita in the hermitage as
well as the vulture, who was living on the
outskirts of the hermitage, while returning,
the said scion of Kakutstha felt agonized.
Seeing the vulture, Jatayu, who was dearer
to him than his own father, killed, while
looking out for Sita (a princess of the Videha
territory), Sri Rama, a scion of Raghu, for
his part, who was accompanied by
Laksmana, ranged along the bank of the
Godavari as also the blossomed woodlands.

(33-34)
