878

restored. “Having said as above to
DaSagriva, O Rama, Brahma, the grandfather
of the universe, spoke as follows to Vibhisana:
‘Vibhisana, my child, | am highly pleased
with you, whose mind is imbued with Dharma,
O pious-minded one! Ask for a boon, O
ogre of holy vows!’ Vibhisana, the
Dharmatma, always endowed with all good
qualities like the moon with its rays, said
with folded hands, ‘I am Krtakrtya (one who
has his life’s purpose accomplished) O
venerable sir, in that the ‘Loka-guru’ (the
world-teacher) is himself pleased with me.

(22—29)

प्रीतेन ate दातव्यो वरो A yO, Wad
परमापद्गतस्यापि धर्मे मम मतिर्भवेत्॥३०॥

‘If you grant a boon to me in your
pleasure, O god of holy vows, please give
me a hearing: Even when | get into the
greatest of difficulties, my mind should remain
steady in virtue. (30)

अशिक्षितं च ब्रह्मास्त्रं भगवन् प्रतिभातु मे।
या या मे जायते बुद्धिर्येषु येष्वाश्रमेषु WN ३१॥
सा सा भवतु धर्मिष्ठा तं तं धर्मं च पालये।
Wa A परमोदारो वर: परमको मत:॥३२॥

‘O Lord, let the knowledge of Brahmastra
(a mystic missile presided over by Brahma)
dawn on me untaught. May all the thoughts
that come to me in the various stages of life,
be in accord with Dharma. Let me also
perform the duties appropriate to each such
stage, O supremely magnanimous one, this
| consider to be the best boon. (31-32)

नहि धर्माभिरक्तानां लोके किंचन दुर्लभम्।
पुन: प्रजापति: what विभीषणमुवाच ह॥ ३३॥
‘There is nothing in the world which
those who are devoted to righteousness
find difficult to obtain.’ The Prajapati, being
pleased, further said to Vibhisana as follows:
(33)

धर्मिष्ठस्त्वं यथा वत्स तथा चैतद् भविष्यति।
यस्माद् राक्षसयोनौ a जातस्यामित्रनाशन॥ ३४॥

« VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

नाधर्मे जायते बुद्धिरमरत्वं ददामि a
इत्युक्त्वा कुम्भकर्णाय वरं दातुमवस्थितम्॥ ३५॥
प्रजापतिं सुरा: सर्वे वाक्यं प्राञ्जलयोऽब्रुवन्।
न Mad कुम्भकर्णाय प्रदातव्यो वरस्त्वया॥ ३६॥
write fe यथा लोकांस्त्रासयत्येष gata: |
नन्दनेऽप्सरस: सप्त महेन्द्रानुचरा दश॥ ३७॥
अनेन भक्षिता ब्रह्मन्नृषयो मानुषास्तथा।
अलब्धवरपूर्वेण यत् कृतं राक्षसेन Tse
यद्येष वरलब्ध: Ve भक्षयेद भुवनत्रयम्।
वरव्याजेन मोहोऽस्मै दीयताममितप्रभ॥ ३९॥

‘My son, since you are exceedingly
virtuous, it shall be so; O destroyer of your
foes, since your mind is not inclined to
unrighteousness, even though you are born
in the family of Raksasas, | make you
immortal.’ “When after saying this to
Vibhisana, the Prajapati was standing ready
to grant a boon to Kumbhakarna, all the
gods with folded hands said to him: ‘No
boon at all should be granted by you to
Kumbhakarna; for you know how this evil-
minded fellow is causing terror in all the
three worlds. Seven celestial nymphs
(Apsaras) in the Nandana Vana (pleasure-
garden of Indra), ten attendants of the mighty
Indra as also seers and human beings have
been devoured by him, O Brahma! When so
much havoc has been done by this Raksasa
even when he had received no boons, he
will devour all the three worlds if boons are
granted to him. Under the pretext of granting
boons to him, let a spell of delusion be cast
on him, O god of limitless lustre! (34—39)

लोकानां स्वस्ति चैवं स्याद् भवेदस्य च सम्मति: |
wage: सुरैर्ब्रह्माचिन्तयत् पद्मसम्भव:॥४०॥

‘The welfare of the world will thus be
assured and honour conferred on him.’
“Addressed thus by the gods, Brahma, the
lotus-born, thought of Goddess Saraswati,
his consort. (40)

चिन्तिता चोपतस्थेऽस्य urge देवी सरस्वती।
Wate: सा तु पार्श्वस्था प्राह वाक्यं सरस्वती ॥ ४१ ॥
“Thought of by him, Goddess Saraswati
