* AYODHYAKANDA +

“Here goes Sri Rama (a scion of
Raghu), who is about to inherit a great royal
fortune by the grace of the king. We too
shall have all our desires fulfilled in that he
shall be our suzerain ruler. (44)
लाभो जनस्यास्य यदेष ad

प्रपत्स्यते राष्ट्मिदं चिराय।
न ह्यप्रियं किंचन जातु कश्चित्
पश्येन्न दु:खं मनुजाधिपेऽस्मिन्॥ ४५ ॥

“This will be our supreme gain that Sri
Rama will for long acquire sovereignty over
this entire state. For, so long as he is the
ruler of men none will ever undergo any

disagreeable experience, much _ less
suffering.” (45)

रभिष्टुतो वैश्रवणो यथा ययौ॥ ४६ ॥

357

Being glorified by Swastikas, who
pronounced’ benedictions by raising
shouts of victory, Sutas (chroniclers) and
Magadhas* (who glorified descent), who
marched ahead of him and extolled by
eloquent eulogists, Sri Rama drove like
Kubera (son of the sage Visrava) alongwith
neighing horses accompanied by elephants.

(46)

wert: परिपूर्णचत्वरम्।

प्रथूच्॰।रल बहुपण्यसचय

ददर्श wat विमलं महापथम्॥४७॥
Sri Rama also beheld the clean road
thronged with elephants in rut and she-
elephants, chariots and horses, with their
crossings packed to the full by large crowds
of men, nay, lined with shops containing
abundant jewels and large stocks of saleable
goods. (47)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्येऽयोध्याकाण्डे WST: AT: ॥ १६ Il

Thus ends Canto Sixteen in the Ayodhyakanda of the glorious Ramayana
of Valmiki, the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

सप्तदश: सर्ग:
Canto XVII

Sri Rama drives in state to his father’s gynaeceum, beholding en route the
charms of Ayodhya, hearing the blessings and encomia of his friends
and relations and ravishing the eyes of all on-lookers, and on
reaching his destination sends back his retinue and
seeks the presence of his royal father alone

स wat रथमास्थाय सम्प्रहृष्टसुहृज्जन:।
पताकाध्वजसम्पन्नं महार्हागुरुधूपितम्॥ १॥
अपश्यन्नगरं श्रीमान् नानाजनसमन्वितम्।
स गृहैरभ्रसंकाशै: पाण्डुरैरुपशोभितम्॥२॥
राजमार्गं aa रामो मध्येनागुरुधूपितम्।
चन्दनानां च मुख्यानामगुरूणां च संचयै:। ३॥

उत्तमानां च गन्धानां क्षौमकौशाम्बरस्य a
अविद्धाभिश्च मुक्ताभिरुत्तमै: स्फाटिकैरपि॥४॥
शोभमानमसम्बाधं तं राजपथमुत्तमम्।
Wat = विविधै: पुष्पैर्भक्ष्यैरुच्चावचैरपि॥५॥
cast तं राजपथं दिवि देवपतिर्यथा।
दध्यक्षतहविर्लाजैर्धूपैरगुरुचन्दनै: ॥ ६ ॥

* The Magadhas were a mixed class born to a Vaisya through a Ksatriya wife—arte: क्षत्रियाविशो:

(Amarakoé§a).
