976

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

Canto XII

Amazed to behold Sri Rama’s arrow re-enter his quiver after piercing all the
seven sal trees and penetrating the bowels of the earth, and applauding
न Rama, Sugriva implores him to make short work of Vali. Sending
Sugriva to challenge Vali to a combat, Sri Rama sits in hiding behind a
tree. When a passage at arms commenced with Vali who would not
brook a challenge, Sri Rama did not hit Vali with an arrow because
the two brothers so closely resembled each other that it was
difficult for him to distinguish one from the other. The result
was that Sugriva lost heart and ultimately taking to his heels,
returned to Rsyamuka. Explaining to Sugriva the reason
of his failure to hit Vali, Sri Rama reassures Sugriva
and encourages him to seek an encounter with Vali
again. Urged by Sri Rama, Laksmana uproots a
blossomed GajapuspI creeper and ties it about
the neck of Sugriva for identification

एतच्च वचनं श्रुत्वा सुग्रीवस्य सुभाषितम्।
प्रत्ययार्थं महातेजा रामो जग्राह कार्मुकम्॥१॥

Nay, hearing this well-worded
submission of Sugriva, Sri Rama, who was
invested with exceptional glory, took up his
bow to inspire confidence in the former. (1)

a गृहीत्वा धनुर्घोरं शरमेकं च मानद:।
सालमुद्दिश्य चिक्षेप पूरयन् स रवैर्दिश:॥ २॥

Taking up the dreadful bow and an
arrow and aiming it at the sal tree (pointed
out by Sugriva), the celebrated Sri Rama,
the bestower of honour on others, discharged
it filling the quarters with the twang of the
bow (2)

a विसृष्टो बलवता बाण: स्वर्णपरिष्कृत:।
भित्त्वा सालान् गिरिप्रस्थं सप्तभूमिं विवेश Tu ३॥

Piercing all the seven sal trees (though
it was aimed at only one of them), as well
as the plateau on which they stood, as also
the six subterranean regions, the aforesaid
arrow, which was shot by the mighty prince
and was decked with gold, entered Patala
(the seventh subterranean region); so the
tradition goes. (3)

सायकस्तु मुहूर्तेन सालान् भित्त्वा महाजव:।
निष्पत्य च wet तमेव प्रविवेश ह॥४॥

Having pierced the sal trees (as well as
the plateau and the bowels of the earth) in
the course of less than an hour and forcing
its way out, the arrow for its part, which was
possessed of great velocity, quickly entered
once more, they say, the same quiver from
which it had emerged. (4)

तान् gaat सप्त निर्भिन्नान् सालान् वानरपुङ्खव: |
रामस्य शरवेगेन विस्मयं परमं Tak

Sugriva (the foremost of monkeys) was
seized with great wonder to see (with his
own eyes) those seven sal trees thoroughly
pierced by the impetuosity of Sri Rama’s
arrow. (5)
स yat न्यपतद् भूमौ प्रलम्बीकृतभूषण:।
Gia: परमप्रीतो राघवाय कृताञ्जलि:॥६॥

Supremely pleased, Sugriva with joined
palms fell flat on the ground as a token of
respect towards Sri Rama (a scion of Raghu),
with his head touching the ground and his
ornaments also hanging loose in the process
of bending low. (6)
