820

आश्रमे तस्य रामस्य सीताया: प्रमुखे चर।
प्रलोभयित्वा वैदेहीं यथेष्टं गन्तुमर्हसि॥ १८॥

“Now hear of that role which has to be
played by you by way of co-operation at my
instance : turning into a golden deer freckled
with silvery spots, roam you in the hermitage
of the aforesaid Rama, before the eyes of
Sita. Having cast your full charm on her,
you may go wherever you please. (17-18)
vat fe मायामयं दृष्टवा काञ्चनं जातविस्मया।
आनयैनमिति fad wa वक्ष्यति मैथिली॥ १९॥

“Wonder-struck to see you transformed
into a golden deer by dint of Maya (conjuring
tricks), Sita, a princess of Mithila, will surely
speak to Rama at once: ‘Pray, fetch the
deer for me.’ (19)

अपक्रान्ते च काकुत्स्थे दूरं गत्वाप्युदाहर।

हा सीते लक्ष्मणेत्येवं रामवाक्यानुरूपकम्॥ २०॥
“Also moving to some distance, when

Rama (a scion of Kakutstha) is away from

his hut, exclaim in a voice similar to Rama’s,

‘Ah, Sita, O Laksmana !’ (20)

wegen waa सीतया च प्रचोदित:।
अनुगच्छति सम्भ्रान्त: सौमित्रिरपि सौहृदात्॥ २१॥

Hearing the call and importuned by
Sita, Laksmana, son of Sumitra, too will
follow in the wake of Rama in a flurry out of
affection for his brother. (21)

अपक्रान्ते च काकुत्स्थे लक्ष्मणे च यथासुखम्।
आहरिष्यामि वैदेहीं सहस्राक्ष: शचीमिव॥ २२॥

When Rama (a scion of Kakutstha)
and Laksmana too are away from their
cottage, | shall bear away Sita, a princess
of the Videha territory, with ease as Indra,
the thousand-eyed god would take away
Saci, his own consort. (22)

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

एवं कृत्वा frag कार्यं यथेष्टं गच्छ राक्षस।
राज्यस्यार्धं प्रदास्यामि मारीच तव सुव्रत॥ २३॥
“Of course, having accomplished this
work in this way, go wherever you please,
O ogre ! | shall confer half of my kingdom
on you, O Marica of noble vows ! (23)

Tres सौम्य शिवं मार्गं कार्यस्यास्य विवृद्धये।
अहं त्वानुगमिष्यामि सरथो दण्डकावनम्॥ २४॥

“Proceed on your auspicious journey,
my good friend, for the accomplishment of
this object. | shall follow at your heels in a
chariot to the Dandaka forest. (24)

प्राप्य सं।त।मयुट्टुद्वेन वञ्चयित्वा तु राघवम्।
लङ्कां ula गमिष्यामि कृतकार्य: सह त्वया॥ Re UI

“Having hoodwinked Rama and won
Sita without any struggle, | shall for my part
return to Lanka with you, my purpose being
accomplished. (25)

नो चेत् करोषि मारीच हन्मि त्वामहमद्य वै।
Wad कार्यमवश्यं A बलादपि करिष्यसि।
Tat विप्रतिकूलस्थो न जातु सुखमेधते॥ २६॥

“If you don’t do this, O Marica, | shall
make short work of you this very day. You
need must do this work of mine even
perforce. None who stands directly opposed
to a king can live happily. (26)
आसाद्य तं जीवितसंशयस्ते

मृत्युर्धुवो ह्यद्य मया विरुध्यत: ।
Uae यथावत् परिगण्य बुद्ध्या
यदत्र पथ्यं कुरु तत्तथा त्वम्॥ २७॥

“Approaching Rama, danger to life will
be met by you; whereas death is certain for
you this very day if you are at variance with
me. Weighing this carefully in the scales of
reason, do that which is wholesome for you
on this point accordingly.” (27)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्येऽरण्यकाण्डे चत्वारिंश: सर्ग: ॥ ४० ॥

Thus ends Canto Forty in the Aranyakanda of the glorious Ramayana of Valmiki,
the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

