910

तं शब्दं कांक्षमाणस्तु राम: खड्गी सहानुज:।

ददर्शं सुमहाकायं राक्षसं विपुलोरसम्॥ २६॥
Seeking to find out the cause of that

sound, sword in hand, Sri Rama for his part

with his younger brother, Laksmana, beheld

an ogre of vast proportions and distinguished

by a broad chest. (26)

आसेदतुश्च तद्रक्षस्तावुभौ wa स्थितम्।
विवृद्धमशिरोग्रीवं कबन्धमुदरेमुखम्॥ २७॥

Both the princes approached that ogre
stationed before them. Colossal in size, the
ogre consisted of a mere trunk without a
head or neck and having his mouth in the
belly. (27)

रोमभिर्निशितैस्तीक्ष्णैर्महागिरिमिवोच्छितम् ।
नीलमेघनिभं रौद्रं मेघस्तनितनि:स्वनम्॥ २८॥
Covered with sharp bristling hair and
tall as a big mountain, he possessed the
hue of a blue cloud, was ferocious and had
a voice resembling thunder. (28)

अग्निज्वालानिकाशेन ललाटस्थेन दीप्यता।
महापक्षेण पिङ्खेन विपुलेनायतेन च ॥२९॥

एकेनोरसि घोरेण नयनेन सुदर्शिना।
महादंष्टोपपन्नं तं लेलिहानं महामुखम्॥ ३०॥
Endowed with a single fearful reddish
yet brown fiery eye, both long and wide and
bright as a flame, located in a forehead in
the centre of the chest, nay, furnished with
long lashes and possessing a good vision,
the ogre was licking again and again
his enormous mouth set with big teeth.
(29-30)

भक्षयन्तं महाघोरानृक्षसिंहमृगद्विजान्।
art भुजौ विकुर्वाणमुभौ योजनमायतौ॥ ३१॥

कराभ्यां विविधान् गृह्य ऋक्षान् पक्षिगणान् मृगान्।
आकर्षन्तं विकर्षन्तमनेकान् मृगयूथपान्॥३२॥

The ogre devoured the fiercest bears
and lions as well as other beasts and birds.
Stretching out both his frightful arms, each
eight miles long, and seizing with his hands
bears and other beasts and flocks of birds

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

of various kinds, he drew towards himself
many leaders of herds of deer and cast
aside others. (31-32)
स्थितमाव्रृत्य wert तयोभ्रीत्रो: प्रपन्नयो:।
अथ तं समतिक्रम्य क्रोशमात्रं ददर्शतु:॥ ३३॥
कबन्धमिव संस्थानादतिघोरप्रदर्शनम्॥ ३४॥
The ogre was stationed blocking the
way of the two brothers when they drew
near him. Thereupon receding to a distance
of two miles, the two brothers looked on the
great ogre, Kabandha by name, who was
cruel and terrible, a mere trunk, as it were,
encircled with arms and most fearful to
behold by his very constitution. (33-34)

a महाबाहुरत्यर्थं ward विपुलौ भुजौ।
Woe सहितावेव राघवौ पीडयन् बलात्॥ ३५॥

Stretching his extensive arms वां full
length, the mighty-armed ogre forcibly seized
the two scions of Raghu together, squeezing
them with his grip. (35)

ख्ड्गिनौ दृढधन्वानौ तिग्मतेजौ महाभुजौ।
भ्रातरौ विवशं प्राप्तौ कृष्यमाणौ महाबलौ॥ ३६॥

Though armed with swords and wielding
strong bows, and possessed of great
strength, the two mighty-armed brothers of
fiery energy were reduced to a helpless
plight when being pulled by the ogre.

(36)
तत्र धैर्याच्च शूरस्तु राघवौ Aa विव्यथे।
बाल्यादनाश्रयाच्चैव लक्ष्मणस्त्वभिविव्यथे॥ ३७॥

Of them, by virtue of his firmness, the
heroic Sri Rama (a scion of Raghu) for his
part did not feel distressed at all. Due to his
puerile nature and feeling of helplessness
too, Laksmana, however, completely gave
himself up to agony. (37)
sara च विषण्ण: सन् राघवं राघवानुज:।
पश्य at विवशं वीर राक्षसस्य वशंगतम्॥ ३८॥

Nay, feeling despondent, Laksmana,
the younger brother of Sri Rama, submitted
