864

तत्रास्यतां जनस्थाने शून्ये निहतराक्षसे।
Wet बलमाश्रित्य त्रासमुत्सृज्य दूरत:॥ २१॥

“Relying on your own manliness and
strength and casting off fear at a distance,
get yourself established in the said
Janasthana, which is now desolate, the
ogres living there having been exterminated
by Rama. (21)
aged महावीर्यं जनस्थाने निवेशितम्।
सदूषणखरं युद्धे निहतं रामसायकै:॥ २२॥

“The very powerful and large army
stationed in Janasthana has been wiped out
on the battlefield alongwith Dusana and Khara
by the arrows of Rama. (22)
तत: क्रोधो ममापूर्वो धैर्यस्योपरि वर्धते।
at च सुमहज्जातं रामं प्रति सुदारुणम्॥ २३॥

“As a sequel to it a rage which was
never known before has taken possession
of me and is growing beyond the limits of
forbearance. Nay, a very great and fierce
enmity has since then been set up with
Rama. (23)
निर्यातयितुमिच्छामि तच्च at महारिपो:।
नहि लप्स्याम्यहं निद्रामहत्वा संयुगे रिपुम्॥ evil

“| wish to put an end to the enmity by
being quits with my great enemy, Rama,

and | shall not get a wink of sleep till | have
slain the enemy in battle. (24)

तं त्विदानीमहं war खरदूषणघातिनम्।
Wa शर्मोपलप्स्यामि धनं लब्ध्वेव निर्धन:॥ २५॥
“| shall have peace of mind now only

after killing the slayer of Knara and Dusana,
as a destitute would on obtaining wealth. (25)

जनस्थाने वसद्भिस्तु भवद्भी राममाश्रिता।
प्रवृत्तिरुपनेतव्या fe करोतीति तत्त्वत:॥ २६॥

“Information bearing on Rama as to

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

what he is doing should be correctly made
available to me by you while staying in
Janasthana. (26)

अप्रमादाच्च गन्तव्यं data निशाचरै:।
कर्तव्यश्च सदा यत्नो राघवस्य ae प्रति॥ २७॥

“Journey should be undertaken by all
the rangers of the night with vigilance and
an endeavour should always be made for
the destruction of Rama. (27)
युस्माकं तु बलं ज्ञातं बहुशो रणमूर्धनि।
अतश्चास्मिञ्जनस्थाने मया यूयं निवेशिता:॥ २८ ॥

“Your strength, of course, has been
witnessed on many an occasion in the van
of fight and hence you have been selected
by me for being stationed in yonder
Janasthana.” (28)

wa: fret वाक्यमुपेत्य राक्षसा
महार्थमष्टावभिवाद्य रावणम्।
यतो जनस्थानमलक्ष्यदर्शना:॥ २९॥

Receiving the command couched in
endearing terms and full of deep meaning,
nay, greeting Ravana and quitting Lanka, all
the eight ogres thereupon set out towards
the quarter in which lay Janasthana, their
body remaining invisible. (29)

ततस्तु सीतामुपलभ्य रावण:
सुसम्प्रहष्ट: परिगृह्य मैथिलीम्।
प्रसज्य रामेण च वैरमुत्तमं

aye मोहान्मुदित: स रावण:॥ ३०॥

Extremely rejoiced to secure Sita, the
princess of Mithila, and having placed her
within the four walls of his gynaeceum and
having set up bitter enmity with Sa Rama,
the aforesaid Ravana, for his part, who
made people cry by his cruel deeds, felt
happy through ignorance. (30)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्येऽरण्यकाण्डे चतुष्पञ्चाश: AW: ॥ ५४॥

Thus ends Canto Fifty-four in the Aranyakanda of the glorious Ramayana of Valmiki,
the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

