736

work of the ogre Ravana even as the mighty
Indra killed the giants, my lord!” (16)

इत्युक्त: सम्परिक्रम्य wi तमभिवाद्य च।
आरुरोह तदा WA लोकाल्लक्ष्म्या विराजयन्॥ १७॥

Duly walking round that chariot
clockwise (as a mark of respect) and saluting
it, when requested, as aforesaid by Matali,
Sri Rama then ascended the chariot,
illumining all the three worlds by his splendour.

(17)
aq बभौ चाद्भुतं युद्धं द्वैरथं रोमहर्षणम्।
WHT च महाबाहो रावणस्य च रक्षस:॥१८॥

Then ensued a wonderful and thrilling
duel, between the mighty-armed Sri Rama
and the ogre, Ravana. (18)

स गान्धर्वेण med दैवं दैवेन waa:
अस्त्रं राक्षसराजस्य जघान परमास्त्रवित्॥१९॥
That scion of Raghu, who was
supremely skilled in the use of excellent
missiles, destroyed the missile presided over
by Gandharvas as well as that presided
over by gods, discharged by Ravana, by
means of missiles of the same kind. (19)
अस्त्रं तु परमं घोरं ward राक्षसाधिप:।
ससर्ज Wes: पुनरेव निशाचर:॥२०॥
Greatly enraged, Ravana (a ranger of
the night), the suzerain lord of ogres, for
his part once more discharged an
exceedingly formidable missile presided over
by ogres. (20)

ते रावणधनुर्मुक्ता: शरा: काञ्चनभूषणा:।
अभ्यवर्तन्त काकुत्स्थं सर्पा भूत्वा महाविषा:॥ २१॥
Turning into highly venomous serpents,
the aforesaid arrows, discharged from the
bow of Ravana, which were decked with
gold, rushed towards Sri Rama (a scion of
Kakutstha). (21)
a दीप्तवदना दीप्तं वमन्तो ज्वलनं मुखै:।
राममेवाभ्यवर्तन्त व्यादितास्या भयानका:॥ २२॥

With flaming mouths wide open, and

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA +

vomiting a blazing fire from them, those
dreadful arrows darted towards Sri Rama

alone. (22)
daar aes eras eeae: ।
दिशश्च संतता: सर्वा विदिशश्च समाव्रृता:॥ २३॥

By those highly venomous reptiles with
flaming coils, whose impact was hard as
that of Vasuki (the king of serpents), all the
quarters stood covered and the corners
between the quarters too stood enveloped.

(23)

तान् दृष्टवा पन्नगान् WA: समापतत आहवे।

अस्त्रं गारुत्मतं घोरं Wes भयावहम्॥२४॥
Seeing those reptiles flying at him on

the battlefield, Sri Rama discharged the

formidable and fearful missile presided over

by Garuda, the king of birds (an avowed

enemy of serpents). (24)

a राघवधनुर्मुक्ता रुक्मपुङ्खा: शिखिप्रभा:।
सुपर्णा: काञ्चना भूत्वा विचेरु: सर्पशत्रव:॥ २५॥
Turning into golden eagles, the natural
enemies of snakes, those golden-feathered
arrows discharged from the bow of Sri Rama,
a scion of Raghu, which shone like flames,
flew about. (25)

ते तान् सर्वान् शराञ्घ्नु: सर्परूपान् महाजवान्।
सुपर्णरूपा रामस्य विशिखा: कामरूपिण:॥ २६॥
Appearing in the form of eagles, the
aforesaid arrows of Sri Rama, which were
able to change their form at will, destroyed
all those shafts which flew with great speed
in the form of snakes. (26)

area प्रतिहते क्रुद्धो रावणो राक्षसाधिप:।

अभ्यवर्षत् तदा WH घोराभि: शरवृष्टिभि: tt २७॥
Provoked to anger on his missile having

been frustrated by Sri Rama, the suzerain

lord of ogres, then covered Sri Rama with
formidable showers of shafts. (27)

तत: शरसहस्रेण राममक्लिष्टकारिणम्।
अर्दयित्वा शरौघेण मातलिं प्रत्यविध्यत॥ २८॥
