62

नियुज्यमानो राज्याय नैच्छद् राज्यं महाबल:।
स जगाम at at रामपादप्रसादक:॥ ३४॥

“Meeting his beloved Guha, the chief
of the Nisadas (a mixed tribe sprung from a
Brahmana through a Sddra woman), at
Srngaverapura on the bank of the Ganga,
Sri Rama, who was virtue-incarnate,
accompanied by Guha, Laksmana and Sita,
sent away the charioteer back to Ayodhya.
Going from forest to forest, and crossing
streams contaning deep water, they saw
the sage Bharadwaja at Prayaga and,
dismissing Guha there, later on reached
Citrakuta according to the instructions of
sage Bharadwaja and, erecting a lovely
cottage, the three sojourned happily there
sporting in the woods like gods and
Gandharvas (celestial musicians). Sri Rama
having proceeded to Citrakuta on foot as
reported by the charioteer, who had since
returned to Ayodhya, Emperor DaSaratha
forthwith gave up the ghost and ascended
to heaven bewailing his son, stricken as he
was with grief at his separation from the
latter. Though being urged to accept the
throne by the Brahmanas headed by sage
Vasistha (the family priest and preceptor of
the kings of Ayodhya), on the king having
departed to the other world, Bharata, who
was very powerful, did not covet the throne.
He proceeded to the forest in order to please
the venerable Rama and persuade him to
return to Ayodhya and accept his father’s
throne. (29—34)
गत्वा तु स महात्मानं WH सत्यपराक्रमम्।
अयाचद् भ्रातरे राममार्यभावपुरस्कृत:॥ ३५॥

“Approaching the high-souled Rama of
unfailing prowess, Bharata, rich in noble
sentiments, actually implored Sri Rama, his
elder brother, accordingly. (35)

त्वमेव राजा धर्मज्ञ इति WH वचोऽब्रवीत्।
रामोऽपि परमोदार: सुमुख: सुमहायशा:॥ ३६॥
न चैच्छत् पितुरादेशाद Wet Wa महाबल:।

पादुके चास्य राज्याय न्यासं दत्त्वा पुन: TA: ॥ ३७॥

« VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

निवर्तयामास ततो भरतं भरताग्रज:।
स काममनवाप्यैव रामपादावुपस्पृशन्॥ ३८॥

“He addressed the following words to
Sri Rama: ‘Let you alone be the ruler, since
you know what is right.’ In deference to his
father’s decree (boon conferring the throne
of Ayodhya on Bharata) Sri Rama too, who
was supremely magnanimous and enjoyed
a very great renown, and who always wore
a gracious aspect, did not hanker for the
kingdom. Nay, handing over to Bharata his
own pair of wooden sandals as his token of
love and urging Bharata to rule over the
kingdom, Sri Rama, Bharata’s elder brother,
who was possessed of great might,
persuaded him to return from Citrakuta by
repeated importunities. Without realizing his
ambition (of seeing Sri Rama back in Ayodhya
and crowning him king), Bharata returned to
Ayodhya, touching the feet of Sri Rama and
taking leave of him. (836—38)
नन्दिग्रामेऽकरोद् राज्यं रामागमनकाङ्क्षया।
ते तु भरते श्रीमान् सत्यसंधो जितेन्द्रिय:।। ३९॥
रामस्तु पुनरालक्ष्य नागरस्य जनस्य च।
तत्रागमनमेकाग्रो दण्डकान् प्रविवेश ह॥४०॥

“Longing for the return of Sri Rama, he
ruled over the kingdom while living at
Nandigrama, a lonely retreat fourteen miles
away from Ayodhya. When _ Bharata,
however, had left, the glorious Sri Rama of
unfailing vow, who had conquered his senses
and was intent on one object, viz., that of
implementing the pledge of his father, entered
the Dandaka forest, they say, anticipating
the renewed visit of the people of Ayodhya
to that region (of Citrakuta). (39-40)
प्रविश्य तु महारण्यं Wa राजीवलोचन:।
विराधं राक्षसं हत्वा शरभङ्गं ददर्शं ह॥४१॥
सुतीक्ष्णं चाप्यगस्त्यं च अगस्त्यभ्रातरं तथा।
अगस्त्यवचनाच्चैव जग्राहैन्द्रं शरासनम्॥४२॥
खड्गं च परमप्रीतस्तूणी चाक्षयसायकौ।
वसतस्तस्य रामस्य वने वनचरै: सह॥४३॥
ऋषयोऽभ्यागमन् सर्वे वधायासुररक्षसाम्।

स तेषां प्रतिशुश्राव राक्षसानां तदा वने॥४४॥
