698

“A gallant and shrewd car-warrior,
fighting with a sword in the foremost of your
chariots, you will be able to lay your hands
on the princess of Mithila only on making
short work of Rama, son of DaSaratha.”

(67)

a a दुरात्मा wea निवेदितं
aa: सुधर्म्य प्रतिगृह्य रावण:।

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA +

Te जगामाथ ag वीर्यवान्
UW: सभां च weal qega uae
Accepting the aforesaid advice tendered
by a friend, which was fully consonant with
righteousness, the evil-minded yet powerful
ogre Ravana forthwith withdrew to his palace
and then proceeded once more to the council
chamber, accompanied by his friends.(68)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये FERS द्विनवतितम: AWA: ॥ ९२॥

Thus ends Canto Ninety-two in the Yuddhakanda of the glorious Ramayana
of Valmiki, the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

त्रिनवतितम: सर्ग:
Canto XClIll

Destruction of ogre-troops at the hands of Sr Rama

स vasa सभां राजा दीन: परमदु:खित:।
निषसादासने मुख्ये सिंह: Ge sa श्वसन्॥१॥

Entering in state the assembly hall, the
aforesaid monarch, who was_ feeling
miserable and greatly distressed, sank down
on a pre-eminent seat, snorting like a furious
lion. (1)

अब्रवीच्च स AM सर्वान् बलमुख्यान् महाबल:।
रावण: प्राञ्जलिर्वाक्यं पुत्रव्यसनकर्शित:॥ २॥
Afflicted by the death of his eldest son,
Indrajit, the said Ravana, who was endowed
with extraordinary might, spoke as follows
with joined palms to all those leaders of his
army assembled there: (2)

Wa भवन्त: सर्वेण हस्त्यश्वेन Arad: |

Par रथसङ्घैश्च पादातैश्चोपशोभिता:॥३॥
“Surrounded by the entire army of

elephants and horses, nay, graced with

columns of chariots and foot soldiers, march
you all. (3)

Uh रामं परिक्षिप्य समरे हन्तुमर्हथ।
वर्षन्तत शरवर्षाणि प्रावृट्काल इवाम्बुदा:॥४॥

“Nay, encompassing Rama, the leader
of the enemies, you ought to kill him
in combat, discharging hails of arrows
even as clouds pour showers during the
monsoon. (4)
aaa शरैस्तीक्ष्णैर्भिन्नगात्रं महाहवे।
wate: श्वो निहन्तास्मि रामं लोकस्य पश्यत: ॥ ५ ॥

“Or, | shall easily dispatch him
tomorrow, while the world stands looking
on, once his limbs have been torn by
you with your sharp arrows in a major
conflict.” (5)

इत्येतद् वाक्यमादाय राक्षसेन्द्रस्य राक्षसा:।
निर्ययुस्ते रथै: शीघ्रैर्नानानीकैश्च संयुता:॥६॥
Accompanied by diverse battalions, the
aforesaid ogres sallied forth in their swift-
moving chariots on hearing this command
of Ravana, the ruler of ogres. (6)

परिघान् पदट्टिशांश्चैव शरखड्गपरश्वधान्।
शरीरान्तकरान् ad चिक्षिपुर्वानरान् प्रति॥७॥

They threw iron clubs as well as
