862

“O Lord of living beings, we are
overpowered by these Raksasas; for fear
of these wicked ones we are unable to
reside in our abodes. (26)

तदस्माकं हितार्थाय जहि तांश्च त्रिलोचन।

राक्षसान् हुंकृतेनैव दह प्रदहतां वर॥ २७॥
“O three-eyed God and the foremost

of destroyers, kill these Raksasas for our

good and consume them with just a roar
(Hunkara).” (27)

इत्येवं त्रिदशैरुक्तो निशम्यान्धकसूदन:।

Rr: at च धुन्वान इदं वचनमब्रवीत्॥ २८ ॥
Listening to these words of the gods,

the Slayer of Andhaka, shaking His head

and hand, spoke the following words: (28)

अवध्या मम ad cal: सुकेशतनया रणे।

wet तु व: प्रदास्यामि यस्तान् वै निहनिष्यति॥ २९॥
‘O gods, those sons of SukeSa are

immune from death at my hands in war; but

| shall advise you as regards the person

who will surely kill them. (29)

योऽसौ चक्रगदापाणि: पीतवासा जनार्दन:।
हरिर्नारायण: श्रीमान् शरणं तं प्रपद्यथ॥ ३०॥
‘Seek refuge in Him, the glorious
Janardana, who holds in His hands the
discus and the club, who wears a yellow
garment and who is also known as Hari and
Narayana.’ (30)
हरादवाप्य ते wat कामारिमभिवाद्य al
नारायणालयं प्राप्य तस्मै सर्वं न्यवेदयन्॥ ३१॥
Receiving this advice from Hara, they
paid obeisance to the foe of Kama (Lord
Siva) and reaching the abode of Narayana,
submitted all their woes to Him. (31)

ततो नारायणेनोक्का देवा इन्द्रपुरोगमा:।
सुरारींस्तान् हनिष्यामि सुरा vad निर्भया:॥ ३२॥

“The gods led by Indra were thereupon

assured by Narayana: ‘I will kill those
enemies of yours, O gods, shed your fear.’
(32)

« VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

देवानां भयभीतानां हरिणा राक्षसर्षभौ।
प्रतिज्ञातो वधोऽस्माकं चिन्त्यतां यदिह क्षमम्॥ ३३ ॥
“O best of Raksasas, Hari has
promised to the frightened gods that He will
bring about our destruction; therefore, think
of what is the proper action to do on this
occasion. (33)
हिरण्यकशिपोर्मृत्युरन्येषां च सुरद्विषाम्।
नमुचि: कालनेमिश्च संह्रादो वीरसत्तम:॥ ३४॥
राधेयो बहुमायी च लोकपालोऽथ धार्मिक:।

यमलार्जुनौ च हार्दिक्य: शुम्भश्चैव निशुम्भक: 11 ३५ ॥
असुरा दानवाश्चैव सत्त्ववन्तो महाबला:।
सर्वे समरमासाद्य न श्रूयन्तेऽपराजिता:॥ ३६॥

“The death of Hiranyakasipu, and other
enemies was encompassed by him. Nay,
Namuci, Kalanemi, Sarmmhrada, the best of
the brave, Radheya, who knew many
conjuring tricks, the righteous Lokapala,
Yamala, Arjuna and Hardikya, Sumbha and
NiSumbha and other demons and giants of
great might, and full of courage, who were
never defeated on the battlefield are heard
of no more. (34—36)

Wa: क्रतुशतैरिष्टं सर्वे मायाविदस्तथा।

सर्वे सर्वास्त्रकुशला: Aa शत्रुभयंकरा:॥ ३७॥
“All of them had performed hundreds of

Vedic sacrifices and all of them knew deceitful

warfare; all of them were well-practised in all

arms and all of them were such as created
fright in the minds of their enemies. (37)
नारायणेन निहता: शतशोऽथ सहस्रश:।
एतज्ञात्वा तु सर्वेषां क्षमं कर्तुमिहार्हथ।
Ga नारायणं Vd यो नो हन्तुमिहेच्छति॥ ३८॥
“They were killed in hundreds and
thousands by Narayana; keeping this in
mind all of you will do well to do that which
is proper for you all at this juncture. It is
difficult to conquer Narayana, who desires
to kill us at this moment.” (38)

तत: सुमाली माली च श्रुत्वा माल्यवतो वच:।
waquiat ज्येष्ठमश्विनाविव वासवम्॥ ३९॥
