32

shadow of his looked charming like a row of
clouds sailing in the white sky. (77)

शुशुभे स महातेजा महाकायो महाकपि:।
वायुमार्गे निरालम्बे पक्षवानिव पर्वत:॥७८॥

On his aerial path, where he had
nothing to rest upon, that great monkey of
vast proportions, who was endowed with
extraordinary energy, appeared lovely like a
winged mountain. (78)

येनासौ याति बलवान् वेगेन कपिकुञ्जर:।
तेन मार्गेण सहसा द्रोणीकृत इवार्णव:॥७९॥

The sea below the path by which that
mighty elephant-like monkey, Hanuman,
moved with speed, got suddenly transformed
into a trough, as it were. (79)

आपाते पक्षिसङ्घानां पक्षिराज इव व्रजन्।
हनुमान् मेघजालानि प्रकर्षन् मारुतो यथा॥८०॥
Coursing through the path of birds like
Garuda, the king of winged creatures,
Hanuman appeared like the wind drawing
away clouds with force. (80)

पाण्डुरारुणवर्णानि नीलमञ्जिष्ठकानि च।
कपिनाऽऽकृष्यमाणानि महाभ्राणि चकाशिरे॥ ८१॥

Being drawn by Hanuman, big clouds,
which were either white or reddish in colour
or blue or madder-coloured, looked charming;

(81)
प्रविशन्नभ्रजालानि निष्पतंशच पुन: पुन:।
प्रच्छन्नश्च प्रकाशश्च चन्द्रमा इव दूश्यते॥८२॥

Repeatedly entering into the masses of
clouds and then emerging, he looked like
the hidden and the visible moon, respectively.

(82)
प्लवमानं तु तं get प्लवगं त्वरितं तदा।
वव्रृषुस्तत्र पुष्पाणि देवगन्धर्वचारणा:॥८३॥

Seeing the aforesaid Hanuman bounding
apace at that time, gods, Gandharvas

(celestial songsters) and Danavas (demons)
rained flowers on him. (83)

« VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

तताप नहि तं सूर्य: wast वानरेश्वरम्।
fara च dat वायू रामकार्यार्थसिद्धये॥ cx il

The sun did not actually scorch
Hanuman, the ruler of monkeys, who was
travelling for the sake of accomplishing his
object in the shape of Sri Rama’s task viz.,
the quest of Sita; while the wind-god
ministered to him by fanning him with a
delightful breeze in order to refresh him.

(84)

ऋॠषयस्तुष्टुवुश्चैनं waa विहायसा।
जगुश्च देवगन्धर्वा: प्रशंसन्तो वनौकसम्॥ cy tl
Nay, Rsis (seers of Vedic Mantras)
extolled Hanuman coursing through
airspace; while gods and Gandharvas sang
praises in order to sustain him in his arduous
journey. (85)
नागाश्च तुष्टुवुर्यक्षा रक्षांसि विविधानि च।
Wea ud कपिवरं सहसा विगतक्लमम्॥८६॥

Observing Hanuman, the foremost of
monkeys, with a smile on his lips and entirely
free from languor, Nagas (semi-divine beings
having the face of a man and the tail of a
serpent, and inhabiting Patala) and Yaksas
(a class of demigods) as well as ogres of all
classes—all lauded him. (86)

तस्मिन् प्लवगशार्दूले प्लवमाने हनूमति।
इक्ष्वाकुकुलमानार्थी चिन्तयामास सागर:॥८७॥

While Hanuman, that tiger among
monkeys, was moving along through
airspace, the deity presiding over oceans,
who sought to do honour to the lineage of
Ikswaku, to which Sri Rama had the honour
to belong, reflected as follows : (87)

साहाय्यं वानरेन्द्रस्य यदि नाहं हनूमत:।
करिष्यामि भविष्यामि सर्ववाच्यो विवक्षताम्॥ ८८ ॥
‘If | त० not lend assistance to Hanuman,

a leader of monkeys, | shall incur the obloquy
of all among those gifted with speech. (88)

अहमिक्ष्वाकुनाथेन सगरेण विवर्धित:।
इक्ष्वाकुसचिवश्चायं तन्नार्हत्यवसादितुम्॥८९॥
