* SUNDARAKANDA +

“He is a reputed knower of all virtues
and fond of those who have sought shelter
with him. Let your friendship be established
with him if you seek to survive. (20)
प्रसादयस्व त्वं चैनं शरणागतवत्सलम्।

मां चास्मै प्रयतो भूत्वा निर्यातयितुमर्हसि॥ २१॥

“Nay, propitiate Sri Rama, who is fond
of those who have sought protection with
him. And, remaining restrained throughout in
your behaviour with me, be pleased to
restore me to him. (21)

एवं fe a भवेत् स्वस्ति सम्प्रदाय रघूत्तमे।
STAM त्वं FS कुर्वाण: परां प्राप्स्यसि चापदम्॥ २२॥
“Surely your welfare lies in thus restoring
me to Sri Rama, the foremost of the Raghus.
Acting otherwise you will undoubtedly meet
with adversity. (22)

वर्जयेद् aay वर्जयेदन्तकश्चिरम्।
त्वद्बिधं न तु संक्रुद्धो लोकनाथ: स राघव:॥ २३॥
“The thunderbolt may spare a
wrongdoer like you, even though discharged;
Death too may ignore an offender like you
for a long time. That scion of Raghu, the
protector of the people, will not, however,
leave you when enraged. (23)
रामस्य धनुष: शब्दं श्रोष्यसि त्वं महास्वनम्।
शतक्रतुविसृष्टस्य निर्घोषमशनेरिव॥ २४॥
“You will soon hear the twang of Sri
Rama’s bow, producing a terrific sound and
resembling the crash of the thunderbolt hurled
by Indra (who is presupposed to have
performed a hundred ASwamedha sacrifices
in his previous existence as a condition
precedent to his attainment of that exalted
position). (24)
Be vite सुपर्वाणो ज्वलितास्या gare: |
saat निपतिष्यन्ति रामलक्ष्मणलक्षिता:॥ २५॥
“Well-mounted arrows marked by the
names of Sri Rama and Laksmana will soon

rain on this city like serpents with flaming
jaws. (25)

117

रक्षांसि निहनिष्यन्त: पुर्यामस्यां न संशय:।
असम्पातं करिष्यन्ति पतन्त: कङ्कवासस: Il २६॥
“Descending on this city, the arrows
decorated with the plumes of a buzzard,
which are sure to exterminate the ogres, will
leave no space uncovered by them; there is
no doubt about it. (26)

राक्षसेन्द्रमहासर्पान् स रामगरुडो महान्।
sete a वैनतेय इवोरगान्॥ २७॥

“That great secretary-bird in the form
of Sri Rama will speedily stamp out the
mighty serpents in the form of the leaders of
ogres in the same way as Garuda, the king
of birds, son of Vinata, would extirpate
serpents. (27)

अपनेष्यति मां wat त्वत्त: शीघ्रमरिंदम:।
असुरेभ्य: श्रियं chat विष्णुस्तिभिरिव क्रमै: ॥। २८ ॥
“My husband, the tamer of his foes, will
soon recover me from you even as Lord
Visnu wrested the radiant sovereignty of the

three worlds from the demons in the course
of three strides. (28)

जनस्थाने हतस्थाने fed रक्षसां act
BTA त्वया रक्ष: कृतमेतदसाधु Au २९॥

“The host of the ogres stationed in
Janasthana having been destroyed by Sri
Rama and your foothold on Janasthana
having consequently been lost, this wicked
deed in the shape of my abduction was
actually perpetrated by you, impotent as
you were to avenge yourself on the
destruction of the army in Janasthana, O
ogre ! (29)
Tet गतयोभ्रीत्रोरपनीता त्वयाधम॥ ३०॥

“| was borne away by you, O vile
wretch, entering that lonely hermitage of the
aforesaid two brothers, who are lions among
men and who had gone out a-hunting. (30)

नहि गन्धमुपाघ्राय रामलक्ष्मणयोस्त्वया।
wet संदर्शने स्थातुं शुना शार्दूलयोरिव॥ ३१॥
