256

to be given away by me to that exalted soul.
By doing so | seek to redeem my pledge.
Be pleased to sanction it. (10)

सोपाध्यायो महाराज पुरोहितपुरस्कृत:।
शीघ्रमागच्छ भद्रं A द्रष्टुमर्हसि राघवौ॥११॥

“‘Accompanied by your preceptor and
placing the family priest at your head, O
great king, come soon and be pleased to
behold Sri Rama and Laksmana, the two
scions of Raghu; may God bless you! (11)

प्रतिज्ञां मम राजेन्द्र निर्वर्तयितुमर्हसि।
पुत्रयोरुभयोरेव प्रीतिं त्वमुपलप्स्यसे॥ १२॥

“You ought to bring my pledge to
completion, O king of kings! In this way you
will witness the joyous mood of both your
sons. (12)
wa विदेहाधिपतिर्मधुरे वाक्यमब्रवीत्।
विश्वामित्राभ्यनुज्ञात: शतानन्दमते स्थित:॥ १३॥

“Seconded by Viswamitra and abiding
by the advice of Satananda, the ruler of
the Videha territory has addressed such
sweet words to you.’” (13)
दूतवाक्यं तु तच्छुत्वा राजा परमहर्षित:।
वसिष्ठं वामदेवं च मन्तिणश्चैवमब्रवीत्॥ exit

Supremely delighted to hear the
aforesaid submission of the envoys of
Janaka, king Dasaratha addressed the
sages, Vasistha and Vamadeva, as well
as his counsellors in the following words :

(14)
Te: कुशिकपुत्रेण कौसल्यानन्दवर्धन:।
लक्ष्मणेन सह भ्रात्रा विदेहेषु वसत्यसौ॥ १५॥

“Looked after by ViSwamitra, son of

« VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

Kusika, Sri Rama, who enhances the joy of
Kausalya by his presence is sojourning at
present in the kingdom of the Videhas
alongwith his brother, Laksmana. (15)

दृष्टवीर्यस्तु काकुत्स्थो जनकेन महात्मना।
सम्प्रदानं सुतायास्तु राघवे कर्तुमिच्छति॥ १६॥

‘The prowess of Sri Rama, the
ornament of Kakutstha’s race, has been
witnessed by the high-souled Janaka, who
accordingly desires to give away his daughter
to Sri Rama, a jewel of Raghu’s race. (16)
यदि at tad ad जनकस्य महात्मन:।
पुरीं गच्छामहे शीघ्रं मा भूत् कालस्य TAA: Ul १७॥

“If the family history and the mode of
life of the high-souled Janaka commends
itself to you, let us proceed at once to his

capital, Mithila, and let there be no loss of
time.” (17)

मन्त्रिणो बाढमित्याहु: सह सर्वैर्महर्षिभि:।
सुप्रीतश्चाब्रवीद् राजा श्वो यात्रेति च मन्त्रिण: ।। १८ ॥

The counsellors and all the great seers
said, “Amen !” And highly pleased, the king,
DaSaratha, too said to the counsellors,
“Let the journey be commenced tomorrow.”

(18)

मन्तरिणस्तु नरेन्द्रस्य रात्रिं परमसत्कृता:।
Ba: प्रमुदिता: सर्वे गुणै: सर्वै: समन्विता:॥ Ve
Greately delighted to hear of the king’s
decision and highly honoured by DaSaratha,
all the counsellors of King Janaka, who
were richly endowed with all excellences
befitting a king’s counsellor, halted for the
night at Ayodhya. (19)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये
बालकाण्डेऽष्टषष्टितम: सर्ग: i ६८ Il

Thus ends Canto Sixty-eight in the Balakanda of the glorious Ramayana of Valmiki,
the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

