288

किमर्थमस्त्रं tag न योजयसि weal
न दानवा न गन्धर्वा नासुरा न मरुद्गणा:॥१९॥

qa Wa रणे शक्तास्तथा प्रतिसमासितुम्।
तव वीर्यवत: कश्चिन्मयि यद्यस्ति सम्भ्रम:॥ २०॥

क्षिप्रं सुनिशितैर्बाणैर्हन्यतां युधि रावण:।
भ्रातुरादेशमाज्ञाय AAT वा परंतप:॥ २१॥
a feat नरवरो न at रक्षति wea:
शक्तौ dt पुरुषव्याघ्रौ वाय्वग्निसमतेजसौ॥ 22

सुराणामपि दुर्धर्षो किमर्थं मामुपेक्षत:।
ममैव दुष्कृतं किंचिन्महदस्ति न संशय:॥ २३॥
समर्थौ सहितौ यन्मां न waa परंतपौ।
वैदेह्या वचनं श्रुत्वा करुणं साधुभाषितम्॥ २४॥
पुनरप्यहमार्यां ae वचनमब्रुवम्।
त्वच्छोकविमुखो wat देवि सत्येन ते शपे॥ २५॥

“The crow at long last sought your
presence once more at Citrakuta, O tamer
of foes! Fit as you are to afford protection
to those seeking it, you for your part afforded
shelter in your mercy to the crow, who
sought your protection and had fallen flat on
the ground, even though he deserved death,
O scion of Kakutstha! You, as_ such,
however, destroyed the right eye of that
crow only because it was not possible to
render the missile ineffectual, O scion of
Raghu ! Having saluted you as well as King
DaSaratha (in heaven, who had obviously
sent him back to Sri Rama to seek his
forgiveness), the crow for his part, when
spared by you, returned forthwith to his
abode.

Says Sita: “‘You are in this way the
foremost of those skilled in the use of mystic
missiles, full of courage and endowed with
an amiable disposition. Wherefore then do
you not direct your missiles against the
ogres, O scion of Raghu? Neither giants
nor Gandharvas (celestial musicians) nor
demons nor the troops of wind-gods are
able to withstand you in combat any more
than that crow, O Rama! If there exists any
regard for me in your mind, powerful as you
are, let Ravana be killed on the field of battle

« VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

with exceptionally sharp arrows without delay.
Or, knowing as he does the behest of his
elder brother, why does Laksmana, a scion
of Raghu, the foremost among men and the
scourge of his foes, not come forward to
rescue me? Wherefore do those two powerful
tigers among men, who vie with the wind-
god and the god of fire in energy and are
difficult to overcome even for gods, disregard
me? No doubt there is some great sin
committed by myself due to which Sri Rama
and Laksmana, the two scourges of their
foes, though powerful and living together,
fail to protect me.’ Hearing the plaintive and
gently-worded invocation of Sita, | once more
addressed the following words to that noble
lady: ‘| swear to you by my truthfulness
that Sr Rama has grown indifferent to
everything because of grief born of separation
from you, O godlike lady ! (15—25)
TH दु:खाभिभूते च लक्ष्मण: परितप्यते।
कथंचिद् भवती दृष्टा न काल: परिशोचितुम्॥ २६ ॥
“‘Sr Rama being overwhelmed with
agony, Laksmana too is feeling afflicted.

Somehow you have been discovered. Hence
this is not the time for you to lament. (26)

अस्मिन् ded दु:खानामन्तं द्रक्ष्यसि भामिनि।
तावुभौ नरशार्दूलौ राजपुत्रौ परंतपौ॥ २७॥
त्वद्दर्शनकृतोत्साहौ लङ्कां भस्मीकरिष्यत:।
हत्वा च समरे रौद्रं रावणं सहबान्धवम्॥ २८॥
राघवस्त्वां वरारोहे स्वपुरीं नयिता ध्रुवम्।
यत् तु रामो विजानीयादभिज्ञानमनिन्दिते॥ २९॥
साभिवीक्ष्य दिश: सर्वा वेण्युद्ग्रथनमुत्तमम्॥ ३०॥
मुक्त्वा वस्त्राद् ददौ मह्यं मणिमेतं महाबल।
प्रतिगृह्य मणिं deat तव हेतो रघुप्रिय॥ ३१॥
शिरसा सम्प्रणम्यैनामहमागमने त्वरे।
गमने च कृतोत्साहमवेक्ष्य वरवर्णिनी॥३२॥
विवर्धमानं च fe मामुवाच जनकात्मजा।
अश्रुपूर्णमुखी दीना बाष्पगद्गदभाषिणी॥ ३३॥
“You will see the end of your woes
during this very hour, O lovely lady ! Striving
