536

washed and so on and articles of dress,
toilet etc. (9)
सर्वलक्षणसम्पन्नं सर्वं विधिवदर्चितम्।
सर्वं सुगुणलक्ष्मीवत् तदभूदाभिहारिकम्॥१०॥
All that was worth bringing within the
sight of the Emperor at the time of his
waking for his good luck and was endowed
with all auspicious characteristics and all
that was praiseworthy, of excellent quality
and possessed of charm was kept ready in
accordance with the scriptural ordinance.
(10)

तत: सूर्योदयं यावत् wa परिसमुत्सुकम्।
तस्थावनुपसम्प्राप्तं किंस्विदित्युपशङ्कितम्॥११॥

Till sunrise all the king’s retinue stood
immensely eager to see the king and
apprehensive as to what mishap had befallen
the king, who had not yet come out of the
gynaeceum. (11)

अथ या: कोसलेन्द्रस्य शयनं प्रत्यनन्तरा:।
ता: स्वियस्तु समागम्य भर्तारं प्रत्यबोधयन्॥ १२॥
Now approaching their consort, those
ladies, other than Kausalya and the other
principal queens, for their part, who were close
to the couch of the king of Kosala, began to
rouse him by calling him in gentle and polite
words and touching his person. (12)

अथाप्युचितव्त्तास्ता विनयेन नयेन al
Tera wet wear किंचिदप्युपलेभिरे॥ १३॥
Nevertheless, on touching his couch
with reverence and skill, the ladies, whose
behaviour on the occasion was perfectly
justifiable, could not detect any sign of life
whatsoever in him. (13)

ता: fara: स्वप्नशीलज्ञाश्चेष्टां संचलनादिषु।
ता वेपथुपरीताश्च Ua: प्राणेषु शङ्किता:॥१४॥
अथ संदेहमानानां SAT दृष्टवा च पार्थिवम्।
यत् तदाशाङ्कितं पापं dat wat विनिश्चय: ek tl

Those ladies, who knew the condition
of a body in slumber, did not discover any

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

throbbing in the heart, the pulse and other
organs. They were accordingly seized with
tremor, apprehensive as they were about
the king’s life, and looked unsteady like the
ends of reeds standing against a stream.
Now on seeing the condition of the Emperor
at that time a certainty rose in the mind of
the doubting ladies about the disaster in
the form of death, which was apprehended.

(14-15)

कौसल्या च सुमित्रा च पुत्रशोकपराजिते।
प्रसुप्ते न प्रबुध्येते यथा कालसमन्विते॥१६॥

Being fast asleep, Kausalya and Sumitra
too, who had been prostrated with grief
caused by separation from their sons, would
not wake up as though they had been
overtaken by death. (16)

निष्प्रभासा विवर्णा च सन्ना शोकेन संनता।
न व्यराजत कौसल्या ara तिमिरावृता॥१७॥

Shorn of splendour and divested of her
native colour, nay, stricken and laid prostrate
with grief, Kausalya did not shine brightly as
before any more than a star engulfed in
darkness. (17)

कौसल्यानन्तरं Ue: सुमित्रा तदनन्तरम्।
न स्म विभ्राजते cat शोकाश्रुलुलितानना॥ १८॥

Laying asleep close to the king, who
was now dead and therefore pale, Kausalya
too did not shine brightly any more than the
king nor did Queen Sumitra, who lay asleep
next to Kausalya, and whose face was
bathed in tears of grief. (18)

ते च दृष्टवा dal सुप्ते उभे देव्यौ च तं नृपम्।
सुप्तमेवोद्गतप्राणमन्त:पुरममन्यत ॥ १९॥
Seeing both the aforesaid queens,
Kausalya and Sumitra, asleep at that time,
the inmates of the gynaeceum concluded
that King Dasaratha had breathed his last
while asleep. (19)
Ad: प्रचुक्रुशुर्दीना: सस्वरं ता वराङ्गना:।
करेणेव इवारण्ये स्थानप्रच्युतयूथपा:॥ २०॥

Then those pretty women loudly wailed,
