« KISKINDHAKANDA +

विद्युन्मालेश्च सम्पाते: सूर्याक्षस्य हनूमत:।
aaa: सुबाहोश्च नलस्य च Ale: i Qo
कुमुदस्य सुषेणस्य तारजाम्बवतोस्तथा।
दधिवक्त्रस्य नीलस्य सुपाटलसुनेत्रयो:॥११॥
एतेषां कपिमुख्यानां राजमार्गे महात्मनाम्।
ददर्श गृहमुख्यानि महासाराणि लक्ष्मण:॥१२॥
पाण्डुराभ्रप्रकाशानि गन्धमाल्ययुतानि च।
प्रभूतधनधान्यानि Get: शोभितानि च॥ १३॥

Laksmana also surveyed the lovely
abode of Angada as well as the foremost
abodes of the following high-souled leaders
of monkeys, viz., Mainda and Dwivida,
Gavaya, Gavaksa, Gaja, Sarabha,
Vidyunmali, Sampati, Suryaksa, Hanuman,
Virabahu and Subahu as also of the high-
souled Nala, nay, those of Kumuda and
Susena, Tara and Jambavan, Dadhivaktra,
Nila, Supatala and Sunetra, which stood on
the highway and were very strong, nay,
which shone like white clouds, were scented
with fragrant substances and adorned with
wreaths of flowers, full of abundant riches
and plentiful foodgrains and graced with
excellent women. (9—13)

पाण्डुरेण तु शैलेन परिक्षिप्तं दुरासदम्।
वानरेन्द्रगृहुं रम्यं महेन्द्रसदनोपमम्॥१४॥

There was the lovely abode of Sugriva,
the king of monkeys, which was indeed
difficult to reach and was enclosed by a
white mountain of crystal, and vied with the
palace of the mighty Indra. (14)

शुक्लै: प्रासादशिखरै: कैलासशिखरोपमै:।
adams: पुष्पितैरुपशोभितम्॥ १५॥
महेन्द्रदत्तै: श्रीमद्धिर्नीलजीमूतसंनिभै: |
दिव्यपुष्पफलैर्वृक्षै: शीतच्छायैर्मनोरमै: ।। १६ ॥

It was graced with white pinnacles
looking like the peaks of Mount Kailasa as
well as with trees in blossom bearing fruits
that yielded all one’s desires, and was further
adorned with graceful trees, pleasing to the
mind, which had been gifted by the mighty
Indra, and resembled dark clouds, which

1065

bore celestial blossoms and fruit and cast a
cool shade. (15-16)
हरिभि: Padget बलिभि: शस्त्रपाणिभि:।
दिव्यमाल्यावृतं शुभ्रं तप्तकाञ्चनतोरणम्॥१७॥
The palace, which was white in colour,
had its gates guarded by mighty monkeys
bearing weapons in their hands, was covered
with heavenly wreaths and had arched
doorways of refined gold. (17)

सुग्रीवस्य गृहं wet प्रविवेश महाबल:।
अवार्यमाण: सौमित्रिर्महाभ्रमिव भास्कर:॥ १८ i

Not being checked by anyone,
Laksmana, son of Sumitra, who was
possessed of extraordinary might, duly
entered the lovely palace of Sugriva even
as the sun would penetrate into a big cloud.

(18)
स सप्त कक्ष्या धर्मात्मा यानासनसमाव्रता:।
ददर्श सुमहद्गुप्तं ददर्शान्त:पुरं महत्॥१९॥

Having crossed seven enclosures,
which were filled with conveyances and
couches etc., Laksmana, whose mind was
set on virtue, beheld the extensive
gynaeceum, guarded with very great care.

(19)
STATA Soh ET वरासनै: ।
महार्हास्तरणोपेतैस्तत्र तत्र समावृतम्॥ Roll

It was adequately furnished at proper
places with numerous gold and silver
couches and excellent seats overspread
with costly coverlets. (20)
प्रविशन्नेव सततं शुश्राव मधुरस्वनम्।
तन्त्रीगीतसमाकोर्णं समतालपदाक्षरम्॥ २१॥

The moment he entered the gynaeceum
he constantly heard a sweet melody
dominated by songs sung to_ the
accompaniment of Vina, in which words
and letters were being articulated in harmony
with time. (21)

aaa विविधाकारा रूपयौवनगर्बिता:।
faa: सुग्रीवभवने cast स महाबल:॥ २२॥
