444

peaks for weapons, those monkeys of golden
hue with coppery faces, who had dedicated
their lives to the cause of Sri Rama, advanced
towards Lanka itself. (14)

a ga: पर्वताग्रैश्च मुष्टिभिश्च प्लवंगमा:।
प्राकाराग्राण्यसंख्यानि ममन्थुस्तोरणानि AN १५॥

By means of trees and mountain-
tops as well as with their fists the said
monkeys demolished the tops of countless
defensive walls as well as archways. (15)

परिखान् पूरयन्तश्च प्रसन्नसलिलाशयान्।
पांसुभि: पर्वताग्रैश्च तृणै: काष्ठैश्च वानरा:॥ १६॥

The monkeys stood filling the moats
containing translucent water with sands,
mountain-tops, grass and logs of wood.

(16)

ad: सहस्रयूथाश्च कोटियूथाश्च यूथपा:।
कोटियूथशताश्चान्ये लङ्कामारुरुहुस्तदा।॥ १७॥
The leaders of monkey troops then
scaled the walls of Lanka taking with them
battalions of monkeys in thousands, crores
and even hundreds of crores. (17)
काञ्चनानि प्रमर्दन्तस्तोरणानि प्लवङ्गमा:।
कैलासशिखराग्राणि गोपुराणि प्रमध्य AN १८॥
आप्लवन्त: प्लवन्तश्च गर्जन्तश्च प्लवङ्गमा:।
लङ्कां तामभिधावन्ति महावारणसंनिभा:॥१९॥
The monkeys stood demolishing the
archways of gold. Nay, having razed to the
ground the gates with their tops resembling
the peaks of Mount Kailasa, the monkeys,
who closely resembled huge elephants,
rushed towards the said Lanka, springing
on all sides and leaping the walls, nay,
roaring all the time. (18-19)

जयत्युरुबलो WAT लक्ष्मणश्च महाबल:।
राजा जयति सुग्रीवो राघवेणाभिपालित:॥ २०॥
“Victorious is Sri Rama, who is
possessed of surpassing strength, and
Laksmana, who is endowed with extra-

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA +

ordinary might! Victorious too is King Sugriva,
protected on all sides by Sri Rama, a scion
of Raghu!” (20)
इत्येवं घोषयन्तश्च गर्जन्तश्च प्लवंगमा:।
अभ्यधावन्त लङ्काया: प्राकारं कामरूपिण: ॥ २१॥
Shouting thus, the monkeys, who
were all able to change their form at will,

rushed roaring towards the defensive walls
of Lanka. (21)

ara: सुबाहुश्च नलश्च पनसस्तथा।
निपीड्योपनिविष्टास्ते प्राकारं हरियूथपा:।

एतस्मिन्नन्तरे चक्रु: स्कन्धावारनिवेशनम्॥ २२॥

Storming the defensive walls, the
monkey generals, Virabahu and Subahu, as
also Nala and Panasa, took up their position
on them. In the meantime they settled the
beleaguering army in camps. (22)

पूर्वद्वारं तु कुमुद: कोरिभिर्दशभिर्वृत:।
SMA बलवांस्तस्थौ हरिभिर्जितकाशिभि: ॥ २३॥

Surrounded by monkeys, numbering
ten crores, who all behaved like conquerors,
the mighty Kumuda for his part stood
besieging the eastern gate, while remaining
stationed in north-east. (23)

सहायार्थे तु तस्यैव निविष्ट: प्रघसो aft: |
पनसश्च महाबाहुर्वानरैरभिसंवृत: WV Ul

Surrounded by other monkeys, the
monkey Praghasa and the mighty-armed
Panasa for their part took up their position
by his side in order to assist Kumuda himself.

(24)
दक्षिणद्वारमासाद्य ait: शतबलि: कपि:।
आवृत्य बलवांस्तस्थौ विंशत्या कोटिभिर्वृत: ॥ २५ ॥

Reaching the southern gate (while
remaining stationed in the south-east), the
valiant and mighty monkey Satabali, who
was accompanied by monkeys numbering
twenty crores, stood besieging the aforesaid
gate. (25)
