772

today on a long journey, which is very
difficult to undertake, O king, take me also
with you, stricken as | am with agony. |
shall no longer survive without you.
Wherefore do you wish to depart, leaving
me miserable, as | am, here? (48—60)
दीनां विलपतीं teat किं च मां नाभिभाषसे।
Gea न खल्वभिक्रुद्धो मामिहानवगुण्ठिताम्॥ ६१ ॥
निर्गतां नगरद्वारात् पद्भ्यामेवागतां प्रभो।
पश्येष्टदार दारांस्ते भ्रष्टलज्जावगुण्ठनान्॥ ६२॥
“Why do you not speak to me, a forlorn
and unfortunate creature, wailing as | am?
How are you not enraged at me, who have
issued out of the city gate, unveiled and
come on foot here, my lord? Look on your
consorts, whose veils have dropped off, O
lover of your spouses! (61-62)

बहिर्निष्पतितान् सर्वान् कथं दृष्टवा न कुप्यसि।
अयं क्रीडासहायस्तेऽनाथो लालप्यते जन:॥ ६३॥
न चैनमाश्वासयसि fe वा न बहुमन्यसे।
यास्त्वया विधवा TSH Gal नैका: कुलस्तिय: WEY
पतिव्रता धर्मरता गुरुशुश्रूषणे रता:।
ताभि: शोकाभितप्ताभि: शप्त: परवशं गत:॥ ६५॥
“Why do you not feel enraged to see
them all come forth? Nay, this Mandodari,
your playmate, is lamenting in a forlorn
condition. Why do you not comfort her or
treat her with respect? You have fallen
under the sway of your enemy, Sri Rama,
in that you were cursed by those numerous
ladies of noble lineage, who, though devoted
to their husband, fond of piety and intent on
the service of their elders, had been widowed
by you, O king, and were accordingly
tormented with grief. (63—65)

त्वया विप्रकृताभिश्च तदा शप्तस्तदागतम्।
प्रवाद: सत्यमेवायं cat प्रति प्रायशो नृप॥६६॥
पतिव्रतानां नाकस्मात् पतन्त्यश्रूणि भूतले।
कथं च नाम ते राजल्लोकानाक्रम्य तेजसा॥ ६७॥
अपनीयाश्रमाद् WH यन्मृगच्छद्मना त्वया॥६८॥

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA +

आनीता रामपत्नी सा अपनीय च लक्ष्मणम्।
कातर्यं च न ते युद्धे कदाचित् संस्मराम्यहम्॥ ६९॥

“That curse which was pronounced by
them at that time on their having been
wronged by you, has fallen on you. The
popular saying that ‘the tears of women
devoted to their husband do not generally
fall on the earth’s surface in vain’ has come
out true in your case, O king! Nay, how
was this mean act of abducting a woman
actually perpetrated by you, O king, who,
having invaded all the three worlds by your
might, prided on your heroism? How cowardly
it was on your part that the aforesaid consort
of Sri Rama was borne away by you after
luring away Sri Rama from his hermitage by
recourse to a fraud in the shape of an
illusory deer and also removing Laksmana
from the scene. Nay, | do not recall your
faint-heartedness on any occasion on the
battlefield. (66—69)

ad तु भाग्यविपर्यासान्नूनं ते पक्वलक्षणम्।
अतीतानागतार्थज्ञो वर्तमानविचक्षण: ॥ ७० I
मैथिलीमाहृतां Gear ध्यात्वा नि:श्वस्य चायतम्।
सत्यवाक स महाबाहो cat A यदब्रवीत्॥७१॥
अयं राक्षसमुख्यानां विनाश: प्रत्युपस्थित:।
कामक्रोधसमुत्थेन व्यसनेन प्रसङ्घिना॥७२॥
निव्रृत्तस्त्वत्कृतेनार्थ: सोऽयं मूलहरो महान्।
त्वया कृतमिदं सर्वमनाथं Watt कुलम्॥७३॥
The pusillanimity which appeared in
you on the solitary occasion of your carrying
off Sita, due to an irony of fate was surely
an indication of your impending doom.
Whatever, O mighty-armed one, my
younger brother-in-law, Vibhisana, who
knows matters relating to the past as well
as to the future, and is also conversant with
the present—said after reflecting and sighing
for long, on seeing Sita (a princess of Mithila)
borne away by you, viz., ‘the extermination
of the jewels among the ogres is now
imminent!’ has come true. Your entire fortune
