1032

them on the right path and delights his
subjects by ‘Dharma’. Therefore, he (his
rule) is known as ‘Dharma’. (8)

एष राजन् परो ad: फलवान् Wet राघव।
नहि धर्माद् wed किंचिद् दुष्प्रापमिति मे मति: ।। ९ ॥

“This act of ‘Dharana’ or sustaining is
‘Dharma’—this is the conclusion. O king Sri
Rama, this is the highest ‘Dharma’ which
yields reward after death. My view is that
nothing is unattainable by ‘Dharma’. (9)
art दया सतां पूजा व्यवहारेषु चार्जवम्।
एष WA परो धर्मो रक्षणात् प्रेत्य चेह च॥१०॥

“Charity, compassion, honouring noble
men, straight-forwardness in behaviour, O
Rama! this is the ‘Dharma’ in this life and
the life hereafter that accrues from protecting
the subjects. (10)
त्वं प्रमाणं प्रमाणानामसि राघव aad
विदितश्चैव a ad: सद्धिराचरितस्तु वबै॥११॥
धर्माणां त्वं परं धाम गुणानां सागरोपम:।
अज्ञानाच्च मया राजक्का राजसत्तम॥ १ २॥
प्रसादयामि शिरसा न त्वं क्रोद्धुमिहार्हसि।
शुन: स वचनं श्रुत्वा राघवो वाक्यमब्रवीत्॥ १३॥

“O Rama, strict observer of vows! You
are the authority par-excellence. You are
conversant with the ‘Dharma’, which is
practised by good people. You are the
supreme abode of ‘Dharmas’ (Duties) and
an ocean of virtues, as it were. | spoke out
of my ignorance. Bowing my head, | pray,
You should not get angry on this account.”

(11—13)
किं dard करोम्यद्य ब्रूहि विस्त्रब्ध मा चिरम्।
रामस्य वचनं श्रुत्वा सारमेयोऽब्रवीदिदम्॥ १४॥
धर्मेण we विन्देत धर्मेणैवानुपालयेत्।
धर्माच्छरण्यतां याति राजा सर्वभयापह:॥ १५॥

On this Sri Rama told the dog: “Tell me
fearlessly what | should do for you. Do not
delay,” On hearing Rama’s speech, the dog

addressed the follwoing words: ‘The king
should acquire territory by ‘Dharma’ and

« VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

should protect it by ‘Dharma.’ The king
comes to be recognized as a refuge and
dispels all fear. (14-15)
भिक्षु: सर्वार्थसिद्धश्च ब्राह्मणावसथे वसन्॥१६॥

“Having realized this, O Rama! listen
to what you have to do for me. There is a
mendicant, named Sarvarthasiddha, who lives
in the house of a Brahmana. Without any
cause he struck at me! sinless though |
was.” (16)
wt ad: Wert मे निष्कारणमनागस:।
एतच्छुत्वा तु रामेण द्वा:स्थ: सम्प्रेषितस्तदा॥ १७॥
आनीतश्च द्विजस्तेन सर्वसिद्धार्थकोविद:।
अथ द्विजवरस्तत्र Wa geal महाद्युति: ec
fe a ard मया राम aq ale त्वं ममानघ।
एवमुक्तस्तु विप्रेण wat वचनमब्रवीत्॥१९॥
त्वया दत्त: प्रहारोऽयं सारमेयस्य a द्विज।
fe तवापकृतं विप्र दण्डेनाभिहतो aa: tot
क्रोध: प्राणहर: BIA: क्रोधो मित्रमुखो fra: |
क्रोधो ह्यसिर्महातीक्ष्ण: Hel क्रोधोऽपकर्षति॥ २१॥
wad यजते da यच्च दानं प्रयच्छति।
क्रोधेन Aa हरति तस्मात् क्रोधं विसर्जयेत्॥ २२॥
इन्द्रियाणां प्रदुष्टानां हयानामिव धावताम्।
कुर्वीत धृत्या सारथ्यं संहृत्येन्द्रयगोचरम्॥ २३॥

On hearing this, Sri Rama sent the
gatekeeper, who brought the learned
Brahmana Sarvarthasiddha by name. Thus
the eminent Brahmana, endowed with
splendour seeing Sri Rama there asked
him, ‘O sinless Sri Rama! Tell me what do
you want me to do for you?’

Thus told by the Brahmana, Sri Rama
addressed the following words, ‘O Brahmana!
You hurt the dog. What ill did it do to you, for
which you struck it with a stick? Anger is a
deadly enemy, anger is a friend-faced enemy.
Anger is a highly sharp sword. Anger takes
away everything, destroys all virtues.
Whichever sacrifices a person performs and
whatever in charity he gives, all that he
destroys by anger. Therefore, one should
