* SUNDARAKANDA +

the command of my master have been carried
out by me in the real sense of the term. (7)

कथं नु खल्वद्य भवेत् सुखागतं

प्रसह्य Ge मम राक्षसै: सह।
तथैव खल्वात्मबलं च सारवत्

समानयेन्मां च रणे दशानन:॥८॥

‘How can my journey to this place at
this juncture possibly prove to be a truly
happy one? How will my encounter with the
ogres come about all of a sudden? And,
similarly, how indeed will that ten-headed
monster Ravana actually know the strength
of his own mighty troops as well as myself
in a combat between us? (8)

सुखेन मत्वाहमित: पुनर्व्रजे॥९॥

‘Then, meeting Ravana, the ten-headed
monster, his body of ministers, troops and
charioteer, and conveniently reading the
design enshrined in his heart, and
ascertaining his strength, | shall return from
this place afterwards. (9)

set नन्दनोपममुत्तमम्।
at नेत्रमन:कान्तं नानाद्रुमलतायुतम्॥१०॥
‘This excellent grove of the cruel Ravana,
which vies with the Nandana grove in heaven,
is pleasing to the eyes as well as to the
mind and is full of trees and creepers of
every variety. (10)
अस्मिन् भग्ने तत: कोपं करिष्यति स रावण:॥ ११॥
‘| shall presently lay it waste even as
fire consumes a dry grove. When this has
been laid waste, the notorious Ravana will
forthwith give vent to his anger. (11)
ततो महत्साश्वमहारथद्दिपं
बलं समानेष्यति राक्षसाधिप:।
त्रिशूलकालायसपदट्टिशायुधं
ad महद्युद्धमिदं भविष्यति॥ १२॥

191

‘Ravana, the suzerain lord of ogres,
will thereupon lead his huge army, full of
horses, large chariots and elephants and
armed with tridents and spears made of
iron, and a formidable struggle will then
immediately follow. (12)
अहं च a: संयति चण्डविक्रमै:

समेत्य रक्षोभिरभङ्गविक्रम:।
Pet तद् रावणचोदितं बलं
Gel गमिष्यामि हरीश्वरालयम्॥ १३॥

‘Nay, coming to grips on the battle-field
with those ogres of terrible prowess and
destroying that army led by Ravana, my
valour knowing no frustration, | shall happily
return to the abode of Sugriva, the lord of
monkeys.’ (13)

ततो मारुतवत् क्रुद्धो मारुतिर्भीमविक्रम:।
ऊरुवेगेन महता FAM क्षेप्तुमथारभत्॥१४॥

Furious like the wind, Hanuman (son of
the wind-god) of redoubtable valour, now
forthwith proceeded to fell the trees with
great impetuosity of his thighs. (14)

ततस्तद्धनुमान् वीरो बभञ्ज प्रमदावनम्।
मत्तद्विजसमाघुष्टं नानाद्रुमलतायुतम्॥ १५ I

The valiant Hanuman then laid waste
the aforesaid pleasance attached to the
gynaeceum, which was resonant with the
shrieks of birds in heat and full of trees and
creepers of every variety. (15)

तद्वनं मथितैर्वृक्षै॰भिन्नैश्च सलिलाशयै: |
afta: पर्वताग्रैश्च बभूवाप्रियदर्शनम्॥१६॥
With its trees uprooted and ponds stirred
up and rendered muddy and the crests of
its pleasure-hills crushed, that pleasure-grove
presented an unsightly appearance. (16)
नानाशकुन्तविरुतै३ प्रभिन्नसलिलाशयै:।
Aa: किसलयै: क्लान्तै: क्लान्तद्रुमलतायुतै: ।। १७॥
न बभौ dq at तत्र दावानलहतं यथा।
व्याकुलावरणा रेजुर्विह्वला sa ता लता:॥१८॥

With the shrieks of various birds, the
brinks of its ponds demolished, its coppery
