+ UTTARAKANDA +

Meghanada, the notorious conqueror of Indra,
forthwith replied to the imperishable Brahma,
who was standing there: “The alternative
consummation which may be acceptable to
me in consideration for the release of Indra
(who is pre-supposed to have performed a
hundred horse-sacrifices as a condition
precedent for attaining Indrahood) may be
known from me. (9—11)

ममेष्टं नित्यशो हव्यैर्मन्ररै: सम्पूज्य पावकम्।
संग्राममवतर्तुं च शत्रुनिर्जयकाङ्क्षिण:॥१२॥
swag tat मह्यमुत्तिष्ठेत् तु विभावसो:।
`तत्स्थस्यामरता स्यान्मे एष मे निश्चितो वर:॥१३॥

“What is sought by me is that whenever,
seeking the utter discomfiture of my enemies,
| wish to engage in a fight after duly propitiating
the sacred fire through oblations daily while
chanting the sacred texts, a huge chariot
harnessed to steeds should emerge from
the sacred fire before me and immunity from
death should be insured for me so long as
| remain seated in that chariot. This is the
avowed boon sought by me. (12-13)

तस्मिन् यद्यसमाप्ते च जप्यहोमे विभावसौ।
युध्येयं देव संग्रामे तदा मे ate विनाशनम्॥ १४॥
“If, O lord, | should engage in fight on
the battlefield before the muttering of prayers,
and the pouring of oblations into the sacred
fire is completed, my death should take
place then and then alone. (14)

wat fe तपसा ea वृणोत्यमरतां पुमान्।
विक्रमेण मया त्वेतदमरत्वं प्रवर्तितम्॥ १५॥

“Every person, O lord, seeks immortality
through askesis alone. By me, however,
such immunity from death is being sought
through prowess.” (15)

wanttata तं चाह वाक्यं ca: पितामह:।

मुक्तश्चेन्द्रजिता शक्रो गताश्च त्रिदिवं सुरा:॥१६॥
Lord Brahma now gave him the

assurance: “Be it so!” Nay, Indra was set at

liberty by Indrajit, and the gods returned to
heaven. (16)

949

एतस्मिन्नन्तरे राम दीनो भ्रष्टामरद्युति:।
इन्द्रश्चिन्तापरीतात्मा ध्यानतत्परतां गत:॥१७॥

In the meanwhile, O Rama, the wretched
Indra, whose divine lustre had disappeared,
and whose mind was plunged in thought,
was lost in contemplation. (17)

तं तु gear तथा भूतं we ca: पितामह:।

शतक्रतो fay पुरा करोति स्म सुदुष्कृतम्॥ Veil
Seeing him in that (wretched) plight,

Lord Brahma (the grandfather of the entire

creation) said, “O Indra, why did you
perpetrate a heinous sin in the past? (18)
SACS मया बुद्ध्या प्रजा: सृष्टास्तथा प्रभो।
एकवर्णा: समाभाषा एकरूपाश्च सर्वश:॥१९॥
“Created beings were so evolved by
me in my wisdom, O ruler of gods, that they
had the same complexion, the same voice

and the same form in everyway, O king!
(19)

तासां नास्ति विशेषो fe agit लक्षणेऽपि ar
ततोऽहमेकाग्रमनास्ता: प्रजा: समचिन्तयम्॥ २०॥

“There was no difference whatsoever in
their appearance or even in their distinguishing
marks. Hence with a concentrated mind |
duly thought of introducing differences in those
created beings. (20)
सोऽहं तासां विशेषार्थं स्नियमेकां विनिर्ममे।
यद्यत् प्रजानां प्रत्यङ्गं विशिष्टं तत् तदुद्धृतम्॥ २१॥

“As such in order to make a distinction
between them, | evolved a woman. Whatever
was striking in every limb of the created
beings was reproduced in her. (21)

ततो मया रूपगुणैरहल्या स्त्री विनिर्मिता।
हलं नामेह वैरूप्यं हल्यं तत्प्रभवं भवेत्॥ २२॥
“With those features and excellences was
created by me, the woman Ahalya. ‘Hala’
stands here for ugliness and the reproachability
following from it is ‘Halya’. (22)
यस्या न fat हल्यं तेनाहल्येति विश्रुता।
अहल्येत्येव च मया तस्या ATA प्रकीर्तितम्॥ २३॥
