1112

Having spoken this much, Brahma, the
lord of the three worlds, went to heaven
together with other gods. (23)

ये च तत्र महात्मान ऋषयो ब्राह्मलौकिका:।
ब्रह्मणा समनुज्ञाता न्यवर्तन्तं महौजस:॥ २४॥
उत्तरं श्रोतुमनसो भविष्यं यच्च राघवे।
ततो WH: शुभां वाणीं देवदेवस्य भाषिताम्॥ २५ ॥
श्रुत्वा परमतेजस्वी वाल्मीकिमिदमब्रवीत्।
भगवन् श्रोतुमनस ऋषयो ब्राह्मलौकिका:॥ २६॥
भविष्यदुत्तरं यन्मे श्वोभूते सम्प्रवर्तताम्।
एवं विनिश्चयं pet सम्प्रगृह्य कुशीलवौ॥ २७॥
तं जनौघं विसृज्याथ पर्णशालामुपागमत्।
तामेव शोचत: सीता सा व्यतीता च शार्वरी॥ २८॥

« VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

The noble and splendrous sages
belonging to the world of Brahma, being
ordered by Brahma, returned, having a mind
to hear what will happen to the scion of Raghu
thereafter in the future. Then the most powerful
Sri Rama after hearing the holy words spoken
by the God of gods, Brahma, said to Valmiki:
‘Sir the Uttarakanda pertaining to what will
happen to me in future, that the sages of the
world of Brahma desire to hear, may be
described tomorrow.’ Thus having decided,
taking hold to Kuga and Lava, He (Sri Rama)
leaving that assembly of men, went to his
arbour—and as he kept thinking of Sita, that
night passed. (24—28)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये उत्तरकाण्डेऽष्टनवतितम: WA: ॥ ९८ ॥

Thus ends Canto Ninety-eight in the Uttarakanda of the glorious Ramayana of Valmiki,
the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

Canto LXXXXIX
Sri Rama enters Ayodhya in grief for Sita and afterwards performs

Ten-thousand Horse-sacrifices. Passing away of
His mothers and brothers

रजन्यां तु wart समानीय महामुनीन्।
गीयतामविशङ्काभ्यां राम: पुत्राव्रुवाच ह॥१॥
After the night had passed, dawn came,

Rama said to the two sons, calling all the
great sages, “Sing unhesitatingly”. (1)

तत: समुपविष्टैषु महर्षिषु महात्मसु।
भविष्यदुत्तरं काव्यं जगतुस्तौ कुशीलवौ॥ २॥
Then after the great and noble sages
had taken their seats, the twin KuSa and Lava
sang the poem relating to the Uttarakanda,
dealing with events of the future: (2)
प्रविष्टायां तु सीतायां भूतलं सत्यसम्पदा।
तस्यावसाने यज्ञस्य राम: पस्मदुंर्मना'; ।। ३॥
अपश्यमानो «ade मेने शून्यमिदं जगत्।
शोकेन परमायस्तो न शान्तिं मनसागमत्॥४॥

“On Sita entering the netherworld through
the efficacy of truth, Sri Rama was much
agitated at the conclusion of the sacrifice
and considered this earth as a void. Not
being able to see Sita and being terribly
afflicted by sorrow, he had no peace of
mind. (3-4)

fara पार्थिवान् सर्वानृक्षवानरराक्षसान्।
जनौघं विप्रमुख्यानां वित्तपूर्वं विसृज्य च॥५॥
एवं समाप्य यज्ञं तु विधिवत् a तु राघव:।
ततो विसृज्य aM सर्वान् WAT राजीवलोचन:॥ ६॥
ge कृत्वा dar सीतामयोध्यां प्रविवेश ह।
इष्टयज्ञो नरपति: पुत्रद्वयसमन्वित: ।॥ ७॥

Leaving all kings, the bears and
