396

चारास्तु ते तथेत्युक्त्वा प्रहृष्टा राक्षसेश्वरम्।
शार्दूलमग्रत: Heal ततश्चक्रु: प्रदक्षिणम्॥ २२॥
Saying “Amen!” to Ravana (the king
of ogres) and placing Sardula at their
head, the aforesaid spies for their part
thereupon went round Ravana clockwise,
highly rejoiced. (22)
ततस्तं qd महात्मानं चारा राक्षससत्तमम्।
कृत्वा प्रदक्षिणं जग्मुर्यत्र WA: सलक्ष्मण:॥ २३॥
Having gone round the gigantic Ravana,
the foremost of ogres, clockwise, the
spies for their part then left for the place
where Sri Rama accompanied by Laksmana
was (23)

a — शैलस्य समीपे रामलक्ष्मणौ।
Term ददृशुर्गत्वा ससुग्रीवविभीषणौ॥ २४॥

Approaching the Suvela mountain in
disguise, they saw Sri Rama and Laksmana,
accompanied by Sugriva and Vibhisana.

(24)

प्रेक्षमाणाश्चमूं at च बभूवुर्भयविह्वला:।

ते तु धर्मात्मना FST राक्षसेन्द्रेण राक्षसा:॥ २५॥
Nay, they were beside themselves

with fear as they were observing the afore-

said army of monkeys. Meanwhile the said

ogres were detected by Vibhisana (the lord of

ogres), whose mind was given to piety. (25)

विभीषणेन तत्रस्था निगृहीता यदृच्छया।
शार्दूलो ग्राहितस्त्वेक: पापोऽयमिति wera: it २६॥

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA +

Standing unexpectedly there, the
ogres were scolded by Vibhisana. The
ogre Sardila alone was, however, pointed
out by name on the plea that he was a
sinner. (26)

मोचित: सोऽपि रामेण वध्यमान: प्लवंगमै: |
आनृशंस्येन रामेण मोचिता राक्षसा: परे॥ २७॥

He too was, however, set free by Sri
Rama, even while he was being smitten by
the monkeys. Nay, the other ogres too
were given their freedom by the humane,
Sri Rama. (27)

वानरैर्दितास्ते तु विक्रान्तैर्लघुविक्रमै:।
पुनर्लङ्कामनुप्राप्तार श्वसन्तो नष्टचेतस:॥ २८॥

Harassed all the same by the
monkeys, who were all valiant and swift-
footed, they returned to Lanka panting and

stupefied. (28)
ततो दशग्रीवमुपस्थितास्ते
चारा बहिर्नित्यचरा निशाचरा:।
न्यवेदयन् रामबलं महाबला:॥२९॥
Arrived in the presence of Ravana, the
ten-headed monster, the aforesaid ogres,
who were always ranging outside as spies
and who were endowed with extraordinary
might, reported the army of Sri Rama to
be camping in the vicinity of the Suvela
mountain. (29)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये FERS एकोनत्रिंश: सर्ग: ॥ २९ ॥

Thus ends Canto Twenty-nine in the Yuddhakanda of the glorious Ramayana of
Valmiki, the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

