* AYODHYAKANDA +

“When | have joined the majority
consequent on Rama, the foremost of men,
having proceeded to the forest, you, a widow,
notorious as you will be for your act of
exiling Rama, will then rule over the kingdom
with your son. (93)

त्वं राजपुत्रि daa न्यवसो मम agar
अकीर्तिश्चातुला लोके ध्रुव: परिभवश्च मे।
सर्वभूतेषु चावज्ञा यथा पापकृतस्तथा॥९४॥
“Through ill luck of mine, O princess
of Kekaya, you took up your abode in my
palace. That is why ill repute which is
unmatched in the world and lasting reproach
as well as the scorn of all men will fall to my
share as to a perpetrator of sinful deeds.
(94)
कथं रथैर्बिभुर्यात्वा गजाश्वैश्च मुहुर्मुहु:।
पद्भ्यां Wa महारण्ये वत्सो A विचरिष्यति॥ ९७५ ॥

“How, having driven on chariots and
ridden on elephants and horses on every
occasion he was required to move, will my
darling, the powerful Rama roam about in
an extensive forest on foot? (95)

यस्य चाहारसमये Yat: कुण्डलधारिण:।
अहंपूर्वा: पचन्ति स्म प्रसन्ना: पानभोजनम्॥ ९६॥
स कथं नु कषायाणि तिक्तानि कटुकानि a
भक्षयन् वन्यमाहारं सुतो A वर्तयिष्यति॥९७॥

“How will my son—at whose dinner
time cooks wearing (gold and bejewelled)
ear-rings and full of delight used to prepare
food and drinks of various kinds, trying to
finish their work before others—actually
sustain his life living on alkaline, bitter and
pungent fruits as well as on other wild
edibles such as bulbs and roots? (96-97)

महार्हवस्त्रसम्बद्धो भूत्वा चिरसुखोचित:।
काषायपरिधानस्तु कथं wat भविष्यति॥९८॥

“How, having been clad in costly robes,
will Rama, who is deserving of lasting
comforts, wear ochre-coloured garments?

(98)

337

रामस्यारण्यगमनं भरतस्याभिषेचनम्॥ ९९॥

“At whose instance has such a cruel
proposal as the one demanding the exile of
Rama into the forest and the installation of
Bharata as Prince Regent been put forward
by you? (99)

धिगस्तु योषितो नाम शठा: स्वार्थपरायणा:।
न ब्रवीमि fara: सर्वा भरतस्यैव मातरम्॥ १००॥

“Woe unto womankind, who are
malignant by nature and whose supreme
concern is to advance their own selfish
interests । | do not speak of all women, but
of Bharata’s mother alone. (100)

अनर्थभावेऽर्थपरे नृशंसे
ममानुतापाय निवेशितासि।
किमप्रियं पश्यसि मन्निमित्तं
हितानुकारिण्यथवापि रामे॥१०१॥
“O cruel woman of evil intent, given to
the pursuit of your selfish ends, you have
been lodged in my house by Providence for
causing affliction to me. What mischief do
you expect through me or through Rama,
who has repeatedly been doing good to
you? (101)

परित्यजेयु: पितरोऽपि पुत्रान्
भार्या: पतींश्चापि कृतानुरागा:।
दृष्टवैव रामं व्यसने Fra oR tl
“Even fathers, who have bestowed
their love on Rama, are sure to abandon
sons in order to be able to follow Rama in
his exile and wives too thier husbands and
everything else; nay, the whole world will
get exasperated at the very sight of Rama

plunged in adversity in the shape of
banishment. (102)
अहं पुनर्देवकुमारसूप-

acid तं सुतमाव्रजन्तम्।
नन्दामि पश्यन्निव दर्शनेन
भवामि दृष्टवैव पुनर्युवेव॥१०३॥
