710

wea बुद्धिरियं जाता चिन्तयानस्य संततम्।
स्वयंवरं तनूजाया: करिष्यामीति धर्मत:॥ ३८॥
“As he was constantly reflecting the
idea struck his mind : According to the moral
code prescribed for the Ksatriyas, | shall so
arrange that my daughter selects a match
for herself of her own free will at an assembly
of suitors. (38)

महायज्ञे तदा तस्य वरुणेन महात्मना।
ad धनुर्वरं प्रीत्या quit चाक्षय्यसायकौ॥ ३९॥

“At a great sacrifice (performed by
Daksa, a lord of created beings, at the
beginning of creation) an excellent bow
capable of subduing the enemy as well as
a pair of quivers containing an inexhaustible
stock of arrows was bestowed with love by
the high-souled Varuna (as an agent of
gods as enjoined by Lord Siva, whom the
gods had approached for such a bow) upon
the celebrated Devarata (a forbear of King
Janaka) at a time when the gods were
oppressed by Lord Siva, infuriated by the
self-immolation of His divine Consort, Sat.

(39)

असंचाल्यं मनुष्यैश्च यत्नेनापि च गौरवात्।
तन्न शक्ता नमयितुं स्वप्नेष्वपि नराधिपा:॥४०॥

“Nay, monarchs were not able even in
their dreams to bend it, as it could not even
be moved with effort by men because of its
heavy weight. (40)

तद्धनु: प्राप्य मे पित्रा ened सत्यवादिना।
समवाये नरेन्द्राणां पूर्वमामन्त्य पार्थिवान्॥४१॥
इदं च धनुरुद्यम्य सज्यं य: कुरुते नर:।
तस्य मे दुहिता भार्या भविष्यति न संशय:॥४२॥

“Having in the first instance invited
rulers of the earth and then with reverence
sought the aforesaid bow, it was announced
by my father, who always spoke the truth,
in an assembly of monarchs, that ‘my
daughter shall come to be the wife of that
man who, having lifted up this bow, forthwith
strings it: there is no doubt about it.’ (41-42)

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

तच्च Gat धनु:श्रेष्ठं गौरवाद् गिरिसंनिभम्।
अभिवाद्य FO जग्मुरशक्तास्तस्य तोलने॥४३॥

“Beholding that jewel among bows,
which to a great extent compared with a
mountain in point of its weight, and saluting
it, the rulers of men withdrew, unable as
they were even to support it on their hands.

(43)
सुदीर्घस्य तु कालस्य राघवोऽयं महाद्युति: |
विश्चामित्रेण सहितो यज्ञं द्रष्टुं समागत:॥४४॥

“After a sufficiently long time, however,

Sri Rama, who is present here and who is
possessed of great splendour, duly arrived
at the scene, accompanied by Sage
Viswamitra, to behold the bow-stringing event.
(44)

लक्ष्मणेन सह WAT WA: सत्यपराक्रम:।

विश्वामित्रस्तु धर्मात्मा wa पित्रा सुपूजित:॥४५॥

“Sri Rama, who is possessed of an
unfailing prowess, alongwith his younger
brother, Laksmana, as well as Sage
Viswamitra, whose mind is set on piety,
was undoubtedly treated with great respect
by my father. (45)

Wart faat at राघवौ रामलक्ष्मणौ।
ait दशरथस्येमौ धनुर्दर्शनकांक्षिणौ।
धनुर्दर्शय रामाय राजपुत्राय दैविकम्॥४६॥

“ViSwamitra on that occasion said to
my father, ‘Here are the two sons of
Dasaratha, Sri Rama and Laksmana by
name, scions of Raghu, who are keen to
behold the bow. Therefore, please show the
celestial bow to Prince Rama.’ (46)

इत्युक्तस्तेन विप्रेण तद् धनु: समुपानयत्।
तद् धनुर्दर्शयामास राजपुत्राय दैविकम्॥४७॥

“Urged in these words by that Brahmana
(Viswamitra), my father caused that bow to
be duly brought to their presence and showed
that celestial bow to the prince. (47)

निमेषान्तरमात्रेण तदानम्य महाबल:।
ज्यां समारोप्य झटिति पूरयामास वीर्यवान्॥४८॥
