* AYODHYAKANDA +

“Even while instructing me as aforesaid,
the mighty-armed and highly illustrious Sri
Rama, who has eyes resembling the petals
of a lotus, shed tears again and again.

(25)

लक्ष्मणस्तु सुसंक्रुद्धो नि:श्चसन् वाक्यमब्रवीत्।
केनायमपराधेन राजपुत्रो विवासित:॥ २६॥

“Highly enraged, Laksmana for his part
spoke hissing as follows : ‘For what offence
has this prince, Sri Rama, been exiled?

(26)

राज्ञा तु खलु HHAM लघु UAT शासनम्।

कृतं कार्यमकार्यं वा वयं येनाभिपीडिता:॥ २७॥
““Having quickly promised to carry out

the command of Kaikeyi, the king executed

it, not minding whether it was worth doing or

not, as a result of which we have been

subjected to excessive suffering. (27)

ate प्रव्राजितो रामो लोभकारणकारितम्।
वरदाननिमित्तं वा सर्वथा दुष्कृतं कृतम्॥ २८॥

“ ‘If the event of Sri Rama having been
exiled was brought about through greed for
power or because a boon had been granted
to that effect by the Emperor, a wholly
undesirable act has been done. (28)

Be तावद् यथाकाममीश्वरस्य HA कृतम्।
रामस्य तु परित्यागे न हेतुमुपलक्षये॥२९॥
“* ‘Whether this was done according to
the king’s pleasure or through the will of
Providence, | do not find any justification
whatsoever for Sri Rama’s exile. (29)
असमीक्ष्य समारब्धं विरुद्धं बुद्धिलाघवात्।
जनयिष्यति संक्रोशं राघवस्य विवासनम्॥ ३०॥
“‘The exile of Sri Rama, which has
been brought about contrary to usage without
proper consideration, due to shortsight, will
lead to remorse. (30)
ae तावन्महाराजे fae नोपलक्षये।
भ्राता भताँचबग्धुंश्चपिताचममराघव;॥इशा।
“‘l, at any rate, perceive no parenthood

511

in the Emperor; Sri Rama (a scion of Raghu)
is my elder brother, master, kinsman and
father too. (31)

सर्वलोकप्रियं त्यक्त्वा सर्वलोकहिते रतम्।
सर्वलोकोऽनुरज्येत कथं चानेन कर्मणा॥३२॥

“‘How can the entire populace be pleased
through this act with the king, who is devoted
to the good of all people, having forsaken Sri
Rama, the beloved of all people? (32)
सर्वप्रजाभिरामं fe we प्रव्रज्य धार्मिकम्।
सर्वलोकविरोधेन कथं राजा भविष्यति॥ ३३॥

“‘Having actually exiled the pious Sri
Rama, the delighter of all the people, in
opposition to the will of all people, how can
father continue to be the king?’ (33)

जानकी तु महाराज नि:श्चसन्ती तपस्विनी।
भूतोपहतचिनत्तेव विष्ठिता विस्मृता स्थिता॥ ३४॥

“Sita (daughter of Janaka), for her part,
who is engaged in austerities, stood sighing
and motionless, oblivious of everything as
though her mind was possessed by a spirit,
O Emperor ! (34)

अदृष्टपूर्वव्यसना राजपुत्री यशस्विनी।

तेन दु:खेन रुदती Aa at किंचिदब्रवीत्॥ ३५॥
“Having never seen adversity before,

the illustrious princess did not speak anything

at all to me, weeping, as she did, due to the

distress of her husband. (35)

उद्बीक्षमाणा भर्तारं मुखेन परिशुष्यता।
मुमोच सहसा बाष्पं प्रयान्तमुपवीक्ष्य AT ३६॥
“Seeing me about to depart for Ayodhya,
she suddenly broke into tears as she stood
looking at her husband with a withering
face. (36)

तथैव रामोऽश्रुमुख: कृताञ्जलि:
स्थितोऽब्रवील्लक्ष्मणबाहुपालित: |
तथैव सीता रुदती तपस्विनी
निरीक्षते राजरथं तथैव माम्॥३७॥
“Precisely, as aforesaid, spoke Sri Rama,
protected by the arms of Laksmana, and
