354

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA +

Canto XIX

Falling at the feet of Sri Rama on coming down to the earth alongwith his
ministers, when he had received an assurance of safety from Sri Rama,
Vibhisana submits to the former that, having been reprimanded
by his eldest brother, Ravana, he has sought refuge with
him, and on being questioned by Sri Rama tells
him everything about Ravana.

राघवेणाभये दत्ते संनतो रावणानुज:।
विभीषणो महाप्राज्ञो भूमिं समवलोकयत्॥१॥
Ti पपातावनिं हृष्टो भक्तैरनुचरै: सह।
स तुं रामस्य धर्मात्मा निपपात विभीषण:॥ २॥
पादयोर्निपपाताथ चतुर्भि:; सह ward:
अब्रवीच्च तदा वाक्यं रामं प्रति विभीषण:॥ ३॥
धर्मयुक्तं च युक्तं च साम्प्रतं सम्प्रहर्षणम्।
अनुजो रावणस्याहं at चास्म्यवमानित:॥४॥
भवन्तं सर्वभूतानां शरण्यं शरणं गत:।
परित्यक्ता मया लङ्का मित्राणि च धनानि च॥ & ॥
An assurance of safety having
been vouchsafed by Sri Rama (a scion of
Raghu), the highly sagacious Vibhisana,
the younger brother of Ravana, who had
bent low in submission, surveyed the earth
below and descended joyously from the
airspace to the ground with his devoted
followers. The aforesaid Vibhisana for his
part, whose mind was set on virtue, fell
prostrate at the feet of Sri Rama. Nay, he
did so with all the four other ogres who
had accompanied him. Again, Vibhisana
addressed to Sri Rama on that occasion
the following appeal, which was full of
righteousness, reasonable, opportune and
thrilling: ‘| am the youngest brother of Ravana
and, having been insulted by him, have
sought you, who are capable of affording
shelter to all created beings, as my refuge.
The city of Lanka has been abandoned by
me as also my friends and possessions.
(1—5)

भवद्गतं fe मे we जीवितं च सुखानि च।
तस्य aq वचनं श्रुत्वा रामो वचनमब्रवीत्॥६॥
वचसा सान्त्वयित्वैनं लोचनाभ्यां पिबन्निव।
आख्याहि मम तत्त्वेन राक्षसानां बलाबलम्॥ ७॥
‘My sovereignty, nay, even life and
amenities are now centred in you.’ Hearing
his aforesaid appeal, and soothing him with
his speech, Sri Rama spoke as follows,
drinking him, as it were, with his eyes, full
of love: “Please let me know in truth the
strength as well as the weakness of the
ogres.” (6-7)

Wage तदा रक्षो रामेणाक्लिष्टकर्मणा।
रावणस्य बलं सर्वमाख्यातुमुपचक्रमे॥८॥

Commanded in these words by Sri Rama
of unwearing action, the ogre, Vibhisana,
forthwith proceeded to recount as follows the
entire strength of Ravana: (8)

अवध्य: सर्वभूतानां गन्धर्वोरगपक्षिणाम्।
राजपुत्र दशग्रीवो वरदानात् स्वयम्भुव:॥९॥
“By virtue of a special boon granted
by Brahma (the self-born creator), O prince,
Ravana, the ten-headed monster, is incapable
of being killed by all created beings including
Gandharvas (celestial musicians), serpents
and birds. (9)
रावणानन्तरो भ्राता मम ज्येष्ठश्च वीर्यवान्।
कुम्भकर्णो महातेजा: शाक्रप्रतिबलो युधि॥ १०॥
“My powerful elder brother,
Kumbhakarna, who is younger to Ravana
