* BALAKANDA +

183

Canto XLI

Under orders of Sagara his grandson Amsuman proceeds to Rasatala
through the underground passage made by his uncles and,
bringing back the sacrificial horse, tells the king
about the fate of his uncles

पुत्रांश्चिरगताञ्ञात्वा सगरो रघुनन्दन।
नप्तारमब्रवीद् राजा दीप्यमानं स्वतेजसा॥१॥
Perceiving that his sons had been away
for a long time, O scion of Raghu, King
Sagara spoke as follows to his grandson,
Armsuman, resplendent with his own glory :
(1)

शूरश्च कृतविद्यश्च पूर्वैस्तुल्योऽसि तेजसा।
पितॄणां गतिमन्विच्छ येन चाश्वोऽपवाहित:॥२॥

“You are valiant and learned and the
compeer of your forbears in splendour. Trace
the whereabouts of your uncles as well as
of the man by whom the sacrificial horse
has been stolen away. (2)

arta सत्त्वानि वीर्यवन्ति महान्ति च।
तेषां तु प्रतिघातार्थं सासिं गृह्णीष्व कार्मुकम्॥ ३॥

“The living beings inhabiting the
subterranean regions are full of great
prowess and gigantic of body. In order to
meet their assault, therefore, take up a bow
alongwith a sword. (3)

अभिवाद्याभिवाद्यांस्त्वं gear विघ्नकरानपि।
सिद्धार्थ: संनिवर्तस्व मम यज्ञस्य पारग:॥४॥

“Bowing to those who deserve to be
greeted and at the same time killing those
who come in your way, return you only
when you have accomplished your purpose,
and thus ensure the completion of my
sacrificial performance.” (4)

Vasa सम्यक सगरेण महात्मना।
धनुरादाय Get च जगाम लघुविक्रम:॥५॥
Duly instructed thus by the high-souled
Sagara and taking his bow and sword,
Amsuman departed with quick paces. (5)

स खातं faqiatieata महात्मभि:।
word owas तेन राज्ञाभिचोदित:॥६॥

Urged by the aforesaid king, O jewel
among men, he reached in no time the
underground passage dug by his high-minded
uncles. (6)

देवदानवरक्षोभि: पिशाचपतगोरगै: |
wer महातेजा दिशागजमपश्यत॥ ७॥

The exceptionally glorious Amsuman
presently saw an elephant guarding one of
the four quarters, that was being worshipped
by gods, demons and ogres, fiends, winged
creatures and serpents. (7)

a तं प्रदक्षिणं कृत्वा पृष्टा wa निरामयम्।
पितॄन् स परिपप्रच्छ वाजिहर्तारमेव mic

Walking clockwise round the elephant
and inquiring after his welfare, he questioned
him about his uncles as well as about the
stealer of the sacrificial horse of his father.

(8)

दिशागजस्तु तच्छुत्वा प्रत्युवाच महामति:।
आसमञ्ज कृतार्थस्त्वं सहाश्व: शीघ्रमेष्यसि॥९॥

Hearing his aforesaid question, the
highly intelligent elephant presiding over
the quarter, for his part, replied,
“Accomplished of purpose, O son of
Asamanfija, you will soon come back alongwith
the horse.” (9)

तस्य तद् वचनं seat सर्वानेव दिशागजान्।
यथाक्रमं यथान्यायं we समुपचक्रमे॥१०॥
Hearing the aforesaid reply of the

elephant, AmsSuman proceeded to ask the
same question of all the elephants guarding
