146

accomplished by the prince, Sr Rama.”
Saying so all the gods disappeared into the
heavens, extolling Viswamitra, and then the
twilight set in. Lovingly smelling the crown
of the head of Sri Rama, ViSwamitra, the
foremost of hermits, who felt consoled by
the death of Tataka, then addressed the
following words to Sri Rama: “Let us spend
this night here, O good-looking Rama ! Next
morning at sunrise we shall proceed to the
site of my well-known hermitage.” Pleased
to hear the words of ViSwamitra, Sri Rama,
son of Dasaratha, happily spent the night in
that forest, which had so long been the

« VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

haunt of Tataka. Nay, the aforesaid forest,
instantly rid of molestation that very day,
shone brightly like the delightful grove of
Caitraratha (belonging to Kubera and existing
in his capital, Alaka). (31—35)
निहत्य तां यक्षसुतां स राम: प्रशस्यमान: सुरसिद्धसंघै: |

उवास तस्मिन् मुनिना सहैव प्रभातवेलां प्रतिबोध्यमान: ।। ३६ ।।

Having disposed of the aforesaid
Tataka, (the daughter of a Yaksa) and being
applauded by hosts of gods and Siddhas, the
celebrated Sri Rama halted for the night in
the forest in the company of the sage, being
awakened by the latter towards sunrise. (36)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये ATH IS षड्विंश: सर्ग: ॥ २६ ॥

Thus ends Canto Twenty-six in the Balakanda of the glorious Ramayana of Valmiki,
the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

Canto XX VII

Gratified with the death of Tataka, Vigwamitra imparts to Sri Rama
the knowledge of the various missiles

अथ at रजनीमुष्य विश्वामित्रो महायशा:।
प्रहस्य Wad वाक्यमुवाच मधुरस्वरम्॥१॥
Having rested during that night (in the
forest haunted so long by Tataka), the highly
illustrious Viswamitra smiled and addressed
the following words in a sweet tone to Sri
Rama: (1)

परितुष्टोऽस्मि ws ते राजपुत्र महायश:।
प्रीत्यापस्मयायुक्तोदद।म्यस्त्रग्णिसर्वश।।२।।
देवासुरगणान् वापि सगन्धर्वोरगान् भुवि।
यैरमित्रान् प्रसह्याजौ वशीकृत्य जयिष्यसि॥ ३॥

“lam highly pleased with you, O
highly glorious prince! May prosperity attend
you! Full of supreme affection | hereby
impart to you the knowledge of all the
missiles, whereby you will forcibly bring
under control and conquer in battle all your
enemies on earth and even hosts of gods

and demons including the Gandharvas and
Nagas. (2-3)

तानि दिव्यानि we a ददाम्यस्त्राणि ade: |

दण्डचक्रं महद् feet aa arene wean x
धर्मचक्रं ततो dt कालचक्रं ata al

विष्णुचक्रं तथात्युग्रमैन्द्रं Uh तथैव च॥५॥
वज्रमस्त्रं नरश्रेष्ठ va शूलवरं तथा।
aa ब्रह्मशिरश्चैव ऐषीकमपि राघव॥६॥
“| deliver to you all those celestial
missiles, may good betide you! | shall deliver
to you, O scion of Raghu, the great and
ethereal Danda-Cakra and then the Dharma-
Cakra, O gallant prince, as well as the Kala-
Cakra, also the Visnu-Cakra as well as the
most formidable Indra-Cakra and the missile
in the shape of a thunderbolt, O jewel among
men, similarly the Sula of Siva, the best
among all presided over by Lord Siva, as
