+ UTTARAKANDA +

‘Even in Dvapara, penance by a Sudra
is taken to be great irreligion. (Now in Treta
surely) some Sidra is engaged in severe
penance in some frontier province—the
wreched one. (28)

अद्य तप्यति दुर्बुद्धिस्तेन बालवधो ह्ययम्।

यो ह्यधर्ममकार्यं वा विषये पार्थिवस्य तु॥ २९॥

करोति चाश्रीमूलं तत्पुरे वा दुर्मतिर्नर:।

fag च aah याति स च राजा न संशय:॥ ३०॥
‘This infantile death is the result of the

same. If some one practises Adharma in

the territory of a King, it causes a great loss

to the state prosperity and the king goes to

hell; there is no doubt about it. (29-30)

अधीतस्य च तप्तस्य कर्मण: सुकृतस्य च।

षष्ठं भजति भागं तु प्रजा धर्मेण पालयन्॥ ३१॥

1065

षड्भागस्य च भोक्तासौ रक्षते न प्रजा: कथम्।
स त्वं पुरुषशार्दूल मार्गस्व विषयं स्वकम्॥ ३२॥
दुष्कृतं यत्र पश्येथास्तत्र यत्नं समाचर।
एवं ae धर्मवृद्धिश्च yor चायुर्विवर्धनम्।
भविष्यति नरश्रेष्ठं बालस्यास्य च जीवितम्॥ ३३॥

‘Righteously ruling over the subjects, the
king shares one sixth portion of the merit that
accrues due to pious deeds performed by
study and penance, why should partaker of
one sixth not protect the subjects? So you, O
lion among kings, investigate your territory.
Wherever you see unrighteous actions done,
then make efforts to put them right; thus
righteousness and long life will prevail among
men, O best among men, and also the child
will come back to life.’ (31—33)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये उत्तरकाण्डे चतु:सप्ततितम: सर्ग: ॥ ७४॥

Thus ends Canto Seventy-four in the Uttarakanda of the glorious Ramayana of
Valmiki, the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

Canto LXXV
Sri Rama goes round in the aerial celestial car Puspaka of Kubera, in
order to trace out unrighteousness in his kingdom, but finding
no trace of it anywhere, He proceeds to the south and
comes across a Sidra practising penance

नारदस्य तु de वाक्यं श्रुत्वामृतमयं यथा।
प्रहर्षमतुलं लेभे लक्ष्मणं चेदमब्रवीत्॥१॥
Hearing those nectar-like words of
Narada, Sri Rama was highly pleased and
spoke thus to Laksmana: (1)

Tes सौम्य द्विजश्रेष्ठं समाश्वासय dad
बालस्य च शरीरं तत् तैलद्रोण्यां निधापय॥ २॥
‘O gracious one, go and console the

best among Brahmanas, and place the body
of the dead child in an oil tub. (2)

Tig परमोदारैस्तैलैश्च सुसुगन्धिभि:।
यथा न क्षीयते बालस्तथा सौम्य विधीयताम्॥ ३॥

‘O gracious one, provide it (the tub)
with lasting and fragrant oils, so that the
body of the child may not decompose. (3)

यथा शरीरो बालस्य TA: सन् क्लिष्टकर्मण:।
विपत्ति: परिभेदो वा न भवेच्च तथा कुरु॥४॥

‘Make arrangements to preserve the
body of the child, the innocent one, so
that it may not get decomposed and the
limbs are not disjointed.’ (4)
एवं संदिश्य काकुत्स्थो लक्ष्मणं शुभलक्षणम्।
मनसा पुष्पकं दध्यावागच्छेति महायशा:॥५॥
thus told

Having the auspicious
