* AYODHYAKANDA +

which had proved a terrible curse for the
entire population of Ayodhya and seizing
her most heartlessly, the porter on duty
delivered her to Satrughna with the following
words : (8)

यस्या: Hd वने रामो न्यस्तदेहश्च a: पिता।
सेयं पापा नृशंसा च तस्या: He यथामति॥ eu
“Here is that cruel wretch because of
whom Sri Rama is living in the forest and
your father has cast off his body ! Deal with
her as you please.” (9)
शत्रुघ्नश्च तदाज्ञाय वचनं भृशदु:खित:।
अन्त:पुरचरान् सर्वानित्युवाच धृतव्रत:॥१०॥
Pondering the aforesaid submission of
the porter and having determined his course
of action, Satrughna, who was feeling sore
distressed, spoke to all the inmates of the
gynaeceum as follows: (10)

aoe Se ee
यथा सेयं नृशंसस्य HAT: फलमश्नुताम्॥११॥

“Let this wench reap the fruit of her
cruel deed as acute agony has been caused
by her to my brothers as well as to my
father.” (11)
एवमुक्त्वा च तेनाशु सखीजनसमाव्रृता।
गृहोत। ललवत् Hol सा dq गृहमनादढयत्॥ १२॥

With these words the humpback, who
was surrounded by her female companions,
was violently seized by him at once; and
she in her turn made that chamber, where
he stood, resound with her shrieks. (12)

ad: सुभृशसंतप्तस्तस्या: सर्व: सखीजन:।
क्रुद्धमाज्ञाय शत्रुघ्नं व्यपलायत WaT: iu Vil
॥ Extremely agonized to _ perceive
Satrughna enraged, all her female
companions forthwith ran away helter-skelter
in all directions. (13)
अमन्त्रयत कृत्स्नश्च तस्या: Ta: AEST: |
यथायं समुपक्रान्तो नि:शेषं A: करिष्यति॥ १४॥
All her female companions as well as
the entire menial staff said to one another,

581

“From the way in which he has started dealing
with us, it can easily be concluded that he
will put an end to us all. (14)
सानुक्रोशां वदान्यां च धर्मज्ञां च यशस्विनीम्।
कौसल्यां शरणं याम: सा हि नोऽस्ति ध्रुवा गति: ।। १५ Ul
“We shall fly for protection to Kausalya,
who is merciful, polite of soeech and glorious
and knows what is right; for she is our
unfailing asylum.” (15)

स च रोषेण संवीत: शत्रुघ्न: शत्रुशासन:।
विचकर्ष तदा कुब्जां क्रोशन्तीं पृथिवीतले॥ १६॥
Nay, overwhelmed with anger, the said
Satrughna, the chastiser of his enemies,
then violently dragged the crying humpback
along the floor. (16)
fat बहुविधं भाण्डं पृथिव्यां तद्व्यशीर्यत॥ १७॥
While the notorious Manthara was
being dragged to and fro on the ground, her
excellent ornaments of various kinds,
mentioned above, were actually dashed to
pieces. (17)

तेन भाण्डेन विस्तीर्णं श्रीमद् राजनिवेशनम्।
अशोभत तदा भूय: शारदं WH यथा॥१८॥
Strewn with those broken ornaments,
the splendid royal palace shone all the more
at that moment like the clear actual sky
spangled with stars. (18)

स बली बलवत् क्रोधाद् गृहीत्वा पुरुषर्षभ:।
कैकेयीमभिनिर्भर्त्सत्य बभाषे wet वच:॥१९॥

Continuing to hold Manthara in violent
rage and sharply rebuking Kaikeyi (who
had come to protect her maidservant), that
mighty prince, a veritable jewel among men,
spoke harsh words to her. (19)

शत्रुघ्नभयसंत्रस्ता पुत्रॆ शरणमागता॥२०॥
Greatly pained by those harsh and
unpleasant words and overwhelmed with

fear of Satrughna, Kaikeyi fled for protection
to her own son. (20)
