392

Vedas, nay, who is the foremost of the
knowers of the Vedas, who can split the
vault of heaven with his arrows and even
rend the earth, whose wrath is like the
wrath of Death and whose prowess is similar
to that of Indra (the ruler of gods), and
whose consort, Sita, was borne away by
you from Janasthana. The selfsame Rama
is advancing to wage war on you, O king!

(18—21)

यस्यैष दक्षिणे ued शुद्धजाम्बूनदप्रभ:।
विशालवक्षास्ताम्राक्षो नीलकुञ्चितमूर्धज:॥ २२॥
war fe लक्ष्मणो नाम भ्रातु: प्रियहिते ta: |
नये युद्धे च कुशल: सर्वशस्त्रभृतां वर:॥२३॥
“He who actually stands here on the
right side of Rama, radiant as refined gold,
with a broad chest, coppery eyes and dark
curly locks, is Laksmana by name. He is
devoted to his eldest brother’s pleasure and
interests, skilled in statecraft as well as in
warfare and the foremost among all wielders
of weapons. (22-23)

अमर्षी दुर्जयो जेता विक्रान्तश्च जयी बली।
रामस्य दक्षिणो बाहुर्नित्यं प्राणो बहिश्चर:॥ २४॥

“He is unforgiving towards the enemies
of Rama, difficult to conquer, victorious,
brave, conquering and mighty. He has always
been the right arm of Rama, nay, his very
external life-breath. (24)

नह्येष राघवस्यार्थे जीवितं परिरक्षति।
weaned युद्धे निहन्तुं सर्वराक्षसान्॥२५॥
“Surely he does not spare his own self
for the sake of Rama (a scion of Raghu).
He too aspires to exterminate all the ogres
in battle. (25)
यस्तु सव्यमसौ vet रामस्याश्रित्य तिष्ठति।
रक्षोगणपरिक्षिप्तो राजा ह्येष विभीषण:॥ २६॥
“He who for his part stands over

there sticking to the left flank of Rama
and surrounded by a party of ogres is

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA +

King Vibhisana indeed.

श्रीमता राजराजेन लङ्कायामभिषेचित:।
त्वामसौ प्रतिसंरब्धो युद्धायैषोऽभिवर्तते॥ २७॥

“Having been consecrated as a
sovereign of Lanka by the glorious Rama
(the king of kings) and filled with rage, he is
marching towards you for an encounter.

(27)

aq पश्यसि तिष्ठन्तं मध्ये गिरिमिवाचलम्।
सर्वशाखामृगेन्द्राणां भर्तारममितौजसम्॥ २८॥
तेजसा यशसा बुद्ध्या बलेनाभिजनेन AI
a: कपीनतिबभ्राज हिमवानिव पर्वत:॥ २९॥
किष्किन्धां a: समध्यास्ते गुहां सगहनद्रुमाम्।
out पर्वतदुर्गम्यां wert: सह यूथपै:॥ ३०॥
यस्यैषा काञ्चनी माला शोभते शतपुष्करा।
कान्ता देवमनुष्याणां यस्यां लक्ष्मी: प्रतिष्ठिता ।। ३१॥
एतां मालां च तारां च कपिराज्यं च शाश्वतम्।
सुग्रीवो वालिनं हत्वा रामेण प्रतिपादित:॥ ३२॥
“Sugriva, whom indeed you see
standing immovable like a rock in the centre,
the lord of all monkey chiefs, endowed with
immeasurable energy, who outshines all the
monkeys in glory, renown, intelligence, might
and pedigree, even as the Himalaya mountain
outshines other mountains; who comfortably
dwells with the principal monkey leaders in
Kiskindha, a cave with thickly growing trees
and difficult of access, which cannot further
be easily reached because of mountains;
about whose neck shines a chain of gold
wrought with a hundred lotuses and coveted
by gods and men alike, in which Laksmi,
the goddess of fortune, stands firmly
installed—the same Sugriva was granted
this chain as well as Tara (the consort of
his elder brother Vali) as also the lasting
rulership of monkeys by Rama after the
latter had killed Vali. (28—32)
wd शतसहस्राणां कोटिमाहुर्मनीषिण:।
wd कोटिसहस्राणां शङ्कुरित्यभिधीयते॥ ३३॥

(26)
