* AYODHYAKANDA +

आदिदेशाग्रतो राज्ञ: स्थितान् युक्तान् कृताञ्जलीन्।
सुवर्णादीनि रत्नानि बलीन् सर्वौषधीरपि॥ ८॥
शुक्लमाल्यानि लाजांश्च पृथक च मधुसर्पिषी।
अहतानि च वासांसि wi सर्वायुधान्यपि॥ ९॥
agai wa wt च शुभलक्षणम्।
चामरव्यजने चोभे east BA च पाण्डुरम्॥१०॥
शतं च शातकुम्भानां कुम्भानामग्निवर्चसाम्।
Roast wat व्याघ्रचर्म च॥११॥
यच्चान्यत्किंचिदेष्टव्यं तत् सर्वमुपकल्प्यताम्।
उपस्थापयत प्रातरग्न्यगारे TA UAH

The emperor's statement having ended,
there actually issued forth a loud clamour
from men. And that clamour of men having
died out by degrees, DaSaratha, the ruler of
men, addressed the following words to Sage
Vasistha, a veritable tiger among hermits
(as also to Vamadeva): “Be pleased, O
venerable Sir, to enjoin all the traditional
ceremonials which are required (according
to the Sastras) for the installation of Sri
Rama as Prince Regent, alongwith the
accessories that will be required for
conducting the ceremonial.” Hearing the
aforesaid submission of DaSaratha (the ruler
of the earth), Vasistha, the foremost of sages,
commanded the ministers (Sumantra and
others) authorized in this behalf, who stood
with joined palms in front of the Emperor :
“Please get ready gold and other precious
substances, oblations to be offered to the
gods as well as all the medicinal herbs
essential for the installation ceremony, white
flowers and parched grains of paddy as
also honey and ghee kept apart, nay, pieces
of brand new (lit., unbeaten) cloth, a chariot
as also all kinds of weapons as well as the
army consisting of all its four limbs (viz., the
horse, elephants, chariots and _ infantry),
again, an elephant endowed with auspicious
bodily marks, a pair each of whisks made
of a yak’s tail and fans both, a flag and a
white umbrella, nay, a hundred gold pitchers
effulgent as fire, a bull with gold-plated horns
and a whole lion-skin (with nails etc., intact)

295

and everything else such as sandal-paste
that may be desirable. Keep all these
requisites ready next morning at or about
the royal fire-sanctuary. (5—12)

अन्त:पुरस्य द्वाराणि सर्वस्य नगरस्य च।
चन्दनस्तरग्भिरर्च्यन्तां धूपैश्च घ्राणहारिभि: 1 १३॥

“Let the gates and doorways of the
gynaeceum as well as of the whole city be
decorated with sandal-paste and garlands
as well as with fumes of incense ravishing
the olfactory sense. (13)

Wrest गुणवद् दधिक्षीरोपसेचनम्।
द्विजानां शतसाहस्रं यत्प्रकाममलं भवेत्॥१४॥
ape द्विजमुख्यानां va: प्रभाते प्रदीयताम्।
ad दधि च लाजाश्च दक्षिणाश्चापि पुष्कला: tl १५ UI
“Let excellent and wholesome rice
cooked in milk or curds that may fully suffice
for a lakh of Brahmanas, as well as ghee,
curds and parched grains of paddy be served
up with respect and Daksinas (monetary
gifts at the end of a dinner) on a liberal
scale given to the foremost of Brahmanas
tomorrow morning. (14-15)

सूर्येऽभ्युदितमात्रे श्वो भविता स्वस्तिवाचनम्।
ब्राह्मणाश्च PASI कल्प्यन्तामासनानि च॥ १६॥

“As soon as the sun rises tomorrow
there will be Svasti-Vacana (a religious rite
preparatory to any religious or solemn
observance, in which blessings are invoked
on the individual to be consecrated for the
observance) and let Brahmanas be invited
for the purpose and seats provided for them.

(16)
आबध्यन्तां पताकाश्च राजमार्गश्च सिच्यताम्।
सर्वे च तालापचरा गणिकाश्च स्वलंकृता:॥ १७॥
कक्ष्यां द्वितीयामासाद्य तिष्ठन्तु नृपवेश्मन:।
देवायतनचैत्येषु सान्नभक्ष्या: सदक्षिणा:॥१८॥
उपस्थापयितव्या: स्युर्माल्ययोग्या: TATA |
दीर्घासिबद्धगोधाश्च gl मृष्टवासस:॥१९॥
महाराजाङ्गनं शूरा: प्रविशन्तु महोदयम्।
एवं व्यादिश्य faut तु क्रियास्तत्र विनिष्ठितौ it 20 1
