416

among men then actually caused that wealth
to be distributed among Brahmanas, who
were yet mere boys or aged, and to the
afflicted. (28)

तत्रासीत् पिङ्गलो गार्ग्यस्त्रिजटो नाम St द्विज:।
क्षतव्त्तिर्वने नित्यं फालकुद्दाललाङ्गली॥२९॥

“They say there lived in those days in
the forest near about Ayodhya, a Brahmana,
Trijata by name, born in the line of Garga,
who looked pale due to privations and, all
his means of subsistence having failed,
always carried an axe, a spade and a
ploughshare living as he did by digging
the soil in order to get roots and bulbs etc.

(29)
तं वृद्धं तरुणी Wat बालानादाय दारकान्।
AAAS ब्राह्मणं वाक्यं स्त्रीणां भर्ता हि देवता Ul Bo ॥
TH दर्शय धर्मज्ञं ate किंचिदवाप्स्यसि॥ ३१॥

“Taking her young children with her,
his wife, who was still young, approached
and spoke to the said Brahmana, who
had grown old, as follows: “Although the
husband is a veritable god to the weaker
sex, does not deserve to be commanded
by his wife, pray, follow my instructions,
discarding the hatchet and the spade. Seek
the presence of Sri Rama, who knows his
duty by the Brahmanas and you are sure to
get something at least.” (30-31)

सभार्याया वच: श्रुत्वा शाटीमाच्छाद्य दुश्छदाम्।
स प्रातिष्ठत पन्थानं at रामनिवेशनम्॥ ३२॥
Hearing the request of his wife and
wrapping about his lower limbs a loin-cloth,
that could hardly cover his body, tattered as
it was, he set out on the track which led to
Sri Rama’s palace. (32)
आपञ्चमाया: कक्ष्याया Ad कश्चिदवारयत्॥ ३३॥
Up to the fifth gate none in the large
concourse of men, collected at the gates of
the palace, stopped this Trijata, who vied

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

with the sages Bhrgu and Angira in spiritual
glow befitting a Brahmana. (33)

स राममासाद्य तदा faster वाक्यमब्रवीत्।
निर्धनो ळहुपुत्रोऽस्मि राजपुत्र महाबल॥ ३४॥
Approaching Sri Rama, the said Trijata
then spoke as follows : “I have many children,
though destitute, O prince of extraordinary
might ! (34)

क्षतव्रत्तिर्वने नित्यं प्रत्यवेक्षस्व मामिति।
तमुवाच ततो राम: परिहाससमन्वितम्॥ ३५॥

“All my means of subsistence having
failed, | perpetually dwell in the forest. Pray,
look to me.” Sri Rama thereupon replied
jestingly to him as follows: (35)
Tat सहस्रमप्येकं न च विश्राणितं मया।
परिक्षिपसि दण्डेन यावत्तावदवाप्स्यसे॥ ३६॥

“Not even one thousand of my cows
have been given away by me so far. You
will get as many of them as you will cover
by throwing your staff across them.” (36)

स शाटीं परित: Heat सम्भ्रान्त: परिवेष्ट्य ताम्।
आविध्य दण्डं चिक्षेप सर्वप्राणेन वेगत:॥ ३७॥

Tightening his aforesaid loin-cloth round
his waist and twirling his staff he violently
threw it with all his might, excited as he
was. (37)

स dat सरयूपारं दण्डस्तस्य कराच्च्युत:।
Tat बहुसाहस्रे पपातोक्षणसंनिधौ॥ ३८॥
Released from his hand and _ flying
across the Sarayu, that staff fell close to a
bull in the midst of the multitude of cows
numbering many thousand, grazing there.
(38)
तं परिष्वज्य धर्मात्मा आ तस्मात् सरयूतटात्।
आनयामास ता गावस्तिजटस्याश्रमं प्रति॥ ३९॥

Embracing him, Sri Rama of devout
mind, caused to be driven to Trijata’s
hermitage all the cows from the spot where
the staff fell right up to that bank of the
Sarayu beyond which the cows stood
grazing. (39)
