* SUNDARAKANDA +

distinguished by his fleshy, large and broad
chest, which was smeared with red sandal-
paste and shone brightly with a charming
string of pearls: who had blood-red eyes
and was covered below the loins with a
white silken loin-cloth, which had been
dislodged from its position, and was properly
covered with a costly yellow upper garment;
who resembled a heap of black beans, was
hissing like a serpent and looked like an
elephant lying fast asleep in a large stream
of the holy Ganga; who was being illumined
on all the four sides by four lights set on
golden pillars and accordingly had all his
limbs lit up even as a cloud is irradiated by
flashes of lightning—and also looked on his
wives lying close by his feet. (25—30)

शशिप्रकाशवदना वरकुण्डलभूषणा: |
अम्लानमाल्याभरणा ददर्शं हरियूथप:॥ ३१॥

Hanuman, a leader of monkey hordes,
found them with their faces resplendent as
the moon, nay, adorned with excellent
earrings and graced with unwithered celestial
garlands. (31)

नृत्यवादित्रकुशला राक्षसेन्द्रभुजाङ्कगा: |
वराभरणधारिण्यो निषण्णा ag कपि:॥ ३२॥

Hanuman saw lying there women who
were skilled in dancing and playing on musical
instruments, nay, who found a place in the
arms and lap of Ravana, the ruler of ogres,
and who wore excellent jewels. (32)

वज्रवैदूर्यगर्भाणि श्रवणान्तेषु योषिताम्।
cat तापनीयानि कुण्डलान्यंगदानि च॥३३॥

He beheld on the lobes of the ears of
those women earrings of gold set with
diamonds and cat’s-eye gems, as well as
armlets about their arms. (33)

तासां चन्द्रोपमैर्वक्तरै: शुभैर्ललितकुण्डलै:।
विरराज faa तन्नभस्तारागणैरिव॥ ३४॥

That chamber, which was shaped like
an aerial car, shone brightly with their faces,
bright as the moon and graced with lovely

77

earrings, even as the firmament with hosts
of stars. (34)

मदव्यायामखिन्नास्ता राक्षसेन्द्रस्य योषित:।
तेषु तेष्ववकाशेषु प्रसुप्तास्तनुमध्यमा:॥ ३५॥

Languid with intoxication and amorous
dalliance, the aforesaid consorts of Ravana
with slender waists had fallen asleep during
the varying spells of respite. (35)
अंगहारैस्तथैवान्या कोमलैर्नृत्यशालिनी।
विन्यस्तशुभसर्वांगी प्रसुप्ता वरवर्णिनी॥ ३६॥

Though fast asleep, a certain woman
with an excellent complexion, all of whose
limbs had been specially endowed with
beauty, likewise appeared graceful in a
dancing mood (due to habit) with delicate
motions of her limbs. (36)

काचिद् वीणां परिष्वज्य प्रसुप्ता सम्प्रकाशते।
महानदीप्रकोर्णेव नलिनी पोतमाश्रिता॥३७॥

Fallen fast asleep hugging her vina
of six strings, another woman _ looked
exceptionally charming like a lotus plant,
thrown about in a large river, having clung
to a boat. (37)

अन्या कक्षगतेनैव मड्डुकेनासितेक्षणा।
प्रसुप्ता भामिनी भाति बालपुत्रेव वत्सला॥ ३८॥
Another dark-eyed lovely woman, who
had lain fast asleep with a Madduka (a kind
of small drum) placed in one of her arm-pits
looked like a loving matron with her infant in
her lap. (38)
wee चारुसर्वांगी न्यस्य wa शुभस्तनी।
चिरस्य रमणं लब्ध्वा परिष्वज्येव कामिनी॥ ३९॥

Another woman with lovely breasts and
graceful of every limb lay hugging a
tambourine as though a passionate woman
lay embracing her lover on securing him
after a long time. (39)

काचिद् वीणां परिष्वज्य सुप्ता कमललोचना।
at प्रियतमं Ta सकामेव fe कामिनी॥४०॥

Yet another woman with lotus-like eyes
lay asleep pressing a vina of six strings to
