568

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

Canto LXXV

Swearing that what had already come to pass in the shape of exile of Sri
Rama, Sita and Laksmana and the resultant death of the King-Emperor
was not to his liking, Bharata moves with Satrughna to the apartments
of his stepmother, Kausalya, who speaks unkindly to him taunting
him with the remark that his mother, Kaikeyi, had rendered
good offices to him by securing for him the kingdom of
Kosala, sought after by him. Bharata, however, politely
denies on a number of oaths all complicity in the
machinations of his vile mother. Thereby coming
to know of his heart, the guileless Kausalya
places Bharata on her lap and weeps bitterly

दीर्घकालात् समुत्थाय संज्ञां लब्ध्वा स वीर्यवान्।
नेत्राभ्यामश्रुपूर्णाभ्यां दीनामुद्वीक्ष्य मातरम्॥१॥
सोऽमात्यमध्ये भरतो जननीमभ्यकुत्सयत्।
राज्यं न कामये जातु मन्त्रये नापि मातरम्॥ २॥

Regaining his consciousness after a
long time the said Bharata, who was full of
valour, got up and, casting a glance at his
mother, who looked miserable at the
unexpected turn of events, with her eyes
full of tears, reproached her right and left in
the midst of the ministers (who had evidently
collected there on coming to know of Bharata’s
arrival) and said, “I never coveted the throne,
nor did | ever hold any consultation with my
mother. (1-2)

अभिषेकं न जानामि arse राज्ञा समीक्षित: |
विप्रकृष्टे ह्यहं देशे शत्रुघ्नसहितोऽभवम्॥३॥

“Nor did | know anything about the
installation of Sri Rama as Prince Regent
which was contemplated by the king; for, |
happened to be at that time in a distant land
with Satrughna, my brother. (3)

wad न जानामि wren महात्मन:।

विवासनं च afta: सीतायाश्च यथाभवत्॥४॥
“Nor again was | aware of the residence

in the forest of the high-souled Sri Rama,

nor how the exile of Laksmana (son of
Sumitra) and Sita came about.” (4)

तथैव क्रोशतस्तस्य भरतस्य महात्मन:।
कौसल्या शब्दमाज्ञाय सुमित्रां चेदमब्रवीत्॥५॥

Recognizing the voice of the celebrated
Bharata of noble mind, who was lamenting
as aforesaid, Kausalya spoke to Sumitra as
follows : (5)
आगत: क्रूरकार्याया: कैकेय्या भरत: AA:
we द्रष्टुमिच्छामि wd दीर्घदर्शिनम्॥६॥

“| think Bharata, the son of Kaikeyi of
cruel deeds, has returned from his maternal
grandfather’s. | long to see the aforesaid
Bharata, who takes a long-range view of
things.” (6)
एवमुक्त्वा सुमित्रां at विवर्णवदना कृशा।
प्रतस्थे भरतो at वेपमाना विचेतना॥७॥

Speaking as aforesaid to the said
Sumitra, the pale-faced and emaciated
lady, who looked absent-minded, advanced
trembling to the place where Bharata was.

(7)
स तुं राजात्मजश्चापि शात्रुघ्नसहितस्तदा।
प्रतस्थे भरतो येन कौसल्याया निवेशनम्॥८॥

Nay, accompanied by Satrughna, the
said prince, Bharata, too, on the other side,
proceeded that very moment along the route
by which Kausalya’s apartments could be
reached. (8)
