82 « VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

Adorned with mountain-like mansions
built of precious stones, and thickly set with
attics, it looks like Indra’s Amaravati. (15)
चित्रामष्टापदाकारां वरनारीगणायुताम्।
सर्वरत्नसमाकीर्णां विमानगृहशोभिताम्॥ १६॥

Presenting a colourful appearance, it
is laid out after the design of a dice-board,
is thronged with bevies of lovely women
and full of all varieties of precious stones,

and is embellished with seven-storied
buildings. (16)
गृहगाढामविच्छिद्रां समभूमौ निवेशिताम्।

शालितण्डुलसम्पूर्णामिक्षुकाण्डरसोदकाम् ॥१७॥

Thick with houses, it is faultless of
design and has been built on a level ground,
abounds in rice and contains water sweet
as the juice of a sugar-cane. (17)
दुन्दुभीभिर्मृदङ्गैश्च वीणाभि: पणवैस्तथा।
नादितां भृशमत्यर्थं पृथिव्यां तामनुत्तमाम्॥१८॥

Made deeply resonant with the sound
of kettledrums, clay tomtoms, lutes and
drums, it is altogether unexcelled on the
earth. (18)
विमानमिव सिद्धानां तपसाधिगतं दिवि।
सुनिवेशितवेश्मान्तां नरोत्तमसमाव्रताम्॥ १९॥

With its well-arranged houses it looks
like a row of aerial cars in heaven belonging
to Siddhas (a class of semi-divine beings
naturally endowed with mystic powers) and
attained through askesis, and is inhabited
by jewels among men. (19)

ये च बाणैर्न विध्यन्ति विविक्तमपरापरम्।
शब्दवेध्यं च विततं लघुहस्ता विशारदा:॥ २०॥
सिंहव्याघ्रवराहाणां मत्तानां नदतां वने।
हन्तारो निशितै: शस्तैर्बलाद् बाहुबलैरपि॥ २१॥

It is crowded on all sides with thousands
of great car-warriors' who never strike with
arrows an isolated warrior, one who has no
father or son, one who, being out of sight,
could only be struck with the help of his
voice or who has fled from an encounter—
warriors who are not only skilled archers
but also well-versed in the use of all kinds
of arms, nay, who kill with violence by
means of sharp-edged missiles and even
with the might of arms (unaided by weapons)
lions, tigers and boars furiously roaring in
the woods. (20-21)
तादृशानां सहस्रैस्तामभिपूर्णां महारथै:।
पुरीमावासयामास राजा दशरथस्तदा॥ २२॥
ताग्मग्निग्मद्धिर्गुणवद्धिराक्ता द्विजोत्तमैर्वेदषडङ्गपारगै: |

सहस्रदै: सत्यरतैर्महात्मभिर्महर्षिकल्पैर्ऋषिभिश्च केवलै: ।। २३ ।

It is such a city that King Dasaratha
re-populated in those days—a city which is
peopled by the foremost of Brahmanas,
who maintain and worship the sacred fire,
are adorned with good qualities, have
mastered the Vedas as well as the six
branches? of knowledge auxiliary to the study
of the Vedas by high-souled men, who give
away in abundance and are devoted to
truth, as well as by eminent seers who are
almost as good as Maharsis. (22-23)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये बालकाण्डे TAA: सर्ग: ॥ ५ ॥

Thus ends Canto Five in the Balakanda of the glorious Ramayana of Valmiki,
the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

1. A Maharatha (a great car-warrior) has been defined in our scriptures as below :

आत्मानं सारथिं चाश्वान् रक्षन् युध्येत यो नर:। स महारथसंज्ञ: स्यात्

“A man who is able to fight while defending himself, his charioteer and horses enjoys the title of a

Maharatha.”

According to another definition a Maharatha is he who is able to fight single-handed ten thousand

archers—Went दश सहस्राणि योधयेद् यस्तु धन्विनाम्।

2. The six branches of knowledge auxiliary to a study of the Vedas are:

(1) Siksa (Phonetics),

(2) Vyakarana (Grammar), (3) Chandas (Prosody), (4) Nirukta (Etymology), (5) Jyautisa (Astronomy) and
(6) Kalpa (which prescribes the ritual and gives rules for ceremonial or sacrificial acts).
