* AYODHYAKANDA +

northward and, going apace awhile, bring
the chariot back again. Remaining careful,
drive the chariot in such a way that the
citizens may not be able to locate me.”
(30-31)
रामस्य तु वच: श्रुत्वा तथा चक्रे च सारथि:।
प्रत्यागम्य च रामस्य स्यन्दनं प्रत्यबेदयन्।। ३२॥
Hearing the command of Sri Rama, the
said charioteer for his part did as he was told
and, returning by a different route reported to
Sri Rama the arrival of the chariot. (32)
तौ सम्प्रयुक्तं तु रथं समास्थितौ
तदा ससीतौ रघुवंशवर्धनौ।
प्रचोदयामास ततस्तुरंगमान्
स सारथिर्येन पथा तपोवनम्॥ ३३॥
Then Sri Rama and Laksmana (the
promoters of the race of Raghu) for their

465

part alongwith Sita comfortably took their
seats in the chariot, which was duly kept
ready by the charioteer for their use. The
said charioteer thereupon urged the horses
along the route by which they could reach a
forest suited to the practice of austerities.
(33)
ad: समास्थाय रथं महारथ:

ससारथिर्दाशरथिर्वनं ययौ।
प्रयाणमाङ्गल्यनिमित्तदर्शनात् ॥ ३४॥
At the outset, however, the charioteer
placed the chariot facing the north; for he
saw omens auspicious for journey in that
quarter. Having duly occupied the chariot,
Sri Rama, son of Dagaratha, who was a
great car-warrior, thereupon proceeded to
the forest alongwith the charioteer. (34)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्येऽयोध्याकाण्डे षट्चत्वारिंश: सर्ग: ॥ ४६ ॥

Thus ends Canto Forty-six in the Ayodhyakanda of the glorious Ramayana of Valmiki,
the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

Canto XLVII

The citizens that had followed Sri Rama in his journey to the forest woke
to find Sri Rama and his party gone and begin to reproach
themselves. Overcome with grief they hunt up the
tracks of his chariot; but unable to find them,
they helplessly return to Ayodhya
in utter despondency

प्रभातायां तु शर्वर्यां पौरास्ते wee विना।
शोकोपहतनिश्चेष्टा बभूवुर्हतचेतस: ॥ १॥
The night having ended in dawn, the
aforesaid citizens, who were stunned with
grief, became unconscious, as it were. (1)

शोकजाश्रुपरिद्यूना वीक्षमाणास्ततस्तत: |
आलोकमपि रामस्य न पश्यन्ति स्म gaat: । २॥

Made miserable by tears born of grief

and full of agony, they could not catch even
a glimpse of Sri Rama, though casting their
eyes all round. (2)

ते विषादार्तवदना रहितास्तेन धीमता।
PUNT: करुणा वाचो वदन्ति TA मनीषिण:॥ ३॥

Their faces withered — through
despondency, deprived as they were of
Sri Rama who was full of wisdom, and,
therefore, non-plussed, the citizens, even
