* SUNDARAKANDA +

अङ्गदो AA लक्ष्मीवान् वालिसूनुर्महाबल:।
Uke: कपिशार्दूलस्तिभागबलसंवृत:॥ ५७॥
“The glorious son of Vali, Angada by
name, who is endowed with extraordinary
might and is a veritable tiger among monkeys,
set out accompanied by one-third of the
Vanara army. (57)

तेषां नो विप्रणष्टानां विन्ध्ये पर्वतसत्तमे।
भृशं शोकपरीतानामहोरात्रगणा गता:॥५८]॥

“A number of days and nights rolled
past us, overwhelmed as we were with
grief, having got lost on the Vindhyan range,
the foremost of mountains. (58)

ते वयं कार्यनैराश्यात् कालस्यातिक्रमेण च।
भयाच्च कपिराजस्य प्राणांस्त्यक्तुमुपस्थिता:॥ ५९॥

“Due to despondency in the matter of
accomplishing our purpose and in fear of
the lord of monkeys, the time-limit for return
having expired, we got ready to give up the
ghost. (59)

विचित्य गिरिदुर्गाणि नदीप्रस्रवणानि च।
अनासाद्य Ud CAM: प्राणांस्त्यक्तुं व्यवस्थिता: ॥ ६० ॥
“Having not been able to find out any
trace of Your Majesty, even on scouring
mountain fastnesses as also river banks
and regions surrounding cascades, we stood
resolved to yield our lives. (60)

ततस्तस्य «PRG वयं प्रायमुपास्महे।
qe प्रायोपविष्टांश्च सर्वान् वानरपुङ्खवान्॥६१॥
aa नाशं च वैदेहि वालिनश्च तथा वधम्॥६२॥
प्रायोपवेशमस्माकं मरणं च जटायुष:।
तेषां न: स्वामिसंदेशान्निराशानां मुमूर्षताम्॥६३॥
कार्यहेतोरिहायात: शकुनिर्वीर्यवान् महान्।
गृध्रराजस्य सोदर्य: सम्पातिर्नाम गृध्रराट्॥६४॥

“We then sat down to fast till death on
the summit of that Vindhyan mountain.
Plunged deep into an ocean of grief on
seeing all the foremost of monkeys resolved
upon fasting till death, Prince Angada began
to bewail your untraceability, O princess of

163

the Videha territory, as also the destruction
of Vali, his own father, and our resolution to
die of hunger as well as the death of Jatayu.
“For helping our cause (under the
dispensation of Providence), now that we
had lost all hope of carrying out the behest
of our master, Sugriva, and longed to die,
there appeared on the spot a gigantic and
powerful bird, the king of vultures, Sampati
by name, the uterine elder brother of Jatayu,
also a king of vultures. (61—64)
श्रुत्वा भ्रातूवधं कोपादिदं वचनमब्रवीत्।
यवीयान् केन मे भ्राता हत: क्व च निपातित: 1 ६७५ ॥
एतदाख्यातुमिच्छामि भवद्धिर्वानरोत्तमा:।
अङ्गदोऽकथयत् तस्य जनस्थाने महद्बधम्॥६६॥
रक्षसा भीमरूपेण त्वामुद्दिश्य यथार्थत:।
जटायोस्तु वधं श्रुत्वा दु:ख्रित: सोऽरुणात्मज: ॥ ६७॥
“Hearing of the destruction of his younger
brother, Jatayu, he spoke in anguish as
follows : ‘I wish to hear it narrated by you, O
jewels among monkeys, by whom my
younger brother was killed and where he
was struck down.’ Thereupon Angada truly
related to him how that great soul was killed
by an ogre of terrible form on account of you
(Sita), whom Jatayu was trying to rescue
from that monster’s clutches. That son of
Aruna, Sampati, for his part felt distressed to
hear of Jatayu’s killing. (65—67)
त्वामाह स वरारोहे वसन्तीं रावणालये।
तस्य तद् वचनं श्रुत्वा सम्पाते: प्रीतिवर्धनम्॥ ६८ ॥
अङ्गदप्रमुखा: सर्वे ad: प्रस्थापिता वयम्।
विन्ध्यादुत्थाय सम्प्राप्ता: सागरस्यान्तमुत्तमम्॥६९॥
“Nay, he spoke of you as dwelling in
the abode of Ravana, O lady of excellent
limbs! Hearing the aforesaid report of
Sampati, which intensified our joy, and
departing from the aforesaid Vindhyan
mountain, as urged by Sampati, we all duly
reached the excellent seashore, with Angada
as our leader. (68-69)

त्वद्दर्शने कृतोत्साहा BET: TST: प्लवङ्गमा:।
अङ्गदप्रमुखा: सर्वे वेलोपान्तमुपागता:॥७०॥
