* AYODHYAKANDA +

473

पञ्चाश: सर्ग:
Canto L

Standing with his face turned towards Ayodhya, Sri Rama bids farewell to
his birth-place and, sending back the people hailing from the countryside,
who had come to see him, and crossing the frontiers of Kosala, Sri
Rama reaches the bank of the holy Ganga. Alighting from the
chariot under an Ingudi tree standing on the bank, he goes
forward to meet Guha, the chief of the Nisadas, who
had come to meet him. Nay, worshipping the evening

twilight and
and drink),

taking water
the prince

only (for food
lies down on the

ground to repose for the night; while
Sumantra, Guha and Laksmana
spend the night talking together

विशालान्कोसलान्रम्यान्यात्वा लक्ष्मणपूर्वज: |
अयोध्यामुन्मुखो धीमान् प्राञ्जलिर्वाक्यमब्रवीत्॥ १॥

Having travelled across the extensive
and beautiful territory of Kosala and standing
with his face turned towards Ayodhya, the
wise Sri Rama, elder brother of Laksmana,
with folded hands addressed the following
words to Ayodhya : (1)

आपृच्छे cat पुरिश्रेष्ठे काकुत्स्थपरिपालिते।
दैवतानि च यानि त्वां पालयन्त्यावसन्ति च॥ २॥

“| take leave of you, O pre-eminent
city, carefully protected by King DaSaratha,
a scion of Kakutstha, as well as of the
deities that protect you and dwell in you. (2)
निव्रत्तवनवासस्त्वामनृणो जगतीपते: ।
पुनर्द्रक्ष्यामि मात्रा च पित्रा च सह संगत:॥ ३॥

“When the period of my exile in the
forest has expired and | have got square
with the Emperor (by executing his command
and implementing the promise made by him
to Kaikeyi), | shall see you again, united
once more with my mother and father.” (3)

ततो रुचिरताम्राक्षो भुजमुद्यम्य दक्षिणम्।
अश्रुपूर्णमुखो दीनोऽब्रवीज्जानपदं जनम्॥४॥

Lifting up His right arm and wearing a

wretched look, his face covered with tears,
Sri Rama (who was possessed of lovely
reddish eyes) then spoke to the people
hailing from the countryside as follows:
(4)
अनुक्रोशो दया चैव यथार्हं मयि a: कृत:।
चिरं दु:खस्य पापीयो गम्यतामर्थसिद्धये॥५॥

“Respect and compassion according
to my worth in your eyes have been shown
to me by you all. Prolongation of the agony
which is being experienced by you due
to your presence by my side is most
undesirable. Therefore, pray, let you be
gone for accomplishing your desired chores
(viz., attending to your household work) !”

(5)
तेऽभिवाद्य महात्मानं कृत्वा चापि प्रदक्षिणम्।
विलपन्तो नरा घोरं व्यतिष्ठंश्च क्वचित् क्वचित्॥ ६॥

Greeting the high-souled prince and
going round him clockwise as a mark of
respect, those men stood rooted here and
there, not minding where they stood, wailing
frightfully. (6)
तथा विलपतां तेषामतृप्तानां च राघव:।
अचक्षुर्विषयं प्रायाद् यथार्क: क्षणदामुखे॥७॥

Even while they were lamenting as
