* AYODHYAKANDA +

shape of plaited locks because of its flowing
in a curved line, while at other places it was
adorned with eddies. (16)

क्वचित्स्तिमितगम्भीरां क्वचिद्वेगसमाकुलाम्।
क्वचिद्गम्भीरनिर्घोषां क्वचिद् भैरवनि:स्वनाम्॥ १७॥

Somewhere its waters were still and
deep, and at other places they were disturbed
with violent agitation. Here it made a deep
roaring sound and there it produced a terrific
noise. (17)
देवसं : निर्मले : ।
क्वचिदाभोगपुलिनां क्वचिन्निर्मलवालुकाम्॥ १८ ॥

Hosts of gods took a dip into its water,
covered all over with white lotuses. Here it
was hemmed in with spacious banks and
there it was lined with white sands. (18)

. a =O RRIATE |
सदामत्तैश्च विहगैरभिपन्नामनिन्दिताम्॥ १९॥

The river, which is free from reproach
in everyway was rendered noisy by swans
and cranes, was graced with Cakrawakas
(a species of bird which gets disunited with
its mate by night); and other birds which are
in rut all the year round, kept hovering on its
waters. (19)

क्वचित् तीररुहैर्वृक्षैर्मालाभिरिव शोभिताम्।
क्वचित् फुल्लोत्पलच्छन्नां क्वचित् पद्मवनाकुलाम्॥ २० ॥

Here it was decked with trees growing
on its banks, which encircled it like garlands.
Here it was covered with full-blown lotuses,
while there it was carpeted with a bed of
lotuses. (20)

क्वचित् कुमुदखण्डैश्च कुड्मलैरुपशोभिताम्।
नानापुष्परजोध्वस्तां समदामिव च क्वचित्॥ २१॥
Here it was graced with beds of water-
lilies in the form of buds, while there it was
reddened with the pollen of numerous flowers
and looked like a woman excited with
passion. (21)
व्यपेतमलसंघातां मणिनिर्मलदर्शनाम्।
दिशागजैर्वनगजैर्मत्तैश्च STANT: ॥ २२॥

475

देवराजोपवाह्यैश्च संनादितवनान्तराम्।
प्रमदामिव यत्नेन भूषितां भूषणोत्तमै:।॥ २३॥
mega: किसलयैर्वृतां गुल्मैर्दविजैस्तथा।
विष्णुपादच्युतां दिव्यामपापां पापनाशिनीम्॥ २४॥

Stocks of sins of those bathing in it or
drinking of its waters are washed away by it
and it presents an appearance spotless as
the effulgence of a gem. The interior of the
forests encircling its banks is rendered noisy
by the elephants guarding the quarters, wild
elephants and other tame elephants of
excellent breed, belonging to the Airavata
species, used for riding by Indra, the ruler of
gods. Surrounded by trees laden with fruits
and flowers and tender leaves, shrubs and
birds of various species, it looked like a young
woman artistically decked with the best of
jewels. Not only devoid of sins, the celestial
river dispels all sins, flowing as it does from
the holy feet of Lord Visnu. (22—24)

शिंशुमारैश्च wes भुजंगैश्च समन्विताम्।
WR जटाजूटाद् Wet सागरतेजसा॥ २५॥
In deep waters the river was infested
with sharks and crocodiles as well as with
snakes and had fallen from the mass of
matted hair on the head of Lord Sankara,
thanks to the Yoga power acquired through
religious austerities by Emperor Bhagiratha.
(25)
आससाद महाबाहु: शृङ्गवेरपुरं प्रति॥ २६॥
In the vicinity of SrAgaverapura (the
modern Singraur) Sri Rama, the mighty-
armed prince, reached the bank of the Ganga,
the principal consort of Ocean, which was
rendered noisy by cranes and herons. (26)

तामूर्मिकलिलावर्तामन्ववेक्ष्य महारथ:।
सुमन्त्रमन्रवीत् सूतमिहैवाद्य वसामहे॥ २७॥

Perceiving the river, which was full of
eddies interspersed with its waves, the great
car-warrior said to the charioteer, Sumantra,
“Let us halt at this very spot today. (27)
