# YUDDHAKANDA +

301

ade : सर्ग:
Canto IV

Hearing the report of Hanuman, Sri Rama fixes a propitious
hour for the departure of his forces for
Lanka, and perceives good omens

श्रुत्वा हनूमतो वाक्यं यथावदनुपूर्वश:।
ततोऽब्रवीन्महातेजा राम: सत्यपराक्रम:॥ १॥
Having duly heard the account of
Hanuman seriatim, Sri Rama of unfailing
prowess, who was endowed with extra-
ordinary energy, then spoke as _ follows:
(1)
क्षिप्रमेनां वधिष्यामि सत्यमेतद् ब्रवीमि ते॥ २॥

“| shall destroy without delay Lanka,
that city of the redoubtable ogre, Ravana, of
which you have just spoken: | truly promise
this to you. (2)

अस्मिन् ded सुग्रीव प्रयाणमभिरोचय।
युक्तो मुहूर्ते विजये प्राप्तो मध्यं दिवाकर:॥ ३॥

“Approve of our march at this very
hour, O Sugriva! The sun has reached
the meridian and departure at this hour,
known by the name of Abhijit (so-called
because it brings victory to the departing
person), is advisable. (3)

सीतां हृत्वा तु Ag यातु क्वासौ यास्यति जीवित: |
सीता श्रुत्वाभियानं मे आशामेष्यति जीविते।
जीवितान्तेऽमृतं wear पीत्वामृतमिवातुर:॥४॥

“That ogre for his part may return to
his abode after abducting Sita; but he cannot
escape alive. Hearing from the mouth of
Siddhas and others of my march to
Lanka, Sita too will regain her lost hope of
survival, even as an ailing man would on
touching an immortalizing herb or quaffing
the drink of immortality at the close of his
life. (4)

उत्तराफाल्गुनी ह्यद्य श्वस्तु हस्तेन योक्ष्यते।
अभिप्रयाम सुग्रीव सर्वानीकसमावृता:॥५॥
“The constellation Uttaraphalguni is
actually in the ascendant today, while
tomorrow the moon will be in conjunction
with the constellation Hasta. Let us, therefore,
march this very day, accompanied by all
the troops, O Sugriva! (5)
निमित्तानि च पश्यामि यानि प्रादुर्भवन्ति a1
निहत्य रावणं सीतामानयिष्यामि जानकोम्॥६॥
“From the omens, which actually
appear on my person and which । behold, |
conclude that killing Ravana, | shall bring
back Sita, Janaka’s daughter. (6)
उपरिष्टाद्धि नयनं स्फुरमाणमिमं मम।
विजयं समनुप्राप्तं शंसतीव मनोरथम्॥७॥
“Twitching in the upper lid, this right
eye of mine actually foretells, as it were, my
coveted victory as being near.” (7)

ततो वानरराजेन लक्ष्मणेन सुपूजित:।
उवाच रामो धर्मात्मा पुनरप्यर्थकोविद:॥ ८॥

Warmly applauded by Sugriva, the ruler
of monkeys, as well as by Laksmana,
Sri Rama, whose mind was set on piety
and who was well-versed in politics, then
spoke once more as follows: (8)

अग्रे ad बलस्यास्य नीलो मार्गमवेक्षितुम्।
qd: शतसहस्रेण वानराणां तरस्विनाम्॥९॥
“Let Nila, accompanied by one lakh of

agile monkeys, march at the head of this
army to examine the passage. (9)

फलमूलवता नील शीतकाननवारिणा।
पथा मधुमता चाशु सेनां सेनापते AA oll
