1044

brave chiefs of the army spoke thus to
them: (13)

Ua at गणिता वासा aa aa निवत्स्यथ।
स्थातव्यं चाविरोधेन यथा बाधा न कस्यचित्॥ १४॥
‘These are the decided places where
you can dwell, according to your liking;
wherever you are stay amicably.’ (14)
तथा तांस्तु समाज्ञाप्य प्रस्थाप्य च महद्बलम्।
कौसल्यां च सुमित्रां च कैकेयीं चाभ्यवादयत्॥ १५ ॥
Thus ordering them and despatching

the mighty army, he made obeisance to
Kausalya, Sumitra and Kaikeyl. (15)

रामं प्रदक्षिणीकृत्य शिरसाभिप्रणम्य च।
लक्ष्मणं भरतं चैव प्रणिपत्य कृताञ्जलि:॥ १६॥
पुरोहितं वसिष्ठं च wae: प्रयतात्मवान्।

« VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

रामेण चाभ्यनुज्ञात: शत्रुघ्न: शत्रुतापन:।
प्रदक्षिणमथो कृत्वा निर्जगाम महाबल:॥१७॥
Paying salutation to Sri Rama with his
head and going round Him, and falling at the
feet of Laksmana and Bharata, and the chief
priest Vasistha, Satrughna of pious mind, the
torturer of the foes, the mighty one going round
Sri Rama again, departed. (16-17)
प्रस्थाप्य सेनामथ सोऽग्रतस्तदा
गजेन्द्रवाजिप्रवरौघसंकुलाम् ।
उवास मासं तु नरेन्द्रपार्श्वत-
स्त्वथ प्रयातो रघुवंशवर्धन:॥१८॥

Sending ahead the army then, full of
elephants and horses, he himself lived there
with Sri Rama for a month and then he too
started. (18)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये उत्तरकाण्डे चतु:षष्टितम: AW: ॥ ६४॥

Thus ends Canto Sixty-four in the Uttarakanda of the glorious Ramayana of
Valmiki, the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

Canto LXV

Sage Valmiki narrates to Satrughna the story of
Kalmasapada, son of Sudasa

प्रस्थाप्य च बलं wd मासमात्रोषित: पथि।
एक एवाशु शत्रुघ्नो जगाम त्वरितं तदा॥१॥
Despatching the entire army, residing

for a month only in Ayodhya on his way,
Satrughna alone proceeded in haste. (1)

द्विरात्रमन्ते शूर उष्य राघवनन्दन:।
वाल्मीकेराश्रमं पुण्यमगच्छद् वासमुत्तमम्॥२॥

After spending two nights on the way,
Satrughna, descendant of the Raghus,
reached the holy hermitage of Valmiki, the
best of the places to dwell. (2)

सोऽभिवाद्य महात्मानं वाल्मीकिं मुनिसत्तमम्।
कृताञ्जलिरथो भूत्वा वाक्यमेतदुवाच ह॥३॥

z

Satrughna after saluting him with folded
hands spoke these words to Valmiki, the
best among the ascetics: (3)

भगवन् वस्तुमिच्छामि गुरो: कृत्यादिहागत:।
va: Ward गमिष्यामि प्रतीचीं वारुणीं दिशम्॥४॥
‘Sir, | desire to stay here; | have come

for a mighty purpose. | shall go tomorrow
morning to the west, the quarter of Varuna.’

(4)
शत्रुघ्नस्य वच: श्रुत्वा weet मुनिपुङ्खव:।
प्रत्युवाच महात्मानं स्वागतं ते महायश:॥५॥

Having heard those words of Satrughna,
the best among the ascetics, Valmiki, said
