+ UTTARAKANDA +

ततो रसातलं tat: प्रविष्ट: पयसां निधिम्।
दैत्योरगगणाध्युष्टं वरुणेन सुरक्षितम्॥४॥

In order to reach Rasatala (the
penultimate subterranean region) the ogre
then entered the ocean (the repository of
waters) inhabited by giants and the hosts of
Nagas (semi-divine beings having the face
of a man and the tail of a serpent) and duly
protected by Varuna (the god of water). (4)

स तु भोगवतीं गत्वा पुरीं वासुकिपालिताम्।
कृत्वा नागान् AN हृष्टो ययौ मणिमयीं पुरीम्॥ ५॥
Proceeding to the city of Bhogavati,
ruled by Vasuki (the ruler of the Nagas) and
having subdued the Nagas, he for his part
joyously went to the city of Manimayi (made
of gems). (5)
निवातकवचास्तत्र दैत्या लब्धवरा वसन्।
राक्षसस्तान् PAT युद्धाय समुपाह्वयत्॥ ६॥
In that city lived a race of giants, known
as the Nivatakavacas, who had obtained

boons (from Brahma). Approaching them,
the ogre challenged them to a combat. (6)

ते तु aa सुविक्रान्ता दैतेया बलशालिन:।
नानाप्रहरणास्तत्र प्रहृष्ठटा युद्धदुर्मदा:॥७॥

The said mighty sons of Diti for their
part, who were all exceedingly valiant, were
armed with all sorts of weapons and were
ferocious in combat, were transported with
joy on getting this god-sent opportunity for
fighting. (7)
शूलैस्तिशूलै: कुलिशै: पट्टिशासिपरश्वथै:।
अन्योन्यं बिभिदु: क्रुद्धा राक्षसा दानवास्तथा॥ ८॥

Provoked to anger, the ogres as well
as the Danavas pierced each his opponent
with pikes, tridents, thunderbolts, sharp-edged
spears, swords and battle-axes. (8)
तेषां तु युध्यमानानां साग्र: संवत्सरो गत:।

न चान्यतरतस्तत्र विजयो वा क्षयोऽपि are i

When they were fighting thus, more then

a year actually elapsed and there was neither
victory nor defeat for any of the two sides. (9)

919

aa: पितामहस्तत्र त्रैलोक्यगतिरव्यय:।
आजगाम द्रुतं देवो विमानवरमास्थित:॥१०॥

Seated in his excellent aerial car, the
immortal Lord Brahma, the refuge of the
three worlds, then hurriedly came there.

(10)
निवातकवचानां तु fart trad adi
ag: पितामहो वाक्यमुवाच विदितार्थवत्॥११॥

Stopping the said bellicose activity of
the Nivatakavacas, the ancient grandfather

(of the creation) for his part spoke the following
explicit words to them: (11)

नह्ययं रावणो युद्धे शक्यो जेतुं सुरासुरै:।
न भवन्त: क्षयं नेतुमपि सामरदानवै:॥१२॥

“Neither can this Ravana be got the
better of in a conflict jointly by the gods and
the demons nor can you be exterminated by
the Danavas including the gods. (12)

राक्षसस्य aad a vate: सह रोचते।
अविभक्ताश्च सर्वार्था: Geet ATA संशय:॥१३॥
“Nay, the friendship of the ogre with
you finds favour with me. All blessings are
held in common by friends: there is no
doubt about it.” (13)
निवातकवचै: सार्धं प्रीतिमानभवत् dari evil
Thereupon Ravana concluded an
alliance with the Nivatakavacas in the
presence of the sacred fire then and there
and was much pleased. (14)
अर्चितस्तैर्यथान्यायं संवत्सरमथोषित:।
स्वपुरान्निर्विशेषं च प्रियं प्राप्तो दशानन:॥१७५॥
Honoured by them according to the
rules of propriety, Ravana (the ten-headed
monster) then stayed there for a year and
enjoyed pleasures indistinguishable from
those of his own city. (15)
तत्रोपधार्य मायानां शतमेकं समाप्तवान्।
सलिलेन्द्रपुरान्वेषी भ्रमति स्म रसातलम्॥१६॥

There he duly learnt a hundred conjuring
