894

deer pointed to the vault of heaven as well
as to the southern quarter, we had better
move in this south-westerly direction, which
is presided over by ogres headed by Nirrti,
my lord ! (21-22)

afe तस्यागम: कश्चिदार्या वा साथ लक्ष्यते।
बाढमित्येव काकुत्स्थ: प्रस्थितो दक्षिणां दिशम्॥ २३ ॥
लक्ष्मणानुगत: श्रीमान् वीक्षमाणो वसुंधराम्।
एवं सम्भाषमाणौ तावन्योन्यं भ्रातरावुभौ॥ २४॥
वसुंधरायां पतितपुष्पमार्गमपश्यताम्।
पुष्पवृष्टिं निपतितां दृष्टवा WAT महीतले॥ २५॥
sara लक्ष्मणं वीरो ¢:Radt दु:खितं aa: |
अभिजानामि पुष्पाणि तानीमानीह लक्ष्मण॥ २६॥
अपिनद्धानि वैदेह्या मया दत्तानि कानने।
मन्ये सूर्यश्च वायुश्च मेदिनी च यशस्विनी॥ २७॥
अभिरक्षन्ति पुष्पाणि प्रकुर्वन्तो मम प्रियम्।
`एवमुक्त्वा महाबाहुर्लक्ष्मणं पुरुषर्षभम्॥ २८॥
sara wat धर्मात्मा गिरिं प्रस्रवणाकुलम्।

कच्चित् क्षितिभृतां नाथ दृष्टा सर्वाङ्गसुन्दरी।॥ २९॥
रामा रम्ये वनोद्देशे मया विरहिता त्वया।
क्रुद्धोऽब्रवीद् गिरिं at सिंह: क्षुद्रमृगं यथा॥ ३०॥
यावत् सानूनि सर्वाणि न at विध्वंसयाम्यहम्॥ ३१॥
“Perchance some trace of Sita may be
found or that noble lady herself may come to
our view.” Saying “All right !” and nothing more
and gazing on the earth, the glorious SriRama
(a scion of Kakutstha), followed by Laksmana,
set out in a southerly direction. Conversing
with each other as aforesaid, both those
brothers saw a track on the earth with flowers
scattered on it. Seeing a shower of flowers
fallen on the earth’s surface, the heroic Sri
Rama, who was full of agony, spoke as follows
to the afflicted Laksmana : “I recognize these
flowers. The flowers lying here, O Laksmana,
were given by me in the forest to Sita (a
princess of the Videha territory) and tied by
her on her hair. | believe the sun-god and the
wind-god as well as the illustrious Mother
Earth preserved the flowers from decay in
order kindly to do what is pleasing to me.”

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

Having spoken as aforesaid to Laksmana;
the flower of men, the mighty-armed Sri Rama,
whose mind was set on virtue, accosted the
mountain, which was full of cascades (and
hence known by the name of Prasravana),
as follows: “Was a young lady comely of
every limb, bereft of me, seen by you ina
delightful part of this forest, O lord of
mountains?” Provoked to anger (on not getting
an answer) Sri Rama on that spot challenged
the mountain (in the following words) as a
lion would a petty deer : “Show to me Sita,
possessing a golden hue and endowed with
golden limbs, before | shatter all your crests,
O mountain !” (23—31)

`एवमुक्तस्तु रामेण पर्वतो मैथिलीं प्रति।
दर्शयन्निव at dat नादर्शयत Waar ३२॥
Though seeming to reveal that princess
of Mithila (in the shape of some tokens)
when threatened as aforesaid by Sri Rama,
the mountain for its part did not actually
show Sita to Sri Rama (a scion of Raghu).
(32)

ततो दाशरथी Wa sara च शिलोच्चयम्।
मम बाणाग्निनिर्दग्धो भस्मीभूतो भविष्यसि॥ ३३॥

Thereupon Sri Rama (son of Dagaratha)
once more said to the rocky mass,
“Consumed by the fire of my shafts you will
be reduced to ashes in no time. (33)

असेव्य: सर्वतश्चैव निस्तृणद्रुमपल्लव:।
इमां वा सरितं चाद्य शोषयिष्यामि लक्ष्मण॥ ३४॥
यदि नाख्याति मे सीतामद्य चन्द्रनिभाननाम्।
एवं प्ररुषितो रामो दिधक्षन्निव चक्षुषा॥ ३५॥

“Nay, stripped of all grass, trees and
leaves, you will become uninhabitable on all
sides. Turning to Laksmana, he continued:
Nay, | shall even dry up this Godavari river
today, O Laksmana, if it does not tell me
the whereabouts of Sita of moon-like
countenance.” Thus enraged Sri Rama
looked at the river as though he would
consume it with his fiery eye. (34-35)
