586

various kinds, looked most charming like a
pathway of gods. (13-14)

आज्ञाप्याथ यथाज्ञपति युक्तास्तेऽधिकृता ANT: |
Tuy देशेषु बहुस्वादुफलेषु च॥१५॥
यो निवेशस्त्वभिप्रेतो भरतस्य महात्मन:।

भूयस्तं शोभयामासुर्भूषाभिर्भूषणोपमम्॥१६॥

Nay, having given orders to the
workers to fix tents etc., as enjoined by
Bharata, the aforesaid officers entrusted
with the work of fixing tents etc., who were
all alert, got tents pitched forthwith in
delightful areas abounding in luscious fruits.
They further adorned with decorations the
tent which was liked by the high-souled
Bharata and in itself resembled an ornament.

(15-16)

नक्षत्रेषु प्रशस्तेषु मुहूर्तेषु च तद्विद:।
निवेशान् स्थापयामासुर्भरतस्य महात्मन:॥१७॥
The knowers of the science of
architecture consecrated the camps erected
for the high-souled Bharata at auspicious
hours on days when the stars were propitious.
(17)

बहुपांसुचयाश्चापि परिखा: परिवारिता:।
तत्रेन्द्रनीलप्रतिमा: प्रतोलीवरशोभिता: ॥ १८ ॥

Many heaps of earth were raised and
moats too excavated round these camps.
Enclosed by those moats stood tents
containing images of sapphire and adorned
with excellent lanes. (18)

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

पताकाशोभिता: सर्वे सुनिर्मितमहापथा:॥१९॥

Accompanied by rows of temples, the
camps were bounded by _ enclosures
whitewashed with lime. They were all
decorated with buntings and divided by well-
designed roads. (19)

विसर्पद्भिरिवाकाशे विटङ्काग्रविमानकै:।
समुच्छितैर्निवेशास्ते बभु: शक्रपुरोपमा:॥ Ro UI

Standing side by side with seven
storeyed mansions, the tops of which were
provided with dove-cots and which flew
about, as it were, in the air, the said camps
shone like so many capitals of Indra. (20)

Wea तु समासाद्य विविधद्रुमकाननाम्।
शीतलामलपानीयां महामीनसमाकुलाम्॥ २१॥
सचन्द्रतारागणमण्डितं यथा

नभ: क्षपायाममलं विराजते।
नरेन्द्रमार्ग: स dal व्यराजत

क्रमेण VT: शुभशिल्पिनिर्मित: ।। २२॥

Extending up to the bank of the holy
Ganga (foster-daughter of King Jahnu)—which
was hemmed in with forests consisting of
trees of every description, was full of cool
and limpid waters and infested with large
fishes—that delightful road, constructed in
gradual stages by capable engineers,
looked very charming at that time even as a
cloudless sky adorned with a host of stars
accompanied by the moon during the night.

(21-22)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्येऽयोध्याकाण्डेऽशीतितम: सर्ग: ॥ Lo Il

Thus ends Canto Eighty in the Ayodhyakanda of the glorious Ramayana of Valmiki,
the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

