534

son even of bad morals? And what son
when being sent into exile by his father
would not find fault with his father? | can no
longer see you with my eyes and my memory
too is fading. Nay, these messengers of
Yama (son of Vivaswan, the sun-god), are
urging me to make haste, O Kausalya!
Really speaking, what can be more painful
than the fact that even at the end of my life
| cannot behold Rama, of unfailing prowess,
who knows what is right!

“The grief born of my not being able
to see my son of incomparable deeds is
really drying up my vitality even as sunshine
dries up meagre water. They who will be
able to behold again in the fifteenth year
Rama’s face with lovely and beautiful earrings
are not men but gods. Lucky men alone will
look on the moon-like countenance of Rama
with eyes resembling lotus petals, shapely
eyebrows, lovely teeth and a charming nose.
Blessed are they who will see the sweet-
smelling face of my Rama, resembling the
autumnal moon and a full-blown lotus. The
happy alone will behold the celebrated
Rama returned to Ayodhya on his term of
exile having expired, even as people see
with delight the planet Venus reverted to
its usual course. Due to obtuseness of
mind, O Kausalya, my heart is sinking, and
| have no sensation of sound, touch and
taste even when these objects of senses
are brought into contact with my senses;
for all the senses are obscured as a
result of the failure of the mind, even as
the exceedingly luminous rays of a lamp,
whose oil has been consumed, disappear.

(61—73)

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

अयमात्मभव: शोको मामनाथमचेतनम्।
संसाधयति वेगेन यथा कूलं नदीरय:॥७४॥

“This grief, which has emanated from
my own self, is rendering me helpless and
unconscious by its vehemence in the same
way as the current of a river wears away its
own bank by its swift motion. (74)

ह्रा Wad महाबाहो हा ममायासनाशन।
a पितृप्रिय मे नाथ हा ममासि गत: सुत॥ ७५॥

“Ah! mighty-armed scion of Raghu, O
reliever of my suffering, O darling of your
father, Ah! my protector. Ah! my son, are
you really gone out of sight? (75)

a कौसल्ये न पश्यामि a सुमित्रे तपस्विनि।

a Wwe ममामित्रे कैकेयि कुलपांसनि॥७६॥
“Ah Kausalya, | can no longer see with

my eyes. Ah Sumitra, given to austerities !

Oh cruel Kaikeyi, my sworn enemy, the

disgrace of my family !” (76)

sft मातुश्च weer सुमित्रायाश्च संनिधौ।
राजा दशरथ: शोचञ्जीवितान्तमुपागमत्॥ vy tl

Lamenting thus in the presence of Sri
Rama’s mother, Kausalya, and Sumitra, King
DaSaratha reached the end of his life. (77)

तथा तु दीन: कथयन् नराधिप:

प्रियस्य पुत्रस्य विवासनातुर:।
गतेऽर्धरात्रे भृशदु:खपीडित-

स्तदा Wel प्राणमुदारदर्शन:॥७८॥

Speaking as aforesaid, the king of noble
aspect, who was already feeling miserable
and distressed on the score of his beloved
son’s exile, felt sore stricken with agony by
the time half the night passed and forthwith
gave up the ghost. (78)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्येऽयोध्याकाण्डे चतु:षष्टितम: सर्ग: ॥ ६४॥

Thus ends Canto Sixty-four in the Ayodhyakanda of the glorious Ramayana of Valmiki,
the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

