1156

whereabouts of Sita, the monkeys, who
were all endowed with the prowess of a
lion, thundered with joy. (1)
सम्पातेर्वचनं श्रुत्वा हरयो रावणक्षयम्।
Ber: सागरमाजग्मु: सीतादर्शनकांक्षिण:॥ २॥
Rejoiced to hear the words of Sampati,
the monkeys sought the ocean, constituting

a passage to the abode of Ravana, keen as
they were to discover Sita. (2)

अभिगम्य तु तं देशं ददृशुर्भीमविक्रमा:।
कृत्स्नं लोकस्य महत: प्रतिबिम्बमवस्थितम्॥ ३॥

Approaching the aforesaid region (viz.,
the seashore), the monkeys, who were
possessed of terrific prowess, beheld the
ocean, in which there stood a full image of
the vast steller region. (3)

दक्षिणस्य समुद्रस्य समासाद्योत्तरां दिशम्।
संनिवेशं ततश्चक्रुर्हरिवीरा महाबला:॥४॥

Duly reaching the northern end of the
South Sea (the Indian Ocean), the monkey
heroes, who were possessed _ of
extraordinary might, halted there. (4)

प्रसुप्तमिव चान्यत्र क्रीडन्तमिव चान्यत:।

क्वचित् पर्वतमात्रैश्च जलराशिभिरावृतम्॥७५॥
संकुलं दानवेन्द्रैश्च पातालतलवासिभि:।

रोमहर्षकरं दृष्टवा विषेदु: कपिकुञ्जरा:॥६॥

Those elephants among the monkeys
felt despondent on seeing the ocean, which
lay fast asleep as it were at one place, was
sporting as it were at another and was
covered at a third place with volumes of
water as high as mountains, nay, which
was thickly inhabited by the rulers of demons
living in the depths of Patala (the seventh or
nethermost subterranean region) and made
one’s hair stand on end. (5-6)

आकाशमिव gat सागरं Wea वानरा:।
विषेदु: सहिता: ad कथं कार्यमिति ब्रुवन्॥७॥
The monkeys felt dejected on perceiving

the ocean, which was difficult to cross like
the sky, and all exclaimed with one voice :

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

“How will our purpose be achieved?”
विषण्णां वाहिनीं दृष्टवा सागरस्य निरीक्षणात्।
आश्वासयामास हरीन् भयार्तान् हरिसत्तम:॥८॥

Seeing the whole band of his followers
despondent at the sight of the ocean,
Angada, the foremost of the monkeys,
consoled as follows the monkeys, stricken
as they were with fear: (8)

न fame wa: ard विषादो दोषवत्तर:।

विषादो हन्ति Ged बालं Hag इवोरग:॥९॥
“Your mind should not be allowed to be

swayed by despondency; for despondency

is very harmful. The latter destroys a man
as an angry serpent would kill an infant.

(9)

(7)

यो विषादं weed fawn समुपस्थिते।
तेजसा तस्य हीनस्य पुरुषार्थो न सिद्ध्यति॥ १०॥
“The endeavour of a man, lacking in
spirit, who falls a prey to despondency
when an occasion for valour duly presents
itself, does not bear fruit.” (10)

Stas: समागम्य पुनर्मन्त्रममन्त्रयत्॥११॥
Meeting the older among the monkeys
when that night had passed, Angada took
counsel with them once more. (11)
सा वानराणां ध्वजिनी परिवार्याङ्गदं बभौ।
aad परिवार्येव मरुतां वाहिनी स्थिता॥१२॥
Surrounding Angada on all sides, that
monkey force shone like an army of gods
standing round Indra. (12)
कोऽन्यस्तां वानरीं सेनां शक्त: स्तम्भयितुं भवेत्।
अन्यत्र वालितनयादन्यत्र च हनूमत:॥१३॥
Barring Angada (the son of Vali) and
barring Hanuman, who else would be able
to hold that army of monkeys in check?
(13)
ततस्तान् हरिवृद्धांश्च तच्च सैन्यमरिदम:।
अनुमान्याङ्गद: श्रोम।न् वाक्यमर्थबदब्रव्रीतृ ।। १४॥

Showing respect to those elderly
