* SUNDARAKANDA +

with various jewels, which resembled
Mounts Meru and Mandara in height and
was enriched with various auspicious articles,
the valiant Hanuman thundered like a cloud
appearing at the time of universal dissolution.

(19-20)

शऽवसनेन च संयोगादतिवेगो महाबल:।
कालाग्निरिव जज्वाल प्रावर्धत हुताशन:॥ २१॥

Through contact with the wind, the very
mighty fire (lit., the consumer of oblations)
grew out of all proportion with great rapidity
and blazed like the fire of universal
destruction. (21)

प्रदीप्तमग्निं पवनस्तेषु वेश्मसु चारयन्।
तानि काञ्चनजालानि मुक्तामणिमयानि TNR I
भवनानि व्यशीर्यन्त रत्नवन्ति महान्ति al
arm भग्नविमानानि निपेतुर्वसुधातले॥ २३॥
भवनानीव सिद्धानामम्बरात् पुण्यसंक्षये।
संजज्ञे तुमुल: शब्दो राक्षसानां प्रधावताम्॥ २४॥
स्वे स्वे गृहपरित्राणे भग्नोत्साहोज्झितश्रियाम्।
नूनमेषोऽग्निरायात: कपिरूपेण at इति॥ २५॥

The wind began to spread the blazing
fire through all those dwellings. The result
was that those stately mansions made of
pearls and gems, nay, provided with lattices
of gold and full of precious stones, got
cracked and, their storeys being shattered,
they toppled to the earth like the mansions
of Siddhas fallen from the heavens on the
exhaustion of their merits. There ensued a
tumultuous uproar among the ogres running
with great speed each to save his own
dwelling, their spirit broken and splendour
gone. They said to one another. “Ah, here
indeed is the god of fire arrived in the form
of a monkey !” (22—25)

क्रन्दन्त्य: सहसा Ud: स्तनंधयधरा: fea: |
काश्चिदग्निपरीताङ्ग्यो हर्म्यभ्यो मुक्तमूर्धजा:॥ २६॥
पतन्त्योरेजिरेऽभ्रेभ्य: सौदामन्य इवाम्बरात्।
वज्रविद्रुमवैदूर्यमुक्तारजतसंहतान् ॥ २७॥

विचित्रान् भवनाद्धातून् स्यन्दमानान् ददर्श a: |
नाग्निस्तृप्यति काष्ठानां तृणानां च यथा तथा॥ २८॥

235

हनूमान् राक्षसेन्द्राणां ad किंचिन्न gata
न हनूमद्विशस्तानां राक्षसानां वसुन्धरा॥ २९॥
Nay, women carrying their sucklings
fell down crying precipitately. While falling
from their mansions, some women with
dishevelled hair, their limbs enveloped in
flames, shone like flashes of lightning falling
from clouds in the heavens. Hanuman beheld
strange molten metals mixed with diamonds,
corals, cat’s-eye gems, pearls and silver
streaming from every house. Hanuman did
not feel wearied in killing the ogre chiefs any
more than fire is sated with consuming logs
of wood and blades of grass; nor did Mother
Earth (lit., that which carries riches) feel
wearied in receiving in her lap, ogres killed
by Hanuman. (26—29)

हनूमता वेगवता वानरेण महात्मना।
लङ्कापुरं प्रदग्धं aq रुद्रेण rat यथा॥३०॥

The aforesaid city of Lanka was burnt
up by the gigantic Hanuman, who was full of
impetuosity, in the same way as Tripura (a
triad of cities built of gold, silver and iron, in
heaven, the aerial region and the earth by
the demon Maya) was burnt by Rudra, the
god of destruction. (30)

ad: स लङ्कापुर पर्वताग्रे

समुत्थितो भीमपराक्रमोऽग्नि: |
प्रसार्य चूडावलयं प्रदीप्तो

हनूमता वेगवतोपसृष्ट: ॥ ३१॥

Lighted by the impetuous Hanuman, a
fire then broke out on the summit of the
mountain Trikuta on which the city of Lanka
stood—a fire which was endowed with terrible
prowess, and expanding its circle of flames,
flared up. (31)

युगान्तकालानलतुल्यरूप:
समारुतोऽग्निर्ववृधे दिवस्पृक।
विधूमरश्मिर्भवनेषु सक्तो
रक्ष:शरीराज्यसमर्पिताचि:;र ॥३२॥
Fanned by the wind and inflamed by
ghee in the shape of the bodies of ogres,
