252

once more to proceed further. Nay, | was
permitted by the lofty-minded Mainaka to
depart. (18-19)

स चाप्यन्तर्हित: शैलो मानुषेण वपुष्मता।
wot महाशैल: शैलेन च महोदधौ॥ २०॥

“The aforesaid mountain too, the lord of
big mountains, vanished in his human form
consisting of charming limbs, while in his
rocky form he disappeared into the ocean.

(20)
उत्तमं जवमास्थाय शेषमध्वानमास्थित:।
ततोऽहं सुचिरं कालं जवेनाभ्यगमं पथि॥ २१॥

“Catching excellent speed, | proceeded
on the rest of my journey. From that moment
| continued on my course with speed for a
sufficiently long time. (21)
ad: पश्याम्यहं देवीं सुरसां नागमातरम्।
समुद्रमध्ये सा देवी वचनं चेदमब्रवीत्॥२२॥

“Then | perceived in mid-ocean the
goddess Surasa, the mother of serpents,
and that goddess spoke to me as follows:

(22)
wm भक्ष्य प्रदिष्टस्त्वममरैर्हरिसत्तम।
ततस्त्वां भक्षयिष्यामि विहितस्त्वं fe मे at: २३॥

“You have been destined by the
immortals to be my food, O jewel among
monkeys! | shall accordingly devour you
since you have been sent by the gods.’ (23)

एवमुक्त: सुरसया Wea: word: स्थित:।
विवर्णवदनो भूत्वा वाक्यं चेदमुदीरयम्॥ २४॥

“Spoken to as aforesaid by Surasa, |
stood bent low with joined palms before her;
and my face turning pale, | submitted to her
as follows : (24)

रामो दाशरथि: श्रीमान् प्रविष्टो दण्डकावनम्।
लक्ष्मणेन सह भ्रात्रा सीतया च परंतप:॥ २५॥

‘The glorious Sri Rama, son of
Dasaratha and the scourge of his foes,
penetrated deep into the Dandaka forest
with his consort, Sita, and younger brother,
Laksmana. (25)

« VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

तस्य सीता हृता भार्या रावणेन दुरात्मना।
तस्या: WHIT दूतोऽहं गमिष्ये रामशासनात्॥ २६॥
“His consort, Sita, was borne away by
the evil-minded Ravana. At the behest of Sri
Rama | am going to seek her presence as
a messenger. (26)
कर्तुमर्हसि रामस्य साहाय्यं विषये सती।
अथवा मैथिलीं TAT रामं चाक्लिष्टकारिणम्॥ २७॥
आगमिष्यामि ते वक्त्रं सत्यं प्रतिश्रृणोमि ते।
Vat मया सा तु सुरसा कामरूपिणी॥ २८ ॥
अब्रवीन्नातिवर्तेत कश्चिदेष at मम।
Wah: सुरसया दशयोजनमायत:॥२९॥
ततोऽर्धगुणविस्तारो बभूवाहं क्षणेन तु।
मत्प्रमाणाधिकं चैव व्यादितं तु मुखं तया॥ ३०॥
“Living as you do in the dominion of Sri
Rama, you ought to render assistance to
him. Or, having seen the daughter of Janaka
and having reported to Sri Rama of unwearied
action, | shall seek your mouth : | truthfully
promise this to you. Assured thus by me,
the said Surasa for her part, who was able
to change her form at will, replied, ‘None
can dare escape me: this is the boon granted
in my favour.’ Threatened thus by Surasa, I,
for my part, who was ten Yojanas (or eighty
miles) in extent, grew half as much in size
in a trice. Her mouth too was distended by
her to a size greater than mine. (27—30)
तद् दृष्ट्वा व्यादितं त्वास्यं Bea ह्यकरवं पुन: |
तस्मिन् मुहूर्ते च पुनर्बभूवाङ्गुष्ठसम्मित:।॥। ३१॥
Perceiving her mouth wide open, | then
assumed a dwarfish form, nay, the same
moment | further reduced myself to the size
of a human thumb. (31)
अभिपत्याशु तद्वक्त्रं निर्गतोऽहं तत: क्षणात्।
अब्रवीत् सुरसा देवी TAT WATT AT पुन:॥ ३२॥
“Having entered her mouth quickly, |
came out of it instantly. Appearing in her
native form, the goddess Surasa_ further
said to me: (32)

अर्थसिद्धौ हरिश्रेष्ठ wes सौम्य यथासुखम्।
waa च वैदेहीं राघवेण महात्मना॥ ३३॥
