+ UTTARAKANDA +

सुकेशपुत्रानामन्त्र्य वरदोऽस्मीत्यभाषत।
ब्रह्माणं वरदं ज्ञात्वा सेन्दैर्देवगणैर्वृतम्॥१३॥
ऊचु: Wee: सर्वे ATA sa FAT: |
तपसाऽऽराधितो ea ate नो दिशसे वरम्॥१४॥
aaa: शत्रुहन्तारस्तथैव चिरजीविन:।
प्रभविष्ण्वो भवामेति परस्परमनुव्रता:॥१५॥

“Seeing SukeSa, the pious Raksasa,
having obtained boons, a pious-minded
Gandharva, Gramani by name and equal in
lustre to ViSwavasu, gave in marriage to
SukeSa his daughter, Devavati by name,
looking like a second Laksmi, famed in all
the three worlds and endowed with beauty
and youth, who embodied as it were the
glory of the race of Raksasas. Having
obtained a loving husband who had secured
rulership through boons, Devavati was
perfectly pleased even as a pauper is when
he obtains riches. Being married to her, the
Raksasa shone like a mighty elephant,
sprung from Afjana (an elephant guarding a
cardinal point), united with a she-elephant.
“In course of time, O Raghava, SukeSa, the
lord of the Raksasas, begot three sons, the
ogres Malyavan, Sumali and Mali, the last of
whom was the foremost among the strong
and who were equal in lustre to the three
fires, and all the three were compeers of
Lord Siva. The three sons remained steady
like the three worlds, were bright as the
three sacrificial fires, powerful like the three
strengths (of rulership, strenuous effort and
sacred formula—aupiha, उत्साहशक्ति and मन्त्रशक्ति
or the three Vedas) and formidable like the
three kinds of diseases (arising from
derangement of the three humours of the
body, viz., wind, bile and phlegm). The three
sons of SukeSa, who were bright as the
three sacrificial fires, grew up like diseases
that have been neglected. “Knowing that by
dint of his Tapas their father had secured
boons as well as rulership, the three brothers
repaired to Mount Meru determined to perform
Tapas. Having adopted formidable rules of
conduct, O jewel among the rulers of men,

857

the aforesaid ogres practised severe
austerities which proved to be a source of
terror to all created beings. Through
austerities combined with — truthfulness,
straightforwardness and self-control and rare
in the world, the Raksasas, O best of kings,
caused unrest to the three worlds inhabited
by gods, Asuras and human beings. Then
Lord Brahma came seated in an excellent
aerial car and addressing the sons of Sukesa
said, ‘| have come to grant boons’. Knowing
Brahma, surrounded by hosts of gods,
including Indra, to have come to grant boons,
all the three, shaking like trees said with
folded hands: ‘Propitiated by our Tapas, O
Lord, if you deign to grant us boons, let us
become invincible, the scourge of our foes
and also long-lived; let us also become
powerful and full of love for one another.’

(1—15)

एवं भविष्यथेत्युक्त्वा सुकेशतनयान् विभु:।
स ययौ ब्रह्मलोक।य ब्रह्मा ब्राह्मणवत्सल: Il VE Il
Having said to the sons of SukeSa,
‘You shall become all this’, Lord Brahma,
loving to Brahmanas, repaired to Brahmaloka.
(16)

at ced तु ते ad wa रात्रिंचरास्तदा।
सुरासुरान् प्रबाधन्ते वरदानसुनिर्भया:॥१७॥
“Having obtained the boons, and free
from fear by reason of them, all the three

Raksasas went about harassing the gods
and demons, O Sri Rama! (17)

तैर्बाध्यमानास्त्रिदशा: सर्षिसङ्घा: सचारणा:।
त्रातारं नाधिगच्छन्ति निरयस्था यथा नरा:॥१८॥
“Tormented by them, the gods,
alongwith the seers and the Caranas, did
not find a protector any more than those
cast in hell. (18)

अथ a विश्वकर्माणं शिल्पिनां वरमव्ययम्।
Ba: समेत्य संहृष्टा राक्षसा रघुसत्तम॥१९॥

“Highly rejoiced, the Raksasas in a
body then approached the best of architects,
