* AYODHYAKANDA +

you to be converted into dawn (for Rama will
have to be exiled as soon as the day dawns).
(14—17)
क्रियतां A दया भद्रे मयायं रचितोऽज्जलि: |
अथवा गम्यतां शीघ्रं नाहमिच्छामि निर्घृणाम्॥ १८ ॥
Waa ततो राजा कैकेयीं संयताञ्जलि: 1 १९॥
प्रसादयामास पुन: कैकेयीं राजधर्मवित्।
साधुवृत्तस्य दीनस्य त्वद्गतस्य गतायुष:॥ oll
प्रसाद: क्रियतां भद्रे देवि राज्ञो विशेषत:।
Wa न खलु सुश्रोणि मयेदं समुदाहतम्॥ २१॥
“Let compassion be shown to me, O
blessed one; salutation is hereby offered by
me with joined palms to you. Or let yourself
be gone quickly. | wish no more to see the
ruthless and hard-hearted Kaikeyi, to whom
| owe my present adversity.” Having told
Kaikeyi thus, the Emperor, who knew the
duties of a king, viz., the expedients of
conciliation etc., then proceeded with joined
palms once more to conciliate Kaikeyi in the
following words : “Let favour be shown, O
good queen, to my wretched self, guileless
of conduct and fallen at your mercy, whose
span of life is well nigh exhausted,and more
so to a king. Indeed this, viz., Rama’s
installation was not announced by me ina
lonely quarter, O lady, with lovely limbs !
(18—21)

ee साधुप्रसादं A बाले सहृदया ह्यसि।
प्रसीददेविरामोमेत्वद्दत्तराज्य्।मव्ययम्॥२२॥

प्रियमेतद् गुरुश्रोणि कुरु चारुमुखेक्षणे॥ २३॥

“Show abundant grace to me, O young
lady, kind-hearted as you are. Be gracious
to me; let my Rama inherit the everlasting
kingship granted by you, O fair-eyed queen !
You will thereby attain the highest renown.

341

Do this kindness to me, to Rama, to the
people, to our elders (Vasistha and others)
as well as to Bharata, O lady with
well-proportioned limbs and a charming
countenance and eyes !” (22-23)

विशुद्धभावस्य हि दुष्टभावा
दीनस्य ताम्राश्रुकलस्य राज्ञ:।
भर्तुर्नृशंसा न चकार वाक्यम्॥ २४॥
Even on hearing the piteously-worded
doleful wail of her wretched husband,
DaSaratha, of guileless mind consisting as
it did of threats mixed with coaxing, whose
eyes had turned coppery through grief and
were wet with tears, the hard-hearted queen
of malicious intent did not accede to his
request. (24)

ad: स राजा पुनरेव मूच्छित:
प्रियामतुष्टां प्रतिकूलभाषिणीम्।
समीक्ष्य पुत्रस्य विवासनं प्रति
क्षितौ विसंज्ञो निपपात दु:खित: 1 २५॥
Perceiving his beloved queen still
unpropitiated and speaking in a hostile strain,
insistent as she was on his son’s exile, the
aforesaid king thereupon fainted once more
and, full of agony, sank down unconscious
on the floor. (25)

इतीव राज्ञो व्यथितस्य सा निशा
जगाम घोरं शवसतो AAR: |
निवारयामास स राजसत्तम:॥ २६॥

While the high-minded king, who was
full of extreme agony, was dolefully sighing,
that night stole past. When being awakened
by panegyrists and bards etc., the said
DaSaratha (the foremost of kings) stopped
the festal music started with a view to
rousing him at that moment. (26)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्येऽयोध्याकाण्डे त्रयोदश: AA: ॥ 23 I

Thus ends Canto Thirteen in the Ayodhyakanda of the glorious Ramayana of Valmiki,
the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

