42

monkey, Hanuman, then noticed her ugly
enormous mouth, which was of the same
dimensions as his body, as well as her
vulnerable parts. Contracting his body further,
that mighty monkey, Hanuman, who was
hard as a diamond, fell into her hideous
mouth. Siddhas and Caranas beheld him
disappearing into her mouth like the full
moon being devoured on a full moon night
by the demon Rahu. Then, tearing out her
vulnerable parts with his sharp nails, the
monkey forthwith rushed out with the rapidity
of thought. Having overthrown her with the
help of Providence, as well as through
firmness and ingenuity, Hanuman, for his
part, who was the foremost hero among the
monkeys and self-possessed too, rapidly
grew once more in size. With her heart, the
very seat of her life, torn asunder by
Hanuman, she fell down dead into the water.
Hanuman was created as an instrument for
her destruction by Brahma, the self-born
creator himself. (192—198)
तां हतां वानरेणाशु पतितां वीक्ष्य सिंहिकाम्।
भूतान्याकाशचारीणि तमूचु: प्लवगोत्तमम्॥ १९९॥
Perceiving the aforesaid Simhika killed
in no time by Hanuman and fallen, the beings
who ranged the skies said to that jewel
among the monkeys : (199)

भीममद्य कृतं कर्म महत्सत्त्वं त्वया हतम्।
साधयार्थमभिप्रेतमरिष्टं प्लवतां ATI Roo ll

“A terrific valiant deed has been performed
by you this day in that a mighty creature has
been killed by you. Now accomplish your
desired object without hindrance, O jewel
among the monkeys ! (200)

यस्य त्वेतानि चत्वारि वानरेन्द्र यथा aa
धृतिर्दृष्टिर्मतिर्दाक्ष्यं a कर्मसु न सीदति॥ २०१॥

“He in whom the following four virtues,
viz., firmness, vision, understanding and skill
actually exist, as in you, never fails in his
undertakings.” (201)

« VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

स तै: सम्पूजित: पूज्य: प्रतिपन्नप्रयोजनै:।
जगामाकाशमाविश्य पन्नगाशनवत् ALA: tl २०२॥

Bounding in the air like Garuda (who
feeds on serpents), adored with ceremony
by those beings, who were now
accomplished of purpose—thanks to the
gallantry of Hanuman—the aforesaid monkey,
who was worthy of adoration for his exploits,
sped on. (202)

प्राप्तभूयिष्ठपारस्तु सर्वत: परिलोकयन्।
योजनानां शतस्यान्ते GR ददर्श स:॥ २०३॥

Looking around on all sides when he
had well-nigh reached the opposite shore at
the end of a hundred Yojanas (or eight hundred
miles), he espied a row of forest trees: (203)

ददर्श च पतन्नेव विविधद्रुमभूषितम्।
git शाखामृगश्रेष्ठो मलयोपवनानि च॥ २०४॥

While yet in the airspace, Hanuman, the
foremost of monkeys, also beheld an island
adorned with trees of various kinds as well
as groves on the Malaya mountain. (204)

सागरं सागरानूपान् सागरानूपजान् द्रुमान्।
सागरस्य च पत्नीनां मुखान्यपि विलोकयत्॥ २०७५ I

He further saw the sea skirting the
island, the watery regions bordering it, the
trees growing in those regions and the mouths
of rivers (consorts of the ocean) too. (205)

स महामेघसंकाशं समीक्ष्यात्मानमात्मवान्।
निरुन्धन्तमिवाकाशं चकार मतिमान् मतिम्॥ २०६ UI
Gazing on his own person, which
closely resembled a big cloud and blocked
the sky, as it were, the intelligent Hanuman,
who was self-possessed too, began to reflect.
(206)

कायवृद्धिं watt च मम apa wearer: |
मयि कौतूहलं कुर्युरिति मेने महामति:॥ २०७॥

The highly talented Hanuman felt
convinced that seeing the extraordinary
growth of his body and his tremendous
speed itself, the ogres would be inquisitive
about him. (207)
