564

of piercing words, the high-souled Bharata,
even though tormented with grief, roared

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

like a lion ensconced in a cave of Mount
Mandara. (28)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्येऽयोध्याकाण्डे त्रिसप्ततितम: सर्ग: ॥ ७३ ॥

Thus ends Canto Seventy-three in the Ayodhyakanda of the glorious Ramayana of
Valmiki, the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

चतु:सप्ततितम: सर्ग:
Canto LXXIV

Severely reproaching his mother once more, and making up his mind not only
to bring back Sri Rama from the forest and crown him king, but also
to go into exile for fourteen years in order to redeem his elder
brother's vow; Bharata, who is filled with rage at the
thought of the mischief wrought by his mother,
cannot contain his grief and falls
unconscious on the ground

at तथा गर्हयित्वा तु मातरं भरतस्तदा।
रोषेण महताविष्ट: पुनरेवाब्रवीद् वच:॥१॥
Having reproached his mother, Kaikeyi,
as aforesaid, on that occasion, Bharata, for
his part, who was filled with violent anger,
spoke once more as follows : (1)
राज्याद् wera कैकेयि aA दुष्टचारिणि।
परित्यक्तासि धर्मेण मा yd रुदती wane
“Be deprived of sovereignty, O cruel
Kaikeyi of vicious conduct! Since you have
been forsaken by virtue, keep wailing for
life, taking me to be dead (since the course
you have adopted is bound to prove fatal to
me). (2)

किं नु तेऽदूषयद् wat राजा वा भृशधार्मिक:।
ययोर्मृत्युर्विवासश्च त्वत्कृते तुल्यमागतौ॥ ३॥

“What interest of yours, | wonder, did
Sri Rama or the exceedingly pious king
mar, whose banishment and death (severally)
came about at one and the same time
because of you? (3)

भ्रूणहत्यामसि Wat कुलस्यास्य विनाशनात्।
कैकेयि नरकं Wes मा च तातसलोकताम्॥४॥

“By having brought destruction to this
family you have incurred the sin of having
killed a Brahmana studying the Veda.
Proceed you, therefore, to hell after death,
O Kaikeyi, and not to heaven in common
with my father (your husband, the virtuous
King DaSsaratha). (4)
यत्त्वया gest पापं pd घोरेण HAUT
सर्वलोकप्रियं हित्वा ममाप्यापादितं भयम्॥५॥

“Since such a gross sin has been
incurred by you through a terrible act in the
form of taking the life of a pious husband
and sending into exile a loving and virtuous
son, peril of being disowned by my loving
brother has been brought by you to me as
well by banishing a prince, who is the beloved
of all people. (5)

त्वत्कृते A पिता व्त्तो रामश्चारण्यमाश्रित:।
अयशो जीवलोके च त्वयाहं प्रतिपादित:॥ ६॥

“Because of you my father has joined
the majority, while Sr’ Rama has taken up
his abode in the forest, and | too have been
subjected to ignominy in the world of mortals
by you. (6)
