1028

prosperous city of Kiskindha, when duly
permitted by you, he, with his host of near
and dear ones, will perform in the proper
way all his kingly duties. Having gone through
as a part of the installation ceremony the
ceremonial bath with water made fragrant
by perfumes and medicinal herbs in
accordance with the scriptural ordinance,
he will offer special worship to you with
garlands and jewels. You should, therefore,
visit this lovely mountain-cave in which the
city of Kiskindha is comprised. (4—7)
कुरुष्व स्वामिसम्बन्धं वानरान् सम्प्रहर्षय।
Want हनुमता राघव: परवीरहा॥८॥
प्रत्युवाच हनूमन्तं बुद्धिमान् वाक्यकोविद:।
चतुर्दश समा: सौम्य ग्रामं वा यदि वा पुरम्॥९॥
न प्रवेक्ष्यामि eq पितुर्निर्देशपालक:।
सुसमृद्धां Wet feet सुग्रीवो वानरर्षभ:॥ go tl
प्रविष्टो विधिवद्वीर: क्षिप्रं राज्येऽभिषिच्यताम्।
एवमुक्त्वा हनूमन्तं Wa: सुग्रीवमब्रवीत्॥११॥
“Pray, unite the monkeys with a master
and thereby afford exceptional delight to
them.” Requested thus by Hanuman, the
wise Sri Rama (a scion of Raghu), the
slayer of hostile warriors, who was an
adept in expression, replied as follows to
Hanuman: “Obeying, O gentle Hanuman,
the directions of my late lamented father, |
will not enter for fourteen years even a
village, much less a town. Let the valiant
Sugriva, the foremost of monkeys, be
installed without delay on the throne of
Kiskindha with due ceremony as soon as
he has entered the highly prosperous and
wonderful cave comprising the city of
Kiskindha.” Having replied thus to Hanuman,
Sri Rama spoke as follows to Sugriva :
(8—11)

वृत्तज्ञो वत्तसम्पन्नमुदारबलविक्रमम्।
wage वीरं यौवराज्येऽभिषेचय॥१२॥

“Conversant as you are with the rules
of conduct, both wordly as well as religious,
install in the office of Prince Regent this

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

gallant prince, Angada, too, who is rich in
moral character and endowed with
extraordinary strength and valour. (12)

ज्येष्ठस्य हि सुतो ज्येष्ठ: सदरृशो विक्रमेण च।
अङ्गदोऽयमदीनात्मा यौवराज्यस्य भाजनम्॥१३॥

“Being the eldest son of your elder
brother and equal to him in prowess, this
boy, Angada, noble-minded as he is,
deserves the office of Prince Regent. (13)

पूर्वोऽयं वार्षिको मास: श्रावण: सल्निलागम: |
Wea: सौम्य चत्वारो मासा वार्षिकसंज्ञिता: ॥। १४॥

“This is the first rainy month of Sravana
(roughly corresponding to July), in which
showers are expected. The four months
known by the name of rainy months have
already commenced, O gentle one! (14)

नायमुद्योगसमय: प्रविश त्वं पुरीं शुभाम्।
अस्मिन् वत्स्याम्यहं सौम्य पर्वते सहलक्ष्मण:॥ १५ ॥
This is not the time for endeavour in
the nature of a search for Sita. Therefore,
re-enter you the beautiful city of Kiskindha;
while I, O dear one, shall dwell with
Laksmana on this mountain. (15)

sa गिरिगुहा wer विशाला युक्तमारुता।
प्रभूतसलिला सौम्य प्रभूतकमलोत्पला॥१६॥

“This lovely cavern, O gentle brother,
is commodious and airy, contains plenty of
water in the form of cascades and bounds
in lotuses and lilies. (16)

कार्तिके समनुप्राप्ते त्वं रावणवधे यत।
We A: समय: सौम्य प्रविश त्वं स्वमालयम्॥ १७॥
“When the autumnal month of Kartika
(roughly corresponding to October) has duly
set in, make you an endeavour to get rid of
Ravana: such is our understanding, O dear
friend ! For the present enter you your palace.
(17)

अभिषिञ्जस्व wet च सुहृद: सम्प्रहर्षय।
Sta रामाभ्यनुज्ञात: सुग्रीवो वानरर्षभ:॥ १८ ॥
तं वानरसहस्राणि प्रविष्टं arrange tl
