* AYODHYAKANDA +

foremost among the Brahmanas, as also
other cultured Brahmanas. Fully adoring them

413

all, | shall forthwith proceed to the forest.”
(37)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्येऽयोध्याकाण्डे एकत्रिंश: सर्ग: ॥ ३१ ॥

Thus ends Canto Thirty-one in the Ayodhyakanda of the glorious Ramayana of
Valmiki, the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

Canto XXXII

Having received gifts of jewels and ornaments from Sri Rama and Sita,
Suyajfia invokes divine blessings on the couple. Enjoined by Sri
Rama, Laksmana then bestows silk costumes and ornaments
etc., on the sons of Sage Agastya and others. Urged by his
wife, a sage, Trijata by name, approaches Sri Rama and
seeks riches from him. Sri Rama thereupon bestows
on him thousands of cows and distributes
his remaining wealth among other
Brahmanas as well as among his
relations and dependants

aa: शासनमाज्ञाय भ्रातु: frant fer
Tat स प्रविवेशाशु सुयज्ञस्य निवेशनम्॥१॥
Bowing to the delightful and salutary
command of his eldest brother (the execution
of which involved substantial service to
deserving Brahmanas) and_ departing,
Laksmana speedily entered the house of
Suyajfia. (1)
तं विप्रमग्न्यगारस्थं वन्दित्वा लक्ष्मणोऽब्रवीत्।
सखेऽभ्यागच्छ पश्य त्वं AVA दुष्करकारिण:॥ २॥
Saluting the said Brahmana, who was
present in the fire-sanctuary, he said, “O
friend, visit you the palace of Sri Rama,
who is going to do something hard to
accomplish and witness his doing with your
own eyes. (2)

तत: संध्यामुपास्थाय गत्वा सौमित्रिणा सह।
ऋद्धं स प्राविशल्लक्ष्म्या रम्यं रामनिवेशनम्॥ ३॥
Concluding forthwith his periodical fire-

worship for midday and proceeding with
Laksmana, he entered in no time the lovely

palace of Sri Rama, overflowing with wealth
of all kinds. (3)

तमागतं वेदविदं wate: सीतया सह।
सुयज्ञमभिचक्राम राघवोऽग्निमिवाचितम्॥ ४॥

Seeing him arrived, Sri Rama, a scion
of Raghu, rose from his seat with joined
palms alongwith Sita to receive Suyajfa, a
knower of the Vedas, even as one would
welcome a flame offered worship in the
form of oblations. (4)

जातरूपमयैर्मुख्यैरङ्गदै: कुण्डलै: शुभे:।
सहेमसूत्रैर्मणिभि: केयूरैर्वलयैरपि।। ५ ॥
अन्यैश्च रत्नैर्बहुभि: काकुत्स्थ: प्रत्यपूजयत्।
Gat स तदोवाच wa: सीताप्रचोदित:॥६॥

Sri Rama (a scion of Kakutstha) gratified
Suyajfia with presents of excellent Angadas
(armlets) and beautiful earrings of gold, gems
strung on gold threads as also with Keyuras
(another ornament similar in shape to an
Angada but worn above it near the arm-pit)
and bracelets as well as with many other
