* ARANYAKANDA «

889

Canto LXUI
Sri Rama’s Lament Continue

a राजपुत्र: fara fade:
शोकेन मोहेन च पीड्यमान:।
विषादयन् भ्रातरमार्तरूपो
भूयो विषादं प्रविवेश तीव्रम्॥ १॥
Filling his younger brother, Laksmana,
with despondency, the aforesaid prince, Sri
Rama, who was being tormented with grief
and infatuation, bereft as he was of his
beloved consort and wore a distressed air,
once more sank into the slough of acute
despondency. (1)
स लक्ष्मणं शोकवशाभिपन्नं
शोके निमग्नो विपुले तु राम:।
उवाच वाक्यं व्यसनानुरूप-
मुष्णं विनि:श्वस्य रुदन् सशोकम्॥ २॥
Drawing a hot and deep breath, and
crying with grief, Sri Rama for his part, who
was plunged in profound grief, addressed to
Laksmana, who had likewise fallen a prey
to grief, the following words befitting the
misfortune in the shape of his sister-in-law’s
abduction that had befallen him : (2)

न मद्बिधो दुष्कृतकर्मकारी
मन्ये द्वितीयोऽस्ति वसुंधरायाम्।
शोकानुशोको fe परम्पराया
मामेति भिन्दन् हृदयं मनश्च॥ ३॥
“| believe none else on earth has
perpetrated sinful deeds as | have done, in
that grief after grief is overtaking me in
uninterrupted succession, breaking my heart
and disturbing the mind. (3)

Gat ge ace विशामि॥४॥

“Surely in my previous existences sinful

deeds, fondly designed, were perpetrated
by me more than once. The fruit of some of
them has appeared suddenly before me
today in that through one sorrow | pass to
another. (4)
राज्यप्रणाश: स्वजनैर्वियोग:

पितुर्विनाशो जननीवियोग:।
सर्वाणि मे लक्ष्मण शोकवेग-

मापूरयन्ति प्रविचिन्तितानि॥५॥

“The loss of sovereignty, separation from
my kith and kin, the demise of my father, the
parting from my mother, Kausalya—all these,
when pondered deeply over, aggravate the
force of my grief, O Laksmana! (5)
wa तु GE मम लक्ष्मणेदं

शान्तं शरीरे वनमेत्य क्लेशम्।
सीतावियोगात् पुनरप्युदीर्णं
काष्ठैरिवाग्नि सहसोपदीप्त:॥६॥

“All this agony, which was followed by
bodily discomfort, O Laksmana, on my
reaching the forest had disappeared on
account of Sita’s presence. It has flared up
once more consequent on separation from
Sita even as a fire would burst into flames
all of a sudden with the addition of pieces of
firewood. (6)

सा नूनमार्या मम राक्षसेन
are खं समुपेत्य भीरु:।
अपस्वरं सुस्वरविप्रलापा
भयेन विक्रन्दितवत्यभीक्ष्णम्॥ ७॥
“On reaching the skies when actually
carried away by force by an ogre through
the air-space, that noble and timid consort
of mine, who used to converse so sweetly,
must have surely cried again and again ina
dissonant voice from fear. (7)

तौ लोहितस्य प्रियदर्शनस्य
सदोचितावुत्तमचन्दनस्य ।
