# YUDDHAKANDA #

wes द्विविद: क्रुद्धाश्चक्रुर्वेगमनुत्तमम्।
a तु वृक्षैर्महावीरा राक्षसानां चमूमुखे॥ sei
कदनं सुमहच्चक्रुर्नलीलया हरिपुंगवा:।
Try राक्षसान् Wa नानाप्रहरणैर्भृशम्॥ ३२॥
An exceedingly fearful struggle ensued
between those monkeys and ogres, who
were getting ready to fight by dealing blows
with trees and rocks and who had dedicated
their souls to the cause of Sri Rama and
Ravana, respectively. All the monkeys as
well as the ogres were indeed endowed with
exceeding might and valour and all closely
resembled hills in size. The tremendous
noise of the aforesaid warriors of exceeding
impetuosity even as they thundered with
intent to kill each one of his adversary, and
bawled at one another, could be distinctly
heard on the battlefield. Nay, there rose
again and again an exceedingly terrible cloud
of smoky dust raised by monkeys and ogres,
and enveloped all the ten directions. Nay, the
combatants could no longer discern the living
beings on the battlefield, covered as they
were by the dust raised by one another,
which was whitish like a piece of silk shaken
by the wind. Neither standard nor pennant,
nor shield nor even horse, nor weapon, nor
even chariot could be seen due to that dust.
Although the terrific and tumultuous clamour
of warriors roaring and rushing against one
another was heard on the field of battle, no
forms were visible. In the darkness on that
occasion the monkeys, when extremely

493

enraged, struck the monkeys themselves on
the battle-field, while the ogres too killed the
ogres. Exterminating the foes and friends
too, the monkeys and ogres drenched the
earth with blood on that occasion and covered
it over with mud. Moistened with blood, the
dust for its part now virtually settled and the
earth was covered with dead bodies. The
ogres and monkeys vigorously and rapidly
struck each other with trees, javelins, maces
and darts, rocks, iron bars and iron clubs.
Contending with their arms resembling iron
bars, the monkeys of terrible deeds assailed
the ogres, who looked like mountains, on the
field of battle. Highly enraged, the ogres on
the other hand, who bore darts and iron
clubs in their hands exterminated the monkeys
with their most formidable weapons on the
field of battle. Highly enraged, Akampana,
the commander of the army of ogres, cheered
all those ogres of terrible prowess. Assailing
the ogres and snatching their weapons by
dint of valour, the monkeys too mangled
them with gigantic trees and huge rocks. In
the meantime, filled with rage, the valiant
monkeys, Kumuda, Nala, Mainda and Dwivida
displayed unsurpassed impetuosity. All the
aforesaid bulls among monkeys, for their
part, who were exceedingly valiant, brought
about in sport the terrible carnage of the
ogres by means of trees in the van of the
latter's army, and repeatedly crushed the
ogres with weapons of every kind. (15—32)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये FERS पञ्चपञ्चाश: सर्ग: ॥ ५५ ॥

Thus ends Canto Fifty-five in the Yuddhakanda of the glorious Ramayana
of Valmiki, the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

