570

Vali, a veritable bull among the monkeys,
killed, and which vied with the thunderbolt in
velocity did not cause much pain and
discomfort to the body of Kumbhakarna on
that occasion. (152)

a वारिधारा ga सायकांस्तान्
पिबन् शरीरेण महेन्द्रशत्रु:।
Wart रामस्य शरप्रवेगं

व्याविध्य तं मुद्गरमुग्रवेगम्॥१५३॥

Drinking up through his body those
aforesaid arrows as a mountain would
drink up so many torrents of water, nay,
flourishing his afore-mentioned club with
terrible speed, Kumbhakarna (the enemy of
the mighty Indra), obstructed the tremendous
speed of Sri Rama’s arrows. (153)

ततस्तु रक्ष: क्षतजानुलिप्तं
वित्रासनं देवमहाचमूनाम्।
व्याविध्य तं मुद्गरमुग्रवेगं
विद्रावयामास चमूं हरीणाम्॥१५४॥
Brandishing with fearful speed the
aforesaid club, which caused terror to the
mighty celestial forces and was smeared
with blood, the ogre, for his part, scattered
the army of the monkeys. (154)
वायव्यमादाय ततोऽपरास्त्रं
wa: प्रचिक्षेपष निशाचराय।
mat तेन wet WE
स कृत्तबाहुस्तुमुलं ननाद॥ gail
Taking up another mystic missile,
presided over by the wind-god, Sri Rama
then shot it against the prowler of the night,
severed with it his right arm with which he
held the mace. His arm thus cut off, the
ogre let out an uproarious cry. (155)

a तस्य बाहुर्गिरिशृङ्गकल्प:

wat oat वानरवाहिनीं च॥ १५६॥

Severed by the arrow of Sri Rama,
a scion of Raghu, that arm of Kumbhakarna,

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA +

which resembled a mountain-peak fell
alongwith the mace on the army of Sugriva,
the king of monkeys, and killed well-nigh a

regiment of the monkeys. (156)

a arnt भग्नहतावशेषा:
पर्यन्तमाश्रित्य तदा विषण्णा:।
नरेन्द्ररक्षोऽधिपसंनिपातम् ॥ १५७॥

Taking their stand by the side of the
fallen arm, those monkeys who had escaped
being mutilated or killed by that arm, although
their limbs had all the same been squeezed
by the impact of the arm and who were feeling
despondent, witnessed at that moment the
most terrible combat of Sri Rama, a ruler of
men, and Kumbhakarna, the overlord of the
ogres. (157)

a कुम्भकर्णोऽस्त्रनिकृत्तबाहु-

gat
ततोऽभिदुद्राव रणे नरेन्द्रम्॥ १५८ ॥
With his arm torn off by the missile, the
said Kumbhakarna looked like a huge
mountain whose summit had been cloven
with a big sword. He tore up a palmyra tree
with his other arm and then rushed towards
Sri Rama, a ruler of men, on the field of
battle. (158)
aq wea ag सहतालवृक्षं
समुद्यतं पन्नगभोगकल्पम्।
ऐन्द्रास्त्रयुक्तेन जघान रामो
बाणेन जाम्बूनदचित्रितेन।॥। १५९ UI

With an arrow decked with gold and
charged with a mystic missile presided ever
by Indra (the ruler of gods), Sr Rama
severed his uplifted arm, which held the
palmyratree and looked like the coils of a
serpent. (159)

a कुम्भकर्णस्य भुजो निकृत्त:
पपात भूमौ गिरिसंनिकाश:।
