# YUDDHAKANDA #

being killed by the foremost of monkeys on

that occasion and longing for sunset*, the | stubborn fight once more.

451

prowlers of the night quickly embraked on a
(46)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये युद्धकाण्डे त्रिचत्वारिंश: सर्ग: ॥ ४३ ॥

Thus ends Canto Forty-three in the Yuddhakanda of the glorious Ramayana of
Valmiki, the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

Canto XLIV

During the nocturnal engagement the monkeys too dauntlessly offer a stiff
fight to the ogres even though they were fighting against heavy
odds inasmuch as the strength of ogres gets doubled at night,
and felt highly rejoiced to find Indrajit vanquished by
Angada. Sri Rama and Laksmana too put to flight
numberless foes with their shower of arrows.
Eventually, however, they are both
bound by Indrajit in a
noose of serpents

युध्यतामेव तेषां तु तदा वानररक्षसाम्।
रविरस्तं गतो रात्रि: प्रव्रत्ता प्राणहारिणी॥१॥
While the aforesaid monkeys and ogres
were still fighting on the occasion, the sun
actually sank below the horizon and the
night fell, which proved destructive to life.
(1)
सम्प्रव्रत्तं निशायुद्धुं तदा वानररक्षसाम्॥ I
Then ensued in full swing a nocturnal
fight between the redoubtable monkeys and
ogres, whose enmity for one another was
deep-rooted and who were all yearning for
victory. (2)

राक्षसोऽसीति हरयो वानरोऽसीति राक्षसा:।
अन्योन्यं समरे जघ्नुस्तस्मिंस्तमसि दारुणे॥ ३॥

The monkeys put the question to their
antagonist: “Are you an ogre?”; while the

ogres made the inquiry: “Are you a monkey?”
Then alone they struck one another on the
field of battle in that terrible gloom. (3)

हत aa चैहीति कथं विद्रवसीति ai
एवं सुतुमुल: शब्दस्तस्मिन् सैन्ये तु शुश्रुवे॥४॥
“Strike!”, “Tear asunder!”, “Come onl”,
“Why do you flee away?” Such was the
tumultuous noise actually heard in that army
of monkeys and ogres. (4)

काला: काञ्चनसंनाहास्तस्मिंस्तमसि राक्षसा:।
सम्प्रदृश्यन्त शैलेन्द्रा दीप्तौषधिवना sang
Clad in golden armour, the dark-
complexioned ogres could be clearly seen
in that darkness like the foremost of

mountains clothed with forests abounding
in phosphorescent herbs. (5)

तस्मिस्तमसि दुष्पारे राक्षसा: क्रोधमूच्छिता:।
परिपेतुर्महावेगा Need: प्लवङ्गमान्॥६॥

* Tt is traditionally believed that the strength of ogres gets augmented after nightfall.
