80

been exhausted through dancing while others
had been overpowered by drink. (5)

मुरजेषु मृदंगेषु चेलिकासु च संस्थिता:।
तथाऽऽस्तरणमुख्येषु संविष्टाश्चापरा: स्निय:॥ ६ ॥
Nay, some had reclined on tabors,
wooden tomtoms and Celikas (a kind of
musical instrument); while other women had
likewise lain asleep on excellent beds. (6)

अंगनानां सहस्रेण भूषितेन विभूषणै:।
रूपसंलापशीलेन युक्तगीतार्थभाषिणा॥ ७॥
देशकालाभियुक्तेन युक्तवाक्याभिधायिना।
रताधिकेन संयुक्तकां cat हरियूथप:॥८॥

Hanuman, a commander of monkey
hordes, saw the banquet hall full of thousands
of belles adorned with excellent jewels, who
indulged in talking of one another’s charms
and discussing the apposite meaning of
songs, were skilled in discerning time and
place and capable of using appropriate
expressions and excessively addicted to
pleasure. (7-8)
अन्यत्रापि वरस्त्रीणां रूपसंलापशायिनाम्।
सहस्रं युवतीनां तु प्रसुप्तं स ददर्शं ह॥९॥

Elsewhere too he actually saw lying
fast asleep thousands of young belles who
were wont to lie down talking of one another's
charms: so the tradition goes. (9)

देशकालाभियुक्तं तु युक्तवाक्याभिधायि तत्।
रताविरतसंसुप्तं ददर्श हरियूथप: ।॥ १० Ui

Hanuman, a leader of monkey hordes,
found these latter capable of discerning what
was called for at a particular time and place
and wont to use proper expression and
lying fast asleep after ceaselessly indulging
in sexual delights. (10)

तासां मध्ये महाबाहु: शुशुभे राक्षसेश्वर:।

गोष्ठे महति मुख्यानां Wat मध्ये यथा वृष:॥११॥
In their midst the mighty-armed Ravana,

the lord of ogres, looked charming like a bull

lying in the midst of excellent cows in a big
Cow-pen. (11)

« VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

स राक्षसेन्द्र: शुशुभे ताभि: wad: स्वयम्।
करेणुभिर्यथारण्ये परिकीर्णो महाद्विप:॥१२॥

Surrounded by them, the aforesaid lord
of ogres himself looked charming like a
lordly elephant encircled by female elephants
in a forest. (12)

सर्वकामैरुपेतां च पानभूमिं महात्मन:।
cast कपिशार्दूलस्तस्य रक्ष:पतेर्गृहे॥१३॥

Hanuman, a tiger among monkeys, once
more ransacked the banquet hall in the
palace of the aforesaid lord of ogres of
gigantic proportions, which was furnished
with all desired objects. (13)

मृगाणां महिषाणां च वराहाणां च भागश:।
तत्र न्यस्तानि मांसानि पानभूमौ ददर्शं स:॥ १४॥
He saw the meats of deer and buffaloes

as well as of boars separately arranged in
that banquet hall. (14)

रौक्मेषु च विशालेषु भाजनेष्वप्यभक्षितान्।
ददर्श कपिशार्दूलो मयूरान् कुक्कुटांस्तथा॥ १५॥

Hanuman further beheld placed in big
vessels of gold the meats of peacocks and
fowl, that had not yet been tasted by anyone.

(15)

वराहवाध्रीणसकान् दधिसौवर्चलायुतान्।
Wet मृगमयूरांश्च हनुमानन्ववैक्षत॥१६॥
कृकलान्विविधांशछागान्शशकानर्धभक्षितान्।
महिषानेकशल्यांश्च Ags कृतनिष्ठितान्॥ १७॥
लेह्यानुच्चावचान् पेयान् भोज्यान्युच्चावचानि च।
तथाम्ललवणोत्तंसैर्विविधै रागखाण्डवै:॥ १८॥

Hanuman also perceived there the
meats of boars, rhinoceroses, porcupines,
deer and peacocks preserved in curds and
Sochal salt, as also the meats of birds
known by the name of Krkala, goats of
various kinds, hares, half-consumed
buffaloes, also EkaSalyas (a kind of fish),
and the dressed meat of rams as well as
chutneys and drinks of various kinds as
also dishes of different kinds that could be
