# YUDDHAKANDA #

developed flame, sighs for its smoke and
his native strength for its scorching heat the
blazing fire in the shape of the ogre, Ravana,
has been extinguished on the battlefield by
the rainy cloud in the shape of Sri Rama.

(11)
पराभिजिद्गन्धनगन्धवाह: ।
रक्षोवृषश्चापलकर्णचक्षु:
क्षितीशर्वरव्याघ्रहतोऽवसन्न: ॥ १२॥

“With the ogres* (who followed him)
for its tail, hump and _ horns, and
lasciviousness for its ears and eyes, the
bull in the shape of the ogre, Ravana, the
conqueror of its enemies, which vied with
the wind in energy, is lying dead, struck
down by a tiger in the shape of Sri Rama (a
ruler of the earth).” (12)
वदन्तं हेतुमद्वाक्यं परिदृष्टार्थनिश्चयम्।
राम: शोकसमाविष्टमित्युवाच विभीषणम्॥ १३॥

To Vibhisana, who was uttering words
full of reason, nay, which revealed his
determined view of the matter, nay, who
was fully possessed by grief, Sri Rama
spoke as follows: (13)
नायं विनष्टो निश्चेष्ट: समरे चण्डविक्रम:।
अत्युन्नतमहोत्साह: पतितोऽयमशङ्कित: Ul १४॥

“Ravana has not met his death because
he lacked in energy. He has fallen in combat
for the good of the world even though he
was endowed with terrific prowess and
exhibited extraordinary enthusiasm of a
very exalted type and remained undaunted
throughout. (14)

3a विनष्टा: शोचन्ते क्षत्रधर्मव्यवस्थिता:।
वृद्धिमाशंसमाना ये निपतन्ति रणाजिरे॥ १५॥

“Warriors who fall on the battlefield
while remaining steadfast in the duty of a

763

Ksatriya (warrior) and seeking advancement
in the shape of victory and are thus killed,
need not be mourned for. (15)

येन सेन्द्रास्त्रयो लोकास्त्रासिता afer धीमता।
तस्मिन् कालसमायुक्ते न काल: परिशोचितुम्॥ १६ I

“There is no occasion to grieve for his
having been brought under the sway of
death, by whom, intelligent as he was, (all)
the three worlds (viz., earth, heaven and
the intermediate region), including Indra, their
ruler, were constantly thrown into a fright.

(16)
नैकान्तविजयो युद्धे भूतपूर्व: कदाचन।
Wat ead वीर: परान् वा हन्ति WaT eon

“None has ever been exclusively

victorious even in the past. A hero is either

killed by his enemies or makes short work
of them in combat. (17)

ga fe gd: संदिष्टा गति: क्षत्रियसम्मता।
क्षत्रियो निहत: संख्ये न शोच्य इति Para: eeu
“Such indeed is the destiny proclaimed
by the ancients as highly esteemed for a
warrior. A warrior killed in action does not

deserve to be mourned: such is the
conclusion of the scriptures. (18)
aed निश्चयं gear तत्त्वमास्थाय fava: |
यदिहानन्तरं कार्यं कल्प्यं तदनुचिन्तय॥१९॥
“Therefore, bearing this conclusion in
mind, nay holding on to the right path and
freed from grief, please consider what duty
deserves to be performed next at this
juncture.” (19)
तमुक्कतवाक्यं विक्रान्तं राजपुत्रं विभीषण:।
उवाच शोकसंतप्तो भ्रातुर्हितमनन्तरम्॥ २०॥
To that valiant prince, Sri Rama, who
had just finished his say, Vibhisana, who
was torn with grief, next made the following

* The word ‘Sirhharksa’ stands for the lunar mansion known by the name of Mula, which holds sway

over the ogre race. Due to its close association with the ogre race the word has been used in this verse as

a synonym for the ogres.
