930

with flowers of various kinds and is known
for its cool water, fascinates me, stricken
though | am with grief. (6)

“Though thickly covered with lotuses,
infested with serpents and beasts of prey
and surrounded by deer and birds, it actually
wears an exceedingly pleasant aspect. (7)
अधिकं प्रविभात्येतन्नीलपीतं तु शाद्बलम्।
द्रुमाणां विविधै: पुष्पै: परिस्तोमैरिवार्पितम्॥८॥

“Scattered with blossoms of various
kinds dropped from trees, this turf, which
presents a blue and yellow hue, looks
extremely charming, overspread, as it were,
with carpets. (8)

पुष्पभारसमृद्धानि शिखराणि समन्तत:।
लताभि: पुष्पिताग्राभिरुपगूढानि सर्वत:॥९॥

“Enriched by loads of flowers on all
sides, the tree-tops stand entwined all-round
by climbers with blossomed ends. (9)

सुखानिलोऽयं सौमित्रे काल: प्रचुरमन्मथ:।
Tear सुरभिर्मासो जातपुष्पफलद्रुम:॥ १०॥
“This month of Caitra (the first month
of the vernal season, roughly corresponding
to the month of March), O Laksmana,
represents a period of agreeable breezes,
awakening deep love and full of pride (on
this achievement), when trees blossom and
bear fruit. (10)

पश्य रूपाणि सौमित्रे वनानां पुष्पशालिनाम्।

सृजतां पुष्पवर्षाणि ad तोयमुचामिव॥११॥
“Behold, O Laksmana (son of Sumitra),

the scenery of these woods adorned with

flowers and raining volumes of flowers like
clouds discharging showers. (11)

प्रस्तरेषु च way विविधा: काननद्रुमा:।
वायुवेगप्रचलिता: पुष्पैरवकिरन्ति गाम्॥१२॥

“Nay, shaken by the tempo of blasts,
forest trees of every description standing in
the midst of pleasing flat rocks cover the
ground with flowers. (12)

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

Ufad: पतमानैश्च पादपस्थैश्च मारुत:।
कुसुमै: पश्य सौमित्रे क्रीडतीव समन्तत:॥ १३॥

“See how the breeze is sporting as it
were on all sides with the flowers that have
fallen, are falling and are still on the trees, O
Laksmana ! (13)

विक्षिपन्विविधा: शाखां नगानां कुसुमोत्कटा:।
मारुतश्चलितस्थानै: षट्पदैरनुगीयते॥ १४॥

“Violently shaking the various branches,
richly endowed with blossom of trees, the
breeze is being celebrated in song by black
bees which have shifted from their position
(on the flowers, dislodged as they were by
the breeze). (14)
मत्तकोकिलसंनादैर्नर्तयन्निव पादपान्।
Neha: प्रगीत sa चानिल:॥१५॥

“Emerging from mountain-caves and
as though making the trees dance by the
dulcet notes of cuckoos in heat, the breeze
has started singing, as it were. (15)

तेन विक्षिपतात्यर्थं पवनेन समन्तत:।
अमी संसक्कतशाखाग्रा ग्रथिता इव पादपा:॥ १६॥

“With the tips of their branches united
on all sides by the aforesaid breeze, which
was violently shaking them, those trees
appear as though strung together. (16)

स Wa सुखसंस्पर्शो aft चन्दनशीतल:।
गन्धमभ्यवहन् पुण्यं श्रमापनयनोऽनिल:॥ १७॥

“Delightful to the touch and rendered
cool by the touch of sandalwood and hence
relieving fatigue, and wafting its pleasing
fragrance, the aforesaid breeze moves along.

(17)
अमी पवनविक्षिप्ता विनदन्तीव पादपा:।
षट्पदैरनुकूजद्धिर्वनेषु मधुगन्धिषु॥ १८ ।

‘Violently shaken by the blast, those
trees in the groves, fragrant with honey, are
singing as it were through the black bees
continuously humming. (18)
गिरिप्रस्थेषु सरम्येषु पुष्पवद्भिर्मनोरमै:।
संसक्कतशिखरा: शैला विराजन्ति महाद्रुमै: ee i
