234

तत: प्रदीप्तलाङ्गूल: सविद्युदिव तोयद:।
भवनाग्रेषु लङ्काया विचचार महाकपि:॥६॥
With his tail set ablaze, Hanuman, the
great monkey, began to flit over the tops of
houses in Lanka like a cloud charged with
lightning. (6)

Tee गृहं राक्षसानामुद्यानानि च वानर:।
वीक्षमाणो ह्यसंत्रस्त: प्रासादांश्च चचार स:॥७॥
Not the least daunted, he actually
passed from one house to another, surveying
the pleasances and mansions of the ogres.

(7)
अवप्लुत्य महावेग: weer निवेशनम्।
ait aa विनिक्षिप्य श्वसनेन समो बली॥८॥
ततोऽन्यत् पुप्लुवे वेश्म महापार्श्वस्य वीर्यवान्।
मुमोच हनुमानग्निं कालानलशिखोपमम्॥९॥

Springing up with great impetuosity to
the mansion of Prahasta (the chief minister)
and scattering fire there, the powerful
Hanuman, who was equal in might to the
wind god, then leapt to another dwelling,
belonging to Mahaparswa, and scattered
fire, which resembled the flames of the fire
of final dissolution. (8-9)

वज्रदंष्टुस्य च aM पुप्लुवे a महाकपि:।

शुकस्य च महातेजा: सारणस्य च धीमत:॥ Yo i
Nay, that gigantic monkey likewise

bounded to the dwelling of Vajradamstra as

also to that of Suka as well as to the house
of the sagacious Sarana. (10)

am चेन्द्रजितो aya ददाह हरियूथप:।
Wael: सुमालेश्च ददाह भवनं तत:॥११॥

Even so, Hanuman, the leader of
monkey hordes, burnt the palace of Indrajit
and then the habitat of Jambumali as well
as that of Sumali. (11)

रश्मिकेतोश्च भवनं सूर्यशत्रोस्तथैव च।
हरस्वकर्णस्य दंष्ट्रस्य रोमशस्य च रक्षस:॥१२॥
युद्धोन्मत्तस्य मत्तस्य ध्वजग्रीवस्य रक्षस:।
विद्युज्जिह्वस्य घोरस्य da हस्तिमुखस्य च॥ १३॥

« VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

करालस्य विशालस्य शोणिताक्षस्य चैव हि।
कुम्भकर्णस्य भवनं मकराक्षस्य चैव हि॥१४॥
नरान्तकस्य कुम्भस्य निकुम्भस्य दुरात्मन:।
यज्ञशत्रोश्च wet ब्रह्मशत्रोस्तथैव च ॥१५॥
वर्जयित्वा महातेजा विभीषणगृहं प्रति।
क्रममाण: क्रमेणैव ददाह हरिपुङ्खव:॥१६॥

Nay, leaping up one after another in
order of importance to the house of
Rasmiketu, and even so to that of SuryaSatru,
to those of HraSwakarna, Damstra and the
ogre Romasa, to the dwellings of
Yuddhonmatta, Matta, the ogre Dhwajagriva,
to those of Vidyujjihva, Ghora and likewise
of Hastimukha, Karala, Visala and even so
Sonitaksa, to the palace of Kumbhakarana
and also to those of Makaraksa, of
Narantaka, Kumbha, the — evil-minded
Nikumbha, and Yajfhasatru and likewise of
Brahmasatru, Hanuman, the foremost of
monkeys, who was-~ endowed with
extraordinary energy, set fire to them, avoiding
the palace of Vibhisana alone (who had
averted his death sentence). (12—16)

तेषु तेषु महार्हेषु भवनेषु महायशा:।
गृहेष्वद्धिमतामृद्धिं dae कपिकुञ्जर:॥१७॥
Penetrating into all costly houses, the
highly illustrious Hanuman, an elephant among
the monkeys, burnt all the wealth in the
mansions of the rich. (17)

सर्वेषां समतिक्रम्य राक्षसेन्द्रस्य वीर्यवान्।
आससादाथ लक्ष्मीवान् रावणस्य निवेशनम्॥ १८ ॥

Passing over the houses of all, the
powerful and glorious monkey forthwith
reached the palace of Ravana, the lord of
ogres. (18)

ततस्तस्मिन् गृहे मुख्ये नानारत्नविभूषिते।
मेरुमन्दरसंकाशे नानामङ्गलशोभिते॥ १९॥
प्रदीप्तमग्निमुत्सृज्य लाङ्गूलाग्रे प्रतिष्ठितम्।
ननाद हनुमान् SRT युगान्तजलदो यथा॥ Ro Il

Scattering blazing fire on his tail in
that distinguished palace, which was decked
