« KISKINDHAKANDA +

ते क्षिप्रमभिगम्याथं यूथपा यूथपर्षभम्।
ह्रयो वानरश्रेष्ठं परिवार्योपतस्थिरे॥८॥

Reaching the peak in no time, the
monkeys, who were all leaders of troops,
stood surrounding Sugriva (the foremost of
monkeys), the leader of those leaders. (8)

`एवमेकायनगता: प्लवमाना frre
प्रकम्पयन्तो a गिरीणां शिखराणि च॥९॥

Leaping from crag to crag, and violently
shaking the hill-tops with their vehemence,
the monkeys thus reached a common track.

(9)
तत: शाखामृगा: सर्वे प्लवमाना महाबला:।
बभञ्जुश्च नगांस्तत्र पुष्पितान् दुर्गमाश्रितान्॥१०॥

Nay, while leaping (from crag to crag),
the monkeys, who were all possessed of
extraordinary might, thereupon broke down
the trees in blossom standing on the hill at
that time. (10)

आप्लवन्तो हरिवरा: सर्वतस्तं महागिरिम्।
मृगमार्जारशार्दूलांस्त्रासयन्तो ययुस्तदा॥ ११॥

Jumping on that great mountain from
all sides and scaring the deer, wild cats and
leopards (living on that hill), the foremost of
monkeys then moved on. (11)

aa: सुग्रीवसचिवा: पर्वतेन्द्रे समाहिता:।
संगम्य कपिमुख्येन सर्वे प्राञलय: स्थिता:॥ १२॥

Coming together with Sugriva (the chief
of monkeys), all the ministers of Sugriva then
stood attentive on the Rsyamuka hill (the lord
of mountains) with joined palms. (12)

उवाच STAM वाक्यं सुग्रीवं वाक्यकोविद:॥ १३॥
Thereupon Hanuman, for his part, who
was an adept in expression, spoke as follows
to Sugriva, who was distracted through fear
and was apprehensive of some mischief on
the part of Vali: (13)
सम्भ्रमस्त्यज्यतामेष सर्वैर्वालिकृते महान्।
मलयोऽयं गिरिवरो भयं नेहास्ति वालिन:॥ ew

“Let this great flurry on account of Vali

941

be given up by all. This jewel among
mountains is no other than Malaya (otherwise
known as Rsyamuka); there is no fear here
from Vali. (14)
यस्मादुद्विग्नचेतास्त्वं fag हरिपुङ्खव।
तं क्रूरदर्शनं Ht Ae पश्यामि वालिनम्॥१५॥
“| do not see here that cruel Vali of
ferocious aspect, because of whom you

have run away, perturbed in mind, O bull
among monkeys ! (15)

यस्मात् तव भयं सौम्य पूर्वजात् पापकर्मण: |

स नेह वाली दुष्टात्मा न ते पश्याम्यहं भयम्॥ १६ ॥
“That Vali of wicked mind, your elder

brother of sinful deeds, from whom there is

danger to you, O gentle one, is not here. |,
therefore, see no cause of fear to you. (16)

अहो शाखामृगत्वं ते व्यक्तमेव प्लवङ्गम।
लघुचित्ततयाऽऽत्मानं न स्थापयसि यो मतौ॥ १७॥
“Oh, too evident is the ape in you, O
bull among monkeys, who due to light-
mindedness, are not able to keep yourself
fixed on a particular conclusion. (17)

बुद्धिविज्ञानसम्पन्न इङ्नितै: सर्वमाचर।
नह्यबुद्धि Wat राजा सर्वभूतानि शास्ति हि॥ १८॥

“Reading the mind of others through their
gestures, richly endowed as you are with
intelligence and wisdom, do everything needful
in the proper way. Surely a king who has
taken recourse to thoughtlessness cannot
effectively rule over all his subjects.” (18)
सुग्रीवस्तु शुभं वाक्यं श्रुत्वा सर्वं हनूमत:।
तत: शुभतरं वाक्यं हनूमन्तमुवाच ह॥१९॥

Hearing the brilliant speech of Hanuman
in its entirety, Sugriva for his part addressed
to Hanuman the following observation, which
was more brilliant than the former (that of
Hanuman) : (19)

दीर्घबाहू विशालाक्षौ शरचापासिधारिणौ।
कस्य न स्याद् भयं दृष्टवा ह्येतौ सुरसुतोपमौ It २०॥

“Who will not be actually seized with fear
to see these two warriors possessed of
