442

who was highly respected among his
mothers, Sri Rama, who had a supremely
pious mind, spoke to her with folded hands
as follows : (33)”

अम्ब मा ¢:Raat भूत्वा पश्येस्त्वं पितरं मम।
क्षयोऽपि वनवासस्य fauna भविष्यति॥ ३४॥

“Pray, don’t you regard my father with
a doleful countenance. The end of exile too
will come rather soon. (34)

सुप्तायास्ते गमिष्यन्ति नव वर्षाणि पञ्च च।
समग्रमिह सम्प्राप्तं at द्रक्ष्यसि सुहृद्वृतम्॥३५॥

“Nine years and five will slip past you
even while you are asleep. One fine morning
you will find me duly arrived back here in
Ayodhya in my entire being alongwith Sita
and Laksmana, surrounded by my friends
and relations.” (35)

एतावदभिनीतार्थमुक्त्वा स जननीं वच:।
त्रय: शतशतार्धा fe ददर्शावेक्ष्य मातर:॥ ३६॥
ताश्चापि स तथैवार्तां मातूर्दशरथात्मज:।
धर्मयुक्तमिदं वाक्यं निजगाद कृताञ्जलि:॥ ३७॥

Having made the aforesaid
comprehensive submission to his mother,
and gazing on his three hundred and
fifty stepmothers, he actually found those
mothers too distressed in the same way
as his own mother was. Nay, folding his
hands the said son of Dasaratha once
more made the following submission, which
was in consonance with the spirit of
righteousness : (36-37)

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

: 1 Rich f यत् ।
wt समुपजानीत सर्वाश्चामन्त्रयामि व:॥ ३८॥
“Pray, forgive whatever unkind word or
even act may have been uttered or done by
me through ignorance because we lived
together. Now | take leave of you all.” (38)
वचनं राघवस्यैतद् धर्मयुक्तं समाहितम्।
शुश्रुवुस्ता: fara: सर्वा: शोकोपहतचेतस: ॥ ३९॥
All those royal ladies whose mind was
agitated through grief, heard the aforesaid
cool submission of Sri Rama, a scion of
Raghu, which conformed to the principles of
righteousness. (39)

Wasa तासां Gate: क्रौञ्चीनामिव नि:स्वन: |
मानवेन्द्रस्य भार्याणामेवं act waduxon

While Sri Rama, a scion of Raghu,
was speaking thus, an outcry resembling
the wail of female cranes rose from the
mouth of those consorts of Dasaratha (a
ruler of men). (40)

दशरथवेश्म बभूव यत् पुरा।
व्यसनगतं तदभूत् सुदु:खितम्॥४१॥
The same palace of DaSaratha, which
was formerly marked with the sound of
tomtoms, large drums and Meghas (a musical
instrument the sound of which resembled
the rumbling of clouds), was now filled with
extreme agony, agitated as it was through
wails and cries and fallen on evil days. (41)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्येऽयोध्याकाण्डे
एकोनचत्वारिंश: FW: ॥ ३९ il

Thus ends Canto Thirty-nine in the Ayodhyakanda of the glorious Ramayana of
Valmiki, the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

