70

शिष्यस्तु तस्य ब्रुवतो मुनेर्वाक्यमनुत्तमम्।
प्रतिजग्राह संतुष्टस्तस्य तुष्टोऽभवन्मुनि:॥१९॥
Even as the aforesaid sage uttered the
couplet, unexcelled as it was (in that it was
suggestive of the entire theme of the
Ramayana), his pupil, highly delighted,
actually committed it to memory. The sage
thereupon felt much pleased with him.
(19)

सोऽभिषेकं तत: कृत्वा तीर्थे तस्मिन् यथाविधि।
तमेव चिन्तयन्नर्थमुपावर्तत बै मुनि:॥ २०॥

Having finished his midday ablution with
due ceremony in that descent of the holy
Tamasa, the sage then returned to his
hermitage, brooding over the same incident,
as a matter of fact. (20)

भरद्वाजस्तत: शिष्यो विनीत: श्रुतवान् गुरो:।
कलशं पूर्णमादाय पृष्ठतोऽनुजगाम Fie

Taking the pitcher filled with water, his
submissive and learned pupil, Bharadwaja,
too, they say, thereupon followed in the
wake of his teacher. (21)

स प्रविश्याश्रमपदं fret we धर्मवित्।
उपविष्ट: कथाश्चान्याश्चकार ध्यानमास्थित:॥ २२॥
Reaching the grounds of the hermitage
alongwith his pupil, the sage, who knew
what is right, sat down and talked on various
other topics, while remaining absorbed in
contemplation of the couplet uttered by him.
(22)

आजगाम ततो ब्रह्मा लोककर्ता स्वयं प्रभु:।
चतुर्मुखो महातेजा द्रष्टुं तं मुनिपुङ्खवम्॥२३॥

Then appeared the almighty Brahma,
the four-faced creator of the fourteen worlds,
who was possessed of great splendour,
personally to see Valmiki, the chief of
hermits. (23)

वाल्मीकिरथ तं GBT सहसोत्थाय वाग्यत:।
Wate: प्रयतो भूत्वा तस्थौ परमविस्मित:॥ २४॥

Greatly astonished to see him, Valmiki
forthwith rose in haste from his seat and

« VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

stood tongue-tied with folded hands in great
humility. (24)
पूजयामास तं देवं Uae: |

प्रणम्य विधिवच्चैनं opt चैव निरामयम्॥ २५॥

Bowing low to him according to the
scriptural ordinance and inquiring after his
welfare too, the sage worshipped the
aforesaid deity by offering water to wash
his feet and hands with, as well as a
glorious seat and bestowed encomiums on
him. (25)

अथोपविश्य भगवानासने परमार्चिते।
वाल्मीकये च wud संदिदेशासनं तत:॥ २६॥

Making himself comfortable on the most
exalted seat offered by Valmiki, the almighty
creator, who was covered all over by his
own effulgence, forthwith directed the sage
Valmiki to take his seat. (26)

ब्रह्मणा समनुज्ञात सोऽप्युपाविशदासने।
उपविष्टे तदा तस्मिन् साक्षाल्लोकपितामहे॥ २७॥
तद्गतेनैव मनसा वाल्मीकिर्ध्ययानमास्थित:।
पापात्मना कृतं कष्टं वैरग्रहणबुद्धिना॥ २८॥
शोचन्नेव पुन: क्रौञ्चीमुपश्लोकमिमं जगौ॥ २९॥
पुनरन्तर्गतमना भूत्वा शोकपरायण:।
तमुवाच Aa TAT प्रहसन् मुनिपुङ्खवम्॥ Zo
Duly permitted by Brahma, Valmiki too
made himself comfortable on his seat. Even
though Brahma, the progenitor of the entire
creation, was directly seated before him at
that time, Valmiki remained absorbed in
reverie with his mind fixed on that very
incident. He said to himself : “A grave wrong
was perpetrated by the wicked fowler, who
was bent upon catching the bird with
malicious intent, in that he struck down
without any fault the crane in that state,
cooing so delightfully !’ Even while bewailing
the lot of the female crane, disunited from
its mate, he repeated the same couplet in
the presence of Brahma and, pondering
over the meaning of the verse, fell a prey to
