« KISKINDHAKANDA +

953

Canto VI

Telling Sri Rama that he had come to know from Hanuman all about his
misfortune (in the shape of the abduction of his wife) and assuring him that
he will have her traced out wherever she may be and restore her to him,
Sugriva fetches from inside his cave an ornament tied in a corner of
a silk wrapper and dropped by her from the air while being carried
away by Ravana, and shows it to Sri Rama. Recognizing it as
belonging to Sita alone, Sri Rama is plunged once more in
grief born of separation from his beloved spouse and,
violently hissing like a serpent, impatiently inquires

who that Ravana was and where from he hailed

पुनरेवाब्रवीत् प्रीतो wad रघुनन्दनम्।
अयमाख्याति a wa सचिवो मन्तिसत्तम:॥१॥

हनुमान् यन्निमित्तं त्वं निर्जनं वनमागत:।
लक्ष्मणेन सह Wat वसतश्च वने तव॥ २॥

रक्षसापहृता भार्या मैथिली जनकात्मजा।
त्वया वियुक्ता रुदती लक्ष्मणेन च धीमता॥ ३॥

अन्तरं प्रेप्सुना तेन हत्वा गृध्रं जटायुषम्।
भार्यावियोगजं ga प्रापितस्तेन रक्षसा॥४॥
Sugriva once more lovingly submitted
as follows to Sri Rama (a scion of Raghu),
the delight of the Raghus : “This Hanuman,
a veritable jewel among my counsellors and
your servant, has revealed to me the
purpose for which you have sought this
lonely forest, O Rama! He has told me how
while you were living in the forest with your
brother, Laksmana, your consort, Sita (a
princess of Mithila), daughter of Janaka,
was carried off, wailing at a time when she
was disunited from you as well as from the
talented Laksmana, after killing the vulture,
Jatayu, by that ogre Ravana, who had (all
along) been seeking an opportune moment
(to lay his violent hands on her), and how
you have been subjected by that ogre to
the agony of separation from your spouse.
(1—4)

भार्यावियोगजं दु:खं नचिरात् त्वं विमोक्ष्यसे।
ae तामानयिष्यामि नष्टां वेदश्रुतीमिव॥५॥

“You will cast away before long the
agony of separation from your consort; for |
will bring her back even as the Lord (in His
descent as the Divine Fish) recovered the
Veda (the Divine Revelation) that had
vanished out of sight. (5)

रसातले वा वर्तन्तीं वर्तन्तीं वा नभस्तले।
अहमानीय दास्यामि तव भार्यामरिदम॥६॥

“Recovering your consort, O tamer of
foes, no matter whether she exists in the
bowels of the earth or is living in the vaults
of heaven, | shall deliver her to you. (6)

इदं aa wa वचस्त्वमवेहि च weal

न शक्या सा जरयितुमपि Sa: सुरासुरै:॥७॥
aa wat महाबाहो vet विषकृतं यथा।
त्यज शोकं महाबाहो तां कान्तामानयामि ते॥८॥

“Know this statement of mine to be
true, O mighty-armed scion of Raghu, that
the aforesaid consort of yours cannot be
absorbed (with impunity) even by gods and
demons including Indra, any more than food
cooked with poison. Cast away grief, O
mighty-armed prince, | shall surely bring

back that darling of yours. (7-8).
अनुमानात् तु जानामि मैथिली सा न संशय:।
ह्रियमाणा मया दृष्टा रक्षसा रौद्रकर्मणा॥९॥
क्रोशन्ती रामरामेति लक्ष्मणेति च विस्वरम्।

स्फुरन्ती रावणस्याङ्के पन्नगेन्द्रवधूर्यथा॥१०॥
