342

नाग्निर्नान्यानि शस्त्राणि न न: पाशा भयावहा:।
ONT: स्वार्थप्रयुक्तास्तु ज्ञातयो नो भयावहा:॥ ७॥

“ ‘Neither fire nor other arms nor snares
strike terror in us; but those of our own
kind, who are cruel and actuated by self-
interest, are dangerous. (7)
उपायमेते वक्ष्यन्ति ग्रहणे नात्र संशय:।
pene भयाज्ञातिभयं कुकष्टं fated TA: ue ॥

““These (latter) will point out the device
of catching us; there is no doubt about it.
Nay, the peril from those of our kind is
known to us as the most formidable of all
perils.’ (8)

विद्यते गोषु सम्पन्नं विद्यते ज्ञातितो भयम्।
विद्यते स्त्रीषु चापल्यं विद्यते ब्राह्मणे तप:॥९॥

“There exists wealth in the cow; there
exists peril from one’s own kinsfolk; there
exists Capriciousness in women; and there
exists asceticism in the Brahmana. (9)

ततो नेष्टमिदं सौम्य aad लोकसत्कृत:।
ऐश्वर्यमभिजातश्च Root wet च Pera: i go tl

“Therefore, it is not to your liking, my
good brother, that | am honoured by the
whole world, have attained power and pelf
and have set my foot on the heads of my
enemies. (10)

यथा पुष्करपत्रेषु पतितास्तोयबिन्दव:।
न श्लेषमभिगच्छन्ति तथानार्येषु सौहृदम्॥११॥

“Love bestowed on the unworthy does
not moisten their heart any more than drops
of water fallen on lotus leaves penetrate the
latter. (11)

यथा शरदि मेघानां सिञ्चतामपि गर्जताम्।
न भवत्यम्बुसंक्लेदस्तथानार्येषु सौहृदम्॥१२॥

“Even as the earth is not saturated
with the water of clouds thundering and
raining in autumn, so love bestowed on
the unworthy fails to moisten their heart.

(12)

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA +

यथा मधुकरस्तर्षाद् ta विन्दन्न तिष्ठति।
तथा त्वमपि तत्रैव तथानार्येषु सौहृदम्॥१३॥

“Affection does not abide in the heart
of the unworthy any more than a black bee
stays with a flower even though sucking its
nectar with avidity. You too are of that type.

(13)

यथा मधुकरस्तर्षात् काशपुष्पं पिबन्नपि।
रसमत्र न विन्देत तथानार्येषु सौहृदम्॥१४॥

“One bestowing love on the unworthy
does not attain happiness any more than a
black bee, though sucking the flowers of a
grass known by the name of Kasa gets
nectar there. (14)

यथा Ue गज: स्नात्वा गृह्य हस्तेन A रज:।
दूषयत्यात्मनो देहं तथानार्येषु सौहृदम्॥१५॥

“Just as picking up sand in its proboscis
immediately after taking a dip in water in the
first instance, an elephant soils its body
again, so the affection bestowed on the
unworthy gets clogged. (15)
योऽन्यस्त्वेवंविधं ब्रूयाद् वाक्यमेतन्निशाचर।
अस्मिन् मुहूर्ते न भवेत् cat तु धिक कुलपांसन॥ १६ ॥

“He who, other than you, actually utters
the aforesaid words in the way you have
done, O ranger of the night, would have
undoubtedly ceased to be this very moment.
As for you, a curse upon you, 0 obloquy of
your race!” (16)

इत्युक्त: परुषं वाक्यं न्यायवादी विभीषण:।
उत्पपात गदापाणिश्चतुर्भि: सह War: Voi
Rebuked in these harsh ॥0168,
Vibhisana, who had spoken what is right,
rose in the airspace, mace in hand, alongwith
four other ogres, his ministers. (17)
अब्रवीच्च तदा वाक्यं जातक्रोधो विभीषण:।
अन्तरिक्षगत: श्रीमान् भ्राता वै राक्षसाधिपम्॥ १८॥
Nay, standing in airspace, the glorious
Vibhisana, (half-) brother of Ravana, who
was filled with indignation, actually addressed
