+ UTTARAKANDA +

1015

Canto LIII

ऽत Rama narrates the story of king Nrga, who was cursed for not attending to his
subjects, and instructs Laksmana, to perform obligatory duties towards citizens

लक्ष्मणस्य तु dq वाक्यं निशम्य परमाद्भुतम्।
सुप्रीतश्चाभवद् wa वाक्यमेतदुवाच ह॥१॥
Hearing those most striking words of
Laksmana, Sri Rama was highly pleased
and spoke in the following manner: (1)

दुर्लभस्त्वीदृशो बन्धुरस्मिन् काले विशेषत:।
यादृशस्त्वं महाबुद्धिर्मम सौम्य मनोऽनुग:॥ २॥
“A kinsman as faithful and wise as
you, O courteous one, is difficult to be
found, specially at this time. (2)

यच्च मे हृदये किंचिद ada शुभलक्षण।
तन्निशामय च श्रुत्वा कुरुष्व वचनं मम॥३॥
“O noble one! bearing auspicious marks,
whatever is passing in my mind, | shall say:
listen to it and do as | say. (3)

चत्वारो दिवसा: dra ard पौरजनस्य a
अकुर्वाणस्य सौमित्रे तन्मे मर्माणि कृन्तति॥४॥

Our full four days, O lovely one, have
passed, and the duties towards citizens
have not been attended to, O son of Sumitra,
that negligence eats as if my vitals. (4)

आहूयन्तां प्रकृतय: पुरोधा मन्तरिणस्तथा।
कार्यार्थिनश्च पुरुषा: स्रियो वा पुरुषर्षभ॥७५॥
“Let all my subjects be called, so also
the priest and the counsellors, and even men
or women too seeking their business. (5)

पौरकार्याणि यो राजा न करोति fet दिने।
Wad नरके घोरे पतितो नात्र संशय:॥६॥
“The king, who does not perform the
daily duties to his subjects falls undoubtedly
into the dreadful Sarnvrta (airless) hell. (6)
gad fe पुरा राजा नृगो नाम महायशा:।
aya पृथिवीपालो ब्रह्मण्य: सत्यवाक शुचि: 1 ७॥
“In the days of yore, there was a king,
Nrga by name, of high fame, protector of the

earth, devoted to Brahmanas, truth-speaking
and pure of heart and conduct. (7)

सकदाचिद्गवां कोटी: सवत्सा: स्वर्णभूषिता:।
नृदेवो भूमिदेवेभ्य: पुष्करेषु ददौ Tuc

“That king, at one time gave away
millions of cows ornamented with gold and
accompanied with calves to Brahmanas (the
gods on earth) at the holy pilgrim-centre of
Puskara. (8)
ad: Age गता धेनु: सवत्सा स्पर्शितानघ।
ब्राह्मणस्याहिताग्नेस्तु दरिद्रस्योञ्छवर्तिन:॥९॥

“A cow with its calf belonging to a poor
Brahmana, who had laid the sacrificial fire
and subsisted on gleaning, was also touched
among the assemblage of cows by that
king, for gift given away. (9)
स Wet गां क्षुधार्तो a अन्विषंस्तत्र तत्र ह।
नापश्यत् सर्वराष्टेषु संवत्सरगणान् बहून्॥१०॥

“Afflicted by hunger, he (the Brahmana)
roamed about all the provinces in quest of
the missing cow for many years, and yet
could not find it (the cow). (10)
ad: कनखलं गत्वा जीर्णवत्सां निरामयाम्।
aga at स्विकां धेनुं ब्राह्मणस्य निवेशने॥११॥

“Then reaching Kanakhala* he saw his

own cow in good health accompanied by a
full grown calf, in the abode of a Brahmana.
(11)

अथ at नामधेयेन स्वकेनोवाच ब्राह्मण:।
आगच्छ शबलेत्येवं सा तु शुश्राव गौ: स्वरम्॥ १२॥
“The Brahmana then called the cow by
the name given to her by himself thus: “O
Sabala! come. That cow too heard the voice
of the Brahmana. (12)

तस्य तं स्वरमाज्ञाय क्षुधार्तस्य द्विजस्य a1
अन्वगात् पृष्ठत: सा गौर्गच्छन्तं पावकोपमम्॥ १३॥

* A holy place of pilgrimage near Haridwara.
