12 « VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

“| adore Sri Rama,who is dark-brown (of complexion) and is comfortably seated
alongwith Sita (a princess of the Videha territory) in the posture of a warrior (with one knee
touching the ground) on a throne of gems as the centre of the aerial car Puspaka under
an extensive pavilion of gold at the front of a celestial (wish-yielding) tree, surrounded by
Bharata and others, with Hanuman (son of the wind-god) propounding in front of Sri Rama
before the hermits the highest truth (already) expounded (by others). To His left is seated
Sita (Daughter of Goddess Earth); facing Him sits Hanuman and at His back Laksmana
(son of Sumitra); Satrughna and Bharata are seated on His two sides, while in the corners
between every two quarters (viz., north-west, north-east, south-east and south-west) are
seated Sugriva (the ruler of monkeys), Vibhisana (the ogre king of Lanka), Crown prince
Angada (son of Tara) and Jambavan (the lord of bears) respectively; and in the centre |
worship Sri Rama,who is cerulean of hue and is endowed with the soft lustre of a blue

lotus.”
SALUTATIONS TO SRI RAMA’S ENTOURAGE
सुग्रीवं ag च woh a: पुन:॥
नमोऽस्तु रामाय सलक्ष्मणाय
देव्यै च तस्यै जनकात्मजायै।
नमोऽस्तु रुद्रेन्द्रयमानिलेभ्यो
नमोऽस्तु चन्द्रार्कमरुद्गणेभ्य: II
“I respectfully bow down again and again 10० . Sri Rama; His younger brother
(Laksmana), Sita, Bharata and His younger brother (Satrughna), Sugriva and Hanuman
(son of the wind-god). Hail to Sri Rama, accompanied by Laksmana as well as to that
godlike lady, Janaka’s Daughter! Hail to Rudra (the god of destruction), Indra (the ruler of
gods), Yama (the god of retribution) and the wind-god! Hail to the moon-god, the sun-god
and the troops of the wind-god!”

SALUTATIONS TO SRIMAD RAMAYANA

चरितं रयुनाथस्य शतकोटिप्रविस्तरम्।
एकैकमशक्षरं पुंसां महापातकनाशनम्॥
वाल्मीकिगिरिसम्भूता रामाम्भोनिधिसंगता।
श्रीमद्रामायणी गङ्गा पुनाति भुवनत्रयम्॥
वाल्मीकेर्मुनिसिंहस्य कवितावनचारिण:।

wa रामकथानादं को न याति wt गतिम्॥

“The story of Sri Rama (the Protector of the Raghus) extends to a hundred crore
couplets. Every single letter of this (vast book) destroys the major sins of people (going
through it). The holy Ganga in the form of the glorious Ramayana which has descended
from the mountain in the form of Sage Valmiki and flows to the ocean embodied as Sri
Rama, purifies (all) the three worlds (with its contact). Hearing the roar, in the form of Sri
Rama’s narrative, of Valmiki, the lion among sages, roaming in the forest of poetry, who
would not attain to the highest goal?”

Once the reader has started reading the Ramayana he should not pause before the
end of any canto. If he does so he should resume reading it from the very canto which
he has left unfinished. The reading should be carried on at a moderate pitch, distinctly, with
