376

out of the army, the valiant Angada, who is
difficult to conquer, should take up his position
alongwith Nila at the bosom of the (human-
shaped) formation in which the troops are
going to be deployed. (14)

तिष्ठेदु वानरवाहिन्या वानरौघसमावृत:।
आश्रितो दक्षिणं पार्श्वमृषभो ATT वानर:॥१५॥

“Surrounded by a battalion of monkeys,
the monkey Rsabha by name should remain
stationed on the right wing of the simian
army. (15)

गन्धहस्तीव दुर्धर्षस्तरस्वी गन्धमादन:।
तिष्ठेद् वानरवाहिन्या: सव्यं पारश्वमधिष्ठित: i १६ ॥
“Let Gandhamadana, who is difficult to
overpower and agile like an elephant in rut,
remain stationed at the head of the left flank
of the simian army. (16)

WR स्थास्याम्यहं यत्तो लक्ष्मणेन समन्वित:।
जाम्बवांश्च सुषेणश्च वेगदर्शी च वानर:॥१७॥
ऋक्षमुख्या महात्मान: कुक्षिं रक्षन्तु ते Aa: |
wet कपिसेनाया: कपिराजोऽभिरक्षतु।
पश्चार्धमिव लोकस्य प्रचेतास्तेजसा da: i १८॥

“Accompanied by Laksmana, | shall
remain alert at the head of the formation.
And let Jambavan and Susena as well as
the monkey Vegadarsi—these three highly
intelligent leaders of bears and monkeys
protect the belly. Let Sugriva, the ruler
of monkeys, protect on all sides the hips
and lions even as Varuna, the god of
water, who remains enveloped with glory,
guards the western quarter of the earth.”

(17-18)

सुविभक्तमहाव्यूहा महावानररक्षिता।
अनीकिनी सा विबभौ यथा at: साभ्रसम्प्लवा ।॥। १९ ॥

Systematically disposed in the form of
a huge formation and protected by eminent
monkeys, that army looked exceptionally
charming like the heavens with their mass
of clouds. (19)

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA +

प्रगृह्य गिरिशृङ्गाणि महतश्च महीरुहान्।
आसेदुर्वानरा लङ्कां मिमर्दयिषवो रणे॥२०॥

Seizing peaks of mountains and gigantic
trees, the monkeys reached Lanka, which
they were keen to crush in the course of a
combat. (20)
शिखरैर्विकिरामैनां लङ्कां मुष्टिभिरेव वा।
इति स्म दधिरे ad मनांसि हरिपुङ्खवा:॥ २१॥

“Let us dash yonder Lanka to pieces
with the peaks of mountains or with our bare
fists,” so did all the leaders of monkeys
resolve. (21)

ततो रामो महातेजा: सुग्रीवमिदमब्रवीत्।
सुविभक्तानि सैन्यानि शुक एष विमुच्यताम्॥ २२॥

Sri Rama, who was endowed with
extraordinary energy, then spoke as follows
to Sugriva: “The troops have been marshalled
thoroughly well. Let yonder Suka be set
free.” (22)
रामस्य तु वच: श्रुत्वा वानरेन्द्रो महाबल:।
मोचयामास तं दूतं शुकं रामस्य शासनात्॥ २३॥

Hearing the words of Sri Rama, Sugriva
(the lord of monkeys) for his part, who was
endowed with extraordinary might, set at
liberty the well-known envoy, Suka, in
obedience to the command of Sri Rama.

(23)
मोचितो रामवाक्येन arts निपीडित:।
Wer: परमसंत्रस्तो रक्षोधिपमुपागमत्॥ २४॥

Released under orders of Sri Rama
and molested by the monkeys, Suka, who
was exceedingly terrified, sought the presence

of Ravana, the suzerain lord of ogres.
(24)

रावण: प्रहसन्नेव शुकं वाक्यमुवाच Fl
किमिमौ a सितौ पक्षौ लूनपक्षश्च दृश्यसे॥ २५॥
Ravana, they say, put the following
questions to Suka, even while laughing
to his heart’s content: “How have these
