206

तथा शप्त्वा च वै शक्रं भार्यामपि च शप्तवान्।
इह वर्षसहस्राणि बहूनि निवसिष्यसि॥ २९॥
वातभक्षा निराहारा तप्यन्ती भस्मशायिनी।
अदूश्या सर्वभूतानामाश्रमेऽस्मिन् वसिष्यसि॥ ३०॥

Nay, having imprecated Indra in the
foregoing words, he cursed his wife too
as follows: ‘You will stay here for many
thousands of years without food or drink,
living on air alone, and remain lying on
ashes full of remorse. You will dwell in this
hermitage unperceived by anyone of all created
beings. (29-30)
यदा त्वेतद् at MNT WA दशरथात्मज:।
आगमिष्यति दुर्धर्षस्तदा gat भविष्यसि॥ ३१॥

“When, however, Sri Rama, son of
DaSaratha, who is hard to overcome for

anyone, visits this fearful grove, then alone
you will be absolved of your sin. (31)

« VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

तस्यातिथ्येन दुर्वृत्ते लोभमोहविवर्जिता।
मत्सकाशं मुदा युक्ता स्वं वपुर्धारयिष्यसि॥ ३२॥
“‘Completely rid of cupidity and
infatuation by virtue of hospitality that you
will extend to him (in the same invisible
form), O immoral woman, you will regain
your own pristine body and return to my
presence full of joy.’ (32)

`एवमुक्त्वा महातेजा गौतमो दुष्टचारिणीम्।
इममाश्रममुत्सृज्य सिद्धचारणसेविते।
हिमवच्छिखरे रम्ये तपस्तेपे महातपा:॥ ३३॥

“Having imprecated, as aforesaid, that
woman of immoral conduct, the exceptionally
glorious sage Gautama left this hermitage
and the great ascetic resumed his austerities
on a delightful peak of the Himalayas,
frequented by Siddhas and Caranas.”

(33)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये बालकाण्डेऽष्टचत्वारिंश: सर्ग: ॥ ४८ ॥

Thus ends Canto Forty-eight in the Balakanda of the glorious Ramayana of Valmiki,
the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

Canto XLIX

At the intercession of the gods, Indra is supplied with testicles of a ram;
Ahalya gets back her pristine celestial form at the very sight of
Sri Rama, the moment he enters the hermitage, and the two
divine brothers are entertained by the lady
with the help of her husband

अफलस्तु तत: शक्रो देवानग्निपुरोगमान्।
अब्रवीत् त्रस्तनयन: सिद्धगन्धर्वचारणान्॥१॥
“Deprived of his testicles, Indra with
timid eyes then sought the presence of and
spoke to the gods headed by Agni, the god
of fire, as well as to the Siddhas, Gandharvas
and Caranas as follows : (1)

कुर्वता तपसो fast गौतमस्य महात्मन:।
क्रोधमुत्पाद्य fe मया सुरकार्यमिदं कृतम्॥ zi

“‘Hampering as | did the austerities of

the high-souled Gautama by exciting his
wrath and thereby foiling his attempt to
claim my throne, | have only just served the
cause of gods. (2)

अफलोऽस्मि कृतस्तेन क्रोधात् सा च निराकृता।
शापमोक्षेण महता तपोऽस्यापहनतं मया॥३॥
“‘In a fit of anger | have accordingly
been deprived of my virility and Ahalya
too has been disowned by him. He has
thus been robbed by me of his spiritual
