50

on both sides of the gates inside as well as
with those inlaid with diamonds, crystals
and  pearls—entrances which were
embellished with floors of gems and graced
with elephants of refined gold and were
crowned with spotless white vaults of silver,
entrances accessible by means of stairs of
cat’s-eye and with their inside walls made of
crystal and free from dust and provided with
lovely and charming assembly halls,
entrances which appeared to have risen to
the skies due to their height, and were
rendered noisy by herons and frequented
by swans—and by which Lanka was resonant
on all sides with the sound of clarionets and
the tinkling of ornaments, was a replica of
Vaswokasara (another name of the city of
Alaka) and appeared as though risen to the
skies on account of its lofty mansions.
(8—12)

तां समीक्ष्य UT लंकां राक्षसाधिपते: शुभाम्।
अनुत्तमामृद्धिमतीं चिन्तयामास वीर्यवान्॥१३॥
Gazing on Lanka, that splendid city of
the suzerain lord of ogres, which was
unsurpassed in beauty and was full of

opulence, the valiant Hanuman reflected as
follows : (13)

नेयमन्येन नगरी ween धर्षयितुं बलात्।

रक्षिता रावणबलैरुद्यतायुधपाणिभि: 11 १४॥
‘Guarded by the forces of Ravana with

weapons uplifted in their hands, this city is

incapable of being subdued by anyone by
force. (14)

कुमुदाङ्गदयोर्वापि सुषेणस्य महाकपे:।
West wae भूमिर्मैन्दद्दिविदयोरपि॥ १५॥
‘This land is accessible only to Kumuda
and Angada or to the great monkey, Susena,
as also to Mainda and Dwivida. (15)

विवस्वतस्तनूजस्य हरेशच कुशपर्वण:।
ऋक्षस्य कपिमुख्यस्य मम चैव गतिर्भवेत्॥१६॥

‘Again access to it may be had by
Sugriva (sprung from the loins of the sun-

« VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

god), the monkey KuSaparva, Jambavan,
the bear, the foremost of the monkey hordes,
and even by myself.’ (16)

समीक्ष्य च महाबाहो राघवस्य पराक्रमम्।
लक्ष्मणस्य च विक्रान्तमभवत् प्रीतिमान् कपि: UW १७॥

Fully considering, however, the prowess
of the mighty-armed Sri Rama, a scion of
Raghu, as also the valour of Laksmana,
Hanuman felt satisfied. (17)
तां रत्नवसनोपेतां गोष्ठागारावतंसिकाम्।
यन्त्रागारस्तनीमृद्धां प्रमदामिव भूषिताम्॥१८॥
at नष्टतिमिरां दीपैर्भास्वरेश्च महाग्रहै:।
नगरीं राक्षसेन्द्रस्य स cast महाकपि:॥१९॥

That mighty Hanuman looked upon that
celebrated and flourishing city of Ravana,
the lord of ogres—whose darkness had
been dispelled by lights as well as by the
major planets full of radiance—as if it were
a young woman adorned with ornaments,
nay, having the bejewelled defensive wall
for her raiment, the cow-pens (including
stables etc.,) as well as other houses for
her earrings and the armouries for her
breasts. (18-19)
अथ सा हरिशार्दूलं प्रविशन्तं महाकपिम्।
नगरी स्वेन रूपेण ददर्शं पवनात्मजम्॥ २०॥

Appearing in her personal form, Lanka,
the presiding ogress of the city, now beheld
the great monkey, Hanuman, sprung from
the loins of the wind-god, a tiger among the
monkeys, entering the city. (20)

सा तं हरिवरं get लंका रावणपालिता।

स्वयमेवोत्थिता तत्र विकृताननदर्शना॥ २१॥
Seeing that jewel among the monkeys,

the aforesaid Lanka, protected by Ravana,

rose up on her own initiative on that spot
showing her ugly features. (21)

पुरस्तात् तस्य वीरस्य वायुसूनोरतिष्ठत।
WAT महानादमब्रवीत् पवनात्मजम्॥ २२॥

She stood before that heroic offspring
of the wind-god. Emitting a loud cry she
