550

“Is my own mother, Kaikeyi, who always
seeks to gain her own ends, is violent and
given to wrath and accounts herself wise—
also healthy and what message has she
sent for me?” (10)
एवमुक्तास्तु ते gat भरतेन महात्मना।
ऊचु: सम्प्रश्रितं वाक्यमिदं तं भरतं तदा॥११॥

Questioned thus by the high-souled
Bharata on that occasion, the aforesaid
messengers for their part addressed the
following most polite words to the said
Bharata : (11)

कुशलास्ते नरव्याघ्र येषां कुशलमिच्छसि।
श्रीश्च cat व्रणुते पद्मा युज्यतां चापि ते रथ:॥ १२॥

“They are all well, whose welfare
you seek, O tiger among men! Nay, holding
a lotus in her hand, Sri, the goddess of
fortune, looks on you with favour. Therefore
let your chariot be equipped for journey.”

(12)

भरतश्चापि तान् दूतानेवमुक्तोऽभ्यभाषत।
आपृच्छेऽहं महाराजं Ga: संत्वरयन्ति APL १३॥
Told thus, Bharata too replied to the
messengers, “I shall presently seek the
permission of the monarch, my maternal
grandfather, saying that you, the messengers,
are urging me to make haste to depart for
Ayodhya”. (13)

एवमुक्त्वा तु तान् दूतान् भरत: पार्थिवात्मज:।

qa: संचोदितो वाक्यं मातामहमुवाच Ti evil
Having told the messengers thus, Prince

Bharata for his part made the following

submission to his maternal grandfather, as

entreated by the messengers : so the tradition

goes : (14)

राजन् पितुर्गमिष्यामि सकाशं दूतचोदित:।
पुनरप्यहमेष्यामि यदा A त्वं स्मरिष्यसि॥ ek Il

“Urged by the messengers, | shall,
Your Majesty, return to the presence of my
father. | shall come again whenever you
remember me.” (15)

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

भरतेनैवमुक्तस्तु नृपो मातामहस्तदा।
तमुवाच शुभं वाक्यं शिरस्याघ्राय राघवम्॥१६॥
Smelling (as a token of affection) the
head of Bharata (a scion of Raghu), when
requested as aforesaid by the latter on that
occasion, the king, his maternal grandfather,
addressed to him the following agreeable
words : (16)

गच्छ तातानुजाने at कैकेयी सुप्रजास्त्वया।
मातरं कुशलं ब्रूया: frat च परंतप॥१७॥
पुरोहितं च कुशलं ये चान्ये द्विजसत्तमा:।
at च तात महेष्वासौ भ्रातरौ रामलक्ष्मणौ॥ १८॥

“Depart, dear child! | grant you leave
to return to Ayodhya. Kaikeyi is blessed
with a noble son in you. Communicate, O
tormentor of enemies, our welfare to your
mother as well as to your father on my
behalf, also to Sage Vasistha (the family-
priest) and to other jewels among Brahmanas,
whoever are present on the occasion and
lastly to the two celebrated brothers, Rama
and Laksmana, the wielders of mighty bows.”

(17-18)
तस्मै हस्त्युत्तमांश्चित्रान् कम्बलानजिनानि च।
सत्कृत्य केकयो राजा भरताय ददौ धनम्॥१९॥

Treating him with honour, the king of
Kekaya bestowed on the aforesaid Bharata
foremost of elephants, multi-coloured
blankets, deerskins and riches consisting
of gold vessels etc. (19)

अन्त:पुरेऽतिसंवृद्धान् व्याघ्रवीर्यबलोपमान्।
दंष्टायुक्तान् महाकायान् शुनश्चोपायनं ददौ॥ २०॥

He also gave as a present dogs of
enormous size, possessed of large teeth,
brought up with care in the gynaeceum
itself and vying in prowess and strength of
body with a tiger. (20)

रुक्मनिष्कसहस्रे द्वे षोडशाश्वशतानि च।
सत्कृत्य केकयीपुत्रं heat धनमादिशत्॥ २१॥

Receiving him kindly, the king of the
Kekayas further bestowed on Bharata, the
