# YUDDHAKANDA +

swarms on the tops of seven-storeyed
buildings. (19)
Tag परिलीयन्ते पुरीमुपरि पिण्डिता:।

उपपन्नाश्च संध्ये द्वे व्याहरन्त्यशिवं शिवा:॥ २०॥

“Nay, vultures collected in swarms hover
over the city; while, arrived near the city,
she-jackals howl ominously both morning
and evening. (20)
क्रव्यादानां मृगाणां च पुरीद्वारेषु संघश:।
श्रूयन्ते विपुला घोषा: सविस्फूर्जितनि:स्वना: Wt २१॥

“At the gates of the city are heard the
loud cries of carnivorous animals (Such as
wolves and hyenas) gathered in herds
alongwith peals of thunder. (21)
add Wedd कार्ये प्रायश्चित्तमिदं क्षमम्।
रोचये ae aes राघवाय प्रदीयताम्॥ rei

“Therefore, when the action of evil forces
has started in this way, O gallant brother,
this atonement is desirable that Sita (a
princess of the Videha territory) be restored
to Rama (a scion of Raghu) and | like it.(22)

Be च यदि वा मोहाल्लोभाद् वा व्याहृतं मया।
तत्रापि च महाराज न ae कर्तुमर्हसि॥ २३॥
“Even if this submission has been made
through infatuation or greed, you ought not
to find fault with me, O eminent monarch!
(23)

ama fe दोष: सर्वस्य जनस्यास्योपलक्ष्यते।
Tae राक्षसीनां च पुरस्यान्त:पुरस्य च॥ २४॥
“This offence in the shape of Sita’s
abduction is recognized by all the people
here, the ogres and the ogresses, the whole
city and the gynaeceum. (24)

प्रापणे चास्य मन्त्रस्य निवृत्ता: सर्वमन्त्रिण:।

अवश्यं च मया वाच्यं Aq दृष्टमथवा श्रुतम्।
सम्प्रधार्य यथान्यायं तद् भवान् कर्तुमर्हति॥ २५॥
“True, all your counsellors have

refrained from tendering this advice to you
for fear of incurring your displeasure; yet

325

that which has been perceived or heard by
me needs must be submitted. Determining
the propriety or otherwise of my counsel
according to the principles of equity, you
ought to act accordingly.” (25)

इति स्वमन्तिणां मध्ये भ्राता भ्रातरमूचिवान्।
Want रक्षसां श्रेष्ठं पथ्यमेतद् विभीषण:॥ २६॥
Thus in the midst of his half-brother’s

counsellors, Vibhisana, brother of Ravana,
tendered the aforesaid salutary advice to

his (eldest half-) brother, Ravana, the
foremost of ogres. (26)
fet महार्थं मृदु हेतुसंहितं
व्यतीतकालायतिसम्प्रतिक्षमम् ।
निशम्य तद्वाक्यमुपस्थितज्वर:
प्रसङ्गवानुत्तरमेतदब्रवीत् ॥। २७॥

Hearing the foregoing submission of
Vibhisana, which was wholesome, full of
great significance, gentle, logical and capable
of doing good in the past, present and
future, Ravana (who was seized with fever
in the form of anger and) who was full of
passion (for Sita), made the following reply:

(27)

wae न पश्यामि कुतश्चिदप्यहं

न राघव: प्राप्स्यति जातु मैथिलीम्।

at: सहेन्द्रैपि dik asi
ममाग्रत: स्थास्यति लक्ष्मणाग्रज:॥ २८॥
“| see no cause for fear from any
quarter whatsoever. Rama (a scion of Raghu)
shall in no case get back Sita (a princess of
Mithila). How can Rama (the eldest half-
brother of Laksmana) stand before me in an
encounter even though aided by gods
including Indra (their ruler)?” (28)

इत्येवमुक्त्वा सुरसैन्यनाशनो

महाबल: संयति चण्डबिक्रम:।
दशाननो भ्रातरमाप्तवादिनं
विसर्जयामास तदा विभीषणम्॥ २९॥

Having spoken as aforesaid, Ravana,
