722

शरान्धकारमाकाशं चक्रतु: WA तदा।
गतेऽस्तं तपने चापि महामेघाविवोत्थितौ।॥ ३०॥
Like two huge clouds risen into view at
a time when the sun had set and even when
it rose, the two warriors enveloped the sky
with great darkness with their arrows. (30)

तयोरभून्महायुद्धमन्योन्यवधकांक्षिणो: ।
अनासाद्यमचिन्त्यं च वृत्रवासवयोरिव॥ ३१॥
Like the duel that took place in the hoary
past between the demon Vrtra and Indra, an
unapproachable and unimaginable major
conflict ensued between the two warriors, who
sought the destruction of each other. (31)

sat fe परमेष्वासावुभौ युद्धविशारदौ।
उभावस्त्रविदां मुख्यावुभौ युद्धे विचेरतु:॥ ३२॥

Indeed, both were armed with excellent
bows, both were skilled in fighting, both
were the foremost of those adept in the use
of missiles and both moved unhampered on
the battlefield. (32)

उभौ fe येन व्रजतस्तेन तेन शारोर्मय:।
ऊर्मयो वायुना विद्धा जग्मु: सागरयोरिव॥ ३३॥
Indeed, whichever course they both
took in their manoeuvrings streams of shafts
were set in motion like waves in two oceans,
whipped up by the wind. (33)

तत: संसक्तहस्तस्तु रावणो लोकरावण:।
नाराचमालां रामस्य ललाटे प्रत्यमुञ्चत॥ ३४॥
Then Ravana for his part, who made
people cry wherever he went and whose
hands were’ constantly engaged _ in
discharging arrows, dug into the brow of Sri
Rama a succession of steel arrows, which
adorned it like a chaplet. (34)
रौद्रचापप्रयुक्तां तां नीलोत्पलदलप्रभाम्।
शिरसाधारयद् WA न व्यथामभ्यपद्यत॥ ३५॥
Sri Rama bore that chaplet, discharged
from the terrible bow of Ravana and shining
like the petals of a blue lotus, on his head
and did not experience any pain. (35)

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA +

अथ मन्त्रानपि जपन् रौद्रमस्त्रमुदीरयन्।
शरान् भूय: समादाय WA: क्रोधसमन्वित:।॥ ३६॥
मुमोच च महातेजाश्चापमायम्य वीर्यवान्।
तान् शरान् राक्षसेन्द्राय चिक्षेपाच्छिन्नसायक: ॥ ३७॥

Then, seizing hold of more arrows,
nay, reciting sacred formulas and thereby
invoking the mystic missile sought for and
making use of the missile presided over by
Rudra (the god of destruction), and stretching
his bow, the valiant Sri Rama, who was
endowed with extraordinary energy, and was
seized with anger, let fly those arrows in
uninterrupted succession against the king
of ogres. (36-37)
ते महामेघसंकाशे कवचे पतिता: शरा:।
अवध्ये राक्षसेन्द्रस्य न व्यथां जनयंस्तदा॥ ३८॥

Fallen on the impenetrable armour of
Ravana, the ruler of ogres, which looked
like a large cloud, the aforesaid arrows
did not cause any pain to him at the
time. (38)
पुनरेवाथ तं रामो रथस्थं राक्षसाधिपम्।
ललाटे परमास्त्रेण सर्वास्त्रकुशलोऽभिनत्॥ ३९॥

Sri Rama, who was an_ adept in the
use of all mystic missiles, fortwith pierced
that suzerain lord of ogres, seated in his
chariot, once more in the forehead with an
excellent missile. (39)

ते भित्त्वा बाणरूपाणि पञ्चशीर्षा इवोरगा:।
yao विविशुर्भूमिं रावणप्रतिकूलिता:॥४०॥

Having pierced the excellent arrows of
Ravana, the arrows of Sri Rama, generated
by the missile, penetrated like five-headed
hissing serpents into the earth, when repelled
by Ravana (40)
निहत्य राघवस्यास्त्रं रावण: saleryfes: |
आसुरॆ सुमहाघोरमस्त्रं प्रादुश्चकार स:॥४१॥

Rendering the missile of Sri Rama, a

scion of Raghu, void, the aforesaid Ravana,
who was filled with wrath, manifested an
