* BALAKANDA + 81

“We two, KuSa and Lava, shall presently
sing from the very beginning in all its details
the whole of this story, which is conducive
to piety, worldly prosperity and sense-
enjoyment alongwith Liberation. It should be
heard by one who is free from a carping
spirit. (4)

कोसलो नाम मुदित: स्फीतो जनपदो महान्।
निविष्ट सरयूतीरे प्प्रभूतधनधान्यवान्॥५॥

There is a great principality, known by
the name of Kosala, extending along the
bank of the Sarayu. It is happy and
prosperous, nay, full of abundant riches
and plenty of food-grains. (5)

अयोध्या नाम नगरी तत्रासील्लोकविश्रुता।
मनुना मानवेन्द्रेण या पुरी निर्मिता स्वयम्॥६॥

In it stands comprised the world-
renowned city, Ayodhya by name, a city
which was built by dint of his own volition
by Vaivaswata Manu, the ruler of mankind.

(6)
आयता दश च द्वे च योजनानि महापुरी।
stadt त्रीणि विस्तीर्णा सुविभक्तमहापथा॥ ७ ॥

That great and glorious city with its
well-aligned roads is twelve Yojanas (ninety-
six miles) long and three Yojanas (twenty-
four miles) wide. (7)

राजमार्गेण महता सुविभक्तेन शोभिता।
मुक्तपुष्पावकीर्णेन जलसिक्तेन नित्यश:॥८॥

It is graced with a beautifully ramified
extensive highway, which is daily sprinkled
all along with water and strewn with flowers
dropped from the heavens by celestial
damsels, who hover over the city to have a
look at it and pay their homage to it. (8)

तां तु राजा दशरथो महाराष्ट्रविवर्धन:।
पुरीमावासयामास दिवि देवपतिर्यथा॥ ९॥

King DaSaratha, who promoted his great
kingdom to a pre-eminent degree by virtue
of his righteous and benevolent rule, really
made the city more populous even as Indra,

the ruler of the gods, adds to the population
of his own capital, Amaravati, in heaven.

(9)
कपाटतोरणवतीं सुविभक्तान्तरापणाम्।
सर्वयन्त्रायुधवतीमुषितां सर्वशिल्पिभि: ।। १० ॥

It has arched gateways with beautiful
doors, is provided with well-laid out markets
and equipped with all sorts of catapults and
weapons and is peopled by all classes of
craftsmen. (10)
सूतमागधसम्बाधां श्रीमतीमतुलप्रभाम्।
उच्चाट्टालध्वजवतीं शतघ्नीशतसंकुलाम्॥११॥

Crowded with panegyrists and bards, it
is prosperous and possessed of matchless
splendour, is marked with tall attics and
flags and equipped with numberless
Sataghnis (interpreted by some as a kind of
rocket and by others as iron pikes). (11)

वधूनाटकसंघैश्च dant ada: पुरीम्।
उद्यानाम्रवणोपेतां महतीं सालमेखलाम्॥१२॥
The great city is enriched with troupes
of female dancers on all sides and graced
with orchards in the shape of mango groves
and is enclosed by a defensive wall. (12)

दुर्गगम्भीरपरिखां दुर्गामन्यैर्दुरासदाम्।
वाजिवारणसम्पूर्णां गोभिरुष्टै: LETT १३॥
Encircled by a deep moat which cannot
be easily entered or crossed, the city is
difficult of access and cannot be easily
approached by enemies. It abounds in horses
and elephants, cows, camels and donkeys.
(13)

सामन्तराजसंघैश्च बलिकर्मभिरावृताम्।
नानादेशनिवासैश्च वणिग्भिरुपशोभिताम्॥ १४॥
It is ever thronged with crowds of
feudatory princes that flock from all sides
on the mission of paying their annual tribute,

and is graced with the presence of traders
inhabiting different countries. (14)

wee रत्नविकृतै: पर्वतैरिव शोभिताम्।
कूटागारैश्च सम्पूर्णामिन्द्रस्येवामरावतीम्॥ १५॥
