268

« VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

Canto LXXIII

Janaka escorts DaSaratha and his four sons clad in nuptial attire to the pavilion
erected for the wedding. Placing ViSwamitra and Satananda ahead,
Vasistha conducts the marriage ceremony. Sri Rama and his three

brothers clasp the hand of Sita and her sisters. Singing and
dancing for joy, the gods rain heavenly flowers
on the brides and bridegrooms

यस्मिस्तु feat राजा चक्रे गोदानमुत्तमम्।
तस्मिंस्तु दिवसे वीरो युधाजित् समुपेयिवान्॥१॥
Ua: केकयराजस्य साक्षाद्भरतमातुल:।
gem Yea च कुशलं राजानमिदमब्रवीत्॥ २॥

On that very day when in fact Emperor
DaSaratha performed the grand Samavartana
ceremony, the valiant Yudhajit, the son of
the ruler of the Kekeya kingdom and
Bharata’s own maternal uncle, duly arrived
at Mithila. Seeing the Emperor and inquiring
after his welfare, he submitted to him as
follows: (1-2)

केकयाधिपती राजा Meld कुशलमब्रवीत्।
येषां कुशलकामोऽसि तेषां सम्प्रत्यनामयम्॥ ३॥
“My father, the soverign ruler of the
Kekeya territory, has out of affection inquired
after your welfare and added that all is well
at present with those whose well-being you
desire. (3)
स्वस्रीयं मम राजेन्द्र द्रष्टुकामो महीपति:।
तदर्थमुपयातोऽहमयोध्यां रघुनन्दन॥ ४॥
“The king, my father, is eager to see
Bharata, my sister’s son, O king of kings !
For this purpose | went straight to Ayodhya,
O scion of Raghu! (4)
श्रुत्वा त्वहमयोध्यायां विवाहार्थं तवात्मजान्।
मिथिलामुपयातांस्तु त्वया we महीपते॥५॥
त्वरयाभ्युपयातोऽहं द्रष्टुकाम: स्वसु: सुतम्।
aa राजा ane: प्रियातिथिमुपस्थितम्॥६॥

प्रभाते पुनरुत्थाय कृत्वा कर्माणि तत्त्ववित्।
Ree पुरस्कृत्य यज्ञवाटमुपागमत्॥८॥

“When, however, O king, | heard at
Ayodhya of your sons, Bharata and
Satrughna, having proceeded with you direct
10 Mithila for the wedding of Sri Rama, |
drove in haste to this place, eager to see
my sister's son.” Seeing his beloved guest
Yudhajit, deserving of all honour, arrived in
his presence, King Dasaratha forthwith
entertained him with utmost attentions. Then,
having spent that night with his high-souled
sons, he got up again in the morning; and,
having finished his duties for the morning,
the king (who had realized the truth) forthwith
reached the pavilion erected for the wedding,
placing the sages at the head. (5—8)

युक्ते मुहूर्ते fast सर्वाभरणभूषितै:।
adr: सहितो wa: कृतकौतुकमङ्गल:॥९॥
वसिष्ठं पुरत: कृत्वा महर्षीनपरानपि।
वसिष्ठो भगवानेत्य वैदेहमिदमब्रवीत्॥१०॥

Placing ahead sage Vasistha and
other eminent sages too, and accompanied
by all his three brothers, adorned with
every ornament, Sri Rama, who was
himself dressed in a_ festive attire
appropriate to the occasion of wedding,
also arrived at the hour known (in
astronomical works) by the name of Vijaya
(so-called because it is calculated to bring
success to an _ enterprise undertaken
during that hour), propitious for a wedding.
Arriving there, the holy Vasistha spoke to
