* AYODHYAKANDA +

Cakrawaka birds are ascending the banks
uttering charming notes, O blessed lady !
(11)

दर्शनं चित्रकूटस्य मन्दाकिन्याश्च शोभने।
अधिकं पुरवासाच्च मन्ये da च दर्शनात्॥१२॥
“| value the sight of Citrakuta as well
as of the Mandakini more than even residence

in the capital particularly because of your
sight, O charming lady ! (12)

विधूतकल्मषै:३ सिद्धैस्तपोदमशमान्वितै:।
नित्यविक्षोभितजलां विगाहस्व मया सह॥ १३॥

“Take a dip with me in this river, whose
waters are ever agitated through daily bath
by Siddhas endowed with austerity and
control of the senses and mind and whose
sins have been completely shaken off. (13)

सखीवच्च विगाहस्व सीते मन्दाकिनीं नदीम्।
कमलान्यवमज्जन्ती पुष्कराणि च भामिनि॥ १४॥

“Nay, freely take a dip in the river
Mandakini even as a friend would sport in
the company of her friend, submerging out
of fun the red and white lotuses in which the
river abounds, O proud lady ! (14)

त्वं पौरजनवद् व्यालानयोध्यामिव पर्वतम्।
मन्यस्व ata fet सरयूवदिमां नदीम्॥१५॥
“Esteem you ever the dwellers in the
forest as you would the citizens of Ayodhya,
the mountain Citrakuta as the city of
Ayodhya, and this river Mandakini as the
Sarayu, my darling ! (15)
लक्ष्मणश्चैव धर्मात्मा मन्निदेशे व्यवस्थित:।
त्वं चानुकूला ade प्रीतिं जनयती मम॥१६॥

“Not only is Laksmana, whose mind is

631

given to righteousness, fully determined to
carry out my command, but you too, O
princess of the Videha kingdom, favourably
disposed towards me, causing delight to me.

(16)
उपस्पृशंस्त्रिषवणं मधुमूलफलाशन:।

नायोध्यायै न राज्याय स्पृहये च त्वया सह॥ Vou

“Bathing thrice a day (every morning,
midday and evening) and living on honey,
roots and fruits with you, | long neither for
Ayodhya nor for its sovereignty ! (17)

न सोऽस्ति य: CATA गतक्लम: सुखी ।। १८ ॥

“Surely there is no one who will not be
relieved of his fatigue and feel refreshed on
taking a dip in this delightful river which is
churned by herds of elephants, whose waters
are partaken of without interruption by
elephants, lions and monkeys alike, which
is hemmed with trees laden with blossom
and as such remains decked with loads of
flowers all through the year.” (18)

प्रियासहाय: सरितं प्रति ब्रुवन्।
wat Ta नयनाञ्जनप्रभं
a चित्रकूटं रघुवंशवर्धन:॥१९॥
Offering many such cogent remarks
concerning the aforesaid river, the celebrated
Sri Rama, the promoter of the race of Raghu,
wandered in the company of his beloved
spouse, Sita, over the lovely Citrakuta, which
shone like a heap of collyrium. (19)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्येऽयोध्याकाण्डे
पञ्चनवतितम: सर्ग: ॥ ९५ ॥

Thus ends Canto Ninety-five in the Ayodhyakanda of the glorious Ramayana of
Valmiki, the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

