* BALAKANDA +

257

Canto LXIX

With a large number of followers, DaSaratha proceeds to Mithila for the
wedding and is received with signal honour by Janaka and his
people and comfortably lodged

ततो रात्र्यां व्यतीतायां सोपाध्याय: सबान्धव:।
राजा दशरथो we: सुमन्त्रमिदमब्रवीत्॥१॥

Then, on the night being over, King
Dasaratha, who was closeted with his
preceptor and relations, joyously summoned
and addressed Sumantra, his favourite and
trusted minister, as follows : (1)

अद्य Ua धनाध्यक्षा धनमादाय पुष्कलम्।
व्रजन्त्वग्रे सुविहिता नानारत्नसमन्विता:॥ २॥

“Taking with them abundant riches and
richly provided with various kinds of precious
stones and duly protected by armed guards,
let all treasury officers proceed ahead today.

(2)
ममाज्ञासमकालं च यानं युग्यमनुत्तमम्॥३॥

“Let the army consisting of all its four
limbs (viz., the horse, chariots, elephants
and infantry) sally forth, as soon as they
receive my order, as also the whole lot of
palanquins etc., as well as other conveyances,
chariots etc., superbly appinted. (3)

वसिष्ठो वामदेवश्च जाबालिरथ कश्यप:।
मार्कण्डेयस्तु दीर्घायुर्ऋषि: कात्यायनस्तथा॥४॥
Ud द्विजा: प्रयान्त्वग्रे स्यन्दनं योजयस्व मे।
यथा कालात्ययो न स्याद् दूता हि त्वरयन्ति माम्॥ ५ ॥

“Let these Brahmanas—Vasistha and
Vamadeva as well as Jabali, KaSyapa as
also the long-lived Markandeya and Sage
Katyayana go ahead in palanquins or
chariots; and also get ready my chariot so
that there may be no delay, since the envoys
are urging me to make haste.” (4-5)

वचनाच्च नरेन्द्रस्य सेना च चतुरंगिणी।
राजानमृषिभि: सार्धं व्रजन्तं पृष्ठतोऽन्वयात्॥६॥

In pursuance of the royal command
the army consisting of all its four limbs
marched close behind the king himself driving
alongwith the sages, each in his own
conveyance. (6)
Tet चतुरहं art विदेहानभ्युपेयिवान्।
राजा च जनक: श्रीमान् श्रुत्वा पूजामकल्पयत्॥ 9

Driving along the road for four days, he
entered the territory of the Videhas. The
moment the glorious King Janaka heard of
DaSaratha’s advent, he set about preparing
for his reception. (7)
ततो राजानमासाद्य ge दशरथं नृपम्।
मुदितो जनको राजा vet परमं ययौ॥८॥

Then, approaching the aged King
DaSaratha, a protector of men, King Janaka,
already full of joy, experienced supreme
felicity. (8)
sara वचनं श्रेष्ठो नरश्रेष्ठं मुदान्वितम्।
स्वागतं ते arses दिष्ट्या प्राप्तोऽसि wera eu

The extremely noble Janaka submitted
as follows to the delighted DaSaratha, the
foremost among men: “Welcome is your
advent to my capital, O jewel among men!
It is through my good luck that you have
come, O scion of Raghu ! (9)

पुत्रयोरुभयो: प्रीतिं लप्स्यसे वीर्यनिर्जिताम्।
दिष्ट्या प्राप्तो महातेजा वसिष्ठो भगवानृषि:।॥ १०॥
we सर्वैद्विजश्रेष्ठैर्दैवैरिव शतक्रतु:।
दिष्ट्या मेनिर्जिता विघ्ना दिष्ट्या मेपूजितं कुलम्॥ ११॥
Wad: We सम्बन्धाद् वीर्यश्रेष्ठैर्महाबलै: |
va: Wd AK त्वं संवर्तयितुमर्हसि॥१२॥
यज्ञस्यान्ते were विवाहमृषिसत्तमै:।
Wea ae वचनं श्रुत्वा ऋषिमध्ये नराधिप:॥ १३॥
