+ UTTARAKANDA +

which is the cause of my pleasure and
sorrow, as you desire to know it. (2)

पुरा वैदर्भको राजा पिता मम महायशा:।
सुदेव इति विख्यातस्तिषु लोकेषु वीर्यवान्॥ ३॥

“In the old days, my father Vaidarbha
of great fame was possessed of great power
and was known in the three worlds by the
name of Sudeva. (3)

तस्य पुत्रद्वयं ब्रह्मन् द्वाभ्यां स्त्रीभ्यामजायत।

अहं Vad Sit ख्यातो यवीयान् सुरथोऽभवत्॥ ४॥
“Two sons were born to him from his

two wives. I, the elder one, was known as

Sweta, while my younger brother was known
as Suratha. (4)

aa: faa स्वर्याते पौरा मामभ्यषेचयन्।
wale कृतवान् राज्यं धर्म्य च सुसमाहित:॥५॥
“On my father having attained heaven,

the citizens consecrated me. And | ruled
righteously, with care. (5)

एवं वर्षसहस्राणि समतीतानि सुव्रत।
TR कारयतो ब्रह्मन् WT धर्मेण रक्षत:॥६॥

“O Brahmana, observer of vows, thus
a thousand years passed by, with my ruling
over the kingdom and protecting my
subjects. (6)

सोऽहं निमित्ते कस्मिश्चिद विज्ञातायुर्दविजोत्तम।
कालधर्मं हृदि न्यस्य ततो वनमुपागमम्॥७॥
ase वनमिदं दुर्गं मृगपक्षिविवर्जितम्।
तपश्चर्तुं प्रविष्टोऽस्मि समीपे ara: शुभे॥८॥
“So, O best among Brahmanas, knowing
from some men about the span of my life,
keeping in mind the approach of death, | came
and entered this forest near the beautiful lake,
difficult to enter and with no animals or birds
residing therein to perform penances. (7-8)
wet सुरथं wee अभिषिच्य महीपतिम्।
इदं सर: समासाद्य तपस्तप्तं war चिरम्॥९॥
“Having consecrated Suratha as the
king, and reaching this lake, | performed
penances for long. (9)

1073

सोऽहं वर्षसहस्राणि तपस्त्रीणि महावने।
तप्त्वा सुदुष्करं Wal ब्रह्मलोकमनुत्तमम्॥१०॥
“Practising severe austerities for three
thousand years in this great forest, | obtained
the world of Brahma (heaven) excelling all
other worlds. (10)

तस्येमे स्वर्गभूतस्य क्षुत्पिपासे द्विजोत्तम।
बाधेते परमोदार ततोऽहं व्यथितेन्द्रिय:॥ ११॥

“Having reached the heaven, O best
among Brahmanas, great hunger and thirst
pained me and my senses were badly
afflicted. (11)

गत्वा त्रिभुवनश्रेष्ठं पितामहमुवाच ह।
भगवन् ब्रह्मलोकोऽयं क्षुत्पिपासाविवर्जित: ue?

“Then approaching Brahma the best in
the three worlds, | said, ‘Sir, this world of
Brahma is free from hunger and thirst. (12)

कस्यायं HUT: पाक: क्षुत्पिपासानुगो ह्यहम्।
आहार: कश्च A ea तन्मे gfe पितामह॥ esi

“*As a consequence of which actions |
am afflicted by hunger and thirst? What my
food is, O God? O Brahma! please tell me
that’. (13)

पितामहस्तु मामाह तवाहार: सुदेवज।
स्वादूनि स्वानि मांसानि तानि भक्षय नित्यश: 1 १४॥

“On this Brahma told me, ‘O son of
Sudeva, your food is your own tasty flesh,
eat that for ever. (14)

स्वशरीरं त्वया GS कुर्वता तप उत्तमम्।

अनुप्तं रोहते vad न कदाचिन्महामते॥ eu il
“You have well-nourished your own body

performing the best of penances. That which

is not sown, shall never sprout O wise one.
(15)

ad न तेऽस्ति सूक्ष्मोऽपि तप wa निषेवसे।
तेन स्वर्गगतो वत्स बाध्यसे क्षुत्पिपासया॥ १६॥
“You have not given even the smallest
thing in charity, and have only practised

great penances. Therefore, having reached
heaven hunger and thirst afflict you. (16)
