# YUDDHAKANDA #

did not look ahead or behind or sideways,
so that some dropped into the sea while
others remained sailing in the air. (14)

वध्यमानास्तु ते वीरा राक्षसेन च लीलया।
सागरं येन ते तीर्णा: पथा Aa दुद्रुवु:॥ १५॥

Nay, while being struck by the ogre in
mere sport, the monkey heroes for their
part fled along the same route by which
they had crossed the sea. (15)

a स्थलानि तदा Prat विवर्णवदना भयात्।

RAT FAL समारूढा: केचित् पर्वतमाश्रिता: ॥ १६ ॥
They rushed towards the plains, taking

a downward course, their faces rendered

pale through fear. The bears climbed up

trees, while others sought asylum on

mountains. (16)

केचिद् भूमौ निपतिता: केचित् सुप्ता मृता इव॥ V9

Some monkeys and bears got drowned
in the sea, while others took shelter in
caves. Some others fell down, while others
could not stand firmly. Some more fell flat
on the ground, while others lay stretched as
though they were dead. (17)

तान् समीक्ष्याङ्गदो भग्नान् वानरानिदमब्रवीत्।
अवतिष्ठत युध्यामो निवर्तध्वं प्लवंगमा:॥ १८॥
Seeing them routed, Angada spoke to

them as follows: “Stay. We shall fight.
Return, O monkeys ! (18)

भग्नानां at न पश्यामि परिक्रम्य महीमिमाम्।

स्थानं सर्वे Paced किं प्राणान् परिरक्षथ॥ १९॥
“| do not see any refuge for you, routed

as you are, even if you range this entire

globe. Therefore, come back. Why do you
seek to preserve your life? (19)

निरायुधानां क्रमतामसङ्गगतिपौरुषा: |
दारा ह्युपहसिष्यन्ति स वै घात: सुजीवताम्॥ २०॥

“O monkeys ! whose movement or

553

valour Knows no obstruction, your very
wives will ridicule you if you run away
abandoning your arms. That would be death
indeed even for those leading an easy life.

(20)

कुलेषु जाता: सर्वेऽस्मिन् विस्तीर्णेषु महत्सु च।
क्व गच्छत भयत्रस्ता: प्राकृता हरयो यथा।
अनार्या: खलु यद्भीतास्त्यक्त्वा वीर्यं प्रधावत॥ २१॥

“Even though you are all born in widely
spread and noble families, where are you
fleeing panic-stricken like ordinary monkeys?
You are indeed unworthy in that you are
fleeing terrified, casting your prowess to the
wind. (21)

विकत्थनानि at at भवद्धिर्जनसंसदि।
तानि a: क्व नु यातानि सोदग्राणि हितानि च॥ 22

“Where have those braggadocios of
yours melted away, in which you indulged
in a popular assembly, as also your tall
claims of friendly acts done to your master?

(22)

भीरो: प्रवादा: श्रूयन्ते यस्तु जीवति धिक्कृत: |
मार्ग: सत्पुरुषैर्जुष्ट: सेव्यतां त्यज्यतां भयम्॥ २३॥

“Words of reproach are heard with
reference to a coward, saying ‘Woe to him
who lives even though censured by good
men! Let the path trodden by the virtuous
be followed and let fear be shaken off.

(23)

ware वा निहता: पृथिव्यामल्पजीविता:।
प्राप्नुयामो ब्रह्मलोकं दुष्प्रापं च कुयोधिभि:।। २४॥
“If, in the event of our span of life
being brief, we lie down killed by the
enemy, we shall attain the realm of
Brahma, which is difficult to attain for bad
warriors, who are afraid of an encounter.
(24)
अवाप्नुयाम: कीर्तिं वा निहत्वा शात्रुमाहवे।
निहता वीरलोकस्य भोक्ष्यामो वसु वानरा:॥ २५॥

“Killing the enemy in combat, we shall
