502

slumber, drowsiness and fatigue consequent
on the previous day’s journey. (3)
तत उत्थाय ते सर्वे स्पृष्टवा नद्या: शिवं जलम्।
पन्थानमृषिभिर्जुष्टं चित्रकूटस्य तं ययु:॥४॥
Getting up and bathing in the cool
waters of the Yamuna, they all then

proceeded on the aforesaid path to Citrakuta,
trodden by the seers. (4)

तत: सम्प्रस्थित: काले Wa: सौमित्रिणा सह।
सीतां कमलपत्राक्नीमिदं वचनमब्रवीत्॥५॥
Having duly set out with Laksmana
(son of Sumitra) at that time, Sri Rama
spoke as follows to the lotus-eyed Sita:
(5)

आदीप्तानिव वैदेहि सर्वत: पुष्पितान् नगान्।
Fa: पुष्पै: किंशुकान् पश्य मालिन: शिशिरात्यये॥ ६ ।।
“See, O Sita, a princess of the Videha
clan, the Kimsuka (Butea frondosa) trees
laden with blossoms on all sides and
appearing as though illumined and adorned
with garlands, as it were, due to the rows of
their flowers in this vernal season
synchronizing with the close of winter. (6)

Wa भल्लातकान् बिल्वान् नरैरनुपसेवितान्।
फलपुष्पैरवनतान् नूनं शक्ष्याम जीवितुम्॥७॥

“Look at the markingnut and Bel trees,
not made use of by men (being out of their
reach) and bent low under the weight of
their fruit and blossoms. We shall surely be
able to live through. (7)

पश्य द्रोणप्रमाणानि लम्बमानानि लक्ष्मण।

मधूनि मधुकारीभि: सम्भृतानि नगे नगे॥८॥
“Behold hanging from every tree

honeycombs equal in weight to a Drona

(fifteen kg.) and constructed and stocked
with honey by bees, O Laksmana ! (8)

wa क्रोशति नत्यूहस्तं शिखी प्रतिकूजति।
रमणीये वनोद्देशे पुष्पसंस्तरसंकटे I ९ ॥

“Here is a Cataka bird crying and a
peacock responding to it in a charming part

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

of the forest thick with a scattered mass of

flowers. (9)

चित्रकूटमिमं usa प्रव्रद्धशिखरं गिरिम्॥१०॥

“Look at this Citrakuta hill with elevated
peaks, a hill infested with herds of elephants
and rendered noisy by flocks of birds. (10)

समभूमितले सरम्ये NPAT
qua रंस्यामहे aa चित्रकूटस्य कानने॥११॥

“We shall sport, dear brother, in the
lovely and holy forest of Citrakuta consisting
of level grounds and covered by many trees.”

(11)
ततस्तौ पादचारेण गच्छन्तौ सह सीतया।
रम्यमासेदतु: शैलं चित्रकूटं मनोरमम्॥१२॥

Going on foot with Sita, the two
brothers then reached the delightful and
soul-captivating Citrakuta hill. (12)
तं तु पर्वतमासाद्य नानापक्षिगणायुतम्।
बहुमूलफलं सरम्यं सम्पन्नसरसोदकम्॥१३॥
मनोज्ञोऽयं गिरि: सौम्य नानाद्रुमलतायुत:।
बहुमूलफलो Ta: स्वाजीव: प्रतिभाति मे॥ १४॥

Reaching that lovely mountain,
abounding in flocks of birds of many kinds
and having a rich stock of roots and fruits
and having sweet water in abundance, Sri
Rama for his part said to Laksmana, “Soul-
captivating is this delightful mountain adorned
with many trees and creepers and abounds
in roots and fruits. To me it appears to be a
place where sustenance could be found
with ease, O gentle brother ! (13-14)

Wag महात्मानो वसन्त्यस्मिन् शिलोच्चये।
aa वासो भवेत् तात वयमत्र वसेमहि॥ १५॥
“High-souled ascetics too dwell on this
mountain. It may prove habitable, O dear
brother! Let us take up our abode here.”
(15)
Sta सीता च रामश्च लक्ष्मणश्च कृताञ्जलि:।
अभिगम्याश्रमं सर्वे वाल्मीकिमभिवादयन्॥ १६॥
