596

by mere speech nor can people become
good men through sheer braggadocio. While
| stand before you armed with a bow, arrow
in hand, demonstrate your strength, O evil-
minded one! (58)

कर्मणा सूचयात्मानं न विकत्थितुमर्हसि।
पौरुषेण तु यो युक्त: स तु शूर इति स्मृत:॥ ५९॥
“Reveal yourself through your action;
you ought not to blow your own trumpet. He
alone who is actually endowed with prowess
is recognized as a hero. (59)

सर्वायुधसमायुक्तो धन्वी त्वं रथमास्थित:।
शरैर्वा यदि वाप्यस्तैर्दर्शयस्व पराक्रमम्॥६०॥

“Fully equipped with all kinds of weapons
and armed with a bow, you are seated ina
chariot. Therefore, manifest your prowess
either with your arrows or with your mystic
missiles. (60)
aa: शिरस्ते निशितै: पातयिष्याम्यहं शरै:।
मारुत: कालसम्पक्वं व्रन्तात् तालफलं यथा ।। ६१॥

“Then shall | strike down your head
with my whetted shafts even as the wind

detaches a palm fruit ripened in process of
time from its stem. (61)

TI A मामका बाणास्तप्तकाञ्चनभूषणा:।
पास्यन्ति रुधिरं गात्राद्बाणशल्यान्तरोत्थितम्॥ & 2 ॥
“My arrows decked with refined gold
shall drink the blood ejected from your body
through the holes made by the points of my
arrows. (62)

बालोऽयमिति विज्ञाय न चावज्ञातुमर्हसि।

बालो वा यदि वा वृद्धो मृत्युं जानीहि संयुगे॥ ६३॥
“Nor should you underestimate me

thinking that |am a mere boy. Whether | am

a child or grown-up, know me to be your

death on the field of battle. (63)

बालेन विष्णुना लोकास्त्रय: क्रान्तास्त्रिविक्रमै: ।
लक्ष्मणस्य वच: श्रुत्वा हेतुमत् परमार्थवत्।
अतिकाय: Wot बाणं चोत्तममाददे॥६४॥

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA +

“The three worlds were covered in three
strides of Lord Visnu, descended as Lord
Vamana, while He was yet a child.” Hearing
the reply of Laksmana, which was full of
reason and contained the whole truth, Atikaya
flew into a rage and laid hold of an excellent
arrow. (64)
ततो विद्याधरा भूता car दैत्या महर्षय:।
गुह्यकाश्च AAAS GR द्रष्टुमागमन्॥६५॥

Thereupon Vidyadharas (heavenly
artistes), ghosts, gods, giants and eminent
Rsis (seers of Vedic Mantras) as well as
high-minded Guhyakas, Yaksas arrived to
witness the duel. (65)

ततोऽतिकाय: कुपितश्चापमारोप्य सायकम्।
लक्ष्मणाय प्रचिक्षेप संक्षिपन्निव चाम्बरम्॥ ६६॥

Putting an arrow to his bow, Atikaya
thereupon furiously discharged it against
Laksmana, shrinking up space as it were.

(66)
तमापतन्तं निशितं शरमाशीविषोषमम्।
अर्धचन्द्रेण चिच्छेद लक्ष्मण: परवीरहा॥६७॥

Laksman, the destroyer of hostile
champions, however, split with his arrow,
having a _ crescent-shaped head, that
sharpened shaft, which came flying like a
venomous serpent. (67)
तं निकृत्तं शरं दृष्टवा कृत्तभोगमिवोरगम्।
अतिकायो भृशं क्रुद्ध: पञ्च बाणान् समादधे॥ ६८ Il

Enraged to find that arrow torn like a
serpent whose hood has been severed,
Atikaya fitted five arrows to his bow. (68)

तान् शरान् सम्प्रचिक्षेप लक्ष्मणाय निशाचर:।
तानप्राप्तान् शितैर्बाणैश्चिच्छेद भरतानुज:॥६९॥
The ranger of the night, Atikaya,

discharged the aforesaid arrows with full
force against Laksmana. The younger brother
of Bharata, Laksmana, however, split them
with his whetted arrows while they had not
yet reached him. (69)
