# YUDDHAKANDA #

thunderbolt, would not have performed a
horse-sacrifice (to atone for the sin of having
killed a Brahmana) on killing a hermit (viz.,
ViSwarupa, son of Twasta*). (29)
अधर्मसंश्रितो धर्मो विनाशयति weet
सर्वमेतद्यथाकामं काकुत्स्थ Hed नर:॥३०॥
‘Virtue destroys enemies only when
united with strength (something other than
virtue), O scion of Raghu! Therefore, a wise
man takes recourse to every such means
(viz., virtue and strength both) at will, O
scion of Kakutstha! (30)

wa ad ud aa धर्मोऽयमिति waa
धर्ममूलं त्वया fot राज्यमुत्सृजता तदा॥ ३१॥

“Nay my opinion is that righteousness
consists in such recourse to both the
aforesaid expedients (viz., virtue and
strength). The very roots of Dharma in the
shape of earthly gain have been severed by
you in that you spurned sovereignty the other
day (when it was being offered to you). (31)

अर्थेभ्योऽथ Wega: संव्रत्तेभ्यस्ततस्तत:।
fea: Gat: प्रवर्तन्ते पर्वतेभ्य इवापगा:॥ ३२॥

“Even as streams flow from mountains,
all undertakings (those conducive to union
with God as well as those conducive to
material enjoyment) follow from riches brought
from place to place and augmented. (Those
carried on in a disinterested spirit lead to
union with God, while those actuated by
interested motives make for enjoyment).(32)

अर्थेन fe विमुक्तस्य पुरुषस्याल्पचेतस:।
विच्छिद्यन्ते क्रिया: सर्वा ग्रीष्मे कुसरितो यथा॥ ३३॥

“All the undertakings of a man of
meagre intelligence, forsaken by wealth, are
interrupted even like small streams in
summer. (33)

सोऽयमर्थं परित्यज्य सुखकाम: सुखैधित:।
पापमाचरते कर्तुं तदा दोष: प्रवर्तते॥३४॥

655

“Renouncing wealth within easy reach,
a man brought up in comfort and seeking
comfort then proceeds to commit sin (in the
shape of thieving etc.,) and evil (in the form
of punishment) follows from it. (34)

यस्यार्थास्तस्य मित्राणि यस्यार्थास्तस्य बान्धवा: ।
यस्यार्था: स पुमाँल्लोके यस्यार्था: स च पण्डित: ।। ३५ ।

“Friends gather round him in whom
riches abide; kinsfolk too stand by him in
whom riches have found their way. He
alone is honourable, in whom riches find
their place; nay, he alone is learned, in
whom riches have found their abode. (35)

यस्यार्था: स च विक्रान्तो यस्यार्था: स चबुद्धिमान्।
यस्यार्था: स महाभागो यस्यार्था: A गुणाधिक:॥ ३६॥

“Nay, he alone is gallant, to whom
riches have flown; and he alone is clever,
in whom riches have come to stay. He
alone is highly fortunate, in whom riches
exist; again he alone is superior in
excellences, in whom riches have found
their receptacle. (36)

अर्थस्यैते परित्यागे दोषा: प्रव्याहृता मया।
राज्यमुत्सृजता at येन बुद्धिस्त्वया Hari ou

“The evils attendant on the abjuration
of wealth have been dwelt upon by me here
in the shape of their contraries (verses
35-36 above). The ground on which the
resolve was made by you to sacrifice your
all, while forswearing the kingdom, O resolute
one, is not known to me. (37)

यस्यार्था धर्मकामार्थास्तस्य सर्वं प्रदक्षिणम्।
अधनेनार्थकामेन नार्थ: शक्यो विचिन्विता॥ ३८ ॥

“The other ends too in the shape of—
virtue and pleasure—of a man in whom
riches abide are easily accomplished; nay,
everything turns exceedingly favourable to
him. Wealth, however, cannot be attained
without endeavour by a penniless man

* The story has been narrated at length in Book VI, Discourse IX. of Srimad Bhagavata.
