856

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

who had been fatally

injured by the | part, whose countenance shone like the

vehemence of Ravana and thrown on the | moon, cried once more on that occasion.

ground, Sita, daughter of Janaka, for her

(46)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्येऽरण्यकाण्डे एकपञ्चाश: सर्ग: ॥ ५१ ॥

Thus ends Canto Fifty-one in the Aranyakanda of the glorious Ramayana of Valmiki,
the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

Canto LII
Ravana carries away Sita

सा तु ताराधिपमुखी रावणेन निरीक्ष्य तम्।
गृध्रराजं farted विललाप सुदु:खिता॥१॥
Sore distressed to perceive the aforesaid
king of vultures mortally wounded by Ravana,
Sita, whose countenance resembled the full
moon (the king of stars), for her part wailed
as follows addressing Sri Rama: (1)
निमित्तं लक्षणं स्वप्नं शकुनिस्वरदर्शनम्।
अवश्यं सुखदु:खेषु नराणां परिदरृश्यते॥२॥
“Omens, dreams and the sight of the
movement of birds and deer etc., to one’s
left or right and the hearing of their cries are
invariably found to foreshadow joy or sorrow
in the case of human beings. (2)

न नूनं wa जानासि महद्व्यसनमात्मन:।
धावन्ति नूनं काकुत्स्थ मदर्थं मृगपक्षिण:॥ ३॥
“Surely, 0 Rama, you do not perceive
the great calamity in the shape of my
abduction which has befallen you, although
deer and birds are moving in a direction
foreboding evil in order to indicate my
abduction, O scion of Kakutstha ! (3)

aa fe कृपया wa मां त्रातुमिह संगत:।

शेते विनिहतो भूमौ ममाभाग्याद् विहंगम:॥४॥
“Here lies on the ground, mortally

wounded due to my misfortune, the bird,

Jatayu, who actually arrived here to rescue
me out of compassion, O Rama ! (4)

त्राहि मामद्य काकुत्स्थ लक्ष्मणेति वराङ्गना।
सुसंत्रस्ता समाक्रन्दच्छृण्वतां तु यथान्तिके॥५॥
“Deliver me today, O Rama, a scion of
Kakutstha, and Laksmana!” So did Sita (a
lovely lady), who was greatly alarmed, cry
bitterly at such a pitch that those listening at
close quarters at least might hear her. (5)

तां क्लिष्टमाल्याभरणां विलपन्तीमनाथवत्।
अभ्यधावत ade रावणो राक्षसाधिप:॥६॥
Ravana, the suzerain lord of ogres,
darted towards the aforesaid Sita (a princess
of the Videha territory), whose garland and
ornaments had been squeezed and who
was wailing like a woman without her lord.
(6)

at लतामिव वेष्टन्तीमालिङ्गन्तीं महाद्रुमान्।
मुञ्च मुञ्जेति बहुश: प्राप at राक्षसाधिप:॥ ७॥
Ravana (the suzerain lord of ogres)
approached the aforesaid Sita—who was
embracing huge trees like a climber entwining
them—saying again and again, “Save, Save
me, O trees ! (7)

क्रोशन्तीं wa waa रामेण रहितां वने।
जीवितान्ताय केशेषु जग्राहान्तकसंनिभ:॥ ८॥
For his destruction the ogre (who
resembled Death) seized by the hair Sita,

who was crying “Rama, O Rama!” bereft
as she was of Sri Rama in the forest. (8)
