140

the pangs of hunger fallen off from the body
of the great Indra in this tract of land, the
gods derived joy thereby. And Indra, for his
part, was completely rid of his impurity and
hunger. (17—21)

ततो देशस्य सुप्रीतो at प्रादादनुत्तमम्।
Sat जनपदौ स्फीतौ ख्यातिं लोके गमिष्यत: ॥ २२॥
मलदाश्च करूषाश्च ममाङ्गमलधारिणौ।
साधु साध्विति तं देवा: पाकशासनमब्रुवन्॥ २३॥
देशस्य पूजां At FET कृतां शक्रेण धीमता।
एतौ जनपदौ स्फीतौ दीर्घकालमरिंदम॥ २४॥
मलदाश्च करूषाश्च मुदिता धनधान्यत:।
कस्यचित्त्वथ कालस्य यक्षिणी कामरूपिणी ।। २५ ॥
at नागसहस्ररस्य धारयन्ती तदा ह्यभूत्।
ताटका A भद्रं A भार्या सुन्दस्य धीमत:॥ २६॥
मारीचो राक्षस: पुत्रो यस्या: शक्रपराक्रम:।
वृत्तबाहुर्महाशीर्षो विपुलास्यतनुर्महान्॥ २७॥
राक्षसो भैरवाकारो नित्यं त्रासयते प्रजा:।
sat जनपदौ fet विनाशयति राघव॥ २८॥
मलदांश्च करूषांश्च ताटका दुष्टचारिणी।
सेयं पन्थानमावृत्य वसत्यत्यर्धयोजने॥२९॥
Highly pleased at this Indra thereupon
conferred the following superb boon on the
two tracts of land: “These two stretches of
land, that have imbibed my impurity, will grow
prosperous and will be known in the world
by the names of Malada and Karusa.” Seeing
that honour conferred on those tracts of land
by the wise Indra, the gods, for their part,
applauded the celebrated Indra (the chastiser
of the demon Paka) in the words “Well done !
good !!” For a considerable length of time, O
subbuer of foes, these two territories, Malada
and Karusa, thenceforword continued to be
prosperous, and rich in wealth and food-
grains. Now, when some time had elapsed
since the aforesaid incident, there appeared,
in this region, so the tradition goes, a Yaksa

« VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

woman, Tataka by name, capable of
assuming any form at will and possessing
at the very time of her birth the might of a
thousand elephants, who is the wife of the
wise Sunda, may good betide you, and whose
son, the ogre Marica, possesses the strength
of Indra and is endowed with round arms, a
large head, an enormous mouth and a
colossal body. The mighty Raksasa, who
has a terrible form, is a perennial source of
terror to the people; while Tataka, who
conducts herself like a wicked woman,
constantly ravages these two principalities
of Malada and Karusa, O scion of Raghu !
As such she lives in an area of twelve miles,
obstructing the road. (22—29)

अत Va च गन्तव्यं ताटकाया at यत:।
स्वबाहुबलमाश्रित्य Beat दुष्टचारिणीम्॥ ३०॥

“For this very reason let us proceed in
the quarter where exists the forest of Tataka.
Relying on the might of your own arms,
make short work of this ogress of wicked
conduct. (30)
मन्नियोगादिमं देशं qe निष्कण्टकं पुन:।
नहि कश्चिदिमं देशं शक्तो ह्यागन्तुमीदृशम्॥ ३१॥
यक्षिण्या घोरया राम उत्सादितमसह्यया।

Wad ते सर्वमाख्यातं यथैतद् दारुणं वनम्।
यक्ष्या चोत्सादितं सर्वमद्यापि न निवर्तते॥ ३२॥

“Under my order make this realm
thornless as before. None is, really speaking,
able to visit this land, though so holy and
beautiful, tormented as it is by the terrible
Yaksa woman, who has grown so intolerable.
In this way has been told by me everything
that you asked, viz., how this forest looks so
fearful, how the entire region has been laid
waste by the Yaksa woman and how she
does not desist from her nefarious activities
even to this day.” (31-32)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये बालकाण्डे चतुर्विंश: AWA: ॥ २४॥

Thus ends Canto Twenty-four in the Balakanda of the glorious Ramayana of Valmiki,
the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

