516

“Abandon grief and infatuation as well
as agitation born of sorrow; for, shaking off
agony, Sri Rama (a scion of Raghu) will
take up his abode in the forest. (5)

लक्ष्मणश्चापि रामस्य पादौ परिचरन् वने।
आराधयति धर्मज्ञ: परलोकं जितेन्द्रिय:।॥ ६॥

“Serving the feet of SriRama in the forest,
Laksmana too, who knows what is right and
has subdued his senses, is straightening his
path to the other world thereby. (6)

विजनेऽपि at सीता वासं प्राप्य गृहेष्विव।
विस्ररम्भं लभतेऽभीता wa विन्यस्तमानसा॥७॥

“Getting her abode even in a lonely
forest, Sita, whose mind stands focussed
on Sri Rama, remains undaunted and
enjoys composure as if she were in her
own house. (7)
नास्या दैन्यं कृतं किंचित् सुसूक्ष्ममपि लक्ष्यते।
उचितेव प्रवासानां वैदेही प्रतिभाति मे॥८॥

“Not the faintest dejection of any kind
caused by her exile is traceable in her.
The daughter of Janaka, the ruler of the
Videha kingdom, appears to me as though
accustomed to staying away from home
now and then. (8)

नगरोपवनं गत्वा यथा स्म रमते पुरा।
wa wa da निर्जनेषु वनेष्वपि॥ ९॥

“Sita finds as much delight in lonely
forests as she used to do in the past
whenever she visited the groves in the
precincts of the city. (9)

बालेव रमते सीताबालचन्द्रनिभानना।
रामा wa ह्यदीनात्मा विजनेऽपि at सती॥१०॥

“The charming and virtuous Sita,
whose countenance shone like the full moon
and who was ever undepressed in spirits,
surely found delight as a girl even in the
lonely forest in the presence of Sri Rama.

(10)
तद्गतं हृदयं यस्यास्तदधीनं च जीवितम्।
अयोध्या fe भवेदस्या रामहीना तथा वनम्॥११॥

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

“Devoid of Sri Rama, however, Ayodhya
too would be no better than a forest to Sita,
whose heart is intent on him and whose life
is dependent on him. (11)

परिपृच्छति वैदेही ग्रामांश्च नगराणि ai
गतिं gear नदीनां च पादपान् विविधानपि॥ १२॥
“Seeing villages and cities too as well
as the flow of rivers as also trees of every
description, Sita, a princess of the Videha
clan, makes inquiries concerning them of
Rama or Laksmana, whoever is by her
side. (12)

रामं वा लक्ष्मणं वापि दृष्टवा जानाति STAT |
अयोध्या क्रोशमात्रे तु विहारमिव साश्रिता॥ १३॥

“Finding Sri Rama or Laksmana beside
her, the daughter of Janaka feels that she is,
as it were, on a visit to a pleasure-garden
only a couple of miles away from Ayodhya.

(13)

इदमेव स्मराम्यस्या: सहसैवोपजल्पितम्।
कैकेयीसंश्रितं Bet नेदानीं प्रतिभाति माम्॥ १४॥
“| remember only this much pertaining
to Sita. The remark uttered by her only in an
unguarded moment concerning Kaikeyi does
not strike me just at present.” (14)
Set वचनं सूतो cam मधुरमब्रवीत्॥१५॥
Skipping over that reference that had
escaped from his lips through inadvertence,
the charioteer spoke the following agreeable
words that brought delight to the queen :
(15)

अध्वना वातवेगेन सम्भ्रमेणातपेन च।
न विगच्छति वैदेह्याश्चन्द्रांशुसदृशी प्रभा॥१६॥

“The splendour of Sita (a princess of
the Videha clan), which resembles the
moonlight, does not fade through fatigue of
the journey, high velocity of the winds,
agitation caused by the sight of fearful
beasts etc., and the heat of the sun.

(16)
