* AYODHYAKANDA +

द्वारेण वैजयन्तेन प्राविशच्छान्तवाहन:।
द्वा:स्थैरुत्थाय विजयमुक्तस्तै: सहितो war ३३॥
His horses being fatigued, he effected
his entry by the western gate known by the
name of Vaijayanta. Greeted with shouts of
triumph by the porters, who rose to usher
him in, he moved on accompanied by them.
(33)

स त्वनेकाग्रहृदयो द्वा:स्थं प्रत्यर्च्य तं जनम्।
Garg: क्लान्तमब्रवीत् तत्र राघव:॥ ३४॥

Sending the porters back with honour,
the said Bharata (a scion of Raghu) for his
part, troubled as he was at heart, spoke on
the spot to the wearied charioteer of King
Aswapati as follows : (34)

fang त्वरयाऽऽनीत: कारणेन विनानघ।
अशुभाशङ्कि ea शीलं च पततीव Anak
“Why have | been brought to Ayodhya
in a hurry without mentioning any cause, O
sinless one? My heart is, therefore,

apprehensive of some misfortune and my
composure is vanishing, as it were. (35)

श्रुता नु यादृशा: पूर्वं नृपतीनां विनाशने।
आकारांस्तानहं सर्वानिह पश्यामि सारथे॥ ३६॥
“| observe at this moment, O charioteer,
all those indications that have been heard of
by me in the past as pointing to the demise
of kings. (36)
सम्मार्जनविहीनानि परुषाण्युपलक्षये।
असंयतकवाटानि श्रीवबिहीनानि सर्वश:॥ ३७॥
“| behold the dwellings of householders
unswept, dirty-coloured, shorn of splendour
in everyway and with open doors. (37)

बलिकर्मविहीनानि धूपसम्मोदनेन च।
अनाशितकुटुम्बानि प्रभाहीनजनानि च॥ ३८॥
अलक्ष्मीकानि पश्यामि कुटुम्बिभवनान्यहम्।
अपेतमाल्यशोभानि असम्मृष्टाजिराणि च॥ ३९॥
देवागाराणि शून्यानि न भान्तीह यथा पुरा।
देवतार्चा: प्रविद्धाश्च यज्ञगोष्ठास्तथैव च॥४०॥
माल्यापणेषु राजन्ते नाद्य पण्यानि वा तथा।
wad वणिजोऽप्यद्य न यथापूर्वमत्र वै॥४१॥

555

ध्यानसंविग्नहृदया नष्टव्यापारयन्तिता: |
देवायतनचैत्येषु दीना: पक्षिमृगास्तथा॥४२॥

“| find that no oblations have been
offered in them to the various creatures,
that they are devoid of odour coming from
the burning of incense and bereft of fortune,
that members of the household have not
been fed in them for many days past and
their inmates look pale. Temples which are
no longer adorned with garlands hanging on
the gates, whose courtyards have not been
swept for the last so many days and which
are devoid of men, do not look charming
now as before. Images of gods as well as
sacrificial halls have been deserted; saleable
goods such as flowers and garlands do not
figure prominently as before in flower marts
today. Merchants too in this city, whose
hearts are seized with fear due to anxiety
and who feel dispirited because of their
business having been brought to a standstill,
do not appear as happy as they looked
before. Nay, birds and beasts in temples
and other places of worship are distressed.

(38—42)
मलिनं चाश्रुपूर्णाक्षं दीनं ध्यानपरं कृशम्।
सस्त्रीपुंसं च पश्यामि जनमुत्कण्ठितं पुरे॥४३॥

“Again, | behold the people in the city,
including men and women, in soiled attire,
miserable, worried, emaciated and sorrowful,
with eyes full of tears.” (43)

इत्येवमुक्त्वा भरत: सूतं तं दीनमानस:।
तान्यनिष्टान्ययोध्यायां Wet राजगृहं ययौ॥४४॥
Perceiving those unwelcome indications
in Ayodhya and having spoken to the said
charioteer as above, Bharata drove to the
royal palace afflicted in mind. (44)

दृष्टवा पुरीमिन्द्रपुरीप्रकाशां
Gat सम्पूर्णतरो बभूव॥४५॥

He was filled to the brim with sorrow to
