* BALAKANDA +

(lit., one who has turned the flow of his
generative fluid upwards and never allowed
it to escape), Culi by name, who was
exceptionally glorious and given to virtuous
conduct, actually embarked upon a course
of austerities* (in the form of meditation)
directed towards the realization of Brahma.

(11)

तपस्यन्तमृषिं तत्र गन्धर्वी पर्युपासते।
सोमदा नाम भद्रं aA ऊर्मिलातनया तदा॥१२॥

At that very place, during the period of
his askesis, may good betide you, a
Gandharva girl, Somada by name, daughter
of Urmila, waited upon the Rsi in the hope
of securing his goodwill, while he was busy
practising his austerities. (12)

सा च तं प्रणता भूत्वा शुश्रूषणपरायणा।
उवास काले धर्मिष्ठा तस्यास्तुटोऽभवद् TS: ॥। १३॥

Bending low before him and devoted to
his service, that most pious girl waited upon
him at the right time whenever her presence
was needed by him. The venerable sage
got pleased with her. (13)

स च at कालयोगेन प्रोवाच रघुनन्दन।
परितुष्टोऽस्मि ug ते किं करोमि aa प्रियम्॥ १४॥
And when the propitious hour came,
the sage, O scion of Raghu, said to the girl,
। am highly pleased with your innocent
services, may all be well with you! What
service can | do to you?’ (14)
परितुष्टं मुनिं ज्ञात्वा गन्धर्वी मधुरस्वरम्।
sara परमप्रीता वाक्यज्ञा वाक्यकोविदम्॥ १५॥
Supremely delighted to know the sage
much gratified, the eloquent Gandharva girl
spoke as follows in a sweet voice to the
seer, who was a master of speech: (15)

लक्ष्म्या समुदितो ब्राह्मया TAY AT महातपा:।
ब्राह्मेण तपसा युक्तं पुत्रमिच्छामि धार्मिकम्॥ १६॥

163

“A great ascetic illumined with Brahmic
(spiritual) splendour, you have become one
with the Infinite. Hence | seek from you a
pious son, rich in askesis (in the form of
meditation) directed towards the realization
of Brahma, the Absolute. (16)

अपतिश्चास्मि भद्रं ते भार्या चास्मि न कस्यचित्।
ब्राह्मेणोपगतायाश्च दातुमर्हसि A सुतम्॥१७॥

“As for myself, | am unmarried nor
shall | be the wife of any. Therefore, let your
grace descend on me. Be pleased to grant
me a son by dint of your Brahmic (spiritual)
glory, since | have sought refuge in you.”

(17)
तस्या: Weal ब्रह्मर्षिर्ददौ ब्राह्ममनुत्तमम्।
ब्रह्मदत्त sit ख्यातं मानसं चूलिन: FTL ecu

Full of delight, the Brahmana sage
Culina (a variant of Cull) conferred on her a
mind-born son, rich in askesis (in the form
of meditation) directed towards the realization
of Brahma, excelled by none and known by
the name of ‘Brahmadatta’. (18)

स राजा ब्रह्मदत्तस्तु पुरीमध्यवसत् तदा।
काम्पिल्यां परया लक्ष्म्या देवराजो यथा दिवम्॥ १९॥
Invested with supreme (royal) splendour,
the said Brahmadatta for his part lived at
that time as king in the city of Kampilya
(built by Kampila) as Indra (the ruler of
gods) does in paradise. (19)

स बुद्धिं कृतवान् राजा कुशनाभ: सुधार्मिक: |

ब्रह्मदत्ताय काकुत्स्थ Ad कन्याशतं तदा॥ Ro tl
The aforesaid KuSanabha, a most pious

king, at that time made up his mind, O scion

of Kakutstha, to give away all his hundred
daughters to Brahmadatta. (20)

तमाहूय महातेजा ब्रह्मदत्तं महीपति:।
ददौ कन्याशतं राजा सुप्रीतेनान्तरात्मना॥ २१॥

Calling the said Brahmadatta, the

* There is a Smrti text which runs as under :

wast च dart we aa

“One-pointedness of the mind and the senses constitutes the highest form of askesis.”
