* AYODHYAKANDA +

सा विषण्णतरा भूत्वा कुब्जा तस्यां हितैषिणी ।
विषादयन्ती प्रोवाच भेदयन्ती च राघवम्॥१९॥

Nay, getting all the more dejected to
hear the nonchalant question of Kaikeyi, the
hunchback, who posed to be her great well-
wisher, replied as follows, inspiring dejection
into Kaikeyi’s mind and estranging her from
Sri Rama, a scion of Raghu: (19)
wert सुमहद् देवि wgd त्वद्विनाशनम्।

TH creat राजा यौवराज्येऽभिषेक्ष्यति॥ २०॥

“The very great work of ruining you,
against which there is no remedy, has
commenced, O queen! King DaSgaratha is
going to install Rama in the office of Prince
Regent. (20)

सास्म्यगाधे भये मग्ना दु:खशोकसमन्विता।
दह्यमानानलेनेव त्वद्धितार्थमिहागता ।। २१॥

“Plunged in fathomless fear on your
score, nay, full of agony and grief and
burning as it were with fire, | as such have
come here to make known to you your best
interest in the matter. (21)

तव दु:खेन कैकेयि मम दु:खं महद् भवेत्।
त्वद्वृद्धौ मम वृद्धिश्च भवेदिह न संशय:॥ २२॥

“Great suffering is sure to come to me
due to your suffering, O Kaikeyi! And my
advancement is sure to follow in the wake
of your advancement: there is no doubt
about it. (22)

नराधिपकुले जाता महिषी त्वं महीपते: |
उग्रत्वं राजधर्माणां कथं देवि न बुध्यसे॥ २३॥

“You were born in the race of kings
and are the favourite consort of a king. How
is it that you do not know the sternness of
kingly duties, O royal lady? (23)

धर्मवादी शठो भर्ता श्लक्ष्णवादी च दारुण:।
शुद्धभावेन जानीषे तेनैवमतिसंधिता॥ aw tt

“Your husband is deceitful, though
professing piety, and hard-hearted, though
using sweet expressions. Still you consider
him as blessed with a guileless heart and in

311

this way stand deceived by him.

उपस्थित: प्रयुञ्जानस्त्वयि सान्त्वमनर्थकम्।
अर्थेनैवाद्य a vat कौसल्यां योजयिष्यति॥ २७५ ॥

“Standing by your side, speaking kind
words that have no meaning, your spouse
is going this very day to invest Kausalya
alone with fortune (in the shape of sovereign
powers for her son) ! (25)

अपवाह्य तु दुष्टात्मा भरतं da बन्धुषु।
काल्ये स्थापयिता रामं राज्ये निहतकण्टके।॥ २६॥
“Having sent away Bharata to (the
kingdom of) your kinsfolk, the evil-minded
king for his part will install Rama next morning
on the throne of Ayodhya, now that all the
thorns have been completely removed. (26)

wa: पतिप्रवादेन मात्रेण हितकाम्यया।
आशीविष इवाङ्गेन बाले परिध्रृतस्त्वया॥ २७॥

“Like a venomous serpent reared by a
mother on her own person with intent to do
good to it, O puerile lady, an enemy under
the appellation of spouse has been held by
you close to your bosom. (27)

यथा fe कुर्याच्छत्रुर्वा सर्पो at wearer: |

Tal दशरथेनाद्य सपुत्रा त्वं तथा Hari २८॥
“Alongwith your son, Bharata, you have

been dealt with by Emperor DaSaratha quite

in the same way today as an enemy or a

serpent would behave if ignored. (28)

पापेनानृतसान्त्वेन बाले नित्यं सुखोचिता।
TH स्थापयता राज्ये सानुबन्धा हता ह्यसि॥ २९॥
“Ever fond of ease you have indeed
been ruined with your friends and relations,
O young (inexperienced) lady, by the wicked
king, uttering falsely kind words, by going
to install Rama on the throne of Ayodhya.
(29)

सा प्राप्तकालं कैकेयि fat pe fed तव।
त्रायस्व पुत्रमात्मानं wt च विस्मयदर्शने॥ ३०॥
“As such, 0 Kaikeyi, promptly
accomplish what is opportune in your interest

(24)
