* SUNDARAKANDA +

masses of clouds and emerging again, his
person accordingly becoming visible and
invisible, the hero Hanuman, who was clad
in white, thereby shone like the moon in the
sky. (9)
Tea गगने स बभौ वायुनन्दन:।
दारयन् Wee निष्पतंश्च पुन: पुन:॥१०॥
Emerging again and again tearing
asunder the masses of clouds, that delight
of the wind-god looked like Garuda in the
sky. (10)
नदन् नादेन महता मेघस्वनमहास्वन:।
प्रवरान्राक्षसान्हत्वग्नामविश्राव्यच।त्मन; UV
आकुलां नगरीं कृत्वा व्यथयित्वा च रावणम्।
अर्दयित्वा महावीरान् वैदेहीमभिवाद्य च॥१२॥
आजगाम महातेजा: पुनर्मध्येन सागरम्।
पर्वतेन्द्रं सुनाभं च समुपस्पृश्य वीर्यवान्॥१३॥
ज्यामुक्त sa नाराचो महावेगोऽभ्युपागमत्।
स किंचिदारात् सम्प्राप्त: समालोक्य महागिरिम्॥ १४॥
Tes मेघसंकाशं ननाद A महाकपि:।
a पूरयामास कपिर्दिशो दश समन्तत:॥१५॥
नदन् Wet महता मेघस्वनमहास्वन:।
स तं देशमनुप्राप्तत॥ सुहृदर्शनलालस:॥१६॥
wa नानद्यमानस्य सुपर्णाचरिते पथि॥१७॥
फलतीवास्य घोषेण WH सार्कमण्डलम्।
ये तु तत्रोत्तरे कूले समुद्रस्य महाबला:॥१८॥
yd संविष्ठिता: शूरा वायुपुत्रदिदृक्षव:।
महतो वायुनुन्नस्य तोयदस्येव नि:स्वनम्।
शुश्रुवुस्ते तदा घोषमूरुवेगं हनूमत:॥१९॥
Having dispatched the eminent ogres
and thereby made his name widely known,
created a stir in the city of Lanka and
caused agony to Ravana, killed eminent
heroes among the ogres and greeted Sita, a
princess of the Videha territory, Hanuman
endowed with extraordinary energy, whose
roar resembled a peal of thunder, once
more reached the middle of the sea,
thundering with a great roar. Nay, having
duly touched the Sunabha _ (Mainaka)

247

mountain, the lord of mountains, the powerful
Hanuman, who was full of great impetuosity,
sped on like an arrow discharged from a
bowstring. Having arrived a bit near, and
observing Mahendra, the great mountain,
that mighty monkey thundered like a cloud.
Emitting a roar, the aforesaid monkey,
whose loud cry resembled the rumbling of a
cloud, filled all the ten directions completely
with his roar. Arrived in that region where
his companious were waiting for him,
Hanuman, who was panting to see his
friends, gave out a very loud cry and waved
his tail. The firmament with the solar orb
began to crack, as it were, due to his roar
even as he repeatedly roared on the path
followed by Garuda endowed with beautiful
wings. Those heroes, endowed _ with
extraordinary might, who stood already on
the aforesaid northern shore of the sea,
eager to see Hanuman, heard at that time
the sound produced by the sweeping motion
of Hanuman’s thighs, which resembled the
rumbling of a huge cloud propelled by the
wind. (11—19)

a दीनमनस: ad शुश्रुवु: काननौकस:।
वानरेन्द्रस्य निर्घोषं पर्जन्यनिनदोषमम्॥ २०॥

All those monkeys, who were feeling
distressed in mind due to anxiety on the
score of Hanuman, heard the thunder-like
roar of Hanuman. (20)

निशम्य नदतो Ale वानरास्ते समन्तत:।

बभूवुरुत्सुका: सर्वे सुहृददर्शनकाङ्क्षिण:॥ २१॥
Hearing the roar of Hanuman, who was

emitting a loud cry, all the aforesaid monkeys

on all sides became full of longing, eager as
they were to see their comrade. (21)

जाम्बवान् स हरिश्रेष्ठ: प्रीतिसंहृष्टमानस:।

TTA हरीन् सर्वानिदं वचनमब्रवीत्॥ २२॥
Addressing all the monkeys present

there, Jambavan, the foremost of monkeys

and bears, who felt enraptured at heart with
joy, spoke as follows: (22)
