498

पुरस्योपनिविष्टस्य ae पीडितस्य ह।
नान्ययुद्धात् प्रपश्यामि wet युद्धविशारद॥५॥

“| do not see any deliverance, through
fighting carried on by anyone else, for the
city, which stands beleaguered and is hard
pressed by the enemy, O warrior skilled in
warfare! (5)

अहं वा कुम्भकर्णो वा त्वं वा सेनापतिर्मम।
इन्द्रजिद् वा निकुम्भो वा वहेयुर्भारमीदूशम्॥ ६॥

“Either myself or Kumbhakarna or
you, my Commander-in-Chief, or Indrajit or
Nikumbha can undertake such a burden.

(6)
स त्वं बलमत: शीघ्रमादाय परिगृह्य a
विजयायाभिनिर्याहि at सर्वे वनौकस:॥७॥

“Therefore, taking a contingent with you
and taking over its charge, speedily set you
forth for conquest from this post to the
place where all the monkeys stand gathered.

(7)
निर्याणादेव तूर्णं च चलिता हरिवाहिनी।
नर्दतां राक्षसेन्द्राणां श्रुत्वा नादं द्रविष्यति॥ ८॥

“Nay, unsettled in no time by your very
sortie, the army of monkeys will take to
flight on hearing the uproar of the thundering
ogre chiefs. (8)

चपला ह्यविनीताश्च चलचित्ताश्च वानरा:।
न सहिष्यन्ति a we सिंहनादमिव द्विपा:॥९॥
“The monkeys, who are volatile,
undisciplined and fickle-minded, will not be
able to endure your roar any more than
elephants would endure the roaring of a
lion. (9)
विद्रुते च act afer राम: सौमित्रिणा सह।
अवशस्ते निरालम्ब: प्रहस्त वशमेष्यति॥ Qo

“And helpless and deprived of all
support, when the said army of monkeys
has fled, Rama alongwith Laksmana (son
of Sumitra) will be held captive by you, O
Prahasta! (10)

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA +

आपत्संशयिता sat नात्र नि:संशयीकृता।
प्रतिलोमानुलोमं वा यत् तु नो मन्यसे हितम्॥ ११॥
“Uncertain death in an encounter is
desirable and not that which comes as a
matter of course without risk. Suggest that
which you for your part consider to be to
our advantage, no matter whether it is
palatable or unpalatable to me.” (11)

रावणेनैवमुक्तस्तु प्रहस्तो वाहिनीपति:।
राक्षसेन्द्रमुवाचेदमसुरेन्द्रमिवोशना ॥ १२॥

Commanded as above by Ravana,
Prahasta, the Commander-in-Chief, for his
part submitted as follows to the king of
ogres even as USana, the preceptor of
demons, would speak to Bali, the king of
demons: (12)

राजन् मन्तितपूर्वं न: कुशलै: सह मन्तरिभि:।
विवादश्चापि नो qa: समवेक्ष्य परस्परम्॥१३॥
“This topic has been discussed in the
past with expert counsellors and a
controversy too arose amongst us on our
examining the viewpoint of one another,
(and we could not come to a unanimous
decision). (13)

प्रदानेन तु सीताया: श्रेयो व्यवसितं मया।
अप्रदाने पुनर्युद्धं दृष्टमेव aa न:॥१४॥

“It was my firm opinion that good would
come to us only through restoration of Sita;
whereas war alone was foreseen as a result
of our not restoring her. War has come
upon us precisely as expected. (14)

सोऽहं दानैश्च AAA wad पूजितस्त्वया।
सान्त्वैश्च विविधै: काले किं न pat fact तव॥ १७५ ॥

“I, for my part, have ever been honoured
by you with gifts and honours too as well as
with various kind words. How shall | not
render service to you when the time for it
comes? (15)
नहि मे जीवितं wet पुत्रदारधनानि a
त्वं पश्य at जुहूषन्तं cad जीवितं युधि॥ १६॥
