* ARANYAKANDA «

planet Saturn would approach _ the
constellation, Citra. Looking intently at Sita,
a princess of the Videha territory, the
illustrious consort of Sri Rama, Ravana
suddenly stood before her in an auspicious
garb and thereby resembling व well
overgrown with blades of grass.

Standing delighted in mind to gaze at
that moment on Sita, a princess of the
Videha kingdom, the blessed consort of Sri
Rama—who had lovely teeth and lips, a
countenance shining brightly as the full moon
and eyes resembling the petals of a lotus,
was clad in yellow silk—sitting in her hut of
leaves tormented with grief and flooded with
tears, the ogre, Ravana, drew near her.

(83—13)

gaat कामशराविद्धो ब्रह्मघोषमुदीरयन्।
अब्रवीत् प्रश्रितं वाक्यं रहिते राक्षसाधिप:॥ १४॥
Pierced with the darts of Love to see
her and chanting Vedic Mantras in order to
impress on her that he was a Brahmana
recluse, Ravana, the suzerain lord of ogres,
proceeded to address polite words to her in
that lonely place. (14)
तामुत्तमां त्रिलोकानां पद्महीनामिव श्रियम्।
बिभ्राजमानां वपुषा रावण: WTA ह॥१५॥
Ravana, they say, extolled that lady,
who was the foremost among women in all
the three worlds, and shone brightly with
her body like Laksmi, the goddess of beauty
and fortune, without a lotus, in the following
words : (15)

रौप्यकाञ्चनवर्णाभे पीतकौशेयवासिनि।
कमलानां शुभां मालां पद्मिनीव च बिभ्रती।। १६॥
ह्री: श्री: कीर्ति: शुभा लक्ष्मीरप्सरा वा शुभानने।
भूतिर्वा त्वं वरारोहे weal स्वैरचारिणी॥१७॥

“O lady possessing the hue and
splendour of silver and gold and clad in
yellow silk, and having in your person a
cluster of lotuses (in the guise of eyes,
countenance, hands, feet and so on) like a
lotus pond, are you Hri (the deity presiding

837

over modesty), Sri (the goddess of
elegance), Kirti (the deity presiding over
fame), the blessed Laksmi (the goddess of
fortune), or a celestial nymph or Bhuti (the
goddess presiding over the mystic powers)
or Rati (the consort of Love) acting according
to her own inclinations, O lady with a
charming countenance and other comely
limbs? (16-17)

समा: शिखरिण: स्निग्धा: पाण्डुरा दशनास्तव।
विशाले विमले At रक्तान्ते कृष्णतारके॥ १८ tl
“How even smooth and white are
your teeth with their surface resembling
jasmine buds and how large and fair are
your eyes red at the end with dark pupils.
(18)

विशालं जघनं पीनमूरू करिकरोपमौ।
`एतावुपचितौ adit संहतौ सम्प्रगल्भितौ॥१९॥

पीनोन्नतमुखौ कान्तौ स्निग्धतालफलोपमौ।
मणिप्रवेकाभरणौ रुचिरौ ते पयोधरौ॥ Roll

“Broad and fleshy are your hips and
thighs resembling the trunk of an elephant;
and these breasts of yours are fully
developed, round, joined together, and
prominent with rounded and elevated teats,
lovable and charming, resembling a pair of
smooth palmyra fruits and adorned with
strings of excellent gems. (19-20)

चारुस्मिते चारुदति चारुनेत्रे विलासिनि।
TT हरसि A रामे नदीकूलमिवाम्भसा॥ २१॥

“O playful and charming lady with
sweet smiles, shapely teeth and lovely eyes,
you steal away my heart even as a river
washes away its banks with its current.

(21)
करान्तमितमध्यासि सुकेशे संहतस्तनि।
qa देवी न गन्धर्वी न यक्षी न च किंनरी॥ een
नैवंरूपा मया नारी दृष्टपूर्वां महीतले।
SU च लोकेषु सौकुमार्यं वयश्च ते॥२३॥
इह वासश्च कान्तारे चित्तमुन्माथयन्ति मे।
सा प्रतिक्राम भद्रं ते न त्वं वस्तुमिहार्हसि॥ २४॥
