* AYODHYAKANDA +

tender-heartedness of Bharata, O mighty-
armed prince, | do not lament for my father
and mother. (8)

त्वया कार्यं नरव्याघ्र मामनुव्रजता कृतम्।
अन्वेष्टव्या fe ager रक्षणार्थं सहायता॥९॥
“By following me to the forest, O tiger
among men, a great purpose of mine has
been served by you; for, otherwise aid would
have to be sought for by me for looking
after Sita (a princess of the Videha kingdom).
(9)
अद्भिरेव fe सौमित्रे वत्स्याम्यद्य निशामिमाम्।
Wakes Wad मह्यं वन्येऽपि विविधे सति॥ १०॥

“| shall certainly live on water alone
tonight, O son of Sumitra! Although there
are various kinds of wild fruits and roots,
this alone pleases me.” (10)

एवमुक्त्वा तु सौमित्रिं सुमन्त्रमपि wea:
अप्रमत्तस्त्वमश्वेषु भव सौम्येत्युवाच ह॥११॥

Having told Laksmana (son of Sumitra)
as above, Sri Rama, a scion of Raghu, so
the tradition goes, spoke to Sumantra too
as follows : “Attend you to the horses now,
O good sir!” (11)
सोऽश्वान् सुमन्त्र: संयम्य सूर्येऽस्तं समुपागते।
प्रभूतयवसान् कृत्वा ANA प्रत्यनन्तर:॥१२॥

Fastening the horses tightly, the sun
having completely set, and supplying them
with abundant grass, the said Sumantra
returned to the presence of Sri Rama. (12)
उपास्य तु शिवां deat दृष्टवा रात्रिमुपागताम्।
THe wet चक्रे सूत: सौमित्रिणा सह॥ १३॥

Having worshipped the goddess
presiding over the benign evening twilight
(according to his grade in society) and
seeing the night fallen, the charioteer
alongwith Laksmana, son of Sumitra,
prepared a ground suitable for Sri Rama to
sleep on (by brushing aside gravel and
particles of dust etc.) as well as a bed of
leaves. (13)

463

at शय्यां तमसातीरे वीक्ष्य वृक्षदलैर्वृताम्।
wa: सौमित्रिणा सार्धं सभार्य: संविवेश ह॥ १४॥

Perceiving the aforesaid bed overspread
by Sumantra with fresh leaves of trees on
the bank of the Tamasa with the help of
Laksmana (son of Sumitra), Sri Rama with
his consort lay down on it: so they say. (14)

सभार्यं सम्प्रसुप्तं तु श्रान्तं सम्प्रेक्ष्य लक्ष्मण:।
कथयामास सूताय रामस्य विविधान् गुणान्॥ १५ ॥
Observing Sri Rama buried in deep
sleep with his spouse, fatigued as he was,
Laksmana for his part began to recount the

various virtues of Sri Rama before the
charioteer. (15)
जाग्रतोरेव at रात्रिं सौमित्रेरुदितो रवि:।
सूतस्य तमसातीरे रामस्य ब्रुवतो गुणान्॥१६॥
The sun rose past Laksmana (son of
Sumitra) even as he was recounting to the
charioteer on the bank of the Tamasa the
excellences of Sri Rama, both Laksmana
and Sumantra keeping awake the whole of
that night. (16)

गोकुलाकुलतीरायास्तमसाया विदूरत:।
अवसत् तत्र at रात्रिं wa: प्रकृतिभि: सह॥ voi
At a respectable distance from the
Tamasa, whose bank was crowded with
herds of cows, Sri Rama spent that night
with the citizens on the aforesaid stretch of
land. (17)
उत्थाय च महातेजा: प्रकृतीस्ता निशाम्य च।
अब्रवीद् भ्रातरं WAT लक्ष्मणं पुण्यलक्षणम्॥ १८॥
Getting up from the bed and seeing
those people lying at some distance, Sri
Rama, who was possessed of extraordinary
splendour, spoke as follows to his younger
brother, Laksmana, who was endowed with
auspicious bodily marks : (18)

अस्मद्व्यपेक्षान् सौमित्रे निर्व्यपेक्षान् गृहेष्वपि।
वृक्षमूलेषु संसक्तान् पश्य लक्ष्मण साम्प्रतम्॥ १९॥

“Behold, O Laksmana, the citizens, full
of great longing for us and absolutely
