# YUDDHAKANDA #

heart of the ocean, where my troops were
stationed before their crossing over the
Lanka. On this very spot did the all-pervading
Lord Siva (the Supreme Deity) bestow His
grace on me by appearing in the form of a
Linga and accepting my worship as Lord
Rameswara before the construction of this
bridge. Here on the shore of the gigantic
ocean can be seen the sacred spot which
will be known by the name of Setubandha
where the construction of the well-known
bridge was commenced and will be adored
in all the three worlds. This spot will be held
as supremely sacred and will be capable of
washing away major sins. At this very spot
did this king of ogres, Vibhisana, make his
appearance for the first time. Here is seen,
O Sita, the delightful city of Sugriva,
Kiskindha, which is full of lovely woods,
where Vali, the elder brother of Sugriva,
was killed by me.” Seeing the city of
Kiskindha, (once) protected by Vali, Sita,
who was feeling timid through love, forthwith
addressed to him the following humble
submission: “Really speaking | wish to reach
Ayodhya, your future seat of government, in
your company, accompanied by the beloved
consorts of Sugriva, with Tara at their head,
as well as by the wives of othermonkey
chiefs too, O ruler of men!” (14—25)

एवमुक्तोऽथ वैदेह्या राघव: प्रत्युवाच ताम्।
एवमस्त्विति किष्किन्धां प्राप्य संस्थाप्य राघव: ।॥ २६ ॥
विमानं wea सुग्रीवं वाक्यमेतदुवाच ह।
ae वानरशार्दूल सर्वान् वानरपुङ्खवान्॥२७॥
स्त्रीभि: परिव्रता: सर्वे ह्ययोध्यां यान्तु सीतया।
तथा त्वमपि सर्वाभि: स्त्रीभि: सह महाबल॥ २८ UI
अभित्वरय सुग्रीव गच्छाम: प्लवगाधिप।
waned सुग्रीवो रामेणामिततेजसा॥ २९॥
वानराधिपति: श्रीमांस्तैश्च सर्वै: समावृत:।
प्रविश्यान्त:पुरं शीघ्रं तारामुद्बीक्ष्य सोऽब्रवीत्॥ ३०॥
Spoken to in these words by Sita (a

princess of the Videha territory), Sri Rama (a
scion of Raghu) forthwith said to her in reply,

813

“Amen!” Reaching Kiskindha, (nay) causing
the aerial car to halt, and looking intently on
Sugriva, Sri Rama (a scion of Raghu), they
say, spoke as follows: “Instruct, O jewel
among the monkeys, all the monkey chiefs
in the following words: ‘Followed by your
wives, you should unhesitatingly proceed to
Ayodhya with Sita!’ And you too should
likewise do the same alongwith all your
consorts, 0 monkey endowed with
extraordinary might! Make haste, Sugriva,
so that we may be able to depart soon, O
suzerain lord of monkeys!” Surrounded by
all the aforesaid monkeys, nay, quickly
penetrating into his gynaeceum and looking
up at Tara, when admonished in these words
by Sri Rama, who was endowed with
immeasurable energy, that glorious and
suzerain lord of monkeys, Sugriva, for his
part spoke to her as follows: (26—30)
fra त्वं सह नारीभिर्वानराणां महात्मनाम्।
राघवेणाभ्यनुज्ञाता मैथिलीप्रियकाम्यया॥ ३१॥
“You have, my darling, been duly
permitted by Sri Rama, a scion of Raghu, to
proceed to Ayodhya in the company of the
wives of the high-souled monkeys with intent
to gratify Sita, a princess of Mithila. (31)
त्वर त्वमभिगच्छामो Te वानरयोषित:।
अयोध्यां दर्शयिष्याम: सर्वा दशरथस्तिय:॥ ३२॥
“As such hasten you to depart. Taking
the wives of the monkeys we shall proceed
on our journey through the air and shall
show you Ayodhya and all the consorts of
Emperor DaSaratha.” (32)

सुग्रीवस्य वच: श्रुत्वा तारा सर्वाङ्गशोभना।
आहूय चाब्रवीत् सर्वा वानराणां तु योषित: ॥ ३३॥
Hearing the admonition of Sugriva, and
summoning the wives of all the monkeys,
Tara for her part, who was charming of every
limb, spoke to them all as follows: (33)

सुग्रीवेणाभ्यनुज्ञाता गन्तुं सर्वैश्च art:
मम चापि fet कार्यमयोध्यादर्शनेन च॥ ३४॥
