« KISKINDHAKANDA +

not give way to anger without rhyme or
reason. (33)

यद्यस्य कृतमस्माभिर्बुध्यसे किंचिदप्रियम्।
तदबुद्ध्या सम्प्रधार्याशु क्षिप्रमेवाभिधीयताम्॥ ३४॥

“If you are aware of anything having
been done by us, which is not to his liking,
let it be made known to me without the least
delay after divining it by your insight at
once. (34)

अथवा स्वयमेवैनं द्रष्टुमर्हसि भामिनि।
ar: सान्त्वयुक्तैश्च प्रसादयितुमर्हसि॥ ३५॥

“Or you ought personally to see him, O
charming lady, and should pacify him with
words of conciliation. (35)

त्वद्दर्शने विशुद्धात्मा न स्म कोपं करिष्यति।
नहि स्त्रीषु महात्मान: क्वचित् कुर्वन्ति दारुणम्॥ BE ॥

“On seeing you, Laksmana, who is
endowed with an utterly pure mind, will never
be angry; for magnanimous souls never
practice harshness in relation to ladies. (36)

त्वया सान्त्वैरुपक्रान्तं प्रसन्नेन्द्रियमानसम्।

तत: कमलपत्राक्षॆ द्रक्ष्याम्यहमरिंदमम्॥ ३७॥
“When he is approached by you with

mild words, and his senses and mind are

soothed, then only | shall see Laksmana

(the tamer of his foes), whose eyes resemble
the petals of a lotus.” (37)

सा प्रस्खलन्ती मदबिह्वलाक्षी
प्रलम्बकाञ्चीगुणहेमसूत्रा ।
सलक्षणा लक्ष्मण संनिधानं

जगाम तारा नमिताङ्घयष्टि:॥ ३८॥

The celebrated Tara, whose eyes were
rolling through intoxication, nay, who was
endowed with auspicious marks on her body,
sought tottering the presence of Laksmana,
the gold string of her girdle hanging loose
and her slender frame bent low through
feminine modesty. (38)

a oat समीक्ष्यैव हरीशपत्नीं
तस्थावुदासीनतया महात्मा।

1067

अवाङ्मुखोऽभून्मनुजेन्द्रपुत्र:
स्त्रीसंनिकर्षाद् fara: ॥ ३९॥

The high-souled Prince Laksmana
stood unconcernedly without noticing her
bodily charms, his face turned downwards,
the moment he descried Tara (the wife of
the lord of monkeys), his anger having
completely vanished due to his proximity to
a woman. (39)

सा पानयोगाच्च निवृत्तलज्जा
दृष्टिप्रसादाच्च॰नरैक्को;।
उवाच तारा प्रणयप्रगल्भं
वाक्यं महार्थं परिसान्त्वरूपम्॥४०॥

Her bashfulness having gone as a result
of her being drunk with wine as well as due
to the kindness in the prince’s look, Tara
addressed to Laksmana the following
submission, which was fearless through
amity, full of great significance and couched
in highly conciliatory words : (40)
किं कोपमूलं मनुजेन्द्रपुत्र

Hed न संतिष्ठति वाङ्निदेशे।
क: Wendt वनमापतन्तं
दावाग्निमासीदति निर्विशङ्क: ।॥ ४१॥

“What is the root of your anger, O
Prince? Who does not obey your verbal
command? Who dares to approach recklessly
a forest-fire rushing towards a_ thicket
consisting of dried trees?” (41)

स तस्या वचनं श्रुत्वा सान्त्वपूर्वमशङ्कित:।
Wa: प्रणयदृष्टार्थं लक्ष्मणो वाक्यमब्रवीत्॥४२॥
Rid of all misgiving on hearing her
submission, which was prefaced with words
of conciliation and in which the purport was
expressed in the most endearing terms, the
celebrated Laksmana replied as_ follows:
(42)

feat कामवृत्तस्ते लुप्तधर्मार्थसंग्रह:।
wat भर्तृहिते युक्ते न चैनमवबुध्यसे॥४३॥

“Intent upon the gratification of his
senses, this husband of yours has lost
