566

Making use of mystic missile presided
over by Rudra (the god of destruction), Sri
Rama, son of DaSaratha, forthwith dug pointed
arrows into the breast of Kumbhakarna. (116)

तस्य रामेण विद्धस्य सहसाभिप्रधावत:।
अङ्गारमिश्रा: क्रुद्धस्य मुखान्निश्चेरुरर्चिष: tl ११७॥

As the latter darted in fury all at
once towards Sri Rama, when hurt by him,
flames mixed with embers shot forth from
his mouth. (117)

रामास्त्रविद्धो घोरं वै Ady राक्षसपुङ्खव:।
अभ्यधावत संक्रुद्धो हरीन् विद्रावयन् रणे॥ ११८ il

Highly enraged when pierced by the
arrows of Sri Rama, Kumbhakarna (a
veritable bull among the ogres) rushed
towards him terribly roaring and dispersing
the monkeys on the battle-field. (118)

तस्योरसि निमग्नास्ते शरा बर्हिणवासस:।
हस्ताच्चास्य परिभ्रष्टा गदा Area पपात TU ११९॥

Adorned with peacock’s plumes, the
said arrows disappeared into his breast.
Nay, fallen from his hand, his mace too
dropped to the ground; so the tradition goes.

(119)
आयुधानि च सर्वाणि विप्रकीर्यन्त भूतले।
स निरायुधमात्मानं यदा AA महाबल:॥१२०॥
मुष्टिभ्यां च कराभ्यां च चकार कदनं महत्।
a बाणैरतिविद्धाङ्ग: क्षतजेन समुक्षित:।
eRe परिसुस्राव fit: प्रस्रवणं यथा॥१२१॥

All his other weapons too were scattered
on the earth’s surface. When the ogre, who
was endowed with extraordinary might,
realized himself to be unarmed, he played
great havoc among the monkeys with his
fists and hands too. His limbs pierced beyond
measure with arrows and bathed in blood,
he poured forth blood even as a mountain
would pour out streams. (120-121)

स तीव्रेण च कोपेन रुधिरेण च मूच्छित:।
वानरान् राक्षसानृक्षान् GIST स परिधावति॥ १२२॥

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA +

Overcome with violent anger and
covered all over with blood as well, the
notorious ogre ran about devouring the
monkeys, ogres and bears alike. (122)

अथ ye समाविध्य भीमं भीमपराक्रम:।
चिक्षेप राममुद्दिश्य बलवानन्तकोपम:॥१२३॥

Firmly seizing hold of a formidable
mountain peak, the mighty ogre, who
was endowed with terrific prowess and
resembled Death himself, hurled it towards
Sri Rama. (123)
अप्राप्तमन्तरा राम: सप्तभिस्तमजिह्मगै: |
चिच्छेद गिरिशृङ्गं तं पुन: संधाय कार्मुकम्॥ १२४॥

Making use of his well-known bow once
more, Sri Rama, however, split that mountain
peak, while it was still on its way and had
not yet reached him, with seven straight
going arrows. (124)

wt: काञ्चनचित्राङ्गैश्चिच्छेद भरताग्रज:॥ 824 UI

Thereupon Sri Rama, the elder brother
of Bharata, for his part, whose mind was
set on virtue, split up the huge mountain
peak, hurled by the ogre, with golden-stripped
arrows. (125)

तन्मेरुशिखराकारं द्योतमानमिव श्रिया।
द्वे Md वानराणां च पतमानमपातयत्॥ १२६॥

While falling down, the aforesaid crag,
which looked like a peak of Mount Meru and
was shining, as it were, with splendour,
knocked down two hundred monkeys too.

(126)

तस्मिन्काले स धर्मात्मा लक्ष्मणो राममब्रवीत्।
कुम्भकर्णवधे युक्तो योगान् परिमृशन् बहून्॥ १२७॥

At that moment the celebrated
Laksmana, whose mind was set on virtue,
nay, who had been attentive all the time and
who was busy devising numerous plans of
killing Kumbhakarna submitted as follows to
Sri Rama: (127)
