* AYODHYAKANDA +

“Let him with whose concurrence my
elder brother has departed for the woods
ever delight in deception, remaining a
backbiter and impure and afraid of the king
all his life, his mind being given to
unrighteousness. (51)
अतिवर्तेत दुष्टात्मा यस्यार्योऽनुमते गत:॥७५२॥

“Let the evil-minded fellow with whose
concurrence my elder brother has departed
for the woods ignore his chaste wife who
has attained purity after menstruation (and
is thus fit to conceive) and approaches him
for union, the period being favourable for
procreation. (52)

विप्रलुप्तप्रजातस्य दुष्कृतं ब्राह्मणस्य यत्।
तदेतत् प्रतिपद्येत यस्यार्योऽनुमते गत:॥५३॥

“Let him with whose concurrence my
elder brother has departed for the woods
incur that very sin which attaches to a
Brahmana whose offsprings have perished
for lack of nourishment. (53)
ब्राह्मणायोद्यतां पूजां fared कलुषेन्द्रिय:।
ATA च गां दोग्धु यस्यार्योऽनुमते गत:॥ ५४॥

“Let that man of sinful mind with whose
concurrence my elder brother has departed
for the woods interrupt the worship going to
be offered to a Brahmana by another and
milk a cow which calved less than ten days
ago. (54)

धर्मदारान् परित्यज्य परदारान् निषेवताम्।
त्यक्तधर्मरतिर्मूढो यस्यार्योऽनुमते गत:॥५५॥

“Let the fool with whose concurrence
my elder brother has departed for the woods
enjoy another’s wife, forsaking his lawful
wife and having given up his love for piety.

(55)
पानीयदूषके पापं तथैव विषदायके।
यत्तदेक: स AMA यस्यार्योऽनुमते गत:॥५६॥

“Let the fellow with whose concurrence
my elder brother has departed for the woods
incur all at once the sin that attaches to him

573

who defiles the water of a well or tank as
well as that which attaches to one who
administers poison. (56)
gad सति पानीये विप्रलम्भेन योजयन्।
यत् पापं AMA तत् स्याद् यस्यार्योऽनुमते गत: ॥ ५७॥
“Let the sin, which a man disappointing
a person oppressed with thirst by recourse
to deception in the form of giving a false
report denying the presence of water, even
though there is water with him, attach to him
with whose concurrence my elder brother
has departed for the woods. (57)

भक्त्या विवदमानेषु मार्गमाश्रित्य पश्यत:।
तेन पापेन युज्येत यस्यार्योऽनुमते Aa uae tl

“Let him with whose concurrence my
elder brother has departed for the woods be
held guilty of the same sin which attaches
to a man standing on the road and witnessing
a dispute with partiality for one of the disputing
parties.” (58)

`एवमाश्वासयन्नेव दु:खार्तोऽनुपपात ह।
विहीनां पतिपुत्राभ्यां कौसल्यां पार्थिवात्मज:॥ ५९॥
Even while reassuring as aforesaid
Kausalya, who was bereft both of her
husband and son, the prince, Bharata, they
say, fell to the ground, stricken as he was
with agony. (59)

तदा तं शपथै: we: शपमानमचेतनम्।

Wd शोकसंतप्तं कौसल्या वाक्यमब्रवीत्॥६०॥
Thereupon Kausalya spoke as follows

to Bharata, who was solemnly pleading his

innocence by means of oaths that were

hard to take and had become unconscious,

sore stricken as he was with grief: (60)

मम दु:खमिदं a wa: समुपजायते।
wad: शपमानो fe प्राणानुपरुणत्सि मे॥६१॥

“The present agony of mine, my son,
is aggravated all the more inasmuch as you
are choking my breath while solemnly
pleading your innocence by means of oaths.

(61)
