752

जघनेभ्य: स्फुलिङ्गाश्च नेत्रेभ्योऽश्रूणि संततम्।
मुमुचुस्तस्य तुरगास्तुल्यमग्निं च वारि Anse

The horses of his chariot incessantly
let out sparks from their hips and loins and
tears from their eyes, releasing out in this
way fire and water both at a time. (32)
एवंप्रकारा aed: समुत्पाता भयावहा:।
रावणस्य विनाशाय दारुणा: सम्प्रजज्ञिरे॥ ३३॥

Foreboding disaster to Ravana, many
such appalling and fearful portents appeared.

(33)
रामस्यापि निमित्तानि सौम्यानि च शिवानि च।
बभूवुर्जयशंसीनि प्रादुर्भूतानि सर्वश:॥ ३४॥
निमित्तानीह सौम्यानि waa: स्वजयाय वै।
दृष्टवा पस्मसहृ।ष्टो हतं AT च रावणम्॥३५॥

Before Sri Rama too appeared on all

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA +

sides omens which were delightful and
propitious and foreboded victory to him. Sri
Rama, a scion of Raghu, was really over-
joyed to behold on this occasion delightful
omens foretelling his own triumph, and
regarded Ravana as_ already _ killed.
(34-35)

ad निरीक्ष्यात्मगतानि राघवो

रणे निमित्तानि निमित्तकोविद:।

जगाम wa च ut च निर्वृतिं
चकार Ge ह्यधिकं च विक्रमम्॥ ३६॥
Sri Rama, who was well-versed in the
science of omens, now experienced delight,
nay, supreme felicity on observing the
propitious omens appearing on his own
person on the battlefield and exhibited even
greater prowess in combat. (36)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये FERS षडधिकशततम: सर्ग: ॥ १०६ ॥

Thus ends Canto One hundred and six in the Yuddhakanda of the glorious
Ramayana of Valmiki, the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

सप्ताधिकशततम: eat:
Canto CVII

Fierce encounter of Sri Rama with Ravana

ad: Wad pt रामरावणयोस्तदा।
सुमहद द्वैरथं a सर्वलोकभयावहम्॥१॥
Then ensued on that occasion a fierce
and prolonged duel between Sri Rama and
Ravana, which struck terror in all the worlds.(1)

ततो राक्षससैन्यं च हरीणां च महद्बलम्।

प्रगृहीतप्रहरणं निश्चेष्टं समवर्तत॥ २॥
At that time the army of ogres as well

as the huge army of the monkeys stood

motionless with their weapons held fast
in their hands. (2)

सम्प्रयुद्धौ तु dt gear बलवन्नरराक्षसौ।
व्याक्षिप्तहृदया: awd wt विस्मयमागता:॥ ३॥

Distracted in heart to behold the two
warriors, a human being and an ogre,
both full of might, engaged in a desperate
duel, all for their part experienced great
wonderment. (3)

नानाप्रहरणैर्व्यग्रैर्भुजैर्विस्मितबुद्धय: ।
तस्थु: Wet च संग्रामं नाभिजग्मु: परस्परम्॥४॥
Their arms, which were ready with
weapons and impatient for action, the
warriors on both sides stood amazed in
mind to witness the encounter and did not
attack one another. (4)
रक्षसां रावणं चापि वानराणां च राघवम्।
पश्यतां विस्मिताक्षाणां सैन्यं चित्रमिवाबभौ in ५॥
