« KISKINDHAKANDA +

ad तु Acal तथा वाक्यमङ्गढस्य मुखोद्वत्तम्।
अब्रवीद् वचनं गृध्रस्तीक्ष्णतुण्डो महास्वन:॥ १८॥
Nay, hearing the speech that had
escaped from the lips of Angada as above,
the sharp-beaked vulture, Sampati, spoke
as follows, making a loud noise : (18)

कोऽयं गिरा घोषयति प्राणै: प्रियतरस्य मे।
जटायुषो वधं भ्रातु: कम्पयन्निव A मन:॥१९॥

“Who is the being which proclaims in
so many distinct words the death of my
brother, Jatayu, who was dearer to me than
life itself, causing my heart to tremble as it
were (with this heart-rending news)? (19)

कथमासीज्जनस्थाने युद्धं राक्षसगृध्रयो:।
नामधेयमिदं भ्रातुश्चिरस्याद्य मया श्रुतम्॥२०॥
“How did an encounter take place
between an ogre and the vulture in
Janasthana? This name of my younger
brother has been heard of by me after a
long time today. (20)
sea गिरिदुर्गाच्च भवद्धिरवतारितुम्।
यवीयसो गुणज्ञस्य शइलाघनीयस्य fame: i २१॥

1139

अतिदीर्घस्य कालस्य परितुष्टोऽस्मि कीर्तनात्।
तदिच्छेयमहं श्रोतुं विनाशं वानरर्षभा:॥२२॥
भ्रातुर्जटायुषस्तस्य जनस्थाननिवासिन:।
तस्यैव च मम भ्रातु: सखा दशरथ: कथम्॥ २३॥
यस्य राम: प्रिय: Gat ज्येष्ठो गुरुजनप्रिय:।
सूर्यांशुदग्धपक्षत्वानन wate विसर्पितुम्।
इच्छेयं पर्वतादस्मादवतर्तुमरिदमा: ॥ २४॥

“Nay, with your help | wish to bring
myself down from the mountain citadel on
which | am perched. | am highly gratified with
the praises, heard after a very long time, of
my younger brother, Jatayu, who appreciated
the virtues of others and was deserving of
praise because of his exploits. Therefore, O
leaders of monkeys, | long to hear about the
destruction of my younger brother, Jatayu,
who lived in Janasthana. Again, how did King
DaSaratha, a friend of the selfsame brother
of mine—whose beloved eldest son is Sri
Rama, the favourite of his elders—meet his
end? My wings having been scorched by the
rays of the sun, | cannot fly about. All the
same, | wish to descend from this eminence,
O tamers of your foes.” (21—24)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये किष्किन्धाकाण्डे षट्पञ्चाश: सर्ग: ॥ ५६ ॥

Thus ends Canto Fifty-six in the Kiskindhakanda of the glorious Ramayana of Valmiki,
the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

सप्तपञ्चाश: सर्ग:
Canto LVIT

Having helped Sampati to climb down the mountain, Angada narrates
to him the whole story from the entry of Srt Rama into the
Dandaka forest to his own fasting

शोकाद् भ्रष्टस्वरमपि star वानरयूथपा:।
श्र्दधुर्नैव तद्वाक्यं कर्मणा तस्य शङ्किता:॥१॥
Even after hearing the words of Sampaii,
whose voice had turned hoarse due to grief
caused by the news of his brother’s death,
the monkey generals did not put faith in his
words, seized as they were with suspicion

caused by his contemplated action of eating
up the monkeys. (1)

ते प्रायमुपविष्टास्तु gear Wel प्लवंगमा:।

चक्रुर्बुद्धिं तदा रौद्रां सर्वान् नो भक्षयिष्यति॥ २॥
Seeing the vulture, the said monkeys,

for their part, who had sat down to starve
