1076

Through true actions of many types,
then the son of Manu, the pious one,
procreated the hundred sons, comparable
with the sons of the gods. (13)

तेषामवरजस्तात सर्वेषां रघुनन्दन।
मूढश्चाकृतविद्यश्च न शुश्रूषति पूर्वजान्॥१४॥
नाम तस्य च दण्डेति पिता चक्रेऽल्पमेधस:।
अवश्यं दण्डपतनं शरीरेऽस्य भविष्यति॥ १५॥
The youngest one of them, was ignorant,
and illiterate and did not serve his elders.
His father gave him, dull-witted son, the
name ‘Danda’, thinking that physical
punishment shall certainly be the fate of this
one (son). (14-15)
विन्ध्यशैवलयोर्मध्ये UT प्रादादरिदम॥ १६॥
“Not seeing any territory fully fearful, the
father gave him the kingdom situated between
the Vindhya and Saivala mountains. (16)
स दण्डस्तत्र राजाभूद् Ta पर्वतरोधसि।
Ut चाप्रतिमं राम न्यवेशयदनुत्तमम्॥१७॥

“That Danda became the king of that

« VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

territory situated at the foot of the mountains
and established a city unmatched and the
best (among the cities). (17)

पुरस्य चाकरोन्नाम मधुमन्तमिति प्रभो।
पुरोहितं तूशनसं वरयामास सुव्रतम्॥१८॥
“Danda named the city Madhumanta,
O lord, and chose as his chief priest USana,
rich in vows. (18)

एवं स राजा ae राज्यमकरोत् सपुरोहित:।
Weer देवराजो यथा दिवि॥१९॥

“Thus that king, Danda, ruled over that
kingdom together with the chief priest, the
Kingdom being filled with joyful men as the
king of gods rules in the heaven. (19)

wd: स राजा मनुजेन्द्रपुत्र:
ae च तेनोशनसा तदानीम्।
चकार et सुमहान्महात्मा
शक्रो दिवीवोशनसा समेत:॥ २०॥
“Then that King, Danda, the grandson
of Manu, together with Usana of great fame,
ruled as a highly pious king, like Indra ruling
over the gods.” (20)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये उत्तरकाण्डे एकोनाशीतितम: AW: ॥ ७९ ॥

Thus ends Canto Seventy-nine in the Uttarakanda of the glorious Ramayana of
Valmiki, the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

अशीतितम: सर्ग:
Canto LXXX

The story of Dandakavana. King Danda violates the chastity
of Bhargava’s daughter and is cursed by him

एतदाख्याय रामाय महर्षि: कुम्भसम्भव:।
अस्यामेवापरं वाक्यं कथायामुपचक्रमे॥१॥
Having thus narrated the story of Iksvaku
to Sri Rama, the great sage, Agastya, the
pitcher-born one, began to narrate another
story connected with the same. (1)

तत: स WS: काकुत्स्थ बहुवर्षगणायुतम्।
अकरोत् तत्र दान्तात्मा राज्यं निहतकण्टकम्॥ २॥

‘Then, O scion of Kakutstha, that Danda,
the self-controlled one, ruled over that
kingdom there, uprooting all foes, for
successively ten thousand years. (2)

अथ काले तु कस्मिंश्चिद् राजा भार्गवमाश्रमम्।
रमणीयमुपाक्रामच्चैत्रे मासि मनोरमे॥३॥

Then at one time the king, Danda,
went to the beautiful hermitage of sage
