124

Another ogress, Vikata by name, for
her part, addressed the following words to
Sita: “He has come by your side, by whose
terrible prowess the Nagas, Gandharvas
and demons were routed more than once
on the battlefield. (14)

तस्य सर्वसमृद्धस्य रावणस्य महात्मन:।
किमर्थं राक्षसेन्द्रस्य भार्यात्वं नेच्छसेऽधमे॥ १५॥

“Why don’t you solicit the wifehood of
the aforesaid ruler of ogres, the high-souled
Ravana, who is fully accomplished in every
way, O vile woman?” (15)

ततस्तां दुर्मुखी नाम राक्षसी वाक्यमब्रवीत्।

यस्य सूर्यो न तपति भीतो यस्य स मारुत:।

न वाति स्मायतापाङ्नि किं त्वं तस्य न तिष्ठसे॥ १६॥
Then another ogress, Durmukhi by

name, spoke as follows: “Why don’t you

yield to Ravana, in fear of whom the sun

does not shine brightly and the wind stops

« VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

blowing terrifically, O lady with long-cornered
eyes? (16)

पुष्पवृष्टिं च तरवो मुमुचुर्यस्य A भयात्।
Wen: सुस्रुवु: पानीयं जलदाश्च यदेच्छति॥ १७॥
तस्य नैर्ऋतराजस्य राजराजस्य भामिनि।
fe त्वं न कुरुषे बुद्धिं भार्यार्थे रावणस्य हि॥ १८॥

“Why don’t you really make up your
mind, O lovely woman, to become the wife
of that Ravana, the lord of ogres and the
king of kings, in fear of whom the trees rain
down flowers, mountains and clouds shed
their water whenever he wills? (17-18)

साधु ते तत्त्वतो देवि कथितं साधु भामिनि।
गृहाण सुस्मिते वाक्यमन्यथा न भविष्यसि॥ १९॥

“Accept cheerfully, O lovely lady with
sweet smiles, the advice which has been
tendered to you in good spirit and in
accordance with facts; or else you shall
die.” (19)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये सुन्दरकाण्डे त्रयोविंश: सर्ग: ॥ 23 ॥

Thus ends Canto Twenty-three in the Sundarakanda of the glorious Ramayana
of Valmiki, the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

Canto XXIV

Citing the examples of Saci, Arundhati and other devoted wives, even
though threatened by the ogresses, Sita with a stout heart boldly
proclaims her resolve not to submit to anyone else other than
her own husband even on pain of death. Hanuman silently
watches her being menaced by the ogresses by means
of harsh words and show of weapons, and weeping

तत: सीतां समस्तास्ता राक्षस्यो विकृतानना:।
wea परुषानर्हामूचुस्तद्वाक्यमप्रियम्॥ 8
Thereupon all those ogresses of
loathsome appearance addressed _ the
following harsh and unpalatable words to Sita,
who did not merit such harsh words: (1)

fe त्वमन्तपुरे सीते सर्वभूतमनोरमे।
महार्हशयनोपेते न वासमनुमन्यसे॥ २॥

“Why don’t you consent to dwell, O
Sita, in the gynaeceum of Ravana, ravishing
the soul of all created beings and furnished
with costly couches? (2)

मानुषी मानुषस्यैव भार्यात्वं बहु मन्यसे।
प्रत्याहर मनो रामान्नैवं जातु भविष्यति॥ 3

“A human being that you are, you prize
the wifehood of a human being alone. Pray,
