338

“| for my part rejoice when | behold
with my own eyes that son of mine,
possessing the comeliness of a divine boy
and adorned with ornaments, coming to me
and feel rejuvenated as it were the moment
| see him. (103)

विना fe gator भवेत् प्रव्रत्ति-

रवर्षता वज्रधरेण वापि।
TH तु गच्छन्तमित: समीक्ष्य

West कश्चित्त्विति चेतना Ai १०४॥

“Active life may be possible even without
the sun or even with Indra, the wielder of
the thunderbolt, not pouring showers. None
in the capital, however, can survive on
perceiving Rama departing from Ayodhya
to the woods: such is my conviction indeed.

(104)
विनाशकामामहिताममित्रा-
मावासयं मृत्युमिवात्मनस्त्वाम्
महाविषा तेन हतोऽस्मि मोहात्॥ १०५ Il

“| lodged in my house, as one would
one’s own mortal enemy, you, who seek
my life and are not only unfriendly but
positively hostile to me. Alas! through
ignorance in your person a highly venomous
female serpent has been embraced so long
by me and, therefore, | am undone. (105)

मया च रामेण सलक्ष्मणेन
प्रशास्तु BAT भरतस्त्वया सह।
पुरं च Ue च निहत्य बान्धवान्
ममाहितानां च भवाभिहर्षिणी॥ १०६ ॥
“Devoid of me as also of Rama and
Laksmana, let Bharata alongwith you rule
over the city as well as the state. Having
got rid of your relations (husband and
stepsons) bring joy to my enemies. (106)
नृशंसवृत्ते व्यसनप्रहारिणि
प्रसह्य वाक्यं यदिहाद्य भाषसे।
न नाम ते तेन मुखात् पतन्त्यधो
विशीर्यमाणा दशना: सहस्रधा॥ १०७॥

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

“O woman of cruel behaviour, who
have dealt this severe blow in the shape of
Rama’s banishment at me in my adversity
in the form of old age, when you violently
utter such words at this place and on this
occasion, it is a matter of surprise that
breaking into thousands of pieces, your
teeth do not on that accout drop down from
your mouth. (107)

न किंचिदाहाहितमप्रियं वचो
न वेत्ति राम: परुषाणि भाषितुम्।
कथं तु wa ह्यभिरामवादिनि
ब्रवीषि दोषान् गुणनित्यसम्मते॥ १०८ Il

“| daresay, Rama did not utter any
hurtful or unkind word to you; for he does
not know how to speak harsh words. How
then, do you dare find fault with Si Rama,
who invariably speaks pleasing words to
all and is ever esteemed by all for his
excellences? (108)

प्रताम्य वा प्रज्वल वा प्रणश्य वा
Peat वा स्फुटितां महीं व्रज।

न ते करिष्यामि वच: सुदारुणं
ममाहितं केकयराजपांसने॥१०९॥

“You may faint or flare up or perish by
swallowing poison or strangling yourself or
enter the bowels of the earth split up into
thousands of chasms, | shall never accede
to your most cruel demand, which is so
prejudicial to me, O disgrace to the king of
the Kekayas ! (109)

रोपमां गि त्प्रियंवदां
प्रदुष्टभावां स्वकुलोपघातिनीम्।
न जीवितुं cat विषहेऽमनोरमां
दिधक्षमाणां हृदयं सबन्धनम्॥११०॥

“| do not wish you to survive—you,
who are destructive as a razor, utter falsely
pleasing words, are of extremely malicious
intent, nay, the bane of your family, and are
intent upon burning my heart alongwith my
vitals and, therefore, repellent to my mind.

(110)
