* AYODHYAKANDA +

“Nay, neglecting a duty yielding visible
joy, what Ksatriya esteemed by his race
would practise a virtue which is of doubtful
result, which does not promise happiness,
which brings its reward in a future state
only and which is undefined? (20)
अथ क्लेशजमेव त्वं धर्मं चरितुमिच्छसि।
धर्मेण चतुरो AUT पालयन् क्लेशमाप्नुहि॥ २१॥

“If you desire to pursue a virtue following
from hardship alone, undergo suffering while
protecting the four divisions of society by
recourse to righteousness. (21)
चतुर्णामाश्रमाणां fe गार्हस्थ्यं श्रेष्ठमुत्तमम्।
आहुर्धर्मज्ञ धर्मज्ञास्तं कथं त्यक्तुमिच्छसि॥ २२॥

“The knowers of what is right definitely
declare the life of a householder to be the
noblest and best of all the four stages of life,
inasmuch as it is depended upon by all
others; how then do you seek to abandon it,
O knower of the principles of righteousness?

(22)
AAT बाल: WHA जन्मना भवतो ह्यहम्।
स कथं पालयिष्यामि भूमिं vata तिष्ठति॥ २३॥

“| am decidedly junior to you in point of
learning, rank and date of brith. As such
how shall | be able to rule over the earth
when you are present? (23)

हीनबुद्धिगुणो बालो हीनस्थानेन चाप्यहम्।
भवता च विनाभूतो न वर्तयितुमुत्सहे॥२४॥

“A mere child as | am, of poor
understanding and virtues, and also placed
in an inferior position as compared to you, |
cannot even live without you, much less
rule over the people. (24)
अनुशाधि स्वधर्मेण धर्मज्ञ सह बान्धवै:।॥ २५॥

“O knower of what is right, rule with
your kinsmen over the whole of this foremost
ancestral kingdom, without opposition,
according to the code of conduct prescribed
for you. (25)

671

इहैव त्वाभिषिञ्चन्तु Wal: Wada: सह।
कऋत्विज: सवसिष्ठाश्च मन्त्रविन्मन्त्रकोविदा:॥ २६ 1

“Let all the ministers as well as the
priests including Vasistha, well-versed in
sacred formulas, conjointly consecrate you
as the king of Ayodhya on this very spot, O
knower of sacred texts ! (26)

अभिषिक्तस्त्वमस्माभिरयोध्यां पालने व्रज।
विजित्य ater citar मरुद्धिरिव वासव:॥ २७॥

“Consecrated by us, as Indra by Maruts

(the wind-gods), and having conquered the

worlds by dint of your might, march you
back to Ayodhya in order to rule over it.

(27)

ऋणानि त्रीण्यपाकुर्वन् Gea: साधु निर्दहन्।
सुहृदस्तर्पयन् कामैस्त्वमेवात्रानुशाधि माम्॥ २८ ॥

“Discharging the three obligations you
owe to gods, Rsis and manes severally by
offering oblations, studying the Vedas and
procreating children, completely destroying
the foes and gratifying your near and dear
ones through their desired objects, you
instruct me at Ayodhya itself.” (28)

अद्यार्य मुदिता: सन्तु सुहृदस्तेऽभिषेचने।
अद्य भीता: पलायन्तु दुष्प्रदास्ते दिशो दश॥ २९॥

“Let those who are friendly to you
feel rejoiced today on your consecration as
the king of Ayodhya, O noble brother ! Let
those who are inclined to cause pain to you
run frightened in every direction today.

(29)
आक्रोशं मम मातुश्च प्रमृज्य पुरुषर्षभ।
I तत्रभवन्तं च पितरं tat किल्बिषात्॥ ३०॥

“Wiping off the obloquy attaching to me
as well as to my mother, O jewel among
men, save our esteemed father as well from
remorse today. (30)

शिरसा त्वाभियाचेऽहं कुरुष्व करुणां मयि।
बान्धवेषु च सर्वेषु भूतेष्विव ASME ।। ३१॥

“| implore you with my head bent low:
pray, take pity on me as well as on all your
