+ UTTARAKANDA +

a तु तत्र गुणोपेता बलै: uaa: स्वकै:।
युक्त्वा रथान् कामगमानुद्यद्भास्करवर्चस:॥ २९॥

Having harnessed their chariots, which
were able to move wherever one liked and
which shone like the rising sun, they, for
their part, adorned as they were with all
virtues appeared on the field of battle,
surrounded by their troops. (29)

ततो युद्धं समभवद् दारुणं रोमहर्षणम्।
सलिलेन्द्रस्य पुत्राणां रावणस्य च धीमत:॥ ३०॥

Then ensued a fierce struggle, which
caused one’s hair to stand on end, between
the sons of Varuna, the god of water, and
the clever Ravana. (30)

अमात्यैश्च महावीर्यैर्दशग्रीवस्य रक्षस:।
वारुणं dq बलं ae क्षणेन विनिपातितम्॥ ३१॥
And the whole of that army of Varuna
was exterminated in an instant by the
ministers of the ten-headed ogre, who were
endowed with extraordinary valour. (31)
समीक्ष्य act संख्ये वरुणस्य सुतास्तदा।
stem: शरजालेन निवृत्ता रणकर्मण:॥ ३२॥
Perceiving their army destroyed in battle,
the sons of Varuna, who were overwhelmed

by a shower of arrows, retreated from the
conflict. (32)

महीतलगतास्ते तु रावणं दृश्य पुष्पके।
आकाशमाशु विविशु: स्यन्दनै: शीघ्रगामिभि: ॥। ३३ ॥
Seeing Ravana seated in the Puspaka
car, even though they stood on the ground,
they rose quickly to the skies in their fast-
moving chariots. (33)
महदासीत् ततस्तेषां तुल्यं स्थानमवाप्य तत्।
आकाशयुद्धुं तुमुलं देवदानवयोरिव॥ ३४॥
On their attaining that position of equality,
a tumultuous and fierce struggle then raged
in the air between them, which resembled
the fight between the gods and the Danavas.
(34)
ततस्ते रावणं युद्धे शरै: पावकसंनिभै:।
विमुखीकृत्य संहृष्टा विनेदुर्विविधान् रवान्॥ ३५॥

921

Having forced Ravana by their fiery
shafts to turn his face away from the battle,
they (the sons of Varuna) thereupon felt
transported with joy and raised various kinds
of shouts. (35)

ततो महोदर: क्रुद्धो राजानं वीक्ष्य धर्षितम्।

त्यक्त्वा मृत्युभयं वीरो युद्धाकांक्षी व्यलोकयत्॥ ३६ I
Provoked to anger on perceiving the

king of ogres overpowered, and shedding

all fear of death, the valiant Mahodara looked
round, seeking an encounter. (36)

तेन ते वारुणा युद्धे कामगा: पवनोपमा:।
महोदरेण गदया हयास्ते प्रययु: fahren sou
Struck by the said Mahodara with a
mace, on the battlefield, those well-known
steeds of Varuna (yoked to the chariot of
his sons), who could move according to the
will of their master and were fleet as the
wind, came to the ground. (37)

तेषां वरुणसूनूनां हत्वा योधान् हयांश्च तान्।
मुमोचाशु महानादं विरथान् प्रेक्ष्य तान् स्थितान्॥ ३८ UI
Having killed the soldiers of the sons
of Varuna as well as their aforesaid horses
and perceiving them deprived of their chariots,
he (Mahodara) soon raised a great roar.
(38)

ते तु तेषां रथा: साश्वा: सह सारथिभिर्वरै:।
महोदरेण निहता: पतिता: पृथिवीतले॥ ३९॥

Destroyed by Mahodara, the aforesaid
chariots of the sons of Varuna for their part
fell on the ground alongwith their horses and
expert drivers. (39)

a `तु त्यक्त्वा रथान् GAT ASTUTE Aalst: |
आकाशे विष्ठिता: शूरा: स्वप्रभावान्न विव्यथु: ॥ ४० I
Leaving their chariots, those heroic sons
of the high-souled Varuna for their part stood
firmly in the air by virtue of their divine
power and did not feel afflicted. (40)
धनूंषि कृत्वा सज्जानि विनिर्भिद्य महोदरम्।
रावणं समरे क्रुद्धा: सहिता: समवारयन्॥४१॥

Having strung their bows, and pierced
