658

Sri Rama for his part spoke as follows to
the distressed Laksmana on that very spot :

(19)
चीरमाहर चोत्तरम्।
जलक्रियार्थं तातस्य गमिष्यामि महात्मन:॥ २०॥

“Bring the crushed pulp of Ingudi, a
piece of bark for being wrapped about my
lions and another for being used as an
upper garment. | shall proceed to the river
bank to perform the rite of offering water to
the spirit of our high-souled father. (20)

सीता पुरस्ताद् व्रजतु त्वमेनामभितो at

अहं पश्चाद् गमिष्यामि गतिर्ह्यषा सुदारुणा॥ २१॥
“Let Sita walk ahead and follow you at

her heels. | shall follow in the rear; for such

is the most painful procedure employed on
occasions of mourning.” (21)
ततो नित्यानुगस्तेषां विदितात्मा महामति: |
मृदुर्दान्तश्च कान्तश्च TA च दृढभक्तिमान्॥२२॥
सुमन्त्रस्तैर्नृपसुतै: सार्धमाश्वास्य राघवम्।
अवतारयदालम्ब्य नदीं मन्दाकिनीं शिवाम्॥ २३॥
Consoling Sri Rama, a scion of Raghu,
alongwith those other princes, and holding
the former by the hand, Sumantra, their
hereditary servant—who had realized the
Self, was possessed of great intelligence,
gentle, self-controlled and glorious, and was
full of unswerving devotion to Sri Rama—
helped him descend to the blessed river,
Mandakini. (22-23)

a सुतीर्थां तत: कृच्छादुपगम्य यशस्विन:।
नदीं मन्दाकिनीं teat सदा पुष्पितकाननाम्॥ २४॥
शीघ्रस्रोतसमासाद्य तीर्थं शिवमकर्दमम्।
सिषिचुस्तूदकं Ua ad Ude भवत्विति॥ eu

Having reached with difficulty (because
of their inability to walk, overwhelmed as
they were with grief caused by their father’s
demise) the lovely and swift-flowing river
Mandakini—which was provided with easy
descents for bathing purposes and was
hemmed in with woodlands ever full of
blossom—and, betaking themselves to a

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA +

blessed descent free from mud, Sri Rama
and others for their part offered water to the
departed king, saying “Dear father, let this
water reach you.” (24-25)

प्रगृह्य तु महीपालो जलापूरितमञ्जलिम्।
fest याम्यामभिमुखो रुदन् वचनमब्रवीत्॥ २६॥

Holding together, in the form of a hollow,
his palms full of water, and standing with his
face turned towards the southern quarter
presided over by Yama, the god of death,
Sri Rama, the ruler of the earth, for his part
spoke weeping as follows: (26)

एतत् ते राजशार्दूल विमलं तोयमक्षयम्।
पितॄलोकगतस्याद्य महत्तमुपतिष्ठतु॥ २७॥

“Let this limpid water offered by me
today serve you, who have left for the world
of manes, inexhaustibly, O tiger among
kings !” (27)

ततो मन्दाकिनीतीरं प्रत्युत्तीर्य स राघव:।
पितुश्चकार तेजस्वी निर्वापं भ्रातृभि: सह॥ २८॥

Re-ascending to the bank of the
Mandakini the celebrated and glorious Sri
Rama (a scion of Raghu) then offered balls
of food to his father alongwith his other
three brothers. (28)

बदरैर्मिश्रं frome दर्भसंस्तरे।
न्यस्य राम: सुदु:खार्तो SSL वचनमब्रवीत्॥ २९॥

Serving the crushed pulp of INgudi fruit
mixed with the pulp of plums on a mat of
Kuga grass, Sri Rama, who was sore stricken
with agony, spoke weeping as follows:

(29)
इदं भुङ्क्ष्व महाराज Wat यदशना वयम्।
यदन्न: पुरुषो भवति तदन्नास्तस्य देवता:॥ ३०॥

“Delightfully partake of this, which is
our only food, O great monarch! Deties
partake of the same food which a man
worshipping them eats.” (30)

ततस्तेनैव मार्गेण प्रत्युत्तीर्यं सरित्तटात्।
आरुरोह नरव्याघ्रो रम्यसानुं महीधरम्॥३१॥

Moving up from the river bank once
