266

and is determined to die rather than submit
to Ravana. (27)

कथंचिन्मृगशावाक्षी विश्वासमुपपादिता।
da: सम्भाषिता da सर्वमर्थं प्रकाशिता॥ २८॥

“Somehow the lady with eyes like those
of a fawn was inspired with confidence. She
was then talked to and apprised of the
whole truth. (28)

रामसुग्रीवसख्यं च श्रुत्वा प्रीतिमुपागता।
नियत: समुदाचारो भक्तिर्भर्तरि arava २९॥

“Hearing of the alliance between Sri
Rama and Sugriva, she experienced joy.
Constant is her chastity and supreme is her
devotion to her lord. (29)

aa हन्ति anita स महात्मा दशानन:।
निमित्तमात्रं रामस्तु ad तस्य भविष्यति॥ ३०॥
“Since Sita does not kill Ravana by

subjecting him to a curse, it is evident that
the aforesaid Ravana is very powerful by

« VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

virtue of his asceticism. Nevertheless as
the great sin incurred by him through the
abduction of Sita has filled his cup of sin to
the brim, Sri Rama will serve only as an
instrument for his death. (30)

सा प्रकृत्यैव तन्वङ्गी तद्वियोगाच्च कर्शिता।
प्रतिपत्पाठशीलस्य विद्येव तनुतां गता॥३१॥

“Frail-bodied by her very nature, Sita
has been further reduced through separation
from her Lord and has grown thin like the
learning of a scholar continuing his studies
even on the first day of a lunar fortnight
(which must be observed as a complete
holiday by students). (31)

एवमास्ते महाभागा सीता शोकपरायणा।

यदत्र प्रतिकर्तव्यं aq सर्वमुपकल्प्यताम्॥ 32 Il
“In this way the highly blessed Sita

remains given over to grief. Let all that be

devised which requires to be done by way
of a remedy in this behalf.” (32)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये सुन्दरकाण्डे एकोनषष्टितम: सर्ग: ॥ ५९ ॥

Thus ends Canto Fifty-nine of the Sundarakanda in the glorious Ramayana of Valmiki,
the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

षष्टितम: at:
Canto LX

Feeling encouraged by the tributes paid to his valour by his fellow
monkeys, Prince Angada undertakes to exterminate the entire
ogre race including Ravana and bring back Sita from Lanka.

Jambavan, however, who is more sagacious and
practical-minded, discourages him by recourse
to potent counter-arguments

तस्य तद् वचनं श्रुत्वा वालिसूनुरभाषत।
अश्विपुत्रौ महावेगौ बलवन्तौ प्लवंगमौ॥१॥
पितामहवरोत्सेकात् परमं दर्पमास्थितौ।
अश्विनोर्माननार्थं हि सर्वलोकपितामह:॥ २॥
सर्वावध्यत्वमतुलमनयोर्दत्तवान् पुरा।
वरोत्सेकेन मत्तौ च wae महतीं चमूम्॥३॥

सुराणाममृतं वीरौ पीतवन्तौ महाबलौ।
`एतावेव fe संक्रुद्धौ सवाजिरथकुञ्जराम्॥४॥
अहमेकोऽपि wate: सराक्षसगणां पुरीम्॥५॥
तां लङ्कां तरसा हन्तुं रावणं च महाबलम्।
fe पुन: सहितो वीरैर्बलवद्भि: कृतात्मभि:।॥ ६॥
