184

the quarters in their order of seniority and in
a befitting manner. (10)

ag सर्वैर्दिशापालैर्वाक्यज्ञैर्वाक्यकोविदै: |
Ufa: सहयश्चैवागन्तासीत्यभिचोदित:॥ ११॥

He was received with honour by all the
elephants guarding all the four quarters—
who could easily understand the meaning of
others’ speech and were equally adept in
expression—and told that he would return
alongwith the horse. (11)

तेषां तद् वचनं श्रुत्वा जगाम लघुविक्रम:।
भस्मराशीकृता यत्र पितरस्तस्य सागरा:॥१२॥

Hearing that reply of theirs, Arnsuman
repaired with quick paces to the place where
his uncles, the sons of Sagara, lay reduced
to heaps of ashes. (12)

a दु:ख्वशमापन्नस्त्वसमञ्जसुतस्तदा |
चुक्रोश परमार्तस्तु वधात् तेषां सुदु:खित:॥१३॥
Already fallen a prey to affliction on not
finding them, the said son of Asamajja for
his part thereupon felt deeply distressed
over their death and actually cried in great
agony. (13)

awa च ta at चरन्तमविदूरत:।
ददर्श पुरुषव्याघ्रो दु:खशोकसमन्वित:॥१४॥

Nay, full of sorrow and grief the tiger
among men also perceived the sacrificial
horse grazing on the spot not very far from
him. (14)
स तेषां राजपुत्राणां कर्तुकामो जलक्रियाम्।
सजलार्थीमहातेजानचापश्यजलम्रायम्।।१५।।

He felt inclined to offer water to the
spirits of those princes. Though desirous of
water for that purpose, that exceptionally

« VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

glorious prince, however, did not come across
any reservoir of water nearby. (15)

विसार्य निपुणां दृष्टिं ततोऽपश्यत् खगाधिपम्।

पितॄणां मातुलं राम सुपर्णमनिलोपम्॥१६॥
Extending his penetrating vision all

round, O Rama, he then saw Garuda, the

king of birds, who is swift as the wind, and
the maternal uncle of his uncles. (16)

a चैनमब्रवीद् वाक्यं वैनतेयो महाबल:।
मा शुच: पुरुषव्याघ्र वधोऽयं लोकसम्मत:॥ Vy il
कपिलेनाप्रमेयेण दग्धा हीमे महाबला:।
सलिलं नार्हसि प्राज्ञ दातुमेषां हि लौकिकम्॥ १८॥

The exceptionally mighty Garuda (son
of Vinata), however, addressed to him the
following admonition: “This death of your
uncles, O tiger among men, is conducive to
the interests of all the three worlds inasmuch
as it will serve as an occasion for the
advent of the holy Ganga to the terrestrial
plane. These exceptionally mighty princes
have undoubtedly been burnt to death by
Sage Kapila of immeasurable glory. You
should not therefore offer them earthly*
water, O wise prince ! (17-18)

गङ्गा हिमवतो ज्येष्ठा दुहिता पुरुषर्षभ।

तस्यां कुरु महाबाहो पितॄणां सलिलक्रियाम्॥ १९॥
Ganga is the elder daughter of Himavan,

the deity presiding over the Himalayas. Offer

water, O mighty-armed prince, to the soul of

your departed uncles in that river, O jewel

among men! (19)

भस्मराशीकृतानेतान् प्लावयेल्लोकपावनी।
तया क्लिन्नमिदं भस्म गङ्गया लोककान्तया।
षष्टिं पुत्रसहस्राणि स्वर्गलोकं गमिष्यति॥ २०॥

* There is a Smrti text running as under:

चाण्डालादुदकात् wae वैद्युताद् ब्राह्मणादपि।

दंष्ट्रभ्यश्च पशुभ्यश्च

मरणं पापकर्मणाम्॥

उदकं पिण्डदानं च न तेषां तु विधीयते।
“Death at the hands of a pariah or a Brahmana or through being submerged in water, through snake-
bite, through being struck by lightning or through being bitten by animals with fangs falls to the lot of
men of sinful deeds alone. Offering water or lumps of cooked rice or uncooked flour etc., is not

recommended for their peace in the other world.”
