# YUDDHAKANDA #

हिमवच्छिखराणीव दह्यमानानि ade:
हर्म्यग्रैर्दह्यमानैश्च ज्वालाप्रज्वलितैरपि ।। २६ ॥
Tat सा दृश्यते लङ्का पुष्पितैरिव किंशुकै:।
हस्त्यध्यक्षैर्गजैर्मुक्तैर्मुक्तैश्च तुरगैरपि।
बभूव लङ्का लोकान्ते भ्रान्तग्राह इवार्णव:॥ २७॥

The fire burnt on the said occasion in
Lanka lakhs of houses of all the well-known
ogres dwelling in Lahka—who were fond of
their homes, were protected by coats of
mail encrusted with gold and were decked
with garlands and jewels and wore garments
on their person, their eyes wild with inebriation,
who walked slowly due to intoxication, whose
garments were supported by their loved
ones (even as they walked), who were
seized with fury against their enemy, who
carried maces, pikes and swords in their
hands, who were eating and drinking too, or
lay fast asleep on sumptuous beds with
their loved ones, or who were hurriedly
moving panic-stricken on all sides taking
their sons with them—and flared up again
and again. The aforesaid fire wholly
consumed the houses in Lanka, which were
strong and costly, were endowed with the
virtue of impenetrability (provided as they
were with many enclosures, defensive walls,
secret doors, gates and posterns) and had
been constructed with gold in the shape of
the full moon or the crescent, nay, which
rose high with their top rooms, were provided
all round with beautiful eye-holes and
furnished with seats and couches etc., were
decorated with gems and corals and
appeared to touch the sun, and were
rendered noisy with the notes of herons
and peacocks as well as with those of
Vinas and the jingling of ornaments and
looked like mountains. Enveloped with fire,
the archways shone like clouds girt round
with lightning when the summer had just
passed. Wrapped up in fire, the houses
shone brightly like the peaks of a large

621

mountain inflamed with a forest fire. Having
given up all connection with their ornaments
(which were melting due to excessive heat)
when getting scorched with fire while lying
fast asleep in their seven-storeyed mansions,
lovely women screamed at the top of their
voice, saying “Alas! Woe is me!!” Like the
peaks of a huge mountain, struck with the
thunderbolt of Indra (the wielder of the
thunderbolt), the houses too, which were
wreathed in fire, collapsed. While being
burnt, they shone from afar like the peaks
of the Himalaya mountain burning on all
sides. With its burning house-tops set ablaze
by the flames during the night, Lanka looked
as if adorned with Kurnsuka trees in blossom.
With elephants set free by their keepers
and horses let loose (in order to save them
from fire) Lanka looked like a sea with
alligators running wild (with fear) at the end
of the world-cycle. (14—27)

अश्वं मुक्तं गजो Gea क्वचिद् भीतोऽपसर्पति।
भीतो भीतं गजं दृष्टवा क्वचिदश्वो निवर्तते॥ २८ ॥

Here an elephant ran away alarmed to
see a horse let loose, while there a horse
turned back terror-stricken to see the alarmed
elephant. (28)

लङ्कायां दह्यमानायां शुशुभे च महोदधि:।
छायासंसक्कसलिलो लो।हेतोद इवाणंव्। ।॥ २९॥
With its image reflected on its waters
while Lanka was burning, the ocean looked
charming like a sea of red waters. (29)

सा aya मुहूर्तेन हरिभिर्दीपिता पुरी।
लोकस्यास्य क्षये घोरे प्रदीप्तेव वसुन्धरा॥ ३०॥
Set fire to by the monkeys, the said
city assumed in less than an hour the
appearance of the earth in flames at the
dread destruction of this world. (30)

नारीजनस्य धूमेन व्याप्तस्योच्चैर्विनेदुष:।
स्वनो ज्वलनतप्तस्य BIA शतयोजनम्॥ ३१॥

The clamour of the womenfolk of Lanka,
