# YUDDHAKANDA +

373

Canto XXIll

न Rama speaks of evil portents to Laksmana

निमित्तानि निमित्तज्ञो gear लक्ष्मणपूर्वज:।
सौमित्रिं सम्परिष्वज्य इदं वचनमब्रवीत्॥१॥
Perceiving portents दोर्पे closely
embracing Laksmana (son of Sumitra), Sri
Rama, the eldest brother of Laksmana who
had knowledge of portents, spoke as follows:
(1)

परिगृह्योदकं शीतं वनानि फलवन्ति च।
बलौघं संविभज्येमं व्यूह्य तिष्ठेम लक्ष्मण॥ २॥
“Occupying a region provided with fresh
water and woods, rich in fruit, nay, dividing
this multitude of troops into battalions and
drawing it up in battle-array, we should
remain alert, O Laksmana! (2)

लोकक्षयकरं भीमं भयं पश्याम्युपस्थितम्।
प्रबर्हणं प्रवीराणामृक्षवानररक्षसाम्॥ ३॥
“| perceive a formidable danger imminent,
which bodes destruction to the world and
the extermination of eminent heroes among
the bears, monkeys and ogres. (3)
वाताश्च कलुषा वान्ति कम्पते च वसुंधरा।
पर्वताग्राणि वेपन्ते पतन्ति च महीरुहा:॥४॥

“Winds are blowing full of dust and the
earth is quaking. Nay, mountain-peaks are
shaking and trees are falling. (4)

क्रूरा: Bt प्रवर्षन्ति fast शोणितबिन्दुभि:॥। ५॥
“Fierce and unkind clouds closely
resembling carnivorous animals and emitting
a harsh sound are cruelly letting loose
showers mingled with drops of blood. (5)
रक्तचन्दनसंकाशा Beat परमदारुणा।
ज्वलत: प्रपतत्येतदादित्यादग्निमण्डलम्॥ ६ ॥

“The evening twilight, resembling red

sandalwood in colour, appears most lurid.
From the blazing sun is falling a roundish
mass of fire. (6)

दीना दीनस्वरा: HU: सर्वतो मृगपक्षिण:।
प्रत्यादित्यं विनर्दन्ति जनयन्तो महद्भयम्॥७॥
“Wretched looking ferocious beasts and

birds are crying on all sides in pitiful tones
facing the sun, causing great fear. (7)

रजन्यामप्रकाशस्तु संतापयति चन्द्रमा:।
कृष्णरक्तांशुपर्यन्तो लोकक्षय इवोदित:॥८॥
“Bereft of splendour even at night, the
moon is radiating heat contrary to her nature.
Invested with a black and red halo, she has
risen as though at the time of universal
dissolution. (8)

Bat रूक्षोऽप्रशस्तश्च परिवेषस्तु लोहित:।
आदित्ये विमले नीलं लक्ष्म लक्ष्मण दृश्यते॥९॥
“A short, dreary, inauspicious and
coppery halo is actually seen round the sun
and a blue spot appears in the cloudless
sun, O Laksmana! (9)

रजसा महता चापि नक्षत्राणि हतानि a
युगान्तमिव लोकानां पश्य शंसन्ति लक्ष्मण॥ १०॥
“Lo! Obscured by a thick coat of dust,

the stars too forebode, as it were, the
destruction of all the world, O Laksmana! (10)

काका: श्येनास्तथा नीचा गृध्रा: परिपतन्ति च।
शिवाश्चाप्यशुभान् ASM नदन्ति सुमहाभयान्॥ ११॥

“Crows, hawks and vile vultures also
are falling on Lanka. And she-jackals too
are emitting sinister howls, which instil great
terror. (11)

We: शूलैश्च खड्गैश्च faq: कपिराक्षसै: |
भविष्यत्याव्रता भूमिर्मांसशोणितकर्दमा॥ १२॥
