* AYODHYAKANDA +

न रोचते ममाप्येतदार्ये aq Waal वनम्।
त्यक्त्वा राज्यश्रियं गच्छेत् RATT वाक्यवशंगत: I २॥
विपरीतश्च ges विषयैश्च प्रधर्षित:।
qu: किमिव न ब्रूयाच्चोद्यमान: समन्मथ:॥ ३॥
“To me either it does not appeal, O
worthy lady, that Sri Rama, a scion of
Raghu, should proceed to the forest
relinquishing the royal fortune. Dominated
by the words of a woman, the king has
become perverse and is full of lust, senile
and overpowered by his love for the pleasures
of sense. What will he not say, when urged
by Kaikeyi? (2-3)

नास्यापराधं पश्यामि नापि ere तथाविधम्।
येन निर्वास्यते Were वनवासाय राघव:॥४॥

“| do not perceive in Sri Rama any
such offence against the king nor any vice
for which Sri Rama, a scion of Raghu,
should be exiled from the state to take up
his abode in a forest. (4)

न तं पश्याम्यहं लोके परोक्षमपि यो नर:।
स्वमित्रोऽपि निरस्तोऽपि योऽस्य दोषमुदाहरेत्॥ ५॥

“| find no such man in the world who
may point out Sri Ram’s fault even in his
absence—not even the man who is his
deadly enemy or has been vanquished by
him. (5)
अवेक्षमाण: को धर्मं त्यजेत् पुत्रमकारणात्॥६॥

“What man having regard for virtue
would forsake without any cause a son who
stands on a par with the gods, is guileless,
disciplined and fond even of his enemies?(6)

aed ae Ua: पुनर्बाल्यमुपेयुष:।
Ua: को Ba Had राजव्रत्तमनुस्मरन्॥७॥

“What son having an eye to
statesmanship would heed such a command
of a king who has attained a second
childhood in the shape of dotage?” (7)

यावदेव न जानाति कश्चिदर्थमिमं नर:।
तावदेव मया सार्धमात्मस्थं He शासनम्॥८॥

373

Addressing Sri Rama, he continued :
“Before any individual comes to know this
fact of the king having decided to send you
into exile, take the reins of administration in
your hands with my help after duly installing
yourself as Prince Regent. (8)

मया ued सधनुषा तव Wet Weal
क: समर्थोऽधिकं ad कृतान्तस्येव तिष्ठत:॥ ९॥
“Before you standing as death, guarded
by me, stationed beside you, bow in hand,
who will be able to exhibit greater valour, O
scion of Raghu? (9)
निर्मनुष्यामिमां सर्वामयोध्यां मनुजर्षभ।
करिष्यामि शरैस्तीक्ष्णैर्यदि स्थास्यति विप्रिये॥ १०॥
“If the city of Ayodhya stands in
opposition to you, | shall depopulate the

entire city by means of my sharp-pointed
shafts, O jewel among men! (10)

भरतस्याथ पक्ष्यो वा यो area हितमिच्छति।
सर्वांस्तांश्च वधिष्यामि मृदुर्हि परिभूयते॥११॥

“Nay, whosoever is a supporter of
Bharata and whoever seeks to advance his
interests, | shall kill them all; for he alone
who is meek is subjected to contumely.

(11)
प्रोत्साहितोऽयं कैकेय्या संतुष्टो यदि न: पिता।
अमित्रभूतो Prag वध्यतां वध्यतामपि॥१२॥

“If pleased with Kaikeyi and instigated
by her, our royal father, behaves as an
enemy, let him be made captive or even got
rid of without the least scruple. (12)

कार्याकार्यमजानत:।
उत्पथं प्रतिपन्नस्य कार्यं भवति शासनम्॥१३॥

“Coercion has to be resorted to even
with reference to a father or teacher who
being puffed up with pride has ceased to
distinguish between what ought to be done
and what ought not to be done and has
taken to the evil path. (13)

बलमेष किमाश्रित्य ed वा पुरुषोत्तम।
दातुमिच्छति कैकेय्यै उपस्थितमिदं तव॥१४॥
