712

the frightened ogres, duly cheering them
up. (16)
सोऽतिविद्ध: शितैर्बाणै: कपीन्द्रस्तेन रक्षसा।

चुक्रोश च महाक्रोधो al AT AAT दधे॥ १७॥

Deeply pierced with sharp arrows by
that ogre, the said king of monkeys, who
was seized with great anger, roared and set
his mind on killing him. (17)
तत: पादपमुद्धृत्य शूर: सम्प्रधनो at |
ahaa जघानास्य प्रमुखे तं महागजम्॥१८॥

Tearing up a tree and springing forward,
the valiant monkey, Sugriva, who also fought

well, struck that huge elephant-like,
Virupaksa, standing opposite to him. (18)

स तु versed: सुग्रीवेण महागज:।
अपासर्पद ait निषसाद ननाद च॥१९॥

Overwhelmed with his blow by Sugriva,
the colossal elephant for its part receded to
a distance of four cubits only, sank down
and roared. (19)

गजात् तु मथितात् तूर्णमपक्रम्य स वीर्यवान्।
राक्षसोऽभिमुख: Wa प्रत्युद्गम्य Ad: कपिम्॥ Ro Il
आर्षभं चर्म wet च wre लघुविक्रम:।
भर्त्सयन्निव सुग्रीवमाससाद व्यवस्थितम्॥ २१॥

Jumping down with all speed from his
wounded elephant, nay, seizing hold of his
shield made of a bull’s hide, and sword and
advancing with rapid paces towards the
monkey-king, Sugriva, with his face turned
towards him, that powerful ogre for his part
approached his enemy—who stood firm to
meet him—threatening him, as it were.(20-21)

a fe तस्याभिसंक्रुद्ध: wre विपुलां शिलाम्।
विरूपाक्षस्य fasta सुग्रीवो जलदोषमाम्॥ २२॥
Seizing hold of a huge rock, which
looked like a cloud, the celebrated Sugriva,
who felt highly enraged, actually hurled it on
the aforesaid Virupaksa. (22)
स तां शिलामापतन्तीं gear राक्षसपुंगव:।
अपक्रम्य सुविक्रान्त: GSM प्राहरत् तदा॥ २३॥

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA +

Seeing that rock falling and jumping
aside, that bull among the orges, who was
exceedingly powerful, then struck sugriva
with his sword. (23)

wt खड्गप्रहारेण रक्षसा बलिना हत:।
मुहूर्तमभवद् भूमौ विसंज्ञ sa वानर:॥ २४॥

Wounded by the mighty’ ogre,
Virupaksa, with a stroke of his sword, the
monkey, Sugriva, lay awhile on the ground
unconscious, as it were. (24)

सहसा स तदोत्पत्य राक्षसस्य महाहवे।
मुष्टिं संवर्त्य वेगेन पातयामास वक्षसि॥ २५॥

Springing up all at once and whirling
his fist, Sugriva brought it down violently on
the ogre’s chest in that major conflict. (25)

मुष्टिप्रहाराभिहतो विरूपाक्षो निशाचर:।
तेन खड्गेन dee: सुग्रीवस्य चमूमुखे॥ २६॥
कवचं पातयामास पद्भ्यामभिहतोऽपतत्।
स समुत्थाय पतित: कपिस्तस्य व्यसर्जयत्॥ २७॥
तलप्रहारमशने: wat भीमनि:स्वनम्।
तलप्रहारं aq रक्ष: सुग्रीवेण समुद्यतम्॥ २८॥
नैपुण्यान्मोचयित्वैनं ताडयत्।
ततस्तु संक्रुद्धतर: सुग्रीवो वानरेश्वर:॥२९॥

Filled with rage when wounded by the
blow of Sugriva’s fist, the night-ranger,
Virupaksa, destroyed the formers armour
with that sword in the forefront of his army.
Nay, kicked by him, Sugriva fell down.
Spiringing to his feet when fallen, the monkey
gave the ogre a slap which produced a
terrific thunder-like crash.

Dodging by his adroitness the slap,
which was about to be dealt by Sugriva, the
ogre, Virupaksa, struck the latter on the
chest with his fist. Sugriva, the monkey
king, for his part thereupon grew all the
more furious. (26—29)

मोक्षितं चात्मनो दृष्टवा Wat तेन रक्षसा।
a ददर्शान्तरं तस्य विरूपाक्षस्य वानर:॥ ३०॥

Nay, seeing his blow parried by that
