170

“With what motive did that world-
purifying stream choose to wash all the
three regions (heaven, earth and the space
intervening them)? How did the Ganga, which
takes a threefold course, come to be known
as the foremost of rivers? (3)

fay लोकेषु धर्मज्ञ कर्मभि: कै: समन्विता।
तथा gata काकुत्स्थे विश्चामित्रस्तपोधन:॥४॥

निखिलेन कथां सर्वामृषिमध्ये न्यवेदयत्।
पुरा Wa कृतोद्बाह: शितिकण्ठो महातपा:।
at च भगवान् देवीं मैथुनायोपचक्रमे॥ ५॥
तस्य संक्रीडमानस्य महादेवस्य धीमत:।
शितिकण्ठस्य देवस्य दिव्यं वर्षशतं गतम्॥६॥

“With what achievements is she
associated in the three worlds, O knower of
Dharma (what is right)?” While Sri Rama (a
scion of Kakutstha) was speaking thus,
ViSwamitra, who claims askesis as his only
wealth, narrated in extenso in the midst of
the Rsis, that accompanied him, the whole
story as follows : “Seeing Goddess Parvati
by His side, O Rama, Lord Siva, who bears
a blue patch on His throat, nay, who is
noted for His great asceticism and had just
married Her, devoted Himself to the delights
of conjugal bliss. A hundred celestial years
(equivalent to 36,000 human years) rolled
past the all-wise Lord Siva, the Supreme
Deity, while He sported with His Spouse.

(4—6)
न चापि तनयो wa तस्यामासीत् परंतप।
wa देवा: समुद्युक्ता: पितामहपुरोगमा:॥७॥
यदिहोत्पद्यते भूतं कस्तत् प्रतिसहिष्यति।
अभिगम्य सुरा: सर्वे प्रणिपत्येदमब्रुवन्॥८॥
देवदेव महादेव लोकस्यास्य हिते रत।
सुराणां प्रणिपातेन प्रसादं कर्तुमर्हसि॥९॥

“Neither any son nor any daughter was,
however, born of Her, O Rama, the chastiser
of foes! All the gods with Brahma, the
progenitor of the entire creation, as their

leader girded up their loins to stop the
amorous sport. For, they said to themselves,

« VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

‘Who will be able to bear the glory of the
offspring that is born of this divine Lady?’
Approaching Him and falling prostrate before
Him, all the gods addressed to Him the
following prayer: ‘O Supreme Lord, the
adored of all gods, devoted as You are to
the good of this universe, be pleased to
extend Your grace to us, gods, in response
to our prostrations. (7—9)

न लोका धारयिष्यन्ति da तेज: सुरोत्तम।
ब्राह्मेण तपसा युक्तो देव्या As ABT १०॥

“The worlds or their denizens will not
be able to bear Your glory in the shape of
Your progeny, O Chief of gods! Therefore,
rich as You are in askesis in the form of
oneness with Brahma, desist from enjoying
the delights of connubial bliss and practise
austerities alongwith Your Divine Consort.

(10)
त्रैलोक्यहितकामार्थं तेजस्तेजसि ara
Ta सर्वानिमाँल्लोकान् नालोकं कर्तुमर्हसि॥ ११॥

““EFor the welfare of all the three worlds,
which is Your chief concern, pray retain
Your vital energy in Your own glorious Self
and thereby preserve all these worlds from
destruction, for the son that will be born to
You will be extremely glorious and will burn
all the three worlds. Pray, do not bring
about the extinction of the worlds.’ (11)

देवतानां वच: श्रुत्वा सर्वलोकमहेश्वर:।
बाढमित्यब्रवीत् सर्वान् पुनश्चेदमुवाच ह॥१२॥
धारयिष्याम्यहुं तेजस्तेजसैव सहोमया।
त्रिदशा: पृथिवी चैव निर्वाणमधिगच्छतु॥ 23 i

“Hearing the remonstrance of the gods,
Lord Siva (the suzerain Lord of all the
worlds) said ‘Amen !’ And further addressed
the following words to them all, so the tradition
goes: ‘I alongwith Uma shall retain Our
vital energy by dint of Our very glory
(retentive power). Let the terrestrial globe
as also the other worlds, O gods, live in
peace, i.e., free from fear of destruction.

(12-13)
