642

It was further graced with fearful arrows
encased in quivers and_ shining like
sunbeams, in the same way as Bhogavati
(the realm of Nagas) is graced by serpents
with incandescent hoods (21)

महारजतवासोभ्यामसिभ्यां च विराजिताम्।

रुक्मबिन्दुविचित्राभ्यां चर्मभ्यां चापि शोभिताम्॥ २२ ॥
The hut was also decked with a couple

of swords encased in sheaths of gold and

further adorned with two shields emblazoned
with flowers of gold. (22)

गोधाङ्ग श्चत्रकाञ्चनभूषितै: ।
घैरनाधृष्यां मृगै सिंहगुहामिव॥ २३॥
Distinguished by gloves of iguana skin
decked with excellent gold and hanging on
walls, the hut was unassailable by hordes
of enemies even as the lair of a lion is
incapable of being assailed by deer. (23)
ददर्श भरतस्तत्र पुण्यां रामनिवेशने॥ २४॥
In that habitat of Sri Rama, Bharata
also beheld a spacious holy altar inclining
towards the south-east and with a lighted
fire placed on it. (24)

निरीक्ष्य स ued तु ददर्शं भरतो गुरुम्।
उटजे राममासीनं जटामण्डलधारिणम्॥ २५॥
Fixing his gaze awhile, Bharata for his
part descried his elder brother, Sri Rama,
seated in the hut wearing a rounded mass
of matted hair on his head. (25)
कृष्णाजिनधरं तं तु चीरवल्कलवाससम्।
cast राममासीनमभित: पावकोपमम्॥ २६॥
He saw the said Sri Rama wearing the
skin of a black buck and clad in a strip of
bark and resembling fire in brilliance, seated
closeby. (26)
सिंहस्कन्धं महाबाहुं पुण्डरीकनिभेक्षणम्।
पृथिव्या: सागरान्ताया भर्तारं धर्मचारिणम्॥ २७॥
उपविष्टं महाबाहुं ब्रह्माणमिव शाश्वतम्।
स्थण्डिले दर्भसंस्तीर्णे सीतया लक्ष्मणेन च॥ २८॥

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

He saw the mighty-armed Sri Rama, the
protector of the earth extending up to the
ocean, who had shoulders resembling a lion’s
and eyes resembling a pair of lotuses and
was given to the practice of virtue, seated
like the eternal Brahma (the creator) on a
levelled and squared piece of ground strewn
with blades of the sacred KuSa grass,
alongwith Sita and Laksmana. (27-28)

तं BT भरत: श्रीमान् शोकमोहपरिप्लुत:।
अभ्यधावत धर्मात्मा भरत: केकयीसुत:॥ २९॥

Overwhelmed with agony and
infatuation, the glorious Bharata, son of
Kaikeyi, whose mind was given to piety,
rushed towards him on seeing him. (29)
ea विललापार्तो बाष्पसंदिग्धया गिरा।
अशक्नुवन् वारयितुं धैर्याद् वचनमब्रुवन्॥ ३०॥

Distressed at his very sight, he wailed
as follows in a voice choked with tears,
unable as he was to restrain his agony

through firmness and failing to articulate
words : (30)

a: Wate प्रकृतिभिर्भवेद युक्त उपासितुम्।
वन्यैर्मृगैरुपासीन: सोऽयमास्ते ममाग्रज:॥ ३१॥

“Here is that very elder brother of mine
sitting in the company of wild deer, who
deserves to be attended upon by ministers
in a royal assembly. (31)

वासोभिर्बहुसाहस्रैर्यो महात्मा पुरोचित:।
मृगाजिने सोऽयमिह प्रवस्ते धर्ममाचरन्॥३२॥
“The same exalted soul who was used
to wearing clothes worth many thousands
in the city of Ayodhya, puts on in this forest
today pieces of deerskin, one about his
loins and the other as an upper garment,
discharging his sacred obligation towards
his father. (32)

अधारयद् यो विविधाश्चित्रा: सुमनस: सदा।
सोऽयं जटाभारमिमं सहते राघव: कथम्॥ ३३॥

“How does the selfsame Sri Rama, a
scion of Raghu, who ever adorned his head
