+ UTTARAKANDA +

Under the blow of the mace directed
by Arjuna, however, the notorious Ravana
receded a bow’s length and sank down
crying. (62)

स विह्वलं तदालक्ष्य दशग्रीवं ततोऽर्जुन:।
सहसोत्पत्य जग्राह गरुत्मानिव पन्नगम्॥६३॥

Springing forward all of a sudden on
seeing Ravana (the ten-headed monster)
confused at that time, Arjuna thereupon
caught hold of him as Garuda (the king of
birds) would seize a serpent. (63)

स तुं बाहुसहस्रेण acne Wel दशाननम्।
बबन्ध बलवान् राजा बलिं नारायणो यथा॥ ६४॥

Forcibly laying hold of Ravana with his
thousand arms, the mighty king bound him
even as Lord Narayana in His descent as
Vamana bound Bali. (64)

ब्ध्यमाने दशग्रीवरे सिद्धचारणदेवता:।
साध्वीति वादिन: पुष्पै: किरन्त्यर्जुनमूर्धनि॥ ६५॥

While Ravana (the ten-headed monster)
was being bound, the Siddhas (a class of
semi-divine beings credited with supernatural
powers by virtue of their very birth), Caranas
(celestial bards) and gods (witnessing the
scene from the skies) covered the airspace
over the head of Arjuna with flowers, saying
“Well done!” (65)

व्याघ्रो मृगमिवादाय मृगराडिव pac
wre हैहयो राजा हर्षादम्बुदवन्मुहु:॥६६॥

Having captured Ravana even as a
tiger would seize a deer or a lion would lay
hold of an elephant, King Arjuna (the ruler of
the Haihayas) thundered like a cloud again
and again. (66)

प्रहस्तस्तु समाश्वस्तो दृष्टवा Teg दशाननम्।
सहसा राक्षस: Hal ह्यभिदुद्राव हैहयम्॥६७॥

Provoked to anger on seeing Ravana

(the ten-headed monster) bound, when fully
restored to consciousness, the ogre Prahasta
for his part rapidly rushed headlong on Arjuna.
(67)

961

नक्तंचराणां वेगस्तुं तेषामापततां बभौ।
उद्धूत आतपापाये पयोदानामिवाम्बुधौ॥ ६८॥

The onrush of those assailing night-
rangers grew in violence as that of clouds
appearing on the sea at the end of summer.

(68)

मुञ्चमुञ्चेति भाषन्तस्तिष्ठतिष्ठेति चासकृत्।
मुसलानि च शूलानि सोत्ससर्ज तदा रणे॥६९॥

The ogres rushed forth, repeatedly
crying “Hurl the weapon! Hurl the weapon”
and “Stay awhile, Stay awhile” and he
(Prahasta) hurled pestles and darts on the
battlefield. (69)

अप्राप्तान्येव तान्याशु असम्भ्रान्तस्तदार्जुन:।
आयुधान्यमरारीणां जग्राहारिनिषूदन: ॥ ७० ॥
Not at all confused, Arjuna, the
destroyer of his foes, at that time speedily
took hold of those weapons of the enemies
of gods even before they reached him. (70)

ततस्तैरेव रक्षांसि दुर्धरै: प्रवरायुधै:।
भित्त्वा बविद्रावयामास वायुरम्बुधरानिव॥७१॥

Piercing the ogres with those very
weapons, which were most excellent and
difficult even to hold, Arjuna drove them
away even as the wind disperses clouds.

(71)
राक्षसांस्त्रासयामास कार्तवीर्यार्जुनस्तदा।
रावणं Ta नगरं प्रविवेश Wega: veri

Arjuna, son of Krtavirya, frightened the
ogres at that time. Nay taking Ravana and
surrounded by his friends, he entered the
city. (72)
स कीर्यमाण: कुसुमाक्षतोत्करै-

fos: सपौरै: पुरुहूतसंनिभ:।
atet निगृह्येव सहस्रलोचन:॥७३॥

Being covered with heaps of flowers

and unbroken grains of rice by Brahmanas

(the twice-born) and other citizens on
capturing Ravana, Arjuna, who closely
