* AYODHYAKANDA +

“Indeed we long to see the mighty-
armed Sri Rama, a hero among the Raghus,
who is possessed of great strength, riding
on a huge elephant with his head canopied
with the royal umbrella.” (22)

इति तद्वचनं श्रुत्वा राजा तेषां मन:प्रियम्।
sama जिज्ञासुरिदं वचनमब्रवीत्॥ २३॥

Hearing the aforesaid statement of the
councillors, the Emperor made the following
reply with the intention of ascertaining what
would please their mind as though not
knowing it: (23)
श्रुत्वैतद् वचनं at wad पतिमिच्छथ।
राजान: संशयोऽयं मे तदिदं FA तत्त्वत:॥ २४॥

“Since on hearing this proposal of mine
you desire Sri Rama, a scion of Raghu, to
be your ruler, O kings, here is my doubt (on
this point); therefore, please answer my
following question correctly. (24)

कथं नु मयि धर्मेण पृथिवीमनुशासति।
भवन्तो द्रष्टुमिच्छन्ति युवराजं महाबलम्॥ २५॥
“How is it, | ask you, that even while |
am ruling the earth with righteousness, you
wish to see Sri Rama (who is possessed of
extraordinary strength) as Prince Regent?”
(25)

a तमूचुर्महात्मान: पौरजानपदै: सह।
aed FA कल्याणगुणा: सन्ति सुतस्य ते॥ २६॥
Those high-minded men in agreement
with the citizens of Ayodhya as well as with
the people of other territories replied to
the Emperor as follows: “Many benignant
qualities inhere in your eldest son, Sri Rama,
O protector of men! (26)

गुणान् गुणवतो ea देवकल्पस्य धीमत:।
प्रियानानन्दनान् कृत्स्नान् प्रवक्ष्यामोऽद्य तान् ATTN २७॥

“We shall just recount, O lord, all the
beloved and pleasing virtues known to us of
the talented and godlike Sri Rama, who is a
repository of excellences; pray, hear about
them. (27)

291

दिव्यैर्गुणै: शक्रसमो WA: सत्यपराक्रम:।
इक्ष्वाकुभ्योऽपि सर्वेभ्यो ह्यतिरिक्तो विशाम्पते॥ २८ ॥

“Sri Rama of unfailing prowess is a
compeer of Indra in superhuman virtues
and has unquestionably surpassed all the
scions of Ikswaku, O ruler of men! (28)

TH: सत्पुरुषो लोके सत्य: सत्यपरायण:।
Mate ware विनिर्वृत्तो धर्मश्चापि श्रिया सह॥ २९॥

“Sri Rama is the only righteous man in
the world: he is not only truthful but also
solely devoted to truth. Virtue alongwith
the _resultant_prosperity too has directly
proceeded from Sri Rama. (29)
प्रजासुखत्वे चन्द्रस्य वसुधाया: क्षमागुणै: |
बुद्ध्या बृहस्पतेस्तुल्यो वीर्ये साक्षाच्छचीपते: it ३० I

“He is a compeer of the moon in
affording delight to all created beings, vies
with the earth in his forbearance and other
allied virtues, is a replica of the sage
Brhaspati, the preceptor of gods, in wisdom
and is a direct image of Indra (the spouse of
Saci) in valour. (30)
ada: सत्यसंधश्च शीलवाननसूयक:।
क्षान्त: सान्त्वयिता THM: Saal विजितेन्द्रिय: ।। ३१ ॥

“He knows what is right, is true to his
vow, is full of amiability and free from
censoriousness, is tranquil, comforting, polite
of speech and grateful and has fully mastered
his senses. (31)

मृदुश्च स्थिरचित्तश्च सदा भव्योऽनसूयक:।
प्रियवादी च भूतानां सत्यवादी च राघव:॥ ३२॥

“Nay, Sri Rama, a scion of Raghu, is
gentle and stable of mind, ever gracious
and uncarping, speaks kindly to all living
beings and is veracious too. (32)
तेनास्येहातुला कोर्तिर्यशस्तेजश्च वर्धते॥३३॥

“He is a votary of the learned, his
elders and the Brahmanas. By virtue of
such service rendered to the learned and
others, his incomparable renown,celebrity
and glory stand enhanced in this world. (33)

