+ UTTARAKANDA +

“Hearing these words of Malyavan,
Sumali and Mali spoke to their elder brother
even as the Aswins speak to Indra: (39)
स्वधीतं cafe च tead परिपालितम्।
आयुर्निरामयं प्राप्तं सुधर्म: स्थापित: afr xo tt

‘We have studied the Vedas, have
performed acts of charity and the Vedic
sacrifices. We have safeguarded our wealth;
we have obtained a long lease of life free
from disease. We have Dharma installed in
our life. (40)

देवसागरमक्षोभ्यं शस्त्रै; समवगाह्य च।
जिता द्विषो ह्यप्रतिमास्तन्नो Ae भयम्॥४१॥
‘The sea in the form of gods, which
was incapable of being disturbed has been
penetrated by our missiles; unequalled foes
have been conquered. There is no fear of
death to us. (41)
नारायणश्च रुद्रश्च शक्रश्चापि यमस्तथा।
अस्माकं प्रमुखे स्थातुं सर्वे बिभ्यति सर्वदा॥४२॥
‘Narayana and Rudra and Indra, and

Yama—all of them are always afraid of
standing in front of us. (42)

famnguet नास्त्येव ANU राक्षसेश्वर।
देवानामेव दोषेण विष्णो: प्रचलितं मन:॥४३॥
‘O Lord of Raksasas, Visnu has no
cause for quarrel with us; his mind has
been poisoned only by the crookedness of
gods. (43)
तस्मादद्यैव सहिता: सर्वेऽन्योन्यसमाव्रता:।
देवानेव जिघांसामो येभ्यो दोष: समुत्थित:॥४४॥
‘Therefore, let us all even now join together

and, guarded by one another, kill the very
gods from whom enmity has started.’ (44)

एवं waa बलिन: सर्वसैन्यसमाव्रता:।
उद्योगं घोषयित्वा तु wd नैर्ऋतपुंगवा:॥४५॥
युद्धाय निर्ययु: क्रुद्धा जम्भवूत्रादयो यथा।
इति a wa सम्मन्त्य सर्वोद्योगेन राक्षसा:॥४६॥
aera निर्ययु: ae महाकाया महाबला:।
स्यन्दनैर्वारणैश्चैव हयैश्च करिसंनिभै:॥४७॥

863
खरैर्गोभिरथोष्ट्रश्च शिशुमारैर्भुजंगमै: ।
मकरै: कच्छपैर्मीनैर्विहंगैर्गरुडोपमै: ॥ ४८ ॥
सिंहैर्वयाघ्रैर्वराहैश्च सृमरैश्चमरैरपि।
त्यक्त्वा लङ्कां गता: सर्वे राक्षसा बलगर्विता: ॥ ४९ ॥
प्रयाता देवलोकाय योद्धुं दैवतशत्रव:।
लङ्काविपर्ययं दृष्टवा यानि लङ्कालयान्यथ॥ ५०॥
भूतानि भयदर्शीनि विमनस्कानि सर्वश:।
रथोत्तमैरुह्यमाना: शतशोऽथ सहस्रश:॥७५१॥
प्रयाता राक्षसास्तूर्णं देवलोकं प्रयत्नत:।
रक्षसामेव मार्गेण दैवतान्यपचक्रमु:॥७५२॥

“Having taken counsel in this manner,
all those strong leaders of the Raksasas,
like Jambha, Vrtra and etc., followed by all
their troops and proclaiming their intention,
sallied forth for war in anger. Having thought
thus, O Rama all the said Raksasas of
huge bodies and immense strength, set forth
for war with all preparations. Leaving Lanka,
all the Raksasas, the enemies of gods, in
the pride of their strength, proceeded towards
the abode of gods to wage war followed by
chariots, elephants, horses huge as
elephants, mules, cows, camels, Sisumaras
(dolphins), snakes, alligators, tortoises, fish,
birds huge as Garuda, lions, tigers, boars,
varieties of deer known as Srmara and
Camara. Other living beings, who were
residing in Lanka, foreseeing its destruction
and apprehending danger, became sad.
The Raksasas in their hundreds and
thousands soon set out collectively in the
best of chariots towards the realm of gods
with determination. The gods also went out
through the same passage as the Raksasas.

(45—52)
भौमाश्चैवान्तरिक्षाश्च कालाज्ञप्ता भयावहा:।
उत्पाता राक्षसेन्द्राणामभावाय समुत्थिता:॥७५३॥

“Portents, both terrestrial and celestial,
ordained by Yama and _ indicating the
impending danger, distinctly arose suggesting
the destruction of the Raksasas. (53)
अस्थीनि मेघा वव्रृषुरुष्णं शोणितमेव च।
वेलां समुद्राश्चोत्क्रान्ताश्चेलुश्चाप्यथ भूधरा:॥५४॥
