622

enveloped in smoke, scorched with fire and
shrieking at the top of their voice could be
heard up to one hundred Yojanas (or eight
hundred miles). (31)

प्रदग्धकायानपरान् राक्षसान् निर्गतान् ate: |
सहसा ह्युत्पतन्ति स्म हरयोऽथ युयुत्सव:॥ ३२॥
Nay, the monkeys, who were eager to
come to blows, would actually assail all of
a sudden other ogres, whose bodies had
been badly burnt and who rushed out of the
city to save their lives. (32)

उद्घुष्टं वानराणां च राक्षसानां च नि:स्वनम्।

दिशो दश समुद्रं च पृथिवीं च व्यनादयत्॥ ३३॥
The clamour of the monkeys as well

as the cry of distress of the ogres caused

all the ten directions as well as the sea and
the earth to resound. (33)

विशल्यौ च महात्मानौ तावुभौ रामलक्ष्मणौ।
असम्भ्रान्तौ जगृहतुस्ते उभे धनुषी वरे॥३४॥
Healed of their wounds and not the
least nonplussed, both those high-souled
princes, Sri Rama and Laksmana, seized
hold of both their well-known excellent
bows. (34)

ततो विस्फारयामास was धनुरुत्तमम्।

aya तुमुल: शब्दो राक्षसानां भयावह:॥ ३५॥
Nay, thereupon Sri Rama drew his

excellent bow and as a result of it there

arose a tumultuous twang, which struck
terror in the ogres. (35)

अशोभत तदा Wal धनुर्विस्फारयन् महत्।
भगवानिव संक्रुद्धो भवो वेदमयं धनु:॥ ३६॥
Bending his great bow, Sri Rama shone
at that time as Lord Siva (the Source of the
universe) stretching His bow, consisting of
the Vedas, in great fury at the time of the
dissolution of the universe. (36)
SETS वानराणां च राक्षसानां च नि:स्वनम्।
ज्याशब्दस्तावुभौ शब्दावति WHT शुश्रुवे॥ ३७॥

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA +

The twang of Sri Rama’s_ bow-
string could be heard above both the
aforesaid sounds, viz., the clamour of the
monkeys and the cry of distress of the
ogres, too. (37)

वानरोद्घुष्टघोषश्च राक्षसानां च नि:स्वन:।
ज्याशब्दश्चापि रामस्य त्रयं cara fest ser ३८ i

Nay, the shout of victory raised by the
monkeys, as also the wailing of the ogres
as well as the twang of Sri Rama’s bow-
string—the three sounds filled all the ten
directions. (38)

wa कार्मुकनिर्मुक्तै: शरैस्तत्पुरगोपुरम्।
कैलासशृङ्गप्रतिमं विकीर्णमभवद् भुवि॥३९॥

Under the shafts discharged from Sri
Rama’s bow, the principal gate of the
aforesaid city, which resembled a peak of
Mount Kailasa (the abode of Lord Siva),
crumbled to the ground. (39)

ततो रामशरान् gear विमानेषु गृहेषु च।
संनाहो राक्षसेन्द्राणां तुमुल: समपद्यत॥४०॥
On beholding the arrows of Sri Rama
descending on the seven-storeyed mansions
and other houses of Lanka, the war-
effort of the ogre chiefs thereupon waxed
fierce. (40)
तेषां सं  सिंहनादं च sare |
wet राक्षसेन्द्राणां रौद्रीव समपद्यत॥४१॥
As the aforesaid ogre chiefs were
preparing for a sortie and emitting leonine
roars night came upon them even as the
night of final dissolution presided over by
Rudra, the god of destruction. (41)

आदिष्टा वानरेन्द्रास्ते सुग्रीवेण महात्मना।
आसन्नं द्वारमासाद्य युध्यध्वं च प्लवंगमा:॥४२॥
The celebrated monkey chiefs were
commanded by the high-souled Sugriva as
follows: “Attacking the nearest gate, begin
to fight, O monkeys! (42)
