# YUDDHAKANDA #

having been killed by Nila, an offspring of
the fire-god. And the overlord of ogres fell a
prey to anger on hearing their aforesaid
report. (2)
Sara तान् राक्षसयूथमुख्या-
निन्द्रो यथा निर्जरयूथमुख्यान्॥३॥
Tormented with anger, his mind
overwhelmed with grief on hearing of Prahasta
having been killed in combat, Ravana spoke
as follows to those leaders of ogre troops
even as Indra, the ruler of gods, would to
the commanders of celestial troops: (3)

नावज्ञा रिपवे कार्या यैरिन्द्रबलसादन:।
सूदित: सैन्यपालो A सानुयात्र: सकुञ्जर:॥४॥

“No low opinion should be entertained
with regard to an enemy by whom my
Commander-in-Chief, who was capable of
exterminating the army of Indra, the ruler of
gods, has been killed alongwith his followers
and elephants. (4)

aise रिपुविनाशाय विजयायाविचारयन्।
स्वयमेव गमिष्यामि रणशीर्षं तदद्भुतम्॥५॥

“| shall, therefore, unhesitatingly proceed
to the incredible scene of battle for the
extermination of the enemies and our own
conquest. (5)
TI तद् वानरानीकं Wa च सहलक्ष्मणम्।
निर्दंहिष्यामि बाणौघैर्वनं दीप्तैरिवाग्निभि:।
aa संतर्पयिष्यामि पृथिवीं कपिशोणितै:।॥ ६॥

“| shall with the streams of my arrows
burn up this very day that army of monkeys
as also Rama with Laksmana even as one
would burn a forest with luminous flames. |
shall satiate the earth with the blood of the
monkeys today.” (6)

स एवमुक्त्वा ज्वलनप्रकाशं

रथं तुरंगोत्तमराजियुक्तम्।

507

vert age ज्वलन्तं
समारुरोहामरराजशत्रु:
Saying so, that enemy of Indra (the ruler
of immortals) duly ascended his splendid
chariot, which shone like fire and was yoked
to a team of the foremost of horses and was
blazing by virtue of its golden frame. (7)

a

Voll

शङ्खभेरीपणवप्रणादै-
रास्फोटितक्ष्वेडितसिंहनादै: ।
qd: wast सुपूज्यमान-
स्तदा ययौ राक्षसराजमुख्य:॥८॥

Ravana, the foremost of ogre chiefs,
went forth at that moment while being
honoured by means of the blast of conches;
the beating of kettle-drums, by the clapping
of arms, menacing sounds and _ leonine
roars as well as by means of agreeable
encomiums. (8)

aq _

र्मांसाशनै: पावकदीप्तनेत्रै: |
at वृतो राक्षसराजमुख्यो

भूतैर्वृतो रुद्र इवामरेश: ॥ ९॥

Surrounded by ogres (lit., eaters of
flesh), whose forms closely resembled
mountains and clouds, and whose eyes
blazed like fire, that suzerain lord of ogres,
shone brightly like Rudra (the god of
destruction), the lord of immortals, surrounded
by genii. (9)

समुद्यतं पादपशैलहस्तम्॥ १०॥

Issuing all at once from the city of
Lanka, Ravana, who was endowed with
extraordinary energy, beheld that formidable
army of monkeys, fully prepared for combat
with trees and rocks in their hands, and
roaring like an ocean and thundering like
a mass of clouds. (10)
