# YUDDHAKANDA +

यद्यप्येष तु Gaal ade गदितो मम।
समुद्रपारगमने हरीणां किमिवोत्तरम्॥१८॥

Although this fact of the impassability
of the sea has been mentioned even by
Sita, a princess of the Videha territory, what
step should be taken for the passage of the
monkeys across the sea?” (18)

295

इत्युक्त्वा शोकसम्भ्रान्तो TA: शत्रुनिबर्हण:।
हनूमन्तं महाबाहुस्ततो ध्यानमुपागमत्॥१९॥
Having spoken as_ aforesaid to
Hanuman, the mighty-armed Sri Rama, the
exterminator of his foes, who felt perplexed
through grief, then became thoughtful.
(19)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये युद्धकाण्डे GIA: सर्ग: ॥ १ il

Thus ends Canto One in the Yuddhakanda of the glorious Ramayana of
Valmiki, the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

द्वितीय: सर्ग:

Canto Il

Sugriva heartens Sri Rama, who is tormented with grief,
by asking him to take courage

तं तु शोकपरिद्यूनं wa दशरथात्मजम्।
उवाच वचनं श्रीमान् सुग्रीव: शोकनाशनम्॥ १॥
To the said Sri Rama, sprung from the
loins of DaSaratha, who was sore stricken
with grief, the glorious Sugriva for his
part made the following reply, which was
calculated to drive away his grief: (1)

किं त्वया तप्यते वीर यथान्य: प्राकृतस्तथा।
मैवं भूस्त्यज संतापं कृतघ्न ga सौहृदम्॥ २॥

“Why do you give way to sorrow,
O hero, even as another common man
would? Do not be sorrowful like this; shake
of agony even as an ungrateful fellow would
cast all goodwill to the winds. (2)

संतापस्य च a स्थानं नहि पश्यामि राघव।
प्रवृत्तावुपलब्धायां wd च fea रिपो:॥ ३॥
“Moreover, | do not actually find any
occasion for your agony, O scion of Raghu,
intelligence about Sita having been received
and the enemy’s abode discovered. (3)

मतिमाञ्शास्त्रवित् Wa: पण्डितश्चासि राघव।
त्यजेमां प्राकृतां बुद्धिं कृतात्मेवार्थदूषिणीम्॥४॥

“You are endowed with prudence, well-
versed in the sacred lore, exceedingly
wise and learned, O scion of Raghu! As
such like one who has disciplined one’s
mind, give up this commonplace mentality,
which is calculated to mar your very purpose.

(4)
समुद्रं लङ्घयित्वा तु महानक्रसमाकुलम्।
लङ्कामारोहयिष्यामो हनिष्यामश्च a रिपुम्॥५॥

“Crossing the sea, infested with mighty
crocodiles, we shall climb up the fortress

of Lanka and make short work of your
enemy, Ravana. (5)
निरुत्साहस्य दीनस्य शोकपर्याकुलात्मन:।
सर्वार्था व्यवसीदन्ति व्यसनं चाधिगच्छति॥६॥
“All the affairs of a man who is lacking
in spirit and miserable, and whose mind is

puzzled through grief, come to nought and
he meets with disaster. (6)

इमे शूरा: समर्थाश्च सर्वतो हरियूथपा:।
त्वत्प्रियार्थं कृतोत्साहा: प्रवेष्टुमपि पावकम्।
wat हर्षेण जानामि तर्कश्चापि get मम॥७॥
