* ARANYAKANDA «

own eyes the glory of your high-souled
preceptors, heard of by me of its true
character from the demon Kabandha.” Hearing
these words issued from the lips of Sri Rama,
Sabari for her part showed both the brothers
round that vast forest, saying: “Behold the
forest dark as a rainy cloud and thronged
with beasts and birds and widely known by
the name of Matangavana only, O joy of the
House of Raghu!” She said: “Here the
aforesaid preceptors of mine, who had purified
the soul by meditating on God, sacrificed their
body consecrated by repeating the holy text
of Gayatri while uttering the Mantra which
are recited at the time of pouring oblations
into the sacred fire, O prince endowed with
great splendour ! (17—22)

इयं प्रत्यक्स्थली वेदी यत्र ते A सुसत्कृता:।
पुष्पोपहारं कुर्वन्ति श्रमादुद्वेपिभि: करै:।॥ २३॥

“This is the altar known by the name of
Pratyaksthali, where the aforesaid Rsis,
highly adored by me, offered worship with
flowers to the deities with their hands shaking
due to exhaustion caused by old age, coupled
with austerity of life. (23)

तेषां तप:प्रभावेण पश्याद्यापि रघूत्तम।
द्योतयन्ती दिश: सर्वा: श्रिया वेद्यतुलप्रभा॥ २४॥

“See how the altar retains its matchless
effulgence even to this day, illumining all the
quarters by its splendour through the power
of their asceticism, O flower of Raghu’s
race ! (24)

अशक्नुवद्धिस्तैर्गन्तुमुपवासश्रमालसै: ।
चिन्तितेनागतान् पश्य समेतान् AA सागरान्॥ २५॥

“Behold all the seven oceans encircling
the earth drawn in a collective form to this
spot by the very thought of those sages
when they had grown feeble due to
exhaustion occasioned by fasting and were
consequently unable to undertake a journey
to the seven oceans. (25)

कृताभिषेकैस्तैर्न्यस्ता वल्कला: पादपेष्विह।
अद्यापि न विशुष्यन्ति प्रदेशे रघुनन्दन॥ २६॥

925

“The barks of trees (clothes) spread by
them on the trees in this region, after they had
finished their ablutions, have not dried up till
today, O delight of the Raghus ! (26)

देवकार्याणि कुर्वद्भिर्यानीमानि कृतानि ay
पुष्पै: कुवलयै: सार्धं म्लानत्वं न तु यान्ति TU २७॥
“The garlands which were actually
made by them with flowers interspersed
with blue water-lilies while going through
rites undertaken to propitiate the gods have
not really faded till now. (27)
तदिच्छाम्यभ्यनुज्ञाता त्यक्ष्याम्येतत् कलेवरम्॥ VS ॥
“The whole of this forest has been
seen and what was worth hearing about it
has been heard by you. |, therefore, wish
that duly permitted by you, | may cast off this
body. (28)
मुनीनामाश्रमो रे च परिचारिणी॥२९॥
“| long to approach those ascetics of
purified mind to whom this hermitage belongs
and whose servant | have been.” (29)
धर्मिष्ठं तु वच: श्रुत्वा राघव: सहलक्ष्मण:।
प्रहर्षमतुलं लेभे आश्चर्यमिति चाब्रवीत्॥३०॥
. Hearing the most pious submission of
Sabari, Sri Rama (a scion of Raghu) for his
part together with Laksmana experienced
incomparable —_exultation and _ said,
“Wonderful !” (30)
तामुवाच ततो wa: शबरीं संशितव्रताम्।
अर्चितोऽहं त्वया भद्रे गच्छ कामं यथासुखम्॥ ३१॥
Sri Rama then replied to the said Sabari
of austere vows, “I have been duly honoured
by you, O blessed lady! Now depart
happily at will.” (31)
इत्येवमुक्ता जटिला चीरकृष्णाजिनाम्बरा।
अनुज्ञाता तु रामेण हुत्वाऽऽत्मानं हुताशने॥ ३२॥
ज्वलत्पावकसंकाशा स्वर्गमेव जगाम ह।
दिव्याभरणसंयुक्ता दिव्यमाल्यानुलेपना॥ ३३॥
दिव्याम्बरधरा dt aya प्रियदर्शना।
विराजयन्ती तं देशं विद्युत्सौदामनी यथा॥ ३४॥
