# YUDDHAKANDA #

Seeing him and _ intercepting the
streams of his arrows by hurling rocks etc.,
the celebrated Hanuman, an offspring of
the wind-god, who was endowed with
extraordinary courage, darted towards
Ravana. (53)

रथं तस्य समासाद्य बाहुमुद्यम्य दक्षिणम्।
त्रासयन् रावणं धीमान् SAM वाक्यमब्रवीत्॥ ५४॥
Approaching his chariot, nay lifting
his right arm and menacing him, the
sagacious Hanuman spoke to him as
follows: (54)

देवदानवगन्धर्वैर्यक्षैश्च de राक्षसै:।
अवध्यत्वं त्वया प्राप्तं वानरेभ्यस्तु A भयम्॥ ५५॥
“The boon of immunity from death
at the hands of gods, demons and
Gandharvas (celestial musicians) as also
of Yaksas (a class of demigods) and
ogres has been secured by you from
Brahma; but there is danger to you from the
monkeys. (55)
एष A दक्षिणो aE: पञ्चशाख: समुद्यत:।
विधमिष्यति a देहे भूतात्मानं चिरोषितम्॥ ५६॥
“Duly raised, this right hand of mine,
consisting of five branches (in the shape of
the thumb and the four fingers) will expel
from your body the Jivatma and constituting
one’s very Self, which has long dwelt in
your body.” (56)
श्रुत्वा हनूमतो वाक्यं रावणो भीमविक्रम:।
संरक्तनयन: क्रोधादिदं वचनमब्रवीत्॥५७॥
Hearing the challenge of Hanuman,
Ravana of terrible prowess, his eyes inflamed
with anger, retorted as follows: (57)
fad ver नि:शङ्कं Rent कीर्तिमवाप्नुहि।
ततस्त्वां ज्ञातविक्रान्तं नाशयिष्यामि वानर॥ ५८ I
“Strike at once without fear and earn
lasting renown. Then | shall destroy you,

your prowess having been ascertained
thereby, O monkey!” (58)

513

रावणस्य वच: श्रुत्वा वायुसूनुर्वचोऽब्रवीत्।

प्रहतं fe मया duet da सुतं स्मर॥५९॥
Hearing the reply of Ravana, Hanuman

(son of the wind-god) rejoined as follows:

“Call to your mind your son, Aksa, having

been actually killed by me in the past.” (59)

एवमुक्को महातेजा रावणो राक्षसेश्वर:।
आजघानानिलसुतं तलेनोरसि वीर्यवान्॥६०॥

Spoken to as aforesaid, the powerful
Ravana, the lord of ogres, who was endowed
with extraordinary energy, gave a blow to
the son of the wind-god on the chest. (60)

a तलाभिहतस्तेन चचाल च मुहुर्मुहु:।
स्थितो मुहूर्तं तेजस्वी स्थैर्यं pear महामति: ।। ६१॥
आजघान च संक्रुद्धस्तलेनैवामरद्विषम्।
तत: स तेनाभिहतो वानरेण महात्मना॥६२॥
दशग्रीव: समाधूतो यथा भूमितलेऽचल:।
संग्रामे तं तथा Gear रावणं तलताडितम्॥ ६३॥
ra वानरा: सिद्धा नेदुर्देवा: सहासुरै:।
AMPA महातेजा रावणो वाक्यमब्रवीत्॥ ६४॥

Smacked by him, Hanuman reeled
again and again. Shortly recovering his
balance, however, the highly intelligent
Hanuman, who was endowed with energy,
stood firm again and, getting infuriated, struck
the enemy of gods with his palm alone.
Struck by that high-souled monkey, the
celebrated Ravana, a ten-headed monster,
was thereupon violently shaken as a
mountain during an earthquake. Seeing the
said Ravana struck so hard in combat,
Rsis (the seers of Vedic Mantras), the
monkeys, Siddhas (a class of demigods
endowed with mystic powers by virtue of
their very birth) and gods alongwith demons
raised a shout of joy. Recovering his breath,
Ravana, who was endowed with high spirits
forthwith said: (61—64)

साधु वानर वीर्येण श्लाघनीयोऽसि A रिपु:।
रावणेनैवमुक्तस्तु मारुतिर्वाक्यमब्रवीत्॥ ६५ Ul
