# YUDDHAKANDA #

स am fara शितैर्बाणैर्लक्ष्मण: परवीरहा।
आददे निशितं ant ज्वलन्तमिव तेजसा॥७०॥

Having torn them with his sharp
arrows, Laksmana, the destroyer of hostile
champions, seized a whetted shaft, which
was flaming as it were with splendour. (70)

तमादाय धनु:श्रेष्ठे योजयामास लक्ष्मण:।
विचकर्ष च वेगेन विससर्ज च सायकम्॥७१॥

Laying hold of it, Laksmana set it to
his excellent bow, pulled its string to full
stretch and shot the shaft with impetuosity.

(71)

पूर्णायतविसृष्टेन शरेण नतपर्वणा।
ललाटे राक्षसश्रेष्ठमाजघान स वीर्यवान्॥७२॥

Nay, with that flat-jointed arrow, which
was discharged after the string had been
stretched to full length, the valiant Laksmana
struck Atikaya (the foremost of ogres) in
the brow. (72)

स ललाटे शरो मग्नस्तस्य भीमस्य Tera: |
Set शोणितेनाक्त: पन्नगेन्द्र इवाचले॥७३॥

Sunk into the forehead of that terrible
ogre and stained with blood, that arrow
looked like a ruler of serpents clinging to a
mountain. (73)
राक्षस: प्रचकम्पेऽथ लक्ष्मणेषु प्रपीडित:।
erated घोरं यथा त्रिपुरगोपुरम्॥७४॥

Severely injured by the shaft of
Laksmana, the ogre forthwith shook violently
like the formidable gate of Tripura (a city built
of gold, silver and iron in the heaven, in the
airspace as well as on the earth by the demon
Maya and burnt by Rudra) struck with the
arrow of Rudra (the god of destruction).(74)

चिन्तयामास चाश्वास्य विमृश्य च महाबल:।
साधु बाणनिपातेन श्लाघनीयोऽसि A रिपु:॥ ७५॥
Nay, recovering his breath and

reflecting for a moment, the ogre, who
was endowed with extraordinary might,
contemplated upon his course of action.

597

“By discharging this arrow against me, as

you have done, you have turned out an

enemy eminently worthy of praise by me!”
(75)

विधायैवं विदार्यास्यं नियम्य च महाभुजौ।

a रथोपस्थमास्थाय रथेन प्रचचार ह॥७६॥

Distending his mouth and speaking
to him as aforesaid, nay, controlling his
mighty arms and taking his seat in the rear
of the chariot, he pressed forward in his
chariot. (76)

एवं त्रीन् पञ्च सप्तेति सायकान् राक्षसर्षभ:।
आददे संदधे aly विचकर्षोत्ससर्ज च॥ ७७॥

Atikaya, a bull among the ogres, seized
hold of one, three, five and seven arrows
(respectively) and put them to his bow,
stretched the string to full length and let
them fly. (77)
ते बाणा: कालसंकाशा राक्षसेन्द्रधनुश्च्युता: |
हेमपुङ्खा रविप्रख्याश्चक्रुर्दीप्तमिवाम्बरम्॥ ७८ ॥

Shot from the bow of Atikaya (a ruler
of ogres), those golden-feathered arrows,
which resembled Death and shone like

the sun, set the firmament ablaze, as it
were. (78)

ततस्तान् राक्षसोत्सृष्टान् शरौघान् राघवानुज:।
असम्भ्रान्त: प्रचिच्छेद निशितैर्बहुभि: get: ue ti
Remaining unruffled, the younger brother
of Sri Rama (a scion of Raghu) thereupon
cut off with his numerous whetted shafts
the aforesaid volleys of arrows discharged
by the ogre. (79)

ताञ्शरान् युधि सम्प्रेक्ष्य निकृत्तान् रावणात्मज: |
aay त्रिदशेन्द्रारिर्जग्राह निशितं शरम्॥८०॥

Duly perceiving those arrows cut down
on the field of battle. Atikaya (sprung from
the loins of Ravana), an enemy of Indra, the
ruler of gods, flew into a rage and took hold
of a sharpened arrow. (80)
स संधाय महातेजास्तं बाणं सहसोत्सृजत्।
तेन सौमित्रिमायान्तमाजघान स्तनान्तरे॥८१॥
