458

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA +

Canto XLVI

Though itching to killl the enemy on beholding Sri Rama and
Laksmana enmeshed in a network of snakes, the monkeys,
who were unable to perceive him, feel frustrated.
Vibhisana exhorts Sugriva, who was seized
with fear on finding Indrajit hidden under
the cloak of witchcraft, to take heart and
not to give way to fear. Concluding
the two brothers to be dead, Indrajit,
for his part, triumphantly

enters Lanka and is
welcomed by
his father

ततो द्यां पृथिवीं चैव वीक्षमाणा वनौकस:।
See: संततौ बाणैरभ्रातरौ रामलक्ष्मणौ॥ १॥

The ten monkeys (lit., denizens of the
woods) who had been surveying the heavens
and the earth in search of Indrajit, found on
returning from their quest the two brothers,
Sri Rama and Laksmana, covered all over
with arrows. (1)

वृट्टेवोपरते देवे कृतकर्मणि राक्षसे।
आजगामाथ तं देशं ससुग्रीवो विभीषण:॥ २॥

The ogre, Indrajit, having retired after
accomplishing his work even as Indra, the
god of rain, would after raining. Vibhisana,
accompanied by Sugriva, forthwith came to
that spot. (2)

तूर्णं हनुमता सार्धमन्वशोचन्त राघवौ॥ 3 Il
अचेष्टौ मन्दनि:श्चासौ शोणितेन परिप्लुतौ।
शरजालाचितौ स्तब्धौ शयानौ शरतल्पगौ॥४॥

Nila and Dwivida, Mainda, Susena,
Kumuda and Angada alongwith Hanuman
forthwith began to grieve for the two scions
of Raghu, who were lying inactive and
motionless on a bed of arrows, breathing

faintly, bathed in blood and covered all over
with a network of darts. (3-4)

नि:श्चसन्तौ यथा aut निश्चेष्टौ मन्दविक्रमौ।
रुधिरस्रावदिग्धाङ्गौ तपनीयाविव ध्वजौ॥५॥
at वीरशयने वीरौ शयानौ मन्दचेष्टितौ।
यूथपै: a: परिव्रृतौ बाष्पव्याकुललोचनै:।। ६॥
राघवौ पतितौ दृष्ट्वा शरजालसमन्वितौ।
बभूवुर्व्यथिता: सर्वे वानरा: सविभीषणा:॥७॥

All the monkeys alongwith Vibhisana
were pained to see the two celebrated and
heroic scions of Raghu fallen motionless,
and sometimes with a feeble movement,
covered with a network of arrows, sighing
like a pair of serpents, their prowess having
grown faint, all their limbs smeared with a
stream of blood and lying stretched on a
heroes’ couch like two golden standards,
surrounded by their own generals, whose
eyes were suffused with tears. (5—7)

अन्तरिक्षं निरीक्षन्तो fest: सर्वाश्च वानरा:।
न चैनं मायया wt ददृशू रावणिं रणे॥८॥

Though surveying the sky as well as
all the quarters, the monkeys could not even
discover Indrajit (son of Ravana), who was
veiled by his occult power during the fight. (8)
