530

स तच्छुत्वा वच: Ht मया तदघशंसिना।
नाशकत् तीव्रमायासं A कर्तुं भगवानृषि:।॥ २०॥
“Hearing that cruel story related by
me, who confessed the guilt, the aforesaid
sage, though capable of pronouncing a
terrible curse, could not do so, my sin
having been attenuated by voluntary
confession. (20)

स बाष्पपूर्णवदनो नि:श्चसन् शोकमूच्छित:।
मामुवाच महातेजा: कृताञ्जलिमुपस्थितम्॥ २१॥

“Stupefied through grief and sighing,
his face bathed in tears, the sage, who was
exceptionally glorious, replied as follows to
me, who stood near him with folded hands :

(21)

यद्येतदशुभं कर्म न स्म A कथये: स्वयम्।
फलेन्मूर्धा स्म A राजन् सद्य: शतसहस्रधा॥ २२॥
“‘“Had you not told me of this evil deed
yourself, your head, O king, would have
instantly split into a hundred or even thousand
pieces. (22)

क्षत्रियेण वधो राजन् वानप्रस्थे विशेषत:।
ज्ञानपूर्वं कृत: स्थानाच्च्यावयेदपि वज्रिणम्॥ २३॥

“The death of a hermit wittingly brought
about by a Ksatriya in particular, O king, is
sure to bring down even Indra, the wielder
of a thunderbolt, from his position. (23)
waa तु भवेन्मूर्धा मुनौ तपसि तिष्ठति।
arg विसृजत: शस्त्रं तादृशे ब्रह्मवादिनि॥ २४॥

“‘Nay, the head of a man consciously
hurling a weapon against such a hermit,
remaining engaged in austerities and

expounding the Vedas, is sure to split into
seven. (24)

अज्ञानाद्धि कृतं यस्मादिदं A तेन जीवसे।

अपि ह्यकुशलं न स्याद् राघवाणां Hat भवान्॥ २७५ ॥
“‘Since this sinful deed has been done

by you actually through ignorance, therefore

you survive. Otherwise the race of the

Raghus itself would have become extinct,
much more you.’ (25)

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

नय नौ ya तं देशमिति मां चाभ्यभाषत।
अद्य तं द्रष्टुमिच्छाव: पुत्रं पश्चिमदर्शनम्॥ २६॥
रुधिरेणावसिक्ताङ्घं प्रकीर्णाजिनवाससम्।
wart भुवि नि:संज्ञं धर्मराजवशं गतम्॥ २७॥
“The sage further said to me, ‘Take us,
O monarch, to that place where my son is
lying dead. We two long today to see that
son of ours—whom, alas, we are going to
see for the last time—lying unconscious on
the ground, transferred to the control of
Dharmaraja (the god of piety, who receives
virtuous souls into his realm after death),
his whole body bathed in blood and his
robes of deerskin thrown about.’ (26-27)

अथाहमेकस्तं देशं नीत्वा तौ भृशदु:खितौ।
अस्पर्शयमहं Ut तं मुनिं ae भार्यया॥ २८॥
“I took the sore afflicted couple to that

spot single-handed, and | immediately made
that sage with his wife touch his son. (28)

तौ पुत्रमात्मन: स्पृष्टवा तमासाद्य तपस्विनौ।
निपेततु: शरीरेऽस्य पिता चैनमुवाच ह॥२९॥

“Approaching that son of theirs and
touching him, the two ascetics fell on his
person and the father addressed him as
follows : so the tradition goes : (29)

नाभिवादयसे We न च मामभिभाषसे।

किं च शेषे तु भूमौ त्वं वत्स fee कुपितो ह्यसि it ३०॥
“You do not greet me today as you

used to do before, nor do you speak to me.

Moreover, why are you actually lying on the

ground, my darling? Are you really displeased

with me? (30)

नन्वहं तेऽप्रिय: Ua मातरं पश्य धार्मिकोम्।
fe च नालिङ्गसे UT सुकुमार वचो वद॥ ३१॥

“‘If | am unwelcome to you, my son,
look at your pious mother. Moreover, why
do you not embrace her, my tender son?
Pray, address loving words to me. = (31)

कस्य वा पररात्रेऽहं श्रोष्यामि हृदयङ्गमम्।
अधीयानस्य मधुरं शास्त्रं arate, विशेषत:॥ ३२॥
