# YUDDHAKANDA #

endowed’ with extraordinary might,
comfortably took their seats in that heavenly

811

car without causing any obstruction to
others. (27)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये FERS SAM AUTH MITA: सर्ग: Il १२२॥

Thus ends Canto One hundred and twenty-two in the Yuddhakanda of the glorious
Ramayana of Valmiki, the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

Canto CXxXIll

In the course of their flight to Ayodhya, Sri Rama shows
to Sita the places over which they were flying

अनुज्ञातं तु रामेण aq विमानमनुत्तमम्।
हंसयुक्तं महानादमुत्पपात विहायसम्॥१॥
Permitted by Sri Rama, that aerial car,
which was unsurpassed in its manifold virtues
and was provided (in the front) with the
image of a swan, flew through the air with a
great noise. (1)
पातयित्वा ततश्चक्षु: सर्वतो रघुनन्दन:।
अब्रवीन्मैथिलीं सीतां राम: शशिनिभाननाम्॥ २॥
Casting his glance all round, Sri Rama,
the delight of the Raghus, thereupon spoke
as follows to Sita, who had a moon-like
countenance: (2)

कैलासशिखराकारे त्रिकूटशिखरे स्थिताम्।
लङ्कामीक्षस्व वैदेहि निर्मितां विश्वकर्मणा॥३॥

“Survey the city of Lanka perched ona
summit of the Trikuta mountain, resembling
a peak of Mount Kailasa, and built by
Viswakarma (the architect of gods), O
princess of the Videha territory! (3)
एतदायोधनं पश्य मांसशोणितकर्दमम्।
हरीणां राक्षसानां च सीते विशसनं महत्॥४॥

“Behold the yonder field of battle covered
with a mire of flesh and blood, the scene of
carnage of monkeys and ogres, O Sita!

(4)

We दत्तवर: शेते प्रमाथी weravar: |
wa हेतोर्विशालाक्षि Peat रावणो मया॥५॥

“Here lies the deceased ruler of ogres,
who was given to torturing the people and
on whom a boon of invincibility had been
conferred by Brahma. Ravana was made
short work of by me on your account, O
large-eyed one! (5)
कुम्भकर्णोऽत्र fred: प्रहस्तश्च निशाचर:।
धूम्राक्षश्चात्र निहतो वानरेण हनूमता॥६॥

“Here was Kumbhakarna killed (by me)
and the ogre Prahasta, by Nila. And here

was Dhumraksa dispatched by Hanuman,
the monkey chief. (6)

विद्युन्माली हतश्चात्र सुषेणेन महात्मना।
लक्ष्मणेनेन्द्रजिच्चात्र रावणिर्निहतो रणे॥७॥

“Nay, here was Vidyunmali disposed
of by the high-souled Susena, and here
was Indrajit, the eldest son of Ravana, killed
in action by Laksmana. (7)

अङ्गदेनात्र निहतो facet नाम राक्षस:।
विरूपाक्षश्च gaat महापार्श्वमहोदरौ॥८॥

“Here was the ogre, Vikata by name,
struck down by Angada and Virupaksa,
who was difficult even to look at, by Sugriva,
and, even so, Mahaparswa by Rsabha and
Mahodara by Nila. (8)
