582

ज्वलन्तं प्रासमुद्यम्य संग्रामाग्रे नरान्तक:।
ददाह हरिसैन्यानि वनानीव विभावसु:॥७१॥
Uplifting his flaming lance in the van
of the battle, Narantaka consumed the
monkey troops even as fire would burn up
forests. (71)

Tage aTag sg aM. vert वनौकस: |
तावत् Weed: Uqddaepat इवाचला: W192 Ul
Struck with his lance, the monkeys fell
like mountains uprooted by lightning, even
as they tore up trees and crags. (72)

fea wate बलवान् विचचार नरान्तक:।

WA सर्वतो युद्धे प्रावृट्काले यथानिल:॥ ७३॥

Crushing down everything, the mighty
Narantaka ranged over the battle-field on
all sides even as the wind in the rainy
season. (73)
न शेकुर्धावितुं वीरा न tard स्पन्दितुं भयात्।
उत्पतन्तं स्थितं यान्तं सर्वान् विव्याध वीर्यवान्॥ ७४॥

The monkey heroes could neither flee
nor stand nor move through fear. The valiant
ogre, Narantaka, pierced all with his lance
no matter whether one was springing up,
stationary or moving. (74)

एकेनान्तककल्पेन प्रासेनादित्यतेजसा।
भग्नानि हरिसैन्यानि निपेतुर्धरणीतले॥७५॥

Struck down by that one lance, which
looked like Death and was bright as the
sun, the simian ranks fell down on the
earth’s surface. (75)

वज्रनिष्पेषसदृशं प्रासस्याभिनिपातनम्।
न शेकुर्वानरा: सोढुं a विनेदुर्महास्वनम्॥७६॥
The monkeys could not stand the
impact of the lance, which resembled the
stroke of lightning. Hence they cried loudly.
(76)

पततां हरिवीराणां रूपाणि प्रचकाशिरे।
वज्रभिन्नाग्रकूटानां शैलानां पततामिव॥७७॥

The forms of the monkey heroes falling

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA +

down shone brightly like the mountains which
fell down even as their peaks were shattered
by the thunderbolt of Indra. (77)

ये तु Va महात्मान: कुम्भकर्णेन पातिता:।
a स्वस्था वानरश्रेष्ठा: सुग्रीवमुपतस्थिरे॥७८॥

Those high-souled jewels among the
monkeys, who for their part had been struck
down by Kumbhakarna earlier, sought the
presence of Sugriva, now that they were
their normal selves again. (78)

प्रेक्षमाण: स सुग्रीवो cast हरिवाहिनीम्।

नरान्तकभयत्रस्तां बविद्रवन्तीं यतस्तत:॥७९॥

Looking all-round, the said Sugriva saw
the simian army running helter-skelter in all
directions, stricken, as it was, with the fear
of Narantaka. (79)

fagat वाहिनीं gear स cast नरान्तकम्।
गृहीतप्रासमायान्तं हयपृष्ठप्रतिष्ठितम्॥ ८०॥

Seeing the army in stampede, he
now beheld Narantaka, mounted on
horseback, advancing with a lance held by
him. (80)

दृष्टबोवाच महातेजा: सुग्रीवो वानराधिप:।
कुमारमङ्गदं aA शक्रतुल्यपराक्रमम्॥८१॥
Perceiving him, Sugriva, the suzerain
lord of monkeys, who was endowed with
extraordinary energy, spoke as follows to
the gallant Prince, Angada, a compeer of
Indra, the ruler of gods, in prowess: (81)

Tart राक्षसं at योऽसौ तुरगमास्थित:।
aad हरिबलं fad प्राणैर्वियोजय॥८२॥
“March against the younder heroic ogre,
striking terror into the simian army, | mean,
the fellow who is seen mounted on the back

of a horse over there, and speedily deprive
him of his life-breath.” (82)

a भर्तुर्वचनं श्रुत्वा निष्पपाताङ्गदस्तदा।

अनीकान्मेघसंकाशादंशुमानिव वीर्यवान्॥८३॥
Hearing the command of his master,

the valiant Angada rushed forth at once
