1020

« VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

infatuated by wrath, the king said to Vasistha,
the son of Brahma. (18)

अजानत: शयानस्य क्रोधेन कलुषीकृत:।

उक्तवान् मम शापाग्निं यमदण्डमिवापरम्॥१९॥
“Defiled by anger you pronounced a

fire-like curse, like a second staff of Yama

on me, who was asleep, unaware of your
arrival. (19)

तस्मात् तवापि ब्रह्मर्षे चेतनेन विनाकृत:।
देह: स सुचिरप्रख्यो भविष्यति न संशय:॥ २०॥

“Therefore, O Brahmarsi! This ever
handsome body of your’s also undoubtedly

be devoid of consciousness.” (20)
इति रोषवशादुभौ तदानी-
मन्योन्यं शपितौ नॄपद्विजेन्द्रौ।
सहसैव बभूवतुर्विदेहौ
तत्तुल्याधिगतप्रभाववन्तौ ॥ २१॥
Thus the great king and the great
Brahmana, who cursed’ each _ other

immediately became devoid of their physical
body. (21)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये उत्तरकाण्डे पञ्चपञ्चाश: AA ॥ ५५ ॥

Thus ends Canto Fifty-five in the Uttarakanda of the glorious Ramayana of Valmiki,
the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

षट्पञ्चाश: सर्ग:
Canto LVI

At the instance of Brahma Vasistha enters the semen of Varuna;
Varuna places his semen in a pitcher near Urvasi; as
a consequence of Mitra’s curse Urvasi lives
with king Pururava on the earth
and bears him a son

रामस्य भाषितं श्रुत्वा लक्ष्मण: परवीरहा।
उवाच प्राञ्जलिर्भूत्वा राघवं दीप्ततेजसम्॥१॥
On hearing Sri Rama’s_ speech,
Laksmana, the destroyer of his brave
enemies, said with folded hands _ to
splendorous Sri Rama. (1)

निक्षिप्य cet काकुत्स्थ कथं at द्विजपार्थिवौ।
पुनर्देहेन संयोगं जग्मतुर्देवसम्मतौ Ut २॥

“O descendant of Kakutstha! How were
the two, viz., the Brahmana (Vasistha) and
the king, who were honoured by gods, again
embodied?” (2)

लक्ष्मणेनैवमुक्तस्तु राम इक्ष्वाकुनन्दन:।
प्रत्युवाच महातेजा लक्ष्मणं पुरुषर्षभ:॥३॥

Thus asked by Laksmana, Sri Rama,
the foremost among men, a source of delight

of the Iksvaku endowed with great splendour,
replied to Laksmana. (3)

at परस्परशापेन देहमुत्सृज्य धार्मिकौ।
अभूतां नृपविप्रर्षी वायुभूतौ तपोधनौ॥४॥

“The two viz., the sage-like king and
the Brahmana whose austerities made for
their treasure and who had cursed each
other, assumed the form of air after their
death. (4)
अशरीर: शरीरस्य कृतेऽन्यस्य महामुनि:।
वसिष्ठस्तु महातेजा जगाम पितुरन्तिकम्॥७५॥

“The highly majestic hermit Vasistha,
who was without a _ physical body,
approached his father with a view to getting
another body. (5)

सोऽभिवाद्य da: पादौ देवदेवस्य धर्मवित्।
पितामहमथोवाच वायुभूत इदं वच:॥६॥
