236

the fire with smokeless flames, which had
persisted in the houses in Lanka shot up to
the skies and appeared like the fire at the
time of universal dissolution. (32)

आदित्यकोटीसदूश: सुतेजा
Pear wih
भिंन्दन्निवाण्डं vast महाग्नि:।। 33 0

Like the fire of universal destruction,
which splits up the egg-shaped universe,
with various sounds, harsh like claps of
thunder, the brilliant fire, which enveloped
the entire Lanka, shone brightly like millions
of suns. (33)

तत्राम्बरादग्निरतिप्रव्रद्धो
wary: किंशुकपुष्पचूड:।
निर्वाणधूमाकुलराजयश्च
नीलोत्पलाभा: प्रचकाशिरेऽभ्रा:।। ३४॥
Extending up to the skies, the fire,
which cast a fierce splendour and shot
scarlet flames resembling Kirnsuka flowers,
grew out of all proportion. And dense columns
of smoke hanging in the air on all sides
shone at that time like clouds bearing the
colour of blue lotuses. (34)

amt महेन्द्रस्त्रिदशेश्वरो वा

Mae यमो वा वरुणोऽनिलो aw
रौद्रोऽग्निर्को धनदश्च सोमो

न वानरोऽयं स्वयमेव काल:॥ ३५॥

“He is surely the mighty Indra, the ruler
of gods, who wields the thunderbolt, or Yama
(the god of retribution) in person or Varuna
(the god of water), or the wind-god, the fire
seated in the third eye of the forehead of
Lord Siva, the sun-god, Kubera (the bestower
of riches) or the moon-god. He is no monkey,
but Kala, the Time-Spirit himself. (35)

लोकस्य धातुश्चतुराननस्य।
इहागतो वानररूपधारी
रक्षोपसंहारकर: Wena: ॥ ३६ Ul

« VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

“May it be the fury of the four-faced
Brahma, the grandfather of all, the creator of
the world, arrived here in the guise of a
monkey, playing the role of a destroyer of
the ogres? (36)
fe aod a कपिरूपमेत्य

रक्षोविनाशाय परं सुतेज:।
अचिन्त्यमव्यक्तमनन्तमेकं
स्वमायया साम्प्रतमागतं वा॥ ३७॥

“Or, may it be the supreme adorable
energy of Lord Visnu, the Protector of the
universe, unthinkable, unmanifest, infinite and
peerless, arrived at this juncture for the
extermination of ogres, assuming the form
of a monkey by virtue of Her supernatural
creative power?” (37)

इत्येवमूचुर्बहवो विशिष्टा
रक्षोगणास्तत्र समेत्य सर्वे।
सप्राणिसङ्खां सगृहां सवृक्षां
दग्धां पुरीं at सहसा समीक्ष्य॥ ३८ UI
Thus spoke all the numerous hosts of
eminent ogres, gathering together in the
presence of Ravana on perceiving that city
burnt all of a sudden with its multitudes of
living beings inhabiting it, houses and trees.
(38)
ततस्तु लङ्का सहसा प्रदग्धा
सराक्षसा साश्वरथा सनागा।
सपक्षिसङ्घा समृगा सवृक्षा
ete दीना तुमुलं सशब्दम्॥ ३९॥
Consumed all of a sudden with ogres,
horses, chariots and elephants, flocks of
birds, beasts and trees, the deity presiding
over Lanka for its part thereupon cried in
distress with a tumultuous noise. (39)
हा तात हा पुत्रक ard मित्र
a जीवितेशाङ्ग et सुपुण्यम्।
रक्षोभिरेवं बहुधा ब्रुवद्भि:
शब्द: Sel घोरतर: सुभीम:॥४०॥
A terrific and exceedingly violent clamour
was raised by the ogres crying in various
