* BALAKANDA +

149

Canto XXVIII

At the request of Sri Rama the sage Viswamitra instructs him as well as
Laksmana in the process of calling back the missiles and delivers
some more missiles to them

प्रतिगृह्य ततोऽस्त्राणि प्रहृष्टवदन: शुचि:।
गच्छन्नेव च काकुत्स्थो विश्वामित्रमथान्रवीत्॥ १॥

When just about to proceed further
from the forest haunted so long by Tataka,
after receiving the missiles from ViSwamitra,
the all-pure Sri Rama, a scion of Kakutstha,
with a most cheerful countenance now
addressed Viswamitra as follows : (1)

गृहीतास्त्रोऽस्मि भगवन् दुराधर्ष: सुरैरपि।
अस्त्राणां त्वहमिच्छामि संहारान् मुनिपुंगव॥ २॥
“Having received the knowledge of
invoking missiles from you, O omnipotent
sage, | can no longer be easily overpowered
even by gods. | also wish to learn the
Mantras capable of calling them back once
discharged, O jewel among sages!” (2)

एवं gata काकुत्स्थे विश्चामित्रो महातपा:।
संहारान् व्याजहाराथ धृतिमान् सुव्रत: शुचि:॥ ३॥
Even while Sri Rama was speaking
thus, the great ascetic Viswamitra of noble
vows, possessed as he was of extraordinary
firmness and purity, forthwith taught to him
as well as to Laksmana the Mantras capable
of calling the missile(s) back. (3)

Sere TIE
ere SET

ज्योतिषं शकुनं नैर।रयक्मिलावुभौ॥६॥
यौगंधरविनिद्रौ च दैत्यप्रमथनौ तथा।
शुचिबाहुर्महाबाहुर्निष्कलिर्विरुचस्तथा ।
सार्चिमाली धृतिमाली व्रत्तिमान् रुचिरस्तथा॥ ७॥
fra: सौमनसश्चैव विधूतमकरावुभौ।
wet रतिं चैव धनधान्यौ च राघव॥८॥

कामरूपं कामरुचिं मोहमावरणं तथा।
जृम्भकं सर्पनाथं च पन्थानवरुणौ तथा॥९॥
कृशाश्वतनयान् WA भास्वरान् कामरूपिण:।
प्रतीच्छ मम भद्रं A पात्रभूतोऽसि राघव॥१०॥

He said: “Receive from me, O Rama,
a scion of Raghu, since you are a fit recipient,
other glorious missiles (sons of Krsaswa),
capable of assuming any form at will and
bearing the names of Satyavan, Satyakirti,
Dhrsta and  MRabhasa, Pratiharatara,
Paranmukha and Avafmukha, Laksya and
Alaksya as well as the yonder Drdhanabha
and Sunabha, Dasgaksa and Satavaktra as
well as  DaSasirsa and _ Satodara,
Padmanabha and Mahanabha, Dundunabha
and Swanabha, Jyotish as well as Sakuna,
both Nairasya and Vimala, Yaugandhara
and Vinidra and even so, Daitya and
Pramathana, those going by the names of
Sucibahu, Mahabahu, Niskali and Viruca,
Sarcimali, Dhrtimali, Vrttiman and Rucira,
Pitrya as well as Saumanasa, both Vidhuta
and Makara, as also Paravira and Rati,
Dhana and Dhanya, Kamarupa, Kamaruci,
Moha and Avarana, Jrmbhaka and
Sarpanatha, Panthana and Varuna, O scion
of Raghu! May good betide you !” (4—10)
बाढमित्येव काकुत्स्थ: प्रहृष्टेनान्तरात्मना।
दिव्यभास्वरदेहाश्च UT: सुखप्रदा:॥११॥

Sri Rama (a scion of Kakutstha)
received them with a most cheerful mind,
saying, “Amen !” The missiles in their concrete
living form were invested with an ethereal
and effulgent personality and afforded delight
to all. (11)
