772

प्रभिन्नगजसंकाशास्तोयशोणितधारिण: ।
आकाशं तदनाकाशं चक्रुर्भीमाम्बुवाहका:॥७॥
Fearful clouds carrying blood in the
form of water and looking like elephants in
rut screened the heavens. (7)
दिशो वा प्रदिशो वापि सुव्यक्तं न चकाशिरे॥ ८॥
A fearful and thick darkness that caused
the hair to stand prevailed. Neither the

quarters nor the intermediate points were
clearly discernible. (8)

क्षतजार्द्रसवर्णाभा deat caret विना बभौ।
GS चाभिमुखं नेदुस्तदा घोरा WT: GMT: usu

Evening shades resembling a canopy
drenched with blood fell before time and
frightful beasts and birds cried at that time
facing Khara. (9)

कङ्कगोमायुगृध्राश्च चुक्रुशुर्भयशंसिन:।
नित्याशिवकरा युद्धे frat घोरनिदर्शना:॥१०॥
नेदुर्बलस्याभिमुखं ज्वालोद्गारिभिराननै:।
कबन्ध: परिघाभासो Gad भास्करान्तिके।॥ ११॥

Foreboding danger, buzzards, jackals
and vultures uttered shrill notes; and female
jackals invariably bringing disaster in war
and presenting a terrible aspect shrieked
with their mouths vomitting flames. Again, a
headless human figure resembling an iron
club appeared near the sun. (10-11)

woe सूर्यं स्वर्भानुरपर्वणि महाग्रह:।
प्रवाति मारुत: शीघ्रं निष्प्रभोऽभूद् दिवाकर:॥ १२॥

The great planet Rahu (now identified
with the shadow of the earth) obscured the
sun even when there was no time for it; the
wind blew violently and the sun became
lustreless. (12)

उत्पेतुश्च विना Us तारा: खद्योतसप्रभा:।
संलीनमीनविहगा नलिन्य: शुष्कपङ्कजा:॥१३॥

Stars flashing like fire-flies appeared
even when there was no night. Lotus-ponds
found their lotuses withered and their fishes
and aquatic birds hidden in its depths. (13)

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

तस्मिन् क्षणे बभूवुश्च विना पुष्पफलैर्द्रमा:।
उद्धूतश्च विना वातं रेणुर्जलधरारुण:॥१४॥
At that moment, the trees were bereft
of their blossom and fruit, and dust, greyish
as the cloud, arose even without wind. (14)

चीचीकूचीति वाश्यन्त्यो बभूवुस्तत्र सारिका: |
उल्काश्चापि सनिर्घोषा निपेतुर्घोरदर्शना:॥१५॥

Minas started warbling in that region
and even meteors, presenting a terrible
aspect, descended with a crash. (15)

प्रचचाल मही चापि सशैलवनकानना।
areal च रथस्थस्य नर्दमानस्य धीमत:॥१६॥
प्राकम्पत भुज: सव्य: स्वरश्चास्यावसज्जत।
aren सम्पद्यते दृष्टि: पश्यमानस्य सर्वत:॥ १७॥

Nay, the earth with its mountains,
forests and woodlands violently shook. Again,
while the wise Khara was thundering in his
chariot, his left arm throbbed violently and
voice grew faint. While he was looking
around, his vision got bedimmed with tears.

(16-17)

ate च Sail Wal न च मोहान्न्यवर्तत।

तान् समीक्ष्य महोत्पातानुत्थितान् रोमहर्षणान्॥ १८ ॥
AAS राक्षसान् सर्वान् प्रहसन् स खरस्तदा।
महोत्पातानिमान् सर्वानुत्थितान् घोरदर्शनान्॥१९॥
न चिन्तयाम्यहं date बलवान् दुर्बलानिव।
तारा अपि शरैस्तीक्ष्णै: पातयेयं नभस्तलात्॥ २०॥
A pain also arose in his forehead, yet
he did not give up his folly. Observing those
stunning evil portents of a stirring nature
sprung up at that moment, and laughing
loudly, the celebrated Khara said to all the
ogres (constituting his army), “Banking on
my strength | do not care for all these
stupendous evil portents sprung up, even
though they are terrible to look at, any more
than a powerful man does for weaklings.
With my sharp arrows | can even shoot
down the stars from the heavens.(18—20)
मृत्युं मरणधर्मेण संक्रुद्धो योजयाम्यहम्।
राघवं तं बलोत्सिक्तं भ्रातरं चापि लक्ष्मणम्॥ २१॥
