122

wielder of a thunderbolt, the foremost of
gods. (12)

भरतो नाम कैकेय्यां जज्ञे सत्यपराक्रम:।
Mare विष्णोश्चतुर्भाग: सर्वै: समुदितो गुणै: ।। १३॥

Next, through the womb of Kaikeyi, the
youngest wife of King Dasaratha, was born
Bharata, possessed of true valour, who
actually represented a quarter of Lord Visnu
and was adorned with all divine virtues.

(13)

अथ लक्ष्मणशत्रुघ्नौ सुमित्राजनयत् सुतौ।
at सर्वास्त्रकुशलौ विष्णोरर्धसमन्वितौ॥ ex i

Sumitra, the second wife of King
DaSaratha, then gave birth to two (twin)
sons, Laksmana and Satrughna, both valiant
and skilled in the use of all kinds of missiles
and jointly representing a portion one-sixth
of Lord Visnu. (14)

पुष्ये जातस्तु भरतो मीनलग्ने प्रसन्नधी:।
सार्पे जातौ तु सौमित्री कुलीरेऽभ्युदिते रवौ॥ १५॥

Bharata of cheerful mind was born
when the constellation Pusya was in the
ascendant and the Sun had entered the
zodiacal sign of Pisces; while the twin sons
of Sumitra were born when the constellation
Aslesa was in the ascendant and the sun
had reached the meridian, touching the
zodiacal sign of Karka (Cancer). (15)

Ua: UAT महात्मानश्चत्वारो जज्ञिरे पृथक्।
गुणवन्तोऽनुरूपाश्च रुच्या प्रोष्ठपदोपमा:॥१६॥

The four high-souled sons of the
Emperor were born separately, though
identical in essence. Endowed _ with
transcendental virtues, they all resembled
one another and vied with the four stars
comprising the constellations Purva
Bhadrapada and Uttara Bhadrapada in
splendour. (16)

« VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

जगु: कलं च Weal ननृतुश्चाप्सरोगणा:।
देवदुन्दुभयो नेदु: पुष्पव्रष्टिश्च खात् wad oil

The Gandharvas sang melodiously
and bevies of Apsaras (celestial nymphs)
danced; nay, the kettledrums of the gods
sounded of their own accord and a shower
of flowers dropped from the heavens. (17)

उत्सवश्च महानासीदयोध्यायां जनाकुल:।
Tag जनसम्बाधा नटनर्तकसंकुला:॥१८॥

There was great rejoicing marked with
crowds of men in Ayodhya. Nay, the streets
got crowded with actors and dancers and
were marked with a great rush of men. (18)

गायनैश्च विराविण्यो वादनैश्च तथापरै:।
विरेजुर्विपुलास्तत्र सर्वरत्नसमन्विता: ॥ १९॥

The extensive roads in Ayodhya, which
were noisy with the sound of songsters and
those who played on musical instruments as
well as with that of others such as the
chanters of the Vedas, minstrels, bards and
panegyrists and were strewn with all kinds of
precious stones (thrown by the people in
order to signify their admiration for their songs
etc.), presented a gala appearance. (19)

प्रदेयांश्च ददौ राजा सूतमागधवन्दिनाम्।

ब्राह्मणेभ्यो ददौ वित्तं गोधनानि Geet: tl २०॥
The king bestowed presents worth

giving on the ballad-singers, bards and

panegyrists and gave away riches and cows
in thousands to Brahmanas. (20)

अतीत्यैकादशाहं तु नामकर्म तथाकरोत्।
ज्येष्ठं रामं महात्मानं भरतं कैकयीसुतम्॥ २१॥
सौमित्रिं लक्ष्मणमिति शात्रुघ्नमपरे तथा।
वसिष्ठ: परमप्रीतो नामानि कुरुते तदा॥ २२॥
He further performed the naming

ceremony with respect to his sons on
completing eleven* days (after the birth of

* The Sruti says:

क्ष्रियस्य द्वादशाहं सूतकम्।

“The impurity of a Ksatriya, occasioned by childbirth, lasts for twelve days.” And a Smrti text says:
त्रयोदशे Wat नामकरणम् (The naming ceremony of Ksatriya boys takes place on the thirteenth day).
