248

Wad प्रसादो भगवन्नग्निरूपो महाद्युति: |
कालाग्निना यथा Yet त्रैलोक्यं दह्यतेऽख्लम्॥ १७॥
card चिकीर्षेत दीयतामस्य यन्मन:।
ad: सुरगणा: सर्वे पितामहपुरोगमा:॥१८॥
विश्वामित्रं महात्मानं वाक्यं मधुरमब्रुवन्।
ब्रह्मर्षे स्वागतं तेऽस्तु तपसा TA सुतोषिता:॥१९॥
“Nay, the sun stands totally eclipsed by
the glory of that great Rsi. The great sage
ViSwamitra, who is fire personified, endowed
as he is with unique splendour, O venerable
Sir, deserves to be propitiated before he sets
his mind on wholesale destruction. Even as
all the three worlds were consumed by the
fire of universal destruction in the past (at the
time of universal dissolution), they may
likewise be burnt by him. Therefore, let that
very boon be vouchsafed to him, on which
his mind is set, even if he seeks to rule over
the gods.” Thereupon all the hosts of gods
with Brahma (the progenitor of the entire
creation) at their head called on and addressed
the following sweet words to the high-souled
Viswamitra : “Hail to you, O Brahmana Rsi !
We are highly pleased with your asceticism.
(16—19)
ब्राह्मण्यं तपसोग्रेण प्राप्तवानसि कौशिक।
दीर्घमायुश्च a ब्रह्मन् ददामि PAST: Il oll
“You have attained Brahmanhood by
virtue of your severe austerities, O son of
Kusika ! Accompanied by hosts of gods, O
holy Brahmana, | further confer longevity on
you. (20)
स्वस्ति प्राप्नुहि भद्रं ते गच्छ सौम्य यथासुखम्।
पितामहवच: श्रुत्वा सर्वेषां त्रिदिवौकसाम्॥ २१॥
कृत्वा प्रणामं मुदितो व्याजहार महामुनि:।
ब्राह्मण्यं यदि मे प्राप्तं दीर्घमायुस्तथैव च॥ २२॥
ॐन्कारोऽथ वषट्कारो वेदाश्च वरयन्तु माम्।
क्षत्रवेदविदां श्रेष्ठो ब्रह्मवेदविदामपि॥ २३॥
ब्रह्मपुत्रो वसिष्ठो मामेवं वदतु देवता:।
यद्येवं WA: काम: Heal यान्तु AHA: २४॥
“Enjoy blessedness कदोर्पे deport
according to your pleasure. May good betide

« VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

you!” Pleased to hear the benediction of
Brahma and offering salutation to all the
gods (lit., denizens of heaven), the great
sage ViSwamitra said, “If Brahmanhood as
well as long life has been secured by me,
let the mystic syllable OM (the key to Self-
Knowledge), the sacred word ‘Vasat’ (which
is used after the name of the deity to whom
an oblation is made at a sacrifice, while
pouring an oblation into the sacrificial fire)
and the Vedas, which furnish us with details
of Self-Knowledge as well as of ritual acts,
seek me of their own accord. Let Vasistha,
a mind-born son of Brahma, the creator, the
foremost among the masters of the science
of archery etc., (the sciences mastered by
the Ksatriyas) as well as of those mastered
by the Brahmanas (viz., the four Vedas,
including the Upanisads, that treat of Brahma,
the Infinite), call me as such a Brahmana, O
gods! If this supreme desire of mine is
granted by you, depart then, O jewels among
gods !” (21—24)

aa: प्रसादितो देवैर्वसिष्ठो जपतां वर:।
सख्यं dan ब्रह्मर्षिरेवमस्तिविति चाब्रवीत्॥ २५॥

Conciliated by the gods, Vasistha, a
Brahmana sage, the foremost among
ascetics, thereupon made friends with
ViSwamitra and said, “Amen !” (25)
ब्रह्मर्षिस्त्वं न संदेह: ad सम्पद्यते तव।
इत्युक्त्वा देवताश्चापि सर्वा जग्मुर्यथागतम्॥ २६॥

“You are a Brahmana seer no doubt.
Every desire of your’s stands fulfilled !” Saying

so, the gods too returned each to his own
abode in heaven as they hadcome. (26)

विश्वामित्रोऽपि धर्मात्मा लब्ध्वा ब्राह्मण्यमुत्तमम्।
पूजयामास ब्रह्मर्षि वसिष्ठं जपतां वरम्॥ RII
Having attained the highest status of a
Brahmana, the pious ViSwamitra too paid
his homage to Vasistha, a Brahmana sage
and the foremost among ascetics. (27)

कृतकामो महीं Gat चचार तपसि स्थित:।
Ud त्वनेन ब्राह्मण्यं We WA महात्मना॥ २८॥
