148

“Receive from me, O illustrious prince,
O tiger among men, the well-known missile
beloved of the fiends, Mohana by name,
so-called because it infatuates the enemy,
as also the missiles Tamasa and the mighty
Saumana, O tiger among men, as well as
Sarvarta and the formidable Mausala, O
son of King Dasaratha, the missile known
by the name of Satya as also the great
missile called Mayamaya, O mighty-armed
one, the missile presided over by the sun-
god, Tejahprabha by name, which takes
away the glory of the enemy, the missile
presided over by the moon-god, Sisira by
name, the most formidable missile presided
over by Twasta, the architect of gods, the
dreadful missile of Bhaga (one of the twelve
sons of Aditi, presiding over the sun by
turns month after month) as well as the
missile presided over by Manu, known by
the name of Sitesu. (17—20)

एतान् WA महाबाहो कामरूपान् महाबलान्।
गृहाण परमोदारान् क्षिप्रमेव नृपात्मज॥ २१॥

“Receive at once, O mighty-armed
Rama, these very powerful and supremely
beneficent missiles capable of taking any
form at will, O son of King Dasaratha !” (21)

स्थितस्तु प्राङ्मुखो भूत्वा शुचिर्मुनिवरस्तदा।
ददौ रामाय सुप्रीतो मन्त्रग्राममनुत्तमम्॥ २२॥

Getting purified through ablutions etc.,
and sitting with his face turned towards the
east, ViSwamitra, the foremost of hermits,
who was highly delighted, imparted to Sri
Rama a string of Mantras (sacred texts
capable of invoking the missiles) unexcelled
by others in their field. (22)

तान्यस्त्राणि तदा faut राघवाय न्यवेदयत्॥ 23

« VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

The Brahmana, ViSwamitra, then
delivered to Sri Rama, as well as to Laksmana
the missiles which could not be easily retained
in one’s memory in their entirety even by
gods. (23)

जपतस्तु मुनेस्तस्य विश्वामित्रस्य धीमत:।
उपतस्थुर्महार्हाणि सर्वाण्यस्त्राणि WALI २४॥

Even while that intelligent sage
Viswamitra was silently repeating the
Mantras, embodying the said missiles, all
the missiles, worthy of great adoration as
they were, appeared before Sri Rama in
their shining ethereal forms. (24)

Sag मुदिता wa ad प्राञ्जलयस्तदा।
इमे च water किंकरास्तव राघव॥ २५॥
aq यदिच्छसि भद्रं ते तत् ad करवाम वै।
ततो WA: प्रसन्नात्मा तैरित्युक्तो महाबलै: ।। २६॥
प्रतिगृह्य च काकुत्स्थ: समालभ्य च पाणिना।
मानसा मे भविष्यध्वमिति तान्यभ्यचोदयत्॥ २७॥

Nay, full of joy, all spoke as follows
with folded hands (as a mark of respect) to
Sri Rama: “Here do we stand as your
servants, O supermely generous Sri Rama,
a scion of Raghu! We are prepared to do
all that you would have us do. May good
betide you !” Addressed thus by those mighty
missiles in living form, Sri Rama, a scion of
Kakutstha, thereupon accepted them with a
cheerful mind as his own and, stroking
them with his hand, commanded them as
follows : “Appear in my mind whenever |
think of you.” (25—27)

aa: प्रीतमना wat fast महामुनिम्।
अभिवाद्य महातेजा गमनायोपचक्रमे॥ 2c
Saluting the great sage Viswamitra, the

highly glorious Sri Rama with a delighted mind
then got ready to proceed further. (28)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये बालकाण्डे सप्तविंश: FW: ॥ २७॥

Thus ends Canto Twenty-seven in the Balakanda of the glorious Ramayana of
Valmiki, the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

