* AYODHYAKANDA +

549

सप्ततितम: सर्ग:
Canto LXX

While Bharata was narrating to his friends the dream seen by him the previous
night, the messengers from Ayodhya arrive in his presence and, bowing low to
Bharata, communicate to him the orders of Sage Vasistha. Having
heard of the welfare of all from the mouth of the messengers,
the prince takes leave of his maternal grandfather
and others and departs for Ayodhya

Wd Fatt स्वप्नं दूतास्ते क्लान्तवाहना:।
प्रविश्यासह्यपरिखं रम्यं Ws पुरम्॥१॥
समागम्य च राज्ञा ते राजपुत्रेण चार्चिता:।
Ua: पादौ गृहीत्वा च तमूचुर्भरतं वच:॥ २॥
Entering the lovely city of Rajagrha—
the moat enclosing which was unassailable
by the enemies—at a time when Bharata
was narrating the dream to his friends, their
horses being exhausted, nay, meeting the
king of Kekaya as well as the Crown prince
and treated with honour by them, and
touching as a mark of respect the feet of
Bharata, their prospective king, the aforesaid
messengers spoke to the celebrated Bharata
as follows: (1-2)

पुरोहितस्त्वां कुशलं We Aa च मन्त्रिण:।
त्वरमाणश्च निर्याहि कृत्यमात्ययिकं त्वया॥ ३॥
“Sage Vasistha (the family-priest) as
well as all the counsellors tell you that all is
well. Yet please depart expeditiously. There
is business with you, which cannot brook
delay. (3)
इमानि च महार्हाणि वस्त्राण्याभरणानि च।
प्रतिगृह्य विशालाक्ष मातुलस्य च दापय॥४॥
“Nay, accepting from us these valuable
robes and jewels, O large-eyed prince, have

them presented to your maternal grandfather
and maternal uncle too. (4)

अत्र विंशतिकोट्यस्तु नृपतेर्मातुलस्य ते।
दशकोट्यस्तु सम्पूर्णास्तथैव च नृपात्मज॥५॥

“Of these, articles worth twenty crores,
of course, are meant for the king; while full

ten crores worth of articles are likewise meant
for your maternal uncle, O prince !” (5)

प्रतिगृह्य तु तत् Wd स्वनुरक्त: सुहृज्जने।
दूतानुवाच भरत: कामै: सम्प्रतिपूज्य तान्॥६॥
Accepting for his part all those presents
brought by the messengers from Ayodhya,
Bharata, who was very fond of his near and
dear ones, had them presented on behalf of
his royal father to his maternal grandfather
and maternal uncle and, having entertained
the messengers with articles of food and
drink coveted by them, spoke to them as
follows : (6)

कच्चित् स कुशली राजा पिता दशरथो मम।
कच्चिदारोग्यता Wa लक्ष्मणे च महात्मनि॥७॥

“Is my father, the celebrated DaSaratha,
doing well? Does good health abide in Sri
Rama and the high-souled Laksmana? (7)

आर्या च धर्मनिरता धर्मज्ञा धर्मवादिनी।
अरोगा चापि कौसल्या माता रामस्य धीमत: ॥ ८ ।।

“And is the mother of the wise Sri
Rama, the noble Kausalya, who is devoted
to virtue, Knows what is right and talks
virtue, enjoying good health? (8)

कच्चित् सुमित्रा धर्मज्ञा जननी लक्ष्मणस्य या।
शत्रुघ्नस्य च वीरस्य अरोगा चापि मध्यमा॥९॥

“Is my intermediate mother, Sumitra—
who knows what is right and is the mother
of Laksmana and the valiant Satrughna—
also free from ailment? (9)

आत्मकामा सदा चण्डी क्रोधना प्राज्ञमानिनी ।
अरोगा चापि मे माता कैकेयी किमुवाच ह॥ १०॥
