454

the brothers, Sri Rama and Laksmana
applauded the aforesaid exploit of Ahgada
(son of Vali), who was worthy of praise for
his valour. (30)

ward सर्वभूतानि faghsfsrat afer
ततस्ते तं महात्मानं दृष्ट्वा तुष्टा: प्रधर्षितम्॥ ३१॥
All created beings present there
were aware of the might of Indrajit in war;
therefore, they all felt gratified to find the
latter, even though endowed with great
courage, overpowerd by Angada. (31)

तत: Wet: कपय: ससुग्रीवविभीषणा:।
साधुसाध्विति नेदुश्च दृष्ट्वा शत्रुं पराजितम्॥ ३२॥
Highly rejoiced to see the enemy
vanquished, the monkeys too, alongwith
Sugriva and Vibhisana, cried out “Well done!
Bravo!” (32)
इन्द्रजित् तु तदानेन निर्जितो भीमकर्मणा।
संयुगे वालिपुत्रेण क्रोधं चक्रे सुदारुणम्॥ ३३॥
Utterly routed in combat by the aforesaid
Angada (son of Vali) of redoubtable deeds,
Indrajit, for his part, then exhibited a terrible
rage. (33)
सोऽन्तर्धानगत: पापो रावणी रणकर्शित:।
ब्रह्मदत्तवरो वीरो रावणि: क्रोधमूच्छित:।॥ ३४॥
Sg निशितान् बाणान् मुमोचाशनिवर्चस: ।
Wa च लक्ष्मणं चैव घोरैर्नागमयै: शरै:॥ ३५॥
fave समरे Ge: सर्वगात्रेषु राक्षस:।
मायया dade मोहयन् राघवौ युधि॥ ३६॥
aga: सर्वभूतानां कूटयोधी निशाचर:।
बबन्ध शरबन्धेन भ्रातरौ रामलक्ष्मणौ॥ sen

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA +

Infatuated with anger, the notorious and
gallant Indrajit, the sinful son of Ravana—
who, having been enfeebled by his encounter
with Angada, had gone out of sight and on
whom a boon had been conferred by Brahma
(the creator)—shot sharp arrows, bright as
lightning, while remaining still invisible. Nay,
enraged in battle, the ogre pierced Sri Rama
and Laksmana, too, with formidable shafts,
consisting of serpents, all over their limbs.
Confounding the two scions of Raghu in the
struggle, the ranger of the night, who was
fully guarded by supernatural power and as
such remained invisible to all created beings,
and who fought treacherously, bound the
two brothers, Sri Rama and Laksmana, ina
network of arrows. (34—37)

at तेन पुरुषव्याघ्रौ क्रुद्धेनाशीविषै: शरै:।
सहसाभिहतौ वीरौ तदा werd वानरा:॥ ३८॥

At that time monkeys beheld those two
heroes, who were veritable tigers among
men, enmeshed by the furious ogre all of a
sudden with darts in the form of venomous

snakes. (38)
प्रकाशरूपस्तु यदा न शक्त-

स्तौ बाधितुं राक्षसराजपुत्र:।
मायां प्रयोक्तुं समुपाजगाम

ary तौ राजसुतौ दुरात्मा॥३९॥

When Indrajit (son of the king of ogres)
was not able to overcome them in his
visible form, the evil-minded fellow duly
proceeded to employ a conjuring trick and
bound the two princes, Sri Rama and
Laksmana. (39)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये FERS चतुश्चत्वारिंश: सर्ग: ॥ ४४॥

Thus ends canto Forty-four in the Yuddhakanda of the glorious Ramayana of
Valmiki, the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

