* ARANYAKANDA «

803

चतुस्रिंश: सर्ग:

Canto XXXIV

Sirpanakha instigates

ad: शूर्पणखां geal ब्रुवन्तीं परुषं aa: |
अमात्यमध्ये संक्रुद्ध: परिपप्रच्छ रावण:॥१॥
Highly enraged to see Surpanakha
speaking harsh words in the midst of
ministers, Ravana then interrogated her as
follows : (1)

कश्च WA: कथं ata: किं wu: किं पराक्रम:।
किमर्थं दण्डकारण्यं प्रविष्टश्च सुदुस्तरम्॥ २॥
“Who is Rama? What is his strength?
What does he look like, and what is the
measure of his prowess and what for has
he penetrated into the forest of Dandaka,
which is exceedingly difficult to pass through?
(2)

आयुधं fee च रामस्य येन A राक्षसा हता:।
wg निहत: संख्ये दूषणस्तिशिरास्तथा॥३॥
“And what is the weapon in the
possession of Rama, with which those ogres
have been killed by him as also Khara,
Dusana and Trisira on the battlefield? (3)

wa ब्रूहि wists केन त्वं च विरूपिता।
इत्युक्ता राक्षसेन्द्रेण राक्षसी क्रोधमूच्छिता॥४॥
ततो रामं यथान्यायमाख्यातुमुपचक्रमे।
दीर्घबाहुर्विशालाक्षश्चीरकृष्णाजिनाम्बर:
कन्दर्पसमरूपश्च रामो दशरथात्मज:।
शक्रचापनिभं ad विकृष्य कनकाङ्गदम्॥६॥
दीप्तान् क्षिपति नाराचान् सर्पानिव महाविषान्।
नाददानं शरान् घोरान् विमुञ्चन्तं महाबलम्॥७॥
न कार्मुकं विकर्षन्तं रामं पश्यामि संयुगे।
हन्यमानं तु तत्सैन्यं पश्यामि शरवृष्टिभि:।॥८॥
इन्द्रेणेवोत्तमं सस्यमाहतँ त्वश्मवृष्टिभि:।
रक्षसां भीमवीर्याणां सहस्राणि चतुर्दश॥ i
निहतानि शरैस्तीक्ष्णैस्तेनैकेन पदातिना।
अर्धाधिकमुहूर्तेन खरश्च सहदूषण:॥१०॥
“Also tell me in truth, O lady of
captivating limbs, by whom were you

Ravana to abduct Sita

deformed.” Overwhelmed with anger when
questioned by the ruler of ogres in these
words, the ogress then proceeded to
portray Sri Rama correctly as follows:
“Distinguished by long arms and large eyes
and clad in the bark of trees and the skin of
a black antelope, Rama, son of DaSaratha,
vies with the god of love in appearance.
Stretching at full length his bow shining
brightly like a rainbow and provided with rings
of gold, he lets loose effulgent Naracas (steel
arrows) resembling highly venomous snakes.
| could not perceive when Rama _ of
extraordinary might seized the dreadful
arrows, when he pulled the bow at full length
and when he discharged them on the
battlefield. | only saw the army of the ogres
being exterminated by the volleys of his
arrows, just like an excellent crop destroyed
by Indra (the god of rain) with showers of
hailstones. “By him, fighting single-handed
on foot, fourteen thousand ogres of terrible
prowess as also Khara and Dusana were
killed with sharp arrows in the span of an
hour and a half. (4—10)
ऋषीणामभयं दत्तं कृतक्षेमाश्च दण्डका:॥११॥

“Nay, an assurance of safety was
granted by him to the Rsis (seers of Vedic
Mantras) and the Dandaka forest rendered
secure for their habitation. (11)

wet कथंचिन्मुक्ताहं परिभूय महात्मना।
at शङ्कमानेन रामेण विदितात्मना॥१२॥

“| alone was spared somehow, after
disgracing me in the form of mutilation, by
the high-souled Rama, who has realized the
Self, afraid as he was of the sin of killing a
woman. (12)

भ्राता चास्य महातेजा गुणतस्तुल्यविक्रम:।

अनुरक्तश्च WHY लक्ष्मणो AT वीर्यवान्॥१३॥
