* SUNDARAKANDA +

तं मां शाखा: प्रशाखाश्च स्कन्धांश्चोत्तमशाखिनाम्।
दृष्ट्वा च परिधावन्तं भवेयु: परिशङ्किता:॥ २४॥
‘Again, they will get alarmed to see me
as such leaping on the boughs and branches
as well as on the trunks of the tallest trees.
(24)
मम wea च Umer at विचरतो महत्।
राक्षस्यो भयवित्रस्ता भवेयुर्विकृतस्वरा:॥ २५॥

‘Nay, sore stricken with terror to perceive
my gigantic form even as | move about in
the forest, the ogresses will begin to scream

in terror. (25)
तत: Ga: समाह्वानं राक्षस्यो रक्षसामपि।
राक्षसेन्द्रनियुक्तानां राक्षसेन्द्रनिवेशने॥ २६ ॥

‘The ogresses will then summon to their
aid the ogres too posted on duty by Ravana,
the lord of ogres, at his own palace. (26)

a शूलशरनिस्निंशविविधायुधपाणय: |
आपतेयुर्विमर्देऽस्मिन् वेगेनोद्वेगकारणात्॥ २७॥

‘Due to excitement in this commotion
they will rush with impetuosity taking darts,
arrows, swords and various other weapons
in hand. (27)

संरुद्धस्तैस्तु परितो विधमे wart बलम्।

शक्नुयां न तु सम्प्राप्तुं परं पारं महोदधे:॥ २८॥
‘Surrounded on all sides by them, | can

no doubt exterminate the army of ogres; but

| shall not in that case be able to reach the
other end of the ocean. (28)

मां वा गृह्णीयुरावृत्य बहव: शीघ्रकारिण:।
स्यादियं चागृहीतार्था मम च ग्रहणं भवेत्॥२९॥
‘Or, it is also possible that surrounding
me, many agile ogres may capture me. In
that case Sita will remain unacquainted with
my mission and my capture too will be
effected. (29)
हिंसाभिरुचयो हिंस्युरिमां at जनकात्मजाम्।
विपन्नं स्यात् ad: कार्यं रामसुग्रीवयोरिदम्॥ ३०॥

‘Alternatively, the ogres, who take delight
in bloodshed, may dispose of this daughter
of Janaka. The present object of Sri Rama

145

and Sugriva will in that case be defeated.
(30)

उद्देशे नष्टमार्गेऽस्मिन् ward: परिवारिते।

सागरेण परिक्षिप्ते गुप्ते वसति जानकी॥ ३१॥

‘Sita, Janaka’s daughter, lives in this
obscure sea-girt region, whose approaches
are unknown and which is surrounded by
ogres. (31)

विशस्ते वा गृहीते वा रक्षोभिर्मयि संयुगे।
नान्यं पश्यामि रामस्य सहायं कार्यसाधने॥ ३२॥

“In the event of my being either killed
or captured by the ogres in an encounter, |
do not find anyone else who can assist Sri
Rama in accomplishing this task of seeing
sita and conveying her message to Sri
Rama. (32)
विमृशंश्च न पश्यामि at ad मयि वानर:।
शतयोजनविस्तीर्णं लङ्घयेत महोदधिम्॥ ३३॥

‘Even on taxing my brain | do not see
any monkey who should be able, when | am

dead, to leap across the vast sea a hundred
Yojanas (eight-hundred miles) wide. (33)

कामं हन्तुं समर्थोऽस्मि सहस्राण्यपि रक्षसाम्।

न तु शक्ष्याम्यहं wed ut पारं महोदधे: ।। ३४॥
‘Although | am capable of killing

thousands of ogres, | shall not, however, be

able to reach the other end of the ocean due
to exhaustion caused by the combat. (34)

असत्यानि च युद्धानि संशयो A न रोचते।

कश्च नि:संशयं कार्यं Hale Wit: ससंशयम्॥ ३५ Ul
‘Conflicts are always dubious and

uncertainty does not find favour with me.

And what wise man would embark on a
dubious undertaking without demur? (35)

एष दोषो महान् हि स्यान्मम सीताभिभाषणे।
प्राणत्यागश्च वैदेह्या भवेदनभिभाषणे॥ ३६॥

‘Indeed this will constitute a great error
on my part if | openly talk with Sita. And the
death by her own self of Sita, a princess of
the Videha territory, will follow if | do not talk
to her. (36)
