* ARANYAKANDA «

सक्थिनी च शिरश्चैव शरीरे सम्प्रवेशितम्।
स मया याच्यमान: सन् नानयद् यमसादनम्॥ ११॥

“The latter in his turn vouchsafed a
long life to me. As a result of the aforesaid
boon of longevity granted by Brahma, pride
took possession of me. | said to myself, ‘A
long life has been secured by me, what
harm will Indra (the avowed enemy of my
race) do to me?’ Banking on this conviction
| assailed Indra on a field of battle. By the
thunderbolt of one hundred edges hurled by
him, my thighs as well as my head was
thrust into my body. Though as requested
by me, he did not despatch me to the abode
of Yama, the god of death. (9—11)
पितामहवच: सत्यं तदस्त्विति ममाब्रवीत्।
अनाहार: कथं शक्तो भग्नसक्थिशिरोमुख:॥ १२॥
वज्रेणाभिहत: कालं सुदीर्घमपि जीवितुम्।

स एवमुक्त: Weal मे ae योजनमायतौ॥ १३॥
तदाचास्यंचमेकुक्षौ तीक्ष्णदंष्ट्रमकल्पयत्।
सोऽहं भुजाभ्यां दीर्घाभ्यां संक्षिप्यास्मिन् वनेचरान्॥ १४॥
सिंहद्वीपिमृगव्याघ्रान् भक्षयामि समन्तत:।
स तु मामब्रवीदिन्द्रो यदा WA: सलक्ष्मण:॥ १५॥
छेत्स्यते WAL बाहू तदा स्वर्गं गमिष्यसि।
अनेन वपुषा तात वनेऽस्मिन् राजसत्तम॥ १६॥
Gq यत् पश्यामि सर्वस्य ग्रहणं साधु रोचये।
अवश्यं ग्रहणं wat मन्येऽहं समुपैष्यति॥१७॥

“He replied as follows to me, ‘Let that
boon of Brahma (granting you long life)
prove true.’ ‘Struck by your thunderbolt |
have been deprived of my thighs, head and
mouth which have disappeared into my
trunk; how then shall | be able to servive for
a very long time even without subsistence?’
Questioned thus, Indra forthwith made my
arms eight miles long and placed a mouth
provided with sharp teeth in my belly.
Throwing into my mouth with my exceptionally
long arms, lions, leopards, deer and
tigers roaming in the forest all around, | eat
them up. The aforesaid Indra also said
to me. ‘When Sri Rama, in conjunction with
Laksmana, severs your arms in an

915

encounter, you will forthwith ascend to
heaven’ | prefer to lay hold of with this body
of every creature that | behold in this forest,
O beloved Rama, the foremost of kings; for
| thought within myself: ‘Rama will surely fall
within my grip.’ (12—17)

इमां बुद्धिं पुरस्कृत्य देहन्यासकृतश्रम:।
स त्वं रामोऽसि ws ते नाहमन्येन Wea Vel
we हन्तुं यथा तत्त्वमेवमुक्तं महर्षिणा।
अहं fe मतिसाचिव्यं करिष्यामि नरर्षभ॥१९॥
Wage धर्मात्मा दनुना तेन Waa: il oll
B¢ We वचनं लक्ष्मणस्य च पश्यत:।
रावणेन हृता भार्या सीता Wa यशस्विनी॥ २१॥

निष्क्रान्तस्य जनस्थानात् सह भ्रात्रा यथासुखम्।
नाममात्रं तु जानामि न रूपं तस्य रक्षस:॥ २२॥

“Keeping this thought before me | have
all along striven to cast off my unwieldy
body by laying my hands on every living
being in the hope that it might turn out to be
Rama. | am now convinced that you are the
aforesaid Rama. May prosperity attend on
you ! For, | am not capable of being slain by
anyone other than you, O scion of Raghu:
this was truthfully declared by the great
sage, Sthulasira. When going to be
consecrated with fire by you both, | will
surely render help to you through my counsel
and will also point out to you an ally, O
jewel among men!” Spoken to as aforesaid
by the demon, Sri Rama, a scion of Raghu,
for his part, whose mind was set on virtue,
replied to him as follows, while Laksmana
stood looking on : “Sita, my illustrious spouse,
was borne away at ease by Ravana at a
time when | had gone out of Janasthana
with my younger brother, Laksmana. | know
the name only but not the look of the ogre.

(18—22)
निवासं वा प्रभावं at aa तस्य न faa
शोकार्तानामनाथानामेवं विपरिधावताम्॥ २३॥
कारुण्यं Use कर्तुमुपकारेण वर्तताम्।
काष्ठान्यानीय भग्नानि काले शुष्काणि कुञ्जरै: Ul २४॥
