* AYODHYAKANDA +

and was conversant with the moral code
prescribed for kings, was waiting for her
husband with a delighted mind. (4)

In the meantime Sri Rama for his part
entered his gynaeceum, which was most
tastefully decorated and was crowded with
overjoyed attendants, his head _ bent
somewhat low through bashfulness. (5)

अथ सीता समुत्पत्य वेपमाना च तं पतिम्।
अपश्यच्छोकसंतप्तं चिन्ताव्याकुलितेन्द्रियम्॥ ६॥

Forthwith springing up from her seat,
Sita tremblingly saw her celebrated husband
stricken with grief, his mind perplexed with
anxiety. (6)

at दृष्टवा a fe धर्मात्मा न शशाक मनोगतम्।
तं शोकं राघव: सोढुं ततो विव्रृततां Ta: uot
Seeing her the said Sri Rama, a scion
of Raghu, whose mind was given to
righteousness, could not contain that grief
existing in his mind; hence it became manifest.
(7)

विवर्णवदनं qeat तं प्रस्विन्नममर्षणम्।
आह दु:खाभिसंतप्ता किमिदानीमिदं प्रभो॥८॥
Seeing him pale of countenance, bathed
in perspiration and unable to restrain his
grief, Sita, who felt sore stricken with grief,
said, “What is this now, my lord? (8)

अद्य बार्हस्पत: श्रीमान् युक्त: TROT राघव।
प्रोच्यते ब्राह्मणै: प्राज्ञै: केन त्वमसि दुर्मना:॥ ९॥
“The auspicious constellation Pusya,
which is presided over by the sage Brhaspati
and which is propitious for installation is in
the ascendant today. The ceremony is
recommended by learned Brahmanas when
the moon is in conjunction with the said
asterism, O scion of Raghu! Wherefore
then are you ill at ease? (9)

न ते शतशलाकेन जलफेननिभेन च।
Tad वदनं वल्गु च्छत्रेणाभिविराजते॥१०॥

395

“Your lovely countenance does not shine
splendidly as it should when canopied by
an umbrella white as foam and provided
with a hundred ribs. (10)

व्यजनाभ्यां च मुख्याभ्यां शतपत्रनिभेक्षणम्।

चन्द्रहंसप्रकाशाभ्यां वीज्यते न तवाननम्॥११॥
“Nor is your lotus-eyed face, | find,

being fanned as it should with a pair of

excellent chowries shining like the moon
and a swan. (11)

वाग्मिनो वन्दिनश्चापि weercat नरर्षभ।

स्तुवन्तो नाद्य Gad मङ्गलै: सूतमागधा:॥१२॥
“Nor again are overjoyed minstrels and

bards or even eloquent panegyrists seen

extolling you in words full of benedictions
today, O jewel among men! (12)

न ते ale च दधि च ब्राह्मणा वेदपारगा:।
मूश्चि मूर्धाभिषिक्तस्य ददति स्म विधानत:॥१३॥

“Brahmanas well-versed in the Vedas
have not poured with due ceremony honey
and curds alongwith water from holy places
on your head after you had taken a full bath
drenching your head too. (13)

न त्वां प्रकृतय: Gat: श्रेणीमुख्याश्च भूषिता: |
अनुव्रजितुमिच्छन्ति पौरजानपदास्तथा Ut १४॥

“Nor do all the king’s ministers and the
foremost among the traders, decked with
ornaments, nor again the citizens and people
belonging to the countryside seek to follow
you in state. (14)

चतुर्भिर्वेगसम्पन्नैर्हयै: काञ्चनभूषणै: |
मुख्य: पुष्परथो युक्त: किं न गच्छति तेऽग्रत: ।। १७५ UI
“How does an excellent chariot used
for travelling or pleasure and driven by four
swift horses, decked with gold ornaments,
not go ahead of you? (15)

न हस्ती चाग्रत: श्रीमान् सर्वलक्षणपूजित:।
प्रयाणे लक्ष्यते ate कृष्णमेघगिरिप्रभ:॥ १६॥
“Nor is a glorious elephant, adorned
with all noble characteristics and resembling
a mountain crowned with a dark cloud,
