1036

Sri Rama, of long arms, then addressed alll
the great ascetics thus: (4—10)

इमान्यासनमुख्यानि यशथार्हमुपविश्यताम्।
रामस्य भाषितं श्रुत्वा सर्व Wa महर्षय:॥११॥
aay afore | निषेदु: काञ्चनीषु ते।
उपविष्टानृषींस्तत्र gear परपुरंजय:।
Wad: प्राञ्जलिर्भूत्वा राघवो वाक्यमब्रवीत्॥१२॥
“These are the special seats, please
be seated as it sults you”. Hearing the
words of Sri Rama all the great Rsis seated
themselves on the lovely golden cushions.
Seeing them thus seated, the conqueror of
the strongholds of enemies, the scion of the
Raghus, serenly with joined hands uttered
these words: (11-12)

किमागमनकार्यं a: किं करोमि समाहित:।
आज्ञाप्योऽहं महर्षीणां सर्वकामकर: WALI १३॥
‘For what purpose do you come here,
what should | perform for you. | am at your
command. | shall happily perform all that is
desired by you. (13)
इदं राज्यं च सकलं जीवितं च afe स्थितम्।
सर्वमेतद् द्विजार्थं A सत्यमेतद ब्रवीमि a: evi
‘This kingdom, my entire life, and even

what dwells in my heart, all that is for the
Brahmanas, | speak to you the truth’. (14)

« VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

तस्य तद् वचनं श्रुत्वा साधुकारो महानभूत्।
ऋषीणामुग्रतपसां यमुनातीरवासिनाम्॥ १५ ॥
ऊचुश्चैव महात्मानो हर्षेण महता व्रृता:।
उपपन्नं नरश्रेष्ठं तवैव भुवि नान्यत:॥१६॥

Hearing these words of Sri Rama and
His prolonged proclamation, the Rsis, who
were performing right penances and dwelling
on the banks of the Yamuna, arose. In great
joy the noble ones said: ‘O best among
men, this befits you alone in this world, and
none other. (15-16)

बहव: पार्थिवा राजन्नतिक्रान्ता महाबला:।
कार्यस्य गौरवं मत्वा प्रतिज्ञां नाभ्यरोचयन्॥ १७॥
‘Many powerful kings have gone

by, who looking at the greatness of our
task, never desired to promise to fulfil them.

(17)
त्वया पुनरब्रीह्मणगौरवादियं
al प्रतिज्ञा ह्यनवेक्ष्य कारणम्।
ततश्च कर्ता ह्यसि नात्र संशयो

महाभयात् त्रातुमृषींस्त्वमर्हसि॥ १८॥

‘Respecting Brahmanas you made
promise, without having a second thought
about the task. No doubt, therefore you will
dispell all fears that haunt Rsis.’ (18)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये उत्तरकाण्डे षष्टितम: सर्ग: ॥ ६० ॥

Thus ends Canto Sixty in the Uttarakanda of the glorious Ramayana of Valmiki,
the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

एकषष्टितम: सर्ग:
Canto LXI

The sages inform Sri Rama about the boon obtained by the Asura, Madhu,
and the might, and atrocities perpetrated by Lavanasura and
appeal to Sri Rama to dispel their fear

ब्रुवद्भिरेवमृषिभि: काकुत्स्थो वाक्यमब्रवीत्।

fe are ga मुनयो wa तावदपैतु व:॥१॥ | your fear may be dispelled’.

out the task that | should perform, so as

(1)

As the Rsis spoke thus, Sri Rama the | TT gata काकुत्स्थे भार्गवो वाक्यमब्रवीत्।

scion of Kakutstha said: ‘O ascetics, speak | भयानां श्रृणु यन्मूलं देशस्य च नरेश्वर॥ २॥
