# YUDDHAKANDA #

exceedingly dreadful missile, presided over
by demoniac forces. (41)

गृध्रश्येनमुखांश्चापि श्रृगालवदनांस्तथा Ut ४२ ॥
ईहामृगमुखांश्चापि व्यादितास्यान् भयावहान्।
पञ्चास्याँल्लेलिहानांश्च ससर्ज निशितान् शरान्॥ ४३॥
शरान् खरमुखांश्चान्यान् वराहमुखसंश्रितान्।
शवानकुक्कुटवक्त्रांश्च मकराशीविषाननान्॥४४॥
He discharged arrows having the heads
of lions and tigers, those of buzzards and
red geese, even of vultures and falcons, as
well as those of jackals and wolves, also
shafts having the heads of terrible lions with
their mouths wide open and even resembling
serpents, also those having the heads of
donkeys and others having the heads of
boars, dogs and cocks, alligators and
venomous snakes. (42—44)

एतांश्चान्यांश्च मायाभि: ससर्ज निशिताञ्छरान्।
TWH प्रति महातेजा: Hag: सर्प FA श्वसन्॥४५॥
Hissing like a serpent provoked to
anger, Ravana, who was endowed with
extraordinary energy, let go against Sri Rama
by his conjuring tricks these and other
whetted arrows. (45)
आसुरेण समाविष्ट: सोऽस्त्रेण TET EA: |
ससर्जास्त्रं महोत्साहं पावकं पावकोपम:॥४६॥
Overwhelmed by that missile presided
over by demoniac forces, that prince of the
Raghus, who was endowed with extra-
ordinary animation and resembled the god
of fire in brilliance, employed the missile
presided over by the god of fire. (46)

अग्निदीप्तमुखान् बाणांस्तत्र सूर्यमुखानपि।
च्न्द्रार्धचन्द्रवक्त्रांश्च धूमकेतुमुखानपि।
ग्रहनक्षत्रवर्णांश्च महोल्कामुखसंस्थितान्॥४७॥

723

विद्युज्जिह्वोपमांश्चापि wast विविधाञ्छरान्।
ते रावणशरा घोरा राघवास्त्रसमाहता:॥४८॥
विलयं जग्मुराकाशे जघ्नुश्चैव सहस्रश:।
तदस्त्रं Pred दृष्टवा रामेणाक्लिष्टकर्मणा॥४९॥
Wel नेदुस्तत: सर्वे कपय: कामरूपिण:।
सुग्रीवाभिमुखा वीरा: सम्परिक्षिप्य राघवम्॥ ५०॥

He produced through it arrows of every
description, some with heads bright as fire,
others with heads shining like the sun, the
moon, the crescent, a comet and a huge
meteor respectively, others shining like
planets and lunar mansions and some
resembling flashes of lightning. Pierced by
the missile employed by Sri Rama, a scion
of Raghu, those formidable arrows of Ravana
melted away in the air; yet, before they did
so, they killed the monkeys in thousands.
Rejoiced to see that missile, presided over
by demoniac forces, rendered void by
Sri Rama of unwearied action, and
encompassing Sri Rama (a scion of Raghu),
all the monkeys, who were capable of
changing their form at will, thereupon raised
a clamour facing Sugriva. (47—50)

प्रसह्य तद् रावणबाहुनि:सृतम्।
मुदान्वितो दाशरथिर्महात्मा
विनेदुरुच्चैर्मुदिता: कपीश्वरा:॥५१॥

The high-souled Sri Rama (a scion of
Raghu), son of Dasaratha, was then filled
with joy on having forcibly rendered void
that well-known missile which had flown
from the arms of Ravana; while the valiant
monkey chiefs, full of joy, shouted at the top
of their voice. (51)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये FERS एकोनशततम: सर्ग: ॥ ९९ ॥

Thus ends Canto Ninety-nine in the Yuddhakanda of the glorious Ramayana of
Valmiki, the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

