908

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

Canto LXIX

Laksmana punishes Ayomukhi. Falling a prey to the grip of Kabandha,
Rama and Laksmana give way to anxiety

कृत्वैवमुदकं तस्मै प्रस्थितौ राघवौ तदा।
अवेक्षन्तौ वने सीतां जग्मतु: पश्चिमां दिशम्॥ १॥
Set out on their journey after offering
water to the spirit of the deceased Jatayu,
as aforesaid, and looking about for Sita in
the forest, the two scions of Raghu now
proceeded in a south-westerly direction.
(1)

at fast दक्षिणां गत्वा शरचापासिधारिणौ।
अविप्रहतमैक्ष्वाकौ wert waded २॥

गुल्मैर्वृक्षैश्च बहुभिर्लताभिश्च प्रवेष्टितम्।
qd सर्वतो gi Tet घोरदर्शनम्॥३॥
Having moved in that south-westerly
direction, the two scions of Ikswaku, who
wielded a bow, a sword and arrows each,
reached an untrodden track blocked with
many shrubs, trees and creepers, covered
on all sides, difficult to tread, impenetrable
and dreadful to look at. (2-3)

व्यतिक्रम्य तु वेगेन गृहीत्वा दक्षिणां दिशम्।
ait तन्महारण्यं व्यतियातौ महाबलौ॥४॥
Passing beyond it with speed and
taking to a southerly direction, the two princes,
who were possessed of great might, left
that vast and most fearful forest behind. (4)

ad: Ut जनस्थानात् त्रिकोशं गम्य राघवौ।
क्रौञ्चारण्यं विविशतुर्गहनं dt महौजसौ॥५॥
नानामेघघनप्रख्यं प्रहृष्टमिव सर्वत:।
नानावर्णै:३ शुभै: पुष्पैर्मृगपक्षिगणैर्युतम्॥६॥

Having covered a distance of two
leagues beyond Janasthana, those two
scions of Raghu, who were endowed with
great energy, penetrated into the dense
Kraufica forest, which wore the hue of a
mass of clouds and looked highly rejoiced
on all sides, adorned as it was with beautiful

flowers of various colours and inhabited by
herds of beasts and flocks of birds. (5-6)

दिदृक्षमाणौ वैदेहीं aq at at विचिक्यतु:।
तत्र तत्रावतिष्ठन्तौ सीताहरणदु:खितौ॥७॥

Eager to behold Sita (a princess of the
Videha territory), they explored that forest,
halting here and there when exhausted,
distressed as they were due to the abduction
of Sita. (7)
तत: पूर्वेण at गत्वा त्रिक्रोशं भ्रातरौ तदा।
क्रौञ्चारण्यमतिक्रम्य मतङ्गाश्रममन्तरे॥ ८ ॥
दृष्टवा तु तद् at at बहुभीममृगद्विजम्।
नानावृक्षसमाकीर्णं सर्वं गहनपादपम्॥९॥
aged «FRY aa दरीं दशरथात्मजौ।
पातालसमगम्भीरां तमसा नित्यसंवृताम्॥१०॥
आसाद्य च नरव्याघ्रौ दर्यास्तस्याविदूरत:।
ददर्शतुर्महारूपां राक्षसीं विकृताननाम्॥११॥
भयदामल्पसत्त्वानां बीभत्सां रौद्रदर्शनाम्।
लम्बोदरीं तीक्ष्णदंष्टां करालीं परुषत्वचम्॥ १२॥
भक्षयन्तीं मृगान् भीमान् विकटां मुक्तमूर्धजाम्।
अवैक्षतां तु तौ त्त्र भ्रातरौ रामलक्ष्मणौ॥१३॥

Then having travelled two leagues in
an easterly direction and leaving the Kraufnica
forest behind, and seeing the hermitage of
Sage Matanga midway, the aforesaid two
brothers, Sri Rama and Laksmana, for their
part sighted the dreadful forest adjoining it,
which was infested with many fearful beasts
and birds and thickly set with trees of every
description, and which was all full of dense
clusters of trees. Reaching there a cave in
the mountain, which was deep like Patala
(the nethermost of the subterranean regions)
and eternally enveloped in darkness, the
two sons of DaSaratha, tigers among men,
beheld not far from that cave an ogress of
