* SUNDARAKANDA +

and coppery eyes and looked like Love himself
bereft of his bow and was disengaging and
re-adjusting his excellent and stainless upper
garment, which was white as the foam of
churned milk, decorated with flowers and
superior pearls, and had got entangled with
his armlet. (21—24)
तं पत्रविटपे लीन: पत्रपुष्पशताव्रृत:।
समीपमुपसंक्रान्तं विज्ञातुमुपचक्रमे॥ २५ I
Remaining hidden behind a leafy bough,
Hanuman, who was covered with hundreds
of leaves and flowers, strove to discover
the identity of Ravana, who had now drawn
near. (25)

अवेक्षमाणस्तु तदा ददर्शं कपिकुञ्जर:।
स्पपयौवनसम्पन्ना रावणस्य वरस्त्रिय:॥ २६॥

Looking round at that moment,
Hanuman, an elephant among monkeys,
also beheld the excellent consorts of Ravana,
who were richly endowed with comeliness
and youth. (26)

ताभि: परिव्रृतो राजा सुरूपाभिर्महायशा:।
तन्मृगद्बिजसंघुष्टं प्रविष्ट: प्रमदावनम्॥ २७॥

Surrounded by those women of a
charming exterior, the highly illustrious king,
Ravana, deeply penetrated into that
pleasance for the use of ladies, rendered
noisy by deer and birds. (27)

क्षीबो विचित्राभरण: शङ्कुकर्णो महाबल:।
तेन विश्रवस: Ga: स दृष्टो राक्षसाधिप:॥ २८ ॥
qa: परमनारीभिस्ताराभिरिव चन्द्रमा:।
तं ददर्शं महातेजास्तेजोवन्तं महाकपि:॥२९॥

109

रावणोऽयं महाबाहुरिति संचिन्त्य वानर:।
सोऽयमेव पुरा wa पुरमध्ये गृहोत्तमे।
अवप्लुतो महातेजा SAM मारुतात्मज:॥ ३०॥
That suzerain ruler of ogres, Ravana,
son of Sage Visrava, who was endowed
with extraordinary might, was seen by
Hanuman adorned with lovely jewels, drunk,
distinguished by pointed (dart-like) ears, and
surrounded by excellent women as the moon
is by stars. Hanuman, who was endowed
with extraordinary energy, thus beheld the
glorious Ravana. Distinctly recalling that it
was he who was lying asleep the previous
night in a sumptuous apartment in the heart
of the city, and concluding that he was no
other than the mighty-armed Ravana,
Hanuman, sprung from the loins of the wind-
god, got down from the bough on which he
was perched. (28—30)

a तथाप्युग्रतेजा: स निर्धूतस्तस्य तेजसा।
पत्रे गुह्यान्तरे सक्तो मतिमान् संव्रतोऽभवत्॥ ३१॥
Overshadowed by the brilliance of
Ravana, though himself possessed of terrific
energy, the sagacious Hanuman stood rooted
and concealed behind a bough thick with
leaves. (31)
a तामसितकेशान्तां सुश्रोणीं संहतस्तनीम्।
दिदृक्षुरसितापांगीमुपावर्तत रावण:॥ ३२॥
Keen to see Sita of charming limbs and
well-knit breasts, the ends of whose tresses
were black and the corners of whose eyes
were also dark, Ravana approached her.
(32)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये सुन्दरकाण्डेऽष्टादश: सर्ग: Il १८॥

Thus ends Canto Eighteen in the Sundarakanda of the glorious Ramayana of Valmiki,
the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

