* SUNDARAKANDA +

“Recalling the dual boon granted by
him long before in favour of the queen Kaikeyi,
the aforesaid king, who was true to his
word, fainted on hearing the cruel and
unpalatable demand of Kaikeyi. (22)
ततस्तं स्थविरो राजा सत्यधर्मे व्यवस्थित:।
ज्येष्ठं यशस्विनं पुत्रं रुदन् राज्यमयाचत॥ २३॥

“Then on regaining consciousness the
aged king, who stood firmly by the vow of
truthfulness, begged the sovereignty of
Ayodhya, in favour of Bharata, of his aforesaid
eldest and illustrious son, Sri Rama. (23)
a पितुर्वचनं श्रीमानभिषेकात् wt प्रियम्।
मनसा पूर्वमासाद्य वाचा प्रतिगृहीतवान्॥ २४॥

“Having bowed first with his mind to
the command of his father, which was dearer
to him than his own installation on the throne
as Prince Regent, the glorious Sri Rama
accepted it with his words. (24)

दद्यान्न प्रतिगृह्णीयात् सत्यं ब्रूयान्न चानृतम्।

अपि जीवितहेतोर्हि राम: सत्यपराक्रम:॥ २५॥
“Sri Rama of unfailing prowess would

only give and not accept gifts. He would

speak the truth and never utter a falsehood

even for his life. (25)

a विहायोत्तरीयाणि महार्हाणि महायशा:।
विसृज्य मनसा राज्यं जनन्यै मां समादिशत्॥ २६॥
“Casting off his costly upper garments
and renouncing the kingdom with his mind,
that highly illustrious prince gave me into his
mother’s keeping. (26)
साहं तस्याग्रतस्तूर्णं प्रस्थिता वनचारिणी।
नहि मे तेन deren वास: स्वर्गेऽपि रोचते॥ २७॥

153

“Resolved to range in the forest
with my husband, I, however, immediately
marched to the forest in front of him; for
living apart from him even in heaven would
not find favour with me. (27)

प्रागेव तु महाभाग: सौमित्रिर्मित्रनन्दन:।
पूर्वजस्यानुयात्रार्थे कुशचीरैरलंकृत: ॥ २८ ॥

“Clad in robes of KuSa grass and
tattered clothes, the highly fortunate
Laksmana (son of Sumitra) too, the delight
of his friends, got ready to accompany his
eldest brother even before me. (28)

a ad भर्तुरादेशं बहुमान्य दृढव्रता:।
प्रविष्टा: स्म पुरादृष्टं at गम्भीरदर्शनम्॥ २९॥

“Highly respecting the command of our
lord, and steadfast in our vows, we the
aforesaid three penetrated deep into the
forest, which had never been seen by us
before and which was dreadful to look at.

(29)
aad दण्डकारण्ये तस्याहममितौजस:।
रक्षसापहृता भार्या रावणेन दुरात्मना॥३०॥

“The consort of the aforesaid prince,
who is endowed with immense strength, |
was borne away, while the latter was
sojourning in the Dandaka forest, by the
evil-minded ogre, Ravana. (30)
द्वौ मासौ तेन मे कालो जीवितानुग्रह: sa: |
ऊर्ध्व द्वाभ्यां तु मासाभ्यां ततस्त्यक्ष्यामि जीवितम्॥ ३१ ॥

“A period of two months has been
allowed to me by him to live on sufferance.

After the said two months, however, | shall
give up the ghost.” (31)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीये आदिकाव्ये सुन्दरकाण्डे त्रयस्तिंश: AW: ॥ ३३ Il

Thus ends Canto Thirty-three of the Sundarakanda in the glorious Ramayana of
Valmiki, the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

