# YUDDHAKANDA #

663

षडशीतितम: सर्ग:
Canto LXXXVI

In the course of an encounter of the monkeys with the ogres,
Hanuman plays havoc among the hostile army and
challenges Indrajit to a duel and Laksmana
catches sight of the ogre

अथ तस्यामवस्थायां लक्ष्मणं रावणानुज:।
परेषामहितं वाक्यमर्थसाधकमब्रवीत्॥ १॥
In that situation Vibhisana, the youngest
brother of Ravana, forthwith tendered to
Laksmana an advice, which was conducive
to his interest and detrimental to the enemies.
(1)

यदेतद् राक्षसानीकं मेघश्यामं विलोक्यते।
`एतदायोध्यतां शीघ्रं कपिभिश्च शिलायुथै:॥ २॥
“Let this army of ogres, which is seen
here, dark as a cloud, be quickly engaged
in battle by the monkeys, using rocks as
their weapon. (2)

तस्यानीकस्य महतो Yet यत लक्ष्मण।
राक्षसेन्द्रसुतोऽप्यत्र भिन्ने दृश्यो भविष्यति॥ ३॥

“Nay, make an effort in the direction of
overthrowing that mighty army, O Laksmana!
When the yonder army is destroyed, Indrajit,
son of the ruler of ogres, too will become
visible here. (3)

स त्वमिन्द्राशनिप्रख्यै: शरैरवकिरन् परान्।
अभिद्रवाशु यावद् SA नैतत् कर्म समाप्यते॥४॥

“Therefore, so long as this undertaking
of Indrajit is not actually carried through,
promptly assail you the enemies, covering
them with your arrows resembling the
thunderbolt of Indra, the ruler of gods. (4)

we वीर दुरात्मानं मायापरमधार्मिकम्।
रावणिं क्रूरकर्माणं सर्वलोकभयावहम्॥५॥
“Destroy, O hero, the evil-minded and
unrighteous Indrajit, son of Ravana, of cruel
deeds, who is given up to conjuring tricks
and is the terror of all the worlds.” (5)

विभीषणवच: श्रुत्वा लक्ष्मण: शुभलक्षण:।
ववर्ष शरवर्षेण राक्षसेन्द्रसुतं TN
Hearing the counsel of Vibhisana,
Laksmana, who was_ endowed with
auspicious bodily marks, began to cover
the army of ogres with a rain of shafts in
order that it may descend on Indrajit, son of
the ruler of ogres. (6)

meant: शाखामृगाश्चैव द्रुमप्रवरयोधिन:।
अभ्यधावन्त सहितास्तदनीकमवस्थितम्॥ ७॥
Bears and monkeys, too, who fought
with big trees in this hands, rushed together
towards that army drawn up in battle-array.
(7)

राक्षसाश्च शितैर्बाणैरसिभि: शक्तितोमरै:।
अभ्यवर्तन्त समरे कपिसैन्यजिघांसव:॥८॥

Eager to exterminate the simian army,
ogres too launched a counter-attack on the
battlefield with their sharp arrows, swords,
javelins and lances. (8)

a सम्प्रहारस्तुमुल: dat कपिरक्षसाम्।
Wert Hed लङ्कां नादयन् A समन्तत:॥९॥
That encounter between the monkeys
and ogres proved to be a tumultuous one,
rendering Lanka noisy, as it did on all sides
with its mighty uproar. (9)
शस्त्रैश्च विविधाकारै: शितैर्बाणैश्च पादपै: |
उद्यतैर्गिरिशृङ्गैश्च चोरैराकाशमावृतम्॥ १०॥

The sky on that battlefield was covered
with weapons of various shapes as well
as with sharp arrows and uplifted trees
and formidable mountain-peaks. (10)
