+ UTTARAKANDA +

uttered by the Raksasa, in the form of a
Brahmana. (32-33)
तच्छुत्वा पार्थिवेन्द्रस्य रक्षसा विकृतं च AL!
UA: Wart राजानं वसिष्ठ: पुरुषर्षभम्॥ ३४॥
After having heard what the King
said and knowing the food _ being
contaminated by the Raksasa, Vasistha
again spoke to Saudasa, the bull among
men: (34)
मया रोषपरीतेन यदिदं व्याह्तं aa:
नैतच्छक्यं Ga कर्तुं प्रदास्यामि च ते वरम्॥ ३५॥
‘These words that have been uttered
by me in anger, cannot be rendered ineffective,
| will, however, grant you a boon. (35)
कालो द्वादशवर्षाणि शापस्यान्तो भविष्यति।
मत् प्रसादाच्च राजेन्द्र अतीतं न स्मरिष्यसि॥ ३६॥

The curse will come to an end after

1047

twelve years and by my grace, you will not
remember the past.” (36)

एवं स राजा तं शापमुपभुज्यारिसूदन:।
प्रतिलेभे पुना राज्यं प्रजाश्चैवान्वपालयत्॥ ३७॥
Thus that King, the extirpator of enemies,
having borne that curse, regained his kingdom
and protected his subjects. (37)
आश्रमस्य समीपेऽस्य यन्मां पृच्छसि राघव॥ ३८॥
‘Of that Kalmasapada is this holy place
of sacrifice, near the hermitage about which
you asked me’. (38)
तस्य तां पार्थिवेन्द्रस्य कथां श्रुत्वा सुदारुणाम्।
विवेश पर्णशालायां महर्षिमभिवाद्य च॥ ३९॥
Having heard this dreadful story of that

king Kalmasapada, Satrughna saluted the
great Rsi and entered the hutment. (39)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये उत्तरकाण्डे पञ्चषष्टितम: सर्ग: ॥ ६५ ॥

Thus ends Canto Sixty-five in the Uttarakanda of the glorious-Ramayana of Valmiki,
the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

षट्षष्टितम: सर्ग:
Canto LXVI

Birth of two sons to Sita, Valmiki makes arrangement for their protection.
Satrughna is happy over this and leaves for the bank of the Yamuna

ama रात्रिं शत्रुघ्न: पर्णशालां समाविशत्।
ama रात्रिं सीतापि प्रसूता दारकद्वयम्॥१॥
During that night Satrughna entered
the arbour. The same very night Sita gave
birth to two sons. (1)
ततोऽर्धरात्रसमये बालका मुनिदारका:।
वाल्मीके: प्रियमाचख्यु: सीताया: Was शुभम्॥ २॥
At midnight, the young ascetics spoke
to sage Valmiki about the auspicious

motherhood of Sita, which news very much
pleased him: (2)

भगवन् रामपत्नी सा Waal दारकद्वयम्।
ततो wat महातेज: कुरु भूतविनाशिनीम्॥ ३॥

‘Sir, the wife of Rama has given birth to
two sons. So, O powerful one, make the
protecting rites that destroy the ill spirits of
the nether world.’ (3)

तेषां aq वचनं श्रुत्वा महर्षि: समुपागमत्।
बालचन्द्रप्रतीकाशौ देवपुत्रौ महौजसौ॥४॥
Hearing these words from them, the
great sage went there and saw the two
sons, who were like sons of the gods and
were as effulgent as the moon. (4)

जगाम तत्र हृष्टात्मा ददर्शं च कुमारकौ।
भूतघ्नीं चाकरोत् ताभ्यां रक्षां रक्षोविनाशिनीम्॥ ५ ॥

The sage went there joyfully and looked
