« KISKINDHAKANDA +

सम्प्रस्थिता मानसवासलुब्धा:
प्रियान्विता: सम्प्रति चक्रवाका:।
अभीक्ष्णवर्षोदकविक्षतेषु
यानानि मार्गेषु न सम्पतन्ति॥ १६॥

“Covetous of sojourn’ १ the
Manasarovara lake (in Tibet), swans are
well on their way to that region and the
Cakravaka birds (the red geese) are now
united with their mates. Conveyances (such
as a Chariot) no longer venture on the roads,
which are badly damaged due to repeated
showers. (16)

SG यथा शान्तमहार्णवस्य॥ १७॥

“The sky—which is visible at places
and invisible at other places due to clouds
being scattered here and there—appears
like the surface of an unruffled ocean
interspersed here and there with hills. (17)
व्यामिथश्रितं सर्जकदम्बपुष्पै-

aad जलं पर्वतधातुताम्रम्।
मयूरकेकाभिरनुप्रयातं ।
शैलापगा: शीघ्रतरं वहन्ति॥१८॥

“The mountain-streams very swiftly
carry to the sea their fresh waters, which
are strewn with Sarja and Kadamba flowers,
nay, are reddened with the mineral deposits
of the rocks and are followed by the cries of
peacocks. (18)

भूमौ पतत्याम्रफलं विपक्वम्॥ 28 I

“The fruits of Jambu (rose-apple) trees
which are bursting with juice and fully resemble
a black bee in colour are partaken of freely
by the people; while mango fruits, which
assume diverse hues on getting fully ripe, fall
to the earth when shaken by the wind. (19)

1037

विद्युत्पताका: सबलाकमाला:
शैलेन्द्रकूटाकृतिसंनिकाशा: |
गर्जन्ति मेघा: समुदीर्णनादा
मत्ता गजेन्द्रा इव संयुगस्था:॥ २०॥

“With the lightning for their banner and
adorned with garlands in the shape of rows
of herons, the clouds, whose appearance
resembles the shape of a mountain-peak and
which emit a loud peal of thunder, rumble like
elephants in rut standing in battle-array. (20)

वर्षोदकाप्यायितशाद्बलानि

att निर्वृष्टबलाहकानि
पश्यापराह्णेष्वधिकं विभान्ति॥ २१॥

“Lo! With their grass made richer
by rain-water, their peacocks having
commenced their festivity of dance, the
woodlands on which the clouds have poured
their copious showers look more charming
during the afternoons. (21)

बलाकिनो वारिधरा नदन्त:।
महत्सु TST महीधराणां
विश्रम्य विश्रम्य पुन: प्रयान्ति॥ २२॥
“Having rested again and again on the
colossal peaks of mountains, the thundering
clouds, adorned with herons and strenuously
carrying their big load of water, resume their
journey. (22)
मेघाभिकामा परिसम्पतन्ती
सम्मोदिता भाति बलाकपंक्ति: |
वातावधूता वरपौण्डरीकी
लम्बेव माला रुचिराम्बरस्य॥ २३॥
“Flying with speed in a flock with a
longing to meet the cloud—their beloved—
the highly rejoiced row of herons looks like
a long garland of excellent lotuses shaken

by the wind and adorning the charming
sky. (23)

बालेन्द्रगोपान्तरचित्रितेन
विभाति भूमिर्नवशाद्बलेन।
