* AYODHYAKANDA +

Fondly gazing on those people as
though drinking them with his eyes, Sr
Rama lovingly spoke to them as follows as
though they were his own children: (5)

या प्रीतिर्बहुमानश्च मय्ययोध्यानिवासिनाम्।
मत्प्रियार्थं विशेषेण भरते सा विधीयताम्॥६॥

“The love and high esteem that has been
bestowed upon me by you (the inhabitants of
Ayodhya) may, for my pleasure, be bestowed
in a special measure on Bharata. (6)

a fe कल्याणचारित्र: कैकेय्यानन्दवर्धन:।
करिष्यति यथावद् a: प्रियाणि च हितानि च॥ ७॥

“For, Bharata, who enhances the delight
of Kaikeyi and who is possessed of an
excellent conduct, will properly do things
which are not only pleasing but conducive
to your best interests, too. (7)

ज्ञानवृद्धो वयोबालो मृदुर्वीर्यगुणान्वित:।
अनुरूप: स at भर्ता भविष्यति भयापह:॥ ८॥

“Elderly in wisdom, though juvenile in
age, tender though adorned with heroic
qualities, he will prove to be a worthy master
and will dispel your fears. (8)

a fe राजगुणैर्युक्तो gars: समीक्षित:।
अपि चापि मया fered: कार्य वो भर्तॄशासनम्॥ ९॥

“Endowed as he is with kingly virtues,
he has been thought fit to be the Prince
Regent. For this reason too the behest of
your master must be carried out by you and
also because you are enjoined by me. (9)

न संतप्येद् यथा चासौ वनवासं गते मयि।
महाराजस्तथा कार्यो मम प्रियचिकोर्षया॥१०॥

“Moreover, with intent to oblige me, the
said Emperor should be treated by you in
such a way that he may not suffer agony
when | have gone in exile to the forest.”

(10)
यथा यथा दाशरथिर्धर्ममेवाश्रितो भवेत्।

तथा तथा प्रकृतयो WA पतिमकामयन्॥११॥

The more did Sri Rama (son of
DaSaratha) hold fast to righteousness in the

459

form of obedience to his father’s wishes,
the more did the people desire him to be
their ruler. (11)

बाष्पेण fated दीनं wa: सौमित्रिणा सह।
चकर्षेव Wiis जनं पुरनिवासिनम्॥१२॥

Sri Rama with Laksmana (son of
Sumitra) drew, as it were, by their virtues
the residents of Ayodhya—who were afflicted
and covered with tears—as though bound
with cords. (12)

ते द्विजास्त्रिविधं वृद्धा ज्ञानेन वयसौजसा।
वय:प्रकम्पशिरसो दूरादूचुरिदं वच:॥१३॥
Of them such Brahmanas as were
senior in three ways, viz., in point of wisdom,
age and power acquired through asceticism,
and whose heads were shaking under the
weight of senility, spoke from a distance as
follows, unable as they were to keep pace
with the chariot of Sri Rama: (13)

वहन्तो जवना TH भो भो जात्यास्तुरंगमा:।
निवर्तध्वं न weet feat vad भर्तरि॥ १४॥
“Return, O swift steeds of excellent
breed drawing the chariot conveying Sr
Rama, and be friendly to your master, since
by taking Sri Rama against our wishes you
will be doing a disservice to him; you ought
not to proceed further. (14)

कर्णवन्ति fe भूतानि विशेषेण तुरङ्गमा:।

qa तस्मान्निवर्तध्वं याचनां प्रतिवेदिता:॥१५॥
“Indeed all created beings which are

endowed with ears, more so horses, stand

apprised of our entreaty. Therefore, please

return. (15)

ada: a विशुद्धात्मा वीर: शुभदरूढव्रत:।
उपवाह्यस्तु वो भर्ता नापवाह्य: पुराद् वनम्॥ १६॥
“The said master of yours is exceedingly
pure-minded, heroic and a man of virtuous
and firm resolve. As such he justly deserves
to be conveyed by you nearer the city and
not to be carried away from the city to the
forest.” (16)
