584

अथाङ्गदो मृत्युसमानवेगं
निपातयामास तदा महात्मा
नरान्तकस्योरसि वालिपुत्र: ।। ९३ ॥

Clenching his fist, whose vehemence
equalled the vehemence of Death, and which
descended like a mountain-peak, Angada,
the high-souled son of Vali, then immediately
brought it down on Narantaka’s breast.(93)

a मुष्टिनिर्भिन्ननिमग्नवक्षा

ज्वाला वमञ्शोणितदिग्धगात्र: ।
नरान्तको भूमितले पपात

यथाचलो वज्रनिपातभग्न: 1 ९४॥

His chest having been split asunder
by the blow of Angada’s fist and having
sunk deep, and his limbs stained with blood,
Narantaka fell to the earth’s surface vomitting
flaming blood like a mountain shattered by a
stroke of lightning. (94)
तदान्तरिक्षे त्रिदशोत्तमानां

वनौकसां da महाप्रणाद:।

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA +

तस्मिन् निहतेऽग्रयवीर्ये
नरान्तके वालिसुतेन संख्ये॥९५॥

When the aforesaid Narantake, who
was foremost in prowess, was killed by
Angada (son of Vali) in the encounter, a
great shout of joy rose from the foremost of
gods in the heavens as well as from the
monkeys on the battle-field. (95)

agent तं paar fe विक्रमम्।
fafafera सोऽप्यथ भीमकर्मा
Ws as a aya हर्षित:॥९६॥

Angada actually performed on this
occassion the aforesaid feat of valour
which was exceedingly difficult to perform
and which brought excessive delight to
the mind of Sri Rama, so much so that the
latter too was struck with wonder. Nay,
Angada of terrific valiant deeds was

infused with vigour once more for a fight.
(96)

aya

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये FERS एकोनसप्ततितम: सर्ग: ॥ ६९ ॥

Thus ends Canto Sixty-nine in the Yuddhakanda of the glorious Ramayana of

Valmiki, the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

Canto LXX

Death of Devantaka and Trisira at the hands of Hanuman, of
Mahodara at the hands of Nila and of Mahaparswa
at the hands of Rsabha

नरान्तकं हतं दृष्ट्वा चुक्रुशुर्नैर्ऋतर्षभा:।
देवान्तकस्तिमूर्धा च पौलस्त्यश्च महोदर:॥१॥

Seeing Narantaka killed, Devantaka
and Trisira, a scion of Pulasti, as well
as Mahodara, who were veritable bulls
among the ogres (scions of Nirrti), cried.

(1)

वालिपुत्रं महावीर्यमभिदुद्राव वेगवान्॥२॥

Mounted on the foremost of elephants,
which closely resembled a cloud, Mahodara,
who was full of impetuosity, darted towards
Angada (son of Vali), who was endowed
with extraordinary prowess. (2)
