480

“When the king is dead, Kausalya will
die in his wake and my mother (Sumitra)
too will meet her end immediately after. (18)

अतिक्रान्तमतिक्रान्तमनवाप्य मनोरथम्।
राज्ये राममनिक्षिप्य पिता A विनशिष्यति॥ १९॥

“Not attaining his desired end and
without installing Sri Rama on the throne
of Ayodhya, my father will breathe his
last with the words ‘Lost ! Lost !!’ on his lips.

(19)

प्रेतकार्येषु सर्वेषु संस्करिष्यन्ति राघवम्॥२०॥

“Fortunate men alone will consecrate
our deceased father, DaSaratha (a scion of
Raghu) in the course of all funeral rites
when that unlucky moment has actually
arrived. (20)
eetarergeeratt गणिकावरशोभिताम्॥ २१॥

gan विचरिष्यन्ति राजधानीं पितुर्मम॥ २३॥

“If, on the other hand, DaSsaratha
survives, people will move about happily in
the capital of my father, provided with cross
roads, allocated at lovely sites, and well-
aligned roads, nay, rich in mansions of well-
to-do men, temples of gods and royal palaces,
adorned with the foremost of courtesans,
crowded with chariots, horses and elephants,
made resonant with the sound of musical
instruments, full of all blessings and crowded

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

with merry and well-fed men, well-provided
with gardens and royal parks and bright
with festivities carried on under the auspices
of associations. (21—23)

aft जीवेद् दशरथो वनवासात् पुनर्वयम्।
प्रत्यागम्य महात्मानमपि पश्याम सुव्रतम्॥ २४॥
“In case DaSaratha, our father, survives,
we might on returning from our exile in the
forest see that high-souled king of noble
vows once more. (24)

अपि सत्यप्रतिज्ञेन सार्धं कुशलिना वयम्।
frat वनवासेऽस्मिन्नयोध्यां प्रविशेमहि॥ २५॥

“Let us hope when this period of exile
in the forest has expired, we may safely
return to Ayodhya alongwith Sri Rama, who
is true to his promise.” (25)

परिदेवयमानस्य दु:खार्तस्य महात्मन:।
तिष्ठतो राजपुत्रस्य शार्वरी सात्यवर्तत॥ २६॥

While the high-souled prince, Laksmana,
sat lamenting as above, afflicted with agony
as he was, that night slipped away. (26)
तथा हि सत्यं gata प्रजाहिते

नरेन्द्रसूनौ गुरुसौहृदाद् गुह:।
मुमोच बाष्पं व्यसनाभिपीडितो
ज्वरातुरो नाग इव व्यथातुर:॥ २७॥

While Laksmana, son of DaSaratha, a
friend of the people, was speaking the truth
as above out of affection for his elder brother,
Sri Rama, Guha, who was sore pinched
with adversity and oppressed with agony,
shed tears like an elephant tormented with
fever. (27)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्येऽयोध्याकाण्डे
एकपञ्चाश: सर्ग: ॥ ५१ il

Thus ends Canto Fifty-one in the Ayodhyakanda of the glorious Ramayana of Valmiki,
the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

