998

received the command of Sri Rama (a scion
of Raghu) Laksmana (the son of Sumitra)
mounting a chariot drove speedily to the
palace of Sri Rama (a scion of Raghu). (5)
प्रयान्तं लक्ष्मणं दृष्टवा द्वा:स्थो भरतमन्तिकात्।
उवाच भरतं त्त्र वर्धयित्वा कृताञ्जलि:॥६॥
विनयावनतो भूत्वा राजा cat द्रष्टुमिच्छति।
भरतस्तु वच: श्रुत्वा द्वा:स्थाद् रामसमीरितम्॥ 9
उत्पपातासनात् तूर्णं पद्भ्यामेव महाबल:।
दृष्टवा प्रयान्तं भरतं त्वरमाण: कृताञ्जलि:॥ ८॥
WAM Wa ततो वाक्यमुवाच ह।
एह्यागच्छ रघुश्रेष्ठ राजा cat द्रष्टुमिच्छति॥९॥
गतो fe लक्ष्मण: Ys भरतश्च महायशा:।
श्रुत्वा तु वचनं तस्य VA: परमासनात्॥१०॥
शिरसा aa धरणीं प्रययौ यत्र राघव:।
द्वा:स्थस्त्वागम्य रामाय सर्वानेव कृताञ्जलि:।॥ ११॥
निवेदयामास तथा भ्रातॄन् स्वान् समुपस्थितान्।
कुमारानागताञ्छुत्वा चिन्ताव्याकुलितेन्द्रिय: tt १२॥
अवाङ्मुखो दीनमना द्वा:स्थं वचनमब्रवीत्।
प्रवेशय कुमारांस्त्वं मत्समीपं त्वरान्वित:॥१३॥
Having seen Laksmana departing, the
door-keeper went to Bharata and there having
wished prosperity and having bowed down
with humility with his palms joined together
said to Bharata, “The King desires to see
you.” On hearing from the door-keeper the
message sent by Sri Rama, the mighty
Bharata sprang up from his seat and
hurriedly left on foot. Then having beheld
Bharata going away, the door-keeper moving
speedily to the palace of Satrughna, said
with his palms joined together: “Come, come
along, O best of the Raghus! The king
desires to see you. Laksmana has left earlier
and the celebrated Bharata too.” Now,
hearing his words Satrughna got down from
his throne and paying obeisance to the
earth with his head, reached where Sri Rama
(a scion of Raghu) was. Then having come
back, the door-keeper with his palms joined
together informed Sri Rama that all His
brothers were duly present, as ordered.
Having heard that the princes have

« VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

come, Sri Rama, His senses agitated due
to anxiety, His mind distressed and His
face downcast gave the following command
to the door-keeper: “Immmediately, send in
the princes to me. (6—13)
एतेषु जीवितं मह्यमेते प्राणा: frat मम।
आज्ञप्तास्तु नरेन्द्रेण कुमारा: शुक्लवासस:॥ १४॥
Wel: प्राञ्जलयो year विविशुस्ते समाहिता:।
ते तु Fea मुखं तस्य सग्रहं शशिनं यथा॥ १५॥
संध्यागतमिवादित्यं प्रभया परिवर्जितम्।
बाष्पपूर्णे च नयने दृष्ट्वा रामस्य धीमत:।
हतशोभं यथा पद्मं WS वीक्ष्य च तस्य an eeu
ततोऽभिवाद्य त्वरिता: पादौ रामस्य मूर्धभि:।
RY: समाहिता: सर्वे रामस्त्वश्रूण्यवर्तयत्॥ १७॥
“My life rests on them. These dear
ones constitute my very life-breath.” Then
ordered by the king, these princes of steady
mind, clad in white entered, bowing down
with their palms joined together. Having
beheld His face like the eclipsed moon and
like the evening sun shorn of brilliance,
having also seen the sagacious Sri Rama’s
eyes full of tears and having glanced at His
face looking like a withered lotus, they all
hurriedly bowed down their head in salutation
at the feet of Sri Rama and became transfixed
attentively, while Sr Rama shed tears.
(14—17)

तान् परिष्वज्य बाहुभ्यामुत्थाप्य च महाबल:।
आसनेष्वासतेत्युक्त्वा ततो वाक्यं जगाद ह॥ १८॥
भवन्तो WA सर्वस्वं भवन्तो जीवितं मम।
भवद्भिश्च कृतं Wet पालयामि AVERT: uke Ul

Then having them embraced between
his arms and lifting them up, asked them to
take their seats, the mighty Sri Rama
verily made the following statement: “O
guardians of the people, you constitute all
my possessions. You are my very life. | am
simply looking after the kingdom carved out
by you. (18-19)

भवन्त: कृतशास्त्रार्था बुद्ध्या च परिनिष्ठिता:।
सम्भूय च मदर्थोऽयमन्वेष्टव्यो AVANT: Ul २०॥
