+ UTTARAKANDA +

The said ministers, Marica, Suka and
Sarana alongwith Prahasta, were badly
beaten by Anaranya and fled like deer. (19)

ततो बाणशतान्यष्टौ पातयामास मूर्धनि।
तस्य राक्षसराजस्य इक्ष्वाकुकुलनन्दन:॥ २०॥
Thereupon Anaranya (the delight of

Ikswaku’s race) shot eight hundred arrows
on the head of the king of the Raksasas. (20)

तस्य बाणा: पतन्तस्ते चक्रिरे न क्षतं क्वचित्।
वारिधारा इवाभ्रेभ्य: ude गिरिमूर्धनि॥ २१॥

Though falling on the head of Ravana,
the aforesaid arrows of Anaranya did not
cause any injury anywhere any more than
torrents of water falling from clouds on the
top of a hill. (21)

ad राक्षसराजेन क्रुद्धेन नृपतिस्तदा।
तलेनाभिहतो aft स रथान्निपपात ह॥ २२॥

Then, struck on the head by the enraged
king of the Raksasas with his palm, the
aforesaid king fell from the chariot: so the
tradition goes. (22)

स राजा पतितो wat विह्वल: प्रविवेपित:।
वज्रदग्धं इवारण्ये सालो निपतितो यथा॥ २३॥

Confused and completely shaken, the
said king fell on the ground like a sal tree
struck by lightning in a forest. (23)

तं प्रहस्याब्रवीद् tat इक्ष्वाकुं पृथिवीपतिम्।
किमिदानीं फलं प्राप्तं त्वया मां प्रति युध्यता॥ २४॥
Making fun of that ruler of Ikswaku’s
dynasty, Ravana said, “What have you gained
by encountering me, on this occasion? (24)
त्रैलोक्ये नास्ति यो gg मम दद्यान्नराधिप।
WS प्रसक्तो भोगेषु न श्रृणोषि बलं मम॥ २५॥
“There is none in all the three worlds
who can give battle to me, O Lord of men!
Deeply addicted (as you were) to sense-

enjoyments, | imagine, you did not hear of
my might.” (25)

तस्यैवं Gad राजा मन्दासुर्वाक्यमब्रवीत्।
किं शक्यमिह कर्तुं वै कालो fe दुरतिक्रम:॥ २६॥

907

To him who was speaking thus, the
king, whose life was sinking, replied as
follows: “What can be done by me now?
For, death is inviolable, indeed. (26)
wee निर्जितो रक्षस्त्वया चात्मप्रशंसिना।
कालेनैव विपन्नोऽहं हेतुभूतस्तु A भवान्॥ २७॥

“Surely, | have not been vanquished by
you, O ogre, who are indulging in self-praise;
| stand destroyed by Fate alone and you are
a mere instrument in the hands of Death. (27)
Wee विमुखी tat युद्ध्यमानस्त्वया हत:॥ २८॥

“What can be done by me precisely at
this moment when my life is coming to an
end? Thank God, | have not been averse to
fighting, O ogre, and have been killed while
fighting. (28)

इक्ष्वाकुपरिभावित्वाद् वचो वक्ष्यामि राक्षस।
यदि दत्तं यदि हुतं यदि मे सुकृतं तप:।
Ole TAT: प्रजा: MAH तदा सत्यं वचोऽस्तु A Ul २९ ॥
“Since you have insulted the race of
Ikswaku, | shall pronounce a curse (on
you), O ogre! If a gift has ever been
bestowed, an oblation has ever been poured
into the sacred fire, and austerities have
been practised well and if the people have
been well protected by me, let my words
prove to be true. (29)

उत्पत्स्यते कुले ह्यस्मिन्निक्ष्वाकूणां महात्मनाम्।
TH दाशरथिर्नाम स a प्राणान् हरिष्यति॥ ३०॥

“Indeed, in this race of high-souled
Ikswakus will be born a son of DaSaratha,
Sri Rama by name; He will take your life”.

(30)

ततो जलधरोदग्रस्ताडितो देवदुन्दुभि:।
तस्मिन्नुदाहृते शापे पुष्पवृष्टिश्च खाच्च्युता॥ ३१॥

When that curse was pronounced, the
kettledrum of the gods was sounded at a
high pitch like the roar of thunder and an
abundance—of flowers were showered from
the heavens. (31)
