* AYODHYAKANDA +

शक्तस्त्रैलोक्यमप्येष भोक्तुं किं नु महीमिमाम्।

नास्य क्रोध: प्रसादश्च निरर्थोऽस्ति कदाचन॥ ४५ ॥
“He is capable of ruling even the three

worlds (viz., heaven, earth and_ the

intermediate region), to say nothing of this

earth. His frown and favour are never

purposeless. (45)

हन्त्येष नियमाद् वध्यानवध्येषु न कुप्यति।
युनक्त्यर्थै: wees तमसौ यत्र तुष्यति॥४६॥

“He kills those deserving death
according to the scriptural ordinance and is
never angry with those who do not deserve
to be killed. Nay, greatly rejoiced, he endows
with riches the man with whom he gets
pleased. (46)

at: सर्वप्रजाकान्तै: प्रीतिसंजननैर्नृणाम्।
गुणैर्विरोचते war दीप्त: wa इवांशुभि:॥४७॥

“Like the sun irradiated by its rays,
Sri Rama shines brightly by virtue of his
excellences characterized by self-control,
loved by all created beings and affording
delight to men. (47)
लोकपालोपमं नाथमकामयत मेदिनी॥४८॥

“Earth seeks to have as its master, the
aforesaid Sri Rama of unfailing might, and
vying with the guardians of the spheres,
endowed as he is with the above-noted
virtues. (48)

वत्स: श्रेयसि जातस्ते दिष्ट्यासौ तव राघव:।
दिष्ट्या पुत्रगुणैर्युक्तो मारीच इव कश्यप:॥४९॥

“Fortunately for us your aforesaid son
has grown capable of doing good to the
world at large and, like KaSyapa, son of
Marici (one of the nine mind-born sons of
Brahma, the creator), Sri Rama, a scion of
Raghu, is, luckily enough, endowed with all
filial* virtues. (49)

293

बलमारोग्यमायुश्च रामस्य विदितात्मन:।
देवासुरमनुष्येषु सगन्धर्वोरगेषु च॥५०॥
आशंसते जन: सर्वो We War तथा।
आभ्यन्तरश्च बाह्यश्च पौरजानपदो जन:॥७५१॥

“Everyone among gods, demons and
men, including Gandharvas _ (celestial
musicians) and Nagas (a class of semi-
divine beings, having the face of a human
being and the tail of a serpent) as also in
the state of Kosala as well as in the capital
town of Ayodhya, nay, everyone belonging
to the gynaeceum and forming part of the
urban and rural population outside the state
prays for the strength, health and longevity
of Sri Rama of well-known amiability.

(50-51)
स्रियो व्रद्धास्तरुण्यश्च सायं प्रात: समाहिता: |
सर्वा देवान्नमस्यन्ति रामस्यार्थे मनस्विन:।
तेषां Ae याचितं Sa त्वत्प्रसादात्समृद्ध्यताम्॥ ५२ ॥

“Both morning and evening as well as
at midday, all women, old as well as young,
devoutly bow to the gods in the interest of
the lofty-minded Sri Rama. Let that entreaty
of theirs be fulfilled by your grace, O lord!

(52)
राममिन्दीवरश्यामं सर्वशत्रुनिबर्हणम्।
पश्यामो यौवराज्यस्थं तव राजोत्तमात्मजम्॥ ५३॥

“We would see installed in the office of
Prince Regent your eldest son, Sri Rama,
cerulean as a blue lotus, the destroyer of all
enemies, O jewel among kings ! (53)
तं देवदेवोपममात्मजं ते

सर्वस्य लोकस्य fea निविष्टम्।
हिताय न: क्षिप्रमुदारजुष्टं
मुदाभिषेक्तुं वरद त्वमर्हसि॥७५४॥
“In our interest, O bestower of boons,

you ought delightfully to install as Prince
Regent without delay your aforesaid son,

* According to Sarnskrita etymology, that son (Putra) alone is really worth the name, who is capable
of redeeming his father from the hell going by the name of ‘Put’ (into which those who die without leaving
a male son are said to fall) by offering water to his departed soul after death : Garett नरकात्त्रायते इति Ta: |
