# YUDDHAKANDA +

Raghu, in combat right in front of the
enemy, who resemble the rod of Brahma
(the creator) in glory, that present a look
similar to that of Death and are equal to the
rod of Yama (the god of retribution)? (13)

धनानि wiht सुभूषणानि
वासांसि दिव्यानि मणींश्च चित्रान्।

341

सीतां च waa निवेद्य देवीं
वसेम राजन्निह वीतशोका:॥१४॥
“Offering riches, precious stones,
excellent jewels, celestial garments and
various gems, as well as the godlike Sita to
Rama, let us live here free from grief, O
king!” (14)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये युद्धकाण्डे VAT: सर्ग: ॥ १५ ॥
Thus ends Canto Fifteen in the Yuddhakanda of the glorious Ramayana of
Valmiki, the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

षोडश: at:
Canto XVI

Annoyed to hear this advice of his youngest half-brother, Vibhisana, which,
though unpleasant to hear, was most wholesome, Ravana, on whom
it made no impression, castigates him with harsh words

सुनिविष्टं fed वाक्यमुक्तवन्तं विभीषणम्।
अब्रवीत् परुषं वाक्यं रावण: कालचोदित:॥ १॥
Ravana, who was under the influence
of Death, addressed the following harsh
words to Vibhisana, who had rendered an
advice which was wholesome and
impregnated with meaning: (1)

aad सह सपत्नेन क्रुद्धेनाशीविषेण च।
न तुं मित्रप्रवादेन संवसेच्छत्रुसेविना॥२॥

“One would rather live with an avowed
enemy and even with an enraged venomous
serpent than with an individual who, though
professing himself to be a friend, is devoted
to the enemy. (2)
जानामि शीलं ज्ञातीनां सर्वलोकेषु राक्षस।
Bat व्यसनेष्वेते ज्ञातीनां ज्ञातय: सदा॥ ३॥

“| know, O ranger of the night, the
disposition of one’s relatives in all the worlds.
These latter always rejoice in the misfortunes
of their relatives. (3)

wart साधकं det धर्मशीलं च wera
ज्ञातयोऽप्यवमन्यन्ते we परिभवन्ति च॥४॥
“Kinsfolk (as a rule) despise their
chief, even though he carries on his duties
as a ruler, is learned and given to piety, O
ogre, and try to humiliate him, if he is a
hero. (4)
नित्यमन्योन्यसंहृष्टा व्यसनेष्वाततायिन: |
प्रच्छन्नहदया ant ज्ञीतयस्तु भयावहा:॥ ७५ Ul
“Feeling highly rejoiced ॥१ the
misfortunes of one another, having secret
designs and turning desperadoes any

moment, kinsfolk are generally cruel and
formidable. (5)
श्रूयन्ते हस्तिभिर्गीता: श्लोका: पद्मवने पुरा।
पाशहस्तान् नरान् FAT श्रृणुष्व गदतो मम॥ Il
“Couplets uttered in the past by
elephants in a bed of lotuses on seeing men
with snares in their hands (to catch them)
have been heard by me. Listen to them
from me even as | repeat them: (6)
