346

अथ at स्वयमेवैष छिद्रमासाद्य बुद्धिमान्।
अनुप्रविश्य विश्वस्ते कदाचित् प्रहरेदपि॥ २३॥

“Or, discovering our weak points on
entering our ranks, this fellow, shrewd as
he is, may even strike us himself some
day when we have reposed faith in him.

(23)
मित्राटविबलं wa मौलभृत्यबलं तथा।
सर्वमेतद् बलं We वर्जयित्वा द्विषद्बलम्॥ २४॥

“A contingent supplied by allies, that
provided by the foresters, that furnished by
hereditary servants and the one supplied by
paid servants—all these are worth accepting,
but not the one supplied by an enemy.

(24)
प्रकृत्या राक्षसो ह्येष भ्रातामित्रस्य वै प्रभो।
आगतश्च रिपु: साक्षात् कथमस्मिंश्च विश्वसेत्॥ २५ ॥

“Indeed, he is an ogre by birth and a
brother of the enemy to boot, my lord! The
enemy himself has in this way made his
appearance before us. How can one repose
trust in him in such circumstances? (25)

रावणस्यानुजो भ्राता विभीषण sft श्रुत:।
ade: सह रक्षोभिर्भवन्तं शरणं गत:॥ २६॥
“Ravana’s own younger brother, known
by the name of Vibhisana, has sought
you as his refuge alongwith four other
ogres. (26)
रावणेन प्रणीतं fe तमवेहि विभीषणम्।
were निग्रहं मन्ये क्षमं क्षमवतां वर॥ २७॥
“Know the said Vibhisana to have been
dispatched by Ravana himself. |, therefore,

deem it fit to arrest him, O the foremost of
the indulgent! (27)

राक्षसो जिह्मया बुद्धया संदिष्टोऽयमिहागत:।
Wed मायया छन्नो विश्वस्ते त्वयि चानघ॥ २८॥

“This ogre has evidently made his
appearance here as directed by Ravana
with crooked intent in order to strike you
when you have reposed faith in him, remaining

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA +

concealed by his witchcraft all the time,
O sinless one! (28)
वध्यतामेष तीव्रेण दण्डेन सचिवै: सह।
रावणस्य Frees भ्राता ह्येष विभीषण:॥ २९॥
“Let this Vibhisana be killed alongwith
his ministers by recourse to severe
punishment, inasmuch as he is a brother of
the cruel Ravana.” (29)
एवमुक्त्वा तु तं रामं संरब्धो वाहिनीपति: |
वाक्यज्ञो वाक्यकुशलं ततो मौनमुपागमत्॥ ३०॥
Having submitted as aforesaid to Sri
Rama, who was adept in expression, Sugriva,
the Commander-in-Chief, for his part, who
knew how to speak and felt agitated, then
assumed silence. (30)

सुग्रीवस्य तु Ag वाक्यं श्रुत्वा रामो महाबल:।
समीपस्थानुवाचेदं हनुमत्प्रमुखान् कपीन्॥३१॥
Hearing the foregoing speech of
Sugriva, Sri Rama, who was endowed with
extraordinary might, spoke as follows to the
monkeys headed by Hanuman, who stood
near him: (31)
ah कपिराजेन रावणावरजं प्रति।
वाक्यं हेतुमदत्यर्थं भवद्भिरपि च श्रुतम्॥३२॥
“The advice which has been tendered
by Sugriva, the king of monkeys, regarding
Vibhisana (Ravana’s youngest half-brother)
is extremely reasonable and has been heard
by you, too. (32)

सुहृदामर्थकृच्छ्रेषु Gh बुद्धिमता सदा।
समर्थेनोपसंदेष्टुं शाश्वतीं भूतिमिच्छता॥ ३३॥
“It is always desirable for one who is
intelligent and capable of judgment and seeks
the lasting good of one’s near and dear
ones to express one’s honest opinion on
knotty points in regard to duty.” (33)
इत्येवं परिपृष्टास्ते स्वं स्वं मतमतन्दिता:।
सोपचारं तदा राममूचु: प्रियचिकोर्षव:।॥ ३४॥
Consulted in these words, the monkeys,
who were free from lassitude and keen to
