# YUDDHAKANDA #

species in the course of his combat with
Ravana. (77)

स तान् Farry समासाद्य प्रतिचिच्छेद रावण:।
अभ्यवर्षच्च घोरेण शरवर्षेण पावकिम्॥७८॥

Finding those trees near, the celebrated
Ravana cut them in pieces and covered
Nila (son of the fire-god) with a formidable
hail of shafts. (78)

अभिवृष्ट:ऽ शरौघेण मेघेनेव महाचल:।
Ba Heal ततो wa ध्वजाग्रे निपपात Ti veil

Reducing his form to a diminutive size
when rained upon by a hail of shafts as a
huge mountain is by a cloud, Nila thereupon
leapt on to the top of Ravana’s standard.

(79)
पावकात्मजमालोक्य ध्वजाग्रे समवस्थितम्।
जज्वाल WAU: क्रोधात् AA नीलो AAS च॥ ८०॥

Beholding the offspring of the fire-god
perched on the point of his standard, Ravana
blazed with fury and Nila thereupon gave
forth a shout. (80)
ध्वजाग्रे धनुषश्चाग्रे किरीटाग्रे च तं हरिम्।
लक्ष्मणोऽथ हनूमांश्च रामश्चापि सुविस्मिता:॥ ८१॥

Laksmana and Hanuman and again Sri
Rama too were greatly astonished to see
that monkey now on the apex of the banner
and now at the end of the bow and again on
the peak of the diadem. (81)

रावणोऽपि महातेजा: कपिलाघवविस्मित:।
अस्त्रमाहारयामास दीप्तमाग्नेयमद्भुतम्॥ ८२॥

Wonder-struck at the agility of the
monkey, Ravana too, who was endowed
with extraordinary energy, invoked the
marvellous missile presided over by the
fire-god. (82)
ततस्ते चुक्रुशुर्हृष्टा लब्धलक्षा: प्लवंगमा:।
नीललाघवसम्भ्रान्तं दृष्टवा रावणमाहवे॥८३॥

Thereupon those monkeys, who felt
rejoiced to see Ravana nonplussed at the

515

agility of Nila and had found an occasion for
jubilation, shouted with joy. (83)
वानराणां च नादेन संरब्धो रावणस्तदा।
सम्भ्रमाविष्टहृदयो न किंचित् प्रत्यपद्यत॥ ८४॥
Provoked by the clamour of the

monkeys, his heart possessed with flurry,
Ravana did not know what to do. (84)

आग्नेयेनापि संयुक्तं गृहीत्वा रावण: शरम्।
ध्वजशीर्षस्थितं नीलमुदैक्षत निशाचर:॥८५॥

Taking up an arrow charged with the
missile presided over by the fire-god, the
prowler of the night looked at Nila perched
on the tip of his standard. (85)

ततोऽब्रवीन्महातेजा रावणो राक्षसेश्चर:।
कपे लाघवयुक्तोऽसि मायया परया सह॥ ८६॥

Ravana, the lord of ogres, who was
endowed with high spirits, then spoke
as follows: “You are endowed with
agility combined with supreme deceptive
power. (86)

जीवितं खलु रक्षस्व यदि शक्तोऽसि वानर।
तानि तान्यात्मरूपाणि सृजसि त्वमनेकश:॥ ८७॥

तथापि cat मया मुक्त: सायकोऽस्त्रप्रयोजित: |
Wad परिरक्षन्तं जीविताद् भ्रंशयिष्यति॥ ec i
“Indeed, save your life if you are able
to do so, O monkey! Even though you
accomplish numerous deeds of various kinds
worthy of your own self, nevertheless the
arrow charged with a mystic missile and
discharged by me will deprive of your life,
you, who are sedulously preserving it.”
(87-88)

एवमुक्त्वा महाबाहू रावणो राक्षसेश्चर:।
संधाय बाणमस्त्रेण चमूपतिमताडयत्॥८९॥
Saying so and charging an arrow with
a mystic missile, the mighty-armed Ravana
struck Nila, the Commander-in-Chief, with
it (89)

सोऽस्त्रमुक्तेन बाणेन नीलो वक्षसि attsa: |
निर्दह्यमान: सहसा स पपात महीतले॥९०॥
