910

तं mea राक्षसेन्द्रोऽसौ स्वयमेव गमिष्यति।
यो विधाता च धाता च Ad दुष्कृतं तथा॥ ३१॥
त्रैलोक्यं विजितं येन तं कथं विजयिष्यते।
amt fe तु ped विधानं संविधास्यति॥ ३२॥
“When he is conquered, all stands
automatically conquered : there is no doubt
about it.” Heartily laughing and greeting
Narada, who was flaming with effulgence,
when spoken to in these words, the king of
Lanka for his part, replied to him as
follows: “O great Rsi, who find delight in
the company of the gods and _ the
Gandharvas, who are fond of witnessing a
conflict, | am fully prepared to proceed to
the nether world known as Rasatala with a
view to conquering it. Then after conquering
all the three worlds and placing the Nagas
and the gods under my yoke, | will churn up
the ocean, which is the seat of nectar, for
nectar.” The revered Sage Narada then said
to Dasagriva: “Where, then, are you
proceeding to along a different path? Indeed,
this path which is extremely difficult to tread,
leads to the city of Yama (the king of the
departed), O scourge of your foes, who are
so difficult to assail.” Uttering a laugh
resembling the rumbling of an autumnal
cloud, the notorious Ravana (the ten-headed
monster) said: “It is as good as
accomplished!” and added the following:
“Resolved to make short work of Yama
(son of the sun-god), O Brahmana, |
accordingly proceed to the southern quarter,
where its ruler, the son of the sun-god
resides. Thirsting for an encounter, O Revered
Sir, | have actually taken a vow in rage that
| shall conquer the four guardians of the
world, my lord ! Having now actually set out

« VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

on my journey to the city of Yama (the king
of the departed), | shall accordingly put an
end to the torment of living beings.”
Having spoken as above, and greeted
the aforesaid sage, Ravana (the ten-headed
monster) departed and entered the southern
quarter, accompanied by his ministers.
Plunged in meditation for a while, Narada, the
foremost of Brahmanas, who was clothed
with great effulgence like a smokeless fire,
for his part reflected as follows: “How will
Death (the Time-Spirit), by whom all the three
worlds including the mobile and immobile
creation as well as Indra (their ruler) are
afflicted in accordance with righteousness
when their life has come to an end, be
conquered (by Ravana)? How will that ruler
of the ogres approach of his own accord that
exalted soul who is like a second fire in
brilliance, who is aware of the gifts as well
as of the doings of all creatures, through
whose energy all created beings derive their
consciousness and varied activity and before
whom all the three worlds ever recoil fear-
stricken? How will Ravana subjugate him
who is the sustainer of the universe and the
dispenser of the fruit of their good and evil
deeds and by whom all the three worlds stand
subjugated? Again, after adopting such a
course of conduct (viz., subjugating Yama),
what other order will he establish? (17—32)

कौतूहलं समुत्पन्नो यास्यामि यमसादनम्।
विमर्दं द्रष्टुमनयोर्यमराक्षसयो: स्वयम्॥३३॥
“Curiosity having been aroused in me,
| shall personally seek the abode of Yama
(the god of retribution) in order to witness
the encounter of these two heroes, Yama
and the ogre, Ravana.” (33)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये उत्तरकाण्डे विंश: AW: ॥ २० ॥

Thus ends Canto Twenty in the Uttarakanda of the glorious Ramayana of Valmiki,
the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

