* ARANYAKANDA «

“Due to cold occasioned by the fall of
frost as also the mildness of the sun, the
water even on mountain-tops is generally
tasty. (25)
जराजर्जरितै: wat: शीर्णकेसरकर्णिकै:।
नालशेषा हिमध्वस्ता न भान्ति कमलाकरा:॥ २६॥

“With their lotuses worn out due to
decay and their filaments and pericarps
withered, the lotus-beds, blasted as they
are by snow, are reduced to mere stalks
and no longer look charming. (26)

अस्मिंस्तु पुरुषव्याघ्र काले दु:खसमन्वित:।
तपश्चरति धर्मात्मा त्वद्भक्त्या भरत: पुरे॥ २७॥

“At this time of the year, O tiger among
men, the pious-minded Bharata, full of agony
(caused by separation from you) is practising
austerities in the city out of devotion to you.

(27)
त्यक्त्वा राज्यं च मानं च भोगांश्च विविधान् बहून्।
तपस्वी नियताहार: ott शीते महीतले॥ २८॥

“Giving up the sovereignty and honour
as well as the manifold and diverse
enjoyments and living on a restricted diet,
the ascetic reposes on the cold surface of
the earth. (28)

सोऽपि वेलामिमां नूनमभिषेकार्थमुद्यत:।

aa: प्रकृतिभिर्नित्यं प्रयाति art नदीम्॥ २९॥
“Ready for a dip in the river, and followed

by his ministers, he too without doubt walks

to the Sarayu river daily at this hour. (29)

“Tormented by cold, though brought up
in the highest luxury and tender as he is,
how indeed does he take a dip in the Sarayu
during the last watch of the night? (30)

पद्मपत्रेक्षण: श्याम: श्रीमान् निरुदरो महान्।
धर्मज्ञ: सत्यवादी च ह्रीनिषेवी जितेन्द्रिय: ।। ३१॥
प्रियाभिभाषी मधुरो दीर्घबाहुररिंदम:।
संत्यज्य विविधान् सौख्यानार्यं सर्वात्मनाश्रित: ॥ ३२॥

787

“With his eyes resembling the petals of

a lotus, dark-brown of complexion, majestic,
almost without a belly, a great knower of
Dharma, truthful, bashful, master of his
senses, polite of expression, amiable, long-
armed, the subduer of enemies, he has
given up the various pleasures and is devoted
to you (his elder brother) with all his being.
(31-32)

जित: स्वर्गस्तव भ्रात्रा भरतेन महात्मना।
वनस्थमपि तापस्ये यस्त्वामनुविधीयते॥ ३३॥

“Paradise has been conquered by your
high-souled brother, Bharata, who is following
you in your ascetic life, even though you
are staying in the forest (away from him).

(33)

न पित्र्यमनुवर्तन्ते मातृकं द्विपदा इति।
Tad लोकप्रवादोऽयं भरतेनान्यथा कृत:॥ ३४॥

“The well-known popular saying that
men follow the nature of their mother and
not of their father has been belied by Bharata.

(34)

भर्ता दशरथो AEM: साधुश्च भरत: Ad |
कथं नु साम्बा कैकेयी तादृशी क्रूरदर्शिनी॥ ३५॥

“How is it that mother Kaikeyi, whose
husband was DaSaratha and whose son is
the virtuous Bharata, wears such a cruel
aspect?” (35)

इत्येवं लक्ष्मणे वाक्यं स्नेहाद् वदति धार्मिके।
परिवादं जनन्यास्तमसहन् राघवोऽब्रवीत्॥ ३६॥

Unable to endure such condemnation
of his (step-) mother, while the righteous
Laksmana was speaking as above out
of affection (for Sri Rama), Raghava said :

(36)
न तेऽम्बा मध्यमा तात गर्हितव्या Hala |
तामेवेक्ष्वाकुनाथस्य भरतस्य कथां Beso

“Dear brother, Kaikeyi, our second
mother, should never be condemned by

you. Speak exclusively about that Bharata,
the king of the Iksvakus. (37)
