162

mountain* reputed to be the seat of the fire
of universal destruction is ever burning with
a mighty blazing fire, O noble lady! (45)

त्वत्कृते तमनिद्रा च शोकश्चिन्ता च राघवम्।
तापयन्ति महात्मानमग्न्यगारमिवाग्नय: ॥ ४६ ॥

“On account of you, sleeplessness,
grief and anxiety too consume the high-
souled Sri Rama (a scion of Raghu), even
as the three sacred fires keep a fire-sanctuary
heated. (46)

तवादर्शनशोकेन Wad: परिचाल्यते।
महता भूमिकम्पेन महानिव शिलोच्चय:॥४७॥

“Sri Rama, a scion of Raghu, has been
shaken by grief caused by your absence in
the same way as a large mountain is rocked
by a violent earthquake. (47)

काननानि सुरम्याणि नदीप्रस्रवणानि =a
चरन् न रतिमाप्नोति त्वामपश्यन् नृपात्मजे॥४८॥

“Unable to see you, 0 princess, Sri
Rama finds no delight even while ranging
highly charming woodlands and by the side
of streams and cascades. (48)

स cat मनुजशार्दूल: fad प्राप्स्यति राघव:।
समित्रबान्धवं हत्वा रावणं जनकात्मजे॥४९॥

“Making short work of Ravana with his
near and dear ones, O daughter of Janaka,
the celebrated Sri Rama, a scion of Raghu,
a veritable tiger among men, will soon recover
you. (49)
aed रामसुग्रीवावुभावकुरुतां तदा।
समयं वालिनं हन्तुं da चान्वेषणं प्रति॥७५०॥

“United together in this way, both Sri
Rama and Sugriva then arrived at a mutual
understanding to get rid of Vali and to institute
a search for you. (50)
ततस्ताभ्यां कुमाराभ्यां वीराभ्यां स हरीश्वर:।
किष्किन्धां समुपागम्य वाली युद्धे निपातित: ॥ ५१॥

« VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

“On their reaching Kiskindha together,
the aforesaid Vali, the ruler of monkeys,
was then killed in combat by those two
gallant princes. (51)

ततो निहत्य तरसा war वालिनमाहवे।
सर्वरक्षहरिसङ्घानां सुग्रीवमकरोत् waa

“Having struck down Vali by his
prowess in_ fight, Sri Rama thereupon
crowned Sugriva king of all the hordes of
bears and monkeys. (52)
रामसुग्रीवयोरैक्यं eid समजायत।
हनूमन्तं च at विद्धि तयोर्दूतमुपागतम्॥५३॥

“In this way, O godlike lady, did the
alliance of Sri Rama and Sugriva come
about. And know me to be Hanuman arrived
here as their envoy. (53)

स्वं राज्यं प्राप्य सुग्रीव: स्वानानीय महाकपीन्।
त्वदर्थं प्रेषयामास दिशो दश ARAN GY Ul
“Having regained his lost sovereignty
and calling together the great monkeys owing
allegiance to him, and endowed with
extraordinary might, Sugriva despatched
them in all the ten directions (viz., the four
quarters, the four intermediate points, the
higher and the lower regions). (54)

आदिष्टा वानरेन्द्रेण सुग्रीवेण महौजस:।
अद्रिराजप्रतीकाशा: सर्वत: प्रस्थिता महीम्॥ ५५॥

“Commanded by Sugriva, the lord
of monkeys, monkeys’ possessed of
extraordinary vigour and looking like so many
lordly mountains, sallied forth in all directions
on the earth. (55)

ततस्ते मार्गमाणा वै सुग्रीववचनातुरा:।
चरन्ति वसुधां कृत्स्नां वयमन्ये च वानरा:॥ ५६॥
“Searching for you, afraid as we were
of violating the command of Sugriva, we as
well as other monkeys have been actually
trotting the entire globe. (56)

* In the Bhisma-Parva of, the Mahabharata, we find mention of the fire of universal destruction,
called by the name of Sarhvartaka, existing on a peak of Mount Malyavan:

तत्र माल्यव्रत: शृङ्गे दृश्यते हव्यवाट् सदा। नाम्ना संवर्तको नाम कालाग्निर्भरतर्षभ॥
