* SUNDARAKANDA +

अहो धिग् धिक्कृतमिदं कथितं हि यदस्य मे।
रूपान्तरमुपागम्य स एवायं fe रावण:॥१०॥
She said to herself : ‘Oh, shame ! What
a pity that | held all this converse with him.
Indeed, he is the same Ravana, who has
come here assuming another guise.’ (10)

तामशोकस्य शाखां तु विमुक्त्वा शोककर्शिता।
तस्यामेवानवद्याङ्गी धरण्यां समुपाविशत्॥११॥

Letting go that branch of the Asoka
tree, Sita, for her part, of faultless limbs,
sank down on that very spot on which she
stood, exhausted as she was from grief.

(11)
अवन्दत महाबाहुस्ततस्तां जनकात्मजाम्।
सा चैनं भयसंत्रस्ता भूयो नैनमुदैक्षत॥१२॥

Thereupon Hanuman of mighty arms
saluted the aforesaid daughter of Janaka.
Sore stricken as she was with fear, Sita,
however, no longer raised her eyes to him.

(12)
तं दृष्ट्वा वन्दमानं च सीता शशिनिभानना।
sade दीर्घमुच्छ्वस्य वानरं मधुरस्वरा॥१३॥

Drawing a deep audible breath on
seeing him while bowing down to her, Sita,
however, whose countenance resembled the
full moon, spoke to Hanuman in sweet
accents as follows : (13)

मायां प्रविष्टो मायावी यदित्वं रावण: स्वयम्।
उत्पादयसि मे भूय: संतापं तन्न शोभनम्॥१४॥
“If you are Ravana himself, given to
conjuring tricks and, having entered a deceitful
form, are causing agony to me once more,
it is not good. (14)
स्वं परित्यज्य रूपं a: परिव्राजकरूपवान्।
WRIT मया दृष्टस्त्वं स एव fF रावण:॥१५॥
“Surely you are the same Ravana, who,
having assumed the guise of a vagrant
recluse, abandoning your native form, were
seen by me in Janasthana. (15)
उपवासकृशां दीनां कामरूप निशाचर।
संतापयसि मां भूय: संतापं तन्न शोभनम्॥१६॥

155

“It is not right, O ranger of the night,
able to change form at will, that you should
once more torment me, emaciated through
fasting and miserable as | am. (16)

अथवा नैतदेवं fe यन्मया परिशाङ्कितम्।
मनसो fe मम प्रीतिरुत्पन्ना तव दर्शनात्॥१७॥

“Or, that which is feared by me may
not at all be true; for delight has sprung up
in my heart at your sight. (17)

यदि रामस्य दूतस्त्वमागतो भद्रमस्तु ते।
पृच्छामि wat हरिश्रेष्ठ प्रिया रामकथा fe Au ecu

“If, on the other hand, you have really
come as a messenger of Sri Rama, may
good betide you. In that case | make inquiries
of you about Sri Rama; for talk about Sri
Rama is pleasing to me, O jewel among the
monkeys ! (18)
गुणान् रामस्य कथय प्रियस्य मम वानर।
fad ata मे सौम्य नदीकूलं यथा रय:॥१९॥

“Recount the virtues of my beloved Sri
Rama, O gentle monkey ! Even as the current
of a river wears away its bank, you are luring
my mind with the prospect of delighting me
with the news of Sri Rama. (19)

अहो स्वप्नस्य सुखता याहमेव चिराहृता।
प्रेषितं नाम पश्यामि राघवेण वनौकसम्॥ २०॥

“Oh the sweetness of the dream
presented to me, in which the selfsame I,
who was borne away by Ravana long since,
see with my own eyes a monkey sent by
Sri Rama, a scion of Raghu! (20)
पश्येयं नावसीदेयं स्वप्नोऽपि मम मत्सरी॥ २१॥

“If | could see the heroic Sri Rama
accompanied by Laksmana, even in a dream,
| would not feel disheartened; but even a
dream is proving niggardly in my case. (21)

नाहं स्वप्नमिमं मन्ये स्वप्ने दृष्ट्वा fe वानरम्।
न शक्योऽभ्युदय: प्राप्तुं प्राप्तश्चाभ्युदयो मम॥ २२॥

“| do not believe this to be a dream; for
good fortune cannot be attained on seeing a
