* SUNDARAKANDA +

and the breezes are laden with sweet odour.’
On account of the aforesaid good omens,
whose welcome results had been witnessed
by me on many an occasion in the past,
nay, for very potent reasons such as the
glory of Sri Rama and Sita’s exclusive
devotion to her husband, which led me to
conclude that Sita was alive as also on the
strength of the words of the Caranas, who
could see everything, which were based on
perceived facts, | felt rejoiced in my mind.’
Nay, Sita, a princess of the Videha territory,
was seen by me once more and | was
granted leave by her again. (164-165)

तत: पर्वतमासाद्य तत्रारिष्टमहं पुन:।
प्रतिप्लवनमारेभे युष्मद्दर्शनकाङ्क्षया॥१६६॥

“Having reached the Arista mountain
there in Lanka, | then proceeded to leap
back from that mountain with a longing to
see you all. (166)

263

ad: श्वसनचन्द्रार्कसिद्धगन्धर्वसेवितम्।
पन्थानमहमाक्रम्य भवतो दृष्टवानिह॥ १६७॥

“Following the path frequented by the
wind, the moon, the sun, the Siddhas and
the Gandharvas, | have found you all here.

(167)
राघवस्य प्रसादेन भवतां da तेजसा।

सुग्रीवस्य च कार्यार्थं मया सर्वमनुष्ठितम्॥ १६८॥

“Everything has been accomplished by
me through the grace of Sri Rama as well
as through your boisterous energy, as also
for achieving the purpose of King Sugriva.

(168)
एतत् wa मया aa यथावदुपपादितम्।
wa यन्न कृतं शेषं aq aa क्रियतामिति॥ १६९॥

“All this has been duly carried out by
me in Lanka. Let all that which could not be
done there and still remains to be done, be
accomplished by you.” (169)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये सुन्दरकाण्डे अष्टपञ्चाश: सर्ग: ॥ 4c Il

Thus ends Canto Fifty-eight of the Sundarakanda in the glorious Ramayana of Valmiki,
the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

एकोनषष्टितम: सर्ग:
Canto LIX

Picturing to his fellow monkeys the said plight of Sita, and feeling that
it behoved them all to see Sri Rama only after recovering Sita
from Lanka, nay, recounting the past heroic exploits of
Jambavan and others, Hanuman incites them all to
have recourse to the arbitrament of war

एतदाख्याय ad aa हनूमान् मारुतात्मज:।
भूय: समुपचक्राम वचनं वक्तुमुत्तरम्॥१॥
Having narrated all this story to
the monkeys assembled there, Hanuman
(sprung from the loins of the wind-god) once
more proceeded to make _ his _ further
statement as follows : (1)
सफलो राघवोद्योग: सुग्रीवस्य च सम्भ्रम:।
शीलमासाद्य सीताया मम च प्रीणितं मन:॥२॥

“Fruitful is the endeavour of Sri Rama,
a scion of Raghu, and the perseverance of
Sugriva. Nay, my mind is gratified to witness
the chastity of Sita. (2)

आर्याया: सदृशं शीलं सीताया: प्लवगर्षभा:।
तपसा धारयेल्लोकान् क्रुद्धा वा Megas ३॥

“The conduct of Sita is worthy of that
noble lady, O jewels among monkeys. She
can sustain all the worlds by virtue of her
