* AYODHYAKANDA +

mea ममामित्रे नृशंसे राज्यकामुके।
न तेऽहमभिभाष्योऽस्मि दुर्वृत्ते पतिघातिनि॥७॥

“| ought not to be spoken to by you, O
cruel woman of evil conduct and covetous
of sovereignty, who have killed your own
husband and are my enemy in the guise of
a mother ! (7)

कौसल्या च सुमित्रा च याश्चान्या मम मातर:।

दु:खेन महताविष्टास्त्वां प्राप्य कुलदूषिणीम्॥ ८॥
“Having got you, the disgrace of your

family, for a co-wife, Kausalya and Sumitra

and my other mothers too have been filled
with great agony. (8)
न त्वमश्चपते: कन्या धर्मराजस्य धीमत:।
राक्षसी तत्र जातासि कुलप्रध्वंसिनी faq: eu
“Surely you are not the daughter of the
virtuous and wise King Aswapati, but an
ogress sprung from his loins, who has
brought complete ruin to my father’s race.
(9)
यत् त्वया धार्मिको रामो नित्यं सत्यपरायण: |
वनं प्रस्थापितो diz: पितापि त्रिदिवं गत:॥ १०॥
यत् प्रधानासि तत् पापं मयि पित्रा विना कृते।
भ्रातृभ्यां च परित्यक्ते सर्वलोकस्य चाप्रिये॥ ११॥

“Since the virtuous hero, Sri Rama,
who is ever devoted to truth, has been sent
into exile to the forest by you and my father
too has departed for heaven because of
you, the sin that has been chiefly incurred
by you thereby has been visited on me,
who have consequently been deprived of
my father, nay, abandoned by my brothers,
Sri Rama and Laksmana, and have become
unpopular with the whole world. (10-11)
कृत्वा कं प्राप्स्यसे ह्यद्य लोकं निरयगामिनि॥ १२॥

“Indeed, having rendered Kausalya, who
is wedded to piety, desolate (by depriving
her of her husband and only son), O woman
of sinful resolve and doomed to perdition,
what realm other than the infernal regions

565

will you attain now after death?
ज्येष्ठं पितृसमं रामं कौसल्यायात्मसम्भवम्॥ १३॥
“Did you not cognize Sri Rama, born of
Kausalya’s own womb, to be my eldest
brother and, therefore, as good as my father,

self-controlled and the asylum of his kinsfolk,
O cruel woman? (13)

अङ्गप्रत्यङ्गज: UN हृदयाच्चाभिजायते।
तस्मात् प्रियतरो मातु: प्रिया Wet तु बान्धवा:॥ १४॥
“A son takes his shape from the
essence of the various primary and
secondary limbs of his father (in the form of
his generative fluid) and the heart of his
mother (which is the fount of her ovum).
Hence he is dearer than all others to his
mother, whereas her other relations are
simply dear to her. (14)

अन्यदा किल धर्मज्ञा सुरभि: सुरसम्मता।
वहमानौ ददर्शोर्व्य पुत्रौ विगतचेतसौ॥ १७५ ॥

“On one occasion in the hoary past, so
the tradition goes, Surabhi, the cow of plenty,
who knows what is right and is adored by
gods, saw a pair of bullocks (her own sons)
fallen unconscious on the ground while
drawing the plough. (15)

तावर्धदिवसं श्रान्तौ दृष्ट्वा Yat महीतले।
Ble पुत्रशोकेन बाष्पपर्याकुलेक्षणम्॥१६॥

“Seeing her two sons lying on the
ground exhausted due to their having toiled
hard for half the day, Surabhi wept with grief
born of anxiety for her sons, her eyes
blinded with tears. (16)

अधस्ताद् व्रजतस्तस्या: सुरर।ज्ञं। महात्मन: |
बिन्दव: पतिता गात्रे सूक्ष्मा: सुरभिगन्धिन:॥ १७॥
“Her sweet-scented tear-drops fell on
the person of the high-souled Indra, the
ruler of gods, who happened to pass below.
(17)

निरीक्षमाणस्तां शक्रो cast सुरभिं स्थिताम्।
आकाशे विष्ठितां दीनां Gad भृशदु:खिताम्॥ १८ ॥

(12)
