670

तीक्ष्णसायकनिर्भिन्नान् शूलशक्त्यृष्टितोमरै: ।
ata at गमयिष्यामि सर्वानेव यमक्षयम्॥८॥

“Armed with pikes, javelins and
lances, | shall dispatch you all, once you are
pierced with my sharp arrows, to the abode
of Yama (the god of retribution) today. (8)

सृजत: शरवर्षाणि क्षिप्रहस्तस्य संयुगे।
जीमूतस्येव नदत: क: स्थास्यति AAT: Ie I

“Who dare stand before me as | shot
hails of shafts on the battlefield with a switt
hand, thundering like a cloud? (9)

शायितौ at मया भूयो विसंज्ञौ सपुर:सरौ॥ Fo

“Formerly in the course of a night
engagement on that day you two celebrated
princes were laid low by me with my shafts,
which were equal to the thunderbolt and
the weapon Asani, and then lay unconscious
with your leading warriors, Sugriva and
others. (10)
स्मृतिर्नतेऽस्ति वा मन्ये व्यक्तं यातो यमक्षयम्।
आशीविषसमं क्रुद्धं यन्मां योद्धुमुपस्थित:॥११॥

“Since, however, you are here to give
battle to me, enraged as | am like a venomous
serpent, | presume the thought of it no
longer exists in your mind or evidently you
are on the road to the abode of Yama.”

(11)
तच्छुत्वा राक्षसेन्द्रस्य गर्जितं राघवस्तदा।
अभीतवदन: क्रुद्धो रावणिं वाक्यमब्रवीत्॥ १२॥

Enraged to hear the foregoing
braggadocio of Indrajit, a ruler of the ogres,
Laksmana, a scion of Raghu, replied as
follows to the son of Ravana with an intrepid
mien. (12)
SHA TIA: पार: कार्याणां राक्षस त्वया।
कार्याणां कर्मणा पारं यो गच्छति स बुद्धिमान्॥ १३॥

“The successful conclusion of your
undertakings has been proclaimed by you,

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA +

O ogre, even though it is difficult to achieve.
He alone is clever, who carries through his
undertakings indeed, and not in words alone.

(13)

स त्वमर्थस्य हीनार्थो दुरवापस्य केनचित्।
वाचा व्याहृत्य जानीषे कृतार्थोऽस्मीति दुर्मते॥ १४॥

“Proclaiming through words alone the
achievement of your end in the shape of
worsting me, which is difficult to attain for
anyone; though lacking in the capacity to
achieve your purpose, you think that you
have accomplished your end, O evil-minded
one! (14)

अन्तर्धानगतेनाजौ यत्त्वया चरितस्तदा।
तस्कराचरितो amt aa वीरनिषेवित:॥ १५॥

“The path which was adopted by you,
viz., remaining invisible on the battlefield, is
the one trodden by thieves; it is not the path
chosen by heroes. (15)

यथा बाणपथं प्राप्य स्थितोऽस्मि तव राक्षस।
दर्शयस्वाद्य तत्तेजो वाचा त्वं किं विकत्थसे॥ १६ ॥

“Having reached the range of your
shafts, | duly stand before you, O ogre!
Exhibit your well-known prowess today. Why
should you brag with your tongue?” (16)

एवमुक्तो धनुर्भीमं परामृश्य महाबल:।
ससर्ज निशितान् बाणानिन्द्रजित् समितिंजय: ॥ १७॥
Seizing hold of his dreaded bow when
challenged thus by Laksmana, Indrajit,
who was endowed with extraordinary
might and was ever victorious in combat,
discharged whetted arrows on his adversary.
(17)

तेन सृष्टा महावेगा: शरा: सर्पविषोपमा:।
सम्पाप्यलक्ष्मणंपेत्तु; VIA SA पन्नगा: UY? il
Duly reaching Laksmana, the arrows
discharged by Indrajit, which flew with great
velocity and were deadly as the venom of

snakes, hit Laksmana, hissing like serpents.
(18)
