896

him, Nandigwara, an attendant of Lord Siva,
dreadful, of yellowish dark complexion,
dwarfish, misshapen, with his head clean
shaved, of short arms and very strong,
and ever full of joy, fearlessly spoke the
following words to the king of the
Raksasas: (8-9)
निवर्तस्व दशग्रीव viet क्रीडति शंकर:।

सुपर्णनागयक्षाणां देवगन्धर्वरक्षसाम्॥ १०॥
सर्वेषामेव भूतानामगम्य: पर्वत: कृत:।

इति नन्दिवच: श्रुत्वा क्रोधात् कम्पितकुण्डल: ॥ ११ ॥
Wad तु ताम्रनयन: पुष्पकादवरुह्य स:।

कोऽयं VST इत्युक्त्वा शैलमूलमुपागत:॥१२॥

“‘Turn back, O Dasagriva! Lord
Sankara is sporting on this hill; hence it has
been rendered inaccessible even to
Suparnas, Nagas, Yaksas, gods,
Gandharvas and Raksasas, nay, to all
created beings.’ Hearing these words of
Nandi and alighting from the Puspaka, and
his earrings shaking on account of his wrath
and his eyes coppery through indignation,
Ravana sought the foot of the hill, saying,
‘Who is this Sankara?’ (10—12)

सोऽपश्यन्नन्दिनं at देवस्यादूरत: स्थितम्।

att शूलमवष्टभ्य द्वितीयमिव शङ्करम्॥१३॥
“There he beheld Nandi standing near

the Lord, holding a flaming pike and appearing

like a second Sankara. (13)

तं दृष्टवा वानरमुखमवज्ञाय स राक्षस:।
Wert मुमुचे aa सतोय ga तोयद:॥१४॥

“Seeing him endowed with the head of
a monkey, and disregarding him, the said
Raksasa laughed loudly thundering like a
cloud laden with water. (14)

तं क्रुद्धो भगवान् नन्दी शङ्करस्यापरा तनु:।
अब्रवीत् AT aq रक्षो दशाननमुपस्थितम्॥१५॥
“Provoked to anger, the divine Nandi,
an alter ego of Lord Sankara, spoke to the
said ogre, DaSanana, who was standing
there closeby: (15)

« VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

यस्माद् वानररूपं मामवज्ञाय दशानन।

अशनीपातसंकाशमपहासं प्रमुक्तवान्॥ १६॥
i मद्रूपसमतेजस:।

उत्पत्स्यन्ति वधार्थं fe कुलस्य तव AMAT: १७॥

“‘O Dasanana, since, deriding me in
my monkey-form, you burst into a loud laughter
resembling a stroke of lightning, therefore,
monkeys will be born to destroy your race.
They will possess my valour; they will have a
lustrous form like mine. (16-17)

नखदंष्टायुधा: Rt मन:सम्पातरंहस:।
युद्धोन्मत्ता बलोद्रिक्ता: शैला इव विसर्पिण:॥ १८॥
““They will have claws and teeth for
their weapons; they will have the speed of
the mind; they will be frantic in fight; they will
be proud of their might; they will look like
moving mountains, O cruel one! (18)

a तव yao दर्पमुत्सेधं च पृथग्विधम्।
व्यपनेष्यन्ति सम्भूय सहामात्यसुतस्य च॥१९॥

“‘Gathering together, they will take away
your excessive arrogance and pride of
physical superiority alongwith that of your
ministers and sons. (19)
किं त्विदानीं मया शक्यं हन्तुं cat हे निशाचर।

न हन्तव्यो हतस्त्वं fe पूर्वमेव स्वकर्मभि:।॥ २०॥

“‘O Raksasa, | can kill you even now;
but you shall not be killed inasmuch as you
are already killed by your own misdeeds.’

(20)
इत्युदीरितवाक्ये q ca तस्मिन् महात्मनि।
देवदुन्दुभयो नेदु: पुष्पवृष्टिश्च खाच्च्युता॥ २१॥

“When that high-souled divine being
uttered these words, the kettledrums of the
gods for their part sounded and a shower of
flowers fell from the heavens. (21)

अचिन्तयित्वा स det नन्दिवाक्यं महाबल:।

पर्वतं तु समासाद्य वाक्यमाह दशानन:॥ २२॥
“Not minding the utterance of Nandi,

and approaching the hill, DaSanana, that

very mighty ogre, however, said on that
occasion: (22)
