766

The pious-minded Raghava too strung
his mighty bow ornamented with gold and
said to those ogres: (6)

पुत्रौ दशरथस्यावां भ्रातरौ रामलक्ष्मणौ।
प्रविष्टौ सीतया सार्धं दुश्चरं दण्डकावनम्॥७॥

“We two. brothers, Rama_ and
Laksmana, sons of DaSaratha, have entered
with Sita the forest of Dandaka, which is
difficult to pass through. (7)

फलमूलाशनौ दान्तौ तापसौ ब्रह्मचारिणौ।
वसन्तौ दण्डकारण्ये किमर्थमुपहिंसथ॥८॥

“Why do you seek to injure us, who
subsist on fruits and roots, are self-disciplined,
practise austerities and continence and are
living in the Dandaka forest? (8)

युष्मान् पापात्मकान् हन्तुं विप्रकारान् महाहवे।
ऋषीणां तु नियोगेन Gee: सशरासन:॥९॥
“Armed with a bow, | for my part have
duly come here at the behest of sages to
kill in a major conflict you, whose mind is
given to sin and who have offended against
the sages. (9)
तिष्ठतैवात्र संतुष्टा नोपवर्तितुमर्हथ।
यदि प्राणैरिहार्थो at निवर्तध्वं निशाचरा:॥१०॥
“Halt where you stand, if you love war
and you should not run away. If, however,
you love your life, go back, O night-stalkers !”
(10)

तस्य तद् वचनं श्रुत्वा राक्षसास्ते चतुर्दंश।
र्व्य सुप्तक्नुद्भ'।' ब्रह्मघ्ना: शूलपाणय: ॥ ११॥
परुषा मधुराभाषं हृष्टा दृष्टपराक्रमम्॥१२॥
Highly enraged and delighted (at the
same time) to hear the aforesaid challenge
of Sri Rama, those fourteen dreadful ogres,
the slayers of Brahmanas, who were armed
with lances and had bloodshot eyes, spoke
harshly as follows to Rama, who had naturally
deep red eyes, who always spoke sweet
words and whose prowess had been seen
by them: (11-12)

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

क्रोधमुत्पाद्य नो Md: खरस्य सुमहात्मन:।
त्वमेव हास्यसे प्राणान् सद्योऽस्माभिर्हतो युधि॥ १३॥
“Having provoked the anger of our
extremely high-souled master, Khara, you
will surely give up your ghost in no time,
when struck by us on the battlefield. (13)

का fe a शक्तिरेकस्य बहूनां रणमूर्धनि।

अस्माकमग्रत: tad fee पुनर्योद्भुमाहवे॥ १४॥
“Indeed what power have you to stand

single-handed in front of us, who are so

many, in the van of a fight, much less to
give fight in a battle? (14)

एभिर्बाहुप्रयुक्तैश्च परिघै: शूलपद्टिशै:।
प्राणांस्त्यक्ष्यसि ate च धनुश्च करपीडितम्॥ १५॥
“Under the pressure of these iron clubs,
darts and PattiSas (a kind of sharp-edged
sword) hurled by our arms, you will give up
the ghost, your valour too as well as the
bow pressed in your hands.” (15)

इत्येवमुक्त्वा संरब्धा राक्षसास्ते चतुर्दश।
उद्यतायुधनिस्निशा राममेवाभिदुद्रुवु: ।। १६॥
Saying so, those fourteen ogres ran in
their zeal towards Rama alone, their weapons,
including swords, uplifted. (16)

चिक्षिपुस्तानि शूलानि wee प्रति दुर्जयम्।

तानि शूलानि काकुत्स्थ: समस्तानि चतुर्दश॥ १७॥

तावद्भिरेव चिच्छेद शरै: काञ्चनभूषितै: |

ad: पश्चान्महातेजा नाराचान् सूर्यसंनिभान्॥१८॥

जग्राह परमक्रुद्धश्चतुर्दश शिलाशितान्।

गृहीत्वा धनुरायम्य लक्ष्यानुद्दिश्य राक्षसान्॥१९॥

मुमोच Weal बाणान् वज्रानिव शतक्रतु:।

ते भित्त्वा रक्षसां erie वक्षांसि रुधिरप्लुता: it २० ॥

विनिष्पेतुस्तदा sat वल्मीकादिव पन्नगा:।

तैर्भग्नह्दया भूमौ छिन्नमूला इव द्रुमा:॥ २१॥

निपेतु: शोणितस्नाता feat विगतासव:।

तान् भूमौ पतितान् दृष्टवा राक्षसी क्रोधमूर्छिता Ul २२॥

उपगम्य tat सा तु किंचित्संशुष्कशोणिता।

पपात पुनरेवार्ता सनिर्यासेव वल्लरी॥ २३॥
They threw those darts at Raghava,

who was difficult to conquer. Kakutstha cut
