108

and with them was the sacrificial altar
constructed by priests skilled in the
architecture pertaining to sacrifices. (28)

a चित्यो राजसिंहस्य संचित: pereiiga: |
Teel रुक्मपक्षो वै त्रिगुणोऽष्टादशात्मक: ॥ २९॥

The sacrificial fire meant for that altar
and going to be worshipped by DaSaratha
(a lion among kings) was placed with due
ceremony by expert Brahmanas. (According
to the shape of the altar in which the fire
was placed) the fire resembled in shape a
figure of Garuda with his wings and tail
distended and looking downward facing the
east with wings of gold (due to the sides of
the pit having been constructed with bricks
of gold). Being treble in size as compared
to ordinary altars, it consisted of eighteen
sacrificial pits (an ordinary altar comprising
of six only). (29)

नियुक्तास्तत्र पशवस्तत्तदुद्दिश्य दैवतम्।
sem: पक्षिणश्चैव यथाशास्त्रप्रचोदिता:॥ ३०॥

Beasts, serpents and birds too, ordained
by scriptural injunctions, had been tied down
to those pillars for being offered to particular
gods. (30)

शामित्रे तु हयस्तत्र तथा जलचराश्च ये।
ऋषिभि: सर्वमेवैतन्नियुक्तं शास्त्रतस्तदा॥ ३१॥

The sacrificial horse as well as the
aquatic creatures (turtle etc.,) that had been
brought there for the act of sacrifice, all
these were bound that very moment by the
seers/priests, according to the scriptural
ordinance. (31)

« VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

अश्वरत्नोत्तमं AT Wal दशरथस्य ह॥३२॥

Three hundred beasts were tied down
at that time to the aforesaid pillars; the
foremost of the best horses belonging to
King DasSaratha too, they say, was tied
down there. (32)

कौसल्या तं हयं at परिचर्यं समन्तत:।
कृपाणैर्विससारेनं त्रिभि: परमया मुदा॥ ३३॥

Consecrating the said horse on all sides
(by sprinkling it with water and so on) there,
Kausalya as also the other queens touched
it with great joy with three swords. (33)

पतत्तरिणा तदा सार्धं सुस्थितेन च चेतसा।
अवसद् रजनीमेकां कौसल्या धर्मकाम्यया॥ ३४॥

Nay, with intent to acquire religious
merit Kausalya then spent one night with
the said horse (swift as Garuda, the king
of the winged creation) with a perfectly
composed mind. (34)

होताध्वर्युस्तथोद्गाता हस्तेन समयोजयन्।
महिष्या Unga वावातामपरां तथा॥ ३५॥

The four archpriests' officiating at the
sacrifice, viz., the Hota, the Adhwaryu, the
Udgata and the Brahma then at the close of
the night caused the king’s second wife?
(ordinarily belonging to the Vaisya class
and bearing the generic name of Vavata)
alongwith the first wife (bearing the class-
name of Mahisi) as well as the third wife
(known by the class-name of Parivrtti) to be
brought into contact with the horse. (35)

1. Of the four priests mentioned above, the Hota invokes the gods at a sacrifice, reciting the Rgveda;
the Adhwaryu’s duty is to measure the ground, to build the altar, to collect and arrange the sacrificial vessels,
to fetch wood and water, to light the fire and so on, repeating the texts of the Yajurveda while doing so;
the Udgata chants the hymns of the Samaveda; while the duty of the Brahma, who is required to be the
most learned of them all and is expected to know all the Vedas, is to supervise the sacrifice.

2. The kings in ancient India generally had three wives. The first of them, who was required to be
a Ksatriya princess, and was consecrated alongwith her husband during the ceremony of installation on the
throne, bore the generic name of Mahisi; the second one, who could be taken from the Vaisya class, was
known by the name of Vavata; while the third wife, who could be taken from the Sidra class, bore the
designation of Parivrtti. In the case of DaSaratha, however, all the three queens, severally known by the
names of Kausalya, Sumitra and Kaikeyi—were Ksatriya princesses.
