# YUDDHAKANDA #

the monkeys at any time. It should be
constantly observed whether the hostile
army is zealously active, is advancing
towards Lanka or stands where it
was.” (16)

ततस्ते राक्षसा: सर्वे श्रुत्वा लङ्काधिपस्य तत्।

वचनं सर्वमातिष्ठन् यथावत् तु महाबला:॥१७॥
Hearing the aforesaid command of

Ravana, the suzerain lord of Lanka, all

those ogres for their part, who were endowed

with extraordinary might, duly carried it out

forthwith in its entirety. (17)

तान्सर्वान् fe समादिश्य रावणो राक्षसाधिप: |
मन्युशल्यं वहन् दीन: प्रविवेश स्वमालयम्॥ १८॥

603

Having duly enjoined them all as
aforesaid, Ravana, the suzerain lord of ogres,
actually penetrated deep into his palace,
carrying the thorn of wrath in his bosom,
miserable as he was. (18)

तत: a संदीपितकोपवह्नि-
र्निशाचराणामधिपो महाबल: |
तदेव wert विचिन्तयन्
मुहुर्मुहुश्चैव तदा विनि:श्वसन्॥१९॥
The fire of wrath having been inflamed
in him, that suzerain lord of ogres, who was
endowed with extraordinary might, then
remained brooding on the self same fall of
his son, Atikaya, and also sighing again and
again at that time. (19)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये FERS द्विसप्ततितम: सर्ग: ॥ 9? Il

Thus ends Canto Seventy-two in the Yuddhakanda of the glorious Ramayana of
Valmiki, the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

Canto LXXIll

A missile presided over by Brahma and shot by Indrajit renders
Sri Rama and Laksmana as well as the whole army
of monkeys unconscious

स्ते रावणाय त्वरिता: शशंसु:॥१॥

Those ogre hosts who had survived
those who had been killed, thereupon hastily
reported to Ravana about the well-known
bulls among ogres as had been made short
work of, viz., Devantaka, Trisira, Atikaya
and others. (1)
ततो हतांस्तान् सहसा निशम्य

राजा महाबाष्पपरिप्लुताक्ष:।
wed भ्रातृवधं च घोरं
विचिन्त्य राजा विपुलं प्रदध्यौ॥ २॥

Hearing all of a sudden of those who
had been killed, the king found his eyes
bathed in copious tears. Brooding on the
destruction of his sons as well as on the
terrible fall of his brothers, the king became
exceedingly thoughtful. (2)

ततस्तु राजानमुदीक्ष्य दीनं
शोकार्णवे सम्परिपुप्लुवानम्।
राक्षसराजसूनु-
स्तमिन्द्रजिद् वाक्यमिदं बभाषे॥३॥
Perceiving the king disconsolate and
deeply plunged in an ocean of grief, Indrajit
for his part, the eldest son of Ravana,
the ruler of ogres, and the foremost of

रथर्षभो
