490

Hearing the advice of Sri Rama,
Laksmana led the way, Sita following him,
and immediately after Sita followed Sri Rama,
a scion of Raghu, the delight of the Raghus.

(99)
mr q + । °
we ra: wad निरीक्ष्य।
र्मुमोच बाष्पं व्यथितस्तपस्वी॥ १००॥

Constantly gazing on Sri Rama, who
had soon reached the other bank of the
Ganga, and his vision having failed due to
the long distance covered by the exiles in
the meantime, Sumantra, who was full of
remorse and afflicted too, shed tears of
grief over his separation from Sri Rama.

(100)

स लोकपालप्रतिमप्रभाव-
स्तीरत्वा महात्मा वरदो महानदीम्।
तत: समृद्धान् शुभसस्यमालिन:
क्रमेण वत्सान् मुदितानुपागमत्॥१०१॥

Having crossed the great river Ganga,

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

the high-souled Sri Rama, who vied in glory
with the guardians of the spheres and was
capable of bestowing boons, thence reached
step by step the prosperous and happy
land of Vatsa, the land comprised between
the Ganga and the Yamuna rivers, which
contained rows of beautiful crops. (101)

तौ तत्र हत्वा चतुरो महामृगान्

वराहमृश्यं पृषतं महारुरुम्।
आदाय मेध्यं त्वरितं बुभुक्षितौ

वासाय काले ययतुर्वनस्पतिम्॥१०२॥

Having hunted for love of sport four
large deer, viz., a Varaha, Rsya, Prsata
and Maharuru (the four principal species of
deer), and taking with them articles of food
consisting of fruits etc. fit for being consigned
as an oblation into the sacred fire, now that
they felt hungry (after sport), the two brothers
quickly sought the foot of a tree where they
had evidently stationed Sita within their sight
for the time they were engaged in sport, for
taking rest after supper during the night.

(102)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्येऽयोध्याकाण्डे द्विपञ्चाश: सर्ग: 4? il

Thus ends Canto Fifty-two in the Ayodhyakanda of the glorious Ramayana of Valmiki,
the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

Canto LIII

Apprehending trouble for Kausalya and others at the hands of Kaikeyi, Sri
Rama, who was seated at the foot of a banyan tree and was a past
master in the art of persuasion, persuades Laksmana to the best
of his ability to return to Ayodhya. Laksmana, however, pleads
inability to survive in his absence and does not budge an
inch from his resolution to stay with his eldest brother.

Sri Rama, therefore, yields and sets his seal to

his continuing with him during his exile

स तं qa समासाद्य संध्यामन्वास्य पश्चिमाम्।

Having reached the foot of the aforesaid
tree and worshipped the evening twilight, Sri

रामो रमयतां ses इति Mara लक्ष्मणम्॥१॥ Rama, the foremost of those affording delight
