1062

‘| have neither seen nor heard of such
untimely death, of immature type, in the
territory of Sri Rama. (9)
रामस्य दुष्कृतं किञ्चिन्महदस्ति न संशय:।
यथा fe विषयस्थानां बालानां मृत्युरागत:॥१०॥

‘There is no doubt that there must have
been some evil deed performed by Sri Rama
due to which indeed death meets the children
in his territory. (10)
नह्यन्यविषयस्थानां बालानां मृत्युतो भयम्।

स राजञ्जीवयस्वैनं बालं मृत्युवशं गतम्॥११॥

‘There is no fear of death for the children

in other territories. So, O king, bring back to
life this child, possessed by death. (11)

राजद्वारि मरिष्यामि पत्न्या सार्धमनाथवत्।
ब्रह्महत्यां ततो WA समुपेत्य Gat भव॥१२॥

‘At the very royal gate, | shall lay down
my life with my wife, like an orphan, O Sri
Rama; you be happy having committed the
sin of killing a Brahmana. (12)

भ्रातृभि: सहितो राजन् दीर्घमायुरवाप्स्यसि।
उषिता: स्म GE राज्ये तवास्मिन् सुमहाबल॥ १३॥

‘You will attain longlife with your brothers:
till now we have lived happily in your kingdom,
O mighty one. (13)

Be तु पतितं तस्मात् तव राम वशे स्थितान्।
कालस्य वशमापन्ना: स्वल्पं हि नहि न: सुखम्॥ १४॥
‘This death of my son has befallen on
me. Therefore, O Sri Rama, staying under
you we are under the sway of death, and
there is little chance of happiness now. (14)

« VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

सम्प्रत्यनाथो विषय इक्ष्वाकूणां महात्मनाम्।
TH नाथमिहासाद्य बालान्तकरणं ध्रुवम्॥ VG II
‘Presently the reign of the noble
Iksvakus is rendered orphan; now having
accepted Sri Rama as the master, in whose
reign certainly children’s death will occur.
(15)

राजदोषैर्विपद्यन्ते प्रजा ह्यविधिपालिता:।
sega fe नृपतावकाले म्रियते जन:॥१६॥

‘The subjects, who are not protected
rightfully, perish on account of the faults of
the kings; when the king is not rightful, the
people die untimely. (16)

यद् वा पुरेष्वयुक्तानि जना जनपदेषु च।
कुर्वते न च रक्षास्ति तदा कालकृतं भयम्॥ १७॥
‘Whatever impropriety is committed by
men in towns and provinces, and if there is
no protection from them, then there is indeed
such untimely destruction by death. (17)

सुव्यक्तं राजदोषो fe भविष्यति न संशय:।
पुरे जनपदे चापि तथा बालवधो ह्ययम्॥१८॥

‘Both in the towns and provinces it is
clear that there must have been some fault
in the king, there is no doubt, due to which
this death of my son has occurred.’ (18)

एवं बहुविधैर्वाक्यैरुपरुध्य मुहुर्मुहु:।
wt Gada: सुतं तमुपगूहति॥१९॥
Thus making such pitiful utterances
again and again and keeping in check the
King, inflicted by sorrow, he embraced the
dead child repeatedly. (19)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये उत्तरकाण्डे त्रिसप्ततितम: a7: ॥ ७३ ॥

Thus ends Canto Seventy-three in the Uttarakanda of the glorious Ramayana of
Valmiki, the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

