760

as you are of charming limbs, you appear to
me to be an ogress (capable of assuming
any form at will) on the face of it. (18)

इह वा किंनिमित्तं त्वमागता gfe aad: |
साब्रवीद् वचनं श्रुत्वा राक्षसी मदनार्दिता॥१९॥

“Tell me truly what for you have come
here.” Stricken with love to hear this, the
ogress in question replied as follows: (19)
श्रूयतां राम तत्त्वार्थं वक्ष्यामि वचनं मम।

a शूर्पणखा नाम राक्षसी कामरूपिणी॥ २०॥

“Hear my word, O Rama ! | shall give
out to you the real truth. | am an ogress,
Surpanakha by name, and capable of
assuming any form at will. (20)
अरण्यं विचरामीदमेका सर्वभयंकरा।
रावणो नाम A भ्राता Ble A श्रोत्रमागत:॥ २१॥

“Causing fear to all, | haunt this forest
alone. | have a brother, Ravana by name; |
wonder if his name has ever reached your
ears. (21)

at विश्रवस: oat afe a श्रोत्रमागत:।
प्रवृद्धनिद्रश्च सदा कुम्भकर्णो महाबल:॥ २२॥

“He is a valiant son of Visrava, if you
have ever heard of him. The very mighty
Kumbhakarna too, who is given to excessive
sleep, is my brother. (22)

विभीषणस्तु धर्मात्मा न तु राक्षसचेष्टित:।
प्रख्यातवीर्यौ च रणे भ्रातरौ खरदूषणौ॥। २३॥

‘Vibhisana, my third brother, for his
part, is pious-minded; he has none of the
activities of an ogre. Again, my other two
brothers, Khara and Dusana, are well-known
for their valour on the battlefield. (23)
तानहं समतिक्रान्तां राम त्वापूर्वदर्शनात्।
समुपेतास्मि भावेन भर्तारं पुरुषोत्तमम्॥ २४॥

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

“| definitely surpass them all in point of
valour, O Rama ! Ever since | saw you for
the first time, | have sought you, the foremost
among men, as my husband in my mind.

(24)
se प्रभावसम्पन्ना स्वच्छन्दबलगामिनी।
Ferra भव भर्ता मे सीतया किं करिष्यसि॥ २५॥

“lam richly endowed with power. | am
able to range at will by dint of my strength.
Therefore, be my husband for long. What
can you hope to accomplish with Sita as
your partner? (25)

विकृता च विरूपा च न सेयं सदृशी तव।
अहमेवानुरूपा ते भार्यारूपेण पश्य AMT २६॥

“Being deformed and ugly too, she is
not worthy of you. | alone stand as a match
for you. Look upon me as your wife. (26)
अनेन सह ते भ्रात्रा भक्षयिष्यामि मानुषीम्॥ २७॥

“Alongwith this brother of yours | shall
devour this ugly, vile, hideous human lady
with a sunken belly. (27)

aa: पर्वतशृङ्गाणि वनानि विविधानि च।
पश्यन् AS AM कामी दण्डकान् विचरिष्यसि॥ २८ ॥

“Then, beholding the peaks of mountains
and forests of every description, you full of
concupiscence will wander with me through
the Dandaka forest.” (28)

इत्येवमुक्त: काकुत्स्थ: प्रहस्य मदिरेक्षणाम्।

Be वचनमारेभे वक्तुं वाक्यविशारद:॥ २९॥
Spoken to in these words and laughing

heartily, Sri Rama (a scion of Kakutstha),

who was an adept in expression, proceeded

to reply as follows to that woman with love-

intoxicated eyes: (29)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्येऽरण्यकाण्डे सप्तदश: सर्ग: ॥ १७॥

Thus ends Canto Seventeen in the Aranyakanda of the glorious Ramayana
of Valmiki, the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

