« KISKINDHAKANDA +

पुष्पौघेणानुबद्ध्यन्ते करिष्यति तदद्य क:।
at दत्तं Wed युद्धं गन्धर्वस्य महात्मन:॥ २८॥
गोलभस्य महाबाहोर्दश वर्षाणि पञ्च च।

Wa रात्रौ न दिवसे aa युद्धमुपशाम्यति॥ २९॥

‘Vali, a tiger among monkeys, by
whose great might woodlands and groves
were clothed with bunches of flowers all the
year round, having been killed, the monkeys
have been divested of their splendour. Who
will do this now? A fierce encounter was
granted by him to the high-minded and
mighty-armed Gandharva, Golabha by name,
which lasted for ten years and five. The
said conflict did not cease by night or by
day. (27—29)
Wa: षोडशमे at गोलभो विनिपातित:।

तं हत्वा दुर्विनीतं तु वाली दंष्टाकरालवान्।
सर्वाभयंकरोऽस्माकं कथमेष निपातित:॥ ३०॥

“Ultimately Golabha was struck down

in the sixteenth year. Even after slaying that

insolent fellow, how has this Vali—who was
distinguished by the fearfulness of his teeth

1013

and who had rid us of fear from all quarters—
been thrown down?” (30)

at तु ae प्लवगाधिपे तदा

प्लवङ्गमास्तत्र न शर्म लेभिरे।
यथा fe गावो Fad गवां पतौ ।। ३१॥
That heroic Vali, the suzerain lord of
monkeys, having been killed, the monkeys
for their part on that occasion enjoyed no
more happiness than wild cows, living in a
large forest infested with a lion, on the bull
leading their herd having been killed. (31)

ततस्तु तारा व्यसनार्णवप्लुता
मृतस्य भर्तुर्वदनं समीक्ष्य सा।
जगाम भूमिं परिरभ्य वालिनं
महाद्रुमं छिन्नमिवाश्रिता लता॥ ३२॥
Gazing on the face of her deceased
husband and embracing Vali like a creeper
clinging to a huge uprooted tree, the celebrated
Tara for her part, who was submerged in an
ocean of calamity, sank to the ground. (32)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये किष्किन्धाकाण्डे द्वाविंश: सर्ग: I 2? I

Thus ends Canto Twenty-two in the Kiskindhakanda of the glorious Ramayana of
Valmiki, the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

Canto XXIII
Though endeavouring, after smelling Vali’s face, to embrace him, Tara finds
herself unable to do so, bathed as he was in blood and daubed with
dust. Nila pulls out Sri Rama’s arrow from his heart and,
urged by Tara, Angada bows down at his feet

wa: समुपजिघ्रन्ती कपिराजस्य तन्मुखम्।
पतिं लोकश्रुता तारा Ad वचनमब्रवीत्॥१॥

While smelling through love the well-
known face of Vali (the king of monkeys),
Tara, who was famed throughout the world,
then spoke as follows to her deceased
husband : (1)

wa त्वं विषमे दु:खमकृत्वा वचनं मम।
उपलोपचिते वीर सुदु:खे वसुधातले॥२॥
“Not having followed my advice, O hero,
you are lying uncomfortably on an uneven
and extremely hard and stony ground. (2)
मत्त: प्रियतरा Ti वानरेन्द्र मही तव।
शेषे fe at परिष्वज्य at च न प्रतिभाषसे॥ ३॥
