690

“We wish to see Sri Rama absolved
forever from all obligations to his father; for
due to his getting square with Kaikeyi as a
result of Sri Rama’s having readily offered
to be in exile, King DaSaratha has ascended
to heaven.” (6)

एतावदुक्त्वा वचनं गन्धर्वा: समहर्षय:।
राजर्षयश्चैव AM Aa at स्वां गतिं Wat: wo

Having uttered these few words, the
Gandharvas alongwith the eminent sages
as well as the royal sages and all others
went each his own way. (7)

ह्लादितस्तेन वाक्येन शुशुभे शुभदर्शन:।
राम: संहृष्टवदनस्तानृषीनभ्यपूजयत्॥ ८ ।।

Gladdened by this observation, Sri
Rama of blessed appearance looked brighter.
Nay, his face thrilled with joy, he duly extolled
the aforesaid Rsis. (8)

त्रस्तगात्रस्तु भरत: स वाचा सज्जमानया।
कृताञ्जलिरिदं वाक्यं wad पुनरब्रवीत्॥९॥
The celebrated Bharata for his part,
whose limbs were seized with a tremor,
made the following submission to Sri Rama
(a scion of Raghu) with folded hands in
faltering accents : (9)
we धर्ममिमं wea कुलधर्मानुसंततम्।
कर्तुमर्हसि काकुत्स्थ मम मातुश्च याचनाम्॥१०॥
“Fully considering, O Rama, this sacred
obligation of getting yourself consecrated
for the rulership of Ayodhya and protecting
the people, which is also linked with our
family usage, you ought to fulfil it, O scion
of Kakutstha, and grant my prayer as well
as that of your mother, Kausalya. (10)

tad सुमहद् राज्यमहमेकस्तु नोत्सहे।
पौरजानपदांश्चापि war रञ्जयितुं तदा॥११॥

“| for my part cannot protect the vast
dominion single-handed, nor can | please
the citizens and the people of the countryside,
so devoted to you. (11)

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

ज्ञातयश्चापि योधाश्च मित्राणि सुहृदश्च न:।
त्वामेव fF प्रतीक्षन्ते पर्जन्यमिव कर्षका:॥ १२॥

“Indeed our kinsmen, nay, warriors,
friends and relations too wait for you alone
as cultivators do for the rumbling cloud. (12)

इदं WS महाप्राज्ञ स्थापय प्रतिपद्य fei
शक्तिमान् स हि काकुत्स्थ लोकस्य परिपालने॥ १३ ॥
“Accepting the kingdom, 0 highly
intelligent brother, actually place it on a
sound footing. Such as you are, you are
capable of protecting the people on all sides,
O scion of Kakutstha !” (13)

`एवमुक्त्वापतद् भ्रातु: पादयोर्भरतस्तदा।
भृशं सम्प्रार्थयामास राघवेऽतिप्रियं वदन्॥१४॥

Saying so, Bharata then fell at the feet
of his elder brother and made a fervent
appeal to him to accept the sovereignty,
speaking in most endearing tones to Sri
Rama, a scion of Raghu. (14)

तमङ्के भ्रातरं Heat रामो वचनमब्रवीत्।
yard नलिनपत्राक्षं मत्तहंसस्वर: स्वयम्॥१५॥
Placing on his lap the aforesaid brother,
Bharata, who was dark-brown of complexion
and had eyes resembling the petals of a
lotus, Sri Rama, who was himself endowed
with a voice resembling the cackling of
a swan in rut, replied to him as follows :
(15)
आगता त्वामियं बुद्धि: स्वजा वैनयिकी च AT |

भृशमुत्सहसे तात रक्षितुं पृथिवीमपि॥१६॥

“You can very well protect even the
earth, to say nothing of Ayodhya, through
this innate wisdom in the shape of under-
estimation of your worth born of humility,
that has dawned on you, my darling ! (16)

अमात्यैश्च सुहृद्धिश्च बुद्धिमद्भिश्च मन्त्रिभि:।
सर्वकार्याणि warms महान्त्यपि fe कारय॥ een

“Nay, coolly deliberating with your
ministers, friends and wise counsellors too,
get through even your major concerns.

(17)
