984

सुग्रीव कुरु तं wed निष्पतेद् येन वानर:।
जितकाशी जयश्लाघी त्वया चाधर्षित: TTT It १७॥
निष्पतिष्यत्यसङ्घेन वाली स प्रियसंयुग:।
Root धर्षितं श्रुत्वा मर्षयन्ति न संयुगे॥ १८॥
स तु रामवच: श्रुत्वा सुग्रीवो हेमपिङ्गल:॥१९॥
we क्रूरनादेन विनिर्भिन्दन्निवाम्बरम्।
तत्र शब्देन वित्रस्ता गावो यान्ति हतप्रभा:॥ २०॥

राजदोषपरामृष्टा: pera इवाकुला:।
द्रवन्ति च मृगा: शीघ्रं wat इव रणे हया:।
पतन्ति च खगा भूमौ क्षीणपुण्या इव WaT: २१॥

“Therefore, know Vali as killed on the
battlefield this very day by my might. No
falsehood has been uttered by me ever
before even though | continued in adversity
for a long time, overcome as | was by
craving for piety, nor shall | tell a lie under
any circumstances even hereafter. And |
shall fulfil my vow even as Indra (the god of
rain, lit., he who has performed in his previous
lives a hundred horse-sacrifices, which is a
condition precedent for attaining the position
of Indra) invests a field of paddy, rich in
sprouts, with fruit through a timely shower.

“Therefore, in order to summon to a
duel Vali, who is distinguished by a chain of
gold, pray, raise a shout in response to
which the monkey, Vali, may come out of
the palace. Vali has attained pre-eminence
through his victories, is proud of his valour,
has never been subdued by you and is fond
of fighting. As such he will surely come out

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

of the city due to his being free from
attachment for his consorts. Hearing the
challenge of their foes for a combat, those
who are conscious of their valour do not for
their part brook such defiance, particularly
in the presence of ladies.” Hearing the
exhortation of Sri Rama, the celebrated
Sugriva, for his part, who was reddish brown
as gold, emitted a roar, pitilessly rending the
air, as it were, with his fierce yell. Alarmed
by the yell that was heard there and
disconcerted, the cows began to run like
ladies of noble birth laid hands on by others
through the fault (in the shape of misrule) of
rulers and therefore confused. Deer too ran
with quick paces like horses that have taken
fright in battle (due to their inability to endure
the enemies’ blows). And birds fell to the
ground as gods whose merit (which entitled
them to an abode in heaven) has been
exhausted. (14—21)

qa: स जीमूतकृतप्रणादो
नादं ह्यमुञ्चत् त्वरया प्रतीत:।
सूर्यात्मज: शौर्यविवृद्धतेजा:
सरित्पतिर्वाऽनिलचञ्चलोर्मि: ॥ २२ ॥

Thereupon the celebrated Sugriva (a
son of the sun-god), whose martial spirit
was greatly enhanced through valour and
whose roar resembled the rumbling of clouds,
and who was well-known for his tempo in
war, emitted his yell like an ocean (the lord
of rivers) whose waves are lashed by the
wind. (22)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये किष्किन्धाकाण्डे चतुर्दश: सर्ग: ll १४॥

Thus ends Canto Fourteen in the Kiskindhakanda of the glorious Ramayana of
Valmiki, the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

