* AYODHYAKANDA +

“By that Rama, the foremost among
men, whom । would have even in exchange
for my own self and my other sons, (Bharata,
Laksmana and Satrughna), | swear that
your bidding will be done. (8)

भद्रे हृदयमप्येतदनुमृश्योद्धरस्व मे।
Ua समीक्ष्य कैकेयि ब्रूहि यत् साधु मन्यसे॥ ९॥

“Realizing my mind as well to be such,
O good lady, pray, save my life by opening
your mind to me and allowing me to carry
out your order. Considering this consistency
of my mind and speech, O Kaikeyi, speak
out what you deem fit. (9)

बलमात्मनि पश्यन्ती न विशाङ्कितुमर्हसि।
करिष्यामि aa प्रीतिं सुकृतेनापि a शपे॥१०॥

“Perceiving the strength in the form of
my love inhering in you, you ought not to
harbour any misgiving about my bona fides.
| swear even by my virtuous acts that |
shall do what pleases you.” (10)

सा तदर्थमना eat तमभिप्रायमागतम्।
निर्माध्यस्थ्याच्च हर्षाच्च बभाषे दुर्वचं TA: 1 Ve Il

Realizing that the oath which she
expected to hear had come out of the lips of
her husband, her mind being set on the
object sought to be achieved by her, the
queen uttered something which was hard to
utter even for an enemy, prompted as she
was by partiality for her own son, and joy
born of the thought that her husband was
entirely under her thumb. (11)

तेन वाक्येन Meet तमभिप्रायमात्मन:।
व्याजहार महाघोरमभ्यागतमिवान्तकम्॥ १२॥

Thrilled by that thrice repeated oath,
she gave out as follows her intention, referred
to above, which was most terrible—as terrible
as Death standing at his door. (12)

यथा क्रमेण शपसे at wa cafe al
तच्छृण्वन्तु त्रयस्तरिंशद् देवा: सेन्द्रपुरोगमा:॥ १३॥
“Let the thirty-three (principal) gods,

(viz., the twelve Adityas, the eleven Rudras
or gods presiding over destruction, the eight

327

Vasus and the two Aswinikumaras or twin-
born physicians of gods) with Indra, the
ruler of gods, as their leader, hear the way
in which you swear in regular succession,
first by your most beloved son, Rama, and
then by your virtuous acts and offer a boon
to me. (13)

चन्द्रादित्यौ नभश्चैव ग्रहा रात्र्यहनी fest: |
जगच्च पृथिवी चेयं सगन्धर्वा: सराक्षसा:॥१४॥
निशाचराणि भूतानि गृहेषु गृहदेवता:।
यानि चान्यानि भूतानि जानीयुर्भाषितं तव॥ १५॥

“Nay, let the moon and the sun as well
as the sky, the nine planets, day and night,
the four quarters alongwith the Gandharvas
and the Raksasas, the universe including
this terrestrial globe, the spirits roaming about
at night, the deities presiding over individual
houses and residing in them and whatever
other created beings there are (within hearing)
know of your utterance (oath and boon).

(14-15)
सत्यसंधो महातेजा धर्मज्ञ: सत्यवाक्शुचि:।
at मम ददात्येष सर्वे Ya दैवता:॥१६॥

“Here does the highly glorious and
pious Emperor, who is true to his promise,
knows what is right and is truthful of speech,

confer a boon on me; let all gods listen !”
(16)
gla देवी महेष्वासं परिगृह्याभिशस्य च।
तत: परमुवाचेदं वरदं काममोहितम्॥१७॥
Having thus extolled and won over the
monarch, who carried a mighty bow and was
disposed to confer a boon on her, infatuated

as he was through love, the queen (Kaikey!)
then spoke to him as follows : (17)

स्मर राजन् पुरा qd तस्मिन् देवासुरे रणे।
wa wat च्यावयच्छत्रुस्तव जीवितमन्तरा॥ ec il

“Recall, O king, what happened of old
in that conflict between gods and demons—
how the enemy brought you down in the
course of that nocturnal encounter, sparing
only your life. (18)
