« KISKINDHAKANDA +

“Men of endeavour do not get
disheartened when faced with hardest duties.
Falling back upon bare exertion we shall be
able to recover Sita (Janaka’s daughter). (122)
महात्मानं कृतात्मानमात्मानं नावबुध्यसे॥१२३॥

“Casting grief to the background,
abandon the behaviour of one dominated by
concupiscence. It is a pity you no longer
recognize yourself to be an exalted soul
who has disciplined his mind.” (123)

एवं सम्बोधितस्तेन शोकोपहतचेतन:।
त्यज्य शोकं च मोहं च रामो धैर्यमुपागमत्॥ १२४॥

Shaking off grief and infatuation too,
when admonished thus by Laksmana, Sri
Rama, whose understanding had been
clouded by grief, regained his firmness. (124)
सोऽभ्यतिक्रामदव्यग्रस्तामचिन्त्यपराक्रम: ।

TH: पम्पां सुरुचिरां रम्यां पारिप्लवद्रुमाम्॥ १२७५ Il

The celebrated Sri Rama, who was
possessed of inconceivable prowess and
was now unruffled, passed clearly beyond
the aforesaid Pampa, which was exceedingly
charming and delightful and was hemmed
on all sides with waving trees. (125)
निरीक्षमाण: सहसा महात्मा

ad at निर्झरकन्दरं a
Sigram: सह लक्ष्मणेन
ferret दु:खोपहत: प्रतस्थे॥ १२६॥

Having deliberated with Laksmana and
surveying the entire forest as well as the
cascades and caves comprised in it, the
exalted soul, who was feeling perturbed in
mind and was overwhelmed with sorrow,
precipitately sallied forth in quest of Sita.

(126)
तं मत्तमातङ्गविलासगामी
गच्छन्तमव्यग्रमना महात्मा।
स लक्ष्मणो राघवमिष्टचेष्टो
Wa धर्मेण बलेन Wan १२७॥

Walking with the sportful gait of an

939

elephant in rut, the celebrated and high-
souled Laksmana, whose mind was unruffled
and whose movements were agreeable
to his eldest brother, protected Sri Rama
(a scion of Raghu), who was walking ahead,
by showing him his duty and describing his
own might too. (127)

MRT HT समीपचारी
चरन् ददर्शाद्भुतदर्शनीयौ।

वितत्रसे नैव विचेष्ट चेष्टाम्॥ १२८ UI

Moving about on the verge of Pampa,
one day, the mighty Sugriva (the overlord of
monkeys), who used to ramble in the vicinity
of Mount Rsyamuka, espied the two princes,
who were marvellously good-looking, and
got so much frightened that he did not even
move to take his food (which was coveted
by him). (128)
स तौ महात्मा गजमन्दगामी

शाखामृगस्तत्र चरंश्चरन्तौ।
दृष्टवा विषादं wad जगाम
चिन्तापरीतो भयभारभग्न:॥ १२९॥

Overwhelmed with anxiety and weighed
down with a load of fear to see while rambling
the two princes moving about in that area,
that high-souled monkey, who walked with
the slow gait of an elephant, fell a victim to
supreme despondency. (129)

wea शाखामृगसेवितान्तम्।
त्रस्ताश्च दृष्टवा हरयोऽभिजग्मु-
र्महौजसौ राघवलक्ष्मणौ तौ॥ १३० ॥

Frightened to see the aforesaid Sri
Rama (a scion of Raghu) and Laksmana,
who were possessed of great bodily
strength, and whom they suspected to be
allies of Vali, the other monkeys too, who
had cast their lot with Sugriva and lived with
him, retired for safety to the hermitage,
referred to above, (of Sage Matanga, which
had been rendered a_ forbidden land
