516

Being burnt all over when struck in the
chest with the arrow propelled by a mystic
missile, the celebrated Nila fell to the earth’s
surface all at once. (90)

पितृमाहात्म्यसंयोगादात्मनश्चापि तेजसा।

जानुभ्यामपतद् भूमौ न तु प्राणैर्वियुज्यत॥९१॥
By virtue of his father’s greatness and

his own energy, however, Nila only fell

down with his knees to the ground, but was
not deprived of his life. (91)

रथेनाम्बुदनादेन सौमित्रिमभिदुद्रुवे॥ ९२॥

Finding the monkey unconscious,
Ravana (the ten-headed monster), who was
eager for combat, darted towards Laksmana
(son of Sumitra) in his chariot, whose rattling
resembled the rumbling of clouds. (92)

आसाद्य रणमध्ये तं वारयित्वा स्थितो ज्वलन्।
धनुर्विस्फारयामास राक्षसेन्द्र: प्रतापवान्॥९३॥

Approaching Laksmana after
intercepting others and standing in his glory,
the powerful Ravana (the lord of ogres)
twanged his bow. (93)

तमाह सौमित्रिरदीनसत्त्वो

विस्फारयन्तं धनुरप्रमेयम्।
अवेहि मामद्य निशाचरेन्द्र

न वानरांस्त्वं प्रतियोद्धुमर्हसि॥ ९४॥

Undepressed in spirits, Laksmana, the
son of Sumitra, challenged in the following
words the ogre, who was twanging his bow:
“Be aware of me today, O king of ogres!
You ought no longer to fight the monkeys.”

(94)
a तस्य वाक्यं प्रतिपूर्णघोषं
ज्याशब्दमुग्रं च निशम्य राजा।
आसाद्य सौमित्रिमुपस्थितं तं
रोषान्वितं वाचमुवाच रक्ष:॥९५॥
Hearing his challenge as well as the
formidable twang of his bowstring, generating
sonorous vibrations, and drawing near to

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA +

the aforesaid son of Sumitra, standing close
by, the aforesaid ogre king made the following
wrathful reply: (95)

दिष्ट्यासि मे waa दृष्टिमार्गं
प्राप्तोऽन्तगामी विपरीतबुद्धि: |
अस्मिन् क्षणे यास्यसि मृत्युलोकं
संसाद्यमानो मम TUTTI Ne I

“Luckily enough for me you have fallen
within my sight—you, who are soon going
to meet your end, perverted of mind that
you are. Being hard pressed with the streams
of my arrows, you will reach the region of
death this very moment, O scion of Raghu!”

(96)
सौमित्रिरविस्मयानो
गर्जन्तमुद्वृत्तशिताग्रदंष्ट्म् ।
TW न गर्जन्ति महाप्रभावा
विकत्थसे पापकृतां वरिष्ठ॥९७॥

Not feeling in the least surprised, the
son of Sumitra replied as follows to Ravana,
who was blustering and displaying his fierce
and sharp-edged teeth: “Those endowed
with extraordinary valour do not bluster,
while you are talking boastfully, O prince of
sinners! (97)
wa di a राक्षसेन्द्र

at wat च Wet च।
अवस्थितोऽहं शरचापपाणि-
wr fe मोघविकत्थनेन॥९८॥

“| know your valour, strength, greatness
and prowess too, O ruler of ogres! | stand
firmly, arrows and bow in hand; come on,
what will you gain by bragging?” (98)

a wag: कुपित: ससर्ज
रक्षोधिप: wa शरान् सुपुङ्खान्।
ताँल्लक्ष्मण: काञ्चनचित्रपुङ्खै-
श्चिच्छेद बाणैर्निशिताग्रधारै: ।। ९९ ॥
Filled with rage when challenged in
these words, Ravana (the suzerain lord of
ogres) shot seven arrows with beautiful

तमाह
