* BALAKANDA +

ae दक्षिणमासाद्य जग्मतुर्लघुविक्रमौ।
स at घोरसंकाशं GBT नरवरात्मज:॥१२॥
अविप्रहतमैक्ष्वाक: पप्रच्छ मुनिपुंगवम्।
अहो वनमिदं af झिल्लिकागणसंयुतम्॥१३॥
नानाप्रकारै: wera aes: ॥ १४॥

“What is the cause of this tumultuous
noise ostensibly proceeding from a volume
of water striking one against another?”
Hearing the inquiry of Sri Rama, marked
with curiosity, the sage, whose mind is
given to piety, stated as follows the definite
cause of that noise : “There exists, O Rama,
on Mount Kailasa a great lake created by
Brahma (the creator) with his mind, hence it
is known by the name of Manasa (born of
the mind), O tiger among men! A river
named Sarayu—so-called because it has
its source in a lake (ave atfa or aft) and
hallowed in that it has flowed from a lake
created by Brahma—emanated from that
lake. It encircles Ayodhya on all sides
except the south. This sound, which has no
parallel, proceeds from the violent commotion
caused by the onrush of its waters even as
it rushes to meet the Jahnavi, Ganga, so-
called because it was drunk off by the sage
Jahnu, whose sacrificial grounds were
inundated by it, and was later released by
him through his ears. Offer salutation to the
two rivers where they meet with a
concentrated mind, O Rama!” Offering
salutation to the two streams united with
one another and reaching the southern
bank of the Ganga, the two _ brothers,
exceptionally pious as they were, proceeded
on their onward journey with quick paces
alongwith Viswamitra. Beholding a forest of
terrible aspect and unfrequented by men,
Sri Rama (the son of a king, the foremost of
men), a scion of Ikswaku, questioned as
follows ViSwamitra, a jewel among sages :
“Oh! this forest is difficult of access! It is
swarmed with crickets and infested by fierce

139

beasts of prey and vultures raising harsh
notes and various other kinds of birds uttering
fierce cries. (7—14)
सिंहव्याघ्रवराहैश्च वारणैश्चापि शोभितम्।
धवाश्वकर्णककुभैर्बिल्वतिन्दुकपाटलै: ॥ १५ ॥
संकीर्णं बदरीभिश्च किं Fad दारुणं वनम्।
तमुवाच महातेजा विश्वामित्रो wear: ee tl
“What could possibly be this fearful
forest graced with lions, tigers and boars,
as well as with elephants, and thickly set
with Dhavas, ASwakarnas, Kakubhas
(Arjunas), Bilvas, Tindukas, Patalas and
jujubes?” The great sage Viswamitra,
possessed as he was of exceptional glory,
replied to him as follows : (15-16)
TAA वत्स काकुत्स्थ यस्यैतद् दारुणं वनम्।
Udit जनपदौ स्फीतौ पूर्वमास्तां नरोत्तम॥१७॥
मलदाश्च करूषाश्च देवनिर्माणनिर्मितौ।
पुरा gaat राम मलेन समभिप्लुतम्॥१८॥
ae चैव सहस्राक्षं ब्रह्महत्या समाविशत्।
ats मलिनं cat ऋषयश्च तपोधना:॥१९॥
कलशै: स्नापयामासुर्मलं चास्य प्रमोचयन्।
इह भूम्यां मलं दत्त्वा देवा: कारूषमेव च॥ २०॥
शरीरजं महेन्द्रस्य ततो हर्षं प्रपेदिरे।
निर्मलो निष्करूषश्च शुद्ध इन्द्रो यथाभवत्॥ २१॥
“Hear, O darling, of the being to whom
this forest belongs, O Rama! Here on this
land, O jewel among men, there existed in
the former days two prosperous kingdoms,
the Malada and the Karusa by name,
brought into existence by the effort of gods.
In the ancient times, when the demon Vrtra
was killed in battle by Indra, the sin of killing
a Brahmana laid hold of Indra (distinguished
by a thousand eyes), who was accordingly
overcome with impurity and hunger. The gods
and the Rsis rich in askesis bathed the
aforesaid Indra, impure as he was (through
sin, with jars full of water of the holy Ganga,
further consecrated by the utterance of
sacred texts and washed off his impurity
thereby. Depositing the impurity as well as
