Eight’ were the ministers of that heroic
king, who were all glorious, pure of mind
and conduct and ever devoted to the interests
of the king (i.e., affairs of the state). (2)

धृष्टिर्जयन्तो विजय: सुराष्ट्रो राष्ट्रवर्धन:।
अकोपो धर्मपालश्च सुमन्त्रश्चाष्टमोऽर्थवित्॥ 3 i
They were Dhrsti, Jayanta, Vijaya,
Surastra, Rastravardhana, Akopa,
Dharmapala and Arthavit, Sumantra being
the eighth. (3)

ऋत्विजौ द्वावभिमतौ तस्यास्तामृषिसत्तमौ।
वसिष्ठो वामदेवश्च मन्त्रिणश्च तथापरे॥४॥
सुयज्ञोऽप्यथ जाबालि: काश्यपोऽप्यथ गौतम:।

मार्कण्डेयस्तु दीर्घायुस्तथा कात्यायनो gst: Uw I

Vasistha and Vamadeva, the foremost
of seers, were his two beloved family priests
(and counsellors too). And there were other
counsellors? too, viz., Suyajha and Jabali,
KaSyapa (a scion of KaSyapa) and Gautama,
the long-lived Markandeya and the Brahmana
Katyayana. (4-5)

तेज: क्षमायश-:प्राप्ता: स्मितपूर्वाभिभाषिण:।
क्रोधात् कामार्थहेतोर्वा न ब्रूयुरनृतं वच:॥८॥
Alongwith these Brahmana seers, his
hereditary priests too ever functioned as his
counsellors also. The ministers were all
modest through learning, bashful by nature
and clever, had fully controlled their senses,
were affluent, high-souled, well-versed in
the use of weapons, possessed of unbending
prowess, glorious, vigilant, true to their word,
majestic, forgiving and far-famed. They spoke
with a smile ever playing on their lips and

« VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

would never tell a lie even in anger or for
the sake of sense-enjoyment or wealth.
(6—8)
तेषामविदितं किंचित् cay नास्ति परेषु वा।
क्रियमाणं कृतं वापि चारेणापि चिकोर्षितम्॥ ९॥
Nothing connected with their own people
or with others was unknown to them;
whatever was done or sought to be done by
the people was known to them through
spies. (9)
कुशला व्यवहारेषु सौहृदेषु परीक्षिता:।
प्राप्तकालं यथा as धारयेयु: सुतेष्वपि॥ got
They were all tactful in their dealings
with others, had been tried in the matter of
loyalty, and meted out punishment even to
their own sons, strictly according to the law
when occasion demanded it. (10)

कोशसंग्रहणे युक्ता बलस्य च परिग्रहे।

ated चापि qed न हिंस्युरविदूषकम्॥११॥
They were ever intent on augmenting

the state exchequer and consolidating the

army and did not persecute even an enemy
if he was not found guilty. (11)

ahiga नियतोत्साहा राजशास्त्रमनुष्ठिता:।
weit रक्षितारश्च नित्यं विषयवासिनाम्॥ १२॥

They were great heroes with an undying
zeal for warfare and followed the precepts
of political science; they protected under all
circumstances the people of good conduct
in their state. (12)
ब्रह्मक्षत्रमहिंसन्तस्ते कोशं समपूरयन्।
सुतीक्ष्णदण्डा: AMT पुरुषस्य बलाबलम्॥ १३॥

They filled the coffers of the state without
harassing the Brahmana and the Ksatriya
communities and inflicted heavy (or small)

penalties, of course, after duly considering
the abundant or meagre resources? of the

1. Manu has enjoined a king to have seven or eight tried ministers : मन्त्रिण: Ga वाष्टौ वा प्रकुर्वीत परीक्षितान्।

2. A minister (Amatya) is believed to have been charged with executive duties, while a Mantri
(counsellor) is supposed to have exercised judicial powers—3TATeaH देशादिकार्यनिर्वाहका AAV व्यवहारद्रष्टार: |

3. Our scriptures say : देशकालवय: शक्ती: संचिन्त्या दण्डकर्मणि।

“The time and place of punishment as well as the age and capacity of the convict should be taken into

consideration while awarding punishment.”
