300

“A lakh of ogres, with a complete army
of four limbs, viz., horses, foot soldiers,
elephants and chariots, are garrisoned
at the southern gate of this city. Warriors
unsurpassed by others stand comprised in
that army. (25)

wad = रक्षसामत्र पश्चिमद्वारमाश्रितम्।
चर्मखड्गधरा: Aa तथा सर्वास्त्रकोविदा:॥ २६॥

“A million of ogres, all carrying shields
and swords and proficient in the use of all
mystic missiles, are garrisoned at the western
gate of this city. (26)
न्यर्बुदं रक्षसामत्र उत्तरद्वारमाश्रितम्।
रथिनश्चाश्ववाहाश्च कुलपुत्रा: सुपूजिता:॥ २७॥

“A hundred million of ogres, consisting
of car-warriors and horse-soldiers, sons of
noble families and greatly honoured for their

skill in warfare are garrisoned at the northern
gate. (27)

शतशोऽथ सहस्राणि मध्यमं स्कन्धमाश्रिता:।
यातुधाना दुराधर्षा: साग्रकोटिश्च रक्षसाम्॥ २८॥
“Again, ogres, hundreds of thousands
in number, difficult to assail, and totalling
one and a quarter of a crore of ogres, are
garrisoned at the central military station.
(28)

a मया संक्रमा भग्ना: परिखाश्चावपूरिता:।

दग्धा च नगरी लङ्का प्राकाराश्चावसादिता:।
बलैकदेश: क्षपितो राक्षसानां महात्मनाम्॥ २९॥
“The aforesaid drawbridges were
broken by me and the moats filled up with
the wreckage. Nay, the city of Lanka was
burnt, the defensive walls pulled down and

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA +

a part of the army of the gigantic ogres
destroyed. (29)

येन केन तु मार्गेण तराम वरुणालयम्।
हतेति नगरी लङ्का वानरैरुपधार्यताम्॥ ३०॥

“Let us by any means whatsoever
positively cross the sea, the abode of
Varuna, the god of water. The city of Lanka
should then be taken as destroyed by the
monkeys. (30)

अङ्गदो द्विविदो मैन्दो जाम्बवान् पनसो नल:।
नील: सेनापतिश्चैव बलशेषेण fe तव॥ ३१॥

“Angada, Dvivida, Mainda, Jambavan,
Panasa and Nala and Nila, the Commander-
in-Chief, alone will be able to storm Lanka
and recover Sita. What will be gained by the
rest of your forces being taken across the
sea? (31)
पलवमाना fe गत्वा त्वां रावणस्य महापुरीम्।
सपर्वतवनां भित्त्वा सखातां च सतोरणाम्।
सप्राकारा सभवनामानयिष्यन्ति राघव॥ ३२॥

“Reaching the great city of Ravana,
leaping and demolishing it with its mountains
and woods, moats and archways, protective
walls and buildings, they will bring back
Sita, O scion of Raghu! (32)
vara fat बलानां सर्वसंग्रहम्।
मुहूर्तेन तु युक्तेन प्रस्थानमभिरोचय॥ 33 II

“Command the aforesaid generals
accordingly without delay, if the latter course
finds favour with you, or, if you would take
the whole army across the sea, order them
all to get accumulated, and be inclined to
march at an opportune hour.” (33)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये युद्धकाण्डे तृतीय: सर्ग: ॥ ३॥
Thus ends Canto Three in the Yuddhakanda of the glorious Ramayana of
Valmiki, the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

