952

पावितस्तेन यज्ञेन यास्यसे त्रिदिवं तत:।
Us dt eax न विनष्टो महारणे॥४८॥

“Purified by that sacrifice you shall return
to heaven from the sacrificial ground itself.
Your son, too, O ruler of gods, was not
destroyed in the great conflict. (48)

नीत: संनिहितश्चैव आर्यकेण महोदधौ।
Uta महेन्द्रस्तु यज्ञमिष्टवा च वैष्णवम्॥४९॥
पुनस्तिदिवमाक्रामदन्वशासच्च देवराट्।
एतदिन्द्रजितो नाम बलं यत् कोर्तितं Far go tl

“He was borne away by his maternal
grandfather, Puloma, and has been lodged
near him in the ocean.” Hearing this, and having
performed a sacrifice intended to propitiate
Lord Visnu, the mighty Indra, the ruler of gods,
re-ascended to heaven and ruled as before.
Such was the might of Indrajit, which has
been recounted by me. (49-50)

निर्जितस्तेन देवेन्द्र: प्राणिनोऽन्ये तु किं पुन:।
आश्चर्यमिति Was लक्ष्मणश्चाब्रवीत् TATU ke Il
अगस्त्यवचनं श्रुत्वा वानरा राक्षसास्तदा।

विभीषणस्तु रामस्य पार्श्वस्थो वाक्यमब्रवीत्॥ ५२॥

« VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

By him was conquered the ruler of
gods himself. What wonder, then, if other
living beings were so conquered? Hearing
the narration of Agastya, Sri Rama and
Laksmana too exclaimed as also the
monkeys and the ogres present on that
occasion: “Wonderful!” Vibhisana for his part
who sat beside Sri Rama, spoke as follows:

(51-52)

आश्चर्यं स्मारितोऽस्म्यद्य यत् तद् TS पुरातनम्।
अगस्त्यं त्वब्रवीद् WA: सत्यमेतच्छुतं च मे॥५३॥
“| have been put in mind today of the
past miracle which was witnessed by me.”
Sri Rama too said to Sage Agastya, “This is
quite true. Nay, it was heard by me even
before from Vibhisana.” (53)

एवं WA समुद्भूतो रावणो लोककण्टक:।

सपुत्रो येन संग्रामे जित: vw: Wat: ॥ ५४॥
Thus, O Rama, was born Ravana, who

with his son was a thorn in the side of the

worlds, by whom was conquered Indra, the
ruler of gods, in an encounter. (54)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये उत्तरकाण्डे त्रिंश: सर्ग: ॥ 30 ॥

Thus ends Canto Thirty in the Uttarakanda of the glorious Ramayana of Valmiki,
the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

Canto XXXI

Ravana goes to Mahismati; unable to find its ruler, Arjuna, he takes a
dip in the holy Narmada and offers worship to Lord Siva

ततो wat महातेजा विस्मयात् पुनरेव हि।
उवाच प्रणतो वाक्यमगस्त्यमृषिसत्तमम्॥१॥

In surprise indeed Sri Rama, who was
endowed with extraordinary energy, once
more thereupon submissively addressed the
following words to Agastya, the foremost of
sages: (1)

भगवन् राक्षस: क्रूरो यदाप्रभृति मेदिनीम्।
पर्यटत् किं तदा लोका: शून्या आसन् द्विजोत्तम॥ २॥

“Ever since, O revered sir, the cruel
ogre, Ravana, ranged over the earth, were
the people (on earth) devoid of manliness
at that time, O jewel among the twiceborn?

(2)
राजा वा राजमात्रो वा fee तदा Aa कश्चन।
धर्षणं at न Wal रावणो राक्षसेश्वर:॥३॥

“Was there no Ksatriya king or non-
Ksatriya ruler at that time on the earth,
