1158

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

Canto LXV

Questioned by Angada, Gaja and other leaders of monkey hordes proclaim
each his own leaping capacity ranging in an increasing degree from ten Yojanas
or eighty miles to ninety Yojanas or seven hundred and twenty miles.
Jambavan in his turn submits that he can leap full one hundred
Yojanas or eight hundred miles but is doubtful about his capacity
to return. On Angada declaring the same thing, Jambavan
submits that for a work, which can be entrusted to a
servant alone, the services of a ruler would be out of
place, and encourages Hanuman to take up the gauntlet

अथाङ्गदवच: seat A Ua वानरर्षभा:।
स्वं स्वं गतौ समुत्साहमूचुस्तत्र यथाक्रमम्॥१॥
TR गवाक्षो गवय: शरभो गन्धमादन:।
मैन्दश्च द्विविदश्चैव सुषेणो जाम्बवांस्तथा॥ २॥

Hearing the speech of Angada all

the aforesaid leaders of monkeys—
Gaja, Gavaksa, Gavaya,  Sarabha,
Gandhamadana, Mainda and even so

Dwivida, Susena and Jambavan proclaimed
in due succession each his own leaping
capacity on that spot. (1-2)
आबभाषे गजस्तत्र wad दशयोजनम्।
गवाक्षो योजनान्याह गमिष्यामीति विंशतिम्॥ ३॥
Of them, Gaja said, “I can leap as far
as ten Yojanas (or eighty miles);” while
Gavaksa said, “I shall be able to leap to a
distance of twenty Yojanas (or one hundred
and sixty miles).” (3)

शरभो वानरस्तत्र वानरांस्तानुवाच ह।
त्रिंशतं तु गमिष्यामि योजनानां प्लवङ्गमा:॥४॥
The monkey Sarabha, they say, said
to those monkeys on that occassion, “I
shall cover in one leap thirty Yojanas (or
two hundred and forty miles), O monkeys !”
(4)

ma वानरस्तत्र वानरांस्तानुवाच ह।
चत्वारिशद् गमिष्यामि योजनानां न संशय:॥५॥

The monkey Rsabha, it is said, spoke
to the monkeys on that spot as follows : “I

shall cover in one leap forty Yojanas (or
three hundred and twenty miles); there is no
doubt about it.” (5)

वानरांस्तु महातेजा अवब्रवीद् गन्धमादन:।
योजनानां गमिष्यामि पञ्चाशत्तु न संशय:॥६॥
Gandhamadana for his part, who was
endowed with extraordinary energy, spoke,
they say, to the monkeys as follows: “I for
my part shall cover in a leap fifty Yojanas
(or four hundred miles): there is no doubt
about it.” (6)
मैन्दस्तु वानरस्तत्र वानरांस्तानुवाच ह।
योजनानां परं षष्टिमहं प्लवितुमुत्सहे॥७॥
The monkey Mainda for his part, they
say, said to the monkeys on that spot, “I
can leap at the utmost sixty Yojanas (or
four hundred and eighty miles).” (7)

ततस्तत्र महातेजा द्विविद: प्रत्यभाषत।
गमिष्यामि न dee: walt योजनान्यहम्॥ ८॥
Dwivida, who was endowed with
extraordinary energy, then said on that
occassion, “I shall cover seventy Yojanas
(or five hundred and sixty miles): there is no
doubt about it.” (8)

सुषेणस्तु महातेजा: सत्त्ववान् कपिसत्तम:।
अशीतिं प्रतिजानेऽहँ योजनानां पराक्रमे॥९॥
The foremost of monkeys, Susena, for

his part, who was endowed with extraordinary
energy and full of courage, said, “I solemnly
