612

take that tiger among men back to Ayodhya
after having propitiated him, and also to bow
down at his feet. (17)

तं मामेवंगतं मत्वा ware कर्तुमर्हसि।
wa A भगवन् राम: क्व सम्प्रति महीपति: i १८॥
“Believing me as such to have come
with the aforesaid intention, you be gracious
to me. Also kindly tell me, venerable Sir,
where Emperor Rama may at present be.”
(18)

वसिष्ठादिभिर्ऋत्विग्भिर्याचितो भगवांस्तत:।
उवाच तं भरद्वाज: प्रसादाद् भरतं वच:॥१९॥
Solicited by the priests (who had
obviously joined the party in the meantime)
headed by Vasistha, the venerable
Bharadwaja thereupon graciously spoke to
the celebrated Bharata as follows: (19)

त्वय्येतत् पुरुषव्याघ्र Ah राघववंशजे।
गुरुवृत्तिर्दमश्चैव साधूनां चानुयायिता॥ ot
“Service to your elders as also self-
control and walking in the footsteps of the
virtuous—this is worthy of you, descended,
as you are, in the line of Raghu, O tiger
among men ! (20)

जाने चैतन्मन:स्थं ते दृढीकरणमस्त्विति।
अपृच्छं त्वां तवात्यर्थं कीर्तिं समभिवर्धयन्॥ २१॥
“| already knew (by my yogic power)
what existed in your mind. All the same |
questioned you as though | knew nothing

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

in order that your’ resolution may
be strengthened and in order further to
enchance your renown beyond measure.
(21)
जाने च रामं धर्मज्ञं ससीतं सहलक्ष्मणम्।
अयं वसति a भ्राता चित्रकूटे महागिरौ॥ eeu
“| know where Sri Rama, who knows
what is right, is staying accompanied by
Sita and followed by Laksmana. Your brother
is dwelling at present on the great Citrakuta
mountain. (22)
श्चस्तु गन्तासि तं देशं वसाद्य सह Aare: |
wd मे कुरु सुप्राज्ञ कामं कामार्थकोविद॥ २३॥
“You will certainly proceed to that area
tomorrow. Halt here with your counsellors
today. Grant this desire of mine, O highly
sagacious prince, knowing how to fulfil the
desired object of your friends and well-
wishers ! (23)

ततस्तथेत्येवमुदारदर्शन:

प्रतीतरूपो भरतोऽब्रवीद् वच: |
चकार बुद्धिं च तदाश्रमे तदा

निशानिवासाय नराधिपात्मज: 1 २४॥

Thereupon Bharata, who had a broad
outlook and whose reality as a devotee of
Sri Rama had now come to be known,
replied as follows: “So be it.” Nay, the
prince forthwith made up his mind to stay in
that hermitage during the night. (24)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्येऽयोध्याकाण्डे
नवतितम: सर्ग: ॥ ९० ॥
Thus ends Canto Ninety in the Ayodhyakanda of the glorious Ramayana of
Valmiki, the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

