266

पुत्रा दशरथस्येमे रूपयौवनशालिन:।
लोकपालसमा: सर्वे देवतुल्यपराक्रमा:॥७॥

“All these four sons of DaSaratha are
full of charm as well as of youth, nay equal
in prowess to gods, and the very compeers
of the guardians of the spheres. (7)

उभयोरपि राजेन्द्र सम्बन्धेनानुबध्यताम्।
इक्ष्वाकुकुलमव्यग्रं भवत: पुण्यकर्मण:॥८॥
“Through the marriage of both these
pairs let the house of Ikswaku be bound
with ties of love, O ruler of rulers; and let
your mind remain unperturbed by a feeling
of diffidence in contracting a fourfold relation
with the great King DaSaratha all at once, a
man of virtuous deeds as you are.” (8)

विश्वामित्रवच: श्रुत्वा वसिष्ठस्य ad तदा।
जनक: प्राञ्जलिर्वाक्यमुवाच मुनिपुंगवौ॥९॥

Hearing the proposal of ViSwamitra,
agreeing with the view of Vasistha, Janaka
forthwith submitted to both the jewels among
sages with folded hands as follows: (9)
कुलं धन्यमिदं मन्ये येषां तौ मुनिपुंगवौ।
सदृशं कुलसम्बन्धं यदाज्ञापयत: स्वयम्॥१०॥

“| consider my pedigree blessed in that
you two shining jewels among sages
personally enjoin us to contract a matrimonial
alliance worthy of us. (10)

एवं भवतु Wk a: कुशध्वजसुते इमे।
पत्न्यौ भजेतां सहितौ शात्रुघ्नभरतावुभौ॥११॥
“Let it be so ! May good fortune attend
on you all! Let Satrughna and Bharata both,
who ever remain together, take to wife the
said two daughters of KuSadhwaja. (11)
एकाह्ना राजपुत्रीणां चतसूणां महामुने।
पाणीन् Ted चत्वारो राजपुत्रा महाबला:॥ १२॥
“Let all the four very mighty princes

marry the four princesses the same day,
O eminent sage ! (12)

sat दिवसे ब्रह्मन् फल्गुनीभ्यां मनीषिण:।
वैवाहिकं प्रशंसन्ति भगो यत्र प्रजापति:॥ १३॥

« VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

“The wise commend a wedding on the
second of the following two days marked by
the ascenedency of the two lunar mansions
bearing the name of Phalguni, viz., the Purva
Phalguni and the Uttara Phalguni, presided
over by Prajapati, the god presiding over
the genitals.” (13)

एवमुक्त्वा वच: सौम्यं प्रत्युत्थाय कृताञ्जलि: |
उभौ मुनिवरौ राजा जनको वाक्यमब्रवीत्॥ १४॥

Having made the aforesaid gentle
request and rising from his seat as a mark
of respect, King Janaka submitted with folded
hands to both the great sages as follows :

(14)
परो धर्म: कृतो Hel शिष्योऽस्मि भवतोस्तथा।

इमान्यासनमुख्यानि आस्यतां मुनिपुंगवौ॥१५॥

“A supreme merit has been conferred
upon me by you in the form of virtue resulting
from the contemplated gift of my daughters
to worthy recipients. | am servant to you
both in the same way as is DaSaratha; let
you both be seated on exalted seats, O
jewels among sages! (15)
यथा दशरथस्येयं तथायोध्या at मम।
प्रभुत्वे नास्ति संदेहो यथार्हं कर्तुमर्हथ॥ १६॥

“Just as this city of Mithila belongs to
Dasaratha, so is Ayodhya my own city.
There can be no doubt about your authority

here. Be pleased, therefore, to do what is in
the fitness of things.” (16)

तथा ब्रुवति aes जनके रघुनन्दन:।
राजा दशरथो We: प्रत्युवाच महीपतिम्॥ १७॥

While Janaka, who belonged to the line
of the Videhas, was speaking thus, King
Dasaratha, a scion of Raghu, joyously replied
to the aforesaid king as follows : (17)

युवामसंख्येयगुणौ भ्रातरौ मिथिलेश्वरौ।
waa राजसङ्घाश्च भवद्भ्यामभिपूजिता:॥ ge
“You two brothers, the rulers of Mithila,
possess innumerable qualities. Sages and
hosts of princes have been entertained by
you both on many occasions.” (18)
