958

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

Canto VII

Congratulating himself as well as his near and dear ones on his having secured
the friendship of Sri Rama, and sitting on a common bough alongwith the
latter, Sugriva seeks protection from Vali. Dilating once more on the
wrongs done to him by Vali in the shape of wresting his wife and
so on, he solicits Vali’s death at the hands of Sri Rama.

Asked to account for this hostile attitude of Vali, Sugriva
proceeds to relate the circumstances which led to it

परितुष्टस्तु सुग्रीवस्तेन वाक्येन हर्षित:।
लक्ष्मणस्याग्रजं शूरमिदं वचनमब्रवीत्॥१॥
Much _ gratified at the aforesaid
assurance of Sri Rama, Sugriva for his part
joyfully submitted as follows to the gallant
eldest brother of Laksmana : (1)

सर्वथाहमनुग्राह्यो देवतानां न संशय:।

उपपन्नो गुणोपेत: सखा यस्य भवान् AAU २॥
“lam undoubtedly deserving in everyway

of the grace of gods in that you, who are

rich in all natural endowments and endowed
with virtues, are my friend. (2)

शक्यं खलु aq WA सहायेन त्वयानघ।
सुरराज्यमपि we caret किमुत warns
“With you as my ally, O sinless Rama,
it should indeed be possible for me to secure
even the kingdom of gods, to say nothing of
regaining my own lost sovereignty, O lord !
(3)

सोऽहं सभाज्यो बन्धूनां Peat Wa Weal
यस्याग्निसाक्षिकं fit लब्धं राघववंशजम्॥४॥
“As such, O scion of Raghu, | deserve
to be adored by my kinsmen and friends, in

that a friend born in the line of Raghu has
been secured by me with fire as a witness.

(4)

अहमप्यनुरूपस्ते वयस्यो ज्ञास्यसे शनै:।
न तु वक्तुं समर्थोऽहं त्वयि आत्मगतान् गुणान्॥ ५॥
“You will gradually come to know that
| too am a friend worthy of you. | am,

however, not able to make known to you
the virtues inhering in me. (5)
महात्मनां तु भूयिष्ठं त्वद्विधानां कृतात्मनाम्।
निश्चला भवति प्रीतिर्धर्यमात्मवतां aren
“The love of exalted souls like you,
who have mastered their Self, is of course
steady and their fortitude infinite, O jewel
among masters of their Self ! (6)

रजतं वा सुवर्णं वा शुभान्याभरणानि च।
अविभक्कानि साधूनामवगच्छन्ति साधव:॥७॥

“Friends look upon their own silver or
gold or even shining jewels as undivided
with their friends. (7)

आढ्योवापि दरिद्रो वा ¢: Raa: सुखितोऽपि ar |
निर्दोषश्च सदोषश्च वयस्य: परमा गति:।॥८॥

“Rich or even poor, nay, afflicted or
even happy, and faultless as well as full of
faults, a friend is the supreme asylum to a
friend. (8)

धनत्याग: सुखत्यागो देशत्यागोऽपि वानघ।
वयस्यार्थे प्रवर्तन्ते स्नेहं दृष्टवा तथाविधम्॥९॥

“Renunciation of wealth, renunciation
of comforts and renunciation even of one’s
country follow in the interests of a friend on
seeing love of a category evoking such a
sacrifice, O sinless one !” (9)

ad तथेत्यब्रवीद् राम: सुग्रीवं प्रियदर्शनम्।
लक्ष्मणस्याग्रतो लक्ष्म्या वासवस्येव धीमत:॥ १०॥

In the presence of the wise Laksmana,
who vied with Indra in splendour, Sri Rama
