# YUDDHAKANDA +

379

Canto XXV

On Sri Rama having crossed over to the other side of the sea, Ravana
commands his ministers, Suka and Sarana, to enter the enemy’s
ranks and tell him everything about them. Detected
while doing the work of a spy, they are captured
by Vibhisana, but let go by Sri Rama. Going
back to Ravana, they exhort the latter to
hand over Sita to Si Rama

Sri Rama, an offspring of Emperor
DaSaratha having traversed the sea with his
army, the glorious Ravana spoke (as follows)
to his ministers, Suka and Sarana: (1)
अभूतपूर्वं रामेण सागरे ASAIN I

“The entire army of monkeys has
crossed the sea, which was difficult to
cross, and a bridge has been thrown across
the sea by Rama, which is something
unprecedented. (2)
सागरे सेतुबन्धं तं न श्रद्दध्यां कथंचन।
अवश्यं चापि संख्येयं तन्मया वानरं बलम्॥ ३॥

“| could not believe under any
circumstances the aforesaid story of a bridge
having been constructed across the sea.
Nevertheless the numerical strength of that
army of monkeys needs must be ascertained
by me. (3)
vat art सैन्यं प्रविश्यानुपलक्षितौ।
परिमाणं च वीर्यं च ये च मुख्या: प्लवंगमा:॥ ४॥
Pao ये च रामस्य सुग्रीवस्य च सम्मता:।

ये पूर्वमभिवर्तन्ते ये च शूरा: प्लवंगमा:॥७५॥
स च सेतुर्यथा बद्ध: सागरे सलिलार्णवे।
निवेशं च यथा तेषां वानराणां महात्मनाम्॥६॥
Ta व्यवसायं च att प्रहरणानि ai
लक्ष्मणस्य च वीरस्य तत्त्वतो ज्ञातुमर्हथ:॥७॥

“Entering the army of monkeys
unperceived, you two ought to ascertain in
reality the magnitude as well as the strength
of the army as also who are the leading
monkeys and who are the counsellors highly
esteemed by Rama and Sugriva, again,
who march in the front line and who are the
heroic monkeys, how that bridge was thrown
across the sea of salt water associated
with the name of King Sagara, who excavated
it, nay, how those high-spirited monkeys
have been encamped, as also the resolve
and prowess of Rama as well as of the
heroic Laksmana and the weapons used by
them. (4—7)
कश्च सेनापतिस्तेषां वानराणां महात्मनाम्।
तच्च Aa यथातत्त्वं शीघ्रमागन्तुमर्हथ:॥८॥

“Nay, also ascertaining in accordance
with facts who is the commander-in-chief of
those high-spirited monkeys, you two ought
to return apace.” (8)

इति प्रतिसमादिष्टौ राक्षसौ शुकसारणौ।
हरिरूपधरौ वीरौ प्रविष्टौ वानरं बलम्॥९॥
Assuming the semblance of monkeys,
when commanded thus, the two heroic
ogres, Suka and Sarana, penetrated deep
into the simian ranks. (9)
ततस्तद् art सैन्यमचिन्त्यं लोमहर्षणम्।
संख्यातुं नाध्यगच्छेतां तदा at शुकसारणौ il १०॥

The aforesaid Suka and Sarana did
