+ UTTARAKANDA +

“Then Vasistha, with his airy form, and
who knew the essence of Dharma, after
bowing respectfully to the feet of Brahma,
said the following words to the Grandsire:

(6)

भगवन् निमिशापेन विदेहत्वमुपागमम्।
देवदेव महादेव वायुभूतोऽहमण्डज॥७॥

“O God of gods! Born from the Cosmic
Egg! As a result of Nimi’s curse, | have
become devoid of physical body and have
assumed an airy form. (7)
सर्वेषां देहहीनानां महद् ea भविष्यति।
लुप्यन्ते सर्वकार्याणि हीनदेहस्य a प्रभो॥८॥
देहस्यान्यस्य सद्भावे प्रसादं कर्तुमर्हसि।
तमुवाच ततो ब्रह्मा स्वयंभूरमितप्रभ:॥९॥
मित्रावरुणजं तेज आविश त्वं महायश:।
अयोनिजस्त्वं भविता तत्रापि द्विजसत्तम।

धर्मेण महता युक्त: पुनरेष्यसि A वशम्॥१०॥

“All beings, without a physical body will
suffer. Since O Lord! All the activities of a
person, who is without physical body, come
to a standstill. So be pleased so that | could
get a new physical body.” Then self-born
Brahma endowed with infinite splendour said
to him, “O highly renowned one! You enter
the semen dropped by Mitra and Varuna, O
best of Brahmana! There also you will not
be born from the womb and endowed with
religious merit. You will again come and
remain under my control i.e., you will be
born as my son.” (8—10)

एवमुक्तस्तु cat अभिवाद्य प्रदक्षिणम्।
peat पितामहं तूर्णं Waal वरुणालयम्॥११॥
“Thus told by god Brahma, and after
bowing to him and circumambulating to his
right, Vasistha immediately left for the abode
of the god Varuna. (11)
wa कालं मित्रोऽपि वरुणत्वमकारयत्।
क्षीरोदेन सहोपेत: पूज्यमान: सुरेश्वरै:॥१२॥
“At that time god Mitra was also sharing
the position (status) of Varuna, living with

1021

the king of the sea of milk and received
homage from kings of gods. (12)

एतस्मिन्नेव काले तु उर्वशी परमाप्सरा:।
age तमुद्देशमागता सरखिभिर्वृता॥१३॥

“Meanwhile Apsara Urvasi, the eminent
of the celestial nymphs, accidentally arrived
there, accompanied by her nymph friends.

(13)
तां दृष्टवा रूपसम्पन्नां क्रीडन्तीं वरुणालये।
तदाविशत् Ut eat वरुणं चोर्वशीकृते॥१४॥

“On beholding her, who was sporting in
the sea of milk, Varuna was thrilled with joy
on seeing Urvasi. (14)

स oat पद्मपलाशाक्षीं पूर्णचन्द्रनिभाननाम्।

वरुणो वरयामास मैथुनायाप्सरोवराम्॥१५॥
“Varuna invited her, the eminent Apsara,

whose eyes were large like the leaf of a

lotus and whose face was beautiful like the
full moon, for union. (15)

प्रत्युवाच तत: सा तु वरुणं प्राञ्जलि: स्थिता।
मित्रेणाहं Gat साक्षात् पूर्वमेव सुरेश्वर॥ १६॥
“On this she replied to Varuna, with

folded hands: ‘Sureswara! | have already
been chosen by god Mitra himself.’ (16)

वरुणस्त्वब्रवीद् वाक्यं कन्दर्पशरपीडित:।
इदं तेज: समुत्स्रक्ष्ये कुम्भेऽस्मिन् देवनिर्मिते॥ १७॥
waar सुश्रोणि wea वरवर्णिनि।
कृतकामो भविष्यामि यदि नेच्छसि ASAT १८॥

Tormented by the arrows of cupid,
Varuna said the following words: In your
presence | cast my semen into this pitcher
made by gods, O Pretty woman, having
beautiful hips! Thus having dropped my
semen, | shall get my desire fulfilled in
case you do not desire our physical union.

(17-18)

तस्य तल्लोकनाथस्य वरुणस्य सुभाषितम्।
उर्वशी परमप्रीता श्रुत्वा वाक्यमुवाच ह॥१९॥

“On hearing these sweet words of
Varuna, the Lord of the western Region known
