# YUDDHAKANDA +

अवरुह्य जगामाशु वेलावनमनुत्तमम्।
TH रमयतां ses: ससुग्रीव: सलक्ष्मण:॥ eu I
Climbing down the Mahendra mountain,
Sri Rama, the foremost of those who ravish
the mind, accompanied by Sugriva, the king
of monkeys, and Laksmana quickly sought
the most excellent woodland adjoining the
sea. (95)

अथ धौतोपलतलां तोयौघै: सहसोत्थितै:।
वेलामासाद्य विपुलां रामो वचनमब्रवीत्॥९६॥

Having arrived at the vast sea-shore,
the foot of whose rocks had been washed
by volumes of water risen all of a sudden,
Sri Rama spoke as follows: (96)

Wa वयमनुप्राप्ता: सुग्रीव वरुणालयम्।
इहेदानीं विचिन्ता सा या a: पूर्वमुपस्थिता॥ ९७॥
“We have now reached the sea, the
abode of Varuna, the god of water, O Sugriva!
The same problem faces me here at the
present moment, which stared us in the
face before. (97)

अत: परमतीरोऽयं are: सरितां ula: |
न चायमनुपायेन शबक्यस्तरितुमर्णव:॥९८॥

“Beyond this stretches the yonder
shoreless sea, the lord of rivers, and this
sea cannot be crossed without some device.

(98)
तदिहैव निवेशोऽस्तु मन्त्र: प्रस्तूयतामिह।
यथेदं वानरबलं WW पारमवाप्नुयात्॥९९॥

“Therefore, let an encampment be made
at this very spot and let deliberation be set
on foot here, so that this army of monkeys
may reach the opposite shore.” (99)

इतीव स महाबाहु: सीताहरणकर्शित:।
Wa: सागरमासाद्य वासमाज्ञापयत् तदा॥ १०० ll
In these words did the celebrated Sri
Rama of mighty arms, who was emaciated
due to the abduction of Sita, enjoin the
quartering of his army on reaching the sea.
(100)

309

सम्प्राप्तो मन्त्रकालो A: सागरस्येह लङ्घने॥ १०१॥

“Let all the forces be quartered on
the strand, O bull among monkeys,” he
continued. “The time is ripe for us to discuss
the means of crossing the sea at this point.

(101)
स्वां स्वां सेनां समुत्सृज्य मा च कश्चित् कुतो व्रजेत्।
गच्छन्तु वानरा: शूरा ज्ञेयं छन्नं भयं च AU १०२॥

“Let no one slip away on any account
whatsoever, leaving his unit of army. Let
the gallant monkeys make a move to guard
the army against any possible danger; and
it should be known that there may be covert
danger for us.” (102)

रामस्य वचनं श्रुत्वा सुग्रीव: सहलक्ष्मण:।

सेनां निवेशयत् dit सागरस्य द्रुमायुते॥ १०३॥
Hearing the command of Sri Rama,

Sugriva with Laksmana caused the army to

be quartered on the beach covered with
trees. (103)

विरराज समीपस्थं सागरस्य च Ag बलम्।

मधुपाण्डुजल: star द्वितीय ga सागर:॥ १०४॥
Quartered in the vicinity of the sea,

that army shone brightly like a second

glorious sea with its water pale-white as
honey. (104)

वेलावनमुपागम्य ततस्ते हरिपुङ्खवा:।
निविष्टाश्च परं पारं काङ्क्षमाणा महोदधे: Il १०५ Ul
Having reached the forest adjoining
the beach, the aforesaid bulls among
monkeys then encamped there, seeking
to reach the other shore of the vast sea.
(105)
अन्तर्धाय महानादमर्णवस्य प्रशुश्रुवे॥ १०६॥
The noise of the movement of the
army, while they were encamping, was
distinctly heard drowning the roar of the
sea. (106)
