490

with trees, the monkey, Angada, then hurled
it on the head of Vajradamstra. (24)

अभवच्छोणितोद्गारी are: सुमूच्छित:।
मुहूर्तमभवन्मूढो गदामालिङ्ग्य नि:श्चसन्॥२५॥

Vomiting blood, Vajradamstra became
fully unconscious. Clasping the mace to his
bosom, and breathing heavily, he remained
unconscious for a while. (25)

स लब्धसंज्ञो गदया वालिपुत्रमवस्थितम्।
जघान परमक्रुद्धो वक्षोदेशे निशाचर:॥ २६॥

Feeling extremely enraged on regaining
his senses, the said ogre hit Angada
(the son of Vali), who stood firmly, on the
chest with his mace. (26)

Tet त्यक्त्वा ततस्तत्र मुष्टियुद्धमकुर्वत।
अन्योन्यं जघ्नतुस्तत्र तावुभौ हरिराक्षसौ॥ २७॥

Leaving the mace, the ogre then
began to fight on that spot with his fists.
Both the aforesaid monkey and the ogre
began to strike each other with their fists.

(27)

रुधिरोद्गारिणौ तौ तु प्रहारैर्जनितश्रमौ।
ayad: सुविक्रान्तावङ्मारकबुधाविव॥ २८ ॥

Exhausted by the blows, the two
warriors, for their part, who were exceedingly
valiant like the deities presiding over the
planets Mars and Mercury, began to spit
out blood. (28)

ad: परमतेजस्वी अङ्गद: प्लवगर्षभ:।
sured gat स्थितवानासीत् पुष्पफलैर्युत: it २९॥
Uprooting a tree, Angada, the foremost
of monkeys, who was supremely energetic,
remained standing, adorned with flowers
and fruit borne on the tree, which he held in
his hand. (29)
जग्राह चार्षभं चर्म खड्गं च विपुलं शुभम्।
किङ्किणीजालसंछन्नं चर्मणा च परिष्कृतम्॥ ३०॥
The ogre too seized hold of a shield
made of the hide of a bull and a huge

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA +

brilliant sword decorated with a bunch of
tiny bells and encased in leather sheath.
(30)

चित्रांश्च रुचिरान् artista: कपिराक्षसौ।
जघ्नतुश्च तदान्योन्यं नर्दन्तौ जयकांक्षिणौ।॥ ३१॥

The monkey as well as the ogre began
to wheel about in various graceful evolutions.
Nay, they struck each other roaring and
thirsting for victory. (31)
व्रणै: सास्रैरशोभेतां पुष्पिताविव किंशुकौ।
युध्यमानौ परिश्रान्तौ जानुभ्यामवनीं गतौ॥ ३२॥

With their wounds streaming with blood,
they looked charming like a pair of Kirnsuka
trees in blossom. While contending, they
felt exhausted and sank on their knees to

the earth. (32)
निमेषान्तरमात्रेण अङ्गद: कपिकुञ्जर:।
उदतिष्ठत दीप्ताक्षो दण्डाहत इवोरग:॥ ३३॥

In the mere twinkling of an eye, Angada,
an elephant among the monkeys, rose up,
his eyes inflamed through anger, like a
serpent struck with a staff. (33)

निर्मलेन सुधौतेन खड्गेनास्य महच्छिर:।
जघान वज्रदंष्ट्रस्य वालिसूनुर्महाबल:॥ ३४॥

With his stainless sword that had been
duly sharpened, Angada (the son of Vali),
who was endowed with extraordinary might,
lopped off the huge head of the aforesaid
Vajradamstra. (34)

रुधिरोक्षितगात्रस्य aya पतितं द्विधा।

तच्च तस्य परीताक्षं शुभं खड्गहतं शिर:॥ ३५॥
Nay, struck off with the sword of Angada,

that beautiful head of Vajradarnstra, whose

limbs were bathed in blood, with its eyes

rolling, was cleft in two when fallen on the

ground. (35)

वज्रदंष्टं हतंदृष्टच्ञा राक्षसा भयमोहिता:।
विषण्णवदना दीना ह्रिया किंचिदवाङ्मुखा: | ३६ ॥
