# YUDDHAKANDA +

सौवर्णस्तु महांस्तस्या: प्राकारो दुष्प्रधर्षण:।
मणिविद्रुमवैदूर्यमुक्ताविरचितान्तर ॥ १४॥

“A high protective wall of gold—which
is difficult to assail by force and is inlaid at
intervals with gems, corals, cat’s-eyes and
pearls—encircles it. (14)

सर्वतश्च महाभीमा: शीततोया महाशुभा:।
अगाधा ग्राहवत्यश्च परिखा मीनसेविता:॥ १५॥

“Most formidable, fathomless moats,
filled with cold water and fraught with great
evil to the enemy, nay, infested with alligators
and inhabited by fishes, are in existence all
round the city. (15)

द्वारेषु तासां चत्वार: संक्रमा: परमायता:।
यन्त्रैरपेता बहुभिर्महद्भिर्गृहपङ्क्तिभि:।॥ १६॥

“In front of the gateways there are
four very extensive drawbridges across the
moats, which are equipped with numerous
engines and strengthened by many rows of
stately buildings built on the protective wall
and meant for those entrusted with the duty
of guarding the entrances. (16)

त्रायन्ते संक्रमास्तत्र परसैन्यागते सति।
यन्रैस्तैरवकीर्यन्ते परिखासु समन्तत:॥१७॥

“On the arrival of hostile forces near
them the drawbridges are defended by the
aforesaid engines and the forces are flung
into the moats on every side. (17)

एकस्त्वकम्प्यो बलवान् संक्रम: सुमहादृढ:।
काञ्चनैर्बहुभि: स्तम्भैर्वेदिकाभिश्च शोभित:॥ १८॥

“The principal (central) drawbridge
before the northern gate, which is
unshakable, strongly garrisoned and

extremely strong, is embellished with
numerous gold pillars and pedestals. (18)

स्वयं प्रकृतिमापन्नो qa राम रावण:।
उत्थितश्चाप्रमत्तश्च बलानामनुदर्शने॥ १९॥

“The bellicose Ravana, O Rama, is
himself self-possessed, and remains active

299

and alert in reviewing his forces.

लङ्का पुनर्निरालम्बा देवदुर्गा भयावहा।
Wed पार्वतं वान्यं कृत्रिमं च चतुर्विधम्॥ २०॥
“Lanka again, offers no base for invasion,
is difficult of access even for gods and inspires
terror in the invader. It has a fourfold defence,
consisting of (i) a river (which encircles it on
all sides), (ii) a mountain, viz., the Trikuta
mountain, on whose summit it stands, (iii) a
belt of forests surrounding it and (iv) an artificial
fortification in the form of an enclosing wall
and moats. (20)

स्थिता पारे समुद्रस्य दूरपारस्य राघव।
नौपथश्चापि नास्त्यत्र निरुद्देशश्च ada: eel

“Standing as it does beyond the sea
with a distant shore, it offers no passage for
vessels either and the sea is undivided too
on all sides, O scion of Raghu! (21)

sera रचिता gat सा पूर्देवपुरोपमा।
वाजिवारणसम्पूर्णा लङ्का परमदुर्जया॥२२॥

“Built on a mountain peak, the aforesaid
city of Lanka is difficult of access and vies
with a celestial city, is packed with horses
and elephants and is, therefore, most difficult
to conquer. (22)

परिखाश्च शतघ्न्यश्च यन्त्राणि विविधानि च।
शोभयन्ति पुरीं लङ्कां रावणस्य दुरात्मन:॥ २३॥
“Moats and Sataghnis too as well as
engines of various kinds adorn Lanka, the
city of the evil-minded Ravana. (23)
aad रक्षसामत्र पूर्वद्वारुं समाश्रितम्।
शूलहस्ता दुराधर्षा: सर्वे खड्गाग्रयोधिन:॥ २४॥
“A myriad ogres, all carrying darts in
their hands, and contending with swords
in the van of battle, nay, difficult to assail,

are garrisoned at the eastern gate of this
city. (24)

fad रक्षसामत्र दशक्षिणद्वारमाश्रितम्।
चतुरङ्खेण सैन्येन योधास्तत्राप्यनुत्तमा:॥ 2G UI

(19)
