1142

इत्युक्त: करुणं वाक्यं वानरैस्त्यक्तजीवितै: |
सबाष्पो वानरान् गृध्र: प्रत्युवाच महास्वन:॥ १॥
Spoken to in these pitiful words by the
monkeys, who had given up all hope of their
life, the vulture, full of tears, replied as
follows to the monkeys in a loud voice:

(1)

यवीयान् स मम भ्राता जटायुर्नाम वानरा:।
यमाख्यात हतं युद्धे रावणेन बलीयसा॥ zi

“He was my younger brother, Jatayu
by name, O monkeys, whom you have
spoken of as killed in an encounter by
Ravana, who was superior in strength to
him. (2)

वृद्धभावादपक्षत्वाच्छृण्वंस्तदपि मर्षये।
नहि मे शाक्तिरस्त्यद्य भ्रातुर्वैरविमोक्षणे॥ ३॥

“Due to old age and loss of my wings,
| forbear even on hearing of it; for | have no
more strength left in me to requite his mortal
enmity towards my brother. (3)

पुरा qrad qa स we च जयैषिणौ।

आदित्यमुपयातौ tat ज्वलन्तं रश्मिमालिनम्॥४॥
आवृत्याकाशमार्गेण aT स्वर्गतौ भृशम्।

Ta प्राप्ते तु सूर्ये तु जटायुरवसीदति॥५॥

“Seeking to conquer Indra in the olden
days, when the death of the demon Vrtra
had taken place at the hands of Indra,
Jatayu and myself too soared with inordinate
speed through the airspace to heaven.
Turning back from heaven after conquering
him, we flew up still higher and drew near
the sun encircled by its aureole of rays and
illumining heaven. When, however, the sun
reached the meridian, Jatayu for his part
began to grow faint. (4-5)
we wet gear सूर्यरश्मिभिरर्दितम्।
पक्षाभ्यां छादयामास स्नेहात् परमविह्वलम्॥६॥

“Seeing my aforesaid brother tormented
by the sun’s rays and greatly unnerved, |
covered him with my wings out of affection.

(6)

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

निर्दग्धपत्र: पतितो विन्ध्येऽहं वानरर्षभा:।
अहमस्मिन् वसन् भ्रातु: Watt नोपलक्षये॥७॥

“My wings having been fully burnt, |
dropped down on the Vindhyan range, O
leaders of monkeys! Living on this mountain,
as | did, | got no news of my brother,” (7)

जटायुषस्त्वेवमुक्तो wat सम्पातिना तदा।
युवराजो AWA: प्रत्युवाचाङ्गदस्तदा॥८॥
Told thus by Sampati, the brother of
Jatayu on that occassion, the highly intelligent
Angada, the Prince Regent of Kiskindha, for
his part, then replied as follows : (8)

जटायुषो यदि भ्राता ad a गदितं मया।
आख्याहि यदि जानासि निलयं तस्य tera ९॥
“If you are the brother of Jatayu and if
you have listened to what has been narrated
by me, please say if you know the abode of
that ogre. (9)
अदीर्घदर्शिनं तं a रावणं राक्षसाधमम्।
अन्तिके यदि वा दूरे यदि जानासि शंस A: Noll
“If you actually know that short-sighted

Ravana, the vilest of ogres, to be living near
or far, please tell us.” (10)

ततोऽब्रवीन्महातेजा भ्राता ज्येष्ठो जटायुष:।
आत्मानुरूपं वचनं वानरान् सम्प्रहर्षयन्॥११॥
Sampati, the elder brother of Jatayu,
who was endowed with extraordinary energy,
thereupon spoke the following words
becoming of himself, bringing supreme delight
to the monkeys thereby : (11)
निर्दग्धपक्षो गृध्रोऽहं गतवीर्य: प्लवङ्गमा:।
वाङ्मात्रेण तु रामस्य करिष्ये साह्यमुत्तमम्॥ १२॥
“A vulture whose wings have been
entirely burnt and whose virility has departed
for good, O monkeys, | would render
foremost service to Sri Rama through you,
who are engaged in his service, at least
through my speech only. (12)

rift arennectart विष्णोस्न्रैविक्रमानपि।
cartfanaiss ह्यमृतस्य विमन्थनम्॥१३॥
