452

hear the deep and thrilling roar of beasts of
prey. (20)
सकामा wa कैकेयि विधवा राज्यमावस।

नहि तं पुरुषव्याघ्रं विना जीवितुमुत्सहे॥ २१॥

“Having your wishes fulfilled, O Kaikeyl,
enjoy the kingdom as a widow. | am unable
to live without that tiger among men.” (21)
इत्येवं विलपन् राजा जनौघेनाभिसंवृत:।
अपस्नात इवारिष्टं प्रविवेश गृहोत्तमम्॥२२॥

Lamenting as aforesaid, and surrounded
on all sides by a multitude of men, the king
entered his excellent abode, which was full
of sorrow, like one who has bathed on the
death of a relation. (22)
शून्यचत्वरवेश्मान्तां संव्रृतापणवेदिकाम्।
क्लान्तदुर्बलदु:खार्तां नात्याकीर्णमहापथाम्॥ २३॥
तामवेक्ष्य पुरीं सर्वां राममेवानुचिन्तयन्।
विलपन् प्राविशद् राजा गृहं FA इवाम्बुदम्॥ २४॥

Perceiving the entire city of Ayodhya
with its cross roads and portals deserted
and the sheds in front of shops, where
merchandise was spread, closed, its people
depressed in spirits, feeble and afflicted and
its highways not very crowded, the king
entered his palace wailing and thinking all
the time of Sri Rama alone, even as the sun
enters a cloud. (23-24)

सुपर्णेन

महाहरदमिवाक्षोभ्यं हृतोरगम्।
रामेण रहितं वेश्म ACM लक्ष्मणेन Ail २५॥

Bereft of Sri Rama, Sita and Laksmana,
the palace looked like a big pool rendered
imperturbable due to its snakes having been
carried away by Garuda. (25)

अथ गद्गदशब्दस्तु विलपन् agente: |
sara मृदु मन्दार्थं वचनं दीनमस्वरम्॥ २६॥
The lamenting Emperor then spoke to
the porters in faltering, soft, pitiful and
indistinct words, which were also not clearly
intelligible as follows : (26)
कौसल्याया गृहं शीघ्रं राममातुर्नयन्तु माम्।
नह्यन्यत्र ममाश्वासो हृदयस्य भविष्यति॥ २७॥

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

“Take me speedily to the apartments of
Kausalya, the mother of Rama; for nowhere
else will my heart find solace.” (27)

इति ब्रुवन्तं राजानमनयन् द्वारदर्शिन:।
कौसल्याया गृहं तत्र न्यवेश्यत विनीतवत्॥ २८॥
The porters took the king, who was
speaking as aforesaid, to the apartments of
Kausalya and there he was gently laid by
them on a couch. (28)

ततस्तत्र प्रविष्टस्य कौसल्याया निवेशनम्।

अधिरुह्यापि wet aya लुलितं Fa २९॥

The mind of the king, even though he
had entered Kausalya’s apartments and
had been laid on a couch, continued to be
restless. (29)

पुत्रद्वयविहीनं च स्नुषया च विवर्जितम्।
अपश्यद् भवनं राजा नष्टचन्द्रमिवाम्बरम्॥ Bo Il

The king found the palace, which was
bereft of his two sons and destitute of his
daughter-in-law, devoid of charm as the sky
without the moon and the stars. (30)

तच्च Gea महाराजो भुजमुद्यम्य वीर्यवान्।
उच्चै:स्वरेण प्राक्रोशद्धा राम विजहासि AT ३१॥
Looking at the palace and lifting up his
arm, the powerful Emperor cried in a loud
voice: “Oh Rama, are you really deserting
us both, your mother as well as myself?
(31)
सुखिता बत तं कालं जीविष्यन्ति नरोत्तमा:।
परिष्वजन्तो ये रामं द्रक्ष्यन्ति पुनरागतम्॥ ३२॥

“Alas, those jewels among men alone
who will survive the term of Rama’s exile
and are eventually able to see him come
back, clasping him to their bosom, will be
really happy !” (32)
अथ Wat प्रपन्नायां कालरात्र्यामिवात्मन:।
अर्धरात्रे दशरथ: कौसल्यामिदमब्रवीत्॥ ३३॥

Now when the night arrived—the night
which was, as it were, the night of Dissolution

for him—King DaSaratha spoke at midnight
to Kausalya as follows: (33)
