662

Rama, the brilliant Laksmana for his part
departed with all speed, longing as he did
to dispose of Indrajit, son of Ravana.
(28)
सोऽभिवाद्य We: पादौ कृत्वा चापि प्रदक्षिणम्।
निकुम्भिलामभिययौ चैत्यं रावणिपालितम्॥ २९॥

Having saluted the feet of his eldest
brother and also walked round him clockwise,
he set out for the sanctuary of Nikumbhila,
protected by Indrajit, son of Ravana.

(29)

विभीषणेन सहितो राजपुत्र: प्रतापवान्।
कृतस्वस्त्ययनो भ्रात्रा लक्ष्मणस्त्वरितो AAT ३०॥

Accompanied by Vibhisana, the mighty
Prince, Laksmana, for whom Mantras
invoking good-luck were recited by his own
eldest brother, hastened away. (30)

वानराणां सहस्रैस्तु हनूमान् बहुभिर्वृत:।
विभीषणश्च सामात्यो लक्ष्मणं त्वरितं ययौ ।। ३१॥

Hanuman, who was surrounded by
several thousands of monkeys, and
Vibhisana, who was accompanied by his
ministers, followed Laksmana quickly. (31)

vet हरिसैन्येन सबवेगमभिसंवृत:।
ऋक्षराजबलं चैव cast पथि विष्ठितम्॥ ३२॥
Followed with impetuosity by a large
army of monkeys, Laksmana also beheld
the army of Jambavan, the ruler of bears,
stationed on the way. (32)

स गत्वा दूरमध्वानं सौमित्रिर्मित्रनन्दन:।
राक्षसेन्द्रबलं दूरादपश्यद् व्यूहमाश्रितम्॥ ३३॥

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA +

Having covered a great distance,
Laksmana (son of Sumitra), the delight of
his friends, perceived from afar the army of
Ravana, the ruler of ogres, ranged in battle-
array. (33)

स wars धनुष्पाणिर्मायायोगमरिंदम:।
wet ब्रह्मविधानेन विजेतुं रघुनन्दन:॥ ३४॥

Duly reaching Nikumbhila, that tamer
of his enemies, Laksmana (the delight of
the Raghus), stood, bow in hand, to vanquish
utterly Indrajit (who took recourse to conjuring
tricks as an expedient in war) in conformity
with Brahma’s ordinance in the form of the
boon granted by him in favour of Indrajit
(vide verse 14 above). (34)
विभीषणेन सहितो राजपुत्र: प्रतापवान्।
अङ्गदेन च aor तथानिलसुतेन च॥ ३५॥
विविधममलशस्त्रभास्वरं ae

ध्वजगहनं गहनं महारथैश्च।
प्रतिभयतममप्रमेयवेगं
तिमिरमिव द्विषतां act विवेश॥ ३६॥

Accompanied by Vibhisana as also
by the valiant Angada as well as by
Hanuman (son of the wind-god), the mighty
prince, Laksmana, penetrated that
heterogeneous army of the enemy, which
was resplendent with spotless weapons and
thick with ensigns, and which abounded in
huge chariots, was exceedingly formidable
and was endowed with immeasurable
impetuosity—even as one would penetrate
a thick veil of darkness. (35-36)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये युद्धकाण्डे पञ्चाशीतितम: सर्ग: ॥ C4 I

Thus ends Canto Eighty-five in the Yuddhakanda of the glorious Ramayana of
Valmiki, the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

