“Full of confidence in me, seek pleasures
and boldly give orders to me. When you
enjoy pleasures out of kindness to me, let
your relatives too enjoy life. (24)
ऋद्धिं ममानुपश्य त्वं fort भद्रे यशस्विनि।
fe करिष्यसि रामेण सुभगे चीरवासिना॥ २७५॥

“Look at my affluence and prosperity,
O blessed and illustrious lady! What will
you do, O lovely one, with Rama, who
remains clad in tatters? (25)

निक्षिप्तविजयो रामो गतश्रीर्वनगोचर:।
व्रती स्थण्डिलशायी च शंके जीवति वा न वा॥ २६ ॥

“Rama has given up all hope of victory,
has lost his fortune; dwells in the forest, is
observing sacred vows and lies on the
ground without any cot. | am doubtful whether

he still survives or not. (26)
नहि वैदेहि रामस्त्वां द्रष्टुं वाप्युपलभ्यते।
पुरोबलाकैरसितैर्मेघैर्ज्यत्स्नामिवावृताम् ॥२७॥

“Surely Rama will not be able even to
see you, any more than moonshine veiled
by dark clouds perceived by herons, O
Sita, a princess of the Videha territory ! (27)

न चापि मम हस्तात् त्वां प्राप्तुमर्हति राघव:।
हिरण्यकशिपु: कीर्तिमिन्द्रहस्तगतामिव॥ २८ ॥

“Nor will Rama, a scion of Raghu, be
able to get you back from my hands any
more than the demon Hiranyakasipu was
able to recover his glory which had passed
into the hands of Indra. (28)

चारुस्मिते चारुदति चारुनेत्रे विलासिनि।
मनो हरसि मे site सुपर्ण: पन्नगं यथा॥२९॥

“You ravish my mind even as Garuda,
who is noted for his charming wings, carries
away a serpent, O sportive yet timid lady,
distinguished by sweet smiles, lovely teeth
and beautiful eyes ! (29)
क्लिष्टकौशेयवसनां तन्वीमप्यनलंकृताम्।
wat दृष्ट्वा स्वेषु दारेषु रतिं नोपलभाम्यहम्॥ ३०॥

“Seeing you clad in a worn out silk
cloth, emaciated and unadorned, | find no

« VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

delight even in my own principal consort,
Mandodari. (30)

अन्त:पुरनिवासिन्य: fara: सर्वगुणान्विता:।
यावत्यो मम सर्वासामैश्वर्यं pe जानकि॥ ३१॥

“Hold sway, O daughter of Janaka, over
all the women who dwell in my gynaeceum
and are endowed with all excellences. (31)

मम ह्यसितकेशान्ते त्रैलोक्यप्रवरस्तरिय:।
तास्त्वां परिचरिष्यन्ति श्रियमप्सरसो यथा॥ ३२॥

“My celebrated consorts, who are most
excellent in all the three worlds (heaven,
earth and the intermediate region), will wait
on you even as celestial nymphs attend on
Laksmi, the goddess of fortune, O lady with
black hair ! (32)
यानि वैश्रवणे ay रत्नानि च धनानि च।
तानि लोकांश्च सुश्रोणि मया भुङ्क्ष्व यथासुखम्॥ ३३॥

“Make use according to your pleasure
of all the jewels and riches which (though
won by me) exist in the possession of
Kubera (son of Visrava), O lady of charming
brows and graceful limb, and enjoy the
rulership of the three worlds. (33)

न रामस्तपसा देवि न बलेन च fame:
न धनेन मया तुल्यस्तेजसा यशसापि ari ३४॥

“Neither in point of asceticism, nor in
might, nor in prowess, nor in wealth, nor in
glory, nor even in renown is Rama equal to
me. (34)

पिब विहर रमस्व भुङ्छ्ष्व भोगान्
धननिचयं प्रदिशामि मेदिनीं च।
मयि लल ललने यथासुखं त्वं
त्वयि च समेत्य ललन्तु बान्धवास्ते॥ ३५ UI
“Therefore, drink, sport, revel and enjoy
pleasures. Bestow on your relatives the
immense store of wealth that you will own
from now onwards as well as the earth that
will now be yours. Enjoy you life according
to your pleasure, depending on me, O beloved
one, and, reaching your presence, let your
relatives too enjoy life. (35)
