* AYODHYAKANDA +

ocean and keeps it within bounds. Let me
not earn the realms that fall to the share of
heroes after death if | fail to do so. (28)

मङ्गलैरभिषिञ्चस्व at त्वं व्यापृतो भव।
अहमेको महीपालानलं वारयितुं बलात्॥ २९॥

“Allow yourself to be consecrated by
Vasistha and others with auspicious articles
and be up and doing in that direction. | am
enough to repel hostile monarchs forcibly
single-handed. (29)

न शोभार्थाविमौ बाहू न धनुर्भूषणाय मे।
नासिराबन्धनार्थाय न MNT: स्तम्भहेतव:॥ ३०॥

“These arms of mine are not intended
to add to my charm nor is this bow meant
to serve as an ornament for my body. Nor
is my sword meant for being tied to my belt
and hanging by my side as a badge of
honour, nor are my arrows meant to serve
as a support for some structure. (30)

अमित्रमथनार्थाय सर्वमेतच्चतुष्टयम्।
न चाहं कामयेऽत्यर्थं य: स्याच्छत्रुर्मतो ATI ३१॥
असिना तीक्ष्णधारेण विद्युच्चलितवर्चसा।
प्रगृहीतेन a wat वज्रिणं वा न कल्पये॥ ३२॥

“All these four exist only for crushing
the enemy. Nor do | wish that | should not
hew, with my uplifted keen-edged sword
possessing an inconstant sheen like a flash
of lightning, him who is considered to be my
inveterate enemy, be he Indra, the wielder
of the thunderbolt. (31-32)

ख्ड्गनिष्पेषनिष्पिष्टैर्गहना दुश्चरा च मे।
हस्त्यश्वरथिहस्तोरुशिरोभिर्भविता Tat 33 ॥

“The earth will be thickly set in no time
with the trunks (or hands) of elephants,
horses and warriors fighting in chariots,
severed with the blows of my sword, and
will become hard to tread. (33)

ख्ड्गधाराहता Asa दीप्यमाना इवाग्नय:।
पतिष्यन्ति द्विषो भूमौ मेघा ga सविद्युत:।॥ ३४॥

“Killed with the edge of my sword today
and consequently bathed in blood, enemies

385

will drop on the ground like so many blazing
fires or clouds accompanied with flashes of
lightning. (34)
बद्धगोधाङ्गुलित्राणे प्रगृहीतशरासने।
कथं पुरुषमानी स्यात् पुरुषाणां मयि स्थिते॥ ३५॥
“While | stand on the battlefield with
finger-protectors (made of the skin of iguana)
fastened glove-like round the left hand to
prevent injury from a bow-string and with
uplifted bow, how can anyone among men
remain proud of his valour and dare stand
before me? (35)

बहुभिश्चैकमत्यस्यन्नेकेन च बहूञ्जनान्।
विनियोक्ष्याम्यहुँ बाणान्नृवाजिगजमर्मसु॥ ३६॥

“Throwing down a single warrior with
many shafts and many men with a single
arrow, | shall dig arrows into the vitals of
men, horses and elephants. (36)

अद्य मेऽस्त्रप्रभावस्य प्रभाव: प्रभविष्यति।
राज्ञश्चाप्रभुतां कर्तुं प्रभुत्वं च da प्रभो॥ ३७॥

“Today the effectiveness of the might
of my weapons will manifest itself in
order to prove the helplessness of the
king, Dasaratha, and demonstrate your
sovereignty, O lord! (37)

TI चन्दनसारस्य केयूरामोक्षणस्य च।
वसूनां च विमोक्षस्य सुहृदां पालनस्य च॥ ३८॥

अनुरूपाविमौ ate राम कर्म करिष्यत:।
अभिषेचनविघ्नस्य व॰र्तॄणा a निवारणे॥ ३९॥

“These arms of mine, which are worthy
of being daubed with sandal-paste and putting
on a pair of armlets, as well as of giving
away riches and protecting friends and
relations, O Rama, will exert themselves
today to stop those who are interrupting
your consecration. (38-39)

ब्रवीहि कोऽद्यैव मया वियुज्यतां
Aare प्राणयश:सुहृज्जनै:।
यथा तवेयं वसुधा वशा भवेत्
ada मां शाधि तवास्मि किंकर: ॥ ४० ॥
