# YUDDHAKANDA #

yourself to unnecessary suffering?” So did
the warriors of the two contending armies
spoke to one another in the streets of Lanka.
(66)
विप्रलम्भितशस्त्रं च विमुक्तकवचायुधम्।
समुद्यतमहाप्रासं मुष्टिशूलासिकुन्तलम्॥ ६७॥
Wada महारौद्रं Be वानररक्षसाम्।
वानरान् दश सप्तेति राक्षसा जघ्नुराहवे॥६८॥
राक्षसान् दश सप्तेति वानराश्चाभ्यपातयन्।
विप्रलम्भितवस्त्रं च विमुक्कतकवचध्वजम्।
बलं राक्षसमालम्ब्य वानरा: पर्यवारयन्॥६९॥
Presently there ensued an exceedingly
fearful struggle between the monkeys and

625

the ogres, in which arms were dodged,
weapons were dug into armours, long lances
were lifted up for being hurled against the
enemy and fists, pikes, swords and spears
were freely used as weapons of war. The
ogres killed the monkeys at the rate of ten
to seven at a time in the course of the
combat and the monkeys too in their turn
struck down the ogres at the rate of ten to
seven at a time. Intercepting the army of
ogres—whose raiment was kept in order
with difficulty and whose coats of mail and
standards had been thrown away—the
monkeys surrounded it on all sides.

(67—69)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये FERS पञ्चसप्ततितम: सर्ग: ॥ ७५ ॥

Thus ends Canto Seventy-five in the Yuddhakanda of the glorious Ramayana of
Valmiki, the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

षट्सप्ततितम: सर्ग:

Canto LXXVI

Death of Kampana and Prajangha at the hands of
Angada, of Sonitaksa at the hands of
Dwivida, of Yupaksa at the hands
of Mainda and of Kumbha at
the hands of Sugriva

wat संकुले तस्मिन् घोरे वीरजनक्षये।
age: कम्पनं वीरमाससाद रणोत्सुक:॥१॥
While that appalling melee—which
brought about the destruction of so many
heroic warriors was in progress, Angada,
who was eager for an encounter, assailed
the gallant Kampana. (1)

आहूय सोऽङ्गदं कोपात् ताडयामास वेगित:।
गदया कम्पन: पूर्वं A चचाल भृशाहत:॥ २॥
Challenging Angada दापे seized

with impetuosity, Kampana furiously struck
him with a mace in anticipation, so that,

grievously hurt, Angada reeled.
स dat wet तेजस्वी चिक्षेप शिखरं fr:
अर्दितश्च प्रहारेण कम्पन: पतितो भुवि॥ au

Regaining his consciousness, Angada,
who was full of energy, hurled the top of
a mountain at him; and, wounded by
the blow, Kampana fell dead to the
ground. (3)

ततस्तु कम्पनं दृष्टवा शोणिताक्षो हतं रणे।
रथेनाभ्यपतत् क्षिप्रं त्त्राङ्गदमभीतवत्॥४॥

Seeing Kampana made short work of
in combat, Sonitaksa for his part thereupon

(2)
