# YUDDHAKANDA #

Wild with fear and panic-stricken, the
ogres who were still being struck by the
monkeys, fled in the direction of Lanka on
seeing Vajradamstra killed, their faces woe-
begone and heads hung a bit in shame,
miserable as they were. (36)

Rea तं वज्रधर: प्रतापवान्
a ate: कपिसैन्यमध्ये।

491

सहस्रनेत्रस्तिदशैरिवावृत: ॥ ३७॥

Honoured in the midst of the simian
ranks, Angada, son of Vali, who was glorious
like Indra (the wielder of the thunderbolt)
and was endowed with extraordinary
might, experienced joy on having struck
down Vajradamstra even as Indra, the
thousand-eyed god, surrounded by gods.(37)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये FERS चतु:पञ्चाश: सर्ग: ॥ ५४॥

Thus ends Canto Fifty-four in the Yuddhakanda of the glorious Ramayana
of Valmiki, the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

पञ्चपञ्चाश: सर्ग:
Canto LV

Akampana and other ogres appear on the field of battle under orders
of Ravana and wage a deadly conflict with the monkeys

बलाध्यक्षमुवाचेदं कृताञ्जलिमुपस्थितम्॥ १॥
Hearing of Vajradarnstra having been
killed by Angada (son of Vall), Ravana spoke
as follows to the Commander-in-Chief of his
army, who stood near him with folded hands:
(1)

शीघ्रं निर्यान्तुदुर्धर्षा राक्षसा भीमविक्रमा:।
अकम्पनं पुरस्कृत्य सर्वशस्त्रास्त्रकोविदम्॥ २॥

“Placing at their head Akampana, who
was conversant with the use of all weapons
and missiles, ogres of terrible prowess, who
are difficult to overpower, should speedily
go forth. (2)

एष शास्ता च गोप्ता च नेता च युधि WAH: |
भूतिकामश्च मे नित्यं fet च समरप्रिय:॥ ३॥

“He is a tamer of foes, nay, the protector
of his own people and a commander of
his forces on the field of battle. He is the
foremost of warriors, nay, ever desirous of

my welfare and ever fond of war.

एष जेष्यति काकुत्स्थौ सुग्रीवं च महाबलम्।
वानरांश्चापरान् घोरान् हनिष्यति न संशय:॥४॥
“This ogre, Akampana, will conquer
Rama and Laksmana (the two scions of
Kakutstha) as well as Sugriva, and is
endowed with extraordinary might, and will
exterminate the other formidable monkeys
too, there is no doubt about it.” (4)

परिगृह्य स तामाज्ञां रावणस्य महाबल:।
act सम्प्रेयामास तदा लघुपराक्रम:॥५॥
Accepting the aforesaid command of
Ravana, the Commander-in-Chief of quick
prowess, endowed as he was_ with
extraordinary might, duly dispatched his
army to fight with the monkeys. (5)

ततो नानाप्रहरणा भीमाक्षा भीमदर्शना:।
निष्पेतू राक्षसा मुख्या बलाध्यक्षप्रचोदिता:॥६॥

Urged by the Commander-in-Chief, the
principal ogres of fearful eyes and hideous

(3)
