+ UTTARAKANDA +

the great sage began to speak in detail the
wondrous purpose to the descendant of
Raghu: ‘O one of long arms, bull among
men, your maternal uncle Yudhajit has said
pleasingly, listen if it appeals to you. The
territory of the Gandharvas, rich with fruits
and roots, is a region most beautiful on both
sides of the Sindhu river, that is protected
by the Gandharvas, the experts in war,
possessed of arms, the powerful three million
sons of Sailusa, O brave one. Having
conquered them, O scion of Kakutstha,
merge the holy city of the Gandharvas in
your own kingdom, which no one else can
do. May it please you to occupy it, O one
of long arms; | do not say this against your
interests.’ (6é—13)

तच्छुत्वा राघव: प्रीतो महर्षेर्मातुलस्य च।
उवाच बाढमित्येव भरतं चान्ववैक्षत॥ १४॥

Having heard this, Sri Rama the
descendant of Raghu, being pleased with
what the sage and his maternal uncle said:
‘So shall it be’ and looked at Bharata. (14)

सोऽब्रवीद् राघव: Via: साञ्जलिप्रग्रहो द्विजम्।
इमौ pant तं देशं were विचरिष्यत:॥१५॥
भरतस्यात्मजौ वीरौ तक्ष: पुष्कल एव च।
मातुलेन सुगुप्तौ तु धर्मेण सुसमाहितौ॥ १६॥

That descendant of Raghu was pleased
and with folded hands courteously said:
‘O Rsi among Brahmanas, these two brave
sons (of Bharata) Taksa and Puskala will
go to that region, well-protected by my
maternal uncle and observing religious
norms. (15-16)

Wd चाग्रत: कृत्वा Hat सबलानुगौ।
निहत्य गन्धर्वसुतान् द्वे पुरे विभजिष्यत:॥ १७॥
‘Keeping Bharata ahead, the two sons
together with their army and attendants, will
divide the two regions having killed the sons
of the Gandharva, Sailusa. (17)
Fava ते wat आत्मजौ dara a
आगमिष्यति मे भूय: सकाशमतिधार्मिक:॥ १८॥

1115

‘Establishing those two cities and
foresetting his two sons there, this most
pious one, Bharata, will again return to me.’

(18)

ब्रह्मर्षिमेवमुक्त्वा तु भरतं सबलानुगम्।
आज्ञापयामास तदा कुमारौ चाभ्यषेचयत्॥१९॥
नक्षत्रेण च सौम्येन पुरस्कृत्याङ्निर:सुतम्।
We: We सैन्येन कुमाराभ्यां विनिर्ययौ॥ rot

Thus having spoken to the Brahmanas,
he (Rama) ordered Bharata to proceed
with his army and attendants, and also
consecrated the two sons on an auspicious
day with the holy star, putting the son of
Angira at their head, Bharata with his army
and his sons proceeded. (19-20)

सा सेना शक्रयुक्तेव नगरान्निर्ययावथ।
राघवानुगता दूरुं दुराधर्षा सुरैरपि॥ २१॥

Then that army went out of the royal
city Ayodhya like the army of Indra, followed
by the descendant of Raghu for a long
distance—the army that was difficult to
conquer even by the gods. (21)

मांसाशिनश्च ये सत्त्वा रक्षांसि सुमहान्ति च।
अनुजग्मुर्हि भरतं रुधिरस्य पिपासया॥ २२॥
The flesh-eaters and the mighty

Raksasas followed Bharata out of thirst for
blood. (22)

भूतग्रामाश्च बहवो मांसभक्षा: सुदारुणा:।
गन्धर्वपुत्रमांसानि भोक्तुकामा: सहस्रश:॥ २३॥

Hosts of Bhutas (demons), eaters of
flesh, the terrible ones, desirous of devouring
the flesh of the sons of the Gandharva,
followed in thousands. (23)

सिंहव्याघ्रवराहाणां खेचराणां च पक्षिणाम्।
बहूनि a सहस्राणि सेनाया ययुरग्रत:॥ २४॥
Lions, tigers, bears and the sky-roving

birds, thousands in number went to herald
the army. (24)

अध्यर्धमासमुषिता पथि सेना निरामया।
हृष्टपुष्टजनाकीर्णा केकयं समुपागमत्॥ २५॥
