412

“Taking my stringed bow and carrying
a spade and a basket, | shall walk ahead of
you showing you the way. (25)

आहरिष्यामि ते नित्यं मूलानि च फलानि च।
वन्यानि च तथान्यानि स्वाहार्हाणि तपस्विनाम्॥ २६ ॥

“Nay, | shall procure for you from day
to day wild roots and fruits and other products
as well fit for being consigned as oblation
into the sacred fire. (26)
भवांस्तु we aca गिरिसानुषु रंस्यसे।
अहं Ud करिष्यामि जाग्रत: स्वपतश्च ते॥ २७॥

“You will sport at will with Sita, a
princess of the Videha clan, on mountain-
tops. | shall do everything for you whether
you are waking or sleeping.” (27)

रामस्त्वनेन वाक्येन सुप्रीत: प्रत्युवाच तम्।
व्रजापृच्छस्व सौमित्रे सर्वमेव सुहृज्जनम्॥ 2 Il
Highly pleased at this submission Sri
Rama for his part replied as follows to
Laksmana: “Go, take leave to proceed to
the forest, O son of Sumitra, of all your near
and dear ones. (28)

ये च राज्ञो ददौ दिव्ये महात्मा वरुण: स्वयम्।
जनकस्य महायज्ञे धनुषी रौद्रदर्शने॥ २९॥
अभेद्ये कवचे feel quit चाक्षय्यसायकौ।
आदित्यविमलाभौ gt खड्गौ हेमपरिष्कृतौ॥ ३०॥
apa निहितं सर्वमेतदाचार्यसद्मनि।
सर्वमायुधमादाय क्षिप्रमाव्रज लक्ष्मण॥ ३१॥
“Nay, the two heavenly bows, dreadful
to look at, which the high-souled Varuna,
the god of water, personally gave to King
Janaka at a grand sacrifice performed by
the latter, a pair of impenetrable pieces of
armour, a couple of quivers containing an
inexhaustible stock of arrows and a pair of
swords shedding a spotless lustre like
that of the sun and decked with gold—all
these which had been presented to me by
King Janaka as part of my dowry lie
deposited after paying due reverence at the
residence of our preceptor, Sage Vasistha.

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

Taking all those arms return soon, O
Laksmana !” (29—31)

a सुहृज्जनमामन्त्य वनवासाय निश्चित:।
इक्ष्वाकुगुरुमागम्य जग्राहायुधमुत्तमम्॥ ३२॥

Taking leave of his near and dear ones
and approaching Vasistha, the preceptor of
the Ikswakus, the prince, who was now
assured of his sojourn in the forest, took all
the excellent arms etc. (32)

ag दिव्यं राजशार्दूल: सत्कृतं माल्यभूषितम्।
रामाय दर्शयामास सौमित्रि: सर्वमायुधम्॥ ३३॥
Laksmana, son of Sumitra, a tiger
among princes, showed to Sri Rama all the
aforesaid weapons, that were adored as

divine and stood decorated with garlands.
(33)

तमुवाचात्मवान् राम: प्रीत्या लक्ष्मणमागतम्।
काले त्वमागत: सौम्य कांक्षिते AA लक्ष्मण NN Bx Il
To Laksmana, who had come back,
Sri Rama, who had fully brought his mind
under control, lovingly said, “You have
returned within an hour as desired by me, O
gentle Laksmana ! (34)
ब्राह्मणेभ्यस्तपस्विभ्यस्त्वया सह परंतप॥ ३५॥
वसन्तीह दृढं भक्त्या गुरुषु द्विजसत्तमा:।
तेषामपि च मे भूय: सर्वेषां चोपजीविनाम्॥ ३६॥

“With you, O chastiser of foes, | wish
to give away whatever wealth of my own
there is with me to Brahmanas engaged in
austerities as also to those jewels among
Brahmanas, who are firmly devoted to
their preceptors and live here (in my
palace) and again to all my dependants too.

(35-36)
afsqt 88d सुयज्ञमार्यं
त्वमानयाशु Wat द्विजानाम्।
अपि प्रयास्यामि वनं समस्ता-
नभ्यर्च्य शिष्टानपरान् द्विजातीन्॥ ३७॥

“Meanwhile bring you speedily the most
adorable Suyajnha, son of Vasistha and the
