* BALAKANDA +

Being treated with honour by them and
particularly by the king himself, she lived

99

there happily for some time alongwith her
husband and babe. (31)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये बालकाण्डे एकादश: AW: ॥ ११ ॥

Thus ends Canto Eleven in the Balakanda of the glorious Ramayana of Valmiki,
the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

Canto XII

Emperor Dasaratha gives his consent to the performance of a
horse-sacrifice for being blessed with a son

तत: काले बहुतिथे कस्मिंश्चित् सुमनोहरे।
वसन्ते समनुप्राप्ते राज्ञो यष्टुं मनोऽभवत्॥१॥
Afterwards, when a considerable time
had elapsed since the arrival of Rsyasrnga,
and an unusually charming spring set in, an
urge was felt by the Emperor to undertake
a sacrifice for being blessed with a son.
(1)

तत: wore शिरसा तं fax देववर्णिनम्।
यज्ञाय वरयामास संतानार्थं कुलस्य TUN २॥
Touching the ground with his head he
sought the help of the aforesaid Brahmana,
Rsyasrnga, who possessed the splendour
of a god, for conducting a sacrifice with a
view to the propagation of his race as well
as to the attainment of heaven. (2)

तथेति च a राजानमुवाच वसुधाधिपम्।
सम्भारा: सम्भियन्तां ते Teta विमुच्यताम्॥ ३॥
सरय्वाश्चोत्तरे तीरे यज्ञभूमिर्विधीयताम्।
ततोऽब्रवीन्नृपो वाक्यं ब्राह्मणान् वेदपारगान्॥४॥
सुमन्त्रावाहय क्षिप्रमृत्विजो ब्रह्मवादिन:।
सुयज्ञं वामदेवं च जाबालिमथ काश्यपम्॥५॥
पुरोहितं वसिष्ठं च a चान्ये द्विजसत्तमा:।
तत: सुमन्त्रस्त्वरितं गत्वा त्वरितविक्रम:॥ ६॥
समानयत् स तान् सर्वान् समस्तान् वेदपारगान्।
तान् पूजयित्वा धर्मात्मा राजा दशरथस्तदा॥७॥
मम तातप्यमानस्य पुत्रार्थं नास्ति aA सुखम्॥८॥

The sage accordingly said to the king,
who ruled over the entire globe, “Requisites
for the sacrifice may be got ready and your
horse let loose. And let a sacrificial ground
be prepared on the northern bank of the
Sarayu.” The king then spoke to Sumantra
as follows: “Sumantra, speedily call
Brahmanas who are masters of the Vedas
and priests who are capable of expounding
the Vedas, viz., SuyajfAa and Vamadeva,
Jabali and Kasyapa, Vasistha, my family
priest, and whoever other jewels among
Brahmanas there may be. Proceeding hastily,
the celebrated Sumantra, who walked with
quick paces, brought together in a body the
aforesaid Brahmanas, who were all masters
of the Vedas. Receiving them with reverence,
King DaSaratha, whose mind was given to
piety, then addressed to them the following
words, which were reasonable and sweet
and full of piety and purpose : “Really there
is no joy to me, who have been suffering
great agony for want of a son all these

years. (8—8)
पुत्रार्थं हयमेधेन यशक्ष्यामीति मतिर्मम।
ae यष्टुमिच्छामि हयमेधेन कर्मणा॥९॥

“| shall accordingly propitiate the Lord
with a horse-sacrifice : such is my resolve.
|, therefore, intend to worship God through
a sacrificial performance called ASwamedha
(a horse-sacrifice). (9)
