40

My salutation be to you, O daughter of
Daksa ! | shall now move to the place where
Sita, a princess of the Videha territory, is.”
(169)

तं दृष्टा वदनान्मुक्तं wi राहुमुखादिव।
अब्रवीत् सुरसा sat स्वेन WATT वानरम्॥ १७० ॥
Seeing him released from her mouth
as the moon gets released from the mouth
of the demon Rahu, and appearing in her
native form, the goddess Surasa said to the
monkey : (170)

अर्थसिद्ध्यै हरिश्रेष्ठ गच्छ सौम्य यथासुखम्।
समानय च Aaa राघवेण महात्मना॥१७१॥
“Move according to your pleasure for
accomplishing your mission, O gentle
Hanuman, the foremost of monkeys, and
unite Sita, a princess of the Videha territory,
with the high-souled Sri Rama, a scion of
Raghu.” (171)

तत् तृतीयं हनुमतो दृष्टा कर्म सुदुष्करम्।
साधुसाध्विति भूतानि प्रशशंसुस्तदा हरिम्॥ १७२॥
Witnessing this third feat of Hanuman
in the shape of escaping alive from the
mouth of Surasa, which was most difficult to
accomplish, living beings, who were watching
it, applauded the monkey on that occasion,
exclaiming “Well done, excellent!” (172)
a ARRAS AT वरुणालयम् |
जगामाकाशमाविश्य वेगेन गरुडोपम:॥ 293 I
Drawing near the inviolable sea, the
abode of Varuna, the god of water, and
coursing through the air, he moved on with
speed like Garuda. (173)
सेविते वारिधाराभि: पतगैश्च निषेविते।
aha कैशिकाचार्यैरैरावतनिषेविते॥ 29%
सिंहकुञ्जरशार्दूलपतगोरगवाहनै: ।
विमानै: सम्पतद्धिश्च विमलै: समलंकृते॥ १७५ UI
वज्राशनिसमस्पर्श: पावकैरिव शोभिते।
कृतपुण्यैर्महाभागै: स्वर्गजिद्भिरधिष्ठिते॥ १७६॥
वहता हव्यमत्यन्तं सेविते चित्रभानुना।
ग्रहनक्षत्रचन्द्रार्कतारागणविभूषिते ॥ १७७॥

« VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

महर्षिगणगन्धर्वनागयक्षसमाकुले ।
विविक्ते विमले fas विश्वावसुनिषेविते॥ १७८ i
देवराजगजाक्रान्ते चन्द्रसूर्यपथे शिवे।
विताने जीवलोकस्य वितते ब्रह्मनिर्मिते॥ ge
बहुश: सेविते वीरैर्विद्याधरगणैर्वृते।
जगाम वायुमार्गे च गरुत्मानिव मारुति:।॥ १८०॥

Like Garuda, Hanuman, son of the wind-
god, coursed through the path of the wind,
which was refreshed by torrents and
frequented by birds, was traversed by
masters of music and dancing (Tumburu
and other Gandharvas) and used by Airavata
(a celestial elephant which carries Indra on
its back), and was adorned with stainless
fast-moving aerial cars drawn by lions,
elephants, tigers, birds and serpents; which
was presided over and rendered charming
by highly blessed souls, who had performed
meritorious deeds in their previous lives and
had accordingly won their residence in
heaven, were hard to the touch like a
diamond and thunderbolt and shone like fire;
which was inhabited by the god of fire
abundantly carrying oblations to the various
gods, and was richly adorned with planets,
lunar asterisks, the moon, the sun and groups
of stars; which was ever thronged with
hosts of eminent Rsis (the seers of Vedic
Mantras), Gandharvas, Nagas and Yaksas,
and was isolated, cloudless and spacious
and frequented by ViSwavasu, the chief of
Gandharvas; nay which was traversed by
elephants (other than Airavata) belonging to
Indra, the ruler of gods, was the peaceful
orbit of the sun and the moon, and served
as an extensive canopy for the world of
living beings, spread by Brahma, the creator,
and which was frequented by numerous
heroes ascending to heaven by virtue of
their laying down their life in a righteous
cause and blocked by Vidyadharas (celestial
artists). (174—180)

हनुमान् मेघजालानि प्राकर्षन् मारुतो यथा।
कालागुरुसवर्णानि रक्तपीतसितानि च॥ १८१॥
