640

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA +

नवनवतितम: at:
Canto XCIX

Requesting Vasistha to fetch his mothers and pressing forward, Bharata
reaches the hut, made of leafy twigs, in which the three exiles were
living. While attempting to hail Sri Rama, Sita and Laksmana on
seeing them, he stumbles down even on an even ground,
his eyes getting bedimmed with tears at the sight of
their ascetic garb. Sri Rama hastens to lift him up
and clasps him to his bosom. Sumantra and

Guha as well meet Sri Rama and Laksmana

निविष्टायां तु सेनायामुत्सुको भरतस्तत:।
जगाम भ्रातरं द्रष्टुं शात्रुघ्नमनुदर्शयन्॥१॥

The army having encamped, Bharata
for his part, keen as he was to see his elder
brother, then proceeded to see him, pointing
out on the way to Satrughna the marks
indicating the presence of a hermitage
nearby. (1)
Ba त्वरितमग्रे स जगाम गुरुवत्सल:॥ २॥

Requesting Sage Vasistha in the
following words: “Pray, fetch my mothers
promptly,” Bharata, who was fond of his
elder brother, hastily pressed forward. (2)

सुमन्त्रस्त्वपि शत्रुघ्नमदूरादन्वपद्यत।
रामदर्शनजस्तर्षो भरतस्येव तस्य च ॥३॥

Sumantra too for his part closely
followed Satrughna; for an ardent longing
for the sight of Sri Rama possessed his
heart too, as Bharata’s. (3)
गच्छन्नेवाथ भरतस्तापसालयसंस्थिताम्।
wd: पर्णकुटीं श्रीमानुटजं च ददर्शं ह॥४॥

Even while proceeding, Bharata, who
was now radiant with joy at the prospect of
meeting Sri Rama, beheld the hut made of
leafy twigs, belonging to his elder brother
and built after the style of hermits’ dwellings,
as well as another cottage enclosed with
a wooden wall and provided with doors,
intended for Sita: so the tradition goes. (4)

शालायास्त्वग्रतस्तस्या ददर्श भरतस्तदा।
काष्ठानि चावभग्नानि पुष्पाण्यपचितानि च॥५॥

In front of that hut Bharata saw at that
time hewn pieces of wood as well as flowers
gathered for worship. (5)
स लक्ष्मणस्य रामस्य ददर्शाश्रममीयुष:।
कृतं वृक्षेष्वभिज्ञानं कुशचीरै: क्वचित् क्वचित्॥ ६ ।।

He also perceived tokens for indicating
the way made on trees here and there with
blades of KuSa grass and strips of cloth by
Laksmana and Sri Rama while returning to
the hermitage from the riverside after a
bath or with water fetched from the river.

(6)
ददर्शं च वने तस्मिन् महत: संचयान् कृतान्।
मृगाणां महिषाणां च करीषै: शीतकारणात्॥७॥

He further beheld in the vicinity of that
cottage large heaps made of the dried dung
of deer and wild buffaloes for protection
against cold. (7)

गच्छन्नेव  Aeagaaar भरतस्तदा।
शत्रुघ्नं चाब्रवीद्धृष्टस्तानमात्यांश्च सर्वश:॥८॥
Nay, even while going, the mighty-
armed Bharata, who was full of glory, spoke
with delight as follows on that occasion to
Satrughna as well as to all those ministers
that had accompanied him : (8)

मन्ये We: TA तं देशं भरद्वाजो यमब्रवीत्।
नातिदूरे fe मन्येऽहं नदीं मन्दाकिनीमित:॥९॥
