1006

तामवेक्ष्य तु सुग्रीव: क्रोशन्तीं कुररीमिव।

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

osprey, and beholding Angada too arrived

विषादमगमत् कष्टं दृष्टवा चाङ्गदमागतम्॥ २८॥ | on the scene, Sugriva for his part, fell a

Perceiving her screaming like a female | prey to grievous despondency.

(28)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये किष्किन्धाकाण्डे एकोनविंश: सर्ग: ॥ १९ ॥

Thus ends Canto Nineteen in the Kiskindhakanda of the glorious Ramayana of
Valmiki, the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

७
ad
a

सर्ग:

Canto XX

Clasping Vali to her bosom and wailing piteously for the sake of Angada,
Tara resolves upon a fast unto death

रामचापविसृष्टेन शरेणान्तकरेण तम्।
दृष्टवा विनिहतं भूमौ ant ताराधिपानना॥१॥
सा समासाद्य भर्तारं पर्यष्वजत भामिनी।

इषुणाभिहतं gear वालिनं Hao ei
art पर्वतेन्द्राभं शोकसंतप्तमानसा।
तारा तरुमिवोन्मूलं पर्यदेवयतातुरा।॥ ३॥
Beholding her aforesaid husband lying
on the ground mortally wounded by a death-
dealing arrow discharged from Sri Rama’s
bow, and duly reaching him, that proud
lady, Tara, whose face resembled the moon,
clasped him to her bosom. Seeing Vali, the
monkey chief, who looked like an elephant
and resembled a lordly mountain, struck
down with an arrow and lying like an uprooted
tree, Tara, whose mind was tormented with
grief, lamented as follows, distressed as
she was: (1—8)
रणे दारुणविक्रान्त Walt wad वर।
किमिदानीं पुरोभागामद्य त्वं नाभिभाषसे॥४॥
“Why don’t you speak today to me,
who stand before you at this moment, O
great hero, the foremost of monkeys,

possessed as you are of terrific prowess in
combat? (4)

उत्तिष्ठं हरिशार्दूल भजस्व शयनोत्तमम्।
नैवंविधा: शेरते fe भूमौ नृपतिसत्तमा:॥५॥

“Get up, O tiger among monkeys, and
take to your excellent couch. Surely, jewels
among kings, such as you are, do not lie
down on the ground. (5)

aia खलु a कान्ता age वसुधाधिप।
गतासुरपि तां गात्रैर्मां feerae निषेवसे॥६॥

“The earth, O suzerain lord of the earth,
is indeed extremely beloved of you as is
evident from the fact that, ignoring me, you
hug her with your limbs even though your
life has departed. (6)

व्यक्तमद्य wat वीर eda: सम्प्रवर्तता।
किष्किन्धेव पुरी रम्या स्वर्गमार्गे विनिर्मिता॥७॥

“Evidently, O heroic king, a city as
lovely as Kiskindha, which you are leaving
forever, has been specially built today on
your way to heaven by you, who fought
according to the principles of righteousness.

(7)
यान्यस्माभिस्त्वया सार्धं वनेषु मधुगन्धिषु।
fast त्वया काले तेषामुपरम: कृत:॥८॥

“A dead stop has been given by you at
this time to the pastimes which were enjoyed
by us in your company in woodlands emitting
sweet fragrance. (8)

निरानन्दा निराशाहं निमग्ना शोकसागरे।
त्वयि पञ्चत्वमापन्ने महायूथपयूथपे॥९॥
