* SUNDARAKANDA +

“Proceed now, O gentle one, according
to your pleasure for accomplishing your
purpose, O jewel among the monkeys, and
re-unite the princess of the Videha territory
with the high-souled Sri Rama, a scion of
Raghu. (33)
सुखी wa महाबाहो प्रीतास्मि तव वानर।
ततोऽहं साधुसाध्वीति सर्वभूतै: प्रशंसित:॥ ३४॥

“Be happy, O mighty-armed monkey !
| am pleased with you.’ Thereupon | was
applauded by all beings, who said: ‘Well
done ! Bravo !!’ (34)
ततोऽन्तरिक्षं विपुलं प्लुतोऽहं Weel यथा।
छाया मे निगृहीता च न च पश्यामि किंचन॥ ३५॥

“Then | sprang into the vast space like
Garuda (the king of birds, the carrier of Lord

Visnu). In the meantime my shadow was
held fast; yet | perceived nothing. (35)

सोऽहं विगतवेगस्तु दिशो दश विलोकयन्।
न किंचित् aa पश्यामि येन मे विहता गति: ।। ३६ I

“My speed having been arrested thereby,
| surveyed all the ten directions; yet | could
not discover there the object by which my
course had been stayed. (36)

अथ मे बुद्धिरुत्पन्ना किंनाम गमने मम।
sau विघ्न उत्पन्नो रूपमत्र न दृश्यते॥ zou

“Then the thought came to me: ‘How |
wonder such an obstacle has appeared in
my journey, although no concrete form is to
be discerned here?’ (37)

अधोभागे तु मे gfe: शोचत: पतिता तदा।
तत्राद्राक्षमहं भीमां राक्षसीं सलिलेशयाम्॥ ३८॥
“While | was brooding thus, my eye

presently fell downward. There | espied a
terrible ogress lying on water. (38)

प्रहस्य च महानादमुक्तोऽहं भीमया तया।
अवस्थितमसम्भ्रान्तमिदं वाक्यमशोभनम्॥ ३९॥
“Heartily laughing on seeing me
motionless, yet undaunted, that dreadful
woman accosted me with a loud cry in the
following inauspicious words : (39)

253

क्वासि गन्ता महाकाय क्षुधिताया ममेप्सित: |
भक्ष: प्रीणय मे देहं चिरमाहारवर्जितम्॥४०॥

“Whither are you bound, 0 gigantic
monkey? You are my coveted food, hungry
as | am. Pray, gratify my person, which has
remained without sustenance for a long
period.’ (40)
बाढमित्येव तां वाणीं प्रत्यगृह्णामहं तत:।
आस्यप्रमाणादधिकं तस्या: कायमपूरयम्॥४१॥

“Saying ‘Amen,’ | actually bowed to
that command of hers and then expanded
my body to a size larger than the capacity
of her mouth. (41)

तस्याश्चास्यं महद् भीमं वर्धते मम भक्षणे।
न तु मां सा नु बुबुधे मम वा विकृतं कृतम्॥४२॥
“Her huge and dreadful mouth too began
to grow in order to devour me. She, however,
neither recognized me nor did she perceive
the transformation subsequently gone through
by me in the shape of a minute form. (42)
तस्या हृदयमादाय प्रपतामि TH CATH I ४३ Ul
Having contracted my gigantic form in
the twinkling of an eye, and extracting her
heart, | forthwith sprang in the vault of heaven.
(43)

सा विसृष्टभुजा भीमा पपात लवणाम्भसि।
मया पर्वतसंकाशा निकृत्तहृदया सती॥४४॥

“Her heart having been cut off, that
terrible woman, who looked much like a
mountain, dropped into the salty water, her
arms paralysed. (44)

श्रृणोमि खगतानां च वाच: सौम्या महात्मनाम्।
राक्षसी सिंहिका sitar fad हनुमता हता॥४५॥
“| heard at that moment the delightful
words of exalted souls standing in the sky:
‘The terrible ogress, Simhika, has been
dispatched in no time by Hanuman.’ (45)
तां हत्वा पुनरेवाहं कृत्यमात्ययिकं स्मरन्।
गत्वा च महदध्वानं पश्यामि नगमण्डितम्॥४६॥
