844

After offering respectful salutation with
their heads bent low, the epic should be
listened to by the Ksatriyas from the mouth
of a Brahmana (lit., a member of the twice-
born class) everyday. Lordship as well as
the birth of a son will be secured by them:
there is no doubt about it. (118)

रामायणमिदं Het श्रृण्वत: Usd: सदा।
प्रीयते aad wa: स fe विष्णु: सनातन:॥११९॥

He, who listens to or reads the whole of
this Ramayana daily, Sri Rama remains
constantly pleased. Indeed, Rama is none
else than the eternal Lord Visnu. (119)

आदिदेवो महाबाहुर्हरिर्नारायण: प्रभु:।
MATE TA रघुश्रेष्ठ: VAT लक्ष्मण उच्यते॥ १२० Il

The mighty-armed Lord Sri Hari, who
has His abode on the waters of the ocean
of milk, has appeared in person as Sri
Rama, the foremost of the Raghus, and
Sesa, the serpent-god forming His couch,
is spoken of as Laksmana. (120)

एवमेतत् पुराव्रत्तमाख्यानं भद्रमस्तु asl
प्रव्याहरत fret act विष्णो: प्रवर्धताम्॥ १२१॥

Thus runs this ancient _ historical
narrative. May all be well with you!
Confidently repeat it. So say Princes Lava
and Kuga, sons of Sri Rama, to whom
this epic was taught first of all by Valmiki
in his own hermitage, where they were
born—vide I. iv. 6 of Valmiki-Ramayana
Number-l). May the power of Lord Visnu
grow immensely thereby. (121)

देवाश्च सर्वे तुष्यन्ति ग्रहणाच्छ्वणात् तथा।
रामायणस्य श्रवणे तृप्यन्ति पितर: सदा॥ १२२॥

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA +

Nay, all the gods get propitiated by
means of listening to and apprehending this
narrative. The manes are gratified forever
through a hearing of the Ramayana. (122)

भक्त्या रामस्य ये चेमां संहितामृषिणा कृताम्।
ये लिखन्तीह च नरास्तेषां वासस्तिविष्टपे॥ १२३॥

Residence in heaven after death is
assured in the case of those men who
transcribe with devotion in this life this
collection of verses depicting the story of
Sri Rama, composed by the sage Valmiki.

(123)
fags Tet: सुखमुत्तमं al
Tr शुभं काव्यमिदं महार्थं

प्राप्नोति सर्वां भुवि चार्थसिद्धिम्॥ १२४॥

On listening to this charming epic, full
of great meaning, one secures the growth of
one’s family as well as the augmentation of
one’s wealth and stock of grains, excellent
women for wives and supreme felicity as
well as the accomplishment of all one’s

objects on earth. (124)
सौभ्रातूकं बुद्धिकरं शुभं च।

श्रोतव्यमेतन्नियमेन सद्भि-
राख्यानमोजस्करमृद्धिकामै: ॥ १२५ ॥

This charming narrative of Sri Rama,
which is conducive to longevity, health,
renown, brotherly love, wisdom = and
vitality, should be listened to with regularity
by virtuous men desirous of prosperity.

(125)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये युद्धकाण्डेऽष्टाविंशत्यधिकशततम: सर्ग: ॥ १२८ Il
Thus ends Canto One hundred and twenty-eight in the Yuddhakanda of the glorious
Ramayana of Valmiki, the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

॥ युद्धकाण्डं सम्पूर्णम्॥
END OF YUDDHAKANDA

