* AYODHYAKANDA +

anything. Bharata for his part made the
following submission to Sri Rama in the
midst of his near and dear ones: (3)

सान्तिता मामिका माता ad राज्यमिदं मम।
तद् ददामि तवैवाहं भुङ्क्ष्व राज्यमकण्टकम्॥ ४॥
“My mother Kaikeyi has been consoled
by you and this kingdom of Ayodhya
bestowed on me. | hereby return it to your
own self. Please enjoy it without impediment.
(4)

महतेवाम्बुवेगेन भिन्न: सेतुर्जलागमे।
दुरावरं त्वदन्येन राज्यखण्डमिदं महत्॥५॥
“Just as a dam breached by a mighty
onrush of water during the rains cannot be
easily repaired, this large state of Ayodhya
cannot be easily held in one’s sway by
anyone other than you. (5)

गतिं खर इवाश्वस्य aedteta cater: |
अनुगन्तुं न शक्तिर्मे wt तव महीपते॥६॥

“The power to emulate your ruling
capacity does not lie in me, O ruler of the
globe, any more than the power to emulate
the gait of a horse in a donkey and the flight
of Garuda, the carrier of Lord Visnu, in a
common bird. (6)

wid नित्यशस्तस्य 4: परैरुपजीव्यते।
राम तेन I aid य: परानुपजीवति॥७॥

“Know his life to be blessed from day
to day, who is depended upon by others.
Life is, however, dragged on with hardship
by him who depends for his life upon others,
O Rama! (7)
यथा तुं रोपितो qa: पुरुषेण विवर्धित:।
ह्रस्वकेन दुरारोहो रूढस्कन्धो महाद्रुम:॥८॥

“For example a tree planted and nurtured
by a man develops in course of time into a
mighty tree with a stout trunk, hard to scale
for a dwarf. (8)

स यदा पुष्पितो भूत्वा फलानि न विदर्शयेत्।
स तां नानुभवेत् प्रीतिं यस्य हेतो: प्ररोपित:॥ ९॥

“But when, though laden with flowers,

665

it does not bear fruit, the man does not
experience the same delight which he
expected from it due to his failure to reach
the consummation for which it was planted
with effort. (9)

एषोपमा महाबाह्ये तदर्थं वेत्तुमर्हसि।
FA AMET TAM भर्ता भृत्यान् न शाधि FE Ul १० ॥
“This is only an analogy, O mighty-
armed brother: be pleased to make out its
meaning, since you, our supreme master,
do not care to instruct us, your servants, on
this occasion when it becomes you to protect
us. (10)

श्रेणयस्त्वां महाराज पश्यन्त्वग्रूयाश्च सर्वश:।
प्रतपन्तमिवादित्यं राज्यस्थितमरिंदमम्॥ ११॥

“Let the guilds of traders (of every
class) and their leaders behold you, the
subduer of enemies, seated on the throne
like the sun blazing on all sides, O great
king ! (11)

तथानुयाने काकुत्स्थ मत्ता नर्दन्तु HAT: |
अन्त:पुरगता नार्यो नन्दन्तुं सुसमाहिता:॥१२॥

“Likewise, let the elephants in rut trumpet
in the course of your return journey to
Ayodhya and let the ladies living in the royal
gynaeceum, fully collected in mind, rejoice
to see you returned.” (12)
तस्य साध्वनुमन्यन्त नागरा विविधा जना:।
भरतस्य dd: श्रुत्वा रामं प्रत्यनुयाचत: YR

Hearing the submission of the
celebrated Bharata, supplicating as aforesaid
Sri Rama, the citizens of every class,

assembled at Citrakuta, acclaimed it in the

words “Well said !” (13)

and दु:ख्रितं wea विलपन्तं यशस्विनम्।

Ta: Haley भरतं समाश्वासयदात्मवान्॥ १४॥
Perceiving the said illustrious Bharata

wailing as above, afflicted as he was, Sri

Rama, who was self possessed and self-

disciplined comforted him in the following
words : (14)
