* ARANYAKANDA «

821

Canto XLI

Once more Marica tries to deter Ravana from his purpose by picturing to him
the disastrous consequences of his action

आज्ञप्तो रावणेनेत्थं प्रतिकूलं च राजवत्।
अब्रवीत् परुषं वाक्यं नि:शङ्को राक्षसाधिपम्॥ १॥
Commanded in the foregoing words by
Ravana like a king to do a thing which was
repugnant to him, Marica fearlessly spoke
the following harsh words to Ravana, the
suzerain lord of ogres: (1)

केनायमुपदिष्टस्ते विनाश: पापकर्मणा।
सपुत्रस्य सराज्यस्य सामात्यस्य निशाचर॥ २॥

“What man of sinful deeds has advised
you this course of action, which spells your
doom alongwith that of your sons, kingdom
and ministers, O night-stalker? (2)

कस्त्वया सुखिना राजन् नाभिनन्दति पापकृत्।
केनेदमुपदिष्टं ते मृत्युद्बारमुपायत:॥ ३ Ul
“Who is that man of sinful deeds, who
does not rejoice with you while you are
enjoying happiness, O king? By whom has
this door to death been directed to you in
the guise of an expedient, O king? (3)
शत्रवस्तव सुव्यक्तं हीनवीर्या निशाचर।
इच्छन्ति त्वां विनश्यन्तमुपरुद्धुं बलीयसा॥४॥
“Obviously enough, O ranger of the
night, your enemies of meagre strength wish

to see you besieged by a stronger power
and meeting with your doom in consequence.

(4)
केनेदमुपदिष्टं ते क्षुद्रेणाहितबुद्धिना।
यस्त्वामिच्छति Wet स्वकृतेन निशाचर॥५॥

“By what mean fellow of noxious designs
has this course of action been urged on
you? He wishes you to perish as a result of
your own deeds, O prowler of the night ! (5)

वध्या: खलु न वध्यन्ते सचिवास्तव रावण।
ये त्वामुत्पथमारूढं न निगृह्णन्ति सर्वश:॥६॥

“Worthy of execution indeed are your
ministers, O Ravana, who do not hold you
back by every means even though seeing
you having set your foot on a wrong path;
yet they are not put to death by you. (6)
अमात्यै: aa हि राजा कापथमाश्रित: |
निग्राह्य: सर्वथा सद्भि: स निग्राह्यो न गृह्यसे॥ ७॥

“A licentious king, who has taken to
evil ways, surely deserves to be checked
in everyway by virtuous ministers. Though
deserving to be so checked, you have,
however, not been checked. (7)

धर्ममर्थं च कामं च यशश्च Wadi वर।

स्वामिप्रसादात् सचिवा: प्राप्नुवन्ति निशाचर॥ ८॥
“By the grace of their lord, O ranger of

the night, ministers acquire religious merit,

wealth and sensuous enjoyment as well as
fame, O jewel among the victorious! (8)

विपर्यये तु aad व्यर्थं waft रावण।
व्यसनं स्वामिवैगुण्यात् प्राप्नुवन्तीतरे जना:॥९॥

“In the reverse case, however,
everything becomes useless, O Ravana!
Other people meet with adversity through
the fault of a master. (9)

राजमूलो fe धर्मश्च यशश्च जयतां वर।
तस्मात् सर्वास्ववस्थासु रक्षितव्या नराधिपा:॥ १०॥

“Virtue as well as fame have their root
in a king, O jewel among the victorious !
Hence the rulers of men deserve to be
protected under all circumstances. (10)
राज्यं पालयितुं शक्यं न तीक्ष्णेन निशाचर।

न चातिप्रतिकूलेन नाविनीतेन राक्षस॥११॥

“No state can be ruled by a king who
is severe, nor by him who is most adversely
disposed to the people, nor again by him
