* BALAKANDA +

in jars full of ghee. After a considerable
period of time all attained maturity. (18)
अथ दीर्घेण कालेन रूपयौवनशालिन:।
षष्टि पुत्रसहस्राणि सगरस्याभवंस्तदा॥१९॥
“Then after a long time sixty thousand
sons endowed with comeliness and youthful
vigour now stood by the side of King Sagara.
(19)
स च ज्येष्ठो नरश्रेष्ठं सगरस्यात्मसम्भव:।
बालान् गृहीत्वा तु जले सरय्वा रघुनन्दन॥ २०॥
प्रक्षिप्य प्राहसन्नित्यं मज्जतस्तान् निरीक्ष्य वै।
एवं पापसमाचार: सज्जनप्रतिबाधक:॥ २१॥
पौराणामहिते युक्त: पित्रा निर्वासित: पुरात्।
तस्य VASA नाम असमञ्जस्य वीर्यवान्॥ २२॥
सम्मत: सर्वलोकस्य सर्वस्यापि freee: |
तत: कालेन महता मति: समभिजायत।
सगरस्य wets यजेयमिति निश्चिता॥ २३॥
स कृत्वा निश्चयं राजा सोपाध्यायगणस्तदा।
यज्ञकर्मणि वेदज्ञो यष्टुं समुपचक्रमे॥ २४॥

177

“The aforesaid eldest son of Sagara,
however, O jewel among men, actually caught
hold of infants, O scion of Raghu, everyday
and, throwing them into the waters of the
Sarayu, openly and heartily laughed to see
them drowning. Thus given to sinful conduct
and tormenting pious men and intent on
doing harm to the citizens, the youth was
exiled by his father from the capital. The
valiant son of the aforesaid Asamafia,
Armsuman by name, on the other hand, was
beloved of all people and spoke kindly to
all. Then after a considerable period of time
a firm resolve was made by Sagara that he
should perform a sacrifice, O jewel among
men! Having resolved upon a sacrificial
performance, the aforesaid king, who was
well-versed in the Vedas, made ready that
very moment to undertake च sacrifice
alongwith the help of his family-priests.”

(20—24)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये बालकाण्डेऽष्टात्रिंश: सर्ग: ॥ ३८ ॥

Thus ends Canto Thirty-eight in the Balakanda of the glorious Ramayana of Valmiki,
the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

Canto XXXIX

Indra steals away the horse released by Sagara as a prelude to his
horse-sacrifice; his sixty thousand sons proceed to excavate the
earth in quest of the horse and the gods in terror apprise
Brahma of this daring of theirs

विश्वामित्रवच: श्रुत्वा कथान्ते रघुनन्दन:।
उवाच परमप्रीतो मुनिं दीप्तमिवानलम्॥१॥
Sri Rama, a scion of Raghu, felt
supremely delighted to hear the speech of
Viswamitra. At the end of the discourse he
spoke as follows, to the sage who shone as
fire : (1)
श्रोतुमिच्छामि ag ते विस्तरेण कथामिमाम्।
पूर्वजो A कथं ब्रह्मन् यज्ञं वै समुपाहरत्॥२॥

“May God bless you, | wish to hear
this story at length. How did my forefather,
King Sagara, perform the sacrifice, O holy
one?” (2)
तस्य तद् वचनं श्रुत्वा कौतूहलसमन्वित:।
विश्वामित्रस्तु काकुत्स्थमुवाच प्रहसन्निव॥ ३॥

Seized with wonder to hear that question
of Sri Rama, Viswamitra for his part replied
to the scion of Kakutstha as follows as
though laughing heartily : (3)
