# YUDDHAKANDA #

रक्षांस्यथो दुद्रुवरि समन्तात्॥४९॥

When that enemy of gods, Trisira, was
killed by Hanuman, who was endowed with
the prowess of Indra (the ruler of gods), the
monkey, Hanuman, roared in triumph, the
earth shook and the ogres took to their
heels on all sides. (49)

हतं त्रिशिरसं gear ala च महोदरम्।
हतौ Wer दुराधर्षौ देवान्तकनरान्तकौ॥५०॥
gem परमामर्षी मत्तो राक्षसपुङ्खव:।
जग्राहाचिष्मतीं att wet सर्वायसीं तदा॥५१॥
हेमपट्टपरिक्षिप्तां मांसशोणितफेनिलाम्।
विराजमानां विपुलां शत्रुशोणिततर्पिताम्॥५२॥
तेजसा सम्प्रदीप्ताग्रां रक्तमाल्यविभूषिताम्।
ऐरावतमहापद्यसार्वभौमभयावहाम् ॥ ५३ ॥

Finding Trisira killed and Mahodara
too and likewise perceiving Devantaka
and Narantaka, who were difficult to
overpower, made short work of, the highly
indignant Matta (more popularly known by
the name of Mahaparswa) a veritable bull
among the ogres, flew into a rage and
forthwith seized hold of a huge flaming
and glittering mace entirely made of iron,
though plated with gold, which was
covered with foam of flesh and blood when
used against the enemy and had been
saturated with the enemy’s blood, whose
head was inflamed with lustre, which was
decked with crimson flowers and brought
terror to Airavata, Mahapadma_ and
Sarvabhauma (three of the four elephants
supporting the four quarters). (50—53)

गदामादाय संक्रुद्धो मत्तो राक्षसपुङ्खव:।
wry समभिदुद्राव युगान्ताग्निरिव ज्वलन्॥५४॥
Seizing the mace, filled with fury, and
flaring up like the fire of universal destruction
at the end of the world cycle, Matta, a
veritable bull among the ogres, scattered
the monkeys. (54)

589

TITY: WAIT वानरो रावणानुजम्।
मत्तानीकमुपागम्य तस्थौ तस्याग्रतो बली॥५५॥
Springing up and approaching Mattanika
(Mahaparswa), a younger brother of Ravana,
the mighty monkey Rsabha stood facing
him. (55)

तं पुरस्तात् स्थितं gear वानरं पर्वतोपमम्।
आजघानोरसि क्रुद्धो WAT वज्रकल्पया॥ ५६॥
Enraged to behold that monkey, who
looked like a mountain, standing in front
of him, the ogre struck him on the chest
with his mace, which was hard as adamant.
(56)

स तयाभिहतस्तेन गदया वानरर्षभ:।
भिन्नवक्षा: समाधूत: सुस्राव vet बहु॥५७॥
Struck by him with that mace and
staggered, that bull among the monkeys,
who had his chest cleft, shed copious
blood. (57)

स सम्प्राप्य चिरात् संज्ञामृषभो वानरेश्वर:।
क्रुद्धो विस्फुरमाणौष्ठो महापाश्वमुदैक्षत॥ ५८ it

Fully regaining consciousness after a
long time, Rsabha, the monkey-chief, cast
a glance at Mahaparswa, enraged as he
was, his lips quivering with rage. (58)
a वेगवान् वेगवदभ्युपेत्य

तं राक्षसं AAS: |
संवर्त्य मुष्टिं सहसा जघान
बाह्वन्तरे शैलनिकाशरूप: ॥ ५९ ।।

Approaching that ogre with impetuosity
and clenching his fist, that agile leader of
monkey heroes, whose exterior presented
the appearance of a mountain, precipitately
struck him on the chest (lit. the space
between the two arms). (59)

a pay: सहसेव ga:
क्षितौ पपात क्षतजोक्षिताङ्ग:।
गदां प्रगृह्याशु तदा ननाद॥६०॥
Like a tree whose roots have been
