+ UTTARAKANDA +

1063

चतु:सप्ततितम: सर्ग:
Canto LXXIV

Narada told Sri Rama the cause of the death of Brahmana’s son
as an unauthorized practice of penance by a Sudra

तथा q went aca द्विजस्य परिदेवनम्।
शुश्राव Wea: Ud दु:खशोकसमन्वितम्॥१॥
The scion of the Raghus, Sri Rama,
heard all the pitiful lamentations of that
Brahmana, full of pain and sorrow. (1)
स Gat च daa मन्तिणस्तानुपाह्वयत्।
वसिष्ठं वामदेवं च भ्रातॄंश्च सह नैगमान्॥२॥
Inflicted by pain He, Sri Rama, called
His councillors, Vasistha and Vamadeva
and also his brothers, together with the
citizens. (2)
ad fast वसिष्ठेन सार्धमष्टौ प्रवेशिता:।
Tat देवसंकाशं वर्धस्वेति ततोऽब्रुवन्॥३॥
Then eight Brahmanas together with
Vasistha were made to appear before the
King comparable with the gods, and they
said ‘victory to you.’ (3)
मार्कण्डेयोऽथ मौद्गल्यो वामदेवश्च काश्यप:।
कात्यायनोऽथ जाबालिर्गौतमो नारदस्तथा॥४॥
Markandeya, Maudgalya, Vamadeva,
Kasyapa, Katyayana, Jabali, Gautama and
Narada were made to enter. (4)
ud द्विजर्षभा: ad आसनेषूपवेशिता:।
महर्षीन् समनुप्राप्तानभिवाद्य कृताञ्जलि:॥५॥
मन्त्रिणो नैगमाश्चैव यथार्हमनुकूलत:।
तेषां समुपविष्टानां सर्वेषां दीप्ततेजसाम्॥६॥
waa: सर्वमाचष्टे द्विजोऽयमुपरोधते।
Wea We वचनं श्रुत्वा राज्ञो दीनस्य ANG: ७॥
प्रत्युवाच शुभं वाक्यमृषीणां संनिधौ स्वयम्।
श्रृणु राजन् यथाकाले प्राप्तो बालस्य संक्षय: ॥ ८॥
श्रुत्वा कर्तव्यतां राजन् कुरुष्व रघुनन्दन।
पुरा कृतयुगे UW ब्राह्मणा वै तपस्विन:॥९॥
अब्राह्मणस्तदा राजन् न तपस्वी कथंचन।
तस्मिन् युगे प्रज्वलिते ब्रह्मभूते Aad gol

These excellent Brahmanas were all

provided with seats. The councillors and
citizens all were suitably seated after all
those effulgent ones had taken their seats.
The descendant of Raghu, Sri Rama, having
saluted the great sages with folded hands,
conveyed to them: ‘This Brahmana obstructs
the royal gate. Narada hearing those words
of the King in grief, replied with these
opportune words in the presence of the
sages; ‘Listen, O King, how the death of
child has taken place untimely. Hearing what
| say, O king, descendant of Raghu, do
what requires to be done. In the Krtayuga
formerly the Brahmanas alone were
performers of austerities; no non-Brahmanas
ever practised austerities in that Yuga,
inflamed by penances, and dominated by
Brahmana, and also there was no prevalence
of ignorance. All were born immortal ones
and also possessed of distant vision; then
came the Tretayuga for men possessed of
mortal frame. (5—10).

अमृत्यवस्तदा wd जज्ञिरे दीर्घदर्शिन:।
ततस्त्रेतायुगं AT मानवानां वपुष्मताम्॥११॥

क्षत्रिया यत्र जायन्ते पूर्वेण तपसान्विता:।
वीर्येण तपसा चैव तेऽधिका: पूर्वजन्मनि॥१२॥
‘In Treta, strongly built Ksatriyas were
dominant and practised austere penance.
But those of Krtayuga were certainly superior
in merit to those who belonged to Treta
(11-12)

मानवा ये महात्मानस्तत्र त्रेतायुगे युगे।
ब्रह्म क्षत्रं च ad Aa यत् पूर्वमवरं च ALU esl

युगयोरुभयोरासीत् समवीर्यसमन्वितम्।
अपश्यन्तस्तु ते सर्वे विशेषमधिकं तत:॥१४॥

‘In Krtayuga Brahmanas were superior
and Ksatriyas were inferior in the merits of
