176

न देवगन्धर्वभुजङ्गराक्षसा
भवन्ति रामेण समा हि संयुगे॥ ६५ ॥

“The heroic achievements of that
exalted soul, capable of crushing the enemy
in combat, have been heard of, nay, actually
witnessed by me. Not even gods,
Gandharvas, Nagas and ogres combined
can in fact be a match for Sri Rama on the
field of battle. (65)

महाबलं वासवतुल्यविक्रमम्।
सलक्ष्मणं को विषहेत weed
हुताशनं दीप्तमिवानिलेरितम्॥ ६६॥

“Who, having vividly perceived Sr
Rama, a scion of Raghu, who is endowed
with extraordinary might and is equal in
prowess to Indra, the ruler of gods,
accompanied by Laksmana and armed with
a bright bow and as such resembling a fire
fanned by a blast and burst into flames,
would dare withstand him? (66)

« VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

सलक्ष्मणं राघवमाजिमर्दनं
दिशागजं मत्तमिव व्यवस्थितम्।
सहेत को वानरमुख्य संयुगे
युगान्तसूर्यप्रतिमं शरार्चिषम्॥६७॥

“Who can, O jewel among monkeys,
resist Sri Rama, a scion of Raghu, capable
of crushing the enemy in combat, and firmly
stationed on the field of battle like an elephant
guarding a quarter in rut and resembling the
sun at the end of creation with the arrows
as its rays? (67)
स मे कपिश्रेष्ठ सलक्ष्मणं प्रियं

सयूथपं क्षिप्रमिहोपपादय।
चिराय रामं प्रति शोककर्शितां
कुरुष्व मां वानरवीर हर्षिताम्॥ ६८ ॥

“Therefore, O jewel among monkeys,
bring here with all speed my beloved lord
alongwith Laksmana and the leaders of
monkey hordes. Bring joy to me, O gallant
monkey, emaciated as | am through grief for
long on account of Sri Rama.” (68)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये सुन्दरकाण्डे सप्तत्रिंश: सर्ग: ॥ 30 Il

Thus ends Canto Thirty-seven of the Sundarakanda in the glorious Ramayana of
Valmiki, the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

Canto XXXVIII

Asked by Hanuman for a token, Sita narrates the episode of a crow,
which occurred on the Citrakuta mountain, and asks Hanuman to
repeat the story to Sri Rama by way of a token. She further sends
her greetings both to न Rama and Laksmana, conveys her
inquiry after their welfare and communicates to them her
resolve to survive only for a month after the expiry of the
time-limit prescribed by Ravana; and last of all, she
hands over to him her jewel for the head as a token

da: स कपिशार्दूलस्तेन वाक्येन तोषित:।
सीतामुवाच तच्छुत्वा वाक्यं वाक्यविशारद:॥ १॥

Hearing the foregoing reply, that tiger

among monkeys, who was gratified by the
aforesaid plea, and was a past-master in
expression, thereupon submitted to Sita as
follows : (1)
