798

fathomless ocean in the form of Rama,
which is infested with alligators in the form
of his bow, whose bottom contains mire in
the form of the might of his arms, which is
rough with waves in the form of arrows and
which contains waters in the form of a
fierce battle. (48)

Wate लङ्केश्वर राक्षसेन्द्र

लङ्कां प्रसन्नो भव साधु गच्छ।
त्वं स्वेषु दारेषु रमस्व नित्यं

TH: सभार्यो Tat वनेषु॥४९॥

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

“Be pleased, O lord of Lanka and ruler
of ogres ! Remain gratified and return safely
to Lanka. Always revel in the midst of your
own wives and let Rama revel with his own
wife in the woods.” (49)

एवमुक्तो दशग्रीवो मारीचेन स रावण:।

न्यवर्तत पुरीं लङ्कां विवेश च गृहोत्तमम्॥५०॥
Exhorted thus by Marica, Ravana, that

ten-headed monster, returned to the city of

Lanka and entered his excellent abode.
(50)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्येऽरण्यकाण्डे एकत्रिंश: FW: ॥ 32 ॥

Thus ends Canto Thirty-one in the Aranyakanda of the glorious Ramayana
of Valmiki, the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

Canto XXXII
Sirpanakha approaches Ravana in Lanka

ad: शूर्पणखा gear सहस्राणि चतुर्दश।
हतान्येकेन रामेण रक्षसां भीमकर्मणाम्॥१॥
wt aw da at त्रिशिरसं रणे।
geet पुनर्महानादान् ननाद जलदोपमा॥ २॥
Then, seeing fourteen thousand ogres
of terrible deeds killed by Rama single-
handed and also perceiving Dusana, Khara
and Trisira too killed in battle, SUrpanakha
uttered loud roars like a cloud. (1-2)

सा दृष्टवा कर्म रामस्य कृतमन्यै: सुदुष्करम्।
जगाम wage लङ्कां रावणपालिताम्॥ ३॥

Extremely perturbed to perceive the
feat of Sri Rama, hard to accomplish for
others, she proceeded to Lanka protected
by Ravana. (3)
सा ददर्शं विमानाग्रे रावणं दीप्ततेजसम्।
उपोपविष्टं सचिवैर्मरुद्भिरिव वासवम्॥४॥

She beheld Ravana of dazzling glory

sitting on the top of his seven-storeyed
palace, surrounded by his ministers as Indra

by the wind-gods.

आसीनं सूर्यसंकाशे काञ्चने परमासने।

रुक्मवेदिगतं wed ज्वलन्तमिव पावकम्॥५॥
He was seated on highly excellent

golden throne, shining brightly as the sun

and looked like a fire fed with abundant
ghee and burning on a golden altar. (5)

देवगन्धर्वभूतानामृषीणां च महात्मनाम्।
अजेयं समरे घोरं व्यात्ताननमिवान्तकम्॥६॥

He was unconquerable in battle by
gods, Gandharvas, genii and high-souled
Rsis and looked fierce like Death with mouth
wide open. (6)

देवासुरविमर्देषु वज्राशनिकृतव्रणम्।
ऐरावतविषाणाग्रैरुत्कृष्टकिणवक्षसम् ॥ ७॥

He bore on his person scars of
wounds caused by the thunderbolt and
lightning in the course of conflicts between
the gods and the demons and his chest
was marked with callosities resulting

(4)
