754

to perceive the nonchalance of those horses
on that occasion, Ravana they say,
discharged a further shower of shafts as
also maces as well as iron clubs, discuses
and mallets, mountain peaks and trees as
well as pikes and axes. He, however, let fall
this rain of weapons as a creation of magic.
Unwearied at heart as well as in effort, he
discharged more arrows in thousands on
that occasion. (15—18)
aq वर्षमभवद् युद्धे नैकशस्त्रमयं महत्॥१९॥
विमुच्य राघवरथं समन्ताद् वानरे बले।
सायकैरन्तरिक्षॆ च चकार सुनिरन्तरम्॥२०॥
मुमोच च दशग्रीवो नि:सङ्घेनान्तरात्मना।
व्यायच्छमानं तं दृष्टवा तत्परं रावणं रणे॥ २१॥
प्रहसन्निव काकुत्स्थ: संदधे निशितान् शरान्।
स मुमोच ततो बाणान् शतशोऽथ ASST: WRU
Leaving alone the chariot of Sri Rama
(a scion of Raghu), that tumultuous, alarming,
fearful and great shower of numerous
weapons, which was attended with a terrible
echo, descended on the simian army on all
sides on the battlefield. Nay, Ravana, the
ten-headed monster, shot arrows with a
mind which had given up all hope of survival,
and wholly covered the space. Seeing the
notorious Ravana putting forth great effort in
the struggle, the celebrated Sri Rama (a
scion of Kakutstha) thereupon put whetted
shafts to his bow as though laughing and
then shot them in hundreds and thousands.
(19—22)
तान् दृष्टवा रावणश्चक्रे स्वशरै: खं निरन्तरम्।
ताभ्यां नियुक्तेन तदा शरवर्षेण भास्वता॥ २३॥
शरबद्धमिवाभाति द्वितीयं भास्वदम्बरम्।
नानिमित्तोऽभवद् बाणो नानिर्भेत्ता न निष्फल: ॥ २४॥
Seeing those arrows, Ravana
completely covered the sky with his own.

Due to that dazzling shower of shafts
discharged by the two contending warriors

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA +

at that time, the shining space looked like a
second heaven raised with a network of
arrows. No arrow (discharged by them)
failed to reach the mark; there was not one
which failed to pierce its target and not one
which was discharged in vain. (23-24)

अन्योन्यमभिसंहत्य निपेतुर्धरणीतले।
तथा विसृजतोर्बाणान् रामरावणयोर्मृधे॥ २५॥
प्रायुध्येतामविच्छिन्नमस्यन्तौ सव्यदक्षिणम्।
चक्रतुश्च शरैर्घोरैर्निरुच्छ्वासमिवाम्बरम्॥ २६॥

Colliding with one another, the arrows
of Sri Rama and Ravana, who were shooting
them on the battlefield, as aforesaid, fell to
the ground. Discharging arrows to their right
and left, the two warriors fought vehemently
without interruption and covered the sky
with their formidable arrows so as not to
leave even breathing space between them,
as it were. (25-26)
रावणस्य हयान् रामो हयान् रामस्य रावण:।
जघ्नतुस्तौ तदान्योन्यं कृतानुकृतकारिणौ॥ २७॥

Exchanging blow for blow, the two
warriors struck each other on that occasion,
Sri Rama hitting the steeds of Ravana and
the latter those of Sri Rama. (27)
एवं तु तौ सुसंक्रुद्धौ चक्रतुर्युद्धमुत्तमम्।
मुहूर्तमभवद् युद्धं तुमुलं रोमहर्षणम्॥२८॥

Extremely enraged, the two warriors
for their part thus carried on a keen contest.
For an hour or so, there raged a fierce

struggle which caused one’s hair to stand
on end. (28)

at तथा युध्यमानौ तु समरे रामरावणौ।
aa: सर्वभूतानि विस्मितेनान्तरात्मना॥ २९॥
All created beings present there for
their part gazed with an astonished mind on
the said Sri Rama and Ravana, fighting as
aforesaid on the battlefield. (29)
अर्दयन्तौ तु समरे तयोस्तौ स्यन्दनोत्तमौ।
परस्परमभिक्रुद्धौ परस्परमभिद्रुतौ ।। ३० I
