* SUNDARAKANDA +

‘Or, | think on account of the great
speed assumed by Ravana and under the
pressure of his arms that large-eyed noble
lady yielded up her life. (9)
उपर्युपरि सा नूनं सागरं क्रमतस्तदा।
विचेष्टमाना पतिता समुद्रे जनकात्मजा॥१०॥

‘Surely, while wriggling in her attempt
to extricate herself from the grip of Ravana,
as he was flying over the sea, that daughter
of Janaka dropped into the sea. (10)

आहो क्षुद्रेण चानेन रक्षन्ती शीलमात्मन:।
अबन्धुर्भक्षिता सीता रावणेन तपस्विनी॥११॥

‘Or, may be, poor unbefriended Sita
was, while guarding her chastity, devoured
by this mean Ravana himself. (11)

अथवा राक्षसेन्द्रस्य पत्नीभिरसितेक्षणा।

अदुष्टा दुष्टभावाभिर्भक्षिता सा भविष्यति॥ १२॥

‘Or, that dark-eyed innocent lady might
have been eaten up by the wives of Ravana,
the ruler of ogres, who were actuated by
vile motives. (12)

सम्पूर्णचन्द्रप्रतिमं पद्मपत्रनिभेक्षणम्।
रामस्य ध्यायती वक्त्रं पञ्चत्वं कृपणा Wari १३॥
‘The pitiable lady met with her death
contemplating on the countenance of Sri
Rama, resembling the full moon, with lotus-
like eyes. (13)
हा Wa लक्ष्मणेत्येवं हायोध्ये चेति मैथिली।
विलप्य ag वैदेही न्यस्तदेहा भविष्यति॥ १४॥
‘Sita, a princess of Mithila, who claimed
her descent from the Videha kings, must have
cast off her body wailing a lot and crying
‘O Rama ! O Laksmana !! O Ayodhya !!!’ (14)
अथवा निहिता wet रावणस्य निवेशने।
भृशं लालप्यते बाला पञ्जरस्थेव सारिका॥ १५॥
‘Or, having been lodged in the abode of
Ravana, the youthful lady is repeatedly
wailing like a caged mina. (15)
जनकस्य Hot जाता रामपत्नी सुमध्यमा।
कथमुत्पलपत्राक्षी रावणस्य वशं व्रजेत्॥१६॥

87

‘How can the slender-waisted consort
of Sri Rama, born in the line of Janaka and
having eyes resembling the petals of a lotus,
submit to the will of Ravana? (16)

विनष्टा वा प्रणष्टा वा मृता वा जनकात्मजा।
रामस्य प्रियभार्यस्य न निवेदयितुं क्षमम्॥१७॥

‘But whether Sita is living unseen
anywhere or has perished by falling into the
sea or has died due to her inability to bear
separation from her lord, the news would
not bear transmission to Sri Rama, who is
fond of his wife. (17)

निवेद्यमाने दोष: स्याद् दोष: स्यादनिवेदने।
कथं नु खलु कर्तव्यं विषमं प्रतिभाति मे॥ १८ ॥

‘A catastrophe in the shape of loss of
Sri Rama’s life may follow if the matter is
reported to Sri Rama and an offence will be
committed by me in the shape of disloyalty
to Sri Rama in the event of my not reporting
the matter to him. How, | wonder, should |
act? Both the courses appear difficult to
me.’ (18)
अस्मिन्नेवंगते कार्ये प्राप्तकालं क्षमं च किम्।
भवेदिति मतिं भूयो हनुमान् प्रविचारयन्॥१९॥

Hanuman now fell seriously on revolving
once more the problem as to what would be
opportune and advisable when the question

as to what should be done has become so
knotty. (19)

यदि सीतामदृष्ट्वाहं वानरेन्द्रपुरीमित:।
गमिष्यामि तत: को मे पुरुषार्थो भविष्यति॥ २०॥

He said to himself: ‘If | return to
Kiskindha, the capital of the ruler of monkeys,
from this place without finding out Sita, of
what avail will my exertion prove to be? (20)
ममेदं wag व्यर्थं सागरस्य भविष्यति।
प्रवेशश्चैव लंकायां राक्षसानां च दर्शनम्॥ २१॥

‘My leaping across the sea in this way,
as well as my entry into Lanka and my

survey of the ogres will come to nought.
(21)
