694

“Departed, as permitted by the
exceptionally high-souled Sri Rama, | am
returning to Ayodhya itself taking the blessed
pair of sandals with me.” (14)

एतच्छुत्वा शुभं वाक्यं भरतस्य महात्मन:।
Wet: शुभतरं मुनिर्वाक्यमुदाहरत्॥ १५॥

Hearing this happy report of the high-
souled Bharata, Sage Bharadwaja made
the following reply, which was still more
agreeable to hear : (15)
नैतच्चित्रं नरव्याघ्रे शीलवृत्तविदां वरे।
यदार्यं त्वयि तिष्ठेत्तु निम्नोत्सृष्टमिवोदकम्॥१६॥

“It is no wonder that, even as water
discharged from above collects into a
depression, noble conduct for its part should
find its place in you, a tiger among men and
the foremost of those who know how to
behave well and conduct themselves with
propriety. (16)

अनृण: A महाबाहु: पिता `दशरथस्तव |
यस्य त्वमीदृश: पुत्रो धर्मात्मा धर्मवत्सल:॥ १७॥
“Free from all debt is your mighty-
armed father, the celebrated Dasaratha, of
whom was born such a pious son as you,
fondly devoted to virtue.” (17)
तमृषिं तु महाप्राज्ञमुक्तवाक्यं कृताञ्जलि:।
आमन्त्रयितुमारभे चरणावुपगृह्य च॥१८॥
Bharata for his part stood with folded
hands before the highly wise Rsi, Sage
Bharadwaja, who had spoken as above,
and clasping his feet, proceeded to take
leave of him. (18)

aa: प्रदक्षिणं peat भरद्वाजं पुन: पुन:।
भरतस्तु ययौ श्रीमानयोध्यां सह मन्त्रिभि:।॥१९॥

Going clockwise round Bharadwaja as
a mark of respect, again and again, the

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

glorious Bharata for his part then left for
Ayodhya alongwith his counsellors. (19)

यानैश्च शकटैश्चैव हयैर्नागैश्च सा चमू:।
Uta विस्तीर्णा भरतस्यानुयायिनी॥ २०॥

That large army following Bharata
returned along the same route on chariots
and bullock-carts as well as on horseback
and on the back of elephants. (20)
ददृशुस्तां UA: Wa Tet शिवजलां नदीम्॥ २१॥

Having crossed the divine river,
Yamuna, adorned with a succession of
waves, they all then beheld once more the
river Ganga, containing holy waters. (21)
तां रम्यजलसम्पूर्णां संतीर्य सहबान्धव:।
yet wa प्रविवेश ससैनिक:॥२२॥

Having easily crossed with his kinsfolk
the aforesaid river, which was brimful with
delightful waters, Bharata, with his army
men, duly entered the lovely town of
Srngaverapura. (22)

शृङ्गवेरपुराद् YI अयोध्यां संददर्शं ह।
अयोध्यां तु तदा दृष्टवा पित्रा भ्रात्रा विवर्जिताम्॥ २३॥
भरतो Gada: सारथिं चेदमब्रवीत्।
सारथे पश्य विध्वस्ता अयोध्या न प्रकाशते॥ २४॥
निराकारा निरानन्दा दीना प्रतिहतस्वना॥ २५॥

Proceeding from Srngaverapura he
vividly saw Ayodhya once more: so the
tradition goes. Seeing Ayodhya deserted by
his father and elder brother, Sri Rama,
Bharata for his part felt sore stricken with
agony at that moment and spoke as follows
to the charioteer Sumantra: “Look, O
charioteer ! Desolate and shorn of its grace,
bereft of joy, wretched and lifeless, Ayodhya
does not look bright as before.”

(23—25)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्येऽयोध्याकाण्डे त्रयोदशाधिकशततम: Wr: ॥ 223 I

Thus ends Canto One hundred and thirteen in the Ayodhyakanda of the glorious
Ramayana of Valmiki, the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

