* AYODHYAKANDA +

उवाच च तदा रामस्तं गार्ग्यमभिसान्त्वयन्।
मन्युर्न खलु कर्तव्य: परिहासो ह्ययं मम॥४०॥

Nay, consoling the said scion of Garga
in everyway, Sri Rama then said to him,
“No offence should be taken by you, since
this was only a jest indulged in by me. (40)

इदं fe तेजस्तव यद् दुरत्ययं
dea जिज्ञासितुमिच्छता मया।
इमं भवानर्थमभिप्रचोदितो
वृणीष्व किंचेदपरं व्यवस्यसि॥ ४१॥

“You were requested by me to undergo
this trial wishing, as | did, precisely to test
this remarkable strength of yours, which is
really hard to excel. If you desire anything
else, please ask for it. (41)

त्रवीमि सत्येन न ते स्म यन्त्रणां
धनं हि यद्यन्मम विप्रकारणात्।
भवत्सु सम्यक्प्रतिपादनेन
मयार्जितं चैव यशस्करं भवेत्॥४२॥

“| tell you the truth: let there be no
hesitation on your part; for whatever wealth
belongs to me has been earned by me for
the sake of Brahmanas alone. Nay, through
bestowal on you (Brahmanas) according to
the scriptural ordinance it will bring me
renown.” (42)
ad: सभार्यस्त्रिजटो महामुनि-

र्गवामनीकं प्रतिगृह्य मोदित:।

417

यशोबलप्रीतिसुखोपबृंहिणी-
स्तदाशिष: प्रत्यवदन्महात्मन:॥४३॥
Taking the herd of cows bestowed
upon him by Sri Rama the great ascetic,
Trijata, who felt rejoiced with his wife,
thereupon pronounced on Sri Rama (the
magnanimous prince) at that time blessings
calculated to enhance his reputation, strength,
delight and happiness. (43)

स चापि wa: प्रतिपूर्णपौरुषो
महाधनं धर्मबलैरुपार्जितम्।
नियोजयामास सुहृज्जने चिराद्
यथार्हसम्मानवच: प्रचोदित: ॥४४॥

Encouraged by words expressive of
highest regard befitting his rank, the illustrious
Sri Rama too, who was endowed with perfect
valour, portioned out to his near and dear
ones in no time his enormous wealth earned

through righteous might. (44)
द्विज: सुहृद् भृत्यजनोऽथवा तदा
दरिद्रभिक्षाचरणश्च यो भवेत्।
न तत्र wat aya तर्पितो
यथार्हसम्माननदानसम्भ्रमै; ॥४५॥

At that time in Ayodhya there was no
Brahmana, relation, dependant or pauper
who was living on alms, who was not
gratified with honour, gifts and attentions
conformable to his deserts. (45)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्येऽयोध्याकाण्डे
द्वात्रिंश: सर्ग: ॥ ३२ Il
Thus ends Canto Thirty-two in the Ayodhyakanda of the glorious Ramayana of
Valmiki, the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

