* SUNDARAKANDA +

a fe मे समय: सौम्य प्राप्तोऽद्य तव दर्शनात्।
स्वयम्भूविहित: सत्यो न तस्यास्ति व्यतिक्रम: ॥ ४८ UI

“From your sight, 0 gentle one, it is
concluded by me that the aforesaid time
has now come. The fact has been ordained
by Brahma, the self-born creator, and no
reversal of it is possible. (48)

सीतानिमित्तं राज्ञस्तु रावणस्य दुरात्मन:।
रक्षसां चैव सर्वेषां विनाश: समुपागत:॥४९॥
“The time of destruction of King Ravana
of perverted mind as well as of all the ogres
has duly arrived on account of the abduction
of Sita. (49)
aq प्रविश्य afters पुरीं रावणपालिताम्।
विधत्स्व सर्वकार्याणि यानि यानीह वाञ्छसि॥ ७५० UI

“Therefore, penetrating deep into this

53

city protected by Ravana, accomplish all
objects whichever you seek to accomplish.
(50)
प्रविश्य शापोपहतां हरीश्वर

पुरीं शुभां राक्षसमुख्यपालिताम्।
विमार्गं सर्वत्र गतो यथासुखम्॥ ५१॥
“Entering deep into the charming city
protected by Ravana (the foremost of ogres),
which has been consigned to destruction by
an imprecation (uttered by Nandikeswara,
the divine bull, who carries Lord Siva on his
back and remains posted at the entrance of
His Abode), O lord of monkeys, and, having
easily found access to every place, carefully
look at will for the virtuous daughter of
Janaka.” (51)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये सुन्दरकाण्डे तृतीय: AA: ॥ 3 ॥

Thus ends Canto Three in the Sundarakanda of the glorious Ramayana of Valmiki,
the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

ade: सर्ग:
Canto IV

Entering Lanka and hearing the music of various instruments being played
upon inside, and also observing the enemy’s forces armed with various
weapons, Hanuman finds his way into the royal gynaeceum

स निर्जित्य पुरीं लंकां श्रेष्ठां at कामरूपिणीम्।
विक्रमेण महातेजा हनूमान् कपिसत्तम:॥१॥
अद्वारेण महावीर्य:र प्राकारमवपुप्लुवे।
निशि लंकां महासत्त्वो विवेश कपिकुञ्जर:॥ २॥

Having subdued by dint of his superior
prowess Lanka, the ogress presiding over
that most excellent city, able to take any
form at will, the jewel among the monkeys,
Hanuman, who was~ endowed with
extraordinary energy and great virility, leapt

over the defensive wall without passing
through the gate; and the elephant-like
monkey, endowed as he was with exceptional
courage, entered Lanka by night. (1-2)
चक्रेऽथ पादं सव्यं च शत्रूणां स तु मूर्धनि॥ ३॥

Nay, having penetrated deep into the
city of Lanka, Hanuman, who was in the
habit of doing acts of service to Sugriva, the
king of monkeys, thereby actually placed

* Works on Hindu military science recommend entry into a hostile city without passing through the

gate to ensure the overthrow of the enemy.
