« KISKINDHAKANDA +

throne in place of Sugriva, conduct the
search for Sita (the daughter of a ruler of
men) alongwith the foremost heroes among
monkeys.” (4)

।।

तमात्तबाणासनमुत्पतन्त

निवेदितार्थं रणचण्डकोपम्।
उवाच राम: परवीरहन्ता

स्ववीक्षितं सानुनयं च वाक्यम्॥ ५॥

To Laksmana, who was rushing forward

towards Kiskindha, bow in hand, nay, who
had made known to Sri Rama, his purpose
of sallying forth to Kiskindha and manifested
wild anger as a precursor of fight, Sr’ Rama,
the destroyer of hostile warriors, gave the
following reply, which was well thought out
and full of civility : (5)

नहि a wafget लोके पापमेवं समाचरेत्।
कोपमार्येण यो हन्ति स वीर: पुरुषोत्तम:॥६॥

“Surely no one like you, who knows
what is right, will ever knowingly perpetrate
such a sin as indulging in the very thought
of killing a friend. He who kills his anger
through right judgment is a hero and the
foremost of men. (6)
नेदमत्र त्वया Wel साधुव्त्तेन लक्ष्मण।
at प्रीतिमनुवर्तस्व udat च संगतम्॥७॥

“No such idea should be entertained
on this occasion by you, O Laksmana, a
man of pious conduct as you are. Pursue
the former love that existed between us and

Sugriva and recollect what happened in the
past and also our friendship. (7)

सामोपहितया वाचा रूक्षाणि परिवर्जयन्।
वक्तुमर्हसि सुग्रीवं व्यतीतं कालपर्यये॥८॥

“Avoiding harsh words, you ought to
speak to Sugriva, who stands guilty of delay,
in a conciliatory language, reminding him of
the time that has already elapsed.” (8)

सोऽग्रजेनानुशिष्टार्थो यथावत् पुरुषर्षभ:।
प्रविवेश पुरीं वीरो लक्ष्मण: परवीरहा॥९॥

Having been duly instructed as to what

1057

should be done, Laksmana, the well-known
hero, a veritable jewel among men and the
slayer of hostile warriors, boldly proceeded
to enter the city of Kiskindha. (9)

aa: शुभमति: wat ard: प्रियहिते रत:।
लक्ष्मण: प्रतिसंरब्धो जगाम Yat HA: i oll

Thereupon the wise and pious-minded
Laksmana—who was intent on doing what is
pleasing and what is conducive to the good
of his eldest brother, and was feeling
indignant—made for the palace of the monkey
chief. (10)
शक्रबाणासनप्रख्यं धनु: कालान्तकोपमम्।
प्रगृह्य गिरिशृङ्गाभं wer: सानुमानिव॥११॥

“Bearing as he did his bow, shining
brightly like the rainbow (the bow of Indra),
nay, dreadful as the all-destroying, Time-Spirit
and the god of death (the destroyer of the
world) and resembling a mountain-peak, he
stood like the Mandara mountain. (11)

यथोक्कतकारी वचनमुत्तरं चैव सोत्तरम्।
बृहस्पतिसमो बुद्ध्या मत्वा रामानुजस्तदा॥ १२॥
कामक्रोधसमुत्थेन भ्रातु: क्रोधाग्निना ad: |
प्रभञ्जन sala: Waal लक्ष्मणस्तत:॥१३॥
सालतालाश्वकर्णांश्च तरसा पातयन् बलात्।
wer गिरिकूटानि द्रुमानन्यांश्च वेगित:॥ १४॥

Revolving in his mind what he had
got to say to Sugriva as well as the reply
he expected from the latter alongwith his
own contemplated rejoinder, Laksmana, a
younger brother of Sri Rama—who was
wont to do as he was told by Sri Rama,
who vied with Sage Brhaspati, the preceptor
of gods, in intelligence, nay, who was
encompassed by the fire of wrath sprung
from the longing in his brothers heart (for
getting a search for Sita initiated) and its
frustration and displeased with Sugriva—
then rushed from that place like a tempest,
uprooting with his might sal, palmyra and
Aswakarna as well as other trees, throwing
down mountain-peaks, full of impetuosity as
he was. (12—14)
