* SUNDARAKANDA +

“Tell us if you are a messenger of the
god of riches, Kubera, (a son of Sage
ViSrava), Yama (the god of retribution) or
Varuna (the god of water) and have deeply
penetrated into this city of ours, having
assumed the disguise of a spy. (9)

विष्णुना प्रेषितो वापि दूतो विजयकाङ्क्षिणा।
नहि a वानरं तेजो रूपमात्रं तु वानरम्॥१०॥

“Or, tell me if you are an envoy
dispatched by Visnu, who is longing for
conquest. Surely your prowess is not like
that of a monkey; your form alone, for that
matter, is that of a monkey. (10)

aad: कथयस्वाद्य ततो वानर मोक्ष्यसे।

अनृतं वदतश्चापि दुर्लभं तव जीवितम्॥११॥
“Correctly communicate this today. Then

you shall be set free, O monkey! On the

other hand, it will be difficult for you to
survive if you tell a lie. (11)

अथवा यन्निमित्तस्ते प्रवेशो रावणालये।
एवमुक्तो हरिवरस्तदा रक्षोगणेश्वरम्॥१२॥

अब्रवीन्नास्मि शक्रस्य यमस्य वरुणस्य च।
धनदेन न मे सख्यं विष्णुना नास्मि चोदित: ।। १३॥

“Or, simply let us know the motive of
your penetrating deep into the abode of
Ravana.” Interrogated in the foregoing
words on that occasion, Hanuman, the
foremost of monkeys, submitted as follows
to Ravana, the lord of ogre hordes: “Il am
neither a messenger of Indra (the ruler of
gods) nor of Yama, nor of Varuna, nor does
my friendship exist with Kubera (the bestower
of riches) nor have | been dispatched by
Visnu. (12-13)

wiara मम त्वेषा वानरोऽहमिहागत:।
दर्शने राक्षसेन्द्रस्य तदिदं दुर्लभं मया॥१४॥

221

at राक्षसराजस्य दर्शनार्थं विनाशितम्।
ततस्ते राक्षसा: प्राप्ता बलिनो युद्धकाङ्क्षिण: ॥ १५ ॥
रक्षणार्थं च देहस्य प्रतियुद्धा मया रणे।
अस्त्रपाशैर्न शबक्योऽहं Seg देवासुरैरपि॥ ee i

“ am a monkey by my very birth and

as a monkey alone have | come here for a
sight of the king of ogres. Nay, this well-
known and rare grove of the king of ogres
has been laid waste by me merely for the
sake of obtaining a sight of Ravana, the
king of ogres. Thereupon came those mighty
ogres longing for an encounter, and in self-
defence they were met by me on the field of
battle. | am incapable of being bound with
missiles and nooses by gods and demons.
(14—16)

पितामहादेष att ममापि fe समागत:।
राजानं द्रष्टुकामेन मयास्त्रमनुवर्तितम्॥१७॥

“A boon to this effect has actually been
won even by me from Brahma (the progenitor
even of the lords of creation). The missile
was respected by me only because | longed
to see the king. (17)

विमुक्तोऽप्यहमस्त्रेण राक्षसैस्त्वभिवेदित:।
केनचिद्रामकार्येण आगतोऽस्मि तवान्तिकम्॥ १८ ॥

“Though completely set free by the
missile, | have been brought and announced
to you as if | were still bound with the
missile. Spurred on by some mission of Sri
Rama, have | sought your presence. (18)

दूतोऽहमिति fasta राघवस्यामितौजस:।
श्रूयतामेव वचनं an पथ्यमिदं प्रभो॥१९॥

“Recognizing the fact that | am an
envoy of Sri Rama, who is endowed with
limitless energy, let this salutary advice of
mine be definitely listened to, O lord! (19)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये सुन्दरकाण्डे TART: सर्ग: ॥ ५० ॥

Thus ends Canto Fifty of the Sundarakanda in the glorious Ramayana of Valmiki, the
work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

