* AYODHYAKANDA +

नाशुक्लवासास्तत्रासीत् क्षुधितो ACTA ST वा।
रजसा ध्वस्तकेशो वा नर: कश्चिददृश्यत॥ ६६॥

No one in that area was clad in soiled
attire, hungry or even untidy. Nor was
any man seen with his hair soiled with dust.

(66)
आजैश्चापि च वाराहैर्निष्ठानवरसंचयै:।
फलंनिर्यूहससिद्धै सूपैग्न्धिरसाग्वितै TRACE
agufiterarera नरा लौही: सहस्रश:॥६८॥

Struck with wonder people beheld there
placed all round, in thousands, gold vessels
decorated with floral flags and filled with
excellent seasoned articles of food prepared
from bulbs known by the name of Varahi,
flavoured with Ptychotis ajowan, and well
boiled in the decoction of fruits; as well as
with flavoursome boiled pulses and spotless
white boiled rice. (67-68)

ayqaragy AUT: पायसकर्दमा:।
ताश्च कामदुघा गावो द्रुमाश्चासन् मधुच्युत: ।॥। ६९॥
The wells in the precincts of the forest
around the hermitage of Bharadwaja had
their mud transformed into milk thickened
with rice and sugar; the cows in that region
were transformed into cows of plenty and
the trees dripped honey. (69)

वाप्यो मैरेयपूर्णाश्च मृष्टमांसचयैर्वृता:।
प्रतप्तपिठरैश्चापि मार्गमायूरकौक्कुटै: ॥ ७० I

The bigger wells with flights of stairs
got filled with Maireya (a kind of intoxicating
drink) and were banked with heaps of dainty
meat of deer, peacocks and fowls dressed
in intensely heated earthen vessels (perhaps
for the use of Nisadas and other low-caste
people in the army of Bharata). (70)
पात्रीणां च सहस्राणि स्थालीनां नियुतानि a
न्यर्बुदानि च पात्राणि शातकुम्भमयानि AI Il

Thousands of gold vessels containing
boiled rice, lakhs of gold cauldrons holding
seasoned articles of food and millions of

619

plates, also made of gold were to be seen
there. (71)

स्थाल्य: कुम्भ्य: करम्भ्यश्च दधिपूर्णा: सुसंस्कृता:।
यौवनस्थस्य गौरस्य कपित्थस्य सुगन्धिन:॥७२॥
Bal: पूर्णा रसालस्य ca: Att चापरे।
बभूवु: पायसस्यान्ये शर्कराणां च संचया:॥ ७३॥
There appeared clay pans, smaller
earthen vessels and big broad-mouthed clay
vessels full of curds duly spiced with dry
ginger etc., and tanks full of fragrant buttermilk
tinged yellow with saffron and prepared a
few hours back, as well as of buttermilk
flavoured with cumin seeds, others full of
white curds and still others of milk, as also
heaps of sugar. (72-73)
कल्कांश्चूर्णकषायांश्च स्नानानि विविधानि च।
ददृशुर्भाजनस्थानि तीर्थेषु सरितां नरा:॥७४॥
On the stairs for descent to the rivers
people saw kept in large pans crushed
emblic myrobalans and powdered fragrant

substances and varied articles such as
oils, hot water etc., useful for a bath. (74)

शुक्लानंशुमतश्चापि दन्तधावनसंचयान्।
शुक्लांश्चन्दनकल्कांश्च समुद्रेष्ववतिष्ठत:॥ ७५॥
दर्पणान् परिमृष्टांश्च वाससां चापि संचयान्।
पादुकोपानहँ चैव युग्मान्यत्र सहस्रश:॥७६॥
आञ्जनी: HAM कूर्चांश्छत्राणि च धनूंषि च।
मर्मत्राणानि चित्राणि शयनान्यासनानि च॥ ७७॥
प्रतिपानह्रदान् षूणांन् खरोष्ट्टगजवाजिनाम्।
अवगाह्यसुतीर्थांश्च sar सोत्पलपुष्करान्।
आकाशवर्णप्रतिमान् स्वच्छतोयान् सुखाप्लवान्॥ ७८ ॥
नीलवैदूर्यवर्णांश्च मृदून् यवससंचयान्।
निर्वापार्थं पशूनां ते ददृशुस्तत्र सर्वश:॥७९॥
They further beheld at every place in
that area bundles of fresh white twigs with
their one end crushed for being used as a
tooth-brush, as well as the paste of white
sandalwood for being used as a shampoo,
kept in round covered wooden cases,

perfectly cleaned mirrors as well as piles of
textiles, as also thousands of pairs of wooden
