54

his left foot, as it were, on the head of his
foes. (3)
प्रविष्ट: सत्त्वसम्पन्नो निशायां मारुतात्मज:।
a महापथमास्थाय मुक्तपुष्पविराजितम्॥४॥
ततस्तु तां पुरीं लंकां रम्यामभिययौ कपि:।
हसितोत्कृष्टनिनदैस्तूर्यघोषपुरस्कृतै: ॥ ५ ।।
वज्राङ्कुशनिकाशैश्च वज्रजालविभूषितै:।
गृहमेघै: पुरी रम्या बभासे द्यौरिवाम्बुदै:॥६॥
Taking the main road, which looked
bright with flowers strewn along it, now that
he had definitely made good his entry into
the city by night, the said monkey, for his
part, who was an offspring of the wind-god
and was full of courage, then headed towards
that lovely city of Lanka. The delightful city
looked charming with its excellent houses,
which resounded with exquisite peals of
laughter preceded by the sound of musical
instruments, were marked with figures of
thunderbolts and goads and adorned with
lattice—windows of diamonds, even as the
sky looks charming with clouds. (4—6)

प्रजज्वाल तदा लंका रक्षोगणगृहै: शुभे:।
सिताभ्रसदृशैश्चित्रै: पद्मस्वस्तिकसंस्थितै:।॥ ७॥
वर्थमानगृट्टैश्च।'पि सर्वत: सुविभूषितै; ।
a चित्रमाल्याभरणां कपिराजहितंकर:॥८॥
राघवार्थे चरन् श्रीमान् ददर्श च ननन्द च।
भवनाद् भवनं गच्छन् cast कपिकुञ्जर:॥९॥
विविधाकृतिरूपाणि भवनानि ततस्तत:।
शुश्राव what गीतं त्रिस्थानस्वरभूषितम्॥१०॥
Lanka shone brightly at that time with
the magnificent and wonderful mansions

belonging to the hosts of ogres, and
resembling white clouds and of designs

« VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

known by the name of Padma* and Swastika
and also of the pattern called Vardhamana,
all of which were profusely decorated on all
sides. Ranging in the interest of Sri Rama,
a scion of Raghu, Hanuman, the glorious
one, who was wont to do a good turn to
Sugriva, the ruler of monkeys, surveyed
that city decorated with wonderful wreaths
and jewels and rejoiced. Going from house
to house, the elephant-like monkey,
Hanuman, beheld on every side buildings of
various shapes and forms and _ heard
melodious songs embellished by notes of
higher, medium and lower pitches (uttered
from the three different centres viz., the
cerebrum, the throat and the heart,
respectively). (7—10)
स्त्रीणां मदनविद्धानां fefa चाप्सरसामिव।
शुश्राव काञ्चीनिनदं नूपुराणां च नि:स्वनम्॥ ११॥
सोपाननिनदांश्चापि भवनेषु महात्मनाम्।
आस्फोटितनिनादांशच श्ष्वेडितांश्च ततस्तत:॥ १२॥
He also heard the tinkling of ornaments
with tiny bells worn round the waist as well
as the jingling sound of anklets of women
stung with love, who vied with celestial
nymphs, as also the foottfalls of those going
upstairs and downstairs in the houses of
high-minded ogres, nay, the sound of clapping
of arms by way of challenge prior to or
during a wrestling bout and the roar of
heroes competing in a duel everywhere.
(11-12)

शुश्राव जपतां तत्र मन्त्रान् रक्षोगृहेषु a
स्वाध्यायनिरतांश्चैव यातुधानान् east स:॥१३॥

He actually heard there the sound of

* We read the following description of these patterns of buildings in the Samhita of Varahamihira:

चतुश्शालं age सर्वतोभद्रसंज्ञितम् | पश्चिमद्वाररहितं नन्द्यावर्ताह्नयं तु तत्।

दक्षिणद्वाररहितं

ada धनप्रदम् । प्राग्वाररहितं स्वस्तिकाख्यं पुत्रधनप्रदम्॥

“A house with four rooms (one in each quarter) with an equal number of exits is known by the name
of Sarvatobhadra. A house (with only three gates) having no opening in the west is called by the name of
Nandyavarta. A house without any opening in the south is known as Vardhaman and bestows riches (on
the owner or the occupant); while that which has no entrance in the east is called Swastika and bestows

sons and riches both.”
