1004

ये त्वङ्गदपरीवारा वानरा fe महाबला:।
a सकार्मुकमालोक्य रामं त्रस्ता: प्रदुद्रुवु:॥५॥
Alarmed to see Sri Rama with a bow,
the monkeys who followed Angada as his
bodyguard, ran helter-skelter even though
they were possessed of extraordinary might.
(5)

सा ददर्शं ततस्त्रस्तान् हरीनापततो द्रुतम्।
यूथादेव परिभ्रष्टान् मृगान् निहतयूथपान्॥६॥

Presently she saw the terror-stricken
monkeys rushing headlong like deer, the
leader of whose herd had been killed and
who had strayed from their herd. (6)

तानुवाच समासाद्य ¢:faart दु:ख्रिता सती।
रामवित्रासितान् सर्वाननुबद्धानिवेषुभि: ॥ ७॥

Duly approaching them, who were all
stricken with sorrow inspired as they were
with terror of Sri Rama, as though they
were being chased by his arrows, Tara, a
virtuous lady, who was full of sorrow herself,
admonished them as follows : (7)

वानरा राजसिंहस्य यस्य यूयं पुर:सरा:।
तं विहाय सुवित्रस्ता: Hee द्रवत दुर्गता:॥ ८ ॥
राज्यहेतो: स A MA AAT PLOT पातित:।
रामेण प्रहितैर्दूरान्मार्गणैर्दूरपातिभि: ।। ९॥

“Deserting that lion among kings whose
servants you are, O monkeys, why should
you run away in a miserable state greatly
dismayed, if, for the sake of sovereignty,
Vali, brother of Sugriva, has been caused
by his cruel brother Sugriva to be laid low
by Sri Rama with arrows hitting a remote

target and discharged from afar?” (8-9)
कपिपत्न्या वच: श्रुत्वा कपय: कामरूपिण: |
प्राप्तकालमविश्लिष्टमूचुर्वचनमङ्गनाम् ॥ १०॥

Hearing the admonition of Tara, wife of
Vali, the monkey chief, the monkeys, who
were capable of assuming any form at will,
made the following reply, which was both
unambiguous and appropriate to the occasion,
to the lady ; (10)

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

जीवपुत्रे निवर्तस्व ut रक्षस्व चाङ्गदम्।
अन्तको रामरूपेण हत्वा नयति वालिनम्॥११॥

“Go back, O mother of a surviving son,
and protect your son, Angada; having struck
down Vali, God of Death in the disguise of
Rama is bearing him away to his abode. (11)

क्षिप्तान् aay समाविध्य विपुलाश्च तथा शिला:।
act वज्रसमैर्बाणैर्वज्रेणेव निपातित:॥१२॥

“Destroying with his arrows, resembling
the lightning, the trees as well as the huge
rocks hurled by Vall, Sri Rama has struck
him down as Indra would strike down a
mountain with lightning. (12)
अस्मिन् प्लवगशार्दूले हते शक्रसमप्रभे॥१३॥

“This tiger among monkeys, whose
splendour equalled the splendour of Indra,
having been killed, the whole of this army of
monkeys has taken to flight as though
overpowered by Rama. (13)

रक्ष्यतां नगरी शूरैरङ्गदश्चाभिषिच्यताम्।
पदस्थं वालिन: पुत्रं भजिष्यन्ति प्लवंगमा:॥ १४॥
“Let the city of Kiskindha be guarded
by gallant soldiers and let Angada be installed
on the throne. All the monkeys will serve
Vali’s son when he assumes office. (14)

अथवारुचितं write a रुचिरानने।
आविशन्ति च दुर्गाणि क्षिप्रमद्यैव AMT: kk Il

“Your continuance here (in Kiskindha),
however, is not to our liking, O lady with a
charming countenance; for, hostile monkeys
(Hanuman and others) will soon take
possession of all the citadels in Kiskindha
this very day. (15)

अभार्या: सहभार्याश्च सन्त्यत्र वनचारिण:।
लुब्धेभ्यो विप्रलब्धेभ्यस्तेभ्यो A: सुमहद्भयम्॥ १६ Ul

“There are monkeys (lit., denizens of
the forest) both with and without wives here,
from whom there is very great fear, covetous
of sovereignty as they are and victims of
deprivation.” (16)
