622

river Mandakini, shaded by trees in blossom
and hemmed with lovely groves laden with
flowers. (11)
अनन्तरं odds च पर्वतम्।
aa: पर्णकुटीं तात at at वसतो ध्रुवम्॥१२॥
“Not far from that river and adjacent to
the Citrakuta hill, you will find the hut of the
two brothers, made of leafy twigs; the two
brothers undoubtedly dwell in that hut. (12)

दक्षिणेन च मार्गेण सव्यदक्षिणमेव a
गजवाजिसमाकोर्णां वाहिनीं वाहिनीपते॥१३॥
वाहयस्व महाभाग ततो द्रक्ष्यसि राघवम्।
प्रयाणमिति च श्रुत्वा राजराजस्य योषित:॥ १४॥
हित्वा यानानि यानार्हा ब्राह्मणं पर्यवारयन्।
वेपमाना HIT दीना सह देव्या सुमित्रया॥ Vu il
कौसल्या तत्र जग्राह कराभ्यां ATT AA: |
असमृद्धेन कामेन सर्वलोकस्य गर्हिता॥१६॥
कैकेयी at woe चरणौ सव्यपत्रपा।
तं प्रदक्षिणमागम्य भगवन्तं महामुनिम्॥१७॥
अदूराद् भरतस्यैव तस्थौ दीनमनास्तदा।
तत्र पप्रच्छ भरतं भरद्वाजो महामुनि:।॥ १८॥

“Leaving by the southern route
(proceeding along the southern bank of the
Yamuna) take the army full of elephants
and horses along the bye-path turning to
the left and proceeding southward, O lord of
the army! Proceeding along that route you
will be able to behold Sri Rama, a scion of
Raghu, O highly fortunate prince!” Nay,
hearing the talk going on about the journey
to Citrakuta, the consorts of the deceased
emperor, Kausalya and others, stood
encircling the Brahmana (Bharadwaja),
leaving their chariots, even though they
deserved to remain in their vehicles because
of their sex, old age and high rank. Of them
Kausalya—who was quaking through old
age and emotion, was emaciated through
grief caused by the loss of her husband and
afflicted because of her separation from Sri
Rama—while Queen Sumitra clasped the
sage’s feet with both her hands. Kaikeyi

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

too—who was condemned by the whole
world because of her ambition to see her
son appointed as Prince Regent of Ayodhya
having not been fulfilled, clasped the sage’s
feet with bashfulness because of her having
brought about the banishment of Sri Rama.
Having gone round that venerable and
eminent sage clockwise, she stood close to
Bharata himself, sad at heart because of
her designs having been frustrated on that
occasion and the ignoming she had suffered.
At that time the eminent sage Bharadwaja
spoke to Bharata as follows: (183—18)
एवमुक्तस्तु भरतो भरद्वाजेन धार्मिक:॥१९॥
sara प्राञ्जलिर्भूत्वा वाक्यं वचनकोविद:।

यामिमां भगवन् दीनां शोकानशनकर्शिताम्॥ २० ॥
पितुर्हि महिषीं edt देवतामिव पश्यसि।

wa तं पुरुषव्याघ्रं सिंहविक्रान्तगामिनम्॥ २१॥
कौसल्या सुषुवे रामं धातारमदितिर्यथा।

अस्या वामभुजं श्लिष्टा या सा तिष्ठति दुर्मना: ॥ २२॥
इयं सुमित्रा दु:खार्ता देवी राज्ञश्च मध्यमा।

कर्णिकारस्य शाखेव शीर्णपुष्पा वनान्तरे॥ २३॥

“| seek to know the _ particulars
concerning your mothers, O scion of Raghu!”
Addressed thus by Bharadwaja, the pious
Bharata, for his part, who was a master of
expression, made the following answer with
folded hands : “This godlike Queen Kausalya,
the seniormost consort of my father, whom
indeed you see here afflicted and emaciated
through fasting on account of grief, O
venerable Sir, brought forth that tiger among
men, Sri Rama—who takes gallant strides
like a lion—even as Aditi (the mother of
gods) gave birth to Upendra (Lord Vamana,
so-called because he was a younger brother
to Indra). Here is the celebrated Sumitra,
the middle queen of the king, stricken with
agony, who stands disconsolate at heart
clinging to the left arm of Kausalya and
looking like a branch of Karnikara tree with
withered flowers standing in the interior of a
grove. (19—23)
