+ UTTARAKANDA +

सान्त:पुरश्च भरत: शत्रुघ्नसहितो aati
we गतिमुपागम्य साग्निहोत्रमनुव्रता:॥११॥

Bharata and Satrughna, accompanied
with the ladies of gynaeceum, went forth
and having approached Sri Rama, the resort
of all followed Him together with the Agnihotra.

(11)
a च Od महात्मान: साग्निहोत्रा: समागता:।
WANT: काकुत्स्थमनुजग्मुर्महामतिम्॥१२॥

All of the noble ones, together with the
Agnihotra assembled and with their sons
and spouses followed the scion of Kakutstha.

(12)
मन्त्रिणो भृत्यवर्गाश्च सपुत्रपशुबान्धवा:।
wa सहानुगा राममन्वगच्छन् प्रहृष्टवत्॥१३॥

The councillors, the servants, altogether
with their sons, cattle and kinsmen, with
their followers followed Sri Rama as if in
pleasure. (13)

तत: Wal: प्रकृतयो हृष्टपुष्टजनाव्रृता:।
गच्छन्तमनुगच्छन्ति Wet गुणरञ्जिता:॥१४॥
Then all subjects, comprising happy
and _ well-nourished men, followed the
descendant of Raghu on his way, devoted
to him due to his qualities.* (14)

तत: सस्त्रीपुमांसस्ते सपक्षिपशुबान्धवा:।
राघवस्यानुगा: aad हृष्टा विगतक्काषा;।।१५।।
Then all males and females with the

birds, animals and kinsmen, free from blemish
followed the scion of Raghu. (15)

स्नाता: प्रमुदिता: Wad हृष्टपुष्टाश्च AMT: |

दृढं किलकिलाशब्दै: wd राममनुव्रतम्॥१६॥
All monkeys, happy and well-fed, having

taken their dip in the Sarayu, with their

1131

sounds of Kila-kila, being closely attached
to Sri Rama, followed. (16)

न तत्र कश्चिद् दीनो वा व्रीडितो वापि ¢: faa: ।
we समुदितं wa बभूव परमाद्भुतम्॥१७॥
There was no one poor or ashamed or

pained, they all were happy: all this was
extraordinary. (17)

द्रष्टुकामोऽथ निर्यान्तं रामं जानपदो जन:।
य: प्राप्त: सोऽपि दृष्ट्वैव स्वर्गायानुगतो जन:॥ १८॥

The citizens that came desiring of seeing
Sri Rama departing, they too followed him to
the heaven by merely seeing him. (18)

ऋक्षवानररक्षांसि जनाश्च पुरवासिन:।
आगच्छन् परया भक्त्या पृष्ठत: सुसमा'हित्ता'; ।। १९॥
The bears, monkeys and Raksasas,

the townsmen stood behind with firm resolve
out of devotion to Sri Rama. (19)

यानि भूतानि नगरेऽप्यन्तर्धानगतानि च।
wad तान्यनुययु: स्वर्गाय समुपस्थितम्॥ २०॥

Those Bhitas (evil spirits) who dwelt
there invisibly, (they also) followed the
descendant of Raghu on his journey to
heaven. (20)

यानि पश्यन्ति काकुत्स्थं स्थावराणि चराणि च।
सर्वाणि रामगमने अनुजग्मुर्हि तान्यपि॥ २१॥

All stationary and moving objects, who
saw the scion of Kakutstha, wishing best of
him, followed him departing. (21)

नोच्छ्वसत् तदयोध्यायां सुसूक्ष्ममपि दृश्यते।
तिर्यग्योनिगताश्चैव सर्वे राममनुव्रता:॥२२॥

No sensible being, even of the smallest
size could be seen in Ayodhya, even sub-
human species, not following devotedly Sri
Rama. (22)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये उत्तरकाण्डे नवाधिकशततम: AA: ॥ १०९ ॥

Thus ends Canto One hundred and nine in the Uttarakanda of the glorious Ramayana
of Valmiki, the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

* The author of Bhagavata also recalls —aea: स्पृष्टोऽभिदृष्टो वा संविष्टोऽनुगतोऽपि वा। कोसलास्ते ययु: स्थानं यत्र

गच्छन्ति योगिन: ॥
