386

“Speak out, which enemy of yours may
be deprived this very day of his life, fame of
invincibility and relations. Pray, instruct me
how to proceed so that the globe may be
brought under your control. | am at your
beck and call.” (40)

विमृज्य बाष्पं परिसान्त्व्य चासकृत्
a लक्ष्मणं राघववंशवर्धन:।

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

उवाच पित्रोर्वचने व्यवस्थितं
निबोध मामेष fe सौम्य सत्पथ:॥४१॥

Wiping the tears of Laksmana and
comforting him more than once, Sri Rama,
the promoter of Raghu’s race, replied, “Know
me, gentle brother, to be firmly obedient to
the command of my parents; for such is the
path trodden by the righteous.” (41)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्येऽयोध्याकाण्डे त्रयोविंश: सर्ग: ॥ 23 ॥

Thus ends Canto Twenty-three in the Ayodhyakanda of the glorious Ramayana
of Valmiki, the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

Canto XXIV

Finding Sri Rama firm in his obedience to the command of his parents,
Kausalya (Sri Rama’s mother) urges him to take her alongwith him.
On being told, however, that it was incumbent on a matron
whose husband was alive to remain with the latter
and serve him, she consents to Sri Rama’s
departure to the forest

तं समीक्ष्य व्यवसितं पितुर्निर्देशपालने।
कौसल्या बाष्पसंरुद्धा Ta धर्मिष्ठमब्रवीत्॥१॥
Perceiving Sri Rama resolved on
carrying out the command of his father,
Kausalya spoke as follows to her most
pious son, her voice choked with tears :
(1)
अदूष्टदु:खो धर्मात्मा सर्वभूतप्रियंवद:।
मयि जातो दशरथात् कथमुञ्छेन वर्तयेत्॥२॥
“Ah! born of me through Dasaratha,
how will the pious-minded boy, who has
never known sorrow and who speaks kindly
to all created beings, live on grains gleaned
from a market-place (after the heaps collected
there for sale have been disposed of)? (2)

यस्य भृत्याश्च दासाश्च मृष्टान्यन्नानि भुञ्जते।
कथं स भोक्ष्यते WH वने मूलफलान्ययम्॥ ३॥

“How shall this boy, the same Rama

whose very dependants and servants partake
of dainty dishes, eat roots and fruits in the
forest? (3)

H UAHA KA AT A भवेद् भयम्।
गुणवान् दयितो Ua: काकुत्स्थो ae विवास्यते॥ ४॥

“Who will believe this story that Rama,
a scion of Kakutstha, the pet child of the
Emperor and rich in excellences, is being
exiled? And who will not be alarmed to hear
this? (4)
नूनं तु बलवाँल्लोके कृतान्त: सर्वमादिशन्।
लोके रामाभिरामस्त्वं at यत्र गमिष्यसि॥५॥

Sure enough, in this world, O Rama,
where you, who are so charming, are going

to retire to the forest, destiny alone is mighty
and rules all. (5)

TF तु मामात्मभवस्तवादर्शनमारुत:।
विलापदु:खसमिधो रुदिताश्रुहुताहुति: ।। & ॥
