* ARANYAKANDA «

अहत्वा सायकैस्तीक्ष्णैर्नोपावर्तितुमुत्सहे।
यन्निमित्तं तु रामस्य लक्ष्मणस्य विपर्यय:॥ २२॥
सकामा भगिनी मेऽस्तु पीत्वा तु रुधिरं तयो: |
न क्वचित् प्राप्तपूर्वो मे संयुगेषु पराजय:॥ २३॥

“Highly enraged | shall invest Death
himself with mortal nature. | dare not return
without killing with my sharp arrows the
celebrated Rama, a scion of Raghu, proud
of his strength, and his brother Laksmana,
too. “Let my sister, Surpanakha, with
reference to whom a wrong act has been
done by Rama and Laksmana, will have her
desire fulfilled by drinking their blood. A
defeat has never been faced by me on the
fields of battle. (21—23)

युष्माकमेतत् प्रत्यक्षॆ नानृतं कथयाम्यहम्।
देवराजमपि क्रुद्धो मत्तैरावतगामिनम्॥ २४॥
वज्रहस्तं रणे हन्यां किं पुनस्तौ च मानवौ।
सा तस्य गर्जितं श्रुत्वा राक्षसानां महाचमू:॥ २५ UI
प्रहर्षमतुलं लेभे मृत्युपाशावपाशिता।
समेयुश्च महात्मानो युद्धदर्शनकांक्षिण:॥ २६॥
Va देवगन्धर्वा: सिद्धाश्च WE ATT: |
समेत्य चोचु: सहितास्तेऽन्योन्यं पुण्यकर्मण:॥ २७॥
“This is evident to you. | am not telling
a lie. Enraged in battle | can make short
work even of Indra, the lord of celestials,
riding on the mad Airavata, holding the
thunderbolt in his hand, to say nothing of
these two mortals.” Hearing his roar, that
huge army of ogres, caught as it was in the
noose of Death, derived joy that knew no
parallel. Longing to witness the encounter,
high-souled Rsis (seers of Vedic Mantras),
gods and Gandharvas (celestial musicians)
as well as Siddhas (a class of demigods
endowed with mystic powers from their very
birth) alongwith Caranas (celestial bards)
assembled there and, meeting together, the
aforesaid beings of meritorious deeds, who
were friendly to all, spoke to one another as
follows : (24—27)

स्वस्ति गोब्राह्यणेभ्यस्तु लोकानां ये च सम्मता: |
जयतां राघवो युद्धे पौलस्त्यान् रजनीचरान्॥ २८॥

773

चक्रहस्तो यथा विष्णु: सर्वानसुरसत्तमान्।
एतच्चान्यच्च AEM ब्रुवाणा: परमर्षय:॥ २९॥
जातकौतूहलास्तत्र विमानस्थाश्च देवता:।
ददृशुर्वाहिनीं तेषां राक्षसानां गतायुषाम्॥ ३०॥
“May all be well with the cows and the
Brahmanas as well as with those who are
highly esteemed by the people. Even as
Lord Visnu, holding the discus in His hand,
conquered all the foremost of demons, may
Sri Rama, a scion of Raghu, conquer the
ogres born in the line of Sage Pulastya.”
Speaking as aforesaid and saying many
other such things, the greatest of Rsis as
well as gods seated in their aerial cars, in
whom curiosity had sprung up, beheld there
the army of those ogres, the sands of whose
life had already run out. (28—30)

रथेन तु GU वेगात् सैन्यस्याग्राद् विनि:सृत: |
श्येनगामी पृथुग्रीवो यज्ञशत्रुर्विहंगम:॥ ३१॥
दुर्जय: करवीराक्ष: Wea: कालकार्मुक:।
हेममाली महामाली सर्पास्यो रुधिराशन:॥ ३२॥
द्वादशैते महावीर्या: प्रतस्थुरभित: खरम्।
महाकपाल: स्थूलाक्ष: प्रमाथस्तिशिरास्तथा।
चत्वार Ut सेनाग्रे दूषणं पृष्ठतोऽन्वयु:॥ ३३॥
Khara for his part hurriedly rode in his

chariot beyond his army; while Syenagami,
Prthugriva, Yajhasatru, Vihangama, Durjaya,

Karaviraksa, Parusa, Kalakarmuka,
Hemamali, Mahamali, Sarpasya and
RudhiraSana—these twelve, who were

possessed of great prowess, marched round
about Khara. Mahakapala, Sthulaksa,
Pramatha and Trisira—these four followed
at the heels of Dusana at the head of the
army. (31—33)
सा भीमवेगा समराभिकांक्षिणी
सुदारुणा राक्षसवीरसेना।
at राजपुत्रौ सहसाभ्युपेता
माला ग्रहाणामिव चन्द्रसूर्यौ॥ ३४॥
Eagerly seeking a combat, that most
formidable army of Raksasa_ warriors,
