# YUDDHAKANDA #

hurled by the monkeys and the showers of
arrows coming from Sri Rama, (a scion of
Raghu) the ten-headed monster felt
bewildered at heart. (27)

यदा च Wet AY न चकर्ष शरासनम्।
नास्य प्रत्यकरोद वीर्यं विक्लवेनान्तरात्मना॥ २८ ॥
क्षिप्ताश्चाशु शरास्तेन शस्त्राणि विविधानि च।
मरणार्थाय वर्तन्ते मृत्युकालोऽभ्यवर्तत॥ २९॥

When, on account of his mind being
confused, he could no longer take up weapons
nor stretch his bow, nor, again, could he
oppose Sri Rama’s valour, while the arrows
and other weapons of all kinds swiftly
discharged by Sri Rama, had his death for
their objective, the hour of his death appeared
imminent. (28-29)

743

सूतस्तु रथनेतास्य तदवस्थं निरीक्ष्य तम्।
शनैर्युद्धादसम्भ्रान्तो रथं तस्यापवाहयत्॥ ३०॥

Perceiving him reduced to such a plight,
the charioteer, who controlled his chariot,
for his part, calmly drove his chariot out of
the fray. (30)

रथं च तस्याथं wat सारथि-

Fart sit जलदस्वनं तदा।
wre भीत्या समरान्महीपतिं

निरस्तवीर्यं पतितं समीक्ष्य॥३१॥

Turning in haste the chariot of Ravana,
which was rumbling like a cloud, on
perceiving the king (the lord of ogres) sunk
down, bereft of energy, the charioteer forthwith
sneaked away in dismay from the battlefield.

(31)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये युद्धकाण्डे STH MITA: AA: ॥ १०३ ॥
Thus ends Canto One hundred and three in the Yuddhakanda of the glorious
Ramayana of Valmiki, the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

Canto CIV
Ravana reproaches the charioteer and the latter after

satisfying his master with his reply drives his
chariot back to the battlefield

स तु Wad सुसंक्रुद्ध: कृतान्तबलचोदित:।
क्रोधसंरक्तनयनो रावण: सूतमब्रवीत्॥१॥
Feeling extremely enraged due to
infatuation, his eyes blood-red through anger,
Ravana, impelled by force of destiny, spoke
as follows to his charioteer: (1)
हीनवीर्यमिवाशक्तं पौरुषेण विवर्जितम्।
We लघुमिवासत्त्वं विहीनमिव तेजसा॥ २॥
विमुक्तमिव मायाभिरस्नैरिव बहिष्कृतम्।
मामवज्ञाय दुर्बुद्धे स्वया बुद्ध्या विचेष्टसे॥ ३॥

“Disdaining me as though | were

deficient in prowess, powerless, bereft of
manliness, cowardly and_ petty-minded,
devoid of energy, forsaken by conjuring
tricks and abandoned by mystic missiles, O
evil-minded fellow, you act according to
your own discretion! (2-3)

faut मामवज्ञाय मच्छन्दमनवेक्ष्य al
त्वया शत्रुसमक्षॆ मे रथोऽयमपवाहित:॥४॥

What for was this chariot of mine
removed by you in the presence of the
enemy, belittling me and without ascertaining
my will? (4)
