282

प्रीत्या च परयोपेतो राघव: परवीरहा।

« VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

scion of Raghu, the destroyer of hostile

बहुमानेन महता हनूमन्तमवैक्षत Il ४७५ Il | warriors, too looked on Hanuman with great

Full of supreme affection, Sri Rama, a | and high regard.

(45)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये सुन्दरकाण्डे
चतु:षष्टितम: सर्ग: ॥ ६४॥
Thus ends Canto Sixty-four of the Sundarakanda in the glorious Ramayana of Valmiki,
the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

Canto LXV
Asked by Sri Rama to tell him the news about Sita, Hanuman apprises
न Rama of her presence at the foot of a SirnSapa tree in the
midst of ogresses and delivers her message after narrating
the incidents related by her as a token

तत: प्रस्रवणं शैलं a गत्वा चित्रकाननम्।
प्रणम्य शिरसा WH लक्ष्मणं च महाबलम्॥१॥

युवराजं पुरस्कृत्य सुग्रीवमभिवाद्य च।
प्रवृत्तिमथ सीताया: प्रवक्तुमुपचक्रमु:॥ २॥
Then moving to Mount Prasravana,
clothed with lovely woods, making obeisance
with their heads bent low to Sri Rama, and
also Laksmana, who was endowed with
extraordinary might, nay, greeting Sugriva,
and placing Angada, the Crown prince at
their head, the monkeys forthwith proceeded
to give information regarding Sita as follows:
(1-2)

रावणान्त:पुरे tet राक्षसीभिश्च तर्जनम्।
रामे wat च यथा च नियम: कृत:॥३॥
एतदाख्याय a ad wat रामसंनिधौ।
वैदेहीमक्षतां श्रुत्वा रामस्तूत्तरमब्रवीत्॥४॥
Having related in the presence of Sri
Rama all this, viz., Sita’s detention in the
pleasance of Ravana, she being threatened
by ogresses, her unflinching devotion to Sri
Rama and how a time limit of a couple of
fortnights had been fixed for her survival by
Ravana, the said monkeys kept mum.
Hearing of Sita, a princess of the Videha

territory, being alive, Sri Rama for his part
asked the following question: (3-4)

क्व सीता ada eat कथं च मयि ada
एतन्मे सर्वमाख्यात वैदेहीं ult वानरा:॥५॥
“Where does Sita, the godlike lady, live
and how is she disposed towards me? Pray,
tell me all this concerning Sita (a princess of
the Videha territory) O monkeys !” (5)
रामस्य Wed श्रुत्वा हरयो रामसंनिधौ।
चोदयन्ति हनूमन्तं सीताव्रृत्तान्तकोविदम्॥६॥

Hearing the command of Sri Rama, the
monkeys began to urge, in the presence of
Sri Rama, Hanuman, who knew full well the
facts about Sita, to answer the question of
Sri Rama. (6)
TN तु वचनं तेषां हनूमान् मारुतात्मज:।
प्रणम्य शिरसा देव्यै सीतायै at fest प्रति॥७॥
उवाच वाक्यं वाक्यज्ञ: सीताया दर्शनं यथा।

तं मणिं काञ्चनं दिव्यं दीप्यमानं स्वतेजसा॥ ८॥
दत्त्वा रामाय हनुमांस्तत: प्राञ्ञजलिरब्रवीत्।

समुद्रं लङ्घयित्वाहं शतयोजनमायतम्॥९॥
wa लङ्केति नगरी रावणस्य दुरात्मन:॥१०॥
