# YUDDHAKANDA #

Struck with the crag, that ruler of
monkeys fell senseless on the battlefield.
Highly rejoiced to see him fallen unconscious
on the battleground, the ogres let forth a
roar of triumph. (67)

समभ्युपेत्याद्भुतघोरवीर्यं

स कुम्भकर्णो युधि वानरेन्द्रम्।
सुग्रीवमभिप्रगृह्य

यथानिलो मेघमिव प्रचण्ड:॥६८

Approaching on the battlefield Sugriva,
the lord of monkeys, who was endowed
with marvellous and terrific prowess, nay,
pressing him in his arm-pit, the notorious
Kumbhakarna bore him away even as a
tempestuous wind would sweep away a

जहार

cloud. (68)
स तं महामेघनिकाशरूप--

मुत्पाट्य गच्छन् युधि कुम्भकर्ण:।
रराज मेरुप्रतिमानरूपो

मेरुर्यथा व्युच्छितघोरशृङ्ग: WSU

Departing after lifting up Sugriva, whose
form resembled a huge cloud, the said
Kumbhakarna, who was endowed with a
form resembling Mount Meru (in size), shone
on the battlefield like the said Mount Meru,
distinguished by its exceedingly lofty and

formidable peak. (69)
ततस्तमादाय जगाम वीर:
संस्तूयमानो युधि राक्षसेन्द्र:।
प्लवङ्गराजग्रहविस्मितानाम् ॥ ७० ॥

Seizing hold of Sugriva, the heroic
Kumbhakarna (the lord of ogres) left for
Lanka, being duly extolled by the ogres on
the battlefield and hearing the outcry of
gods (the denizens of heaven) who were
taken aback at the capture of Sugriva, the
lord of monkeys. (70)

ततस्तमादाय तदा स मेने
हरीन्द्रमिन्द्रोपममिन्द्रवीर्य: ।

561

afer हते सर्वमिदं at स्यात्
सराघवं सैन्यमितीन्द्रशत्रु: ।। ७१ ॥
Having seized hold at that moment of
the aforesaid ruler of monkeys, Sugriva,
who vied with Indra (the ruler of gods), that
enemy of Indra, Kumbhakarna, who was
endowed with the valour of Indra, thereupon
concluded that, Sugriva having been killed,
this entire army of monkeys, including Sri
Rama (a scion of Raghu), would be
automatically destroyed. (71)
fagat वाहिनीं दृष्टवा वानराणामितस्तत:।
कुम्भकर्णेन सुग्रीवं गृहीतं चापि वानरम्॥७२॥
हनूमांश्चिन्तयामास मतिमान् मारुतात्मज:।
एवं गृहीते सुग्रीवे किं कर्तव्यं मया भवेत्॥७३॥
Beholding the army of monkeys
scattered here and there and the monkey
Sugriva, too, captured by Kumbhakarna,
the sagacious Hanuman, sprung from the
loins of the wind-god, thought to himself:
‘What should be done by me when Sugriva
has been captured in this way? (72-73)
भूत्वा पर्वतसंकाशो नाशयिष्यामि राक्षसम्॥७४॥
‘| shall undoubtedly do that which is fit

to be done by me. Growing to the size of a
mountain, | shall kill the ogre. (74)

मया हते संयति कुम्भकर्णे
महाबले मुष्टिविशीर्णदेहे।
विमोचिते वानरपार्थिवे च
भवन्तु हृष्टा: प्लवगा: AAT: ll ७५ Il
‘When Kumbhakarna, who is endowed
with extraordinary might, has been killed by
me in a duel, his body being shattered with
my fist, and the king of monkeys delivered,
let all the monkeys feel rejoiced. (75)
अथवा स्वयमप्येष मोक्षं प्राप्स्यति AMT: |
गृहीतोऽयं ate भवेत् त्रिदशै: सासुरोरगै:।॥ ७६॥

‘Or, this monkey, Sugriva, will win his
