* AYODHYAKANDA +

more by the same route along which he had
descended, Sri Rama, a tiger among men,
then ascended the mountain Citrakuta,
which was crowned with a lovely summit.

(31)

aa: जगतीपति: ।
परिजग्राह पाणिभ्यामुभौ भरतलक्ष्मणौ॥ ३२॥

Reaching the entrance of the hut of
leafy twigs in which he dwelt, Sri Rama (the
emperor) now clasped both Bharata and
Laksmana by his hands and wept loudly.

(32)

तेषां तु रुदतां शब्दात् प्रतिशब्दोऽभवद् गिरौ।
भ्रातूणां सह वैदेह्या सिंहानां नर्दतामिव॥ ३३॥

From the cry of those brothers with
Sita, a princess of the Videha kingdom,
which resembled the noise of roaring lions,
rose an echo in the mountain. (33)
fasta तुमुलं शब्दं त्रस्ता भरतसैनिका:॥ ३४॥
अब्रुवंश्चापि रामेण भरत: संगतो ध्रुवम्।
तेषामेव महान् शब्द: शोचतां frat मृतम्॥ ३५॥

The troops of Bharata got alarmed to
hear the confused noise of the four
exceptionally mighty brothers, who, they
thought were crying while offering water to
the spirit of their deceased father, and said
to one another, “Surely Prince Bharata has
met Sri Rama. This is undoubtedly the loud
cry of those four brothers mourning for their
deceased father.”

अथ वाहान् परित्यज्य तं सर्वेऽभिमुखा: स्वनम्।
अप्येकमनसो जग्मुर्यथास्थानं प्रधाविता:॥ ३६॥
Leaving their conveyances, all troops
without exception ran fast with an undivided
mind to the place from which the sound was
coming, with their faces turned towards that
sound. (36)
aa गजैरन्ये रथैरन्ये स्वलंकृतै:।
सुकुमारास्तथैवान्ये पद्भिरेव WT ययु:॥ ३७॥

Some people, other than the troops,

(34-35) ..

659

who were tender of body rode on horses,
others on elephants and still others in chariots
tastefully decorated; while still others went
on foot alone. (37)
अचिरप्रोषितं wt चिरविप्रोषितं यथा।
द्रष्टुकामो जन: सर्वो जगाम सहसाश्रमम्॥ ३८॥
Eager to see Sri Rama, as though he
had been away from his home, Ayodhya,
for a long time, although he had left his
home not long before, all men rushed
headlong to the hermitage of Sri Rama.
(38)

भ्रातूणां त्वरितास्ते तु द्रष्टुकामा: समागमम्।
ययुर्ब्रहुविधैर्यार्नै `खुरनेमिसमाकुलै: ।। ३९ ।।

Keen to behold the meeting of the four
brothers, they for their part hastily rode on
hoofed animals and wheeled vehicles of
various kinds. (39)

सा भूमिर्बहुभिर्याने रथनेमिसमाहता।
मुमोच तुमुलं शब्दं द्यौरिवाभ्रसमागमे॥४०॥

Run over by many animals and vehicles
and consequently struck against by hoofs
and felloes, that land of Citrakuta produced
a tumultuous noise as heavens do during
the gathering of clouds. (40)

तेन वित्रासिता arm: करेणुपरिवारिता:।
आवासयन्तो गन्धेन Wards तत:॥४१॥
Terrified by that noise, wild elephants
accompanied by female elephants migrated
to another forest from that place, perfuming
the quarters with the scent of their ichor.
(41)
वराहव्कसिंहाश्च महिषा: ATT
व्याघ्रगोकर्णगवया वित्रेसु: पृषतै: सह॥४२॥
Boars, wolves and lions, buffaloes,
Srmaras and Gokarnas, two distinctive
species of deer, as well as tigers and
Gavayas alongwith spotted deer felt stricken
with terror. (42)

रथाह्वहंसानत्यूहा: प्लवा: कारण्डवा: परे।
तथा पुंस्कोकिला: क्रौञ्चा विसंज्ञा भेजिरे दिश: । ४३ ॥
