840

enjoying the luxuries available to humankind,
| lived in the midst of an abundance of all
kinds of enjoyments. (4)

wa त्रयोदशे वर्षे राजाऽमन्त्रयत Wy: I
अभिषेचयितुं we समेतो राजमन्तिभि:॥ ५॥
“In the thirteenth year of my stay in
that palace, the powerful monarch, my father-
in-law, accompanied by his counsellors,
decided to install Sri Rama as Prince Regent.
(5)
तस्मिन् सम्भ्रियमाणे तु राघवस्याभिषेचने।
कैकेयी नाम भर्तारं ममार्या याचते वरम्॥६॥
“While the aforesaid installation in the
office of Prince Regent of Sri Rama (a
scion of Raghu) was being arranged, my
mother-in-law, Kaikeyi by name, asked a
boon of her husband. (6)
परिगृह्य तु कैकेयी श्वशुरं सुकृतेन मे।
मम प्प्रव्राजनं भर्तुर्भरतस्याभिषेचनम्॥ ७ II
द्वावयाचत भर्तारं सत्यसंधं नॄपोत्तमम्।
Wel भोक्ष्ये न च स्वप्स्ये न पास्ये न कदाचन॥ ८ ॥
एष मे जीवितस्यान्तो war यदभिषिच्यते।
इति ब्रुवाणां कैकेयीं श्वशुरो मे स पार्थिव:॥ ९ ॥
अयाचतार्थैरन्वर्थैर्न च aeat चकार सा।
मम Mat महातेजा वयसा पञ्चविंशक:॥१०॥
अष्टादश fe वर्षाणि मम जन्मनि गण्यते।

रामेति प्रथितो लोके सत्यवान् शीलवान् शुचि: ॥। ११॥
विशालाक्षो महाबाहु: सर्वभूतहिते रत:।
कामार्तश्च महाराज: पिता दशरथ: स्वयम्॥१२॥
कैकेय्या: प्रियकामार्थं तं रामं नाभ्यषेचयत्।
अभिषेकाय तु पितु: समीपं राममागतम्॥१३॥
कैकेयी मम भर्तारमित्युवाच द्रुतं वच:।
तव पित्रा समाज्ञप्तं ममेदं श्रृणु Waa evil
“Binding my father-in-law with an oath
in the name of virtue, Kaikeyi for her part
asked of her lord, that jewel among kings,
who was true to his promise, a couple of
boons in the shape of exile of my husband
and the installation as Prince Regent of
Bharata, her own son, and added: “If Rama
is installed today, | shall neither eat nor

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

sleep nor drink any longer. This event, viz.,
the installation of Rama, will constitute the
end of my life.” The said king, my father-in-
law, sought to win over Kaikeyi, who was
speaking in this strain, by means of things
worth coveting and enjoying; she, however,
did not grant his request. My husband, who
is possessed of great energy, was over
twenty-five years of age when he left for the
forest, while my age at the time of our
departure from Ayodhya was calculated to
be eighteen years from my birth. Known in
the world by the name of Rama, my husband
is truthful, amiable of disposition and virtuous;
is possessed of large eyes and mighty
arms and devoted to the good of all created
beings. Yet, in order to fulfil the cherished
object of Kaikeyi’s desire, his father, the
emperor, who was himself stricken with
love (for her), did not install Sri Rama as
Prince Regent. To Sri Rama, my husband,
arrived in the presence of his father for
getting installed (as Prince Regent), Kaikeyi
for her part promptly spoke as follows:
‘Hear from me, O scion of Raghu, the
following decree duly issued by your father :
(7—14)

भरताय प्रदातव्यमिदं राज्यमकण्टकम्।
त्वया तु खलु वस्तव्यं नव वर्षाणि was AN १५॥

at प्रव्रज काकुत्स्थ पितरं मोचयानृतात्।
तथेत्युवाच At Wa: कैकेयीमकुतोभय:॥ १६॥

चकार aga: श्रुत्वा भर्ता WA दृढव्रत:।
दद्यान्न प्रतिगृह्णीयात् सत्यं TAA चानृतम्॥ १७॥
“This kingdom has to be bestowed on
Bharata without any hindrance and you at
all events must dwell in the forest for nine
years and five. Therefore, depart, O scion
of Kakutstha, to the forest and save your
father from the sin of falsehood. Hearing her
command, my husband, Sri Rama, who had
no fear from any quarter and is firm of
vows, replied as follows : ‘Let it be so,’ and
followed it. He would ever bestow and never
accept a gift. He would ever speak the truth
and never tell a lie. (15—17)
