668

and weeping should in that case undoubtedly
be given up under all circumstances by a
resolute man possessed of wisdom. (39)

स स्वस्थो भव मा शोको यात्वा चावस तां पुरीम्।
तथा पित्रा नियुक्तोऽसि वशिना वदतां वर॥४०॥

“As such, be at ease; let not grief over-
power you. And, returning home, dwell in
that city of Ayodhya. So have you been
enjoined by father, a master of his will, O
jewel among the eloquent ! (40)

यत्राहमपि तेनैव Pam: पुण्यकर्मणा।
तत्रैवाहं करिष्यामि पितुरार्यस्य शासनम्॥४१॥

“I too shall do the bidding of our noble
father continuing in that very place where |
have been enjoined to stay by that emperor
of virtuous deeds. (41)
न मया शासनं तस्य त्यक्तुं न्याय्यमरिदम।
सत्वयापि सदा मान्य: स वै बन्धु: स न: पिता॥ ४२॥

“It is not justifiable on my part to flout
his command, O subduer of foes ! He ever
deserved to be honoured even by you,
since he was our friend, he was our (very)
father. (42)
तद् aa: पितुरेवाहं सम्मतं धर्मचारिणाम्।
कर्मणा पालयिष्यामि वनवासेन राघव॥४३॥

“Through my action in the shape of

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

sojourning in the forest, O scion of Raghu,
| shall obey that very command of my
father, which is thought highly of by those
practising virtue. (43)

धार्मिकेणानृशंसेन नरेण गुरुवर्तिना।
भवितव्यं wear परलोकं जिगीषता॥४४॥

“A pious man seeking to conquer the
other world, O tiger among men, ought to be
kind-hearted and obedient to his elders,
father and others. (44)

आत्मानमनुतिष्ठ त्वं स्वभावेन नरर्षभ।
निशाम्य तु शुभं ad पितुर्दशरथस्य न:॥४५॥

“Keeping in view the virtuous conduct
of our father, King DaSaratha, O jewel among
men, direct your thoughts only towards the
welfare in the other world of your spirit in
consonance with your pious nature.” (45)

इत्येवमुक्त्वा वचनं महात्मा
पितुर्निदेशप्रतिपालनार्थम् ।
भ्रातरमर्थवच्च
प्रभुर्मुहूर्ताद् विरराम राम:॥४६॥
Having tendered to his younger brother,
Bharata, in about an hour, the aforesaid
significant advice, urging him to carry out
the behests of their father, the high-souled
and almighty Sri Rama became silent. (46)

यवीयसं

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्येऽयोध्याकाण्डे
पञ्चाधिकशततम: We Il १०५ ॥

Thus ends Canto One hundred and five in the Ayodhyakanda of the glorious
Ramayana of Valmiki, the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

