« KISKINDHAKANDA +

1115

Canto XLVII

Even after scouring more than once the regions comprised in the quarter
assigned to them, Vinata and others fail to get any clue to the whereabouts
of Sita. Returning despondent even before a month, they bow down
to Sri Rama and Sugriva and report their inability to find out
Sita. They feel convinced for many reasons that
Hanuman alone will be able to discover Sita

दर्शनार्थं तु ate: wa: कपिकुञ्जरा:।
व्यादिष्टा: कपिराजेन यथोक्तं जग्मुरञ्जसा॥ १॥
Dispatched all round by Sugriva (the
lord of monkeys) to find out Sita (a princess
of the Videha territory), the foremost of the
monkeys for their part instantly departed to
the quarter severally assigned to them. (1)

a सरांसि सरित्कक्षानाकाशं नगराणि a
नदीदुर्गांस्तथा देशान् विचिन्वन्ति समन्तत:॥ २॥

They scanned on all sides lakes, shrubs
on the banks of rivers, open stretches of
land and cities as also tracts rendered
impassable by streams. (2)

सुग्रीवेण समाख्याता: Wa वानरयूथपा:।
तत्र देशान् विचिन्वन्ति सशैलवनकाननान्॥ ३॥

Thoroughly instructed by Sugriva, all
the leaders of monkey bands explored the
regions comprised in the quarter assigned
to them with their mountains, forests and
woodlands. (3)

विचित्य दिवसं ad सीताधिगमने धृता:।

समायान्ति स्म मेदिन्यां निशाकालेषु वानरा:।॥४॥
Having carried on their search for Sita

during the daytime, all the monkeys, who were

bent on finding out Sita, came together for
repose at a rendezvous during the nights.(4)

सर्वर्तुकांश्च देशेषु वानरा: सफलद्रुमान्।
आसाद्य Get शय्यां चक्रु: सर्वेष्वह:सु ते॥५॥
Reaching during the days (in the course

of their search) in all the regions trees which
manifested all the seasons (in the course of

a day) and ever bore fruits, the aforesaid
monkeys slept during the night. (5)
Wee: प्रथमं कृत्वा मासे प्रस्रवणं गता:।
कपिराजेन संगम्य निराशा: कपिकुञ्जरा:॥६॥
Reckoning the day of their departure
as the first, the monkey chiefs returned
disappointed in a month to Mount Prasravana
(where Sugriva had been camping till then
with Sri Rama) and meeting Sugriva,
continued there. (6)

विचित्य तु fast gat यथोक्तां सचिवै: सह।
अदृष्टवा विनत: सीतामाजगाम महाबल:॥७॥

Having explored the eastern quarter
assigned to him, but not finding Sita, Vinata

for his part, who was possessed of
extraordinary might, withdrew with his
ministers. (7)

दिशमप्युत्तरां wat विविच्य स महाकपि:।
आगत: सह सैन्येन भीत: शतबलिस्तदा॥ ८॥

Having combed the whole of the northern
quarter, that great monkey, Satabali, too
presently returned with his band, full of fear.(8)

सुषेण: पश्चिमामाशां विविच्य सह art:
समेत्य मासे पूर्णे तु सुग्रीवमुपचक्रमे॥९॥
Having scoured the western quarter with
the other monkeys and returning when a month
had been completed, Susena too for his part
sought the presence of Surgriva. (9)
तं प्रस्रवणपृष्ठस्थं समासाद्याभिवाद्य च।
आसीनं सह रामेण सुग्रीवमिदमब्रुवन्॥१०॥

Approaching and greeting Sugriva,
