794

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA +

सप्तदशाधिकशततम: सर्ग:

Canto CXVII

Gods seek the presence of Sri Rama, and Brahma (the creator)
proclaims his divinity and extols him

ततो fe दुर्मना wa: aad वदतां गिर:।
दध्यौ मुहूर्तं धर्मात्मा बाष्पव्याकुललोचन: ॥१॥
Hearing the cries of those who were
wailing as aforesaid, Sri Rama for his part,
whose mind was set on virtue, thereupon
became thoughtful for a while, afflicted as
he was in mind, his eyes blinded by tears.
(1)

ततो वैश्रवणो राजा aay पितृभि: wel
सहस्राक्षश्च देवेशो वरुणश्च जलेश्वर:॥२॥

षडर्धनयन: श्रीमान् महादेवो व्रृषध्वज:।
कर्ता सर्वस्य लोकस्य ब्रह्मा ब्रह्मविदां वर:॥ ३॥

wa सर्वे समागम्य विमानै: सूर्यसंनिभै:।
आगम्य नगरीं लङ्कामभिजग्मुश्च राघवम्॥४॥
Nay, gathering together and reaching
the city of Lanka in their aerial cars, which
shone brightly like the sun, Kubera (son of
Sage Visrava), the king (of Yaksas), and
Yama (the god of retribution), alongwith the
Pitrs (the eternal manes), as also the
thousand-eyed Indra (the ruler of gods) and
Varuna, the ruler of the waters, the glorious
three-eyed Lord Siva (the Supreme God)
who bears the device of a bull on His
banner, Brahma, the creator of the entire
universe, the foremost of the knowers of
Brahma (the Absolute)—all these then
approached Sri Rama (a scion of Raghu).
(2—4)

तत: सहस्ताभरणान् प्रगृह्य विपुलान् भुजान्।
अब्रुवंस्त्रिदशश्रेष्ठा wad प्राञ्जलिं स्थितम्॥७५॥
Lifting up their long arms, their hands
adorned with jewels, the foremost of gods
thereupon submitted as follows to Sri Rama
(a scion of Raghu), who stood with joined

palms by way of salutation:
कर्ता सर्वस्य लोकस्य श्रेष्ठो ज्ञानविदां विभु:।
उपेक्षसे कथं सीतां पतन्तीं हव्यवाहने।
कथं देवगणश्रेष्ठमात्मानं नावबुद्ध्यसे॥६॥
“The Maker of the entire cosmos, the
foremost of those well-versed in the spiritual
lore, and the suzerain lord of the cosmos,
how do You ignore Sita falling into the fire,
the bearer of sacrificial offerings? How do
You not recognize Yourself to be the foremost
of the hosts of gods? (6)

ऋतधामा वसु: Ud वसूनां च प्रजापति:।
त्रयाणामपि लोकानामादिकर्ता स्वयंप्रभु:॥७॥
“Among the Vasus (a class of gods)
You are the Vasu Rtadhama, who was
formerly a lord of creation and the first

creator of all the three worlds, their self-
constituted Ruler. (7)

रुद्राणामष्टमो ws: साध्यानामपि पञ्चम:।
अश्विनौ चापि कर्णौ a सूर्याचन्द्रमसौ दृशौ॥ i

“You are the eighth Rudra (Mahadeva)
of the eleven Rudras and the fifth Viryavan
by name among the Sadhyas (a particular
class of celestial beings). The twin Aswins
(the physicians of the gods) are Your ears
and the sun and the moon, likewise, constitute
Your eyes. (8)
ard चादौ च मध्ये च दृश्यसे च परंतप।
उपेक्षसे च aed मानुष: प्राकृतो यथा॥९॥

“Nay, You are seen to exist at the end
as also at the beginning, as well as at the
middle of the creation, O scourge of Your
enemies! And yet You seem to ignore Sita,
a princess of the Videha territory, as a
common man would do.” (9)

(5)
