828

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA +

Canto CXXVII

Arrangements for the reception of Sri Rama in Ayodhya; the
departure of Bharata with all others for Nandigrama to
receive Sri Rama; Sri Rama’s meeting with Bharata
and others and his sending back the aerial car,
Puspaka, to Kubera, the ruler of Yaksas
(a class of demigods), to whom
it originally belonged

श्रुत्वा तु परमानन्दं भरत: सत्यविक्रम:।
हृष्टमाज्ञापयामास शत्रुघ्नं परवीरहा॥ १॥
Hearing the supremely delightful news
of Sri Rama’s impending return to Ayodhya,
Bharata of unfailing prowess, the destroyer
of hostile champions, commanded as follows
Satrughna, the younger twin brother of
Laksmana, who too felt delighted at the
news: (1)

दैवतानि च सर्वाणि dent नगरस्य च।
सुगन्धमाल्यैर्वादित्रैरर्चन्तु शुचयो नरा:॥२॥

“Let men of good conduct offer worship
to their family deities as well as at all the
temples in the city with fragrant flowers and
to the accompaniment of various musical
instruments. (2)
सूता: स्तुतिपुराणज्ञा: Wa वैतालिकास्तथा।
wa वादित्रकुशला गणिकाश्चैव सर्वश:॥३॥
राजदारास्तथामात्या: सैन्या: सेनाङ्गनागणा:।
ब्राह्मणाश्च सराजन्या: श्रेणीमुख्यास्तथा गणा:॥४॥
अभिनिर्यान्तु रामस्य द्रष्टुं शशिनिभं मुखम्।
भरतस्य वच: श्रुत्वा शत्रुघ्न: Uae il
विष्टीरनेकसाहस्रीश्चोदयामास भागश:।
समीकुरुत निम्नानि विषमाणि समानि angi
स्थानानि च निरस्यन्तां नन्दिग्रामादित: परम्।
सिञ्चन्तु पृथिवीं कृत्स्नां हिमशीतेन वारिणा॥७॥

“Nay, let bards well-versed in singing
praises as well as in the Puranas (containing
ancient legends, cosmogony, etc.,) as also

minstrels, all those proficient in the use of
musical instruments as well as courtesans
from every quarter, the queen-mothers as
also the ministers, the troops stationed in
the royal palace and drawing _ their
emoluments from the palace itself, army
men and their wives, nay, the Brahmanas
accompanied by the Ksatriyas (the members
of the warrior class, the leaders of the
guilds of traders and artisans as well as
their members issue forth to behold the
moonlike countenance of Sri Rama.” Hearing
the command of Bharata, Satrughna, the
destroyer of hostile champions, called
together labourers working on wages and
numbering many thousand and, dividing them
into so many gangs, ordered them as follows:
“Level all the low-lying areas as also the
elevated grounds from this place, Ayodhya,
onwards upto Nandigrama. Of course, let
all the intervening temples be left alone as
they are. Nay, sprinkle the whole length of
land with ice-cold water. (83—7)

ततोऽभ्यवकिरन्त्वन्ये लाजै: पुष्पैश्च ada: |
समुच्छितपताकास्तु रथ्या: पुरवरोत्तमे॥८॥

“Let others then strew it all over with
parched grains of paddy and flowers. Also
line with flags the streets of Ayodhya, which
is superior even to the foremost of cities. (8)

शोभयन्तु च वेश्मानि सूर्यस्योदयनं प्रति।
स्रग्दाममुक्तपुष्पैश्च gal: पञ्चवर्णकै:॥९॥
