+ UTTARAKANDA +

Raksasas, came to the presence of Lord

Visnu. (12)

शङ्खचक्रधरं dt wry बहुमान्य al

ऊचु: सम्भ्रान्तवद् वाक्यं सुकेशतनयान् प्रति॥ १३॥
“Paying obeisance and praising the Lord,

who holds the conch and the discus, in a

voice full of awe, they spoke the following
words with regard to the sons of SukeSa:

(13)
सुकेशतनयैर्देव त्रिभिस्त्रेताग्निसंनिभै: ।

आक्रम्य वरदानेन were न:॥१४॥

“*) Lord, by reason of the boons
granted to them, the three sons of SukeSa,
resembling the three fires, have usurped
our places after invading them. (14)

लङ्का नाम पुरी ant त्रिकूटशिखरे स्थिता।
aa स्थिता: प्रबाधन्ते सर्वान् A: क्षणदाचरा: ।॥ १५॥

“‘There is a city, Lanka by name,
situated on the crest of Mount Trikuta, which
is difficult of access. The Raksasas settled
there are harassing all of us. (15)

a त्वमस्मद्धितार्थाय wie तान् मधुसूदन।
wut wat ad wat गतिर्भव सुरेश्वर॥१६॥
“‘O Lord Madhusudana, we have taken

refuge in You; as such be our saviour and
kill them for our good, O Ruler of gods ! (16)

चक्रकृत्तास्यकमलान् निवेदय यमाय al
भयेष्वभयदोऽस्माकं नान्योऽस्ति भवता विना॥ १७॥

राक्षसान् समरे हृष्टान् सानुबन्धान् मदोद्भधतान्।
qe त्वं नो wet देव नीहारमिव भास्कर:॥१८॥

““O Lord, except You there is surely
none else who will grant us protection in
times of danger; with Your discus tear the
lotus-like faces of these haughty Raksasas
who are full of haughtiness for war and give
them as a gift to Yama alongwith their
followers and remove our fear as the sun
melts the frost.’ (17-18)

sad दैवतैरुक्तो देवदेवो जनार्दन:।
अभयं भयदोऽरीणां दत्त्वा देवानुवाच ह॥१९॥

861

“Thus spoken to by the gods, Janardana,
the adored of gods, the scourge of His foes,
granted protection to the heavenly beings
and said: (19)
सुकेशं wat जाने ईंशानवरदर्पितम्।
तांश्चास्य तनयाञ्जाने येषां RIS: स माल्यवान्॥ २०॥

“|! know the ogre SukeSa who has
grown arrogant by reason of the boons
granted to him by Siva; | know his notorious
sons also, of whom the said Malyavan is
the eldest. (20)

até समतिक्रान्तमर्यादान् राक्षसाधमान्।
निहनिष्यामि संक्रुद्ध: सुरा भवत विज्वरा:॥ २१॥
“Getting infuriated | will kill these
despicable Raksasas, who have
transgressed all propriety, O gods; be free
from worry.” (21)

इत्युक्तास्ते सुरा: सर्वे विष्णुना प्रभविष्णुना।
यथावासं ययुर्हृष्टा: प्रशंसन्तो जनार्दनम्॥ २२॥
“Having been assured thus by the All-
powerfull Lord Visnu, the gods praised
Janardana and left for their respective places
full of joy. (22)
श्रुत्वा तौ भ्रातरौ वीराविदं वचनमब्रवीत्॥ 23 I
Having heard of the move of the gods,
Malyavan, the Raksasa, spoke as follows
to his aforesaid heroic brothers: (23)
अमरा ऋषयश्चैव संगम्य किल शङ्करम्।
Tega परीप्सन्त sé वचनमब्रुवन्॥ wll
सुकेशतनया देव वरदानबलोद्भधता:।
बाधन्तेऽस्मान् AYA घोररूपा: We पदे॥ २५॥
“The gods and seers, seeking our
destruction, addressed in a body, the following
words to Sankara: ‘O Lord, the fierce-looking
sons of SukeSa, grown haughty and arrogant
by reason of the boons granted to them,
torment us every now and then. (24-25)

राक्षसैरभिभूता: TAT न शक्ता: स्म प्रजापते।
TAY सद्यसु संस्थातुं भयात् तेषां दुरात्मनाम्॥ २६॥
