158

“Describe in detail once more those
distinctive marks which exist on the person
of Sri Rama as well as on that of Laksmana,
O Hanuman, so that grief may not take
possession of me. (3)
कोदूशं तस्य संस्थानं रूपं तस्य च कीदृशम्।
कथमूरू कथं बाहू लक्ष्मणस्य च शंस मे॥४॥

“Tell me what the shape and form of
Sri Rama as well as of Laksmana are like.
What are their thighs and arms like?” (4)

एवमुक्तस्तु वैदेह्या हनूमान् मारुतात्मज:।
ततो रामं यथातत्त्वमाख्यातुमुपचक्रमे॥५॥

Questioned thus by Sita, Hanuman,
sprung from the loins of the wind-god, for
his part forthwith proceeded to describe Sri
Rama in accordance with facts as follows:

(5)
जानन्ती बत दिष्ट्या at वैदेहि परिपृच्छसि।
Ud: कमलपत्राक्षि संस्थानं लक्ष्मणस्य च॥६॥

He said: “Luckily enough for me, O
princess of the Videha territory, whose eyes
resemble a lotus petal, you inquire in detail
of me about the disposition of limbs of your
husband as well as of Laksmana, even
though knowing them. (6)

यानि रामस्य चिह्नानि लक्ष्मणस्य च यानि a
लक्षितानि विशालाक्षि aga: so, तानि मे॥७॥

“Hear from me even as | speak, O
large-eyed lady, of those distinctive marks
which have been actually noticed by me on
the person of Sri Rama as well as on that of
Laksmana. (7)
TH: कमलपत्राक्ष पूर्णचन्द्रनिभानन:।
रूपदाक्षिण्यसम्पन्न: प्रसूतो जनकात्मजे॥८॥

“Sri Rama has eyes resembling a lotus
petal; his countenance resembles the full
moon, O daughter of Janaka ! He is richly
endowed with charm and generosity from
his birth. (8)

तेजसाऽऽदित्यसंकाश: क्षमया पृथिवीसम:।
बृहस्पतिसमो बुद्ध्या यशसा वासवोपम:॥९॥

« VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

“He vies with the sun in effulgence,
with the earth in forbearance, with sage
Brhaspati, the preceptor of gods, in intelligence
and with Indra in renown. (9)

रक्षिता जीवलोकस्य स्वजनस्य च रक्षिता।
रक्षिता स्वस्य वृत्तस्य धर्मस्य च WAT: oll
“He is a protector of the entire world of
living beings as well as of his own people.
Nay, he guards his own character and is a

vindicator of virtue and the scourge of his
enemies. (10)

रामो भामिनि लोकस्य चातुर्वर्ण्यस्य रक्षिता।
मर्यादानां च लोकस्य al कारयिता च स:।॥ ११॥

“Sri Rama, 0 lovely lady, is a protector
of the world and the preserver of the four
grades of society. Nay, as the Creator and
Protector of the universe, he has fixed the
bounds of propriety to be observed by the
people and has inspired the Rsis and others
to do so. (11)

अर्चिष्मानर्चितोऽत्यर्थं ब्रह्मचर्यव्रते स्थित:।
साधूनामुपकारज्ञ: प्रचारज्ञश्च कर्मणाम्॥१२॥
“He is full of splendour and is greatly
adored by all and is steadfast in his vow of
chastity. He is keenly alive to the services

of holy men and knows how to popularize
right actions. (12)

राजनीत्यां विनीतश्च ब्राह्मणानामुपासक:।
ज्ञानवान् शीलसम्पन्नो विनीतश्च परंतप:॥१३॥

“He is well-versed in politics and a
worshipper of Brahmanas, is full of wisdom
and richly endowed with amiability, has
subdued his passions and is the torment of
his foes. (13)

add च ad च aay च निष्ठित:॥१४॥

“He is well-versed in Yajurveda and is
highly respected by the knowers of Veda.
He is highly proficient in the science of
archery as well as in the Vedas as also in
the sciences auxiliary to the Vedas. (14)
