* AYODHYAKANDA +

son of Kaikeyi, wealth consisting of two
thousand gold mohurs and sixteen hundred
horses. (21)

तदामात्यानभिप्रेतान् विश्वास्यांश्च गुणान्वितान्।
ददावश्चपति:र शीघ्रं भरतायानुयायिन:॥ २२॥

On that occasion King Aswapati also
quickly sent as escorts for Bharata esteemed
and trustworthy ministers endowed with
good qualities. (22)

ऐरावतानैन्द्रशिरान् नागान् वै प्रियदर्शनान्।
खरान्शीघ्रान् सुसंयुक्तान्मातुलोऽस्मै धनं ददौ ।। २३ Ul

Bharata’s maternal uncle, Yudhajit, too
bestowed on him wealth consisting of
elephants of the Airavata breed and those
born in the territory of Indrasira and agreeable
to the sight, as well as swift-going and well-
trained mules. (23)
स ad केकयेन्द्रेण at तन्नाभ्यनन्दत।

Wea: केकयीपुत्रो गमनत्वरया तदा॥ २४॥

Because of his hurry to depart for
Ayodhya, Bharata, the son of Kaikeyi, did
not at that moment welcome the aforesaid
wealth gifted by the king of the Kekayas.

(24)

aya ह्यस्य ea चिन्ता सुमहती तदा।
त्वरया चापि दूतानां स्वप्नस्यापि च दर्शनात्॥ २५ ॥

Nay, due to the hastening of the
messengers and also because of his having
seen the ominous dream indeed a (very)
great anxiety appeared in his heart at that
time. (25)

स स्ववेश्माभ्यतिक्रम्य नरनागाश्वसंकुलम्।
प्रपेदे सुमहच्छीमान् राजमार्गमनुत्तमम्॥ २६॥

Returning to his own residence and
then leaving it, Bharata, who now owned a
very large fortune, reached the main road,

551

which was crowded with men, elephants
and horses and unexcelled by other roads.
(26)

अभ्यतीत्य ततोऽपश्यदन्त:पुरमनुत्तमम्।
ततस्तद् भरत: श्रीमानाविवेशानिवारित:॥ २७॥

Passing thence he saw the gynaeceum,
which was unsurpassed by other mansions.
The glorious Bharata thereupon entered it
unchallenged. (27)

स मातामहमापृच्छ्य मातुलं च युधाजितम्।
रथमारुह्य भरत: शत्रुघ्नसहितो ययौ॥ २८॥
Taking leave of his maternal grandfather
and grandmother as well as of his maternal
uncle, Yudhajit, and aunt and mounting his
chariot with Satrughna, the said Bharata left
for Ayodhya. (28)

रथान् मण्डलचक्रांश्च योजयित्वा पर: शतम्।
उष्ट्गोऽश्वचखरैर्भृत्या भरतं यान्तमन्वयु:॥ २९॥

Fitting a hundred other chariots having
circular wheels with camels, bullocks, horses
and mules, servants of King Aswapati
followed Bharata as he departed. (29)

बलेन गुप्तो भरतो महात्मा
सहार्यकस्यात्मसमैरमात्यै: ।
आदाय शत्रुघ्नमपेतशात्रु-
Tete ययौ सिऽद्ध इवेन्द्रलोकात्॥ ३०॥

Guarded by a detachment sent by his
maternal grandfather and taking Satrughna
with him, Bharata, who was possessed of
great fortitude and had no enemies, departed
with ministers, who were equalled by none
but themselves, from his residence even as
a Siddha (a member of a class of demigods
credited with supernatural powers by virtue
of their very birth) would from the realm of
Indra, the lord of paradise. (30)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्येऽयोध्याकाण्डे सप्ततितम: AA: ॥ Vo ॥

Thus ends Canto Seventy in the Ayodhyakanda of the glorious Ramayana of Valmiki,
the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

