452

Smitten with anger, the ogres, who
were endowed with great impetuosity,
assailed the monkeys on all sides in that
darkness, which was diffcult to penetrate,
devouring them. (6)

ते हयान् काञ्चनापीडान् ध्वजांश्चाशीविषोपमान्।
आप्लुत्य दशनैस्तीक्ष्णैर्भीमकोपा व्यदारयन्॥७॥
Springing up, the monkeys (in their
turn) whose fury was terrible, tore with their
sharp teeth the horses of the ogres, decked
with golden ornaments, as well as _ their
flags, which looked like venomed serpents.
(7)

वानरा बलिनो युद्धेऽक्षोभयन् राक्षसीं चमूम्।
कुञ्जरान् कुञ्जरारोहान् पताकाध्वजिनो रथान्॥ ८ ॥

चकर्षुश्च ददंशुश्च दशनै: क्रोधमूच्छिता:।
लक्ष्मणश्चापि रामश्च शरैराशीविषोपमै:॥ ९ ॥

दृश्यादृश्यानि रक्षांसि प्रवराणि निजघ्नतु:।
तुरंगखुरविध्वस्तं रथनेमिसमुत्थितम्॥ १० ॥

eta कर्णनेत्राणि युध्यतां धरणीरज:।

वर्तमाने तथा घोरे संग्रामे लोमहर्षणे।
रुधिरौघा महाघोरा नद्यस्तत्र विसुस्रुवु:॥११॥

The mighty monkeys sowed confusion
in the army of the ogres, nay, infatuated
with fury, they draggd the elephants, those
mounted upon them and the chariots, which
were dressed with flags and pennons, and
tore them with their teeth. With their arrows,
resembling venomous snakes, Laksmana
and Sri Rama too killed the principal ogres,
visible as well as invisible. Pulverized by
the horses’ hoofs and raised by the chariot
wheels, the dust of the earth filled the ears
as well as the eyes of the combatants.
While that terrible conflict, which made one’s
hair stand on end, was raging as aforesaid,
most dreadful streams carrying volumes of
blood flowed on the battlefield. (8—11)

ततो भेरीमृदङ्गानां पणवानां च नि:स्वन:।
शङ्खनेमिस्वनोन्मिश्र सम्बभूवाद्भुतोपम:॥१२॥

Then there arose a marvellous sound

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA +

of kettledrums, wooden tomtoms and drums
mixed with the blast of conches and the
rattling of wheels. (12)

हतानां स्तनमानानां राक्षसानां च नि:स्वन:।
VAT वानराणां च सम्बभूवात्र दारुण:॥ १३॥
There also arose on the battlefield a

fearful wailing of wounded ogres groaning
with pain, as well as of injured monkeys.

(13)
हतैर्वानरमुख्यैश्च शक्तिशूलपरश्वथै: |

निहतै: पर्वताकारै राक्षसै: कामरूपिभि:।॥ १४॥
शस्त्रपुष्पोपहारा च dada युद्धमेदिनी।
gaa दुर्निवेशा च शोणितास्त्रावकर्दमा॥ १५॥

With the foremost of monkeys lying
wounded by javelins, pikes and axes, and
ogres, huge as mountains and able 10
change their form at will, who had been
killed, the battle-ground in Lanka, on which
offerings of flowers in the form of weapons
had been made and which had been rendered
muddy by the flow of blood, had beocme
difficult of recognization and were difficult of
access. (14-15)

सा aya निशा ant हरिराक्षसहारिणी।
कालरात्रीव भूतानां सर्वेषां दुरतिक्रमा॥१६॥
Like the night of dissolution, that fearful
night, which proved destructive to the
monkeys and ogres alike, was difficult to
pass for all created beings. (16)

ततस्ते राक्षसास्तत्र तस्मिंस्तमसि दारुणे।
राममेवाभ्यवर्तन्त संहृष्टा: शरवृष्टिभि:॥ १७॥

Feeling highly delighed in that dreadful
darkness, the aforesaid ogres then assailed
Sri Rama himself with a hail of shafts on
that battlefield. (17)

तेषामापततां शब्द: क्रुद्धानामपि गर्जताम्।

Sed FA सप्तानां समुद्राणामभूत् स्वन:॥१८॥
The noise of those roaring ogres,

rushing furiously towards Sri Rama,

resembled the roar of all the seven oceans

(dividing the seven Dwipas or principal
