1080

« VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

Canto LXXXII
Sri Rama leaves Agastya’s hermitage and starts for Ayodhya

ऋॠषेर्वचनमाज्ञाय राम: संध्यामुपासितुम्।
उपाक्रमत् सर: पुण्यमप्सरोगणसेवितम्॥१॥

Having heard with reverence the words
of the sage, Agastya, Sri Rama approached
the holy lake inhabited by the host of Apsaras,
for performing his evening adoration. (1)

तत्रोदकमुपस्पृश्य संध्यामन्वास्य पश्चिमाम्।
आश्रमं प्राविशद् राम: कुम्भयोनेर्महात्मन:॥ २॥
Having sipped the water there and
performed the evening Puja, Sri Rama entered
the hermitage of Agastya, the holy pitcher-
born one. (2)
तस्यागस्त्यो बहुगुणं कन्दमूलं तथौषधम्।
शाल्यादीनि पवित्राणि भोजनार्थमकल्पयत्॥ ३॥
Agastya offered to him for food radish

of good quality and also purified rice and
other edibles. (3)

a Wma नरश्रेष्ठस्तदन्नममृतोपमम्।
Wags परितुष्टश्च at रात्रिं समुपाविशत्॥४॥

That best among men, Sri Rama,
enjoyed that food comparable with nectar,
was highly pleased and satisfied. He spent
that night together with the sage. (4)

प्रभाते काल्यमुत्थाय कृत्वाऽऽह्निकमरिदम:।
mt समुपचक्राम गमनाय रघूत्तम:॥५॥
Sri Rama, the best among the Raghus,
the tamer of foes, getting up at dawn and
having performed the morning daily rites,
approached the sage to beg leave of him
and to depart. (5)

अभिवाद्यान्रवीद् रामो महर्षि कुम्भसम्भवम्।
आपृच्छे tat पुरीं गन्तुं मामनुज्ञातुमर्हसि॥६॥
Having saluted the great sage, born of
the pitcher, Agastya, Sri Rama said to him:
‘| beg leave of you to depart to my own
capital; may you permit me to do so. (6)

धन्योऽस्म्यनुगृहीतोऽस्मि दर्शनेन महात्मन:।
द्रष्टुं चैवागमिष्यामि पावनार्थमिहात्मन:॥७॥

‘Lam fortunate having been favoured
by seeing you. | shall come again to see
you, O holy one, for purification of myself.’

(7)

तथा deft काकुत्स्थे वाक्यमद्भुतदर्शनम्।
उवाच परमप्रीतो धर्मनेत्रस्तपोधन: ॥ ८ ।।

While Rama spoke in this marvellous
manner, the great ascetic possessed of
virtuous vision was highly pleased and
said : (8)

अत्यद्भुतमिदं वाक्यं तव Wa शुभाक्षरम्।
Wet: सर्वभूतानां त्वमेव रघुनन्दन॥९॥
‘O Rama, your speech of auspicious
syllables is indeed wonderful, O descendant
of Raghu, you are the purifier of all beings.

(9)
मुहूर्तमपि राम wat येऽनुपश्यन्ति केचन।
पाविता: स्वर्गभूताश्च पूज्यास्ते त्रिदिवेश्वरै:।॥ १० i

‘The few who see you even for a
moment, are purified, and attain heaven,
and are worshipped by the lord of heaven
(gods). (10)

ये च cat घोरचक्षुर्भि: पश्यन्ति प्राणिनो भुवि।
हतास्ते यमदण्डेन सद्यो निरयगामिन:॥ ११॥

“Those beings on earth, who see you
with inimical eyes, they are instantly struck
by the rod of Yama and descend to hell.(11)

ईदृशस्त्वं TENS पावन: सर्वदेहिनाम्।
भुवि त्वां कथयन्तो fe सिद्धिमेष्यन्ति wera १२॥

‘O best among the Raghus, in this
manner you are the purifier of all mortals, O
scion of Raghu. The one describing Your
sports (Lilas) on earth shall attain perfection.

(12)
