748

the valiant one! Hail to you as denoted by
the mystic syllable OM! Hail to you, the
awakener of the lotus! Hail to you, the fierce
one! (18)

ब्रह्मेशानाच्युतेशाय सूरायादित्यवर्चसे।
भास्वते सर्वभक्षाय रौद्राय वपुषे नम:॥१९॥

“Hail to you, the ruler of Brahma, Lord
Siva and Lord Visnu, the infallible! Hail
to you, the sun-god, the (spiritual) light
indwelling the solar orb, the resplendent one,
the devourer of all, appearing in the form of
Rudra, who drives away ignorance. (19)

तमोघ्नाय हिमघ्नाय शत्रुघ्नायामितात्मने।
कृतघ्नघ्नाय देवाय ज्योतिषां Uda AA: Roll

“Hail to you, the dispeller of darkness,
the destroyer of cold, the exterminator of
foes, the one whose extent is immeasurable,
the destroyer of the ungrateful, the god who
is the ruler of all lights! (20)

तप्तचामीकराभाय हरये विश्वकर्मणे।
नमस्तमोऽभिनिघ्नाय रुचये लोकसाक्षिणे॥ २१॥

“Hail to you, possessing the lustre of
refined gold, the dispeller of ignorance, the
architect of the universe, the uprooter of
darkness, splendour-incarnate, the onlooker
of the world! (21)

नाशयत्येष a भूतं तमेव सृजति प्रभु:।
पायत्येष तपत्येष ater गभस्तिभि:॥ २२॥

“The aforesaid Lord alone actually
destroys, brings into existence and sustains
all that has come into being. He alone
radiates heat by his rays and sends showers.

(22)

we Way जागर्ति yay परिनिष्ठित:।
wea चैवाग्निहोत्रं च wet चैवाग्निहोत्रिणाम्॥ 23 i

“Planted in all created beings as their
Inner Controller, he remains awake when
they have fallen asleep. Nay, he himself is
the act of pouring oblations into the sacred
fire as well as the fruit attained by those

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA +

who pour such oblations.
देवाश्च क्रतवश्चैव क्रतूनां फलमेव च।
यानि कृत्यानि लोकेषु सर्वेषु परमप्रभु:॥ २४॥

“Nay, he comprises all the gods as
well as the sacrifices as also the fruit of
sacrifices. Again, he is the Supreme Controller
of all activities which are found in all living
beings. (24)

एनमापत्सु FY कान्तारेषु भयेषु च।
कीर्तयन् पुरुष: कश्चिननावसीदति राघव॥ २५॥

“No individual, celebrating the aforesaid
Lord through the foregoing encomium, in
Straits, in difficulties, in the woods as well as
in times of peril comes to grief, O scion of
Raghu! (25)
पूजयस्वैनमेकाग्रो देवदेवं जगत्पतिम्।
एतत् त्रिगुणितं wear युद्धेषु विजयिष्यति॥ २६॥
अस्मिन् क्षणे महाबाहो रावणं त्वं जहिष्यसि।
VAG ततोऽगस्त्यो जगाम A यथागतम्॥ २७॥

“Worship the aforesaid Lord of the
universe, the adored of all gods, with a
concentrated mind. Muttering this praise as
many as three times, one will come out
victorious in combats. You will be able to
make short work of Ravana this very moment,
O mighty-armed one!” Saying so, the
celebrated Sage Agastya thereupon left in
the same way as he had come. (26-27)

एतच्छुत्वा महातेजा नष्टशोकोऽभवत् तदा।
धारयामास सुप्रीतो राघव: प्रयतात्मवान्॥ २८॥
Hearing this advice, Sri Rama (a scion
of Raghu), who was endowed with
extraordinary energy and had a subdued
mind, found his grief immediately dissipated.
Nay, feeling greatly delighted, he retained
the alleluia in his memory. (28)
आदित्यं Wet Wedd परं हर्षमवाप्तवान्।
त्रिराचम्य शुचिर्भूत्वा धनुरादाय वीर्यवान्॥ 28 Il
रावणं Vet हृष्टात्मा जयार्थं समुपागमत्।
सर्वयत्नेन महता वृतस्तस्य वधेऽभवत्॥ ३०॥

(23)
