* SUNDARAKANDA +

was extended by the sons of Sagara,
who were born in the ancestry of Sri Rama.
(112)

a cat रामहिते युक्तं प्रत्यर्चयति सागर:।
कृते च प्रतिकर्तव्यमेष धर्म: सनातन:॥११३॥

“The deity presiding over the said sea
seeks to offer respect to you, who are
engaged in the service of Sri Rama. And
service must be rendered in return for a
service: such is the eternal law. (113)
सोऽयं तत्प्रतिकारार्थी त्वत्त: सम्मानमर्हति।
त्वन्निमित्तमनेनाहं बहुमानात् प्रचोदित:॥ ११४॥

“Hence, seeking to repay that obligation
of his benefactors, the sons of Sagara, this
Ocean merits attention in the shape of
willingness to accept his hospitality by you.
| have, therefore, been very politely charged
by him in the following words to honour you:

(114)

योजनानां शतं चापि कपिरेष खमाप्लुत:।
तव सानुषु विश्रान्त: शेषं प्रक्रमतामिति॥ ११५ i

““Hanuman has taken a leap in the sky
with a view to covering a distance of even
a hundred Yojanas (or eight hundred miles).
Having rested awhile on your peaks, he
may cover the remaining distance.’ (115)

तिष्ठ त्वं हरिशार्दूल मयि विश्रम्य गम्यताम्।

तदिदं गन्धवत् स्वादु कन्दमूलफलं FU Vee il
“Therefore, tarry, O tiger among

monkeys, and proceed further after reposing

on me for some time. Here are abundant

bulbs, roots and fruits, both fragrant and

luscious. (116)

तदास्वाद्य eters विश्रान्तोऽथ गमिष्यसि।
अस्माकमपि सम्बन्ध: कपिमुख्य त्वयास्ति वै ।

प्रख्यातस्त्रिषु लोकेषु महागुणपरिग्रह:॥ ११७॥

“Having relished them, O jewel among
monkeys, and reposed for a short while,
you should then proceed on your course.
Indeed we too have some relation with
you, O jewel among monkeys! You are a

35

repository of great virtues and are widely
known in all the three worlds. (117)

वेगवन्त: प्लवन्तो ये प्लवगा मारुतात्मज।
तेषां मुख्यतमं मन्ये त्वामहं कपिकुञ्जर॥ ११८॥

“| account you the most prominent
among monkeys, who are given to leaping
and full of vigour, O elephant among monkeys!

(118)

अतिथि: किल पूजार्ह: प्राकृतोऽपि विजानता।
ad जिज्ञासमानेन किं पुनर्यादृशो भवान्॥११९॥

“Even an ordinary newcomer is surely
deserving of adoration at the hands of a
discerning man who is keen to know his
duty, much more so an individual such as
you. (119)

त्वं fe देववरिष्ठस्य मारुतस्य महात्मन:।
पुत्रस्तस्यैव वेगेन wee: कपिकुञ्जर॥ १२०॥

“Indeed, you are a son of the high-
souled wind-god, the most pre-eminent
among gods, and the only one equal to him
in speed, O elephant among monkeys! (120)
पूजिते त्वयि धर्मज्ञे पूजां प्राप्नोति मारुत:।
तस्मात्त्वं पूजनीयो मे OT चाप्यत्र कारणम्॥ १२१ UI

“On your being adored, a knower as
you are of what is right, the wind-god will
have received my homage. You are worthy
of adoration to me for that reason. Know
one further reason for my adoring the wind-
god through you : (121)

Ue कृतयुगे तात पर्वता: पक्षिणोऽभवन्।
asta जग्मुर्दिश: सर्वा गरुडा इव वेगिन:॥ १२२॥

“Formerly, in Satyayuga, O dear one,
mountains were endowed with wings. Full
of speed they too used to range all the
four quarters even like so many Garudas.

(122)

ततस्तेषु प्रयातेषु देवसङ्घा: सहर्षिभि:।
भूतानि च भयं जग्मुस्तेषां पतनशाङ्कया॥ १२३॥

“Therefore, when they moved with speed
to and fro, hosts of gods with Rsis (seers of
