« KISKINDHAKANDA +

be heard. | shall narrate everything in
extenso. (2)
यदा तु दुन्दुभिं नाम दानवं महिषाकृतिम्।
प्रतिकालयते वाली मलयं wa पर्वतम्॥३॥
तदा विवेश महिषो मलयस्य गुहां प्रति।
विवेश वाली तत्रापि ued तज्जिघांसया॥४॥

“When Vali for his part was driving
back the demon, Mayavi* (son of Dundubhi)
by name, living in the form of a buffalo,
towards the Malaya mountain, the buffalo
forthwith entered into a cave of the Malaya
mountain. Vali too entered the cave of the
Malaya mountain on that occasion with intent
to kill the demon. (3-4)

ततोऽहं da निक्षिप्तो गुहाद्वारि विनीतवत्।
न च निष्क्रामते वाली daar संवत्सरे Wag il

“Having been placed there (by Vali), |
thereupon obediently stood at the entrance
of the cave. Vali, however, did not come out
at that juncture even though a year had
elapsed. (5)

Wa: क्षतजवेगेन आपुपूरे तदा बिलम्।
तदहं विस्मितो दृष्टवा भ्रातु: शोकविषार्दित: us
“Then the cave was forthwith filled with
a gushing stream of blood. | was amazed to
see it and felt oppressed with the sting of
grief on the score of my elder brother, Vali.
(6)

अथाहं गतबुद्धिस्तु Woah निहतो We:
शिला पर्वतसंकाशा बिलद्वारि मया कृता॥७॥

अशक्नुवन्निष्क्रमितुं महिषो विनशिष्यति।
ततोऽहमागां किष्किन्धां निराशस्तस्य जीविते॥ ८ i

“| was, however, immediately seized
with the idea that my elder brother, Vali, had
most evidently been killed. A rock as big as
a hill was placed by me at the entrance of
the cave in the hope that, unable to come
out, the buffalo would perish without
nourishment. Hopeless about Vali’s life, |

1113

thereupon came away to Kiskindha. (7-8)
Ws च सुमहत् Wea aA च रुमया सह।
fas सहितस्तत्र वसामि विगतज्वर:॥९॥

“Having attained a vast dominion and
secured Tara (Vali’s wedded wife) with (my
own wedded wife) Ruma, | began to live in
Kiskindha with my friends, free from anxiety.

(9)
आजगाम ततो वाली हत्वा तं वानरर्षभ:।
ततोऽहमददां Wt गौरवाद् भययन्तित:॥१०॥

“Having killed the demon, Vali, the
foremost of monkeys, returned in the
meantime. Thereupon | restored the kingdom
to him out of respect, seized as | was also
with fear. (10)

स at जिघांसुर्दुष्टात्मा वाली प्रव्यथितेन्द्रिय: |
परिकालयते वाली धावन्तं सचिवै: सह॥ ११॥

“Wishing to kill me, the said malevolent
Vali, who had a thick coat of hair on his
body and whose mind was extremely
agonized, angrily pursued me, who was
running for life with my ministers. (11)

ततोऽहं वालिना तेन सोऽनुबद्ध: प्रधावित:।
नदीश्च विविधा: पश्यन् वनानि नगराणि च॥ १२॥

“Pursued by the aforesaid Vali, | as
such then ran fast beholding various streams,
forests and cities too. (12)

आदर्शतलसंकाशा dat a पृथिवी मया।
अलातचक्रप्रतिमा दृष्टा गोष्पदवत् कृता॥१३॥

“At that time the earth, which was turned
into the imprint of a cow’s hoof, as it were,
(and entailed no exertion in going round it),
was seen by me much like a mirror (clearly
revealing, as it did, everything on its surface)
and a whirling firebrand due to the swiftness
of my movement. (13)

Yat fast ततो गत्वा पश्यामि विविधान् द्रुमान्।
पर्वतान् सदरीन् रम्यान् सरांसि विविधानि च॥ १४॥

* According to the popular maxim `आत्मा वै जायते पुत्र:` (One’s ownself is reborn as one’s son) Mayavi
(son of Dundubhi) has been spoken of here as Dundubhi; for the story evidently relates to Mayavi as will
be clear from a reference to Canto Nine, where it stands already narrated.
