346

of the king and were ever keen to please
him, dared not stop him, senior as he was
in years as well as in wisdom and had
already been permitted to see him whenever
he would. (44)

स समीपस्थितो राज्ञस्तामवस्थामजज्ञिवान्।
वाग्भि: परमतुष्टाभिरभिष्टोतुं प्रचक्रमे॥४५॥

Stationed besides the king and ignorant
about the aforesaid helpless plight of the
monarch, Sumantra made up his mind to
glorify him in most pleasing words. (45)

तत: सूतो यथापूर्वं पार्थिवस्य निवेशने।
सुमन्त्र: प्राञ्जलिर्भूत्वा तुष्टाव जगतीपतिम्॥४६॥

Standing with joined palms as before
in the king’s gynaeceum, Sumantra, the
charioteer, then extolled the emperor as
follows : (46)

यथा नन्दति तेजस्वी सागरो भास्करोदये।

Wea: Wea मनसा तथा नन्दय नस्तत:॥४७॥

“Even as the ocean gladdens the heart
at sunrise, glorious as it is in the sunshine,
pray, gladden us with your delighted mind,
being delighted yourself thereby. (47)

इन्द्रमस्यां तु वेलायामभितुष्टाव rater: |
सोऽजयद् SAA सर्वांस्तथा TAT बोधयाम्यहम्॥ YSU

“At this very hour of sunrise Matali,
Indra’s charioteer, extolled Indra, the ruler
of gods, with the result that the latter
conquered all the demons on the field of
battle. So do | glorify you. (48)

वेदा: सहाङ्गा विद्याश्च यथा ह्यात्मभुवं प्रभुम्।
ब्रह्माणं बोधयन्त्यद्य AM cat बोधयाम्यहम्॥४९॥

“Even as the Vedas alongwith Grammar
etc., (the branches of knowledge auxiliary
to them) as well as the sciences such as
the science of archery guide* in the work of
creation the self-born Lord Brahma, the
creator, so do | awaken you to your duty
today. (49)

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

आदित्य: सह चन्द्रेण यथा भूतधरां शुभाम्।
बोधयत्यद्य पृथिवीं तथा cat बोधयाम्यहम्॥ Ko I
“Even as the sun alongwith the moon
arouses the people of the blessed earth,
which sustains the entire creation (the sun
while rising and the moon while setting), so
do | arouse you today. (50)

उत्तिष्ठं सुमहाराज कृतकौतुकमङ्गल:।
विराजमानो age मेरोरिव दिवाकर:॥५१॥

“Having dressed and adorned yourself
in consonance with a festal occasion, and
shining brightly with your effulgent personality,
rise, O very great monarch, like the sun
from Mount Meru. (51)

सोमसूर्यौ च काकुत्स्थ शिववैश्रवणावपि।
वरुणश्चाग्निरिन्द्रश्च विजयं werd ते॥५२॥

“May the gods—Moon, Sun, Siva,
Kubera, Varuna, Agni and Indra bestow
upon you victory, O descendent of
Kakutstha ! (52)

Ta भगवती रात्रि: pd कृत्यमिदं aa
बुध्यस्व नृपशार्दूल He कार्यमनन्तरम्॥५३॥
“Night, the goddess, is gone. All things
desired by you are done. Now get up
please, O lion among kings ! and pay your

attention to the following programme.
(53)

उदतिष्ठत रामस्य समग्रमभिषेचनम्।
पौरजानपदाश्चापि नैगमश्च कृताञअलि:॥५४॥

“All the requisites for the installation of
Sri Rama as Prince Regent are ready. The
citizens as well as the people from the
countryside as also the merchants stand at
the door with joined palms. (54)

स्वयं वसिष्ठो भगवान् ब्राह्मणै: सह तिष्ठति।
क्षिप्रमाज्ञाप्यतां राजन् राघवस्याभिषेचनम्॥ ५५॥

“Here stands the mighty Vasistha
alongwith the other Brahmanas. Let the

* Tt is a well-known fact that Brahma derives his knowledge of objects to be evolved at the beginning

of creation from the Vedas.
