954

“By surmise on my part | conclude that
the aforesaid princess of Mithila was seen
by me while being carried off by Ravana (the
ogre) of terrible deeds, crying in a husky
voice “Rama, Rama!” and “Laksmana !” and
wriggling like a female serpent in the arms of
Ravana—there is no doubt aboutit. (9-10)

आत्मना पञ्चमं मां हि दृष्टवा शैलतले स्थितम्।
उत्तरीयं तया ah शुभान्याभरणानि च॥११॥

“Seeing me standing at the foot of Mount
Malaya (in the company of four others) with
myself as the fifth, a wrapper was actually
dropped by her as also shining jewels. (11)

तान्यस्माभिर्गृहीतानि निहितानि च राघव।
आनयिष्याम्यहं तानि प्रत्यभिज्ञातुमर्हसि॥ १२॥

“They were collected by us and have
been preserved, O scion of Raghu ! | shall
presently bring them; you ought to (be able
to) recognize them (as belonging to Sita).”

(12)
तमब्रवीत् ततो wa: सुग्रीवं प्रियवादिनम्।
आनयस्व सखे शीघ्रं किमर्थं प्रविलम्बसे॥ १३॥

Sri Rama thereupon said to the
celebrated Sugriva, who had_ spoken
agreeable words to him, “Bring them soon,
my friend; wherefore do you tarry!” (13)

`एवमुक्तस्तु Gila: शैलस्य Tet गुहाम्।
प्रविवेश dd: शीघ्रं राघवप्रियकाम्यया॥ १४॥

Urged in these words, Sugriva for his
part then quickly penetrated deep into a
cavern in the mountain, which was difficult
of access, with intent to sooth Sri Rama (a
scion of Raghu). (14)
उत्तरीयं Wat तु स तान्याभरणानि a
इदं पश्येति रामाय दर्शयामास वानर:॥१५॥

Taking hold of the wrapper as well as
of the aforesaid jewels, the said monkey,

Sugriva, for his part showed them to Sri
Rama, saying: “Look here !” (15)

ततो गृहीत्वा वासस्तु शुभान्याभरणानि च।
अभवद् बाष्पसंरुद्धो नीहारेणेव चन्द्रमा:॥ १६॥

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

Then holding the raiment as well as the
sparkling jewels, Sri Rama for his part was
fully covered up with tears even as the
moon is with fog. (16)

सीतास्नेहप्रव्त्तेन स तु बाष्पेण दूषित:।
a प्रियेति रुदन् धैर्यमुत्सृज्य न्यपतत् क्षितौ॥ १७॥

Stained with tears that gushed forth
due to his affection for Sita, and losing his
presence of mind, Sr Rama for his part
toppled down to the ground crying “Ah my
darling !” (17)

de pant स बहुशस्तमलंकारमुत्तमम्।
निशश्वास भृशं aut बिलस्थ sa रोषित:॥ १८॥
Pressing that excellent jewel to his
bosom repeatedly, he violently hissed like a
serpent provoked in its hole. (18)

अविच्छिन्नाश्रुवेगस्तु सौमित्रिं wet urea: |
परिदेवयितुं det wa: समुपचक्रमे॥१९॥
Perceiving Laksmana (son of Sumitra)
by his side, Sri Rama for his part duly
began to wail piteously as follows, the stream
of his tears remaining unbroken : (19)

पश्य लक्ष्मण वैदेह्या संत्यक्तं ह्रियमाणया।
उत्तरीयमिदं भूमौ शरीराद् भूषणानि च॥ २०॥
“Behold, O Laksmana, this wrapper as
well as the jewels consciously dropped on
the ground from her person by Sita (a
princess of the Videha territory) while being
borne away by the ogre. (20)

उत्सृष्टं भूषणमिदं तथा wa हि दृश्यते॥ २१॥
“Surely this jewel was dropped on a
grassy ground by Sita while being borne

away as is evident from the fact that it looks
just the same in appearance.” (21)

एवमुक्तस्तु WATT लक्ष्मणो वाक्यमब्रवीत्।
नाहं जानामि केयूरे नाहं जानामि कुण्डले॥ Vl
नूपुरे त्वभिजानामि fet पादाभिवन्दनात्।
ततस्तु waa वाक्यं सुग्रीवमिदमब्रवीत्॥ २३॥

Spoken to as aforesaid by Sri Rama,
