710

तेषां तु रथघोषेण राक्षसानां महात्मनाम्।
वानराणामपि चमूर्युद्धायैवाभ्यवर्तत॥ ४९॥
At the sound of the chariots of those
gigantic ogres, the simian army too stood
ready facing them for an encounter. (49)
तेषां तु तुमुलं ae aya कपिरक्षसाम्।
अन्योन्यमाह्वयानानां क्रुद्धानां जयमिच्छताम्॥ ५०॥
A tumultuous contest actually ensued
between the monkeys and the ogres, who

challenged each his adversary, enraged as
they were and eager for victory. (50)

ad: क्रुद्धो दशग्रीव: vit: काञ्चनभूषणै: |

वानराणामनीकेषु चकार कदनं महत्॥५१॥
Provoked to anger, Ravana, the ten-

headed monster, thereupon played great

havoc among the simian ranks with his
arrows decked with gold. (51)

निकृत्तशिरस: केचिद् रावणेन वलीमुखा:।
केचिद् विच्छिन्नहृदया: केचिच्छोत्रविवर्जिता:॥ ५२॥

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA +

Some monkeys had their heads cut off
by Ravana; others had their hearts pierced
and still others were deprived of their ears.

(52)

निरुच्छ्वासा हता:केचित्केचित् पारश्वेषु दारिता:।
केचिद् विभिन्नशिरस: केचिच्चक्षुर्विनाकृता: i ५३ Ul
Some were struck down lifeless, others
were split in the flanks; some more had
their skulls smashed and still others were
deprived of their eyes. (53)

दशानन: क्रोधविवृत्तनेत्रो
यतो यतोऽभ्येति रथेन संख्ये ।

ततस्ततस्तस्य
we न शॆक्रूरियूथपास्ते ॥ ५४॥
Wheresoever the ten-headed monster
drove in his chariot on the battlefield, his eyes
rolling in fury, the celebrated commanders of
monkey troops stationed in that quarter could

no withstand the mad fury of his arrows. (54)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये FERS पञ्चनवतितम: सर्ग: ॥ ९५ ॥

Thus ends Canto Ninety-five in the Yuddhakanda of the glorious Ramayana of
Valmiki, the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

ण्णवतितम: सर्ग:
Canto XCVI

Destruction of the army of ogres at the hands
of Sugriva and the fall of Virupaksa

तथा तै: कृत्तगात्रैस्तु दशग्रीवेण मार्गणै:।
aya वसुधा at प्रकोर्णा हरिभिस्तदा॥१॥
The battle-field of Lanka for its part
was strewn on that occasion with those
monkeys whose limbs had thus been torn
asunder by the ten-headed monster with
his arrows. (1)
रावणस्याप्रसह्यं तं शरसम्पातमेकत:।
न शेकु: सहितुं de पतङ्मा ज्वलनं यथा॥२॥

The monkeys could not stand even for
an instant the irresistible hail of shafts
discharged by Ravana, any more than moths
would stand a blazing fire. (2)

तेऽर्दिता निशितैर्बाणै: क्रोशन्तो विप्रदुद्रुवु:।
पावकार्चि: समाविष्टा दह्यमाना यथा गजा:॥ ३॥
Tormented by those sharp arrows,

they fled screaming like elephants enveloped
in flames and getting scorched by them.

(3)
