408

In these words did the large-eyed
daughter of Janaka lament, tormented as
she was with agony, and looked on her
husband’s head and bow. (33)
एवं लालप्यमानायां सीतायां तत्र wera: |
अभिचक्राम भर्तारमनीकस्थ: कृताञ्जलि:।॥ ३४॥

While Sita was wailing, as aforesaid,
an ogre guarding the gate approached his
master, Ravana, on that spot with joined
palms. (34)

विजयस्वार्यपुत्रेति सोऽभिवाद्य प्रसाद्य च।
न्यवेदयदनुप्राप्तं प्रहस्तं वाहिनीपतिम्॥ ३५॥
Greeting Ravana with the words
“Be victorious, my lord!” and_ thereby
winning his pleasure, the ogre reported
to him in the following words about
Prahasta, the Commander-in-Chief, having
arrived: (35)

अमात्यै: सहित: Wa: प्रहस्तस्त्वामुपस्थित:।
wt दर्शनकामेन अहं प्रस्थापित: प्रभो॥ ३६॥

“Accompanied by all the ministers,
Prahasta has sought your presence. | have
been dispatched by him, eager as he is to
see you, my lord! (36)

नूनमस्ति महाराज राजभावात् क्षमान्वित।
किंचिदात्ययिकं are तेषां त्वं att कुरु॥ ३७॥
“Surely there is some urgent work, O
great monarch endowed with forgiveness
as a mark of royalty, therefore, be pleased
to see them.” (37)

एतच्छृत्वा दशग्रीवो राक्षसप्रतिवेदितम्।
अशोकवनिकां त्यक्त्वा मन्रिणां दर्शनं ययौ ।। ३८ ॥
Leaving the Asoka grove on hearing
the aforesaid submission of the ogre, Ravana
(the ten-headed monster) left to see the
counsellors. (38)

स तु ad aaedta abate: कृत्यमात्मन:।
सभां प्रविश्य विदधे विदित्वा रामविक्रमम्॥ ३९॥

Having come to know the prowess

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA +

of Sri Rama, nay, entering the council-
chamber and deciding upon his course of
action in consultation with his counsellors,
Ravana for his part proceeded to act
accordingly. (39)

अन्तर्धानं तु तच्छीर्षं तच्च कार्मुकमुत्तमम्।
जगाम रावणस्यैव निर्याणसमनन्तरम्॥४०॥

Immediately after the departure of
Ravana, the aforesaid (illusory) head as
well as that excellent bow vanished. (40)

समर्थयामास तदा रामकार्यविनिश्चयम्॥४१॥

In consultation with the aforesaid
counsellors of terrible prowess, Ravana
(the ruler of ogres) for his part then
arrived at a definite conclusion regarding
the course of action to be taken against
Sri Rama. (41)

अविदूरस्थितान् सर्वान् बलाध्यक्षान् हितैषिण: |
erat कालसदृशं रावणो राक्षसाधिप:॥४२॥

Ravana, the suzerain lord of ogres,
thereupon spoke in the following opprotune
words to all the troop commanders, who
wished him well and stood not very far from
him: (42)
शीघ्रं भेरीनिनादेन स्फुटं कोणाहतेन मे।
समानयध्वं सैन्यानि वक्तव्यं च न कारणम्॥४३॥

“Speedily collect in my _ presence
the forces through the sounding of
kettledrums, produced by beating them
with drum-sticks. The reason for collecting
the forces should not, however, be
pointed out.” (43)

ततस्तथेति प्रतिगृह्य aga-
स्तदैव Gat: सहसा महद् बलम्।
समानयंश्चैव समागतं च

न्यवेदयन् भर्तरि युद्धकाङ्क्षिणि।॥४४॥

Bowing to his command in the words
“Amen!”, the envoys, who were present
