* AYODHYAKANDA +

685

एकादशाधिकशततम: सर्ग:
Canto CXI

Pleading the superiority of a teacher in comparison to one’s parents, Sage
Vasistha by virtue of his superiority and as a concession to Bharata, a
dependant of Sri Rama, whose vow it has been to respect the feelings of
his dependants, urges Sri Rama to grant the prayer of Bharata. Sri
Rama, however, contends that one’s parents are more worthy of
respect even than one’s teacher and is accordingly insistent on
implementing the pledge already given by him to his father. Thus
discomfited in argument, Bharata makes up his mind to undertake
a fast unto death as a last resort to exert pressure on him.
On Sri Rama’s dubbing such a step as repugnant to the
code of conduct prescribed for a Ksatriya, Bharata
requests his elder brother to allow him to remain in
exile in the forest as the latter’s proxy. Sri Rama,

however,

rules out this proposition also as

something preposterous, saying that one’s duty
is entrusted to a proxy only on the formers
incapacity, which could not be predicated
of him, and reaffirms his decision to
enter Ayodhya only after fulfilling
the pledge given to his father

वसिष्ठ: स dar राममुक्त्वा राजपुरोहित:।
sade धर्मसंयुक्तं पुनरेवापरं वच:॥१॥

Having spoken to Sri Rama as
aforesaid on that occasion, the said
Vasistha, the family-priest of the king,
addressed to him once more the following
words in consonance with righteousness :

(1)
पुरुषस्येह जातस्य भवन्ति Wa: सदा।
आचार्यश्चैव काकुत्स्थ frat माता च राघव॥ २॥

“The preceptor, O scion of Kakutstha,
as well as one’s father and mother, O
descendant of Raghu, ever come to be the

adored of a man from the time he is born in
this world. (2)

frat at जनयति yee पुरुषर्षभ।
Wat ददाति चाचार्यस्तस्मात् स गुरुरुच्यते॥ ३॥

“The father only procreates and the
mother brings forth a human being, O jewel
among men; the preceptor, on the other
hand, bestows wisdom on him, hence he is
spoken of as Guru (superior even to the
parents). (3)
a ase पितुराचार्यस्तव wa परंतप।
मम त्वं वचनं कुर्वन् नातिवर्ते: Pat गतिम्॥४॥

“l, for my part, am the preceptor not
only of your father but yours too, O chastiser
of foes ! Doing my bidding, therefore, you
will not be transgressing the path of the
virtuous. (4)

sat fe a परिषदो ज्ञातयश्च नृपास्तथा।

We तात चरन् धर्मं नातिवर्ते: Pat गतिम्॥५॥
“Here indeed are your subjects, kinsmen

and tributary princes too. Discharging your
