+ UTTARAKANDA +

पुष्पकस्य गतिश्छिन्ना यत्कृते AA गच्छत:।
तमिमं शैलमुन्मूलं करोमि तव गोपते॥ २३॥

“‘O master of a bull, | shall pull up by
the roots this hill on whose account the
course of Puspaka in which | was travelling
has been arrested. (23)

केन प्रभावेण भवो नित्यं क्रीडति राजवत्।
विज्ञातव्यं न जानीते भयस्थानमुपस्थितम्॥ २४॥

“‘By virtue of what power does Siva
continually sport like a king? He does not
seem to understand what should be known
to him, viz., that danger has come to him.’

(24)

Vata ततो राम भुजान् विक्षिप्य पर्वते।
तोलयामास तं शीघ्रं स शैल: समकम्पत॥ २५॥
“Having said so, O Rama, he put his
hands below the hill and lifted it up in no
time so that, the hill shook violently. (25)

चालनात् पर्वतस्यैव गणा देवस्य कम्पिता:।
चचाल पार्वती चापि तदाश्लिष्टा महेश्वरम्॥ VE Il

“By the shaking of the hill the attendants
of the Lord trembled; Parvati also slipped and
clung to Maheswara at that moment. (26)

ततो WA महादेवो देवानां प्रवरो हर:।
पादाङ्गुष्ठेन तं vei पीडयामास लीलया॥ २७॥

“Then, O Rama, Mahadeva, the foremost
of the gods, also known as Hara, the
Destroyer, sportively pressed the hill with
His great toe. (27)

पीडितास्तु ततस्तस्य शैलस्तम्भोषमा भुजा:।
विस्मिताश्चाभवंस्तत्र सचिवास्तस्य रक्षस:॥ २८॥

“His (DaSanana’s) arms, which
resembled pillars supporting the hill, were
then crushed; and the ministers of the
Raksasa standing there were surprised. (28)

रक्षसा तेन रोषाच्च भुजानां पीडनात् तथा।
मुक्तो विराव: सहसा त्रैलोक्यं येन कम्पितम्॥ २९॥
“When his arms were thus crushed, the
Raksasa in fury raised a cry all of a sudden.
All the three worlds were shaken by it. (29)

897

मेनिरे वज्रनिष्पेषं तस्यामात्या युगक्षये।
तदा वर्त्मसु चलिता देवा इन्द्रपुरोगमा:॥ ३०॥

“His ministers took it to be a crash of
thunder, which takes place at the end of the
world-period. At that time even the gods,
with Indra at their head, stumbled on their
way. (30)
समुद्राश्चापि संक्षुब्धाश्चलिताश्चापि पर्वता:।
aan विद्याधरा: सिद्धा: किमेतदिति चाब्रुवन्॥ ३१॥

“Even the oceans became turbulent
and the mountains also shook; nay, the
Yaksas, Vidyadharas and Siddhas cried out,
“What is this?” (31)
तोषयस्व महादेवं नीलकण्ठमुमापतिम्।
तमृते VOT नान्यं पश्यामोऽत्र दशानन॥ ३२॥

“‘Propitiate Mahadeva, the blue-necked
God, and the husband of Uma; O Dasanana,

we do not see any protector other than Him.
(32)

स्तुतिभि: प्रणतो seat तमेव शरणं व्रज।
कृपालु: शङ्करस्तुष्ट: ware a विधास्यति॥ ३३॥
“‘In all humility seek refuge in Him
by singing His praises. Sankara is
compassionate and will become gracious to
you when gratified.’ (33)

Ca HEAT AET STA वरषभध्वजम्।
सामभिर्विविधै: स्तोत्रै: प्रणम्य स दशानन:।
संवत्सरसहस्रं तु रुदतो रक्षसो गतम्॥ svi
“Respectfully bowing to Him when
advised thus by his ministers, DaSanana
glorified the God, whose standard bears the
ensign of a bull, by singing psalms from the
Samaveda and other hymns. A thousand
years elapsed while the Raksasa went on
crying in this manner. (34)
तत: प्रीतो महादेव: शैलाग्रे विष्ठित: wey: |
मुक्त्वा चास्य भुजान् राम We वाक्यं दशाननम्॥ ३५ ॥
“Relieving his hands of the pressure,

when pleased with his eulogy, while
remaining seated on a peak of the hill, Lord
