718

पफाल हृदयं चास्य A पपात हतो भुवि।

तस्मिन् विनिहते भूमौ तत् सैन्यं सम्प्रचुक्षुभे॥ २३॥
अभवच्च महान् क्रोध: समरे रावणस्य तु।
वानराणां प्रहृष्टानां सिंहनाद: सुपुष्कल:॥ २४॥
Gazing on Sugriva when Mahodara
had been struck down by the latter,
Mahaparswa for his part, who was endowed
with extraordinary might, and whose eyes
had turned crimson through anger, forthwith
set up a commotion with his shafts in the
formidable ranks of Angada. Nay, that ogre
severed the heads of the leading monkeys
from their trunks even as the wind would
detach a fruit from its stalk. Again, with his
arrows he also cut off the arms of some
monkeys: while, getting infuriated, he tore
off the region of the ribs of the others.
Oppressed with a hail of shafts by
Mahaparswa, all the monkeys wore a
dejected look from despondency and lost
heart. Seeing his army frightened on being
hard pressed by the ogre, Mahaparswa.
Angada, who was endowed with great
impetuosity, exhibited his tempo like a sea
on the full-moon days. Seizing hold of an
iron bludgeon, which shone like the rays of
the sun, Angada, the foremost of the
monkeys, flung it at Mahaparswa on the
battlefield. Stunned by _ that blow,
Mahaparswa for his part dropped senseless
on the ground from his chariot alongwith the
charioteer. Rushing forward from his battalion,
which closely resembled a dark cloud, and
seizing in fury a huge rock, resembling a
mountain-peak, the celebrated Jambavan
(the king of bears), who was full of ardour
and exceedingly powerful and looked like a
heap of black antimony, struck down his
horses with impetuosity and shattered his
well-known chariot. Having regained his
consciousness after a while, Mahaparswa
for his part, who was endowed with

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA +

extraordinary might, pierced the celebrated
Angada once more with numerous arrows
and struck Jambavan, the ruler of bears,
with three arrows in the chest. He also
struck Gavaksa, with numerous shafts.
Seized with anger on seeing Gavaksa as
well as Jambavan tormented with arrows,
Angada picked up a formidable iron bludgeon.
Firmly grasping that iron bludgeon, which
shone like the rays of the sun, with both
hands and brandishing it with force, Angada,
son of Vali, his eyes red with anger, hurled
it with the intention of killing the ogre,
Mahaparswa, who stood at a distance.
Thrown by the mighty Angada, that bludgeon
for its part knocked the bow with the arrow
set to it from the ogre’s hand as also his
helmet. Nay, approaching the ogre with all
speed, the glorious Angada, son of Valli, full
of rage, slapped him on the temple (root of
the ear), shining with an earring. Provoked
to anger, Mahaparswa, for his part, who
was endowed with great impetuosity and
extraordinary splendour, seized a huge axe
in one hand. Extremely enraged, the ogre
hurled that stainless and solid axe, which
had been washed in oil and sharpened
thereby, and was made of steel, at the son
of Vali. Full of fury, the celebrated Angada,
however, evaded the axe, which had been
aimed with violence at his left shoulder
bone. The aforesaid Angada, who was the
equal of his deceased father in prowess
and was extremely enraged, clenched his
adament-like fist. Nay, knowing, as he did,
the vital parts of the body, he let fall the fist,
which impinged like the thunderbolt on the
bosom of the ogre in the vicinity of his breasts.
Due to its impact the bosom of the ogre
burst open and he fell down dead on the
ground in that major conflict. On Mahaparswa
having been struck down on the ground, his
army got confused, while a violent rage
