1002

wea wa सौमित्रे अस्वस्थमिव mara
औत्सुक्यं परमं चापि अधृतिश्च परा मम॥ १५॥

“O Lady, Sita, the daughter of the king
of Videha, you shall be taken to the holy
hermitages of the Rsis and placed in the
forest inhabited by the ascetics, in all haste
at the bidding of our Lord.” Thus addressed
by the noble Laksmana, Sita (the daughter
of the king of Videha) was highly pleased
and agreed to depart, Sita (the daughter of
the king of Videha) taking with her those
costly garments and gems, said “I shall
distribute these garments and costly gems
of various types to the spouses of the
ascetics.” Laksmana (son of Sumitra) fully
approved of her desire and having seated
Sita (the daughter of the king of Mithila) in
the chariot, keeping in mind the order of Sri
Rama drove on with speedy horses. Then
Sita addressed to Laksmana, the enhancer
of prosperity thus :

“O Laksmana (the descendant of
Raghu). | see ill-omens in abundance, my
right eye throbs and my limbs shiver: O
Laksmana (son of Sumitra), my heart seems
to be distressed, great anxiety (regarding
the city or Sri Rama) ails me and my
forbearance fails completely. (8—15).

शून्यामेव च पश्यामि पृथिवीं पृथुलोचन।
अपि स्वस्ति भवेत् तस्य भ्रातुस्ते भ्रातृवत्सल॥ VE Il

vag चैव A dit सर्वासामविशेषत:।
Gt जनपदे wa कुशलं प्राणिनामपि॥१७॥
“O the big-eyed and lover of brothers
Laksmana, the earth seems a void (deprived
of all happiness), may all be well with your
brother; and welfare be with all my mothers-
in-law too in equal measure and so be it
with all beings in the town and country.”
(16-17)

saat सीता देवता अभ्ययाचत।
लक्ष्मणोऽर्थं तत: श्रुत्वा शिरसा ar मैथिलीम्॥ १८ ॥

शिवमित्यब्रवीद्हृष्टो ea विशुष्यता।
ततो वासमुपागम्य गोमतीतीर आश्रमे॥१९॥

« VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

Wud wees सौमित्रि: सूतमब्रवीत्।
योजयस्व रथं शीघ्रमद्य भागीरथीजलम्॥२०॥
frat धारयिष्यामि त्रियम्बक इवौजसा।
सोऽश्वान् विचारयित्वा तु रथे युक्तान् मनोजवान्॥ २१॥
आरोहस्वेति adel सूत: प्राञ्जलिरब्रवीत्।
सा तु सूतस्य वचनादारुरोह रथोत्तमम्॥ २२॥
सीता सौमित्रिणा सार्धं सुमन्त्रेण च धीमता।

आससाद विशालाक्षी गङ्गां पापविनाशिनीम्॥ २३॥

Thus Sita prayed to the gods with folded
hands; Laksmana then hearing this and
paying homage to Sita (the daughter of the
Lord of the Mithila), with his head bending
and with a langering heart said: “All is well”
as if he was pleased (to say so), Having
approached the residence in the Agrama on
the banks of the Gomati, he slept and at the
break of dawn, Laksmana (the son of
Sumitra), waking up again addressed the
Charioteer thus: “You yoke the chariot soon,
| shall bear the waters of Ganga on my
head as the Lord Siva (the three-eyed god)
with prowess.” The Charioteer having made
the horses yoked to the chariot who had a
speed equal to that of the mind, with folded
hands asked Sita (the daughter of the Lord
of Mithila) to ascend the chariot and she
ascended the beautiful chariot as requested.
Sita of larger eyes together with Laksmana
(son of Sumitra) and the wise Sumantra
reached the Ganga, the dispeller of all sins.

(18—23)
अथार्धदिवसे गत्वा भागीरथ्या जलाशयम्।
निरीक्ष्य लक्ष्मणो दीन: प्ररुरोद महास्वन:॥ २४॥

After spending half a day (on reaching

Ganga) and looking at the streams of

Bhagirathi the agitated Laksmana cried
making a loud noise. (24)

सीता तु परमायत्ता दृष्टवा लक्ष्मणमातुरम्।
उवाच वाक्यं धर्मज्ञा किमिदं wad त्वया॥ २५॥
जाह्नवीतीरमासाद्य चिराभिलषितं मम।
हर्षकाले किमर्थं at विषादयसि लक्ष्मण॥ २६॥

The well composed Sita knower of good
