# YUDDHAKANDA +

the following words at that moment to Ravana
(the suzerain lord of ogres): (18)

स त्वं भ्रान्तोऽसि मे राजन् gfe मां ag यदिच्छसि।
ज्येष्ठो मान्य: पितृसमो न च धर्मपथे स्थित:।
इदं हि परुषं वाक्यं न क्षमाम्यग्रजस्य ते॥१९॥
“You, who have spoken harsh words
to me, O king, are deluded. Rebuke me in
whatever words you will. Being my eldest
brother, you are worthy of respect to me
like a father; yet you are not steadfast on
the path of virtue. ।, therefore, cannot tolerate
your abusive speech, even though you are
my elder. (19)
सुनीतं हितकामेन वाक्यमुक्तं दशानन।
न Verdana: कालस्य वशमागता:॥ २०॥
“Those who have not mastered their
self and have fallen under the sway of
Death do not heed the excellent words of
wisdom uttered by a well-wisher, O Ravana
(endowed with ten heads)! (20)

सुलभा: Tea राजन् add प्रियवादिन:।
अप्रियस्य च पथ्यस्य वक्ता श्रोता च दुर्लभ:॥ २१॥
“People ever given to uttering palatable
words, O king, can be easily had. He,
however, who utters and listens to words
which, though unpleasant to hear, yet are
conducive to one’s good are difficult to find.
(21)

ag कालस्य पाशेन सर्वभूतापहारिण:।
न Wada त्वां प्रदीप्तं शरणं यथा॥२२॥

“| could not ignore you, held fast in the
noose of Death—who snatches away all

343

beings—and going to perish like a house in
flames. Hence | went out of my way to tell
you all this. (22)

दीप्तपावकसंकाशै: शितै: काञ्चनभूषणै: |
न त्वामिच्छाम्यहं द्रष्टुं रामेण Pad wt २३॥
“| did not wish to see you killed by

Rama with sharp arrows glowing like a
flaming fire and ornamented with gold. (23)

WIT बलवन्तश्च कृतास्त्राश्च नरा रणे।
कालाभिपन्ना: सीदन्ति यथा वालुकसेतव:॥ २४॥

“Seized by death, even gallant and
mighty men, nay, those who are skilled in
archery fall in battle like dams of sand. (24)
तन्मर्षयतु यच्चोक्तं गुरुत्वाद्धितमिच्छता।
आत्मानं सर्वथा Tat Ut AAT सराक्षसाम्।
स्वस्ति तेऽस्तु गमिष्यामि सुखी भव मया विना it २५ ॥

“Being my elder brother, pray, forgive
what has been said by me, wishing you
well, as | do. Now protect yourself in every
way, as well as this city including the ogres.
May prosperity attend on you. Be happy in
my absence. (25)

निवार्यमाणस्य मया हितैषिणा

न Wad a वचनं निशाचर।
परान्तकाले fe गतायुषो नरा

fet न गृह्णन्ति सुहृद्धिरीरितम्॥ २६॥

“While you were being restrained by me
as | wished you well, my warning did not find
favour with you, O ranger of the night! At the
hour of death men whose life has run its
course do not, as a rule, heed the salutary
advice tendered by their well-wishers.” (26)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये FERS षोडश: AWA: ॥ १६ Il

Thus ends Canto Sixteen in the Yuddhakanda of the glorious Ramayana of
Valmiki, the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

