* SUNDARAKANDA +

यच्च नान्यमना WA यच्च शोकपरायण:॥ २॥

“What has been said by you, O
Hanuman, viz., that Sri Rama does not give
his mind to any other thing than me and that
he is given over to grief, is nectar mixed
with poison. (2)

teat वा सुविस्तीर्णे व्यसने वा सुदारुणे।
रज्ज्वेव पुरुषं बद्ध्वा कृतान्त: परिकर्षति॥ ३॥
“Tying a man with a cord, as it were,
Death snatches away a man, no matter
whether he is rolling in very extensive fortune
or sunk in terrible adversity. (3)

विधिर्नूनमसंहार्य:२ प्राणिनां प्लवगोत्तम।
सौमित्रिं मां च रामं च व्यसनै: पश्य मोहितान्॥४॥
“Inevitable indeed is the destiny of living
beings, O jewel among monkeys! For
example, look at Laksmana, son of Sumitra,
Sri Rama and myself distracted by woes.
(4)

शोकस्यास्य कथं ut राघवोऽधिगमिष्यति।
प्लवमान: परिक्रान्तो हतनौ: सागरे यथा॥७५॥

“How will Sri Rama, a scion of Raghu,
reach the end of this ocean of grief any
more than a powerful man who has suffered
a shipwreck and is swimming in a sea? (5)

राक्षसानां at कृत्वा सूदयित्वा च रावणम्।
लङ्कामुन्मथितां Heat कदा द्रक्ष्यति मां पति:। ६॥
“When will my lord, Sri Rama, see me
after compassing the destruction of ogres,
killing Ravana and laying Lanka waste? (6)
a area: संत्वरस्वेति यावदेव न पूर्यते।
अयं संवत्सर: कालस्तावद्धि मम जीवितम्॥७॥
“He should be asked to act with great
haste; for my life is going to last only till the
current period of twelve months is not
complete. (7)

वर्तते दशमो मासो gt q शेषौ प्लवङ्गम।
रावणेन नृशंसेन wa य: pa मम॥८॥

“This is the close of the tenth month

171

and two months still remain, O Hanuman,
out of the time-limit of twelve months that
has been fixed by the merciless Ravana for
my survival. (8)

विभीषणेन च wrt मम निर्यातनं प्रति।
अनुनीत: प्रयत्नेन न च ad Hed मतिम्॥ ९॥

“Nay, Ravana was _perseveringly
entreated by his younger brother, Vibhisana,
for my restoration to Sri Rama; but the
former does not feel inclined to do it. (9)

मम प्रतिप्रदानं fe रावणस्य न रोचते।
रावणं मार्गते संख्ये मृत्यु: कालवशंगतम्॥१०॥
“My restoration does not find favour
with Ravana; for Death lies in wait for him in
combat, fallen as he is in the clutches of the
Time-Spirit (an embodiment of the destructive
principle). (10)
ज्येष्ठा कन्या कला नाम विभीषणसुता कपे।
तया ममैतदाख्यातं मात्रा प्रहितया स्वयम्॥११॥
“The eldest daughter born of Vibhisana
is called by the name of Kala, O Hanuman !

This was reported to me by Kala herself when
she was sent to me by her mother. (11)

अविन्ध्यो नाम मेधावी विद्वान् राक्षसपुङ्खव:।
धृतिमाञ्छीलवान् वृद्धो रावणस्य सुसम्मत:॥१२॥

“There is a jewel among the ogres,
Avindhya by name, who is intelligent and
learned, full of fortitude and rich in amiable
disposition, aged and highly respected by
Ravana. (12)
रामात् क्षयमनुप्राप्तं रक्षसां प्रत्यचोदयत्।

न च तस्य स दुष्टात्मा श्रृणोति वचनं हितम्॥ १३॥

“He forewarned Ravana of the imminent
destruction of ogres at the hands of Sri
Rama if he did not restore me; but the evil-
minded fellow did not heed his salutary
advice. (13)

आशंसेयं हरिश्रेष्ठ fart at प्राप्स्यते uta: |
अन्तरात्मा fe मे शुद्धस्तस्मिंश्च बहवो गुणा:॥ १४॥

“| hope, O jewel among monkeys, that
my lord will regain me soon; for my heart is
