# YUDDHAKANDA #

fleeing in all directions, Sri Rama intercepted
the aforesaid ogres on that occasion with a
hail of shafts. (8)

वारितान् राक्षसान् SAT मकराक्षो निशाचर:।
कोपानलसमाविष्टो वचनं चेदमब्रवीत्॥९॥

Seeing the ogres intercepted, the
prowler of the night, Makaraksa, was filled
with the fire of anger and spoke as follows:

(9)
fers राम मया सार्धं द्वन्द्वयुद्धं भविष्यति।
त्याजयिष्यामि ते प्राणान् धनुर्मुक्तै: fore: शरै: ।। १० ॥

“Tarry, O Rama! Your duel will take
place with me. With sharp arrows shot from
my bow | shall relieve you of your life.(10)

यत् तदा दण्डकारण्ये पितरं हतवान् मम।
तदग्रत: स्वकर्मस्थं स्मृत्वा रोषोऽभिवर्धते॥११॥

“Inasmuch as you killed my father the
other day in the Dandaka forest, my wrath
grows violent when | think of you engaged
in such nefarious acts from that time on.

(11)

wad भृशमङ्गानि दुरात्मन् मम Waal
यन्मयासि न दृष्टस्त्वं तस्मिन् काले महावने॥ १२॥
“My limbs were being wildly consumed,
O evil-minded scion of Raghu, in that you
were not seen by me in that large forest at
that time. (12)

दिष्ट्यासि दर्शनं wa मम त्वं प्राप्तवानिह।
कांक्षितोऽसि क्षुधार्तस्य सिंहस्येवेतरो WA: १३॥
“By good fortune you have caught my
sight here. You were sought by me even as
an ordinary animal is sought by a lion afflicted
with hunger, O Rama! (13)

TI मद्बाणवेगेन प्रेतराड्विषयं गत:।
ये त्वया निहता: शूरा: सह तैश्च वसिष्यसि॥ १४॥

“Nay, having reached the realm of Yama
(the ruler of the departed) through the
impetuosity of my arrows today, you shall
dwell with those very champions who have
been killed by you. (14)

639

agua किमुक्तेन AUT WA वचो मम।
पश्यन्तु सकला लोकास्त्वां At चैव रणाजिरे॥ १५ I

“What will be gained through much talk
on this topic? Listen, O Rama to my advice.
Let all people see you as well as me trying
our strength on the field of battle. (15)

अस्तरैर्वा गदया वापि बाहुभ्यां वा रणाजिरे।
अभ्यस्तं येन वा राम वर्ततां तेन वा मृधम्॥ १६॥

“Let our trial of strength commence on
the battlefield with mystic missiles, or with
maces or with arms, or with any other
weapon with which you may have carried
on your military practice, O Rama!” (16)

मकराक्षवच: श्रुत्वा रामो दशरथात्मज:।
अब्रवीत् प्रहसन् वाक्यमुत्तरोत्तरवादिनम्॥ १७॥
Heartily laughing on hearing the
challenge of Makaraksa, Sri Rama, sprung
from the loins of Emperor DaSaratha, replied

as follows to the ogre, who was speaking
further and further without interruption: (17)

कत्थसे fe gat tat बहून्यसदृशानि ते।
न रणे शक्यते जेतुं विना युद्धेन वाग्बलात्॥ १८ ॥

“Why do you indulge in self-praise in
vain, O ogre? Many things have been said
by you, which are unworthy of you. No
victory can be scored on the battlefield by
sheer force of speech without an encounter.

(18)

चतुर्दश सहस्राणि रक्षसां त्वत्पिता च a: |
त्रिशिरा दूषणश्चापि दण्डके निहतो मया॥१९॥

“Fourteen thousand of ogres as also
Khara, who was your father, Trisira and
Dusana too were killed by me in the Dandaka
forest. (19)
स्वाशिताश्चापि मांसेन गृध्रगोमायुवायसा:।
भविष्यन्त्यद्य वै पाप तीक्ष्णतुण्डनखाङ्कुशा: ॥ २० ॥

“Nay, vultures, jackals and crows with
sharp beaks and goad-like claws were
sated with their flesh. Today too they shall

likewise be sated with your flesh, O sinful
one!” (20)
