574

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

दिष्ट्या न चलितो धर्मादात्मा a सहलक्षण:।
वत्स सत्यप्रतिज्ञो हि सतां लोकानवाप्स्यसि॥ ६२॥

“Luckily enough your mind, endowed
as it is with excellences, has not deviated
from righteousness. Since you are true to
your promise, you will attain to the realms of
the virtuous, my child !” (62)

इत्युक्त्वा चाङ्कमानीय भरतं भ्रातृवत्सलम्।
परिष्वज्य महाबाहुं ete भृशदु:खिता॥६३॥
Saying so and placing the mighty-
armed Bharata, who was so fond of his
brother, on her lap, and embracing him,
Kausalya, who felt sore distressed, wept
aloud. (63)

एवं विलपमानस्य दु:खार्तस्य महात्मन:।
मोहाच्च शोकसंरम्भाद् aya लुलितं मन:॥ ६४॥
The mind of the high-souled Bharata,
who was wailing as aforesaid, stricken as
he was with sorrow, got agitated through
infatuation and excess of grief. (64)

लालप्यमानस्य विचेतनस्य
प्रणष्टबुद्धे: पतितस्य भूमौ।
मुहुर्मुहुर्नि:श्चसतश्च दीर्घं
सा तस्य शोकेन जगाम TA: ।। ६५ ॥
While Bharata was lamenting thus and
lay fallen unconscious on the ground, sighing
again and again through grief, his power of
judgment having been lost, the aforesaid
night passed. (65)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्येऽयोध्याकाण्डे पञ्चसप्ततितम: सर्ग: ॥ ७५ ॥

Thus ends Canto Seventy-five in the Ayodhyakanda of the glorious Ramayana of
Valmiki, the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

षट्सप्ततितम: सर्ग:
Canto LXXVI
Removing his father’s dead body from the vessel full of oil and cremating it
with the help of articles befitting an Emperor, and offering libations
of water to the spirit of the deceased on the bank of the Sarayu,
as enjoined by Vasistha, Bharata returns to Ayodhya

Jara वदतां श्रेष्ठो वसिष्ठ: श्रेष्ठवागूषि:।॥ १॥
To Bharata, the son of Kaikeyi, who
was sore stricken with grief, as aforesaid,
Sage Vasistha, the foremost of speakers,
spoke as follows in a most polite language :
(1)

अलं शोकेन UR A राजपुत्र महायश:।
प्राप्तकालं Aad: कुरु संयानमुत्तमम्॥ २॥
“Have done with grief, O highly illustrious
prince! May good betide you! Perform
now in an excellent way the funeral of
the deceased king, which is now overdue.”

(2)

वसिष्ठस्य वच: श्रुत्वा भरतो धरणीं गत:।

प्रैतकृल्यानि सर्वाणि कारयामास धर्मवित्॥ ३॥
Hearing the admonition of Vasistha,

Bharata, who knew what is right, fell prostrate

and ordered all obsequies concerning his
father to be taken in hand. (3)

उद्धृत्य तैलसंसेकात् स तु भूमौ निवेशितम्।
आपीतवर्णवदनं प्रसुप्तमिव भूमिपम्॥४॥
संवेश्य शयने चाग्रये नानारत्नपरिष्कृते।
ततो दशरथं पुत्रो विललाप सुदु:ख्रित:॥५॥
Taking the dead body of the king out of
the vessel in which it lay immersed in oil,
and placing Dasaratha—who was first laid
on the ground and, though pale-faced, looked
