556

तच्छैलवेगाभिहतं हताश्चं हतसारथिम्।
रक्षसां रुधिरक्लिन्नं बभूवायोधनं महत्॥१२॥
That vast battle-field, on which havoc
was played by the tremendous velocity of the
rock, horses killed and charioteers struck

down, got wetted with the blood of ogres.
(12)

रथिनो वानरेन्द्राणां शरै: कालान्तकोपमै:।
शिरांसि नर्दतां जह्रु: सहसा भीमनि:स्वना: ॥ १३॥
Emitting a terrible roar, car-warriors
precipitately severed the heads of the
yelling monkey chiefs with their arrows,
which were deadly like the destructive darts

appearing at the time of universal dissolution.
(13)

वानराश्च महात्मान: समुत्पाट्य महाद्रुमान्।
रथानश्वान् गजानुष्टान् राक्षसानभ्यसूदयन्॥१४॥

Uprooting large trees, the gigantic
monkeys too in their turn began to destroy
the chariots, horses, elephants, camels and
ogres. (14)

हनूमाञ्शैलशृङ्गाणि शिलाश्च विविधान् द्रुमान्।
ववर्ष कुम्भकर्णस्य शिरस्यम्बरमास्थित:॥ १५ ॥
Remaining stationed in the air,
Hanuman, for his part, rained mountain
peaks, rocks and trees of every kind on the
head of Kumbhakarna. (15)

तानि पर्वतशृङ्गाणि शूलेन a fave ह।
बभञ्ज वृक्षवर्षं च कुम्भकर्णो महाबल:॥ Ve Il
The said Kumbhakarna, who was
endowed with extraordinary might, split those
mountain peaks and intercepted the shower
of trees with his pike. (16)
ततो हरीणां तदनीकमुग्रं
दुद्राव शूलं निशितं प्रगृह्य।
weet स तस्यापतत: परस्ता-
Tee हनुमान् प्रगृह्य॥ १७॥
Firmly seizing hold of his sharpened
pike, he then rushed towards that formidable

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA +

army of monkeys. Tightly holding a mountain
peak, the celebrated Hanuman stood before
him even as he advanced. (17)

a कुम्भकर्णं कुपितो जघान

वेगेन शैलोत्तमभीमकायम्।
संचुक्षुभे wt तदाभिभूतो

मेदार्द्रगात्रो रुधिरावसिक्त: ॥ १८ ॥

Getting enraged, Hanuman struck with
vehemence Kumbhakarna, who was
endowed with a body formidable as the
foremost of hills. Overpowered by that blow,
the ogre was thoroughly upset, and
bespattered with fat and bathed in blood.(18)

a शूलमाविध्य तडङित्प्रकाशं
गिरिं यथा प्रज्वलिताग्निशृङ्गम्।
बाह्वन्तरे मारुतिमाजघान

गुहोऽचलं क्रौञ्चमिवोग्रशक्त्या॥१९॥

Brandishing his pike which was bright
as lightning, and resembled a mountain
crowned with a blazing fire, he struck with
it Hanuman (son of the wind-god) in the
breast (lit., the space between the arms),
even as Kartikeya (son of Lord Siva) struck
the Kraufca mountain with his formidable
javelin. (19)

a शूलनिर्भिन्नमहाभुजान्तर:
प्रविह्वल: शोणितमुद्वमन् मुखात्।
ननाद भीमं हनुमान् महाहवे
युगान्तमेघस्तनितस्वनोपमम् ॥ २०॥
Ejecting blood from his mouth,
Hanuman, who was thrown completely out
of his wits, his broad chest being pierced
with a pike by Kumbhakarna, gave forth in
that major conflict a terrific cry of anguish,
which resembled the thunder-clap of clouds
at the end of the world-cycle. (20)

ततो «fate: सहसा RT
रक्षोगणास्तं व्यथितं समीक्ष्य।
Wega: संयति कुम्भकर्णात्॥२१॥
