* AYODHYAKANDA +

Invoking divine blessings on_ her
husband, the dark-eyed Sita, who was greatly
honoured by her spouse, followed her
husband up to the gate. (21)
we द्विजातिभिर्जुष्टं राजसूयाभिषेचनम्।
कर्तुमर्हति ते राजा वासवस्येव लोककृत्॥ २२॥

“(Having once installed you in the office
of Prince Regent), the king ought to
consecrate you in course of time, as Brahma,
the maker of the universe, consecrated Indra,
for the Rajasuya sacrifice (as a preliminary
to which all the kings on the globe shall
have to be conquered and reduced to
submission), as his kingdom is inhabited by
learned Brahmanas well-versed in ritual
acts. (22)
PASAT च पश्यन्ती AT भजाम्यहम्॥ २३॥

“Seeing you consecrated for the said
sacrifice and rich in religious austerities
appropriate to the occasion, wearing excellent
deerskin (for loin-cloth) and leading a pure
(chaste) life and carrying a horn of an
antelope in your hand (in order to scratch
your limbs with when feeling an itching
sensation), | wish to serve you in that state.

(23)
vat fest वज्रधरो दक्षिणां पातु a यम:।
वरुण: पश्चिमामाशां धनेशस्तूत्तरां दिशम्॥ २४॥

“May Indra, the wielder of the
thunderbolt, guard your eastern side; Yama,
the god of punishment, your southern side;
Varuna, the god of water, your western side
and Kubera, the lord of riches, your northern
side.” (24)

अथ सीतामनुज्ञाप्य कृतकौतुकमङ्गल:।
निश्चक्राम सुमन्त्रेण सह Wat निवेशनात्॥ २५॥

Taking leave of Sita and having gone
through auspicious rites appropriate to the
solemn occasion, Sri Rama_ forthwith
departed from his palace alongwith Sumantra.

(25)

355

पर्वतादिव निष्क्रम्य सिंहो गिरिगुहाशय:।
लक्ष्मणं द्वारि सोऽपश्यत् प्रह्वाञअलिपुटं स्थितम्॥ २६ Ul

Issuing forth from the palace as a lion
dwelling in a mountain-cave would emerge
from a mountainous valley, he beheld
Laksmana standing at the very first gate,
bent low with joined palms. (26)
अथ मध्यमकक्ष्यायां समागच्छत् सुहृज्जनै:।

a सर्वानर्थिनो दृष्टवा समेत्य प्रतिनन्द्य च॥ २७॥
ad: पावकसंकाशमारुरोह रथोत्तमम्।
वैयाघ्रं पुरुषव्याघ्रो राजितं राजनन्दन:॥ २८॥

Then, at the middle gate, he met his
friends and relations. Seeing those who
longed for his sight or for his installation and
having met and addressed them kindly, the
heir apparent, who was a tiger among men,
mounted next his splendid and excellent
chariot, which shone like fire and was
upholstered with tigerskin. (27-28)

मेघनादमसम्बाधं मणिहेमविभूषितम्।
मुष्णन्तमिव चक्षंषि प्रभया मेरुवर्चसम्॥२९॥
करेणुशिशुकल्पैश्च sh परमवाजिभि:।
हरियुक्तं सहस्राक्षो रथमिन्द्र इवाशुगम्॥ ३०॥
प्रययौ तूर्णमास्थाय राघवो ज्वलित: श्रिया।
स पर्जन्य इवाकाशे स्वनवानभिनादयन्॥ ३१॥
निकेतान्निर्ययौ श्रीमान् महाभ्रादिव चन्द्रमा:।
चित्रचामरपाणिस्तु लक्ष्मणो राघवानुज:॥३२॥
जुगोप भ्रातरं भ्राता रथमास्थाय पृष्ठत:।
ततो हलहलाशब्दस्तुमुल: समजायत॥ ३३॥
wa निष्क्रममाणस्य जनौघस्य समन्तत:।
ततो हयवरा मुख्या नागाश्च गिरिसंनिभा:॥ ३४॥
अनुजग्मुस्तथा WH शतशोऽथ सहस्रश:।
अग्रतश्चास्य संनद्धाश्चन्दनागुरुभूषिता: ॥ ३५ ॥
खड्गचापधरा: शूरा जग्मुराशंसवो GAT: |
ततो वादित्रशब्दाश्च स्तुतिशब्दाश्च वन्दिनाम्॥ ३६ I
सिंहनादाश्च शूराणां aa: शुश्रुविरे पथि।
हर्म्यवातायनस्थाभिर्भूषिताभि:॥ समन्तत:॥ ३७॥
कीर्यमाण: सुपुष्पौघैर्ययौ स्त्रीभिररिंदम:।
TH सर्वानवद्याङ्ग्यो रामपिप्रीषया aa: i ३८॥
