« KISKINDHAKANDA +

Having set out at once on. their
expedition, the foremost of monkeys, led by

1121

Hanuman, circumambulated the Vindhyan
range itself to begin with. (22)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये किष्किन्धाकाण्डे एकोनपञ्चाश: सर्ग: ॥ ४९ ॥

Thus ends Canto Forty-nine in the Kiskindhakanda of the glorious Ramayana of
Valmiki, the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

पञ्चाश: सर्ग:
Canto L
The time appointed by Sugriva for finding out the whereabouts of Sita in the
southern quarter having been exceeded in ransacking the caves of the
Vindhyan range, which were hard to explore, Hanuman and others, who
were tormented with hunger and thirst, catch sight of a cave known by
the name of Rksabila. Concluding, from the presence of birds with
wet wings at the entrance of the cave, that there must be water
inside, the monkeys enter the cave, which was enveloped in
thick darkness, in a line holding the hand of one another.
Proceeding to a short distance, the monkeys behold
an ascetic woman in a strange spot illumined
by trees of gold. Greeting her, Hanuman
inquires of her the name of the place

विचिनोति च विन्ध्यस्य गुहाश्च गहनानि च॥१॥
सिंहशार्दूलजुष्टाश्च गुहाश्च परितस्तदा।
विषमेषु नगेन्द्रस्य महाप्रस्रवणेषु च॥२॥

Joining hands with Tara and Angada,
the monkey, Hanuman for his part began to
explore the caves as well as the dense forests
of the Vindhyan range as also the caves
inhabited by lions and tigers, round about in
the corners of that lord of mountains, rugged
slopes and by the side of big waterfalls. (1-2)

आसेदुस्तस्य शैलस्य कोटिं दक्षिणपश्चिमाम्।
at da वसतां a कालो व्यत्यवर्तत॥ ३॥

They now reached the south-western
summit of that mountain. While they continued
on that summit the time appointed by Sugriva
for the search clearly slipped away. (3)

a fe देशो दुरन्वेष्यो गुहागहनवान् महान्।
wa वायुसुत: सर्वं विचिनोति ot पर्वतम्॥४॥

That region, vast as it was, was also
difficult to explore inasmuch as it was full
of caves and impenetrable forests. Yet
Hanuman, son of the wind-god, scoured the
whole of the mountain in that region.

(4)
परस्परेण रहिता अन्योन्यस्याविदूरत:।
TR गवाक्षो Was: शरभो गन्धमादन:॥७५॥
मैन्दश्च द्विविदश्चैव हनूमान् जाम्बवानपि।
अङ्गदो युवराजश्च तारश्च वनगोचर:॥६॥
गिरिजालावृतान् देशान् मार्गित्वा दक्षिणां दिशम्।
विचिन्वन्तस्ततस्तत्र ददृशुर्विवृतं fami
दुर्गमृक्षबिलं नाम दानवेनाभिरक्षितम्।
क्षुत्पिपासापरीतास्तु श्रान्तास्तु सलिलार्थिन:॥८॥
sant लतावृक्षैर्ददृशुस्ते महाबिलम्।
wa क्रौञ्चाश्च हंसाश्च सारसाश्चापि निष्क्रमन्॥९॥
जलारद्राश्चक्रवाकाश्च रक्ताङ्गा: पद्मरेणुभि:।
ततस्तद् बिलमासाद्य सुगन्धि दुरतिक्रमम्॥१०॥
