* BALAKANDA +

151

Canto XXIX

Viswamitra tells Sri Rama the history of Siddhasgrama and arrives
at his own hermitage with the two brothers

Hearing the question of Sri Rama, who
though possessed of infinite glory made
inquiries as above, the highly glorious
Viswamitra proceeded to make answer as
follows : (1)

se राम महाबाहो विष्णुर्देवनमस्कृत:।
वर्षाणि सुबहूनीह am युगशतानि च॥२॥
तपश्चरणयोगार्थमुवास सुमहातपा:।
एष पूर्वाश्रमो राम वामनस्य महात्मन:॥ ३॥
सिद्धाश्रम इति ख्यात: सिद्धो Wa महातपा:।
`एतस्मिन्नेव काले तु राजा वैरोचनिर्बलि:॥४॥

निर्जित्य दैवतगणान् सेन्द्रान् सहमरुद्गणान्।
कारयामास तद्राज्यं fry लोकेषु विश्रुत:॥५॥
“Here in this very grove, O mighty-
armed Rama, Lord Visnu, the adored of all
gods, who is noted for His exceptional
asceticism, stayed for hundreds of revolutions
of the four Yugas and many more years for
practising austerities and Yoga (concentration
of mind). Here stands the former hermitage
of Lord Vamana, the divine Dwarf—who is
no other than the Supreme Spirit—known
by the name of Siddhasrama; for it was
here that Lord Visnu, who is noted for his
great asceticism, realized His end prior to
His descent in the form of Vamana. It was
during this very period that King Bali, the
son of Virocana and grandson of Prahlada,
ruled over the kingdom of Indra and became
well-known in all the three worlds, having
thoroughly conquered the hosts of gods
including Indra, their ruler, as well as the
forty-nine wind-gods. (2—5)

at चकार सुमहानसुरेन्द्रो महाबल:।
aed यजमानस्य देवा: साग्निपुरोगमा:।
समागम्य wat चैव विष्णुमूचुरिहाश्रमे॥६॥

“The very mighty Bali, the ruler of
demons, who was exceptionally great,
initiated a sacrifice. While Bali was proceeding
with the sacrifice, the gods alongwith Agni,
the god of fire, who headed them, personally
met Lord Visnu, who had been practising
austerities in this very hermitage and
submitted to Him as follows : (6)

बलिर्वैरोचनिर्विष्णो यजते यज्ञमुत्तमम्।
असमाप्तव्रते तस्मिन् स्वकार्यमभिपद्यताम्॥७॥

“‘Bali, the son of Virocana, O
omnipresent Lord, has commenced a great
sacrifice. Let the object of Your proteges
(gods) be fully accomplished while he has
not yet concluded his sacred observance.

(7)
a चैनमभिवर्तन्ते याचितार sae:
Ta यत्र यथावच्च wd तेभ्य: प्रयच्छति॥ ८॥

‘To those who approach him from here
and there with some solicitation, he duly
gives whatever object they ask and of
whatever category. (8)

a त्वं सुरहितार्थाय मायायोगमुपाश्रित:।
वामनत्वं गतो विष्णो कुरु कल्याणमुत्तमम्॥९॥
‘Therefore, assuming the semblance of
a dwarf by establishing contact with Maya
(the energy which veils Your true nature
and invests You with a seemingly human or
mortal character) for the sake of doing
good to gods, be pleased to serve our best
interest.’ (9)

एतस्मिन्नन्तरे राम कश्यपोऽग्निसमप्रभ:।
अदित्या सहितो wa दीप्यमान इवौजसा॥१०॥
“In the meantime, O Rama, the delighter
of all, there appeared on the scene Sage
Kasyapa, resplendent as fire, accompanied
