698

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

पञ्चदशाधिकशततम: सर्ग:
Canto CXV

Permitted by Vasistha and accompanied by Satrughna and others,
when the queens had entered the gynaeceum, Bharata proceeds to
Nandigrama and, installing the wooden sandals of Sri Rama
on the royal seat, himself puts on the garb of an ascetic
and carries on the rule under orders ascribed to the
sandals, holding the royal umbrella over them

ततो निक्षिप्य मातृस्ता अयोध्यायां दृढव्रत:।
भरत: शोकसंतप्तो गुरूनिदमथाब्रवीत्॥१॥
Having brought his celebrated mothers
back to Ayodhya, Bharata of steadfast
vows, sore stricken with grief as he
was, then submitted to his preceptors
(Vasistha, Vamadeva and others) forthwith
as follows: (1)
नन्दिग्रामं गमिष्यामि सर्वानामन्त्रयेऽत्र व:।
wl gute wd सहिष्ये wad विना॥२॥
“| take leave of you all here: | shall at
once proceed to Nandigrama. Bereft of Sri

Rama, a scion of Raghu, | shall endure all
this suffering there. (2)

गतश्चाहो fet राजा वनस्थ: स गुरुर्मम।
रामं प्रतीक्षे राज्याय a fe राजा महायशा:॥ ३॥
“Alas, the king has ascended to heaven
and that elder brother of mine has taken up
his abode in the forest. | look forward to Sri
Rama to take care of the kingdom; for he is
the highly illustrious ruler of Ayodhya.” (3)

एतच्छृत्वा शुभं वाक्यं भरतस्य महात्मन:।
अब्रुवन् Ua: ad वसिष्ठश्च पुरोहित:॥४॥
Hearing this blessed utterance of the
high-souled Bharata, all his counsellors as
well as Vasistha, the chief family-priest,
replied as follows : (4)
सुभृशं श्लाघनीयं च यदुक्तं भरत त्वया।
वचनं भ्रातृवात्सल्यादनुरूपं तवैव AUG
“The statement that has been made by
you through loving devotion to your elder

brother is extremely laudable; nay, it is
worthy of you alone. (5)

नित्यं a बन्धुलुब्धस्य तिष्ठतो भ्रातृसौहृदे।
मार्गमार्यं प्रपन्नस्य नानुमन्येत क: पुमान्॥६॥

“What man would not approve of the
resolution of Your Royal Highness, who are
ever covetous of the welfare of your kinsmen
and are steadfast in your affection for your
brothers, nay, who have taken to the noble
path, the path of virtue?” (6)
मन्तरिणां वचनं श्रुत्वा यथाभिलषितं प्रियम्।
अब्रवीत् सारथिं वाक्यं रथो मे युज्यतामिति॥ ७॥

Hearing the agreeable reply of the
counsellors, which was in consonance with
his desire, Bharata spoke as follows to the
charioteer, Sumantra: “Let my chariot be
got ready !” (7)
Wea: Wal ag: समभिभाष्य al
sete रथं श्रीमान्शत्रुघ्नेन समन्वित:॥८॥

Having spoken kindly with a most
cheerful countenance, to all his mothers

and accompanied by Satrughna, the glorious
prince got into the chariot. (8)

आरुह्य तु रथं fad शत्रुघ्नभरतावुभौ।

wad: परमप्रीतौ वृतौ मन्तिपुरोहितै:॥ ९॥
Mounting the chariot, supremely delighted

and surrounded by the counsellors and family

priests, both Bharata and Satrughna for their
part quickly departed. (9)

अग्रतो गुरव: wa वसिष्ठप्रमुखा fest: |
Waa: प्राङ्मुखा: सर्वे नन्दिग्रामो यतो भवेत्॥ १०॥
