* ARANYAKANDA «

Then, approaching her notorious brother,
Khara of terrific energy, who lived in
Janasthana, surrounded by a multitude of
ogres, that mutilated woman then dropped
down on the ground like a bolt from the
blue. (25)
ad: सभार्यं भयमोहमूर्छछिता

सलक्ष्मणं राघवमागतं वनम्।

763

विरूपणं चात्मनि शोणितोक्षिता
vere ae भगिनी खरस्य AT २६ ॥

Overcome with a swoon through fear
and drenched in blood, that sister of Khara
then told him everything about Raghava
having arrived in the forest with his wife and
Laksmana and of her own mutilation. (26)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्येऽरण्यकाण्डेऽष्टादश: सर्ग: ॥ १८ II

Thus ends Canto Eighteen in the Aranyakanda of the glorious Ramayana of Valmiki,
the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

Canto XIX
Khara sends fourteen ogres with her for despatching Rama

at तथा पतितां दृष्टवा विरूपां शोणितोक्षिताम्।
भगिनीं क्रोधसंतप्त: खर: पप्रच्छ राक्षस:॥१॥
Inflamed with anger to see his aforesaid

sister fallen as she had done, mutilated and
drenched in blood, the ogre Khara said: (1)

उत्तिष्ठं तावदाख्याहि wate जहि सम्भ्रमम्।
व्यक्तमाख्याहि केन त्वमेवंरूपा विरूपिता॥ २॥

“Get up, shake off your
unconsciousness and fear and point out
explicitly by whom you have been mutilated
in this way. (2)
क: कृष्णसर्पमासीनमाशीविषमनागसम्।
तुदत्यभिसमापन्नमङ्गुल्यग्रेण लीलया । ३॥

“Who has hit in sport with the tip of his

finger a poisonous black serpent arrived in
front and sitting harmlessly: (3)

कालपाशं समासज्य HIS मोहान्न बुध्यते।
यस्त्वामद्य समासाद्य पीतवान् विषमुत्तमम्॥४॥

“He who having assailed you has drunk
up a most effective poison (in the form of
mutilating you) is not conscious of his having
fastened the noose of Death round his neck.

(4)

बलविक्रमसम्पन्ना कामगा कामरूपिणी।
इमामवस्थां नीता त्वं केनान्तकसमागता॥७५॥

“By whom were you approached and
reduced to this state—you, who are richly
endowed with strength and prowess, nay,
moving at will, are capable of assuming any
form you like and are a compeer of Death?

(5)
देवगन्धर्वभूतानामृषीणां च महात्मनाम्।
कोऽयमेवं महावीर्यस्त्वां विरूपां चकार ह॥६॥

“Possessed of extraordinary prowess
among gods, Gandharvas (celestial
musicians) and high-souled seers of Vedic
Mantras, who is it that has actually mutilated
you thus? (6)

नहि पश्याम्यहं लोके a: कुर्यान्मम विप्रियम्।
अमरेषु सहस्राक्षे AS पाकशासनम्॥७॥
“Really | do not perceive in the world
anyone who dare give offence to me—not
even the mighty Indra, the thousand-eyed
tamer of the demon Paka. (7)
staré मार्गणै: प्राणानादास्ये जीवितान्तगै: 1
सलिले क्षीरमासक्तं निष्पिबन्निव सारस:॥८॥
