* AYODHYAKANDA +

329

Canto XII

Extolling the virtues of Sri Rama and showing him undeserving of exile, the
Emperor endeavours to dissuade Kaikeyi from her pertinacity in sending
Sri Rama into exile. Quoting the examples of Harigcandra and others,
Kaikeyi, however, redoubles her insistence. The Emperor for his
part rebukes her in harsh words and goes the length of falling
at her feet in order to bring her round but in vain

तत: श्रुत्वा महाराज: कैकेय्या दारुणं वच:।
चिन्तामभिसमापेदे मुहूर्तं प्रतताप THN II
On hearing the cruel request of Kaikeyl,
the Emperor thereupon fell a prey to anxiety
and suffered great agony awhile. (1)

fe नु Asa दिवास्वप्नश्चित्तमोहोऽपि at मम।
अनुभूतोपसर्गो वा मनसो वाप्युपद्रव:॥ २॥

He said to himself, ‘Can it possibly be
a day-dream on my part or could it be a
confusion of my mind? Or could it be a vivid
mental picture of things experienced in a
previous birth or a disturbance of the mind?’
(2)
इति संचिन्त्य तद् राजा नाध्यगच्छत् तदासुखम्।
प्रतिलभ्य da: Gat कैकेयीवाक्यतापित:॥ ३॥
Reflecting thus, the king could not
make out on the spur of the moment what it
was; on the other hand, he experienced
great agony causing him to swoon. Then,
regaining consciousness, he felt tormented
once more by the memory of Kaikeyi’s
words. (3)
व्यथितो विक्लवश्चैव व्याघ्रीं दृष्टवा यथा मृग: |
असंवृतायामासीनो जगत्यां दीर्घमुच्छ्वसन्॥४॥
Wet पन्नगो रुद्धो मन्त्रैरिव महाविष:।
अहो धिगिति सामर्षो वाचमुक्त्वा नराधिप:॥ ५॥
मोहमापेदिवान् भूय: शोकोपहतचेतन:।
चिरेण तु नृप: Gat प्रतिलभ्य सुदु:खित:॥६॥
कैकेयीमब्रवीत् क्रुद्धो निर्दंहन्निव तेजसा।
Wwe दुष्टचारित्रे कुलस्यास्य विनाशिनि॥७॥
fe कृतं तव रामेण पापे पापं मयापि ari
सदा a जननीतुल्यां aft वहति राघव:॥८॥

Distressed and uneasy as a deer at
the sight of a lioness and seated on the
bare floor he began to sigh like a highly
venomous serpent fixed to a charmed spot
through magic spells. Uttering the remark
“Oh, what a pity!” the indignant king fell into
a swoon once more, his mind infatuated
with grief. Regaining consciousness after a
long time and feeling greatly distressed and
enraged, the monarch spoke to Kaikeyi (as
follows) as though consuming her with his
glow: “O cruel woman of wicked conduct,
bent upon exterminating this race, what
wrong has been done to you, O wretch, by
Rama or even by me? Rama (a scion of
Raghu) always serves you in the same
way as he does his own mother. (4—8)
तस्यैवं त्वमनर्थाय किंनिमित्तमिहोद्यता।
त्वं मयाऽऽत्मविनाशाय भवनं स्वं निवेशिता॥ ९॥
अविज्ञानान्नृपसुता व्याला तीक्ष्णविषा यथा।
जीवलोको यदा सर्वो रामस्याह गुणस्तवम्॥ १०॥
अपराधं कमुद्दिश्य त्यक्ष्यामीष्टमहं सुतम्।
कौसल्यां च सुमित्रां च त्यजेयमपि वा श्रियम्॥ ११॥
fad चात्मनो रामं न त्वेव पितॄवत्सलम्।

TI भवति A प्रीतिर्दृष्टवा तनयमग्रजम्॥१२॥
अपश्यतस्तु मे रामं नष्टं भवति चेतनम्।
तिष्ठेल्लोको विना सूर्यं सस्यं वा सलिलं FAT it १३॥
Tq wa fan देहे तिष्ठेत्तु मम जीवितम्।
तदलं त्यज्यतामेष निश्चय: पापनिश्चये॥१४॥

“Wherefore then are you bent in this
way upon bringing ruination to such a one
at this juncture? Surely you have been
unwittingly lodged in my house for my own
