* ARANYAKANDA «

अथवा मृगशावाक्षीं मृग जानासि मैथिलीम्।
मृगविप्रेक्षणी कान्ता मृगीभि: सहिता भवेत्॥ २३॥

Addressing the animals of the forest,
he said: “O deer, do you know of Sita, a
princess of Mithila, whose eyes resemble
those of a fawn? My darling, who glances
round like a female deer, is likely to be with
female deer. (23)

गज सा गजनासोरुर्यदि Get त्वया भवेत्।
तां मन्ये विदितां तुभ्यमाख्याहि वरवारण॥ २४॥

“O elephant, tell me if Sita, whose
thighs resemble the proboscis of an elephant
(in their tapering shape), has been seen by
you? | presume her to be known to you, O
excellent elephant! (24)

शार्दूल यदि सा geet प्रिया चन्द्रनिभानना।
मैथिली wa free: कथयस्व न ते भयम्॥ २५ ॥

“Tell me without fear, O tiger, if that
darling, the princess of Mithila, who has a
moon-like countenance, has been seen by
you? There is no cause for fear to you. (25)
fe धावसि fra नूनं दृष्टासि कमलेक्षणे।
वृक्षैराच्छाद्य चात्मानं किं at न प्रतिभाषसे॥ २६॥

Imagining to see Sita before him, he
addresses her: “Why do you run, my
darling? You have undoubtedly been seen
by me, O lotus-eyed one ! Screening yourself
behind the trees, why do you not answer
me? (26)
तिष्ठ foes वरारोहे न तेऽस्ति करुणा मयि।
नात्यर्थं हास्यशीलासि किमर्थं मामुपेक्षसे॥ २७॥

“Stay, tarry awhile, O Sita with excellent
limbs ! Is there no compassion in your heart
for me? You are not excessively given to
fun; why then do you disregard me? = (27)

पीतकौशेयकेनासि सूचिता वरवर्णिनि।
धावन्त्यपि मया get fats यद्यस्ति सौहृदम्॥ २८ Il

“You stand disclosed by your yellow
silk garment, O lady with an excellent
complexion! You have been seen by me
even while running. Therefore, halt if there
is any affection left in you for me. (28)

883

wa सा नूनमथवा हिंसिता चारुहासिनी।
pee We न मां नूनं यथोपेक्षितुमर्हति॥ २९॥
“Or, it was definitely not Sita of charming
smiles, who has most probably been killed;
surely she could not have ignored me, fallen
in adversity. (29)
व्यक्तं सा भक्षिता बाला राक्षसै: पिशिताशनै: |
विभज्याङ्गानि सर्वाणि war विरहिता प्रिया॥ ३०॥

“Bereft of me, my youthful darling has
evidently been devoured by flesh-eating
ogres, dividing all her limbs among
themselves. (30)
नूनं तच्छुभदन्तोष्ठं सुनासं शुभकुण्डलम्।
पूर्णचन्द्रनिभं wet We निष्प्रभतां गतम्॥३१॥

“Seized by the ogres, that face of Sita,
which was distinguished by charming teeth
and lips and a shapely nose and adorned
with beautiful earrings and resembled the
full moon, must have surely been eclipsed.

(31)
सा fe चम्पकवर्णाभा ग्रीवा ग्रैवेयकोचिता।
कोमला विलपन्त्यास्तु कान्ताया भक्षिता STAT ।। ३२ ॥

“That lovely दाप _ delicate neck,
possessing the hue and splendour of a
Campaka flower and worthy of being adorned
with a necklace, of my wailing darling has
undoubtedly been devoured by the ogres.

(32)
नूनं विक्षिप्यमाणौ at बाहू पल्लवकोमलौ।
भक्षितौ वेपमानाग्रौ सहस्ताभरणाङ्गदौ॥ ३३॥

“Being thrown restlessly, those arms
of hers, tender as shoots and adorned with
bracelets and armlets, with their fore parts
trembling through fear have surely been
eaten up. (33)

मया विरहिता बाला रक्षसां भक्षणाय a)
सार्थेनेव ute भक्षिता बहुबान्धवा॥ ३४॥

“The youthful lady was left alone by
me only for being eaten up by the ogres.
Though having numerous kinsfolk, she has
been devoured by the ogres like a women
deserted by co-travellers. (34)
