706

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA +

पञ्चनवतितम: at:
Canto XCV

Ravana calls together his generals and, marching with them to the
field of battle, exhibits his valour against the enemy

आर्तानां राक्षसीनां तु लङ्कायां वै Hot कुले।
रावण: करुणं शब्दं शुश्राव परिदेवितम्॥१॥
Ravana for his part actually heard the
piteous and plaintive cry of the afflicted
ogresses in every house in Lanka. (1)

स तु दीर्घं विनि:श्वस्य ged ध्यानमास्थित:।
aya परमक्रुद्धो रावणो भीमदर्शन:॥ २॥

Sighing for a long time, and remaining
engrossed in thought awhile, the aforesaid
Ravana for his part got highly enraged and
assumed a terrible aspect. (2)
संदश्य दशनैरोष्ठं क्रोधसंरक्तलोचन:।
राक्षसैरपि दुर्दर्श: कालाग्निरिव मूर्तिमान्॥३॥
उवाच च समीपस्थान् राक्षसान् राक्षसेश्वर:।
क्रोधाव्यक्कतकथस्तत्र निर्दंहन्निवं चक्षुषा॥४॥

Nipping his lips with his teeth, his eyes
crimson with wrath, the king of ogres, who
looked like the fire of dissolution-incarnate,
and whose sight was difficult to endure
even for the ogres, commanded the ogres
standing near on that spot, viz., Mahodara,
Mahaparswa and the ogre Virupaksa, as
follows, in words indistinct through anger,
as though consuming them with his glance:

(3-4)
महोदरं महापाश्वं विरूपाक्षं च राक्षसम्।
शीघ्रं वदत सैन्यानि निर्यातेति ममाज्ञया॥७५॥

“Speedily instruct the troops at my
command, as follows: ‘March out to the
battlefield!’ ” (5)

तस्य तद् वचनं श्रुत्वा राक्षसास्ते भयार्दिता:।
चोदयामासुरव्यग्रान् राक्षसांस्तान् नृपाज्ञया॥६॥

Hearing his aforesaid command, the
said ogres, who were stricken with fear,

enjoined the afore-mentioned ogres, who
were quite unruffled, in accordance with the
king’s order. (6)
ते तु Gd तथेत्युक्त्वा राक्षसा भीमदर्शना:।
कृतस्वस्त्ययना: सर्वे A रणाभिमुखा Faq: oll
Saying “Amen!” and having performed
a religious rite preparatory to all sacred
undertakings for averting evil, all the aforesaid
ogres of terrible aspect for their part sallied
forth with their faces turned towards the
battlefield. (7)

प्रतिपूज्य यथान्यायं रावणं ते महारथा:।
तस्थु: प्राञ्ञलय: a भर्तुर्विजयकाङ्क्षिण:॥ ८॥
Paying reverence to Ravana according
to the rules of propriety, all those great car-
warriors stood with joined palms wishing
triumph to their master. (8)

ततोवाच प्रहस्यैतान् रावण: क्रोधमूच्छित:।
महोदरमहापाश्वौ «facet च राक्षसम्॥९॥
Laughing heartily in sneer, Ravana, who
was filled with anger, then spoke as follows
to the said warriors, viz., Mahodara and
Mahaparswa and the ogre Virupaksa: (9)

अद्य बाणैर्धनुर्मुक्तैर्युगान्तादित्यसंनिभै: ।
Tad लक्ष्मणं चैव नेष्यामि यमसादनम्॥१०॥
“With the shafts discharged from my
bow and resembling the sun as seen at the
end of the world-cycle, | shall dispatch Rama
(a scion of Raghu) as well as Laksmana to
the abode of Yama (the god of retribution)
today. (10)
ख्रस्य कुम्भकर्णस्य प्रहस्तेन्द्रजितोस्तथा।
करिष्यामि प्रतीकारमद्य शत्रुवधादहम्॥११॥

“Through the death of my aforesaid
