* ARANYAKANDA «

Full of misgiving, when requested as
aforesaid by Indra, Sita for her part replied
as follows to Indra, the ruler of gods : “How
can | know you to be the ruler of gods, the
lord of Saci, present here? (16)
देवलिङ्गानि दृष्टानि रामलक्ष्मणसंनिधौ।
am दर्शय देवेन्द्र यदि त्वं cate TAI १७॥

“The distinguishing marks of gods have
been seen by me in the presence of Sri
Rama and Laksmana. Kindly reveal them to
me, O ruler of gods, if you are Indra (the
king of gods) himself.” (17)
सीताया वचनं श्रुत्वा तथा चक्रे शचीपति:।
पथिवीं नास्पृशत् पद्भ्यामनिमेषेक्षणानि च॥ १८॥

Hearing the request of Sita, Indra, the
spouse of Saci, did the same. He did not

touch the ground with his feet and his eyes
did not wink. (18)

अरजोऽम्बरधारी च नम्लानकुसुमस्तथा।
तं ज्ञात्वा लक्षणै: सीता वासवं परिहर्षिता॥ १९॥

उवाच वाक्यं रुदती भगवन् राघवं प्रति।
सह भ्रात्रा महाबाहुर्दिष्ट्या मे श्रुतिमागत:॥ २०॥
His clothes were free from dust and
the flowers of his garland did not fade even
after his very long journey. Greatly rejoiced
to recognize him by his distinguishing marks
to be no other than Indra, Sita spoke as
follows to Indra, shedding tears for Sri
Rama, a scion of Raghu: “The mighty-
armed prince, Sri Rama, with his younger
brother, Laksmana, has by good _ luck
reached my ears in the form of their names.
(19-20)

यथा A VaR राजा यथा च मिथिलाधिप:।
तथा AAT पश्यामि सनाथो A पतिस्त्वया॥ २१॥

“| view you today to be the same as
my father-in-law, the late king of Ayodhya
and as my father the sovereign ruler of
Mithila. My lord, Sri Rama, has found a
protector in you. (21)

तवाज्ञया च eax पयोभूतमिदं हवि:।
अशिष्यामि त्वया दत्तं TUT कुलवर्धनम्॥ २२॥

873

“Nay, at your bidding, O ruler of gods,
| shall partake of this food fit to be offered
as an oblation to the sacred fire in the form
of milk, boiled with rice and sugar, offered
by you, which may prove to be the promoter
of Raghu’s race.” (22)

इन्द्रहस्ताद् गृहीत्वा तत् पायसं सा शुचिस्मिता।
न्यवेदयत wt सा लक्ष्मणाय च मैथिली॥ २३॥

Taking that preparation of milk and rice
sweetened with sugar from the hands of
Indra, that renowned princess of Mithila of
bright smiles mentally offered it to her husband
and her brother-in-law, Laksmana, in the
following words : (23)
ate जीवति A stat Ge भ्रात्रा महाबल:।
इदमस्तु तयोर्भक्त्या तदाश्नात् पायसं स्वयम्॥ २४॥

“If my husband, who is possessed of
extraordinary might, is yet alive with his
younger brother, let this food offered with
devotion by me conduce to their gratification.”
Then she partook of it herself. (24)

इतीव तत् Wea हविर्वरानना
wel क्षुधादु:खसमुद्धवं च तम्।
इन्द्रात् Waray उपलभ्य जानकी

काकुत्स्थयो: प्रीतमना TATU २५॥

Having thus partaken of that food fit to
be offered as an oblation to the sacred fire,
Sita, the daughter of King Janaka, who was
possessed of a charming countenance, bade
adieu to the agony caused by the pangs
of hunger and experienced by all hunger-
stricken creatures, and felt delighted in mind
to gather from Indra the news of Sri Rama
and Laksmana, the two scions of Kakutstha.

(25)
स चापि शक्रस्तिदिवालयं तदा
Wat ययौ राघवकार्यसिद्धये।
sa सीतां स ततो महात्मा
जगाम निद्रासहित: स्वमालयम्॥ २६ ॥
Taking leave of Sita, the said celebrated

and high-souled Indra too, accompanied by
Nidra, then joyously left forthwith for the
