708

known ogres in every house to march to
the battlefield. (23)

ततो मुहूर्तान्निष्पेत् राक्षसा भीमदर्शना:।
नदन्तो भीमवदना नानाप्रहरणैर्भुजै:॥ २४॥
शक्तिभिस्तीक्ष्णधाराभिर्महद्भि:॥ कूटमुद्गरै:॥ २५॥
यष्टिभिर्विविधैश्चक्रैर्निशितैश्च परश्वथै:।
भिन्दिपालै: शतघ्नीभिरन्यैश्चापि वरायुधै:। २६॥

Thereupon ogres of terrible aspect with
hideous faces presently ran out roaring,
their arms equipped with weapons of every
kind, viz., swords, sharp-edged darts,
pikes, maces, clubs, Halas (plough-like
weapons), sharp-pointed javelins and huge
Kutamudgaras, staffs, discuses of every
kind, sharpened axes, Bhindipalas (a kind
of sling for throwing stones), Sataghnis
(a stone or cylindrical piece of wood studded
with iron pikes) and other excellent
weapons. (24—26)
अथानयन् बलाध्यक्षाश्चत्वमो रावणाज्ञया |
रथानां नियुतं साग्रं नागानां नियुतत्रयम्॥ २७॥

At the king’s command four troop-
commanders then led to the battlefield more
than a lakh of chariots and three lakhs of
elephants. (27)
अश्वानां षष्टिकोट्यस्तु खरोष्ट्धाणां तथैव च।
पदातयस्त्वसंख्याता जग्मुस्ते राजशासनात्॥ २८॥

Nay, six crores of horses and the
same number of mules and camels and
innumerable foot-soldiers marched to the
battlefield at the king’s command. (28)

बलाध्यक्षाश्च संस्थाप्य राज्ञ: सेनां पुर:स्थिताम्।
एतस्मिन्नन्तरे सूत: स्थापयामास तं रथम्॥ २९॥
दिव्यास्त्रवरसम्पन्नं नानालंकारभूषितम्।
नानायुधसमाकीर्णं किङ्किणीजालसंयुतम्॥ ३०॥
नानारत्नपरिक्षिप्तं रत्नस्तम्भैर्विराजितम्।
जाम्बूनदमयैश्चैव सहस्रकलशैर्वृतम्॥३१॥ ॥

Having duly rallied the king’s army
stationed in the city, the troop-commanders

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA +

too marched to the battlefield. In the meantime
the king’s charioteer placed on the battlefield
his well-known chariot equipped with the
foremost of celestial missiles, adorned with
various jewels, filled with weapons of every
kind, furnished with rows of small bells,
encrusted with precious stones of various
kinds, beautified with bejewelled pillars
and covered with thousands of round gold
pinnacles. (29—31)
तं दृष्टवा राक्षसा: सर्वे विस्मयं परमं गता:।
तं दृष्टवा सहसोत्थाय रावणो राक्षसेश्वर:।॥ ३२॥
कोटिसूर्यप्रतीकाशं ज्वलन्तमिव पावकम्।
gt सूतसमानुक्तं चुक्ताष्टतुरग रथम्।
आरुरोह dat भीमं दीप्यमानं स्वतेजसा॥ ३३॥
All the ogres were struck with great
wonder to behold the chariot. Springing up
from his seat on seeing the swift-going
formidable chariot, which resembled a blazing
fire and shone like crores of suns, was
controlled by a charioteer, had eight horses
yoked to it and was effulgent with its own
splendour, Ravana, the king of ogres, forth-
with ascended it on that occasion. (32-33)

तत: Wald: wear राक्षसैर्बहुभिर्वृत:।
रावण: सत्त्वगाम्भीर्याद् दारयन्निव मेदिनीम्॥ ३४॥
Surrounded by numerous फ0०फु8७8,
Ravana thus precipitately set out from Lanka
rending the earth as it were by the
abundance of his might. (34)

ततश्चासीन्महानादस्तूर्याणां च ततस्तत:।
मृदङ्गै: Wee: Wg: Hele: AS रक्षसाम्॥ ३५॥
Then there burst forth on all sides
a loud flourish of trumpets accompanied by
the roll of clay tomtoms and tabors, the
blast of conches and the clamour of ogres.
(35)

आगतो रक्षसां राजा छत्रचामरसंयुत:।

सीतापहारी दुर्वृत्तो ब्रह्मघ्नो देवकण्टक:।
योद्धुं रघुवरेणेति शुश्रुवे कलहध्वनि:।॥ ३६॥

“There comes the ruler of ogres, the
