+ UTTARAKANDA +

water to wash his feet and _ hands
(respectively) with, Arjuna, the king of kings,
submitted as follows to Sage Pulastya in a
voice choked with delight: (9)

अद्यैवममरावत्या तुल्या माहिष्मती कृता।
अद्याहं तु द्विजेन्द्र wat यस्मात् पश्यामि दुर्दृशम्॥ १०॥
“Mahismati has in this way been placed
on a par with Amaravati (the city of Indra)
this day in that | see today, O prince of the

twice-born, you, who are really so difficult to
behold. (10)

TI A कुशलं ea अद्य A कुशलं व्रतम्।
अद्य A सफलं जन्म अद्य A सफलं तप:॥११॥
यत् a देवगणैर्वन्द्यौ वन्देऽहं चरणौ तव।
इदं राज्यमिमे पुत्रा इमे दारा इमे वयम्।
ब्रह्मन् किं कुर्मि किं कार्यमाज्ञापयतु नो भवान्॥ १२॥
“Prosperity attends on me today, O
revered one! My vow too stands fulfilled
today; my birth too stands consummated
today and my askesis too have borne fruit
today in that | salute your holy feet, which
deserve to be saluted by gods. This kingdom,
these sons and these consorts of mine,
nay, even ourselves stand at your service.
What should we do? Pray, command us
what should be done by us.” (11-12)

तं धर्मेऽग्निषु पुत्रेषु शिवं पृष्टवा च पार्थिवम्।
पुलस्त्योवाच राजानं हैहयानां तथार्जुनम्॥१३॥

Having inquired of the king about his
welfare concerning religious practices,
sacrificial fires and sons, Sage Pulastya
spoke as follows to Arjuna, the ruler of the
Haihayas: (13)

नरेन्द्राम्बुजपत्राक्ष पूर्णचन्द्रनिभानन।
अतुलं a act येन दशग्रीवस्त्वया जित:॥ १४॥
“Matchless is your might by dint of
which Ravana stands conquered by you, O
ruler of men whose eyes resemble the lotus-
petals and whose countenance shines as

the full moon. ~ (14)

wag यस्योपतिष्ठेतां निष्पन्दौ सागरानिलौ।
सोऽयं मृधे त्वया ag: पौत्रो A रणदुर्जय:॥ १५॥

963

“That very grandson of mine, who was
hard to conquer, and for fear of whom the
ocean as well as the wind stood motionless
in attendance, was made captive by you on
the battlefield. (15)

पुत्रकस्य यश: Utd नाम विश्रावितं त्वया।
AGING याच्यमानोऽद्य FST AT दशाननम्॥ १६ ॥
“The glory of my beloved child stands
swallowed up by you and your own name
has been made widely known by you. Being

solicited by me today, pray, set my child,
Ravana, free at my intercession.” (16)

पुलस्त्याज्ञां प्रगृह्योचे न किंचन वचोऽर्जुन:।
मुमोच a पार्थिवेन्द्रो राक्षसेन्द्रं प्रहृष्टवत्॥१७॥

Arjuna did not utter a word in reply.
Bowing to the command of Pulastya, however,
the king of kings joyously set free the ruler
of ogres. (17)

स तं waa त्रिदशारिमर्जुन:
प्रपूज्य दिव्याभरणस्त्रगम्बरै:।
हिंसवं रे ग्रिकं
प्रणम्य तं ब्रह्मसुतं गृहं ययौ॥ १८॥
Having unconditionally released the
enemy of gods and duly honoured him with
celestial ornaments, garlands and raiment,
nay, contracted with him in the presence of
fire an alliance which involved no destruction
to each other and, respectfully bowing down
to the aforesaid son of Brahma (the creator),
the celebrated Arjuna entered his palace.
(18)
पुलस्त्येनापि संत्यक्तो राक्षसेन्द्र: प्रतापवान्।
परिष्वक्त: कृतातिथ्यो लज्जमानो विनिर्जित: ॥ १९॥
Though unconditionally released by
Arjuna after being hospitably treated, and
lovingly embraced by his grandfather,
Pulastya, the glorious Ravana felt shy due
to his having been utterly vanquished. (19)

पितामहसुतश्चापि पुलस्त्यो मुनिपुङ्खव:।
मोचयित्वा दशग्रीवं ब्रह्मलोकं जगाम ह॥ २०॥

Having secured the deliverance of
