442

while still others, recalling the joys of war,
experienced joy alone at the prospect of
fighting. (96-97)
pee fe fated प्राकारपरिखान्तरम्।
ददृशू राक्षसा दीना: प्राकारं वानरीकृतम्।
हाहाक।रमङ्कृन्त राक्षसा भयमागता: ॥ ९८ Ul

The entire space between the
defensive walls and the surrounding moat
was actually filled with monkeys. The
downcast ogres saw the defensive walls
converted, as it were, into monkeys

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA +

themselves. Overwhelmed with fear, they
raised an outcry of distress. (98)

तस्मिन् महाभीषणके set
कोलाहले राक्षसराजयोधा:।
प्रगृह्य रक्षांसि महायुधानि
युगान्तवाता sat संविचेरु:॥९९॥
Seizing hold of mighty weapons, when
that most appalling tumult had set in, the
soldiers of Ravana, the ruler of ogres, rushed
like the winds raging at the dissolution of the
worlds. (99)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये युद्धकाण्डे एकचत्वारिंश: FW: ॥ ४१ ॥

Thus ends Canto Forty-one in the Yuddhakanda of the glorious Ramayana of
Valmiki, the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

Canto XLII

Approaching Ravana, the ogres break to him the news about Lanka having
been laid siege to by the monkeys led by S17 Rama. Ascending the roof
of his palace and taxing his brain about the means of putting an end
to the monkeys, he casts a look at Sri Rama and the monkeys.
Pained at the thought that Sita was being bullied by Ravana
on his account, and commanding the monkeys to besiege
all the four gates of Lanka and to destroy the ogres,

Sri Rama, on the other side, takes up his position
alongwith Laksmana near the northern gate.

Apprised of these developments, Ravana
mobilizes his army and, encouraged
by him, the ogres beat their drums
and emit a terrible roar

ततस्ते राक्षसास्तत्र गत्वा रावणमन्दिरम्।
न्यवेदयन् पुरीं wet रामेण we वानरै:॥१॥
Proceeding to the palace of Ravana in
Lanka, the said ogres thereupon broke the
news to him about the city having been laid
siege to by Sri Rama, accompanied by the
monkeys. (1)

रुद्धां तु नगरीं star जातक्रोधो निशाचर:।
विधानं द्विगुणं peat प्रासादं चाप्यरोहत॥ २॥
Enraged to hear of the city having
been besieged by the monkeys, nay,
doubling the arrangements already made for
the defence of the capital, the ranger of the
night for his part ascended the palace. (2)
