* ARANYAKANDA «

gathered together and all of them spoke as
follows : (13)

अस्माकं कस्यचित् स्थानमेष प्रार्थयते AP: |
gta संविग्नमनस: ad aa दिवौकस:॥१४॥

“This sage is seeking the state of
some one among us.’ Thus all the denizens
of heaven felt disturbed in mind. (14)

तत: wd तपोविघ्नं सर्वदेवैर्नियोजिता:।

प्रधानाप्सरस: पञ्च विद्युच्चलितवर्चस:॥ १५॥
“Then, for causing interruption in his

austerities, all the gods appointed five

principal nymphs with bodies flashing like
lightning. (15)

अप्सरोभिस्ततस्ताभिर्मुनिर्दृष्टपरावर: ।

नीतो मदनवश्यत्वं देवानां कार्यसिद्धये॥ १६॥
“Now that sage, who had seen what is

wholesome or otherwise in this world as

well as in the other, was captured with love

by those nymphs for accomplishing the work

of gods. (16)

ताश्चैवाप्सरस: पञ्च मुने: पत्नीत्वमागता:।
तटाके निर्मितं तासां तस्मिन्नन्तर्हितं Tei vo
“The same five nymphs have become

the wives of the sage. In the lake has been
built a secret house for them. (17)

तत्रैवाप्सरस: us निवसन्त्यो यथासुखम्।
रमयन्ति तपोयोगान्मुनिं यौवनमास्थितम्॥१८॥
“Dwelling happily in that very house,
the five nymphs delight the sage, who has
regained his youth, by virtue of his austerities.
(18)

तासां संक्रीडमानानामेष वादित्रनि:स्वन:।
श्रूयते भूषणोन्मिश्रो गीतशब्दो मनोहर:॥१९॥

“This is the sound of the musical
instruments and the charming song of the
nymphs sung while they are playing, mixed
with the tinkling of ornaments, that is the
sound being heard.” (19)

आश्चर्यमिति तस्यैतद् वचनं भावितात्मन:।
Waa: प्रतिजग्राह सह Wal महायशा:॥ २०॥

739

Raghava of great renown together with
his brother accepted the report of the pure-
minded sage as a piece of wonder. (20)

एवं कथयमान: स ददर्शाश्रममण्डलम्।

कुशचीरपरिक्षिप्तं ब्राह्मया लक्ष्म्या समावृतम्॥ २१॥
While speaking thus, he saw a group

of hermitages enveloped in Brahmic grandeur

with KuSa grass and bark garments spread
round about. (21)

प्रविश्य सह वैदेह्या लक्ष्मणेन च Waa: |
तदा तस्मिन् स काकुत्स्थ: श्रीमत्याश्रममण्डले ।। २२॥
उषित्वा स सुखं तत्र पूज्यमानो महर्षिभि:।
जगाम चाश्रमांस्तेषां पर्यायेण तपस्विनाम्॥ २३॥
येषामुषितवान् पूर्वं सकाशे स महास्त्रवित्।
क्वचित् परिदशान् मासानेकसंवत्सरं क्वचित्॥ २४॥
क्वचिच्च UT मासान् पञ्च Ve च परान् क्वचित्।
अपरत्राधिकान् मासानध्यर्धमधिकं क्वचित्॥ २५॥
त्रीन् मासानष्टमासांश्च राघवो न्यवसत् सुखम्।
तत्र संवसतस्तस्य मुनीनामाश्रमेषु TUN २६॥
रमतश्चानुकूल्येन ययु: संवत्सरा दश।
परिसृत्य च धर्मज्ञो waa: सह सीतया॥ evil
सुतीक्ष्णस्याश्रमपदं पुनरेवाजगाम ह।
a तमाश्रममागम्य मुनिभि: परिपूजित:॥ २८॥
तत्रापि न्यवसद् wa: किंचित् कालमरिंदम:।
अथाश्रमस्थो विनयात् कदाचित् तं महामुनिम्॥ २९॥
उपासीन: स काकुत्स्थ: सुतीक्ष्णमिदमब्रवीत्।
अस्मिन्नरण्ये भगवन्नगस्त्यो मुनिसत्तम:॥ ३०॥
Raghava together with Vaidehi and
Laksmana then entered that beautiful group
of hermitages and staying there happily, being
honoured by great sages, that descendant of
Kakutstha visited one by one the hermitages
of those sages with whom that knower of
great weapons had previously stayed.
Raghava happily stayed somewhere for ten
months, somewhere for a year, somewhere
for four months, somewhere five, six and
(even) more, elsewhere for more months,
somewhere half a month more and in other
hermitages for eight and three months. While
he was thus staying in the hermitages of the
