90

living at the foot of trees and remaining self-
restrained. In any case, | shall not return
from this place without seeing the dark-
eyed Sita. (45)
ae तु प्रतिगच्छामि सीतामनधिगम्य ताम्।

sive: सहित: सर्वैर्वानरैर्न भविष्यति॥४६॥

‘If, however, | go back without finding
the celebrated Sita, Prince Angada, with the
other monkeys, will cease to be. (46)

विनाशे Seat दोषा जीवन् प्राप्नोति भद्रकम्।
तस्मात् प्राणान् धरिष्यामि ध्रुवो जीवति संगम: ॥ ४७॥
‘There are numerous evils attending
self-destruction; a man continuing to live
attains good fortune sooner or later. | shall,
therefore, preserve my life; for attainment of
happiness is more or less certain if one
continues to live.’ (47)
एवं बहुविधं दु:खं मनसा धारयन् बहु।
नाध्यगच्छत् तदा पारं शोकस्य कपिकुञ्जर:॥ ४८ UI
Conceiving with his mind a good deal
of trouble of various kinds in this way,
Hanuman could not reach the end of his
grief at that time. (48)

ततो वबिक्रममासाद्य धैर्यवान् कपिकुञ्जर:।
रावणं वा वधिष्यामि दशग्रीवं महाबलम्।
काममस्तु BA सीता प्रत्याचीर्णं भविष्यति॥४९॥
Then, recalling his prowess, the
courageous Hanuman, an elephant among
the monkeys, said to himself, ‘Or, | shall
make short work of the ten-headed Ravana,
who is endowed with extraordinary might. It
does not matter if Sita has been abducted;
her abduction will be avenged by me in that
way. (49)

अथवैनं समुत्क्षिप्य उपर्युपरि सागरम्।
रामायोपहरिष्यामि पशुं पशुपतेरिव॥७५०॥
‘Or, lifting him up and carrying him
across the sea, | shall offer him to Sri
Rama, a Sacrificial animal, as it were, to
Lord Rudra (the god of destruction): (50)
sta चिन्तासमापन्न: सीतामनधिगम्य ताम्।
ध्यानशोकपरीतात्मा चिन्तयामास aT UG I

« VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

Thus overwhelmed with uneasiness due
to his failing to find out the celebrated Sita,
Hanuman, whose mind was overcome with
anxiety and grief, reflected as follows: (51)

यावत् सीतां न पश्यामि रामपत्नीं यशस्विनीम्।
तावदेतां पुरीं लंकां विचिनोमि पुन: पुन:॥७५२॥
‘| shall explore the city of Lanka again

and again as long as | do not find out Sita,
the illustrious consort of Si Rama. (52)
सम्पातिवचनाच्चापि रामं यद्यानयाम्यहम्।
अपश्यन् राघवो भार्यां Peds सर्ववानरान्॥ ५३॥
‘Even if | fetch Sri Rama here on the
strength of Sampati’s words, Sri Rama, a
scion of Raghu, may burn all monkeys with
the fire of his wrath on not beholding his
spouse. (53)

इहैव नियताहारो वत्स्यामि नियतेन्द्रिय:।
न मत्कृते विनश्येयु: ad a नरवानरा:॥७५४॥

‘Therefore, | shall continue to live at
this very place, Lanka, on a regulated diet
with my senses under control. Let not all
men and monkeys perish for my fault.(54)

अशोकवनिका चापि महतीयं महाद्रुमा।
इमामधिगमिष्यामि नहीयं विचिता warn

‘Here is a large grove too of Asoka
trees, containing gigantic trees. | shall now
explore it since it has not been scoured by
me so far. (55)

वसून् रुद्रांस्तथाऽऽदित्यानश्विनौ मरुतोऽपि |
नमस्कृत्वा गमिष्यामि रक्षसां शोकवर्धन:॥७६॥

‘Having saluted the eight Vasus (a class
of gods), the eleven Rudras as well as the
twelve Adityas (sons of Aditi), the two
ASwins (the twin-born physicians of gods)
as also the forty-nine wind-gods, | shall
proceed to ransack the Asoka garden, and
thereby intensify the grief of the ogres. (56)

जित्वा ¢ राक्षसान् देवीमिक्ष्वाकुकुलनन्दिनीम्।
सम्प्रदास्यामि रामाय सिद्धीमिव तपस्विने॥७५७॥

‘Again, having conquered the ogres, |
shall hand over the godlike Sita, the delight
