308

चक्रवाकानुचरिता: कारण्डवनिषेविता:।
wa: was संकीर्णा वराहमृगसेविता:॥ ८३॥
All the aforesaid trees on their part
were set in commotion by the said monkeys,
who felt pleased at the sight of their blossom.
There were lovely wells with stairs as well
as ponds on that mountain, which were
frequented by Cakrawaka birds, the ruddy
geese, inhabited by ducks, crowded with
water-fowls and cranes and were haunted
by boars and deer. (82-83)
ऋक्षैस्तरक्षुभि: fae: शार्दूलैश्च भयावहै:।
व्यालैश्च बहुभिर्भीमै: सेव्यमाना: समन्तत:॥ ८४॥

Nay, they were being visited on all
sides by bears, hyenas, lions, tigers inspiring
terror and many dreadful and vicious
elephants. (84)
Wal: सौगन्धिकै: Het: कुमुदैश्चोत्पलैस्तथा।
वारिजैर्विविधै: पुष्पै रम्यास्तत्र जलाशया:॥८५॥

The reservoirs of water in the shape of
lakes etc., on that mountain looked charming
with expanded blue lotuses, water-lilies, white
water-lilies and other aquatic flowers of
various kinds. (85)
तस्य सानुषु कूजन्ति नानाद्बिजगणास्तथा।
स्नात्वा पीत्वोदकान्यत्र जले क्रोडन्ति वानरा: ॥ ८६ Ul
अन्योन्यं प्लावयन्ति स्म शैलमारुह्य वानरा:।
फलान्यमृतगन्धीनि मूलानि कुसुमानि Aico
बभञ्जुर्वानरास्तत्र पादपानां मदोत्कटा:।
द्रोणमात्रप्रमाणानि लम्बमानानि वानरा:॥८८॥
aq; पिबन्त: स्वस्थास्ते मधूनि मधुपिङ्गला:।
पादपानवभञ्जन्तो विकर्षन्तस्तथा लता:॥८९॥
विधमन्तो गिरिवरान् प्रययु: प्लवगर्षभा:।
वृक्षेभ्योऽन्ये तु कपयो नदन्तो मधु दर्पिता:॥९०॥
ara वृक्षान् werd प्रपिबन्त्यपि चापरे।
aya वसुधा तैस्तु सम्पूर्णा हरिपुङ्खवै:।
यथा कमलकेदारै: पक्वैरिव वसुंधरा॥९१॥

Nay, flocks of birds of various kinds
sang on the peaks of that mountain. Having

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA +

bathed and quaffed water, the monkeys
sported and plunged one another in these
lakes etc. Climbing the mountain, the
monkeys broke down the fruits, fragrant as
nectar, as well as the flowers of the trees
as also the roots on that mountain. Nay, the
aforesaid monkeys, who were drunk with
pride of strength and were tawny like honey,
quaffed honey from the hanging honeycombs,
weighing about a maund* each, and went
their way contented and happy. The jewels
among monkeys marched on, smashing the
trees, pulling the climbers and throwing away
the foremost of mountains. Removing honey
from the trees, other proud monkeys for
their part thundered. Others proceeded to
the trees to snatch away honey, while still
others quaffed honey to their heart’s content.
Entirely covered with those bulls among
monkeys, the earth for its part looked like a
piece of land covered with ripe fields of
paddy. (86—91)

महेन्द्रमथ सम्प्राप्य रामो राजीवलोचन:।
आरुरोह महाबाहु: शिखरं द्रुमभूषितम्॥९२॥

Duly reaching the Mahendra mountain,
the mighty-armed Sri Rama with lotus-like
eyes forthwith ascended its peak adorned
with trees. (92)

Having climbed up its peak, Sri Rama,
son of King DaSsaratha, beheld from it the
sea crowded with turtle and fish. (93)

a Wa समतिक्रम्य मलयं च महागिरिम्।
आसेदुरानुपूर्व्यण समुद्रं भीमनि:स्वनम्॥९४॥
Having duly crossed in the first place the
Sahya mountain as well as the great Malaya
mountain, they reached in due course, after

crossing the Mahendra mountain the sea,
which was making a terrible noise. (94)

* roughly about 40 Kg.
