634

(aforesaid) ruler of monkeys as though
the ogre would consume him with his
wrath. (1)
तत: स्रग्दामसंनद्धं दत्तपञ्चाङ्गुलं शुभम्।
आददे परिघं धीरो महेन्द्रशिखरोपमम्॥२॥
हेमपट्टपरिक्षिप्तं वज्रविद्रुमभूषितम्।
यमदण्डोपमं भीमं रक्षसां भयनाशनम्॥३॥
The brave ogre forthwith took hold of
his brilliant club, which was festooned with
wreaths and provided with iron plates
measuring five digits in breadth, nay, which
resembled a peak of the Mahendra mountain
in size, was further plated with gold and
decked with diamonds and corals, was
terrible as the rod of Yama, the god
of retribution, and dispelled the fear of
ogres. (2-3)

wast महातेजा: शक्रध्वजसमौजसम्।
निननाद विव्रत्तास्यो निकुम्भो भीमविक्रम:॥४॥

Brandishing the weapon, which vied
with the banner of Indra in splendour,
Nikumbha of redoubtable prowess, who was
endowed with extraordinary energy, roared
with his mouth wide open. (4)

उरोगतेन निष्केण भुजस्थैरङ्गदैरपि।
कुण्डलाभ्यां च चित्राभ्यां मालया च सचित्रया॥ & ॥
निकुम्भो भूषणैर्भाति तेन स्म परिघेण च।

यथेन्द्रधनुषा मेघ: सविद्युत्स्तनयित्नुमान्॥६॥

With his jewels such as a golden
ornament adorning his breast, also armlets
encircling his arms as well as with charming
earrings and a lovely garland, as also with
that club, the aforesaid Nikumbha shone
even as a cloud shot with lightning and
accompanied by thunder looks bright with a
rainbow. (5-6)

परिघाग्रेण पुस्फोट वातग्रन्थिर्महात्मन:।
प्रजज्वाल सघोषश्च विधूम sa पावक:॥७॥

The conjunction of the seven winds or
bands of air (Pravaha, Avaha and so on)

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA +

burst on coming in contact with the tip of
the club of the gigantic ogre and the
club glowed like a smokeless flame with a
crash. (7)
नगर्या विटपावत्या गन्धर्वभवनोत्तमै:।
सतारागणनक्षत्रं सचन्द्रसमहाग्रहम्।
निकुम्भपरिघाघूर्णं भ्रमतीव नभस्थलम्॥८॥
The vault of heaven with the city of
Vitapavati (Alaka), the excellent mansions
of the Gandharvas (the celestial musicians),
the hosts of stars and lunar mansions,
the moon and other major planets appeared
to spin round as though it were caused
to revolve by the motion of Nikumbha’s
club. (8)

दुरासदश्च संजज्ञे परिघाभरणप्रभ: |
क्रोधेन्धनो निकुम्भाग्निर्युगान्ताग्निरिवोत्थित:।। ९॥

Nay, having burst into flames like the
fire at the end of the world-cycle, the fire in
the shape of Nikumbha, which had the club
and his ornaments for its flames and
his wrath for its fuel, became difficult to
assail. (9)

राक्षसा वानराश्चापि न शेकु: स्पन्दितुं भयात्।
हनुमांस्तु विव्रत्योरस्तस्थौ प्रमुखतो बली॥१०॥

In their terror neither the ogres nor the
monkeys dared to move. Baring his bosom,
the mighty Hanuman, however, stood in
front of him. (10)
परिघोपमबाहुस्तु परिघं भास्करप्रभम्।
act बलवतस्तस्य पातयामास वक्षसि॥११॥

The mighty ogre for his part, whose
arms resembled iron bars in_ stiffness,
struck his club, which shone like the

sun, on the breast of the mighty monkey,
Hanuman. (11)

Rex तस्योरसि ae afta: शतथधा कृत:।
विकोर्यमाण: agar उल्काशतमिवाम्बरे॥ 22

Split into a hundred splinters as soon
as it impinged on his solid and broad chest,
