16 « VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

KARANYASA

So GAA SABA AA: | ॐ शान्तमनसे तर्जनीभ्यां नम:। 3% सत्यसंधाय मध्यमाभ्यां नम:।
ॐ जितेन्द्रियाय अनामिकाभ्यां नम:। ॐ धर्मज्ञाय नयसारज्ञाय कनिष्ठिकाभ्यां नम:। ॐ राज्ञे दाशरथये जयिने
करतलकरपृष्ठाभ्यां AA: |

After performing Hrdayadinyasa with these very Mantras one should meditate
according to the following verse:

श्रीराममाश्रितजनामरभूरुहेश-
मानन्दशुद्धमखिलामरवन्दिताङ्ध्रिम् ।
पुत्रान्वितं धृतधनुश्शरमादिदेवम्॥

“| worship Sri Rama, the primal deity, the foremost wish-yielding tree (lit., a celestial
tree) for people dependent on Him, who is Joy personified and immaculate, whose feet are
adored even by the immortals, who is constantly united with His (divine) Consort, Sita, and
accompanied by Laksmana (son of Sumitra) and who holds a bow and an arrow in His
hands.”

ॐ सुप्रसन्न: शान्तमना: सत्यसंधो जितेन्द्रिय:।
at नयसारज्ञो राजा दाशरथिर्जयी॥

“The victorious King Rama (son of DaSaratha), who is denoted by the mystic syllable
‘OM’, is exceedingly cheerful, tranquil of mind and true to His promise. He keeps his
senses under control, knows what is right and is a master of the essence of polity.”

One should worship Lord Sri Rama while uttering the foregoing Mantra and should
read the Balakanda repeating the word “Rama” or this very verse at the beginning and
end of each single verse. By doing so one can expect to secure the appeasement of evil
stars, riddance from the fear of Itis* (unforeseen calamities) and the birth of a male
progeny.

THE VINIYOGA AND NYASAS PERTAINING TO THE AYODHYAKANDA
ॐ अस्य श्रीअयोध्याकाण्डमहामन्त्रस्य भगवान् वसिष्ठ ऋषि:। SS छन्द:। भरतो दाशरथि: परमात्मा

Saat | भं बीजम्। नम: शक्ति: । भरतायेति कीलकम्। मम भरतप्रसादसिद्ध्यर्थमयोध्याकाण्डपारायणे विनियोग: | 3%

वसिष्ठऋषये नम: शिरसि। ॐ अनुष्टुप्छन्दसे नम: मुखे। So दाशरथिभरतपरमात्मदेवतायै AA: हृदि। So भं बरीजाय

AA: गुह्ये। ॐ नम: VHA AA: पादयो: | ॐ भरताय कीलकाय नम: Tats |

KARANYASA

ॐ भरताय नमस्तस्मै अङ्गुष्ठाभ्यां नम:। ॐ सारज्ञाय तर्जनीभ्यां AA: | ॐ महात्मने मध्यमाभ्यां नम:। ॐ
तापसाय अनामिकाभ्यां नम:। 3 अतिशान्ताय कनिष्ठिकाभ्यां नम:। ॐ शात्रुघ्नसहिताय च करतलकरपृष्ठाभ्यां
TA: |

After going through the Hrdayadinyasa with these very Mantras one should meditate
according to the following verse:

* The six Itis or unforeseen calamities are—
अतिवृष्टिरनावृष्टिर्मूषका: शलभा: YR: | AMAIA राजान: षडेता ईतय: स्मृता॥
“Excessive rainfall, drought, a swarm of rats, locusts and parrots and hostile kings arrived very nearer
the six unforeseen calamitiles.”
