* ARANYAKANDA «

इत्युक्त्वाभ्यपतद् KS संधाय धनुषि क्षुरम्।
क्रुद्धो राम: समुद्रान्तां चालयन्निव मेदिनीम्॥ १३॥
Saying so and angrily setting an arrow
going by the name of Ksura to his bow, Sri
Rama rushed to see him, shaking as it were
the whole earth bounded by the ocean. (13)
तं दीनदीनया वाचा aad रुधिरं वमन्।
अभ्यभाषत पक्षी स रामं दशरथात्मजम्॥१४॥
Vomiting foaming blood, the aforesaid
vulture submitted to the celebrated Sri Rama,

son of Dasaratha, in most piteous accents
as follows : (14)

यामोषधीमिवायुष्मन्नन्वेषसि महावने।
सा cat WA च प्राणा रावणेनोभयं SALI १५॥

“That godly lady whom you are seeking
in the great forest as one would a life-giving
herb, as well as my life, both have been
snatched away by Ravana, O child blessed
with long life ! (15)

त्वया विरहिता eat लक्ष्मणेन च waa
ह्रियमाणा AAT दृष्टा रावणेन बलीयसा॥१६॥

“Bereft of you as well as of Laksmana,
O scion of Raghu, the queen was seen by
me being carried away by Ravana of superior
might. (16)

सीतामभ्यवपन्नोऽहँ रावणश्च रणे yr
विध्वंसितरथच्छत्रर पतितो धरणीतले॥ १७॥

“| flew to the succour of Sita as soon
as | heard her cry and in the course of the
struggle that ensued with the powerful ogre,
Ravana, my lord, fell down on the earth’s
surface with his chariot and canopy
shattered. (17)
एतदस्य धनुर्भग्नमेते चास्य शरास्तथा।
अयमस्य रणे राम भग्न: सांग्रामिको रथ:॥ १८॥

“Here is his broken bow and here are
his arrows reduced to splinters. And here,
O Rama, is his chariot of war smashed by
me in the contest. (18)

aa तु सारथिस्तस्य मत्पक्षनिहतो भुवि।
परिश्रान्तस्य A पक्षौ छित्त्वा खड्गेन रावण:॥ १९॥

903

सीतामादाय वैदेह्रीमुत्पपात विहायसम्।
रक्षसा निहतं ga मां न हन्तुं त्वमर्हसि॥ २०॥
“Here, again, is his charioteer lying
slain on the ground with the stroke of my
wings. Severing with his sword both my
wings, exhausted as | was, and taking Sita,
the princess of the Videha kingdom, Ravana
eventually flew in the air. You ought not to
kill me, who stand already slain by the
ogre.” (19-20)

रामस्तस्य तु विज्ञाय सीतासक्तां frat कथाम्।
गृध्रराजं परिष्वज्य परित्यज्य महद् धनु:॥ २१॥
निपपातावशो भूमौ रुरोद सहलक्ष्मण:।
द्विगुणीकृततापार्तो wat धीरतरोऽपि सन्॥ २२॥

Abandoning his mighty bow on coming
to know his pleasing story, connected as it
was with Sita, and embracing Jatayu, the
king of vultures, Sri Rama for his part fell
down to the ground, having lost control over
his self. Nay, though very resolute, he cried
with Laksmana, afflicted as he was with
double agony. (21-22)

एकमेकायने hed नि:श्वसन्तं मुहुर्मुहु:।
wher दु:खितो wa: सौमित्रिमिदमब्रवीत्॥ २३॥

Distressed to perceive the vulture lying
all by himself in a precarious condition on a
narrow passage accessible to only one man,
and drawing a deep breath again and again,
Sri Rama spoke as follows to Laksmana,
son of Sumitra : (23)

राज्यं WS वने वास: सीता नष्टा मृतो द्विज:।
ईदृशीयं ममालक्ष्मीर्दहेदपि fe पावकम्॥२४॥

“My sovereignty is lost, exile to the
forest has been forced on me, Sita too has
disappeared and the bird, my great ally in
the forest, has all but died. Such is my
misfortune, which can surely consume even
fire itself that consumes all. (24)

सम्पूर्णमपि चेदद्य प्रतरेयं महोदधिम्।
सोऽपि नूनं ममालक्ष्म्या विशुष्येत् सरितां पति: i २५ ॥

“Even if | were to cross the ocean full
