# YUDDHAKANDA #

Seizing hold of an enormous mountain
peak, which was difficult even to reach for
others, Hanuman, an elephant among the
monkeys, marched at their head. (8)
a ददर्श हतानन्दां सीतामिन्द्रजितो रथे।
एकवेणीधरां दीनामुपवासकृशाननाम्॥ ९॥
परिक्लिष्टैकवसनाममृजां राघवप्रियाम्।
रजोमलाभ्यामालिप्तै सर्वगात्रैर्वरस्त्रियम्॥ १०॥

He beheld in the chariot of Indrajit the
cheerless and wretched ‘Sita’, the darling of
Sri Rama (a scion of Raghu), a lovely lady,
wearing a single tress, clad in a single
soiled garment and unadorned, all her limbs
covered with dust and mud and her face
emaciated through fasts. (9-10)

at निरीक्ष्य ged तु मैथिलीमध्यवस्य च।
बभूवाचिरदृष्टा fe at सा जनकात्मजा॥११॥

Gazing on her awhile and concluding
her to be no other than Sita, a princess of
Mithila, Hanuman for his part became
melancholy. He took no time in recognizing
her inasmuch as Sita, daughter of Janaka,
had been seen by him before long. (11)
अब्रवीत् at तु शोकार्तां निरानन्दां तपस्विनीम्।
दृष्टवा रथस्थितां दीनां राक्षसेन्द्रसुतथश्रिताम्॥ 82
fe समर्थितमस्येति चिन्तयन् स महाकपि:।
सह तैर्वानरश्रेष्ठैरभ्यधावत रावणिम्॥१३॥

Seeing that joyless and miserable
ascetic woman seated in the chariot stricken
with grief, under the sway of Indrajit (son of
the ruler of ogres), and wondering what his
intention might be in bringing her in his
chariot to the battlefield, that great monkey
for his part spoke about it to the leaders of
monkeys and rushed towards the son of
Ravana with those monkey leaders. (12-13)

aq वानरबलं Feat रावणि: क्रोधमूच्छित: |
कृत्वा विकोशं निस्निंशं मूर्धि सीतामकर्षयत्॥ १४॥
Filled with rage on seeing that simian
army rushing towards him and unsheathing
his sword, Indrajit (son of Ravana) pulled

647

‘Sita’ by the hair on her head.
तां स्नियं पश्यतां तेषां ताडयामास Were: |
क्रोशन्तीं राम रामेति मायया योजितां रथे॥ १५॥
The ogre began to strike that woman,
who had been placed in the chariot by dint
of legerdemain, and was crying “Rama! O
Rama”, while the monkeys stood looking
on (15)

दु:खजं वारि नेत्राभ्यामुत्सृजन् मारुतात्मज:॥ १६॥

Dropping tears of agony from his eyes
on perceiving her seized by the hair,
Hanuman, sprung from the loins of the wind-
god, gave way to affliction. (16)
at दृष्टवा चारुसर्वाङ्गीं रामस्य महिषीं प्रियाम्।
अब्रवीत् परुषं वाक्यं क्रोधाद् रक्षोधिपात्मजम्॥ १७॥

Beholding that cherished consort of Sri
Rama, who was lovely of all limbs, he
angrily addressed the following harsh rebuke

to Indrajit (son of the suzerain lord of ogres):
(17)

दुरात्मन्नात्मनाशाय केशपक्षे परामृश:।
ब्रह्मर्षीणां Het जातो राक्षसीं योनिमाश्रित:॥ १८॥
“It is to your own destruction, O evil-
minded one, that you have seized her by
the hair on her head. Though descended in
the line of Brahmana Rsis (seers of Vedic
Mantras), you have lived in the womb of an
ogress. (18)
fare cat पापसमाचारं यस्य ते मतिरीदृशी।
नृशंसानार्य दुर्वृत्त क्षुद्र पापपराक्रम।
अनार्यस्येदृशं कर्म घृणा ते नास्ति निर्घृण॥१९॥

“Woe be to you of sinful conduct, in
whom such a resolve has taken place. O
cruel, ignoble and mean scoundrel of sinful
prowess, such an act is worthy of a barbarian
alone. Obviously there is no pity in you, O
ruthless one! (19)

च्युता गृहाच्च राज्याच्च रामहस्ताच्च मैथिली।
fe तवैषापराद्धा fe यदेनां da निर्दय॥ २०॥

(14)
