# YUDDHAKANDA #

the Videha territory) even while she was
entering the fire. (17)

न fe शक्त: सुदुष्टात्मा मनसापि fe मैथिलीम्।
प्रधर्षयितुमप्राप्या दीप्तामग्निशिखामिव॥ १८॥

“The extremely evil-minded fellow,
Ravana, could not actually lay his violent
hands even in thought on the princess of
Mithila, who was inaccessible to him like a
flaming tongue of fire. (18)

नेयमर्हति वैक्लव्यं रावणान्त:पुरे सती।
अनन्या हि मया सीता भास्करस्य प्रभा यथा॥ १९॥
“This virtuous lady could not give way
to frailty in the gynaeceum of Ravana
inasmuch as Sita is non-different from me
even as sunlight is non-different from the
sun (19)

विशुद्धा fry लोकेषु मैथिली जनकात्मजा।
न विहातुं मया शक्या कीर्तिरात्मवता यथा॥ २०॥

“The daughter of Janaka, a princess
of Mithila, is absolutely unsullied in all the

799

three worlds. She can no longer be renounced
by me any more than good name by a man
of prudence. (20)
अवश्यं च मया कार्यं सर्वेषां वो वचो हितम्।
स्निग्धानां लोकनाथानामेवं च वदतां हितम्॥ २१॥
“The friendly advice of you all, the
loving protectors of the world, who are saying
what is conducive to our good, needs must
be acted upon by me.” (21)

इत्येवमुक्त्वा विजयी महाबल:
प्रशस्यमान: स्वकृतेन कर्मणा।
समेत्य राम: प्रियया महायशा:
Ge सुखार्होऽनुबभूव Waar eeu

Saying as aforesaid and getting reunited
with his darling, Sita, the victorious and
highly illustrious Sr Rama, a scion of Raghu,
who was endowed with extraordinary might
and deserved happiness, and was being
glorified by exploits performed by his own
self, experienced great felicity. (22)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये युद्धकाण्डेऽष्टादशाधिकशततम: सर्ग: ॥ ११८ Il

Thus ends Canto One hundred and eighteen in the Yuddhakanda of the glorious
Ramayana of Valmiki, the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

Canto CXIX

As enjoined by Lord Siva, Sri Rama and Laksmana pay their respects
to the soul of Emperor DaSaratha, who appears in an ethereal
form, a replica of his extinct personality, and ascends
once more to heaven after giving necessary
instructions to his two former sons
and daughter-in-law

एतच्छुत्वा शुभं वाक्यं राघवेणानुभाषितम्।
तत: शुभतरं वाक्यं व्याजहार महेश्वर:॥१॥
Hearing the foregoing excellent reply
made by Sri Rama (a scion of Raghu),
Lord Siva (the Supreme Lord) thereupon

delivered the following still more charming
speech: (1)
पुष्कराक्ष महाबाहो महावक्ष: परंतप।

दिष्ट्या कृतमिदं कर्म त्वया धर्मभृतां वर॥२॥

“O lotus-eyed, mighty-armed and broad-
