1012

you in the event of your failing to do so
(bound as you are by your plighted word to
help him in recovering his lost spouse) and
he may kill you if he is disregarded. (15)

इमां च मालामाधत्स्व दिव्यां सुग्रीव काञ्चनीम्।
उदारा sit: स्थिता ह्यस्यां सम्प्रजह्यान्मृते मयि॥ १६ ॥

“Also wear this ethereal chain of gold,
O Sugriva; for the exalted goddess of victory
abides in it and may leave it for good if it
remains on my dead body, when | am
dead.” (16)

इत्येवमुक्त: सुग्रीवो वालिना भ्रातृसौहृदात्।
हर्षं त्यक्त्वा पुनर्दीनो ग्रहग्रस्त इवोडुराट्॥१७॥

Giving up joy when instructed thus by
Vali out of brotherly affection, Sugriva felt
wretched again like the moon when seized
by the demon Rahu at the time of a lunar
eclipse. (17)

तद्बालिवचनाच्छान्त: कुर्वन् युक्तमतन्दित:।
जग्राह सोऽभ्यनुज्ञातो मालां AT चैव काञ्चनीम्॥ १८ A

Pacified by the aforesaid conciliatory
words of Vali and carefully doing what was
appropriate to the occasion, he also accepted,
when permitted by him, that chain of gold.

(18)
तां मालां काञ्चनीं दत्त्वा दृष्ट्वा चैवात्मजं स्थितम्।
संसिद्ध: प्रेत्यभावाय स्नेहादङ्गदमब्रवीत्॥१९॥

Parting with that chain of gold and gazing
on his son, Angada, standing before him, Vali,
who was now firmly resolved to die, fondly
spoke to Angada as follows : (19)

देशकालौ भजस्वाद्य क्षममाण: प्रियाप्रिये।
सुखदु:खसह: काले सुग्रीववशगो भव॥ २०॥

“Have due regard now to time and
place while doing an action, viewing alike
the agreeable and the disagreeable and
ignoring joy and sorrow when the time comes
for it, be amenable to the control of Sugriva.

(20)
यथा fe त्वं महाबाहो लालित: Wad मया।
न तथा वर्तमानं wat सुग्रीवो ag मन्यते॥ २१॥

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

“Sugriva may not hold you in high
esteem if you behave in the same way as
you actually did when constantly cherished
by me, O mighty-armed prince! (21)

नास्यामित्रैर्गतं गच्छेर्मा शत्रुभिररिदम।
भर्तुरर्थपरो दान्त: सुग्रीववशगो भव॥२२॥

“You should not enter into an alliance
with those who are not his friends, much
less with his enemies, O tamer of your
foes! Remain devoted to the interests of
your master, self-disciplined and subordinate
to the will of Sugriva. (22)

न चातिप्रणय: कार्य: कर्तव्योऽप्रणयश्च ते।
sua fe महादोषं तस्मादन्तरदृग् Va २३॥
“Neither excessive fondness nor lack
of affection should be shown by you towards
anyone; for both constitute a major fault;
therefore keep your eye on the golden mean.”
(23)

इत्युक्त्वाथ विव्रत्ताक्ष: शरसम्पीडितो भृशम्।
विव्रृतैर्दंशनैर्भीमैर्बभूवोत्क्रान्तजीवित: ॥ २४॥

Having spoken as aforesaid, Vali, who
felt extremely agonized due to pain caused
by the arrow, as could be seen by his
upturned eyes and terrible teeth exposed,
gave up his ghost. (24)

ततो विचुक्रुशुस्तत्र वानरा हतयूथपा:।
परिदेवयमानास्ते सर्वे प्लवगसत्तमा:॥ २५॥

Thereupon all the celebrated monkeys
whose leader had been killed and who were
present there, nay, who were the foremost
of their race, fell acrying and wailed as
follows : (25)

किष्किन्धा Gel शून्या च स्वर्गते वानरेश्वरे।

उद्यानानि च शून्यानि पर्वता: काननानि च॥ २६॥
“The ruler of monkeys having ascended

to heaven, desolate indeed is Kiskindha

today and desolate its gardens, mountains
and woodlands. (26)

हते प्लवगशार्दूले निष्प्रभा वानरा: gat: |
यस्य वेगेन महता काननानि वनानि an een
