# YUDDHAKANDA #

तस्यैव Het चान्यद् रावणस्योत्थितं शिर:।
ad. faa Fegeechy eer RermeTAROT a
छिन्नमात्रं च तच्छीर्षं पुनरेव प्रदृश्यते।।५६।।
तदप्यशनिसंकाशैश्छिन्नं रामस्य सायकै:।
wana wd छिन्नं शिरसां तुल्यवर्चसाम्॥५७॥
न चैव रावणस्यान्तो दृश्यते जीवितक्षये।
Wd: सर्वास्त्रविद् ak: कौसल्यानन्दवर्धन:॥ ५८ I
मार्गणैर्बहुभिर्युक्तश्चिन्तयामास राघव:।
मारीचो निहतो यैस्तु खरो यैस्तु सदूषण:॥५९॥
क्रौञ्चावटे विराधस्तु कबन्धो दण्डकावने।
यै: साला गिरयो भग्ना वाली च क्षुभितोऽम्बुधि: Ut ६० ॥
त इमे सायका: सर्वे युद्धे प्रात्ययिका मम।
fee नु तत् कारणं येन रावणे मन्दतेजस:॥ ६१॥

Another head, exactly similar to the
former, cropped up on the shoulders of
Ravana. That second head too of Ravana
was struck off on the battlefield in no time
by the nimble-handed Sri Rama, who was
quick in action, with his arrows. The aforesaid
head rose into view once more the moment
it was severed; but that too was severed by
the thunderbolt-like shafts of Sri Rama. In
the same way a hundred of heads, equally
brilliant, was successfully struck off by Sri
Rama, yet no certainty about his death
could be arrived at. Though equipped with
numerous arrows and well-versed in the
use of all kinds of mystic missiles, the
valiant Sri Rama (a scion of Raghu), the
enhancer of Kausalya’s joy, thereupon
became thoughtful. (He said to himself:) “I
wonder what is the reason why these well-
known shafts—which have all been tried
and found infallible by me on the battlefield,
nay, by the help of which the ogre, Marica,
for his part was made shortwork of by me
as also Khara alongwith Dusana, nay, the
ogre Viradha too was disposed of in a hole
in the ground in the Kraufica wood, and
Kabandha in the Dandaka forest, by which
again were the seven sal trees at Kiskindha

757

and mountains too were transfixed as also
Vali (the lord of monkeys) and (last of all)
the sea was thrown into agitation—have
proved of little efficacy against Ravana.”
(55—61)

इति चिन्तापरश्चासीदप्रमत्तश्च संयुगे।
ववर्ष शरवर्षाणि «wear रावणोरसि॥६२॥

Though absorbed in thought as
aforesaid, yet not at all careless on the
battlefield, Sri Rama, a scion of Raghu,
rained showers of arrows on the breast of
Ravana. (62)

रावणोऽपि तत: क्रुद्धो रथस्थो राक्षसेशर्वर:।
गदामुसलवर्षेण रामं प्रत्यर्दयद् रणे॥६३॥

Provoked to anger the king of ogres,
Ravana, too, who was seated in his chariot,
tormented Sri Rama in return with a shower
of maces and mallets on the battlefield.

(63)
तत् प्रवृत्तं Fee युद्धं तुमुलं रोमहर्षणम्।
ska च भूमौ च wg गिरिमूर्धनि॥६४॥

Then followed a great and tumultuous
fight, which caused one’s hair to stand on
end, in the air as well as on the earth and
again on the top of the Trikuta mountain.

(64)
देवदानवयक्षाणां पिशाचोरगरक्षसाम्।
wad तन्महद् Ge सर्वरात्रमवर्तत॥६५॥

While the gods, the devils and the
Yaksas as also the fiends, the Nagas
(serpent-demons or semi-divine beings
credited with the face of a man and the tail
of a serpent, and said to inhabit the
nethermost subterranean region, Patala) and
the ogres looked on that major conflict that
continued for entire days and nights. (65)

नैव रात्रिं न दिवसं न aed न च क्षणम्।
रामरावणयोर्युद्धं विराममुपगच्छति॥ ६६ I
The contest between Sri Rama and

Ravana ceased neither by night nor by day,
not even for an hour or a moment. (66)
