# YUDDHAKANDA #

terrible aspect by whom you have been
threatened in the past, O illustrious lady!”
Reflecting and pondering a while, when told
thus by Hanuman, the wretched Sita, who
was fond of the miserable, spoke to him as
follows: “Who will be angry, O prince of
monkeys, with obedient maid-servants, who
are dependent on a king because of their
being in his service and as such act according
to other's command? All this is being reaped
by me as a result of my own fault in the
shape of adverseness of fate, nay,
on account of a misdeed committed in the
past; for the fruit of one’s own actions is
reaped in one’s life. Therefore, do not speak
thus, O mighty-armed one! Such was the
destiny, which is supreme. (34—40)
प्राप्तव्यं तु दशायोगान्मयैतदिति निश्चितम्।
दासीनां रावणस्याहं मर्षयामीह दुर्बला॥४१॥
“It was in fact predetermined that this
must be reaped by me through a combination
of circumstances. As such | condone the

fault of the slaves of Ravana, feeble-hearted
as | am in these matters. (41)

आज्ञप्ता राक्षसेनेह राक्षस्यस्तर्जयन्ति माम्।
हते तस्मिन् न कुर्वन्ति तर्जनं मारुतात्मज॥४२॥

“The ogresses threatened me because
they had been ordered by the ogre-king to
do so. Now that he has been killed, they no
longer threaten me, O offspring of the wind-
god! (42)

783

अयं व्याघ्रसमीपे तु पुराणो धर्मसंहित:।
WAT tia: श्लोकोऽस्ति तं Prater प्लवंगम ।। ४३ ॥

“The following is an old maxim,
conformable to righteousness, actually
uttered by a bear in the presence of a tiger.
Please hear it, O monkey-chief! (43)

न पर: पापमादत्ते परेषां पापकर्मणाम्।
समयो रक्षितव्यस्तु सन्तश्चारित्रभूषणा:॥४४॥

“*A superior man does not take into
account the sin of those who have committed
an offence against him. The vow of not
returning evil for evil must be redeemed at
all costs; for the virtuous account good
conduct as their ornament.’ * (44)

पापानां वा शुभानां वा वधार्हाणामथापि वा।
ald कारुण्यमार्येण न कश्चिन्नापराध्यति॥ wu i

“Compassion should be shown by a
noble soul towards sinners as well as for
the good, nay, even for those deserving
death; for there is none who never commits
a wrong. (45)

नोकहिंसादि . दि । ।
कुर्वतामपि पापानि Aa कार्यमशोभनम्॥४६॥

“No evil should be done even to those
cruel men of sinful deeds, who revel in
genocide, and continue to perpetrate sins.”

(46)
एवमुक्तस्तु हनुमान् सीतया वाक्यकोविद:।
प्रत्युवाच da: सीतां रामपत्नीमनिन्दिताम्॥४७॥

Admonished in the foregoing words by
Sita, Hanuman for his part, who was an

* Formerly a tiger ran in pursuit of a hunter. The latter climbed up a tree. There was a bear already perched
on a bough of the tree. Making to the foot of the tree, the tiger addressed the following words to the bear : “Look
here, both of us are denizens of the forest. The hunter is our common enemy. Therefore, knock him down from
the tree.” The bear, however, replied, “Having reached my abode, the hunter has in a way sought asylum with
me. I am, therefore, not going to hurl him down; I would be deviating from my duty if I do so.” Saying so, the
bear laid himself down to sleep. The tiger now turned to the hunter and said, “Push the bear down. I shall afford
protection to you.” The hunter thereupon pushed the sleeping bear. The bear, however, clutched at another
bough and thus escaped from falling down. The tiger now addressed the following appeal to the bear: “The
hunter sought to hurl you down and has thus wronged you. Therefore, push him down.” Though pressed by the
tiger again and again, the bear refused to hurl him down and repeated the above-quoted verse in support of his

attitude.
