1072

“You are ignoble and ungrateful and a
liar too, O monkey, in that having accomplished
your purpose through the good offices of Sri
Rama in the first instance, you are not requiting
the services of Sri Rama. (13)

ननु नाम कृतार्थेन त्वया रामस्य वानर।
सीताया मार्गणे यत्न: कर्तव्य: कृतमिच्छता॥ १४॥

“Surely an effort ought to be made at
all costs by you, O monkey, since you
have acomplished your object through the
good offices of Sri Rama; you ought to
requite the services of Sri Rama by the
discovery of Sita. (14)

स त्वं ग्राम्येषु भोगेषु सक्तो मिथ्याप्रतिश्रव:।
न त्वां रामो विजानीते ad मण्डूकराविणम्॥ १५॥

“On the contrary, you stand addicted
to carnal enjoyments and have proved false
to your promise. Sri Rama does not recognize
you to be a serpent croaking through the
throat of a frog held within its jaws. (15)

महाभागेन रामेण पाप: करुणवेदिना।
हरीणां प्रापितो राज्यं त्वं दुरात्मा ARIST I १६॥
“Though sinful and evil-minded, you have
been enabled to secure the rulership of
monkeys by the highly blessed and high-
souled Sri Rama, who gets melted through
pity. (16)

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

pd चेन्नातिजानीषे राघवस्य महात्मन:।
सद्यस्त्वं निशितैर्बाणैर्हतो द्रक्ष्यसि वालिनम्॥ १७॥

“Pierced with his sharp arrows, you
will soon see Vali (in the abode of Death) if
you fail to recognize the services of the
high-souled Sri Rama, a scion of Raghu.(17)

न स संकुचित: wer येन वाली हतो गत:।
समये तिष्ठ सुग्रीव मा वालिपथमन्वगा:॥१८॥

“The well-known path along which
Vali had departed to the abode of Death
when killed by Sr Rama has not been
closed. Therefore, honour the understanding
arrived at by you with Sri Rama, O Sugriva;
pray, do not follow in the wake of Vali.

(18)
न नूनमिक्ष्वाकुवरस्य कार्मुका-
च्छरांश्च तान् पश्यसि वज्रसंनिभान्।
तत: सुखं am विषेवसे सुखी
न रामकार्यं मनसाप्यवेक्षसे॥१९॥

“Surely you do not behold the well-
known arrows, resembling the thunderbolt,
shot from the bow of Sr Rama, the
foremost of the Ikswakus. Hence it is that
you complacently enjoy pleasures to your
heart’s content and do not attend to the
business of Sri Rama even with the
mind.” (19)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये किष्किन्धाकाण्डे चतुस्तिंश: सर्ग: ॥ ३४॥

Thus ends Canto Thirty-four in the Kiskindhakanda of the glorious Ramayana of
Valmiki, the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

Canto XXX V

Consoling Laksmana, who was wroth against Sugriva, by showing reasons
for the delay, Tara requests the former to compose himself,
assuring him that everything will be accomplished

तथा ब्रूवाणं सौमित्रिं प्रदीप्तमिव तेजसा।
अब्रबील्लक्ष्मणं तारा ताराधिपनिभानना॥१॥

To Laksmana, son of Sumitra, who
was speaking as aforesaid, and who was
inflamed, as it were, with a fiery spirit, Tara,
