316

समप्तम:

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA +

सर्ग:

Canto VII

Indulging in praise of their own might on hearing the command of
Ravana, all the ogres present stimulate him with confidence,
asking him not to give way to despondency

इत्युक्ता राक्षसेन्द्रेण राक्षसास्ते महाबला:।
ऊचु: प्राञ्जलय: सर्वे रावणं राक्षसेश्वरम्॥१॥
द्विषत्पक्षमविज्ञाय नीतिबाह्यास्त्वबुद्धय: |
राजन् परिघशक्त्यृष्टिशूलपट्टिशकुन्तलम्॥ २॥
सुमहन्नो act कस्माद् विषादं भजते भवान्।
त्वया भोगवतीं गत्वा निर्जिता: पन्नगा युधि॥ ३॥

Not knowing in full about the strength
of the enemy’s army, all the aforesaid ogres,
who, though endowed with extraordinary
might, were unaware of political wisdom
and lacked intelligence, submitted, when
commanded thus by Ravana, the lord of
ogres, with joined palms as follows: “There
exists with us, O king, a huge army equipped
with iron bars, javelins, double-edged
swords, darts, sharp-edged spears and
lances. Why then do you give way to
despondency. After proceeding to Bhogavati
(the city of the Nagas in Patala), the Nagas
were completely subdued by you in combat.

(1—3)
कैलासशिखरावासी यक्षैर्बहुभिरावृत:।
सुमहत्कदनं कृत्वा वश्यस्ते धनद: कृत:॥४॥

“Nay, after waging a terrible conflict,
even Kubera, the bestower of riches, who
dwells on a peak of Mount Kailasa and
remains surrounded by numerous Yaksas
(a class of demigods), was reduced to
submission by you. (4)

a महेश्वरसख्येन श्लाघमानस्त्वया विभो।
fafa: समरे रोषाल्लोकपालो महाबल:॥ ५॥
“Priding, as he did, on his friendship

with Lord Siva, the Supreme Lord, the
aforesaid Kubera (a guardian of the world),

who is endowed with extraordinary might,
was utterly subdued by you on the field
of battle in indignation, O powerful king!
(5)
विनिपात्य च यक्षौघान् विक्षोभ्य विनिगृह्य च।
त्वया कैलासशिखराद् विमानमिदमाहतम्॥६॥

“After causing a stir among the Yaksa
hordes, nay, taking them as prisoners and
overthrowing them—this aerial car (Puspaka)
was taken away by you from the peak of
Mount Kailasa. (6)
मयेन दानवेन्द्रेण त्वद्भधयात् सख्यमिच्छता।
दुहिता aa भार्यार्थे दत्ता राक्षसपुङ्खव॥७॥

“By Maya (मय ), a ruler of the Danavas
(the son of Danu), who sought an alliance
with you out of fear of you, O bull among
ogres, his daughter, Mandodari, was given
to you in marraige as your wife. (7)
दानवेन्द्रो महाबाहो वीर्योत्सिक्तो दुरासद:।
विगृह्य वशमानीत: कुम्भीनस्या: सुखावह:॥ ८॥

“Madhu (another ruler of the Danavas),
the husband (lit., the joy) of Kumbhinasi,
your beloved sister, who was proud of his
virility and was difficult to approach, was
subjugated by you by offering battle to him,
O mighty-armed one! (8)

निर्जितास्ते महाबाहो नागा गत्वा रसातलम्।
वासुकिस्तक्षक: शङ्खो Wet च वशमाहता:॥९॥

“After descending into Rasatala (the
penultimate subterranean region) the serpent-
demons Vasuki, Taksaka, Sankha and
Jati were completely subdued and reduced
to submission by you, O mighty-armed
one! (9)
