# YUDDHAKANDA #

TM जाम्बवतो वाक्यमुवाचेदं विभीषण:।
आर्यपुत्रावतिक्रम्य कस्मात् पृच्छसि मारुतिम्॥ १९॥

Hearing the query of Jambavan,
Vibhisana made the following reply: “Passing
over the two sons of Dasaratha, wherefore
do you inquire about Hanuman (son of the
wind-god)? (19)

Wa राजनि ita age नापि राघवे।
आर्य संदर्शित: Gel यथा वायुसुते पर:॥ oll

“The way in which the utmost affection
has been clearly manifested by you for
Hanuman, son of the wind-god, has not at
all been shown for King Sugriva, nor for
Angada, nor even for Sri Rama, a scion of
Raghu.” (20)

विभीषणवच: श्रुत्वा जाम्बवान् वाक्यमब्रवीत्।
TOT नैर्ऋतशार्दूल यस्मात् पृच्छामि मारुतिम्॥ २१॥

Hearing the observation of Vibhisana,
Jambavan replied as follows: “Listen, O
tiger among the ogres (lit, the progeny of
Nirrti), why | inquire solely about Hanuman,
son of the wind-god: (21)

अस्मिञ्जीवति dit तु हतमप्यहतं बलम्।
हनूमत्युज्झितप्राणे जीवन्तोऽपि Wat वयम्॥ २२॥

“If this hero, Hanuman, for his part is
still breathing, our army is intact, even though
destroyed. If Hanuman, on the other hand,
has given up the ghost, we are all dead,
even though living. (22)
धरते मारुतिस्तात मारुतप्रतिमो यदि।
वैश्वानरसमो वीर्ये जीविताशा ततो भवेत्॥ २३॥

“If Hanuman, son of the wind-god, a
compeer of the wind-god, who vies with the
god of fire in prowess, is still living, O dear

one, there may be some hope of our survival
in that case.” (23)

ततो वृद्धमुपागम्य विनयेनाभ्यवादयत्।
Te जाम्बवत: पादौ हनूमान् मारुतात्मज:॥ २४॥
Approaching the aged bear and clasping

613

the feet of Jambavan, Hanuman, an offspring
of the wind-god, thereupon greeted him
with humility. (24)
श्रुत्वा हनूमतो वाक्यं तदा विव्यथितेन्द्रिय: |
पुनर्जातमिवात्मानं मन्यते स्मर्क्षपुङ्गव:॥ २७५॥
Hearing the words of Hanuman,
Jambavan, a bull among the bears, whose
mind was sore afflicted through agony

caused by his wounds, thought himself as
though born again. (25)

ततोऽब्रवीन्महातेजा हनूमन्तं स जाम्बवान्।
आगच्छ हरिशार्दूल वानरांस्त्रातुमर्हसि॥ २६॥

Thereupon the aforesaid Jambavan,
who was endowed with extraordinary energy,
spoke as follows to Hanuman: “Come along,
O tiger among the monkeys! You ought to
deliver the monkeys. (26)
नान्यो विक्रमपर्याप्तस्त्वमेषां परम: सखा।
त्वत्पराक्रमकालोऽयं नान्यं पश्यामि कञ्चन॥ २७॥

“None other than you is consummate
in prowess. Moreover, you are the greatest
friend of the monkeys. This is the time for
exhibiting your prowess and | see no one
else capable of doing that. (27)

ऋक्षवानरवीराणामनीकानि प्रहर्षय।
विशल्यौ कुरु चाप्येतौ सादितौ रामलक्ष्मणौ tt २८ ॥

“Bring excessive joy to the ranks of
the champions among the bears and
monkeys. And also heal the yonder Sri
Rama and Laksmana, who are lying wounded
of their arrow-wounds. (28)

गत्वा परममध्वानमुपर्युपरि सागरम्।
हिमवन्तं नगश्रेष्ठं हनूमन् गन्तुमर्हसि॥ २९॥

“Covering a long distance over the
sea, O Hanuman, you ought to proceed to
the Himalaya mountain, the highest of all
mountains. (29)
wd: काञ्चनमत्युच्चमृषभं पर्वतोत्तमम्।
कैलासशिखरं चात्र द्रक्ष्यस्यरिनिषूदन॥ ३०॥
