* BALAKANDA +

“Invite kings, nay, whoever on earth
are pious, as well as Brahmanas, Ksatriyas,
Vaisyas and Sudras in thousands. (20)

समानयस्व UPA सर्वदेशेषु मानवान्।
मिथिलाधिपतिं we जनकं सत्यवादिनम्॥ २१॥
तमानय महाभागं स्वयमेव सुसत्कृतम्।
पूर्वं सम्बन्धिनं ज्ञात्वा ad: पूर्वं ब्रवीमि TU
“Bring together men (other than those
specified in the foregoing verse) from all
lands, treating them with honour. Nay, bring
yourself with great respect from Mithila the
celebrated and highly blessed Janaka, the
heroic and truthful king of Mithila, first of all.
| make this suggestion to you, knowing him
to be a predetermined relation of the Emperor,
as the prospective father-in-law of his sons.
(21-22)
aga देवसंकाशं स्वयमेवानयस्व ह॥ २३॥
“Also bring personally the friendly and
god-like ruler of the kingdom of Kasi, who
ever speaks kindly, they say, and possesses
a noble character. (23)
तथा केकयराजानं gg परमधार्मिकम्।
me राजसिंहस्य wt तमिहानय॥ २४॥
“Similarly, bring here the celebrated
and extremely pious king of the Kekayas,
the aged father-in-law of DaSaratha, a very
lion among kings, as well as his son. (24)
ara राजसिंहस्य wat तमिहानय॥ २५॥
“Also bring here with great respect
King Romapada, the ruler of the Angas, a
well-known friend of our lion-like sovereign
and the wielder of a mighty bow, alongwith
his son. (25)
तथा कोसलराजानं भानुमन्तं सुसत्कृतम्।
मगधाधिपतिं शूरॆ सर्वशास्त्रविशारदम्॥ २६॥
Ua: शासनमादाय चोदयस्व FINAL
प्राचीनान्सिन्धुसौवीरान् सौराष्टेयांश्च पार्थिवान्॥ २७॥

103

“Likewise, bring most respectfully
Bhanuman, the king of Kosala, and with
due honour Praptijfa, the heroic and
supremely large-hearted ruler of Magadha,
the foremost among men and well-versed in
all sacred lore. Taking the orders of His
Majesty, invite the eminent rulers of the
eastern territories as well as the monarchs
of the Sindhusauvira and Saurastra.

(26-27)

दाक्षिणात्यान् नरेन्द्रांश्च समस्तानानयस्व ह।
सन्ति स्निग्धाश्च ये चान्ये राजान: पृथिवीतले॥ २८ Ul

तानानय यथा क्षिप्रं सानुगान् सहबान्धवान्।
Way दूतैर्महाभागैरानयस्व नॄपाज्ञया॥ २९॥

“Further bring all the rulers of the south
and duly get together apace whatever other
friendly monarchs there are on the surface
of the earth, alongwith their followers and
relations, get these through highly
distinguished ambassadors under orders of
His Majesty.” (28-29)
वसिष्ठवाक्यं तच्छुत्वा सुमन्त्रस्त्वरितं तदा।
व्यादिशत् पुरुषांस्तत्र राज्ञामानयने शुभान्॥ ३०॥

Hearing the aforementioned command
of Vasistha on that occasion, Sumantra
hastily charged capable men with the
aforesaid duty of bringing monarchs. (30)

स्वयमेव fe धर्मात्मा प्रयातो मुनिशासनात्।
सुमन्त्रस्त्वरितो भूत्वा समानेतुं महामति:॥ ३१॥

Nay, under orders of the sage the
highly intelligent Sumantra, whose mind was
given to piety, personally departed with haste
to bring with honour those who had been
specially marked out by Vasistha for being
brought personally by Sumantra. (31)

a च कर्मान्तिका: Wd वसिष्ठाय महर्षये।
wa निवेदयन्ति स्म यज्ञे यदुपकल्पितम्॥३२॥

Nay, all those who had been employed
to work for the sacrifice till the end reported
to the eminent sage, Vasistha, whatever
had been accomplished in connection with
the sacrifice. (32)
