854

परिश्रान्तं तु तं gear जरया पक्षियूथपम्।
उत्पपात पुनर्हृष्टो मैथिलीं गृह्य रावण:॥ २१॥
Clasping the princess of Mithila, Ravana,
for his part—who felt rejoiced to see Jatayu,
the ruler of the feathered kingdom, exhausted
due to age—rose once more to the heavens.
(21)

तं wee निधायाङ्के रावणं जनकात्मजाम्।
गच्छन्तं खड्गशेषं च प्रणष्टहतसाधनम्॥ २२॥

गृध्रराज: समुत्पत्य रावणं समभिद्रवत्।
समावार्य महातेजा जटायुरिदमब्रवीत्॥२३॥
Springing up on his wings, the king of
vultures rushed towards Ravana, who was
now on his move, highly rejoiced, clasping
the daughter of Janaka in his arms, the
sword alone being left with him, all his other
implements of war destroyed. Intercepting
Ravana, Jatayu (who was—endowed with
great energy) spoke as follows to Ravana :
(22-23)

वज्रसंस्पर्शबाणस्य भार्यां रामस्य रावण।
अल्पबुद्धे हरस्येनां वधाय खलु रक्षसाम्॥ २४॥
“Surely it is for the destruction of ogres
that you are carrying away this spouse of
Sri Rama, whose arrows impinge on the

body like the thunderbolt, O Ravana of
meagre understanding ! (24)

समित्रबन्धु: सामात्य: Tact: सपरिच्छ्द:।
विषपानं पिबस्येतत् पिपासित इवोदकम्॥ २५॥
“With your near and dear ones,
ministers, army and retinue you are drinking
this beverage mixed with poison (in the

shape of princess Sita) as a thirsty man
would drink water. (25)

अनुबन्धमजानन्त: कर्मणामविचक्षणा: |
viata विनश्यन्ति यथा त्वं विनशिष्यसि॥ २६ 1
“Not foreseeing the result of their evil
acts, unwise men perish very soon as you
are going to perish. (26)
बद्धस्त्वं कालपाशेन क्व गतस्तस्य मोक्ष्यसे।
ama बडिशं Ter सामिषं जलजो यथा॥ २७॥

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

“Caught as you are in the noose of
Death, where can you hope to be delivered
from it, like the fish which has swallowed a
hook alongwith the bait? (27)

नहि जातु दुराधर्षौ काकुत्स्थौ तव रावण।
धर्षणं चाश्रमस्यास्य क्षमिष्येते तु राघवौ॥ २८॥

“Nay, Sri Rama and Laksmana, the
two scions of Raghu, for their part, who are
descended from the stock of Kakutstha,
and are hard to overcome, will never on any
account brook the violation of the sanctity
of their hermitage. (28)

यथा त्वया hd कर्म भीरुणा लोकगर्हितम्।
तस्कराचरितो मार्गो नैष वीरनिषेवित:॥२९॥

“The way in which an act denounced
by the world has been perpetrated by you,
a coward that you are, is the path trodden
by thieves; it is not the path followed by
heroes. (29)

युद्ध्यस्व ate शूरोऽसि ded तिष्ठं रावण।
शयिष्यसे हतो भूमौ यथा भ्राता खरस्तथा॥ Bo Il

“Fight with me, if you are a hero and
pause awhile, O Ravana ! Struck dead by
me, you will lie on the ground in the same
way as did your brother Khara. (30)

परेतकाले पुरुषो aq कर्म प्रतिपद्यते।
विनाशायात्मनोऽधर्म्य प्रतिपन्नोऽसि कर्म तत्॥ ३१॥

“For your own destruction you have
adopted such an unrighteous conduct as a
man does at the hour of death. (31)

पापानुबन्धो वै यस्य HAT: को नु तत् पुमान्।
att लोकाधिपति: स्वयंभूर्भगवानपि॥ ३२॥

“What man on earth, be he even Lord
Brahma (the self-born) and the ruler of all
the worlds, would undertake an action that
results invariably in sin?” (32)

एवमुक्त्वा शुभं वाक्यं जटायुस्तस्य रक्षस:।
निपपात yet पृष्ठे दशग्रीवस्य वीर्यवान्॥३३॥
Uttering these wholesome words, the
powerful Jatayu swooped on the back of
that ten-headed ogre. (33)
