* SUNDARAKANDA +

thighs, sides, waist and backs of one another,
their limbs placed on one another's limbs.
(61)
अन्योन्यस्यांगसंस्पर्शात् प्रीयमाणा: सुमध्यमा: ।
एकीकृतभुजा: सर्वा: सुषुपुस्तत्र योषित:॥६२॥

Feeling delighted with the touch of one
another’s limbs, their arms intertwined, all
the women, who were distinguished by their
slender waist, were lying asleep there. (62)
अन्योन्यभुजसूत्रेण स्त्रीमाला ग्रथिता fe सा।
मालेव ग्रथिता सूत्रे शुशुभे मत्तषट्पदा॥६३॥

Strung on the arms of one another
intertwined as one string, drunken black
bees in heat resting over it (in the form of
hair and nipples etc.,) the aforesaid garland
of women looked really charming like a
wreath of flowers strung on a thread. (63)

लतानां माधवे मासि फुल्लानां वायुसेवनात्।
अन्योन्यमालाग्रथितं संसक्तकुसुमोच्चयम्॥६४॥
प्रतिवेष्टितसुस्कन्धमन्योन्यभ्रमराकुलम् ।
आसीद् वनमिवोद्भूतं स्त्रीवनं रावणस्य ALI ६५॥

Shaken by the breaths from their mouths
(in the shape of their covering), that gathering
of the consorts of Ravana, strung together
in the form of a garland, with their bunches
of flowers joined with one another, their
boughs in the form of shoulders interlocked
and the black bees in the form of hair
promiscuously mixed, looked like a cluster
of creepers blossomed in the vernal month
of VaiSakha (corresponding to April) due to
the caress of the southern breeze. (64-65)
उचितेष्वपि सुव्यक्तं न तासां योषितां तदा।
विवेक: VT आधातुं भूषणांगाम्बरस्रजाम्॥ ६६ UI

It was not possible to distinguish at
that moment the jewels, the limbs, the raiment
and the garlands of those women lying
intertwined, as they were, even though the
jewels etc., very vividly figured in their
customary places. (66)

Waar सुखसंविष्टे at: स्नियो विविधप्रभा:।
ज्वलन्त: HT दीपा: प्रेक्षन्तो निमिषा इव॥ ६७॥

73

While Ravana lay comfortably asleep,
the deities presiding over the lights burning
on lamp posts of gold gazed with unwinking
eyes, as it were, on those women of varying
splendour whom they dared not look at for
fear of Ravana so long as he was awake.

(67)
राजर्षिविप्रदैत्यानां गन्धर्वाणां च योषित:।
रक्षसां चाभवन् कन्यास्तस्य कामवशंगता:॥ ६८ ॥

Fallen a prey to lust, unmarried
daughters of royal sages, Brahmnas and
demons, as well as of Gandharvas (celestial
musicians) and ogres had chosen to become
his wives. (68)

युद्धकामेन ता: Mat रावणेन हृता: Fara:
समदा मदनेनैव मोहिता: काश्चिदागता:॥६९॥

Many other women had been borne
away by him because he was fond of war
(since he thought that their relatives would
offer resistance); while yet others, who were
drunk with passion, had come of their own
accord, infatuated as they were through
love. (69)

न तत्र काश्चित् Waal: प्रसह्य
वीर्योपपन्नेन गुणेन लब्धा:।
न चान्यकामापि न चान्यपूर्वा
विना altel जनकात्मजां TI Vo Il
Even though he was full of prowess,
no women among them, excepting, of course,
the daughter of Janaka, who was worthy of
being adored even by the best, had been
forcibly carried off by him; they had been
won through eminence in valour, prowess,
comeliness etc. Nor was there any who
longed for another, nor anyone who had
belonged to another in the past. (70)

न चाकुलीना न च हीनरूपा

नादक्षिणा नानुपचारयुक्ता।
भार्याभवत् तस्य न हीनसत्त्वा

न चापि कान्तस्य न कामनीया ।॥ ७१ ॥

Again, no consort of his was low-born,
