# YUDDHAKANDA #

कुम्भकर्णं Her जातो धृष्ट: प्राकृतदर्शन:।
अवलिप्तो न शक्नोषि कृत्यं सर्वत्र वेदितुम्॥ २॥

“Though born in a noble race, you are
insolent and arrogant and possessed of an
unsophisticated intellect and as such unable
to know what should be done under all
circumstances. (2)

नहि राजा न जानीते कुम्भकर्णं नयानयौ।
त्वं तु कैशोरकाद् धृष्ट: केवलं वक्तुमिच्छसि॥ ३॥
“It is not that His Majesty does not
know what is politic and what is impolitic, O
Kumbhakarna! You are, however, insolent
from your very juvenescence and only feel
inclined to speak. (3)
स्थानं वृरद्धिं च हानिं च देशकालविधानवित्।
आत्मनश्च Wet च बुध्यते राक्षसर्षभ:॥४॥
“Ravana, a bull among the ogres, is
conversant with the laws of time and place
and knows his own progress, decline and
status quo, as well as of the enemies. (4)
यत् त्वशक्यं बलवता ah प्राकृतबुद्धिना।
अनुपासितव्रृद्धेन क: कुर्यात् तादृशं बुध:॥५॥
“What wise man would, however,
attempt to undertake that which cannot be
achieved by one who is possessed of an
unsophisticated intellect and has not waited
upon his elders. (5)
यांस्तु धर्मार्थकामांस्त्वं ब्रवीषि पृथगाश्रयान्।
अवबोद्धुं स्वभावेन नहि लक्षणमस्ति तान्॥६॥
“The capacity to know virtue, worldly
gain and sensuous pleasure in their true
character does not exist in you in that you
speak of them as incompatible (lit., existing
in different individuals). (6)
कर्म wa fe सर्वेषां कारणानां प्रयोजनम्।
श्रेय: पापीयसां चात्र wet भवति कर्मणाम्॥७॥

“Again, action is the root of all the three

543

means to happiness, viz., virtue, worldly
gain and sensuous pleasure; moreover, the
fruit of actions, both noble and exceedingly
sinful, in this world accrues to the same
agent. (7)
नि:श्रेयसफलावेव धर्मार्थावितरावपि।
अधर्मानर्थयो: Wa weet च प्रत्यवायिकम्॥८॥
‘Virtue in the shape of muttering of
prayers, meditation etc., which have no
dependence on wealth, and the performance
of sacrifices and practice of charity etc., for
the accomplishment of which wealth is
indispensable, though conducive to final
beatitude alone, if pursued in a disinterested
spirit, also lead, if pursued with some
interested motive, to goals other than final
beatitude such as heavenly bliss and worldly
prosperity. From the omission of an obligatory
virtue follow unrighteousness and evil, and
alongwith them, the bitter fruit of the offence
of omission. (8)
ऐहलौकिकपारक्यं कर्म पुंभिर्निषेव्यते।
कर्माण्यपि तु कल्याणि लभते काममास्थित:॥ ९॥
“The fruit of past actions, good or bad,
is reaped by living beings in this as well as
in the other world. He, however, who remains
sedulously devoted to actions with a view
to attaining sensuous pleasure perceptibly
enjoys blessings even in this life and not
hereafter as in the case of virtue and material
gain. (9)
तत्र क्लृप्तमिदं राज्ञा हृदि कार्यं मतं च न:।
शत्रौ fe साहसं यत् aa किमिवात्रापनीयते॥ १०॥

“In such circumstances the pursuit of
sensuous pleasure (in the form of retaining
Sita and trying to win her over), which has
been cherished by the king in his heart
and is also approved of by us, must be
indulged in by him*. What wrong is there in

* The hedonistic theory which has been propounded here by Mahodara in order to win the pleasure
of Ravana is fallacious. Of the three objects of human pursuit, viz., virtue, material gain and sensuous
pleasure, virtue alone is worth pursuing as that alone can lead all to happiness.
