* AYODHYAKANDA +

“| for my part shall offer worship as
follows in the form of bringing him back from
the forest and restoring his patrimony to
him, my elder brother, Sri Rama, and entire
worship in the form of all obsequial rites to
my father and also enhance their reputation :
there is no doubt about it. (30)
आनाय्य च महाबाहुं कोसलेन्द्रं महाबलम्।
स्वयमेव प्रवेक्ष्यामि at मुनिनिषेवितम्॥ ३१॥

“Having caused Sri Rama (the ruler of
the kingdom of Kosala)—who is distinguished
by long arms and is possessed of great
might—to return to Ayodhya, | shall myself
retire in his place to the forest frequented by
hermits and thus save him from the sin of
having violated his vow. (31)
शक्तो धारयितुं Uiestenudrtifara: 1 ३२॥

“Looked on by the citizens with their
throat full of tears, | shall surely not be able
to brook the sin perpetrated by you in the
shape of sending the eldest brother into
exile and securing the kingdom in favour of
a younger one, O wicked woman of sinful
resolve ! (32)

सा त्वमग्निं प्रविश वा स्वयं वा विश दण्डकान्।
Tat बद्ध्वाथवा कण्ठे AS तेऽन्यत् परायणम्॥ ३३ ॥

“Having deliberately committed this sin,

567

enter you the fire or retire yourself to the
Dandaka forest or again end your life by
tying a cord round your neck and throttling
yourself: there is no other course left for
you. (33)

अहमप्यवनीं प्राप्ते रामे सत्यपराक्रमे।
papa भविष्यामि विप्रवासितकल्मष:॥ ३४॥

“| too shall have washed my stain and
accomplished my purpose only when Sri
Rama of unfailing prowess has returned to
his native land.” (34)

इति नाग इवारण्ये तोमराङ्कुशतोदित:।
पपात भुवि संक्रुद्धो नि:श्चसन्निव पन्नग:॥ ३५॥

Having spoken thus and hissing, highly
enraged, like a serpent, Bharata dropped
unconscious to the ground like an elephant
pricked with a javelin and a goad in a forest.

(35)
संरक्तनेत्र शिथिलाम्बरस्तथा
विधूतसर्वाभरण: परंतप:।
aya भूमौ पतितो नृपात्मज:
शचीपते: केतुरिवोत्सवक्षये॥ ३६ ॥

With deep red eyes, his garment
loosened and all his jewels tossed about,
the prince, Bharata, the tormentor of his
foes, fell to the ground like a banner raised
in honour of Indra and pulled down at the
end of the festival. (36)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्येऽयोध्याकाण्डे
चतु:सप्ततितम: सर्ग: ॥ ७४॥
Thus ends Canto Seventy-four in the Ayodhyakanda of the glorious Ramayana of
Valmiki, the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

