358

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA +

७
२
२

सर्ग:

Canto XX

Told by an ogre, Sardiila by name, that an army of monkeys led by
Sugriva was advancing towards Lanka, Ravana dispatched an
ogre, Suka by name, as an envoy to carry his message to
Sugriva. While commencing to deliver the message to
Sugriva, Suka is captured by the monkeys; but Sri
Rama causes him to be set free and he
delivers the message to Sugriva

ततो निविष्टां ध्वजिनीं सुग्रीवेणाभिपालिताम्।
ददर्श राक्षसोऽभ्येत्य शार्दूलो नाम वीर्यवान्॥१॥
चारो राक्षसराजस्य रावणस्य दुरात्मन:।
at दृष्टवा सर्वतोऽव्यग्रां प्रतिगम्य स राक्षस:॥ २॥
आविश्य लङ्कां वेगेन राजानमिदमब्रवीत्।
we a amie wget समभिवर्तते॥ su
अगाधश्चाप्रमेयश्च द्वितीय ga सागर:।
पुत्रौ दशरथस्येमौ भ्रातरौ रामलक्ष्मणौ॥४॥
उत्तमौ रूपसम्पन्नौ सीताया: पदमागतौ।
Udit सागरमासाद्य संनिविष्टौ महाद्युते॥५॥

Going near the army, defended on all
sides by Sugriva, in the meantime, a powerful
ogre, Sardila by name, a spy of the evil-
minded Ravana, the king of ogres, beheld it
camping there. Seeing it undisturbed on all
sides and turning back, nay, entering Lanka
with speed, the said ogre submitted to the
king as follows: “Deep and immeasurable
like another sea, this flood of monkeys and
bears is heading towards Lanka. Those
two brothers, Rama and Laksmana, son of
DaSaratha, foremost warriors, richly endowed
with charm, have come to the succour of
Sita. Having reached the seashore, they
have camped there, O ogre, endowed with
extraordinary splendour! (1—5)

बलं चाकाशमाव्रृत्य सर्वतो दशयोजनम्।
तत्त्वभूतं महाराज fad वेदितुमर्हसि॥६॥
“Nay, the army roughly covers a space

of ten Yojanas (or eighty miles) in all
directions. You ought to ascertain the real

situation immediately. O great monarch! (6)

wa gat महाराज क्षिप्रमर्हन्ति वेदितुम्।
उपप्रदानं सान्त्वं वा भेदो वात्र प्रयुज्यताम्॥७॥
“Your spies ought to know things
quickly, O eminent king! The expedient
of restitution or conciliation or sowing
dissension in the enemy’s ranks may then
be employed, as you deem fit under such
circumstances.” (7)

शार्दूलस्य वच: श्रुत्वा रावणो राक्षसेश्वर:।
उवाच सहसा व्यग्र: सम्प्रधार्यार्थमात्मन:।
Woh साधु तदा tat वाक्यमर्थविदां वरम्॥८॥
Perturbed all at once to hear the report
of Sardula and instantly determining his
course of action, Ravana, the lord of ogres,
forthwith addressed the following well-chosen
words to the ogre Suka, the foremost of
those who know their duty: (8)

सुग्रीवं af गत्वाऽऽशु राजानं वचनान्मम।
यथासंदेशमक्लीबं श्लक्ष्णया परया गिरा॥९॥
“Departing at once, speak boldly to
king Sugriva on my behalf in a gentle and
excellent tone according to my command,
as follows: (9)
त्वं बै महाराजकुलप्रसूतो
महाबलश्चर्क्षरज:सुतश्च ।
न कश्चनार्थस्तव नास्त्यनर्थ-
स्तथापि मे भ्रातृसमो हरीश॥ १०॥
“Born in a race of eminent kings, you
are also endowed with extraordinary might
