588

exile to the forest by this very mother of
mine casting righteousness to the winds.”
(7)

saad भरतं वीक्ष्य विलपन्तमचेतनम्।
कृपणा रुरुदु: सर्वा: सुस्वरं योषितस्तदा॥ ८॥
Perceiving Bharata lamenting as
aforesaid in a distracted state of mind at
that critical moment, all the women present
in the gynaeceum piteously wailed at the
top of their voice. (8)

तथा afer विलपति वसिष्ठो राजधर्मवित्।
सभामिक्ष्वाकुनाथस्य प्रविवेश महायशा:॥९॥
While Bharata was wailing as mentioned
above, the highly illustrious Sage Vasistha,
who was well-versed in the code of conduct
prescribed for kings, entered the court of
King Dasaratha (the ruler of the Ikswakus).

(9)
शातकुम्भमयीं wat मणिहेमसमाकुलाम्।
सुधर्मामिव धर्मात्मा सगण: प्रत्यपद्यत॥ oll

Accompanied by his host of pupils, the
sage, whose mind was given to piety, got
into the delightful council-chamber, which
was mostly built of gold and studded all
over with pearls and precious stones of
various kinds and looked like Sudharma
(the court of Indra, the lord of paradise).

(10)
स काञ्चनमयं पीठं स्वस्त्यास्तरणसंवृतम्।
अध्यास्त सर्ववेदज्ञो दूताननुशशास च॥११॥

The sage, who had mastered all the
Vedas, occupied a seat of gold covered by
a cloth bearing the design of swastika
(denoting good luck), and commanded the
messengers as follows: so the tradition
goes : (11)

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

ब्राह्मणान् क्षत्रियान् योधानमात्यान् गणवल्लभान्।
क्षिप्रमानयताव्यग्रा: कृत्यमात्ययिकं fe न:॥१२॥
सराजपुत्रं शत्रुघ्नं भरतं च यशस्विनम्।
युधाजितं सुमन्त्रं च ये च तत्र feat जना:॥१३॥
“Since there is some urgent business
to be disposed of by us, please bring here
promptly and quietly Brahmanas, Ksatriyas,
warriors, ministers, troop commanders,
Satrughna and the illustrious Bharata with
other princes, Yudhajit (one of the chief
counsellors, nicknamed Vijaya) and Sumantra
as well as all other people who are friendly
to Bharata.” (12-13)

ततो हलहलाशब्दो महान् समुदपद्यत।
रथैरश्वैर्गजैश्चापि जनानामुपगच्छताम्॥ १४॥

A great noise then burst forth from
men approaching in chariots as well as on
horseback and on elephants. (14)

ततो भरतमायान्तं शतक्रतुमिवामरा:।
प्रत्यनन्दन् प्रकृतयो यथा दशरथं तथा॥१५॥

The ministers and counsellors as well
as the people cheered Bharata coming to
the council-chamber as they used to greet
DaSaratha and even as gods would greet
Indra (who is believed to have performed a
hundred Aswamedha sacrifices as a
condition precedent for his assuming the
position of Indra). (15)

aut
सदशरथेव बभूव सा पुरा॥१६॥
Resembling a pool* (in the sea), having
still waters and infested with Timis (a
kind of fish credited with a length and breadth
of many leagues) and sea-elephants and

* In this simile the figures of Timis and sea-elephants painted on the floor of the council-chamber
are compared to aquatic creatures of the same name figuring in the sea, the sheen of the glittering pavement
of the chamber to the still waters of the sea, the gems with which the floor is inlaid with those embedded
in the depths of a sea, the figures of conches figuring in the pavement to conch-shells found in sea-beds
and the gold costing on the floor to the dust of gold found in gold mines in the bowels of a sea.
