* AYODHYAKANDA +

Saying, “Be pleased to listen!” when
requested in the foregoing words, the aforesaid
Sita, for her part, actually began as follows to
narrate that story to the hermitess, who was
given to the practice of virtue : (26)

मिथिलाधिपतिर्वीरो जनको नाम धर्मवित्।
क्षत्रकर्मण्यभिरतो न्यायत: शास्ति मेदिनीम्॥ २७॥

“The gallant king of Mithila, Janaka by
name, who knows what is right and is
devoted to the duties of a Ksatriya, rules
over the earth with equity. (27)

तस्य लाङ्गलहस्तस्य कृषत: क्षेत्रमण्डलम्।

até किलोत्थिता भित्त्वा जगतीं नृपते: सुता॥ २८ ॥
“While he was furrowing a plot of land

(fit to serve as a sacrificial ground), plough

in hand, | emerged, they say, breaking

through the earth and came to be the king’s

daughter since that time. (28)

a मां gar नरपतिर्मुष्टिविक्षेपतत्पर:।
पांसुगुण्ठितसर्वाङ्गीं विस्मितो जनकोऽभवत्॥ 28

“The said King Janaka, who was
diligently engaged in scattering handfuls of
seeds (of annual plants), was astonished to
behold me, all my limbs covered with dust.

(29)

अनपत्येन च स्नेहादङ्कमारोप्य च स्वयम्।
ममेयं तनयेत्युक्त्वा स्नेहो मयि निपातित:॥ ३०॥

“Nay, spontaneously lifting me up in
his arms out of affection and saying ‘This
shall be my daughter!’, since he had no
issue then, love was bestowed lavishly by
him on me. (30)

अन्तरिक्षे च वागुक्ता प्रतिमामानुषी किल।
एवमेतन्नरपते धर्मेण तनया तव॥३१॥

“A superhuman voice, they say, was
also heard in the sky about me: ‘Let it be
so, O protector of men! She will be your
daughter from the moral point of view,
indeed.’ (31)

तत: West धर्मात्मा पिता A मिथिलाधिप:।
अवाप्तो विपुलामृद्धिं मामवाप्य नराधिप:॥ ३२॥

709

“My father, the ruler of Mithila, whose
mind is given to piety, felt highly rejoiced
at that. Nay, the king attained a vast
fortune on securing me (as his foster-
daughter). (32)

दत्ता चास्मीष्टवद्देव्यै ज्येष्ठायै पुण्यकर्मणे।
तया सम्भाविता चास्मि स्निग्धया मातृसौहृदात्॥ ३३ ॥

“| was further given over, like a coveted
issue, to the seniormost queen, who was
given to meritorious deeds; and | was brought
up by that tender lady through motherly
affection. (33)

पतिसंयोगसुलभं वयो gyat तु A पिता।
चिन्तामभ्यगमद् दीनो वित्तनाशादिवाधन:॥ ३४॥
“Perceiving my age to be such when
union with a husband can be easily had, my
father for his part fell a prey to anxiety,
feeling distressed as a destitute would
through loss of fortune. (34)

सदृशाच्चापकृष्टाच्च लोके कन्यापिता जनात्।
प्रधर्षणमवाप्नोति शक्रेणापि समो भुवि॥ ३५॥

“The father of an unmarried girl, even
though he is a compeer of Indra (the lord of
paradise) on earth, suffers indignity in the
world at the hands of a suitor’s men, no
matter if they are equal or even inferior in
status to him. (35)
तां धर्षणामदूरस्थां संदरृश्यात्मनि पार्थिव:।
चिन्तार्णवगत: पारं नाससादाप्लवो यथा॥ ३६॥

“Perceiving that indignity threatening
him at no distant date, the king was plunged
in a sea of anxiety and did not reach its end
any more than a man without a bark would
reach the end of a sea. (36)

अयोनिजां fe at ज्ञात्वा नाध्यगच्छत् स चिन्तयन्।
सदृशं चाभिरूपं च महीपाल: पतिं AT ३७॥

“Knowing me, as he did, undoubtedly
to be one not emerged from a mother’s
womb, the aforesaid king could not, even
though reflecting, find out a befitting and
worthy match for me. (37)
