636

व्यपेते तु जीवे निकुम्भस्य हृष्टा

विनेदु: प्लवंगा दिश: सस्वनुश्च।
चचालेव चोर्वीं पपातेव सा द्यौ-

dat राक्षसानां wa चाविवेश॥ २४॥

When Nikumbha’s life had departed,

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA +

the monkeys emitted loud cries of joy and
the quarters resounded. Nay, the earth
seemed to quake, the heavens appeared to
crumble and fear took possession of the
army of ogres. (24)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये युद्धकाण्डे सप्तसप्ततितम: AA: ॥ ७७॥

Thus ends Canto Seventy-seven in the Yuddhakanda of the glorious Ramayana of

Valmiki, the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

अष्टसप्ततितम: at:
Canto LXXVIII

Makaraksa sets out for an encounter
under orders of Ravana

निकुम्भं निहतं श्रुत्वा कुम्भं च विनिपातितम्।
Tat: परमामर्षी प्रजज्वालानलो यथा॥ Qu
Filled with extreme indignation on
hearing of Nikumbha having been killed and
Kumbha laid low, Ravana flared up as fire.
(1)
नैर्ऋत: क्रोधशोकाभ्यां द्वाभ्यां तु परिमूच्छित:।
ख्रपुत्रॆ विशालाक्षॆ मकराक्षमचोदयत्॥ २॥
Overcome by anger and grief both, the
ogre for his part commanded Makaraksa,
the large-eyed son of Khara as follows:
(2)
गच्छ UA मयाऽऽज्ञप्तो बलेनाभिसमन्वित:।
wad लक्ष्मणं da wie dl सवनौकसौ॥ ३॥

“Enjoined by me and accompanied by
an army, go, my son, and make short work
of the two brothers alongwith the monkeys
(lit., the dwellers in the woods).” (3)

रावणस्य वच: श्रुत्वा शूरमानी खरात्मज:।
बाढमित्यब्रवीद्धृष्टो मकराक्षो निशाचरम्॥४॥

Rejoiced to hear the command of
Ravana, Khara’s son, Makaraksa who
accounted himself a hero, answered to the

night-ranger, “Amen!”

सोऽभिवाद्य दशग्रीवं कृत्वा चापि प्रदक्षिणम्।
निर्जगाम गृहाच्छुभ्राद् रावणस्याज्ञया बली॥५॥
Having greeted Ravana (the ten-headed
monster) and also walked clockwise round
him as a mark of submission, the mighty
warrior emerged from the shining palace
of Ravana in obedience to his command.
(5)

समीपस्थं बलाध्यक्षं खरपुत्रोऽब्रवीद् वच:।
रथमानीयतां तूर्णं सैन्यं त्वानीयतां त्वरात्॥६॥
The son of Khara spoke as follows to
the Commander-in-Chief standing near: “Let
my chariot be brought at once and let the
army be mobilized expeditiously.” (6)

तस्य तद् वचनं श्रुत्वा बलाध्यक्षो निशाचर:।
स्यन्दनं च at चैव समीपं प्रत्यपादयत्॥७॥
Hearing his aforesaid command, the
night-stalker in command of the army of
Lanka placed his chariot as well as a
contingent by his side. (7)
प्रदक्षिणं tet peat समारुह्य निशाचर:।
सूतं संचोदयामास शीघ्रं A रथमावह॥८॥

(4)
