592

Seeing that army ready to depart,
Bharata for his part said to Sumantra,
standing by his side, in the presence of his
preceptor Sage Vasistha, “Get my chariot
ready soon.” (27)

भरतस्य तु तस्याज्ञां परिगृह्य प्रहर्षित:।
रथं गृहीत्वोपययौ युक्तं परमवाजिभि:॥ २८॥

Bowing to the command of the
celebrated Bharata and taking a chariot
driven by excellent horses, Sumantra for
his part approached him, highly delighted at
the prospect of meeting Sri Rama and others
as well as of their returning to Ayodhya.

(28)
स Waa: सत्यधृति: प्रतापवान्
त्रुवन् सुयुक्तं दृढसत्यविक्रम:।
प्रसादयिष्यन् भरतोऽब्रवीत् तदा॥ २९॥

Intending to undertake a journey to
persuade his illustrious elder brother Sri
Rama, staying in a dreary forest viz., the
Dandaka, to return to Ayodhya by arguing
with him in a well-reasoned way, that
glorious scion of Raghu, Bharata of unfailing
firmness and unflinching veracity and
prowess, spoke on that occasion as
follows : (29)
तूर्णं त्वमुत्थाय सुमन्त्र गच्छ

बलस्य योगाय बलप्रधानान्।

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

आनेतुमिच्छामि fe तं वनस्थं
Weare WH जगतो हिताय॥ ३०॥
“Getting up promptly, O Sumantra,
approach you the generals of the army in
order to get them equip the forces for the
journey; for, propitiating Sri Rama residing
in the forest, | intend to bring him back to
Ayodhya for the good of the world.” (30)
a सूतपुत्रो भरतेन सम्य-
गाज्ञापित: सम्परिपूर्णकाम:।
 प्रव : ‘ :
बलस्य मुख्यांश्च सुहृज्जनं Al ३१॥
Commanded as above by Bharata and
accounting thereby his ambition of seeing
Sri Rama fully realized, Sumantra duly issued
orders accordingly to all the leading citizens
and army chiefs as well as to the friends
and relations of Bharata. (31)

तत: समुत्थाय Sel Het a
राजन्यवैश्या व्रृषलाश्च विप्रा:।
अयूयुजन्नुष्ट्रथान् खरांश्च
नागान् हयांश्चैव कुलप्रसूतान्॥३२॥
Springing on their feet in great
eagerness, people from every house—
Ksatriyas and Vaisyas, Sudras and
Brahmanas—thereupon got ready for the
journey camels and chariots, donkeys and
elephants, as well as horses of excellent
breed. (32)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्येऽयोध्याकाण्डे

द्व्यशीतितम:

सर्ग: ॥ ८२॥

Thus ends Canto Ejighty-two in the Ayodhyakanda of the glorious Ramayana of
Valmiki, the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

