388

glorious and mighty jewel among the
monkeys, a commander of troops, Krathana
by name, who is ever unboastful in wars,
revels on a mountain (Kailasa), which is the
king of rulers of mountains, frequented by
numerous Kinnaras, a class of demigods
with a human figure and the head of a horse
or with a horse’s body and the head of a
man, nay, on which King Kubera (son of
Sage ViSrava) takes his seat beneath a
Jambu (a variety of rose-apple) tree, and
which affords the delight of sport to your
(said half-) brother, Kubera, O suzerain lord
of ogres! (20—23)
qa: कोटिसहस्रेण हरीणां समवस्थित:।
एषैवाशंसते लङ्कां स्वेनानीकेन मर्दितुम्॥२४॥
“Standing firm, surrounded by

thousands of crores of monkeys, he too
aspires to crush Lanka with his army.(24)

यो गङ्गामनुपर्येति त्रासयन् गजयूथपान्।
हस्तिनां वानराणां च पूर्ववैरमनुस्मरन्॥ २५॥
एष यूथपतिर्नेता गर्जन् गिरिगुहाशय:।
गजान् रोधयते वन्यानारुजंश्च महीरुहान्॥ २६॥

“Thundering and uprooting trees, this
commander and leader of monkeys—who,
remembering, as he does, the old antagonism
between elephants and monkeys, roams
along the banks of the Ganga, sowing terror
among the leaders of herds of elephants,
and dwells in mountain caves—obstructs
thereby the passage of wild elephants.

(25-26)
हरीणां वाहिनीमुख्यो नदीं हैमवतीमनु।
उशीरबीजमाश्रित्य मन्दरं पर्वतोत्तमम्॥ २७॥
Tad वानरश्रेष्ठो दिवि शक्र sa स्वयम्।
wT शतसहस्राणां सहस्रमभिवर्तते॥ २८॥
वीर्यविक्रमदृप्तानां नर्दतां बाहुशालिनाम्।

स एष नेता चैतेषां वानराणां महात्मनाम्॥ २९॥

“Taking up his abode now on Mount
Usirabija, along the bank of the Ganga
(having its source in the Himalayan range)

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA +

and now on Mount Mandara, the foremost
of mountains, the prince of monkeys, a
leader of the simian troops, revels there as
Indra, the ruler of gods, himself does in
heaven. Ten crores of roaring monkeys
proud of their virility and prowess and rich
in strength of arms follow him; nay, he alone
is the leader of these powerful monkeys.
(27—29)
स एष दुर्धरो राजन् प्रमाथी नाम यूथप:।
वातेनेवोद्धतं we यमेनमनुपश्यसि॥ ३०॥
उद्धूतमरुणाभासं पवनेन समन्तत:॥३१॥
विवर्तमानं बहुशो यत्रैतद्वहुलं रज:।
एतेऽसितमुखा घोरा गोलाङ्गूला महाबला:॥ ३२॥
शतं शतसहस्राणि दृष्टवा वै सेतुबन्धनम्।
गॊलङ्गां महाराज गवाक्षॆ नाम यूथपम्॥ ३३॥
परिवार्याभिनर्दन्ते लङ्कां मर्दितुमोजसा।
भ्रमराचरिता यत्र सर्वकालफलद्रुमा:॥ ३४॥
a सूर्यस्तुल्यवर्णाभमनुपर्येति पर्वतम्।
यस्य भासा सदा भान्ति AGU मृगपक्षिण: ॥ ३५ UI
यस्य प्रस्थं महात्मानो न त्यजन्ति महर्षय:।
सर्वकामफला Tat: सदा फलसमन्विता:॥ ३६॥
मधूनि च महार्हाणि यस्मिन् पर्वतसत्तमे।
तत्रैष रमते राजन् रम्ये काञ्चनपर्वते॥ ३७॥
Tat वानरमुख्यानां केसरी नाम aera: |
षष्टिर्गिरिसहस्राणि रम्या: काञ्चनपर्वता:॥ ३८॥
“Difficult to resist, O king, is this
celebrated general, Pramathi by name, whom
you see there, resembling a cloud propelled
by the wind as also a furious band of agile
monkeys, the smoke-coloured abundant dust
raised by which is being repeatedly scattered
in all directions by the wind. Here are
formidable black-faced Golangulas (a species
of large-tailed monkeys) endowed with
extraordinary might and numbering a crore.
Witnessing the construction of च bridge
(across the sea), they stand surrounding the
general, Gavaksa by name, who is a
Golangula himself and are roaring in their
