* ARANYAKANDA «

मम चापगुणोन्मुक्तैर्बाणजालैर्निरन्तरम्।
मर्दितं मम नाराचैर्ध्वस्तभ्रान्तमृगद्विजम्॥६४॥
समाकुलममर्यादं जगत् पश्याद्य लक्ष्मण।
आकर्णपूर्णैरिषुभिर्जीवलोकदुरावरै: ।॥। ६५ ।।
करिष्ये मैथिलीहेतोरपिशाचमराक्षसम्।
मम रोषप्रयुक्तानां विशिखानां बलं qT: Wee I
द्रक्ष्यन्त्यद्य विमुक्तानाममर्षाद् दूरगामिनाम्।
qa देवा न दैतेया न पिशाचा न राक्षसा:॥ ६७॥
भविष्यन्ति मम क्रोधात् त्रैलोक्ये विप्रणाशिते।
देवदानवयशक्षाणां लोका a रक्षसामपि॥६८॥
ager निपतिष्यन्ति बाणौघै: शकलीकृता:।
निर्मर्यादानिमाँल्लोकान् करिष्याम्यद्य सायकै: ॥ ६९॥
wt मृतां वा सौमित्रे न दास्यन्ति ममेश्वरा:।
तथारूपां fe वैदेहीं न दास्यन्ति यदि प्रियाम्॥ ७० ॥
नाशयामि जगत् सर्वं त्रैलोक्यं सचराचरम्।
यावद् दर्शनमस्या वै तापयामि च ATA: Ih ७१॥
“| will subject the three worlds (viz.,
heaven, earth and the intermediate region)
to annihilation (the work of the Time-Spirit)
with the result that the planets will be
completely brought to a standstill, the moon
will be veiled, the elements of fire and air
will be annihilated and the brightness of the
sun obscured; the crests of the mountains
will be crushed, the seats of water (lakes
and ponds etc.,) will get dry, trees, creepers
and shrubs will be uprooted and the oceans
drained. If those in authority, viz., gods, due
to whose negligence my consort has been
carried away by ogres, do not restore Sita
intact to me, they will witness my prowess
this very hour, O darling of Sumitra! All
feathered creatures, O Laksmana, will no
longer be able to fly in air-space, which will
be rendered compact with the network of
arrows shot from the string of my bow, O
Laksmana ! Behold the world crushed today,
O Laksmana, by my steel arrows and
consequently greatly perplexed with all
the bounds of propriety gone and all the
beasts and birds destroyed or gone astray.
With my arrows loosed from the sides of
the ear with full force and as such difficult

897

for the world of mortals to ward off, | shall
rid the world of fiends and ogres for Sita’s
sake. The gods will witness today the power
of my headless shafts discharged in
indignation and impelled by anger and covering
a long range.

“When all the three worlds are
annihilated through my anger, neither gods
nor demons (the son of Diti) nor goblins nor
ogres will survive. Torn to a number of
pieces by the volley of my arrows, the
worlds of gods, demons and Yaksas as
also those which are inhabited by ogres will
collapse. With my arrows | will reduce these
worlds to a state of utter confusion today if
those in authority, viz., the gods in power,
do not restore Sita to me, no matter if she
has been killed or is dead. If they do not
hand over my beloved Sita (a princess of
the Videha territory) in that very condition
(to which she may have been reduced), |
will annihilate the entire universe consisting
of the three worlds and comprising both the
animate and inanimate creation, and shall
continue to scorch them with my arrows till
| am able to see her.” (60—7 1)

इत्युक्त्वा क्रोधताम्राक्ष: स्फुरमाणोष्ठसम्पुट:।
वल्कलाजिनमाबद्ध्य जटाभारमबन्धयत्॥७२॥

Having spoken thus and tightened his
robes of the bark of trees and deerskin, Sri
Rama knotted his head of matted hair, his
eyes rendered coppery through anger and
both his lips compressed and _ trembling.

(72)

तस्य क्रुद्धस्य रामस्य तथाभूतस्य धीमत:।
त्रिपुरं जघ्नुष: Ud रुद्रस्येव बभौ तनु:॥७३॥

The personality of the aforesaid Sri
Rama, who, though full of wisdom, looked
so terrible, enraged as he was, shone like
that of Lord Rudra, the god of destruction,
bent upon in the former times on the
destruction of the three cities (of gold, silver
and steel in the sky, air and earth, built by
the demon Maya). (73)
