# YUDDHAKANDA #

681

नवतितम: at:
Canto XC

A fierce contest between Indrajit and
Laksmana and Indrajit’s fall

स हताश्वो महातेजा भूमौ तिष्ठन् निशाचर:।
इन्द्रजित् परमक्रुद्ध: सम्प्रजज्वाल तेजसा॥१॥
Standing on the ground, extremely
enraged, the horses of his chariot having
been killed the night-stalker, Indrajit, who
was endowed with extraordinary energy,
flamed with spirit. (1)

तौ धन्विनौ जिघांसन्तावन्योन्यमिषुभिर्भृशम्।
विजयेनाभिनिष्क्रान्तौ वने गजव्रृषाविव॥ २॥

Exceedingly eager to make short work
of each other with their arrows, the said two
archers closed with each other like two
lordly elephants that had sallied forth with a
view to conquest. (2)

निबर्हयन्तश्चान्योन्य ते राक्षसवनौकस:।
भर्तारं न Wee सम्पतन्तस्ततस्तत:॥ ३॥
The ogres as well as the monkeys £(lit.,
the denizens of the woods) kept rushing
this way and that, each killing his adversary,
but did not forsake their master in the
combat. (3)

ततस्तान् राक्षसान् सर्वान् हर्षयन् रावणात्मज:।
wart हर्षमाणश्च इदं वचनमब्रवीत्॥४॥
Applauding and cheering all the
aforesaid ogres, nay, feeling delighted
himself, Indrajit (sprung from the loins of
Ravana) thereupon spoke as follows: (4)

तमसा बहुलेनेमा: संसक्ता: सर्वतो दिश:।
नेह विज्ञायते स्वो वा परो वा राक्षसोत्तमा:॥ ५ ॥

“These quarters stand enveloped on
all sides by a profound darkness. Hence it
is difficult to ascertain at this time whether
one belongs to one’s own army or is an
enemy, O jewel among the ogres! (5)

qe भवन्तो युध्यन्तु हरीणां मोहनाय a
ae तु रथमास्थाय आगमिष्यामि संयुगे॥६॥
“Boldly strive you so as to dumbfold
the monkeys. Ascending another chariot (in
the meantime), | shall for my part return to
the battlefield. (6)

तथा भवन्त: Haq यथेमे fe वनौकस:।
न युध्येयुर्महात्मान: vert art मयि॥७॥

“Manage things in such a way that
these monkeys (lit., denizens of the woods),
endowed, as they are, with extraordinary
courage, may not carry on the struggle
with me when | have started entering
the city (so as to interfere with my safe
entry).” (7)

इत्युक्त्वा रावणसुतो वञ्जयित्वा वनौकस:।
wert yi लङ्कां रथहेतोरमित्रहा॥८॥
Saying so, and putting the monkeys off
the scent, Indrajit (son of Ravana), the slayer
of his enemies, entered deep into the city of
Lanka in order to provide himself with another
chariot. (8)

a wi भूषयित्वाथं रुचिरं हेमभूषितम्।
प्रासासिशरसंयुक्तं oh परमवाजिभि:॥ ९ ॥
stated हयज्ञेन सूतेनाप्तोपदेशिना।
आरुरोह महातेजा रावणि: समितिंजय:॥ १०॥

Causing a splendid chariot—which was
decked with gold, was furnished with darts,
swords and arrows, yoked to excellent
horses, and directed by a charioteer who
could read the mind of his horses and
tendered good counsel—to be decorated,
Indrajit (son of Ravana), a victor in combat,
who was endowed with extraordinary energy
forthwith ascended it. (9-10)
