544

accomplishing that which is surely to be a
daring act against the enemy? (10)

`एकस्यैवाभियाने तु हेतुर्य: प्राहृतस्त्वया।
तत्राप्यनुपपन्नं ते वक्ष्यामि यदसाधु च॥११॥
“As for the reason, viz., your
extraordinary might, which you have adduced
for marching all alone for an encounter, |
shall presently point out to you what is ill-
considered and wrong about it. (11)
येन Ua जनस्थाने बहवोऽतिबला हता:।
राक्षसा waa तं त्वं कथमेको जयिष्यसि॥ १२॥
“How will you be able to conquer single-
handed that scion of Raghu by whom
numerous ogres endowed with exceeding
might were made short work of in Janasthana
in the past? (12)
ये ud निर्जितास्तेन जनस्थाने महौजस:।
राक्षसांस्तान् पुरे सर्वान् भीतानद्य न पश्यसि॥ १३॥

“Don’t you see all those ogres, endowed
with extraordinary strength, who were put to
flight by him in the past in Janasthana, living
in fear in the city even today? (13)
सर्पं सुप्तमहो बुद्ध्वा प्रबोधयितुमिच्छसि॥ १४॥

“You desire to meet in combat Rama,
an offspring of DaSaratha, who is like an
enraged lion, and knowingly seek to awaken
a serpent which is asleep. (14)

ज्वलन्तं तेजसा नित्यं क्रोधेन च दुरासदम्।
कस्तं मृत्युमिवासह्यमासादयितुमर्हति ।। १७५ U

“Who would dare to encounter Rama,
who is ever burning with spirit, and is difficult
to approach in fury and unbearable as
Death? (15)
एकस्य Wat तात नहि A रोचते भृशम्॥१६॥

“This entire army of ogres would be
involved in danger on standing face to
face with the aforesaid enemy. In such
circumstances, O beloved one, your going

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA +

alone to meet Rama does not find favour
with me at all. (16)

हीनार्थस्तु समृद्धार्थं को Ry प्राकृतं यथा।
Rid जीवितत्यागे वशमानेतुमिच्छति॥ १७॥
“Bereft of resources, who would feel
inclined to reduce to submission an enemy,
who is rich in resources and determined to
lay down his life, as a common enemy?
(17)

यस्य नास्ति मनुष्येषु सदृशो राक्षसोत्तम।
कथमाशंससे योद्धुं तुल्येनेन्द्रविवस्वतो:॥ १८॥
“How do you wish to enter into combat
with him, who is an equal of Indra and the
sun-god, and whose compeer there is none
among human beings, O prince of ogres?”
(18)

एवमुक्त्वा तु संरब्धं कुम्भकर्णं महोदर:।
उवाच रक्षसां मध्ये रावणं लोकरावणम्॥१९॥
Having spoken thus to the enraged
Kumbhakarna, Mahodara for his _ part
submitted as follows in the midst of other
ogres to Ravana, who made people cry by
his tyranny: (19)

लब्ध्वा पुरस्ताद् वैदेहीं किमर्थं त्वं विलम्बसे।
यदीच्छसि तदा सीता वशगा ते भविष्यति॥ २०॥
“Having laid your hands already on
Sita (a princess of the Videha territory),
why do you procrastinate? Sita will submit

to your will the moment you would have her
do so. (20)

ge: कश्चिदुपायो मे सीतोपस्थानकारक:।
रुचितश्चेत् स्वया बुद्ध्या राक्षसेन्द्र Aa: श्रृणु॥ २१॥
“A means of bringing her round has
been discovered by me. Listen to it,
O lord of ogres! Ponder it with your
intellect and act according to it if it is found
acceptable. (21)
até द्विजिह्व संह्रादी कुम्भकर्णो वितर्दन:।
us रामवधायैते निर्यान्तीत्यवघोषय॥ २२॥

“Have it proclaimed by beat of drum
that Dwijihwa, Samhradi, Kumbhakarna,
