# YUDDHAKANDA #

येनाद्य त्वं महाबाहो संयुक्त: कालधर्मणा।
एष पन्था: सुयोधानां सर्वामरगणेष्वपि।
a: Hd हन्यते Ud: स पुमान् स्वर्गमृच्छति॥ ९॥

“Having gratified Laksmana with his
arrows, he has ascended to the highest
worlds.” Hearing of that terrible, cruel and
ghastly end of his son, Indrajit, on the
battlefield, Ravana gave way to a protracted
swoon. Regaining his consciousness after a
long time, King Ravana (the foremost among
the ogres), who was beside himself with
grief on account of his son’s death, his
mind distracted, lamented as follows, afflicted
as he was: “Having conquered Indra, Ah!
my child, the leader of the army of ogres,
endowed as you were with extraordinary
might, how have you been overpowered by
Laksmana today? Surely, when provoked,
you could pierce with your arrows in combat
even Death and Yama (the god of retribution)
as well as the peaks of Mount Mandara,
much more so Laksmana. Highly esteemed
in my eyes is King Yama (son of the sun-
god), by whom, O mighty-armed one, you
have been subjected to the ravages of
Time today. This is the path trodden by
noble warriors even among the celestial
hosts. The man who is killed for the cause
of his lord attains heaven. (4—9)

अद्य देवगणा: ad लोकपाला vada: |
हतमिन्द्रजितं श्रुत्वा सुखं स्वप्स्यन्ति निर्भया:। go ॥

“Hearing of Indrajit having been disposed
of, and being rid of all fear, all the hosts of
heaven, the guardians of the world and
eminent Rsis (the seers of Vedic Mantras)
will repose comfortably today. (10)

अद्य लोकास्त्रय: कृत्स्ना पृथिवी च सकानना।
एकेनेन्द्रजिता हीना शून्येव प्रतिभाति मे॥११॥

“Devoid of Indrajit alone, the entire globe
with its forests, nay, all the three worlds,
viz., heaven, earth and the intermediate
region, appear desolate to me. (11)

693

अद्य नैर्ऋतकन्यानां श्रोष्याम्यन्त:पुरे रवम्।
करेणुसङ्घस्य यथा निनादं गिरिगह्वरे॥१२॥

“| shall hear today the cries of the ogre
maidens in the gynaeceum even as one
would hear the roar of female-elephants in a
mountain cave. (12)
यौवराज्यं च ast च tafe च परंतप।
मातरं मां च भार्याश्च क्व गतोऽसि विहाय A: ।॥ १३॥

“Relinquishing the office of Prince-
Regent, nay, abandoning Lanka as well as
the ogres inhabiting it as also us, viz., your
mother and myself as well as your consorts,
where have you gone, O scourge of your
enemies? (13)

मम नाम त्वया वीर गतस्य यमसादनम्।
प्रेतकार्याणि कार्याणि विपरीते fe वर्तसे॥ १४॥

“Really speaking, obsequies in my
honour ought to have been performed by
you when | would have departed to the
abode of Death, O hero! You have, however,
acted in a contrary way by preceding me to
the abode of Yama. (14)

स त्वं जीवति सुग्रीवे लक्ष्मणे च सराघवे।
मम शल्यमनुद्धृत्य क्व गतोऽसि विहाय न:॥ १५॥
“Deserting us without extracting my
thorn, while Sugriva is still living as also
Laksmana, accompanied by Rama (a scion
of Raghu), where have you gone?” (15)
एवमादिविलापार्तं रावणं राक्षसाधिपम्।
आविवेश महान् कोप: पुत्रव्यसनसम्भव:॥ १६॥
A violent anger born of his son’s death
took possession of Ravana, the suzerain

lord of ogres, while he was feeling distressed
through lamentation as aforesaid. (16)

प्रकृत्या कोपनं ह्येनं पुत्रस्य पुनराधय:।
दीप्तं संदीपयामासुर्घर्मेऽर्कमिव रश्मय:॥१७॥

Indeed, pangs occasioned by the death
of his son further inflamed Ravana, who
was irascible and fiery by nature, even as
sunbeams make the bright sun brighter in
summer. (17)
