« VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

Canto XIX
Finding himself unable, as it were, to depict the mental state of Sita,
who got withered up and began to shudder at the sight of Ravana,

the poet tries to portray her with the help of similes. Arrived
in her presence, Ravana tries to win her

ततो दृष्ट्वैव aed रावणं राक्षसाधिपम्।
प्रावेपत वरारोहा प्रवाते कदली यथा॥ २॥
Thereupon the irreproachable princess,
Sita (a princess of the Videha territory) of
excellent limbs, began to shake like a plantain
tree in a windy place as soon as she caught
sight of, at that place and that very moment,
Ravana, the suzerain ruler of ogres, richly
endowed with comeliness and youth and
decked with excellent ornaments. (1-2)
ऊरुभ्यामुदरं छाद्य बाहुभ्यां च पयोधरौ।
उपविष्टा विशालाक्षी रुदती वरवर्णिनी॥ ३॥
Concealing her belly behind her thighs
and her breasts with her arms, the large-
eyed lady with an excellent complexion sat
down weeping. (3)
दशग्रीवस्तु वैदेहीं रक्षितां राक्षसीगणै:।
ददर्श दीनां दु:खार्तां wad सन्नामिवार्णवे॥४॥
असंवृतायामासीनां धरण्यां संशितव्रताम्।
छिन्नां प्रपतितां wat शाखामिव वनस्पते:।॥५॥
मलमण्डनदिग्धांगी मण्डनार्हाममण्डनाम्।
मृणाली पङ्कदिग्धेव विभाति न विभाति च॥६॥
समीपं राजसिंहस्य रामस्य विदितात्मन:।
संकल्पहयसंयुक्तैर्यान्तीमिव TAT: ॥ ७॥
शुष्यन्तीं रुदतीमेकां ध्यानशोकपरायणाम्।
दु:खस्यान्तमपश्यन्तीं wat राममनुव्रताम्॥८॥
चेष्टमानामथाविष्टां पन्नगेन्द्रवधूमिव।
धूप्यमानां ग्रहेणेव रोहिणीं धूमकेतुना॥९॥
वृत्तशीले कुले जातामाचारवति धार्मिके।
पुन: संस्कारमापन्नां जातामिव च दुष्कुले॥१०॥

Ravana, the ten-headed monster for

his part gazed on Sita, a princess of the
Videha territory, of austere vows, who was
guarded in turns by batches of ogresses
and looked miserable and stricken with agony
like a bark lying motionless in the sea; who
was seated on the bare ground like the
bough of a tree severed from the trunk and
fallen flat on the ground; whose limbs were
coated with dirt by way of decoration and
was undecorated though deserving of
decoration and who, like a lotus fibre stained
with mud, looked charming as well as did
not look charming; who was _ constantly
seeking the presence of Sri Rama, a well-
known personality, a lion among sovereigns,
in the chariot of her mind, drawn by the
horses of thought; who was a lovely woman
ever growing emaciated and, seeing no end
to her grief, wept alone and remained
absorbed in thought of her beloved spouse
and grieving, and who was devoted to Sri
Rama; who was writhing like the female of
the king of serpents under the spell of an
incantation and was undergoing suffering
like the constellation Rohini when tormented
by the smoke coloured planet, Ketu; and
who, though born in a family distinguished
for right conduct and noble disposition and
also married in a pious family of good conduct,
wore a shabby appearance like a woman
born in an ignoble family. (4—10)

सन्नामिव महाकीर्तिं श्रद्धामिव विमानिताम्।
प्रज्ञामिव परिक्षीणामाशां प्रतिहतामिव॥११॥
आयतीमिव विध्वस्तामाज्ञां प्रतिहतामिव।
दीप्तामिव fast काले पूजामपहतामिव॥ १२॥
पौर्णमासीमिव निशां तमोग्रस्तेन्दुमण्डलाम्।
पद्मिनीमिव विध्वस्तां हतशूरां चमूमिव॥१३॥
