# YUDDHAKANDA #

abductor of Sita, the destroyer of Brahmanas,
the thorn in the sides of gods, notorious for
his bad conduct and accompanied by his
canopy and pair of whisks to try his
strength with Rama, the foremost of the
Raghus!” Such was the clamour heard
on all sides. (36)

तेन नादेन महता पृथिवी समकम्पत।
तं शब्दं सहसा श्रुत्वा वानरा दुद्रुवुर्भयात्॥ ३७॥
The earth violently shook at that loud

din. The monkeys precipitately fled in panic
on hearing that noise. (37)

रावणस्तु महाबाहु: सचिवै: परिवारित:।
आजगाम महातेजा जयाय विजयं प्रति॥ ३८॥

Surrounded by his ministers, the mighty-
armed Ravana for his part, who was
endowed with extraordinary energy, turned
up on the battlefield for the avowed purpose
of victory. (38)

रावणेनाभ्यनुज्ञातौ महापाश्वमहोदरौ।
विरूपाक्षश्च दुर्धर्षो रथानारुरुहुस्तदा॥ ३९॥
Duly permitted by Ravana, Mahaparswa
and Mahodara as also Virupaksa, who was
difficult to overpower, then mounted their
chariots. (39)

ते तु हृष्टाभिनर्दन्तो Arad sa मेदिनीम्।

नादं घोरं विमुञ्जन्तो निर्ययुर्जयकाङ्क्षिण:॥४०॥
Roaring exultantly as though rending

the earth and raising a formidable uproar,

they set out eager for victory. (40)

ततो युद्धाय तेजस्वी रक्षोगणबलैर्वृत:।
निर्ययावुद्यतधनु: कालान्तकयमोपम: ॥ ४१ ॥

Surrounded by battalions consisting of
hordes of ogres, the energetic monarch,
who vied with Yama, playing the role of
Death at the time of universal Dissolution,
set out for the combat with his bow uplifted.

(41)

ad: प्रजविताश्वेन रथेन स महारथ:।
gro निर्ययौ तेन aa dt रामलक्ष्मणौ॥४२॥

709

In his chariot, drawn by exceedingly
swift horses, that great car-warrior then
made his exit through the northern gate
where the celebrated Sri Rama and
Laksmana were. (42)
ततो नष्टप्रभ: gat fester तिमिरावृता:।
द्विजाश्च नेदुर्घोराश्च संचचाल च मेदिनी॥४३॥

At that moment the sun lost its brilliance
and the four quarters were enveloped in

gloom. Nay, the birds emitted fearful notes
and the earth too violently shook. (43)

ववर्ष रुधिरं देवश्चस्खलुश्च तुरंगमा:।
ध्वजाग्रे न्यपतद् गृध्रो विनेदुश्चाशिवं शिवा:॥४४॥
Again, the cloud rained blood and the
horses of Ravana stumbled. A_ vulture
perched on the top of his ensign, while she-
jackals shrieked sinister howls. (44)
नयनं चास्फुरद् ad वामो बाहुरकम्पत।
विवर्णवदनश्चासीत् किंचिदभ्रश्यत स्वन:॥४५॥
His eye twitched and his left arm

quivered. His face grew pale and his voice
turned a bit hoarse. (45)

ततो निष्पततो ag दशग्रीवस्य wera: |
Tw निधनशंसीनि रूपाण्येतानि जज्ञिरे॥४६॥

Again, even as the ten-headed ogre,
Ravana, set forth for an encounter the
following evil phenomena presaging his death
appeared on the battlefield. (46)

अन्तरिक्षात् पपातोल्का निर्घातसमनि:स्वना।
विनेदुरशिवा गृध्रा वायसैरभिमिथ्रिता:॥४७॥

A meteor fell from the sky with a crash
resembling a peal of thunder. United with
crows, vultures emitted sinister cries. (47)

एतानचिन्तयन् घोरानुत्पातान् समवस्थितान्।
निर्ययौ रावणो मोहाद् वधार्थं कालचोदित: it ४८ ॥

Not minding these fearful portents
unmistakably present before him, impelled
as he was by Death, Ravana rushed madly
to his doom. (48)
