1092

‘Perceiving Ila, who was more
auspicious than any other in the three worlds,
it came to his mind: ‘Who indeed is She,
lovlier than a goddess. (13)

न देवीषु न नागीषु नासुरीष्वप्सर:सु च।
दृष्टपूर्वा मया काचिद् रूपेणानेन शोभिता॥ १४॥

‘| have not seen formerly any woman
possessed of such beauty among the
goddesses, the female Nagas, the wives of
Asuras or even the Apsaras. (14)

agit wa vaq यदि नान्यपरिग्रह:।

इति बुद्धिं समास्थाय जलात् कूलमुपागमत्॥ 8 ॥
“If not wedded to another, she may be

favourable to me. Thus thinking, Budha came

out of the waters on the bank of the lake.
(15)

आश्रमं समुपागम्य ततस्ता: प्रमदोत्तमा:।
शब्दापयत धर्मात्मा ast च ववन्दिरे॥ १६॥
‘Reaching the hermitage, he, the noble

one, called those beautiful women, and they
all also saluted him. (16)

स ता: पप्रच्छ धर्मात्मा कस्यैषा लोकसुन्दरी।
किमर्थमागता चैव सर्वमाख्यात मा चिरम्॥१७॥

‘He, the noble one, then enquired of
those women, thus : ‘To whom belongs this
faminine beauty of the worlds? Why has
she come, please let me know fully without
delay?’ (17)

शुभं तु तस्य तद् वाक्यं मधुरं मधुराक्षरम्।

श्रुत्वा frag a: wat ऊचुर्मधुरया गिरा॥ ee
Hearing those words of his, spoken

with sweet syllables, all those women replied

in sweet tones: (18)

« VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

अस्माकमेषा सुश्रोणी wart add सदा।
sft: काननान्तेषु सहास्माभिश्चरत्यसौ॥ १९॥

‘This woman of beautiful limbs always
commands us, is unmarried and roams about
in the forest alongwith us.’ (19)
तद्वाक्यमाव्यक्तपदं तासां स्त्रीणां निशम्य च।
विद्यामावर्तनीं पुण्यामावर्तयत a द्विज:॥ २०॥

‘Having heard the words of unmanifest
syllables of those women, that Brahmana
(Budha) recited the holy Avartani Vidya Stotra
or chantings. (20)

ise विदित्वा सकलं तस्य राज्ञो यथा तथा।
wat wa स्नियस्ताश्च बभाषे मुनिपुङ्खव:॥ २१॥

Having thus known the whole account
of that king, as it had happened, the great
ascetic then spoke to all those women: (21)

अत्र किंपुरुषीर्भूत्वा शैलरोधसि वत्स्यथ।
आवासस्तु गिरावस्मिन् शीघ्रमेव विधीयताम्॥ २२॥

‘Beside at the foot of this mountain as
Kirnpurusis, find out your residence soon of
this mountain. (22)

मूलपत्रफलै: सर्वा वर्तयिष्यथ नित्यदा।
fara: किंपुरुषान्नाम भर्तॄन् समुपलप्स्यथ॥ २३॥

‘Subsist always on roots, leaves and
fruits all of you women, and_ obtain
Kimnpurusas as husbands.’ (23)

ता: श्रुत्वा सोमपुत्रस्य ftaa: किंपुरुषीकृता: |
उपासांचक्रिरे शैलं वध्वस्ता बहुलास्तदा॥ २४॥

Then those women hearing the words
of the son of Soma, changed into Kirmmpurusis,
resided near the mountain in a large number.

(24)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये उत्तरकाण्डेऽष्टाशीतितम: सर्ग: ॥ ८८ ॥

Thus ends Canto Ejighty-eight in the Uttarakanda of the glorious Ramayana of Valmiki,
the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

