368

sinful deeds. This excellent shaft may,
therefore, be discharged to hit in the region.”
(34)

तस्य Ae वचनं श्रुत्वा सागरस्य महात्मन:।
मुमोच तं शरं दीप्तं परं सागरदर्शनात्॥३५॥
Hearing the aforesaid request of the
high-souled sea-god, Sri Rama let fly that

flaming and supreme dart as desired by the
former. (35)

तेन तन्मरुकान्तारं पृथिव्यां किल विश्रुतम्।
निपातित: शरो aa वज्राशनिसमप्रभ:॥ ३६॥

The region where the dart, which
flashed like lighting, was discharged by
Sri Rama, became for that reason, they
say, widely known as Marukantara (or
Marujangala, roughly extending over the
modern territories of Marwara and Bikanera
in Rajasthana). (36)
ननाद च dal aa agen शल्यपीडिता।
तस्माद् व्रणमुखात् तोयमुत्पपात रसातलात्॥ 39

Nay, pierced with the dart, the earth
at that time shrieked on that spot. And
the waters of Rasatala, the penultimate

subterranean region, gushed forth from the
mouth of that cleft. (37)

स aya dat Ha aut seta fasta: |

Wad चोत्थितं drt समुद्रस्येव qvadi ३८॥
The cleft now turned into a well and

became widely known as Vrana. The water

constantly gushing forth from that well

resembles sea-water in brackishness. (38)

अवदारणशब्दश्च दारुण: समपद्यत।
तस्मात् A बाणपातेन अप: कुक्षिष्वशोषयत्॥ ३९॥
A terrible sound vividly issued from the
act of cleaving the earth. Through that sound
caused by the hurling of that arrow, Sri
Rama dried up the water existing in the
cavities of the earth. (39)

विख्यातं fra लोकेषु मरुकान्तारमेव च।
शोषयित्वा तु तं कुक्षिं Wat दशरथात्मज:॥४०॥
at wet ददौ विद्वान् मरवेऽमरवबिक्रम:॥४१॥

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA +

The region has ever since been widely
known in all the three worlds precisely as
Marukantara. Having dried up that cavity of
the sea, the learned Sri Rama, sprung from
the loins of DaSaratha, for his part, who
was endowed with the valour of gods,
conferred the following boon on the land of
Maru: (40-41)

पशव्यश्चाल्परोगश्च फलमूलरसायुत: |
बहुस्नेहो बहुक्षीर: सुगन्धिर्विविधौषधि:॥४२॥

“This land will be good for cattle, with
few diseases, will be full on all sides with
fruit, roots and honey, will abound in ghee
and milk, will be rich in varied herbs and full
of fragrance.” (42)

एवमेतैश्च संयुक्तो बहुभि: संयुतो मरु:।
रामस्य वरदानाच्च Ra: पन्था Ta ह॥४३॥
Endowed thus with the aforesaid
features and rich in many virtues due to
Sri Rama’s conferring boon on it, the land of
Maru, they say, turned out to be a charming
region. (43)

तस्मिन् दग्धे तदा Gait age: सरितां पति: |
Tat सर्वशास्त्रज्ञमिदं वचनमब्रवीत्॥४४॥

The aforesaid cavity of the sea having
been dried up at that time, the sea-god, the
lord of rivers, submitted as follows to Sri
Rama, a scion of Raghu, who was learned
in all the scriptures: (44)

अयं सौम्य नलो नाम तनयो विश्वकर्मण:।
पित्रा दत्तवर: श्रीमान् प्रीतिमान् विश्वकर्मण: ॥ ४५ ॥

“This glorious son of Viswakarma (the
architect of gods), Nala by name, O gentle
Sir, has been granted by his father a boon
of proficiency in all crafts and is full of love
for you, the maker of this universe. (45)

एष Ad महोत्साह: करोतु मयि वानर:।
ame धारयिष्यामि यथा ह्येष पिता तथा॥४६॥

“Let this monkey, who is full of great
zeal, build a bridge over me. | will sustain it.
