656

seeking wealth and even hunting for it.
(38)
अर्थादेतानि सर्वाणि yada नराधिप॥ ३९॥

“Delight and sensuous pleasure, pride,
virtue, anger and control of the mind and the
senses—all these become effective through
wealth alone, O ruler of men! (39)
तेऽर्थास्त्वयि न दृश्यन्ते दुर्दिनेषु यथा Wet: il ¥o ti

“Those riches due to renunciation of
which worldly happiness of those practising
austerities and treading the path of virtue
goes to the dogs are not found in you any
more than the nine planets are seen on

cloudy days. (40)
त्वयि vata dit गुरोश्च वचने स्थिते।
Taare भार्या प्राणै: प्रियतरा तव॥४१॥

“While you have been in exile, faithful
to the pledge of your father, your consort,
who was dearer to you than life itself, was
borne away by the ogre, Ravana, O heroic
prince! (41)

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA +

wea विपुलं वीर दु:खमिन्द्रजिता कृतम्।
कर्मणा व्यपनेष्यामि तस्मादुत्तिष्ठं Wea sel

“| shall fully dispel with my exploits today
the great agony caused by Indrajit, O gallant
prince! Therefore, rise, O scion of Raghu! (42)

उत्तिष्ठ नरशार्दूल दीर्घबाहो धृतव्रत।
किमात्मानं महात्मानमात्मानं नावबुध्यसे॥४३॥
“Get up, O tiger among men! Why don’t
you recognize yourself to be the Supreme
Spirit, endowed with vast intelligence, O long-
armed prince, who have kept your vows? (43)

अयमनघ तवोदिक प्रियार्थं

जनकसुतानिधनं निरीक्ष्य रुष्ट:।
सरथगजहयां सराक्षसेन्द्रां
भृशमिषुभिर्विनिपातयामि लङ्काम्॥४४॥
“This submission has been made by
me to win your pleasure. Enraged to learn
about the destruction of Janaka’s daughter,
| shall completely destroy with my arrows
Lanka with its chariots, elephants and horses,
alongwith Ravana, the ruler of ogres, O
sinless one!” (44)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये FERS त्र्यशीतितम: सर्ग: ॥ ८३ Il

Thus ends Canto Ejighty-three in the Yuddhakanda of the glorious Ramayana of
Valmiki, the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

Canto LXXXIV

Telling Sri Rama the secret of the conjuring trick practised by
Indrajit, Vibhisana assures him of Sita being still
alive and urges him to send Laksmana with an
army to the sanctuary of Nikumbhila

राममाश्वासमाने तु लक्ष्मणे भ्रातृवत्सले।
निक्षिप्य गुल्मान् स्वस्थाने तत्रागच्छद् विभीषण: ॥ १॥
नानाप्रहरणैर्वीरैश्चतुर्भिरभिसंवृत: ।
नीलाञ्जनचयाकारैर्मातंगैरिव यूथपै: WU

Having restored the simian troops
to their position while Laksmana, who
was so fond of his elder brother, was
reassuring Sri Rama, Vibhisana for his part
made his appearance there, surrounded by
