« KISKINDHAKANDA +

महाप्रमाणैर्विपुलै: प्रपातै-
र्मुक्ताकलापैरिव लम्बमानै:॥४८॥

“Fully washed by showers, the gigantic
mountain-peaks look exceedingly charming

due to numerous cascades of large
dimensions falling from them like streams of
pearls. (48)
जैलोपलप्रस्खलमानवेगा:

शैलोत्तमानां विपुला: प्रपाता:।

गुहासु संनादितबर्हिणासु
ant विकोर्यन्त इवावभान्ति॥४९॥
“With their force getting diffused against
the jutting rocks, the numerous waterfalls
on the foremost of mountains sparkle like
pearl necklaces getting broken and the pearls
being scattered in caves in which peacocks

are singing loudly. (49)
शीघ्रप्रवेगा विपुला: प्रपाता
निर्धीतशृङ्गोपतला गिरीणाम्।
मुक्काकलापप्रतिमा: पतन्तो
महागुहोत्सङ्गतलैश्रियन्ते KON

“While falling with impetuous force like
streams of pearls, after having cleanly washed
the lowest reaches of the mountain-peaks
the numerous cascades on mountains are
arrested by the bottoms of large caves. (50)

सुरतामर्दविच्छिन्ना: स्वर्गस्त्रीहारमौक्तिका:।
पतन्ति चातुला दिक्षु तोयधारा: समन्तत:॥५१॥

“Resembling the pearls of necklaces
of celestial women, disjoined when violently
pressed during sexual embrace, the peerless
streams of water are falling on every side in
all the quarters. (51)

विलीयमानैर्विहगैर्निमीलद्धिश्च ag: |
विकसन्त्या च मालत्या गतोऽस्तं ज्ञायते रवि: ॥ ५२ ॥

“The sun, which has remained invisible
during the whole day, is concluded to have
set only because of the birds retiring to their
nests, the lotus flowers closing and the
Malati (evening jasmine) opening their petals.

(52)

1041

aa यात्रा नरेन्द्राणां सेना पथ्येव वर्तते।
auf चैव मार्गांश्च सलिलेन समीकृता:॥५३॥

“The warlike expeditions of the rulers
of men have been turned back and their
armies stand obstructed on the way itself.
Nay, hostilities as well as the roads have
been stopped and thus reduced to the same
state by water. (53)

मासि प्रौष्ठपदे Seal ब्राह्मणानां विवक्षताम्।
अयमध्यायसमय: सामगानामुपस्थित: ॥ ५४॥

“Now has come the time in the bright
half of the month of Bhadrapada (roughly
corresponding to August of the Georgian
calendar) of commencing the study of Veda
for Brahmanas belonging to that class, who
chant the Samaveda and wishing to study
the Veda. (54)
आषाढीमभ्युपगतो भरत: कोसलाधिप:॥ ५५॥

“Having finished all the work such as
thatching the roof relating to his dwelling (as
a protection against the showers) and got
together the necessaries of life (which may
last him for the four rainy months), Bharata,
the suzerain lord of the kingdom of Kosala,
has surely undertaken his special vows
relating to the four rainy months on the full
moon of the month of Asadha (roughly
corresponding to June). (55)

नूनमापूर्यमाणाया: सरय्वा वर्धते रय:।

मां समीक्ष्य समायान्तमयोध्याया इव स्वन:॥ ५६॥
“The onrush of the Sarayu river, which

is getting flooded, is without doubt increasing

even as the shouts of acclamation of the

people of Ayodhya will be on perceiving me

duly returning from the forest. (56)

इमा: स्फीतगुणा वर्षा: सुग्रीव: सुखमश्चुते।
विजितारि: सदारश्च wa महति च fea: ५७॥

“Having fully overcome his enemy and
having been re-united with his wife and
established once more in his vast kingdom,
Sugriva is enjoying happiness during these
rains, whose excellences are too many. (57)
