# YUDDHAKANDA #

placed all those benign offerings, which were
intended to bring felicity, at the disposal of
Sri Rama (a scion of Raghu) and Laksmana.
(21)

कृतकार्यं समृद्धार्थं दृष्टवा war विभीषणम्।
प्रतिजग्राह ad We तस्यैव प्रतिकाम्यया॥ २२॥
Seeing Vibhisana accomplished of
purpose and abundantly endowed with riches,
Sri Rama accepted it all in sheer deference
to his desire. (22)

aa: Veet वीरं प्राञ्जलिं word स्थितम्।
उवाचेदं वचो WAT हनूमन्तं प्लवङ्गमम्॥२३॥
Thereupon Sri Rama addressed the
following words to the valiant monkey,
Hanuman, who resembled a mountain (in
size) and stood in a suppliant mood with
joined palms: (23)

अनुज्ञाप्य महाराजमिमं सौम्य विभीषणम्।
प्रविश्य नगरीं लङ्कां कौशलं ale मैथिलीम्॥ २४॥

779

वैदेह्यै मां च कुशलं सुग्रीवं च सलक्ष्मणम्।
आचक्ष्व वदतां ses रावणं च ed रणे॥ ei
“Taking the permission of this great
monarch, Vibhisana, O gentle one, and
penetrating into the city of Lanka, inquire of
Sita (the princess of Mithila) how she is
doing. Also speak to Sita (the princess of
the territory of Videha) about me as well as
about Sugriva, including Laksmana being
well, and also speak to her about Ravana
having been killed in combat, O jewel among
the eloquent! (24-25)

प्रियमेतदिहाख्याहि वैदेह्यास्त्वं हरीश्वर।
प्रतिगृह्य तु संदेशमुपावर्तितुमर्हसि॥ २६॥
“Communicate, O chief of monkeys,
these agreeable tidings to Sita (a princess
of the Videha territory), and you, for your

part, should return hereafter receiving her
message.” (26)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये युद्धकाण्डे SIGMA MATA: AT: ॥ 22? Il

Thus ends Canto One hundred and twelve in the Yuddhakanda of the glorious
Ramayana of Valmiki, the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

त्रयोदशाधिक्शततम: wat:
Canto CXIll

Hanuman delivers Sri Rama’s message to Sita
and brings back her message to him

Particularly commanded as aforesaid,
Hanuman, sprung from the loins of the wind-
god, penetrated deep into the city of Lanka,
being treated with honour by the rangers of
the night, (1)

प्रविश्य च gt लङ्कामनुज्ञाप्य विभीषणम्।
ततस्तेनाभ्यनुज्ञातो हनूमान् व्रृक्षवाटिकाम्॥२॥

सम्प्रविश्य यथान्यायं सीताया विदितो eft: |
ददर्श मृजया हीनां सातङ्कां रोहिणीमिव॥ ३॥
वृक्षमूले निरानन्दां राक्षसीभि: परीव्रताम्।
निभृत: Word: We: सोऽभिगम्याभिवाद्य च॥४॥

Having penetrated deep into the city of
Lanka and seeking the permission of
Vibhisana, nay, duly entering the grove of
Asoka trees (where Sita had been detained),
when permitted by him, Hanuman then
