372

हनूमन्तं त्वमारोह अङ्गदं त्वथ लक्ष्मण:।
अयं fe विपुलो वीर सागरो मकरालय:॥८२॥
वैहायसौ युवामेतौ वानरौ धारयिष्यत:।
अग्रतस्तस्य सैन्यस्य श्रीमान् राम: ASAT: ॥ ८३॥
जगाम धन्वी धर्मात्मा सुग्रीवेण समन्वित:।
अन्ये मध्येन गच्छन्ति पार्श्वतोऽन्ये प्लवंगमा: ।। ८४॥

“Mount you the back of Hanuman and
let Laksmana for his part mount the shoulder
of Angada. Vast indeed is this sea, the
abode of alligators, O gallant prince! These
two monkeys, who are capable of ranging
the sky, will carry you.” Accompanied by
Sugriva, the glorious Sri Rama, who wielded
a bow and whose mind was set on virtue,
proceeded with Laksmana in the van of that
army. Some monkeys walked in the middle,
while others strode in the flanks. (82—84)

सलिलं प्रपतन्त्यन्ये मार्गमन्ये प्रपेदिरे।
केचिद् वैहायसगता: सुपर्णा इव पुप्लुवु:॥ ८५॥

Some leapt into the water and swam
through it, others marched on the bridge;
while springing into the airspace, others
darted like eagles. (85)

चोषेण महता घोषं सागरस्य समुच्छितम्।
भीममन्तर्दधे भीमा तरन्ती हरिवाहिनी॥८६॥

Advancing to the other shore, the
formidable army of monkeys drowned by its
loud din the terrible and powerful roar of the
sea. (86)

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA +

वानराणां fe सा तीर्णा वाहिनी नलसेतुना।
तीरे fafafast राज्ञो बहुमूलफलोदके॥ ८७॥

Having actually reached the other shore
through the bridge constructed by Nala, the
aforesaid army of monkeys was encamped
by the king, Sugriva, on the shore, abounding
in roots, fruits and water. (87)
तदद्भुतं राघवकर्म दुष्करं

समीक्ष्य देवा: we सिद्धचारणै:।
उपेत्य रामं सहसा महर्षिभि-
स्तमभ्यषिञ्चन् सुशुभैर्जलै: पृथक॥८८॥

Gazing on that marvellous achievement
of Sri Rama (a scion of Raghu), which was
difficult of accomplishment for others, and
approaching Sri Rama all of a sudden with
Siddhas, Caranas (celestial bards) and
eminent Rsis (the seers of Vedic Mantras),
the gods consecrated him with highly

auspicious waters separately. (88)
जयस्व wa wea मेदिनीं
ससागरां पालय शाश्वती: AAT: |
इतीव रामं नरदेवसत्कृतं
शुभैर्वचोभिर्विविधैरपूजयन् TRAST

They further hailed Sri Rama, who was
honoured by kings, (lit., lords of men), in the
following auspicious expressions of various
kinds: “Conquer your enemies, O king, and
rule over the earth including the seas for
numberless years!” (89)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये युद्धकाण्डे द्वाविंश: सर्ग: ॥ २२ ॥

Thus ends Canto Twenty-two the Yuddhakanda of the glorious Ramayana of
Valmiki, the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

