361

# YUDDHAKANDA +

Springing up, when commanded
by their sovereign, the monkeys thereupon
captured and bound the ogre, who
was wailing all the time like a forlorn
creature. (31)

शुकस्तु वानरैश्चण्डैस्तत्र a: सम्प्रपीडित:।
व्याचुक्रोश महात्मानं WA दशरथात्मजम्।
लुप्येते मे बलात् पक्षौ भिद्येते मे तथाक्षिणी ।। ३२॥
Excessively tormented by those furious
monkeys, Suka for his part called out at the
top of his voice to the high-souled Sri Rama,
sprung from the loins of DaSaratha, saying:
“My wings are being violently torn off and
my eyes are being put out. (32)

यां च रात्रिं मरिष्यामि जाये रात्रिं च यामहम्।
एतस्मिन्नन्तरे काले यन्मया ह्यशुभं कृतम्।
ae तदुपपद्येथा Walt wae यदि जीवितम्॥ ३३॥

“If | lose my life at this juncture, you
will indeed take on your head all those sins
that have been perpetrated by me during
this interval since the night on which | was
born till the night on which | shall give up the
ghost.” (33)

नाघातयत् तदा WA: seat तत्परिदेवितम्।
वानरानब्रवीद् WH मुच्यतां दूत आगत:॥ ३४॥

On hearing his wail, Sri Rama did not
let him be killed. He said to the monkeys,
“Let him be set free; he has come as an
envoy.” (34)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये युद्धकाण्डे विंश: AT: ॥ २० ॥
Thus ends Canto Twenty in the Yuddhakanda of the glorious Ramayana of
Valmiki, the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

Canto XXI

When the sea did not, even when requested, allow a passage to
Sti Rama, who was keen to cross it, nor did the sea-god
care to appear in person before him, Sri Rama
discharges fierce arrows which cause a stir
among the creatures inhabiting
the sea and make the
sea-water overflow

qd: सागरवेलायां दर्भानास्तीर्य waa:
अञ्जलिं प्राङ्मुख: कृत्वा प्रतिशिश्ये महोदधे: ।। १॥
बाहुं भुजङ्गभोगाभमुपधायारिसूदन: |
जातसरूपमयैश्चैव भूषणैर्भूषितं WTNH

Spreading blades of the sacred Kusa
grass on the seashore and joining his palms
as a mark of respect to the ocean, Sri
Rama (a scion of Raghu), the destroyer of
his foes, then lay down with his face turned
towards the east and using as a pillow his

arm,which looked like the coils of a serpent
and was adorned in the past with ornaments
of gold. (1-2)

मणिकाञ्चनकेयूरमुक्ताप्रवरभूषणै: ।
भुजै: परमनारीणामभिमृष्टमनेकधा NN ३॥
चन्दनागुरुभिश्चैव पुरस्तादभिसेवितम्।
बालसूर्यप्रकाशैश्च चन्दनैरुपशोभितम्॥ ४॥
शयने चोत्तमाङ्गेन सीताया: शोभितं पुरा।
तक्षकस्येव सम्भोगं गङ्गाजलनिषेवितम्॥७५॥
