498

प्रहृष्टकोयष्टिभकोकिलस्वनै-
र्विनोदयन्तं च ae परं शिवम्।
Wig मत्तैर्बहुभिश्च pat:
सुरम्यमासाद्य समावसाश्रयम्॥ ४३॥
Reaching the agreeable दापे highly

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

blessed mountain, which entertains the
visitors with the notes of the overjoyed
Tittibha bird and cuckoo, is most delightful
because of its many deer and elephants in
rut and is fit for habitation, take up your
abode on it. (43)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्येऽयोध्याकाण्डे चतु:पञ्चाश: सर्ग: ॥ ५४॥

Thus ends Canto Fifty-four in the Ayodhyakanda of the glorious Ramayana of Valmiki,
the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

पञ्चपञ्चाश: सर्ग:
Canto LV

Sage Bharadwaja tells Sri Rama and Laksmana, even as they set out
on their journey to Citrakuta, the route by which they should
proceed. Accompanied by Sita, Sri Rama and Laksmana
cross the Yamuna on a raft prepared by themselves.

In the evening they halt on the bank of the
Yamuna alongwith Sita, who is rejoiced

to get fruits and blossoms of her liking

उषित्वा रजनीं तत्र राजपुत्रावरिंदमौ।
महर्षिमभिवाद्याथ जग्मतुस्तं गिरिं प्रति॥१॥
Having spent the night at the hermitage
of Sage Bharadwaja and greeting the great
seer, the two princes, Sri Rama and
Laksmana, the subduers of their foes,
forthwith proceeded in the direction of the
said mountain. (1)

तेषां स्वस्त्ययनं da महर्षि: स चकार Fl
प्रस्थितान् प्रेक्ष्य तांश्चैव पिता पुत्रानिवौरसान्॥ २॥

Nay, perceiving the three travellers
about to start on their journey, that great
seer too, so the tradition goes, performed a
religious rite ensuring their safe journey
(scattering boiled rice on the ground and
invoking blessings through the repetition of
certain sacred texts) in the same way as a
father would bless his own sons (and
daughter-in-law). (2)
Wd: Wart ab वचनं स महामुनि:।
Wet महातेजा WH सत्यपराक्रमम्॥३॥

Then that eminent sage, Bharadwaja,
who was invested with great spiritual glory,
proceeded to instruct Sri Rama, who was
possessed of unfailing valour, as follows :

(3)
गङ्गायमुनयोर संधिमासाद्य मनुजर्षभौ।
कालिन्दीमनुगच्छेतां नदीं पश्चान्मुखाश्रिताम्॥४॥

“Reaching the confluence of the Ganga
and the Yamuna, the two jewels among
men, should follow the river Yamuna, which
has taken a westerly course (for some
distance due to the great rush of the waters
of the Ganga). (4)
अथासाद्य तु कालिन्दीं प्रतिस्रोत:समागताम्।
तस्यास्तीर्थं प्रचरितं प्रकामं प्रेक्ष्य waa
wa यूयं wa कृत्वा तरतांशुमतीं नदीम्॥५॥

“Then, approaching the Yamuna turned
in an opposite direction, and carefully
perceiving in it a passage (across the river)

too much frequented, O scion of Raghu,
cross you the river Yamuna (the deity
