Publisher’s Note

The Valmiki-Ramayana is read all over India with great reverence and love as it
contains the most authentic story of Lord Sri Rama, one of the two most popular
incarnations, viz., Sri Rama and Sri Krsna, who lived amongst us thousands of years ago
and have left an indelible impression on our lives. It is as fresh today as it was during the
time of Valmiki, a contemporary of Sri Rama. It is one of the world’s most remarkable
classics and excels all in its moral appeal. It is full of lessons for all and deserves to be
read with interest and benefit by all lovers of sublime literature. It is noted for its poetic
excellences and is the oldest specimen of epic poetry. An authentic and readable
translation of this world-renowned book was published in Hindi, the national language of
India, some years ago after critically editing the text with the help of different recensions,
and is very widely read all over the Hindi-speaking States and adjacent areas in India as
also abroad.

For the benefit of those who cannot read Hindi and at the same time who are not so
well-versed in Sanskrit as to understand and appreciate original Sanskrit text, an accurate
and faithful English translation of this sacred text by scholarly translators has been got
done by the Gita Press. Some years ago, we had published the entire narrative of Valmiki-
Ramayana in English in serials under the caption of Valmiki-Ramayana in three Annual
Numbers of our English monthly journal ‘Kalyana-Kalpataru’. After that, as an independent
work, we published the Valmiki-Ramayana in three volumes—Part one containing Balakanda
and Ayodhyakanda, Part two containing Aranyakanda, Kiskindhakanda and Sundarakanda;
Part three containing Yuddhakanda and Uttarakanda. But since we received a number of
suggestions from our readers to reduce the number of volumes as much as possible, we
are publishing it in two volumes—Volume one containing Balakanda to Kiskindhakanda
and volume two, Sundarakanda to Uttarakanda. In doing so, convenience of the readers
was the main consideration and at the same time the book has been saved from being
unmanagably bulky.

Although great care has been taken in translating and printing these books, typographical
and other errors may have crept in and we crave the indulgence of our kind readers to
bear with us. In our translation we have tried to reproduce the meaning of the original as
accurately as possible so as to enable the readers to follow the text word by word, and
have made it as close as possible, preserving even the grammatical peculiarities of the
original and translating even indeclinables like a, wa, 4, fe, ह, 4 and so on, which cannot
be called redundant in the work of a Rsi. We leave it to our learned readers, who are
conversant with both the languages, to judge how far we have succeeded in the work we
have undertaken. In the end, we dedicate our humble effort to the Almighty Lord Sri Rama,
who has sustained us throughout in His abundant grace and enabled us to bring out these
volumes.

We thankfully acknowledge and appreciate the services rendered by Sri J. P. Agarwal,
former Controller of Examinations, Kurukshetra University, in meticulously preparing the
present Revised Edition.

—Publisher
