326

aforesaid, and inclined to put up that unkind
proposal, Kaikeyi made ready to torment

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

her husband further by putting forward that
unpalatable proposal. (40)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्येऽयोध्याकाण्डे
SIA: सर्ग: I १० ॥

Thus ends Canto Ten in the Ayodhyakanda of the glorious Ramayana
of Valmiki, the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

एकादश: सर्ग:
Canto XI

Egged on by Kaikeyi to grant her desire, DaSaratha gives his word of
honour to her to that effect. Invoking the presence of gods as
witnesses and reminding the Emperor of what took place
during the conflict of gods and demons, Kaikeyi asks of
him the two boons promised by him in the shape of
exiling Sri Rama for a period of fourteen years
and installing Bharata as Prince Regent

तं मन्मथशरैर्विद्धुं कामवेगवशानुगम्।
sara पृथिवीपालं कैकेयी दारुणं वच:॥१॥
To the Emperor, who had been pierced
with the shafts of love and was a slave
to the promptings of passion, Kaikeyi
addressed the following cruel reply: (1)

नास्मि विप्रकृता देव केनचिन्नावमानिता।
अभिप्रायस्तु मे कश्चित् तमिच्छामि त्वया कृतम्॥ २॥

“| have neither been insulted nor treated
with disrespect by anyone, O lord ! Of course,
there is some cherished object of mine; |
desire it to be accomplished by you. (2)
प्रतिज्ञां प्रतिजानीष्व यदि त्वं कर्तुमिच्छसि।
अथ a व्याहरिष्यामि यथाभिप्रार्थितं मया॥ ३॥

“Make a solemn vow to that effect if
you wish to accomplish it. | shall then duly
tell you what is keenly sought by me.” (3)

तामुवाच महाराज: कैकेयीमीषदुत्स्मय:।
कामी हस्तेन संगृह्य मूर्धजेषु भुवि स्थिताम्॥४॥

Putting in order with his hands her
dishevelled hair, lying on the ground and
placing her head on his lap, the loving

Emperor spoke as follows to Kaikeyi, gently
smiling : (4)

अवलिप्ते न जानासि त्वत्त: प्रियतरो मम।

मनुजो मनुजव्याघ्राद् रामादन्यो न विद्यते॥५॥

“O proud lady, don’t you know that no
man other than Rama, a veritable tiger among
men, is dearer to me than yourself? (5)

तेनाजय्येन मुख्येन राघवेण महात्मना।
wa a जीवनार्हेण gfe यन्मनसेप्सितम्॥६॥

“| swear to you by the said Rama, a
scion of Raghu, who is invincible and high-
sould, the foremost among men and more
valuable than my own life; speak out what
is sought by your mind. (6)
a मुहूर्तमपश्यंस्तु न जीवे तमहं ध्रुवम्।
wt रामेण कैकेयि शपे a वचनक्रियाम्॥७॥

“By that Rama, without seeing whom
even for an hour or so, O Kaikeyi, | am
surely not going to survive, | swear that
your wishes shall be carried out. (7)

आत्मना चात्मजैश्चान्यैर्वृणे यं मनुजर्षभम्।
तेन रामेण कैकेयि शपे a वचनक्रियाम्॥८॥
