« KISKINDHAKANDA +

you, O lord of monkeys: there is no doubt
about it.” (64)
स तस्य वाक्यं मधुरं महात्मन:
समाहितं धर्मपथानुवर्तितम्।
निशम्य रामस्य रणावमर्दिनो
aa: सुयुक्तं निजगाद वानर:॥ ६५ I
Having listened to the sweet and
reassuring words, which strictly followed the
path of righteousness, of the high-souled Sri
Rama, who stood before him and who was
capable of crushing his enemy on the field of
battle, the aforesaid monkey, Vali, made the

1003

following well-reasoned answer : (65)
writes विचेतसा मया

प्रभाषितस्त्वं यदजानता विभो।
महेन्द्रोपमभीमविक्रम

प्रसादितस्त्वं क्षम मे नरेश्चर॥ ६६॥

“Pray, propitiated by me, O powerful
ruler of men, possessed of terrific prowess
and vying with the mighty Indra, forgive
whatever unseemly and harsh words have
been unwittingly uttered by me, agonized as
| was with pain caused by your arrow and,
therefore, confounded.” (66)

इदं

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये किष्किन्धाकाण्डेऽष्टादश: सर्ग: Il १८॥

Thus ends Canto Eighteen in the Kiskindhakanda of the glorious Ramayana of Valmiki,
the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

Canto XIX

Agonized with grief to hear about the death of her husband, Tara, wife of
Vali, sallied forth from Kiskindha to arrive in the presence of Vali. Fleeing
helter-skelter through fear of Srt Rama and meeting Tara on the
way, the monkeys try to send her back inspiring fear in her and
advise her to make arrangements for the defence of the city and
install Angada on the throne. Rushing to the scene of
contest after dismissing them, Tara catches sight of Vali
lying on the ground, as well as of Sri Rama and others

स वानरमहाराज: शयान: शरपीडित:।
प्रत्युक्तो हेतुमद्वाक्यैर्नोत्तरं TTT NII

Answered in words which were
supported with reason, Vali, the overlord of
monkeys, who was lying on the ground
afflicted with pain caused by Sri Rama’s
arrow, could not make any reply. (1)

अश्मभि: परिभिन्नाङ्ग: पादपैराहतो भृशम्।
रामबाणेन चाक्रान्तो जीवितान्ते मुमोह स:॥ २॥

Severely battered with trees and pierced
with Sri Rama’s arrow, his limbs shattered
by rocks, he swooned at the close of his
life. (2)

तं wat बाणमोक्षेण रामदत्तेन संयुगे।

Ba प्लवगशार्दूलं AT शुश्राव वालिनम्॥३॥
His wife, Tara, heard of the said Vali, a

tiger among the monkeys, having been killed

with the propulsion of an arrow by Sri Rama

while the former was engaged in a trial of

strength with Sugriva. (3)

सा सपुत्राप्रियं श्रुत्वा वधं sd: सुदारुणम्।
निष्पपात भृशं तस्मादुद्बिग्ना गिरिकन्दरात्॥४॥
Sore perturbed to hear the unpalatable
and most cruel news of her husband’s death,
Tara sallied forth with her son, Angada, from
that rocky cavern, which Kiskindha was. (4)
