712

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

Canto CXIX

Glorifying the evening shades, that had now fallen, Anasuya sends away Sita,
decked with the ornaments bestowed on her by herself, to the presence of
Sri Rama. To the latter, who was agreeably surprised to behold Sita
resplendent with heavenly jewels, she relates how she received the
jewels as a loving gift from the hermitess. Accepting the hospitality
of the hermits and staying with them for the night, Sri Rama
asks leave of them in the morning to proceed further
and, following the route shown by the hermits,

the princely party enters the Dandaka forest

अनसूया तु धर्मज्ञा श्रुत्वा at महतीं कथाम्।
wis बाहुभ्यां शिरस्याघ्राय मैथिलीम्॥ १॥
Hearing that great narrative and smelling
the head of the princess of Mithila as a
token of affection, Anasuya for her part,
who knew what is right, folded her in her
arms and said: (1)
यथा स्वयंवरं ad तत् aa च ot मया॥ २॥
“What you have said in distinct tones
and words is surprising and sweet. The
way in which your self-choice-marriage took
place has also been fully heard by me. (2)

wa कथया a gq gé मधुरभाषिणि।
रविरस्तं गत: श्रीमानुपोह्य रजनीं शुभाम्॥३॥
“| would have been delighted much to
hear more of your story, O sweet-speaking
lady ! Ushering in the charming night, the
glorious sun has, however, sunk below
horizon. (3)
दिवसं परिकीर्णानामाहारार्थं पतत्तिणाम्।
संध्याकाले निलीनानां निद्रार्थं श्रूयते eat: uv it
“The noise is being heard of birds
scattered about during the daytime in search
of food and roosted in their nests at eventide
for sleep. (4)

Ud चाप्यभिषेकार्द्र मुनय: कलशोद्यता:।
सहिता उपवर्तन्ते सलिलाप्लुतवल्कला:॥५॥

“These hermits too, wet after a bath
and their coverings of bark too soaked with
water, are returning in a body with uplifted
vessels full of water. (5)

अग्निहोत्रे च ऋषिणा et च विधिपूर्वकम्।
कपोताङ्गारुणो धूमो दृश्यते पवनोद्भधत:॥६॥

“The rite of offering oblations into the
sacred fire having been performed by the
sage Atri according to the scriptural
ordinance, a column of smoke, dark-blue
like a pigeon’s neck, raised by the wind, is
seen over there. (6)
अल्पवर्णा fe तरवो घनीभूता: समन्तत:।
विप्रकृष्टेन्द्रये देशे न प्रकाशन्ति वै दिश:॥७॥

“In the landscape remote from our eyes
trees, though clothed with sparse leaves,
indeed look dense all round with foliage, so
that the quarters do not shine vividly. (7)
रजनीचरसत्त्वानि प्रचरन्ति समन्तत:।
तपोवनमृगा at वेदितीर्थेषु शेरते॥८॥

“Ogres, who range at night, are freely
moving all round, while these deer of groves
reserved for practising austerities are lying
down on the sacred altars. (8)

सम्प्रव्रत्ता निशा सीते नक्षत्रसमलंकृता।
ज्योत्स्नाप्रावरणश्चन्द्रो दृश्यतेऽभ्युदितोऽम्बरे॥ ९॥

“The night richly adorned with stars
has fairly set in, O Sita; the moon enveloped
