572

vied with the thunderbolt of Indra, the ruler

of gods. (167)

a तन्महापर्वतकूटसंनिभं

क्तूत्तदष्ट चलचारुकुण्डलम् ।
रक्षोऽधिपते: शिरस्तदा

यथैव वृत्रस्य पुरा पुरंदर:॥१६८॥

The aforesaid arrow immediately tore
off the well-known head of Kumbhakarna
(the overlord of ogres), which closely
resembled the peak of a huge mountain,
was distinguished by beautifully globular teeth
and swinging lovely earrings, even as Indra
(the destroyer of citadels) severed the head
of Vrtra in the hoary past. (168)

कुम्भकर्णशिरो भाति कुण्डलालंकृतं महत्।
आदित्येऽभ्युदिते Wal मध्यस्थ इव चन्द्रमा: ULE ॥

Adorned with a pair of earrings,
Kumbhakarna’s enormous head shone like
the moon located in mid heavens when the
constellation Punarvasu (presided over by
Aditi, the mother of gods and consisting of
twin-stars) has risen at the close of night.

(169)

Wad

तद् रामबाणाभिहतं पपात
रक्ष:शिर: पर्वतसंनिकाशम्।
प्राकारमुच्चं तमपातयच्च॥ १७० Il
Torn off by Sri Rama’s arrow, the
aforesaid head of the ogre, which closely
resembled the peak of a mountain, fell down
and demolished the buildings on the king’s
highway as well as their gates and pulled
down the high defensive wall (even as it
fell). (170)
तच्चातिकायं हिमवत् Wart
रक्षस्तदा तोयनिधौ पपात।
भूमिं च dar विवेश॥ १७१॥

And the colonel ogre (himself) who
shone like the Himalaya mountain (in size)

aya

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA +

forthwith fell into the sea. There it crushed
under its weight the principal alligators, the
foremost of fishes and aquatic serpents and
entered the bowels of the earth. (171)

तस्मिन् हते ब्राह्मणदेवशत्रौ

महाबले संयति कुम्भकर्णे।
भूर्भूमिधराश्च ad

Bet देवास्तुमुलं प्रणेदु:॥१७२॥

The aforesaid Kumbhakarna, the enemy
of the Brahmanas and gods, who was
endowed with extraordinary might, having
been killed in combat, the earth as well as
all the mountains shook and the gods raised
an uproarious shout of joy. (172)

ततस्तु देवर्षिमहर्षिपन्नगा:

सुराश्च भूतानि सुपर्णगुह्यका:।
सयक्षगन्धर्वगणा नभोगता:

प्रहर्षिता रामपराक्रमेण I १७३ UI

Thereupon celestial sages, eminent Rsis

(the seers of Vedic Mantras) and serpents
as also gods, genii, Suparnas (a class of
bird-like beings of a semi-divine character),
Guhyakas (another class of demi-gods)
including hosts of Yaksas and Gandharvas
(celestial musicians) standing in the air felt
highly rejoiced at the prowess of Sri Rama.
(173)

चचाल

ae ad aa am भूरिणा
मनस्विनो नैर्ऋतराजबान्धवा:।
विनेदुरुच्चैर्व्यथिता रघूत्तमं
हरिं समीक्ष्यैव यथा मतंगजा:॥ १७४॥
At the very sight of Sri Rama, the foremost
of the Raghus, the well-known kinsfolk of
Ravana (the king of ogres) for their part,
who, though resolute of mind, were pained
by the momentous fall of Kumbhakarna, and
let out loud cries even as elephants would
at the sight of a lion. (174)

a देवलोकस्य ant fea
सूर्यो यथा राहुमुखाद् faye: |
