# YUDDHAKANDA #

555

Canto LXVII

Kumbhakarna’s terrible encounter with
Sri Rama and death at his hands

a fant महाकाया: श्रुत्वाङ्गदवचस्तदा।
नैष्ठिकों बुद्धिमास्थाय Wa संग्रामकाङ्क्षिण: tk
Having arrived at a firm resolution, all
those giants returned on hearing the
exhortation of Angada, longing for an
encounter. (1)

समुदीरितवीर्यास्ते समारोपितविक्रमा: |
पर्यवस्थापिता वाक्यैरङ्गदेन बलीयसा॥२॥

Reminded of their past valour, and
restored to confidence by means of his
words by the exceedingly mighty Angada,
they exhibited their prowess once more.(2)

प्रयाताश्च गता हर्षं मरणे कृतनिश्चया:।

चक्रु: सुतुमुलं युद्धं वानरास्त्यक्तजीविता:॥ ३॥
Having returned to Angada and been

restored to their spirits, the monkeys who

had staked their life and were resolved to
die, carried on a fierce struggle. (3)

अथ Gary महाकाया: सानूनि सुमहान्ति च।
वानरास्तूर्णमुद्यम्य कुम्भकर्णमभिद्रवन्॥ ४॥

Lifting up huge trees and mountain
peaks, the colossal monkeys now rushed
towards Kumbhakarna with all speed. (4)

कुम्भकर्ण: सुसंक्रुद्धो गदामुद्यम्य वीर्यवान्।
धर्षयन् स महाकाय: समन्ताद् व्यक्षिपदू रिपून्॥ ५ ॥
Raising his mace and displaying his
audacity, the valiant and gigantic
Kumbhakarna, who got extremely enraged,
struck down the enemies on all sides. (5)

शतानि सप्त चाष्टौ च सहस्राणि च arnt: |
प्रकीर्णा: शेरते भूमौ कुम्भकर्णेन ताडिता:॥६॥
Struck by Kumbhakarna, eight thousand
and seven hundred monkeys lay thrown
about on the gound. (6)

षोडशाष्टौ च दश a विंशत्तरिंशत्तथैव च।
परिक्षिप्य च बाहुभ्यां खादन् a परिधावति।
भक्षयन् भृशसंक्रुद्धो Wes पन्नगानिव॥७॥

Folding in his arms as many as sixteen,
eight or ten or twenty and, likewise, even
thirty monkeys at a time, extremely infuriated,
he ran about devouring them, even as
Garuda would wheel round consuming
serpents. (7)
Pas च समाश्वस्ता: संगम्य च ततस्तत:।
वृक्षाद्रिहस्ता हरयस्तस्थु: संग्राममूर्धनि॥८॥

Restored to confidence with great
difficulty, nay, rallying from here and there,
trees and mountain-tops in hand, the

monkeys remained standing in the forefront
of the battle. (8)

aa: पर्वतमुत्पाट्यं द्विविद: प्लवगर्षभ:।

दुद्राव गिरिशृङ्गाभं विलम्ब ga तोयद:॥ ९॥
Tearing up a rock, Dwivida, a bull among

the monkeys, who looked like a threatening

cloud, darted towards Kumbhakarna, who
resembled a mountain peak. (9)

तं समुत्पाट्य चिक्षेप कुम्भकर्णाय वानर:।
तमप्राप्य महाकायं तस्य सैन्येऽपतत् Aa: uo
Tearing up a rock, the monkey flung
it at Kumbhakarna. Missing the colossus,
the rock, however, fell on his army instead.
(10)

ममर्दाश्चान् गजांश्चापि रथांश्चापि गजोत्तमान्।
तानि चान्यानि रक्षांसि एवं चान्यद्गिरे: शिर:॥ ११॥
It crushed the horses as well as the
elephants as also the chariots and lordly

elephants; while another mountain peak
crushed other well-known ogres. (11)
