364

with its fishes and alligators, assumed an
exceptionally terrible aspect, attended as it
was with the roaring of the wind. (28)

महोर्मिमालावितत: शङ्खशुक्तिसमावृत: |
सधूम: Utada: सहसासीन्महोदधि:॥ २९॥
The ocean was all of a sudden covered
all over with rows of mighty billows and
overspread with conches and mothers-of-
pearl; it was screened with smoke which
rose from the flaming arrows as they entered
into the waters and waves began to play on
it. (29)
व्यथिता: पन्नगाश्चासन् दीप्तास्या दीप्तलोचना: ।
दानवाश्च महावीर्या:; पातालतलवासिन:॥ ३०॥

Nay, serpents with flaming hoods and
burning eyes, as well as Danavas, who
were endowed with extraordinary virility and
had their abode in the depths of Patala,
the nethermost subterranean region, felt
oppressed. (30)
waa: सिन्धुराजस्य सनक्रमकरास्तथा।
विन्ध्यमन्दरसंकाशा: समुत्पेतु: सहस्रश:॥ ३१॥

Waves of the ocean (lit., the ruler of
rivers), which closely resembled the Vindhya
and Mandara mountains in height, rose
high in thousands alongwith crocodiles and
alligators. (31)

आघूर्णिततरङ्गौघ: सम्भ्रान्तोरगराक्षस:।
उद्वर्तितमहाग्राह: सघोषो वरुणालय:॥ ३२॥

With its multitudes of waves tossed
in a whirling motion, the Nagas and
ogres (inhabiting it) excited and huge alligators
thrown upwards, the sea (lit., the abode

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA +

of Varuna, the god of water, emitted a roar.

(32)
ततस्तु तं राघवमुग्रवेगं
प्रकर्षमाणं धनुरप्रमेयम्।
मामेति चोक्त्वा धनुराललम्बे॥ ३३॥

Rushing towards the celebrated Sri
Rama (a scion of Raghu)—who in his burning
ardour was violently stretching once more
his bow, which was immeasurably great,
and breathing hard through anger—and
saying “no farther, no farther’, Laksmana
seized hold of the bow. (33)

एतद्विनापि ह्युदधेस्तवाद्य
सम्पत्स्यते वीरतमस्य कार्यम्।
भवद्बिधा: क्रोधवशं न यान्ति
दीर्घं भवान् पश्यतु साधुव्रत्तम्॥३४॥
“Your purpose of taking the monkeys
across the sea will surely be accomplished
today (he continued) even without drying up
the sea, the greatest hero as you are.
People like you do not fall under the sway
of anger. Therefore, devise some other noble
and durable way of taking your army across

the sea.” (34)
अन्तर्हितैश्चापि तथान्तरिक्षे
ब्रह्मर्षिभिश्चैव सुरर्षिभिश्च।

शब्द: कृत: कष्टमिति ब्रुवद्भि-
ममिति चोक्त्वा महता स्वरेण॥ ३५॥

Nay, an alarm was raised at a high
pitch by Brahmana Rsis and celestial Rsis
too, who stood invisible in the sky, saying
“Woe is me!” and crying “Hold! Hold!!” (35)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये FERS एकविंश: सर्ग: ॥ २१ ॥

Thus ends Canto Twenty-one in the Yuddhakanda of the glorious Ramayana of
Valmiki, the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

