318

duck-weeds, nay, full of turtles in the form
of elephants, teeming with frogs in the form
of horses, infested with alligators in the
form of the eleven Rudras (gods of
destruction) and twelve Adityas (sons of
Aditi), and with huge serpents in the form of
the forty-nine Maruts (wind-gods) and the
eight Vasus, and having chariots, horses
and elephants for its volume of water and
foot-soldiers for its sandy beach, Indra,
the ruler of gods, was actually captured
by him and thrust into Lanka as a detenu.
(20—22)

पितामहनियोगाच्च मुक्त: शम्बरवरत्रहा।
गतस्तिविष्टपं राजन् सर्वदेवनमस्कृत:॥ २३॥
“Nay, liberated by the command of
Brahma (the grandfather of all created beings,

the whole creation having been brought into
existence by his ten mind-born sons, the

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA +

Prajapatis), Indra (the destroyer of the
demons Sambara and Vrtra), who is adored
by all the gods, returned to heaven, O
king! (23)
wa त्वं महाराज विसृजेन्द्रजितं सुतम्।
यावद् वानरसेनां at सरामां नयति क्षयम्॥ २४॥
“Therefore, dispatch, O mighty ruler,
your aforesaid son, Indrajit, alone, so that
he may bring to an end the said army of the
monkeys, including Rama (even before it
dares to cross the sea). (24)

राजन्नापदयुक्तेयमागता प्राकृताज्जनात्।
हृदि नैव त्वया कार्या त्वं वधिष्यसि राघवम्॥ २५ ॥

“This adversity, which has come from
ordinary beings (like human beings and
monkeys), O king, does not deserve your
concern. It should not at all be given any
corner in your heart; for, you shall kill Rama
without doubt.” (25)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये युद्धकाण्डे सप्तम: सर्ग: ॥ ७॥
Thus ends Canto Seven in the Yuddhakanda of the glorious Ramayana of
Valmiki, the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

Canto VIII

Prahasta and others reassure Ravana by vauntingly
vowing the death of Sri Rama and others

ततो नीलाम्बुदप्रख्य: प्रहस्तो नाम राक्षस:।
अब्रवीत् प्राञ्जलिर्वाक्यं शूर: सेनापतिस्तदा॥ १॥
The valiant ogre, Prahasta by name,
the Commander-in-Chief, who resembled a
dark cloud, then submitted as follows with
joined palms on that occasion: (1)

देवदानवगन्धर्वा: पिशाचपतगोरगा: |

wa धर्षयितुं green: fe पुनर्मानवौ wr ei
“The gods, Danavas (sons of Danu)

and Gandharvas, fiends, birds and serpents,

all are capable of being easily overpowered
by us in an encounter, much less a couple
of mortals. (2)

wa प्रमत्ता विश्वस्ता वञ्चिता: स्म हनूमता।
नहि मे जीवतो गच्छेज्जीवन् स वनगोचर:॥ ३॥

“We were all hoodwinked by Hanuman
because we were unwary and unsuspecting.
That monkey (a denizen of the forest) could
not otherwise escape alive so long as | am
living. (3)
