* AYODHYAKANDA +

701

Canto CXVI

Learning from outward signs that the ascetics who lived in the vicinity of
Sri Rama were anxious to shift to some other forest, the latter asks
them why they wished to leave the place. Being told in reply
that they were being molested by Raksasas under the
leadership of Khara, he gives his consent and,
sending them away with great respect,
retires to his own hermitage

प्रतियाते तु भरते वसन् रामस्तदा वने।
लक्षयामास सोद्वेगमथौत्सुक्यं तपस्विनाम्॥१॥

Living in the forest when Bharata had
returned to Ayodhya, Sri Rama for his part
forthwith noticed during that period anxiety
accompanied by perturbation among the
ascetics. (1)

a aa चित्रकूटस्य पुरस्तात् तापसाश्रमे।
राममाश्रित्य निरतास्तानलक्षयदुत्सुकान्॥ २॥

He perceived the ascetics, who looked
formerly quite pleased in that hermitage at
Citrakuta, depending, as they did, on Sri
Rama, anxious. (2)

vaipetiis wt निर्दिश्य शङ्किता:।
wasted: शनैश्चक्रुर्मिथ: कथा:॥३॥

Making references to Sri Rama through
the movements of their eyes and eyebrows
and calling one another, full of misgiving,
they whispered among themselves. (3)

तेषामौत्सुक्यमालक्ष्य रामस्त्वात्मनि शाङ्कित:।
कृताञ्जलिरुवाचेदमृषिं peat तत:॥४॥
Perceiving their anxiety, Sri Rama was
filled with apprehension about himself and
accordingly submitted with folded hands as
follows to the Rsi (a seer of Vedic Mantras)
who presided over the hermitage : (4)

न कश्चिद् भगवन् किंचित् पूर्वव्रत्तमिदं मयि।
grad fapd येन विक्रियन्ते तपस्विन:॥ ५॥

“| fear, O venerable sir, the conduct of
my forefathers is not seen in me here, or

there is some change for the worse in me,
due to which the ascetics feel agitated. (5)
प्रमादाच्चरितं किंचित् कच्चिन्नावरजस्य मे।
लक्ष्मणस्यर्षिभिर्दृष्टं नानुरूपं महात्मन:॥६॥
“| hope no lapse, unbecoming of an
exalted soul, on the part of my younger
brother, Laksmana, has been detected by the
sages. (6)

कच्चिच्छुश्रूषमाणा व: शुश्रूषणपरा मयि।
प्रमदाभ्युचितां aft dat युक्तां न वर्तते॥७॥
“While attending on you, Sita, who
remains solely devoted to my service, does
not, | am afraid, follow the conduct wholly
worthy of a young lady and showing due
respect to you.” (7)

अथर्षिर्जरया वृद्धस्तपसा च जरां गत:।
amt इवोवाच रामं भूतदयापरम्॥८॥

The Rsi, who was not only worn out from
age but had also attained ripeness through
askesis, replied as follows, as though quaking,
to Sri Rama, who regarded compassion for
created beings as the highest virtue: (8)
Ha: कल्याणसत्त्वाया: कल्याणाभिरते: ART |
चलनं तात वैदेह्यास्तपस्विषु विशेषत:॥९॥

“How can there be any aberration, my
darling, on the part of Sita, a princess of the
Videha kingdom, who has a benign disposition

and is ever devoted to goodness, particularly
in her attitude towards ascetics? (9)

त्वन्निमित्तमिदं तावत् तापसान् प्रति वर्तते।
रक्षोभ्यस्तेन संविग्ना: कथयन्ति मिथ: कथा:॥ १०॥
