+ UTTARAKANDA +

“Fortune and piety are constantly
established in you, O Rama (a scion of
Kakutstha)!” These and other sweet encomia
too were chanted by the bards. (9)

सूताश्च संस्तवैर्दिव्यैर्बोधयन्ति स्म राघवम्।

स्तुतिभि: स्तूयमानाभि: प्रत्यबुध्यत राघव:॥१०॥
Panegyrists too woke up Sri Rama (a

scion of Raghu) by means of wonderful

panegyrics. Sri Rama awoke while praises
were being sung. (10)

a तद्बिहाय शयनं पाण्डुराच्छादनास्तृतम्।
उत्तस्थौ नागशयनाद्धरिर्नारायणो यथा॥११॥
Quitting his well-known — couch
overspread with a bed covered by a white
sheet, he got up as would Lord Narayana,
the Destroyer of sins, from His couch
consisting of a serpent (Sesa). (11)
तमुत्थितं महात्मानं Wel: प्राञ्ञजलयो ANT:
सलिलं भाजनै: शुभ्रैरुपतस्थु: ASST: ULI
Attendants in thousands bowing with
joined palms brought water in shining ewers

for the use of the high-souled monarch who
had just risen. (12)

Para: शुचिर्भूत्वा काले हुतहुताशन:।
देवागारं जगामाशु पुण्यमिक्ष्वाकुसेवितम्॥१३॥
Having bathed and getting thus purified
and having propitiated the sacred fire through
oblations in time, he repaired with quick steps
to the holy temple of the Ikswakus. (13)

aa cart पितॄन् विप्रानर्चयित्वा यथाविधि।

बाह्यकक्षान्तरं wa निर्जगाम जनैर्वृत:॥१४॥
Having duly worshipped there the gods,

the manes and the Brahmanas, Sri Rama,

surrounded by men, sought the interior of
the outer chamber. (14)

उपतस्थुर्महात्मानो मन्त्रिण: सपुरोहिता:।
वसिष्ठप्रमुखा: सर्वे दीप्यमाना इवाग्नय:॥१५॥

Like blazing fires, all the high-souled

981

counsellors including priests, Vasistha being
the foremost among them, presented
themselves. (15)

क्षत्रियाश्च महात्मानो नानाजनपदेश्वरा:।
रामस्योपाविशन् पार्वे शक्रस्येव यथामरा:॥ १६॥

Magnanimous' Ksatriyas, rulers of
various parts of the country, sat at the side of
Sri Rama even as gods would by Indra. (16)

भरतो लक्ष्मणश्चात्र शात्रुघ्नश्च महायशा:।
उपासांचक्रिरे हृष्टा वेदास्त्रय इवाध्वरम्॥१७॥

Like the three Vedas (Rgveda,
Yajurveda and Samaveda) waiting upon a
sacrificial performance, Bharata, Laksmana
as also Satrughna of great renown waited,
full of joy, on Sri Rama. (17)

याता: Weta seat किंकरा मुदितानना:।
मुदिता ATA पार्श्वस्था बहव: समुपाविशन्॥ १८॥

With joined palms and च cheerful
countenance many a servant known by the
class name of Muditas walked and sat
comfortably at his side. (18)

वानराश्च महावीर्या विंशति: कामरूपिण:।
सुग्रीवप्रमुखा राममुपासन्ते महौजस:॥१९॥
Nay, endowed with great prowess and
extraordinary strength the twenty monkeys*,
Sugriva being the foremost among them,
who were able to change their form at will,
sat at the side of Sri Rama. (19)
विभीषणश्च रक्षोभिश्चतुर्भि:; परिवारित:।
उपासते महात्मानं धनेशमिव गुह्यक:॥ २०॥
Like a Yaksa attending on Kubera (the
god of riches), Vibhisana, surrounded by
four ogres (his ministers), waited on the
high-souled Sri Rama. (20)
तथा निगमव्रद्धाश्च कुलीना ये च मानवा:।
शिरसा aa राजानमुपासन्ते विचक्षणा:॥ २१॥
Bowing with their heads bent low,
sagacious human beings too, who were

* Sugriva, Angada, Hanuman, Jambavan, Susena, Tara, Nila, Nala, Mainda, Dwivida, Kumuda,
Sarabha, Satabali, Gandhamadana, Gaja, Gavaksa, Gavaya, Dhumra, Rambha and Jyotimukha are the names
of the principal monkeys (and bears) present at Ayodhya at that time.
