520

तिष्ठ तिष्ठ मम त्वं हि कृत्वा विप्रियमीदृशम्।
क्व नु राक्षसशार्दूल गत्वा मोक्षमवाप्स्यसि॥ १२९॥

“Forbear, forbear, O tiger among ogres!
Going whither will you get deliverance after
giving me such offence? (129)

यदीन्द्रवैवस्वतभास्करान्
स्वयंभुवैश्चानरशंकरान्
गमिष्यसि त्वं दशधा दिशो a
तथापि मे Ara गतो विमोक्ष्यसे॥ १३० ॥

“If you fly for protection either to Indra
(the ruler of gods), Yama (son of the sun-
god) and the sun-god (himself) or to Brahma
(the self-born creator), the god of fire, or
Lord Siva (who brings prosperity to all) or in
the ten directions; nevertheless you shall
not escape from my hands today even if
gone there. (130)

ase reat | Preceraerel

वा
aT |

सपुत्रपौत्रस्य तवाद्य युद्धे।।१३१।।

“The same Laksmana who, on having
fallen a prey to insensibility when grievously
hurt by you with a javelin today, you having
arrived in my presence shall prove to be
death not only of yourself but also of your
sons and grandsons on the battlefield. (131)

एतेन चात्यद्भुतदर्शनानि

चतुर्दशान्यात्तवरायुधानि
रक्ष:सहस्राणि निषूदितानि॥ १३२॥

“By this adversary of yours, viz., myself,
were exterminated with his arrows fourteen
thousand ogres of exceedingly weird looks,
who had taken up their abode in Janasthana
and pressed excellent weapons into their
service.” (132)

राघवस्य वच: श्रुत्वा राक्षसेन्द्रो महाबल:।
वायुपुत्रं महावेगं वहन्तं राघवं रणे॥१३३॥

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA +

रोषेण महताऽऽविष्ट: पूर्ववैरमनुस्मरन्।
आजघान शारैर्दीप्तै: कालानलशिखोपमै:॥ १३४॥

Seized with violent anger on hearing the
speech of Sri Rama (a scion of Raghu), and
recollecting his former enmity, Ravana (the
ruler of ogres), who was endowed with
extraordinary might, struck with flaming
arrows, resembling the tongues of the
destructive fire at the time of Universal
Dissolution, Hanuman (son of the wind-god),
who was full of great impetuosity and bore
Sri Rama (a scion of Raghu) on the field of
battle, severely injuring him. (133-34)

राक्षसेनाहवे तस्य ताडितस्यापि ara:
स्वभावतेजोयुक्तस्य भूयस्तेजोऽभ्यवर्धत॥ १३५ Il

The vigour of Hanuman, who was
endowed with native energy, grew all the
more even when he was struck with arrows
by the ogre, Ravana, on the battlefield.

(135)

ततो WaT महातेजा रावणेन कृतव्रणम्।
दृष्टवा प्लवगशार्दूलं क्रोधस्य वशमेयिवान्॥ १३६ ॥

Sri Rama, who was endowed with
extraordinary energy, was seized with anger
on seeing Hanuman (a tiger among the
monkeys) wounded by Ravana. (136)

साश्वध्वजच्छत्रमहापताकम् |

थिं नि :

wa: प्रचिच्छेद ford: शराग्रै:॥ १३७॥

Finding Ravana, advancing towards his
chariots, Sri Rama tore it into pieces with its
wheels, horses, standard, canopy, huge
pennon, charioteer, ASanis (a kind of missile),
pikes and swords with the sharp heads of
his arrows. (137)
अथेन्द्रशत्रुं तरसा जघान

art वज्राशनिसंनिभेन।
भुजान्तरे

व्यूढसुजातरूपे
वज्रेण मेरुं भगवानिबेन्द्र:॥ १३८॥
