* AYODHYAKANDA +

Sri Rama and all others, by whom father
was cremated with their own hands! (29)

न नूनं At महाराज: प्राप्तं जानाति कीर्तिमान्।
उपजिघ्रेत् तु At मूर्धि तात: संनाम्य सत्वरम्॥ ३०॥
“Surely the illustrious Emperor does
not know me to have come home.
Otherwise, pressing me down, father would
have quickly smelt my head as a token of
affection. (30)

क्व स पाणि: सुखस्पर्शस्तातस्याक्लिष्टकर्मण: ।
यो हि मां रजसा ध्वस्तमभीक्ष्णं परिमार्जति॥ ३१॥

“Where is that hand, agreeable to the
touch, of my father—who did great things
without much exertion—that would wipe me
again and again when he found me soiled
with dust. (31)

यो मे भ्राता पिता बन्धुर्यस्य दासोऽस्मि सम्मत: |
dea मां शीघ्रमाख्याहि रामस्याक्लिष्टकर्मण: ॥ ३२॥

“Pray, announce me soon to Sri Rama,
who is unwearied in action, nay, who is my
elder brother, father in the absence of the
Emperor and friend, all in one, and whose
beloved servant | am. (32)

पिता fe भवति ज्येष्ठो धर्ममार्यस्य जानत:।
तस्य पादौ ग्रहीष्यामि a हीदानीं गतिर्मम॥ ३३॥

“To a worthy man knowing what is
right, an elder brother is a virtual father. |
shall, clasp his feet as a mark of respect
since he is my support now. (33)

धर्मविद् धर्मशीलश्च महाभागो दृढव्रत:।
आर्ये किमब्रवीद् राजा frat मे सत्यविक्रम: ।। ३४॥

“What did the king, my father, of firm
resolve and unfailing prowess—who knew
what is right, had a virtuous disposition and
was highly fortunate—say to my elder brother
at the last moment? (34)

पश्चिमं साधुसंदेशमिच्छामि श्रोतुमात्मन:।
इति पृष्टा यथातत्त्वं कैकेयी वाक्यमब्रवीत्॥ ३५ ॥

“| wish to hear his last kind message
for me.” Questioned thus, Kaikeyi replied as

559

follows, strictly in consonance with facts :

(35)

रामेति राजा विलपन् हा सीते लक्ष्मणेति च।
स महात्मा परं लोकं गतो मतिमतां वर:॥ ३६॥
“That high-souled monarch, the

foremost among the wise, departed for the
other world crying ‘O Rama, O Sita, O
Laksmana !’ (36)

इतीमां पश्चिमां वाचं व्याजहार पिता aa
कालधर्मं परिक्षिप्त: पाशैरिव महागज:॥ ३७॥
“Bound by the laws of Time (according
to which a living being meets his end at the
appointed time), like a huge elephant bound
with ropes, your father uttered the following
parting words : (37)

सिद्धार्थास्तु नरा राममागतं we सीतया।
लक्ष्मणं च महाबाहुं द्रक्ष्यन्ति पुनरागतम्॥ ३८॥
‘Only those men who are able to
behold Rama returned with Sita, as also the
mighty-armed Laksmana come back to
Ayodhya, will have their object accomplished.’
(38)

तच्छुत्वा विषसादैव द्वितीयाप्रियशंसनात्।
विषण्णवदनो भूत्वा भूय: पप्रच्छ मातरम्॥३९॥
Hearing the aforesaid report, the prince
grew melancholy at that other unpleasant
tidings and, assuming a dejected look, further
questioned his mother as follows : (39)

wa चेदानीं स धर्मात्मा कौसल्यानन्दवर्धन:।
लक्ष्मणेन सह Wat सीतया च समागत:॥४०॥

“Where is Sri Rama, whose mind is
given to virtue and who enhances the joy
of Kausalya, now, conjoined with brother
Laksmana and Sita?” (40)

तथा UST यथान्यायमाख्यातुमुपचक्रमे।
मातास्य युगपद्वाक्यं विप्रियं प्रियशंसया॥४१॥
Questioned as aforesaid, his mother
began duly to relate as follows the unpleasant
event, simultaneously with the news of his
father’s demise in the tone of breaking a
welcome news : (41)
