558

विललाप महातेजा भ्रान्ताकुलितचेतन:॥१८॥

Overwhelmed with grief and distressed
over the death of his father, Bharata, who
was endowed with great glory, then lamented
in the following words, his mind being
confused and agitated through grief: (18)

wad सुरुचिरं भाति frat शयनं पुरा।
शशिनेवामलं wat गगनं तोयदात्यये॥१९॥

“This couch of my father looked most
charming before like a clear sky adorned
with the moon on an autumnal night. (19)

तदिदं न faster विहीनं तेन धीमता।
व्योमेव शशिना हीनमप्शुष्क FA सागर:॥ oll

“Devoid of that sagacious_ king,
however, the same couch does not shine
brightly today any more than a moonless
sky or a sea whose water has been
dried up by the fire of universal dissolution.”

(20)
बाष्पमुत्सृज्य कण्ठेन स्वात्मना परिपीडित:।
प्रच्छाद्य वदनं श्रीमद् वस्त्रेण जयतां वर:॥ २१॥

Shedding tears with a sound expressive
of anguish from his throat, and covering his
charming face with a cloth, Bharata, the
foremost of victorious men, who felt greatly
troubled in his own mind, continued to wail.

(21)
निकृत्तमिव सालस्य स्कन्धं परशुना वने॥२२॥
माता ai । i सुतम्।
उत्थापयित्वा watt वचनं चेदमब्रवीत्॥ २३॥

Perceiving her aforesaid son, shining
brightly like a god—who closely resembled
the young of an elephant and vied with the
moon and the sun in splendour and felt
stricken with grief, fallen in a wretched plight
on the ground like a bough of a sal severed
with an axe in a forest—and lifting him, the
mother Kaikeyi spoke to him as follows :

(22-23)

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

उत्तिष्ठोत्तिष्ठं किं शेषे राजन्नत्र महायश:।
त्वद्विधा नहि शोचन्ति सन्त: सदसि सम्मता:॥ २४॥

“Get up, 0 king! Rise, O highly
illustrious one! Wherefore are you lying
down here on the ground? Virtuous souls
like you, honoured in an assembly of men,
do not grieve. (24)

दानयज्ञाधिकारा fe शीलश्रुतितपोनुगा।
aed बुद्धिसम्पन्न प्रभेवार्कस्य मन्दिरे॥ २५॥

“Your mind, O prince richly endowed
with intelligence—which is ever devoted
to charity and sacrificial performances
and which pursues right conduct—follows
the injunctions of the Vedas, and is prone
to austerities—is steady as the radiance
of the sun is fixed in the orb of the sun.”

(25)
a रुदित्वा fat कालं भूमौ परिविव्रृत्य च।
जननीं प्रत्युवाचेदं शोकैर्बहुभिरावृत:॥ २६॥

Weeping for a long time and rolling on
the floor, Bharata, who was filled with many-
sided grief, replied to his mother as follows :

(26)
अभिषेक्ष्यति wa तु राजा यज्ञं नु यक्ष्यते।
Bae कृतसंकल्पो हृष्टो यात्रामयासिषम्॥ २७॥

“Having arrived at the conclusion that
the king will most probably install Sr’ Rama
as Prince Regent or perform a sacrifice, |
gladly undertook the journey to Ayodhya.

(27)
तदिदं ह्यन्यथाभूतं व्यवदीर्णं wT मम।
frat यो न पश्यामि नित्यं प्रियहिते रतम्॥ २८॥

“Indeed that calculation of mine has
come to be incorrect, and my mind is torn
with anguish in that | do not behold my
father, who was ever intent on doing kind
acts to me and devoted to my good. (28)

अम्ब केनात्यगाद् राजा व्याधिना मय्यनागते।

धन्या रामादय: सर्वे यै: पिता संस्कृत: स्वयम्॥ २९॥
“Of what disease did the king die before

| arrived, O mother? How fortunate are
