118

Vidyadhara women, the wombs of female
Kinnaras* and she-monkeys procreate sons
in the form of monkeys, equal in strength to
you, well-versed in conjuring tricks, gallant,
swift as the wind in speed, expert in policy,
gifted with intelligence, equal in prowess
to Lord Visnu, incapable of being killed
by the enemy, conversant with various
contrivances, endowed with an ethereal
body, skilled in the use and withdrawal etc.,
of missiles and resembling the gods that
feed on ambrosia. (83—6)

पूर्वमेव मया सृष्टो जाम्बवानृक्षपुंगव:।
TUT सहसा FA वरक्त्रादजायत॥ ७॥
“Jambavan, the chief of bears, has
already been begotten by me. He issued
forth from my mouth all of a sudden (even)
as | was yawning.” (7)
ते तथोक्ता भगवता तत् प्रतिश्रुत्य शासनम्।
ward dt पुत्रान् वानररूपिण:॥८॥
Enjoined thus by Brahma and accepting
his aforesaid command, the above-mentioned
gods as instructed begot sons in the form
of monkeys. (8)

may महात्मान: सिद्धविद्याधरोरगा:।

चारणाश्च सुतान् वीरान् ससृजुर्वनचारिण:॥९॥
Nay, high-souled Rsis, Siddhas,

Vidyadharas (artists of heaven) and Nagas

and Caranas (celestial bards) begot heroic
sons belonging to the monkey class. (9)

वानरेन्द्रं महेन्द्राभमिन्द्रो वालिनमात्मजम्।
aie जनयामास तपनस्तपतां वर:॥१०॥
Indra, the ruler of gods, begot as his
son Vali, the ruler of monkeys, who vied
with the great Indra himself. The sun-god,
the foremost of those radiating heat, begot
Sugriva, the younger brother of Vali. (10)

बृहस्पतिस्त्वजनयत् तारं नाम महाकपिम्।
सर्ववानरमुख्यानां बुद्धिमन्तमनुत्तमम्॥ ११॥

« VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

The sage Brhaspati, the preceptor
of gods, begot the mighty monkey, Tara,
unsurpassed in intelligence among all the
monkey chiefs. (11)

धनदस्य Ua: श्रीमान् वानरो गन्धमादन:।
विश्वकर्मा त्वजनयन्नलं AA महाकपिम्॥१२॥
The glorious monkey Gandhamadana
was an Offspring of Kubera (the bestower of
riches); while Viswakarma, the architect of
gods, begot the mighty monkey named
Nala. (12)

पावकस्य सुत: श्रीमान् नीलोऽग्निसदृशप्रभ:।
तेजसा यशसा वीर्यादत्यरिच्यत वीर्यवान्॥१३॥

The glorious and valiant Nila, a son
of the fire-god, who vied in splendour with
fire, outdid all in point of glory, renown and
prowess. (13)

रूपद्रविणसम्पन्नावश्चिनौ waar |

मैन्दं च fgfad Wa जनयामासतु: स्वयम्॥ १४॥
And the twin-gods, ASwinikumaras, who

are esteemed for their comeliness and rich

in the wealth of beauty, themselves begot

Mainda as well as Dwivida. (14)

वरुणो जनयामास सुषेणं नाम वानरम्।
wee जनयामास पर्जन्यस्तु महाबल:॥१५॥
Varuna, the god of water, begot the
monkey named Susena; while the mighty
Parjanya, the god of rain, begot Sarabha.(15)
मारुतस्यौरस: श्रीमान् हनूमान् ATA वानर:।
वज्रसंहननोपेतो वैनतेयसमो जवे॥ १६॥
The glorious monkey named Hanuman
is the own son of the wind-god. He is
endowed with a body invulnerable as the
thunderbolt and vies with Garuda (son of

Vinata and the carrier of Lord Visnu) in
speed. (16)

सर्ववानरमुख्येषु बुद्धिमान् बलवानपि।
at सृष्टा बहुसाहस्रा दशग्रीववधोद्यता:॥ १७॥

* A class of demigods with a human figure and the head of a horse or with a horse’s body and the

head of a human being.
