# YUDDHAKANDA +

“Springing up, he casually took
Vibhisana captive; while Laksmana with the
monkey troops was made to flee in all
directions. (25)

सुग्रीवो ग्रीवया सीते भग्नया प्लवगाधिप:।
निरस्तहनुक: सीते हनूमान् राक्षसैर्हत:॥ २६॥

“Sugriva, the suzerain lord of monkeys,
lies prostrate with his neck broken; while
Hanuman, with his lower jaw dashed off,
has been killed by the ogres, O Sita!

(26)

जाम्बवानथ जानुभ्यामुत्पतन् निहतो युधि।
पट्टिशैर्हुभिङ्छिन्नो निकृत्त: पादपो यथा॥ oi

“While springing up, Jambavan was
forthwith struck violently at the knees in a
melee and, cut with many scimitars, was
felled like a tree. (27)

मैन्दश्च द्विविदश्चोभौ तौ वानरवरर्षभौ।
नि:श्वसन्तौ रुदन्तौ च रुधिरेण परिप्लुतौ॥ २८॥
असिना व्यायतौ छिन्नौ मध्ये ह्यरिनिषूदनौ।
अनुश्वसिति मेदिन्यां पनस: पनसो यथा॥२९॥

“Nay, the gigantic Mainda and Dwivida,
the foremost among the best of monkeys
and the well-known slayers of their foes,
who were breathing hard and groaning,
bathed as they were in blood, have both
been actually cut into two with a sword at
the waist. Burst open like a ripe jack fruit,
Panasa lies on the ground gasping for
breath (28-29)

नाराचैर्बहुभिश्छिनन: शेते cat दरीमुख:।
कुमुदस्तु महातेजा निष्कूजन् सायकैर्हत:॥ ३०॥
“Pierced with numerous steel arrows,
Darimukha is lying in a ravine; while Kumuda,
who was endowed with extraordinary energy,
lies shrieking, struck down with arrows.
(30)

अङ्गदो बहुभिश्छिन्न: शरैरासाद्य ware: |
परितो रुधिरोद्गारी fart निपतितोऽङ्गद:॥ ३१॥

403

“Pierced by the ogres with many arrows
after marching towards him, Angada, who
was adorned with armlets, lies fallen down
on the ground, vomiting blood on all sides.

(31)

ह्रयो मथिता नागै रथजालैस्तथापरे।
शयाना मृदितास्तत्र वायुवेगैरिवाम्बुदा:॥ ३२॥

“Lying asleep there, other monkeys
were crushed by elephants and multitudes
of chariots even as clouds are rent asunder
by force of wind. (32)
प्रसृताश्च परे त्रस्ता हन्यमाना जघन्यत:।
अनुद्रुतास्तु रक्षोभि: सिंहैरिव महाद्विपा:॥ ३३॥

“Nay, pursued by ogres as huge
elephants are by lions, still other monkeys

fled panic-stricken while being struck in the
back. (33)
सागरे पतिता: केचित् केचिद् गगनमाश्रिता:।
RM व्रक्षानुपारूढा वानरीं व्त्तिमाश्रिता:॥ ३४॥
“Some took a plunge into the sea,
while others sought refuge in the air, nay,
resorting to the ways of monkeys, the
bears climbed up trees (in order to escape

destruction at the hands of the ogres).
(34)

सागरस्य च तीरेषु wey च वनेषु च।
पिङ्गलास्ते विरूपाक्षै राक्षसैर्बहवो हता:॥ ३५॥

“Nay, many more well-known monkeys
have been killed by the ogres with fierce
eyes on the shores of the sea, as well as in
the midst of rocks as also in the woods.

(35)
एवं तव हतो wat ससैन्यो मम सेनया।
क्षतजार्द्र रजोध्वस्तमिदं चास्याहृतं शिर:॥ ३६॥

“In this way has your husband been
destroyed with his forces by my army.
Soaked in blood and smeared with dust, his
head too has been brought here to convince
you of his death.” (36)
