# YUDDHAKANDA +

Narmada, is the suzerain lord of all bears
and a commander of troops, Dhumra by
name. (8-9)

यवीयानस्य तु भ्राता पश्यैनं पर्वतोपमम्।
भ्रात्रा समानो रूपेण विशिष्टस्तु पराक्रमे॥१०॥

“Again, there is a younger brother of
Dhumra, who, though like him in appearance,
is decidedly superior in prowess. Look at
him, resembling, as he does, a mountain.

(10)

स एष जाम्बवान् नाम महायूथपयूथप:।
प्रशान्तो गुरुवर्ती च सम्प्रहारेष्वमर्षण:॥११॥

“This warrior is Jambavan by name,
a commander even of mighty generals. He
is exceedingly placid, devoted to his elders
and indignant in war. (11)

एतेन साह्यं तु महत् Hd शक्रस्य धीमता।
दैवासुरे जाम्बवता लब्धाश्च बहवो वरा:॥१२॥
“In the conflict between gods and
demons, great assistance was actually
rendered to Indra and numerous boons
won by the intelligent Jambavan. (12)

आरुह्य पर्वताग्रेभ्यो महाभ्रविपुला: शिला:।
मुञ्चन्ति विपुलाकारा न मृत्योरुद्विजन्ति च॥१३॥
राक्षसानां च Gee: पिशाचानां च रोमशा:।
एतस्य सैन्या बहवो विचरन्त्यमितौजस:॥ १४॥

“Scaling mountain-heights, his troops—
who are like ogres and fiends in ferocity,
are shaggy and endowed with immense
energy, and roam about in large numbers—
hurl from them massive rocks, as big as
huge clouds, and do not tremble in the face
of death. (13-14)

य एनमभिसंरब्धं प्लवमानमवस्थितम्।
प्रेक्षन्ते वानरा: सर्वे स्थिता यूथपयूथपम्॥१५॥
Wa राजन् सहस्राक्षं wud हरीश्वर:।
बलेन बलसंयुक्तो दम्भो नामैष यूथप:॥१६॥

“This lord of monkeys—who is a
commander of commanders, and at whom,

387

whether he is leaping in fury or standing
still, all the monkeys stand gazing, O king—
is a commander of troops, Rambha by
name, who, accompanied, as he is, by an
army, ministers to Indra (the thousand-eyed
god) with his army. (15-16)

य: स्थितं योजने viet गच्छन् Ut सेवते।
ऊर्ध्व तथैव कायेन गत: प्राप्नोति योजनम्॥ १७॥

यस्मात् तु परमं रूपं चतुष्पात्सु न विद्यते।
a: संनादनो नाम वानराणां frame: eeu
“He who, while moving about, touches
with his flanks a mountain situated at a
distance of one Yojana (or eight miles) and,
reaching likewise an object one Yojana high,
grasps it with his body itself, nay, a form
bigger than whom does not exist among the
quadrupeds, is reported to be the grandfather
of the monkeys, Sarnnadana by name.
(17-18)

येन GK तदा ad Wr शक्रस्य धीमता।
पराजयश्च न We: सोऽयं यूथपयूथप:॥१९॥
“Battle was once given by that intelligent
monkey to Indra on a field of battle, but no
defeat was sustained by him on that
occasion. Such is that commander of
commanders. (19)

यस्य विक्रममाणस्य शक्रस्येव पराक्रम:।
एष गन्धर्वकन्यायामुत्पन्न कृष्णवर्त्मना॥२०॥
तदा देवासुरे युद्धे साह्यार्थं त्रिदिवौकसाम्।
at asa राजा जम्बूमुपनिषेवते॥ २१॥
यो राजा पर्वतेन्द्राणां बहुकिंनरसेविनाम्।
विहारसुखदो fret urged राक्षसाधिप॥ २२॥
तत्रैष रमते श्रीमान् बलवान् वानरोत्तम:।
युद्धेष्वकत्थनो नित्यं क्रथनो नाम यूथप:॥ २३॥

“This = monkey—whose _ prowess,
even as he marches for a combat, equals
that of Indra (ruler of gods)—was begotten
by the god of fire through a Gandharva
maiden for the purpose of helping the gods
(lit., the denizens of heaven) in the conflict
between the gods and the demons. This
