# YUDDHAKANDA +

405

Canto XXXIl

Sita bursts into a wail at the sight of Sri Rama’s head and bow, when
Ravana is abruptly called away by an emissary and after
consultation with his ministers prepares his forces
for action against the army of Sri Rama

सा सीता तच्छिरो दृष्टवा तच्च कार्मुकमुत्तमम्।
सुग्रीवप्रतिसंसर्गमाख्यातं च हनूमता॥१॥
नयने मुखवर्णं च भर्तुस्तत्सदृशं मुखम्।
केशान् केशान्तदेशं च तं च चूडामणिं शुभम्॥ २॥
wd: सर्वैरभिज्ञानैरभिज्ञाय सुदु:खिता।
विजगर्हेऽत्र कैकेयीं क्रोशन्ती कुररी यथा॥३॥

Beholding that head as well as that
excellent bow, nay, recalling the alliance of
Sri Rama with Sugriva, which accounted for
the destruction of monkeys by the ogres,
spoken of by Hanuman, the eyes, the hue
of the countenance, the said countenance
resembling that of her husband, the locks
as well as the brow as also the well-known
splendid jewel on the top, nay, identifying
the head of her husband by means of these
distinguishing marks, the aforesaid Sita felt
sore distressed and, crying like a female
osprey, began to reproach Kaikeyi for this
as follows: (1—8)
सकामा भव कैकेयि हतोऽयं कुलनन्दन:।
कुलमुत्सादितं सर्वं त्वया कलहशीलया॥४॥

“Be now Satisfied, now that your desire
has been fulfilled, O Kaikeyi, in that this
delight of his House has been killed. The

entire race has been uprooted by you, given
as you were to quarrelling. (4)

आर्येण किं नु कैकेय्या: कृतं रामेण विप्रियम्।

यन्मया चीरवसनं दत्त्वा प्रव्राजितो वनम्॥७५॥
“What offence, | wonder, was given by

the noble Sri Rama to Kaikeyi, for which he

was exiled into the forest with me, after
presenting him with a robe of bark!” (5)

way तु वैदेही वेपमाना तपस्विनी।
जगाम जगतीं बाला छिन्ना तु कदली यथा॥६॥

Trembling all over while saying so, the
youthful lady, the poor Sita, a princess of
the Videha territory, for her part fell prostrate
to the ground like a plantain tree cut to the
root. (6)

सा मुहूर्तात् समाश्वस्य परिलभ्याथ चेतनाम्।
are: समुपास्थाय विललापायतेक्षणा॥७॥

Regaining consciousness after a while
and taking heart, nay, sitting very near the
head, that large-eyed lady began to lament
as follows: “Alas! | am undone, O mighty-
armed prince, faithful to your heroic vow
of carrying out the command of your father
till the last moment of your life! | have
witnessed your final state, widowed as |
am. (8)
a हतास्मि महाबाहो वीरव्रतमनुव्रत।
इमां a पश्चिमावस्थां गतास्मि विधवा कृता॥८॥

“The death of a husband before that of
his wife is declared to be a catastrophe. A
man of noble conduct, you have died before
me, a woman of virtuous conduct! (9)
wat मरणं नार्या भर्तुर्वैगुण्यमुच्यते।
Gat: साधुवृत्ताया: संव्रत्तस्त्वं ममाग्रत:॥९॥

“Even you, who were actually intent on
delivering me, fallen in great adversity and
swallowed up in an ocean of grief, have
been struck down by the enemies! (10)
महद् दु:खं प्रपन्नाया मग्नाया: शोकसागरे।

यो fe मामुद्यतस्त्रातुं सोऽपि त्वं विनिपातित: it १०॥
