218

above these, | shall give you one crore of
young cows distinguished by their different
colours. Only let Sabala be given (in exchange
for these). (16—20)

यावदिच्छसि रत्नानि हिरण्यं वा द्विजोत्तम।
तावद् ददामि ते aa दीयतां शबला मम॥ २१॥
“Nay, | shall give you without reservation
as many jewels and as much gold as you
want, O jewel among the twice-born! Let
Sabala be given to me.” (21)
एवमुक्तस्तु भगवान् विश्वामित्रेण धीमता।
न दास्यामीति शबलां Wes राजन् कथंचन॥ २२॥
Even though solicited thus by the
talented ViSwamitra, the almighty Vasistha
made the same answer: “I shall on no
account part with Sabala, O king! (22)

एतदेव fe मे रत्नमेतदेव fe A धनम्।
Wied fe सर्वस्वमेतदेव हि जीवितम्॥ २३॥

“She is indeed the only jewel in my

« VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

possession; nay, she is my only wealth.
She alone is really my everything; she alone
is my very life. (23)

दर्शश्च पौर्णमासश्च यज्ञाश्चैवाप्तदक्षिणा:।
एतदेव fe मे राजन् विविधाश्च क्रियास्तथा॥ २४॥

“She alone is my half-monthly sacrifice
performed on the new moon as well as its
counterpart, viz., that performed on the full
moon, nay, all sacrificial performances
concluded with abundant gifts and even so,
ritual acts of various kinds, O king! (24)

अतोमूला: क्रिया: Wat मम राजन् न संशय: |
aot किं प्रलापेन न दास्ये कामदोहिनीम्॥ २५ ॥

“All my religious rites, no doubt, are
rooted in her, O king ! What is to be gained
by prattling a good deal? The long and
short of it is that, | shall not part with
Sabala (who yields all my desired objects).”

(25)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये बालकाण्डे त्रिपञ्चाश: सर्ग: ॥ 43 Il

Thus ends Canto Fifty-three in the Balakanda of the glorious Ramayana of Valmiki,
the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

Canto LIV

On Viswamitra attempting to take her away by force, Sabala seeks to know
Vasistha’s mind, and at his instance produces a multitude of warriors
that disperse ViSwamitra’s army

कामधेनुं वसिष्ठोऽपि यदा न त्यजते मुनि:।
तदास्य शबलां wa विश्वामित्रोऽन्वकर्षत॥ १॥
When Sage Vasistha did not consent
to part with his wish-yielding cow, O Rama,
ViSwamitra too thereupon proceeded to take
Sabala away by force to his capital. (1)

नीयमाना तु शबला राम राज्ञा महात्मना।
दु:खिता चिन्तयामास रुदन्ती शोककर्शिता॥२॥
परित्यक्ता वसिष्ठेन fae सुमहात्मना।
ae राजभृतैर्दीना ह्रियेय भृशदु:खिता॥ ३॥

Being taken away by force by the
mighty king, Sabala for her part felt afflicted
and, distracted with grief, fell a-weeping.
She reflected, “Have | been deserted by the
exceptionally high-souled Vasistha, in that |
am being taken away in this wretched
condition by the king’s retainers, sore
distressed as | am? (2-3)

fe मयापकृतं तस्य महर्षेर्भावितात्मन:।
यन्मामनागसं दृष्टवा भक्तां त्यजति धार्मिक:॥ ४॥
