936

as Naga trees, all in blossom. Behold here,
O Laksmana (son of Sumitra), the numerous
lovely trees in blossom entwined by climbers
crested with blossom on the edge of the
Pampa. Like pretty women drunk with love,
the climbers embrace these trees, whose
branches are tossed by the wind and which
are bent so low as to appear quite at hand.
Passing from tree to tree, from crag to crag
and from wood to wood, the wind blows
gently as though enraptured by enjoying
diverse tastes from diverse flowers. Some
trees are in full blossom and emit the
fragrance of honey; while others are covered
all over with buds and appear dark-brown of
hue because of these buds. ‘How sweet is
this ! How delicious is that ! How full-blown
is that (the other)!’ Reflecting thus, the
black bee steeped in love for the flowers
remains buried in flowers alone. Remaining
hidden (in flowers for some time) and then
flying off, the black bee, covetous of honey,
suddenly moves to other trees on the margin
of the Pampa. (80—88)
इयं कुसुमसंघातैरुपस्तीर्णां सुखाकृता।
स्वयं निपतितैर्भूमि३ शयनप्रस्तरैरिव॥८९॥
“Strewn with heaps of flowers, fallen
off themselves, this plot looks as if made
smug by bedsheets. (89)

विविधा fafa: पुष्पैस्तैरेव नगसानुषु।
विस्तीर्णा: पीतरक्ताभा: सौमित्रे WERT: कृता: ॥ ९० ॥

“Extensive beds of a mixed yellow and
red colour and of various sizes and designs
have been made, as it were, with those
flowers of different kinds on tops of the
mountain, O Laksmana (son of Sumitra).

(90)

हिमान्ते पश्य सौमित्रे वृक्षाणां पुष्पसम्भवम्।
पुष्पमासे fe ma: संघर्षादिव पुष्पिता:॥९१॥
“Behold the wealth of flowers on the
trees at the close of winter, O Laksmana
(son of Sumitra)! Indeed in the month of
Caitra (a month of flowers) the trees stand

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

clothed with blossom as if in a spirit of
rivalry. (91)

आह्वयन्त इवान्योन्यं नगा: षट्पदनादिता:।
कुसुमोत्तंसविटपा: शोभन्ते A लक्ष्मण॥९२॥

“Rendered noisy by the humming of
bees and as such challenging one another
as it were, and their boughs crowned with
flowers, the trees, O Laksmana, look very
charming. (92)

एष कारण्डव: पक्षी विगाह्य सलिलं शुभम्।
Ta कान्तया सार्धं काममुद्दीपयन्निव॥९३॥

“Diving into the limpid water this bird of
the Karandava species (a kind of water-fowl)
is sporting with its beloved mate, thereby
inspiring love as it were (in me, who have
been torn away from my beloved). (93)
मन्दाकिन्यास्तु यदिदं रूपमेतन्मनोरमम्।
स्थाने जगति विख्याता गुणास्तस्या मनोरमा: ॥ ९४॥

“Since this beauty of Pampa, which
looks like the Mandakini, is so soul-ravishing,
it is but proper that its soul-enchanting
excellences are famed throughout the world.

(94)
यदि दृश्येत सा साध्वी afe चेह वसेमहि।
Wert न शक्राय नायोध्यायै रघूत्तम॥ ९५ ॥

“If that pious lady comes to view and if
we live in this forest, | shall not look with
envy on Indra, the ruler of gods, nor long to
be at Ayodhya, O jewel among the Raghus !

(95)
न Oa रमणीयेषु mete तया सह।
रमतो A भवेच्चिन्ता न स्पृहान्येषु वा भवेत्॥ ९६॥

“If | sport with her on such lovely
lawns, no worry will ever seize me, nor any
craving for other pleasures. (96)

amit fe विविधै: पुष्पैस्तरवो विविधच्छदा:।
काननेऽस्मिन्विना कान्तां चिन्तामुत्पादयन्ति मे॥ ९७॥

“Clothed with leaves of various kinds
and laden with flowers of every description,
the yonder trees in this forest cause worry
to Me, bereft as | am of Sita. (97)
