134

directions, viz., the four quarters, the four
corners intervening the quarters, the upper
and the lower directions, the two high-
souled princes, who were devoted to the
sage and were resplendent with glory and
were irreproachable in everyway, and looked
like a pair of three-headed serpents (the
two quivers appearing like two additional
heads), followed the noble-minded
Viswamitra even as_ the _ twin-gods
ASswinikumaras, the physicians of gods,
would accompany Brahma (the progenitor
of the entire creation)—adding lustre to the
sage. (7-8)
तदा कुशिकपुत्रं तु धनुष्पाणी स्वलंकृतौ।

बद्धगो Geax महाद्युती॥ ९ ॥
कुमारौ चास्त्यघुषौ भ्रातरौ रामलक्ष्मणौ।

अनुयातौ श्रिया दीप्तौ शोभयेतामनिन्दितौ॥ १०॥
स्थाणुं देवमिवाचिन्त्यं कुमाराविव पावको।

अध्यर्धयोजनं गत्वा सरय्वा दक्षिणे तटे॥११॥
रामेति मधुरां वाणीं विश्चामित्रोऽभ्यभाषत।

गृहाण वत्स सलिलं मा Ue कालस्य पर्यय: ।॥। १२॥

Following at his heels the two juvenile
and irreproachable brothers, Rama and
Laksmana—who carried a bow in their hand,
were duly adorned with jewels, nay, who
had gloves of iguana skin fastened about
their fingers and were further armed with a
sword, who were possessed of great
splendour and charming limbs and were
radiant with glory—added to the lustre of
Viswamitra (a scion of Kusika) as the two
boys Skanda and Visakha (born of the fire-
god) would adorn the immortal Lord Siva,
who is beyond all conception. Having walked
to a distance of about twelve miles along
the southern bank of Sarayu, the sage
ViSwamitra addressed the following sweet
words : “Rama, sip a little water; let there be
no loss of time. (9—12)
Tam गृहाण त्वं बलामतिबलां तथा।

न श्रमो न ज्वरो वा ते न रूपस्य विपर्यय:॥ १३॥

“Receive you from me with Laksmana

« VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

instruction in the chain of Mantras known
by the name of Bala and the other known
as Atibala. By recourse to them you will
have no fatigue, nor fever, nor will your
loveliness be ever marred by old age etc.
(13)

न च सुप्तं प्रमत्तं वा धर्षयिष्यन्ति Akar: |
न बाह्वो: सदृशो वीर्ये पृथिव्यामस्ति कश्चन॥ १४॥
“Nor will the ogres (born of Nirrti, the
goddess of death and variously regarded
as the wife of Adharma or as a daughter of
Adharma and Himsa) overpower you even
when you are asleep or careless (having
omitted, for instance, to rinse your mouth,
say, after evacuating your bladder); none
on earth will equal you in the prowess of
arms. (14)

त्रिषु लोकेषु वा राम न Vad सदृशस्तव।
बलामतिबलां चैव पठतस्तात राघव॥ eal

“Nay, so long as you continue to mutter
the spells known by the names of Bala and
Atibala, none will prove to be a match for
you in all the three worlds, O Rama! (15)

न सौभाग्ये न दाक्षिण्ये न ज्ञाने बुद्धिनिश्चये।
नोत्तरे प्रतिवक्तव्ये समो लोके तवानघ॥ Ei

“None in the world will be your equal,
O sinless one, either in good fortune or in
prowess or in wisdom or in the judgment of
your intellect or, again, in counter-arguments.
(16)

एतद्विद्याद्वये लब्धे न Wad सदरृशस्तव।
बला चातिबला चैव सर्वज्ञानस्य art eeu

“When the two aforementioned spells
have been received (learnt) by you, none
will compare with you in any virtue
whatsoever; for Bala and Atibala are the
sources of all wisdom (inasmuch as they
dispel hunger and thirst etc., which dull
one’s intellect and thereby make one forget
whatever he has learnt). (17)

क्षुत्पिपासे न a राम भविष्येते नरोत्तम।
बलामतिबलां चैव पठतस्तात राघव॥१८॥
