* BALAKANDA +

ततो वसिष्ठो भगवान् कथान्ते रघुनन्दन।
विश्वामित्रमिदं वाक्यमुवाच प्रहसन्निव॥१२॥

“Then, at the end of the dialogue, O
scion of Raghu, the almighty Vasistha spoke
to Viswamitra as follows, as though heartily
laughing for joy : (12)

आतिथ्यं कर्तुमिच्छामि बलस्यास्य महाबल।
qa चैवाप्रमेयस्य यथार्हं सम्प्रतीच्छ मे॥१३॥

“| wish to offer hospitality to this
distinguished army of yours as well as to
your own unfathomable self, according to
your dignity, O very mighty king! Please
accept it from me. (13)
सत्क्रियां हि भवानेतां प्रतीच्छतु मया कृताम्।
राजंस्त्वमतिथिश्रेष्ठ:उ पूजनीय: प्रयत्नत:॥१४॥

“Receive you this honour done by me,
O king, since you are the worthiest of my

guests and as such deserve to be zealously
honoured by me.” (14)

एवमुक्तो वसिष्ठेन विश्वामित्रो महामति:।
कृतमित्यब्रवीद् राजा पूजावाक्येन मे त्वया॥ १५॥

Requested thus by Vasistha, the great-
minded King ViSwamitra, replied as follows :
“Honour has been done to me by your very
words of hospitality. (15)

फलमूलेन भगवन् विद्यते यत् तवाश्रमे।
पाद्येनाचमनीयेन भगवद्दर्शनेन च ॥१६॥

सर्वथा च महाप्राज्ञ पूजार्हेण सुपूजित:।
नमस्तेऽस्तु गमिष्यामि मैत्रेणेक्षस्व चक्षुषा॥ १७॥

“Duly entertained in everyway by you,
who deserve to be honoured by me, O
venerable Sir, through fruits and roots that
are available in your hermitage and water
offered to us for washing our feet and rinsing
our mouth with, nay, by your very sight, O
highly enlightened soul, | shall now depart.
Let my salutation be acceptable to you.
Pray, ever regard me with a friendly eye.”

(16-17)

215

न्यमन्त्रयत धर्मात्मा पुन: पुनरुदारधी:॥१८॥
The pious and liberal-minded Vasistha
actually invited the king once more, even
though the latter went on saying like that
again and again. (18)
बाढमित्येव meat वसिष्ठं प्रत्युवाच ह।
यथा fet भगवतस्तथास्तु मुनिपुंगव॥१९॥
Thereupon ViSwamitra, son of Gadhi,
they say, replied to Vasistha as follows:

“All right, let it be as it pleases your venerable
self, O jewel among sages !” (19)
Wag स्तथा तेन वसिष्ठो Wadi वर: |
आजुहाव Aa: प्रीत: कल्माषीं धूतकल्मषाम्॥ २०॥
Full of delight, when addressed thus
by Viswamitra, the exceptionally glorious
Vasistha, the foremost of ascetics, then
called in the following words his cow, Sabala
by name (so called because of her spotted
colour), that had been washed clean of
mud : (20)

एह्येहि शबले fart soy चापि वचो मम।
सबलस्यास्य राजर्षे: कर्तुं व्यवसितोऽस्म्यहम्।
भोजनेन महार्हेण सत्कारं संविधत्स्व मे॥ २१॥

“Come along, pray come soon, O
Sabala, and hear also what | say. | am
determined to entertain with a sumptuous
repast this Rajarsi ViSwamitra, alongwith
his army. Please get everything ready for
me. (21)
यस्य यस्य यथाकामं षड्रसेष्वभिषूजितम्।
ad सर्वं कामधुग् दिव्ये अभिवर्षकृते मम॥ २२॥
रसेनान्नेन पानेन लेह्यचोष्येण संयुतम्।
samt निचयं सर्वं सृजस्व शबले त्वर॥ २३॥

“Yield for my sake in desired quantities,
O celestial cow of plenty, each one of the
six varieties of dishes (viz., pungent, acid,
sweet, saline, bitter and alkaline) that may
be pleasing to a particular individual, to
his heart’s content. Look sharp ! Produce,
O Sabala, in plenty all kinds of food
