992

in honour of Indra, the god of rain, when the
cord fastening it is loosed. (2)

अस्मिन् निपतिते भूमौ ederor गणेश्वरे।
नष्टचन्द्रमिव व्योम न aaa मेदिनी॥ ३॥

On Vali, the ruler of the hordes of
monkeys and bears, having fallen to the
ground, the part of the earth ruled by him
did not shine brightly any more than the
firmament when the moon has disappeared
from it. (3)

भूमौ निपतितस्यापि तस्य देहं महात्मन:।
न श्रीर्जहाति न प्राणा न तेजो न पराक्रम:॥४॥

Even though he lay fallen to the ground,
neither grace nor life-breath nor vital energy
nor prowess left the body of the high-minded
monkey. (4)
शक्रदत्ता A माला काञ्चनी रत्नभूषिता।
दधार हरिमुख्यस्य प्राणांस्तेज: श्रियं च सा॥५॥

The well-known excellent bejewelled
chain of gold, bestowed on him by Indra,
the ruler of gods, preserved the life, vital
energy and grace of Vali (the foremost of
monkeys). (5)
स तया मालया वीरो हैमया हरियूथप:।

संध्यानुगतपर्यन्ता पयोधर इवाभवत्॥६॥

With that necklace of gold that heroic
leader of monkey hordes appeared like a
cloud whose outlines are tinged with the
roseate hues of dusk. (6)

तस्य माला च देहश्च मर्मघाती च a: शर:।
fea रचिता लक्ष्मी: पतितस्यापि शोभते॥ ७॥

His necklace and body as well as the
arrow which pierced his vital parts, even while
he lay fallen, shone as though his splendour
had been divided into three parts. (7)

तदस्त्रं तस्य वीरस्य स्वर्गमार्गप्रभावनम्।

रामबाणासनक्षिप्तमावहत् परमां गतिम्॥८॥
Discharged from the bow of Sri Rama,

that missile, while illuminating the path of

the said hero, Vali, to (the highest) heaven,
brought to him the supreme state. (8)

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

तं am पतितं संख्ये गताचिषमिवानलम्।
ययातिमिव पुण्यान्ते देवलोकादिह च्युतम्॥९॥
आदित्यमिव कालेन युगान्ते भुवि पातितम्।
महेन्द्रमिव दुर्धर्षमुपेन्द्रमिव दु:सहम्॥१०॥
व्यूढोरस्कं महाबाहुं दीप्तास्यं हरिलोचनम्॥११॥
लक्ष्मणानुचरो रामो ददर्शोपससर्प च।
तं amt पतितं att गताचिषमिवानलम्॥१२॥

Sri Rama, followed by Laksmana, saw
the aforesaid Vali, son of the mighty Indra—
who was adorned with a chain of gold and
was distinguished by a broad chest, long
arms, a radiant face and yellow eyes, nay,
who was difficult to overcome as the great
Indra and hard to resist as Lord Visnu
(descended as a younger brother of Indra in
the form of the Divine Dwarf)—fallen on the
field of battle as mentioned in the foregoing
lines like a fire without flame and resembling
King Yayati descended on earth from the
realm of gods on the exhaustion of his
merits (which entitled him to an abode in
heaven) and further looking like the sun
cast down on the earth by the Time-Spirit at
the end of the world cycle, and proceeded
towards the aforesaid hero fallen as described
above like a fire without flame. (9—12)
agra च तं वीरं वीक्षमाणं शनैरिव।
उपयातौ महावीर्यौ भ्रातरौ रामलक्ष्मणौ॥१३॥

Nay, showing great honour to that hero,
who was looking intently on them, the two
brothers, Sri Rama and Laksmana, who
were possessed of extraordinary valour,
went up to him slowly, as it were. (13)

तं दृष्टवा राघवं वाली लक्ष्मणं च महाबलम्।
अब्रवीत् परुषं वाक्यं प्रश्रितं धर्मसंहितम्॥ evi
स भूमावल्पतेजोऽसुर्निहतो नष्टचेतन:।
अर्थसंहितया वाचा Wad रणगर्वितम्॥१५॥
Seeing the celebrated Sri Rama (a
scion of Raghu) and Laksmana, who was

exceptionally strong, the said Vali, who had
scant vitality and life left in him and who lay
