* BALAKANDA +

“From the fact of your having not only
seized but also strung and drawn this bow
of Lord Visnu, which could be strung by
none else, | conclude you to be no other
than the imperishable Lord Visnu, the
suzerain Lord of gods), the Slayer of the
demon Madhu. Let everything be well with
you, O chastiser of foes ! All these hosts of
gods gathered together here are looking at
you, whose deeds are incomparable and
who are unrivalled in combat. (17-18)

न चेयं da काकुत्स्थ व्रीडा भवितुमर्हति।
त्वया त्रैलोक्यनाथेन aad विमुखीकृत:॥१९॥

“This powerlessness of mine in your
presence, O scion of Kakutstha, cannot be
a matter for shame to me, since | stand
worsted by none else than the Lord of all
the three worlds. (19)

शरमप्रतिमं राम मोक्तुमर्हसि सुव्रत।
शरमोक्षे गमिष्यामि महेन्द्रं पर्वतोत्तमम्॥ २०॥
“Be pleased, O Rama of noble vows,
to discharge your matchless arrow. On your
having discharged the arrow | shall return to
Mount Mahendra, the foremost of mountains.”
(20)

तथा gata wa तु जामदग्न्ये प्रतापवान्।
रामो दाशरथि: श्रीमांश्चिक्षेप शरमुत्तमम्॥ २१॥

279

Even while Parasurama, son of
Jamadagni, was speaking as aforesaid, the
mighty and glorious Rama, son of DaSsaratha,
discharged the superb shaft. (21)

सहतान् दृश्य रामेण स्वाँल्लोकांस्तपसार्जितान्।
जामदग्न्यो जगामाशु महेन्द्रं पर्वतोत्तमम्॥ २२॥

Finding his own prospective realms,
earned by dint of asceticism, ruined by Sri
Rama, Parasurama (son of Jamadagni)
immediately returned to Mount Mahendra,
the foremost of mountains. (22)
act वितिमिरा: wat दिशश्चोपदिशस्तथा।
सुरा: सर्षिगणा रामं प्रशशंसुरुदायुधम्॥ २३॥

Thereupon all the quarters and even
so the intermediate corners intervening them
were rid of darkness. The gods including
the hosts of Rsis accompanying them
glorified Sri Rama, who stood with the uplifted
bow. (23)
रामं दाशरथिं wat जामदग्न्य: wats: |
तत: प्रदक्षिणीकृत्य जगामात्मगतिं प्रभु:॥ २४॥

Having walked clockwise round Sri
Rama, son of Dasaratha, the mighty
Parasurama, son of Jamadagni, highly
honoured by Sri Rama, then retired to his
own abode on Mount Mahendra. (24)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये बालकाण्डे
षट्सप्ततितम: सर्ग: ॥ ७६ I

Thus ends Canto Seventy-Six in the Balakanda of the glorious Ramayana of Valmiki,
the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

