* SUNDARAKANDA +

101

Canto XVI
Admiring the virtue and propitious bodily marks etc., of Sita, Hanuman grieves

at the thought of that lady, for whose sake Khara, Viradha and other ogres
were killed, having been reduced to such a sad plight

प्रशस्य तु प्रशस्तव्यां dat at हरिपुंगव:।
TART TH च पुनश्चिन्तापरोऽभवत्॥१॥
Having admired the aforesaid Sita, who
was worth admiring, as well as Sri Rama,
who was pleasing by virtue of his
excellences, Hanuman for his part became
absorbed in thought once more. (1)

स मुहूर्तमिव ध्यात्वा बाष्पपर्याकुलेक्षण:।
सीतामाश्रित्य तेजस्वी हनूमान् विललाप Tz

Reflecting awhile, the celebrated and
glorious Hanuman, whose eyes got
bedimmed with tears, started lamenting about
Sita as follows: (2)

मान्या गुरुविनीतस्य लक्ष्मणस्य गुरुप्रिया।
यदि सीता fe दु:खार्ता कालो fe दुरतिक्रम:॥ ३॥
‘If even Sita, who deserves all honour
and is the beloved consort of Sri Rama, the
eldest brother of Laksmana, who had been
instructed in good morals by his elders, is
stricken with sorrow, indeed it is difficult to
withstand the force of destiny. (3)

We व्यवसायज्ञा लक्ष्मणस्य च धीमत: |
नात्यर्थं क्षुभ्यते edt Wa जलदागमे॥४॥
‘Conscious as she is of the prowess of
Sri Rama as well as of the sagacious
Laksmana, the godlike lady does not feel
much agitated any more than the holy Ganga
at the approach of the monsoon. (4)
तुल्यशीलवयोवृत्तां तुल्याभिजनलक्षणाम्।
राघवोऽर्हति aed तं चेयमसितेक्षणा॥५॥
‘Sri Rama, a scion of Raghu, is worthy
of Sita, a princess of the Videha territory,
whose character, age and conduct are well-
matched with his and whose pedigree and

bodily marks too are on a par with his; and
this dark-eyed lady too is worthy of Sri
Rama.’ (5)

at Gea नवहेमाभां लोककान्तामिव श्रियम्।
जगाम मनसा We वचनं चेदमब्रवीत्॥६॥
Perceiving the aforesaid lady, who
looked quite young and shone like gold and
who resembled Laksmi, the goddess of
fortune, coveted by the whole world,
Hanuman sought the presence of Sri Rama
with his mind and said to himself as follows:
(6)

अस्या हेतोर्विशालाक्ष्या हतो Aleit महाबल:।
रावणप्रतिमो वीर्ये कबन्धश्च निपातित:॥७॥

‘For the sake of this large-eyed lady
was killed Vali; Kabandha as well, who was
equal to Ravana in valour, was disposed of.

(7)
विराधश्च ed: Get राक्षसो भीमविक्रम:।
at रामेण fame महेन्द्रेणेव शम्बर:॥८॥

‘The ogre Viradha too of redoubtable
prowess was got rid of in combat by Sri
Rama by showing his valour even as the
demon Sambara was killed by the mighty
Indra. (8)

चतुर्दश सहस्राणि रक्षसां भीमकर्मणाम्।
निहतानि जनस्थाने शरैरग्निशिखोपमै:॥९॥
‘Fourteen thousand ogres of terrible
deeds were made short work of in
Janasthana by means of arrows resembling
tongues of fire. (9)

दूषणश्च महातेजा रामेण विदितात्मना॥१०॥

‘Khara too was slain on the field of battle
