* SUNDARAKANDA +

Durdhara, Prahasta, the ogre Mahaparsva
and the counsellor Nikumbha, seated by his
side, and looked like the entire terrestrial
globe in miniature enclosed by the four oceans
in the quarters; and who was being reassured
by counsellors knowing the secret of good
counsel and other ministers wishing well of
him even as Indra, the ruler of gods, is
reassured by gods. (1—13)

अपश्यद् राक्षसपति हनूमानतितेजसम्।
वेष्टितं मेरुशिखरे सतोयमिव तोयदम्॥१४॥

Hanuman thus saw Ravana, the ruler
of ogres, who was endowed with surpassing
energy, resembling a cloud laden with
moisture and perched on a peak of Mount
Meru. (14)

a a: सम्पीड्यमानोऽपि रक्षोभिर्भीमविक्रमै: |
विस्मयं ut गत्वा रक्षोऽधिपमवैक्षत॥ eu tl

Experiencing supreme wonder, even
though greatly oppressed by those ogres of
terrible prowess, Hanuman looked intently
on Ravana, the suzerain lord of ogres. (15)

भ्राजमानं ततो दृष्ट्वा हनुमान् राक्षसेश्वरम्।
मनसा चिन्तयामास तेजसा तस्य मोहित:॥१६॥
Dazzled by his magnificence on seeing
Ravana shining brightly, Hanuman thought
in his mind as follows: (16)

219

अह्रो रूपमहो धैर्यमहो सत्त्वमहो fa:

अहो राक्षसराजस्य सर्वलक्षणयुक्तता॥१७॥
‘What charm, what presence of mind,

what courage, what splendour and what

combination of all auspicious bodily marks

are present in the king of ogres! (17)

यद्यधर्मो न बलवान् स्यादयं राक्षसेश्वर:।
स्यादयं सुरलोकस्य सशक्रस्यापि रक्षिता॥१८॥

‘Had this mighty lord of ogres not been
antagonistic to virtue, he would have proved
to be a protector of the realm of gods
including Indra, the ruler of gods. (18)

अस्य क्रूरैर्नृशंसैश्च कर्मभिर्लोककुत्सितै:।
सर्वे बिभ्यति खल्वस्माल्लोका: सामरदानवा: ।। १९॥

‘Due to his cruel and ruthless deeds,
condemned by the world, all people including
gods and demons remain actually afraid of
him. (19)
अयं ह्युत्सहते Sa: कर्तुमेकार्णवं जगत्।
इति चिन्तां बहुविधामकरोन्मतिमान् aft: |
दृष्टवा राक्षसराजस्य प्रभावममितौजस:॥ २०॥

‘If enraged, he can really turn the world
into one ocean.’ Perceiving the glory of Ravana
(the king of ogres), who was endowed with
extraordinary might, the sagacious Hanuman
brooded on such diverse thoughts. (20)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये सुन्दरकाण्डे
एकोनपञ्चाश: सर्ग: Il ४९ Il
Thus ends Canto Forty-nine of the Sundarakanda in the glorious Ramayana of Valmiki,
the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

