The illustrious sage, endowed as he
was with a catholic outlook, then composed
in hundreds and thousands of soul-ravishing
verses with their feet comprising an even
number of syllables and consisting of words
depicting the noble deeds of the glorious Sri
Rama, a poem which has brought great
renown to him. (42)
तदुपगतसमाससंधियोगं सममधुरोपनतार्थवाक्यबद्धम्।
रघुवरचरितं मुनिप्रणीतं दशशिरसश्च वधं निशामयध्वम्॥४३॥

« VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

Hear, O devout souls ! the story of the
Chief of the Raghus, composed by sage,
Valmiki, and culminating in the destruction
of Ravana, the ten-headed monster—the
story in which compounds, the conjunction
of letters and the combination of root words
with their suffixes etc., figure in their proper
places and which is made up of expressions
of uniform beauty, sweet to hear and marked
with perspicuity. (43)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये बालकाण्डे द्वितीय: सर्ग: ॥ २॥

Thus ends Canto Two in the Balakanda of the glorious Ramayana of Valmiki,
the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

Canto HI
A brief outline of the Ramayana as given by the poet himself

श्रुत्वा वस्तु समग्रं aq धर्मार्थसहितं हितम्।
व्यक्तमन्वेषते भूयो aq qd तस्य धीमत:॥१॥

Having heard from Narada, as
aforesaid, the entire theme of the poem to
be composed by him, promising religious
merit and worldly prosperity to its readers
and hearers and _ conferring supreme
benefit in the shape of final beatitude, Valmiki
sought to discover directly through intuition
a detailed life-account of that sagacious
prince. (1)
प्राचीनाग्रेषु दर्भेषु धर्मेणान्वेषते गतिम्॥ २॥

Sipping water as a purificatory rite,
according to the scriptural ordinance, and
taking his seat with folded hands on the
blades of KuSa grass with their ends pointing
to the east, the sage sought to discover the
exploits of Sri Rama through yogic power
conferred on him by Brahma. (2)
रामलक्ष्मणसीताभी Wat दशरथेन al
सभार्येण सराष्टेण यत् Wa तत्र तत्त्वत:॥३॥
हसितं भाषितं da गतिर्यावच्च चेष्टितम्।
ad सर्वं धर्मवीर्येण यथावत् सम्प्रपश्यति॥४॥

By dint of that yogic power he was
able to perceive directly and clearly in reality
every detail in that state of absorption all
that pertained to Sri Rama, Laksmana and
Sita as well as to Emperor Dasaratha,
alongwith his wives and kingdom—how they
laughed and talked and moved and whatever
they did. (3-4)

स्त्रीतृतीयेन च तथा यत् Wa चरता वने।
सत्यसंधेन रामेण ad Wd चान्ववैक्षत॥ ५॥

Likewise, he further directly perceived
in order of sequence all that was enacted
by Sri Rama, while roaming about in the
forests in the company of Laksmana and
Sita (his spouse), true to his promise. (5)

aa: पश्यति धर्मात्मा तत् सर्वं योगमास्थित:।
पुरा यत् da निर्वृत्तं पाणावामलकं यथा॥६॥

Absorbed in deep meditation, that pious
sage thereby saw, as clearly as one would
see a myrobalan placed in one’s palm, all
that had happened in the past in relation to
Sri Rama, Laksmana and Sita as well as
that which still awaited them. (6)
