« KISKINDHAKANDA +

wise रूपसादृश्यान्मोहितो वानरोत्तम।
नोत्सृजामि महावेगं शरं शत्रुनिबर्हणम्॥३२॥
जीवितान्तकरं घोरं सादृश्यात् तु विशङ्कित:।
मूलघातो न नौ स्याद्धि द्वयोरिति Heat मया॥ ३३॥

“Puzzled as | was by the likeness of
your features, O jewel among the monkeys,
|, therefore, did not let fly the deadly and
terrible arrow possessed of great velocity
and capable of destroying the enemy. Seized
as | was with apprehension, due to your
close resemblance, lest the very root of
us both should be destroyed by me by
killing you unwittingly, this omission was
deliberately committed by me. (32-33)

vata an faust fe अज्ञानाल्लाघवान्मया।
मौढ्यं च मम बाल्यं च ख्यापितं स्यात् कपीश्वर ।। ३४॥

“In the event of your being killed by me
through ignorance or frivolity, my stupidity
and puerility would have been surely
exposed, O gallant ruler of monkeys! (34)

aarvaaelt नाम पातकं महदद्भधुतम्।
अहं च लक्ष्मणश्चैव da च वरवर्णिनी॥ ३५॥
त्वदधीना ad ad वनेऽस्मिन् शरणं भवान्।
WATE युध्यस्व भूयस्त्वं मा माशाङ्कीश्च वानर॥ BE Ul
“Killing one to whom protection has
been vouchsafed is professedly a great and
astounding sin. Moreover, myself and
Laksmana too as well as Sita of excellent
complexion—we all depend on you. You
are our refuge in this forest. Therefore,
engage you in a combat with Vali once
more. Pray, do not, O do not fall a prey to
misgiving, O monkey chief ! (35-36)

एतन्मुहूर्ते तु vat पश्य वालिनमाहवे।
निरस्तमिषुणैकेन चेष्टमानं महीतले॥ ३७॥

979

“Within this hour behold Vali struck
down by me in course of the very combat
with you with a single arrow and writhing on
the ground. (37)

अभिज्ञानं कुरुष्व त्वमात्मनो वानरेश्वर।
येन त्वामभिजानीयां द्वन्द्वयुद्धमुपागतम्॥ ३८॥

“Wear some distinguishing mark on
your person, O lord of monkeys, by means
of which | might recognize you when actually
come to grips with Vall. (38)

गजपुष्पीमिमां फुल्लामुत्पाट्य शुभलक्षणाम्।

कुरु लक्ष्मण कण्ठेऽस्य सुग्रीवस्य VST: I ३९॥
Turning to Laksmana, he continued:

“Uprooting this creeper, named Gajapuspi,

which is in blossom and is propitious in

character, fasten it, O Laksmana, about the

neck of the high-souled Sugriva.” (39)

ततो गिरितटे जातामुत्पाट्यं कुसुमायुताम्।
लक्ष्मणो गजपुष्पीं तां तस्य कण्ठे व्यसर्जयत्॥ ४०॥

Plucking Gajapuspi creeper, adorned
with flowers and growing on the side of the
mountain, Laksmana then fastened it about
the neck of Sugriva. (40)

स तया शुशुभे श्रीमाल्लतया कण्ठसक्तया।

मालयेव बलाकानां ससंध्य sa तोयद:॥४१॥
With that creeper fastened to his neck,

the glorious Sugriva shone like a cloud

accompanied by twilight, and encircled by a
string of herons. (41)

बिभ्राजमानो वपुषा रामवाक्यसमाहित:।
जगाम सह रामेण किष्किन्धां पुनराप स:॥४२॥
Shining brightly with his body and
reassured by Sri Rama’s words, Sugriva
left with Sri Rama and reached Kiskindha
once more. (42)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये किष्किन्धाकाण्डे द्वादश: सर्ग: ॥ १२॥

Thus ends Canto Twelve in the Kiskindhakanda of the glorious Ramayana of Valmiki,
the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

