« KISKINDHAKANDA +

wee vitrset cat aif GERraaA |

afc शोभते पम्पा विकूजद्धिर्विहंगमै: 1 ९९॥

“Behold, O Laksmana (son of Sumitra),
this lake full of cool water, covered all over
with lotuses, frequented by Cakravakas (red
geese), nay, inhabited by water-fowls,
teeming with ducks and herons and visited
by large deer. Pampa looks very charming
with birds singing melodiously. (98-99)
दीपयन्तीव मे कामं विविधा मुदिता fest: |
VAT चन्द्रमुखीं स्मृत्वा frat पद्मनिभेक्षणाम्॥ १०० I

“Putting me in mind of my youthful
darling, whose countenance resembles the
full moon and who has lotus-like eyes, the
merry birds of different species intensely
inflame my love, as it were. (100)

पश्य सानुषु चित्रेषु मृगीभि: सहितान् मृगान्।
मां पुनर्मृगशावाक्ष्या वैदेह्या विरहीकृतम्।
व्यथयन्तीव मे चित्तं संचरन्तस्ततस्तत:॥१०१॥
“Behold, on the one hand, the deer O
Laksmana, accompanied by female deer,
on the picturesque peaks and on the other
hand, myself, who stand disunited from the
fawn-eyed Sita (a princess of the Videha
territory); moving freely here and there they
afflict my mind, as it were. (101)

अस्मिन् सानुनि रम्ये fe मत्तद्विजगणाकुले।
पश्येयं यदि तां कान्तां Ad: स्वस्ति भवेन्मम॥ १०२॥
“Happiness will come to me then only
if | am able to behold that beloved one on
this delightful peak thronged with flocks of
birds in heat. (102)
Wea खलु सौमित्रे मया सह सुमध्यमा।
सेवेत यदि वैदेही पम्पाया: पवनं शुभम्॥१०३॥
“| should certainly survive, O Laksmana,
if Sita (a princess of the Videha territory) of
charming limbs enjoys with me the pleasant
breeze coming from the Pampa. (103)

पद्मसौगन्धिकवहं शिवं शोकविनाशनम्।
धन्या लक्ष्मण सेवन्ते पम्पाया वनमारुतम्॥ १०४॥

9३7

“Only blessed souls drink, O Laksmana,
the delightful breeze from the woodlands
surrounding Pampa, carrying as it does the
fragrance of lotuses and Saugandhika flowers
(the white water-lilies) and uprooting all grief.

(104)

vara पद्मपलाशाक्षी fran विरहिता मया।
HA धारयति प्राणान् विवशा जनकात्मजा॥ १०५
“How, | wonder, does the beloved and
youthful Sita (Janaka’s daughter), who has
eyes resembling lotus petals, preserve her
life, disunited as she is from me and helpless
as such? (105)
किं नु वक्ष्यामि धर्मज्ञं राजानं सत्यवादिनम्।
जनकं पृष्टसीतं तं कुशलं जनसंसदि॥ १०६॥
“How, | wonder, shall | tell the celebrated
King Janaka, who knows what is right and
always speaks the truth, when he asks me
about Sita in an assemblage of men, that all
is well with her? (106)
या मामनुगता मन्दं पित्रा प्रस्थापितं वनम्।
सीता धर्मं समास्थाय क्व नु सा वर्तते प्रिया॥ १०७॥
“Where on earth is that beloved Sita, who,
clinging fast as she did to the principles of
virtue, followed me when | was exiled to the
forest by my father, unlucky as | was? (107)
तया विहीन: PUTT: Ha लक्ष्मण धारये।
या मामनुगता राज्याद् We विहतचेतसम्॥ १०८ il
“How, 0 Laksmana, shall | survive,
miserable as | am because bereft of Sita,

who followed me even when । was deprived
of my sovereignty and dispirited? (108)

तच्चार्वाञ्चितपद्याक्षं सुगन्धि शुभमव्रणम्।
अपश्यतो मुखं तस्या: सीदतीव मतिर्मम॥ १०९॥
“My mind is indeed troubled as | fail to
behold her comely and bright face with
graceful lotus-like eyes, free from scars
and emitting a sweet fragrance. (109)
रि i धुरं । ।
वैदेह्या वाक्यमतुलं Hal श्रोष्यामि लक्ष्मण॥ ११०॥

When shall | hear, O Laksmana, the
