52

the ill-famed Lanka, who was able to take
any form at will, once more uttered the
following harsh words : (35)

मामनिर्जित्य दुर्बुद्धे राक्षसेश्वरपालिताम्।

न wet ह्यद्य a द्रष्टुं पुरीयं वानराधम॥ ३६॥
“Without overcoming me, protected as

| am by Ravana, the ruler of ogres, O

monkey of perverted mind, it is surely not

possible for you to see the city today, O the

lowest of monkeys !” (36)

तत: स हरिशार्दूलस्तामुवाच निशाचरीम्।
eet पुरीमिमां भद्रे पुनर्यास्ये यथागतम्॥३७॥

Thereupon that tiger among the
monkeys, said to that ogress, “Having seen
this city, O good lady, | shall go back as |
came.” (37)
तत: कृत्वा महानादं सा A लंका भयंकरम्।
तलेन वानरश्रेष्ठं ताडयामास «= afta ३८॥

Raising a loud and frightful cry, Lanka
then actually struck with impetuosity that
jewel among the monkeys with the palm of
her hand. (38)

ad: स हरिशार्दूलो लंकया ताडितो भृशम्।

ननाद सुमहानादं वीर्यवान् मारुतात्मज:॥ 38 il
Smitten violently by Lanka, that valiant

offspring of the wind-god, a veritable tiger

among the monkeys, thereupon uttered a

very high-pitched roar. (39)

Overcome with anger, the aforesaid
Hanuman then closed the fingers of his left
hand and smote her with his fist. (40)

Tat चेति मन्यमानेन नातिक्रोध: FAA कृत:।
सा तु तेन प्रहारेण विह्वलाङ्गी निशाचरी।
पपात सहसा भूमौ विकृताननदर्शना॥४१॥

No violent anger, however, was
exhibited by him of his own accord, inasmuch
as he looked upon her as a woman. Her
limbs having been overpowered by that blow,

« VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

that ogress fell precipitately to the ground,
displaying her ugly features. (41)

ततस्तु हनुमान् वीरस्तां ger विनिपातिताम्।

Pa चकार तेजस्वी मन्यमान: Rast च ATL ४२॥
Seeing her prostrated, the heroic and

noble Hanuman showed compassion to her,

considering her to be a woman (one belonging

to the weaker sex). (42)

ततो वै भृशमुद्विग्ना लंका सा गद्गदाक्षरम्।
उवाचागर्बितं वाक्यं हनुमन्तं प्लवङ्गमम्॥४३॥
Greatly alarmed at this turn of events,
the aforesaid Lanka actually addressed the
following words, which were shorn of pride,
to the monkey, Hanuman, in a faltering tone:
(43)

Weta सुमहाबाहो त्रायस्व हरिसत्तम।
समये सौम्य तिष्ठन्ति सत्त्ववन्तो महाबला: ॥४४॥

“Get propitiated, O exceedingly mighty-
armed one! Spare me, O jewel among the
monkeys! Those endowed with courage and
extraordinary might honour the code of
chivalry that a woman ought not to be killed,
O gentle one ! (44)
अहं तु नगरी लंका स्वयमेव wag
Paiste त्वया att विक्रमेण महाबल॥ wu Il

“| am the city of Lanka-incarnate. |
have actually been vanquished by you by
dint of your prowess, O heroic monkey of
extraordinary might ! (45)

इदं च तथ्यं YO. A ब्रुवन्त्या वै हरीश्वर।

स्वयं स्वयम्भुवा ad वरदानं यथा मम॥४६॥
“And duly hear this truth from me even

as | speak, O lord of monkeys ! The following

prophecy was uttered in my presence by

Brahma himself : (46)

यदात्वां वानर: कश्चिद्विक्रमाद्वशमानयेत्।

तदा त्वया हि विज्ञेयं रक्षसां भयमागतम्॥४७॥
“Surely, at the time when some monkey

subdues you by dint of his prowess,

destruction of the ogres should be concluded

by you to be imminent. (47)
