654

“You, too, should know, O gentle
brother, that we are held by holy men to be
in the same position in the world with
reference to the deceased king-emperor as
the wives, progeny and pupils of a house-
holder are considered as amenable to his
control. (19)

at वा चीरवसनं सौम्य कृष्णाजिनाम्बरम्।
राज्ये वापि महाराजो at वासयितुमीश्वर:॥ २०॥

“The emperor, King DaSaratha, was
perfectly within his rights to lodge me in a
forest with the bark of trees wrapped about
me and wearing the skin of a black buck
about my loins or install me on the throne of
Ayodhya, O gentle brother ! (20)

यावत् पितरि eta गौरवं लोकसत्कृते।
तावद् धर्मकृतां se जनन्यामपि गौरवम्॥ २१॥

“The same degree of respect is due
even to our mother, Kaikeyi, as is due to
our father, who was honoured by the world,
O knower of what is right and jewel among
those practising virtue ! (21)
एताभ्यां धर्मशीलाभ्यां at गच्छेति राघव।
मातापितृभ्यामुक्तोऽहं कथमन्यत् समाचरे॥ २२॥

“Commanded by these parents of mine,
who are pious by disposition, in the words
‘Proceed to the forest,’ O scion of Raghu,
how can | do anything else? (22)
त्वया राज्यमयोध्यायां प्राप्तव्यं लोकसत्कृतम्।
वस्तव्यं दण्डकारण्ये मया वल्कलवाससा॥ २३॥

“Sovereignty in Ayodhya, respected by
the world, should be enjoyed by you, while

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

| must dwell in the Dandaka forest, clad in
the bark of trees. (23)

एवमुक्त्वा महाराजो विभागं लोकसंनिधौ।

व्यादिश्य च महाराजो fed दशरथो गत:॥ २४॥
“Saying so and giving two different

orders for us two in the presence of the

people, Emperor DaSaratha ascended to
heaven. (24)

स च प्रमाणं धर्मात्मा राजा लोकगुरुस्तव।
frat दत्तं यथाभागमुपभोक्तुं त्वमर्हसि॥ २५॥

“Nay, that pious-minded king, the
adored of the people, is your authority in
this matter. You ought, therefore, to enjoy
duly the share allotted to you by our high-
souled father. (25)
चतुर्दश समा: सौम्य दण्डकारण्यमाश्रित:।
उपभोक्ष्ये त्वहं दत्तं भागं पित्रा महात्मना॥ २६॥

“Taking up my abode in the Dandaka
forest, O gentle brother, | for my part shall
enjoy the share allotted to me by our high-
souled father for fourteen years. (26)

पिता महात्मा विबुधाधिपोपम: |
तदेव मन्ये परमात्मनो fed
न सर्वलोकेश्चरभावमव्ययम्॥ २७॥

“| consider that alone to be supremely
good for me, which our high-souled father,
who is respected by the world of human
beings and is a compeer of Indra, the ruler
of gods, has enjoined upon me, and not the
state of Brahma (the lord of all the worlds),
which knows no decay.” (27)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्येऽयोध्याकाण्डे
एकाधिकरश्शततम: AA: Il १०१ Il

Thus ends Canto One hundred and one in the Ayodhyakanda of the glorious
Ramayana of Valmiki, the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

