# YUDDHAKANDA +

हुताग्नेर्चिसंकाशामेनां सौरीमिव प्रभाम्।
उन्नसं विमलं वल्गु वदनं चारुलोचनम्॥१६॥
पश्यंस्तदवशस्तस्या: कामस्य वशमेयिवान्।
च॥ १७॥
शोकसंतापनित्येन कामेन कलुषीकृत:।
सा तु संवत्सरं कालं मामयाचत भामिनी॥ १८॥
प्रतीक्षमाणा भर्तारं राममायतलोचना।
तन्मया चारुनेत्राया: प्रतिज्ञातं वच: शुभम्॥१९॥

“Beholding her, who closely resembles
the flame of a sacred fire fed with oblations
and rivals the splendour of the sun, and
gazing on her well-known fair and lovely
countenance with a prominent nose and
charming eyes, | am no longer master of
myself and have become a slave of passion.
Nay, | have been unnerved by love, which
is uniform in anger and joy, makes one pale
and is ever present even in grief and agony.
Expecting, as she does, to meet in the
meantime Rama, her husband, that large-
eyed lovely woman, however, asked of me
a time-limit* of one year. That pleasing
request of that lovely-eyed lady has been
solemnly granted by me. (16—19)

MASE सततं कामाद् यातो हय इवाध्वनि।
कथं सागरमक्षोभ्यं तरिष्यन्ति वनौकस:॥ २०॥
बहुसत्त्वझषाकीर्णं dt वा दशरथात्मजौ।
अथवा कपिनैकेन pd न: कदनं Ae २१॥
Gat: कार्यगतयो ad यस्य यथामति।
मानुषान्नो भयं नास्ति तथापि तु विमृश्यताम्॥ २२॥

“Like a horse that has travelled over a
long distance, |, however, constantly feel
worn-out through love. Although Rama is
reported to be on his way to Lanka with an
army of monkeys and bears, how will the
monkeys (lit., denizens of the forest) or

331

even Rama and Laksmana, the two sons of
DaSaratha, be able to cross the sea, which
is unassailable and infested with numerous
aquatic creatures, including large fish?
The other side of the picture is that a great
havoc was wrought on our side by a
single monkey, Hanuman. The ways of
accomplishing one’s purpose are thus
difficult to ascertain. Therefore, speak what
is there in whosoever’s mind according to
the belief of each. There is no cause for
apprehension to us from a human being;
nevertheless let us ponder over the question,
in any case. (20—22)

तदा देवासुरे युद्धे युष्माभि: सहितोऽजयम्।
ते मे भवन्तश्च तथा सुग्रीवप्रमुखान् हरीन्॥ २३॥
परे Ut समुद्रस्य पुरस्कृत्य नृपात्मजौ।
सीताया: पदवीं प्राप्य सम्प्राप्तौ वरुणालयम्॥ २४॥

“The other day, assisted by you, |
came out victorious in a conflict between
the gods and the demons. You, who are the
same, stand likewise by my side even today.
Having discovered the whereabouts of Sita,
through Hanuman, after crossing the sea
and placing ahead the monkeys led by
Sugriva (their chief), the two princes have
duly arrived on the other side of the sea.

(23-24)
अदेया च यथा सीता वध्यौ दशरथात्मजौ।
भवद्धिर्मन्त्यतां Wea: सुनीतं चाभिधीयताम्॥ २५॥

“Consultations should, therefore, be held
by you and a judicious line of conduct
suggested, so that Sita may not have to
be given back and Rama and Laksmana,
the two sons of DaSaratha, may be killed.

(25)
नहि शक्तिं प्रपश्यामि जगत्यन्यस्य कस्यचित्।
am antec निश्चयेन जयो मम॥ २६॥

* Ravana utters an impudent lie in order to vaunt his sham generosity. Sita never asked him for a
time-limit of one year assuring him that she would yield to his advances if her husband did not turn up
within the stipulated period. She for her part consistently spurned his sinful proposal. The time-limit was
fixed by Ravana of his own accord (vide Aranyakanda LVI. 24-25 of Valmiki-Ramayana)
