* AYODHYAKANDA +

“| believe we have reached that region
of which Rsi Bharadwaja spoke to us. |
conclude the river Mandakini to be not very
far from this place. (9)

उच्चैर्बद्धानि चीराणि लक्ष्मणेन भवेदयम्।
अभिज्ञानकृत: went विकाले गन्तुमिच्छता॥ १०॥

“Since strips of cloth are seen fastened
to the trees high up, this may be the path
provided with identifications by Laksmana
wishing to go out for a bath or in order to
bring water from the river at odd hours. (10)
इतश्चोदात्तदन्तानां कुञ्जराणां तरस्विनाम्।
vers परिक्रान्तमन्योन्यमभिगर्जताम्॥११॥

“Nay, on this side do _ swift-footed
elephants, distinguished by huge tusks, roam
about trumpeting at one another in the flanks
of the mountain. (11)
यमेवाधातुमिच्छन्ति तापसा: Add वने।
तस्यासौ दूश्यते YA: संकुल: कृष्णवर्त्मन:॥ १२॥

“There can be seen the thick smoke of
the sacred fire, which ascetics in a forest
seek to preserve incessantly for pouring
oblations into it both morning and evening.

(12)
se पुरुषव्याघ्रं गुरुसत्कारकारिणम्।
आर्य द्रक्ष्यामि des महर्षिमिव राघवम्॥१३॥

“Here | shall be able to see Sri Rama,
a scion of Raghu, my elder brother, a
veritable tiger among men, who shows
respect to his elders, highly delighted like
an eminent sage.” (13)

अथ गत्वा मुहूर्तं तु चित्रकूटं स राघव:।
प्राप्तस्तं जनं चेदमब्रवीत्॥१४॥
Then, going awhile, the celebrated
Bharata, a scion of Raghu, for his part
reached Citrakuta on the bank of the
Mandakini and spoke as follows to those
men that had accompanied him : (14)

जगत्यां पुरुषव्याघ्र आस्ते वीरासने रत:।
जनेन्द्रो निर्जनं प्राप्य धिङ्मे जन्म सजीवितम्॥ १५ ॥

“Having reached a lonely place Sri

641

Rama (a tiger among men), a ruler of the
people, sits delighted on the bare ground in
the posture of a hero (with his left foot
placed on his right knee). Woe be to my
birth alongwith my life ! (15)
मत्कृते व्यसनं Wat लोकनाथो महाद्युति:।

सर्वान् कामान् परित्यज्य वने वसति राघव:॥ १६॥

“‘Fallen in adversity (in the shape of
being deprived of his inheritance and exiled)
on my account, Sri Rama, a scion of Raghu,
the protector of the world, who is possessed
of great splendour, is dwelling in the forest,
having completely given up all enjoyments.

(16)

इति लोकसमाक्रुष्ट: पादेष्वद्य प्रसादयन्।
रामं तस्य पतिष्यामि सीताया लक्ष्मणस्य च॥ १७॥

“Reviled thus by the world, | shall fall
at the feet of Sri Rama, Sita and Laksmana
today with a view to propitiating them.” (17)

एवं स विलपंस्तस्मिन् at दशरथात्मज:।
cael महतीं पुण्यां पर्णशालां मनोरमाम्॥१८॥
सालतालाश्वकर्णानां पर्णैर्बहुभिरावृताम्।
विशालां मृदुभिस्तीर्णां कुशैर्वेदिमिवाध्वरे॥ १९॥

Wailing as aforesaid, the celebrated
Bharata (son of Dasaratha) beheld in that
forest a large and holy hut of leafy twigs
pleasing to the mind and thatched with
abundant leaves of sala, palmyra and
Aswakarna trees, and thus appearing from
a distance like an extensive altar, softly
overspread with blades of KuSa grass in a
sacrificial performance. (18-19)
शक्रायुधनिकाशैश्च कार्मुकैर्भारसाधनै:।
रुक्मपृष्ठैर्महासारै: शोभितां शत्रुबाधकै: Il २०॥

The hut was adorned with very strong
bows, plated with gold at the back and
shining like rainbows, nay, instrumental in
accomplishing great deeds and capable of
causing pain to the enemy. (20)

अर्करश्मिप्रतीकाशैर्घोरैस्तूणगतै: शरै: |
शोभितां दीप्तवदनै: सर्पर्भोगवतीमिव॥ २१॥
