* ARANYAKANDA «

सर्वकामफलैर्वृक्षैर्नानापुष्पफलैर्वृताम् ।
सर्वकालमदैश्चापि fest: समुपसेविताम्॥३३॥
Taking the princess of Mithila with them
when commanded thus by Ravana, those
ogresses for their part left for the ASoka grove,
encompassed with trees yielding all one’s
desires and laden with flowers and fruits of
every description and inhabited by birds
remaining in heat every moment. (32-33)

सा तु शोकपरीताङ्गी मैथिली जनकात्मजा।
राक्षसरीवशमापन्ना व्याघ्रीणां हरिणी यथा॥ ३४॥

The aforesaid princess of Mithila, Sita,
daughter of Janaka, however, found her
limbs overpowered by grief. Fallen into the
clutches of the ogresses, she was reduced
to the plight of a female deer fallen into the
clutches of tigresses. (34)

871

शोकेन महता Wea मैथिली जनकात्मजा।
न शर्म लभते site: पाशबद्भधा मृगी यथा॥ ३५॥

Overwhelmed with excessive grief, the
timid Sita (a princess of Mithila), daughter of
Janaka, did not find peace of mind any more
than a female deer caught in asnare. (35)

न विन्दते da तु शार्म मैथिली
विरूपनेत्राभिरतीव तर्जिता।
विचेतनाभूद् भयशोकपीडिता॥ ३६ I
Thereatened in an excessive measure
by those misshapen ogresses of deformed
eyes, the princess of Mithila, however, did
not find rest there. Remembering her beloved
lord as well as her brother-in-law, Laksmana,
she lost her consciousness, oppressed as
she was with fear and grief. (36)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्येऽरण्यकाण्डे षट्पञ्चाश: सर्ग: ॥ ५६ ॥

Thus ends Canto Fifty-six in the Aranyakanda of the glorious Ramayana of Valmiki,
the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

An Interpolated Canto*

At the command of Brahma (the creator), Indra, the ruler of gods,
goes to Lanka with Nidra and offers a heavenly menu in the
form of milk boiled with rice and sugar to Sita

तदा Wart case परितुष्टं शतक्रतुम्॥१॥

When Sita had been brought into Lanka,
Brahma, the progenitor of the entire creation,
presently instructed as follows Indra (who
had performed in his previous existences
a hundred AsSwamedha sacrifices as a
condition precedent for Indrahood), the ruler
of gods, who felt highly gratified to hear the
news as the event, to his mind, had sealed
the fate of Ravana. (1)

त्रैलोक्यस्य हितार्थाय रक्षसामहिताय ai
लङ्कां प्रवेशिता सीता रावणेन दुरात्मना॥२॥
“To the good of the three worlds and
the detriment of ogres Sita has been brought
by the evil-minded Ravana into Lanka.

(2)
पतिव्रता महाभागा fet wa सुखैधिता।
अपश्यन्ती च Ma पश्यन्ती राक्षसीजनम्॥ ३॥
Tenia: परिव्रता भर्तृदर्शनलालसा।
निविष्टा fe पुरी लङ्का तीरे नदनदीपते: ।॥४॥

* This canto is believed by some to be an interpolation since it has not been commented upon by
classical commentators. However, it is being included in this Volume since it serves as an interesting and

fitting interlude to the main story.
