980

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

त्रयोदश: wet:
Canto XIII

While going to Kiskindha alongwith Sugriva and others with intent to make
short work of Vali, Sri Rama sees a delightful grove and inquires of
Sugriva as to whose hermitage it was. Sugriva tells him in reply
that the hermitage belonged to a group of sages known by the
name of Saptajanas, who had bodily ascended to heaven

ऋष्यमूकात्स धर्मात्मा किष्किन्धां लक्ष्मणाग्रज:।
जगाम सह सुग्रीवो वालिविक्रमपालिताम्॥१॥

समुद्यम्य महच्चापं राम: काञ्चनभूषितम्।
शरांश्चादित्यसंकाशान् गृहीत्वा रणसाधकान्॥ २॥
Duly lifting up his great bow, decked
with gold, and taking his arrows, which
shone brightly like the sun and were so
effective in battle, and accompanied by
Sugriva, Sri Rama (the eldest brother of
Laksmana), whose mind was set on virtue,
proceeded from Rsyamuka to Kiskindha,
which stood protected by Vali’s valour.
(1-2)

अग्रतस्तु ययौ तस्य राघवस्य महात्मन:।
Gita: संहतग्रीवो लक्ष्मणश्च महाबल:॥ ३॥
In front of the high-souled Sri Rama, a
scion of Raghu, strode Sugriva who had a
strongly built neck, as well as Laksmana,
who was possessed of extraordinary might.
(3)

Todt SAM वीरो नलो नीलश्च वीर्यवान्।
तारश्चैव महातेजा हरियूथपयूथप: i ४॥

Behind him came the valiant Hanuman,
Nala and the powerful Nila and Tara, who
was endowed with exceptional energy and
was a commander of commanders of
monkey hordes. (4)

a वीक्षमाणा वृक्षांश्च पुष्पभारावलम्बिन:।
प्रसन्नाम्बुवहाश्चैव att: सागरंगमा:॥७५॥
कन्दराणि च शैलांश्च निर्दराणि गुहास्तथा।
शिखराणिचमुख्यानिदरीश्चप्रियदश्न्सि।।६।।

कारण्डै: सारसैर्हंसैर्वञ्जुलैर्जलकुक्कुटै: |
चक्रवाकैस्तथा चान्यै: शकुनै: प्रतिनादितान्॥ ८॥
मृदुशष्पाङ्कुराहारान्निर्भयान् वनगोचरान्।
चरत: सर्वत: पश्यन् स्थलीषु हरिणान् स्थितान्॥ ९॥
तटाकवैरिणश्चापि शुक्लदन्तविभूषितान्।
PMR वन्यान् द्विरदान् Perales: tl १०॥
Tar गिरितटोत्कृष्टान् पर्वतानिव जङ्घमान्।
वानरान् द्विरदप्रख्यान् महीरेणुसमुक्षितान्॥११॥
वने वनचरांश्चान्यान् खेचरांश्च विहंगमान्।
पश्यन्तस्त्वरिता Wy: सुग्रीववशवर्तिन:॥१२॥
Observing trees which were bending
under the load of their blossom as well as
rivers journeying to the sea and carrying
placid waters, also caves and cliffs,
mountain-clefts and holes, also outstanding
peaks and hollows pleasing to the sight,
nay, seeing on the way ponds full of water,
rendered charming by _ their waters,
transparent as a cat’s-eye jewel, and lotuses
still in the state of buds up to their very
mouths and rendered noisy by ducks,
cranes, swans, Vafjulas, water-fowls,
Cakrawakas and also by other birds, also
beholding in the forest wild deer grazing on
the tender shoots of grass, fearlessly moving
everywhere or standing on tablelands and
further perceiving fearful wild elephants in
rut—which proved a menace to ponds in
that they damaged their brinks (and rendered
the water turbid), which were adorned
with white tusks and moved all alone, nay,
which tore asunder with their tusks the
edges of mountains and looked like moving
mountains—and monkeys looking like
