758

निश्चितैव fe a बुद्धिर्वनवासे दृढव्रता।
भरतस्नेहसंतप्ता बालिशीक्रियते पुन:॥ ३८॥
“To be sure, my mind is intent on my
vow of residing in the forest alone, and is of
firm resolve; yet, being agonized by Bharata’s
affection, it gets infatuated once more. (38)
संस्मराम्यस्य वाक्यानि प्रियाणि मधुराणि च।
हृद्यान्यमृतकल्पानि मन:प्रह्लादनानि च॥३९॥
“| fully recollect his agreeable, sweet,
affectionate, nectar-like and soul-ravishing
words. (39)
कदा ह्यहं समेष्यामि भरतेन महात्मना।
शत्रुघ्नेन च वीरेण aa च रघुनन्दन॥४०॥
“When shall | actually be united with the
high-souled Bharata, the heroic Satrughna,
together with you, O scion of Raghu?” (40)
चक्रेऽभिषेकं काकुत्स्थ: ATA: AS AAA It VF

Discoursing thus on the aforesaid topic

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

and reaching the river Godavari, Sri Rama
with his younger brother and Sita bathed in
it. (41)

तर्पयित्वाथ सलिलैस्तै: पितॄन् दैवतानपि।
स्तुवन्ति स्मोदितं सूर्यं देवताश्च तथानघा:॥४२॥

Having propitiated with those waters
the manes as well as the gods, the sinless
trio then glorified the shining sun and the
other gods as well. (42)

कृताभिषेक: स रराज WT:

सीताद्वितीय: सह लक्ष्मणेन।
कृताभिषेकस्त्वगराजपुत्र्या

es: सनन्दिर्भगवानिवेश:॥४३॥

Having finished his bath, Sri Rama
shone with Sita and Laksmana even as
Lord Siva (the Destroyer of the universe)
with Nandi (His beloved associate) and
Parvati (the Daughter of the lord of mountains)
on having concluded His bath in the Ganga.

(43)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्येऽरण्यकाण्डे WET: सर्ग: ॥ १६ ॥

Thus ends Canto Sixteen in the Aranyakanda of the glorious Ramayana of Valmiki,
the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

सप्तदश: सर्ग:
Canto XVII
The arrival of Sirpanakha at the hermitage

कृताभिषेको wed सीता dra al
PATS गोदावरीतीरात् ततो जग्मु: स्वमाश्रमम्॥ १॥
Having taken their bath, Rama, Sita
and also Laksmana_ then returned to their
hermitage from the aforesaid bank of the
Godavari. (1)

आश्रमं तमुपागम्य राघव: सहलक्ष्मण:।
कृत्वा पौर्वाह्निकं कर्म पर्णशालामुपागमत्॥ २॥

Having reached that hermitage on
performing the morning devotions, Raghava
with Laksmana entered his hut thatched

with leaves.

उवास सुखितस्तत्र पूज्यमानो महर्षिभि:।
स wa: पर्णशालायामासीन: सह सीतया॥ ३॥
विरराज महाबाहुश्चित्रया चन्द्रमा इव।
लक्ष्मणेन सह भ्रात्रा चकार विविधा: Haw: ux

Being honoured by great sages, he
stayed happily there. Seated with Sita in
that hut thatched with leaves, the mighty-
armed Sri Rama shone brightly like the
moon accompanied with the constellation
Citra, and discussed various topics with his
brother, Laksmana. (3-4)

(2)
