* AYODHYAKANDA +

without mastication (such as milk boiled
with rice and sugar), those which can be
drunk, those which are fit to be licked up
and those which can be sucked. Moreover,
there are excellent beds for you to sleep on
as well as fodder for your horses.” (39)

गुहमेवं ब्रुवाणं q Wea: प्रत्युवाच ह।
अर्चिताश्चैव हृष्टाश्च भवता सर्वदा वयम्॥४०॥
पद्भ्यामभिगमाच्चैव स्नेहसंदर्शनेन च।
भुजाभ्यां साधुवृत्ताभ्यां पीडयन् वाक्यमब्रवीत्॥ ४१ ॥

To Guha, who was speaking as
aforesaid, Sri Rama (a scion of Raghu),
for his part, they say, replied as follows :
“We stand honoured by you by your very
coming all the way on foot to meet us as
well as by your exhibition of affection, and
are always pleased with you.” Pressing
Guha tightly once more with his rounded
arms, Sri Rama added the following:

(40-41)

दिष्ट्या tat गुह पश्यामि ह्यरोगं सह बान्धवै: ।
aft a कुशलं we मित्रेषु च वनेषु च॥४२॥

“lam glad, O Guha, | see you quite in
good health with your relations. Is all well
with your state, allies and forests? (42)

यत्त्विदं भवता किंचित् प्रीत्या समुपकल्पितम्।
wa तदनुजानामि नहि ad प्रतिग्रहे॥४३॥
“| for my part accept and allow you to
take back all this, that has been lovingly
offered by you, since | do not make use of
gifts for my own purpose. (43)
कुशचीराजिनधरं फलमूलाशनं च माम्।
विद्धि प्रणिहितं धर्मे aod वनगोचरम्॥४४॥
“Know me as under a vow to wear (a
zone of) KuSa grass, the bark of trees and
deerskin and to subsist on fruits and roots

alone, to practise austerities and dwell in
the forest, remaining devoted to piety. (44)

अश्वानां खादनेनाहमर्थी नान्येन केनचित्।
एतावतात्र भवता भविष्यामि सुपूजित:॥४५॥

“| दा interested only in having food for

477

the horses and in nothing else. By being
provided with this much at the present
moment | shall be duly entertained by you.
(45)

wa fe दयिता wa: पितुर्दशरथस्य मे।
wa: सुविहितैरश्वैर्भविष्याम्यहमचित: ॥ ४६ ।
“Since these horses are beloved of my
father, King DaSaratha, | shall feel honoured
by these horses being duly fed.” (46)

अश्वानां प्रतिपानं च खादनं चैव सोऽन्वशात्।
गुहस्तत्रैव पुरुषांस्त्वरितं दीयतामिति॥४७॥
On that very spot the said Guha
commanded his men in the following words :
“Let milk etc., (which horses of excellent
breed are given to drink after being fed with
grass etc.) and barley flour mixed with ghee,
sugar and so on, which they are given to
eat in addition to grass etc., be promptly
supplied to the horses.” (47)

ततश्चीरोत्तरासङ्ग: संध्यामन्वास्य पश्चिमाम्।
जलमेवाददे भोज्यं लक्ष्मणेनाहृतं स्वयम्॥४८॥
Having worshipped the evening
twilight, appearing in the west, with an upper
garment made of the bark of trees on his
person, Sri Rama then took for food only
water brought by Laksmana himself thus
observing a fast in honour of the sacred
river which he visited. (48)

तस्य भूमौ शयानस्य पादौ प्रक्षाल्य लक्ष्मण: 1
सभार्यस्य ततोऽभ्येत्य तस्थौ वृक्षमुपाश्रित: ॥४९॥

Having cleanly washed the feet of Sri
Rama, and his consort lying on the ground
to repose for the night, and receding from
that place, Laksmana took his position at
the foot of another tree close by. (49)

गुहोऽपि we wat सौमित्रिमनुभाषयन्।
अन्वजाग्रत् ततो राममप्रमत्तो धनुर्धर:॥७५०॥

Following in the footsteps of Laksmana
(son of Sumitra) and encouraging him to
speak on the virtues of Sri Rama, and
wielding his bow, Guha too thereupon kept
vigil with the charioteer, remaining alert all
