* SUNDARAKANDA +

‘| was greatly extended by King Sagara,
the protector of Ikswaku’s race, while
Hanuman is helping Sri Rama, a descendant
of Ikswaku. He must not, therefore, come to
grief in this journey. (89)

तथा मया विधातव्यं fasta यथा aft: |
शेषं च मयि विश्रान्त: सुखी सोऽतितरिष्यति॥ ९०॥

‘| should so arrange that Hanuman may
rest awhile. Having rested awhile on me, |
am sure he will leap across the rest of the
sea with ease.’ (90)

gta कृत्वा मतिं साध्वीं समुद्रश्छन्नमम्भसि।
हिरण्यनाभं मैनाकमुवाच गिरिसत्तमम्॥९१॥

Having made this righteous resolve,
the god presiding over the oceans spoke as
follows to Mainaka, the foremost of
mountains, consisting mainly of gold and
submerged in water : (91)
त्वमिहासुरसङ्घानां देवराज्ञा महात्मना।
पातालनिलयानां fe परिघ: संनिवेशित:॥९२॥

“You have actually been established
here by the high-souled Indra, the ruler of
gods, by way of a barrier against the intrusion
into the terrestrial region of the hordes of
demons inhabiting Patala, the nethermost
subterranean region. (92)
त्वमेषां ज्ञातवीर्याणां पुनरेवोत्पतिष्यताम्।
पातालस्याप्रमेयस्य द्वारमावृत्य तिष्ठसि॥९३॥

“You stand here blocking the entrance
of the immeasurable Patala against the
aforesaid demons, whose valour is well
known and who are prone to come up to the
surface of this earth once more. (93)

तिर्यगूर्ध्वमधश्चैव शक्तिस्ते शैल वर्धितुम्।
तस्मात् संचोदयामि त्वामुत्तिष्ठं गिरिसत्तम॥ ९४॥

“The capacity to grow from side to side
(horizontally) as also upwards’ and
downwards (vertically) is there in you, O
mountain! I, therefore, command you as
follows: please swell upwards, O jewel among
mountains! (94)

33

aw कपिशार्दूलस्त्वामुपर्येति वीर्यवान्।
हनूमान् रामकार्यार्थी भीमकर्मा खमाप्लुत:॥ ९५॥

“Here is the powerful Hanuman of terrific
deeds, a veritable tiger among monkeys,
who has already sprung in the sky, seeking,
as he does, to achieve the purpose of Sri
Rama, passing over you. (95)

अस्य साह्यं मया कार्यमिक्ष्वाकुकुलवर्तिन:।

मम इक्ष्वाकव: पूज्या: UL पूज्यतमास्तव॥ ९६॥
“Assistance must be rendered by me

to Hanuman, who is a servant of the House

of Ikswaku. The Ikswakus are worthy of

adoration to me and are by far the highest

object of veneration to you. (96)

Se साचिव्यमस्माकं न न: कार्यमतिक्रमेत्।
कर्तव्यमकृतं कार्यं सतां मन्युमुदीरयेत्॥९७॥
“Therefore, please render assistance
to us. Our plan should not be allowed to
miscarry through default. A duty which needs
must be performed is likely to rouse the
anger of the virtuous if not scrupulously
discharged. (97)

सलिलादूर्ध्वमुत्तिष्ठ तिष्ठत्वेष कपिस्त्वयि।
अस्माकमतिथिश्चैव पूज्यश्च प्लवतां वर:॥ ९८ ॥

“Therefore, rise up from the water. Let
Hanuman stand on you. Hanuman, the
foremost of monkeys, is our unexpected
guest and worthy of our adoration, too. (98)

चामीकरमहानाभ देवगन्धर्वसेवित।
हनूमाँस्त्वयि विश्रान्तस्तत: srt गमिष्यति॥९९॥
“Having rested on you, O mountain

with a lofty peak of gold and frequented by
gods and Gandharvas, Hanuman will then

cover the remaining distance. (99)

काकुत्स्थस्यानृशंस्यं च मैथिल्याश्च विवासनम्।

TH च प्लवगेन्द्रस्य समीक्ष्योत्थातुमर्हसि॥ १००॥
“Nay, fully considering the  soft-

heartedness of Sri Rama, a_ scion of
Kakutstha, as well as of Sita, a princess of
Mithila, living perforce in an alien land, as
