990

सुग्रीवेण तु नि:शङ्कं wearer तेजसा।
गात्रेष्वभिहतो वाली वज्रेणेव महागिरि:। २३॥

Forcibly tearing up a sal tree, Vali too
was fearlessly smitten on his limbs by
Sugriva even as a big mountain were struck
with lightning. (23)

aq वृक्षेण fata: सालताडनविह्वल:।
गुरुभारभराक्रान्ता at: ससार्थेव सागरे॥ Wil

Crushed under the weight of the tree
and overpowered by being beaten with a
sal, Vali began to shake like a bark full of
passengers and pressed by the heavy
weight of its load in a sea. (24)

तौ भीमबलविक्रान्तौ सुपर्णसमवेगितौ।
Vast घोरवपुषौ चन्द्रसूर्याविवाम्बरे॥ २५॥
परस्परममित्रघ्नौ छिद्रान्वेषणतत्परौ |
ततोऽवर्धत वाली तु बलवीर्यसमन्वित:॥ २६॥
सूर्यपुत्रो महावीर्य: सुग्रीव: परिहीयत।
वालिना भग्नदर्पस्तु सुग्रीवो मन्दविक्रम:॥ २७॥
वालिनं प्रति सामर्षो दर्शयामास राघवम्।
aa: सशाखै: शिखरैर्वज्रकोटिनिभैर्नखै: ii २८ u
मुष्टिभिर्जानुभि: पद्धिर्बाहुभिश्च पुन: पुन:।
तयोर्युद्धमभूद्घोरं व्रत्रवासवयोरिव॥ २९॥

The two brothers—who were endowed
with terrible might and prowess and
possessed the agility of Garuda (the carrier
of Lord Visnu), nay, who were engaged in a
grim fight, were possessed of fearful bodies
and capable of destroying the enemy and
were intent on finding out the vulnerable
points of each other—resembled the moon
and the sun in the sky. Thereupon Vali, for
his part, who was richly endowed with
strength and valour, gained the upper hand;
while Sugriva, son of the sun-god, even
though possessed of extraordinary might,
lost ground. Full of indignation towards Vall,
Sugriva whose vanity was shattered by Vali
and whose strength grew feeble, becked
Sri Rama about his failing strength. A terrible
combat, resembling that between the
demon Vrtra and Indra, now ensued between

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

the two brothers, who fought with trees
including their branches, mountain-tops, their
claws, which were as cutting as millions of

diamonds, fists, knees, feet and arms
repeatedly. (25—29)
at शोणिताक्तौ युध्येतां वानरौ वनचारिणौ।

मेघाविव महाशब्दैस्तर्जमानौ परस्परम्॥ ३०॥

Threatening each other with loud noise,
the aforesaid two monkeys, who roamed
about in the forest and stood smeared with
blood, contended like a pair of clouds. (30)

ह्रीयमानमथापश्यत् सुग्रीवं वानरेश्वरम्।
प्रेक्षमाणं दिशश्चैव Wea: स मुहुर्मुहु:॥ ३१॥
The celebrated Sri Rama (a scion of
Raghu) presently beheld Sugriva, a lord of
monkeys, getting weaker and looking intently
in all directions again and again. (31)

ततो WAT महातेजा आर्तं दृष्ट्वा हरीश्वरम्।
स शरं aad at वालिनो वधकांक्षया॥ ३२॥

Seeing Sugriva (a ruler of monkeys)
afflicted, the aforesaid Sri Rama, a hero as
he was, thereupon surveyed his arrow with
intent to make short work of Vali. (32)

ततो धनुषि संधाय शरमाशीविषोपमम्।
पूरयामास Teng कालचक्रमिवान्तक:॥ ३३॥
Putting the arrow, which resembled a
venomous serpent, to the bow, Sri Rama
then stretched the aforesaid arrow at full
length even as the god of death would lift
his wheel for the destruction of the world.
(33)

तस्य ज्यातलघोषेण त्रस्ता: पत्ररथेश्वरा:।
प्रदुद्रुवुर्मृगाश्चैव युगान्त sa मोहिता:॥ ३४॥

Scared by the twang of the bow-string
and bewildered as at the end of the world
cycle, the foremost of birds flew and deer
too ran helter-skelter. (34)

मुक्तस्तु वज्रनिर्घोष: प्रदीप्ताशनिसंनिभ:।
राघवेण महाबाणो वालिवक्षसि पातित:॥ ३५॥

When discharged with च _ sound
resembling the crash of thunder, the mighty
