728

अस्मिन् मुहूर्ते नचिरात् सत्यं प्रतिश्रृणोमि a: |

अरावणमरामं वा जगद द्रक्ष्यथं वानरा:॥ ४८ Il

“| take this unfailing vow before you at
this hour, O monkeys, that before long you
will see the world devoid of Ravana or
Rama (myself). (48)
राज्यनाशं at वासं दण्डके परिधावनम्।
वैदेह्याश्च परामर्शो रक्षोभिश्च समागमम्॥४९॥

“| suffered the loss of my sovereignty,
exile in the forest, peregrination in the woods
of Dandaka and the insult offered to Sita (a
princess of the Videha territory) by the ogre,
Ravana. (49)
We दु:खं महाघोरं क्लेशश्च निरयोपम:।
aI सर्वमहं त्यक्ष्ये निहत्वा रावणं रणे॥७५०॥

“In this way great and terrible agony
has been suffered by me as also bodily
torment approaching the tortures in hell.
Making short work of Ravana in combat, |
shall have done with all this today. (50)
यदर्थं art सैन्यं समानीतमिदं मया।
सुग्रीवश्च pat we निहत्वा वालिनं रणे।
यदर्थं सागर: क्रान्त: सेतुर्बद्धश्च सागरे॥५१॥
सोऽयमद्य रणे पापश्चक्षुर्विषयमागत:।
चक्षुर्विषयमागत्य नायं जीवितुमर्हति॥७५२॥

“This sinful ogre on whose account
this army of monkeys has been dragged by
me to this distant land, Sugriva has been
installed on the throne of Kiskindha after
disposing of Vali in combat, and on whose
account the sea has been crossed and a
bridge thrown over it, has fallen within the
range of my vision on the battlefield today.
Having come within my sight, he does not
deserve to survive any longer. (51-52)

दृष्टिं दृष्टिविषस्येव सर्पस्य मम रावण:।
यथा वा वैनतेयस्य दृष्टिं प्राप्तो भुजंगम:॥ ५३॥
“Having fallen within my view, Ravana

cannot survive any more than one who has
entered the range of vision of a snake

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA +

injecting deadly venom with his very glance,
or, than a serpent who has fallen under the
gaze of Garuda, the king of birds and enemy
of serpents. (53)

qa wad दुर्धर्षा युद्धं वानरपुङ्खवा:।
आसीना: पर्वताग्रेषु ममेदं रावणस्य च॥७५४॥
“Perched on mountain-peaks, O bulls
among the monkeys, witness at ease you,
who are so difficult to overpower, this trial of
strength between myself and Ravana.(54)
TI Wag रामस्य wad मम संयुगे।
त्रयो लोका: सगन्धर्वा: सदेवा: सर्षिचारणा:॥ ५५ ॥
“Let all the three worlds (viz., earth,
heaven and the intermediate region) including
the Gandharvas (celestial musicians), gods,
Rsis (the seers of Vedic Mantras) and
Caranas (celestial bards) behold with their
own eyes today the Ramahood of Rama in
the course of my combat. (55)

अद्य कर्म करिष्यामि यल्लोका: सचराचरा:।
सदेवा: कथयिष्यन्ति यावद् भूमिर्धरिष्यति।
समागम्य सदा लोके यथा युद्धं प्रवर्तितम्॥५६॥
“| shall accomplish today a feat which
people in the world including all living beings,
mobile as well immobile, gods not excepted,
will ever recount together, describing how
the combat proceeded, as long as the earth
is able to support those inhabiting it.” (56)

`एवमुक्त्वा शितैर्बाणैस्तप्तकाञ्जनभूषणै: |
आजघान रणे रामो दशग्रीवं समाहित:॥ ५७॥

Saying so, Sri Rama steadily proceeded
to strike Ravana (the ten-headed monster)
on the battlefield with penetrating shafts
embellished with refined gold. (57)

तथा प्रदीप्तैर्नाराचैर्मुसलैश्चापि रावण:।
अभ्यवर्षत् dat रामं धाराभिरिव तोयद:॥ ५८ ॥
Ravana too likewise covered Sri Rama
on that occasion with flaming steel arrows
and clubs even as a cloud would cover a
mountain with torrents of rain. (58)
