626

speedily darted in his chariot towards Angada
like a fearless warrior. (4)

सोऽङ्गदं निशितैर्बाणैस्तदा विव्याध afta: |
शरीरदारणैस्तीक्ष्णै: कालाग्निसमविग्रहै: ।॥ ५ I

Seized with impetuosity, he then pierced
Angada with his sharp and_ piercing
shafts, which tore the flesh and resembled
the fire raging at the time of universal
dissolution. (5)

क्षुरक्षुरप्रनाराचैर्वत्सदन्तै: शिलीमुखै: ।
कर्णिशल्यविपाठेश्च बहुभिर्निशितै: शरै:॥६॥
age: प्रतिविद्धाङ्गो वालिपुत्र: प्रतापवान्।
aed रथं बाणान् ममर्द तरसा बली॥७॥
His limbs pierced with numerous sharp
arrows known by the names of Ksura,'
Ksurapra,? Naraca,? Vatsadanta,*‘ Silimukha,®
Karni,° Salya’ and Vipatha,® the mighty and
powerful Angada, son of Vali, crushed with
his might the formidable bow, chariot and
arrows of Sonitaksa. (6-7)

शोणिताक्षस्तत: क्षिप्रमसिचर्म समाददे।
उत्पपात तदा क्रुद्धो वेगवानविचारयन्॥८॥

Sonitaksa thereupon instantly took up
his sword and shield. Full of impetuosity he
then leapt down from his chariot in rage
unhesitatingly. (8)
तं क्षिप्रतरमाप्लुत्य परामृश्याङ्गदो बली।
करेण तस्य तं Get समाच्छिद्य ननाद च॥९॥

Springing forward even more nimbly,
nay, seizing hold of him and wresting his
aforesaid sword with his hand, the mighty
Angada roared. (9)
यज्ञोपवीतवच्चैनं चिच्छेद कपिकुञ्जर:॥१०॥

Angada then dug the sword into the

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA +

flat surface of his shoulder and the monkey
chief cut him diagonally. (10)

तं we महाखड्गं विनद्य च पुन: पुन:।
वालिपुत्रोऽभिदुद्राव रणशीर्षे परानरीन्॥११॥
Tightly holding that huge sword and
roaring at the top of his voice again and
again, the son of Vali darted in the direction
of other enemies in the forefront of the
battle. (11)

wagered वीरो यूपाक्षस्तु ततो बली।
रथेनाभिययौ क्रुद्धो वालिपुत्रं महाबलम्॥१२॥

Accompanied by Prajangha, the heroic
and mighty Yupaksa for his part then furiously
drove in his chariot towards Angada (son of
Vali), who was endowed with extraordinary
might. (12)
आयसीं तु Wet Tel स ak: कनकाङ्गद:।
शोणिताक्ष: समाश्वस्य तमेवानुपपात ह॥१३॥

Recovering himself, and seizing his
steel mace, the aforesaid Sonitaksa for his
part, who was adorned with gold armlets,
rushed behind Angada himself: so the
tradition goes. (13)

प्रजङ्घस्तु महावीरो यूपाक्षसहितो बली।
गदयाभिययौ क्रुद्धो वालिपुत्रं महाबलम्॥ evil

Accompanied by Yupaksa, the mighty
Prajangha for his part, who was an eminent
hero, assailed furiously with his mace Angada
(son of Vali), who was endowed with
extraordinary might. (14)

तयोर्मध्ये कपिश्रेष्ठ: शोणिताक्षप्रजङ्घयो:।
विशाखयोर्मध्यगत: पूर्णचन्द्र sarah eg il
Between the two warriors, Sonitaksa

and Prajangha, Angada, the foremost of
monkeys, shone like the full moon between

1. An arrow with a razor-shaped head: 2. An arrow with a crescent-shaped head: 3. An arrow entirely made

of steel: 4. An arrow with its head shaped like the teeth of a calf. 5. An arrow with its head shaped like the

feathers of a buzzard: 6. An arrow provided with earlike protuberances on both sides: 7. An arrow with a long

head: 8. An arrow with its head resembling the leaf of a Karavira tree.
