874

heaven-world in order to accomplish the
purpose of Sri Rama (a scion of Raghu)

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

and reached his own abode in Amaravati,
the capital of heaven. (26)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्येऽरण्यकाण्डे Wea: सर्ग: ॥

Thus ends the interpolated Canto in the Aranyakanda of the glorious Ramayana of
Valmiki, the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

सप्तपञ्चाश: सर्ग:
Canto LVII

While returning to his hermitage Sri Rama feels concerned to perceive ill
omens and on meeting Laksmana scolds him for leaving Sita
unprotected and feels apprehensive about Sita’s safety

Tad मृगरूपेण aed कामरूपिणम्।
निहत्य wat मारीचं तूर्णं पथि न्यवर्तत॥१॥

Having slain the ogre Marica, who was
capable of changing his form at will, moving
about in the form of a deer, Sri Rama
quickly returned to the trodden path leading
to his hermitage. (1)

तस्य संत्वरमाणस्य द्रष्टुकामस्य मैथिलीम्।
क्रूरस्वनोऽथ गोमायुर्विननादास्य पृष्ठत:॥२॥

While he was making all possible haste
to return to the hermitage, eager as he was
to see Sita (a princess of Mithila), a jackal
uttering a fierce yell presently cried loudly at
his back. (2)

स तस्य स्वरमाज्ञाय दारुणं रोमहर्षणम्।
चिन्तयामास गोमायो: स्वरेण परिशङ्कित:॥३॥

Concluding the yell of that jackal, which
made one’s hair stand on end, to be of
fearful consequence, Sri Rama, who was
already seized with apprehension to hear
Marica’s voice in imitation of his own, became
thoughtful. (3)

अशुभं बत मन्येऽहं गोमायुर्वाश्यते यथा।
स्वस्ति स्यादपि वैदेह्या राक्षसैर्भक्षणं विना॥४॥
He said to himself ‘From the way in
which the jackal is yelling, alas, | apprehend
some evil. Is all well with Sita (a princess of

the Videha territory)? Has she escaped
being devoured by the ogres? (4)
मारीचेन तु विज्ञाय स्वरमालक्ष्य मामकम्।
विक्रुष्टं मृगरूपेण लक्ष्मण: श्रृणुयाद् यदि॥५॥
स सौमित्रि: स्वरं श्रुत्वा तां च हित्वाथ मैथिलीम्।
waa प्रहित: fad मत्सकाशमिहैष्यति॥६॥
‘If Laksmana happens to have heard
the piteous wail, knowingly uttered in imitation
of my voice by Marica, appearing in the
disguise of a deer, then, hearing that voice
and forthwith leaving the said Sita (a princess
of Mithila), and sent by that very lady, the
aforesaid son of Sumitra will speedily seek
my presence here. (5-6)

Tae: सहितैर्नूनं सीताया ईप्सितो वध:।
काञ्चनश्च Wit भूत्वा व्यपनीयाश्रमात्तु माम्॥७॥
दूरं नीत्वाथं मारीचो राक्षसोऽभूच्छराहत:।
ह्रा लक्ष्मण हतोऽस्मीति यद्वाक्यं व्याजहार ह॥ ८॥
aft स्वस्ति were great रहिताभ्यां मया वने।
जनस्थाननिमित्तं fe कृतवैरोऽस्मि राक्षसै:॥९॥

‘The destruction of Sita is surely sought
by the ogres joined together. From the way
in which the ogre, Marica, appearing as a
golden deer, nay, luring me away from my
hermitage and taking me afar, uttered the
cry, ‘Alas, O Laksmana, | am killed indeed !’
when he was pierced with my arrow, | for
