* SUNDARAKANDA +

Hanuman once more assumed the
appearance of a mountain. (38—42)

वरीक्षमाणश्च ager परिघं तोरणाश्रितम्।
स तं Ta महाबाहु: कालायसपरिष्कृतम्।
रक्षिणस्तान् UA: सर्वान् सूदयामास मारुति: ॥४३॥
Nay, looking round about him, he caught
sight of a club studded with iron, lying at the
gate. Seizing it, the mighty-armed Hanuman,
son of the wind god, destroyed once more
all those who were guarding the gate. (43)

233

स तान् निहत्वा रणचण्डविक्रम:
समीक्षमाण: पुनरेव लङ्काम्।
प्रकाशितादित्य इवारचिमाली i vx it
Having got rid of them and surveying
Lanka once more, Hanuman, whose prowess
on the field of battle was terrific, and who was
surrounded by a circle of flames depicted by
his inflamed tail, shone brightly like the sun
with a circle of rays surrounding it. (44)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये सुन्दरकाण्डे त्रिपञ्चाश: सर्ग: ॥ 43 Il

Thus ends Canto Fifty-three of the Sundarakanda in the glorious Ramayana of Valmiki,
the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

Canto LIV

Making up his mind to set fire to the city of Lanka, which was the only
work left for him to do, and coming out into the open, Hanuman
burns the entire city barring the abode of Vibhisana.
Astonished to see the city burning, the gods and
Gandharvas (celestial musicians) are
filled with supreme joy

वीक्षमाणस्ततो लङ्कां कपि: कृतमनोरथ:।
वर्धमानसमुत्साह: कार्यशेषमचिन्तयत्॥ १॥
While surveying Lanka, Hanuman,
whose desired object had been accomplished
and whose zeal was growing, pondered
over that which remained for him to do. (1)
fe नु खल्ववशिष्टं मे कर्तव्यमिह साम्प्रतम्।
यदेषां रक्षसां भूय: संतापजननं भवेत्॥२॥
He said to himself, ‘What is actually left
for me to do in Lanka at the present moment,

which may prove to be a source of further
torment to these ogres? (2)

वनं तावत्प्रमथितं प्रकृष्टा राक्षसा हता:।

बलैकदेश: afta: शेषं दुर्गविनाशनम्॥ ३॥
‘The grove has already been laid waste,

eminent ogres killed and a part of the army

has been destroyed. The demolition of the
citadel alone remains. (3)

qt विनाशिते कर्म भवेत् सुखपरिश्रमम्।
अल्पयत्नेन कार्येऽस्मिन् मम स्यात् सफल: श्रम: UY A

‘With their fort destroyed, my work of
leaping across the sea and laying waste the
grove will prove to be a labour with a happy
conclusion. My labour in the cause of searching
for Sita will become fruitful with a little effort in
the direction of demolishing the fort. (4)
यो ga मम लाङ्गूले दीप्यते हव्यवाहन:।
अस्य संतर्पणं न्याय्यं कर्तुमेभिर्गृहोत्तमै:।। ५॥

‘It is advisable for me to feed to the fill
with these excellent buildings this fire (lit.,
the bearer of sacrificial offerings to the gods)
which is actually blazing on my tail though
proving so cool to me.’ (5)
