# YUDDHAKANDA #

कथं च राक्षसैरेभिर्मया च परिसान्त्वित:।
जिघांसुभिर्दाशरथिं व्यथसे त्वं सदानघ॥४०॥

“Nay, why do you feel vexed all the
time, O sinless one, though reassured by
these ogres as well as by myself, who are
eager to kill Rama (son of DaSaratha)? (40)

मां निहत्य fea wai fe निहनिष्यति wea: |
नाहमात्मनि संतापं गच्छेयं राक्षसाधिप॥४१॥

“Surely, Rama, a scion of Raghu, will
be able to kill you only after killing me. |,
however, never give way to misgiving on
that account, O suzerain lord of ogres!

(41)
कामं त्विदानीमपि at व्यादिश त्वं परंतप।
न Ut: प्रेक्षणीयस्ते युद्धायातुलविक्रम॥४२॥

“Therefore, command me at will to wage
war even at this moment, O scourge of
your enemies! No one else should be sought
for by you for this purpose, O incomparable
hero ! (42)
अहमुत्सादयिष्यामि शत्रूंस्तव महाबलान्।
यदि शक्रो यदि यमो यदि पावकमारुतौ॥४३॥
ae योधयिष्यामि कुबेरवरुणावपि।
गिरिमात्रशरीरस्य शितशूलधरस्य मे॥४४॥
नर्दतस्तीक्ष्णदंष्टरस्य बिभीयाद् a पुरंदर:।
अथ वा त्यक्तशस्त्रस्य मृद्गतस्तरसा रिपून्॥४५॥
नमे प्रतिमुख: कश्चित् स्थातुं शक्तो जिजीविषु: ।
नैव शक्त्या न गदया नासिना निशितै: vit: । ४६ ॥

“| shall exterminate your enemies,
though endowed with extraordinary might.
Even if it is Indra, the ruler of gods, or,
again, if it is Yama, the god of retribution,
or even if they are the god of fire and the
wind-god, | shall contend with them, nay,
even with Kubera and Varuna. Even Indra,
the destroyer of citadels, will dread me,
endowed as | am with a body as big as a
mountain and pointed teeth and wielding a
sharpened pike for a weapon, even as |
roar. Again, none will be able to withstand,
if he wishes to survive, even if | begin to

541

crush the enemies. with impetuosity,
abandoning the arms. | shall in no case fight
with a javelin, nor with a mace, nor, again,
with a sword, much less with whetted shafts.
(43—46)

हस्ताभ्यामेव संरभ्य हनिष्यामि सवज्रिणम्।
यदि मे मुष्टिवेगं स राघवोऽद्य सहिष्यति॥४७॥
ad: पास्यन्ति बाणौघा रुधिरं राघवस्य मे।
चिन्तया तप्यसे wer किमर्थं मयि तिष्ठति॥ ४८ i

“Getting enraged, | shall make short
work of Rama, even if he is accompanied
by Indra, the wielder of the thunderbolt, with
my bare hands. If the said scion of Raghu
will be able to withstand the force of my
fists today, the volleys of my arrows will in
that case drink the blood of Rama. Why do
you feel tormented with anxiety, O king, so
long as | exist! (47-48)

aise शत्रुविनाशाय aa निर्यातुमुद्यत:।
Ww ware wt at निहनिष्यामि संयुगे॥४९॥
wad लक्ष्मणं चैव सुग्रीवं च महाबलम्।
हनूमन्तं च रक्षोघ्नं येन लङ्का प्रदीपिता॥५०॥
“I, for my part, am prepared to sally
forth for the extermination of your enemies.
Give up the violent fear proceeding from
Rama. | shall without doubt make _ short
work on the battlefield of Rama (a scion of
Raghu) as well as of Laksmana as also of
Sugriva, who is endowed with extraordinary
might, and shall also dispose of Hanuman,
the destroyer of ogres, by whom Lanka
was set on fire. (49-50)
wig भक्षयिष्यामि dat समुपस्थिते।
असाधारणमिच्छामि तव दातुं महद् यश:॥५१॥
“Nay, | shall devour the monkeys when
a struggle is quite at hand. | wish to confer
uncommon and great glory on you. (51)

यदि Gale भयं राजन् यदि चापि स्वयंभुव: |

ततोऽहं नाशयिष्यामि नैशं AA इवांशुमान्॥५२॥
“Again, if fear of Indra (the ruler of

gods) and even of Brahma (the self-born
