+ UTTARAKANDA +

aaratsht समुद्रेभ्य: संध्यामन्वास्य रावण।
इदं मुहूर्तमायाति वाली तिष्ठ मुहूर्तकम्॥६॥

“After saying his Sandhya prayers on
the shore of all the four oceans, O Ravana,
Vali must be returning this very hour. Pray,
wait awhile. (6)

एतानस्थिचयान् पश्य य एते शङ्खपाण्डुरा:।
युद्धार्थिनामिमे राजन् वानराधिपतेजसा॥७॥

Behold these heaps of bones, which
are white as a conch. These are the bones
of those who sought combat with Vali and
were crushed by the might of Vali, the
suzerain lord of monkeys, O King! (7)

यद्वामृतरस: पीतस्त्वया रावण राक्षस।
तदा वालिनमासाद्य तदन्तं da जीवितम्॥८॥

“Or, even if the drink of immortality has
been imbibed by you, O Ravana, your life
will have reached its end the moment you
encounter Vali, O ogre! (8)
पश्येदानीं जगच्चित्रमिमं विश्रवस: सुत।
इदं मुहूर्तं तिष्ठस्व दुर्लभं a भविष्यति॥९॥

“Presently behold this marvel of the
world, O son of Visrava! Wait till this hour.
Your life will be difficult to retain any more. (9)

अथवा त्वरसे Ad गच्छ दक्षिणसागरम्।
alert द्रक्ष्यसे तत्र भूमिष्ठमिव पावकम्॥१०॥
“Or, if you are in a hurry to breathe
your last, proceed to the southern sea.
There you will see Vali like the god of fire
staying on earth.” (10)
स तु तारं farted रावणो लोकरावण:।
पुष्पकं तत् समारुह्य प्रययौ दक्षिणार्णवम्॥११॥
Severely scolding Tara, the notorious
Ravana, who made people cry, flew to the

southern sea, getting on his well-known
Puspaka car. (11)

wa हेमगिरिप्रख्यं तरुणार्कनिभाननम्।
रावणो वालिनं Gear संध्योपासनतत्परम्॥ १२॥
पुष्पकादवरुह्याथ रावणोऽञ्जनसंनिभ: |
ग्रहीतुं वालिनं तूर्णं नि:शब्दपदमव्रजत्॥१३॥

965

Alighting from the Puspaka on seeing
Vali, who resembled a mountain of gold and
whose countenance shone like the newly
risen sun, absorbed in saying the Sandhya
prayers, Ravana who had the hue of
collyrium, proceeded hastily with silent steps
in order to capture him. (12-13)

यदृच्छया तदा Fer वालिनापि स रावण:।
पापाभिप्रायकं दृष्टवा चकार न तु सम्भ्रमम्॥ १४॥
By chance the notorious Ravana too
was espied by Vali. The latter, however, did
not feel perturbed even on seeing him of
sinful intent. (14)

शशमालक्ष्य सिंहो वा पन्नगं गरुडो यथा।
न चिन्तयति तं वाली रावणं पापनिश्चयम्॥ १५॥

Vali did not feel worried even on
perceiving Ravana of sinful resolve any
more than a lion would on seeing a hare or
Garuda (the king of birds) on seeing a
serpent. (15)
जिघृक्षमाणमायान्तं रावणं पापचेतसम्।
कक्षावलम्बिनं कृत्वा गमिष्ये त्रीन् महार्णवान्॥ १६॥

(Vali said to himself:) “Pressing in my
arm-pit the sinful-minded Ravana as soon
as he approaches with intent to catch hold
of me and leaving him hanging there, | shall
visit the three remaining oceans too. (16)
द्रक्ष्यन्यरिं ममाङ्कस्थं स्रंसदूरुकराम्बरम्।
लम्बमानं दशग्रीवं गरुडस्येव पन्नगम्॥१७॥

“People will see my enemy, Ravana
(the ten-headed monster), hanging from my
arm-pit with his thighs, hands and raiment
dangling, like a serpent in the claws of
Garuda.” (17)

इत्येवं मतिमास्थाय वाली मौनमुपास्थित:।
जपन् a नैगमान् मन्त्रांस्तस्थौ पर्वतराड्व॥ १८॥
Making up his mind thus, Vali remained
standing like the king of mountains, silently
repeating Vedic Mantras. (18)

तावन्योन्यं जिघृक्षन्तौ हरिराक्षसपार्थिवौ।
प्रयत्नवन्तौ तत् कर्म ईहतुर्बलदर्पितौ॥१९॥
