1016

mountain (behind which the sun is supposed
to set). (29)
न मे ad: पथ्यमिदं त्वया pd

न चास्मि शक्ता हि निवारणे तव।
हता सपुत्रास्मि हतेन संयुगे

सह त्वया श्रीर्विजहाति मामपि॥ ३०॥

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

“Neither was my salutary advice referred
to above followed by you nor was | actually
able to restrain you. The result is that you
having been killed in a combat, |, with my
son, have been ruined and alongwith you
the goddess of fortune is deserting me as
well as my son.” (30)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये किष्किन्धाकाण्डे त्रयोविंश: सर्ग: ॥ 23 ॥

Thus ends Canto Twenty-three in the Kiskindhakanda of the glorious Ramayana of
Valmiki, the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

Canto XXIV

Beseeching Angada and others to conduct the search for Sita, Sugriva, whose
heart melted to hear the laments of Tara, seeks Sri Rama’s permission to
enter fire to atone for Vali’s death, making $17 Rama sad. Approaching

Sri Rama in her turn, Tara extols him with devotion and
expresses her intention to give up the ghost, on which
Sti Rama expostulates with her and urges her to
survive for the earthly good of Angada

तामाशु वेगेन दुरासदेन
त्वभिप्लुतां शोकमहार्णवेन।
पश्यंस्तदा वाल्यनुजस्तरस्वी
भ्रातुर्वधेनाप्रतिमेन aT
Seeing Tara flooded with an ocean of
grief of dashing impetuosity and difficult to
encounter, Sugriva (younger brother of Vall)
for his part, who was full of energy, felt
agonized at that time due to the death of his
elder brother, which he was instrumental in
bringing about and which he thought was
unbecoming of him. (1)

स बाष्पपूर्णेन मुखेन पश्यन्
क्षणेन निर्विण्णमना मनस्वी।

भृत्यैर्वृत: सम्परिदूयमान:॥ २॥
Gazing with a face bathed in tears and
getting disgusted at heart in a momert, nay,

feeling sore distressed, the wise Sugriva,
surrounded by his dependants, slowly sought
the presence of Sri Rama. (2)

स तं समासाद्य गृहीतचाप-
मुदात्तमाशीविषतुल्यबाणम् ।
लक्षणलक्षिताङ्ग-
मवस्थितं राघवमित्युवाच॥ ३ ॥
Duly approaching the celebrated, noble
and glorious Sri Rama (a scion of Raghu),
who stood with his bow held in his grip and
whose arrows resembled a snake, nay,
whose limbs were distinguished with marks
of royalty, Sugriva submitted to him as
follows : (3)
यथा प्रतिज्ञातमिदं नरेन्द्र
pd त्वया दृष्टफलं च कर्म।
maT भोगेषु नरेन्द्रसूनो
wt Rad हतजीवितेन॥४॥

यशस्विनं
