* SUNDARAKANDA +

those mighty tigers among men, who were
richly endowed with charm and auspicious
bodily marks. Having fully known the real
facts from me, those two jewels among men
were filled with joy, and were transported by
me on my shoulders to that region where
Sugriva was. The two princes’ were
introduced in their reality by me to the high-
souled Sugriva. (23—32)
तयोरन्योन्यसम्भाषाद् भृशं प्रीतिरजायत।
wa तौ कीर्तिसम्पन्नौ हरीश्वरनरेश्वरौ॥ ३३॥
परस्परकृताश्वासौ कथया waar
तं तत: सान्त्वयामास सुग्रीवं लक्ष्मणाग्रज:॥ ३४॥
स्व्रीहेतोर्वालिना wat fret पुरुतेजसा।
ततस्त्वन्नाशजं शोकं रामस्याक्लिष्टकर्मण:॥ ३५॥
लक्ष्मणो वानरेन्द्राय सुग्रीवाय न्यवेदयत्।
स श्रुत्वा वानरेन्द्रस्तु लक्ष्मणेनेरितं वच:॥ ३६॥
तदासीन्निष्प्रभोऽत्यर्थं ग्रहग्रस्त इवांशुमान्।
ततस्त्वद्गात्रशोभीनि रक्षसा ह्रियमाणया॥३७॥
यान्याभरणजालानि पातितानि महीतले।
तानि सर्वाणि रामाय आनीय हरियूथपा:॥ ३८॥
संहृष्टा दर्शयामासुर्गतिं तु न विदुस्तव।
तानि रामाय दत्तानि मयैवोपहृतानि च॥ ३९॥
स्वनवन्त्यवकीर्णानि तस्मिन् विहतचेतसि।
तान्यङ्के दर्शनीयानि कृत्वा बहुविधं तदा॥४०॥
तेन देवप्रकाशेन देवेन परिदेवितम्।
पश्यतस्तानि रूदतस्ताम्यतश्च UA: पुन:॥ ४१ ll
प्रादीपयद् दाशरथेस्तदा शोकहुताशनम्॥४२॥
“As a sequel to their holding talks with
one another, a great amity sprang up between
them—Sri Rama and Sugriva. On that
occasion those illustrious personage, the lord
of monkeys and the ruler of men, felt mutually
comforted by narrating their respective past
history. Sri Rama (the eldest brother of
Laksmana) then consoled Sugriva, who had
been banished for the sake of his wife, Ruma,
who had been wrested from him by his elder
brother, Vali, who was endowed with
extraordinary energy. Thereupon Laksmana
spoke to Sugriva, the lord of monkeys, about
the grief caused to Sri Rama of unwearied

161

action by your (Sita’s) loss.

“Hearing the words uttered by Laksmana,
the aforesaid lord of monkeys for his part
looked extremely lustreless on that occasion
like the sun overshadowed by the planet Rahu.
Fetching all those sets of jewels which adorned
your limbs and which had been dropped on
the earth’s surface by you while being carried
away by the ogre Ravana, the leaders of
monkey-hordes, greatly delighted, showed
them to Sri Rama. They, however, did not
know your whereabouts. The jewels, which
were handed over at that time to Sri Rama
while he had _ completely lost his
consciousness due to excessive grief, had
fallen with a tinkling sound and got scattered,
and had been brought in the first instance
when they had actually fallen on the ground,
by me alone. Clasping those jewels, worth
beholding as they were, to his bosom, that
adorable prince, who is a manifestation of the
Deity, wailed in many ways. Even as he
looked on them, he wept and pined for you
again and again; the lamentation of Sri Rama,
son of Dasaratha, highly inflamed the fire of
our grief at that time. (33—42)
शायितं च fat तेन दु:खार्तेन महात्मना।
मयापि विविधैर्वाक्यै: कृच्छादुत्थापित: पुन:॥ ४३॥

“Stricken with agony, that exalted soul
lay down senseless on the ground for a
long time and was then roused by me by
means of various cheering expressions with
difficulty. (43)
तानि दृष्ट्वा महार्हाणि दर्शयित्वा मुहुर्मुहु:।
राघव: सहसौमित्रि: सुग्रीवे संन्यवेशयत्॥४४॥

“Having examined those’ valuable
jewels, they showed them again and again

to one another, and Sri Rama, together with
Laksmana, deposited them with Sugriva.(44)

स तवादर्शनादार्ये waa: परितप्यते।
महता ज्वलता नित्यमग्निनेवाग्निपर्वत:॥४५॥

“That scion of Raghu feels sore
distressed at your loss even as the
