190

शतादित्यमिवाभाति mt गततोयदम्।
शिंशुमारोरगगणैर्मीनैरपि च चञ्चलै:॥ २१॥
विद्युद्धिरिव विक्षिप्तैराकाशमभवत् तदा।
पाण्डुरे: सलिलोत्पीडै: कीर्यमाणै: सहस्रधा॥ २२॥
क्वचिद् द्रुततरं alt कुटिलं क्वचिदायतम्॥ २३॥
सलिलेनैव सलिलं क्वचिदभ्याहतं पुन:॥ २४॥
मुहुरूर्ध्वपथं गत्वा पपात वसुधां पुन:।
तच्छंकरशिरोभ्रष्टं भ्रष्टं भूमितले पुन:॥ २५॥
व्यरोचत dat तोयं निर्मलं गतकल्मषम्।
तत्रर्षिगणगन्धर्वा वसुधातलवासिन: ।। २६ I
शापात् प्रपतिता ये च गगनाद् वसुधातलम्॥ २७॥
pa तत्राभिषेकं ते बभूवुर्गतकल्मषा:।
धूतपापा: पुनस्तेन तोयेनाथ शुभान्विता:॥ २८ ॥
पुनराकाशमाविश्य स्वाँल्लोकान् प्रतिपेदिरे।
मुमुदे मुदितो लोकस्तेन तोयेन भास्वता॥ eel
कृताभिषेको गङ्गायां AYA गतकल्मष:।
भगीरथो fe राजर्षिर्दिव्यं स्यन्दनमास्थित:॥ ३०॥
प्रायादग्रे महाराजस्तं गङ्गा पृष्ठतोऽन्वगात्।
देवा: सर्षिगणा: सर्वे दैत्यदानवराक्षसा:॥ ३१॥
गन्धर्वयक्षप्रवरा: सकिंनरमहोरगा: |
सर्पाश्चाप्सससो राम भगीरथरथानुगा:॥ BR
गङ्गामन्वगमन् प्रीता: सर्वे जलचराश्च ये।
यतो भगीरथो राजा ततो गङ्गा यशस्विनी॥ ३३॥
जगाम सरितां श्रेष्ठा सर्वपापप्रणाशिनी।
ततो fe यजमानस्य जह्नोरद्भुतकर्मण:॥ ३४॥
Tet सम्प्लावयामास यज्ञवाटं महात्मन:।
तस्यावलेपनं ज्ञात्वा क्रुद्धो WEF Waa sy il
अपिबत् ¢ जलं we गङ्गाया: परमाद्भुतम्।
ततो cat: सगन्धर्वा ऋषयश्च सुविस्मिता:॥ ३६॥
Tet चापि नयन्ति स्म दुहितॄत्वे महात्मन:॥ ३७॥
There on the earth’s surface the water
of the Ganga meandered with a terrific noise.
And the earth looked exceptionally charming
with its hosts of fishes and tortoises as well

as with its multitudes of sea-elephants falling
and already fallen alongwith the stream on

« VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

the earth’s surface. At that time, seized with
great bewilderment those celestial Rsis and
Gandharvas as well as the hosts of Yaksas
and Siddhas, and the gods stationed there
(in the heavens) beheld from their aerial
cars, big as cities, as well as from the back
of their horses and excellent elephants the
Ganga’s descent on the earth from the said
heavens. Eager to see this celebrated, nay,
wonderful and superb descent of the Ganga
on the mortal plane, multitudes of gods
possessed of infinite strength collected in
the heavens. With the hosts of gods coming
down with great speed and with the brilliance
of their shining jewels, the cloudless
firmament looked as if irradiated by hundreds
of suns. Scattered on that occasion with
multitudes of sea-elephants and snakes as
well as with throbbing fishes, the sky
appeared covered with streaks of lightning.
Nay, with volumes of white foam that were
being tossed about in numberless particles
the vault of heavens looked as if overcast
with autumnal waterless and hence white
clouds and crowded with flocks of flying
swans.

The Ganga now flowed very swiftly,
now tortuously; now it broadened out and
now again narrowed down when forcing its
way through a ravine; now it was tossed
high when dashed against a rock and now
it glided. Now buffeted by the waves of the
same water indeed (when turned back by
the wind), the water of the Ganga spouted
upwards once more and dashed to the
ground again. First fallen on the head of
Lord Sankara and again dropped on the
earth’s surface, the limpid water of the
Ganga, which rids those who come in
contact with it of all sin, shone bright on
that occasion. On that spot hosts of Rsis
and Gandharvas as well as the inhabitants
of the globe touched (sipped) the water
fallen from the person of Lord Siva (the
Source of the universe) as purifying. Those
who had fallen from the heavens to the
