796

forbear of the Siddhas (a class of demigods
endowed with mystic powers by virtue of
their very birth) as well as of the Sadhyas
(a class of celestial beings). You are the
Sacrificial performance; nay, You are the
sacred syllable ‘Vasat’ (on hearing which
the Adhvaryu priest casts the oblation offered
to a deity into the sacred fire); You are the
mystic syllable ‘OM’ (an appellation of God)
and higher than the highest. (19)

प्रभवं निधनं चापि नो fag: को भवानिति।
दृश्यसे सर्वभूतेषु Wy च ब्राह्मणेषु च॥ २०॥

“People neither know your origin, nor
Your end, nor who You are in reality. You
alone are manifest in all created beings, in
the cows as well as in the Brahmans. (20)

feq wale TM पर्वतेषु Ady च।
सहस्रचरण: श्रीमान् शतशीर्ष: सहस्रदूक॥ २१॥
“You exist in all the quarters, in the
firmament, in mountains as well as in rivers.
You are the glorious Being endowed with
thousand of feet, hundreds of heads and
thousand of eyes. (21)
त्वं धारयसि भूतानि पृथिवीं सर्वपर्वतान्।
ard पृथिव्या: सलिले दृश्यसे त्वं महोरग:।॥ २२॥
“You sustain all created beings, the
earth as also all the mountains. On the
disappearance of the earth at the end of the
Cosmic day, You are seen lying on a huge
serpent known by the name of Sesa, on the
waters. (22)

त्रील्लोकान् धारयन् राम देवगन्धर्वदानवान्।
अहं ad wa wa fra eat सरस्वती॥ २३॥

“You are the Cosmic Person, Lord
Narayana, supporting all the three worlds
as also the gods, the Gandharvas (celestial
musicians) and the devils, O Rama! l,
Brahma, constitute Your heart, while Goddess
Saraswati, O Rama, Your tongue. (23)

देवा रोमाणि गात्रेषु ब्रह्मणा निर्मिता: प्रभो।
निमेषस्ते स्मृता रात्रिरुन्मेषो दिवसस्तथा॥ २४॥

“The gods created by Brahma are the

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA +

hair on Your limbs, O Lord! Night has been
recognized as the closing of Your eyelids
and the day as the opening of your eyelids.(24)

संस्कारास्त्वभवन् वेदा नैतदस्ति त्वया विना।
WT Wa शरीरं A We ते वसुधातलम्॥ २५॥
“And the latencies of Your mind
appeared as the Vedas. The visible universe
does not exist but for You. The entire Cosmos
is Your body and the earth constitutes Your
firmness. (25)

अग्नि: कोप: प्रसादस्ते सोम: श्रीवत्सलक्षण:।
त्वयालोकास्त्रय: क्रान्ता: पुरा स्वैर्विक्रमैस्तिभि: ।। २६ ॥

“Fire is Your wrath and the moon
constitutes Your placidity. Nay, You are
Lord Visnu, who bears the mark of
Srivatsa—a curl of white hair on His breast.
All the three worlds were covered by You in
Your three strides in the past. (26)

महेन्द्रश्च कृतो राजा बलिं बद्धवा सुदारुणम्।
सीता लक्ष्मीर्भवान् विष्णुर्देव: HOT: प्रजापति: ।। २७॥
“Nay, after binding the exceptionally
formidable Bali (the ruler of the three
worlds) the mighty Indra was crowned king
by you. Sita is no other than Goddess
Laksmi, the divine consort of Lord Visnu,
while You are the same as Lord Visnu. You
alone are Krsna, who is all Truth,
Consciousness and Bliss and You are the
Lord of created beings. (27)
वधार्थं रावणस्येह प्रविष्टो मानुषीं तनुम्।
तदिदं नस्त्वया are pdt धर्मभृतां वर॥ २८॥
“For the destruction of Ravana You
assumed a human semblance on this earth.
This aforesaid purpose of ours has been
accomplished by You, O prince of those
upholding the cause of virtue! (28)

निहतो रावणो wa wast दिवमाक्रम।
अमोघं ca did ते न ते मोघा: पराक्रमा:॥ २९॥
“Ravana has been killed by You, O

Rama! Therefore, highly rejoiced, return to
Your divine Abode. Unfailing, O Lord, is
