# YUDDHAKANDA #

Nay, assuming a triumphant air, the
monkeys shouted with all their might and
further began to drag the ogres, who were
still alive on the battlefield. (37)

a वरीरशोभामभजन्महाकपि:
समेत्य रक्षांसि निहत्य मारुति:।
। पीममगि ।
विष्णुर्यथैवोरुबलं चमूमुखे॥ ३८ i

Having encountered and killed the ogres,
that great monkey, Hanuman (son of wind-
god), enjoyed the glory appropriate to a
hero much in the same way as Lord Visnu
did on killing in the front of the army in line
of battle the redoubtable and great demons

497

(Madhu, Kaitabha and so on) who were
endowed with great strength and were

capable of destroying their enemies. (38)
अपूजयन् देवगणास्तदा कपिं
स्वयं च रामोऽतिबलश्च लक्ष्मण:।
विभीषणश्चैव महाबलस्तदा॥ ३९॥

At that time hosts of gods, nay, Sri
Rama himself as well as Laksmana, who
was endowed with exceeding might, even
so, the monkeys headed by Sugriva as
also Vibhisana, who was endowed with
extraordinary might, honoured the monkey,
Hanuman. (39)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये FERS षट्पञ्चाश: सर्ग: ॥ ५६ ॥

Thus ends Canto Fifty-six in the Yuddhakanda of the glorious Ramayana of
Valmiki, the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

ACTS: सर्ग:
Canto LVII

Under orders of Ravana, Prahasta sallies forthwith
a large army for the battlefield

अकम्पनवधं श्रुत्वा क्रुद्धो A राक्षसेश्वर:।
किंचिद् दीनमुखश्चापि सचिवांस्तानुदैक्षत॥ १॥
Enraged to hear of Akampana’s death,
nay, with his face a bit downcast, too,
Ravana, the lord of ogres, intently looked at
his well-known counsellors. (1)

स तु ध्यात्वा qed तु मन्त्रिभि: संविचार्य a
ade रावण: पूर्वदिवसे राक्षसाधिप:।
पुरीं परिययौ लङ्कां सर्वान् गुल्मानवेक्षितुम्॥ २॥
Having reflected awhile, and then
deliberated with his counsellors, Ravana,
the suzerain lord of ogres, for his part
then actually proceeded in the forenoon to
the city of Lanka in order to inspect all

the fortified posts.

तां राक्षसगणैर्गुप्तां गुल्मैर्बहुभिरावृताम्।

cast नगरीं राजा पताकाध्वजमालिनीम्॥ ३॥
The king found that city guarded by

detachments of ogres, encompassed with

numerous defences and dressed with rows
of flags and pennants. (3)
रुद्धां तु नगरीं दृष्ट्वा रावणो राक्षसेश्वर:।
उवाचात्महितं काले प्रहस्तं युद्धकोविदम्॥४॥
Seeing the city besieged, Ravana,
the lord of ogres, for his part spoke as
follows to Prahasta, who was skilled in
warfare and wished well of him even at a
critical time: (4)

(2)
