* AYODHYAKANDA +

Dasaratha, who was our most venerable
sovereign, has ascended to heaven. (2)

त्वमद्य भव नो राजा राजपुत्रो महायश:।
संगत्या नापराध्नोति राज्यमेतदनायकम्॥ ३॥

“This kingdom being without a ruler, be
you our ruler now, O highly illustrious
prince! There being justification for your
assuming the reins of government because
your elder brother has been exiled under
the command of your father and you have
been nominated by him as his successor,
you are not to blame for superseding the
claims of your brother. (3)
आभिषेचनिकं सर्वमिदमादाय weal
प्रतीक्षते cat स्वजन: श्रेणयश्च नृपात्मज॥४॥

“Taking all these requisites for your
consecration, O scion of Raghu, your own
people, the counsellors and ministers, as
well as the citizens are awaiting your
pleasure, O prince । (4)
अभिषेचय चात्मानं पाहि चास्मान् नरर्षभ॥५॥

“Accept the throne of Ayodhya, which
has surely been inherited by you from your
father and grandfather, O Bharata, and have
yourself consecrated and thereby protect
us, O jewel among men!” (5)
भरतस्तं जनं Wa प्रत्युवाच yaaa gil

Going clockwise as a mark of respect
round all the requisites for consecration,
Bharata, who had taken the vow of propitiating
Sri Rama, replied to all those counsellors
as follows : (6)

ज्येष्ठस्य राजता नित्यमुचिता fe कुलस्य a: |
नैवं भवन्तो मां वक्तुमर्हन्ति कुशला जना:॥७॥

“Since the practice of conferring the
kingship on the eldest brother has ever
been regarded as commendable in our race;
you, who are all clever people, ought not to
make such a request to me. (7)

583

wa: gat fe नो भ्राता भविष्यति महीपति: |
अहं त्वरण्ये वत्स्यामि वर्षाणि नव we च॥ ८॥

“Sri Rama will be the ruler of the earth,
since he is our eldest brother. |, for my part,
shall reside in the forest for nine years and
five on his behalf. (8)

wat महती सेना चतुरङ्महाबला।
आनयिष्याम्यहं ज्येष्ठं भ्रातरं राघवं वनात्॥९॥
“Let a large and exceptionally powerful
army consisting of all the four limbs be got
ready to accompany me to the forest. | shall
bring back in state my elder brother, Sri
Rama, a scion of Raghu, from the forest.

(9)
आभिषेचनिकं wat सर्वमेतदुपस्कृतम्।
पुरस्कृत्य गमिष्यामि रामहेतोर्वनं प्रति॥१०॥

“Placing in the van all these requisites
got together for the consecration ceremony,
| shall proceed in the direction of the forest
in order to meet Sri Rama. (10)

तत्रैव तं नरव्याघ्रमभिषिच्य पुरस्कृतम्।
आनयिष्यामि a रामं हव्यवाहमिवाध्वरात्॥११॥

“Having consecrated that tiger among
men in the forest itself, | shall surely bring
Sri Rama back to Ayodhya with honour
even as one would bring a sacred fire from
a big fire-sanctuary to one’s own house.

(11)
न सकामां करिष्यामि स्वामिमां मातृगन्धिनीम्।
वने वत्स्याम्यहं दुर्गे Ta राजा भविष्यति॥ १२॥

“| shall not allow this so-called mother
of mine to realize her ambition of seeing her
son crowned king. | shall, on the contrary,
reside in a forest difficult to cross, while Sri
Rama will be crowned king. (12)

क्रियतां शिल्पिभि: wer: समानि विषमाणि च।

रक्षिणश्चानुसंयान्तु पथि दुर्गविचारका:॥१३॥
“Let a passage be carved by masons

where there is none, let uneven roads be

levelled, and let guards knowing the difficult
and narrow passages duly follow us.” (13)
