* ARANYAKANDA «

809

Canto XXXVI

Ravana tells Marica how he has been wronged by Rama and
asks for his help in taking away Sita

मारीच श्रूयतां तात वचनं मम भाषत:।
आर्तोऽस्मि मम चार्तस्य भवान् fe परमा गति: ।। १॥

“Marica dear, listen to my words even
as | speak. | feel distressed and undoubtedly
you are my supreme resort, afflicted as |
am. (1)

जानीषे त्वं जनस्थानं war यत्र खरो मम।

दूषणश्च महाबाहु: स्वसा शूर्पणखा च मे॥२॥
त्रिशिराश्च महाबाहू राक्षस: पिशिताशन:।
अन्ये च बहव: VAT लब्धलक्षा निशाचरा:॥ ३॥
वसन्ति मन्नियोगेन अधिवासं च राक्षसा:।
aaa महारण्ये मुनीन् A धर्मचारिण:॥४॥

“You know Janasthana, where my
brother, Khara, and the mighty-armed Dusana
as well as my sister Surpanakha as also the
mighty-armed Trisira, the flesh eating ogre,
and many other valiant night-stalking ogres,
who received encouragement in the form of
victory in warfare, made their abode at my
command, molesting ascetics who practised
virtue in the great forest of Dandaka. (2—4)

चतुर्दश सहस्राणि रक्षसां भीमकर्मणाम्।
शूराणां लब्धलक्षाणां खरचित्तानुवर्तिनाम्॥५॥
Fourteen thousand valiant ogres of
terrible deeds, who received encouragement
in warfare and followed the mind of Khara,
lived there. (5)

a त्विदानीं जनस्थाने वसमाना महाबला:।
ast: परमायत्ता रामेण we संयुगे॥६॥
नानाशस्त्रप्रहरणा: खरप्रमुखराक्षसा: |
तेन सजातरोषेण रामेण रणषूर्धंनि।।७।।

wg निहत: संख्ये दूषणश्च निपातित:॥९॥

हत्वा त्रिशिरसं चापि निर्भया दण्डका: कृता:।
foot निरस्त: क्रुद्धेन सभार्य: क्षीणजीवित:॥ १०॥
स हन्ता तस्य सैन्यस्य राम: क्षत्रियपांसन:।
अशील: कर्कशस्तीक्ष्णो Wat लुब्धोऽजितेन्द्रिय: ULL
त्यक्तधर्मा त्वधर्मात्मा भूतानामहिते रत:।
येन वैरं विनारण्ये सत्त्वमास्थाय केवलम्॥१२॥
कर्णनासापहारेण भगिनी मे विरूपिता।

अस्य भार्यां जनस्थानात् सीतां सुरसुतोपमाम्॥ १३॥
आनयिष्यामि विक्रम्य सहायस्तत्र मे भव।
त्वया ह्यहं सहायेन पार्श्वस्थेन महाबल॥ १४॥
भ्रातृभिश्च सुरान् सर्वान् नाहमत्राभिचिन्तये।
aaa va त्वं A समर्थो ह्यसि राक्षस॥ eu

“Living in Janasthana with Khara as
their head, those exceptionally mighty ogres
for their part, who were fully prepared, skilled
as they were in the use of various weapons,
came into a clash with Rama on the battlefield.
Without uttering any harsh word, the bow
with arrows was made use of by Rama, in
whom anger had burst forth, in the van of
the fight. Fourteen thousand ogres of terrific
energy were made short work of by a human
being, contending on foot, single-handed,
with fiery arrows. Nay, Khara was slain by
him on the battlefield and Dusana too was
killed; and, disposing of Trisira too, the forest
of Dandaka was rendered secure for the
habitation of ascetics. Exiled alongwith his
wife by his enraged father, the aforesaid
Rama, whose life has been spent and who
has brought disgrace to the Ksatriyas, is
the slayer of that army. Ill-behaved, hard-
hearted, fiery, stupid, avaricious and having
no control over his senses, he has abandoned
virtue, his mind being set on unrighteousness,
and is intent on doing harm to all created
beings. By use of might | shall bring from
