* ARANYAKANDA «

making up your mind, nay, weighing carefully
the preponderance and otherwise of the
merits and demerits of the proposition and
judging aright your own strength as well as
that of Rama (a scion of Raghu), and
ascertaining what is conducive to your good,
you ought to do the proper thing. (23-24)

अहं I Wa तव न as रणे
समागमं कोसलराजसूनुना।

813

क्षमं च युक्तं च निशाचराधिप॥ २७५ ॥

“l, for my part, do not deem fit your
encounter on a field of battle with Rama,
the prince of Kosala. Listen once more,
O suzerain lord of ogres, to my following
most useful, appropriate and reasonable
submission. (25)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्येऽरण्यकाण्डे सप्तत्रिंश: Wr: ॥ ३७॥

Thus ends Canto Thirty-seven in the Aranyakanda of the glorious Ramayana of
Valmiki, the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

अष्टात्रिंश: सर्ग:
Canto XXXVIII

Narrating his own experience of Sri Rama’s prowess,
Marica asks Ravana not to provoke Sri Rama

कदाचिदप्यहं वीर्यात् पर्यटन् पृथिवीमिमाम्।
बलं नागसहस्रस्य धारयन् पर्वतोपम:॥१॥
नीलजीमूतसंकाशस्तप्तकाञ्चनकुण्डल: ।
भयं लोकस्य जनयन् किरीटी परिघायुध:॥ २॥
व्यचरन् दण्डकारण्यमृषिमांसानि भक्षयन्।
विश्वामित्रोऽथ धर्मात्मा मद्बित्रस्तो महामुनि:।। ३॥
wae गत्वा दशरथं नरेन्द्रमिदमब्रवीत्।
अयं Tad at Wa: पर्वकाले समाहित:॥४॥
“Once while | was ranging this earth
through pride of valour, looking like a
mountain and possessing the might of a
thousand elephants and the hue of a dark
blue cloud, adorned with ear-rings of refined
gold with a diadem on my head and an iron
club in my hand, | roamed about in the
Dandaka forest eating the flesh of Rsis (seers
of Vedic Mantras) and causing terror in the
hearts of men. Personally approaching
Dasaratha, the great Sage Viswamitra, whose

mind was set on righteousness, and who was
greatly afraid of me, spoke to the king as
follows: ‘Let this Rama protect me at the time
of a sacrifice, remaining vigilant all the time.
(1—4)
इत्येवमुक्तो धर्मात्मा राजा दशरथस्तदा॥५॥
प्रत्युवाच महाभागं विश्वामित्रं महामुनिम्।
ऊनद्वादशवर्षोऽयमकृतास्त्रश्च WHA: NEU
“‘A terrible calamity has arisen before
me through Marica, O ruler of men!’ Solicited
in the above words, on that occasion, King
DaSaratha, whose mind was set on piety,
replied as follows to the eminent and highly
blessed Sage ViSwamitra: ‘This scion of
Raghu is less than twelve* years of age
and has not yet practised archery. (5-6)

कामं तु मम ad सैन्यं मया सह गमिष्यति।
at चतुरङ्खेण स्वयमेत्य निशाचरम्॥७॥

* In I. xx. 2 the age of Rama at that time was declared by DaSaratha to be less than fifteen years.
Marica, however, minimizes it here to impress upon Ravana the extraordinary might of Srt Rama even at

that tender age.
