# YUDDHAKANDA +

सर्वां सागरपर्यन्तां सशैलवनकाननाम्।
करोम्यवानरां भूमिमाज्ञापयतु at भवान्॥४॥
“| can sweep the entire globe, bounded
by the oceans, with its mountains, forests
and woodlands, clear it of all monkeys.
Command me, if you will. (4)

Tat wa विधास्यामि वानराद् रजनीचर।
नागमिष्यति a दु:खं किंचिदात्मापराधजम्॥७५॥
“Nay, | shall certainly protect you
against the monkey race, O ranger of the
night! No calamity of any kind born of your
own crime (in the shape of Sita’s abduction)
will come to you.” (5)

अब्रवीत् तु सुसंक्रुद्धो दुर्मुखो नाम राक्षस:।
sé न क्षमणीयं fe सर्वेषां न: प्रधर्षणम्॥६॥
“Feeling extremely enraged, another
ogre, Durmukha by name, for his part
submitted: “This outrage committed against
us all is not worth pocketing, indeed.
(6)

aa परिभवो भूय: पुरस्यान्त:पुरस्य च।
श्रीमतो Uae वानरेण प्रधर्षणम्॥७॥
“Furthermore, this assault by a monkey
is an affront to the city of Lanka, to the royal
gynaeceum as well as to the glorious ruler
of ogres. (7)

अस्मिन् ded गत्वैको निवर्तिष्यामि वानरान्।
प्रविष्टान् सागरं भीममम्बरं वा रसातलम्॥८॥

“Marching alone at this very hour, |
shall repulse the monkeys, even if they
have taken refuge in the dreaded deep, in
the heavens or in Rasatala (the penultimate
subterranean region).” (8)

ततोऽब्रवीत् सुसंक्रुद्धो ATT महाबल:।
we परिघं घोरं मांसशोणितरूषितम्॥९॥
Then spoke as follows Vajradamstra,
who was endowed with extraordinary
might, extremely enraged and clasping his
terrible iron bludgeon stained with flesh and
blood: (9)

319

fe नो हनूमता ar कृपणेन तपस्विना।
रामे तिष्ठति दुर्धर्षे सुग्रीवेऽपि सलक्ष्मणे॥१०॥

“What have we got to do with the
miserable and poor Hanuman, so long as there
is Rama, who is difficult to assail, as well as
Sugriva, accompanied by Laksmana? (10)

अद्य Wa ससुग्रीवं परिघेण सलक्ष्मणम्।
आगमिष्यामि हत्वैको विक्षोभ्य हरिवाहिनीम्॥ ११॥

“Having disposed of single-handed
with my iron bludgeon, Rama, accompanied
by Sugriva and Laksmana, and having
caused panic in the army of monkeys, |
shall return today. (11)
उपायकुशलो ह्येव जयेच्छत्रूनतन्दित:॥१२॥

“Pray, listen, if you will, O king, to this
further submision of mine; for he alone who
is resourceful is able to conquer his enemies
if he is vigilant. (12)
कामरूपधरा: शूरा: सुभीमा भीमदर्शना:।
राक्षसा वा सहस्राणि राक्षसाधिप निश्चिता:॥ १३॥
काकुत्स्थमुपसंगम्य बिभ्रतो मानुषं वपु:।
सर्वे ह्यसम्भ्रमा भूत्वा ब्रुवन्तु रघुसत्तमम्॥१४॥
प्रेषिता भरतेनैव भ्रात्रा तव यवीयसा।

a fe सेनां समुत्थाप्य क्षिप्रमेवोपयास्यति॥ १५॥

“Assuming a human semblance, nay,
approaching Rama, a scion of Kakutstha,
and feeling altogether free from
embarrassment, O suzerain lord of ogres,
heroic and most formidable ogres, terrible to
look at, nay, capable of assuming any form
at will and determined of purpose, should
speak as follows to Rama, the foremost of
Raghus: ‘We have been sent by your
younger brother, Bharata, himself, and,
ordering his army to march, Rama too will
surely sally forth apace.’ (18—15)

ततो वरयमितस्तूर्णं शूलशक्तिगदाधरा:।
चापबाणासिहस्ताश्च त्वरितास्तत्र यामहे॥१६॥

“Carrying pikes, javelins and maces
