400

मृगायुतं वानरवारणैश्च।
वने निवत्स्यामि यथा पितुर्गृहे
तवैव पादावुपगृह्य सम्मता॥ २२॥
“| shall proceed to the forest of Dandaka
which is most difficult to penetrate and is
infested with game of various kinds as well
as with monkeys and elephants. Nay, clinging
to your feet alone and esteemed by you, |
shall dwell in the forest as though in my
fathers home. (22)

अनन्यभावामनुरक्तचेतसं

त्वया वियुक्तां मरणाय निश्चिताम्।
नयस्व मां साधु कुरुष्व याचनां

नातो मया ते गुरुता भविष्यति॥ २३॥

“Therefore, grant my prayer and take

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA +

me with you to the forest—me, who am
exclusively devoted to you, whose mind is
fondly attached to you and who am
determined to die if disunited from you. You
shall not be burdened by my being taken
alongwith you.” (23)

तथा ब्रुवाणामपि धर्मवत्सलां
न च स्म सीतां Fat निनीषति।
उवाच चैनां बहु संनिवर्तने
an निवासस्य च दु:खितां प्रति॥ २४॥
Sri Rama, the foremost among men, did
not feel inclined in the least to take to the
forest Sita, who was so fond of righteousness
and even though she spoke as aforesaid.
Nay, in order to turn her away from her
resolve, he spoke to her a lot about the
miseries attendant upon forest life. (24)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्येऽयोध्याकाण्डे सप्तविंश: AW: ॥ २७॥

Thus ends Canto Twenty-seven in the Ayodhyakanda of the glorious Ramayana of
Valmiki, the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

अष्टाविंश: सर्ग:
Canto XXVIII

Bringing home to Sita the austerity and hardships of forest life,
Sri Rama tries once more to dissuade her from her
insistence on accompanying him to the forest

स एवं gadt सीतां धर्मज्ञां धर्मवत्सल:।
न नेतुं Hed बुद्धिं at cust fears १॥
Bearing in mind the hardships one will
be called upon to bear in the forest, Sri
Rama, who was fond of righteousness, did
not favour the idea of taking alongwith him
to the forest Sita, who knew what is right,
and spoke as aforesaid. (1)

सान्त्वयित्वा ततस्तां तु बाष्पदूषितलोचनाम्।
निवर्तनार्थे धर्मात्मा वाक्यमेतदुवाच ह॥२॥
Soothing with kind words Sita, whose
eyes were bedimmed with tears, Sri Rama,
whose mind was given to piety, for his part,

so the tradition goes, then spoke as follows
with a view to turning her back from her
resolve : (2)

ait महाकुलीनासि xt च frat सदा।

इहाचरस्व धर्मं त्वं यथा मे मनस: GEA ३॥
“Sita, you are born of a high pedigree

and are ever devoted to righteousness.

Practise you virtue here so that gratification
may be caused to my mind. (3)

सीते यथा cat वक्ष्यामि तथा कार्यं त्वयाबले।
at der fe बहवो वसतस्तान् निबोध मे॥४॥

“You should act as | am going to tell
you, O frail Sita! A dweller in forest, really
