* BALAKANDA +

“Alarmed to see those missiles being
discharged by the talented ViSwamitra, the
hermits escaped in their hundreds in various
directions. (22)

वसिष्ठस्य च ये शिष्या a च वै मृगपक्षिण:।
विद्रवन्ति ware भीता नानादिग्भ्य: ASAT: tl २३॥
“Afraid of the danger, whatever pupils
of Vasistha and whatever beasts or birds
there were in his hermitage fled in their
thousands from the various quarters. (23)

वसिष्ठस्याश्रमपदं शून्यमासीन्महात्मन:।
मुहूर्तमिव नि:शब्दमासीदीरिणसंनिभम्॥ २४॥
aed a वसिष्ठस्य मा भैरिति मुहुर्मुहु:।
नाशयाम्यद्य गाधेयं नीहारमिव भास्कर:॥ २५॥
“The site of the hermitage of the mighty
Vasistha turned desolate. In an hour or so
it became noiseless and looked barren as it
were in spite of Vasistha repeatedly calling
out : ‘Don’t be afraid, | shall presently make
short work of ViSwamitra, the son of Gadhi,

223

as the sun dispels fog.’ (24-25)
एवमुक्त्वा महातेजा वसिष्ठो जपतां वर:।
विश्वामित्रं der वाक्यं सरोषमिदमब्रवीत्॥ २६॥

“Saying so, the exceptionally glorious
Vasistha, the foremost of ascetics, then
angrily addressed the following words to
Viswamitra : (26)
दुराचारो fe यन्मूढस्तस्मात् त्वं न भविष्यसि॥ २७॥

“`5!#10&2 you have made havoc of my
hermitage, fostered for long, and inasmuch
as you are a wicked fool, you will cease to
be what you are.’ (27)

इत्युक्त्वा परमक्रुद्धो दण्डमुद्यम्य सत्वर:।
विधूम इव कालाग्निर्यमदण्डमिवापरम्॥ २८॥

“Saying so and hurriedly lifting a staff,
which looked like another rod of Yama,
Vasistha stood highly enraged like the
smokeless fire raging at the time of universal
destruction.” (28)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये बालकाण्डे पञ्चपञ्चाश: AW: ॥ ५५ ॥

Thus ends Canto Fifty-five in the Balakanda of the glorious Ramayana of Valmiki,
the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

षट्पञ्चाश: सर्ग:
Canto LVI
With his Brahmanical staff alone Vasistha renders ineffectual all the mystic
missiles discharged by ViSwamitra, whereupon the latter condemns

military strength and makes up his mind to practise austerities
with a view to attaining Brahmanhood

vagal वसिष्ठेन विश्वामित्रो महाबल:।
आग्नेयमस्त्रमुद्दिश्य fas तिष्ठेति चाब्रवीत्॥१॥

Aiming a missile presided over by the
god of fire, when challenged as aforesaid
by Vasistha, the very mighty ViSwamitra
said, “Stay awhile! Wait a bit !!” (1)
ब्रह्मदण्डं समुद्यम्य कालदण्डमिवापरम्।
वसिष्ठो भगवान् क्रोधादिदं वचनमब्रवीत्॥ २॥

Steadily uplifting his Brahmanical staff,
which looked like another rod of Yama, the
almighty Vasistha angrily spoke as follows :

(2)
क्षत्रबन्धो स्थितोऽस्म्येष ae बलं ae विदर्शय।
नाशयाम्यद्य ते दर्पं शस्त्रस्य तव गाधिज॥ ३॥

“Here | stand, O unworthy Ksatriya !
Pray, exhibit whatever might you possess;
