# YUDDHAKANDA +

wings of yours been fastened? Nay, it

looks as though they have been clipped.
(25)

कच्चिन्नानेकचित्तानां तेषां त्वं वशमागत:।

तत: स भयसंविग्नस्तेन राज्ञाभिचोदित:।

ar प्रत्युवाचेदं राक्षसाधिपमुत्तमम्॥ २६॥

“| hope you did nof fall into the dutches
of those capricious monkeys.” Interrogated
by king Ravana, Suka, who was wrought
up with fear, then replied as follows to the
suzerain lord of ogres: (26)
सागरस्योत्तरे तीरेऽब्रुवं d वचनं तथा।
यथा संदेशमक्लिष्टं सान्त्वयन् श्लक्ष्णया गिरा ।। २७॥

“Standing in the airspace over the
northern seashore, | faithfully delivered, as
enjoined, your message in an unembarrassed
manner, reassuring the monkeys by means
of gentle words. (27)

क्रुद्धैस्तैरहमुत्प्लुत्य दूष्टमात्र: प्लवंगमै:।
गृहीतोऽस्म्यपि चारब्धो हन्तुं लोप्तुं च मुष्टिभि: ।। २८ ॥
“Having been barely caught sight of by
monkeys, who were seized with fury at my
very sight, | was caught hold of with a jump
and began to be smitten with fists and
shorn of my wings. (28)

न ते संभाषितुं शक्या: सम्प्रश्नोऽत्र न विद्यते।
प्रकृत्या कोपनास्तीक्ष्णा वानरा राक्षसाधिप॥ २९॥

“The monkeys are furious and violent
by nature, O suzerain lord of ogres! They
are not wont to being negotiated with. Nor
was there any occasion at that time for
asking them (as to why they had started
pummelling me). (29)
स च am विराधस्य कबन्धस्य खरस्य च।
सुग्रीवसहितो wa: सीताया: पदमागत:॥ ३०॥

“Nay, accompanied by Sugriva, the
celebrated Rama, the slayer of Viradha,

Kabandha and Khara, has come to rescue
Sita after ascertaining her whereabouts. (30)

377

स कृत्वा सागरे सेतुं ateat च लवणोदधिम्।
we रक्षांसि Pele धन्वी तिष्ठति राघव:॥ ३१॥

“Having thrown a bridge across the
sea and crossed the salt sea and setting
the ogres at nought, here stands Rama (a
scion of Raghu) armed with a bow. (81)

ऋक्षवानरसङ्घानामनीकानि सहस्रश:।
गिरिमेघनिकाशानां छादयन्ति वसुंधराम्॥३२॥

“Companies in thousands of hordes of
bears and monkeys, resembling mountains
and clouds, cover the earth. (32)

राक्षसानां बलौघस्य वानरेन्द्रबलस्य a
नैतयोर्बिद्यते संधिर्देवदानवयोरिव॥ ३३॥

“No alliance is possible between these
two armies—the multitude of ogre troops
and the army of Sugriva (the lord of monkeys)
any more than between the gods and the
demons. (33)

पुरा प्राकारमायान्ति क्षिप्रमेकतरं कुरु।
सीतां चास्मै प्रयच्छाशु युद्धं वापि प्रदीयताम्॥ ३४॥

“Before they are able to reach the
defensive wall, quickly follow either of the
two courses being suggested. Restore Sita
to him without delay or battle may be given
to him.” (34)

शुकस्य वचनं श्रुत्वा रावणो वाक्यमब्रवीत्।
रोषसंरक्तनयनो dette चक्षुषा॥ ३५॥

Hearing the submission of Suka,
Ravana replied as follows, his eyes blood-
red with agner, as though he would consume
him with his glance: (35)
यदि मां ult युद्धेरन् देवगन्धर्वदानवा:।
नैव dat प्रदास्यामि सर्वलोकभयादपि॥ ३६॥

“| would not give back Sita in any
case even if gods, Gandharvas (celestial
musicians) and demons were to contend
with me, nay, not even through fear of the
whole world. (36)
कदा समभिधावन्ति मामका Wad शरा:।
aed पुष्पितं मत्ता भ्रमरा Fa पादपम्॥ ३७॥
