# YUDDHAKANDA +

quivering breasts, resembling the palmyra
fruit, actually press me even as she embraces
me? (14)

सा नूनमसितापाङ्मी रक्षोमध्यगता सती।
मन्नाथा नाथहीनेव त्रातारं नाधिगच्छति॥ १५॥

“Surely that virtuous lady with dark-
cornered eyes, who has myself alone for
her protector and has fallen in the midst of
ogres, does not find a redeemer any more
than a woman without a protector. (15)

कथं जनकराजस्य deat मम च प्रिया।
राक्षसीमध्यगा शेते स्नुषा दशरथस्य Al Veil

“How does the daughter of Janaka,
nay, my darling and the daughter-in-law

of Dasaratha repose in the midst of
ogresses? (16)
अविक्षोभ्याणि रक्षांसि सा विधूयोत्पतिष्यति।

faa जलदान् नीलाञ्शशिलेखा शरत्स्विव॥ १७॥

“Will Sita emerge into view destroying
through me the unshakable ogres, in the
same way as the crescent would shine
forth during the autumn dispersing the dark
clouds? (17)

स्वभावतनुका नूनं शोकेनानशनेन च।
भूयस्तनुतरा सीता देशकालविपर्ययात्॥१८॥
“Sita, who is slender by nature, must
undoubtedly be leaner still from grief and
abstinence from food due to adversity of
time and place. (18)

कदा नु राक्षसेन्द्रस्य निधायोरसि सायकान्।
शोकं प्रत्याहरिष्यामि शोकमुत्सृज्य मानसम्॥१९॥

313

“O, when, digging shafts into the breast
of Ravana (the ruler of ogres), and casting
off my mental woe, shall | dispel the grief of
sita? (19)

कदा नु खलु A साध्वी सीतामरसुतोपमा।
सोत्कण्ठा कण्ठमालम्ब्य मोक्ष्यत्यानन्दजं जलम्॥ २० UI

“O when, clinging to my neck, full of
longing, will my virtuous Sita, who is like a
daughter of the gods, shed tears of joy?

(20)
कदा शोकमिमं घोरं मैथिलीविप्रयोगजम्।
सहसा विप्रमोक्ष्यामि ara: शुक्लेतरं यथा॥ २१॥

“When shall | cast away thoroughly
and for good all at once this terrible grief
born of separation from Sita, a princess of
Mithila, in the same way as one would
discard a soiled garment?” (21)

एवं विलपतस्तस्य at रामस्य धीमत:।
दिनक्षयान्मन्दवपुर्भास्करोऽस्तमुपागमत् ॥२२॥
While the sagacious Sri Rama was
wailing as aforesaid on that spot, the sun,
whose brilliance had grown dim due to the

decline of the day, disappeared below the
western horizon. (22)

आश्वासितो लक्ष्मणेन Wa: संध्यामुपासत।
स्मरन् कमलपत्राक्षीं सीतां शोकाकुलीकृत: ॥ २३॥
Comforted by Laksmana, Sri Rama,
who was distracted with grief, performed
his evening devotions, thinking all the time

of Sita, whose eyes resembled the petals
of a lotus. (23)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये युद्धकाण्डे TAA: सर्ग: ॥ 4 ॥

Thus ends Canto Five in the Yuddhakanda of the glorious Ramayana of
Valmiki, the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

