196

thought haunted those high-souled beings :
“How can we possibly be immortal, immune
from old age and proof against malady?”
(16)
तेषां चिन्तयतां तत्र बुद्धिरासीद् विपश्चिताम्।
क्षीरोदमथनं कृत्वा Ta प्राप्स्याम at agen

“Even as they reflected, an idea occurred
to them at the moment, intelligent as they
were : ‘Churning the ocean of milk we can
surely obtain the immortalizing drink from it.’

(17)

ततो निश्चित्य मथनं योक्त्रं कृत्वाच वासुकिम्।
मन्थानं मन्दरं कृत्वा ममन्थुरमितौजस:॥१८॥

“Making up their mind to churn the
ocean and using Vasuki (the king of serpents)
as a cord and turning Mount Mandara into
a churning rod, the gods as well as the
demons, who were possessed of infinite
strength, then started churning the ocean.

(18)
अथ वर्षसहस्रेण योक्त्रसर्पशिरांसि ai
वमन्तोऽतिविषं तत्र ददंशुर्दशनै: शिला:॥१९॥

“Now after a thousand years the heads
of the serpent that was being used as a
cord began to bite the rocks forming part of
Mount Mandara with their fangs, throwing
up copious venom. (19)
उत्पपाताग्निसंकाशं हालाहलमहाविषम्।
तेन we जगत् सर्वं सदेवासुरमानुषम्॥२०॥

“As a result of the churning there
appeared on the surface of the ocean all of
a sudden a deadly poison bearing the name
of ‘Halahala’. The whole universe comprising
gods, demons and human beings began to
be consumed by it. (20)

जग्मु: पशुपतिं ws त्राहि त्राहीति तुष्टुवु:॥ २१॥

“The gods thereupon mentally sought
the great Divinity, Rudra, the Deity presiding
over destruction, the Protector of the

embodied spirit (that has been likened to a
beast because of its bondage), seeking

« VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

protection with Him, and glorified Him, saying
‘Save us! Protect us !!’ (21)

एवमुक्तस्ततो देवैर्देवदेवेश्वरर wy!
प्रादुरासीत् ततोऽत्रैव शङ्खचक्रधरो हरि:॥ २२॥
“Addressed thus by the gods, Lord
Siva, the Controller even of the rulers of
gods, forthwith appeared on the spot, and
immediately thereafter appeared on that very
spot Lord Sri Visnu, wielding a conch and a
discus. (22)
दैवतैर्मध्यमाने तु यत् Ue समुपस्थितम्॥ 23 il
ad त्वदीयं सुरश्रेष्ठं सुराणामग्रतो हि adi
अग्रपूजामिह स्थित्वा गृहाणेदं विषं war २४॥

“Sri Hari spoke smiling as follows to
the aforesaid Lord Rudra, the Wielder of a
trident: ‘That which has appeared in the
very first instance on the ocean being
churned by the gods, conjointly with the
demons, is really speaking Your share, O
Jewel among gods, since it is You that take
the lead among gods. Therefore, standing
here, O almighty Lord, accept this poison
as the tribute offered in precedence over
others.’ (23-24)
इत्युक्त्वा च सुरश्रेष्ठस्तत्रैवान्तरधीयत।
देवतानां भयं FBT श्रुत्वा वाक्यं तु शाङ्गिण: ॥ २५ ॥
देवान् विसृज्य देवेशो जगाम भगवान् हर:॥ २६॥

“Nay, saying so, Lord Visnu, the
foremost among gods, went out of sight on
that very spot. Perceiving the fright of the
gods and listening to the exhortation of Lord
Visnu (the Wielder of a bow made of horn),
Lord Siva (the Destroyer of the universe),
the Ruler of gods, for His part swallowed
and treasured up in His throat the deadly
poison named Halahala as though it were
nectar, and, leaving the gods, departed to
His own realm. (25-26)

ततो देवासुरा: wa ममन्थू रघुनन्दन।
प्रविवेशाथ पातालं मन्थान: पर्वतोत्तम:॥ २७॥
