738

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

एकादश: सर्ग:
Canto XI
The episode of Sage Mandakarni and the Pafcapsara Lake. Rama visits
several hermitages and returns to Sutiksna’s hermitage.
From there he goes to the hermitage of Agastya

अग्रत: प्रययौ Wa: सीता मध्ये सुशोभना।
पृष्ठतस्तु धनुष्पाणिर्लक्ष्मणोऽनुजगाम ह॥१॥

Rama walked in the van, the most
beautiful Sita in the middle, and in the rear
followed Laksmana, bow in hand. (1)

at पश्यमानौ विविधान् शैलप्रस्थान् वनानि च।
नदीश्च विविधा ter wag: सह सीतया॥ २॥
They two, together with Sita, went on
seeing several mountain-peaks and forests,
and several charming rivers. (2)

सारसांश्चक्रवाकांश्च नदीपुलिनचारिण:।
सरांसि च सपद्मानि युतानि जलजै: Gt: ३॥

यूथबद्धांश्च WA मदोन्मत्तान् विषाणिन:।
महिषांश्च वराहांश्च गजांश्च द्रुमवैरिण:॥४॥
They further saw cranes and Cakravaka
birds moving on river banks, lakes with
lotuses and aquatic birds, spotted deer
moving in herds, horned buffaloes in rut,
boars and elephants, the destroyers of trees.
(3-4)

at गत्वा दूरमध्वानं लम्बमाने दिवाकरे।
ददृशु: eat रम्यं तटाकं योजनायुतम्॥५॥

पद्मपुष्करसम्बाध गजयूथैरलबृज्।म्।
सारसैर्हंसकादम्बै:: संकुलं जलजातिभि:॥ ६॥
Covering a long distance, they sighted
together, while the sun was going down, a
beautiful lake with an area of a square
Yojana, full of red and white lotuses, adorned
with herds of elephants and crowded with
cranes, flocks of swans and other aquatic
creatures. (5-6)

प्रसन्नसलिले wa afer सरसि शुश्रुवे।
गीतवादित्रनिर्घोषो न तु कश्चन दृश्यते॥७॥

In that beautiful lake of clear water the

sound of singing and musical instruments
was heard, but nobody was to be seen. (7)
ad: कौतूहलाद् WAT लक्ष्मणश्च महारथ:।
at धर्मभृतं नाम WS समुपचक्रमे॥८॥
Then, out of curiosity Sri Rama and
Laksmana, the great car-warrior, proceeded
to ask the sage named Dharmabhrt, who
accompanied them : (8)
इदमत्यद्भुतं श्रुत्वा सर्वेषां नो महामुने।
कौतूहलं महज्जातं किमिदं साधु कथ्यताम्॥९॥
“O great sage, hearing this most
wonderful sound we are all seized with
great curiosity. What is this? Pray, tell us in
detail about it.” (9)

तेनैवमुक्तो धर्मात्मा राघवेण मुनिस्तदा।
प्रभावं सरस: क्षिप्रमाख्यातुमुपचक्रमे॥ १०॥
Thus addressed by Raghava, the
righteous sage forthwith started speaking
about the greatness of the lake: (10)
इदं पञ्चाप्सरो AA तटाकं सार्वकालिकम्।
निर्मितं तपसा wa मुनिना माण्डकर्णिना॥११॥
“This is a lake named Pafcapsara,
ever full of water and created by Sage
Mandakarni by dint of his ascetic power, O
Rama ! (11)
a fe a तपस्तीव्रं माण्डकर्णिर्महामुनि:।
दशवर्षसहस्राणि वायुभक्षो जलाशये॥१२॥
“That great Sage Mandakarni performed

severe austerities in the lake living on air
alone for ten thousand years. (12)

ad: प्रव्यथिता: aa देवा: साग्निपुरोगमा:।
अब्रुवन् वचनं सर्वे परस्परसमागता:॥१३॥

“Thereupon getting disquieted, all the
gods, with the god of fire at the head,
