« KISKINDHAKANDA +

surface, equal in size to the wheel of a
chariot. (5)

क्वचिद वादित्रघोषश्च क्वचिद् भूषणनि:स्वन: ।
गायन्ती: स्माङ्गना बह्वी: पश्यावो रक्तवासस:॥६॥
“In one region of the sky was heard
the sound of musical instruments, while in
another could be heard the jingling of
ornaments. In a third region we found singing
numerous young ladies clad in red. (6)
तूर्णमुत्पत्य चाकाशमादित्यपदमास्थितौ |
आवामालोकयावस्तद् at शाद्बलसंस्थितम्॥७॥
“Nay, speedily rising above the region
immediately below the path of the sun and
having reached the path of the sun, we
found the forest below looking like a grassy
plot. (7)
आपगाभिश्च संबीता waka वसुंधरा॥८॥

“Thickly covered with mountains, the
earth looked as though strewn with pebbles;
nay, surrounded by rivers, the terrestrial
globe appeared entwined with threads. (8)

हिमवांश्चैव विन्ध्यश्च मेरुश्च सुमहागिरि:।
भूतले सम्प्रकाशन्ते नागा इव जलाशये॥९॥

“The Himalayan range as well as the
Vindhyan range and the huge mountain Meru
too vividly appeared on the earth’s surface
as so many elephants in a pond. (9)

da: Bes Ges भयं चासीत् तदावयो: |
समाविशत मोहश्च ततो West च दारुणा॥१०॥
“Intense perspiration and fatigue as well
as fear presently came upon us. Nay,
confusion and then violent unconsciousness
too overcame us. (10)

न च दिग् ज्ञायते याम्या न चाग्नेयी न वारुणी |
युगान्ते नियतो लोको हतो ater इवाग्निना॥११॥

“Neither the southern quarter presided
over by Yama, the god of retribution, nor the

1151

south-eastern corner presided over by the
god of fire nor again the western quarter
presided over by Varuna (the god of water)
could be distinguished between. The world,
which is governed by laws of nature and
could not perish before the appointed time,
seemed to have been consumed by fire as
at the time of universal destruction (lit., the
end of a Kalpa or cycle). (11)

मनश्च A हतं भूयश्चक्षु: प्राप्य तु संश्रयम्।
यत्नेन महता ह्यस्मिन् मन: संधाय चक्षुषी॥ १२॥
यत्नेन महता भूयो भास्कर: प्रतिलोकित:।
तुल्य पृथ्वीप्रमाणेन भास्कर: प्रतिभाति नौ॥ १३॥

“Nay, falling back upon the sense of
vision as its medium, my mind for its part
got lost (due to the failure of my vision).
Fixing once more my mind and eyes on the
sun with great effort, of course, the sun
could at least be seen with great effort. The
sun appeared to us to be equal in size to
the earth. (12-13)

जटायुर्मामनापृच्छ्य निपपात wel तत:।
तं दृष्टवा तूर्णमाकाशादात्मानं मुक्तवानहम्॥ १४॥

“Without taking leave of me, Jatayu
then descended to the earth. Seeing him
descend, | too speedily let myself fall from
the sky. (14)

पक्षाभ्यां च मया WaT जटायुर्न प्रदह्यत।
प्रमादात् तत्र निर्दग्ध: पतन् वायुपथादहम्॥ १५॥
आशङ्के तं निपतितं जनस्थाने जटायुषम्।
अहं तु पतितो विन्ध्ये दग्धपक्षो जडीकृत:॥ १६॥
“Having been protected by me with my
wings, Jatayu was not burnt; I, however;
got my wings badly burnt at that time due to
my recklessness. While falling down from
the sky | suspected Jatayu to have dropped
somewhere in Janasthana; while | fell down
unconscious on the Vindhyan range, my
wings having been burnt. (15-16)

राज्याच्च हीनो भ्रात्रा च पक्षाभ्यां विक्रमेण च।
सर्वथा मर्तुमेवेच्छन् पतिष्ये शिखराद् गिरे:।॥ १७॥
