+ UTTARAKANDA +

ऋषिवाटेषु पुण्येषु ब्राह्मणावसथेषु च।
रथ्यासु राजमार्गेषु पार्थिवानां गृहेषु च॥६॥

‘Sing in the holy huts of sages, in the
dwellings of Brahmanas, on the by-ways
and highways and also in the residences of
the kings,” (6)
रामस्य भवनद्वारि at कर्म च add
ऋत्विजामग्रतश्चैव oat गेयं विशेषत:॥७॥

‘At the entrance of the apartment of Sri
Rama and also where the ritual is being
performed, and specially before the priests,
this poem is to be sung. (7)

इमानि च फलान्यत्र स्वादूनि विविधानि च।
जातानि पर्वताग्रेषु आस्वाद्यास्वाद्य गायताम्॥८॥

‘These tasty fruits of many varieties
have grown on the tops of the mountains.
Enjoying them again and again, sing the
poem. (8)
न यास्यथ: श्रमं वत्सौ भक्षयित्वा फलान्यथ।

मूलानि च सुमृष्टानि न रागात् परिहास्यथ:॥ ९॥

‘O you two, dear ones, having eaten
the fruits and also the roots well-ruled, you
shall not tire and not deviate from the Raga
(musical notes). (9)

यदि शब्दापयेद् राम: श्रवणाय महीपति:।
ऋषीणामुपविष्टानां यथायोग्यं प्रवर्तताम्॥१०॥
‘if Sri Rama calls you to hear your
song, then perform the singing of the poem
in front of the sages seated, to the best of
your ability. (10)
दिवसे विंशति: ant गेया मधुरया गिरा।
प्रमाणैर्बहुभिस्तत्र यथोद्दिष्टं मया पुरा॥११॥
‘Twenty cantoes are to be sung ina
day in a melodious voice, as instructed

by me with different number of verses as
instructed by me earlier. (11)

लोभश्चापि न कर्तव्य: स्वल्पोऽपि धनवाञ्छया |
fe धनेनाश्रमस्थानां फलमूलाशिनां सदा॥ १२॥

‘Do not be greedy even in the least
with desire for wealth; of what use is wealth

1101

to dwellers of hermitages and subsisting
always on fruits and roots? (12)

Ole Tadd स काकुत्स्थो Fat कस्येति दारकौ।
वाल्मीकेरथ शिष्यौ gt ब्रूतमेवं नराधिपम्॥१३॥
‘If that scion of Kakutstha asks you:
“whose sons are you two, then say to the
king thus “We are the two disciples of
Valmiki’. (13)

seat: सुमधुरा: wrt वापूर्वदर्शनम्।
मूर्च्छयित्वा सुमधुरं गायतां विगतज्वरौ॥१४॥

‘Playing on these lutes, emitting sweet
sounds, and wonderfully divided according
to musical notes, sing sweetly, having no
worry. (14)

आदिप्रभृति गेयं स्यान्न चावज्ञाय पार्थिवम्।
frat fe सर्वभूतानां राजा भवति eda: ugg il

‘This Ramayana has to be sung from
the beginning; do nothing disrespectful to
the king; the king is the father of all beings,
according to the law. (15)

aq Gat हृष्टमनसौ va: प्रभाते समाहितौ।

Tad Heat गेयं तन्त्रीलयसमन्वितम्॥१६॥
‘Therefore, you two, with a cheerful

mind and attentively sing tomorrow morning

the sweet song, accompanied with the lute
and keeping proper tune and rhythm. (16)

sta संदिश्य age मुनि: प्राचेतसस्तदा।
वाल्मीकि: परमोदारस्तूष्णीमासीन्महामुनि: ee i
Having thus instructed many times, the
son of Praceta, the great sage Valmiki, the
most large-hearted one, then became silent.
(17)

संदिष्टौ मुनिना तेन तावुभौ मैथिलीसुतौ।
तथैव करवावेति निर्जग्मतुररिंदमौ॥ ec
Thus instructed by that sage, both those
two sons of Maithili (Sita), the subduer of

foes, saying ‘we shall do as you say’ went
out. (18)

तामद्धुतां dt wa pant
निवेश्य वाणीमृषिभाषितां तदा।
