284

jewels among men, were equally dear to
him like four arms sprung from one’s own
person. (5)
तेषामपि महातेजा रामो रतिकर: पितु:।
raya भूतानां बभूव गुणवत्तर:॥६॥
; Of them, however, the highly glorious
Sri Rama _ afforded ecstatic delight to
him and was more richly endowed with
excellences than others, as Brahma, the
self-born creator, is among created beings.
(6)
a fe देवैरुदीर्णस्य रावणस्य वधार्थिभि:।
अर्थितो मानुषे cite जज्ञे विष्णु: सनातन:॥७॥

For, entreated by the gods, seeking
the destruction of the haughty Ravana, the

eternal Lord Visnu (Himself) was born on

the mortal plane as Sri Rama. (7)

कौसल्या शुशुभे तेन पुत्रेणामिततेजसा।
यथा aot देवानामदितिर्वज्रपाणिना॥ ८॥

Queen Kausalya, the mother of Sri
Rama, shone with that her son, possessed
as he was of infinite glory, even as Aditi did
with her son, Indra, the wielder of thunderbolt,
the foremost of gods. (8)

a fe रूपोपपन्नश्च वीर्यवाननसूयक:।

भूमावनुपम: सूनुर्गुणैर्दशरथोपम: ॥ ९॥
He was indeed possessed of physical
charm, full of valour and free from

censoriousness. He was incomparable on
earth as a son and was a replica of
DaSaratha in point of virtues. (9)

स च नित्यं प्रशान्तात्मा मृदुपूर्वं च भाषते।
उच्यमानोऽपि परुषं नोत्तरं प्रतिपद्यते॥१०॥

He was ever tranquil of mind and spoke
softly without being accosted. Nay, he did
not retort even though spoken harshly to.

(10)
कदाचिदुपकारेण कृतेनैकेन तुष्यति।

न स्मरत्यपकाराणां शतमप्यात्मवत्तया॥११॥

He felt gratified even with a single
good turn casually rendered and did not

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

take to heart even a hundred wrongs
because of his mastery over his self. (11)

शीलवृद्धैर्जानवृद्धैर्वयोवृद्धैश्च सज्जनै: |
कथयन्नास्त बै नित्यमस्त्रयोग्यान्तरेष्वपि॥ १२॥

He ever used to converse only with
pious men senior to him in point of moral
worth, enlightenment and age, even at times
of respite from his training in the use of
missiles. (12)
बुद्धिमान् मधुराभाषी पूर्वभाषी प्रियंवद:।
वीर्यवान्न च वीर्येण महता स्वेन विस्मित:॥ १३॥

He was talented and suave of speech,
took the initiative in speaking with others,
affable and valiant, yet not elated with his
extraordinary prowess. (13)

न चानृतकथो fag aarti प्रतिपूजक:।
अनुरक्त: प्रजाभिश्च प्रजाश्चाप्यनुरज्यते॥१४॥

He never told a lie, was learned and a
respecter of his elders, nay, was loved by
the people and also loved the people in his
turn. (14)

सानुक्रोशो जितक्रोधो ब्राह्मणप्रतिपूजक:।
दीनानुकम्पी धर्मज्ञो नित्यं प्रग्रहवान् शुचि:॥ १५॥

He was full of compassion, had
conquered anger, was a votary of the
Brahmanas, commiserate to the miserable,
knew what is right, always exercised self-
control and practised purity, both internal
and external. (15)

कुलोचितमति: at स्वधर्मं ag मन्यते।
मन्यते परया प्रीत्या Aad स्वर्गफलं तत:॥ १६॥

With his mind intent on what was worthy
of his race, he made much of his duty as a
Ksatriya and with great fondness regarded
heaven as the eminent reward following
from it. (16)

नाश्रेयसि रतो ay न विरुद्धकथारुचि:।
उत्तरोत्तरयुक्तीनां aT वाचस्पतिर्यथा॥ १७॥

He never took delight in an act which
was not conducive to blessedness, had no
relish for profane talks and, like the sage
