« KISKINDHAKANDA +

point of virtues, O prince, really ventilate his
anger against one of inferior strength? What
man of your category, who is kept in check
by his goodness and is a mine of sobriety
would give way to anger? (52)
जानामि कोपं हरिवीरबन्धो-
र्जानामि कार्यस्य च कालसङ्गम्।
जानामि ar त्वयि यत्कृतं न-
स्तच्चापि जानामि Aaa कार्यम्॥ ५३ UI
“| know the reason for the displeasure
of Sri Rama, the befriender of the monkey
hero, Sugriva; | know also the cause of
delay that has taken place in his work. |
also know the service which was rendered
to us by you and which was upto you alone
and | also know what ought to be done in
this connection by us in return for your
services. (53)

तच्चापि write तथाविषह्यं
at wits शरीरजस्य।
जानामि यस्मिंश्च जनेऽवबद्धं

कामेन सुग्रीवमसतक्तमद्य It ५४॥

“| also know how irresistible is the
force of carnal desire, O jewel among men !
| also Know on whom his attachment stands
fastened through love and further know
Sugriva to be unattached to everything else
at this moment. (54)

न कामतन्त्रे da बुद्धिरस्ति
त्वं a यथा मन्युवशं प्रपन्न:।
न देशकालौ fe यथार्थधर्मा-
ववेक्षते कामरतिर्मनुष्य: ।। ५५ UI

“As you have fallen under the sway of
wrath, you have evidently no idea about one
who is dominated by passion. To say nothing
of a beast, a man who is full of passion for
the gratification of his senses does not, really
speaking, reckon time and place any more
than he takes account of his worldly interests
and religious merit. (55)

कामाभियोगाच्च विमुक्तलज्जम्।

1069

क्षमस्व तावत् परवीरहन्त-
स्त्वद्भ्रातरं वानरवंशनाथम्॥ ५६॥
“Therefore, O slayer of hostile warriors,
pardon that protector of the Vanara race,
who is a brother to you, being a friend of
your elder brother, nay, who is given to the
gratification of his senses and was, therefore,
at my side just now and has totally shaken
off all sense of decorum possessed as he
is with lust. (56)
महर्षयो धर्मतपोऽभिरामा:
कामानुकामा: प्रतिबद्भमोहा:।
कथं न सज्जेत सुखेषु राजा॥ ५७॥
“Even eminent sages, who attract
others by their piety and asceticism and
have kept infatuation at a distance, sometimes
hanker after sense-gratification. How, then,
will Sugriva, a monkey, who is fickle by
nature, and who is a king to boot, not get
addicted to pleasures?” (57)

सा वानरी लक्ष्मणमप्रमेयम्।
Wi: wed मदविह्वलाक्षी
Udfed वाक्यमिदं बभाषे॥५८॥

Having addressed the foregoing reply,
which was full of great significance, to
Laksmana, who was immeasurable in
prowess, Tara, who belonged to the race of
monkeys and whose eyes were rolling
through drunkeness, once more made the
following submission, conducive to the good
of her husband, Sugriva in a doleful voice :

(58)
उद्योगस्तु चिराज्ञप्त सुग्रीवेण नरोत्तम।
कामस्यापि विधेयेन तवार्थप्रतिसाधने॥७५९॥

“Endeavour for accomplishing your
purpose has, really speaking, long since been
enjoined by Sugriva, O jewel among men,
even though he is a slave to passion. (59)

आगता हि महावीर्यां हरय: कामरूपिण:।
कोटी: शतसहस्राणि नानानगनिवासिन:॥ ६०॥
