1022

as Varuna-Loka, Urvasi became very happy
and said the following words: (19)
काममेतद् भवत्वेवं हृदयं मे त्वयि स्थितम्।
भावश्चाप्यधिकं तुभ्यं cet मित्रस्य तु प्रभो॥ २०॥
“‘Be it so. My heart is set on you. |

love you more, but, O Lord! my physical
body belongs to Mitra.’ (20)

उर्वश्या एवमुक्तस्तु रेतस्तन्महदद्भुतम्।
ज्वलदग्निसमप्रख्यं तस्मिन् HEY न्यवासृजत्॥ २१॥
“Thus told by Urvasi, Varuna dropped
his mighty wonderful semen, which was like
a flame of burning fire, into the pitcher. (21)

उर्वशी त्वगमत् तत्र मित्रो a aa देवता।

at तु मित्र: सुसंक्रुद्ध उर्वशीमिदमब्रवीत्॥ २२॥
“Urvasi left for the place where god

Mitra was waiting for her. Mitra was infuriated

and said to Urvasi: (22)

मयाभिमन्तिता Yel कस्मात् त्वमवसर्जिता।

पतिमन्यं वृतवती किमर्थं दुष्टचारिणि॥ २३॥
“You were first invited by me. O

impious woman! Why did you forsake me
and chose someone else? (23)

अनेन दुष्कृतेन त्वं मत्क्रोधकलुषीकृता।
मनुष्यलोकमास्थाय कंचित् कालं निवत्स्यसि॥ २४॥

“‘Defiled by my anger on account of
this sin of yours, you will live for sometime
in the world of the mortals. (24)
बुधस्य Yat wate: काशिराज: Tata: |
तमभ्यागच्छ दुर्बुद्धे स ते Val भविष्यति॥ २५॥

« VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

“‘O Evil-minded one! There is a Rajarsi
Pururava, son of Budha and king of Kasi.
Go to him. He will be your husband.’ (25)

तत: सा शापदोषेण पुरूरवसमभ्यगात्।
प्रतिष्ठाने पुरूरवं बुधस्यात्मजमौरसम्॥ २६॥

“Then as an evil consequence of the
curse she went to Budha’s legitimate son,
Pururava, who ruled in the city of Pratisthana.

(26)

तस्य जज्ञे तत: श्रीमानायु: Gal महाबल:।
नहुषो यस्य पुत्रस्तु बभूवेन्द्रसमद्युति:॥ २७॥

“From her a majestic son named Ayu
endowed with great prowess, was born to
him, whose son was Nahusa and whose
majesty was like that of Indra. (27)

वज्रमुत्सृज्य gaa श्रान्तेऽथ त्रिदिवेश्वरे।
शतं वर्षसहस्राणि येनेन्द्रत्वं प्रशासितम्॥ २८॥

“When Indra vacated his post after hurling
his thunderbolt on Vrtra, Nahusa, ruled as
Indra for a hundred thousand years. (28)

wren ययौ AN २९॥

“Thus, following the curse, Urvasi, who
had beautiful teeth and eyes went to the
region of the earth and the beautiful woman
lived there for several years and when the
duration of the curse was over, she repaired
to the abode of Indra.” (29)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये उत्तरकाण्डे षट्पञ्चाश: AA: ॥ ५६ Il

Thus ends Canto Fifty-six in the Uttarakanda of the glorious Ramayana of Valmiki,
the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

