« KISKINDHAKANDA +

deserve to be seen by Sugriva (the ruler of
monkeys), have fallen within the range of
our sight. (26)

a fe राज्याश्च बिभ्रष्ट: कृतवैरश्च वालिना।
went at aed भ्रात्रा विनिकृतो भृशम्॥ २७॥

“Antagonized and deposed from his
throne, nay, actually deprived of his spouse
and exiled by his elder brother, Vali, Sugriva
lives in the forest greatly alarmed. (27)

करिष्यति स साहाय्यं युवयोर्भास्करात्मज:।
सुग्रीव: सह चास्माभि: सीताया: परिमार्गणे॥ २८॥

“Alongwith us (monkeys) the said
Sugriva, sprung from the loins of the sun-
god, will render help to you in tracing out
Sita.” (28)
इत्येवमुक्त्वा हनुमान् श्लक्ष्णं मधुरया गिरा।
बभाषे साधु गच्छाम: सुग्रीवमिति राघवम्॥ २९॥

Having spoken thus in a sweet tone,
Hanuman softly said to Sri Rama, a scion
of Raghu, “Well, let us proceed to meet
Sugriva.” (29)
एवं Gat धर्मात्मा हनूमन्तं स लक्ष्मण:।
प्रतिपूज्य यथान्यायमिदं प्रोवाच राघवम्॥३०॥

Having honoured according to the rules
of propriety Hanuman, who was speaking
thus, the celebrated Laksmana, whose mind

was set on virtue, submitted as follows to
Sri Rama (a scion of Raghu) : (30)

कपि: कथयते हृष्टो यथायं मारुतात्मज:।
Paar सोऽपि सम्प्राप्त: कृतकृत्योऽसि राघव॥ ३१॥

“Full of joy, this son of the wind-god
speaks aright. Sugriva too has some end to
be achieved (through you). Having arrived
here at the right time, you have your object

949

accomplished, O scion of Raghu!

प्रसन्नमुखवर्णश्च ah हृष्टश्च भाषते।
Wid वक्ष्यते वीरो हनूमान् मारुतात्मज:॥ ३२॥

“Full of delight, Hanuman speaks
unambiguously and with a cheerful glow on
his face. The gallant son of the wind-god
would not tell a lie.” (32)

तत: स सुमहाप्राज्ञो हनूमान् मारुतात्मज:।
जगामादाय तौ वीरौ हरिराजाय राघवौ॥ ३३॥

Taking Sri Rama and Laksmana, the
two heroic scions of Raghu, the aforesaid
Hanuman, the extremely wise son of the
wind-god, thereupon sallied forth to meet
Sugriva (the ruler of monkeys). (33)

भिक्षुरूपं परित्यज्य amt रूपमास्थित:।
पृष्ठमारोप्य dt वीरौ जगाम कपिकुञ्जर:॥ ३४॥

Having abandoned the guise of a
mendicant (recluse) and resumed the form
of a monkey, and placing the aforesaid two
heroes on his shoulders, Hanuman (a
veritable elephant among monkeys) departed
for Rsyamuka. (34)

स तु विपुलयशा: कपिप्रवीर:
पवनसुत: कृतकृत्यवत् Wee: |
गिरिवरमुरुविक्रम: प्रयात:
स शुभमति: सह रामलक्ष्मणाभ्याम्॥ ३५ ॥
Overjoyed like one whose object has
been accomplished, that great hero among
the monkeys, the noble-minded son of the
wind-god, for his part, who had earned an
extensive fame and was possessed of
extraordinary prowess, proceeded alongwith
Sri Rama and Laksmana to Rsyamuka (the
foremost of mountains). (35)

(31)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये किष्किन्धाकाण्डे चतुर्थ: सर्ग: ॥ ४॥

Thus ends Canto Four in the Kiskindhakanda of the glorious Ramayana of Valmiki,
the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

