* SUNDARAKANDA +

dragged violently to the presence of Ravana,
the ruler of ogres. (52)
sesh तं प्रसमीक्ष्य मुक्त-
मस्त्रेण बद्धं द्रुमचीरसूत्रै:।
व्यदर्शयत् तत्र महाबलं तं
हरिप्रवीरं सगणाय राज्ञे॥५३॥
Vividly perceiving that eminent hero
among the monkeys, who was endowed
with extraordinary might, set free by the
missile and bound with cords of bark alone,
Indrajit now presented him in the court before
the king, Ravana, surrounded by his
courtiers. (53)
तं मत्तमिव wag ae कपिवरोत्तमम्।
राक्षसा राक्षसेन्द्राय रावणाय न्यवेदयन्॥७५४॥
The ogres announced to Ravana, the
ruler of ogres, the presence of that jewel
among the foremost of monkeys, who stood
bound like an elephant in rut. (54)

कोऽयं कस्य कुतो वापि किं कार्यं कोऽभ्युपाश्रय: |
इति राक्षसवीराणां दृष्ट्वा संजज्ञिरे HAM: WKY Il
“Who is this being? Whose son or
servant is he? Where has he come from?
What is his mission and who is _ his
supporter?” So went round the inquiries of
the ogre heroes on seeing Hanuman. (55)
हन्यतां दह्यतां वापि भक्ष्यतामिति चापरे।
राक्षसास्तत्र संक्रुद्धा: परस्परमथाब्रुवन्॥५६॥
Nay, highly enraged, other ogres on
the spot forthwith said to one another, “Let
the monkey be killed, roasted alive or even
devoured.” (56)
अतीत्य मार्गं सहसा महात्मा
स त्त्र रक्षोऽधिषपपादमूले।
ददर्श Ua: परिचारवृद्धान्
गृहं महारत्नविभूषितं Ae
Having covered the way, that exalted
soul, Hanuman, beheld all of a sudden on

217

that spot—elderly attendants of the king
seated at the feet of Ravana, the suzerain
lord of ogres, as well as his assembly hall
richly decorated with precious jewels. (57)

a cat महातेजा रावण: कपिसत्तमम्।
रक्षोभिर्विकृताकारै:३ कृष्यमाणमितस्तत:॥ ७५८ ॥

The splendid Ravana too, who was
endowed with extraordinary energy, saw
Hanuman, the foremost of monkeys being
dragged hither and thither by ogres of ugly
bearing. (58)

राक्षसाधिपतिं चापि east कपिसत्तम:।
तेजोबलसमायुक्तं तपन्तमिव भास्करम्॥७५९॥

Hanuman, too beheld Ravana, the
suzerain lord of ogres, richly endowed with
energy and strength and resembling the
blazing sun. (59)
aq _
र्दशाननस्तं कपिमन्ववेक्ष्य।
अथोपविष्टान् कुलशीलवृद्धान्
समादिशत् तं प्रति मुख्यमन्त्रीन्॥ ६० UI

Looking unwinkingly and intently on the
aforesaid monkey, his coppery eyes rolling
rapidly through rage, that ten-headed monster
forthwith commanded his chief counsellors
seated in their due places there, who were
distinguished for their lineage and character,
to interrogate him. (60)

यथाक्रमं a: a कपिश्च ge:

कार्यार्थमर्थस्य च मूलमादौ।
निवेदयामास हरीश्वरस्य

दूत: सकाशादहमागतोऽस्मि॥ ६१॥

Questioned by them in succession as
to the work he had taken upon himself, the
motive by which he was actuated and the
ultimate aim with which he had come, that
monkey said at the outset: “l am a messenger
arrived from the presence of Sugriva, the
lord of monkeys.” (61)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये सुन्दरकाण्डेऽष्टचत्वारिंश: सर्ग: ॥ ४८ ॥

Thus ends Canto Forty-eight of the Sundarakanda in the glorious Ramayana of
Valmiki, the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.
