768

अथवा रामरूपेण कृतान्त: स्वयमागत:।
Tat तव विनाशाय विधायाप्रतितर्किताम्॥९॥

“Or, taking recourse to inconceivable
magic for your destruction, Death himself
appeared in the form of Rama. (9)
अथवा वासवेन त्वं धर्षितोऽसि महाबल।
वासवस्य तु का शक्तिस्त्वां द्रष्टुमपि AAT Il Qo Il
व्यक्तमेष महायोगी परमात्मा सनातन:॥११॥
अनादिमध्यनिधनो महत: परमो महान्।
तमस: wal धाता शङ्खचक्रगदाधर: ॥ १२॥
श्रीवत्सवक्षा नित्यश्रीरजय्य: शाश्वतो ya: |
मानुषं रूपमास्थाय विष्णु: सत्यपराक्रम:॥ १३॥
wa: परिव्रतो देवैर्वानरत्वमुपागतै:।
सर्वलोकेश्वर: श्रीमाँल्लोकानां हितकाम्यया i १४॥
a राक्षसपरीवारं देवशत्रुं भयावहम्।
इन्द्रियाणि पुरा जित्वा जितं त्रिभुवनं त्वया॥ १५॥

“Or, it seems, you were overcome by
Indra (disguised as Rama), O lord endowed
with extraordinary might! Indra, however,
had no power even to gaze on you, the
avowed enemy of gods, on the battlefield,
endowed as you were with extraordinary
might, valour and energy. “Assuming a
human semblance, prompted as He was by
the desire to do good to all the worlds and
surrounded by all the gods, who had taken
the form of so many monkeys, evidently the
celebrated Lord Visnu of unfailing prowess,
the eternal Supreme Spirit, a great master
of yoga, the gracious Ruler of all the three
worlds as well as their sustainer, who has
no beginning, middle or end, is supremely
greater than the great and stands eternally
beyond darkness (ignorance) who carries a
conch, a discus and a mace on His person
and is distinguished by the mark of Srivatsa
(a curl of white hair) on the breast, who is
constantly endowed with fortune, is invincible,
everlasting and perpetual, made short work
of you, a terrible enemy of gods, alongwith

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA +

the ogres who surrounded you. After
subduing the senses, including the mind,
the internal sense, all the three worlds were
conquered by you in the course of the
austerities practised by you in the past.
(10—15)
स्मरद्भिरिव aq वैरमिन्दियैरेव निर्जित:।
यदैव हि जनस्थाने राक्षसैर्बहुभिर्वृत:॥ १६॥
Tred निहतो भ्राता तदा WaT न मानुष:।
aa amt लङ्कां दुष्प्रवेशां सुरैरपि॥१७॥
प्रविष्टो हनुमान् वीर्यात् तदैव व्यथिता वयम्।
क्रियतामविरोधश्च राघवेणेति यन्मया॥१८॥

उच्यमानो न गृह्णासि तस्येयं व्युष्टिरागता।
अकस्माच्चाभिकामोऽसि सीतां राक्षसपुङ्खव॥ १९॥
ऐश्वर्यस्य विनाशाय देहस्य स्वजनस्य च।
अरुन्धत्या विशिष्टां at रोहिण्याश्चापि दुर्मते॥ २०॥
वसुधाया fe वसुधां श्रिया: श्रीं भर्तृवत्सलाम्॥ २१॥
“You now stand vanquished in your
turn by the senses themselves, who have
ceased to co-operate with you as though
they recollected their old grudge against
you, occasioned by their discomfiture at
your hands. The moment your brother, Khara,
was actually killed by Sri Rama_ in
Janasthana, even though surrounded by
numerous ogres, it became evident that Sri
Rama was really no mortal. Nay, we all felt
perturbed about our future the moment
Hanuman penetrated by dint of his prowess
deep into the city of Lanka, which was
difficult to penetrate into even for gods. This
nemesis has come upon you since you did
not heed my advice. You were being
repeatedly admonished by me to the effect
that no hostility should be entered into with
Sri Rama (a scion of Raghu). Nay, to the
destruction of your sovereignty, life and
your own people, you unaccountably
conceived a passion for Sita, O bull among
the ogres! Surely an unworthy act was
perpetrated by you, O foolish one, while
treating with indignity, the celebrated Sita,
