852

तस्याश्रमपदस्थस्य बुद्धिर्जज्ञे महात्मन:।
चरिष्ये परमं at धर्मो fe परमा गति:॥१०॥

As this high-souled person was living
in the ASrama, a thought occurred to him
that he must practise the highest form of
Dharma, as it was the ultimate goal. (10)

स gq वर्षसहस्राणि तपस्तप्त्वा महावने।
यन्तितो नियमैरुग्रैश्चकार सुमहत्तप:॥११॥

Performing Tapas for thousands of years
in a vast forest retreat, he had subdued his
senses by stern discipline; the Tapas that he
performed was a very severe one. (11)
पूर्णे वर्षसहस्रान्ते तं तं विधिमकल्पयत्।
जलाशी मारुताहारो निराहारस्तथैव च॥१२॥

At the end of a thousand years, he
imposed on himself the discipline appropriate
for the occasion and lived on water, then on
air and then went without anything to live
upon. (12)
एवं वर्षसहस्राणि जग्मुस्तान्येकवर्षवत्।
अथ प्रीतो महातेजा: सेन्द्रै: सुरगणै: Ben esi
गत्वा तस्याश्रमपदं Weld वाक्यमब्रवीत्।
परितुष्टोऽस्मि a वत्स कर्मणानेन Padi १४॥

Thus a thousand years flew away
like one year. “The highly glorious Brahma,
greatly pleased, went to his Asrama
accompanied by Indra and a host of other
gods and spoke as follows: ‘O sage of
commendable vows, may all be well with
you. | am pleased with your achievement,
my son ! (13-14)
at quite ud ते वरार्हस्त्वं महामते।
अथाब्रवीद् वैश्रवण: पितामहमुपस्थितम्॥ १५॥

O highly intelligent one, you deserve a
boon. Ask for one.’ Addressing Brahma, who
had come in person, VaiSravana said: (15)

wTdecienurerairesa लोकरक्षणम्।
अथाब्रवीद् वैश्रवणं परितुष्टेन चेतसा॥१६॥
ब्रह्मा सुरगणै: सार्धं बाढमित्येव हृष्टवत्।
अहं A लोकपालानां चतुर्थं Sea Vel

« VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

‘| like to be a guardian of the world
(Lokapala) and its protector (Lokaraksaka),
O venerable sir !’ “With a well-pleased mind
and greatly satisfied, Brahma, in the presence
of the host of gods, said: ‘Be it so. | was
about to create the fourth Lokapala (guardian
of the world). (16-17)
यमेन्द्रवरुणानां च Ud यत् aa चेप्सितम्।
तद् Tes aa ade निधीशत्वमवाप्नुहि॥ १८॥

‘Go, therefore, O knower of Dharma, and
attain the position of the lord of wealth and be
an equal of Yama, Indra and Varuna. (18)
शक्राम्बुपयमानां च चतुर्थस्त्वं भविष्यसि।
एतच्च पुष्पकं नाम विमानं सूर्यसंनिभम्॥१९॥
प्रतिगृह्णीष्व यानार्थं त्रिदशै: समतां व्रज।
स्वस्ति तेऽस्तु गमिष्याम: सर्व Wa यथागतम्॥ २०॥
कृतकृत्या at तात दत्वा da वरद्वयम्।
इत्युक्त्वा स गतो ब्रह्मा स्वस्थानं त्रिदशै: सह॥ २१॥

‘You will be the fourth, besides Indra,
Varuna and Yama. Accept this aerial car,
Puspaka by name, resplendent like the sun,
as your conveyance and become equal to
gods. Let all be well with you. We shall go
back as we came, having accomplished our
purpose by granting you the two boons.’
Having said this, Brahma went back to his
abode accompanied by the gods. (19—21)

गतेषु ब्रह्मपूर्वेषु देवेष्वथ नभस्तलम्।
धनेश: पितरं We Wale: प्रयतात्मवान्॥ २२॥

When Brahma and the other gods had
gone to the heavens, the lord of wealth, with
folded hands and with all humility, said to

his father: (22)

wTaeteraiter वरमिष्टं पितामहात्।

निवासनं न मे cat विदधे स प्रजापति:। २३॥
‘Revered sir, from Brahma | have

obtained the boon of my choice, but the said
lord of creation did not assign a place for
my abode. (23)

तं पश्य भगवन् कंचिन्निवासं साधु मे प्रभो।
न च पीडा भवेद् यत्र प्राणिनो यस्य कस्यचित्॥ २४॥
