* SUNDARAKANDA +

‘Sri Rama, a scion of Raghu, will surely
derive joy through recovery of her even as
a king, deprived of his throne, on regaining
the land. (23)

कामभोगै: परित्यक्ता EAT बन्धुजनेन च।
धारयत्यात्मनो देहं तत्समागमकाङ्क्षिणी॥ २४॥

‘Deprived of all coveted enjoyments and
bereft of her kinsfolk, she preserves her body,
desirous as she is of meeting him. (24)

नैषा पश्यति राक्षस्यो नेमान् पुष्पफलद्रुमान्।
एकस्थहृदया नूनं राममेवानुपश्यति॥ २५॥

‘She neither sees the ogresses around
her nor these trees laden with flowers and
fruit. With her heart centred on one object
only, she undoubtedly beholds Sri Rama
alone all the time. (25)

Vat नाम Ut Aral: शोभनं भूषणादपि।
wart fe teat तेन vite न शोभते॥ २६॥

‘Indeed, the husband is the greatest
adornment for a woman, greater even than
an ornament. Hence, though deserving of
decoration, she no longer looks charming,
bereft as she is of her husband. (26)

Gat Hed रामो हीनो यदनया Wy: 1
धारयत्यात्मनो देहं न दु:खेनावसीदति॥ २७॥

‘Lord Sri Rama is really doing something
great in that he is preserving his body even
though bereft of her, and does not faint
through grief. (27)
इमामसितकेशान्तां शतपत्रनिभेक्षणाम्।
Gare ¢:Ract ज्ञात्वा ममापि व्यथितं मन: ।॥ २८ ॥

‘My mind too is seized with anguish on
finding this lady with dark long hanging hair
and lotus-like eyes afflicted, though deserving
of happiness. (28)

क्षितिक्षमा पुष्करसंनिभेक्षणा
या रक्षिता राघवलक्ष्मणाभ्याम्।

103

सा राक्षसीभिर्विकृतेक्षणाभि:
संरक्ष्यते सम्प्रति qari eu

‘She, who is forbearing as the earth
and whose eyes resemble a pair of lotuses
and who was protected by Sri Rama (a
scion of Raghu) and Laksmana, is now
being strongly guarded at the foot of a tree
by ogresses with deformed eyes. (29)

हिमहतनलिनीबव नष्टशोभा
व्यसनपरम्परया निपीड्यमाना।
सहचररहितेव चक्रवाकी
जनकसुता कृपणां दशां WIAA ll Bo ।।
‘Deprived of her charms like a lotus
plant blasted by frost, being sore oppressed
as she is by a series of misfortunes, Sita,
Janaka’s daughter, has been reduced to a
pitiable plight like a female Cakrawaka (red
goose) bereft of her mate. (30)

अस्या fe पुष्पावनताग्रशाखा:

शोकं दृढं A जनयन्त्यशोका:।
हिमव्यपायेन च शीतरश्मि-

रभ्युत्थितो नैकसहस्ररश्मि:॥ ३१॥

‘Indeed, the Asoka trees with the ends
of their boughs bent under the weight of
their blossom, actually cause immense grief
to her; while due to the close of winter
marked by the advent of spring, the moon
with its cool rays has grown fierce like the
myriad-rayed sun.’ (31)

इत्येवमर्थं

सीतेयमित्येव तु जातबुद्धि:।
संथ्रित्य afer निषसाद get

बली हरीणामृषभस्तरस्वी॥ ३२॥

Duly considering his interest, the mighty
Hanuman the foremost of monkeys, who
was full of impetuosity, and who for his part
felt convinced that she was Sita, remained
firmly seated on that tree. (32)

इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये सुन्दरकाण्डे षोडश: सर्ग: ॥ १६ ॥

Thus ends Canto Sixteen in the Sundarakanda of the glorious Ramayana of Valmiki,
the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

