* SUNDARAKANDA +

183

Canto XXXIX

Sita asks Hanuman, when the latter is about to depart with the jewel for her
head, to apprise Sri Rama and Laksmana of her own welfare and urge them
to rescue her. When Sita expresses her misgivings about the capacity of
the heroes on Sri Rama’s side to cross the sea, Hanuman expatiates
on the might of the monkey heroes and assures her of their ability
to cross it, and in the end consoles her by promising to bring
Sri Rama and Laksmana on his back across the sea in any case

मणिं ara तत: सीता हनूमन्तमथाब्रवीत्।
अभिज्ञानमभिज्ञातमेतद् रामस्य तत्त्वत:॥१॥

Having parted with her jewel, Sita then
spoke to Hanuman forthwith as follows: “This
token is fully known to Sri Rama in its
reality. (1)
मणिं gear तु रामो वै त्रयाणां संस्मरिष्यति।
at जनन्या मम च राज्ञो दशरथस्य च॥ २॥

“Seeing the jewel, the heroic Sri Rama
for his part will surely call to mind three
individuals all at once, viz., my mother, King
Dasaratha and myself as it was given as a
dowry to me by my mother in the presence
of my father-in-law. (2)

स waed समुत्साहचोदितो हरिसत्तम।
अस्मिन् कार्यसमुत्साहे प्रचिन्तय यदुत्तरम्॥३॥
“Goaded further by extraordinary zeal,
O jewel among monkeys, consider carefully
what is to be done next for giving impetus to
this work of rescuing me. (3)
त्वमस्मिन् कार्यनिर्योगे wart हरिसत्तम।
wea चिन्तय यो यत्नो दु:खक्षयकरो भवेत्॥४॥
“You alone are capable of bringing this
task to completion, O jewel among monkeys !
Please consider what effort might bring my
misfortunes to an end. (4)
हनूमन् यत्नमास्थाय दु:खक्षयकरो भव।
a तथेति प्रतिज्ञाय मारुतिर्भीमविक्रम:॥७५॥
शिरसाऽऽवन्द्य वैदेहीं गमनायोपचक्रमे।
ज्ञात्वा सम्प्रस्थितं देवी वानरं पवनात्मजम्॥६॥

बाष्पगद्गदया वाचा मैथिली वाक्यमब्रवीत्।
हनूमन् कुशलं ga: सहितौ रामलक्ष्मणौ॥७॥
सुग्रीवं च सहामात्यं सर्वान् वृद्धांश्च वानरान्।
ब्रूयास्त्वं arg कुशलं धर्मसंहितम्॥८॥
“Remaining active, therefore, O
Hanuman, pray, terminate my suffering.”
Giving his assurance in the words “Be it
so”, and making obeisance to Sita, a princess
of the Videha territory, with his head bent
low, Hanuman, son of the wind-god, of
redoubtable prowess made ready to depart.
Perceiving Hanuman, sprung from the loins
of the wind-god, fully prepared to leave,
Sita, a princess of Mithila, spoke as follows
in a voice choked with tears: “Communicate
my welfare to Sri Rama and Laksmana
together, O Hanuman ! Nay, make a report
in consonance with righteousness regarding
my welfare, O jewel among monkeys, to
Sugriva and his ministers, as also to all
elderly monkeys. (5—8)

यथा च स महाबाहुर्मां तारयति राघव:।
अस्माद् दु:खाम्बुसंरोधात् त्वं समाधातुमर्हसि॥ ९॥
“You ought to make efforts to see that

the mighty-armed scion of Raghu delivers
me from this ocean of sorrow. (9)

जीवन्तीं मां यथा राम: सम्भावयति कोर्तिमान्।

Ae त्वया हनुमन् वाच्यं वाचा धर्ममवाप्नुहि।। १० ॥
“My case should be put by you in such

a way, O Hanuman, that the illustrious Sri

Rama may find me alive. Reap the virtue of
rendering help to me by your words. (10)
