320

spoke to Manthara as follows: “I will not
disparage your wisdom, O noblest woman,
who are imparting the best counsel to me.

(34—38)

पथिव्यामसि कुब्जानामुत्तमा बुद्धिनिश्चये।
त्वमेव तु ममार्थेषु नित्ययुक्ता हितैषिणी । ३९॥

“You. are the best among the
hunchbacked on earth in judgment arrived
at through reason. You are in fact my only
well-wisher, and ever devoted to my
interests. (39)
We समवबुद्ध्येयं hot राज्ञश्चिकीर्षितम्।
सन्तिदु:संस्थिता: कुब्जा: वक्रा: परमपापिका: ।॥ So Ut

“| cannot fully make out the intention of
the king, O hunchback ! Deformed women,
O hunchback, are generally ill-disposed and
most sinful. You are, however, an honourable
exception. (40)
त्वं पद्ममिव ana संनता प्रियदर्शना।
उरस्तेऽभिनिविष्टं वै यावत् स्कन्धात् समुन्नतम्॥ ४१ ॥

“Though doubled up even as a lotus by
wind, you are charming to look at. Only your
breast is deformed by a hump and is unusually
projected up to the shoulders. (41)
अधस्ताच्चोदरं शान्तं सुनाभमिव लज्जितम्।
प्रतिपूर्णं च wet सुपीनौ च पयोधरौ॥४२॥

“Below the breast there is your
abdomen of modest dimensions with a
shapely navel, looking abashed as it were
of the unusually protruding breast. Again
there are your broad hinder part and
remarkably full breasts. (42)

विमलेन्दुसमं वक्त्रमहो राजसि मन्थरे।
wet तव निर्मृष्टं रशनादामभूषितम्॥४३॥
“Your countenance resembles _ the
spotless moon. Oh, you look so splendid
with it! Hairless and therefore smooth is

your hinder part, adorned as it is with a
girdle of tiny bells. (43)

जङ्घे भृशमुपन्यस्ते पादौ च व्यायतावुभौ।
त्वमायताभ्यां सक्थिभ्यां मन्थरे क्षौमवासिनी ii ४४॥

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

अग्रतो AA गच्छन्ती राजसेऽतीव शोभने।

आसन् या: शम्बरे माया: सहस्रमसुराधिपे॥ ४५ ॥
waa ते निविष्टास्ता भूयश्चान्या: सहस्रश:।
तदेव स्थगु ae दीर्घं रथघोणमिवायतम्॥४६॥

“Most contiguous are your shanks and
both your feet are exceptionally long. With
your long thighs you look most charming
while walking before me, O good-looking
Manthara, clad in a silk garment. A thousand
conjuring tricks, which were known to
Sambara, the overlord of demons, and still
other tricks in thousands lie treasured in
your heart. They alone constitute your big
hump, which is prominent as the hub of a
wheel of a chariot. (44—46)

मतय: क्षत्रविद्याश्च मायाश्चात्र वसन्ति a

अत्र तेऽहं प्रमोक्ष्यामि मालां Host हिरण्मयीम्॥ ४७॥
अभिषिक्ते च wd राघवे च at गते।

Wet च सुवर्णेन सुनिष्टप्तेन सुन्दरि॥४८॥

“In this hump of yours reside thoughts
of various kinds, diplomacies and artifices.
Nay, on this hump of yours | shall reverently
drop a chain of molten gold of the highest
quality, O lovely Manthara, when Bharata is
installed and Rama, a scion of Raghu, has
proceeded to the forest. (47-48)

लब्धार्था च प्रतीता च लेपयिष्यामि ते स्थगु।
मुखे च तिलकं चित्रं जातरूपमयं शुभम्॥४९॥
कारयिष्यामि ते कुब्जे शुभान्याभरणानि च।
परिधाय शुभे वस्त्रे cada चरिष्यसि॥५०]॥

“When | have realized my aforesaid
object and am thus pleased, | shall further
paint your hump with sandal-paste and shall
cause to be stuck (with wax etc.) on your
forehead a sacred and beautiful tiny disk of
gold inlaid with precious stones. Wearing a
pair of garments, one about your loins and
another covering your trunk, and lovely
ornaments, you will move about like a
goddess, O hunchback ! (49-50)

चन्द्रमाह्वयमानेन मुखेनाप्रतिमानना।
गमिष्यसि गतिं मुख्यां गर्वयन्ती द्विषज्जने॥७५१॥
