* BALAKANDA +

He is the cleverest and strongest of all
monkey chiefs. They were begotten in many
thousands and were ever ready to make
short work of Ravana. (17)

अप्रमेयबला वीरा विक्रान्ता: कामरूपिण:।
ते गजाचलसंकाशा वपुष्मन्तो महाबला:॥१८॥

They were valiant and full of prowess
and possessed infinite strength. Mighty as
they were, they could take any form at will,
were endowed with gigantic bodies and
looked like elephants and mountains. (18)

ऋक्षवानरगोपुच्छा: क्षिप्रमेवाभिजज्ञिरे ।
यस्य देवस्य यद्रूपं वेषो यश्च पराक्रम:॥१९॥
अजायत समं तेन तस्य तस्य पृथक् पृथक्।
गोलाङ्गूलेषु चोत्पन्ना: किंचिदुन्नतविक्रमा: tt २० ॥

The bears, monkeys and long-tailed
monkeys (lit., those with a tail resembling
that of a cow) saw the light in no time after
conception, as is the case with heavenly
beings. The son of each god was individually
born as on all fours with the complexion,
bodily structure and prowess that the latter
possessed; while those born among the
long-tailed monkeys were endowed with a
slightly superior prowess as compared even
with their respective fathers. (19-20)

ऋक्षीषु च तथा जाता वानरा: किंनरीषु च।
देवा महर्षिगन्धर्वास्तार्क्ययक्षा यशस्विन:॥ २१॥
arm: किम्पुरुषाश्चैव सिद्धविद्याधरोरगा:।
बहवो जनयामासुर्हृष्टास्तत्र सहस्रश:॥२२॥

Even so, monkeys were born of she-
bears and Kinnara women. Many renowned
gods, great Rsis and Gandharvas, Garuda
and others (sons of KaSyapa) and Yaksas,
the elephants guarding the quarters and
Kimpurusas (a class of beings allied to the
Kinnaras, who are regarded as the attendants
of Kubera), Siddhas, Vidyadharas and Nagas,
full of delight, begot sons in thousands on
that occasion. (21-22)

चारणाश्च सुतान् वीरान् ससृजुर्वनचारिण:।
वानरान् सुमहाकायान् सर्वान् वै वनचारिण: ॥ २३॥

119
अप्सरस्सु च मुख्यासु तथा विद्याधरीषु च।
नागकन्यासु च तदा गन्धर्वीणां तनूषु च।
कामरूपबलोपेता यथाकामविचारिण:॥ २४॥

Through the principal Apsaras and
Vidyadhara women as well as_ through
maidens of the Nagas and the wombs of
Gandharva women, the Caranas too begot
in the form of sons monkeys endowed with
a gigantic body and roaming about in the
forests and all living only on wild fruits etc.
They were gifted with the power of assuming
any form and acquiring any amount of
strength at will and could go about wherever
they liked. (23-24)

सिंहशार्दूलसदृशा दर्पेण च बलेन Tl
शिलाप्रहरणा: सर्वे aa पर्वतयोधिन:॥ २५॥

Nay, they resembled the lion and tiger
in point of haughtiness and strength. All
used even rocks as their missiles and all
fought with mountains as their weapon. (25)

नखदंष्ट्वयुधा: Ud Wa सर्वास्त्रकोविदा:।
विचालयेयु: शैलेन्द्रान् भेदयेयु: स्थिरान् द्रुमान्॥ २६ UI
All had claws and teeth for their
weapons and all were skilled in the use of
all sorts of missiles. They could shake

great mountains and cleave rooted trees.
(26)
क्षोभयेयुश्च वेगेन समुद्रं सरितां पतिम्।
दारयेयु: faft पद्भ्यामाप्लवेयुर्महार्णवान्॥ २७॥
They could agitate the sea, the lord of
the rivers, with their impetuosity, rend the

earth with their feet and leap across extensive
oceans. (27)

नभस्तलं विशेयुश्च गृह्णीयुरपि तोयदान्।
गृह्णीयुरपि मातङ्गान् मत्तान् प्रव्रजतो वने॥ २८॥

They could penetrate into the firmament
and catch hold of the clouds. They could
even seize elephants in rut roaming at will
in the forest. (28)
नर्दमानांश्च नादेन पातयेयुर्विहंगमान्।
ईदृशानां प्रसूतानि हरीणां कामरूपिणाम्॥ २९॥
