336

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA +

चतुर्दश: सर्ग:
Canto XIV

Vibhisana exhorts Ravana to restore Sita to Sri Rama before the
latter’s arrows pierced the heads of the ogres

निशाचरेन्द्रस्य निशम्य वाक्यं
a कुम्भकर्णस्य च गर्जितानि।

विभीषणो राक्षसराजमुख्य-
मुवाच वाक्यं हितमर्थयुक्तम्॥१॥

Having listened to the braggadocio of
Ravana, the ruler of ogres, and the thundering
of Kumbhakarna, Vibhisana made_ the
following salutary and significant submission
to Ravana, the foremost of the rulers of
ogres: (1)

qt हि बाह्वन्तरभोगराशि-
सीतामहाहिस्तव केन राजन्॥२॥
“By whom, O king, has the huge serpent
of gigantic proportions in the form of Sita—
her bosom for its coils, her remaining plunged
in thought for its poison, her sweet smiles
for its sharp fangs, her five fingers for its
five hoods—been tied to your neck? (2)

gat ast समभिद्रवन्ति
बलीमुखा: पर्वतकूटमात्रा: |
दंष्टायुधाश्चैव नखायुधाश्च
प्रदीयतां दाशरथाय Afar ३॥
“Let Sita, a princess of Mithila, be given
back to Rama (son of DaSaratha) while the
monkeys, who are tall as mountain-tops

and have teeth and claws for their weapons,
have not yet invaded Lanka. (3)

यावन्न Tera शिरांसि बाणा
रामेरिता राक्षसपुंगवानाम्।
वज्रोपमा वायुसमानवेगा

प्रदीयतां दाशरथाय मैथिली॥४॥

“Let Sita, a princess of Mithila, be
restored to Rama (son of DaSaratha) till the
arrows propelled by Rama, which resemble
the thunderbolt in their fury and are swift as
the wind, do not catch the heads of the
foremost among the ogres. (4)
न कुम्भकर्णेन्द्रजितौ च राजं-

स्तथा महापार्श्वमहोदरौ वा।
निकुम्भकुम्भौ च तथातिकाय:
स्थातुं समर्था युधि राघवस्य॥७५॥

“Nay, neither Kumbhakarna and Indrajit
nor even Mahaparswa and Mahodara nor
Nikumbha and Kumbha, nor even Atikaya

are capable of withstanding Rama (a scion
of Raghu) in combat, O king! (5)

Weed रामस्य न Hem त्वं
Ta: सवित्राप्यथवा मरुद्धि:।
न वासवस्याङ्कगतो न मृत्यो-
र्नभो न पातालमनुप्रविष्ट:॥६॥

“You shall not be spared by the arrows
of Sri Rama even though protected by the
sun-god or the wind-gods nor if seated in
the lap of Indra or Death nor if you have
penetrated into the heavens or Patala, the
nethermost subterranean region.” (6)
निशम्य वाक्यं तु विभीषणस्य

तत: प्रहस्तो वचनं बभाषे।
न नो wa far न दैवतेभ्यो
न दानवेभ्योऽप्यथवा कदाचित्॥७॥

Hearing the submission of Vibhisana,
Prahasta for his part forthwith observed as
follows: “We do not know if there is ever
any cause for fear to us from gods or even
from demons. (7)
