1008

and as he strode forward, the disciples of
the great wise sage followed him. Walking
barefooted and carrying Arghya in his hands,
the sage Valmiki reached the shore of the
Ganga and beheld Sita, the consort of Sri
Rama, lamenting there helplessly. (3—9)
at सीतां शोकभारार्तां वाल्मीकिर्मुनिपुङ्खव:।
sara मधुरां वाणीं ह्लादयन्निव तेजसा॥१०॥
Valmiki, the foremost of the ascetics,
spoke these sweet words to Sita, pained by
sorrow, delighting her as if with his powerful
effulgence. (10)

स्नुषा दशरथस्य त्वं रामस्य महिषी fran
जनकस्य सुता राज्ञ: स्वागतं A पतिव्रते॥११॥
“You are the daughter-in-law of
DaSaratha and the beloved queen of Rama
and also the daughter of the king Janaka.
Welcome to you, O chaste lady! (11)

आयान्ती चासि विज्ञाता war धर्मसमाधिना।
कारणं da wd मे हृदयेनोपलक्षितम्॥१२॥
“| knew through my subtle eyes that

you were coming. The causes also thereof
are known to me in my heart. (12)

qa aa महाभागे fafed wa तत्त्वत:।
ad च fated val त्रैलोक्ये यद्धि adan १३॥

“O fortunate one, your purity is known
to me. All that exist in the three worlds is
known to me. (13)

अपापां afar dtd ते तपोलब्धेन चक्षुषा।
विस्रब्धा wa वैदेहि साम्प्रतं मयि वर्तसे॥ १४॥

“Yes, indeed, with my inner eye acquired
through penance, | have perceived that you
are sinless. Be composed, O daughter of
the lord Videha, you are now in my charge.

(14)
आश्रमस्याविदूरे A तापस्यस्तपसि स्थिता:।
तास्त्वां वत्से यथा वत्सं पालयिष्यन्ति FAT: ॥ १५ ॥

“Not very far from the hermitage are
the female ascetics engaged in penances.
They, O child, shall always look after you
as a child. (15)

« VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

genet प्रतीच्छ त्वं विस्रब्धा विगतज्वरा।
यथा स्वगृहमभ्येत्य विषादं चैव मा कृथा:॥१६॥
“Accept this ablution and be calm and
free from all maladies. As if you are entering
your own home, so do not be despondent.”
(16)

श्रुत्वा तु भाषितं सीता मुने: परममद्भुतम्।
शिरसा aa चरणौ तथेत्याह कृताञ्जलि:॥ Voi

Hearing this most wonderful utterance
of the ascetic, doing homage to him with her
head and with folded hands Sita said: “Be it
So.” (17)
तं प्रयान्तं मुनिं सीता प्राञ्जलि: पृष्ठतोऽन्वगात्।

तं gear मुनिमायान्तं acer मुनिपत्नय:।
उपाजग्मुर्मुदा युक्का वचनं चेदमब्रुवन्॥१८॥

Sita with folded hands followed the
ascetic, Valmiki, as he went to his cottage
and the spouses of the ascetics seeing him
coming, together with the daughter of the
Lord of Videha, proceeded to receive them
and spoke thus with joy: (18)

स्वागतं a मुनिश्रेष्ठं चिरस्यागमनं च a
अभिवादयामस्त्वां सर्वा उच्यतां किं च कुर्महे॥ १९॥
“Welcome O greatest of the ascetics,

we salute you for your arrival is delayed.
Tell us now what we should do.” (19)

तासां तद् वचनं श्रुत्वा वाल्मीकिरिदमब्रवीत्।
सीतेयं समनुप्राप्ता पत्नी रामस्य धीमत:॥ २०॥
स्नुषा दशरथस्यैषा जनकस्य सुता सती।
अपापा पतिना त्यक्ता परिपाल्या AAT सदा॥ २१॥

Being thus addressed, Valmiki replied
to them thus: “The wife of Rama has come
to us; the daughter-in-law of Dasaratha,
formerly the daughter of Janaka, this one,
Sita, is guiltless and being forsaken by her
husband, shall always be under my charge.

(20-21)
इमां भवत्य: पश्यन्तु Set परमेण fel
गौरवान्मम वाक्याच्च UST वोऽस्तु विशेषत: ॥ २२॥

“O ladies, look upon her, Sita, with the
greatest of affection: the honour that you
