1050

तमुवाच सहस्राक्षो लवणो ATA राक्षस:।
मधुपुत्रो मधुवने न तेऽऽज्ञां कुरुतेऽनघ॥१३॥

The thousand-eyed Indra told him, ‘O
sinless one, the son of Madhu, the Raksasa
Lavana by name, does not obey your orders.’

(13)
wegen विप्रियं घोरं सहस्राक्षेण भाषितम्।
व्रीडितोऽवाङ्मुखो राजा व्याहर्तुं न शशाक ह॥ १४॥

Having heard the dreadful unpleasant

words, conveyed by Indra, the King put to

shame with face downcast, could not speak.
(14)

आमन्त्र्य तु सहस्राक्षं प्रायात् किंचिदवाङ्मुख: |
पुनरेवागमच्छीमानिमं लोकं ANAT UGH
Taking leave of the thousand-eyed god,
with his face turned somewhat downwards,
the lord of the mortals proceeded and came
back again to this world. (15)

स कृत्वा हृदयेऽमर्षं सभृत्यबलवाहन:।
आजगाम मधो: पुत्रं वशे कर्तुमरिंदम:॥१६॥
That king, the destroyer of foes, with
anger in his heart and together with his
attendants and carriers came to bring the
son of Madhu, Lavana, under his sway. (16)

स काङ्क्षमाणो लवणं युद्धाय पुरुषर्षभ:।
दूतं सम्प्रेषयामास सकाशं लवणस्य स:॥१७॥
Desirous to fight with Lavana, the bull

among men, Mandhata, sent a messenger
to Lavana. (17)

a गत्वा विप्रियाण्याह बहूनि मधुन: सुतम्।
वदन्तमेवं तं दूतं भक्षयामास राक्षस:॥१८॥
He, the messenger, having approached
the son of Madhu, said many unpleasant
words; the Raksasa_ devoured that
messenger while he was speaking thus.
(18)
चिरायमाणे दूते तु राजा क्रोधसमन्वित:।
अर्दयामास aq Tat: शरवृष्टया समन्तत:॥१९॥
The messenger, on being late in
returning, the King possessed of anger,

« VALMIKI-RAMAYANA «

inflicted injury on the Raksasa by shower of
arrows on all sides. (19)
तत: प्रहस्य ag रक्ष: शूलं जग्राह पाणिना।
वधाय सानुबन्धस्य मुमोचायुधमुत्तमम्॥ 20 Il
Then that Raksasa laughed and took
the trident in his hand and released the best
among weapons, the trident, for the purpose
of slaying Mandhata with all his followers. (20)
तच्छूलं दीप्यमानं तु सभृत्यबलवाहनम्।
भस्मीकृत्वा नृपं भूयो लवणस्यागमत् करम्॥ २१॥
That enflamed trident on its part, having
rendered to ashes the king together with his

attendant, army and carriers—came back
to the hand of Lavana. (21)

एवं स राजा सुमहान् हत: सबलवाहन:।
शूलस्य तु बलं सौम्य अप्रमेयमनुत्तमम्॥ २२॥
Thus that great King was killed together
with his army and carriers, O gracious one,
the power of the trident is impossible to
fathom. (22)
Va: Wd तु लवणं वधिष्यसि न संशय:।
अगृहीतायुधं क्षिप्रं gat fe विजयस्तव॥ २३॥
Tomorrow morning, you shall soon kill
Lavana while he is without the weapon, there
is no doubt that your victory is certain. (23)

लोकानां स्वस्ति चैवं स्यात् कृते कर्मणि च त्वया।
Udd ते सर्वमाख्यातं लवणस्य दुरात्मन:॥ २४॥
शूलस्य च बलं घोरमप्रमेयं नरर्षभ।
विनाशश्चैव मान्धातुर्यत्नेनाभूच्च पार्थिव॥ २५॥

By you performing this deed the welfare
of the worlds will be achieved. Thus all has
been narrated to you, O bull among men,
about the might of the wicked Lavana and
the unfathomable dreadful power of the trident,
O king Mandhata; Lavana perished due to
his own misdeeds. (24-25)

त्वं Va: प्रभाते लवणं महात्मन्

वधिष्यसे at तु संशयो मे।
शूलं विना निर्गतमामिषार्थे

ध्रुवो जयस्ते भविता नरेन्द्र॥ २६॥

Tomorrow morning you will slay Lavana
