# YUDDHAKANDA #

the club shone like a hundred meteors
crumbling in the air all at once. (12)

स तु तेन प्रहारेण न चचाल महाकपि:।
परिघेण समाधूतो यथा भूमिचलेऽचल:॥१३॥

Though struck with the club, that great
monkey did not shake under that blow any
more than a mountain in an earthquake.

(13)
स तथाभिहतस्तेन हनूमान् प्लवगोत्तम:।
मुष्टिं संवर्तयामास बलेनातिमहाबल:॥ ex il

Struck as aforesaid by the ogre, the
celebrated Hanuman, the foremost of the
monkeys, who was endowed with exceeding

might, clenched his fist with vehemence.
(14)

तमुद्यम्य महातेजा निकुम्भोरसि वीर्यवान्।
अभिचिक्षेप वेगेन वेगवान् वायुविक्रम:॥ १५॥

Raising it, the powerful and agile
monkey, who was-~ endowed~ with
extraordinary energy and vied with the wind-
god in prowess, dashed it with impetuosity
on the chest of Nikumbha. (15)

तत्र पुस्फोट वर्मास्य प्रसुस्राव च शोणितम्।
मुष्टिना at संजज्ञे मेघे विद्युदिवोत्थिता॥ १६॥

The armour of Nikumbha in that region
got split up and blood shot forth under the
impact of that fist. It appeared on his breast
as lightning sprung from a cloud. (16)
स तु तेन प्रहारेण निकुम्भो विचचाल च।
स्वस्थश्चापि Pome हनूमन्तं महाबलम्॥ Voll

Nay, the notorious Nikumbha for his
part staggered under that blow. Recovering
himself, however, he caught hold of
Hanuman, even though the latter was
endowed with extraordinary might. (17)

चुक्रुशुश्च dat संख्ये भीमं लङ्कानिवासिन:।
निकुम्भेनोद्यतं gaat हनूमन्तं महाबलम्॥१८॥

Seeing Hanuman, who was endowed
with extraordinary strength, captured by

635

Nikumbha on the field of battle, the inhabitants
of Lanka terribly roared on that occasion.
(18)

a तथा ह्रियमाणोऽपि हनूमांस्तेन रक्षसा।
आजघानानिलसुतो वज्रकल्पेन मुष्टिना॥१९॥

Even while being carried off as aforesaid
by that ogre, Hanuman, son of the
wind-god, struck him with his fist, which
was hard as adamant. (19)

आत्मानं मोक्षयित्वाथं «= fararearszrercerct |
हनूमानुन्ममाथाशु निकुम्भं मारुतात्मज:॥ Ro Il

Disengaging himself from his grip,
Hanuman, sprung from the loins of the wind-
god, forthwith leapt to the ground and
speedily struck Nikumbha down. (20)

निक्षिप्य परमायत्तो निकुम्भं निष्पिपेष च।
उत्पत्य चास्य वेगेन पपातोरसि वेगवान्॥ २१॥

Having thrown Nikumbha_ down,
Hanuman, who was_ supremely active,
crushed him. Nay, springing up, the agile
monkey jumped impetuously on his chest.

(21)

परिगृह्य च बाहुभ्यां uae शिरोधराम्।
उत्पाटयामास शिरो भैरवं नदतो महत्॥ २२॥

Taking hold of the ogre’s neck and
twisting it, Hanuman tore off his huge head
while the ogre continued to emit a terrible
cry. (22)
अथ निनदति सादिते निकुम्भे

पवनसुतेन रणे बभूव युद्धम्।
दशरथसुतराक्षसेन्द्रसून्वो-
र्भृशतरमागतरोषयो: सुभीमम्॥ २३॥

When Nikumbha, who was ८110
loudly, was killed in combat by the son of
the wind-god, there ensued forthwith an
exceedingly formidable struggle between Sri
Rama (son of Emperor DaSaratha) and
Makaraksa (son of Khara, a ruler of ogres),
who were seized with terrible anger. (23)
