756

गदानां मुसलानां च परिघाणां च नि:स्वनै:।
शराणां पुङ्ख्वातैश्च क्षुभिता: WA सागरा:॥४५॥
Nay, all the seven seas were thrown
into agitation by the sound of maces, mallets
and iron bludgeons and the gusts raised by
the plumes adorning the flying arrows.(45)
क्षुब्धानां सागराणां च पातालतलवासिन:।
व्यथिता दानवा: सर्वे पन्नगाश्च ASST: USE Il
All the devils as well as the snakes
inhabiting in their thousands the nethermost

subterranean region situated underneath the
agitated seas felt disquieted. (46)

चकम्पे मेदिनी कृत्स्ना सशौलवनकानना।
भास्करो निष्प्रभश्चासीन्न ववौ चापि मारुत:॥ ४७॥

The entire globe shook with its
mountains, forests and jungles. Nay, the
sun (the source of light) lost its brilliance
and the wind too ceased to blow. (47)

ततो cat: सगन्धर्वा: सिद्धाश्च परमर्षय:।
चिन्तामापेदि सर्वे सकिंनरमहोरगा:॥४८॥

Thereupon all the gods—including the
Gandharvas (celestial musicians), as well
as the Kinnaras (another class of demigods
credited with a human figure and the head
of a horse or with a horse’s body and the
head of a man) and huge serpents—as also
Siddhas (a class of demigods endowed
with mystic powers from their very birth)
and great Rsis (the seers of Vedic Mantras)
fell a prey to anxiety. (48)

स्वस्ति गोब्राह्मणेभ्यस्तु लोकास्तिष्ठन्तु शाश्वता:।
जयतां राघव: संख्ये रावणं राक्षसेश्वरम्॥४९॥
“May all be well with the cows and the
Brahmanas. May all the worlds endure
forever. May Sri Rama, a scion of Raghu,

* VALMIKI-RAMAYANA +

conquer Ravana, the king of ogres, in
combat!” (49)

एवं जपन्तोऽपश्यंस्ते देवा: सर्षिगणास्तदा।
रामरावणयोर्युद्धुं सुघोरं रोमहर्षणम्॥५०॥

Saying so, the gods including the hosts
of Rsis (the seers of Vedic Mantras), present
on the occasion, witnessed the fierce struggle
between Sri Rama and Ravana, which
caused one’s hair to stand on end. (50)
गन्धर्वाप्सरसां सङ्घा दृष्ट्वा युद्धमनूपमम्।
TH! गगनाकारं सागर: सागरोपम:॥५१॥
रामरावणयोर्युद्धं रामरावणयोरिव।
एवं ब्रुवन्तो ददृशुस्तद युद्धं रामरावणम्॥५२॥

Watching that matchless struggle and
observing that even as the sky is its own
compeer and that the sea is its own analogue,
the struggle between Sri Rama and Ravana
can be likened only to the struggle between
Sri Rama and Ravana, the hosts of
Gandharvas_ (celestial musicians) and
Apsaras (heavenly nymphs) looked on that
combat between Sri Rama and Ravana.

(51-52)
तत: क्रोधान्महाबाहू रघूणां कीर्तिवर्धन:।
संधाय धनुषा राम: शरमाशीविषोपमम्॥५३॥
रावणस्य शिरोऽच्छिन्दच्छीमज्ज्वलितकुण्डलम्।
तच्छिर: पतितं भूमौ qe लोकैस्तिभिस्तदा॥ ५४॥

Putting to his bow an arrow, which
resembled a venomous serpent (in its
fierceness) in wrath the mighty-armed Sri
Rama, who enhanced the glory of the Raghus
(his forbears), cut off the glorious head? of
Ravana, which was graced with flaming
earrings. The aforesaid head was seen fallen
on the ground by the denizens of all the
three worlds on that occasion. (53-54)

1. This verse `गगनं गगनाकारं ........ रामरावणयोरिव` has been quoted in works on Sanskrit poetics as an illustration of
the figure of speech known by the name of ‘Ananyaya’, the occasion of which arises only where the object

described is peerless and serves as its own comparison.

2. It seems Ravana appeared on the battlefield with a single head only during this combat.
