( xxvi )

language of science tells no stories, no myths. It states the truth
pure and simple. Hence the resort to Swami Dayananda, either
before or after Sayana and the western scholars, is indispensable.

There is one observation I must make on Swami Dayananda.
Swami Dayananda has given a socio-economic orientation to the
Vedic mantras because he underscores the relevance of the Vedas
to the social, economic and political situation of humanity,
especially in India, which was necessary and highly meaningful.
For example, the Ashwins, in general, are the complementary
powers of nature and humanity working as twin forces like the
positive and negative currents of electricity, or like the theoretician
and the laboratory man, or the curative and recuperative powers
of medicine and nature’s powers of rejuvenation. Swami
Dayananda often explains such powers in the interest of practical
understanding: he defines them as teacher and preacher, or father
and mother, sun and moon, fire and water, prana and Apana
energy, ruler and council, scientist and engineer, and so on,
depending on the mantra context. Sometimes it appears as if he
is delimiting the open-ended general meaning of the Veda. But
we should be careful before we say so, and realise that the
definiteness of his meaning is illustrative and in no way
exhaustive. In this translation such situations have been
appreciated and the meaning has been kept open ended, inclusive
of the meanings given by Swami Dayananda, as suggested by
Yaska and the etymology of the terms. In short, this translation
has been done with cautious reference to Sayana, under the
guidance of Swami Dayananda, with respect for Pundit
Satavalekara and with very careful observance of the western
anglers.

Pundit Satavalekara comes in between Sayana and swami
Dayananda for his excellent syntactic structures of mantra
meanings in continuous Hindi. But he explains words such as
Indra, Agni, Ashwins, Vrtra, Trita, Bhujyu, Kashyapa, Jamadagni,
etc. as proper names so that the mantra appears to be a mythical
or historical statement of either fact or fiction. But Swami
