( xi )

Foreword

Veda Bhashya by Prof. Tulsiram - A step to make Vedas
available to the English World

I have had the privilege of going through some of the
chapters of Yajurveda Bhashya written by Prof. Tulsiram, a well
known Vedic scholar and author of English language and
literature. I congratulate him because he has done this translation
for an average English reader who is keen to know the Vedas.
Knowledge of the Vedas is like the knowledge of science. Vedic
language is a scientific language and nobody can understand that
without the profound knowledge of Vedangas, especially Nirukta
of Maharshi Yaska and the grammar of Panini and Patanjali.
Nobody can interpret the Veda mantras without these two. This
translation proves that Prof. Tulsiram has done this insightful
translation after doing hard work in both Vedangas.

In translating the Vedas, only literal meaning is just not
sufficient, sometimes it may create confusion and contradiction.
Prof. Tulsiram deeply merges himself into Vedic Mantras,
thinking deeply about words, derivatives and analyzes the hidden
nuances of meaning in their context. For example, 'Sumitriya na
aapa oshadhayah santu..... Yajur. 36, 23': If we take literal meaning
in the ordinary sense, "may the waters, vital forces of life, and
herbs be friendly to us and may they be enemies to those who
hate us and whom we hate", it will not make acceptable sense.
After raising some questions, he says, "How can we accept this?"
So, after going deeply into the words and context he gives this
meaning of the said mantra: May waters, tonics, pranic energies
and medicinal herbs be good friends of our health system and
immunity and let the same waters, tonics, pranic energies herbal
medicines act against those ailments, diseases and negativities
which injure us, which we hate to suffer and which we love to
destroy, moreover let them have no side effects because side
effects too help the negativities and injure us.

After giving the actual sense of the Mantra he writes that
this Mantra is a reasonable prayer for the health programme of an
