( xxxiv )

translation today is the Arsh tradition followed by Swami
Dayananda.

The Arsh way is the only right way, the key, to discover
the truth of the Vedas. According to Shri Aurobindo, Swami
Dayananda alone, in modern times, possessed this key to the secret
of the Vedas. Interpreted this way the Vedas shine in their essential
scientific refulgence. As science is pure knowledge, no story, no
history, no mythology, so are the Vedas, pure knowledge:
knowledge of nature, mind, spirit, human society, Dharma, the
dynamics of existence and the right way of living as individuals
and as members of organised society upto the international level.
Even Max Muller, though he was once committed to uprooting
the religion of India by his arbitrary translation of Rigveda, had
to admit in his Biographical Essays that: “To Swami Dayanand,
everything contained in the Vedas was not only perfect truth, but
he went one step further and, by their interpretation, succeeded
in persuading others that everything worth knowing, even the
most recent inventions of modern science, were alluded to in the
Vedas. Steam Engines, Electricity, Telegraphy and Wireless
Marconogram were shown to have been at least in the germ known
to the poets of the Vedas”. In fact Shri Aurobindo in his essay on
“Dayananda and the Veda” goes even further: “There is nothing
fantastic in Dayananda’s idea that Veda contains truth of science
as well as truth of religion (i.e., Dharma). I will even add my
own conviction that Veda contains other truths of a Science
the modern world does not at all possess, and in that case,
Dayananda has rather understated than overstated the depth
and range of the Vedic wisdom”. (see Bankim, Tilak,
Dayananda, p. 57).

The basic requirement of scriptural interpretation for us
is faith and intellingential solemnity, not doubt and cynicism. This
way, if we want to confirm our faith in the scientific vision of the
Veda, refer to Rgveda 1, 34, 7 and 9 for three-stage rocket chariot
of the Ashwins, to 1, 36, 18 for Agni missile, to 1, 37, 3 for winds
and communication, to 1, 46, 10 for concentration of light, to 1,
