( xii )

advanced society, and then, logically in the next Mantra, follows
the prayer for a full hundred years and more of life and healthy
living (Tacchakshurdevahitam purastat-Yajur.36, 24).

The translation by Prof. Tulsiram is without any extraneous
motive and without any extra-academic intention. The translation
has been done purely as communication of the Vedic message
for the welfare of mankind.

While giving his opinion on the Vedas Prof. Tulsiram writes
in his Introduction....Veda is the Voice of God revealed in
scientific Vedic Sanskrit free from local color and historical facts,
therefore Vedic language is to be interpreted and understood
according to its own laws and structure, and the only key available
for such interpretation is the Nirukta of Maharshi Yaska and the
grammar of Panini & Patanjali. According to Maharshi Dayananda
Saraswati, 'without reference to these bases of Vedic interpretation
certain words have been given a distorted meaning in the
translations of Max Muller, Griffith, Whitney and even Sayana.'
Actually the torch light for proper translation today, as Aurobindo
says, is the Arsha tradition followed by Maharshi Dayananda
Saraswati.

At the end I will say that this translation of Yajurveda, based
on Nirukta and Grammar, follows the known ancient Indian
tradition. It is factual, without prejudice or hidden motive. Prof.
Tulsiram thinks deeply on every word of the mantra, looks into
the context and etymology according to Nirukta and then does
the translation. I congratulate him on this one more pioneering
step to make the knowledge of Vedas available to the western
world and the average English knowing reader. May God give
him long and healthy life so that he continues to do this kind of
stupendous work.

Prof. Dr. Subhash Vedalankar;
Ex-Prof. and Chairman of Sanskrit Department,
Rajasthan University, Jaipur, India.

Presently Chairman,

Dept. of Sanskrit and Vedic Vangmaya,
Maharshi Dayananda Saraswati University,
Ajmer, Rajasthan, India.
