( xxxili )

Swami Dayananda works out the age of the Vedas on the basis of
Surya Siddhanta which in the year 2010 A.D. comes to
1,96,08,53,110 years. If someone does not accept it and insists
on historical proof, we learn the problem but no possibility of
solution on scientific and historical grounds from Max Muller, a
world renowned Vedic scholar and exegesist of the West: Max
Muller once ventured to pronounce a purely arbitrary date based
on unproven assumptions that around 1200 B.C. was the date of
the Rgveda. Later, he himself warned his students that “Whether
the Vedic Hymns were composed in 1000 or 1500 or 2000 B.C.,
no power on earth could ever fix .... Whatever may be the date of
the Vedic hymns... they have their own unique place and stand
by themselves”. The daring presumptions of western scholars
about the date of the Vedas are exposed by Graham Hancock in
his latest researches, in his book: Underworld : The Mysterious
Origins of Civilization (2002). If no history, no Science, no human
imagination can help, better follow the sages, tradition, Surya
Siddhanta, and the daily sankalpa of the dedicated Brahmanas,
and lastly follow the internal evidence of the Vedas themselves:
Vedas are the Original, Universal, Eternal articulation of Divinity,
by Divinity, for humanity at the beginning of human creation.

Since Vedas are the oldest recorded knowledge of the
world, no one can guess how much time, even ages, might have
passed between the Vedas and the next work in Sanskrit. If so,
there is no other work in Sanskrit comparable to the Vedas.
Consequently the language of any other work would not provide
any clue for the interpretation of Veda mantras. Vedic language
then has to be interpreted on its own, and the only key available
for such independent interpretation is the Nirukta and Nighantu
of Maharshi Yaska, the grammatical works of Pinini and Patanjali,
and Swami Dayananda’s notes in his commentary on Vedic verses
explaining the structure and meaning of words. Without reference
to these bases of Vedic interpretation, certain words have been
given a very twisted meaning in other translations, by Max Muller,
Griffith, Whitney, and even Sayana. The torch light for proper
