( xxxi )

is atree, Ashwattha, and the entire cosmos including ourselves is
a Purusha, and we as human beings are but cells in this Divine
Purusha. Without living this way in a state of full awareness, we
cannot realise that you and I, Mother Nature and the Supreme
Brahma are all together, one in union and communion.

Vedic knowledge then is the Divine knowledge of
existence from the dimensionless point and particle unto Infinity.
And prayerful living and communion in meditation and yoga
means: Self-integration of the particle, Re-integration of the part
with the whole, and Re-Union of the finite with the Infinite.

This is the climactic close of Yajurveda: The light and life
that shines in and beyond the sun is that Supreme Purusha. That
is there, and that is here in me.

Om is the saviour. Om is Brahma. Brahma is Infinite,
Sublime!

The message of Yajurveda begins with the rousing divine
call to live: “Be vibrant as the winds!” But we must be gratefully
vibrant: ““O Lord we pray for and thank thee for the gift of food
and energy for life, for the health and efficiency of body, mind
and soul.” All of us must dedicate ourselves to Savita, giver of
life and light, with devotion to the highest, yajnic action, we must
not hurt the cosmic ‘Cow’, and we must not allow a thief to boss
over us and deprive us of our freedom of thought, word and deed.

As you open the text of Yajurveda, you find the words:
Savita Devata, Prajapati Parameshthi Rshi. ‘Devata’ here means
the subject which is dealt with in the mantra. ‘Devata’ as a Vedic
term means a presence, a power, a force, which is brilliant,
illuminative, and generous. The “Devata’ of a mantra may be God,
the One Sacchidananda Brahma as in the closing mantra quoted
above, or Savita, the same One self-refulgent God as in the
opening mantra; or it can be a generous divine power of Nature
such as the sun, moon, earth; or it can be a noble person of brilliant
quality of nature, character and performance as a ruler, leader,
commander, teacher, etc. What the ‘Devata’ means in any
