( xxxii )

particular mantra depends on the total context that emerges from
the mantra.

Prajapati Parameshthi is the Rshi of the opening mantra.
The Rshi in the Arsh tradition is not the author of the mantra,
Rshi is the exponent of the meaning of the mantra. As Maharshi
Yaska says in the Nirukta, Rishis are the ‘seers of the mantras’:
they are the sages who went into deep meditation unto the
universal frequency of the Cosmic Mind and experienced the voice
of Divinity speaking in the mantra; the mantra, a Semantic
correspondence of the Divine Voice; the Divine Voice, a sound
correspondence of Divine Awareness of the Reality of Existence
in the modes of Being and Becoming.

Who then is the poet of the Vedas? The answer is in
Yajurveda 40, 8: That Cosmic Spirit which pervades and rules
every moving particle in the moving universe is “the poet, thinker,
all-comprehending, and self-existent”. That is the Lord who
creates the world of existence, ordains the Laws of its dynamics,
and reveals the poetry of its beauty and majesty, the Vedas. “From
that Lord of universal yajna were born the Rks and Samans. From
Him were born the chhandas of Atharva-veda and from Him were
born the Yajus” (Yajurveda 31, 7). The Vedic lore comes in Pura-
kalpa, the beginning of the world of humanity
(Shvetashvataropanishad, 6, 22) and when its function is over at
the end of the kalpa, one cycle of existence, it retires into Brahma-
loka (Atharva-veda 19, 71, 1).

The Vedas were revealed by the Lord Omniscient to four
primeval Rshis: Rgveda to Agni, Yajurveda to Vayu, Samaveda
to Aditya, and Atharva-veda to Angira, directly in their spiritual
consciousness. The Sage Brahma received and collected the four
from them and passed them on to other sages.

When were the Vedas revealed? What is their age? How
old are they? As old as the age of humanity on earth. The Lord
who creates humanity leaves them not to nature like animals. He
enlightens them with the knowledge of existence and their place
in the world, with the vision of their journey, and its culmination.
