( xxiii )

member of the Committee of Public Instruction in India under
Lord Macaulay as Chairman and Lord William Bentinck as
Governor General of India. And then English had been accepted
and introduced as the medium as well as the content of Education.

Monier Williams says: “One consideration which led my
predecessor (Professor H.H.Wilson) to pass on to me his project
of a root-arranged Lexicon was that, on being elected to the Boden
Chair, he felt that the elaboration of such a work would be
incompatible with the practical objects for which the Boden
Professorship was founded... The main object was really a
missionary one, as I have shown in the Preface of this volume.”
(p. xi)

The object, Professor Williams explains in the Preface to
his Dictionary (p. ix): “I must draw attention to the fact that Iam
only the second occupant of the Boden Chair, and that its founder,
Colonel Boden, stated most explicitly in his will (dated August
15, 1811) that the special object of his munificent bequest was to
promote the translation of the Scriptures (that is, the Bible) into
Sanskrit, so as ‘to enable his countrymen to proceed in the
conversion of the natives of India to the Christian Religion’.

“Surely then it need not be thought surprising, if
following in the footsteps of my venerated master, I have made
it the chief aim of my professional life to provide facilities for
the translation of our sacred Scriptures into Sanskrit, and
for the promotion of a better knowledge of the religions and
customs of India as the best way to a knowledge of the religious
needs of our great Eastern Dependency (India). My very first
public lecture delivered after my election (to the Boden Chair)
in 1860 was on ‘The Study of Sanskrit in Relation to
Missionary Work in India’ (published in 1861)”. (pp. xxi)

For any student of Veda, specially in India, in fact anywhere,
it is difficult to overlook the words of Monier Williams in the
Preface and Introduction to his Dictionary of Sanskrit, for the
reason that from translation of Christian Scriptures into
