( xxx )

But there is a difference between scientific knowledge
and Vedic knowledge: While science is knowledge of nature to
the extent that man has been able to discover it, Veda is the
quintessential knowledge of all that is, including Nature, all that
happens, all that we are, all that we do, and all that we reap in
consequence of our action. It is the Original and Universal
knowledge of the Reality of Existence and the Ideality of our
aspirations, covering the facts and processes of existence, their
interaction and the laws that operate in the interaction. In short,
Veda is an eternal articulation of Omniscience, The Voice of God.

Vedic knowledge is classified thematically into three:
Stuti, Prarthana and Upasana. Stuti is, praise, solemn reverential
remembrance and description and celebration of the attributes,
the nature, character and function of divine powers. Prarthana,
prayer, is an autosuggestive resolution to realise our limitations
and rise above those limitations by calling on Divinity for aid
and blessings when we have exhausted our effort and potential.
Upasana is meditation, the surrender of our limited identity to
participate in the Divine Presence. Stuti implies knowledge
(Janana), Prarthana implies humility and action (Karma), and
Upasana implies total love and surrender (Bhakti). So formally
Vedic knowledge is divided into four:

Rgveda is the Veda of Knowledge, Yajurveda is the Veda
of Karma, Samaveda is the Veda of Bhakti, and Atharva-veda is
Brahma Veda, an umbrella, celebrating the Divine Presence as in
Book 10, hymns 7 and 8.

Yajurveda is Karma Veda, knowledge of the application
of knowledge in practical living in a positive, creative and
constructive manner at both the individual and the collective level.
This way of living and working is “Yajna” which, in simple words,
means a selfless and participative way of life and thereby creating
the maximum out of the minimum for all, including nature,
humanity, the environment and the whole universe, with complete
faith in the living, breathing, self-organising, self-conscious,
Sovereign System. Living the yajnic way, we realise that Nature
