( xxvii )

Dayananda interprets these terms in the yaugic manner and
explains them as scientific terms of the forms, functions, orders
and attributes of the powers of existence representing the
manifestive diversity of one Divinity and one Prakrti in the state
of objective existence. These words are not historical names,
because the time context of the creation of the Vedas remains
unknown beyond history and imagination as even Max Muller
confessed in his Gifford lectures in 1890.

This translation respects the entire tradition of Vedic
interpretation, and under the guidance of this tradition takes Vedic
interpretation to the original level of scientific rationality in the
context of modern consciousness, modern language and global
culture, a message both sanatan and, at the same time, modern
(ref. Atharva, 10,8,23).

Take just one example of the problem I have faced, with
the solution I have suggested: Yajurveda (36, 23) says, if we take
the literal meaning in the ordinary sense: “May the waters, pranic
energies and herbs be friendly to us and may they be enemies to
those who hate us and whom we hate.” How can we accept this?
How can the same waters, tonics and herbs be good friends to us
and enemies to those we hate or those who hate us? Medicine is
medicine after all. This is excellent stuff for a translator who
believes that Vedic poetry is nothing but the voice of a tribal
society in the barbaric, not civilized, state of social evolution.
But let us think deeply. What is the context? Who are our enemies
in that context? Who or what are those that injure us? What are
those we hate or want to injure and destroy? The context is health.
In the context of health, they are the ailments, diseases, germs
and bacteria, viruses, negativities and side effects of medicines
in our system. So the correct and scientific interpretation in the
context of health would be: “May waters, tonics, pranic energies
and medicinal herbs be good friends of our health and immunity
system and let the waters, tonics, pranic energies and herbal
medicines act against those ailments, diseases and negativities
which injure us, which we hate to suffer and which we love to
