174 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 10

sere tain inte a tick Peete AAA eee eT RENAE RATTLES RAAT TTR LEST TTS

to look out for the base of the lotus under water along its stalk, | revealed to you My being
in your very heart. (37)
यच्चकर्थाङ्ग  मत्स्तोत्रं मत्वाथाश्चुदपाङ्किश्रु।यद्वातपासैतेनिष्ठासएषमदनुप्रह:।इधां
घ्रीतोऽहमस्तु भद्रं ते लोकानां विजयेच्छया । यदस्तौषीर्गुणमयं निर्गुणे मानुवर्णयन् ।३९।
य एतेन पुमान्नित्यं स्तुत्वा स्तोत्रेण मां भजेत्। तस्याशु सम्प्रसीदेये सर्वकामवरेश्वर: ।४०॥

सर्ववेदमयेनेदमात्मनाऽऽत्माऽऽत्प्योनिना । प्रजा: Gt यथापूर्वं याश्च मय्यनुशेरते ।४३।

That you have offered Me praises interspersed with the glory of My stories or that you
have developed faith in austere penance, dear Brahma, all this is due to My grace. (38) May
success attend you ! | am pleased with you since you have extolled Me in your eagerness
to create the worlds, describing Me as destitute of the Gunas (modes of Prakrti), even though
| appear as endowed with such Gunas. (39) I, the Bestower of all desired objects and
blessings, shall be quickly and immensely pleased with the man who offers worship to Me
everyday, extolling Me through this hymn of praise. (40) The knowers of Truth are of the
opinion that My pleasure alone is the highest good to be attained by men through works of
public utility (such as the digging of wells etc.), austere penance, sacrificial performances,
charitable gifts, practice of Yoga (control of mind) and abstract meditation. (41) 1am the Self
of all embodied souls, O Brahma (the Creator), and the dearest of all dear ones. Therefore,
a man should bestow his love on Me alone; for the body and other things are dear only on
My account. (42) Now evolve the three worlds as well as the beings who are lying hidden in
Me even asin the Kalpa preceding the period of universal dissolution by means of your own
personality, that has emanated from Me, and which is an embodiment of all the Vedas. (43)

मैत्रेय उवाच
तस्मा एवं जगत्स्रष्टे प्रधानपुरुषेश्वर: । व्यज्येदं Ba रूपेण कञ्जनाभस्तिरोदधे ।`४४॥

The sage Maitreya continued : The Lord whose navelis distinguished by alotus sprung

from it, and who is the Ruler of both Matter and Spirit, thus disclosed to Brahma (the Creator

of the universe) the means of evolving the creation and concealed from his view His divine
form (the form which is known by the name of Narayana). (44)

Thus ends the ninth discourse in Book Three of the great and
glorious Bhagavata-Purana, otherwise known
as the Paramahamsa-Samhita.

sata tet ts
rower

अथ दशमोऽध्याय:
Discourse X
Description of the tenfold creation
विदुर Sara
अन्तर्हिते भगवति ब्रह्मा लोकपितामह: । प्रजा: ससर्ज कतिधा दैहिकीर्मानसीर्विभु: । १ |
aaa we पृष्टास्त्वय्यर्था aefaan | a aaa fester a: HARTA | २ ।
