Dis. 6] BOOK SIX 579

CLARE ERS SERRA SESS EERO REESE S AEE EARLE EEE EE Te

deities presiding over the thirty MuhGrtas—each consisting of 48 minutes—comprised in
every twenty-four hours) was born of Muharta. They actually dispense to (all) living beings
the fruit (of their actions) appropriate to the division of time presided over by each. (9) Of
Sankalpa, again, was born Sarikalpa (the deity presiding over thoughts); (and) Kama (the
god of love) has been declared to be the progeny of Sankalpa. The eight Vasus (another
group of gods) are the sons of Vasu; (now) hear their names from me;—(10) (They are)
Drona, Prana, Dhruva, Arka, Agni, Dosa, Vasu and Vibhavasu. (And) of Abhimati, the wife
of Drona, were born Harsa, Soka, Bhaya and others (the deities presiding over the emotions
of joy, grief, fear and so on). (11) Urjaswati was (the name of) the wife of Prana; and Saha,
Ayu and Purojava, his sons. (And) Dhruva’s wife, Dharani, bore (the deities presiding over)
the various cities and towns. (12) Vasané (the deity presiding over latent desires was (the
name of) the wife of Arka and Tarsa (the deity presiding over excessive longing) and others
are known-to be his sons. (Similarly) Dhara is (the name of) the Vasu named Agni and
Dravinaka and others are his sons. (13) Skanda (the god Kartikeya) was the son of Krttika
(the other wife of Agni); while (the gods) Vigakha and others sprang up from (the loins of)
Skanda. The son of Dosa through Sarvari (the deity presiding over nights) was (known by
the name of ) Sigumara (the deity presiding over the stellar sphere, already described in
Book V as resembling a dolphin in shape), a scintillation of Sri Hari. (14) Viswakarma (the
architect of the gods), the husband of Akrti, was the son of Vasu through Angirasi (a daughter
of the sage Angira). From (the loins of) Viswakarma appeared Caksusa (the sixth) Manu;
(the group of gods called) the Viswedevas and the Sadhyas are the sons of Caksusa
Manu.(15) Usa, the wife of Vibhavasu, gave birth to (three sons,) Vyusta, Rocis and Atapa.
From (the loins of) Atapa sprang up Paficayama’*(the deity presiding over the daytime),
because of whom (all) living beings remain awake and engaged in (their) activities. (16)

सरूपासूत भूतस्य भार्या रुद्रांश्च कोटिरा: | रैवतोऽजो wat भीमो ara sat वृषाकपि: । १७॥
अजैकपादहिर्बुध्यो बहुरूपो महानिति । रुद्रस्य पार्षदाश्चान्ये घोरा भूतविनायका: । १८
प्रजापतेरङ्गिस: स्वधा पत्नी पितॄनथ । sealed वेदं पुत्रत्वे चाकरोत् सती ।१९॥
कृशाश्वोऽर्चिषि भार्यायां धूम्रकेशमजीजनत्।धिषणायां वेदरिरो देवलं वयुनं मनुम् । २०॥
तार्श्यस्यविनताक्लृन्नू:पतङ्गींयामिनीतिच।पतङ्ग्र्यसृद्वापतगान्यापिनळीज्ञलभानथ।रश्।
सुपर्णासूत गरुडं साक्षाद् wee ays च again: 1221

Again, Sartpa, the (first) wife of Bhita, brought forth the Rudras (a class of gods
presiding over destruction) in crores. Of these, Raivata, Aja, Bhava, Bhima, Vama, Ugra,
Vrsakapi, Ajaikapada, Ahirbudhnya, Bahuripa and Mahan were the foremost. And the
terrible attendants of Rudra (appearing in the aforesaid eleven principal forms), (viz.,) the
Pretas (spirits) and Vinayakas (a class of evil-minded demigods), were distinct from the
Rudras (being born of the other wife of Bhita). (17-18) Again, the wife of Angira, a lord of
created beings, Swadha (by name), accepted the manes for her sons; while (his other
wife) Sati adopted Atharvaveda (the fourth Veda, henceforth known by the name of
Atharvangirasa) as her son. (19) Krsaswa begot (a son named) Dhimrakesga through his
(first) wife Arci, and (four more sons, viz.,) Vedagira, Devala, Vayuna and Manu through
(his second wife) Dhisana. (20) Vinata, Kadra, Patangi and Yamini were the (four other)
wives of the sage KaSyapa (who was also known as Tarksya because of his father, the
sage Marici, who bore the title of Trksa). (Of these) Patanigi gave birth to birds, while
A a Se hl

* The deity presiding over the daytime Is called Paficayama because the period of time presided over by him consists
on an average of five Yamas or fifteen hours Including Pratyisa and Pradosa, the morning and evening hours, leaving only
three Yamas or nine hours for the night which Is therefore called Triyama.
