234 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 22

Rese He wey He श्रजा क ॐ ङ दाता TN A आ ड य OR ON ONE ANE EOS अन्या क्रैक NH कौत्यो eH RHEE
ज्ज्र्त्त

duties of a king who is anxious to protect his subjects. (5) It is my good fortune that | have
been able to see you; for you cannot be easily perceived by those who have not subdued
their mind. And | am all the more fortunate in that | have touched with my head the blessed
dust of your feet. (6) Luckily enough | have been instructed by you (in the duties of kings)
and thus a great favour has been bestowed on me; and thank God | have listened with open
(eager) ears to your charming words. (7)

a भवान्दुहितृस्नेहपरिक्लिष्टात्मनो मम ।श्रोतुमर्हसि daa श्रावितं कृपया मुने । ८ ।
यदा तु भवत: ङीलश्रुतरूपवयोगुणान्। अश्रृणोन्नारदादेषा त्वय्यासीत्कृतनिश्चया igo
तत्प्रतीच्छ द्विजाग्र्येमां श्रद्धयोपहतां मया । सर्वात्मनानुरूपां ते गृहमेधिषु कर्मसु ।११।
उद्यतस्य fe कामस्य प्रतिवादो न शस्यते। अपि निर्मुक्तसङ्गस्य कामरक्तस्य किं पुन: 122!
य sae कीनाशमभियाचते । क्षीयते तद्यश: स्फीतं मानश्चावज्ञया Ba: ।१३॥
अहं त्वाश्रृणवं विद्वन् विवाहार्थं समुद्यतम्। अतस्त्वमुपकुर्वाण: wat प्रतिगृहाण मे ।१४॥

Be graciously pleased to listen, O sage, te the prayer of my humble self, troubled in mind
due to affection for my daughter (Devahuti). (8) This daughter of mine, a sister to Priyavrata
and Uttanapada, is on the look-out for a match worthy of her in point of age, character and
good qualities etc. (9) The moment she heard from the sage Narada of your noble character,
learning, comely appearance, young age and other virtues, she fixed her mind on you. (10)
Therefore, accept her (as your wife), O chief of the Brahmanas, since | offer her with
reverence (to you) and because she is in everyway fit to be your helpmate in (the discharge
of) your household duties. (11) It is not commendable—even on the part of one who is
absolutely free from attachment, much less of him who is addicted to the pleasures of
sense—to spurn an object of desire that has come of itself. (12) He who rejects an object
offered to him and begs it of a miser loses his widespread reputation and his pride is humbled
by the disrespectful behaviour of others. (13) | heard of you, O wise man, that you were
prepared to marry. Therefore, accept her hand, which is being offered by me, since you have
not taken a vow of perpetual celibacy. (14)

ऋषिरुवाच
बाढमुद्बोढुकामोऽहमप्रत्ता च तवात्मजा। आव्रयोरनुरूपोऽसावाद्यो वैवाहिको विधि: । १५॥
काम: स भूयान्नरदेव तेऽस्या: पुत्र्या: समाम्नाचविधौ प्रतीत: |
क एवं ते तनयां ahaa स्वयैव कान्त्या क्षिपतीमिव श्रियम् । १६॥
या egy क्वणदङ्घ्रिशोभां बिक्रीडतीं कन्दुकविह्वलाक्षीम्।

विश्वावसुर्न्यपतत्स्वाद्विमानाद्बिलोक्य सम्मोहविमूढचेता: 129 |
तां प्रार्थयन्तीं ललनाललाममसेवितश्रीचरणैरदृष्टाम् ।

वत्सां मनोरुच्चपद: wat को नानुमन्येत बुधोऽभियाताम् kc
aa भजिष्ये समयेन साध्वीं यावत्तेजो बिभृयादात्मनो मे।
अतो धर्मान् पारमहंस्यमुख्यान् WENA, ae मन्येऽविहिंस्रान् ee!
यतोऽभवद्विश्वमिदं विचित्रॆ संस्थास्यते यत्र च वावतिष्ठते ।
प्रजापतीनां पतिरेष a फपरं प्रमाणं भगवाननन्त: ।२०॥
The sage replied : Certainly | have a desire to marry and your daughter too has not yet

been affianced (to anyone else). Hence our marriage according to (what is known as) the
Brahma* method (the best of all methods) will be quite in the fitness of things. (15) That desire

“ The Brahma form of mariage is that in which a girl is given away. duly adorned according to one's means, to a
