338 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 10

RR RR eK Bra .३.३:३.३३ ६३83 LOH RAMEE 3६33 ER ASO HEELERS ER eee EET eh eee kevbtoetterKrrrerkh sree
पजा ज च भ् सा er a re ee

उत्तानपादो राजर्षि: प्रभावं तनयस्य तम्। श्रुत्वा eget प्रपेदे विस्मयं परम् । ६५॥
वीक्ष्योढवयसं तं च प्रकृतीनां च सम्मतम्। अनुरक्तप्रजं राजा qd चक्रे भुव: पतिम् । ६६॥
आत्मानं च प्रवयसमाकलय्य विशाम्पति: । वनं विरक्त: प्रातिष्ठद्विमृशन्नात्मनो गतिम् । ६७॥

इति श्रीमद्भागवते महापुराणे पारमहंस्यां संहितायां चतुर्थस्कन्धे ध्रुवराज्याभिषेकवर्णनं नाम नवमोऽध्याय: ।९।

The royal sage Uttanapada was highly amazed to see (with his own eyes) the most
wonderful glory of his son (Dhruva), of which he had (already) heard (from the mouth of
Narada). (65) (Later on) the king made Dhruva the sovereign of the entire globe, when he
saw that the prince had not only come of age, but had also won the esteem of the ministers
and the devotion of the people. (66) And perceiving himself advanced in age, the king was
(now) disgusted with the pleasures of sense and departed for the woods, contemplating on
the essential character of the Self. (67)

Thus ends the ninth discourse entitled "The Coronation of Dhruva" in Book
Four of the great and glorious Bhagavata-Purana, otherwise
Known as the Paramahamsa-Samhita.

Stine teats
PICT Siege

अथ दशमोऽध्याय:

Discourse X
Uttama's death at the hands of the Yaksas and

Dhruva's encounter with them

मैत्रेय उवाच
wager = RTT वै ध्रुव: । ।उपयेमे भ्रमिं नाम तत्सुतौ कल्पवत्सरौ । १ ।
इलायामपि भार्यायां व्रायो: पुत्र्यां महाबल: । पुत्रमुत्कलनामानं योषिद्रत्नमजीजनत् । २ ।

उत्तमस्त्वकृतोद्बाहो मृगयायां बलीयसा । हत: पुण्यजनेनाद्रौ तन्मातास्य गातिं गता । ३ |

Maitreya continued : Dhruva married Bhrami, daughter of Sigumara, a lord of created
beings, and the couple were blessed with two sons, Kalpa and Vatsara. (1) Through his
(other) wife, lla, daughter of Vayu (the wind-god), too.the mighty Dhruva begota son, Utkala
by name, and a daughter, a very jewel among women. (2) Uttama (Dhruva’s half-brother),
however, who was yet unmarried, was killed in the course of a hunting expedition on the
Himalaya mountain by a Yaksa, who was stronger than he, and his mother (Suruci, Dhruva's
stepmother) followed him (to the abode of Yama). (3)

Yat weet श्रुत्वा कोपामर्षशुचार्पित: । जैत्रं स्यन्दनमास्थाय गत: पुण्यजनालयम् । ४ ।

Tread feet राजा रुद्रामुचरसेविताम् | ददर्शं हिमवदद्रोण्यां ait गुह्यकसंकुलाम् । ५ |

दध्मौ शङ्खं dae खं दिशश्चानुनादयन् fem: क्षत्तरुपदेव्योऽत्रसन्भृशम् । ६ ।
Overcome with anger, indignation and grief at the news of his brother's death, Dhruva
mounted his victorious car and marched against the city of Alaka (the abode of the Yaksas).

(4) Proceeding in a northerly direction, the king (Dhruva) saw ina valley of the Himalayas
the city (of Alaka) crowded with the Guhyakas (Yaksas) and inhabited by spirits and ghosts

