Dis. 17 ] BOOK FIVE 501

BERTH चत दे ह का का जा दा च ET HR HE TT TE RTT ET TT STOTT TT WE ET TR RE ERO ORT गोजाजा

it got coloured by its red pollen-like dust and thus acquired the virtue of wiping out by its very
touch the dirt of sin of the whole world, itself remaining untouched by the sin, and was
(thenceforth) expressly and directly called by the (sacred) appellation of "Bhagavatpadi"
(that which proceeds from the foot of the Lord Himself)—to the exclusion of other names
(Jahnavi, Bhagirathi etc., suggesting other later and less momentous associations). (1) In
the aforesaid realm indeed that foremost devotee of the Lord, Dhruva (the celebrated son
of Uttanapada), steadfast in his vow (of devotion), bears (sprinkles) on his head even to this
day (the water of) the (holy) Bhagavatpadi (later known as the Ganga) with supreme
reverence, rémembering thatithas washed the lotus- foot of his family Deity, his heart deeply
saturated with an incessant flow of constantly growing devotion, with tears of pure love
escaping from his eyes—resembling a pair of lotus buds—half-closed in a fit of self-
forgetfulness induced by ardent longing (for his beloved Lord), and the hair on his body
standing on their end. (2)

ad: Wa ऋषयस्तत्प्रभावाभिज्ञा यां ननु तपस आत्यन्तिकी सिद्धिरेतावती भगवति सर्वात्मनि
वासुदेवेऽनुपरतभक्तियोगलाभेनैवोपेक्षितान्यार्थात्मगतयो मुक्तिमिवागतां मुमुक्षव sa सबहुमानमद्यापि

जटाजूटैरुद्बवहन्ति | ३ | तताऽनकंसह्वस्रकोटिक्मिम्यानप्ताकप्तङ्कुलदक्यग्ननक्कान्दाफाडलमस्वार्यं
ब्रह्मसदने निपतति । ४1
Further on (in the next stages of the descent of this stream) the seven seers
(responsible for the maintenance of the world order and having their abode immediately
below the realm of Dhruva, where the seven stars of the Ursa major are located), who know
the greatness of this (holy) stream, receive (sprinkle) it with great reverence even to the
present day on the tuft of their matted locks—in the same way as the seekers of liberation
would hail final beatitude coming to them (in a concrete form of its own accord), accounting
it the supreme reward of their austerities—having spurned (all) other objects of human
pursuit including Self-Realization, simply due to their having achieved the boon of
unceasing devotion to Lord Vasudeva, the Soul of the universe. (3) Descending thence
through the heavens (the passage of the gods), crowded with many billions of aerial cars,
the stream washes the lunar sphere and comes down to the city of Brahma (on the summit
of Mount Meru). (4)
ora erent Perera argh at at ger fe rat reeset rere aera af ereTte AtaeTeh TT
चक्षुर्भद्रेति। | सीता तु ब्रह्मसदनात्केसराचलादिगिरिशिखरेभ्योऽधोऽध: प्रस्रवन्ती गन्धमादनमूर्धसु
Utara भद्राश्ववर्षं प्राच्यां दिशि क्षारसमुद्रमभिप्रविशति।६। एवं माल्यवच्छिखरान्निष्पतन्ती
ततोऽनुपरतवेगा केतुमालमभि Bal: प्रतीच्यां दिशि सरित्पतिं प्रविशाति। ७। भद्रा चोत्तरतो मेरुशिरसो
दिशि जलधिमभिप्रविशति।८। तथैवालकनन्दा cam ब्रह्मसदनाद्बहूनि गिरिकूटान्यतिक्रम्य
हेमकूटाद्धैमकूटान्यतिरभसतररंहसा लुठयन्ती भारतमभि ad दक्षिणस्यां दिशि जलधिमभिप्रविशति
यस्यां स्नानार्थं चागच्छत: पुंस: Ue पदेऽश्वमेधराजसूयादीनां फलं न दुर्लभमिति । ९ । अन्ये च नदा नद्यश्च
ad ad सन्ति age मेर्वादिगिरिदुहितर: शतश: । 201
Branching forth into four streams there, the Bhagavatpadi flows in four directions under
four (different) appellations —Sita, Alakananda, Caksu and Bhadra —and (finally) enters the
ocean (the lord of streams and rivers). (5) Passing through the city of Brahma and gradually
descending from the principal summits of one of the many mountains represented (in XVI.
26 above) as so many filaments surrounding the pericarp-like Mount Meru, the Sita falls on
the peaks of Mount Gandhamadana and, coursing through Bhadraswavarsa, enters the salt
ocean on the east. (6) Likewise, reaching Mount Malyavan and descending from it, the
Caksu flows with unabated speed in the direction of (the land of) Ketumala and enters the
