Dis. 3] BOOK SIX 563

SREKAHLHHE KLE REALEREELE HLH ESELEHR EHH ERAE KENTA HERARERE LAE HHA ER See HHH
SSS SE SRE RAL EAA KARE R SOHAL दौ EER

you). The moment the word 'Narayana' was uttered (by the sinner) they hastenedin saying

"Do not be afraid !" (10)
श्रीगुक उवाच
इति देव: स आपृष्ट: प्रजासंयमनो यम: । प्रीत: स्वदूतान् प्रत्याह स्मरन् पादाम्बुजं हरे: । ११।
SriSuka continued : Thus interrogated the celebrated god Yama, the controller of living

beings, was (greatly) delighted and replied to his messengers (as follows), contemplating
on the lotus-feet of Sri Hari. (11)

यम उवाच
परो मदन्यो जगतस्तस्थुषश्च ओतं sit पटवद्यत्र विश्वम् ।
यदंशतोऽस्य स्थितिजन्मनाशा नस्योतवद् यस्य at च लोक: ।१२।
यो नामभिर्वाचि जनान्निजायां बध्नाति तन्त्यामिव दामभिर्गा: |
aa af a इमे नामकर्मनिबन्धबद्धाश्चकिता वहन्ति । १३
आदित्यविश्रे वसवोऽथ साध्या weg रुद्रगणा: ससिद्धा: ।१४॥।
अन्ये च ये विश्वसृजोऽमरेशा भृग्वादयोऽस्पृष्ठरजस्तमस्का: |
यस्येहितं न fag: स्पृष्टमाया: सत्त्वप्रधाना अपि fe adieu
यं 8 न गोभिर्मनसासुभिर्वा हृदा गिरा वासुभृतो विचक्षते ।
आत्मानमन्तर्हृदि सन्तमात्मनां चक्षुर्यथैवाकृतयस्तत:र परम्।१६॥
तस्यात्मतन्त्रस्य हरेरधीशितु: परस्य भायाधिपतेर्महात्मन: ।
प्रायेण दूता इह वै मनोहराश्चरन्ति तद्रूपगुणस्वभावा: ।१७॥
रक्षन्ति RT: परेभ्यो मत्तश्च eae सर्वतश्च IRC

Yama said : The Supreme Lord of the mobile and immobile creation is other than me
(and all other guardians of the spheres—Indra, Varuna and others). It is by Him that the
whole universe stands pervaded on all sides as a piece of cloth by its warp and woof. (Nay,)
itis from His part manifestations (Brahma, Visnu and Siva) that the evolution, maintenance
and dissolution of this universe proceed and the (entire) creation is subject to His control
even as a bullock tied with a string passed through its nostrils is controlled by the man holding
the string. (12) Just as a farmer ties (his) oxen with tethers to a big cord (to keep them
together), He binds men with (different) denominations (Brahmana, Ksatriya and so on) to
His own Word (the Veda)—allots them different duties as enjoined by the Vedas; and, bound
by (these) strong ties in the shape of class, names and obligations (attaching thereto), the
aforesaid men meticulously bear offerings (do homage) to Him (through the scrupulous
discharge of their duties). (13) Myself (Yama, the guardian of the southern quarter), the
mighty Indra (the guardian of the east), Nirrti (the demon presiding over the south-west),
Varuna (the god of water, presiding over the western quarter), the moon-god (the guardian
of the north), the god of fire (the guardian of the south-east), Lord Siva (the guardian of the
north-east), the god of the air (the guardian of the north-west), the sun-god, Brahma (the
creator), the (twelve) sons of Aditi (presiding by turns month after month, over the sun), (the
group of gods known as ) the Viswedevas, the (eight) Vasus (another class of gods) and (the
group of gods called) the Sadhyas, the (forty-nine) Maruts (wind-gods), the (eleven) Rudras
(the gods presiding over destruction) along with the Siddhas (a class of demigods endowed
with mystic powers from their very birth), the creators of the world like (the sage) Bhrgu, the
