50 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA .. . [७&.13

। . ०
BERBER RRO PRR RE Re MEME RE GIRO RRB HTM WME BET REIT RENE REDE THT BL BER WORE RE BE ROR! BAB OROR ROR ROR OR ROR IONE ORO ED RR ROMO ROR Fr Bek Re ३७३ ० Rr ie er Br
ज्र्त्त

father of Yudhisthira and his brothers) as well as all the other ladies and their sons went forth
in great joy to meet him even as the organs would be roused into activity when life returned
to a dead body. They all duly received him by embracing or greeting him and shed copious
tears of love, overwhelmed as they were with anxiety caused by (long) separation. When he
had taken his seat, the king (duly) paid his respects to him. (@—6) When after finishing his
meal and having reposed (forsome time) he was comfortably seated, the king addressed him
in the presence of all, his head bent low with humility.(7)

युधिष्ठिर उवाच
af ea नो युष्मत्पक्षच्छायासमेधितान्। विपद्णाद्विषाग्न्यादेर्मोचिता यत्समातृका: | ८ ।
कया Fa वर्तितं वश्चरद्भि: fate dei क्षेत्रमुख्यानि सेवितानीह भूतले । ९ ।
भवद्विधा भागवतास्तीर्थभूता: we विभो । तीर्थीकुर्वन्ति-तीर्थानि स्वान्त:स्थेन गदाभृता 1201
अपि A: सुहृदस्तात बान्धवा: कृष्णदेवता: | दृष्टा: श्रुता वा yaa: स्वपुर्यां सुखमासते ie

Yudhisthira said : Do you remember us, brought up under your fostering care (like
young birds that flourish under the protective wings of their parents)—how with our mother
we were delivered by you from a host of calamities like poisoning and fire ? (8) How did you
manage to keep your body and soul together during your peregrinations on the terrestrial
globe? And what places of pilgrimage and principal sacred spots did you visit on the face of
the earth? (9) Devotees of God like you, my lord, are not only consecrated themselves; but
itis they who revive the sanctity of sacred places (that get polluted by the contact of sinners)
by the living presence of Lord Visnu (the Wielder of a mace), in their heart. (10) Dear uncle,
are our friends and relations, the Yadavas, who look upon Sri Krsna as their deity, doing well
in their own city (Dwaraka) ? Did you happen to see or even hear of them ?(11)

इत्युक्तो धर्मराजेन ad तत् समवर्णयत्।यथानुभूतं saat विना यदुकुलक्षयम् ।१२॥
नन्वप्रियं दुर्विषह॰ नॄणां स्वयमुपस्थितम्।नावेदयत् सकरुणो दु:खितान् द्रष्टुमक्षम: 123 1
कञ्चित्कालमथावात्सीत्सत्कृतो देववत्सुखम्। wpe श्रेयस्कृत्सर्वेषां प्रीतिमावहन् । १४॥
अबिभ्रदर्यमा aus यथावदघकारिषु। यावद्दधार ITT यम: ।१५॥
सुधिष्ठिरो लब्धराज्यो a पौत्रं कुलन्धरम्। भ्रातृभिर्लोकपालाभैर्मुमुदे परया श्रिया ।१६॥
एवं FY BHA प्रमत्तानां तदीहया। अत्यक्रामदविज्ञात॥ काल: परमदुस्तर: 1291

Thus interrogated by the pious king (Yudhisthira) he narrated in order all that he had
known at first hand (from Uddhava) omitting, of course, the extermination of the Yadava
race. (12) Compassionate by nature, he could not bear to see his kinsmen in distress; hence
he did not break to them that unpleasant news, which was more than they could bear; for
he knew that it would come to be known to the people of its own accord. (13) Adored (by his
kinsfolk) as a veritable god, he lived comfortably (at Hastinapura) for some time, anxious to
do good to his eldest brother (Dhrtarastra) and bringing delight to all. (14) Aryama (the
second of the twelve sons of Aditi, who preside over the sun successively every month,
vide Srimad Bhagavata XII. xi. 32—44) duly carried on the duties of punishing the evil-
doers during the hundred years Yama (the god of justice) tenanted the body of a Sidra
(as Vidura) under a curse (pronounced by the sage Mandavya.* (15) Having got back his
kingdom and seen the face of a grandson capable of upholding the traditions of the family,

* Once upon a time the members of a king's police force apprehended some thieves at the hermitage of a sage,
Mandavya by name. They naturally suspected the sage of complicity in their nefarlous activities and arrested him as well, who
was transfixed on the stake along with the thieves under orders of the king, When, however, the king learnt that the suspected
accomplice was a saint, he immediately ordered the latter to be released and obtained his forgiveness by falling at his feet.
