Dis. 35 ] BOOK TEN 247°

A sen etree rer er ree et ee Se ede hase ee

splendid gem, He lovingly presented itto His elder brother in the presence otihe women, who
stood looking on (with wonder). (32)

Thus ends the thirty-fourth discourse entitled “The Lord slays Sankhacida",
in the first half of Book Ten of the greai and glorious Bhagavata-Purana,
otherwise known as the Paramahamsa-Saminita.

सिसु
ODODE ENE LD OD

अथ पञ्चत्रिंशोऽध्याय:

Discourse XXXV

The Gopis' song in pairs of verses

गोप्य: कृष्णे वनं याते तमनुद्रुतचेतस: | कृष्णलीला: प्रगायन्त्यो निन्युर्दु:खेन वासरान् । १ ।
$ri Suka began again : On Sri Krsna having proceeded to the forest (for pasturing the

cattle), the cowherd women (whose mind accompanied Him to the forest) spent their days
in anguish, loudly singing His pastimes. (1)

तु Sec ति दितवेणम् |
रोमलाङ्गलिभिराश्रितमार्गं गोप्य ईरयति यत्र मुकुन्द: । २ ।
काममार्गणसमर्पितचित्ता: करुमलं ययुरपस्मृतनीव्य: । ३ ।

The Gopis sang : When SriKrsna (the Bestower of Liberation) plays onthe flute, applied
to His lips—the holes of which are (gently) touched by His delicate fingers—dancing His
eyebrows, His left cheek inclined towards (the root of) His left arm, O cowherd women, the
consorts of the Siddhas (flying through the air), accompanied by the Siddhas (their spouses),
are struck with wonder to hear that music and, blushing to find their mind made a target of
the shafts of love. fall into a trance, forgetful of their skirts (that get loosened and unsettled
in that helpless state). (2-3)

हन्त चित्रमबला: «oe «6 हारहास उरसि स्थिरविद्युत्।

नन्दसूनुरयमार्तजनानां नर्मदो aig कूजितवेणु: । |
दन्तदष्टकवला धृतकर्णा निद्रिता लिखितचित्रमिवासन् । ५ ।

Oh. hear of this strange phenomenon, O delicate women ! When this Darling of Nanda—
on whose bosom smiling with pear-necklaces shines Goddess Laksmi (in the form of a
golden streak) like a stationary flash of lightning—sounds His flute, bringing delight to the
afflicted people (smitten with the pangs of separation from Him), herds of bulls in Vraja as
