372 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA Dis. 60

Oy RON UTR Seti Fete Sgr Oy OS ere ere 2 re ee CE TEE RE OO ETT EET eT १२२ २२२

hand of a female companion the chowrie provided with a handle of jewels, the glorious lady
rendered service to the Lord, fanning Him with it. (7) Holding the handle of the fan in her hand
adorned with rings and bangies and making music by her anklets made of gems beside the
infallible Lord, she looked (most) charming with the splendour of her pearl necklace—
reddened by the saffron painted on her breasts covered by the end of her sari—and with her
girdle of unsurpassed value worn about her hips. (8) Delighted to see her, the beautiful
Laksmi Herself, who was exclusively devoted to Him, and had assumed a form matching with
Sri Krsna's—who had sportfully taken a (human) semblance—(nay,) on whose countenance,
embellished by locks, ear-rings and a neck adorned with a gold necklace, shone a nectarine
smile, Sri Krsna (who captivates the heart of all) spoke smilingly (as follows). (9)

4

श्रीभगवानुवाच
राजपुत्रीप्सिता भूघैलींकर्व्य:।महानुभावै; stars BOHaSIa: 1201
तान् प्राप्तानर्थिनो हित्वा चैद्यादीन् स्मरदुर्मदान्। दत्ता भ्रात्रा स्वपित्रा च कस्मान्नो ववृषेऽसमान् । ११॥
राजभ्यो fers: सुभ्रू: समुद्रं शरणं गतान्। बलवद्धि: कृतद्वेषान् प्रायस्त्यक्तनृपासनान् । १२॥
अस्पष्टवर्त्मनां पुंसामलोकपथमीयुषाम्। आस्थिता: पदवीं सुभ्रू: प्राव: सीदन्ति योषित: 1231
निष्किञ्चना वं दाश्वन्निष्किञ्चनजनप्रिया: | तस्मात् प्रायेण न ह्याढ्या मां भजन्ति सुमध्यमे ।१४॥
winery वित्तं जन्मैश्चर्याकृतिर्भव: । तयोर्विवाहो Set च नोत्तमाधमयो: क्वचित् । १५।

वैदर्थ्यतदविज्ञाय त्वयादीर्घसमीक्षया | वृता वयं गुणैर्हीना भिक्षुभि: इलाघिता मुधा । १६॥
अथात्मनोऽनुरूपं ao भजस्व क्षत्रिवर्षभम्। येन त्वमाशिष: सत्या इहामुत्र च लप्स्यसे eel
चैद्यशाल्वजरासन्धदन्तवक्त्रादयो yo: । मम द्विषन्ति वामोरु रुक्मी चापि तवाग्रज: ।१८॥
aut वीर्यमदान्धानां दृप्तानां स्मयनुत्तये । आनीतासि मा भद्रे तेजोऽपहर्तासताम् ।१९।
उदासीना वयं नूनं न स्व्यपत्यार्थकामुका: | आत्पलब्ध्याऽऽस्महे पूर्णा गेहयार्जयोतिरक्रिया: 1201

The glorious Lord said : Princess ! you were sought after by kings, who vied in wealth
with the lords of tHe spheres, wielded great influence, were endowed with splendour and
distinguished for their comeliness, magnanimity and bodily strength. (10) Leaving them (all),
the king of Cedi etc.—who were all love-intoxicated and had called at your door as suitors
and to whom you had been affianced by your brother and father—how did you choose for
your husband us, who were no match for you. (11) Afraid of kings, Obeautiful one, ourselves
have sought refuge In the ocean, have entered into enmity with the strong and have well-
nigh relinquished the royal throne. (12) O lovely one ! generally those women suffer, who
follow the track of men whose ways are not clear and who are treading the paths
unrecognized by the world. (13) We are penniless and are ever loved by the poor. Therefore,
O lady of slender waist, the well-to-do, as a maiter of fact, do not generally resort to Me. (14)
Marriage and friendship should be contracted between those two who are equal to each
other in wealth, birth, sovereignty, exterior and future prospects, and never between a
superior and an inferior. (15) O princess of Vidarbha l ignoring these facts due to your short-
sightedness, you (wrongly) selected (for a husband) us, who, though praised for nothing by
beggars, are (really) devoid of merits. (16) Even now choose you an eminent Ksatriya who
is amatch for you. Through him shall you find the desires of your heart fulfilled both here and
hereafter. (17) Kings like Sisupala (the ruler of Cedi), Salva, Jarasandha and Dantavaktra,
nay, your own elder brother Rukmi too bear enmity towards me, O handsome lady ! (18) It
was in order to curb the pride of those haughty kings. who had grown blind under the
intoxication of their might that you were brought by Me, the eclipser of the wicked, O
auspicious one ! (19) Having no desire of women, progeny and wealth, we are really
