564 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 3
SAKA AHAAAMK HAA ASKS SHAKE H REL RESCH AAEHEEEE ERATE HERE EE ELEN EH COHEEEO REE EERE HEHE
rulers (adored) of gods (such as the sage Brhaspati, the preceptor of the gods) and others
too who are untainted with Rajas and Tamas and in whom Sattva predominates have no
knowledge of His intention—dominated as they are by His Maya (deluding potency)—much
less those other than these. (14-15) Even as colours (the objects of sight) cannot perceive
the faculty of vision, which reveals them, the Jivas cannot grasp or reach with (their) senses
of perception, mind or organs of action (which predominantly manifest the activity of the vital
airs) nor with (their) intellect or speech Him who is the seer of all living beings, though
dwelling in their very heart (as their Inner Controller). (16) Charming messengers of the
aforementioned Sri Hari, the -Supreme Person, the absolute and transcendent Lord, the
Controller of Maya (Prakrti), generally go about in this world (for the good of the Jivas),
endowed as they are with a form, virtues and disposition similar to those of their (divine)
Master. (17) Those most wonderful servants of Lord Visnu, who are adored (even) by the
gods and whose (transcendental) forms cannot be easily perceived (by earthly beings),
protect mortals devoted to the Lord from enemies as well as from myself (Death), yea, from
everyone else. (18)
धर्म तु साक्षाद्धगवत्प्रणीतं न a विदुर्ऋषयो नापि देवा: ।
न सिद्धमुख्या असुरा मनुष्या: कुतश्च विद्याधरचारणादय: ।१९॥
स्वयम्भूर्नारद: Wy: कुमार: कपिलो wy: प्रह्रादो जनको भीष्मो बलिर्वैयासकिर्वयम् । २०॥
weet विजानीमो धर्मं भागवतं भटा: । गुह्यं fae gift यं ज्ञात्वामृतमश्नुते । २१।
एतावानेव लोकेऽस्मिन् ga धर्म: पर: स्मृत: । भक्तियोगो भगवति तन्नामग्रहणादिभि: 1221
नामोच्चारणमाहात्यं हरे: पर्यत पुत्रका: । अजामिलोऽपि यैनैव मृत्युपाशादमुच्यत 1231
एतावतालमघनिर्हरणाय पुंसां agit भगवतो गुणकर्मनाम्नाम्।
विक्रुश्य पुत्रमघवान् यदजामिलोऽपि नारायणेति म्रियमाण इयाय मुक्तिम् । २४॥
प्रायेण ae तदिदं न महाजनोऽयं देव्या विमोहितमतिर्बत माययालम् |
rat जडीकृतमतिर्मधुपुष्पितायां वैतानिके महति कर्मणि युज्यमान: 1241
Asa matter of fact, neither seers nor even gods nor the foremost of the Siddhas can precisely
know (the secret of) virtue (as) expounded by the Lord Himself; how, then, can the demons,
human beings, Vidyadharas (celestial artistes), Caranas (heavenly bards) and others know
it?(19) Brahma (the self-born), the sage Narada, Lord Siva (the fountain-head of blessedness),
the sage Sanatkumara, Lord Kapila, Swayambhuva Manu, Prahrada, king Janaka, Bhisma,
the demon king Bali, the sage Suka (son of Vyasa) and myself (Yama)—these twelve (alone)
know (the essence of) Dharma (as) taught by the Lord—secret, pure and difficult to
understand—by knowing which one enjoys immortality (in the shape of final beatitude). (20-21)
To develop loving attachment to the Lord through the utterance of His Name and so on—
this alone has been declared to be the paramount duty of (all) men in this world. (22) Realize,
my boys, the glory of uttering the name of Sri Hari, by which alone (pronounced unintention-
ally once only) even (a vile sinner like) Ajamila was liberated from the noose of Death! (23)
To celebrate duly the virtues and exploits of the Lord and to chant His name—this much is
not needed for (merely) wiping out the sins of men ! For even the (most) sinful Ajamila
attained liberation by (simply) calling his son at the pitch of his voice (and not with proper
intonation) as Narayana (and that too) while on the verge of death (when neither his body
nor his mind was in a sound condition). (24) Alas ! the average learned man (well-versed
in the scriptures—whose judgement is completely bewildered by the all-powerful (divine)
Maya (deluding potency) and whose thought is focussed on (the teachings of) the three
Vedas, full of sweet and attractive encomiums (on the efficacy or rituals as leading to
