654 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 29

AROMA सा ल्शा ए ल्शाक ल् ए कक CERAM सा TO ल-क-म-म श्र च एक OTOH RENEE TERRE HERE

still others (viz., those brought about by evil stars and snakes etc.), through askesis (selt-
denial), spells and drugs (as required). (39) Some obstacles (suchas |ust and anger) yielding
evil results one should gradually get over through continued contemplation on Me, by loudly
chanting the Divine Names and so on, and still others (such as hypocrisy and pride) by
waiting upon masters of Yoga. (40) Some men, having controlled their senses and made
their living body exceptionally strong (proof against disease and old age) and ever young by
various means, take to the practice of Yoga for the attainment of mystic powers (such as
transferring one’s soul to a dead body and tenanting it). (41) That is (however) not to be made
much of by the wise; for the pains taken over such a consummation are futile inasmuch as
the body (after all) is perishable like the fruit of a tree (and might drop any moment). (42)
(Even) if the body of a man ever diligently practising Yoga attains exceptional fitness, a wise
man should not lay much store by such fitness, discontinuing the (practice of) Yoga; he
should (on the other hand) remain devoted to Me.(43) The Yogi who, depending on Me,
diligently carries on the aforesaid practice of Yoga is not baffled by obstacles; he is (on the
other hand) rid of all hankerings and enjoys the bliss of Self-Realization. (44)

Thus ends the twenty-eighth discourse in Book Eleven of the great
and glorious Bhagavata-Purana, otherwise known
as the Paramahamsa-Samhita.

48०९ i ९७8०
PDE re

अथैकोनत्रिंशोऽध्याय:

Discourse XXIX
Courses of conduct pleasing to the Lord; Uddhava's
departure for Badarikasrama
TEA उवाच
सुदुश्चरामिमां मन्ये योगचर्यामनात्मन: | यथाञ्जसा पुमान् सिद्ध्येत् तन्मे ब्रूह्यञ्जसाच्युत । १ ।
weg: पुण्डरीकाक्ष युञ्जन्तो योगिनो मन: । विषीदन्त्यसमाधानान्पनोनिग्रहकर्शिता: 121
सुखं नु ft योगकर्मभिस्त्वन्माययामी विहता न मानिन: । ३ ।
fe चित्रमच्युत तवैतदशेषबन्धो दासेष्वनन्यदारणेषु यदात्मसात्त्वम् ।
योऽरोचयत् we मृगै: स्वयमीश्वराणां श्रीमत्किरीटतटपीडितपादपीठ: । ४ ।
तं त्वाखिलात्मदयितेश्वरमाश्रितानां सर्वार्थदं स्वकृतविद् विसृजेत को नु ।
को वा भजेत् किमपि विस्मृतयेऽनु ye किं वा भवेन्न तव पादरजोजुषां न: । ५ ।
नैवोषयन्त्यपचितिं कवयस्तवेश ब्रह्यायुषापि कृतमृद्धमुद: स्मरन्त: ।
योऽन्तर्बहिस्तनुभृतामशुभं विधुन्वन्नाचार्यचैत्यवपुषा स्वगतिं व्यनक्ति । ६ ।
Uddhava submitted : | consider this Yogic discipline extremely hard to practise for one
who has not been able to control his mind. (Therefore, pray) tell me explicitly. 0 immortal

Lord, the means by whicha man may easily attain perfection.(1) Yogis (strivers) trying to curb
their mind, O lotus-eyed Lord, get tired in their attempt to control it and often feel frustrated
