362 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 16

PANEER RHEE ENE E ERE SEE SRE S TET AHHHAEHEETEERAEESAE CEREAL EERE CEE EER CEE

RAKSHA य क ee eee — meg OO Oe

when they are praised for qualities confirmed by conduct and known to all, justas those who
are truly modest and supremely generous do not appreciate sincere praise for any
reproachful show of valour. (25) As for ourselves, O (noble) bard, we are yet unknown in the
world. Hence we find no reason to get ourselves celebrated by songs of praise for greatest
performances. Such self-proclamation is only worthy of a child. (26)

Thus ends the fifteenth discourse, forming part of the Narrative of king Prthu,
in Book Four of the great and glorious Bhagavata-Purana,
otherwise known as the Paramahamsa-Samhita.

Sot PR tac १५
PICS Seo

अथ षोडशोऽध्याय:

Discourse XVI
Glorification of king Prthu by the bards
मैत्रेय उवाच
इति ब्रुवाणं नृपति गायका मुनिचोदिता: । तुष्टुवुस्तुष्टमनसस्तद्वागमृतसेवया । १ ।

Maitreya continued : The minstrels were delighted at heart to hear the sweet words of
the king, which they enjoyed as ambrosia. Urged by the sages, however, they began to
glorify him (in the following words) as soon as he ceased to speak :—(1)

aes at & महिमानुवर्णने यो देववर्योऽवततार मायया ।
वेनाङ्गजातस्य च पौरुषाणि a वाचस्पतीनामपि बभ्रमुर्धिय: । २ ।
अथाप्युदारश्रवस: पृथोर्हरेरे कलावतारस्य कथामृतादृता: ।
यथोपदेशं मुनिभि: प्रचोदिता: ङ्लाघ्यानि कर्माणि at वितन्महि । ३ ।

"We are not able to describe Your greatness as You are the foremost among the gods
and have (condescended to) come to the world through exercise of a mysterious power of
Yours, knownas Maya. (Itis a fact that) You have arisen from the arms of king Vena, yet Your
powers and performances are such that the minds of even (the recognized) masters of
speech get perplexed (in trying to describe them). (2) You are a part manifestation of the
Supreme Divinity known as Sri Hari, which name has here been changed to Prthu, the
accounts of whose glorious deeds are worth hearing; we love to enjoy the same, as they are

as good as nectar and want to spread the fame of Your magnificent deeds, as we realize
them in our hearts according to the instructions of the sages. (3)

wa धर्मभृतां श्रेष्ठो लोकं धर्मेऽनुवर्तयन्। गोप्ता च धर्मसेतूनां शास्ता तत्परिपन्थिनाम् । ४ |
एष वै लोकपालानां बिभर्त्यकस्तनौ तनू: । काले काले यथाभागं लोकयोरुभयोर्हितम्। ५ |
aq we उपादत्ते ae चायं विमुञ्जति। सम: सर्वेषु भूतेषु प्रतपन् सूर्यवद्विभु: । ६ ।
तितिक्षत्यक्रमं वैन्य उपर्याक्रमतामपि । भूतानां करुण: हाश्वदार्तानां क्षितिवृत्तिमान् । ७ |
देवेऽवर्षत्यसौ देवो नरदेववपुर्हरि: | कृच्छ्रप्राणा: प्रजा ह्येष we । ८ ।
Tee लोके वदनामृतमूर्तिना | सानुरागावलोकेन विशादस्मितचारुणा । ९ ।
erate निगूढकार्यो गम्भीरवेधा उपगुप्तवित्त: ।

अनन्तमाहात्म्यगुणैकधामा sy: प्रचेता इव संवृतात्मा I QOL
"He is the best among those who pursue the paths of righteousness, and will persuade
