446 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 78

जन सा ATTEN आ ज # # ON aE 2 # 92०2 ७० १७ 2७ ११9 ७88 2 २98 % Ke eH # ## 2848 28 4८६ शं 8999 प

nor a chariot with him and) came armed with nothing but a mace. But he was so powerful that
the earth shook under his feet when he proceeded on foot to meet Sri Krsna in battle. (1-2)
Seeing him advance in that manner, Bhagavan Sri Krsna promptly took up His own mace
and, leaping down from His chariot, intercepted Dantavaktra even as the shore checks the
advancing sea. (3) Raising his mace, Dantavaktra, the arrogant king of KarUsa, said to
Bhagavan Srikrsna, "lam glad, | am, indeed, lucky, O Krsna, that you have appeared before
my eyes today. (4) Even though you are my cousin, you have killed my friends and seek my
life, too. Therefore, O fool, | shall make short work of you with this mace which is as hard as
the thunderbolt. (5) Though a relation of mine, youare my enemy like a disease in one’s body.
Devoted as | am to my friends, | can discharge my debts to them only by putting an end to
you." (6) Pariksit, thus pricking Bhagavan Sri Krsna with unkind words even as a tamer pricks
an elephant with his goad, Dantavaktra struck Sri Krsna on the head with his mace and
roared like a lion. (7) But Sri Krsna, the ornament of Yadu’s race, remained quite unshaken
by the shock, and with His own heavy mace known by the name of Kaumodaki struck in His
turn a severe blow on Dantavaktra's chest, which split the latter's heart. Vomiting blood
through the mouth, Dantavaktra fell down dead on the ground with dishevelled hair and
outstretched arms and legs. (8-9) Pariksit, just as it happened when Sigupala fell, a very
subtle ray of light emanated from the body of Dantavaktra and entered that of Sri Krsna in
an astonishing way before the eyes of all. (10)
विदूरथस्तु तद्भ्राता भ्रातृशोकपरिप्रुत: | आगच्छदसिचर्मभ्यामुच्छ्वसस्तज्घांसया ।1११॥
तस्य चापतत: कृष्णश्चक्रेण क्षुरनेमिना। शिरो जहार राजेन्द्र सकिरीटं सकुण्डलम् । १२।
एवं सोभं wed च दन्तवक्त्रं सहानुजम्।हत्वा दुर्विषहानन्यैरीडित सुरमानवै: ।१३॥
भुनिभि: सिद्धगन्धर्वैर्विद्याधरमहोरगै: । अप्सरोभि: पितृगणैर्यक्षै: किन्नरचारणै: । १४॥
उपगीयमानविजय: कुसुमैरभिवर्षित: । वृतश्च वृष्णिप्रवरैर्विवेशालङ्कृतां पुरीम् । १५॥
एवं athe: get भगवाञ्जगदीश्वर: । ईयते पशुदृष्टीनां निर्जितो जयतीति a: ।१६॥
Dantavaktra had a brother, Viddratha by name. Overwhelmed with grief at the death of
his brother, he appeared, panting (with rage) on the spot with a sword and shieldin his hands,
intent on killing Sri Krsna. (11) Pariksit, as he rushed at Him, Sri Krsna with His sharp-edged
discus lopped of Viddratha’s head armed with a crown and ear-rings. (12) Thus putting an
end to Salva, with his famous aerial car Saubha, as well as Dantavaktra and his younger
brother Viduratha, who could not be easily encountered by others, Bhagavan Sri Krsna
returned in triumph to Owaraka. Men and gods extolled Him at the time for His extraordinary
feat of arms. (Greatest of ) sages, Siddhas, Gandharvas, Vidyadharas, great serpents (like
Vasuki), Apsaras, the manes, Yaksas, Kinnaras and Caranas all showered flowers on Him
and sang of His victory. The city was decorated to commemorate His triumph over His
enemies and principal Yadava warriors followed Him in procession as He entered the
city. (13—15) Pariksit, the Master of Yoga andalmighty Ruler of the universe, SriKrsna, thus

enacts various sports in the world. To the ignorant He appeared now and then as the
vanquished. But as a matter of fact, He always wins. (16)

श्रुत्वा युद्धोद्यमं राम: कुरूणां सह पाण्डवै: । तीर्थाभिषेकव्याजेन मध्यस्थ: प्रययौ fre । १७॥
स्नात्वा प्रभासे aad देवर्षिपितृमानवान्।सरस्वतीं प्रतिस्रोतं ययौ ब्राह्मणसंवृत: ।१८॥
पृथूदकं बिन्दुसरस्तितकूपं सुदर्शनम् । विशालं warts च चक्रं प्राचीं सरस्वतीम् ।१९।
यमुनामनु यान्येव गङ्गामनु च भारत। जगाम नैमिषं aa ऋषय: सत्रमासते [Rol
तमागतमभिप्रेत्य मुनयो दीर्घसत्रिण: । अभिनन्द्य यथान्यायं प्रणम्योत्थाय चार्चयन् 1221
