530 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 44

त्रज विल् terior enters tot व terre rnioininictniniricnitonirtrtctr ९

wa विरहिता cen पुरीयं पुरुषर्षभ। न waa वयमिव निवृत्तोत्सवमङ्गला ise!
अनागसां त्वं भूतानां कृतवान् द्रोहमुल्लणम् SAM भो sai नीतो भूतध्रुक् को लभेत TL Iw
सर्वेषामिह भूतानामेष fe प्रभवाप्यव: । गोप्ता च तदवध्यायी न क्वचित् सुखमेधते ive!
Burning all over with rage, the eight younger brothers of Karnsa—Kanka, Nyagrodha and
others—rushed (towards Sri Krsna) in order to get square with their (deceased) brother by
avenging his death. (40) Taking up a bludgeon Balarama (Rohini's son), however, made
short work of them (even) as they came fully prepared (for an encounter) with such great
impetuosity, (just) as alion (the king of beasts) would kill the cattle. (41) Kettledrums sounded
in the heavens; full of delight, Brahma (the creator), Lord Siva and other (special)
manifestations of divine glory extolled the Lord covering Him with (showers of) flowers, and
celestial women (Apsaras) danced (out of joy). (42) Grieved at the death of their near and
dear ones, O great king, the widows of the deceased came over to that place, severely and
repeatedly beating their heads with tears in their eyes. (43) Embracing their husbands lying
(dead) in the arena (which serves as a most glorious bed for heroes that have laid down their
lives in an open combat), the women wailed (in the following words) at the pitch of theirvoice,
lamenting their lot and repeatedly shedding tears of grief:—{44) “Ah, beloved lord, the
knower of Dharma (the principles of righteousness) ! O kind-hearted one, fond of the
helpless ! due to your having been slain, we (too), your own, with our homes and progeny
have been ruined. (45) Bereft of you, its master, this city (of Mathura),O jewel among men,
does not look charming any more than we, all its festivities and felicity having ceased. (46)
You wrought immense harm even toinnocent creatures. Itis for that reason that you have been
reduced to this plight, O lord ! What oppressor of living beings can attain happiness ?(47)
This Sri Krsna indeed is the Source, the End and the Protector of all created beings in this
universe. Anyone showing disrespect to Him can never prosper. (48)

SYR उवाच
राजयोषित आश्वास्य भगवाँल्लोकभावन: | ames संस्थां हतानां समकारयत् ।४९।
मातरं पितरं ga मोचयित्वाथ बन्धनात्। PERM ववन्दाते शिरसाऽऽस्पृश्य पादयो: । ५०1
देवकी वसुपेवश्च fama जगदीश्वरौ । कृतसंवन्दनो gt सस्वजाते न alge ।५१॥

Sri Suka went on : Having comforted the royal ladies the Lord, who is the Protector of
the universe, caused what they call obsequies to be duly performed with regard to the slain
for their welfare in the other world. (49) Having then secured the release of Their mother
(Devaki) and father (Vasudeva) too from bondage (while they were being taken to the gaol
for being placed behind the bars), Sri Krsna and Balarama bowed to them fully touching their
feet with Their head. (50) Perceiving their sons—who had (just) bowed to them—to be (none
else than) the Rulers of the universe, Devaki and Vasudeva did not embrace Them, afraid
as they were (of showing disrespect to Them). (51)

Thus ends the forty-fourth discourse entitled “Karmsa slain (by the Lord)," in the
first half of Book Ten of the great and glorious Bhagavata-Purana,
otherwise known as the Paramahamsa-Samnhita.

ssinginet:
CDOS EL SO IOS
