Dis. 7] BOOK Six 585

१.३.३.३.६.३.३..३.६:.३.३.३.३.३..६:.६.३
पुत्राणां fe परो धर्म: पितृशुश्रूषणं सताम्। अपि पुत्रवतां ब्रह्मन् किमुत ब्रह्मचारिणाम् । २८॥
आचार्यो ब्रह्मणो मूर्ति: पिता मूर्ति: प्रजापते: | भ्राता मरुत्पतेर्मूर्तिर्माता साक्षात् क्षितेस्तनु: 1221
दयाया भगिनी मूर्तिर्धर्मस्यात्मातिथि: war अग्नेरभ्यागतो मूर्ति: सर्वभूतानि चात्मन: 1301
तस्मात्  पितॄणामार्तानामार्तिं परपराभवम्।तपसापनयंस्तात सन्देशं कर्तुमर्हसि । ३१॥
वृणीमहे त्वोपाध्यायं ब्रह्मिष्ठं ब्राह्मणं गुरुम्। यथाञ्जसा विजेष्याम: सपत्नांस्तव तेजसा 1321
न गर्हयन्ति ह्यर्थेषु यविष्ठाङ्घ्रयभिवादनम् | छन्दोभ्योऽन्यत्र न ब्रह्मन् वयो ज्यैष्ठ्यस्य कारणम् । ३३ |

The gods said : We have called at your hermitage as unexpected visitors (deserving
your kind attention); may all be well with you. (Now) be pleased, dear son, to fulfil the timely
wishes of your uncles (ourselves). (27) Indeed service of parents is the highest duty of
virtuous sons—even of those that have been blessed with sons. O holy Brahmana, much
more of celibates. (28) A preceptor (who invests one with the sacred thread and teaches the
Vedas) is Veda incarnate; a father (or uncle) is an image of Brahma (the lord of creation);
a brother is an effigy of Indra (the chief of the gods); (and) a mother is a direct incarnation
of the goddess Earth. (29) A sister is an embodiment of tenderness: an unexpected visitor
is the very incarnation of virtue; a guestis an incarnation of the sacred fire andall living beings
are embodiments of the (supreme) Self (Lord Visnu). (30) Therefore, getting rid, by virtue
of your asceticism, of the affliction of your parents in the shape of their discomfiture at the
hands of their enemies, O dear child, you ought to do our bidding. (31) We choose you, a
Brahmana established in (identity with) Brahma and (therefore) worthy of adoration (forall),
as our preceptor, so that we may easily and fully conquer our enemies through your
(spiritual) glory. (32) Indeed, as a means of accomplishing one’s ends, the wise do not
condemn the act of bowing at the feet of the younger. Setting aside (the knowledge of) the
Vedas, O (holy) Brahmana, (mere) age is no criterion of seniority. (33)

अभ्यर्थित: सुरगणै: पौरोहित्ये महातपा: । स विश्वस्तपस्तानाह प्रसन्न: इलक्ष्णया गिरा । ३४॥

The sage (Sri Suka) went on : (Thus) importuned by the hosts of gods to accept the
Office of their priest, the said Viswarupa, (who was) a great ascetic, felt delighted and replied to
them in soft words (as follows). (34)

विश्वररूप उवाच
प्रत्याख्यास्यति तच्छिष्य: स एव स्वार्थ उच्यते । ३५॥
wa विगर्ह्य नु aired: पौरोधसं हृष्यति येन दुर्मति: ।३६॥
तथापि न प्रतिब्रूयां गुरुभि: प्रार्थितं fai भवतां प्रार्थितं ad प्राणैरर्थैश्च साधये ise!

ViSwardpa said ; Priesthood has been condemned by the virtuous as involving the loss
of the spiritual glory investing a Brahmana. Yet how shall a person like me, O masters,
(venture to) turn down the solicitation of guardians of the spheres (like you), by whom he
deserves to be commanded; for obedience alone is declared (inthe scriptures) as conducive
to his good. (35) Sila (gleaning grains left in a field after reaping the harvest) and Ufchana
(picking up grains lying scattered in a market-place after the piles have been removed from

there) are the (only) wealth’ of the destitute (Brahmanas). (All) acts (such as pouring
oblations into the sacred fire and feeding an unexpected visitor), appropriate to noble souls
Se Oe ee eee

* Sila and Ufichana have been glorified in our scriptures as the best means of livelihood for a Brahmana.

[564] B. M. 21_.
