Dis. 17] BOOK EIGHT ~ 807
SH ARARASESAIESRIOASHSOHH RADON ES HCUNEHENENASR RHA NH HECEMOEEEhEneETanowennm en,

by their enemies (the Asuras), (nay,) who have been driven away from their home.(12) You
wish to live with your sons when they have retrieved their triumphal glory after utterly and
finally defeating those vainglorious Asura chiefs.(13) (Nay,) you long toapproach and behold
(with your own eyes)the sorrowful and bewailing wives of your enemies when the latter have
been slain by yoursons, the eldestof whom is Indra.(14) You (further) desire tosee yoursons
highly prosperous, with their glory and splendour restored and diverting themselves after
regaining mastery over heaven.(15) Those Asura generals are for the most part invincible
at present ; that is My conviction, O celestial lady! For, they are protected by Brahmanas to
whom (the all-powerful) Time is propitious. (Hence) heroic valour against them will not yield
happiness. (16) Nevertheless, O heavenly lady, some expedient must be thought of by Me,
propitiated by your observance ofa sacred vow. (For) My worship ought not to prove fruitless,
bringing as it does its reward according to the desire of the worshipper.(17) Worshipped in
the proper way for the protection of your sons through (the observance of the vow called)
Payovrata and duly extolled by you, | shall assume the role ofa son to you, entering by a part
of My Being the procreative energy of the sage Kagyapa (son of Marici), and protect your
Progeny. (18) (Therefore,) seek your consort, the faultless Kagyapa (a lord of created
beings), O blessed lady, visualizing Me as present in this (very) form (standing before you)
in the person of your husband. (19) This (Secret) should on no account be disclosed to
another by you, even when questioned. (For) all secret plans of the gods, O celestial lady,
succeed (only) when scrupulously guarded. (20)

SYS उवाच
एतावदुक्त्वा भगवांस्तत्रैवान्तरधीयत । अदितिर्दुर्लभं लब्ध्वा हरेर्जन्मात्मनि प्रभो: 1291
उपाधावत् पतिं भक्त्या परया कृतकृत्यवत्। स बै समाधियोगेन कश्यपस्तदबुध्यत । २२ |
प्रविष्टमात्मनि हरेरंशं ह्यवितथेक्षण:। सोऽदित्यां वीर्यमाधत्त तपसा चिरसंभृतम् ।
समाहितमना राजन्दारुण्यग्निं यथानिल: 123 |
अदितेर्धिष्ठितं mi भगवन्तं सनातनम्। हिरण्यगर्भो विज्ञाय समीडे गुह्यनामभि: । २४॥

Sri Suka went on: Saying this much, the Lord disappeared on that very spot. Having
secured the rare boon of Lord Sri Hari's birth through her, Aditi waited upon her husband with
supreme devotion like one who has accomplished her purpose. By power of concentration
he said KaSyapa of true insight actually perceiveda part of SriHari having entered his mind.
laving (fully) concentrated his mind, O Pariksit, the sage Kasyapa (who was alike to the
jods and the Asuras) placed (mentally) in Aditi his seed long conserved through
‘Sceticism (even) as the wind (which equally pervades everywhere) places (a spark of) fire

1 firewood. (21—23) Perceiving the eternal Lord having entered the womb of Aditi,
liranyagarbha (Brahma) proceeded to praise Him with mysterious epithets (as follows). (24)

कालो भवानाक्षिपतीक्ञ विश्वं स्रोतो यथान्त:पतितं TRA । २७॥
@ वै प्रजानां स्थिरजङ्घमानां प्रजापतीनामसि सम्भविष्णु: ।

i देव दिवश्च्युतानां um नौरिव TSTMS । २८॥ `
इतिश्रंप्पद्भप्ताक्तेमहापुराणेणापइंस्यांसॊहॆतप्त्यम्पष्टक्कोक्याप्रादुर्भावेंसप्तदञोऽथ्याय:!श्या
