784 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 11:

Rite Ee re ae ARO OTK Se OH ERATE EEE EEDEREREE OER ति व ह्ये ज ड डि

threatening in the word "You are slain!" and flung it at Indra (the ruler of the gods), roaring
like a lion (the king of beasts).(30) Hari (Indra) cut it with (his) arrows into a thousand pieces
(even) as it flew towards him through the air with great speed. Full of anger, the ruler of the
gods (then) struck him (Namuci) with his thunderboltin the neck, aiming to chop off the latter's
head.(31) The powerful thunderbolt which was hurled with (great) force by Indra (the king of
the gods) did not as a matter of fact pierce even the skin of Namuci. This was most wonderful
that the weapon which smashed the mighty Vrtra was baffled by the skin on Namuci's
neck.(32) Indra (now) gotafraid of that enemy (Namuci) from whom the thunderbolt had been
repelled. (He said to himself,) "through a conspiracy of Fate what has this happened, that has
bewildered the world? " (33) By means of this (very) thunderbolt, in old days, | clipped the
wings of mountains, that flew with (those) wings and settled down on earth on account of their
(huge) weight, thus conducing to the destruction of created beings.(34) (Nay,) by this was
rent asunder (the demon) Vrtra, the vigorous austerity (personified) of Twasta (a lord of
created beings), and others too, who were endowed with (extraordinary) strength and whose
skin could not (even) be scratched with all the missiles.(35) (When) hurled by me at this puny
Asura, the same thunderbolt has been rendered ineffectual! A (mere) staff, | shall no more
handle it; though embodying the (spiritual) energy of a Brahmana (the sage Dadhici), it is
unavailing (now)."(36) To Sakra, who was thus sorrowing, an incorporeal voice said, "This
demon can be killed neither with dry nor with wet things, since a boon has been conferred
on him by Me to the effect that death will surely not come to him through any wet or dry
substance. Hence any other contrivance should be thought of by you for (the death of ) this
enemy, O Maghava (Indra) ! (37-38) Hearing that ethereal voice, Indra fully composed his
mind and contemplated; and presently he discovered a means in the shape of foam (of the
sea), which combined both (the aforesaid) attributes and could not therefore be called
exclusively dry or wet). (39) With that foam, which was neither dry nor wet, he severed the
head of Namuci; (and) hosts of sages glorified him and showered flowers on the mighty
Indra. (40) Vigwavasu and Paravasu, the chief among the Gandharvas (heavenly musi-
cians), sang songs, the celestial drums sounded and (heavenly) dancing girls danced with
joy. (41) Similarly other gods too, headed by Vayu (the wind-god), Agni (the god of fire) and
Varuna (the god of water), destroyed their rivals with volleys of missiles just as lions would
kill deer.(42) Perceiving the extermination of the Danavas, the celestial sage Narada was
sent by Brahma (the creator) to the gods, O protector of men, and he remonstrated with the
gods (in the following words).(43)
ARG उवाच

भवद्भिरमृतं प्राप्ते नारायणभुजाश्रयै: । श्रिया समेधिता: Be उपारमत विग्रहात् xv
Narada said: Nectar has been secured by you by resorting to the arms of Lord Narayana
and (besides) all (of You) have been blessed by Goddess Sri (His divine Spouse).
(Therefore,) cease you (now) from hostilities.(44)

श्रीशुक उवाच
संयम्य wget मानयन्तो मुनेर्वच: । उपगीयमानानुचरैर्ययु:३ ad त्रिविष्टपम् ॥४५॥
येऽवशिष्टा wi तस्मिन् नारदानुमतेन ते। बलिं विपन्नमादाय अस्तं गिरिमुपागमन् ive
तत्राविनष्टावयवान् विद्यमानशिरोधरान्। sat जीवयामास संजीविन्या स्वविद्यया iv!
बलिश्चोनसा स्पृष्ट- प्रत्यापन्नेन्द्रियस्मृति: | पराजितोऽपि नाखिद्यल्लोकतत्त्वविचक्षण: ॥४८॥
