Dis. 15] BOOK SEVEN 727

SCIRITEC ETI STROH Omer eo ent erin ein etree ersrecsencers ance nity BME ROM Ree He

and level ground, one should squat on it with his body erect ina steady, Straight and easy
pose, repeating (the mystic syllable) OM. (31) Fixing his gaze onthe tip of his nose, he should
thoroughly control his expiration and inspiration by (first) inhaling the air, (then) suspending
the breath and (finally) exhaling the air (and repeating the process in the same order) till his
mind gives up (indulging in diverse desires). (32) A wise man should gradually hold in the
heart his roving mind, smitten with desires, withdrawing it from all those objects towards
which it goes. (33) The mind of that striver, constantly exerting himself in this way, attains
quiescence irra very shorttime, (even) as a fire without fuel goes out before long. (34) Amind
which is no longer agitated by lust etc., (nay,) all whose operations have been completely
set at rest and which is immersed in the bliss of absorption into Brahma (the Absolute) will
never feel distracted (again). (35)

a: प्रव्रज्य गृहात् Ya त्रिवर्गावपनात् पुन: । यदि सेवेत तान्भिक्षु: स वै area: 1361
यै: स्वदेह: स्मृतो नात्मा weil विदकृमिभस्मसात् । त एनमात्मसात्कृत्वा श्लाघयन्ति ह्यसत्तमा: । ३७॥
गृहस्थस्य क्रियात्यागो व्रतत्यागो वटोरपि । तपस्विनो ग्रामसेवा भिक्षोरिन्दियलोलता । ३८॥
आश्रमापसदा ह्येते खल्वाश्रमविडम्बका: | देवमायाविमूढांस्तानुपेक्षेतानुकम्पया । ३९॥
आत्मानं ae विजानीयात् परं ज्ञानधुताशय: | किमिच्छन्कस्य वा हेतोर्देहं पुष्णाति लम्पट: ।४०॥

ae शरीरं रथमिन्दियाणि हयानभीषून् मन sheer

amit मात्रा धिषणां च gi am बृहद् बन्धुरमीशसृष्टम् ।४१॥

ae तस्य प्रणवं पठन्ति a तु wid परमेव weve!
रागो द्वेषश्च लोभश्च area भयं ve: | मानोऽवमानोऽसूया च माया हिंसा च मत्सर: ।४३॥
रज: प्रमाद: क्षुन्निद्रा झत्रवस्त्वेवमादय: | रजस्तम:प्रकृतय: सत्त्वप्रकृतय: क्वचित् ।`४४॥

ज्ञानासिमच्युतबलो BER: स्वाराज्यतुष्ट sr इदं विजह्यात् ।`४५॥

नो चेत् प्रमत्तमसदिन्द्रियवाजिसूता नीत्वोत्पथं विषयदस्युषु निक्षिपन्ति |

aq दस्यव: सहयसूतममुं तमोऽन्धे संसारकूप उरुमृत्युभये fifa iva!

If a recluse, having first retired from (taken leave of) his home—a field for the culture of
religious merit, worldly riches and sensuous enjoyment (the first three objects of human
pursuit)— seeks after them again, he is indeed a shameless fellow and (virtually) eats what
has been vomited. (36) Those very fools who (once) thought of their body as not-self, mortal
and sure to be converted into ordure (if left unprotected and allowed to be consumed by
Carnivorous animals), reduced to the state of worms (if interred and thus allowed to rot) or
reduced to ashes (if cremated), treat it (once more) as their (very) self and get others to extol
it. (37) Neglect of religious duties on the part of a householder, violation of the vow of chastity
etc., on the part of a Brahmacari (religious student), reversion to a village life on the part of
ananchorite and lack of self-restraint on the part of a recluse (are most blame-worthy;)—men
guilty of these (aberrations) are indeed the vilest among those em bracing (any of) the (four)
Asramas (stages in life). They actually bring their ASrama to ridicule; out of compassion (for
them) one should ignore such men, infatuated (as they are) by the deluding potency of the
Lord. (38-39) If a man has come to recognize his self as (one with) the Supreme, he must

have (all) his cravings uprooted by this knowledge. Seeking what (gain) and for what purpose
should he (then) remain addicted to sensual pleasures and nourish his body ? (40) They
