218 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 27

BESANT RIAA RR ERE Ae eee LS eee LER ELE TE He RET eS foe EE eee hehe bik

a मद्बिधाज्ञा जगदीशमानिनस्त्वां वीक्ष्य कालेऽभयमाशु तन्मदम् ।
हित्वाऽर्यमार्गं प्रभजन्त्यपस्मया ईहा खलानामपि तेऽनुशासनम् । ७ |
स त्वं मपश्वर्यमंदह्रुतस्य कृतागसस्तेऽविदुष प्रभावम्। ॥
ay प्रभोऽथार्हसि मूढचेतसो मैवं पुनर्भून्मतिरीग मेऽसती । ८ ।
त्तवावतारोऽयमधोक्षजेह स्वयम्भराणामुरुभारजन्मनाम् ।
चमूपतीनामभवाय . देव भवाय युष्मच्चरणानुवर्तिनाम् । ९ ।
नमस्तुभ्यं भगवते पुरुषाय महात्मने । वासुदेवाय कृष्णाय सात्वतां पतये नम: ।१०॥
स्वच्छन्दोपात्तदेहाय विशुद्धल्ञानमूर्तये । सर्वस्मै सर्वबीजाय सर्वभूतात्मने नम: ।११॥
मयेदं भगवन् गोष्ठनाशायासारवायुभि: । चेष्टितं विहते यज्ञे मानिना तीव्रमन्युना ।१२॥
त्वयेशानुगृहीतोऽस्मि ध्वस्तस्तम्भो वृथोद्यम: gat गुरुमात्मानं we oUt गत: ।१३॥

Indra prayed ; Your essential character, consisting as it does of pure Sattva, is
uniform, full of wisdom and untouched by Rajas and Tamas. This phenomenal
universe, which is a product of Maya, finds no place in You, persisting as it does
through ignorance (alone). (4) How, then, could greed etc.—which are responsible for
rebirth and are born of identification with the body, constituting as they do the
distinguishing marks of the ignorant— exist in You? Yet You wield the rod of
punishment for the maintenance of righteousness and for the punishment of the
wicked. (5) You are the father, the preceptor and the supreme ruler of (all) the worlds;
You are the Time-Spirit that cannot be easily set at naught and that holds the sceptre
of sway (over the universe). It is for the good of the world that You carry on Your sport
in embodied forms assumed at will, curbing the pride of those who fancy themselves
to be the rulers of the world. (6) Fools like me, who regard themselves as rulers of the
universe, speedily shake off that pride on seeing You undaunted even in times of
danger and, rid of their haughtiness, take the path of Devotion trodden by the
righteous. (In fact) Your very activity serves as a punishment for the wicked. (7) Such
that You are, be pleased, O almighty Lord, to forgive me—who, immersed as | am in
the pride of wealth and power and ignorant of Your greatness, have sinned against
You—and to ordain that my mind may not be so evilly disposed again hereafter,
deluded as my intellect is. (8) Your descent on this earth, 0 Lord who are above
sense-perception, is conducive to the extermination of leaders of (great) armies—who
are not only a burden to the earth themselves but who bring into existence many such
scourges—and to the welfare of those devoted to Your feet. (9) Hail, hail to You, the
almighty and infinite Lord, the Inner Controller of all, Sri Krsna, Son of Vasudeva, the
Protector of the Yadavas.(10) Salutation to the Lord, who has assumed a form
conforming the wish of His devotees, who is an embodiment of pure consciousness,
who is all-formed, the Cause of ail, the Soul of all living beings ! (11) On my worship
having been interfered with, this (mischief) was done, O Lord, for the destruction of
Vraja by means of torrential rain and winds by me who was full of pride and seized
with violent rage. (12) My pride having been crushed and my efforts having been foiled,
| have been favoured by You, 0 Lord! | have (accordingly) sought You, the Supreme
Ruter and Preceptor, (nay) my very Self, as my refuge.(13)
