208 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA ( Dis. 24

SCR OR Coin ete Rote it eee Ee Ceres tener neers eee re eee

(sought to be propitiated through a sacrifice), the sacrificer, the act of sacrifice (itself) and the
religious merit (flowing from a sacrificial performance)—has Himself appeared in the race of
the Yadus; yet we could not recognize Him, fools that we are. (47-48) Oh most blessed are
we, in whose lot have fallen such wives as these, through whose devotion our mind (too) has
been irrevocably fixed on Sri Hari. (49) Hail to You, the almighty Lord Sri Krsna, whose
intellect knows no obstruction. It is (only) because our judgment has been clouded by Your
Maya (deluding potency) that we are wandering in the alleys of Karma. (50) May that most
ancient Person be pleased as a matter of fact to forgive the transgression on our part, who
did not know His glory, infatuated as we were by His Maya.” (51)
इति स्वाघपनुस्मृत्य कृष्णे ते कृतहेलना: | दिदृक्षवोऽप्यच्युतयो: कंसाद्भीता न चाचलन् 1G?

Recalling thus their own offence again and again the aforesaid Brahmanas, who had

shown disrespect to Sri Krsna (by turning a deaf ear to His request for being supplied with

boiled rice), did not stir out, afraid as they were of Karnsa, though eager to behold the two
immortal Brothers. (52)

Thus ends the twenty-third discourse entitled “The Redemption of the wives of
some Brahmanas engaged in a sacrifice’, in the first half of Book Ten
of the great and glorious Bhagavata-Purana, otherwise
known as the Paramahamsa-Saminhita.

a TE et
rere rr

अथ चतुर्विंशोऽध्याय:

Discourse XXIV

The Lord stops the sacrifice to Indra

श्रीयुक उवाच
भगवानपि तत्रैव seed daa: । अपङ्यन्निवसन् गोपानिन्द्रयागकृतोद्यमान्। १ ।

तदभिज्ञोऽपि भगवान् सर्वात्मा सर्वदर्शन: । प्रश्रयावनतोऽपृच्छद वृद्धान् नन्दपुरोगमान् । २ ।

कथ्यतां मे पित: कोऽयं सम्भ्रमो व उपागत: । किं फलं कस्य lea: केन वा साध्यते मख: । ३ ।

We ब्रूहि महान् कामो मह्यं शुश्रूषवे पित: । न हि गोप्यं हि साधूनां He सर्वात्मनामिह । ४ ।

अस्त्यस्वपरदृष्टीनाममित्रोदास्तविद्विषाम् । उदासीनोऽरिवद् वर्ज्य आत्मवत् सुहृदुच्यते । ५ ।

ज्ञात्वाज्ञात्वा च कर्माणि जनोऽयमनुतिष्ठति i विदुष: कर्मसिद्धि: स्यात्तथा नाविदुषो भवेत् । ६ 1

तत्र तावत् क्रियायोगो भवतां किं विचारित: । अथवा लौकिकस्तन्मे पृच्छत: साधु भण्यताम् । ७ 1
दि Si Suka began again : Dwelling in the same land of Vraja accompanied by Baladeva,
Sri Krsna too saw the cowherds engaged in preparations for the worship of Indra (the god
of rain). (1) Though aware of it, the Lord, whois the Indweller of all (hearts) and all-perceiving
and was (yet) bent low with humility, enquired of the elderly people (of Vraja): the leader of
whom was Nanda, (as follows):—{2) "It may kindly be pointed out to me, O father, what is
this occassion for (unusual) flutter come up before you ? What will be the fruit (of it) ? For

whom is it intended ? And by whom and through what materials is this sacrifice going to be
performed ? (3) (Kindly) tell me this, eager as | am to hear it, O father! Great is my longing
