4] BOOK SIX 569

Stee thernntnnnmnnnneneREteetethentaenhanenniannnemnnmmmnmmmemennn
easeaisen waa yaa aA aw fae: ut aq

we पुमान् ae गुणांश्च तज्ञो न वेद सर्वज्ञमनन्तमीडे ie

यदोपरामो मनसो नामरूपरूपस्य दृष्टस्मृतिसम्प्रमोषात् ।

य gat केवलया स्वसंस्थया daa तस्मै aed नम: ।२६॥
मनीषिणोऽन्तर्हदि संनिवेशितं स्वशक्तिभिर्नवभिश्च त्रिवृद्धि: ।

af यथा दारुणि पाञ्चदश्यं मनीषया निष्कर्षन्ति गूढम् । २७|

स वै ममाशेषविरोषमायानिषेधनिर्वाणसुखानुभूति: ।

a सर्वनामा स च विश्वरूप: प्रसीदतामनिरुक्तात्महाक्ति: 1221

wie वचसा fetid धियाक्षभिर्वा मनसा da यस्य ।

मा भूत् स्वरूपं गुणरूपं fe तत्तत् स वै गुणापायविसर्गलक्षण: ।२९॥
यस्मिन् at a च wa यस्मै चद यो यथा कुरुते कार्यते च ।
परावरेषां परमं प्राक प्रसिद्धं We ब्रह्म तद्धेतुरनन्यदेकम् ।३०॥
यच्छक्तयो aed वादिनां वै विवादसंवादभुवो भवन्ति ।
कुर्वन्ति चैषां मुहुरात्ममोहं तस्मै नमोऽनन्तगुणाय भूम्ने ।३१।
अस्तीति नास्तीति च वस्तुनिष्ठयोरेकस्थयोर्भिन्नविरुद्धधर्मयो: |
अवेक्षितॆ किञ्चन amare: ad परं WARS बृहत्तत् । ३२॥
योऽनुग्रहार्थं भजतां पादमूलमनामसरूपो भगवाननन्त: ।
नम्पानिरूपाणिचजन्मकर्पभिर्भेजेसमह्यंपस्म:प्नसौदतु।इइ।
: पार्थिवमाश्रितो गुणं a ईश्वरो a कुरुतान्मनोरथम् । ३४॥

The Prajapati prayed : | offer salutations to the self-effulgent Supreme of infallible
consciousness—the Controller of both the Jiva (the soul as reflected through the three
Gunas or matter) and Prakrti (the basis of such reflection)—whose true nature is not
perceived by those that take the objects of senses (the products of the three Gunas) to be
real, and who is beyond (all) the means of cognition. (23) | make obeisance to that Supreme
Lord whose beneficent nature and friendly (helpful) attitude (as the Prompter of the senses
and the mind) the Jiva dwelling in this body, His constant companion, does not know—even
though the Lordlives with the Jiva as the latter's Friend (in the same body), He being the seer
of this visible universe (and therefore not Open to perception)—just as an object of
perception cannot perceive the illuminating quality of the sense that perceives it. (24) The
body, the vital airs, the senses, the internal senses (the mind, understanding, intellect and
the ego) and the gross and subtle elements know neither themselves (individually) nor any
other (among themselves) nor that whichis beyond (all these, viz., the Jiva). The (conscious)
Jiva (however) knows all (these, including itself) as well as the (three) Gunas (the root of all
the aforesaid categories except the Jiva); but, though knowing (all) these, it does not know
the all-knowing Lord who is infinite (and therefore unknowable). | (hereby) extol Him. (25)
Hail to that pure Substance (Brahma), revealed (only) ina pure mind, thatis realized through
Its absolute existence (consisting of consciousness and bliss) when the mind, which
manifests this world of names and forms, (altogether) ceases to function (attains the state
of Samadhi or complete absorption into the Self) due to the extinction of all cognition and
recollection. (26) The wise find Him out by their purified intellect (as distinct from their lower
self, referred to as ‘I’ and) as installed within their heart—though veiled by His nine potencies

Dis.
water

