82 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 16
+ H Cee Ree eterers:

ttehewerereretsrtrerereneres SRRRES ESCO ESE RESET Eee Eee

slayer of hostile warriors) duly made her over to his father (sage Jamadagni). (36) Rama
recounted to his father as well as to his (elder) brothers his own achievement and also that
which was done by Arjuna. Having heard the account, Jamadagni spoke (as follows):—(37)
“Rama, O Rama of mighty arms you have committed a (great) sin in that you slew for no
purpose a ruler of men, who represented all the gods {in his person). (38) We, Brahmanas,
O dear child, have earned a title to adoration through forgiveness alone, by virtue of which
Brahma, the adored of the (whole) world, attained to the position of the supreme ruler (of the
universe). (39) Through forgiveness the glory of a Brahmana shines forth like the brilliance
of the sun. (Nay,) with the forgiving the almighty Lord Sri Hariis quickly pleased. (40) Slaying
a king whose head has been (duly) consecrated (at the time of coronation) is more sinful than
the killing of a Brahmana. Therefore, O dear one, atone for the sin by reverently visiting the
holy places with your mind fixed on Sri Visnu (the immortal Lord). (41)

Thus ends the fifteenth discourse in Book Nine of the great and glorious
Bhagavata-Purana, otherwise known as the
Paramahamsa-Samhita.

न्न्न्

अथ षोडशोऽध्याय:

Discourse XVI
Extermination of the Ksatriyas by ParaSurdma : an account
of the posterity of the sage ViSwamitra
श्रीगुक उवाच
पित्रोपशिक्षितो रामस्तथेति कुरुनन्दन dae तीर्थयात्रां चरित्वाऽऽश्रममाव्रजत् । १ |
कदाचिद् रेणुका याता गङ्गायां पद्ममालिनम् । गन्धर्वराजं क्रीडन्तमप्सरोभिरपर्यत । २ |
विलोकयन्ती क्रीडन्तमुदकार्थं ad गता।होमवेलां न सस्मार किञ्चिच्चित्ररथस्पृहा । ३ |
कालात्ययं तं faster मुने: शापविशङ्किता | आगत्य set तस्थौ पुरोधाय कृताञ्जलि: । ४ |
व्यभिचारं मुनिर्जात्वा पत्न्या: प्रकुपितोऽब्रव्रीत् weal पुत्रका: पापामित्युक्तास्ते न चक्रिरे । ५ |
TH: wastes: पित्रा भ्रातॄन् मात्रा सहावधीत् । प्रभावज्ञो मुने: सम्यक् समाधेस्तपसश्च स: । ६ ।
वरेणच्छन्दयामास «= Mid: सत्यवतीसुत: । वव्रे हतानां रामोऽपि जीवितं चास्मृति वधे । |
उत्तस्थुस्ते कुशलिनो fame इवाञ्जसा । पितुर्विद्वांस्तपोवीर्यं रामश्चक्रे सुहद्वेधम् । ८ ।

Sri Suka resumed ; Admonished by his father (as aforesaid)* and saying "So be it’,
Parasurama returned to his hermitage (only) after having performed pilgrimage for a year,
Odelight of the Kurus! (1) Ona certain day, having gone to the Ganga, Renuka (Paragurama's
mother saw (there) Citraratha (the king of the Gandharvas)—adorned with alotus garland—
sporting with celestial nymphs. (2) It was for water that she had gone to the river. (But) gazing
at the sporting Gandharva, she did not remember the time scheduled for offering oblations

into the sacred fire (when the water was required by her husband), her heart being seized
with a slight longing for Citraratha. (3) Perceiving the delay thus caused, and terribly afraid

Ee
* Vide verses 38—41 of Discourse XV above.
