422 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 71

AHAA COKE HHNMONN HAA EE ET AALS eee pe cl PELTT ET ERETEN TESS CES EP eee ee ee श्लि EH OL ALT

came out into the streets to see the one attraction of all human eyes, abandoning their
household works and leaving their respective husbands in their beds. As they came out in
haste the plaits of their hair and the knots of their dress got loosened on account of their
ardent desire tosee Him. (34) The roads were crowded with elephants, horses, chariots and
pedestrians. The women, therefore, saw Sri Krsna and His consorts from the tops of their
houses, showered flowers on Him and mentally embracing Him greeted Him with smiling
looks. (35) Seeing the consorts of Sri Krsna accompanying their husband on the road even
as the stars surround the-moon, the women said to themselves: "We wonder what
meritorious deeds were performed by these ladies whereby the Best of Persons, Sri Krsna,
constantly delights their eyes with His winsome smiles and sportful glances.” (36) Here and
there prominent and sinless citizens and leaders of tradeguilds met Him with auspicious
articles in their hands and offered Him worship. (37)

अन्त:पुरजनै: प्रीत्या मुकुन्द: फुल्ललोचनै: । ससम्भ्रमैरभ्युपेत: प्राविशाद् राजमन्दिरम् ae!

पृथा विलोक्य भ्रात्रेयं कृष्णं त्रिभुवनेश्वरम्। प्रीतात्मोत्थाय पर्यङ्कात् सस्नुषा परिषस्वजे । ३९॥

Wee गृहमानीय देवदेवेशमादृत: । पूजायां नाविदत् कृत्यं प्रमोदोपहतो नृप: Ivo

`पितृषुसुर्गुरुस्रीणां कृष्णश्चक्रेऽभिवादनम् | स्वयं च कृष्णया राजन् भगिन्या चाभिवन्दित: ।४१॥

al सञ्चोदिता कृष्णा कृष्णपत्नीश्च सर्वश: | आनर्च रुक्मिणीं सत्यां भद्रां जाम्बवतीं तथा ।४२॥

कालिन्दीं मित्रविन्दां च deat नाम्नजितीं सतीम् । अन्याश्चाभ्यागता वास्तु वास:स्रङ्मण्डनादिभि: ।४३ |

qe निवासयामास धर्मराजो जनार्दनम्। ससैन्यं सानुगामात्यं सभार्य` च नवं नवम् ४४1

तर्पयित्वा खाण्डवेन बह्निं फाल्गुनसंयुत: । मोचयित्वा मयं येन राज्ञे दिव्या सभा कृता xu!

zara कतिचिन्मासान् राज्ञ: प्रियचिकीर्षया fem रथमारुह्य फाल्गुनेन भटैर्वृत: । ४६1

इति श्रीमद्धागवते महापुराणे पारमहंस्यां संहितायां दशमस्कथे उत्तरार्धे कृष्णस्येन्द्रप्र्थगमनं नामैकसप्ततितमोऽध्याय: (eg |

Welcomed by the women of the palace with eyes blooming with joy and excited with
emotion, Bhagavan Sri Krsna entered the king’s palace. (38) When Kunti saw her brother's
son, Sri Krsna, the Lord of thé three worlds, her heart was filled with delight. Rising from her
couch alongwith her daughter-in-law, Draupadi, she gave Him a hearty embrace. (39) King
Yudhisthira was beside himself with joy on having brought (with him) Sri Krsna, the Supreme
Ruler of the gods, within his palace and, full of reverence, did not know how to proceed with
His worship. (40) Sri Krsna bowed to His aunt and other elderly women, and was in His turn
saluted by Draupadi and His sister Subhadra, O King! (41) Under the direction of her mother-
in-law, Draupadi, honoured Rukmini, Satyabhama, Bhadra, Jambavati, Kalindi, Mitravinda,
Laksmana, the devoted Satya and other consorts of Sri Krsna, who had accompanied them,
by offering them costumes, garlands and other articles of beauty. (42-43) The virtuous King
Yudhisthira comfortably lodged Bhagavan Sri Krsna with His army, attendants, ministers and
consorts with elaborate arrangements for the supply of fresh articles (for their use). (44)
Alongwith Arjuna, Sri Krsna propitiated the god of fire by offering to him the Knandava forest
and rescued Maya, the demon, who in his turn constructed a wonderful assembly hall for the
king. (45) In order to please Yudhisthira, the Lord spent several months at Indraprastha.
There He occasionally went out with Arjuna for excursion in his chariot followed by a number
of warriors. (46)

Thus ends the seventy-first discourse entitled "Sri Krsna's visit to Indraprastha,"
in the latter half of Book Ten of the great and glorious Bhagavata-Purana,
otherwise known as the Paramahamsa-Samhita.

isos ts
Prd prs
