Dis. 20] BOOK FOUR 377

BEN ir iin trina 2 inne oe eae tog es ne ee He eT Rte oe HHT HAR RH SR

knows this body to be a product of ignorance (about one's own self), desire and action
never gets attached to it. (5) Having no attachment to this body, what wise man would
entertain a feeling of mineness with regard to the house, progeny or wealth, produced
by that body ? (6)
Wr: Ue: स्वयंज्योतिर्निर्गुणोऽसौ गुणाश्रय: । सर्वगोऽनावृत: साक्षी निरात्माऽऽत्माऽऽत्मन: पर: 1 ७ ।
य एवं सन्तमात्मानमात्मस्थं वेद पूरुष: । नाज्यते प्रकृतिस्थोऽपितदगुणै: स मयि fem: । ८ |
a: स्वधर्मेण ot fre निराशी: श्रद्धयान्वित: | भजते शानकैस्तस्य मनो राजन् प्रसरीदति । ९ ।
afer: सम्यग्दर्शनो विशदाशय: । शान्तिं मे समवस्थानं wa कॆवल्यमश्नुते । १०॥
उदासीनमिवाध्यक्षं द्रव्यज्ञानक्रियात्मनाम् । कूटस्थमिममात्मानं यो वेदाप्नोति शोभनम् ke I
The Self referred to (in verse 3 above) is one without change, pure (untainted by Maya),
self-effulgent, beyond the three Gunas (modes of Prakrti), the substratum of divine
attributes, all-pervading, unveiled, the witness ( of all), having no other soul and distinct from
the body. (7) The man who knows the Self, existing in the body, as described above is never
tainted by the modes of Prakrti, though abiding in Prakrti, established as he is in Me (the
supreme Spirit). (8) The mind of the man who daily worships Me with reverence through (the
performance of) his own duty (as enjoined by the Sastras), expecting nothing (from Me), is
gradually purified, O king ! (9) He whose mind is purified dissociates himself from the world
of matter and, attaining true wisdom, enjoys (eternal) peace, which is the same as My
equipoised state and is also known by the name of Brahma (the Absolute) or final
beatitude.(10) He who knows this immutable Self as ifit were unconcerned, though presiding
over the body, the senses of perception, the organs of action and the mind, attains
blessedness. (11)
दृष्टासु wag विपत्सु सूरयो न विक्रियन्ते मयि बद्धसौहदा: 122!
सम: समानोत्तममध्यमाधम: सुखे च ga च जितेन्द्रियाशाय: |
मयोपक्कप्ताख्रिळलाकप्तयुतो विधत्स्व वीराखिललोकरक्षणम् 123 |
sa: प्रजापालनमेव wat यत्साम्पराये सुकृतात् षष्ठमंशम्।
हर्तान्यथा हृतपुण्य: प्रजानामरक्षिता करहारोऽघमत्ति 12% |
एवं द्विजाग्र्यानुमतानुवृत्तधर्मप्रधानोऽन्यतमोऽवितास्या: |
eat कालेन गृहोपयातान् द्रष्टासि सिद्धाननुरक्तलोक: 1241
at च a कञ्चन मानवेन्द्र वृणीघ्र तेऽहं गुणशीलयन्तित: |
Transmigration takes place only of the subtle body—which is made of the five subtle
elements, the senses and the deities presiding over the same anda reflection of the Spirit—
and which is distinct from the Spirit. Enlightened souls who have conceived a strong
attachment to Me never give way to the morbid feelings of joy and grief, when they meet with
affluent or adverse circumstances. (12) Viewing the exalted, the middling and the vile alike
and balanced in joy and sorrow, and having conquered the senses and the mind (therefore),
O valiant monarch, protect all the worlds with the help and co-operation of all the people
(ministers and others) made available by Me. (13) Protection of the people is the only way
to the salvation of a ruler ; for thereby he gains hereafter one-sixth of the merit (earned by
the people); while he, on the other hand, who fails to protect the people and yet levies taxes
on them, forfeits his merits and eats sin. (14) Thus, mainly devoted to the sacred duties
