476 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 10

HAAKAAHHCHACAHSESEHHKOLHAKNE HEL SEK HHAEEK KEL EE REACHES EEEELEKEELOCEE CEE EHRERL EER HESS HH

by you, O valiant monarch, by correcting me or teaching a lesson to me, who behave like
a lunatic, a sot or a dunce, even though established in my own Self. And if | am (really)
stupid or drunk, giving alesson to me will be (as unprofitable and preposterous as) grinding

flour. (13) sie ठवाच

एतावदनुवादपरिभाषया verte मुनिवर उपशमशील उपरतानात्म्यनिमित्त उपभोगेन कर्मारब्धं
व्यपनयन् राजयानमपि तथोवाह।१४। स चापि पाण्डवेय सिन्धुसौवीरपतिस्तत्त्वजिज्ञासायां
सम्यक्श्रद्धयाधिकृताधिकारस्तद्धृदयग्रन्थिमोचनं द्विजवच आश्रुत्य बहुयोगग्रन्थसम्मतं त्वरयावरुह्य
शिरसा पादमूलमुपसृत: क्षमापयन् विगतनृपदेवस्मय Tare! १५ |
Sri Suka continued : Having made this brief reply inthe form ofa bare statement of facts,
the great sage (Bharata)—who was tranquil by nature and in whom the cause (in the shape
of ignorance) for identification with the body had (altogether) ceased—bore the palanquin
even as before in order to exhaust the stock of Karma which had already begun to bear fruit,
by reaping its consequences. (14) On hearing the reply of the Brahmana, which was capable
of resolving the knot (of ignorance) existing in one’s heart, and was (at the same time) borne
out by many a work on Self-knowledge, the said ruler of the territories of Sindhu and Sauvira
too, who had by virtue of (his) genuine faith acquired the (necessary) qualification for
enquiring into the Truth, quickly alighted (from his conveyance) and, asking forgiveness (for
his fault) and approaching (touching) the soles of his feet with his head, spoke (as follows),
completely rid of his pride of sovereignty :— (15)
कस्यासि gaat इहापि mem क्षेमाय नश्चेदसि नोत शुक्ल:।१६॥
नाहं विशङ्कं सुसाजवज्रान FIT यमस्य दण्डात्।

वचांसि चोगग्रथितानि uit न a: क्षमन्ते मनसापि wae
we wae: किमिहारणं तत् साक्षाद्धरि ज्ञानकलावतीर्णम्।१९।
स 8 भवाँल्लोकनिरीक्षणार्थमव्यंक्तलिङ्गो विचरत्यपिस्वित्।

योगेश्वराणां गतिमन्धबुद्धि met विचक्षीत गृहानुवन्ध:। २०॥

“Who are you, that go about incognito and wear the sacred thread (a distinguishing mark)
of the twice-born ? If you are an Avadhita (one who has shaken off all worldly feeling and
obligation), which (of the well-known Avadhitas, such as the divine sage Dattatreya and
others) may you be ? (Again,) whose son are you and born at what place, and wherefore
are you here ? If (you have come here) for our good, are you not the sage Kapila (who is
Sattva personified) ? (16) | fear neither the thunderbolt of Indra (the lord of paradise) nor the
trident of Lord Siva (the three-eyed) nor (even) the rod (of punishment) of Yama (the god of
retribution) nor (again) the weapons of the fire-god, the sun-god, the moon-god, the wind-
god and Kubera (the lord of riches); but | am terribly afraid of showing disrespect to the
Brahmana race. (17) Tell me (all) this, (as to who you are) roaming about as you do like a
dunce, with your greatness in the shape of profound wisdom fully disguised, free from
attachment and possessing infinite glory. Your words which are replete with Self-Knowledge,
