Dis. 23] BOOK TEN 203

EMA AREER ERSTE aH SLES EEE ET eSERERE RES CET न ESHER ERTS SE ETH E SER ETHER

अथ त्रयोविंशोऽध्याय:

Discourse XXill

Redemption of the wives of some Brahmanas engaged in a sacrifice
गोप Dy:
wa wa. महावीर्य कृष्ण दुष्टनिबर्हण । एषा 4 बाधते क्षुन्नस्तच्छान्तिं कर्तुंमर्हथ:। १।
The cowherd boys said: 0 Balarama, the delighter of souls and possessed of

extraordinary valour, O Krsna, the exterminator of the wicked, this hunger is actually
pinching us; (therefore) be pleased to appease it. (1)
AYE उवाच

इति विज्ञापितो गोपैर्भवान् देवकीसुत: । भक्ताया विप्रभार्याया: प्रसीदन्निदमब्रवीत्। 21

wa wa ब्राह्मणा ब्रह्मवादिन: । सत्रमाङ्गिरसं नाम ured स्वर्गकाम्यया। ३।

त्त्र गत्वौदनं गोपा याचतास्मद्विसर्जिता: । कीर्तयन्तो भगवत आर्यस्य मम चाभिधाम्।४।

इत्यादिष्टा भगवता गत्वायाचन्त A तथा | कृताञ्जलिपुटा विप्रान् दण्डवत् पतिता भुवि। ५॥

हे भूमिदेवा: yo कृष्णस्यादेशकारिण: | प्राप्ताञ्जानीत भद्रं वो गोपान् नो रामचोदितान्। ६1

गाश्चारयन्तावविदूर ओदनं रामाच्युतौ oat लषतो बुभुक्षितौ।
wife ओदनमर्थिनोर्यदि set च at wea धर्मवित्तमा:। ७ ।

दीक्षाया: पशुसंस्थाया: सौत्रामण्याश्च सप्तमा: | अयत्र दीक्षितस्यापि नान्नमश्नन् हि दुष्यति। ८ ।

इति ते भगवद्याच्ञा शृण्वन्तोऽपि न शुश्रुवु: । क्षुद्राशा भूरिकर्माणो बालिशा वृद्धमानिन:। ९ ।

देश: काल: पृथग् द्रव्यं मन्त्रतन्त्रत्विजोऽग्नव: । देवता यजमानश्च क्रतुर्धर्मश्च यन्मय:। १०॥

तं ब्रह्म WH साक्षाद् भगवन्तमधोक्षजम् । मनुष्यदृष्ट्या दुष्प्रज्ञा ceed न मेनिरे। ११।

न ते चदोमिति प्रोचुर्न नेति च utero । गोपा निराशा: प्रत्येत्य तथोचु: कृष्णरामयो: । १२॥

तदुपाकर्ण्य भगवान् प्रहस्य जगदीश्वर: । व्याजहार पुनर्गोपान् दर्शयँल्लौकिकीं गतिम्। १३1

at ज्ञापयत पलीभ्य: ससंकर्षणमागतम् | दास्यन्ति काममन्नं व: स्निग्धा मय्युषिता धिया। ex!

Sri Suka resumed: Thus requested by the cowherd boys, Lord Sri Krsna (the
Son of Devaki), who sought to shower His grace on certain Brahmana matrons devoted
to Him, spoke as follows:—(2) “Repair to the sacrificial hall where certain Brahmanas,
who are expositors of the Vedas, are actually conducting a sacrificial session, known
by the name of Angirasa with a desire to ascend to heaven (after death). (3) Arriving
there, O cowherd boys, as despatched by us, and mentioning the name of my venerable
brother as well as my own, ask some cooked rice of them.” (4) Thus instructed by
the Lord, they went and solicited the Brahmanas as directed with joined palms and
lying prostrate on the ground (in the following words):—{5) “O Brahmanas (lit., gods
on the earth), listen to us! Know us, cowherd boys, to be the servants of Sri Krsna
arrived (here) as directed by Balarama. May Good betide you ! (6) Pasturing their cows
not very far (from this place) and stricken with hunger, Balarama and Sri Krsna (the
immortal Lord) long to have boiled rice from you. Give Them rice, O Brahmanas, when
They (earnestly) ask for it, provided you have it and if you possess (any) reverence
for Them, foremost as you are of (all) knowers of Dharma (the principles of
