Dis. 4] BOOK FOUR © - 305.

SEALE EEA AAA HEH LTE ETERS LENHART EEE HEA eee EE १.३.३.७.८.६.७.२.३.३.७.३.३.३.३.३.३.३.३.३.३.३..६.॥

yellow piece of linen, closed Her eyes and resorted to the device of shedding the body after
the manner of the Yogis. (24) Having steadied herself in a squatting posture, she brought
the Prana and Apana airs on the same level (at the navel) and forcing the Udana* air
upwards from the mystical circle at the navel, held itin the region of the heart along with the
intellect. Thereafter the irreproachable lady drew the air thus held in the-region of the heart
to the middle of her eyebrows through her throat. (25) Thus intending to drop her body—
which had been lovingly placed on the lap more than once by Lord Siva (the most adored
even of exalted souls)—as a mark of displeasure against Daksa (her father), the strong-
willed lady summoned the presence of air and fire in her limbs through (deep) concentration
of mind. (26) Thereafter Satiwas so completely absorbed in enjoying with her mind the honey
of the lotus-feet of her lord (Bhagavan Sankara), the Preceptor of the whole world, that she
perceived none else. She was thereby rid of the last traces of impurity (in the shape of the
consciousness that she was a daughter of Daksa) and her body was soon ablaze with the
fire produced by deep meditation. (27)

तत्पश्यतां खे भुवि चाद्भुतं महद् हाहेति वाद: सुमहानजायत |
हन्त fin cama देवी जहावसून् केन सती प्रकोपिता ic
जहावसून् यद्बिमताऽऽत्मजा सती मनस्विनी मानमभीक्ष्णमर्हति । २९।
सोऽयं दुर्मर्षहृदयो ब्रह्मध्रुकू च लोकेऽपकीर्तिं महतीमवाप्स्यति |
यदङ्गजां स्वाँ पुरुषद्बिडुद्यतां न प्रत्यषेधन्मृतयेऽपराधत: 1301

There ensued in the heavens as well as on the earth a tremendous uproar among those
who witnessed this most extraordinary event : "Alas ! angered by Daksa (her own father),
Goddess Sati, the beloved spouse of the most adorable Divinity (Lord Siva), has given up
the ghost ! (28) Ah, look at the enormous wickedness of this lord of created beings, who is
ihe father of all these mobile and immobile creatures, and slighted by whom Sati, his own
high-souled daughter, gave up her life—Sati, who ever deserved honour at his hands ! (29)
Possessed of a jealous heart and an enemy of the Supreme Spirit, he will incur great infamy
in the world. People will say that this Siva-hater did not forbid his own begotten child when
she was preparing to die because of the ill-treatment received from him !" (30)

aid जने सत्या दृष्टासुत्यागमद्भुतम्।दक्षे तत्पार्षदा इहन्तुमुदतिष्ठन्नुदायुधा: 1381
तेषामापततां वेगं निशाम्य भगवान् भृगु: । यज्ञघ्नघ्नेने यजुषा efor जुहाव ह ।३२॥
अध्वर्युणा हूयमाने देवा उत्पेतुरोजसा । ॠभवो नाम तपसा सोमं प्राप्ता: PRAT: 133 |

erga: wd wan: सहगुह्यका:। हन्यमाना दिशो भेजुरुशद्भिर्व्रह्मतेजसा ।३४॥
इति श्रीमद्भागवते महापुराणे पारमहंस्यां संहितायां चतुर्थस्कन्धे सतीदेहोत्सर्गो नाम चतुर्थोऽध्याय: ।४॥

While a people were observing thus Sati's attendants, who saw the wonderful self-
mmolation rose with uplifted weapons to kill Daksa. (31) Seeing the vehemence of their
onrush, the worshipful Bhrgu poured oblations into the fire known by the name of Daksinagni,
reciting the text of the Yajurveda possessing the efficacy of killing those who are out to wreck
a sacrifice. (32) While the sage Bhrgu (the priest officiating at the sacrifice) was pouring
oblations, heavenly beings called the Rbhus, who had attained to (the sphere of) the moon-
god by dint of their austere penance, rose (from the sacrificial pit) in thousands with great

* Fora clear conception of these airs, vide the foot-note below Ill vi. 9 (p. 175).
