642 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA ail Dis. 19

श्रीरुक उवाच
QW मार्गशिरे usd योषिद्धर्तुरनुज्ञया ! आरभेत anise सार्वकामिकमादित: । २ |
निशम्य मरुतां जन्म ब्राह्मणाननुमन्त्य च । स्नात्वा Use Ue वसीतालङ्कृताम्बरे ।
पूजयेत्प्रातराशात्प्रागभ्भगवन्तं frat ag) ३ ।
a ते far पूर्णकाम नमोऽस्तु ते। महाविभूतिपतये नम: सकलसिद्धये x |
यथा त्वं कृपया Yen तेजसा महिनौजसा । जुष्ट ga गुणै: सर्वैस्ततोऽसि भगवान् प्रभु: । ५ ।
विष्णुपत्नि महामाये महापुरुषलक्षणे । प्रीयेथा मे महाभागे लोकमातर्नमोऽस्तु ते । ६ ।

Sri Suka replied : A wife should start observing this vow, which is calculated to grant
all one's desires, from the very first day of the bright fortnight of (the month of) Margasirsa
with the permission of her husband. (2) Having listened to the story of the birth of the Maruts
(the forty-nine wind-gods) and (duly) consulted the Brahmanas, she should after cleaning
her teeth and finishing her bath cover herself with a pair of white pieces of cloth and adorn
herself (with ornaments). She should (then) worship the Lord along with His (divine Consort)
Sri (the goddess of beauty and prosperity) before her breakfast (and pray:) (3) "Whatever
You already have is enough for You, (absolutely) unconcerned as You are, O Lord whose
desire is (ever) sated ! My obeisance be to You, the Lord of Mahalaksmi (who embodies in
Herself the highest glory and fortune) ! ! Hail to You, the Abode of all mystic powers ! (4) You
are fully endowed with compassion, fortune, glory, majesty, virility and all other excellences,
O Lord; You are therefore the almighty Ruler. (5) O (divine) Consort of Lord Visnu, O
Embodiment of marvellous powers, possessing as You do the characteristics of the
Supreme Person, may You be pleased with me, O highly blessed one. (My) obeisance be
to You, O Mother of the universe !" (6)

ॐ नमो भगवते महापुरुषाय महानुभावाय महाविभूतिपतये we महाविभूतिभिर्बलि-
मुपहराणीति अनेनाहरहर्मन्रेण विष्णोरावाहनार्घ्यपाद्योपस्पर्शनस्नानवासउपव्रीतविभूषणगन्ध-
पुष्पधूपदीपोपहाराद्युपचारांश्च समाहित उपहरेत् । ७।

ॐ नमो भगवते महापुरुषाय महाविभूतिपतये स्वाहेति । ८ ।

fa विष्णुं च वरदावाशिषां प्रभवावुभो । भक्त्या सम्पूजयेन्नित्यं यदीच्छेत्सर्वसम्पद: । ९ |

t भक्तिप्रह्णेण चेतसा । ayant जपेन्मन्रं तत: स्तोत्रमुदीरयेत् । १०॥
"Hail to Lord Visnu (the Supreme Person), denoted by the mystical syllable OM and
possessed of the highest glory, the Spouse of Goddess Mahalaksmi ! Let me offer worship
to You along with Your highest potencies (Goddess Laksmi and others) !" While repeating
this sacred text the worshipper should offer everyday to Lord Visnu with aconcentrated mind
(loving) invocation, water to wash His hands and feet and rinse His mouth and water for His
bath, a pair of pieces of linen to cover His Body, a sacred thread and ornaments, sandal-
paste, flowers, burning incense, light, food and other articles of worship. (7) Out of the food
left after being offered to the Lord one should pour twelve oblations into the sacred fire-while
repeating the following prayer:—“Hail to Lord Visnu (the Supreme Person), denoted by the
mystical syllable OM, the Spouse of Goddess Mahdlaksmi ! । offer this oblation to Him-!!" (8)
One should duly worship with devotion everyday Goddess Sriand (Her Consort) Lord Visnu,
both of whom are disposed to confer boons (on Their devotees) and yield one's desired
blessings in an abundant degree, if one is desirous of having all kinds of fortune. (9) (Nay,)

one should fall prostrate on the ground with a mind humble through devotion, repeat the
aforementioned sacred text ten times and (then) utter the following hymn:—{10)
