394 . SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 23

DHLEAAKE SHAH EEHEHHRE क EEEHELEHEEEEE ERED क्तैदा AEE EEEEEEEERE EEE EEE tS ete hha eh

Uninterruptedly observing his rules of self-discipline there too, he embarked on (a course
of) severe asceticism, highly approved of by anchorites, with the same earnestness as he
had erstwhile evinced in the conquest of his own ancestral dominion. (4) Subsisting on
bulbs, roots and fruits (to begin with), he ate dried leaves for sometime, contented himself
with water alone for some fortnights and thereafter lived on air (alone). (5) Leading the life
of a hermit, the dauntless Prihu basked in the heat of five fires (one in each of the four
quarters with the sun shining overhead) in summer, exposed himself to hard showers during
the rains, stood immersed in water up to his neck in the last two months of winter and slept
on the bare ground (all the year round). (6) Practising forbearance with (strict) control over
his speech and senses, he observed (a vow of) complete celibacy, controlled his vital airs
and did the highest form of austerity, seeking (thereby) to please Sri Krsna. (7) His (stock
of) Karma having been burntas a result of thatasceticism, gradually developed to perfection,
and his mind (thus) purged of all impurities, he thoroughly subdued his senses and mind by
controlling the breath and was (thereby) able to cut asunder the bonds of his Vasanas (latent
desires). (8) Prthu (the foremost of men) now adored the Supreme Person through that very
Yoga (mode of worship) which the divine sage Sanatkumara had taught him as the best
means of realizing the Self. (9) Ever engaged in duties sacred to the Lord and striving with
utmost reverence the pious soul developed exclusive devotion to the Lord, who is no other
than Brahma (the Absolute). (10)
तस्यानया भगवत: परिकर्मशुद्धसत्त्वात्मनस्तदनु «6 deroagea ।
ज्ञानं विरक्तिमदभून्निशितेन येन चिच्छेद संशयपदं निजजीव्रकोशाम् ee!
छिन्नान्यधीरधिगतात्मगतिर्निरीहस्तत्तत्यजेऽच्छिनदिदं aT येन ।
wea योगगतिभिर्यतिरप्रमत्तो यावद्गदाग्रजकथासु wat न कुर्यात्।१२।
एवं स वीरप्रवर: संयोज्यात्मानमात्मनि । ब्रह्मभूतो दृढं काले तत्याज स्वं कलेवरम् 1231
सम्पीड्य पायुं पार्णिभ्यां वायुमुत्सारयन् Fa: । नाभ्यां कोष्ठेषवस्थाप्य हृदुर:कण्ठशीर्षणि । १४॥
उत्सर्पयंस्तु तं मूर्छि क्रमेणावेश्य नि:स्पृह: । वायुं वायो झक्षितौ कायं तेजस्तेजस्ययूयुजत् । १५॥
खान्याकाशे द्रवं तोये यथास्थानं विभागश: । क्षितिमम्भसि तत्तेजस्यदो वायौ नभस्यमुम् ILE |
Frag मनस्तानि तन्मात्रेषु यथोद्भवम्।भभूतादिनामून्युत्कृष्य महत्यात्मनि सन्दधे । १७।
तं सर्वगुणविन्यासं जीवे मायामये न्यधात्। तं चानुशयमात्मस्थमसावनुशायी पुमान्।
ज्ञानवैराग्यवीर्येण स्वरूपस्थोऽजहात्प्रभु: 1221
His mind having been transformed into pure Sattva (Sattva unmixed with Rajas and
Tamas) through worship of the Lord, he attained wisdom, coupled with dispassion and
sharpened by that devotion, which had been supplemented by constant and perfect
remembrance of the same Lord; and through such wisdom he was able to tear off the veil
of egotism (which conceals the true nature of the Jiva), the origin of all doubt (and
misapprehension). (11) Having got rid of his self-identification with the body and realized
the true nature of the Self, and freed of all cravings he gave up ( the pursuit of) even that
wisdom by which he had been able to tear off the veil of egotism. For, so long as a Striver
does not take delight in the stories of Sri Krsna (who had Gada for His elder brother), he will
not cease to be led astray by the (minor) achievements of Yoga (concentration of mind). (12)
Having thus irrevocably fixed his mind on the Supreme Spirit and become one with the
Infinite, that great hero cast off his body at the (proper) time. (13) Closely pressing the anus
with his heels and slowly forcing up the breath (from the Muladhara or the mystical circle
situated in the space between the generative organ and the anus), he held it (first) at the
