Dis. 17 ] BOOK NINE 65

ल्न्वि वज व A ARTEL EERE AYE LEEAAR HII AHHH AALS HAT

ये मानं मेऽनुगृह्णन्तो वीरवन्तमकर्त माम् 134!
एष oa: git dt देवरातस्तमन्वित। अन्ये चाष्टकहारीतजयक्रतुमदादय: । ३६॥
एवं कौशिकगोत्रं तु विश्चामित्रै: पृथग्विधम्। प्रवरान्तरमापन्नं तद्धि चैवं प्रकल्पितम् । ३७1

Gadhi's son was (the celebrated sage) Vigwamitra possessed of extraordinary
effulgence, like a blazing fire, who, shedding his Ksatriyahood, attained Brahmanical glory
through (his) asceticism. (28) And Vigwamitra had one hundred and one sons, O protector
of men! The fifty-first son (who formed the middle of the whole lot, was (named)
Madhucchanda; (hence) they (all) came to be known as Madhucchandas. (29) Adopting
Ajigarta's son Sunahgepa, also known as Devarata, a scion of the sage Bhrgu, as his own
son, the sage Vigwamitra said to his sons, "Let this boy be treated as the eldest (of you
all)."(30) He was the same Sunahgepa (a descendant of Bhrgu) who was sold (by his
parents) to be used as a human victim in the sacrificial performance of King HarigScandra*
(Having sought the protection of ViSwamitra,) he was freed from bond in the shape ofa cord
by extolling (as instructed by Viswamitra) gods such as the lords of creation. (Thus) saved
by the gods (Varuna and others) in a sacrificial ‘performance meant to propitiate the god
Varuna, the ascetic boy became celebrated among the scions of Gadhi by the name of
Devarata. (31-32) The (fifty) sons of Viswamitra, older than Madhucchanda, did not approve
of Sunahgepa being treated as the eldest. Full of anger, the sage (Vigwamitra) cursed them,
"Become Mlecchas (barbarians), 0 evil ones!" (33) Alongwith his fifty (younger) brothers—
so the tradition goes—Madhucchanda then said: “We shall abide by whatever you enjoin on
us." (34) They (accordingly) took Sunahsepa, a seer of Vedic Mantras, as the eldest (of them
all) and said to him, "Indeed we are (all) your followers (younger brothers)." (Gratified at this)
Vigwamitra said to these (latter) sons, “You will be blessed with sons—you who have made
me a father of worthy sons by conceding my superiority (acceptting my command). (35) This
valiant Devaratais one of you (as good a scion of Kusika as you), O scions of Kusika! (Hence)
follow him (as an elder brother)." There were other sons too of Viswamitra— -Astaka, Harita,
Jaya, Kratuman and so on. (36) Thus, of course, the line of Kusgika was ramified into various
off-shoots due to the sons of Vigwamitra. And it acquired a different Pravara (branch name,
viz., that of Devarata) inasmuch as it was given a new shape (with Devarata as the eldest
son of Vigwamitra). (37)

Thus ends the sixteenth discourse in Book Nine of the great and
glorious Bhagavata-Purana, otherwise known
as the Paramahamsa-Samhita.

वन्र
PISS ier

११११ ११

* Vide verses 20 and 21 of Oiscourse VII above.
