Dis. 13 ] BOOK FIVE 485

त् or तं Beh ee i क ह Re te eh ine ha ee ee oe डो को niet re 8 inti Be tt 8 eR:

a strayed sheep. (2) Harassed by cruel gnats and mosquitoes, in a place dense with
numerous creepers, grass and shrubs, they witness here an imaginary city in the sky, while
at other places they behold a fleeting ogre appearing like a firebrand. (3) Looking upon a
habitat, water and wealth as their own, they run about here and there in the forest, O
Rahugana; while at some places they cannot distinguish the quarters smoky with the dust
raised by a whirlwind, their eyes being blinded with dust. (4) The (shrill) notes of unseen
crickets jarring upon their ears and their mind disquieted with the hooting of owls, they betake
themselves fo unholy trees when oppressed with hunger; while at some places they run after
a mirage (in order to quench their thirst). (5) Here they march towards streams without water
and, when starving, they seek food from one another; there they meet with a forest
conflagration and get scorched with fire; while at a third they give way to despair when about
to be killed by Yaksas (a species of demigods ruled over by Kubera; the god of riches). (6)
When dispossessed of their wealth by (other) heroic men, they feel depressedin spirits; nay,
grieving and getting confused, they faint away. And, entering an imaginary city somewhere,
they rejoice (there) for an hour or so as though (quite) happy. (7) Desirous of climbing up a
hill, they sometimes proceed in that direction to some distance; but, (the soles of) their feet
being pierced with thorns and gravel, they sit down like one sad at heart. Burdened with (the
maintenance of) a large family (but unable to support them) and tormented with hunger
(lit.,the gastric fire), they indeed get angry every moment with their own people. (8) Cast (to
their fate) in the forest now and devoured by a serpent belonging to the species known as
the boa constrictor, they have no consciousness left in them; and now bitten by poisonous
creatures (snakes etc.), and fallenin some covered (and therefore deceptive) well, deprived
of their sight, remain lying down there in darkness. (9) Sometimes seeking after honey
(stored by bees), they are tormented by bees and feel frustrated in their attempt. (Even) if
they achieve (some) success in that direction with great hardship, others forcibly rob them
of the booty and (while they are engaged in an encounter with these) yet others snatch away
the prize. (10) Andatsome places they are unable to ward off (provide against) cold, the sun,
storm and rain and sit down (helpless); while elsewhere they sell between themselves
whatever commodity they have with them, and make enemies of one another, on the
contrary, because of their greed. (11) On some occasions, when impovarished and deprived
ofa bed, a mat etc., to squat on, a dwelling and conveyance (for a pleasure trip) in that forest,
they ask these of another. But, on failing to secure the desired object, they cast a (wistful)
look on others’ property and incur ignominy. (12)
—_ eee q स्ना

अध्वन्यमुष्मिन्नुरुकृच्छ्रवित्तवाधापसरगैर्विहरन् विपन्न:। १३ ॥

तांस्तान् विपन्नान् a fe ax तत्र विह्यं ard परिगृह्य सार्थ:।

sadist न कश्चिदत्र वीराध्वन: पारमुपैति योगम्।१४॥

qe शयीरन तु तद्व्रजन्ति यन्न्यस्तदण्डो गतवैरोऽभियाति।१५॥।

In spite of their feeling of animosity having been aggravated by their attraction for one
another's wealth, they enter into marital relations with one another and, while sporting along
this road, are reduced to a miserable condition through great many hardships, monetary
losser and (other) calamities. (13) Leaving behind all their deceased companions at different
stages of their journey and taking with them every new-born babe, the company marches

onward and onward. None of this company has returned (from the journey) to this day, O
brave monarch, nor does anyone take to (the practice of) Yoga (methods of God-
