Dis. 17} BOOK FOUR 365

SRESELCHK AHHH ERHKEREKESLESAE NER EL EE ECEREEAHE HEH eee Se SF A TI ee eee ee

this primordial monarch to be no other than Lord Visnu (who holds a discus in one of His
hands for a weapon) and will sing songs of His fame. (21) In obedience to Him as a supreme
king. Earth will become a cow for Him (to milk the desirable items of wealth for the good of
all). As a powerful patriarch He will provide for the livelihood of the people. He will smash the
mountains, even as Indra did, with the points of His bow and level the earth in mere sport.(22)
When He roams over the earth like a lion with his tail thrown up, twanging His bow made of
the horns of a cow and a goat, and irresistible in encounter, all workers of iniquity will hide
themselves here and there. (23) He will perform as many as a hundred horse-sacrifices at
the source of the Saraswati river (in Brahmavarta) and in the course of the last sacrifice Indra
(the king of the gods), himself a performer of one hundred sacrifices, will steal away the
(sacrificial) horse. (24) In the garden attached to His own palace, He will meet the divine
Sanatkuméara (the master of spiritual knowledge) alone. Prthu will worship him with devotion
and service and attain that pure and perfect enlightenment by which they realize the
Supreme Absolute.(25) Prthu's warlike power and influence are unlimited and are known far
and wide. A large volume of sayings, songs and sagas and stories will grow around Him (in
the different parts of the earth) and He will hear them (sung and recounted) wherever He will
go (in the course of His wanderings). (26) The vast orbit of His power knows no force of
opposition, His burning spirit will enable Him to destroy the enemies of the people by
conquering the quarters. He will be a (matchless) Master of the earth and His mighty glory
will serve as the theme of songs for the chiefs of the gods and demons to sing." (27)

Thus ends the sixteenth discourse in Book Four of the great and
glorious Bhagavata-Purana, otherwise known as
the Paramahamsa-Samhita.

—-
PIRES Ser

अथ सप्तदशोऽध्याय:

Discourse XVII
King Prthu gets angry with Earth and the latter extois him

मेत्रेय उवाच
एवं स भगवान् वैन्य: ख्यापितो गुणकर्मभि: | छन्दयामास तान् कामै: प्रतिपूज्याभिनन्द्य च । १ ।
ब्राह्मणप्रमुखान् वर्णान् भृत्यामात्यपुरोधस: | पोराञ्जानपदान् श्रेणी: प्रकृती: समपूजयत् 2 ।

Maitreya continued : Thus glorified by recounting his virtues and exploits, the
celebrated Lord Prthu gratified the panegyrists by honouring them with presents of their
choice and applauding them.(1) He (further) greeted with due honour (members of) all the
(four) Varnas (grades of society), from the Brahmana downwards, nay, his servants,
ministers and family priests, the citizens as well as the inhabitants of his entire state,
people following the various trades and the (various) functionaries and officials (of the
state). (2)

विदुर उवाच
कस्माद्दधार गोरूपं धरित्री बहुरूपिणी । यां दुदोह पृथुस्तत्र को वत्सो दोहनं च किम् । ३ ।
प्रकृत्या विषमा देवी कृता तेन समा Haida मेध्यं हयं देव: कस्य हेतोरपाहरत्। ४ |
