३०० SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 46

- SEPARA RAEN EE hee eee keer hee eMeLeeteeeeeeer enn १२११ ११ eS het eee

back after killing Karnsa, the enemy of the Yadus, in the midst of an (open) assembly. (35)
Grieve not, O highly blessed ones; you will (at no distant date) find Sri Krsna by your side.
He dwells in the heart of (all) created beings (even) as fire (is latent) in wood. (36) Indeed
none is dear or unwelcome to Him, whois not identified witha (particular) body. Noris anyone
superior or inferior nor even unequal in His eyes, He being the same (to all). (37) He has
neither father nor mother, neither wife nor sons etc.; none is His own or alien to Him; nor can
a body, much less birth or action be attributed to Him. Even as such He descends in high,
low and mixed species (of life) in the world for the sake of pastime with a view to protecting
the virtuous. (38-39) Though untouched by the (three) Gunas (modes of Prakrti), He
assumes the qualities of Sattva, Rajas and Tamas, and, sporting with them, though (really)
transcending them, the birthless Lord evolves, maintains and absorbs the universe by
means of these Gunas here (in the realm of Prakrti). (40) (Just) as when looked at with a
revolving eye (by a revolving person) the earth is seen rotating or while the mind (alone) is
the doer, the soul is recognized as such due to its identification with the mind, so is God held
to be responsible for the creation etc., of the universe, although, as a matter of fact, the same
is being done by the Gunas. (41) He, the divine Sri Krsna (the alleviator of the distress of all)
is certainly not only your son; for He is the Son, the (very) Self, the Father, the Mother, (Nay,)
the Ruler of all. (42) (Nay,) nothing which is seen or heard of, has gone by or is (still) existent
or which is (yet) to come, which is immobile or mobile, big or small, is really worth naming
(when considered) apart from God; for He alone is everything, He alone is true. (43)

एवं fa सा ब्रुवतोर्व्यतीता नन्दस्य कृष्णानुचरस्य राजन्।

दघ्नश्च निर्मन्थनशब्दमिश्रितो निरस्यते येन दिशाममङ्गलम् ve!

The night slipped past Nanda and Uddhava (Sri Krsna's servant) while they were thus
chatting, O king | Quitting their bed (towards the close of night), kindling their lights and duly
worshipping (on the threshold etc.), the deities presiding over their house the cowherdesses
(of Vraja) began to churn their curds. (44) With rows of bangles round their wrists pulling the
cords (that revolved the churning-staff), their cheeks shining with (bright) ear-rings (that
rocked with the motion of their arms), and their faces painted with red saffron (a product of
the Balkh territory), the Gopis looked very charming with gems (in their girdle etc.),
brightened by the lights, their hips, breasts and necklaces shaking (all the time). (45) (Now)
rose to the heavens the music of the women of Vraja, who were celebrating at the pitch of
their voice the exploits of Sri Krsna (the lotus-eyed Lord), blended with the (gurgling) noise
produced by the churning of curds, both of which combined to drive away the evil forces
Operating in the (four) quarters. (46)

भगवत्युदिते सूर्ये नन्दद्दारि व्रजौकस: eg रथं शातकौम्भं कस्यायमिति चाब्रुवन् ॥४७॥
अक्रूर आगत: किं वा य: कंसस्यार्थसाधक: । येन नीतो मधुपुरीं कृष्ण: कमललोचन: vc!
fe साधयिष्यत्यस्माभिर्भर्तु: प्रेतस्य निष्कृतिम् sft aint वदन्तीनामुद्धवोऽगात् कृताह्निक: 1691

इति श्रीमद्भागवते महापुराणे पारमहंस्यां संहितायां दशमस्कन्धे पूर्वार्धे नन्द्चोकापनयनं नाम षट्चत्वारिंशोऽध्याय: we

Seeing a chariot plated with gold at the portals of Nanda, now that the glorious sun-god
