94 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA Dis. 24]

ELSPRS EARS ECL ER EASE AA LEA ESE AEE LEE LEAL SESS ० १ २२०१ ७ RES SEL eh ESE

मिश्रकेश्यामप्सरसि वृकादीन् वत्सकस्तथा। तक्षपुष्करशालादीन् दुर्वाक्ष्याँ वृक आदधे । ४३॥
सुमित्रार्जुनपालादीञ्छ्मीकात्तु सुदामिनी। ages कर्णिकायां वै ॠतधामजयावपि wx

Again, Vrddhasarma, a scion of Karissa, duly espoused Srutadeva, of whom was bom
Dantavaktra, who was (first) born of Diti (as the demon Hiranyaksa), because cursed by
the sages (Sanaka and others). (37) And Dhrstaketu, the (then) ruler of the territory of
Kekaya, took Srutakifti to wife. His sons were Santardana and others, the five princes of
Kekaya. (38) Through Rajadhidevi (his wife) Jayasena—so the tradition goes—begot Vinda
and Anuvinda (who became rulers of Avanti); (while) Damaghosa, the king of Cedi,
accepted (for his wife) Srutasrava. (39) The latter's son was Sigupala, the story of whose
birth has already been told* Citraketu and Brhadbala were the sons of Devabhaga by his
wife Karhsa. (40) Suvira and Isuman were the two sons of Devasgrava by Karnsavati, while
Satyajit as well as Purujit were born of Kanka, through Anaka. (41) Again, Srfjaya begot
through Rastrapall Vrsa, Durmarsana and others; while Syamaka begot through Surabhimi
Harikega and Hiranyaksa, (42) Similarly, Vatsaka begot through Migrakesi—a celestial
nymph—Vrka and others; while Vrka begot through (his wife) Durvarksi, Taksa Puskara,
Sala and so on. (43) Through (her union with) Samika, again, his wife Sudamini bore
Sumitra, Arjunapala and others; while Kanka too, for his part, begot Rtadhama and Jaya. (44)

पौरवी रोहिणी भद्रा मदिरा रोचना इला। देवकीप्रमुखा आसन्पत्न्या आनकदुन्दुभे:। ४५॥
बलं गदं सारणं च दुर्मदं विपुलं ध्रुवम्। वसुदेवस्तु रोहिण्यां कृतादीनुदपादयत्।४६॥
सुभद्रो भद्रवाहश्च दुर्मदो wR va च। पौरव्यास्तनया da भूताद्या द्वादशाभवन्।४७।
नन्दोपनन्दकृतकशूराद्या मदिरात्मजा:। कौसल्या केशिनं त्वेकमसूत कुलनन्दनम्। ४८॥
रोचनायामतो जाता हस्तहेमाङ्गदादय:। इलायामुरुवल्कादीन् यदुमुख्यानजीजनत्।४९॥
विपृष्ठो धृतदेवायामेक आनकदुन्दुभे:। शान्तिदेवात्मजा राजञ्छुमप्रतिश्रुतादय:।५०॥
राजान: कल्पवर्षाद्या उपदेवासुता दश। वसुहंससुवंशाद्या: श्रीदेवायास्तु षट्सुता:। ५१॥
taf लब्धा Wa चात्र गदाद्य:। वसुदेव GAB सहदेवया।५२॥
पुरुविश्रुतमुख्यांस्तु wane wt वसूनिव। वसुदेवस्तु देवक्यामष्ट पुत्रानजीजनत्। ५३॥
कीर्तिमन्तं सुषेणं च भद्रसेनमुदारधी:। sal सम्मर्दनं भद्रं संकर्षणमहीश्चरम्।५४॥
अष्टमस्तु तयोरासीत् स्वयमेव eft किल। सुभद्रा च महाभागा तव राजन् पितामही । ५५॥
Pauravi, Rohini, Bhadra, Madira, Rocana, lla, Devaki and others (Dhrtadevat—and so
on, all sisters of Devaki) were the wives of Anakadundubhi (Vasudeva). (45) Now, Vasudeva
begot through Rohini Bala, Gada, Sarana, Durmada Vipula, Dhruva, Krta and others (46)
Bhuta, Subhadra and Bhadravaha, Durmada and also Bhadra and (seven) others—these
twelve indeed were the sons born of Pauravi. (47) Similarly Nanda, Upananda, Krtaka, Stra
and so on were the sons of Madira. Bhadra (hailing from Kosala), however, brought forth only
one son (the delight of his race), Kesi by name. (48) Through Rocana from ( the loins of)
Vasudeva appeared Hasta, Hemarigada and others; (and) through Ila he begot Uruvalka
and others, foremost among the Yadus. (49) Viprstha alone appeared from (the loins of)
Anakadundubhi through Dhrtadeva; while Srama, Pratigruta and others were the sons of
Santideva, O Parikgit ! (50) Kalpavarsa and other kings, numbering ten, were the sons of

Upadeva; while Vasu, Harhsa, Suvanéga and (three others) were the six sons of Srideva. (61)

ee
* Vide Book VII.

t Vide Verses 22-23 above.
