634 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 25

BREN OREN ONAN TORT ETH E PONE EEE शाशा R TORRE CAEN E ६9 सशङम श्र ६४६ ग Onan e nee

swallowed by Ahankara) is reduced to (its subtle state, viz.,) the quality of sound. (Even so)
the Indriyas (the products of Rajasika Ahankara) are merged in their (respective) causes
(viz., the deities presiding over them and ultimately into the Rajasika Ahankara). (24) The
causes (viz., the gods), O gentle one, are merged in their controller, the mind, which is a
product of Sattvika Ahankara (and ultimately into the Sattvika Ahankara alongwith the gods).
(Even) sound returns to (the state of) the Tamasika Ahankara (the cause of the elements)
and the mighty Tamasika Ahankara (as well as the Sattvika and Rajasika types of Anankara)
is merged in Mahat-tattva (the principle of cosmic intelligence). (25) The most powerful
Mahat-tattva (which is endowed with the potency of Jfana or knowledge and the potency of
Karma or activity) is reduced to its causes, the (three) Gunas. The latter get dissolved into
the Unmanifest (Primordial Matter) and the Unmanifest is merged in the Time-Spirit, which
has (now) ceased to operate. (26) The Time-Spirit is merged in the Cosmic Person (the
Creator of the universe), the Director of Maya; and the latter, in Me, the birthless (eternal)
Spirit. The Spirit, which is absolute (unconditioned) and is inferred by the (processes of)
creation and dissolution (of the universe as their background), stands by Itself (and does not
get merged in any other entity). (27) How could there arise any misconception, engendered
by the notion of difference, in the mind of one investigating into the Spirit as aforesaid, and
(ifit ever arose) how could it persist any more than darkness would on the appearance of the
sun in the sky ? (28) This is the process of differentiating the Spirit from Matter, which cuts
the knot of doubt and which has been set forth by me, the Knower of (the truth relating to both)
the cause and the effect, from the standpoint of evolution and involution. (29)

Thus ends the twenty-fourth discourse in Book Eleven of the great and
glorious Bhagavata-Purana, otherwise known
as the Paramahamsa-Samhita.

सि
CDODR ELLIO

319 पञ्चविंशोऽध्याय:

Discourse XXV

The operation of the three Gunas described

श्रीभगवानुवाच
गुणानामसमिश्राणां पुमान् येन यथा भवेत् । तन्मे पुरुषवर्येदमुपधारय War । १ ।
झमो दमस्तितिक्षेक्षा तप: सत्यं दया स्मृति: | तुष्टिस्त्यागोऽस्पृहा श्रद्धा ह्रीर्दयादि: स्वनिर्वृति: । २ ।
काम ईहा मदस्तृष्णा AST आशीर्भिदा सुखम् । मदोत्साहो यहा:प्रीतिर्हास्यं वीर्यं weiter: । ३ ।
क्रोधो लोभोऽनृतं हिंसा याच्ञा eer: gm: कलि: | श्ञोकमोहौ विषादार्ती निद्राऽऽशा भीरनुद्यम: । ४ |
सत्त्वस्य रजसश्चैतास्तमसश्चानुपूर्वश: । वृत्तयो वर्णितप्राया: सन्निपातमथो शृणु । ५ ।
सन्निपातस्त्वहमिति ममेत्युद्ध्र या मति: । व्यवहार: सन्निपातो प्’ग्नोपात्रॆद्रियासुथि;।प्त्ष्।
धर्मे amd च कामे च यदासौ परिनिष्ठित: । गुणार्ना सन्निकर्षोऽयं श्रद्धारतिधनावह: । ७ |
प्रवृत्तिलक्षणे fag पुमान् यर्हि गृहाश्रमे । स्वधर्मे चानुतिष्ठेत गुणानां समितिर्हि सा । ८ ।

The glorious Lord began again: (Now) learn from Me, O jewel among men, as | tell you,
how and by which of the (three) Gunas (modes of Prakrti), working independently of one
another, is man affected (1) Control of the mind and the senses, forbearance, sound
