Dis. 80 BOOK TEN 453

नजा क # 9 892 # ann esas # 928 24 2898 98 ४४ #%9घज # 9 # 2 १६28 922८ 2 ००० #.७ 2०७० १8 4

श्रीशुक FATT
कृष्णस्यासीत् सखा Hise ब्राह्मणो ब्रह्मवित्तम: | विरक्त इन्दरियार्थेषु प्रशान्तात्मा जितेन्द्रिय: । ६ ।
यदृच्छयोपपन्नेन वर्तमानो गृहाश्रमी | तस्य भार्या कुचैलस्य aa च तथाविधा । ७ |
पतिव्रता प्तिं प्राह म्लायता वदनेन सा।दरिद्रा सीदमाना सा वेपमानाभिगम्य च । ८ ।
ननु ब्रह्मम् भगवत: सखा साक्षाच्छ्य: पति: । ब्रह्मण्यश्च झरण्यश्च भगवान् सात्वतर्षभ: । |
ae महाभाग साधूनां च परायणम्।दास्यति द्रविणं भूरि सीदते ते कुटुम्बिने ।१०॥
आस्तेऽधुना द्वारवत्यां भोजवृष्ण्यन्धकेश्वर: । स्मरत: पादकमलमात्मानमपि यच्छति ।
॥ fe न्वर्थकामान् भजतो नात्यभीष्टाञ्जगद्गुरु: । ११॥

स एवं भार्यया fast बहुश: प्रार्थितो मृदु। अयं fe परमो लाभ उत्तमह्लोकदर्शनम् ez
इति सञ्जिनत्य मनसा गमनाय मतिं ca अप्यस्त्युपायनं किञ्चिद् गृहे wearin दीयताम् । १३।
याचित्वा चतुरो मुष्टीन् विप्रान् पृथुकतण्डुलान् | चैलखण्डेन तान् बद्ध्वा भत्रें प्रादादुपायनम् । १४॥
a तानादाय fase: प्रययौ geet किल । कृष्णसन्दर्शनं we कथं स्यादिति चिन्तयन् eu!

Sti Suka replied : (Pariksit),there was a certain Brahmana, who was a (great) friend
of Bhagavan Sri Krsna. He possessed true knowledge of Brahma and was free from
attachment to the objects of the senses. His mind was composed and he had full control over
his senses. (6) Although a householder, he used to remain contented with whatever he got
without effort. He was always ill-clad and his wife too had no sufficient clothing to cover her
body with. (Due to extreme poverty they seldom had a full meal and) the wife (specially)
became very feeble on account of starvation. (7) (One day) the poor and afflicted wife of the
Brahmana, who was (extremely) devoted to her husband, approached her husband with a
withering face and a trembling body, and said to him:—(8) "Adorable husband! Bhagavan
Sri Krsna, the spouse of the Goddess of Wealth, Himself is your friend. He is like a wish-
yielding tree to His devotees, the refuge of all and a great devotee of the Brahmanas. (9)
O blessed one, be pleased to approach Him, who is the resort of the righteous. When He
comes to know that you are a householder and that you are suffering from want, He will
bestow abundant wealth on you. (10) He now resides at Dwaraka as the protector of the
Bhojas, Vrsnis and Andhakas. He (is so generous that He) gives away His own Self to those
who contemplate on His lotus-feet. It is no wonder, then, that He, the Supreme Teacher of
the World, should bestow on His devotees wealth and objects of worldly enjoyment, which
are after all not very desirable things.” (11) Thus frequently and gently entreated by the wife,
the Brahmana at last agreed to the proposal; for he thought that it would give him an
opportunity of seeing Bhagavan $ri Krsna, which was a supreme gain in itself. Developing
this idea in his mind he decided to go, and addressinghis wife said, * O dear, Is there anything
in the house fit to be taken as a present ? If so, let me have it. * (12-13) The wife of the
Brahmana begged of her neighbours and secured four handfuls of parched and beaten rice,
which she tied up in a piece of rag and gave it to her lord for presentation to Sri Krsna. (14)
With those handfuls ofbeaten rice, itis said, the foremost of Brahmanas set out on his journey
to Dwaraka. His only thought on the way was how it would be possible for him to obtain a sight
of Bhagavan Sri Krsna. (15)

त्रीणि गुल्मान्यतीयाय fre: mang स द्विज: । विप्रोऽगम्यान्धकवृष्णीनां गृहेष्वच्युतधर्मिणाम् । १६।
गृहं द्वयष्टसहस्राणां महिषीणां हरेर्दिज: । विवेशैकतमं श्रीमद् ब्रह्मानन्दं गतो यथा ।१७।
a विलोक्याच्युतो दूरात् प्रियापर्यङ्कमास्थित: | सहसोत्थाय चाभ्येत्य stat पर्यग्रहीन्मुदा । १८।

