572 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 13

SHC TH TCE AR REET H KOT ECCT EMER RES ETON Es RECENTER HON गा कक न ee Eh

श्रीभगवानुवाच

एवं yt महादेव: स्वयंभूर्भूतभावन: | ध्यायमान: set नाभ्यपद्यत कर्मधी: ec!
स मामचिन्तयद् देव: प्रश्नपारतितीर्षया । तस्याहं हंसरूपेण war तदा ।१९॥
दृष्टवा मां त उपव्रज्य कृत्वा पादाभिवन्दनम् । ब्रह्माणमग्रत: Heal wy: को भवानिति 1201
इत्यहं मुनिभि: पृष्टस्तत्त्वजिज्ञासुभिस्तदा। यदवोचमहं तेभ्यस्तदुद्धव निबोध मे ।२१॥
वस्तुनो यद्यनानात्वमात्मन: प्रश्न ईदृश: t कथं घटेत वो विप्रा वक्तुर्वा मे क आश्रय: 1221
पञ्चात्मकेषु भूतेषु समानेषु च वस्तुत: । को भवानिति a: प्रश्नो वाचारम्भो ह्यनर्थक: 1231
मनसा वचसा Gea गृह्यतेऽन्यैरपीन्दियै: । अहमेव न मत्तोऽन्यदिति बुध्यध्वमञ्जसा । २४॥
गुणेष्वाविशते चेतो गुणाश्चेतसि च प्रजा: । जीवस्य देह उभयं qs मदात्मन: 1241
गुणेषु चाविशच्चित्तमभीक्ष्णे गुणसेवया। गुणाश्च चित्तप्रभवा मद्रूप उभयं त्यजेत् । २६|
जाग्नत् स्वप्न: A च गुणतो बुद्धिवृत्तय: । तासां विलक्षणो sta: साक्षित्वेन विनिश्चित: 1201
यर्हि संसृतिबन्धोऽयमात्मनो गुणवृत्तिद: | मयि तुर्येस्थितो जह्यात्त्यागस्तद्गुणचेतसाम् 1221
अहङ्कारकृतं बन्धमात्मनोऽर्थविपर्ययम् । विद्वान् निर्विद्य संसारचिन्तां तुर्ये स्थितस्त्यजेत् 1281
यावन्नानार्थधी: पुंसो न निवर्तेत युक्तिभि: । जागर्त्यपि aoa: स्वप्ने जागरणं यथा ।३०॥
असत्त्वादात्मनोऽन्येषां भावानां तत्कृता भिदा । गतयो हेतवश्चास्य मृषा स्वप्नदृशो यथा ।३१।

चो जागरे बहिरनुक्षणधर्मिणोऽर्थान् भुङ्क्ते समस्तकरणैर्हृदि तत्सदृक्षान् ।

स्वप्ने सुषुप्त उपसंहरते स एक: स्मृत्यन्वयात्तिगुणवृत्तिदृगिन्दियेशा: 1321

एवं विमृश्य गुणतो मनसस्त्र्यवस्था मन्मायया मयि कृता इति निश्चितार्था: ।

संछिद्य हार्दमनुमानसदुक्तितीक्ष्णज्ञानासिना भजत माखिलसंशायाधिम् 1331

The glorious Lord continued : Thus interrogated, Brahma (the great goa), the self-born
creator of beings, could not get, in spite of his deep thought, at the root of the question
(ignorance about the Self), his mind being taken up with his duty (of creation). (18) The said
god fixed his mind on Me with intent to get to the other side (the hidden meaning) of the
question. Then I sought his presence in the form of a swan (in order to hint at His capacity
to alienate the sense-objects from the mind just as the swan is credited with the virtue of
separating water from milk when mixed together). (19) Beholding Me and placing Brahma
at their head, they (Sanaka and others) came up to Me and, bowing at My feet, asked Me
as to who | was. (20) In these words was | interrogated on the said occasion by the sages,
keen as they were to know the Truth. (Now) hear from Me, O Uddhava, what | spoke to them
(in reply). (21) If there is unity of the substance known as the Self (and If your question relates
to the Self in Me), how can such a question on your part (as you have asked Me, calling upon
Me to specify Myself out of many) be relevant, O Brahmana sages ! Or (even) if | (proceed
to) speak (in reply), what (distinctive quality) can be My basis (for an answer) ? (22) (If, on
the other hand, it relates to My body, even then) your question as to who | am is indeed a
(mere) drill in words and (hence) meaningless, the bodies of living creatures being identical
(in substance), constituted (as they are) of the five elements, and (also) from the point of view
of ultimate reality. (23) Whatever is grasped by the mind, expressed through speech and
perceived through the faculty of vision, nay, even with the other senses is but Myself, there
iS Nothing other than Me, know this as a result of enquiry into the truth. (24) (True,) the mind
cleaves to the sense-objects and the latter getimprinted on the mind, O My sons ! The sense-

