216 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 26

HEHLLARHAHAAK ESS CLELHSEAAKALEOCOSESTEASE AERA ORE GE SESE TES ESE SSSA SER CEEEE ECO REREREEEE

slain by the powerful Balarama, he rescued the cattle of Vraja as well as the cowherds
from a forest fire. (11) Having subdued the most venomous Kaliya (a ruler of serpents)
and rid it of haughtiness, he forcibly expelled it from the pool (inhabited by it) and made
the waters of the Yamuna free from poison! (12) The love of us all, who have our abode
in Vraja, for this boy of yours, O Nanda, is such as cannot be easily given up and his
love for us (too) is quite natural. How is it? (13) A boy of seven years lifting up a big
mountain—how inconceivable is this ! It is for this reason that our suspicion is aroused,
O ruler of Vraja, with regard to your son (being God Himself). (14)

Tq उवाच

gaat मे वचो गोपा व्येतु शङ्का च वोऽर्भके । एनं कुमारमुद्दिश्व wit मे यदुवाच ह।१५॥
वर्णास्त्रय: किलास्यासन् गृह्णतोऽनुयुगं तनू:। शुक्लो रक्तस्तथा पीत इदानीं कृष्णतां गत:। १६॥
wd वसुदेवस्य क्वचिज्जातस्तवात्मज: । वासुदेव इति श्रीमानभिज्ञा: सम्प्रचक्षते। १७॥
ag सन्ति नामानि रूपाणि च सुतस्य ते । गुणकर्मानुरूपाणि तान्यहं वेद नो जना:।१८॥
एष a: श्रेय आधास्यद् गोपगोकुलनन्दन: । अनेन सर्वदुर्गाणि यूयमज्जस्तरिष्वथ। १९॥
पुरानेन व्रजपते साधवो दस्युपीडिता:। अराजके रक्ष्यमाणा जिम्युर्दस्यून् समेधिता:। २०॥
य एतस्मिन् महाभागा: प्रीतिं कुर्वन्ति मानवा:। नारयोऽभिभवन्त्वेतान् विष्णुपक्षानिवासुरा:। २१॥
Terre कुमारोऽयं नारायणसमो Wi: । श्रिया कीर्त्यनुभावेन तत्कर्मसु न विस्मय:। २२॥
इत्यद्धा मां समादिश्य गर्गे च स्वगृहं गते । मन्ये नारायणस्यांशं कृष्णमक्लिष्टकारिणम्। २३॥
Nanda replied : (Pray,) hear my statement, 0 Gopas, which is (precisely) what the
sage Garga told me concerning this boy; and let your suspicion about the child melt
away. (15) (Garga said:) Taking (diverse) forms indeed in each Yuga, this boy has
manifested (in his body) three (different) colours, viz., white, red and yellow; this time he
has assumed a dark complexion. (16) Some time in the past this son of yours was born
in the house of Vasudeva; (hence) the wise (who know this truth) will duly designate him
as the glorious Vasudeva (son of Vasudeva). (17) There are numerous names and
forms of your son, conforming to his excellences and actions. | (alone) know them, not
the commonality. (18) The delight of the cowherds, nay, of the entire Gokula, this boy
will bring you happiness. By his help you will easily surmount ail difficulties. (19) Being
protected and strengthened by him during a period of anarchy in former times, O lord
of Vraja, pious souls, tormented by robbers, (eventually) conquered them. (20) Enemies
cannot overpower those highly blessed men who offer love to this boy, any more than
demons can prevail over those whose cause has been espoused by Lord Visnu. (21)
Therefore, this son of yours, O Nanda, is a compeer of Lord Narayana in point of
excellences, splendour, fame and glory, so that there is nothing to be wondered at his
exploits. (22) Ever since, having directly exhorted me thus, Garga retumed to his
abode, | have recognized Krsna, who has (ever) rid us of affliction, to be (no other than)
a part manifestation of Lord Narayana. (23)
इति were: श्रुत्वा गर्गगीतं व्रजौकस:। दृष्टश्रुतानुभावास्ते कृष्णस्यामिततेजस: |
मुदिता Feared: कृष्णं च गतविस्मया:। २४॥
सीदत्पालपशुस्ति आत्मशरणं दृष्ट्वानुकम्प्युत्स्मयन्।
उत्पाट्यैककरेण शैलमबलो लीलोच्छिलीन्ध्रं यथा

fave गोष्ठमपान्महेन्द्रमदभित् at इन्द्रो गवाम्। २५॥
