670 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [Ois.1

SE न न न न य REESE OE OO CRORE ERNE CBO RET EE OTOL TONE HONE TONNE म संड TENT OW ONE

These ten Sungas will rule the earth for more than a century. (18)
wa: कण्वानियं भूमिर्यास्यत्यल्पगुणान् नृप । ag हत्वा देवभूतिं कण्वोऽमात्यस्तु कामिनम् । १९॥
wa करिष्यते wei वसुदेवो महामति: । तस्य org भूमित्रस्तस्य नारायण: सुत: |
नारायणस्य भविता सुझार्मा नाम विश्रुत: 1201

काण्वायना इमे भूमिं seni पञ्च च । शतानि त्रीणि भोक्ष्यन्ति वर्षाणां च कलौ युगे 1२१1
हत्वा काण्वं सुदार्माणं तद्भृत्यो quel बली | गां भोक्ष्यत्यन्ध्रजातीय: कञ्चित् कालमसत्तम: 1२२॥
कृष्णनामाथ तद्भ्राता भविता पृथिवीपति: । श्रीशान्तकर्णस्तत्पुत्र: पौर्णमासस्तु तत्सुत: 1221
लम्बोदरस्तु तत्पुत्रस्तस्माच्चिबिलको नृप: । मेघस्वातिश्चिबिलकादटमानस्तु तस्य AIRS!
अनिष्टकर्मा हालेयस्तलकस्तस्य चात्पज: । पुरीषभीरुस्तत्पुत्रस्ततो राजा सुनन्दन: ।२५॥
चकोरो बहवो यत्र शिवस्वातिररिन्दम: । तस्यापि गोमतीपुत्र: पुरीमान् भविता aa: 128!
मेद्:शिरा: शिवस्कन्दो यज्ञश्रीस्तत्सुतस्तत: । विजयस्तत्सुतो भाव्यश्चन्द्रविज्: सलोमधि: । २७।
एते fase alae पृथिवीं भोक्ष्यन्ति कुरुनन्दन ।२८॥

Then this earth will pass on to the Kanva Kings, though they will be possessed of poor
merit, O protector of men ! Having assassinated the lewd Devabhuti of the Sunga clan, his
very clever minister, Vasudeva of the Kanva dynasty, will, as a matter of fact, assume the
reins of government himself. Again, Bhumitra will be his son and Bhumitra's son will be
Narayana. (And) Narayana's son will be widely known by the name of Sugarma.({19-20)
These kings of Kanva’s race will rule the earth for three hundred and forty-five years in the
Kali age. (21) Assassinating Susarma of Kanva's line, his (own) servant, Bali, a vile Sudra
of the Andhra race will hold away on the earth for some time. (22) His (own) brother, Krsna
by name, will succeed him as the ruler of the earth. His son will be Sri Santakarna and the
latter's son, Paurnamasa. (23) His son will be Lambodara and Cibilaka wil! succeed him
as king. Meghaswati will succeed Cibilaka and Meghaswati’s son will be Atamana. (24)
Anistakarma and Haleya will come next and Haleya's son will be Talaka. His son will be
Purisabhiru and Sunandana will succeed him as king. (25) Cakora will come next and then
(by turn) his (eight) sons, (collectively) known as the Bahus, the last of whom will be
Sivaswati, a chastiser of his foes. His son, again, will be Gomatiputra and Puriman will
come next. (26) Medassira and Sivaskanda will come next and Sivaskanda's son will be
Yajfiasri, Vijaya will follow Yajfiasri and his sons will be Candravijfia and Lomadhi. (27)
These thirty princes will (successively) rule over the earth for four hundred and fifty-six
pears, O delight of the Kurus ! (28)

सप्ताभीरा आवभृत्या दश गर्दभिनो नृपा: | कङ्का: षोडदा भूपाला भविष्यन्त्यतिलोलुपा: 12¢1
AAS यवना भराव्याश्चतुर्दश तुरुष्कका: | भूयो SM गुरुण्डाश्च मौना एकादैव तु ।३०॥
एते भोक्ष्यन्ति पृथिरवीं दहावर्षगातानि च । नवाधिकां च नवतिं मौना waren क्षितिम् । ३१।
भोक्ष्यन्त्यब्दहातान्यङ्ग त्रीणि a: संस्थिते aa: | किलिकिलायां नृपतयो भूतनन्दोऽथ afgfe: 1321
शिशुनन्दिश्च तद्भ्राता wate: प्रवीरक: । इत्येते वै वर्षशतं भविष्यन्त्यधिकानि षट् ।३३॥
तेषां water सुता भवितारश्च बाह्लिका: । पुष्पमित्रोऽथ राजन्यो दुर्भित्रोऽस्य ada च ।३४॥

एक्कङ्मुलाइघ्रेभ्रूपा: सप्तान्धा: सप्त कोसला: ! विदूरपतयो wre निषधास्तत wa fe । ३५॥
Seven Abhira princes having their capital at Avabhrti. ten Gardabhis and sixteen of the
Kanka dynasty, (all) most rapacious, will hold sway (one after another) as kings. (29; Then
will follow eight Yavanas, fourteen Turuskakas: again. ten Gurundas and then Maunas
numbering eleven only. (30) These (Thirty-two) kings (excluding the Maunas) will rule over
