238 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Disees

Hey उवाच
तुष्टोऽहमद्य तव मानवि मानदाया: शुश्रूषया परमया परया च भक्त्या |
यो देहिनामयमतीव सुहृत्स्वदेहो नावेक्षित: समुचित: क्षपितुं मदर्थे । ६ ।
ये मे स्वधर्मनिरतस्य तप:समाधिविद्यात्मयोगविजिता भगवत्प्रसादा: |
ama ते मदनुसेवनयावरुद्धान् दृष्टिं saga वितराम्यभयानशोकान् । ७ |
अन्ये पुनर्भगवतो ya उद्विजृम्भविभ्रंशितार्थरचना: किमुरुक्रमस्य |
सिद्धासि भुङ्छ्ष्व विभवान्निजधर्मदोहान् दिव्यान्नरैर्दुरधिगान्नृपविक्रियाभि: । ८ ।

Kardama said : 0 daughter of Manu, you have shown great respect to me and | am
pleased today with your most faithful service and supreme devotion. You ungrudgingly
wasted your body for my sake (in my service)—body which is extremely dear to all living
beings and deserves every attention. (6) |, therefore, confer on you supernatural vision :
thereby see for yourself the divine blessings (in the shape of unearthly enjoyments) that were
secured by me through concentrated application to austere penance, Samadhi (abstract or
deep meditation) and worship of God, and through devotion to my own duty—blessings which
are free from fear and grief and to which you have also won a title through services rendered
to me. (7) Of what account (in comparison to these) are other enjoyments (including those
obtained in heaven), aspirations in regard to which are frustrated by the mere contraction of
a brow on the part of the Lord, who possesses infinite power ? You have now attained your
object (through fidelity to me); therefore, enjoy the extensive unearthly pleasures earned
through devotion to your (wifely) duties, and which can be had with difficulty by human beings
due to false notions of their royal dignity etc. (8)

एवं ब्रुवाणमबलाखिलयोगमायाविद्याविचक्षणमवेक्ष्य गताधिरासीत् |
सम्प्रश्रयप्रणयविह्वलया गिरेषद्व्रडावलोकविलसद्धसिताननाऽऽह । ९ |

When the sage spoke thus, Devahiti felt relieved to discover that he was the master of
all Yogic powers and an adept in all forms of worship. Her face brightening with a smile and
bashful glances, she spoke in voice choked with modesty and love. (9)

earghaea इ
यस्तेऽभ्यधायि समय: सकृदङ्गसङ्घो भूयाद्गरीयसि गुण: प्रसव: सतीनाम् । १०॥
सिद्ध्येत a कृतमनोभवधर्षिताया दीनस्तदीशा भवनं weet विचक्च्व see

Devahiti said ; | know it, my lord : all that you have said, O chief of the Brahmanas, is
something natural to you, a master of unfailing Yogic powers that you are, O great one. Now
let the promise you made (in the presence of my father) about allowing me the contact of your
body but once be redeemed; for itis a rare boon for virtuous wives to have a progeny through
a highly venerable husband. (10) Kindly instruct me what arrangements have to be made and
what requisites to be got together (in the shape of unguents, scents, wearing apparel and
nourishing food etc.) according to the injunctions of the scriptures (works on erotics), by
resorting to which my poor body, emaciated through intense passion, may be rendered fit
for union, smitten as | am with darts of love excited by you. And also think of (getting) a
suitable house (for the purpose), my lord. (11)

प्रियाया: फ्रियमन्विच्छन् कर्दमो योगमास्थित: । विमानं कामगं क्षत्तस्तर्ह्यवाविरचीकरत् 1221
