526 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 3
एवं लोकं परं विद्यान्नश्वरं कर्मनिर्मितम्। सतुल्यातिङायध्वंसं यथा मण्डलवर्तिनाम् । २०॥
were गुरुं soda जिज्ञासु: श्रेय उत्तमम्।जाब्दे परे च निष्णातं ब्रह्मण्युपद्ममाश्रयम् । २१1
तत्र भागवतान् धर्मान् fade गुर्वात्मदैवत: | अमाययानुवृत्तया यैस्तुष्येदात्माऽऽत्पदो हरि: 1221
सर्वतो मनसोऽसङ्गमादौ ag च साधुषु । दयां मैत्रीं seri च भूतेष्वद्धा यथोचितम् । २३
शौचं तपस्तितिक्षां च मोनं स्वाध्यायमार्जवम् । ब्रह्मचर्यमहिंसां च समत्वं द्वन्द्वसंज्ञयो: ।२४॥
सर्वत्रात्मेश्वरान्वीक्षां कैवल्यमनिकेतताम् । विविक्तचीरवसनं सन्तोषं येन केनचित् । २५॥
wel भागवते शास्त्रेऽनिन्दामन्यत्र चापि fei मनोवाक्कर्मदण्डं च सत्यं हामदमावपि 1261
at कीर्तनं oad हरेरद्भुतकर्मण: । जन्मकर्मगुणानां च तदर्थेऽखिलचेष्टितम् । २७।
इष्टं दत्तं तपो जप्तं वृत्तं यच्चात्मन: प्रियम् । दारान् सुतान् गृहान् प्राणान्यत् परस्मै निवेदनम् । २८॥
एवं कृष्णात्मनाथेषु मनुष्येषु च सौहदम्। परिचर्यां चोभयत्र महत्सु नृषु साधुषु ।२९॥
परस्परानुकथनं पावनं भगवद्यदा: । मिथो  रतिर्मिथस्तुष्टिर्निवृत्तिर्मिथ आत्मन: 1301
wet: स्मारयन्तश्च मिथोऽघौघहरं हरिम्। भक्त्या सञ्जातया भक्त्या बिभ्रत्युत्पुलुकां तनुम् । ३१1

क्वचिद् weenie क्वचिद्धसन्ति नन्दन्ति वदन्त्यलौकिका: |
Jaa गायन्त्यनुशीलयन्त्यजं भवन्ति qui ada निर्वृता: 1321
इति भागवतान् धर्मान् शिक्षन् भक्त्या तदुत्थया । नारायणपरो मायामञ्जस्तरति दुस्तराम् 331
Prabuddha replied : One must observe how human beings living in pairs (as husband

and wife) striving to gain happiness and remove misery obtain only contrary results. (18)

What happiness can be derived from wealth, which is (so) difficult to obtain and can be

earned only by means of constantly painful effort and which leads to one’s death ? Or, what

joy can one get from the possession of houses, children friends or relations and cattle,
transient as they are, and the fruit of one's actions ? (19) Similarly one should realize that the
heavenly regions are also transient (and full of misery), their attainment being the fruit of
one’s actions; (and there too as in this world) there is rivalry with the superior ones, mutual
discord among the equals and hatred towards those inferior to one’s own self and fear ofa
fall, as there is here among chieftains. (20) Therefore, one desirous of knowing the highest
good should resort to a preceptor who is versed in the Vedas (which embody Brahma in the
form of words), has realized the ultimate Reality and who is free from attachment and
hatred.(21) Under the preceptor, whom one should love as one’s own self and as the object
of one’s devotion, one should, by rendering devoted service to him, learn the ways of life of
the Lord's devotees, by which Sri Hari is pleased—Sri Hari, who is the Soul of the universe
and gives Himself away to His devotees. (22) First the disciple should learn detachment of
the mind from all objects (body, children etc.), and attachment to the Lord's devotees. And
he should also fearn to cherish in all sincerity compassion, friendliness and humility towards
one’s inferiors, equals and superiors respectively. (23) He should (further) learn (to acquire)
purity (external and internal), devotion to his religious duties, endurance, control over his
speech, a habit to study the scriptures, sincerity, continence, non-violence and evenness of
mind under the stress of dualities (like pleasure and pain, profit and loss). (24) He should
learn to see the Atma (as the intelligent substance) and igwara (the Ruling Principle)
pervading all, live in solitude, without any sense of possession for any dwelling. wear pure

clothing or rags (stitched together) and feel satisfied with whatever he could get for food. (25)

He should (also) learn to have faith in the scnptures celebrating the Lord, without disparaging

other scriptures, and curb his mind, speech and actions (through control of breath, tongue

and activity respectively), and to be truthful and able to control the senses and mind. (26) He

