Dis. 23 ] BOOK THREE 239

PARHEREMLA CH KKHEE AL UWE EAE AEE COTE AEH EAHA EA CEE EHH NEALE AEH Ree HHA eH
त्प्तर्या ह ती कीं वज ।

सर्वकामदुघं दिव्ये सर्वरत्नसमन्वितम्। सर्वद्धर्युपचयोदर्क मणिस्तम्भैरुपस्कृतम् ।१३॥
दिव्योपकरणोपेतं सर्वकालसुखावहम् | पट्टिकाभि: पताकाभिर्विचित्राभिरलंकृतम् । १४॥
स्रग्भिर्विचित्रमाल्याभिर्मञ्जुशिञ्जत्षडङ्घ्रिभि: । दुकूलक्षौमकोशोयैर्नानावस्रैर्विराजितम् 124
उपर्युपरि विन्यस्तनिलयेषु पृथक्पृथक | क्षिप्तै: कशिपुभि: कान्तं पर्यङ्कव्यजनासनै: । १६॥
तत्र तत्र विनिक्षिप्तनानाशिल्पोपञ्ञोभितम्। महामरकतस्थल्या जुष्टं विद्रुमवेदिभि: । १७॥
द्वासु विद्रुमदेहल्या भातं वज्रकपाटवत्।शिखरेष्ठिन्रनीलेषु हेमकुम्भैरधिश्रितम् ।१८॥
चक्षुष्मत्पद्मरागाग्रयैर्वज्रभित्तिषु fia: । ae fafarcardereenanat: 1291
हंसपारावतव्रातैस्तत्र तत्र निकूजितम्। कृत्रिमान् मन्यमाने: स्वानधिरुह्याधिरुह्य च 1201
विहारस्थानविश्रामसंवेशप्राङ्गखणाजिरेर ।यथोपजोषं रचितैर्विस्मापनमिवात्मन: । २१॥

Maitreya went on : Seeking to oblige his beloved spouse, the sage Kardama, 0 Vidura,
exercised his wonderful Yogic power and instantly produced an aerial mansion which could
range at will. (12) It was a wonderful structure, containing all sorts of jewels, adorned with
pillars of precious stones and capable of yielding whatever one desired, and was equipped
with every form of wealth, which tended to multiply in course of time (instead of diminishing
by use). (13) It was provided with supematural articles of domestic use, was comfortable in
all seasons and was decorated with buntings and flags of variegated colours. (14) It was
further embellished with wreaths of charming flowers, that attracted the sweet humming of
bees, as well as with tapestries of linen, silk and other fabrics of various kinds. (15) The house
looked charming with cushions, beds, fans and seats separately arranged in the several
storeys rising one above another. (16) Its beauty was enhanced by (engravings and other)
works of art (on the walls etc.) here and there; and it was provided with pavements of emerald
and coral daises. (17) Its entrances shone with coral thresholds and had doors of diamond.
Its domes of sapphire were crowned with gold pinnacles. (18) With the choicest of rubies set
in its diamond walls it appeared as though possessed of eyes; and it was furnished with
wonderful canopies and highly valuable festoons of gold. (19) It resounded with the cries of
swans and pigeons, which flew up to their likenesses (set up there), thinking them to be their
own kind. (20) With its pleasure-grounds, resting-chambers, bed-rooms and inner and outer
yards, designed with an eye to the comfort (of the occupant), it caused astonishment as it
were to the sage himself (who had produced it). (21)

ईदृग्गृहे तत्पश्यन्तीं नातिप्रीतेन चेतसा । सर्वभूताश्याभिज्ञ: प्रावोचत्कर्दम: स्वयम् 1221
निमज्ज्यास्मिन् gt भीरु विमानमिदमारुह। इदं शुक्ककृतं तीर्थमाशिषां यापकं नृणाम् । २३॥
The sage Kardama, who could read the mind of all living beings, perceived that Devahiti
did not regard even such a house with a much delighted heart, and said to her of his own
accord :— (22) "Bathe in the yonder lake, O timid one, and ascend this aerial mansion. Having

been consecrated by Lord Visnu Himself (who dropped His tears in it), this sacred lake is
capable of granting all the desires of human beings (who resort to it)." (23)

सा med: समादाय ae: कुवलयेक्षणा । सरजं बिभ्रती वासो वेणीभूतांश्च मूर्धजान् । २४॥

ay च मलपङ्केन ded शबलस्तनम्। आविवेश सरस्वत्या: सर: शिवजलादयम् । २५॥

सान्त:सरसि वेर्मस्था: शतानि Se कन्यका: । सर्वा: किञ्चोरवयसो ददर्शोत्पलगन्धय: 1261

at दृष्टा सहसोत्थाय sig: प्राञ्जलय: स्रिय: । वयं कर्मकरीस्तुभ्यं anf a: करवाम किम् 1201 ।
Bowing to that command of her lord, the lotus-eyed princess—who had a soiled cloth (on

her person) and wore matted locks (on her head), and whose frame was coated with a thick
ayer of dirLand breasts discoloured—dived into the lake, which contained the sacred waters
