448 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 3

SO SE ER AMEE SRSA SOOM EEERE SEH EEK HH He CET Eee He AAR He eeHe AHH RHKHHLECHHHNAH AOS

Sti Suka went on ; By thus employing a language clever in expressing sensual things,
prince Agnidhra, who possessed the intelligence of gods and proved a past master in winning
over the young woman, propitiated that celestial damsel by showing her great regard. (17)
She too, whose mind was captivated by the intelligence, amiability, comeliness, youth,
splendour and nobility of that leading hero, then enjoyed with that lord of (the entire)
Jambtdwipa earthly as well as celestial pleasures for a period extending over ten crore
years. (18) Through her, itis said, that foremost of kings, Agnidhra, begot nine sons—Nabhi,
Kimpurusa, Harivarsa, llavrta, Ramyaka, Hiranmaya, Kuru, Bhadraswa and Ketumala by
name. (19)

बुभुजु:। २१ । आग्नीध्रो राजातृप्त: कामानामप्सरसमेवानुदिनमधिमन्यमानस्तस्या: सलोकतां श्रुतिभिरवारुन्ध
यत्र पितरो मादयन्ते । २२ सम्परेते पितरि नव भ्रातरो मेरुदुहितॄर्मेरुदेवीं wire et लतां रम्यां श्यामां नारीं
भद्रां देववीतिमितिसंज्ञा नवोदवहन्। 23 1

Having brought forth (as many as) nine sons, (one) each year, and leaving them (all) in
that very house (of Agnidhra), Parvacitti once more joined the service of the (supreme) god,
Brahma (the birthless one). (20) The aforesaid sons of Agnidhra, who were well-built and
strong by birth through the grace of their (celestial) mother, were allotted their due share (in
his kingdom) by their father and ruled over the divisions of Jambdadwipa apportioned to them,
which were (also) named after them. (21) King Agnidhra, who was not (yet) sated with sense-
delights, constantly thought of that celestial nymph as superior (to everything else), and
secured through deeds enjoined by the Vedas residence in the same heaven with her, the
heaven where the manes live in delight. (22) On the demise of (their) father the nine brothers
married the nine daughters of Meru (the deity presiding over Mount Sumeru), Merudevi,
Pratiripa, Ugradamstr, Lata, Ramya, Syama, Nani, Bhadra and Devaviti by name. (23)

Thus ends the second discourse entitled “An account of Agnidhra” in Book Five
of the great and glorious Bhagavata-Purana, otherwise
known as the Paramahamsa-Samhita.

Atri २:.
PDD ESE OD

अथ तृतीयोऽध्याय:

Discourse Ill
The descent of Lord Rsabha

नाभिरपत्यकामोऽप्रजया मेरुदेव्या भगवन्तं यज्ञपुरुषमवहितात्मायजत।१। तस्य ह वाव श्रद्धया
मनोनयनानन्दनावयवाभिरामप्राविश्चकार।२। अथ ह तमाविष्कृतभुजयुगलद्वयं हिरण्मयं पुरुषविशेषं

Saar

<

रि ह । दि न विभूषितमृरि ॥

~~ ११ ॥ i
इवोत्तमधनमुपलभ्य सबहुमानमर्हणेनावनतशौर्षाण SATE: । ३ ।
