Dis. 2] BOOK ELEVEN 523

nn nine en eA ERE tH Onetentetethest nn One T ENON ree ONO Ee Te

गृहीत्वापीन्दियैरर्थान् यो न eB न हष्यति । विष्णोर्मायामिदं प्यन् स वै भागवतोत्तम: Ive!
देहेन्द्वियप्राणमनोधियां यो जन्माप्ययक्षुद्धयतर्षकृच्छै: |
संसारधर्मैरविमुह्यमान: स्मृत्या हरेर्भागवतप्रधान: 1881
न कामकर्मबीजानां ga चेतसि aera: । वासुदेवैकनिलय: स वै भागवतोत्तम: 140!
न ae जन्मकर्मभ्यां न वर्णाश्रमजातिभि: | सज्जतेऽस्मिन्नहंभावो देहे वै स हरे: प्रिय: 1421
न यस्य स्व: पर इति fags वा भिदा । सर्वभूतसम: aa: स वै भागवतोत्तम: ।५२॥
त्रिभुवनविभवहेतवेऽप्यकुण्ठस्मृतिरजितात्मसुरादिभिर्विमृग्यात् ।
न च्लति भगवत्पदारविन्दाल्लवनिमिषार्धमपि a: स वैष्णवाग्र्य: 1431
भगवत उरुविक्रमाङ्ध्रिशाखानखमणिचन्दिकया निरस्ततापे ।
a कथमुपसीद्तां oa: स प्रभवति चन्द्र इवोदितेऽर्कताप: । ५४॥
विसृजति wei न यस्य साक्षाद्धरिरवशाभिहितोऽप्यघौघनारा: |
wre शधृताङ्ध्रिपद्म: स भवति भागवतप्रधान Fh: ।५५।

Hari said : He is the foremost of the Lord's devotees, who sees himself established in
all creatures as in the Lord (himself), and sees (all) creatures established in his own self as
in the Divine Soul. (45) The votary who cherishes love for the Lord, is friendly to other
devotees of the Lord, compassionate to the ignorant, and indifferent to his enemies, is a
second-rate votary (because he discriminates among these classes, whereas the one
described in the previous verse makes no discrimination). (46) He who does worship to the
Lord with faith in an image only and does not serve His devotees and other beings is an
ordinary devotee. (47) He who sees the universe as (a creation of) Visnu’s Maya and, even
though contacting the objects with his senses, neither experiences delight nor repulsion is
Indeed a devotee of the highest order. (48) He is the foremost devotee of the Lord, who by
virtue of his (constant) remembrance of Sri Hari is never overwhelmed by mundane
properties, (viz.,) birth and death, hunger (and thirst), fatigue, fear and ardent longing, which
(really) belong to the body, vital air, senses, mind and intellect (and never to the Self). (49)
He is undoubtedly the foremost devotee of the Lord, in whose mind the craving for enjoyment,
the impulse for action and the seeds of future incarnation (in the shape of virtue and sin) never
sprout, and to whom Lord Visnu is the only resort. (50) He is indeed beloved of the Lord, who
never identifies himself with this body by virtue of his birth and pursuits, grade in society, race
or Stage of life. (51) He is the best among the devotees of the Lord, who makes no distinction
between his own and that belonging to others in the matter of his possessions and body. He
looks upon all created beings with an equal eye and is (always) calm. (52) He is the foremost
of the votaries of Lord Visnu, whose memory of the Lord is ever fresh, and who even for the
sovereignty of all the three worlds (heaven, earth and the intermediate region) and even for
half the time taken by the twinkling of an eye does not turn away from (the adoration of) the

. Lords's lotus-feet, which are sought after by the gods and others whose mind is fixed on the

invincible Lord. (53) Just as with the rising of the moon the heat of the sun disappears, so
the fever in the devotee’s heart, (once) banished by the cool lustre shed by the gem-like nails
of the Lord’s feet taking long strides (while dancing with the devotee as during the Rasa

_dance) can never appear again. (54) The name of the Lord is such that, even when uttered

under constraint or unconsciously, it destroys multitudinous sins. That man is called the best
of devotees, whose heart the Lord Himself does not leave as His lotus-feet are fastened by
