Dis. 9 ] BOOK NINE - 37

राक्षसं भावमापन्न: We कल्माषतां गत:। व्यवायकाले eel वनौकोदम्पती द्विजौ ।२५॥
क्षुधार्तो जगृहे विप्रं तत्पत्न्याहाकृतार्थवत्। न भवान् राक्षस: साक्षादिक्ष्वाकूणां महारथ: 1२६॥
Tere: पतिर्वीर नाधर्मं कर्तुमर्हसि fe मेऽपत्यकामाया अकृतार्थं पतिं द्विजम् ize
asd मानुषो राजन् पुरुषस्याखिलार्थद:। तस्मादस्य वधो dh सर्वार्थवध उच्यते । २८॥
we हि ब्राह्मणो विद्वांस्तप:श्लीलगुणान्वित: | आरिराधयिषुर्ब्रह्म महापुरुषसंज्ञितम् ।
॥ सर्वभूतात्मंभावेन भूतेष्वन्तर्हितं गुणै: 1281

सोऽयं ब्रह्मर्षिवर्यस्ते राजर्षिप्रवराद् विभो । mead ote वधं पितुरिवात्मज: 1301
तस्य साधोरपापस्य भ्रूणस्य ब्रह्मवादिन: । कथं वधं यथा बभ्रोर्मन्यते सन्मतो भवान् । ३१1
wea क्रियते भक्षस्तर्हि at we पूर्वत: । न जीविष्ये विना येन क्षणं च मृतकं यथा 1321
एवं करुणभाषिण्या विलपन्त्या अनाथवत्। व्याघ्र: पशुमिवाखादत् सौदास: शापमोहित: 1331
ब्राह्मणी dex fey पुरुषादेन भक्षितम्। शोचन्त्यात्मानमुर्वीशामशपत् कुपिता सती ।३४॥
यस्मान्मे भक्षित: पाप कामार्ताया: पतिस्त्वया । तवापि मृत्युराधानादकृतप्रज्ञं दर्शित: ।३५॥
एवं free me पतिलोकपरायणा । तदस्थीनि समिद्धेऽग्नौ प्रास्य भर्तुर्गतिं गता । ३६1

Sri Suka replied : While roaming in pursuit of game, so the tradition goes, Saudasa (son
of Sudasa) killed a certain ogre and let go his brother, whoimmediately left with the intention
of retaliating. (20) Contemplating harm to the king (Saudsa), he assumed the form of the
latter's cook at his palace and, having dressed human flesh, took it to his preceptor (the sage
Vasistha), who had called at he palace with intent to dine. (21) Immediately perceiving
human flesh (which is ever prohibited as food) about to be served to him, the glorious sage
flew into a rage and uttered an imprecation on the king saying, "You will surely turn an ogre
through this (improper) conduct of yours." (22) Learning (in the meantime) that it was the
work of an ogre, the sage limited (the operation of) the curse to (a period of) twelve years
(only); (while) Saudasa too (in his turn) took water in the hollow of his joined palms, fully
prepared to utter a (counter) curse on his preceptor (who had cursed him for no fault of
his).(23) Stopped by (his wife) Madayanti, and finding the (four) quarters, the sky and the
earth all instinct with life, the king (Saudasa) dropped that harmful water (burning with the
fire of his wrath) on his own feet (lest it might injure any other living being, thus justifying his
appellation, Mitrasaha, which means he who is indulgent towards his friends and well-
wishers). (24) Blackened in his feet (by the action of the water thrown by him and hence
named as Kalmasapada) and having acquired an ogre-like disposition, Saudasa saw (one
night) a Brahmana couple dwelling in a forest at the time of copulation. (25) Pinched by
hunger, Saudasa seized the Brahmana (with the intention of devouring him), whereupon
his wife pleaded like one afflicted:—"You are no ogre as such; you are (on the other hand)
a great car-warrior among the scions of Ikswaku and the husband of Madayanti, O valiant
monarch! You ought not to do what is unrighteous. (Pray,) restore (to me—eager as | am to
have a son—my husband, whois a Brahmana and has not yet attained his object (in the form
of a son). (26-27) This human body, O king, is capable of yielding all the objects sought after
by aJiva. Therefore, the destruction of this body, O heroic king, is spoken of asthe frustration
of all one's objects. (28) Indeed this Brahmana is not only learned but endowed with
asceticism, an amiable disposition and other virtues. (Nay,) he seeks to worship Brahma (the
Absolute), known by the name of Lord Visnu (the supreme Person)—which, though present
in (all) created beings is screened by ego etc., (the products of the three Gunas or modes
of Prakrti)—by looking upon all living beings as his (very) self. (29) As such how can he, the

