368 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 59

See Eee SEN ERE EY TEN ere eee eee eS EKER CELE Tee EAE Nee NEE REHASH

had been beaten off. Though pierced by it, Garuda did not budge any more than an elephant
would when struck with a garland. (20) His attempt having proved futile, Naraka (son of
Mother Earth) picked up a pike with intent to strike at Sri Krsna. (But) before he could
discharge it, Sri Krsna with His discus (Sudargana), which was keen-edged as a razor,
lopped up the head of Naraka, who rode on an elephant. (21) Fallen on the ground, Naraka's
head, which was accompanied with a pair of ear-rings and adorned with a lovely diadem,
shone most resplendent. "Oh, what a pity I" cried his people and "Bravo |” exclaimed the
seers; while the chiefs of gods extolled Sri Krsna (the Bestower of Liberation), covering Him
with (a shower of) flowers. (22) Approaching Sri Krsna, Goddess Earth (the mother of
Naraka) delivered (to Him) a pair of ear-rings (belonging to Aditi, mother of the gods), brilliant
with jewels chased in purest gold, alongwith a garland of sylvan flowers accompanied by a
Vaijayanti (a garland of valuable flowers interspersed with jewels), as well as the umbrella
belonging to Varuna (the god of water and the guardian of the western quarter) and the crest
of Mount Mandara, known by the name of Mahamani or Maniparvata (so-called because of
its abounding in precious gems). (23) Bending low (in humility) with joined palms, and with
a mind full of devotion the goddess then glorified (as follows) Sri Krsna (the Lord of the
universe), who is worshipped (even) by the foremost of gods, O king ! (24)

नमस्ते देवदेवेश शङ्खचक्रगदाधर । भक्तेच्छोपात्तरूपाय परमात्मन् नमोऽस्तु ते । २५॥
नम: UES नम: पङ्कजमालिने। नम: पङ्कजनेत्राय नमस्ते पङ्कजाङ्घ्रये ।२६॥
नमो भगवते ma वासुदेवाय विष्णवे । पुरुषायादिबीजाय पूर्णबोधाय ते नम: 1201
अजाय जनयित्रेऽस्य ब्रह्मणेऽनन्तशक्तये । परावरात्मन् भूतात्मन् परमात्मन् नमोऽस्तु ते । २८।
a वै सिसृक्षू रज उत्कटं प्रभो wh निरोधाय बिभर्ष्यसंवृत: |
स्थानाय सत्त्वं जगतो जगत्पते काल: प्रधानं पुरुषो भवान् VE 1२९1
अहं पयो ज्योतिरथानिलो नभो मात्राणि ta मन sharin
aa महानित्यखिलं चराचरं त्वय्यद्वितीये भगवन्नयं भ्रम: ।३०॥
तस्यात्मजोऽयं तव wea भीत: प्रपन्नार्तिहरोपसादित: |
a owed कुरु हस्तपङ्कजे शिरस्यमुष्याखिलकल्मषापहम् । ३१1
Earth prayed : Hail to You, O Ruler of the (very) gods of god, O Wielderofa conch, discus
and mace! O Inner Controller of the gods and other beings, my salutations be to You, who
have assumed this form in deference to the wishes of Your devotees. (25) Hail to You, who
have a lotus sprung from Your navel ! Hail to You, who are adomed with a garland of lotuses !!
Hail to You, the lotus-eyed One !!! Hail to You, who are possessed of lotus-like feet!!! (26)
Salutations to You, who are no other than Lord Visnu, though appearing as a son of
Vasudeva ! Salutations to You, who are anterior’ to all evolutes, the Cause (even) of Prakrti
(the source of the entire creation), (the Embodiment of) perfect Knowledge. (27) Hail to You,
the birthless Creator of this (objective) universe, the Absolute, possessed of endless
potencies ! (My) salutation be to You, O Inner Controller of the great and the small, O Lord,
who are one with the five (gross) elements, O Supreme Spirit ! (28) When inclined to create,
0 Lord, it is You who assume vehement Rajoguna (and appear as Brahma); for the
dissolution of the universe You assume gross Tamoguna (and appear in the form of Rudra,
the god of destruction); and for the continuance of the world You assume abundant

Ce

* The Sruti says:— पूर्वमेवाहमिहासमिति तत् पुरुषस्य पुरुषत्वम्
