Dis. 20] BOOK EIGHT 819

SASSASR SSAA RENTER SSNS UHETE RELL eEEKhhktkthereeneeeTEREHRAEHAhhanhenoerernnreneane
Sensnete tenets tb tneeneeeetreensetonthaerhshtetenrereennEnnnhnhhhnenseerenerennrne
aa बलिस्तस्य महाविभूतेर३  wefetrertace एतत् |
ददर्श विश्वं त्रिगुणं गुणात्मके भूतेन्दियार्थाशयजीवयुक्तम् 122 |
रसामचष्टाङ्ध्रितलेऽथ पादयोर्महीं महीध्रान्पुरुषस्य जङ्घयो: ।

नाभ्यां नभ: कुक्षिषु सप्तसिन्धूनुरुक्रमस्योरसि चर्क्षमालाम् । २४॥
Sy wo weit च at च मनस्यथेन्दुम् |
श्रियॆ च वक्षस्यरविन्दहस्तां aos च सामानि समस्तरेफान् 1241
इन्द्रप्रधानानमरान्भुजेषु तत्कर्णयोर ककुभो द्यौश्च मूर्धि ।
केशेषु furan नासिकायामक्ष्णोश्च gt at च वह्निम् । २६॥
वाण्यांचछन्दांसिरसेजलेर्शंभ्रुवोर्निषेघंचविधिंचपक्ष्मसु।
अहृश्चरात्रिंचपरस्ययुंसोमन्युंललाटेऽधरएवलोभम्।श्य।
छायासु मृत्युं हसिते च मायां तनूरुहेष्नोषधिजातयश्च । २८॥
नदीश्च नाडीषु शिला नखेषु बुद्धावजं देवगणानृषींश्च ।
प्राणेषु गात्रे स्थिरजङ्घमानि सर्वाणि भूतानि ददर्श वीर: 1281

(In the meantime) that diminutive form of Sri Hari, the infinite Lord, which comprised in
Itself the three Gunas (as well as their product, the universe) grew to such a wondertul extent
that the earth, the sky (the aerial region), the (four) quarters, heaven, the subterranean
regions and the (seven) oceans as well as (the various species of living beings such as)
Juman beings, gods, Rsis, and the subhuman creation (all) found their place in it. (21) In the
30dy of that Lord (of extraordinary powers), whichis the Groundof the three Gunas (of which
‘his universe is constituted), Bali along with the priests (officiating at the sacrifice), the
sreceptor and the superintending priests beheld (the whole of ) this universe, made up of the
aforesaid) three Gunas, including the five (gross) elements, the (ten) Indriyas (the five
senses Of perception as well as the five organs of action), the (five) objects of the senses (viz.,
sound, touch colour, taste and smell), the mind (in its four aspects) and the Jiva (the
*mbodied soul). (22) Bali (who had an army as Strong and equipped as that of Indra, whose
hrone he was now occupying) saw the (seven) subterranean regions at the sole of the feet
f the Supreme Person, appearing in His cosmic form, the earth in His feet, mountains in His
thanks, (the realm of) the featheredkingdom (viz., the atmosphere) in His knees and the host
if gods (forty-nine in number) presiding over the air in His thighs. (23) He (further) beheld
sandhya (the deity presiding over the morning and evening twilights) in the loin-cloth of the
iniversal Lord, the Asuras headed by himself (Bali) in His anus, the sage Marici and others

the lords of created beings) in His genitals, the firmament in His navel, the seven oceans
1 His sides and the host of stars in the chest of the Lord of wide strides. (24) Again, he saw
)harma (the god of piety), O dear Pariksit, in the heart of Lord Visnu (the Slayer of the demon
fura), (the gods presiding over) Rta (truthful and polite language) and Satya (seeing all with
18 same eye) in His breasts, and the moon-god in His mind, Sri (the goddess presiding over
ches and beauty) witha lotus in Herhandin His bosom and the Samas (sacred texts forming
art of Samaveda) as well as all sounds in His throat. (25) He also beheld the immortals with
\dra as their head in His arms and the (four) quartersin His ears, heavenin His crown, clouds
