588 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA { Dis. 8

SHER MAKE KKCR ARACEAE EEA EKR LEECH E REECE RRELEEE REECE EEE RLEETHE ECE ER EL THERE EEE REE

becomes a (very) embodiment (as it were) of the Mantra. (9-10) He should (then) visualize
himself as (one with) the Supreme Self, possessed of six divine attributes (viz., power, virtue,
fame, affluence, wisdom and aversion to the pleasures of sense , each in its fullest measure),
the object of his meditation, manifested in the form of learning, glory and asceticism, and
repeat the following prayer:—_(11)

दरारिचर्मासिगदेषुचापपाशान् दध्रानाऽष्टगुणोऽष्टबाहु । १२॥
जलेषु मा रक्षतु मत्स्यमूर्तिर्यादोगणेभ्यो वरुणस्य पाञात् ।
weg मायावदुवामनोऽव्यात् त्रिविक्रम: खेऽवतु विश्वरूप: 1231
दुर्गेष्टव्याजिमुखादिषु प्रभु: पायान्नृसिंहोऽसुरयूथपारि: ।
विमुञ्चतो यस्य महाट्ठटहासं दिशो विनेदुर्न्यपतंश्च गर्भा: ew
रामोऽद्रिकूटेषथ विप्रवासे सलक्ष्मणोऽव्याद् भरताग्रजोऽस्मान् ।१५॥
मामुग्रधर्मादखिलात् प्रमदान्नारायण: पातु नरश्च हासात्।
दत्तस्त्वयोगादथ योगनाथ: wee गुणेश: कपिल: कर्मबन्धात् ।१६॥
सनत्कुमारोऽवतु कामदेवाद्ध्यशीर्षा मा पथि देवहेलनात्।
देवर्षिवर्यर पुरुषार्चनान्तरात् कूर्मो eat निरयादशेषात् ।१७॥
धन्वन्तरिर्भगवान् पात्वपथ्याद् fee भयादृषभो निर्जितात्मा ।
यज्ञश्च लोकादवताजनान्ताद् sel गणात् क्रोधवशादहीन्द्र: । १८॥
द्वैपायनो भगवानप्रबोधाद् बुद्धसतुं पाखण्डगणात् TTL
cafe: कले: कालमलात् प्रपातु धर्मांबनायोरुकृतावतार: ।१९॥
am केशवो गदया प्रात्तरव्याद् गोविन्दं आसङ्गवमात्तवेणु: |
नारायण: प्राह्ण उदात्तशाक्तिर्मध्यन्दिने विष्णुररीन्द्रपाणि: 1201
देवोऽपराह्णे मधुहोग्रधन्वा सायं त्रिधामावतु माधवो ALI
दोषे हृषीकेश उतार्धरात्रे निशीथ एकोऽवतु पद्मनाभ: 1221
श्रीवत्सधामापररात्र ईंश: sae ईशोऽसिधरो जनार्दन: |
दामोदरोऽव्यादनुसन्ध्यं प्रभाते faded भगवान् कालमूर्ति: 1221

"May Sri Hari, denoted by (the mystical syllable) OM, afford me protection on all sides
as well as from all dangers—Sri Hari, who has His lotus-feet placed on the back of Garuda
(the king of the birds), nay, who wields in His eight arms (hands) a conch, discus (lit., that
which is provided with a number of spokes), shield, sword, mace, arrow, bow and noose and
who is (naturally) possessed of the eight mystic powers (the faculty of assuming an atomic
form and so on). (12) (Appearing) in the form of the divine Fish, may He protect me in water
from the (various) species of aquatic creatures, representing the noose of Varuna (the god
of water). May He, who appeared of His own will in the form of a religious student, dwarfish
in stature, guard me on land; and may the same Lord, appearing in His cosmic form as
Trivikrama (He who measured the entire universe in less than three paces) guard me in the
air. (13) May the almighty Lord Nrsirhha (who appeared in a queer form, half man and half
lion), the Slayer of Hiranyakasipu (the leader of the demon hosts), protect me in places full
of danger, such asa forest (infested with wild beasts etc.) and the fore-front ofa battle—Lord
