516 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 20

SEMPRE RE Re A eet TE Re Oe SWE Y San Oe er or tr tre oe eo een ten et eo Sete wr Re eRe HHH HH ७३ ॥
OO IEE SEH A HY ES HSH Wr EW We

prayer, (when) implored by them; but certainly He does not confer the real boon (on such
men) as (is evident from the fact that) their supplication is renewed (not long) after their
prayer is granted. To them (however) who adore Him, seeking nothing (of Him), He
vouchsafes (reveals) of His own accord His own lotus-feet, which satiate (one's) longings
(for all time). (27) If there is (any) religious merit—following from a good sacrifice duly
performed, a religious discourse properly delivered or (any other noble) act done by us (in
a previous existence)—still left (to our credit) after (enjoying) the pleasures of heaven, O,
let us be blessed with an incarnation in the Ajanabhavarsa’* (Bharatavarsa), endowed with
(the) consciousness (that Sri Hari alone is worthy of adoration), inasmuch as (we know that)
Sri Hari extends (His) blessing (grace) to those who worship Him. (28)
श्रीशुक उवाच
जम्बूद्वीपस्य च राजन्नुपद्वीपानष्टौ हैक उपदिशन्ति सगरात्मजैरश्वान्वेषण sai महीं परितो
निखनद्भिरुपकल्पितान्। २९॥ तद्यथा स्वर्णप्रस्थश्चन्द्रशुक्ल आवर्तनो रमणको मन्दरहरिण: पाञ्जजन्य:
सिंहलो agit | ३० । एवं तव भारतोत्तम जम्बूद्वीपवर्षविभागो चथोपदेशमुपवर्णित इति । ३१ |

Sri Suka went on : Some (wise men), 0 king, speak of eight minor Dwipas (islands),
comprised in Jambddwipa and brought into existence by the sons of king Sagara while
digging up this globe on all sides in the course of their search for the horse (released by their
father preparatory to the performance of a horse-sacrificet). (29) They are known as
Swarnaprastha, Candrasukla, Avartana, Ramanaka, Mandaraharina, Paficajanya, Sirhhala
and Lanka. (30) In this way the division of JambUdwipa into (so many) Varsas has been
described to you, O jewel among the descendants of Bharata, even as | was told (by my
preceptor). (31)

Thus ends the nineteenth discourse entitled "A description of Jambudwipa," in Book
Five of the great and glorious Bhagavata-Purana, otherwise known
as the Paramahamsa-Samhita.

सट १५९८ ३ न्ना fe
PIPTESE RS pre

अथ बविंशोऽध्याय:

Discourse XX
A description of the other six Dwipas and the
mountain-range called Lokaloka

श्रीशुक उवाच
फाक्षख्येनपरिंक्षिप्तोयधाफ्रिंखाबाह्योपबनेन।प्तक्षोजम्बूप्नमष्णोद्बीपाखाक्तोहिरण्मयउत्थितो

* We have already seen how this subdivision तं the terrestrial globe, was previously called Ajanabhavarsa and came
to be known as Bharatavarsa after the name of its illustrious ruler, Emperor Bharata (vide. V. vii. 3).

tT Vide IX. viii. 8-9.
