430 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 30

Wee RW He Be MMe He eR VE ERS eR WL We ERT He Ew Ry RE RR RRR OR Re HEEB RE RC RHR OM AOE RR ७.७.७.७.७.७.७.७.७ १७ ७७0
णात्तर्त्त

अथ त्रिंशोऽध्याय:

Discourse XXX

Bhagavan Visnu confers a boon on the Pracetas, who then return to their

city and marry the foster-daughter of the trees

विदुर उवाच
a त्वयाभिहिता ब्रह्मन् Ga: प्राचीनबर्हिष: । ते रुद्रगीतेन aft सिद्धिमापु: sare काम्। १ ।
fe बार्हस्पत्येहे wa वाथ कैवल्यनाथप्रियपार्श्ववर्तिन: |
आसाद्य aa fie यदृच्छया प्रापु: परं नूनमथ प्रचेतस: । २ |

Vidura said ; What reward did the sons of Pracinabarhi, mentioned by you, get, O holy
sage, by propitiating Sri Hari through (the repetition of) the hymn sung by Sri Rudra ? (1)
Having accidentally met with (secured the presence of) Lord Siva (who lives on Mount
Kailasa), | am sure, the Pracetas, who were able to win the grace of that divine Personage,
the favourite of Bhagavan Narayana (the Dispenser of Liberation) must have eventually

accomplished the supreme object of their life (in the shape of finai beatitude). What (else)
did they achieve, O Maitreya (pupil of the sage Brhaspati), either here or hereafter ? (2)

प्रचेतसोऽन्तरुदधौ पितुरादेशकारिण: । जपयज्ञेन तपसा पुरञ्जनमतोषयन् । ३ ।
दशवर्षसहस्रान्ते पुरुषस्तु सनातन: | तेषामाविरभूत्कृच्छं शान्तेन शमयन् रुचा । ४ |

सुपर्णस्कन्धमारूढो मेरुशृङ्गमिवाम्बुद: | पीतवासा मणिग्रीव: कुर्वन् वितिमिरा दिश: । ५ ।
अष्टायुधैरनुचरैर्मुनिभि: सुरेन्ररासेवितो गरुडकिन्नरगीतकीर्ति: । ६ ।
पीनायताष्टभुजमण्डलमध्यलक्ष्मा स्पर्धच्छ्या परिवृतो वनमालयाऽऽद्य: |
aad: पुरुष आह सुतान् प्रपन्नान् पर्जन्यनादरुतया सघृणावलोक: । ७ |
Maitreya replied : In obedience to the commands of their father (king Pracinabarhi) the
Pracetas propitiated Lord Sri Hari (the Creator of all bodies) through worship i in the form of
repeating the hymn sung by Sri Rudra and austerities carried on in water in a lake almost
as extensive as the ocean (vide IV. xxiv. 14). (3) At the end of a myriad years Bhagavan
Narayana (the supreme and eternal Purusa) appeared (before them) in His placid form
(consisting of Sattva unmixed with Rajas and Tamas), soothing by His (very) effulgence their
agony (caused by long and severe austerities). (4) Mounted on the shoulders of Garuda (the
king of the birds), He looked like a cloud settled on a peak of Meru (the mountain of gold),
was dressed in yellow and had the Kaustubha gem suspended from His neck, by the
splendour of which (and above all by His own effulgence) He drove away the darkness from
(all) the quarters. (5) Not only His cheeks but His entire face shone brightly with brilliant gold
ornaments presenting a variety of attractive hues (due to the various precious stones
embedded in them): He wore (on His head) a glorious crown and was waited upon by His
eight weapons (viz., a conch, a lotus, an arrow, a bow, a mace, a sword and a shield,
appearing in living forms, though usually adorning His eight arms) as well as by (a number
of) attendants, sages and rulers of gods (Brahma and others), His glory sung by Garuda like
the Kinnaras (through the music of his wings). (6) Encircled on the bosom by a wreath of
sylvan flowers whose splendour vied with that of Goddess Laksmi, adorning the space
enclosed by His eight long and rounded arms, Lord Narayana (the most ancient Person)
spoke to the sons of Barhisman—who had sought His protection—in a voice (deep) as the
