Dis. 8] BOOK SEVEN 681

RHKRAERH HH HH eo ee eh LRKKREAKHCKHHAKEREHE HSS tere Hee ARS SERA rer etre to tot eh Pe

अथाष्टमोऽध्याय:

Discourse VIII
Lord Nrsimha extolled on the death of the demon king
(at His hands)

ARG उवाच
अथ देत्यसुता: wd श्रुत्वा तदनुवर्णितम् । जगृहुर्निरवद्यत्वान्नैव गुर्वनुशिक्षितम् । १ ।
अथाचार्यसुतस्तेषां बुद्धिमेकान्तसंस्थिताम्। sneer भीतस्त्वरितो राज्ञ आवेदयद् यथा । २ |

gen तदप्रियं eat gee तनयानयम्। कोपावेशचलङ्गात्र: पुत्रं हन्तुं wt दधे । ३ ।

Narada resumed : Onhearing his (Prahrada's) exhortation all the Daityas’ sons forthwith
accepted it because of its faultlessness, but not the teaching of their preceptor. (1) Alarmed
to perceive their mind intent on (the realization of) a single purpose (viz., devotion to the
Lord), the preceptor's son thereupon quickly and correctly reported the matter to the king.(2)
Hearing of that unwelcome misdemeanour on the part of his son (Prahrada), which was hard
to bear, Hiranyakasipu made up his mind to dispose of his son, his limbs shaking under the
impulse of anger. (3)

fact परुषया वाचा प्रह्रादमतदर्हणम्। आहेक्षमाण: पापेन तिरश्चीनेन च्लक्षुषा । ४ ।
प्रश्रयावनतं दान्ते बद्धाञ्जलिमवस्थितम्।सर्प: पदाहत इव श्वसन्प्रकृतिदारुण: । ५ ।
हे दुर्बिनीत मन्दात्मन्कुलभेदकराधम । स्तब्धं मच्छासनोद्भूतं नेष्ये त्वाद्य यमक्षयम् । ६ |
क्रुद्धस्य यस्य कम्पन्ते त्रयो लोका: सहेश्वरा: । तस्य मेऽभीतवन्मूढ aed किम्बलोऽत्यगा: । ७ |
Reproaching in a harsh language Prahrada—who was not only (thoroughly) disciplined
but was bent low with modesty and standing with joined palms and (as such) was (altogether)
undeserving of such treatment—and regarding him with a wicked and crooked eye, the
demon, who was cruel by nature, spoke (as follows), hissing (all the time) like a serpent struck
with the foot:—(4-5) "O unruly, stupid wretch, causing discord in our family, | shall despatch
you this (very) day to the abode of Yama (the god of death)—you, who have grown (so)
obstinate and have slipped away from my authority ! (6) By whose might, O fool, have you
violated, like an undaunted person, the authority of one, viz., myself, before whom, when
angry, (all) the three worlds, including their guardians, shake (with fear)?" (7)
Were उवाच
न mas मे way We स a as afeat uote
परेऽवरेऽमी स्थिरजङ्घमा a weed a at प्रणीता: । ८ ।
स ईश्चर: काल उरुक्रमोऽसावोज:-सह:सत्त्वबलेन्द्रियात्मा ।
a एव fai परम: wake: सृजत्यवत्यत्ति गुणत्रयेशा: । ९ |
wart भावमिमं त्वमात्मन: समं मनो aaa न सन्ति विद्विष: ।
ऋतेऽजितादात्मन उत्पथस्थितात् तद्धि ह्यनन्तस्य महत् समर्हणम् । १०॥
ey wu विजित्य लुम्पतो मन्यन्त wh स्वजिता दिशो aa
जितात्मनो ज्ञस्य समस्य देहिनां साधो: स्वमोहप्रभवा: कुत: परे । ११।

Prahrada replied : He is unquestionably the strength not only of mine but yours as well,

[564] B. M. 24—
