Dis. 7 ] BOOK SIX 583
SAAHK SHAH HHHHHH ERS SH HHeEKeEKeHHHeee Hee Seer ereKreHaseaHeHeTeyKEeeIeThAAAha Hane
was being waited upon and extolled. O Pariksit (a descendant of Bharata), by the Siddhas,
Caranas, Gandharvas, sages who were (great) expositors of the Vedas, as well as by the
Vidyadharas (celestial artistes) and Apsaras (celestial nymphs), Kinnaras (another class of
celestial musicians), birds and Nagas (serpent-demons) and his praises were being sweetly
sung. (Duly) provided with a white (royal) umbrella, charming as the orb of the moon, and
other insignia of supreme royalty such as chowries and fans, he shone most splendid with
(his spouse) Saci (the daughter of Puloma), who shared the throne with him. (2—6) When,
as would appear from the following account, he did not welcome—by rising (from his
throne), offering a seat and other (appropriate) honours—the chief preceptor of (all) the
gods including himself, Brhaspati, the foremost of sages, adored (alike) by the gods as
well as the demons, as he came in, nay, (when) Indra did not stir from his seat even on
seeing the sage (actually) present in the court, the enlightened sage, a (worthy) son of
Angira, went out of the court at once and quietly returned to his own residence, though
powerful (enough to correct his disciple ), (fully) aware of the aberration brought about by
pride of affluence and power. (7—9)

wa प्रतिबुद्ध्येन्द्रो गुरुहेलनमात्मन: । गर्हयामास सदसि स्वयमात्मानमात्मना । १०॥
wa at ममासाधु कृतं वै दभ्रबुद्धिना । यन्मयैश्चर्यमत्तेन गुरु: सदसि कात्कृत: 12k 1
को गृध्येत् पण्डितो लक्ष्मीं त्रिविष्टपपतेरपि । ययाहमासुरं भावं नीतोऽद्य विबुधेश्वर: 1221
येपारमेष्ठचंयिषर्व्यनकञ्चन।प्नत्युत्तिंष्ठेदितिब्रूयुंर्धर्पंतेनपरंविदु:।१३।
war कुपथदेष्टृणां पततां तमसि ह्यध:। ये श्रद्दध्युर्वचस्ते वै waren इव । १४॥
अथाहममराचार्यमगाधधिषणं द्विजम् । प्रसादयिष्ये Frere: aitent तच्चरणं स्पृशन् । १५॥

Realizing that very moment the disrespect shown by him towards his preceptor, Indra
spontaneously himself reproached his own self in the court (in the following words):—(10)
"Oh, my conduct has been deplorably unrighteous in that the preceptor was slighted in
(open) court by me, a creature of poor wits indeed and maddened by power and
opulence.(11) What prudent person will covet the fortune even of the lord of paradise, by
which |, the ruler of the gods (who are predominantly Sattvika by nature), have been dragged
into (the slough of) egotism (a demoniac propensity)! (12) They do not know the highest
(standard of) morality who declare that one occupying the throne of a suzerain lord should
not rise (from one's seat) to receive anybody. (13) They that believe the words of the
aforesaid misleading guides—who undoubtedly (themselves) fall down into the dark
regions of hell—surely sink (into the abysmal depths of hell) like those embarking ona ship
ofrock. (14) Guilelessly touching his feet with my head (therefore), | shall presently propitiate
the (kind-hearted) Brahmana, the preceptor of (all) the gods, who is endowed with
fathomless intelligence. (15)

एवं चिन्तयतस्तस्य मघोनो भगवान् गृहात्। बृहस्पतिर्गतोऽदृष्टां गतिमध्यात्ममायया । १६
गुरोर्नाधिगत: संज्ञां परीक्षन् भगवान् स्वराट्। ध्यायन् धिया सुरैर्युक्त: at नालभतात्मन: 1201
तच्छुत्वैवासुरा: Ad आश्रित्यौशानसं मतम्। देवान् प्रत्युद्यमं चक्रुर्दुर्मदा आततायिन: । १८॥
तैर्विसृष्टेषुभिस्तीक्णेर्निर्भिन्नाङ्गोरुबाहव: । ब्रह्माणं WOT जग्मु: सहेन्द्रा नतकन्धरा: 1221
तांस्तथाभ्यर्दितान् वीक्ष्य भगवानात्मभूरज:। कृपया परया देव उवाच परिसान्त्वयन् । 20 |

While Indra was pondering thus (even at the court), the all-wise Brhaspati (who knew
what was going on in Indra's mind as well as what was in store for him) disappeared from
his house by dint of his extraordinary Yogic power. (16) Getting no clue to the whereabouts
of his preceptor, though looking for him all round, the glorious Indra reflected by force of
reason (how to get the better of his powerful enemies, the demon hosts, in the absence of
