704 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 9

RESALE AAA A EAE EE २२२२ २००२ १२ BEE RRR RRR RRR ER REE LAA HE

सक्ष्मान्तरिक्षं सदिवं सभागणं त्रैलोक्यमासीत् सह दिग्भिराष्रुतम्।

स एक एवोर्वर्तो महामुनिर्बभ्राम विक्षिप्य जटा जडान्धवत् eu!

aye मकरैस्तिमिङ्गिलैरुपद्गुतो वीचिनभस्वता हत: |

तमस्यपारे पतितो भ्रमन् fat न वेद खे mt च परिश्रमेषित: ।१६॥
क्कचिद् गतो महावर्ते तरलैस्ताडित: क्वचित् । यादोभिर्भक्ष्यते क्वापि स्वयमन्योन्यघातिभि: igo!
क्वचिच्छोकं क्वचिन्मोहं क्वचिद् दु:खं सुखं भयम् । क्वचिन्मृत्युमवाप्नोति  व्याध्यादिभिरुतार्दित: 1१८1
अयुतायुतवर्षाणां सहस्राणि aati च । व्यतीयुर्भरमतस्तस्मिन् विष्णुमायावृतात्मन: 1231

One day, at eventide, 0 jewel among the Bhrgus ! while the sage was worshipping the
Lord on the bank of the river Puspabhadra, O Brahmana sage! a furious wind sprang up.(10)
Following close upon the blast, that made a terrible noise, appeared frightful clouds attended
with flashes of lightning, and poured all round volleys of rain as thick as the axle of achariot,
loudly rumbling. (11) Then there were seen the oceans inthe four quarters with most terrible
whirlpools, fearful crocodiles and a loud roar, engulfing the earth onall sides with their waves
tossed by the fury of the storm. (12) The sage felt perturbed at heart and was dismayed to
behold the fourfold creation (as consisting of mammals, oviparous creatures, the sweat-born
and those sprouting from the soil) alongwith himself tormented inside as well as outside by
waves that rose tothe skies as well as by severe blasts and strokes of lightning, and the earth
deluged with water. (13) While he was thus looking on, the boundless ocean—that looked
terrible with its waves and with its waters tossed about by a violent wind, and was being
flooded by the raining clouds—submerged the earth alongwith its Dwipas (broad divisions)
and Varsas (subdivisions) and mountains. (14) The whole universe, comprising the earth
and the aerial region and including heaven and the hosts of luminaries, was deluged
alongwith the (four) quarters (and the entire living creation). The great sage Markandeya,
who was the only living being left alive, drifted along like a stupid and blind creature tossing
about his matted looks. (15) Oppressed with hunger and thirst, assailed by alligators and
whales, beaten by storm and waves, enveloped in endless darkness and overcome with
exhaustion, the sage, while drifting along, could not make out the directions, nor the sky and
earth. (16) Now fallen into a great whirlpool, and now buffeted by waves, he was sometimes
bitten by the aquatic creatures, themselves killing one another (in their attempt to seize
him).(17) Now he fell a prey to grief and now to infatuation; now he experienced sorrow and
at other times joy; now he fell a victim to fear and now he suffered death; while at other times
he was afflicted with diseases and so on. (18) Millions upon millions of years rolled away in
the eyes of the sage, (even) ashe remained drifting along in that deluge, his judgment having
been clouded by the enchanting potency of Lord Visnu.(19)

‘a कदाचिद् भ्रमंस्तस्मिन् पृथिव्या: ककुदि द्विज: । न्यग्रोधपोतं eA फलपल्लवज्ञोभितम् ।२०॥
प्रागुत्तरस्यां श्ञाखायां तस्यापि eget शिशुम्। war पर्णपुटके WAR प्रभया तम: IRR!
महामरकतद्यामं श्रीमद्वदनपङ्कजम् aga महोरस्कं सुनासं सुन्दरभ्रुवम् 1२२॥
श्वासैजदलकाभातं कम्बुश्रीकर्णदाडिमम् | विद्रुमाधरभासेषच्छोणायितसुधास्मितम् ।२३॥
पद्मगर्भारुणापाङ्गं हृद्यहासावलोकनम् । श्वासैजद्वलिसंविग्ननिम्ननाभिदलोदरम् । २४॥
चार्वङ्गुलिभ्यां पाणिभ्यामुन्नीय चरणाम्बुजम् । मुखे निधाय विग्रेन्द्रो धयन्तं वीक्ष्य विस्मित: 1241

Rolling about in that deluge, the said Brahmana once beheld on an elevation of earth ४
young (and tender) banyan tree adorned with leaves and fruits. (20) On a branch of the tree
located in the north-east he saw a babe as well lying in a hollow leaf and swallowing up the
