Dis. 45 ] BOOK TEN 295:

SADIE ree reine Res ee epee ewer Tet EE CE EEE HH RAE H EMER HEH TTT

ask for the preceptor’s fee of his liking,O King ! (36) Clearly perceiving such marvellous glory
of the two Brothers (in the shape of Their having mastered all sciences and the other
branches of learning without any effort) as well as Their superhuman intelligence, and
deliberating with his wife, O Pariksit, the aforesaid Brahmana (Sandipani) asked for (as his
fee the restoration of) their child lost in the ocean at Prabhasa (the modern Prabhaspatan
in Saurashira), so the tradition goes. (37) Saying "So be it!" and mounting Their chariot, the
two Brothers, who were great car-warriors, of endless powers, presently reached Prabhasa
and, going near the seashore, squatted there for a moment. Coming to know of Their divine
character, the god presiding over the ocean brought presents for Them. (38) The Lord said
to him, "Let My preceptor’s son be restored at once—the same child which was swallowed
up by you in a great wave here." (39)
- TER उवाच

ज्नैवाहार्षमहं देव दैत्य: पञ्चजनो महान्।अन्तर्जलचर: कृष्ण शङ्खरूपधरोऽसुर: ।४०॥

आस्ते तेनाहतो नूनं तच्छुत्वा सत्वरं प्रभु:। Temes तं हत्वा नापर्यदुदरेऽर्भकम् । ४१1

तदङ्गप्रभवं शङ्खमादाय रथमागमत्। तत: संयमनीं नाम यमस्य दयितां पुरीम् ।४२॥

Tar waa: ag seat सहलायुध: । शङ्खनिर्ह्यदमाकर्ण्य प्रजासंयमनो यम: 1631

`तयो: qual महतीं चक्रे भक्त्युपबृंहिताम्। उवाचावनत: कृष्णं सर्वभूताशायालयम्।

लीलामनुष्य हे विष्णो युवयो: करवाम किम् ॥४४॥

The god of the ocean replied : "I did not carry away the child, 0 Lord! There is a great
demon belonging to the Daitya class, Paficajana (by name), who lives under waterin the form
of aconch, O Krsna! The child was surely carried away by him." Hearing it the Lord speedily
plunged into the water but on killing the demon did not find the child in his bowels. (40-41)
Taking the conch that formed his body the Lord returned to the chariot. Then, going to the
beloved city of Yama, Samnyamani by name, Sri Krsna (who is solicited by the people),
accompanied by Balarama (who had a plough for his weapon), blew the (same) conch.
Hearing the blast of the conch Yama, the chastiser of the people (transgressing the scriptural
ordinance), offered to Them both worship ona grand scale, accompanied with devotion, and,
bending low (with humility), addressed (as follows) Sri Krsna, who has His abode in the heart
of all created beings (as the Inner Controller of all), "O Visnu (the all-pervading Lord)
disguised as a human being by way of sport,what can we do for You both 2" (42—44)

श्राभगवानुवाच
गुरुपुत्रमिहानीतं निजकर्मनिबन्धनम्। आनयस्व महाराज मच्छासनपुरस्कृत: ॥४५॥
aa तेनोपानीतं गुरुपुत्रं यदूत्तमौ । दत्त्वा स्वगुरवे भूयो वृणीघ्वेति तमूचतु: 1४६1
The glorious Lord said : "Impelled by My command, O great ruler, fetch My preceptor’s
son, who was brought here as a result of his own Karma." (45) Handing over to Their

preceptor his son, brought by Yama with the words "So be it!” the two Brothers, the foremost
of the Yadus, said to him, "(Be pleased to) ask for another boon (of your choice)." (46)

गुरुरुवाच
सम्यक् संपादितो वत्स भवद्भ्यां गुरुनिष्क्रय: । को नु युष्मद्विधगुरो: कामानामवशिष्यते ।४७।
Ted स्वगृहं a कीर्तिर्वामस्तु पावनी । छन्दांस्ययातयामानि भवन्त्विह Ta alec!

गुरुणैमनुज्ञातौ रथेनानिलरंहसा । आवातौ wat तात पर्जन्यनिनदेन चै ॥४९॥
