Dis. 7] BOOK THREE 161

RUKLCKHHHA KE HKH AK CCHALEKCEHERKHKC ECE HAA HEE EHS TH ee hI toni i ite Retin

एतस्मिन्मे मनो fag खिद्यतेऽज्ञानसङ्कटे। aa: पराणुद fast कश्मलं मानसं महत्। ७ |

Vidura asked : O holy sage, how can the Lord, who is pure consciousness,
immutable and unqualified (absolute), come to be associated with attributes and activity
evenin sport? (2) Itis the hankering (for pleasure) and the desire to play with another (child
or plaything) that impels a child to betake itself to play. But how can the Lord, whois satisfied
in Himself and is ever one without a second, take to play ? (3) It was through His own Maya,
consisting of the three Gunas (Sattva, Rajas and Tamas), that the Lord created the universe.
Nay, itis through the same Maya that He sustains it and shall finally withdraw it. (4) How can
He whose knowledge—which is His very nature—is never obscured by space, time or
circumstance either by itself or through any other external cause, be associated with
Maya?(5) It is the Lord alone who is present in all bodies (as the enjoyer); how can there be
any ill luck for Him, and how can He suffer any agony due toKarmas ?(6) My mind, O sage,
is much distracted, stuck as it is in this morass of ignorance. Remove, my lord, this great
confusion of my mind. (7)

IR उवाच

स sa चोदित: aren तत्त्वजिज्ञासुना मुनि: i sare भगवच्चित्त: स्मयन्निव wae: । ८ |
Sri Suka went on: Interrupted thus by Vidura, who was keen to know the truth, the sage,
who was free from all conceit replied as though smiling (at him), his mind fixed on the Lord. (8)

aay उवाच

aa भगवतो माया यन्नयेन विरुध्यते। deca विमुक्तस्य कार्पण्यमुत बन्धनम् । ९ |
यदर्थेन विनामुप्य पुंस आत्मविपर्यय: । प्रतीयत उपद्रष्टु: स्वशिररछेदनादिक: 1201
यथा जले चन्द्रमस: कम्पादिस्तत्कृतो गुण: । दृश्यतेऽसन्नपि द्रष्टुरात्मनो नात्मनो WT: । ११।
a वै निवृत्तिधर्मेण वासुदेवानुकम्पया। भगवद्भक्तियोगेन तिरोधत्ते ङानैरिह । १२।
यदेन्दियोपरामोऽथ द्रष्टात्मनि परे हरौ | विलीयन्ते तदा क्लेशा: संसुप्तस्येव कृत्स्नश: 1231

अशेषसंक्लेशाशमं विधत्ते गुणानुवाद्श्रवणं AM: ।

कुत: पुनस्तच्चरणारविन्दपरागसेवारतिरात्मलब्धा । 2% |

Maitreya said : That the Spirit, who is the ruler (of Prakrti) and ever free, should feel
miserable and fall into bondage is against all logic; yet such is the Lord's Maya (deluding
potency). (9) It is because of this Maya that the Jiva appears to be bound etc., (which is
something contrary to its nature), even though such bondage does not exist in reality, just
as aman sees himself beheaded in a dream (even though in reality his head has not been
severed). (10) Again, just as trembling and other characteristics, which are attributable to
water alone, are seen in the moon (as reflected) in water, though really non-existent there-
in, so the attributes (birth etc.) of the body (which is not the soul) appear in the soul that has
identified itself with a body. (11) That false identification gradually disappears through the
practice of devotion to the Lord, which is possible only by the grace of Lord Vasudeva (Sri
Krsna), which in its turn is secured by discharging one's duties in a disinterested spirit in this
world. (12) When the senses have withdrawn from their objects and get exclusively devoted
to Sri Hari, the Supreme Spirit and Seer, all the distractions of the soul (in the shape of
attachment and aversion etc.) vanish as in the case of a man buried in deep sleep. (13) All
one's afflictions are got rid of by uttering and hearing the praises of Sri Krsna (the Slayer of
the demon Mura); what wonder, then, that sucha result should be brought about by fondness
developed in one’s heart for worshipping the dust of His lotus-feet? (14)
