Dis. 11] BOOK ELEVEN 561

अथ age मुक्तस्य वैलक्षण्यं वदामि ai विरुद्धधर्मिणोस्तात स्थितयोरेकधर्मिणि । ५ ।
सुपर्णावेतौ ag wert यदृच्छयैतौ कृतनीडौ च वृक्षे ।
एकस्तयो:ऽ wea पिप्पलान्नमन्यो निरन्नोऽपि ata भूयान्। ६ |
amma च स ae विद्वानपिप्पलादो न तु पिप्पलाद: |
योऽविद्यया aa a तु नित्यबद्धो विद्यामयो a: a a नित्यमुक्त: । ७ ।
देहस्थोऽपि न देहस्थो विद्वान् स्वप्नाद् यथोत्थित: | अदेहस्थोऽपि देहस्थ: कुमति: स्वप्नदृग् यथा । ८ |
इन्दियैरिन्दियार्थेषु गुणैरपि गुणेषु च । गृह्यमाणेषुहं कुर्यान्न विद्वान् यस्त्वविक्रिय: । ९ |
दैवाधीने झरीरेऽस्मिन् गुणभाव्येन कर्मणा । वर्तमानोऽबुधस्तत्र कर्तास्मीति निबद्ध्यते igo

The glorious Lord began again : The characterization ofa Jiva as bound or emancipated
is determined by its being subject or not to (the influence of) the (three) Gunas (modes of
Prakrti) controlled by Me, and has nothing to do with its essential nature. And the Gunas
being rooted in Maya (which is under My control), there is neither emancipation nor bondage
for Me. (1) (Even) as dream is an illusory aspect of the mind, grief and infatuation, joy and
sorrow and embodiment (or the loss of one’s body) are falsely attributed to the Self. (Hence
even) transmigration (of the soul) is not real (out is ascribed to it through ignorance alone).(2)
Know that Saving Knowledge and Ignorance are My potencies, specially brought into being
by My Maya, and have existed without beginning, and make for release and bondage
(respectively of the Jiva), O Uddhava ! (3) Though | am one, O highly intelligent one, it is in
relation to the Jiva alone, a reflection of Mine, that bondage has existed from time immemorial
throughignorance; anditis in relation to the Jiva alone that the other state (release) is brought
about through Knowledge (in the form of Self-Realization vouchsafed by Me). (4) Next |
(proceedto) tell you the distinction between the one in bondage (viz., the Jiva or the individual
soul) and the other who is liberated (viz., God), characterized by contrary properties (viz.,
sorrow and joy respectively), though (co-) existing in one and the same individual, ७ dear
Uddhave! (5) The two (viz., the Jiva and God, the Inner Controller of the Jiva) are (distinct
from the body like) a pair of birds (dwelling on a tree yet apart from it), kindred (in character
as being spiritual in substance) and settled as (constant) companions in the same nest (of
the heart) on the tree (of the body) by forceof Maya (the divine Will). One of them (viz., the
Jiva) partakes of the fruit (in the shape of joy and sorrow to be experienced) in the peepul
tree of the body (as a result of past good and evil deeds); while the other (viz., God), though
going without food (in the shape of those pleasurable and painful experiences) is (always)
superior (to the former) in strength (the strength of wisdom etc.).* (6) (Of the two
aforementioned,) the enlightened one (viz., God), who does not partake of the fruit of the
peepul tree, knows Himself as well as the other (the Jiva); but not so the one who partakes
of the fruit of the peepul tree. Again, the one who is characterized by ignorance (viz., the Jiva)
has been in bondage from eternity; while He who is all Knowledge (viz., God) is ever free.(7)
An enlightened soul (a Jivanmukta) is not tied to the body even though he remains in the body
(by force of his past Samskaras), any more than one who has awoke from a dream (remains
tiedto the dream body, though continuing in that body in thought). A man of pervertedintellect
(who looks upon the body alone as his self) remains identified (on the contrary) with his body,
though not (essentially) confined within it, (even) as one whois (actually) seeing a dream is
identified with his dream body, though not (actually) present in it. (8) Remaining unaffected

* This very idea linds expression in the lollowing Sruti text:—
व सुपर्णा सयुजा arn समानं वृक्षं परिषस्वजाते । तयोरेक: पिष्पल स्वाद्वन्यनश्नन्नन्योऽभिचाकशीति ॥
