Dis. 17 ] BOOK SIX 633

नारायणपरा: सर्वे न कुतश्चन बिभ्यति । स्वर्गापवर्गनरकेषुपि तुल्यार्थदर्शिन: । २८।
देहिनां देहसंयोगाद् इवन्दवानीश्वरलीलया । सुखं दु:खं मृतिर्जन्म शापोऽनुग्रह wa च । २९॥
अविवेककृत: पुंसो ह्यर्थभेद इवात्मनि । गुणदोषविकल्पश्च भिदेव स्रजिवत्कृत: 1301
वासुदेवे भगवति भक्तिमुद्वहतां नृणाम् । ज्ञानवैराग्यवीर्याणां नेह कश्चिद् व्यपाश्रय: ।३१॥
नाहं विरिञ्चो न कुमारनारदौ न ब्रह्मपुत्रा मुनय: gem
विदाम यस्येहितमंशकांशका न aT पृथगीशमानिन: 1321
न ह्यस्यास्ति प्रिय: कश्चिन्नाप्रिय: स्व: परोऽपि वा । आत्मत्वात्सर्वभूतानां सर्वभूतप्रियो हरि: 1331
तस्य चायं महाभागश्चित्रकेतु: प्रियोऽनुग: । सर्वत्र समदृक् ae ह्यहं चैवाच्युतप्रिय: । ३४॥
wera विस्मय: कार्य: पुरुषेषु महात्मसु | महापुरुषभक्तेषु शान्तेषु समदर्शिषु । ३५॥

Sri Rudra said : You have seen (with your own eyes), O fair one, the glory of the high-
souled servants of servants of Lord Sri Hari of marvellous deeds, who are free from craving
(of every kind). (27) All those (who are devotedto Lord Narayana have no fear from any quarter
whatsoever for they find the same use (no use) for heaven, for final beatitude and even for
the infernal regions (perceiving as they do the same Reality pervading everywhere). (28)
It is (only) through the deluding potency of God that souls are invested with a body and it
is due to their connection with a body that pairs of Opposites such as joy and sorrow, life and
death, execration and benediction are experienced by embodied souls. (29) The notion of
desirability and otherwise (with reference to pleasure and pain etc.), toois really the outcome
of a man's ignorance (and therefore illusory) just like the distinction of pleasurable and
painful experiences etc., with reference to one's own self (in a dream), and has been
precisely conceived as the notion of a snake etc., with reference toa wreath of flowers. (30)
There is no object in this world worth resorting to in particular for men cherishing devotion
to Lord Vasudeva and equipped with the strength of wisdom and dispassion. (31) Neither
myself nor Brahma (the creator), nor the Sages Sanatkumara and Narada, nor even the
(other) sages (Bhrgu, Angira and so on) begotten by Brahma nor the rulers of gods (Indra,
Yama and others) know His intention. Much less can those accounting themselves
independent lords (of the universe), though mere parts of His partial manifestations, know
His (true) nature. (32) None indeed is dear and none hateful to Him; none is His own and
none alien to Him either. Being the very Self of all living beings, Sri Hari is the beloved of all
creatures. (33) And this highly blessed Citraketu is His beloved servant, looking on all with
the same eye and tranquil (by nature); and indeed | tooam a devotee of the immortal Lord (and
hence did not feel perturbed by his behaviour at all). (34) Therefore, you should have no wonder
in regard to (the behaviour of those) high-souled men who are devotees of Lord Visnu (the
Supreme Person) and tranquil (by nature) and who view all with the same eye. (35)

श्रीरुक उवाच
इति श्रुत्वा भगवत: शिवस्योमाभिभाषितम् aya sat राजन् देवी विगतविस्मया 1361
इति भागवतो gen: प्रतिशप्तुमलन्तम: get सञ्जगृहे श्ञापमेतावत्साधुलक्षणम् | ३७॥
जज्ञे त्वष्टुर्दक्षिणाम्नौ दानवीं योनिमाश्रित: । वृत्र इत्यभिविख्यातो ज्ञानविज्ञानसंयुत: । ३८॥
एतत्ते सर्वमाख्वातं wt त्वं परिपृच्छसि | वृत्रस्यासुरजातेश्च कारणं भगवन्मते: । ३९॥
इतिहासमिमं पुण्यं चिन्रर्कार्म्महात्मन:।पाहाव्यंविष्णुंभक्तन्धांश्रुत्वाबन्माद्बिपुच्यतेन्धिं॰।
च एतत्मातरुत्थाय श्रद्धया वाग्यत: पठेत्। इतिहासं हरिं स्मृत्वा स याति परमां गतिम् ।४१॥

