672 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA { Dis. 2

a aia द्वितीयोऽध्याय:

Discourse Il

The Evils of Kaliyuga
श्रीगुक उवाच

ततश्चानुदिनं धर्म: aa ate क्षमा दया । कालेन बलिना राजन् नङ्क्ष्यत्यायुर्बलं स्मृति: । १ ।

वित्तमेव कलौ qui जन्माचारगुणोदय: । धर्मन्यायव्यवस्थायां कारणं बलमेव fe २ |

दाम्पत्येऽभिरुचिर्हेतुर्मायैव व्यावहार्कि । aia पुंस्त्वे च fe रतिर्विप्रत्वॆ सूत्रमेव हि । ३ ।

लिङ्गमेवाश्रमख्यातावन्योन्यापत्तिकारणम् । अवृत्त्या न्यायदौर्बल्यं पाण्डित्ये चापलं wa: । ४ ।

अनाढ्यतैवासाधुत्वे साधुत्वे TT एव तु। स्वीकार wa चोद्वाहे स्रानमेव प्रसाधनम् 4 |

दूरे वार्ययनं dd लावण्यं qemu उदरम्भरता a: सत्यत्वे apis हि । ६ ।

aed कुटुम्बभरणं aise धर्मसेवनम्।एवं प्रजाभिर्दुष्टाभिराकीर्णे fafa । ७ |

ब्रह्मविद्क्षत्रशूद्रार्णां यो बली भविता नृप:। प्रजा fe लुब्धै राजन्यैर्निर्घृणैर्दस्युधर्मभि: । ८ ।

आच्छिन्नदारद्रविणा यास्यन्ति गिरिकाननम्। झाकमूलामिषक्षोद्रफलपुष्पाष्टिभोजना: । ९ ।

क्षुत्तृडभ्यां व्याधिभिश्चैव सन्तप्स्यन्ते च चिन्तया । त्रिंशद्विंशतिवर्षाणि परमायु: कलौ नॄणाम् । ११।

क्षीयमाणेषु देहेषु देहिनां कलिदोषत: । वर्णाश्रमवतां धर्मे नष्टे वेदपथे नॄणाम् ।१२॥

पाखण्डप्रचुरे धर्मे दस्युप्रायेषु राजसु ।चौर्यानृतवृथाहिंसानानावृत्तिषु वै FH ।१३॥

शूद्रप्रायेषु वर्णेषुच्छागप्रायासु धेनुषु । गृहप्रायेष्ठाश्रमेषु योनप्रायेषु बन्धुषु ।१४॥

अणुप्रायास्वोषधीषु दामीप्रायेषु Teg i विद्युत्मायेषु मेघेषु शून्यप्रायेषु सद्मसु ।१५॥

wai कलौ गतप्राये जने तु खरधर्मिणि। धर्मत्राणाय सत्त्वेन भगवानवतरिष्यति eel
Sri Suka began again: Thenceforward, day after day. by force of the all-powerful Time,
Oking, righteousness, veracity, purity (of mind and body), forgiveness, compassion, length
of life, bodily strength and keenness of memory will decline. (1) In the Kali age wealth alone
will be the criterion of pedigree, morality and merit Again, might will be the only factor
determining righteousness and fairness. (2) (Personal) liking will be the deciding factor in
making the choice of a partner in life, and trickery alone will be the motive force in business
dealings. Capability of affording sexual delight will be the (only) criterion ol masculine or
feminine excellence and the sacred thread will be the only mark of Brahmanhood. (3)
External marks will be the only means of knowing the ASrama or stage in life (of an individual)
and the (only) guide in determining the mode of greeting which people should adopt when
meeting one another. Justice will have every chance of being vitiated because of one's
inability to gratify those administering it, and voluble speech will be the (only) criterion of
scholarship. (4) Want of riches will be the sole test of imprety and hypocrisy will be the only
touchstone of goodness. (Mutual) consent will be the sole determining factor in marriage and
toilet alone will be regarded as a sign of bath. (5) A distant tank or pond will be the (only) holy
resort for bath etc., and wearing (long) hair will be regarded as the (only) sign of beauty Filling
one's belly will be the (only) end of human pursuit and audacity of speech will be the only
criterion of veracity. (6) Skill will consist in supporting one’s family. virtuous deeds will be
performed (only) with the object of gaining fame: and when ।। this way the terrestrial globe

will be overrun by wicked people, the person who would prove to be the most powerful
amongst the Brahmanas. Ksatnyas, Vaisyas and Sudras will become the ruler Robbed of
