714 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA Dis. 11

BENCH ACB BORSA MACRO शाशा BC SETAE RL EER TE PARE BBA AER RB AEA BE BEB HA सि

of Lord Visnu), a different batch presided over by the Sun-god, consisting of seven”
remains on duty month after month. (27) (Pray.) tell us, who are full of reverence, about
the (said) entourage of Lord Sri Hari, appearing in the form of the Sun-god—in other words,
the names and functions of those groups (of six pairs) combined with the deities presiding
over them. (28) ६

सूत उवाच

अनाद्यविद्यया विष्णोरात्मम: सर्वदेहिनाम्। निर्मितो लोकतन्त्रोऽवं लोकेषु परिवर्तते ire
एक wa हि लोकानां सूर्य आत्माऽदिकृद्धरि: | सर्ववेदक्रियामूलमृषिभिर्बहुधोदित: 1 ३०
कालो ar: क्रिया कर्ता करणं कार्यमागम: । द्रव्यं फलमिति ब्रह्मन् नवधोक्तोऽजया ER: ।३१॥
मध्वादिषु ger भगवान् कालरूपधृक्।लोकतन्त्राय चरति पृथग्दादशभिर्गणै: 1321
Brought into existence by the dateless Maya of Lord Visnu, the Inner Controller of (all)
embodied souls, this (visible) sun, which keeps the world going on, courses through the
spheres. (29) Though one without a second, the Sun-god—who is really the same as Sn
Hari, the Soul and first Cause (of the worlds)}—has been spoken ofby the seers underdiverse
names inasmuch as He is the source of all Vedic rites. (30) Because of His Maya (which has
no beginning) Sri Hari has been called, O Brahmana sage, by nine names as time, place,
activity, the doer, an instrument, duty, a sacred text, material substance {rice etc.), and the
fruit (heaven etc.). (81) Assuming the form of Time (out of the aforesaid nine), in order to keep
the world going on, the Lord (as the Sun-god) runs His course through the twelve months
beginning from Caitra, alongwith His twelve different batches of attendants. (32)

धाता कृतस्थली हेतिर्वासुकी रथकृन्मुने। पुलस्त्यस्तुम्नुरुरिति मधुमासं नयन्त्यमी ।३३॥
aim पुलहोऽथौजा: प्रहेति: पुञ्जिकस्थली । नारद: कच्छनीरश्च नयन्त्येते स्म माधवम् ।३४॥
मित्रोऽत्रि पषौरुषेयोऽथ तक्षको मेनका हहा:। रथस्वन इति ह्येते aaa नयन्त्यमी 1३५॥
वसिष्ठो वरुणो wo सहजन्यस्तथा हुहू: । शुक्रश्चित्रस्वनश्चैव gfe नयन्त्यमी ।३६॥
इन्द्रो विश्वावसु: sie एलापत्रस्तथाङ्निरा: । प्रम्लोचा राक्षसो वर्यो नभोमासं नयन्त्वमी । ३७
विवस्वानुग्रसेनश्च व्याघ्र आसारणो भृगु: । अनुम्लोचा हङ्खपालो नभस्याख्यं नयन्त्यमी ।३८॥
पूषा धनञ्जयो वात: सुषेण: सुरुचिस्तथा। घृताची गौतमश्चेति तपोमासं नयन्त्यमी । ३९1
क्रतुर्वर्चा भरद्वाज: पर्जन्य: सेनजित्तथा। विश्व ऐरावतश्चैव तपस्याख्यं नयन्त्यमी ।४०॥
aq: करश्यपस्तार्क्य ऋतसेनस्तथोर्वशी । विद्युच्छत्रुर्महाशङ्ख: सहोमासं नयन्त्यमी vel
am: स्फूर्जोऽरिष्टनेमिरूर्ण sige पञ्चम: । कर्कोटक: पूर्वचित्ति: पुष्यमासं नयन्त्यमी ।४२1
त्वष्टा ॠऋचीकतनय: कम्बलश्च तिलोत्तमा। ब्रह्मापेतोऽथ ञञतजिद् धृतराष्ट्र इषम्भरा: ।४३॥
विष्णुरश्चतरो रम्भा सूर्यवर्चाश्च सत्यजित्। fare मखापेत ऊर्जमासं नयन्त्यमी xs

The Sun-god (under the name of Dhata), Krtasthali (the Apsara), Heti (the ogre), Vasuki
(the Naga), Rathakrt (the Yaksa), Pulastya (the sage) and Tumburu (the Gandharva)—these
(seven) run the month of Caitra. (83) Aryama, Pufijikasthali, Praheti, Kacchanira, Athauja,
Pulaha and Narada—these run the month of Vaisakha.t (34) Mitra, Menaka, Pauruseya,
Taksaka, Rathaswana, Atri and Hahaé—these run the month of Jestha. (35) Varuna,
Rambha, Citraswana, Sukra, Sahajanya, Vasistha and HahU—these run the month of

* The group of seven already referred to in Book Five consists of a pair each of sages, Gandharvas, Apsaras, Nagas,
Yaksas, Raksasas, and the sun-god himself as the sevenih—-Vide V.xx.). 18.
+ The names of the sun-god, Apsara etc., in verse 34 ef eg have been arranged in the order followed in verse 33.
