Dis. 54] BOOK TEN 345

क्षत्रियाणामवं धर्म: प्रजापतिविनिर्मित: | भ्रातापि भ्रातरं हन्याद् येन घोरतरस्तत: ॥४०॥
राज्यस्य भूमेर्वित्तस्य स्रियो मानस्य तेजस: । मानिनोऽन्यस्य वा हेतो: श्रीमदान्धा: क्षिपन्ति fe sel
aaa विषमा af: सर्वभूतेषु दुर्हृदाम्। यन्मन्यसे Fae सुहृदां भद्रमज्ञवत् ।४२॥
aera goats कल्प्यते देवमायया । सुहृद gee इति देहात्ममानिनाम् ।४३॥
एक wa परो men सर्वेषामपि देहिनाम्। नानेव गृह्यते geden ज्योतिर्यथा नभ: ।४४॥
देह आद्यन्तवानेष द्रव्यप्राणगुणात्मक: | आत्पन्यविद्यया ga: संसारयति देहिनम् ISG I

भात्मनोऽन्येन संयोगो वियोगश्चासत: सति । तद्धेतुत्वात्तत्प्रसिद्धेर्दृग्रूपाभ्यां यथा a: ।४६1
जन्मादयस्तु देहस्य विक्रियानात्मन: क्वचित्। कलानामिव नैवेन्दोर्मृतिर्ह्यस्य कुहूरिव sl

यथा Ta आत्मानं विषयान् फलमेव च ! अनुभुङ्क्तेऽप्यसत्यर्थे तथाऽऽप्नोत्यबुधो भवम् 1४८1
तस्मादज्ञानजं शोकमात्मज्लोषविमोहनम् । तत्त्वज्ञानेन Ada स्वस्था wa afar xe

Sri Suka continued ; With His feet thus clasped by Rukmini—whose limbs were
perceptibly shaking with terror, (nay,) whose mouth was being parched and throat choked
through grief and whose gold necklace had been displaced through nervousness—the
merciful Lord desisted (from His purpose). (34) Binding the evil-doer with (his own) scarf, the
Lord disfigured him by shaving him (with the blade of His sword) in such a way as to leave
(intact) a part of his moustaches and locks. Meanwhile the chosen among the Yadava
warriors (led by Balarama) crushed the wonderful army of the enemy (even) as elephants
would trample a lotus plant. (35) Making their way into the presence of Sri Krsna, they found
there Rukmi reduced to that (ignominious) plight and all but dead (through shame). Filled with
pity to see him bound, the almighty Lord Safikarsana released him and spoke to Sri Krsna
(thus):—(36) "Krsna | you have perpetrated an impious act abhorred by our race. (Partially)
removing the moustaches and (curly) locks of a relative and (thereby) disfiguring him is
tantamount to killing him. (37) (Turing towards Rukmini,) please do not take offence with
us, 0 good lady, thinking of the disfiguration of your brother. None else is responsible for
one's joy and sorrow; for a man reaps the fruit of his own doings (in the shape of pleasurable
and painful experiences). (38) A relative does not deserve death at the hands of his relative
even if he has committed an offence deserving such treatment and should be let off. Why
should he who stands killed by his own offence be killed again? (39) Such is the code of
conduct specially prescribed for the Ksatriya race by Brahma (the lord of created beings),
by Virtue of which even a brother is permitted to kill his (own brother). Hence it is (so)
exceedingly cruel. (40) (Reverting to Sri Krsna,) the proud alone, who are blinded by pride
of fortune, offer indignity to their relatives for the sake of dominion, land, (other movable)
property, women, honour, dignity or any other consideration. (41) (Turning to Rukmini once
more.) it is your differential outlook through which you, like an ignorant person, constantly
bear ill-will, among all created beings, to those who are ill-disposed to you, and wish well to those
who are kindly disposed to you (remaining neutral to those who are indifferent to you). (42) By
the Lord's Maya (deluding potency) is engendered this self-deception in the mind of those
who are identified with the body, that a certain individual is your friend, another your enemy
and a third,neutral to you. (43) Indeed the transcendent Self, which is but common to all
embodied beings, is perceived by the ignorant as varied, even as a luminary (such as the
sun orthe moon) is viewed as different (in relation to the different vessels full of water in which.
the luminary is reflected), or as the sky is conceived as different (in relation to the different
apartments or jars in which it is enclosed).(44) This (objective) body (psycho-physical
organism), constituted as it is of physical substances (the five gross elements), the (five)
senses and the objects of their perception (viz., sound, touch, sight, taste and smell), and
has a beginning end an end, and which has been projected through ignorance on the

[565] B.M. Part II—40
