358 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 14
DHAKA क्तिं SELENE LEAH EREEHKESELEEAEECEE REESE ERE LEONE LEHEREE HARA EK SEHK eee
at their prayer being turned down. (30) "Let him be slain; let this wicked fellow pitiless
by nature, be killed ! If he survives, he will surely reduce the (whole) world to ashes in
no time. (31) This immoral man does not deserve the exalted throne of a monarch—he who
shamelessly reviles Lord Visnu, the supreme lord of sacrifices.(32) Who else than this
unlucky Vena, the only one of his kind, would denounce Him by winning whose grace the
fellow attained such affluence and power ?" (33)

इत्थं व्यवसिता हन्तुमृषयो रूढमन्यव: | निजघ्नुहुङकुतैर्वेनं हतमच्युतनिन्दया । ३४

ॠषिभि: स्वाश्रमपदं गते - पुत्रकलेवरम्। सुनीथा पालयामास विद्यायोगेन sired 134!

Thus resolved to get rid of him, the sages, who now gave free vent to their fury,
despatched by their very menacing sounds of Hum’ Vena, who had already been killed by
reproaching the immortal Lord Visnu. (34) The sages having left each for his own hermitage,
the sorrowing Sunitha (Vena's mother) preserved the (dead) body of her son by means of
spells and other devices. (35)

एकदा मुनयस्ते तु सरस्वत्सलिलाप्लता OT: | हुत्वाम्नीन् सत्कथाश्चक्रुरुपविष्टा: सरित्तटे । ३६1
वीक्ष्योत्थितान् महोत्पातानाहुर्लोकभयङ्करान्। अप्यंभ्रद्रमनाथाया दस्युभ्यो न भवेद्भुव: 1391
wa LN त स ratte ice fr x often fa 7 13c1
तदुपद्रवमाज्ञाय Ta ado तस्मिन्नन्योन्यं च जिघांसताम् ।३९॥
arr जनपदं हीनसत्त्वमराजकम्।लोकान्नावारयन् शक्ता अपि तद्दोषदर्शिन: ।`४०॥
ब्राह्मण: WER Wea दीनानां समुपेक्षक: | स्रवते ब्रह्म wera भिन्नभाण्डात्पयो यथा ।४१॥
aga ae राजर्षेरेष संस्थातुमर्हति | अमोघवीर्या fe नृपा वंहोऽस्मिन् केशवाश्रया: 1x21
विनिश्चित्यैवमूषषो विपन्नस्य महीपते: । ममन्थुरूरुं तरसा तत्रासीद्बाहुको नर: ।४३॥
काककृष्णोऽतिह्रुस्वाङ्गो ह्रस्वबाहुर्महाहनु: | ह्रस्वपान्निम्ननासाग्रो रक्ताक्षस्ताम्रमूर्धज: ।`४४॥
तं तु तेऽवनतं दीनं किं करोमीति वादिनम् । निषीदेत्यन्रुवंस्तात स निषादस्ततोऽभवत् ।४५॥
wa वंश्यास्तु नैषादा गिरिकाननगोचरा: | येनाहरज्जायमानो वेनकल्मषमुल्बणम् ।४६1
इति श्रीमद्भागवते महापुराणे पारमहंस्यां संहितायां चतुर्थस्कन्धे पृथुचरिति निषादोत्पत्तिर्नाम चतुर्दशोऽध्वाय: ।१४॥

Having, on one occasion, bathed in the waters of the river Saraswati and offered
oblations into the sacrificial fires, and squatting on the river bank, those sages held
discourses about the Lord. (36) They saw at that time evil portents appearing, which
caused terror to the world, and said (to one another), "No evil may befall the earth on
account of thieves and dacoits, masterless as she is." While the sages were thus reflecting,
a large volume of dust was raised by thieves running in every direction and practising
spoliation wherever they went. (37-38) They then perceived the mischief wrought by those
that looted the property of the people and were disposed to kill one another, now that Vena
(their ruler) was dead. (39) They also came to know that the state had grown weak due to
anarchy and that thieves and dacoits had gained in strength. Though powerful enough (to
arrest the mischief), the sages did not stop the people (responsible for looting etc.),
inasmuch as they were alive to the evil (in the form of violence etc., involved. in
counteracting the mischief). (40) (They, however, said to themselves :) “If a Brahmana,
who looks upon all with the same eye and is tranquil (by nature), ignores the afflicted, the
spiritual energy stored even by him (through penance) will run out like water from a broken
jar. (41) The line of the royal sage Anga (Vena’'s father) too must not get extinct. For in this

race have appeared monarchs (solely depending on Lord Kesava (Visnu) and possessed
of unfailing prowess." (42) Having thus resolved, the sages churned with great velocity the

