538 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 25

HHKKEKAKEKHKAHHEEEKE HH HEE HH ETE केदेन्र RECON SHH EEK EER SHH EH HHRMA

बिलेशया ga वसन्ति ये वै सरमयेन्द्रदूत्या वाग्भिर्मन्त्रवर्णाभिरिन्द्राद् विभ्यति | ३० |

Below that, in (the region of) Rasatala, reside (in holes); like serpents, the (notorious)
sons of Diti and Danu (two of the many wives of the sage Kasyapa, the progenitor of the
various species of living beings), known as the Panis and (further) divided into three classes,
viz., the Nivatakavacas, the Kaleyas, and the denizens of Hiranyapura. (Natural) enemies
of the gods, they are very powerful and extremely daring by birth, their pride of strength
being quelled only by the brilliant weapon (discus) of Sri Hari, the divine Lord whose glory
pervades all the worlds. Thanks to the threats in the form of sacred (Vedic) texts employed
by Sarama’*, the (canine) female messenger of Indra, they are (terribly) afraid of that ruler
of the gods. (30)

ततोऽधस्तात्पातालेनागलोकपतयोवासुकिप्रमुखा: शङ्खकुलिकमहाशङ्खश्वेतधनञ्जयधृतराष्ट्रशङ्खचूड-
कम्बलाश्वतरदेवदत्तादयो महाभोगिनो महामर्षां निवसन्ति येषामु ह वै पञ्चसप्तदशशतसहस्ररशीर्षाणां
फणासु विरचिता महामणयो रोचिष्णव: पातालविवरतिमिरनिकरं स्वरोचिषा विधमन्ति। 38

इति श्रीमद्भागवते महापुराणे पारमहंस्यां संहितायां पञ्चमस्कन्धे राह्वादिस्थितिविलस्वर्गमर्यादानिरूपणं  नाम चतुर्विंशोऽध्याय:। २४

Below that, in (the region of) Patala, dwell the lords of the realm of the Nagas (demon-
serpents), Sankha, Kulika, Mahagankha, Sweta, Dhanafijaya, Dhrtarastra, Sankhacida,
Kambala, Aswatara, Devadatta and others, (all) provided with extensive hoods an extremely
furious (by nature), the chief of whomis Vasuki. The big and shining gems fixed on the hoods
of these serpents—that are possessed of five, seven, ten, hundred and (in some cases even)
thousand heads (respectively)—drive away by their splendour the (entire) mass of darkness
prevailing in the (nethermost) region of Patala. (31)

Thus ends the twenty-fourth discourse entitled “The position of Rahu etc., and the limits of the
heavenlike terrestrial regions" in Book Five of the great and glorious Bhagavata-Purana,
otherwise known as the Paramahamsa-Samhita.

१०३३ २१ €२:.
eurvs Seo ry

अथ पञ्चविंशोऽध्याय:

Discourse XXV
A supplement to the description of the subterranean system
श्रीशुक उवाच
भगवतोऽनन्तमूर्ते: सहस्रशिरस एकस्मिन्नेव शीर्षणि ध्रियमाणं सिद्धार्थं इव लक्ष्यते | 21 यस्य ह वा इदं

* According to a Vedic legend, the Panis once stole away the earth and hid it under water. Indra sent downa heavenly bitch
(the mother of the canine race), Sarama by name, to trace out the globe. The Panis tried to confer with Sarama with a view
to compromise; but Sarama spurned their offer and uttered the following words by way of a threat +---`हता इन्द्रेण पणव: BEA
(Killed by indra, lie down on the battle-field, O Panis! ) The Panis are terribly afraid of Indra, the legend further tells us, ever
since they heard this threat from the mouth of Sarama.
