112 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 3

७ 99१२ 99 ११ १२9 १७ ७ २७ न ७१७ ७ १७2 29 ७ # २99१ ENE SOSH E २9 9२49 299 49 92 22 .७.७.4.9.२.9.५ 9२9 ८9 92० 4 कक nen

killed Your elder brothers, 0 Ruler of the gods ! Leaming of Your advent as soon as it is
intimated by his men, he will rush in this very moment with uplifted weapons. (22)

SR उवाच
अथैनमात्मजं वीक्ष्य महापुरुषलक्षणम्। देवकी तमुपाधावत् कंसाद् भीता झरुचिस्मिता ।२३॥
Sri Suka went on: Perceiving her aforesaid son endowed with the characteristics of
Lord Visnu (the Supreme Person), Devaki, who was (hitherto) afraid of Karnsa, now bore a
bright smile (on her countenance) and glorified Him. (23)

+

दवक्युवाच
aa निर्विशेषे निरीहं स त्वं साक्षाद् विष्णुरध्यात्मदीप: ।२४॥
नष्टे लोके द्विपरार्धावसाने maya गतेषु ।
व्यक्तेऽव्यक्तं कालवेगेन याते भवानेक: झिष्यते ङोषसंज्ञ: ।२५॥
asd कालस्तस्य तेऽव्यक्तबन्धो चेष्टामाहुश्चेष्टते येन विश्वम् ।
निमेषादिर्वत्सरान्तो महीरयांस्ते त्वेशानं क्षेमधाम प्रपद्ये ।२६॥
Tai मृत्युव्यालभीत: पलायन् लोकान् सर्वान्निर्भयं नाध्यगच्छत् |
त्वत्पादाब्जे प्राप्य यदृच्छयाद्य स्वस्थ: Fa मृत्युरस्मादपैति io!
a त्वे घोरादुग्रसेनात्मजान्नस्राहि त्रस्तान् भृत्यवित्रासहासि ।
रूपं चेदं uke ध्यानधिष्ण्यं मा saat मांसदृशां कृषीष्ठा: ।२८॥
wa a मय्यसौ od मा विद्यान्मधुसूदन aga भवद्धेतोर कंसादहमधीरधी: । २९।
उपसंहर विश्वात्मन्नदो रूपमलौकिकम्। शङ्खचक्रगदापद्यश्रिया qs चतुर्भुजम् ।३०॥
fed यदेतत् wet fart यथावकाशं पुरुष: परो wan
बिभर्ति सोऽयं मम गर्भगोऽभूदहो नृलोकस्य विडम्बनं fe aise
Devaki prayed : You are Lord Visnu Himself, the l!luminator of (all) psycho-physical
organisms, the indefinable Reality, which the Vedas declare as the unmanifest cause
consisting of (mere) consciousness, transcending the three Gunas, absolute existence,
unqualified and devoid of activity. (24) When at the end of two Parardhas (constituting the
lifetime of Brahma) the universe (consisting of seven higher and seven lower worlds) is
dissolved (into its constituent elements), by force of Time the (five) gross elements are
ultimately merged ( alongwith the ten Indriyas and the mind including the deities presiding
over them) in Ahankara (their cause), (Ahankara is merged in the Mahat-tattva), the Mahat-
tattva in the Unmanifest (and the Unmanifest in Yourself), You alone are left and (therefore)
called by the name of Sesa (lit., the residue). (25) The wise declare as a potency of Yours
the aforesaid Time, which extends (in point of duration) from the twinkling of an eye toa year
and is infinite in extent, and under whose impulse the universe proceeds on in its cyclic
course, O Director of the Unmanifest ! । fly (for protection) to You as such, the Ruler (of Time
as well as of Prakrti), the Abode of security. (26) Afraid of the serpent of death and running
about all the worlds (in quest of a quarter free from the fear of death), a mortal is not able to
attain a place void of fear. Having by an indescribable stroke of good luck (however) reached
Your lotus-feet, he rests in peace, O Primeval Being; for (even) death turns away from
him.(27) As such (kindly) protect You us (Your devotees), afraid of the terrible Karnsa (the

son of Ugrasena); (for) You are the dispeller of the grave fears of Your servants. And (pray),
do not reveal to the ignorant (whose eyes are directed to the flesh) this divine form, the object
