Dis. 59 ] BOOK TEN 369

ARES SIO Ieee eT ES ERT Eee See ECOL EEE ETS EEE CEE

Sattvaguna, though remaining (ever) unobscured (by these Gunas), O Lord of the universe!
(Nay,) You (alone) are the Time-Spirit, primordial Matter and Spirit (too) and (yet) distinct
(from them). (29) Myself (earth), water, fire and air, ether, the (five) objects of the senses (viz.,
sound, touch, colour, taste and smell), the gods (presiding over the Indriyas etc.), the mind,
the (ten) Indriyas (the five senses and the five organs of action), the ego, the Mahattattva
(the principle of cosmic intelligence), (nay,) the entire mobile and immobile creation—(all) this,
O Lord, is a (mere) phantom (appearing) in You, who are (really) one without a second. (30)
This son (Bhagadatta) of Naraka, afraid as he is, has (accordingly) been brought (by me) to
(the soles of) Your lotus feet, O Reliever of the distress of those fallen at Your feet! Therefore,
protect him and place on his head Your lotus palm, which destroys all sin. (31)
इति भूम्यार्थितो वाग्भिर्भगवान् भक्तिनम्रया । दत्त्वाभवं भौमगृहं wiles, सकलर्धिमत् ।३२॥
त्त्र Wee षट्सहस्राधिकायुतम्। भौमाहतानां विक्रम्य राजभ्यो eget हरि: 1321
तं प्रविष्टं feet वीक्ष्य नरवीरं विमोहिता: । मनसा वव्रिरेऽभीष्टं पतिं दॆवोपसादितम् ।३४॥
भूयात् पतिरयं मह्यं धाता तदनुमोदताम् | इति सर्वा: पृथक कृष्णे भावेन हृदयं दधु: BUI
a प्राहिणोद् द्वारवतीं सुमृष्टविरजोऽप्बरा: | नरयानैर्महाकोदान् रथाश्वान् द्रविणं महत् ।३६॥
ऐरावतकुलेभांश्च चतुर्दन्तांस्तरस्विन: । पाण्डुरांश्च चतु:षष्टिं प्रेषयामास केशव: ।३७॥
SriSuka continued : Entreated in these words by Goddess Earth bentlow with devotion,
and vouchsafing security (to Naraka’s son), Sri Krsna entered the palace of Naraka (son of
Mother Earth), full of all (kinds of) riches (luxuries). (32) There Sri Krsna saw sixteen
thousand (and one hundred* ) Ksatriya maidens snatched away by Naraka from (the
gynaeceum of) kings (as well as of gods, Siddhas and demons) after showing valour. (33)
Fascinated to behold that hero among men, who had (now) entered the women's
apartments, the damsels mentally chose Him for their beloved spouse ushered (into their
presence) by (a benign) providence. (34) (They) all severally set their heart on SrikKrsna with
the feeling (prayer), "May He be my husband and may Providence approve of this.” (35) Sri
Krsna sent them (all) in (closed) palanquins to Dwaraka, now that they had been duly washed
and neatly dressed, and (also) sent (with them) valuable treasures, chariots, horses and
abundant wealth, as wellas sixty-four swift-footed white elephants descended from Airavata
(the king of elephants and the carrier of Indra) and endowed with four tusks. (36-37)

गत्वा सुरेन्द्रभवनं दत्त्वादित्यै च कुण्डले । पूजितस्विदशेन्देण सहेन्द्राण्या च सप्रिय: । ३८|
चोदितो भार्ययोत्पाट्यं पारिजातं गरुत्मति | आरोप्य Bar विबुधान्निर्जित्योपानयत् पुरम् । ३९॥
स्थापित: सत्यभामाया गृहोद्यानोपशोभन: । अन्वगुर्भरमरा: स्वर्गात् तद्गन्धासवलम्पटा: 1४०1
fad Wa feed wera सुराणां च तमो धिगाढ्यताम् 1४१
* We read in the Visnu-Purana as follows -—
fee नृपाणां च  जनार्दते। इत्वा तु सोऽसुर: कन्या रुरुधे निजमन्दिरे॥

४ x x x x x
(V.xxix. 9,31)

“Having brought by force, O Krsna {who are supplicated by all men)! daughters of gods, Siddhas and Asuras as well as
of (human) kings (rulers of men), that demon (Naraka) detained them in his (own) palace. x x x $ri Krsna of incomparable
prowess saw in his gynaeceum, 0 high-minded one. sixteen thousand and one hundred maidens.”
