800 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA { Dis. 16

DHOOM HHKE HAE टावं औ है शी त्रो का य EERE LESH HEE वित् ङ दौ SHH GHA HAE द् ऊत्यी कोनौ He KEHOE

follows to his wife (Aditi), wno wore a melancholy aspect, O jewel among the Kurus! (3) |hope
no harm has come to the Brahmanas in the world at present, O good lady, nor to (the cause
of) righteousness nor (again) to the people, who (have to) follow the whims of Death.(4) Or
is there any hindrance, O mistress of the house, in the pursuit of piety, wealth or enjoyment,
(experienced) in the life of a householder, where God-Realization can be attained (through
the mere disinterested discharge of one's sacred duties) even by those who fail to practise
Yoga, (contemplation on God)? (5) Or did strangers, having unexpectedly called at your door
on any occasion, return from your house unhonoured by you even with (the courtesy of) rising
from your seat, while you remained engrossed in the duties and cares of your family? (6)
These houses are undoubtedly no better than the den of a leader of jackals if newcomers
calling at their door go away unentertained even with water.(7) May be the sacred fires were
not fed with oblations at the proper time on some occasion, O good lady, by you, perturbed
as you were in mind, O blessed one, due to my being away from home. (8) The Brahmana
and the (sacred) fire, by whose worship a householder attains to worlds that yield all one's
desired objects, actually represent the mouth of Lord Visnu, the Soul of all the gods. (9) Are
all your sons faring well, O proud lady ? From outward signs (your facial expression etc.) |
perceive your mind not at ease. (10)

ag द्विजगवां ब्रह्मन्धर्मस्यास्य जनस्य च ।त्रिवर्गस्य परं oat गृहमेधिन्गृहा shee

अग्नयोऽतिथयो yor भिक्षवो ये च लिप्सव: । सर्वं भगवतो ब्रह्मन्ननुध्यानान्न रिष्यति ee

को नु मे भगवन्कामो न सम्पद्येत मानस: | यस्या Marea एवं धर्मान्प्रभाषते ।१३॥

waa मारीच मन:शरीरजा: प्रजा इमा: सत्त्वरजस्तमोजुष: ।
aq भवांस्तास्वसुरादिषु प्रभो तथापि oo भजते महेश्वर: ।१४॥

तस्मादीश भजन्त्या मे श्रेयश्चिन्तय yaad ecient हृतस्थानान्सपत्नै: पाहि न: प्रभो ।१५॥

परैर्विवासिता साहं मग्ना व्यसनसागरे। ऐश्चर्यं श्रीर्यश: wr हृतानि प्रबलैर्मम । १६॥

यथा तानि Ga: साधो प्रपद्येरन् ममात्मजा: | तथा विधेहि कल्याणं धिया कल्याणकृत्तम । १७।
Aditi replied: All is well with the twice-born (the Brahmanas) and the cows, O holy sage;
and so is virtue prospering, as well as this servant of yours. (And) this house (the life of a
householder), O master of the house, is the best field for (the culture of all) the three objects
of human pursuit—viz., religious merit, worldly possessions and gratification of the senses
(and everything regarding them is going on smoothly). (11) The sacred fires, strangers,
servants, beggars and whoever else expect anything (from us) have (all) been (properly) fed
by me. (In fact,) nothing is (found) lacking by virtue of my incessant thought of your worshipful
self, O holy Brahmana! (12) Indeed what desire of my mind, O holy one, would not be fulfilled,
to whom you, O lord of created beings, teach my duties in this way ? (13) (All) these created
beings, (mainly) partaking as they do of Sattva (goodness), Rajas (passion) and Tamas
(ignorance), are born of your mind and body alone, O son of the sage Marici ! (Although) you
are alike to them, the Asuras and others, yet (even) the supreme Lord is (particularly)
attached to His devotees (alone). (14) Therefore, O lord of holy vows, (pray,) consider what
is good to me, your servant. (Kindly) protect us, whose wealth has been usurped and whose
abode has been taken possession of by the enemy, O my master ! (15) Having been exiled
by the foes, I, Aditi, am plunged in anoceanof misery. My fortune, splendour, glory and abode
have (all) been usurped by the mighty ones. (16) (Therefore,) by your (sound) judgment, O
most beneficent one, (kindly) devise some salutary means by which my sons (the gods) may

‘(be enabled to) retrieve them (their fortune and so on), O pious soul ! (17)
