Dis. 24 ] BOOK EIGHT ' 837
SRRRAS ASA SAET NOS SPENT SONANNTUED ANTENA EERE Te hnENE AH HHEheRENESEnHEneNnaienenmet ns
are)

अचक्षुन्धस्य Fa: कृतस्तथा जनस्याविदुषोऽबुधो गुरु: ।
त्वमर्कदूक Ades समीक्षणो वृतो we: «ania बुभुत्सताम् । 4o |
जनो जनस्यादिरतेऽसतीं मति यथा प्रपद्येत दुरत्ययं a:
त्वं त्वव्ययं ज्ञानममोघमञ्जसा प्रपद्यते येन जनो निजं पदम् । ५१॥
त्वं सर्वलोकस्य yea प्रियेश्वरो ह्यात्मा गुरुर्जानमभीष्टं सिद्धि: ।
तथापि लोको न भवन्तमन्धधीर्जानाति सन्तं Be बद्धकाम: 1421
छिन्ध्यर्थदीपैर्भगवन् वचोभिर्ग्रन्थीन् हृदय्यान् विवृणु स्वमोक: 1431
The king prayed : People whose true knowledge of their own self stands obscured by
dateless ignorance and who are exhausted by the toils (and turmoils) of worldly existence,
traceable to that nescience, realize You here (only) when they take shelter in You by Your
unaccountable grace. Such as You are, may You act as our highest preceptor and prove to
be the Bestower of final beatitude (on us). (46) This ignorant Jiva (human soul), bound (as
it is) by its own (previous) Karma, performs actions with great pains in the hope of (attaining)
happiness and is able to get rid of that hope as well as of its wrong notion (in the shape of
identification with body etc.), through Your worship (alone). May that Lord, who is our (true)
guide, snap our knot (ofignorance) existing in the heart.(47) Through His worship (alone) can
an embodied soul shake off its impurity in the shape of ignorance and regain its essential
(blissful) character, (even) as silver and gold* shed their impurity and reyain their native
brilliance through contact with fire (alone). May that immortal Lord, whois (even) higher than
a Guru, be our (real) preceptor. (48) Gods, preceptors and other people joined together
cannot by themselves show to a worshipper grace which is equivalent to one out of ten
thousand parts of His. It is that almighty Lord in You whom । seek as my refuge.(49) An.
inenlightened soul chosen as a preceptor in relation to an ignorant person is of the same
vorth as a sightless person appointed as a guide in relation to another blind man. By us
however), who are eager to know the truth relating to the Self, You have been elected as
ur preceptor—You who are not only self-illumined like the sun but also impart light to all the
enses of perception.(50) A worldly soul (thatis subject to birth and death) imparts to another
inwise Counsel (showing him the way to worldly riches and gratification of the senses alone),
y (following) which he is sure to enter darkness (in the shape of transmigration or what is
till worse, viz., hell) which is hard to overcome. You, however, impart (to the Jiva)
ndecaying and unfailing wisdom (knowledge of the Self), through which the Jiva easily
2alizes its essential (blissful) Character.(51) Indeed to the whole world You are the
isinterested friend, beloved and inner Controller, the (very)Self, the teacher, wisdom and
1€ realization of (all) desired objects. Yet, having deep-rooted desires and possessed ofan
ndiscerning intellect, the world does not know You, though present in the heart (itself).(52)
uch as You are, | approach You—the almighty Lord, adorable (even) to gods, and worthy

"The Sruti tells us that the tears shed by Rudra {the god of destruction, so-called because he cried as soon as he
peared—vide |. ili. B—10) were converted into gold and silver:

2 Oe

@ arm
