768 ॥ SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 8

eR RA Se Re er Be PEER AEA EEE OETA EAE ERERSESETHAKELAAE EAE EEERAER KAA LER HOE ER HAA

अथाष्टमोऽध्याय:

Discourse VIII
The manifestation (in a personal form) of the Lord's

(own) enchanting potency

॥ श्रीगुक उवाच
da गरे वृषाङ्केण प्रीतास्तेऽमरदानवा:। ममन्थुस्तरसा सिन्धुं हविर्धानी ततोऽभवत्। १ ।
तामग्निहोत्रीमृषयो जगृहुर्ब्रह्मवादिन: । यज्ञस्य देवयानस्य मेध्याय हविषे नॄप । २ ।
तत उच्चै:श्रवा नाम हयोऽभूच्चन्द्रपाण्डुर: | तस्मिन्बलि: wet चक्रे नेन्द्र ईश्वरशिक्षया । ३ ।
तत ऐरावतो aa वारणेन्द्रो विनिर्गत: । दन्तैश्चतुर्भि:; श्वेताद्रेर्हरन्भगवतो महिम् । ४ |
कौस्तुभाख्यमभूद् रत्नं पद्मरागो महोदधे: । तस्मिन्हरि: Wel चक्रे वक्षोऽलङ्करणे मणौ । ५ ।
ततोऽभवत् पारिजात: सुरलोकविभूषणम्। पूरयत्यर्थिनो aise: gag भुवि यथा भवान् । ६ ।
ततश्चाप्सरसो जाता निष्ककण्ठ्य: सुवासस: | रमण्य: स्वर्गिणां वल्गुगतिलीलावलोकनै: । ७ |
ततश्चाविरभूत् साक्षाच्छी रमा भगवत्परा । रञ्जयन्ती दिश: कान्त्या विद्युत्सौदामनी यथा । ८ |
तस्या आसनमानिन्ये महेन्द्रो महदद्भुतम्। मूर्तिमत्य: सरिच्छेष्ठा हेमकुम्भैर्जलं शुचि: । १०॥
आभिषेचनिका भूमिराहरत् सकलौषधी: । गाव: ug पवित्राणि वसन्तो मधुमाधवौ । ११।
wa: merges यथाविधि । जगुर्भद्राणि गन्धर्वा नट्यश्चननृतुर्जगु: 1821

मेघा मृदङ्पणवमुरजानकगोमुखान्। व्यनादयञ्छङ्खवेणुवीणास्तुमुलनि:स्वनान् ।1१३॥
ततोऽभिषिषिचुर्देवीं श्रियं पद्मकरां सतीम्। दिगिभा: guineas: सूक्तवाक्यैर्दविजेरितै: । १४॥
aug: पीतकौरेयवाससी समुपाहरत्। वरुण: GS वैजयन्तीं मधुना मत्तषट्पदाम् । १५।

भूषणानि विचित्राणि विश्चकर्मा प्रजापति:। हारं सरस्वती पद्ममजो नागाश्च कुण्डले ।१६॥

Sri Suka resumed: On the poison having been drunk by Lord Siva (who bears the
emblem of a bull) the aforesaid gods and demons, full of joy, churned the ocean (of milk) with
(redoubled) vigour; and from the said act of churning came forth the cow of plenty (the store-
house of milk, ghee and so on, the principal substances fit for being offered as oblation into
the sacred fire). (1) Seers who were exponents of the Vedas (and engaged in sacrificial
performances) took that cow (the source of milk etc., fit for being poured as oblations into the
sacred fire) for (obtaining) sacred material (milk, ghee and so on)to be used in sacrificial
performances capable of taking (the sacrificer) to the path of gods (leading to Brahmaloka
and so on), O king ! (2) Next sprang forth the (celebrated) horse, Uccaihsrava by name,
which was white as the moon. Bali longed for (took) it and not Indra because of the
admonition given by the Lord. (3) Then issued forth the (moon-white) king of elephants,
Airavata by name, which by its four tusks (resembling the four peaks ofa mountain) obscured
the splendour of Kailasa (the white mountain forming the abode) of Lord Siva. (4) Next rose
from the ocean (of milk) a jewel of the ruby type, bearing the name of Kaustubha. Sri Hari
(Himself) longed for (took) that gem as an adornment for His breast. (5) Then appeared (the
tree known by the name of) Parijata, the ornament of the celestial world, which incessantly
gratifies petitioners with the objects sought for, even as you (Pariksit) do it on earth. (6) Then
came forth the Apsaras (celestial nymphs) adorned with gold necklaces and cladin excellent
