Dis. 19} BOOK FIVE ॥ 55

BORER MM HERE EN, FONT OOO कजा ऊह कोक कोजाजा RRO IEE TE RTT EE YORI RT RRR HOR Ra RE He HEH RR RE REN

न Ut वैकुण्ठकथासुधापगा न साधवो भागवतास्तदाश्रया:।

न यत्र यज्ञेशमखा महोत्सवा: सुरेशलोकोऽपि न वै स सेव्वताम्। २४॥

प्राप्तानृजातित्वि-’प्यच-रन्तवानानक्रिवाद्रव्यक्याम्पसाभताम्।
न बवै चतेरन्नपुनर्भवाय ते भूयो वनौका ga चान्ति बन्धनम्।२५॥

The gods too extol human life (as follows):"Oh, what meritorious deed was performed
(in a previous birth) by them—or it may be that Sri Hari was pleased with them of His own
accord (through His own compassionate nature, such a meritorious deed being most difficult
to perform,)—who have secured (the rare boon of) birth among human beings in the land
of Bharatavarsa—(the only birth) suitable for the service of Lord Sri Visnu (the Bestower of .
Liberation), (and therefore) coveted (but not attained) even by us ! (21) What has been
gained by us through sacrificial performances, austerities and (other) sacred vows, (practice
of) charity and other (meritorious) acts, so difficult to perform, or even through the fruitless
attainment of heaven (earned through those meritorious acts), where one gets no opportunity
for the remembrance of Bhagavan Narayana, which is eliminated due to excessive
gratification of the senses ? (22) (Nay,) securing (birth in) the land of Bharatavarsa on the
part of men with a short span of life is preferable to the attainment of the abode (the spheres
higher than Indra’s heaven, viz., Maharloka, Janaloka, Tapoloka and Satyaloka or Brahmaloka)
of those who live for a (whole) Kalpa (the lifetime of the three worlds, covering a thousand
revolutions of the four Yugas, or 4,32,00,00,000 human years)—an abode which leads to
rebirth (after one has enjoyed one's allotted span of life there). For, offering (to the Lord) the
actions done in the course of an instant (even) with their mortal body, wise men (in this land)
attain to the fearless Abode of Sri Hari. (23) That region—be it the abode of Brahma (the
highest ruler of the gods) himself—should in no case be resorted to, where streams of nectar
in the shape of the stories of Lord Visnu do not flow, where there are no pious devotees of
the Lord, living on those nectarean streams and where there are no sacrificial performances
intended to propitiate Lord Visnu (the Lord of sacrifices) and accompanied with grand
festivities (in the shape of sacred music and dancing etc.). (24) Those Jivas (embodied
souls), however, who do not strive to secure immunity from rebirth (even) after attaining birth
in the human race—fully equipped with knowledge (discrimination), capacity for actions
leading to knowledge and substances helpful to such activities—fall into bondage again like
wild birds (disentangled from the fowler's net, yet carelessly sporting on the same tree where
they were once entrapped). a

Uh: पृथङ्नामभिराहुतो मुदा गृह्णाति got: स्वयमाशिषां प्रभु:। २६।
wa बिधत्ते भजतामनिच्छतामिच्छापिधानं निजपादपल्लवम्।२७।
तेनाजनाभे स्मृतिमज्जन्मं न: स्याद् वर्षे हरिर्यद्धजतां शं तनोति।२८।

“Invoked in sacrifices under diverse names (Indra, Agni and so on) by the people of
Bharatavarsa, the same Lord—who is (not only) perfect (in every respect) but who is the
Bestower of (all) blessings (sought for by men)—Himself gladly accepts (nay, eats) the
oblations set apart (for different gods) in (due) proportions and poured into the sacrificial fire
(for being conveyed to those gods) with reverence according to the correct procedure, while

reciting the sacred text (consecrated to the deity invoked) and with (particular) regard to
substance (which is different in the case of different gods). (26) True, the Lord grants men's
