354 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 13

के वित् कछै कीं वी KURA HEE CRREM CHEK त्या REC EHEKLR LAKES EEE CEH e EEE HEAT HE LCE THANE RHR HE

his palms and, smelling it, joyfully handed it over to his wife.(37) The issueless queen ate
that food, which possessed the efficacy of producing a male child, conceived through union
with her husband and, when the time came, brought forth ason. (38) While yet a (mere) child,
the boy was ardently attached to his mother’s father, Mrtyu (the god of death), who had
sprung from a portion of Adharma (the spirit presiding over unrightgeusness), so he turned
out to be impious. (39)

स OUR मृगयुर्वनगोचर: । हन्त्यसाधुर्मृगान् दीनान् वेनोऽसावित्यरौजन: 10!

आक्रीडे क्रीडतो बालान् व्रयस्यानतिदारुण: । प्रसह्य «=a: पशुमारममारयत् ।`४१॥

तं विचक्ष्य woe wt ज्ञासनैर्विविधैर्नृप: i यदा न शासितुं कल्पो भृशमासीत्सुदुर्मना: 1621

प्रायेणाभ्यर्चितो देवो येऽप्रजा गृहमेधिन: । कदपत्यभृतं दु:खं चे न विन्दन्ति दुर्भरम् ।४३॥

aa: पापीयसी कीर्तिरधर्मश्च महान्नृणाम्। चतो विरोध: aaet aq आधिरनन्तक: xx!

wet प्रजापदेशं वै मोहबन्धनमात्मन: | पण्डितो ag मन्येत यदर्था: क्लेशादा गृहा: isu

कदपत्यं at मन्ये सदपत्याच्छुचां veri निर्विद्येत गृहान्मरत्यो यत्केशानिवहा yer: ive

Taking up his bowand playing the role of a hunter dwelling in the woods, the wicked fellow
would kill poor (innocent) deer; and people would cry out (whenever they saw him): "Here
is Vena (a tyrant)!" (40) Nay, that most cruel and hard-hearted boy would violently strangle,
as so many beasts, children of his own age sporting in the playground. (41) Finding his son
(so) wicked, the emperor (Anga) tried to correct him by various (forms of ) punishment; but
when he was unable to tame him, he felt sore depreesed in spirits. (42) (He said to himself:)
"Householders who are issueless have surely propitiated the Deity (in their previous birth)
inasmuch as they are saved the agony caused by (the presence of) an undesirable son,
which is indeed hard to bear. (43) What wise man would make much of that which, though
bearing the name ofa son, binds one's soul with the fetter of infatuation, is a source of infamy
to the parents and involves them in great sin, nay; which arouses a feeling of antagonism
in all, causes infinite worry and makes the home a hotbed of affliction?(44-45) | account
a bad son as preferable to a worthy son, who is a source of (many):sorrows (inasmuch as
he strengthens one's attachment to the home). For the former turns a home into a hell so that
aman gets (easily) disgusted with it.” (46)

एवं a निर्विण्णमना नृपो गृहान्निशीथ sera महोदयोदयात्।
अलब्धनिद्रोऽनुपलक्षितो नृभिर्हित्वा गतो वेनसुवं YAM Ixy!
विज्ञाय निर्विद्य wa off प्रजा: पुरोहितामात्यसुहृद्गणादय: |
विचिक्युरुरव्यामतिशोककातरा यथा निगूढं पुरुषं कुयोगिन: vc
TSA: पदवीं प्रजापतेर्हुताद्यमा: प्रत्युपसृत्य a पुरीम् ।
wi समेतानभिवन्द्य साश्रवो न्यवेदयन् wna भर्तृविप्लवम् ।४९॥

Pondering thus and disgusted at heart witn his home, which was full of great prosperity,
the emperor, who could not get a wink of sleep, got up (from his bed) at dead of night and,
unobserved by (other) men, departed (for the woods), leaving the queen (the mother of
Vena) fast asleep. (47) The people as well as the high priest (of the royal house), ministers
and relations of the king and others were overwhelmed with excessive grief when they came
to know that their lord had departed in disgust, and searched for him all over the globe, even

as Yogis not knowing the secret of Yoga look (outside for the Supreme Person concealed
within the heart. (48) Finding no trace of the emperor (however) and balked in their attempt,

