Dis. 14] BOOK FIVE । 494

BHLARKAHKHECHHELHEREHREESEEHLEKAAHAHKCET See teeReKKheneHwreceeHrwree een MEE
FS ज शा BT HE जजो HT BERT He Hr Hy

from them the woman and property seized by them andfromthe said Devadattaa Visnumitra
wrests them. In this way the objects of enjoyment never.stay (with a single individual). (24)
And sometimes unable to ward off (provide against) cold wind and many other (adverse)
situations brought about by divine will or (by the will of) other created beings or related to
one's own body or mind, they remain cast down with anxiety difficult to get rid of. (25) Now,
carrying on business transactions on a very small scale with those of their own company
or snatching from others even (a trifling sum of) twenty cowries or any amount (even less
than that), they incur (their) hatred due to their (own) grabbing nature. (26)
अध्वन्यमुष्मिन्निम उपसर्गास्तथा सुखदु:खरागद्वेषभयाभिमानप्रमादोन्मादशोकमोह-
लोभमात्सर्येरष्यावमानक्षुत्पिपासाधिव्याधिजन्मजरामरणादय:। Ro क्वापि देवमायया स्निया भुजलतोपगूढ:
प्रस्कन्नविवेकविज्ञानो यद्विहारगृहारम्भाकुलहृदयस्तदाश्रयावसक्तसुतदुहितृकलत्रभाषिताव-
लोकविचेष्टितापहृतहृदय आत्मानमजितात्मापारेऽन्धे तमसि प्रहिणोति। २८ |

There are on this path (of worldly activity) these (obstacles, viz., great hardships,
monetary losses and so on—vide verse 13 of Discourse XIII above) and other obstacles
too—such as joy and sorrow, likes and dislikes, fear and pride, error and insanity, grief and
infatuation, greed and spite, jealousy and ignominy, hunger and thirst, worries and ailments,
birth, old age and death. (27) Sometimes folded by woman—who is (no other than) the
Lord's (own) deluding potency (personified) —in her arms, (tender and slender) like a pair
of creepers, they are deprived of their discriminating wisdom; and, anxious at heart to build
a pleasure-house for her and lured by the (sweet) words, (affectionate) glances and
(delighting) gestures of their sons, daughters and daughters-in-law, brought together under
her protection, these men of uncontrolled mind hurl themselves in the bottomless and dark
(regions of) hell. (28)

ten a a. निमिषतो मिषतां रि . ——— a
acdarhrerti2e1 aa ण्ङिषि or Pa ; aa.
निगमाचारेऽशुद्धितो यस्य मिथुनीभाव: कुटुम्बभरणं यथा वानरजाते: 1301 तत्रापि निरवरोध: स्वैरेण
विहरन्नतिकृपणबुद्धिरन्योन्वमुखनिरीक्षणादिना ग्राम्यकर्मणैव विस्मृतकालावधि:। 391 gata
द्रुमवदैहिकार्थेषु गृहेषु रंस्यन् यथा वानर: सुतदारवत्सलो व्यवायक्षण: । ३२॥

Now their heartis filled with terror at the thought of the discus of the almighty Lord Visnu,
manifested in the form of the ever-wakeful time (with its manifold divisions) from the minutest
point (corresponding to an atom) to the period covering two Parardhas (the life-span of
Brahma, equivalent to 31,10, 40, 00, 00, 00, 000 human years), which sweeps away all
created beings—while they keep looking on—from Brahma (down) to the (merest) clump of
grass, by means of its quick movement representing the passage of time (from childhood
to youth and from youth to old age and so on). Nevertheless they ignore that very almighty
Lord, who is no other than the Deity presiding over sacrifices and wields the wheel of time
as His own (characteristic) weapon, and betake themselves to the deities worshipped by
heretics and discarded by Vedic tradition—deities who are no better than buzzards,
vultures, herons and quails (which are unable to protect one against the lion of death)—on
the authority of the sacred works of heretics. (29) When they are grossly betrayed by those
self-deluded heretics, they take up their residence with the Brahmana race. But, not liking their
(pious) way, such as investiture with the sacred thread and the worship of Lord Visnu (the Deity
presiding over the sacrifices carried on by them) through the performance of rituals enjoined
(both) by the Vedas and the Smrti-texts, they join the Sddra community, who like the monkey
