318 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 7
oii tee teint tree tric teitrk tritt ttt h teeth t ewe reek See eee een ELEHAAAAAHARRER HERAT ARES SES

Daksa said : In your own glorious being You are pure Consciousness, undifferentiated
and fearless, beyond all the states of mind. You (ever) stand free, having negated Maya; but
when, assuming Jivahood by the same Maya, You abide in that Maya, You appear as tainted

(with passion etc:)/(26)

ऋत्विज HA:
aad न ते वयमनञ्जन रुद्रशापात् कर्मण्यवग्रहधियो भगवन्विदाम: |
धर्मोपलक्षणमिदं त्रिवृदध्वराख्यं ज्ञातं यदर्थमधिदॆवमदोव्यवस्था: 1201

The priests said : With our mind foolishly attached to the ritual as a result of the
imprecation uttered by Nandiswara (the chief of Rudra's attendants), O Lord untainted
by Maya! we know not Your true character. We have known only that form of Yours which
is known by the name of sacrifice, which yields religious merit and is the theme of the
three Vedas and for conducting which the sphere of each particular deity has been
defined. (27)

सदस्या HY:
उत्पत्त्यध्वन्यशरण क्कोञ्चदुंर्पे ऽन्त्रवत्र्ग्",ग्व्याल]"[न्व॰ष्ट` fap fare TSA: ।
Sead Wea श्ञोकदावेऽज्ञसार्थ: पादौकस्ते शरणद कदा याति कामोपसृष्ट: । २८।

The superintending priests said : Tormented by desire and oppressed by the heavy
burden of body (which Is regarded as the self) and house (which is called one's own), this
company of ignorant folk has been traversing the path-of transmigration, which is devoid of
any shelter and difficult to tread on account of great hardships, where the fierce serpent of
Death ever lies in wait (to devour them), nay, which tantalizes the way-farers with the mirage
of sensuous pleasures, and is full of pitfalls in the form of pairs of opposites (such as pleasure
and pain, heat and cold etc.), and which is fearful on account of carnivorous animals in the

_form of wicked people and is surrounded by the wild fire of grief. When will this crowd resort
to Your feet for shelter, O Lord affording protection to all ? (28)

eK उवाच

qa वरद वराङ्घ्रावाशिषेहाखिलार्थे ह्यपि मुनिभिरसक्तैरादरेणार्हणीये |
यदि रचितधियं माविद्यलोकोऽपविद्धुं जपति न गणये तत्त्वत्परानुग्रहेण । २९।

Rudra said : Your charming feet, 0 Bestower of boons ! confer on those who are
actuated by some desire all the blessings sought for in this world; nay, they deserve to be
worshipped with reverence even by hermits who are not attached to enjoyments. If ignorant
folk dub me as one who has cast to the winds all the rules of decorum—me whose mind is
fixed on Your feet, by Your supreme grace | pay no heed to it. (29)

fl
यन्मायया गहनयापहृतात्मबोधा ब्रह्मादयस्तनुभृतस्तमसि स्वपन्त: |
नात्मन् श्रितं तव विदन्त्यधुनापि तत्त्वं सोऽयं प्रसीदतु भवान् प्रणतात्मबन्धु: । ३० |
Bhrgu said : Brahma and other embodied beings, who have been deprived of Self-
Knowledge by Your incomprehensible Maya (deluding potency) and sleep in the darkness

of ignorance, are unable to know even to this day Your reality, which permeates their own
self. Therefore, be gracious to them, since You are the friend, nay, the very Self of Your

suppliants. (30)
ब्रह्मोवाच
