Dis. 33] BOOK THREE 287

STEREO IO en tritntrinint tote rte ee tata tty ELKKKHL ARH KEH SR Se Sho ३६६३ .६८६.६..६..३..३..३.३.३.५..३.३३.३

Providence—even when her hair got loose and her clothes fell off from her body.(29)

wa सा कपिलोक्तेन मार्गेणाचिरत: परम्। आत्मानं owe Par भगवन्तमवाप ह 1301

तद्बीरासीत्पुण्यतमं क्षेत्रं त्रैलोक्यविश्रुतम्। नाम्ना सिद्धपदं यत्र सा संसिद्धिमुपेयुषी ie

तस्यास्तद्योगविधुतमार्त्य मर्त्यमभूत्सरित्। स्रोतसां प्रवरा सौम्य सिद्धिदा सिद्धसेविता 1321

In this way, by following the path pointed out by Lord Kapila, she attained before long
to (the abode of) the Lord, who is eternally free and is no other than the Supreme Spirit or
Brahma.(30) The most sacred spot where she attained final beatitude, O valiant Vidura, was
known all over the three worlds by the name of ‘Siddhapada'.(31) Her mortal frame, which
had been purged through Yoga of all its dross, was transformed into a river, which ranks
foremost among all streams, O gentle Vidura, confers the highest blessings (on those who
bathe in it) and is (frequently) resorted to by Siddhas.(32)

कपिलोऽपि महायोगी भगवान् पितुराश्रमात्। मातरं समनुज्ञाप्य wpe feet ययो । ३३॥

सिद्धचारणगन्धर्वैर्मुनिभिश्चाप्सरोगणै: । स्तूयमान: समुद्रेण दत्तार्हृणनिकेतन: । ३४॥

आस्ते योगं समास्थाय सांख्याचार्यैरभिष्टुत: | त्रयाणामपि लोकानामुपज्ञान्यै समाहित: । ३५॥

Having taken leave of His mother (Devahiuti), Lord Kapila, the great Yogi, proceeded

towards the north-east from the hermitage of His father.(33) Duly worshipped and offered
an abode by Ocean himself, He continues (there even to this day) in perfect peace of mind,
absorbed in deep meditation for the good of all the three worlds, and is (ever) being extolled
by Siddhas, Caranas (celestial bards), Gandharvas (celestial musicians) and sages as well
as by hosts of Apsaras (celestial nymphs), and praised by the teachers of Sankhya (Asuri
and others).(34-35)

एतन्निगदितं तात ages तवानघ। कपिलस्य च dad देवहूत्याश्च पावन: । ३६॥

य semis योऽभिधत्ते कपिलमुनेर्मतमात्मयोगगुह्यम् ।
भगवति कृतधी: सुपर्णकेतावुपलभते भगवत्पदारविन्दम् 1 319 |

कापिलयापाख्यान त्रयस्रिंशोऽध्याय: 1331

।। हरि: ॐ तत्सत् ।।
| have thus narrated to you, dear and sinless Vidura, what you asked me, viz., the holy
dialogue between Lord Kapila and Devahiti (His mother).(36) He who listens to and
(similarly) he (too) who expounds this teaching of the (divine) sage Kapila, which is the most
secret of all the doctrines teaching the ways and means of God-Realization, is able to fix his
mind on Lord Visnu (who bears on His banner an emblem of Garuda, the king of the birds)
and attains (proximity) to the Lord's feet. (37)

Thus ends the thirty-third discourse, forming part of the "Story of Lord Kapila",
in Book Three of the great and glorious Bhagavata-Purdna, otherwise
known as the Paramaharhsa-Samhita, composed by
the sage Vedavyasa and consisting of
eighteen thousand Slokas.

TET E
PI PSS ore

END OF BOOK THREE

SEPT १६३
PIDOD REELS OS
