Dis. 2] BOOK SEVEN 653

VRHHARHEERENCRELHEREA केर्हक्तै HERDER TERESA SHEARS कज् दि HEEL EAH CHEE HARE EH MH ती AA HH व वं

he addressed the following to (them as also to) their mother (and his own sister-in-law),
Rusabhanu, as well as to Diti, his (own) mother, in soft words, O lord of men ! (19)

हिरण्यकरिपुरुवाच
अम्बाम्ब हे ay: पुत्रा att मार्हथ शोचितुम् । रिपोरभिमुखे sera: quo aw ईप्सित: 1201
भूतानामिह संवास: प्रपायामिव सुव्रते। दैवेनैकत्र नीतानामुन्नीतानां स्वकर्मभि: । २१।
fra आत्माव्यय: Ye: सर्वग: सर्ववित्पर: । धत्तेऽसावात्मनो लिङ्गं मायया विसृजन्गुणांन् 1221
यथाम्भसा प्रचलता तरवोऽपि wet इव । चक्षुषा भ्राम्यमाणेन aad चलतीव भू: 1231
एवं Wee मनस्यविकल: gar ala तत्साम्यतां भद्रे ह्यलिङ्गो लिङ्गवानिव । २४॥
एष आत्मविपर्यासो ह्यलिङ्गे लिङ्गभावना । एष प्रियाप्रियैर्योगो वियोग: कर्मसंसृति: 1241
सम्भवश्च ferry छ्ञोकश्च विविध: wa: । अविवेकश्च चिन्ता च विवेकास्मृतिरेव च । २६॥
अत्राप्युदाहरन्तीममितिहासं पुरातनम्। यमस्य प्रेतबन्धूनां dare तं निबोधत 1201

HiranyakaSipu said : Mother, O mother, sister-in-law and sons ! You ought not tolament
the hero (Hiranyaksa). The death of the brave in front of their enemy is praiseworthy and (as
such) coveted (by them). (20) The dwelling together in this world of created beings (first)
collected at one place (under one roof) and (then) separated by Providence on account of
their (past) actions, is (just) like the gathering of men in a shed (on the roadside) containing
a reservoir of water (for the wayfarers), O virtuous mother ! (21) The soul is eternal
(deathless) free from decay, taintless, omnipresent, all-knowing and transcendent. It
assumes bodies (of various kinds), procuring the (numerous) objects of senses by its own
Maya (ignorance). (22) (Just) as due to (proximity to) a running stream the trees (standing
motionless on its edge and reflected in it) appear as though moving and (even) as due to
one's rotating eyes the earth (around) appears to revolve, so when the mindis agitated by
the (three) Gunas (modes of Prakrti), the soul, whichis really unagitated (free from the morbid
feelings of grief etc.), acquires homogeneity indeed with the mind, O blessed one, so
that, though (really) detached from body etc,. it appears as if endowed with a body and so.
on. (23-24) To identify with the body the self, which has no connection (whatsoever) with a
body—this is the perversion of the soul. (And) it is from such identification that there ensues
its union with agreeable objects and separation from disagreeable ones and vice versa,
(egoistic) action and (consequent) transition from one embodied state to another, birth and
death, grief of various kinds, mentioned in the scriptures, want of discrimination between
matter and spirit and so on, anxiety and forgetting the aforementioned distinction (even
though having known it once). (25-26) On this subject the wise narrate the following ancient
legend too in the form of a dialogue between Yama (the god of retribution) and the relations
of a deceased person. (Please) listen to it. (27)

उशीनरेष्रभूद्राजा gat st fay: । सपत्नैर्निहतो ge ज्ञातयस्तमुपासत ।२८॥
विशीर्णरत्नकवचं बिभ्रष्टाभरणस्रजम् | हारनिर्भिन्नहृदयं शयानमसृगाविलम् । २९।
vault ध्वस्ताक्षॆ रभसा Bese रज:कुण्ठमुखाम्भोजं छिन्नायुधभुजं मृधे । ३०॥

In the Usinara territory there lived an illustrious king Suyajiia by name. He was killed by
the enemiesina battle andhis kith and kin sat around him even as he lay on the field of battle,
stained with blood and biting his lips in anger, his jewelled armour smashed, his ornaments
and wreaths of flowers fallen off (from his person), his heart pierced through with an arrow,
his hair thrown about (in disorder), his eyes sunk deep, his lotus face covered with dust and
his weapons and arms cut into pieces. (28—30)
