610 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 13
श्वथ AEE जज कक ज्जी ती क HHT क क HESSEN य का डज पि KETENE EL SHH HEE ORE LEVEN OST HHH EAST ae Re
by Indra (with his thunderbolt) and dropped from the air with both its wings chopped off. (26) The
demon, who was possessed of inordinate strength and extraordinary prowess and whose
gigantic form was exceedingly tall, (now) stretched his lower jaw to the ground and extended the
upper one to heaven; as though devouring (all) the three worlds (heaven, earth and the
intervening space) with his mouth, deep as the sky, tongue fearful as the serpent's and teeth
fierce as Death, nay, shaking mountains with (great) violence and pounding the earth under his
feet like a huge mountain walking about, he went up to Indra (who was armed with his
thunderbolt) and swallowed him with Airavata (that carried him on its back) even as a python
would swallow an elephant. Seeing him devoured by Vrira, the gods along with the lords of
creation (Brahma and others) and eminent sages were seized with despair and exclaimed, “Ah,
what a pity !" (2730) Though swallowed by Vrtra (the chief of the demons), and reaching his
stomach, Indra did not die, protected as he was by Lord Narayana (the Supreme Person in the
form of the armour-like Narayana-Kavaca) as well as by mystical powers and the powers of
conjuration. (31) Ripping up his belly with his thunderbolt, and coming out (in this way), the
powerful Indra (the slayer of the demon Bala) with (great) vigour lopped off the enemy's head
like the top of a mountain. (32) Though revolving with a quick speed, and cutting on all sides, the
thunderbolt (of Indra) felled the neck of Vrira in as many (three hundred and sixty) days as are
taken by the northward and southward marches of (the sun and other) heavenly bodies, at the
time appointed for the death of the demon. (33) At that time drums sounded with a loud noise
and the Gandharvas and Siddhas alongwith hosts of eminent sages joyously showered flowers
on him, glorifying him with sacred hymns celebrating the prowess of the slayer of Vrtra.(34)
Issuing forth from the body of Vitra in the form of an effulgence, O Pariksit (a chastiser of foes),
the soul of Vrtra entered and merged into the Lord (who is beyond all the material worlds, while
all the people (present there) looked on (with wonder). (35)

Thus ends the twelfth discourse entitled "Vrtra slain," in Book Six of
the great and glorious Bhagavata-Purana, otherwise

known as the Paramahamsa-Samhita.

२४२० Sos १९
PII Sees

अथ त्रयोदशोऽध्याय:

Discourse XIll
Indra‘s Victory

श्रीरुक उवाच
aa हते त्रयो लोका विना झक्रेण ye! सपाला ह्यभवन् सद्यो विज्वरा निर्वृतेन्दिया: । १ ।
देवर्षिपितृभूतानि gen देवानुगा: स्वयम्। प्रतिजग्मु:स्वधिष्ण्यानि व्रह्मेरोन्द्रादयस्तत: | २ |

Sri Suka began again : Vrira having (thus) been slain, (all) the three worlds with their
guardian deities, excepting, of course, Indra, O munificent Pariksit, were immediately rid of
anxiety and felt gratified at heart. (1) The gods and sages, manes and spirits, the demons
and the attendants of the gods (Gandharvas and others) returned to their (respective)
realms of their own accord without taking leave of (Indra) and then Brahma (the creator),
Siva, Indra and other (great) gods (too) dispersed. (2)

