780 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 10

ROR A AAR AA ERA EE REE ELAR AEE SHALE EEA RELEEKE REECE ATER EERE EERE EERE EEE

Bali assailed the mighty Indra with ten arrows, Airavata (his elephant) with three, the four
guards of Airavata with four (each with one) and its driver with one. (41) Quick in showing
his valour, Sakra (Indra) cut them with the same number of (eighteen) sharp Bhallas, as
though smiling, as they came flying (towards him), even before they reached him. (42)
Observing his superb feat, Bali, who could not easily tolerate this discomfiture, took up a dart
glowing like a mighty firebrand. Indra (however) cut it while it was (yet) in Bali's hand (before
he was able to discharge it). (43) Bali thereupon took up a spear, then a Prasa and then
(again) a Tomara (iron club) and double-edged swords. (But) whatever weapon he took in
his hand (the powerful) Indra cut down all of them (in no time). (44) Going out of sight, the
demon (Bali) next let loose his demoniacal Maya (illusion) and thereupon came into view a
mountain over (the heads of ) the celestial forces, O king! (45) From that mountain fell down
trees burning with forest fire and rocks with (their) tops sharp as (the edge of) a chisel,
pulverizing the enemy’s forces. (46) Further (from that mountain) rused forth large serpents
and (other) snakes with scorpions, as well as lions, tigers and boars crushing gigantic
elephants. (47) There also appeared in hundreds nude ogresses with pikes in (their) hands,
exclaiming "Cut down", "Break asunder!" and ogres too, O lord! (48) Then large thundering
clouds, buffeted by winds, rained live coals with a deep and terrific roar. (49)Conjured up by
the demon, a very extensive and most formidable fire, helped by the winds, began to burn
the celestial army like the fire appearing at the time of final dissolution of the universe. (50)
Then was observed on all sides an ocean that transgressed (all) limits and looked terrible
on account of (its) whirlpools and waves tossed up by fierce winds.(51) in the midst of
illusions that were being likewise created by other Daityas (too), who were great adepts in
conjuring tricks and were (most) formidable because of their imperceptible movements, the
celestial warriors grew despondent.(52) When Indra and others, O protector of men, did not
know how to counteract this evil, the almighty Lord, who is the Protector of the universe and
was called to mind (by the gods), manifested Himself there. (53) Presently there appeared
the Lord, clad in yellow robes and endowed with eight arms wielding (different) weapons,
with eyes resembling a pair of budding lotuses and His feet, tender as young leaves, placed
across the shoulders of Garuda (who had a pair of beautiful wings), and on whose person
shone forth Goddess Sri (in the form ofa golden streak on His bosom), the Kaustubha gem,
a priceless crown anda pair of invaluable ear-rings. (54) The moment He entered the battle-
field the illusions created by the conjuring tricks of the demons yielded to the glory of that
mighty Lord even as a dream is broken the moment wakefulness returns (toa sleeping man).
For, (to say nothing of the Lord's actual presence), the (very) thought of Sri Hari is the (only)
radical cure for all ills. (85) Perceiving Lord Visnu (the Rider of Garuda) on the field of battle,
and revolving his dart, (the demon) Kalanemi (who was reborn as Karhsa in his next
incarnation and) who rode on a lion (the enemy of an elephant) presently flung it (at Him).
Seizing it by way of sport as it was about to descend on Garuda's head, Visnu (the Lord of
the three worlds) despatched with it, O protector of the people, the enemy (Kalanemi) along
with his mount (the lion). (56) Encountering the Lord, by whose discus (Sudargana) the
mighty Mali and Sumali (too) had their heads lopped off and fell on the battle-field, Malyavan
(another general ofthe Asurika forces) was just going to strike Garuda (the king of birds) with
a pointed mace when Sri Hari (the most ancient Person) severed the head of the roaring
enemy with the same discus.(57)

Thus ends the tenth discourse, forming part of the story of the war between
the gods and the demons in Book Eight of the great and
‘glorious Bhagavata-Purana, otherwise known as
the Paramahamsa-Samhila.

ES &
PII ICS
