Dis. 4 ] ` BOOK FOUR `-- 301

.. .६ ३३३६ ३ ३६३ ६६६ UAH KSSH ADEEEA LEEK EATER LERAE WEARS KHATER AEA ELE KAA ERR HAHAH
ज्ञा

should never look at the face of Daksa—even though he is your father, your very
procreator—nor of those who are devoted to him, because he bears ill-will to me and offered
indignity to me by abusing me, O charming lady, when | visited the sacrifice performed by
the lords of created beings, even though | did no wrong to him. (24) If you ignore my advice
and go there, no good will come to you thereby. For, when a man whois heldinhigh esteem
suffers indignity at the hands of a relation, the affront forthwith causes his death. (25)

Thus ends the third discourse, forming part of the Dialogue between Goddess Uma and
Lord Rudra, in Book Four of the great and glorious Bhagavata-
Purana, otherwise known as the Paramaharmsa-Samhita.

PARTS
PKIPISSRER IOSD

अथ चतुर्थोऽध्याय:

Discourse IV

Sati burns herself with the fire of Yoga
मैत्रेय उवाच

eee: परिशङ्किता भवान्निष्क्रामती निर्विशाती द्विधाऽस ari १ ।
सुहददिदृक्षाप्रतिघातदुर्मना: स्नेहाद्गुदत्यश्रुकलातिविह्वला |
भवं भवान्यप्रतिपूरुषं रुषा प्रधक्ष्यतीवैक्षत जातवेपथु: । २ ।
ततो विनि:श्वस्य सती faa तं wea रोषेण च aaa etl
पित्रोरगात्स्रेणविमूढधीर्गृहान् प्रेम्णाऽऽत्मनो योऽर्धमदात्सतां प्रिय: । ३ ।
तामन्वगच्छन् staat सतीमेकां त्रिनेत्रानुचरा: सहस्रहश: ।
सपार्षंदयक्षा मणिमन्मदादय: पुरोवृषेन्द्रास्तससा गतव्यथा: । ४ |

सारिकाकन्दुकदर्पणाग्बुजश्वेतातपत्रव्यजनस्रगादिभि: ।
गौतस्यनैर्दुन्दुभिवाङ्खवणुभिर्वृवेन्द्रप्णोप्य विटङ्किता ययु: । ५ ।
आब्रह्मघोषोर्जितयज्ञवैशसं विप्रर्षिजुष्टुं विबुधैश्च सर्वश: ।
मृदार्वय:काञ्चनदर्भचर्मभिर्निसृष्टभाण्डं यजनं समाविशत् । ६ ।
तामागतां तत्र न कश्चनाद्रियद् विमानितां यज्ञकृतो wars: |
mi स्वसूर्वै wi च सादरा: प्रेमाश्रुकण्ठ्य: परिषस्वजुर्मुदा । ७ |
सौदर्यसम्प्रश्नसमर्थवार्तता मात्रा च मातृष्वसृभिश्च meni
et सरपर्यां वरमासनं च सा aed पित्राप्रतिनन्दिता सती । ८ ।

Maitreya continued: Having said this much, Lord Sankara (the Bestower of happiness)
became silent; for He thought the death of His consort was inevitable in either case (whether
she proceeded to her father's house or stayed behind). (As for the latter) she swung like a
pendulum, (now) sallying forth in her eagerness to see her relations and (now) returning for

fear of Lord Siva (the Source of the universe). (1) Vexed at the thwarting of her desire to see
her relations and overpowered with emotion, she burst into tears and wept. Shaking with
