Dis. 24 ] BOOK THREE 243

St ¥5 O81 Be We Bee AT ME RET BOR TR ER RR AS HE RO ROR RO HH
त्त्र

अथ [रोऽध्याय:

Discourse XXIV
Descent of Lord Kapila

मेत्रेय उवाच
निर्वेदवादिनीमेवं मनोर्दुहितरं मुनि: | दयालु: शालिनीमाह शुक्काभिव्याहतं स्मरन्। १ ।
Maitreya resumed ; When Devahiti (ihe daughter of Swayambhuva Manu), who was
worthy of all praise, spoke such words, full of dispassion, the merciful sage recalled the words
of Lord Visnu and replied (as follows).{1)
ऋषिरुवाच
मा feet राजपुत्रीत्थमात्मानं प्रत्यनिन्दिते। भगवांस्तेऽक्षरो गर्भमदूरात्सम्प्रपत्स्यते । २ ।
धृतव्रतासि भद्रं ते दमेन नियमेन च । तपोद्रविणदानैश्च org det भज । ३ |
स त्वयाऽऽराधित: शुक्को वितन्वन्मामकं a: । छेत्ता ते हृदयग्रन्थिमोदर्यो ब्रह्मभावन: । ४ |
The sage said : Worry not about yourself, 0 princess of irreproachable conduct. The
immortal Lord will enter your womb at no distant date. (2) You have undertaken sacred
vows, God bless you. Hence do you adore the Lord with reverence through control of the
senses and religious observances as well as through austere penance and charitable
gifts of money. (3) Propitiated by you, Lord Visnu will be born as a son to you, thereby
spreading my renown too, andwill cut the knot of ignorance (in the form of self-identification
with the material sheaths), existing in your heart, by instructing you in the knowledge of the
Spirit. (4)
मत्रेय उवाच
Ta बरहुतिथे काले भगवान्मधुसूदन:। कार्दमं वीर्यमापन्नो जज्ञेऽपग्निरिव दारुणि । ६ ।
अवादयंस्तदा व्योम्नि वादित्राणि घनाघना: । गायन्ति तं स्म गन्धर्वा नृत्यन्त्यप्सरसो मुदा । ७ |
ta: सुमनसो दिव्या: खेचरैरपवर्जिता: । प्रसेदुश्च fea: सर्वा अम्भांसि च मनांसि च । ८ ।
तत्कर्दमाश्रमपदं सरस्वत्या परिश्रितम्। स्वयम्भू:; साकमृषिभिर्मरीच्यादिभिरभ्ययात्। ९ ।
Wed Ut ब्रह्म सत्त्वेनांशेन ङत्रुहन्।तत्त्वसंख्यानविज्ञप्त्यै जातं विद्वानज: स्वराद् ।१०॥
Maitreya went on : Reposing full faith in the message of the sage Kardama (a lord
of created beings), out of great regard for him, Devahiti too betook herself to the
worship of the immutable Supreme Person as the Preceptor of the world. (5) After a
pretty long time Lord Visnu (the Slayer of the demon Madhu) manifested Himself first
through the generative fluid of Kardama and then through Devahiti, even as fire
appears through firewood. (6) At the time of His descent on earth gods in the form of
raining clouds sounded musical instruments (in the shape of thunder-claps) in the sky;
the Gandharvas (celestial musicians) sang praises to Him; while Apsaras (celestial
nymphs) danced through joy. (7) Heavenly flowers rained by the gods flying in the air.
cropped (from the heavens); and all the quarters as well as the waters (of lakes, rivers
ic.) and the minds of the people too became clear. (8) Brahma (the self-born) went
