692 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 6

वित् वित् AM EEL LERMAN ALIAS AEGEAN LEAH EIA HAI ALAA MERE A HEA AA IAAI HE

यजूंषि तित्तिरा भूत्वा तल्लोलुपतयाऽऽददु: । तैत्तिरीया इति Gaara आसन् सुपेशला: । ६५!
याज्ञवल्क्यस्ततो see छन्दांस्यधिगवेषयन् । गुरोरविद्यमानानि सूपतस्थेऽर्कमीश्वरम् । ६६1

As is well-known, some pupils of VaiSampayana were known as Carakadhwaryus
because they went through on behalf of their teacher a course of penance to expiate the
sin of Brahmanicide. (61) (Thereupon) Yajfiavalkya, another discip!e of Vaisampayana,
submitted (to his preceptor), "Oh, of what account, venerable sir, will be the reward
obtained through the penance of these pupils (of yours) of poor strength ! । shall undergo
a course of penance very difficult to practise." (62) Offended, when addressed thus, the
preceptor retorted, "Get away (from here). | have nothing more to do with you, a pupil
contemning Brahmanas. Give up at once all that you have learnt from me." (63) Vomiting
the portions of Yajurveda (which he had learnt from his preceptor), Yajfavalkya, son of
Devarata, too immediately left the place. Sages beheld those portions of Yajurveda and,
greatly enamoured of them, assumed the form of partridges and picked them up.
(Thenceforward) that most attractive branch of Yajurveda came to be known by the name
of Taittiriya (connected with partridges). (64-65) Seeking to obtain additional Srutis not
known even to his preceptor, Yajfiavalkya, O Brahmana sage, thereupon duly extolled the
Sun-god, the Master of the Vedas (as follows). (66)

याञवल्क्य उवाच
ॐ नमो भगवते आदित्यायाखिलजगतामात्मस्वरूपेण कालस्वरूपेण चतुर्विधभूतनिकायानां
ब्रह्मादिस्तम्बपर्यन्तानामन्तर्हृदयेषु बहिरपि चाकाश इवोपाधिनाव्यवधीयमानो vara एव
क्षणलवनिमेषावयवोपचितसंवत्सरगणेनापामादानविसर्गाभ्यामिमां लोकयात्रामनुवहति । ६७1
यदु ह aa बिबुधर्षभ सवितरदस्तपत्यनुसवनमहरहराम्नायविधिनोपतिष्ठमानानामखिल-
दुरितवृजिनब्रीजावभर्जन भगवत: समभिधीमहि तपनमण्डलम् । ६८
य इह वाव स्थिरचरनिकराणां निजनिकेतनानां मनईइन्दियासुगणाननात्मन: स्वयमात्मान्तर्यामी
प्रचोदयति । ६९॥
च एवेमं लोकमतिकरालवदनान्धकारसंज्ञाजगरग्रहगिलितं मृतकमिव विचेतनमवलोक्यानु-
पतिरिवासाधूनां भयमुदीरयन्नटति । ७०।
Ufa आश्लापालैस्तत्र TA कमलकोशाञ्जलिभिरुपहतार्हण: 98 |
aq ह भगवंस्तव चरणनलिनयुगलं त्रिभुवनगुरुभिर्वन्दितमहमयातयामयजु:काम
उपसरामीति 1921
_ Yajfavalkya prayed : Hail to the almighty Sun-god, denoted by the sacred syllable
OM! Dwelling as the very Soul of the universe in the heart of multitudes of created beings—
falling under four categories (viz., mammals, oviparous creatures, the sweet-born and
those sprouting from the soil), from Brahma down to a clump of grass—and outside too as
(the wheel of) Time revolving in the form of years made up of (minute) parts like an instant,
a moment and the twinkling of an eye, yet unlimited by any condition, like the sky, You
maintain the progress of the world all alone by sucking (in the hot season) and releasing
the moisture (during the monsoon). (This passage explains the meaning of the first foot of
the Gayatri-Mantra.) (67) We duly and devoutly contemplate on that well-known orb of
Your venerable Self, 0 Jewel among the gods, which is burning over there, O Father (of

the universe), who burn away all the sins and miseries (resulting from them) as well as their
seed (viz., ignorance) of those who wait upon You (with prayers etc.) in the manner
