Dis. 24 ] BOOK FIVE 537

कशिजीन्धेजजा वी जौजठीन्यैच्छ HLA HH OHE वत्धापत्छदेज्येत्छिक या को छ्व KT LERE त्र श्रज्छजीकडो क त्छित्येजीजी क्तय चैद्य ङी ऊ ती डी ङी डौ व कौ ङ ड हौ कौ वी

Self-Realization, nay, wno bestows His own Self on (places Himself at the disposal of) His
devotees. (21) Nor indeed can it be said that the Lord showered His grace on Indra in that
He bestowed on him only the illusory pleasures of sense and affluence, which, on the other
hand, take away the remembrance in relation to the Lord Himself. (22) For, (when) robbed
of (the sovereignty of) all the three worlds (and allowed no other possessions) except his
mere body and thrown into a mountain-cave, tightly bound with the cords of Varuna (the god
of water), by the Lord (who did all this) under the pretext of begging for three paces of land)
because He found no other means (of depriving him of his glory and possessions), Bali
actually uttered the following memorable words:—(23) "Alas! this glorious god who is called
Indra is surely not clever in attaining the object of (his) life in that he—whose counseller is
(the celebrated sage) Brhaspati, exclusively chosen (by him) for deliberation—ignored that
sage and asked me through Lord Vamana (younger brother of Indra) Himself for (the
sovereignty of) the three worlds (the objects of his desire) and on no account the service of
that Lord. (After all) of what account are these three worlds, which change hands at the end
of a Manvantara (the period of sovereignty of a Manu, extending to a little over Seventy-one
rounds of the four Yugas), a (minute) fraction of Time, which has an infinite duration. (24)
Itis well-known that my grandfather (the great devotee Prahlada) asked for His service only,
but not the throne of his father (Hiranyakasipu, the suzerain lord of the three worlds), which
had (now) no fear from any quarter, even though it was being offered by the Lord on the
latter's death, (only) because it was something other than the Lord. (25) What individual like
me, whose passions have not been attenuated and who has totally rejected the Lord's grace,
can possibly hope to tread in the footsteps of that noble soul?" (26) The narrative of Bali will
be told at length later on (in Book Eight), at whose door stays, mace in hand, the divine
Narayana Himself, the adored of the whole universe—Narayana, whose heart is full of
compassion for His own devotees and by whom Ravana (the ten-headed monster) was
thrown a hundred million Yojanas away with His toe (when he appeared there) in the course
of his (expedition for the) conquest of the quarters. (27)
ततोऽधस्तात्तलातले मयो नाम दानवेन्द्रस्न्रिपुराधिपतिर्भगवता पुरारिणा त्रिलोकीशां चिकीर्षुणा
महॊयते । २८ ।

Below that, in (the region of) Talatala, resides the demon chief, Maya by name, the lord
of three cities, who had all his three cities (formerly) reduced to ashes by Lord Siva
(thenceforth known as the Destroyer of the enemy's city) in His eagerness to bring happiness
(thereby) to all the three worlds, (but) who (later on) secured a footing (in this realm) by His
grace. He is the teacher of (all) those who are expert in conjuring tricks, stands protected on
sides by that great deity (Lord Siva) and (therefore) immune from the fear of Sudarsana (the
discus of Lord Visnu) and is held in great respect (by the denizens of that region). (28)

ततोऽधस्तान्महातलॆ काट्रवेयाणां सर्पाणां नैकशिरसां क्रोधवशो नाम गण:
कुहकतक्षककालियसुषेणादिप्रधाना महाभोगवन्त: पतत्तिराजाधिपते: पुरुषवाहादनवरतमुद्विजमाना:
स्वकलत्रापत्यसुहृत्कुटुम्बसङ्घेन क्वचित्प्रमत्ता विहरन्ति। २९॥

Below that, in (the region of) Mahatala, lives a many-headed brood of serpents, born of
Kadri, called the Krodhavasas, the chief of them being Kuhaka, Taksaka, Kaliya, Susena,
and so on. Though possessed of a gigantic form, they are constantly afraid of Garuda (the
supreme lord of all the rulers of birds)—who carries (on his back) Lord Visnu (the Supreme
Person); sometimes they sport recklessly through attachment to their wives, offspring,
relations and kinsmen. (29)
