370 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 18

ह्रसोन्र तर्बश्य ROR ह उ Pw ee ST EEE RE PEER ee S EE RES Ee ee EF eo ट ज ड्छी
SSS

as hereafter. (3) Anyone of the later times who follows with faith and reverence those
expedients found and taught by the ancient masters easily achieves the purposes of his
life. (4) He who in his foolishness disregards them and undertakes to accomplish (ignorantly
planned) purposes in his own (vainly independent) ways, can never be successful in his
efforts. His ends are never realized, even though his efforts are renewed every now and
then. (5) O king ! | noticed that the herbs and annual plants that had been evolved of old
by Brahma, the Creative Agent of God, were being used and enjoyed by those who were
unrighteous and had not undertaken any religious vows and observances. (6) | (therefore)
absorbed (into my bosom) the herbs and annual plants, finding myself unprotected and
uncared for by Your predecessors and that a generation of thievish people flourished on
earth. | meant to preserve them for sacrificial rites. (7) It is natural that the plants have got
assimilated in me through a long process of time. Now You are the person competent to
draw them forth by some expedient known to be effective in this behalf. (8) O Hero of
mighty arms, O Lord sustaining the life of beings, pray, find a calf, a befitting milk-pot and
one who can draw the milk, so that, full of affection for the calf, | shall yield for you the
desired objects in the form of milk if you want to have nutritious food coveted by living
beings. (9-10) O king of boundless power ! remove my ruggedness and make me level so
that, even when the rains have passed, the water poured down by the god of rain may stand
on me. May all be well with You!" (11)

इति fra fed वाक्यं ya आदाय भूपति: । वत्सं कृत्वा मनुं पाणावदुहत्सकलौषधी: 1221
तथा परे च aaa सारमाददते बुधा: | ततोऽन्ये च यथाकामं दुदुहु: पृथुभाविताम् । १३|
ॠषयो दुदुहुर्देवीमिन्दियेष्वथ सत्तम । वत्सं बृहस्पति कृत्वा पयश्छन्दोमयं शुचि ie
कृत्वा वत्सं सुरगणा se सोममदूदुहन्।हिरण्मयेन पात्रेण वीर्यमोजो as wa: ।१५॥
qe दानवा वत्सं प्रह्रादमसुरर्षभम्। विधायादूदुहन् क्षीरमय:पात्रे सुरासवम् ।१६॥
गन्धर्वाप्सरसोऽधुक्षन् पात्रे पद्ममये पय: | वत्सं विश्वावसुं कृत्वा गान्धर्वं मधु सौभगम् । १७॥
वत्सेन पितरोऽर्यम्णा mel क्षीरमधुक्षत। आमपात्रे महाभागा: श्रद्धया श्राद्धदेवता: । १८।
प्रकल्प्य ae कपिलं fag: सङ्कल्पनामयीम्। सिद्धिं नभसि विद्यां च ये च विद्याधरादय: 121
अन्ये च मायिनो मायामन्तर्धानाद्भुतात्मनाम्। मयं प्रकल्प्य वत्सं ते दुदुहुर्धारणामयीम् 120

Accepting this agreeable and wholesome advice of goddess Earth, the Emperor made
a calf of Swayambhuva Manu and drew from her in his own hands all species of herbs and
annual plants. (12) Likewise all other wise and intelligent persons too take the essence of
everything and so after Prthu others also drew from Earth, asa cow tamed byhim, the objects
sought after by them . (13) The seers and sages, O most righteous one, made a calf of
Brhaspati (the preceptor of the gods), milked the goddess and got the sacred Veda for milk,
their milk-pots being the organs of hearing and of speech and the mind, which is the sense
of senses. (14) The gods made a calf of Indra (their king) and drew (from Earth) the
(ambrosial) drink known as Soma besides mental vigour, ardour of the senses and physical
strength for their milk in a vessel of gold. (15)The Daityas and Danavas made a calf of
Prahrada, the noblest of them all, and obtained wines and distillates (toddy etc.) for their milk
ina bucketofiron. (16) The Gandharvas (celestial musicians) and Apsaras (heavenly nymphs)
made a calf of Viswavasu and derived the sweetness of song and beauty for their milk ina cup
of lotus. (17) The venerable Pitrs—the deities presiding over the rites in honour of the spirits
of departed ancestors—made a calf of Aryama (one of the twelve deities presiding over
the sun, the chief of the Pitrs) and drew with reverence what is known as Kavya (food for the
Pitrs), which they held in a sun-dried earthen vessel and which was milk for them. (18)
