786 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 1

BPR RE BY BE HEM MOR RR Ri He Re ATH a ER Be EE EYE ER hy HE TR RS Re HY Ge RR HH TH EB BH HW MRR BY

blessed) Akati and Devahiti, daughters of the aforesaid (Swayambhuva) Manu, in order to
teach (the former)piety (in the person of Yajfia) and (to the latter spiritual) wisdom (in the
person of the sage Kapila) respectively. (5) (Of these) | have already related” (to you) the
achievement of Kapila (in the shape of instruction in Devotion and spiritual wisdom imparted
to Devahiti, which led her to renounce everything and, fixing her thought exclusively on the
Lord, attain final beatitude). | shall (now) recount, O chief of the Kurus what Lord Yajfia did.(6)
farm: कामभोगेषु ञतरूपापति: sy: । विसृज्य राज्यं तपसे सभार्यो वनमांविशत् । ७ |
सुनन्दायां aad wer भुवं स्पृशन्।तप्यमानस्ततो घोरमिदमन्वाह aici
Fed up with the enjoyment of sense-objects and having relinquished his kingship,
Emperor Swayambhuva Manu (the spouse of Satarupa) withdrew to the forest for
(practising) austerities along with his consort. (7) Practising rigid asceticism on the bank of
the (river) Sunanda for a hundred years and touching the ground with(only) one foot, he
repeated the following (prayer), O scion of Bharata !(8)

FRAT
aq चेतयते fad fas चेतयते न यम्। यो amid हयानेऽस्मिन्नायं तं ae Gea: । ९ ।
आत्मावास्यमिदं fad यत् किञ्चिज्जगत्यां जगत् । तेन त्यक्तेन भुञ्जीथा मा गृध: कस्यस्विद्भधूनम् 1 Fo |
यं न uaa cert चक्षुर्यस्य न रिष्यति। तं भूतनिलयं ta सुपर्णमुपधावत । ११।
न यस्याद्यन्तौ मध्यं च स्व: परो नान्तरं बहि: | विश्वस्यामूनि ae cere fed च तदृतं महत् । १२।
a faye: पुरुहूत gt: wa: स्वयंज्योतिरज: पुराण: |
धत्तेऽस्य जन्माद्यजयाऽऽत्मशक्त्या तां विद्ययोदस्य निरीह आस्ते 1831
अथाग्रे aaa: कर्माणीहन्तेऽकर्महेतवे । ईहमानो हि ges: प्रायोऽनीहां प्रपद्यते ex
ged भगवानीशो न fe aa विषज्जते । आत्मलाभेन पूर्णार्थो नावसीदन्ति येऽनु तम् ।१५॥
— —— ai errfits । न्न्
नॄळ्छिक्षयन्ते निजवर्त्मसंस्थितॆ प्रभुं प्रपद्येऽखिलधर्मभावनम् ।१६॥
Manu prayed: Oh, how strange (that) the individual soul does not know Him—although
He knows the individual soul— because of whom (whose presence) the world (of matter, viz.,
the body, senses, mind and so on) is endowed with consciousness but to whom the world
does not lend consciousness (He being conscious by His very nature), and who keeps
awake(as the witness) while the world is asleep.(9) Whatever animate( or inanimate)
creation there exists in the world, all that is pervaded by the (cosmic) Spirit (who not only
sustains it but also enlivens it). (Therefore,) live upon what has been assigned (to you) by
Him (or what has been consecrated to Him); do not covet the wealth of anyone (else).(10)
Flee (for protection) to that self-effulgent Lord, the abode (Inner Controller) of (all) created
beings, (and who has been figuratively depicted in the Upanisads as) a bird with beautiful
wings( dwelling on the tree of this body as an unconcerned witness along with the Jiva,
represented as its companion attached to the tree), whom, as the Perceiver (of all), the
world (or the sense of sight) cannot perceive(because He is above sense-perception and
because the knower cannot be known by the means of knowledge) and whose perception
(knowledge) never fails (inasmuch as it constitutes His very being, unlike the consciousness
of the finite Jiva, which disappears with the disappearance of its object). (11) The all-
pervading Brahma (alone) is that (supreme) Reality to which neither beginning nor end nor
middle can be attributed, nay, in whose eye there is neither friend nor foe. ( It being the Self

a `--=न्=

*Vide Book Ill.
