122 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA Dis. 5

SOCEM ० न कक २ गक 279 # 4 ७.8 252 939 # 2999 # 6८ १ 999 #^ 9 १ १99 9^^ % १ # 9 # # १999 १94 4१ 4७८ 499 249 #

पूजित:र सुखमासीन: पृष्टानामयमादृत: । प्रसक्तघी: स्वात्मजयोरिदमाह विशाम्पते ।२२॥
Having charged the cowherds with the protection of Gokula, Nanda went to Mathura in
order to pay his annual tribute to Karnsa, 0 jewel of the Kurus! (19) Reliably hearing of his
friend, Nanda, having come (to Mathura) and coming to know that he had paid his tribute,
Vasudeva repaired to his camp (to see him and enquire about his own sons, Balarama and
Sri Krsna). (20) Rejoiced to see him come and at once rising to his feet even as a body (lying
unconscious) would do on consciousness returning to it, Nanda folded his most beloved
friend in the arms, overwhelmed as he was with affection. (21) Welcomed (by Nanda) and
honoured with an enquiry after his health, and comfortably seated, Vasudeva, whose mind
was deeply attached to his sons, sqpke as follows, O protector of the people:—(22)
fem we: प्रवयसा इदानीमप्रजस्य ते ! प्रजाशाया निवृत्तस्य प्रजा यत् समपद्यत 1231
fem संसारचक्रेऽस्मिन् वर्तमान: पुनर्भव: ।उपलब्धो भवानद्य दुर्लभं प्रियदर्शनम् । २४॥
नैकत्र प्रियसंवास: सुहृदां चित्रकर्मणाम्। ओघेन व्यूह्यमानानां प्लवानां स्रोतसो यथा ।२५॥
कच्चित् vrei fret भूर्यम्बुतृणवीरुधम्। get तदधुना are त्वं सुहृद्वृत: ।२६॥
भ्रातर्मम सुत: कच्चिन्मात्रा सह भवद्व्रजे। तातं भवन्तं मन्वानो भवद्भ्यामुपलालित: 1201
पुंसस्रिवर्गो विहित: get ह्यनुभावित: । न तेषु क्लिङ्यमानेषु त्रिवर्गोऽर्थाय कल्पते 1261
"it is a matter for congratulation, 0 brother, that an issue has now been vouchsafed to
you, aged and issueless as you were, and had been shut out from all hopes of getting a
progeny. (23) Through good luck you have been perceived today like one reborn (revolving
all along) on this whirligig of mundane existence; for the sight of a loved one is (so) difficult
to obtain. (24) The living together at one and the same piace of friends engaged in diverse
occupations, which is so agreeable, is not (always) possible any more than that of wooden
planks etc. , swept along by the current of a river. (25) Is that Vrhadvana (Gokula) where you
are residing at present surrounded (accompanied) by your kith and kin, favourable to cattle,
free from diseases and provided with abundant water, grass and plants? (26) Cherished by
you both (your wife and yourself) and recognizing you as his father, is my son (Balarama),
O brother, doing well with his mother (Rohini) in your Vraja? (27) Indeed the threefold object
of human pursuit (viz., religious merit, wealth and sensuous pleasure) is recommended only
inso far as it is shared with one's near and dear ones. When the latter are in distress, such
threefold pursuit does not make for happiness (the goal of all sentient beings). (28)

नन्द उवाच
अहो ते देवकी पुत्रा: कंसेन बहवो हता: । एकावशिष्टावरजा कन्या सापि दिवं गता ।२९॥
नूने ह्यदृष्टनिष्ठोऽयमदृष्टपरमो जन: | अदृष्टमात्मनस्तत्त्वं यो ae न स मुह्यति ।३०॥

Nanda replied : Born of Devaki, (O friend,) many a son of yours has been killed alas!
by Kamsa. (Only) one daughter, subsequently born, was left (having escaped death at his
cruel hands). But she too ascended to heaven. (29) Indeed a created being depends on its
destiny and is controlled by destiny. He who knows destiny to be his (very) essence (the
unfailing cause of his happiness and misery) does not get infatuated. (30)

वसुदेव उवाच
करो वै वार्षिको a UA दृष्टा ad च व: । नेह स्थेयं बहुतिथं सन्त्युपाताश्च AHS 1321
Vasudeva said : The annual tribute has actually been paid to the king and we (too) have
been seen by you. You should not (therefore) stay here long; (for) there are startling
