Dis. 1] BOOK TEN 101

श्व व HH eee Se Rese PEEEAS Ee cee eth he EERE RERERA ATTA २२२२ SAAS HH HHH

एवं स्वमायारचितेष्सौ पुमान् wy रागानुगतो विमुह्यति ise!
wera कस्यचिद् द्रोहमाचरेत् स तथाविध: | आत्मन: क्षेममन्विच्छन् द्रोग्धुर्वै परतो भयम् ee
TH Fa बाला कृपणा पुत्रिकोपमा । हन्तुं नार्हसि कल्याणीमिमां त्वं दीनवत्सल: ।४५॥

Vasudeva said : You are possessed of virtues worthy of being extolled by heroes and
are the glory of the Bhojas. As such how can you slay your (own) cousin, a woman, on the
festive occasion of her wedding ? (37) The death of those that are born is ordained alongwith
their birth, 0 valiant prince! Death is indeed inevitable to (all) living beings (no matter)
whether it comes this (very) day orat the end of a hundred years. (38) When the body is about
to expire (lit., to be dissolved into its five constituent elements, viz., earth, water, fire, airand
ether), the soul (tenanting it), following (the course of) its destiny, helplessly quits the former
body on (mentally) obtaining another corporeal form. (39) As indeed a walking man paces
forward with another leg while sticking to the earth by one leg or even as a caterpillar leaves
a blade of grass (only) when it has caught hold of another, so does the embodied soul,
following the course of its destiny, leave the former body only when it has caught hold of
another. (40) Just as a man ina dream state or one whose mind is entirely possessed with
a longing and who is contemplating on the object of his desire with a mind coloured by that
which has (either) been (actually) perceived (by himin his waking life) or heard of, visualizes
a corresponding conceptual form {of the kind actually seen or heard of by him) and
(unconsciously) comes to identify himself with it, and (forthwith) indeed forgets his (living)
body, so does the embodied soul quit the previous body on attaining a new one. (41)
Identifying itself with that (particular) body out of the (numberless) material bodies (which
are nothing but the five elements) moulded (into diverse forms) by Maya (the creative energy
of the Lord)—which his mind, consisting of (various) ideas and impelled by destiny, flows
towards and clings to, the embodied soul passes into that very form alongwith the mind. (42)
Evenas the sunorthe moon, with which we are so familiar, when reflectedin earthen vessels
full of water, appears as shaking due to the force of the wind (though not actually shaking),
३० does the soul, entering through attachment the material forms brought forth by its own
ignorance, gets deluded (seized with the fear of death and so on). (43) As such (i.e.,
inevitably exposed to the fear of death), the embodied soul, seeking after its own welfare,
should not therefore do wrong to anyone; for there is fear to the wrong-doer from others
(viz., from the individual wronged, its kith and kin and the god of retribution). (44) This
younger cousin of yours is a (mere) helpless girl andis like a daughter to you. You ought not
(therefore) to kill this girl, who has just gone through the auspicious nuptial rites, kind as you
are to the helpless. (45)

श्रीगुक उवाच
एवं स सामभिर्भेदैर्बोध्यमानोऽपि दारुण:। न न्यवर्तत कौरव्य पुरुषादाननुव्रत: Ise!
fei तस्य तं wer विचिन्त्यानकदुन्दुभि: ig कालं प्रतिव्योढुमिदं तत्रान्वपद्यत ive)
मृत्युर्बुद्धिमतापोह्यो यावद्बुद्धिबलोदयम् । यद्यसौ न निवर्तेत नापराधोऽस्ति देहिन: ॥४८॥
प्रदाय मृत्यवे पुत्रान् मोचये कृपणामिमाम् ae मे ale जायेरन् मृत्युर्वा न म्रियेत चेत् ४९1
विपर्ययो वा किं न ae गतिर्धातुर्दुरत्यया । उपस्थितो निवर्तेत free: पुनरापतेत् । ५०1
arin दारुवियोगयोगयोरदृष्टतोऽन्यन्न निमित्तमस्ति ।
एवं fe तं पापं यावदात्मनिदर्शनम्। पूजयामास वै जोरिर्बहुमानपुर:सरम् ।५२॥
