614 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 14

KEKE क क SLC HERA HARA HHA KELH RES HK ECE CHEK ESTEE CSKHEM HSER HEH HEE TERA HEHEHE
Oe SES Ee eee eee

अथ चतुर्दशोऽध्याय:

Discourse XIV
The Lament of Citraketu
परीक्षिदुवाच

रजस्तम:स्वभावस्य ब्रह्मन् FAM Wo: । नारायणे भगवति कथमासीद् ger मति: । १ ।

देवानां शुद्धसत्त्वानामृषीणां चापलात्मनाम्।भक्तिंपुङ्कृचरणे’ न प्रायेणोपजायते । २ ।

रजोभि: समसंख्याता: पार्थिवैरिह जन्तव: । तेषां ये केचनेहन्ते श्रेयो वै मनुजादय: । ३ ।

प्रायो मुमुक्षवस्तेषां केचनैव द्विजोत्तम । मुमुक्षूणां सहस्रेषु कश्चिन्मुच्येत सिध्यति । ४ ।

मुक्तानामपि सिद्धानां नारायणपरायण: | सुदुर्लभ: प्रशान्तात्मा कोटिष्पि महामुने । ५ ।

aq स me we: सर्वलोकोपतापन: | इत्थं दृढमति: कृष्ण आसीत् संग्राम उल्बणे ! ६ ।

अत्र न: संज्यो भूयाञ्छोतुं कौतूहलं VAs: पौरुषेण समरे सहस्राक्षमतोषयत् |

Pariksit submitted : How did (such an) unflinching devotion to the almighty Narayana
appear in the heart of the sinful Vrtra, whose nature, O holy Brahmana, was predominated
by Rajas and Tamas? (1) Devotion to the feet of Lord Visnu (the Bestower of Liberation)
does not ordinarily develop in the heart of (even) gods, whose intellect is (generally) pure,
and sages, whose mindis untainted by sin. (2) Living beings in this universe are as numerous
(innumerable) as there are particles of dust. Of them, only a few human creature and other
(higher) beings, as a matter of fact, practise virtue. (3) Of them (again) seekers of liberation
are ordinarily only few, O jewel among the Brahmanas ! And among thousands of those
seeking release scarce one is completely rid of attachment (to his home etc.) and attains
success (in the shape of Self-Realization). (4) Even among tens of millions of those who
have been rid of identification with the body etc., and even realized the Self, he whose mind
is perfectly serene (entirely free from the craving for sense-gratification) and solely devoted
to (the feet of) Lord Narayana is most difficult to find. (5) How, then, did the sinful Vitra, the
tormentor of all the worlds, who gratified by his valour on the battle-field (even) Indra (the
thousand-eyed lord of paradise), remain so steadfast in (his) devotion to the Lord (the
Attractor of all) in the midst of a fierce combat ? Great is our doubt in this matter and so is
our eagerness to hear about it, O Master. (6-7)
Yd उवाच
परीक्षितोऽथ Ue भगवान् बादरायणि: | निशम्य श्रद्दधानस्य प्रतिनन्द्य वचोऽब्रवीत् । ८ ।
Sita continued : The glorious Suka (the son of Badarayana, more popularly known as

Vedavyasa) welcomed the relevant enquiry of the devout king Pariksit, when he heardit, and
then made the following reply. (8)

ay Fara
orate राजन्नितिहासमिमं यथा । श्रुतं द्वैपायनमुखान्नारदाद्देवलादपि । ९ ।
आसीद्राजा सार्वभौम: जूरसेनेषु a qui चित्रकेतुरिति ख्यातो यस्यासीत् कामधुङ्गही । १०॥
तस्य भार्यासहस्राणां सहस्राणि दशाभवन्। सान्तानिकश्चापि नृपो न लेभे arg सन्ततिम् । ११।
स्तपोदार्यवयोजन्मविद्यैश्वर्यश्रियादिभि: । सम्पन्नस्य WU: सर्वैश्चिन्ता वन्ध्यापतेरभूत् । १२।
न तस्य संपद: सर्वा महिष्यो वामलोचना: । addres भूश्चेयमभवन् प्रीतिहेतव: 1231
