828 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 22

रा कय्यषटी डी AHR ककयो काजीन कटि ज्जी EKER ESSERE ELSOK ETERS EEA AEN SSO RESET R ee EEA EHH
eee SSE ST SY ERT SST ST er टा ता ता न

क्षीणरिक्थञ्च्युत: स्थानात् fant aes शत्रुभि: । ज्ञातिभिश्च परित्यक्तो यातनामनुयापित: । २९॥
गुरुणा भ्त्सित: a जहौ सत्यं न सुव्रत: । छलैरुक्तो मया धर्मो नायं त्यजति wears 1301
w मे प्रापित: स्थानं दुष्प्रापममरैरपि । सावर्णेरन्तरस्यायं भवितेन्रो मदाश्रय: 1321
Wed सुतलमध्यास्तां विश्वकर्मविनिर्मितम्। यन्नाधयो व्याधयश्च sae पराभव: |
नोपसर्गा निवसतां सम्भवन्ति ममेक्षया 1321

इन्द्रसेन महाराज याहि भो भद्रमस्तु तें । सुतलं स्वर्गिभि: med ज्ञातिभि: परिव्रारित: 1331
न त्वामभिभविष्यन्ति लोकेशा: किमुतापरे।तत्वच्छासनातिगान् दैत्यांश्चक्रं मे सूदयिष्यति ax!
रक्षिष्ये सर्वतोऽहं at सानुगं सपरिच्छदम्। सदा सन्निहितं वीर तत्र ot द्रक्ष्यते भवान् ।३५॥
WA दानवदैत्यानां सङ्गात् ते Wa आसुर: | दृष्टा मदनुभावं वै we: कुण्ठो विनङ्क्ष्यति । ३६॥

The glorious Lord replied : | take away the fortune (and power etc.) of whomsoever |
show My grace to, O Brahma! For, intoxicated with wealth (and power etc.) a person
becomes stiff (with pride) and disregards the world and (even) Myself. (24) Passing through
diverse wombs (states of existence) according to its actions, this Jivatma (individual soul),
dependent as it is, seldom attains to the human state.(25) On the part of him (however) in
whom pride does not appear in consequence of pedigree, (meritorious) actions, youth,
comeliness of form, learning, power, affluence and so on, this (absence of pride) should be
regarded as (a token of) My grace (andin that exceptional case | am not reduced to the painful
necessity of stripping him of his possessions). (26) Of course, one devoted to Me does not
get infatuated in spite of (his) high birth and so on, which are not only conducive to pride and
vanity but are in everyway opposed to (the attainment of) all forms of blessedness. (27) This
Bali, the leader of the Danavas and Daityas and the promoter of their glory, has (already)
conquered My invincible Maya (deluding potency). (That is why) though in distress, he does
not feel perplexed: (28) Though impoverished and fallen from his position, (nay,) reproached
and tied down by his enemies, forsaken by his kinsfolk (who have fled to Rasatala*) and
subjected to (bodily) torture (by being tied down), and though twitted and cursed by his
preceptor (Sukracarya), this demon of firm resolve did not abandon truth (retract
his promise). (Even) when taught Dharma (righteousness) by recourse to ambiguous
expressions by Me, he would not give up righteousness, truthful as he is. (29-30) He has
been all but sent to My (divine) realm, difficult of access even to gods. (But before he is sent
there) he will be Indra (the Lord of paradise) under My protection during the Manvantara
presided over by (the Manu called) Savarni (because he wished to enjoy the position of
Indra). (31) Till then let him occupy (rule over) the (subterranean) region of Sutala, whose
(artificial) beauty has been enhanced by Viswakarma (the architect of heaven). Agonies and
ailments, fatigue; drowsiness, mortification and troubles (of various kinds) will never
overtake the denizens of that region due to My (gracious) look. (32) Indrasena, O great king,
may good betide you; surrounded by (your) kinsfolk, go to Sutala, which is worthy of being
sought after (even) by gods. (33) Not even the guardians of the (various) worlds, much less
others, will (be able to) overpower you. (And) My discus (Sudarsana) will put an end to the
Daityas that may violate your commands.(34) | shall protect from all dangers you as well
as your followers and possessions (too). (Nay,) you will ever find Me present there, O heroic

* Vide verse 25 of Discourse XXI above.
