382 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 21
ZnO nt toile sricipi inion tan Rn Ie Ronn ROR iia en soit dar ion iotom @iioe rereni dace areca ec eceea eeton aCe MENTAL
eeow————SSS9aananasSaaSSSSS ee SRN SE ME RENE Be Oe SER Re MEIC साजाजा च RENCE YY व HE He HE

Vidura said ; What did that Prthu (further) do, who was installed as king by the
Brahmanas, received presents from all the gods and bore the prowess of Lord Visnu in his
arms, by which he milked Earth (in the form of a cow)? (9) What knowing man would not hear
the glory of king Prthu; for itis the remains of whatever was achieved by his valour that all
the (so-called) rulers of the earth as well as the’ different worlds and their guardian deities
enjoy to their heart's content even to this day. Therefore, pray, tell (me more of) his faultless
doings. (10)

गङ्खायमुनयोर्नद्योरन्तराक्षेत्रमावसन् ! आरब्धानेव ब्रुभुजे भोगान् पुण्यजिहासया । ११।
सर्वत्रास्खलितादेश: सप्तद्बीपैकदण्डधूक | अन्यत्र ब्राह्मणकुलादन्यत्राच्युतगोत्रत: । १२।

- एकदाऽऽसीन्महासत्रदीक्षा तत्र दिवौकसाम् aah ब्रह्मर्षीणां च राजर्षीणां च सत्तम ! १३॥
afer सर्वेषु स्वर्चितेषु यथार्हत: । उत्थित: सदसो मध्ये ताराणामुडुराडिव । १४॥
व्यूढवक्षा बृहच्छेणिर्वलिवल्गुदलोदर: | आवर्तनाभिरोजस्वी काञ्चनोरुरुदग्रपात् । 25 |
सूक्ष्मवक्रासितस्निग्धमूर्धज: कम्बुकन्धर: । महाधने Gem परिधायोपवीय wires
व्यञ्जिताशोषगात्रश्रीर्नियमे न्यस्तभूषण: | कृष्णाजिनधर: श्रीमान् कुशापाणि: कृतोचित: । १८।
शिझषिरस्निग्धताराक्षर wed समन्तत: । ऊचिवानिदमुर्वींश:र we: संहर्षयन्नित्र ees
चारु चित्रपदं ङइलक्ष्णं मृष्टं गूढमविक्लवम्। सर्वेषामुपकारार्थं तदा अनुवदन्निव ।२०॥

Maitreya resumed : Living in (ruling over) the holy stretch of land lying between the two

rivers, the Ganga and the Yamuna, he enjoyed only such pleasures as had been earned by
his past deeds and (that too) with a view to exhausting his merits (and not for the gratification
of his senses). (11) His commands were respected everywhere and he held undisputed
sway over all the seven main divisions of the terrestrial globe, barring, of course, the
Brahmanas and the votaries of the immortal Lord (who recognize the Lord alone as their
progenitor). (12) Once he consecrated himself for a great sacrificial session and there was
a huge gathering on that occasion of heavenly beings, Brahmana seers and royal sages, O
noblest Vidura ! (13) When all the venerable persons in that assembly had been duly
honoured according to their rank and position, the king rose in their midst like the moon in
the midst of stars. (14) He was tall of stature with brawny and long arms and had a fair
complexion, eyes ruddy as a lotus, a shapely nose and a lovely countenance. He was gentle
in appearance, had rounded shoulders, beautiful (rows of) teeth and a winsome smile. (15)
Full of vigour, he had a broad chest, bulky hips and a belly shaped like a leaf of the holy fig
tree and charming with folds. His navel was deep and circular like an eddy; his thighs
resembled a pair of gold pillars; and his feet were slightly elevated in front. (16) The hair on
his head was fine, curly, dark and sleek and his throat was marked by three spiral lines like
those of a conch-shell. He had on his person a pair of costly and excellent pieces of linen,
one wrapped about his loins and the other slung across his right side and left shoulder. (17)
Being under a vow of abstinence he had laid aside his jewels so that the natural beauty of
all his limbs was (now) manifest. Covering himself with the skin of a black buck and wearing
( aring of) Kusa grass (used on ceremonial occasions) in his hands, he looked (exception-
ally) graceful and had (just) finished his (religious) duties appropriate to the hour. (18) The
king looked all round with eyes which were full of love and soothed one’s agony and, thrilling
the whole assembly with delight—as it were, made the following speech, which was
charming to the ear, full of elegant (figurative) expression, bland, polished, deep in
significance and uninterrupted by emotion. (As he spoke,) itseemedas if he was recounting
at that time his own experience for the benefit of all (who had assembled there). (19-20)
