Dis. 7 ] BOOK FOUR 321°

LERORTKKABKERRAKVMECLHREL ECC ELEKAHHARECECEEK SEAR HHH HER EE eee ee eee
re ae RE ESE SORTA ST ee Sr न व व व a ar व्ये य

The gods (in a body) said : At the end of the (previous) round of creation and before
this creation it was You, the first Person, who reposed on the excellent bed of Sesa (the lord
of serpents) on those waters (that submerged all the three worlds). The selfsame You, the
way of whose realization is sought after in their heart (even) by the Siddhas (a class of
celestial beings naturally endowed with the eight mystic powers such as Anima and so on),
have appeared before our eyes today and protect us, Your dependants (servants) ! (42)

क्रोडाभाण्डं विश्वमिदं यस्य विभूमन् at नित्यं नाथ नमस्ते करवाम 1x3 |
The Gandharvas (celestial musicians) said : These Marici and other sages as well as
the hosts of divinities such as Brahma (the creator), Indra (the lord of paradise), and others
with Rudra at their head, are but rays of Your part manifestations, O shining one. We ever
make obeisance to You, infinite Lord, to whom this universe is a mere toy-box. (43)
विद्याधरा ऊचु:
त्वन्माययार्थमभिपद्य कलेवरेऽस्मिन् कृत्वा ममाहमिति दुर्मतिरुत्पथै: स्वै: ।
क्षिप्तोप्यसद्विषषलालस आत्ममोहं युष्मत्कथामृतनिषेवरक उद व्युदस्येत् ।४४॥

The Vidyadharas (a class of demigods) said : (Even) after attaining the human body,
a means of realizing the (highest) object of human pursuit (viz., Moksa or final beatitude),
the foolish Jiva (embodied soul) regards it as his own, nay, his very self and, though
reproached by his own senses, that have strayed from the path of virtue, he longs only for
the unreal (illusory) pleasures of sense. He alone who quaffs the nectar of Your stories is
able to shake off completely the infatuation of his mind. (44)
ब्राह्मणा HA:

त्वं क्रतुस्त्वं हविस्त्वं हुताश: wa त्वं fe मन्त्र: समिद्दर्भपात्राणि च ।

त्वं सदस्यत्विजो दम्पती देवता अग्निहोत्रं स्वधा सोम आज्यं पशु: sul

त्वं पुरा गां warn महासूकरो aa पद्मिनीं वारणेन्द्रो यथा ।

स्तूयमानो नदॆल्लीलया योगिभिर्व्यज्जहर्थं त्रयीगात्र atom: Ie

स प्रसीद त्वमस्माकमाकाङ्क्षतां दर्शनं ते परिभ्रष्टसत्कर्मणाम्।

कीर्त्यमाने नृभिर्नाम्नि यज्ञेश a यज्ञविघ्ना: क्षयं यान्ति तस्मै नम: vol

The Brahmanas said : You are the sacrifice; You are the offering; You are Yourself the

fire (that consumes the offerings poured into it). You are the Mantra (the sacred text recited
at the time of pouring the oblations), the sacrificial wood (with which the fire is fed and kept
alive), the (sacred) Ku$a grass and the (sacrificial) vessels. And You are the priests
superintending, and officiating at, the sacrifice, the sacrificer and his wife, the deity (sought to
be propitiated through the sacrifice), the act of offering oblations into the sacred fire, the
oblation offered to the manes, the juice extracted from the Soma plant (used as a libation to
the gods), clarified butter (also poured into the sacred fire as an offering to the gods) and the
sacrificial animal. (45) Appearing as the mighty Boar, itwas You who sportfully lifted the earth
out of the depths of the ocean on Your tusks—even as a lordly elephant wouldlifta lotus plant—
roaring and being glorified by the Yogis. Nay, the Vedas constitute Your very body and You
are both the institution of sacrifice and the vow to perform a sacrifice. (46) Therefore, be
gracious to us, whose noble undertaking (in the shape of this sacrifice) was interrupted and
who were (therefore) longing for Your sight. Interruptions in sacrificial performances disappear
when, O Lord of sacrifices, Your name is chanted by men. Hail to You ! (47)
