Dis. 29 ] BOOK TEN 223

चकक Oi ieee sons ris कक दाण eee ee ie ee i ititinaretrer

अथैकोनत्रिंशोऽध्याय:

Discourse XXIX
A description of the (celebrated) Rasa Play (of the Lord)

भगवानपि ता wat: झारदोत्फुल्लमल्लिका: । वीक्ष्य रन्तुं मनश्चक्रे योगमायामुपाश्रित: | १ ।
a चर्षणीनामुदगाच्छुचो मृजन् fa: fer ga दीर्घदर्शन: । २ ।
a कुमुद्वन्तमखण्डमण्डलं रमाननाभं नवकुङ्कुमारुणम् ।
वनं च तत्कोमलगोभिरञ्जितॆ wh कलं amen मनोहरम् । ३ ।
आज्ञग्मुरन्योन्यमलक्षितोद्यमा: स यत्र कान्तो जवलोलकुण्डला: । ४ ।

Sri Suka began again : Finding those nights” adorned with full-blown jasmines (even)
in autumn, the Lord too (who has all His desires fulfilled} made up His mind to play, falling
back upon His Yogamaya (wonderful divine potency that supplies ail the requisites for such
play). (1) Presently there appeared (on the horizon) the familiar moon (the king of the stars)
painting the face of the Orient with a red hue by its most soothing rays—(even) as a lover
appearing (returninghome) after a long absence would daub the face of his beloved wife with
saffron paste—and alleviating the sufferings of the people (caused by the hot sun during the
daytime). (2) Beholding the moon (lit., the friend of the lilies, so-called because a water-lily
opens only under the rays of the moon) in full orb—which shone like the countenance of
Goddess Laksmi and possessed a scarlet hue like that of fresh saffron—and the woodland
(of Vrndavana) illumined with its soft rays, Sri Krsna struck a melodious note on His flute, that
enraptured the mind of the fair-eyed Gopis. (3) Hearing that music, kindling love (in the
bosom of the Gopis), the women of Vraja, whose mind had (already) been captivated by Sri
Krsna, sallied forth from all sides (with the help of the note of the flute) to the spot where that
beloved One was—so (hurriedly) that their endeavour (to reach the Lord) could not be
perceived by one another—their ear-rings swinging due to their swift movement. (4)

दुहन्त्योऽभिययु: काश्चिद् दोहं हित्वा समुत्सुका: । पयोऽधिश्रित्य संवावमनुद्वास्यापरा ag । ५ ।

परिवेषयन्त्यस्तद्धित्वा weer: शिशून् पय: । qe: पतीन् काश्चिदह्नन्त्योऽपास्य भोजनम् । ६ ।
लिम्पन्त्य: प्रमृजन्त्योऽन्या SIA: काश्च लोचने | व्यत्यस्तवस्त्राभरणा: काश्चित् कृष्णान्तिकं ययु: । ७ ।
ता वार्चमाणा: पतिभि: पितॄभिरभ्रातृबन्धुभि: । गोविन्दापहतात्मानो न न्यवर्तन्त मोहिता: । ८ |
अन्तर्गृहगता: काश्चिद् गोप्योऽलब्धविनिर्गमा: । कृष्णं तद्भावनायुक्ता दध्युर्मीलितलोचना: । ९ |
दु:सहप्रेष्ठविरहतीव्रतापधुताशुभा: । ध्यानप्राप्ताच्युताङ्लेषनिर्वृत्या क्षीणमङ्गला: 1१०॥

waa परमात्मानं जारबुद्ध्यापि सङ्घता: । जहुर्गुणमयं देहं सद्य: प्रक्षीणबन्धना: 1११।

* The above verse should be read with verse 29 of discourse XXII, in which the Lord promised to sport with the damsels
of Vraja, who worshipped Goddess Katyayani during the previous winter tn order to secure His grace.
