Dis. 6 ] SRIMAD BHAGAVATA-MAHATMYA 39
Bee eB AR RAPA HB Be BE PRR TC He He Be Re BL ORR Rt te Rs Be BB BER ARR Rt Bee Re RR BORD a Br Bi ROR Re ar har Be eine
(if it is to be arranged in one's own house) one should keep them in a corner of the house
and the ground should be cleaned and swept, plastered with cow-dung and clay and
decorated with paintings of minerals (dissolved in water). (13) Five days in advance one
should get together with zeal coverings (to be spread on the ground for the visitors to sit on)
and a tall yet temporary shed should be erected (on that ground) and decked with (fresh)
stems of bananas. (14) The shed should be roofed with an awning and decorated all round
with (green) leaves, flowers and fruits. Flags shouldbe planted on all sides and adomed with
decorations of various kinds. (15) Nay, on a higher level (within the shed) seven spacious
divisions should be made (one higher than the other), each representing one of the seven
spheres (into which the universe stands divided) and Brahmanas as well as those who have
shaken off worldly attachments should be seated there after due persuasion. (16) First of all
seats should be arranged for them one after another and then one should get ready an
excellent seat even for the exponentof Srimad Bhagavata. (17) If the exponentis to sit facing
the north, the (chief) listener should in that case sit actually facing the east. And if the
exponent is to sit facing the east, the (chief) listener should then sit facing the north. (18) Or
(if such arrangmentis not possible) the space intervening the worshipful exponent and the
worshipper (listener) should be considered to be the east: such is the ruling given about the
hearers by those possessing (authoritative) knowledge concerning the time and place etc.,
of hearing (an exposition of) Srimad Bhagavata. (19) A Brahmana who is a votary of Lord
Visnu and has shaken off (all) worldly attachments, who is capable of expounding the Vedas
and other scriptures, is expertin giving (apt) illustrations (to bring home a truth), is discerning
and altogether free from cravings should be selected as the exponent (of Srimad Bhagavata). (20)
Those who are bewildered by (their attraction towards) diverse courses of conduct, are fond
of women and preach heresies should be avoided as disqualified for an exposition of Srimad
Bhagavata (the scripture associated with the name of Sri Suka), even if they are learned. (21)
By the side of the exponent (just ) by way of helping him should be installed another learned
man of the same calibre, capable of resolving doubts and intent on enlightening the
public.(22)
बक्त्रा क्षौरं प्रकर्तव्यं दिनादर्वाख्रताप्तये। अरुणोदयेऽसौ निर्वर्त्य act स्नानं समाचरेत् 123 |
नित्यं संक्षेपत: कृत्वा संध्याद्यं स्वं प्रयत्नत: | कथाविघ्नविधाताय गणनाथं प्रपूजयेत् । २४॥
पितॄन् संतर्प्य asad प्रायश्चित्तं समाचरेत्। मण्डलं च प्रकर्तव्यं तत्र स्थाप्यो हरिस्तथा ।२५॥
कृष्णमुद्दिय मन्त्रेण चरेत्पूजाविधिं क्रमात्।प्रदक्षिणनमस्कारान् पूजान्ते स्तुतिमाचरेत् ।२६॥
संसारसागरे मग्नं दीनं eT । कर्ममोहगृहीताङ्गखं मामुद्धर भवार्णवात् । २७॥
श्रीमद्भागवतस्यापि ad: पूजा प्रयत्नत: । कर्तव्या विधिना प्रीत्यां धूपदीपसमन्विता । २८॥ .
ade श्रीफलं धृत्वा नमस्कारं समाचरेत्। ala: प्रसन्नचित्तेन कर्तव्या केवलं तदा ।२९॥
श्रीमद्भागवताख्योऽयं प्रत्यक्ष: कृष्ण wa fei स्वीकृतोऽसि war नाथ मुक्त्यर्थं भवसागरे 1301
मनोरथो मदीयोऽयं सफल: सर्वथा त्वया । निर्बिघ्नेनैव कर्तव्यो दासोऽहं aa केशव ।३१।

\> In order to undertake the sacred vow of expounding Srimad Bhagavata the prospective
exponent should have his head and chin etc., shaved on the eve of the day when the
exposition is to commence. Easing his nature at daybreak, he should duly take a bath. (23)
Finishing with zeal his Sandhya prayers and other devotions in a short form everyday, he
should particularly worship Lord Gane§Sa (the elephant-headed god) for warding off obstacles
in the way of the exposition. (24) Having duly gratified the manes through oblations of water,
