790 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 13

REREEACHREAEEA HAE EE CHEEK HE TERETE AREER E EERE EEE CTH HE OOH EEE KET HSH

who stood glorifying Him, Lord Siva (the Source of the universe) lovingly spoke to His
Spouse (as follows) about the aforesaid Maya, the (divine) energy of Lord Visnu (His own
self).(42) "Did you behold with your own eyes the deluding potency of Lord Visnu (the
birthless One), the highest Person, the supreme Deity, under whose influence (even) I, the
foremost of His rays, helplessly fell a prey to delusion! What wonder, then, that others, who
are not masters of their self, should do so. (43) He is actually the same eternal Person about
whom you inquired, approaching me when | had just ceased from deep meditation at the end
of a thousand (celestial) years, (nay,) whom Time cannot set bounds to nor can the Veda
comprehend.(44)
SPT Jara

एतन्मुहु: कीर्तयतोऽनुशृण्वतो न feat जातु समुद्यम: क्वचित् ।
यदुत्तमह्लोकगुणानुवर्णनं समस्तसंसारपरिश्रमापहम् 1४६1

कपटयुवतिवेषो मोहयन्य: सुरारींस्तमहमुपसृतानां कामपूरं नतोऽस्मि 1४७1

Sri Suka went on: In this way has been narrated to you, 0 dear one, the story of the
exploits of Lord Visnu (the Wielder of the Sarnga bow), by whom (in the form of the divine
Tortoise) was supported on His back the huge mountain (called Mandara) during the
churning of the ocean (of milk). (45) The exertion of a man reciting or listening to this story
again and again never goes in vain anywhere. For, a narration of the virtues of Lord Visnu,
enjoying excellent renown, relieves the entire fatigue of birth and death. (46) | bow to Him
who grants the wishes of those that approach Him for shelter and who, having assumed by
His illusive power the form of a (bewitching) damsel and deluding the demons( the enemies
of the gods), gave nectar, churned out of the ocean (of milk), to drink to the foremost of the
gods, that had sought refuge in His feet—inaccessible to the vile and attainable through
devotion (alone). (47)

Thus ends the twelfth discourse entitled "The infatuation of Lord Sankara" in Book
Eight of the great and glorious Bhagavata-Purana, otherwise
known as the Paramahamsa- Samhita.

CEP WATE
PISS irs

अथ त्रयोदशोऽध्याय:

Discourse XIll

An account of the (concluding eight) Manvantaras
श्रीगुक उवाच
मनुर्विवस्वत: ga: seta इति श्रुत: । सप्तमो adam यस्तदपत्यानि मे श्रृणु । १ ।
इक्ष्वाकुर्नभगश्चैव «gp: शर्यातिरेव च । नरिष्यन्तोथ नाभाग: सप्तमो fee उच्यते । २ ।
करूषश्च पृषध्रश्च दशमो वसुमान्स्मृत: । मनोर्वैवस्वतस्यैते दा wT: परन्तप ! ३ |
आदित्या वसवो रुद्रा विश्वेदेवा मरुद्गूणा: । अश्विनावृभवो राजन्निन्द्रस्तेषां पुरन्दर: 1 ४ ।
