Dis. 16 ] BOOK FIVE 499

HHAHWMVECKHEHCLAHHHAKNTSH ESET TESTE LHL VETTEL CERT ELEEKEHA TEENS HENSCHEL AA HHH HLH SHH HK AH

adorn the person ofimmortals. (20) Indeed, as the tradition unmistakably points out, the gods
and other heavenly beings (such as the Gandharvas) with their spouses wear this (on their
person) in the shape of diadems, bangles, girdles and other ornaments. (21)

सुपार्श्वशिखरात्पतन्त्योऽपरेणात्मानमिलावृतमनुमोदयन्ति। 221 या ह्यपयुञ्जानानां मुखनिर्वासितो वायु:
समन्ताच्छ्तयोजनमनुवासयति। २३॥

Five torrents of honey, each measuring five fathoms in diameter that stream forth from
the hollows of that great Kadamba tree which stands firmly rooted on Mount Suparswa—
when falling from the summit of Suparswa, delight with their aroma (the region of) llavrta,
lying to the west of those torrents. (22) The breeze surcharged with the odour issuing from
the mouth (breath) of (celestial) damsels drinking of those torrents perfumes an area of one
hundred Yojanas (800 miles) all round. (23)

एवं कुमुदनिरूढो a: wea नाम व्टस्तस्य स्कन्धेभ्यो नीचीना:

पयोदधिमधुघृतगुडान्नाद्यम्बरशय्यासनाभरणादय: Wa एव कामदुघा नदा: कुमुदाग्रात्पतन्तस्तमुत्तरेणेला-

वृतमुपघाजयन्ति। २४।यानुपजंषाणानानक्ताचिदपिप्रजानाबलापलितक्तमस्व'ददौर्गंन्धांजरा
भवन्ति यावज्जीवं सुखं निरतिशायमेव। 24 |

In the same way from the boughs of that banyan tree, fe Saves by name (so-called
because it has hundreds of boughs), which stands firmly rooted on Mount Kumuda, issue
(anumber of) streams—all flowing downward and capable of yielding the objects of one's
desire, such as milk, curds, honey, clarified butter, jaggery, cereals and other edibles as
wellas raiment, beds, seats and ornaments—and, falling from the summit of Mount Kumuda,
benefit the region of llavrta lying to the north of the said mountain. (24) Afflictions of various
kinds—such as wrinkles, grey hairs, fatigue, perspiration, foul smell, old age, disease,
(untimely) death, (sensations of) cold and heat, pallor and (other) troubles are never
experienced by those created beings that make use of these rivers; nay, they enjoy the
greatest happiness throughout their life. (25)

नारदादयो विंशतिगिरयो मेरो: कर्णिकाया Sa केसरभूता मूलदेशे परित उपक्लृप्ता: | २६ । जठरदेवकूटौ मेरुं
पूर्वेणाष्टादशयोजनसहस्रमुदगावतौ द्विसहस्रं पृथुतुङ्गौ भवत:। एवमपरेण पवनपारियात्रौ दक्षिणेन
कैलासकरवीरौ प्रागायतावेवमुत्तरतस्निशृङ्गमकरावष्टभिरतै: परिस्तृतोऽग्निरिव परितश्चकास्ति काञ्चनगिरि:। २७
मेरोर्मूर्धनि भगवत आत्मयोनेर्मध्यत उपक्लृप्तां पुरीमयुतयोजनसाहस्रीं समचतुरस्रां Miche वदन्ति। २८ ।
`तामनु परितो लोकपालानामष्टानां यथादिशं यथारूपं तुरीयमानेन पुरोऽष्टावुपक्लृप्ता:। २९॥
इति श्रीमद्भागवते महापुराणं पारमहंस्यां संहितायां पञ्चमस्कन्धे भुवनकोशवर्णनं नाम षोडशोऽध्याय:। १६ |
Like filaments surrounding the pericarp (of a lotus), there are twenty mountains—
Kuranga, Kurara, Kusumbha, Vaikanka, TrikUta, Sigira, Patanga, Rucaka, Nisadha, Sinivasa,
Kaptta, Sankha, Vaidurya, Jarudhi, Harnsa, Rsabha, Naga, Kalafjara, Narada and so on—
situated round about Meru near its foot. (26) (Again,) to the east of Meru stand the Jathara
and Devaktita mountains, extending north to south to a length of eighteen thousand Yojanas
(1,44,000 miles) and possessing a hight and width of two thousand Yojanas (16,000 miles).
Similarly to the west (of the same mountain) are situated the Pavana and Pariyatra; to the
south (of Meru) stand the Kailasa and Karavira extending east to west—and to the north
are situated the Trigrnga and Makara. Enclosed onall sides by these eight mountains, Mount
Sumeru (the mountain of gold) shines as a sacred fire surrounded by blades of KuSa grass
(marking its boundaries as it were). (27) On the summit of Mount Meru, at the very centre,
they say, is situated the city of Brahma (the self-bom), built (entirely) of gold, with an area
