12 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 4

WER ME M TRMRR RHOME HE ACM RE BRERA AE MRR RT RTT LEN ERE FR ad ad Rd ck Dns i Dt tL ch i Ll iL Ml Rk Ld ald ERE MM AEM BME RE ME

faa लोकस्य भवाय भूतये य उत्तमङ्लोकपरायणा ST:
जीवन्ति नात्मार्थमसौ cast मुमोच निर्विद्य ga: कलेवरम् ।१२॥
aed न: समाचक्ष्व पृष्टो यदिह faa मन्ये at विषये वाचां स्नातमन्यत्र छान्दसात् 1१३1

Saunaka said : Sita, youare highly blessed and the foremost of expositors. Pray, repeat
to us the same sacred story of the Lord as the divine sage Suka recited (to king Pariksit).(2)
In which particular Yuga (aeon) was the discourse held and at what place, and what was the
occasion for it ? And at whose instance did the sage Krsna (Vedavyasa) compose this
Samhita (large collection of poems) ? (3) His son (Sukadeva) is a great Yogi (mystic), viewing
all alike, in whose eye diversity has ceased to exist, whose mind is exclusively set upon God
and who has awoke from the sleep of worldliness. He remains incognito and is therefore
taken for a stupid fellow. (4) On perceiving the sage Vyasa (closely) following his son (who
was retiring to the forest as a recluse) the ladies (who happened to be bathing in a pond on
the roadside),covered themselves out of modesty, even though the sage had clothes on,
while they took no notice of his son (who was stark naked). Noticing this strange behaviour
on their part the sage asked them to account for it; thereupon the ladies told him that he was
still alive to the difference of sex, but not so his son, whose vision was faultless (who
perceived no difference at all ). (5) How did the citizens of Hastinapura come to recognize
him when he visited the Kuru-Jangala country and went about that city like one mad, dumb
and dull ? (6) And, how did the royal sage Pariksit (a scion of Pandu) come to have a
talk with that sage, in the course of which the latter recited this Bhagavata-Purana ? (7)
That highly blessed sage (Sukadeva) waits at the door of householders to sanctify their
abode only for such time as one takes in milking a cow. (8) They say king Pariksit
(Abhimanyu's son), O Sita, was counted among the foremost devotees of the Lord. Kindly
narrate to us the story of his most wonderful birth and doings. (9) Why did that emperor,
who served to enhance the glory of the Pandavas, take his seat on the bank of the Ganga
with a vow to fast unto death, spurning his imperial fortune ? (10) Enemies bowed at his
footstool, bringing to him riches for their own security. It is really strange, dear Suta, how
did that valiant prince, while he was so young, take it into his head to relinquish that fortune,
which is so difficult to renounce, as well as his life. (11) Men who are solely devoted to the
Lord of excellent fame live, not for their own sake, but only for (promoting) the welfare,
affluence and prosperity of the world. Why, then, did he cast off his body, which was the
support of other beings, ina spirit of aversion ? (12) Therefore, pray, tell us all that we have
asked you on this occasion; for we know you have mastered the entire range of sacredlore
barring, of course, the Vedas. (13)

qd sara
द्वापे समनुप्राप्ते तृतीये a जात: पराहाराद्योगी वासव्यां कलया हरे: । १४॥
स कदाचित्सरस्वत्या उपस्पृशय जलं दयुचि । विविक्तदेश आसीनं उदिते रविमण्डले ।१५॥
Wats: स ऋॠषि: कालेनाव्यक्तरंहसा । युगधर्मव्यतिकरं om भुवि युगे युगे 1१६1
भौतिकानां च भावानां ahs च तत्कृतम् । अश्रद्दधानान्नि:सत्त्वान्दुर्मेधान् ह्रसितायुष: ।१७॥
दुर्भगांश्च जनान् वीक्ष्य मुनिर्दिव्येन चक्षुषा । सर्ववर्णाश्रमाणां यद्दध्यौ हितममोघदूक । १८
ag कर्मशुद्धं sami वीक्ष्य वैदिकम्। व्यदधाद्यज्ञसन्तत्यै वेदमेकं चतुर्विधम् 1१९1
ऋॠग्यजु:सामाथर्वाख्या वेदाश्चत्वार उद्धृता: । इतिहासपुराणं च पञ्चमो वेद उच्यते RO!

अथर्वाङ्निरसामासीत्सुमन्तुर्दारुणो gia: । इतिहासपुराणानां पिता मे रोमहर्षण: 1221
