Dis. 32 ] BOOK TEN 237

See TORII OO ES CUTS ITY SE ES PTR IE Es PORWR

we भ्रुकुटिमाबध्य प्रेमसंरम्भविह्वला । घ्नतीवैक्षत् waa: संदष्टदशनच्छदा । ६ ।
अपरानिमिषद्दृग्भ्यां जुषाणा तन्मुखाम्बुजम्। आपीतमपि नातृप्यत् सन्तस्तच्चरणं यथा । ७ ।
4 aero हृदिकृत्य निमील्य च । पुलकाङ्ग्युपगुह्यास्तै योगीवानन्द agar । ८ |

सर्वास्ता: केशवालोकपरमोत्सवनिर्वृता: | जहुर्विरहजं तापं प्राज्ञं प्राप्य यथा जना: । ९ ।
ताभिर्विधूतशोकाभिर्भगवानच्युतो ga: । व्यरोचताधिकं तात पुरुष: हाक्तिभिर्यथा go

Sri Suka began again : Thus singing at the pitch of their voice and raving in various
ways, the cowherd women loudly wailed, O king, seizedas they were witha longing to behold
Sri Krsna. (1) in their (very) midst appeared (all of a sudden) Sri Krsna (a scion of Sara), clad
in yellow (silk) and adorned witha garland and wearing a smiling lotus-like countenance, the
Enchanter of Cupid himself (who maddens the whole world). (2) Beho!ding Sri Krsna, their
most beloved Lord. come (back), all the women sprang on their feet all at once, their eyes
wide open with joy, (even) as the limbs of a body would on finding the life-breath returned.(3)
One (of them) clasped the lotus-like hands of Sauri with her joined palms with delight, while
another placed on her shoulder His arm smeared with sandal-paste. (4) A certain Gopi of
delicate limbs took in the hollow of her palms the betel chewed by Him, while another set His
lotus-feet on her bosom, burning as she was (with the fire of passion). (5) Knitting her brows
andclosely biting her (lower) lip. another looked at Him as though tormenting Himwith volleys
ofher side-glances. agitated as she was with anger caused by (unrequited) love. (6) Another
continued to gaze on His lotus-like countenance with unwinking eyes, even though it had
been duly contemplated (for a long time), but did not feel sated any more than saints would
while contemplating on His (lotus) feet. (7) A certain Gopi ushered Him into his heart through
the hollows of her eyes, shut her eyes (in order to preclude His egress) and. (mentally)
embracing Him with the hairs of her body standing on end, stood immersed in bliss like a Yogi
(one united in thought with God). (8) Enraptured with the grand feast provided by the sight
of Sri Krsna (the Ruler even of Brahma and Lord Siva), they all shed the agony caused by
separation from Him even as men get rid of their grief on meeting an enlightened soul. (9)
Surrounded by those women, who had shaken off their sorrow. SriKrsna (the immortal Lord)
shone very brightly, O dear Pariksit, like the Supreme Spirit endowed with His potencies (in
the form of Sattva etc.). (10)

ता: समादाय कालिन्या falda पुलिनं fay: | विकसत्कुन्दमन्दारसुरभ्यनिलषद्पदम् । ११॥
शरच्चन्द्रांशुसन्दोहध्वस्तदोषातम: freq कृष्णाया हस्ततरलाचितकोमलवालुकम् । १२1
तद्दर्शनाह्लादविधूतहृद्बुनो मनोरथान्तं श्रुतवो यथा ययु: ।
तत्रोपविष्टो भगवान् स ईश्वरो योगेश्वरान्तर्हदि कल्पितासन: |
aaa गोपीषरिषद्भतोऽर्चितस्रैलोक्यलक्ष्येकपदं वपुर्दंधत् । १४॥

= a. ee
aentageretiert: संस्तुत्य ईषत्कुपिता बभाषिरे । १५|

Taking them (with Him) in a body the almighty Lord repaired to the delightful bank of the
Kalindi, which was swarmed with black bees drawn by (gentle) winds charged with the
fragrance of full-blown jasmines and Mandaras, where the darkness of the night had been
dispelled by the flood of rays ofthe autumna! moon andon which soft sands had been spread
by the hands—in the form of waves—of the Krsna (Yamuna). (11-12) The Gopis, whose
