704 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 10

 reeheehhnneee Rien nnanhhs Hitt tEneMnenhhihe rene Tenth hn hie taw nee hh freee enh es sete

विलोक्य भग्नसङ्कल्पं विमनस्कं वृषध्वजम्।तदायं भगवान्विष्णुस्तत्रोपायमकल्पयत् | ६१1
वत्स आसीत्तदा wen स्वयं विष्णुरयं हि गौ: । प्रविश्य Bot काले रसक्रूपामृतं पपौ eR!
तेऽसुरा ह्यपि wast न न्यषेधन्विमोहिता: । तद् विज्ञाय महायोगी रसपालानिदं जगौ । ६३॥
स्वयं fase: ज्ञोकार्तान्समरन्दैवगतिं च ताम् । देवोऽसुरो नरोऽन्यो वा नेश्वरोऽस्तीहं कश्चन । ६४॥
आत्मनोऽन्यस्य वा दिष्टं देवेनापोहितु Bal: | अथासौ हाक्तिभि: स्वाभि: eat: प्राधानिर्कं व्यधात् । ६५1
धर्मज्ञानविरक्त्यृद्धितपोविद्याक्रियादिभि: । रथं सूतं ध्वजं वाहान्धनुर्वर्मं हारादि यत् । ६६1
Gael रथमास्थाय wt धनुरुपाददे।शारं धनुषि सन्धाय मुहूर्तऽभिजितीश्वर: । ६७1
qe तेन दुर्भेद्या हरोऽथ त्रिपुरो नृप। दिवि दुन्दुभयो नेदुर्विमानशतसङ्कुला: । ६८॥
देवर्षिपितृसिद्धेशा जयेति कुसुमोत्करै: | अवाकिरञ्जगुर्हृष्टा ननृतुश्चाप्सरोगणा: । ६९1
एवं wea पुरस्तिस्रो भगवान्पुरहा नृप।ब्रह्मादिभि: स्तूयमान: स्वधाम प्रत्यपद्यत Iso!

wir हरे: स्वमाबया विडम्बमानस्य नृलोकमात्मन: |

वीर्याणि गीतान्यृषिभिर्जगद्गुरोर्लोकान् पुनानान्यपरं वदामि free!

Finding Lord Siva (who bears the device of a bull on His banner) depressed in spirits
because of His will having been crossed, the aforesaid Lord Visnu (Sri Krsna) then contrived
a plan for drying up the immortalizing fluid. (61) On that occasion Brahma (the creator) took
the form of a calf, while the aforesaid Visnu Himself actually assumed the semblance of a
cow and, entering the three cities at midday, drank off the immortalizing fluid of that well of
nectar. (62) Though watching this, the demons in charge of the well did not forbid them,
greatly bewildered as they were (by the deluding potency of the Lord). Coming to know of
this, and reflecting on the course of destiny working in that (miraculous) way, the demon
Maya (a past master in conjuring tricks), himself destitute of grief, addressed the following
(words) to the demons guarding the fluid, who were stricken with grief :—"No one in this
world—be he a god, demon, human being or anyone else—is capable of setting aside what
has been ordained by fate with regard to oneself or another or both.” After that, by means
of His own (divine) potencies in the form of Righteousness, Wisdom, Dispassion, Affluence,
Asceticism, Learning, Activity and so on, He (Sri Krsna) created the requisites for war forthe
use of Lord Siva (the Source of blessedness), viz., a chariot, a charioteer, an ensign, horses,
abow, armour, arrows etc. (respectively). (63 —66) Clad in armour and mounting the chariot,
the almighty Lord (Siva) then took up the bow and an arrow; and, fitting the arrow to the bow
during the Muhdrta known as Abhijit, Siva (the Destroyer of the universe) burnt with it (all)
the three cities, which were (so) difficult to penetrate, O Yudhisthira ! Dfums began to sound
in heaven; while gods, Rsis (seers), manes and the lords of Siddhas (a class of demigods
endowed with mystic powers from their very birth)—with their hundreds of aerial cars
crowded together (in the heavens)—showered heaps of flowers on the Lord, crying "May
You be victorious !" And hosts of Apsaras (celestial nymphs) sang and danced, full of
joy.(67—69) Having burnt the three cities in this way, O king, Lord Siva (who henceforward
became known as the Destroyer of the three cities) returned to His abode (Mount Kailasa),
being glorified by Brahma and others. (70) There are similar (other) exploits—the accounts

of which purify (all) the three worlds—celebrated by seers, of the aforesaid Sri Hari, the .

Preceptor of the universe, who by His own deluding potency imitates (the ways of) His human
world. What else shall I say (to you)? (71)
