Dis. 2 ] BOOK SEVEN 651°

PERHAAKEKEHEAE HEATH HE EERE EE EEE EEE EEE ERA AEA EEERELR EEE HAE OAER HEE AREERHAHEAEAE

युधिष्ठिर उवाच
विद्देषो दयिते पुत्रे कथमासीन्महात्मनि gfe मे भगवन्येन प्रह्रादस्याच्युतात्मता ।४७॥
इति श्रीमद्भागवते महापुराणे पारमहंस्यां संहितायां सप्तमस्कन्धे प्रह्रादचरितोपक्रमे प्रथमोऽध्याय:। १।
Yudhisthira submitted : How did intense hatred come to be developed (in the mind of
Hiranyakasipu) towards his high-souled and beloved son (Prahrada)? (Also) tell me, O

glorious sage, the circumstances under which exclusive devotion to the immortal Lord
sprang up in the heart of Prahrada. (47)

Thus ends the first discourse, forming part of the Introduction to the story of
Prahrada, in Book Seven of the great and glorious Bhagavata-Purana,
otherwise known as the Paramahamsa-Samhita.

ees ieee.

अथ fadtetseara:

Discourse II

HiranyakaSipu rids his mother (Diti) of her grief (caused by the death of his
younger brother, Hiranyaksa)

ARG Jara
भ्रातर्येवॆ विनिहते हरिणा क्रोडमूर्तिना। हिरण्यकशिपू राजन् पर्यतप्यद्गुषा शुचा । १ ।
ame चेदं रुषा घूर्ण: सन्दष्टदशनच्छद: | कोपोज्ज्वलद्भ्यां aaa निरीक्षन् ध्रूम्रमम्बरम् । २ ।

करालदंष्टोग्रदृष्ट्या दुष्परेक्ष्यभ्रुकुटीमुख: । शूलमुद्यम्य सदसि दानवानिदमब्रवीत् । ३ |

भो भो दानवदेतेया द्विमूर्धस्त्यक्ष wei हयग्रीव नमुचे पाक इल्वल । ४ |

विप्रचित्ते मम aa: पुलोमन् ङाकुनादय: । शृणुतानन्तरं सर्वे क्रियतामाशु मा fam ७५ |

सपत्नैर्घातित: awit मे दयित: get पार्णिग्राहेण हरिणा समेनाप्युपधावनै: । ६ |

Ta त्यक्तस्वभावस्य घृणेर्मायावनौकस: । भजन्तं भजमानस्य बालस्येवास्थिरात्मन: । ७ |

मच्छूलभिन्नग्रीवस्य wor रुधिरेण वै। रुधिरप्रियं तर्पयिष्ये भ्रातरं मे गतव्यथ: । ८ ।

afer कूटेऽहिते नष्टे कृत्तमूले वनस्पतौ । विटपा इव शुष्यन्ति विष्णुप्राणा दिवौकस: । ९ ।

Wend wa zat विप्रक्षत्रसमेधिताम्। सूदयध्वं तपोयज्ञस्वाध्यायव्रतदानिन: 1201

विष्णुर्दिजक्रियामूलो ag धर्ममय: पुमान्। देवर्षिपितृभूतानां we च परायणम्।११॥

aa यत्र द्विजा mal वेदा वर्णाश्रमा: क्रिया: । तं तं जनपदं यात सन्दीपयत gaa ।१२॥
Narada replied’: On his (younger) brother (Hiranyaksa) having been slain thus (through
seeming partiality towards the gods) by Sri Hari, who had assumed the form of a boar,
Hiranyakasipu (the elder brother), O king (Yudhisthira), felt agonized with anger and grief.(1)
Whirling with rage, he closely bit his lips; nay, with his eyes burning through anger he gazed
intently at the sky, which looked misty (due to the smoke issuing from those fiery eyes as it
were) and spoke thus. (2) With a frowning aspect, terrible to look at because of his fearful
teeth and fierce glances, and raising up his trident, he spoke as follows to the Danavas
(assembled) in his court. (3) 0 Danavas and Daityas, hullo Dwimirdha (lit., a two-headed

monster), Tryaksa (a demon with three eyes), Sambara, Satabahu (a demon with a hundred
arms), Hayagriva (one endowed with a horse’s head), Namuci, Paka, Ilwala, Vipracitti,
