Dis. 27 ] BOOK ELEVEN 643

भ्रना न सकस न मलनगलतललकजाआकल शाल् र्म कटा शकशल-तककश्नशन गक सा सा shai 8

चलाचलेति द्विविधा प्रतिष्ठा जीवमन्दिरम्। उद्वासावाहने न स्त: स्थिरायामुद्धवार्चने । १३॥
अस्थिरायां विकल्प: स्यात् स्थण्डिले तु भवेद् द्वयम् । स्रपनं त्वविलेप्यायामन्यत्र परिमार्जनम् ।१४॥
wa: प्रसिद्धैर्मद्याग: प्रतिमादिषमायिन: । भक्तस्य च यथालब्धैर्हदि भावेन aa हि । १५।
स्नानालङ्करणं प्रेष्ठमर्चायामेव तूद्धव । स्थण्डिले तत्त्वविन्यासो वह्नावाज्यप्लुतं हवि: 1261
ad चाभ्यर्हणं प्रेष्ठं सलिले सलिलादिभि: । श्रद्धयोपाहतं प्रेष्ठं भक्तेन मम वार्यपि । १७॥
भूर्यप्यभक्तोपहृतं न मे तोषाय कल्पते। गन्धो धूप: सुमनसो दीपोऽन्नाद्यं च किं पुन: । १८॥

The glorious Lord began again: Since there is no end to the branch of the Vedas
dealing with ritual acts, which is unlimited in scope andinfinite in volume, O Uddhava!I shall
(accordingly) discuss this topic (of Kriyayoga) in a nutshell in order of sequence in its true
perspective. (6) The procedure of My worship is threefold, viz.,Vedic, Tantika and mixed
(consisting of both elements). Of the three, one should duly worship Me according to that
procedure alone which is liked by him. (7) Hear from Me the way in which, having (first)
attained the status of the twice-born (by getting himself invested with the sacred thread) as
enjoined by (the part of) the Veda prescribing his duties— when the worshipper happens to
be a member of the twice-born classes—a man should worship Me with devotion and
reverence. (8) Full of Devotion he should worship Me, his teacher and father, with the
requisite material (flowers etc.), with sincerity (lit., guilelessness in the shape of entertaining
no hope for its reward) in (through the medium of) an image, a raised ground (levelled,
squared and prepared for a sacrifice) or the sacred fire, the sun, water, (the cavity of) the
heart or a Brahmana . (9) Having cleansed his teeth (with the end of a small green twig
crushed with the teeth and converted into a brush), he should first (of all) perform his
ablutions for the purification of his body. The bath should be repeated with (the utterance of)
both types of Mantras (Vedic as well as Tantric) after (first) daubing the (whole) body with
clay (as well as with fresh cowdung, sacrificial ashes and so on) and going through other
preliminaries (such as invoking the presence of the Ganga and other sacred waters, offering
Arghya to them and seeking their permission for a bath). (10) Undertaking a noble vow (of
propitiating Myself), he should perform My worship, which wipes out (all) Karmas, side by
side with (not neglecting) duties (of a binding nature) such as saying the Sandhya prayers,
(that have been) enjoined by the Veda. (11) Animage has been declared to be of eight kinds
according as itis carved out of (a block of) stone or wood, made of (molten) metal (such as
brass or bronze), clay or sandal-paste etc., painted (on a wall etc.), made of sand or carved
out of a precious stone or conceived by the mind. (12) An image, whichis a temple of the Lord,
is (again) of two varieties, movable and immovable. (The ceremonies of)’ invoking the
presence of or bidding farewell to a deity are not necessary in worship done through the
medium of an immovable one, O Uddhava | (13) There is option in the matter of invocation
etc., in the case of a movable image (other than a Salagrama stone, where no invocation etc.,
is needed); while both must be done in the worship through the medium of a raised ground
(or through an image of sand). Only an image other than a painted one or that made of clay
or sandal-paste etc., should be (invariably) bathed; in (all) other cases (mere) sprinkling all
round with water is enough. (14) My worship through images etc., should be done with
excellent articles. In the case, however, of a devotee (who is) free from wiles (in the shape
of a selfish motive) it may be conducted with articles that are (easily) available. In (the cavity
of) the heart, of course, worship is offered with love alone. (15) (Worship in the form of) bathing
and (decoration with) ornaments is highly desirable only in an image, O Uddhava; ina raised
ground (of course) the (conceptual) installation of the various deities (viz., the principal Deity
and His entourage) in their respective place (with the uttering of formulas sacred to each);

