820 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 20

Beet ह Re kr Pr Wr he उ TAT क च EO EE EEO HAO SEH EOE EOS HH Ee ETE POE HH KE AEeE EH वीर्त

in His looks, the air in His nostrils, the sun in His eyes and fire in His mouth.(26) He further
witnessed the Vedas in the speech of the Supreme Person. Varuna (the god of water) in His
palate, the interdictory as well as the injunctive part of the sacred texts in His eyebrows, the
day and the night in (the two rows of) His eyelashes, and Anger in His forehead and Greed
precisely in His lips. (27) And He saw Love in His tactile sense, 0 protector of men, water in
His generative fluid and Unrighteousness in His back, sacrificial activity in His strides, Death
in His shadow and Maya (creative energy) in His laughter and the (innumerable) species of
herbs and annual plants in the hair on His body. (28) The hero (Bali) beheld rivers in His
arteries, rocks in His nails, Brahma (the birthless) in His intellect, hosts of gods (presiding
over the Indriyas) as well as Rsis in His Indriyas and all created beings—(both) immobile
and mobile—in His person. (29)

Get चक्रमसह्यतेजो धनुश्च शां स्तनयित्नुघोषम् 1301

पर्जन्यघोषो जलज: पाञ्चजन्य: कौमोदकी विष्णुगदा तरस्विनी ।

विद्याधरोऽसि: शतचन्द्रयुक्तस्तूणोत्तमावक्षयसायकौ च ।३१॥

सुनन्दमुख्या SITAR OTe aye: AECTHATOT: ।

मधुव्रतस्ररग्वनमालया वृतो रराज राजन्भगवानुरुक्रम: ।

fafa पदॆकेन बलेर्विचक्रमे au: aie दिशश्च बाहुभि: 1331

पदं द्वितीयं क्रमतस्रिविष्टपं न a तृतीयाय तदीयमण्वपि ।

उरुक्रमस्याङ्घ्रिरुपर्युपर्यथो महर्जनाभ्यां तपस: परं गत: ।३४॥

इति श्रीमद्भागवते महापुराणे पारमहंस्यां संहितायामष्टमस्कन्धे विश्वरूपदर्शनं नाम विंशतितमोऽध्याय:। २० |
Observing this universe in the all-sustaining (person of the) Lord, all the demons were

seized with fear, O dear one! His (well-known) discus, Sudarsana, possessing an effulgence
(the sight of) which was unbearable, and the (famous) Sarnga bow (made of horn and), of
thunder-like twangs, His conch, Paficajanya (byname), which roared like thunder, Kaumodaki,
the mighty mace of Lord Visnu, His sword, Vidyadhara (also known by the name of
Nandaka), pairing with (the shield called) Satacandra (so-called because it is adorned with
a hundred studs resplendent as the moon) and the two excellent quivers containing an
inexhaustible stock of arrows, and His chief attendants with Sunanda as their head,
accompanied by the guardians of the (various) worlds, waited onthe Lord all (ina living form).
Witha diadem, armlets and a pair of alligator-shaped ear-rings glistening (on His person) and
adorned with (the mark of) Srivatsa (a white curl of hair on His bosom) and the Kaustubha
gem (the foremost of all jewels), and encircled by a girdle, clad in yellow and decked with a
wreath of sylvan flowers hovered about by a swarm of black bees, the Lord of wide strides
shone brightly, O king! With a single stride He measured the earth, which (entirely) belonged
to Bali, and covered the sky (aerial region) with His person (trunk) and the (four) quarters with
His arms. (30—33) To Him as He took a second stride heaven proved of no account (covering
only a negligible part of His stride), so that indeed not an atom (of space) was left for a third.
(For,) extending higher and higher, the foot of the Cosmic Person presently reached beyond
Maharloka and Janaloka as well as beyond Tapoloka (as far as Satyaloka, the realm of
Brahma). (34)
