214 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 17

agqenwtn th iite cere k GRIP ee Ree AAMT eehee Ree AAAReS EH EH EAE RATS

Beet ke rte Re Re Ree Re He Be Be He STH BT TT

तं वीरमारादभिपद्य fae: wierd वीरशये श्वभिर्वृत: ।
यस्त्वद्दिधानामसतां over रूपाणि | ad सदनुग्रहेच्छया 1381
fe Severs Ferguh weneed Sarah Tees feermneafefiasa THAIS: 18

Fearing death at the hands of none by virtue of a boon got from Brahma, Hiranyakasipu
was puffed up with pride and brought under his sway by (the strength of) his arms all the three
spheres (the earth, heaven and the subterranean region) along with their guardian deities. (19)
His beloved younger brother, Hiranyaksa, who always tried to please him and was very fond
of war, once went up to heaven, mace in hand, seeking (an adversary in) combat. (20) His
tempo was difficult to resist. He had anklets of goid tinkling about his feet. Adorned with a
Vaijayanti garland, he rested his huge mace on one of his shoulders. (21) His strength of
mind and body as well as the boon conferred on him (by Brahma) had puffed him up. He
feared death at the hands of none and there was nocheck on him. The gods, therefore, were
seized with fear at his very sight and hid themselves even as snakes hide themselves for
fear of Garuda. (22) The chief of the Daityas saw that they had vanished before his might,
and roared aloud on not finding Indra and the other gods that had been intoxicated with
power. (23) Having returned therefrom, the mighty Daitya, like an elephantin rut, dived into
the deep ocean—which was terribly roaring—just for the sake of sport. (24) On his entering
the ocean the aquatic creatures forming the host of Varuna (the god presiding over the
waters) were distracted with fear and ran away too far, scared by his very splendour without
his dealing a blow. (25) Moving about in the ocean for very many years, the mighty
Hiranyaksa smote the gigantic waves tossed by the winds with his iron mace again and again
and reached Vibhavari, the capital of Varuna, O dear Vidura. (26) Seeing Praceta (Varuna),
the guardian of Patala (the abode of the demons) and the lord of the aquatic creatures, there,
he fell at the latter's feet like a low man to make fun of him, and said with a smile, "Give me
battle, O supreme lord! (27) Youare the guardian of a whole sphere anda rulerof wide fame,
and have crushed the might of arrogant and conceited warriors. Nay, having conquered all
the Daityas and Danavas in the world, you once performed a Rajasuya sacrifice, my
lord." (28) Thus wantonly mocked by an enemy whose vanity knew no bounds, the
worshipful lord of waters waxed angry : but he managed to curb the anger that had sprung
in him by dint of his reason and replied, "O dear one, we have (now) desisted from warfare
(have grown too old foracombat). (29) 1 donotsee anyone else than the most ancient Person
(Lord Visnu), who will give satisfaction in battle to you, who are 8० skilled in the ways of war.
Therefore, O chief of the Asuras, approach Him, whom even heroes like you mention with
praise. (30) On reaching Him you will be rid of your pride at once and will lie down on the field
of battle (in eternal sleep), surrounded by dogs. It is in order to exterminate wicked fellows
like you and to show His grace to the virtuous that He assumes various forms (from time to
time)." (31)

Thus ends the seventeenth discourse, forming part of the story of Hiranyaksa's
conquest of the four quarters, in Book Three of the great and
glorious Bhagavata-Purana, otherwise known
as the Paramahamsa-Samhita.

oo tat HS ES
PCD OD EERE EOD OD
