Dis. 31 ] BOOK ELEVEN 667

SEHK EAE १9 कक अक ह 99 9988 #7 49 # AHS HSHA TAT ERRATA ET HAH HAN Te HH KHH HAHAH HK HAA tA eee

स्रीबालवृद्धानादाय हतहोषान् धनञ्जय: । इन्द्रप्रस्थं Ta तत्राभ्यषेचयत् । २५।
श्रुत्वा aged राजन्नर्जुनात्ते पितामहा: । at तु वंहाधरं कृत्वा जग्मु: सर्वे महापथम् । २६॥
य we देवदेवस्य विष्णो: कर्माणि जन्म च । कीर्तयेच्छ्रद्धया मर्त्य: ado: प्रमुच्यते । २७।
sa हरैर्भगवतो रुचिरावतारवीर्याणि बालचरितानि च हान्तमानि ।
अन्यत्र चेह च श्रुतानि yom मनुष्यो भक्तिं परां परमहंसगतौ लभेत ।२८॥
इति श्रीमद्भागवते महापुराणे वैयासिक्यामष्टादशसाहस्र्यां पारमहंस्यां संहितायामेकादशस्कन्धे एकत्रिंशोऽध्याय: 138 1

Distressed at his separation from SriKrsna, his beloved friend, Arjuna comforted himself
with the utterances of Sri Krsna (contained in the Bhagavadgita), full of veracious state-
ments. (21) Arjuna (then) duly caused to be performed in order of seniority (by competent
priests) funeral rites for the welfare in the other world of (those of) his kinsmen that had been
slain (on the battle-field) and whose progeny (too) had perished (in the war). (22) The ocean
drownedin an instant (the city of) Dwaraka, forsaken (as it was) by SriKrsna, barring, O great
king, the palace of the Lord, which wipes out all evils (in the forms of sins and calamities) and
is the most auspicious of all auspicious things in that Lord Sri Krsna (the Slayer of the demon
Madhu) is ever (bodily) present there. (23-24) Taking (with him) to Indraprastha (the former
capital of the Pandavas) the womenfolk, infants and aged men that had survived” the slain,
and having settled them, Arjuna crowned as king Vajra (the surviving son of Aniruddha)
there. (25) Hearing from (the mouth of) Arjuna of the destruction of theirkinsfolk (the Yadus),
Oking, your grandfathers (the Pandavas) all proceeded (in a body) to the Himalaya mountain
(on their voyage to the other world), appointing you of course as their successor (on the
throne of Hastinapura). (26) The man who celebrates with reverence the aforesaid advent
and exploits of Lord Visnu, the adored of the gods (themselves), is completely absolved from
all sins. (27) A man recounting as aforesaid the most auspicious infantile and other sports,
full of delightful divine feats, of the almighty Lord Sri Krsna (the Dispeller of the agony of His
devotees), heard of here (in Srimad Bhagavata) as well as in the other scriptures, bids fair
to attain supreme devotion to Sri Krsna, the goal of ascetics of the highest order. (28)

Thus ends the thirty-first discourse in Book Eleven of the great and glorious
Bhagavata-Purdna, otherwise known as the Paramahamsa-Samnita,
composed by Bhagavan Vedavyasa and consisting
of eighteen thousand Slokas.

mre BN Sieve

END OF BOOK ELEVEN

— SS ee eee SSS

* The survivors must have presumably been other then the Yadus, inasmuch as the curse of the Rsls embraced the entire
race of Yadu—women, children end the eged not excepted; for itis stated elsewhere that Vejra wes the only exception thet hed
escaped destruction.
