Dis. 1] BOOK SIX 555.

CREE EEE HERE EERE REERA EERE EEE EERE EERE EDEAHERETEE AREA HHA SHCHHHK ERA He

aa हि श्रुतसम्पन्न: ङीलवृत्तगुणालय: i धृतव्रतो मृदुर्दान्तत सत्यवान्मन्त्रविक्छुचि: 1481
गुर्वग्न्यतिथिवृद्धानां WER: | सर्वभूतसुहत्साधुर्मितवागनसूयक: । ५७॥
wre ad aa: पितॄसन्देशकृद fis: | आदाय aa आवृत्त: फलपुष्पसमित्कुशान् । ५८।
weal कामिनं कञ्चिच्छृद्रे सह भुजिष्यया । पीत्वा च ay ate मदाघूर्णितनेत्रया । ५९॥
भत्तया विर्लथन्नीव्या व्यपेतं निरपत्रपम्।क्रीडन्तमनु owed हसन्तमनयान्तिके । ६०॥
ae at कामलिप्तेन ae परिरम्भिताम्। जगाम हृच्छयवशं सहसैव विमोहित: ।६१।
स्तम्भयन्नात्मनाऽऽत्मानं यावत्सत्त्वं यथाश्नुतम्। न शाक समाधातुं मनो मदनवेपितम् । ६२।
तन्निमित्तस्मरव्याजग्रहग्रस्तो विचेतन: | aaa मनसा ध्यायन् स्वधर्माद्बिरराम ह ।६३॥
ama तोषयामास पित्रेणार्थेन यावता । ग्राम्यैर्मनोरमै: ar: प्रसीदेत यथा तथा ।६४॥
विप्रां स्वभार्यामप्रौढां कुले महति लम्भिताम्। विससर्जाचिरात्पाप: स्वैरिण्यापाङ्गविंद्धधी: । ६५॥
यतस्ततश्चोपनिन्ये न्यायतोऽन्यायतो धनम्।बभारास्या: कुटुम्बिन्या: Hest मन्दधीरयम् । ६६॥
यदसौ जास्त्रमुल्लङ्घ्य स्वैरचार्यार्यगर्हित: । अवर्तत चिरं कालमघायुरशुचिर्मलात् । ६७।
तत एनं दण्डपाणे: wart कृतकिल्बिषम् । नेष्यामोऽकृतनिर्वेशं aa दण्डेन ङद्ध्यति । ६८।

This fellow (Ajamila) was indeed endowed with learning (the knowledge of the Vedas
and other scriptures), a (veritable) abode of amiability, good conduct and virtues (like
forgiveness), had taken a vow of worship, prayer and so on and controlled his senses, was
gentle (and) truthful, well-versed in sacred formulas and pure (in habits). (56) (Nay,) he
worshipped the sacred fire (by pouring oblations into it) and served his preceptor, strangers
(calling at his house) and elders, was a friend to all living beings, free from egotism, pious,
taciturn and uncavilling (by nature). (57) One day, this Brahmana went to the woods in
obedience to his father's command; and as he returned therefrom, taking fruits and flowers,
sticks for the sacrificial fire and Kuga grass, he saw (on the way) a (most) profligate Sudra,
who was a (most) libidinous and shameless fellow, drunk with spirituous liquor distilled from
meal, sporting with a harlot of the same class—who was not only (similarly) drunk, with her
eyes swimming through intoxication but stood by his side ina half-naked condition (with the
knot of her loin-cloth loosened)—and (also) singing and joking with her. (658—-60) Seeing her
folded in the arm of that Sidra, which was painted with unguents exciting lust, this man
(Ajamila) was inspired with extravagant passion and succumbed to (the darts of) love all at
once. (61) Though controlling his mind by recourse to reason with all his firmness and by
dint of his learning, he could not compose it, agitated as it was with love. (62) Possessed
by the devil of love excited by (the sight of) that (lewd) woman, and (thus) deprived of reason
and thinking of her alone with his mind, he actually deviated from his duty (neglected all his
sacred obligations). (63) With the entire fortune of his father (at his disposal) he indulged her
alone through carnal pleasures delightful to her mind so that she might be pleased (with
him).(64) The sinful fellow, whose judgement had been crippled by the sidelong glance of
that lewd woman, abandoned before long his own wedded wife, a Brahmana girl, still in the
prime of youth and bestowed on him (by her father) in view of his noble pedigree. (65) (Having
spenton herall the fortune of his father,) this stupid fellow brought money from here and there
by fair and foul means and maintained the family (progeny) of this woman, who was (soon)
the mother of many children. (66) Because this fellow—who having violated (the injunc-
tions of) the scriptures, acted according to his own will and was (therefore) censured by
(all) worthy men—leda sinful life and lived for along time in animpure state; eating the food
