36 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA-MAHATMYA [ Dis. 5
We Me We We Bee Mr He He Be BE Re eB RY ie BE Re Me MY We By Be BRE Be BEB Be BHM He Re RR AR Re RR: Re RM RT Ry Re Re BY We Re ta Ree erie ie OR ae a A Re ०
of one's wretchedness, the subjugation of one's mental aberrations and unfaltering devotion
to the hearing of Srimad Bhagavata— if these and other such virtues are accomplished, then
alone is the hearing of Srimad Bhagavata efficacious. At the end of a second hearing (of this
scripture) all will surely attain an abode in Vaikuntha. (75-76) Lord Sri Krsna (the Protector
of cows) will personally take you, O Gokarna! to Goloka (His divine realm)." Saying so, they
all ascended to Vaikuntha (the divine realm of Lord Visnu), chanting in a chorus the names
and praises of Sri Hari. (77)

श्रावणे मासि गोकर्ण: कथामूचे तथा पुन: । सप्तरात्रव्तीं भूय: श्रवणं तै: Ga पुन: 19d!
कथासमाप्तौ Daa श्रूयतां TT नारद 1199 |

fan: we भक्तैश्च हरिराविर्बभूब ह। जयशाब्दा नम:राब्दास्तत्रासन् बहवस्तदा । ८०॥

पाञ्चजन्यध्वनिं चक्रे हर्षात्तत्र wa eft: । गोकर्णं तु समालिङ्गद्याकरोत्स्वसदृशं aft: ice

श्रोतॄनन्यान् घनश्यामान् पीतकौरेयवासस: | किरीटिन: कुण्डलिनस्तथा चक्रे हरि: क्षणात् । ८२1

तद्ग्रामे ये स्थिता जीवा आश्वचाण्डालजातय: । विमाने स्थापितास्तेऽपि गोकर्णकृपया तदा । ८३1

प्रेषिता हरिलोके a यत्र गच्छन्ति योगिन: । गोकर्णेन स गोपालो Mets गोपवल्लभम् ।
कथाश्रवणत: Mat निर्ययो भक्तवत्सल: । ८४।

अयोध्यावासिन: qd यथा रामेण संगता: । तथा कृष्णेन ते नीता गोलोकं योगिदुर्लभम् । ८५॥

यत्र सूर्यस्य सोमस्य सिद्धानां न गति: weit लोकं fe गतास्ते तु श्रीमद्भागवतश्रवात् । ८६1

In the month of Sravana (roughly corresponding to July of the English calender) Gokarna
gave an exposition of Srimad Bhagavata according to the same procedure in the course of
a week once more and they (all) heard it again.(78) Now hear, O Narada ! what happened
at the end of the exposition. (79) Sri Hari appeared, they say, alongwith His devotees ina
number of aerial cars. Shouts of triumph and greetings issued from many lips on that
occasion. (80) Out of delight Sri Hari Himself blew His conch, Paficajanya, on that spot. And,
closely embracing Gokarna, Sri Hari gave hima form similar to His own. (81) Sri Hari likewise
instantly transformed other hearers (too) into (so many) divine personages dark-brown of
hue, clad in yellow silk, decked with a diadem and a pair of (alligator-shaped) ear-rings. (82)
(All) living beings that were present in that village, including dogs and men belonging to the
pariah class, they too were given a Seat in the aerial cars by the grace of Gokarna on that
occasion. (83) They were (all) transferred to the realm of Sri Hari, the destination of Yogis.
Delighted to hear the exposition of Srimad Bhagavata the aforesaid Sri Krsna (the Divine
Cowherd), who is (so) fond of His devotees, ascended with Gokama to His divine realm,
Goloka, (so) dear to cowherds. (84) (Even) as the residents of Ayodhya accompanied Sri
Rama (to His divine realm, Saketa) in the former days, so were they transplanted to Goloka,
Which is (so) difficult (even) for the Yogis to attain. (85) By only hearing (an exposition of)
Srimad Bhagavata they (all) actually reached that (divine) realm which is ever beyond the
reach of the sun, the moon and the Siddhas (a class of semi-divine beings naturally endowed
with mystic powers).(86)

Wis ते किं फलवृन्दमुज्ज्वलं सप्ताहयज्ञेन कथासु संचितम्।
कर्णेन गोकर्णकथाक्षरो यै: पीतश्च a गर्भगता न भूय: । ८७॥
योगैश्च संयान्ति न तां गतिं वै सप्ताहगाथाश्रवणेन यान्ति am icc

पि
