Dis. 24] BOOK NINE 91

र्व्यईं,गैर्व्यश्चंध्रेर्व्यष्टुंश्लाधैदुंग्र्व्यर्व्य…द्वैर्व्यष्टेर्व्यष्पैर्व्यग्र्र्व्यमें…ळंफेर्व्यळैध्रे…र्व्यप्तो॥…र्व्यर्व्य

अथ चतुर्विंशोऽध्याय:

Discourse XXIV

An account of the posterity of Yadu
॥ ॥
wei विदर्भोऽजनयत् पुत्रौ नाम्ना कुशक्रथौ । तृतीयं रोमपादं च विदर्भकुलनन्दनम्। १ |
रोमपादसुतो «oo ahh: कृतिरजायत । उशिकस्तत्सुतस्तस्माच्चेदिश्चैद्यादयो नूप । २ ।
क्रथस्य ofa: पुत्रोऽभूद धृष्टिस्तस्याथ निर्वृति: । ततो दशार्हो नाम्नाभूत् तस्य व्योम: सुतस्तत: । ३ |
जीमूतो विकृतिस्तस्य यस्य भीमरथ: सुत: । ततो नवरथ: पुत्रो जातो TATA । ४ ।
aria: qa: पुत्रो देवरातस्तदात्मज: । देवक्षत्रस्ततस्तस्य मधु: कुरुवशादनु: । ५ |
पुरुहोत्रस्त्वनोर पुत्रस्तस्यायुर सात्वतस्तत: | भजमानो भजिर्दिव्यो वृष्णिर्देवावृधोऽन्थक: | ६ 1
सात्वतस्यसुत्ता:सप्तमहाभाज`श्चपारिष।भजपानस्प1नप्तोचिं^ : किङ्किणो gta च । ७ 1
एकस्यामात्मजा: पत्न्यामन्यस्यां च त्रय: सुता: | शताजिच्च सहस्राजिदयुताजिदिति प्रभो । ८ 1
अभ्रुर्दैवावृधसुतस्तयोर ङइलोकौ पठन्त्यमू | यथैव शृणुमो दूरात् सम्पद्यामस्तथान्तिकात्। ९ ।
ay: श्रेष्ठो मनुष्वाणां देवैर्देवावृध: wa: पुरुषा: पञ्चषष्टिश्च ve सहस्राणि AE च ।१०॥
येऽमृतत्वमनुप्राप्ता अभ्रोर्देवावृधादपि । महाभोजोऽपि धर्मात्मा भोजा आसंस्तदन्वये । ११॥

Sri Suka resumed : Through Bhojya, Vidarbha begot two sons, Kuga and Kratha by
name, and (also) a third, called Romapada, who was the delight of Vidarbha’s family. (1)
Romapada's son was Babhru and of Babhru was born Kirti. His son was Usika, of whom Cedi
was born. And from (the loins of} the latter appeared Damaghosa (the son of Cedi) and so
on, O protector of men ! (2) Kratha's son was Kunti, whose son was Dhrsti; and then came
Nirvrti. Form (the loins of) Nirvrti appeared a son, Daéarha by name, whose son was Vyoma.
From Vyoma followed Jimtta, and his son was Vikrti, whose son was Bhimaratha. From (the
loins of) the latter sprang up a son Navaratha (by name). And from him followed Dasara
tha. (3-4) (DaSaratha's son was Sakuni;) Sakuni’s son was Karambhi and Karambhi's son
was Devarata, from whom followed Devaksatra; Devaksatra's son was Madhu and Madhu's
son was Kuruvasa, of whom was born Anu. (5) Anu's son again was Puruhotra, whose son
was Ayu; and of the latter was born Satvata, Bhajamana, Bhaji, Divya, Vrsni, Devavrdha,
Andhaka and Mahabhoja were the (seven) sons of Saivata, O worthy king ! Nimioci, Kinkina
and even so Dhrsti were the sons of Bhajamana by his one wife; and Satajit, Sahasrajit and
Ayutajit—these were his three sons by the other, O lord ! (6—8) Devavrdha's son was
Babhru; of these two (father and son) they recite the following two couplets:—"As we heard
from a distance, so do we observe from near. Babhru is the foremost of men, (while)
Devavrdha compares with the gods. Men who attained immortality (freedom from birth and
death) through (the precepts of) Babhru and Devavrdha too numbered fourteen thousand
and sixty-five.” Mahabhoja (the seventh son of Satvata) too had’given his mind to piety, and
those born in his line came to be (known as) the Bhojas. (9—11)

वृष्णे सुमित्र: पुत्रोऽभूद् quire परंतप । शिनिस्तस्यानमित्रश्च निम्नोऽभूदनमित्रत: 1221
सत्राजित: प्रसेनश्च निम्नस्याप्यासतु: सुतौ । अनमित्रसुतो योऽन्य: शिनिस्तस्याथ सत्यक: 1231
qm: सात्यकिर्वै जयस्तस्य कुणिस्तत: । बुगन्धरोऽनमित्रस्य वृष्णि: पुत्रोऽपरस्तत: । १४॥

