Dis. 14] BOOK ELEVEN 579

ह्मा 9 IOC Rere IOI Ore tet ne शामा ल्कक PERE TE CHT Ee eH eR

turned upside down with its stalk upwards (like the flower of a plantain)—(in an inverted
position) with eight open petals and pericarp turned upwards, he should picture to his mind
in succession the sun, the moon and fire as existing (in the form of circles) on the pericarp;
in the centre of fire he should mentally behold My form as depicted hereafter, {so) happy to
contemplate upon. (36-37) He should conceive It as symmetrical, gracious, having a
charming countenance, with four long beautiful arms, a most shapely and graceful neck,
lovely cheeks and bright smiles; with brilliant alligator-shaped ear-rings adorning well-
matched ears, clad in golden raiment, dark-brown as a cloud, bearing (on the right and left
side respectively of the chest) the marks of Srivatsa (a white curl of hair) and Sri (a golden
streak); decked with a conch, discus, mace and lotus and a wreath of sylvan flowers, feet
shining with anklets, (nay,) distinguished by the effulgence of the Kaustubha gem, graced
all over with a glorious diadem, wristlets, girdle and armlets, charming of every limb, pleasing
to the heart, with a countenance and eyes enlivened with grace and very soft to the touch.
And he should concentrate the mind on each limb (individually as well). (38—41)

इन्द्रियाणीन्दरियार्थेभ्यो मनसाऽऽकृष्य तन्मन: । बुद्ध्या सारथिना धीर: प्रणयेन्मयि सर्वत: ।४२।

aa सर्वव्यापकं चित्तमाकृष्यैकत्र धारयेत् । नान्यानि चिन्तयेद् भूय: सुस्मितं भावयेन्मुखम् ।४३।

तत्र लब्धपदं चित्तमाकृष्य व्योम्नि धारयेत्। aa त्यक्त्वा मदारोहो न किञ्चिदपि चिन्तयेत् ive

एवं समाहितमतिर्मामेवात्मानमात्मनि | विचष्टे मयि सर्वात्मन् ज्योतिरज्योतिषि संयुतम् । ४५1

ध्यानेनेत्थं सुतीव्रेण युञ्जतो योगिनो मन: । संयास्यत्याशु निर्वाणं द्रव्यज्ञानक्रियाभ्रम: ।४६॥
इति श्रीमद्भागवते महापुराणे पारमहंस्यां संहितायामेकादहस्कन्धे चतुर्दशोऽध्याय: ।१४॥

Withdrawing the senses from their objects with the help of the mind, and weaning the said
mind (too) from all (other) objects with the help of the intellect, the driver (of the chariot of the
body), a wise man should focus it on Me. (42) Gathering that mind which takes in the entire
personality (of the Lord), he should (learn to) concentrate it on one member (alone). He
should no more think of other limbs and should fix his thought (exclusively) on the (Lord's)
face wearing a winsome smile. (43) Diverting the mind once it has gained its firm hold on My
countenance, he should fix iton My all-pervading Self, (the substratum of all and unattached
to all like the sky); and, transcending that too, and becoming one with Me (the Absolute),
should cease to think of anything else (not even of the distinction between the subject and
the object). (44) With his intellect thus established (in Me) he sees Me in himself and himself
actually merged in Me, the Universal Soul, like (an individual) light in (the element of) fire.(45)
The misconception regarding Matter (in the form of the body etc., being his own self),
knowledge (in the form of ascribing knowership to the Self) and action (in the form of
attributing activity to the Self) will soon disappear from the mind of the striver who
concentrates his mind through most intense meditation as aforesaid. (46)

Thus ends the fourteenth discourse in Book Eleven of the great and glorious
Bhagavata-Purana, otherwise known as
the Paramahafisa-Samnita.

sei nwt ६
PI Sirs
