228 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA { Dis. 21
LAAWHRANA LATERAL EECA HSHHAE ORES HEN EEE LEH Rew eS fet eee teh iio heir eterna

and Uttanapada, piously ruled over the entire globe with its seven divisions (Dwipas as they
are Called). (2) His daughter, known by the name of Devahiti, O holy Brahmana, has been
spoken of by you as the spouse of the sage Kardama, a lord of created beings, O sinless
one! (3) How many issues did that great Yogi beget through that princess, who was endowed
with the eight limbs of Yoga (such as the five Yamas and so on)? Pray, tell me all this, keen
as | am to hear it. (4) Similarly, O holy sage, tell me how the worshipful Ruci (another lord
of created beings) and Daksa, a son of Brahma (and also a lord of created beings),
procreated children after securing as their wife the other two daughters of Swayambhuva
Manu (Akati and Prasuti respectively). (5)
—

प्रजा: सृजेति भगवान् कर्दमो ब्रह्मणोदित: । सरस्वत्यां तपस्तेषपे सहस्राणां समा ari |

at: समाधियुक्तेन क्रियायोगेन कर्दम:। सम्प्रपेदे हरिं भक्त्या प्रपन्नवरदाशुषम् । ७ |

तावत्प्रसन्नो भगवान् पुष्कराक्ष: Ha Bi दर्शयामास तं क्षत्त: शाब्दं ब्रह्म दधद्दपु: । ८ ।

Maitreya replied : Commanded by Brahma in the words “Beget children !" the

worshipful Kardama practised penance on the bank of the river Saraswati for a period
of ten thousand years. (6) During that penance the sage Kardama devoutly waited upon
Sri Hari—the Bestower of blessings on those who flee to Him for protection—through
various modes of worship accompanied by deep meditation. (7) Pleased (with his
austerities), O Vidura, the lotus-eyed Lord showed Himself to him at the beginning of
Satyayuga in a form consisting of His own divine essence, which is ordinarily known only
through the divine Word (the Vedas). (8)

स तं विरजमर्काभं सितपद्मोत्पलस्रजम् | faeriomnamasie विरजोऽम्बरम् । ९ |

किरीटिनं कुण्डलिनं शङ्खचक्रगदाधरम्।श्वेतोत्पलक्रीडनकं लनरस्पर्शसस्मितेक्षणम् । १०॥

विन्यस्तचरणाम्भोजमंसदेशे गरुत्मत: | दृष्टा खेऽवस्थितं वक्ष:श्रियं कौस्तुभकन्धरम् । ११।

जातहर्षोऽपतन्मूर्धा fat लब्धमनोरथ: । गीर्भिस्त्वभ्यगृणात्प्रीतिस्वभावात्मा कृताञ्जलि: 1221
Kardama beheld the Lord in His purely divine form, effulgent like the sun, wearing
a garland of white lotuses and water-lilies and clad in spotless (yellow) silk, His lotus
face fringed with sleek dark locks of curly hair. Adorned with a crown and ear-rings,
He held His (characteristic) conch, discus (Sudargana) and mace (in three of His hands)
and a white lily to play with (in His fourth); while His smiling look captivated the heart.
Having set His lotus-feet on the shoulders of Garuda He stood in the air with a golden
streak (symbol of Goddess Laksmi) on His breast and the famous Kaustubha gem
suspended from His neck. (9—11) Having realized the ambition (of his life) and full of
joy, the sage fell prostrate with his head touching the ground and (rising) began to extol
the Lord in the following words with a mind naturally full of love and his palms joined
(in prayer). (12)
ऋषिरुवाच
जुष्टुं बताद्याखिलसत्त्वराशेर सांसिध्यमक्ष्णोस्तव दर्शनान्न: ।
weit जन्मभिरीड्य सद्भिराशासते योगिनो रूढयोगा: 1231

ये मायया ते हतमेधसस्त्वत् पादारविन्दं भवसिन्धुपोतम् ।
उपासते कामलवाय तेषां रासीश कामान्निरयेऽपि ये स्यु: । १४॥
