Dis. 89 ] BOOK TEN $@3

SERRE TTR EOE ककक URI SESE ne SOE ग Orn ६६ ttn mr rorot tig tn sara tote १95

lo this story of His rescuing Lord Sankara (from trouble) gets completely freed from(the cycle
of) births and deaths and is rid of the fear of enemies. (40)

Thus ends the eighty-eighth discourse entitled " Lord Rudra rescued (from trouble),”
in the latter half of Book Ten of the great and glorious Bhagavata-Purana,
otherwise known as the Paramahamsa-Samhita.

cgtnittwett:
Perce

अथैकोननवतितमोऽध्याय:

Discourse LXXXIX
(The three chief gods put to test by the sage Bhrgu;) the
Lord brings back the (dead) sons of a Brahmana
श्रीगुक उवाच

सरस्वत्यास्तटे राजन्नृषय: सत्रमासत | वितर्क: समभूत्तेषां त्रिष्लधीशेषु को महान् । १ |

तस्य जिज्ञासया ते चै भृगुं ब्रह्मसुतं नृप। नज्जप्त्यैप्रेषयामासु:सोऽभ्यगाद्ब्रह्मण: सभाम् । २ ।

न तस्मै प्रह्वणं wd चक्रे सत्त्वपरीक्षया ae चुक्रोध भगवान् प्रज्वलन् स्वेन तेजसा । ३ ।

a आत्मन्युत्थितं भन्युमात्मजायात्मना प्रभु:। अक्लीदामद्यथा वह्निंस्वयोन्या वारिणाऽऽत्मभू: । ४ |

Sri Suka began again : O king, (on one occasion) great sages assembled on the bank

of the Saraswati (for exchange of views on the object of life and the means of attaining the
same). (In the course of their discussion) a question came up before the assemblage as to
which of the three lords of creation (viz., Brahma, Visnu and Siva) was the greatest. (1) O
king, the Rsis actually deputed Bhrgu, one of Brahma’s sons, to ascertain the out of curiosity
fact with intent to know this truth, Maharsi Bhrgu (first) visited the court of Brahma, and with
a view to testing Brahma's forbearance and other qualities, did neither bow to him nor
offer any praises. Brahma got angry with him and looked as if burning with his majestic
glow. (2-3) But considering that the insult was offered by his own son, Brahma (the self-born)
subdued the anger of his heart within his mind by force of reason, just as one extinguished
fire by water, which is an evolute of fire itself. (4)

तत: कैलासमगमत् स तं देवो महेश्वर: । परिरब्धुं समारेभे उत्थाय भ्रातरं मुदा । ५ ।

Twenge इति देवश्चुकोप ह।झयूलमुद्यम्य तं हन्तुमारेभे तिग्मलोचन: । ६ ।

पतित्वा पादयोर्देवी सान्त्वयामास तं गिरा। अथो am वैकुण्ठं aa देवो जनार्दन: । ७ ।

wert श्रिय उत्सङ्गे vel वक्षस्यताडयत्। ad उत्थाय भगवान् सह Baa सतां गति: । ८ ।

स्वतल्पादवरुह्याथ ननाम शिरसा मुनिम्। आह ते स्वागतं ब्रह्मन् निषीदात्रासने क्षणम् ।

अजानतामागतान् व: क्षन्तुमर्हथ न: प्रभो । ९ ।
अतीव कोमलौ aa चरणौ ते महामुने । इत्युक्त्वा विप्रचरणौ मर्दयन् स्वेन पाणिना । १०॥
पुनीहि सहलोकं at लोकपालांश्च मद्गूतान्। पादोदकेन भवतस्तीर्थानां तीर्थकारिणा ।११॥
