26 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 7

EERE Re त्ती REM कौ ORT ee ता छ व सि वी GS YY HBB त Be Be Re ह ती ती डो MM HY Gy he जो ती क तीर्जी त्ती वी कौ RR Re Re ज ङ जज वी ORE कौ ती ती OR AR ती
त्त्रर्त्त

Moreover, you gave your word to Draupadi (the daughter of the king of Paficala) within my
hearing: । shall bring you the head of the man who has slain your sons, O proud lady." (38)
Therefore, O valiant Arjuna, dispose of this sinful ruffian, who has murdered your own sons.
This unworthy member of his race has done something which was loathsome even to his
master (Duryodhana)." (39) Urged in these words by Sri Krsna who was putting his
righteousness to the test, the great Arjuna (the son of Kunti) would not slay ASwatthama (his
preceptor's son), even though he had murdered his own sons. (40) Then, coming up to his
camp, Arjuna, who had Sri Govinda for his friend and charioteer, showed him (Agwatthama)
to his beloved consort, who had been grieving all the while for her murdered sons. (41)
Looking intently at ASwatthama (Drona's son), who had been brought in that plight, bound
with cords like a sacrificial beast, his face cast down on account of his shameful act,
Draupadi,who was tender by nature, took compassion on the offender and bowed to
him.(42) That noble lady could not bear to see him brought in bondage and said, “Let him
be freed, lethim be released,a Brahmana that he is and worthy of our utmost adoration. (43)
That worshipful Drona, by whose grace you learnt the science of archery with its manifold
secrets and acquired the knowledge of the various missiles as well as how to discharge and
call them back—it is he himself who is present in the person of his progeny, his wife, his
better half, Krpi (a sister of Acarya Krpa, another preceptor of the Pandavas) yet survives
: she did not follow him (declined to ascend his funeral pile) only because of her having given
birth to a valiant son. (44-45) Therefore, my blessed lord, the family of your preceptor, which
is ever worthy of adoration and salutation for you, does not deserve persecution at your
hands, pious as you are. (46) Let not his (ASwatthama's) mother, Gautami (a descendant
of the sage Gautama), who worshipped her husband as a deity, wail even as | do, grieved
at the loss of my children and shedding tears again and again. (47) The whole family of those
princes of unconquered mind by whom the Brahmana race is angered is plunged in grief and
is soon burnt up with all their kith and kin." (48)
Yd उवाच
धर्म्य न्याय्यं सकरुणं निर्व्यलीकं समं महत्। राजा धर्मसुतो ugar: प्रत्यनन्दद्दचो द्विजा: ।४९॥
नकुल: सहदेवश्च युयुधानो धनञ्जय: | भगवान् देवकीपुत्रो ये ord याश्च योषित: iyo!
तत्राहामर्षितो भीमस्तस्य sar ae: स्मृत: । न भर्तुर्नात्मनश्चार्थे योऽहन् सुप्ताञ्शिलून् gat । ५१॥
निशम्य भीमगदितं द्रौपद्याश्च चतुर्भुज:। आलोक्य वदनं सख्युरिदिमाह हसन्निव 1421
1% Sita went on : King Yudhisthira, the son of Dharma (the god of virtue), O holy
‘VY Brahmanas, greeted the queen's words, which were pious and fair, compassionate,
guileless, impartial and noble.(49) Nakula and Sahadeva, Yuyudhana (Satyaki), Arjuna, the
divine Sri Krsna (the son of Devaki) Himself and all other men and women (who happened
to be there) endorsed what she said. (50) On that occasion Bhima indignantly (intervened
and) said, "For him who wantonly murdered sleeping youngsters without any gain either to
himself or to his master death has been declared as a boon." (51) Hearing the words of
Bhima as well as of Draupadi, Lord Sri Krsna (who was distinguished by His four arms)
looked into the face of his friend (Arjuna) and uttered the following words, as though

smiling:(52)
श्रीकृष्ण उवाच
wae हन्तव्य aaa वधार्हण: | मयैवोभयमाम्नातं परिपाह्यनुशासनम् । ५३॥
कुरु way सत्यं यत्तत्सान्त्वयता fram fa च भीमसेनस्य पाञ्चाल्या मह्यमेव च् । ५४॥

Sri Krsna said: Even a fallen Brahmana ought not to be slain and a ruffian surely
deserves to be killed. Both these precepts have been taught by Me in the scriptures.

