256 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 37

LEMAR ASS TET ES Soe L ete ECR ER ites वर्त्त १२५० २०१ त त्त ।

(aforesaid) legs, Sti Krsna (who is above sense-perception) whirled itin a rage with His arms
and, flinging it disdainfully to a distance of a hundred bows (four hundred cubits), even as
Garuda (son of the sage KaSyapa) would throwa serpent, stood as before (as if nothing had
happened). (5) Having recovered its senses and tising up again, the said Kegi rushed
towards Sri Hari with (great) speed, opening its mouth in fury. He too smilingly thrust His left
arm into its mouth (as playfully) as a snake-charmer would put a serpent into a hole. (6)
Touching the Lord's arm the teeth of Kesi dropped down as they would on touching a heated
iron rod, Nay, finding its way into its body, the arm of Si Krsna (the Supreme Spirit) swelled
to an enormous degree, even as (the fluid collected in the body of aman suffering from) the
disease of dropsy would if neglected. (7) With its breath choked by the immensely swelling
atm of Sri Krsna and its eyes rolling, and profusely sweating all over, the animal dropped
deadon the ground throwing up its legs and passing excrement. (8) Drawing out His arm from
its dead body, which resembled a (ripe) cucumber (that had burst open at several places),
the mighty-armed Lord, who had killed the enemy without any effort and (therefore) stood
unelated, was glorified by the highly amazed gods (lit, the denizens of heaven), who
showered flowers (on Him). (9)

भागवतप्रवरो नृप | कृष्णमक्लिष्टकर्माणं रहस्येतदभाषत । १०॥

कृष्ण कृष्णाप्रमेयात्मन् she जगदीश्वर। वासुदेवाखिलावास सात्वतां war प्रभो 1११1

त्वमात्मा सर्वभूतानामेको ज्योतिरिवैधसाम्। गूढो aera: waft महापुरुष gaz: । १२

आत्मनाऽऽत्माश्रय: YS मायया ससृजे गुणान्। तैरिदं सत्यसंकल्प: सृजस्यत्स्यवसीश्वर: 1231

स त्वं भूधरभूतानां देत्यप्रमथरक्षसाम्। अवतीर्णो fare सेतूनां रक्षणाय च । १४

दिष्ट्या ते fet दैत्यो लीलयायं हयाकृति: । यस्य हेषितसंत्रस्तास्त्यजन्त्यनिमिषा दिवम् । १५॥
Approaching Sri Krsna, who was unwearied in action, Narada (the celestial sage), the
foremost of the Lord's votaries, O protector of men, spoke to Him in secret as follows:—(10)
“O Krsna of incomprehensible character, O Enchanter of all, O Master of Yoga (possessed
of inconceivable powers), O Ruler of the universe, O Vasudeva (present in all beings), the
Abode of all, the foremost of the Yadus, O almighty Lord ! (11) You are the one Spirit,
indwelling all created beings and remaining concealed like the fire hidden in logs of wood,
Nay, enshrined inside the intellect, the Witness (of all), the Supreme Person, the almighty
Lord. (12) Depending on Your own Self, You evolved the three Gunas atthe dawn of creation
by Your Maya (creative energy), which is (no other than) Your own Self; and with their help
You create, protect and absorb (into Your own Self) this (visible) universe, unfailing of
purpose and almighty as You are. (13) As such You have descended (in the world of matter)
for the annihilation of demons, goblins and ogres born as kings (lit.,the conservators of the
earth) and for the protection of the virtuous (who are the living standards of morality). (14)
Luckily enough by You, has been sportfully slain this demon (Kei) in the form of a horse,

frightened by whose neighs the gods (whose eyelids never fall) evacuated heaven. (15)

चाणूरं मुष्टिकं चैव मल्लानन्यांश्च हस्तिनम्। कंसं च fed द्रक्ष्ये परश्चोऽहनि ते विभो । १६।
Tay शङ्खयवनमुराणां नरकस्य च ।पारिजातापहरणमिन्द्रस्य च पराजयम् ।१७॥
ae वीरकन्यानां वीर्यशुल्कादिलक्षणम्। नृगस्य मोक्षणं पापाद् great जगत्पते ect
स्यमन्तकस्य च मणेरादानं सह भार्यया ! मृतपुत्रप्रदानं च ब्राह्मणस्य स्वधामत: ।१९।
पौण्ड्रकस्य वधं पश्चात् कादिपुर्याश्च दीपनम्। दन्तवक्त्रस्य निधनं dee च महाक्रतौ ।२०॥
यानि चान्यानि वीर्याणि द्वारकामावसन् भवान्। कर्तां द्रक्ष्याम्यहं तानि गेयानि कविभिर्भुवि ee
