460 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 6

PRA AAAS SHANE कक E ROR AHHH EHR क्तैतीत्त व क व्येत्क्तै वी ती कक फि डली ARERR दनधि कौ ती दौ कौत् वाकौ क SOAK

Thus ends the fifth discourse forming part of the Narrative of Rsabhadeva,
in Book Five of the great and glorious Bhagavata-Purana,
otherwise known as the Paramahamsa-Samhita.

ot
ew Sieve

अथ षष्ठोऽध्याय:

Discourse VI _
Lord Rsabha quits His body
राजोवाच
न नूनं भगव आत्मारामाणां योगसमीरितज्ञानावभर्जितकर्मब्रीजानामैश्वर्याणि पुन: क्लेशदानि
भवितुमर्हन्ति यदृच्छयोपगतानि। १1
King Pariksit said : Surely to those who revel in the Self and have burnt up the seeds
of (future) actions (in the shape of likes and dislikes and so on) through (the fire of) wisdom

strengthened by the practice of Yoga. Yogic powers coming unsolicited cannot again prove

to be a source of evils (such as likes and dislikes). (Why, then, did the Lord not accept
them?) (1)

~

कऋरषपिरुवाच
सत्यमुक्तं किन्तिह वा एके न मनसोऽद्धा विश्रम्भमनवस्थानस्य शठकिरात sa सङ्घच्छन्ते। २ । तथा चोक्तम्--
The sage (Suka) replied ; What you have observed is (quite) true; but there are some

(discreet men) in this world who would never feel quite confident about their fickle mind any
more than a clever hunter would about a deer (trapped by him). (2) Similarly it is said:—

न कुर्यात्कर्हिचित्सख्यं मनसि ह्यनवस्थिते | यद्विश्रम्भाच्चिराच्चीर्णं चस्कन्द तप ऐश्वरम्। ३।
feat ददाति कामस्यच्छिद्रं तमनु येऽरय:। योगिन: कृतमैत्रस्य पत्युर्जायेव पुंश्चली।४।
कामो मन्युर्मदो लोभ: शोकमोहभयादय:। कर्मवन्धश्च यन्मूल: स्वीकुर्यात्को नु Ag बुध:। ५।

"One should never make friends with (rely on the friendship of ) the inconstant mind;
for as a result of confidence placed in it the austere vow (of chastity)—maintained for a long
period—even of Lord Siva* (and other stalwarts like the celebrated sage Saubhari + ) was
broken. (3) The mind of a Yogi (striving mystic) who has made friends with it is ever alert
to fling the gates open to Lust and other enemies (such as Anger) that follow him—even
as a faithless wife would allow her paramours to enter her husband's house and murder
him. (4) What wise man would admit (the trustworthiness of) the mind, which is the root of
lust, anger, vanity, greed, sorrow, infatuation, fear and other evils and which binds a man
to his actions ? (5)

SOATTGAT TINT | & | Te SAT Ua Game Wad ANT STTATaTaTETAT SE gat
जगतीमभिमानाभासेन संक्रममाण: कोङ्कवेङ्ककुटकान्दक्षिणकर्णाटकान्देशान् यदृच्छयोपगत:
कुटकाचलोपवन आस्यकृताश्मकवल उन्माद Fa मुक्तमूर्धजोऽसंवीत va विचचार।७। अथ

* Vide VIII. xii. 24—32.
t See IX, vi. 39-52.

