Dis. 20] BOOK FIVE 519°
SRN EN SE Ce REE ATE RR Re Onn init t nin aie etre tieieciar eta
SERN fr eri EEE ER fe er been ee Ri ie Netra tome ernie

Priyavrata, divided his Dwipa, in due proportion among his seven sons—Vasu, Vasudana,
Drdharuci, Nabhigupta, Stutyavrata, Viviktaand Vamadeva—and himself took to religious
austerities. (14) In their Varsas the well-known mountains, forming their boundaries, and
rivers are severally seven only—viz., the Cakra, Catuhsrnga, Kapila, Citrakdta, Devanika,
Urdhvaroma and Dravina (mountains) and the Rasakulya, Madhukulya, Mitravinda,
Srutavinda, Devagarbha, Ghrtacyuta and Mantramala (rivers). (15) Purified by their
waters, (the four classes of) the inhabitants of Kusadwipa—enjoying the title of Kusala,
Kovida, Abhiyukta and Kulaka—worship the Lord manifested as the God of fire, by
means of their proficiency in rituals. (16) (They repeat the following prayer :—) "You are
the Carrier of oblations to Bhagavan Narayana (the transcendent Brahma) Himself, O
God of fire ! (Therefore,) by means of the worship (offered through you) to the gods, who
are (So many) limbs* of that Supreme Person (Cosmic Being), propitiate (convey our
oblations to and thereby contribute directly to the pleasure of) Sri Hari (the Supreme
Person)." (17)
तथा घृतोदाद्वहि: क्रौञ्चद्वीपो द्विगुण: स्वमानेन क्षीरोदेन परित उपक्लृप्तो वृतो तथा कुशद्वीपो घृतोदेन
यस्मिन् क्रौञ्चो नाम पर्वतराजो द्वीपनामनिर्वर्तक आस्ते । १८ । वोऽसौ गुहप्रहरणोन्मथितनितम्बकुञ्जोऽपि
क्षीरोदेनासिच्यमानो भगवता वरुणेनाभिगुप्तो विभवो aya । १९ ।तस्मिन्नपि प्रैयव्रतो घृतपृष्ठो नामाधिपति:
TARTAN आत्मभूतस्य हरेश्चरणारविन्दमुपजगाम। Ro! आमो मधुरुहो मेघपृष्ठ: सुधामा
वर्धमानो भोजन उपबर्हिणो नन्दो नन्दन: सर्वतोभद्र इति अभया अमृतौघा आर्यका तीर्थवती वृत्तिरूपवती
पवित्रवती शुक्लेति। २१ यासामम्भ: पवित्रममलमुपयुञ्जाना: पुरुषऋषभद्रविणदेवकसंज्ञा वर्षपुरुषा
आपोमयं देवमपां पूर्णेनाञ्जलिना यजन्ते। 221
आप: पुरुषवीर्या: स्थ पुनन्तीर्भूर्भुव: Ya: | ता न: पुनीतामीवघ्नी: स्पृशतामात्मना भुव इति। २३ ।
Likewise, beyond the ocean of clarified butter lies the Krauficadwipa, twice as wide (as
that ocean) and surrounded (on the other side) by an ocean of milk of the same width as itself,
even as the KuSadwipa is enclosed by the ocean of clarified butter (as mentioned in the last
paragraph). There stands the king of mountains, Kraufica by name, which is responsible for
the name of this Dwipa. (18) Though it had its ledges and arbours riven and destroyed by
the weapon (spear) of Guha (the younger son of Lord Siva), the mountain became fearless
(immune from danger), sprayed (constantly) by (the billows of) the ocean of milk and
protected on all sides by the glorious Varuna (the god of water). (19) Its ruler, (the fifth) son
of Priyavrata, Ghrtaprstha by name, (who lived) in that Dwipa of his own (share), carved out
seven Varsas and, having installed his seven heirs in those Varsas—which were named
after his sons—as their rulers, himself resorted to the lotus-feet of Lord Sri Hari of most
auspicious renown, his own inner Self, enlightened as he was. (20) The sons of Ghrtaprstha
were named Ama, Madhuruha, Meghaprstha, Sudhama, Bhrajistha, Lohitarna and Vanaspati.
The well-known mountains of their Varsas are seven (only)—viz., Sukla, Vardhamana,
Bhojana, Upabarhina, Nanda, Nandana and Sarvatobhadra; and the rivers also are seven—
viz., Abhaya, Amrtaugha, Aryaka, Tirthavati, Vrttirdpavati, Pavitravati and Sukla. (21) Using
the sacred and purifying water of these rivers, (the four classes of) the people of these
ee EEE

* This is borne out by the Sruti text: स आत्मा अङ्गान्यन्या देव्ता: |
