Dis. 9 ] BOOK SIX 599

RAKE CHCA AA A ELERA AAT LESSEN HEV ELE SHSHH SCR AHE SHARE LER AEA E RH AAA AHEM ELAAA HEE EAA
युष्मभ्यं याचितोऽश्विभ्यां धर्मज्ञोऽङ्गानि दास्यति 1 ततस्तैरायुधश्रेष्ठो विश्वकर्मविनिर्मित: ।
येन वृत्रशिरो gat मत्तेज उपबृंहित: 1५४1
तस्मिन् fated ga तेजोऽस्त्रायुधसम्पद:। ya: प्राप्स्यथ भद्रं वो न हिंसन्ति च मत्परान् । ५५॥
इति श्रीमद्भागवते महापुराणे पारमहंस्या संहितायां षष्ठस्कन्धे नवमाऽध्याय: 1¢ II

The Lord said : | am pleased, 0 jewels among the gods, with the sacred text by which
you have offered prayer to Me and by (repeating and revolving) which consciousness of the
transcendent nature of the soul as well as devotion to Me will be awakened in (the mind of)
men. (47) What is there which cannot be easily attained when | am pleased, O great gods |
Yet, he, who knows the truth and is solely devoted to Me does not seek anything else than
Myself. (48) The fool who looks upon the material objects (which are products of the three
Gunas) as real is not alive to his highest good. (And) if anyone bestows those objcets on the
individual seeking them, such a one is of the same description (no better than a fool). (49)
Indeed he who is himself conscious of the highest good (final beatitude) would never tell
(show) an ignorant person the path of action (worldly activity). Surely a good doctor would
never give unwholesome food to an ailing man longing for it. (50) Indra, may all be well with
you; seek ye Dadhyan (more popularly known as Dadhica or Dadhici),the noblest of seers,
and beg of him without delay (the gift of) his body, which has grown (exceptionally) strong
through the repetition of Mantras (prayers such as the holy Narayana-Kavaca), religious
observances and asceticism. (51) Having actually realized (his identity with) Brahma (the
Absolute), free from (every) tinge (of Maya), he imparted that knowledge to the two
ASwinikumaras (who are twin brothers.and are the physicians of the gods)—the knowledge
which is named Aswasira* (because it was imparted by the sage with the head of a horse)
and which contributed to the immortality (liberation during their very life-time) of the
aforesaid gods. Dadhici, the son of the sage Atharva, (again) taught to the god Twasta the
prayer (serving as a protective cover and therefore known as the Narayana-Kavaca), full of
My essence and incapable of being superseded (by any other Mantra or prayer), which
Twasta (in his turn) taught to (his son) Viswaripa and which you have received from
Viswarupa. (52-53) Solicited (by you), the sage (who knows the essence of virtue) will part
with in your favour and (particularly) in favour of (his disciples,) the two Aswinikumaras (your
physicians) his (own) limbs. Then out of (the bones of) those limbs will be produced a
thunderbolt (the best of weapons), forget by Viswakarma (the artisan of the gods), by means
of which and (further) strengthened with My power, (O Indra) you will be able to sever the
head of Vrira. (54) When he is slain, you will regain your (past) glory, missiles, weapons and
riches, and everything will be well with you; for enemies can never destroy those who are
devoted to Me. (55)

* Having come to know that the sage Dadhici was well-versed in Brahmavidya (the knowledge relating to the Supreme
Spirit), the two ASwinikumaras once approached him and sought from him the knowledge of Brahma. The sage, who was then
engaged in some religious rite, politely dismissed them assuring them that he would impart that knowledge to them on some
other occasion. No sooner had they left than Indra (the chief of the gods) called on the sage and asked him not to teach
Brahmavidya to the Aswinikumaras, who were physicians and as such hardly qualified to receive it, and threatened to behead
the sage in case he insisted on imparting the said knowledge to them. When the Aswinikumaras approached the sage again
and leamt from him of Indra's threat, they offered to cut off the sage’s head even before and replace it with the head of a horse,
and requested him to teach Brahmavidya by the horse's head, so that if Indra actually came and severed the sage's head in
the course of the latter's discourse they would easily restore his original head. The sage, who prized his word more than his
head, readily agreed and allowed himself to be beheaded by the heavenly physicians and taught them Brahmavidya by the
horse's head.
