Dis. 16 ] BOOK NINE 63

nin ooo Seen etek eT Seek eh eee Teese et HAHAH EERE RSPRERTLSSHHA CHORE EAR

of the sage’s (her husband's) curse, she returned (forthwith) and, placing the pitcher before
him, stood with joined palms. (4) Enraged to know (through Yoga) the (mental) lapse of his
wife, the sage exclaimed, “My sons! do away with this sinful woman.” Though enjoined thus,
they did not carry out his command. (5) Peremptorily urged by the father, Paragurama, who
knew well the power of the sage's deep concentration of mind and austerities killed his
brothers alongwith the mother. (6) The gratified Jamadagni (the son of Satyavati) asked him
to seek a boon. Rama for his part requested that those despatched by himself might be
restored to life and forget their having been killed (by him). (7) They instantly rose (quite)
whole (again) as if after sleep. Paragurama put his dear ones to death (only) because he
knew the power of his father's austerities. (8)

ashe सुता राजन् स्मरन्त: स्वपितुर्वधम्। रामवीर्यपराभूता GRR हार्म न क्वचित्। ९ ।
Wess wa सभ्रातरि वनं गते। वैरं सिसाधयिषवो लब्धच्छिद्रा उपागमन् ।१०॥
geo आसीनमावेशितधियं मुनिम्। anager जघ्नुस्ते पापनिश्चया: 1281
याच्यमाना: कृपणया राममात्रातिदारुणा: । प्रसह्य fae उत्कृत्य निन्युस्ते क्षत्रबन्धव: 1821
रेणुका Gaited निघ्नन्त्याऽऽत्मानमात्मना । राम रामेहि तातेति विचुक्रोशोच्चकै: सती ।१३॥
तदुपश्रुत्य दूरस्थो हा रामेत्यार्तवत्स्वनम्।त्वरयाऽऽश्रममासाद्य eet Pea हतम् ।१४॥
aa दु:खरोषामर्षार्तिश्लोकवेगव्निमोहित: | हा तात साधो धर्मिष्ठ त्यक्त्वास्मान् स्वर्गतो भवान् । १५1
विलप्यैवं fie निधाय भ्रातृषु स्वयम्। प्रगृह्य Fel राम: क्षत्रान्ताय मनो दधे । १६॥

Those sons of Arjuna that had been vanquished by Rama's valour found peace
nowhere, recollecting as they did the death of their father (at the hands of Parasurama), ण
king! (9) One day, when Parasurama, alongwith his (elder) brothers, had gone to the woods
from his hermitage, Arjuna’s sons (who were anxious to repay their grudge) came to the
hermitage, finding a suitable opportunity (to accomplish their object). (10) Perceiving the
sage seated in the hut consecrated to the sacrificial fire, with his mind fixed on the Lord of
sacred renown, they of sinful resolve made short work of him. (11) Though entreated by the
helpless mother of Paragurama (to spare her husband), those vile and extremely heartless
Ksatriyas forcibly lopped off the sage's head and took it away (with them). (12) Stricken with
agony and grief and violently beating herself with her hands, the virtuous Renuka loudly and
plaintively cried, “Rama ! 0 Rama !! Come, dear child !!!" (13) Attentively hearing that cry of
“Oh Rama!" uttered as though by one in distress, ParaSurama, who was ata distance, hastily
returned to the hermitage and beheld his father done to death. (14) Utterly confounded with
an outburst of agony, anger, indignation, affliction and grief, Parasurama then cried:—"Ah
noble and mostvirtuous father, leaving us, you have ascended to heaven!" (15) Wailing thus,
he himself tightly gripped his battle-axe and, entrusting the father's dead body to the care of
his brothers, made up his mind to extirpate the Ksatriya race”. (16)

गत्वा माहिष्मतीं रामो ब्रह्मघ्नविहतश्रियम्। तेषां स aie राजन् मध्ये चक्रे महागिरिम् । १७॥
wea नदीं घोरामब्रह्मण्यभयावहाम्। हेतुं कृत्वा पितृवधे क्षत्रेऽमङ्गखलकारिणि ec
त्रि:सप्तकृत्व: पृथिवीं कृत्वा Paar sy: समन्तपञ्चके चक्रे ज्ञोणितोदान् Ber, नृप ।१९॥
fq कायेन सन्धाय fi आदाय बर्हिषि । सर्वदेवमयं देवमात्मानमयजन्मखै: । २०॥
ददौ प्राचीं fet होत्रे ब्रह्मणे दक्षिणां दिशम्। अध्वर्यवे प्रतीचीं वै उद्गात्रे उत्तरां दिशम् । २१

* Tradition says thatin her deep agony caused by her husband's brutal murder Rama’s mother beat her breast twenty-
one fimes. In order to pacify her, ParaSurama too wiped out the Ksatriya race as many times.
