Dis. 11] >, BOOK THREE 179

Hie on ee ee ee ee TEMS HCE AK CCENT CE EA Lee A HHA HAHA ACOH AAA TAHA ENA HA UMMAH

वी च क्तय eT ee Re. OS ee oe

minutest particle of matter or mote), seen floating in space through the sun's rays that enter
a room through the eye-holes of a lattice. (5) The measure of time which (in the form of the
sun) travels across a composite of three Trasarenus is known as a Truti; a Vedha consists
ofa hundred Trutis, while three Vedhas constitute what is known as a Lava. (6) Acomposite
of three Lavas should be known by the name of Nimesa (the twinkling of an eye); while three
Nimesas are spoken of as one moment (Ksana). A composite of five moments is known as
a Kastha; while fifteen Kasthas go to make a Laghu. (7) Fifteen Laghus taken together are
called a Nadika; a couple of Nadikas constitute one Muhirta, while six or seven Nadikas
(according as the day or night is short or long) make a Prahara, which forms one quarter of
a day or night of human beings. (8) A pot (of copper) weighing six Palas or ninety-six Masas
(8 Tolas) and with a capacity of one Prastha (two seers) of water should be bored (at the
bottom) with a gold needle weighing four Masas and four Angulas (a finger's breadth) long,
and left on water. The time which willbe taken by such a pot to be filled with and consequently
submerged in water is known as a Nadika. (9) The day and night of human beings consist
of four Yamas or quarters each: while fifteen days and nights constitute a fortnight, which
is bright and dark (alternately), O respecter of others. (10) Both these fortnights, taken
together, make one month, which constitutes a day and night of the Pitrs (manes). Two
months, taken together, go to make a Rtu (season); while an Ayana consists of six months.
An Ayana is southerly and northerly by turns ( according as the sun takes a southerly or
northerly course), and the two Ayanas constitute a day and night of the gods in heaven.
These are known as one year or twelve months (on earth) and a hundred years have been
declared as the full life-span of human beings. (11-12) The ever-vigilant sun-god, who is
manifestation of the Lord Himself and identical with the Time-Spirit, and stays in the midst
of planets, lunar mansions and other stars, goes round the whole universe in course of time
beginning from a Paramanu and extending to a whole year. (13) The year, O Vidura, is
variously termed as Sarhvatsara', Parivatsara’, Idavatsara*, Anuvatsara* and Vatsara’
(according as it is calculated on the basis of the revolutions of the sun, the Jupiter, the moon
and so on). (14) Bear offerings, (O men!) to the sun-god, the originator of these five kinds
of years, who by his potency called Time unfolds in various forms the capacity of the seed
etc., to germinate, who as (a huge ball of) fire, which is one of the five gross elements,
courses through the heavens in order to dispel the delusion of men (by cutting short their
span of life and thus ridding them of their attachment for the pleasures of sense) and who
(for those performing sacrifices etc., with some interested motive) yields many kinds of
material fruits (in the shape of heavenly and other enjoyments) through sacrificial

performances. (15)
fagt sara

पितृदेवमनुष्याणामायु:र परमिदं स्मृतम्। परेषां गतिमाचक्ष्व ये स्यु: कल्पाद् बहिर्विद: । १६।
war वेद कालस्य wd wad ननु । विश्वं विच्क्षते धीरा योगराद्धेन चक्षुषा ।१७॥
Vidura said : The full life-span of the manes, gods and human beings has thus been

1. Sarnvatsara is the nameof the solar yearor the period taken by the sun to pass through all the twelve signs of the zodiac
(viz., 372 days).

2. Parivatsara is the name of the period taken by the Jupiter to pass from one sign of the zodiac to another. The Jupiter
takes approximately twelve years to complete its circuit through all the twelve signs.

3. Idavatsara is the name of the Savanas year, each month of which has a uniform duration of 30 days.

4.Anuvatsara is the name of the lunar year, each month of which ends on the Amavasya.

§. Vatsara is the name of the year, each month of which consists of 27 days only, the period taken by the moon to pass
through each Naksatra or lunar mansion.
