Dis. 8 BOOK NINE 31

ee ACeSE HATER CEE ee SES EH e ES Re ETERS EES ES TE EP EERE ETERS seeetn hese kn eer न

with the air; and (again) merging the air in ether, the latter in the Tamasika aspect of the Ego
and the said Tamasika Ego in the Mahat-tattva (the principle of cosmic intelligence), and
laying aside its objective character, he contemplated its knowledge aspect as his very self
and through such contemplation he finally and thoroughly bumt his ignorance (that veiled the
nature of the Self). (24-26) (Again,) giving up that contemplation (too) through conscious-
ness consisting of unmixed bliss, and with (all) his bondage (in the shape of self-identification
with the body and so on) shaken off he stood in his essential character, which is beyond the
range of description and reasoning. (27)

Thus ends the seventh discourse, entitled the "Story of Hari§candra,"
in Book Nine of the great and glorious Bhagavata-Purana, ॥
otherwise known as the Paramaharnsa-Samnhita.

reed Sees

अथाष्टमोऽध्याय:

Discourse VIll

The story of King Sagara
श्रीगुक उवाच
हरितो रोहितसुतश्चम्पस्तस्माद् विनिर्मिता । चम्पापुरी सुदेवोऽतो विजयो यस्य चात्मज: । १ ।
भरुकस्तत्सुतस्तस्माद् वृकस्तस्यापि बाहुक: | सोऽरिभिर्हृतभू राजा सभार्यो वनमाविदयत्। २ |
ae तं पञ्चतां प्राप्ते महिष्यनु मरिष्वती steer जानताऽऽत्मानं प्रजावन्तं निवारिता । ३ |
आज्ञायास्यै सपत्नीभिर्गरो aise सह। सह तेनैव संजात: सगराख्यो AEM: । ४ ।

Sri Suka resumed: Harita was the son of Rohita and from (the loins of) Harita sprang
up Campa, by whom was built the city of Campa. And of Campa was born Sudeva, whose
son was Vijaya. (1) Vijaya's son was Bharuka; and from (the loins of) Bharuka sprang up
Vrka, whose son again was Bahuka. His land having been usurped by the enemies, King
Bharuka retired to the forest alongwith his wife. (2) Intending to follow (ascend the funeral
pile of) the aged king, who died (in the forest), the queen was stopped by the sage Aurva,
who knew her to be enceinte. (3) By her co-wives, who came to know this, poison was
administered to her with her food (through jealousy); but (no harm came to her. On the other
hand,) a highly renowned son was born of her alongwith that poison and (thus) came to be
known by the name of Sagara (one born with poison). (4)

सगरश्चक्रवर्त्यसीत् सागरो यत्सुतॆ: कृत: । यस्तालजङ्घान् यवनाञ्छकान् हैहयबर्बरान्। ५ ।
नाबधीद् गुरुवाक्येन चक्रे विकृतवेषिण: | मुण्डाञ्छ्मश्रुधरान् कांश्चिन्मुक्तकेशार्धमुण्डितान् । ६ |
अनन्तर्वासस: कांश्चिदवहिर्वाससोऽपरान् | सोऽश्वमेघैरयजत सर्ववेदसुरात्मकम् | ७ ।
और्वोपदिष्टयोगेन हरिमात्मानमीश्वरम् । तस्योत्सृष्टं UH जहाराश्वं पुरन्दर: । ८ ।
सुमत्यास्ततया दृप्ता: पितुरादेशकारिण: | हयमन्वेषमाणास्ते समन्तान्न्यखनन् महीम्। ९ ।
घ्रागुदीच्यां fr हं ददृशु: कपिलान्तिके। एष वाजिहरश्चौर आस्ते मीलितलोचन: ।१०॥
हन्यतां geet पाप इति षष्टिसहस्रिण: । उदायुधा अभिययुरुन्मिमेष तदा सुनि: ।११॥
स्वशरीराम्निना तावन्महेन्द्रहतचेतस: | महद्व्यतिक्रमहता भस्मसादभवन् क्षणात् ।१२॥
