450 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 79

onenterernenneteenineneceerennaceenherenteenstenneeeeternterenenententnevenangdert

उपस्पृश्य महेन्राद्रौ रामं दृष्टाभिवाद्य च । सप्तगोदावरीं वेणां पम्पां steel aa: ।१२॥

wee gE ययो wa: श्रीश्नैलं गिरिशालयम्। द्रविडेषु महापुण्यं ape वेङ्कटं प्रभु: ।१३॥

कामकोष्णीं qi काञ्चीं aad च सरिद्वराम्। श्रीरङ्खाख्यं महापुण्यं aa सन्निहितो हरि: ।१४॥

ॠषभाद्रि हरे: क्षेत्रं दक्षिणां मथुरां तथा । सामुद्रं सेतुमगमन्महापातकनादानम् । १५॥

तत्रायुतमदाद् धेनूर्ब्रह्मणेभ्यो हलायुध: । कृतमालां anal मलयं च कुलाचलम् ।१६॥

तत्रागस्यं समासीनं नमस्कृत्याभिवाद्य च । योजितस्तेन चाशीर्भिरनुज्ञातो गतोऽर्णवम् ।
दक्षिणं aa कन्याख्यां दुर्गां देवीं ददर्श a: ।१७॥

Wa: फाल्गुनमासाद्य पञ्चाप्सरसमुत्तमम्। विष्णु: सन्निहितो यत्र स्नात्वास्पर्हाद्रावायुतम् । १८॥

Now, with the permission of the sages of Naimisaranya, Balarama together with His
Brahmana companions went to the Kausiki river, and after bathing in that river went to the
lake from which the Sarayu emanates. (9) Following the downward course of the Sarayu, He
thence came to Prayaga. After taking His bath there and propitiating the gods, Rsis and
manes by offering water to them, He went to the hermitage of the sage Pulaha. (10) (Then)
he bathed in the Gomati, Gandaki, Vipasa and Sona rivers and, visiting Gaya, worshipped
the manes (according to the instructions of His father Sri Vasudeva). From Gaya He went
to the mouth of the Ganga where He took a bath (and performed other religious rites).(Then)
He went to the Mahendra Hill, where He saw and paid His respects to the sage ParaSurama.
Having bathed in the seven branches of the Godavari and in the Vena and Bhimarathi rivers
as well as in the Pampa lake, He paid a visit to the shrine of Lord Kartikeya and (thence)
proceeded to Srigaila, the abode of Lord Siva (known by the name of Mallikarjuna). From Srisaila
He went to see the most holy mountain-peak of Venkata in the Dravida territory. (11—13)
(Then) passing through Siva-Kafici and Visnu-Kafici and after taking a bath in the holy
Kaveri, He reached the most sacred site of Sriranga where Bhagavan Visnu (eternally)
dwells. (14) From there He went to visit the Rsabha Hill, sacred to Lord Visnu, and the
southern Mathura and thence proceeded to the dam across the sea at Rameswara, visitors
to which are purged (even) of their greatest sins. (15) There Balarama gifted ten thousand
cows to the Brahmanas. (Then) after taking a bath in the Kriamala and Tamraparni rivers,
He went to the Malaya mountain. It is one of the seven principal ranges of mountains of
Bharatavarsa. (16) Greeting and bowing to the sage Agastya residing there, and receiving
his blessings and permission, He went to the southern sea and visited (the shrine of)
Goddess Durga (at Kanyakumari) known by the name of Kanya. (17) Next He went to the
Phalguna Tirtha (AnantaSayana) and the great lake of Pafcapsarasa, another abode of Lord
Visnu. There after bathing in its holy waters, He gave away ten thousand cows (to the
Brahmanas). (18)

ततोऽभिव्रज्य भगवान् केरलांस्तु त्रिगर्तकान्। गोकर्णाख्यं शिवक्षेत्रं सान्निध्यं aa धूर्जटे: ।१९॥

आर्यां द्वैपायनीं दृष्टा दूर्पारकमगाद् बल: | तापीं पयोष्णीं निर्विन्ध्यामुपस्पृश्याथ दण्डकम् 1201

sfagq रेवामगमद् aa माहिष्मती पुरी । मनुतीर्थमुपस्पृशय प्रभासं पुनरागमत् ।२१॥

ga fet: कथ्यमानं कुरुपाण्डवसंयुगे । सर्वराजन्यनिधनं wt मेने wi भुव: 1221

स भीमदुर्योधनयोर्गदाभ्यां युध्यतोर्मृधे। वारयिष्यन् विनानं जगाम यदुनन्दन: 1231
Then Lord Balarama visited the principalities of Kerala and Trigarta, and (from there He)
went to Gokarna, sacred to Siva, where Bhagavan Sankara is eternally present. (19) Thence

He visited (the shrine of) Goddess Parvati (known by the name of Arya) located in anisland,
after which He went to Surparaka. Then after bathing in the Tapti, Payosni and Nirvindhya
