Dis. 28 ] BOOK ELEVEN 651

CeVENe ine CN Rok An eH Hh AhHei ere renee eekrenehnnhenesennrenenscrensenrentseenennnen

the body, senses and vital airs metempsychosis continues to bear fruit (in the shape of
pleasure and pain), even though ithas no reality. (12) Even though phenomena {in the shape
of the various bodies) do not exist (in the Self), metempsychosis (consisting in the experience
of pleasure and pain) does not cease in the case of the embodied soul continuing to think
of the objects of senses, even as calamities do not cease to afflict a mian in the dream state
so long as the dream is not broken, although the objects seen in it (including the body
appearing in the dream) do not (actually) exist. (13) Just as the dream experience brings
many a woe to a man who has not yet woken—while the same surely does not infatuate him
who has woken up—so what brings sorrow to the ignorant does not afflict a wise man. (14)
Grief, delight, fear, anger, greed, infatuation, craving and other moods as well as birth and
death are seen in relation to the ego and not to the Self. (15) The spirit hidden behind the
body, the senses, the vital airs and the mind and identifying itself with them is called the Jiva.
The subtle body (constituted of the’ Gunas and Karmas) is its material manifestation and is
variously known as the Sutratma or the Mahat-tattva. Controlled by God (in the form of the
Time-Spirit), it revolves in Sarnsara (the whirligig of metempsychosis). (16) Cutting down
with the sword of wisdom, whetted by worship (of God), this (tree of the) ego-sense—which
has no root and (yet) stands revealed in multitudinous forms (such as those of gods, human
beings etc.), and is entertained in relation to the mind, speech, vital airs and body—a
contemplative soul roams about on the globe destitute of (all) thirst (for the pleasures of
sense). (17) Wisdom consists in distinguishing the Self from the non-Self. (Study of) the
Vedas and askesis (in the shape of discharging one’s own sacred obligations), the teachings
of exalted souls, ratiocination (consistent with those teachings) and one’s own realization
(which does not contradict the two) constitute the means to (the attainment of) such
discriminating knowledge. And such discrimination results in the conviction that what alone
existed at the beginning of creation and will survive at the end oft exists in the middle as well
and that is (Brahma,) the revealer as well as the cause of the universe. (18) (Even) as gold
not (yet) wrought into various beautiful shapes (as ornaments), which existed before as well
as after all tnatis made ofit, is the same even at the middle, while itis being called by different
names (ear-ring, bangle and so on), so do! (the Cause of the universe) exist before and after
the universe and am designated by different names even at the middle. (In other words, the
creation is in no way other than Me.)(19) That (one substance, viz., Brahma) alone is real,
because of which—the fourth principle (consisting of absolute Consciousness)-—O dear
uddhava, this mind subject to its three states (viz., waking, dream and deep slumber), the
three Gunas or modes of Prakrti (which bring about the three states) as well as the threefold
universe (consisting of the cause, viz., the Adhyatma or the senses, the effect, viz., the
Adhibhuta or the five elements —earth etc., and the agent, viz., the Adhidaiva or the gods
presiding over the Indriyas) appear through invariable concomitance, and which substance
(equally) persists even when this threefold distinction disappears (viz., during Samadhi or
the state of absorption).(20) That (on the other hand) which neither existed before nor will
persist after (viz.,the manifest creation) does not (really) exist even in thé middle except in
name alone. An effect is the same as that other substance (viz., the cause) through which
it came into being and by which it stands revealed: such is My conviction.(21) This world of
modifications, though it did not exist (before), has evolved from Brahma through Rajas and
is revealed (also) by Brahma, which (on the other hand) is the cause of all by itself (and not
the effect of any other cause) and the revealer (too). (Therefore) it is Brahma (alone) which
appears as this diversified universe, consisting (as it does) of the senses and their objects
(the subtle elements), the mind (including the gods presiding over the senses and the mind)
and the five gross elements. (22) Resolving one's doubts concerning the Self by the
