40 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA-MAHATMYA [ Dis. 6
Me BEB शा ज By ROW BR ती tM उ य TR इ य त्री क ॐ ST TN HERBY Re BRAT को की He WB Br BEE Re RY पि क RHE च BETH RR जो ती RHR Hi ARH Be ae
he should go through a course of expiatory rites for the sake of purification (of his self) and
should draw a mystrical diagram (used in invoking a deity) and instal on it Sri Hari (in the
form of an image or the Salagrama stone). (25) He should (then) with the chanting of
Mantras (sacred texts) successively offer to Sri Krsna (through that image) the (sixteen
prescribed) courses of worship including Pradaksina (walking round the Deity clockwise)
and salutation and at the end of the worship address (the following) prayer (to Him):— (26)
"Rescue, O Storehouse of compassion ! from the ocean of mundane existence my
wretched self, sunk in that ocean of metempsychosis, my body having been seized by (the
alligator in the shape of) infatuation for action." (27) Worship should be zealously offered
next with due ceremony and love to (the copy of ) Srimad Bhagavata as well by means
of articles including incense and light. (28) Nay, holding a cocoanut (in the hollow of his
joined palms), he should then duly offer salutation and then with a cheerful mind alone the
following prayer should be addressed (to Srimad Bhagavata); for here is Sri Krsna Himself
manifest (before us) under the name of Srimad Bhagavata. "| have sought You, O Lord!
for being rescued from the ocean of mundane existence. (29-30) This aspiration of mine may
(kindly) be fulfilled by You in everyway without impediment as a matter of fact, (since) | am
Your servant, O Krsna !" (31)

एवं दीनवच: प्रोच्य वक्तारं चाथ पूजयेत्। सम्भूष्य वस्त्रभूषाभि: पूजान्ते तं च संस्तवेत् 1321
yaaa प्रबोधज्ञ सर्वशासतत्रविशारद। uname nea विनाहाय 133!
तदग्रे fram: पश्चात्कर्तव्य: श्रेयसे मुदा । सप्तरात्रं यथाशक्त्या धारणीय: a wa fF ।३४॥
aut पञ्चविप्राणां कथाभङ्गनिवृत्तये। कर्तव्यं तैर्हरर्जाप्यं द्वादशाक्षरविद्यया । ३५॥
ब्राह्मणान् वैष्णवांश्चान्यांस्तथा कीर्तनकारिण: । नत्वा सम्पूज्य दत्ताज्ञ: स्वयमासनमाविदोत् । ३६।
लोकवित्तधनागारपुत्रचिन्तां व्युदस्य च । कथाचित्त: qeafa: a लभेत्फलमुत्तमम् ।३७॥

Having addressed this piteous appeal (to Sri Krsna in the form of Srimad Bhagavata),
he should next worship the (prospective) exponent and, fully adorning him with wearing
apparel and jewels, should further duly extol him atthe end of the worship (as follows):— (32)
"O manifestation of Suka, expert (as you are) in enlightening others and well-versed in the
entire range of sacredlore, eradicate my ignorance by revealing (to me) this story (in the form
of Srimad Bhagavata)." (33) Before him then a vow should be gladly taken (by the chief
listener) for his own (spiritual) good and it should be truly observed by him at all events to
the best of his ability for a (full) week (34) Five Brahmanas should be engaged as priests for
averting interruption in the exposition; they should mutter prayers to Sri Hari by repeating
the twelve-syllabled Mantra ( 2% नमो भगवते वासुदेवाय ). (35) Bowing to the Brahmanas and other
votaries of Lord Visnu as well as to those engaged in chanting the names and praises of Sri
Hari and, duly worshipping them, he should himself occupy his seat (only) when permitted
by them. (36) He who, giving up the thought of the world, riches and other possessions,
house and children, focusses his mind on the exposition (alone) with a guileless heart
secures the highest reward. (37)

आसूर्योदयमारभ्य सार्धत्रिप्रहरान्तकम् । वाचनीया कथा सम्यग्धीरकण्ठं सुधीमता । ३८॥
कथाविराम: कर्तव्यो मध्याह्ने घटिकाद्वयम्। तत्कथामनु ari a कीर्तनं वैष्णवैस्तदा । ३९॥
मलमूत्रजयार्थं हि लघ्वाहार: सुखावह: | हविष्यान्नेन कर्तव्यो ह्येकवारं कथार्थिना ivol
उपोष्य UNA वै हाक्तिश्चेच्छृणुयात्तदा । घृतपानं पय:पानं Hea A शृणुयात्सुखम् ।४१॥
