504 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 89

SR ROTE MOORE CONTE CE EN TOUR O TT HET ७ EOE क्तं HE CELT क OEE ORE EERE EH ETEN EE MNO ककात ००१० १

अद्याहं Weems आसमेकान्तभाजनम्। वत्स्यत्युसि मे भूतिर्भवत्पादहतांहस: । १२।
From Brahma's court the sage Bhrgu went to Kailasa (the home of Siva).Seeing that it
was his own brother (Bhrgu, who hadcome ona visit to Him), the Lord Sarikara (the supreme
Deity) rose in (great) joy (from His seat) and proceeded to embrace the sage. (5) But Bhrgu
avoided his touch saying, "I shall not touch you, since you have broken social conventions
and flouted the injunctions of the Vedas." Siva lost His temper when He heard this. His eyes
shot fire. Taking up His trident, He proceeded to strike the sage (with it.) (6) But Goddess
Parvati, falling at Siva's feet. pacified Him by soothing words. Thereafter Bhrgu went to
Vaikuntha, the realm of Bhagavan Visnu. (7) He found the Lord reposing (with His head) on
the lap of Laksmi (the goddess of prosperity). (Breaking into His room unceremoniously) the
sage suddenly kicked Him on the chest. The almighty Lord. the (sole) refuge of the virtuous,
thereupon (quickly) rose with Laksmi alighted from His bed and, bowing His head
(in reverence) to the sage said, “ O sage, you are welcome. Make yourself comfortable on
this seat and rest awhile. Unaware of your arrival, we could not offer you welcome in time.
Pray, forgive us this omission.(8-9) O great one ! great sage, your feet are so soft, O dear
one!" Saying this, the Lord began to knead the feet of the sage with His own hands, and again
said:—(10) “O sage, the water touched by your feet lends sanctity even to the sacred waters.
(Pray) sanctify Me, My realm (Vaikuntha) and the protectors of the world residing in Me, with
the same. (11) O worshipful sage, all My sins have been washed off by the very touch of your
feet. From this day | have become the sole abode of Sri Laksmi, the goddess of wealth. She
will hereafter (constantly) dwell on My bosom (bearing the mark of your foot)." (12)
श्रीगुक उवाच
एवं ब्रुवाणे वैकुण्ठे भृगुस्तन्मन्द्रया गिरा । निर्वृतस्तर्पितस्तूष्णीं भक्त्युत्कण्ठोऽश्रुलोचन: ।१३॥
Ga सत्रमाव्रज्य मुनीनां ब्रह्मवादिनाम् । स्वानुभूतमशेषेण राजन् भृगुग्वर्णयत् ।१४॥
तन्निशम्याथ मुनयो विस्मिता मुक्तसंशया: । yard श्रदृदधुर्विष्णुं यत: झान्तिर्यतोऽभयम् । १५॥
ad: Tene यतो ज्ञानं ard च तदन्वितम् । ऐश्वर्यं चाष्टधा यस्माद् यशाश्चात्ममलापहम् । १६॥
मुनीनां न्यस्तदण्डानां शान्तानां समद्चेतसाम्। अकिञ्चनानां साधूनां चमाहु: परमां गतिम् ।१७॥
aa यस्य fra मूर्तिर्ब्रह्मणास्तविष्टदेवता: | भजन्त्यनाज्ञिष: are a वा निपुणबुद्धय: । १८॥
त्रिविधाकृतयस्तस्य राक्षसा असुरा: सुरा: । गुणिन्या मायया gE: सत्त्वं तत्तीर्थसाधनम् 1 १९॥

Sri Suka continued : Hearing these words of the Lord uttered in a deep low tone, the
sage Bhrgu felt (highly) satisfied and happy. His voice got choked through (the rising tide
of) Devotion and tears rushed to his eyes. He could not utter a word. (13) O king, returning
to the assembly of sages, who were (all) expository of the Vedas, he narrated all that he
had experienced (in the valms of Brahma, Sankara and Bhagavan Visnu). (14) Hearing his
experiences, the sages in the assembly were filled with wonder and freed from all doubts
They were now convinced that Visnu was the Supreme Deity, the fountain-head of
tranquillity and security. (15) From Visnu proceed virtue itself, wisdom. dispassion, united
with it, the eight forms of supernatural powers and fame, which wipes out the impurities of
the mind. (16) He is described as the supreme resort of saints and sages who are
embodiments of peace, equanimity and detachment, and who have taken a vow of
complete non-violence.(17) The quality of Sattva constitutes His beloved person, and the
Brahmana is His favourite deity. Men possessed of disinterestedness, serenity (of mind)
and subtle understanding take to His adoration. (18) Itis his Maya, constituted of the three
Gunas, which has evolved His three forms, viz.. the Raksasas, the Asuras and the gods.
Of these, only gods embodying the quality of Sattva are the means of His realization (He
Himself being the end of all pursuit).(19)

