302 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 47°

BENE EASEMENT Y A TEETSEN S HET Ee HET eee eer eLEER REED eee TEE २२२२ ae ering २१3 etre tae

(such) a handsome appearance and dressed and adorned in the style of that immortal Lord,
whence he had come and whose son (or servant) he was. (1-2) Concluding him to be a
messenger from Sri Krsna (who was no other than Lord Visnu, the Spouse of Goddess
Rama), the Gopis, bentlowwith modesty, enquired of himin private (as follows) when he had
been duly greeted with bashful smiles and glances and kind words etc., and had squatted
on a seat:—(3) "We know you to bea companion of Sri Krsna (the Lord of the Yadus), duly
arrived in our midst. You have been despatched here by your master with intent to bring
delight to His parents. (4) Otherwise we do not find anything worth remembering for Him in
Vraja, a (mere) pasture-land for cows. Ties of affection for one’s relations are most difficult
to disregard even for a hermit. (5) Friendship with others (who are not bound by ties of
blood)—like that cultivated by lovers with their sweethearts or by black bees with flowers—
actuated as itis by self-interest, lasts (only) till one’s interests continue to be served (by them)
and is (at best) a travesty of love. (6) Harlots forsake a destitute (lover); the people, an
incapable ruler; students who have learnt what they wanted to learn, their teacher; the priests
officiating at a sacrifice, the sacrificer who has paid the sacrificial fees (at the end of the
sacrifice); the birds, a tree from which fruits have disappeared; strangers, a dwelling (which
afforded shelter to them) after finishing their meal; animals, a burnt forest anda paramour,
च women attached to him (even though unsated), the moment he has enjoyed her.” (7-8) In
this way, when Uddhava, the messenger of SriKrsna, arrived in Vraja, the cowherd women, *
whose speech, body and mind were undoubtedly devoted to Sri Krsna, (the Protector of
cows) cast to the winds (all) worldly etiquette. (9) Recalling again and again the exploits of
Sri Krsna (their beloved Lord), that pertained to His boyhood and infancy they celebrated
them in song and wept, (all) sense of shame having taken leave of them. (10) Musing over
her (past) union with Srikrsna and (presently) perceiving a black bee (before her), a certain
Gopi (presumably Sri Radha Herself, the foremost and the beloved of all Gopis, some of
whom loved Her even more than they loved Sti Krsna) fancied it to be a messenger
despatched by Sri Krsna (her Darling) and spoke” as follows. (11)

गाप्युवाच

वहतु मधुपतिस्तन्मानिनीनां प्रसादं यदुसदसि विडम्ब्यं यस्य दूतस्त्वमीदृक् 1१२॥
सबृब्दधस्मृधांत्वांपोहिनींपायघित्वामुफाप्तइवसद्यस्तत्यज्ञेऽस्पान्भवादृकृ।
प'रिचरतिकथंतत्यादपद्मंतुफ्द्माह्मपिक्तहृत्तवेताउत्तमठ्लॊक्तल्ये;।श्रॆ।

* Authoritative Vaisnava commentators like Sanatana Goswami, who are believed to have actually witnessed these Lilas
of $1 Krsna and His beloved Gopis by the special grace of the Lord. have traced the following utterances to Sri Radha, on the
basis of the Agni-Purana as well as on the strength of their own transcendent vision. Again, these utterances are believed to
have escaped from the lips of Sri Racha ina state of divine ecstasy (Oivyonmada), which has no parallel anywhere andis the
special monopoly of Sri Radha, a unique personification of Mahabhava, the highest and purest form of divine Love. These
utterances have also been classified under various heads such as Citrajalpa, which have been clearly defined in standard works
on poetics tke the Ujjvala-nilamani of Rupa Goswami.
