Dis. 18 ] BOOK NINE 69

ERERAR AHHH TET EELA AE RE ett ee er eee ee PERE ERE EEEE EE EE CEE HHE REHEAT TEETER EEE EEE

Brahmanas—by whom this worid has been created by dint of (their) asceticism, who
represent the mouth of the supreme Person (in the sense that they emanated from the mouth
of the Cosmic Person and also because it is by feeding them that the Lord is easily
propitiated) and by whom is cherished (as the object of their worship) the (transcendent)
Brahma (thatis all effulgence), by whom has been revealed the way to biessedness (in the
shape of the Vedic religion), whom hail and extol the guardians of the spheres and the
rulers of the gods, (nay,) even the almighty Lord, the Soul of the universe, the Purifier (of
ail) and the abode of Sri (the goddess of beauty and prosperity)—we are the descendants
of Bhrgu ! Her (Sarmistha's) father, a demon chief, is a disciple of ours. (Yet) like a Stdra
who has learnt by heart the Veda, this wench has put on the garment which was to be worn
by us !" (12—14) Hissing like a female serpent and biting her lips in anger, the ill-treated
Sarmistha spoke (as follows) to the preceptor's daughter, who was thus abusing her:—(15)
"Not knowing your own status, O beggar-maid, you brag much! Do you not (ail) wait at our
door like a swarm of crows (the eaters of crumbs offered to them as representatives of the
feathered kingdom)?" (16) Reproaching in such exceedingly harsh words the preceptor's
daughter, who was worthy of respect, Sarmistha violently dashed her into a well after
snatching her clothes through anger. (17)

wet गतायां wy ययातिर्मृगयाँ चरन्। प्राप्तो यदृच्छया कूपे जलार्थी at ददर्शं ह । १८।

दत्त्वा स्वमुत्तरं वासस्तस्यै राजा विवाससे। गृहीत्वा पाणिना पाणिमुजहार दयापर: ।१९॥

तं वीरमाहौशानसी प्रेमनिर्भरया गिरा । राजंस्त्वया गृहीतो मे पाणि: परपुरञ्जय ।२०॥

हस्तग्राहोऽपरो मा भूद् गृहीतायास्त्वया fe मे । एष geet वीर सम्बन्धो नौ न पौरुष: ।
यदिदं HUSA भवतो दर्शनं मम ।२१॥

न ब्राह्मणो मे भविता हस्तग्राहो महाभुज। कचस्य बार्हस्पत्यस्य UTE यमशपं पुरा ।२२॥

ययातिरनभिप्रेतं दैवोपहतमात्मन: । मनस्तु तद्गूतं बुद्ध्वा प्रतिजग्राह AES: 1231

When Sarmistha had left for her home, Yayati, who had been wandering in search of
game, arrived there by chance.Being desirous of water, he looked into the well and descried
her (Devayani)—so the tradition goes. (18) Giving to the naked girl the piece of cloth
covering the upper part of his body, the kind-hearted king lifted her out, grasping (her) hand
by his own. (19) Devayani, (the daughter of the sage USana) spoke to the hero ina language
full of love (as follows): —"O king, the conqueror of (your) enemy's cities ! my hand has been
accepted by you. (20) Indeed, let none eise take my hand, now that | have been accepted
by you. This union of ours, O valiant king, has been brought about by Providence and is not
man-made inasmuch as this sight of yours has been vouchsafed to me while | was clinging
to a well. (21) A Brahmana is not destined to be my husband, thanks to the imprecation of
Kaca (the son of the sage Brhaspati)—Kaca, whom | had cursed” on a former occasion, 0
long-armed one !” (22) Recognizing the connection as having been pre-ordained by fate,
even though it was not (atall) acceptable to him (inasmuch as it was against the recognized
code of ethics), and perceiving his mind too (which could not lean towards unrighteousness)
drawn towards her, Yayati agreed to her proposal. (23)

Ta राजनि सा वीरे तत्र स्म रुदती पितु: । न्यवेदयत् तत: सर्वमुक्तं शर्मिष्ठया कृतम् ।२४॥

* Kaca was receiving Instruction in the science of reviving the dead from Sukracarya at the latter's house. While he was
retuming home after finishing his course of instruction, Devayani wooed him, but was refused by Kaca on the ground of her
being like a sister to him. Devayani thereupon pronounced an imprecation on him that the instruction received by him would
bear no fruit. Kaca too uttered a counter-curse on Devayani, saying that no Brahmana would take her to wife.
