2 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 1

DRA ECE RH ROR ROI RS RI Ro i dotnet eater tet eine ere th ae oe He te eH .३.३.३.७..३. A HH

other superfluous matter). Go on drinking this divine nectar again and again till there is
consciousness left in you.(3)

नैमिषेऽनिमिषक्षेत्रे saa: शौनकादय:। aa wala लोकाय सहस्रसममासत x |
a एकदा तु मुनय: प्रातर्हुतहुताग्नय: । सत्कृते सूतमासीनं पशप्रक्नुरिदमादरात्। ५ ।

Once uponatime, in the forest knownas Naimisaranya (the modern Nimsar in Oudh),
a place sacred to Lord Visnu, Saunaka and other sages were engaged in a great sacrifice,
to be completed in the course of a thousand years, with a view to realizing the Lord who is
sung in heaven andis the abode of His devotees.(4) One morning, having poured oblations
into the sacred fire,the sages paid their respects to the Sita; and when he had taken his
seat,they asked him the following question with due reverence. (5)

am wa पुराणानि सेतिहासानि ore आख्यातान्यप्यधीतानि धर्मशास्त्राणि यान्युत । ६ ।
यानि वेदविदां set भगवान् बादरायण:। अन्ये च मुनय: Ya परावरविदो fag: । ७ ।
au त्वं aha aad तत्त्वतस्तदनुग्नहात्। ब्रूयु: स्निग्धस्य शिष्यस्य गुरवो गुह्यमप्युत । ८ ।
wa त्त्राञ्जसाऽऽयुष्मन् भवता यद्बिनिश्चितम्। पुंसामेकान्तत: श्रेयस्तन्न: शंसितुमर्हसि । ९ ।
प्रायेणाल्पायुष: सभ्य कलावस्मिन् युगे जना: | मन्दा: सुमन्दमतयो मन्दभाग्या ह्युपद्गुता: ।१०॥
भूरीणि भूरिकर्माणि श्रोतव्यानि farm: । अत: साधोऽत्र यत्सारं समुद्धृत्य मनीषया |
ब्रूहि न: श्रद्दधानानां येनात्मा सम्प्रसीदति । ११
सूत जानासि भद्रं ते भगवान् सात्वतां पति: । देवक्यां वसुदेवस्य जातो यस्य चिकीर्घया । १२

तन्न: शुश्रूषमाणानामर्हस्यङ्गानुवर्णितुम् । यस्यावतारो भूतानां क्षेमाय च भवाय च । १३॥

आपन्न: संसृतिं घोरां यन्नाम विवशो yor aa: सद्यो विमुच्येत यद्बिभेति स्वयं भयम् ex!

यत्पादसंश्रया: सूत मुनय: प्रशमायना:। सद्य: GR: स्वर्धुन्यापोऽनुसेवया 124

को वा भगवतस्तस्य पुण्यहलोकेड्यकर्मण: | शुद्धिकामो न OAT: कलिमलापहम् । ke |

wea कर्माण्युदाराणि परिगीतानि सूरिभि: । ब्रूहि a: श्रद्दधानानां लीलया दधत: Het: । १७
The sages said: O sinless Sita, you have indeed studied and also expounded all the
Puranas and Itinasas as well as the codes of laws.(6) Whatever is known by the divine sage
Badarayana (Vedavyasa, so-called because he is reputed to have his abode in a grove of
jujube-trees), the foremost among the knowers of Veda, and even by other sages who have
realized both the qualified and absolute aspects of the Godhead, you know all that in reality
by their grace, which you were able to earn by your guileless and pure heart; for the teachers
confide even their profoundest secrets to their beloved pupil. Be pleased to tell us, O long-
lived Sta, that which you have determined through a study of all those sacred books as the
unfailing and easy means to the supreme good of men. (7—9) O the ornament of holy
congregations, in this age of Kali people are mostly short-lived, slothful (little inclined to tread
the path of God-Realization), most dull-witted, unlucky and tormented with diseases and
other evils. (10) The scriptures too are numerous and inculcate not one discipline, but a
number of practices and rituals; and, besides, (being too voluminous) they have to be
listened to part by part. Therefore, benevolent as you are, draw out by your critical insight
their quintessence and declare the same to us, who are full of faith, so that our mind may
become placid and tranquil.(11) SUta, God bless you, you know the purpose for which the
divine Lord, the protector of His devotees, was born of Devaki, Vasudeva's consort. (12)
Dear Suta, please explain it to us who are keen to hear of the same; for the Lord's descent
