Dis. 51] BOOK TEN 327

HAOESERE AE REEEL EEA CEE COMET EHS eS CEET ERT यमाकक यमामा यशा

the fact that) You are dispelling the darkness of this cave (as well as the darkness of
ignorance enveloping my mind) by Your (very) effulgence even asa lamp. (30) May You,
O Jewel among men, tell us—who are sincerely eager to hear—about your birth (pedigree),
doings or family name, if it pleases you. (31) We, for our part, O Tiger among men, are
Ksatriyas by caste and belong to the race of Ikswaku. (Personally) | am sprung from the
loins of Mandhata (son of Yuvan@gwa), and called by the name of Mucukunda, 0 Lord. (32)
Wearied with vigil extending over long ages (while engaged in protecting the gods against
the onslaughts of the demons) and with my senses overpowered by sleepiness, | had lain
asleep in this lonely cave undisturbed till! was aroused (just) now by someone (not known
to me). (33) He too has been reduced to ashes surely by his own sin. Immediately
afterwards was noticed (by me) Your glorious Self, the Destroyer of foes. (34) Dazzled
by Your unbearable effulgence, we are unable to look at You for a long time, O highly
blessed One! (All the same we can easily perceive that) You deserve to be honoured by
(all) embodied souls. (35) Respectfully addressed in these words by the king, the Lord,
who is the Protector of (all) created beings, heartily laughed and replied (as follows) ina
voice deep as the rumbling of clouds. (36)

शभगवानुवाच

जन्मकर्माभिधानानि सन्ति मेऽङ्ग eee । न शक्यन्तेऽनुसंख्यातुमनन्तत्वान्मयापि हि।३७॥
क्वचिद् रजांसि विममे पार्थिवान्युरुजन्मभि: । गुणकर्माभिधानानि न मे जन्मानि कर्हिचित्। ३८
कालत्रयोपपन्नानि जन्मकर्माणि मे नृप । अनुक्रमन्तो नैवान्तं गच्छन्ति परमर्षय: । ३९॥
तथाप्यद्यतनान्यङ्ग शृणुष्व गदतो मम। विज्ञापितो विरिञ्चेन पुराहं धर्मगुप्तये।
भूमेर्भारावमाणानामसुराणां क्षयाय च।४०॥1
अवतीर्णो चदुकुले गृहं आनकदुन्दुभे:। वदन्ति वासुदेवेति वसुदेवसुतं fe AAI xe!
कालनेमिर्ददत: tha: प्रलस्वाद्याश्च सद्द्विष: । aa च यवनो दग्धो राजंस्ते तिग्मचक्षुषा।४२।
wise तवानुग्रहार्थं गुहामेतामुपागत:। प्रार्थित: Wat पूर्वं त्वयाहं भक्तवत्सल:।४३।
वरान् quite राजर्षे सर्वान् कामान् ददामि ते । मां प्रपन्नो जन: कश्चिन्न भूयोऽर्हंति शोचितुम्। vs |
The glorious Lord said: My descents, exploits and appellations, O beloved one,
number thousands and cannot actually be counted even by Me (omniscient as | am)
because of their being infinite (in number). (37) Someone might have at any time (in the
past) been able through many lives to count the particles of dust on the earth; but one could
never reckon My excellences, exploits and names or (even) My descents. (38) The
greatest sages (like Narada and Sanaka) cannot reach the end of My descents and doings
relating to the past, present and future if they (try to) enumerate them in order. (39)
Nevertheless, O beloved monarch, hear from Me, as | tell you, of those relating to
the present day. Prayed to of yore by Brahma (the creator) for the vindication of virtue

and the extermination of the demons that were proving a (veritable) burden to the earth,
। have appeared in the house of Anakadundubhi (Vasudeva) in the race of Yadu. They

call Me by the name of Vasudeva because of My being the most distinguished son
of Vasudeva (although | have been known by this name even before in a different sense
of course). (40-41) (As regards My exploits) the demon Kalanemi, born as Karhsa,
has been killed (by Me), as well as Pralamba and other enemies of the righteous. And this
Yavana has been burnt to death (by Me), O king, through your fiery eyes.(42) Having been
repeatedly entreated by you before, | the said Vasudeva, have come to this cave (but) for
the purpose of showering My grace on you, fond as । am of My devotees. (43) Ask
boons of your choice (of Me), O royal sage; | shall confer on you all your desired objects.
No body who has sought Me for protection will have cause to grieve any more. (44)
