a

Dis. 1 ] BOOK TWELVE 669

MMMM MCAT OE HNC ERE SORE मामा TORT ERR RB OER OTE BEE NOE SCRE GSO RO EERE ERR IR AH

महापद्मपति:; कश्चिन्नन्द: क्षत्रविनादाकृत्। adt qa भविष्यन्ति yesrarcaunitten: । ९ ।

Sigunaga will come next and his son will be Kakavarna. The latter's son will be
Ksemadharma and Ksetrajia will be the son of Ksemadharma. (5) His son will be Vidhisara
and Vidhisara’s son will be Ajatagatru. Darbhaka will be his son and Darbhaka’s son has
been namedas Ajaya. (6) Nandivardhana will be the son of Ajaya and Mahanandi will be the
son sprung from the loins of Nandivardhana. These ten kings, (collectively known as) the
Sigunagas, alone will rule over the earth for three hundred and sixty years during the age of
Kali, O jewel among the Kurus | Mahanandi’s mighty son, who will be born of Stdra woman,
Oking, willbe a certain Nanda, who will own a huge army or untold riches and will bring about
the ruin of the Ksatriya race, Thenceforward the rulers of men will be mostly Sudras and
unrighteous. (7—9)

स एकच्छत्रां पृथिवीमनुल्लङ्घितशासन: | शासिष्यति महापद्मो द्वितीय ga भार्गव: ।१०॥

तस्य चाष्टौ भविष्यन्ति सुमाल्यप्रमुखा: सुता: । य sat भोक्ष्यन्ति महीं राजान: HWA समा: । ११॥

नव नन्दान् द्विज: कश्चित् प्रपन्नानुद्धरिष्यति । तेषामभावे जगतीं मौर्या भोक्ष्यन्ति वै कलौ । १२।

स एव चन्द्रगुप्तं वै fet राज्येऽभिषेक्ष्यति । तत्सुत्तो वारिसारस्तु ततश्चाशोकवर्धन: 1231

सुयशा भविता तस्य aga: सुयश-:सुत: । झालिशूकस्ततस्तस्य सोमदार्मा भविष्यति ex!

शतधन्वा ततस्तस्य भविता तद् बृहद्रथ: । मौर्या ह्येते ca नृपा: सप्तत्रिंशच्छतोत्तरम् ।
समा भोक्ष्यन्ति पृथिवीं कलौ कुरुकुलोद्वह 1241

हत्वा बृहद्रथं utd तस्य सेनापति: wet पुष्यमित्रस्तु शुङ्गाह्व: aa wa करिष्यति |
अग्निमित्रस्ततस्तस्मात् सुज्येष्ठोऽथ भविष्यति । १६॥

वसुमित्रो भद्रकश्च पुलिन्दो भविता तत: । ततो घोष: सुतस्तस्माद् वज्रमित्रो भविष्यति । १७

ततो भागवतस्तस्माद् देवभूतिरिति श्रुत: agi eat भोक्ष्यन्ति भूमिं वर्षशताधिकम् ec!

Like another Paragurama (a scion of the sage Bhrgu) the said Mahapadma will bring the
(entire) gobe under one sceptre and nobody will (dare) violate his commands. Eight sons with
Sumalya as the eldest will be born to him; they will rule over this globe as kings for a hundred
years (all told): so the tradition goes. (10-11) A certain Brahmana (Canakya or Kautalya by
name and also nicknamed as Vatsyayana) will uproot (all) the nine Nandas (Mahapadma
and his eight sons) who will be at heomercy. On their destruction it is the Mauryas that will
rule the earth during the Kali age. (12) That very Brahmana will instal Candragupta on the
throne. His son indeed will be Varisara and ASokavardhana will be born to the latter. (13) His
son will be Suyasa and Suyasa's, Sarhgata. SalisUka will be born to him and his son will be
Somaégarma. (14) Satadhanva will be born to Somagarma and to him, Brhadratha. Indeed,
these ten* Maurya kings will hold sway over the earth for a hundred and thirty-seven years
in the Kali age, O jewel of Kuru’s line ! (15) Assassinating Brhadratha, the Maurya his
generallissimo, Pusyamitra, bearing the surname of Sunga, will assume the reins of
government himself.t Agnimitra will be bom to Pusyamitra and to him again, will be born
Sujyestha. (16) His son will be Vasumitra and Vasumitra’s Bhadraka; to him will be born
Pulinda. Ghosa will be born as a son to Pulinda and from Ghosa will follow Vajramitra. (17)
To him will be born Bhagavata and to Bhagavata, a son known by the name of Devabhuti.

* The number of Maurya kings. including Empesror Candragupta.isten only The list givenin the Visnuand other Puranas
includes the name of DaSaratha as the fitth in order tram Candragupta His name should theretore be taken as included in the
list in order to complete the number ten

+ The tirst two {ines of verse 16 have not been recognized by Sridhara and some other commentators too.
