698 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 10

TiS Soin tothe: art reeriree act उक्षो iow iota ew 8 ee esr Oh eT He ee

अथ द्मोऽध्याय:

Discourse X
(The story of) the conquest of Tripura

ARE sald
भक्तियोगस्य तत् सर्वमन्तरायतयार्भक: । मन्यमानो हृषीकेशं स्मयमान उव्राच ह । १ |

Narada began again : Regarding all that (asking boons and so on) as an impediment
to the practice of Devotion, the infant (Prahrada) smilingly addressed Lord Nrsimha (the
Ruler of the senses) as follows. (1)

Yele उवाच

मा मां प्रलोभयोत्पत्त्याऽऽसक्तं कामेषु ade: । तत्सङ्घभीतो निर्विण्णो मुमुक्षुस्त्वामुपाश्रित: 1 २ 1
भृत्यलक्षणजिज्ञासुर्भक्तं कामेष्ठचोदयत् । war, संसारवीजेषु हृदयग्रन्थिषु प्रभो । ३ ।
नान्यथा तेऽखिलगुरो घटेत करुणात्मन: | यस्त आशिष आशास्ते न स भृत्य: स वैवणिक् । ४ |
AMAA न वै Wea: स्वामिन्याशिष आत्मन: | न स्वामी भृत्यत: स्वाम्यमिच्छन् यो राति चाशिष: । ५ ।
अहं त्वकामस्त्वद्धक्तस्त्वं च स्वाम्यनपाश्रय: | नान्यथेहावयोरर्थो राजसेवकयोरिव । ६ |
चदि ude मे कामान् aie वरदर्षभ । कामानां wee भवतस्तु वृणे ami
इन्द्रयाणि wa: sro आत्मा धर्मो धृतिर्मति: । ह्री: श्रीस्तेज: स्मृति: सत्यं यस्य नर्यन्ति जन्मना । ८ ।
विमुञ्चति ae कामान्मानवो मनसि स्थितान्। तर्ह्यव पुण्डरीकाक्ष भगवत्त्वाय wed! ९ |
नमो भगवते qa पुरुषाय महात्मने।हरयेऽद्भुतसिंहाय ब्रह्मणे परमात्मने ।१०॥

Prahrada said : Pray, do not tempt me, attached as | am to the pleasures of sense by
birth, with boons in the form of those (very) pleasures. Afraid of attachment to them and fed
up with them, | have approached You for protection, anxious to secure freedom (from the
shackles of birth and death). (2) Eager to ascertain (make known to the world) the
characteristics of a (true) devotee, You directed me to the pleasures of sense, the seeds of
transmigration, serving as so many knots to bind the heart, O Lord ! (3) Otherwise such a
thing would not be possible for You, who are (so) kind-hearted, O Preceptor of the universe!
He who seeks (worldly) blessings from You is no servant (of Yours). He is only a business
man. (4) One desiring blessings for oneself from a master is no servant in the true sense
of the word. And (likewise) he is no master, who grants (such) gifts expecting the recognition
of his mastership from his servant. (5) !, however, am Your devotee without any craving;
while You are my master having no axe to grind. Unlike the interests of a king and his servant
here, our interest (in each other) is not governed by any other (selfish) motive. (6) If You (are
inclined to) bestow on me, O Lord, boons sought after by me, O Chief of the bestowers of
boons, | solicit from You this boon alone that no more desires may (ever) sprout in my
heart.(7) With the (very) appearance of desire the Indriyas (the senses of perception as well
as the organs of action), the mind, vital energy, the body, righteousness, firmness,
understanding, modesty, wealth, glory. memory and truthfulness disappear. (8) (On
the other hand,) when a man gets rid of the desires rooted in the heart, then alone, O lotus-
eyed One, he becomes qualified for (attaining) divine glory.* (9) Hail to You, the almighty and

OS

* This is corroborated by the following Sruti text:-—
