Dis. 21 ] BOOK NINE 79

Reb ee RHR नननननननननन्नेन डकक २३३9 ih it >>कशनकश्रशकाकश्ङटरशशमकक्जरटशजजशकक

Discourse XXI

The posterity of Bharata and the story of Rantideva

- STE उवाच
वितथस्य सुतो eet | जयस्तत: । महावीर्यो नरो गर्ग: सङ्कुतिस्तु नरात्मज: । १ ।
Ts रन्तिदेवश्च age पाण्डुनन्दन । रन्तिदेवस्य fe यश इहामुत्र च गीयते । २ ।
वियद्वित्तस्य ददतो लब्धं लब्धं बुभुक्षत: । निष्किञ्चनस्य धीरस्य सकुटुम्बस्य सीदत: । ३ ।
. व्यतीयुरष्टचत्वारिंशदहान्यपित: किल । घृतपावससंबावं तोयं प्रातरुपस्थितम् । ४ ।
कृच्छ्रप्राप्तकुटुम्बस्य क्षुत्तृड्भ्यां जातवेपथो: | अतिथिर्ब्रह्मण: काले भोक्तुकामस्य चागमत्। ५ ।
wa संव्यभजत् सोऽन्नमादृत्य श्रद्धयान्वित: । et सर्वत्र संपर्यन् स भुक्त्वा प्रययौ द्विज: । ६ ।

Sri Suka resumed : The son of Vitatha (Bharadwaja) was Manyu, of whom were born
Brhatksatra, Jaya, Mahavirya, Nara and Garga; and Nara's son was Sarikrii. (1) Sankrti's
sons were Guru and Rantideva, O delight of Pandu ! The glory of Rantideva is, as a matter
of fact, sung both in this world and the world beyond. (2) In the case of Rantideva, who
subsisted on whatever was obtained without any effort and who, though feeling hungry
(himself), gave away all that was got, and was thus rendered (utterly) destitute (having no
provision even for the evening much less for the next day), and therefore suffering terrible
hardship, alongwith his family—who were reduced to (great) straits—({nay), trembling due
to (a@xcessive) hunger and thirst, yet calm, passed (not less than) forty-eight days—so the
tradition goes—without his taking (even) water. In the morning (of the forty-ninth day) there
came to him (by chance) ghee, rice cooked in milk with sugar, Sarhyava” (a kind of porridge
made of wheat flour with ghee and) milk, as wellas water. And when he was intending to partake
of it, there arrived, at that (very) time, a newcomer in the person of a Brahmana. (3—5) Viewing
Sri Hari everywhere and (therefore) full of reverence, Rantideva welcomed him and gave
to him a proportionate share (of those dishes). (And) the Brahmana went away after taking
that food. (6)

अथान्यो भोक्ष्यमाणस्य विभक्तस्य महीपते । विभक्तं व्यभजत् तस्मै वृषलाय हरिं स्मरन्। ७ ।

aa ge तमन्योऽगादतिथि: श्वभिरावृत: । राजन् मे dea ama बुभुक्षते । ८ ।

स आदृत्यावशिष्टं चद् बहुमानपुरस्कृतम्।तच्च दत्त्वा नमश्चक्रे श्वभ्य: श्वपतये विभु: । ९ 1

पानीयमात्रमुच्छेषं तच्चैकपरितर्पणम् । पास्यत: पुल्कसोऽभ्यागादपो BAYA मे ।१०॥

qa तां went वाचं era विपुलश्रमाम्। कृपया ye इदमाहामृतं वच्: ।११।
न mma गतिमीश्वरात् परामष्टर्धियुक्तामपुनर्भवं वा ।

आर्ति प्रपद्येऽखिलदेहभाजामन्त:स्थितो येन भवन्त्यदु:खा: 1221
ager गात्रपरिश्रमश्च et gm ञोकविषादमोहा: |
wa निवृत्ता: कृपणस्य जन्तोर्जिजीविषोर्जीवजलार्पणान्मे 1831

