Dis. 20] BOOK NINE

आभ्क th

(and) do not spurn Sakuntala (your wedded wife). (21) A son who procreates (and thus
propagates his line) leads (his father) out of the abode of Yama, O ruler among men!
Sakurtala truly says that you are the procreator of this child.” (22)

सोऽपि चक्रवर्ती cami महिमा गीयते तस्य हरेरंशभुवो भुवि ।२३॥

चक्रं दक्षिणहस्तेऽस्य पद्मकोकोऽस्य पादयो: । ईजे महाभिषेकेण सोऽभिषिक्तोऽधिराड् विभु: । २४॥
पञ्चपञ्चाशता मेध्यैर्गङ्गायामनु वाजिभि:। मामतेयं पुरोधाय यमुनायामनु wy: ।२५॥
अष्टसप्तरतिमेध्याश्चान् बबन्ध प्रददद् वसु।भरतस्य हि दौष्यन्तेरग्नि: साचीगुणे चित: ।
सहस्रं aga यस्मिन् ब्राह्मणा गा विभेजिरे 1२६

त्रयस्रिंशच्छतं ह्यश्वान् बद्ध्वा विस्मापयन् oR दौष्यन्तिरत्यगान्मायां देवानां गुरुमाययौ ।२७।
मृगाञ्छुक्कुदत: कृष्णान् हिरण्येन परीवृतान्। अदात् कर्मणि मष्णारे नियुतानि चतुर्दशा ।२८॥
भरतस्य महत् कर्म न पूर्वे नापरे नृपा: । नैवापुर्नैव प्राप्स्यन्ति बाहुभ्यां त्रिदिवं यथा 1२९1
किरातहूणान्यवनानन्ध्रान् कङ्कान्खलाञ्छकान्। अब्रह्मण्यान् नृपांश्चाहन् म्लेच्छान् दिग्विजयेऽखिलान् । ३०॥
जित्वा पुरासुरा देवान् ये रसौकांसि भेजिरे। देवस्रियो cat नीता: प्राणिभि: पुनराहरत् । ३१1
सर्वकामान् दुदुहतु: प्रजानां तस्य रोदसी । समास्रिणवसाहस्रीर्दिक्षु चक्रमवर्तयत् 132 |
स ame लोकपालाख्यमैश्चर्यमधिराद् श्रियम्। चक्रं चास्खलितं प्राणान् मृषेत्युपरराम ह ।३३॥

After his father's death Bharata too became a universal monarch of great renown. The
glory of the said monarch, born with a ray of Sri Hari, is sung on earth (even to this day). (23)
He bore the mark of a discus in his right palm and that of a lotus-bud on (the soles of both)
his feet. Having been (duly installed on the throne after being) consecrated by means ofa
grand (religious) bath, the powerful emperor performed (as many as) fifty-five horse-
sacrifices on the banks of the (holy) Ganga in order of sequence (from the source to the
mouth) and seventy-eight sacrifices (lit, he tied seventy-eight holy horses) along the
Yamunain the same order, choosing Dirghatama (the son of Mamata) as his priest and freely
gifting (ample) wealth. The sacrificial fire of Bharata, the son of Dusyania, was set up on
an exceedingly excellent (most sacred) site where a thousand Brahmanas divided among
themselves cows (gifted by Bharata)—each getting as his share a Badva (thirteen thousand
and eighty four*). (2426) Having (thus) performed one hundred and thirty-three horse-
sacrifices (lit., having tied to the sacrificial post 133 horses) to the (great) wonder of (other)
kings, Bharata (the son of Dusyanta) not only overcame the Lord's Maya (the deluding
potency) but (also) attained to Lord Sri Hari (the adored of the gods). (27) In the sacrificial
function called 'Masnara’ Bharata gave away (to the Brahmanas) fourteen lakhs of dark
elephants of excellent breed with white tusks—all adorned with gold. (28) Neither did kings
that have gone by nor will future kings emulate the great example of Bharata any more than
one can touch heaven with one’s hands. (29) In the course of his conquest of the (four)
quarters he crushed all the Kiratas, Hunas, Yavanas, Andhras, Kankas, Khagas, Sakas and
Mlecchas as well as kings who despised the Brahmanas and the Vedas. (30) He (Further)
recovered wives of gods that had been carried away to Rasatala (the sixth subterranean
regionfrom above) by the demons, who having conquered the godsin the past had occupied
(various) parts of Rasatala. (31) (During his reign) heaven as well as the earth yielded to
his subjects all the objects of their desire. (In this way) he held sway in all the (four) quarters
for thrice nine millenniums. (32) Realizing his sovereignty, that had carried his fame (even)
to the guardians of the spheres, imperial fortune, his authority, which was unobstructed

“ चतुर्दंशानां लक्षाणां सताघिकशतांशक: 1 बट्टं चतुरशीत्यग्रसहस्राणि त्रयोदश॥
