Dis. 28] BOOK THREE 265

SHALES EEE EEE EEE TATE HELLER ECELE RL CHHHEH EEA ETE LEVERASS EHR पि छ्वक क री विछै

creation). He should also duly contemplate on the Lord's discus (Sudarsana), containing a
thousand spokes and possessing a dazzling lustre, as well as on the conch, which looks like
a swan in His lotus-like palm. (27) He should then call to mind the Lord's beloved mace,
known by the name of Kaumodaki and besmeared with the clotted blood of enemy warriors;
His garland (of sylvan flowers), attended with the humming of a swarm of bees; and the gem
(Kaustubha) adorning His neck and representing the pure essential character of the Jivas
(viz., the Spirit). (28)
भृत्यानुकम्पितधियेह yaad: सञ्चिन्तयेद्भधगवतो वदनारविन्दम्।
यद्बिस्फुरन्मकरकुण्डलवल्गितेन विद्योतितामलकपोलमुदारनासम् | २९॥
यच्छीनिकेतमलिभि: परिसेव्यमानं yar स्वया कुटिलकुन्तलवृन्दजुष्टम् |
मीनद्दयाश्रयमधिक्षिपदव्जनेत्रं ध्यायेन्मनोमयमतन्दित उल्लसद्भ्रु 1301
Next he should rivet his thought on the lotus-like countenance of the Lord, who reveals
His form in this world out of compassion for His devotees—a countenance which is
distinguished by a prominent nose and whose crystalline cheeks are irradiated by the
oscillation of His glittering alligator-shaped ear-rings. (29) Adorned with curly tresses and
possessed of lotus-like eyes, the Lord's face, which is further characterized by dancing
eyebrows, puts to shame by its elegance a lotus (the abode of Goddess Laksmi) swarming
with bees, with a pair of fish throbbing on it. With an alert mind he should dwell on a
conceptual image of the aforesaid countenance.(30)

तस्यावलोकमधिकं कृपयातिघोरतापत्रयोपशमनाय निसृष्टमक्ष्णो: |

स्निग्धस्मितानुगुणितं विपुलप्रसादं ध्यायेच्चिरं विततभावनया गुहायाम् । ३१1

हासं हरेरवनताखिललोकतीव्रशोकाश्रुसागरविशोषणमत्युदारम् |

सम्मोहनाय रचितं निजमाययास्य भ्रूमण्डलं मुनिकृते मकरध्वजस्य 132

art weed बहुलाधरोष्ठभासारुणायिततनुद्विजकुन्दपङ्क्ति |

ध्यायेत्स्वदेहकुहरेऽवसितस्य विष्णोर्भक्त्याऽऽर्द्रयार्पितमना न पृथग्दिदृक्षेत् 1331

With full devotion he should contemplate for a long time in his heart on the glances

frequently cast out of compassion by His eyes in order to soothe the most fearful threefold
agony of His devotees—glances which are accompanied by loving smiles and are full of
abundant grace.(31) He should similarly meditate on the most benevolent smile of Lord Sti
Hari, a smile which dries away the ocean of tears—caused by intense grief—of all those who
bow to Him, as well as on His arched eyebrows manifested by dint of His own Maya
(wonderful creative energy) in order to charm the god of love (whose ensign bears the
emblem of an alligator) for the good of hermits (who are molested by him).(32) Full of
devotion steeped in love, he should finally fix his thought on the laughter of Lord Visnu,
visualized as abiding in the cavity of his heart—a laughter which is so captivating that it can
be easily meditated upon, andin the course of which come to view the rows of His small teeth,
resemblirig jasmine buds, rendered rosy by the profuse (crimson) splendour of His lips. And
having (exclusively) devoted his mind to the same, he should no more desire to see anything
else.(33)

एवं हरौ भगवति प्रतिलब्धभावो wae द्रवद्धृदय उत्पुलक: प्रमोदात् |

औत्कण्ठ्यबाष्पकलया मुहुररद्यमानस्तच्चापि चित्तबडिश्रं ङानकैर्वियुङ्क्ते । ३४॥

मुक्ताश्रयं यर्हि निर्विषयं विरक्तं निर्वाणमृच्छति wa: सहसा यथार्चि: ।

आत्मानमत्र पुरुषोऽव्यव्रधानमेकमन्वीक्षते प्रतिनिवृत्तगुणप्रवाह: 1341
[564] B. M. ll—
