68 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 16

RMR BE WOM ROR RR RNR RHR He We He REWER RE Re ARH Ber SOR Ke HERE GRO Te Be Me ROR RR OR Re RR Re ORR Be BRR ROR HOR HR ARR ar ee a

who had come down to the mortal plane only in order to relieve your onerous burden
and has now vanished out of sight, mother Earth—are you reminded of His exploits, the
very thought of which is conducive to final beatitude ? (23) Tell me, Earth (storehouse
of all riches) ! the cause of your mental agony, on account of which you look so emaciated.
Or is it that Time, who is more powerful than all powerful beings, has robbed you, mother,
of your good fortune, which was once extolled even by the gods ? (24)

RITA
war fe aq aed यन्मां धर्मानुपृच्छसि । चतुर्भिर्वर्तसे येन पादैर्लोकसुखावहै: 1241
सत्यं शौचं दया क्षान्तिस्त्याग: सन्तोष आर्जवम् । शमो दमस्तप: साम्यं तितिक्षोपरति: श्रुतम् । २६॥
ज्ञानं विरक्तिरैश्चर्यं aid तेजो बलं स्मृति: । erst कौशलं कान्तिर्थैर्य मार्दवमेव च । २७॥
प्रागलभ्यं wera: ees सह ओजो बलं भग: । गाम्भीर्यं स्थैर्यमास्तिक्यं कीर्तिर्मानोऽनहंकृति: 1271
एते चान्ये च भगवन्नित्या wa महागुणा: | weal महत्त्वमिच्छद्भिर्न वियन्ति स्म कर्हिचित् । २९॥
dare गुणपात्रेण श्रीनिवासेन साम्प्रतम्। क्ञोचामि रहितं लोकं पाप्मना कलिनेक्षितम् 1301
आत्मानं चानुशोचामि भवन्तं चामरोत्तमम्। देवान् पितॄनृषीन् साधून् सर्वान् वर्णांस्तथाऽऽश्रमान् । ३१1
ब्रह्मादयो बहुतिथं यदपाङ्ममोक्षकामास्तप: समचरन् भगवत्प्रपन्ना: |
सा श्री: स्ववासमरविन्दवनं विहाय यत्पादसौभगमलं भजतेऽनुरक्ता 1321
ते३ भश्रीमत्पदैर्भभवत: समलंकृताङ्गी |
त्रीनत्यरोचउपलभ्यततोविभ्रूविंलोकाम्सपाव्यसृजदुत्स्वयतींतदन्ते।इइ।
यो a ममातिभरमासुरवंशाराज्ञामक्षोहिणीशतमपानुददात्मतन्त्र: |
त्वां दु:स्थमूनपदमात्मनि पौरुषेण सम्पादयन् यदुषु रम्यमबिभ्रदङ्गम् । ३४॥
का वा सहेत विरहं पुरुषोत्तमस्य प्रेमावलोकरुचिरस्मितवल्गुजल्पै: ।
ee समानमहरन्मधुमानिनीनां रोमोत्सवो मम यदङ्घ्रिविटङ्किताया: 1341
waa =o mead: पृथिवीधर्मयोस्तदा । परीक्षिन्नाम राजर्षि: प्राप्त: प्राचीं सरस्वतीम् । ३६॥
इति श्रीमद्भागवत महापुराणे पारमहंस्यां संहितायां प्रथमस्कन्धे पृथ्वीधर्मसंवादो नाम षोडशोऽध्याय: ।१६॥

Earth replied :—"Dharma, you surely know all that you ask me. It was due to Him
(Sri Krsna) that you were endowed (till the other day) with all your four feet, that were
conducive to the happiness of the world. (25) Nay, truthfulness, purity, compassion,
forbearance, liberality, contentment, guilelessness, composure of mind, subjugation of the
senses, austerity, evenness of temper, endurance, quietism, sacred knowledge, self-
realization, dispassion (absence of thirst for sensuous enjoyment), lordship (power to
rule), heroism, majesty, strength, right judgment, independence (absolute freedom),
dexterity, loveliness of form, fortitude, gentleness of disposition, exceptional intelligence,
modesty, amiability, quickness of mind, acuteness of the senses and bodily vigour, good
fortune, sobriety, steadiness, reverence, good reputation, respectability and absence of
egotism—these and many other excellent virtues, which are sought by men aspiring for
greatness, are ever present in Him and never decline, O blessed one. (26—29) By Him,
who is the receptacle of all noble qualities and the abode of Sri (the goddess of prosperity)
has the world been deserted today and has thus fallen under the eye of the wicked Kali.
It is such a world that | am grieving for. (30) | am equally concerned for myself, for you,

the chief of divinities, and the other gods, manes sages and holy men as_ well as for
the generality of men belonging to all grades of society and stages of life. (81) Though
