३6 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 9

PAREN RELEASE EAA ETAER EERE EREARER EL EERELREER ERE LERER SOE EPESEEAE RAE SELLE RERE REED

universe is woven, warp andwoof, asa piece of cloth into its threads—will bear your force.(7)
Having spoken thus, the said king (Bhagiratha) proceeded to propitiate Lord Siva by means
of his austerities. (And) after a very short time, O Pariksit, the Lord (Siva) became highly
pleased (with him). (8) Having accepted the king's prayer, saying, “So be it!" Lord Siva, the
Friend of the whole world, cautiously bore (on His head) the Ganga, whose water stands
hallowed by (the touch of) SriHari’s foot. (9) The said royal sage, Bhagiratha, led the Ganga
(which is capable of purifying the whole universe) to the spot where the bodies of his great
granduncles fay reduced to ashes. (10) (Closely) following Bhagiratha, who rode in advance
in achariot swift as the wind, and hallowing the lands on its way, the Ganga bathed the burt-
up sons of Sagara. (11) Though destroyed by their own offensive behaviour towards a (holy)
Brahmana, the sons of Sagara ascended to heaven through the mere touch of its waters with
their ashes alone! (12) When the (aforesaid) sons of Sagara rose to heaven through the
(mere) contact of its waters with their body converted into ashes, what need be said about
them who make use of this heavenly stream with reverence (everyday), having taken a vow
to this effect? (13) That which has been said here with regard to this heavenly river—
emanated (as it is) from the lotus-feet of the infinite Lord (Visnu) and (therefore) capable of
ending transmigration—is not something which should excite great wonder. (14) (For) by
fully concentrating their mind on those feet with reverence pure-hearied sages have speedily
attained oneness with the Lord, shaking off their identification with the body (a product of the
three Gunas or modes of Prakrti)—identification with which is (so) difficult to give up. (15)

gh भगीरथाजज्ञे तस्य नाभोऽपरोऽभवत्। सिन्धुद्वीपस्ततस्तस्मादयुतायुस्ततोऽभवत् ।१६॥

ऋतुपर्णो नलसखो योऽश्वविद्यामयान्नलात्। दत्त्वाक्षहदयं चास्मै सर्वकामस्तु तत्सुत: ।१७॥

wa: सुदासस्तत्पुत्रौ मदयन्तीपतिर्नृप। आहुर्मित्रसहं यं वै कल्माषाङ्घ्रिमुत क्वचित् ।
वसिष्ठशापाद् रक्षोऽभूदनपत्य: स्वकर्मणा ।१८॥

From (the loins of) Bhagiratha sprang up Sruta, whose son was Nabha. Of the latter was
born Sindhudwipa; of Sindhudwipa, Ayutayu; and from him sprang up Rtuparna a friend of
Nala, who received the knowledge of training horses from Nala, imparting to him (in return)
the secret of winning the game of dice. And Rtuparna's son was Sarvakama. (16-17) From
(the loins of) Sarvakama sprang up Sudasa and his son, O king, was Saudasa (the husband
of Madayanti), whom people actually called Mitrasaha, while in some places they referred to
him as Kalmasapada. Due to the curse pronounced by the sage Vasistha (his preceptor) he
turned out to be an ogre and had no issue (sprung from his own loins) in consequence of his

tion. (18
own action. (18)
किं निमित्तो गुरो: ae: सौदासस्य महात्मन: । एतद् वेदितुमिच्छाम: कथ्यतां न रहो यदि ।१९॥

The king (Pariksit) submitted : What was the occasion for the curse pronounced by the
preceptor (the sage Vasistha) on the high-souled Saudasa? We desire to know this, which
may (kindly) be pointed out (to us) unless it is a secret. (19)

श्रीशुक उवाच

सौदासो मृगयां कञ्चिच्चरन् रक्षो war ह।मुमोच् भ्रातरं सोऽथ गत: प्रतिचिकीर्षया । २०॥
स चिन्तयन्नघे wa: सूदरूपधरो गृहे। गुरवे भोक्तुकामाय पक्त्वा निन्ये नरामिषम् । २१
परिवेक्ष्यमाणं भगवान् विलोक्याभक्ष्यमञ्जसा । राजानमशापत् क्रुद्धो Tat Da भविष्यसि 1221
रक्ष:कृतं तद विदित्वा चक्रे द्वादशवार्षिकम्। सोऽप्यपोऽद्जलिनाऽऽदाय YS WA समुद्यत: 1231
aia neat रुशती: पादयोर्जहौ । दिश: समवनीं ad पश्यञ्जीवमयं Fa: । २४॥
