664 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 31

EPPEROREMTHEMETHERARH EH EOEDHENAANHEHHPEHHHO HE KRHA DENTE RAE H HORE OTET ANKE न ७ न 8 ७१ १ १ ० Ne

इत्युक्तस्तं परिक्रम्य नमस्कृत्य पुन: पुन: । तत्पादौ afteeforera दुर्मना: eat पुरीम् 1401
इति श्रीमद्भागवते मह पुर ण पारमहंस्यां संहितायामेकादशस्कन्धे त्रिंशोऽध्याय: 130]

Commanded thus by Lord Sri Krsna, who takes a format will, the hunter thrice walked round
Him clockwise (so as to keep Him ever to his right and thus ensure His benignity) and, bowing
to Him, ascended to heaven in an aerial car (brought by His attendants to take him). (40) Hunting
up and tracking out the whereabouts of Sri Krsna by inhaling the breeze charged with the
fragrance of Tulasi, Daruka (the Lord's own charioteer) sought His presence. (41) Seeing his
Master actually seated there at the base of an Aswattha (the sacred fig tree) and surrounded
by weapons (appearingina living form) possessing a dazzling brilliance, the charioteer jumped
down from (his box in) the chariot and fell prostrate at His feet, with eyes full of tears, his mind
overwhelmed with affection. (42) (He said.) “O Lord, my vision has completely gone and stands
enveloped indarkness (opacity) eversince| have ceased to behold Your lotus-feet. (Even now)
I fail to recognize the (four) quarters and find no peace (of mind) any more than a traveller on
the moon having set at night.” (43) While the charioteer was speaking thus, the (Lord's) chariot,
which was distinguished by the emblem of Garuda (on its banner), rose to the sky, horses,
banner and all, O king of kings, while Daruka stood looking up. (44) The transcendent weapons
of Lord Visnu (Sri Krsna) too followed the chariot, Sri Krsna (who is solicited by all men) said
to the charioteer, who felt much astonished at heart at the aforesaid occurrence:— (45)
“Proceed, O charioteer, to Dwaraka and communicate to My kinsfolk (there) the destruction
of their relations at the hands of one another, (nay,) the departure (for His own divine realm)
of Lord Sankarsana (Balarama) as wellas My own predicament. (46) (Tell them on My behalf:)
“You should no longer stay at Dwaraka with your relations inasmuch as the sea will submerge
the capital of the Yadus (now thatit has been) forsaken by Me. (47) Taking (with you) each your
own family and possessions as well as Our parents (Devaki and Vasudeva) and guarded by
Arjuna, you should all leave for Indraprastha without exception." (48) As for yourself, follow the
course of conduct (the path of Devotion) which is dear to Me, get established in the knowledge
of your being one with Brahma, cultivate an attitude of nonchalance (towards the world) and,
realizing this (visible) universe to be a creation of My Maya (enchanting potency), acquire
calmness (of mind).” (49) !nstructed thus (by the Lord), Daruka went round the Lord (clockwise
So as to keep Him always to his right), bowed to Him again and again and, placing His feet on
his head (and then removing them) proceeded to Dwaraka, sad at heart. (50)

Thus ends the thirtieth discourse in Book Eleven of the great and glorious
Bhagavata-Purana, otherwise known as the
Paramahamsa-Samnhita.

३8२8
rer DES rss

aan sear:

Discourse XXX]
The Lord's Ascent to His Divine Realm
श्रीशुक उवाच
अथ तत्रागमद् FM भवान्या च समं भव: । महेन्द्रप्रमुखा देवा मुनय: सप्रजेश्चरा: । १ |
पितर: सिद्धगन्धर्वा विद्याधरमहोरगा: । चारणा: यक्षरक्षांसि किन्नराप्सरसो द्विजा: । २ ।
द्रष्टुकामा भगवतो निर्याणं परमोत्सुका: | गायन्तश्च गृणन्तश्च sit: कर्माणि जन्म च । ३ ।
