Dis. 64] BOOK TEN 391

ete eee Tee EEE TE rey ee ee EEE See Oe EES EEE TEE TE BORER Re se Pe SHE

(Pariksit !) he who, rising from his bed in the morning, duly recalls the story of SrikKrsna's
combat with Lord Sankara and His victory, will never meet with discomfiture. (53)

Thus ends the sixty-third discourse entitled “ Aniruddha brought back (to Dwaraka),”
in the latter half of Book Ten of the great and glorious Bhagavata-Purana,
othenvise known as the Paramaharhsa-Samnhita.

TEAST
reer

अथ चतु:षष्टितमोऽध्याय:

Discourse LXIV

The story of king Nrga
श्रीगुक उवाच

`एकदोपवनं राजन् जग्मुर्यदुकुमारका: । fered साम्बप्रद्युम्ननारुभानुगदादय: । १ ।
क्रीडित्वा सुचिरं तत्र विचिन्वन्त: पिपासिता: । जलं निरुदके कूपे a सत्त्वमद्भुतम्। २ ।
कृकलासं गिरिनिभं वीक्ष्य विस्मितमानसा:। तस्य चोद्धरणे aa चक्रुस्ते कृपयान्विता: । ३ ।
चर्मजैस्तान्तवै: ouside पतितमर्भका: । नाहाक्नुवन् समुद्धर्तुं कृष्णायाचख्युरुत्सुका: । ४ |
तत्रागत्यारविन्दाक्षो भगवान् विश्वभाव्रन: | वीक्ष्योजहार वामेन तं करेण स लीलया । ५ ।

स उत्तमह्लोककराभिमृष्टो fae सद्य: कृकलासरूपम्।

सन्तप्तचामीकरचारुवर्ण: स्वर्ग्यद्भुतालङ्कुरणाम्बरस्रक | ६ |

aa महाभाग awash देवोत्तमं at गणयामि FRY!

दशामिमाँ वा कतमेन कर्मणा सम्प्रापितोऽस्यतदर्ह सुभद्र ।

_ आत्मानमाख्याहि विवित्सतां नो यन्मन्यसे न: क्षममत्र वक्तुम् । ८ ।

ङ Suka began again : Pariksit, on a certain day, Gada (Sri Krsna's younger brother),
Pradyumna, Samba, Caru, Bhanu and other Yadava princes went to play in a garden. (1)
Having sported there for a pretty long time they felt thirsty and went to a well in search of
water. They found the well dry and noticed a strange animal (fallen) in it. (2) It was a
chameleon as big as a rock. Their mind was struck with wonder at the sight. Moved with pity
they tied it with thongs of leather and ropes of fibres and attempted to take it out of the well
but could not. Full of curiosity they (went to Sri Krsna and) reported this incident to Him. (3-4)
Bhagavan Sri Krsna of lotus-like eyes, the almighty Creator and Protector of the universe
(went to the well), saw the animal and lifted it up with His left hand by way of play. (5) Touched
by the hand of the glorious Lord, the animal forthwith cast off the form of a chameleon and
was transformed into a celestial being adorned with wondrous jewels, clothes and garlands
and possessed of a charming hue like that of molten gold. (6) Although He knew the cause
of his obtaining the form of achameleon, yet in order to make the facts known to the people,
SriKrsna (the Bestower of Liberation) asked that shining person, "O highly blessed one, who
are you, possessed of this excellentform ? 1 surely reckon you to be a great god. (7) Through

what Karma were you condemned to this state ? Surely you did not deserve it, O highly
virtuous soul! We are keen to know your history. If you consider it proper to inform Us about
