Dis. 68] BOOK TEN 405

SOE CE SECRETE SOR ERT eT BY NC a eo EE, SER । 3 व वित् १२२१ ११२४

तं तु ते faa चक्रुश्चत्वारश्चतुरो हयान्। एकस्तु सारथिं जघ्ने चिच्छेदान्य: IAA । ११।
त्तं mam विरथीकृत्य Fe कुरवो चुधि । कुमारं स्वस्य कन्यां च स्वपुरं जयिनोऽविहान् । १२।
Seeing the sons of Dhrtarastra (closely) pursuing him, Samba, a great car-warrior, took
up a fine bow and singly stood defiant like a lion. (6) In their eagerness to capture him, the
Kaurava warriors advanced in great rage under the leadership of Karna, shouting ‘Stop,
stop’, and approaching him, covered him up with (a shower of} arrows. (7) Pariksit, though
yeta boy, Samba was a son of the incomprehensible Lord (Sri Krsna). Unjustly attacked by
the Kurus, he resenteditlike a lion attacked by the smaller animals. (8) Twanginghis splendid
bow, he individually hit the six Kuru heroes—advancing against him in their chariots—with
six arrows eachat one and the same time. (9) With four arrows he hit the four horses (drawing
the chariot of each warrior) and with one arrow each he hit the driver as well as the warrior
himself. The enemies, who were (each) armed with a large bow, admired this exploit of
Samba. (10) (All) the (six) Kuru warriors then (attacked him simultaneously and) deprived
him of his chariot. Four of them killed his four horses, one in his turn killed his charioteer and
the remaining one tore off his bow. (11) (Thus) depriving him of his chariot in the baitle, the
` Kurug bound Samba with difficulty and returned triumphantly to their city,carrying him and
.. Duryodhana's daughter, Laksmana (with them). (12)
तच्छुत्वा नारदोक्तेन राजन् सञ्जातमन्यव: | कुरून् weer चक्रुरुग्रसेनप्रचोदिता: 123
सान्त्वयित्वा q तान् राम: सन्नद्धान् वृष्णिपुङ्खवान् । नेच्छत् कुरूणां Bait कलिं कलिमलापह: 18%
जगाम हास्तिनपुरे रथेनादित्यवर्चसा are: कुलवृद्धैश्च Fae इव Fe 1k!
गत्वा med रामो बाह्योपवनमास्थित:।उद्धवं प्रेषयामास धृतराष्टरं ब्रुभुत्सया । १६॥
Pariksit, hearing of this from the lips of the (celestial) sage Narada, the Yadus felt greatly
enraged and began their preparations, as directed by (their chief) Ugrasena, to march
against the Kauravas. (13) Balarama, the Destroyer of the impurities of the Kali age did not
however approve of a quarrel between the Kurus and the Yadus. Although the Yadava
heroes had completed their preparations (for the fight). He pacified them and drove to
Hastinapura in a chariot brilliant like the sun, accompanied by a number of Brahmanas and
some elders of the Yadu race, like the moon in the midst of planets. (14-15) Reaching
Hastinapura, Balarama stoppedin a garden outside the city and sent Uddhava to Dhrtarastra
with intent to ascertain the intention of the Kauravas. (16)

सोऽभिवन्य्याम्बिकापुत्रं भीष्मं द्रोणं च वाह्लिकम् । दुर्योधनं च विधिबद् राममागतमब्रवीत् । १७॥

तेऽतिप्रीतास्तमाकर्ण्य owe रामं सुहत्तमम्।तमर्चयित्वाभिययु: सर्वे मङ्गलपाणय: ।१८॥

तं apa यथान्यायं We च न्यवेदयन् । तेषां A तत्प्रभावज्ञा: प्रणेमु: शिरसा बलम् । १९1

बन्धून् Gales: श्रुत्वा WET शिवमनामयम् । परस्परमथो रामो बभाषेऽविकृवं वच: 1२०॥

उग्रसेन: fade aq व आज्ञापयत् sy: तदव्यग्रधिय: श्रुत्वा कुरुध्वं माविलम्बितम् । २१॥

wa qa बहवस्त्वेके जित्वाधर्मेण धार्मिकम्। अबश्नीताथ तन्मृष्ये बन्धूनामैक्यकाम्यया 122 1
(Reaching the Kaurava court.) Uddhava duly saluted Dhrtarastra, Bhisma, Drona,
Bahlika (Bhisma’s uncle) and Duryodhana and informed them of Balarama's arrival. (17) The
Kauravas were greatly delighted to hear of the arrival of Balarama, their best friend, and,
treating Uddhava with honour, all went forth to receive Balarama, taking festal presents in
their hands. (18) They received Balarama with due honours and offered Him Arghya (water

for washing His hands with) anda cow; and such of them as knew His greatness saluted Him
with their heads (bent low). (19) When both parties had inquired after each other's welfare
