Dis. 30] BOOK THREE 273

कौके वी वी ieirtntnk ooh tot ert ee eee SHE OHHH HK CHR He eee HH ered eek ज ङ art as he वी BM Res HH SW He He Ge Be HTH He PH

the same respect as before, evenas the miserly cultivators do not accord the same treatment
to their old and worn-out oxen. (13) Yet he feels no aversion for them. Maintained by those
whom he had (once) brought up himself and deformed on account of old age, he falls a prey
to diseases like dyspepsia; his diet and activity both diminish and he remains confined to his
house, awaiting his death and livinglike a dog on whatever is thrown despisingly (by his sons
and wife). (14-15) (At the approach of death) his eye-balls are shot out by the action of the
life-breath trying to find an exit; his wind-pipe gets choked with phlegm, coughing and
breathing cause him exertion and death-rattle is heard from his throat. (16) Lying (in his bed)
surrounded by his sorrowing relations and caught in the noose of Death, he cannot utter a
word even when addressed. (17)

एवं कुदुम्बभरणे व्यापृतात्माजितेन्द्रिय: । म्रियते want स्वानामुरुवेदनयास्तधी: । १८।

aught तदा प्राप्तौ भीमौ सरभसेक्षणौ ia ag त्रस्तहदय: शाकृन्मूत्रं विमुञ्चति । १९।

यातनादेह आवृत्य पाहैर्बद्ध्वा गले बलात्। नयतो दीर्घमध्वानं दण्ड्यं राजभटा यथा 120!

तयोर्निर्भिन्नहदयस्तर्जनैर्जातवेपथु: । पथि श्वभिर्भक्ष्यमाण आर्तोऽघं स्वमनुस्मरन् । २१

क्षुत्तृद्परीतोऽर्कदवानलानिलैर सन्तप्यमान+ ae तप्तवालुके ।
yet पृष्ठे कशया च ताडितश्चलत्यशक्तोऽपि निराश्रमोदके i221

तत्र तत्र पतञ्छान्तो alee: पुनरुत्थित: । पथा पापीयसा नीतस्तमसा यमसादनम् । २३॥

योजनानां सहस्राणि नवतिं va चाध्वन: | त्रिभिर्मुहूरतैर्द्दभ्यां वा ata: प्राप्नोति यातना: । २४॥

आदीपनं स्वगात्राणां वेष्टयित्वोल्मुकादिभि: । आत्ममांसादनं क्वापि स्वकृत्तं परतोऽपि वा । २५॥

जीवतश्चान्त्राभ्युद्धार: श्वगृध्रैर्यमसादने | सर्पवृश्चिकदंशाद्यैर्दशद्भिश्चात्मवबैशसम् IRI

कृन्तनं चावयवशो गाजादिभ्यो भिदापनम्। पातनं गिरिशृङ्गेभ्यो रोधनं चाम्बुगर्तयो: ie:

यास्तामिस्रान्धतामिस्रा रौरवाद्याश्च यातना: | भुङ्क्ते नरो वा नारी वा मिथ: सङ्घेन निर्मिता: । २८।

अत्रैव नरक: et sft मात: प्रचक्षते। या यातना वै नारक्यस्ता इहाप्युपलक्षिता: ।२९॥

He whose mindis thus engrossed in the thought of maintaining his family and who has
failed to subdue his senses dies in the midstof his weeping kinsmen, rendered unconscious
or thrown out of his wits by excessive agony. (18) Trembling at heart to see a couple of
frightful messengers of Death arrived at the moment, their eyes full of wrath, he passes stool
and urine. (19) Clothing his soul in a special (aerial) body’ fit for undergoing the tortures of
hell and binding him with cords about the neck, they forcibly drag him along a long road (to
the abode of Yama) even as the constables of a king drag a convict (to gaol). (20) With his
heart cleft by their threats and trembling (with fear) he feels deeply distressed at the thought
of his sins when bitten on the way by dogs. (21) Nay, overcome by hunger and thirst,
oppressed by sunshine, forest fire and hot winds and flogged on the back with whips, he
trudges along, though unable to walk, on that road, which has no shelter or water and is
covered by burning sands. (22) Dropping down now and then and fainting due to exhaustion
and rising again, he is quickly taken by that exceedingly troublesome path to the abode of
Yama (the god of punishment). (23) Dragged along this road, which is ninety-nine thousand
Yojanas (7,92,000 miles) long, within two to three hours, he suffers the tortures (indicated
hereafter). (24) Placed in the midst of burning pieces of wood, his limbs are set on fire, while
in some cases he is made to eat his own flesh cut out either by himself of by others. (25) His
entrails are pulled out by the hounds and vultures of hell, even though he is still alive (to see

* It is mentioned in our scriptures that sinners condemned to hell are invested with an aerial body, which, though
subjected to torturesin various forms, is wonderfully tenacious and does not perish till the sinner has fully served the sentence.
