676 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 3

PEN He REET २ यमा Oe CLONE CE TERRE CON HERE HERS न न न

aia wet pee a a qafa anfea: 1 eatore fret pia fiers eRe aT: 1c |
पृथु: पुरूरवा गाधिर्नहुषो भरतोऽर्जुन: | मान्धाता सगरो राम: खट्वाङ्खो धुन्धुहा रघु: । ९ ।
तृणबिन्दुर्ययातिश्च शार्याति:३ ङन्तनुर्गय: । भगीरथ: कुवलयाश्व: ककुत्स्थो नैषधो नृग: । १०॥
हिरण्यकशिपुर्वृत्रो रावणो लोकरावण: | नमुचि: aad भौमो हिरण्याक्षोऽथ तारक: । ११
अन्ये च aed दैत्या राजानो ये महेश्वरा: । ad सर्वविद: qu: सर्वे सर्वजितोऽजिता: । १२॥
ममतां मय्यवर्तन्त कृत्वोच्चैर्मर्त्यधर्मिण: | कथावहोषा: कालेन ह्यकृतार्था: कृता विभो 1231

Sri Suka began again: Seeing the kings (so) impatient to conquer her, this earth
laughs at them (and says):—”" How surprising it is that these kings, (mere) playthings (in
the hands) of Death, wish to conquer me thoroughly ! (1) Fruitiess is this ambition of the
kings, by which these rulers of men have been led to repose utter faith in the (human) body,
which is (evanescent) like a bubble of water, even though they are aware of this fact. (2)
(They say to themseives:—) 'Having at the outset conquered the six Indriyas (the five
senses of perception and the mind), we shall then reduce to submission the counsellors
and ministers of (hostile) kings as well as their relations and friends, the citizens and drivers
of elephants (in fact, the entire army of the enemy); and having removed (all) thorns (in the
form of thieves and robbers), we shall thus by degrees bring under subjection the (whole)
earth with the oceans as its girdle.’ With their hearts held fast by such aspirations they fail
to see Death standing at hand. (3-4) Having conquered by their might one Dwipa
surrounded by the ocean, they embark on a sea-voyage (in order to conquer other
continents). What a poor reward it is for their conquest of the mind and senses (since all
this is transient) ! Liberation is the (true) recompense for subduing the self.” (5) "These
stupid feliows”, Mother Earth goes on, O jewel among the Kurus, "hope to conquer through
warme, whom (even) the Manus and their sons had only to leave (in the end) and departed
as they came ! (6) For my sake indeed springs up a conflict between father and sons as
well as between brothers of evil intent, whose mind is held fast by the notion of myness with
respect to their kingdom. (7) Contending with one another in the words. This entire globe
is mine and not yours, O fool !’ rulers of men strike one another and die on my account. (8)
Prthu, Pururava, Gadhi, Nahusa, Bharata, (the thousand-armed) Arjuna, Mandhata,
Sagara, Rama, Khatwanga, Dhundhumara. Raghu, Trnabinduand Yayati, Saryati, Santanu,
Gaya, Bhagiratha, Kuvalayagwa, Kakutstha, Nala (king of the Nisadhas), Nrga,
Hiranyakasipu, (the demon) Vrtra, Ravana who caused people to cry (in terror), Namuci,
Sambara, the demon Naraka (son of Earth), Hiranyaksa and Taraka, and many other
demons and kings, who were suzerain rulers (of the world), who understood everything
and were all brave and conquerors of all, and were invincible (themselves), claimed me
as their own and led an exalted life; but mortal as they were by nature, they were actually
converted into (mere) themes of a story by (the cruel hands of) Death, their object
remaining unaccomplished." So concluded Mother Earth, 0 Pariksit ! (9—13)

कथा gard कथिता महीयसां विताय लोकेषु यदा: परेयुषाम् ।
विज्ञानवैराग्यविवक्षया विभो वचोविभूतीर्न तु णामार्थ्यम् । १४॥
यस्तूत्तमश्लोकगुणानुवाद: संगीयतेऽभीक्ष्णममङ्गलघ्न: ।
तमेव fret शृणुयादभीक्ष्णं कृष्णेऽमलो भक्तिमभीप्समान: ।१५॥
These stories of glorious men who, having spread their fame in the worlds, passed away
have been narrated to you with intent to impart to you the knowledge of the unsubstantial
