Dis. 16 ] BOOK EIGHT 799
HOHHHR HANA Eee eee we ae to th ease Ra ie a ore meee eee ee
यत् AEE NETH NS ERRTE MARAT CONES ORME Neen REY SEmIEthtiMENe Rte

power today. By insulting those very Brahmanas (the Bhrgus) he will perish with (all) his
wealth and so on.(31) Having thus been offered a wise counse! about their (course of)
conduct by the preceptor (the sage Brhaspati), who could foresee things in their reality, the
said gods went out of paradise, capable as they were of assuming any shape at will. (32) The
gods having disappeared, Bali, the son of Virocana, forthwith occupied the city of Amaravati
(the city of the gods) and brought under subjection all the three worlds (heaven, earth and
the intermediate region). (33) Full of affection for their disciples, the Bhrgus got their
aforesaid disciple (Bali), who had (now) conquered the universe and was (fully) devoted to
them, to propitiate the Lord by means of a hundred horse-sacrifices (in order to stabilize his
dominion). (34) Diffusing virtue of those sacrifices in (all) the quarters (even beyond the three
worlds) his renown, already well-known all over the three worlds, Bali now shone like the
moon (the lord of the stars). (35) And, considering himself as having accomplished all his
objects as it were, the high-minded Bali enjoyed the overflowing wealth (most prosperous
kingdom) bestowed on him by the Brahmanas (the adored among the twice-born). (36)

Thus ends the fifteenth discourse, in Book Eight of the great and glorious
Bhagavata-Purana, otherwise known as the
Paramahamsa-Samhita

cok Pot Pt PS
PISS Sie

अथ षोडशोऽध्याय:

Discourse XVI

The procedure of (observing the vow of) Payovrata disclosed to Aditi
sie उवाच
एवं पुत्रेषु नष्टेषु देवमातादितिस्तदा।हृते त्रिविष्टपे दैत्यै: पर्यतप्यदनाथवत् 2 ।
एकदा कश्यपस्तस्या आश्रमं भगवानगात्। | ed निरानन्दं समाधेर्विरतश्चिरात्। २ ।
a Udi दीनवदनां कृतासनपरिग्रह: । सभाजितो यथान्यायमिदमाह कुरुद्वह । ३ ।
अप्यभद्रं न विप्राणां भद्रे लोकेऽधुनाऽऽगतम्। न धर्मस्य न लोकस्य मृत्योर्छन्दानुवर्तिन: । ४ ।
अपि बाकुशलं किञ्चिद् गृहेषु गृहमेधिनि । धर्मस्यार्थस्य कामस्य aa योगो ह्ययोगिनाम् & |
af वातिथयोऽभ्येत्य कुटुम्बासक्तया त्वया । गृहादपूजिता am: प्रत्युत्थानेन वा क्वचित् । ६ ।
गृहेषु येषुतिथयो नार्चिता: सलिलैरपि । यदि निर्यान्ति a नूनं फेरुराजगृहोपमा: । ७ |
अप्यग्रयस्तु deri न em हविषा सति । त्वयोद्विग्रधिया भद्रे प्रोषिते मयि कर्हिचित् । ८ ।
यत्पूजया कामदुघान्याति लोकान्गृहान्वित: | ब्राह्मणोऽग्निश्च वै विष्णो: सर्वदेवात्मनो मुखम् । ९ ।

. af ad कुशलिनस्तव पुत्रा मनस्विनि ।लक्षयेऽस्वस्थमात्मानं भवत्या लक्षणैरहम् । १०॥

Sri Suka resumed: On her sons having disappeared and on‘the (sphere of) heaven
having been taken possession of by the Daityas (the sons of Diti), Aditi, the mother of the
gods, now felt much distressed like a helpless woman.(1) Having risen from Samadhi
(abstract meditation) after a long time,the glorious sage KaSyapa (her husband) visited her

hermitage, which was cheerless and bereft of joy. (2)Suitably welcomed (by his wife,
according to place and occasion) and having accepted a seat (offered by her), he spoke as
