७ऽ. 5] . . .. . BOOK THREE 155

PHA KERTAU TRAE ES COE STARE eERE HReeTeetekARKe Tere RARAeHHeETeahagEReeNnnaneEenneEe
Gat सुदूरुं वसतोऽपि gal भजेम तत्ते भगवन् पदाब्जम् ।४३॥
तान् 8 ह्यसद्वृत्तिभिरक्षिभिर्ये पराहूतान्तर्मनस: ota
अथो न पञ्यन्युरुगाय नूनं चे ते पदन्यासविलासलक्ष्म्या: ।`४४॥
पानेन ते देव कथासुधाया: प्रवृद्धभक्त्या fan ये ।
ara प्रतिलभ्य बोधं यथाञ्जसान्वीयुरकुण्ठधिष्ण्यम् vu!
. तथापरे चात्मसमाधियोगबलेन जित्वा प्रकृतिं afer
ama धीरा: get विशन्ति तेषां श्रम: wre तु सेवया Five
The gods said : We bow, 0 Lord, to Your lotus-feet, that relieve the agony of the suppliant
even as an umbrella affords relief from the heat of the sun, and by resorting to whose soles striving
men easily drive away the endless woes of earthly existence. (38) Because living beings in this
world, O Creator and Lord of the universe, never enjoy peace of mind, stricken as they are by
the threefold agony, therefore, O Lord, do we resort to the shade of Your feet, which is the abode
of wisdom. (39) We have taken shelter in Your feet, which are the abode of sanctity, which the
seers search for in seclusion with the help of Vedic Mantras, that are like birds having their nest
in the lotus of Your mouth, and which are the source of the Ganga, the foremost of all the rivers
whose water possesses the virtue of wiping out one's sins. (40) We resort to the footstool bearing
Your lotus-feet, by contemplating on which in their heart, that is being purified through reverence
and devotionin the shape of hearing (andchanting) the divine namesand glory etc., Yourvotaries
succeed in controlling their mind with the help of wisdom strengthened by dispassion. (41) Lord,
You have descendedinto the world of matter for creating, preserving and destroying the universe.
We all take refuge in Your lotus-feet, which, when meditated upon, vouchsafe fearlessness to
their worshippers. (42) We resort, O Lord, to Your lotus-feet, which are far removed from
(inaccessible to) such men as have deep-rooted, though false, identification with their frail body
and habitation as well as with persons and things connected with them, looking upon them either
as their very self or their own—even though You dwell in their own body (heart) as the Inner
Controller. (43) They whose inner mindis led astray by their senses, that are ever moving among
the unworthy objects of the world, O suzerain Lord of wide renown! are, therefore, surely unable
to see those devotees who enjoy the privilege of beholding the elegance of Your graceful
footsteps. (44) They, on the other hand, O Lord, whose heart has been purified through devotion
intensified by drinking the nectar of Your stories, duly attain that spiritual insight whose essence
lies in dispassion, and easily ascend to Your eternal Abode (Vaikuntha). (45) Even so other wise
men, who have conquered Your most powerful Prakrti (Maya) by force of Yoga consisting in
concentration of mind on the Self, undoubtedly enter You, the Supreme Spirit, though their
hardship is great; whereas there is no hardship in adoring You. (46)

™ wd लोकसिसृक्षयाद्य त्वयानुसृष्टास्रिभिरात्मभि: स्म ।
सर्वे fem: स्वविहारतन्रं न शक्नुमस्तत्प्रतिहर्तवे ते ।४७।
wage तेऽज हराम काले यथा aq चान्नमदाम यत्र ।
यथोभयेषां त इमे हि लोका बलिं हरन्तोऽन्नमदन्त्यनूहा: Ive!
त्वं न: सुराणामसि सान्वयानां Heer आद्य: पुरुष: पुराण: |
4 देव जशक्त्यां गुणकर्मयोनौ wee कविमादधेऽज: xe
ततो wa सत्प्रमुखा wef बभूविमात्मन् करवाम किं a1
त्वं न:ळूस्च्छृचक्षुन्नूपरिदेङ्घि शक्त्या देव क्रियार्थे यदनुग्रहाणाम् । ५०॥
