Dis. 89 } BOOK TEN 505

SCE EE OER OR EEE THOT ONAL ORE TOOT O TCE STONE HONOR RHEE ee He

श्रीशुक उवाच
एवं सारस्वता fam yo संशयनुत्तये । पुरुषस्य पदाम्भोजसेवया तद्गतिं गता: 1201

Sri Suka went on: (Pariksit !) the sages assembled on the bank of the Saraswati arrived
this conclusion (not for their own sake, but) for dispelling the doubts of men. Adoring the lotus-
feet of the Supreme Person, they attained to His supreme state. (20)

Yd उवाच

इत्येतन्मुनितनयास्यपद्मगन्धपीयूषं भवभयभित् परस्य पुंस: ।
qth श्रवणपुटे: पिबत्यभीक्ष्णं पान्थोऽध्वभ्रमणपरिश्रमं जहाति । २१।

Sita said ; (Saunaka and other sages !) this story, which brings out the glory of the
Supreme Person, dispel the fear of transmigration (in the form of births and deaths). Like (a
stream of) sweet-smelling nectar ithas emanated from the lotus-like lips of SriSuka, (the son
of the sage Vyasa.) The traveller who, coursing through the circuitous paths of this world,
constantly drinks of it through the cups of his ears gets rid of the fatigue of wandering through

the world. (21)
a उवाच
एकदा द्वारवत्यां तु विप्रपत्न्या: कुमारक: । जातमात्रो भुवं wp ममार किल भारत 1221
fast गृहीत्वा qa राजद्वार्युपधाय स:। इदं प्रोवाच विलपन्नातुरो दीनमानस: 1231
gat: weft लुब्धस्य विषयात्मन: । क्षत्रबन्धो कर्मदोषात् पञ्चत्वं मे गतोऽर्भक: ।२४॥
हिंसाविहारं नृपति दु:शीलमजितेन्द्रियम्। son भजन्त्य: सीदन्ति दरिद्रा नित्यदु:खिता: ।२५॥
एवं feta विप्रर्षिस्तृतीयं त्वेवमेव च । विसृज्य स नृपद्वारि तां mat समगायत ।२६॥
तामर्जुन say कर्हिचित् केशवान्तिके । परेते नवमे बाले व्राह्मणं समभाषत । २७॥
किंस्विद् ब्रह्मंस्त्वन्निवासे इह नास्ति धनुर्धर: । राजन्यबन्धुरेते वै ब्राह्मणा: Ba आसते । २८॥
धनदारात्मजापृक्ता यत्र शोचन्ति ब्राह्मणा: a वै राजन्यवेषेण नटा जीवन्त्यसुम्भरा: 1221
अहं प्रजा वां भगवन् रक्षिष्ये दीनयोरिह । अनिस्तीर्णप्रतिजोऽग्निं प्रवेक्ष्ये हतकल्मष: 1301
SriSuka resumed: Pariksit, once upon a time at Dwaraka the wife of a Brahmana gave
birth to a child; but the moment it was born and touched the ground, they say, it died. (22)
Taking the deceased child to the portal of the royal palace, the Brahmanailaid it on the ground
and with a heart full of grief began to weep (for it) piteously. He spoke thus:—"My child has
died because of some vicious act of the ruler of this kingdom, (a base ksatriya) who is a
Brahmana-hater, has a wicked disposition, is full of avarice and has set his mind on the
pleasures of his sense. (23-24) The people depending on a ruler who takes delight in bloody
acts, has a vicious character andis a slave of his senses, lead a miserable life and are always
in distress for want of money." (25) The second and third child of the Brahmana sage also
died under similar circumstances and the Brahmana brought their dead bodies in the same
manner to the palace gate and repeating the same observation in a loud tone left the
deceased children there. (26) (Thus as many as eight children of the Brahmana died one
after another.) When he repeated the complaint at the loss of his ninth child, Arjuna was also
sitting by the side of Lord Sri Krsna. Hearing the remarks of the Brahmana, he vauntingly

said, “ 0 venerable Brahmana, is there no Ksatriya who can wield a bow in this city of
Dwaraka (where you reside)? It seems these Yadavas (who are unable to protect their

[565} B.M. Part li—45
