Dis. 4] BOOK NINE 13

HeeMH LMM e USE ee eee Te rH eH ककक आ शा कक TAHARI

father (Nabhaga) accordingly. (7) (Nabhaga said,) "At some sacrifice (performed of yore by
Daksa a lord of created beings) the sages determined everything left on the sacrificial
grounds as a share meant for Rudra; hence that god deserves all that wealth."* (8)
(Returning and) bowing low to Rudra, Nabhaga said, “The wealth left on the sacrificial
grounds is undoubtedly yours, O lord: so says my father, O holy one! With my head bent
low (therefore) | pray for Your grace (apologize to You)." (9) "Since your father’, (replied
Rudra), “has spoken what is right and you too have uttered the truth, । (hereby) impart to
you, the seer of Vedic Mantras, knowledge which is the same as the eternal Brahma (the
Absolute). (10) (Please also) accept (for your subsistence) the wealth left after the sacrifice
as a gift from Me." Saying so, Lord Rudra, who is (so) fond of truth, disappeared. (11) He
who with a fully concentrated mind reverently remembers (mentally repeats) this story (both)
morning and evening becomes a learned man aswell as a knower of (the meaning of ) Vedic
Mantras and attains his goal {in the shape of final beatitude or God-Realization). (12) From
(the loins of ) Nabhaga sprang up Ambarisa, an eminent devotee of the Lord and (highly)
virtuous (too), on whom even the punishment (in the form of the magical fire known as the
Krtya) inflicted by a Brahmana (the sage Durvasa)— a punishment that was not frustrated
anywhere before—had no effect. (13)

भगवञ्छोतुमिच्छामि राजर्षेस्तस्य धीमत: । न प्राभूद् यत्र निर्मुक्तो ब्रह्मदण्डो दुरत्यय: ।१४॥
The king (Pariksit) submitted : | long to hear the story of that royal sage, (so) full of
wisdom, against whom the scourge fully released by a Brahmana—which is (so) difficult to
avert—did not prove effectual. (14)

oye उवाच .
अम्बरीषो महाभाग: सप्तद्वीपवतीं महीम्। अव्ययां च Bre लब्ध्वा fase चातुलं भुवि । १५।
मेनेऽतिदुर्लभं gat wd तत् स्वप्नसंस्तुतम्। विद्वान्विभवनिर्वाणं तमो विशति यत् पुमान् । १६1
वासुदेवे भगवति ary च साधुषु । प्राप्तो भावं परं fad येनेदं लोष्टवत् स्मृतम् । १७॥
a a om: कृष्णपदारविन्दयोर्वचांसि वैकुण्ठगुणानुवर्णने ।
ai हेरेर्मन्दिरमार्जनादिषु श्रुतिं चकाराच्युतसत्कथोदये । १८॥
mi च तत्पादसरोजसौरभे श्रीमत्तुलस्या रसनां तदर्पिते eg
पादौ हरें क्षेत्रपदानुसर्पणे fat हषीकेशपदाभिवन्दने ।
कामं च दास्ये न तु कामकाम्यया यथोत्तमह्लोकजनाश्रया रति: ।२०॥
एवं सदा कर्मकलापमात्मन: परेऽधियज्ञे भगवत्यधोक्षजे ।
सर्वात्मभावं विदधन्महीमिमां ततन्निष्ठवित्राभिहितर शङाशास ह ।२१)॥
ततैर्वसिष्ठासितगौतमादिभिर्धन्वन्यभिस्रोतमसौ सरस्वतीम् 1221
यस्य क्रतुषु गीर्वाणै: सदस्या ॠत्विजो जना: । तुल्यरूपाश्चानिमिषा व्यदृश्यन्त सुवासस: 1221
wit न प्रार्थितो ae मनुजैरमरप्रिय: । शृण्वद्भिरुपगायद्भिरुत्तमह्लोकचेष्टितम् ।२४॥
समर्द्धयन्ति am कामा: स्वाराज्यपरिभाविता: | दुर्लभा नापि सिद्धानां qed हृदि पद्यत: । २५1

* The Sruti also says— उच्छैषणघागो 4 रुद्र:`।

