18 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA-MAHATMYA [Dis.3 `
rok RRR AUR EERE AACR RRR RR Re SR RRR RR Se el Re ll ll il ll ३६३
enter his ear even for a moment. (27) What will be gained through the hearing of many
scriptures and Puranas, which will (only) create confusion (in one's mind) ? The Bhagavata-
Sastra alone proclaims loudly its capacity to grant Liberation. (28) That house itself in which
Srimad Bhagavata is read everyday is actually converted into a sacred place and drives
away the sins of those dwelling in it. (29) Thousands of Aswamedha Yajhas and hundreds
of Vajapeya sacrifices cannot compare (in their efficacy even) with one-sixteenth of a reading
of Srimad Bhagavata. (30) Sins persist in this body, O sages richin asceticism, (only) so long
as the story of the glorious Bhagavata is not duly heard by men. (31) In point of efficacy
neither the (holy) Ganga nor Gaya nor Kasi nor Puskara nor Prayaga can bear comparison
with a reading of Srimad Bhagavata. (32)

श्लोकार्धं इलोकपादं वा नित्यं भागवतोद्भवम्। पठस्व स्वमुखेनैव यदीच्छसि परां गतिम् । ३३॥
वेदादिर्वेदमाता च wed सूक्तमेव wind भागवतं Ga game wa च ।३४॥
Berea प्रयागश्च काल: संवत्सरात्मक: | ब्राह्मणाश्चाग्निहोत्रं च सुरभिर्द्दशी तथा ।३५॥
तुलसी च वरसन्तश्च पुरुषोत्तम wa च । एतेषां तत्त्वत: oa पृथग्भाव इष्यते । ३६॥
ay भागवतं ae वाचयेदर्थतोऽनिराम्। जन्मकोटिकृतं पापं न्यते नात्र dara: 13091
श्लोकार्धं श्लोकपादं वा पठेद्धागवतं च य: । नित्यं पुण्यमवाप्नोति राजसूयांश्चमेधयो: । ३८॥।
उक्तं भागवतं नित्यं ad च हरिचिन्तनम्।तुलसीपोषणं चैव धेनूनां सेवनं समम् ।३९।
अन्तकाले तु येनैव श्रूयते Yasar! sien तस्यैव वैकुण्ठं गोविन्दोऽपि प्रयच्छति ।४०॥
हेमसिंहयुतं चैतद्वैष्णवाय ददाति च । कृष्णेन सह सायुज्यं स पुमाँल्लभते ध्रुवम् ।४१।

If you seek the highest destiny, read even yourself daily one half of (even) a quarter of a
verse of Srimad Bhagavata. (33) (The sacred syllable) OM (the seed of Veda) and the (holy)
Gayatri (the Mother of Veda), as also the Purusa-Sikta (a hymn consisting of sixteen Mantras
sacred to the Cosmic Person and figuring with a little variation in all the Vedas), the three Vedas
(Rk, Samaand Yajus) and so also Srimad Bhagavata as well as the twelve-syllabled Mantra( 3%
नमो भगवते वासुदेवाय), the sun-god (appearing in twelve forms, severally presiding over the twelve
months of the Hindu calendar), Prayaga, Kala (the Time-Spirit) represented by a twelve
month, nay, the Brahmanas and Agnihotra (the daily offering of oblations —chiefly consisting
of milk, oil and sour gruel considered as incumbent on every householder of the twice-born
- classes in the former days), the cow and even so the twelfth of every lunar month,also the
(holy) basi! plant and the vernal season (consisting of the two months, Caitra and Vaisakha,
roughly corresponding to March and April of the English calendar) as well as Lord Visnu (the
Supreme Person)—no distinction in reality is recognized by the wise among these. (34 —36)
The sins committed in crores of lives by the man who intelligently reads the whole of the
scripture known by the name of Srimad Bhagavata without a pause get rooted out: there is
no doubt aboutit. (37) Again, he who reads one half or (even) one quarter of a verse of Srimad
Bhagavata everyday secures the (combined) fruit of a Rajasuya and an ASwamedha
sacrifice. (88) Srimad Bhagavata read everyday, contemplation practised on Sri Hari, the
watering of the Tulasi plant and service rendered to cows are equal (in value). (39) Lord Sri
Krsna (the Protector of cows) out of love grants an abode in Vaikuntha itself to him by whom
is heard at the time of his death even a sentence from Srimad Bhagavata. (40) Nay, the man
who gifts a copy of it placed on a seat of gold to a votary of Lord Visnu decidedly attains
absorption into Sri Krsna. (41)
