614 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 21

Peet weneretenowe न माल् माकागाग क ७० ग न ० ० न ७ २२० १० ० Pnttennwet renner ene न शलजन कक७.१ ०१ ०

a pastime and with their mind set on the pleasures of sense worship the gods as well as the
manes and the rulers of evil spirits through sacrificial performances carried on by means of
animals slaughtered with the desire of gratifying themselves. (29-30)

श्रवणप्रियम्। आशिषो af agra त्यजन्त्यर्थान् यथा वणिक् । ३१
रज:सत्त्वतमोनिष्ठा रज-:सत्त्वतमोजुष: | उपासत इन्द्रमुख्यान् देवादीन् न ada माम् 132
see देवता यज्ञैर्गत्वा रंस्यामहे दिवि । तस्यान्त इह भूयास्म महाज्ञाला महाकुला: 1931
एवंषुष्पितयाक्ताव्याक्षिप्तमनसांनृणाम्।मानिर्नाचातिस्तब्धलांपद्रार्तांपिनरोच्चप्ते।झा।

Picturing to their mind the other world—which is evanescent like the objects seen ina
dream and a source of misery, though delightful to the ear—and the blessings sought for
(in this world), they part with their earnings (expend them on sacrificial performance etc.),
even as a merchant would stake his (hard-earned) fortune {in the hope of gaining
more).(31) Rooted in Rajas, Sattva and Tamas, they worship gods etc., Indra being the
chief of them—who (likewise) take delight in Sattva, Rajas and Tamas—and not so
(devotedly) Myself (who stand beyond the three Gunas). (32) They indulge in the (fond)
hope that, having worshipped the gods through sacrifices in their earthly career, they will
ascend to heaven and revel (there), and at the end of such enjoyment (in heaven) will be
born (again) in the terrestrial region of a high pedigree and be great householders (living
in stately mansions). (33) Even the talk bearing on Me does not find favour with the egotistic
and highly arrogant men who have their mind distracted thus by (seemingly) flowery
promises (contained in the Vedas). (34)

aq ब्रह्मात्मविषयास्रिकाण्डविषया इमे । परोक्षवादा ऋषय: waa मम च प्रियम् । ३५॥
Wem agai प्राणेन्द्रियमनोमयम्। अनन्तपारं गम्भीरं दुर्विगाह्यं समुद्रवत् ।३६॥
मयोपबृंहितं भूम्ना ब्रह्मणानन्तशक्तिना । भूतेषु घोषरूपेण बिसेषूर्णेव लक्ष्यते । ३७॥
यथोर्णनाभिर्हृदयादूर्णामुद्वमते मुखात्। आकाशाद्घोषवान् प्राणो मनसा स्पर्शरूपिणा । ३८॥
छन्दोमयोऽमृतमय: सहस्रपदवीं प्रभु:। ओङ्काराद् व्यञ्जितस्पर्छास्वरोष्मान्त:स्थभूषिताम् 13 |
विचित्रभाषाविततां छन्दोभिश्चतुरुत्तरै: | अनन्तपारां बृहतीं सृजत्याक्षिपते स्वयम् ive!
गायत्र्युष्णिगनुष्टुपु च बृहती पङ्क्तिरेव च । त्रिष्टुब्जगत्यतिच्छन्दो ह्यत्यष्ट्यतिजगद् fare ।४१॥
fe विधत्ते किमाचष्टे किमनूद्य विकल्पयेत् | इत्यस्या eel लोके नान्यो ug वेद कश्चन ।`४२।
मां विधत्तेऽभिधत्ते मां विकल्प्यापोह्यते त्वहम्। एतावान्सर्ववेदार्थ: शब्द आस्थाय मां भिदाम् ।
मायामात्रमनूद्यान्ते प्रतिषिद्ध्य प्रसीदति । ४३
These Vedas dealingwith the three departments (viz., ritual acts, the worship of gods and
Brahma-Realization) teach (as a matter of fact) the truth that Brahma (alone) constitutes the
Self of (us) all. The Vedic texts, however, (as wellas their seers) convey their meaning (only)
indirectly (and hence it is not manifest to allat first sight) and (such indirect mode of) teaching
(alone) is dear to Me as well (inasmuch as the pure-hearted alond can grasp the real spirit.
the generality of men being liable to misunderstand it and be led astray). (35) (The meaning
of) the Veda (which is Brahma manifested in the form of word) is most difficult to understand,
consisting as it does of the vital air (the Para stage of speech), the mind (the Pasyanti stage

residing in the Anahata Cakra, including the Madhyama stage, consisting of Buddhi or the
intellect and residing in the Maniptra Cakra located in the heart) and the organ of speech
