700 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 10

HORAK कौ ह्येज्ज यै जन AHHH OKE LESH SK क री का KEE त्या क EH KEL HE सि डत्त रै ज ङ्यो LEER क LH MIT Ree MMM AH MR

wait न हिसन्ति भूतग्रामेषु किञ्चन । उच्चावचेषु दैत्येनद्र मद्भावेन गतस्पृहा: 1201
भवन्ति पुरुषा लोके मद्भक्तास्त्वामनुव्रता: | भवान्मे We भक्तानां सर्वेषां प्रतिरूपधूक् 1221
कुरु त्वं प्रेतकार्याणि पितु: gra सर्वश: । मदङ्गस्पर्शानेनाङ्ग लोकान्यास्यति सुप्रजा: 1221
fea च स्थानमातिष्ठ यथोक्तं ब्रह्मवादिभि: । मय्यावेश्य मनस्तात He कर्माणि मत्पर: 1231

The Lord said : Your father, O sinless one, was purified along with (as many as) twenty-
one past generations* by the very fact that you, the sanctifier of your race, were born in his
house, 0 pious soul ! (18)-Wherever there are My devotees, perfectly tranquil, pious and
extremely noble in character, viewing all with the same eye, (all) those tracts of land
get hallowed, (the desecrated land of) Kikata (and other such territories including their
inhabitants) not excepted. (19) Those whose hankering has (totally) disappeared through
devotion to Me, O ruler of the Daityas, persecute none among the multitudes of living beings,
high and low, by any means (whatsoever). (20) (Even) persons following your way of life in
this world will become My devotees. Indeed you will serve as a model for all My devotees.(21)
(Now) perform you the obsequies with respect to your father (Hiranyakasipu), though he has
been purified in everyway by the touch of My Person, O beloved one. Having been blessed
with a noble son (like you), he will attain to the higher worlds. (22) (Also) occupy the throne
of your father (as the ruler of the Daityas) and, fixing your mind on Me, dear son, and
(completely) devoted to Me, perform your duties as directed by the exponents of the
Vedas.(23)

ARG उवाच
प्रह्लादोऽपि तथा चक्रे पितुर्यत्साम्परायिकम्। यथाऽऽह भगवान्राजन्नभिषिक्तो द्विजोत्तमै: । २४॥
प्रसादसुमुखं spt wen नरहरिं हरिम्। स्तुत्वा वाग्भि: पवित्राभि: प्राह देवादिभिर्वृत: 124

Narada continued : Prahrada too did what was due to his (deceased) father by way of
funeral rites in the same way as the Lord had commanded him (to do), O king (Yudhisthira)!
He was (then) crowned (as king) by the foremost of the Brahmanas. (24) Finding Sri Hari,
who was disguised as a man-lion, wearing a serene look as a token of grace, Brahma, who
was surrounded by gods and others, (first) extolled Him by means of sacred hymns and
(then) submitted (as follows). (25) ॥

ब्रह्मावाच
देवदेवाखिलाध्यक्ष भूतभावन पूर्वज । fee ते निहत: पापो लोकसन्तापनोऽसुर: । २६।
योऽसौ wera THT न वध्यो qq gies: | aaTanTaarag: Ga rMare । २७॥
दिष्टयास्य तनय: साधुर्महाभागवतोऽर्भक: | त्वया विमोचितो मृत्योर्दिष्ट्या त्वां समितोऽधुना ।२८।
Wid, वपुस्ते भगवन् ध्यायत: प्रयतात्मन: । सर्वतो गोप्त संत्रासान्मृत्योरपि जिघांसत: 121

Brahm said : 0 god of gods, supreme Ruler of all, Protector of (all) created beings, my
Father ! fortunately (for us) the wicked demon (Hiranyakasipu), the tormentor of the world,
has been slain by You. (26) He is the same fellow who having secured a boon from me (to
this effect) was not to be killed by living beings of my creation and, proud of his strength
derived from austerities and Yoga (concentration of mind), stamped outall virtues inculcated
by the Vedas. (27) Luckily enough his son, a pious soul and an eminent devotee, though (yet)
an infant, has been delivered by You from (the jaws of) death and itis good that he has now

* Sprung from the loins of the sage Kasyapa, son of Marici, a mind-bom son of Brahma (the creator), Hiranyakasipu was
in the third generation from Brahma. By alleging that he was purified along with twenty-one past generations, the Lord, therefore,
evidently refers to the twenty-one generations of his parentage in his previous incarnation (in the preceding Kalpa).
