18 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA { Dis. 5

BeBe Re be MB Rs A AH GE BBE EHR BH BR ROR Re RR Be RRR Er OH BRR ROR Ri ey RRR ei aire ining: १ PAPA OHERAO ERENT AS
व्यात्र्त्त न् त् वी का a

the Absolute by Maya. (27) In this way, throughout the rains as well as in the coming
autumn, | heard with rapt attention thrice everyday the holy praises of Sri Harias they were
sung by those high-souled sages; and forthwith sprouted in my heart that Devotion which
eradicates the element of Rajas (passion) and Tamas (ignorance). (28) To me, who was
devoted to those sages, modest in bearing, sinless, full of faith, tame and submissive,
though yet a child, those saints, compassionate as they were to the afflicted, graciously
imparted, when about to depart, that most esoteric wisdom which has been directly
revealed by the Lord Himself. (29-30) Through that wisdom | came to know the glory of
that Maya (deluding potency) of Lord Vasudeva, the Maker of this world, by knowing which
men attain to His (supreme) Abode. (31)

एतत्संसूचितं ब्रह्मंस्तापत्रयचिकित्सितम् | यदीश्वरे भगवति कर्म ब्रह्मणि भावितम् । ३२॥
आमयो ag भूतानां जायते येन सुव्रत । तदेव ह्यामयं द्रव्यं न पुनाति चिकित्सितम् । ३३॥
एवं Jot क्रियायोगा: सर्वे संसृतिहेतव: । त एवात्मविनाञाय कल्पन्ते कल्पिता: परे । ३४॥
यदत्र क्रियते कर्म भगवत्परितोषणम्।ज्ञानं यत्तदधीनं हि भक्तियोगसमन्वितम् aul
कुर्वाणा यत्र कर्माणि भगवच्छिक्षयासकृत्। गृणन्ति गुणनामानि कृष्णस्यानुस्मरन्ति च । ३६॥
नमो भगवते तुभ्यं वासुदेवाय धीमहि। प्रद्युम्नायानिरुद्धाय नम: asda 71301
इति मूर्त्यभिधानेन मन्त्रमूर्तिममूर्तिकम्। यजते यज्ञपुरुषं स सम्यग्दर्शन: पुमान् ।३८॥
इमं स्वनिगमं ब्रह्मन्नवेत्य मदनुष्ठितम्। अदान्मे ज्ञानमैश्चर्यं स्वस्मिन् भावं च haa: । ३९॥

त्वमप्यदभ्रश्रुत विश्रुते fat: समाप्यते a fact बुभुत्सितम्।

आख्याहि दु:खैर्मुहुरर्दितात्मनां संक्लेशनिर्वाणमुशान्ति नान्यथा ।४०॥

इति श्रीमद्भागवते महापुराणे पारमहंस्यां संहितायां प्रथमस्कन्धे व्यासनारदसंवादे पञ्चमोऽध्याय: ।। ५॥

O sage, | have thus indicated to you how actions dedicated to the Lord, who is the Ruler
of this universe as well as the supreme Brahma (the Absolute), serve as the cure for
the threefold agony. (32) O Vyasa of commendable vow, the same substance which
contributes to a particular malady cannot ordinarily counteract the disease; but, when taken
ina properly medicated form, it does cure the ailment. (33) Similarly, all the activities of men
ordinarily lead to transmigration; but the same, when offered to the Lord, lose their binding
character.(34) On duties (of an obligatory nature) that are performed in this world for the
pleasure of the Lord depends the attainment of wisdom combined with Devotion, (35) Those
who perform their actions in obedience to the Lord's behests repeatedly utter and meditate
on the praises and names of Sri Krsna (in the course of such actions). (36) "Obeisance to
You, O Lord Vasudeva: we meditate on You. Obeisance also to Pradyumna, Aniruddha and
Sankarsana.” (37) The lord presiding over sacrifices has the divine Mantra (mystical
formula) for His body and has no material form. He alone is of true insight, who worships
Him uttering the name of the four forms as indicated above. (38) O holy Brahmana, when
| had thus carried out His behest, Lord KeSava blessed me with Self-Knowledge, mystic
powers and loving Devotion to His feet. (39) O sage of unlimited knowledge, pray, recount
the glories of the Almighty Lord, by hearing which even the wise reach the end of their quest
for knowledge. For they recognize only the chanting of such glory, and no other, as the only
means of relieving the afflictions of those who are repeatedly tormented by trials and
turmoils. (40)

Thus ends the fifth discourse, forming part of the dialogue between Vyasa and
Narada, in Book One of the great and glorious Bhagavata-Purana,
otherwise known as the Paramahamsa-Samhita.

ct ENT PT ५
PIPITS Sg
