372 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 19

SARAH SAA AENEAN AHH EERE RELEASE RENE EE See eee ee eEHHKEECCHEHEHS ERED ER EET RAHA EEE

the ends of his bow and mostly levelled the surface of the terrestrial globe. (29) Lord Prthu
(the son of Vena), who was a father to his subjects and provided them with the means of
subsistence, next planned with due regard to propriety dwellings (for human beings) at
different places all over the earth, and he founded villages, towns and cities, built castles and
forts of every description, designed abodes for cowherds and pens for cattle, contrived
camps andcantonments and taught how todig mines. He (also) provided houses for farmers
and cultivators and raised hamlets on hill-sides. (30-31) Before (the advent of) Prthu people
had no idea of different kinds of human dwellings like villages and towns on this globe. Now
they began to live comfortably (in rural and urban conditions) with a sense of security of life
and property in every part of the earth. (32)

Thus ends the eighteenth discourse forming part of the Story of Prthu's Conquest,
in Book Four of the great and glorious Bhagavata-Purana,
otherwise known as the Paramahamsa-Samhita.

२३३ २१३० नेद्
CPD OCDE NOS

अथैकोनवबिंशोऽध्याय:

Discourse XIX
King Prthu performs a hundred horse-sacrifices

अथादीक्षत राजा तु हयमेधशतेन स: । ब्रह्मावर्ते मनो: AX यत्र प्राची सरस्वती । १ |

vee भगवान् कर्मातिशायमात्मन:। हातक्रतुर्न ममृषे पृथोर्यज्ञमहोत्सवम् । २ ।

यत्र यज्ञपति: साक्षाद्भगवान् etter: । अन्वभूयत सर्वात्मा सर्वलोकगुरु: प्रभु: । ३ ।

अन्वितो ब्रह्महार्वाभ्यां लोकपालै: सहानुगै: । उपगीयमानो गन्धर्वैर्मुनिभिश्चाप्सरोगणै: । ४ ।

fag विद्याधरा ten दानवा गुह्यकादय: । सुनन्दनन्दप्रमुखा:॥ पार्षदप्रवरा हरे: । ५ ।

कपिलो नारदो दत्तो योगेशा: सनकादय: । तमन्वीयुर्भागवता ये च तत्सेवनोत्सुका: । ६ |

यत्र aga भूमि: सर्वकामदुघा सती । दोग्धि स्माभीप्सितानर्थान् यजमानस्य भारत । ७ |

we | ae: क्षीरदध्यन्नगोरसान्।तरवो Ya: प्रासूयन्त मधुच्युत: । ८ ।

feud रत्ननिकरान् गिरयोऽन्नं चतुर्विधम्। उपायनमुपाजह्रु: सर्वे लोका: सपालका: । ९ |
Maitreya continued: The king (Prthu) now consecrated himself as a preparation for (the
performance of) a hundred horse-sacrifices in Brahmavarta, the land of Swayambhuva
Manu, where flows the Saraswati in an easterly direction. (1) The glorious Indra (the lord of
paradise, who had attained to this exalted position by virtue of his performing a hundred
sacrifices) grew jealous of the grand sacrificial festivities started by king Prthu inasmuch as
he saw that the same would obscure his own. achievements. (2) For in that sacrifice
Bhagavan Sri Hari; the Lord of all sacrifices and the almighty Ruler, Teacher and Soul ef the
whole universe, was directly perceived by all. (3) He was accompanied by Brahma and Siva
and the other protectors of the world—who came with their retinue—and was being extolled
by Gandharvas (celestial musicians), and hosts of Apsaras (celestial nymphs) as well as by
sages. (4) Along with the Lord came a number of (celestial and semi-celestial beings such

as) Siddhas, Vidyadharas, Daityas, Danavas, Guhyakas (Yaksas) and so on, the foremost
attendants of Sri Hari led by Sunanda and Nanda, and devotees of the Lord like Kapila,
