Dis. 20] BOOK FIVE 517

PERM OM ME ROWER ITE MS ROR MORNE NE RE BE MOMENT RE RE EER WOT TEE TE TE TOE TS TEE WENT RT OT RR REET ROR HONOR OR HOR BR RR RRR
त्तन्र

AAA आकलच्य स्वयमात्मयोगेनोपरराम। २ । शिवं यवसं सुभद्रं शान्तं क्षेमममृतमभयमिति वर्षाणि
मेघमाल इति AGMA: | अरुणा नृम्णाऽऽङ्गिरसी सावित्री सुप्रभाता ॠऋतम्भरा सत्यम्भरा इति महानद्य:।
विवुधोपमसन्दर्शानप्रजनना: स्वर्गद्वारं त्रव्या विद्यया भगवन्तं त्रयीमयं सूर्यमात्मानं चजन्ते YI
प्रत्नस्य विष्णो रूपं यत्सत्यस्यर्तस्य TIT: | अमृतस्य च मृत्योऽच सूर्यमात्मानमीमहीति। ५
प्लक्षादिषु पञ्चसु पुरुषाणामायुरिन्द्रियमोज:सहो बलं बुद्धिर्विक्रम इति च सर्वेषामौत्पत्तिकी
सिद्धिरविशेषेण ada । ६ ।

Sri Suka resumed : Hereafter the division of Plaksa and the other Dwipas into Varsas
is going to be described with (particular) reference to their extent, distinctive character and
configuration. (1) Even as Mount Meru is surrounded by Jambtdwipa, this JambUdwipa (in
its turn) is encircled by a salt ocean, as wide as the Dwipa itself; and the salt ocean too is
hemmed in (on the other side) by what bears the name of Plaksadwipa—which is twice as
wide as the salt ocean (or two lakh Yojanas wide)—even as a moat may be enclosed by an
outer garden. (In that Dwipa) stands an effulgent Plaksa tree—of the same dimensions as
the Jambd (rose-apple) tree (in JambUdwipa)—which is responsible for the name of the
Dwipa and at the foot of which dwells the god of fire with seven tongues. Its (very first) ruler,
Idhmajihva, (the second) son of Emperor Priyavrata, divided his Dwipa (into seven parts)
and, having entrusted (these) seven Varsas (subdivisions) to (the care of) his (seven) sons,
bearing the name of the seven Varsas himself attained liberation by being united with the
(supreme) Spirit. (2) The Varsas are called Siva, Yavasa, Subhadra, Santa, Ksema, Amrta
and Abhaya. The well-known mountains and rivers in those Varsas are severally seven only
(one in each). (3) Manikuta, VajrakUta, Indrasena, Jyotisman, Suparna, Hiranyasthiva and
Meghamala are the (principal) mountains forming the boundaries (of the Varsas). (And ) the
principal rivers are called Aruna, Nrmna, Angirasi, Savitri, Suprabhata, Rtambhara and
Satyambhara. The four classes (of people here) bearing the title of Harnsa, Patanga,
Urdhvayana and Satyanga respectively (which correspond to the fourcastes in Bharatavarsa),
are (gradually) able to shake off Rajas and Tamas by bathing in the water of these rivers;
they live to an age of a thousand years, possess a form (free from fatigue, perspiration etc.),
similar to that of the gods, bear children like the gods and worship the (almighty) Lord, the
Soul of the universe, in the form of the sun-god, the gateway to heaven and the veritable
embodiment of the three Vedas (being their preserver and teacher, nay, their very theme)
through the rituals taught in the three Vedas. (4) (They repeat the following prayer:)— "We
resort to the sun-god, who is a manifestation of the most ancient Lord Visnu and the very Soul
of (the Deity presiding over) Satya (regarding all with the same eye, Rta (speaking politely and
truthfully), the Veda (that reveals the true nature of both these types of virtue) as wellas of good
(resulting from righteousness) and evil (resulting from unrighteousness)." (5) Inthe five Dwipas
commencing from the Plaksadwipa, long life. soundness and potency of the Indriyas (the
senses of perception as well as the organs of action), strength of mind and bodily vigour,
intellectual acumen and bravery are the natural endowment of all men without distinction. (6)

परिवृङ्क्ते । ७ । चत्र ह व शाल्मली प्लक्षायामा यस्वां वाव किल निलवमाहुर्भगवतएछन्द:स्तुत: पतत्तिराजस्य
— ८ तद्द्वीपाधिपति: प्रियव्रत्तात्मजायनचाट्टु स्वसुतेभ्य: सप्तभ्यस्तन्नामानि
नद्यप्न-चप्तप्तन्राम्याभनाता स्वरस: प्रातशृ-प्वाग्म…॰[ कुन्दो मुकुन्द: पुष्पवर्ष: स्रहस्रश्रतिरिंति।अनुंपति
सिनीवाली सरस्वती GE रजनी नन्दा राकेति । १० ।तद्दर्षपुरुषा: श्रुतधरवीर्यधरवसुन्धरेषन्धरसंज्ञा भगवन्तं
