Dis. 31 ] BOOK THREE 277

SHAKEN AHHHKEKEA NEESER EA HE CSHAA THEE CERES OEE EHE EAE OCH .३.३.३..७.७.७.३.३.३.७.८.३ ७७१७ ७७३८ ३ ३ २ त
ज्ज् aU व न St Bt ST

Overflowing with compassion, it is Your peerless Self, O Lord, that has imparted to this
creature, who is (hardly) ten months old, such (incomparable) wisdom. May that Protector
of the afflicted (Yourself) be pleased with His own (benevolent) act (the bestowal of wisdom);
for who can ever repay His obligations except by joining his palms( out of gratitude)?(18)
पश्यत्ययं धिषणया aq सप्तवध्रि: जारीरके दमशारीर्यपर: wee
यत्सृष्टयाऽऽसं तमहं पुरुषं quot usa afede च चैत्यमिव प्रतीतम् । १९
_सोऽहं वसन्नपि fast बहुदु:खवासं गर्भान्न निर्जिगमिषे बहिरन्धकूपे |
यत्रोपयातमुपसर्पति देवमाया मिथ्यामतिर्यदनु संसृतिचक्रमेतत् ।२०॥
तस्मादहं व्रिगतविक्कव safer आत्मानमाशु तमस: सुहृदाऽऽत्मनैव |
भूयो यथा व्यसनमेतदनेकरन्धरं मा मे भविष्यदुपसादितविष्णुपाद: 1221
The other type of embodied souls (viz., birds, beasts and so on) perceives (experiences)
by instinct only the agreeable and disagreeable sensations in its body. |, however, endowed
as | am with a (human) body capable of practising self-control (and other spiritual
disciplines), behold that most ancient Person, both without and within my heart, by virtue of
reason conferred on me by the selfsame Person, whois as manifest as my own self, referred
to as 'I' (19) Though living in this womb a life full of numerous troubles, O Lord, | have no
desire to get out of it and descend into the pitfall of the outside world; for the Lord's (Your)
Maya overtakes the soul who goes there, and in the wake of Maya appear the false notion
of “` (with reference to the body) and the consequent cycle of births and deaths.(20)
Therefore, having installed (in my heart) the feet of Lord Visnu and shaking off all distraction
of mind, | shall quickly redeem myself from the ocean of worldly existence with the help of
reason, which is my greatest friend, so that this calamity (in the shape of transmigration),
entailing many rounds of gestation, may not befall me again. (21)
HS उवाच
एवं कृतमतिर्गर्भे दशमास्य: स्तुवन्नृषि: । ae: क्षिपत्यवाचीनं waa सूतिमारुत: 1221
तेनावसृष्ट: सहसा कृत्वावाक fax ange: | विनिष्क्रामति qe निरुच्छ्वासो हतस्मृति: 1231
पतितो भुव्यसृङ्मूत्रे विष्ठाभूरिव चेष्टते। रोरूयति na ज्ञाने विपरीतां गतिं गत: । २४॥
Lord Kapila went on : When the ten-month-old Jiva, who has thus resolved even
while in the womb, extols the Lord as aforesaid, the wind that helps parturition propels him
forthwith, with his face turned downward, in order that the child may be born. (22) Pushed
downwards all of a sudden by the wind, the child issues out (of the womb) with great trouble,
head downward, breathless and deprived of memory out of agony. (23) Fallen on earth in
a pool of blood and urine (discharged by the mother), the new-born babe tosses like a worm

sprung from ordure, and having lostits wisdom (acquiredin the womb) and reduced toa state
(of self-identification with the body) which is just the reverse of wisdom, cries loudly.(24)

were न fem पुष्यमाणो जनेन स: । अनभिप्रेतमापन्न: प्रत्याख्यातुमनीश्वर: । २५॥

शायितोऽशुचिपर्यङ्के wy: स्वेदजदूषिते | Aa: कण्डूयनेऽङ्गानामासनोत्थानचेष्टने 126 |

तुदन्त्यामत्वचं दंशा मशका मत्कुणादय:।रुदन्तं विगतज्ञानं कृमय: कृमिकं यथा ire!
Being nourished by people who do not know the mind of another, it is given something
which was not intended; and (the pity of it is that) the child is unable to refuse it.(25) Laid on
a foul bed infested by sweat-born creatures the (poor) creature is incapable even of

scratching its limbs (to relieve itching), much less of sitting up, standing or moving itself.(26)
Justas smaller worms bite a big worm, even so gnats, mosquitoes, bugs and other creatures
