Dis. 11 ] . , BOOK THREE 181

HRAWELNHE TE HEHEHE OKKE TET CALE KAKSKU TAH HELEN HTETE HOKE CCH OETA ATER MARA HAM MI

compassion and truthfulness). In the other Yugas, even as unrighteousness advances,
virtue diminishes by one limb successively* (21) Beyond the three worlds, (from the
Maharloka) as far as the abode of Brahma, one thousand revolutions of the four Yugas
constitute a day; and equal in length is the night, dear Vidura, when Brahma (the Creator of
the universe) goes to sleep (withdrawing all the three worlds into his belly). (22) At the close
of night the creation of the three worlds commences (as in the preceding Kalpa) and
continues for the livelong day of Brahma, which embraces the regime of the fourteen
Manus.(23) Each Manu holds power for the period allotted to him, which is a little over
seventy-one (71 and 6/14) revolutions of the four Yugas. During these Manvantaras there
are separate Manus and their descendants, separate groups of seven Rsis and gods, and
separate Indras (the rulers of all the three worlds) and their attendants (Gandharvas and so
on), allof whom (excepting, of course, the descendants of Manu) are born together. (24) This
is the day-to-day creation of Brahma, which affects the three worlds alone and in which the
sub-human creatures, human beings, manes and gods are born according to their respective
Karma. (25) During these Manvantaras the Lord assumes the quality of Sattva (harmony)
and protects the universe, exhibiting His strength in the form of Manus and others, who are
His own manifestations. (26) At the close of the day Brahma assumes an iota of Tamoguna
(the principle of inertia) and, winding up his activity (in the shape of creation), becomes quiet
(retires for the night). At that time everything else is withdrawn into him by force of time. (27)
Again, when the night (of universal dissolution) sets in, the moon and the sun as well
disappear and all the three worlds, viz., BhGh, Bhuvah and Swah get reabsorbed into his
body. (28) (How this happens is described now.) When the three worlds are being consumed
by the divine energy in the shape of fire emitted by the mouth of Lord Sankarsana (the
serpent-god), the sages Bhrgu and others (who have their abode in the Maharloka,
immediately above Indra's paradise) feel oppressed by the heat (of that huge conflagration)
and ascend from the Maharloka to the Janaloka (the next higher world). (29) Meanwhile all
the seven oceans exceed their limits at the approach of universal destruction. Their waters
get unusually swollen and with their waves tossed by boisterous and fearful gusts of wind
they submerge all the three worlds in no time. (30) In the midst of that (vast expanse of) water
lies Sri Hari on His couch of Lord Ananta (Sesa), His eyes closed on account of sleep in the
form of abstract meditation, the inhabitants of the Janaloka extolling Him (on all sides). (31)
With the alternation of days and nights of the above description, which can be (easily)
deduced from the (constant) flux of time, the hundred years even of Brahma’s life which is
the longest in this creation, are well-nigh spent. (32)

यदर्धमायुषस्तस्य परार्धमभिधीयते । पूर्व: परार्धोऽपक्रान्तो ह्यपरोऽद्य प्रवर्तते 1331
पूर्वस्यादौ परार्धस्य ब्राह्मो AM महानभूत्। कल्पो यत्राभवद् ब्रह्मा शब्दब्रह्मेति यं fag: । ३४
तस्यैव चान्ते कल्पोऽभूद् यं पाद्ममभिचक्षते । यद्धेर्नाभिसरस आसील्लोकसरोरुहम् ।३५॥
अयं तु कथित: aren द्वितीयस्यापि भारत । वाराह इति विख्यातो यत्रासीत्सूकरो aft: 1281
ares द्विपरार्धाख्यो निमेष उपचर्यते। अव्याकृतस्यानन्तस्य अनादेर्जगदात्मन: 1391
कालोऽयं परमाण्वादिर्ददिपरार्धान्त ईश्वर: । नैवेशितुं sae deat धाममानिनाम् । ३८।
One-half of Brahma’s life is called Parardha. The first Parardha has already expired and

the second is now running (has commenced from the current Kalpa). (33) The first Parardha
opened with a momentous Kalpa, the Brahma Kalpa, inwhich appeared Brahma, whom the

* That is to say, in Treté austere penance falls into destitute; only purity, compassion and truthfulness are practised in
the name of virtue. In the Dwapara, however, penance and purity both become obsolete; compassion and truth alone prevail.
And in Kali truthfulness alone remains, the other three virtues become very rare.
