Dis. 12 } BOOK FOUR . 345°

HRUUVEKCLH LEAKE A GEM Ce UE CSET eee ese eR Re THEE Ee य RRR he Be Rs Ri Hs Ge BRR eR a Rea ae He ee

अथ द्वादशोऽध्याय:

Discourse XIl
Kubera confers a boon on Dhruva, who ascends
to the abode of Lord Visnu

REN

मेत्रेय उवाच
तत्रागतश्चारणयक्षकिन्नरे: संस्तूयमानोऽभ्यवदत्कृताञ्जलिम् । १ ।

Maitreya continued : Having come to know that Dhruva's anger had been appeased
and that he had desisted from (further) bloodshed, the worshipful Kubera (the god of riches)
arrived there, glorified by the Caranas (celestial bards), Yaksas and Kinnaras, and spoke to
Dhruva, who stood (before him) with joined palms. (1)

Yq Jara

भो भो: क्षत्रियदायाद परितुष्ठोऽस्मि astai aed पितामहादेशाद्वैरं दुस्त्यजमत्यज: । २ I
न भवानवधीद्यक्षान्न यक्षा wat तव। काल wa fe भूतानां प्रभुरप्ययभावयो: । ३ ।
अहं त्वमित्मपार्था dare हि । स्वाप्नीवाभात्यतद्ध्यानाद्यया बन्धविपर्ययौ । ४ |
Tes YI भद्रं ते भगवन्तमधोक्षजम्। सर्वभूतात्मभावेन सर्वभूतात्मविग्रहम् । ५ ।

we भजनीयाङ्घ्रिमभवाय भवच्छिदम् ge fated wee गुणमय्याऽऽत्ममायया । ६ |
Tt Rist a aE शुश्रुम । ७ ।

The god of riches said : O Ksatriya prince, | am highly pleased with you since at the
remonstrance of your grandfather (Swayambhuva Manu) you have renounced the feeling
of animosity, so difficult to give up, O sinless one. (2) (As a matter of fact), it was not you who
killed the Yaksas nor did the Yaksas slay your brother (Uttama). The Time-spirit alone is
responsible for the birth and death of living beings. (3) Like the dream-consciousness, the
false notion of 'I' and 'you' arises in man through ignorance (of his essential nature) and as
a result of his self-identification with the body; and it is due to this notion that he has to suffer
bondage as well as miseries. (4) Therefore, God bless you, Dhruva, go and worship for the
sake of freedom from birth (and death) the Lord—who is above sense-perception and yet
manifest in the form ofall living beings, whose feet are the only object worth resorting to, who
puts an end to birth (and death) and who, though united (for the purposes of creation etc.),
with His own energy known by the name of Maya and consisting of the three Gunas (Sattva,
Rajas and Tamas), is yet devoid of it (in His absolute aspect)—treating all living beings as
your own Self. (5-6) Freely and unhesitatingly ask of me, O king, a boon which is foremost
in your mind, O son of Uttanapada, you being (eminently) fit to receive a boon (from me); for
we have heard, dear Dhruva, that you are so near the feet of the Lord (who has a lotus sprung
from His navel). (7)

मैत्रेय उवाच
a राजराजेन am चोदितो gat महाभागवतो महामति: |
