118 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 4

#.१.१:१.१४° ७१ १४.१:१- १ 9 # CRRA ORER OREO १ #-9^ 99 # ##:^ १39 AERA १## 9 # # 9 १##:# १७8७ १ ### १69 १५9 # HERON

Sri Suka continued : Thus addressed ina guileless manner by Devaki and Vasudeva,
who felt (quite) appeased, and permitted by them, Karnsa withdrew to his palace. (28) That
night having passed, Kamsa summoned his counsellors and told them all that which was
intimated by Yogamaya (representing the trance-sleep of Lord Visnu). (29) Hearing the
words of their master, the demons (lit., the progeny of Diti), the (sworn) enemies of the gods—
who were resentful towards the gods and were not very clever—said:—(30)

एवं चेत्तर्हि भोजेन्द्र पुरग्रामव्रजादिषु | अनिर्दंशान् निर्दशांश्च हनिष्यामोऽद्य 4 शिशून् 1३१1
किमुद्यमै: करिष्यन्ति देवा: समरभीरव: । नित्यमुद्विम्नमनसो ज्याघोषैर्धनुषस्तव 1321
अस्यतस्ते ads: संमन्तत: । जिजीविषव उत्सृज्य पलायनपरा ययु: 1331
केचित् प्राञ्लयो दीना न्यस्तशस्त्रा दिवौकस: । मुक्तकच्छशिखा: केचिद् भीता: स्म इति वादिन: । ३४॥
न त्वे विस्मृतदास्त्रास्रान् विरथान् भयसंवृतान्। हंस्यन्यासक्तविमुखान् भग्नचापानयुध्यत: 1341
किं क्षेमशूरैर्विबुधैरसंयुगविकत्थनै: । रहोजुषा fe हरिणा हाम्भुना वा वनौकसा ।
किमिन्देणाल्पवीर्येण ब्रह्मणा वा तपस्यता 136 1
तथापि देवा: सापत्यान्नोपेक्ष्या इति मन्महे। ततस्तन्मूलखनने नियुङ्क्ष्वास्माननुव्रतान् 1301
यथाऽऽमयोऽङ्गे समुपेक्षितो gfe शाक्यते रूढपदश्चिकित्सितुम् ।
atte उपेक्षितस्तथा रिपुर्महान् बद्धबलो न चाल्यते ।३८॥
qe fe विष्णुर्देवानां यत्र धर्म: सनातन: । तस्य च ब्रह्म गोविप्रास्तपो om: सदक्षिणा: । ३९1
तस्मात् सर्वात्मना राजन् ब्राह्मणान् ब्रह्मवादिन: | तपस्विनो यज्ञशीलान् गाश्च हन्मो हविर्दुघा: vo!
fam गावश्च वेदाश्च तप: सत्यं दम: Wa: । श्रद्धा दया तितिक्षा च क्रतवश्च हरेस्तनू: Ive!
अयं वै तद्बधोषायो uation विहिंसनम् 1s?

"IMthat is so, O ruler of the Bhojas, then we shall presently kill without doubt (all) the babes
of above and below ten days (dwelling) in towns, villages, cowherd-stations and other
places.(31) What will the gods do (to us) with al heirendeavours, cowards as they are in battle
and ever perturbed in mind at the twangs of your bowstring? (32) Being assailed on all sides
with the volleys of your arrows (even) as you discharged them, they took to their heels (in
the past), anxious to escape with life, and made good their retreat, deserting the battle-
field.(33) Having laid down their arms, some gods (lit., denizens of heaven) stood with their
palms joined over their heads, reduced as they were to a miserable plight. Others, who
appeared with the tufts of hair on their crown untied and with the back end of their loin-cloth
remaining untucked to their loin (as a token of humility), exclaimed, "We are frightened (and
seek your mercy!)" (34) You, however, never strike those (of your enemies) who have
forgotten to take their missiles and (other) weapons, have lost their chariots, are overtaken
with fear, are intent on something else, have turned their back on the battle-field, or whose
bow has been broken or who are disinclined to fight. (35) What (harm) could be wrought by
the gods, valiant (only) in a safe retreat and boastful in places other than the battle-field?
What could be done by Hari, living in seclusion (in the heart of all) or by Siva, dwelling in
woods? (And) what could be achieved by Indra of poor strength or by Brahma (engaged in)
practising austerities ? (36) Yet we think that the gods donot deserve to be ignored because
of their hostile attitude (towards us). Therefore, command us, your obedient servants, to
destroy Visnu (disguised as an infant and forming their very mainstay). (37) (Even) as a
