Dis. 29 ] BOOK TEN 225

Seinen ner tee ee nee PERE EN ENE COREE eee eH ee

cherish (the feeling of) lascivious passion, wrath, fear, affection, kinship or devotion toward
$n Hari attain oneness with Him. (15) Hence no feeling of wonder should be entertained
by you as you do with regard to Sri Krsna—the birthless Lord, the Ruler of all masters
of Yoga—by whose grace (the whole of) this (mobile and immobile) creation can be
liberated.(16) Finding the aforesaid women of Vraja arrived in His presence, the Lord, who
is the foremost of (all) elocutionists, addressed them (as follows), infatuating them by His
elegant expressions. (17)

श्रीभगवानुवाच

स्वागतं वो महाभागा: fa किं करवाणि व: । व्रजस्यानामयं कच्चिद् व्रूतागमनकारणम् । १८।
रजन्येषा घोररूपा घोरसत्त्वनिषेविता । प्रतियात व्रजं नेह स्थेयं स्रीभि: सुमध्यमा: ।१९।
मातर: faa: Gar भ्रातर: पतयश्च a: विचिन्वन्तिह्यपञ्यन्तो मा कृढ्वं बन्धुसाध्वसम् । २०
oot wats राकेशकररञ्जितम्। यमुनानिललीलैजत्तरुपल्लवशोभितम् ।२१॥
aq aa मा fat गोष्ठं शुश्रूषध्वं पतीन् सती: । क्रन्दन्ति वत्सा बालाश्च तान् पाययत दुह्यत 1२२॥
अथवा मदभिस्नेहाद् भवत्यो यन्त्रिताशया: । आगता ह्युपपन्नं a: प्रीयन्ते मयि जन्तव: । २३1
भर्तु: शुश्रूषणं aint परो धर्मो ह्यमायया । तद्वन्धूनां च कल्याण्य: प्रजानां 1 चानुपोषणम् । २४1
gate दुर्भगो वृद्धो जडो रोग्यधनोऽपि वा ofa: SiR हातव्यो लोकेप्सुभिरपातकी 1241
saree च फल्गु Fey भयावहम्। जुगुप्सितं च ada औषपत्यं Gefen: । २६॥
श्रवणाद् दर्शनाद् ध्यानान्मयि भावोऽनुकीर्तनात् । न तथा सन्निकर्षेण प्रतियात ततो गृहान् ।२७॥

The glorious Lord said : Welcome is your presence (here), O highly blessed ones ! In
what way can | oblige you? Is everything well with Vraja ? (Please) reveal (to Me) the motive
of your visit (to this place). (18) Frightful in aspect is this night and characterized by the
presence of hideous creatures (too). (Therefore) return to Vraja (forthwith); you should not
tarry here, 0 slender-waisted ones ! (19) Not finding you (at home), mothers and fathers,
sons, brothers and husbands must be looking for you. (Pray,) do not cause anxiety to your
near and dear ones. (20) The blossoming forest, illumined with the rays of the full moon and
adorned with the tender leaves of trees waving before the sport of breezes from the Yamuna,
has been seen (by you). (21) Therefore, return without delay to Vraja and serve your
husbands, O virtuous ladies ! The calves as well as the children are crying (due to hunger);
nourish them with milk and milk the cows. (22) Or (may be) you have come because your
mind is bound by ties of attachment for Me. (If so) it is but proper for you; for (all) creatures
find delight in Me. (23) Indeed the paramount duty of women is to wait in a guileless manner
upon their husband aswell as his relations and to nourish the children. (24) A husband should
not be abandoned by women aspiring for higher (heavenly) regions, be he depraved,
unlucky, decrepit, dull-witted, ailing or even indigent, unless (of course) he is areprobate.(25)
Intercourse with a paramour on the part of a woman of noble pedigree is a bar to heaven,
scandalous, mean, a source of trouble, fraught with fear and hateful everywhere. (26) Love
for Me is fostered not so much by physical proximity (to Me) as by hearing My praises, looking
at Me, meditating on Me or by singing Me glories. Therefore, return home. (27)

इति विप्रियमाकर्ण्य गोप्यो गोविन्दभाषितम्। विषण्णा भग्नसङ्कुल्पाश्चिन्तामापुर्दुरत्ययाम् । २८1
अस्रैरुपात्तमषिभि: कुचकुङ्कुमानि तस्थुर्मृजन्त्य seg wT: स्म तूष्णीम् ।२९॥
