344 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 11

BEAK HRER EAH HERA EE EHHERAH HERES HEAL SARAH व यके ज SHEE SCE EEA ESHER eH HSH

your brother. It is God alone, dear son, who is responsible for a man's birth and death. (24)
It is He who creates the universe and it is He again who preserves and destroys it.
Nevertheless, being free from egotism, He is neither attached to the modes of Nature nor
to the functions (of creation etc., discharged by Him). (25) United with His own energy known
by the name of Maya, He evolves, protects and withdraws into Himself (all) living beings—
He who is their Ruler and Protector, nay, their very Self. (26) With all your being, dear son,
resort to that Divinity alone, who is death itself (to those who are not devoted to Him) and
Immortality (to His devotees), whois the ultimate resort of the (whole) universe and to whom
(even) the creators of the world (Brahma and the other lords of created beings) bear offerings
even as oxen, controlled by a string passed through their nostrils, bear loads (for their
master). (27) Cut to the quick by the (taunting) words of your stepmother, you left your (own)
mother when a (mere) child of five; and, retiring to the woods, you succeeded in propitiating
the Lord by means of your penance and by controlling your senses, and secured (for
yourself) an abode higher than the three worlds (the earth, heaven and the intermediate
region) ! (28) With your eyes turned inward, seek, dear Dhruva, that Supreme Spirit, who
fondly staysina mind free from animosity, whois devoid of attributes, one (without a second),
imperishable and ever free, and by whose presence this phenomenal world of diversity,
though unreal, appears to exist. (29) Then, by practising supreme devotion to the immortal
Lord, who is the Inner Controller of all selves, who is pure and absolute Bliss and is
possessed of all powers, you will gradually succeed in breaking asunder the hard knot
of ignorance in the shape of (the notions of) "I" and "mine". (30) By dint of your vast
learning, O king, curb your anger—which is the greatest impediment to (the attainment
of) every blessing—even as a disease is controlled with the help of a medicine. May God
bless you. (31) A wise man who seeks (to attain) for himself the state of fearlessness
should never allow himself to be overpowered by anger; for people are terribly afraid of the
man who is swayed by it. (32) You have committed a (great) offence against Kubera (the god
of riches), the friend of Lord Siva (who lives on a mountain), in that you killed the Yaksas,
though under provocation, thinking that it were they who had killed your brother. (33)
Propitiate him soon, my child, through submissiveness and polite words before the anger of
exalted souls (like him) should destroy our race. (34)

एवं स्वायम्भुव: पौत्रमनुशास्य मनुर्धुवम्।तेनाभिवन्दित: साकमृषिभि: स्वपुरं ययौ 134!
इति श्रीमद्भागवते महापुराणे पारमहंस्यां संहितायां चतुर्थस्कन्धे एकादशाऽध्याय 1११1
Having thus admonished his grandson, Dhruva, and greeted by the latter, Swayambhuva
Manu returned to his city along with the sages (who had accompanied him). (35)

Thus ends the eleventh discourse in Book Four of the great
and glorious Bhagavata-Purana, otherwise known
as the Paramahamsa-Samhita.

teat Cath.
Prd Sie
