Dis. 90] BOOK TEN 509

७५७ ५७ ७ ५ ७ ७ ७ ७ ७५ ७ ७.७ ७७ ERE ^ २७ ७७ १७१ १७ ७ १७ ७७७ १७ ७७७ ७७ ७.७.७.१ ७ ५७१२ RAAT 4०७ ०.७ ७७ ७७७ ७० ७७ २७ ERR ७4०७ ०48

Fema aura धाम पार्थ: परमविस्मित: | यत्किञ्चित् पौरुषं पुंसां मेने कृष्णानुकम्पितम्। ६३ |
इतीदृशान्यनेकानि वीर्याणीह प्रदर्शयन्। बुभुजे विषयान् ग्राम्यानीजे चात्यूर्जितैर्मखै: । ६४॥
प्रववर्षाखिलान् कामान् प्रजासु ब्राह्मणादिषु | यथाकालं यथैवेन्द्रो भगवाञ्छैष्ठ्यमास्थित: । ६५॥
wat नृपानधर्मिष्ठान् घातयित्वार्जुनादिभि:। अञ्जसा वर्तयामास धर्मं धर्मसुतादिभि:। ६६॥
इति श्रीमद्भागवते महापुराणे पारमहंस्यां संहितायां दशमस्कन्धे उत्तरार्धे द्विजकुमारानयनं नाम एकोननवतितमोऽध्याय: ॥ ८९॥

The said Sri Krsna and Arjuna accepted the mandate of the Supreme Person,
bowed to Him and, supremely delighted, returned to Dwaraka with the sons of the
Brahmana following the same route by which they had gone there. The sons of the
Brahmana had grown up according to their respective age, but in appearance they were
the same as at the time of their birth. Bhagavan Sri Krsna and Arjuna returned them to
the Brahmana. (61-62) Seeing the glorious realms of Bhagavan Visnu, Arjuna felt much
astonished. He realized that whatever prowess is possessed by men was due to the
grace of Bhagavan Sri Krsna. (63) (Pariksit!) exhibiting these and many other similar
feats, Bhagavan Sri Krsna appeared to men as if enjoying worldly pleasures (like
ordinary men of the world) and performed sacrifices on the highest scale (like the
greatest of kings). (64) Just as Indra sends down timely showers, so He showered all
boons on the Brahmanas and other subjects, adopting the conduct of an ideal king. (65)
He Himself killed many an unrighteous king, and caused many others to be killed by
Arjuna and others. In this way He easily re-established the rule of Dharma (throughout
the world) with the help of Yudhisthira and other (righteous) kings. (66)

Thus ends the eighty-ninth discourse entitled “The Lord brings back the (dead) sons
of a Brahmana’, in the fatter half of Book Ten of the great and glorious
Bhagavata-Purana, otherwise known as the Paramahamsa-Samhita.

eS rs

अथ नवतितमोऽध्याय:

Discourse XC

The Story of (the amorous sports of) Sri Krsna narrated

AYE उवाच

सुखं स्वपुर्यां निवसन् द्वारकायां श्रिय: पति:। सर्वसंपत्समृद्धायां जुष्टायां वृष्णिपुङ्गवै:। १ ।
स्त्रीभिश्चोत्तमवेषाभिर्नवयौवनकान्तिभि: । कन्दुकादिभिर्हर्म्यषु क्रीडन्तीभिस्तडिद्द्युभि:। २ ।
नित्यं संकुलमार्गायां मदच्युद्धिर्मतङ्गजै:। स्वलङ्कृतैर्भटैरश्चै रथैश्च कनकोज्ज्वलै:। ३ ।
उद्यानोपवनाढ्यायां पुष्पितद्रुमराजिषु | समन्तत:। ४ ।
रेमे षोडशसाहस्रपतीनामेकवल्लभ: | तावद्विचित्ररूपोऽसौ तद्गृहेषु महद्धिषु। ५ ।
प्रोत्फुल्लोत्पलकह्लारकुमुदाम्भोजरेणुभि: । वासितामलतोयेषु कूजद्द्विजकुलेषु च। ६ ।
विजहार विगाह्याम्भो हृदिनीषु महोदय:। कुचकुङ्कुमलिप्ताङ्ग: परिरब्धश्च योषिताम्। ७ ।

।

उपगीयमानो । गन्धर्वैर्मृदङ्गपणवानकान् । वादयद्विर्मुदा वीणां सूतमागधवन्दिभि:। ८

इ Suka began again: (Pariksit! the splendour of Dwaraka was matchtess.) Its roads
