Dis. 31] ` BOOK FOUR’ .. - 437.

SEW ERE ROR TE EO HE TOT HH जग EET ME PME Ee EGE EE ERE SHEMET EATER TENG TN SORE च्या केको CRE HE HR RE

the organs of action) appear (to function) in the waking state and remain dormant in sound
sleep. As a matter of fact, however, (the three modifications of the ego in the shape of) the
five gross elements, the five organs of action and the five senses of perception as well as the
phantom of diversity arising from it are (ever) absent in Him. (16) Just as clouds, darkness
and light appear, O rulers of the globe, and disappear in the sky by turns so do the potencies
of Brahma in the form of Rajas, Tamas and Sattva appear and then disappear in the
Absolute. So does the process (of creation and dissolution) continue uninterrupted. (17)
Therefore (since He is the Cause of all), worship you as one with yourselves Sri Hari (the
Ruler even cf the highest gods, Brahma and others) Himself, the one (undifferentiated) Soul
of all embodied existences, who is (the same as) Time (the efficient cause), the Unmanifest
(the material cause) and the Supreme Purusa (the doer), and who has by His energy (ii the
shape of Consciousness) cast out the material creation. (18)

wa सर्वभूतेषु सन्तुष्टया येन केन- वा । adie च qe जनार्दन: 1281
अपहतसकलॆषणामलात्मन्यविरतमेधितभावनोपहूत: ।
निजजनवगत्वमात्मनोऽयन्न सरति छिद्रवदक्षर: wat हि 1201
न भजति कुमनीषिणां a sat हरिरधनात्मधनप्रियो रसज्ञ: ।
श्रुतधनकुलकर्मणां मदैर्ये विदधति पापमकिञ्चनेषु सत्सु ।२१॥
श्रिग्रमनुचग्.र्ती तदर्थिनश्च द्विपदपतीन् विवुध्रा.श्च यत्स्वषूर्ण: |
न walt निजभृत्यवर्गतन्त्र: कथममुमुद्विसृजेत्पुमान् कृततज्ञ: 1221

By kindness to all living beings, by remaining contented with anything whatsoever and
by taming the senses Lord Janardana is soon propitiated. (19) Lured into the heart of pious
souls—rid of all cravings and (thus) purged of all dross by their constantly growing
devotion—the imperishable Lord surely does not escape from it any more than the ether
locked in it, (thereby) proving His amenability to the control of His servants. (20) SriHari, who
loves the destitute looking upon Him as their (only) wealth, and knows the bliss inherent in
Devotion, does not accept the worship of those foolish men who through their pride of
learning, affluence, pedigree and (remarkable) deeds show disrespect to such destitute
devotees. (21) How can a man who has any sense of gratitude in him give up even for a while
(the thought of) Him who has no regard (even) for Sri (the goddess of beauty and prosperity
and His own Consort)—even though She (ever) waits on Him—much less for kings (rulers
of men) and gods seeking Her favour—inasmuch as He is perfect in Himself—but who is
(nonetheless) subject to the will of His servants ? (22)

asta तन्मुखनिर्यातं यज्ञा लोकमलापहम्।हरेरनिंशम्य तत्पादं ध्यायन्तस्तद्गतिं ययु: । २४॥

Maitreya resumed : Having thus told the Pracetas what has been reproduced just now
and discoursed on other topics relating to the Lord, O Vidura, the sage Narada (son of
Brahma, the self-born) returned to the abode of Brahma. (23) Having heard the praises of
Sri Hari—which wipe out the sins of the world, and which were uttered by the mouth of
Narada—and contemplating on His feet. the Pracetas too attained to His realm. (24) | have
thus repeated to you. O Vidura, the dialogue between the Pracetas and Narada, containing
the praises of Sri Hari—which was all you asked me. (25)

य ow wma मानवस्यानुवर्णित: a: प्रियव्रतस्यापि निवोध नृपसन्तम 126!
