260 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 27

।७.३.७.३.३ Re Fe Be A RR ERR RO EH RR RAAT REE PERE HEE HE EEE EE EER HH RANE HM A

connected with it as his own, who transcends the three states of consciousness (waking,
dream and deep sleep), and therefore no longer sees anything else than God—such a man
is able to perceive his true Self with his purified intellect even as one sees the sun with his
eyes, and (forthwith) attains to that Brahma who is one without a second, who is free from
all adjuncts (such as body), who shines as the only reality through the false ego, who is the
foundation of Prakrti,(the material cause of the universe), nay, who reveals the Mahat-tattva
and other evolutes and interpenetrates everything—both cause and effect. (6—11)

यथा जलस्थ आभास: स्थलस्थेनावदृश्यते | स्वाभासेन तथा gat जलस्थेन दिवि स्थित: 1221
एवं त्रिवृदहङ्कारो भूतेन्द्रियमनोमयै: । स्वाभासैर्लक्षितोऽनेन सदाभासेन सत्यदूक 1831
भूतसूक्ष्मेन्दियमनोबुद्ध्यादिष्निह निद्रया । लीनेष्नसति यस्तत्र विनिद्रो निरहंक्रिय: । १४॥
मन्यमानस्तदाऽऽत्मानमनष्टो नष्टवन्मृषा । नष्टेऽहङ्करणे द्रष्टा नष्टवित्तं इवातुर: 1241
१ प्रत्यवमृश्यासावात्मानं प्रतिपद्यते।साहङ्कारस्य द्रव्यस्य योऽवस्थानमनुग्रह: ।१६॥

Just as a reflection of the sun in water (existing in a pot in a corner of some house) is
discovered (by the inmates of the house) with the help of a reflection of that reflection on a
wall of the house, and the sun in the heavens can be seen with the help of its own reflection
in water, even so the threefold (Sattvika, Rajasika and Tamasika) ego (which reflects the
Spirit) is revealed through its reflections on the body, the Indriyas and the mind; and through
the ego, which contains a reflection of the Spirit, is seen God, who is possessed of true
wisdom, is absolutely free from egotism and keeps awake even when the subtle elements
(in the shape of sound etc.), the Indriyas, the mind and the intellect etc., get merged in the
Unmanifest (Primordial Matter) on accountof sleep (during the state of deep slumber).(12—14)
Although (in waking life)the existence of the Self can be vividly felt as the seer (of objects
of perception such as sound etc.), he falsely takes himself as lost, though not lost, because
of the disappearance of the ego (which forms its adjunct) during the state of deep sleep, just
as a man who has lost his fortune feels distressed and takes himself as lost. (15) Pondering
thus, a man of understanding realizes his own Self, who is the substratum and revealer of
all fundamental principles including the ego. (16)

रेवहूति
पुरुषं प्रकृतिर्ब्रह्मन्न frei कर्हिचित्। अन्योन्यापाश्रयत्वाच्च नित्यत्वादनयो: प्रभो ie!
यथा गन्धस्य yay न भावो व्यतिरेकत: | अपां रसस्य च यथा तथा Fe: परस्य च 1१८1
aed: कर्मबन्धोऽयं पुरुषस्य यदाश्रय: । गुणेषु सत्सु प्रकृते: Hard aya: कथम् 1१९1
wie तत्त्वावमर्शोन निवृत्तं भयमुल्बणम्। अनिवृत्तनिमित्तत्वात्पुन: प्रत्यवतिष्ठते 120 |

Devahiti said : Matter, 0 divine sage, can never leave the Spirit, the two being
interdependent and co-eternal, O Lord. (17) Just as odour and earth and (similarly)taste and
water can never exist apart, so can Buddhi ( understanding, which is an evolute of Matter)
and the Spirit never remain dissociated from each other. (18) Hence how can there be any
freedom for the soul so long as the Gunas (modes) of Prakrti continue to exist—Gunas that
bind the soul, who is a non-doer, to actions?(19) Even if the great fear of such bondage is
averted through an enquiry into (the nature of) the fundamental principles in any particular
case; the same may appear again, since the cause of it (in the shape of the aforesaid Gunas)
has not ceased.(20)

a

श्रीभगवानुवाच
अनिमित्तनिमित्तेन स्वधर्मेणामलात्मना | तीव्रया मयि भक्त्या च श्रुतसम्भृतया चिरम् 1२१1

ज्ञानेन Gea वैराग्येण बलीयसा । तपोयुक्तेन योगेन तीव्रेणात्मसमाधिना ।२२॥
