चतुर्थ: स्कन्ध:
अथ प्रथमोऽध्याय:

Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana
Book Four
Discourse |

The Progeny of Swayambhuva Manu's Daughters
W394 उवाच

मनोस्तु शतरूपायां fra: कन्याश्च जज्ञिरे। आकूतिर्देवहूतिश्च प्रसूतिरिति विश्रुता: । १ ।

apf रुचये प्रादादपि भ्रातृमतीं qa: । पुत्रिकाधर्ममाश्रित्य श्ञतरूपानुमोदित: । २ ।
Maitreya continued : (Besides his two sons, Priyavrata and Uttanapada) three
daughters were also born to Swayambhuva Manu through Sataripa (his wife). They were
severally known by the names of Akiti, Devahuti and Prasuti. (1) With the concurrence of
Sataripa he gave away Akiti to Ruci (one of the lords of created beings), treating heras a

Putrika (a daughter married on the explicit understanding that her first male issue would be
taken in adoption by her father), even though she (already) had (two) brothers. (2)

प्रजापति: स भगवान् रुचिस्तस्यामजीजनत्। मिथुनं ब्रह्मवर्चस्वी परमेण समाधिना । ३ ।
यस्तयो: पुरुष: साक्षाद्विष्णुर्यज्ञस्वरूपधृक् । या et सा दक्षिणा भूतेरंशभूतानपायिनी । ४ ।
आनिन्ये eye पुत्र्या: पुत्रं विततरोचिषम् । स्वायम्भुवो मुदा युक्तो रुचिर्जग्राह दक्षिणाम् । ५ |
at कामयानां भगवानुवाह यजुषां पति: । तुष्टायाँ तोषमापन्नोऽजनयद द्वादशात्मजान्। ६ |
dm: प्रतोष: संतोषो भद्र: शान्तिरिडस्पति: | इध्म: कविर्विभु: स्वह्न: सुदेवो रोचनो द्विषट्। ७ |
तुषिता am ते देवा आसन् स्वायम्भुवान्तरे। मरीचिमिश्रा ॠषयो यज्ञ: सुरगणेश्वर: । ८ ।
प्रियत्रतोत्तानपादौ मनुपुत्रौ महौजसौ । तत्पुत्रपौत्रनप्तृणामनुवृत्तं तदन्तरम् । ९ ।

The worshipful Ruci, who was a lord of created beings and invested with the spiritual
glory appropriate to a Brahmana, begot through her (Akiti) a pair—a male and a female
child—after propitiating the Lord through his supreme concentration of mind (on the Lord).(3)
Of them, the male was no other than Lord Visnu, who takes the form of sacrifices, (and was
also known by the name of Yajfia). And the female was Daksina (representing the sacrificial
fee), who was a part manifestation of Laksmi (the goddess of fortune) and hence inseparable
from the Lord. (4) Full of joy, Swayambhuva brought his daughter's son of boundless glory
to his home (as stipulated), while Ruci accepted Daksina (as his own progeny). (5) Lord
Yajfia, who is the Ruler of all sacrifices, married Daksina, who longed for Him and was

(accordingly) much delighted (at her union with Him). The Lord (too) felt (highly) gratified and
hannt thrariah her fas manv as) twelve sons. (6) These twelve sons were Tosa, Pratosa,
