` 692 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 9
SLSSLA SSH SH SHH ene eee cH eee hewherthethevswreerhser tert egk ees eek ere heath ieee
भाया मन: सृजति कर्ममयं बलीय: कालेन चोदितगुणानुमतेन पुंस: |
wera यदजयार्पितषोडशारं संसारचक्रमज कोऽतितरेत् त्वदन्य: 1221
स त्वं हि नित्यविजितात्मगुण: स्वधाम्ना कालो वशीकृतविसृज्यविसर्गशक्ति: ।
चक्रे विसृष्टमजयेश्वरं teat निष्पीड्यमानमुपकर्ष विभो प्रपन्नम् ।२२॥
दृष्टा मया दिवि विभोऽखिलधिष्ण्यपानामायु: श्रियो fave इच्छति याञ्जनोऽयम् |
येऽस्मत्पितु: कुपितहासविजृम्भितभ्रूविस्फूर्जितेन लुलिता: स तु ते निरस्त: 1231
तस्मादमूस्तनुभृतामहमाशिषो ज्ञ आयु: श्रियं विभवमैन्द्रियमाविरिञ्चात् ।
नेच्छामि ते बिलुलितानुरुविक्रमेण कालात्मनोपनय मां निजभृत्यपार्श्वम् । २४॥
निर्विद्यते न तु जनो यदपीति विद्वान् कामानलं aged: शमयन्दुरापै: ।२५॥
wre रज:प्रभव sa तमोऽधिकेऽस्मिन् जात: सुरेतरकुले क्व तवानुकम्पा |
न ब्रह्मणो न तु भवस्य न a रमाया यन्मेऽर्पित: शिरसि पद्मकर: प्रसाद: 1261
नैषा परावरमतिर्भवतो ननु स्याजन्तोर्यथाऽऽत्मसुहृदो जगतस्तथापि ।
संसेवया सुरतरोरिव ते yee: सेवानुरूपमुदयो न परावरत्वम् ।२७॥
एवं जनं निपतितं प्रभवाहिकूपे कामाभिकाममनु य: प्रपतन् प्रसङ्घात्।
कृत्वाऽऽत्मसात् सुरर्षिणा भगवन् गृहीत: सोऽहं Hei नु विसृजे aa भृत्यसेवाम् 1221
मत्राणरक्षणमनन्त पितुर्वधश्च मन्ये स्वभृत्य ऋॠषिवाक्यमृतं विधातुम् ।
खड्गं प्रगृह्य यदवोचदसद्विधित्सुस्त्वामीश्वरो मदपरोऽवतु कं हरामि ie!
एकस्त्वमेव जगदेतदमुष्य यत् त्वमाद्यन्तयो: पृथगवस्यसि मध्यतश्च |
We गुणव्यतिकरं निजमाययेदं नानेव तैरवसितस्तदनुप्रविष्ट: 1201
त्वं वा इदं सदसदीश भवांस्ततोऽन्यो माया यदात्मपरबुद्धिरियं ह्यपार्था |
aa यस्य जन्म निधनं स्थितिरीक्षणं च ae वै तदेव वसुकालवदष्टितर्वो: 1321
Maya (Prakrti or primordial Matter) with her attributes (in the shape of Sattva, Rajas and
Tamas) thrown into activity by Kala (the Time-Spirit), representing the creative will of the
Cosmic Being (a part manifestation of Yours), evolves the subtle body (chiefly consisting of
the mind), which is a product of Karma (activity), is exceedingly powerful (hard to conquer)
and full of (endless) latent desires, and constitutes the wheel of transmigration with sixteen
spokes (in the shape of the mind, the ten Indriyas and the five subtle elements) provided by
Nescience (which has no beginning). Who that is averse (not devoted) to You can cross over
this wheel, O birthless One ? (21) As such You, who have by Your own energy (in the shape
of Consciousness) ever kept under full control the properties of intellect (e.g., joy and sorrow,
attachment and greed and so on) nay, who as Kala (the Director of Maya) have exercised
full sway over the powers of both the effects and the causes, may (kindly) draw me, O
omnipotent Lord, close to You—me who have been thrown by Nescience into this wheel of
sixteen spokes and am being crushed thereby (as a sequel), and who have (now) sought
Your protection.(22) The (inordinately) long life, riches and glory in heaven of all the
guardians of the (different) worlds—which these (earthly) people (generally) crave.for, and
which were swept away by a mere play of my father's eyebrows, knit in the course ofan angry

laugh—have been seen by me. But (even) he has been disposed of by You. (23) Therefore,
| do not covet those blessings, sought for by embodied beings—iong life, wealth, glory and

