Dis. 21] BOOK NINE 81

SHR ERE EEE Re मिज EEEE SEERA ES EERE AAA AAR SHEIK HHH

स gel शुककन्यायां ब्रह्मदत्तमजीजनत्। स योगी गवि भार्यायां विघ्वक्सेनमधात् सुतम् 124 |
जैगीषव्योपदेशेन योगतन्त्रं चकार इ उदक्स्वनस्ततस्तस्माद् भल्लादो बार्हदीषवा: 128!
From (the loins of) Garga sprang up Sini, of whom was born Gargya. From him, indeed,

even though he was a Ksatriya, started a line of Brahmanas. From Mahavirya appeared
Duritaksaya, whose sons were Trayyaruni, Kavi and Puskararuni, who attained to
Brahmanhood though born in a line of Ksatriyas. Brhatksatra’s son was Hast!, by whom was
built (the city of) Hastinapura. (19-20) Hasti’s sons were Ajamidha, Dwimidha and Purumidha.
Priyamedha and other Brahmanas were the progeny of Ajamidha. (21) From (the loins of)
Ajamidha sprang up (another son) Brhadisu, whose son was Brhaddhanwa. Of the latter was
born Brhatkaya, whose son was Jayadratha. (22) His son was Visada, to whom was born
in course of time Senajit, Ruciraswa, Drdhahanu, Kasya and Vatsa were the (four) sons of
Senajit. (23) Ruciragwa’s son was Para, whose son (again) was (named ) Prthusena. There
was (another) son of Para, Nipa by name, who had no less than a hundred _ sons. (24)
Through Krivi, the daughter of Suka* Nipa begot (another son) Brahmadatta. The latter,
(who was) a Yogi, begot through his wife Gau (Saraswati), (a son named) Viswaksena. (25)
Inspired by the teachings of Jaigisavya, itis said, he produced a work on Yoga. From (the
loins of) Viswaksena sprang up Udakswana and from him followed Bhallada. These are
the descendants of Brhadisu. (26)

यवीनरो द्विमीढस्य कृतिमांस्तत्सुत: स्मृत: । नाम्ना सत्यधृतिर्यस्य दृढनेमि: सुपार्श्वकृत् ie!

qualia, सुमतिस्तस्य पुत्र: सन्नतिमांस्तत: । कृतिर्हिरण्यनाभाद्यो चोगं प्राप्य जगौ स्म षट् । २८॥

संहिता: प्राच्यसाम्नां वै नीपो ह्युग्रायुधस्तत: । तस्य aa: सुवीरोऽथ सुवीरस्य रिपुञ्जय: ।२९॥

wit बहुरथो am पुरुमीढोऽप्रजोऽभवत्।नलिन्यामजमीढस्य नील: aha: सुतस्तत: | Zo!

ea: सुशान्तिस्तत्पुत्र: पुरुजोऽर्कस्ततोऽभवत्। watreraeras URRY ROTA: । ३१1

यवीनरो बृहदिषु: काम्पिल्य: संजय: सुता: । vais: प्राह पुत्रा मे पञ्चानां रक्षणाय हि 1321

विषयाणामलमिमे इति पञ्चालसंज्ञिता:। मुद्गलाद् ब्रह्म निर्वृत्तं गोत्रं मौद्गल्यसंज्ञितम् । ३३

Dwimidha's son was Yavinara, whose son is remembered by the name of Krtiman. His

son was Satyadhrti by name, whose son, Drdhanemi, begot Suparswa. (27) From Suparswa
followed Sumati, whose son was Sannatiman. From (the loins of) the latter appeared Krii,
who having received instruction in Yoga from Hiranyanabha taught (separately) indeed the
six Samhitas (or collections of sacred texts) known as Pracyasamas. His son to be sure was
Nipa, from whom followed Ugrayudha. His son was Ksemya, of whom was bom Suvira,
whose son was Ripufjaya. (28-29) From (the loins of) the latter appeared a son named
Bahuratha. (Dwimidha’s younger brother) Purumidha remained issueless. Ajamidha's son,
through his (second) wife Nalini, was Nila, of whom was born a son, Santi (by name). (30)
Santi's son was Susanti, and Susanti’s son was Puruja, of whom was born Arka. His son was
Bharmyaswa, who had five sons (viz.,) Mudgala, Yavinara, Brhadisu, Kampilya and
Safijaya. Bharmyaswa said, "These five sons of mine are competent enough to protect five
lands.” Hence, they were known as the Pajicalas. From Mudgala sprang up a line of
Braéhmanas called the Maudgalyas. (1—33)

मिथुनं मुद्गलाद् wate दिवोदास: पुमानभूत्॥। अहल्या कन्यका यस्यां शतानन्दस्तु गौतमात् । ३४॥

* Although Suka (the son of Vedavyasa) renounced his father's home even without being invested with the sacred thread,
and remained a celibate ever afterwards, he is said to have left for the solace of his disconsolate father a shadow-form of his,
known by the name of Chayasuka, who lived as a householder and begot children.
