56 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 14

MERE REWER REM HERS REMC HL HONE NE eRe CRON Be eR RR ET त् Bi Be We Re ee ROMY HY WT Re HL BRT HT RTRs Bi BEB MEAT i पि Be ती HAE Be HR BAT HE HE ती घौ BEE

gi हतप्रभं ua wend मिथो दिवि । adqesirwndiod इव रोदसी ।१७॥

नद्यो नदाश्च क्षुभिता: wife च मनांसि च । न ज्वलत्यग्निराज्येन कालोऽयं किं.विधास्यति । १८॥

न पिबन्ति स्तनं वत्सा न दुह्यन्ति च मातर: । रुदन्त्यश्रुमुखा Wal न AAI AT ।१९॥

दैवतानि रुदन्तीव स्विद्यन्ति ह्युच्चलन्ति च । इमे जनपदा ग्रामा: पुरोद्यानाकराश्रमा: |
भ्रष्टश्रियो निरानन्दा: किमघं दर्शयन्ति a: 1201

मन्य एतैर्महोत्पातैर्नूनूं भगवत: पदॆ: | अनन्यपुरुषश्रीभिर्हीना भूर्हतसोभगा । २१।

Yudhisthira said : "Arjuna was sent to Dwaraka to see our relations (Sri Krsna and
others) as well as to find out what Sti Krsna of sacred renown was doing. (6) Although seven
months have since elapsed, O Bhimasena, | do not quite understand why your younger
brother has not yet returned. (7) May it not be that the time predicted by the celestial sage
has arrived, when the Lord intends to cast off the form assumed by Him for the sake of sport—
the Lord to whose grace we owe our fortune, our kingdom, our spouses, our life, the
continuance of our race, our progeny, our victory over the enemies and our title to the higher
worlds. (8-9) Observe the fearful portents, O tiger among men, in the heavens as well as
on the earth as also in our own person, boding some calamity near at hand, that will distract
our mind. (10) My left thigh, left eye and left arm, dear brother, are throbbing again and again
and my heart quakes every now and then: all these will surely bring some unhappy news.(1 1)
Lo! the she-jackal, vomitting fire, howls at the rising sun and this dog, dear Bhima, fearlessly
bays at me. (12) Good animals (such as the cow) pass by to my left, while other
(inauspicious) animals (as the donkey etc.) turn to my right. Nay, । see my horses weeping,
O tiger among men. (13) This dove, the harbinger of death, as well as the owl andits enemy,
the crow, keeping awake all the night, make my heart shudder with their horrible cries and
would have the world converted into a desert. (14) The quarters look smoky; the orbs of the
sun and the moon appear with a misty halo encircling them; the earth with the mountains
quakes (every now and then); and there are frequent thunder-claps accompanied by violent
lightning-strokes, dear brother.(15) The wind blows very hard, spreading darkness with dust;
the clouds rain blood, thus creating a ghastly scene everywhere. (16) Look at the sun, which
has lost its brilliance, and the planets contending against one another in the heavens. The
heaven and the earth seem to be set on fire due to multitudes of ghosts and other creatures
congregating here and there. (17) Streams and big rivers no less than lakes and minds (of
the people) are (all) agitated. The fire does not burn (even) with clarified butter. | wonder what
surprise is this (fateful) time going to spring on us ? (18) Calves refuse to suck the udders
and their mother do not allow themselves to be milked. Cows weep, tears trickling down their
faces; while bulls too do not rejoice with the herd. (19) The images of gods appear to weep;
nay, they perspire and move from their seats. These outlying districts and villages, cities and
gardens, mines and hermitages look cheerless and robbed of their splendour. (God knows)
what evil they portend for us. (20) From these grave forebodings | am led to believe that the
earth has undoubtedly lost its charm, having been deprived (of the touch) of the Lord's feet,
that possess a grace (graceful marks of a thunderbolt etc.) unknown to the feet of any other
person." (21)

इति चिन्तयतस्तस्य दृष्टारिष्टेन चेतसा । राज्ञ: प्रत्यागमद ब्रह्मन् यदुपुर्या: कपिध्वज: 1221
तं पादयोर्निपतितमयथापूर्वमातुरम्। अधोवदनमब्बिन्दून् Yat नयनाब्जयो: 1231
विलोक्योद्विग्नहदयो विच्छायमनुजे नूप:। पृच्छति wm सुहृन्मध्ये संस्मरन्नारदेरितम् । २४।
As the king was thus expressing his concern with a heart full of anxiety at the sight of
these portentous phenomena, O Saunaka, Arjuna (whose banner was emblazoned with the
