266 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 39

tot rte soi tri etre neering for en et ie trier nie st OE ER a ast Rae eet

विहाय गेहान् स्वजनान् सुतान् पतांस्तद्दास्यमद्धोपगता नवप्रिय: 1221
स्रप्नविष्टस्प मुखं व्रजस्पते पास्यन्त्यपाङ्गीत्वच्लितस्मितासवम्।रइ ।
तासां मुकुन्दो मधुमञ्जुभाषितैर्गृहीतचित्तर परवान् मनस्व्यपि ।
aa gad: प्रतियास्यतेऽबला ग्राम्या: सलज्जस्मितविभ्रमैरभ्रमन् ।२४॥
महोत्सव: श्रीरमणं गुणास्पदं द्रक्ष्वन्ति a चाध्वनि देवकीसुतम् ।२५॥

Alas ! the Darling of Nanda (Himself) whose friendship is (but) momentary, and who is
fond of the new, does not even gaze on us, who have-been enslaved by the spell cast by
Himself and who directly sought His service renouncing our homes, relations, sons and
husbands! (22) Happy will be the dawn following this night for the ladies of the city (of
Mathura); (nay,) their aspirations have been surely realized; (for) they will fondly gaze on the
countenance—full of nectarean smiles exhibited by the corners of eyes—of Sri Krsna (the
Lord of Vraja), even as He fearlessly enters the city. (23) How, then, will Sti Krsna (the
Bestower of Liberation) return to us, helpless rustic women—even though He has got other
relations (too in Vraja), and although He is self-possessed—when His mind is captivated by
the utterances, sweet as honey, of those ladies (of Mathura), and remains deluded by their
bashful smiles and amorous glances ? (24) Today surely a grand feast awaits (in Mathura)
the eyes of the Dasarhas, the Bhojas, the Andhakas, the Vrsnis and the Satvatas—who will
behold Sri Krsna (the Son of Yagoda, nicknamed as Devaki), the Spouse of Sri (the goddess
of beauty and prosperity) and the (one) Abode of (all) excellences—as well as to the eyes
of those that will see Him (driving) on the road (to Mathura). (25)

योऽसावनाश्वास्य «dated जनं प्रियात्प्रियं नेष्यति पारमध्वन: 1261
अनार्द्रधीरेष समास्थितो wi तपन्वमी च त्वरयन्ति दुर्मदा: |
qm अनोभि: स्थविरैरुपेक्षितॆ Fe oa नोऽद्य प्रतिकूलमीहते 1201
निवारयाम: समुपेत्य wea fe नोऽकरिष्यन् कुलवृद्धबान्धवा: |
मुङ्कृसङ्गात्निमिषाधदुंस्त्यनाद् दैवेन विध्वंसितदीनचेतसाम् । २८।

~ >
त गक ।

नीता: स्म न: क्षणमिव क्षणदा विना तं गोप्य: कधन्यत्तितम्पतपादून्तम्।शा।
योऽह्न: क्षये व्रजमनन्तसख: परीतो Wee खुररजङ्छुरितालकस्त्रक |
वेणुं क्वणन् स्मितकटाक्षनिरीक्षणेन fad क्षिणोत्यमुमृते नु Ha भवेम 1३०1
‘Akrura’ (one who is not crue!) should not have been the name of such a ruthless fellow
who is extremely hard-hearted in that he is going to take Sti Krsna (who is dearer than life)
beyond the familiar path, not caring to comfort us (the womenfolk), sore distressed as we
are.(26) Sri Krsna (whose mind is altogether devoid of the moisture of love) is (already)
comfortably seated in the chariot and, following Him, these arrogant Gopas in their bullock-
carts are urging Akrira to make haste. (On top of it) the aged ones have grown indifferent
(do not interfere). And Fate too is working against us today ! (27) Let us politely approach
Sri Krsna (a scion of Madhu) and stop Him. What harm can the elders of the race or our
relations do to us, who stand deprived by Providence of Sri Krsna‘s company—which could
not be easily forgone even for halfa second—and are (so) distressed in mind ? (28) How shall

