200 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 15

torte ttt he eh ee a eH ee LER CRRELEA HCA eee E HSE e ETH E AHA EN HHH ६..६- ३३३३

अथ पञ्चदशोऽध्याय:

Discourse XV

Sanaka and his three brothers pronounce a curse against Jaya and Vijaya
मैत्रेय उवाच
प्राजापत्यं तु तत्तेज: परतेजोहनं दिति: । दधार वर्षाणि ad wea सुरार्दनात् । १ |
लोके तेन हतालोके लोकपाला हतौजस: | न्यवेदयन् विश्वसृजे ध्वान्तव्यतिकरं दिशाम् । २ ।
Maitreya resumed ; Apprehending trouble to the gods (at the hands of her expected
sons), Diti retained (in her womb) for a hundred years the aforesaid seed of Kasyapa (a lord
of created beings), which was powerful enough to put down the enemy's strength. (1) (The
brilliance of that) seed (though cabined in the womb) dimmed the light (of all the luminaries)
in the world and the guardians of the various spheres too lost their splendour. They,
therefore, complained to Brahma (the creator of the universe) about the spread of darkness
in all directions. (2) ह
दवा ऊचु:

तम wet aw diam wad भृशम्।न ह्यव्यक्तं भगवत: कालेनास्पृष्टवर्त्मन: | ३ |
देवदेव जगद्धातर्लोकनाथशिखामणे | परेषामपरेषां त्वे भूतानामसि भाववित् । ४ |
नमो विज्ञानवीर्याय माययेदमुपेयुषे ! गृहीतगुणभेदाय नमस्तेऽव्यक्तयोनये । ५ ।
a त्वानन्येन waa भावयन्त्यात्मभावनम्। आत्मनि प्रोतभुवनं ot सदसदात्मकम् । ६ ।
at सुपक्वयोगानां जितश्वासेन्दियात्मनाम्।लब्धयुष्मत्पसादानां न कुतश्चित्पराभव: । ७ |
Te वाचा प्रजा: सर्वा गावस्तन्त्येव यन्निता: । हरन्ति बलिमायत्तास्तस्मै मुख्याय ते नम: । ८ ।
स त्वं विधत्स्व जं भूमंस्तमसा लुप्तकर्मणाम्। अद्भ्रदयया दृष्ट्या आपन्नानर्हसीक्षितुम् । ९ |
wr देव fart sie: काङश्यपमर्पितम्। दिशस्तिमिरयन् सर्वा वर्धतेऽग्निरिवैधसि ।१०॥

The gods said : You must be knowing, 0 lord, about this gloom, of which we are very
much afraid. We are sure nothing is hidden from You inasmuch as the range of Your
knowledge is unaffected by time. (3) O god of gods, O Maker of the universe, O crest-jewel
of the guardians of all spheres, You know the mind ofall living beings, big and small. (4) Hail,
hail to You, whose strengthis knowledge, and who have assumed this (four-faced) form as well
as the quality of Rajas by Your own Maya (playful nature), Your cause being unknown. (5)
All the worlds are woven into You; nay, the whole of this universe, consisting of both cause
and effect, is Your body. Really speaking, however, You are beyond all this. They who
contemplate on You, the Creator ofall Jivas, with exclusive devotion, having controlled their
breath, senses and mind, and whose Yoga (effort at Self-Realization) has ripened cannot
meet with discomfiture from any quarter since they have secured Your grace. (6-7)
Governed by Your word (the Vedas), even as oxen are controlled by a rope, all created
beings bear offerings to You (by performing their respective duties) subject to Your control.
Therefore, hail to You, the Chief Controller of all (even as the vital breath controls all the other
organs of the body). (8) People have failed to perform their duties because of this darkness
(which has rendered it impossible for them to distinguish between night and day). Kindly do
that which is good to them. And be pleased to regard us, who are in great affliction, with an
eye expressing abundant compassion, O infinite Lord ! (9) Enveloping all the quarters in
darkness, the seed of Kasyapa placed in Diti's womb is developing as fire thrown in a pile
of firewood. (10)
