Dis. 10] BOOK TWELVE 707

eat HR TEM HARRAH SHAR AAO I HM EAA RA ANA IA IS MANA व भि

condition, Uma spoke {as fallows) to Lord Siva (who has His abode on Mount Kailasa )—
"(Kindly) look at this Brahmana, O Lord, whose body, senses and mind have been stilledand
who can (as such) be (easily) compared to a sea whose waters and fishes have become
motionless due to a storm having passed. (Pray,) manifest the fruit of his asceticism, since
You are the Bestower of fruit. (4-5) ।

नैवेच्छत्याशिष: क्वापि ब्रह्यर्षिर्पोक्षमग्युत।भक्तिंपरांध्राग्वत्तिक्तावाम्पुंरुर्षेऽव्यये।क्षा
अथापि संवदिष्यामो भवान्येतेन साधुना। अयं हि परमो लाभो ym साधुसमागम: । ७ ।

The glorious Lord replied : This Brahmana sage would not have any blessing under
any circumstance, not even final beatitude, inasmuch as he has attained supreme devotion
to the immortal Lord, the Indweller of all hearts. (6) Even then we shall discourse with the
saint, 0 Bhavani; for itis the greatest gain to meet a pious soul. (7)

सूत उवाच
इत्युक्त्वा तमुपेयाय भगवान् स सतां गति: । ईशान: सर्वविद्यानामीश्वर: सर्वदेहिनाम् । ८ ।
तयोरागमनं साक्षादीदयोर्जगदात्मनो: । न a रुद्धधीवृत्तिरात्मानं विश्वमेव च । ९ ।
भगवांस्तदभिज्ञाय ret योगमायया | आविशात्तद्गुहाकालं वायुङ्छिद्रमिवेश्वर: 1201
आत्मन्यपि fra प्राप्तं तडित्पिङ्गजटाधरम्।त्र्यक्षं दशभुजं प्रांशुमुद्यन्तमिव भास्करम् ।११।
व्याघ्रचर्माम्बरधरं शूलखद्वाङ्गचर्मभि: | अक्षमालाडमरुककपालासिधनु: सह ।१२॥
बिभ्राणं सहसा भातं विचक्च्य ef विस्मित: । किमिदं कुत एवेति समाधेर्विरतो मुनि: ।१३॥
aR उन्मील्य aq सगणं सोमयाऽऽगतम् | रुद्रं त्रिलोकैकगुरुं ननाम झिरसा मुनि: ।१४॥
aa सपर्यां व्यदधात् सगणाय सहोमया। स्वागतासनपाद्यार्घ्यगन्धस्त्रग्धूपदीपकै: । १५
ame चात्मानुभावेन पूर्णकामस्य ते विभो । करवाम facie येनेदं निर्वृतं जगत्।१६॥
aa: faa ज्ञान्ताय सत्त्वाय प्रमृडाय च। रजोजुषेऽप्यघोराय नमस्तुभ्यं तमोजुषे । १७।

Sita went on : Having thus observed (to Parvati), the aforesaid Lord, the resort of the
righteous, the Master of all sciences, the Ruler of all embodied souls, approached the
sage. (8) Markandeya (however), who had all his mental faculties suspended, was
conscious neither of his own body nor of the (outside) world and (as such) did not perceive
(even) the advent of the very Sovereigns of the universe (Sankara and Parvati), the Inner
Controllers of (all) creation. (9) Knowing his mental condition full well, the almighty Lord Siva
(the Ruler of Kailasa) entered the cavity of his heart by virtue of His Yogamaya (wonderful
divine power), (even) as the air enters an opening. (10) The sage felt amazed to perceive
as having entered into his very being and flashed all of a sudden in his heart Lord Siva—a
tall figure with three eyes and ten arms, wearing matted locks—reddish-brown like streaks
of lightning—and effulgent like the rising sun, wrapping a tiger's skin for His loin-cloth and
carrying (in His hands) a rosary of Rudraksa beads, a Damart (a sort of small drum shaped
like an hour-glass), a begging-bow! (made of skull), a sword and a bow with a trident, a club
shaped like the foot of a bedstead and a shield—and, wondering what the vision was and
whence, woke up from his trance. (11—13) Opening his eyes, Markandeya beheld Lord
Rudra, the one Preceptor of (all) the three worlds, arrived (in his hermitage) alongwith (His
Divine Spouse) Uma and His entourage, and saluted Him with his head bent low. (14) He
did worship to the Lord alongwith Uma and His attendants—by according them (a hearty)
welcome, offeringseats, water to wash their feet and hands with, sandal paste and garlands,
and burning incense and lights—and submitted (as follows):—*What (service) can | do to
You, Oomnipresent Lord ! who are sated through realization of Your own blissful nature, and
