264 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 28

Metter 8) ea tert re ee ee ETH EES HHA KEVE CE HH EVE ETEAE THUNK RSE LEEPER ASHER EH HHS EH

यच्छौचनि:सृतसरित्प्रवरोदकेन तीर्थेन मूर्ध्यधिकृतेन fra: शिवोऽभूत्।
ध्यातुर्मन:रामलशैलनिसृष्टवज्रं ध्यायेच्चिरु भगवतश्चरणारविन्दम् । २२॥

The devotee should (first of all) concentrate his thought on the Lord's lotus-feet—
adorned with the marks (in the form of lines) of a thunderbolt, a goad, a banner and a lotus—
the splendour of whose prominent, ruddy and brilliant nails, resernbling the orb of the moon,
dispels the thick gloom of one’s heart. (21) The blessed Lord Siva became all the more
blessed by bearing on His head the holy waters of the Ganga (the foremost of all rivers),
which has its source in the water that washed the Lord's lotus-feet. Again, His feet are like
a thunderbolt hurled to shatter the mountain of sins stored in the mind of the devotee
meditating upon them. One should meditate on these for a long time.(22)

जानुद्दयं जलजलोचनया wen लक्ष्याखिलस्य सुरवन्दितया विधातु: |
ऊर्वोर्निधाय करपल्लवरोचिषा aq denied ee विभोरभवस्य कुर्यात् 231

व्यालम्बिपीतवरवाससि वर्तमानकाञ्जीकलापपरिरम्भि नितम्बबिम्बम् । २४॥
षि + x tz . NBIC S iN ।
ag हरिन्मणिवृषस्तनयोरमुष्य oa द्वयं विरादहारमयूखगोरम् 124 |

वक्षोऽधिवासमृषभस्य महाविभूते: पुंसा मनोनयननिर्वृतिमादधानम्।
कण्ठं च कौस्तुभमणेरधिभूषणार्थं कुर्यान्मनस्यखिललोकनमस्कृतस्य । २६॥

Then the devotee should impress on his heart the knees (as well as the shanks) of the
birthless Lord (who cuts short the transmigration of His devotees), which are fondled by
Laksmi (the goddess of fortune), the lotus-eyed mother of Brahma—the maker of the
universe—and the adored of the gods, with Her shining sprout-like hands, placing them (the
knees) on Her thighs. (23) Next he should fix his mind on the Lord's thighs, the storehouse
of energy, that possess the (blue)lustre of the linseed flower and appear most graceful when
borne on the shoulders of Garuda (the king of the birds). Similarly he should contemplate
on His roundedhips, encircled by a girdle resting on the exquisite yellow silk that covers them
and extends up to His ankles. (24) Now he should meditate on His pool-like navel at the
centre of His belly, the abode of the entire system of the worlds, from which sprang the lotus
representing all the spheres and forming the home of Brahma (the self-born). Likewise he
should concentrate his thought on the Lord's nipples, resembling a pair of most excellent
emeralds, which look whitish on account of the rays of the milk-white pearl necklaces
(adorning His chest). (25) He should then fix his mind on the bosom of the Supreme Person,
the abode of Goddess Mahalaksmi—which brings delight to the mind and eyes of men (who
contemplate on it). He should also imprint on his mind an image of the neck of the Lord who
is adored by the whole universe—a neck which serves to enhance the beauty of the
Kaustubha gem itself. (26)

बाहूंश्च मन्दरगिरे: परिवर्तनेन निर्णिक्तबाहुवलयानधिलोकपालान्।
सञ्चिन्तग्रेददशाशतारमसह्यतेजज शङ्खे च तत्करसरोरुहराजहंसम् । २७।
कौमोदकीं भगवतो दयितां स्मरेत दिग्धामरातिभटशोणितकर्दमेन |
Tet मधुव्रतवस्थगिरोपघुष्टां चैत्यस्य तत्त्वममलं मणिमस्य कण्ठे 1221
He should further focus his thought on the Lord’s four arms, the abode of the guardians

of the various spheres, the ornaments (armletsetc.),on which were burnished by revolving
Mount Mandara (at the time of churning the milk ocean along with the gods at the dawn of

