Dis. 13] BOOK EIGHT gc

feeeankirretesheeenetrerteksareereerieetherigenneeereecannreneeseseeeneennre
oS RO चवा वा SAREE HR HE:

आर्यकस्य सुतस्तत्र धर्मसेतुरिति स्मृत: । वैधृतायां हरेरंशस्रिलोकीं धारयिष्यति izes

The high-minded Dharmasavarni will be the eleventh Manu; while Satyadharma ar
others are going to be his ten sons.(24) the Vihangamas, the Kamagamas and tt
Nirvanarucis are going to be the (orders of) gods (in office) and Vaidhrta will be their Indi
(ruler); while Aruna and others * will be the seers.(25) A part manifestation of Sri Hari, bo!
of Vaidhrta through Aryaka, and known by the name of Dharmasetu, will maintain the thre
worlds. (26)

भविता रुद्रसावर्णी राजन् | eT मनु: । देववानुपदेवश्च देवश्रेष्ठादय: सुता: 12

ऋतधामा च aS देवाश्च हरितादय:। TAT तपोमूर्तिस्तपस्व्याग्नीध्रकादय: 121

स्वधामाख्यो हरेरंश: साधयिष्यति तन्मनो: | अन्तरं सत्यसहस: सूनृताया: सुतो विभु: ।२९॥
Rudrasavarni, O king, will be the twelfth Manu; and Devavan, Upadeva, Devaéresth
and others will be his sons. (27) Again, Rtadhama will be (the name of) the Indra and th
Haritas and so on will be the (orders of) gods. And Tapomtrti, Tapaswi, Agnidhraka an

others will be the (seven) seers. (28) The almighty son of Satyasaha and Sunrté, Swadham
by name, a part manifestation of Sri Hari, will protect that Manvantara. (29)

मनुस्रयोदशो भाव्यो देवसावर्णिरात्मवान् । चित्रसेनविचित्राद्या देवसावर्णिदेहजा: 130 |

देवा: सुकर्मसुत्रामसंज्ञा इन्द्रो दिवस्पति: । fafa भविष्यन्त्यृषयस्तदा 132 |

देवहोत्रस्य तनय उपहर्ता दिवस्पते: । योगेश्वरो हरेरंशो बृहत्यां सम्भविष्यति 132

The high-souled Devasavarni will be the thirteenth Manu; (and) Citrasena, Vicitra an

others will be the sons of Devasavarni. (80) The (orders of) gods bearing the names c
Sukarmas and Sutramas will remain in office, while Diwaspati will hold the office of Indre
(Even so) Nirmoka, Tattvadarga, and so on will be the (seven) Rsis t in that Manvantara.(31
A part manifestation of Sti Hari, Yogeswara (by name), will be born of Brhati as the son
Devahotra and will (prove to) be the benefactor of Indra (the ruler of heaven).(32)

मनुर्वा इन्द्रसावर्णिश्चतुर्ददम एष्यति । उरुगम्भीरबुद्ध्याद्या इन्द्रसावर्णिवीर्यजा: 1331
पवित्राश्चाक्षुषा देवा: हगुचिरिन्द्रो भविष्यति । अभ्निर्बाहु: aa: शुद्धो मागधाद्यास्तपस्विन: । ३४॥
सत्रायणस्य तनयो वृहद्भानुस्तदा हरि: | वितानायां महाराज क्रियातन्तून्वितायिता । ३५1
Indeed Indrasavarni will come to be the fourteenth Manu; while Uru,Gambhirabuddt
and so on will be the sons of Indrasavarni. (33) The Pavitras and the Caksusas will be th:
(orders of) gods and Suci will be (the name of) the Indra. (Even so) Agnibahu, Suci, Suddha
Magadha and so on will be the (seven) ascetics (sages¢ in office). (34) Born as the son ८
Satrayana, Brhadbhanu (by name), through Vitana, O great king, Sri Hari will propagate th:
rituals.(35)
राजंश्चतुर्दशीतानि त्रिकालानुगतानि ते। प्रोक्तान्येभिर्मित: कल्पो युगसाहस्रपर्यय: i361
Oking, these fourteen Manvantaras—covering the past, present and future—have beer

* The Harivarh$a mentions the following as the seven Rsis holding office in the eleventh Manvantara: Havismar
Vapusman, Aruna, Anagha, Urudhi, Niscara and Agniteja.

+ Nirmoka, Tattvadarsi, Niskampa, Nirutsuka, Dhrtiman, Avyaya and Sutapa are the names of the seven Rsis of it
thirteenth Manvantara according to the Harivarhsa.

$The seven seers in the fourteenth Manvantara, according to the Harivarhga, are: Agnidhra, Magadha, Agnibahu, Suc
Mukta, Suddha and Ajjta.
