4३4 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 30-

ज्जजाजा ज ME Ke He BCR AY तं RE क BOR ARON RAO SORRY TOR EIT IRI IORCICEE FT HORTON TIT SE TRO ROR ORR, Ste,

without food—all this, O Lord, we desire to convert into a means of pleasing You, the all-
pervading Spirit. (89-40) Swayambhuva Manu, Brahma (the self-born) and Lord Siva (the
Source of the universe) and others whose intellect has been purified through asceticism and
Self-Realization (constantly) extol You, though unable to perceive the end of Your glory.
Hence we (too) glorify You according to our own (poor) lights. (41) Hail to You, the Supreme
Purusa, the same to all and untainted by Maya. Obeisance to Lord Vasudeva, who is
(absolute) Sattva personified ! (42)

इति प्रचेतोभिरभिष्टुतो हरि: प्रीतस्तथेत्याह Uae: ।
अनिच्छतां यानमतृप्तचक्षुषां ययौ स्वधामानपवर्गवीर्य: ।४३।

ay fata सलिलात्प्रचेतस उदन्वत: | वीक्ष्याकुप्यन्दुमैश्छन्नां ni गां रोद्धुमिवोच्छितै: ।४४॥
ततोऽग्निमारुतौ राजन्नमुञ्चन्मुखतो रुषा। महीं निर्वीरुधं कर्तुं Made इवात्यये vu

भस्मसात्क्रियमाणांस्तान्दुमान् वीक्ष्य पितामह: | आगत: ङामयामास पुत्रान् बर्हिष्मतो Aa: ।४६॥
तत्रावशिष्टा ये gar भीता दुहितरं तदा । उज्जह्रुस्ते प्रचेतोभ्य उपदिष्टा: स्वयम्भुवा ive!
a च ब्रह्मण आदेशान्मारिषामुपयेमिरे। यस्यां महदवज्ञानादजन्यजनयोनिज: ।४८]।
चाक्षुषे त्वन्तरे प्राप्ते प्राक्सर्गे कालविद्रुते । a: wast प्रजा इष्टा: स दक्षो दॆवचोदित: ।४९॥
यो जायमान: सर्वेषां तेजस्तेजस्विनां रुचा । स्वयोपादत्त cea कर्मणां दक्षमब्रुवन् । ५०॥
4 प्रजासर्गरक्षायामनादिरभिषिच्य च । युयोज युयुजेऽन्यांश्च a a सर्वप्रजापतीन् । ५१॥

Maitreya went on: Thus glorified the Pracetas and (highly) pleased with them, Sri Hari,
who is full of affection for those seeking refuge in Him and is possessed of irresistible might,
said,"Be it so!” and returned to His own (divine) Abode, eventhough the princes, whose eyes
had not been sated with His sight, did not want that He should go. (43) Now the Pracetas
emerged from the water of the ocean-like lake and were filled with anger to see the earth
covered (all over) with trees, that had grown (very) tall as if to block the way to heaven. (44)
Then, like Kalagnirudra (the god of destruction presiding over the all-destroying fire) at the
dissolution of the three worlds, they breathed out fire and wind through their mouths in rage,
O king, in order to strip the earth of all vegetation. (45) Seeing the trees being reduced to
ashes, Brahma (the creator) arrived (there) and pacified the sons of Barhisman by words of
wisdom. (46) Seized with terror, such of the trees as had survived (destruction) bestowed
their daughter upon the Pracetas under the advice of Brahma (the self-born). (47) Bowing
to the commands of Brahma, the Pracetas too married Marisa (the daughter of the trees),
through whom Daksa, (a mind-born) son of Brahma (who himself owed his existence to the
birthless Lord Narayana) was reborn as a result of his having slighted the great Lord
Siva.(48) He was the same Daksa who begot. as directed by God, progeny of his choice at
the dawn of the Manvantara presided over by Caksu (the sixth Manu). the former creation
having been dissolved by flux of time. (49) Even while being born. he overshadowed with
his own splendour the brilliance of all resplendent beings and they called him Daksa
(dextrous) because of his proficiency in rituals. (50) Having installed him (to the office of the
chief of the lords of created beings), Brahma (the beginningless creator) appointed him to
the task of extending and preserving the creation, while he (in his turn) charged all the other
lords of creation with their respective duties. (51)
