॥ SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 13.

AMMAR AMN THEME A Oe Ow AH KHH Hee IHL EeT य See See Pee He ew Ee TR Iw a a a

should merge earth in water, water in fire, the latter in the air, that (again) in ether, the last-
named in Ahankara (the principle of self-consciousness), the latter in Mahattattva (the
principle of cosmic intelligence), that in the Unmanifest (Prakrti or primordial Matter) and the
last-named in the Indestructible (Brahma). (30) (And) recognizing the Self—left (as a
residue) in the form of absolute Consciousness by this process (of eliminating all its
vestures)—as (no other than) the Indestructible (Brahma) and thus remaining without a
second, he should cease functioning even like fire that has consumedits own support (in the
shape of wood). (31)

Thus ends the twelfth discourse, entitled “An inquiry into right conduct (continued)"
forming part of the dialogue between Emperor Yudhisthira and the sage Narada
in Book Seven of the great and glorious Bhagavata-Purana,
otherwise known as the Paramahamsa-Samnhita.

STE SE PT १
OD OD ROE ELA OD

अथ त्रयोदशोऽध्याय:

Discourse XIll

The course of conduct prescribed for a Samnyasi and a dialogue between
an Avadhtta and Prahrada

नारद उवाच

कल्पस्त्वेवरॆ परिव्रज्य देहमात्रावरोषित: | ग्रामैकरात्रविधिना निरपेक्षश्चरेन्मरहीम् । १ ।

बिभृयाद् यद्यसो वास: कौपीनाच्छादनं परम् । त्यक्तं न दण्डलिङ्गादेरन्यत् किञ्चिदनापदि । २ ।

एक एवं we भिक्षुरात्मारामोऽनपाश्रय: । सर्वभूतसुहच्छान्तो नारायणपरायण: । ३ ।

पर्येदात्मन्यदो fag ut सदसतोऽव्यये। आत्मानं च परं wa सर्वत्र सदसन्मये । ४ |

Baraat: सन्धावात्मनो गतिमात्मदृक् । wea च मोक्षं च मायामात्रं न वस्तुत: । ५ |

aires ध्रुवं Fs वास्य जीवितम्। कालं परं प्रतीक्षेत Yaa प्रभवाप्ययम् । ६ |

नासच्छास्त्रेषु Gea नोपजीवेत जीविकाम्। वरादवादांस्त्यजेत् तर्कान्पक्षं कं च न संश्रयेत्। ७ |

न शिष्याननुबध्नीत ग्रन्थान्नैवाभ्यसेद् बहून्। न व्याख्यामुपयुञ्जीत नारम्भानारभेत् क्वचित् । ८ |

न वयतेराश्रम: प्रायो धर्महेतुर्महात्मन: | श्ञान्तस्य समचित्तस्य बिभृयादुत वा त्यजेत्। ९ |

अव्यक्तलिङ्नो व्यक्तार्थो मनीष्युन्मत्तवालवत्। कविर्मूकवदात्मानं स दृष्ट्या दर्शयेन्नृणाम् gol
Narada began again : He, however, who is (intellectually and mentally) fit should enter
the life of a recluse (by renouncing everything) in the aforesaid manner; and, with the body
alone left to him (as his possession), and free from all desires, he should roam about on the
globe, (strictly) observing the rule of staying only one night in a (particular) village. (1) If (at
all) he should put on any covering, he should wear only a strip of cloth to cover the privy parts
and should not except in times of distress, carry (about him) anything (already) renounced
by him, other than the distinguishing marks of a Samnyasi, viZ., a staff and a Kamandalu. (2)
Living on alms, delighting in his own Self (indulging in no other delights), shelterless, friendly
to all living beings, tranquil and devoted to Lord Narayana, he should go about all alone

(without any companion). (3) He should view this (objective) universe (as dwelling) in his
immutable Self transcending (both) cause and effect, and himself as the transcendent
