Dis. 52] BOOK TEN 335

Sea aE eR RIE Re ee CEC EEE TES ET EEE REELS EATER Ee ee eth

quarry of a lion, O lotus-eyed Lord | (39) If the almighty Lord (Narayana), the Supreme Ruler
(of the universe), has thoroughly been propitiated (by me) through works of public utility (such
as the digging of wells and tanks, construction of temples, laying out gardens and distribution
of foodgrains), sacrificial performances, charitable gifts, religious observances (such as
taking a dip in holy waters), fasting, offering worship to gods, the Brahmanas, elders and so
on, may Sri Krsna (the elder Brother of Gada) and not others such as Sisupala (the son of
Damaghosa) come and espouse me. (40) Duly reaching (all alone) the territory of Vidarbha
(the city of Kufdinapura, the capital of the rulers of Vidarbha) incognito at a time when the
marriage is going to take place the following day, O invincible Lord ! and (then), surrounded
by the generals of Your army and completely crushing the (combined) forces of Sigupala (the
ruler of Cedi) and Jarasandha (the king of Magadha), marry me perforce according to the
system prevalent among the Raksasas”, winning me as a prize of valour. (41) If You urge
(in protest), “How can | marry you without killing your relations (who are sure to resist any
attempt on My part to take you by force}, living as you do within the four walls of the
gynaeceum (and therefore under the tutelage of your gurdians)?", | (hereby) tell You
beforehand the means (of securing me without spilling the blood of my relations). On the eve
of marriage a grand procession will be taken out to (the shrine of) Goddess Ambika (our
family deity), in which the young bride has to go out (of the palace) to see Goddess Parvati
(the Daughter of Himavan, the king of mountains). (42) If (however) । do not secure Your
grace, O lotus-eyed Lord—a bath in the dust of whose lotus-feet great souls like Lord Siva
(the Spouse of Uma) seek to obtain for dispelling their darkness (of ignorance )—I shall lay
down my life, (already) withered through fasting, (each time | am reborn) in the hope that the
grace may be secured (even) through (say) a hundred births. (43)

ब्राह्मण उवाच
इत्येते गुह्यसन्देशा यदुदेव assed: । विमृश्य कर्तुं यच्चात्र क्रियतां तदनन्तरम् ।४४॥

इति श्रीमद्धागवते महापुगणे ene संहितावां Tees उत्तरार्धे रुक्मिण्युद्बाहप्रस्ताव द्विपञ्चादत्तमोऽध्याय: ।५२।

The Brahmana concluded ; These are the secret messages brought by me (and
delivered to You), O Sri Krsna (the adored of the Yadus) | Considering them, whatever is

* Our scriptures have recognized as many as eight different types of marriage. They are :—

1, The Arsa type, in which the bridegroom has fo presenta pair of cows to the bride's father before marriages आदायर्पस्तुयम्`
(Yajhavalkya-Smrti 1.59; cf. Manusmrii Ill. 53).

2. The Asura type. in which the bride's father accepts large sums of money from the bridegroom as a price for the girt—
“agi दविगत्दानान्` (vide Y. S..1. 61:cf. M.S. Ill. 31)

3. The Brahma type, in which the bride's father gives away the girl after duly adoring her according to his means—'aeit
विवाह आहुय 294 शक्त्यलंकृता` (Y.S.. 1.58: cf. M.S. Ill. 27).

4.The Paigaca type, in which the girl is ravished while asleep, intoxicated or deranged—' सु Fai प्रमत्तां वा at यत्रोपगच्छति`
(M.S., ।।. (34).

5, The Daiva type. in whicha girlis given away toa priest officiating at a sacrificial performance — यरस्थ ऋत्विजेटैव:` (Y. S. |. 59).

6. The Gandharva tyce, in eabichy a pair is allowed to marry by mutual consent alone without ceremonies and without
consulting relatives— : समवान्मिब:` (Ibid.. 1.61).

7. The Raksasa type, in which a girl is taken away by force after vanquishing formidable opponents— wera gare’ (I bid. ).

8. The Prajapatya type, in which a girlis given away. vathout receiving any present from the bridegroom, on the express
understanding that the two will practise virtue together—‘ sett चरतां धर्ममिति वाचातुभाष्य च। कन्याप्रदानं............ M.S., UL
30; cf. ¥.S.,1. 60).

