378 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 20
LAPS AP STEAK HAA ANE REALE AES ELS ONT त्र Lene Se माशं LENE eer heey een see eT

approved of by the foremost Brahmanas and enjoined by tradition, though unattached to
them, and ruling over the earth (with righteousness) you will win the love and devotion of the
people and ina short time you will be able to see the perfect ones (Sanaka and others), who
will call on you at your own house. (15) And ask of Me any boon (of your choice), O ruler of
men, since you have won Me by your virtues and good disposition. | am not easily accessible
through sacrificial performances or austerities or even Yoga (concentration of mind),
dwelling as । do in the heart of the even-minded. (16)

a sa लोकगुरुणा विषुक्सेनेन विश्वजित्। अनुशासित amet शिरसा जगृहे aw: । १७॥
BRT पादयो: प्रेम्णा व्रीडितं स्वेन कर्मणा । शतक्रतुं oft fees विससर्जं ह ।१८॥
भगवानथ विश्वात्मा पृथुनोपहृतार्हण: | समुञ्जिहानया vem गृहीतचरणाम्बुज: ।१९॥
प्रस्थानाभिमुखोऽप्येनमनुग्रहविलम्बित: | पश्यन् पद्मपलाशाक्षो न प्रतस्थे सुहृत्सताम् । २०॥
न किञ्चनोवाच स बाष्पविक्कबो हदोपगुह्यामुमधादवस्थित: ।२९।
MAM YH विलोकयन्नतृप्तदृग्गोचरमाह पूरुषम् |
vat स्पृशन्ते क्षितिमंस उन्नते विन्यस्तहस्ताग्रमुरङ्गविद्विष: 1221
Maitreya continued ; Thus instructed by Lord Viswaksena (Visnu), the Preceptor of
the universe, king Prthu, the conqueror of the world, bowed his head to Sri Hari's
command.(17) He embraced Indra (who had attained to that position through a hundred
sacrifices)—who was (just) going to touch the latter's feet (by way of apology) and was
ashamed of his own act—and gave up his enmity towards him. (18) Prthu now offered
worship to the Lord, who is the Soul of the universe, clasped His lotus-feet with increasing
devotion. (19) Though inclined to depart, the Lord, who had eyes resembling the petals of
a lotus and who is the disinterested friend of the virtuous, kept on looking at him and could
not proceed, being detained by his own kindly disposition. (20) Prthu (the first constitutional
monarch on this earth) could not see Sri Hari because his eyes were bedimmed with tears,
nor could he speak anything, his voice choked with tears. Embracing Him in his heart, he
(therefore) held Him (there) and stood with joined palms (where he was). (21) Then, wiping
his tears, he gazed on the Supreme Person—who (now) appeared before his eyes, that
would not be sated (with His sight), and who stood touching the ground with His feet and with

the finger-tips of one of His hands placed on the elevated shoulder of Garuda (the sworn
enemy of serpents)—and addressed the Lord (as follows). (22)

बृयुर्वाच
वरान् विभो त्वद्वरदेश्वराद् ga: कथं वृणीते गुणविक्रियात्मनाम् ।
ये नारकाणामपि सन्ति देहिनां तानीश कैवल्यपते वृणे न च ।२३॥
न कामये नाथ तदप्यहं क्वचिन्न यत्र युष्मच्चरणाम्बुजासव: |
महत्तमान्तर्हृदयान्मुखच्युतो ofan कर्णायुतमेष मे वर: ।२४॥
a ORR महन्मुखच्युतो भवत्पदाम्भोजसुधाकणानिल: |
aid पुनर्विस्मृततत्त्ववर्त्मनां कुयोगिनां नो वितरत्यलं वरै: ।२५॥

