440 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 1

COE HOON Re EOE TAAAA AHEM HKAAAATSACHELG SHE LECERAHERASRL EH OHA ESTE CHOTA Ee

LARUE AHOHMN ESSE ee eee 0800 ee

Sri Suka said : What you have stated is (quite) right. They, however, whose mind is
engrossed in enjoying the (sweet) honey of the charming feet of Lord Sri Hari (of exalted
fame) do not generally give up their most blessed path (habit) of listening to the narrative of
the Lord, who is the beloved of His devotees and ascetics of the highest order, even though
it may be (temporarily) obstructed by some impediments. (5) And it is a well-known fact, O
king, that when that prince Priyavrata—who was a supreme devotee of the Lord and had
through the adoration of Narada’s feet easily come to know the true nature of the highest
Reality, and was about to undertake a vow of (lifelong)contemplation on the Spirit—was
called upon by his father (Swayambhuva Manu) to rule over the earth because of his being
a unique repository of hosts of excellent virtues mentioned in the scriptures, he did not
welcome it, although the command (of his father) was inviolable; for he had through constant
absorption of his mind in Lord Vasudeva completely resigned all the activities of his senses
and organs of action to Him and he thought that on his assuming the reins of government
(the true nature of) his self would be obscured by (contact with) the non-self, even though
the latter has no reality. (6)

अथ ह भगवानादिदेव wea गुणविसर्गस्य uftdgorqearaatanrncmema
आत्मयोनिरखिलनिगमनिजगणपरिवेष्टित: स्वभवनादवततार।७। स तत्र तत्र गगनतल उडुपतिरिवर
गन्धमादनद्रोणीमवभासयन्नुपससर्पं | ८ । तत्र ह वा एनं देवर्षिर्हंसयानेन पितरं भगवन्तं हिरण्यगर्भमुपलभमान:
सहसैवोत्थायार्हृणेन सह पितापुत्राभ्यामवहिताञ्जलिरुपतस्थे।९। भगवानपि भारत तदुपनीतार्हण:
सूक्तवाकेनातितरामुदितगुणगणावतारसुजय: प्रियत्रतमादिपुरुषस्तं सदयहासाबलोक इति होवाच । १० |

Thereupon the glorious Brahma (the self-born), the first among the gods—who kept
himself acquainted with the designs of all the worlds, being ever engaged in the thought of
promoting the creation, which is a product of the three Gunas (modes of Prakrti)—came
down (to the earth) from his abode (the Brahmaloka), surrounded by all the (four) Vedas (in
visible form) and his retinue (consisting of the sage Marici and others). (7) Shining like the
moon and being worshipped at many points on his way through the heavens by the foremost
among the gods, who rodein their aerial cars, and glorified along the route in separate groups
by troops of Siddhas (a class of heavenly beings endowed with supernatural powers from
their very birth), Gandharvas (celestial songsters), Sadhyas (another class of celestial
beings), Caranas (celestial bards) and sages, he approached the prince, illumining the
(entire) valley of Mount Gandhamadana (by his brilliance). (8) Recognizing there from his
mount, a swan, that he was no other than his father, the glorious Brahma, Narada (the
celestial sage) quickly rose and waited upon him with articles of worship along with the father
(Swayambhuva Manu) and son (Priyavrata), his palms joined (in prayer). (9) The glorious
Brahma too, the first among embodied beings, who was offered (many an article of) worship
(by Narada) and whose hosts of virtues, coming down to the earth (to bless his devotees),
and excellent glories were sung in appropriate words, spoke as follows to Priyavrata, casting
at him a smiling look full of compassion indeed. (10)

श्रीभगवानुवाच
ad wad aq wa महर्षिर्वहाम wa विवशा चस्य दिष्टम्।११।
न तस्य कश्चित्तपसा fas वा न योगवीर्येण मनीषया वा।
jaded: wa: war वा qa बविहन्तुं तनुभृद्बिभूयात्।१२॥।
