620 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 15

PARMAR AAMAS EE CES HH EEK ERA ETEK AEA HE SEE ३.2.३.६.३.३६.३.३३.३.३.३.३.३.३.३.७३७.७.३.३.३ ३३ ३३३ eee
eee eee eee ee

अथ पञ्चदशोऽध्याय:

Discourse XV
Citraketu consoled

श्रीगुक उवाच
ऊचतुर्मृतकोपान्ते पतितं मृतकोपमम्।ञ्ञोकाभिभूतं राजानं बोधयन्तो सदुक्तिभि: । १ ।
कोऽयं स्यात् तव राजेन्द्र भवान् यमनुश्ञोचति | त्वं चास्य कतम: सृष्टो पुरेदानीमत: परम् । २ ।
यथा प्रयान्ति संयान्ति alates वालुका: । संयुज्यन्ते वियुज्यन्ते तथा कालेन देहिन: । ३ ।
यथा धानासु वै धाना भवन्ति न भवन्ति च । एवं भूतेषु भूतानि चोदितानीशामायया । ४ |
वयं च त्वं च ये चेमे तुल्यकालाश्चराचरा: । जन्ममृत्योर्यथा पश्चात् प्राङ्नैवमधुनापि भो: । ५ ।
भूतैर्भूतानि oa: सृजत्यवति हन्त्यज: | आत्मसृष्टैरस्वतन्तैरनपेक्षोऽपि बालवरत् । ६ ।
देहेन देहिनो राजन् देहाद्देहोऽभिजायते | बीजादेव यथा बीजं देह्यर्थं इव a: । ७ I
देहदेहिविभागोऽयमविवेककृत: पुरा । जातिव्यक्तिविभागोऽयं यथा वस्तुनि कल्पित: । ८ |

SriSuka began again: Enlightening, by means of wise utterances, king Citraketu, who was
lying by the side of the dead babe like a dead man, overwhelmed as he was with grief, the sages
Angira and Narada spoke (as follows):—(1) "In what relation did the boy whom youare lamenting
(just now), O king of kings, stand to you in a previous birth, what is he to you at present and what
will he be to you hereafter ? Again, what were you to him in a former incarnation, what are you
at present and what will you be hereafter ? (2) Just as stands part (from one another) and come
together by the current of a stream, so are embodied beings brought together and parted by
Time. (3) Just as Seeds do spring up from (other) seeds (in some cases), and do not spring up
(inother cases), so do living beings prompted by the Lord's Maya evolve from (other) living beings
(in some cases) and do not (in other cases). (4) You and we and all these mobile and immobile
creatures belonging to the present time do not (really) exist even now (just) as we did not before
birth and shall not be after death, O Citraketu ! (5) It is God (the Lord of created beings) who,
though unborn (and imperishable) and (absolutely) unconcerned, creates, protects and destroys
living beings (sportfully) as a child through (other) beings evolved by Himself and (therefore) not
independent. (6) The body of one embodied being (inthe shape ofa son), Oking, is evolved from
the body of another embodied being (in the shape of the mother) united with the body of a third
embodied being (in the shape of the father), justas one seed springs up from another seed: while
the soul inhabiting all these bodies is eternal like God (the only Reality). (7) The aforesaid
distinction of body and soul has existed from eternity and has been conceived through
ignorance even as the distinction of the generic property and the individuality of a thing
assumed as inhering in the thing itself (although the two are interdependent and cannot
therefore be really distinguished)." (8)

SYR उवाच
Temata राजा चित्रकेतुर्दविजोक्तिभि: । प्रमृज्य पाणिना वक्त्रमाधिम्लानमभाषत 1 ९ ।

Sri Suka continued : Thus consoled by the words of the (holy) Brahmanas (Angira and
Narada), king Chitraketu wiped his face, withered through mental anguish (caused by his
son's death) with his hand and spoke (as follows).(9)

।।

al Yat ज्ञानसम्पन्नो महिष्ठौ च महीयसाम्। अवधूतेन वेषेण गूढाविह समागतौ ।१०॥
