Dis. 26 ] BOOK FIVE 543

RHRKAMAEVCLLKLELHAHHHELEHE REAR AHHELETEES ALESHA EAELHEMLRAKAHAANAAT RAHEEM AAA AR

स्वयमेव तदशुभेन रौरवे Fraafa 1 १० । ये त्विह यथैवामुना विहिंसिता जन्तव: परत्र यमयातनामुपगतं त
Ua रुरवो भूत्वा तथा तमेव विहिंसन्ति तस्माद्रौरवमित्याहू रुरुरिति सर्पादतिक्रूरसत्त्वस्यापदेश:। ११।
एवमेव महारौरवो aa निपतितं पुरुषं क्रव्यादा नाम रुरवस्तं क्रव्येण घातयन्ति a: केवलं देहम्भर: । १२ ॥

Again, he indeed who fondly nourishes from day to day his own family exclusively
through hostility to (other) living beings in this world, regarding the body alone as his self and
the objects of this world (viz., his wife, children, house and other belongings) as his own,
leaves them (the body and everything else) here and himself alone (accompanied by none)
falls into (the hell called) Raurava because of the sin resulting from such hostility. (10)
Further, the very creatures that were killed by him here are born as Rurus in the other world
(in that hellish region) and kill the same fellow—when he goes through the tortures inflicted
by Yama—in the same way as they were killed by him. Hence they speak of that region as
Raurava (the abode full of Rurus), Ruru being the name of a creature more ferocious (even)
than a snake. (11) Quite similar is (the hell called) Maharaurava ( class of) Rurus, called
Kravyadas (flesh-eaters, so-called because of their being carnivorous by nature) kill for the
sake of flesh the man who solely nourishes (here) his own body (hating others), and
(consequently) falls into that region. (12)

यस्त्विह वा उग्र: पशून् पक्षिणो वा प्राणत उपरन्धयति तमपकरुणं पुरुषादैरपि विगर्हितममुत्र यमानुचरा:
कुम्भीपाकेतप्ततैलेउपरन्धवन्ति। १३ ।यस्त्वह पितृविप्रब्रह्मध्रुकु स कालसूत्रसंज्ञकेनरके अयुतयोजनपरिमण्डले
ताम्रमये तप्तखले उपर्यधस्तादग्न्यर्काभ्यामतितप्यमानेऽभिनिवेशित: क्षुत्पिपासाभ्यां च दह्यमानान्तर्बहि:शरीर
आस्ते Vid चेष्टतेऽवतिष्ठति परिधावति च यावन्ति पशुरोमाणि तावद्वर्षसहस्राणि । १४1

Again, in (the hell called) Kumbhipaka in the region, the servants of Yama fry in boiling
oil that merciless fellow, censured even by the Raksasas (those feeding on the human flesh),
who is actually so cruel as to cook beasts and birds alive. (13) Further, he who is hostile to
his (own) father, a Brahmana, or the Vedas is thrown into the hell called Kalasitra,
(consisting of) a burning level sheet of copper, having a circumference of ten thousand
Yojanas and being excessively heated (both) above and below by the sun and fire
(respectively); and his mind and body being tormented with hunger and thirst, he continues
(there) for as many thousand years as there are hair on the body of a beast (for, in fact, he
is no better than a beast)—(now) sitting, (now) lying down and rolling about (restlessly), and
(now) springing on his feet and running in every direction. (14)

मूच्छित: पदे ue निपतति स्वधर्महा पाखण्डानुगतं फलं भुङ्क्ते। १५ ।

Him, again, who actually deviates here from the path chalked out for him by the
Vedas, otherwise than in an emergency (warranting such a course) and embraces a
heretic creed, the servants of Yama throw into (the hell called) Asipatravana (a cluster
of trees having sword-like leaves) and beat with a whip. Actually running there to and fro
with all his limbs being torn by the sword-like leaves—sharp-edged on both sides—of the
palmyra trees in that grove, and crying 'Ah! । am finished!’ he drops down unconscious
at every step through excessive agony and, apostate as he is, reaps the fruit of the sin
attaching to heretics. (15)

यस्त्विह वै राजा राजपुरुषो वा अदण्ड्ये दण्डं प्रणयति ब्राह्मणे वा शरीरदण्डं स पापीयान्नरकेऽमुत्र
कश्मलमुपगतो यथैवेहादृष्टदोषा उपरुद्धा: । LE

Again, a king or a king's officer who inflicts punishment on one undeserving of
