602 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 19

क न न न 3 34० व EO OEE TE OEE ग७ व ७ OEE OOO DEE TT ENON EEE OE HOEK EEO SEEMED NONE TONNE OES

तापत्रयेणाभिहतस्य घोरे संतप्यमानस्य भवाध्वनीझा |
पर्यामि नान्यच्छरणं तवाङ्घ्रिद्वन्द्वातपत्रादमृताभिवर्षात् । ९ ।

समुद्धरनं कृपयाऽऽपव्ग्यैर्वचोभिरासिञ्च महानुभाव । १० !

Uddhava submitted : (Pray,) expound in a thorough (conclusive) way, O Lord of the
universe, which is Your own form! this purifying and most ancient (because embodied in the
dateless Vedas) wisdom, coupled with dispassion and intuition, as well as the path of
Devotion, sought after (even) by the great (Brahma and others). (8) For a man tormented on
all sides with the threefold agony (viz., 1—that brought about by divine agencies in the form
of natural calamities, 2— that inflicted by other living beings and 3—that arising out of bodily
distemper or mental disturbance) and undergoing intense suffering in the fearful path of
metempsychosis, O Lord, | find no shelter other than the umbrella of Your feet, which (not
only affords protection against the scorching sunshine but also) rains nectar on all sides. (9)
Kindly lift up once for all this creature fallen deep into this abyss (of transmigration) and bitten
by the snake of Death, (yet) seized by the great thirst for trifling delights (of sense), and
soothe me with (nectar-like) words showing the way to Liberation, O Lord possessed of

immense glory ! (10)
श्रीभगवानुवाच
इत्थमेतत् पुरा राजा भीष्मं धर्मभृतां वरम्। अजातशत्रु: पप्रच्छ सर्वेषां नोऽनुशृण्वताम् ।११।
निवृत्ते भारते युद्धे सुहन्निधनविह्वल: । श्रुत्वा धर्मान् बहून् पश्चान्मोक्षधर्मानपृच्छत । १२।
तानहं तेऽभिधास्यामि देवब्रतमुखाच्छुतान्। ज्ञानवैराग्यविज्ञानश्रद्धाभक्त्युपबृंहितान् ।१३॥
नवैकादश wa त्रीन् भावान् wy येन ai ईक्षेताथैकमप्येषु wa मम निश्चितम् । १४॥
एतदेव fg विज्ञानं न तथैकेन येन यत् । स्थित्युत्पत्त्यप्ययान् पड्येद् भावानां त्रिगुणात्मनाम्। १५॥
आदावन्ते च मध्ये च सृज्यात् सृज्यं यदन्वियात् । पुनस्तत्प्रतिसंक्रामे यच्छिष्येत तदेव सत् ।१६॥
श्रुति: प्रत्यक्षमैतिह्यमनुपानं चतुष्टयम्। प्रमाणेषुनवस्थानाद् विकल्पात् a विरज्यते । १७॥
कर्मणां परिणामित्वादाविरिञ्चादमङ्गलम् । विपश्चिन्नश्वं पड्येददृष्टमपि दृष्टवत् ।१८॥

The glorious Lord replied : Thus did King Yudhisthira (who bore no enmity to any
creature whatsoever) ask this (very) question in the former days of Bhisma, the foremost of
those devoted to the righteous course (pleasing to the Lord), while all of us listened. (11)
Having heard the exposition of many righteous courses—when the (internecine) war
between the Bharatas had come to an end—Yughisthira, distressed over the death of his
kinsmen, subsequently asked Bhisma about the courses of conduct conducive to
emancipation. (12) | shall reproduce to you the exposition of those righteous courses which
was heard (by Me) from the lips of Bhisma (of heavenly vows), and which is full ot precepts
on spiritual enlightenment, dispassion, intuition, faith and Devotion. (13) JAana (spiritual
enlightenment) has been concluded by Me to be that by which one is enabled to perceive
the nine (viz., Prakrti or primordial Matter, Purusa or the Spirit, Mahat-tattva or the principle
of cosmic intelligence, Anankara orthe cosmic Egoand the five Tanmatras or subtle elements),
the eleven (viz., the five senses of perception, the five organs of action and the mind), the five
(viz., the gross elements), and the three categories {namely, the three Gunas or modes of
Prakrti, viz., Sattva or the principle of harmony, Rajas or the principle of activity and Tamas
