Dis. 10] BOOK EIGHT 777

घंज्ञै’ज्ञै’षींघेघेध्रघेषीं…घ्रंस्मिँणेष्टेघेष्पैघेभ्रे॰र्व्यर्थेर्दंफ्रिगैभेभेघैघेघ्रेप्नेप्रंगेर्व्यघेथेथे…घै'प्॰'प्रै’भेछांप्नेछांप्रंगेर्व्यघं*गेर्थेगैष्पैघ्रे॰ष्पैघे*घ्रेघ्रेप्रंप्रंप्रंघ्रंध्रेघे
fet कालनाभोऽथ प्रहेतिर्हेतिरिल्वल: | शकुनिर्भूतसंतापो वज्रदंष्टो विरोचन: ।२०॥
हयग्रीव: ज्ञङ्कुच्छिरा: कपिलो मेघट्टुभि: I ANAARSH TT Frysh sat sane: । २१॥
अरिष्टोऽरिष्टनेमिश्च wag त्रिपुराधिप: art पौलोमकालेया निवातकवचादय: 1221
अलब्धभागा: सोमस्य केवलं seni: सर्व we रणमुखे age निर्जितामरा: 1231
सिंहनादान्विमुञ्चन्त: शङ्खान्दध्मुर्महारवान्। FBT सपत्नानुत्सिक्तान्बलभित् कुपितो भृञम् । २४॥
ऐरावतं दिक्करिणमारूढ: qaqa स्वराट्। यथा स्रवत्प्रस्नवणमुदयाद्रिमहर्पति: ।२५॥
तस्यासन्सर्वतो देवा नानावाहध्वजायुधा: | लोकपाला: सह गणैर्वाय्वग्निवरुणादय: ।२६॥
तेऽन्योन्यमभिसंसृत्य क्षिपन्तो मर्मभिर्मिथ: orga विशान्तोऽग्रे युयुधुर्द्वन्द्वयोधिन: । २७॥
qe बलिरिन्रेण तारकेण गुहोस्यत | वरुणो हेतिनायुध्यन्मित्रो राजन्प्रहेतिना 121
यमस्तु कालनाभेन विश्वकर्मा मयेन ai ङम्बरो युयुधे त्वष्टा सवित्रा तु विरोचन: ।२९॥
अपराजितेन ager वृषपर्वणा । सूर्यो बलिसुतैर्देवो बाणज्येष्ठै: aaa च । ३०॥
राहुणा च तथा सोम: पुलोम्ना युयुधेऽनिल: । निशुम्भशुम्भयोर्देवी भद्रकाली तरस्विनी । ३१॥
वृषाकपिस्तु जम्भेन महिषेण विभावसु:।इल्वल: सह वातापिर्ब्रह्मपुत्रैररिन्दम 1321
कामदेवेन git उत्कलो मातृभि: सह। बृहस्पतिश्चोशानसा नरकेण ङानैश्चर: 1331
मरुतो निवातकवचै: कालेयैर्वसवोऽमरा: | विश्वेदेवास्तु पौलोमै रुद्रा: mead: az । ३४॥

With the ranks of warriors distinguished by (their) ensigns of various colours, spotless
white costly umbrellas with handles of diamond, fly-flappers of peacock feathers and the
bushy tail of Camaris (a species of deer foundin the Himalayan region), turbans and pieces
of cloth used as upper garment waved by the wind, brilliant coats of mail and ornaments and
burnished weapons shining brightly under the rays of the sun, O king, the armies of the
celestial and Asura heroes shone like two oceans with rows of sea-monsters.(138—15) In that
battle the celebrated Bali, son of Virocana, was the commander-in-chief of the Asura forces.
Seated in his famous vehicle, Vaihayasa by name, the foremost of (all) aerial cars— which
had been manufactured by (the demon) Maya and could fly at will, (nay,) which was equipped
with all implements of warfare and full of all wonders, O lord, which was incomprehensible
by reason and could not be precisely located (because ofits uncertain and wonderfully swift
movements) and which, though perceived (now and then), defied perception (because ofits
dazzling splendour)— and surrounded by all troop-commanders, he shone in the midst of
a pair of chowries (which were being waved on his right and left) and under an exquisite
umbrella like the moon on the eastern hill (while rising). (16—18) On all his sides appeared
in (their respective) aerial cars (other) Asuras, the commanders of the (various) squadrons—
Namuci, Sambara, Bana, Vipracitti, Ayomukha (steel-mouthed), Dwimurdha (possessed of
a pair of heads), Kalanabha and Praheti, Heti, !lwala, Sakuni, Bhutasantapa (the torment of
created beings), Vajradamstra (possessedof adamantine teeth), Virocana (shining brightly),
Hayagriva (having the head and neck of a horse), Sankusira (spear-headed), Kapila (tawny
of hue), Meghadundubhi, Taraka, Cakradrk (having wheel-like eyes), Sumbha, NiSumbha,
Jambha, Utkala, Arista, Aristanemi, Maya, the lord of the three (flying) cities, and others, viz.,
the Paulomas and Kaleyas, the Nivatakavacas and so on. (19—22) Having not received any
share in the nectar (churned out of the ocean of milk), they had only suffered hardship (in
toiling for the nactar). All these (however) had on many an occasion utterly defeated the
immortals at the very commencement of the operations.(23) Sending forth the roars of a lion,
they blew loud-sounding conchs. Seeing his foes puffed up with pride, Indra (the destroyer
[564] B. M. 27— .

