¢

26 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA-MAHATMYA [ Dis. 4

..&.३.७.७.७.३.७.७.७.७.७.३.७.७.७.७.७.७.३..७.३.७.७..३.७..७.७.७..३.३..३.३.३..७.3.३..३.३.३..३.३.३.७.३.३:.३६.३.३.३.३.७.३.३..३..७..७..३.३.३.३.३.७. He Me SE He HC HT MME HE ME HH
up all hope of having a family. There is all happiness in renunciation (Sarmmnyasa). (36)

MAT उवाच
fader भवेत्किं मे पुत्रं देहि बलादपि । नो चेत्त्यजाम्यहं प्राणांस्त्वद्रे शोकमूच्छित: 1201
पुत्रादिसुखहीनोऽयं संन्यास: Wen wa हि। गृहस्थ: सरसो लोके पुत्रपोत्रसमन्वित: । ३८॥

The Brahmana said : (O saint!) How will Viveka help me ? Perforce let me have ason,
otherwise | willin your (very) presence become unconscious with grief and give up my life.(37)
This renunciation, in which there is no pleasure of having ason etc., is altogether insipid. The
only sweet thing in this world is family life crowded with sons and grandsons. (38)

इति विप्राग्रहं ay प्राब्रवीत्स तपोधन: । चित्रकेतुर्गत: ae विधिलेखविमार्जनात् 13¢ |
न यास्यसि qa पुत्राद्यथा दैवहतोद्यम: | अतो हठेन युक्तोऽसि ह्यर्थिनं किं वदाम्यहम् ।४०।
Seeing this insistence of the Brahmana, the sage rich in askesis said, "King Citraketu
suffered (greatly) in his attempt to undo his destiny. (39) Therefore you cannot be happy with
a son because you are like one whose plans are frustrated by destiny. You are so insistent
and stand before me seeking end; what should | tell you in these circumstances ?" (40)

तस्याग्रहं समालोक्य फलमेकं स दत्तवान्। इदं भक्षय पत्या त्वं aa: पुत्रो भविष्यति ive

aa wet an दानमेकभक्तं तु भोजनम्। वर्षावधि स्रिया ard a पुत्रोऽतिनिर्मल: ।४२॥
When the sage saw that the Brahmana was still pressing his demand, he gave a fruit to the
Brahmana and said, "Let your wife eat this fruit. She will then give birth to a son. For one year
your wife must practise truthfulness,cleanliness and kind-heartedness, give alms and take

meals consisting of (only) one type of cereals (and that too) once a day. By doing so she will
get a son of exceedingly sinless disposition.” (41-42)

एवमुक्त्वा ययौ योगी विप्रस्तु गृहमागत: 1 पत्न्या: पाणौ फलं दत्त्वा स्वयं यातस्तु कुत्रचित् ।४३॥
RU कुटिला तस्य सख्यग्रे च रुरोद Fi अहो चिन्ता ममोत्पन्ना फलं चाहं न भक्षये xs
फलभक्षेण mM: स्याद्गर्भेणोदरवृद्धिता । स्वल्पभक्षं ततोऽशक्तिर्गृहकार्यं aed भवेत् sul
दैवाद्धाटी aa पलायेद्गर्भिणी कथम्। शुकवन्निवसेद्गर्भस्तं ge: कथमुत्सृजेत् ॥४६॥
तिर्यक्वेदागतो गर्भस्तदा मे मरणं भवेत्। प्रसूतो दारुणं दु:खं सुकुमारी कथं we ive
waa मयि ada ननान्दा संहरेत्तदा । सत्यशौचादिनियमो दुराराध्य: a gaa ।४८॥
लालने Wed दु:खं प्रसूतायाश्च वर्तते। वन्ध्या वा विधवा नारी सुखिनी चेति मे मति: ।४९॥

Having said so, the Yogi departed and the Brahmana returned to his house. (There) he
gave the fruit to his wife and himself went away somewhere. (43) Crooked as she was, his
young wife wept and said to one of her female friends, "| am greatly worried and so | will not
eat this fruit. By eating the fruit । will conceive a child and get big-bellied. | will not be able to
take full meals. This will make me weak and | will not be able todo domestic work. If by
chance dacoits attack the village, how will a pregnant woman be able to run ? If, like the
celebrated sage Suka, the foetus lingers in the womb, howwill she be able to deliver it ? (44 —46)
In case the foetus comes out in a slanting position (at the time of delivery), | may (even) lose
my life.(Otherwise too, O friend !) pangs of childbirth are (very) severe, how will a delicate .
woman like me bear them ? (47) When | become feeble (due to confinement), my husband's
sister willin that case take away all my possessions (from my house). (Moreover) it appears
difficult for me to observe the vows of truthfulness, cleanliness and so on. (48) A woman who
