500 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 17

त्ती को OWT BW eR री SOR OE EO कक ली EEE ee ER ST EE ee HHH

of fourteen* thousand Yojanas (1,12,000 square miles) and rectangular in shape. (28) After
this model and round above the same have been built the eight cities of the eight Lokapalas
(guardians of the spheres—Indra and others) in a style befitting their master and in the
direction allotted to him, each city being one-fourth (in extent) of Brahma's city. (29)

Thus ends the sixteenth discourse entitled "A description of the terrestrial
world" in Book Five of the great and glorious Bhagavata-Purana,
otherwise known as the Paramahamsa-Samhita.

२३८ २०१० ०१
।स्जित्जैह्रिहिरडक्षैर्दिस्जत्सन

अथ सप्तदशोऽध्याय:

Discourse XVII
An account of the descent of the holy Ganga and a song of praise to Lord
Sankarsana by the divine Sankara
aya उवाच
तत्र Wad: साक्षाद्यज्ञलिङ्घस्य विष्णोर्विक्रमतो वष्पा।दङ्मुष्ठनखनिभिंनाघ्व्रप्ताडवत्वाह्वदिबरणान्त

प्रविष्टा या बाह्यजलधारा तच्चरणपङ्कजावनेजनारुणकिञ्जल्कोपरञ्जिताखिलजगदघमलापहोपस्पर्शनामला
साक्ष।द्भग्|बत्पदॊत्यनुपल‘क्षतवचोऽभिध।यमानातिमहता कालेन युग्म्सहस्रम्पलश्या क्कि मूर्धन्यक्का
यत्तद्बिष्णुपदमाहु:। १ । यत्र ह वाव वीरव्रत औत्तानपादि: परमभागवतोऽस्मत्कुलदेवताचरणारविन्दोदकमिति
कुड्मलविगलितामलबाष्पकलयाभिव्यज्यमानरोमपुलककुलकोऽधुनापि परमादरेण शिरसा बिभर्ति | २।

Sri Suka continued : (Standing) on this terrestrial globe (referred to in the foregoing
discourse) when Lord Visnu Himself, appearing in the form of Trivikramat at the sacrificial
performance of Bali, raised His (left) foot (in order to measure the heavenly regions after
having measured the earth including the subterranean worlds with His right foot), a stream
from the (immaterial) waters existing outside the egg-like cosmos, which rushed inside
through a breach made in the upper shell of the cosmic egg as a result of its being pierced
by the nail of His left big toe, flowed down to the realm of Dhruva (forming the crest of the
starry heavens)—which they call Visnupada (the abode of Lord Visnu)—after a very long

(measure of) time covering a thousand revolutions of the four Yugas (Satya, Treta, Dwapara
and Kali). While washing the lotus-foot of the Lord (on which it fell in the very first instance),

* The compound epithet अयुतयोजनसाहस्रीम् ८०06 be taken on the face of it to mean ‘covering an area of a thousand times
ten thousand i.e., one crore square Yojanas or eight crore square miles’, as almost every renowned commentator of Srimad
Bhagavata has done. Considering the extent of Mount Meru, which is mentioned in passage 7 above as only 32,000 Yojanas
wide, however, this figure strikes us as enormous. Hance, following a leammed commentator, we have split the compound as
अयुतयोजना चासौ साहस्री Wand taken Beet to mean ‘covering an area of four thousand square miles\—AeeNia (चतु:सहस्राणि) परिमाणं
यस्या: A. Thus interpreted, the compound will mean ‘having an area of ten plus four, i.e., fourteen thousand square Yojanas,
which exactly tallies with the figure given in the Visnupurana. In that we come across the following description of the city of
Brahma on the summit of Mount Meru :— ॥

चतुर्दश सहस्राणि योजनानां महापुरो । मेरोरूपरि Aes ब्रह्मण: प्रथिता दिवि ।। (I. it. 31)

+ For an account of the Lord’s descent as Vamana (the divine Dwarf) and His assuming a cosmic form (as Trivikrama)
at the sacrificial performance of Bali, the celebrated demon king and a great devotee of the Lord, see Discourses XVIII-XX of
Book VIII.
