456 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 81

#२ १2१ न १2४ १89 9७१६ 299७ ७22 oe SSeS SEN AA ४99 9४99 29 4 94०७ २85१ 29 2६28 5999 9६४9 ४ 52१5 4 ७

directions, we wandered in the forest in great confusion holding each other by the hand. (38)
Our preceptor, sage Sandipani, when he learnt this, proceeded in search of us at sunrise and
discovered us, his disciples, in that bewildered state. (39) He said, “My dear boys, you have
been put to great hardship on my account. One's own self is dear to all more than anything
else. How wonderful that you have shown your devotion to me by disregarding even the self.
(40) A good disciple should offer with a sincere heart his all, including his very self, to the
Guru. That is precisely what he should actually do in order to repay the debt to the Guru. (41)
Ojewels of the twice-born, lam (supremely) pleased (with you); let all your desires be fulfilled,
and may all the knowledge of the Vedas, that you have acquired from me, remain ever fresh
in your memory. May it never fail ypu whether here or hereafter.” (42) O friend, numerous
incidents of this type occurred during our life at the preceptor's house. itis by the grace of
the preceptor alone that man attains perfection and supreme peace. (43)

ब्राह्मण उवाच
किमस्माभिरनिर्वृत्तं देवदेव जगद्गुरो । भवता सत्यकामेन येषां वासो Way ।४४॥
यस्यच्छन्दोमयं ब्रह्म te आवपनं विभो । श्रेयसां तस्य गुरुषु वासोऽत्यन्तविडम्बनम् isu
इति श्रीमद्धागवते महापुराणे पारमहंस्यां संहितायां ददमस्कन्धं उत्तरार्धे श्रीदामचरितेऽशीतितमोऽध्याय: ।८०।

The Brahmana replied ; 0 God of gods, Preceptor of the World, what else remains to
be achieved by me? ( i have accomplished everything, realized everything) inasmuch as |
enjoyed the privilege of staying in the preceptor's house with You, whose resolution is
unfailing? (44) O Lord, the Vedas which are the repository of the four objects of life, viz.,
Dharma (virtue), Artha (prosperity), Kama (worldly enjoyments) and Moksa (salvation),

constitute Your body. You went to the preceptor's house to study those very Vedas only to
imitate the ways of men, as a matter of sport. (45)

Thus ends the eightieth discourse forming part of the Story of Sudama, in the
latter half of Book Ten of the great and glorious Bhagavata-Purana,

otherwise known as the Paramahamsa-Samnhita.

Ned Pca tL
PIPE ६७

अथैकाशीतितमोऽध्याय:

Discourse LXXXI

The story of parched rice brought as a Present (for Sri Krsna) by Sudama
श्रीरुक उवाच
a sa द्विजमुख्येन ae सङ्कुथयन् aft: सर्वभूतमनोऽभिज्ञ: स्मयमान उवाच तम् । १ ।
ब्रह्मण्यो ब्राह्मणं कृष्णो भगवान् प्रहसन् प्रियम् Se निरीक्षणेनैव प्रेक्षन् we सतां गति: । २ ।
Sri Suka began again : ( Pariksit!) Bhagavan Sri Krsna knows the mind of all beings.
He is devoted to Brahmanas (always takes care to relieve their suffering) and is the sole

refuge of saints. Thus heartily talking alongwith that honourable Brahmana, He now smilingly
spoke to His dear comrade in a jesting mood looking at him with eyes full of affection. (1-2)

किमुपायनमानीतं ब्रह्मम् मे भवता गृहात्। अण्वप्युपाहतं भक्तै: प्रेम्णा ya A भवेत् ।
भूर्यप्यभक्तोपहतं न मे तोषाय कल्पते | ३ ।
