Dis. 7 ] BOOK EIGHT 765

tieertrrrnteeree ree errr reed eeere व न्विक

साख्यात्मन: रेंप्नस्त्रदृक्तास्तवेंक्षा छन्दोमयो देव ऋषि: पुराण: ।३०॥
ज्योति:परंयत्ररजस्तपश्चसत्वंनयद्ब्रह्मनिरस्तभेदम्|३१।
कामाध्वरत्रिपुरकालगराद्यनेकभूतद्रुहहऽ ad: स्तुतये न तत् ते ।

यस्त्वन्तकाल इदमात्मकृतं स्वनेत्रवह्निस्फुलिङ्गशिखया भसितं न वेद । ३२।
येत्वात्परामगुंरुथिर्हदिचिन्तिताह्वांघ्नेद्व्रद्धंचरन्तमुपयातपसाभितप्तम्।

werd उग्रपरुषं निरतं इमशाने ते ya मूतिमविदंस्तव हातलज्जा: 1331
तत्तस्यतेसदसतो:परत:परस्यनाञ्ज:स्वरूपगपनेप्रभवन्तिभूम्न:।

ब्रह्यादय:किंघुतसंस्तवनेक्यंतुतत्सग्सिग्ग्विषयाआंपेज्ञक्तिपान्रम्।इश्वा

एतत्परंप्नपश्यग्पोनपरंतेमहेश्वर।मृडनायहिंलोक्रस्यव्यक्तिस्तेऽव्यक्तक्तंर्मण:|३५।

The lords of created beings prayed: 0 god of gods, O supreme Deity, the Protector,
nay, the very Self of (all) created beings, save us, that have sought refuge in You, from this
poison, which is burning (all) the three worlds.(21) You are the one Lord competent to enthral
and liberate the whole world. Such as You are, the wise worship You, the Preceptor (of the
universe), capable of relieving the agony of those who have sought refuge in You. (22) (It is
only ) when You undertake through Your own energy (Maya), consisting of the three Gunas,
the (work of) creation, maintenance and dissolution of this universe, O self-seeing Lord,
(that) You (severally) assume the title of Brahma, Visnu and Siva, O perfect One | (23) You
are the supreme, mysterious Brahma (the Absolute), the Creator of all beings, (the gods,
beasts and so on), high and low. Itis You, the (supreme) Spirit, that stand manifested as the
universe by virtue of (Your) manifold energies (in the form of Sattva, Rajas and Tamas) and
are its Ruler (too). (24) You are the Source of the Word (the Veda); the cause of the universe
(in the form of the Mahat-tattva or the Principle of cosmic intelligence); the (cosmic) Ego—
characterized by the (three) Gunas (Sattva, Rajas and Tamas), that bring forth the (eleven)
Indriyas (the five senses of perception, the five organs of action and the mind), the (five) vital
airs and the (five) subtle elements (respectively); the intrinsic nature of everything (which
brings about transformation); the Time-Spirit (which disturbs the equilibrium of the three
Gunas) and Kratu (the creative will) as well as Dharma (piety), consisting of Satya
(truthfulness) and Rta (polite speech). The wise (further) declare that which is known as the
Indestructible (primordial Matter), consisting of the three Gunas, as depending on You. (25)
Fire, which represents all the gods, is Your mouth; the wise conceive the earth to be Your
lotus-like feet, O Source of the universe: Time, to be Your movement, while You are
conceived of as representing all the gods in Your person; the quarters as (representing) Your
ears, and the god Varuna (the ruler of the waters) as Your palate.(26) The sky is Your navel;
the air, Your respiration; the sun, Your eyes; and water is Your generative fluid, Your ego is
the support of all the Jivas (embodied souls), (both) high and low (from Brahma down to the
minutest creature); the moon embodies Yourmind; and heaven, Your head, O Lord !(27) The
oceans represent Your abdomen; the mountains, Your framework of bones; all the annual
plants and creepers, the hair on Your body; the (seven Vedic) metres (viz., Gayatri, Tristubh,
Anustubh, Brhat!, Pankti, Jagati, and Usnik), no other than the (seven) constituents (viz.,
chyle, blood, flesh,fat bone, marrow and the generative fluid) of Your body; and the entire
range of Dharma (piety as enjoined by the Vedas), Your heart, O Lordwitha body constituted
of the three Vedas (Rk, Yajus and Sama) ! (28) The five sacred (Vedic) texts (known by the
