120 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 5

CR ता न न ० ७७ HREM AHN ONAL EARN सा ANOS शाल् श्व # क 9 श 4६४4 १४१५ ४८७ ENR HOR # 6.#: 46४6 #

अथ पञ्चमोऽध्याय:

Discourse ४

Festivities connected with the Birth of Lord Sri Krsna at Gokula
SR उवाच

नन्दस्त्वात्मज उत्पन्ने जाताह्लादो महामना: 1 आहूय विप्रान् वेदज्ञान् स्नात: छुचिरलङ्कृत: । १ ।
वाचयित्वा wert जातकर्मात्मजस्य वै। कारयामास विधिवत् पितृदेवार्चनं तथा । २ ।
धेनूनां नियुते meq fa: सप्नलङ्कृते।विलाद्रीन्सप्तरतौघज्ञातकौष्पाम्बराबृतान्।इ।
कालेन स्नानशौचाभ्याँ संस्कारैस्तपसेज्यया | शुध्यन्ति aa: सन्तुष्ट्या द्रव्याण्यात्पाऽऽत्मविद्यया । ४ ।
सौमङ्गल्यगिरो विप्रा: सूतमागधवन्दिन: । गायकाश्च जगुर्नेदुर्भेर्यो दुन्दुभयो मुहु: । ५ ।

$ri Suka resumed : Calling in Brahmanas, well-versed in the art of fortune-telling and
having made them repeat benedictory hymns, the high-souled Nanda, on the other hand,
who was rejoiced at the thought of a son having been born to him (in his ripe old age), and
who had just bathed and attained purity (thereby) and was (duly) adorned, had the
Jatakarma* ceremony actually performed with respect to the Babe according to precept and
(also) caused the manes and gods (in the form of Nandi-Sraddha and so on) to be
worshipped. (1-2) He gave away to the Brahmanas two lakhs of newly calved and richly
adorned cows as well as seven mountain-like piles of sesamum seedst studded with a vast
number of precious stones and covered with a piece of gold cloth.(3) Material substances
get purified through passage of time, bath and washing, sacraments, asceticism, sacrificial
performances, charitable gifts and contentment; while the soul is purified through Self-
knowledge (alone). (4) Brahmanas as well as Sutas,t Magadhas and Vandis uttered
benedictory words; songsters sang songs, while kettledrums and larger drums sounded
again and again. (5)
व्रज: सम्मृष्टसंसिक्तद्वाराजिरगृहान्तर: | चित्रध्वजपताकास्रक्चैलपल्लवतोरणै: । ६ ।
“mat वृषा वत्सतरा हरिद्रात्तैलरूषिता: | विचित्रधातुबर्हस्रग्वस्त्रकाञ्चनमालिन: । ७ ।
भहार्हवस्त्राभरणकञ्चुकोष्णीषभूषिता: । गोपा: समाययू राजन् नानोपायनपाणय: । ८ ।

Vraja had its doorways, courtyards and interiors of houses well swept and duly sprinkled
with water, and was decorated with flags and buntings of various colours as well as with
arches made of wreaths, textiles and leaves. (6) Cows, bulls and grown up calves were
daubed with oil mixed with termeric, painted with minerals of various colours and decked with
peacock plumes, wreaths, cloth and 506 necklaces. (7) Cowherds dressed in costly loin-
cloths, coats and turbans and adorned with valuable jewels flocked (in the house of Nanda),
carrying presents of various kinds in their hands, O Pariksit ! (8)

* This ceremony consisis in touching the tongue of a new-born mate child thrice with ghee afler appropriate prayers.

+ Itis customary among the Hindus to give away heaps of sesamum seeds on the euspicious occasion of the birth ofa
son

}These terms have been defined in |he following couplet —

* Sutas are those who recite stories from the Puranas: Magadhas are no other than bards reciting the glories of ancestors
ol kings. white Vandis are those who make observations suited to particular occasions *
