Dis. 41 BOOK NINE 15

+ tr innit tereeree sees वज वज ज्जज्ज seers eee ee

alephants, chariots, horses and foot-soldiers, inexhaustible (store of) jewels, ornaments and
weapons etc., as well as regarding his endless treasuries he developed the notion that they
were (all) unreal. (27) Pleased with his exclusive devotion and love, Sri Hari delivered to
him His own discus (Sudargana), the terror of His adversaries and the protector of his
servants.(28)

आरिराधयिषु: कृष्णं महिष्या तुल्यशीलया । युक्त: साबत्सरवीरोदध्रारद्वादशॊव्रतम्।२९।
wart कार्तिके मासि त्रिरात्रं समुपोषित: | ere: कदाचित्कालिन्यां aff मधुवनेऽर्चयत् । ३०
महाभिषेकविधिना सर्वोपस्करसम्पदा | अभिषिच्याम्बराकल्पैर्गन्धमाल्यार्हणादिभि: 1321
तद्गूतान्तरभावेन पूजयामास केशवम्। ब्राह्मणांश्च महाभागान् सिद्धार्थानपि भक्तित: 1321
Tat रुक्मविषाणीनां रूष्याङ्घ्रीणां सुवाससाम् ! पय:ञ्चीलवयोरूपवत्सोपस्करसम्पदाम् 1331
प्राहिणोत् साधुविप्रेभ्यो गृहेषु न्यर्बुदानि vei भोजयित्वा द्विजानग्रे स्वाद्वन्नं गुणवत्तमम् । ३४1
लब्धकामैरनुज्ञात: पारणाबोपचक्रमे | तस्य तर्ह्यतिथि: साक्षाद् दुर्वासा भगवानभूत् । ३५॥

Intending to please ( the all-enchanting) Lord Visnu, the heroic king (Ambarisa)
undertook (in right earnest) alongwith his wife, wno had a similar disposition, a vow to fast
on every Dwadast (the twelfth day of either fortnight of a lunar month) for a whole year.* (29)
On one Dwadasi day (the day following the fast) during the month of Kartika, the king, who
had duly fasted for three (previous) nightst and bathed in the river Kalindl (Yamuna),
worshipped Sri Hari in the (sacred) forest of Madhuvana (on the site of which was built the
city of Mathura later on). (30) Having bathed Lord Visnu (the Ruler even of Brahma and Siva)
according to the procedure (laid down in the scriptures) for a royal bath, requiring a rich
variety of accessories (such as sandal-paste and flowers for scenting the water with), he
worshipped Him with his mind absorbed in Him by offering raiment and ornaments as well
as sandal-paste, flowers, water for washing the hands with and other articles of worship, and
(similarly) honoured with reverence the highly blessed (devoted) Brahmanas even though
they had (all) their objects accomplished (and thus did not seek any honour). (31-32) He
(then) gifted so pious Brahmanas and sent to their houses sixty crores of cows endowed with
(abundant) milk, good disposition, young age and a good appearance and accompanied by
their calves and (necessary) appendages (which are usually given alongwith a cow, such as
a vessel for holding milk while milking a cow) and which had their horns plated with gold and
hoofs with silver and were covered with excellent pieces of cloth. He first gave the
Brahmanas delicious and most excellent food to eat and, permitted by them, when they had
received all their desired objects (such as presents of money), he set about concluding the
fast (bytakinghis meal). Thatvery moment there appeared before himan unexpected guest
in the person of no less a personage than the glorious sage Durvasa. (33—35)

coe: + सि
तमानर्चातिथि भूप: प्रत्युत्थानासनार्हणै: | चवाचेऽभ्यवहाराय पादमूलमुपागत: 13% 1
Sit स Aer कर्तुमावह्यकं गत:। Faas बृहद ध्यायन् कालिन्दीसलिले शुभे 1391
मुहूर्तार्धावशिष्टायां द्वादश्यां पारणं प्रति। चिन्तवामास धर्मज्ञो द्विजैस्तद्धर्मसङ्कटे ।३८॥

~ as a ~ +
ब्राह्मणातिक्रमे दोषो द्वादश्यां यदपारणे । चत्कृत्वा साधु मे भूयादधर्मो वा न मां AN, 1३९1
* Although every Vaisnava ण votary of the Lord Visnu is enjoined to fast on the eleventh day of either fortnight of each
unar month throughout his life. Ambarisa obviously took this vow for a period of one year only and that too in Madhuvana in
order to impress on the people the advisability of fasting on this day.
+ Anyone observing a fast on the Ekadasi day is expected to have one meal only on the preceding as well as onthe the

allowing day and to observe a total fast, abstaining from all food and drink including water, on the Ekadaéi. It Is in this sense
one that King Ambarisa should be taken to have fasted on three consecutive nights.

