Dis. 19] BOOK ELEVEN 605

SRE RT EA A ET ORE BERR OR RE RR RIOR TOR On totem tre We cone te

श्रीर्गुणा नैरपेक्ष्याद्या: qa दु:खसुखात्यय: । दु:खं कामसुखापेक्षा पण्डितो बन्धमोक्षवित् । ४१1
Weal देहाद्यहंबुद्धि: पन्था मन्निगम: स्मृत: । उत्पथश्चित्तविक्षेप- स्वर्ग: सत्त्वगुणोदय: 121
नरकस्तमउन्नाहो जन्धुर्गुरुरहं सखे । गृहं TH मानुष्यं गुणाढ्यो wea उच्यते 1x31
दरिद्रो यस्त्वसन्तुष्ट: कृपणो योऽजितेन्द्रिय: । गुणेष्वसक्तधीरीञ्ञो गुणसङ्घो विपर्यय: ।४४॥
एतउद्धन्रतेप्नश्ना;सवेंप्ताघुस्सिपिप्ता:।किंवर्णितेनबहुना लक्षणं गुणदोषयो: ।
शुणदोषदृशिर्दोषो गुणस्तूभयवर्जित: ।४५॥
इति श्रीमद्भागवते महापुराणे पारमहंस्यां संहितायामेकादशस्कन्धे एकोनविंशझचोऽध्याय: 1291

The glorious Lord replied ; Harmlessness, uttering only that which is wholesome,
agreeable and true, non-thieving, absence of attachment, modesty, non-accumulation of
possessions, faith, chastity, silence, firmness (of resolve), forgiveness and fearlessness,
bodily cleanliness and mental purity, muttering the Gayatri and other sacred texts, austerity,
pouring oblations into the sacred fire, reverence (for true religion), hospitality and offering
worship to Me; visiting sacred places, working for the benefit of others, contentment and
service to the preceptor—these have been declared to be the twelve Yamas and the twelve
Niyamas divided in two (separate) verses.Carried into practice they positively yield fruit (in
the shape of final beatitude or worldly prosperity) according to the desire of men, O dear
one ! (33-35) Sama is dependence of the intellect on Me; Dama consists in control of the
senses. Titiks& consists in (calmly) enduring, suffering and firmness in completely controlling
the palate and the sex. (36) Forswearing enmity towards (the entire) creation is the highest
form of charity; Tapas has been declared to consist in abandoning luxuries (of all kind).
Valour consists in curbing one’s natural propensities or cravings and truthfulness consists
in perceiving unity (in the form of Brahma) everywhere. (37) Rta has been declared by the
wise as consisting in truthful and agreeable speech. Sauca (which is a variety of Tyaga when
construed in the sense of shaking off impurity) consists in absence of attachment to one’s
actions; while Tyaga is declared as consisting in (renouncing the world and) entering the
order of Sarnyasa. (38) Righteousness is the esteemed wealth of men; Myself, the supreme
Lord, am the Yajfia (which should accordingly be performed as identical with Myself and not
as a dry ritual). Daksina (or gift made ata sacrifice) consists inservice to the preceptor (which
induces the preceptor to impart wisdom). Pranayama (control of breath) is the supreme
strength (inasmuch as it is helpful in curbing the mind, which is so difficult to curb). (39) My
divine state (consisting in the six attributes of tordship, piety, glory, affluence, wisdom and
dispassion, each in its fullest measure) is (real) fortune and Devotion to Me is the highest
gain. Wisdom consists in sublating diversity (appearing) in the Self and Hariis shrinking from
prohibited acts. (40) Adornment consists in virtues like desirelessness; happiness consists
in rising above joys and sorrows and misery lies in seeking gratification through enjoyment;
aman of erudition is he who knows what is bondage and what is liberation. (41) The fool is
he who looks upon the body as his self and that connected with it as his: that which leads
to My realization (the path of renunciation) has been declared to be the path (of virtue) and
the path of worldly activity (which distracts the mind) is the wrong one; predominance of
Sattvaguna is heaven. (42) Preponderance of Tamogunais hell. The preceptoris one’s (true)
friend and he is no other than Me (the teacher of the entire universe), O friend | The human
body is the (true) habitation (place of enjoyment). He alone who abounds in virtues is said
tobe opulent. (43) Destitute is he who is discontented; he (alone) is pitiable, who has not been
able to control his senses. He is the master (of his self), whose mind is not attached to the
