13० SRIMAD BHAGAVATA (Dis. 7

REMAKE OE THANE MENEAME TROON EERO ERERN DD का मामा क का REO ENON SE CONCERN EHR OENE

Taking up her crying son, Yasoda, who was afraid of the presence of some evil spirit,
gave Him suck (only) when the ceremony of invoking blessings on Him had been performed
by Brahmanas with the help of Vedic hymns (destroying evil spirits). (11) Having poured
oblations into the sacred fire (in order to propitiate the deities presiding over the planets and
so on), the Brahmanas worshipped the cart (which was the seat of their wealth in the shape
of dairy products, and the abode of Laksmi) with curds, unbroken grains of rice, blades of the
(sacred) KuSa grass and water, when it had been placed as before by mighty cowherds and
provided (once more) with (all) its goods (whatever was kept on it). (12) Taking up the Boy
and sprinkling Him with water consecrated through (the recitation of) sacred texts from the
Samaveda and Yajurveda and hallowed with sanctifying herbs, (nay,) causing benedictions
tobe pronounced by the foremost of Brahmanas and propitiating the (sacred) fire (by pouring
oblations into it), Nanda, the cowherd chief—who felt convinced that the benedictions uttered
by those truthful ones who are completely free from a carping spirit, mendacity, hypocrisy,
jealousy, violence and pride never go in vain—gave to the Brahmanas very wholesome food
to eat. (13—15) For (the purpose of ensuring) his son's all-round prosperity Nanda (further)
gave away (to the Brahmanas) cows endowed with all good qualities and adorned with cloth,
garlands and gold necklaces and they uttered their (choicest) blessings in return. (16)
Obviously benedictions that are uttered by Brahmanas well versed in sacred prayers and
united with God shall never prove fruitless and (invariably) come out true. (17)

एकदाऽऽरोहमारूढं लालयन्ती सुतं सती । गरिमाणं शिशोर्वोढुं न सेहे गिरिकूटवत् । १८॥
भूमौ निधाय तं गोपी विस्मिता भारपीडिता । महापुरुषमाद्ध्यौ जगतामास कर्मसु । १९॥

One day (when Sri Krsna had just attained the age of one year), Yasoda (the good old
lady), while she was busy fonding her son, seated in her lap, could not bear the weight of the
Babe, who had (all of a sudden) grown heavy as a mountain-peak. (18) Placing Him on the
ground, Yasoda (the cowherd lady), who'felt astonished (at this wonderful phenomenon)
and, oppressed with burden, contemplated on the Supreme Person (out of fear of some
unexpected calamity) and set about her worldly duties (such as summoning Brahmanas for
the ceremony of invoking blessings on her babe). (19)

दैत्यो नाम्ना तृणावर्त: कंसभृत्य: प्रणोदित: । चक्रवातस्वरूपेण जहारासीनमर्भकम् 120 |
गोकुलं सर्वमावृण्वन् yungeife रेणुभि: । ईरयन् सुमहाघोरशब्देन feet दिश: 1221
मुहूर्तमभवद् गोष्ठं रजसा तमसाऽऽवृतम्। सुतं यञ्ञोदा नापदयत्तस्मिन् न्यस्तवती यत: 1221
aad, कश्चनात्मानं परं चापि विमोहित: । तृणावर्तनिसृष्टाभि: झर्कराभिरुपद्रुत: 1231
इति खरपवनचक्रपांसुवर्षे सुतपदवीमबलाविलक्ष्य माता ।
अतिकरुणमनुस्मरन्त्यशोचद् भुवि पतिता मृतवत्सका यथा गौ: 1241
wera तत्र गोप्यो भृङामनुतप्तथियोऽश्रुपूर्णमुख्य: |
नन्दसूनुं पवन उपारतपांसुवर्षवेगे 1241

A demon, Trnavarta by name and a servant of Kamsa, particularly directed (by him),
appeared in the form of a whirlwind, enveloping the entire Gokula in particles of dust and
blinding the eyes (of all), and shaking the quarters as well as the intermediate points with his
most terrible roar, and carried away the squatting Babe. (20-21) For an hour or so Vraja
remained enveloped in dust and darkness. Yasoda did not find her son on the spot where
she had set him. (22) Oppressed with particles of sands wafted by Trnavarta and utterly
confused, one could not see one’s own self, much less another. (23) Not finding any trace
of her son in the shower of dust occasioned by that violent whirlwind, and repeatedly thinking
of Him in a most pathetic manner, the helpless mother (Yasoda) lamented and dropped on
the ground like a cow whose Calf had died. (24) Having heard the cry (of YaSoda) later on,
