Dis. 10} . BOOK TWO - 131

RoR SiR inion fr trenton triniei ot irene frie hee te eee ee ines sore Ae TAREE

प्रजापतीन्मनून् देवानृषीन् पितृगणान् पृथक् । सिद्धचारणगन्धर्वान् विद्याध्रासुरगुह्यकान् 139 |
किन्नराप्सरसो नागान् सर्पान् किम्पुरुषोरगान्। मातृ रक्ष:पिञाचांश्च प्रेतभूतविनायकान् 1321
कूष्माण्डोन्मादवेतालान् यातुधानान् ग्रहानपि । खगान्मृगान् पशून् वृक्षान् गिरीन्नृप सरीसृपान् । ३९1
द्विविधाश्चतुर्विधा asad जलस्थलनभौकस: | कुशलाकुञला मिश्रा: कर्मणां गतयस्त्विमा: ।४०॥
wa wen sf fie: Gene: । तत्राप्येककशो राजन् भिद्यन्ते गतयस्रिधा |
यदॆकॆकतरोऽन्याभ्यां स्वभाव उपहन्यते ।४१॥

स wae जगद्धाता भगवान् धर्मरूपधृक् । पुष्णाति स्थापयन् विश्वं तिर्यङ्नरसुरात्मभि: ।४२॥
तत: कालाग्निरुद्रात्मा यत्सृष्टमिदमात्मन: | संनियच्छति कालेन घनानीकमिवानिल: ।४३॥

Both the subtle and gross forms of the Lord, which | have described to you, are the
creation of the Lord's Maya. Hence the wise refuse to accept either (for worship). (35) The
supreme Lord is really actionless; it is by His own Maya that He becomes active. Assuming
the form of Brahma, He reveals Himself both in the form of word and what it denotes, and
evolves many anameandform and activity. (36) Prajapatis (lords of created beings), Manus,
gods, Rsis (seers), the various classes of the manes, Siddhas, Caranas (celestial bards) and
Gandharvas (celestial musicians), Vidyadharas (another class of demigods), Asuras (de-
mons) and Guhyakas (Yaksas), Kinnaras (another class of celestial musicians), Apsaras
(celestial nymphs), Nagas, serpents, Kimpurusas (another class of demigods) and snakes,
Matrkas, Raksasas, Pisacas, Pretas, Bhitas and Vinayakas, Kusmandas, Unmadas and
Vetalas, Yatudhanas and Grahas, birds and reptiles, beasts of prey and otheranimals, trees,
mountains and all other names and forms in the universe, O king, are His. (87—39) All other
creatures, both animate and inanimate, whether viviparous, oviparous, sweat-born or
sprouting from soil, and living either in water, on land or in the air, are the good, bad or mixed
fruit of corresponding actions (done in the past). (40) The predominance of Sattva
(goodness), Rajas (passion) and Tamas (opacity or ignorance) is severally responsible for
birth as a god, as ahuman being and as a denizen of hell or as a member of the sub-human
species. Each of these three destinies is again sub-divided into three varieties according as
each of the three Gunas is eclipsed by either of the other two Gunas (modes of Prakrti ) or
not. (41) Having assumed the form of Visnu (whois all virtue) for the support and sustenance
of the world, the same Lord preserves and sustains this universe by appearing from time to
time in the guise of animals, men and gods. (42) Again, when the time comes, the Lord
appears as Rudra (the god of destruction) from the fire of universal destruction and dissolves
this universe, once created by Himself, even as a blast blows away a mass of clouds. (43)

इत्थभावेन कथितो भगवान् भगवत्तम:। नेत्थभावेन हि परं द्रष्टुमर्हन्ति सूरय: xv
नास्य कर्मणि जन्मादौ परस्यानुभिधीयते । कर्तृत्वप्रतिषेधार्थं माययारोपितं हि तत्।४५॥
aa तु ब्रह्मण: कल्प: सविकल्प उदाहृत: | विधि: साधारणो aa सर्गा: प्राकृतवैकृता: ।४६॥
GRAM च कालस्य कल्पलक्षणविग्रहम्। यथापुरस्तादव्याख्यास्ये पाद्मं कल्पमथो A] ।४७।

The Lord, who is possessed of inconceivable power, has been described as above (as
the creator, preserver and destroyer of the universe). The wise, however, should not regard
Him only as such; for He is even beyond this description. (44) The Supreme has no doership
in relation to the creation and other activities connected with this universe. Sruti texts ascribe
it to Him only with a view to denying it; for the same has been superimposed on Him by
Maya.(45) | have told you about the great Kalpa (cycle) connected with the appearance of
Brahma as also about the other smaller Kalpas. The process of creation is the same in all
the Kalpas, the only difference being that during a Mahakalpa (the Kalpa immediately
