326 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 51

SAARI OIA EE RR CEL EE ESAT SAE चिन ETT ERE ERROR व

having been swept away (by the cruel hand of Death). (18) The Time- -Spirit is mightier than

the mighty; (nay,) it is the almighty and immortal Lord (Himself). Like’a herdsman driving a

herd it sweeps away created beings in (mere) sport. (19) May good betide you, ask of us

today any boon other than Liberation; (for) the imperishable Lord Visnu is the sole authority

capable of granting it." (20) Thus addressed (by them), King Mucukunda of great renown

respectfully saluted the gods and, entering deep into the (aforesaid) cave’, and overpowered

by (a very long spell of) sleep, vouchsafed by the gods (in response to his prayer), lay down

to repose (there). (21) (The gods further said to him,) “Let him, however, who thoughtlessly

awakens you, when fallen into sleep, in the middle, be instantly reduced to mere ashes when”
but seen by you.” (22)

भस्मसान्नीते wer सात्वतर्षभ: । आत्मानं दर्शयामास मुचुकुन्दाय धीमते । २३॥
तमालोक्य aaa पीतकौरोयवाससम्।श्रीवत्सवक्षसं भ्राजत्कौस्तुभेन विराजितम् । २४॥
चतुर्भुजं रोचमानं वैजयन्त्या च मालया । चारुप्रसन्नवदनं स्फुरन्मकरकुण्डलम् 1241
Revit नृलोकस्य सानुरागस्मितेक्षणम्। अपीच्यवयसं मत्तमृगेन्द्रोदारविक्रमम् । २६॥

तस्य धर्षित: । शङ्कित: arm राजा दुर्धर्षमिव तेजसा ize)

On the Yavana having (thus) been converted into ashes, Lord Sri Krsna (the foremost
of the Yadus) showed Himself to the wise Mucukunda. (23) Beholding the Lord—dark-
brown as a cloud, clad in yellow silk, bearing the mark of Srivatsa on His breast, irradiated
with the brilliant Kaustubha gem, endowed with four arms, splendid with a garland of sylvan
flowers, wearing a lovely and cheerful countenance, and adomed with a pair of shining
alligator-shaped ear-rings, captivating to the sight of human beings, enlivened witha loving
smile and endearing glances, possessed of a charming youth, walking with the charming
gait of a proud lion, and formidable as it were by His glory—and overwhelmed by His lustre,
the king who was possessed of a great wisdom, was filled with awe and slowly inquired of
Him (as follows). (24—27)

मुचुकुन्द उवाच
को भवानिह सम्प्राप्तो विपिने गिरिगह्वरे। पद्भ्यां पद्मपलाशाभ्यां विचरस्युरुकण्टके । २८॥
किंस्वित्तेजस्विनां तेजो भगवान् वा विभावसु: । सूर्य: सोमो महेन्द्रो वा लोकपालोऽपरोऽपि वा 1281
wa at देवदेवानां त्रयाणां पुरुषर्षभम्। यद् बाधसे गुहाध्वान्तं प्रदीप: प्रभया यथा ।३०॥

शुश्रूषतामव्यलीकमस्माकं नरपुङ्खव । स्वजन्म कर्म गोत्रं वा Herat यदि रोचते 1321
aa तु पुरुषव्याघ्र ऐक्ष्वाका: क्षत्रबन्धव: । मुचुकुन्द इति प्रोक्तो यौवनाश्वात्मज: प्रभो ।३२॥
चिरप्रजागरश्रान्तो निद्रयोपहतेन्द्रिय: | हायेऽस्मिन् विजने कामं केनाप्युत्थापितोऽधुना 1331

सोऽपि भस्मीकृतो नूनमात्मीयेनैव पाप्मना । अनन्तरं भवाञ्छीमान् लक्षितोऽमित्रशातन: । ३४॥
तेजसा तेऽविषह्येण भूरि द्रष्टुं न शक्नुम: । हतौजसो महाभाग माननोयोऽसि देहिनाम् । ३५॥

एवं सम्भाषितो राज्ञा भगवान् भूतभावन: । प्रत्याह प्रहसन् awa मेघनादगभीरया । ३६॥
Mucukunda submitted : Who may you be, arrived in the mountain cave, and how is it
that you roam about in this forest abounding in thorns with your feet tender as the petals of
a lotus ? (28) Are you the effulgence (incarnate) of the effulgent, or the glorious fire-god, the
sun-god, the moon-god or the mighty Indra (the ruler of paradise) or any other Lokapala
(guardian of a particular sphere) ? (29) | consider You to be (no other than) Lord Visnu, the
Supreme Person) out of the three rulers of gods (Brahma, Visnu and Siva) as (is clear from

* The cave is located to the south of Mathura near Dholpur in the State of Rajasthan.
