Dis. 19 ] ` BOOK EIGHT ~~ 813

SAAN ere er ee eee - : घेप्रै'प्रेंघेप्रेप्रेंघे…ष्पैक्लीर्व्यर्व्यघेमैंथेघेघेघेमैंप्रेंष्टेघेगैप्नेप्रेंटू’ध्रेमैंघेर्व्य

एवं स निश्चित्य रिपो: ङारीरमाधावतो निर्विविरोऽसुरेन्द्र ।

श्चासानिलान्तर्हितसूक्ष्मदेहस्तत्प्राणरन्रेण विविग्नचेता: 1201

a तन्निकेते परिमृश्य oye: कुपितो ननाद ।

am द्यां fea: खं विवरान् समुद्रान् विष्णुं विचिन्वन् न ददर्श ah: 1११॥
अपढ्यन्नितिहोव।चमयान्विष्टमिदंजगत्।भ्रातृहामेंगतोनूनंयतोनाबर्ततेप्रुप्तान्।१२।
वैरानुबन्धं एतावानामृत्योरिहे देहिनाम्। अज्ञानप्रभवो मन्युरहंमानोपबृंहित: । १३॥
पिता प्रह्वादपुत्रस्ते तद्विद्वान्दविजवत्सल: | स्वमायुर्दविजलिङ्गेभ्यो देवेभ्योऽदात् a याचित: । १४॥
भवानाचरितान्धर्मानास्थितो गृहमेधिभि: । ब्राह्मणै: पूर्वजै: शूरैरन्यैश्चोद्दामकीर्तिभि: । १५॥
तस्मात् त्वत्तो महीमीषद् वृणेऽहं वरदर्षभात्। पदानि त्रीणि Sete संमितानि पदा मम । १६॥
Wad ते कामये राजन्वदान्याज्जगदीश्वरात्। नैन: प्राप्नोति वै विद्वान्यावदर्थप्रतिग्रह: । १७॥

The gracious Lord replied: This speech of yours, O ruler of men, is (both) agreeable
and full of truth and just (too), and (thus) not only worthy of your race but conducive to your
(own) glory. For your authority in secular matters are the Bhrgus; whereas in the course-of
duty relating to the other world your guide is Prahrada (your grandfather), the eldest of your
race and altogether free from passions.(2) Indeed there has never been in this race (of yours)
any man who was so lacking in goodness (charity) as to refuse a Brahmana (waiting at the
door for alms) or so niggardly as not to give a thing (even) after promising it. (3) In your race—
wherein like the moonin the firmament shines forth by his untarnished glory Prahrada—there
have never been kings who were so low-minded as to turn away their face when requested
(for a charitable gift) by a mendicant on an occasion of gift or (for a combat) by one seeking
an encounter on the battle-field.(4) Born in this race, Hiranyaksa could not find a rival while
traversing this earth (all) alone, armed with a mace, for the conquest of the quarters.(5) Even
though Visnu killed him with great difficulty when he appeared (before Visnu) at the time of
(the latter's) rescuing the earth (from the bottom of the ocean), Visnu did not account himself
victorious recalling Hiranyaksa's superior valour again and again (even after his death). (6)
Hearing of his death, his (elder) bfother, Hiranyakasipu (Prahrada's father), full of rage, Went
of yore to the abode of Hari in order to kill the slayer of his brother.(7) On observing him
approaching, spear in hand, like Death (himself), Visnu, who knows what is Opportune and
is the foremost of those practising conjuring tricks, reflected (thus within himself):— (8)
"(Even) as Death dogs the footsteps of living beings (wherever they go), he (Hiranyakasipu)
is sure to follow wherever | go. Hence | shall enter his heart (and hide there), his eye being
turned to the outer world (alone)’ (9) Having concluded thus, Visnu—who was greatly
agitated in (his) mind and who hid his body, reduced to a subtle state, in the ingoing breath
of Hiranyakasipu—stealthily entered, through the latter's nostril, O ruler of the Asuras, the
body of the enemy (Hiranyakasipu), who was rushing towards him. (10) Ransacking his
abode, which was devoid of Visnu, yet not perceiving him, Hiranyakasipu roared in rage. The
hero (then) searched heaven and earth, the (four) quarters, the aerial region, the (Seven)
subterranean regions as wellas the (seven) oceans, but could not find Visnu (anywhere).(1 1)
Not perceiving Visnu, he actually spoke as follows:— "(The whole of) this universe-has been
(thoroughly) searched by me (but in vain). The slayer of my brother has (therefore) surely
reachedthe realm (of Death) from which man does not return.(1 2) The persistence in enmity
of embodied souls in this world goes only so far, viz., till (the adversary's) death. Andso does
their wrath (the father of enmity), which has its root in ignorance (about the true nature of the
