20 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 6

BBA खी BR A MATH ङीडीकी त् ROR कौ RRR OB ER Ee रै ॐ क ह जरीकी कीं डी eR ee ज् ती डी कौ री ह ती et torr छ वी बौको ज वन्र HOH पि

परिश्रान्तेद्दरियात्माहं तृदपरीतो नुभुक्षित: । स्नात्वा पीत्वा Be नद्या उपस्पृष्टो गतश्रम: ।१५॥
तस्मिन्निर्मनुजेऽरण्ये पिप्पलोपस्थ आस्थित: | आत्मनाऽऽत्मानमात्मस्थं यथाश्रुतमचिन्तयम् । १६॥
ध्यायतश्चरणाम्भोजं भावनिर्जितचेतसा | औत्कण्ट्याश्रुकलाक्षस्य FATA दानैर्हरि: 1 १७॥
प्रेमातिभरनिर्भिन्नपुलकाङ्गोऽतिनिर्वृत: । आनन्दसम्पुवे लीनो नापड्यमुभयं Wel
रूपं Wad aa शुचापहम्। अपर्यन् सहसोत्तस्थे वैक्लव्याद्दुर्मना aie
दिदृक्षुस्तदहं भूय: प्रणिधाय मनो हदि। वीक्षमाणोऽपि नापश्यमवितृप्त इवातुर: 1201
एवं aad विजने मामाहागोचरो firm गम्भीरश्लक्ष्णया aren ya: प्रशमयन्निव । २१।
हन्तास्मिञ्जन्मनि भवान्न मां द्रष्टुमिहार्हति । अविपक्वकषायाणां दुर्दर्शोऽहं . कुयोगिनाम् 1221
wee Ue दर्शितं रूपमेतत्कामाय तेऽनघ । मत्काम: ae: साधु: सर्वान्मुञ्चति हृच्छयान् ।२३॥
सत्सेवया दीर्घया a जाता मयि gar मति: । हित्वावद्यमिमं लोकं गन्ता मज्जनतामसि । २४॥
मतिर्मयि fags न व्रिपद्येत कर्हिचित्।प्रजासर्गनिरोधेऽपि स्मृतिश्च मदनुग्रहात् ।२५॥
we च ae महतां महीयसे शीर्षघ्णावनामं विदधेऽनुकम्पित: 126)
नामान्यनन्तस्य हतत्रप: पठन् गुह्यानि भद्राणि कृतानि च स्मरन्।
र्गं पर्यटस्तुष्टमना गतस्पृह: कालं प्रतीक्षन् विमदो विमत्सर: 1201
In that journey | passed through prosperous lands, cities, villages, temporary habitats
of cowherds, mines, hamlets, stray habitations by the side of mountains and rivers,
enclosures containing plantations, groves and gardens, mountains charming with minerals
of various colours, trees with boughs broken by elephants, lakes containing delightful water,
lotus-ponds frequented by gods and rendered vocal by birds of diverse notes and adorned
by bees hovering about (from one lotus-bed to another). Having journeyed across these all
alone, | came in sight of an extensive and formidable forest dense with rushes, bamboos,
reeds, KuSa grass and hollow bamboos and which presented a dreadful appearance,
infested as it was with serpents, owls and jackals. (11—14) Wearied in mind and body and
overcome with thirst and hunger, | bathed in the pool of a river, drank of its water, rinsed my
mouth with it and felt refreshed. (15) In that forest, uninhabited by man, | sat down at the
foot of a Peepul tree and contemplated with a collected mind on the Lord residing in my
heart,as | had heard of Him (from the lips of my preceptors). (16) Even as | meditated on His
lotus-feet with a mind overpowered by love, tears rushed to my eyes as a result of eagerness
to behold Sri Hari, who gradually appeared on the screen of my heart. (17) The hair of my
body stood on end due to an outburst of love, and my heart experienced a thrill of excessive
joy and tranquillity. lmmersed in a flood of ecstasy, O sage, | lost consciousness of both
myself and the object of my perception (Sri Hari). (13) Even as | failed to perceive that
indescribable form of the Lord, which was enrapturing to the heart and dispelled all grief, |
felt disturbed and sprang on my feet like one troubled at heart. (19) Longing to behold it once
more, | fixed the mind on my heart and looked for it, but could not see it. Now | felt miserable
like one whose desire had not been sated. (20) To me thus struggling in that lonely forest,
the Lord, who is beyond words, spoke in sublime yet soft words, as if to soothe my grief: (21)
"Alas ! in this birth you are unfit to behold Me; for | am difficult of perception for those who
have not attained perfection in Yoga (Devotion), and the impurities of wnose heart have not
yet been wholly burnt. (22) It was only to arouse in you a burning désire to see Me that! have
once revealed My form to you. One who longs to see Me shakes off gradually but completely
all one’s latent desires. (23) Through services rendered by you to the saints even for a short
