Dis. 7] BOOK TEN 131

LOOK श्र न्नान ANE म # # # # > 98 ४ ENT ENCE RERAREHEERERERECE RAR #.# # ८८ RRR #9# 99४६ ALE 494 १६१9 94 #:9#-

when the wind had the vehemence of its shower of dust abated, and with their mind sore
afflicted at not perceiving there the Darling of Nanda, the cowherd women (too) wept, their
face flooded with tears. (25)

qed: ज्ञान्तरवो वात्यारूपधरो हरन्। कृष्णं नभोगतो गन्तुं नाहाक्नोद् भूरिभारभृत् ।२६॥
TRA मन्यमान आत्मनो गुरुमत्तया। गले गृहीत उत्स्रष्टुं नाशाक्नोदद्भुतार्भकम् 1201
गलग्रहणनिश्चेष्टो दैत्यो निर्गतलोचन:। अव्यक्तरावो न्यपतत् सहबालो व्यसुर्व्रजे । २८॥

पुरं , यथा sat विद्धं feat रुदत्यो eq: समेता: 1२९॥

प्रादाय wa प्रतिहत्य विस्मिता: gel च तस्योरसि लम्बमानम्

a स्वस्तिमन्तं gered faq मृत्युमुखात् प्रमुक्तम्।

Wag गोपा: fae नन्दमुख्या लब्ध्वा पुन: प्रापुरतीव मोदम् ।३०॥

अहो बतात्यद्भुतमेष we बालो निवृत्तिं गमितोऽभ्यगात् पुन: ।

fea: स्वपापेन विहिंसित: ae: साधु: समत्वेन wae विमुच्यते । ३१

किं नस्तपश्चीर्णमधोक्षजार्चनं पूर्तेष्ठदत्तमुत भूतसौहदम् |

ame: पुनरेव बालको fem स्वबन्धून् प्रणयन्नुपस्थित: 1321
wre बहुशो नन्दगोपो बृहद्वने। वसुदेववचो भूयो मानयामास विस्मित: 1331

Carrying away Lord Sri Krsna, Tmavarta, who hadassumed the form ofa whirlwind, went
up to the skies (to a certain height) but could not proceed (further), his impetuosity having
ceased now that he (felt he) was carrying a huge burden (since the Lord had grown heavy
again). (26) Taking that wonderful Boy to be a rock (of sapphire) because of His being heavier
than himself (and having given up the form of a whirlwind), he could not cast Him away,
caught as he was by the throat. (27) Rendered motionless by the (extraordinary) pressure
at the throat and giving forth an indistinct groan, the demon fell down dead in (the outskirts
of) Vraja, Babe andall, his eyes having been shot out (of the sockets), (28) The crying women
assembled there saw the terrible demon fallen from the skies on a slab, with all his limbs
shattered, like the city* (built by the demon Maya and) cleft by the arrow of Lord Rudra. (29)
Nay, astonished to find Sri Krsna dangling on his breast, they picked up and restored Him
to His mother. The cowherdesses and cowherds headed by Nanda, so the tradition goes,
experienced excessive joy to get back the Babe, sound of body, though taken away by the
ogre through the air, and extricated from the jaws of Death (as it were). (30) Oh, what a joyl
Itis extremely wonderful that, though brought to an end by the ogre, this boy has returned
safe! The bloody and wicked fellow has been destroyed by his own sin and a pious soul is
completely rid of fear by virtue of his even-mindedness. (31) What austerities, worship of Lord
Visnu (who is above sense-perception), act of pious liberalityt (Purta) and sacrificial

* Vide Vil. x.S4—59.
+ The word ‘Purta’ has been defined by Manu in the following couplet:—
वापीकूपतडागादि देवतायतनानि च। अन्नप्रदानमाग्रम: पूर्तमित्यभिधीयते॥

(Manusmru, ॥४. 226)
* Digging wells, big and small, tanks etc., construclion of temples, giving away foodgrains, laying out garden—these ere
called by the name of Purta.*
The word ‘Ista’ egain, has been defined by Atri as below:—
अग्निहोत्रं त्प: मत्यं वेदानां चैव पालनम्। आतिथ्यं वैश्रदेवश्च इष्टमित्यभिधीयते॥
“Pouring oblations inte the secred fire, practising austerities, truthfulness and also preserving the Vedas by committing
them to memory, hospitelity, performing the rite called Vaiswadeva—this is called by the name of Ista.”
