other than the exploits of the Lord who shatters the sin of His devotees—talks which, when
heard by those unfortunate men rob them of their merit and throw them alas ! into the dark
regions of hell, where they find no shelter, (23) Alas ! they who do not offer worship to the
Lord even after attaining human birth, which is solicited even by us (gods) and where one

is projected everywhere. (24) On the other hand, they alone attain to that realm—which is
located even higher than our abode (the Satyaloka)—who have reached beyond the
jurisdiction of Yama (the god of retribution) by virtue of their devotion to Lord Visnu (the
foremost of the gods), who are possessed of an enviable character, and whose eyes stream
with tears and whose body is thrilled allover when they are beside themselves with love while
talking to one another about the glories of their lord. (25) The Sages (Sanaka and his three
brothers) felt supremely delighted when they reached by dint of their Yogamaya (wonderful
power of Yoga) the divine and unique realm of Vaikuntha, presided over by Lord Visnu (the
Father of the whole universe), which is the sole object of reverence for all the worlds, and
shone resplendent with the wonderful aerial cars of the foremost gods. (26)

सुनय: षडसज्जमाना: कक्षा: समानवयसावथ सप्तमायाम् |
देवावचक्षत गृहीतगदौ वेषो 12191
।

मत्तद्बिरेफवनमालिकया निवीतौ

ऊचु: सुहृत्तमदिदृक्षितभङ्ग gama सहसा त उपपुताक्षा: 138 |
Having passed through six entrances to the Lord's residence without feeling attached to
anything, they saw at the seventh gate two shining beings of the same age, armed with a
mace and adorned with most valuable armlets, ear-rings and diadems. (27) With a garland
of sylvan flowers, which attracted to ita swarm of intoxicated bees, placed round their neck
and between their four Swarthy arms, they wore a countenance which looked somewhat
agitated from their arched eyebrows, distended nostrils and reddish eyes. (28) Even while

looked (from their appearance) only five years of age, even though they were the eldest (of
Brahma's creation) and had realized the truth of the Self. But when the porters, who
happened to possess a disposition which was quite unpalatable to the Lord, saw the sages
(passing through the gate guarded by them without taking any notice of their presence), they
blocked the sages’ way with their staff, despising their glory, although the sages did not
deserve such treatment at their hands. (30) Being thus forbidden by the two chief porters of
