Dis. 56 ] BOOK TEN ३51

सि ES ETE ETE EEE SP HARA HTT RHA ARORA

अथ षट्पञ्चाहात्तमोऽध्याय:

Discourse LVI
The story of the Syamantaka gem; Sri Krsna weds

Jambavati and Satyabhama

श्रीगुक उवाच
सत्राजित: स्वतनयां कृष्णाय कृतकिल्विष: । स्यमन्तकेन मणिना स्वयमुद्यम्य दत्तवान्। १ |

$ri Suka began again ; Having done a wrong (to Sri Krsna), Satrajit gave away to Sri
Krsna of his own accord after due exertion his daughter (Satyabhama) alongwith the
Syamantaka gem. (1)

राजोवाच
सत्राजित: किमकरोद ब्रह्मन् कृष्णस्य किल्बिषम् | स्यमन्तक: कुतस्तस्य कस्माद् SA सुता हरे: । २ ।

The king (Pariksit) submitted : What wrong did Satrajit perpetrate against Sti Krsna,
O holy one ? Wherefrom was the Syamantaka gem got by him and why did he give away his
daughter to Sri Hari ? (2) ॥

Ar उवाच
आसीत् सत्राजित: सूयों भक्तस्य परम: सखा । प्रीतस्तस्मै मणिं प्रादात् सूर्यस्तुष्ट: स्यमन्तकम् । ३ ।
स तं बिभ्रन् मणिं कण्ठे भ्राजमानो यथा रवि: । प्रविष्टो द्वारकां राजंस्तेजसा नोपलक्षित: । ४ ।
4 विलोक्य जना दूरात्तेजसा मुष्टदृष्टय: । दिव्यतेऽक्षैर्भगवते oem: सूर्चशङ्किता: । ५ |
AR नमस्तेऽस्तु शङ्खचक्रगदाधर। दामोदरारबिन्दाक्ष गोविन्द यदुनन्दन । ६ ।
एष आयाति सविता त्वां दिदृक्षुर्जगत्पते । मुष्णन् गभस्तिचक्रेण नॄणां walle तिग्मगु: । ७ ।
नन्वन्विच्छन्ति ते uni त्रिलोक्यां विबुधर्षभा: । ज्ञात्वाद्य गूढं यदुषु द्रष्टुं त्वां यात्यज: प्रभो । ८ ।

Sri Suka replied : The sun-god, though adorable in the eyes of Satrajit, his devotee,
behaved as a loving friend to him. Pleased with him, the sun-god bestowed on him the
Syamantaka gem. (3) Wearing that gem about his neck and shining as the sun (because of
that gem), he entered Dwaraka (presumably from his place of worship in the outskirts of the
city) but could not be identified, O king, through his (dazzling) brilliance. (4) Gazing at him
from a distance, their eyes blinded with his splendour, and suspecting him to be the sun-god,
people reported his arrival to the Lord, who was playing at dice (as follows):—{5) "Hail to You,
O Narayana. the Wielder of a conch, discus and mace ! O Lord, who (once) had a cord tied
about Your abdomen (by mother YaSoda by way of punishment), O lotus-eyed One, O
Protector of cows, O Scion of Yadu! (8) Dazzling the eyes of men with his rays, here comes
the glorious sun-god with intent to see You, O Lord of the universe ! (7) Indeed the foremost
of the gods (Brahma and others) in the three worlds seek the way to You (but fail to find You).
Having come to know You as living incognito at present among the Yadus, the sun-god (who
is self-existent) comes to see You, O Lord." (8)

Aaa बालवचनं प्रहस्याम्बुजलोचन: । प्राह नासो रविर्देव: सत्राजिन्मणिना ज्वलन्। ९ ।
