384 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 21
ESAS ESTES RAR HEMT L See Thee hte heehee har seekeneernersersrerinherhaener
SRE SEE SSE RAE SA SNS S TL SEATON EER CAREC RETREATS t EEN eR Rew ee Rink वित्

wa यूयं भजतात्मवृत्तिभिर्मनोवच:कायगुणै: स्वकर्मभि: ।

अमायिन: कामदुघाङ्घ्रिपङ्कजं यथाधिकारावसितार्थसिद्धय: 133 |

Like the (sacred) stream (the Ganga) that has flowed from His great toe, the pious and

ever-increasing relish one finds in adoring His feet immediately wipes out the impurity of
mind of those afflicted by the trials and tribulations of mundane existence, accumulated in
the course of all previous births. (31) Even the man who has taken shelter in the soles of His
feet is completely rid of all the impurities of mind and, acquiring the special power of
dispassion and Self-Realization, never returns to worldly life, which brings misery in its
train.(32) Confident of achieving the goal according to your (individual) merits and free from
hypocrisy, (therefore) worship Him alone—whose lotus-feet are capable of yielding
whatever you desire—with the functions of your mind, speech and body and by your own
duties which serve as a means of procuring a living to you. (33)

असाविहानेकगुणोऽगुणोऽध्वर: पृथग्विधद्रव्यगुणक्रियोक्तिभि: ।
सम्पद्यतेऽर्थाशयलिङ्गनामभिर्विशुद्धविज्ञानघन: WSU: 131
प्रधानकालाशयधर्मसंग्रहे शझरीरं एष प्रतिपद्य चेतनाम्।
क्रियाफलत्वेन विभुर्विभाव्यते यथानलो दारुषु तद्गुणात्मक: 1341
स्वधर्मयोगेन यजन्ति मामका निरन्तरुं क्षोणितले gana: ।३६॥
मा We तेज: प्रभवेन्महर्धिभिस्तितिक्षया तपसा fara च ।

अवाप लक्ष्मीमनपायिनीं यो जगत्पवित्रॆ च महत्तमाग्रणी: । ३८॥
यत्सेवयाशेषगुहाशय: स्वराड् विप्रप्रियस्तुष्यति काममीश्वर: |
तदेव तद्धर्मपरैर्विनीते: सर्वात्मना ब्रह्मकुलं निषेव्यताम् । ३९॥
पुमाँल्लभेतानतिवेलमात्मन: प्रसीदतोऽत्यन्तशमं wa: स्वयम् ।
यन्नित्यसम्बन्धनिषेववा तत: परं किमत्रास्ति मुखं हविर्भुजाम् ।४०॥
न a aa चेतनया बहिष्कृते हुताशने पारमहंस्यपर्यगु: ।४१॥
समाधिना बिभ्रति हार्थदृष्टवे यत्रेदमादर्श इवावभासते ।४२॥
तेषामहं पादसरोजरेणुमार्यां वहेयाधिकिरीटमायु: |
a नित्यदा बिभ्रत ay पापं नश्यत्यमुं सर्वगुणा भजन्ति ।४३॥
प्रसीदतां ब्रह्मकुलं गवां च जनार्दन: सानुचरश्च मह्यम् ।४४॥
A compact mass of pure consciousness and attributeless in essence, He (the Supreme
Person) manifests Himself, in the path of the ritual, in the form of a sacrifice, possessed of
many attributes, which is accomplished with the help of diverse substances (such as barley,

rice, sesame seeds and clarified butter), qualities (of things), actions (such as the pounding
of paddy and fanning the chaff from the grain) as well as through the purposes to which the

