764 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 7

REHHBCEKKKEHCHEKKECCVEKCECHKHKKEKHAKELTEKAHCEAORECSHELA CEH SHCA क कज्न्र क क्तैककक LAKE R OHHH EHH

तदुग्रवेगं दिशि दिश्युपर्यधो विसर्पदुत्सर्पदसह्यमप्रति |
भीता: प्रजा STE सेश्वरा अरक्ष्यमाणा: शरणं सदाशिवम् ।१९॥
आसीनमद्रावपवर्गहेतोस्तपो जुषाणं स्तुतिभि: प्रणेमु: 1201

When nectar (however) did not appear from the ocean (of milk), being churned in the
aforesaid manner by the commanders of the heavenly and Asura forces, Lord Ajita Himself
took up the churning. (16) Holding the serpent (Vasuki) with His (four) triumphant arms
vouchsafing protection to the world, and agitating the ocean with the churn-dasher (in the
form of Mount Mandara), the Lord—who was dark-brown ike a cloud, had a cloth of golden
hue wrapped about His loins, was adorned with a garland (of sylvan flowers) and a pair of
ear-rings that flashed like lightning, wore glossy and wavy locks on His head and was
possessed of reddish eyes, and who (in the form of the divine Tortoise) bore Mount Mandara
(on His back), now shone like a rival mountain. (17) From the ocean—which was teeming
with Timis (a fish of enormous size), sea-elephants, sharks and whales (big enough to
devour even Timis) and which when it was being churned, disturbed the fishes and agitated
the alligators, snakes and tortoises—first issued a most deadly poison called Halahala. (18)
Seeing that effervescent, unbearable and irresistible poison possessing tremendous force
and spreading in all quarters, as well as above and below, and finding no protection
(anywhere), living beings along with their leaders got (much) frightened and flew for
protection to Lord Sadasiva (the ever-auspicious), O dear one! (19) Beholding the aforesaid
Chief of the gods—seated (dwelling) on Mount Kailasa with His divine Spouse for the welfare
of the three worlds and practising austerities, so dear to ascetics, (inorder to setan example
before them) for their emancipation—they greeted Him with hymns. (20)

प्रजापतय HF:
tata महादेव भूतात्मन् भूतभावन।त्राहि न: झरणापन्नांस्रैलोक्यदहनाद विषात् । २१।
त्वमेक: सर्वजगत gat बन्धमोक्षयो: । तं त्वामर्चन्ति कुराला: प्रपन्नार्तिहरं गुरुम् । २२।
Tren स्वशक्त्यास्य सर्गस्थित्यप्ययान्विभो | धत्से यदा Berl भूमन्ब्रह्मविष्णुशिवाभिधाम् 123 |
त्वं Fa we गुह्य सदसद्भावभावन: । नानाशक्तिभिराभातस्त्वमात्मा जगदीश्वर: ।२४॥
त्वं शब्दयोनिर्जगदादिरात्मा प्राणेन्द्रियद्रव्यगुणस्वभाव: |
काल: क्रतु: Te च धर्मस्त्वय्यक्षरं यत् त्रिवृदामनन्ति eu
अग्निर्मुखं तेऽखिलदेवतात्मा fats विदुर्लोकभवाङ्घ्रिपङ्कजम्।
ae a तेऽखिलदेवतात्मनो fers कर्णौ wa जलेशम् ।२६॥
नाभिर्नभस्ते get नभस्वान् सूर्यश्च चक्षूषि जलं स्म रेत: ।
परावरात्माश्ररणं तवात्मा सोमो मनो द्यौर्भगवञ्छिरस्ते 1201
waa साक्षात् तव सप्त धातवस्त्रयीमयात्मन् हृदयं सर्वधर्म: ।२८॥
मुखानि पञ्चोपनिषदस्तवेशा यैस्रिंशदष्टोत्तरमन्त्रवर्ग: |
यत् deat amides देव स्वरयंज्योतिरवस्थितिस्ते । २९1
