Dis. 38 ] BOOK TEN 259

Jhon tie io ttinre$ pres ies Oe EE SHEERS eee ESET E ATES Spenser Ree २१० १ ee HSE IE

fe मयाऽऽच्चरितं भद्रं किं ag परमं ao: किं वाथाप्यर्हंते दत्तं यद् द्रक्ष्याम्यद्य केशवम् । ३ ।
ममैतद् ge मन्य उत्तमश्लोकदर्शनम्।विषयात्मनो यथा ब्रह्मकीर्तनं YR: । ४ |
aq ममाधमस्यापि स्यादेवाच्युतदर्शनम्।ह्रियमाण: कालनद्या क्वचित्तरति कश्चन । ५ |
nang नष्टं फलवांश्चैव मे भव:। वन्नमस्ये भगवतो योगिध्येयाङ्धिपङ्कजम्। ६ |
केसो बताद्याकृत मेऽत्यनुग्रहं द्रक्ष्येऽङ्धरिपद्मं प्रहितोऽमुना हरे: |
`कृतावतारस्य दुरत्ययं तम: पूर्वेऽतरन् यन्नखमण्डलत्विषा । ७ |

qa मुकुन्दस्य गुडालकावृतं + प्रदक्षिणं मे प्रचरन्ति वै मृगा: । ९ ।
अप्यद्य विष्णोर्मनुजत्वमीयुषो भारावताराय भुवो निजेच्छया ।
लावण्यधाम्नो भवितोपलम्भनं मह्यं न न स्यात् फलमञ्जसा दृश: ।१०।
च ईक्षिताहंरहितोऽप्यसत्सतो: स्वतेजसापास्ततमोभिदाभ्रम: ।
। स्वमाययाऽऽत्मन् रचितैस्तदीक्षया प्राणाक्षधीभि: 1981
Sri Suka began again : Having spent that night* at Mathura (the city founded by the
demon Madhu), the high-minded Akrura too mounted a chariot and drove to Nanda’s
Vraja.(1) Proceeding along the road the highly blessed one developed supreme devotion to
the lotus-eyed Lord and thought as follows adopting the following line of reasoning:—(2)
"What noble act has been performed, (nay,) what supreme austerity has been gone through
or again what gift has been bestowed on a worthy recipient by me, by virtue of which । am
going to behold Sri Krsna (the Protector of even Brahma and Lord Siva) ? (3) | consider it
as difficult for me—whose mind is given to sensuous pleasures—to gain the sight of Lord Sri
Krsna of excellent renown as a recital of the Vedas is for one born of Sidra parents. (4)
(Rather) | should not think like that. Even to me, a vile creature, the sight of Sri Krsna, (the
immortal Lord) must be vouchsafed; (for, though) borne away by the stream of Time, one may
get to the shore (the end of mundane existence) some time. (5) (All) my evil has been
destroyed today; nay, my birth too has become fruitful in that | shall bow to the lotus-feet of
the almighty Lord, that are fit to be meditated upon by Yogis (those given to contemplation).
(6) Ah, Karnsa has done me a great favour today; (for) despatched by him (to Vraja) | shall
behold the lotus- feet of Sri Hari, descended in the world of matter—feet by the splendour
of whose spherical nails people in the past have got over the darkness of ignorance, so
difficult to cross over, (nay) which are adored by gods headed by Brahma and Lord Siva (the
Source of the universe), by the divine Sri (the goddess of beauty and prosperity) as well as
by sages and devotees; which move about in the forest alongwith their followers for the
purpose of pasturing the cows, and which are tinged with the saffron paint on the bosom of
cowherd women. (7-8) | shall surely behold the countenance of Sri Krsna (the Bestower of
Liberation) with lovely cheeks and a shapely nose and with reddish lotus-like eyes casting
smiling glances, and overhung by curly locks; forthe deerwalkto my rightindeed.t (9) If there
comes about today a meeting with Lord Visnu, the home of loveliness, who has of His own

NN
* This has reference to verse 40 of Discourse XXXVI above.
+ According to the science of omens this is considered to be a propitious omen as is borne out by the following verse:—
