152 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis.

MAHER उ झ हो अत्ये EE TELE GEEMA ETTORE झत्येजो KL SUR SE LOCTEA HOHE EAE HTT HHS AUTRE REESE SHR Se
eee eee eee

over again and) entered it as the Inner Controller, the Lord of all Masters of Yoga, thouc
one, appears in diverse forms. (5-6) Also recount to me the exploits that He performs ६
amere sport for the well-being of the Brahmanas, the cows and the gods in the course
His various Avataras or descents into the world of matter. My mind does not feel sated eve
though | go on hearing the nectar-like stories of Sri Krsna (the Crest-jewel of those enjoyir
fair renown). (7) Pray, further tell me, O chief of the Brahmanas, with what principles th.
suzerain Lord of all the worlds created the different worlds and their guardian deities, as we
as the dark regions (lying beyond the mountain called Lokaloka*), wherein appear all classe
of beings entrusted with different duties, and how theself-existent Lord Narayana, the Make
of the universe, endowed all created beings with a distinctive disposition, activity, form ar
name. (8-9) | have often heard, O worshipful sage, from the lips of the sage Vyasa about tr
duties of the higher (twice-born) as well as the lower classes of men; but | am nowfed up wil
all other Dharmas, conducive as they are to trivial joys, and find my sole delight in the streal
of nectar that flows from the stories of Sri Krsna. (10) As a matter of fact, who can be sate
with the stories of Sri Krsna (whose feet are the abode of all sanctity), which are sung wil
praise by seers (like Narada) in the assemblies of holy men like you ? For, entering the cavi
of a man's ears (through His stories) the Lord cuts asunder the bond of attachment to h
home, which throws one into the whirlpool of metempsychosis. (11) It was with the intentic
of recounting the Lord's virtues that your friend, the sage Krsna Dwaipayana (Vedavyasa
composed the Mahabharata. For even there, while (apparently) dwelling on the pleasure
of sense, the mind of human beings is (ultimately) drawn towards the stories of Sri Hari. (1%
The attraction (thus generated) for the stories of Sri Hari, when it grows, creates aversion ।
the mind of a devout man for other things. Nay, it speedily puts an end to all the sorrows ९
the man who has tasted the joy flowing from the constant remembrance of Sri Hari's feet. (1¢
| deplore those ignorant men who have a dislike for the stories of Sri Hari due to their sir
and, therefore, deserve to be pitied even by the pitiable. The deity presiding over time cul
short (every moment) their allotted span of life, engaged as they are (all the time) in idle tall
idle activities and idle thought. (14). Therefore, O Maitreya (son of Kusaru), friend of th
afflicted, even asa bee gathers honey from the flowers, so be pleased to extract the essenc
of all stories in the shape of the stories of Sri Hari, the Bestower of blessedness and th
Abode of sacred renown, and relate the same to me for my good. (15) Also kindly recour
to me the superhuman feats performed by the Lord when He descended into the world (
matter, assuming His energy (known by the name of Maya) for the sake of creatior
preservation and dissolution of the universe. (16)
श्रीशुक उवाच
स एवं भगवान् पृष्ट: क्षत्रा कौषारविर्मुनि: | gat नि:श्रेयसार्थेन ame ag मानयन् । १७॥

Sri Suka continued : Questioned thus by Vidura for the supreme good of men, th
worshipful sage Maitreya (the son of Kusaru) addressed him as follows, showing grez
honour to him. (17)

साधु पृष्टं त्वया साधो लोकान् साध्वनुगृह्णता | कीर्तिं वितन्वता लोके आत्मनोऽधोक्षजात्मन: 1१८1
नैतच्चित्रं त्वयि क्षत्तर्वादरायणवीर्यजे | गृहीतोऽनन्यभावेन यत्त्वया हरिरीश्वर: ।१९॥
भाण्डव्यशापाद्भगवान् प्रजासंयमनो यम: | भ्रातु: क्षेत्रे भुजिष्यायां जात: सत्यवतीसुतात् । २०॥

"A belt or circle of mountains surrounding the outermost of the seven seas and dividing the visible world from the regic
of darkness (As the sun 1s within this wall of mountains, they are light on one side and dark on the other).
