Dis. 15 ] BOOK NINE 61

जजजजजजजआनकाशाशय जाजाक्तै ककन्रजा

अक्षोहिणी: सप्तदशातिभीषणास्ता TH एको भगवानसूदयत् ।३०॥
यतो यतोऽसौ प्रहरत्परश्वथो मनोऽनिलौजा: परचक्रसूदन: |
ततस्ततर्छिन्नभुजोरुकन्धरा निपेतुरुर्वया हतसूतवाहना: 1321
`विवृक्ण्तर्मध्वजचापविग्रहं निपातितं हैहय आपतद् BAT IR
अथार्जुन: पञ्चशतेषु बाहुभिर्धनु:षु बाणान् gd स सन्दधे ।
रामाय रामोऽस्त्रभृतां समग्रणीस्तान्येकधन्वेषुभिराच्छिनत्समम् । ३३॥
पुन: स्वहस्तैरचलान् मृधेऽङ्धिपानुत्किप्य वेगादभिधावतो afr
भुजान् कुठारेण कठोरनेमिना free wa प्रसभं त्वहेरिव । ३४॥
quae: शिरस्तस्य fr: शृङ्गमिवाहरत्। हते पितरि तत्पुत्रा अयुतं दुद्रुवुर्भयात् ।३५॥

(Even) while enteringhis capital, Arjuna saw rushing with (great) vehemence Paragurama
(the foremost of the Bhrgus), wielding a bow and armed with an arrow and an axe, clad in
the skin of a black antelope and marked with matted locks brilliants as (the rays of) the
sun.(29) Arjuna sent forth (against the intruder) seventeen most formidable Aksauhinis*
characterized by elephants, chariots, horses and foot-soldiers and armed with maces,
swords, arrows, javelins, Sataghnis (a stone or cylindrical piece of wood studded with iron
spikes) and darts. The glorious Rama destroyed them (all) single-handed. (30) In whatever
direction appeared Rama (the destroyer of hostile armies), quick as mind and the wind,
whose axe was (ever) prone to strike, there fell down to the ground warriors with their arms,
thighs and necks severed and their charioteers and animals slain. (31) Seeing his army laid
low in the battle-field—rendered miry with streams of blood—with their shields, ensigns,
bows and bodies cut to pieces by the axe and shafts of Rama, Arjuna (the chief of the
Haihayas) rushed forward in rage. (32) Now, with his (one thousand) arms the celebrated
Arjuna synchronously fitted arrows to his five hundred bows in order to pierce Rama. Rama
(however), who was by far the foremost of those that (ever) wielded missiles and who had
(only) one bow, simultaneously cut them down with his arrows. (33) Again, with his hard-
edged axe Rama, for his part, violently lopped off, like the hoods of a serpent, (all the
thousand) arms of Arjuna, who came rushing forward in battle with (terrible) speed uprooting
with his (numerous) hands rocks and trees on the battle-field. (34) Rama severed, like the
peak ofa mountain, the head of Arjuna, whose arms had (thus) been lopped off. On the father
having been killed, his ten thousand sons ran away out of fear. (35)

अग्निहोत्रीमुपावर्त्य सवत्सां परवीरहा। समुपेत्याश्रमं पित्रे परिक्लिष्टां समर्पयत् ।३६॥
wed तत्कृतं राम: पित्रे भ्रातृभ्य एव च।वर्णवामास तच्छुत्वा जमदम्निरभाषत ।३७॥
TH WA महाबाहो भवान् पापमकारषीत्। अवधीन्नरदेवं यत् सर्वदेवमयं वृथा ।३८॥
aa हि ब्राह्मणास्तात क्षमयार्हृणतां गता:। यवा लोकगुरुर्देव: पारमेष्ठ्यमगात् पदम् ।३९॥
क्षमया रोचते लक्ष्मीर्ब्रह्मी सौरी यथा प्रभा। क्षमिणामाशु भगवांस्तुष्यते हरिरीश्वर: ।४०॥
राज्ञो मूर्धाभिषिक्तस्व वधो ब्रह्मवधाद् गुरु: । तीर्थसंसेवया चांहो जह्यङ्गाच्युतचेतन: ive!

Bringing back the cow of plenty—sore distressed (at its having been removed by force

from the hermitage)—together with her calf, and returning safe to his hermitage, Rama (the

* For the strength of an Aksauhini see foot-note below I. viii. 48.
