Dis. 18] BOOK SIX 637

SHREEORERARA AR RAH TRATES EE EEE ee Tee Eee ere eeHALHTHMHOH RRR ARR ROKR E

इति भावेन सा arenes aE प्रश्रयेण दमेन च ।२७।
भक्त्या परमया राजन् मनोज्ञैर्वल्गुभाषितॆ: | मनो जग्राह भावज्ञा सुस्मितापाङ्गवीक्षणै: । २८॥
एवं fan जडीभूतो विद्वानपि विदग्धया । बाढमित्याह fast न तच्चित्रं fe .स्रोषिति । २९
विलोक्यैकान्तभूतानि भूतान्यादौ प्रजापति: । fact चक्रे स्वदेहार्धं यया det after aol
एवं शुश्रूषितस्तात भगवान् ae: fai प्रहस्य परमप्रीतो दितिमाहाभिनन्द्य aise!

Sri Suka resumed : Diti, whose sons (Hiranyakasipu and Hiranyaksa) had been slain
by Lord Visnu, the Ally of Indra (the chief of the gods), and who was (consequently) burning
with rage kindled by grief, pondered as below :—(23) "When shall | have an undisturbed
sleep, having brought about the death of the voluptuous cruel, hard-hearted and sinful Indra
(who has been instrumental in causing the death of his own half-brothers) ? (24) He who
seeks to hurt (other) beings for the sake of his (own) body—which, though (once) designated
as a king (ultimately, when dead) goes by the name of (is transformed into) worms (if buried
and thus consumed by worms), or that of excrement (if exposed and devoured by
Carnivorous beings such as dogs and jackals, vultures and crows), or that of ashes (in
cremated)—is he alive to his (higest) interests ? (Certainly not). For damnation (invariably)
follows from such hostility to (other) beings. (25) (Therefore) let me devise some means
whereby a son may be born to me, that may quell the pride of the aforesaid Indra, who looks
upon this (perishable) body as everlasting and whose mind knows no restraint." (26) With
this idea (uppermost in her mind) she constantly pleased her husband (the sage Kasyapa)
through (personal) service, affection, humility and self-control. (27) Knowing as she did the
heart of her husband, she captivated his mind, O Pariksit, by her supreme devotion,
charming and sweet words winsome smiles and sidelong glances. (28) Thus infatuated by
that clever lady, and powerless (against her womanish charms), the sage, though learned,
said, "All right! (Your wish shall be granted.)" Such stupefaction of men by awoman (through
her devoted conduct) indeed is not to be wondered at. (29) Finding men (absolutely)
unattached at the dawn of creation, Brahma (the lord of created beings) converted one half
of his body into the fair sex, who robbed men of their judgment. (30) Waited uponin this way,
O dear son (Pariksit) ! by that lady (Diti), the glorious sage Kasyapa felt highly pleased; and,
welcoming her, he laughingly spoke (as follows). (31)

करयप उवाच
a वरय वामोरु प्रीतस्तेऽहमनिन्दिते। स्रिया ath सुप्रीते क: काम इह चागम: 1321
पतिरेव fe नारीणां gad परमं wai ame: सर्वभूतानां वासुदेव: श्रिय: पति: 1331
स एवं देवतालिङ्गैर्नामरूपविकल्पितै: | इज्यते भगवान् gia: स्रीभिश्च पतिरूपधृक् । ३४॥
तस्मात्पतिव्रता नार्य: श्रेयस्कामा: सुमध्यमे | यजन्तेऽनन्यभावेन पतिमात्मानमीश्वरम् 134 |
सोऽहं त्वयार्चितो भद्रे ईदृग्भावेन भक्तित: । तत्ते सम्पादये काममसतीनां सुदुर्लभम् ।३६॥

KaSyapa said : Ask (of me) a boon of your choice, O beautiful one; | am pleased with
you, O irreproachable lady. When the husband is fully pleased, what desire of a woman
remains unattainable here as well as hereafter ? (32) The husband alone has been declared
to be the supreme Deity for women. Although (as a matter of fact,) Lord Vasudeva, the
Consort of Sri (the goddess of beauty and prosperity), dwelling in (presiding over) the mind
of all created beings, is the supreme Deity, it is the said Lord alone who is worshipped by
men in the guise of (various) divinities diversely conceived under (different) names (Indra

and so on) and forms (wielding a thunderbolt and other distinctive weapons); and it is He
(again) who is worshipped by women as appearing in the form of their husband. (33-34)

