Dis. 4].  “BOOKONE: .. 13

ESRB Br GER RH Be BT BY SRT HTB BH BER BRIM Re HGS RR RE RT ERR HE HT: Me RE RON TRO BM PERE ROTORE ROR ROH BE SERRE ROTOR RR ROR Eat

7 Ud ऋषयो ag स्वं स्वं व्यस्यन्ननेकधा | शिघ्यै: प्रशिष्यैस्तच्छिष्यैर्वेदास्तेशाखिनोऽभवन् 1231
a we aa दुर्मेधैर्धार्यन्ते पुरुषैर्यथा । एवं चकार भगवान् व्यास: कृपणवत्सल: । २४॥

Sita replied : In the Dwapara age, the third Yuga of the present Caturyugi (the period of
four Yugas from Satya to Kali) the great Yogi, Vyasa, who is a part manifestation of Sri Hari,
was born of Satyavati (who had sprung from the seed of Uparicara Vasu) through the sage
ParaSara. (14) One day, after taking his bath in the sacred water of the Saraswati he sat ina
lonely place just at sunrise. (15) The sage, who had an unfailing eye and could read the past
as well as the future, saw how by flux of time, which passed unnoticed, there ensued in every
age an overlapping of duties, as a result of which the potency of material objects had
diminished and people had grown irreverent, weak, dull-witted and short-lived. Finding the
people so unlucky, the sage began to investigate by means of his divine insight as
to wherein lay the welfare of men belonging to all the grades of society and stages of
life. (16—18) Perceiving that Vedic sacrifices, which are performed through the agency of four
priests (viz., the Hota, the Adhwaryu, the Udgata and the Brahma’ ) are the purifiers of men,
he divided the one Veda into four for the continuance of sacrifices. (19) He thus separated the
four Vedas under the names of Rgveda, Yajurveda, Samaveda and Atharvaveda. And the
Itihasas and the Puranas are called the fifth Veda. (20) Of these Paila received (was taught)
Rgveda, the seer Jaimini (was the first who) learnt how to chant the Samaveda, while
VaiSampayana was the only one who mastered the Yajurveda. (21) The sage Sumantu, son
of Daruna, acquired proficiency in the Atharvaveda; while my (Stta's) father, Romaharsana,
gained mastery over the Itihasas and Puranas. (22) These latter sages (Paila and others)
divided their respective Vedas into more than one branches. In this way through their pupils,
pupils’ pupils and the pupils of these latter the four Vedas came to be divided into so many
branches. (23) The divine Vyasa, who is compassionate to men of poor wits (evidently) did so
in order that even the dull-witted might be able to retain the Vedas (in parts). (24)

स्रीश्द्रद्विजबन्धूनां त्रयी न श्रुतिगोचरा । कर्मश्रेयसि मूढानां श्रेय wa भवेदिह ।
ft भारतमाख्यानं कृपया मुनिना कृतम् Ie |
एवं प्रवृत्तस्य सदा भूतानां श्रेयसि द्विजा: । सर्वात्मकेनापि यदा नातुष्यद्धृदयं तत: 1261
नातिप्रसीदद्धृदय: सरस्वत्यास्तरे दुचो । वितर्कयन् विविक्तस्थ इदं प्रोवाच धर्मवित् i!
धृतव्रतेन हि मया छन्दांसि गुरवोऽग्नय: । मानिता निर्व्यलीकेन गृहीतं चानुशासनम् । २८।
भारतव्यपदेशेन ह्याम्नायार्थश्च दर्शित: । दृर्यते यत्र धर्मादि स्त्रीशूद्गादिभिरप्युत 1201
wee बत मे दैह्यो ह्यात्मा चैवात्मना fay: । असम्पन्न इवाभाति ब्रह्मवर्चस्यसत्तम: 1301
fe वा भागवता eat न प्रायेण निरूपिता: | प्रिया: परमहंसानां a wa ह्यच्युतप्रिया: । ३१॥
तस्यैवं खिलमात्मानं मन्यमानस्य feed: | कृष्णस्य नारदोऽभ्यागादाश्रमं प्रागुदाहृतम् । ३२।
तमभिज्ञाय सहसा प्रत्युत्थायागतं मुनि:। पूजयामास विधिवन्नारदुं सुरपूजितम् । ३३॥
इतिश्रंन्धांमहापुंश्योपास्महंस्यांसंन्तिन्धांप्रथग्मस्वक्तधेर्नैपिपोयंफ्याचतुर्थौऽघ्यप्त्य।न्धिं॥

Seeing that the women, the ऽएताऽ and the fallen Brahmanas, Ksatriyas and Vaisyas
were debarred even from hearing the Vedas, and did not know how to perform acts that are

* The function of a Hota is to invoke the gods by reciting the Rgveda; that of an Adhwaryu is to measure the sacrificial
ground, to build the altar, to prepare the vessels, to fetch wood and water, to light the fire while repeating the Yajurveda. and
so on; that of an Udgala is to chant the Samaveda and that of a Brahma to supervise the sacrificial pertormance and set
right mistakes.
