1)5ऽ. 25 | BOOK THREE 251

RAEN ECRETEN SAH क AEE EL HEN EESSCE REPS CEAE EKKO ERENT EHH LEH ORTH EAH
नाजान्र ree Sr Se Nae a are aa

defined above) is superior to final beatitude itself in that it speedily dissolves the subtle body
even as the gastric fire digests the food that is devoured. (32-33) Some devotees of the
Lord—who ever delightin the service of My feet and are engaged in activites only for My sake,
and who lovingly sing to one another of My exploits alone—crave not even for absorption into
My Being. (34) The aforesaid saints, O mother, behold My charming and divine forms
possessed of a smiling face and ruddy eyes—forms which confer boons on them—and have
talks with them, which are the envy even of the greatest sages. (35) Their devotion (to Me)
secures to them (a place in) My subtle Abode even though they never seek it, their mind and
senses fascinated by those forms with attractive limbs, captivating playful gestures, glances
accompanied with a smile and delightful speech. (36) They no longer crave for the wealth
and enjoyments of Satyaloka (the highest heaven) and the other spheres falling within My
jurisdiction as the Lord of Maya, nor for the eight kinds of supernatural powers that come to
them of their own accord as a sequel to Devotion, nor even for the wealth and splendour of
the Lord's own realm (Vaikuntha), which are full in every respect; yet they do enjoy these in
that Abode of the Supreme. (37) They who depend on Me, nay, to whom | am the only object
of love, nay, the very self, the son, the friend, the preceptor, the kith and kin and the chosen
deity, are never deprived of these enjoyments in Vaikuntha (which consists of pure Sattva);
nor does My weapon in the shape of Time ever devour them. (38) .

इमं लोकं तथैवामुमात्मानमुभयायिनम्। आत्मानमनु ये चेह ये राय: पशवो गृहा: 1391

विसृज्य सर्वानन्यांश्च we विश्चतोमुखम्।भजन्त्यनन्यया भक्त्या तान्मृत्योरतिपारये ।४०॥

Ae मद्भगवत प्रधानपुरुषेश्वरात्। आत्मन: सर्वभूतानां भयं तीव्रं fada ives

मद्भयाद्वाति वातोऽवं सूर्यस्तपति asa adds दहत्यग्निर्मृत्युश्चरति मद्धयात् ।४२।

ज्ञानवैराग्ययुक्तेन भक्तियोगेन योगिन: । aera पदामूलं मे प्रविशान्त्यकुतोभयम् v3 |

एतावानेव लोकेऽस्मिन् get नि:श्रेयसोदय: । तीव्रेण भक्तियोगेन मनो मय्यर्पितं स्थिरम् ।४४॥

| take them once for all to the other side of death (the ocean of birth and death), who

worship Me with exclusive devotion in the aforesaid manner, realizing My presence in
every quarter and renouncing this world and the next, nay, even their own conditioned self
(in the shape of their subtle body), which wanders through both, and all those who are
connected with the same here (viz., one's near and dear ones) as well as (one's
possessions such as)wealth, cattle and houses and everything else. (39-40) The terrible
fear of birth and death can never be got rid of by resorting to anyone other than Myself, the
almighty Lord, the Ruler of both Prakrti and Purusa (Matter and Spirit), the Self of all living
beings. (41) Itis through fear of Me that the wind blows; it is through fear of Me that the sun
shines; it is through fear of Me that Indra (the god of rain) sends forth showers, fire burns
and death goes about (taking its toll). (42) For lasting happiness the Yogis (striving souls)
betake themselves through the practice of Devotion, accompanied by spiritual Knowledge
and Dispassion, to My feet, which are free from fear (of every kind). (43) A mind fixed on
Me through the intense practice of Devotion and steadied thereby—that is the only means
for men in this world to attain final beatitude. (44)

Thus ends the twenty-fifth discourse, forming part of the "Story of Lord Kapila"
in Book Three of the great and glorious Bhagavata-Purana,
otherwise known as the Paramahamsa-Samhita.

SEEN ES

FS FAI AEN PEE CSD OD

१२
