Dis. 38 | BOOK TEN 261

AEA Se ee EET २२२२ १ ESS ESTES SE PEER कककन्र

लब्धाङ्गसङ्गं woe कृताञ्जलिं मां वक्ष्यतेऽक्रूर ततेत्युरुश्रवा: |
तदा वयं जनमभृतो महीयसा नैवादृतो यो धिगमुष्य जन्म तत् ।२१॥
न we कश्चिद् दयित: सुहृत्तमो न चाप्रियो द्वेष्य उपेक्ष्य एवं वा ।
तथापि भक्तान् भजते यथा तथा सुरद्रुमो यद्वदुपाश्रितोऽर्थद: 1221
“yg प्रवेड्याप्तसमस्तसत्कृतं संप्रक्ष्यये केसकृतं स्वबन्धुषु ।२३॥

Alighted from the chariot immediately afterwards, | shall certainly bow at the feet of the
almighty Lords (of the universe), the foremost Persons (Balaramaand SriKrsna)—which are
(only) cherished in their mind by (great) Yogis for Self-Realization (but are never seen by
them)—and alongwith Them | shall greet Their friends (the cowherd boys) as well as the
(other) inhabitants of Vraja (consisting mainly of a woodland). (15) Will the Lord place onmy
head, when | am fallen at the soles of His feet, His own lotus-like palm, that has given
assurances of safety to men terrified by the speed of the serpent of Time and seeking shelter
(at His feet)? (16) Placing articles of worship in (the hollow of) that palm, Kausika (a former
Indra) attained the rulership of (all) the three worlds and pouring water into it the demon Bali
(the celebrated demon king and devotee) secured (a title to) the sovereignty of the three
worlds. Nay, it relieved byits (softand fragrant) touch the fatigue of the women of Vraja during
the Rasa-Play, emitting as it didthe fragrance ofa Saugandhika (a particular species of lotus,
so-called because ofits remarkable fragrance). (17) Even though | have been sent by Karnsa
as his messenger, Sri Krsna (the immortal Lord)—who is omniscient and the Knower of all
bodies and who witnesses with His unclouded vision the activity of the mind, existing as He
does inside as well as outside the latter—will not (I am sure) harbour a feeling of enmity
towards me. (18) If He smilingly looks on me—fallen at the soles of His feet with a fully
controlled mind and joined palms—with a compassionate eye, | shall forthwith be absolved
from all sins and, completely rid of (all) fear (of rebirth etc.), experience supreme bliss. (19)
Again, when He folds in His long arms me, his most sincere friend and kinsman exclusively
devoted to Him, my body will at once be actually turned into a (veritable) sanctuary and my
bonds in the form of Karma will fall off from it. (20) When । have thus enjoyed His (blissful)
embrace and stand bowing low (before Him) with joined palms, Sri Krsna (of wide renown)
will address me in the words ‘Uncle Akrura !’ Then (alone) will my birth be fruitful. Fie upon
that birth of him whois notaccepted as His own by SriKrsna (the Supreme Lord). (21) Neither
is anyone beloved of Him, much less His dearest friend, nor again is anyone unwelcome,
much less hateful or even worthy of being treated with indifference. Nevertheless He loves
His devotees (alone) inthe same way as they do, justas a wish-yielding tree grants the desire
of men (only) when approached (by them). (22) Further His elder Brother (Balarama), the
foremost of the Yadus, would smilingly embrace me—bowing low (before Him)—and
conduct me; caught by my joined palms into the house and will enquire in detail of me, when
| have received all attentions, about the conduct of Karhsa towards His kinsfolk." (23)

श्रीगुक sara
इति सञ्चिन्तयन् कृष्णं श्वफल्कतनयोऽध्वनि । रथेन Tree प्राप्त: सूर्यश्चास्तगिरिं नृप । २४॥
पदानि ततस्याखिललोकपालकिरीटजुष्टामलपादरेणो: ।
zi गोष्ठे क्षितिकौतुकानि विर्लाक्षतान्यळायचाङ्कुशाद्ये । २५
तददर्शनाह्लादविवृद्धसम्भ्रम: प्रेम्णोर्ध्वरोमाश्रुकलाकुलेक्षण: |
TRE स तेष्वचेष्टत प्रभोरमून्यङ्ध्रिरजांस्यहो FT NRE]

