62 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 15

SA HE RE DUR MERE ORR RARE BRO BAERS ROE RRA RAE RRR REA STRERH AOR RE HERE TARE A HORN REA BP ANE AEE AR EAHA HH

addressing me as son of Prtha (Kunti), Arjuna, beloved companion and delight of the
Kurus stir my heart to its very depth, O ruler of men, even as | call them to mind. (18)
Since we treated each other on an equal footing while in bed or sitting together, while
rambling or indulging in self-praise, or even at dinner and so on, | occasionally twitted
him and said, "Friend, you are indeed a veracious man |" Yet, in His unlimited greatness,
that exalted soul put up with all my faults, fool as | was, even as a friend would bear
with his friend or a father with his own son. (19) Bereft of that Supreme Person, who
was my beloved corhpanion and friend, O suzerain lord, | am left without a heart. That
is why while escorting the Lord's spouses on the way, dear brother, | was vanquished
like a woman by the wicked cowherds. (20) The same indeed is my Gandiva bow, and
the same my shafts; the same my chariot and drawn by the same horses; nay, | am the
same car-warrior before whom monarchs bowed their head. Bereft of the Lord, however,
all these were reduced to nothingness in a moment, like an oblation poured into ashes,
service done with some covert motive and the seed sown in a barren land. (21)
राजंस्त्वयाभिपृष्टानां सुहृदां न: सुहृत्पुरे। विप्रशापविमूढानां निघ्नतां मुष्टिभिर्मिथ: 1221
वारुणीं मदिरां die मदोन्मथितचेतसाम्। अजानतामिवान्योन्यं चतु:पञ्चावरोषिता: 1231
gia waa gre विचेष्टितम्। मिथो निघ्नन्ति भूतानि भावयन्ति च यन्मिथ: । २४।
जलौकसां जले यद्द्वन्महान्तोऽदन्त्यणीयस: । दुर्बलान्बलिनो राजन्महान्तो बलिनो मिथ: 1241
एवं बलिष्टैर्यदुभिर्महद्भिरितरान् विभु:। यदून् यदुभिरन्योन्यं भूभारान् संजहार ह ।२६॥
देशकालार्थयुक्तानि हृत्तापोपशमानि च ।हरन्ति स्मरतश्चित्तं गोविन्दाभिहितानि मे । २७॥

"O king, as regards our relations at Dwaraka (the city of the Yadavas) about whom
you have made enquiries just now, they all lost their reason under the influence of a curse
pronounced by the Brahmanas, and drank wine; and their mind having been thrown
completely off the balance through revelry, they struck one another with their fists like
strangers and perished with the exception of only four or five. (22-23) In fact, it is a
diversion of the Almighty Lord that living beings now kill one another and now foster one
another. (24) Even as in water (the deep), O king, the larger among the aquatic creatures
devour the smaller ones, the stronger consume the weaker and the larger and the
stronger ones eat up one another, even so the Lord caused the other powerful princes
to be exterminated by the mighty and most powerful Yadus and had the Yadus killed by
the Yadus themselves, since they had now grown to be a burden to the earth. (25-26)
The words of Lord Govinda (Sri Krsna), appropriate as they were to the place and
occasion of the talk and pertinent to the subject in hand and soothed the agony of the
heart, ravish my soul even as | call them to mind." (27)

सूत sara
एवं चिन्तयतो जिष्णो: कृष्णपादसरोरुहम्। सौहार्देनातिगाढेन शान्ताऽसीद्विमला मति: । २८॥
वासुदेवाङ्घ्रयनुध्यानपरिबृंहितरंहसा । भक्त्या निर्मथधिताहोषकषायधिषणोऽर्जुन: ।२९॥

गीतं भगवता ज्ञानं यत् aa सङ्ग्राममूर्धनि । कालकर्मतमोरुद्धुं पुनरध्यगमद् बिभु: ।३०॥

feet saan संछिन्नद्वैतसंशय: । लीनप्रकृतिनैर्गुण्यादलिङ्गत्वादसम्भव: । ३१॥
Sita said : As Jisnu (Arjuna) was thus contemplating on Sri Krsna's lotus-feet with
most intense devotion, his mind became tranquil and free from passion. (28) All the
impurities of his mind (in the shape of lust, anger and so on) having been wiped out by
Devotion that had grown in intensity through contemplation on the feet of Lord Vasudeva,
he now recollected the gospel which, though preached by the Lord in the battle front,
