Dis. 16 ] BOOK SIX 629

RAHHS SEH HHALSATELREK ESTED ATER SL KHALECEK AAALAC EHNA REHEAT EET HATTER HH

लब्ध्वेह मानुषीं योनिं ज्ञानविज्ञानसम्भवाम्। आत्मानं यो न बुद्ध्येत न क्वचिच्छममाप्नुयात् । ५८॥
स्मृत्वेहायां परिक्वेशं तत: फलविपर्ययम्। अभयं चाप्यनीहायां सङ्कल्पाद्बिरमेत्कवि: । ५९॥
सुखाय दु:खमोक्षाय कुर्वाते दम्पती क्रिया: । ततोऽनिवृत्तिरप्राप्निर्दु-खस्य च सुखस्य च । ६०॥
एवं विपर्ययं बुद्ध्वा zon विज्ञाभिमानिनाम्। आत्मनश्च गतिं gent स्थानत्रयविलक्षणाम् । ६१॥
दृष्टश्रुताभिर्मात्राभिर्निर्मुक्तत स्वेन तेजसा।ज्ञानविज्ञानसन्तुष्टो मद्धक्त: पुरुषो wae?!
एतावानेव मनुजैर्योगनैषुणबुद्धिभि: । स्वार्थ: सर्वात्मना ज्ञेयो यत्परात्मैकदर्शानम् । ६३॥
त्वमेतच्छ्रद्धया राजन्नप्रमत्तो ad मम।ज्ञानविज्ञानसम्पन्नो धारयन्नाशु सिध्यसि ex

The Lord said : You have fully achieved your purpose through the instruction which
was given to you by the sages Narada and Angira about (the means of propitiating) Me
and the prayer (taught by Narada) as well as by My sight. (50) In fact, all created beings
are (the same as) |; nay, |am the Self (the Inner Controller) as well the Creator of (all) living
beings. The Veda (which, as the Word of God, is identified with the Supreme) and the
transcendent Reality (revealed by the same) both are My eternal bodies. (61) A man
should recognize his own self as extending through (pervading) the (whole objective)
universe (as the subject) and the universe as comprised in his own self (as the object of
his experience). Nay, he should regard both (his own self as well as the universe) as
pervaded by Me (the Prime Cause) and even so both as conceived in Me. (52) (Just) as
aman dreams himself as fast asleep and (also) perceives (in another dream forming part
of the first dream) the world (in the form of mountains, forests and so on existing
elsewhere) within himself and (again), on waking from the (second) dream, visualizes
himself as lying (on a bed) in a part of a room (realizes himself as awake while still
dreaming), (even) so, realizing awakeness and the other states of the mind (which is an
adjunct of the Jiva) as mere products of the Maya (deluding potency) of the (Supreme) Self,
(one should fix one’s mind on the Supreme Spirit, the witness of these states. (53-54) Know
Me to be that transcendental Reality, the (real) Self (of a Jiva), identified with which an
embodied soul, (that is) fast asleep, is conscious of its deep sleep at that time as well as
of the supersensuous gratification (enjoyed by it). (55) The consciousness that runs
through (the state of) deep sleep as well as through awakeness and continues (even)
beyond the two in the case of the Jiva (embodied soul) that is aware of both is (no other
than) that transcendent Brahma (the Absolute). (56) If the aforesaid Brahma—which is My
own essence—is forgotten by the Jiva, It comes to be viewed as different from the self; and
from this (differentiation) follows the (circuit of) mundane existence of the soul, which consists
in passing from one body to another and undergoing one death after another. (57) He who fails
to realize his own essential nature (even) after attaining here (birth in) the human
species—where one can hope to acquire (both) knowledge (of the Self, based on the
scriptures) and wisdom (direct knowledge of the Self)—can get no peace of mind
anywhere. (58) Remembering the hardship (involved) in (all) worldly endeavour and the
contrary results following from such endeavour, and even so (bearing in mind) the
fearlessness consequent on the withdrawal from worldly activity, a wise man
should cease from (all) volition in regard to such activity. (59) A husband and wife
(generally) undertake activities for (the attainment of) happiness and for freedom from
suffering. From such activities (however) ensues neither cessation of suffering nor
attainment of happiness. (60) Thus perceiving the contrary results met with by men who
think themselves clever, and realizing the subtle nature of the Self—which transcends the
three states of the mind (the state of awakeness, the dream state and the state of deep
sleep)— nay, rid of (the craving for) the pleasures of sense, both of this world and of the next,
through one's faculty of discrimination, and contented with one's knowledge and wisdom,
