578 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 6

RRA RR RAH RE HE SRR RR Re ee ER EER ERE ee AEA AHH EEA EEE E LEH HHA REESE S

अथ षष्ठोऽध्याय:

Discourse VI
The posterity of Daksa through his sixty daughters
श्रीगुक उवाच
तत: प्राचेतसोऽसिक्न्यामनुनीत: स्वयम्भुवा । षष्टिं सञ्जनयामास दुहितॄ: पितृवत्सला: । १ |
a धर्माय कायेन्दोर्दिषद् fora दत्तवान्। भूताङ्घिर:कृशाश्वेभ्यो द्वे द्वे Meats चापरा: । २ |
नामधेयान्यमूषां त्वं सापत्यानां च मे श्रृणु। यासां प्रसूतिप्रसवैर्लोका आपूरितास्त्रय: । ३ |
Sri Suka resumed : Pacified and prevailed upon by Brahma (the self-born), Daksa (the
son of the Pracetas) then begot through Asikni (his wife) sixty daughters, who were (very)
affectionate towards their father. (1) He gave away ten (of them) to Dharma (the god of
piety), thirteen to the sage Kasyapa (son of Marici), thrice nine (twenty-seven) to the moon-
god, two each to the sages Bhita, Angira and Krsaswa and the rest (again) to Kagyapa (who
is also known by the name of Tarksya). (2) (Now) hear you from me their names as well as
of their offspring, by whose children and their descendants (all) the three worlds (heaven,
earth and the intermediate region) were filled on all sides. (3)

भानुर्लम्बा ककुव्जामिर्विश्वा साध्या मरुत्वती । वसुर्मुहूर्ता सङ्कल्पा धर्मपत्न्य: सुतान् शृणु । ४ |
भानोस्तु देवक्रषभ इन्द्रसेनस्ततो 77! विद्योत आसील्लम्बायास्ततश्च स्तनयित्नव: । ५ |
ककुभ: सङ्कटस्तस्य कीकटस्तनयो यत: । भुवो दुर्गाणि जामेय: स्वर्गो नन्दिस्ततोऽभवत् । ६ |
विश्वैदेवास्तु विश्वाया अप्रजांस्तान् प्रचक्षते। साध्यो गणस्तु साध्याया अर्थसिद्धिंस्तु तत्सुत: । ७ ।
मसुत्वांश्च जयन्तश्च मसुत्वत्यां बभूवतु: । जयन्तो वासुदेवांशं उपेन्द्र इति यं विदु: । ८ ।
मौहूर्तिका देवगणा मुहूर्तायाश्च जज्ञिरे । ये a फलं प्रयच्छन्ति भूतानां स्वस्वकालजम् । ९ |
सङ्कल्पायाश्च TET: काम: सङ्कल्पज: स्मृत: | वसवोऽष्टौ वसो: पुत्रास्तेषां नामानि मे op । १०॥
द्रोण: प्राणो ध्रुवोऽर्कोऽग्निर्दोषो वसुर्विभावसु: | द्रोणस्याभिमते:; पत्या हर्षशोकभयादय: 1881
प्राणस्योर्जस्वती wai सह आयु: Gia: ध्रुवस्य भार्या धरणिरसूत विविधा: पुर: ।१२॥
अर्कस्य वासना भार्या पुत्रास्तर्षादय: war: । अग्नेर्भार्या वसोर्धारा पुत्रा द्रविणकादय: 1231
स्कन्दश्च कृत्तिकापुत्रो ये विशाखादयस्तत: । दोषस्य झार्वरीपुत्र: शिझशुमारो et: कला ।१४॥
वसोराङ्घिरसीपुत्रो विश्वकर्माऽऽकृतीपति: । ततो मनुश्चाक्षुषोऽभूद fad साध्या मनो: सुता: 1241
नो ap । पञ्चयामोऽथ भूतानि aa जाग्रति कर्मसु ।१६॥
Bhanu, Lamba, Kakubh, Jami, Viswa, Sadhya, Marutvati, Vasu, Muhurta and Sankalpa
were (the names of) Dharma’s wives; (now) hear (the names) of their sons. (4) Of Bhanu,
in the first instance was born Devarsabha and from (the loins of) Devarsabha, sprang up
Indrasena. (Even so) Vidyota was the son of Lamba andfrom (the loins of) Vidyota appeared
(the spirits presiding over) the clouds. (5) (Again), the son of Kakubh was Sankata and
Sankata's son was Kikata, from whom appeared (the spirits presiding over) the fortresses
on earth. (Similarly) Swarga was the son of Jami and from (the loins of) Swarga appeared
Nandi. (6) The sons of ViSwa were the Viswedevas (a group of gods, ten in number); the
learned speak of them asissueless. Again, the group (of gods) called the Sadhyas was born
of Sadhya and Arthasiddhi was (the name of) their son. (7) Marutvan and Jayanta were born

of Marutvati; (of these) Jayanta was a part manifestation of Lord Vasudeva (Visnu); he is
(also) known by the name of Upendra. (8) Again, arace of gods called the Mauhurtikas (the

