52 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 13

.............

virtues of men.” (27) १
एवं राजा व्रिदुरेणानुजेन प्रज्ञाचक्षुर्बोधित आजमीढ: ।
fer स्वेषु स्नेहपाशान्द्रढिम्रनो निश्चक्राम भ्रातृसंदर्शिताध्वा irc
Ud wa सुबलस्य Gt पतिव्रता चानुजगाम साध्वी ।
हिमालयं न्यस्तदण्डप्रहर्षं मनस्विनामिव सत्सम्प्रहार: । २९॥

_ Thus instructed by Vidura, his younger brother, the blind king Dhrtarastra (a descendant
of Ajamidha) had his mind's eye opened. Cutting asunder the strong ties of affection that bound
him to his kinsmen, he departed, his brother (Vidura) himself acting as his guide. (28)
Perceiving that her husband was proceeding to the Himalayas—which afforded great delight
to recluses (lit., those who have taken a vow of non-violence) even as a righteous combat (on
ihe battle-field) delights a heroic warrior—the virtuous Gandhari (the daughter of king Subala)
too, who had taken a vow of devoted service to her lord, followed him in his journey. (29)

qe प्रविष्टो गुरुवन्दनाय न umahaat सौबलीं च ।३०॥
तत्र सञ्जयमासीनं पप्रच्छोद्विभ्नमानस: । गावल्गणे क्व नस्तातो Gal हीनश्च नेत्रयो: । ३१॥
अम्बा च हतपुत्राऽर्ता पितृव्य: क्व गत: Ye अपि मय्यकृतप्रज्ञे हतबन्धु: a भार्यया ।
आशंसमान: Wass गङ्गायां दु:ख्रितोऽपतत् । ३२॥
पितर्युपरते पाण्डौ सर्वान्न: yee: शिशून्। अरक्षतां व्यसनत: पितृव्यौ छ्व गतावित: 1231
Having said his Sandhya prayers and poured oblations into the sacred fire, and having
bowed to the Brahmanas and bestowed on them gifts of sesamum seeds, cows, lands and
gold, king Yudhisthira (who looked upon none as his enemy) entered the apartments of his
elders for his daily salutations, but failed to perceive either of his uncles or even his aunt
(Gandhari). (30) With an anxious heart he asked Safijaya (Dhrtarastra's counsellor and
trusted servant), who was sitting there, "Safijaya (son of Gavalgana), where is our aged
uncle, who is blind too? (31) Where is my aunt, grieved at the loss of her sons, and where
is my younger uncle gone, who was so kindly disposed towards us ? Distressed at the loss
of his near and dear ones and apprehending ill treatment from my foolish self, may it be that
he has thrown himself into the Ganga, along with his wife? (32) After the death of our father,
king Pandu, it was our uncles who protected us all, their children, against a series of
calamities, tender of age as we were. Ah, where have they gone from here ?" (33)
qd उवाच

कृपया स्नेहवैक्वव्यात्सूततो विरहकर्शित: । आत्मेश्वरमचक्षाणो न प्रत्याहातिपीडित: a6)

7 विमृज्याश्रूणि पाणिभ्यां व्रिष्टभ्यात्मानमात्मना। STA प्रत्यूचे प्रभो: पादावनुस्मरन् 34 |

™ इद्मांब०ल्माप्रश्त: Sore afflicted with grief and overwhelmed with affection at the sudden
disappearance of his master and feeling very sad on account of his separation from him,
Safijaya (who too was a Sita by birth) could not utter a word in reply. (84) Then, wiping the
tears with his hands and steadying his mind by recourse to reason, he replied to Yudhisthira
(as follows) with his thought fixed on the feet of his lord (Dhrtarastra) : (35)
सञ्जय उवाच
नाहं ae व्यवसितं fad: कुलनन्दन । गान्धार्या वा महाबाहो मुषितोऽस्मि महात्मभि: 1361

अथाजगाम भगवान् नारद: सहतुम्बुरु: । प्रत्युत्थायाभिवाद्याह सानुजोऽभ्यर्चयन्निव । ३७॥

Safijaya said : "| know neither the resolve of your uncles nor of your aunt, 0 delight of
