Dis. 17 ] BOOK ELEVEN 589

क अकाग त्ञ एकक गक शाशा सा क कान्र TORE ERECT R ४१० ७१७ ०७४७ ० # OE ०० ०००० १०

अथ सप्तदशोऽध्याय:

Discourse XVII

५
The duties pertaining to the four Varnas and four Asramas
उद्ध्व उवाच
यस्त्वयाभिहित: gd धर्मस्त्वद्धक्तिलक्षण: । वर्णाश्रमाचारवतां सर्वेषां द्विपदामपि । १ ।
यथानुष्ठीयमानेन af भक्तिर्नृणां भवेत् । स्वधर्मेणारविन्दाक्षॆ aq समाख्यातुमर्हसि । २ ।
qu fee महाबाहो धर्मं ume प्रभो । यत्तेन हंसरूपेण ब्रह्मणेऽभ्यात्थ माधव । ३ ।
a geet सुमहता कालेनामित्रकर्शान । न प्रायो भविता मर्त्यलोके प्रागनुञ्ञासित: । ४ ।
वक्ता कर्ताविता ara धर्मस्याच्युत ते भुवि । सभायामपि वैरिञ्च्यां यत्र मूर्तिधरा: कला: । ५ ।
aaa प्रवक्त्रा च भवता मधुसूदन।त्यक्ते महीतले देव विनष्टं क: प्रवक्ष्यति । ६ |
wa न: सर्वधर्मज्ञ धर्मस्त्वद्धक्तिलक्षण: । यथा यस्य विधीयेत an वर्णय मे प्रभो । ७ ।
Uddhava submitted : The righteous course expressive of and engendering devotion to
You and open to those observing the rules of conduct laid down for the (four) Varnas (grades
of society) and ASramas, nay, to all human beings was taught by You in the foregoing Kalpa
(cycle). (1) (Now) be pleased to tel! me in detail, O lotus-eyed One, how Devotion is
engendered (in man) through one’s own (allotted) duty being (duly) followed. (2) The
supreme and blissful course of conduct, O Lord of mighty arms, which You taught, it is said,
to Brahma in the former days in the form of the divine Swan mentioned before (in Discourse
XIII), O Lord of Laksmi ! has now disappeared after a very long time, O Chastiser of foes !
and will not ordinarily survive on this mortal plane, even though it was taught (by You) long
ago. (3-4) Other than You, O immortal Lord, there is none to teach, institute or defend this
righteous course on earth, (nay) not even in Brahma's court, where (all) sciences (in the form
of the Vedas etc.) are in attendance in a personal form. (5) When the terrestrial soil is
deserted, O Slayer of the demon Madhu । by You—who institute, maintain and teach this
righteous course—O Lord ! who will expound this extinct Dharma ? (6) Therefore, O Knower
of (the secret of) all righteous courses, (pray,) tell me, O Lord, how and on whom among us
the Dharma engendering Devotion to You has been enjoined. (7)

श्रीशुक उवाच
इत्थं स्वभृत्यमुख्येन ye: स भगवान् हरि: । प्रीत: क्षेमाय aa धर्मानाह सनातनान् । ८ ।

SriSuka continued ; Thus interrogated by Uddhava (the foremost of His servants), the
celebrated Lord Sri Hari (Sri Krsna) felt (much) delighted and taught (as follows) for the
welfare of mortals the courses of conduct which are binding for all times. (8)

श्रीभगवानुवाच
धर्म्य एष तव प्रश्नो नै:श्रेयसकरो नॄणाम्।वर्णाश्रमाचारवतां तमुद्ध्व निबोध मे । ९ ।
आदौ कृतयुगे वर्णो नॄणां हंस इति स्मृत: । कृतकृत्या: प्रजा जात्या तस्मात् कृतयुगं विदु: । १०
aq प्रणव एवाग्रे anise वृषरूपधृक् । sored तपोनिष्ठा हंसं मां मुक्तकिल्बिषा: । ११॥
त्रेतामुखे महाभाग प्राणान्मे हृदयात्त्रयी । विद्या प्रादुरभूत्तस्या अहमासं rare: 1221
विप्रक्षत्रियविद्शूद्रा मुखबाहूरुपादजा: | वैराजात् पुरुषाज्ञाता य आत्माचारलक्षणा: । १३॥
गृहाश्रमो जघनतो weed el मम । वक्ष:स्थानाद्वनेवासोन्यास:क्षीर्षणिसंस्थित: । १४॥
