46 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 12

BRR RT ERR Rea RR RONORORT SORES SRC ROT RT BHT ORR BeBe Be ARR erat ARNT BERR HRT ROR RR RENN RHE AAT RT BB EERE ORT RO Be Mra

brought back to life by the Lord Himself. (1) We now wish to hear about the birth and exploits
of that noble soul of great wisdom, to whom Suka imparted (true) knowledge, how his death
came about and what destiny he attained after death. Kindly narrate all this to us, who are
so earnest about it, if you deem fit. (2-3)

सूत उवाच

अपीपलद्भर्मराज: fagae wea प्रजा: । नि:स्पृह: सर्वकामेभ्य: कृष्णपादाब्जसेवया । ४ ।
Sita continued : Freed from thirst for all enjoyments through the service of Sri Krsna's
lotus-feet, the righteous king Yudhisthira protected his subjects like a father, gratifying them
in everyway. (4)
सम्पद: क्रतवो लोका महिषी भ्रातरो मही । जम्बूद्वीपाधिपत्यं च aay त्रिदिवं गतम्। 4 |

किं a arm: सुरस्पार्हा मुकुन्दमनसो द्विजा: | अधिजह्रुर्मुदु wa: क्षुधितस्य यथेतरे। ६ ।

He had (untold) riches and had performed many a sacrifice and earned thereby a place
in the highest worlds. His consort (queen Draupadi) and brothers were all devoted to him.
His suzerainty extended over the entire globe, while he enjoyed the sovereignty of
Jambtidwipa. Nay, his fame had reached as far as heaven. (5) But could all these objects
of enjoyment, coveted even by the gods, O Brahmanas, bring delight to the king, who had
given his mind to Lord Sri Krsna (the Bestower of Liberation), any more than things other
than food gratify a hungry soul. (6)

at: स तदा भृगुनन्दनौ । ददर्शं पुरुषं कञ्चिद्दह्यमानोऽस्त्रतेजसा । ७ |
अङ्गुष्ठमात्रममलं स्फुरत्पुरटमौलिनम्। अपीच्यदर्शनं इयामं तडिद्वाससमच्युतम्। ८ ।
श्रीमद्दीर्घचतुर्बाहुं तप्तकाञ्चनकुण्डलम्। क्षतजाक्षं तदापाणिपात्मन: सर्वतोदिहाम् ।
परिभ्रमन्तमुल्काभां भ्रामयन्तं Tel मुहु: ।९।
saat: स्वगदया नीहारमिव गोपति: । विधमन्तं संनिकर्षे dart क इत्यसौ । १०।
विधूय तदमेयात्मा भगवान्धर्मगुब् fag: । मिषतो दशमासस्य तत्रैवान्तर्दथे हरि: ।११।
While being scorched by the fire of the Brahmastra, that hero (Pariksit) in the womb of
his mother (Uttara), O Saunaka (the delight of the Bhrgus), beheld some effulgent Being of
the size of a thumb, most charming in appearance and swarthy of hue, cladin yellow robes
that shone like lightning and wearing a brilliant diadem of gold. He was no other than Lord
Acyuta (Sri Krsna). (7-8) He had four long and graceful arms, was adorned with pendants
of refined gold, had bloodshot eyes and held in one of His hands a mace that shone likea
firebrand even as He waved it in a circle again and again, Himself revolving round the child
all the time. (9) He was quenching the fire of the Brahmastra with His mace, even as the sun
disperses the fog. Perceiving Him by his side, the childin the womb wondered who itwas.(10)
Having quenched that fire, Lord Sri Hari (Sri Krsna), the Protector of virtue, who is infinite
by nature and omnipresent too, disappeared i in the womb itself, that (unborn) child of ten
months still looking on. (11)

aa: सर्वगुणोदर्के सानुकूलग्रहोदये । जज्ञे वंशधर: पाण्डोर्भूय: पाण्डुरिवोजसा । १२।
तस्य प्रीतमना राजा विप्रैर्धोम्यकृपादिभि: | जातकं कारयामास वाचयित्वा च मङ्गलम् । १३।
हिरण्यं गां महीं ग्रामान् हस्त्यश्वान्नृपतिर्वरान्। प्रादात्स्वन्नं च विप्रेभ्य: प्रजातीर्थे स तीर्थवित् । १४॥
aires राजानं प्रश्रयान्वितम्। एष ह्यस्मिन् प्रजातन्तौ पुरूणां पौरवर्षभ eu
दैवेनाप्रतिघातेन शुक्के संस्थामुपेयुषि । रातो वोऽनुग्रहार्थाय विष्णुना प्रभविष्णुना ee
तस्मान्नाम्ना विष्णुरात इति लोके बृहच्छ्रवा: | भविष्यति न deel महाभागवतो महान् । १७।
