Dis. 70 ] BOOK TEN 417

Reto ferro 8 ee OE Ee OCHS TEENS ERS NATH EELS LEHI MELA REE

श्रीनारद उवाच

दृष्टा मया ते बहुशो दुरत्यया माया fat विश्वसृजश्च मायिन: ।

Wy «yi: स्वशक्तिभिर्वह्नेरिवच्छन्नरुचो न मेऽद्भुतम् ।३७॥

waa कोऽर्हति साधु वेदितुं स्वमाययेदं सृजतो नियच्छत: ।

यद् विद्यमानात्मतयावभासते तस्मै नमस्ते स्वविलक्षणात्मने । ३८

जीव्रस्य य: संसरतो विमोक्षणं न जानतोऽनर्थवहाच्छरीरत: |

aera: स्वय:प्रदीपकॆ प्राज्वालयत्त्वा we प्रपद्ये 1३९1
अथाप्याश्रावये ब्रह्म नरलोकविडम्बनम् ua: पैतृध्वसेयस्य भक्तस्य च चिकीर्षितम् vol
अक्ष्यति si aan राजसूयेन पाण्डव: । पारमेष्ठ्यकामो नृपतिस्तद् भवाननुमोदताम् ise
तस्मिन् देव क्रतुवरे भवन्तं वे सुराद्य: । दिदृक्षव: समेष्यन्ति राजानश्च यरास्विन: 1x21
श्रवणात् कीर्तनाद् ध्यानात् पूयन्तेऽन्तेवसायिन: । तव ब्रह्ममयस्येश किमुतेक्षाभिमर्शिन: ॥४३॥

यस्यामलं दिवि ae: प्रथित्तं रसायां yet च ते भुवनमङ्गल दिग्वितानम् ।

॥ भन्दाकिनीति fete भोगवतीति चाधो गङ्गेति चेह चरणाम्बु पुनाति विश्वम् 1४४॥

Sri Narada replied : 0 all-pervading Infinite Lord, You are such a great magician that
even coniurers like Brahma (the creator of the world) are unable to penetrate (the veil of) Your
Maya. Lord, You abide in all created beings by virtue of Your (inscrutable) potencies even
as fire remains latent in every log of wood. | have witnessed Your Maya more than once,
hence Your inquiry about the Pandavas does not appear to me as something out of the
common. (37) (Lord,) You bring forth and destroy this universe by Your own Maya; and by
Your Maya it appears as existent (though without any reality). Whocan know Your intentions
full well ? You are inconceivable by nature; my salutation be to You. (38) (Tied down to the
body) the soul moves on the whirligig of birth and death and knows not the way to deliverance
from this sheath, the source of (all) evil. Descending on earth in so many Forms by way of
sport, You kindle the lamp of Your glory (with the help of which he may free himself from the
bondage of the body). Lord, | resort to You for protection. (39) The Supreme Spirit as You
are, You nevertheless imitate the ways of the human world; therefore | shall communicate
to You what Your cousin and loving devotee, king Yudhisthira, intends to do. (40) The
Pandava king enjoys on this very earth all the enjoyments of the abode of Brahma (the
highest Paradise). He is (absolutely) desireless. And yet he would worship You through the
supreme sacrifice known as Rajasuya. May You be pleased to give Your consent to his
proposal. (41) Eager to see You, the (principal) gods, Rsis and illustrious kings too will
assemble in that grand sacrifice. (42) Lord, You are an embodiment of the Supreme Spirit;
even the low-born are hallowed by hearing of Your glories, singing Your praises and
contemplating on Your virtues, to say nothing of those who see and touch Your person. (43)
Lord. whose very presence on this earth constitutes a blessing for the three worlds. Your
spotless glory envelops all the quarters and is diffused on earth, in heaven as well as in the
subterranean regions. even as the waters washing Your feet hallow the (entire) universe
under the name of Mandakini in heaven, Bhogavati in the subterranean regions and the
Ganga on earth. (44)

श्रीगुक उवाच
, तत्र तेष्वात्मपक्षेष्ठगृह्णु विजिगीषया । ara: पेडी: स्मयन् gorge प्राह केशव: 1४५1
$ri Suka went on : (Pariksit !) the clansmen of Sri Krsna, assembled there, seized as
