Dis. 9] BOOK SEVEN 695

SSSAATE SSS SAE TAN SNOT OOO ALEA AFT TCC HNAT LEER eHOTEHTAMheENNEETRERANAhMMAERooe

the various Yugas, O supreme Person ! (And) because You remain hidden (unmanifest) in
the Kali age, hence You as such are called Triyuga (the Lord manifest in the first three Yugas,
viz., Satya, Treta and Dwapara only). (38)

कामातुरं हर्षशोकभयेषणार्तं तस्मिन्कथं aa गतिं विमृशामि दीन: ।३९॥
घ्राणोऽन्यतश्चपलदृक् क्व च कर्मशक्तिर्बह्वय: wea sa गेहपतिं लुनन्ति ।४०॥
पश्यञ्जनं स्वपरविग्रहवैरमेत्रॆ हन्तेति पारचर पीपृहि मूढमद्य ।४१॥
को न्वत्र तेऽखिलगुरो भगवन्प्रयास उत्तारणेऽस्य भवसम्भवलोपहेतो: ।
मूडेषुवैमहदनुप्रहआर्तबस्थौकिंप्तेनतेप्रियजनाननुसेंवतांन:।४२।
नैवोद्बिज्ञे पर दुरत्ययवैतरण्यारत्वद्बीर्यगायनमहामृतमप्नच्चित्त: |
शोचे ततो व्रिमुखचेतस इन्दियार्थमायासुखाय og विमूढान् iss
प्रायेण देवमुनय:रवविवुक्लिमामौनंचरन्तिव्रिजनेनपरार्थंनिष्ठा:।
नैतान्विहाय कृपणान्विमुमुक्ष wat नान्यं त्वदस्य WU भ्रमतोऽनुपङ्ये ।`४४॥

This mind (of mine), 0 Lord of Vaikuntha, does not find sufficient delight in Your stories,
vitiated as itis by sins, (nay,) grossly wicked, morbid due to lust and afflicted with joy and grief,
fear and (the threefold) craving (for progeny, wealth and fame). With such a mind how can
|, € wretched creature, contemplate on Your essential nature ? (39) Not fully gratified, the
palate pulls me, O immortal Lord, in one direction (towards dainties); the generative organ
drags me in another direction (towards sexual gratification); the tactile sense, the (empty)
stomach and the sense of hearing pull me in other directions (viz., towards objects that are
pleasant to touch, substantial food and a melodious sound or voice respectively); the
olfactory sense drags me in a quite different direction (towards sweet-smelling flowers,
scents and so on); while the eyes, which are (very) restless, and the faculties (Organs) of
action pull me in yet other directions (viz., towards things of beauty and the objects to be
attained through the various organs of action). (All) these tear me (even) as a number of co-
wives wrench a householder (each to her bedroom). (40) Perceiving (all) these foolish
creatures fallen thus in consequence of their own (evil) actions into the Vaitarani* of
metempsychosis and exceedingly afraid of birth, death and suffering proceeding from one
to another and making friendship with the bodies of their own people and enmity with the
bodies of others, (pray,) protect them this very day (by ferrying them across), feeling
compassion for them, O Lord (ever) staying on the other side (of that river) ! (41) Oh! What
exertion can there be, O Lord, the Teacher of all, in this work of lifting up (rescuing) these
people, to You, who are responsible for the birth, existence (continuance) and dissolution of
this universe? Indeed, it is on the ignorant that the grace of the exalted ought to descend,
O Befriender of the afflicted! Such grace will be superfluous to us who are busy serving Your
beloved devotees (and will cross the ocean of metempsychosis by serving them). (42) |am
not at all afraid, O Supreme, of the (aforesaid) Vaitarani—which is (So) difficult to cross—My
mind being immersed in the songs of Your prowess, which are like an extraordinary nectar.
| lament (only) those deluded persons whose mind is turned away from such nectar and who

* Vaitaraniis the name ofa river marking the boundary of the realm of departed spirits, presided over by Yama (the god
of retribution). It is described as rushing with great impetuosity, hot, fetid and filled with blood, hair and bones etc.
