100 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA - [0७ऽ. 4

RASH य क KATATE कदन्विटी र्छा कोत् ह क्तैव ॐडत्री LST VEC AACE SOON PEP HOE EERE EH जा जा eee कक ज्रे

was भगवते वासुदेवाय वेधसे agai सोम्या यन्मुखाम्बुरुहासवम् । २४॥

- Sri Suka said : Obeisance to that Supreme Person of infinite glory, who in order to carry
on His sportful activity of creating, preserving and destroying the universe has (in the form
of Visnu, Brahma and Siva) assumed the three Saktis in the shape of Sattva (harmony),
Rajas (activity) and Tamas (darkness), nay, who is the Inner Controller of all beings and
whose true nature and ways cannot be apprehended through the intellect.(12) Salutations
again to Him who roots out the sorrows and sufferings of the virtuous (and bestows on them
the boon of His love), who puts a stop to the (material) growth of the wicked (and grants them
liberation) and further confers on those who have entered the order of Paramahamsas
(recluses) the boon (of Self-Realization) sought after by them; for all (animate and inanimate)
beings are His manifestations (and hence He has no partiality for or prejudice against
anyone). (13) Hail, hail to You who foster Your devotees, but are far from the reach (elude
the grasp) of those that are destitute of Devotion, and who by virtue of Your divine nature,
unequalled and unsurpassed, delight in Your own essence which is known by the name of
Brahma (the Absolute). (14) Salutations again and again to that Lord of most auspicious
renown, by singing whose praises, by thinking of, seeing, greeting and adoring whom and
by hearing whose glory men are cleansed of their impurities at once. (15) Hail, hail to that
Lord of most blessed renown, by taking refuge in whose feet the wise shake off from their
mind the attachment to this as well as to the other world and attain to the state of Brahma
without any exertion. (16) Ascetics and those devoted to charity, men of high repute and
those who have controlled their mind and senses, the knowers of the Mantras and men of
righteous conduct never attain blessedness without dedicating themselves to His feet. To
that Lord of most blessed renown we make obeisance again and again. (17) The Kiratas, the
Hunas, the Andhras, the Pulindas, the Pulkasas, the Abhiras, the Kankas, the Yavanas, the
Khasas and other sinful races no less than others of sinful conduct are purged of their sins
even by taking refuge in those who depend on Him. To that all-powerful Lord we offer our
greetings. (18) May that Lord be gracious to me, who is the very Self to the wise and the
supreme Lord of His devotees, who is Veda itself (to those devoted to ritual acts), nay, who
is Dharma (righteousness) personified (to those given to righteous conduct) and austere
penance (to men of askesis), and whose reality is looked upon with wonder by sincere
devotees like Brahma, Sankara and others. (19) May that Lord of Sri (the goddess of
prosperity and beauty), the Lord of sacrifices, the Lord of all created beings, the Ruler of all
intellects, the Lord of the earth, the Protector as well as the asylum of the Andhakas, the
Vrsnis and the Satvatas and the Lord of the holy ones be gracious to me. (20) The wise
realize the truth of the Self with the help of their reason, purified through Samadhi in the form
of meditation on His feet, and describe It according to their own predilection. May that Lord
Mukunda (the Bestower of Liberation and Divine Love) be gracious to me. (21) Egged on by
Him at the dawn of creation to revive in Brahma's heart the memory of the past cycle,
Saraswati (the goddess of wisdom) appeared from the latter's mouth (in the form of the
Vedas) with all her limbs (in the form of Siksa or Phonetics, Grammar and so on). May that
Lord, the foremost of the disseminators of wisdom, be propitious to me. (22) Having created
these bodies out of the five gross elements (viz., earth, water, fire, air and ether) that all-
pervading Lord indwells them as the Purusa (the individual soul) and, endowed with sixteen
instruments (the five senses of perception, the five organs of action, the five vital airs and
the mind) enjoys their sixteen objects. May that Lord lend charm to my expression. (23) Hail
to the omniscient Lord Vedavyasa (whois no other than Lord Vasudeva), from whose lotus-
like lips the devotees drink the nectar of wisdom. (24)
