Dis. 69] BOOK TEN 409

EUCHRE RELER TEE LEE SE ESE LEH TE TEER LETT CTR SEE LAAT SETI IAEA EN

अथैकोनसप्ततितमोऽध्याय:

Discourse LXIX
A Glimpse into the household life of Sri Krsna

ace fied ger तथोद्वाहं च योषिताम्। कृष्णेनैकेन बह्वीनां we fea: स्म नारद: 1 १ ।
fai लतैतदेकेन वपुषा युगपत् पृथक । गृहेषु दयष्टसाहस्रं स्रिय एक उदावहत्। २ ।
इत्युत्सुको द्वारवतीं देवर्षिर्द्रष्टुमागमत् । पुष्पितोपवनारामद्बिजालिकुलनादिताम् । ३ ।
उत्फुल्लेन्दीवराम्भोजकह्लारकुमुदोत्पलै ।छुरितिषु CATS: कूजितां Sea: । ४ ।
प्रास दलक्षैन’ब धैमर्जुष्टां स्फा टैकराजते॰ st HEATH: wunaattee: । ५ ।
संसिक्तमार्गाङ्गणवीथिदेहलीं पतत्पताकाध्वजवारितातपाम् । ६ ।

Sri Suka began again ; Having heard that the demon Naraka had been killed and that
SriKrsna had singly married numerous girls, the sage Narada felt eager to see how the Lord
lived with them (all). (1) He said to himself, “Oh, how wonderful it was that the one Lord should
with one personality marry sixteen thousand wives in separate houses all at once. (2) Thus
full of curiosity and eager to see (this sport of) the Lord (with his own eyes), the divine sage
came to Dwaraka, which was adorned with parks and gardens in full blossom and resounded
with the warbling of birds and the humming of bees. (3) It was rendered noisy with the loud
crackle of swans and cranes residing in ponds spread over with full-blown lotuses and lilies
of various colours. (4) It was studded with nine lakhs of mansions built of crystal and silver,
inlaid with shining emeralds and furnished with articles of gold and precious stones. (5) It
looked charming with its well-defined roads and other thoroughfares, quadrangles and
market-places, sheds for animals, temples and guild halls. Its roads, courtyards, lanes and
thresholds of houses were (daily) sprinkled with water. The everflying flags and pennons
warded off sunshine. (6)

तस्यामन्त:पुरं श्रीमदर्चितं सर्वधिष्ण्यपै: । हरें: स्वकौशलं यत्र त्वष्टा eI दर्शितम् । ७ ।
विष्टब्धं विद्रुमस्तम्भैरवैदूर्यफलकोत्तमै: । इन्द्रनीलमयै: कुड्यैर्जगत्या चाहतत्विषा । ९ ।

वितानैर्निर्मितैस्त्वष्टा मुक्तादामविलम्बिभि: | दान्तैरासनपर्यङ्कैर्मण्युत्तमपरिष्कृतै: 1१०॥
दासीभिर्निष्ककण्ठीभि: सुवासोभिरलङ्कृतम्। पुम्भि: सकञ्चुकोष्णीषसुवस्त्रमणिकुण्डलै: ।११।

रत्नप्रदीपनिकरद्युतिभिर्निरस्तध्वान्तं विचित्रबलभीषु शिखण्डिनोऽङ्ग |
नृत्यन्ति aa विहितागुरुधूपमक्षैर्निर्यान्तमीक्ष्य घनबुद्ध्य उन्नदन्त: ।१२॥
तस्मिन् समानगुणरूपवयस्सुवेषदासीसहस्रयुतयानुसवं गृहिण्या ।
fast zest चमरव्यजनेन रुक्मदण्डेन सात्वतपति परिव्रीजयन्त्या ।१३।

In that city there was the (most) splendid (richly furnished) row of palaces of Lord Sri
Krsna, admired by all the guardians of the world, in the construction of which Viswakarma
(the celestialarchitect) had exhibited all his (architectural) skill. (7) The row was adorned with
sixteen thousand (beautiful) mansions of Sri Krsna’s consorts. Narada (at random) entered
a big palace out of these. (8) Supported on columns of coral, on excellent slabs of Vaidirya
(the cat's eye gem) and walls of sapphire, it was provided with a floor-whose lustre never

. [565] B.M. Part Il-—42
