Dis. 49 ] BOOK TEN 315

Re ERROR ere Ie reer RTT RO ROI TI IAT SRO I RHE

skill, bodily strength, prowess, modesty and other excellent qualities of Prtha's sons as well
as of the love which the people bore for them. (5-6)

qa तु भ्रातरं प्राप्तमक्रूरमुपसृत्य तम्।उवाच जन्मनिलयं स्मरन्त्यश्रुकलेक्षणा । ७ ।

अपि स्मरन्ति a: सौम्य पितरौ amg मे। भगिन्यो भ्रातृपुत्राश्च जामय: सख्य एव च । ८ ।

भ्रात्रेयो भगवान् कृष्ण: जरण्यो भक्तवत्सल: । पैतृष्सेयान् स्मरति रामश्चाम्बुरुहेक्षण: । ९ ।

सापत्नमध्ये ज्ञोचन्तीं वृकाणां हरिणीमिव । सान्त्वयिष्यति मां वाक्यै: पितृहीनांश्चबालकान् 1१०1

कृष्ण कृष्ण महायोगिन् विश्वात्मन् विश्वभावन i प्रपन्नां पाहि गोविन्द शिशुभिश्चावसीदतीम् । ११।

नान्यत्तव पदाम्भोजात् प्वामि झरणं नॄणाम्।बिभ्वतां मृत्युसंसारादीश्वरस्यापवर्गिकात्।१२॥

नम: कृष्णाव WS ब्रह्मणे परमात्मने । योगेश्वराय aa त्वामहं शरणं गता ।१३॥

Approaching her cousin, Akrira, who was (quite) at hand, and recollecting her birth-place

(Mathura) Prtha for her part spoke to him with tear-drops in her eyes (as follows): —(7) "Do
my parents (Sirasena and Marisa) and brothers” (Vasudeva etc.), sisters (Srutadeva and
so on) and nephews (Sri Krsna, Balarama and others), ladies of the household (Devaki,
Rohini and others) as well as my female friends remember me? (8) Does my nephew, Lord
Sri Krsna, who is fit to protect all and is (so) fond of His devotees, as well as the lotus-eyed
Balarama, remember Yudhisthira and others (the sons of His father's sister, i.e., myself)? (9)
Will He (ever care to) console with His (comforting) words me—grieving (as | do) in the midst
of enemies (even) as a she-deer would doin the midst of wolves—as well as these fatherless
boys (of mine)? (10) O Krsna, O Enchanter of all, O great Yogi (Wielder of mystic powers),
O Soul of the universe, 0 Saviour of all, O Deliverer of cows, protect me, that have sought
You (as my refuge) and am suffering with my infants. (11) Formenafraid of death and (future)
birth | find no asylum other than Your lotus-feet, which are capable of conferring Liberation
(on their worshippers), almighty that You are. (12) Hail to You, the Enchanter of all, the all-
pure Brahma (the Absolute), the Supreme Spirit, the Master of Yoga (mystic powers), (nay,)
Yoga (wisdom) personified ! | have sought You as my refuge." (13)

इत्यनुस्मृत्य स्वजनं कृष्णं च जगदीश्वरम्।प्रारुदद् phen राजन् भवतां प्रपितामही ।१४॥

समदु-खसुखोऽक्रूरो विदुरश्च Nera: | सान्त्वयामासतु: कुन्तीं तत्पुत्रोत्पत्तिहेतुभि: । १५

यास्यन् राजानमभ्येत्य विषमं पुत्रलालसम्। अवदत् सुहदां मध्ये बन्धुभि: सोहदोदितम् । १६1

Sri Suka continued : Remembering thus her own kinsfolk and (particularly) Sri Krsna,

the Lord of the universe, O king, your great grandmother (Kunti) wept bitterly, afflicted as
she was. (14) Akrura, to whom joy and sorrow made no difference, and the highly
renowned Vidura comforted Kunti by reminding her of those responsible for the birth of her
sons (viz., Dharma, Vayu, Indra and the two Aéwins). (15) Approaching the king
(Dhrtarastra)—who differentiated between his own sons and nephews and was (particularly)
fond of the former—while about to return (to Mathura), Akriira repeated in the midst of his

kingmen what was communicated (to the king) out of goodwill by his relations (Sri Krsna,
Balarama and others). (16)

भो भो वैचित्रव्रीर्य त्वं कुरूणां कीर्तिवर्धन । भ्रातर्युपरते पाण्डावधुनाऽऽसनमास्थित: 1291

* For the names of Priha's brothers, sisters, nephews and the ladies of her parental home vide verse 28-29, 30-31,
46—55, 22-23 and 45 of Discourse XXIV of Book Nine
