250 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 25

SORT Int Shearer Inno fe tor ee eee CS HEHE EK KEYE eee ee eH RE

Through renunciation of the material objects of sense, through wisdom supplemented by
dispassion, through Yoga (concentration of mind) and through Devotion directed towards
Me, man attains to Me, the Self of all embodied souls, in that very life. (27)

काचित्त्वय्युचिता भक्ति: कीदृशी मम गोचरा । यया पदं ते निर्वाणमञ्जसान्वाश्नवा अहम् । २८।

यो योगो भगवद्वाणो निर्वाणात्मंस्त्वयोदित: | कीदृश: कति चाङ्गानि यतस्तत्त्वावबोधनम् । २९॥

तदेतन्मे विजानीहि यथाहं मन्दधीर्हरे। qa बुद्ध्येय दुर्बोधं योषा भवदनुग्रहात् । ३०॥

Devahiti said : What kind of Devotion is worth developing towards You, and what is
the type fit to be practised by me, through which | may easily andimmediately attain to Your
Being, a synonym for Liberation? (28) What is the character of the Yoga (discipline)
referred to by You, O Embodiment of supreme bliss, as a direct means to God-Perception
(like an arrow which goes straight to its target) as well as to the realization of Truth; and how
many are the processes supplementary to the same? (29) Kindly explain all this to me insuch
a way that I, a dull-witted woman, O Hari, may understand the difficult process with ease by
Your grace. (30) -
FAY उवाच

विदित्वार्थं कपिलो मातुरित्थॆ जातस्नेहो चत्र तन्वाभिजात: |
तत्त्वाम्नायं aaa सांख्यं प्रोवाच वै भक्तिवितानयोगम् ।३१॥

Maitreya resumed : Having thus leamt the object of His mother (>€४दाफा) through
whom He had appeared in a human semblance, Lord Kapila was filled with affection for
her and expounded the system of philosophy which teaches the fundamental principles
(such as Prakrti, Purusa and so on) and which they call Sankhya, as well as the elaborate
course of Devotion and Yoga (the process of meditation and the other methods of mind-
control). (81)

n

श्राभगवानुवाच
देवानां गुणलिङ्गानामानुश्रविककर्मणाम् | सत्त्व एवॆकमनसो वृत्ति: स्वाभाविकी तु या । ३२।
अनिमित्ता भागवती भक्ति: सिद्धेर्गरीयसी । जरयत्याशु a art निगीर्णमनलो यथा 33)
नैकात्मतां मे स्पृहयन्ति केचिन्मत्पादसेव्राभिरता मदीहा: |
येऽन्योन्यतो भागवता: प्रसज्य सभाजयन्ते मम पौरुषाणि ge
uta ते मे रुचिराण्यम्ब सन्त: प्रसन्नवक्त्रारुणलोचनानि |
sain दिव्यानि वरप्रदानि we amt स्पृहणीयां वदन्ति ।३५॥
तैर्दर्शनीयावयवैरुदारविलासहासेक्षितवामसूक्तै: |
हतात्मनो हृतप्राणांश्च भक्तिरनिच्छतो मे गतिमण्वीं प्रयुङ्क्ते । ३६॥
अथो fayfa मम भायाविनस्तामैश्चर्यमष्टाङ्गमनुप्रवृत्तम् |
Bret भागव्तीं वास्पृहयन्ति भद्रां परस्य मे तेऽश्नुवते तु लोके 1301
न कर्हिचिन्मत्परा: ज्ञान्तरूपे नङ्क्ष्यन्ति नो मेऽनिमिषो लेढि हेति: ।
येषामहं fra आत्मा सुतश्च सखा OTe: सुहदो दॆवमिष्टम् ।३८॥
The Lord said : Motiveless devotion to the Lord may be defined as the natural
inclination—towards the Lord, who is an embodiment of Sattva (goodness)—of the senses

of a man of undivided mind, which are the only means of perceiving the objects, as well as
of his organs of action, which are engaged in activities enjoined by the Vedas. Devotion (as
