548 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA { Dis. 7

SERRA OEE AAT ARENT OHONCOEAEOKKEAENSHRERNONKS COREE र्ह 99 # 99 829 29 सू६ # ८ता # ग9#॥ ERE

acquiring wisdom from whom | wander in the world free (from all turmoil and worry). Please
hear about them. (32) The earth, the air, the sky, water, fire, the moon and the sun, the dove,
the boa-constrictor, the sea, the moth, the honey-bee, the elephant, the honey-gatherer, the
deer, the fish, Pingala (a courtesan), the osprey, the infant, the maiden, the forger of arrows,
the serpent, the spider and the Bhrnga (a kind of wasp)—these twenty-four have been
accepted, O king, by me as preceptors. From the conduct of these have | learnt all that | had
tolearnin this life for my good. (33—35) | (presently) tell you, O tigeramong men, what learnt
from whom and how, O son of Yayati (Nahusa's son); (please) hear it. (36) | imbibed from
the earth her vow, viz., that remaining unperturbed even while being oppressed by beings
following the will of Providence, a man should not deviate from his course (of righteousness),
conscious of the fact (of their being subject to the will of Providence). (37) A pious man should
learn from the mountain (a modification of the earth itself) that (like a mountain) all his
movements should ever be guided by altruism and that his (very) birth is solely intended for
(the service of) others. (Similarly) as a disciple of the tree (another modification of the earth)
he should learn (complete) submission to the will of others. (38) An ascetic should remain
fully gratified with bare sustenance after the manner of the life-breath (a form of the air, which
is sustained by mere subsistence) and should not pamper his senses by means of articles
which are delightful to them. He should (only) so manage that his cognitive faculty may not
be lost (through starvation), nor should he indulge himself in such a manner that his speech
and mind may be diverted. (39) Though moving (freely) among (and enjoying) all (sorts of)
objects (of the senses) possessing diverse characteristics, a Yogi should not get particularly
attached, to them any more than the (external) air, his to mind remaining unaffected by their
merits or demerits. (40) Although clothed in earthly bodies in this (mortal) plane and
(appearing as though) endowed with their characteristics (plumpness, slimness and so on),
an ascetic who has his eyes fixed on the Self is not (actually) endowed with those
characteristics any more than the air is with the odours (of various kinds, which really belong
to the particles of earth wafted by the air and not to the air itself). (41) Though clothed in a
body, the ascetic should, by identifying himself with Brahma (the Infinite), visualize the affinity
of his all-pervading soul with the sky in the shape of freedom from (all) limitations and
absence of attachment because of its interpenetrating all mobile and immobile organisms
at once. (42) The soul is not touched by material adjuncts (like the body)—{which are) the
creation of Kala (the Time-Spirit) and are constituted of fire, water and earth {in the form of
its products,viz., food-grains)—any more than the sky is by phenomena like the clouds,
tossed by the wind. (43) Bearing (close) affinity with water, an ascetic is transparent, soft by
nature, sweet and a seat of purity and purifies people through (mere) sight, touch and
utterance of his name. (44) Full of glory and made brighter by glow {in the shape of austerity),
formidable and having no vessel other than his belly, the Yog,, like fire, does not imbibe any
impurity (in the form of sin) even though consuming anything and everything (although he
never consciously eats any impure substance). (45) (Like fire, again,) he remains hidden
from view at times and becomes visible at others, (thereby) earning the respect of those who
seek blessedness. And burning the past as well as the future sin of those who make an
offering to him, he eats everywhere (only that which is offered by others). (46) (Again, even)
as fire (though having no definite shape of its own) assumes the shape of the firewood
through which it reveals itself, (so) having entereda particular body (viz., that of a divinity or
a sub-human creature) possessed of noble or ignoble characteristics andevolved by His own
Maya, the all-pervading Brahma appears endowed with that (very) form. (47) The (various)
states beginning with birth and ending with death, brought about by {the passage of) Time,
whose course cannot be perceived, belong to the body alone and not to the soul, just as
