184 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 12

ज्जत्तयो toon errr en eee eee eT THE SEH CHO Ke HH ATER HECHT CREAT EH ETH KEL eH HHH EH

sun and the moon and austere penance—these are the abodes | have already assigned to
you. (11) You will be further called Manyu, Manu, Mahinasa, Mahan, Siva, Rtadhwaja,
Ugrareta, Bhava, Kala, Vamadeva and Dhrtavrata (according to the abodes assigned to
you). (12) Dhi, Vrtti, Usana, Uma, Niyut, Sarpi, la, Ambika, Iravati, Sudha and Diksa, O
Rudra, shall be your wives, who will all be called Rudranis (as a class). (13) Accept these
names and abodes and consorts too, and beget through these numerous progeny, since you
are a Prajapati (a god presiding over creation)." (14) Thus enjoined by his father (Brahma),
Lord Nilalohita (so-called because of his dark-red hue) begot progeny resembling himself
in strength, appearance and disposition. (15) Brahma (the lord of created beings) was
alarmed to see numberless hosts of Rudras (gods presiding over destruction), procreated
by Rudra, devouring the creation on all sides. (16) "Beget no more of such progeny, O chief
of the gods, who are burning with their fearful eyes all the four quarters including myself. (17)
Practise austere penance that may bring happiness to all living beings; God bless you.
Through penance alone you will be able to create this universe as it was before (in the Kalpa
preceding the last Pralaya). (18) And through penance alone can a man easily attain the
Lord, who is supreme effulgence, nay, who is beyond sense-perception and dwells in the
heart of all living beings.” (19) ॥
Hae उवाच

एवमात्मभुवाऽऽदिष्ट: परिक्रम्य गिरां पतिम् । वाढमित्यमुमामन्त्य विवेश तपसे वनम् । २०

अथाभिध्यायत: सर्गं a पुत्रा: प्रजज्ञिरे। भगवच्छक्तियुक्तस्य लोकसन्तानहेतव: 128 1

Tifa पुलस्त्य: पुलह: क्रतु: । भृगुर्वसिष्ठो दक्षश्च दशमस्तत्र नारदं: 1221

उत्सङ्गान्नारदो जज्ञे दक्षोऽङ्गुष्ठात्स्वयम्भुव: | प्राणाद्दसिष्ठ: सञ्जातो भृगुस्त्वचि करात्क्रतु: 123 |

पुलहो नाभितो जज्ञे पुलस्त्य: कर्णयोरृषि: । अङ्घिरा मुखतोऽक्ष्णोऽत्रिर्मरीचिर्मनसोऽभवत् | २४।

धर्म: स्तनाद्दक्षिणतो चत्र नारायण: स्वयम्। अधर्म: पृष्ठतो यस्मान्मृत्युर्लोकभयङ्करं: 1241

ae कामो ya: क्रोधो लोभश्चाधरदच्छदात्। आस्याद्वाक्सिन्धवो मेद्गान्निर्ऋति: पायोरघाश्रय: । २६॥

छायाया: कर्दमो जज्ञे देवहूत्या: पति: प्रभु: । मनसो देहतश्चेदं जज्ञे विश्वकृतो जगत् । २७।
Maitreya continued : Thus instructed by Brahma (the self-born), Rudra said, “&^॥ right!"
and, taking leave of the lord of speech and going round him (as a mark of respect), he retired
to the woods with intent to practise austere penance. (20) Equipped with the creative energy
of the Lord, Brahma now contemplated further creation and presently produced ten more
sons, who were instrumental in multiplying the creation, viz., Marici, Atri, Angira, Pulastya,
Pulaha, Kratu, Bhrgu, Vasistha and Daksa, Narada being the tenth. (21-22) Narada sprang
up from Brahma’s lap, Daksa from his thumb, Vasistha from his breath, Bhrgu from his skin
and Kratu was evolved from his hand. (23) Pulaha emanated from his navel, the sage
Pulastya from his ears, Angira from his mouth, Atri from-his eyes and Marici came out of his
mind. (24) Dharma (the god of virtue), from whom was descended Lord Narayana Himself
(in the form of the twin brothers Nara and Narayana), appeared from his right breast. Even

so Adharma (the spirit presiding over unrighteousness), from whom sprang the god of death,
the terror of the whole world, appeared from his back. (25) From his heart sprang up Kama

of ordinary male adults. We find mention in our scriptures of hosts of Rsis who had mastered their sexual impulse so thoroughly
that the flow of their generative fluid had turned upwards, a thing unknown in any other part of the world, This shows to what
inconceivable length our forefathers had developed the art of preserving the vital fluid and utilizing it towards the noblest end
of God-Realization (चदिच्छन्तौ ब्रह्म्च्य चरन्ति : Cf. Bhagavadgita VIII.11).
