148 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 4

ROWE BERET EO RE ROR SOT Re EEE OE HE EEE EEO OE HERE CEE ANKE S ज क क SHOR SHORE HHH A He OHH

in faltering accents with joined palms, the hair on my body standing erect through affection
andtears flowing from my eyes :—(14) “Whichon earth of the four objects (of human pursuit),
my lord, is difficult to attain for those who are devoted to Your lotus-feet ? Yet, O Perfect One,
| crave fornone of these, keen as !amtoworship Your lotus-feet. (15) That You should resort
to action, though actionless, should be born, though devoid of birth, should take to Your heels
for fear of the enemy and seek shelter in a fortress, even though being the Destroyer of all,
and should take to wife (over) ten thousand damsels though delighting in Your own blissful
Self, puzzles the mind even of the knowing. (16) That You,whose knowledge is unimpeded,
uninterrupted and ever free from doubt and error, and who are ever awake, should call me
in Your deliberations and consult me as an ignorant man would do, perplexes our mind as
it were, O glorious Lord ! (17) Pray, instruct us, my master, in that supreme and integral
wisdom which unfolds the mystery of Your Being and which You taught to Brahma, in case
it is fit to be received by us, so that we may easily get over the sorrows (of mundane
existence)." (18)

इत्यावेदितहार्दाय मह्यं स भगवान् ot | आदिदेशारविन्दाक्ष आत्मन: परमां स्थितिम् । १९1

स `एवमाराधितपादतीर्थादधीततत्त्वात्मविबोधमार्ग: |
प्रणम्य पादौ परिवृत्य देवमिहागतोऽहँ विरहातुरात्मा । २०।
Mist तद्दर्शनाह्लादवियोगार्तियुतर प्रभो 1 गमिष्ये दयिते तस्य बदर्याश्रममण्डलम् 1221
यत्र नारायणो देवो नरश्च भगवानृषि: । मृदु तीव्रं तपो दीर्घं तेपाते लोकभावनौ 1221
When | submitted to Him in these words what was uppermost in my mind, the supreme
Lord with lotus-like eyes revealed to me His transcendent character. (19) Having thus learnt
from my worshipful Guru (Sri Krsna) the way of realizing God, who is the only Truth, and
bowing to the Lord's feet, | went round Him clockwise as a mark of reverence and came away
to this place, distressed at heart due to separation from Him. (20) Delighted by His sight, but
now afflicted by separation from Him, O Vidura, | shall proceed to the sacred spot of
Badarikasrama, His favourite retreat, where the glorious Narayana and the worshipful sage
Nara are engaged in peaceful yet austere penance extending over a long period (a whole
Kalpa) for the good of the world. (21-22)
SH उवाच
इत्युद्धवादुपाकर्ण्य सुहृदां दु:सहं वधम्।ज्ञानेनाशमयस्क्षत्ता शोकमुत्पतितं बुध: ।२३॥
स तं महाभागवतं ai कौरवर्षभ: । विश्रम्भादभ्यधत्तेदे get कृष्णपरिग्रहे । २४॥
Sri Suka continued : The enlightened Vidura assuaged by force of wisdom the grief that

had burst forth (in his heart) when he heard the unbearable news about the death of his near
and dear ones. (23) When that great devotee (Uddhava), the chief among the servants of

Lord Sri Krsna, was about to depart (for Badarikasrama), Vidura (the foremost among the
Kauravas) spoke to him out of love (as follows). (24)

fag उवाच
ज्ञाने परं स्वात्मरह:प्रकाशॊ eet SRT ।
ap भवान्नोऽर्हति यद्धि विष्णोर्भृत्या: स्वभृत्यार्थकृतश्चरन्ति 1२५॥
Vidura said : Be pleased to impart to us the supreme wisdom which unfolds the secret
‘of the Lord's own essential nature and which the divine Sri Krsna, the Master of Yoga, taught
to you; for the devotees of Lord Visnu move about (in the world) only in order to accomplish
the object of their servants. (25)
