Dis. 1 ] BOOK FOUR 289

ASESESESE PSEA LER RAT ESSE CONT T SERRE TSIM AL REE REE RENeAENEhEREHrenEnEnnnAeMeee

Santosa, Bhadra, Santi, Idaspati, Idhma, Kavi, Vibhu, Swahna, Sudeva and Rocana. (7) It
was these (twelve sons of Lord Yajfia) who held the office of gods in the Swayambhuva
Manvantara and were collectively known as the Tusitas. Marici and others figured as the
(seven) Rsis, while Lord Yajfia Himself filled the place of Indra (the chief of the gods). (8)
Priyavrata and Uttanapada, who were possessed of great might, were the two sons of
Manu. Their sons, grandsons and great grandsons as well as their Progeny ruled for the
whole length of that (Swayambhuva) Manvantara. (9)

देवहूतिमदात्तात कर्दमायात्मजां मनु: । तत्सम्बन्धि yard भवता गदतो मम ।१०॥
दक्षाय ब्रह्मपुत्राय प्रसूतिं भगवान्मनु: | प्रायच्छद्यत्कृत: सर्गस्तिलोक्यां विततो महान् । ११

As for Devahiti, his (next) daughter, Manu gave her to sage Kardama (another lord of
created beings), O dear Vidura. Their Story has already been heard by you’ from my mouth
almost in full. (10) And the worshipful Manu gave Prasiti (his third and youngest daughter)
to Daksa (still another lord of created beings and) a mind-born son of Brahma, whose
numberless descendants are spread all over the three worlds. (11)

या: कर्दमसुता: प्रोक्ता नव ब्रह्मर्षिपत्नय: । तासां प्रसूतिप्रसवं प्रोच्यमानं निबोध Are
Wat मरीचेस्तु कला सुषुवैर्कापप्त्यजा।कश्यपंपृर्णिपानंचययोराषूस्तिंजगत्।श्इ।
पूर्णिमासूत विरजं fat च परंतप । देवकुल्याँ हरे: पादशोचाद्याभूत्सरिद्दिव: । १४॥
aa: पत्न्यनसूचा त्रीञ्जज्ञे सुयशस: सुतान्। at दुर्वाससं सोममात्मेशब्रह्मसम्भवान् । १५॥

Now hear as | tell you about the sons and grandsons of the nine daughters of the sage
Kardama, who became the wives of (great) Brahmana sages (the mind-born sons of
Brahma) and of whom | have already spoken. (12) The daughter of Kardama named Kala,
the wife of Marici, bore Kasyapa and Purnima, whose race filled the universe. (13) Parnima
(the younger brother), O Vidura (a chastiser of enemies), begot Viraja and Vigwaga and
Devakulya (a daughter) who (in her next incarnation) descended in the form of the
heavenly stream (Ganga) from the waters washing the feet of Lord Visnu.(14) Atri's wife,
Anasuya, gave birth to three well-renowned sons, Datta (Lord Dattatreya), the sage Durvasa
and the moon-god, who were severally born as (part) manifestations of Lord Visnu, Lord Siva
and Brahma (the creator). (15)

विदुर उवाच

अत्रेर्गृहे सुरश्रेष्ठा: स्थित्युत्पत्यन्तहेतव:।किञ्चिच्चिर्कोर्षंवोक्ताएतदख्यापिमॆगुंरो 1१६॥
Vidura said: With what intention did the three foremost gods (Brahma, Visnu and Siva),
who are severally responsible for the (processes of) creation, preservation and destruction
(of the universe), appear in the house of Atri ? Tell me this, my master. (16)

मैत्रेय उवाच
ब्रह्मणा नोदित: सृष्टावत्रिर्ब्रह्मविदां वर: । सह USM ययावृक्षं कुलाद्रिं तपसि स्थित: । १७॥
तस्मिन् प्नसूनस्तबकपलह्याशोक्ताप्तने।वार्भि:स्रबद्भिळ्घुष्टेनिर्विंच्याया: समन्तत: 1261
प्राणायामेन संयम्य मनो वर्षशतं मुनि: । अतिष्ठदेकपादेन निर्द्वन्द्दोऽनिलभोजन: । १९॥
शरणं तं ws य एवं जगदीश्वर: । प्रजामात्मसमां मह्यं प्रयच्छत्विति चिन्तयन् 1201
Maitreya replied: Urged by Brahma to multiply creation, the sage Atri, the foremost of
the knowers of Brahma, removed with his wife to the Rksa mountain, one of the principal
mountain ranges (of India), intent on practising austere penance. (17) On that mountain,

clothed with a forest of Palaga and Asoka trees, which was laden with bunches of flowers
and echoed on all sides with the sound of the waters of the Nirvindhya river falling (on its
