822 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 21

BAAR EEE RAHA EAA AHHH कीं वं SEE EL AER EREEREHEE ELE ज्क्तै जज EERE EERE LEREEE

बलेन सचिवैर्बुद्ध्या = giftisiteenfefe: | सामादिभिरुपायैश्च कालं नात्येति वै जन: 1221
भवद्भिर्निर्जिता ह्येते बहुशोऽनुचरा हरे: । दैवेनर्द्धस्त एवाद्य युधि जित्वा नदन्ति a: 1231
एतान् वयं विजेष्यामो यदि दैवं प्रसीदति । तस्मात् कालं प्रतीक्षध्वं यो नोऽर्थत्वाय कल्पते । २४।

Sri Sukaresumed: Observing the Lord's foot as having reached Satyaloka, Brahma (the
lotus-born), who was (now) encircled by (the lustre of) the moon-like nails (of that foot) and
whose (very) realm was eclipsed by them, went forth to greet the foot. So did Marici and the
other seers, lifelong celibates (like the celestial sage Narada) and Yogis (united with the Lord
through perception of identity), headed by Sanandana, O ruler among men, (deities
presiding over) the (four) Vedas as well as the (four) Upavedas,* the (twelve) Yamas t(forms
of self-discipline) along with the (twelve) Niyamas ¢ (religious vows), (the science of) logic,
Itinasas (works on history such as the Ramayana of Valmiki and the Mahabharata), the (six)
Vedangas (classes of works regarded as auxiliary to the Vedas and designed to aid in the
correct pronunciation and interpretation of the text and the right employment of the Mantras
in ceremonials), the (eighteen) Puranas and Samhitas (methodically arranged collections of
sacred texts or verses, such as the Paficaratra-Samhita, Brahma-Samhita, Stta-Samnhita
and Garga-Samhita) and whoever else had their impurities in the shape of Karma burnt up
with the fire of wisdom kindled by the breeze of Yoga (contemplation on God), and bowed
to that foot, by virtue of whose contemplation they had ascended to the realm of Brahma (the
self-born), (which is) not accessible through rituals.(1-2) Now Brahma of unsullied fame
offered water as an act of worship to the upraised foot of Lord Visnu, from the lotus at whose
navel he had himself emerged; and having duly worshipped the foot (in other ways too), he
sang His praises with devotion. (3) That water poured from the water-pot of Brahma (the
creator) came to be the (holy) Ganga (the heavenly river) because of its being hallowed by
washing the aforesaid foot of Lord Visnu (of wide strides), O ruler of men. Falling through the
heavens, the stream purifies (all) the three worlds (through which it courses) as the Lord's
untarnished fame does.(4) Full of great reverence, Brahma and other guardians of the
(various) worlds along with their followers offered worship to their own Ruler—who had (now)
contracted His dimensions (once more resumed His diminutive form)—with water (to wash
His hands and feet, rinse His mouth, and bathe Him with), presents (of various kinds),
fragrant wreaths of flowers, ethereal perfumes and sandalpaste etc., to daub His person
with, incense (of various kinds), lights, parched grains of paddy, unbroken rice, fruits and
sprouts, songs of praise and shouts of victory marked by the glory of His power, dances and
music—both instrumental and vocal—and the sound of conchs and kettledrums. (5—7)
Jambavan, the king of the bears’, who ran swift as thought, actually proclaimed (while
running) by (repeated) sounds of drumin all the (four) quarters the triumph (of Lord Vamana),
(which was) marked with great festivity. (8) Enraged at finding the whole earth, which was
till now in the possession of their master—who had taken a solemn undertaking to perform
a sacrifice (and to abstain:in consequence from all forms of violence till the end of the

* A class of writings subordinate to the Vedas, viz., Ayurveda or the science of medicine, Dhanurveda or the military
science, Gandharvaveda or the science of music and Sthapatyaveda or the science of architecture which are attached in order
to Agveda, Yajurveda, Samaveda and Atharvaveda.

+ & ¢ For a list of the Yamas and Niyamas vide translation of IV. xxii. 24.

$ He is the same Jambavan who subsequently figured so prominently in the expedition of Sri Rama against Lankan the
Treta age and also unwittingly fought with Sri Krsna in the Dwapara age—vide X.55 of Srimad Bhagavata.
