Dis. 12] BOOK EIGHT 787

SHEAKESEAERRERAHAARAT EARTH AORTA ENTTLEMAATARAENT NAS eed eRe eee teeter eerresetes

So do You pervade the whole universe, You being its very Soul. (11) Your descents (in the
world of matter) when You carried on (Your) sport with the (three) Gunas (modes of Prakrti)
have been seen by me. As such | long to behold that (bewitching) form of a damsel which
was assumed by You (the other day). (12) Eager to behold that form by which the Daityas
were greatly enchanted and the gods given nectar to drink, we have come (to You); for great
is our curiosity (with regard to that). (13)

श्रीरुक उवाच

एवमभ्यर्थितो विष्णुर्भगवान् शूलपाणिना । प्रहस्य भावगम्भीरं fife प्रत्यभाषत rex!

Sri Suka continued: Thus entreated by Rudra (the Wielder of a trident), Lord Visnu
heartily laughed a laugh which was pregnant with meaning and replied (as follows ) to Lord
Siva (who has His abode on Mount Kailasa). (14)

कौतूहलाय दैत्यानां योषिद्देषो मया कृत:। usa सुरकार्याणि गते पीयूषभाजने । १५॥
तत्तेऽहं दर्शयिष्यामि दिदृक्षो: सुरसत्तम। कामिनां ag मन्तव्यं सङ्कल्पप्रभवोदयम् । १६।

The Lord said: The jar of nectar having disappeared (passed into the hands of the
Daityas), the form of a (bewitching) damsel was assumed by me—for (exciting) wonder in
the minds of the Daityas— having regard to the interests of the (outraged) gods (which could
best be served in that way alone, woman being the most effective and appropriate means
of infatuating and beguiling the treacherous and greedy Daityas, who had wrested the jar of
nectar from the hands of Dhanvantari and thus deprived the fair-minded gods of their rightful
share). (15) To You, O chief of the gods, who are eager to behold it, | shall (presently) reveal
that form, which excites passion (in the hearts of males) and (as such) is (so) valuable in the
eyes of libidinous souls.(16) न

ARTA उवाच

इति ब्रुवाणो भगवांस्तत्रैवान्तरधीयत । सर्वतश्चारयंश्चक्षुर्भब आस्ते सहोमया । १७
विक्रीडतीं कन्दुकलीलया लसददुकूलपर्यस्तनितम्बमेखलाम् । १८॥
आवर्तनोद्वर्तनकम्पितस्तनप्रकृष्टहारोरुभरै: पदे पदे I
प्रभज्यमानामिव् मध्यतश्चलत्पदप्रवालं नयतीं ततस्तत: । १९।
दिक्षु भ्रमत्कन्दुकचापलैर्भृशं प्रोद्दिग्नतारायतलोललोचनाम् ।
स्वकर्णविभ्राजितकुण्डलोल्लसत्कपोलनीलालकमण्डिताननाम् । २०॥
Wu TE कबरीं च विच्युतां सन्नह्यतीं वामकरेण वल्गुना ।
विनिघ्नतीमन्यकरेण कन्दुकं विमोहयन्तीं जगदात्ममायया 122 |
तां वीक्ष्य ca इति कन्दुकलीलयेषद्ब्रीडास्फुटस्मितविसृष्टकटाक्षमुष्ट: |
स्रीप्रेक्षणप्रतिसमीक्षणविह्वलात्मा नात्मानमन्तिक sat स्वगणांश्च वेद । २२।
तस्या: TAM A तु कन्दुको यदा गतो विदूरं तमनुव्रजत्सिया: |
वास: ससूत्रं लघु मारुतोऽहरद् wae देवस्य किलानुपर्यत: 1231

एवं a रुचिरापाङ्कीं दर्शनीयां मनोरमाम्। दृष्टा तस्यां मनश्चक्रे विषज्जन्त्यां भव: किल । २४॥

तयापहतविज्ञानस्तत्कृतस्मरबिह्वल: । भवान्या अपि पद्यन्त्या गतह्वीस्तत्पदं Tat । २५॥

Sri Suka went on: Saying thus, the Lord vanished on that very spot; while Lord Siva (the
Source of the universe) waited (there) with Goddess Uma, casting (His) look all round.(17)
