492 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA { Dis. 87

#२:१:१ १ ११ १०१ १ १७ १ .७.१ ७ ७ ७ ७ ७ ११ ० ७ ७ १७ १ ७ १ ७ ७ १ ११ ११ ७ ७.७ ७ १ १७ ७ १ ११ ११ ० ७.१.१.१ ५० ० ७५ ७५ ० १ १० १५ ७५ ०9 9० ७.५.७ १ १ 4 ७

men (who sing them)—and (thereby) shed their (threefold) sufferings. What wonder,
then, that they should get rid of their afflictions, who, having conquered by dint of their
Self-Realization the tendencies (evil) of their mind (in the shape of attraction and
repulsion etc.) as well as the effects of Time (such as old age), O Supreme, contemplate
on Your essential character consisting of eternal consciousness and bliss. (16) People
live (justify their existence only) if they are obedient to You (follow Your commandments)
or else they (simply) breathe like bellows. You are that (creative principle) by whose
grace (interpenetrated by which) Mahattattva (the principle of cosmic intelligence),
Ahanikara (the cosmic ego) etc., (though insentient) have brought into being this egg-tike
universe (including this microcosm); (nay,) it is You who animate (all) the (five) sheaths
(with which the soul is invested), assuming the shape of those sheaths and permeating
them (as their material Cause), although (as a matter of fact) You are the ultimate
Substance underlying all (phenomena), beyond the gross as well as the subtle, that
which remains (after everything else has disappeared) as the Reality. (17)

उदरमुपासते य ऋषिवर्त्मसु कूर्पदृश: परिसरपद्धतिं हृदयमारुणयो cam

तत उदगादनन्त तव am शिर: परमं पुनरिह यत् समेत्य न पतन्ति कृतान्तमुखे। १८

स्वकृतविचित्रयोनिषु विशन्निव हेतुतया तरतमतश्चकास्स्यनलवत् स्वकृतानुकृति:।

ay वितथास्वमूष्ववितथं तव am समं विरजधियोऽन्वयन्त्यभिविपण्यव एकरसम्। १९ |

Out of the (many) paths (leading to God-realization) chalked out by the seers (of

old), men of gross vision (lit, having their eyes blinded with gravel) contemplate on
(Brahma as presiding over the spiritual centre called Manipuraka located in) the abdomen;
while the sons of the sage Aruna (who are possessed of a subtler vision) contemplate
on (Brahma as manifested in the centre known as the Anahata Cakra located in) the
cavity of the heart, the organ from which the veins and arteries branch out (in various
directions). Thence proceeds upwards, O infinite Lord, the artery known as Susumna
(the supreme effulgent channel leading to You) to (the crown of) the head (the seat of the
spiritual centre known as the Sahasrara). Reaching this path men do not fall again into
the jaws of death here. (18) Entering as it were the diverse types of living organisms
evolved by Yourself, though (as a matter of fact) You already existed in them as their
(material) Cause, and assuming those forms, You shine (through them) as high or low
like fire (which, though undifferentiated in itself, assumes diverse shapes according to
the shape of the fire-wood). Therefore, men of unclouded judgment, who do not expect
any (worldly or other-worldly) reward for their actions, recognize Your true nature as the
one immutable, undifferentiated and uniform Substance in those unreal forms. (19)

इति नृगतिं विविच्य कवयो निगमावपनं भवत उपासतेऽङ्ध्रिमभवं भुवि विश्वसिता: 101

त्वदनुपथं कुलायमिदमात्मसुहृत्प्रियवच्चरति तथोन्मुखे त्वयि fea fra आत्मनि a
न बत रमन्त्यहो असदुपासनयाऽऽत्महनो यदनुशया भ्रमन्त्युरुभये कुशरीरभृत:। २२।
निभृतमरुन्मनोऽक्षदूढयोगयुजो हृदि यन्मुनय उपासते तदरयोऽपि ययु: स्मरणात्।
fora उरगेन्द्रभोगभुजदण्डविषक्कतधियो वयमपि a समा: समदरृशोऽङ्ध्रिसरोजसुधा: । २३॥

The Vedas speak of the Purusa (the individual soul) dwelling in these bodies shaped (as
a result of its own deeds) by itself—though, as a matter of fact, it is not limited by anything
which is of the nature of a cause or an effect—as a part made as it were out of You, the Wielder
