370 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 59

SERENA SUSE EOS SENT FOYE ME REST, SOROS Sar ee SE Sr टक च्मा

Flying (thence) to the abode of Indra (the ruler of the gods), ihe Lord made over to Aditi
(Indra’s mother) her pair of ear-rings (recovered from the possession of Naraka, by whom
they had been snatched away by force), as wellas the umbrella (of Varuna) to Indra, and was
worshipped (in return) alongwith His beloved spouse (Satyabhama) by the said king of
immortals accompanied by his consort. (38) Urged on by His consort, He pulled up a Parijata
tree (from the garden of Indra) and, placing it on the back of Garuda and vanquishing the
gods, Indra and all (who opposed Him), He brought it down* to His (own) capital (Dwaraka).(39)
It was planted to adom the (pleasure-) garden attached to Satyabhama’s mansion.
Hankering after its (delicious) fragrance and honey, bees followed it (all the way) from
heaven. (40) Bowing low (with reverence) and touching His feet with the corners of his
diadem, Indra had (formerly) sought from Sri Krsna (the immortal Lord) the accomplishment
of his purpose (viz., the recovery of his mother's ear-rings and the umbrella of Varuna from
Naraka). Once (however) he had his purpose accomplished, he fought with Him, though
wise. Oh, the ignorance even of the gods (who are predominantly Sattvika in character)!
Accursed is opulence. (41)

aa ded एकस्मिन् नानागारेषु ता: fea: | यथोपयेमे भगवांस्तावद्रूपधरोऽव्यय: 152 |
गृहेषु तासामनपाव्यतर्क्यकृन्निरस्तसाम्यातिहायेष्वस्थित: 1
a रमाभिर्निजकामसंप्रुतो यथेतरो गार्हकमेधिकांश्चरन् ।४३॥
इत्थं रमापतिमवाप्य पतिं स्रिवस्ता ब्रह्मादयोऽपि न विदु: पद्वीं यदीयाम् 1
भेजुर्मुदाविरतमेघितयानुरागहासावलोकनवसङ्गमजल्पलज्जा: 18% 1
केशप्रसारशयनस्त्रपनोपहार्यैर्दासीराता अपि विभोर्विदधु: स्म दास्यम् ।४५॥
इति श्रीमद्भागवते महापुराणे पारमहंस्यां संहितायां दमस्कन्धे उत्तरार्धे पारिजातहर्णनरकवधो

Assuming as many semblances as the brides, and remaining undiminished (integral), the
almighty Lord espoused with due ceremony (all) those damsels in different mansions at one
and the same hour. (42) Remaining constantly (and simultaneously) present in their
mansions, which were not only unsurpassed but were beyond (all) comparison (in point of
abundance of luxuries), Sri Krsna, who wrought inconceivable things and was perfect in His
own blissfulness, sported with those part manifestations of Goddess Rama like an ordinary
mortal, (Scrupulously) performing (all) the duties of a householder. (43) Having thus secured
for their husband the (very) Spouse of Rama, whose ways (the path leading to whom) even
Brahma (the creator) and others are unable to make out, the aforesaid ladies waited upon
Him with incessantly increasing joy, greeting Him with glances accompanied by loving smiles
in their (ever) fresh meeting (with the Lord) marked by exchange of jokes and bashtulness. (44)
Though attended by hundreds of servant-maids, they rendered (persona!) service to the
almighty Lord by going forth to meet Him (when He called at their door), offering Him (an
exalted) seat and excellent articles of worship, laving His feet, presenting betel leaves
seasoned with catechu, lime areca-nut parings, cloves and cardamom seeds etc., relieving
His fatigue (by kneading His feet etc.), fanning Him, daubing Him with sandal-paste and

* We have already seen in verse 55 of Discourse L that Indra himself sent a Parijata tree to Owaraka even when the city
was built. But it was planled elsewhere away from the mansion of Satyabhama, who wanted to have one just beside her.
