702 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 10

ROR RR Re Rr IE A HHA ESR ENE eH HEE KSEE SETH HEE GRO EK HI HH ee क्र a RMT

Him), so did kings such as Sigupala (the ruler of Cedi) attain similarity of form with Sri Hari
through contemplation on Him (as their enemy). (40)
आख्यातं सर्वमेतत् ते यन्मां त्वं परिपृष्टवान्। दमघोषसुतादीनां हरे: सात्म्यमपि द्विषाम् Ix!
Ua ब्रह्मण्यदेवस्यं कृष्णस्य च महात्मन: | अवतारकथा पुण्या aM यत्रादिदॆत्ययो: ive
प्रह्रादस्यानुचरितॆ महाभागवतस्य Siena विरक्तिश्च याथात्म्यं चास्य a हरे: 1४३1
सर्गस्थित्यप्ययेहास्य गुणकर्मानुवर्णनम् । परावरेषां VIA कालेन व्यत्ययो महान् ।४४॥
धर्मो भागवतानां च War गम्यते। आरख्यानेऽस्मिन्समाम्नातमाध्यात्मिकमरोषत: ।४५॥
य एतत् पुण्यमाख्यानं विष्णोर्वीर्योपबृंहितम् । कीर्तयेच्छुद्धया श्रुत्वा कर्मपादोर्विमुच्यते ।४६॥
we य आदिपुरुषस्य मृगेन्द्रलीलां दैत्येनद्रयूथपवधं प्रयत: पठेत ।
दैत्यात्मजस्य च सतां प्रवरस्य पुण्यं श्रुत्वानुभावमकुतोभयमेति लोकम् xo!

All that you asked me in detail has (thus) been related to you, namely, the attainment as
aforesaid of similarity of form with SriHari by kings suchas Sigupala (the son of Damaghosa),
even though His enemies; the sacred story, just told by me, of the descent (in the form of a
man-lion) of Lord Sri Krsna, the Supreme person, a votary of the Brahmanas, in which has
been described the death of the two most ancient Daityas (Hiranyaksa and Hiranyakasipu);
the narrative of Prahrada, a great devotee of the Lord, as wellas (an account of) his Devotion,
spiritual enlightenment and dispassion and as a matter of fact the true nature of SrtHari, who
is responsible for the creation, existence and dissolution of the universe; an account of His
excellences and exploits as well as of the great change of abodes, in course of time, of the
higher and lower orders of creation (such as the gods and demons and so on), and the cult
of the Bhagavatas (votaries of the Lord), by means of which the Lordis (easily and speedily)
reached. (Further) in this chronicle has been discussed at length in all (its) bearings the topic
of the Spirit. (41—45) Whoever, on hearing with reverence this sacred narrative, enriched
with an account of the prowess of Lord Visnu, recites it (to others) is completely freed from
the bonds of Karma. (46) (And) whosoever reads with a concentrated mind this story of the
pastime of Lord Visnu (the most ancient Person) figuring as a lion, (mainly) consisting of the
destruction of Hiranyakasipu (the ruler of the Daityas), who resembled a mighty elephant
(the leader of a herd of elephants), after hearing of the hallowed glory of Prahrada (the son
of Hiranyakasipu), the foremost of virtuous souls, attains to the realm (of Lord Visnu) where
there is no fear from any quarter. (47)

यूयं नृलोके aq भूरिभागा ste पुनाना मुनयोऽभियन्ति ।
येषां गृहानावसतीति «mane ye परं RM मनुष्यलिङ्गम् Xe!
स वा अयं wa महद्विमृग्यकेवल्यनिर्वाणसुखानुभूति: |
fa: de a: खलु मातुलेय आत्मार्हणीयो विधिकृद् गुरुश्च ve
न यस्य साक्षाद् भवपद्मजादिभी ed fea वस्तुतयोपवर्णितम् ।
aia भक्त्योपशमेन पूजित: प्रसीदतामेष स सात्वतां पति: ।५०॥
स एष भगवान्राजन्व्यतनोद् विहतं यञ:। पुरा रुद्रस्य देवस्य मयेनानन्तमायिना । ५१॥

Oh, exceedingly fortunate (far more fortunate than Prahrada) on earth (this world of
human beings) are you (the Pandavas and the Yadus), to whose residences flock from all
quarters sages sanctifying the (whole) world, inasmuch as the supreme Brahma bodily stays
there disguised in the form of a human being. (48) This very Sri Krsna, your well-known

beloved friend and cousin (son of your maternal uncle, Vasudeva), (nay,) your very self
(body), worthy of your adoration, obedient servant (ambassador and charioteer) and
