712 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 12

SRI OINOS SO kriien torent re 8 fee ee ee eee ee ee ee eee eS we SR we ar eee er Hee BR eB

predilections and fitness) the life of a householder (marry and beget children) or retire to the
woods (take to the life of an anchorite) or renounce the world and wander forth as an ascetic
mendicant (recluse) or continue there (in the teacher's house as a lifelong celibate). (13-14)
He should visualize Lord Visnu (who is above sense-perception) as having entered (taken
up His abode in) the sacred fire, the teacher, his own self as well as all the (five) elements
(viz., earth, water, fire, airand ether)—including the (diverse orders of) living beings dwelling
in them—as their Inner Controller, even though He has not (really) entered them (having
been already present in them by virtue of His pervading all as their very Cause). (15)
Following the rules of conduct laid down for his Asrama, and having (thereby) come to know
that which ought to be known, a Brahmacari (religious student), anchorite, recluse or
householder of this type (visualizing the Lord as present in all) realizes the transcendent
Absolute. (16)

वानप्रस्थस्य वक्ष्यामि नियमान्मुनिसम्मतान्।यानातिष्ठन् मुनिर्गच्छेदृषिलोकमिहाञ्जसा 120!
न कृष्टपच्यमश्नीयादकृष्टं चाप्वकालत: | अग्निपक्वमथामं वा अर्कपक्वमुताहरेत् 1१८]
वन्यैश्चरुपुरोडाशान् निर्वपेत् कालचोदितान् | लब्धे नवे नवेऽन्नाद्ये पुराणं तु परित्यजेत् । १९1
smite ङारणमुटजं वाद्रिकन्दराम्। श्रयेत हिमवाय्वग्निवर्षार्कातपषाद् स्वयम् ।२०॥
केशरोमनख्मश्रुमलानि जटिलो दधत्।कमण्डल्वजिने दण्डवल्कलाग्निपरिच्छदान् । २१॥
ae वने द्वादशाब्दानष्टौ वा चतुरो मुनि: ।द्वावेके वा यथाबुद्धिर्न विपद्येत कृच्छ्रत: 1221

| shall (now) tell (you) the rules of conduct prescribed fora Vanaprastha (anchorite) and
approved of by sages, by following which in this life an ascetic bids fair to ascend easily (after
death) to Maharloka (the realm of the Rsis and then attain Mukti in due course). (17) An
anchorite must not eat anything which ripens on cultivated soil (viz., the products of
agriculture) and not even the products of uncultivated land before time. He should neither
eat food cooked on fire nor anything raw, but only that which has ripened under (the rays of)
the sun (in season). (18) He should prepare Caru (an oblation of rice, barley and pulse boiled
with butter and milk) and Purodasa (a mass of ground rice rounded into a kind of cake and
usually divided into pieces placed on separate receptacles), enjoined at different times (for
being offered to the gods through the sacred fire), with wild corns. Each time a fresh (natural)
supply of cereals and other eatables is obtained, he should, however, reject the old
stock.(19) Himself enduring (remaining exposed to) snow, winds, fire, rain and the heat of
the sun, he should betake himself to a shelter in the form of a hut of leaves or a
mountain-cave only for the sake of (preserving) the sacred fire. (20) Wearing matted locks
(on his head), preserving the (other) hair (such as those in the arm-pits and other private
parts), as well as the hair on his body, nails, moustaches and beard, and the dirt* (on his skin)
and keeping (with him) a Kamandalu (a water-pot made of cocoanut-shell or gourd etc.),
deerskin (to be wrapped about his loins), a staff, the bark of (the birth and other) trees (as
a covering for his body) and the accessories of fire-worship (alone), a hermit should practise
austerities in the woods for (a period of) twelve, eight, four or two years or (only) one year
(as the case may be) lest his reason should get perverted through hardship. (21-22)

यदाकल्प: स्वक्रियायां व्याधिभिर्जरयाथवा । आन्वीक्षिक्यां वा विद्यायां कुर्यादनरानादिकम् 123 |
|

* This should not be taken to mean that an anchorite is forbidden to take his bath or that he is asked to remain positively
unclean or allow dirt to accumulate on his body. What is sought to be conveyed by all these restrictions is simply this that he
should be unmindful of his exterior,that he should not devote particular attention to cleanliness etc., that his bodily needs should
be reduced to the minimum and that he should completely subordinate his physical self to the higher self.
