110 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA `[ Dis. 7

de wee tet ae ERE HEH eae RR OTT TORT RONCHI ESTES want ee TENE TREAT HE MEE SE RTE VE Mee Re RO RR RRR ARORA

decorum, good fortune and intellectual acumen, that which has a wonderful colour and
whateveriswithor without formis the same as the ultimate Truth. (42—44) Again, O Narada,
the scriptures have described the chief among the sportful descents of the Lord, and | shall
presently narrate those most delightful stories, which dry up the impurities of the ears. Please
drink this nectar to your heart's content. (45)

Thus ends the sixth discourse in Book Two of the great and
glorious Bhagavata-Purana, otherwise known as
the Paramahamsa-Samhita

S2tNTINT ES
PDD EES OD

अथ सप्तमोऽध्याय:

Discourse VII
The stories of the Lord's sportful descents
ब्रह्मोवाच

Brahma continued : When the infinite Lord assumed the form of the divine Boar,
representing all kinds of sacrifices, and determined to lift the earth (from the bottom of the
ocean), Hiranyaksa (the very first progeny of Diti) came upon Him (for an encounter) inside
that great ocean and the Lord tore him to death with His tusks even as Indra (the wielder of

the thunderbolt) clipped the wings of the mountains. (1)
जातो रुचेरजनयत् सुयमान् सुयज्ञ आकूतिसूनुरमरानथ दक्षिणायाम् ।
लोकत्रयस्य महतीमहरद् यदार्तिं स्वायम्भुवेन मनुना हरिरित्यनूक्त: । २ |
Next He wasborn as the son of Ruci (who belonged to the class knownas the Prajapatis
or lords of created beings) and his wife Akuti ( a daughter of the very first Manu
Swayambhuva) under the name of Suyajfa (who held the position of Indra in the first, i.e.,
Swayambhuva Manvantara), and begot through His Consort, Daksina, a group of gods who
bore the title of Suyama. When (as Indra) He relieved the great affliction of all the three
worlds, He was renamed by Swayambhuva (His maternal grandfather) as Hari (the Reliever
of distress). (2)
ऊचे ययाऽऽत्मशमलं गुणसङ्घपङ्कमस्मिन् विधूय कपिलस्य गतिं प्रपेदे । ३ |
Again He was born, O Narada, as the son of Kardama (another Prajapati) and his wife
Devahiti (under the name of Kapila) with nine sisters, and imparted to His mother the
Knowledge of the spirit, by means of which she wiped off in the course of that very life the
dirt of attachment to the world of matter, which had polluted her heart,and attained to thi
state of Kapila (i.e. final peatitude). (3) ॥

अत्रेरपत्यपभिकाङ्घत्तआहतुष्टौदत्तोपयाहमितियद्भगवान्सदत्त:।
यत्पादपङ्कजपरागपवित्रदेहा चोगद्धिमापुरुभयीं यदुहैहयाद्या: । ४ | ।

Pleased with the sage Atri (one of the seven sages who held the office of the Saptars
