250. SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 35

सि च व न न वित् er sists scars ie seeracrere ener

When, having gaily decorated Himself with wreaths of jasmine flowers, and surrounded
by cowherd boys and His cattle-wealth, your Darling, Sri Krsna (Nanda's Son), O sinless
YaSoda, sports on the bank of the Yamuna, giving delight to His loving companions, a gentle
breeze fans Him agreeably, welcoming Him by its cool and fragrant touch like that of sandal-
paste; andhosts of demigods (Gandharvas and others), who play the role of panegyrisis,wait
upon Him with their instrumental and vocal music and offerings (of various kinds and thereby
delay His return to Vraja). (20-21)

चत्सलो व्रजगवां यदगध्रो ae: पथि वृद्धै: ।

कृत्स्नगोधनमुपोह्य दिनान्ते गीतवेणुरनुगेडितकीर्ति: 1221
उत्सवं श्रमरुचापि दृशीनामुन्नयन् रखुररजद्छुरितस्रक ।
दित्सयैति सुहृदाशिष एष देवकीजठरभूरुडुराज: 123 1

With intent to grant the desire of His near and dear ones, here comes Sti Krsna (a
veritable moon) born of Devaki’s womb—who is (so) fond of the people of Vraja as well as
of the cows, for whose sake He held up the mountain (for full seven days)—collecting all the
cattle-wealth at the close ofthe day, (nay,) playing on His flute and bringing delight to the eyes
of all even by the splendour of His fatigued person, His feet being adored on the way by the
oldest of the old (Brahma and others), His glory being sung by His followers and His garland
covered all over with the dust raised by the hoofs of the cattle. (22-23)

मदविघूर्णितलोचन ईषन् मानद: स्वसुहृदां वनमाली |
बदरपाण्डुवदनो मृदुगण्डे मण्डयन् कनककुण्डललक्ष्म्या 1२४॥
यदुपतिर्दिरदराजविहारो चामिनीपतिरिवॆष दिनान्ते ।
मुदितवक्त्र उपयाति दुरन्तें मोचयन् eT दिनतापम् । २५1

With His eyes somewhat rolling through inebriety and His face turnedpaleasa (ripening)
plum, lighting up as He does His soft cheeks with the splendour of His gold ear-rings, Sri
Krsna (the Lord of the Yadus)—who is adorned with a wreath of sylvan flowers, wears a
cheerful countenance and bestows honour on His near and dear ones—is coming over there
even as the moon at the close of day, sporting as the leader of a herd of elephants and
relieving the daylong and endless agony (of separation) of the women of Vraja (who are as
docile and deserving of protection as cows). (24-25)

श्रीगुक उवाच
एवं safe राजन् कृष्णलीला नु गायती: । रेमिरेऽह:सु तच्चित्तास्तन्मनस्का महोदया: 1281

Sri Suka continued : In this way, Oh Pariksit, the women of Vraja, whose intellect and
mind were absorbed in Him and who were therefore full of greai rejoicing, delightfully spent
their time (even) during the day, celebrating in song the pastimes of Sri Krsna. (26)

Thus ends the thirty-fifth discourse entitled "The Gopis' Song in pairs of Verses‘,
in the first half of Book Ten of the great and glorious Bhagavata-Purana,
otherwise known as the Paramahamsa-Samhita.
