720 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 12

RRR RE MD AE WONC RE BEAR ERE RO RCRE BERG ERE ROR MERE RMSE RE ROR EMER ENE RE SER ATOR EAE EM RENT ME BE WHEE AE ENE NOTE SE BE EH

`विप्रशापापदेशेन ae: स्वकुलस्य च। उद्ध्वस्य च संवादो वासुदेवस्य चाद्भुत: ।४१॥

यत्रात्मविद्या ह्यखिला प्रोक्ता धर्मविनिर्णय: । ततो मर्त्यपरित्याग आत्मयोगानुभावत: ॥४२॥

युगलक्षणवृत्तिश्च mel नॄणामुपप्नुव: । चतुर्विधश्च sea उत्पत्तिस्रिविधा तथा ।४३।

देहत्यागश्च राजर्षेर्विष्णुरातस्य धीमत:। ञ्ञाखाप्रणयनमृषेर्मार्कण्डेयस्य सत्कथा I
महापुरुषविन्यास: सूर्यस्य जगदात्मन: ॥४४॥

इति चोक्त द्विजश्रेष्ठा यत्पृष्टोऽहमिहास्मि व:। लीलावतारकर्माणि कीर्तितानीह weer: 1४५1

(In Book Eleven we are told) how the destruction of His own race was brought about (by
the Lord) under the pretext of the Brahmanas' curse, and the wonderful dialogue between
Uddhava and Sri Krsna (Son of Vasudeva), in which has been taught as a matter of fact the
entire (range of) Self-Knowledge as also the final conclusion about the duties of the various
Varnas and Asramas given and later on is told the story of the Lord's concealing His mortal
semblance by dint of His own Yogic power. (41-42) The characteristics of the (four) Yugas
and the conduct (of people) conforming to them, and the perversity of men in the Kali age,
as well as the fourfold Pralaya (Dissolution) and the threefold creation (viz., Sattvika,
Rajasika and Tamasika). (43) How the wise and saintly King Pariksit (the favoured of Lord
Visnu) cast off his body; classification of the Vedas into (so many) Sakhas (branches or
schools); the holy narrative of the sage Markandeya; the disposition of the limbs and
weapons etc., of Lord Visnu (the Supreme Person) and the entourage of the Sun-god, the
Soul of the universe (during the twelve months of a year). (44) In this way has been stated
(by me) in this discourse, O jewel among the Brahmanas ! whatever | was asked by you and
something more (too). (And what is more valuable) the exploits of the (various) Avataras,
which are nothing but Their pastimes, have (also) been narrated in all their bearing. (45)

पतित: स्खलितश्चार्त: क्षुत्वा वा विवज्ञो ब्रुवन्। हरये नम इड्युच्चैर्मुच्यते सर्वपातकात् ।४६॥
प्रविरय चित्तं विधुनोत्यशोषं यथा तमोऽर्कोऽभ्रमिवातिवात: Ive!
मृषा गिरस्ता ह्यसतीरसत्कथा न कथ्यते यद् भगवानधोक्षज: |
`तदेव wi we मङ्गलं wa Wa भगवद्गुणोदयम् ise!
तदेव @amiagest gut यदुत्तमश्लोकयञ्षोऽनुगीयते ve
न तद् वचश्चित्रपदे eet जगत्पवित्रॆ प्रगृणीत कर्हिचित्।
