364 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 58

ROH EAI rit ee HEE TROT E LEASE HEE TE SOE R EN NEE Eee EE HUE CTE ANT

number of chariots, and men-servants hundred times the number of horses. (50-51)
Placing the (married) couple in a chariot, the king of Kosala, whose heart was moistened
through affection, sent them attended with a large army. (52)

श्रुत्वैतद् रुरुधुर्भूपा नयन्तं पथि कन्यकाम्। भग्नवीर्या: सुदुर्मर्षा . यदुभिर्गोवृषे: ga ।५३॥
qe: शरव्रातान् बन्धुप्रियकृदर्जुन: । गाण्डीवी कालयामास सिंह: क्षुद्रमृगानिव ies
पारिर्हमुपागृह्य द्वारकामेत्य सत्यया।रेमे यदूनामृषभो भगवान् देवकीसुत: 1441

Hearing of this, the highly envious kings, even though they had their spirit broken by the
Yadus (the followers of Sri Krsna) and earlier by the lusty bulls, intercepted Sri Krsna, while
He was taking the bride (with Him), on the road. (53) Arjuna, the wielder ot the Gandiva bow,
who was (accompanying the Lord and was) keen to oblige his friend and cousin, repulsed
them even as they came discharging volleys of arrows (at the Lord), (just) as a lion would
drive away small beasts (before it). (54) Reaching Dwaraka with the dowry, Lord Sri Krsna
(Son of Devaki), the foremost of the Yadus, delightfully spent His time with Satya. (55)

gaat: सुतां भद्रामुपयेमे पितृघ्वसु: | कॆकेयीं भ्रातृभिर्दत्तां कृष्ण: सन्तर्दनादिभि: । ५६1
सुतां च मद्राधिपतेर्लक्ष्मणां लक्षणैर्युताम्। स्वयंवरे waite: स सुपर्ण: सुधामिव । ५७1
अन्याश्चैवंविधा wat: कृष्णस्यासन् dees: । भौमं हत्वा ततन्निरोधादाहताश्चारुदर्शना: । ५८

Sri Krsna (next) married Bhadra, a princess of Kekaya, daughter of His father's sister,
Srutakirti* offered (to Him) by her brothers, the foremost of whom was Santardana. (56) He
(further) carried away single-handed, in an assemblage called for self-election of a husband,
Laksmana, daughter of the (then) ruler of the Madra territory, endowed with auspicious
marks, (even) as Garuda (the king of birds) snatched away (the jar of) nectar (from Indra's
paradise). (57) There were other such consorts of Sri Krsna, (all) good-looking and
numbering thousands (sixteen thousand) rescued from the captivity of Bhaumasurat(the
son of Mother Earth) after killing him. (58)

Thus ends the fifty-eighth discourse entitled "Si Krsna’s marriage with (the rest of) His
eight principal spouses’, in the latter half of Book Ten of the great and glorious
Bhagavata-Purdna, otherwise known as the Paramahamsa-Samhita.

tint att.
ODODE LE LOIS

* Vide IX xxiv. 30

{The demon was bom of Mother Earth through her touch with the Lord manifested as the divine Boar at the time of His
lifting her up from the depths of the ocean (vide III. xiii. 31). Mother Earth herself acknowledges this in the Visnu-Purana when
she says:—

यदाहमुद्घृता नाथ त्वया सूकरमूतिंना । तत्स्पर्शसम्भव: पुत्रस्तदायं मध्यजायत॥
