Dis. 2] SRIMAD BHAGAVATA-MAHATMYA 13

BRR Be BB ह क Batt Be Bi ङी ORI वी वी RE SRT नो Hee Br Re BT Se Gt RH Rr air Be By BB BRE RCT He Be Be AER Re Re HAA He Be BEB PERL RT RR BR HH PERT
SSS re OS PE BTA व वा OT HT

FART HY:
मा fant कुरु देवर्षे हर्षं fae समावह । उपाय: सुखसाध्योऽन्र ada ud wa हि 143
ae ane धन्योऽसि विरक्तानां हिरोमणि: । सदा श्रीकृष्णदासानामग्रणीर्योगभास्कर: । ५४॥
त्वयि fat न मन्तव्यं भक्त्यर्थमनुवर्तिनि । घटते कृष्णदासस्य भक्ते: संस्थापना सदा । ५५॥
ऋषिभिर्बहवो लोके पन्थान: प्रकटीकृता: । श्रमसाध्याश्च ते सर्वे प्राय: स्वर्गफलप्रदा: । ५६॥
वैकुण्ठसाधक: पन्था: स तु गोप्यो हि वर्तते । तस्योपदेष्टा पुरुष: प्रायो भाग्येन लभ्यते । ५७॥
सत्कर्म aa निर्दिष्टं व्योमवाचा तु यत्पुरा । तदुच्यते शृणुष्वाद्य स्थिरचित्त: प्रसन्नधी: । ५८॥

The Kumaras said : Do not worry, 0 celestial sage ! Make your mind happy. There is
already in actual existence an easy way to do this. (53) Oh, blessed you are, O Narada, who
are the crest-jewel of those who have turned away from the pleasures of sense. You have
always been the guide of the devotees of Sri Krsna and the illuminator of Bhaktiyoga. (54)
Itshould be regarded as no matter of wonder for you, who are making (such) incessant efforts
in the cause of Devotion. It is (but) proper on the part of a servant of Sri Krsna to make
constant endeavour to establish Bhakti on a sound footing.(55) Many a course of discipline
has been brought to light by Rsis in this world, but they all involve exertion and mostly confer
the fruit of Swarga (heavenly bliss). (56) As for the path leading to Vaikuntha (the everlasting
and all-blissful realm of Lord Visnu), it yet remains hidden. It is generally through good luck
(alone) that a person promulgating that course of discipline is found. (57) The righteous
practice which was hinted at to you the other day by a voice from the heaven is, however,
described today. (Please) listen with a composed and cheerful mind. (58)

द्रव्ययज्ञास्तपोयज्ञा योगयज्ञास्तथापरे | स्वाध्यायज्ञानयज्ञाश्च ते तु कर्मविसूचका: ।५९॥
सत्कर्मसूचको नूनं ज्ञानयज्ञ: स्मृतो qa: । श्रीमद्भागवतालाप: स तु गीत: शुकादिभि: । ६०॥
भक्तिज्ञानविरागाणां तद्घोषेण ae महत्। व्रजिष्यति द्वयो: कष्टं सुखं भक्तेर्भविष्यति ।६१॥
wea fe गमिष्यन्ति श्रीमद्भागवतध्वने: | कलेर्दोषा इमे सर्वे सिंहशब्दाद् वृका इव 1821
ज्ञानवैराग्यसंयुक्ता भक्ति:३ प्रेमरसावहा । प्रतिगेहं प्रतिजनं aa: क्रीडां करिष्यति ।६३॥

Sacrificial performances conducted by means of material substances (consigned to the
sacred fire), those consisting austerities, those in the form of concentration of the mind and
others consisting of knowledge acquired through a study of the Vedas, they are (all) symbolic
of action leading to heaven alone. (59) Indeed Jfiana-Yajfia (sacrifice in the form of
Knowledge) has been recognized by the wise as a symbol of righteous action (action leading
to Liberation). That JfAana-Yajia is the reading of Srimad Bhagavata, and that has been
extolled by Suka and others. (60) By its (very) chanting great strength will be derived by
Bhakti, Jnana and Vairagya. The suffering of Jfiana and Vairagya will disappear and
happiness will be regained by Bhakti. (61) All these evils of Kali will surely disappear at the
(very) chanting of Srimad Bhagavata, even as wolves take to flight at the (very) roar of a
lion.(62) Then Bhakti, that yields the milk of love, accompanied by JAana and Vairagya, will
dance in every heart and in every home. (63)

IRQ उवाच

वेदवेदान्तघोषैश्च tins: प्रबोधितम्।भक्तिज्ञानविरागाणां नोदतिष्ठत्निकं यदा । ६४॥
