44 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA-MAHATMYA [ Dis. 6

BRE का चरा ती MRR क कौ CATS Be तौ ती HIE BE He He PONG Hi Be HWE Re Be Ee HO BR A HEHE Re He क्र RS RAT ROG RH BEB ह BE HB RR व Re AA Ra

spat सर्वभूतानां सप्ताहं नियतात्मनाम्।यथाविधि ad देवं qa: पुरुषोत्तमम् ।७१।
तदन्ते ज्ञानवैराग्यभक्तीनां पुष्टता परा।तारुण्यं परमं चाभूत्सर्वभूतमनोहरम्।७२।
नारदश्च कृतार्थोऽभूत्सिद्धे स्वीये मनोरथे। पुलकीकृतसर्वाङ्ग: परमानन्दसम्भृत: ।७३।
एवं कथां समाकर्ण्य नारदो भगवत्पिय: i प्रेमगद्गदया वाचा तानुवाच कृताञ्जलि: ।७४॥

उप्रांव॥82ऽप्राटवं : Having spoken thus the aforesaid exalted souls (Sanaka and his three
brothers ) expounded with due ceremony in the presence of all living beings, who listened
with a restrained mind, for seven days the sacred story of Srimad Bhagavata, which absolves
one ofall sins and bestows (on the hearer both) enjoyment and Liberation. Then they extolled
Lord Visnu (the Supreme Person). (70-71) At the end of it Jhana, Vairagya and Bhakti feit
highly invigorated and attained exuberant youth, which ravished the mind ofall living beings. (72)
On his ambition having been realized Narada too felt (much) gratified. The hair stood on their
end all over his body andhe was overwhelmed with supreme joy. (73) Having thus heard the
exposition (of Srimad Bhagavata) Narada, the beloved of the Lord, spoke to them with joined
palms (as follows) in a voice choked with emotion: (74)

ARG उवाच
धन्योऽस्म्यनुगृहीतोऽस्मि wate: करुणापरै: । अद्य मे भगवाँल्लब्ध: सर्वपापहरो eft: 194!
श्रवणं सर्वधर्मेभ्यो at मन्ये तपोधना: | वैकुण्ठस्थो यत: कृष्ण: श्रवणाद्यस्य लभ्यते 196 |
Narada submitted : Blessed am lin that | have been favoured by you, compassion being
foremost in your heart . This day has been attained by me Lord Sri Hari, Who takes away all
sins. (75) | account the hearing of Srimad Bhagavata as the best of all righteous courses, O
sages rich in askesis | For through the hearing of it is attained Sri Krsna who dwells in
Vaikuntha. (76)
Yd sary
एवं ब्रुवति a wa नारदे वैष्णवोत्तमे। परिभ्रमन् समायात: yal योगेश्वरस्तदा ioe!
तत्राययौ षोडशवार्षिकस्तदा व्यासात्मजो ज्ञानमहाब्धिचन्द्रमा: |
कथावसाने निजलाभपूर्ण: प्रेम्णा पठन् wad हानै: BA: ।७८॥
gy सदस्या: परमोरुतेजसं सद्य: समुत्थाय ददुर्महासनम्।
प्रीत्या सुरर्षिस्तमपूजयत्सुखें स्थितोऽवदत्संश्रृणुतामलां गिरम् । 1
Stta continued : While Narada, the foremost of the votaries of Lord Visnu, was
speaking in this strain, there actually came wandering about at the moment Sri Suka, a
master of Yoga.(77) Presently there appeared on the scene at the end of the exposition,
slowly and fondly reciting Srimad Bhagavata, Sri Suka (the son of Vedavyasa), a
(veritable) moon that occasions a rise in the ocean of spiritual wisdom, who is sated with
Self-Realization and (ever) looks like a youth of sixteen summers. (78) Those present in
the assembly rose at once with reverence to behold Sri Suka (who was possessed of very

great splendour), and offered him an exalted seat. Narada (the celestial sage) worshipped
him with love and Sri Suka, when comfortably seated, spoke as follows: (Please) listen to

his faultless speech.(79)
AYR उवाच

नि तेर्गलितं । न्
fart भागवतं रसमालयं deel रसिका भुवि भावुका: idol
