80 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA Dis. 21

Rone nr ei rion ie Poin einen er EER ee REE EAE HAE EEE AE AHH RERE RAE AAAR AREA

इति प्रभाष्य पानीयं म्रियमाण: पिपासया । पुल्कसायाददाद्धीरो निसर्गकरुणो नृप: ।१४॥
तस्य त्रिभुवनाधीशा: फलदा: `फलमिच्छताम्। आत्मानं दर्शयाञ्चक्रुर्माया विष्णुविनिर्मिता: ius
स वै तेभ्यो नमस्कृत्य Prag विगतस्पृह: । वासुदेवे भगवति भक्त्या चक्रे मन: परम् । १६॥
ईश्चरालम्बनं चित्तं कुर्वतोऽनन्यराधस: । माया गुणमयी राजन् स्वप्नवत् प्रत्यलीयत Ie
तत्म्रसङ्गानुभावेन रन्तिदेवानुवर्तिन: । अभवन् योगिन: सर्वे नारायणपरायणा: । १८॥

In the meantime, O ruler of the earth, while he was going to eat, having divided the
remaining fare among themselves, yet another stranger came. Remembering Sri Hari, he
gave away to the newcomer, who wasa Sidra, a share of the food (already) divided (among
themselves). (7) When the Sddra had left, there came to him another stranger surrounded
(followed) by dogs. He said, “O king, let food be given to me, seized (as | am) with hunger
alongwith my followers (the dogs)." (8) Receiving the newcomer kindly, the king gave away
with great reverence whatever was left to the dogs as well as to their master and bowed to
them (asso many manifestatations of the Lord). (9) There was but some water left, which
was barely sufficient to slake the thirst of (only) one individual. When he was about to drink
it, there unexpectedly came a Candala (one belonging to the lowest rank in Hindu society)
saying, "(Kindly) give the water to me, an unlucky fellow." (10) Hearing that pitiful request,
uttered with great effort (due to exhaustion), the king, who was sore stricken with pity, spoke
the following nectar-like words:—(11) "I do not seek from the Lord the highest position
attended with the eightfold Yogic power (Anima and so on) or even final beatitude (cessation
of rebirth). Dwelling in their heart (as the sufferer) ! would (rather) undergo the suffering of
all embodied souls, so that (through such vicarious suffering of mine) they may be relieved
of misery. (12) My exhaustion due to hunger and thirst, the weariness of my limbs, low spirits,
langour, grief, despondency and infatuation have all disappeared on account of my giving
away the water, which meant life to this miserable fellow, anxious to survive." (13) Having
expressed such noble sentiments, the king, who was full of fortitude and merciful by
nature, gave the water to the Candala, though himself dying of thirst. (14) The Lords of the
three spheres (Brahma, Visnu and Siva), who bestow rewards on those who seek them,
and who appeared (a short while ago) in (three) illusory forms (viz., those of a Brahmana,
Stdra and a Candala) created by Lord Visnu (in order to test the fortitude of Rantideva),
(now) revealed themselves (in their own form) in his (Rantideva's) presence (15) Greeting
them (all), Rantideva, who was (entirely) free from attachment and whose craving had
altogether ceased, simply fixed his mind on Lord Vasudeva with (great) devotion (and did
not ask anything of them). (16) Maya (the Lord's deluding potency)—consisting of the three
Gunas (Sativa, Rajas and Tamas)—dissolved like a dream into (its own source, viz.,) the
Spirit, O king, in the case of Rantideva, who concentrated his mind on God and sought
no other boon from Him (than Devotion to His feet). (17) By virtue of their close association
with him, all that followed in the footsteps of Rantideva became Yogis exclusively devoted
to Lord Narayana. (18)

गर्गाच्छिनिस्ततो गार्ग्य: क्षत्राद् ब्रह्म ह्यवर्तत । दुरितक्षयो महावीर्यात् तस्य त्रय्यारुणि: कवि: 1१९॥
पुष्करारुणिरित्यत्र ये ब्राह्मणगति गता: । बृहत्क्षत्रस्य पुत्रोऽभूद्धस्ती यद्धस्तिनापुरम् rol
arate: द्विमीडश्च पुरुमीढ्श्च हस्तिन: | अजमीढस्य dean: स्यु: प्रियमेधादयो द्विजा: ।२१॥
अजमीढाद बृहदिषुस्तस्य पुत्रो बृहद्धनु: । बृहत्कावस्ततस्तस्य पुत्र आसीज्यद्रथ: 1221
तत्सुतो विशदस्तस्य सेनजित् समजायत। रुचिराश्वो दृढहनु: कार्यो वत्सश्च तत्सुता: 1231
रुचिराश्वसुत पार: पृथुसेनस्तदात्मज: । षारस्य तनयो नीपस्तस्य पुत्रशतं त्वभूत् ।२४॥
