Dis. 4 ] BOOK TWELVE 681

HARARE REA REA BORO व वित् ज AMMA AA BARE ASB AAAS IKI A SABA AA AAA AAA AAA AH ABIL EAE HEA HEH.

Three). Now hear also the extent of a Kalpa (one round of creation) and Laya (the period of
final dissolution), O king ! (1) One thousand revolutions of the four Yugas (Satya, Treta,
Dwapara and Kali) are spoken of as a day of Brahma. This constitutes a Kalpa, in the course
of which fourteen Manus (successively) hold sway, O king | (2) At the end of a Kalpa an
equally long period of Pralaya (Dissolution) follows; it is spoken of as one night of Brahma,
for during that period these three worlds (heaven, earth and the intermediate region) remain
dissolved. (3) This is called Naimittika (occasional!) Pralaya (because it is occasioned by
Brahma’s going to bed and is different from the Mahapralaya or Fina! Dissolution when
Brahma's career comes to a close). During this Pralaya Lord Narayana (the Maker of the
universe) withdraws the whole universe into Himself and remains asleep on His couch of
Ananta (the serpent-god) and Brahma (the self-born) follows suit. (4) When the fifetime of
Brahma, the greatest of all (the Jivas), consisting of two Parardhas, has expired, all the seven
causal principles (viz., Mahat-tattva or the principle of cosmic intelligence, Ahankara or the
cosmic Ego and the five Tanmatras or subtle elements) actually get dissolved (in Prakrti or
Primordial Matter). (5) This constitutes, O king, the Prakrtika Pralaya, as in this, the occasion
for final dissolution having been reached, the aggregate of (all) the (twenty-four) fundamental
principles in the form of the cosmic egg gets (tinally) dissolved. (6) For one hundred years,
Oking, the god of rain does not send down any shower on earth. Then, tormented by hunger,
the earth being divested of food—grains, people actually begin to eat one another and,
persecuted by time, gradually perish. Rendered much brighter by the ‘period of final
dissolution, the sun sucks up by its fearful rays all the water in the seas, on the earth and in
the human bodies, and does not release it.Sprung from the mouth of Lord Sankargana (the
serpent-god) and rising in flames by the force of the wind, the fire characteristic of the period
of dissolution then burns the subterranean regions, already desolate (all their inhabitants
having been burnt long before due to their moisture having been sucked up by the rays of
the sun).Being burnt above and below as well as on all sides by the rays of the sun and the
flames of fire, the cosmic egg now looks like a burnt ball of cowdung. Then a strong and
violent wind characteristic of the period of final dissolution blows for (a fittle) more than a
hundred years, so that the sky gets enveloped in dust and assumes a smoky appearance.
Next, O dear one, numerous hosts of clouds of various colours pour down showers for a
hundred years roaring with violent peals of thunder. Then the universe within the cosmic egg
is swept by a single sheet of water. (7—13)

तदा भूमेर्गन्थगुणे ग्रसन्त्याप उदघ्लुवे। ग्रस्तगन्धा तु पृथिवी प्रलयत्वाय कल्पते eel
amt रसमथो तेजस्ता लीयन्तेऽथ नीरसा: । ग्रसते तेजसो wa वायुस्तद्रहितं तदा ।१५॥
लीयते चानिले तेजो वायो: खं ग्रसते गुणम्। स वै fags खं राजंस्ततश्च नभसो गुणम् । १६|
we प्रसति भूतादिर्नभस्तमनुलीयते | तैजसश्चेन्दियाण्यङ्ग देवान् वैकारिको गुणै: Ie
भहान् असत्यहङ्कारं गुणा: सत्त्वादयश्च तम्।ग्रसतेऽव्याकृतं WH गुणान् कालेन चोदितम् । १८
न तस्य कालावयवै: परिणामाद्यो गुणा:। अनाद्यनन्तमव्यक्तं fet कारणमव्ययम् ।१९।
न यत्र वाचो न मनो न सत्त्वं तमो रजो वा महदादयोऽमी ।
न प्राणबुद्धीन्द्रिदेवता वा न सन्निवेल: खलु लोककल्प: ।२०॥
न स्वप्नजाग्रन्न च तत् सुषुप्ते न खं जलें भूरनिलोऽग्निरर्क: ।
संसुप्तवच्छून्यवदप्रतर्क्य तन्मूलभूतं पद्मामनन्ति । २१1
लय: प्राकृतिको ह्येष पुरुषाव्यक्तयोर्यदा । ana: सम्प्रलीयन्ते faa: कालविद्रुता: 1221

Everything being submerged in water, the latter absorbs the (essential) property of the
