328 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 8
SE NER PER SETI SYRUITRO RIOR BOR OR FOE SCE REO EOE Bo ORT eo er Re et ER Re ain tira
FH EET ATHEROS HH HT

With an ever cheerful face and eyes, He is always disposed to shower His grace (on His
devotees). He has a shapely nose, charming brows and lovely cheeks and is the most
enchanting of all the gods. (45) (Eternally) youthful and possessed of charming limbs, He
has rosy lips and reddish eyes andis the (sole) resort of his suppliants. Nay, Heis supremely
delightful, fit to protect all and an ocean of tenderness. (46) Bearing (on His breast) the mark
of Srivatsa (a golden curl of hair) and swarthy as a cloud, He has all the features of an
extraordinary personage and wears a garland of sylvan flowers (about His neck). And His
four arms are distinguished by aconch, a discus, a mace andalotus. (47) He wears adiadem
anda pair of ear-rings andis adorned with armlets and bracelets; His neckaddstothe beauty
of the Kaustubha gem and He has a piece of yellow silk wrapped about His loins. (48)
Encircled (at the waist) by a girdle of many strings, He has a shining pair of gold anklets, is
most charming to look at wears a serene aspect and brings delight to the mind and eyes. (49)
He stands in the mental horizon of those who worship Him, His feet—resplendent with a row
of gems in the form of nails—installed in the pericarp of their lotus-like heart. (50) With a
steadied and concentrated mind he should visualize the Lord, the foremost of all bestowers
of boons, as smiling and casting a loving glance at the devotee. (51) The mind of a man who
thus contemplates on the Lord's most blessed form is soon immersed in supreme bliss and
never gives up the meditation. (52) .

wag परमो गुह्य: श्रूयतां a नृपात्मज । यं सप्तरात्रं प्रपठन् पुमान् पश्यति खेचरान् 1431
`ॐ नमो भगवते वासुदेवाय` |

मन्त्रेणानेन देवस्य gale द्रव्यमयीं gu: । सपर्यां विविधैर्द्रव्यैर्देशकालविभागवित् । ५४॥

सलिलै:र शुचिभिर्माल्यैर्वन्यैर्मूलफलादिभि : । शस्ताङ्कुरांशुकैश्चार्चेत्तुलस्या प्रियया प्रभुम् । ५५॥:

लब्ध्वा द्रव्यमयीमर्चां क्षित्यम्ब्वादिषु वार्चयेत्। आभृतात्मा मुनि: शान्तो यतवाङ्मितवन्यभुकृ । ५६।

स्वेच्छावतारचस्तिरचिन्त्यनिजमायया | करिष्यत्युत्तमर्लोकस्तद्ध्यायेदधृदयङ्गमम् ।५७],`

परिचर्या भगवतो यावत्य: पूर्वसेविता: । ता मन्त्रहृदयेनैव प्रयुञ्ज्यान्मन्त्रमूर्तये 1401

Also hear from me, O prince, the most secret formula (which should be muttered along
with the meditation and) by repeating which for seven days and nights a man is able to
behold the Siddhas moving in the air. (53) The Mantrais: ` ॐनमो भगवत arqgara’’ (Obeisance
to Lord Vasudeva). While repeating this sacred formula, a wise man should perform the
Lord's worship with the help of material substances, using various articles with due regard
to the differences of place and time. (54) He should worship the Lord with undefiled water,
(sylvan) flowers, wild roots and fruits etc., sprouts of approved plants, barks of trees and with
(the leaves of) the Tulasi (the basil plant), so beloved( of the Lord). (55) Having secured an-
image of stone or any other substance, he should worship the Lord through the same or
(else) through the medium of earth, water and so on, and with his mind and speech duly
controlled, he should subsist on a limited quantity of wild fruits etc., and remain calm and
collected and absorbed in contemplation. (56) He should also, mentally survey the soul-
Stirring deeds the glorious Lord will perform in the course of the manifestations He assumes
according to His pleasure by His own incomprehensible Maya (creative power). (57) One
should offer to the Lord, who stands revealed in the form of a Mantra, all the articles of
worship prescribed for Him by the ancients, while repeating this very Mantra (consisting of
twelve letters). (58)

एवं कायेन मनसा aa च मनोगतम्। परिचर्यमाणो भगवान् भक्तिमत्परिचर्यया ue!
पुंसाममायिनां सम्यग्भजतां भाववर्धन:। श्रेयो दिशत्यभिमतं यद्धर्मादिषु देहिनाम् ।६०॥
विरक्तश्चेन्द्ररतौ भक्तियोगेन भूयसा। तं निरन्तरभावेन भजेताद्धा विमुक्तये ee
Being thus waited upon with body, mind and speech through loving worship according

to one’s choice, the Lord heightens the devotion of men who adore Him in the right way and
in a guileless spirit, and bestows on them the boon of their liking from among Dharma
