116 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ 08. 7 -

We We we He He HEMT sewerage Se ROA RHetE TER POR EIA TEA RE ELLE CA TOLER S TE LEED

their cattle will, atthe (tender) age of seven, graciously and sportfully hold up on His untiring
hand Mount Govardhana even as a tall mushroom for seven days (consecutively). (32)
While sporting in the groves (of Vrndavana) ona night bright with the rays of the full moon,
He will, as a prelude to His Rasa dance, pour out (from His flute) a sweet and prolonged
melody, which will kindle the flame of love in the heart of the young cowherdesses (and
draw them to the lovely spot). (In the course of the Rasa dance that follows) an attendant
of Kubera (Sankhaciida by name) will carry them off and the Lord (while rescuing them)
will sever his head* (33) Nay, (demons like) Pralamba, Dhenuka (who lived in the form of
a donkey), Vaka, Kesi and Arista, champion wrestlers (such as Cantra), the elephant
(Kuvalayapida), Karnsa, the Yavana hero (Kalayavana), the demon Naraka (born of Earth),
Paundraka (who had assumed the false appearance of Sri Krsna and posed as the real Sri
Krsna) and so on; evenso other champions like Salva, Dwivida (the monkey chief), Balwala,
Dantavaktra, the seven bulls (of king Nagnajit), the demon Sambara, king Vidtratha
(Dantavaktra's brother) and Rukmi (brother of Rukmini); the kings of the Kambojas, the
Matsyas, the Kurus, the Kekayas, the Srijayas, and other bragging warriors who will appear
on the field of battle, armed with a bow, will be slain by Sri Hari Himself under the assumed
names of Balarama, Arjuna, Bhima and so on, and attain to His divine Abode. (34-35)

कालेन मीलितधियामवमृर्य नॄणां स्तोकायुषां स्वनिगमो aa दूरपार: |

आविर्हितस्त्वनुयुगं स fe सत्यवत्यां वेदद्रुमं विटपशो विभजिष्यति स्म । ३६।

By flux of time the intellectual calibre of men gets dwarfed and their life too becomes
short. When, therefore, the Lord realizes that the import of the entire Veda—which
embodies His teachings—can no longer be grasped by them, He manifests Himself in
every cycle through the womb of Satyavati (as Vedavyasa) and splits up the tree of Veda
into many branches. (36)

SIEM Fat afafeitentecdiet ae fare ag ser sitaereiA, 139
aeteagtt gat a a: se: |: areata fess Ie Fea: |
are aur aafetar wa Firat a ae are Alaeafe HenstraAA TTI 136 |

When the demons (the enemies of the gods), though devoted to the path of the Vedas,
will destroy the people with their (aerial) citadels of invisible velocity, built by Maya (their
architect), the Lord will assume a garb that will delude their mind and prove most alluring to
them, and teach them many a heresy. (37) At the close of the Kali age, when there will be
no discourses on Sti Hari even in the residences of pious souls, when the twice-born (the
Brahmanas, the Ksatriyas and the Vaigyas) will turn heretics and the Sddras will become
the rulers of men, nay, when the uttering of "Swaha", “Swadha” and "Vasat"t will be heard
no more (when there will be no talk of sacrifices to gods of offering oblations to the manes),
the Lord will appear as Kalki (the Punisher of Kali). (38)

ai ads za aoe: VA a erase: |
अन्ते त्वधर्महरमन्युवशासुराद्या मायाविभूतय इमा: पुरुशक्तिभाज: । ३९1
क्थिग्नेर्तुंवीर्यगणनांकतमोऽर्हतीहय:पार्थिबान्यपिकविर्बिपमेज्जांसि।

* Although the incident connected with Sankhaciida did not occur the very night the famous Rasa dance took place,
the two events have been promiscuously joined together apparently because Brahma is making only a passing reference
to the pastimes of the Lord and is not so attentive to details. ।

+The words ‘Swaha’' and ‘Vasat' are uttered when an offering is made to the gods: while every oblation that is offered to
the Pitrs is accompanied with the utterance of the word 'Swadha’.
