Dis. 16] BOOK THREE . 209

Sri HR ie HHO THN OEE ECR HEH EY TE AH HELE EH NW HH STH RH BER BORER He BR BE NT

they could not understand what He intended doing. (14) The Brahmanas were all the same
extremely delighted to behold Him and experienced a thrill all over their body. They then
spoke (as follows) to the Lord, who had revealed the mighty glory of His supreme divinity
through His Yogamaya (wonderful divine potency). (15)
IT HY:
न aa भगवन् विद्मस्तव देव चिकीर्षितम्। कृतो मेऽनुग्रहश्चेति यदध्यक्ष: प्रभाषसे ।१६॥
ब्रह्मण्यस्य -परं दैवं ब्राह्मणा: किल a प्रभो । विप्राणां देवदेवानां भगवानात्मदैवतम् ee!
त्वत्तत सनातनो धर्मो waa तनुभिस्तव । धर्मस्य cent गुह्यो निर्विकारो भवान्मत: 1१८
तरन्ति ह्यञ्जसा ya fem यदनुग्रहात्। योगिन: स vam किंस्विदनुगृह्येत aa: । १९।
यं वै वबिभूतिरुपयात्यनुवेलमन्यैरर्धार्थिभि: «aie धृतपादरेणु: |
धन्यार्पिताङ्ध्रितुलसीनवदामधाम्नो लोकं मधुव्रतपतेरिव कामयाना ।२०॥
यस्तां विविक्तचरितैरनुवर्तमानां नात्याद्रियत्परमभागवतप्रसङ्ग: |
स त्वं द्विजानुपथपुण्यरज: पुनीत: श्रीवत्सलक्ष्म किमगा भगभाजनस्त्वम् 128 |
धर्मस्य a भगवतस्तियुग त्रिभि: स्वै: पद्भिश्चराचरमिदं द्विजदेवतार्थम् ।
wi भृतं तदभिघाति रजस्तमश्च सत्त्वेन नो वरदया तनुवा निरस्य । २२।
न त्वं द्विजोत्तमकुलं यदिहात्मगोपं am ge: स्वर्हणेन ससूनृतेन ।
aga नङ्क्ष्यति शिवस्तव देव पन्था लोकोऽग्रहीष्यदृषभस्य fe तत्प्रमाणम् 123 |
तत्तेऽनभीष्टमिव सत्त्वनिधैर्विधित्सो: at जनाय निजहाक्तिभिरुद्धृतारे: |
नैतावता त्र्यधिपतेर्वत विश्वभर्तुस्तेज: et त्ववनतस्य a a विनोद: । २४॥
यं वानयोर्दममधीश war विधत्ते वृत्तिं a वा तदनुमन्महि निर्व्यलीकम् |
अस्मासु वा य उचितो ध्रियतां स दण्डो येऽनागसौ वयमयुङ्क्ष्महि किल्बिषेण ।२५॥

The sages said: O self-effulgent Lord, we are unable to know what You contemplate doing;
for, even though the Ruler of all, You speak of favour done to You (by us)! (16) A friend and well-
wisher of the Brahmanas as You are, itis but natural for You to believe that the Brahmana is Your
supreme deity. The fact, however, is that the Lord (Yourself) is the Self and the Deity of not only
the Brahmanas but even of the gods of gods (Brahma, Siva andothers). (17) The Eternal Religion
(Sanatana Dharma) has proceeded from You and the same is protected (from time to time) by
Your manifestations (Avataras). Nay, You alone are recognized (by the Sastras) as the
immutable goal as wellas the secret of Dharma (Religion). (18) By Your grace the Yogis (mystics)
treading the path of Nivrtti (indifference to the world) are easily able to cross the ocean of birth
and death. How, then, can You be favouredby others? (19) Laksmi (the goddess of fortune)—the
dust of whose feet is borne by others, viz., seekers of wealth, on their head—waits upon You at
the appointed hours, as though anxious to secure a place in the abode (in the shape of Your loius-
feet) of the king of bees, who hovers on the fresh wreath of Tulasi leaves offered at Your feet by
some blessed devotee. (20) Excessively fond as You are of Your greatest devotees, You have
no great regard for Laksmi, even though She offers You Her faultless services. Adored as You
are by anumber of adorable virtues, how can the dust of the roads trodden and hallowed by the
feet of the Brahmanas or the mark of Srivatsa (a curl of hair) on Your breast lend sanctity to You
or how could You accept them as ornaments? (21) O Lord, in the form of Dharma (virtue) You
are manifest in all the three ages (viz., Satya, Treta and Dwapara, the fourth, i.e., Kali being

notorious for its marked absence of Dharma) andas such You protect with Your three feet (viz.,
purity of mind and body, austere penance and compassion, which severally characterize the
