Dis. 63 ] BOOK TEN 389

See HA Ire AREER NESE eae ee ee LATE CCE E NATE LN AREER EEE आण

श्रीरुद्र उवाच
त्वंहिब्रह्मपरंज्योक्तिर्पूढंब्रह्मणिवाङ्ग्रये।यंपरैयन्त्यमलात्मानआकाशमिवकेन्रलम्।इभ्रा
नाभिर्नभोऽग्निर्मुखमम्बु रेतो ct: aida श्रुतिरङ्भ्रिरुर्वी ।
aa owt यस्य ge आत्मा अहं at जठरं भुजेन्द्र: ।३५॥
रोमाणि यस्यौषधयोऽम्बुवाहा: केशा fait धिषणा विसर्ग: ।
_प्रजापतिर्हृदयं ge धर्म: स चै war पुरुषो लोककल्प: 134)
तवावतारोऽयमकुण्ठधामन् धर्मस्य गुप्यै जगतो भवाय ।
aq च wa भवतानुभाविता विभावयामो भुवनानि सप्त 1३७1
प्रतीयसेऽथापि यथाविकारं स्वमायवा सर्वगुणप्रसिद्ध्यै ।३८॥
aia सूर्य: पिहितर्छायया स्वया छायां च रूपाणि च सञ्जकास्ति |
एवं गुणेनापिहितो गुणांस्त्वमात्मप्रदीपो गुणिनश्च IRS

Sri Rudra prayed : Indeed You are the supreme effulgence lying hidden in the Veda
(which is no other than the Supreme revealed as the Word of God) and known as Brahma
(the Infinite), that men of purified intellect realize as all-pervading (like the sky) and
absolute.(34) The firmamentis Yournavel; fire, Your mouth; water, Your generative fluid; the
celestial region, Your head; the quarters, Your ears; the earth, Your feet; the moon, Your
mind; the sun, Your eye; myself, Your ego; the ocean, Your belly; and Indra (and the other
guardians of the sphere), Your arms. (35) Herbs and plants are the hairon Your body; clouds
are Your (flowing) locks and Brahma (the creator) is Your intellect, Prajapati (the lord of
creation) is Your organ of generation and Dharma (the god of virtue) is Your heart. Thus You
are the Supreme Person with whom all the spheres are connected (as so many limbs). (36)
O Lord of undiminished glory, You have taken this form for the vindication of virtue and
advancement of the world. Endowed with power derived from You, we rule the seven regions
(of the universe). (37) You are the one secondless, most ancient Person beyond the three
states (brought about by Maya viz., the waking, dreamanddreamless states), self-luminous,
the Cause and Ruler (of all), Himself uncaused; yet, in order to reveal the diversities of the
three Gunas, You appear through Your own Maya indivergent forms (such as those of gods,
men, birds, beasts and various other beings). (38) Justas the sun gets concealed (in others’
eyes) by its own shadow (the clouds) and reveals the clouds as well as all other forms, even
so, O Perfect One, self-luminous Yourself, You get as if covered by the Ego (which has its
origin in You) and yet make the Gunas and all beings, who are qualified by the Gunas, shine
(in Your light). (39)

यन्मायामोहितधिय: पुत्रदारगृहादिषु । उन्मजजन्ति निमजन्ति प्रसक्ता वृजिनार्णवे 1४०1
देवदत्तमिमं लब्ध्वा नृलोकमजितेन्द्रिय: | यो नाद्रियेत त्वत्पादौ स शोच्यो ह्यात्मवञ्चक: 1४१1
चस्त्वां विसृजते मर्त्य आत्मानं प्रियमीश्वरम्। विपर्ययेद्दियार्थार्थं विषमत्त्यमृतं त्यजन् ४२1
अहं ब्रह्माथ विबुधा मुनयश्चामलाशया: । सर्वात्मना प्रपन्नास्त्वामात्मानं प्रेष्ठमीश्वरम् ।४३॥
तँ त्वा weed समं sar सुहृदात्मदैवम्।
aes oO जगदात्मकेते भवापवर्गाय भजाम देवम् ISI
at owe दयितोऽनुवर्ती wed दत्तममुष्य देव ।
सम्पाद्यतां तद् भवत: wat यथा हि & दैत्यपतौ प्रसाद: isu)
