Dis. 57 ] BOOK TEN 355

JANSSON ner cen rn nt STE EEE ER ee EEE Te eee ew Pe Bea ae

with an amiable disposition, comely appearance, magnanimity and other (similar) virtues. (44)
The Lord (however) said (as follows), O protector of men, "We would not accept the gem;
let it remain with you, a devotee of the sun-god (who conferred it on you). We shall only enjoy
its fruit (in the shape of the abundant gold it yields everyday.” (45) ॥

Thus ends the fifty-sixth discourse, forming part of the story of Syamantaka, in the
latter half of Book Ten of the great and glorious Bhagavata-Purana,
otherwise known as the Paramahamsa-Samhiia.

Stine inet:
PIES ces

AA सप्तपञ्चाहात्तमोऽध्याय:

Discourse LVII

Syamantaka stolen; Satadhanva killed and Akrira recalled to Dwaraka
aye उवाच
विज्ञातार्थोऽपि गोविन्दो दग्धानाकर्ण्य पाण्डवान् । कुन्तीं च कुल्यकरणे सहरामो ययौ कुरून्। १ ।
dit go सविदुरं गान्धारीं द्रोणमेव च । तुल्यदु:खौ च age हा कष्टमिति होचतु: । २ ।
Sri Suka began again : Hearing about the sons of Pandu and Kunti having been burnt
(to death in a house of lac built for them and subsequently set on fire by Duryodhana),
although the truth (about their having escaped unscathed in good time before the house was
set on fire) was fully known to Him (omniscient as He was), Sri Krsna (the Protector of cows)
proceeded to (Hastinapura, the capital of) the kingdom of the Kurus, accompanied by
Balarama, for.a friendly inquiry after their family affairs (by way of condolence). (1) Meeting
Bhisma, Krpa, Vidura and Gandhari (wife of King Dhrtarasira) as well as Drona, and equally
sharing their grief, so the tradition goes, the Lord said, "Ah, what a pity !" (2)

लब्ध्वैतदन्तरं राजन् Se: | अक्रूरकृतवर्माणो मणि: कस्मान्न गृह्यते । ३ ।
aia संप्रतिश्रुत्य कन्यारत्नं विगर्ह्य न: । कृष्णायादान्नसत्राजित्कस्माद्भ्रातरमन्वियात् । ४ ।
एवं भिन्नमतिस्ताभ्यां सत्राजितमसत्तम: | शयानमवधील्लोभात् स पाप: क्षीणजीवित: । ५ }
Sint विक्रोशामानानां क्रन्दन्तीनामनाथवत् । हत्वा Wa सौनिकवन्मणिमादाय जग्मिवान्। ६ |

Seizing this opportunity (afforded by the absence of Sri Krsna), O king, Akrira and
Krtavarma (another leading Yadava and a devotee of Sri Krsna, who hated Satrajit for his
having calumniated Sri Krsna) said to Satadhanva (who had a malice prepense), "Why
should not the gem be taken possession of (at this opportune moment) ? (3) Why should not
Satrajit—who having solemnly promised us his jewel ofa daughter, yet disregarding us, gave
it away to Sri Krsna—{be made to) follow (the fate of) Prasena (his brother) 2" (4) His mind
having thus been poisoned by them, that vile and most wicked fellow, whose life had (now)
been spent, murdered Satrajit (in cold blood) out of greed while he was asleep. (5) Having
made short work of Satrajit (even) as a butcher would slaughter animals, and taking the gem
in the midst of the womenfolk who were (all) screaming and wailing as though masterless,
Satadhanva withdrew. (6)

सत्यभामा च fiat हतं वीक्ष्य yenfiai व्यलपत्तात तातेति a हतास्मीति मुह्यती । ७ ।
