Dis. 23 } BOOK NINE 89

सि + + त्तविल् २२२२ २२२२ See ese RF EEE PANE न RENT ATE See eH १२१० न

पञ्चाशीतिसहस्राणि ह्यव्याहतबल: समा: | अनष्टवित्तस्मरणो त्रुभुजेऽक्षय्यषड्वसु । २६॥
तस्य पुत्रसहस्रेषु पञ्चैवोर्वरिता मृघे।जयध्वज: aR वृषभो मधुरूर्जित: ।२७॥

Longing for the (imperial) throne, however, the said Dusyanta reverted to his own line.
(Now,) O jewel of men, | (proceed to) give an account of the posterity of Yadu, the eldest son
of Yayati, which is productive of extraordinary religious merit and capable of wiping out all
the sins of men. Amanis completely rid of all sins by listening to an account of Yadu's line,
inwhich the almighty Lord, the supreme Spirit, took His descent in the semblance of aman.
Sahasrajit, Krosta, Nala and Ripu were the four celebrated sons of Yadu. Of these (four),
the son of the eldest was Satajit; and Mahahaya, Venuhaya and Haihaya were the sons
of Satajit. (1821) Haihaya's son again was Dharma and from him followed Netra, the
father of Kunti. From (the loins of) Kunti sprang up Sohajiji. Then followed Mahisman,
whose son was Bhadrasena. (22) Durmada and Dhanaka were the (two) sons of
Bhadrasena, the latter of whom was *e father of Krtavirya. Kriagni, Kriavarma and Krtauja
were the (other) sons of Dnanaka. (23) Arjuna, the son of Krtavirya, became the ruler of
(all) the seven divisions of the globe. He (further) attained from Lord Dattatreya, a part
manifestation of Sri Hari, proficiency in Yoga (concentration of mind) as well as great
achievements (in the form of the eight mystic powers). (24) Surely, no (other) kings (lit,
rulers of the earth) will attain to the level of Arjuna (the son of Krtavirya) in point of sacrificial
performances, munificence, asceticism, Yogic power, learning, valour, victory and so
on.(25) Indeed for eighty-five thousand years he enjoyed the objects of the six senses,
which could not be exhausted, his strength (of body, mind and senses too) remaining
unimpaired and his very thought proving (for the people who remembered him) a security
against loss of wealth. (26) Of thousands of his sons, only five survived in battle (with
Paragurama)—Jayadhwaja, Surasena, Vrsabha, Madhu and Urjita. (27)

जयध्वजात् तालजङ्घस्तस्य GA त्वभूत्।क्षत्रॆ यत् तालजङ्घाख्यमौर्वतेजोपसंहृतम् ।२८॥
तेषां ज्येष्ठो वीतिहोत्रो वृष्णि: पुत्रो मधो: स्मृत: | तस्य पुत्रशतं त्वासीद् वृष्णिज्येष्ठं Ta: GORE
भाधवा Gort राजन् यादवाश्चेति संज्ञिता: । यदुपुत्रस्य च क्रोष्टो: पुत्रो वृजिनवांस्तत: 1301
श्वाहिस्ततो wed तस्य चित्ररथस्तत: । हाविन्दुर्महायोगी महाभोजो महानभूत् ।३१॥
चतुर्दशामहारत्नश्चक्रवर्त्यपराजित: । तस्य पत्नीसहस्राणां SWAT सुमहायशा: 1321
दशलक्षसहस्राणि पुत्राणां तास्वजीजनत्।तेषां तु षट्प्रधानानां पृथुश्रवस आत्मज: 1331
धर्मो Wert तस्य हयमेधशतस्य Del a रुचकस्तस्य पञ्चासन्नात्मजा: A] । ३४॥
पुरुजिद्गुक्मरुक्मेषुपृथुज्यामघसंज्ञिता: | ज्यामघस्त्वप्रजोऽप्यन्यां भार्यां रैव्यापतिर्भयात् 134 1
नाविन्दच्छन्रुभवनाद् deat कन्यामहारषीत्। रथस्थां at निरीक्ष्याह ten पतिममर्षिता । ३६1
aa sen मत्स्थानं रथमारोपितेति Siam तवेत्यभिहिते स्मयन्ती पतिमब्रवीत् ise!
अहं वन्ध्यासपत्नी च स्नुषा मे युज्यते कथम्।जनयिष्यसि od राज्ञि तस्येयमुपयुज्यते ac!
अन्वमोदन्त तद्विश्चेदेवा: पितर एव ai जैव्या गर्भमधात् काले कुमारं सुषुवे शुभम् ।
स विदर्भं इति प्रोक्त उपयेमे स्नुषां सतीम् । ३९1

इति श्रीमद्धागवते महापुराणे पारमहंस्यां संहितायां नवमस्कन्धे यदुवंदानुवर्णने त्रयोविंशोऽध्याय: ।२३॥

From (the loins of) Jayadhwaja (the eldest of Arjuna's sons) appeared Talajarigha, of
whom again were born a hundred sons. The race of Ksatriyas known by the name of the
Talajanghas (sons of Talajangha) was exterminated by King Sagara (strengthened by the

[565] B.M. Part II—32
