630 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 17
SERS SSSHR VASA SHS MH KTR EME NT ETE eerokehrerterenhekttheneehernenhenensennennnnee een
SERS SR SAR ARA SSR SSS RESTS SEES eee Reh eHhehtesterenhehekhenketannenhenensensewennenent
one should cultivate devotion to Me. (61-62) To realize the oneness of the Supreme Spirit
and the individual soul—that is the sole interest deserving to be known by every (possible)
means by men whose intellect’has acquired acuteness through concentration. (63)
Carefully bearing in mind and acting up to this exhortation of mine with reverence, O
Citraketu, you will soon acquire (true) knowledge and wisdom and attain perfection. (64)
श्रीरुक उवाच ॥
आश्वास्य भगवानित्थं चित्रकेतुं जगद्गुरु: । पञ्यतस्तस्य विश्वात्मा ततश्चान्तर्दथे aft ।॥६५॥

Sri Suka continued : Having reassured Citraketu in this way, Lord Sri Hari, who is not
only the Preceptor of the world but the soul of the universe (too), disappeared from that place
while he stood looking on. (65)

Thus ends the sixteenth discourse entitled “Citraketu realizes the Supreme Spirit’,
in Book Six of the great and glorious Bhagavata-Purana,
otherwise known as the Paramaharhsa-Samhita.

उयो Sica? र्द ह
POISE eg

अथ सप्तदशोऽध्याय:

Discourse XVII

Citraketu cursed (by Goddess Parvati)
श्रीरुक उवाच
यतश्चान्तर्हितोऽनन्तस्तस्यै कृत्वा fest नम: । विद्याधरश्चित्रकेतुश्चचार गगनेचर: । १ ।
स लक्षं  वर्षलक्षाणामव्याहतबलेन्द्रिय: | स्तूयमानो महायोगी मुनिभि: सिद्धचारणै: । २ ।
कुलाचलेन्द्रद्रोणीषु नानासङ्कल्पसिद्धिषु । रेमे विद्याधरस्त्रीभिर्गापयन् हरिमीश्वरम् । ३ ।
एकदा स विमानेन विष्णुदत्तेन भास्वता । गिरिं ददूशे गच्छन् परीतं सिद्धचारणै: । ४ |
आलिङ्ग्याङ्कीकृतां देवीं बाहुना मुनिसंसदि | sara देव्या: शृण्वत्या जहासोच्चैस्तदन्तिके । ५ ।

Sri Suka began again : Having made obeisance to the quarter in which Lord Ananta
had disappeared, Citraketu, the Vidyadhara (chief), went about flying in the air. (1)
Panegyrized by sages, Siddhas (a class of demigods endowed with mystical powers from
their very birth) and Caranas (celestial bards), and getting Vidyadhara women to sing
praises of Lord Sri Hari, that eminent Yogi (ever united with the Lord) sported for ten
thousand million years in the valleys of Mount Sumeru (the chief of the principal mountains
of the terrestrial globe)—where one realizes (as a matter of course) the various objects of
one's desire—his (physical) strength and organic power not (at all) diminished (through
these long ages). (2-3) On one occasion, while flying in a resplendent aerial car bestowed
on him by Lord Visnu, he beheld Lord Siva (who dwells on Mount Kailasa) surrounded by
Siddhas and Caranas, having folded in His arm His divine Spouse (Goddess Parvati),
seated on His lap, in an assembly of sages: Going near them, Citraketu laughed loudly and
spoke (as follows) within the hearing of the goddess. (4-5)

We लोकगुरु: साक्षाद्धर्मं aq शरीरिणाम्। आस्ते मुख्य: सभायां वै मिथुनीभूय भार्यया । ६ |

=
