Dis. 14] BOOK ELEVEN 577

err rrr rrr Te Tr Tritt iii ht tt ek

the stigma of not being able to repay My debt to him) by the dust of his feet (that is sure to
fall on My person in that case). (16) Others cannot realize My all-blissful character which is
apprehended by those exalted souls who have nothing to call their own, whose mind is
devoted to Me, who have subdued their passions and are fond of all living beings and whose
understanding is unclouded by desires; (for) this character of Mine can be known only by
those who are free from wants. (17)

बाध्यमानोऽपि मद्धक्तो विषयैरजितेन्द्रिय: । प्राय: प्रगल्भया भक्त्या विधयैर्नाभिभूयते । १८॥
यथाग्रि: सुसमृद्धार्चि: करोत्येधांसि भस्मसात्। तथा मद्बिषया भक्तिरुद्धवैनांसि कृत्स्नश: ।१९॥
न साधयति मां योगो न सांख्यं et aga न स्वाध्यायस्तपस्त्यागो यथा भक्तिर्ममोर्जिता 1201
भक्त्याहमेकया ग्राह्य: श्रद्धयाऽऽत्मा प्रिय: सताम् । भक्ति: पुनाति मन्निष्ठा श्रपाकानपि सम्भवात् । २१1
धर्म: सत्यदयोपेतो fan वा तपसान्विता । मद्धक्त्यापेतमात्मानं न सम्यक् श्रपुनाति fe 1221
awa विना रोमहर्षं द्रवता चेतसा विना । विनाऽऽनन्दाश्रुकलया Wes भक्त्या विनाऽऽशय: 1231

वाग् ower द्रवते यस्य fad रुदत्यभीक्ष्णं हसति क्वचिच्च ।

from उद्गायति gaa च मद्धक्तियुक्तो भुक्नं पुनाति । २४॥

यथाग्निना हेम मलं wala ध्मातं पुन: स्वं भजते च रूपम्।

आत्मा च कर्मानुशयं विधूय मद्धक्तियोगेन भजत्यथो माम् ।२५॥

यथा यथाऽऽत्मा परिमृज्यतेऽसौ मत्पुण्यगाथाश्रवणाभिधानै: ।

am तथा wa aq सूक्ष्मं चक्षुर्यथैवाञ्जनसम्प्रयुक्तम् ici

Though attracted by objects of senses, My devotee, who has not (yet) been able to
conquer his senses, is not generally overpowered by (such) objects, thanks to his powerful
devotion (to Me). (18) (Even) as fire which has fully burst into flames reduces a pile of
firewood to ashes, so does devotion directed towards Me (whatever its origin) burns one's
sins in toto, O Uddhava ! (19) Neither Yoga nor Sankhya nor righteousness nor study of the
Vedas (or Japa of the Divine Name), austerity or renunciation captivates Me (so thoroughly)
as does intense Devotion. (20) |, the beloved Self of the righteous, can be captured (only)
through exclusive Devotion coupled with reverence. Devotion concentrated on Me absolves
even the pariahs (who cook and eat the flesh of dogs) from the stigma attaching to their
birth.(21) Piety accompanied by veracity and compassion or (even) learning coupled with
askesis indeed does not thoroughly and once for all cleanse a mind destitute of Devotion.(22)
How can Devotion be known except through the hair standing on end or through one’s heart
melting or through tears of joy (trickling down one's cheeks) and how can one's mind be
purified except through Devotion ? (23) Aman full of devotion to Me—who speaks in a voice
choked with emotion, whose heart melts (through affection), who weeps incessantly (at the
thought of his separation from Me) and sometimes laughs (when reminded of the inwardness
of My pastimes), (nay,) who sings unabashed at the top of his voice anddances (out of joy)—
purifies the (whole) world. (24) (Even) as gold sheds its dross and regains its purity (only)
when heated with fire, so does the soul shake off the seeds of Karma through the discipline
of Devotion and forthwith attains oneness with Me. (25) The more one's mind gets purified
by listening to and recounting My auspicious stories the better able is the Jiva to discern the
subtle reality (of the Self), even as the eye is better able to perceive a minute object (the
clearer it becomes) when treated with a (medicated) pigment. (26)

विषयान् ध्यायतश्चित्तं विषयेषु विषज्जते । मामनुस्मरतश्चित्तं मय्येव प्रविलीयते 1281
तस्मादसदभिध्यानं यथा स्वप्नमनोरथम् । हित्वा मयि समाधत्स्व मनो मद्भावभावितम् । २८॥
