1 ७६.४ ६. १ ४ per] Of 0
DiSSi1S 5] ळ्ळ्ळ् = ८ -~>:BOOK ONE ट 61
र्दं’ध्रेम्नंर्पोर्भंषींश्रेश्र’गैधीरींर्धीष्ठीप्तोर्धीर्धीर्श्वप्तेध्रेघंधैध्रेर्णैनींगेग्भिफ्रिर्मेभ्रेघ्रंर्घोघंधंघ्नंद्रौ/ग्रैघेग्नेध्रेर्घोगैभ्रेगेगे PER EAT MY Me HEHE BE Be BEE RL RENT ROR HT WENT Ne HERE RCT OME WE WM M8 Re
BOAR BREE SER TAA AEB RR RRR BA BEATER ROA BBA A Reeve too

(left in Draupadi’s kettle). By His doing so the whole host of students (that had
accompanied Durvasa), while yet immersed in water (for ablutions and prayers), felt as
if all the three worlds had been surfeited.* (11) Again, it was by His might that | astonished
(with my valour) in a single combat Lord Sankara (who holds a trident in His hand) no
less than His Spouse, Goddess Girija (the daughter of Himalaya, the king of the
mountains), the former of whom was pleased to impart to me (the secret of using) His
own missile (called the Pasupatastra), as also did the guardian of every other quarter.
Nay, (ascending to heaven) in this very body | shared with the mighty Indra the exalted
throne in his court.(12) While | was enjoying a holiday in the same celestial abode, Indra
and the other gods sought the help of my powerful arms, which bore the celebrated
Gandiva bow and owed their strength to Him, for the destruction of their enemies (the
Nivatakavacas and other demons, who often molested them), 0 Yudhisthira (a descend-
ent of Ajamidha) | Alas ! by that Supreme Person | stand cheated today. (13) Befriended
by Him, | was able to cross on a chariot all alone the boundless and unfathomable ocean
of the Kaurava host, which was rendered further impassable by formidable aquatic
Creatures (in the shape of Bhisma, Drona and others). Again, it was with His help that
| not only recovered from the hands of our enemies (the Kauravas) the abundant wealth
(in the shape of cattle of king Virata) but was also able to snatch from their heads their
glorious turbans as well as the precious stones from their diadems. (14) Keeping in front
of me (as a charioteer) as | stood face to face with the armies (successively) led by
Bhisma, Drona (our preceptor), Karna and Salya and adorned with the chariots of a host
of Ksatriya chiefs, my lord, He stole away by His very look the life-span, the heart as
well as the strength and vigour of the great car-warriors who commanded the various
troops. (15) Securely placed as | was in His arms, the missiles of unfailing power hurled
at me by my preceptor (Drona), Bhisma, Karna, Bhtrigrava (the grandson of Bahlika),
Susarma (the king of the Trigartas), Salya, Jayadratha (the king of the Sindhus) and
Bahlika (the younger brother of Santanu) and others did not even touch my person any
more than the weapons of the demons (in this service of king Hiranyakasipu, Prahlada's
father) did Prahlada (a devotee of Lord Visnu). (16) Stupid as | was, | chose for my
charioteer the Lord whose lotus-feet are adored by noble souls for exemption from birth
and death, and who surrenders to His devotees His very Self. Nay, dazzled by His glory,
great car-warriors who were arrayed against me could not strike at me even though |
Stood on the ground, my horses being exhausted. (17) The jokes of Lord Madhava (Sri
Krsna), brightened with His hearty and charming smiles, and His captivating manner of
eee व

“Ona certain occasion prince Duryodhana showed great hospitality to the sage Durvasa. Pleased with him, the sage
desired himto ask a boon. Finding ita splendid opportunity to bring ruination on his cousins, the Pandavas, by inviting the sage's
Curse on them, he persuaded him to seek the hospitality of Yudhisthira, the principal member of his race with his ten thousand
alumni. Buthe advised the sage to call onthe Pandavas, living in the forest, ata time when theirconsort, Draupadi, had finished
her meal after feeding all the other people of their camp, so that the virtuous lady might not have to starve. Draupadi had in
her possession a miraculous kettle, bestowed on her by the sun-god, the contents of which would not be exhausted til! she
had partaken of them. Durvasa, as advised by Duryodhana, called on the Pandavas with his ten thousand pupils in the
afternoon after Draupadi had taken her meal and, after meeting Yudhisthira and asking him to get food ready for him and his
pupils, he proceeded with them to the river bank for ablution and prayers. Much concerned over this, Draupadi in her deep
agony invoked the succour of Sri Krsna, the friend of the distressed, who immediately responded to her prayer and called at
her door. No sooner had He stepped Into her cottage than He asked her to get Him something to eat, as He was feeling awfully
hungry. Draupadi felt overwhelmed with gratitude at the Lord’s unique grace in asking her for food, even though He sustained
the whole universe, but pleaded helplessness, as there was nothing left in the kitchen to satisfy His hunger. The Lord would
not however, be easily put off; He insisted on seeing the kettle Himself. Draupadi could no longer resist His importunity and
brought the kettle before Him, when lo! He found a fragment of the vegetable food cooked in it sticking somewhere in the neck
of the kettle. The Lord, who Is the Soul of the universe, satisfied His hunger with that fragment, thereby satisfying the whole
universe, and asked Bhimasena to call the sage and his host of pupils for dinner, The sage and his pupils, however, had already

disappeared since they felt no appetite and feared lest they should incur the displeasure of the Pandavas, who like Ambarisa
were great devotees of the Lord, for declining their hospitality.
