Dis. 1] BOOK ONE

SESS FA RHP RT Me We a a Ee PE BRR RM Re RE ee Be He Be RH GER RESTS RR RRR RD HM RR RRR ROR RON ONOR RCRCROROME REE AERC HEB HERE AT BeRCE
—kewowF न HEME BS Be ता BS He He MT WY Bh HY

on this earth is intended for the protection and prosperity of all living beings. (13) Anyone who
has fallen into the terrible whirlpool of birth and death can be speedily delivered from the
same if he utters His Name even helplessly; for Fear itself is afraid of the Lord. (14) Sdta,
sages who have taken shelter in His feet and therefore ever abide in perfect calm forthwith
purify those who come in contact with them; whereas the waters of the celestial stream
(Ganga) cleanse the heart only by long and continued use (because they are no longer in
direct touch with those feet, although they still retain their purifying virtue because of the
touch they once had with them). (15) Is there anyone who, though desirous of purifying one's
soul, would refuse to hear the glory of that divine Lord whose exploits are extolled by saints
of holy renown, since such glory wipes out the impurities of the Kali age ? (16) Narrate to us,
who are full of reverence, the noble doings of the Lord who playfully assumes various
forms—the doings that have been sung by seers (like Narada and others). (17)

अथाख्याहि हरेर्धीमन्नवतारकथा: शुभा:। लीला fees: स्वैरमीश्वरस्यात्ममायया । १८|॥

wt तु न वितृप्याम उत्तमह्लोकविक्रमे । यच्छृण्वतां रसज्ञानां स्वादु स्वादु पदे पदे । १९।

paar, किल वीर्याणि सह रामेण cera: | arf भगवान् गूढ: कपटमानुष: 1201

कलिमागतमाज्ञाय क्षेत्रेऽस्मिन् वैष्णवे वयम्। आसीना दीर्घसत्रेण कथायां सक्षणा हरे: 1221

त्वं a: संदर्शितो धात्रा gen निस्तितीर्षताम्। कलिं सत्त्वहरं पुंसां कर्णधार इवार्णवम् 1221

ae योगेश्वरे कृष्णे ब्रह्मण्ये धर्मवर्मणि at काष्ठामधुनोपेते धर्म: कं aut गत: 1231

इति श्रीमद्भागवते महापुराणे पारमहंस्यां संहितायां प्रथमस्क्रन्धे नैमिषीयोपाख्याने प्रथमोऽध्याय: ।। १ ॥

"O wise Suta, now recount the blessed stories of the descent of the Almighty Lord who
enacts at will sports of various kinds by dint of His Yogamaya (divine potency). (18) We, for
our part are never sated with hearing the exploits of the illustrious Lord, which are more and
more delightful to hear at every step to those listeners who have a taste for sweet things. (1 9)
Indeed the divine Sri Krsna, who had disguised Himself in a human semblance, performed
with His elder brother, Sri Balarama, feats that were beyond human power. (20) Having come
to know that the age of Kali has arrived, we are assembled in this holy retreat sacred to Sri
Visnu for a long sacrificial session and have thus got ample time to hear the stories of Sri
Hari. (21) This age of Kali takes away the purity of mens' heart and is thus difficult to conquer.
Anxious as we are to get over this Kali, Providence has arranged our meeting with you, even
as a pilot is shown to those who seek to cross a turbulent sea. (22) Since Sri Krsna, the
Master of Yoga, the friend of the Brahmanas and the Protector of virtue, has left for His abode
(in Heaven), tell us in whom has righteousness sought protection now.(23)

Thus ends the first discourse, forming part of the story relating to the Naimisa forest,
in Book One of the great and glorious Bhagavata-Purana, otherwise known as
the Paramahamsa-Samhita (the book of the God-realized souls).

of Bot १९३९ ES
PDO ENN ELE SOD
