Dis. 28 ] BOOK TEN 221

वित् renee Ce EEE EE ee LETTE ETHERNET TET EE EH A

तदन्तिकं गतो राजन् स्वानामभयदो विभु: । ३ ।
wa वीक्ष्य gist लोकपाल: सपर्यया । महत्या पूजयित्वाऽऽहह तद्दर्शनमहोत्सव: । ४ |
Sri Suka began again : Having fasted on the (following) Ekadasi (the eleventh day of
a lunar fortnight) and duly worshipped Lord Visnu (who is solicited by His devotees and is
the deity presiding over this day), Nanda descended into the water of the Kalindi (during the
third watch of the night) in order to take his bath within the hours of the Dwadasi (the twelfth
day). (1) A demon servant of Varuna {the god of water) seized and took Nanda to the
presence of his master on the plea of his (Nanda’s) having entered the water at night,
(apparently) not knowing that the hour is reserved for the (activities of) demons. (2) Failing
to perceive Nanda, the cowherdscried out, "0 Rama! O Krsna!" Hearing the cry and coming
to know of His father having been carried away to Varuna, the almighty Lord, who affords
protection to His own, sought thepresence of Varuna, O king! (3) Finding SriKrsna (the Ruler
of the senses) arrived at his door, Varuna (the guardian of a sphere), who was greatly
rejoiced at His sight, worshipped Him with grand presents and spoke (as follows). (4)
वरुण उवाच

aa मे निभृतो देहोऽद्यैवार्थोऽधिगत: प्रभो । त्वत्पादभाजो भगवन्नव्रापु: पारमध्वन: । ५ ।

नमस्तुभ्वं भगवते ब्रह्मणे परमात्मने। न चत्र श्रूयते माया लोकसृष्टिविकल्यना । ६ |

अजानता मामकेन मूढेनाकार्यवेदिना | आनीतोऽयं तव पिता aq भवान् क्षन्तुमर्हति । ७ ।

ममाप्यनुग्रहरं कृष्ण HEE । गोविन्द नीयतामेष पिता ते पितृवत्सल । ८ |

Varuna said : It is today that my life has been fulfilled and it is only today that a (real)

treasure has been found (by me), (even though | possess all the treasures of the world, being
the lord of the ocean, a storehouse of all jewels), O my Master. (The end of my worldly
existence also seems to be near inasmuch as) those worshipping Your feet have reached
to the other end of their life's journey (viz., final beatitude). (5) Hail to You, the almighty Lord,
the all-perfect Supreme Spirit (the controller of all embodied souls), in whom Maya, which
brings about the creation of the (various) worlds, is not even heard of. (6) This father of Yours
was brought (here) by this ignorant and foolish servant of mine, who did not know his duty.
May You be pleased to forgive this fault. (7) Be pleased, O Krsna, to shower Your grace on
me too, O omniscient Lord! O Govinda, here is Your father, who may be taken (back), fond
as You are of Your parents. (8)

श्रीगुक उवाच
एवं प्रसादित: कृष्णो भगवानीश्वरेश्वर: | आदायागात् स्वपितरं बन्धूनां चावहन् मुदम् । ९ ।
नन्दस्त्वतीन्दियं SBT लोकपालमहोदयम्। He च Tala तेषांज्ञातिभ्यो विस्मितोऽब्रवीत् ।१०॥
ते त्वौत्सुक्यधियो राजन् मत्वा गोपास्तमीश्वरम्। अपि a: स्वगतिं सूक्ष्मामुपाधास्यदधीश्वर: 1221
इति स्वानां स भगवान् विज्ञायाखिलदृक् स्वयम् । सङ्कुल्पसिद्धये Fat कृपयैतदचिन्तयत् 1१२॥
जनो वै लोक एतस्मिन्नविद्याकामकर्मभि: | उच्चावचासु गतिषु न ae स्वां ait भ्रमन् । १३
इति सञ्जिनत्य भगवान् महाकारुणिको हरि: । दर्शयामास लोकं स्वं गोपानां तमस: परम्।१४॥
सत्यं ज्ञानमनन्तं aE ब्रह्म ज्योति: सनातनम्। akg पद्यन्ति मुनयो गुणापाये समाहिता: 1941
ते go megs नीता मग्ना: कृष्णेन degen: | ददृशुर्ब्रह्मणो लोकं यत्राक्रूरोऽध्यगात् पुरा 1१६1
नन्दादयस्तु तं दृध्वा परमानन्दनिर्वृता: | कृष्णं च तत्रच्छन्दोभि: स्तूयमानं सुविस्मिता: । १७।
