312 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 6

कोकोजा ज AEA HETAH AEE SEHR जज घि क क्त प ELSE COREHHERHAECEEVELRAEECHEE AEE HERE HERG

inhabited by the wives of Yaksas, the city looked like the firmament overcast with clouds
accompanied by lightning. (27). They overpassed the capital of Kubera (the lord of the
Yaksas) as well as the aforementioned garden called Saugandhika, which looked charming
with its wish-yielding trees, laden with fruits, flowers and leaves of variegated colours. (28)
The notes of cuckoos and hosts of other birds in that garden added to the melody of the
(humming of) bees and it was spotted with ponds containing lotus beds, the’ most favourite
resorts of swans. (29) By the breezes wafting the perfume of its sandal-trees, whose (soft)
bark was scratched by wild elephants (rubbing their bodies against it in order to relieve their
itching sensation), it flamed the passion of Yaksa women again and again. (30) (Going
further) they saw a number of extensive wells containing beds of blue lotuses and provided
with stairs of.cat's-eye, which were frequented by Kimpurusas (another class of demigods);
and not far from them they sighted a banyan tree. (31)
a वयोजनशतोत्सेधा पादोनविटपायत: । पर्यक्कृताचलच्छायो निर्नीडस्तापवर्जित: 1221
तस्मिन्महायोगमये मुमुक्षुशारणे सुरा:। ददृशु: शिवमासीनं त्यक्तामर्षमिव्रान्तकम् 133 |
सनन्दनाद्यैर्महासिद्धै: Ud: संशान्तविग्रहम्। उपास्यमानं सख्या च Mal गुह्यकरक्षसाम् । ३४॥
fos च तापसाभीष्टं भस्मदण्डजटाजिनम्। aaa संध्याभ्ररुचा चन्द्रलेखां च बिभ्रतम् । ३६॥
उपविष्टं दर्भमय्यां get wa सनातनम्।नारदाय प्रवोचन्तं पृच्छते शृण्वतां सताम् । ३७॥
कृत्वोरौ दक्षिणे wet पादपद्मं च जानुनि । बाहुं प्रकोष्ठेऽक्षमालामासीनं तर्कमुद्रया । ३८॥
सलोकपाल। मुनयो मनूत।माद्य॰ मनु SIA: sory: 1381
a `तूपलभ्यागतमात्मयोनिं सुरासुरेशैरभिवन्दिताङ्धि: |
उत्थाय चक्रे रशिरसाभिवन्दनमर्हत्तम: कस्य चथैव विष्णु: ।४०॥
तथापरे सिद्धगणा महर्षिभिर्ये वै समन्तादनु नीललोहितम्।
vet: प्राहं शशाङ्कशेखरं कृतप्रणामं प्रहसन्निवात्मभू: ।४१॥

The tree had a height of one hundred Yojanas (or eight hundred miles) and its boughs
extended toa distance of seventy-five Yojanas (or six hundred miles) on every side. It cast
a permanent shade on all sides and thus warded off the sun; yet it contained no nest. (32)
Beneath that tree, which induced great concentration of mind and was the (happy) resort
of those seeking liberation, the gods beheld Lord Siva seated like Death free from
anger.(33) Possessed of a most tranquil personality, He was being waited upon by highly
realized and peaceful souls, Sanandana and others, as well as by His friend, Kubera (the
lord of the Yaksas and the Raksasas). (34) That supremé Lord, who is the disinterested
friend of the whole universe, remains engaged in the practice of worship, concentration of
mind and deep meditation (in order to set anoble example to others) and does penance
which is conducive to the welfare of the world out of affection (for all). (85) On His body
possessing the (reddish) hue of an evening cloud He wears the marks so dear to ascetics,
viz., a coat of ashes, a staff, matted locks and deerskin, and the crescent moon (on His
forehead). (36) Seated on a mattress of Kuga grass, He was expounding the truth relating

to the eternal Brahma to (the celestial sage) Narada, who was putting questions to Him,
while (other) worthy personages also listened. (37) Placing His left lotus foot on the right
