Dis. 23 ] BOOK THREE 237

RAKSHA OHH T HEHE AACE EE ECT EEA EAA EE HP RTE BH RT RI NT RRR PO EO I

Rajas and Tamas), he thus spent the whole of his Manvantara consisting of seventy-one
rounds of the four Yugas (Satya, Treta, Dwapara and Kali) in pursuits connected with Lord
Vasudeva (such as meditation on His divine Form, chanting His names and virtues etc., and
worshipping His images and so on). (36) How can bodily and mental troubles and those
attributable to some divine or human agency or to other living beings, O Vidura (son of
Vyasa), afflict him who has sought refuge with Sri Hari? (37) | have thus narrated to you the
wonderful story of the first king, Swayambhuva Manu, who deserved all praise and who in
reply to the questions asked by certain sages taught the diverse sacred duties of men
in general as well as of the different Varnas (grades of society) and Agramas (stages in
life) in particular, friendly disposed as he was to all living beings. Now hear of the glory
of his daughter (Devahiti). (38-39)

Thus ends the twenty-second discourse in Book Three of the great
and glorious Bhagavata-Purana, otherwise known as
the Paramahamsa-Samhita.

ptt २१० ts
CDOT REE ONES OD

अथ त्रयोविंशोऽध्याय:

Discourse XXIll
Amorous pastimes of Kardama and Devahiti
मैत्रेय उवाच
पितृभ्यां प्रस्थिते साध्वी पतिमिङ्घितकोविदा ! fret पर्यचरत्पीत्या भवानीव wa wy १ |
विश्रम्भेणात्मशोचेन गोरवेण दमेन Biya wee an मधुरया च भो: । २ ।

विसृज्य कामं asl च ge लोभमघं मदम्। अप्रमत्तोद्यता नित्यं तेजीयांसमतोषयत् 3 |
a a देवर्षिवर्यस्तां मानवीं समनुव्रताम्। दैवाद्गरीयस: पत्युराशासानां महाशिष: । ४ ।

कालेन भूयसा क्षामां कर्शितां व्रतचर्यया । प्रेमगद्गदया aren पीडित: कृपयाब्रवीत्। ५ |

Maitreya continued : When the parents of Devahiati had left (for their capital), that
virtuous girl, who could easily read the mind of her lord, daily attended to his comforts
with the same delight as Goddess Parvati looks after Her Consort, Lord Siva. (1)
Forswearing lust deceit,malice, covetousness, vanity and forbidden acts (of every kind),
nay, ever vigilant and active, she won the pleasure of her glorious husband through
fidelity, purity of mind and body, reverence, control of the senses, service and love,as
well as by her affable speech, O Vidura! (2-3) That daughter of Manu, who looked upon
her lord as greater even than Providence and was fully devoted to him, expected great
blessings from him. Nay, having served him for a long time, she had grown weak and
emaciated on account of her religious observances. Kardama (the foremost of celestial
sages) was, therefore, oppressed with a feeling of commiseration for her and spoke to her
in accents faltering with love. (4-5)

2Ziasika disposition stay in the middle (in the terrestrial region). And those of a Tamasika temperament, enveloped as they
2r2 in the Tamoguna (dullness), sink down to the abysmal depths of hell.”
