Dis. 18 ] BOOK FIVE 507

SHAHCRECHEKELALCLCC EHH ACEVETCHE KEN KEN ECE Kee eee eNe rere ET eee eee ate
ee ew eee वज ज च्

इदं चोदाहरति | el ॐ ह्रां Bisse नमो भगवते हृषीकेशाय सर्वगुणविशेषैर्विलक्षितात्मने आकूतीनां
` । वी <7 = ; series त ।
सर्वमयाय VSS BITS बलाय कान्ताय कामाव नमस्ते उभयत्र भूयात्। १८ ।

So in Ketumalavarsa the Lord stays in the form of Kamadeva (Pradyumna) with intent 1
to please Goddess Laksmi (His own divine consort) as well as the daughters (the female
deities presiding over nights) and sons (the deities presiding over days)—the rulers of that
Varsa—of Sarhvatsara (the deity presiding over a year, a Lord of created beings), (severally)
numbering 36,000 (as many as there are days and nights comprising the full span of human
life, viz., a hundred years). The embryos born in the womb of the former (the daughters of
Sarmvatsara), whose mind gets frightened by the (dazzling) brilliance of the mighty weapon
(the discus Sudarsana) of Lord Visnu (the supreme Person), perish at the end ofa year and
get discharged in a lifeless state. (15) By the elegance of His lotus face, lovely with the
shapely arches of His brows, which are slightly raised on account of His playful glances
accompanied with a winsome smile—which in its turn is embellished with the charm of His
highly graceful gait—He brings excessive joy to Goddess Rama (who is His other Self) and
(thereby) delights His own senses. (16) Accompanied by the daughters of Prajapati
Samvatsara during nights and by their spouses (the deities presiding over days) during the
daytime, Goddess Rama waits upon the aforesaid manifestation of the Lord, an embodiment
of His own will (or creative energy), by recourse to supreme concentration of mind and
repeats the following (prayer):—(17) "Hram ! Hrim !! Hram !!!* Hail to Lord Hrsikega (the
Controller of the senses), denoted by the mystic syllable OM, distinguished by (all)
extraordinary qualities, the Ruler of (all) the organs of action and the senses of perception,
as well as of the (four) aspects of the internal senses (viz., the intellect, the ego, the
understanding and the mind) including their functions and objects, who is manifested in the
form of the sixteen limbs of a subtle body (viz., the mind and the ten Indriyas and the five
subtle elements), who is Veda personified, who in the form of food sustains the physical
body, whois immortality (final beatitude) itself, nay, whois everything and whois the fountain
of (all) strength-of mind, the potency of the Indriyas and physical strength. Hail to You, (our)
beloved Lord, Love personified, both here and hereafter." (18) -

aa न ते a परिपान्त्यपत्यं fet धनायूषि चतोऽस्वतन्त्रा:।१९॥
स a ua: स्यादकुतोभय: wa समन्तत: पाति भयातुरं जनम्।
स एक एवेतरथा मिथो we नैवात्मलाभादधि मन्यते परम्।२०॥
a तस्य od पादसरोरुहार्हणं निकामयेत्साखिलकामलम्पटा।
मत्प्राप्तयेऽजेशसुरासुरादवस्तप्यन्त उग्रं a ऐन्द्रियेधिय:।
ma भवत्पादपरायणान्न मां fee त्वद्धृदया चयतोऽजित।२२॥
स त्वं ममाप्यच्युत viet वन्दितं कराम्बुजं यत्त्वदधायि सात्वताम्।
विभर्षि at men वरेण्य maar क इंश्वरस्येहितमूहितुं विभुरिति। २३।

* The Tantras mention a number of mystical syllables (Bija-Mantras) whose utterance is believed to possess a unique
power to propitiate and reveal certain deities. Hram, Hrim and Hrim are three such syllables well-known for their efficacy to
please a number of gods and goddesses. They are obviously intended here to propitiate Lord Pradyumna (who is Love
personified).
