58 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 15

FREER A EERE EEO REAREAERERE EERE ENE CHEE RESEE SESE EE ERASERS LOR SOT EEE ELE LE RATES ER EERE

createdin this universe by way ofits property or food). Through the ceremony of consecration
(as enjoined by the three Vedas) it was adopted by the king (Puriirava) in three forms (viz.,
the Ahavaniya, the Garhapatyaandthe Daksinagni)as his son (because leading tosacredregions
above). (46) Seeking after the realm of Urvasi, Puriirava worshipped by means of that fire
Lord Sri Hari, the Ruler of sacrifices (the Bestower of their fruit), who is above sense-
perception and represents all the gods in His person. (47) Of yore (before the time of
Puriirava) there was but one Vedain the form of Pranava (the mystical syllable OM), the seed
of all speech; there was one deity, Narayana, and no other; there was but one fire (and not
three) and only one caste known as the Hamsas. (48) The three Vedas (the cult of rituals
expounded by them) came into being from Purtrava alone at the dawn of the Treta age, 0
protector of men, andthe king attained (after death) to the realm of the Gandharvas by means
of the sacred fire, adopted by him as his son. (49)

Thus ends the fourteenth discourse bearing (inter alia) on the story of Purtrava
(the son of Hl), in Book Nine of the great and glorious Bhagavata-Purana,
otherwise known as the Paramahamsa-Samhita.

ttt 533
recs

अथ पञ्चदशोऽध्याय:

Discourse XV

The stories of Rcika, Jamadagni and Parasurama
श्रीगयुक उवाच
tea चोर्वशीगर्भात् षडासन्नात्मजा नृप । आयु: श्रुतायु: सत्यायू रयोऽथ विजयो wa: । १ ।
श्रुतायोर्वसुमान् पुत्र: सत्यायोश्च श्रुतञ्जय: । रवस्य सुत एकश्च जयस्य तनयोऽमित: । २ |
sim विजयस्याथ काञ्चनो होत्रकस्तत: । तस्य जह्नु: सुतो गङ्गां गण्डूषीकृत्य योऽपित् ।
जह्नोस्तु पूरुस्तत्पुत्रो बलाकश्चात्मजोऽजक: । ३ 1
तत: कुश: कुशस्यापि कुशाम्बुस्तनयो ag: | कुशनाभश्च चत्वारो गाधिरासीत् कुशाम्बुज: | ४ |

$ri Suka resumed : Purtrava (the son of ॥2), again, O protector of men, had by Urvasi
six sons, Ayu, Srutayu, Satyayu, Raya, Vijayaand Jaya. (1) Vasuman was the son of Srutayu
and Srutafijaya, of Satyayu. Raya’s son was Eka and Jaya's sonwas Amita. (2) Again, Bhima
was the son of Vijaya; from Vijaya followed Kaficana and of Kaficanawas born Hotra. Hotra's
son was Jahnu, who took the (holy) Ganga in the hollow of his palms and quaffed it. Again,
Jahnu's son was Piru, whose son was Balaka, and the latter's son was Aja. (3) Then came
Kua: from (the loins of) Kuga, again, sprang up four sons—Kusambu, Tanaya, Vasu and
Kuganabha. Gadhi was the son of Kugambu. (4)

qa सत्यव्तीं कन्यामृचीकोऽयाचत द्विज: iat frag मत्वा गाधिर्भार्गवमब्रवीत् । ५ ।
wea: ङइयामकर्णानां हयानां चन्द्रवर्चसाम्। सहस्रं दीयतां yet कन्याया: कुशिका वयम् । ६ |
इत्युक्तस्तन्मतं WT गत: स वरुणान्तिकम्। आनीय दत्त्वा तानश्वानुपयेमे वराननाम् ! ७ |
स ॠषि: प्रार्थित: ue श्वश्र्वा चापत्यकाम्यया । श्रपयित्वोभयैर्मन्रैश्चरुं स्नातुं गतो सुनि: । ८ ।
ताबत्सत्यंक्तोमांत्रास्वचरुंयाचितासतीं।श्रेष्ठंमत्वातयग्र्यच्छन्मान्नेमातुरदत्स्वयम्।९।
