350 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 13

PHASE e RE Ree aS See HME RSS HEH THES EEO KET OEE THRE AEE AHHH He

Maitreya took up the thread again : | have thus told you all that you asked me on this
spot about the life-story of Dhruva of exalted renown, a story valued so much by noble
souls.(44) It is conducive to wealth, fame and longevity, is (most) sacred and full of great
blessings. Nay, in bestows heavenly bliss and even the eternal state; it is highly
commendable and fit to be heard (even) by gods and wipes out one's sins. (45) By devoutly
listening again and again to this story of a favourite devotee of the immortal Lord, Devotion
to the Lord is sure to be engendered—Devotion which cuts at the root of (all) affliction. (46)
Virtues like amiability and so on appear in (the heart of) the man who listens (to this story),
nay, it is a fountain of greatness for those who seek it, a mine of spiritual glow for those
aspiring for it and a source of honour to the high-minded. (47) With a concentrated mind one
should recite this glorious story of king Dhruva of sacred renown (both) morning and evening
before a congregation of the Brahmanas. (48) Devoted to the sacred feet of Lord Hari, he
who recites it before an audience of pious souls on a full-moon day, the last day of a dark
fortnight (when the sun and the moon ‘dwell together’), the twelfth day of either fortnight, the
day on which the moon passes through the asterism known by the name of Sravana, a lunar
day which commences after sunrise on a particular day and ends before the next sunrise,
a Vyatipata (a particular astronomical Yoga when the sun and the moon are in the opposite
Ayana and have the same declination, the sum of their longitudes being 180°), a Sarnkranti
(the day on which the sun passes from one sign of the zodiac to another) or any sunday (or
the seventh lunar day of either fortnight, which is particularly sacred to the sun-god), seeking
no return for his service (either here or hereafter) and remaining satisfied with himself by
himself, thereby attains perfection. (49-50) The gods shower their grace on that tender-
hearted benefactor of the afflicted, who imparts to one who has no knowledge of Truth this
wisdom, which is like nectar on the path leading to God-Realization. (51) | have narrated to
you, O foremost scion of Kuru, this narrative of king Dhruva whose pious doings are widely
known and who, when he was a mere child, left his playthings as well as the roof of his mother
and resorted for protection to Lord Visnu. (52)

Thus ends the twelfth discourse entitled “The Narrative of Dhruva"
in Book Four of the great and glorious Bhagavata-Purana,
otherwise known as the Paramahamsa-Samhita.

NEP ONE TS

ED ED ONES ONC LS OD
अथ त्रयोदशोऽध्याय:
Discourse XIll
Dhruva's posterity and the narrative of king Anga
Yd उवाच
S * = 7 an 3 os ।

=~

प्ररूढभावो भगवत्यधोक्षजे se पुनस्ते fag: प्रचक्रमे । १ ।
Siita continued : Vidura's devotion to the Lord (who is beyond sense-perception) was

intensified when he heard (the story) of Dhruva's ascent to the Abode of Lord Visnu as told
by the sage Maitreya (son of Kusaru); and he proceeded to ask the sage further questions

(as below). (1)
विदुर Sara
के ते yaaa am कस्यापत्यानि yaa! कस्यान्ववाये प्रख्याता: HA वा सत्रमासत | २ ।

