588 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 63

SAK HKKVENRK KK THN kkete true ret eer tese teehee essere eee

ज्वर उवाच
नमामि wisi परेशं wale केवलं afi
विश्वोत्पत्तिस्थानसंरोधहेतुं यत्तद् ब्रह्म ब्रह्मलिङ्गे SRT । २५॥

तत्सङ्घातो बीजरोहप्रवाहस्त्वन्मावैषा तन्निषेधं प्रपद्ये ।२६॥
नानाभावैरलीलयैवोपपन्नैर्देवान् साधूल्लोकसेतून् बिभर्षि ।
हंस्युन्मार्गान् हिंसया वर्तमानान् जन्मैतत्ते भारहाराय भूमे: ।२७॥
wis ते तेजसा दु:सहेन TTA ज्वरेण ।
तावत्तापो देहिनां तेऽङ्धिमूलं नो सेवेरन् यावदाशानुबद्धा: ।२८॥

The Jwara said : | salute You, endowed (as You are) with infinite power, the Ruler (even)
of the highest gods, the Soul of the universe, the one without a second, absolute
Consciousness, the Cause of the appearance, subsistence and dissolution of the universe,
comprising whatever there is, the most tranquil Brahma, who are (only) inferred (and not
directly known) by the Vedas. (25) The Time-Spirit (which disturbs the equilibrium of the three
Gunas), Destiny, Karma, Swabhava (the tendencies produced by the latter), the individual
soul, the (five) subtle elements, the body, the vital breath, the ego, the evolutes (viz., the five
gross elements and the eleven Indriyas), the subtle body (a combination of the aforesaid
evolutes) and the process of mutual causation going on in a cycle between the Linga body
and Karma as between a seed and the sprout—all this constitutes Your Maya (deluding
potency). । take refuge in You, in whom the said Maya finds its negation. (26) Appearing in
diverse forms, assumed by way of mere sport, You protect the gods and the pious, uphold
the standards of morality that maintain the world order, and kill those who deviate from the
path of virtue and live by violence. Your present descent (too) is intended to relieve the
burden of the earth. (27) [ stand scorched by Your radiance in the form of this fever, which
is most terrible and hard to bear, and which, though mild (before), has grown (so) severe
(now). Embodied beings undergo suffering only so long as they remain bound by desire and
do not seek the soles of Your lotus-feet. (28)

त्रिशिरस्ते प्रसन्नोऽस्मि व्येतु ते मज्ज्वराद् भयम् । यो नौ स्मरति संवादं तस्य त्वन्न भवेद भयम् । २९1
इत्युक्तोऽच्युतमानम्य TH माहेश्वरो ज्वर: । बाणस्तु रथमारूढ: प्रागाद्योत्स्यञ्जनार्दनम् 1३०॥
wi बाहुसहस्रेण नानायुधधरोऽसुर: ।मुमोच परमक्रुद्धो बाणांश्चक्रायुघे नृप । ३१
तस्यास्यतोऽस्त्राण्यसकृच्चक्रेण क्षुरनेमिना | चिच्छेद भगवान् बाहून् AGT इव वनस्पते: 1321

बाणस्य भगवान् भव: | भक्तानुकम्प्युपव्रज्य चक्रायुधमभाषत ।३३॥

The glorious Lord said : "| am pleased with you, 0 three-headed one ! Let your fear of
My Jwara cease (now). There willbe no more (cause of) fear from you to him who remembers
this dialogue of ours.” (29) Thus addressed (reassured) and bowing to Sri Krsna (the infallible
Lord), the Jwara under the command of Lord Siva departed. Mounting a chariot in the
meanwhile, Banasura returned (to the field of battle) to contend with Sri Krsna. (30) Highly
enraged, the demon, who wielded various weapons in his thousand arms, then showered
arrows on Sri Krsna (the Wielder of a discus), O protector of men ! (31) While he was (thus)
discharging missiles again and again the Lord with His discus, keen-edged like a razor, cut
off his arms like the boughs of a tree. (32) (Even) as the arms of Bana were being lopped off,
Lord Siva (the Source of the universe), who took compassion on His devotee, approached
Sri Krsna (the Wielder of a discus) and submitted to Him (as follows). (33)
