728 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 15°

BOWE SERCH Bh He BORE Be Re STE ROSE Be Re ORS Be Re A WE RS SR ee PE Ee oe ee re ee eee ee ७७

(figuratively) speak of the body as a chariot,* the senses as the horses (drawing the chariot),
the mind—the ruler of the senses—as the reins (guiding the horses), the objects of senses
(sound, etc.,) as the paths (to be traversed by the horses), reason (or understanding) as the
charioteer and the intellect as his capacious seat, (all) made by God. (41) They actually refer
to the tent vital airs as the axletree, (past) virtue and sin (responsible for the existence and
functioning of the body) as the two wheels, the Jiva (embodied soul) identifying itself with the
body as the owner (occupant) of the chariot, (the mystic syllable) OM as his bow, the (pure)
Self as the shaft and the Supreme Itself as the mark. (42) Attachment and aversion and
cupidity, grief and infatuation, fear, vanity, the feelings of pride andignominy and a carping
spirit, deceitfulness, violence and jealousy, instinctive clinging to worldly life and bodily
enjoyments, negligence, hunger and sleep and so on are the enemies (to be conquered).
They are (all) born of Rajas (passion) and Tamas (ignorance); (while) sometimes
propensities (such as compassion) born of Sattva (the principle of goodness too) prove to
be our enemies (as they did in the case of Emperor Bharata—vide V. viii). (43-44)
While (yet) the Jiva retains the chariot in the shape of a human body with (all) its
appurtenances (in the shape of the senses etc.,) under his control, he should body with (all)
its appurtenances (in the shape of the senses etc.) under his control, he should get rid of
(all the aforesaid) enemies, wielding the sword of wisdom sharpened with the worship of
the feet of most exalted souls and finding his strength in (depending on) Lord Acyuta
(alone). (Then,) sated with the bliss which constitutes His very being and tranquil (of mind),
he should cast off the chariot (too). (45) Otherwise the unruly horses in the shape of the
senses inclined towards the world as well as the charioteer (in the shape of a feeble
understanding) lead the unwary occupant of the chariot astray (put him on the path of
worldly activity) and betray him to robbers in the shape of the objects of senses. (And)
these robbers hurl him, horses, charioteer and all, into the pit of transmigration, dark with
ignorance and beset with the great fear of death . (46)

vat च fad च द्विविधं ad वैदिकम्। आवर्तेत प्रवृत्तेन निवृत्तेनाश्नुतेऽमृतम् Ivo!

हिंस्रं द्रव्यमचं काम्यमग्निहोत्राद्यशान्तिदम् । दर्शश्च पूर्णमासश्च चातुर्मास्यं ay: qa: ।४८॥

एतदिष्टं प्रवृत्ताख्यं हुतं प्रहुतमेव च । पूर्तं सुरालयारामकूपाजीव्यादिलक्षणम् ।४९॥

द्रव्यसूक्ष्मविपाकश्च धूमो सरात्रिरपक्षय: । अयनं दक्षिणं सोमो ast ओषधिवीरुध: ।५०॥

अन्नं रेत इति ae पितृयानं पुनर्भव: । एकॆकश्येनानुपूर्वं भूत्वा wee जायते । ५१॥

आङ्कारं fat नादे तं तं तु प्राणे महत्यमुम् । ५३।

अग्नि: gat fear se: el राकोत्तरं स्वराद्। विश्वश्च तेजस: प्राज्ञस्तुर्य आत्मा समन्वयात् । ५४

waa प्राहुर्भूत्वा भूत्वानुपूर्वश: | आत्मयाज्युपणान्तात्मा ह्यात्मस्थो न निवर्तते । ५५॥
Action recommended in the Vedas is of two kinds : Pravrtta Karma (that which turns the
mind towards worldly objects) and Nivrita Karma (that which draws the mind away from the
external world and turns it inwards). By means of Pravrita Karma one is likely to return to

mundane existence (in order to enjoy its fruit); while through Nivrtta Karma one enjoys
immortality (final beatitude). (47) A ritual (such as Syena-Yaga or hawk-sacrifice) having for

* Compare the following verses of the Kathopanisad:
आत्मान १ tied विद्धि शरोर ३ रथमेव qi बुद्धिं तु amd विद्धि मन: प्रग्रहमेव च॥
aaa हयानाहुर्विषया ३ स्तेषु गॊचरान्। (I. ili. 3-4)
+ For the names and respective functions of the vital airs vide footnote below III. vi. 9.
