280 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 32
fetter ew irt:

RAR OE HR FR Be RRA TE Bk ee ee EET ६६ CEASERS ERE EAE LEER

अथ द्वात्रिशोऽध्याय:
Discourse XXXIl
Destiny of the souls departing from this world by the "Bright Path",
the "Dark Path" and so on, and the superiority of Bhaktiyoga

कपिल Sart
अथ यो गृहमेधीयान्धर्मानेवावसन् गृहे । काममर्थ a धर्मान् स्वान् दोग्धि भूय: पिपर्ति तान् । १ ।
स चापि भगवद्धर्मात्काममूढ: पराङ्मुख: । यजते क्रतुभिर्देवान् figs श्रद्धयान्वित: । २ |
तच्छ्रद्धयाक्रान्तमति:र पितृदेवब्रतर पुमान्।गत्वा चान्द्रमसं लोकं सोमपा: पुनरेष्यति | ३ |
यदा चाहीन्द्रशय्यायाँ हेतेऽनन्तासनो हरि: । तदा लोका लयं यान्ति त एते गृहमेधिनाम् । ४ ।
ये स्वधर्मान्न दुह्यन्ति धीरा: कामार्थहेतवे | नि:सङ्गा न्यस्तकर्माण: प्रशान्ता: Ysa: । ५ ।
निवृत्तिधर्मनिरता निर्ममा निरहङ्कृता: । स्वधर्माख्येन सत्त्वेन परिशुद्धेन चेतसा । ६ ।
सूर्यद्वारेण ते यान्ति पुरुषं विश्वतोमुखम्। परावरेशं प्रकृतिमस्योत्पत्त्यन्तभावनम् । ७ ।
ह्रिपरार्द्धवसाने य: प्रलयो ब्रह्मणस्तु ते।तावदध्यासते लोकं परस्य परचिन्तका: । ८ |
श्र्माम्भोऽनलानिलवियन्मनइन्दियार्थभूतादिभि: परिवृतं प्रतिसञ्जिहीर्षु: ।
अव्याकृतं विशति यर्हि गुणत्रयात्मा कालं पराख्यमनुभूय पर: स्वयम्भू: । ९ ।
एवं परेत्य भगवन्तमनुप्रविष्टा ये योगिनो जितमरुन्मनसो विरागा: ।
तेनैव साकममृतं पुरुषं पुराणं ब्रह्म प्रधानमुपयान्त्यगताभिमाना: ।१०।॥
अथ तं सर्वभूतानां weg कृतालयम्। श्रुतानुभावं wet व्रज भावेन भामिनि ।११।
ane: स्थिरचराणां यो वेदगर्भ: सहर्षिभि: arte: कुमाराद्यै: सिद्धैर्योगप्रवर्तकै: 1221
भेददृष्ट्याभिमानेन नि:सङ्गेनापि कर्मणा । कर्तृत्वात्सगुणं ब्रह्म पुरुषं पुरुषर्षभम् 123 1
स संसृत्य पुन: we कालेनेश्वरमूर्तिना। जाते गुणव्यतिकरे यथापूर्वं प्रजायते 1१४1
ted un च तेऽपि धर्मविनिर्मितम्। निषेव्य पुनरायान्ति गुणव्यतिकरे सति ।१५॥
Lord Kapila continued : As for the man who, while continuing at home, performs the
duties of a householder and, earning wealth and the pleasures of sense through them resorts
to those actions again, he too turns his face away from the Lord, deluded as he is by desire,
and worships through sacrificial performances the gods as well as the manes with
reverence. (1-2) His mind being swayed by reverence for the aforesaid beings, the man
undertakes vows to propitiate the gods and the manes and, having attained (thereby) to the
realm of the moon (a part of the heavenly world) drinks (with them) the (inebriating) sap of
the Soma plant; but (when the stock of merit that earned him an abode in the aforementioned
realm is exhausted) he must return (to this mortal world).(3) When (at the end of a Kalpa)
Sri Hari, who has Ananta (the Serpent-god Sesa) for His seat, reclines on His couch of Sesa
(the lord of the serpents), these worlds, attained to by the householders, get dissolved (enter
His body and disappear). (4) Those wise men, however, who do not perform their duties for
the sake of sensuous enjoyment and wealth but offer their actions to Me, nay, who are free
from attachment, most serene, pure of mind, devoted to the duties of those who have retired
from the world, have no feeling of “I" and "mine" (with regard to the body and everything
connected with it) and are endowed with a mind thoroughly cleansed by recourse to Sativa

(the quality of goodness) passing by the name of one's own sacred duty, reach by the "Bright
Path" the all pervading Supreme Person, the Lord of both Prakrti and Purusa (Matter and
