130 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 10

Se et HD क EH CEE OME ELE SER CCH RESCH KE SHER वी SHEER SEL क SEE OEE EERE EEE ARYA HK

as well as the auditory sense) as well as the auditory sense itself; and thence followed the
perception of sound (the object of the auditory sense). (22) When, again, the Cosmic Being
felt inclined to experience the softness or hardness, lightness or heaviness and warmth or
coolness of objects, there appeared in Him the skin (the seat of the tactile sense) and on the
skin there arose the hair (the sense perceiving touch as well as the itching sensation), the
trees (the deities presiding over the hair) as well as the wind-god (the deity presiding over
the tactile sense). Nay, He was also covered all over His skin, within as well as without, by
the tactile sense, when followed the perception of touch (the object of the tactile sense). (23)
As soon as the Cosmic Being felt inclined to perform various acts a pair of hands grew out
of Him. In these hands there appeared the faculty of grasping things and even so Indra (the
deity presiding over this faculty) as well as the act of grasping, which depends both on the
faculty of grasping and the deity presiding over it. (24) Even as the Cosmic Being felt inclined
to walk according to His will a pair of feet grew out of Him and along with them appeared Lord
Visnu (the deity presiding over the feet) Himself as well as the faculty of locomotion, with the
help of which people procure the materials for sacrifice. (25) When the Cosmic Being craved
for offspring, sexual enjoyment and immortality (heavenly bliss procurable through a pious
married life) a penis grew out of Him and even so there appeared in Him the faculty of
copulation, the god Prajapati (the deity presiding over this faculty) and the pleasure arising
from sexual commerce, which depends both on the faculty of coition and the deity presiding
over the same. (26) On the Cosmic Being feeling the urge to void excrement there appeared
in Him the anus and thereafter the faculty of defecation and then the god Mitra (the deity
presiding over the organ of evacuation) as well as the act of defecation, which depends both
on the faculty of evacuation and the deity presiding over it. (27) When the Cosmic Being felt
inclined to pass from one body to another and leave the former with that end in view, there
appeared in Him the navel and in the navel sprang up the vital air called ’Apana’ and then
the god of death (the deity presiding over the ‘Apana' air); and then came about the
dissociation of Prana form Apana, i. e., death, which depends on both the ‘Apana' air and the
deity presiding over the same. (28) On the Cosmic Being feeling inclined to take food and
drink there appeared in Him the cavity of the abdomen, the intestines and the network of
veins and arteries as well as seas (the deities presiding over the intestines) and rivers (the
deities presiding over the blood vessels) and even so satisfaction and nutrition, the former
of which depends on the intestines and the seas, and the latter on the veins and arteries and
rivers. (29) When the Cosmic Being felt inclined toccontemplate on His own Maya (wonderful
energy) there appeared in Him the heart and thereafter the mind, then the moon (the deity
presiding over the mind) and last of all volition and desire, the two functions of the mind. (30)
From the elements of earth, water and fire were evolved the seven constituents of the body
of the Cosmic Being, viz., the thick outer skin, the thin inner skin, flesh, blood, fat, marrow
and bone; even so from ether, water and air sprang up His vital air. (31) The senses of
perception are all directed towards their objects, and the objects of sense are bom of the
Ego (the source of the elements). Mind is the seat of all morbid feelings; while Intellect reveals
to us the reality of all objects. (32) | have thus described to you the gross form of the Lord;
itis enveloped outside by eight sheaths, viz., earth, water, fire, air, ether, the Ego, the Mahat-
tattva (the principle of cosmic intelligence) and Prakrti (Primordial Matter). (83) Beyond this
is (the Lord's) most subtle form, which is unmanifest, unqualified, having no beginning,
middle or end, eternal and outside the realm of mind and speech. (34)

अमुनी भगवद्रूपे मया a अनुवर्णिते ! उभे अपि न गृह्णन्ति मायासृष्टे विपश्चित: 134)
a वाच्यवाचकतया war ब्रह्मरूपधृक ! नामरूपक्रिया wt सकर्माकर्मक: पर: 138!
