Dis. 11] BOOK NINE 47

PRERAEA EEE ESETE RLS EER Eee eRe See ee he ete १९१४ १६

with the ornaments and the two pieces of cloth He had (on His person); and Empress Sita
(Daughter of Janaka, the ruler of the Videha country) too was left (only) with Her Mangala-
Sutra* (every other ornament even on Her person having been given away by Her to
Brahmana ladies). (4) Delighted to witness the most praiseworthy parental affection of the
Lord, who is (so) fond of the Brahmanas, they however returned (all) that to Him and spoke
as follows, their mind moistened with affection—(5) “As a matter of fact what has not been
given to us by You, O Lord, O Ruler of the universe, when (we know that), entering our
innermost heart, You wipe out our ignorance by Your (divine) splendour? (6) Hail to Lord Sri
Rama, a votary of the Brahmanas, the foremost of those enjoying excellent renown, whose
wisdom knows no obstruction and whose (holy) feet are cherished by those who have given
up (all forms of} violence. (7)

aGiarmatargi रात्र्यामलक्षित: । चरन्वाचोऽशृणोद्रामो भार्यामुद्दर्यकस्यचित् । ८ |
नाहं बिभर्मि त्वां दुष्टामसतीं aden diene faye सीतां रामो नाहं भजे पुन: । ९ ।
इति लोकाद् बहुमुखाद् दुराराध्यादसंविद: | पत्या भीतेन सा त्यक्ता प्राप्ता प्राचेतसाश्रमम् । १०॥
अन्तर्वल्यागते काले यमौ सा सुषुवे सुतौ । gat wa इति ख्यातौ तयोश्चक्रे क्रिया मुनि: । ११॥
अङ्गदश्चित्रकेतुश्च लक्ष्मणस्यात्मजो स्मृतौ । तक्ष: पुष्कल इत्यास्तां भरतस्य महीपते 1221
We श्रुतसेनश्च छात्रुघ्नस्य बभूवतु: | गन्धर्वान् atest जघ्ने भरतो विजये दिशाम् ।१३॥
mat धनमानीय wd राज्ञे न्यवेदयत्।त्रुघ्नश्च vel: पुत्रं लवणं नाम राक्षसम्।
हत्वा मघुवने चक्रे मथुरां नाम वै पुरीम् । १४॥
मुनौ fra तनयौ diet cat विवासिता । ध्यायन्ती रामचरणौ विवरं प्रविवेश ह ।१५॥

तद्प्त्यग् भगवान्रापोस्॰न्धन्नपिध्रियाशुच | स्मरंस्तस्या गुणांस्तांस्तान्नाशक्नोद् रोद्धुमीश्वर: ।१६॥

i त्रासमावह: | अपीश्वराणां किमुत ग्राम्यस्य गृहचेतस: ।१७।

Ona certain night, while moving about i incognito and unperceived (in the capital) with the
intention of knowing the mind of the people, Sri Rama overheard the (following) remarks of
someone concerning His own Spouse (Sita):—(8) "| would have you no more, a wicked and
unchaste woman that you are, since you have lived in the house of another. King Rama,
who is excessively fond of his wife, may retain Sita (in his house); (but) | am not going to
accept you again (in any case).” (9) Forsaken by Her (divine) Consort (Sri Rama), who was
afraid of the ignorant and myriad-mouthed world, which could not be easily placated, Sita
reached the hermitage of the sage Valmiki (son of Pracet&, the god of water). (10) Being
enceinte, She gave birth, when the time came, to twins who became (severally) known as
Kuga and Lava. The sage (Valmiki) performed the (purificatory) rites concerning them.(11)
The two sons of Laksmana were called Angada and Citraketu; while Taksa and Puskala
were the two sons of Bharata, O lord of the earth! (12) (Further) Subahu and Srutasena were
the two sons of Satrughna. In the course of his conquest of the (four) quarters Bharata slew
Gandharvas (celestial musicians) in tens of millions and, bringing their wealth (to Ayodhya),
presented it all to the King (SriRama). Again, getting rid of the demon, Lavana by name, son
of Madhu, Satrughna for his partfounded on the site of (the forest of) Madhuvanaa city known
as Mathura (13-14) Having committed Her sons (KuSa and Lava) to the care of the sage
(Valmiki) and contemplating on Sri Rama's feet—so the tradition goes—Sita, who had been
exiled by Her (divine) Spouse (and could no longer bear separation from Him) found Her way
into the bowels of the earth (that parted asunder to take Her). (15) Hearing of this and

* The auspicious thread with a piece of gold at the centre wom by married women round their neck as long as their
husband lives.
