Dis. 27 ] BOOK FOUR 413
THRE SHES RALES ASS SS REA eH ETET EER AHASERELA EP Se hoeeeeHereerMeRNHAMAEEAREHAARAEaAEOn

worlds ( or even) beyond them, if he is other than a servant of Lord Visnu (the Slayer of the
demon Mura). (24) Never before did | see your face without its Tilaka (sacred mark on the
forehead), dull, cheerless, frowning with anger, untrimmed and sullen, nor did | (ever) see
even your lovely breasts soiled with tears of grief and your lips, ruddy as the ripe Bimba fruit,
without their saffron-like hue. (25) Therefore, be gracious to me, your loved one, even though
| have committed an offence against you in that I went out a hunting of my own will ( without
taking your leave), seized with a passion for sport. What woman, longing for union, would
not accept, for befitting services, her beloved one, who was (ever) under her sway and had
been deprived of his patience by the vehemence of love ? (26)

Thus ends the twenty-sixth discourse forming part of the story of Purafijana,
in Book Four of the great and glorious Bhagavata-Purana,
otherwise known as the Paramaharhsa-Samhita.

SR ELE RE १५
POI OSS ie

अथ सप्नविंशोऽध्याय:

Discourse XXVII
Raid of Candavega against the capital of Purafijana
and the story of Kalakanya
ARG उवाच

3a पुरञ्जनं सध्यग्वशमानीय विम्रमै:।घुरञ्जनीमहक्शजरेमेस्मयतींपतिम्।श्।
स राजा महिषीं राजन् सुस्नातां रुचिराननाम् । कृतस्वस्त्ययनां तृप्तामभ्यनन्ददुपागताम् । २ ।

तयोपगूढ: परिरब्धकन्धरो रहोऽनुमन्त्रैरपकृष्टचेतन: |

न कालरंहो age ged दिवा निशेति प्रमदापरिग्रह: । ३ ।

शयान उन्नद्धमदो महामना महार्हतल्ये महिषीभुजोपधि: ।

तामेंबर्वंमोमनुतेपरंयतस्तमोऽभिभ्रूत्तोननिजंपरंचयत्।४।

Narada resumed : Having thus brought Purafijana completely under sway by her
feminine graces, O great king, Purafijani (the wife of Purafijana) enjoyed life, bringing delight
to her spouse.(1)King Purafijana, O Pracinabarhi, greeted her when she came up to him with
a bright countenance, having washed herself well and fitted herself with auspicious
decoration, and (fully) gratified (after a hearty and sumptuous dinner). (2) Embraced by her,
he threw his arms about her neck; and, infatuated by her secret amatory counsel, he did not
notice the rapid movement of time, which was difficult to master, knowing not whether it was
day or night, his mind being completely possessed by (the charms of) that young woman.(3)
Lying on a splendid couch with the arm of his queen serving as a pillow, the over-ambitious
and valiant Purafijana, whose arrogance knew no bounds, accounted his wife the supreme

object of his life; and, overpowered as he was with infatuation, he did not know what was his
and what was alien (to him). (4)

waa रममाणस्य कामकश्मलचेतस: | क्षणार्धमिव राजेन्द्र व्यतिक्रान्तं नवं वय: । ५ ।
तस्यामजनयत्पुत्रान् पुरञ्जन्यां पुरञ्जन:। शतान्येकादश विराडायुषोऽर्धमथात्यगात् । ६ ।
दुहितृर्दशोत्तरशतं पितृमातृयशस्करी: । शीलोदार्यगुणोपेता: dhe: प्रजापते । |
