Dis. 12 ] BOOK SIX 609°

SHEN ETE NLA EELS Ree HANI eE RTT eEREhA ALANA ETeEMeENTeeARARTRRENEREEHAHEA ee

भवानतार्षीन्मायां वै qwrt जनमोहिनीम्। ae विहायासुरं भावं महापुरुषतां गत: 1201
wag महदाश्चर्यं यद् रज:प्रकृतेस्तव aged भगवति सत्त्वात्मनि ger मति: 1221
यस्य भक्तिर्भगवति हरौ निश:श्रेयसेश्वरे। विक्रीडतोऽमृताम्भोधौ fer ae: खातकोदकै: 1221
Indra said : Oh, you have (really) achieved your object, O demon (chief), blessed as you
are with such a (catholic, discerning, resolute and devout) mind (even at this critical moment),
and devoted with all your being to the Lord (the Ruler of the universe), your (very) Selfand (true)
Friend ! (19)*You have actually reached the end of the (insurmountable) Maya of Lord Visnu—
which deludes people—in that, having shed the demoniac disposition, you have attained to
the level of an exalted soul. (20) It is really a great wonder that, though Rajasika by
temperament, you have conceived such an unflinching devotion to Lord Vasudeva, who is
Sattva (unmixed with Rajas and Tamas) personified ! (21) What use can he have for the
Shallow ditch-water (in the shape of heavenly and other trivial enjoyments) who sports in an
ocean of nectar, blessed as he is with devotion to the almighty Sri Hari, the Bestower of final
beatitude? (22)

Siem उवाच
इति ब्रुवाणावन्योन्यं धर्मजिज्ञासया नृप। युयुधाते महावीर्याविन्द्रवृत्रौ युधाम्पती 1231
आविध्य ue ga: कारष्णायसमरिन्दम:। इन्द्राय प्राहिणोद् घोरं वामहस्तेन मारिष ।२४॥
स तु वृत्रस्य परिघं करं च करभोपमम्।चिच्छेद ae देवो वज्रेण aad । २५॥
दोर्भयामुत्कृत्तमूलाभ्यां बभौ रक्तस्तरवोऽसुर: | छिन्नपक्षो यथा गोत्र: खाद् Wel वज्रिणा हत: 1261

कृत्वाधरां हनुं भूमौ दैत्यो दिव्युत्तरां हनुम्। नभोगम्भीरवक्तेण लेलिहोल्बणजिह्वया 1201
ae: कालकल्पाभिर्ग्रसन्निवं जगत्त्रयम् । अतिमात्रमहाकाय आक्षिपंस्तरसा गिरीन् । २८॥
frit पादचारीव पद्भ्यां निर्जरयन् महीम्। जग्रास स समासाद्य वज्रिणं सहवाहनम् । २९॥
a कष्टमिति निर्विण्णाश्चुक्रुशु: समहर्षय: 130 |
निगीर्णोऽप्यसुरेद्रेण न Wael गत:। महापुरुषसन्नद्धो योगमायाबलेन च ।३१॥
भित्त्वा वज्रेणतत्कुक्षिं निष्क्रम्य बलभिद् fay: | seed fat: उत्रोर्गिरिशृङ्खमिवौजसा ।३२॥
वज्रस्तु तक्तास्मम्याशुवेंग: कृन्तन् समन्तात् परिवर्तमान: |
तदा च खे दुन्दुभयो विनेदुर्गन्धर्वसिद्धा: समहर्षिसङ्घा: ।.
वारत्रघ्नलिङ्गस्तमभिष्टुवाना मन्रैर्मुदा कुसुमैरभ्यवर्षन् 13% |
वृत्रस्य देहान्निष्क्रान्तमात्मज्योतिररिन्दम | पर्यतां सर्वलोकानामलोके समपद्यत । ३५॥
इति श्रीमद्भागवते महापुराण पारमहंस्यां संहितावां षष्ठस्कन्धे वृत्रवधा नाम द्वादञ्चाऽध्याय: ।१२॥

Sti Suka went on: Thus talking to each other with a view to ascertaining (the true nature of)
Dharma (righteousness), Indra (the chief of the gods) and the demon Vitra, who were both
endowed with extraordinary prowess and were (great) leaders of warriors, fought on. (23) Whirling
his terrible bludgeon made of black (wrought) iron with his left hand, Vrtra, the chastiser of his
foes, hurled it at Indra, O noble Pariksit! (24) That (mighty) god (Indra), however, synchronously
cut down with his thunderbolt—which had a hundred joints—the bludgeon as well as the hand

of Vitra that resembled the trunk of an elephant. (25) With both (his) arms cut asunder at the very
root, and streaming blood ( form the shoulders), the demon (Vrtra) shone like a mountain struck
