Dis. 29 ] ॥ BOOK FOUR 429

ज आ We te ज ह Me He ew REM CNT Ht He Te SHRM TERETE BBR BS AER ROR WME RET AER ORR ROTOR MART ACROMCR RATER HE NRHA RL BONE

O ruler of men, that brings about the birth (and death) of living beings. (76-77) When a Jiva
resorts to actions again and again, thinking of the pleasures enjoyed (by it) through the
senses, itis bound by such actions of the body so long as they continue to be performed by
it through ignorance. (78) Therefore, in order to get rid of this bondage, worship Sri Hari with
all your being, looking on this universe as one with Him inasmuch as it proceeds from Him,
Stays in Him and is (also) dissolved in Him. (79)

भागवतमुख्यो भगवान्नारदो हंसयोर्गतिम् । set ह्यमुमामन्त्य सिद्धलोकं ततोऽगमत् ico!

प्राचीनबर्ही ua: प्रजासर्गाभिरक्षणे। आदिश्य पुत्रानगमत्तपसे कपिलाश्रमम् । ८१॥

तत्रैकाग्रमना वीरो गोविन्दचरणाम्बुजम्। विमुक्तसङ्गोऽनुभजन् भक्त्या तत्साम्यतामगात् 122 |

Maitreya continued : Having (thus) revealed the truth about the swans (in the shape of
the soul and the Oversoul) and taking leave of king Pracinabarhi, the glorious Narada, the
foremost among the devotees of the Lord, then proceeded to the abode of the Siddhas (a
class of superhuman beings naturally endowed with mystic powers). (80) Leaving instruc-
tions for his sons to take care of the people, the royal sage Pracinabarhi (too) retired to the
hermitage of the sage Kapila (at the mouth of the Ganga) for practising asceticism. (81)
Constantly and devoutly adoring the lotus-feet of Lord Govinda witha concentratedmindand
completely rid of attachment, the hero attained (after death) a form similar to the Lord's. (82)

एतदध्यात्मपारोक्ष्यं गीतं देवर्षिणानघ a: श्रावयेद्य: शृणुयात्स लिङ्गेन विमुच्यते ices
a: कीर्त्यमानमधिगच्छति onde नास्मिन् भवे भ्रमति मुंक्तसमस्तबन्ध: । ८४॥।
अध्यात्मपारोक्ष्यमिदं मयाधिगतमद्भुतम्। एवं स्रियाऽऽश्रम: पुंसरिछिन्नोऽमुत्र च संशाय: । ८५॥

wos

नामकानत्रिशाऽध्याय: 132 |

He who reads (to others) and (even so) he who listens to this allegorical dissertation on
the Spirit, delivered by the celestial sage (Narada), O pure-hearted Vidura, is rid once for all
of his subtle body. (83) He who assimilates, as sung (by others), this self-purifying
discourse—that issued from the lips of the sage Narada (the foremost of celestial seers) and
sanctifies the whole world through the glory of Lord Visnu and which confers the highest
reward (in the form of final beatitude)—is freed from all bondage and no longer revolves in
(the whirligig of) metempsychosis. (84) Thus have | understood the meaning of this
wondertul allegorical teaching on the subject of the Spirit. With the help of this the self-
identification of a Jiva (embodied soul) with Buddhi (that has been depicted here as a
woman) is eradicated and all doubts regarding life after death resolved. (85)

Thus ends the twenty-ninth discourse entitled "The Dialogue between king Pracinabarhi
and the sage Narada," forming part of the Dialogue between Vidura and Maitreya,
in Book Four of the great and glorious Bhagavata-Purana, otherwise
known as the Paramahamsa-Samnhita. ॥

cP Pat Tice १३
PIDOD RNID
