Dis. 6] ^:- 8८०८०९]४४0- +> 109

SFE Ke PERM EMT TE HER TE RR ER TOE कच REE OR EEO चजायोजा त्माजा गक ee RRR OWL eee He

true nature; how, then, could the other gods know it ? Our mind is so confounded that we fail
to comprehend the reality even of this universe, whichis a creation of His Maya, but
merely speculate about it according to our own understanding. (36)

यस्यावतारकर्माणि गायन्ति ह्यस्मदादय: । न यं विदन्ति तत्त्वेन तस्मै भगवते नम: 1301
स एष Sa: पुरुष: कल्पे कल्पे सृजत्यज: | आत्माऽऽत्मन्यात्मनाऽऽत्मानं संयच्छति च पाति च । ३८॥

fs केवलं ज्ञानं प्रत्यक सम्यगवस्थितम्। सत्यं पूर्णमनाद्यन्तं निर्गुणं नित्यमद्वयम् ।३९॥
me विदन्ति मुनय: प्रशान्तात्मेन्दियाशया:। यदा तदेवासत्त्कैस्तिरोधीयेत विप्नुतम् ॥४०॥

आद्योऽवतार: पुरुष: परस्य काल: स्वभाव: सदसन्मनश्च ।
seat विकारो गुण stain विराट् स्वराद् erg चरिष्णु भूम्न: xe
ae भवो यज्ञ इमे प्रजेशा दक्षाद्यो ये भवदादयश्च ।

स्वर्लोकपाला: खगलोकपाला नॄलोकपालास्तललोकपाला: ।४२॥
गन्धर्वविद्याधरचारणेशा ये यक्षरक्षोरगनागनाथा: |

a वा ऋषीणामूषभा: पितॄणां देत्येन्द्रसिद्धेश्चरदानवेन्द्रा: |
अन्ये च चये प्रेतपिशाचभूतकूष्माण्डयादोमृगपक्ष्यधीशा: ।४३॥
यत्किं च लोके भगवन्महस्वदोज:सहस्वद् बलवत् क्षमावत् ।
श्रीह्रीविभूत्यात्मवदद्भुतार्णं wea परं रूपवदस्वरूपम् 14 |
प्राधान्यतो aye आमनन्ति लीलावतारान् पुरुषस्य भूम्न: ।
आपीयतां कर्णकषायश्ञोषाननुक्रमिष्ये त इमान् AUT ।॥४५॥

Hail to that Lord whose descent in the world of matter and exploits (in the course of such
descent) myself and others constantly sing, but whom none of us knows in reality. (37) That
unborn Primal Person Himself creates, protects and dissolves Himself (in the form of this
universe) within Himself and by Himself, cycle after cycle. (38) He is pure (subjective)
absolute consciousness uniformly abiding as the inner Self of all. Heis ever true and perfect,
has no beginning or end, andis attributeless, eternal and one without a second. (39) Narada,
those who are given to contemplation realize Him only when they have perfectly subdued
their body, senses and mind. He, however, disappears from our view when He is assailed
by the sophistical reasoning of the wicked. (40) The first manifestation of the Supreme is the
Purusa (the Cosmic Being). Besides Him, Time, Swabhava (innate disposition), Prakrtiin the
form of cause and effect, and mind, the five gross elements, the Ego, the modes of Prakrti
(viz., Sattva etc.), the senses, the Cosmic Body, the Cosmic Being and the bodies of all
animate and inanimate beings are all manifestations of the all-pervading Lord. (41) Nay,
myself, Bhava (Lord Siva), Lord Visnu, these lords of created beings, Daksa and others, nay,
yourself and other devotees like you, the protectors of heaven (Indra and others), the
guardians of the feathered kingdom (Garuda and so on), the rulers of the mortal world and
the protectors of the subterranean regions (Sesa and others): the lords of the Gandharvas
(the celestial musicians), Vidyadharas and Caranas (the celestial bards): the leaders of the
Yaksas, the Raksasas, the serpents and the Nagas; the foremost among the Rsis (seers)
and the manes; the lords of the Daityas, the Siddhas and the Danavas;: other than these,
such as the rulers of the Pretas, Pisacas, Bhitas, Kasmandas, aquatic creatures, beasts and
birds; nay, whatever in this world is endowed with supernatural powers, glory, vigour,
resolution, physical strength and forbearance, or whatever is possessed of splendour,
