22 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA-MAHATMYA [ Dis. 4

QR RR ARERR A CRORE RR ROR ATCC RE RC AE HCHO RCAE RA RRA RRA ABNER NHN

HABER RRR RMA AAA AML HAR BEM MCHA AER

ततोऽपि दोषा: कलिजा इमे त्वां we न शक्ता: प्रभवोऽपि लोके |
एवं तदाज्ञावसरेऽपि भक्तिस्तदा निषण्णा हरिदासचित्ते 11921
“You bestow on the devotees a form similar to that of Sti Krsna (the Protector of cows).

You are the only sustainer of love (for the Lord) and put an end to the disease of
transmigration. (Therefore) taking recourse to extreme firmness, dwell you as such
incessantly in the minds of votaries of Lord Visnu. (71) Though prevailing over the (whole)
world, these evils born of Kaliyuga either willnotbe able to cast their eyeson youthere." Even
while she was thus being directed by them, Bhakti instantly took up her abode in the mind
of the devotees of Sri Hari. (72)

सकलभुवनमध्ये निर्धनास्तेऽपि धन्या निवसति हृदि येषां श्रीहरेर्भक्तिरेका |

हरिरपिनिजलोकंसर्वध्रातोविहायप्नविज्ञतिह्वदितेषांभक्तिसृन्नोपनद्ध: 1७३॥

ब्रूमोऽद्य ते किमधिकं महिमानमेवं ब्रह्मात्मकस्य भुवि भागवताभिधस्य ।

यत्संश्रयान्निगदिते लभते सुवक्ता श्रोतापि कृष्णसमतामलमन्यधर्मै: ।७४।

इतिश्रीपद्मपुंसणेउत्तरखण्डेश्रींपद्भप्ताक्तमाह्मांन्येभक्किष्टंनिवर्तनंक्मतृलीयॊऽध्याय:॥इ॥

Though destitute, they are (really) blessedin all the (three) worlds, in whose heart abides
exclusive devotion to Sri Hari. it is for this reason that, bound with the chord of Devotion,
Sri Hari too dwells in their heart, completely renouncing His own (divine) realm. (73) More than
this what shall we say with regard to the glory of the aforesaid scripture bearing the name
of Bhagavata, the (very) embodiment of Brahma ? On its being expounded with full
dependence on it, the praiseworthy exponent as well as the man listening to its exposition
both attain equality with Sri Krsna! Have done (therefore) with other righteous courses. (74)

Thus ends the third discourse entitled "Cessation of Bhakti's Agony", forming
part of the “Glory of Srimad Bhagavata" contained in the
Uttara-Khanda of the glorious Padma-Purana.

at Scat Lage वं +
Pur SRS Rec

अथ चतुर्थोऽध्याय:

Discourse lV _
Redemption of a Brahmana (Atmadeva)

सूत उवाच
aa बैष्णवचित्तेषु ger भक्तिमलौकिकीम्। निजलोकं परित्यज्य भगवान् भक्तवत्सल: । १ |
वनमाली घनश्याम: पीतवासा WEG | काञ्चीकलापरुचिरोल्लसन्मुकुटकुण्डल: | २ |
त्रिभङ्गललितश्चारुकौस्तुभेन विराजित: । कोटिमन्मथलावण्यो हरिचन्दनचर्चित: । ३ |
परमानन्दचिन्मूर्तिर्मधुरो मुरलीधर: । आविवेश स्वभक्तानां हृदयान्यमलानि च । ४ ।
वैकुण्ठंबासिनोयेचवैष्यान्राउद्धवादय:।तत्वाथाश्रबणार्थंतेगूढरूपेणसंस्थित्ता:।५।
तदा जयजयारावो रसपुष्टिरलौकिकी । चूर्णप्रसूनवृष्टिश्च मुहु: शङ्खरवोऽप्यभूत् । ६ |
तत्सभासंस्थितानां च देहगेहात्मविस्मृति:।दृष्टाचतन्मयावस्थांनारदोवाक्यपब्रवीत्।७।
