Dis. 22 ] BOOK NINE 85

HHRREREeHA eH S HE EE । SIRI OT २3२ २२ २२२ २२२ २१२१

गान्धार्यां gauge जज्ञे पुत्रशतं नृप। तत्र दुर्योधनो ज्येष्ठो दु:शला चापि कन्यका 1२६॥
WOES पाण्डो: Feat महारथा:। जाता ates युधिष्ठिरमुखास्त्रय: । २७।

A hundred sons were born to Dhrtarastra by (his wife) Gandhari (a princess of
Gandhara, the modern Afghanistan), ७ protector of men ! Of them Duryodhana was the
eldest and there was a Daughter also, Duhgala (by name). (26) Through Kunti, the (elder)
wife of Pandu, who was prevented from copulation due to a curse (pronounced by some
sage who had been shot dead with an arrow by Pandu while pairing with his wife in the
form of a pair of deer), three car-warriors—Yudhisthira and others (viz., Bhima and
Arjuna)— appeared (severally) from the loins of Dharma (the god of piety), Anila (the wind-
god) and Indra (the lord of paradise). (27)

नकुल: सहदेवश्च माद्रयां नासत्यदस्रयो: । द्रौपद्यां पञ्च पञ्चभ्य: पुत्रास्ते पितरोऽभवन् ize

युधिष्ठिरात् प्रतिविन्ध्य: श्रुतसेनो वृकोदरात्। अर्जुनाच्छुतकीर्तिस्तु शतानीकस्तु नाकुलि: 128

सहदेवसुतो राजञ्छुतकर्मा तथापरे। युधिष्ठिरात् तु पौरव्यां देवकोऽथ घटोत्कच: ।३०॥

भीमसेनाद्धिडिम्वायां area सर्वगतस्तत: | सहंदेवात् सुहोत्रं तु विजयासूतं पार्वती ।३१॥
मणिपूरपते: सोऽपि तत्पुत्र: पुत्रिकासुत: 1321

तव तात: सुभद्रायामभिमन्युरजायत | सर्वातिरथजिद् GR Seal ततो भवान् 1331

परिक्षीणेषु कुरुषु द्रौणेर्ब्रह्मास्त्रतेजसा | त्वंचकृष्णानुभावेनसजीवो मोचितोऽन्तकात् ।३४॥

(And) through (his second wife) Madri appeared Nakula and Sahadeva from (the loins
of) Nasatya and Dasra (the two Aswinikumaras). Of these, five sons, (all) your uncles, were
born (one of each) through Draupadi. (28) Prativindhya was born of Yudhisthira; Srutasena
from Bhimasena, (who was voracious as awolf) and Srutakirti, from Arjuna. Again, Satanika
was the son of Nakula; while Sahadeva’s son, O Pariksit, was Srutakarma. Besides (these)
there were other sons (too). From (the loins of) Yudhisthira through (his other wife) Pauravi
appeared Devaka; from Bhimasena through Hidimba (an ogress) sprang up Ghatotkaca,
and from (the selfsame) Bhima through Kali (his third wife) appeared Sarvagata. Andthrough
Sahadeva, (his second wife) Vijaya, the daughter of Parvata, bore Suhotra. (29-31) Nakula
begot Niramitra through (his second wife) Karenumati and Arjuna begot Iravan indeed
through Ulipt, while through the daughter of the king of Maniptra (the modern Manipur in
Assam), he begot Babhruvahana, who though sprung from the loins of Arjuna was
recognized as the son of his maternal grandfather (inasmuch as the princess of Manipur was
given in marriage to Arjuna on the express understanding that the son born of her would be
taken in adoption by her father). (32) Of Subhadra (the last wife of Arjuna and the younger
sister of Lord Sri Krsna) was born your father, the valiant Abhimanyu, who conquered all the
Atirathas* (great car-warriors who encountered him on the battle-field). And from him
through Uttara appeared you (O Pariksit!). (33) (All) the Kurus (with the exception of the five
Pandava brothers) having perished, you too had (almost) been burnt by the (fierce) blaze
of the mystic missile presided over by Brahma (the creator), released by Agwatthama (the
son of Dronacarya). But by the (supreme) might of Sri Krsna you were rescued alive from
(the jaws of) death. (34)

* A car-warrior who encounters numberless adversaries on the battle- field is known as an Atiratha: ` अमितान् वोधयेद् यस्तु

सम्पराक्तोऽतिरथस्तु स:`
