164 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 8.

RARER HHH Cee eS HETEPLE CECE E SANE HEHE EN ACHAEA ER HE HLEOHREA SAKE

PAHAAMAHCTOAM HH ee A THAE LS E ee शाशा या —————e rose eee ae OQ} am vv

sinless Maitreya, the means by which Lord Sri Krsna (who is invoked by His devotees), the
source of piety, can be propitiated, and what type of men are able to win His pleasure. (35)
Teachers who are kind to the meek, 0 chief of the Brahmanaas, tell their devoted pupils and
sons even what they may not have asked. (36) In how many ways, O worshipful sage, do
these elements (earth etc.) return to their source (Primordial Matter)? And who wait on Him
even during a Pralaya and who get merged in Him while He is in Yoganidra ? (37) What is
the true nature of the Jiva (embodied soul) and the essential character of the Supreme ?
What is the wisdom taught by the Upanisads and what, again, is the use a teacher has for
his pupil and vice versa ? (38) Then, what are the means suggested by the wise, O sinless
one, for attaining that wisdom? For neither spiritual enlightenment nor Devotion nor
dispassion can be had by itself. (39) Therefore, being friendly disposed towards me, kindly
answer these questions of mine, that | have asked with intent to acquaint myself with the
exploits of Sri Hari, ignorant as | am and blinded by Maya. (40) (The study of) all the Vedas,
sacrificial acts and austere penance and charitable gifts. O holy one, cannot equal even a
fraction of the merit that one acquires by rendering a Jiva (embodied soul) immune from the
fear of birth and death (through instruction in the truth about God). (41)

a इत्थमापृष्टपुराणकल्प: कुरुप्रधानेन मुनिप्रधान: ।
प्रवृद्धहर्षो भगवत्कथायां सञ्चोदितस्तं प्रहसन्निवाह ।४२॥
इति श्रीमद्भागवते महापुराणे पारमहंस्यां संहितायां तृतीयस्कन्धे सप्तमोऽध्याय: ।७।
Sri Suka continued : When Vidura (the foremost of the Kurus) asked Maitreya (the chief

of the sages) questions bearing on the theme of the Puranas, the latter was immensely
delighted on being urged to narrate the stories of the Lord, and smilingly spoke as follows. (42)

Thus ends the seventh discourse in Book Three of the great and
glorious Bhagavata-Purana, otherwise known
as the Paramahamsa-Samnhita.

cP र्व tnt hs
erste Sieve

अथाष्टमोऽध्याय:

Discourse VIII
Brahma's manifestation
मेत्रेय उवाच
सत्सेवनीयो बत पूरुवंशो यल्लोकपालो भगवत्प्रधान: |
बभूविथेहाजितकीर्तिमालां पदे Wa नूतनयस्यभीक्ष्णम् । १ ।
as Wt क्षुल्लसुखाय ea महद्गतानां fame तस्य ।
प्रवर्तये amet पुराणे यदाह साक्षाद्भगवानृषिभ्य: । २ ।
विवित्सवस्तत्त्वमत: परस्य कुमारमुख्या मुनयोऽन्वपृच्छन्। ३ ।
स्वमेव feet ag मानयन्ते य वासुदेवाभिधमामनन्ति ।
प्रत्यग्धृताक्षाम्बुजकोरमीषदुन्मीलयन्तं विबुधोदयाय । ४ |
