10 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 3

स्रे CHATS Sw EHHA HORE E TE ने ees freee wei

these words. (14) (Presently) there emerged (from the pool) three very lovely males of like
appearance, captivating to women, adorned with wreaths of lotuses and ear-rings (of gold)
and finely dressed. (15) Finding them possessed of similar forms and a lustre resembling
that of the sun, and failing to recognize her husband, that virtuous lady (Sukanya) of
charming limbs sought the two Aswins as her refuge (invoked their help in distinguishing
her husband by stariding apart). (16) Pleased with her vow of fidelity, the two gods showed
to her her husband and, asking leave of the sage, returned by their aerial car to heaven. (17)
यक्ष्यमाणोऽथ शर्यातिङ्च्यवनस्याश्रमं गत: । ददर्श ge me पुरुषं सूर्यवर्चसम् ।१८॥
राजा दुहितरं प्राहं कृतपादाभिवन्दनाम्। आशिषश्चाप्रयुञ्जानो नातिप्रीतमना इव ।१९॥
चिकीर्षितं ते किमिदं पतिस्त्वया प्रलम्भितो लोकनमस्कृतो मुनि: ।
यत् त्वं जराग्रस्तमसत्यसम्मतं विहाय जारं भ्जसेऽमुमध्वगम् ।२०॥
कथं मतिस्तेऽवगतान्यथा सतां कुलप्रसूते कुलदूषणं fae
बिभर्षि oat यदपत्रपा ge पितुश्च was नयस्यधस्तम: 1२१॥
एवं ब्रुवाणं पितरं स्मयमाना दुचिस्मिता। उवाच तात जामाता तवैष भृगुनन्दन: 1221
aaa fa ad wd वयोरूपाभिलम्भनम् fina: परमप्रीतस्तनयां परिषस्वजे ies
Intending to perform a sacrifice, King Saryati visited the hermitage of the sage Cyavana
(once more) some time afterwards and saw by the side of her daughter (Sukanya) a male
possessing the effulgence of the sun. (18) When she bowed at his feet, the king, who was
not much pleased at heart as it were (to see her) and did not pronounce (on her in return
for her salutation) his benedictions either, reproached his daughter (in the following pungent
words):—(19) "Whatis it that you intended to achieve, O vile lass (by this unworthy behaviour
of yours)? Your husband, a sage adored by the (whole) world, has been betrayed by youin
that, having deserted him, stricken as he is with old age and (therefore) not liked by you, you
wait upon this vagabond as a lover! (20) How has your reason embraceda wrong conclusion
in that bereft of (all) shame, you (have taken it into your head to) harbour a paramour ? This
is indeed a stain on your family, 0 girl of noble pedigree ! (By this reprehensible conduct of
yours) you will (surely) hurl the family of your father as well as that of your husband into
hell."(21) To the father, who was talking in this strain, that girl of innocent smiles smilingly
replied, “Dear father, he is (no other than) your son-in-law, the delight of the sage
Bhrgu."(22) She (then) related to her father the whole story—the way in which her husband

had regained his youth and acquired a charming appearance. Astonished and supremely
gratified (at this), the king (lovingly) hugged his daughter. (23)

सोमेन याजयन् dit अहं सोमस्य चाग्रहीत्। असोमपोरप्यश्विनोश्च्यवन: स्वेन तेजसा । २४॥

हन्तुं तमाददे वज्रं सद्योमन्युरमर्षित: । सवज्रं स्तम्भयामास भुजमिन्द्रस्य भार्गव: ।२५॥

अन्वजानंस्तत: सर्वे गहं सोमस्य चाश्विनो: | भिषजाविति यत् पूर्वं सोमाहुत्या बहिष्कृतौ ।२६॥

The sage Cyavana (then) enabled the heroic king (Saryati) to propitiate the Lord through

a Soma sacrifice and by dint of his ascetic power bore a cup of the Soma juice to the two
Aswinikumaras, even though they were not entitled to drink it. (24) Full of indignation, Indra
(who gets enraged in no time) took up his thunderbolt to kill the sage. (But) Cyavana (sen
of the sage Bhrgu) paralyzed the arm of Indra, holding the thunderbolt. (25) From that time
forward all (the gods and others) consented to a cup of the Soma juice being given to the
two Aéswins, who being physicians had heretofore been precluded from a share in the
offerings of Soma juice. (26)
