Dis. 15] BOOK SIX 621

RARER तीडनजा हो वी AREER AAT RRE HAHA eee HHA EHE Ee eee ee A Ae On री eM eRe tr

चरन्ति ह्यवनो कामं ब्राह्मणा भगवत्पिया: । मादूशां ग्राम्यबुद्धीनां बोधायोन्मत्तलिङ्गिन: 1291
कुमारो नारद wea देवलोऽसित: 1 अपान्तरतमो व्यासो मार्कण्डेयोऽथ गौतम: 1221
वसिष्ठो भगवान् wa: कपिलो बादरायणि: | दुर्वासा याज्ञवल्क्यश्च जातूकर्ण्यस्तथाऽऽरुणि: 123 |
TR दत्त आसुरि: सपतञ्जलि: । ऋषिर्वेदशिरा बोध्यो मुनि: पञ्चशिरास्तथा ।१४॥
हिरण्यनाभ: aE: श्रुतदेव ऋतध्वज:। एते परे च सिद्धेशाश्चरन्ति ज्ञानहेतव: ।१५॥
तस्माद्युवां ग्राम्यपशोर्मम मूढधिय: प्रभू। अन्धे तमसि मग्नस्य ज्ञानदीप उदीर्यताम् । १६।

The king said : Who are you, rich in wisdom and the most adored of the adorable, that
have come here, disguised in the form of ascetics absolutely unconcerned with the world ? (10)
Indeed Brahmanas (lit., those identified with Brahma), who are beloved of the Lord, go about
the earth at will, disguised as mad men, for admonishing sensually-minded people like
me.(11) Sanatkumara, Narada, Rbhu, Angira, Devala, Asita, Apantaratama, Vyasa,
Markandeya and Gautama, Vasistha, the glorious Parasurama, Kapila, Suka (son of
Badarayana), Durvasa and Yajnavalkya, Jatukarnya and Aruni, Romasa, Cyavana,
Dattatreya, Asuri with Patanjali, the seer Vedasira, the sage Bodhya, Pafiasira,
Hiranyanabha, Kausalya, Srutadeva, and Rtadhwaja—these and other lords of Siddhas
(enlightened souls) range (over the earth) with the object of imparting wisdom (to qualified
souls). (12—15) Therefore, you two are the masters of my stupid self, a sensual brute.
(Pray,) hold aloft the lamp of wisdom to me, plunged in blinding darkness (in the shape of

ignorance). (16)
SHU उवाच
अहं ते पुत्रकामस्य pesca नृप। एष ब्रह्मसुत: साक्षान्नारदो भगवानृषि: । १७॥
इत्थं त्वां पुत्रशोकेन wa तमसि दुस्तरे। अतदर्हमनुस्मृत्य महापुरुषगोचरम् । १८।
अनुग्रहाय भवत: प्राप्तावावामिह प्रभो । ब्रह्मण्यो भगवद्भक्तो नावसीदितुमर्हति ।१९॥
aa ते परं am ददामि गृहमागत: ।ज्ञात्वान्याभिनिवेशं ते पुत्रमेव ददावहम् । २०॥
अधुना पुत्रिणां तापो भवतैवानुभूयते। एवं दारा गृहा रायो विविधैश्चर्यसम्पद: ।२१।
शब्दादयश्च विषयाश्चला राज्यविभूतय: | मही राज्यं बलं कोशो भृत्यामात्या: सुहृज्ना: 1221
ads शूरसेनेमे ङशोकमोहभयार्तिदा: | गन्धर्वनगरप्रख्या: स्वप्नमायामनोरथा: ।२३॥
दृश्यमाना विनार्थेन न aaa मनोभवा: | ahead नानाकर्माणि मनसोऽभवन् । २४॥
wa fe देहिनो देहो द्रव्यज्ञानक्रियात्मक: | देहिनो विविधक्लेशासन्तापकृदुदाहत: । २५॥
तस्मात् wee मनसा fagea गतिमात्मन:। ga ध्रुवार्थविश्रम्भे त्यजोपशममाविरा 1261
The sage Angira said : | am (the same) Angira, who blessed you with a son when you
longed for one, O king ! (And) here is the divine sage Narada, son of Brahma (the creator)
himself. (17) Knowing you, a devotee of Lord Visnu (the Supreme Person), plunged in (a sea
of) despondency—difficult to get through—due to grief caused by the loss of your son,
though not fit to be drowned in it, we have come down here to shower our grace on you, O
Citraketu ! (For) a votary of the Brahmanas and a devotee of the Lord does not deserve to
be despondent. (18-19) | was going to impart the highest wisdom to you even then when |
visited your house (for the first time). Coming to know of your insistence on having something
else (however), | conferred on you (the boon of) a son alone. (20) Now the agony of those
blessed with a sonis being directly experienced by you. Even soa wife, house, riches, power

and prosperity of various kinds, sound and the other objects of sense, the fleeting glories
of sovereignty, lands, kingdom, army, treasury, dependants and ministers and friends and
