272 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 30

LEAH HRE RST ARCH LOH EAO ATE HE EOE AOR EEE HEELS eh eee ss eh eee teeter PeeKCCHS SEH
SSS NE ES SE SEN SSeS ee

य यमर्थमुपादत्ते दु:खेन सुखहेतवे। तं तं धुनोति भगवान् पुमाञ्छोचति यत्कृते । २ ।
यदध्रुवस्य देहस्य सानुबन्धस्य दुर्मति: । ध्रुवाणि मन्यते मोहाद गृहक्षेत्रवसूनि च । ३ |
wad wa wafer यां यां योनिमनुव्रजेत्। cet तस्यां a लभते निर्वृतिं न विरज्यते । ४ |
नरकस्थोऽपि देहं वै न पुमांस्त्यक्तुमिच्छति aes निर्वृतौ wat देवमायाविमोहित: । ५ ।
आत्मजायासुतागारपशुद्रविणबन्धुषु । निरूढमूलहदय ae ag मन्यते। ६ |
सन्दह्यमानसर्वाङ्ग . एषामुद्वहनाधिना । करोत्यविरतं मूढो दुरितानि दुराशय: । ७ |
आक्षिप्तात्मेन्द्रिय: स्रीणामसतीनां च मायया । रहोरचितयाऽऽलापै: शिशूनां कलभाषिणाम् । ८ ।
गृहेषु कूटधर्मेषु दु:खतन्त्रेषुतन्दित: । कुर्वन्दुखप्रतीकारं सुखवन्मन्यते गृही । ९ ।
अर्थैरापादितैर्गुर्या हिंसयेतस्ततश्च तान्। पुष्णाति येषां षोषेण ङोषभुग्यात्यध: स्वयम् । १०॥
वार्तायां लुप्यमानायामारब्धायां पुन: पुन:। लोभाभिभूतो नि:सत्त्व: परार्थे कुरुते स्पृहाम् । ११।
कुटुम्बभरणाकल्पो मन्दभाग्यो वृथोद्यम: | श्रिया विहीन: कृपणो ध्यायञ्छ्सिति मूढधी: । १२।

Lord Kapila continued : Just as a mass of clouds knows not the inordinate strength
of the mighty wind-god, though driven (here and there) by the latter, so this Jiva surely does
not know the enormous power of the omnipotent Kala though being subjected to repeated
births and deaths (by the latter). (1) The almighty Time-Spirit destroys each and every object
the Jiva acquires with great pains for the sake of happiness, and for whose loss he grieves
much. (2) That is because the stupid creature foolishly regards as everlasting the house,
lands and wealth etc., belonging to one's transient body and those connected with it (viz.,
one’s wife, son and so on, who are equally perishable). (3) The Jiva in this world finds delight
in whatever species of life he is born into, and never feels aversion for it. (4) Deluded by the
Lord's Maya, the Jiva feels little inclined to cast off his body even in hell, taking delight in the
infernal enjoyments. (5) With his heart deeply attached fo body, wife, progeny, house,
animals, wealth and relations, he deems himself blessed.(6) Burning all over with anxiety to
maintain them all, the evil-minded fool incessantly commits sins. (7) Nay, with his mirid and
senses captivated by the charms wrought on him in the private chamber by lewd women,
as well as by the talks of lisping infants, the householder remains attached to his home life,
which is mainly full of trouble and the duties of which involve the practice of wiles; and if, while
scrupulously performing these duties, he succeeds in averting calamity, he deems himself
happy as it were.(8-9) Through moneys procured from here and there by practising great
violence, he maintains those people (the members of his family) by fostering whom he goes
down to perdition, himself enjoying only whatis left after nourishing them. (10) When he finds
his business hampered, though renewed again and again, he loses patience and, over-
whelmed with greed, longs-for others’ wealth. (11) His efforts coming to nought through bad *
luck, he becomes moneyless and is no longer able to maintain his family. Nay, puzzled in
mind, he is reduced to a wretched plight, and full of anxiety, heaves deep sighs. (12)

एवं स्वभरणाकल्पं तत्कलत्रादयस्तथा । नाद्रियन्ते यथापूर्वं कीनाशा sa गोजरम् । १३॥
तत्राप्यजातनिर्वॆदो भ्रियमाण: स्वयम्भृतै: । जरयोपात्तबैरूप्यो मरणाभिमुखो गृहे । १४॥
आस्तेऽवमत्योपन्यस्तं गृहपाल इवाहरन्। आमयाव्यप्रदीप्ताम्निरल्पाहारोऽल्पच्चेष्टितत ।१५॥
वायुनोत्क्रमतोत्तार ` कफसंरुद्धनाडिक: | कासश्वासकृतायास: कण्ठे घुरघुरायते ie
warm: परिशोचद्भि: परिवीत: स्वबन्धुभि: | वाच्यमानोऽपि न ब्रूते कालपारावशं गत: 1201

Seeing him unable to support them as aforesaid, his wife and others treat him not with
