14 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis, 4

र्म्म ३३३२ ३०१२ २२२२ न वयैन्र क्दतिमि

स sa भक्तियोगेन तपोयुक्तेन पार्थिव: । स्वधर्मेण eft प्रीणन् wer, सर्वाञ्छनैर्जहौ ।२६।
गृहेषु दारेषु सुतेषु बन्धुषु द्विपोत्तमस्यन्दनवाजिपत्तिषु ।
a शो 1291

तस्मा अदाद्धरिश्चक्रं प्रत्यनीकभयावहम्। एकान्तभक्तिभावेन प्रीतो भृत्याभिरक्षणम् ।२८॥

Sti Suka replied ; Having inherited (the dominion of the (entire) globe with its seven
divisions (Dwipas) and (alongwith it) an inexhaustible store of wealth and unequalled power
and luxuries, the highly blessed Ambarisa regarded all that as equal in value to (no more
valuable than) objects seen in a dream—even thoughitwas most difficult to attain in the eyes
of men (of the world—knowing as he did the perishableness of (all) wealth, through which
man falls a prey to infatuation. (15-16) He had attained that supreme devotion io Lord
Vasudeva and His pious devotees by virtue of which (all) this (untold) wealth was regarded
by him as (no better than) a clod of earth. (17) He fixed his mind exclusively on the lotus-feet
of Lord Visnu (the Enchanter ofall); he employed his words (eloquence) in recounting the
virtues of Lord Vaikuntha, his hands in sweeping the temple of Sri Hari andso on, (and) his
auditory sense in hearing the excellent Stories of the immortal Lord. (18) He employed his
eyes in seeing the idols and temples of Lord Sri Krsna (the Bestower of Liberation) and his
tactile sense (pervading all the parts of his body) in touching the limbs of His servants
(devotees); he devoted his olfactory sense to the fragrance of the blessed Tulasi leaves
derived from (the contact of) His lotus-feet and his sense of taste to the food etc., offered to
Him. (19) (Nay,) he employed his feet in repairing on foot to the tracts of land (Mathura and
$0 On) consecrated to Sri Hari andhis head in bowing to the feet of Lord Visnu (the Controller
of our senses) and coveted the offerings (such as wreaths of flowers, sandal-paste, scents
and dainties) made to the Lord not with a desire to gratify his senses (only) but with a view
to (attaining) His service (as a token of His grace). And he did all this (merely) in order that
attachment may be conceived (in his mind) for the servants (devotees) of Lord Visnu
(enjoying excellent renown). (20) Thus resigning from day to day all his round of duties to
the supreme Lord, who is above (all) sense-perception and whose worship excels all other
sacred observances, and practising devotion to Him with his entire being, he ruled the earth,
itis said, as instructed by Brahmanas (like the sage Vasistha) devoted to Him. (21) He
propitiated the almighty Lord presiding over sacrifices through (a number of} horse-
sacrifices conducted by Vasistha, Asita, Gautama and other sages in a desert land facing
the stream of the Saraswati river—sacrifices that had all their limbs as well as sacrificial fees
(paid to the priests and other Brahmanas) supplemented by abundant riches. (22) In his
sacrifices the superintending priests as well as the priests officiating at the sacrifice and
other men (assembled there), who were (all) richly dressed (and adorned too) and were
gazing with unwinking eyes” (in wonder), looked alike in appearance with the gods (present
there). (23) (Even) the celestial region, beloved of immortals, was never solicited by his men
(much less by the king himself—), who (constantly) heard and chanted the stories of Lord
Visnu (of excellent renown). (24) (Nay,) pleasures of sense which were not easily attainable
even to the Siddhas (a class of demigods endowed with mystic powers from their very birth)
did not delight the aforesaid men—who (always) perceived Lord Mukunda in their heart—
eclipsed 88 they were by the bliss of Self-Realization (enjoyed by them). (25) Thus
propitiating Sri Hari through the practice of Devotion coupled with asceticism, as well as
through (the performance of) his (sacred) duties, the aforesaid king gradually gave up all
attachments. (26) With respect to his houses, wife, children and (other) relations, excellent

eee

* The gads too are believed to possess eyes which never wink.

