688 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 8-

PARANA A SAHRA SH ORL CRAG HOCEH AAS H CHAK eee See ee here we vk rte eter ee ee eee es tetas hia

of (our) agreeable actions, had hitherto been reduced to the position of mere palanquin-
bearers by HiranyakaSipu (Diti’s son). He, however, has (now) been put to death by You, O
Narasimha, the Controller of the twenty-four categories* , knowing as You did the agony
caused to the people by him. (52)
किम्पुरुषा HA:
वयं किम्पुरुषास्त्वं तु महापुरुष ईश्चर: । अयं कुपुरुषो नष्टो धिक्कृत: साधुभिर्यदा ।५३॥

The Kimpurusas said : We are Kimpurusas (insignificant creatures), while You are the
almighty Supreme Person. This wretched fellow was no more (even) when he was
reproached by pious souls. (53)

यस्तां व्यनैषीद् भृशामेष दुर्जनो दिष्ट्या हतस्ते भगवन्यथाऽऽमय: ।५४।
The Vaitalikas said : Celebrating as we did Your untarnished glory inassemblies and
sacrificial sessions, we used to receive great honours (and handsome fees). This extremely

wicked fellow, who had stopped it, has luckily been got rid of by You, O Lord, even as.a
malady. (54)

किन्नरा Ha:

aia किन्नरगणास्तवानुगा दितिजेन विष्टिममुनानु कारिता: !
भवता हरॆ स वृजिनोऽवसादितो नरसिंह नाथ व्रिभवाय नो भव । ५५॥
The Kinnaras said : We, hosts of Kinnaras, (who are) Your servants, 0 Master, were

constantly made to do unpaid labour by this Hiranyakasipu (son of Diti). That wicked fellow,
O Hari, hasbeen slain by You. Make for our prosperity (henceforward), O Lord Narasimha.(55)

विष्णुपार्षदा Hy:
अद्यैतद्धरिनररूपमद्धुतं ते दृष्टुं न: MME सर्वलोकशार्म ।
सोऽयं ते विधिकर ga विप्रशप्तस्तस्येदे निधनमनुग्रहाय faa: 146!

The attendants of Lord Visnu said : It is but today that this weird form of Yours, half
lion, half man, whichis a source of happiness to all the world, has been beheld by us, O Lord
affording protection (to all) ! This demon was (none but) Your servant, cursed by the
Brahmanas (Sanaka and others). (Hence) we know this death of his as an instrument of Your
grace (on him). (56)

Thus ends the eighth discourse, entitled “Lord Nrsimha extolled on the death of Hiranyakasipu
(the demon king)", forming part of the Narrative of Prahrada in Book Seven of
the great and glorious Bhagavata-Purana, otherwise known
as the Paramahamsa-Samnhita.

cat Bah BT TS
PID Sire

* Mala Prakrti (Primordial Matter), the Mahat-tattva (the principle of cosmic intelligence), Ahankara (the Ego), the five
subtle elements, the ten Indriyas and the mind and the five gross elements: these are the twenty-four categories into which
the whole range of objective existence has been broadly divided by the Sankhya system of philosophy. God or the Spirit, who
controls ail these, is the tweny-fifth. This classification has been followed more or less by the other systems too.
