126 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 9

seo enna e enn nnne ng eheten Te een TeTeETeR MA EAT PenCeeyeeh ng ere CSSA RTS RASA ES

which makes it possible for something inexplicable to appear in My Being (as apart from Me)
without any corresponding reality, just like the illusion ofa second moon, and which obscures
My Being (even though | am present everywhere), like the presence of the planet Rahu
(which has a shadowy form) in the midst of the other luminaries, should be regarded as My
Maya (deluding potency). (33) Even as the gross elements (earth, water etc.) may be said
to have entered (the bodies of) all living beings, both great and small, (made up as they are
of those very elements) after their creation, and they can as well be said not to have entered
them (in that they already.inhered in them as their material cause), similarly | can be said to
have entered the bodies of these living beings as their indwelling Spirit (when they are viewed
materially), and | can equally be said not to have entered them (when they are viewed
spiritually, there being no other reality than the Spirit, i-e., Myself). (34) He who is eager to
know the truth of the Spirit should enquire into and_ascertain that Reality alone which is
proved to exist everywhere and at all times—whether you argue by the negative process,
excluding everything else as ‘not that’, ‘not that’, or by the positive method of affirming
everything as that. (35) Establish yourself fully in this doctrine of Mine through perfect
concentration of mind. By doing so you shall never be confounded (fall a prey to egotism etc.)
while creating the diverse forms of life in the course of the various Kalpas. (36)
श्रीगुक उवाच

सम्प्रदिश्यैवमजनो जनानां परमेष्ठिनम्। पङ्यतस्तस्य aq रूपमात्मनो न्यरुणद्धरि: 139!

अन्तर्हितेन्दिवार्थाय हरये विहिताञ्जलि: । सर्वभूतमयो विश्वं ससर्जेदे a पूर्ववत् । ३८॥

प्रजापतिर्धर्मपतिरेकदा नियमान् यमान्। भद्रं प्रजानामन्विच्छन्नातिष्ठत् स्वार्थकाम्यया 1391

4 ane: प्रियतमो रिक्थादानामनुव्रत: | शुश्रूषमाण: शीलेन प्रश्रयेण दमेन च ।`४०॥

माया विविदिघन् faster महामुनि: | महाभागवतो राजन् पितरं पर्यतोषयत् ।४१॥

qe निशाम्य पितरं लोकानां प्रपितामहम् । afd: परिपप्रच्छ भवान् यन्मानुपृच्छति ।४२।

तस्मा इदं भागवतं पुराणं दशलक्षणम् । प्रोक्तं भगवता We प्रीत: पुत्राय भूतकृत् ISR!

नारद: प्राहमुनयेसत्स्वत्यास्तटेनॄप।ध्यायतेव्रहापरपंव्यासम्पाप्रित्ततेजसे।क्षा।
यदुताहं त्वया पृष्टो वैराजात् पुरुषादिदम् । यथाऽऽसीत्तदुपाख्यास्ये प्रश्नानन्यांश्चकृत्स्नश: ।४५॥

Sri Suka continued: Having thus instructed Brahma (the supreme Ruler of all created
beings), the unbornLord Sri Hari withdrew that form of His while the former stood gazing (with
wonder). (37) Brahma, who represented all beings, bowed with joined palms to Sri Hari, who
had now concealed His perceptible form, and created this universe as before ( in the
foregoing round of creation). (38) Eager to secure the good of all created beings, Brahma,
the lord of creation and the protector of righteousness, once practised the various forms of
self-control (Yamas)* and religious observances (Niyamas) with a view to achieving that end,
which he regarded as his own purpose. (39) (During that period) O king, the great sage
Narada, who was the most beloved of all his sons and an eminent devotee of the Lord, and
was eager to know (from Brahma) the Maya (the wonderful power) of Bhagavan Visnu, the
Lord of Maya, waited upon him as an obedient servant and fully gratified his father by his good

* The Yoga-Sitras (Aphorisms on Yoga) of Maharsi Patafijali enumerate the Yamas and Niyamas as below :—

“Non-violence, truthfulness. non-thieving, continence and non-accumulation of worldly possessions are the five

Yamas.”
