Dis. 10] BOOK THREE 175

Peer trae Ht rte & HAE SPE EE HE Rae FEE OR RII RE EET TH BTA He PORE RT RT WY RN Be HT

Vidura said : When the Lord had disappeared from view, how many species of life did Brahma,
the grandfather of the whole creation, evolve either from his body or from his mind? (1) Pray, also
elucidate one after another the points that | have referred to you, O worshipful sage, and
resolve all my doubts, foremost as you are of those possessing a vast knowledge. (2)

सूत उवाच

एवं सञ्चोदितस्तेन aot कौषारवो मुनि: । प्रीत: प्रत्याह तान् प्रश्नान् हृदिस्थानथ भार्गव । ३ ।
Sita continued : Thus requested by Vidura, 0 Saunaka (a scion of Bhrgu), the sage
Maitreya (son of Kusaru) felt highly pleased and proceeded to answer the queries (by
Vidura), which he had borne in his mind.(3)

ay

मेत्रेय उवाच
`विरिञ्चोऽपि am चक्रे fet वर्षशतं au: । आत्मन्यात्मानमावेश्य यदाह भगवानज: । ४ |

तद्विलोक्याब्जसम्भूतो वायुना यदधिष्ठित: । पद्ममम्भश्च तत्कालकृतवीर्येण कम्पितम्। ५ |
तपसा ह्येधमानेन fan चात्मसंस्थया । विवृद्धविज्ञानबलो न्यपाद् वायुं सहाम्भसा । ६ |
aera वियद्व्यापि gent यदधिष्ठितम्। अनेन लोकान् प्राग्लीनान् कल्पितास्मीत्यचिन्तयत् | ७ |
cert तदाऽऽविर्य भगवत्कर्मचोदित: | एकं व्यभाङ्खीदुरुधा त्रिधा भाव्यं द्विसप्तधा । ८ |
Wagar संस्थाभेद: wedi धर्मस्य ह्यनिमित्तस्य विपाक: wages ९ ।

The sage Maitreya said : Brahma (the Creator) practised austere penance for a
hundred celestial years with his mind fixed on Sri Narayana, as he had been told by
the Lord, who is devoid of birth. (4) The lotus-born god now saw the lotus on which he
was perched, as well as the water all round, being tossed by the wind, whose fury had
been intensified by the period of universal destruction. (5) His knowledge (about
creation) and creative power having been greatly enhanced by his ever-growing
penance and worship through the Mantras sacred to the Lord, he drank up the wind along
with the water. (6) Perceiving the lotus on which he sat, and which rose to the very sky,
he thought he should bring back to light the worlds that had disappeared at the end of the
preceding Kalpa, by means of that very lotus. (7) Directed by the Lord to carry on the work

.of creation, Brahma entered the corolla of the lotus and split it up into three parts (viz.,
Bhuh, Bhuvah and Swah), although it was so big that it could be divided into fourteen
or even more parts. (8) It is these three worlds alone that have been declared (in the
scriptures) as constituting the realm where the Jivas (embodied souls) experience the
fruit of their actions. As for Brahma, i.e., his abode (the Satyaloka) and the three worlds
immediately below it (viz., Maharloka, Janaloka and Tapoloka), they are the rewards
of virtue practised without any selfish motive. (9)

विदुर उवाच

चदात्थ बहुरूपस्य हरेरद्भुतकर्मण: | कालाख्यं लक्षणं ब्रह्मन् यथा वर्णय न: प्रभो । १०॥
Vidura said : Tell me in detail, my lord, about the potency—referred to by you under the
name of Time—of Sri Hari of marvellous deeds, who appears as many (in the form of the

universe). (10)
मैत्रेय उवाच
शुणव्यतिकराकारो निर्विशोषोऽप्रतिष्ठित: । पुरुषस्तदुपादानमात्मानं लीलयासृजत् । ११।
faa वै ब्रह्मतन्मात्रं died विष्णुमायया।ईश्वरेण परिच्छिन्नं कालेनाव्यक्तमूर्तिना । १२।
यथेदानीं तथाग्रे च पश्चादप्येतदीदूशम्। ant नवविधस्तस्य प्राकृतो वैकृतस्तु a: ।१३॥
कालद्रव्यगुणेरस्य त्रिविध: प्रतिसंक्रम:। आद्यस्तु महत: सर्गो गुणवैषम्यमात्मन: । १४॥
