Dis. 29 } BOOK THREE 267

BRT HERE EEE AEH APES न कछै AAA EERE EE EEAKAA HECKER ESHA THACERE HH SCOHHAT HAAS

that are regarded (by the common people) as their own self (on account of excessive
fondness), so is the perceiving subject recognized as distinct from the body, senses and
other adjuncts, which are generally identified with one's own self (due to ignorance).(39) (To
take another illustration) just as fire is distinct from a piece of burning wood, a spark or even
from the smoke arising from it, and just as it is distinct even from a torch, which is recognized
as identical with it, so the perceiving subject is distinct from the elements, the senses and
the internal sense; the all-pervading Self, which is called Brahma is distinct even from the
perceiving subject, which is called Jiva (an individual soul); and the Lord (the Supreme
Person) is distinct from Prakrti (which is activated by Him). (40-41) One should see the Self
as identical in all living beings and all beings as identical in the Self, even as all (the four
species of) living beings (viz., mammals, oviparous animals, sweat-born creatures and
those sprouting from the earth) are seen as identical in essence with the gross elements
(being products of the same). (42) Just as fire, though one (undifferentiated) appears as
diversified in the media (pieces of wood etc.) manifesting it, due to the diverse characteristics
(size, shape etc.) of those media, so the Self, though one, appears different as abiding in the
various material bodies, due to the diverse characteristics (species etc.) of those bodies.(43)
Therefore, conquering (by the grace of the Lord) this divine Prakrti (Maya)—which veils the
true character, and brings about the bondage of the Jiva, a fragment of the Lord, nay, which
appears both as cause and effect and is so difficult to comprehend—a devotee of the Lord
realizes his true being.(44)

Thus ends the twenty-eighth discourse entitled "The pursuit of disciplines for
God-Realization”, forming part of the “Teachings of Lord Kapila",
in Book Three of the great and glorious Bhagavata-
Purana, otherwise known as the
Paramahamsa-Samhita.

cat foot Ht १९
ru Sees

अथैकोनत्रिंशोऽध्याय:

Discourse XXIX
True meaning of devotion and the glory of Time
देवहूतिरुवाच
लक्षणं महदादीनां wd: पुरुषस्य च । स्वरूपं लक्ष्यतेऽमीषां aq तत्पारमार्थिकम् । १ ।
यथा सांख्येषु कथितं यन्मूलं तत्प्रचक्षते। भक्तियोगस्य मे मार्गं ब्रूहि विस्तरश: प्रभो । २ ।
fart येन पुरुषो भगवन् सर्वतो भवेत्। आचक्ष्व जीवलोकस्य विविधा मम संसृती: । ३ ।
FSM परेषां च परस्य al स्वरूपं aad Haha यद्धेतो: कुशलं जना: । ४ |
लोकस्य मिथ्याभिमतेरचक्षुषश्चिरॆ प्रसुप्तस्य तमस्यनाश्रये ।
श्रान्तस्यं कर्मस्वनुविद्ध्या fier त्वमाविरासी: fees योगभास्कर: 141
` Devahtti said : You have told me, as described in works on the Sankhya system of
ohilosophy, the characteristics of Mahat-tattva (the principle of cosmic intelligence)as well

as of Prakrti (Primordial Matter) and Purusa (the Spirit)—characteristics which reveal their
true (and distinctive nature); now be pleased to reveal to me at length, O Lord, the path of
