144 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 3

{hee rte Tete rot ttre et doe er ee oe eat व Cee AEH ER eee SHES NAH eH EE HH eM

remaining unscathed. (4) Like a hen-pecked husband, the almighty Lord took away (from
Indra’s paradise) the celestial tree (of Parijata) for His favourite consort (Satyabhama) in order
to please her; andon this account Indra (the wielder of a thunderbolt), blind with rage, pursued
Him with his bodyguards (consisting of the forty-nine wind-gods); for Indra is indeed a toy in
the hands of his wives. (5) Seeing her son (the demon Naraka), who seemed to swallow the
sky with his (gigantic) body, killed by the Lord's discus, Sudargana, goddess Earth prayed to
Him (for mercy) when the Lord bestowed on the deceased's son (Bhagadatta) the portion of
his kingdom that had not been annexed, and entered the gynaeceum (in Naraka's palace). (6)
Seeing Sri Hari (Sri Krsna), the Befriender of the afflicted, the princesses (numbering not less
than sixteen thousand) that had been kidnapped (and imprisoned) there by Naraka (the son
of goddess Earth) sprang on their feet and at once accepted Him as their husband through
glances that betrayed their excessive joy, bashfulness and love. (7)
आसां aad एकस्मिन्नानागारेषु योषिताम्। सविधं जगृहे पाणीननुरूप: स्वमायया । ८ ।
तास्वपत्यान्यजनयदात्मतुल्यानि सर्वत: । Ue दश दश प्रकृतेर्विबुभूषया । ९ |
कालमागधञ्ञाल्वादीननीके सरुन्धत: पुरम्। अजीघनत्स्वयं feet स्वपुंसां तेज आदिशत् । १०।
erat द्विविदं amt मुरं बल्वलमेव च । अन्यांश्च दन्तवक्त्रादीनवधीत्कांश्च घातयत् । ११।
ae ते भ्रातृपुत्राणां पक्षयो: पतितान्नृपान्। चचाल भू: Het येषामापततां बलै: । १२।
सुयोधन॰सानुचरंश्।यानंभप्नोरुमृह्र्यांनननन्द्रपक्यन्।श्झा
टिं भुर्वग्ऽयं ft x, x ~ 7 . a“ BS . \
मिथो oo aaat भविता विवादो मध्वामदाताम्रविलोचनानाम्।
Sui वधोषाय इयानतोऽन्यो मय्युद्यतेऽन्तर्दधते स्वयं स्म ।१५॥

Having assumed by His wonderful divine potency (Yogamaya) an equal number of forms
suited to those girls, the Lord accepted their hand with due ceremony at one and the same
hour, though in different palaces. (8) In order to extend the sphere of His Lila (playful activity)
He begot ten sons through each of them—sons that were His own images in every
respect.(9) When Kalayavana, Jarasandha (the king of Magadha), Salva and others
besieged the city (of Mathura) with their armies, He took the initiative Himself and had them
killed by His people (Mucukunda, Bhima and others), lending to them His own divine
power.(10) Of the demons Sambara, Bana, Mura and Balwala, Dwivida (the monkey chief)
and other warriors like Dantavaktra, some He disposed of Himself, while others he caused
to be despatched (by Balarama, Pradyumna and so on). (11) Thereafter He brought about
the destruction of monarchs who had joined the sides of your nephews (the sons of
Dhrtarastra and Pandu), and who made the entire globe rock as they marched to Kuruksetra
(the scene of the Mahabharata war) with their armies. (12) Nay, He did not rejoice (was not
satisfied) even when He saw Suyodhana (a euphemism for Duryodhana) with his satellites
lying prostrate on the battle-field, his thighs broken (by a blow from Bhima's mace)—
Suyodhana, who had lost his fortune as well as his life as an outcome of the wicked counsel
of Karna,Duhsasana (his younger brother) and Sakuni (the son of Subala). (13) (He said to
Himself) "Even though the earth has been relieved of a huge burden through the destruction
of armies with a total strength of eighteen Aksauhinis” at the hands of Acarya Drona, Bhigsma,

* One Aksauhini consists of 21,870 elephants, an equal number of chariots, 65,610 horses and 1,09,350 foot. Thus the

Mahabharata war alone involved the destruction of 3,93,660 elephants. the same number of chariots, 11.80,980 horses and
19,68,300 foot.
