512 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 90

SRORAAAMORARHECRAKEATHESHKEDAHERAMERT EC ERELE RE # शाशा श्र छ क शादा शाक १ गक न न

मेघ श्रीमंस्त्वमसि दयितो यादवेन्द्रस्य qa श्रीवत्साङ्कं वयमिव भवान् ध्यायति प्रेमबद्ध: ।
अत्युत्कण्ठ: शाबलहृदयोऽस्मद्विधो बाष्पधारा: स्मृत्वा स्मृत्वा विसृजसि मुहुर्दु:खदस्तत्प्रसङ्ग: । २० |

O cloud, your colour is as lovely and beautiful as that of our beloved Lord. Surely you are
very dear to our Lord, the crown-jewel of the race of Yadu. That is why, bound to Him with
ties of love, you are absorbed in His thought like us. With a heart full of anxiety you always
pine for Him like us and recollecting Him again and again shed profuse tears. Oh, the very
contact with Him is painful. (20)

करवाणि fem ते fri aq 4 बल्गितकण्ठ कोकिल 1221

O cuckoo, your voice is so sweet and melodious. It seems our beloved Lord has made
it So sweet (by drilling it). You warble in notes as sweet as those of the honey-tongued Sri
Krsna, Your songs bring life even to the dead. Please tell us what service we may render to
you today. (21)

न uefa न वदस्युदारबुद्धे fafa चिन्तयसे महान्तमर्थम् ।
afi aa वरसुदेवनन्दनाङ्घ्रिं वयमिव कामयसे स्तनैर्विधर्तुम् ।२२।

Oh, dear mountain, you possess a noble mind. ॥ is you who support the earth by
maintaining her balance. How is it that you neither move nor speak anything ? You seem to
be merged in some Serious thought. Oris it that you long to place the lotus-feet of our beloved
Lord on your breast-like peaks (even) as we. (22)

waa: afin aq सिन्धुपत्न्य: सम्प्रत्यपास्तकमलश्रिय इष्टभर्तु: ।
Ue वयं मधुपते: प्रणयावलोकमप्राप्य मुष्टहदया: पुरुकर्शिता: स्म ।२३॥

Orivers, consorts of the ocean, (it is summer now). Your beds are dry. The beauty of the
lotus (full bloom) is no longer tobe in found in you. You have become very lean and thin. (The
reason is notfartoseek.) (Just) as we have been robbed of our heart and have become much
too emaciated, being deprived of the !ove-laden glances of (our beloved Consort) the Lord
of the Yadus, so have you been reduced to this wretched condition because the clouds no
fonger supply you with water from your beloved ocean. (23)

हंस स्वागतमास्यतां पिब पयो ब्रूह्यङ्ग UN: कथां दूतं त्वां नु विदाम कच्चिदजित: स्वस्त्यास्त उक्तं पुरा ।
किं वा नश्चलसौहद: स्मरति तं कस्माद् भजामो वयं क्षौद्रालापय कामदं श्रियमृते सैवैकनिष्ठा स्रियाम् । २४
O dear swan, you are welcome. Take your seat (here) and have a little milk. Please tell
us something of our beloved Lord. We know you are His messenger. Is our dear Sri Krsna.
whois under no body's control, hale and hearty ? O brother, Heis very fickle in His friendship.
Once He told us that we were the most beloved of Him. Does He remember that profession
of His love ? However, letit go. (If He can afford tobe indifferent to us, why should we languish
for Him ?) (Vile) messenger of a treacherous lover! we donot care to. go to Him. (Or if He calls
us just in order to make friends with us,) you might (as well) bring Him here, (so that we may
have a direct talk with Him); but take care not to bring Laksmi with Him. (If He cannot come
here leaving Laksmi alone, we ask you one thing.) Of all women, does Laksmi alone boast
of Her exclusive love for the Lord ? (Is there none among us, who can claim to possess such
