4 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 1

RBBB REAR ARR ERE RARE AE AAAS ६989 कद्रा ककक ४

श्रीगुक उवाच

एकदा गिरिशं द्रष्टुमूषयस्तत्र सुव्रता: | दिशो वितिमिराभासा: कुर्वन्त: समुपागमन् । २९।

तान्विलोक्याम्बिका et विवासा व्रीडिता भृशम्। aig, समुत्थाय नीवीमाश्वथ पर्यधात् ।३०॥

masta तयोर्वीक्ष्य seg रममाणयो: | Aga: प्रययुस्तस्मान्नरनारायणाश्रमम् 132 |

weg भगवानाह प्रियाया: प्रियकाम्यया । स्थानं a: प्रविहेदेतत् स वै योषिद् भवेदिति 1321

ad ऊर्ध्व aa ae a पुरुषा वर्जयन्ति हि। सा चानुचरसंयुक्ता विचचार वनाद् वनम् । ३३॥

अथ त्तामाश्रमाभ्याशे weit प्रमदोत्तमाम्।स्रीभि: परिवृतां वीक्ष्य चकमे भगवान् बुध: ।३४॥

सापि तं चकमे gy: सोमराजसुतं oma तस्याँ जनवामास पुरूरवसमात्मजम् ।३५॥

एवं स्रीत्वमनुप्राप्त: सुद्युम्नो मानवो नृप: । सस्मार स्वकुलाचार्यं वसिष्ठमिति ज्गुश्रुम ।३६॥

स तस्य तां दशां दृष्टा कृपया भृशपीडित: । सुद्युम्नस्याशयन् पुंस्त्वमुपाधावत TET ।३७॥

wet स भगवानृषये प्रियमावहन्। स्वां च वाचमृतां कुर्वन्निदमाह विशाम्पते । ३८॥

मासं पुमान् स भविता मासं स्री तव गोत्रज: | इत्थं व्यवस्थया कामं सुद्युम्नोऽवतु मेदिनीम् । ३९॥

आचार्यानुग्रहात् कामं लब्ध्वा पुंस्त्वं व्यवस्थया | पालयामास जगतीं नाभ्यनन्दन् स्म तं प्रजा: ॥४०॥

तस्योत्कलो गयो राजन् विमलश्च सुतास्त्रय: | दक्षिणापथराजानो बभूवुर्धर्मवत्सला: ।४१॥

wa: परिणते are प्रतिष्ठानपति: प्रभु:। पुरूरवस उत्सूज्य Ti पुत्राय गतो वनम् ।४२॥

इति श्रीमद्भागवते महापुराणे पारमहंस्यां संहितायां नवमस्कन्धे इलोपाख्याने प्रथमोऽध्याय: 121

Sri Suka continued : Once upon a time sages of sacred vows repaired to that land
(of lvrta) in order to see Lord Siva (who ordinarily lives on Mount Kailasa), driving away
darkness as well as (all other) light from the quarters (by their superior sptendour). (29) Much
abashed to see them, Goddess Parvati (the Mother of the universe), who was uncovered
(at that time) sprang immediately from the lap of Her Consort (Lord Siva) and put on Her
raiment at once. (30) Observing the fond union of the (divine) Couple, engaged in (amorous)
sports, the sages too withdrew from that forest and proceeded to the hermitage of (the divine
sages) Nara and Narayana (which is altogether free even from such outward display of
sexuality, the very sight of which is tabooed in the eyes of celibates and ascetics). (31)
Thereupon, in His eagerness to please His beloved in Spouse (who was greatly disturbed
in mind by having been seen in dishabille by other males), Lord Siva uttered the following
(words):—’Whatever male enters this reserve shall (forthwith) become a woman." (32) From
that time onward indeed males shun that forest. Sudyumna, for his part, who was (now)
transformed into a (young) woman, roamed about from forest to forest in the company of her
attendants (also likewise transformed). (33) Perceiving that excellent young woman
roaming in the precincts of his hermitage, surrounded (accompanied) by (other young)
women, the glorious god Budha (son of the moon-god, presiding over the planet of the same
name, now known as Mercury) conceived a passion for her. (34) That pretty damsel (of
charming brows) also (in her turn) coveted the said son of King Soma for her husband. (And)
he begot a son, (known as) Purirava through her. (35) Having thus attained the form of a
woman, King Sudyumna, son of Vaivaswata Manu, remembered the sage Vasistha, the
preceptor of his race: so have we heard. (36) (Thought of by her and instantly appearing in
person before her by dint of Yoga,) the sage was sore oppressed with pity to see that
(changed) condition of Sudyumna and desiring the latter's (restoration to) manhood,

(mentally) approached (prayed to) Lord Sankara. (37) Pleased with the sage (Vasistha) and
in order to secure his gratification and (at the same time) to justify (maintain the truth of)

