598 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 9
JERI IRAE Reo tint fin to nion ff cerning tect rte are fh een eee tr nen neers
$c १ न शा SS Sr HS वी आ ह वी ज व

Vrtra (son of Twasta) too, if You deem fit. (40) (Nay,) be pleased, O sinless one, to cure the
fever within our heart by your (kind) glances, accompanied with a gracious, artless and
charming and refreshing smile, as well as by drops of nectar, in the form of sweet and polite
words, cozing from Your mouth, since we, who were (already) Yours, have (now) been
accepted (by You) as Your own by revealing Your form (before us), and are bent low before
You, O divine father, nay, grandfather, our heart being bound by the chain of love to Your
lotus-feet through contemplation on them. (41) Now, as a matter of fact, O Lord, there is no
particular purpose to be made known by us to You here any more than sparks, etc., (which
depend for their very existence on fire) can bring illumination to fire (their cause), since You
divert Yourself with Your divine Maya (creative will)—that is instrumental as it were in
evolving, maintaining and destroying the whole universe—and dwell within the heart of all
the multitudes of living beings as Brahma and as their Inner Controllerand outside as Prakrti
(primordial matter). As their material cause and revealer it is You that directly know all the
Jivas with (due) regard to the peculiarities of their place, time, body and condition. (Nay, )
You are the witness of the (course of) thought of all, taintless by nature as the sky, the
unconditioned transcendent Reality and the embodiment of Sattva unmixed with Rajas and
Tamas. (42) Therefore, (omniscient as You are,) pray, accomplish Yourself (without
awaiting our submission) that object of ours, the hankering for which has prompted us to
seek the shade of Your lotus-feet, the (only) means of relieving the toil of transmigration,
caused by manifold sins, You being the almighty Lord and supreme Teacher. (43) Hence,
O Master, do away with the demon Vrtra (son of Twasta), who is devouring (all) the three
worlds (heaven, earth and the intermediate region) and by whom, O Enchanter of all, our
glory, missiles and weapons (too) have (already) been swallowed up. (44) Hail to You, the
stainless Sri Hari (the Reliever of agonies), of delightful renown, having Your abode in the
cavity of the heart, and without beginning, the Witness (even of the mind, intellect and so
on), the embodiment of Bliss*, the wealth of the righteous and the universally approved
avenue leading the traveller (drudging) on the path of metempsychosis to his home at the
end (of his journey on that path). (45)
sige उवाच

अथैवमीडितो राजन् wet त्रिदशैर्हरि: । स्वमुपस्थानमाकर्ण्य oe तानभिनन्दित: ive
Sri Suka went on : Thus extolled, 0 king (Pariksit) with (great) reverence by the gods
(who pass through only three stages in life, viz., childhood, adolescence and full manhood,
and never grow old), Sri Hari was highly gratified to hear the prayer offered to Him and
addressed them (in the following words). (46)

4

श्रभगवानुवाच
प्रीतोऽहं a: Bee मदुपस्थानविद्यया । आत्मैश्चर्यस्मृति: पुंसां भक्तिश्चैव यया मयि ive!
fe gua मयि प्रीते तथापि विबुधर्षभा: | मय्येकान्तमतिर्नान्यन्मत्तो वाञ्छति तत्त्ववित् ।४८।
न ae कृपण: श्रेय आत्मनो गुणवस्तुदृक | तस्य तानिच्छतो यच्छेदयदि सोऽपि तथाविध: ।४९॥
wa नि:श्रेयसं विद्वान् न वक्त्यज्ञाय कर्म हि । न राति रोगिणोऽपथ्यं वाञ्छतो fe भिषक्तम: । ५० ।
Wee यात भद्रं at दध्यञ्चमृषिसत्तमम्। विद्याव्रततप:सारं गात्रं याचत मा चिरम् । ५१॥
स वा अधिगतो दध्यङ्ङश्चिभ्यां ब्रह्म निष्कलम्। यद् वा अश्वशिरो am तयोरमरतां व्यधात् । ५२।
दध्यङ्ङाथर्वणस्त्वष्टे वर्माभेद्यं मदात्मकम्। विश्वरूपाय यत्प्रादात्त्वष्टायत्त्वमधास्तत: 143 |
* The word 'Krsna' has been etymologically explained as follows in an old couplet given below :—
कृषिर्भूवाचक: wea णश्च निर्वृतिवाचक:। waited परं wae कृष्ण इत्यभिधीयते॥

The root ‘Krs' Implies ‘absolute existence’, while the syllable 'na‘ signifies bliss or beatitude. The supreme Reality, which
is a combination of these (viz., absolute existence and bliss), is thus spoken of as Krsna.
