Dis. 4] BOOK SEVEN 663

RRO BL ROR, eee Re ST Hee BOO a: ae डाजाजा Ee aS ew य च RR rR Re RE RE RE EME EE EMO He Me PONT HE ता सं OME त्रा ता ह ROWE Me व

wonderful workmanship, thrones of rubies and beddings white as the foam of milk and
fringed with festoons of pearls, and where celestial ladies possessed of charming teeth
and producing a sweet sound with their jingling anklets here and there see their pretty faces
(reflected) in the pavements of precious stones. (8—11) In that palace of the great Indra
revelled the mighty and proud Hiranyakasipu, who had conquered (all) the worlds and was
(now) their sole monarch, (nay,) whose feet were respectfully tended by gods and
others severely oppressed by him and who ruled with a strong and iron hand. (12) Upon him,
O dear one—who remained inebriate with a strong-smelling wine and whose coppery eyes
ever kept rolling (through intoxication), (nay,) who was a reservoir of austerity, Yoga
(concentration of mind) and strength of body and acuteness of the senses—waited with
presents (of various kinds) in their hands all the protectors of the worlds barring (of course)
three (viz., Brahma, Visnu and Siva). (13) Him, who had occupied the throne of the great
Indra by (sheer) force, glorified (the celebrated Gandharvas) Viswavasu and Tumburu and
singers such as myself (Narada). (Nay, other) Gandharvas and Siddhas as well as seers,
Vidyadharas and Apsaras (celestial nymphs), O son of Pandu, extolled him again and
again.(14) Propitiated by men belonging to the different Varnas (grades of society) and
Aégramas (stages in life) through sacrifices with liberal gifts, he alone appropriated (all) the
sacrificial offerings by his own might. (15) The earth consisting of its seven Dwipas (principal
divisions) yielded to him (all) its produce unploughed; even so heaven showered (on him)
everything desired; while the sky presented many a wonderful phenomenon. (16) The
(seven) oceans (lit., reservoirs of precious stones of various kinds), full of salt water, wine,
clarified butter, sugar-cane juice, curds, milk and pure water respectively, as wellas the rivers
falling into them (which are spoken of as so many wives of the oceans in view of the fact that
each of the seven oceans is presided over by a male deity who has a number of wives each
presiding over a river) bore (to him) heaps of jewels on their waves. (17) Mountains provided
him with a pleasure-ground in the shape of their valleys, while trees bore him (excellent)
flowers and fruits in all seasons. (And) he singly possessed (usurped) all the distinctive
qualities (functions) of the guardians of the (various) spheres. (18) Having thus conquered
(all) the (four) quarters, the demon (whowas the undisputed sovereign ofall the three worlds)
did not feel satiated even though enjoying as he pleased his beloved objects, since he had
not been able to subdue his senses and mind. (19)

तस्योग्रदण्डसंविग्ना: Aa लोका: सपालका: | ATS: «AT चययुरच्युतम् । २१॥

qa नमोऽस्तु HET चत्रात्मा हरिरीश्चर: | चद्गत्वा न निवर्तन्ते शान्ता: संन्यासिनोऽमला: 1221
इति ते संयतात्मान: समाहितधियोऽमला: | उपतस्थुर्हृषीकेशो विनिद्रा वायुभोजना: ।२३॥
तेषामाविरभूद्दाणी अरूपा मेघनि:स्वना । सन्नादयन्ती ककुभ: साधूनामभयङ्करी । २४।
मा wy विब्रुधश्रेष्ठा: सर्वेषां भद्रमस्तु ane fe भूतानां सर्वश्रेयोपपत्तये । २५।
ज्ञातमेतस्य दोरात्म्यं दैतेयापसदस्य च ।तस्य शान्तिं करिष्यामि कालं तावत्प्रतीक्षत 1261
यदा way वेदेषु गोषु विप्रेषु साधुषु । धर्मे मयि-च विद्वेष: स वा oy विनर्यति 1201
निर्वैराय प्रशान्ताय स्वसुताय महात्मने i प्रह्रादाय यदा द्रुह्येद्धनिष्येऽपि वरोर्जितम् । २८॥

In this way a considerable time slipped past Hiranyakasipu, who, having been subjected
to an execration by the Brahmanas (Sanaka and his three brothers), was (not only) arrogant
and drunk with power and pelf, but violated (the injunctions of) the Sastras (holy books). (20)
Unnerved by his stern rule and finding no shelter elsewhere, the inhabitants of all the worlds
along with their guardian deities resorted to the immortal Lord (Visnu) for protection. (21)
