Dis. 4] BOOK SIX 567.

LAA ATE HOTELES HE KS HS SEK HEHE HK SHH HHL OEH HAH EEEAU HERE HEEL HHA AAA

a: क्रुध्यमानास्ते तपोदीपितमन्यव: । मुखतो वायुमग्निं च ससृजुस्तद्दिधक्षया । ५ |
ताभ्यां निर्दह्यमानांस्तानुपलभ्य HSE | राजोवाच महान् सोमो मन्युं प्रशमयन्निव । ६ ।
मा द्रुमेभ्यो महाभागा दीनेभ्यो द्रोग्धुमर्हथ। विवर्धयिषवो qa प्रजानां पतय: स्मृता: । ७ |
अहो प्रजापतिपतिर्भगवान् हरिरव्यय: | वनस्पतीनोषधीश्च ससर्जर्जमिषं विभु: । ८ ।
sa चराणामचरा ह्यपद: पादचारिणाम्। अहस्ता हस्तयुक्तानां द्विपदां च चतुष्पद: । |
gaa पित्रान्वादिष्टा देवदेवेन चानघा: । प्रजासर्गाय fe we gam निर्दग्धुमर्हथ igo!
आतिष्ठत सतां ari ard यच्छत दीपितम्। fom पितामहेनापि जुष्टं a: प्रपितामहै: 1221
तोकानां पितरौ बन्धूर्दृशो पक्ष्म fern: ofa: । पति: प्रजानां भिक्षूणां गृह्यज्ञानां बुध: सुहत् । १२।
अन्तर्देहेषु भूतानामात्माऽऽस्ते हरिरीश्वर: । सर्वं तद्धिष्ण्यमीक्षध्वमेवं वस्तोषितो ह्यसो 1231
a: समुत्पतितं देह आकाशान्मन्युमुल्बणम्। आत्मजिज्ञासया यच्छेत् स गुणानतिवर्तते ।१४॥
अलं adie: खिलानां शिवमस्तु व: । वाक्षीं ह्येषा वरा कन्या पत्नीत्वे प्रतिगृह्यताम् । १५॥

Sri Suka began again : When the ten Pracetas, the sons of king Pracinabarhi, emerged
from the lake (which was as extensive as an ocean) and saw the earth covered with trees
(due to the suspension of all agricultural activity and the state of anarchy that prevailed
consequent on the retirement of king Pracinabarhi from active rule at the instance of the
celebrated sage Narada), they got angry with the trees and breathed out wind and fire from
their mouths with the intention of burning them, their wrath having been stimulated by
asceticism. (4-5) Finding the trees being consumed by (the joint action of) windandfire, O Pariksit
(a scion of Kuru), Soma (the moon-god), the mighty ruler of (the deity presiding over) the
vegetable kingdom spoke to the Pracetas (as follows), as though appearing their anger :— (6)
"It is not (quite) becoming of you to bear hostility to the poor trees, since you are declared
to be the rulers of created beings and (as such) eager to promote their growth. (7) Oh, the
immortal and all-pervading Lord Sri Hari, the Ruler of (all) Prajapatis (the lords of creation,
Brahma and others) has brought into existence the (various) trees and annual plants (cereal
crops) as the (source of) food of the manes and gods (respectively), (8) (Flowers and fruits
etc., the produce of) the immobile creatures (viz., trees and plants) constitute the food of the
mobile ones (the winged creatures); the footless (viz., grass and sprout etc.), of those
walking on feet (the graminivorous quadruped); (from among the quadruped) the handless
(the deer etc.), are the food of those provided with hands (the lion and other carnivorous
beasts); while quadrupeds (such as the bovine species and other milch cattle) as well as the
annual plants (cereal crops) are the source of food for human beings (the milch cattle
supplying them with milk and oxen helping them in their agricultural pursuits and producing
their staple food in the shape of cereals). (9) Moreover, how can it be worthy of You—who
have been commanded by your father (king Pracinabarhi) as well as by the Lord (the adored
even of the gods) to procreate children, O sinless ones—to burn away trees (that sustain
all living beings)? (10) (Therefore,) follow the path of the virtuous—trodden by your father,
grandfather and great grandfathers—and curb your intensified anger. (11) The parents are
the (true) friends of children; the eye-lashes, of an eye; the husband, of a (married) women;
the sovereign, of a people (and through them of all living beings including trees); the
householder, of mendicants; and a wise man is the friend of a ignorant. (12) The almighty
Sri Hari indwells the hearts of (all) living beings as their Inner Controller. (Therefore,) regard
the entire creation (both animate and inanimate) as His abode; in this way He will be really
propitiated by you. (13) He who subdues by means of an inquiry into (the true nature of) the
