60 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 15

^.६..७.७..३.३.३..३.७.३.३.३.३..३.३.3. 2 श्वंर्षाभंष्टे/ग्रेर्घर्षाघंधंभंभ्रेगेगेर्माप्तर्घे’प्ध्रंछांर्धर्णेमैंर्भेघैर्षागैगैर्धेध्रंर्णिर्घेगैग्भिघेर्शग्रेर्षा…म्नै’गैषींप्तेघेतेंर्धेर्धघंर्शप्रीणॆप्तोर्धेघेघेध्रेर्धेश्लिगैगेघ्रर्धे

यो भीष्मकर्णगुरुशल्यचमूषद्भ्रराजन्यवर्यरथमण्डलमण्डितासु ।
अग्रेचरो मम fash रथयूथपानामायुर्मनांसि च दृशा सह ओज आर्च्छत् । १५॥
aay मा प्रणिहितं गुरुभीष्मकर्णनप्तुत्रिगर्तशालसैन्धवबाह्लिकाद्यै: |
अस्त्राण्यमोघमहिमानि निरूपितानि नो पस्पृशुर्नृहरिदासमिवासुराणि । १६।
aa ga: कुमतिनाऽऽत्मद gad मे यत्पादपद्ममभवाय भजन्ति भव्या: |

मां श्रान्तवाहमरयो tet भुविष्ठं न प्राहरन् यदनुभावनिरस्तचित्ता: । १७॥
नर्माण्युदाररुचिरस्मितशोभितानि हे पार्थं ai सखे कुरुनन्दनेति |
संजल्पितानि नरदेव gage wddeta wa मम माधवस्य । १८
शाय्यासनाटनविकत्थनभोजनादिष्वैक्याद्वयस्य ऋऋतवानिति विप्रलब्ध: |
सख्यु: wea पितृवत्तनयस्य wd सेहे महान्महितया कुमतेरघं Bee
सोऽहं नृपेन्द्र रहित: पुरुषोत्तमेन wen प्रियेण सुहृदा हृदयेन शून्य: |
अध्वन्युरुक्रमपरिग्रहमङ्ग रक्षन् गोपैरसद्भिरबलेव विनिर्जितोऽस्मि 1201
तद्वै धनुस्त इषव: स रथो हयास्ते सोऽहं WH नृपतयो यत आनमन्ति ।
wd क्षणेन तदभूदसदीशरिक्तं भस्मन् हुतं कुहकराद्धमिवोप्तमूष्याम् 12k!

Arjuna said : "| have been deceived, 0 great king, by Sri Hari (Sri Krsna), who
appeared in the form of a friend and relation to me, and who has now robbed me of my
mighty valour, which was once the wonder even of gods. (5) Ata moment's separation
from Him the world presents a loathsome sight, even as this body is called dead when
bereft of life. (6) Through His might | was able, on the occasion of the self-election of
a husband by Draupadi, to outshine the princes that had assembled at the house of king
Drupada, intoxicated with love, to hit the revolving fish (hanging from the roof as a target)
after duly fitting the bow with an arrow, and in this way to win the hand of Krsna
(Draupadi). (7) In His presence | speedily conquered Indra and his heavenly hosts, offered
the Khandava forest to the god of fire and secured the council-chamber built by the demon
Maya, which was of wonderful workmanship and full of conjuring devices; and tributary
chiefs brought presents from every quarter during your Rajasiya sacrifice. (8) It was by
His might that the revered Bhimasena (your younger brother),possessing as he does the
strength and vigour of ten thousand elephants succeeded in slaying Jarasandha—who
was haughty enough to set his foot on the heads of vanquished kings—in order to
acconiplish the Rajastya sacrifice.* Nay, it was He who set free a number of princes that
had been (made captive and) brought by Jarasandha (to his capital) for being sacrificed
to the god Mahabhairava (the chief of the Pramathas or attendants of Lord Siva) and
who in return brought presents for your sacrifice. (9) When your wife (Draupadi) fell at
His feet with tears rolling down her cheeks, and loosing her lovely braid—which, though
rendered most sacred and praiseworthy by being sprinkled with holy water during the
Rajasuya sacrifice, had been roughly handled by miscreants (like Duh$asana and others)
in open court—He requited the wrong done to her by widowing their own wives and
thereby compelling the latter to loose their hair.t(10) Nay, it was He who saved us from
a terrible pitfall contrived by our enemy (Duryodhana)through the sage Durvasa—who
took his meals ahead (in the company) of not less than ten thousand pupils (wherever
he went)—by going to the forest and accepting a stray remnant of some vegetable stuff

* He alone can perform a Rajasiya sacrifice, who has reduced to submission all the living monarchs of his time.
+ Hindu widows keep their hair unbraided and unkempt and even shave them as a sign of lifelong mourning for their
husband.
