Dis. 10] BOOK ELEVEN 557

TORRE मा४ मा EE त्मा EE ROI TT RE EE ROR EE ET SMR BE EEE OE ETC EOE RH

stomach and ear in some other directions; the sense of smell in another and the restless eye
to something else; and every physical organ draws him in a different direction. Thus like the
lord of the house torn up by co-wives, his senses and organs pullhim on all sides. (27) Having
Created through His innate energy the bodies of the different species of living beings, such
as trees, reptiles, animals, birds, gad-flies, fish etc., the Lord was not satisfied. He rejoiced
(only) when He created the human body endowed with reason and capable of realizing the
Supreme Deity. (28) Having after many births in this world acquired the rare human body,
however frail, which is still the means of attaining the object of life, a wise man should speedily
strive to attain Liberation, before this body, constantly subjected to annihilation, is not
destroyed. The enjoyment of sense pleasures can of course be had in all species. (29)
Having thus freed myself from all attachments and egotism and developed dispassion, and
possessing the light of knowledge (acquired from several preceptors), | wander in this world
established in the Self. (30) Stable and comprehensive knowledge cannot be acquired from
one preceptor. This Brahma, without a second, has been variously sung by Rsis. (31)

इत्युक्त्वा स यदुं विप्रस्तमामन्त्य गभीरधी: | वन्दितोऽभ्यर्थितो राज्ञा ययौ प्रीतो यथागतम् 1321
अवधूतवच: श्रुत्वा पूर्वेषां a: स पूर्वज: adage: समचित्तो aya ह ।३३॥
इति श्रीमद्भागवते महापुराणॆ पारमहंस्यां संहितायामेकादशस्कन्धं नवमोऽध्याय: ।९।
The Lord said : The Brahmana of deep wisdom having thus spoken to King Yadu and
greeted and adored by him, took leave and delightedly went his way. (32) Having listened

to the discourse of the Avadhita (Dattatreya) our remote ancestor (King Yadu) rid himself
of all attachments and gained the steady equilibrium of mind. (33)

Thus ends the ninth discourse in Book Eleven of the great and
glorious Bhagavata-Purana, otherwise known
as the Paramahamsa-Samhita.

सिर्वे
PIR

अथ ददशमोऽध्याय:

Discourse X

The emptiness of earthly and other-worldly enjoyments exposed

मयोदितेष्वहित: स्वधर्मेषु मदाश्रय: । वर्णाश्रमकुलाचारमकामात्मा समाचरेत्। १ ।
अन्वीक्षेत विशुद्धात्मा देहिनां विषयात्मनाम्। गुणेषु तत्त्वध्यानेन सर्वारम्भविपर्ययम् । २ |
सुप्तस्य विषयालोको ध्यायतो वा मनोरथ: | नानात्मकत्वाद् विफलस्तथा भेदात्मधीर्मुणै: । ३ ।
निवृत्तं oad aaa प्रवृत्तं मत्परस्त्यजेत्। जिज्ञासायां संप्रवृत्तो नाद्रियेत् कर्मचोदनाम् । ४ |
यमानभीक्ष्णं सेवेत नियमान् मत्पर: क्वचित्। मदभिज्ञं गुरुं झान्तमुपासीत मदात्मकम्। ५ |
अमान्यमत्सरो दक्षो निर्ममो दृढसोहद: | असत्वरोऽर्थजिज्ञासुरनसूयुरमोघवाक । ६ ।
जायापत्यगृहक्षेत्रस्वजनद्रविणादिषु । उदासीन: समं षड्यन् सर्वेषूर्थमिवात्मन: । |
