Dis. 10} BOOK SEVEN 699

RAK OCALA AE KHEAH HHH ALAA MEMVESSE SES HRSA RASA ELE LATA AEA EME HOA AEREAAA ARE HM TH

high-souled Sri Hari, the Inner Controller, the Absolute, the Supreme Spirit, appearing in the
form of an extraordinary lion ! (10)

Wee उवाच
नैकान्तिनो मे मयि जात्विहाशिष आज्ञासतेऽमुत्र च a भवद्विधा: |
अथापि मन्वन्तरमेतदत्र दैत्येश्वराणामनुभुङ्क्ष्व भोगान् ।११॥
=a मदीया जुषमाण: प्रियास्त्वमावेश्य मामात्मनि सन्तमेकम्।
सर्वेषु भूतेष्ठधियज्ञमीशं चयजस्व योगेन च कर्म हिन्वन् ।१२॥
कीर्तिं विश्युद्धं सुरलोकगीतां विताय मामेष्यसि मुक्तबन्ध: ।१३॥
य एतत् कीर्तयेन्मह्यं त्वया गीतमिदं नर: । त्वां च मां च स्मरन्काले कर्मबन्धात् प्रमुच्यते । १४॥
Lord Nrsirmha replied : Those like you, who are exclusively devoted to Me, never seek
(even) from Me benefits in this or the next world. Nevertheless enjoy here during (the whole
of) this Manvantara continuously the luxuries of the lords of the Daityas. (11) Taking (great)
pleasure in My delightful stories and enthroning in Yourheart Me, the one Lord presiding over
sacrifices and (equally) present in all creatures, worship you Me, renouncing (all) action by
offering it to Me. (12) Exhausting (your) merit by means of enjoyment (of pleasures) and sin
by meritorious actions and casting off (your) body in course of time and spreading (in this
world) an unsullied fame which will be sung (even) in the celestial regions, you will
(eventually) attain to Me, all your bonds being loosened. (13) A man who recites this hymn

addressed to Me by you, thinking of you and Me as well as of this narrative will in course of
time be completely freed from the bondage of actions. (14)
Yelq उवाच

ae aa wat a aera | aha, fet a arofagraa Beri ey!

विद्धामर्षाशय: साक्षात् सर्वलोकगुरुं प्रभुम्। भ्रातृहेति मृषादृष्टिस्त्वद्धक्ते मयि चाघवान् । १६॥

तस्मात् पिता मे पूयेत दुरन्ताद् दुस्तरादघात् । पूतस्तेऽपाङ्गसंदृष्टस्तदा कृपणवत्सल 1219 |

Prahrada submitted : | solicit this boon from You, the Ruler of (all) bestowers of boons,

O supreme Lord, that inasmuch as my father, who was ignorant of Your divine glory and
whose heart was stung with indignation, spoke ill of You—who are no other than the
almighty Lord, the Preceptor of the whole universe—labouring under the false notion that
You had been the slayer of his brother (Hiranyaksa), and (further) bore ill-will to me, a
devotee of Yours, he, my father, may (kindly) be absolved from that sin, which is so difficult
to get rid of and so difficult to cross over, although (1 am sure) he was purged (of it) the
moment he was compassionately regarded with the outer corner of Your eye, O lover of
the afflicted ! (15—17)

त्रि-सप्तभि: पिता ga: पितृभि: सह dove laa साधोऽस्य WR जातो ward कुलपावन: । १८।
यत्र यत्र च मद्भक्ता: प्रशान्ता: Aaa: | साधव: समुदाचारास्ते पूयन्त्यपि कीकटा: । १९

यदा aed प्रमुच्यन्ते कामा येऽस्य हृदि श्रिता:। अध eA भवत्यत्र ब्रह्म समश्नुते॥
(Kathopanisad Il. iii. 14)

“When all the desires rooted in one's heart are got rid of, a mortal forthwith becomes immortal and attains oneness with
Brahma (the Absolute) in this (very) life.°
