110 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 3
<<- 4

अपाशकागशरकाकाकककाकलाकाषटशककशाकाशाहकशाशदज्शशश्शआक १9१9 ## #

flames (automatically) on the occasion. (4) The minds of the righteous became cheerful
oppressed as they had been by the demons. When that birthless Lord was about to be born
kettledrums sounded (of themselves) in heaven. (5) At that time Kinnaras and Gandharvas
sang,Siddhas and Caranas uttered praises and Vidyadhara women danced with celestial
nymphs. (6) Full of joy, sages and gods showered flowers and clouds gently rumbled after
the manner of the (roaring) ocean. (7) When midnight enveloped in (thick) darkness came
and when people's prayer (for His descent) began, Lord Visnu, the Indweller of all hearts,
manifested Himself in His entirety through Devaki—who possessed a form similar to that of
a goddess (being an incarnation of Aditi, the mother of the gods)—even as the full moon
would appear in the eastern horizon. (8)

श्रीवत्सलक्ष्मं गलजोभिकौस्तुभं diarat सान्द्रपयोदसौभगम्। ९ ।

महार्हवैदूर्यकिरीटकुण्डलत्विष परिष्वक्तसहस्रकुन्तलम् |

उद्दामकाञ्च्यङ्गदकङ्कणादिभिर्विरोचमानं वसुदेव ऐक्षत । १०॥

a विस्मय्रोत्फुल्लविलोचनो हरिं सुतं बिलोक्यानकदुन्दुभिस्तदा ।

कृष्णावतारोत्सवसम्भ्रमोऽस्पृशन् मुदा द्विजेभ्योऽयुतमाप्रुतो गवाम्।११॥

अथैनमस्तौदवधार्य yee परं ame: कृतधी: कृताञ्जलि: ।

स्वरोचिषा भारत afer विरोचयन्तं गतभी: प्रभाववित्।१२॥

Vasudeva beheld that extraordinary boy with lotus-like eyes, endowed with four arms
wielding uplifted weapons (and other emblems) such as a conch, a mace and a discus;
bearing on his bosom the mark of Srivatsa (a golden curl of hair characteristic of Lord Visnu);
clad in yellow (silk); possessing the charm of acloud laden with moisture, with the Kaustubha
gem shining at His neck and His profuse locks bathed in the splendour of His diadem and
ear-rings studded with precious cat's-eyes, and highly resplendent with an exquisite girdle,
armlets and bangles etc. (9-10) Plunged in joy to behold Sri Hari as his (own) son and with
his eyes wide open through wonder (at the appearance of the all-pervading Lord through the
womb of his wife, Devaki, even though he was bound inwardly with the shackles of ignorance
and outwardly by the fetters of Karnsa), Vasudeva mentally gave away on that (auspicious)
occasion ten thousand cows to Brahmanas in his hurry to celebrate the descent of Sri Krsna
(Lord Visnu). (11) Concluding the boy, (who was) illuminating the lying-in-chamber with His
(own) splendour, to be (no other than) Lord Visnu (the Supreme Person), O scion of Bharata,
Vasudeva, who was aware of the Lord's greatness and whose fear was (completely) gone,
now proceeded to glorify Him with a guileless mind and joined paims, his body bent low (with
humility). (12)

वसुदेव उवाच

विदितोऽसि भवान् साक्षात् पुरुष: प्रकृते: पर: | केवलानुभवानन्दस्वरूप: सर्वबुद्धिदृक 1931
स एव wee सूष्टाग्रे त्रिगुणात्पकम्।ततदनु त्वं ह्यप्रविष्ट: प्रविष्ट इव भाव्यसे ।१४॥
यथेमेऽविकृता भावास्तथा a fend: सह। नानावीर्या: पृथग्भूता विराजं जनयन्ति हि eet
सन्निपत्य समुत्पाद्य दृश्यन्तेऽनुगता gaia विद्यमानत्वान्न तेषामिह सम्भव: 1१६॥

एवं भवान् बुद्ध्यनुमेयलक्षणैर्ग्रह्यैर्गुणे: walt तद्गुणाग्रह: ।

अनावृतत्वाद् बहिरन्तरं न a सर्वस्य wale आत्पवस्तुन: ive

य आत्मनो दृश्यगुणेषु सन्निति व्यवस्यते स्वव्यतिरेकतोऽबुध: |
