114 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 7.

GRE eter tine teint iesirsctnintinineciniran int fret entrecernrtre tint Str fi fot fff fe trdeah trees trer ere eeaee ra ee SH

Again, it was He who taught (to the world) Ayurveda (the science of healthy and long

life). (21)
aa क्षयाय विधिनोपभृतं महात्मा ब्रह्मध्रुगुज्झितपथं नरकार्तिलिप्सु ।
उद्धन्यसाववनिकण्टकमुग्रवीर्यस्रि:सप्तकृत्व उरुधारपरश्वथेन 1221
When the Ksatriya race turns out to be the enemy (rather than the protector) of the
Brahmanas and abandons the path of virtue, as if courting the tortures of hell, nay, when it
becomes a veritable thorn in the side of the world and is exalted by Providence only for its
destruction, the Supreme Spirit appears as Parasurama of tremendous prowess and
exterminates it thrice seven times with His sharp-edged axe. (22)

अस्मत्प्सादसुमुख: कलया HOM इक्ष्वाकुवंश अवतीर्यं गुरोर्निदेशे ।
तिष्ठन् वनं सदयितानुज आविवेश यस्मिन् विरुध्य दशकन्धर आर्तिमार्च्छत् । २३ |
दूरे सुहृन्मधितरोषसुञ्ञोणदृष्ट्या तातप्यमानमकरोरगनक्रचक्र: 12% |

LN ५०५ २

aa: ऊढ्हासम् |

Ever disposed to shower His grace on us (Brahma and the other gods), will the Lord of
Maya take His descentin the line of kswaku (as SriRama) along with His part manifestations
(Bharata, Laksmana and Satrughna) and in obedience to the command of His father (king
Dasgaratha) go in exile to the forest, accompanied by His Spouse (Sita) and younger brother
(Laksmana). There the ten-headed monster (Ravana) will make Him his enemy and come
to grief. (23). When Sri Rama (reaches the seashore), intent like Hara* (Lord Siva) upon
burning His enemy's city, the whole host of alligators, serpents and crocodiles in the ocean
will feel terribly oppressed by the very look of the Lord, whose eyes will turn crimson with
wrath stirred by separation from His beloved Consort (Sita); and Ocean with his limbs all
trembling due to fear will immediately allow Hima passage. (24) (During Ravana’s encounter.
with Indra in the course of his conquest of the four quarters) the tusks of the elephant
(Airavata) bearing Indra on its back were smashed as they struck against Ravana's breast,-
painting the quarters white with (the clouds of) their dust. This made Ravana, the conqueror
of all the quarters, laugh (in exultation). When, however, he carries off the Lord's Spouse
(Sita) and stalks (with pride) between the two contending armies (on the battle-field of
Lanka), the Lord will immediately put an end to his laughter (pride) as well as his life with
the mere twang of His bow. (25)

qa: सुरेतरवरूथविमर्दिताया: क्लेशव्ययाय कलया सितकृष्णकेश: ।
जात: करिप्यतिजनानुपलक्ष्यपार्ग:कर्षाणिचात्ममहिंपोपनिबन्धनानि।रक्ष्।
तोकेन जीवहरणं यदुलूकिकायास्त्रैमासिकस्य च vel ङाकटोऽपवृत्त: |
aq रिङ्गतान्तरगतेन दिविस्पृशोर्वा, उन्मूलनं त्वितरथार्जुनयोर्न भाव्यम् । २७॥
aq a wa व्रजपशून् विषतोयपीथान् पालांस्त्वजीवयदनुग्रहदृष्टिवृष्टया | A,
तच्छुद्धयेऽतिविषवीर्यविलोलजिह्वमुच्चाटयिष्यदुरगं विहरन् ह्रदिन्याम् । २८
तत्कर्मदिव्यपिवयन्निशिनि:ढ्प्त्यप्तंदत्वाग्निनान्नुचिबनेपरिदह्यमाने।
उन्नेष्यति ब्रजमतोऽवसितान्तकालं नेत्रे पिधाय्य सबलोऽनधिगम्यवीर्य: ।२९॥
दि । ee eS

* There is an allusion here to Lord Siva’s famous expedition against the city of Tripura.
