Dis. 29 ] BOOK TEN 227

{eeiCiniorch corinne en syne eye eg ee eo EE ECE २२२२ २२२ १२२२ tr erat

(bewitching) smiles, (loving) glances and melodious music. If not, on our bodies being
consumed by the fire of separation we shall (like Yogis) attain to the presence of Your (lotus)
feet by force of meditation, O beloved Friend ! (35)

यर्ह्यम्बुजाक्ष तव पादतले रमाया दत्तक्षणे क्वचिदरण्यजनप्रियस्य |
अस्प्राक्ष्म तत्प्रभूति नान्यसमक्षमङ्ग स्थातुं त्वयाभिरमिता aq पारयाम: ।३६॥
श्रीर्यत्पदाम्बुजरजश्चकमे तुलस्या लब्ध्वापि वक्षसि पदं किल भृत्यजुष्टम्।
यस्या: स्ववीक्षणकृतेऽन्यसुरप्रयासस्तद्वदु TH च तव पादरज: प्रपन्ना: 1201
Wa: प्रसीद वृजिनार्दन तेऽङ्धिमूलं प्राप्ता विसृज्य वसतीस्त्वदुपासनाञा: |
त्वत्सुन्दरस्मितनिरीक्षणतीव्रकामतप्तात्मनां पुरुषभूषण देहि दास्यम् ।३८॥
deren qa कुण्डलश्रीगण्डस्थलाधरसुधं हसितावलोकम् ।
दत्ताभयं च भुजदण्डयुगं विलोक्व aa: श्रियैकरमणं च भवाम दास्य: 1381
का @Ug ते कलपदायतमूच्छितेन सम्मोहिताऽऽर्यचरितान्न चलेत्तिलोक्याम् |
त्रैलोक्यसोभगमिदं च निरीक्ष्य रूपं यद् गोद्विजद्रुममृगा: पुलकान्यबिभ्रन् ॥४०॥
तन्नो निधेहि करपङ्कजमार्तबन्धो तप्तस्तनेषु च शिरस्सु च किङ्करीणाम् ।४१॥

From the time, O lotus-eyed One, we touched at some unknown spot {in the forest) the
soles of Your (lotus) feet—that concede the privilege of touching them (even) to Goddess
Rama (only) now and then—alas ! we are not able (even) to stand before anyone else, now
that we have been blessed by You, to whom we (the denizens of the forest) are so dear, 0
Darling ! (36) Having secured a place even on Your bosom, Sri (the goddess of beauty and
prosperity) has (always) sought in rivalry with Tulasi (the deity presiding over the basil plant,
the favourite of the Lord) for the dust of Your lotus-feet, actually enjoyed by Your servants—
Sri, for (drawing) whose (gracious) look (on them) the other gods (strenuously) exert
themselves. We too have likewise sought the dust of Your feet. (37) Therefore, be propitious
to us, 0 Soother of (all) suffering, since we have sought the soles of Your feet quitting our
homes with the (sole) ambition of waiting upon You. (Pray,) grant us, O jewel among men,
the privilege of serving You—us whose mind is tormented with intense longing awakened
by Your piercing glances accompanied by charming smiles. (38) Beholding Your
countenance—overhung by curly locks, with its cheeks illumined by the splendour of ear-
rings and lips full of nectar and characterized by smiles and sidelong glances—and gazing
on Your stout arms, that have vouchsafed protection (to Your devotees) as well as on Your
bosom, the sole delight of Sri (the goddess of beauty and prosperity), we would be Your
slaves. (39) Bewitched by Your music characterized by protracted rise and fall of voice and
consisting of melodious pieces, and having gazed (even once) on this form, most graceful
in all the three worlds—at the sight of which (and hearing which music) cows, birds, trees and
beasts (too) wear a thrill of joy—what woman, O Darling ! in the three worlds would not
deviate from the conduct of virtuous women ? (40) Indeed You have been particularly born
as the Dispeller of the fears and distress of Vraja, (even) as Lord Visnu (the most ancient
Person) was born (in heaven) in the form of the divine Dwarf) as the Protector of the celestial
realm. Therefore, place Your lotus-hand, O Befriender of the afflicted, on the burning breasts
and heads of (us,) Your servant-maids. (41)
