Dis. 5] ‘TAY SBOOK TWO 101

Beinn rE etre gto tin ion fore 8 eee fe ten ewe hf fh Pt RE REN PT NT HTT

`एतदेवात्मभू राजन् नारदाय विपृच्छते। वेदगर्भोऽभ्यधात् साक्षाद् यदाह हरिरात्मन: 1241
इति श्रीमद्भागवते महापुराणे पार्महंस्यां संहितायां द्वितीयस्कन्धे चतुर्थोऽध्याय: ।४।

Questioned by the sage Narada, 0 Pariksit! Brahma (the self-born), the repository of the
Vedas, taught to that sage this very gospel, which Sri Hari Himself had imparted to him
earlier. (25)

Thus ends the fourth discourse in Book Two of the
great and glorious Bhagavata-Purana, otherwise
known as the Paramahamsa-Samhita.

२०.२.२: र्षे
eure es

अथ पञ्चमोऽध्याय:

Discourse ४
A description of the cosmos
नारद उवाच

देवदेव नभमस्तेऽस्तु भूतभावन पूर्वज।तद् विजानीहि यज्ञानमात्मतत्त्वनिदर्शनम् । १।

agg यदधिष्ठाने यत: gee प्रभो।यत्संस्थं यत्परं यच्च ard ae तत्त्वत: ।२।

ad ह्येतद् warm ae भूतभव्यभवत्प्रभु:। करामलकवद् fad विज्ञानावसिते तव ।३।

यद्विज्ञानो यदाधारो यत्परस्त्वं यदात्मक:। एक: सृजसि भूतानि भूतैरेवात्ममायया is

आत्मन् भावयसे तानि न पराभावयन् स्वयम्। आत्मशक्तिमवष्टभ्य ऊर्णनाभिरिवाक्कम: 141

नाहं वेद ut ह्यस्मिन्नापरं न ad विभो । नामरूपगुणैर्भाव्यं सदसत् किञ्चिदन्यत: । ६1

स भवानचरद् घोरं am: सुसमाहित: । तेन खेदयसे Fed पराशङ्कां प्रयच्छसि ।७।

एतन्मे yea: ad सर्वज्ञ सकलेश्वर। विजानीहि यथैवेदमहं बुद्ध्येऽनुशासित: ic!
Narada said : My obeisance to you O god of gods, creator of all beings, forefather of all.
Kindly instruct me in that wisdom which makes one realize the truth of the Spirit. (1) My lord,
kindly tell me in essence the truth about this universe, as to what its characteristics are, on
what it is supported, by whom it has been created, where it ultimately rests, by what power
_ itis ruled and what it essentially is. (2) You surely know all this; for you are the lord of that
which has come to be, that which is still to come and that which is coming into existence.
Like a fruit of the emblic myrobalan on the palm of one’s hand, the universeis within the range
of your knowledge. (3) What is the source of your special knowledge and by whom are you
supported ? To what power do you owe your allegiance and what is your essential nature?
Single-handed you create all beings out of the five elements by dint of your own Maya
(wonderful creative energy)! (4) Even as a spider spins a web out of its own mouth without
any exertion and sports in that web, so do you create all beings in your own self by your own
energy and remain unchanged yourself. (5) Of all that is known through a certain name, form
and qualities, in this world, O lord, | know of nothing, animate or inanimate, high, low or
mediocre, which has its source in anything other than you. (6) By the fact that even you (the
supreme Ruler of all) practised austere penance with great concentration of mind, you

bewilder us and lead us to suspect that there is someone higher than you. (7) Omniscient
as you are , O Ruler of all, | ask you all this. Pray, therefore, instruct me in such a way that
