‘Dis. 12] BOOK EIGHT 789

RHCKHKKKAKK SHS LKHHSHKEKATHKEKHCHHHAEKOHEHENCKRERKEC EH EH ANH Hee ree Hee ee ho

(Eventually) extricating herself from the embrace of Lord Siva (the foremost of the gods), O
dear one, the said girl, who was no other than Maya (the deluding potency) conjured up by
the Lord, ran away, even though she had large hips.(30) As though completely overpowered
by Love, His enemy, the aforesaid Rudra followed the steps of Lord Visnu of wonderful deeds
in that form. (81) Even as He pursued her, as the ruttish leader of a herd of elephants would
run after a she-elephant desiring copulation, the seed of Lord Siva, possessed as He was
of unfailing procreative energy, escaped. (32) The spots on earth where dropped the seed
of that great soul.came to be fields of silver and gold, O ruler of the globe! (33) (In the course
of His pursuit of that girl) Lord Siva (the Destroyer of the universe) was (found) present (near
her) on the margin of rivers and lakes, on hill-tops, in forests and groves and wherever (else)
sages dwelt*. (34) The seed having escaped, He perceived Himself befooled by the Lord's
Maya, O jewel among kings,and (now) completely recovered from infatuation. (35) Having
forthwith realized the glory of Lord Visnu, the Soul of the universe, (nay,) His very Self, whose
power cannot be fully known, He did not consider the event (of His being befooled by the
Lord’s Maya) as actually wonderful in any way. (36) Lord Visnu (the Destroyer of the demon
Madhu) was supremely delighted to find Lord Siva unperturbed and unabashed and,
resuming His (original) masculine form, spoke (as follows). (37)

श्रीभगवानुवाच
fen त्वं विव्रुधश्रेष्ठ ai निष्ठामात्मना fea: । यन्मे स्रीरूपया स्वैरं मोहितोऽप्यङ्ग मायया । ३८
को नु मेऽतितरेन्मायां famed पुमान् । तांस्तान्विसृजरतीं भावान्दुस्तरामकृतात्मभि: ।३९॥
wa गुणमयी माया न त्वामभिभविष्यति । मया समेता कालेन कालसरूपेण ATT: ।४०॥

The glorious Lord said: | am glad, O jewel among the gods, that You have by Yourself
regained Your (unruffled) natural state even though, O dear one, You were easily duped by
My Maya (deluding potency). (38) Indeed what male, other than You, can, when (once)
caught in it, overcome My Maya, which creates various objects (of attraction) and cannot be
easily got over by those who have not been able to control their mind. (39) This aforesaid
Maya, consisting of the three Gunas (Sattva, Rajas and Tamas), which gets united with Me—
appearing in the form of the Time-Spirit—in time (at the time of creation, preservation and
dissolution of the universe) by parts (in the form of Rajas, Sattva and Tamas respectively)
shall no longer overpower You. (40) ॥

SYP उवाच

एवं भगवता राजन् श्रीवत्साङ्केन सत्कृत: | आमन्त्य तं परिक्रम्य सगण: स्वालयं ययो ।४१॥
MARYA A मायां भवानीं भगवान्भव: | शंसतामृषिमुख्यानां प्रीत्याऽचष्टाथ भारत ।४२॥
aft व्यपर्यस्त्वमजस्य wat Wwe पुंस: परदेवताया: |
ae कलानामृषभो faq चयवावशोऽन्ये किमुतास्वतन्त्रा: 1x3
a mgs योगात् werd wre वै ।
स एष साक्षात् पुरुष: पुराणो न aq कालो faa न ae: ixvi
Sri Suka continued: Thus kindly treated (embraced) by Lord Visnu (bearing the mark
of Srivatsa—in the shape of white curly hair—on His bosom), O king, and asking His leave

and walking round Him (as a mark of respect), Lord Siva, accompanied by His retinue,
returned to His own abode (Kailasa). (41) Presently, in the midst of the foremost of seers,

* By visiting in the form of that bewitching girl the hermitages of saints and sages while being pursued by Lord Siva,
Lord Visnu indirectly showed to the sages how difficult it is to conquer the charms of a woman, which even Sankara, the
crown-jewel of Yogis, failed to resist, much less others, who are an easy prey to lust.
