316 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 49

AR RA SOR RO IR न Ross Berit tone on ro RE eR RI ERR 2 oti

धर्मेण पालयन्नुर्वीं प्रजा: शीलेन wal ada: सम: स्वेषु श्रेय: कीर्तिमवाप्स्यसि । १८॥
अन्यथा त्वाचरंल्लोके गर्हितो यास्यसे तम: । तस्मात् समत्वे वर्तस्व पाण्डवेषात्मजेषु च ।१९॥
नेह चात्यन्तसंवास: कर्हिचित् केनचित् सह। राजन् स्वेनापि देहेन किमु जायात्मजादिभि: 1201
एक: प्रसूयते जन्तुरेक एव प्रलीयते। एकोऽनुभुङ्क्ते सुकृतमेक एव च दुष्कृतम् ।२१॥
wedi fad हरन्त्यन्येऽल्यमेधस:। सम्भोजनीयापदेगैर्जलानीव जलौकस: 1221
पुष्णाति यानधर्मेण स्वबुद्ध्या तमपण्डितम्। तेऽकृतार्थं प्रहिण्वन्ति प्राणा राय: सुतादय: 1231
we किल्बिषमादाय तैस्त्यक्तो नार्थकोविद: । असिद्धार्थो विशत्यन्धं स्वधर्मविमुखस्तम: 12%!
तस्माल्लोकमिमं राजन् स्वप्नमायामनोरथम्। वीक्ष्यायम्बात्मनाऽऽत्मानं सम: SIP भव प्रभो 1241

Akriira said : O son of Vicitravirya, O enhancer of the glory of the Kurus, your (younger)
brother, Pandu, having demised, you have now ascended the throne (of Hastinapura). (17)
Ruling over the earth with piety, gratifying the people with your good conduct and behaving
impartially towards your own people (viz., your sons and the sons of Pandu) you will attain
prosperity and renown. (18) Acting otherwise, you will be censured in the world (during your
lifetime) and go (down) to hell (after your death). Therefore, behave impartially towards the
sons of Pandu and your own. (19) And there is no (possibility of one's) living together
perpetually with anyone anywhere in this world—even with one's own body, O king; how,
then, could one expect to live eternally with one's wife, children and so on? (20) A creature
is born alone and dies all by itself. Alone it enjoys the fruit of its good deeds and alone does
it reap the consequences of its misdeeds. (21) Others going by the names of son etc., (that
deserve to be nourished) drain the unrighteously accumulated wealth of the foolish one
(even) as the brood of an aquatic animal share its waters (which constitute its very life as it
were). (22) Life, riches and sons etc., that a man nourishes through unrighteousness under
the (false) notion that they are his own (ultimately) forsake the stupid fellow for good (even)
whenhe (feels thathe) has not yet accomplished his purpose (the enjoyment of pleas ures).(23)
Deserted by them (even) when his object has not (yet) been achieved, and carrying (with him)
his (load of) sins a man who is ignorant of his own (real) interest and (therefore) has his face
turned away from his own duty himself descends (after death) into the dismal hell. (24)
Therefore, realizing this world, O king, to be a (mere) dream, illusion or fancy, and controlling
your mind with your reason, be composed and impartial (to all), O lord ! (25)

यथा वदति कल्याणीं at दानपते Yar) तथानया न तृप्यामि wel: प्राप्य यथामृतम् । २६॥
तथापि सूनृता ara हृदि न स्थीयते wo पुत्रानुरागविषमे विद्युत् सौदामनी यथा । २७॥
gave विधिं को नु विधुनोत्यन्यथा पुमान्। भूमेर्भारावताराय योऽवतीर्णो aa: कुले । २८
यो diastase निजमाययेदं ger गुणान् विभजते तदनुप्रविष्ट: ।
wet नमो दुरवबोधविहारतन्त्रसंसारचक्रगतये परमेश्वराय 1281
Dhrtarastra replied : (Even) as you tender this salutary advice, O prince among the charitable,
| cio not feel sated with itany more than amortal would on securing nectar. (26) Still yourwholesome
and agreeable counsel, O gental one, does not stick into my fickle mind—biassed {as itis) through
attachmentto my sons—any more than (a flash of) lightning does (into a cloud). (27) Whatmancan
possibly set aside (even) indirectly the decree of the almighty Lord, who (lam told) has appeared

in the race of Yadu for removing the earth's burden ? (28) Hail to that supreme Lord who, having
evolved this creation (consisting among others of numberless living organisms) by His own creative
