608 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 12

SEC E RPR Rick Srirt er einit HAHAH ORK EE AAR TEAH EHH EEE CECE AHEALESCHEER ERLE ECHR HHH

as his arm, roundandthickas the body of Vasuki(the king of serpents) with his thunderbolt, which
hada hundredjoints. (3) With one of his arms (thus) lopped off, and full of rage, (the demon) Vrtra
approached Indra, who still held his thunderbolt, andsmote him as well as Airavata (the celestial
elephant) in the jaws with his iron club and (lo !).the thunderbolt dropped down from Indra's
hand.(4) (Both) the gods and the demons as well as the hosts of Caranas (celestial bards) and
Siddhas (a class of demigods endowed with mystical powers from their very birth) admired that
most marvellous feat of Vrtra and (at the same time) cried again and again ‘Alack ! Alack !!' to
see the critical plight of Indra (who is invoked by many). (5) Much ashamed (at his discomfiture),
Indra did not pick up again in the presence of his foe the thunderbolt slipped from his hand. To
him Vrtra (now) said, "Taking up your thunderbolt (once more), O Indra, kill your enemy (in my
person); this is not the time for despondency. (6) Nowhere does victory invariably woo the
bellicose armed with weapons, butonly on particular occasions, since they are all subjectto their
destiny except the Lord (the eternal Person), the all-knowing Cause, the one Controller of
creation, preservation and dissolution (of the universe). (7) That Lord alone (in the form of Time,
the propeller of all) is responsible for (their) victory and defeat; for itis subject to His control that
(all) these worlds along with their guardian deities (Brahma and others) helplessly carry on their
activity like birds caught in a net. (8) Not recognizing the Lord (Time) as the (real) Cause in the
shape of the potency of the Indriyas (the senses of perception as well as the organs of action),
the power of the mind andbodily strength, life, immortality (final beatitude) anddeathas well, man
looks upon the gross body as the cause (of victory etc.). (9) Just as a wooden puppet or even
as a mechanical toy-deer is subject to the control of the showman or the individual winding up
the toy, likewise know (all) living beings, O Indra, as subject to the control of God. (10) Without
His help (inspiration) the Jiva (individual soul), Prakrti (primordial matter), Mahat-tattva (the
principle of cosmic intelligence), the ego, the five elements, the (ten) Indriyas and the mind fail
to create, maintain and dissolve the universe. (11) He who is ignorant of this (fact) regards
his own incapable (dependent) self as capable (of doing everything independently). (Really
speaking, ) itis He who evolves beings through other beings (their parents) and devours them
Himself through (carnivorous) beings (such as a tiger). (12) Whatever blessings in the form of
(long) life, affluence, fame and power are coveted by a man are obtained by him at the time
appointed for the same as surely as their contraries (in the shape of death, poverty, infamy and
३8० on), even though he may be unwilling to have them. (13) Therefore, one should remain
balanced in joy and sorrow (severally) proceeding from fame and disrepute, victory and defeat
and even so from life and death. (14) Sattva, Rajas and Tamas are the (three) modes of Prakrti
(Matter) but not the attributes of the Self. He who recognizes the Self to be a (mere) witness of
these isnot bound (by them). (15) Look atme, O Indra, exerting to the best of my power withintent
to take your life, though (already) vanquished in battle and having my weapon (trident) and arm
cut down (by you). (16) This warfare is (after all nothing but) a game of chance, in which life (itself)
is staked, arrows are thrown as dice and the animals etc., carrying the warriors are the gaming-
boards. It is never known here (till the last) whose lot is victory and whose, defeat.” (17)

AY उवाच
Sel Gade: seal गतालीकमपूजयत्।गृहीतवज्र:र प्रहसंस्तमाह गतविस्मय: 2c!
Sti Suka continued : On hearing the guileless speech of Vrtra, Indra welcomed it.

Picking up his thunderboltand feeling no wonder (at his foe's extraordinary presence of mind
and charitable disposition), he laughed heartily and replied to him (as follows). (18)

इन्द्र उवाच
aa aaa सिद्धोऽसि यस्य a मतिरीदृशी । भक्त: सर्वात्मनाऽऽत्मानं सुहृदं जगदीश्वरम् । १९॥

