-, 534 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 24

PAAKOM ATHY OANA S SU eee KS EHTS TRS eUk PENT e HN ee H eRe Herendeen eee eee

with fear and bewildered at heart and retreats even from a distance. It is this incident (his
proceeding against either of the two planets in a hostile manner and standing awhile in front
of itin a menacing attitude) that the people refer to as a (solar or lunar) eclipse (as the case
may be). (3)
ततोऽधस्तात्सिद्धचारणविद्याधराणां सदनानि तावन्मात्रएव।४।ततोऽधस्ताद्यक्षरक्ष:पिशाचप्रेतभूतगणानां
विहाराजिरमन्तरिक्षं यावद्वायु: प्रवाति यावन्मेघा उपलभ्यन्ते | ५ ॥ ततोऽधस्ताच्छतयोजनान्तर इयं पृथिवी
॥ दि :पत्तति aft ।६ ।उपवर्णितं भमेर्यथासंनिवे
रसातलं पातालमिति। ७। एतेषु fe विलस्वर्गेषु स्वर्गादप्यधिककामभोगैश्वर्यानन्दभूतिविभूतिभि:
॥ शोडविहारॆष दॆ रेया नित्यप्रमुरि ॥
ईंश्वरादप्यप्रतिहतकामा मायाविनोदा निवसन्ति। ८। येषु महाराज मयेन मायाविना विनिर्मिता: पुरो

स्वनादिभिरिन्दियोत्सवैरमरलोकश्रियमतिशयितानि। gol यत्र ह aa न भयमहोरात्रादिभि:
कालविभागैरुपलक्ष्यते | ११ । यत्र fe महाहिप्रवरशिरोमणय: सर्वं तम: प्रबाधन्ते । १२ । न वा एतेषु वसतां
दिव्यौषधिरसरसायनान्नपानस्नानादिभिराधयो व्याधयो वलीपलितजरादयश्च
देहवैवर्ण्यदौर्गन्ध्यस्वेदक्लमग्लानिरिति वयोऽवस्थाश्च भवन्ति। १३ । न fe तेषां कल्याणानां प्रभवति
BATT मृत्युर्विना भगवत्तेजसश्चक्रापदेशात् | १४ | यस्मिन् प्रविष्टे ऽसुरवधूनां प्राय: पुंसवनानि भयादेव
स्रवन्ति पतन्ति च । १५ ॥

At (a distance of) quite as many (ten thousand) Yojanas (as Rahu stands below the sun)
below Rahu lie the abodes (realms) of (demigods such as) the Siddhas (a class of beings
possessing mystic powers from their very birth), Caranas (celestial bards) and Vidyadharas
(celestial artistes). (4) Below these lies the aerial region, the sports-ground (abode) of the
hosts of Yaksas (the attendants of Kubera, the god of riches), Raksasas (ogres), PiSacas
(goblins), Pretas (spirits) and Bhitas (ghosts), extending as far (below) as the wind fiercely
blows and clouds are met with. (5) At a distance of a hundred Yojanas below that (the aerial
region) lies this earth (the terrestrial region), extending as far (high) as the foremost of birds
such as the swans, vultures, hawks and eagles (are able to) soar. (6) The situation of the
earth as well as the arrangement ofits parts has (already) been described as itis. Even below
(in the bowels of) the earth there exist seven holes in the earth (subterranean regions)—
situated at a distance of ten thousand Yojanas (from one another) and each extending to the
(same) length and breadth of ten thousand Yojanas, viz., Atala, Vitala, Sutala, Talatala,
Mahatala, Rasatala and Patala. (7) In the houses, gardens, pleasure-grounds and stadia in
these heavenlike subterranean regions—houses etc., exuberantly rich in sensuous
enjoyments, affluence and joy born of power, surpassing even those enjoyed in heaven—
live as householders Daityas and Danavas (two species of superhuman beings noted for
their herculean strength and gigantic form) and serpents (born of Kadri, one of the wives
of the sage Kasyapa), whose wives and children, relations and kinsmen and servants are
ever highly delighted and devoted (to them), whose desires are never thwarted even by most
powerful gods (like Indra) and who divert themselves with their uncanny skill in (various)
arts.(8) In these regions, O great king (Pariksit), shine forth cities built by the miraculous
architect Maya, and richly adorned with wonderful house, defensive walls, gates, town halls,
places of worship, quadrangles and resting-places etc., built of various excellent gems of best
