Dis. 87 ] BOOK TEN 493

SR ACEO EEE मामाकक NEE ROTH eee KEENER HEHE Os Ree ete

of all potencies. Having thus determined the nature of the Purusa, the wise on this earth, full
of faith, adore Your feet, at which (all) acts enjoined by the Vedas are offered and which (as
a result of such offering) put an end to rebirth (for ail time). (20) Some, who have got over
their fatigue (caused by revolving on the whirligig of births and deaths) by diving into the
ocean of nectar-like stories relating to You—who have assumed personal forms for the
purpose of revealing the truth about Your own Self, which is (so) difficult to realize—and who
have renounced their home as a result of their fellowship with devotees revelling like swans
in the lotus of Your feet, do not aspire even for emancipation, O Lord |(21) This human body
(which is like a nest* for the soul, that has been compared to a bride flitting from one body
to another in the course of its mundane existence), when it follows the track leading to You,
behaves as our own self, benefactor and loved one. People (however) do not find as much
delight in You—who are (ever) favourably inclined towards them and are their (true) well-
wisher and loved one, nay, their very Self—and kill their soul by pampering this body and
those connected with it ( which are all unreal and) by cleaving to which they are thrown into
wretched wombs (like those of dogs and swine) and revolve in this mundane existence,
which is full of great fear. Oh, what a pity! (22) By thinking of You Your enemies too have
realized the same truth which ascetics that have controlled their breath, mind and senses and
rigidly practised Yoga contemplate in their heart. The women (cowherdesses of Vrindavana)
who set their mind on Your (delicate, {ong and) stout arms resembling the body of Sesa
{taking You to be a finite being), and even we, who look upon You as equally present
everywhere and hold fast to Your lotus-feet, are equal in Your eyes. (23)

क इह नु वेद बतावरजन्मलयोऽग्रसरं यत उदगादूषिर्यमनु देवगणा उभये ।

तर्हि न सन्न चासदुभयं न च कालजव: किमपि न aa शास्त्रमवकूष्य शयीत यदा । २४।

जनिमसत: सतो मृतिमुतात्मनि ये च भिदां विपणमृतं स्मरन्त्युपदिदान्ति त आरुपितै: ।

त्रिगुणमय: पुमानिति भिदा यदबोधकृता त्वयि न तत: परत्र स भवेदववोधरसे 1241

Alas! what individual of posterior birth anddeathcan possibly know You, who are anterior

to all and from whom came forth Brahma (the first sage), after whom appeared the two
classes of gods (viz., those presiding over the Indriyas, mind etc., and those presiding over
the heavenly regions). When, withdrawing everything (into Yourself at the end of creation),
You repose (as now), there exist at that time neither the gross phenomena (ether etc.) nor
the subtle (such as the Mahat-tattva and Ahankara) nor the product of both (viz., the
psychophysical organism) nor the flux of time nor anything else nor the scriptural texts (by
means of which You could be known). (24) They who posit (as the VaiSesikas do) the coming
into existence of that which did not exist before (viz., of this world as an evolute of Matter),
or who affirm (as the Naiyayikas do) the cessation (known by the name of Liberation) of that
which exists (viz., suffering of twenty-one kinds), as well as they who admit (as the
Naiyayikas or Sankhyas do) of diversity in the soul or who declare (as the Mimamsakas do)
the fruit of actions (in the shape of enjoyment here as well as hereafter) to be real inculcate
all this on the ground of misconception (alone). Since the conception of diversity with regard
to the soul based on texts such as "The soul is composed of the three Gunas (modes of
Prakrti)" is caused by ignorance about You, thelatter cannot existin You, who are above such
ignorance, Knowledge being Your (very) essence. (25)

सदिव मनस्तरिवृतत्वयि विभात्यसदामनुजात् सदभिमृदान्त्यरोषमिदमात्मतयाऽऽत्मविद: tv
न हि विकृतिं त्यजन्ति कनकस्य तदात्मतया स्वकृतमनुप्रविष्टमिदमात्मतयावसितम् 126 |

* Etymologically the body has been spoken of as a ‘Kulaya’ because It gets dissolved into the earth after death (कौ srt)

