Dis. 6] BOOK ELEVEN 543

SOMES TATRA AH ETO गक शाक न क RET 99 2828 ### en en eee

श्रीगुक उवाच
Ww भगवताऽऽदिष्टां wea: कुलनन्दन। गन्तुं कृतधियस्तीर्थं स्यन्दनान् समयूयुजन् ।३९।॥
तन्निरीक्ष्योद्धवो राजन् श्रुत्वा भगवतोदितम्। दृष्टारिष्टानि घोराणि नित्यं कृष्णमनुव्रत: vo!
विविक्त उपसङ्गम्य जगतामीश्वरेश्वम्। sora शिरसा पादौ प्राञ्जलिस्तमभाषत ।४१॥

Sri Suka went on : Thus directed by the Lord, O delight of your race, the Yadavas made
up their mind to undertake a journey to the sacred place (Prabhasa) and began to get ready
their chariots. (39) Seeing this and overhearing the utterance of the Lord and observing the
fearful portents, Uddhava, who was ever devoted to SriKrsna, approached the suzerain Lord
of the universe in seclusion and, touching His feet with his head, submitted to Him with joined
palms (as follows). (40-41)

THA उवाच
देवदेवेश arta पुण्यश्रवणकीर्तन | संहत्यैतत् कुलं नूनं लोकं सन्त्यक्ष्यते भवान् |
fared समर्थोऽपि प्रत्यहन्न यदीश्वर: ।४२॥
नाहं तवाङ्ध्रिकमलं क्षणार्धमपि केशव। त्यक्तुं समुत्सहे नाथ wera aa मामपि x3
aa विक्रीडितं कृष्ण yo परममङ्गलम्।कर्णपीयूषमास्वाद्य त्यजत्यन्यस्पृहां जन: ।४४॥
शय्यासनाटनस्थानस्नानक्रीडाशानादिषु । कथं त्वां प्रियमात्मानं aa भक्तास्त्यजेमहि xe
त्वयोपभुक्तस्रगान्धवासोऽलङ्कारचर्चिता: । उच्छिष्टभोजिनो दासास्तव ara जयेमहि ive!
वातरशना य ऋषय: श्रमणा ऊर्ध्वमन्थिन: | ब्रह्माख्यं धाम ते यान्ति शान्ता: संन्यासिनोऽमला: ro!
wa fee महायोगिन् भ्रमन्त: कर्मवर्त्मसु । wer तरिष्यामस्तावकैर्दुस्तरुं तम: ।४८॥
स्मरन्त: कीर्तयन्तस्ते कृतानि गदितानि च । गत्युत्सितेक्षणक्ष्वेलि यन्नृलोकविडम्बनम् xe
Uddhava said : O Ruler (even) of the adored of gods, O Master of Yoga, the very hearing
and chanting of whose names and praises makes one sacred, having exterminated this race
You are surely going to leave this world for good as (is evident from the fact that) You did not
(choose to) counteract the Brahmanas' curse, though able to do so, almighty as You are.(42)
| cannot bear to abandon Your lotus-feet even for half a second, O Ruler (even) of Brahma
and Lord Siva! (Kindly, therefore) take meas well to Your (divine) realm, O Lord! (43) Having
enjoyed (with their ears) the story of Your extraordinary pastimes, which is most auspicious
to hear and is (sweet as) nectar to the ear, people give up the craving for other objects. (44)
How (then) could we do without You, our beloved One, (nay,) our very self—we, who have
(constantly) waited on You, while You lay in bed, sat or rambled, (with us), stood (beside us),
bathed (in our company), were engaged in (some) sport or dined (with us) and so on ? (45)
We are Your servants who have been adorned with garlands, sandal-paste, raiments and
ornaments etc., used (and given up) by You, and ate the remnants of Your food. (As such)
we shall conquer Your Maya (We are not afraid of Your Maya but of separation from You).(46)
Sages who have (absolutely) nocovering on their body beyond the belt of air about their loins,
have taken great pains on devotions, are lifelong and perfect celibates (lit., have directed the
flow of their generative fluid upwards or stopped its downward flow for all time to come), are
free from passion, have renounced (all) enjoyments, and have no (trace of) impurity left (in
their mind)—they (alone) attain to Your glorious state known by the name of Brahma. (47)
We, however, O supreme Yogi, even though we are revolving in the alleys of Karma in this
world, shall get over the darkness of ignorance, which is (so) difficult to surmount, through
talks about You carried on with Your devotees, dwelling upon and celebrating Your doings
and utterances, Your gait, smiles, glances and jokes and whatever You did in imitation of
