136 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 1

RA At SR ROR RL SSE NTE CN CERO H OHNE Kee HOH AEKN ATK OTHE APECE HORA OAH HH
टि 533 a =
कालेन तावद्यमुनामुपेत्य तत्रोद्धवं भागवतं weet । २४॥
a वासुदेवानुचरं प्रशान्तं वृहस्पते: wR wa प्रतीतम् ।
आलिङ्गय गाढं प्रणयेन भद्रं स्वानामपृच्छद्भगवत्प्रजानाम् । २५॥

While he was yet travelling in the land of Bharatavarsa and reached Prabhasa (near
Dwaraka), king Yudhisthira (son of Prtha) had established himself, with the help of Sri Krsna,
as the universal and undisputed sovereign of the entire globe. (20) There (at Prabhasa) he
heard how his kinsmen (the Kauravas) had perished due to mutual jealousy even asa thicket
of bamboos is consumed by fire produced by the friction of one bamboo against another.
Grieving over the holocaust, therefore, he quietly repaired to the bank of the Saraswati
where it flows in a westerly direction. (21) On the bank of that river he (visited and ) stayed
at (eleven) different spots—severally sacred to the memory of the sages Trita, Usana (the
father of Sukracarya) and Asita, Swayambhuva Manu, king Prthu, the god of fire, the wind-
god, king Sudasa, the cows, Guha (god Kartikeya,the eldest son of Lord Siva) and king
Sraddhadeva (Vaivaswata Manu)—and many other sanctuaries in this area, consecrated to
Lord Visnu, founded by holy sages and gods and containing temples that bore on their
domes the mark of SudarSana, the chief of His weapons, the very sight of which reminded
one of Lord Sri Krsna. (22-23) Journeying thence through the prosperous land of Saurastra
and the kingdoms of Sauvira, Matsya and Kuru-Jangala, he reached in due course the bank
of the Yamuna, where he came across Uddhava, another great devotee of the Lord. (24)
Vidura fondly clasped in close embrace this celebrated servant of Lord Sri Krsna (son of
Vasudeva)—who had attained perfect serenity of mind and was an erstwhile pupil of the sage
Brhaspati (the preceptor of the gods)—and enquired of him the welfare of his relations (the
Yadavas), the proteges of the Lord:—(25)

आसात उर्व्य: कुशलं विधाय कृतक्षणौ TARTS REI
कच्चित्कुरूणां परम: सुहृन्नो भाम: स आस्ते सुखमङ्ग aie
यो a स्वसृणां पितृबद्ददाति वरान् वदान्यो वरतर्पणेन I

a रुक्मिणी भगवतोऽभिलेभे sama विप्रान् स्मरमादिसर्गे ic
कच्चित्सुखं सात्वतवृष्णिभोजदाशार्हकाणामधिफ स sel
यमभ्यषिञ्चच्छतपत्रनेत्रो नृपासनाशां परिहृत्य दूरात् । २९॥
wet: ara सुत: सदृक्ष आस्तेऽप्रणी रथिनां साधु ara: |
असूत यं जाम्बवती ब्रताढ्या ea गुहं योऽम्बिकया धृतोऽग्रे । ३०॥
aq स कच्चिद्युयुधान आस्ते य: फाल्गुनाल्लब्धधनूरहस्य: |
लेभेऽञ्जसाधोक्षजसेवयेव गतिं तदीयॊ यतिभिर्दुरापाम् 138 1
ae बुध: wera आस्ते श्वफल्कपुत्रो भगवत्प्रपन्न: |
य: कृष्णपादाङ्कितमार्गपांसुषचेष्टत प्रेमविभिन्नधैर्य: 1321
कच्चिच्छिवं देवकभोजपुत्रा विष्णुप्रजाया इव देवमातु: |
या चै स्वगर्भेण em ea त्रयी यथा यज्ञवितानमर्थम् । ३३|
अपिस्विदास्ते भगवान् सुखं at oa: सात्वतां कामदुघोऽनिरुद्ध: |
यमामनन्ति स्म ह हब्दयोनिं मनोमयं सत्त्वतुरीयतत्त्वम् ।३४॥
