490 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 14

Se OI ttt tert er te COHERENT COTE EN eS SEEN कच यात् CCEA KESE TAT HHA ST

आस्ते।१६। कदाचिन्मनोरथोपगतपितृपितामहाद्यसत्सदिति स्वप्ननिर्वृतिलक्षणमनुभवति।१७॥ क्वचिद
सीदति।१८॥ क्वचिच्च दु:सहेन कायाभ्यन्तरवह्निना गृहीतसार: स्वकुटुम्बाय क्रुध्यति।१९॥ A Va
पुनर्निद्र।जगरगृहोंतोऽ’ध्रेतपसिपग्न: शून्यारण्य इवप्तोते नान्यत् fas ae wa sarafag: । २०॥

When they have exhausted their merit earned in previous existences, and are (thus)
themselves reduced to a dying state, though (actually) living, they seek the protection of men
whose wealth is of no use (tothem) either here or hereafter (who neither use it for their own
gratification nor for the gratification of others and thus indirectly for their own benefit in the
other world), and who (thus) resemble accursed trees and creepers like the Karaskara and
Kakatunda (two species of poisonous trees) and wells containing poisonous water and are
as good as dead, though living. (12) On some occasion, their mind being perverted through
close association with vile men, they embrace a heretic creed, which entails misery both here
and hereafter like slipping into (the rocky bed of) a waterless stream. (13) When no food is
forthcoming for themselves even through persecution of others, they indeed proceed to
devour their own father or sons or those who are in possession of (even) a straw belonging
to these. (14) Now, reaching their home, divested of (all) agreeable (enjoyable) objects and
attended with miseries, like a forest conflagration, they are scorched with the fire of grief and
give way to extreme despondency. (15) Sometimes, robbed of their very life in the form of
wealth—which is most dear to them—by the demon in the form of a king's househlold,
angered by (adverse) times, they appear quite dead, destitute as they are of all symptoms
of liveliness. (16) Now, recognizing to be real their deceased father, grandfather and so on
as appearing in fancy, they experience joy like that in a dream. (17) Sometimes, eager to
carry out the huge mountain-like volume of precepts relating to household duties, they are
distracted by worldly calamities and feel miserable like one entering a stretch of land full of
thorns and sharp-edged gravels. (18) Now, with their energy sapped by hunger (lit., the
gastral fire burning within their body) which is hard to bear, they vent their anger on their own
people. (19) Again, caught in the grip of a boa constrictor in the shape of (deep) sleep and
steeped in ignorance, they remain lying down. cast off like a dead body in a lonely forest and
unconscious of everything else. (20)

विज्ञानोऽन्धकूपेऽन्धवत्पतति । २१ । कर्हि स्म चित्काममधुलवान् विचिन्वन्यदा परदारपरद्रव्याण्यवरुन्धानो
राज्ञा स्वामिभिर्वां निहत: पतत्यपारॆ निरये। २२ अध च तस्मादुभयथापि fe कर्मास्मिन्तात्मन:
संसारावपनमुदाहरन्ति। २३। मुक्तस्ततो aie बन्धाद्देवदत्त उपाच्छिनन्ति तस्मादपि विष्णुमित्र
इत्यनवस्थिति: | २४ | क्वचिच्च शीतवाताद्यनेकाधिदैविकभौतिकात्मीयानां दशानां प्रतिनिवारणेऽकल्पो
दुरन्तचिन्तयाविषण्ण आस्ते। २५ ।क्वचिन्मिथो व्यवहरन्यत्किञ्चिद्धनमन्येभ्यो वा काकिणिकामात्रमप्यपहरन्
यत्किञ्चिद्वा विद्वेषमेति वित्तशाट्यात्। २६ |

Sometimes, on their teeth in the form of pride being crushed by biting animals in the
shape of wicked men, they are unable to get (even) a wink of sleep and, their consciousness
getting fainter and fainter because of a distressed heart, they fall like a blind man into a
covered well. (21) Now when, seeking after small drops of honey in the form of sensuous
enjoyment and laying their hands on another's wife and property, they are killed by the king
or by the husband or owner, they descend into the abysmal (depths of) hell. (22) Therefore,
the wise speak of action in both forms (virtuous as well as sinful) on (the part of those
treading) this path (of worldly activity) as a field bearing to the Jiva (the crop of) mundane
existence in quick succession without fail. (23) (Even) if they escape from bondage (etc.,
inflicted by the king or the husband and owner by bribing them), a Devadatta snatches away

।

