७5.1]} BOOK SEVEN 647

LAHRKAAAEHHER EATER RAH EEE SHEKELS ERAKE EEE EEE ER Hewes Hee He ee ti eh A oe
त्त्रर्त्त न् ज eee

यदा सिसृक्षु: Wl आत्मन: परो रज: सृजत्येष पृथक् स्वमायया |
aa विचित्रासु fttgte: ङायिष्यमाणस्तमं ईरयत्यसौ । १०॥

य ow «wrt ae dim सत्त्वं सुरानीकमिवैधयत्यत: |
तत्प्रत्यनीकानसुरान् सुरप्रियो रजस्तमस्कान् प्रमिणोत्युरुश्रवा: ।११॥
अत्रैवोदाहृत:र पूर्वमितिहास: सुरर्षिणा । प्रीत्या महाक्रतौ राजन् पृच्छतेऽजातहात्रवे । १२।
Gt महाद्भुतं राजा राजसूये महाक्रतौ । वासुदेवे भगवति सायुज्यं चेदिभूभुज: । १३|
तत्रासीनं सुरऋषिं राजा पाण्डुसुत: क्रतौ । पप्रच्छ विस्मितमना मुनीनां seater । १४।

Sri Suka replied : Well have you asked, O great king (Pariksit), a question relating to
the wonderful and most sacred story of Sri Hari, whichis replete with the glory of His devotees
(like Prahrada), nay, which goes to intensify one's devotion to the Lord and which is sung
by sages like Narada. Bowing to (my father,) the sage Krsna Dwaipayana (Vedavyasa), |
shall (accordingly) narrate the story of Sri Hari. (4-5) Though really transcending Prakrti and
(therefore) beyond the (three) Gunas (modes of Prakrti), unborn and devoid of (a material)
form, the Lord assumed the role of a chastifer in relation to those deserving punishment by
presiding over the Gunas of His own Maya (Prakrti). (6) Sattva (harmony), Rajas (activity)
and Tamas (inertia) are the adjuncts of Prakrti (Matter) and not of the Spirit. Their decline or
growth, O king (Pariksit), is not simultaneous as a matter of fact. (7) Conforming to the spirit
of the times, He fosters the gods and the Rsis (sages) when (the quality of) Sattva is in the
ascendant,the Asuras (demons) when (the quality of) Rajas is predominant, and the
Yaksas (a class of demigods) and the Raksasas (ogres) when (the quality of) Tamas
preponderates.(8) Like fire and other elements (which, though undifferentiated, appear as
differentiated through diverse media), the Lord (though one) appears endowed with various
forms (in the shape of the numberless Jiva); yet Heis not distinguished from the psychophysical
organism (occupied by Him). Itis only the discerning that are eventually able to realize the
Self dwelling in their own heart after carefully investigating it. (9) When intending to create
bodies (as a means of enjoyment) for the Jiva (the individual soul), the aforesaid Supreme
evolves(the element of) Rajas as a distinct entity (out of the chaos hitherto prevailing) by His
own Maya (creative energy). (Nay,) keen to sport in the midst of (all) these heterogeneous
bodies, the omnipotent Lord evolves the Sattvaguna and when about to retire (from His
sportful activities), He fosters the element of Tamas. (10) The Lord, who is the infallible
Creator (of the universe) in conjunction with Prakrti and Purusa (the grounds of creation), O
ruler among men, brings forth the running Time, which stands as the support (an assistant)
of Prakrti and Purusa. Now that which goes by the name of Time, O Pariksit, fosters the
element of Sattva (at the dawn of creation); hence the Lord too, who enjoys an extensive
fame, fosters as it were the host of gods as their friend and exterminates their enemies, the
Asuras, dominated as they are by Rajas and Tamas. (11) To illustrate this very fact (of the
Lord being entirely free from hatred etc.) a legend was lovingly narratedin the past by Narada
(the celestial sage) to the inquiring Emperor Yudhisthira (in whose eye whom no enemy was
ever born) during his great sacrificial performance (of Rajastya), O Pariksit! (12) On seeing
the most wondertul absorption of Sisupala (the ruler of the kingdom of Cedi) into (the divine
person of) Lord SriKrsna (Son of Vasudeva) in the course of the great sacrificial performance
called Rajastya, the celebrated king Yudhisthira (son of Pandu) asked the celestial sage
(Narada)—seated there—with a wondering mind the following question in the presence of
(other) sages, who were (all) listening. (13-14)
