Dis. 2 BOOK EIGHT 741

क्लीघेघेर्धघे…र्व्यर्धघेघेघेघेघेष्पैर्व्यणिंघेणॆष्पैष्टैर्कोर्व्यप्नेगैघे…क्लीघंघंध्रेश्रेप्नेष्टौगैघ्रेक्लिघेभंभेग्रेप्नेमैध्रेघेघेधेधेद्योषींघ्रेर्मीषींर्णैघेभेगैगै

resonant with the humming of intoxicated bees as well as by sweetly warbling birds. (15) It
was swarmed by swans and Karandavas( a variety of ducks) as well as by Cakravakas
(ruddy geese) andcranes, and resounded with the noise of swarms of water-fowls, Koyastis
(paddy-birds) and Catakas.(16) Its water was overlaid with the pollen of lotuses shaking with
the movements of fishes and tortoises and was hemmed in with Kadambas, canes, Nalas
(a species of reeds), Nipas (a variety of Kadambas) and Vaijjulas. (17).It looked most
charming with its Kundas (a species of jasmine), Kurabakas (red amaranths), ASokas,
Sirisas, Kutajas, Ingudis, Kubjakas, Swamaytthis (yellow jasmines), Nagas, Punnagas and
Jatis, Mallikas and Satapatras, Madhavis (spring- flowers), Jalakas etc., as wellas with other
trees growing on its margin and bearing flowers and fruits during all the seasons. (18-19)

तत्रैकदा तद्गिरिकाननाश्रय: करेणुभिर्वारणयूथपश्चरन् |
सकण्टकान् कीचकवेणुवेत्रवद् विशालगुल्मं प्ररुजन्वनस्पतीन् 1201
यद्न्धमात्राद्धयो गजेन्दा Cae व्यालमृगा: सरखड्गा: |
महोरगाश्चापि भयाद् द्रवन्ति सगौरकृष्णा: शरभाश्चमर्य: 122 1
et वराहा महिषर्क्षराल्या कटाश्च ।

ri । था गृही ।
घृणी करेणू: कलभांश्च दुर्मदो नाचष्ट aed कृपणोऽजमायया । २६॥

In that garden, one day, the leader of a herd of elephants, that had its abode in the forest
of that mountain, was roaming about with (a number of) female elephants, breaking (its)
thorny trees and a large thicket consisting of various types of bamboos (such as Kicakas)
and canes.(20) Perceiving it by scent alone, lions and (other) leaders of elephants, tigers and
other beasts of prey, including rhinoceroses, and even huge serpents, black and white
Sarabhas (eight-footed animals, now extinct, represented as stronger than the lion and the
elephant) and Camaris (female yaks) took to flight out of fear. (21)The weaker animals, viz.,
wolves,boars, bisons, bears, porcupines, baboons, hyenas and monkeys as well as
antelopes, hares etc., fearlessly roamed about elsewhere (outside the range of its sight) by
its sufferance.(22) Surrounded by (other) elephants (of its herd) and female elephants (too)
and followed by their youngs, the elephant, that was emitting temporal fluid (all along) and
was consequently being dogged by swarms of black-bees that fed on that fluid, was shaking
the mountain on every side by its (huge) weight. Scenting from a long distance the breeze
blowing from the lake—charged as it was with the pollen of lotuses—and accompanied by
its herd, which was (likewise) oppressed with thirst, the elephant now swiftly made to the
vicinity of the lake, afflicted as it was by heat, its eyes rolling under the influence of that
temporal fluid.(23-24) Making its way into the lake, bathing itself with its water, and thus
relieved of fatigue, it drank to its satisfaction the clear and nectar-like water perfumed with
the pollen of golden and blue lotuses with the tip of its proboscis. (25) Spraying the female
