Dis. 36 ] BOOK TEN ` 253

Se Re AREER NS LEED ETE TEEN Cee ETE KO TET eee TE ACT es PEELE TERETE EES SE

(however) by Narada and coming to know (from the same sage) of the two Sons of Vasudeva
to have been ordained (by Providence) to be his Death, he bound Vasudeva alongwith his
wife (Devaki) with iron fetters. The celestial sage having (now) returned (to his abode in the
highest heaven), Karhsa conferred with Kegi and despatched him (to Vraja) with the order
"Let Balarama and Kegava (Sri Krsna) be disposed of (by you) !" Summoning in his presence
Mustika, Canira, Sala, Togalaka and others (who were renowned experts in wrestling) as
wellas his ministers and keepers of elephants, Karnsa (the king of the Bhojas) then said, "O!
Let this (command of mine) be listened to (and obeyed forthwith), O heroic Cantra and
Mustika ! (16—22) | hear the two sons of Anakadundubhi (Vasudeva), Balarama and Krsna,
are dwelling in Nanda's Vraja; at their hands | am told has my death been decreed. (23) Let
the two boys, when arrived here, be killed by you in a game of wrestling. Let galleries of
diverse designs be erected (in the form of an amphitheatre) round the arena for the
wrestlers, (and) let all the people of the city as well as of the country (the kingdom of
Mathura) witness the voluntary combat. (24) O keeper of (my) elephants, O blessed one,
let the (mighty) elephant Kuvalayapida be brought to (and stationed at) the (main) entrance
of the amphitheatre (and) kill through it my two (juvenile) enemies. (25) Leta bow-sacrifice
(in which Lord Siva is worshipped in the form of a bow and which is recommended in the
works on Siva-Worship as conducive to victory over enemies) be commenced with due
ceremony on the (coming) fourteenth lunar day (which is held particularly sacred to Lord
Siva). Let the priests immolate animals, fit to be sacrificed, to Lord Siva (the Ruler of the
spirits and popularly worshipped even to this day at Mathura under the name of Sri
Bhitegwara), the Bestower of (all) boons." (26)

sameness आहूय यदुपुङ्खवम् । गृहीत्वा पाणिना पाणिं ततोऽक्रूरमुवाच ह । २७॥
भो भो दानपते मह्यं क्रियतां मैत्रमादृत: । नान्यस्त्वत्तो हिततमो विद्यते भोजवृष्णिषु । २८॥
aac: सौम्य कार्यगौरवसाधनम् aes विष्णुमाश्रित्य स्वार्थमध्यगमद् fay: ।२९।
गच्छ FE तत्र सुतावानकदुन्दुभे:; । आसाते ताविहानेन रथेनानय मा चिरम् । ३०॥
fee: fae मे मृत्युरदेवैर्वैकुण्ठसंश्रयै: । तावानय समं गोपैर्नन्दाद्यै: साभ्युपायनै: 1321
घातयिष्य इहानीतौ कालकल्पेन हस्तिना ae मुक्तौ ततो मल्लैर्घातये वैद्युतोपमै: 1३२1
तयोर्निहतयोस्तप्तान् वसुदेवपुरोगमान् । तद्बन्धून् निहनिष्यामि वृष्णिभोजदशार्हकान् | 33 |
wai च fiat wit राज्यकामुकम्।तद्भ्रातरं देवकं च ये चान्ये विद्विषो मम ।३४॥
aad मही faa भवित्री नष्टकण्टका । जरासन्धो मम गुरुद्दिविदो दयित: सखा 1३५1
erat नरको art मय्येव कृतसौहदा: | तैरहं सुरपक्षीयान् हत्वा भोक्ष्ये महीं नृपान् 1३६1
wares fied रामकृष्णाविहार्भकौ । धनुर्मखनिरीक्षार्थं ag यदुपुरश्रियम् । ३७
Having thus commanded his servants, Karhsa (who was well-versed in the methods of
achieving his personal ends) summoned Akrira, the foremost of the Yadus (and a kinsman
of Vasudeva), and, clasping his hand with his own, addressed him as follows:—(27) “O chief
of the charitably disposed, let an act of friendship be done to me. None else is more honoured
and more friendly (to me) than you in the race of the Bhojas and the Vrsnis. (28) | therefore
depend on you, O gentle one, as the means of accomplishing a great purpose, (even) as the
mighty Indra attained his end (in the form of sovereignty of the three worlds, that had been

usurped by Bali (the demon king), depending as he did on Lord Visnu (descended in the form
of Vamana’, the Divine Dwarf, his younger Brother). (29) Proceed (at once) to Nanda's Vraja;

ES
“ For the story of Lord Vamana see Discourses XVIII to XXII! of Book Eight.
