282 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 32

PERERA EAA AEA AN SASH SOHAL HSL A CTS OH SHAE MEERA RARER SSK HAH AE LSE SEHR ee eH

SHARHKEEAAAATAAH य व Le eeVE CHE LS TS Ee eee

scriptures, as well as those which are of an obligatory nature, in their entirety.(16) With their
understanding clouded by passion, their mind full of desires and their senses uncontrolled,
they worship the manes everyday, their heart finding delight in the home alone. (17) Devoted
to the first three objects of human pursuit (viz., religious merit, wealth and sensuous
enjoyment) only, these people are averse to the stories of Sri Hari (the Slayer of the demon
Madhu), whose knowledge takes away the fear of birth and death and whose innumerable
exploits are worth recounting.(18) Abandoning the nectar-like stories of the immortal Lord,
they who listen to vile talks (relating to sensual enjoyment)—even as the swine feed on
filth—have surely been cheated by fate. (19) Performing religious rites from the ceremony
connected with impregnation down to the obsequies, they ascend to the abode of the manes
presided over by Aryamé (the lord of the manes) by the southern path (also known as the
"dark path") and are (eventually) born in the line of their own progeny. (20) Thereafter, when
their merit (that earned them an abode in the realm of the manes) is exhausted, they are
forthwith robbed of their glorious state by the gods (in charge of that realm) and helplessly
descend once more to this world (of mortals), O virtuous lady. (21) Therefore, do you worship
with all your being the supreme Lord—whose lotus-like feet are worth adoring—through
devotion evoked by His virtues.(22) A link formed through Devotion with Lord Vasudeva calls
forth before long dispassion and spiritual wisdom that reveals the truth of the Absolute. (23)
When the mind of the devotee ceases to perceive, even through the faculty of the senses,
any difference, in the shape of agreeability of otherwise, in the objects of senses, which are
just the same (as being the manifestations of the same Reality, viz., Brahma), he forthwith
realizes by his intellect his own self as the revealer of unity, free from attachment, devoid of
merit and demerit (that which is worth accepting or rejecting) and established in its own
(glorious) state. (24-25) The Lord is nothing but absolute Consciousness and is the
same as the Transcendent Reality (Brahma), the Supreme Spirit, the Ruler of all and the
Highest Person. Though One, He appears in diverse forms as the seer, the object seen, the
means of sight and so on.(26) Absence of attachment to all—that is the only desired end to
be attained through all forms of Yoga practised by a Yogi. (27) Brahma is absolute
Consciousness, one and attributeless; yet, through the senses, which have an outward
tendency, it erroneously appears in the form of various objects possessing sound and other
attributes. (28) Just as the same supreme Brahma appeared as Mahat-tattva (the principle
of cosmic intelligence), the threefold (Sattvika, Rajasika and Tamasika) Ego, the five gross
elements and the eleven Indriyas, and the same self-effulgent Being was named as Jiva
when endowedwith these, even so the body of the Jiva in the form of the universe is no other
than Brahma: for it is from Brahma that it has sprung.(29) Of course, he alone can perceive
it as such, whose mind has been composed and rid of all attachment through reverence,
Devotion, daily practice of Yoga and dispassion. (30)

इत्येतत्कथितं गुर्वि ज्ञानं ape येनानुबुद्ध्यते तत्त्वं प्रकृते: पुरुषस्य F188
ज्ञानयोगश्च मन्निष्ठो नैर्गुण्यो भक्तिलक्षण:। द्वयोरप्येक एवार्थो भगवच्छब्दलक्षण: । ३२।
यथेद्दियै: पृथग्दारैर्थो बहुगुणाश्रय: । एको नानेयते तद्वद्धगवान् झास्त्रवर्त्मभि: 1221
क्रियया क्रतुभिर्दानैस्तप:स्वाध्यायमर्शनै: | आत्मेन्द्रियजयेनापि संन्यासेन च कर्मणाम् । ३४॥
योगेन विविधाङ्गेन भक्तियोगेन चैव हि । धर्मेणोभयचिह्नेन य: प्रवृत्तिनिवृत्तिमान् । ३५॥
आत्मतत्त्वावबोधेन बैराग्येण दृढेन च । ईयते भगवानेभि: सगुणो निर्गुण: ay ।३६॥
| have thus expounded to you, O revered mother, the wisdom which reveals the true
nature of the Absolute, and by means of which one can realize the truth about Prakrti (Matter)

and Purusa (Spirit). (1) The discipline of JAiana (spiritual knowledge) and the discipline of
Devotion—which is free from the influence of the three Gunas—directed towards Me, lead

