48 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA-MAHATMYA [ Dis. 6

GEREN RRR RRMA AI BRA RA AAR RABAT ARBRE RB AS HS BREA BE BAIRD MMA ESHER BBE BESE HEME REE BE HEME SESE BY EWE BEBE BE

Drink with reverence, 0 pious souls ! this (nectar-like) story, which is (so) dear to Sri
Krsna and wipes out all sins, (nay) which is the only means to (the attainment of) Liberation
in this world and promotes Bhakti. What will be gained as a matter of fact by associating with
worthy men and visiting places of pilgrimage? (98) Beholding even his own servant (going
out on his errand of taking the life out of dying persons), noose in hand, Yama (the god of
punishment), it is said, whispers close to his ear, "Leave alone those who are enraptured
over the Lord's stories; (for) | am the ruler of other men but not of the Vaisnavas." (99) O
men whose mind is agitated through attachment to the poison-like pleasures of sense ! drink
the peerless nectar in the form of Srimad Bhagavata (the story narrated by Sri Suka) for your
(spiritual) good (even) for half a second in this unsubstantial world. Why wander for nothing,
O friends ! on the wrong path resonant with vicious talks? Emperor Pariksit stands as a
witness to corroborate the statement (found in our sacred-books) that Mukti (emancipation)
follows in the wake of Srimad Bhagavata entering the very ears. (100) He bids fair to attain
lordship over Vaikuntha (by becoming one with the Lord of Vaikuntha), to whose voice gets
joined the story narrated by Sri Suka immersed in a stream of (ecstatic) joy. (101) In this way
has been imparted by me to you just now a most esoteric truth, the (very) substance of all
conclusions, after ransacking a pile of sacred books. There is nothing purer than Srimad
Bhagavata (the story narrated by Sri Suka). Therefore, quaff for the enjoyment of supreme
bliss the nectar embodied in the twelve Skandhas (of Srimad Bhagavata). (102) He who
hears (an exposition of) Srimad Bhagavata in a regular way with devotion and he who
expounds it before a pure-hearted votary of Lord Visnu—both attain the true reward of
hearing or expounding Srimad Bhagavata because of their duly observing the procedure laid
down for it. There is nothing which cannot be achieved by them. (103)

Thus ends the sixth discourse entitled "The procedure of hearing
(an exposition of) Srimad Bhagavata detailed", forming
part of the "Glory of Srimad Bhagavata" comprised
in the Uttara-Khanda of the glorious Padma-Purana 7

END OF SRIMAD BHAGAVATA-MAHATMYA

inttnet
PITRE ICY
