360 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 15

यड क ज् य वी ह्य प TK EKESKH HCAS H NG He SeH Hee eCKHAPe Het ekerveeeetsertyer ath eehereenerne rere een ge
णात्त

inseparable from Him.” (6) ss
प्रशंसन्ति स्म तं fam रान्धर्वप्रवरा जगु: । ay: सुमनोधारा: सिद्धा नृत्यन्ति |: स्रिय: । ७ ।

ब्रह्मा aes: सहासृत्य सुरेश्वरै: | वैन्यस्य दक्षिणे हस्ते दृष्टा fas गदाभृत: । ९ ।
mead च तं a मेने हरे: कलाम्।यस्याप्रतिहतं चक्रमंश: स परमेष्ठिन: ।१०॥
तस्याभिषेक आरब्धो ब्राह्मणैर्ब्रह्मवादिभि: | आभिषेचनिकान्यस्मा आजह्रु: सर्वतो जना: ।११॥
सरित्समुद्रा गिरयो arm mea: खगा मृगा: ।द्यौ: fafa: सर्वभूतानि समाजह्रुरुपायनम् 122 |
सोऽभिषिक्तो महाराज: Fare: साध्वलङ्कृत: । पत्न्यार्चिषालङ्कृतया विरेजेऽग्निरिवापर: 1231
we wet धनदो हैमं dk वरासनम्।वरुण: सलिलस्रावमातपत्रं -झरशिप्रभम् । १४॥
वायुश्च वालव्यजने धर्म: कोर्तिमयीं amiss: किरीटमुत्कृष्टं ae संयमनं am: ।१५॥
ब्रह्मा ब्रह्ममर्य वर्म भारती हारमुत्तमम्।हरि: सुदर्शनं चक्रं तत्पत्न्यव्याहतां श्रियम् । १६॥
दशचन्द्रमसिं रुद्र: शतचन्द्रं तथाम्बिका । सोमोऽमृतमयानश्वांस्त्वष्टा रूपाश्रयं रथम् ।१७॥
अग्निराजगवबं चापं gat रर्मिमयानिषून्। भू: पादुके चोगमय्यो द्यौ: पुष्पावलिमन्वहम् । १८॥
Tet सुगीतं वादित्रमन्तर्धानं च खेचरा: | ऋषयश्चाशिष: सत्या: समुद्र: शङ्खमात्मजम् ।१९॥
सिन्धव: ude नद्यो रथवीथीर्महात्मन: | सूतोऽथ मागधो बन्दी तं स्तोतुमुपतस्थिरे 1201
स्तावकांस्तानभिप्रेत्य पृथुर्वैन्य: प्रतापवान्। emer वाचा प्रहसन्निदमब्रवीत् । २१॥
Maitreya went on : The Brahmanas extolled Prthu, while the demigods known as
Gandharvas were singing songs, the chief of them; the Siddhas were releasing showers of
(Elysian) flowers, the heavenly damsels were dancing (all for joy at the advent of Prthu). (7)
The sounds of conchs, trumpets, timbrels and drums spread vibrating in Heaven, as all
celestial sages and orders of divine Fathers came down to the place (to pay their respects
to the king where he stood). (8) Brahma, the adorable lord of the world, himself came at the
head of the greatest of the gods, noticed some sign of the divine wielder of the mighty mace
in the right hand of Prthu and lotus-marks on the soles of his feet and recognized him to be
a part personality of Sri Hari (the supreme Lord). He also noticed that Prthu bore on his palm
the sacred sign of a disc unbroken by an alien line, indicating an unconquerable sphere of
power, and knew him to be a ray of the Lord of lords. (9-10) The Brahmana priests, who had
their religious culture founded on the rites and ceremonies dealt with in the Vedas, undertook
to perform the holy ceremony of Prthu's installation. People brought from all sides
(multifarious) things necessary for the coronation. (11) (Then) came with presents and
offerings the deities presiding over rivers, seas and mountains, the sky and the earth, as well
as serpents, birds, stags and cows. (12) When he was bathed with holy waters for installation
as a King of kings, arrayed in royal raiments and richly adorned with bright ornaments and
Stood with Arci, his queen-consort, equally adorned, he shone like a rival of fire itself. (13)
The god of wealth, O valiant Vidura, gave him a splendid throne of gold as a present. Varuna
(the divinity of the seas) brought to him (the brilliant present of) a (wonderful) umbrella
dripping with water and radiating beams like the moon. (14) The god of the winds gave him
two fans made of the tuft of hair (on the tail of wild cows). The god of virtue came with the
present of a garland of flowers, the very embodiment of celebrity. Indra (the king of heaven)

came to present him with an excellent crown and the god of mortality and moral control
honoured him with a sceptre by which to control all. (15) Brahma (the lord of creation) brought
