Dis. 13] । * BOOK ONE ,.- नं 49

RR REM HL ROWE RR a Re BERRA Be HER REA RR Re RR RR RRR Be Be Re Re Ree Be Pe SORT Me Rt Re Be RR Re Be OREM He He ROR MR Bt PHA HEMT He EMG Ht Ht SORE

equipped himself with all the requisites for the sacrifice, king Yudhisthira, the son of Dharma
(the god of righteousness), who was afraid of sin, propitiated Sri Hari by performing three
horse-sacrifices. (34) Having enabled the king to perform the sacrifices with the help of
the twice-born (the Brahmanas), Lord Sri Krsna, who had been invited for the occasion,
stayed with him for some months for the gratification of his friends and relations. (35) Then,
with the leave of the king and his younger brothers, as well as of Krsna (queen Draupadi),
O Saunaka, He proceeded to Dwaravati (Dwaraka) accompanied by Arjuna and surrounded
by the Yadu chiefs (Uddhava, Satyaki and others). (36)

Thus ends the twelfth discourse entitled " The Glory of birth etc., of Parikstit," forming part
of the story relating to the Naimisa forest, in Book One of the great and glorious
Bhagavata-Purana, otherwise known as the Paramaharsa-Samhita

PITS i ees

ge AA त्रयोदशोऽध्याय:

Discourse XIll
Departure of Dhrtarastra and his wife Gandhari,
for the forest at the instance of Vidura
qd उवाच

विदुरस्तीर्थयात्रायां मैत्रेयादात्मनो गतिम्।ज्ञात्वागाद्धास्तिनपुरुं तयावाप्तविवित्सित: । १ ।

यावत: कृतवान् प्रश्नान् क्षत्ता कौषारवाग्रत: | जातैकभक्तिर्गोविन्दे तेभ्यश्चोपरराम ह । २ ।

तं बन्धुमागतं ae धर्मपुत्र: सहानुज: | धृतराष्ट्रो युयुत्सुश्च सूत: शारद्वत: पृथा । ३ ।

Treat stadt ब्रह्मन् सुभद्रा चोत्तरा कृपी । अन्याश्चजामय: पाण्डोर्जातय: ससुता: स्रिय: । ४ |

प्रत्युज्जग्मु: प्रहर्पणप्नस्यांतन्वइवागतम्।अंभिसगप्य विधिवत् परिष्ठङ्गाभिवादनै: । ५ |

Wag: प्रेमबाष्पौघं विरहौत्कण्ठ्यकातरा: । राजा तमर्हयाञ्चक्रे कृतासनपरिग्रहम् । ६ |

तं भुक्तवन्तं विश्रान्तमासीनं सुखमासने । प्रश्रयावनतो राजा oe तेषां च waar! ७ |
Sita continued: Having ascertained the truth about the Spirit from the sage Maitreya
in the course of his pilgrimage, Vidura returned to Hastinapura; for he had thereby come
to know all that he wanted to know.(1) Exclusive devotion to Sri Govinda having welled up
in his heart even before he could elicit replies to all the questions he had urged for solution
by Maitreya (a descendant of the sage Kusaru), Vidura pressed no more for a reply to the
remaining questions. (2) Seeing him, their kinsmen, come back, O sage, Yudhisthira (the
son of Dharma, the god of righteousness) and his younger brothers (Bhima and others),
Dhrtarastra (their eldest uncle and Vidura's eldest brother) and Yuyutsu (Dhrtarastra’s only
surviving son, born of a Vaisya wife), Sita (Safjaya), Krpa (son of Saradvan), Prtha (Kunti,
the mother of the Pandavas), Gandhari (Dhrtarastra's devoted spouse and daughter of the
king of Gandhara, the modern Afghanistan), Draupadi (daughter of king Drupada), Subhadra
(Arjuna's wife and Sri Krsna's younger sister, the grandmother of Pariksit) and Uttara

-(Abhimanyu's widow and Pariksit's mother), Krpi (Drona's widow and Krpa's younger sister,
the mother of ASwatthama) and all the male and female relations of the late king Pandu (the

way of their sacrificial fees. It was more than they could carry home; hence they came away leaving a major part of it on the
‘sacrificial ground. Since all unclaimed property vests in the ruler as a matter of right, the Lord had all this wealth transferred
to Yudhisthira and devoted it lo a sacred cause.
