Dis. 18 ] BOOK SIX । 639

घेध्रेघ्रेग्नी’घे…घेध्रेद्मेधैर्व्य…ध्रेघे*प्रंर्व्यष्पैघै’घेर्व्यष्पै’श्रेष्टौप्नेप्रंग्धिर्व्यत्यें’प्रे*गेर्व्यर्धघ्रेष्पैषींषींध्रेर्व्यक्लीष्टौगैषीधैधैधैथ्रप्नेप्रीहीं
त्रर्त्त जन ST न न

करयप उवाच
न हिंस्याद्भूतजातानि न Tad वदेत्। नच्छिन्यान्नखरोमाणि न स्पृशोद्यदमङ्गलम् ।४७।
नाप्सु स्नायान्न कुप्येत न सम्भाषेत दुर्जनै: । न वसीताधौतवास: स्रजं च विधूतां क्वचित् ।४८॥
नोच्छिष्टं चण्डिकान्नं च सामिषं वृषलाहतम्। भुञ्जीतोदक्यया दृष्टं पिबेदञ्जलिना त्वप: ।४९।
नोच्छिष्टास्पृष्टसलिला सन्ध्यायां मुक्तमूर्धजा । अनर्चितासंयतवाङ्नासंवीता बहिश्चरेद् ।५०॥

=

नाधौतपादाप्रयता नार्द्रपान्नो उदक्ङिरा: | शयीत नापराङ्नान्यैर्न नम्ना न च संध्ययो: 14
dima: Were सर्वमङ्गलसंयुता । पूजयेत्प्रातराज्ञात्प्राग्गोविप्रान् श्रियमच्युतम् । ५२।
स्रियो वीरवतीश्चार्चेत्स्रग्गन्धबलिमण्डनै: । पतिं areca ध्यायेत्कोष्ठगतं च तम् । ५३॥
सांवत्सरं पुंसवनं व्रतमेतदविष्रुतम् | धारयिष्यसि चेत्तुभ्यं sewer भविता सुत: । ५४
Kasyapa said : A woman observing this vow must not injure (much less kill any one of)
the multitudes of living beings nor curse any one nor should she tell a lie. She must not pare
her nails or cut the hair on her person nor should she touch that which is impure. (47) She must
not bathe in water (by diving into it) nor should she lose her temper nor talk with wicked people.
She must not wear a cloth that has not been (duly) washed (after being used) nor a garland
that has (already) been worn on her person. (48) She must not eat the leavings of what has
been eaten by someone nor the food offered to Goddess Candika (Bhadrakall) nor (again) that
which contains meat nor that fetched by a Stdra nor that which has been seen by a woman
in her menstruation : nor again should she drink water with the hollow of her joined palms. (49)
She must not stir out (of her house) with the remants of food sticking in her mouth (without
rinsing her mouth after eating something), nor without washing her hands and feet nor at dusk
nor with dishevelled hair nor with her person unadorned and unwrapped (with an outer
covering) nor with her speech uncontrolled. (50) She must not retire with her feet unwashed
nor in an impure state nor with wet feet nor with her head towards the north or the west nor
in the same bed with others nor bare-bodied nor again in the morning and evening. (51) Putting
on a pair of clothes that have been (duly) washed, ever pure and decked with all auspicious
ornaments, she should worship before breakfast the cow, the Brahmanas, Goddess Sri (the
deity presiding over beauty and prosperity) and (the immortal) Lord Visnu. (52) She should
also worship women whose husbands are living, with garlands, sandal-paste, offerings of food
and ornaments and, offering worship to her husband, should wait upon him and contemplate
on him as having entered her womb (in the form of his vital energy). (53) If you observe this
vow, (known as) the Purnsavana (yielding a son), which is ofa year's duration, without violating
it, a Son will be born to you, who will be able to slay Indra. (54)

बाढमित्यभिप्रेत्याथ दिती राजन् महामना: । काङ्यपं गर्भमाधत्त Ad चाञ्ञो दधार सा । ५५॥
Tras आज्ञाय मानद। शुश्रूषणेनाश्रमस्थां दिति पर्यचरत्कवि: । ५६॥
Pea वनात्सुमनस: फलमूलसमित्कुशान्। पत्राङ्कुरमृदोऽपश्च काले काल उपाहरत् । ५७।
एवं तस्या व्रतस्थाया sakes हरिर्नृप । प्रेप्पु: पर्यचरज्जिह्मो मृगहेव मृगाकृति: uci
नाध्यगच्छद्रतच्छिद्रे तत्परोऽथ toa | fer dha aa: am: केन मे स्याच्छिवंत्विह । ५९॥
एकदा सा तु सन्ध्यायामुच्छिष्टा व्रतकर्शिता । अस्पृष्टवार्यधोताङ्ध्रि: aya विधिमोहिता । ६०1
लब्ध्वा तदन्तरं शक्रो निद्रापहृतचेतस:। fea: प्रविष्ट sat apie योगमायया । ६१1
चकर्त सप्तधा गर्भं वज्रेण कनकप्रभम्। ted सप्तथैकैकं मा रोदीरिति तान् पुन: 1621
ते तमूचु: पाट्यमाना: सर्वे wea नृप । नो जिघांससि किमिन्द्र भ्रातरो मरुतस्तव । ६३॥
