Dis. 9 } BOOK NINE 35

LSE SAAA AS RAS E PAS EREL SESS ESS SSL SSS SSE ASST Lt SETA SE eT Pha Th eee ee Te Te

अथ नवमोऽध्याय:

Discourse IX

The story of King Bhagiratha: the descent of the holy Ganga
ae उवाच
अंशुमांश्च तपस्तेपे गङ्गानयनकाम्यया | कालं महान्तं नाशक्नोत् तत: कालेन संस्थित: । १ ।
दिलीपस्तत्सुतस्तद्वदशक्त: कालमेविवान्। भगीरथस्तस्य पुत्रस्तेपे स सुमहत् तप: । २ ।
दर्शयामास तं देवी प्रसन्ना वरदास्मि ते ।इत्युक्त: स्वमभिप्रायं शशांसावनतो नृप: । ३ ।
कोऽपि धारयिता at पतन्त्या मे महीतले | अन्यथा भूतलं PAT नृप यास्ये रसातलम् । ४ ।
किं चाहं न भुवं यास्ये नरा मय्यामृजन्त्यघम्। मृजामि तदधं कुत्र राजंस्तत्र विचिन्त्यताम् । ५ ।

Sri Suka resumed : (Even like Sagara, who renounced his kingdom,) Arnguman too
(abdicated the throne in favour of his son and) practised asceticism for a long time with a
desire to bring down (from heaven) the holy Gang, but did not succeed. Then, in course of
time he passed away. (1) His son, Dilipa (too) was unsuccessful like him and met his death
(in the course of his efforts). Dilipa’s son was Bhagiratha and he (too) performed very great
Tapas. (2) The goddess (presiding over the holy river) got pleased (with his devotion) and
revealed herself (in person) to him, saying; “I am prepared to confer a boon on you.” Thus
spoken to (by the goddess), the king (Bhagiratha), bent low (with humility) and submitted (to
her) his object (in carrying on his austerities). (3) Somebody must sustain my force (even)
as | descend on earth. Piercing the (hard) crust of the earth, otherwise, O protector of men.
| shall penetrate into Rasatala (the sixth subterranean sphere from above). (4) Further, lam
not inclined to go down to the terrestrial region; (for) people would wash away their sin into
me. Where shall | wash off that sin (myself), O Bhagiratha? Let some thought be bestowed
on this point. (5) .

WIRY उवाच
साधवो न्यासिन: शान्ता ब्रह्मिष्ठा लोकपावना: । हरन्त्यघं तेऽङ्गसङ्गात् तेष्वास्ते ह्यघभिद्धरि: । ६ ।
धारयिष्यति ते वेगं cream शरीरिणाम् । यस्मिन्नोतमिदं प्रोतं fed ada तन्तुषु । ७ ।
इत्युक्त्वा स नृपो देवं तपसातोषयच्छिवम्। कालेनाल्पीयसा राजंस्तस्येरा:; समतुष्यत । ८ ।
waft राज्ञाभिहितं सर्वलोकहित: शिव:। दधारावहितो गङ्गां पादपूतजलां हरे: । ९ ।
भगीरथ: स राजर्षिर्निन्ये भुवनपावनीम्। aa स्वपितॄणां देहा भस्मीभूता: स्म ज्ञेरते । १०॥
रथेन वायुवेगेन प्रयान्तमनुधावती | देशान् पुनन्ती निर्दंग्धानासिञ्चत् सगरात्मजान् 1११1
यज्लस्पर्शमात्रेण ब्रह्मदण्डहता अपि । सगरात्मजा fed जग्मु: केवलं देहभस्मभि: 1221
भस्मीभूताङ्गसङ्घेन स्वर्याता: सगरात्मजा:। किं पुन: seen देवीं ये सेवन्ते धृतव्रता: ।१३॥
न ह्येतत् परमाश्चर्यं स्वर्धुन्या यदिहोदितम्। अनन्तचरणाम्भोजप्रसूताया भवच्छिद: । १४॥
ame मनो यस्मिञ्छद्धया मुनयोऽमला: ।त्रैगुण्यं gent हित्वा सद्यो यातास्तदात्मताम् । १५

King Bhagiratha submitted : Pious souls who have given up attachment to actions as
well as to their fruit, are pure of mind, (nay,) foremost among the knowers of Brahma and
capable of purifying the (whole) world, shall wash off your sin through the (very) contact of
their body (while bathing in your water); for in them (in their heart) dwells Sri Hari, the
Destroyer of sins. (6) Again, Lord Rudra, the (very) Self of embodied souls—into whom this
