592 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 9

WRC BY ता WORE He Be RL ह जज RE Be Re A RR Te ee ee ee CT eee tee Fi ee

breath. (38) Surrounded by ladies, Citraratha, the chief of the Gandharvas once flew in his
aerial car over the spot where the Brahmana had died and instantly fell down with his car,
head downwards. Picking up the bones (ofthe deceased Brahmana) according to the advice
of (the sages known as) the Valakhilyas (who apprised him of the wonderful efficacy of the
Narayana-Kavaca and told him that it was impossible for him to proceed further unless and
until the bones had been removed from there), he dropped them into the (holy) river Saraswati,
which flew in an easterly direction (close by), bathed (in the sacred stream) and(then) returned
to his own abode (the realm of the Gandharvas), amazed (over the incident). (39-40)

य इदं MM काले यो धारचति aga: । तं नमस्यन्ति भूतानि मुच्यते सर्वतो भयात् ।४१॥
wi विद्यामधिगतो विश्वरूपाच्छतक्रतु:।त्रैलोक्यलक्ष्मीं ays विनिर्जित्य मृधेऽसुरान् ।४२॥

Sri Suka continued : (All) beings (men) bow to him who listens to this (prayer) at an
opportune moment (when he is threatened with some danger) and who fixes his mind on it;
nay, he is rid of all fear. (41) Having leamt this prayer from Viswardpa, Indra (who performed
a hundred sacrifices in his previous life, which entitled him to this rank) completely and

decidedly conquered the demons in battle and enjoyed the sovereignty of (all) the three
worlds (heaven, earth and the intermediate region). (42)

Thus ends the eighth discourse, entitled "The text of the Narayana-Kavaca taught"
in Book Six of the great and glorious Bhagavata-Purana,
otherwise known as the Paramahamsa-Samnhita.

२९ १० २५२८ १८
PII Si prs

अथ नवमोऽध्याय:

Discourse IX
Indra slays Viswarupa; and routed by the demon Vrtra (the younger
brother of ViSwarupa), the gods call on the sage Dadhici
at the instance of the Lord

श्रीगुक उवाच

तस्यासन् विश्वरूपस्य रशिरांसि त्रीणि भारत। सोमपीथं सुरापीथमन्नादमिति wk ।
a a बर्हिषि cam भागं प्रत्यक्षमुच्चकै: । अवदद यस्य पितरो देवा: सप्रश्रयं नृप । २ ।
awa हि et भागं परोक्षमसुरान् प्रति। यजमानोऽवहद् भागं मातृस्नेहवशानुग: | ३ ।

तद् देवहेलनं तस्य धर्मालीकं सुरेश्वर: | आलक्ष्य तरसा भीतस्तच्छीर्षाण्यच्छिनद् रुषा । ४ ।

सोमपीथं तु यत् तस्य शिर आसीत् कपिञ्जल: । कलविङ्क: सुरापीथमन्नादं यत् स तित्तिरि: । ५ ।

ब्रह्महत्यामञ्जलिना जग्राह यदपीश्चर: | संवत्सरान्ते तदघं भूतानां स विशुद्धये ।
भूम्यम्बुद्रुमयोषिद्भ्यश्चतुर्धा व्यभजद्धरि: । ६ ।

a छेदविरोहेण वरेण जगृहुर्दुमा: । तेषां निर्यासरूपेण ब्रह्महत्या प्रदृश्यते । ८ ।
