406 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 68 .

न RT SEO SI ORI er Si nearer ie

and health and learnt that their mutual friends and relations were doing well, Balarama
forthwith spoke these fearless words: (20) “Hear with anattentive mind what the king ofkings,
the mighty Ugrasena, has enjoined you to do and Carry it out without delay. (21) He says: "
[ hear that many of you combined by unrighteous means to overpower Samba who fought
single-handed respecting the laws of war, and that you have taken him prisoner. | have,
however, tolerated this with intent to maintain harmony among friends and relations.
(Therefore, do not extend the quarrel, release Samba from captivity and allow him to come
to us with his newly wedded wife.)” (22)

i वं ae: । कुरबो बलदेवस्य निञम्योचु: प्रकोपिता: 1231

wa महच्चित्रमिदं कालगत्या दुरत्यया। आरुरुक्षत्युपानद् वै ft मुकुटसेवितम् ।२४॥

एते यौनेन Fag: FeRAM । वृष्णयस्तुल्यतां नीता अस्मदत्तनृपासना: 1241

चामरव्यजने शङ्खमातपत्रं च पाण्डुरम्। किरीटमासनं peat भुञ्जन्त्यस्मदुपेक्षया ।२६॥

येऽस्मत्रसादोपचिता हि याद्वा आज्ञापयन्त्यद्य TAT बत ।२७॥

कथमिन्द्रोऽपि कुरुभिर्भीष्मद्रोणार्जुनादिभि: | अदत्तमवरुन्धीत सिंहग्रस्तमिवोरण: 1221
Pariksit, enraged to hear these haughty words of Baladeva, inspired as they were with
a sense of virility, strength and gallantry and (quite) becoming of His own power, the
Kauravas replied (as follows): (23) "Oh, what a great wonder it is that by force of Time, so
hard to overcome, the shoe actually aspires to mount the head, which is occupied by the
crown. (24) Boundby conjugal ties and allowed to share our bed, seat and food, and favoured
with a royal throne by us, the Yadavas were exalted to a position of equally with us. (25) They
enjoy the use of a chowrie, fan, conch, white umbrella, crown, a royal seat and bed through
our sufferance. (26) They should no longer be allowed to retain these royal insignia, which
are proving adverse to the giver even as milk offered to aserpent. Elevated (in rank) through
our grace, they have now shamelessly begun to command us. Whata pity ! (27) Just as a

ram dare not seize the prey of a lion, how could even Indra (the celestial king) enjoy what
is not offered to him by Bhisma, Drona, Arjuna and other Kuru chiefs 2°(28)

श्रीगुक उवाच
जन्मबन्धुश्रियोन्नद्धमदास्ते भरतर्षभ | आश्राव्य रामं दुर्वाच्यमसभ्या: पुरमाविशन् । २९1
दृष्टाक्कागंदौ:ज्ञीज्यंश्रुत्वान्रन्धानिचाद्युन:।अवोचत्कोपसंरव्योदुष्पैक्ष्य:प्नहसन्वुहु:।इ॰।
नूनं नानामदोन्नद्धा: at नेच्छन्त्यसाधव: । तेषां fe set दण्ड: पद्यूनां लगुडो यथा ।३१॥
oa यदून् सुसंरब्धान् कृष्णं च कुपितं wa: । सान्त्वयित्वाहमेतेषां ङझममिच्छन्निहागत: 1321
a इमे मन्दमतय: कलहाभिरता: खला:। तं मामवज्ञाय मुहुर्दुर्भाषान् मानिनोऽब्रुवन् 133 |
area: किल विभुर्भोजवृष्ण्यन्धकेश्वर: । शक्रादयो लोकपाला यस्यादेशानुवर्तिन: । ३४॥
सुधर्माऽऽक्रम्यते येन पारिजातोऽमराङ्घ्रिप: | आनीय भुज्यते सोऽसौ न किलाध्यासनार्हृण: 1341
यस्य पादयुगं साक्षात् श्रीरुपास्तेऽखिलेश्वरी। स नार्हति किल श्रीजो नरदेवपरिच्छदान् । ३६1
Fal भवोऽहमपि Fea कला: कलाया: श्रीश्चोद्वहेम चिरमस्य नृपासनं क्व ।३७।
भुञ्जते कुरुभिर्दत्तं भूखण्डं वृष्णय: fers | same: किल वयं wa तु कुरव: fr: ।३८॥
अहो ऐश्वर्यमत्तानां मत्तानामिव मानिनाम्। असम्बद्धा गिरो रूक्षा: ch: सहेतानुशासिता ।३९॥
