170 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 9

PRAM EAE HARARE RH को आ RTH ECT ETE HA RET को HETE RE HCE TE TE क व ee Ee eee eH छ OH MER ARH

Brahma said: Itis after a very long time that | have come to know You today. It is really
shameful that living beings should fail to realize the true nature of the Lord (Yourself). (In fact)
there is nothing other than You; and even that which appears to exist is not real. For, when
the equilibrium of the Gunas of Mayais disturbed, itis You alone who appear as many. (1) The
light of wisdom, which is synonymous with joy, being ever manifest in You, the darkness of
ignorance can never approach You. This form, whichis the seed of hundreds of forthcoming
Avataras, and from the lotus sprung from whose navel | have emanated, has been assumed
by You for the first time justin order to show Your grace to the worshippers. (2) |donotregard
Your essence, which is purely blissful and undifferentiated and of the nature of unobscured
effulgence, as something other than this form of Yours, O Supreme Spirit. Thatis why | have
taken refuge in this very form, which, though creating the universe, is yet beyond the universe
and is the source of all the five elements and the ten Indriyas. (3) It is for the good of Your
worshipper in me, O source of blessings to the world, that You have revealed this form of
Yours to me. | make obeisance again and again to You, who are disregarded only by people
that are addicted to the pleasures of sense and thus deserve a place in hell. (4) O Lord, You
never leave the lotus heart of Your devotees, who take in through the opening of their ears
the fragrance (delightful glory) of Your lotus-feet, wafted by the breeze of the Vedas, Your
feet being held fast by the cords of supreme devotion. (5) A man is subject to fear, grief,
covetousness, ignominy and inordinate greed proceeding from wealth, house and kinsmen;
nay, he is obsessed with the false sense of mineness in respect of the same, which is the
root of all sorrow, only so long as he does not take refuge in Your feet, which secure immunity
from all fear. (6) Programmes connected with You (such as the hearing and chanting of Your
praises etc.) destroy all evil. They have, therefore, been robbed of their wits by (an
unpropitious) fate, who, having withdrawn their senses from such a programme, remain
constantly engaged in sinful pursuits, their mind possessed with covetousness for the most
trivial pleasures of sense, and feeling miserable on that account. (7) It pains my soul, O
immortal Lord of infinite power, to see these* creatures being repeatedly tormented by
hunger and thirst, by the three humours (flatulence, bile and phlegm), by cold, heat, storm
and rain, as well 88 by one another, and by the unbearable fire of passion as also by
anger.(8) So long as a man, O Lord, continues to regard himself as apart from (other than)
the Lord (Yourself) on account of Your Maya (which stands between You and him) in the
shape of the senses and their objects, the cycle of birth and death will not cease for him.
Though this cycle has no reality, itis a perennial source of sorrows; for through this a man
reaps the fruit of his actions. (9)

अह्नयापृतार्तकरणा निशि Perera नानामनोरथधिया क्षणभग्ननिद्रा: ।
दैवाहतार्थरचना ऋॠषयोऽपि देव युष्मत्प्रसङ्गविमुखा इह संसरन्ति । १०॥

त्वं भाव्रयोगपरिभरावितहत्सरोज sma श्रुतेक्षितपथो ननु नाथ yar
यद्यद्धिया a उरुगाय विभावयन्ति तत्तद्वपु: प्रणयसे सदनुग्रहाय ।११॥
रिंर्रिं त\द्दि\ BS fara: raf a: |

soy x
यत्सर्वभूतदययासदलभ्ययॆको नानाजनेषुबहित: सुहृदन्तरात्मा 1221
पुंसामतो विविधकर्मभिरध्वराद्येदनिन चोग्रतपसा व्रतचर्यया च ।
आराधनं wanda सत्कियार्थो धर्मोऽर्पित: कर्हिचिद्ध्रियते न यत्र । १३
शश्वत्स्वरूपमहसॆव निपीतभेदमोहाय बोधधिषणाय नम: OT I
* Although no living being was present before Brahma at that time, since the work of creation had not been started ti

then, he could see their subtle bodies in the person of the Lord, and evidently was able to read thelr future life as ifhe actually.
saw It.

