Dis. 30 ] BOOK THREE 271

RHRAOTRENLAH OKA EEA DEAL EH HSH EA HL EEPHE EVER डोत्यो ह TLE LHL EER HEATER AO LEREERSHAR Hee

सोऽनन्तोऽन्तकर: कालोऽनादिरादिकृदव्यय: 1 जनेन जनयन्मारयन्मृत्युनान्तकम् 4!
इति श्रीमद्भागवते महापुराणे पारमहंस्वां संहितायां तृतीयस्कन्धे `कापिलेयोपाख्याने` एकोनत्रिंशोऽध्याय:। २९ 1

The Yoga (discipline) of Devotion as well as the Yoga with eight limbs have (thus) been
expounded by Me, O daughter of Swayambhuva Manu! By following either of these two
Yogas a man can attain to the Supreme Person.(35) The aforesaid aspect of the Lord—who
is the same as the Absolute (of the Vedanti) and the Supreme Spirit (of the Yogi), nay, who
figures both as Prakrti (Primordial Matter) and Purusa (the Spirit) and yet lies beyond the
two—is also Known by the name of Providence, who brings into play the activity of Karma
(the destiny of the different Jivas in the shape of birth in the various species of life).(36) Italso
bears the appellation of Kala (Time), which brings about the transformation of things and is
possessed of wonderful prowess, nay, which is a source of (constant) terror to those who
regard themselves as a separate entity and have identified themselves with Mahat-tattva
(the principle of cosmic intelligence) and other products of Matter. (37) Kala (the Time-spirit),
who is the Ruler of rulers (Brahma and others) and who, being the support of all, enters the
heart of all living beings (as their Inner Controller) and devours (destroys) them through other
beings, is no other than the deity presiding over sacrifices and known by the name of
Visnu. (38) Although there is none dear or hateful to Him nor anyone His Kinsman, He is ever
on the alert and attacks and destroys the man who (having forgotten the Lord) wallows in
the error of sensuality.(39) For fear of Him blows the wind; for fear of Him the sun shines;
for fear of Him the god of rain pours forth showers and for fear of Him the host of heavenly
bodies shed their lustre. (40) Afraid of Him, trees and creepers along with herbs or annual
plants (that die the moment their fruit ripens) put forth blossoms and fructify each in its own
season. (41) Afraid of Him, rivers flow and the ocean never overflows. Nay, for fear of Him
fire burns and the earth with its mountains sinks not (into the waters supporting it). (42)
Subject to His control the yonder sky allows room to living beings and Mahat-tattva (the
principle of cosmic intelligence) expands its own (sprout-like) form into this (vast) universe
enveloped by seven sheaths (in the shape of earth, water, fire, air, ether, the ego and
Prakrti). (43) For fear of Him the deities presiding over the (three) Gunas or modes of Prakrti
(viz., Brahma, Visnu and Siva),who hold sway over the entire creation consisting of animate
and inanimate beings, remain engagedin their duties of creating, preserving and destroying
itfrom time to time.(44) That imperishable Time-Spirit, who, though beginningless, is the first
maker (of the universe) and who, though endless, brings about the end of the phenomenal
world, carries on the work of creation by bringing into existence one individual (ason) through
another (his father) and likewise dissolves the universe by destroying even Yama (the lord
of death) through Himself (the Destroyer even of Death). (45)

Thus ends the twenty-ninth discourse, forming part of the "Story of Lord
Kapila," in Book Three of the great and glorious Bhagavata-Purana,
otherwise known as the Paramahamsa-Samnhita.

SRST ENE २५
CD ODE SEER ELD OD

अथ त्रिंशोऽध्याय:
Discourse XXX
Downfall of men attached to their body, house etc.
कपिल उवाच
तस्यैतस्य जनो नूनं नायं वेदोरुविक्रमम्। काल्यमानोऽपि बलिनो वायोरिव घनावलि: । १ ।
