Dis. 39 ] BOOK TEN 263

Setting 8 2 Oe Pee ee eee ee ECE TESTES EE ESR E EATEN NREL EH IH

characterized by the mark of a discus and, full of delight, embraced him. (36) The high-
minded Sankarsana (Balarama) too hugged Akrira bowing low (before him) and, clasping
his (joined) palms with His own took him to His house in the company of His younger
Brother (Sri Krsna). (37)

पृष्टाथ स्वागतं तस्मै निवेद्य च वरासनम्। vanes विधिवत् पादौ मधुपर्कार्हणमाहरत् 1३८1

faa ont चातिथये संवाह्य श्रान्तमादृत: (ord बहुगुणं मेथ्यं श्रद्धयोपाहरद् fay: ।३९॥

aa भुक्तवते sien राम: परमधर्मवित्। मुखवासैर्गन्धमाल्यै: परां sift व्यधात् पुन: 1४०॥

ue सत्कृतं नन्द: कथं स्थ निरनुग्रहे। कंसे जीवति aed सौनपाला इवावय: 1४१1

चोऽवधीत् स्वस्वसुस्तोकान् Be असुतृप् खल: | किं नु स्वित्तत्रजानां a: Gere विमृशामहे skh

gal सूनृतया amt नन्देन सुसभाजित:।अक्रूरु परिपृष्टेने जहावध्वपरिश्रमम् ।४३॥
इति श्रीमद्धागवते महापुराणे पारमहंस्यां संहितायां दशमस्कन्धे पूर्वार्घेऽक्रूरागमनं नामाष्टात्रिशोऽध्याय: ।३८॥

Then, enquiring about his safe arrival and giving him an excellent seat, Balarama washed
his feet with due ceremony and fetched (for him) an offering called Madhuparka (consisting
of honey, clarified butter and curds). (38) Again, bestowing on the guest a cow and
massaging him, weary as he was, the almighty Lord respectfully and with (great) reverence
brought (for him) pure food endowed with manifold excellences. (39) When he had finished
his meals, Balarama, who knew the highest Dharma (in the shape of hospitality shown to a
newcomer and so on), gave him supreme joy again by (lovingly) offering him articles (such
as betel and cardamoms) intended to scent his mouth (after meals) as well as perfumes and
garlands. (40) When he had thus been shown (the customary) hospitality, Nanda enquired
of him:—"Like the sheep having a butcher for their keeper, how are you getting on while the
ruthless Karnsais alive, O Akrira (ascion of Dagarha)? (41) We wonder what safety, in truth
could there be to you, the subjects of him who killed the babes of his screaming cousin
(Devaki) a wicked fellow given to the gratification of His own self thathe is." (42) Duly greeted
thus with polite words by Nanda, who had (already) been subjected to (similar) polite
enquiries, Akrura forgot the fatigue of his journey. (43)

Thus ends the thirty-eighth discourse entitled "Akrara’s arrival (in Vraja)" in the first
half of Book Ten of the great and glorious Bhagavata-Purana,
otherwise known as the Paramaharhsa-Samhita.

ssiReisett

अथैकोनचत्वारिंशोऽध्याय:

Discourse XXXIX
Departure of Sri Krsna and Balarama for Mathura
Se उवाच
सुखोपविष्ट:ऽ पर्यङ्के रामकृष्णोरुमानित: । लेभे मनोरथान्सर्वान्पथि यान्स चकार ह । १ ।
किमलभ्यं भगवति प्रसन्ने श्रीनिकेतने। तथापि तत्परा राजन्न हि वाञ्छन्ति किञ्चन । २ ।
सायंतनाशनं Fal भगवान् देवकीसुत: । सुहृत्सु वृत्तं कंसस्य पत्रच्छान्यच्चिकीर्षितम् । ३ ।
