Dis. 18] BOOK EIGHT 811

घेघे*ध्रेघ्नेनृ.॰र्किध्रेघेघे*ध्रेर्व्य*******…र्व्यघ्रे…ध्रेग्निंध्रे*स्मिँर्व्यध्रेपैभेभेग्रेध्रेप्नेप्रंर्व्यदुंघ्नेमै*ध्रेगैदींध्रेगैग्नीप्रैग्रीप्तेघे

प्रविष्टं वीक्ष्य भृगव: सशिष्यास्ते सहान्निभि: । प्रत्यगृह्णसमुत्थाय संक्षिप्तास्तस्य तेजसा 124 |
यजमान: प्रमुदितो दर्शनीयं मनोरमम्।रूपानुरूपावयवं तस्मा आसनमाहरत् । २६॥
स्वागतेनाभिनन्द्याथ wet भगवतो बलि: । अवनिज्यार्चयामास मुक्तसङ्गमनोरमम् | २७॥
qa «= जनकल्मषापहं स धर्मविन्मूर्ध्यदधात् सुमङ्गलम् ।
we देवदेवो गिरिहाश्चन्द्रमौलिर्दधार gal परया च varied

Having heard of the mighty Bali propitiating the Lord by means of horse-sacrifices
conducted by the Bhrgus, Lord Vamana, who was rich in all strength, proceeded thence
(from the hermitage of Aditi) to that place (the sacrificial hall of Bali), causing the earth by His
(huge) weight to bend low at every step. (20) The celebrated Bhrgus, who were conducting
as the priests of Bali a horse-sacrifice (the best of all sacrifices) at the (holy) spot bearing the
name of Bhrgu-Kaccha on the northern bank of the (sacred) Narmada (the modern Narbada
river), keenly observed Him (resplendent) as the sun risen close to them.(21) Eclipsed by the
splendour of the divine Dwayf, O protector of human beings, the said priests including the:
sacrificer (King Bali himself) and the superintending priests thereupon speculated whether
the sun-god or Vibhavasu (the god of fire) or again the (divine) sage Sanatkumara
was actually coming (there) with a desire to witness the sacrificial performance. (22) Thus
speculated about by the Bhrgus and their disciple (Bali) in ways more than one, the said Lord
Vamana (forthwith) entered the enclosure of the horse-sacrifice, bearing the umbrella along
with the sacred staff (in one of his hands) and the Kamandalu full of water (in the other). (23)
Observing Lord Sri Hari as having entered the sacrificial grounds in the form of a short-
Statured Brahmana religious student—encircled by a cord of Mufija grass (at His waist),
with a deerskin placed baldric-wise after the manner of a sacred thread by way of acovering
for the upper part of His body, and having matted hair on His head—and completely
overpowered by His lustre, the Bhrgus along with their disciple (Bali) as well as with the gods
of fire welcomed Him by rising from their (respective) seats.(24-25) Overjoyed to see Lord
Vamana,charming and worth seeing with limbs (quite) in proportion to His (diminutive) form,
the sacrificer (himself) fetched Him a (suitable) seat. (26) Greeting Him with an enquiry after
His health, and then washing the feet of the Lord, Bali worshipped Him who sported in the
mind (even) of those that had given up (all) attachment. (27) Bali, who knew what was right,
placed on his head (as a mark of respect) the water in which His feet had been washed and
which had (thus) been rendered most auspicious, (nay,) which was capable of wiping off the
sins of the people, and which (no less a personage than) Lord Siva (who has His abode on
Mount Kailasa, nay), who is adored by (all the) gods and bears the crescenton His head, bore
on His head with supreme devotion. (28)

बळिरुवाच

स्वागतं ते नमस्तुभ्यं ब्रह्मन्किं करवाम a ब्रह्मर्षीणां तप: साक्षान्मन्ये त्वाऽऽर्यं वपुर्धरम् । २९।
अद्य न: पितरस्तृप्ता sta a: पावितं Hor अद्य flags: क्रतुरयं ae भवानागतो गृहान् । ३०॥

wera मे सुहुता यथाविधि द्विजात्मज त्वच्चरणावनेजनै: |

eden वार्भिरियं च भूरहो aa पुनीता agit: पदैस्तव । ३१॥

यद् a aa वाञ्छसि तत्प्रतीच्छ मे त्वामर्थिनं विप्रसुतानुतर्कये |

T काञ्चनं गुणवद् धाम ys तथान्नपेयमुत वा fay कन्याम्।

ग्रामान् समृद्धांस्तुरगान् गजान् वा रथांस्तथार्हत्तम सम्प्रतीच्छ ।३२॥

