Dis. 7] BOOK FOUR । 319

Srtrtt hf विद्ये ho er ere ee he fe ere tei ae ee PRESALE REHA LANARK EARN HER OR AH

ज्ञानस्य चार्थस्य गुणस्य चाश्रयो मायामयाद् व्यतिरिक्तो यतस्त्वम् 1३१

Brahma said : Your reality is not what the Jiva perceives through the senses, which
cognize the distinctive characteristics of objects, since You are the very Ground of
knowledge, the objects of sense-perception and the senses, and, therefore, distinct from this
illusory world of matter. (31)

सुरविद्विदक्षपणॆरुदायुधैर्भुजदण्डैरुपपन्नमष्टभि: 1321
Indra said : This personality of Yours, O immortal Lord, which has manifested the

universe and is distinguished by eight long and stout arms, holding weapons in readiness
to exterminate the enemies of gods, brings delight to our soul and eyes. (32)

चज्ञोऽवं तव यजनाय केन सृष्टो विध्वस्त: पशुपतिनाद्य aero

तं Ta शवशयनाभशान्तमेधं यज्ञात्मन्नलिनरुचा दृशा पुनीहि 1331

The Priests' wives said ; This sacrifice, which was evolved by Brahma (the lord of
created beings) as a means of worshipping You, has been wrecked today by Lord Siva, who
was angered by Daksa. Threrefore, O Embodimentof sacrifices, hallow this sacrifice of ours,
which has been robbed of all joy and festivity and wears the (desolate) appearance of a
crematory, (by casting a look at it) with Your eyes, lovely like a pair of lotuses. (33)

RIT Hy:
अनन्वितं ते भगवन् विचेष्टितं यदात्मनाऽऽचरसि fe ad नाज्यसे ।
विभूतये ga ॰उपसेदुरीश्वरीं न मन्यते स्वयमनुवर्ततीं भवान् ।३४॥

The sages said : Singular are Your doings, O Lord, in that while You perform deeds
Yourself, You are not affected by them. You do not think much even of Laksmi (the supreme
goddess) whom everyone worships for the sake of prosperity, even though She Herself
remains ever waiting on You. (34)

सिद्धा Hq:

34 त्वत्कथामृष्टपीयूषनद्यां मनोवारण: कछ्लेशदावाग्निदग्ध: 1
तृषार्तोऽवगाढो न wan ad न निष्क्रामति ब्रह्मसम्पन्नवन्न: 134)

The Siddhas said : Scorched by the wild fire of afflictions and oppressed by the thirst
for sensuous enjoyment, this elephant of our mind has plunged into the river of pure nectar
in the shape of Your stories and thinks no more of that forest conflagration nor comes out
of the river, like one that has attained (oneness with) Brahma. (35)

THT GINA
स्वागतं ते प्रसीदेश तुभ्यं नम: श्रीनिवास श्रिया कान्तया are a: ।
त्वामृतेऽधीश नाङ्गैर्मख: aia sida: कबन्धो यथा पूरुष: 136

The sacrificer's wife said : Welcome is Your visit (to this sacrifice). O Lord; be
gracious to me. Hail to You, O Abode of Sri (the goddess of beauty and prosperity); may
You and Your beloved Spouse, Goddess Laksmi, protect us. Without You, O supreme
Ruler (of the universe), a sacrifice, though complete in all its limbs, does not present a

charming look any more than aman whois left without a head, a mere trunk, though perfect
in all other limbs. (36)
