Dis. 6) BOOK TEN 127

LAL मन न HORAK HA OHA #न ATH # EKCOHERTH १२१ ७७४७ 99 9999 # ०० ० ७१2 4००8 २०४ १.७.॥.७.॥ ७८

Sri Suka went on : Giving suck to her Son, whose safety had thus been ensured by
cowherd women, bound (to him) by (ties of) affection, the mother put Him to sleep. (30)
Meanwhile the (party of) cowherds headed by Nanda came back to (the outskirts of) Vraja
from Mathura, and were greatly astonished to see the (colossal) body of Putana. (31) (They
said to one another,) “Oh, surely a seer has been really born in the person of Vasudeva or
he must have been a master of Yoga (in his previous incarnation); for that very calamity has
actually been perceived, of which Anakadundubhi spoke (to us)." (32) Having hacked that
body with axes and cast it piecemeal at a distance, those inhabitants of Vraja (that had been
entrusted with the protection of Gokula) burnt it to ashes after it had been piled over with logs
of wood. (33) Out,of that body, while it was being cremated, arose (a column of) smoke
emitting the fragrance of aloe-wood, the sin attaching to it having been completely wiped out
the moment its life was sucked out (through the breasts) by Sri Krsna. (34) (Lo!) Potana, a
blood-sucking ogress given to the destruction of infants in the world and giving suck to Sri
Hari even with the (deprecable) motive of killing Him, attained the destiny of saints! (35) How
much more, then, should one deserve such a state, who offers one's most beloved
something with (utmost) reverence and devotion to Lord Sri Krsna, the Supreme Spirit, as
did His affectionate mothers” and cows full of motherly affection. (36) Even the said ogress
(Putana), whose breast the Lord sucked covering her body with His feet—feet which remain
enshrined in the heart of His devotees and are worthy of being adored even by Brahm, Siva
and others (who are adored by the world), ascended to heaven (Vaikuntha), a destiny worthy
of His mothers (Devaki and Yasoda)! What wonder, then, that the cows and mothers, the milk
of whose breasts was (lovingly) sucked by Lord Sri Krsna, should attain that destiny? (37-38)
Rebirth, which results from ignorance, could never be possible, O Pariksit, in the case of
those (cows and mothers) that incessantly looked upon Sri Krsna as their as son, nay, whose
milk, oozing out of parental affection, the (said) divine son of Devaki, the Bestower of
Liberation and all other blessings, sucked to His heart's content. (39-40)

कटधूमस्य सौरभ्यमवघ्राय alae । किमिदं कुत एवेति वदन्तो ब्रजमाययु: ।४१॥
ते त्त्र वर्णितं गोपै: पूतनागमनादिकम् । sen तन्निधनं स्वस्ति fortes सुविस्मिता: ।४२॥

नन्द: स्वपुत्रमादाय प्रेत्यागतमुदारधी: । मूर्ध्यपाघ्राय परमां मुदं RRR ।४३॥
य एतत् पूतनामोक्षे कृष्णस्यार्भकमद्भुतम्। शृणुयाच्छ्रद्धया veil गोविन्दे लभते रतिम् ।४४॥

Smelling the fragrance of the smoke rising from the crematorium, the inhabitants of Vraja
(Nanda and others, that had gone out of Vraja before Potana came there), returned to Vraja
saying what (a strange phenomenon) it was and whence the odour actually came ! (41)
Hearing (the story) of Putana’s arrival etc., as well as of her (subsequent) death and the
baby's safety, as told by the cowherds present there, they stood highly amazed. (42) Taking
up (in his arms) his son, who had returned from the jaws of death (as it were,) and smelling

ees
* We shall see in Oiscourse 70 below how Sri Krsna assumed the form of all His boy companions and calves besides
His own form on Iheir having been stolen away by Brahma, and continvedin those forms for a full twelve month, thus conferring
on the mothers of all those youngsters and calves the unique honour and privilege of being His mothers. Itis these numberless
cowherdesses end cows of Vraja that are referred to in ihe above verse as His mothers (am:) in the plural number.
