Dis. 26 ] BOOK THREE 253

PLSROREHEKEO LURES EEHEA TEAK LESSEE EEE RENEE ee Eee se eee e eee eH

waft: पञ्चभिर्व्रह्म चतुर्भिर्दशभिस्तथा । एतच्चतुर्विंशतिकं गणं प्राधानिकं fag: । ११।
महाभूतानि पञ्चैव भूरापोऽग्निर्मरुन्नभ:। तन्मात्राणि च तावन्ति गन्धादीनि मतानि मे ।१२॥
shen दञश श्रोत्रं त्वग्दृग्रसननासिका:। वाक्करौ चरणो मेढुं पायुर्दशाम उच्यते । १३|
wat बुद्धिरहङ्कारश्चित्तमित्यन्तरात्मकम्। चतुर्धा लक्ष्यते भेदो qual लक्षणसर्तपपया 1 १४॥
एतावानेव सङ्ख्यातो ब्रह्मण: सगुणस्य ह। सन्निवेशो मया प्रोक्तो a: काल: पञ्चविंशक: 1241
प्रभावं पौरुषं oe: कालमेके यतो भयम्।अहङ्कारविमूढस्य कर्तु: प्रकृतिमीयुष: eg
प्रकृतेर्गुणसाम्यस्य निर्विशेषस्य मानवि । चेष्टा यत: स भगवान् काल इत्युपलक्षित: । १७॥
अन्त: पुरुषरूपेण कालरूपेण यो बहि: । समन्वेत्येष सत्त्वाना भगवानात्ममायया ec

The Lord resumed : The wise speak of Pradhana (Primordial Matter) as Prakrti—the
Pradhana, which consists of the three Gunas (Sattva, Rajas and Tamas), nay, which is
unmanifest and eternal and exists both as cause and effect andwhich, though undifferentiated
(in its causal state) is the source of distinct categories (such as Mahat-tattva and so on). (10)
The aggregate of twenty-four categories—viz., the five gross elements, the five subtle
elements, the four internal senses, the five senses of perception and the five organs of
action—is known to be an evolute of the Pradhana. (11) The gross elements are only five,
viz., earth, water, fire, air and ether. The number of the subtle elements too is in My opinion
just the same: they are smell, taste, colour, touch and sound. (12) The Indriyas (the senses
of perception and the organs of action) are ten in number, viz., the auditory sense, the tactile
sense, the sense of sight, the sense of taste, the olfactory sense, the organ of speech, the
hands, the feet, the organ of generation and the organ of defecation, which is said to be the
tenth. (13) The interna! sense is seen to have four aspects in the shape of mind, under-
standing, ego and reagon. Their distinction lies in their functions which represent their
characteristics. (14) The disposition of the conditioned Brahma (Brahma manifested through
the Gunas of Prakrti) has been recognized (by the knowers of Truth) as consisting of the
twenty-four principles just enumerated by Me and no other, Kala (Time) being the twenty-
fifth.(15) Some people speak of Kala as a potency (destructive power) of the Purusa (God),
which causes fear to the doer (the individual soul) who has come to associate himself with
Prakrti and is deluded by egotism (arising out of self-identification with body etc.). (16) As
a matter of fact, O daughter of Swayambhuva Manu, the Lord Himself, who activates
Prakrti—which is only another name for the equilibrium of the three Gunas (Sattva, Rajas
and Tamas), and which (in that state) admits of no particular name or form—is designated
as Kala (Time). (17) In this way the Lord Himself, who by His own Maya (wonderful divine
energy) abides unaffected within all living beings as the Purusa (their Inner Controller) and
outside them as Kala (is the twenty-fifth category).(18)

दैवात्क्षुभितधर्मिण्यां स्वस्यां योनौ पर: पुमान्। आधत्त वीर्यं सासूत महत्तत्त्वं हिरण्मयम् । १९।
विश्वमात्मगतं व्यञ्जन् कूटस्थो जगदङ्कुर: | स्वतेजसापिबत्तीव्रमात्मप्रस्वापनं TA: । २०॥

When the Supreme Person placed His energy(in the form of Cit-Sakti or the power of
intelligence) in His own Maya, the source of all created beings, the equilibrium of whose
Gunas had been disturbed by the destiny of the various Jivas, the Maya gave birth to the
Mahat-tattva (the principle of cosmic intelligence), which is full of light. (19) The Mahat-tattva,
which knew no languor or distraction etc., and represented the shoot of the tree of the
universe, drank off by its own effulgence the thick gloom (prevailing at the time of universal
dissolution)—which had once swallowed the Mahat-tattva—in order to manifest the universe,
which lay in it in a subtle form.(20)
