Dis. 9] BOOK TWO — 125

RRAK SPEEA EEE कौ च्च श्र क्रै दौ वी ययो EEE oe HT EE ET EE RE OR RO Er eR

ब्रह्मोवाच

भगवन् सर्वभूतानामध्यक्षोऽवस्थितो Weise ह्यप्रतिरुद्धेन प्रज्ञानेन चिकीर्षितम् । २४॥
तथापि नाथमानस्य नाथ नाथय Awa परावरे यथा रूपे जानीयां ते त्वरूपिण: ।२५॥
यथाऽऽत्ममायायोगेन नानाशक्त्युपबृंहितम् । विलुम्पन् विसृजन् yer बिभ्रदात्मानमात्मना 1261
क्रीडस्यम्रोघसङ्कल्प ऊर्णनाभिर्यथार्णुते । तथा तद्विषयां धेहि मनीषां मयि mera 1201
भगवच्छिक्षितमहं करवाणि ह्यतन्दित: । नेहमान: प्रजासर्गं बध्येयं यदनुग्रहात् ।२८॥
Wad सखा सख्युरिवेश ते कृत: प्रजाविसर्गे विभजामि भो जनम्
अविक्लवस्ते परिकर्मणि स्थितो मा मे समुन्नद्धमदोऽजमानिन: । २९॥

Brahma said : O Lord, You dwell in the heart of all beings as the witness and know by
Your unobstructed wisdom what | intend doing. (24) Nevertheless, my Master, grant one
request of this humble petitioner that | may be blessed with an insight into both the absolute
and relative aspects of Your formless Being. (25) Even as a spider spins a web round itself,
sports in it and then takes it back into its mouth, so do You, O Madhava (Lord of Maya) of
unfailing resolve; through Your own Maya (creative will) multiply Yourself in the form of this
universe, maintain it and then dissolve it all by Yourself, possessed as You are of manifold
powers, and thus carry on Your sport, assuming various forms as and when necessary. Pray,
therefore, bestow on me the insight by which | may be able to know how You do all this. (26-27)
Let me unwearingly carry out Your instructions, O Lord; nay, while carrying on the work of
creation, let me not, by Your grace, be attached to it (through the feeling of doership etc.). (28)
Since you have acknowledged me as Your friend as any other friend would (by clasping my
hand and through other such gestures), O Lord, let me not be puffed up with pride, thinking
that | am immune from birth etc., so long as_ | remain engaged in Your service in the form
of creating living beings and, unperplexed in mind, classify the Jivas (according to their
natural characteristics and past actions). (29)

८

श्रीभगवानुवाच
ज्ञानं परमगुह्यं A aq विज्ञानसमन्वितम्। ae ae च गृहाण गदितं मया ।३०॥
ware यथाभावो वद्रूपगुणकर्मक:। तथैव तत्त्वविज्ञानमस्तु ते मदनुग्रहात् 1321
अहमेवासमेवाग्रे नान्यद् यत् सदसत् परम्। पश्चादहं यदेतच्च योऽवशिष्येत सोऽस्म्यहम् 1321
mest यत् प्रतीयेत न प्रतीयेत चात्मनि । तद्विद्यादात्मनो मायां यथाऽऽभासो यथा तम: 1331
यथा महान्ति भूतानि भूतेषूच्चावचेषुनु । प्रविष्टान्यप्रविष्टानि तथा aq न तेष्हम् । ३४॥
एतावदेव जिज्ञास्यं तत्त्वजिज्ञासुनाऽऽत्मन: | अन्वयव्यतिरेकाभ्यां यत् स्यात् सर्वत्र सर्वदा । ३५॥
wad समातिष्ठ परमेण समाधिना sary कल्पविकल्पेषु न विमुह्यति कर्हिचित् 136 |

The Lord said : Do you receive the most esoteric knowledge, as well as the realization,
which is going to be imparted by Me, about Myself, as also the truth of Devotion and all that
is accessory to it. (30) By My grace you shall have true knowledge about Me, as to how great
| am, what is My essential character, in how many forms do | manifest Myself, what virtues
do | possess and what are My doings. (31) Prior to this creation | alone existed and that too
in my absolute state. Other than Me there was nothing gross or subtle, nor the cause of both,
viz., Prakrti (Primordial Matter). | exist even after creation as well as in the form of this
phenomenal world and! amalso that which remains (after all this has disappeared). (32) That
