24 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 7

BRR RRR ET RR AR HR i By Re RRR BR A RRR BR RR BY RB HR Hs Bb eH BR TR Re RR BOR BYR AT NT We RE RH NY Be Bee He He Ree Be He We Hr

had Sri Krsna for his friend and charioteer, put on his armour and, taking his fierce bow, rode
in a chariot with an ensign bearing the figure of a monkey, in pursuit of ASwatthama (his
preceptors son).(17)

तमापतन्त स विलक्ष्य दूरात् कुमारहोद्दिभ्रमना रथेन।
पराद्रवत्प्राणपरीप्सुरुरव्यां यावद्गमं रुद्रभयाद् यथार्क: । १८॥
यदाशरणमात्मानमैक्षत श्रान्तवाजिनम्। अस्त्रं ब्रह्मशिरो AA आत्मत्राणं द्विजात्मज: । १९।
अथोपस्पृश्य सलिलं संदधे तत्समाहित: । अजानन्नुपसंहारं प्राणकृच्छ्र उपस्थिते 1201
तत: प्रादुष्कृतं तेज: प्रचण्डं सर्वतोदिशम्। प्राणापदमभिप्रेक्ष्य विष्णुं जिष्णुरुवाच ह ।२१॥
When Aswatthama, who was now sad at heart for his having assassinated young boys,
saw from a distance that Arjuna was rushing towards him;he ran for life in a chariot as far
as he could on earth, even as the sun-god fled for fear of Rudra.* (18) When he saw that his
horses were fatigued and that he had none to protect him, that son of a Brahmana thought
of the missile presided over by Brahma (the Creator) as the only means to save his life. (19)
Even though he did not know how to withdraw the missile, he sipped alittle water and, finding
his life in peril, fitted the same to his bow with an attentive mind. (20) A fierce flame blazed
forth from the missile and enveloped all sides. When Arjuna saw the danger to his life, he
addressed Visnu (Sri Krsna) as follows: (21)

अर्जुन उवाच

कृष्ण कृष्ण महाभाग भक्तानामभयंकर।।त्वमेको दह्यमानानामपवर्गोऽसि संसृते: 1221

त्वमाद्य: पुरुष: साक्षादीश्वर: wee: पर: | मायांव्युदस्य चिच्छक्त्या कैवल्ये स्थित आत्मनि 123 |

स wa जीवलोकस्य मायामोहितचेतस: i विधत्से स्वेन वीर्येण sat धर्मादिलक्षणम् ey!

qa चावतारस्ते ya भारजिहीर्षया । स्वानां चानन्यभावानामनुध्यानाय चासकृत् ।२५॥

किमिदं स्वित्कुतो वेति tata न वेदम्यहम्। सर्वतोमुखमायाति तेज: परमदारुणम् 125 |
Arjuna said : Krsna, Krsna, mighty of arm and the Allayer of devotees’ fear, You are the
only rescuer of those who are incessantly burning with the agony of transmigration. (22) You
are God Himself, the Primal Person, existing beyond Prakrti (Matter). Casting aside Maya
by the power of Your wisdom, You stand in Your absolute Being. (23) It is You who by virtue
of Your own power confer Dharma (religious merit) and other forms of blessings on the soul
whose mind is deluded by Your Maya. (24) Even so this Avatara (manifestation) of Yours
is intended to relieve the burden of the earth and to serve as an object of constant meditation

for Your own people as well as for those who are exclusively devoted to You. (25) O self-
effulgent Lord, | know not what and whence this most frightful flame, which is enveloping

me on all sides. (26)
श्रीभगवानुवाच
वेत्थेदं द्रोणपुत्रस्य seme प्रदर्शितम्।नैवासौ ae संहारं प्राणबाध उपस्थिते । २७॥
न werent fee प्रत्यवकर्शानम्। जह्यस्रतेज satel ह्यस्त्रतेजसा cl

Sri Bhagavan replied ; It is no other than the missile presided over by Brahma and
released by Agwatthama (the son of Drona) in extreme peril. You are aware he knows not
how to call it back. (27) There is no other missile that can overpower it. Therefore, quench
the formidable flame of this weapon by a counter-flame of the same missile,expert as you
are in the use of weapons. (28)

* When the sun-god routed the demon Vidyunmali, Bhagavan Rudra darted In fury against the sun-god, trident in hand.
The sun-god, who ran before Rudra, toppled down at Kasi; where he became known as Lolarka .
