Dis. 3] BOOK ONE

SEGA BREA GREER IB GEG BERET AT GE GEE BOR MEM HOME Te WERE RE RE ERENT MM ROME RE LOM EO HIE GE EE ROE RE HEME ERM RR RBH ३७ ८३ ८ REE

earth, which had been transformed into a boat. (15) During His eleventh manifestation, when
the gods and the demons began churning the ocean (with Mount Mandara), the Lord
assumed the form of a tortoise and supported Mount Mandara on His back.(16) InHis twelfth
descent He took the form of Dhanwantari (and emerged from the ocean with a jar full of
nectar ); while during His thirteenth manifestation He assumed the form of an enchanting
woman and gave the gods the nectar to drink, keeping the others (the demons) spell-bound
all the while. (17) In His fourteenth manifestation He took the form of a man-lion and tore
with His claws the bosom of the most powerful demon king (Hiranyakasgipu) even as a maker
of straw mats would tear a reed. (18) Assuming the form of a dwart in His fifteenth descent
He visited the sacrificial performance of Bali (the demon king) and asked him for three paces
of land with the covert intention of robbing him of (his kingdom of) heaven. (19) In His
sixteenth descent (as Parasurama) He found that the kings had become inimicat to the
Brahmanas; enraged at this He rid the earth of the Ksatriya race as many as twenty-one
times. (20) Then, in His seventeenth descent (as Vyasa), He was born of Satyavati through
the sage ParaSara and, finding the people of poor intelligence, divided the tree of Veda into
many branches.(21) Then again (in the eighteenth descent) He assumed the form of a ruler
of men (Sri Rama) with a view to accomplishing the purpose of the gods and performed
heroic feats like bridging the ocean and so.on. (22) In the nineteenth and the twentieth the
Lord was born among the Vrsnis as Balarama and Sri Krsna and relieved the earth of its
burden. (23) When Kali sets in, He will be born in Magadha (North Bihar) as Buddha, son
of Ajana, with a view to deluding the enemies of gods. (24) Then again, towards the end of
the Kali age, when the kings mostly turn into robbers, the Lord of the universe will take
descent from (a Brahmana named) Visnuyasa as Lord Kalki. (25)

अवतारा ह्यसंख्येया हरे: सत्त्वनिधेर्दविजा: । यथाविदासिन: Hem: सरस: स्यु: AEST: 12461
me मनवो देवा मनुपुत्रा महौजस:। कला: wd हरेरेव सप्रजापतयस्तथा i201
एते चांशकला: पुंस: कृष्णस्तु War स्वयम् । इन्द्रारिव्याकुलं लोकं मृडयन्ति युगे युगे । २८।
wa गुह्यं भगवतो य एतत्प्रयतो नर: । सायं प्रातर्गृणन् भक्त्या दु:खग्रामाद्विमुच्यते । २९॥
Even as thousands of rivulets flow from a lake that never dries, so there are countless
descents ofthe Lord, whois a storehouse of Sattva (power, wisdom, etc.) ,O Brahmanas.(26)
The sages and seers, the Manus, the gods, the sons of the Manus, the Prajapatis (lords of
created beings), in fact, all those who possess great power, are rays of Sri Hari. (27) All
these, however, are either part manifestations or rays of the Supreme Person; while Sri
Krsna is the Lord Himself. All these Avataras or manifestations of the Lord appear from age
to age and protect the world when it is oppressed by the enemies of Indra. (28) This story
of the Lord's descents is a secret. The man who devoutly recites it every evening and
morning with a pious mind is rid of all suffering. (29)
एतद्रूपे wad ह्यरूपस्य चिदात्मन: । मायागुणैर्विरचितं `भहदादिभिरात्मनि 130 1
यथा नभसि मेघौघो रेणुर्वा पार्थिवोऽनिले। एवं sph दृश्यत्वमारोपितमबुद्धिभि: । ३१॥
a: परं यदव्यक्तमव्यूढगुणव्यूहितम्। अदृष्टाश्रुतवस्तुत्वात्स जीवो यत्पुनर्भव: 1321
यत्रेमे सदसद्रूपे प्रतिषिद्धे स्वसंविदा । अविद्ययाऽऽत्मनि कृते इति तद्ब्रह्मदर्शानम् 133
यद्येषोपरता देवी माया वैशारदी मति: । aaa एवेति विदुर्महिम्नि स्वे महीयते । ३४॥
एवं war कर्माणि ह्यकर्तुरजनस्य च।। वर्णयन्ति स्म कवयो वेदगुह्यानि gem: 1341

This gross manifestation (in the form of the material universe) of the Lord, who is
essentially spiritual and has no material form, has been evolved by the products of His Maya
such as Mahat (the principle of Cosmic Intelligence) and so on, and superimposed on the
[364] B. M. 3—
