194 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 20

ana नीरजोत्पत्या नीराणि safe वयु:। भ्रष्टानामिव चेतांसि पुनर्योगनिषेवया ।३३॥
व्योम्नोऽब्दं भूतशञाबल्यं qa: veal मलम्।ङारञ्जहाराश्रमिणां कृष्णे भक्तिर्यथाशुभम् । ३४॥
सर्वस्वं जलदा हित्वा विरेजु: शुभ्रवर्चस: | यथात्यक्तैषणा: Tee मुनयो मुक्तकिल्विषा: 1341
frat मुमुचुस्तोयं क्वचिन्न qaqa: शिवम् aan ज्ञानामृतं काले ज्ञानिनो ददते न वा ।३६1
Safer क्षीयमाणं जलं गाधजलेचरा: । यथाऽऽयुरन्वहं क्षव्यं नरा मूढा: कुटुम्बिन: 1301
गाधवारिचरास्तापमविन्दञ्छरदर्कजम् lao afte: कृपण: कुटुम्ब्यविजितेन्दिय: ।३८1
wi: whe पङ्कं स्थलान्यामं च वीरुध: । यथाहंममतां धीरा: शरीरादिष्ननात्मसु 1381
निश्चलाम्बुरभूत्तूष्णीं समुद्रर ङहारदागमे। आत्मन्युपरते सम्यङ्मुनिर्व्यपरतागम: ।४०॥
केदारेभ्यस्त्वपोऽगृह्णन् कर्षका दृढसेतुभि: । यथा प्राणै: स्नवज्ञानं तन्निरोधेन योगिन: ।४१।
शरदर्काशुजांस्तापान् भूतानामुडुपोऽहरत् । देहाभिमानजं बोधो मुकुन्दो व्रजयोषिताम् ॥४२॥
janie निर्मेघं शरद्विमलतारकम्।सत्त्वयुक्तं यथा चित्तं हाब्दव्रह्मार्थदर्शनम् rsa
अखण्डमण्डलो व्योम्नि रराजोडुगणै: ज्ञी । यथा यदुपति: कृष्णो वृष्णिचक्रावृतो भुवि ree
sues समशीतोष्णं प्रसूनवनमारुतम्।जनास्तार्पं welch न कृष्णहृतचेतस: sul

गावो मृगा: खगा नार्य: पुष्पिण्य: were) अन्वीयमाना: स्ववृषै: फलैरीशक्रिया ga ।४६॥
seer, वारिजानि सूर्योत्थाने कुमुद् विना । राज्ञा तु निर्भया लोका यथा दस्यून् विना नृप sel
पुरग्रामेष्वाग्रयणैरैन्दियैश्च WEA: । बभौ भू: पक्वसस्याढ्या Hort नितरां हरे: se

वणिङ्मुनिनृपस्नाता निर्गम्यार्थान् प्रपेदिरे। वर्षरुद्धा यथा सिद्धा: स्वपिण्डान् काल आगते ।४९॥
इति श्रीमद्भागवते महापुराणे पारमहंस्यां संहितायां Sas yale दृद्टारदरर्णनं नाम विंद्योऽध्याय: 1२०1

While Balarama and Sri Krsna (the Ruler even of Brahma and Lord Siva) thus dwelt in
Vraja, there fully set in the autumnal season free from clouds and characterized by crystal
waters and gentle breezes. (32) Due to the autumn, marked with the appearance of lotuses,
waters regained their transparency (even) as the minds of those that have strayed from (the
path of) Yoga recover their purity by resuming the practice of Yoga. (33) The autumn drove
away the clouds from the sky, relieved the congestion of living beings (occasioned by the
overgrowth of creatures), dried up the mire on the earth and eliminated the turbidity of water
(even) as devotion to Sri Krsna puts an end to all evil besetting those belonging to the (four)
Agramas (stages in life). (34) Having discharged all their wealth (in the form of water), the
clouds shone forth in their white fustre (even) like ascetics that have given up (all forms of)
desire (viz., the desire for progeny, the hankering for wealth and the ambition for glory) and
have shed theirimpurity (in the shape of) tendency to action and have (consequently become
composed. (35) As some places the mountains released their pure water whereas at other
places they did not, (even) as enlightened souls impart their nectar-like wisdom on some
(opportune) occasions (to the qualified), while at other times they do not. (36) The creatures
living in shallow waters did notat all notice the water diminishing (everyday), (even) as stupid
householders do not perceive their span of life shortening everyday. (37) Like adestitute and
helpless householder, who has not been able to subdue his senses, suffering hardships, the
creatures living in shallow waters experienced the heat radiated by the autumnal sun. (38)
(Virgin) tracts of land gradually gave up their moisture and the plants their unripe state, (even)
as the wise slowly give up the sense of identification with, and the feeling of mineness with
respect to, the body etc., which are not the self. (39) On the advent of the autumn the ocean
became calm and quiet (even) as an ascetic is relieved of his recitation of the Vedas when

