Dis. 22 ] BOOK ELEVEN 617

SR CIRO REIRSON ORNL CNC CE EN OK शाशा ener E Hee त्क त्ल् nee

पुरुषेश्वरयोरत्र न वैलक्षण्यमण्वपि । तदन्यकल्पनापार्था wa च प्रकृतेर्गुण: । ११।
प्रकृतिर्गुणसाम्ये वै प्रकृतेर्नात्मनो गुणा:। सत्त्वं रजस्तम sft स्थित्युत्पन्त्यन्तहेतव: 1221
aa ज्ञानं रज: कर्म तमोऽज्ञानमिहोच्यते। गुणव्यतिकर: ae: स्वभाव: सूत्रमेव च । १३॥
Self-Realization in the case of the Jiva (individual soul), (who is) characterized by
ignorance that has no beginning, cannot take place by itself (and is possible only through
instructions imparted by another omniscient being) there mustbe another (being) whoknows
the truth and is able to impart His Knowledge (to the Jiva). (That is the argument advanced
in favour of their contention by those who recognize an additional category, viz., God as apart
from the soul and thus raise the number of categories to twenty-six.) (10) There is not the
least difference in this body between the individual soul and God (both being of the nature
of consciousness). (Therefore) the assumption that they are distinct from one another is
meaningless. And knowledge (or Self-Realization) is (but) a function of Sattvaguna (a
constituent of Prakrti). (Hence it is not necessary to recognize a twenty-sixth category in the
shape of God in order to rationalize the possibility of Self-Realization. This is the stand taken
by those who recognize only twenty-five principles.) (11) Prakrti (primordial Matter) is (only
another name for) the (state of) equilibrium of the (three) Gunas. Therefore, Sattva, Rajas
and Tamas—which are (severally) responsible for the continuance, appearance and
disappearance of the universe—are the adjuncts of Prakrti and not of the Spirit (whois anon-
doer and hence cannot be accepted as the ground of the three Gunas responsible for the
continuance etc., of the universe). (12) Knowledge, according to this (latter) classification,
is spoken of as (but) a modification of Sattva ; action, of Rajas; and ignorance, of Tamas (all
the three of which are comprised in Prakrti; hence action and ignorance too are included in
Prakrti). (Again,) Time is (no other than) God (who is responsible for the disturbance of
equilibrium of the Gunas or modes of Prakrti) and Swabhava (nature) is the Mahat-tattva (the
principle of cosmic intelligence, which is all-powerful (Hence it is not necessary to multiply
categories in both these classifications).(13)

पुरुष: प्रकृतिर्व्यक्तमहङ्कारो नभोऽनिल: । ज्योतिराप: क्षितिरिति तत्त्वान्युक्तानि मे नव । १४॥
श्रोत्रं wrest घ्राणो जिह्वेति ज्ञानशक्तय: | वाक्पाण्युपस्थपाय्वङ्घ्रिकर्माण्यङ्गोभयं मन: । १५॥
शब्द: स्पर्शो रसो गन्धो रूपं चेत्यर्थजातय: । गत्युक्त्युत्सर्गशिल्पानि कर्मायतनसिद्ध्य: ।१६।
ania प्रकृतिर्ह्यस्य कार्यकारणरूपिणी । सत्त्वादिभिर्गुणैर्धत्ते पुरुषोऽव्यक्त ईक्षते । १७
व्यक्तादयो विकुर्वाणा धातव: पुरुषेक्षया। लब्धवीर्या: सृजन्त्यण्डं संहता: प्रकृतेर्बलात् i ec!

(Of the twenty-eight categories mentioned in verse | above, in four groups of nine, eleven,
five and three respectively, the last, three viz., the three Gunas, which are included by others
in Prakrti have thus been enumerated. Of the remaining twenty-five) Purusa (the Spirit,
comprising God as well as the individual soul, both of which are conscious by nature), Prakrti
(primordial Matter), Mahat-tattva (the principle of cosmic intelligence), Ahankara (the cosmic
Ego), ether, the air, fire, water and earth (in their gross form)—these are the nine categories
(already) referred to by Me (in verse 1 above). (14) The (five) faculties (senses) of cognition
(perception), viz., the senses of hearing, touch, sight, smell and taste; the (five) organs of
action, viz., the organ of speech, hands, the organ of generation, the organ of defecation and
feet, and the mind, the controller of both (the senses of preception and the organs of action);
the (five) varieties of sense-objects, viz., sound, touch, taste, smell and colour—these are
the other eleven and five categories mentioned in verse 1 supra. Locomotion and speech,
urination and defecation and handicraft are the (five) functions of the organs of actions (and
no separate categories). (15-16) Appearing in the form of (the sixteen) evolutes (viz., the five
