Dis. 9] ~ BOOK FOUR’ 337

६.७.३ १ .३.७.७.३.३.३ dei fotcton ६३३३ ४ Srnec soi nin § ine nino soi me doh aie teh

"Luckily enough (for all of us) your son, who had long been ost, has been recovered andhas
(thus) wiped out your agony. He will in course of time rule over the terrestrial globe. (51) You
have surely adored the Lord, who puts an end to the suffering of the suppliant, and by
constantly contemplating on whom the wise have succeeded in conquering death, whichis
so very difficult to conquer." (52)

लाल्यमानं जनैरेवं ध्रुवं सभ्रातरं नृप:। आरोप्य करिणीं we: स्तूयमानोऽविशात्पुरम् 143 |
तत्र . तत्रोपसंक्लपैर्लसन्मकरतोरणै: । सवृन्दै: कदलीस्तम्भै: पूगपोतैश्च aed: । ५४॥
चूतपल्लववास:स्रङ्मुक्तादामविलम्बिभि:३ । उपस्कृतं प्रतिद्वारमपां कुम्भै: सदीपकै: ।५५॥
प्राकारैर्गोपुरागारै: शातकुम्भपरिच्छदॆ: | सर्वतोऽलंकृतं श्रीमद्विमानशिखरद्युभि: 1461
मृष्टचत्वररथ्याट्टमार्गं चन्दनचर्चितम् aimed: पुष्पफलैस्तण्डुलैर्बलिभिर्युतम् । ५७।
ध्रुवाय पथि ape तत्र त्त्र Utter: | सिद्धार्थाक्षतदध्यम्बुदूर्वापुष्पफलानि च ।५८॥।
Sag: प्रयुञ्जाना वात्सल्यादाशिष: सती: । श्वृण्वंस्तद्वल्गुगीतानि प्राविहाद्भवनं पितु: । ५९1

Placing Dhruva, who was thus being fondly caressed by the people, on (the back of) a
female elephant along with his (younger) brother (Uttama), the king (Uttanapada) joyously
entered the city (of Barhismati), acclaimed (by all). (53) The city was decorated here and
there with plantain trees and young arecas containing bunches (of fruits and blossoms) set
up with charming alligator-shaped festoons tied to them, and was adornedat every entrance
with jars full of water with lights burning on them and leaves of mango trees, pieces of cloth,
wreaths of flowers and strings of pearls hanging about their necks. (54-55) It was graced on
all sides with defensive walls, gates and mansions decked with gold and with their fops
shining like the glorious pinnacles of aerial cars. (56) Its quadrangles, streets, attics and
roads had been cleaned and the city sprinkled with sandal water. Again, it was scattered with
fried as well as unfried rice, unbroken rice, flowers, fruits and (other) offerings. (57)
Everywhere the virtuous women of the city showered on Dhruva, as they saw him on the
road, white mustard seeds, unbroken rice, curds, water, blades of Durva (panic grass),
flowers and fruits, uttering their benedictions (on the child) out of (pure) affection; and
hearing their sweet strains, Dhruva entered the palace of his father. (58-59)

महामणिव्रातमये स तस्मिन् भवनोत्तमे। लालितो नितरां पित्रा न्यवसद्दिवि देववत् igo!
पय: फेननिभा: हाय्या दान्ता रुक्मपरिच्छदा: | आसनानि महार्हाणि aa रौक्मा उपस्करा: 1621
यत्र स्फटिककुड्येषु महामारकतेषु च । मणिप्रदीपा आभान्तिं ललनारत्नसंयुता: ।६२॥
उद्यानानि च vain fafa: | कूजद्बिहङ्गमिथुनैर्गायन्मत्तमधुव्रतै: । ६३1
वाप्यो वैदूर्यसोपाना: पद्मोत्पलकुमुद्वती: | हंसकारण्डवकुलैर्जुष्टाश्चक्राह्वसारसे: । ६४॥

Fondly caressed by his father, Dhruva lived in that excellent palace built of most precious
stones, like a god in heaven. (60) It was furnished with best of ivory (soft and white) as the
froth of milk and provided with coverings of gold, and contained costly seats and other
furniture, made of gold. (61) In its walls of crystal and emerald shone lights in the shape of
bright gems placed in the hands of beautiful female figures carved in precious stones. (62)
Within the premises of the palace there were pleasure-gardens charming with different
species of celestial trees, resorted to by warbling pairs of birds and humming bees drunk with
honey. (63) It also contained extensive wells with steps of cat's-eye, containing white and
blue lotuses and water-lilies and inhabited by swarms of swans and ducks, ruddy geese and
cranes. (64)
