408 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 68
Rik ert

ALHeRS Hee eH EHSAN eee TATA ESS rtreereeeereseserkenrkenae hr ee Ree

We did not know Your greatness. Be pleased (therefore) to forgive us our transgression,
foolish and evil-minded as we are. (44) You are the sole Cause of creation, continuance and
destruction (of the universe), (the substratum of all, though) resting on nothing but Your own
being. Indeed, O Lord, sages speak of the three worlds as Your toys and Yourself as the
Player. (45) O Lord of infinite strength, possessed of a thousand heads ! You alone bear (the
weight of) the terrestrial globe on one of Your heads, without any effort, and at the time of
final dissolution with draw the universe into Yourself and lie (on the causal waters) as the only
remaining substance (Narayana) without a second. (46) Lord, You have assumed this Form
consisting of pure Saitva (goodness). Your anger is not prompted by hatred or malice but is
intended only to teach all and is directed towards the maintenance of the world order. (47)
Hail to You, O Inner Controller of all created beings, O omnipotent and immutable Maker
of the universe ! We have sought You as our Protector. Salutation be to You (again and
again)." (48)
श्रीगुक उवाच

एवं प्रपन्ने: संविन्नैर्वेषमानायनैर्बल: । प्रसादित: सुप्रसन्नो मा भैष्टेत्यभयं ददौ 1४९1

gi: पारिबर्हं कुञ्जरान् षष्टिहायनान्।ददौ च द्वादशञ्षतान्ययुतानि तुरङ्गमान् ।५०।

रथानां षद्सहस्राणि रौक्माणां सूर्यवर्चसाम्। दासीनां निष्ककण्ठीनां wee दुहितृवत्सल: 1421

प्रतिगृह्य तु तत् सर्वं भगवान् सात्वतर्षभ: । ससुत: सस्नुष: प्रागात् सुहृद्भिरभिनन्दित: 1421

तत: Sfas wot femme wa बन्धूननुरक्तचेतस: ।
wera सर्वं GEER मध्ये oat कुरुषु स्वचेष्टितम् ।५३॥
अद्यापि च पुरं ह्येतत् सूचयद् रामविक्रमम्।समुन्नते दक्षिणतो गङड्गायामनुदृह्यते ux

Sri Suka went on :Propitiated thus by the Kurus, who had got alarmed to find their city
shaking and sought protection with Him, Balarama felt much pleased and promised them
protection asking them to shed their fear. (49) Duryodhana was (very) fond of his daughter
(Laksmana). He gave away as a wedding present twelve hundred (young) elephants, each
sixty years of age, ten thousand horses, six thousand gold chariots glowing like the sun, and
a thousand maid-servants adorned with a gold necklace. (50-51) Accepting for His part all
those presents, and acclaimed by his friends and relations, Lord Balarama, the foremost of
the Yadus, departed with Samba and his bride. (52) Returning to His city (Dwaraka),
Balarama met (all) His devoted friends and relations and in the open court told the Yadava
chiefs everything, viz., how he had dealt with the Kurus. (53) Even to this day Hastinapura
appears fairly elevated towards the south and sloping down towards the Ganga, (thereby)
testifying to this (supreme) exploit of Balarama. (54)

Thus ends the sixty-eighth discourse entitled “ The Triumph of Sankarsana in the form of
dragging Hastinapura’, in the latter half of Book Ten of the great and glorious Bhagavata-
Purana, otherwise known as the Paramahamsa-samhita.

२२२ Sat $3
CoS Shere
