Dis. 4] "-BOGK FHREE’'=- 147

AAA ATER HAH EE HEHE TCO डो व्याक मै CUM HH CESS HEC He ETT KNIT HT ERAT BR वी ट्च् BRENT RT He Ht HT

intentions, | nevertheless went after Him, unable to bear separation from His feet. (5) Looking
for my beloved lord, | beheld Him, the abode of all splendour, seated all alone on the bank
of the Saraswati, although (as a matter of fact) He is shelterless (being the shelter. of all). (6)
Possessed ofa brilliant swarthy form, whichis all Sattva or purity (free from a mixture of Rajas
or passion), with reddish yet most gentle eyes, He could be easily distinguished by His four
arms and the yellow silk on His person. (7) Placing His lotus-like right foot on His left thigh,
He was reclining against a young Aswattha (peepul) tree, and was full of joy, even though
He had renounced the pleasures of sense. (8) Meandering through the various worlds, there
came by chance at that moment the enlightened sage Maitreya, a great devotee of the Lord
and a loving friend and fellow-student of the sage Dwaipayana (Vedavyasa). (9) While that
devoted sage stood listening with rapt attention, his head bent low in the ecstasy of delight
and emotion, Lord Sri Krsna (the Bestower of Liberation) spoke to me (as follows), refreshing
me by His endearing smiles and affectionate glances. (10)

वेदाहमन्तर्मनसीप्सितं ते ददामि ae दुरवापमन्यै: ।

wa पुरा विश्चसृजां वसूनां मसत्सिद्धिकामेन वसो त्वयेष्ट: ee!

a एष wat चरमो भवानामासादितस्ते मदनुग्रहो यत्।

यन्मां yor रह उत्सृजन्तं fen ददृश्चान् विशदानुवृत्तया ie?

पुरा मया प्रोक्तमजाय नाभ्ये owl निषण्णाय ममादिसर्गे ।

wt ww मन्पहिमावभासं यत्सूरयो भागवतं वदन्ति 1231

The Lord said : Dwelling within you, | know the desire of your heart and proceed to

confer on you that which is difficult for others to attain. In your previous incarnation, when
you were a Vasu, (O Uddhava !) you worshipped Me, in the sacrifice jointly performed by
the Prajapatis (the lords of created beings ) and the Vasus, with the sole object of attaining
Me. (11) The present is certainly your last incarnation, O saintly Uddhava, since you have
earned My grace in this life. You are indeed fortunate in having seen Me on this secluded
spot, by virtue of your unalloyed devotion, at a time when | am about to leave this mortal
world (and return to My eternal Abode). (12) ( am going to impart to you) that supreme
wisdom, revealing My glory, which the sages call by the name of 'Bhagavata’ and which
| taught to Brahma (the unborn), who was seated on the lotus that had sprung from My
navel, in a former cycle (called the Padma-Kalpa) at the dawn of creation. (13)

इत्यादृतोक्त: परमस्य पुंस: प्रतिक्षणानुग्रहभाजनोऽहम् ।

अपि aa नो प्रहणाय wider aa वृजिनं तरेम । १८

Thus politely addressed by the Lord, and a recipient of His constant favour. | returned
