544 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 26

.३.३.३.७.३.३..३..३.३.३..३.७.६.७..३.३.७.३..३..३..७..३..३.८३.३..३..३:३:६.३..३-अ श .७.६.३.३.७. ७७ ७.७३.३.३..७.३.७ ७३ ३.3-.3-३..३-३.६.३.७..३..६..६:३- ३३६ ३३ .३.६.३.2.३.३

punishment cr corporal punishment on a Brahmana—such an atrocious soul falls hereafter
into the hell known as Sikaramukha. With his limbs being crushed by most powerful hands,
even as a piece of sugar-cane is crushed (in a cane-crushing machine) here, he is filled with
(great) constemation (now) shrieking in a piteous tone and now fainting, even like men who
were detained by him here, though not found guilty. (16)
व्यथामाचरति स परत्रान्धकूपे तदभिद्रोहेण Prof हासौ तैर्जन्तुभि:
. पशुमृगपक्षिसरीसृपैर्मशकयूकामत्कुणर्मा मक्षिकादिभिर्ये के चाभिद्रुग्धास्तै: सर्वतोऽभिद्रुह्यमाणस्तमसि
विहतनिद्रानिर्वृतिरलब्धावस्थान: परिक्रामति यथा कुशरीरे जीव:। १७॥

Again, he indeed whose mode of life in this world (regulated by a number of injunctions
and interdictions based on the division of society into so many Varnas or grades and
Agramas or stages in life) has been determined by the Cosmic Person Himself (by assigning
the different parts of His Body to the four Varnas—the mouth to the Brahmanas, the arms
to the Ksatriyas, the thighs to the Vaisyas and the feet to the Sidras) and by whom the agony
of others is (easily) understood (inferred from his own experience) and who (nonetheless)
inflicts pain on creatures whose means of living (such as sucking the human blood) have
been (similarly) determined by God (appearing as the Creator) and by which the agony of
others is not known (inasmuch as they are devoid or reason and as such incapable of
drawing conclusions) descends after death into (the hell called) Andhakupa because of his
hatred towards those creatures. Being actually hated on all sides in that region by deer and
other beasts, birds and reptiles, mosquitoes and lice, bugs and flies and other living beings—
whatsoever were killed by him (here)—he has his sleep and peace of mind disturbed and,
finding no rest (anywhere), roams about in darkness just as the Jiva (an embodied soul)
remains restless in an unsound (diseased) body. (17)

यस्त्विह वा असंविभज्याश्नाति यत्किञ्चनोपनतमनिर्मितपञ्चयज्ञो वायससंस्तुत: स परत्र कृमिभोजने
नरकाधमे निपतति तत्र शतसहस्त्रयोजने कृमिकुण्डे कृमिभूत: wad कृमिभिरेव भक्ष्यमाण: कृमिभोजनो
यावत्तदप्रत्ताप्रहुतादोऽनिर्वेशमात्मानं यातयते। १८ । यस्त्विह वै स्तेयेन बलाद्वा हिरण्यरत्नादीनि ब्राह्मणस्य
वापहरत्यन्यस्य वानापदि पुरुषस्तममुत्र राजन् यमपुरुषा अयस्मयैरग्निपिण्डै: सन्दंशैस्त्वचि निष्कुषन्ति | १९ ।
यस्त्विह वा अगम्यां स्नियमगम्यं वा पुरुषं योषिदभिगच्छति तावमुत्र कशया ताडयन्तस्तिग्मया Gat
लोहमय्या पुरुषमालिङ्गयन्ति fer च पुरुषरूपया Gat 201 यस्त्विह वै सर्वाभिगमस्तममुत्र निरये
वर्तमानं वज्रकण्टकशाल्मलीमारोप्य निष्कर्षन्ति। २१।

Again, he who eats here whatever comes to him, without sharing” it (with others) and
without performing the five (kinds of daily) sacrificest (obligatory on a householder) has
On _

* {Lis laid down in our scriptures that a householder should take his meal only after he has fed a stranger waiting at his door,
the servants of his household, Ihe young children and the aged of the family, married sisters and daughters and so on.

+ The five kinds of daily sacrifices enjoined on a householder are given in a nutshell in the following couplet of the
Manusmrti -—

(IIl.70-71)

They are :— (1) Brahmayajfia or propitiation of the Rsis (to whom we owe all our knowledge, both lemporal and spiritual),
consisting in teaching and chanting the Vedas and thus sharing with others the benefits of the knowledge bequeathed to us
by the Rsis; (2) Pitryajfia or acknowledgment of our debt to the departed ancestors including the eternal Pitrs in the form of
Tarpana or pouring water for their gratification; (3) Daivayajfia or propitiation of the gods through Homa or pouring oblations
into the sacred fire in theirname; (4) Bhitayaliia or acknowledgment of our debt to the sub-human creation by offering a portion
of the datly mealto all creatures: and (5) Nryajfia or worship of our fellow-beings, which consists in offering homage to a stranger
who calls at our door by feeding and affording shelter to him.
