Dis. 3] SRIMAD BHAGAVATA-MAHATMYA 19

3९ १९१९ १६०९ १८ He BE HREM जं शं श्र सा क्त अ आ आ BE ACRE १९ ESE REBECA MT a He HME HY OF He .. म्नै‘र्य//भंभंग्ने/ध्रंध्रंगैप्ते/थेर्गंभ्'प्र्ना‘/’ळं\’णीं"/.’र्भंक्वर्गाग्‘क्व"/""।'प्र्पोशंर्ण"क्वप्’र्षाश्नंप्रं'/’ We NeW वा का

आजन्ममान्रमपि येन wea किंचिच्चित्तं विधाय शुकशास्त्रकथा न पीता ।

चाण्डालवच्च खरवद् ad तेन नीतं मिथ्या स्वजन्म जननीजनिदु:खभाजा ।४२॥
जोवच्छवो निगदित: स तु पापकर्मा येन श्रुतं छुककथावचनं न किंचित् ।
ध्रिकृतंनरंपशृप्तमंभुविभाररूपमेव्रंबदन्तिदिविदेबसमाजपुख्या:।ष्ठुइ।

The fool by whom even a little of the story of Srimad Bhagavata is not drunk with a
concentrated mind during his whole lifetime has alas ! spenthis life like a pariah or a donkey
in vain and (only) proved instrumental in causing pangs of childbirth to his mother. (42) That
fellow of sinful deeds by whom not even a few words of Srimad Bhagavata (consisting of a
discourse of Sri Suka to Pariksit) have (ever) been heard is depicted as a living corpse.

Leaders of the community of gods in heaven speak (of such a man.) like this: "Fie upon such
a man, who is on a level with the beasts and a veritable burden on earth !" (43)

दुर्लभैव कथा लोके श्रीमद्धागवतोद्भवा । कोटिजन्मसमुत्थेन पुण्येनैव तु लभ्यते ।४४॥
तॆनयोगनिधेधीमन्श्रोतव्यासाप्नयत्रत:।दिनमांनियमोनास्तिसर्वंदाश्रवणंमतम्।४५।
सत्येन ब्रह्मचर्येण सर्वदा श्रवणं मतम्। अशक्यत्वात्कलौ बोध्यो sa TET । ४६
मनोवृत्तिजयश्चैव नियमाचरणं तथा। दीक्षां कर्तुमहाक्यत्वात्सप्ताहश्रवणं मतम् IY!
श्रद्धात: श्रवणे fret माघे तावद्धि यत्फलम् dens YR सप्ताहश्रवणे कृतम् ।४८॥
मनसश्चाजयाद्रोगात्पुंसां चैवायुष: क्षयात्। कलेर्दोषबहुत्वाच्च सप्ताहश्रवणं मतम् ।४९।
यत्फलं नास्ति तपसा न योगेन समाधिना। अनायासेन तत्सर्वं सप्ताहश्रवणे लभेत् ।५०॥
यज्ञाद्गर्जति सप्ताह: सप्ताह्यो गर्जति wai तपसो गर्जति प्रोच्चैस्तीर्थान्नित्यं हि गर्जति । ५१।
योगाद्गर्जति सप्ताहो ध्यानाज्ञानाच्च गर्जति । किं ब्रूमो गर्जनं तस्य रे रे गर्जति गर्जति । ५२॥

An exposition of Srimad Bhagavata is certainly rare in the world. In fact (an opportunity
to hear) it can be had only through merit percolated through crores of lives. (44) Therefore,
O wise one, O storehouse of Yoga, this shouldbe heard with diligence. There is no restriction
regarding the (number of) days in the course of which it is to be heard. The hearing of it is
commendedatall times.(45) The hearing of it is advisedatall times side by side with the vows
of truthfulness and continence. This being impracticable (however) in Kaliyuga, the specific
rules promulgated by Sri Suka in this behalf should (accordingly) be known. (46) Since it is
not possible in the age of Kali to control the vagaries of the mind, to observe rules of conduct
(strictly) and to remain consecrated to a sacred purpose (for a long period of time), it is
considered advisable to hear (the whole of) it in the course of a week.(47) That (very) reward
which is attained by listening to it with reverence everyday during (the month of ) Magha has
been ascribed by Sri Sukadeva to the hearing of Srimad Bhagavata in a week's time. (48)
The (complete) hearing of Srimad Bhagavata in a week has been commended due to lack
of control over the mind and prevalence of diseases as well as because the span of life of
man has been shortened and also because a number of evils are rampant in the Kali age. (49)
One bids fair to attain with ease, through the hearing of Srimad Bhagavata in a week, that
fruit in its entirety which cannot be attained through askesis nor through concentration of
mind nor again through Samadhi (complete absorption of the mindin the Universal Spirit). (50)
The seven days’ hearing of Srimad Bhagavata is superior to a sacrificial performance; it is
(even) superior to fasting. Itis far superior to askesis andis ever superior to (a visit to) sacred
places. (51) It is superior to Yoga; (nay) it is superior (even) to meditation and spiritual
