Dis. 50] BOOK TEN 324

Ree SPEIER EO SO IO es ETE LE HERTS Se ERE NRT EL TS HE

clouds in the shape of hostile troops, Sri Hari twanged His excellent Sarnga bow, esteemed
by the gods and demons (alike). (23) Taking arrows out of His quiver and fitting them (to the
bow), pulling the string (of the bow) at full length and discharging volleys of sharp arrows and
striking down chariots, elephants, horses and foot-soldiers (on all sides) without interval, the
Lord whirled as a revolving fire-brand. (24) Elephants fell dead with the frontal globes on their
foreheads plit up; horses (too) dropped dead in large numbers with their necks cut off with
shafts; chariots toppled down with their horses, ensigns, charioteers and masters struck
down, and foot-soldiers fell prostrate with their arms, thighs and necks severed. (25) On the
field of battle were set flowing in hundreds streams of blood issued from the bodies of foot-
soldiers, elephants and horses that were being mowed down—streams in which arms (of
fallen soldiers) floated like (aquatic) serpents, the heads of men like tortoises, their hands
and thighs like fishes, the locks of men like duck-weedsand their excellent and big gems and
ornaments like gravel and stones. The streams were thick with shoals in the shape of killed
elephants and alligators in the shape of slain horses; (nay,) they were full of waves in the
shape of bows and bushes in the shape of (other) weapons, and looked terrible with eddies
in the shape of shields (or wheels). They brought terror to cowards and encouragement to
the valiant of one army to give battle to the other. By Sankarsana (Balarama) of immeasurable
prowess, even as He was (busy) annihilating the vainglorious enemies with His pestle, was
brought to destruction (the remnant of) that force, led by Jarasandha (the king of the
Magadhas), (even) though it was hard to cross and fearful like the ocean and unfathomable
(in prowess) and endless (in extent) O dear Pariksit! That was (however) a mere amusing
play on the part of Sri Krsna and Balarama (the two sons of Vasudeva), the Rulers of the
universe. (26—29) The (aforesaid) discomfiture of the enemy's forces is no wonder on the
part of the Lord who carries on the (processes of) creation, preservation and annihilation of
(all) the three worlds by way of His (divine) sport, endowed as He is with endless attributes.
Still the story is (being) told (atsome length) as of Him who imitates the ways of mortals (and
fought like two Ksatriya) youths though capable of destroying any army whatsoever in a
twinkling by mere will). (30)
ame fied रामो जरासन्धं महाबलम्। हतानीकावशिष्टासुं सिंह: सिंहमिवौजसा । ३१1
बध्यमानं हतारातिं Uae’: । वारयामास गोविन्दस्तेन कार्यचिकीर्षया 1321
a Ga लोकनाथाभ्यां व्रीडितो वीरसंमत: । तपसे gaged वारित: पथि राजभि: 1331
ae: पवित्रार्थपदैर्नयनै: प्राकृतैरपि । स्वकर्मवन्धप्राप्तोऽयं यदुभिस्ते पराभव: 1341
सर्वानीकेषु नृपो azar । उपेक्षितो भगवता मगधान् दुर्मना चयो । ३५1
(Even) as a lion would seize another with force, Balarama caught hold of Jarasandha,
who though very powerful, had lost his chariot and was left (alone) with his life, his (entire)
force having been wiped out. (31) With intent to accomplish His (own) work (of concentrating
all undesirable elements) through him Sri Krsna (the Protector of cows) prevented his being
bound (by Balarama) with the cords of Varuna as well as with human ropes, although he had
(himself) killed (numberless redoubtable) foes (in the past). (32) Let go by Sri Krsna and
Balarama (the two Lords of the universe) and (therefore) abashed, Jarasandha (who was
honoured by the valiant) resolved upon ausierities but was stopped on the way by (other)
kings (such as his friend and associate Sigupala, the ruler of the Cedis and another sworn
enemy of Sri Krsna, though related to Him by blood) by means of expressions consisting of
words bearing sacred import and even worldly counsels saying "This discomfiture at the
hands of the Yadus has been sustained by you through the binding nature of your own (past)
actions." (33-34) Ignored by the Lord on all his battalions having been wiped out, King
Jarasandha (son of Brhadratha) withdrew dispirited to the Magadh territory (his own
