530 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 4

SEE ORT EL EP AOMO OT ENTEL A TARA TER ERE TONMNENTNTER EES EKER OT ECHR NERO ORTON EEA F ERA ANOS

holy relic (offered flowers etc.), on his own head, (finish the worship and) deposit the
worshipped image at its place and the Lord in his heart. (54) He who thus worships the Lord,
the Universal Soul, in the fire, the sun, water etc., or in his guest or his own heart surely gets
liberated very soon. (55)

Thus ends the third discourse, in Book Eleven of the great and
glorious Bhagavata-Purana, otherwise known
as the Paramahamsa-Samhita.

Sat Piet Cre Ey
IIE rer

Discourse IV

A description of the Lord's Descents

राजोवाच
यानि यानीह कर्माणि यैर्यै: स्वच्छन्दजन्भभि: । चक्रे करोति कर्ता वा हरिस्तानि qed न: । १ |

King Nimi said ; Pray, narrate to us those various deeds which Sri Hari performedin this
world during His different incarnations, assumed according to His free will and tell us those
deeds also which He is performing now or will perform (in future). (1)

gfe sara

यो वा अनन्तस्य गुणाननन्ताननुक्रमिष्यन् स तु बालबुद्धिं: ।
रजांसि भूमेर्गणयेत् कथञ्चित् कालेन नैवाखिलछाक्तिधाम्न: । २ ।
भूतैर्यदा पञ्चभिरात्मसृष्टै: पुरं विराजं विरचय्य afer
स्वांशेन fas: पुरुषाभिधानमवाप नारायण आदिदेव: । ३ ।
यत्काय एष भुवनत्रयसन्निवेशो यस्येन्द्रियैस्तनुभृतामुभयेन्द्रियाणि ।
ज्ञानं स्वत: श्वसनतो बलमोज ger सत्त्वादिभि: स्थितिलयोद्धव आदिकर्ता । ४ ।
आदावभूच्छतधृती रजसास्य सर्गे विष्णु: स्थितौ क्रतुपतिर्बिजधर्मसेतु: |
रुद्रोऽप्ययाय तमसा पुरुष: स आद्य इत्युद्धवस्थितिलया: सततं प्रजासु । ५ |

The sage Drumila said : He who seeks (completely) to count the endless qualities of
the infinite Lordis really a person of puerile understanding. One may (possibly) countanyhow
in course of time the particles of dust on earth, but in no case the excellences of the
omnipotent Lord. (2) When Lord Narayana the first and foremost Deity, created, with the five
primary elements evolved by Himself, the universe as His body and entered into it by a part
of His (as Its Inner Controller), then He acquired the name of Purusa. (3) The three worlds
constitute His body; through His organs come into being the twofold organs (of action and
knowledge) of all creatures, and by Himself He is Consciousness; His breath is the source
of the bodily and organic strength and activity of the world; through Sattva and other qualities
(Rajas and Tamas) He is the first author responsible for the creation, subsistence and
destruction of universe. (4) United with Rajas, that most ancient Person appeared in the
beginning as Brahma for the creation of this universe; in association with the quality of Sattva
the same Lord appeared as God Visnu for the continuity of the universe and for the
