Dis. 9] ‘BOCK THREE 169

PRHAEHKH CCHS EPOCH AKC EEEE KOC SANE EET EK PETTERS EE EEA HT TEKS RAE RR HE TR TR

(by His enemies), being closely guarded by His weapons (like Sudarsana and others) who
were truth, consciousness and bliss personified (i.e., had divine forms of their own), and ever
paraded round Him. (31) That very moment, Brahma, the would-be creator of the world, who
was intent on evolving the universe, beheld (in his heart along with the Lord) the lotus which
had shot forth from His navel, the water (that surrounded Him), the blast (that was blowing),
the sky (that hung over his head like a canopy) as well as himself (seated on the lotus) and
nothing other than these. (32) Dominated as he was by the quality of Rajas (the principle of
activity), he desired to undertake the work of evolving the creation; but when he saw only the
aforesaid meterial for the same, he fixed his mind on the Lord, whose ways are unknown to
anyone, and thus began to extol Him who is the only one deserving of praise, intent as he
was on creation. (33)

Thus ends the eighth discourse in Book Three of the great
and glorious Bhagavata-Purana, otherwise known
as the Paramahamsa-Samhita.

Mh,
aa
%
ड

म Saas eee.
Ce Eire उत्सिह

अथ नव्।मो ध्याय:
Discourse IX
Brahma extols the Lord

ब्रह्मोवाच
ज्ञातोऽसि मेऽद्य सुचिरान्ननु देहभाजां न ज्ञायते भगवतो गतिरित्यवद्यम् |
नान्यत्त्वदस्ति भगवन्नपि तन्न ys मायागुणव्यतिकराद्यदुरुर्विभासि । १ ।
स्पपं यदेतदवबोधरसोदयेन हाश्वन्निवृत्ततमस: सदनुग्रहाय |
aa गृहीतमवतारशतैकबीजं यन्नाभिपद्मभवनादहमाविरासम् । २ |
ad: परं परम यद्भवत: स्वरूपमानन्दमात्रमविकल्पमविद्धवर्च: |
पश्यामि विश्वसृजमेकमविश्चमात्मन् भूतेन्द्रियात्मकमदस्त उपाश्रितोऽस्मि । ३ ।
तद्वा इदं भुवनमङ्गल मङ्गलाय ध्याने स्म नो दर्शितं त उपासकानाम्।
तस्मै नमो भगवतेऽनुविधेम तुभ्यं योऽनादृतो नरकभाम्भिरसत्प्रसङ्गै: । ४ |
aq त्वदीयचरणाम्बुजकोशगन्धं जिघ्रन्ति कर्णविवरै: श्रुतिवातनीतम् ।
भक्त्या गृहीतचरण: परया च तेषां नापैषि नाथ हदयाम्बुरुहात्स्वपुंसाम् । ५ ।
तावद्भयं द्रविणगेहसुहन्निमित्तं een: स्पृहा परिभवो विपुलश्च लोभ: |
तावन्पमेत्यसदवग्रह आर्तिमूलं यावन्न तेऽङ्ध्रिमभयं प्रवृणीत लोक: । ६ |
दैवेन ते हतधियो भवत: प्रसङ्घात्सर्वाशुभोपशमनाद्बिमुखेन्द्विया ये ।
कुर्वन्ति कामसुखलेशलवाय dar लोभाभिभूतमनसोऽकुशालानि Wd! ७ ।
कामाग्निनाच्युत रुषा च सुदुर्भरेण waa मन उरुक्रम सीदते मे । ८ |
यावत्पृथक्त्वमिदमात्मन इन्द्रियार्थमायाबलं भगवतो जन ga ead |
wan संसृतिरसौ प्रतिसंक्रमेत व्यर्थापि दु:खनिवहं वहती क्रियार्था । ९ |
[564] B. M. 8—
