Dis. 14] “BOOK SIX . 619°

जज ज्यै त् व तीत्त LEEK HEATH HEEEEA AE CORK ॐ CECE क्तैयैती ङ HAKEHHAKE SHARE दौ को ज वी क्तय वयै वयै ती ज कच

सुप्तश्चिरं ह्यशानया च भवान् परीतो भुङ्क्ष्व स्तनं पिब शुचो हर न: स्वकानाम् । ५७॥

नाहं तनूज ददूशे हतमङ्गला a मुग्धस्मितं मुदितवीक्षणमाननाब्जम्।

किं वा रातोऽस्यपुनरन्वयमन्यलोकं नीतोऽघृणेन न श्रृणोमि कला गिरस्ते 1५८

"Alas, 0 creator, you are extremely foolish in that you act contrary to (the interests

of) your own creation. Oh, the death of a youngster while an elder is (still) living points
(unmistakably) to this. If (however) you are (just) the reverse (a wise fellow doing all this
designedly), you are our constant enemy (and no benefactor). (54) If (it is urged that)
there is no (strict) regularity in this world in the matter of death and birth of embodied
beings, then let everything happen according to their Karma (independently of you). (It
is, however, strange that) you are cutting asunder (by wresting babes from the hands
of their parents) this cord of affection, which was produced by yourself for the growth of
your creation ! (55) (Addressing her dead child,) and you, dear child, ought not to forsake
me, a wretched and helpless woman; (O) look at your father, burning with grief. With you
(as our pilot) we could easily cross the dark region of hell, which is difficult to cross for
the issueless. (Please) do not go far in the company of cruel Death. (56) Arise, darling!
These infant playmates of yours, O prince, are calling you to romp freely (with them). You
have slept long and must be seized with hunger. (Therefore,) eat something, suck my
breasts and take away the grief of us (all), your near and dear ones. (57) Having lost (all)
good fortune, | could not (get to) behold (when | came by your side to see you) your lotus-
like countenance with its innocent smile and cheerful glances. Or, taken by the cruel
Death, have you gone to the other world, whence you are not going to return ? (For) |
no longer hear your sweet words.” (58)

SH उवाच
विलपन्त्या मृतं पुत्रमिति चित्रविलापनै: । चित्रकेतुर्भृशं तप्तो मुक्तकण्ठो रुरोद 81491
तयोर्विलपतोर॥ सर्वे दम्पत्योस्तदनुव्रता:। रुरुदु: स्म नरा नार्य: सर्वमासीदचेतनम् ico!
Ta कश्मलमापन्नै नष्टसंज्ञमनायकम्।ज्ञात्वाङ्गिरा नाम मुनिराजगाम सनारद: ।६१॥
इति श्रीमद्धागवते महापुराणे पारमहंस्यां संहितायां षष्ठस्कन्धे चित्रकेतुविलापा नाम चतुर्दशोऽध्याय: ।१४॥

Sri Suka resumed : Along with the queen, (who was) mourning her departed son
through such varied laments, Emperor Citraketu (too) wailed at the top of his voice,
extremely agonized as he was. (59) While the couple were (thus) wailing, all those who were
devoted to him, men as well as women, wept and everything was lifeless (as it were). (60)

Knowing the king to have lost (all) consciousness due to his having given way to despair,
and without a guide the sage named Angira appeared (at the scene) along with Narada. (61)

Thus ends the fourteenth discourse entitled "The lament of Citraketu,"”
in Book Six of the great and glorious Bhagavata-Purana,
otherwise known as the Paramahamsa-Samhila.

SLES EEE,
PII Sess
