Dis. 9] BOOK FOUR 335,

rev RASSLARRAAERRRASS SRT EE CASE SES ARARAAALLAARALS ESSELTE EEE LE ee

beatitude) even from the Lord of Mukti; that'is why he was filled with remorse (when the
bitterness was gone through the sight of the Lord). (29)

ध्रुव उवाच
मासैरहं षड्भिरमुष्य पादयोङ्छायामुपेत्यापगत: पृथङ्मति: 1301

अहो बत ममानात्म्यं मन्दभाग्यस्य पर्यत। भवच्छिद: पादमूलं गत्वायाचे यदन्तवत् । ३१॥

मतिर्विदूषिता aa: पतद्भिरसहिष्णुभि: । यो नारदवचस्तथ्यं नाग्राहिषमसत्तम: 1321

eat मायामुपाश्रित्य प्रसुप्त sa भिन्नदृक्। तप्ये द्वितीयेऽप्यसति भ्रातृभ्रातृव्यहद्गुजा 1331

मयैतत्पार्थितं cal चिकित्सेव गतायुषि । see sme तपसा HATA |

भवच्छिदमयाचेऽहं va भाग्यविवर्जित: । ३४॥
स्वाराज्यं यच्छतो मौढ्यान्मानो मे भिक्षितो बत । ईश्वरातक्षीणपुण्येन फलीकारानिवाधन: 1341
Dhruva said (to himself) : Even after securing, in the course of (mere) six months, the
asylum of His feet, whose truth perpetual celibates like Sanandana (and his three brothers—
Sanaka, Sanatana and Sanatkumara)—have been able to realize through abstract medita-
tion practised through many lives, | have receded from them, my mind being fixed on
diversity. (30) Oh, look at my folly! Alas ! how unfortunate | am that, having reached the soles
of His feet, whois capable of ending the cycle of birth and death, । asked for something which
is bound to perish. (31) (It seems) my judgment was perverted by the gods, who (evidently)
could not bear to see my rare good fortune inasmuch as they are sure (one day) to fall (from
their elevated position). That is why | refused to believe the true words of Narada, most
wicked that | am. (32) Clinging to the Lord's Maya (deluding potency) and (hence) taking-a
perverted view of things, I, burnt with jealousy, mistaking my own brother for an enemy—
although (from the point of view of the spirit) there in none other than me—just as a sleeping
(dreaming) man sees the projection of his own self in the form of a lion, snake and so onand
gets afraid of the same. (33) Like medical treatment in the case of one whose life has come
to an end | asked in vain for this (sovereignty of the world). Having propitiated through
austere penance the Soul of the universe, who is (so) difficult to please and is capable of
ending the cycle of birth and death, | asked of Him only worldly fortune (which is conducive
to rebirth), hapless that | am ! (34) Alas! like a pauper seeking unhusked grains of a universal
monarch, I, whose stock of merit had been depleted, foolishly asked for worldly power and
pelf (that tends to swell one's pride) at the hands of Him who was ready to grant me the joy
that constitutes one’s own essence. (35)
मैत्रेय उवाच
न वै मुकुन्दस्य पदारविन्दयो रजोजुषस्तात भवादृशा जना: ।
वराञ्छन्ति तद्दास्यमृतेऽर्थमात्मनो यदृच्छया लब्धमन:समृद्ध्य: 136 |
Maitreya began again : People (devotees) like you, who take delight in the dust of the

lotus-feet of Lord Sri Krsna (the Bestower of Liberation) and whose mind remains sated with
whatever is got without any effort, seek nothing for themselves beyond the ‘privilege of
serving Him. (36)

TRI सम्परेत्य यथाऽऽगतम्।राजा न श्रद्दधे WANE कुतो मम ।३७॥
wera वाक्यं देवर्षेर्हर्षवेगेन धर्षित: । वार्ताहर्तुरतिप्रीतो हारं प्रादान्महाधनम् । ३८॥
red रथमारुह्य कार्तस्वरपरिष्कृतम्।ब्राह्मणै: कुलवृद्धैश्च पर्यस्तोऽमात्यबन्धुभि: 13¢1
