Dis. 8.] BOOK TWELVE

SE AEP OT TR PE NRE ERO CNC TORE EOE EER EI et EE ORR ET

classified the Vedas into (so many) branches—a story which intensifies toa great extent the
Brahmanical (spiritual) glory (of those who listen to it). (25)

Thus ends the seventh discourse in Book Twelve of the great and
glorious Bhagavata-Purana, otherwise known
as the Paramahamsa-Samhita.

सु
PII Sires

अथाष्टमोऽध्याय:

Discourse VIII
The sage Markandeya embarks on a course of austerities

and receives a boon

शौनक उवाच
qe जीव fat साधो aq नो वदतां वर। तमस्यपारे भ्रमतां नृणां त्वे medi १ ।
आहुश्चिरायुषमृषि मृकण्डतनयं जना: । य: कल्पान्ते उर्वरितो येन ग्रस्तमिदं जगत् । २ ।
स वा अस्मत्कुलोत्पन्न: कल्येऽस्मिन् भार्गवर्षभ: । नैवाधुनापि भूतानां aga: कोऽपि जायते । ३ ।
एक एवार्णवे भ्राम्यन् ददर्श qed किल । वटपत्रपुटे ae ङायानं त्वेकमद्धुतम् । ४ |
एष न: संशायो भूयान् सूत कौतूहलं aa: । तं नर्छिन्धि महायोगिन् qos wera: । ५ ।

Saunaka said ; O Sita, O good one, may youlive long ! (Pray,) tell us one thing, O jewel
among speakers ! You (alone) are able to show the way out to men wandering in endless
darkness (in the shape of mundane existence). (1) People speak of Markandeya (the son
of Mrkanda) as a seer blessed with a long life, who remainedalive even at the time of Pralaya
(marking the close of a day of Brahma), by which (the whole of) this (visible) universe was
swallowed up. (2) The said Markandeya (the foremost of the scions of Bhrgu), however, was
born in this (very) Kalpa and in our own race and (so far as we know) 10 wholesale
destruction of created beings has taken place (during the present Kalpa) even to this day.(3)
Itis (further) said that while drifting all alone in the single sheet of water (with which the entire
world was flooded), he beheld the Supreme Person lying as a matter of fact in the form of
an uncommon babe on a leaf of a banyan tree, formed in the shape of a cup. (4) O Sita,
this is a matter for great doubt to us, due to which there is (great) curiosity (in our mind).
(Pray,) resolve the aforesaid doubt, 0 great Yogi, esteemed as you are even for your
knowledge of the Puranas. (5)

सूत उवाच
प्रश्नस्त्वया महर्षेऽयं कृतो लोकभ्रमापह: ।नारायणकथा यत्र गीता कलिमलापहा । ६ ।
प्राप्तद्विजातिसंस्कारो मार्कण्डेय: fig: क्रमात् ।छन्दांस्यधीत्य धर्मेण तप:स्वाध्यायसंयुत: । ७ 1
FER: UR जटिलो वल्कलाम्बर: । बिभ्रत् कमण्डलुं दण्डमुपवीतं समेखलम् । ८ ।
Pork साक्षसूत्रं pais नियमर्द्धये। अग्न्यर्करुरुविप्रात्मस्वर्चयन् सन्ध्ययोर्हरिम् । ९ |
सायं प्रात: स गुरवे भैक्ष्यमाहत्य वाग्यत: । बुभुजे yaaa: सकृन्नो चेदुपोषित: 1201
एवं तप-:स्वाश्यायपरो वर्षाणामयुतायुतम्। आराधयन् हृषीकेशं जिग्ये yet सुदुर्जयम् ig
[565] B.M. Part II—51
