SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 4

TRIAS DIOR IEIDISiDi DE trier teint rains trtom irate int 8 frente eee tree so en eer sh trea ee A ea

perfect in the knowledge of the Spirit, told king Pariksit in reply to his excellent question. (25)

Thus ends the third discourse in Book Two of the great
and glorious Bhagavata-Purana, otherwise

known as the Paramahamsa-Samihita.

st Bact BoE १
re rFER Sirs

अथ चतुर्थोऽध्याय:

Discourse IV
The king asks a question about the creation of the universe and
the sage Suka commences his discourse

सूत उवाच
वैयासकेरिति वचस्तत्त्वनिश्चयमात्मन: | उपधार्य मतिं कृष्णे ओत्तरेय: adi area! १ ।
आत्मजायासुतागारपशुद्रविणबन्धुषु । राज्ये चाविकले fret विरूढां ममतां wet २ ।

पप्रच्छ चेममेवार्थं यन्मां Jee GAA | कृष्णानुभावश्रवणे AEM महामनां: | ३ |
संस्थां विज्ञाय dara we त्रैवर्गिकं च यत् । वासुदेवे भगवति आत्मभावं दृढं गत: । ४ ।

Sita continued : On hearing these words of Sri Suka (the son of Vyasa), which enabled
him to ascertain the truth concerning the Supreme Spirit, king Pariksit (the son of Uttara)
exclusively devoted his pious mind to SriKrsna' feet. (1) He shook off (in a moment) the deep-
rooted attachment which he had conceived all that time for his own body, wife, sons,
residence, animals, wealth and kinsmen as well as for his kingdom, that had known no
trouble. (2) Having come to know of his death (beforehand), the high-minded Pariksit
renounced al! his duties connected with the first three objects of human pursuit (viz.,
Dharma, Artha and Kama). He then established his complete identity with Lord Vasudeva
and, full of deep reverence for hearing the glory of Sri Krsna, asked Sri Suka the same
question which you are now asking me, O most holy ones. (3-4)

~

राजावाच
ait ad ब्रह्मन् सर्वज्ञस्य तवानघ । तमो विशीर्यते मह्यं हरे: कथयत: कथाम्। ५ |
qa wa विवित्सामि भगवानात्ममायया । यथेदं सृजते विश्वं दुर्विभाव्यमधीश्वरे: । ६ |
यथा गोपायति बिभुर्यथा संयच्छते पुन: । यां यां शाक्तिमुपाश्रित्य पुरुशक्ति: पर: पुमान् ।
आत्मानं क्रीडयन् क्रीडन् Hala विकरोति च 1७1
wowed ब्रह्मम् हरेरद्भुतकर्मण: । दुर्विभाव्यमिवाभाति कविभिश्चापि चेष्टितम् । ८ |
यथा गुणांस्तु प्रकृतेर्युगपत् क्रमञ्ञोऽपि वा । fault भूरिशस्त्वेक: कुर्वन् कर्माणि जन्मभि: । ९ ।
विचिकित्सितमेतन्मे ब्रवीतु भगवान् यथा । शाब्दे ब्रह्मणि निष्णात: परस्मिंश्च भवान्खलु Igo!
The king said : All-knowing and sinless as you are, O divine sage, your words are quite
true. Even as you proceed with your discourse on Sri Hari the gloom of my ignorance
disperses. (5) | further wish to know how the Lord by His own Maya (deluding potency)

creates this universe, the mysteries of which even the greatest gods (like Brahma) find it
difficult to unravel. (6) Also tell me how that all-pervading Lord protects the universe and how
