Dis. 1] BOOK TWELVE

LEEPER CH TOTO ATES ESE ETT O ENE ERE शाशा # 8 ene ८० # # ००99 4६६8

the earth for one thousand and ninety-nine years, while the eleven Maunas will hold sway
over the earth for (another) three hundred years, 0 dear Pariksit ! When they cease to be,
Bhutananda and (his son) Vangirl, the latter's (younger) brother, Sigunandi, (his son)
Yasonandi and (grandson) Praviraka—(all) these will actually reign at (their capital) Kilikila
for a hundred and six years only. (31—33) They will leave thirteen sons, (collectively) known
as the Bahlikas. Again, there will be Puspamitra, a Ksatriya, and even so his son
Durmitra.(34) (All) these will hold sway (over different territories) at one and the same time.
Seven (of these) will be kings of Andhra and seven of Kosala. The rulers of Vidura and
Nisadha indeed will also come out of these (the Bahlikas).(35)

मागधानां तु भविता विश्वस्फूर्जि: पुरञ्जय: । करिष्यत्यपरो वर्णान् पुलिन्दयदुमद्रकान् 136 |

प्रजाश्चाब्रह्यभूयिष्ठा: स्थापयिष्यति दुर्मति: । वीर्यवान् क्षत्रमुत्साद्य पद्मवत्यां स a पुरि ।
अनुगङ्गामाप्रयागं गुप्तां भोक्ष्यति मेदिनीम् 13191

सौराष्टावन्त्याभीराश्च शूरा . अर्बुदमालवा: । व्रात्या द्विजा भविष्यन्ति शूद्रप्राया जनाधिपा: ।३८॥

सिन्धोस्तटं चन्द्रभागां कौन्तीं कार्मीरमण्डलम् । भोक्ष्यन्ति qa व्रात्याद्या म्लेच्छाश्चाब्रह्मवर्चस: । ३९

Among the rulers of Magadha there will be one ViswasphUrji, (also) known as Purafijaya
the second, who will convert the higher castes into Pulindas, Yadus and Madrakas (tribes that
will be no better than Mlecchas).(36) Being evil-minded and powerful, he will exterminate the
Ksatriya race and settle in the city of Padmavati (his capital) a population consisting mostly of
casteless people, ruling over the well-guarded tract of land extending along the banks of the
Ganga up to Prayaga (from Haridwara). (87) (As Kaliyuga advances) the Brahmanas of
Saurastra, Avanti, the Abhira territory and (the principalities of Sura, Arbuda and Malawa will
become VrAatyas or fallen men (because of their giving up the Sarhskaras or purificatory rites,
especially the ceremony of investiture with the sacred thread), and the rulers will be mostly of
the Stdra class. (38) Stidras, fallen Brahmanas and members of other higher castes who have
given up the Vedic courses of conduct and Mlecchas will rule over the banks of the Indus and
Chandrabhaga, rivers the city of Kaunti and the territory of Kasmira. (39)

तुल्यकाला इमे राजन् म्लेच्छप्रायाश्च भूभृत: | एतेऽधर्मानृतपरा: फल्गुदास्तीव्रमन्यव: ।४०॥
स्रीबालगोद्विजघ्नाश्च परदारधनादृता: | उदितास्तमितप्राया अल्पसत्त्वाल्पकायुष: ।४१॥
असंस्कृता: क्रियाहीना रजसा तमसाऽऽवृता: । प्रजास्ते भक्षयिष्यन्ति म्लेच्छा राजन्यरूपिण: ।४२॥
तन्नाथास्ते जनपदास्तच्छीलाचारवादिन: । अन्योन्यतो राजभिश्च ert यास्यन्ति पीडिता: iat

इति श्रीमद्भागवते महापुराणे पारमहंस्यां संहितायां द्रादशम्कन्धे प्रथमोऽध्याय: 121

These kings, 0 Pariksit, who will (all) be contemporaries, will be no better than Mlecchas
(in their course of conduct) and will be given over to unrighteousness and mendacity, illiberal
and furious. (40) They will kill women, children, cows and Brahmans, covet—others’ wives
and wealth, experience vicissitudes of fortune in quick succession and will be poor of
Strength and courage and shortlived (too). (41) They will cease to perform purificatory rites,
will be devoid of righteous actions, and dominated by Rajas and Tamas and, being Mlecchas
in the garb of Ksatriyas, will suck the blood of their (own) people. (42) The people ruled over
by them too will acquire their habits, ways of life and mode of speech and, oppressed by one
another as well as by their rulers, will go to ruin. (43)

Thus ends the first discourse in Book Twelve of the great and glorious
Bhagavata-Purana, otherwise known
as the Paramahamsa-Samhita.

सिन्र
OLDE OID
