Dis. 25 ] BOOK ELEVEN 637

आनमा CREA TERETE ESRC THAT APNE मामा Ce He NCeN TERA KKK ४०4० # # ० NER

to Rajas they (continue to) move in the intermediate state (as human beings). (21) Those who
died when Sattva was in the ascendant ascend to heaven; those whose death occured at
a time when Rajas was predominant return to the human world; those whose death took
place at a time when Tamas was in the ascendant go down to hell: while they who have
transcended the three Gunas attain to Me alone (even when they are still alive). (22) One’s
own (allotted) duty (whether of an obligatory or occasional type) performed with the intention
of propitiating Me or without seeking any reward, is of a Sattvika character (has the element
of Sattva predominating in it). That which is performed with the expectation of a reward is
Rajasika (in character); while that which is performed with intent to harm others and is full
of violence etc., is Tamasika (in character).(23) Knowledge concerning the absolute Self
(without reference to the body etc.) is of a Sattvika type; while that which relates to the Self
notunconnected with the body etc., has (the element of) Rajas prevailing init. The knowledge
possessed by the uncultured (e.g., children or the deaf and dumb) or that relating to natural
acts such as eating and drinking is Tamasika (in character); while that relating to Me (the
Supreme Divinity) is beyond (the realm of) the (three) Gunas (modes of Prakrti). (24) The
forest, as a matter of fact, is a Sattvika place of abode (inasmuch as it is solitary and
undefiled); while the countryside is spoken of as Rajasika. The gambling house is a
Tamasika dwelling, while My temple (which is hallowed by My constant presence in the form
of an image) is beyond the (three) Gunas.(25) An unattached doer is Sattvika; he who is
blinded with passion (i.e., keenly intent on its fruit has been declaredtobea Rajasika agent.
He who-has lost his judgment (the notion of right and wrong) is a Tamasika agent; while a
doer who (solely) depends on Me is unaffected by the (three) Gunas. (26) Faith in things
spiritual is Sattvika, while that in ritual acts and other (worldly) duties is Rajasika. Faith in
unrighteousness (as though it were righteousness, is Tamasika) while that in My worship is
beyond the realm of the (three) Gunas. (27) Food which is wholesome, pure and obtained
without taking pains (for it) has been declared to be Sattvika; that which is most agreeable
to the palate is Rajasika; while that which is unwholesome (conducive to suffering in the form
of a malady) and impure (that which corrupts the mind) is Tamasika. Again, that which has
been offered to Me is beyond the three Gunas. (28) The joy springing from (the realization
of) the Self is Sattvika; while that which proceeds from the objects of sense is Rajasika.
(Again,) that which proceeds from infatuation (caused by intoxicating drugs and drinks) and
cajolery (practised towards one’s own wife and children) is Tamasika; while that arising from
thought etc., of Me is beyond the sphere of the (three) Gunas.(29)

द्रव्यं देश: फलं कालो ज्ञानं कर्म च कारक: | श्रद्धावस्थाऽऽकृतिर्निष्ठा त्रैगुण्य: wd wa हि 1301
aa गुणमया भावा: पुरुषाव्यक्तधिष्ठिता: । दृष्टं श्रुतमनुध्यातं बुद्ध्या वा पुरुषर्षभ । ३१1
एता: संसृतय: पुंसो गुणकर्मनिबन्धना: । येनेमे निर्जिता: सौम्य गुणा जीवेन चित्तजा: ।
भक्तियोगेन मन्निष्ठो मद्धावाय प्रपद्यते 1321
तस्माद् देहमिमं लब्ध्वा ज्ञानविज्ञानसम्भवम्। गुणसङ्गं विनिर्धूय मां भजन्तु विचक्षणा: 1321
fag मां wae विद्वानप्रमत्तो जितेद्धिय:।रजरतॄमश्चाभिजयेत् सत्त्वसंसेवया मुनि: ।३४॥
we चाभिजयेद् युक्तो नैरपेक्ष्येण 'प्तान्तधी:।प्तप्य’दृ॰।तेगुणैर्मुक्तोजीचोजीवंविहप्यपाम्।इणां
जौवो जीवविनिर्मुक्तो गुणैश्चाशयसम्भवै: । मयैव ब्रह्मणा पूर्णो न बहिर्नान्तरश्चरेत् 136!
(In this way) substance (food as classified in verse 28 above), place of abode (as

mentioned in verse 25), fruit (in the shape of joy referred to in verse 29), time (as indicated
In verses 13 to 16), knowledge (referred to in verse 24), action (classified in verse 23), the
