Dis. 15] BOOK ELEVEN 581

न ड RO OR RO IESE मामा TERE OSE ACE TE ENTS CHE sere

चक्षुस्त्वष्टरि संयोज्य त्वष्टारमपि चक्षुषि at aa मनसा ध्यायन् fad प्यति सूक्ष्मदृकु 120
मनो मयि सुसंयोज्य देहं तदनु वायुना। मद्धारणानुभावेन तत्रात्मा यत्र वै मन: । २१॥
यदा मन उपादाय ae ag रूपं बुभूषति । तत्तद् भवेन्मनोरूपं मद्योगबलमाश्रय: 1221
परकायं विदान् fag आत्मानं aa भावयेत्। पिण्डं हित्वाविहोत् प्राणो वायुभूत: षडङ्घ्रिवत् 1231
पारष्य्याऽऽपीड्य गुदं प्राणं हृदुर:कण्ठमूर्धसु। आरोष्य seein wa नीत्वोत्सृजेत्तनुम् । २४।
विहरिष्यन् सुराक्रीडे मत्स्थं ae विभावयेत्। विमानेनोपतिष्ठन्ति सत्त्ववृत्ती: arf 124)
यथा ASRS बुद्ध्या यदा वा मत्पर: पुमान्। मयि सत्ये मनो युञ्जंस्तथा तत् समुपाश्नुते ।२६॥
यो a मद्भावमापन्न ईशितुर्वशितु: पुमान्। कुतश्चिन्न विहन्येत तस्य चाज्ञा यथा मम ।२७॥
Tee Yea योगिनो धारणाविद: । तस्य त्रैकालिकी बुद्धिर्जन्ममृत्यूपबृंहिता । २८॥
अग्न्यादिभिर्न हन्येत dined वपु: । मद्योगश्रान्तचित्तस्य यादसामुदकं यथा । २९॥
मद्दिभूतीरभिध्यायन् श्रीवत्सास्त्रविभूषिता: । ध्वजातपत्रव्यजनै:३ स भवेदपराजित: 1301

The glorious Lord replied : Eighteen (in all) are the Siddhis as well as the modes of
concentration (leading to them) taught by those that have attained perfection in Yoga (the
minor ones, such asinsight into the past, present and future, being easily attainable by others
too). Of the former, eight abide chiefly in Me (and in a lesser degree in those that have
attained similarity of form with Me), (the other) ten being attainable through (mere development
of) Sattvaguna. (3) 1-Anima (reducing one’s body to the size of an atom), 2-Mahima
(magnifying it to a gigantic size) and 3-Laghima (extreme lightness of body)—these three
pertain to the body; 4-Prapti consists in establishing contact with the senses of the entire
creation in form of the deities presiding over those senses. 5-Prakamya means the capacity
to enjoy pleasures heard of (through the scriptures as enjoyable in the other world alone) and
capable of being seen (though enjoyed only in the subterranean regions); while 6-isita
consists in the capacity to impel Maya and other subordinate potencies to function (according
to one's will). (4) 7-Vasita means absence of attachment to the pleasures of sense; while the
eighth Siddhi is Kamavasayita (according to which one is able to enjoy in the highest
measure whatever pleasure one seeks to enjoy). These eight Siddhis, O gentle one, are
considered as natural to Me (and unsurpassed). (5) The other ten Siddhis are:—1-absence
of hunger and thirst, old age ete. in this (very) body; 2 & 3-the capacity to see and hear from
anunusual distance; 4-locomotion at a speed which can be increased according to one’s will;
§-taking any form at will; 6-(leaving one's own body and) entering any other (untenanted)
body; 7-giving up the ghost at will; 8-participation in the pastimes of gods (with the Apsaras
or celestial nymphs); 9-attainment of one's desired ends; and 10-exercising authority
unobstructed everywhere. (6-7) The minor Siddhis (hinted atin verse 3 above) are:—to know
things relating to the past, present and future; to remain unaffected by pairs of opposites (like
heat and cold, joy and sorrow, likes and dislikes, etc.); to read others’ mind etc; to neutralize
the power of fire, the sun, water and poison etc., and to suffer no defeat (at the hands of
anyone whatsoever). (8) These are the Siddhis following from Yogic concentration, typically
mentioned by Me. (Now) hear from Me what Siddhi can be acquired through which mode of
concentration and how. (9) He who focusses his mind, identified with the subtle elements,
on Me as ensouling the subtle elements and worships (Me in) that form alone acquires My
power of assuming an atomic size (and thereby attaining the capacity to enter even a slab
of stone). (10) (Even so) concentrating his mind, identified with Mahat-tattva (the principle
of cosmic intelligence), on Me, the Supreme ensouling the (said) Mahat-tattva, he acquires
