14 SRIMAD'BHAGAVATA (Dis. 5

REET Be Be Be Re BE RE RH Re Gy RE RR RR BRE RE RR HORT SE SRR RR HBB ROR Re BeBe eh व श्री RR RRO Ree ee Ee शीकडोङी

conducive to good, the sage (Vedavyasa) was good enough to compose the Mahabharata
epic in order that women and others too might attain blessedness through the same. (25)
Even though Vyasa ever remained whole-heartedly engaged in doing good to living
creatures, his heart was not satisfied with it, O Brahmanas ! (26) Feeling uneasy at heart,
the sage, who knew the secret of Dharma (righteousness), sat reflecting in a secluded spot
on the holy bank of the Saraswati, and said to himself thus:— (27) "Observing the vow of
celibacy | reverently studied theVedas, served the elders and worshipped the sacrificial fires
and honestly followed their precepts. (28) | have also revealed the purport of the Vedas
through the Mahabharata, in which even women, the Stdras and others can find their
respective duties and other things explained. (29) Though | stand foremost among those
who are preeminent in sacred knowledge, and possess uncommon powers too, my soul it
seems has not yet realized its true nature (oneness with Brahma). (30) Is it because | have
not yet fully expounded the virtues that enable one to attain the Lord? It is these virtues that
are loved by God-realized saints and they alone are dear to Lord Visnu Himself." (31) While
the sage Krsnadwaipayana (Vyasa) was thus sorrowing with the consciousness that
something was wanting in him, the sage Narada called at his hermitage already referred
to.(32) When the sage Vedavyasa saw Narada come, he instantly rose to receive him and
duly offered worship to the celestial sage, who was adored even by the gods. (33)

Thus ends the fourth discourse, forming part of the story relating to the Naimisa
forest, in Book One of the great and glorious Bhagavata-Purana,
otherwise known as the Paramahamsa-Samhita

so thik Beh
PII kee

yp AM पञ्चमोऽध्याय:
Discourse ४

Glory of singing the Lord's praises and an account of
Devarsi Narada's previous life
सूत sara
ay तं सुखमासीन उपासीनं बृहच्छ्रवा: | देवर्षि: ome fastt बीणापाणि: स्मयन्निव । १ |

Sita says : When comfortably seated,lute in hand, the celestial sage (Narada) of
extensive renown spoke to the Brahmana sage Vedavyasa, who sat beside him, as if
smiling (at his disconsolation).(1)

ARG उवाच
पाराशर्य महाभाग wad: कच्चिदात्मना । परितुष्यति शारीर आत्मा मानस एव वा । २ ।
जिज्ञासिते सुसम्पन्नमपि a महदद्भुतम्। कृतवान् भारतं यस्त्वं सर्वार्थपरिबृंहितम् । ३ ।
जिज्ञासितमधीतं च arama सनातनम्। अथापि जोचस्यात्मानमकृतार्थं sa प्रभो । ४ |

Narada said : Most blessed Vyasa (son of ParaSara), | hope your physical self as well
as your mental self are satisfied in themselves. (2) | am sure all that you wanted to know has
been fully realized, since you produced the most wonderful Mahabharata which fully deals
with all the objects of human pursuit (Dharma etc.) . (3) You have also investigated the truth

of and realized the eternal Brahma (the Absolute); nevertheless my lord, you bewail your
lot as if you had not yet realized the object of your life ! (4)
