Dis. 5] BOOK SIX 573

६.७.३.३.३.३.३..३.३.३.३.३.३..३..३.३ ३८३३ oti ट प्रैघेध्रेष्पैर्धेघेघेभेणैर्यै…क्लीर्किफ्रिर्किल्लिक्ली…**पै

अथ पञ्चमोऽध्याय:

Discourse ४
Narada subjected to an execration (by Daksa)
उवाच

तस्यांसपाञ्चजत्यांवैविष्णुंमायोपबृंहित:।हृर्यश्वसंज्ञानयुतं पुत्रानजनयद् विभु: । १ ।
अपृथग्धर्मशीलास्ते सर्वे दाक्षायणा नृप for प्रोक्ता: प्रजासर्गे प्रतीचीं प्रययुर्दिशम् । २ ।

तदुपस्पर्शनादेव विनिर्धूतमलाशया: । धर्मे पारमहंस्ये च प्रोत्पन्नमतयोऽप्युत । ४ |
af तप एवोग्रं पित्रादेशेन यन्तिता: । प्रजाविवृद्धये यत्तान् देवर्षिस्तान् cet ह । ५ ।
उवाच चाथ हर्यश्वा: कथं स्रक्ष्यथ वै प्रजा:। अदृष्टान्तं भुवो यूयं बालिशा बत पालका: । ६ ।
तथैकपुरुषं ows बिलं चादृष्टनिर्गमम्। ageat स्रियं चापि पुमांसं पुंश्चलीपतिम् । ७ ।
नदीमुभयतोवाहां पञ्चपञ्चाद्भुतं गृहम्। क्वचिद्धंसं चित्रकथं क्षौरपव्यं स्वयं भ्रमिम् । ८ |
कथ स्वपितुरादेशमविद्वांसो विपश्चित: । अनुरूपमविज्ञाय amt at करिष्यथ । ९ ।

Sri Suka resumed : Indeed energized by Lord Visnu's Maya (creative power),
the aforesaid Daksa (a lord of created beings) begot through Paficajani ten thousand
sons, known as the Haryaswas. (1) Alike in conduct and disposition, all those sons
of Daksa, O king (Pariksit), proceededina westerly direction (to practise austerities)
when commanded by their father to beget offspring. (2) There they reached a most
extensive and holy lake called Narayanasara, situated in the area where the river
Sindhu (the modern Indus) falls into the sea, and resorted to by sages and Siddhas
(a class of demigods endowed with mystic powers from their very birth). (3) By
merely bathing therein they not only had their mind thoroughly cleansed of all
impurities (in the shape of likes and dislikes and so on) but also developed an
inclination to follow the path of ascetics of the highest order (the path of Renunciation
and Self-Knowledge). Yet they practised severe austerities alone, bound as they were
by the command of their father. Narada (the celestial sage), itis said, saw them intent
on increasing the population (of the world) and forthwith said, "O Haryaswas, without
having seen the end of the earth how will you actually (be able to) beget progeny?
Though protectors (of men), alas ! you are ignorant! (4—6) Similarly, without fully knowing
the country inhabited by a single person, the hole with no visible outlet, the woman assuming
different forms (at will) and even so the man whois the husband of a harlot, the river running
both ways (both forward and backward), the wonderful house built of twenty-five materials,
the swan, at one place, which has a strange Story to tell, and something exceptionally sharp ©
and strong (as though made of razors and adamant), independent and revolving, and
without having understood the command of your omniscient father, suitable for you, how will
you proceed with (the work of) creation?" (7—9)

श्रीगुक उवाच
तन्निशम्याथ हर्यश्वा आऔत्पत्तिकमनीषया । वाच:कूटं तु देवर्षे: स्वयं विममृशुर्धिया । १०॥
भू: ea जीवसंज्ञं were निजबन्धनम्। अदृष्टा तस्य frat किमसत्कर्मभिर्भवेत् 129 1
एक एवेश्वसस्तुर्यो भगवान् स्वाश्रय: पर: | तमदृष्टाभवं पुंस: किमसत्कर्मभिर्भवेत् । १२॥
पुमान् adit ae गत्वा बिलस्वर्गं गतो यथा । प्रत्यग्धामाविद इह किमसत्कर्मभिर्भवेत् । १३॥

