Dis. 21] BOOK FIVE 523

Seton कोज्ज च itor @ रो ee te ee ere te ne 8 foto कचयो oro ee witch hare

the sun-god appeared | in this lifeless (inanimate) egg (as the Cosmic Being), the appellation
of Martanda (Ya अण्डे भव:) has been applied to him (ever) since. He is (also) called
Hiranyagarbha inasmuch as he (as the sun) represents the embryo (located) in (the centre

_ Of) the golden egg (of this universe). (44) By the sun indeed are divided (clearly defined) the
quarters, the heavens, the celestial region, the earth and (other such) distinctions (divisions),
the worlds* of enjoyment and supreme bliss (final beatitude), the infernal regions (where one
undergoes tortures of various kinds), the subterranean worlds (Atala and so on) and all
(other divisions). (45) Of gods and human beings as well as of the subhuman creatures (that
are oblong in shape), of reptiles and plants (the vegetable kingdom), nay of all species of
living beings, the sun-god is the very Self (the animating spirit) as well as the deity presiding
over their eyesight. (46)

Thus ends the twentieth discourse—delineating the relative position, extent and distinctive
Character of the oceans and Varsas as a part on the description of the
terrestrial world—in Book Five of the great and glorious
Bhagavata-Purana, otherwise known
as the Paramahamsa-Samnhita.

३३
PICIS RES ier

अथैकबिंशोऽध्याय:

Discourse XXI
A description of the stellar sphere as well as of the
chariot of the sun-god and his entourage

ARTS उवाच
उपदिशन्ति यथा द्विदलयोर्निष्पावादीनां ते अन्तरेणान्तरिक्षं तदुभयसन्धितम्।२॥ यन्मध्यगतो

भगवांस्तपताम्पतिस्तपन आतपेन त्रिलोकीं प्रतपत्यवभासयत्यात्मभासा स एष उदगयनदक्षिणायन-

वेषुवतसनांळ्ळिभमञ्छिशफ्यामानाळ्ळिफ्यार्तांभराराहणाक्यग्ण्यापाक्यानॆषुयथासकामभिपद्यमानामक्तादिषु
राशिष्वहोरात्राणि दीर्घह्रस्वसमानानि विधत्ते । ३ । यदा मेषतुलयोर्वर्तते तदाहोरात्राणि समानानि भवन्ति
यदावृपभ।दिषुपञ्चसुचराशिषुचरतितदप्हम्यान्यववधन्तह्वसतिचग्ममसमप्त्यकेकाधटिकास्फीषु।४ ।
यदा वृश्चिकादिशु wae add तदाहोरात्राणि विपर्ययाणि भवन्ति। ५ | यावददक्षिणायनमहानि वर्धन्ते
[वदुदगयनं WAG: | ६ |
Sri Suka began again : To this extent alone has the disposition of the terrestrial globe
been described (by the learned) with (particular) reference to the extent and distinctive
character of its parts. (1) By (referring to) this (the extent of the terrestrial globe) the knowers
of the subject (indirectly) describe the extent of the heavenly sphere as well, even as by
referring to (the size of anyone of) the two halves of peas and other pulses (that of the other
halfis also made known). Between the two (heaven and earth) intervenes the sky (the aerial
region), which is joined both to heaven (above) and earth (below). (2) Placed at the centre

* Of the six spheres above the terrestrial globe, the first two viz., the aerial world (Bhuvarloka) and the heavenly sphere
(Swarloka) are the worlds of enjoyment; whereas the four higher spheres (the Maharloka, the Janaloka, the Tapoloka and the
Satyaloka or Brahmaloka are the regions inhabited by those (Rsis and others) who either enjoy supreme bliss (Jivanmukti)
or strive for the same, tuming their back on the pleasures of sense, with which they are abundantly provided.
