452 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 4

BRR क दे डौजरी ती Rr eR हयो त् RO HT SHR KHE SEHK KE SHRETHHREL THREE HE A HERRERO REE eH eee hee ee

Sri Suka resumed : Now, finding marks of divinity (such as the figures of a thunderbolt
and goad in the soles of His feet) manifest in (the person of) Lord Rsabha from His very
birth and His glory mounting everyday alongwith (the qualities of) viewing all alike, control
of the internal and external senses, aversion to the pleasures of sense, universal
domination and perfection in everything, the ministers as well as the people, including the
Brahmanas, and gods too eagerly wished that He should rule over the earth. (1)
Considering His personality—which was so exquisite and formed the theme of many a
laudatory verse—majesty, strength, splendour, glory, dominating influence and energy,
his father (Nabhi) gave Him the name of Rsabha (the foremost). (2)

तस्य हीन्द्र: स्पर्धमानो भगवान् वर्षे न ववर्षं तदवधार्य भगवानृषभदेवो योगेश्वर:
स्ववर्षमजनाभं नामाभ्यवर्षत्। ३ । नाभिस्तु यथाभिलषितं सुप्रजस्त्वमवरुध्यातिप्रमोदभरविह्वलो गद्गदाक्षरया
:। ४॥

Envying Him, the mighty Indra did not rain (at all) in his land. Having come to know this,
Lord Rsabhadeva, the Master of Yoga (marvels), laughed heartily and sent down showers
throughout his land, known by the name of Ajanabha, by dint of His Yogamaya (divine
potency). (3) Having been blessed with a worthy son, as desired by him, king Nabhi for his
part was overwhelmed with a transport of excessive joy and felt supremely happy as he
fondly caressed the divine Child—who was really the most ancient Person, having assumed
a human semblance of His own will—addressing Him in a faltering voice as "my child, my
darling", his mind deluded by the divine Maya (which led him to mistake the Lord for his own
child). (4) ६ —_— ॥

विदितानुरागमापौरप्रकृतिजनपदो राजा नाभिरात्मजं समयसेतुरक्षायामभिषिच्य व्राह्मणेषूपनिधाय सह
तन्महिमानमवाप। ५ |

Having come to know that his son (Rsabhadeva) was popular with all including his
ministers and citizens, king Nabhi, who was guided by the popular sentiment, installed him
on the throne for the preservation of moral standards and entrusted him to the care of the
Brahmanas. (And) worshipping Lord Vasudeva as known by the name of Nara and
Narayana through austerities which, thoygh severe, caused no annoyance to others as
well as through the practice of profound meditation with (his spouse) Merudevi at Visala
(in the holy retreat of Badarikasrama, the modern Badrinatha), he attained oneness with
Him at the proper time. (5)

यस्य ह पाण्डवेय श्लोकावुदाहरन्ति--
को नु तत्कर्मं राजर्षेर्नाभेरन्वाचरेत्पुमान्। अपत्यतामगाद्यस्य हरि: शुद्धेन कर्मणा।६।
ब्रह्मण्योऽन्य: Hat नाभेर्विप्रा मङ्गलपूजिता: | यस्य बर्हिषि यज्ञेशं दर्शयामासुरोजसा। ७।
People cite the following two couplets in praise of Nabhi, 0 Pariksit (a scion of Pandu) :—
What (other) man can imitate the celebrated doings of the royal sage Nabhi, attracted by
whose pious deeds Sri Hari (Himself) became a son to him ? (Again) where could be hada
devotee of the Brahmanas other than Nabhi, propitiated by whose (liberal) sacrificial fees the
Brahmanas by dint of sacred hymns made the (very) Lord of sacrifices manifest Himself
during the sacrifice? (6-7) क ॥ ॥ क . ह
अथ ह ward: wad कर्मक्षेत्रमनुमन्यमान: प्रदर्शितगुरुकुलवासो लब्धवरैर्गुरुभिरनुज्ञातो
व्यपदिशन्ति। ९ । तमनु ead इलावर्तो व्रह्यावर्तो cera: केतुर्भद्रसेन इन्द्रस्पृग्विदर्भ: कीकट sia नव
नवतिप्रधाना: | १० |

