Dis. 26 ] BOOK THREE 257

ert 81 Sr Ree: Fr SR 8 RE HT AEA HEA CES E AE TEETH CREAR HTT AEA HA ACER EK AHH SH He HI

peculiarities of all the elements are found (to exist) in earth alone. (49) When the Mahat-
tattva, the ego and the five gross elements—these seven stood disunited, Lord Narayana
(the Cause of the universe) entered them taking with Him Time, the destiny of the various
Jivas and the Gunas (modes of Prakrti). (50) From these seven principles, roused into
activity and united by the presence of the Lord, arose an unintelligent egg, from which
appeared the well-known Cosmic Being.(51) This egg, which is known by the name of
Visesa, is enveloped on all sides by belts of water, fire, air, ether, the ego and the Mahat-
tattva, each.ten times larger than that which it encloses, and these six being enveloped by
the outermost belt of Pradhana (Primordial Matter). All the fourteen worlds, which are a
manifestation of Sri Hari Himself, are spread within this egg. (52) Shaking off an attitude of
indifference to that shining egg, which lay on the causal waters, the Cosmic Being (now)
presided over it and manifested the seats of the various Indriyas out of it. (53) First of all
appeared in Him a mouth and thence came forth the organ of speech and along with it the
god of fire (the deity presiding over the organ of speech). Then appeared a pair of nostrils
and in them the olfactory sense along with Prana (the vital air). (54) In the wake of the
olfactory sense came the wind-god (the god presiding over that sense)* and thereafter
appeared (in Him) a pair of eyes and in them the sense of sight. In the wake of this sense
came the sun-god( the god presiding over the same) and next appeared (in Him) a pair of
ears and in them the auditory sense and in the wake of it the Digdevatas (the deities presiding
over the latter). (55) Then appeared in the Cosmic Being the skin and thereon the hair (on
the body as well as on the head), a pair of moustaches and a beard. In the wake of these
came the herbs and annual plants (the deities presiding over the hair, which represent the
sense abiding in the skin), and then appeared in Him an organ of generation. (56) Inthe latter
appeared the faculty of procreation and thereafter the god presiding over the waters. Next
appeared in Him an anus and in the wake of it the organ of defecation and thereafter came
the god of death, the terror of the world. (57) Then sprouted forth in Him a pair of hands and
in them the capacity of grasping and dropping things and thereafter came the god Indra (the
deity presiding over the hands). Next shot forth in Him a pair of feet and in them appeared
the power of locomotion and thereafter appeared Lord Visnu (the deity presiding over that
power). (58) Next appeared in Him the blood vessels and thereafter came forth blood (the
power of circulation). In the wake of it came the rivers (the deities presiding over the blood
vessels )and then appeared an abdomen. (59) Next grew therein a feeling of hunger and
thirst and in their wake came the ocean (the deity presiding over the abdomen). Then
appeared in Him a heart and in the wake of the heart a mind. (60) After the mind appeared
the moon (the deity presidingover the mind) as wellas Buddhi (the faculty of understanding);
and in the wake of Buddhi came Brahma (the lord of speech and the deity presiding over
Buddhi). Next appeared in Him the ego and thereafter Lord Rudra (the deity presiding over
the ego); and last of all appeared in Him a Citta (reason) and then the Ksetrajfia (the Inner
Controller, the deity presiding over reason).(61)

UW ह्यभ्युत्थिता ta नैवास्योत्थापनेऽशकन्। पुनराविविशु: खानि तमुत्थापयितुं क्रमात् ।६२॥
वह्निर्वाचा मुखं भेजे नोदतिष्ठत्तदा विराद्।घ्राणेन नासिके वायुर्नोदतिष्ठत्तदा विराद्।६३।
अक्षिणी चक्षुषाऽदित्यो नोदतिष्ठत्तदा fares श्रोत्रेन कर्णौ च दिशो नोदतिष्ठत्तदा farce । ६४॥
त्वचं रोमभिरोषध्यो नोदतिष्ठत्तदा विराद्।रेतसा शिश्नमापस्तु नोदतिष्ठत्तदा विराट् । ६५1
गुदे ye नोदतिष्ठत्तदा विराट्।हस्ताविन्द्रो बलेनैव नोदतिष्ठत्तदा विराद् । ६६॥

* InBrahma's creation itis the twin-gods Aswinikumaras who preside over the olfactory sense. In the body of the Cosmic

Being, however, it is the wind-god who is mentioned as presiding over this sense.
