640 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 26

SOO ROMO NAOT HER HS RT NES CA TEA शा ERNE REET PORTE MONOTONE ETE REE REO 4४१८ १४ ७८

Charmed by her alas ! | did not perceive when the sun set or when it rose, nor did | know of
the days, totalling numbers of years, that rolled by ! (8) How greatis the infatuation of my soul
by which myself, a universal monarch, the crest-jewel of kings, was made a toy deer of inthe
hands of women ! (9) Crying like a madman, all naked, | followed the woman (even) as she
went away deserting me, a ruler of men, including my kingdom, like a straw. (10) Whence
could there be any glory, majesty or lordship in me, who followed a departing woman (even)
like a donkey kicked by a she-ass ? (11) What will be gained through worship of gods,
renunciation, askesis, study of scriptures, solitary life or observing silence by him whose
heart has been stolen by women ? (12) Fie upon me, a (veritable) fool, though fancying
myself to be a learned man, who, blind as! am to my own (real) interests, have been enslaved
by women just like a bull or a donkey, even after attaining sovereignty.(13) Although I have
been enjoying the inebriating nectar of UrvaSi's lips for multitudes of years, my hankering,
mind-born as it is, Knows no satiety any more than fire could be quenched by (pouring)
oblations (into it).(14) Who else than Lord Visnu (who is above sense-perception), the ruler
of those revelling in the Self, can possibly succeed in reclaiming a mind captivated by a lewd
woman ? (15) Even though | was admonished by that celestial woman in truthful words
(finding place in a Vedic hymn), the great infatuation lurking in my mind, perverse of intellect
and uncontrolled of mind as | am, does not depart. (16) Or what offence could have been
done by her against us any more than by a rope against a man who, being ignorant of its
reality, (erroneously) conceived it to be a serpent ? For, (in reality) it is |, whose senses are
(still) uncontrolled, that stand to blame. (17) How incompatible are this dirty body (of a
woman), full of bad smell etc., and impure, and the excellences (attributed to It) such as
fragrance, purity and delicacy etc., (which are generally associated with a flower). ॥ was
through ignorance as a matter of fact that the aforesaid virtues were wrongly attributed (by
me) to her body. (18) It cannot be definitely ascertained whether the body (of ahuman being)
is the property of one's parents, wife (who provides amenities and enjoyment for it), master
(employer, if one happens to be a servant) , fire (to which it is ultimately and ordinarily
consigned at the time of cremation), the dog and the vulture (by which it is consumed in the
event of its being left undisposed of after death), the soul (tenanting it, which reaps the fruit
of its actiqns) orits near and dear ones (who befriendand render good offices to it). (19) Man
gets attached to such an impure body, which has a contemptible end (in that it resolves itself
into worms if interred, into excreta if devoured by animals and into ashes if cremated), and
lavishes praise on it in the words "Oh, how delightful is the face of this woman with a shapely
nose and full of charming smiles !” (20) How little difference is there between those who take
delight in the body of a woman (which is no more than a mass of skin, flesh, blood, nerves,
fat, marrow and bones), (on the one hand) and the worms wallowing in ordure, urine and pus
(on the other)? (21) Therefore, he who is alive to his (own) interests should on no account
associate even through sight with the fair sex nor with slaves of woman; (for) it is through
contact of the senses with their objects that the mindis agitated, not otherwise. (22) No (such)
agitation follows from an unseen or unheard of object; (hence) the mind of a man who does
not direct his senses towards their objects becomes still and (eventually) gets composed (23)
Therefore, one should not associate through the senses with the fair sex nor with those
devoted to woman; (for) the five senses and the mind do not deserve to be trusted even by
the wise, much less by (indiscreet) men like me. (24)

श्रीभगवानुवाच
wa प्रगायन् yea: a उर्वशीलोकमथो विहाय ।
आत्मानमात्मन्यवगम्य मां a उपारमज्ञानविधूतमोह: 1241
