616 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 14

PAMEKOM LEK EHEMATH LST LECH LERCH LEC ELE EAA KER TEA RATE A HERP SCH KS eee SEK eee ee ee ee ee

modesty, thereupon replied to the sage (as follows). (22)

भगवन् किं न fated तपोज्ञानसमाधिभि: । योगिनां ध्वस्तपापानां बहिरन्त: sritfty 1231
तथापि पृच्छतो gai ब्रह्मन्नात्मनि चिन्तितम्। vad विदुषश्चापि चोदितस्त्वदनुज्ञया । २४॥
लोकपालैरपि प्रार्थ्य: साम्राज्यैश्वर्यसम्पद: । न नन्दयन्त्यप्रजं मां क्षुत्तृदकाममिवापरे 1241
aa: पाहि महाभाग gd: We WA तम: । यथा तरेम दुस्तारं sora aq विधेहि a: ।२६॥
Citraketu submitted : 0 worshipful sage, what is there without or (even) within (in the
mind of) embodied beings, which is not known to Yogis (like you) whose sins have been
wiped out through asceticism, spiritual enlightenment and deep concentration of mind ? (23)
Yet, prompted by your command. | should speak out, O holy Brahmana, the thought (which
is foremost) in my mind to you, who ask me about it even though you know it. (24) The
sovereignty of the entire globe and the power and affluence attending it—which are worthy
of being coveted even by the guardians of the spheres—bring no delight to me, issueless
as | am, just as other things do not rejoice him who longs for food and drink under pressure
of hunger and thirst. (25) Therefore, (be pleased to ) protect me, O highly blessed one, and
do that for us whereby we may be able with the help of a son to get out of the dark abyss
of hell (the lot of those who die issueless) which has (all but) been reached by us along with
our forefathers, and which is so difficult to cross over. (26)
A उवाच

इत्यर्थित: स भगवान् कृपालुर्व्रह्मण: सुत: । श्रपयित्वा चरुं त्वाष्टुं त्वष्टारमयजद् fay: 1201

ज्येष्ठा श्रेष्ठा च या राज्ञो महिषीणां च भारत । नाम्ना कृतद्युतिस्तस्यै यज्ञोच्छिष्टमदाद् द्विज: । २८॥
अथाह नृपततिं राजन् भवितैकस्तवात्मज: । हर्षशोकप्रदस्तुभ्यमिति med ययौ ।२९॥
सापि aera चित्रकेतोरधारयत्। गर्भं कृतद्युतिर्देवी कृत्तिकामेरिवात्मजम् i301
तस्या अनुदिनं गर्भ: Gg इवोडुप:। ववृधे शूरसेनेशतेजसा ङानकैर्नृप । ३१

Sri Suka continued ; Implored thus, that glorious, merciful and mighty son of Brahma
got a special oblation prepared for being offered to the god Twasta, and propitiated the said
god with the same. (27) The (holy) Brahmana further gave the remainder of the sacrificial
offering to the queen known by the name of Krtadyuti, who was the eldest and the foremost
(in other respects too) of all the king's spouses, O Pariksit (a descendant of Bharata) ! (28)
The sage Angira (Brahma's son) then said to Citraketu (a ruler of men), "O king! a son, who
will be a source of (both) joy and grief to you, will be born to you !" and left. (29) Merely by
eating the remainder of that sacrificial oblation even Krtadyuti (who was barren) conceived
a child through Citraketujust as the goddess Krttika (the deity presiding over the constellation
of that name) conceived a son through the god of fire. (30) The : embryo in the womb of that
lady, which owed its existence to king Citraketu (the ruler of the Sdrasena territory) gradually
developed from day to day, (even) as the moon (the lord of the stars), O king (Pariksit), waxes
during the bright fortnight. (31)

अथ wes Wat BAR: समजायत । जनयन् BEAR श्रृण्वतां परमां मुदम् । ३२॥
हृष्टो राजा कुमारस्य स्नात: शुचिरलंकृत: | वाचयित्वाऽऽशिषो विप्रै: कारयामास जातकम् । ३३ |
wat हिरण्यं रजतं वासांस्याभरणानि च । ग्रामान्हयान्गजान्प्रादाद्धेनूनामर्बुदानि षट् । ३४॥
aad काममन्येषां पर्जन्य इव देहिनाम्।धन्यं यहास्यमायुष्यं कुमारस्य महामना: ।३५॥
कृच्छ्रलब्धेऽथ राजर्षेस्तनयेऽनुदिनं पितु: । यथा नि:स्वस्य कृच्छ्राप्ते धने स्वेहोऽन्ववर्धत । ३६॥

