376 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 20

ROR Ri eer ait tart few tet ee PAE HEMET EEE OTH HHS CECAAAEEA EEK SOARES SHC EHH AH CeO H HH Hee
ofa श्रीमद्भागवते महापुराणे पारमहंस्यां संहितायां चतुर्थस्कन्धे पृथुविजये एकोनविंशाऽध्याय: 129 |

Maitreya went on : Thus advised and instructed by Brahma, the progenitor and
preceptor of the world, Prthu (the ruler of the people) did as he was told (insisted no more
oncompleting the hundredth horse-sacrifice) and not only came to terms with Indra but also
bestowed his affection on him. (89) When Prthu, who had many a (noble) deed to his credit,
had finished the ceremonial bath taken at the end of a sacrifice, the gods (the bestowers of
boons) that had been propitiated by him during his sacrifices, conferred boons (of their
choice on him). (40) The Brahmanas, whose blessings (always) came true and who had
received their sacrificial fees and had been (duly) honoured with reverence, pronounced
their blessings on king Prthu (the first constitutional monarch), O Vidura, (highly) gratified,
(and added:—). (41) "All those who had assembled (here) in response to your invitation, O
mighty-armed ruler !—manes, gods, Rsis and human beings—have been (duly) honoured
by you with gifts and attention." (42)

Thus ends the nineteenth discourse forming part of the Story of Prthu's Conquest,
in Book Four of the great and glorious Bhagavata-Purana,
otherwise known as the Paramahamsa-Samnhila.

CAINE!
PICTON Sees

अथ विंशोऽध्याय:

Discourse XX
Lord Visnu manifests Himself in the sacrificial hall of king Prthu
मैत्रेय उवाच
भगवानपि agus: are मघवता विभु: । यज्ञैर्यज्ञपतिस्तुष्टो यज्ञभुक तमभाषत । १ ।
Maitreya resumed : Pleased with the sacrifices (of king Prthu), the all-pervading Lord

Vaikuntha (Visnu), the Enjoyer and Dispenser of the fruit of sacrifices, too, (appeared on the
scene) with Indra and addressed the king (as follows). (1)

एष तेऽकारषीद्भङ्गे हयमेधशतस्य ह।क्षमापयत sea क्षन्तुमर्हसि । २ ।
सुधिय: साधवो wea नरदेव नरोत्तमा: । agra भूतेभ्यो यर्हि नात्मा कलेवरम् । ३ |
पुरुषा यदि मुह्यन्ति ae देवमायया।श्रम एवं परं जातो दीर्घया वृद्धसेवया । ४ ।
अत: कायमिमं विद्वानविद्याकामकर्मभि: | आरब्धं ofa नैवास्मिन् प्रतिबुद्धोऽनुषज्जते । ५ |
असंसक्तर ङारीरेऽस्मिन्नमुनोत्पादिते गृहे। अपत्ये द्रविणे वापि क: कुर्यान्ममतां बुध: । ६ |

The Lord said : This Indra has interfered with your (vow of) performing a hundred
horse-sacrifices. As he (now) tenders his apology (to you), you will be well advised to grant
him pardon. (2) Those pious souls in this world, O ruler of men, who are possessed of good
understanding and are the best among men bear no ill-will against their fellow-beings, as
(they know that) the body is not their self. (3) If even people like you are bewildered by My
(divine) Maya (deluding potency), services rendered to the elderly (in point of wisdom) for
along time should be regarded as sheer fruitless labour.(4) Hence the awakened soul who
