224 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 29

त्तद् विसि दे

Full of intense longing some, who were milking (their) cows, darted off leaving the
milking-vessel (uncared for); (while) others left as soon as they had placed the milk on the
oven (without waiting for its being boiled) and still others went out without removing the
(dressed) porridge (from the hearth). (5) Some, who were serving food (to their husbands
and other relations) went away neglecting that duty; others, who were feeding their infants
with milk gave up that work and ran. Still others, who were waiting upon their husbands,
turned their back on them and departed; while some (more), who were dining, bolted away
leaving their meal. (6) Others, who were bedaubing their person with sandal-paste etc., left
that work half-finished; still others, who were rubbing and cleaning their person with oily
substances, decamped leaving off that work; and some (more}, who were painting their eyes
with collyrium, put off that work and ran to meet Sri Krsna. Still others sought the presence
of SriKrsna with their garments and jewels wrongly placed. (7) Though being stopped by their
husbands, parents, brothers or other relations, they did not turn back (homeward), infatuated
as they were (through love), their mind having been lured away by Sri Krsna (the Protector
of cows). (8) Some cowherd women, who were inside their house and could not find their way
out for a sally, fixed their mind on Sri Krsna with their eyes closed, seized as they were with
anintense longing to meet Him. (9) (All) their sins having been burnt up by the intense agony
of separation from Sri Krsna (theirmost beloved Lord)—which could not be easily endured—
and their (entire) stock of merit depleted through ecstatic joy proceeding from the loving
embrace of the immortal Lord secured in contemplation, the cowherd women, whose
shackles of Karma (which kept them bound to the world) were (thus) completely sundered,
forthwith cast off their material body, united as they were (in thought) with Sri Krsna (the
Supreme Spirit), even though they recognized Him to be a (mere) paramour. (10-11)

राजोवाच
कृष्णं fae: परं कान्तं न तु ब्रह्मतया मुने। गुणप्रवाहोपरमस्तासां गुणधियां कथम्।१२॥

The king (Pariksit) put in : The (aforesaid) Gopis knew Sri Krsna to be no more than
their darling and in any case did not recognize Him as Brahma (the Infinite), O (holy) sage!
How was the cessation of the stream (cycle) of mundane existences possible in the case of
the aforesaid Gopis, whose mind was swayed by the three Gunas? (12)

श्रीगुक उवाच
उक्तं पुरस्तादेतत्ते oe: fae यथा सत: । द्विषन्नपि हृषीकेशं किमुताधोक्षजप्रिया: ।१३॥
qu नि:श्रेवसार्थाय व्यक्तिर्भगवतो yal अव्ययस्याप्रमेयस्य निर्गुणस्य गुणात्मन: ।१४॥
कामं wid wt Seed सौहदमेव च । नित्यं at विदधतो यान्ति तन्मयतां हि Fees
न aa विस्मय: कार्यो भवता भगवत्यजे ae pet यत we विमुच्यते ea
ता दृष्वान्तिकमायाता भगवान् व्रजयोषित: । अवदद वदतां श्रेष्ठो are: tafser ie

ङ् Suka replied : This has already* been explained to you how Sisupala (the ruler of
Cedi) attained final beatitude (oneness with the Lord) though hating Sri Krsna (the Ruler of
the senses). What wonder, then, that the Gopis who looked upon Sri Krsna (who is above
sense-perception) as their beloved Lord should do so. (13) The manifestation of the Lord,
who is free from decay and cannot be cognized through the intellect, (nay), who is beyond
the three Gunas as well as their Controller, O protector of men, is intended (only) for
bestowing the boon of final beatitude on human beings. (14) Indeed they who constantly

* Vide VILi. 22—31.
