76 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA ‘{Dis. 18

SEI ROR ERE TOR ROR ROR OR EAI EER RE ER REITER Ry SR TORE ECT 8 Br BRIO RE RRA E ARDENT BREEDER A ARNE RB BER RN WY BRR Br Br Ee ee

व्रजन्ति तत्पारमहंस्यमन्त्यं यस्मिन्नहिंसोपशाम: स्वधर्म: 1221

ae हि पृष्टोरर्यमणो भवद्भिराचक्षॆ आत्मावगमोऽत्र यावान्।

नभ: पतन्त्यात्मसमं पतत्तरिणस्तथा समं विष्णुगति विपश्चित: 1231
एकदा धनुरुद्यम्य विचरन् yal वने । मृगाननुगत: श्रान्त: क्षुधितस्तृषितो yar । २४॥
Wear: waa तमाश्रमम्।ददर्शं मुनिमासीनं aed मीलितलोचनम् ।२५॥
प्रतिरुद्धेन्द्रियप्राणमनोबुद्धिमुपारतम् । स्थानत्रयात्परं प्राप्तं ब्रह्मभूतमविक्रियम् । २६॥
विप्रकीर्णजटाच्छन्नं रौरवेणाजिनेन च । विशुष्यत्तालुरुदकं तथाभूतमयाचत । २७॥
अलब्धतृणभूम्यादिरसम्प्राप्तार्घ्यसूनृत: । अवज्ञातमिवात्मानं मन्यमानश्चुकोप ह ।२८॥
अभूतपूर्व: सहसा क्षुत्तृड्भ्यामर्दितात्मन: | ब्राह्मणं प्रत्यभूद् HEM मत्सरो मन्युरेव च । २९।
स तु ब्रह्मऋषेरंसे गतासुमुरगं रुषा । विनिर्गच्छन्धनुष्कोट्या निधाय पुरमागमत् ।३०॥
एष किं निभृताशोषकरणो मीलितेक्षण: । मृषासमाधिराहोस्वित्किं नु स्यात्क्षत्रबन्धुभि: 1391

Sita continued : Though born of a mother whose caste is superior to the father's,
my birth (which has been deprecated in the Sastras) has been fulfilled today through the
service of elders. For association, even by way of conversation, with the noblest souls
quickly drives away the heart's agony caused by such despicable birth. (18) Such a
consummation is all the more assured in the case of him who utters the Name of the
Lord, the only and final resort of the noblest souls. For infinite is the Lord and infinite
His Powers; nay, it is because He is possessed of endless virtues that they call Him
Ananta.(19) In order to show that He is unequalled and unsurpassed in virtues, suffice
it to point out that, rejecting others who courted Her, Goddess Laksmi sought the dust
of His feet, even though He did not seek Her hand. (20) Again, the water which was
offered by the Creator (Brahma) to wash the feet of the Lord (when He assumed a cosmic
Form at the sacrifice of the demon king Bali) and then flowed from the nails of His toes
(in the form of the Ganga—vide verses 3 and 4 of Discourse XXI of Book VIII) sanctifies
the whole universe along with Lord Siva (who bore it on His head in response to the prayer
of king Bhagiratha—vide IX. ix. 9). Under such circumstances, who else than Lord Sri
Krsna (the Bestower of liberation) could deserve the epithet ‘Bhagavan’ in this world ?(21)
The wise that have developed love for Him shake off in no time their deep-rooted
attachment to their body etc., and enter that last stage of Paramaharhsa’s (recluses) in
which the practice of non-violence and control of the senses become one's sacred
duties.(22) 0 sages that shine like the sun, what you have asked me in this assembly
| shall tell you according to my own lights. Winged creatures soar (in the heavens)
according to their own capacity; so do the learned recount the pastimes of the all-
pervading Lord Visnu according to their own understanding. (23) Taking up his bow, king
Pariksit was hunting in the forest on a certain day. Running after the game, he got fatigued
and felt extremely hungry and thirsty. (24) Finding no reservoir of water (near at hand),
he entered the well-known hermitage (of the sage Samika) and saw there a hermit who
sat still with his eyes closed. (25) Having held his senses and breath, mind and intellect
in perfect control, he had withdrawn himself from the world; and having reached that
immutable state which lies beyond the three states of consciousness (waking, dream and
dreamless sleep), he had become one with Brahma. (26) His body was covered with
unloosed matted hair and the skin of a black deer. Finding him in this state, Pariksit asked
him for water (to drink), his tongue being parched (with thirst). (27) Not being offered a
