Dis. 60] BOOK TEN 373

SRO on वित्र्त्त चिविल् सि त् वित् व त्तसं

indifferent (to the world), remain steeped in a sense of fullness through Self-Realization, are
unattached to home or the body and doing no work remain as a witness only like a light.(20)

oR उवाच

एतावदुक्त्वा aR वल्लभामिव । मन्यमानामविश्लेषात् तद्दर्पघ्न उपारमत्।२१॥

aye भीता ge जातवेपथुश्चिन्तां दुरन्तां wedi जगाम ह ।२२॥

Ta सुजातेन Faerie ya लिखन्त्यश्रुभिरञ्जनासितै: !

तस्या: Ee SETS नो व्यजनं पपात ।

देहश्च विक्लबधिय: veda मुह्यन् रम्भेव वायुविहता प्रविकीर्य केशान् । २४॥
तद् दृष्टा भगवान् कृष्ण: प्रियाया: प्रेमबन्धनम्। हास्यप्रौढिमजानन्त्या: करुण: सोऽन्वकम्पत । २५॥
पर्यङ्कादवरुह्याशु तामुत्थाप्य चतुर्भुज: ! केशान् समुह्य तद्वक्त्रं प्रामृजत् पद्मपाणिना । २६॥
प्रमृज्याश्रुकले नेत्रे स्तनौ चोपहतौ Yar stews बाहुना राजन्ननन्यविघयां सतीम् । २७॥
सान्त्वयामास FRSA: कृपया कृपणां प्रभु: । हास्यप्रोढिभ्रमच्चित्तामतदर्हा सतां राति: ।२८।

Sri Suka resumed : Having spoken this much to Rukmini. who looked upon herself by
virtue of her constant presence by His side as His most beloved wife, the Lord, who sought
to uproother pride, became silent. (21) Hearing, then, these unwelcome words—such as had
been never heard before—of her beloved Husband, the Lord of the three worlds. the glorious
lady was struck with terror and, shuddering at heart and shedding tears, she was actually
plunged into endless grief. (22) With her speech choked with excessive anguish she stood
(there) scratching the ground with her tender feet gleaming red due to its (ruddy) nails,
soaking both the breasts—painted with saffron—by her tears rendered black through
collyrium and with her face cast down. (23) Severe agony, fear and grief had so obliterated
her reason that the fan dropped from her hand which (shrivelling immediately) allowed the
bracelets to slip off. The body too of that lady, who had lost control over her mind, swooning
suddenly, fell down with dishevelled hair like a banana tree uprooted by the wind. (24) Seeing
His beloved spouse, who had failed to grasp the deep subtlety of His humour, bound to Him
with such a tie of affection. that merciful and glorious Lord Sri Krsna was moved with pity. (25)
Quickly stepping down from the couch and lifting her up, the four-armed Lord gathered up
her locks and wiped her face with His lotus hand. (26) Wiping her tearful eyes and breasts
soiled with tears of grief and folding in His arms the virtuous lady, who was single-heartedly
attached to Him, O king, the Lord, who is the resort of the righteous and knew how to console,
comforted His distressed consort, who was confounded in mind by the severity of the joke
and was undeserving of it. (27-28)

मा मा agen जाने त्वां मत्परायणाम्।त्वट्वच: श्रोतुकामेन क्ष्वेल्याऽऽचस्तिमङ्गने । २९1
मुखे च प्रेमसंरम्भस्फुरिताधरमीक्षितुम्। कटाक्षेपारुणापाङ्गं सुन्दरभ्रुकुटीतटम् 1301

aa fe परमो लाभो गृहेषु गृहमेधिनाम् । यन्नर्मैर्नीयते am: प्रियया Am भामिनि । ३१
The glorious Lord said ; 0 daughter of the King of Vidarbha, no, do not be angry with
Me. | know you are devoted to Me. | behaved jestingly with you, O beautiful lady, only with
intent to hear your retort and to behold your countenance with the lips quivering due to
resentment through love, with the corners of the eyes growing red while darting glances, and
