Dis. 3] BOOK THREE 143

PHOHHRHAHAHOKHEHKE AHH ELC K KEK ETLESAKATE LEER EH AAA E TEES HHT Ee SOR eR He ere

अथ तृतीयोऽध्याय:

Discourse Ill

A brief survey of the Lord's other exploits
SEF उवाच

तत: स आगत्य पुरं स्वपित्रोश्चिकीर्षषा शं बलदेवसंयुत: |
निपात्य तुङ्माद्रिपुयूथनाथं हतं व्यकर्षदु area । १ ।
सान्दीपने: सकृत्पोक्तं ब्रह्माधीत्य सविस्तरम्।तस्मै प्रादाद्वरं wt मृतं पञ्चजनोदरात्। २ |
समाहुता भीष्मककन्यया a fra: सवर्णेन | quam
गान्धर्ववृत्या मिषतां स्वभागं जह्रे पदं मूर्नि दधत्सुपर्ण: । ३ ।
तद्भम्नमानानपि गृध्यतोऽज्ञाञ्जघ्नेक्षतर शस्त्रभृत TS । ४ ।
fra प्रभुर्गाम्य za प्रियाया विधित्सुरार्च्छद द्युतरुं यदर्थे ।
aga सगणो sre: क्रीडामृगो FT वधूनाम्। ५ ।
आमन्तितस्तत्तनयाय शेषं दत्त्वा तदन्त:पुरमाविवेशा । ६ ।
TT =| AT: कुजेन दृष्टा हरिमार्तबन्धुम्।
उत्थाय सद्यो जगृहु: प्रहर्षव्रीडानुरागप्रहितावलोकै: । ७ |

Uddhava continued :Then, in order to afford delight to His parents (Vasudeva and
Devaki), the Lord returned to the city (of Mathura), accompanied by Baladeva (His elder half-
brother) and, knocking down Karmsa (the leader of His enemies) from his high seat and killing
him, dragged his lifeless body along on the ground. (1) Having learnt the Vedas along with
the sciences subsidiary to the same (viz., Grammar, Astronomy, Phonetics, Prosody,
Etymology and Kalpa or the science dealing with the ritual and laying down rules for
ceremonial or sacrificial acts) from Sandipani (His preceptor), who recited them to Him but
once, He restored to him his dead son by way of the preceptor's fee after ripping up the belly
of the demon Paficajana (and recovering him from Yama's abode). (2) Trampling on those
(king Sigupala and his associates, Jarasandha and others) that had been invited on behalf
of princess Rukmini (the daughter of king Bhismaka of the Vidarbhas) by her comeliness,
that vied with Goddess Laksmi's (or by her elder brother, Rukmi, the first two syllables of
whose name were identical with the corresponding syllables of her own name), and who
stood gazing, the Lord carried her away with the intention of marrying her by mutual consent,
knowing her (as a part manifestation of Goddess Laksmi Herself and as one who had
dedicated herself to Him) to be His own share, even as Suparna (Garuda) carried away the
jar containing nectar (that had been won by him). (3) Having (synchronously) tamed (as
many as seven) bulls whose nostrils had not been bored through, He married princess Satya
(the daughter of king Nagnajit) atan assembly of a suitors called for the election of ahusband
by the princess. But when the other assembled princes, who were foolish enough to retain
a passion for her, even though their pride had been curbed (by His superhuman feet), took
up arms (to contend with Him), He disposed of them with His own (divine) weapons, Himself
