Dis. 12] BOOK SEVEN - 711 .

ती Rr Hye te er a Rae डक PERT Oe I छ्व Ee eR a er ee ttt ae te ER ERO RORY

a gridle (of a species of rush known by the name of Mufija), deerskin and (two pieces of) cloth,
the sacred thread and unkempt hair, and should (also) carry a staff and a Kamandalu (a
water-pot generally made of cocoanut-shell) as enjoined by the scriptures.*(4) (Every)
evening and morning he should go about begging for food and offer it to the teacher. He
should partake of it, (only) if allowed; if not permitted on any day (e.g., on the Ekadasi day,
when everybody is expected to observe a fast or live only on fruits etc., or on any other day
by way of penalty for some transgression or even as a test as to what effect itis likely to have
on his mind), he should fast. (5) Possessing a good moral character, moderate in (his) diet,
active, reverent and exercising control over his senses, he should deal with women as well
as with those enslaved by women only as much as it is (absolutely) necessary. (6) Anyone
other than a householder, who has undertaken the great vow of continence, should shun (all)
talk of women; (for) the senses, which are very turbulent (by nature), forcibly carry away (with
them) the mind (even of one whois fully controlled). . (7) An adult student should never have
(such personal service as) the combing of his hair, massaging and washing his body and
inunction etc., done by the young wives of his teachers (even if they offer their services out
of pure motherly love, treating him as their own son). (8) It is a truism indeed that a young
woman is (like) fire and a man is (akin to) a jar full of ghee (clarified butter). One should avoid
(the presence of) even one’s daughter when (she is) all by herself; (nay,) at other times (too)
one should remain with her (only) so long as it is (absolutely) necessary. (9) Until one has
mastered his self, having (clearly) apprehended through self-realization that (all) this (the
body, the senses and so on) is (only) illusory, the sense of duality (the feeling that woman
is an object of enjoyment and | am the enjoyer) does not cease. (And) from that (sense of
duality) indeed follows the perversity of the embodied soul (through identification with the
body and other material things). (10)

Wat wa Jeers समाम्नातं यतेरपि । गुरुवृत्तिर्विकल्पेन गृहस्थस्यर्तुगामिन: 1221
अञ्जनाभ्यञ्जनोन्मर्दस्त्यवलेखामिषं AY | स्रग्गन्धलेपालंकारांस्त्यजेयुर्ये धृतव्रता: 1221
उषित्वैवं गुरुकुले द्विजोऽधीत्यावबुध्य च ।त्रयीं साङ्गोपनिषदं यावदर्थं यथाबलम् । १३॥
Sea वरमनुज्ञातो गुरो: कामं यदीश्वर: | गृहं वनं वा प्रविहोत् प्रव्रजेत् तत्र वा वसेत् । १४।
amt गुरावात्मनि च सर्वभूतेष्ठधोक्षजम्। ya: स्वधामभि: पश्येदप्रविष्टं प्रविष्टवत् । eu!
एवंविधो ब्रह्मचारी वानप्रस्थो यतिर्गृही । चरन्विदितविज्ञान- परं ब्रह्माधिगच्छति ।१६॥

All this (whatever has been stated in verse 6 above) has been enjoined upon a
householder (too), (nay,) even on a recluse (much more on an anchorite). Service to one's
preceptor (also) is optionally laid down in the case of a householder, who is (ordinarily)
expected to approach his wedded wife during the period favourable for procreation (sixteen
days after menstruation). (11) Those who have undertaken a vow of continence should give
up (the use of) collyrium, inunction, massaging the body, (fellowship with) women, drawing,
meat, spirituous liquor (in the case of those who are ordinarily allowed to drink it or honey
in the case of others), garlands, perfumes, unguents and ornaments. (12) Having thus lived
in a teacher's house and studied and grasped the import of (all) the three Vedas (Rgveda,
Yajurveda and Samaveda) along with the (six) sciences auxiliary to them and the Upanisads
(philosophical treatises forming part, nay, the quintessence of the Vedas) according to his
eligibility and capacity, and having made available to the teacher, if capable of doing so, the
object of his desire, and (duly) permitted by him, he should enter (according to his

* For example. it is laid down in the scriptures that a Brahmana student should carry a staff of the Palasa tree alone
`पालाशो दण्डो ब्राह्मणस्य` etc.
