338 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 53

सि EATS CPOE CET LET LOTR ETS ETE EET EP Eee eS Pees fee pee natn Ei eer er

and all their mounts. (17—19)

gee, भगवान् रामो व्रिपक्षीयनृपोद्यमम्। कृष्णं चैकं गतं हर्तुं कन्यां कलहशाङ्कित: 1201

बलेन महता सार्धं भ्रातृस्रेहपरिष्रुत: | afta: कुण्डिनं प्रागाद् गजाश्वरथपत्तिभि: 1२१॥

Hearing of this (collective military) effort on the part of kings belonging to the opposite

party, and of Sri Krsna having gone all by Himself (presumably) to take away the princess,
Lord Balarama apprehended strife. Overwhelmed with fraternal affection (therefore), he
proceeded post haste to Kundinapura accompanied by a huge army consisting of elephants,
horse, chariots and foot-soldiers. (20-21)

भीष्मकन्या वरारोहा काङ्क्षन्यागमनं हरे: । प्रत्यापत्तिमपहयन्ती द्विजस्याचिन्तयत्तदा 122 1

aa त्रियामान्तरित gel मेऽल्पराधस: । नागच्छत्यरविन्दाक्षो नाहं वेद्म्यत्र कारणम्।

सोऽपि नावर्ततेऽद्यापि मत्सन्देशहरो द्विज: 1231

अपि मय्यनवद्यात्मा os किञ्चिजुगुप्सितम्। मत्पाणिग्रहणे नूनं नायाति fe कृतोद्यम: । २४॥

दुर्भगाया न मे धाता नानुकूलो महेश्वर: । देवी वा विमुखा गौरी रुद्राणी गिरिजा सती eu!

एवं चिन्तयती बाला गोविन्दहतमानसा । न्यमीलयत कालज्ञा नेत्रे चाश्रुकलाकुले । २६॥

एवं वध्वा: sie गोविन्दागमनं नृप।वाम ऊरुर्भुजो नेत्रमस्फुरन् प्रियभाषिण: 1201

aa कृष्णविनिर्दिष्ट, स wa द्विजसत्तम: । अन्त:पुरचरीं देवीं राजपुत्रीं at Zire

सा तं प्रहृष्टवदनमव्यग्रात्मगति सती । आलक्ष्य लक्षणाभिज्ञा समपृच्छच्छुचिस्मिता । २९॥

qa आवेदयत् प्राप्तं शशंस यदुनन्दनम्। उक्तं च सत्यवचनमात्मोपनयनं प्रति । ३०1

wad समाज्ञाय anit हृष्टमानसा । न Waa व्राह्मणाय प्रियमन्यन्ननाम 1381

Yearning for the arrival of Sri Hari (Sri Krsna) and not seeing the Brahmana return, the

beautiful daughter of Bhisma thereupon thought (within herself) as follows:—(22) "Ah, my
wedding, unlucky as | am, comes off (only) after the interval of a night. The lotus-eyed Lord
(however) has not (yet) turned up. । do not know the reason for it. Even the Brahmana who
bore my message has not returned till this moment. (23) Perhaps having found (later on)
something disgusting in me, the Lord (who is faultless in character) is surely not coming (to
Kundinapura now) to marry me, though prepared (to leave Dwaraka in the first instance).
(That is why the Brahmana too, whom the Lord would have otherwise brought with Him, has
not been able to reach Kundinapura in time, coming as he is on foot disappointed and
disheartened. (24) Neither Brahma (the ordainer of events and the dispenser of fruit of one's
good or evil actions) nor Siva (the supreme Lord) is propitious to me. And Goddess Gauri,
the Daughter of Himalaya (the king of mountains) and the virtuous Spouse of Lord Siva (too)
is unfavourable to me." (25)Pondering thus, the young maiden, whose mind had been
ravished by Sri Krsna (the Protector of cows) and who knew that the time was not suitable
for shedding tears (which is considered inauspicious on festive occasions), closed her eyes,
bedimmed (as they were) with tear-drops. (26) (Meanwhile) the left thigh, arm and eye of the
bride, who had thus been awaiting the arrival of Sri Krsna (the Protector of cows), throbbed,
auguring delightful news, O king ! (27) Specially instructed by Sri Krsna (to report His arrival),
the same Sunanda (the foremost of Brahmanas)—so the tradition goes—forthwith saw the
princess, who dwelt in the gynaeceum and shone brightly (with joy born of her meeting with
Sri Krsna in contemplation). (28) Full of bright smiles to find him wearing a cheerful
countenance and unfaltering of gait (which bespoke the success of his mission), the said
virtuous maiden—who could read what was in the mind of another from the latter's facial
expression and other indications—made detailed inquiries of him (about Sri Krsna). (29) He
