206 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA ........ .. [Dis 15
HSAAHHE EK HRA MOCK HCE LEAMA RKHCERKARETHTRASEEKCHH LEECH S HAHAH YEE COMER HEHEHE OMEN
as they were in the joy of oneness with the Absolute (and thus above all excitation caused by
sense-contacts*). (43) Having their heart's desire fulfilled by the sight of His face, which
resembled a blue lotus, and the beauty of which was enhanced by His still lovelier lips and a
smile which shone as a (full-blown) jasmine flower, they then looked lower down at His feet—
which were inlaid as it were with rubies in the shape of ruddy nails—and fixed their mind on the
same. (44) They (now) proceeded to extol the Lord—who is endowed with the eight supernatural
powers, which are eternally present in Him and cannot be acquired by anyone else—and who
reveals a personality fit tobe meditated upon by men seeking to attain their goal through paths
of Yoga, and which is highly esteemed by them and is the delight of their eyes. (45)
FART HF:

योऽन्तर्हितो ge गतोऽपि दुरात्मनां त्वं सोऽद्यैव नो नयनमूलमनन्त TE: |

ada कर्णविवरेण asl ua न: पित्रानुवर्णितरहा भवदुद्भवेन ive!

aoa विदाम भगवन् परमात्मतत्त्वं ae सम्प्रति रतिं रचयन्तमेषाम्।

यत्तेनुतापविदितैर्दृढभक्तियोगैरुद्ग्र्थयो हृदि विदुर्मुनयो विरागा: vol

येऽङ्ग त्वदङ्धिशारणा भवत: कथाया: कीर्तन्यतीर्थयशस: PAST THA: XC

कामं wa: स्ववृजिनैर्निरयेषु a: स्ताच्चेतोऽलिवद्यदि नु ते पदयो wa

वाचश्च नस्तुलसिवद्यदि तेऽङ्ध्रिश्चोभा: पूर्येत a गुणगणॆर्यदि कर्णरन्ध्र: ।`४९॥

wen इदं भगवते नम इद्विधेम योऽनात्मनां दुरुदयो भगवान् प्रतीत: ।५०।

नाम पञ्चदशाऽध्याय: 1241
The Kum§ras said : It is only today, O infinite Lord, that You have appeared before our

eyes—You, who are hidden from the view of the evil-minded, though present in their heart
(as the Inner Controller)—although You had entered our mind through the passage of the
ears when our father (Brahma), who owes his existence to You, told us Your secret. (46) O
Lord, we know You—who bring delight every moment to these (devotees) by Your
personality, which is constituted of pure Sattva—to be the highest spiritual Truth, which
sages free from egotism and passion realize in their heart through the practice of unflinching
Devotion learnt by Your grace. (47) O Lord, Your glories are worth recounting and capable
of taking men across the ocean of worldly existence. Hence those wise men who have
sought the protection of Your feet and know how sweet Your stories are prize not even Your
imperishable boon (in the shape of final beatitude), much less other blessings (such as the
position of Indra and so on), which are ever exposed to fear from Your frowns. (48) Let us
by all means be born in the infernal regions as a result of our sins, only if our mind takes
(constant) delight in Your (lotus-like) feet, if our speech just like Tulasi leaves derives its
grace from Your feet and if the cavity of our ears is filled with the accounts of Your manifold

virtues. (49) O Lord of wide renown, our eyes have derived excessive joy from the form You
have revealed (to us). We, therefore, make obeisance to You, the almighty Lord, who have

a त् । । ॥तत त्त  । ॥ त्ती वित् न्न् नतसक . ।
* This shows that the form of the Lord is purely divine in substance and has no mixture of Prakrti or Maiter in it. Had it

been a product of Matter like our bodies, the fragrance of any part of His body or of anything connected with it could not have
disturbed the serenity of sages like Sanaka and others, who are the masters of Janis and Yogis of all ages.
