192 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 20

PARRA RHE RY NSCS ENE OLE ECAH ERE E LEST TE CER SERRE CES PRET EEE ey ent Eee

मेघागमोत्सवा हृष्टा: प्रत्यनन्दञ्छिखण्डिन: । गृहेषु am निर्विण्णा यथाच्युतजनागमे i201
पीत्वाप पादपा: पद्भिरासन्नानात्ममूर्तय: | प्राक क्षामास्तपसा श्रान्ता यथा कामानुसेवया । २१॥
सरस्वशान्तरोधस्पु A सारसा: । गृहेष्शान्तकृत्येषु ग्राम्या इव दुराशया: 1221
जलौघैर्निरभिद्यन्त सेतवो वर्षतीश्वरे। पाखण्डिनामसद्वादैर्वेदमार्गा: कलौ यथा 1२३॥
व्यमुञ्चन् agin भूतेभ्योऽथामृतं ua: | यथाऽऽशिषो विश्पतय: कालेकालेद्विजेरिता: । २४॥

Then commenced the rainy season, conducive to the growth of all creatures (as being
favourable to their breeding and nourishment both), characterized by bright circles (round
the sun and the moon) and thundering heavens. (3) Overcast with dense and dark clouds
attended with lightning and thunder, with the luminaries rendered obscure, the sky shone as
Brahma (the Spirit) conditioned by the three Gunas (and known as the Jiva with its light of
wisdom obscured by the Sattva, Rajas and Tamas corresponding in the case of the sky to
the flashes of lightning, thunder and the clouds). (4) When the (opportune) time (in the form
of the monsoon) came, the sun-god began to release the wealth of the earth in the form
of water that had been absorbed by him during the (past) eight months (even as arighteous
monarch would return to the people the wealth which he extorted from them in the form of
land revenue and other legitimate taxes). (5) Huge clouds endowed with (the eyes of)
lightning (and perceiving the heat of the world) and tossed by tempestuous winds poured
down water, which brings joy to this world (even as the compassionate, observing the
miserable plight of the world and stirred with a feeling of commiseration for the afflicted,
lay down their very life and thus bring delight fo the world). (6) Shrunk through the (summer)
heat, the earth grew plump again when drenched by heaven, even as the body of aman
engaged in austerities performed for attaining some selfish end, which is emaciated
through such austerities, grow corpuient (again) on realizing the fruit of those austerities. (7)
It is the fire-flies and not the planets that shine at the approach of night shrouded in
darkness (occasioned by a thick coating of clouds obscuring the heavenly bodies), even
as it is heresies and not the Vedas that flourish in the age of Kali contaminated with sin
(born of ignorance that clouds one’s judgment). (8) Frogs, that had been silently hibernat-
ing before, began to utter their croaks on hearing the roar of clouds, (even) as Brahmana
pupils at the end of their (daily) routine of devotions (during which they observe complete
silence and on hearing the call of their preceptor) would start their recitation (of the Vedas).
(9) Small streams that were gradually drying up (now) overflowed their channel (even) as the
bodily resources and material riches of a man who has no self-control flow in a wrong
channel. (10) The earth looked green with its green meadows, crimson with the Indragopas
(a species of red insects with a velvety skin) and shaded (rendered white) by mushrooms,
(even) as the army of kings is arrayed in uniforms of various colours. (11) Fields with their
wealth of crop afforded delight to the cultivators and caused agony to the rich, who ( envied
their lot and) did not know that everything lay in the hands of Providence. (12) All the
inhabitants of land and water put on a winning form and appearance through the use of
fresh (rain) water (even) as devotees attain an attractive (divine) form through the worship
of Sri Hari. (13) United with rivers, the ocean, which was (already) rough with waves
generated by winds, became (all the more) turbulent (even) as the mind of animmature Yogi,
tinged (as it is) with desire, gets agitated when brought into contact with sense-objects. (14)
Beaten by volieys of rain, mountains did not feel the least agitated any more than those
whose mind is fixed on Lord Visnu (who is above sense-perception) when they are
overwhelmed with calamities. (15) Overgrown with grass and remaining untrodden (for a
long time), the tracks became doubtful indeed even like the texts of the Vedas which are not
properly studied by the Brahmanas and are consigned to oblivion by the force of time. (16)

