342 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 54

FORO Son SE toe ett ee RE ee EE te Pe ee 8 en ere Re Rt

has been snatched away by cowherds, who are no better than deer." (57)

Thus ends the fifty-third discourse, entitled ‘The Lord carries away Rukmini",
in the latter half of Book Ten of the great and glorious Bhagavata-Purana,
otherwise known as the Paramaharmsa-Samnhita.

PPS T:
CDOGE SEL DOD

अथ चतु:पञ्चाशत्तमोऽध्याय:

Discourse LIV
Discomfiture of Sigupala’s allies and Rukmi and the Espousal of Rukmini
by Sri Krsna solemnized
Sy उवाच
इति सर्वे geen वाहनारुह्य दंशिता: । स्वै: ddd: परिक्रान्ता अन्वीयुर्धृतकार्मुका: । १ ।
तानापतत आलोक्य याद्वानीकयूथपा: । तस्थुस्तत्संमुखा राजन्विस्फूर्ज्य स्वधनूंषि ते । २ ।
अश्वपृष्ठे गजस्कन्धे रथोपस्थे च ails: agg: हरवर्षाणि मेघा अद्रिषुपो यथा । ३ ।
weds meted वीक्ष्य सुमध्यमा । सव्रीडमैक्षत्तद्वक्त्र भयविह्वललोचना । ४ ।
wee भगवानाह मा स्म भैर्वामलोचने | विनङ्क्ष्यत्यधुनैवैतत् तावकै: ज्ञात्रवं बलम् 1 ५ |
te: झिरांसि रथिनामश्चिनां chat भुवि । सकुण्डलकिरीटानि सोष्णीषाणि च area: । ७ ।
हस्ता: सासिगदेषासा: करभा ऊरवोऽङ्घय: | अश्वाश्वतरनागोष्टृखरमर्त्यशिरांसि च । ८ ।
हन्यमानबलानीका वृष्णिभिर्जयकाङ्खिभि: । राजानो विमुखा जग्मुर्जरासन्धपुर:सरा: । ९ ।

Sri Suka began again : Riding on their mounts and surrounded each by his own troops,
all the (aforesaid) kings, full of rage, ran with the foregoing words in (hot) pursuit (of Sri
Krsna), wielding their bows and clad in armour. (1) Seeing them rushing (after them), the
celebrated generals of the Yadava army stood facing them, O king, twanging their bows. (2)
Like clouds pouring showers on mountains, the adversaries—who were (all) skilled soldiers,
and rode on horseback, the shoulders of elephants and in their seat on the chariots—
discharged volleys of shafts on the Yadava warriors. (3) Perceiving the army of her Spouse
screened by showers of arrows, Rukmini (who had a slender waist) bashfully looked at His
face with eyes confounded through fear. (4) Laughing heartily the Lord said (to her), "Do not
be afraid, O fair-eyed one ! The yonder army of the enemies will be destroyed just now with
the help of your (own) troops.” (5) Intolerant of the aforementioned prowess of the enemies,
Gada, Sankarsana (Balarama) and other heroes (of the Yadava army) proceeded to strike
with Naracas (a particular type of arrows) the horses and elephants as well as the chariots
(of the hostile army). (6) There fell to the ground in tens of millions heads, adorned with ear-
tings, diadems and turbans, hands—bearing swords, maces and bows—forearms, thighs
and feet of car-warriors, horsemen and soldiers fighting on elephants, as well as heads of
horses, mules, elephants, camels, donkeys and men (foot-soldiers). (7-8) Theirarmies being

beaten (thus) by the Vrsnis, who were keen after victory, the kings led by Jarasandha, turned
their backs and withdrew (from the field of battle). (9)
