518 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA { Dis. 2

SEAM ANA ११० ए न शा न OHNE EET ह एकक शाक शाक शा EMENE न HT EERE TOME NARUTO ANE ER

auspicious actions with (all) His desires (ever) gratified, enjoying Himself in His city
(Dwaraka), the Lord of widely established fame desired to destroy His race as that was the
only work left unaccomplished (by Him). (10) The Lord had performed highly auspicious
deeds, which (when sung) bring holiness and destroy the sins of the Kali age in those that
sing them. Now He was residing in the house of Vasudeva as the Destroyer. He bade farewell
to the sages—Viswamitra, Asita, Kanva, Durvasa, Bhrgu, Angira, KaSyapa, Vamadeva, Atri,
Vasistha, Narada and others, and they went away to (the holy place of) Pindaraka (near
Dwaraka). (11-12) The Yadava youths, while sporting (there), approached them and with
mock humility clasped their feet and impudently asked them a question. (13) Having attired
Jambavati's sons, Samba; as a woman, they said (to the Rsis); "O Brahmanas of unfailing
vision, this pregnant woman of dafk eyes, soon to give birth to a child, and desiring to bring
forth a son, wishes to know if she will give birth to a son or a daughter. She (however) feels
shy to ask you directly." (14-15) O king, the sages, who were thus imposed upon, got angry
and said to them: "O fools, she will give birth to a pestle which will destroy your race !" (16)
Greatly terrified to hear that (curse), they at once bared the belly of Samba and actually found
a pestle of iron there. (17) "What have we, unfortunate fellows, done ? What will people say
(of us) ?” Thus perplexed, they returned home with the pestle. (18) With sad and pale faces
they brought the pestle in the court, and in the presence of all the Yadavas narrated the
(whole) incident to their king (Ugrasena). (19) O king, hearing about the unfailing curse of
the sages and seeing the pestle (all) the inhabitants of Dwaraka were struck with wonder and
got alarmed through fear. (20) Ahuka (Ugrasena), the said king of the Y adavas, got the pestle
reduced to powder and thrown into the water of the sea. The remaining iron piece of the pestle
(which could not be powdered) was also thrown (into the sea). (21) Some fish swallowed that
iron piece, while the particles of the powder were borne by the waves to and deposited on
the shore, where they grew into a kind of grass called Eraka. (22) The fish was caughtin the
net alongwith other fishes in the sea by some fisherman. The iron piece foundin its stomach
was fixed to the point of his arrow by a hunter. (23) The Lord knew the whole truth and (being
almighty) had the power to nullify the curse of the sages; but He did not like to render it
ineffectual. (On the other hand) He approved of it, being Himself the Destroyer. (24)

Thus ends the first discourse, in Book Eleven of the great
and glorious Bhagavata-Purana, otherwise known
as the Paramahamsa-Samhiia.

cat Pat Pe:
PIR irc

अथ द्वितीयोऽध्याय:

Discourse Il
Narada visits Vasudeva and reproduces the dialogue between

King Janaka and the nine Yogi$waras
श्रीरुक उवाच

Tepe द्वारवत्यां कुरूद्धह। अवात्सीन्नारदोऽभीक्ष्णं कृष्णोपासनलालस: । १ ।
को नु राजन्निन्दियवान् मुकुन्दचरणाम्बुजम्। न भजेत् सर्वतोमृत्युरूपास्यममरोत्तमै: । २ ।
तमेकदा तु देवरषिं वसुदेवो गृहागतम्। अर्चितं सुखमासीनमभिवाद्येदमव्रवीत् ! ३ ।
