448 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 78

ककक ककक स ६8 मा eh Ce Ke NAHE OLN SKETOR EAH HSE HK कक ८ KH 8 भ् टान #.6% सा

vouchsafed him an unwearied existence for the time this assembly remained in session. (30)
Thus You have unknowingly perpetrated an act which is equivalent to killing a Brahmana.
We know You are a master of Yoga and transcend the authority of the Vedas. (31) But You
have descended on earth in order to purify the world. Should You of Your own accord make
some expiation for the sin of killing a Brahmana, You will thereby set anoble example before

the world.” (32)
afta वधनिर्वेशं लोकानुग्रहकाम्यया fran: प्रथमे कल्पे यावान् q विधीयताम् । ३३ ।
दीर्घमायुर्बतैतस्य सत्त्वमिन्दियम्नेव च । आश्ञासितं यत्तद् ब्रूत साधये योगमायया । ३४॥
Bhagavan Sri Balarama said : | shall certainly make some atonement for this sin in
order to teach a lesson to the world. Please lay down the best form of expiation for Me. (33)
Through Yogamaya | can also vouchsafe to him a renewed span of long life, energy and

soundness of body and the senses and whatever else you desire. Tell me, what can | do for
him? (34)

aaa तव वीर्यस्य मृत्योरस्माकमेव च । यथा भवेद् वच: सत्यं तथा राम विधीयताम् 134 |

The Sages said : (Lord Balarama!) kindly devise some means by which the infallibility
of Yourweapon and Your prowess, and the inevitability of his death may not be compromised
and the boon granted by us may also be vindicated. (35)

आत्मा वै पुत्र उत्पन्न इति aera तस्मादस्य wae am आयुरिन्दियसत्त्ववान् 1361
fe a: कामो मुनिश्रेष्ठा ब्रूताहं करवाण्यथ | अजानतस्त्वपचितिं यथा मे चिन्त्यतां qm: 1301
Bhagavan Sri Balarama said : Worshipful sages, the Vedas declare that one's own self
is reborn as the son. Therefore, in place of Romaharsana, his son will expound the Puranas
to you. | shal! endow him with long life, energy and soundness of the body and the
senses.(36) If you desire anything else, pray tell me, I shall forthwith grant it. And please think
over and tell me what will be the most appropriate expiation for the sin | have unknowingly
committed. (For you know the subject full well. )(37)

ware सुतो घोरो बल्वलो नाम दानव:। स दूषयति a: wa पर्वणि पर्वणि ।३८॥

तं पापं जहि aed aa: wet परम्। पूयशोणितविण्मूत्रसुरामांसाभिवर्षिणम् ।३९।

wag ud af परीत्य सुसमाहित: । after gen मासांस्तीर्थस्नायी विशुद्ध्यसे ।४०॥

बल्वलवधोपक्रमो नामाष्टमप्ततितमोऽध्याय: 1७८1

The Sages said : (Lord Balarama!) there is a terrible demon, Balwala by name, son of
llwala, who comes here on every full-moon and new moon day, and outrages the sanctity
of our gathering. (38) He throws on us piths, blood, faeces, urine, wine and flesh. O Lord of
the Yadus, be pleased to put an end to that monster. You will have thereby rendered the most

valuable service to us. (39) Then, for twelve months, please traverse the whole length and
breadth of Bharatavarsa with a serene mind and take a plunge in its holy waters. That will
