SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 2

WB MWe ARE Re He MY RHE Be He GEL OR HH, ME BONE WT Be Re HEME FM WORE R CR: Hy Be MT ATHY Be Be BENT HT Be My HT BY Be Be Br HH BE Re RE ONT Hie BBY Re By We eT YH ३३

Kx Discourse Il
Glory of the Lord's narrative and of Devotion to Him
व्यास उवाच
इति सम्प्रश्नसंहृष्टो विप्राणां रौमहर्षणि: । प्रतिपूज्य वदचस्तेषां प्रवक्तुमुपचक्रमे । १ ।
Vyasa says : Ugrasrava (the son of Romaharsana) was transported with joy to hear
this question of the holy Brahmanas. He welcomed their words and commenced his
discourse.(1)
सूत उवाच
यं प्रव्रजन्तमनुपेतमपेतकृत्यं द्वैपायनो विरहकातर आजुहाव ।
पुत्रेति तन्मयतया तरवोऽभिनेदुस्ते सर्वभूतहृदयं मुनिमानतोऽस्मि । २ ।
a: स्वानुभावमखिलश्रुतिसारमेकमध्यात्मदीपमतितितीर्षतां तमोऽन्धम्।
संसारिणां करुणयाऽऽह पुराणगुह्यं तं व्याससूनुमुपयामि गुरुं मुनीनाम् । ३ |
नारायणं नमस्कृत्य नरं चैव नरोत्तमम्। देवीं सरस्वतीं व्यासं ततो जयमुदीरयेत् । ४ ।
Sita said : When the sage Dwaipayana (Vedavyasa; lit., one who was born in an island)
saw his son (Sukadeva) going away all alone with the intention of leading the life ofa recluse,
even though he had not yet been invested with the sacred thread and had, therefore, had
no occasion to perform any secular or religious duties, he was agitated at the thought of
separation from him and called out, “Hullo, my son!" At that time it was the trees (on the
roadside) that responded on his behalf, filled as they were by his presence. | bow to that sage
(Sukadeva), who (being one with the Universal Spirit) has access to the hearts of all. (2)
Srimad Bhagavata is a mysterious Purana; it possesses a glory of its own and constitutes
the very essence of all the Vedas. It is a unique light illuminating the spiritual realities for
those worldly men who seek to go beyond the darkness of ignorance. It was out of
compassion for such men that this teacher of sages, Sukadeva, uttered this Purana. । take
refuge in that son of Vyasa. (3) After bowing to the divine sages Narayana and Nara, the
Supreme Person (Sri Krsna), Goddess Saraswati (the goddess of speech) and the sage
Vyasa, one should then recite Srimad Bhagavata (which enables one to conquer the cycle
of birth and death as well as all the aberrations of the mind). (4)

मुनय: साधु पृष्टोऽहं भवद्भिर्लोकमङ्गलम्। यत्कृत: कृष्णसंप्रश्नो येनात्मा सुप्रसीदति । ५ |
a a पुंसां परो anf ad भक्तिरधोक्षजे । अहैतुक्यप्रतिहता ययाऽऽत्मा सम्प्रसीदति । ६ ।
व्रासुदेवे भगवति भक्तियोग: sata: aay are FA च यदहैतुकम् । |
ad: स्वनुष्ठित: पुंसां विष्क्सेनकथासु य: । नोत्पादयेद्यदि रतिं om wa fe केवलम् । |
ata ह्यापवर्ग्यस्य नार्थोऽर्थायोपकल्पते। नार्थस्य धर्मैकान्तस्य कामो लाभाय fe स्मृत: । ९ ।
ame नेन्द्रियप्रीतिर्लाभो जीवेत यावता । जीवस्य तत्त्वजिज्ञासा नार्थो यश्चेह कर्मभि: । १०॥
वदन्ति तत्तत्त्वविदस्तत्वं यज्ञानमद्वयम्।ब्रह्मेति परमात्मेति भगवानिति | sre 1221
Tee मुनयो ज्ञानवैराग्ययुक्तया । पङ्यन्त्यात्मनि चात्मानं भक्त्या श्रुतगृहीतया 1221
अत: पुम्भिद्दिजश्रेष्ठा वर्णाश्रमविभागरश: । स्वनुष्ठितस्य धर्मस्य संसिद्धिर्हरितोषणम् । १३॥
तस्मादेकेन मनसा भगवान् सात्वतां ofa: | श्रोतव्य: कीर्तितव्यश्च eta: पूज्यश्च नित्यदा । १४॥
यदनुध्यासिना युक्ता: कर्मग्रन्थिनिबन्धनम्। छिन्दन्ति कोविदास्तस्य को न कुर्यात्कथारतिम् । १५॥
