Dis. 5 BOOK TWELVE 685

न्वि RE RE REEMA HAE NORA LAIR IALI_AE LABIA AIA ALES AAR AAAS BAAS ABBA EAI ARE

न भविष्यसि भूत्वा त्वं पुत्रपौत्रादिरूपवान्। sige देहादेर्व्यतिरिक्तो यथानल: । ३ |

qa यथा ARES पञ्चत्वाद्यात्मन: स्वयम् । यस्मात् Vela देहस्य तत आत्मा ह्यजोऽमर: । ४ ।

घटेभिन्नैयथाऽक्काज्ञआकाज्ञस्पाद्यघाषुरा।एवंदेहेमृतेजीचोब्रह्मसप्यद्यतेपुन । ५

मन: सृजति वै देहान् गुणान् कर्माणि चात्मन: । तन्मन: सृजतेमम्पाततोजीवस्यप्तयृति।६।

स्नेहाधिष्ठानवर्त्यग्निसंयोगो यावदीयते । ततो दीपस्य दीपत्वमेवं देहकृतो भव: |
रेज-सत्त्वतमोवृत्त्या जायतेऽथ विनञ्यति । ७ ।

न तत्रात्मा स्वयंज्योतिर्यो व्यक्ताव्यक्तयो: पर: । आकाङा इव चाधारो ध्रुवोऽनन्तोपमस्तत: । ८ |

Sri Suka began again: In this (Bhagavata-Mahapurana) stands celebrated every now
and then Lord Sri Hari, the Soul (Controller) of the universe, of whose exultation and anger
were (severally) born Brahma (the creator) and Rudra (the god of destruction). (1) You for
your part, O king, give up this (foolish) notion, characteristic ofa brute, that you will die. Unlike
the body—which is born at a particular moment while it was non-existent before and,
therefore, perishes—you (the soul that you are) were not so bom and (therefore) will not
die.(2) You were never born (asa father) nor will you be born in the form of a son and again
in that of a grandson, and so on as the tree from a seed and (again) a seed from the tree;
(for) you are (quite) distinct from the body etc., just as fire (is distinct from the firewood). (3)
Since—just as in the dream state a man himself sees his head lopped off—one witnesses
the death etc., of one’s body (alone, and not of the self, which is the seer and different from
those states), the self (within you) is as a matter of fact undying and unborn. (4) (Just) as when
an earthen pot is broken the space enclosed by it is (once more) the same as it was before
(the pot came into existence), so when the body is (finally) dissolved (as a result of Self-
Realization) the individual soul becomes one with Brahma again. (S) The mind alone creates
bodies, objects of senses and actions for the soul. Itis Maya that creates the aforesaid mind;
and from Maya proceeds the transmigration of the Jiva. (6) A light maintains its character as
light (only) so long as there is found the combination of oil, that which holds the oil, a wick
and fire. Even soitis through the action of Rajas, Sattva and Tamas that a body appears and
ceases; while transmigration has its root in mistaking the body as one’s own self. (7) (Just
as with the going out of a light the element of fire does not perish, so} the sou! encased in
abody does not perish (with the body)—the soul which is self-effulgent and lies beyond the
physical no less than the astral body, inasmuch as it is the support of all, immutable and all-
pervasive, (nay,) endless and unparalleled like the sky. (8)

एवमात्मानमात्मस्थमात्मनैवामृश प्रभो । बुद्ध्यानुमानगर्भिण्या वासुदेवानुचिन्तया । ९ |
चोदितो विप्रवाक्येन न at धक्ष्यति तक्षक: । मृत्यवो नोपधक्ष्यन्ति मृत्यूनां मृत्युमीश्वरम् ।१०॥
अहं We ut am ब्रह्माहं परमं पदम्। एवं समीक्षन्नात्मानमात्मन्याधाय निष्कले ।११।
wt aad we लेलिहानं विषाननै: । न द्रक्ष्यसि ait च fad च पृथगात्मन: ।१२॥
wea कथितं तात यथाऽऽत्मा पृष्टवान् नॄप। हरेर्विश्वात्मनश्चेष्टां fe भूय: श्रोतुमिच्छसि ies)

इत्तिश्रोमद्भक्कोण्डश्यांपश्महंस्यांसंहितत्यांद्वाददुंग्स्कश्वेर्व्यनाफ्याञ्चपोऽप्यप्य: ।५॥

Full of constant thought of Lord Vasudeva, O king, investigate thus (the truth of) the Self
encased in your psychophysical organism, by your own effort with the help of syllogistic
reasoning. (9) Urged by the curse of a Brahmana, the serpent Taksakawill not be able toburn
you (the soul within your body, even though it may burn the body). (All) the agents of Death
(combined) cannot burn you, who are({no other than) the Death of deaths, the almighty Lord

