Dis. 17 ] BOOK FIVE 503

Se ee ee ee LT Ee

devotees (in the manner to be shown hereafter). (14) In llavrta, of course, the only male
(available) is Lord Sankara (the Source of this universe); none else who is aware of the
circumstances which led to the curse pronounced by (Lord Siva for the satisfaction of)
Goddess Parvati (the divine Spouse of Siva, whose divine sports had been interrupted by
the unannounced and hence unwelcome presence of sages in Her pleasance) dare enter
this land. How a male attempting to enter it is transformed into a woman | shall narrate later
on (in Book IX). (15)
carr. रा — ॥। ao “an fi aft
प्रकृतिमात्मन: सङ्कर्षणसंज्ञामात्मसमाधिरूपेण संनिधाप्यैतदभिगृणन् भव उपधावति। १६ I

Waited upon by hosts of women, numbering billions and forming the retinue of Goddess
Parvati, Lord Siva (the Source of the universe) adores (there) His own Cause, the fourth
manifestation, presiding over destruction (the function of Tamoguna) and known by the
name of Sankarsana, of Lord Visnu (the Supreme Person)—appearing in four forms
(Vasudeva, Pradyumna, Aniruddha and Sankarsana)—realizing His presence in the mind
in the form of a conceptual image and muttering the following (prayer). (16)

श्रीभगवानुवाच
So FAT भगवते महापुरुषाय सर्वगुणसङड्ख्यानायानन्तायाव्यक्ताय नम इति। १७।
भजे भजन्यारणपादपङ्कजं भगस्य कृत्स्नस्य w परायणम्।

भक्तेष्वलं भावितभूतभावनं भवापहँ त्वा भवभावमीश्वरम्।१८।
न यस्य मायागुणचित्तवृत्तिभिर्निरीक्षतो ह्यण्वपि दृष्टिरज्यते।
ईशे यथा नोऽजितमन्युरंहसां med न मन्येत जिगीषुरात्मन:।१९।
असद्दृशो य: प्रतिभाति मायया क्षीबेव मध्वासवताम्रलोचन:।
न नागवध्योऽर्हण gfe ह्रिया यत्पादयो: स्पर्शनधर्षितेन्द्रिया:। २०॥

न ae सिद्धार्थमिव क्वचित्स्थितं भूमण्डलं मूर्धसहस्रधामसु। २१।
यस्याद्य आसीद् गुणविग्रहो wer विज्ञानधिष्ण्यो भगवानज: किल।

vere वैकृततामसेन्द्रिय:र सृजाम सर्वे यदनुग्रहादिदम्।२३॥
न वेद निस्तारणयोगमञ्जसा ast नमस्ते विलयोदयात्मने।२४।
इति श्रौमद्भागवते महापुराणे पारमहंस्यां संहितायां पञ्चमस्कन्धे सप्तदशोऽध्याय:। १७

Lord Siva prays : "Hail, hail to the infinite Lord Visnu (the Supreme Person), denoted
by (the mystical syllable) OM, and manifesting all virtues though (Himself) unmanifest. (17)
O adorable One! 1 adore You, the supreme Lord, whose lotus- feet afford shelter (to all), the
highest Abode of all divine attributes (viz., universal lordship and omnipotence, piety of all
kinds, entire glory, all wealth and splendour, omniscience and unattachment to everything) !
You have fully revealed before (Your) devotees Your divine form (that protects all created
beings) and put an end to their rebirth; while You perpetuate (the bondage of) worldly
existence in the case of those who are not devoted to You. (18) Who that seeks to subdue
his senses would not esteem You, whose vision is notatall coloured by the objects of senses
