542 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 6

SHENK O He EC HONK NOMEN HE COHEN EH HRS RHE THRE Ree TEs ७ क Honnenereanon een e ४१००

(Vaikuntha), and bless us, Your servarts, the guardians of the spheres, alongwith the
spheres (by visiting our realms and accepting our homage). (27)

श्रीभगवानुवाच
अवधारितमेतन्मे यदात्थ faqaer । कृतं a: कार्यमखिलं भूमेर्भारोऽवतार्ति: । २८॥
तदिदे यादवकुलें वीर्यशौर्यश्रियोद्धतम्। लोकं जिघृक्षद् eg A वेलयेव महार्णव: ।२९॥
यद्यसंहत्य दृप्तानां यदूनां विपुलें कुलम्। गन्तास्म्यनेन लोकोऽयमुद्देलेन fargafa 1301
इदानीं नाश आरब्ध: कुलस्य द्विजशापत: । यास्यामि wai ब्रह्मन्नेतदन्ते तवानघ 1281

The glorious Lord replied : What you say has already been decidedupon by Me, Oruler
of the gods ! All your purpose has been accomplished and the burden of the earth
removed.(28) Made insolent by prowess, heroism and fortune and inclined to take posses-
sion of the (whole) world, this (celebrated) race of Yadu has been kept in check by Me as the
ocean by its shore. (29) If | depart (from this world) without destroying the huge race of the
Yadus, who have grown (so) insolent, this (entire) human race will meet its destruction
through this ocean, that has (already) transgressediits limits. (30) The destruction of this race
has (already) begun through the imprecation of the Brahmanas. When its destruction is
complete, O sinless Brahma, | shall ascend to your realm (en route to My own realm). (31)

oy उवाच
इत्युक्तो लोकनाथेन स्वयम्भू: प्रणिपत्य तम्। सह देवगणैर्देवत स्वधाम समपद्यत । ३२॥
अथ तस्यां महोत्पातान् द्वारवत्यां समुत्थितान्। विलोक्य भगवानाह यदुवृद्धान् समागतान् 1331

$ri Suka continued : Told thus by the Lord of the universe, god Brahma (the self-born)
tell prostrate before Him and duly returned to his realm alongwith the host of (other) gods.(32)
Presently noticing grave portents appearing over the aforesaid (city of) Dwaraka, the Lord
spoke to the elderly among the Yadus, that had assembled (there). (33)

एते वै सुमहोत्पाता व्युत्तिष्ठन्तीह ada: । श्ञापश्च न: कुलस्यासीद् ब्राह्मणेभ्यो दुरत्यय: 1361
न वस्तव्यमिहास्माभिर्जिजीविषुभिरार्यका: । प्रभासं सुमहत्पुण्यं यास्यामोऽद्यैव मा far 1३५॥
यत्र स्नात्वा दक्षश्ञापाद् गृहीतो यक्ष्मणोडुराट्। विमुक्त: किल्बिषात् सद्यो भेजे ya: कलोदयम् 1361
aa च तस्मिन्नाप्रुत्य तर्पयित्वा पितॄन् सुरान्। भोजयित्वोशिजो विप्रान् नानागुणवतान्धसा 139 |
aq दानानि पात्रेषु श्रद्धयोप्त्वा महान्ति ai वृजिनानि तरिष्यामो दानैर्नोभिरिवार्णवम् । ३८॥

The Lord said : These exceptionally grave portents are particularly appearing on all
sides here, and acurse from the Brahmanaas, that cannot be easily overcome, has overtaken
our race. (34) We should no longer stay here, if we wish to live on, O respected ones | We
shall (accordingly) shift this very day to Prabhasa, a most sacred place. Let there be no
delay.(35) Having bathed there, the moon-god (the ruler of the stars), who had been seized
with tuberculosis due to a curse pronounced by Daksa, was at once rid of his trouble and
began to enjoy once more the waxing of his digits (as before). (36) Having bathed (in the
sacred waters) there and gratified the manes and gods (with offerings of water), fed good
Brahmanas with (delicious) food of various tastes and bestowed valuable gifts on those
worthy ones, we shall through those gifts get over our sins (even) as people cross the ocean
with the help of ships. (37-38)
