Dis. 1 ] BOOK FIVE 443

प कौ क विपिविप्त कौ ज दौ क कोक त् यैती दौ क द् कौ क क्तदिक EAE कक LEPEREREHEERELLE क कज् SHEETS प ज कौ व घि

(stage of life) and given to (perfect) self-control, these foremost seers indeed wonderfully
attained absolute self-identity with the Lord, who is the very Self, nay, the Inner Controller
of all living beings and whom they realized within the heart, purified by virtue of their
uninterrupted and supreme Devotion resulting from their ceaseless remembrance of the
charming lotus-like feet of Bhagavan Vasudeva, the abode ofall species of living beings and
the asylum ofthe fear-stricken. (27) By another wife too he had three sons—Uttama, Tamasa
and Raivata, each of whom presided over a Manvantara (associated with his name). (28)
पि पि क {= Fs _ =

(Three of) his sons being thus given to self-control, the high-minded emperor (Priyavrata)
ruled over the globe for 1,10,00,00,000 years. (During his reign) the enemies of righteousness
were scared away by the very twang of the bow-string pulled by his stout arms, possessed
of (inordinate) strength, which consummated all his efforts without any obstruction. Nay, like
aman who has forgotten his self, hehad his judgmentcloudedas it were by Barhismati's daily
growing expressions of excessive joy (on his visiting her), her rising from the seat and going
forth to meet him, amatory gestures natural to women, smiles and glances half-concealed
by bashfulness and delightful jokes etc. (29)

चावदवभासयति सुरगिरिमनुपरिक्रामन् भगवानादित्यो वसुधातलमर्धेनैव प्रतपत्यर्धेनावच्छादयति तदा हि
सप्तकृत्वस्तरणिमनुपर्यक्रामद् द्वितीय इव पतङ्ग: | ३० । चे वा उ ह तद्रधचरणनेमिकृतपरिखातास्ते सप्त सिन्धव
आसन् यत Us HAT: सप्त भुवो द्वीपा:। ३१। जम्बूप्लक्षशाल्मलिकुशक्रौञ्चशाकपुष्करसंज्ञास्तेषां परिमाणं
पूर्वस्मात्पूर्वस्मादुत्तर उत्तरो यथासंख्यं द्विगुणमानेन बहि: समन्तत उपक्लृप्ता:।३२॥
क्षारोदेक्षुरसोदसुरोदघृतोदक्षीरोददधिमण्डोदशुद्धोदा: सप्त जलधय: Wa द्वीपपरिखा इवाभ्यन्तरद्वीपसमाना

एकैकश्येन यथानुपूर्वं सप्तस्वपि बहिरद्वीपेषु पृथक्परित उपकल्पितास्तेषु जम्ब्वादिषु
बर्हिष्मतीपतिरनुव्रतानात्मजानाग्नीध्रेध्मजिह्वयज्ञबाहुहिरण्यरेतोघृतपृष्ठमेधातिथिवीतिहोत्रसंज्ञान् यथासंख्ये-
नैकैकस्मिन्नेकमेवाधिपतिं विदधे। 331 दुहितरं चोर्जस्वतीं नामोशनसे प्रायच्छद्यस्यामासीद् देवयानी नाम

काव्यसुता। ३४1
नैवंविध: पुरुषकार उरुक्रमस्य tat तदङ्ध्रिरजसा जितषड्गुणानाम्।
fat विदूरविगत: सकृदाददीत यन्नामधेयमधुना स जहाति बन्धम्।३५।

(Once he observed that) even to the extent the glorious sun-god lights the earth's surface
(viz., up to the Lokaloka mountain) in the course of his circuit round Mount Sumeru (the
mountain of the gods), he shines only on one-half of that portion and leaves the other half
shrouded in darkness. He (however) did not like this. His superhuman glory having been
enhanced by virtue of his adoration of-the Lord, he thereupon like another sun made seven
circuits (round the earth) after the sun, in his effulgent car, as swift as the sun, determined
to turn night as well into day. (30) The tracks that were sunk by the fellies of the wheels of
his chariot came to be the most celebrated seven oceans, which divided the earth into (what
are known as) the seven Dwipas (or main divisions). (31) The Dwipas are (severally) known
as JambUdwipa, Plaksadwipa, Salmalidwipa, Kugadwipa, Krauficadwipa, Sakadwipa and
Puskaradwipa. As regards dimensions, each succeeding one is twice as large as the
preceding one and is placed beyond the ocean and encircling it. (82) The seven oceans
(severally) contain salt water, the juice of sugar-cane, wine, clarified butter, milk, fluid curds
and pure water and serve as a moat as it were one for each of the seven Dwipas. They are
equal in extent to the Dwipa enclosed by them and are situated one beyond and encircling
