652 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 2 `

Beets Fe Ree ee eR ERI ES OH EME KE EEE SERENE EELEKE REL EEEHE ती कीं द्दिक ती क दि वज व व Kew

Puloma, Sakuna and others, listen all tomy word and then letit tobe carried out at once; there
should be no delay. (4-5) My beloved and devoted (younger) brother (Hiranyaksa) has been
caused by the petty enemies (the gods) to be slain at the hands of Hari (the god Visnu), who,
though impartial, has been won over totheir side through services (rendered to Him). (6) With
the copious blood of that god—who, though all effulgence (in essence), assumed the
semblance of a wild animal (boar) through a deceptive trick and has relinquished his (very)
nature (impartial character), nay, who follows anyone who adores him and is (therefore)
fickle-minded as a child—when his head has been severed by my spear, | shall gratify (the
spirit of) my blood-thirsty brother and be (thus) relieved of my agony. (7-8) When that wily
adversary’ (in the person of Visnu) has been disposed of, the gods (the denizens of heaven),
whose (very) life is Visnu, will wither away like the boughs on a tree whose roots have been
cut off. (9) Meanwhile resort you to the earth, made prosperous by the Brahmanas (the
sacerdotal class) and the Ksatriyas (the ruling and warrior class) and exterminate those
engaged in austerities, sacrificial performances and the study of the Vedas, observing
sacred vows and practising charity. (10) God Visnu depends for his existence on the rituals
of the twice-born, being Yajfia (worship) personified and an embodiment of righteousness.
He is the ultimate resort of the gods, the Rsis (seers), the manes and other living beings and
the final goal of righteousness. (11) Repair to each such territory where there are Brahmanas |
(lit., the twice-born), cows, the (four) Varnas (grades of society) and (four) Aéramas (stages
in a and rituals. Set fire to them and cut them (their trees etc.) to pieces. (12)

ते भर्तॄनिर्देशमादाय शलिरसाऽऽदृता: ।तथा प्रजानां कदनं faeg: कदनप्रिया: 1231
पुंय्प्राग्मव्रजोद्यानक्षेक्राम्पाश्नमाकरान् । खेटखर्वटघोषांश्च cag: पत्तनानि च ।१४॥
केचित्खनित्रैर्बिभिदु: सेतुप्राकारगोपुरान्। आजीव्यांश्चिच्छिदुर्वृक्षान् केचित्परशुपाणय: |

प्रादहन् शरणान्यन्ये प्रजानां ज्वलितोल्मुकॆ: । १५1
एवं बविप्रकृते लोके दैत्येन्द्रानुचरैर्मुहु: । fea देवा: परित्यज्य भुवि चेरुरलक्षिता: । १६॥

Reverently bowing to the aforementioned command of their lord (Hiranyakasipu), the
demons (who were fond of bloodshed) began to oppress the people accordingly. (13) They
burnt towns and villages, cow-pens and gardens, corn-fields and parks, hermitages and
mines, farmers' hamlets, villages at the foot of mountains and stations of herdsmen and
(even) cities. (14) Some (of them) demolished with spades bridges, defensive walls and city-
gates; while others, with axes in their hands, cut down (fruit-bearing) trees which served as
ameans Of livelihood (to the people). And (still) others burnt down the dwellings of the people
with flaming brands. (15) When the people were thus oppressed again and again by the
followers of Hiranyakasipu (the lord of the Daityas), the gods deserted heaven and
wandered over the earth unperceived (by the demons). (16)

faureiquiq: सम्परेतस्य दु:खित:। कृत्वा कटोदकादीनि भ्रातृपुत्रानसान्त्वयत् ।१७।

eh wat ye भूतसंतापनं gen कालनाभं महानाभं हरिर्मश्रुमथोत्कचम् । १८।

तन्मातरं रुषाभानुं fafa च जननीं गिरा।श्लक्ष्णया देशकालज्ञ इदमाह जनेश्वर । १९॥
Having offered water and other oblations to (the spirit of) his deceased (younger) brother
(Hiranyaksa), Hiranyakasipu, who felt (very) miserable (himself), comforted his brother's

sons—Sakuni, Sambara, Dhrsta, Bhtasantapana, Vrka, Kalanabha, Mahanabha, Hari$masru
and Utkaca. (17-18) Knowing as he did what was appropriate to a particular time and place,

“The expression ' szfea’ (which has been split up in the above translation as कूटे - अहिने) may also be taken asa compound
word and interpreted as `कूरं इहितं यस्य स:` (a fellow whose actions are of a puzzling nature).
