608 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 20

REE CRU क ग THRE REO ONE COREE Eee न् OF nee OEE Ee TOE OO २७ २ ७७ ET OEE MEOH HENNE EEE,

(everlasting) peace on realizing the Supreme. (16) That man (undoubtedly) kills his soul
(brings about his own spiritual degradation), who—having secured the exceptionally fit
vessel of a human body, the source of all blessings and (therefore) a most rare boon, vet
easily obtained (without any effort by the grace of God) and piloted by (an expert helmsman
in the form of) a preceptor and propelled by a favourable wind in the shape of Myseli—
(nevertheless) fails to cross the ocean of mundane existence. (17)
यदाऽऽरम्भेषु निर्विण्णो fara: संयतेन्द्रिय: । अभ्यासेनात्पनो योगी धारयेदचलें मन: 2c
धार्यमाणं wit aff भ्राम्यदाश्वनवस्थितम्। अतन्दितोऽनुरोधेन मार्गेणात्मवल्षं नयेत् । १९1
मनोगति न विसृजेज्जितप्राणो जितेन्द्रिय: । सत्त्वसम्पन्नया बुद्ध्या WA sera नयेत् 1201
एष a परमो योगो wre: dae: स्मृत: । हदयज्ञत्वमन्विच्छन् दम्यस्येवार्वतो मुहु: ।२१॥
ares सर्वभावानां प्रतिलोमानुलोमत: । भवाप्ययावनुध्यायेन्मनो यावत् प्रसीदति 1221
निर्विण्णस्य विरक्तस्य पुरुषस्योक्तवेदिन: । मनस्त्यजति दौरात्प्यं चिन्तितस्यानुचिन्तया 1231
यमादिभिर्योगपथैरान्वीक्षिक्या च विद्यया । ममार्चोपासनाभिर्वा नान्यैर्योग्यं स्मरेन्मन: । २४॥
When (however) a man feels averse to (all) actions (realizing their being attended with
evils of various kinds) and disgusted (with their fruit as a source of attachment and
consequently of misery), a Yogi should after fully controlling his senses (try to) concentrate
his mind so as to make it steady through repeated effort (at turning it towards the Self). (18)
When, (even) while it is being focussed (on the Self), it soon begins to wander (due to its
habitual vagrancy) and becomes unsteady (again), one should be on his alert and bring ॥
(back) under his control by recourse to the method of conciliation (in the form of granting it
a little freedom). (19) (Once it has been brought under control again) he should never allow
its movements to go unnoticed and, having controlled his breath and conquered his senses.
should reduce his mind to subjection by means of his intellect enriched with Saitva. (20)
(Just) as he who seeks (to secure) the obedience of a horse that has yet to be broken
succeeds In taming it (only) by following its will to some extent in the beginning, repeatedly
winning over the mind (by recourse to the method of conciliation) as aforesaid has been
declared to be (a ladder to) the highest Yoga. (21) With a clear knowledge of the ultimate
principles (enumerated by the Sankhya system of philosophy), he should constantly
contemplate in the order of creation the evolution, and in the reverse order the involution, of
all categories (from Mahat-tattva down to his own body) till his mind becomes still. (22) The
mind of a man averse to worldly activity of various kinds disgusted with the pleasures of this
world as well as of the next and ruminating on what has been taught by his preceptor gives
up its wickedness (in the form of attachment to the pleasures of sense) by repeatedly dwelling
upon what has (already) been ruminated upon (by him viz., the teachings of his preceptor).(23)
The mind should dwell on the Supreme Spirit (the only object worthy of thought) through
Yama (self-control) and other Yogic processes, through right knowledge in the form of an
inquiry into the essential unity of the individual soul and the Supreme Spirit or through
worship of My image or other representation (worthy of adoration), bul never by other
methods. (24)

यदि कुर्यात् प्रमादेन योगी ad विगर्हितम्। योगेनैव दहेदंहौ नान्यत्तत्र कदाचन । २५॥

स्वे स्वेऽधिकारे या निष्ठा स गुण: परिकीर्तित: । कर्मणां जात्यञजुद्धानामनेन नियम: कृत: |
गुणदोषविधानेन ASH त्याजनेच्छया । २६

जातश्रद्धो मत्कथासु निर्विण्ण: सर्वकर्मसु । वेद दु:खात्मकान् कामान् परित्यागेऽप्यनीश्वर: 1201

vat भजेत oot प्रीत: श्रद्धालुर्दृढनिश्चय: | जुषमाणश्च तान् कामान् दु:खोदर्काश्च गर्हयन् । २८॥
