16 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA-MAHATMYA [ Dis. 3

EMH GRIM REGC MESES YRC RE RIOT AOS ORE AE ROIOICECOI I Sti ICKOROR i tt Sot tot ts sore sae at rene aertn ttt १7 ६९ रा को नौ तं Re सा कीं

आशा ना AMINA नो ता च का ना SIA ARERR AEA TOS SAITO RETIRE क  eeeEe—eeeeems—ews—_—_——

The Kumaras replied: Listen, O Narada! We shall tell you (all) this, humble and discreet
as you are. Near Haridwara (the gateway of the holy Ganga, so-called because it enters the
plains here) on the river bank is a place known by the name of Ananda. (4) It is inhabited by
numerous hosts of Rsis and frequented by gods and Siddhas (who are endowed with mystic
powers by their very birth). (Nay,) it is crowded with various trees and creepers and
overspread with fresh and soft sands. (5) The place is charming (to look at) and situated in
a sequestered area. Itis (ever) charged with the sweet odour of golden lotuses. Animosity
(towards one another) does not abide in the mind of living beings dwelling near that place. (6)
A Jfiana-Yajia may be commenced there by you without taking any (special) pains (over it)
and (you will find that) the reading of Stimad Bhagavata there will be full of unprecedented
charm. (7) Bhakti too will appear there (in person) placing in the forefront the aforesaid pair
(viz., Jfiana and Vairagya), always lying before her devoid of (all) strength and with a body
worn out with age. (8) Bhakti and her two sons must reach there where a reading of Srimad
Bhagavata is going on. (Nay) the said trio gets rejuvenated as it were on hearing the words
of the story. (9)

सूत उवाच
एवमुक्त्वा कुमारास्ते नारदेन समं तत:। गङ्गातटं समाजग्मु: कथापानाय AEN: ।१०।
यदायातास्तटंतेतुतदाकोलाहलोऽप्यथूत्।क्लींकेदेवलोकेचब्रहालोकेतघैवच।शा।
श्रीभागवतपीयूषपानाय रसलम्पटा: | धावन्तोऽप्याययु: we प्रथमं ये च वैष्णवा: 1221
भृगुर्वसिष्ठर्च्यवनश्च गौतमो मेधातिथिर्देवलदेवरातौ |
रामस्तथा गाधिसुतश्च ञाकलो मृकण्डुपुत्रात्रिजपिप्पलादा: 1231
योगेश्वरौ व्यासपराशरौ च छायाशुको जाजलिजह्नुमुख्या: |
सर्वेऽप्यमी मुनिगणा: सहपुत्रशिष्या: स्वस्त्रीभिराययुरतिप्रणयेन युक्ता: ।१४॥
वेदान्तानि च वेदाश्च मन्त्रास्तन्रा: समूर्तय: । दशसप्तपुराणानि षद्शास्त्राणि तथाऽऽययु: ।१५॥
गङ्गाद्या: सरितस्तत्र पुष्करादिसरांसि च । क्षेत्राणि च दिश: सर्वा दण्डकादिवनानि च । १६।
नगादयो ययुस्तत्र देवगन्धर्वदानवा: | गुरुत्वात्तत्र नायातान्भृगु: सम्बोध्य चानयत् । १७॥

Sita resumed ; Having spoken thus, the aforesaid Kumaras with Narada went thence
together to that bank of the (holy) Ganga impatient to enjoy the story of Srimad Bhagavata.(10)
As they reached the bank there rose at once an uproar inthe terrestrial region and the realm
of the gods as well as in Satyaloka (the realm of Brahma, the creator). (11) All those who
were keen to enjoy the taste of the Lord's stories, and first of all the votaries of Lord Visnu
came running to drink the nectar-like story of Srimad Bhagavata. (12) The sages Bhrgu,
Vasistha and Cyavana, Gautama, Medhatithi, Devala, Devarata and Parasurama, even so
Vigwamitra (the son of Gadhi), Sakala, Markandeya (the son of Mrkandu), Lord Dattatreya
and Pippalada, Vyasa and (his father) Paragara, both masters of Yoga, Chayasuka and all
the hosts of sages, the foremost of whom were vajali and Jahnu, arrived alongwith their
wives, accompanied by their sons and pupils and full of excessive longing (to listen to the
story). (13-14) So came there the Upanisads and the Vedas, Mantras and Tantras, the
seventeen Puranas and the six Sastras (systems of philosophy), rivers such as the Ganga,
Puskara and the other lakes, holy places, all the (four) quarters, as well as Dandaka and the
other forests (all) in a living form. (15-16) Mountains etc., as well as gods, Gandharvas and
demons went there. The sage Bhrgu persuaded and brought there (even) those who did not
come because of their importance. (17)
