788 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 12

BREAK तीत्री ज LANNE ॐ EHH HECK फि LOOK EHTEL SSR EK EHE EER EN HAO ALOHA ONT छीतविजी-वीज HERA HEH eh
eee EEE ES See

Presently, in a garden (before Him) full of trees rich in blossoms of various kinds and rosy
leaves, He beheld a most beautiful damsel with a girdle lying about her hips, that were
wrapped with a brilliant piece of linen, delightfully sporting with the movements of a ball.(18)
She was so delicate that at every step she was getting broken as it were at the waist by the
heavy weight of her (full) breasts, shaken by her bending and rising (with the downward and
upward movements of the bounding ball), as well as of her exquisite (and solid) necklaces,
and was taking her nimble feet—tender as young leaves—to and fro.(19) The pupils of her
big and restless eyes looked very much agitated due to the unsteadiness of the ball, which
was moving in every direction, and her countenance made lovelier by cheeks resplendent
with a pair of ear-rings shining in her ears, as well as by dark tresses. (20) Tightening her
loosening garment and disturbed braid with her lovely left hand and striking the ball with the
other, she was enchanting the world by her own Maya (ravishing power). (21) Looking
intently at her, the divinity was seduced by her glances flung at Him with a covert smile
induced by slight bashfulness because of her playing with the ball as aforesaid. His mind
being overpowered by His gazing at her and being gazed on by her in return, He lost (all)
consciousness of Himself, of (His Consort ) Uma standing close by as well as of His own
attendants. (22) When, inthe meanwhile, the ball escaped from her fingers to along distance,
lo | the wind blew off the fine texture (wrapped about her loins) girdle and all, (even) as she
ran after the ball, while the god Siva (the Source of the universe) stood looking on. (23)
Beholding that fair-eyed and soul-ravishing girl, (so) beautiful to look at, in such a condition,
Lord Bhava actually gave His heart to her, who gazing at Him with sidelong glances (and
thus appeared to be enamoured of Him). (24) Deprived by her of His good sense and
overpowered with love evoked by her, He sought her presence unabashed even while
Goddess Parvati (His own divine Spouse) stood looking on.(25)

सा तमायान्तमालोक्य विवस्त्रा व्रीडिता भृशम्। निलीयमाना वृक्षेषु हसन्ती नान्वतिष्ठत 126!
तामन्वगच्छद् भगवान् भव: प्रमुषितेन्द्रिय: । कामस्य च वज्ञं da: करेणुमिव यूथप: 1201
सोऽनुव्रज्यातिवेगेन गृहीत्वानिच्छतीं fami ae उपानीय बाहुभ्याँ परिषस्वजे । २८|
सोपगूढा भगवता करिणा करिणी यथा।इतस्तत: sada विप्रकीर्णशिरोरुहा eet
आत्मानॆ मोचयित्वाङ्ग सुरर्षभभुजान्तरात्। प्राद्रवत्सा पृथुश्रोणी माया देवविनिर्मिता 1301
wert vedi रुद्रो विष्णोरद्भुतकर्मण: । प्रत्यपद्यत कामेन afte विनिर्जित: ।३१॥
तस्यानुधावतो रेतश्चस्कन्दामोघरेतस: | शुष्मिणो यूथपस्येव वासितामनु धावत: 1321
यत्र यत्रापतन्मह्यां रेतस्तस्य महात्मन:। तानि रूप्यस्य हेम्नश्च क्षेत्राण्यासन्महीपते 1331
Shear, हलेषु वनेषूपवनेषु च । यत्र क्व चासन्नृषयस्तत्र संनिहितो हर: ।३४॥
wea रेतसि सोऽपर्यदात्मानं देवमायया। जडीकृतं नृपश्रेष्ठ संन्यवर्तत कश्मलात्।३५॥
RMA आत्मनो जगदात्मन: | अपरिज्ञेयवीर्यस्य न मेने तदु हाद्भुतम् । ३६॥
मधुसूदन: | Sara परमप्रीतो बिभ्रत् स्वां पोरुषीं तनुम् ।३७॥ .
The girl, stripped as she was of her cloth, felt much ashamed when she beheld Siva
drawing near. Hiding behind the trees, she kept laughing, but did not tarry (anywhere). (26)
The almighty Siva, whose mind had been stolen (by that girl) and who was swayed by
passion, followed her (even) as the leader of a herd of elephants would follow a she-
elephant.(27) Pursuing the damsel with great speed and seizing her by braid, He brought her
close to Him and folded her in His arms (even) though she was unwilling. (28) Hugged by
the Lord (even) as a she-elephant is covered by an elephant, she wriggled on this side and
that (in order to escape from His grip), her hair getting dishevelled (in that attempt). (29)
