264 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 39
Notre ore

कान्र ककक Hee kheeeanrrer enna severest

Sri Suka began again : Having been comfortably seated on a couch and greatly
honoured by Balarama and Sri Krsna, Akrura actually realized all the aspirations that he
had entertained on his way (to Vraja). (1) What remains unattainable when the Lord,
who is the Abode of Sri (the goddess of beauty and prosperity) is pleased ? Nevertheless
those exclusively devoted to Him, O king, seek nothing as a matter of fact. (2) Having
finished His supper, Lord Sri Krsna (the Son of Devaki) enquired (of Akrira) about
the conduct of Karhnsa towards His kinsmen and what else was sought to be done by
Him. (3)

श्रीभगवानुवाच
तात Granta: कच्चित् स्वागतं भद्रमस्तु a । अपि स्वज्ञातिबन्धूनामनमीवमनामयम् । ४ ।
किं नु न: Se पृच्छे एधमाने कुलामये । कंसे मातुलनाम्न्यङ्ग स्वानां ARTA च । ५ |
aa अस्मदभूद् भूरि पित्रोर्वृजिनमार्ययो: । यद्धेतो: grat यद्धेतोर्बन्धनं तयो: । ६ ।
दिष्ट्याद्य दर्शनं स्वानां मह्यं a: सौम्य काङ्खितम् । सञ्जातं वर्ण्यतां तात तव्रागमनकारणम् । ७ ।

The giorious Lord said : O dear uncle, 0 gentle one, | hope you came safely (all the
way). May all be well with you ! | believe no outrage has been perpetrated (by the tyrant
Karhsa) against your friends, your kinsmen and other relations and good health

.is enjoyed by them all. (4) So long as Karnsa—who, though passing by the name of
my maternal uncle, is a (veritable) pestilence to my family—is thriving, O dear uncle,
what good indeed is our asking about the welfare of our kinsmen and their progeny ? (5)
Oh, (how) great has been the suffering of our noble parents for our sake; (for) it was due
to us that the death of their (other) sons took place and it was on account of us that
bondage was accepted by them. (6) Luckily (enough) has the sight of our kinsmen in
yourself, O gentle one, been vouchsafed today to us, by whom it was (long) coveted.
(Now) the motive of your visit (to Vraja), O dear uncle ! may (kindly) be communicated
(to us). (7)

श्रीगुक उवाच
पृष्टो भगवता wi वर्णयामास माधव:।वैरानुबन्थं यदुषु वसुदेववधोद्यमम् । ८ ।
adem यदर्थं वा दूत: संप्रेषित: Bagh नारदेनास्य स्वजन्मानकदुन्दुभे: । ९ ।
श्रुत्वाक्रूरवच: कृष्णो बलश्च परवीरहा । प्रहस्य नन्दुं feet राज्ञाऽऽदिष्टुं विजज्ञतु: ॥१०॥
गोपान् समादिशत् सोऽपि गृह्यतां सर्वगोरस: | उपायनानि गृह्णीध्वं युज्यन्तां शकटानि च 1११1
area: श्वो मधुपुरीं दास्यामो नृपते रसान्। seam: सुमहत् पर्व यान्ति जानपदा: किल ।
एवमाघोषयत् FM नन्दगोप: स्वगोकुले 1221

Sri Suka continued : Questioned by the Lord (as aforesaid), Akrura (a scion of Madhu)
related (to Him) everything, viz., the inveteracy of Karhsa’s enmity to the Yadus and his
attempt to kill Vasudeva, (also) with what message and for what purpose Akrdra himself had
been sent by Karhsa as his emissary and what was communicated to him by Narada
regarding His having been born of Anakadundubhi (Vasudeva). (8-9) Sri Krsna and Bala, the
slayer of hostile warriors heartily laughed to hear the message of Akrura and apprised Their
father, Nanda, of the king's command. (10) Nanda too duly instructed the Gopas (as
follows):— "Let all the yield of the cows (in the shape of milk, curds and clarified butter) be
collected. (Also) take (with you) presents (of various kinds) and let bullock-carts be got
ready.(11) We shall proceed tomorrow to Mathura (the city founded by the demon Madhu)
and (on arriving there) shall presentto the king delicious substances (such as milk, curds and
