772 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 9

ज्जी कज् री ङ कीकी ॐको ती कीं डीपितयित्छा कौ ARES HEHE CHEREE SHER LEAL EESCEED AEE HEME ASEH EAHA HH

प्रेक्षणीयोत्पलर्यामं सर्वावयवसुन्दरम् | समानकर्णाभरणं सुकपोलोन्नसाननम् ।४२॥
नवयौवननिर्वृत्तस्तनभारकृशोदरम् । मुखामोदानुरक्तालिझङ्कारोद्विमलोचनम् ।1४३॥
FAM स्वकेशभारेण मालामुत्फुल्लमल्लिकाम् | सुग्रीवकण्ठाभरणं सुभुजाङ्घदभूषितम् ।४४॥
विरजाम्बरसंवीतनितम्बद्बीपशोभया । काञ्च्या प्रविलसद्दल्गुचलच्चरणनूपुरम् ॥४५॥

सव्रीडस्मितविक्षिप्तभ्रूविलासावलोकनै: । दैत्ययूथपचेत:सु काममुद्दीपयन् मुहु: KEI

A quarrel arose in their ranks inter se, O king, their mind being seized with a thirst for
nectar. "| shail have it first, | shall have it first; not you, not you !" This is what they said to one
another. (38) "The gods, who have equally contributed to this consummation through (their)
exertion, deserve their share in this prize as much as in (the merit resulting from) a sacrificial
performance* undertaken by a community for common weal: such is the eternal law". (39)
In these words indeed did the weaker Daityas, in whom jealousy was aroused (by the
selfishness of the usurpers) repeatedly protest against the stronger ones, that had taken
possession of the jar, O Pariksit. (40) In the meantime Lord Visnu, who knows (all)
expedients, assumed the most amazing form of a damsel, which could not be described (in
words). (41) It was worth looking at intently, blue as an Utpala (a variety of lotuses) and
comely of every limb. Its well-matched ears were decked with ornaments (ear-rings); its face
was marked with lovely cheeks and a prominent nose. (42) It had a waist slender (as it were)
due to the weight of breasts fully developed as a mark of budding youth. Its eyes looked
frightened by the humming of black bees attracted by the fragrance of its mouth. (43) It bore
on its head of hair a wreath of full-blown Mallikas (a species of jasmine); its neck was
embellished with a necklace and the form was (further) graced with a pair of armlets worn
round its shapely arms.(44) (Nay,) it looked exceptionally charming due to its girdle that
added to the beauty of its broad hips covered by a loin-cloth which was spotless white; and
a pair of anklets adorned its feet that walked in a winsome manner.(45) (Again,) itincessantly
kindled passion in the breast of Daitya generals by its bashful smiles,dancing brows and
amorous glances.(46)

Thus ends the eighth discourse entitled "The manifestation (in a personal form) of the Lord's
(own) enchanting potency", in Book Eight of the great and glorious Bhagavata-Purana,
otherwise known as the Paramahamsa- Samhita.

Kak Psat Pet &
PISS is

अथ नवमोऽध्याय:

Discourse IX
Appearing in the form of Mohini (an enchanting damsel),
the Lord deals out nectar among the gods
ART उवाच
तेऽन्योन्यतोऽसुरा: पात्रं हरन्तस्त्यक्तसौहदा: | क्षिपन्तो दस्युधर्माण आयान्तीं aq: स्रियम् । १ ।
* A Satrayaga has been defined as below:—

कर्तारो वहवो यत्र हीज्यन्ते बहवस्तथा। वहुभ्यो दोयते यत्र त् सत्रमभिघीयते ॥
" & Satra is that in which there are a number of sacrificers and a number of deities to be worshipped and in which gifts

are bestowed on many."

