708 । SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 11

LSKHHHHRKEKASHAKEHCHHHEHAECEKR SHH HoH Se heehee enters Hheev eters aeee Knee eee Eee
ee SS SS BE ST ह Seer er ere ee Hr

living). (18) Gathering ears of corn left by the owner while reaping a harvest or gleaning
foodgrains lying scatteredina grain-market after the heaps have been sold off or removed
is called Rta (lit., right or true); that which is got unasked is called Amrta (nectar). Daily
begging (of foodgrains) is Mrta (death); while agriculture is called Pramrta (lit., greater
death, so-called because it involves the destruction of many living beings). (19) Trade is
(what goes by the name of) Satyanrta (a mixture of truth and falsehood); while service
rendered to those belonging to a lower grade is (what is meant by) a dog's living. A
Brahmana as well as a K§atriya should always shun this detested calling. (For) a
Brahmana is an embodiment of all the (four) Vedas, while a Ksatriya (lit., a ruler of men)
is the personification of all the gods. (20)

शमो दमस्तप: ee संतोष: क्षान्तिरार्जवम् । ज्ञानं दयाच्युतात्मत्वं सत्यं च ब्रह्मलक्षणम् । २१॥

aid dtd धृतिस्तेजस्याग आत्मजय: क्षमा । ब्रह्मण्यता प्रसादश्च रक्षा च क्षत्रलक्षणम् ।२२॥

देवगुर्वच्युते भक्तिस्रिवर्गपरिपोषणम् | आस्तिक्यमुद्यमो नित्यं नैषुणं वैश्यलक्षणम् 1231

शूद्रस्य संनति: ate सेवा स्वामिन्यमायया । अमन्त्रयज्ञो ह्यस्तेयं सत्यं गोविप्ररक्षणम् । २४॥

Control of mind and the senses, austerity (fasting etc.), purity (of body), contentment,

forgiveness, straightforwardness, wisdom (discrimination), compassion, devotion to the
immortal Lord (Visnu) and veracity are the characteristics of a Brahmana. (21) A martial
spirit, valour, fortitude, audacity, liberality, self-control, forgiveness, devotion to the Brahmana
race, benignity and protection (of the weak) constitute the characteristics of a Ksatriya. (22)
Devotion to the gods, to one's preceptor and to the immortal Lord (Visnu); promotion of the
three objects of human pursuit (viz., religious merit, worldly riches and sensual enjoyment);
belief in the existence of God, in life after death, and so on; constant exertion (for the
acquisition of wealth) and dexterity (in acquiring it) are the characteristics of a Vaigya. (23)
(And) submissiveness, purity, guilelessly ministering to one's master, performance of (the
five daily) sacrifices* unaccompanied by (the recitation of) Mantras (sacred texts),
non-thieving, truthfulness and protection of cows and the Brahmanas are indeed the
characteristics of a Sddra. (24)

स्रीणां च पतिदेवानां ततच्छुश्रूषानुकूलता itedsdas fred तद्ब्रतधारणम् । २५॥

संमार्जनोपलेपाभ्यां गृहमण्डलवर्तनै: । स्वयं च मण्डिता fret परिमृष्टपरिच्छदा 1261

कामैरुच्चावचै: साध्वी प्रश्रयेण दमेन च । वाक्यै: सत्यै: प्रियै: प्रेम्णा काले काले भजेत् पतिम् । 219 |

संतुष्टालोलुपा दक्षा धर्मज्ञा प्रियसत्यवाक | अप्रमत्ता शुचि: स्निग्धा पतिं त्वपतितं भजेत् । २८॥

या uff हसिभिवेन भजेच्छीरिव तत्परा। हर्यात्मना Refs पत्या श्रीरिव मोदते । २९1

And the duty of women devoted to their husband (lit., looking upon their husband as a

deity) is to serve him, to do good offices to him, to humour his relations and constantly to
observe his sacred vows. (25) Herself remaining adorned and keeping her utensils etc., well-
scoured at all times, a virtuous wife should serve her husband by thoroughly sweeping her
house and plastering it (with cow-dung etc.), by drawing auspicious diagrams and spherical
designs (on the floor with colours), through sense-objects—great and small—desired by
him, through modesty and control of the senses, through truthful and agreeable words and
(above all) through love at opportune moments. (26-27) Contented (with her resources) and

* The Sastras have made it obligatory for a Sddra to perform the five daily sacrifices, reciting the name of the gods etc.,
to whom oblations are offered in the dative case and adding the word ‘Namah (Hail !) instead of ‘Swaha‘ after it (as '‘Agnaye
Namah', (Hail to the god of fire!). Says the law-qiver Yajfiavalkya:—  नमस्कारेण मन्त्रेण पञ्चयज्ञान् न हापयेत।
