Dis. 46 ] BOOK TEN 237

SRE re ene re CREE CEE EE EP POTEET RF न २७ २२२ SAR REELS HENAN IE RR

connected with their body and have mentally taken refuge in Me alone, their beloved friend,
the highest object of their affection, their very Self. । stand (through thick and thin) by those
that have not only given up their interests in this as well as in the other world but have also
setat naught their moral obligations for my sake. (4) |—the most beloved of (all) their beloved
objects—being at a distance from them, the women of Vraja, O dear Uddhava, remain
forgetful of everything (including their own self), thinking (constantly as they do) of me, and
overwhelmed with intense longing occasioned by separation (from me). (5) With their mind
absorbed in me the cowherd women are in most cases somehow propping up their life with
great difficulty on my assurances of coming back (to Vraja).” (6)
i af

इत्युक्त उद्ध्वो राजन् संदेशं भर्तुरादृत: । आदाय रथमारुह्य प्रययौ नन्दगोकुलम् । ७ |

प्राप्तो नन्द्व्रजं श्रीमान् निम्लोचति विभावसौ । छन्नयान: प्रविशतां पद्यूनां खुररेणुभि: । ८ ।

वासितार्थेऽभियुध्यद्भिर्नादितं शुष्मिभिर्वृषै: । धावन्तीभिश्चवास्राभिरूधोभारै: स्ववत्सकान्। ९ |

इतस्ततो विलङ्घद्भिर्गोवत्सैर्मण्डितं सितै: । गोदोहशब्दाभिरवं वेणूनां नि:स्वनेन च । १०॥

फ्यात्तौभिश्चक्मष्णिशुभानिबलकृष्णयो:।स्वल्ङ्कुत्ताभिर्गंप्सिधिर्गौपै- भिर्गोपैश्च सुविराज्ञितम् ।११।

अग्न्यर्कातिथिगोवित्रपितृदेवार्चनान्वितै: । धूपदीपैश्च माल्यैश्च गोपावासैर्मनोरमम् 122

. सर्वत:र पुष्पितवनं द्विजालिकुलनादितम् । हंसकारण्डवाकीर्णै: पद्मषण्डैश्च मण्डितम् । 231
Sri Suka continued : Thus instructed (by the Lord) and mounting a chariot Uddhava

drove to Nanda’s Gokula (a station of cowherds) carrying the message of his Master (Sri
Krsna) with (great) reverence. (7) The blessed one reached Nanda’‘s Vraja while the sun was
(just) setting, his chariot obscured with the dust raised by the hoofs of cattle that were
entering Vraja (at that very moment). (8) The place was rendered noisy by bulls in rut
contending with one another for the sake of cows in heat and by cows rushing to meet their
(respective) calves though oppressed with the weight of their udders. (9) (Nay,) itwas graced
with white calves capering here and there as well as with the music of flutes and was full of
noise, on all sides, accompanied with the sound of the milking of cows. (1 0) Again, it shone
most resplendent with cowherd women richly adorned and singing the noble deeds of
Balarama and Sri Krsna, as well as with cowherds. (11) The place ravished the mind with
its dwellings of cowherds characterized by the worship of sacred fires, the sun-god,
newcomers, cows, Brahmanas, the manes and gods as well as with frankincense (that was
being burnt there), and lights and garlands (with which the houses were decorated). (12) It
abounded in grovesin full blossom on all sides and was rendered noisy with the notes of birds
and the humming of black bees and was graced with beds of lotuses crowded with swans
and Karandavas (a species of ducks). (13)

aad समागम्य कृष्णस्यानुचरं प्रियम्।नन्द: प्रीत: oh वासुदेवधिचार्चवत् । १४॥

aid परमान्नेन संविष्टं a सुखम्।गतश्रमं पर्यपृच्छत् पादसंवाहनादिभि: ।१५॥

कच्चिदङ् महाभाग wet न: शूरनन्दन: | आस्ते कुशल्यपत्याद्यैर्युक्तो मुक्त: सुहृद्वृत: 1१६1

दिष्ट्या केसो हत: पाप: सानुग: स्वेन पाप्मना । साधूनां धर्मशीलानां यदूनां द्वेष्टि a: सदा 1१७॥

अपि स्मरति a: कृष्णो मातरं सुहृद: सखीन्। गोपान् व्रजं चात्मनाथं गावो वृन्दावनं गिरिम् । १८॥

अप्यायास्यति गोविन्द: स्वजनान् सकृदीक्षितुम् ae द्रक्ष्याम तद्वक्त्रं सुनसं सुस्मितेक्षणम् । १९।

दावाग्रेर्वातवर्षाच्च वृषसर्पाच्च रक्षिता: । दुरत्ययेभ्यो मृत्युभ्य: कृष्णेन सुमहात्मना । २०।

erat कृष्णवीर्वाणि लीलापाङ्गनिरीक्षितम् । हसितं भाषितं arg सर्वा न: शिथिला: क्रिया: 122 |
