Dis. 9 ] BOOK SIX 597

.३.३.३.३.३.३.३.३ ३.३.३..६..७.६.७.३.॥.३.३.३.७.७..७.३.३.३.३.३.३.३.३.३.३.७.७-2-2१.०.3.४.३.३.४.३ Me Fe Me SMe Ee RT eH We Ve Br MOT Ee eH He HEE RS TORE NOME Fe Hr He He

as the realization of the Bliss inherent in the Self and revealed of itself in the region of the
Self when the gate leading to it the shape of the mind is opened consequent on the door of
ignorance being set aside through the practice of Devotion to the Lord (the religion of the
Paramahamsas—ascetics of the highest order), which is awakened and realized by
ascetics and recluses by means of supreme concentration of mind through meditation on
the Self.(33) Devoid of (any) support, bodiless and transcendent as You are, You create,
preserve and destroy this qualified universe by Your own Self, undergoing no transformation;
and not expecting (any) co-operation from us (the deities presiding over the arm and other
organs of action, the seats of strength etc.) ! The course of this pastime of Yours is really
something difficult to understand. (34) Moreover, we donot actually know whether, entering
(the various) bodies (which are products of the three Gunas). You (as a Jiva) helplessly reap
the good and evil consequences of Your own actions, just as a Devadatta builds a house
on his earth and experiences joy and sorrow there, or whether, revelling in Your Self and
given to self-control and with an unruffled consciousness You remain (only) a witness. (35)
Really speaking, the two alternatives are not incompatible in You, the almighty and absolute
Lord, possessing countless varieties of excellences and unfathomable greatness, (nay,)
transcending all phenomena (which are the products of Maya) and (therefore) beyond the
range of controversies of theorists holding perverse views due to their mind being
bewildered by (so-called) scriptures full of doubts, enquiries, hypotheses, specious argu-
ments and sophisms not even touching the fringe of truth. In fact, what predicate is there
which cannot be conveniently applied to You, who stand placing by Your side (as Your
handmaid) Your own Maya (which is capable of bringing even the impossible into the region
of possibility), while both (the aforesaid) alternatives are absent in Your (absolute)
essence.(36) Just as a piece of rope assumes the shape of a serpent and so on in the eye
of those who are prepossessed by the idea of snake and the like, so You appear in Your true
perspective (as Brahma, that is Truth, Consciousness and Bliss combined) to those
endowed with a balanced (correct) judgment, and what You are not to those of a deluded
understanding. Again, You are the only truthin all phenomena, the universal Lord, the cause
of causes (viz., Mahat-tattva etc.), of the entire universe. Your presence is clearly indicated
by the illuminating power of the intellect, senses and soon (which are products of matter and
therefore unable to shed any light except when inspired by You), since You are the Inner
Controller of all the Jivas; (nay,) You are the only entity left over (when everything else has
been negated by the Sruti as ‘not this’, ‘not this’ and so on). (37-38) Under such circum-
stances, then, O Slayer of Madhu, how can these saintly and supreme votaries of Yours—
who are exclusively devoted to You and look upon You alone as their beloved friend, nay,
who are adept in achieving their (highest) object—even think of actually giving up the
constant service of your lotus-feet, on clinging to which further revolution in the whirlpool of
transmigration ceases. For, due to the never-ceasing (stream of) joy flowing copiously into
their mind from a (mere) drop of the sweet ocean of Your nectar-like glory, tasted (but) once,
they are made to forget the small bits of seeming delights of sense, whether (actually) enjoyed
or heard of (as enjoyed in heaven), their mind finding incessant and excessive delight in (You,)
the almighty Lord, the Soul of the universe and (therefore) the beloved friend of all living
beings. (39) O Soul and Abode of (all) the three worlds, O Lord who wield Your power over
the three worlds and whose glory captivates the mind of (the inhabitants of) the three worlds,
O Guide of the three worlds ! (to say nothing of gods, Rsis and other beings,) even the Daityas
(the sons of Diti) and Danavas (the sons of Danu) are Your own glorious manifestations. (Yet,)
considering that this is not an (opportune) time for their (nefarious) activities (which are called
for only at the time of universal destruction), You have (in the past), O Wielder of the rod of
punishment, meted out punishment (to them) according to (the degree of gravity of) their
offence, manifesting Yourself through Your own Maya (will-power) in the form of gods (e.g.,
that of Vamana), human being (such as Sri Rama and Balarama), beasts (such as the divine
Boar), half men and half beasts (such as Nrsimha and Hayagriva) and aquatic creatures
(such as the divine Fish and Tortoise). In the same way, O Lord! (pray,) get rid of the yonder
