Dis. 23] BOOK EIGHT । 829
Brie it trite th .६ ३ ३ ३ .३.३.३.३.३.३.३ 8 22१2 2१2 223 व व दि त्छिनतिनि BORDERED EE I  IRRe H
Sot rh rt tt tert toi trier tre rite ttre वित्

king ! (85) Any demoniac idea suggesting itself to you there due to the company of Danavas and
Daityas will be undoubtedly checked at once at the sight of My glory and die out. (36)

Thus ends the twenty-second discourse entitled "A dialogue between king
Bali and Lord Vamana",comprised in the story of the descent
of the divine Dwarf, in Book Eight of the great and
glorious Bhagavata-Purana, otherwise known
as the Paramahamsa-Samhita.

at £5 ५
PICT Sie

अथ त्रयोविंशोऽध्याय:

Discourse XXIll

Freed from bondage, Bali enters the region of Sutala
बद्धाञ्जलिर्बाष्पकलाकुलेक्षणो weet weet गिराब्रवीत् । १ |
Sri Suka resumed : To Lord Visnu (the most ancient Person in the disguise of a dwar),
who had spoken thus, the magnanimous Bali, who was esteemed by all pious souls,

submitted with joined palms and ina faltering voice (as follows), his eyes dimmed with drops
of tears and his throat choked (with emotion). (1)

अहो प्रणामाय कृत: समुद्यम: प्रपन्नभक्तार्थविधौ समाहित: ।

Bali said : Oh, a (mere) sincere effort made to bow low (at Your feet) is (found) intent
on (capable of) securing (even to people like me, who can never claim to be Your devotees)
the boon sought for by devotees that have sought You (for protection). For by that (very)
endeavour has been vouchsafed to a vile demon (full of Rajas like me)that (unique) favour
of Yours which was never obtained before (even) by the guardians of the (various) worlds
and (other) gods (who are eminently Sattvika by nature). (2)

श्रीशुक उवाच
इत्युक्त्वा हरिमानम्य ब्रह्माणं सभवं तत:। विवेश सुतलं प्रीतो बलिर्मुक्त: सहासुरै: । ३ ।
wars भगवान् प्रत्यानीय त्रिविष्टपम्। पूरयित्वादिते: काममशासत् सकलं जगत् । ४ |
लब्धप्रसादं निर्मुक्तं पौत्रं deat बलिम्। fama भक्तिप्रवण: yee इदमब्रवीत् । ५ ।

Sri Suka continued : Having spoken thus and -bowed low to Sri Hari (disguised as a
dwarf) and then to Brahma (the creator) along with Lord Siva (the Source of the universe),
Bali, who was (now) free (from bondage) and full of delight, got ready to retire to Sutala (the
third region below the earth), accompanied by the (other) demons (too). (3) Having thus
restored (the kingdom of) heaven to Indra and fulfilled the desire of Aditi (Indra's mother as

well as His own), the Lord ruled over the (whole) universe (as a younger brother and protector
of Indra). (4) Seeing his grandson, Bali, who maintained the thread of his line, free from all
