830 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 23
HECKER EEE

PREAH EREAERAAE SERA LELERHE EEEHELE ESHA EEEEEEMEREEEHANES SHH See eS

bondage and a recipient of the Lord's grace, Prahrada, who was steeped in Devotion, spoke
(to the Lord) as follows. (5)
प्रह्राद उवाच

नैमं fait owt see न श्रीर्न oad: किमुतापरे ते ।
यन्नोऽसुराणामसि दुर्गपालो «= fanfare वन्दिताङ्ध्रि: । ६ ।
यत्पादपद्ममकरन्दनिषेवणेन ब्रह्मादय:र ङरणदाश्नुवते विभूती: ।
कस्माद् वयं कुसृतय: खलयोनयस्ते दाक्षिण्यदृष्टिपदवीं भवत: प्रणीता: । ७ ।
fat तवेहितमहोऽमितयोगमायालीलाविसृष्टभुवनस्य विशारदस्य ।
सर्वात्मन: wage विधम: स्वभावो भक्तप्रियौयदसि’कल्यतरुस्वभाव:।क्ष्य
Prahrada submitted : To think that You, whose feet are adored even by those (Brahma,
Siva and others) that deserve the adoration of the universe, should play the governor * of a
. fortto us demons | Neither Brahma (the creator) nor Sri (Your divine Spouse) nor (even) Lord
Siva (the Destroyer of the universe) has (ever) won such (unique) grace; how, then, could
those others (Indra and so on) do so? (6) (It is) by virtue of (their) addiction to the honey of
Your lotus-feet (that guardians of the various worlds such as) Brahma and others enjoy
opulence and powers (of various kinds), O Lord affording shelter to all | (Such being the
case,) we are at aloss to understand wherefore we, those born ofa wicked race and following
evil ways should have been made the recipients of Your gracious look (kindness). (7) Oh,
in Your case—who have released the (different) worlds through the sportful activity of Your
inconceivable creative energy, are omniscient, nay, the (very) Self of all and (therefore)
regard all with the same eye—a discriminating disposition, in the sense that You are fond of
Your devotees (alone), isa wonderful gesture. (But) You (only) exhibit (thereby) the essential
characteristic of a wish-yielding tree (which fulfils the desire of only those who betake
themselves to it and cannot therefore be justly accused of partiality). (8)

श्रीभगवानुवाच
वत्स Wee we a प्रयाहि सुतलालयम्।मोदमान: स्वपोत्रेण ज्ञातीनां सुखमावह । ९ |
नित्यं द्रष्टासि मां तत्र गदापाणिमवस्थितम्। मद्दर्शनमहाह्लादध्वस्तकर्मनिबन्धन: ।१०॥
The glorious Lord replied : Prahrada dear, may all be well with you ! Depart to
(the subterranean region of) Sutala and, rejoicing (there) with your grandson (Bali), bring
delight to your kinsfolk.(9) You will always behold Me stationed there, mace in hand; (and)

you will have your ignorance (the root of all Karma) wiped out by the infinite joy induced by
My sight. (10)

श्रीशुक उवाच
आज्ञां भगवतो राजन् प्रह्रादो बलिना wel बाढमित्यमलप्रज्ञो yeaa कृताञ्जलि: ।११॥
परिक्रम्यादिपुरुषं सर्वासुरचमूपति: । प्रणतस्तदनुज्ञात॥ प्रविवबेशा महाबिलम् । १२॥

अथाहोशनसं राजन् हरिर्नारायणोऽन्तिके | आसीनमृत्विजां मध्ये सदसि ब्रह्मवादिनाम् 1231
FER संतनु शिष्यस्य कर्मच्छिद्रं वितन्वत: । यत् तत् कर्मसु वैषम्यं ब्रह्मदृष्टं समं भवेत् । १४॥
Sri Suka went on: Accepting the Lord's commandin the word’A men, and bowing down

to Him with joined palms, O Pariksit, Prahrada of sinless mind, the generalissimo of all the
Asura forces, walked round the most ancient Person (as a mark of reverence) and, permitted

* Vide verse 35 of Discourse XXII supra.
