172 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 9

Bete tr Br क्त wre ee ee eA He HEH HOVERS K KC CEM RHEM HEHE कजा जी य त्वा जी कैहाशाक्ये जो ककजा HSC HEH HARSHER He

of diversity stands eternally swallowed by the very effulgence of Your Being, the abode of
wisdom. My obeisance to You, the Supreme Person, Youtake delight in the sportful activities
of Maya, who is responsible for the creation, preservation and dissolution of the universe.
| have, therefore, made obeisance to You, the Ruler of the universe. (14) They who utter Your
names, signifying Your descent, virtues and exploits, even in an unconscious state at the
moment of death, are immediately rid of their sins of many lives and attain (oneness with)
Brahma, who shines beyond the veil of Maya. |, therefore, take refuge in You, who are
unborn. (15) Obeisance tothe Lord manifesting Himself (at the time of creation) as the tree
of this universe, which evolves from Prakrti—that has its root, again, in the Lord Himself—
Splitting it up into the three Gunas (Rajas, Sattva and Tamas), and appearing first of all as
its three trunks, viz., myself (Brahma), Lord Visnu Himself and Lord Siva (who dwells on
Mount Kailasa)—who are severally responsible for the creation, preservation and dissolu-
tion of the universe—and thereafter grows into numerous boughs and branches (viz., the
various lords of created beings, Manus and so on). (16) Your worship has been declared by
Yourself as a man's duty yielding happy results. But neglecting this duty, man remains
(mostly) engagedin prohibited acts. Time, however, which is most powerful and vigilant too,
cuts off ina moment his hope of survival. As a matter of fact, itis You who appear in the form
of Time; my obeisance is, therefore, due to You. (17) Even |, who preside over the Satyaloka
(the highest heaven), that endures for two Parardhas (the allotted span of Brahma's life) and
is adored by all the other spheres, am afraid of Time. It was with the object of attaining You
(and thus securing immunity from the ravages of Time) that | practised austere penance for
many years. My obeisance to You, who preside over all sacrifices. (18) (Being ever satisfied
by Your own blissful nature) You have no craving for sense-delights. Yet, with a view to
maintaining the standards of morality and virtue established by Yourself, You have voluntarily
assumed forms in different species of life, such as birds, beasts, human beings, gods and
others ! My salutation to You, the divine Purusottama (the Supreme Person). (19) Though
untainted by Avidya (nescience) which appears in five forms (viz., Avidya or fundamental
ignorance, Asmita or egotism, Raga or attraction, Dwesa or aversion and AbhiniveSa or the
fear of death), You have enjoyed sleep in the midst of water tossed by fearful waves—a sleep
which has proved delightful to You on account of the (soft) touch of the serpent (Lord Sesa),
who serves as abed for You—having deposited all the worlds in Your belly, thereby illustrating
the relief which a man enjoys during sleep (or allowing a respite to the Jivas from ceaseless
exertion during successive births for a whole Kalpa consisting of 4,32,00,00,000 human
years). (20) It is from the lotus sprung from Your navel, O praiseworthy Lord, that | have
emerged and itis by Your grace that | have secured this opportunity of serving the three worlds
by creating them. You kept the universe (as a safe deposit) in Your belly for such a long time
(a whole Kalpa) and Your lotus eyes have just opened, indicating thereby that Your sleep in
the form of abstract meditation has come to an end. I, therefore, make obeisance to You. (21)
You are the sole well-wisher and friend, nay, the very Self (Inner Controller) of all animate and
inanimate beings and the lover of the suppliant. Therefore, pray, endow my vision (understand-
ing) with the same wisdom and supernatural power by which You delight the universe, so that
| may be able to create this universe as it existed in the preceding Kalpa. (22) You grant the
wishes of those who take refuge in You. Therefore, when | proceed to create the universe,
which will be nothing but an exhibition of Your own creative power, be pleased to fill my mind
with (the thought of) each and every exploit You may perform in course of the descents You
take along with Your own divine Energy, Goddess Rama, manifesting many a divine virtue,
so that | may remain untainted by the impurities (in the shape of egotism etc.) attaching to
the work of creation. (23) | am the deity presiding over the Mahat-tattva, which represents
Your power of understanding, one of the innumerable powers possessed by You, and sprang
