Dis. 3] ` BOOK NINE

eee ee See ete rene EHKER KSEE ल्कक ths settee EAHA

सुकन्या प्राह पितरं भीता किञ्चित् कृतं मया । द्वे ज्योतिषी अजानन्त्या निर्भिन्ने कण्टकेन वै । ७ ।
दुहितुस्तत् वच: श्रुत्वा शर्यातिर्जातसाध्वस: । मुनिं प्रसादयामास वल्मीकान्तर्हितं wi 1 ८ |
तदभिप्रायमाज्ञाय प्रादाद् दुहितरं मुने: । कृच्छ्रान्मुक्तस्तमामन्त्य पुरं प्रायात् समाहित: । ९ ।

Sr Suka resumed ; King Saryati, another son of Vaivaswata Manu, they say, was a
master of the (highest) Truth, forming the subject-matter of the Vedas. It was he who
authoritatively advised the ritualistic course of the second day at the sacrifice performed by
the scions ofthe sage Angira. (1) His daughter, Sukanya by name, had eyes beautiful as
apair of lotuses. Gone to the forest (one day) with that girl indeed, he happened to visit the
hermitage of the sage Cyavana. (2) (While) remarking the trees in a grove (ofthe hermitage),
surrounded (accompanied) by her girl companions, she perceived in the hole of an ant-hill
a pair of bright things like two fire-flies. (3) Impelled by destiny, the girl in her childish
innocence actually pricked the two bright things with a thorn and (lo!) a good deal of blood
flowed from them. (4) That very moment there ensued on this side the obstruction of stool
and urine among the troops (that had escorted the king to that place). Astonished to discover
this (phenomenon) the roval sage spoke to his men (as follows):—(5) "Has any injury been
wrought by you to the sage Cyavana (son of Bhrgu) ? Obviously his hermitage has been
profaned by someone amongst us.” (6) Seized with fear, Sukanya (Saryati's daughter)
submitted to her father, "Something (wrong) has been done by me. Ignorant as । was, two
bright things have certainly been pierced by me with a thorn." (7) Fear having been roused
in him, on hearing that report (confession of his daughter), King Saryati gradually propitiated
the sage buried underneath an ant-hill. (8) Coming to know (from the drift of the sage's talk)
of the latter's mind, the king gave away (the hand of ) his daughter to the sage. Saved from
the scrape (thereby), he asked leave of the sage and returned to his capital more cautious
than before. (9)

सुकन्या च्यवनं प्राप्य oof omer sara चित्तज्ञा अप्रमत्तानुवृत्तिभि: 1201
कस्यचित् त्वथ कालस्य नासत्यावाश्रमागतौ at पूजयित्वा प्रोवाच वयो मे दत्तमीश्वरौ ee!
अहं Tee सोमस्य चज्ञे वामप्यसोमपो: | क्रियतां मे वयो रूपं प्रमदानां यद्मीप्सितम् ।१२॥
बाढमित्यूचतुर्विप्रमभिनन्द्य भिषक्तमौ | fost भवानस्मिन् ge सिद्धविनिर्मिते । १३॥
इत्युक्वा जरया ग्रस्तदेहो धमनिसन्तत:। Be प्रवेशितोऽश्विभ्यां बलीपलितविप्रिय: ।१४॥
पुरुषास्रय उत्तस्थुरपीच्चा वनिताप्रिया: । पद्मस्रज: कुण्डलिनस्तुल्यरूपा: सुवासस: ।१५॥
am निरीक्ष्य वरारोहा सरूपान् सूर्यवर्चस: | अजानती off साध्वी अश्विनौ जरणं ययो । १६|
दर्शयित्वा uff तस्यै पातिव्रत्येन तोषितो afer ययतुर्विमानेन त्रिविष्टपम् eet

Having obtained the most irascible sage Cyavana for her husband, Princess Sukanya,
who had come to know his mind, and was (very) careful (too), tried to please him with her
services. (10) After the lapse of some time hence, the two Aéwinikumaras (the celestial
physicians) called at his hermitage. Receiving them with respect, the sage submitted,
"Capable as you are, (pray) bestow youth on me. (11) I shall bear you both a cup of that juice,
éven though (I know) you are not entitled to a potation of the Soma juice ina sacrifice. Be
pleased (therefore) to make my age and exterior such as may be coveted by young
women."(12) Gladly accepting his prayer with the word "Amen" the two foremost physicians
(of the gods) said to the Brahmana (the sage Cyavana) "Plunge you into this pool created
by the Siddhas.” (13) Cyavana, whose body was stricken with old age and who was covered
all over with (protuberant) veins, (nay) who was forbidding on account of his wrinkles and
grey hair, was made to enier the pool by the twin ASwintkumaras, after they had spoken in
