Dis. 4] BOOK ELEVEN 531

जगजा EE ee eR ee PE eR ERE EO CORT

maintenance of Dharma among the twice-born and for giving the fruit of sacrifices; endowed
with Tamas He appeared as Rudra for the destruction of the universe. Through these
(Brahma, Visnu and Rudra) proceed the creation, preservation and destruction of the
creatures in each Kalpa. (5)

ada दक्षदुहितर्यजनिष्ट qai नारायणो at ऋषिप्रवर: प्रशान्त: ।

नैष्कर्म्यलक्षणमुवाच aan ad योऽद्यापि ona ऋषिवर्यनिषेविताङ्घ्रि: । ६ ।

इन्द्रो विशङ्क्य मम धाम जिघृक्षतीति कामं न्ययुङ्क्त सगणं स बदर्युपाख्यम् ।

गत्वाप्सरोगणवसन्तसुमन्दवातै: स्वीप्रेक्षणेषुभिरविध्यदतन्महिज्ञ: । ७ ।

विज्ञाय ङाक्रकृतमक्रममादिदेव: प्राहं प्रहस्य गतविस्मय WAM

मा भैष्ट भो मदन मारुत देववध्वो गृह्णीत नो बलिमशुन्यमिमं कुरुध्वम् । ८ ।

He was born as the foremost of the Rsis, possessed of perfect tranquillity, viz., Narayana
and Nara, of Murti, daughter of Daksa and wife of Dharma. They preached that kind of action
(viz., worship of the Lord) which leads to the knowledge of the Self and themselves practised
it. Their feet are worshipped by the best of Rsis and even today They (Nara-Narayana) are
performing that (very) action. (6) Suspecting that the sage (Narayana) desired to take
possession of his domain (heaven), Indra sent Kamadeva (the god of love) with his
attendants to Badarikasrama (which owed its name to its grove of jujube trees). Kamadeva
did not know His prowess and he went there with a bevy of celestial nymphs, soft breezes
and the spring season, and tried to disturb His mind with the arrow-like amorous glances of
the women. (7) Narayana, knowing that Indra had done that misdeed, loudly laughed and
without astonishment or haughtiness said to the trembling visitors, “O (powerful) Kamadeva,
0 wind-god and celestial damsels ! do not be afraid. Accept our hospitality and fill this
hermitage by your presence.” (8)

ya ब्रुवत्यभयदे नरदेव देवा: सव्रीडनम्रशिरस: सघृणं तमूचु: ।
नैतद् विभो त्वयि परेऽविकृते विचित्रं स्वारामधीरनिकरानतपादपद्मे । ९ ।
त्वां सेवतां सुरकृता बहवोऽन्तराया: स्वौको विलङ्घ्य परमं व्रजतां पदं ते ।
नान्यस्य बर्हिषि बलीन् ददत: स्वभागान् धत्ते पदं त्वमविता यदि विघ्नमूर्नि । १०
रे केचित् ।
क्रोधस्य यान्ति विफलस्य ast पदे ahaha दुश्चर्तपश्च वृथोत्सृजन्ति ।११॥
sf प्रगृणतां तेषां स्वियोऽत्यद्भुतदर्शना: । दर्शयामास geet afin: कुर्वतीर्विभु: । १२।
a देवानुचरा ger faa: श्रीरिव रूपिणी: । गन्धेन मुमुहुस्तासां रूपोदार्यहतश्रिय: 1231
तानाह देवदेवेश: प्रणतान् प्रहसन्निव। आसामेकतमां वृङ्ध्वं सवर्णां स्वर्गभूषणाम् । १४॥
ओमित्यादेशमादाय नत्वा तं सुरवन्दिन: । उर्वशीमप्सर:श्रेष्ठां पुरस्कृत्य fea ययु: ।१५॥
इन्द्रायानम्य सदसि शृण्वतां त्रिदिवौकसाम् । ऊचुर्नारायणबलं हाक्रस्तत्रास विस्मित: ।१६॥
Oking! when Narayana made them fearless and spoke thus, (Kamadeva and) the (other)
gods bent their heads with shame, and said to the merciful Lord, "If You remained unaffected
(by the attacks of Kamadeva) itis no matter for surprise, as You are beyond Maya and subject
tono change. Your lotus-feet are adored by hosts of sages who have conquered their senses
and revel in the Self. (9) When persons worshipping You transcend the region of the gods
and rise to Your supreme Abode, deities put many obstacles in their path. But the other one

is not (So) obstructed—he who offers to the deities their shares in the form of oblations into
the sacred fire. (Yet,) You being the Protector, the devotee tramples over all obstacles. (10)
