Dis. 19 ] BOOK ONE 81

प्नंप्रेर्घोघेघेगेध्रेग्रेगेषींर्णैध्रेश्रंर्थेषींधंघ्रेगेश्वेगींध्रेर्पोप्रेधंभेथैळीगेगेध्रंष्टांघंच्चै’च्चैर्गौर्षार्णैग्रैर्थेच्चिघ्रेशेथेर्णंर्णंर्णंगैग्नेशंभांथेर्णंर्णंप्रेषींर्द्धर्णंर्शेघ्रंघेधंगर्भंगैध्रेधंघ्नंघंषींर्धस्मिँग्रैग्रैर्व्यधंर्पाभेध्रेर्णै॰

The king said : We are the most blessed of all monarchs, possessing as we do
a character which has deserved the grace of the noblest souls. Alas ! the race of kings
(the ruling class) is generally far removed from (deprived of the privilege of bearing on
their head) the water in which the feet of the Brahmanas have been washed: their doings
are so reproachful. (13) TO me, so sinful and ever so deeply attached to the home, the
Lord Himself, who is the Ruler of the entire universe, has come in the form of a
Brahmana’s curse, that has aroused in me a feeling of aversion to worldly enjoyments;
for under such a curse one who is deeply attached to the world speedily develops
dispassion. (14) May the Brahmanas (assembled here) as well as goddess Ganga know
me as a devotee who has approached them for protection, having fixed his mind on the
Lord. Urged by the Brahmana, let someone who has cunningly assumed the form of
Taksaka or Taksaka himself bite me at will. Meanwhile | implore you to sing the stories
of Lord Visnu. (15) Bowing once more to you, the Brahmanas, | pray : in every birth |
take hereafter may | be blessed with devotion to the immortal Lord Sri Krsna, strong
attachment for noble souls depending on Him and friendship for all. (16)

इति स्म राजाध्यवसाययुक्त: प्राचीनमूलेषु कुशेषु धीर: ।
उदङ्मुखो दक्षिणकूल आस्ते समुद्रपत्या: स्वसुतन्यस्तभार: ।१७॥
एवं च तस्मिन्नरदेवदेवे प्रायोपविष्टे दिवि देवसङ्घा: ।
प्रशस्य भूमौ व्यकिरन् प्रसूनैर्मुदा मुहुर्दुन्दुभयश्च नेदु: ।१८॥
महर्षयो वै समुपागता ये प्रशस्य साध्वित्यनुमोदमाना: |
ऊचु: प्रजानुग्रहशीलसारा यदुत्तमश्लोकगुणाभिरूपम् । १९।

Thus resolved, and having placed the kingly responsibilities on the shoulders of
his own eldest son (Janamejaya), the wise king sat down on the southern bank of the
Ganga (a spouse of the deity presiding over the oceans), on the blades of Kusa with
their roots turned to the east, himself facing the north. (17) When that king of kings
(Emperor Pariksit ) had thus taken his seat with a vow to fasting till death, hosts of
gods in heaven shouted applause and joyfully rained down flowers on him on the earth,
while drums were sounded again and again. (18) The great Rsis who had assembled
there were benevolent to the people by their very disposition and spent all their energy
in conferring benefits on them. They too applauded the king and approved of his resolve
exclaiming "Splendid !" and spoke words which fitted well with the king, who was deeply
impressed with the virtues of the Lord of excellent renown:—(19)

न वा इदं राजर्षिवर्य fat भवत्सु कृष्णं समनुव्रतेषु ।
येऽध्यासनं राजकिरीटजुष्टं सद्यो जहुर्भगवत्पार्श्वकामा: । २० |
wi oad तावदिहास्महेऽद्य कलेवरं यावदसौ विहाय ।
we ot बविरजस्कं विश्ञोके यास्यत्ययं भागवतप्रधान: 1221
आश्रुत्य तदृषिगणवच: परीक्षित् समं we गुरु चाव्यलीकम्।
आभाषतैनानभिनन्द्य युक्तान् शुश्रूषमाणश्चरितानि विष्णो: 1221
समागता: सर्वत एव सर्वे वेदा यथा मूर्तिधरास्तिपृष्ठे ।
नेहाथवामुत्र च कश्चनार्थं ऋऋते परानुग्रहमात्मशीलम् ।२३॥
ag व: पृच्छ्यमिमं विपृच्छे fare fam इतिकृत्यतायाम्।
wae म्रियमाणैश्च कृत्यं जशुद्धे च तत्रामृशताभियुक्ता: । २४॥
