पि न | FBOORTWOE Ghul © 89

POE RT aT ST RRR ABB ESE RERER MOA SNe MAT ATR Be SESH RRMA RAT BEM, He Ge GOREN WEATHER REM RENE N ERC OW HEHE EH OREO ME ERE We RE WY Be RTL

the mountains, the system of His bones. (32) The rivers constitute His arteries and veins and
the trees, the hair on the person of the Cosmic Being, O king of kings. The air, possessed
ofinfinite strength, is His breath; Time represents His movementand the uninterrupted action
of the three Gunas (in the form of creation), His activity. (3) The wise recognize the clouds
as the hair (on the head) of the Lord and twilight, as the raiment of the Infinite Being, O chief
of the Kurus. They declare the Unmanifest (Primordial Matter) as His heart and the familiar
moon represents His mind, which is the seat of all passions. (34) They speak of the Mahat-
tattva (the Principle of cosmic intelligence) as the power of understanding and Rudra (the god
presiding over destruction) as the ego of the Universal Spirit. The horse, the mule, the camel
and the elephant represent His nails; while the deer and all other animals abide in His hips
andloins. (35) The birds are His wonderful workmanship; the first Manu (known by the name
of Swayambhuva) represents His intellect and man (the offspring of Manu), His abode.The
Gandharvas (the celestial musicians), the Vidyadharas (another class of demigods), the
Caranas (the celestial bards) and the Apsaras (the celestial nymphs), represent
the reminiscences of His melody and the demon hosts, His virility. (6) The Brahmana
represents the mouth; the Ksatriya, the arms; the Vaisya, the thighs and the
dark-complexioned Sidra, the feet of that mighty Being. And the performance of sacrifices
that are conducted with the help of material substances (such as clarified butter etc.) and in
the name of classes of deities bearing various names is His occupation. (37) Such is the
magnitude and constitution of the Cosmic Body of the Lord as | have just told you. It is on
this grossest form that the mind is concentrated with the help of reason; for there exists
nothing apart from this.(38) Just as a dreamer sees himself projected in various forms in a
dream, it is the one all-witnessing Self who experience everything through the intellects of
all. One should devote oneself to that embodiment of Truth, the storehouse of bliss, and
should not feel attached to any other object; for such attachment brings about the
degradation of the soul. (39)

Thus ends the first discourse in Book Two, describing among other things the Cosmic
Body of the Great Being, of the great and glorious Bhagavata-Purana,
otherwise known as the Paramahamsa-Samnhita.

<9 ek १५०
PIPPI ps

अथ द्वितीयोऽध्याय:

Discourse Il
Concentration on the gross and subtle forms of the Lord and the two
types of Mukti (Liberation), viz., Kramamukti or gradual
Liberation and Sadyomukti or immediate Liberation

श्रीगुक उवाच
एवं पुरा धारणयाऽऽत्मयोनिर्नष्टां aft प्रत्यवरुध्य तुष्टात् ।
am ससर्जेदममोघदृष्टिर्यथाप्ययात् प्रागु व्यवसायबुद्धि: । १ ।
wer fe sam एष पन्था यन्नामभिर्ध्ययति धीरपार्थै: |
परिभ्रमंस्तत्र न विन्दतेऽर्थान् मायामये वासनया ङायान: । २ ।
