582 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA (Dis. 15

न १२० २ २ २० OEE DER ER ELSON NO MET REE RD शाशा २ COTE CEE EE TONES ONES TOON ERO NUOTEO THOTT

the capacity to assume any magnitude (sought for by him), and, focussing his mind on Me
as ensouling any of the (five gross) elements individually, he attains the magnitude (all-
pervasive character) of that particular element. (11) (Similarly) concentrating his mind on Me
as ensouling the atoms of the (four) elements (other than ether), a Yogi attains (extreme)
lightness (of body), viz., the capacity to become as subtle as the subtlest division of time. (12)
(Likewise) focussing his entire mind on Me as ensouling the (cosmic) Ego, born of
Sattvaguna, the Yogi who has given his mind to Me attains the (Siddhi of) Praptiin the shape
of control over the senses of all. (13) He who concentrates his mind on Me as ensouling the
(Sutra, the active aspect of) Mahat-tattva attains (the Siddhi known as) Prakamya (easy
access to all sorts of enjoyments of one’s seeking), the highest Siddhi possessed by Me as
presiding over the Sitra, which is born of the Unmanifest. (14) He who focusses his mind on
(Me as) the all-pervading Witness, the Ruler of Maya (consisting of the three Gunas), attains
(the Siddhi known as) igitva, viz., control over all bodies and conscious selves. (15) The Yogi
who concentrates his mind on Meas Lord Narayana, spoken of as the fourth or transcendent
principle* (existing beyond the three states of 1. Virat or the Cosmic Person, presiding over
the physical plane, 2. Hiranyagarbha, presiding over the astral plane, and 3. the Causal
Principle, presiding over the causal plane) and called by the name of Bhagavan (embodying
in Himself the six divine properties of universal dominion, righteousness, glory, prosperity,
wisdom and dispassion each in its entirety) acquires My virtues and attains (the Siddhi or)
Vagita (non-attachment to all material objects). (16) Focussing his pure mind (cleansed
through Pranayama etc.), on Me as the transcendent Brahma, one attains supreme bliss
(whichis only another name for the Siddhi called Kamavasayita), in which all desire ceases
(for good).(17) Concentrating his mind on Me as Lord Aniruddha (the Lord of Swetadwipa),
who is (absolutely) pure (untainted by the three Gunas) and the embodiment of ( or Propeller
of) virtue, man attains (absolute) purity (in the form of no longer being subject to the three
Gunas or modes of Prakrti) and is rid of the six waves or changes (viz., hunger and thirst,
old age and death, grief and infatuation). (18) Mentally perceiving the (unexpressed) sound
in Me as conceived in the form of the cosmic breath, taintless and all pervading like the sky,
the said Jiva is able to hear (froma distance) the (diverse) sounds of living beings manifested
therein.(19) Uniting the eye with the sun and the sun too with the eye, and contemplating on
Me in the aforesaid (mutual) union (of the two), man is gifted with a penetrating vision and
is (consequently) able to perceive the (whole) universe. (20) By virtue of the concentration
(of mind) practised after uniting with Me the mind and thereafter the body (too) alongwith the
breath (accompanying the body), (one attains the Siddhi called Manojava, as a result of
which) the body surely finds itself wherever the mind goes. (21) The Yogi gets converted into
the very form, sought for by his mind, that he would assume making the mind his material
(for that form), the force of concentration of the mind on Me (whose potency is inconceivable
and who appear in numerous forms) being the ground of all Siddhis. (22) Seeking to enter
another (soulless) body, the Yogi who has controlled his breath as well as his Indriyas and
mind should conceive himself as present in that body. (As a result of such contemplation)
his vital air (the chief constituent of his astral body, which makes for his Jivahood) leaves his
(own) body and becoming one with the cosmic air, enters (alongwith it) the other (through
its nostrils) as a black bee passes from one flower to another. (23) Having blocked his rectum
with his heel and pushed up the vital air (successfully to his heart, chest, throat and crown
of head, and (mentally) forcing it upwards through the (aperture known as) Brahmarandhra

* The seripture delines Ihe Tunya or fourth principle as below —
