48 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA Dis. 11

ज्जकजान्र आङर्या ess h ache tnreerentrerrretteteretthettetehth three

recalling Her manifold virtues, SriRama, the almighty Lord, could not restrain His grief, even
though He tried to suppress it by force of reason. (16) Excessive fondness of menand women
for each other is always such as brings fear (and griefin its train) even to powerful! souls, and
much more to a voluptuary whose thoughts are riveted on his household ! (17)

ब्रह्मचर्यं धारयन्नजुहोत् प्रभु: | त्रयोदशाब्दसाहस्रमग्निहोत्रमखण्डितम् 1१८॥
स्मरतां ee विन्यस्य fae दण्डककण्टकै: | स्वपादपल्लवं राम आत्मज्योतिरगात् तत: ।१९॥
नेदं यज्ञो रघुपते: सुरयाच्ञयाऽऽत्तलीलातनोरधिकसाम्यविमुक्तधाम्न: |
wien जलधिबन्धनमस्त्रपूगै: किं तस्य SAR कपय: सहाया: । २०॥
यस्यामलं नृपसदस्मु यक्लोऽधुनापि गायन्त्वघघ्नमृषयो दिगिभेन्द्रपट्टम्।
aq नाकपालवसुपालकिरीटजुष्टपादाम्बुजं waft mel प्रपद्ये ।२१॥
स यै: स्पृष्टोऽभिदृष्टो वा संविष्टोऽनुगतोऽपि वा । कोसलास्ते ययु: स्थानं यत्र गच्छन्ति योगिन: 1221

रामचरितं श्रवणैरुपधारयन्। आनृशंस्यपरो राजन् कर्मबन्धैर्विमुच्यते 1231

Since then for (a period of) thirteen thousand years nine interruption the Lord poured
oblations into the sacred fire, observing (a strict vow of) celibacy (throughout). (18) Leaving,
in the heart of those who remember Him, an impression of His feet—tender asa pair of young
leaves—pierced (earlier) by the thorns of the Dandaka forest, SriRama then left for His own
effulgent (divine) realm. (19) Extirpation of demons through the instrumentality of multitudes
of missiles and the bridging of the ocean—this is no praise to Sri Rama (the Lord of the
Raghus), who assumed a form for the sake of sport at the entreaty of the gods and whose
glory is absolutely matchless and unsurpassed. Did monkeys (actually) serve as His
helpmates in disposing of the enemy? (No, not at all, Destruction of demons was as good
a sport on His part as enlisting the help of monkeys for that purpose.) (20) | seek as my
protector the aforesaid Lord of Raghus, whose unsullied glory—which is capable of
destroying (all) sins and serves as an adornment for the elephants guarding the (four)
quarters (pervades all the quarters)—sages sing in royal courts even to this day, and whose
lotus-feet are touched by the crowns of (even) rulers of heaven (like Indra) and custodians
of wealth (like Kubera, the god of riches). (21) (All) those people of the Kosala country by
whom He was lovingly touched or fully observed or seated by their side or even followed
(while moving about) reached the goal which Yogis (those adeptin Yoga or deep meditation)
attain to. (22) A man treasuring up (in his mind) the narrative of Sri Rama through the
repeated process of hearing, and pledged to (a vow of) tenderness (cessation from violence),
O Pariksit, is freed from the shackles of Karma (in the shape of virtue and sin, which make
for transmigration). (23)

राजोवाच

कथं स भगवान् रामो भ्रातॄन् वा स्वयमात्मन: | तस्मिन् वा तेऽन्ववर्तन्त प्रजा: पौराश्च ईश्चरे । २४॥

The king (Pariksit) submitted : How did the said Lord Sri Rama conduct Himself and
how did He behave towards His (younger) brothers (Bharata, Laksmana and Satrughna),
who were His own selves (part manifestations)? How, again, did they (Bharata and others)
as well as His subjects and residents of Ayodhya (in particular) behave in their turn towards
Him, their (almighty) lord? (24)

Sp उवाच
अथादिशद् दिग्विजये भ्रातॄंस्रिभुवनेश्वर: । आत्मानं दर्शयन् ami पुरीमैक्षत सानुग: 1241
आसिक्तमार्गां गन्धोदै: करिणां मदशीकरै: । स्वामिनं प्राप्तमालोक्य मत्तां वा सुतरामिव । २६॥
