632 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 17

HOA RR HE AR HEH OE ANH HEH त्ये ECHR HAH SKEAE CCH HARE दाचि HHS OHHH KEHOE HAA HEH

Sri Suka resumed: Thus subjected to an execration, the said Citraketu alighted from
his aerial car and propitiated the noble lady (Goddess Parvati) with his head bent low (in the
following words), O Pariksit (a scion of Bharata). (16)

प्रतिगृह्णामि a जशापमात्मनोऽञ्जलिनाम्बिके i taiaia यत्प्रोक्तं पूर्वदिष्टं f तस्य तत् । १७॥
संसारचक्र एतस्मिञ्जन्तुरज्ञानमोहित: | भ्राम्यन् सुखं च दु:खं च भुङ्क्ते सर्वत्र सर्वदा 1201
नैवात्मा न परश्चापि कर्ता स्यात् सुखदु:खयो: | कर्तारं मन्यतेऽप्राज्ञ आत्मानं परमेव च ।१९॥
शुणप्रवाह एतस्मिन् क: a: को न्वनुग्रह: | क: स्वर्गो नरक: को वा किं FS दु:खमेव वा 120!
एक: सृजति भूतानि भगवानात्ममायया । एषां बन्धं च मोक्षं च सुखं दु:खं च निष्कल: । २१॥
न aa कश्चिद्दयित: प्रतीपो न ज्ञातिबन्धुर्न परो न च स्व: ।
waa सर्वत्र निरञ्जनस्य सुखे न राग: कुत एवं रोष: ।२२॥
तथापि तच्छक्तिविसर्ग wi सुखाय दु:खाय हिताहिताय ।
बन्धाय मोक्षाय च मृत्युजन्मनो: ङारीरिणां संसृतयेऽवकल्पते 1231
ay प्रसादये न wi somes भामिनि । यन्मन्यसे stare मम तत्क्षम्यतां सति । २४॥

Citraketu said : | accept Your imprecation (as a welcome and loving gift from You), with
my palms joined together O Mother! For whatever is pronounced by divinities with reference
to a mortal is undoubtedly that which was predestined for him. (17) Deluded by ignorance
and revolving in this whirligig of mundane existence, an embodied soul experiences joy and
sorrow everywhere at every time. (18) Neither oneself nor anyone else is responsible for
(one's) joy and sorrow. A fool alone holds himself as well as another responsible for them. (19)
In this world of matter (which is a product of the three Gunas or modes of Prakrti) what
distinction is there between an imprecation and a blessing, heaven and hell or even joy and
sorrow ? (20) The one Lord brings forth living beings by His own Maya (creative will) and
(further) ordains their bondage and liberation as well as their happiness and misery, though
free from bondage (Himself). (21) To Him, who is alike to all and free from attachment, none
is dear or hateful, none is a kinsman or relation, and none is His own or alien. He has no love
for pleasure; how (then) can there be anger (in Him)? (22) Yet action, which (is either virtuous
or sinful and) flows from His energy (in the form of Maya) conduces to the joy and sorrow,
welfare and injury, bondage and liberation, birth and death and the circuit of worldly life of
embodied souls. (23) Hence | do not propitiate You with a view to being rid of Your
imprecation, O noble lady. (Only be pleased to) forgive what You consider as unjustly said
by me (even though it was uttered in a purely good spirit), O virtuous lady ! (24)

श्रीरुक उवाच
इति प्रसाद्य fafent चित्रकेतुररिन्दम । जगाम स्वविमानेन ceed: स्मयतोस्तयो: 1241
ततस्तु भगवान् रुद्रो रुद्राणीमिदमब्रवीत्। देवर्षिदेत्यसिद्धानां पार्षदानां च शृण्वताम् । २६।

Sri Suka resumed: Having thus appeased Lord Siva and Goddess Parvati (who have
their abode on Mount Kailasa), O Pariksit (a chastiser of foes), Citraketu went his way by
his aerial car, while the aforesaid (divine) Couple looked on wondering. (25) Thereupon
Lord Rudra spoke as follows to His Spouse (Goddess Parvati) within the hearing of the
gods and sages, demons and Sidchas, as well as of His attendants. (26)

SRE उवाच
दृष्टवत्यसि सुश्रोणि हरेरद्भुतकर्मण: | माहात्स्यं भृत्यभृत्यानां नि:स्पृहाणां महात्मनाम् 12 |
