176 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 10

CR me TB Uc hc he Ui tl as Bd Sed hal a पाजा का eat SSSR LR Rl ls Sl i Rl hi LS कक सा aR का सा MERE TEE EE SE HT ea ee HE

द्वितीयस्त्वहमो यत्र द्रव्यज्ञानक्रियोदय: । भूतसर्गस्तृतीयस्तु तन्मात्रो द्रव्यशक्तिमान् |
wad ऐन्दिय: ait यस्तु ज्ञानक्रियात्मक: । वैकारिको देवसर्ग: पञ्चमो यन्मयं मन: ।१६॥
षष्ठस्तु तमस: सर्गो यस्त्वबुद्धिकृत: प्रभो । षडिमि प्राकृता: सर्गा वैकृतानपि मे शृणु eel
Maitreya said : Time, which in itself is undifferentiated and has no beginning or end,
appears in the form of metamorphosis of worldly phenomena. Making it His instrument, the
Lord (the Supreme Person) sportfully manifested Himself (in the form of the universe). (11)
Having been dissolved by-the Maya (wonderful potency) of Lord Visnu, this universe existed
(during the period of universal destruction) as no other than Brahma God, then evolved it
as a distinct entity through the instrumentality of Time, which is undifferentiated in itself. (12)
As the universe exists today, so it was before and soit will continue to be hereafter. Ninefold
is its creation, the one proceeding both from Prakrti (God) and Vikrti (Brahma) being the
tenth. (13) The reabsorption (dissolution) of the universe, again, is threefold, viz., through
Time, elements and the Gunas (modes of Prakrti). (Now as regards the ninefold creation )
the first in order of sequence is the creation of the Mahat-tattva, which takes place only when
the equilibrium of the Gunas (Sattva, Rajas and Tamas) is disturbed by the will of God
Himself. (14) The secondis the evolution of the ego (Ahan), from which proceed the five gross
elements as well as the five senses of perception and the five organs of action. The third is
the evolution of the subtle elements, which in their turn evolve the gross elements. (15) The
fourth is the evolution of the Indriyas, i.e., the senses of perception and the organs of action;
while the fifth is the evolution of the deities (presiding over the Indriyas), who are born of the
SAttvika ego, as well as of the mind, which is also a product of the Sattvika ego. (16) The
sixth is the evolution of Tamas (the principle of nescience), which clouds the reason and
distracts the mind of the Jivas. These six varieties of creation proceed from Prakrti (God,
the Cause of causes); now hear of those that proceed from Vikrti (Brahma, who sprang up
from the Lord). (17) ॥

रजोभाजो wad sed हरिमेधस: । सप्तमो मुख्यसर्गस्तु षड्विधस्तस्थुषां च य: ।१८॥
वनस्पत्योषधिलतात्वक्सारा वीरुधो द्रुमा: | उत्स्नोतसस्तम: प्राया अन्त:स्पर्शा विहोषिण: । १९1
तिरश्चामष्टम: सर्ग: सोऽष्टाविंशद्दिधो मत:। अविदो भूरितमसो घ्राणज्ञा हृद्यवेदिन: 1201
गौरजो महिष: कृष्ण: सूकरो गवयो oe: । द्विशाफा: sags अविरुष्टश्च TAT ।२१॥
Asam गोर: झशरभश्चमरी तथा । एते चैकशफा: क्षत्त: OY] पञ्चनखान् पशून् । २२।
a वृको व्याघ्रो मार्जार: शशशल्लकौ | सिंह: कपिर्गज: कूर्मो गोधा च मकरादय: 1231
कङ्कगृध्रवटश्येनभासभल्लूकबर्हिण: | हंससारसचक्राह्वकाकोलूकादय: खगा: ।२४॥
अर्वाक्स्नोतस्तु नवम: क्षत्तरेकविधो नृणाम्।रजोऽधिका: कर्मपरा दु:खे च सुखमानिन: 1241
3 wa देवसर्गश्च सत्तम।वैकारिकस्तु च: प्रोक्त: कौमारस्तूभयात्मक: 126 |
(As a matter of fact) the creation proceeding from Brahma too is a pastime of the Lord,
the very thought of whom rids one of all sorrows and who assumes the quality of Rajas
(in order to carry on the work of creation as Brahma). The seventh is the sixfold creation
of immobile creatures (plants and trees etc.), which is the first (in order of sequence of the
three categories of creation proceeding from Brahma, and which is subdivided into six
varieties.(18) These consist of (i) trees which bear fruit without flowering, (e.g., the banyan,
the Peepul and so on), (ii) annual plants and herbs that die as soon as their fruit is ripe (such
as the cereals), (iii) creepers that grow on the support of other trees or walls etc., (iv) plants
which have a hard bark (such as the bamboo), (v) creepers that creep on the ground alone,

being too stiff to climb upwards (such as the melon, the water-melon and so on) and (vi) trees
which bear fruit after blossoming. All these draw their nutriment from below; they are almost

