550 ` SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 1

SRS ESET SEES ESSENSE SEES SORE Se Roe e Ree eKke ee theek teers seers ereeh sen err heerhre ree
न चेदिहैवापचिति चथांहस: कृतस्य कुर्यान्मन उक्तिपाणिभि: |

qua ca aed a कीर्तिता मे भवतस्तिग्मयातना: । |

तस्मात्पुरैवाश्चिहिं पापनिष्कृतौ . यतेत मृत्योरविपद्यताऽऽत्मना |

दोषस्य दृष्टा गुरुलाघव्रं यथा भिषक चिकित्सेत oat निदानवित् । ८ ।

Sri 50तबव॥2]€त:॥ ३।18776068॥160` 81076 during his very lifetime and in the proper way
(as laid down in the scriptures such as Manusmrti) for sins committed (by him) with his mind,
speech and hands (body), he inevitably and actually goes after death to the infernal regions,
that have already been described by me to you, and which are provide with means of severe
torments. (7) Therefore, with a body not (yet) incapacitated (for penance), one should take
prompt measures here, even before death, for the atonement of one's sins, after weighing
the gravity and lightness of the crime, just as a physician who knows the cause of maladies
would adopt prompt remedies before it is too late, duly considering the seriousness or
mildness of a complaint. (8)
राजोवाच

दृष्टश्चुताभ्यां यत्पापं जानन्नप्यात्मनोऽहितम्। करोति भूयो विवश: प्रायश्चित्तमथो कथम् । ९ ।

क्वचिन्निवर्ततेऽभद्रात्क्वचिच्चरति wer: | प्रायश्चित्तमतोऽपार्थं मन्ये कुञ्जरशौचवत् 1201
The king said : Since a man, though knowing a sin to be hurtful to his self on the
testimony of what is actually seen and heard of by him, repeats it (even after atoning for it),
having lost control (over his self), how could there be (any) atonement (for his sins) under
the circumstances (so long as the sinful propensity is there)? (9) Now he is absolved from
a sin and now he does it again. Such being the case, | account (all) atonement fruitless
like the bath of an elephant (which throws dust on its body immediately after it has washed

itself). (10)
श्रीगुक उवाच
कर्मणा कर्मनिर्हारो न ह्यात्यन्तिक sedi अविद्वदधिकारित्वात्प्रायश्चित्त विमर्शानम् । ११
नाश्नत: पथ्यमेवान्नं व्याधयोऽभिभवन्ति हि । एवं नियमकृद्राजन् शनै: क्षेमाय Head 1221
तपसा ब्रह्मचर्येण wa च दमेन च। त्यागेन सत्यशौचाभ्यां यमेन नियमेन च । १३॥
देहवाग्बुद्धिजं धीरा धर्मज्ञा: श्रद्धयान्विता: । क्षिपन्त्यघं महदपि वेणुंगुंल्यमिव'।'नल:।१४।
केचित्केवलया भक्त्या वासुदेवपरायणा: | अघं धुन्वन्ति कात्सर्न्यन नीहारमिव भास्कर: 1241
न तथा ह्यघवान् राजन् Yaa तप आदिभि: | यथा कृष्णार्पितप्राणस्तत्पूरुषनिषेवया | १६।
सध्रीचीनो ह्ययं लोके पन्था: क्षेमोऽकुतोभय: | सुशीला: साधवो AA नारायणपरायणा: । १७॥
प्रायश्चित्तानि चीर्णानि नारायणपराङ्मुखम्। न निष्पुनन्ति राजेन्द्र सुराकुम्भमिवापगा: । १८
aa यमं पाशभृतश्च तद्भटान् स्वप्नेऽपि पर्यन्ति fe चीर्णनिष्कृता: ।१९॥

Sri Suka replied : Indeed the counteraction of a (sinful) act through (another) action (by
way of penance) is not accepted as radical (since there is every possibility of a man's
falling back into sin even after the process of expiation has been undergone, so long as he
isidentified with the body), the ignorant (those identified with the body) alone being qualified
for it (the expiatory process). Self-knowledge (alone) is (therefore) the (true) atonement (for
it is knowledge alone which eradicates ignorance, the root of sin). (11) Maladies do not
actually attack him who eats only wholesome food. In the same way, he who practises self-
