Dis. 2] BOOK SIX 557

Lit PAPC AREAS RASS ESE SAEASSESLAL SLES AAAS SSAA ES ARAL AT LAAAA AAR AREER
ज्र्त्त न Er Be न We

wa: सुरापो faapaeer गुरुतल्पग: । स्रीराजपितृगोहन्ता A च पातकिनोऽपरे । ९ ।

सर्वेषामप्यघवतामिदमेव सुनिष्कृतम् । नामव्याहरणं विष्णोर्यतस्तद्दिषया मति: 1201
न निष्कृतैरुदितैर्ब्रह्मवादिभिस्तथा विशुद्ध्यत्यघवान् व्रतादिभि: ।
waif तद्धि कृतेऽपि निष्कृते wa: पुनर्धावति चेदसत्पथे ।
-तत्कर्मनिर्हारमभीप्सतां हरेर्गुणानुवादु खलु सत्त्वभावन: ।१२।

This man has actually done atonement (not only for the sins of this life but) even for sins
committed (by him) through millions of lives (in the past) in that he uttered, though in a
helpless state, the name of Sri Hari, which (apart from its being the highest atonement for
past sins) is a (direct) means to the attainment of (supreme) felicity (final beatitude). (7) The
atonement for (all) the sins of this (erstwhile) sinner must have been made by the mere fact
that he pronounced a mere semblance of the four-syllabled name of the Lord, ‘NARAYANA’,
while exclaiming (calling his son in the words): "Narayana, come (here) !"(8) The articulation
of a name of Lord Visnu—that is the only thorough atonement for the sins of all classes of
sinners, be he a thief, a drinker (of spirituous liquor), one guilty of treachery to a friend, a
Brahmana-slayer, one sharing the bed of a preceptor's wife, a slayer of a woman, a king,
one's own parent or a cow and whatever other (types of) sinners there may be; for thereby
(by the utterance of the Lord's name) the Lord's (own) mind is directed towards the utterer

-(who is thenceforward remembered by Him as His protege). (9-10) A sinner is not purified
to that extent (so thoroughly) through fasting and other processes of expiation recommended
by the expositors of the Veda (Manu and others) as he is by words standing as names for
SriHari, articulated (merely with the tongue); forthe utterance of such words puts himin mind
of the (divine) attributes of the glorious Lord (and thus qualifies the man for final beatitude
by drawing him towards the Lord, the Bestower of Liberation, unlike the other forms of
expiation, which exhaust themselves in wiping out the sins). (11) For, the process of
expiation is not complete if one's mind runs back to evil ways even after the said process
has been gone through. Therefore, in the case of those seeking the eradication of their (stock
of) sinful Karma the uttering of the praises of Sri Hari is the only remedy; for the same
undoubtedly purifies the mind. (12)

अथैनं मापनयत TTI TaepA यदसौ भगवन्नाम म्रियमाण: समग्रहीत् 1231
Therefore, do not take, by a wrong path (the path of the sinners), (the soul of) this man,
who has done atonement for all (his) sins in that he articulated the Lord’s name in full (while,
as a matter of fact, it wipes out one's sins even when uttered in part) and at a time when he
was about to die (when there was no possibility of his reverting to the path of sin and thereby
incurring any more sin; for one cannot ordinarily be expected to take the Lord's name
precisely at the moment of death). (13)

aga पारिहास्यं a स्तोभं हेलनमेव वा । वैकुण्ठनामग्रहणमशोषाघहरं fag: । १४॥
पतित: स्खलितो wa: सन्दष्टस्तप्त आहत:। हरिरित्यवशेनाह पुमान्नार्हति यातनाम् ।१५॥
Ten च लघूनां च गुरूणि च लघूनि च । प्रायश्चित्तानि पापानां ज्ञात्वोक्तानि महर्षिभि: । १६॥
तैस्तान्यघानि पूयन्ते तपोदानजपादिभि:। नाधर्मजं तद्धुदयं तदपीशाङ्घ्रिसेवया ie!
अज्ञानादथवा ज्ञानादुत्तमश्लोकनाम यत्।सङ्कीर्तितमघं पुंसो दहेदेधो यथानल: । १८
चथागदं वरीर्यतममुपयुक्तं यदृच्छया | अजानतोऽप्यात्मगुणं कुर्यान्मन्त्रोऽप्युदाहत: 1291

The learned recognize the articulation of a name of Lord Visnuas capable of eradicating
