256 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 26

Yer gern toe anno toi rte ee eee ee eee eee EE CES HEALER KE CERES Hee ee

life*, to refresh by slaking thirst, to soften things, to drive away heat and to be in a state of
incessant supply (in wells etc.)—these are the functions of water. (43)

दैवचोदितात् । गन्धमात्रमभूत्तस्मात्पृथ्वी घ्राणस्तु गन्धग: ।४४।
करम्भपूतिसौरभ्यदान्तोग्राम्लादिभि: yaa द्रव्यावयववैषम्याद्न्थं wal विभिद्यते ॥४५॥
We ब्रह्मण: स्थानं aot ao सर्वसत्त्वगुणोद्धेदर पृथिवीवृत्तिलक्षणम् ।४६॥

From water—which is an evolute of the principle of taste— impelled by the destiny of the
various Jivas, proceeded the-principle of smell and thence earth as well as the olfactory
sense, which enables us to perceive odour alone. (44) Smell, though one, becomes
many—as mixed, offensive, fragrant, mild, strong, acid andso on, according to the proportion
of connected substances. (45) Even soto give form (through images etc.) to the concept of
Brahma (the Infinite); to remain in position (without any support other than water etc., which
ate its causes); to hold (water and other substances); to limit (the unlimited space through
walls of houses etc.) and to manifest the bodies as well as the distinctive qualities (sex etc.)
of all living beings—these are the characteristic functions of earth.(46)

नभोगुणविशेषोऽर्थो यस्य तच्छेन्नमुच्यते। वायोर्गुणविहेषोऽर्थो यस्य तत्स्पर्शनं fag: ।४७॥
तेजोगुणविशेषोऽर्थो यस्य तच्चक्षुरुच्यते। अम्भोगुणविरोषोऽर्थो यस्य तद्रसनं विदु: ।
भूमेर्गुणविरोषोऽर्थो यस्य A घ्राण उच्यते 1४८1
परस्य ged धर्मो ह्यपरस्मिन् समन्वयात्। अतो fae भावानां भूमावेवोपलक्ष्यते 1x8
एतान्यसंहत्य यदा महदादीनि सप्त वै। कालकर्मगुणोपेतो जगदादिरुपाविशत् | ५०॥
ततस्तेनानुविद्धेभ्यो युक्तेभ्योऽण्डमचेतनम् । उत्थितं पुरुषो यस्मादुदतिष्ठदसौ बिराट्।५१॥
एतदण्डे विशेषाख्यं क्रमवृद्धैर्दशोत्तरै: । तोयादिभि:र परिवृतं प्रधानेनावृतैर्बहि: ।
यत्र लोकवितानोऽयं रूपं भगवतो हरे: 1421
हिरण्मयादण्डकोलादुत्थाय सलिलेशयात्। तमाविर्य महादेवो ager निर्बिभेद खम् 1431
निरभिद्यतास्य प्रथमं मुखं वाणी ततोऽभवत्। वाण्या वह्निरथो नासे प्राणोतो घ्राण एतयो: 1५४1
घ्राणाद्वायुरभिद्येतामक्षिणी चक्षुरेतयो: | तस्मात्सूर्यो व्यभिद्येतां कर्णौ श्रोत्रं ततो दिश: 144 1
निर्बिभेद विराजस्त्वग्रोमर्मश्र्वादयस्तत: | तत ओषधयश्चासन् शिश्नं निर्बिभिदे तत: 1481
रेतस्तस्मादाप आसन्निरभिद्यत वै गुदम्। गुदादपानोऽपानाच्च मृत्युरलोकभयङ्कर: 1491
हस्तौ च निरभिद्येतां बलं ताभ्यां aa: wae पादौ च निरभिद्येतां गतिस्ताभ्यां ततो aft: । ५८।
नाड्योऽस्य निरभिद्यन्त ताभ्यो लोहितमाभृतम् । see: समभवन्नुदुं निरभिद्यत 1491
क्षुत्पिपासे aa: स्यातां समुद्रस्त्वेतयोरभूत्। अथास्य ea भिन्नं हृदयान्मन उत्थितम् । ६०॥
मनसश्चन्द्रमा जातो बुद्धिर्बुद्धेर्गिरां पति: । अहङ्कारस्ततो रुद्रश्चित्तं चैत्यस्ततोऽभवत् ।६१॥

The sense whose object of perception is sound (the distinctive characteristic of ether),
is called the auditory sense. And that whose object of perception is touch (the distinctive
characteristic of air) is known as the tactile sense.(47) Even so the sense whose object of
perception is colour (the distinctive characteristic of fire) is spoken of as the sense of Sight.
Again, that whose object of perception is taste (the distinctive characteristic of water) is
known as the sense of taste. And (finally) that whose object of perception is odour (the

distinctive characteristic of earth) is called the olfactory sense. (48) Since a cause exists in
its effect as well, the characteristics of the former are observed in the latter. That is why the

* The Sruti too says:— आपामय: प्राण:। “Life depends on water.”

Se ar

