378 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA ॥ [ Dis. 61

SO TORE SE Ae TESORO OT SEP त्ता ee na nS Sr SES SUR aren nace ersrirere re,

अथैकषष्टितमोऽध्याय:

Discourse LXI
(A description of the Lord's progeny;)
Rukmi killed (by. Balarama) during Aniruddha's wedding

Sie उवाच
एकैकशस्ता: FO पुत्रान् दश दशाबला: | अजीजनन्ननवमान्पितु: सर्वात्मसम्पदा । १ ।
Teer dea राजपुत्र्योऽच्युतं स्थितम् । प्रेष्ठं न्यमंसत स्वं स्वं न तत्तत्त्वविद: स्रिय: । २ ।
प्तप्योह्रिताभाग्वतोनक्तोविर्जेनुंस्वेर्बिभ्रमैं:सफ्यावनिप्ताविभूम्न:।इ।
Tay षोडशसहस्रमनड्ववाणैर्यस्येन्दियं विमथितुं करणैर्न होकु: । ४ ।

इत्थं रमापतिमवाप्य पतिं स्वियस्ता ब्रह्मादयोऽपि न fag: पदवीं यदीयाम् 1

x

जुर्मुदाविर ङ्मलालसाद्य । ५ ।

Sri Suka began again : The aforesaid wives of Sri Krsna bore Him ten sons each, who
were In no way inferior to their Father in respect of all their mental and physical qualities. (1)
Percelving Sri Krsna (the immortal Lord) not stirring out of their palaces but (always) present
there, the princesses regarded themselves each as His most beloved spouse. (As a matter
of fact) those ladies were unaware of His real character. (2) The loving ladies were
exceedingly charmed by the lovely countenance, resembling a lotus flower, long arms, big
eyes. glances full of love and merriment and winning talks of the Lord: (but) with (all) their
charms they were unable to win the heart of the Perfect One. (3) (All) His sixteen thousand
(and odd) wives could not shake His mind by their shafts of Cupid and other charms skilled
in conveying the message of love despatched by their arched eyebrows fascinating with the
sentiment expressed by their suppressed smile and sidelong glances. (4) Having gained for
their husband (such a one as) the Consort of Rama, whose ways even (great) gods like
Brahma are unable to know. the aforesaid ladies indulged with ever growing delight in loving
smiles. affectionate glances and a longing for union which ever appeared as new, and so
on.(5) Though attended by hundreds of servant-maids, they rendered (personal) service to
the all-pervading Lord by going forth to meet Him (on His arrival), offering Him a seat and
excellent articles of worship. washing His feet, presenting betel-leaves seasoned with lime,
catechu. areca-nut parings, cardamoms. cloves etc.. relieving Him of His fatigue (by
kneading His feet etc.), fanning Him, daubing Him with sandal-paste and adorning Him with
garlands, dressing His locks. arranging His bed, bathing Him and serving Him with dishes
(of various kinds). (63
