162 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 7

J ROI ren ere tn eR EEO HSS ECHHREE EEE EEK ETE S HELE AHA HAS OE He eH
fagt sara
संछिन्न: det wal तव सूक्तासिना विभो । उभयत्रापि भगवन्मनो मे सम्प्रधावति । १५॥
साध्वेतद व्याहतं famed हरे: । आभात्यपार्थं निर्मूलं विश्वमूलं न यद्बहि: ।१६॥
ay मूढतमो लोके यश्च Ge: परं maida सुखमेधेते क्लिद्यत्यन्तरितो aa: ।१७॥
अर्थाभावं fais प्रतीपस्यापि नात्मन:।तां चापि बुष्मच्चरणसेवयाहं पराणुदे । १८॥
यत्सेवया भगवत: peer Rees: ।रतिरासो भवेत्तीव्र:र पादयोर्व्यसनार्दन: 1281
दुरापा ह्यल्पतपस: सेवा . वैकुण्ठवर्त्मसु । यत्रोपगीयते fet देवदेवो जनार्दन: 1201
Vidura said : My doubts have been eradicated by the sword of your reasoned exposition,
my lord. My mind has now clearly grasped both the points (the Lord's freedom and the Jiva's
dependence). (15) You have rightly observed, O sage, that the bondage etc., of the Jiva is
attributable to Sri Hari's own Maya (deluding potency). Such bondage is only apparent without
any reality or foundation; for the universe itself has no foundation except the Lord's Maya. (16)
He who is the most ignorant and he who has realized God, who is beyond the reach of mind,
both these lead a care-free life in this world; while he who stands between the two (is full of
doubt) lives in misery. (17) Having concluded that the material world, though appearing to exist,
is not real, | shall now, by the service of your feet, get rid even of that false appearance (mental
illusion). (18) Through the service of these feet can be had the feast of intense devotion to the
feet of the immutable Lord, the Slayer of the demon Madhu—devotion that puts an end to the
agony of birth and death. (19) The service of the Lord's devotees, who are living approaches
to Lord Visnu (or His divine realm) and in whose company are ever sung the praises of Lord
Janardana (lit., He who is invoked by His devotees), who is adored even by gods, cannot be
easily secured by men of little penance. (20)

सविकाराण्यनुक्रमात्। तेभ्यो विराजमुद्धृत्य तमनु प्राविशद्विभु: 1221
यमाहुराद्यं पुरुषं सहस्राङ्घ्रयूरुबाहुकम् । aa fae इमे लोका: सविकासं समासते 1221
यस्मिन् दशविध: प्राण: सेन्द्रियार्थेन्द्वियस्तिवृत्। त्वयेरितो यतो वर्णास्तद्बविभूतीर्वदस्व न: 1221
wa पुत्रैश्च पौत्रैश्च agi: सह गोत्रजै: । प्रजा विचित्राकृतय आसन् याभिरिदं ततम् । २४
प्रजापतीनां स पतिश्चक्रृपे कान् प्रजापतीन्। सर्गांश्चैवानुसर्गांश्च `पनून्मन्वन्तराधिपान् । २५॥
want agg वंशानुचरितानि च।उपर्यधश्च a लोका भूमेर्मित्रात्मजासते 126!
तेषां संस्थां प्रमाणं च भूर्लोकस्य च वर्णय । तिर्यङ्मानुषदेवानां सरीसृपपतत्तिणाम् ।
ae न: सर्गसंव्यूहं गार्भस्वेदद्विजोद्भिदाम् । २७॥
गुणावतारैर्विश्वस्य सर्गस्थित्यप्ययाश्रयम् | सृजत: श्रीनिवासस्य व्याचक्ष्वोदारविक्रमम् । २८॥
वर्णाश्रमविभागांश्च रूपशीलस्वभावत: | ॠषीणां जन्मकर्मादि aaa च विकर्षणम् । २९॥
यज्ञस्य च वितानानि योगस्य च पथ: प्रभो । नैष्कर्म्यस्य च सांख्यस्य तन्त्रं वा भगवत्स्मृतम् । ३० ।
पाखण्डपथवैषम्यं प्रतिलोमनिवेशनम्। जीवस्य गतयो याश्च यावतीर्गुणकर्मजा: 12381
(You have just told me that) at the dawn of creation the almighty Lord brought forth in their
order of sequence the Mahat-tattva and other categories along with their evolutes and,
having evolved the Cosmic Body out of those categories, eventually entered the same. (21)
itis that Cosmic Being whom the Vedas call the most ancient Person, who is endowed with
thousands of ( a myriad) feet, thighs and arms and in whom all these different worlds abide
with ample space about them. (22) Nay, it is in that Cosmic Being, as you declare, that the
ten vital airs,each of which again manifests itself in three forms (viz., Vigour, will-power and

bodily strength) abide along with the Indriyas and their objects as well as the deities presiding
over them; and from the same Being have emanated the four classes of society. Pray, speak
