320 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 50
trite treet

IRHHWKEKACUCLECLLRKKLESLLLE LE ACEH ELE TL EERE HHS COMES eRe ete eer eH Meee

to me and have patience (to see the result). Casting off your body torn with my shafts, (either)
ascend to heaven or slay me (if you can). (19)

श्रीभगवानुवाच
न वै qu fame दर्शयन्त्येव पोरुषम्। न गृह्णीमो वचो राजन्नातुरस्थ मुमूर्षत: 1२०॥
The glorious Lord replied ; The valiant never brag; they only exhibit their manliness.

We do not (however) take your words to heart, O knig, full of grief as you are (over the death
of your son-in-law, Karnsa) and about to die. (20)--

Sys उवाच
जरासुतस्तावभिसृत्य माधवौ महाबलौघेन बलीयसाऽऽवृणोत्।
ससैन्ययानध्वजवाजिसारथी सूयनिलौ वायुरिवाभ्ररेणुभि: 1221
सुपर्णतालध्वजचिह्नितो रथावलक्षयन्त्यो हरिरामयोर्मृधे ।
स्रिय: पुराट्टालकहर्म्यगोपुरं समाश्रिता: संमुमुहु: gets: ।२२॥
स्वसैन्यमालोक्य सुरासुरार्चितं व्यस्फूर्जयच्छार्ङ्गरारासनोत्तमम् । २३ |
Tet, निषङ्गादथ सन्दधच्छरान् विकृष्य मुञ्चञ्छितबाणपूगान्।
निघ्नन् रथान् कुञ्जरवाजिपत्तोन् निरन्तं यद्वदलातचक्रम् ।२४॥
रथा हताश्वध्वजसूतनायका: पदातयश्छिन्रभुक्कारा 1२५॥
संछिद्यमानद्विपदेभवाजिनामङ्गप्रसूता: शतशोऽसृगापगा: |
भुजाहय: पूरुषज्ञीषक्तापा हतद्विपद्वोपहयग्रग्ङ्कृ ।२६॥
अच्छूरिकावर्तभयानका मह्यपणिप्नवेकाभरणाग्मङ्मुर्करा: 121
`विनिघ्नतारीन् मुसलेन दुर्मदान् सङ्कुर्षणेनापरिमेयतेजसा 1221
wa प्रणीतं वरसुदेवपुत्रयार्विंक्रीडितं eet: परम्।२९॥
स्थित्युद्धवान्तं भुवनत्रयस्य य: समीहतेऽनन्तगुण: स्वलीलया ।
न तस्य चित्रं परपक्षनिग्रहस्तथापि मत्या’नुविथावृ वर्ण्यते 1301
Sri Suka continued : Marching towards Balarama and Sri Krsna (the two Scions of
Madhu), Jarasandha (the foster-son of the demoness Jara“, who had joined the two halves
of his body into one) surrounded Them, including Their troops, vehicles, flags, horses and
charioteers, with a very powerful and huge multitude of troops even as a tempest would
envelop the sun and a fire with clouds and particles of dust respectively. (21) Stricken with
grief not to perceive on the battle-field the chariots of Sri Krsna and Balarama, distinguished
with ensigns bearing the emblems severally of Garuda (the king of birds, the carrier of Lord
Visnu) and a palmyra tree, the women (of Mathura). who had climbed up to the attics (on the

fort) and (tops of) mansions and gates of the city, fell into a swoon. (22) Seeing His own
(small) force oppressed with the formidable shower of shafts repeatedly discharged by

“Vide verses 7-8 of Oiscourse XXII of Book Nine.
