Dis. 11 ] BOOK SIX 603
PRRAAKVHSELLLHH LEEK HLSLEHERSRERE KEKE TELEES SERRE ARH eee ee teeter
RE SE RTE SET SORE ORT EERE 3 A Br Br St Lt

and harsh words employed by the vile against exalted souls fail to provoke them. (28)
Finding their efforts fruitless, the aforesaid demons, who cherished no devotion to Sri Hari
and had their pride crushed in battle, nay, who had been robbed of their energy (by their
enemies), resorted to (the expedient of) fleeing away (from the battle- -field) deserting their
leader (Vrtra) in the very initial stages of the conflict. (29) Seeing those Asuras—who had
(till then) followed his lead—fleeing away, and (further) observing his ranks (too) broken and
run away through intense fear, the valiant and self-possessed Vrtra heartily laughed and
spoke as follows. (30) That heroic personage made the following speech, which was not only
appropriate to the occasion but thrilling to the brave—"Hullo Vipraciti, Namuci, Puloma,
Maya, Anarva and Sambara, (just) listen tome. (31) This death (which is so abhorrentto you)
is sure to befall everyone that is born, wherever one may be; and no means (whatsoever)
of avoiding it in this world (of matter) has been devised (by the creator). If, therefore, (an
abode in) heaven (hereafter) and fame (in this world) could be had from it, who as a matter
of fact would not actually court such a desirable death ? (32) The following two modes of
death are approved ofin the scriptures and do not easily fall to one's lot. viz., (i) that he who
is devoted to the practice of Yoga should, after controlling his vital airs and senses, cast off
his body through deep concentration of mind on Brahma (the Absolute) and (ii) that, placed
in the forefront of a battle, aman should give up the ghost on the battle-field, taking care not
to turn his back on the enemy." (33)

Thus ends the tenth discourse entitled "An account of the conflict between Indra (the
chief of the gods) and the demon Vrtra," in Book Six of the great and glorious
Bhagavata-Purdna, otherwise known as the Paramahamsa-Samhita.

ज ot
PII SS iviesrey

अथैकादशोऽध्याय:

Discourse Xl
Vrtra's teaching to Indra

SYS उवाच

त एवं ed as ga: पत्युरचेतस: । नैवागृह्णन् भयत्रस्ता: पलायनपरा नृप । १ |

विशीर्यमाणां पृतनामासुरीमसुरर्षभ: | कालानुकूलैस्रिदशी: काल्यमानामनाथवत्। २ ।

दृष्ङ्वातप्यत संक्रुद्ध इन्द्रशत्रुरमर्षित: | तान् निवार्यौजसा राजन् निर्भर्त्यदमुवाच ह । ३ |

fe a उच्चरितैर्मातुर्धावद्भि: पृष्टतो हतै: । न हिभीतव्रध: gore नस्वर्ग्य: शूरमानिनाम् । ४ ।

यदि a: प्रधने श्रद्धा सारं वा क्षुल्लका हृदि | अग्रे तिष्ठत मात्रं मे न Se ग्राम्यसुखे स्पृहा । ५ |
Sri Suka went on : Frantic with fear and robbed of (all) good sense, and intent on flight,
the demons paid no heed at all to the advice of their chief, who was thus preaching virtue to
them, O king (Pariksit) ! (1) Roused to indignation and enraged to see the demon host being
shattered and putto flight—as though it were masterless—by the gods (who pass through only
three stages in life, viz., childhood, adolescence and full manhood and never grow old, and)
to whom time (fortune) appeared propitious, Vrtra (the enemy of Indra), the foremost of the
demons, felt agonized (at heart). Warding the gods off by his (own) might, O Pariksit, and
scolding them, he actually addressed the following words to them:—(2-3) "What will be gained
by you through these fugitives—who are no better than the excreta of their mother—being
