678 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 3

EEE TE न व Oe OEE OOO EOE TORS T STR EN NAAN STE EHEC HEMET ER OREO RECEP ROHS EPO RO ०० ७२ कच १० ००

Dharma (virtue) gets gradually encroached upon by falsehood, violence, discontent and
discord— the (four) feet of Adharma (unrighteousness).(20) In that age (of Treta) people
remain devoted to the performance of Vedic rites and austerities. They are notgiventomuch
violence nor lewd. They pursue the three objects of human endeavour (viz., religious merit,
worldly possessions and sense-enjoyment). People are advanced in Vedic rites and among
(the four) grades of society the Brahmanas form a majority, O protector of men! (21) Assailed
by the four feet of Adharma, violence, discontent, falsehood and hatred, those of Dharma—
compassion, austerity, truthfulness and a charitable disposition — diminish by one half each
in the Dwapara age. (22) The people of that age are fond of glory and given to the
performance of great sacrifices, take delight in learning the Vedas, are affluent and happy,
and maintain big families. Among the (four) grades of society the Brahmanas and Ksatriyas
are predominant. (23) In the Kali age, however, a quarter (alone) of the (four) feet of Dharma
remains. (Nay,) due to the feet of Adharma gaining ground that too steadily declines and
ultimately disappears altogether. (24) People in that age turn out to be greedy, immoral and
merciless, enter into hostility without cause and are unlucky and extremely covetous. The
Sidras, fishermen and the like take the lead. (25) The qualities of Sattva, Rajas and Tamas
are seen (manifested) in men; impelled by force of time they wax or wane in the mind. (26)
When the mind, intellect and senses abound in Sattva, and when people are interested in
practising asceticism and acquiring wisdom, then one should understand that Satyayuga
prevails. (27) When people are fond of religious merit, earthly possessions and worldly
enjoyment, then know that there is Tretayuga, when Rajas is active, O intelligent one ! (28)
When, however, greed, discontent, pride, hypocrisy and jealousy prevail and man is fond of
actions prompted by desire, know that it is Dwapara, when (both) Rajas and Tamas
predominate. (29) When duplicity, mendacity, drowsiness, excessive sleep, violence,
dejection, grief, infatuation, fear and wretchedness prevail, that is recognized as the age of
Kali, characterized by (the predominance of Tamas, as a result of which people become dull-
witted (viz., unable to judge things in their proper perspective) and are unlucky but voracious,
voluptuous and destitute. And women (too) turn out to be profligate. And unchaste. (30-31)
Countries are infested with robbers; the Vedas stand condemned by heretics; rulers exploit
the people; and the Brahmanas remain devoted to the gratification of sexual desires and
intent on filling their belly. (32) Religious students will give up the course of conduct
prescribed for them and fail to observe purity, and householders will take to begging: hermits
will take up their residence in villages and recluses will be seized with an ardent longing for
wealth. (33) Women will be short-statured but voracious, prolific and destitute of modesty.
They will always speak harsh words and will be given to thieving and wiles and very daring.
(34) Low-minded traders will carry on business transactions and practise fraud. Even when
they are not in distress people will favour pursuits which are condemned. (35) Servants will
leave their masters when reduced to penury, though superior in every (other) respect; and
masters too will discharge their servant, when incapacitated for service (through ailment
etc.)., even though he may be hereditary. (Even so) people willcease to maintain cows when
they no longer yield milk. (36)

पितॄभ्रातृसुहृज्ञातीन् हित्वा सौरतसौहदा: | ननान्दूश्यालसंवादा दीना: dom: wet नरा: 1391

Qe प्रतिग्रहीष्यन्ति तपोवेषोपजीविन: । धर्म वक्ष्यन्त्यधर्मज्ञा अधिरुह्योत्तमासनम् ।३८॥
नित्यमुद्बिम्रमनसो दुर्भिक्षकरकर्शिता: । निरन्ने भूतले राजन्ननावृष्टिभयातुरा: 13¢1
वासोऽन्नपानशयनव्यवायस्नानभूषणै: । हीना: पिञ्ञाचसन्दर्शा भविष्यन्ति कलौ प्रजा: ।४०॥

कलौ काकिणिकेऽप्यर्थे विगृह्य त्यक्तसौहदा: । त्यक्ष्यन्ति च fra प्राणान् हनिष्यन्ति स्वकानपि । ४१
