Dis. 52] BOOK TEN 331

SP ETE LIT TEE LTE ESL eee EEE ET Senior serine warrior ee

अथ द्विपञ्चाशत्तमोऽध्याय:

Discourse LIl
Sti Krsna's withdrawal to Dwaraka; Balarama’s marriage; Rukmini sends a

Brahmana with a message to Sri Krsna

mio सोऽनुगृहीतोऽङ् कृष्णेनेक्ष्वाकुनन्दन: । तं परिक्रम्य सन्नम्य निश्चक्राम गुहामुखात्। १ |
स वीक्ष्य क्षुल्लकान् मर्त्यन् पशून् वीरुद्वनस्पतीन् । मत्वा कलियुगं प्राप्तं जगाम दिदमुत्तराम् । २ ।
aug धीरो नि:सङ्घो मुक्तसंजव: । समाधाय मन: कृष्णे wife गन्धमादनम् | ३ |
लदर्याश्रममासाद्य नरनारायणालयम् | BASSAS: जान्तस्तपसा: । ४ ।
भगवान् GS पुरीं यवनवेष्टिताम् । हत्वा म्लेच्छबलं निन्ये तदीयं द्वारकां धनम्। ५ ।
नीयमाने धने गोभिर्नृभिश्चाच्युतचोदितै: । आजगाम जरासन्धस्त्रयोविंशत्यनीकप: । ६ ।
विलोक्म वेगरभसं is Tat | AAERTETATTST राजन् दुद्रुन्रत्तुक्कोम्।\ऽ।
fea वित्तं squint भीरुभीतवत् । पद्भ्यां पद्मपलाज्ञाभ्यां चेरतुर्बहुबोजनम् । ८ ।
पलायमानौ at ep मागध: प्रहसन् बली। अन्वधावद् रथानीकैरीदाबोरप्रमाणवित्। ९ ।
wa संश्रान्तौ तुङ्खमारुहतां गिरिम्।प्रवर्षणाख्यं भगवान् नित्यदा चत्र वर्षति ।१०॥

fa निलीनावाज्ञाय नाधिगम्य पदं नृप।ददाह गिरिमेधोभि: समन्तादग्निमुत्सृजन् ee
तत उत्पत्य तरसा दह्यमानतटादुभौ । ददैकयोजनोत्तुङ्मान्निपेततुरधो afa 1221
अलक्ष्यमाणौ रिपुणा सानुगेन बदूत्तमौ ।स्वपुरुं पुनरायातौ समुद्रपरिखां नृप । १३
distr दग्धाविति मृषा मन्वानो बलकेशवौ । बलमाकृष्य सुमहन्मगधान् मागधो ययौ । १४॥

Sri $uka began again : Thus blessed, 0 dear Pariksit, by Sri Krsna, Mucukunda, a scion
of Ikswaku, went round Him (clockwise as a mark of respect) and, bowing low to Him, came
out (into the open country) through the mouth of the cave. (1) Observing diminutive men,
beasts, plants and trees and concluding the age of Kali to have set in, he proceeded ina
northerly direction.(2) Full of faith in austerities, self-possessed, free from attachment, and
concentrating his mind on Sri Krsna, Mucukunda, who had (all) his doubts cleared, entered
deep into the forest on Mount Gandhamadana. (3) Reaching Badarikagrama (so called
because of its grove of jujube trees), containing the abode of (the divine sages) Nara and
Narayana, he sought the favour of SriHari through asceticism, enduring all pairs of opposites
(such as heat and cold) and remaining tranquil (at all times). (4) Going back to the city (of
Mathura), which continued to be beleaguered by the Yavanas, and wiping out the barbarian
host, the Lord took away their wealth to Dwaraka. (5) While the treasure was (thus) being
carried away on (the back of) oxen and men directed by Sri Krsna (the immortal Lord),
Jarasandha appeared (on the scene) leading an army consisting (as usual) of twenty-three
Akgauhinis. (6) Observing the impetuosity of the onrush of the enemy's host, Balarama and
Sri Krsna (the two Scions of Madhu), who had adopted the ways of human beings, took to
Their heels at once. (7) Leaving the immense spoils (uncared for), the two Brothers covered
many a mile with Their feet, resembling lotus petals, as though terribly afraid, though
(absolutely) fearless. (8) Laughing heartily to see Them flying (like cowards), the powerful
Jarasandha (the ruler of Magadha) pursued Them with the hosts of chariots, not knowing the
