Dis. 19 ] ` BOOK THREE 221

६.३.३.३..३.3.३.३.३.३.७-व व व र्द.दे 3.३.४६.ब--ब-दयेदत-3. 32 SEE EKERENE OHTA ATA OHH HAR RW tee ee Re
ee ee ere eT eae or

more births they will return to their (divine) Abode.” (29)
Gal Hy:
नमो नमस्तेऽखिलयज्ञतन्तवे feat गृहीतामलसत्त्वमूर्तये ।
fen Rise जगतामरुन्तुदस्त्वत्पादभक्त्या वयमीश निर्वृता: 1301

The gods addressed the Lord: Hail, hail to You, the source of all sacrifices; who have
assumed a form consisting of pure Sattva (goodness) for the purpose of maintaining this
world. Fortunately for us this demon, who was a torment to the worlds, has been slain (by
You) and we too, O Lord, are at ease (now) through devotion to Your feet. (30)

एवं हिरण्याक्षमसह्यविक्रमं स सादयित्वा हरिरादिसूकर: |
जगाम लोकं स्वमखण्डितोत्सवं समीडित: पुष्करविष्टरादिभि: 1321
मया यथानूक्तमवादि ते हरे: कृतावतारस्य सुमित्र चेष्टितम्।
यथा हिरण्याक्षॆ उदारविक्रमो महामृधे क्रीडनवन्निराकृत: 1321
Maitreya continued : Having thus killed Hiranyaksa of irresistible prowess, Sri Hari, who
had appeared in the form of the First Boar, retired to His own (divine) realm, which is the
abode of uninterrupted joy; while Brahma (who has his seat on a lotus) and others extolled
him. (31) | have narrated to you, as | was told (by my preceptor), O good friend, the exploits
of Sri Hari, who came down to the material plane (in the form of the divine Boar), and how

that Hiranyaksa of mighty valour was knocked down by Him like a plaything in that great
encounter. (32)

Yd उवाच
इति ARANETA भगवत्कथाम्। क्षत्ताऽनन्दं परं SN महाभागवतो fist 1331
अन्येषां पुण्यश्लोकानामुद्दामयशसां सताम्। उपश्रुत्य भवेन्मोद: श्रीवत्साङ्कस्य किं पुन: । ३४॥

यो गजेन्द्रं झषग्रस्तं ध्यायन्तं चरणाम्बुजम्। क्रोशन्तीनां करेणूनां कृच्छ्रतोऽमोचयद द्गुतम् ।३५॥
तं सुखाराध्यमृजुभिरनन्यशरणैर्नृभि: | Ha: को न सेवेत दुराराध्यमसाधुभि: 1361
यो वै हिरण्याक्षवधं महाद्भुतं विक्रीडितं कारणसूकरात्मन: |
श्रृणोति गायत्यनुमोदतेऽञ्जसा विमुच्यते ब्रह्मवधादपि fem: 1301
प्राणेन्द्राणां युधि शौर्यवर्धनं नारायणोऽन्ते गतिरङ्घ शृण्वताम् । ३८।
इति श्रीमद्घागवते महापुराणे पारमहंस्यां संहितायां तृतीयस्कन्धे हिरण्याक्षवधो नामैकोनविंश्चोऽध्याय: 1291
Sita continued : Hearing the narrative of the Lord as it was told by the sage Maitreya
(son of Kusaru), Vidura, who was a great devotee of the Lord, derived supreme delight, 0
holy sage. (33) One rejoices to hear the life-account even of virtuous souls of sacred renown
and extensive fame; there will be no limit, then, to one's joy on hearing the story of the Lord
who bears the mark of Srivatsa. (34) The Lord quickly delivered from a difficult situation the
lordly elephant who, when seized by an alligator, fixed his mind on His lotus-feet in the midst
of his female companions, who all shrieked (in distress). (35) What grateful soul is there, who
would not devote oneself to such a master, who can be easily pleased by guileless men
resorting exclusively to Him for protection, though the unrighteous find it difficult to propitiate
Him. (36) He, O holy Brahmanas, is speedily and completely absolved even from the sin

attaching to the murder of a Brahmana, who listens to, sings or even applauds the story of
the most wonderful pastime, viz., the destruction of Hiranyaksa at the hands of the Lord, who
