246 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 24

ROW RE OER re eer चोजा EH के कचक ee OE OH Ow Be a EE A SOR RE BAT

Tamasika) Ego and the various spheres as well as their guardians, and then reabsorbs all
these phenomena into Himself by virtue of His energy in the form of Consciousness and who
is the all-witnessing Seer. (33) Acquitted of the debt | owed to my father (Brahma, who had
commanded me to marry and beget children), and having gained all my desires through You,
| now take leave of You, the Lord of all created beings. Treading the path of recluses, | would
roam (at will), free from sorrow, contemplating on You in my heart." (34)

a

श्रीभगवानुवाच
मया ore fe लोकस्य sai सत्यलोकिके। अथाजनि मया qa यदवोचमृतं मुने ।३५॥
एतन्मे we लोकेऽस्मिन्मुमुक्षूणां दुराशयात्।प्रसंख्यानाय तत्त्वानां सम्मतायात्मदर्शाने । ३६॥
एष आत्मपथोऽव्यक्तो AB: कालेन भूयसा । तं प्रवर्तयितुं देहमिमं विद्धि मया भृतम्।३७॥ .
TS HM मयाऽऽपृष्टो मयि संन्यस्तकर्मणा । जित्वा सुदुर्जयं मृत्युममृतत्वाय al भज । ३८1
मामात्मानं स्वयंज्योति: सर्वभूतगुहाशायम्। आत्मन्येवात्मना वीक्ष्य विशोकोऽभयमृच्छसि ।३९॥
मात्र आध्यात्मिकीं feet हामनीं सर्वकर्मणाम् । वितरिष्ये यया चासौ wa चातितरिष्यति ।४०॥

The Lord replied : Whatever | say is an authority to the world in matters secular as well
as sacred. Therefore, it is only to redeem what | said to you (vide verse 32 of Discourse
XXI,above) that | have been born as your son, O sage. (35) My present birth in this world is
meant only for expounding the true nature of the categories so helpful in Self-Realization to
those seeking release from their subtle body. (36) This mysterious path of Self-Knowledge
had been obscured through long ages. Know that this personality has been assumed by Me
in order to revive that path. (37) Allowed by Me, go wherever you like and, conquering death,
which is exceedingly difficult to conquer, through actions dedicated to Me, adore Me witha
view to attaining immortality. (38) Beholding Me—the supreme self-effulgent Spirit dwelling
in the heart of all beings—in your own heart through your intellect, you will be freed from all
sorrow and attain the fearless state (viz., final beatitude). (89) To My mother (Devahuti) as
well | shall impart that spiritual Knowledge, which frees one from the bondage of all actions
and by virtue of which she will get over the fear of transmigration and attain supreme joy. (40)

मेत्रेय उवाच
एवं समुदितस्तेन कपिलेन प्रजापति: i दक्षिणीकृत्य तं प्रीतो वनमेव जगाम ह ।४१॥।
Maitreya resumed : Thus addressed by the celebrated Kapila, Kardama (a lord of

created beings) went round the Lord (as a mark of respect) and straightaway withdrew to the
forest, full of joy. (41)

व्रतं स आस्थितो मौनमात्मैकशारणो मुनि: । नि:सङ्घो कव्यचरत्क्षोणीमनग्निरनिकेतन: 132 |

Ta ब्रह्मणि युञ्जानो यत्तत्सदसत: परम्। गुणावभासे faq एकभक्त्यानुभाविते ॥४३॥

निरहंकृतिर्निर्ममश्च fds: समदृक wen प्रत्यक्त्रशान्तधीर्धीर: प्रशान्तोर्मिरिवोदधि: rsx

वासुदेवे भगवति सर्वज्ञे प्रत्यगात्मनि । परेण भक्तिभावेन लब्धात्मा मुक्तबन्धन: ।४५1

आत्मानं सर्वभूतेषु भगवन्तमवस्थितम्। अपश्यत्सर्वभूतानि भगवत्यपि चात्मनि ie)

इच्छाद्देषविहीनेन सर्वत्र समचेतसा । भगवद्भक्तियुक्तेन oT भागवती ofa: ।४७॥
Observing a vow of non-violence, practised by hermits, and exclusively depending on Sri
Hari (the Supreme Spirit), the sage renounced the sacrificial fire as well as a permanent

dwelling and roamed about the globe, free from attachment. (42) He fixed his mind on
Brahma (the Infinite), who is beyond both cause and effect, who, though devoid of the three
