Dis. 10] BOOK SEVEN 703

RHMMMK EMH S HHA He EHH THEM ATHe Hepes HheeceneTereeKreeer AHH KE HRN Ee
Orc ee ee

preceptor (all in one), is Brahma, the realization of absolute (unconditioned) supreme Bliss
diligently sought after (even) by the great. (49) May this Sri Krsna, the well-known Protector
of devotees, be gracious to us—Sri Krsna, whose essential character has not (so far) been
depicted in its true colours with the help of reason (even) by Lord Siva (the Source of the
universe), Brahma (the lotus-born) and others, and who is adored (by us) through silent
meditation and enquiry, Devotion and control of one's senses and so on (unlike you, who are
on such intimate terms with Him and on whom He lavishes His affection, a privilege which
even Prahrada never enjoyed). (50) He is that very Lord, who spread (revived) of yore, 0
king, the renown of Lord Rudra, which had been marred by (the demon) Maya, who
possessed an endless store of conjuring tricks. (51)
कस्मिन् कर्मणि देवस्य मयोऽहञ्जगदीशितु: | यथा चोपचिता कीर्ति: कृष्णेनानेन कथ्यताम् । ५२1
The king (Yudhisthira) submitted : (Pray) relate (to me) in what (particular) achieve-
ment Maya marred the glory of Lord Siva (the Ruler of the universe) and the way in which
it was enhanced by yonder Sri Krsna. (52)
ING उवाच
a fata पुरस्तिस्रो हैमीरोप्यायसीर्विभु: । दुर्लक्ष्यापायसंचोगा दुर्वितर्क्यपरिच्छदा: । ५४॥
ताभिस्तेऽसुरसेनान्यो लोकांस्त्रीन् सेश्वरान् नृप। स्मरन्तो नाशयाञ्चक्रु: पूर्ववैरमलक्षिता: । ५५॥
ततस्ते सेश्वरा लोका उपासाद्येश्वरं विभो । त्राहि नस्तावकान्देव विनष्टांस्रिपुरालयै: । ५६॥
Narada replied : Utterly defeated in battle (once) by the gods, fostered by Sri Krsna, the
Asuras sought as their protector (the demon) Maya, the supreme teacher of those skilled in
conjuring tricks. (53) Having built three cities (flying fortresses) of gold, silver and steel
(respectively)—whose coming and going could not be easily detected and which were
furnished with articles too numerous to conceive—the powerful demon handed them over
to the Asura chiefs. (54) Remembering their old enmity (with the gods), the aforesaid Asura
generals set about devastating by means of these the three worlds with their rulers, O
Yudhisthira, themselves remaining unperceived. (55) Approaching Lord Siva, the denizens
of these worlds with their rulers then prayed to Him: "O Lord, protect us, Your own people,
(well-nigh) destroyed by the demons ensconced in the three (flying) cities.” (56)
अथानुगृह्य warn भेष्टेति सुरान्विभु:।शरं धनुषि सन्धाय gy व्यमुञ्चत ।५७।
ततोऽग्निवर्णा sua उत्पेतु: सूर्यमण्डलात्। यथा मयूखसंदोहा नादृश्यन्त पुरो यत: । ५८॥
a: स्पृष्टा व्यसव: ad निपेतु: स्म पुरौकस: । तानानीय महायोगी wa: कूपरसेऽक्षिपत् । ५९
सिद्धामृतरसस्पृष्टा वज्रसारा महॊजस: । उत्तस्थुर्मेघदलना वैद्युता इव वह्नय: । ६०॥
Reassuring the gods in the words "Do not be afraid !" the almighty Lord then fitted to His
bow an arrow surcharged with mystic power and discharged it at the three cities. (57) From
that arrow, like streams of rays from the orb of the sun, issued forth (many more) fiery shafts,
screened by which the cities could no longer be seen. (58) Struck by these, all the occupants
of the cities fell down dead. Maya, a great adept in conjuring tricks, fetched and put them into
the nectar-like water of a well (built by himself within the cities). (59) Touched by that nectar-
like fluid endowed with the property of restoring the dead to life, they emerged with an
adamantine frame and possessed of extraordinary strength like fires in the form of lightning
tearing the clouds. (60) ।
