482 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 12

PERK EHARAHCHHKHKHR SEHR HHRECHHREECCEEEECECEHEE CHE REDERAECEK EHEC KEEN EEE EERE
अंसेऽधि aedt शिबिका च ae सौवीरराजेत्यपदेश ore
यस्मिन् var रूढनिजाभिमानो राजास्मि सिन्धुष्विति दुर्मदान्ध:।६।
शोच्यानिमांस्त्वमधिकष्टदीनान् विष्टया निगृह्णन्निरनुग्रहोऽसि।
जनस्य गोप्तास्मि विकत्थमानो न शोभसे वृद्धसभाषु धृष्ट:।७।
aa क्षितावेव urea विदाम fet wt च नित्यम्।
तन्नामतोऽन्यद् anya निरूप्यतां «aq क्रिययानुमेयम्।८।

The Brahmana replied : That which is a modification of earth (itself), traversing its
surface for some reason (or other), O king, comes to be known as this man (a palanquin-
bearer). And above the feet of this (modification of earth) are located the two ankles, the two
shanks, the two knees and the two thighs, the waist, the chest, the neck and the two
shoulders. (5) On one of the shoulders lies the wooden palanquin, in which is seated another
modification of earth bearing the title of Sauviraraja (the king of Sauvira). Having identified
yourself with this, you account yourself as the ruler of the Sindhus (the people of the Sindhu
territory), blinded by vain pride. (6) Nay, constraining these people—who were already
afflicted with great misery (due to poverty) and (therefore) deserved to be pitied (rather than
oppressed)—to do work for you without any remuneration, you are (but) proving your
heartlessness. (Yet) shamelessly bragging that you are a guardian of the people, you
(indeed) cut a sorry figure in the assemblies of the wise. (7) When we know that the (entire)
mobile (animate) and immobile (inanimate) creation invariably springs up from earth and is
reabsorbed into it, tell me if there is any ground for (our manifold worldly) activities—other
than (the) names (of the various earthly objects that we have to deal with in the course of our
activities)—that may be concluded to be real by virtue of the work that we take from it. (8)

wa निरुक्तं क्षितिशब्दवृत्तमसन्निधानात्परमाणवो al
अविद्यया मनसा कल्पितास्ते येषां समूहेन कृतो विशेष:। ९ |
एवं कृशं स्थूलमणुर्वृहद्यदसच्च सज्जीवमजीवमन्यत्।
द्रव्यस्वभावाशयकालकर्मनाम्नाजयावेहि wa द्वितीयम्। १० |
प्रत्यक WI भगवच्छब्दसंज्ञं यद्वासुदेवं कवयो वदन्ति।११।
रहूगणैतत्तपसा न याति न wera निर्वपणाद् गृहाद्वा।
नच्छन्दसा नैव जलाग्निसूर्यैर्विना महत्पादरजोऽभिषेकम्। १२॥
यत्रोत्तमश्लोकगुणानुवाद: प्रस्तूयते ग्राम्यकथाविघात:।
निषेव्यमाणोऽनुदिनं मुमुक्षोर्मतिं सतीं aesfe वासुदेवे। १३॥

What is denoted by the word ‘earth’ is (also) similarly explained because of its being
(ultimately) resolved into the finest atoms (its constituent factors). As for the atoms, by whose
concatenation the element known by the name of earth has been broughtinto existence, they
have been postulated by force of reason through ignorance (because, as a matter of fact,
all these phenomena are but a creation of the Lord's own Maya or creative energy). (9)
Similarly whatever other objective (phenomenal) existence appears to us as lean or stout,
small or big, of the nature of cause or effect, animate or inanimate, know it to be a creation
of Maya (the beginningless creative energy of the Lord) known by various names such as
