Dis. 68 ] BOOK TEN 407

सिर्त्त er ee ee ee २२ २२२4

अद्य निष्कौरवीं पृथ्वीं करिष्यामीत्यमर्षित: । गृहीत्वा हलमुत्तस्थो दहन्निव जगत्त्रयम् ixo!
लाङ्गलाग्रेण wna गजाह्वयम्।विचकर्ष a गङ्गायां प्रहरिष्यन्नमर्षित: xe!

Sri Suka continued : Pariksit, their pedigree, the strength of their kinsmen (Bhisma,
Arjuna and others) and fortune had served to swell their pride. They cast even ordinary
courtesy to the winds and, uttering such harsh words within the hearing of Balarama,
returned to their city.(29) The infallible Balarama observed their discourtesy and heard their
reproaches. Overwhelmed with indignation, and looking (quite) terrific, He burst into
convulsions and said:—-(30) “Certainly these wicked souls are not in favour of conciliation,
elated as they are with pride of various kinds. Chastisement is undoubtedly the best means
of softening such people, just asa staffis necessary to tame the beast. (31) Ohl having slowly
pacified the Yadus, who were terribly excited, as well as Sri Krsna, who was full of rage, |
came here seeking to conciliate them. (32) Butihese slow-witted and wicked fellows are bent
on strife. (Hence) these proud people treated Me, though । was so inclined, scornfully and
showered abuses on Me. (33) Indeed Ugrasena, whose behests are carried out even by
Iridra and the other guardians of the world, is no suzerain lord buta mere ruler of the Bhojas,
Vrsnis and Andhakas. (34) Sri Krsna, who occupies the Sudharma hall and brought the
celestial tree, viz., Parijata (irom heaven) and enjoys it surely does not deserve the royal
throne ! (35) Sri Krsna, whose feet are adored by Laksmi Herself, the mistress of the world,
is certainly not entitled to bear the royal insignia ! (36) He, the dust of whose lotus -feet lends
sanctity (even) to the sacred waters, which are resorted to by holy men.and is borne on their
crowned heads not only by all the guardians of the world (the deities presiding over the
various spheres of the universe), but even so by Brahma and Rudra, (Goddess) Laksmi and
Myself, who are mere fractions of His fractions, is unworthy of a royal seat 1(37) Indeed, the
Yadus rule over a territory bestowed on them by the Kurus ! We are ideed shoes, while the
Kurus represent the head ! (38) Howis it possible for one, who is capable of dealing (proper)
punishment to them. to put up with the harsh and incoherent words of these proud men who
are intoxicated with power and are raving like madmen ? (39) | shall rid the earth of the Kurus
today." With these words Balarama took up (His weapon) the plough, and got up enraged,
as if He would burn (all) the three worlds. (40) With the point of His plough He lifted up the
(whole) city of Hastinapura and began to drag it angrily with a view to throwing it into the
Ganga. (41)

जलयानमिवाघूर्णं गङ्गायां नगरं Wee | आकृष्यमाणमालोक्य कोरवा जात्तसम्भ्रमा: 1421
तमेव wr wy: wee जिजीविषव: । सलक्ष्मणं पुरस्कृत्य साम्बं प्राञ्जलय: प्रभुम् ।४३1
Ta रामाखिलाघार प्रभावं न fam ते। मूढानां न: कुबुद्धीनां क्षन्तुमर्हस्यतिक्रमम् ।४४॥
स्थित्युत्पत्त्यप्ययानां त्वमेको हेतुर्निराश्रय: | लोकान् क्रीडनकानीञ क्रीडतस्त वदन्ति fe su!
।। aiff a व ie ou
अन्ते च च: स्वात्मनि «ges: होषेऽद्वितीय: परिशिष्यमाण: ise!
कोपस्तेऽखिलशिक्षार्थं न द्वेषान्न च मत्सरात्। feat भगवन् सत्त्वं स्थितिपालनतत्पर: । ४७1
नमस्ते सर्वभूतात्मन् सर्वशक्तिधराव्यय | विश्चकर्मन् नमस्तेऽस्तु त्वां वयं BI गता: । ४८1

Being dragged (into water). Hastinapura began to shake like a boat. When the Kauravas
observed that it was falling into the Ganga, they were seized with consternation. (42) Anxious
to save their lives. they placed Samba and Laksmana at their head and, taking their families
with them, sought the almighty Balarama Himself with joined palms for protection. (43) They
said.” O Rama. the Delighter of all, You are (no other than) Sesa (the support of the world).

