798 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 15

SHES SSHK EHH ECERHEHRASCHHSCAAEEK ASEH eH PEI A SMe Seve eH कज्यो tends च घ्रजतरीदी क

(only) those who are free from these defects find access to it.(22) Bali, the (supreme)
commander of his forces, besieged the aforesaid city of the gods on all sides by his army from
without and blew his sonorous conch given (to him) by his preceptor (Sukra), infusing fear
into the ladies (of the household) of Indra. (23)

मघवांस्तमभिप्रेय बले: परममुद्यमम्।सर्वदेवगणोपेतो गुरुमेतदुवाच ह । २४॥

भगवन्नुद्यमो भूयान्बलेर्नन पूर्वबैरिण: । अविषह्यमिमं मन्ये केनासीत्तेजसोर्जित: ।२५॥

नैनं कश्चित् कुतो वापि प्रतिव्योढुमधीश्वर: | पिबन्निव मुखेनेदं लिहन्निव feet दश ।

दहन्निव दिशो दृग्भि: संवर्ताम्निरिवोत्थित: 1261
ब्रूहि कारणमेतस्य दुर्धर्षत्वस्य afd: । ओज: सहो बलं तेजो यत एतत्समुद्यम: 1201
Perceiving it to be the supreme effort of Bali; Maghavan (Indra), accompanied by all the

heavenly hosts, approached the sage Brhaspati (his preceptor) and spoke as follows:— (24)
“The undertaking of Bali, our old enemy, is great, O worshipful one ! (To tell you the truth,)
| account him irresistible; by what power has he become so strong? (25) (In fact,) none is able
on any account whatsoever to beat him back. As though drinking in this (universe) with his
mouth and licking the ten directions (with his tongue) and burning the (four) quarters with his
(fire-shot) eyes, he has sprung (upon us) like the fire of final dissolution.(26) (Pray,) point out
(to me) the cause of such formidableness of my foe, from which have proceeded the strength
of his organs, mind and body as well as his glory, whence this thorough effort (on his part)
has been possible. (27)

गुरुरुवाच

जानामि मघवञ्छत्रोरुन्नतेरस्य कारणम्। शिष्यायोपभृतं तेजो भृगुभिर्ब्रह्मवादिभि: 1201

भवद्बिधो भवान्वापि वर्जयित्वेश्वं हरिम्। नास्य arm: पुर: स्थातुं कृतान्तस्य यथा जना: । २९॥

तस्मान्निलयमुत्सृज्य यूयं सर्वे त्रिविष्टपम्। ara कालं प्रतीक्षन्तो aa: ङत्रोर्विपर्यय: 1301

एष विप्रबलोदर्क सम्प्रत्यूर्जितविक्रम: | तेषामेवापमानेन सानुबन्धो विनङ्खाति।इश्।

एवं सुमन्तितार्थास्ते गुरुणार्थानुदर्शिना । हित्वा त्रिविष्टपं जग्मुर्गीर्वाणा: कामरूपिण: 1321

qaqa निलीनेषु बलिर्वैरोचन: पुरीम्। देवधानीमधिष्ठाय at निन्ये जगत्त्रयम् ।३३॥

तं विश्वजयिनं fret भृगव: शिष्यवत्सला: | aa हयमेधानामनुव्रतमयाजयन् । ३४॥

ततस्तदनुभावेन भुवनत्रयविश्रुताम्। ait दिक्षु वितन्वान: a रेज उडुराडिवि । ३५॥

ay च fre स्वृद्धां द्विजदेवोपलम्भिताम्। कृतकृत्यमिवात्मानं मन्यमानो महामना: 1361

इति श्रीमद्भागवते महापुराणे पारमहंस्यां संहितायामष्टमस्कन्धे पञ्चदशोऽध्याय: 1241

The preceptor (the sage Brhaspati) replied: | Know, O Indra, the cause of the rise of
yonder enemy of yours. (Surely) by the Bhrgus (Sukracarya and the other scions of the sage
Bhrgu), who are (all) exponents of the Vedas, (their own spiritual) energy has been infused
into their disciple (in return for his having surrendered his all to the Bhrgus). (28) Barring (of
course) the almighty SriHari, none like you nor even you can stand before him any more than
created beings can stand before Death.(29) Therefore, quitting heaven, go you all out of

sight, awaiting a (favourable) time which may bring areverse (of fortune) for your enemy. (30)
Rising more and more by the (spiritual) strength of the Brahmanas, he is at the height of
