Dis. 47 ] "BOOK TEN 301

ote Eg SPREE OEE EET PO EE ETE TEETER EET FH ETE EER A A TSA AEG

had appeared (at thehorizon), the (unsophisticated) women of Vraja (who had no knowledge
of the outside world, Sti Krsna being their solitary concern), inquired (of one another) as to
whose chariot it was, and suggested as follows:—{47) "May it be that Akrira—by whom the
lotus-eyed Sri Krsna was taken away to Mathura (the city founded by and named after the
demon Madhu), and who (thus) accomplished the purpose of Karnsa (his master)—has
turned up (once more). (48) Is he (now) going to offer oblations to (the spirit of) his deceased
master with our bodies (flesh)?* While the women were talking in this strain, Uddhava
returned (to Nanda’s residence from the bank of the holy Yamuna) having finished his daily
routine (of bath and devotions). (49)

Thus ends the forty-sixth discourse entitled “Sri Krsna dispels the agony of Nanda,"
in the first half of Book Ten of the great and glorious Bhagavata-Purana,
otherwise known as the Paramahamsa-Samhita.

BA सप्तचत्वारिंशोऽध्याय:

Discourse XLVII

Dialogue between Uddhava and the Gopis and ode to a black bee
श्रीगुक उवाच
4 वीक्ष्य कृष्णानुचरं safes: प्रलम्बबाहुं नवकञ्जलोचनम्।
पीताम्बवरं पुष्करमालिनं लसन्मुखारविन्दं मणिमृष्टकुण्डलम्। १ |
शुचिस्मिता: कोऽयमपीच्यदर्शन: कुतश्च कस्याच्युतबेषभूषण: |
इति स्म सर्वा: परिवव्रुरुत्सुकास्तमुत्तमह्लोकपदाम्बुजाश्रयम् । २ |
तं प्रश्रयेणावनता: सुसत्कृतं सव्रीडहासेक्षणसूनृतादिभि: |
रहस्यपृच्छन्नुपविष्टमासने विज्ञा सन्देशहरं रमापते: । ३ ।
ज्ञानीमस्त्वां यदुपते: ude समुपागतम्।भत्रेंह प्रेषित: पित्रोर्भवान् प्रियचिकीर्षया । ४ ।
अन्यथा Waa तस्य स्मरणीयं न चक्ष्महे। स्नेहानुबन्धथो बन्धूनां मुनेरपि सुदुस्यज: । ५ ।
wage मैत्री यावदर्थविडम्बनम् | पुम्भि: स्रीषु कृता यद्वत् सुमनस्स्विव षट्पदै: । ६ ।
feet त्यजन्ति गणिका अकल्पं नृपतिं प्रजा: । अधीतविद्या आचार्यमृत्विजो दत्तदक्षिणम् । ७ ।
vam वीतफलं वृक्षं भुक्त्वा चातिथयो गृहम्। दग्धं मृगास्तथारण्यं जारो भुक्त्वा रतां स्रियम् । ८ ।
इति tet हि गोविन्दे रातवाक्कायमानसा: । कृष्णदूते aS याते sea त्यक्तलौकिका: । ९ ।
गायन्त्य: प्रियकर्माणि mas गतह्रिय: । तस्य संस्मृत्य संस्मृत्य यानि कैशोरबाल्ययो: 1१०॥
काचिन्मधुकरं दृष्टा ध्यायन्ती कृष्णसङ्घमम्। प्रियप्रस्थापितं दूतं कल्पयित्वेदमब्रवीत् ।११।
इ $uka began again : Gazing on the aforesaid servant of SriKrsna with unusually long
arms, eyes resembling a pair of fresh-blown lotuses anda bright lotus-like countenance, clad
in yellow (silk) and wearing a garland of lotuses and adorned with ear-rings brilliant with

gems, allthe women of Vraja with bright smiles eagerly surrounded Uddhava, who had taken
shelter under the lotus-feet of Sri Krsna (the illustrious Lord), wondering who he was with
