Dis. 19} BOOK ELEVEN 601

EO ENE EE ENERO EEE OE OEE COT EE EE ET OEE

अथैकोनबिंशोऽध्याय:

Discourse XIX
A Dissertation on Devotion, Spiritual Enlightenment and Yogic disciplines
in the form of the five Yamas, the (five) Niyamas and so on

यो विद्याश्रुतसम्पन्न आत्मवान् नानुमानिक: । मायामात्रमिदं ज्ञात्वा ज्ञानं च मयि संन्यसेत् । १ ।
ज्ञानिनस्त्वहमेवेष्ट: स्वार्थो हेतुश्च संमत: । स्वर्गश्चैवापवर्गश्च नान्योऽर्थो waa fea । २ ।
ज्ञानविज्ञानसंसिद्धा॥ पदं श्रेष्ठं विदुर्मम । ज्ञानी प्रियतमोऽतो मे ज्ञानेनासौ बिभर्ति माम् । ३ ।
ततपस्तीर्थं जपो दानं पवित्राणीतराणि च । नालं pata तां सिद्धिं या ज्ञानकलया कृता । ४ ।
तस्माज्ञानेन सहितं ज्ञात्वा स्वात्मानमुद्धव । ज्ञानविज्ञानसम्पन्नो wa मां भक्तिभावित: । ५ ।
ज्ञानविज्ञानयज्ञेन मामिष्टाऽऽत्मानमात्मनि । सर्वयज्ञपतिं at a संसिद्धिं मुनयोऽगमन् । ६ ।
त्वय्युद्धवाश्रयति यस्रिविधो विकारो मायान्तराऽऽपतति नाद्यपवर्गयोर्यत् ।
जन्मादयोऽस्य यदमी aa aw fe स्युराद्यन्तयोर्यदसतोऽस्ति ata मध्ये । ७ ।

The glorious Lord began again: He who is equipped with learning culminating in
intuition, (nay,) who has realized the Self and does not take his stand on (mere) logical
reasoning should know this world of differences (as well as the means of sublating it) to be
a mere phantom appearing in Me and (eventually) relinquish this knowledge too. (This is
what is technically known by the name of Vidwat-Samnyasa.) (1) To a man of wisdom | am
the only beloved: । am recognized to be his purpose (goal) as well as the means of
accomplishing it; lam his heaven (highest joy) and Moksa (release) too; no object other than
Me is dear to him. (2) (Only) those whose mind has been thoroughly purified through
knowledge and realization (of the Self) are able to know My supreme state (glory). The man
of wisdom bears Me up with his knowledge, hence he is most beloved of Me. (3) Askesis,
resorting to sacred places or holy waters, the muttering of prayers, charity and other purifying
agencies do not consummately bring about that perfection which is wrought by a ray of
Knowledge. (4) Therefore. knowing your own self up to the stage of realization, O Uddhava,
and equipped with (such) knowledge and realization and full of Devotion worship Me (alone,
rejecting everything else). (5) Having worshipped Me, their Inner Controller and Bestower
of the fruit of all sacrifices, in their own self (heart), sages have attained to Me alone in the
form of highest perfection (final beatitude). (6) This threefo!d modification (of Prakrti, in the
form of the body. the senses and the mind) that crops up in you, O Uddhava, is (only) an
illusion (and not real) in that it appears in the middle (like the serpent in a rope). and does
notexistin the beginning or at the end. (Hence) when these (six) states—in the shape of birth
etc.,(viz., birth, existence, growth, transformation, decay and death)— befall (by turns) this
psychophysical organism, nothing happens (no chang comes) to you, the substratum
(beyond and unaffected by these states). (Reverting to the illustration of the serpent and the
rope) what (the rope) persists before (the appearance of) and after (the disappearance of)
a phantom (viz., the serpent) also exists in the middle. (Just as the states through which a
serpent passes do not affect its substratum, viz., the rope, the states of the body do not affect
you. the substratum of the body). (7)

आख्याहि faa विश्वमूर्ते त्वद्धक्तियोगं च महद्दिमृग्यम् । ८ ।
[565] B.M. Part II48
