Dis. 31 | BOOK TEN 235

soe gear Tema aah WNW ace 9 WE ELE Sere eer ere Re TE RE a EERE HH NT OO HH I IM

Place on ourhead, O beloved Lord, Your lotus-like palm, that has vouchsafed protection,
O Chief of the Vrsnis, to those that have sought Your feet from fear of transmigration, (nay,)
which grants (all) desires and has clasped the hand of Sri (as a part of the marriage
ceremony). (5) 0 Alleviator of the suffering of the people of Vraja, O gallant Lord, whose
(very) smile crushes the pride (born of unrequited love) of Your own people, accept (in Your
service), O Friend, us, Your (avowed) servants and reveal tous (poor women) Yourcharming
lotus-like countenance.(6) Set on our bosom Your lotus-feet—which dissipate the sins of (all)
embodied beings that bow down to You, which follow (out of affection eve n) animals that live
on grass, (nay,) which are the abode of beauty and prosperity and which were (dauntlessly)
placed on the hoods ofa (terrible) snake (Kaliya)—and thereby soothe the pangs of love pent
up in our heart. (7) (Pray,) revive with the nectar of Your lips O valiant one, these women,
in the person of ourselves, who are ready to do Your bidding and who are getting charmed,
O Lord with lotus eyes, by Your melodious speech, consisting of delightful expressions and
pleasing (even) to the learned. (8) Munificent are those men who extensively recite on earth
Your nectar-like story, which is life-giving to the afflicted, has been celebrated by the wise
and eradicates (all) sins, which is auspicious to hear and is most soothing (too). (9) Your
hearty laugh, O Darling, loving glances and pastimes which are happy to contemplate on and
Your covertjests uttered in secret, that went deep into our heart, really agitate our mind (now
that You are away from us), O deceitful Lover! (10) Ourmind, O beloved Lord, grows uneasy
to think that Your feet, charming as a lotus, get pricked with spikes of corn, blades of grass
and sprouts when You go out of Vraja pasturing the cattle. (41) You kindle love in our heart,
0 gallant Lord, again and again even as You reveal Yourself (before us) at the close of the
day, wearing a countenance overhung by dark curly locks and soiled with the dust raised by
cows (that constitute the wealth of the Gopas), and (thus) resembling a lotus* (surrounded
by black bees and covered with pollen). (12)

arg wt च a mm 7: स्तनेघर्पयाधिहन् 123 1
सुरतवर्धनं 9 - aes स्वरितवेणुना mw चुम्बितम्।

इतररागविस्मारणं yo वितर an नस्तेऽधरामृतम् 12%
कुटिलकुन्तलं श्रीमुखं च 8 जड उदीक्षतां पक्ष्मकृद् दृशाम् ।१५॥

पतिसुतान्वबभ्रातॄबान्धवानतिविलङ्घ्य तेऽन्त्यच्युतागता: |
गतिविदस्तवोद्गीतमोहिता: कितव चोषित: कस्त्यजेन्निशि 1261

ae: श्रियो वीक्ष्य am a मुहुरतिस्पृहा मुह्यते मन: ।१७।

त्वज मनाक च Fee स्वजनहृद्रुजां यन्निषूदनम् RCI

तेनाटवीमटसि aq व्यथते न किंस्वित् कूर्पादिभिर्भरमति धीर्भवदायुषां न: ।१९॥
इति श्रीमद्धागवते महापुराणे weet संहिताया ददमस्कन्धे Wal रासक्रीडायो

गोपीगीतं नामैकत्रिशोऽध्याय: । ३१1

* Lit.. sprung out of water.
