78 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 18

BRR REE RR RRR OR २.३.३.८.३.७.७३.३.३६.३.३.३.३.६.६.६.३८.६.२.६.३ ८.३.१.७..७.३७.७.६.८.३.३.७.७.३.३.३.३.३.७.७.३...३.३.३.३.७.३.६.६.३.३..७.३.३.६ .४ ATE RRR BBY

तदाऽऽर्यधर्मश्च वबिलीयते at वर्णाश्रमाचारयुतस्त्रयीमय: |
ततोऽर्थकामाभिनिवेशितात्मनां et कपीनामिव वर्णसङ्कर: । ४५
धर्मपालो नरपति: स तु AWS बृहच्छ्रवा: | साक्षान्महाभावतो राजर्षिर्हयमेधयाद |
क्षुत्तृदश्रमयुतो दीनो नैवास्मच्छापमर्हति ।४६॥
अपापेषु स्वभृत्येषु बालेनापक्वबुद्धिना । पापं कृतं तद्भगवान् सर्वात्मा क्षन्तुमर्हति Ise!
तिरस्कृता विप्रलब्धा: हप्ता: क्षिप्ता हता अपि । नास्य aa प्रतिकुर्वन्ति तद्भक्ता: प्रभवोऽपि fe isc
sft पुत्रकृताघेन सोऽनुतप्तो महामुनि: | स्वयं विप्रकृतो राज्ञा नैवाघं तदचिन्तयत् xe!
प्रायश: साधवो लोके परैर्दवन्देषु योजिता: । न व्यथन्ति न cea यत आत्माऽगुणाश्रय: 1401
इति श्रीमद्भागवते महापुराणे पारमहंस्यां संहितायां प्रथमस्कन्भे विप्र्लापोपलम्भनं नामाष्टादशोऽध्याय: ।१८।

The boy then returned to his hermitage and, distressed to see his father with a snake
about his neck, wept aloud. (38) On hearing the laments of his son, O Saunaka, the sage
Samika (a scion of Angira) gradually opened his eyes; and throwing off the dead
serpent,which he saw lying across his shoulder, enquired: "Child, wherefore do
you weep? Who has wronged you ?" Thus asked, the boy told him (all that had
happened).(39-40) The Brahmana (Samika) did not applaud his son when he heard of
the execration uttered against the king, who did not deserve it, but said, "Alas ! foolish
child, you have committed a great sin in that you have visited his trivial offence with such
a heavy punishment. (41) It does not behove you to judge a king, who bears the name
of Visnu, by the standard of ordinary men, O child of unripe wisdom ! Protected by his
formidable strength, the people are rid of all fear and secure blessings of all sorts. (42)
When Lord Visnu (who wields a discus in one of his hands), appearing under the name
of 'king', is screened from our view, dear child, thieves will crop forth in large numbers
and the world, which will be unprotected then, will perish like a flock of sheep in a
moment. (43) When the ruler is dead, thieves will rob the people of their property and
the evil that befalls them in this way will now fall on our head (since we shall be held
responsible for the ruler's death, the cause of all this anarchy and lawlessness), even
though we have no direct connection with it; nay, when people take to robbery in large
numbers, they belabour and abuse one another and snatch one another's cattle,
womenfolk and wealth. (44) In such conditions the noble religion of the people, which
derives its authority from the Vedas and is characterized by a course of conduct laid down
for the different grades of society and stages of life, disappears, thence follows a
confusion of castes among men whose hearts are given up to wealth and sense-
gratification, as among dogs and monkeys. (45) Emperor Pariksit, moreover, is a monarch
of wide renown and a defender of righteousness; nay, he is a great devotee of the Lord
and a royal sage who has performed a number of horse-sacrifices. Again, he was
overcome with hunger, thirst and fatigue and absolutely helpless; hence he did not
deserve our curse. (46) May the almighty Lord, who is the Soul of the universe, forgive
the wrong perpetrated by this child of immature understanding against His innocent
servant. (47) Even when reproached, deceived, abused, disregarded or struck by others,
devotees of the Lord never return the wrong done by the wrong-doer, though capable
of doing so." (48) Thus grieved at the wrong done by his son, the great sage (Samika)
did not even think of the offence committed by the king, who had treated him with
disrespect. (49) Generally speaking, holy men in this world neither grieve nor rejoice when
they are subjected to contrary experiences by others; for the soul is ever beyond the three
Gunas. (50)

