Dis. 17] ~ BOOK ONE 1३

प्नेघेभेगेगेधैघेर्घोशैगैशैभ्रेश्चैषैषींग्नीपैगैषोठीधैध्रेघेष्टौ'ष्ठीर्यं॰’ष्पैपुप्नेर्णेप्री*र्धषींथौद्यै’यीथौथौर्पं.’घ्रोघेर्पार्पाघेभौद्बीघे»रेभांनींष्ठी’र्गांमैध्रेफ्रीर्व्यर्गीषींर्गांर्घोर्षामैषींधीधैध्रंमाँद्बीधीषींषींमैभंध्रंफ्रिमाँग्नेध्रे'

in compliance with your orders. (37)
सूत उवाच
अभ्यर्थितस्तदा तस्मै स्थानानि कलये ददौ। द्यूतं पानं स्रिय: सूना यत्राधर्मश्चतुर्बिध: ।३८॥
पुनश्च याचमानाय जातरूपमदात्प्रभु: । ततोऽनृतं मदं कामं रजो At च पञ्चमम् । ३९॥
अमूनि wa स्थानानि ह्यधर्मप्रभव: कलि: । औत्तरेयेण anf न्यवसत् तन्निदेशकृत् ISO |
अथैतानि न aaa ayy: gee: क्वचित्। विशोषतो धर्मशीलो राजा लोकपतिर्गुरु: । ४१॥
वृषस्य Awa पादान् तप: Bet दयामिति । प्रतिसंदध आश्वास्य महीं च समवर्धयत् ।४२॥
स एष एतर्ह्यध्यास्त आसनं पार्थिवोचितम्। पितामहेनोपन्यस्तं राज्ञारण्यं विविक्षता ।४३॥
आस्तेऽधुना स waft: कौरवेन्द्रश्रियोल्लसन्। गजाह्वये महाभागश्चक्रवर्ती बृहच्छ्रवा: ।४४॥
इत्थम्भूतानुभावोऽयमभिमन्युसुतो नृप: । यस्य पालयत: क्षोणीं यूयं ware दीक्षिता: iy
इति श्रीमद्भागवते महापुराणे पारमहंस्यां संहितायां प्रथमस्कन्धे कलिनिग्रहो नाम सप्तदश्ञोऽध्याय: 12101
Suta continued :Thus entreated by Kali, the king then allocated to him the following
(four) places—dice, wine, woman and shambles, the hotbeds of the four vices (falsehood,
intoxication, passion and cruelty). (38) On Kali asking for more abodes, the mighty king
assigned him gold (as the fifth abode). Thus he allotted to him falsehood, intoxication,
passion and slaughter with animosity as the fifth. (39) In obedience to the king's command
Kali, the progenitor of unrighteousness, occupied these five abodes assigned by Pariksit
(the son of Uttara). (40) Hence a man seeking blessedness, especially a pious monarch,
a leader of the people and a religious preceptor should never resort to these. (41) The
king then restored the three lost legs of the bull, viz., penance, purity and compassion,
and comforted and cherished mother Earth. (42) The selfsame monarch still occupies the
royal throne which was bequeathed to him by his granduncle, king Yudhisthira, while
retiring to the forest. (43) Shining with the glory of the Kaurava kings, that most blessed
emperor of extensive renown,the royal sage Pariksit dwells even now at Hastinapura. (44)

Such is the majesty of king Pariksit (the son of Abhimanyu) during whose rulership over
the earth you have undertaken the vow of performing this sacrifice. (45)*

Thus ends the seventeenth discourse entitled "The Subjugation of Kali",
in Book One of the great and glorious Bhagavata-Purana,
otherwise known as the Paramaharnsa-Samhita

१०० peat £5,
PII Si ee

ee

"In verses 43 to 45 the great king Pariksit has been spoken of as if he were present at the time when the holy sacrifice
at Naimisaranya was in progress. According to the aphorism of Panini ` वर्तमानसामौप्ये वर्तमानवद्वा` the present tense can be used even
with reference to the immediate past or future. The great Acarya Vallabha of revered Memory points out in his famous
commentary (the Subodhini) that, even though Parikslthad departed from this world, his renown and glory were still alive. The
distance of time which divided him from the Period of the sacrifice undertaken by Saunaka and others has been eliminated in
order to evoke the utmost reverence for him. His soul had merged in the Lord; that was also one reason why Suta visualized
him as present before his eyes. Not only the learned speaker but his saintly audience too felt his presence. According to the
Vedic maxim ‘sara 4 जायते qa: (the father himselfis rebornasa son)it was Pariksit himselfwho occupied the throne of Hastinapura
in the person of his son and worthy successor, Janamejaya. Considered from all these points of view, a reference to Pariksit
in the present tense goes to heighten the effect of the discourse.

[564] B. M. 5—
