enemies, O king, treat him as च model (of virtue) in their assemblies holding discourses on
the lives of pious souls ! What wonder, then, that others, like you should do it ? (35) It is futile
(indeed) to recount his excellences which are innumerable. The greatness of Prahrada, in
whom could be seen a natural affinity for Lord Vasudeva, is (only) hinted at (in the following
words). (36) ॥
न्यस्तक्रीडनको बालो जड्वत्तन्मनस्तया | कृष्णग्रहगृहीतात्मा न वेद जगदीदृशम् । 319 |
आसीन: dese, ram: प्रपिबन् व्रुवन् । नानुसन्धत्त एतानि गोविन्दपरिरम्भित: । ३८॥
क्वचिद्गुदति वैकुण्ठचिन्ताशबलचेतन: | क्वचिद्धसति तच्चिन्ताह्लाद उद्गायति क्वचित् । ३९॥
नदतिक्वचिदुत्फण्ठोविलज्जौनृत्यतिक्वचित्। Saar STR ह ।४०॥
Tare संस्पर्शनिर्वृत: | अस्पन्दप्रणयानन्दसलिलामीलितेक्षण: ।४१॥
स जाक्ताकण्याविक्यानिफ्याक्रेप्तास्रङ्मल्च्यया ।
तन्वन् परां निर्वृतिमात्मनो मुहुर्दु:सङ्घदीनान्यमन:ञमं व्यधात् ।४२॥
तस्मिन्महाभागवते महाभागे महात्मनि | हिरण्यकशिपू राजन्नकरोदघमात्मजे ।४३॥
Having laid aside playthings even as a child, Prahrada, who looked like a dunce by
reason of his mind being (fully) absorbed in the Lord, and whose soul was Possessed by Lord
Sri Krsna as though by some spirit, did not view the world as such (as it appears to worldly
men, but as full of Sri Krsna). (37) Sitting or walking, eating or drinking, lying down or
speaking, he was never conscious of theseacts, finding himself constantly folded in the arms

of Lord Govinda (the Protector of cows). (38) Now he would cry (in agony at the sudden
disappearance of the Lord), his mind overwhelmed with the thought of Lord Visnu; now

Sing His praises at the pitch of his voice. (39) Now he shrieked with open throat and now he
would dance casting all bashfulness to the winds (as it were). Now imagining himself to be
(none else than) the Lord and completely merged in Him, he imitated His doings. (40)
Enraptured by the thought of having become one with Him, he would now sit mute with the
hair on his body Standing erect and his half-closed eyes brimful with tears of joy brought by
constant love. (41) By devoted service to the lotus-feet of the Lord of excellent renown,
obtained as a reward of the fellowship of devotees Claiming nothing as their Own, he not
only brought supreme felicity to himself but also soothed the mind of others (other Daitya
boys who were his fellow-students), miserable through evil inclination (attachment to the
pleasures of sense). (42) It was such an illustrious and high-souled son, a great devotee of
the Lord, O Yudhisthira, that Hiranyakasipu sought to harm. (43)

युधिष्ठिर उवाच
tat एतदिच्छामो वेदितुं तव Qed | यदात्मजञाय शुद्धाय पितादात् साधवे ह्यघम् ।४४॥
पुत्रान् विप्रतिकूलान् स्वान् पितर: पुत्रवत्सला: | उपालभन्ते frend नैवाघमपरो यथा su
पितु: पुन्रप्ययद्ट्टेपोमश्यायप्नयोजित: ।४६॥
Yudhisthira submitted : O celestial Sage of excellent vows, we are anxious to know
from you wherefore Hiranyakasipu (Prahrada's father) actually inflicted suffering on his
innocent and righteous son (Prahrada). (44) Fathers fond of their sons do admonish their

‘efractory sons in order to correct them; but inno case do they persecute them as an enemy
vould. Much less would they oppress obedientand pious sons like Prahrada, who look upon
