SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis..2

SOR ROR जजो Rona RR ROR RR उ RRR By BBR A AE Rr rR PTE Re Re Re he ती क ॐ a RR By ह a ति री BH A त्री ह

liquidated. (21) That is why with utmost delight the wise constantly practise devotion to Lord
Vasudeva which purifies the soul. (22)
wea रजस्तम इति प्रकृतेर्गुणास्तैर्युक्त: पर: पुरुष एक इहास्य धत्ते ।
स्थित्यादये हरिविरिञ्चिहरेति aa: श्रेयांसि तत्र ae सत्त्वतनोर्नृणां स्यु: 1231
पार्थिवाद्दारुणो धूमस्तस्मादग्निसत्रयीमय: | तमसस्तु रजस्तस्मात्सत्त्वं यद्ब्रह्मदर्शनम् । २४
भेजिरे मुनयोऽथाग्रे भगवन्तमधोक्षजम्। ad faqs aera कल्पन्ते येऽनु तानिह । २५1
मुमुक्षवो घोररूपान् हित्वा भूतपतीनथ । नारायणकला: ङान्ता भजन्ति ह्यनसूयव: ।२६॥
रजस्तम:प्रकृतय: समञज्ञीला भजन्ति वै । पितृभूतप्रजेशादीन् श्रियैश्चर्यप्रजेप्सव: 1291
वासुदेवपरा वेदा वासुदेवपरा मखा:। वासुदेवषरा योगा वासुदेवपरा: क्रिया: ।२८॥
वासुदेवपरॆ ज्ञानं वासुदेवपरं तप:।वासुदेवपरो धर्मो वासुदेवपरा गति: 121
a We ससर्जाग्रे भगवानात्ममायया । सदसद्रूपया चासौ गुणमय्यागुणो fay: । ३०॥
तया विलसितेष्ठेषु गुणेषु गुणवानिव । अन्त:प्रविष्ट आभाति विज्ञानेन विजृम्भित: 1391
यथा ह्यवहितो वह्निर्दारुष्रेक: स्वयोनिषु । ara भाति विश्चात्मा yay च तथा पुमान् । ३२॥
असौ गुणमयैर्भावैर्भूतसूक्ष्मेन्द्रियात्मभि: | स्वनिर्मितेषु ffs भुङ्क्ते भूतेषु तद्गुणान् ।३३॥
भाबयत्येष सत्त्वेन लोकान् वै लोकभावन: | लीलावतारानुरतो देवतिर्यङ्नरादिषु । ३४॥
इति श्रीमद्भागवते महापुराणे पारमहंस्यां संहितायां प्रथमस्कन्धे नैमिषीयोपाख्याने द्वितीयोऽध्याय: ।। २ ।।

Sattva, Rajas and Tamas are the three attributes or modes of Prakrti (Primordial Matter);
assuming these for the preservation, creation and destruction of this universe, the one
Supreme Person severally bears the names of Hari (Visnu), ViriAci (Brahma) and Hara
(Siva). Yet the supreme good of men flows from Sti Hari alone, whose body consists of pure
Sattva. (23) Just as smoke is higher (more active) than wood, whichis an earthly substance
(and hence inert and dull), and higher than smoke is fire, which is associated with many
sacrificial acts recommended inthe three Vedas, even so Rajas (the principle of motion or
activity) is superior to Tamas (darkness or inertia) and even higher than Rajas is Sattva (the
principle of light or knowledge), with the help of which one is able to realize God. (24) Of yore
sages worshipped for their salvation Bhagavan Visnu alone, who is pure Sattva personified.
Even now those who follow in their footsteps likewise get qualified for blessedness. (25)
Those seeking liberation worship Bhagavan Narayana and His part manifestations, all of
whom are so gentle in aspect, leaving alone the lords of evil spirits (Bhairava and others),
who possess a terrible form, though not reviling them. (26) Those, however, who possess
a Rajasika or Tamasika disposition and are seekers of wealth, power and progeny, worship
the manes, evil spirits and the lords of created beings, possessing as they do a character
similar to theirs. (27) The Vedas ultimately treat of Bhagavan Vasudeva; the sacrifices
themselves aim at the attainment of Vasudeva; the various Yogas eventually lead to
Vasudeva; and all sorts of rituals too have their end in Vasudeva. (28) All wisdom has its
culmination in Vasudeva; all austere penance has Vasudeva for its goal; all virtue aims at
the realization of Vasudeva and all destinies culminate in Vasudeva. (29) Although the Lord
is Himself beyond Prakrti (Primordial Matter), and its three modes (Sattva etc.), yet it was
He who evolved this universe at the beginning (of creation) through His own Maya (Prakrti),
which consists of the aforesaid three Gunas and is both real (in its phenomenal aspect) and
unreal (ontologically speaking). (30) Having entered into these three Gunas, that have been
evolved by the aforesaid Maya, He appears as possessed of these Gunas, though
essentially He is Consciousness personified. (31)Just as fire, though really one, appears as
many when abiding in the different logs of wood that manifest it, so does God, the soul of
the universe, (though essentially one) appear as many, when manifested in different
