Dis. 5] ह्मा BOOK ONE 17
Pr Rr Re Sri FR RA PL PEER RY Be Bt RH RR Sr SH Re PL MRT MR Re BSE PONT BEM BY Br HTH MRT Re BE BTR Re RRO RT HHT Re BS BY Rr Hat Ry Be Ge ART rhe Be Br Sr er we er Re Pe
dedicated to God serve to heighten one's glory ? (12) Endowed with an unfailing eye and
possessed ofsacred renown, O highly blessed Vyasa, you are devoted to truth and steadiast
ofresolve. Therefore, with a concentrated mind now recall the exploits of Sri Hari, who wields
unthinkable power, with a view to the liberation of the entire humanity. (13) The man who
desires to talk of anything else than the Lord's exploits falls into the trap of the manifold
names and forms, evolved by such desire and sees diversity everywhere. Like a boat beaten
by a blast, his unsteady mind finds no rest anywhere. (14) ॥ was a great error on your part
to have enjoined horrible acts (acts involving destruction of life) in the name of religion on
men who are naturally addicted to such acts. Misguided by these precepts of yours the
ordinary man of the world would believe such acts to be pious and would refuse to honour
the teachings that prohibit such actions. (15) Only some wise man can by withdrawing from
worldly. enjoyments experience the (supreme) bliss which forms the essential character of
the eternal and infinite Lord. Therefore, kindly narrate the exploits of the Lord for the good
of those who are working under the impulse of the three Gunas (modes of Prakrti) and lack
the spiritual sense. (16) Has evil ever befallen him anywhere (in any womb or birth), who
adores the lotus-feet of Sri Hari neglecting his own duty, even ifhedies at a stage when he
is yet unripe in his devotion, or falls from his Sadhana? On the other hand, what purpose has
been achieved by those who fail to worship God, through devotion to their duty ? (17) A wise
man should strive after that object alone which cannot be attained by going round from the
highest (Brahma's abode) to the lowest (infernal) regions. As for the pleasures of sense they
are had as a matter of course everywhere like sorrow as a result of past actions by flux of
time, whichis too quick to be perceived. (18) Dear Vyasa, a servant of Lord Mukunda (lit. the
Bestower of Liberation) never returns to this world, consisting of birth and death, like others
(i.e., men of action who are averse to the Lord's worship) even if by accident he turns averse
to Him at any time. Recalling the joy of having once (mentally) embraced the Lord's lotus-
feet, he would not think of abandoning them, since he has tasted their sweetness . (19) This
universe is no other than the Lord, who is yet apart from it, being responsible for the
continuance, destruction and coming into being of this world. You know it yourself; yet | have
indicated it to you by way of a hint. (20) O Vyasa of unfailing vision, know it for yourself that
you are a ray of the Highest Person, the Supreme Spirit, and that, though unborn, you have
taken birth for the good of the world. Therefore, describe at full length the exploits of the Lord
of exalted glory. (21) The wise have declared that the abiding purpose of man's austere
penance, sacred knowledge, sacrificial performances, recitation of the Vedas with correct
intonation, enlightenment and bestowal of gifts is to recount the virtues of that Lord of
excellent fame. (22) During the last Kalpa, in my previous existence, O sage, | was born of
a maid-servant of Brahmanas well-versed in the Vedas. While yet a boy, | was told off to
serve some Yogis (wandering ascetics) who wished to stop at one place during the
rains.(23) Though a mere child, । was free from all childish frolics, was quite tame and
submissive, spoke little and remained aloof from playthings. Though viewing all alike, the
sages were particularly kind to me, who did all kinds of service to them. (24) With the willing
consent of those Brahmanas | ate, once in twenty-four hours, whatever was left in their
dishes after they had finished their meals, and was thereby cleansed of all sins. Thus
engaged in their service, | attained purity of mind, which conceived a liking for their religious
creed (the creed of Devotion). (25) There (in that society of godly men) by the grace of those
saints, who were given to singing the Lord's praises, | would daily listen to the soul-ravishing
stories of SriKrsna. Evenas | heard these stories with reverence, O dear Vyasa, step by step
| developed an attraction for the Lord of delightful fame. (26) When | developed an affinity
for Him, O great sage, my mind got firmly established in that Lord of delightful glory; through
such a mind | began to perceive the whole of this gross and subtle world as assumed in me,
