368 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 17

RRA REE कौजा EEE ANGE OAK ELL SHEERS EEA HKES HS ECSUR EKA EARS AERA EEA ERE

woman or a sexless person—who is merciless to (other) beings, is no killing (at all). (26)
Having torn you with arrows into pieces as minute as sesamum seeds—you, who are
stubborn and arrogant and have assumed the illusory appearance of a cow—| shall support
these created beings by sheer dint of my Yogic (supernatural) power. (27)
एवं wordt मूर्तिं कृतान्तमिव बिभ्रतम् । प्रणता प्राञ्जलि: प्राह मही सञ्जातवेपथु: ।२८॥
Seized with a tremor and bowing low, Earth spoke with joined palms to the king, who like
Death bore a form which was the very embodiment of wrath. (28)

7: We yr मायया विन्यस्तनानातनवे गुणात्मने ।
नम: स्वरूपानुभवेन निर्धुतद्रव्यक्रियाकारकविभ्रमोर्मये । २९॥
a wa मां हन्तुमुदायुध: स्वराडुपस्थितोऽन्यं wot कमाश्रये । ३०॥
य एतदादावसृजच्चराचरं स्वमाययाऽऽत्माश्रययावितर्क्यया ।
waa सोऽयं किल गोप्तुमुद्यत: wet नु मां धर्मपरो जिघांसति । ३१1
न Wed यस्त्वकरोदकारयदयोऽनेक एक: परतश्च SAT: 1321
सर्गादि योऽस्यानुरुणद्धि झक्तिभिर्द्रव्यक्रियाकारकचेतनात्मभि: |
तस्मै समुन्नद्धनिरुद्धशक्तये नम: Ue पुरुषाय वेधसे ise
a बै भवानात्मविनिर्मितं ane भूतेन्दियान्तरकरणात्मकं विभो ।
aera मा रसातलादभ्युज्जहाराम्भभ आदिसूकर: ।३४॥
same मयि नाव्यवस्थिता: प्रजा ware रिरक्षिषु: किल ।
a वीरमूर्ति समभूद्धराधरो यो मां पयस्युग्रशरो जिघांससि । ३५॥
नूनं जनैरीहितमीश्वराणामस्मद्विधैस्तद्गुणसर्गमायया ।
न ज्ञायते मोहितचित्तवर्त्मभिस्तेभ्यो नमो वीरयशस्करेभ्य: ।३६॥
इति श्रीमद्भागवते महापुराणे पारमहंस्यां संहितायां चतुर्थस्कन्धे पृथुविजये धरित्रीनिग्रहो नाम सप्तदशोऽध्याय: 12191
Earth said : Hail, hail to the transcendent Person, who evolves diverse forms by dint of
His Maya (creative energy) and appears as constituted of the three Gunas (modes of
Prakrti), though (really speaking) He has by (constantly) realizing His essential nature
eliminated all (possibilities of) identification with physical matter (Adhibhita), the Jiva or
embodied spirit (Adhidaiva) and the Controller of both (Adhiyajfia) and is (therefore) above
all modifications (in the shape of likes and dislikes resulting from such identification). (29)
The same supreme Maker by whom | have been created to be the abode of living beings and
from whom has proceeded this creation consisting of the three Gunas (modes of Prakrti) is
ready with uplifted weapon to strike me ! Whom else shall | (now) resort to for protection ?
(30) He who evolved at the dawn (of creation) this world consisting of animate and inanimate
beings by dint of His Maya (creative energy), which rests on Himself and is beyond all
speculative reasoning, is now out to protect it by the same Maya. How should He seek to kill
me, devoted as He is to righteousness ? (31) The Lord Almighty, though one, appears as
many by virtue of His Maya. It is He who evolved Brahma (the creator) and caused the
universe to be brought about by him. Surely the doings of such a Lord cannot be understood
by men whose mind is tossed by His Maya, which is so hard to conquer. (32) Hail to the
