Dis. 3 ] BOOK SEVEN . 657

Re RRR आजा जाजा कजाजा Oe OF जा ert ete re eB BH

Hiranyakasipu went on: While the child was thus discoursing, all the relations of king
Suyajfia felt astonished and realized everything as transient and unreal. (58) Having
narrated this (legend), Yama (the god of retribution) disappeared on that very spot. The
relations of Suyajia too performed what was conducive to his future (other-worldly)
good.(59) Hence don't you grieve for another nor even for yourselves. Apart from the
preconceived notion distinguishing one's own self from another, which is nothing but
ignorance, what distinction is there between one's own self and another or again between
one's own possession and that belonging to another in the eyes of embodied souls in this
world ? (60)

IRE उवाच
इति दैत्यपतेर्वाक्यं दितिराकर्ण्य सुस्नुषा । पुत्रशोकं क्षणात्त्यक्त्वा तत्त्वे चित्तमधारयत् 1&2 |

Narada continued : Hearing this speech of Hiranyakasipu (the lord of the Daityas), Diti
(his mother) along with her daughter-in-law (the widow of Hiranyaksa, his younger brother)
instantly gave up sorrowing for her son (Hiranyaksga) and fixed her mind on the (highest)
truth.(61)

Thus ends the second discourse entitled “Diti rid of her sorrow",
in Book Seven of the great and glorious Bhagavata-Purana,
otherwise known as the Paramahamsa-Samhita.

cb Raced २५२७ १ .
PISS Siro

अथ तृतीयोऽध्याय:

Discourse IIl

Hiranyakasipu asks a number of boons (of Brahma,
who is pleased with his austerities)

ARG उवाच
हिरण्यकरशिपू राजन्नजेयमजरामरम्। आत्मानमप्रतिद्वन्द्वमेकराजं व्यधित्सत । १ ।
स तेपे weal aa: परमदारुणम्। ऊर्ध्वबाहुर्नभोदृष्टि: पादाङ्गुष्ठाश्रित्ताबनि:।र।
जटादीधितिभी रेजे संवर्तार्क इवांशुभि: । तस्मिंस्तपस्तप्यमाने देवा: स्थानानि भेजिरे । ३ ।
wa qd: aye: सधूमोऽग्निस्तपोमय: | तिर्यगूर्ध्वमधोलोकानतपद्विष्गीरित: । ४ ।

चुक्षुभुर्नद्युदन्वनत्तत सद्बीपाद्रिश्चचाल भू:। निपेतु: सग्रहास्तारा जज्वलुश्च feet दा । ५ ।

aa am fea त्यक्त्वा ब्रह्मलोकं ययु: सुरा: । धात्रे विज्ञापयामासुर्देवदेव जगत्पते । ६ ।

दैत्येन्द्रतपसा am दिवि era न शाक्नुम: । तस्य dest भूमन् विधेहि af मन्यसे ।
लोकानयावन्नङ्खान्तिबलिहारास्तवाभिभू:।…

wert किल सङ्कुल्पश्चरतो est तप:। श्रूयतां किं न विदितस्तवाथापि निवेदित: । ८ ।

Be चराचरमिदं तपोयोगसमाधिना | अध्यास्ते सर्वधिष्ण्येभ्य: परमेष्ठी निजासनम्। ९ ।

ace तर्धमानेन तपोयोगसमाधिना | कालात्मनोश्च नित्यत्वात्साधयिष्ये तथाऽऽत्मन: 1201
अन्यथेदं विधास्येऽहमयथापूर्वमोजसा | किमन्यै: कालनिर्धूते: कल्पान्ते वेष्णवादिभि: । ११ 1

sf yam feat aa: परममास्थित: । विधत्स्वानन्तरं ah स्वयं त्रिभुवनेश्वर । १२॥
