654 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 2°

क की व व क फि कक ता कौ की त्थ को कीं क्रं क्तत् व्ये HOE EEDAREROHHEREHARECRERECHH ERE SEARLE HSE ESHHR EEA
त्तताजा

seats fair तथा कृतं fe महिष्य: प्रसमीक्ष्य दु:खिता: ।
हता: स्मनाथेतिकारुरोभृज्ञघ्नन्त्यम्यामुहुस्तत्पदयारुपम्पतन्।इभ्ट।
we उच्चैर्दयिताङ्ध्रि पङ्कजं fer we: कुचकुङ्कुमारुणै: |
विस्रस्तकेशाभरणा: zt Ft Gr आक्रन्दनया बिलेपिरे ।३२।
aa विधात्राकरुणेन न: प्रभो भवान् प्रणीतो दृगगोचरां aM
उशीनराणामसि वृत्तिद: qa कृतोऽधुना येन yar विवर्धन: 1331
त्वया कृतज्ञेन ad महीपते ai fe we gen ते।
तत्रानुयानॆ wa dk wed: जुश्रूषतीनां fer az यास्यसि ।३४॥
एवं विलपतीनां a परिगृह्य ga पतिम्। अनिच्छतीनां निर्हारमर्कोऽस्ते संन्यवर्तत ।३५॥
wa ह प्रेतबन्धूनामाश्रुत्य परिदेवितम्। आह तान् बालको भूत्वा यम: स्वयमुपागत: ।३६॥

Closely observing their husband, the lord of the Usinaras, reduced to such a (pitiable)
plight by Providence, the queens felt (much) distressed. Violently beating their breast with
their hands again and again and exclaiming “We are lost. O lord!” they dropped down beside
his feet. (31) Weeping loudly and bathing the lotus-feet of their beloved husbend with their
tears, tinted reddish with the saffron paste on their breasts, and causing grief in the heart of
men, the ladies wailed piteously, their locks and jewels loosened and displaced : (32) “Alas,
by the pitiless Providence, O lord, you have been reduced to a state (of existence) beyond
the range of our sight ! Once the life-giver (support) of the Usinaras (the inhabitants of this
land), you have now been made by Him the augmenter of their woes. (33) How can we, 0
ruler of the earth, live without you, our dearest friend, who were disposed to appreciate
whatever was done to you (by way of service)? (Therefore,) permit us, servants of your feet,
O brave one, to follow you to the place where you will go." (34) While they lamented as
aforesaid, clutching their dead husband and unwilling to have him carried out for cremation,
the sun actually sank below the horizon. (85) On hearing the lament of the relations of the
deceased monarch, it is said, Yama (the god or retribution) himself appeared there in the
form of a child and addressed them (as follows). (36)

यम उवाच
यत्रागतस्तत्र Ts AWS wa सधर्मा अपि जोचन्त्यपार्थम् ise
अहो वयं धन्यतमा gen am: पितृभ्याँ न विचिन्तयाम: |
अभक्ष्यमाणा अबला वृकादिभि: a रक्षिता रक्षति यो fe गर्भे । ३८॥
च इच्छयेश: सृजतीदमव्ययो य wa रक्षत्यवलुम्पते च चय: ।
तस्याबला: क्रीडनमाहुरीशितुश्चराचरं निग्रहसङ्ग्रहे प्रभु: 1381
जीवत्यनाथोऽपि तदीक्षितो at गृहेऽपि गुप्तोऽस्य edt न जीवति ।४०॥

Yama said : Oh the infatuation of these, my superiors in age, who clearly perceive the
course of the world (the inevitability of death for everyone that is born) ! Though themselves
alike in nature (equally mortal), they bewail in vain the man who has returned to the source
(the Unmanifest) whence he came ! (37) Ah, most blessed are we that have no anxiety

(whatsoever) and who are not being devoured by wolves and other carnivorous animals,
though weak and forsaken here (in this world full of woes) by our parents (who were
