Dis. 25 ] BOOK FOUR 405

RAE क ति बौ EHH यज गिन्र EEE के लीन्रजा HEHE CREE EKER EER HEEL विज्जछै KEE डौ ती ज ती डौ KH

long.(74) Of all the blessings here spiritual enlightenment leading to final beatitude is the
highest. He who sails in the bark of wisdom easily crosses the ocean of misery (in the
shape of metempsychosis), so difficult to cross. (75) Imbued with reverence, he who dwells
upon this hymn in praise of the Lord, sung by me, willbe able to propitiate SriHari, (otherwise)
so difficult to please. (76) A man whois steady of mind obtains whatever he desires from that
Lord, the sole repository of (all) blessings, when He is celebrated through this hymn sung
by Me andis highly pleased thereby. (77) Rising before daybreak and full of faith, any mortal
who listens to or recites it (to others) with joined palms is freed from all shackles of
Karma.(78) Repeating with a concentrated mind this hymn in praise of the supreme Purusa,
the Oversoul, sung by Me, O princes, practise austerities; thereby you will attain in the long
run the object sought for (by you). (79)

Thus ends the twenty-fourth discourse entitled "The hymn sung by Lord Rudra",
in Book Four of the great and glorious Bhagavata-Purana,
otherwise known as the Paramaharhsa-Samhita.

St PINT Et १५
eI SS Siege

अथ पञ्चविंशोऽध्याय:

Discourse XXV

Introductory part of the parable of Purafijana
HAY उवाच

sft afera भगवान् बार्हिषदैरभिपूजित: | पर्यतां राजपुत्राणां तत्रैवान्तर्दथे हर: । १ ।
watt Wea: Re सर्वे प्रचेतस:। जपन्तस्ते तपस्तेपुर्वर्षाणामयुतं जले । २ ।
प्राचीनबर्हिषं क्षत्त: कर्मस्वासक्तमानसम्।नारदोऽध्यात्मतत्त्वज्: कृपालु: प्रत्यबोधयत् । ३ ।
Tea कतमद्राजन् कर्मणाऽऽत्मन ईहसे। दु:खहानि: सुखावाप्ति: श्रेयस्तन्नेह Bets ४ |

Maitreya continued : Having thus instructed the Pracetas (the sons of Barhisad), and
duly worshipped by them, Lord Siva (the Destroyer of the universe) disappeared on that very
spot, while the princes stood gazing. (1) Repeating the hymn of praise to the Lord, sung by
Sri Rudra (the god of destruction), all the Pracetas practised austerities for a myriad years;
standing in water. (2) (In the meantime) O Vidura, the sage Narada, a knower of the truth
of the Spirit and compassionate by nature, admonished (their father) Pracinabarhi, whose
mind was attached to rituals, (as follows). (3) “What good, O king, do you seek for yourself
through rituals? (True) welfare lies in the cessation of sorrow and the attainment of
happiness, and such welfare is not expected from them." (4)

राजोवाच

न जानामि महाभाग परं कर्मापविद्धधी: । ब्रूहि मे विमलं ज्ञानं येन मुच्येय कर्मभि: । ५ ।
गृहेषु कूटधर्मेषु पुत्रदारधनार्थधी: । न परं विन्दते मूढो भ्राम्यन् संसारवर्त्मसु । ६ ।

The king (Pracinabarhi) replied : | know not the supreme good, O blessed one, my
mind being distracted by (the thought of) rituals. (Therefore) pray, impart to me that pure
wisdom whereby | may be freed from (the shackles of) Karma. (5) Sticking to the life of a
householder—where one performs actions prompted by interested motives—and regarding
sons, wife and riches as the (only) object of human pursuit, an ignorant man fails to attain
