Dis. 11] BOOK NINE 49

शककशाशाशशशाहाशशाटासालालालालाशाशालाकालाहासाहाकालकाकाकाशकाहकाङट्हकिशशरम9किकशि १8 १३8 ककक ककक शाक

प्रासादगोपुरसभाचैत्यदेवगृहादिषु । विन्यस्तहेमकलतौ: पताकाभिश्च मण्डिताम् । २७॥
पूगै: सवृन्तै रम्भाभि: पट्टिकाभि: सुवाससाम्। ares: ahs: कृतकौतुकतोरणाम् 1261

तमुपेयुस्तत्र तत्र पौरा अर्हणपाणय:। आशिषो gaa पाहीमां my त्वयोद्धृताम् ।२९॥
wa: प्रजा वीक्ष्य uff चिरागतं दिदृक्षयोत्सृष्टगृहा: feat नरा: ।
आरुह्य ह्म्याण्यरविन्दलोचनमतृप्तनेत्रा: कुसुमैरवाकिरन् 13 0 |

Sri Suka replied ; Sri Rama (the Ruler of the three worlds) now charged His (younger)
brothers with the conquest of the (four) quarters, and Himself looked round the city with His
followers (attendants), allowing Himself to be seen by His people. (25) With its roads
sprinkled all over with perfumed water and (fragrant) drops of temporal! fluid (emitted by
elephants in rut), the city looked highly inebriated (exhilarated) as it were to see her lord
arrived. (26) It was adorned with domes of gold set on the top of palaces, city gates, council-
chambers, sanctums and temples, as well as with flags. (27) It had festal arches erected by
means of (fresh) areca-nuts joined with their foot-stalks and banana trees (fixed in the
ground), strips of beautiful cloths, mirrors, tapestries and wreaths of flowers. (28) With
articles of worship in their hands citizens met Him at various points and pronounced their
benedictions (on Him) with the prayer, "Protect, O Lord, this (earth), lifted up of yore by
Yourself (in the form of the divine Boar)!" (29) On leaming that their lord had arrived (there)
after a long interval, the people—both men and women—forthwith climbed up to the top of
their mansions with intent to see Him, leaving their household (duties), and showered
flowers on the lotus-eyed Lord, their eyes (still) unsated. (30)

अथ प्रविष्ट: स्वगृहं जुष्टं स्वै: पूर्वराजभि: । अनन्ताखिलकोदाढ्यमनर्घ्यरुपरिच्छदम् ।॥३१॥
विद्रुमोदुम्बरद्वारैर्वैदूर्यस्तम्भपङ्क्तिभि: । स्थलैर्मारकतै: स्वच्छैर्भातस्फटिकभित्तिभि: 1321
चित्रस्नग्भि: पट्टिकाभिर्वासोमणिगणांशुकै: । मुक्ताफलैश्चिदुल्लासै: कान्तकामोपपत्तिभि: 1331
quate: सुरभिभिर्मण्डिते पुष्पमण्डनै: i digits: सुरसंकालौर्जुष्टं भूषणभूषणै: ax
तस्मिन् स भगवान् राम: स्निग्धया प्रिययेष्टया । रेमे स्वारामधीराणामृषभ: सीतया किल 1341
बुभुजे च यथाकालं कामान् धर्ममपीडयन्। वर्षपूगान् बहून् नॄणामभिध्याताङ्घधिपल्लव: 1३६1

इति श्रीमद्धागवते महापुराणे पारमहंस्यां संहितायां नवमस्कन्धे श्रीरामोपाख्याने एकादञ्चोऽध्याय: 12.21

The Lord then returned to His palace occupied (in the past) by His own predecessors,
rich in unlimited treasures of every kind and equipped with an invaluable variety of articles
of household use. (31) It was graced with entrances having thresholds of coral, rows of
pillars of cat’s-eye, transparent floors of emerald and walls of shining crystals, wreaths of
various colours, flags, cloths, gems and canopies, pearls effulgent as consciousness and
(all) luxuries coveted by men, fragrant incenses and lights and decorations of flowers, and
attended by men and women akin to gods and lending charm to ornaments them-
selves(32—34) In that palace the said Lord Sri Rama, the foremost of wise men revelling
in the Self, enjoyed life, so the tradition goes, with His beloved and affectionate Spouse,
Sita. (85) Nay, the Lord, whose feet—tender as young leaves—are contemplated upon by
men, enjoyed pleasures of sense each atits proper time for very many years, taking care
not to twist (the principles of} rignteousness. (36)

Thus ends the eleventh discourse, forming part of the Narrative of Si Rama,
in Book Nine of the great and glorious Bhagavata-Purana,
otherwise known as the Paramahamsa-Samhita.

वजजा
PIPES rs
