488 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 86

त्तया सा य न माशा शाज क OM दाडा ल्श्चा न CNET ET ENCE NETO HEN TE HERE NEO RHE म .८ ०२

श्रुतदेव उवाच

wa नो we oe: wt परमपूरुष: । adie शाक्तिभि: gp प्रविष्टो ह्यात्मसत्तया xx

यथा ङायान: पुरुषो मनसैवात्ममायया। ag eth परं स्वाप्नमनुविङ्यावभासते ।४५॥

‘ant गदतां weedeat area qo संवदतामन्तर्हदि भास्यमलात्मनाम् ।४६॥

हृदिस्थोऽप्यतिदूरस्थ: कर्मविक्षिप्तचेतसाम्। आत्मशक्तिभिरग्राह्योऽप्यन्त्युपेतगुणात्मनाम् ॥४७॥

नमोऽस्तु तेऽध्यात्मविदां परात्मने अनात्मने स्वात्मविभक्तमृत्यवे |
सकारणाकारणलिङ्गमीयुषे स्वमाययासंवृतरुद्धदृष्टये ॥४८॥
स त्वं ale स्वभृत्यान् न: किं देव`करवामहे। एतदन्तो Jo aa यद्भवानक्षिगोचर: ive
Srutadeva submitted : (Lord!) You are the Supreme Person (beyond Prakrti and the
Jivas). It is not for the first time that You have come to our view today. For You have been
with us (since the very beginning of creation), when, having created the universe with the help
of your potencies, You enteredit as its Soul (even) as a sleeping person creates with his mind
itself a peculiar dream-world of his own through his ignorance and, entering that world
himself, appears in various forms. (44-45) You shine in the heart of those men who
constantly hear and repeat Your stories, worship and bow to Your images and talk with one
another about You and have their heart purified (thereby).(46) Though present in their
heart, You are remote from those whose mind is distracted by activities (of various kinds)
and temporal duties. Though beyond the grasp of the various faculties of the mind, You are
(on the other hand) proximate to those who have developed the excellent qualities of their
heart (by singing and hearing of Your glories).(47) (My) salutation be to You, who are the
Supreme spirit in the eyes of those who know the Self; whereas before those who regard
the body etc., (which are other than the Self) as their self, You come. as death allotted by
Yourself. You are the ruler of all effects as well as of their cause. Your Maya cannot screen
Your vision, though it screens the vision of all others. (48) O self-effulgent Lord !(pray,)
instruct us, Your servants, what service we should render to You. The sufferings of men
disappear as soon as You come to their view. (49)
श्रीगुक उवाच
तदुक्तमित्युपाकर्ण्य भगवान् प्रणतार्तिहा । गृहीत्वा पाणिना पाणिं प्रहसंस्तमुवाच ह । ५०॥
Sri Suka continued : Hearing these words of Srutadeva, the Lord, who dispels the

agony of those who betake themselves to Him in all humility, took the Brahmana by hand,
and smilingly said (as follows). so the tradition goes. (50)

श्रीभगवानुवाच
ब्रह्मंस्तेऽनुग्रहार्थाय सम्प्राप्तान् विद्ध्यमून् मुनीन्। सञ्चरन्ति मया लोकान् पुनन्त: पादरेणुभि: । ५१।
aa: क्षेत्राणि तीर्थानि aver: । शनै: पुनन्ति कालेन तदप्यर्हत्तमेक्षया 1421
ब्राह्मणो जन्मना श्रेयान् सर्वेषां प्राणिनामिह। तपसा विद्यया तुष्ट्या किमु मत्कलया युत: 1431
न ब्राह्मणान्मे aad रूपमेतच्चतुर्भुजम्। सर्ववेदमयो fas: सर्वदेवमयो ह्यहम् । ५४॥
zon अविदित्वैवमवजानन्त्यसूयव: । गुरुं मा विप्रमात्मानमर्चादाविज्यदृष्टय: 144 |
चराचरमिदं fad भावा a चास्य हेतव: । मद्रूपाणीति चेतस्याधत्ते fast मदीक्षया 1५६1
तस्माद् ब्रह्मऋषीनेतान् ब्रह्मन् मच्छ्रद्धयार्चय । एवं चेदर्चितोऽस्म्यद्धा नान्यथा भूरिभूतिभि: । ५७1

The glorious Lord said : Srutadeva !_ know that these (great) sages have come here

