316 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 7

Sbhehrdeerer eee kt cen eee See vEe eee He eee HER Keeeeck HToHHHKEAE A SKS ONAA A T IIH विज्ज यीं

the bountiful Lord and Brahma (the creator) went once more to the site of the sacrifice. (7)
Having accomplished all that Lord Siva had commanded them (to do), they joined the head
of the sacrificial animal (goat) to the trunk of Daksa. (8) On the head (of the goat) being joined
(to Daksa's trunk), Daksa, who (now) received akindly glance from Rudra, immediately rose
as though from slumber and beheld Lord Siva (the Delightér of all) in front of Him. (9) Then
Daksa (a lord of created beings), whose mind had been tainted by ill-will towards Lord Siva
(whose banner bears the emblem ofa bull), (now) became free from malice by virtue of Siva's
(gracious ) look, even as a pool becomes clear in autumn. (10) He felt inclined to offer praises
(to the Lord) but could not do so on account of affection and grief as he (now) recollected
his deceased daughter andhis throat was choked with tears. (11) Though overwhelmed with
love, the wise Prajapati (Daksa) controlled his mind with (great) difficulty and proceeded to
extol the Lord with sincere devotion. (12)
ea उवाच

भूयाननुग्रह अहो भवता कृतो मे दण्डस्त्वया मयि भृतो यदपि प्रलब्ध: ।

नव्रह्मबखुषुचवांभग्ग्वन्नवज्ञातुभ्यंहरेश्चकुतएवधृतव्रतेघु।१३।

`विद्यातपोब्रतधरान् मुखत: स्म विप्रान् ब्रह्माऽऽत्मतत्त्वमवितुं प्रथमं त्वमस्राक |

तद्बाह्मणान् परम सर्वविपत्सु पासि पाल: पदूनिव fas प्रगृहीतदण्ड: । १४।

योऽसौ मयाविदिततत्त्वदृशा सभायां क्षिप्तो दुरुक्तिविशिखैरगणय्य तन्माम् |

अर्वाक् पतन्तमर्हत्तमनिन्दयापाद् दृष्ट्याऽऽर्द्रया स भगवान् स्वकृतेन ASA ।१५।

Daksa said : Oh, You did me a great favour in that You meted out punishment to me (in
order to correct me), even though | slighted You. You two, Sri Hari and Yourself, have no
disregard even for fallen Brahmanas; how, then, can You ignore those who have taken
sacred vows? (13) (Appearing) as Brahma You evolved first of all out of Your mouth
Brahmanas rich in learning, austerity and sacred vows for preserving (the knowledge of) the
spiritual Truth (through realization and instruction). Itis therefore, O Supreme Lord, that You
protect the Brahmana race inall crises, wielding the rodof punishment (to correct them ifthey
go astray), even as the herdsman protects his cattle, staff in hand. (14) May that Lord who,
though insulted with abuses piercing as arrows in open assembly by me—ignorant as | was
of His reality—overlooked that fault (of mine) and saved me from falling down through the
vilification of the Most Adorable, by casting His gracious look (on me); be pleased with His

own (benevolent) act (since | am utterly incapable of repaying His obligation and thus
winning His pleasure). (15)

मैत्रेय उवाच
क्षपाष्पैवंसमीक्ष्यसिंब्रह्मणाचानुपन्वित:।कर्मसन्तस्मयम्पत्सर्सत्थाध्यग्र्यत्किंप्नदिभि:।१६।
aud यज्ञसन्तत्यै त्रिकपालं द्विजोत्तमा: । पुरोडाशं निरवपन् वीरसंसर्गशुद्धये । १७।

अध्वर्युणाऽऽत्तहविषा यजमानो विशाम्पते | धिया विशुद्धया दध्यौ तथा प्रादुरभूद्धरि: । १८।
तदा स्वप्रभया तेषां द्योतयन्त्या दिशो दा । मुष्णंस्तेज उपानीतस्ताक्ष्यॆण स्तोत्रवाजिना । १९1
sara हिरण्यरशनोऽर्ककिरीटजुष्टो नी : ।

कम्ब्वन्जचक्रशरचापगदासिचर्मव्यग्रैर्हिरण्मयभुजैरिव कर्णिकार: 1201
वक्षस्यधिश्रिं wag faa
पार्श्वभ्रमद्व्यजनचामरराजहंस: श्चैतातपत्रशशिनोपरि रज्यमान: ।२१॥

Maitreya went on : Having thus sought the forgiveness of Lord Siva (who showers the
