276 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 41

GRIN त्तत्तेभिन्र ee ew Were ee Oe ROR BRR HR २२२

कृतैकपत्रश्रवणैकनूपुरा नाङ्क्वा द्वितीयं त्वपराश्च लोचनम् ।२५॥

BI एकास्तदपास्य सोत्सवा अभ्यज्यमाना अकृतोपमज्जना: |

स्वपन्त्य उत्थाय निशम्य feed प्रपाययन्त्योऽर्भमपोह्य मातर: ।२६॥

मनांसि तासामरविन्दलोचन: प्रगल्भलीलाहसितावलोकनै: |

जहार मत्तद्विरदेन्द्रविक्रमो दृशां ददच्छीरमणात्मनोत्सवम् 1219 |

आनन्दमूर्तिमुपगुह्य दृशाऽऽत्मलब्धं हृष्यत्त्वचो जहुरनन्तमरिन्दमाधिम् । २८॥
प्रासादशिखरारूढा: प्रीत्युत्फुल्लमुखाम्बुजा: । अभ्यवर्षन् सौमनस्यै: प्रमदा बलकेशवौ 1281
we tho अहो गोप्यस्तप: किमचरन् महत्। या ह्येतावनुपञ्यन्ति नरलोकमहोत्सवौ । ३१॥

Eager to have a look at the two Sons of Vasudeva— who had duly entered the city by
the main road and were surrounded by Their companions—the women of the city hurriedly
came together (at every stage) and climbed up the mansions (lining the road), O protector
of men! (24) Some ran with their garments and jewels wrongly placed, while others came
out forgetting one of the ornaments worn in pairs. Some left with ornaments (only) on one
ear and with anklet only on one ankle, while others painted only one of their eyes (with
collyrium), omitting (in their hurry) to paint the other. (25) Full of joy some, who were taking
their meal, went away leavingit; others, who were being smeared with oil, came away without
taking their bath. Some, who were lying asleep, sprang on their feet as soon as they heard
the noise (of the spectators at Their arrival); while mothers, who were fondly suckling their
babe, sallied forth leaving the child (crying). (26) Possessed of the gait of a lordly elephant
in rut, Sri Krsna (of fotus-like eyes) captivated their mind by His smiles and glances full of
charming sport, providing a feast to their eyes by (the sight of) His (divine) personality, the
delight of Sri (the goddess of beauty and prosperity). (27) Beholding Him, who had already
been heard of (by them) many a time (before), and feeling honoured by being sprinkled with
the nectar of His penetrating glances and unreserved smiles, the women of Mathura, whose
mind had already taken wings after Him, (mentally) embraced that Embodiment of Bliss—
now that He had been ushered into their mind through (the gateway of) their eyes—thrilling
all over (with joy), and shed their agony (of separation from Him), which knew no bounds,
O queller of your foes (in the shape of lust and so on)! (28) Standing on the top of mansions,
their lotus-like faces blooming with delight, the women covered Bala and SriKrsna (the Ruler
even of Brahma and Lord Siva) with showers of flowers (which embodied as it were their
affectionate feelings towards the two Brothers). (29) At every step overjoyed Brahmanas
worshipped the two Brothers with curds and unbroken grains of rice (with which they adorned
Their foreheads as a mark of auspiciousness), garlands and perfumes (of various kinds),
offerings (in the shape of sweets, fruits etc.) as well as with vessels full of water (for washing
Their hands and feet with). (30) The women of the city said (to one another), “Oh, what great
austerities did the cowherd women (of Vraja) perform, by virtue of which they actually behold
without interruption the two Brothers who afford great delight to the human world ?" (31)

wah कञ्चिदायान्तं रङ्गकारं गदाग्रज: । दृश्टायाचत वासांसि धौतान्यत्युत्तमानि च ।३२॥
देह्यावयो: समुचितान्यङ्ग वासांसि ard: । भव्रिष्यति परं श्रेयो दातुस्ते नात्र Gara: 1331
a याचितो भगवता परिपूर्णेन सर्वत: । साक्षेपं रुषित: प्राहं भृत्यो wa: सुदुर्मद: ax!
ईदूशान्येव aia fa गिरिवनेचरा: । परिधन्त किमुद्वृत्ता राजद्रव्याण्यभीप्सथ ।३५॥

