Dis. 16 ] BOOK ELEVEN 587

Seema scree, Lt ewe Ce Ree Ne Ne व व्ये ने त्चि व व तवित्किर्चिनेनकति

sacred vows | am (the vow of) harmlessness. Of purifying agencies, again, | am the purifying
agency (par excellence) In the shape of the air, fire, the Sun, water and the word (of a
Brahmana who is the only man qualified to judge and pronounce the purity or otherwise of
a substance or living being).(23) Of all the limbs of Yoga (self-discipline) lam Samadhi (total
absorption of the mind into the Spirit); का political wisdom in those that'Seek victory. Of (all)
scientific courses of correct understanding! am the science by which the distinction between
Matter and Spirit is known; | am the (unending) doubt of those debating on the theory of
Perception. (24) Of the fair sex | am Satarupa (the wife of Swayambhuva Manu and the first
female offspring of Brahma); of men!am Swayambhuva Manu (the first human male creation
of Brahma). Of ascetics | am the sage Narayana; and of celibates, Sanatkumara. (25) Of (all)
virtues | am the vow of causing no fear to anyone; of all factors conducive to fearlessness
| am thought withdrawn from without (and directed towards one’s own self). Of (all) means
of maintaining secrecy | am kind speech and silence (both of which help a man to conceal
what exists in his mind); of pairs, again, | am Brahma (the birthless one, who assumed two
forms, the first part becoming a man and the other a woman).* (26) Of those that (ever) keep
awake (without even winking) | am the (ever-revolving wheel of) time (represented bya
twelvemonth); of the (six) seasons (constituting a year) |am (the two months of) Caitra and
Vaisakha (constituting the vernal season). Of the (twelve) months (of a year) lam (the month
of) Margasirsa; and of the (twenty-seven) lunar mansions । am Abhifit.+(27) Of the (four)
Yugas or aeons) | am the Krta (Satyayuga) and of the self-controlled | am the sages Asita
and Devala. Of the compillers and arrangers of the Vedas | am the Sage (Krsna) Dwaipayana;
of more of wisdom | am the self-possessed Sukracarya (the preceptor of the demon
kings).(28) Of divine personages+| am Lord Vasudeva (the first and foremost of the four
Vyuhas or manifestations of the Godhead, the Deity presiding over the intellect or Citta); and
of the votaries of the Lord | am you (Uddhava). Of Kimpurusas (a species of semi-divine
beings resembling a monkey in shape) | am Hanuman (the monkey-god); of Vidyadharas
(heavenly artistes) | am Sudarganas .(29) Of precious stones | am the tuby; of lovely objects
lam a lotus bud. Of the (many) varieties of Darbha grass (such as Kuga and Durva) | am (the
variety known by the name of) Kuga; of offerings thrown into the sacred fire | am cow's ghee. (30)
Of those engaged in any business (and seeking to amass wealth) | am the wealth; in those
engaged in practising trickery | am gambling. | am the endurance in those practising
endurance; | am the courage of the courageous. (31) tam the organic strength as well as
the strength of mind of the strong; (and) know that lam the action (done by way of an offering
to Me) of the devotees of the Lord. Of the nine forms (viz., Vasudeva, Sankarsna,
Pradyumna, Aniruddha, Narayana, Hayagriva, Varaha, Nrsirmha, and Vamana) worshipped
by the Satvatas (followers of the Paficaratra Agama) | am the first and the highest (of them,
viz., Vasudeva). (32) । am Vigwavasu of the Gandharvas (celestial songsters) and Purvacitti

न च ११११ चच

* Vide ।। xii 52-53. The Sruti ऽ5:--अर्घो ह वा एव आत्मनो यत्पत्नीति।
+ Abhijit represents the last quarter of the astersm Utlarasadha and one-fitteenth of the constellation Sravana Says the

Srut:—
अभिजिन्नाम नक्षत्रमुपरिष्टारदीपाढानामधस्ताच्छ्रोणाया: |
+ A Bhagavan ए divine personage 1s defined as below:—
उत्पत्ति प्रलयं चैव भृतानामागति गतिम् । वेत्ति विद्यामविद्यां च स वेद्यो भगवानिति ॥
“He (alone) should be recognized as a divine being, who possesses knowledge relating to the creation and destruction
of lite. the lite and death of individual beings end of knowledge and nescience.”
x A reference to this Sudarsana has already been made in X. xxxiv. 12—18
