70 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis, 18

BERSSERR ADS ELAR ESET ENE ROHR ON EEE ER EAE EL EHTS EE HE RSSER ARLES He eE ORAL EEERAeEET Eee

दुर्मना भगवान् काव्य: पौरोहित्यं विगर्हयन्। स्तुवन् वृत्तिं च कापोतीं दुहित्रा स ययौ पुरात् । २५॥
वृषपर्वा तमाज्ञाय प्रत्यनीकविवक्षितम्। गुरुं प्रसादयन् मूर्धा पादयो: पतित: पथि ies!
क्षणार्धमन्युर्भगवान् fret व्याचष्ट aria: | arisen: क्रियतां राजन्भैनां त्यक्तुमिहोत्सहे 1201
तथेत्यवस्थिते प्राहं देवयानी मनोगतम् । पित्रा दत्ता यतो यास्ते सानुगा यातु मामनु ।२८॥
स्वानां तत् सङ्कटं diet तदर्थस्य च गौरवम्। देवयानीं पर्यचरत् स्रीसहस्रेण दासवत् ।२९॥
नाहुषाय सुतां दत्त्वा सह शर्मिष्ठयोशना। तमाह राजञ्छर्मिष्ठामाधास्तल्ये न कर्हिचित् । ३०॥
Relea राजञ्छर्मिष्ठा सप्रजां afi तमेव वव्रे रहसि सख्या: पतिमृतौ सती ise!
राजपुत्र्यार्थितोऽपत्ये धर्मं चावेक्ष्य धर्मवित्।स्मरञ्छुक्रवबच: काले दिष्टमेवाभ्यपद्यत 1321
a च तुर्वसुं चैव देवयानी व्यजावत।। द्वुह्युं चानुं च पूरुं च झर्मिष्ठा वार्षपर्वणी ।३३॥
गर्भसम्भवमासुर्या भर्तुर्विज्ञय मानिनी । देवयानी पितुर्गेहं at क्रोधविमूर्छिता ।३४॥
प्रियामनुगत: कामी वचोभिरुपमन्त्रयन्। न प्रसादयितुं रेके पादसंवाहनादिभि: । ३५॥
शुक्रस्तमाह कुपित: स्रीकामानृतपूरुष | at जरा विशतां we विरूपकरणी FOL । ३६॥

On the valiant king having departed, Devayani (too) repaired from the garden to her
father, weeping (all the way), and forthwith related to him all that had been said and done
by Sarmistha. (24) Condemning the vocation of a priest and praising the way of life of a
pigeon (that gleans grains of corn lying scatteredin a field where the harvest has been reaped
and lives on such gleanings alone), that glorious sage, Kavya (Sikracarya), went out of the
city (the capital of Vrsaparva), sad at heart, alongwith his daughter (Devayanf). (25)
Concluding him to have hostile intentions (of bringing victory to the gods), and anxious to
placate the preceptor, Vrsaparva fell (prostrate) at his feet on the road. (28) The worshipful
Sukracarya (a scion of Bhrgu), whose anger lasts but half a moment, gently said to his
disciple, "Let Devayani's wish (condition) be fulfilled, O king! !am unable to ignore her". (27)
When Vrsaparva remained standing, (even) after uttering the words, "So be it !", Devayani
declared what was in her mind, saying, “Given away by my father, whithersoever । go, let
Sarmistha follow mewith (all) her companions." (28) Perceiving the danger to herown people
from the exit of Sukr&carya and the magnitude of good expected from his staying over,
Sarmistha waited upon Devayanilike a menial alongwith herthousand female companions. (29)
Giving away to Yayati (son of Nahusa) his daughter alongwith Sarmistha, the sage USana
(Sukracarya) said to him, "O king ! let not Sarmistha ever share your bed." (30) Perceiving
ona certain occasion Devayani (Usana's daughter) blessed withason. Sarmistha (toc) who
was leading a chaste life, sought during the period favourable for conception the bed in
seclusion of the very husband of her friend (Devayani), (with alonging to be similarly blessed
with progeny). (31) Solicited by the princess for progeny and considering it a sacred duty (to
grant her prayer), Emperor Yayati (who knew what was right) sought her embrace as
something ordained by destiny itself (and not through concupiscence), even though
recollecting in time the warning of Sukrac&rya. (32) Devayani duly gave birth to Yadu and
Turvasu as well, while Sarmistha, the daughter of Vrsaparva, bore Druhyu and Anu and
Puru. (33) Overwhelmed with rage on concluding that Sarmistha (the daughter of the Asura
king) too had conceived through her (own) husband, the haughty Devayani went away to
her father's house. (34) Having followed his darling, the uxorious Yayati tried to reconcile
her with blandishments, as well as by kneading her feet and other such devices, but could
not please her. (35) The angry Sukracarya said to the king, “O fool i O liar, hankering after
women !! Let old age, which disfigures a man, overtake you." (36)
