Dis. 80 ] BOOK TEN 455

fthighatnhetrannkeehenonrenentesnenenenenessetentenngrenenrnsretenninnntass Annee

कच्चिद् गुरुकुले वासं ब्रह्मन् स्मरसि नौ यत: । द्विजो विज्ञाय विज्ञेये तमस: पारमश्नुते । ३१1
स वै सत्कर्मणां mene द्विजातेरिह सम्भव: | आद्योऽङ्ग यत्राश्रमिणां यथाहं ज्ञानदो गुरु: ।३२॥
नन्वर्थकोविदा ब्रह्मम् वर्णाश्रमवतामिह । ये मया गुरुणा वाचा Tee भवार्णवम् 1331
नाहमिज्याप्रजातिभ्यां तपसोपरामेन वा।तुष्येयं सर्वभूतात्मा गुरुशुश्रूषया यथा ।३४॥

Bhagavan Sri Krsna said : 0 pious Brahmana, on your return from the preceptor's
house, after making the voluntary present to him, did you or did you not marry a wife, who
is in every respect worthy of you ? (28) | know that, even though you are leading (I presume)
the life of a householder, your heart is free from worldly desires. | am also aware that having
realized the truth, yOu do not entertain any love for wealth, (29) (In this world) peopte who
have shaken off worldly desires brought forth by Divine Maya, and who yet perform their
prescribed duties with a heart unswayed by desire, just as | do, for the sake of setting an
example before the world, are very rare. (30) Do you remember, O dear Brahmana, our stay
in the house of the preceptor? It is there that the twice-born acquire the knowledge of that
which is worth knowing, and thus cross the darkness of ignorance in the form of mundane
existence. (31) O friend, the father from whom one gets the bodyis the first Guruin this world.
Next, comes the teacher, who invests one with the sacred thread and teaches him his
obligatory duties, He is worthy of adoration like Myself. Lastly, comes the teacher who
imparts the knowledge of Self to men ofall classes and orders and helps one intherealization
of God. He is identical with Me. (32) O dear friend, the teacher is the same as Myself. Among
the followers of the Varnagrama order in this world, they alone who carry out the preceptor's
teachings and thereby cross the ocean of mundane existence without much ado know their
true worldly and other-worldly interests. (33) O friend, lam the Universal Seif (I reside inevery
heartas the Witness.) | am notso pleased with the performance of daily obligatory sacrifices
by the householder, nor with investiture with the sacred thread and study of the scriptures,
which is the duty ofa celibate, nor with the penance of the ascetic, noragain with the quietism
of the recluse, as | am with services rendered by a disciple to the preceptor.(34)

अपि a: स्मर्यते ब्रह्मन् ad निवसतां गुरौ । गुरुदारैश्चोदितानामिन्धनानयने क्वचित् 134 |
प्रविष्टानां महारण्यमपर्तौ सुमहद् द्विज । वातवर्षमभूत्तीव्रं fagu: स्तनयित्नव: 1261
सूर्यश्चास्तं गतस्तावत् तमसा चावृता दिश: । fa कूलं जलमयं न प्राज्ञायत किञ्चन ।३७1
a oy ow महानिलाम्बुभिर्निहन्यमाना मुहुरम्बुसम्प्रवे ।
दिशोऽविदन्तोऽथ wet वने गृहीतहस्ता: परिबभ्रिमातुरा: ।३८॥
एतद् विदित्वा उदिते रवौ सान्दीपनिर्गुरु: | अन्वेषमाणो न: शिष्यानाचार्योऽपइयदातुरान् । ३९1
अहो हे पुत्रका यूयमस्मदर्थेऽतिदु:खिता: | आत्मा वै प्राणिनां प्रेष्ठस्तमनादृत्य मत्परा: ।४०॥
एतदेव fe सच्छिष्वै: कर्तव्यं गुरुनिष्कृतम्। ae वै विशुद्धभावेन सर्वार्थात्मार्पणं गुरौ ees
तुष्टोऽहं भो द्विजश्रेष्ठा: सत्या: सन्तु मनोरथा: | छन्दांस्ययातयामानि waite परत्र च ।४२॥
इत्थॆविधान्यनेकानि वसतां गुरुवेर्मसु । गुरोरनुग्रहेणैव पुमान् पूर्ण: प्रशान्तये ।४३।

O dear Brahmana, do you remember the incident how, one day, when living in the house
of our preceptor, we both were asked by thelatter's wife to bring fuel. (35) We entered a thick
forest, O sage, and were overtaken by a mighty and violent storm of wind and rain, which
broke unexpectedly out of season, and thunders roared relentiessly over our head. (36) The
sun set in the meanwhile and all sides were enveloped in darkness. The land being covered
with water we could not ascertain the high and low level of ground. (37) Severely and
repeatedly beaten by violent blasts of wind and showers in that flood, and not knowing the

