Dis. 11] BOOK TWELVE 713

त्त SARA AR SARA ASIA LIARS FIER SLES SAA RAE REA TE NRTA EH A IR

and supports Yajfia* (the institution of sacrifice) as the Supreme Person (Himself). (19) Sri
Hari's own inseparable energy itself appears as Goddess Sri (the goddess of fortune). The
well-known Viswaksena, the chief of His attendants, embodies (in His person) the Tantras
(such as the Paficaratra Agama, detailing the procedure of His worship). The (eight)
celebrated attributes of Sri Hari, Anima (the capacity to assume an atomic form) etc., stand
(at His portals) as the eight porters, Nanda and others. (20) The Supreme Person (Lord
Narayana) Himself, O Brahmana sage, is spoken of as manifested in the four (adorable)
forms of Vasudeva, Sankarsana, Pradyumna and Antruddha. (21) The (same) Lord is
(philosophically) contemplated upon under the names of Vigwa, Taijasa, Prajfia and Turiya
(respectively) when associated with the (four) states of (individual) consiousness, viz., 1—
Wakefulness (in which the objects of sense are perceived through the senses}, 2—the dream
state (in which the mind alone—the sense par excellence—functions, the other senses
remaining dormant), 3—the state of deep sleep (or complete forgetfulness marked by the
latent impressions of the states of wakefulness and dream) and 4—the state of Self-
Realization ( which the Self stands as the witness of all the three preceding states). (22)
Distinguished by His (aforesaid) limbs, attendants (constituting His auxiliary limbs as it were)
weapons and ornaments, (nay,) possessing His six distinguishing attributes (collectively
denoted by the term “Bhaga") and appearing in the four (adorable) forms (Vasudeva and so
on), the almighty Lord Sri Hari (Himself) assumes these four aspects (Viswa etc.). (23)

ह्रिजऋषभ स एष ब्रह्मयोनि: ge स्वमहिमपरिपूर्णो मायया च स्वयैतत् ।
सृजति हरति पातीत्याख्ययानावृताक्षो विव्रृत ga निरुक्तस्तत्परैरात्मलभ्य: ।२४॥
श्रीकृष्ण कृष्णसख वृष्ण्यूषभावनिधुग्राजन्यवंशदहनानपवर्गवीर्य ।

Wee गोपवनिताव्रजभृत्यगीततीर्थश्रव: श्रवणमङ्गल पाहि भृत्यान् ।२५॥

O jewel among the twice-born ! the aforesaid Lord is the Source of the Vedas, self-
effulgent and perfect in His own glory (all-blissful Self); yet He creates, preserves and
destroys this (objective) universe by His own Maya (deluding potency consisting of the three
Gunas) under differentnames (Brahma, Visnu and Siva respectively), though His coniscious-
ness remains uncircumscribed (thereby). Though spoken of {inthe SAstras) as differentiated
(in this sense), He is (really one inasmuch as He is) realized by His devotees as their own
self. (24) "Friend of Arjuna, jewel among the Vrsnis, O glorious Krsna! who are fire (as itwere)
to burn the whole race of Ksatriyas, that are proving hostile to the earth 0 Govinda (Protector
of cows), whose, prowess is (ever) undiminished, whose sanctifying glory is sung by hosts
of cowherd women as well as by devotees (like Narada), and whose names and praises are
auspicious to hear, (pray,) protect (us,) Your votaries.” (25)

य इदं कल्य उत्थाय पह[पुंरुक्ताक्षण्ग्म्।तक्तिऽप्रयतोजस्वाब्रह्मबेदगुहरिं।यम्प्२६।

He who, rising (early) in the morning and getting clean (through a bath etc.), repeats this
description of the Lord with his mind fixed on Him realizes Brahma enshrined in the heart (of
all), by (merely) repeating it. (26)

are उवाच

yal यदाह भगवान् विष्णुराताय शृण्क्ते।सौरो॰दुंग्णोपासिपासिनानावप्तत्तिसप्तक: ।२७॥

, तेषां नामानि कर्माणि संयुक्तानामधीश्वरै: । ब्रूहि न: श्रद्दधानानां व्यूहं सूर्यात्मनो हरे: ।२८।
Saunaka submitted : As the divine Suka spoke to the listening Pariksit (the protege

NN.

* This is borne out by the Sruti when it says:—7at 4 विष्णु: ।
