594 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 17

प त्त व त्त न OEE HEATON MERON A TERESS FOOTE OL ET ETRE TENG NNO NERO च न मा WEEE ROO १२१ १२१

every kind) or (just) as a king elephant would lift up (fellow) elephants as wellas himself (from
a pitinto which they have fallen), a sagacious king should deliver all (classes of) people from
calamities (of every description) and save himself (too) by himself (his own efforts). (45)
Shaking off all sin (that he might have incurred in his past lives) in this (very) life, such a
(benevolent) king ascends to heaven (after death) in an aerial car, brilliant like the sun, and
revels in the company of indra (the lord of paradise). (46) A Brahmana in distress may (try
to) get over it by taking to the calling of a merchant, dealing in such goods only as are worth
selling (and not in prohibited articles such as spirituous liquor, salt etc.) or (as a third
alternative), when overwhelmed with adversity, he may live even by the sword’, but under
no circumstance by service to a man of lower grade. (47) A Ksatriya too may live by the trade
of a Vaisya or (even) by hunting in (times of) adversity or he may live by teaching etc., (the
pursuit of a Brahmana), but in no case by menial service. (48) (Even so) a Vaisya (in
adversity) may adopt the calling of a Sudra and the latter, the craft of an artisan +, such as
making mats and so on. When rid of adversity (of course) a man belonging to a higher caste
should no longer seek his living by a reproachful pursuit (prescribed for men of a lower
grade). (49) A householder (belonging to the twice-born classes) should according to his
means daily worship the gods, the Rsis, the manes and (other) living beings (including men)
as My (own) manifestations, through oblations into the secred fire, recitation of the sacred
texts (technically known by the name of Brahmayajfia), Sraddha and Tarpana, Bali or
Bhutayajna (offering before the daily meals morsels of cooked food to birds and animals. nay.
all other creatures including lifeless objects) and offering food and water etc., tonewcomers
respectively. (50) With the wealth got without effort or earned (by pursuing one's own
avocation) and (therefore) free from blemish he should perform sacrifices with due ceremony
alone without putting his dependents to hardship. (51)

कुटुम्बेषु न सज्जेत न प्रमाद्येत् कुटुम्ब्यपि । विपश्चिन्नश्नं पश्येददृष्टमपि दृष्टवत् । ५२] ,
पुत्रदाराप्तबन्धूनां सङ्घम:र पान्थसङ्घम: । अनुदेहं वियन्त्येते स्वप्नो निद्रानुगो यथा ual
इत्थं परिमृशान्मुक्तो गृहेषतिथिवद् वसन्। न गृहैरनुबध्येत निर्ममो Fraga: । ५४1
कर्मभिर्गृहमेधीयैरिष्टां oma भक्तिमान् । faba वनं वोपविहोत् प्रजावान् वा परिव्रजेत् । ५५ ॥
यस्त्वासक्तमतिर्गेहे पुत्रवित्तैषणातुर: । स्रैण: कृपणधीर्मूढो ममाहमिति बध्यते । ५६।
अहो मे पितरॊ वृद्धौ भार्या बालात्मजाऽऽत्मजा: । अनाथा anya दीना: कथं जीवन्ति दु:ख्रिता: 1491
एवं गृहाशयाक्षिप्तहदयो मूढधीरयम्। अतृप्तस्ताननुध्यायन् मृतोऽन्धं fae तम: ।५८॥
इति श्रीमद्भागवतॆ महापुराणॆ पारमहंस्यां संह्नितायामकादठाम्कन्धं सप्तदशोऽध्याय. 17.91
ह sane householder too should not get attached to the members of his family nor should
he be unmindful of his goal (i.e., Myself). (Nay.) he should realize even the invisible (worlds)
to be (as) perishable as the visible. (52) Association with one’s sons, wife, friends and
relations is no better than the coming together of travellers (in a rest-house). With every
change of body they vanish like a dream seen during sleep. (53) Pondering thus and living

a

* Although Ihe law-grver Gautama enjoins a Brahmana गा straitened crcumsiances Io take to the milttary prolession in
preference to Irade. the Lord permits him lo do so only as a third alternative and gives preterence to trade obvious!y because
itis a peaceful pursuil and does not invoive destruction of ilfe

+ Lord Manu classifies Karus of artisans under the lollowing five heads -

तक्षा च तन्तुवायश्च नापितो रजकस्तथा । पञ्चमश्चमकारश्च कारव: fale मता: ॥
“The hve varienes of Karus are -carpenters. weavers, barbers washetmen and shoemakers or tanners nt leather “

