Dis. 26 ] BOOK ELEVEN 641

4२०८ १ २८ २० HEE REN EG EE ७ शाक ONES EERO ORLEREE CRORE १८२८ ८ EEOC CHOERE NO ७८9 स्ना # ८४2 ७१११ ११ ७

wa दु:सङ्गमुत्सृज्य सत्सु सज्जेत बुद्धिमान्। सन्त we छिन्दन्ति मनोव्यासङ्गमुक्तिभि: 1261
सन्तोऽनपेक्षा मच्चित्ता: प्रशान्ता: समदर्शिन: । निर्ममा निरहङ्कारा fer निष्परिग्रहा: ।२७॥
aq fret महाभाग महाभागेषु फ्त्वाथा:।सम्भवन्तिहिंतानॄणां जुषतां प्रपुनन्त्यघम् । २८।
ता ये श्रृण्वन्ति गायन्ति ह्यनुमोदन्ति चादूता: । मत्परा: श्रद्दधानाश्च भक्तिं विन्दन्ति a मयि ।२९॥
भक्तिं लब्धवत: साधो: किमन्यदवशिष्यते। मय्यनन्तगुणे ब्रह्मण्यानन्दानुभवात्मनि 1301
यथोपश्रयमाणस्य भगवन्तं क्भिवसुम्। aid wa तमोऽप्येति साधून् संसेवतस्तथा । ३१1
निमज्ज्योन्मजतां घोरे भवाब्धौ परमायनम्। सन्तो ब्रह्मविद: शान्ता नौर्दृढेवाप्सु मज्जताम् ।३२॥
ava fe प्राणिनां प्राण आर्तानां शरणं त्वहम् eat fad qo प्रेत्य सन्तोऽर्वाग् बिभ्यतोऽरणम् । ३३॥
wal दिशन्ति waite बहिरर्क: समुत्थित: । देवता बान्धवा: सन्त: सन्त आत्माहमेव च ।३४॥
वैतसेनस्ततोऽप्येवमुर्वर्या लोकनि:स्पृह: । मुक्तसङ्गो महीमेतामात्मारामश्चचार ह ।३५॥

The glorious Lord continued : Singing thus at the top of his voice, the celebrated
Purtrava (the object of veneration of kings and gods alike) left the realm of Urvasiand, having
realized Me as his very self (dwelling) in his (own) heart and shaken off, by dint of that
realization, his delusion (in the shape of identification with the body etc.), retired forthwith
from the world. (25) Therefore, eschewing evil company, a prudent man should associate
with the righteous; (for) the latter cut asunder the deep attachment of his mind (for the
pleasures of sense) by their precepts. (26) The righteous are free from craving (for the
pleasures of sense), have their mind fixed on Me, are perfectly serene (free from passion),
view everything alike (as an embodiment of Brahma), are free from the senses of mineness
as well as from the ego-sense (identification from the body etc.), are unaffected by the pairs
of opposites and own no property.(27) In the midst of those exceedingly fortunate people,
O highly blessed Uddhava, My stories are always told—stories that are salutary to mankind
and eradicate the sin of those that take delight in them. (28) They who listen to them, sing
them and as a matter of fact heartily approve of them and are respectful towards Me, nay,
exclusively devoted to Me (expecting no other return) and are full of reverence acquire
devotion to Me. (29) What else remains to be achieved by the pious soul who has attained
devotion to Me, endowed with endless virtues (potencies),the (ultimate) Cause of all, the
embodiment of (Truth,) Consciousness and Bliss? (30) (Even) as cold, dismay and darkness
disappear in the case of a man who betakes himself to the glorious Agni (the god of fire), so
do the rigidity and obtuseness (born of stern devotion to duty), the fear of future births and
its root, ignorance, get dissolved in the case of the man who renders loving service to pious
souls. (31) Just as a strong bark is the supreme resort to those that are being drowned in
water, noble souls who have realized Brahma and have attained (perfect) peace of mind are
the highest resort to those who having sunk (once) to the lowest depths are coming (once
more) to the surface in the ocean of mundane existence. (32) (Just as) food is life itself to
those that breathe, (as) | am the only shelter to the afflcted, and (even as) piety is the (only)
wealth for men (to depend upon) in the other world (after death), (so) saints are the (onty)
resort to him who is afraid of being born (again and again) on this (mortal) plane. (33) (Even)
having fully risen, the sun bestows (on us) the external eye (alone), whereas holy men confer
(on those enjoying their fellowship) inner eyes (in the shape of knowledge relating to the
Saguna and Nirguna aspects of Brahma). Holy men (theref®re) are (veritable) gods as well
as one's near and dear ones. They are one's (very) soul (nay,) Myself. (34) Rid in this way
of longing for Urvasi's realm (or sight), and free from (all) attachment due to the fellowship

