Dis. 4] SRIMAD BHAGAVATA-MAHATMYA 25

Rt MEME MEME MEME SOE ME MEME ME FE ACHE NE MECH HE TCI RE MEM EME ME REMC REMORE REE He EE Ke ORT ARE EEN AA OMOEA TCM GOMOME WE RE HE MCT ROMOROW HE HEME MRR

One day, the Brahmana, distressed as he was, left his house for the forest. At midday
he felt thirsty and therefore went up to a tank. (23) The grief born of issuelessness had made
him lean and thin. After he had drunk water, he sat down (exhausted). After one Muharta
(48 minutes) a Sarnnyasi too arrived at that very spot. (24) When the Brahmana saw that the
Samnyasi had quenched his thirst, he went to the Samnyasi and after bowing at his feet stood
in front of him sighing. (25)

यतिरुवाच
wy रोदिषि fas त्वं का ते चिन्ता बलीयसी | वद त्वं सत्वरं मह्यं स्वस्य दु:खस्य कारणम् RE |

The Samnyasi said: O Brahmana, why do you weep ? In what great distress are
you ? Tell me at once the cause of your grief. (26)

MAT SAT
fe ब्रवीमि ॠषे दु:खं पूर्वपापेन संचितम्।मदीया: पूर्वजास्तोयं कवोष्णमुपभुञ्जते । २७॥
मद्दत्तं नैव गृह्णन्ति ster देवा द्विजातय: । प्रजादु:खेन शून्योऽहं प्राणांस्त्यक्तुमिहागत: 1221
धिग्जीवितं प्रजाहीनं frye च प्रजां विना । fer चानपत्यस्य धिक्कुलं संततिं विना ire
पाल्यते या मया धेनु: सा बन्ध्या सर्वथा wa! यो मया रोपितो Gar: सोऽपि वन्ध्यत्वमाश्रयेत् | ३० |
यत्फलं मद्गृहायातं da ate विनश्यति । निर्भाग्यस्यानपत्यस्य किमतो जीवितेन मे । ३१।
इत्युक्त्वा स ween दु:खपीडित: । तदा तस्य यतेश्चित्ते करुणाभूद्गरीयसी 1321
तद्भालाक्षरमालां च वाचयामास योगवान्। सर्वं ज्ञात्वा afa: पश्चाद्विप्रमूचे सविस्तरम् ।३३॥

The Brahmana submitted : 0 sage, what description shall | give you of my sorrow
earned through sins | did in my previous lives ? When | offer oblations of water to (the spirits
of) my (departed) ancestors, the water becomes lukewarm through their sighs and they drink
that lukewarm water. (27) The gods and the Brahmanas do not accept my offerings with
pleasure. | am so grieved by the agony of issuelessness that everything appears to me to
be void (of no value) and | have come here to end my life. (28) Worthless is life without an
issue. Worthless is home without an issue. Worthless is wealth without an issue. Worthless
is a race without an issue. (29) The cow | keep turns out to be altogether barren. The tree
| plant does not bear any flower or fruit. (80) The fruit that comes to my house, soon gets
rotten. When | am so unfortunate and issueless, what for should | live ? (31) Saying so, and
struck with grief, the Brahmana began to weep bitterly beside him. This greatly moved the
heart of the ascetic. (32) He was established in Yoga. He saw the lines on the forehead of
the Brahmana and, coming to know everything, then spoke to him at length as follows: (33)

यतिरुवाच
मुञ्चाज्ञानं प्रजारूपं बलिष्ठा कर्मणो गति: । विवेकं तु समासाद्य त्यज संसारवासनाम् 13%!
sy fas मया asa प्रारब्धं तु विलोकितम्। सप्तजन्मावधि aa पुत्रो नैव च नैव च ।३५॥
aad: WR दु:खमवापाङ्ग: GT तथा । रे मुञ्चाद्य कुटुम्बाशां संन्यासे सर्वथा सुखम् । ३६॥
The Samnyasi said : (O Brahmana !) give up the infatuation for getting anissue. Most
powerful is the course of (one's) destiny. Taking recourse to wisdom give up the craving for
mundane existence. (34) Listen to me, O Brahmana, | have looked into your past Karma

today. For seven lives you will have absolutely no son; and no son at all. (35) In the days of
yore, the kings Sagara and Anga had to suffer (a lot because of their sons). Therefore, give

[564] B. M. 2—
