6 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA .[ Dis.

2
SPSSES SESE SSS He EESHE MEN CEPSCEESHRE eH ee hese oereteccurtneteteriekeeeweigneeee ery

Sri Suka resumed : On his (only) son, Sudyumna, having thus left (for the forest),
Vaivaswata Manu, desirous of (getting) a son, practised asceticism on the banks of the
Yamuna fora hundred years. (1) Then the (said) Manu worshipped the almighty Lord $1 Hari
for the sake of progeny and got (in consequence of that worship) ten sons, resembling
himself, the eldest being Ikswaku. (2) (Of these,) the Manu's son, Prsadhra, however, who
had been made a cowherd by his preceptor (the sage Vasistha), tended cows at night, full
of vigilance and keeping awake as a rule in a standing posture, sword in hand. (3) On one
occasion at night, while it was raining, a tiger entered the cowpen and the cows, that were
(all) resting, started up and, full of panic, ran about in the pen. (4) The powerful beast seized
one (of them) and, stricken with fear, the cow uttered a piercing cry. Hearing that scream of
the cow, Prgadhra, it is said, rushed forth with impetuosity, taking his sword, and unwittingly
cut off the head of the red-brown cow, mistaking it for the tiger, In that dark night (when the
stars had totally disappeared due to clouds). (5-6) The tiger too, that had been struck with
the end of the sword and had one of Its ears severed, escaped from that place in extreme
fear, dropping blood on the way. (7) Prsadhra, the slayer of hostile warriors, who believed
the tiger to be dead, was filled with grief when he saw at the close of night the cow killed by
himself. (8) On him, even though he had unintentionally committed the sin (of slaying 2a cow
and ought to have in the ordinary course been asked to undergo an expiatory rite), the sage
Vasistha (the preceptor of his race) uttered the following curse:—"Due to this (sinful act) you
shall no longer remain (even) a vile Ksatriya, but shall become a Stdra (outright).” (9) Cursed
by his preceptor in these words, the hero (Prsadhra) silently accepted the imprecation with
joined palms and, remaining a lifelong celibate, observed a vow of (strict) continence, which
is (So) dear to ascetics. (10) Friendly and alike to all created beings, he exclusively fixed his
mind through devotion on the supreme Lord Vasudeva, the universal Spirit, (who is) free
from all blemish. (11) Having entirely given up attachment (to all sorts of enjoyments) and
fully controlled his senses, nay, having no possession worth the name (beyond the bare
necessaries of life) and maintaining his body by means of food etc., got by chance, he fixed
his mind on the Self, and roamed about on this earth, tranquil of mind, sated through wisdom
and fully composed though presenting the appearance of a stupid, blind or deaf fellow. (12-13)
Conducting himself in this manner and withdrawing to a forest (one day), Prsadhra (who had
taken a vow of strict silence) saw a wild fire raging. (Entering it,) he allowed his body to be
consumed by it and attained oneness with the transcendent Absolute. (14)

कवि: कनीयान् विषयेषु नि:स्पृहो विसृज्य we सह बन्धुभिर्वनम् ।
fava चित्ते पुरुषं स्वरोचिषं fade seinem: wt गत: ।१५॥
करूषान्मानवादासन् कारूषा: क्षत्रजातय: । उत्तरापथगोप्तारो ब्रह्मण्या धर्मवत्सला: 1261
ge, fae, क्षत्रं ब्रह्मभूयं गतं क्षितौ । नृगस्य de: सुमतिर्भूतज्योतिस्ततो aq ।१७॥
वसो: प्रतीकस्तत्पुत्र ओघवानोघवरत्पिता ! कन्या चौघवती नाम Wain उवाह ताम् । १८|
चित्रसेनो नरिष्यन्तादृक्षस्तस्य सुतोऽभवत्।तस्य मीढ्वांस्तत: कूर्च इन्द्रसेनस्तु तत्सुत: ।१९॥
वीतिहोत्रस्त्वन्द्रसेनात् तस्य सत्यश्रवा अभूत्। see: सुतस्तस्य देवदत्तस्ततोऽभवत् ।२०॥
maser भगवानग्नि: स्वयमभूत् सुत: । कानीन sia विख्यातो जातूक्ण्यो महानृषि: 1291
aa seep जातमाग्निवेश्यायनं नृप । नरिष्यन्तान्वय: प्रोक्तो दिष्टवंशमत: शृणु 1221
Kavi, the youngest (son of Vaivaswata Manu), who was free from (all) craving for the
pleasures of sense, quitted his kingship as well as his kinsfolk while tender of age; and,
installing in his mind on the self-effulgent supreme Person, he retired into the forest and
entered the Supreme. (15) From Karissa, (another) son of Vaivaswata Manu, the families of
