Dis. 24 ] BOOK FOUR SoS &

LAH ECM LACKS EARL See Ae eee Hee व्ये eee Ee CTE IT ROE A HNO RE

aga: we fast शिवेनेह हारीरिणाम्। दुर्लभो मुनयो दध्युरसङ्गाद्यमभीप्सितम् । १७॥
आत्मारामोऽपि यस्त्वस्य लोककल्पस्य राधसे | शक्त्या युक्तो विचरति घोरया भगवान् भव: । १८।

Vidura said : Pray, tell me, O holy sage, how came about the meeting of the Pracetas
with Lord Siva on the way, and what significant precept Lord Hara (the Destroyer of the
universe) was pleased to impart to them. (16) It is indeed difficult for mortals, 0 Brahmana
sage, to get an opportunity to meet Lord Siva, on whom (even) sages have only been able
to contemplate as the cherished object of their desire by shaking off all attachment. (17)
Though revelling in the Self, Lord Bhava (the Source of all creation) goes about the world
associated with His terrible (destructive) energy (in the person of Goddess Siva) for the
maintenance of the world order. (18)

Wada: पितुर्वाक्यं शिरसाऽऽदाय arta: i fest प्रतीचीं WAAR META 1221
समुद्रमुप विस्तीर्णमपरयन् सुमहत्सर: | महन्मन इव स्वच्छं प्रसन्नसलिलाहशयम् 1201
नीलरक्तोत्पलाम्भोजकह्नारेन्दीवराकरम् | हंससारसचक्राह्वकारण्डवनिकूजितम् । २१ ॥
मत्तभ्रमरसास्वर्यहृष्टरोमलताङ्घ्रिपम् । पद्मकोशारजो दिक्षु विक्षिपत्पवनोत्सवम् 1221
तत्र गान्धर्वमाकर्ण्य दिव्यमार्गमनोहरम्। विसिस्म्यू राजपुत्रास्ते मृदङ्गपणवाद्यनु 1231
mda सरसस्तस्मान्निष्क्रामन्तं सहानुगम्। उपगीयमानममरप्रवरं विबुधानुगे: । २४॥
तप्तहेमनिकायाभं शितिकण्ठं त्रिलोचनम्। प्रसादसुमुखं वीक्ष्य प्रणेमुर्जातकौतुका: । २५॥
स तान् प्रपन्नार्तिहरो भगवान्धर्मवत्सल: । धर्मज्ञान् शीलसम्पन्नान् प्रीत: प्रीतानुवाच ह । २६॥
Maitreya went on : Having received their father's command with bowed heads, the
pious Pracetas set outin a westerly direction with their mind earnestly set on austerities. (19)
(At some distance) they saw a very large lake almost as extensive as a Sea and pellucid as
the mind of an exalted soul, with the creatures inhabiting it (ever) cheerful. (20) A home of
blue and red lilies, lotuses, Kahlaras (lilies blossoming at dusk) and blue lotuses, the lake
resounded with the notes of swans, cranes, Cakravakas (ruddy geese) and Karandavas (a
species of ducks). (21) Hemmed in by creepers and trees which were thrilled with joy (as it
were) to hear the sweet humming of drunken bees, it presented a gala appearance due to
the breeze scattering in all directions the pollen from the seed-vessel of (full-blown)
lotuses.(22) The princes were wonder-struck to hear music which ravished the mind by its
weird style and was preceded by the sound of clay and wooden tomtoms. (23) That very
moment they were filled with curiosity to behold the dark-necked and three-eyed Lord Siva
(the foremost of gods), refulgent like a mass of red-hot gold and inclined to shower His grace
(on His votaries), issuing from the lake with His retinue, His glories being sung by
Gandharvas and Kinnaras (attendants of the gods); and the princes bowed to Him. (24-25)
The Lord, who relieves the agony of His suppliants and is a lover of righteousness, gladly
spoke to the princes, who were not only well-versed in the moral code but (also) possessed
a noble character and felt (much) delighted (at His sight). (26)

श्रीरुद्र उवाच
ya वेदिषद: un विदितं वश्चिकीर्षितम्। अनुग्रहाय भद्रं व एवं मे a कृतम् ।२७॥
a परं Wa: साक्षात्नरिगुणाज्जीवसंज्ञितात्। भगवन्तं वासुदेवं प्रपन्न: स प्रियो fe Fire
स्वधर्मनिष्ठ: जतजन्मभि: पुमान् विरिञ्चतामेति aq: परं fe am
अव्याकृतं भागवतोऽथ वैष्णवं पदं चथाहं विव्रुधा: कलात्यये । २९॥
