390 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 63

BORCHERS WR Be Ra Sette He Be Bh SRR ES 8 BBE EEE Ren oe nn soe tetas t

(O Lord.) with their mind deluded by Your Maya people get attached to children, wife,
house etc., and begin to sink and float in the ocean of misery. (40) He who, having obtained
the human body (so graciously) granted by You, does not control his senses and worship
Your feet, is no doubt pitiable creature who is deceiving himself. (41) O Lord, he who neglects
You, the beloved Self, the Supreme Ruler, for the sake of sense-objects, which are just the
reverse of You, (is a fool, who) swallows poison rejecting nectar. (42) Myself, Brahma (the
Creator) and the (other) gods and (all) sages of pure mind have taken refuge in You with our
whole being, because You are our dearest soul and supreme Lord. (43) Youare responsible
for the appearance, continuance and dissolution of the universe, alike to everyone,
unperturbed, the beloved friend and deity, nay, the very Self of all. You are One without a
second, the support of the worlds as also of the individual souls. O Lord, we adore You for
release from the bondage of transmigration. (44) Lord, this Barmsura is a beloved devotee
of mine and is (much) liked oy me; | have assured him of my protection. Therefore, (kindly)
extend Your favour to him even as You did to (his great grandfather) Prahrada (the ruler of

the Daityas). (45)
चदात्थ ieee: करवाम fe तव । भवतो यद् व्यवसितं तन्मे साध्वनुमोदितम् ।४६॥
अवध्योऽयं ममाप्येष वैरोचनिसुतोऽसुर: । प्रह्रादाय at at न वध्यो मे तवान्वय: iver
दोपशमनायास्य प्रवृक्णा बाहवो मया । सूदितं च बलं भूरि यच्च भारायितं भुव: vcr
चत्वारोऽस्य भुजा: शिष्टा भविष्यन्त्यजरामरा: ! पार्षदमुख्यो भवतो न कुतश्चिद्भयोऽसुर: ।४९॥

The glorious Lord replied : O Worshipful One, We shall do whatever You have said and
that which is pleasing to You. | have fully approved of what You have decided (about
him).(46) (I know that) Banasura is a grandson of Virocana (Prahrada's son). | cannot kill him
inasmuch as a boon has been granted by Me to Prahrada that no one born in his line would
be killed by Me. (47) His arms have been cut off by Me only to curb his pride, and his huge
army has been exterminated simply because it was a burden on the earth. (48) Four arms
are left to him; they will be proof against age or destruction. He will be the foremost among
Your attendants. Though an Asura, he will henceforward have nothing to fear from any
quarter. (49)

इति लब्ध्वाभयं कृष्णं sore शिरसासुर: । प्राद्युम्निं रथमारोप्य सवध्वा समुपानयत्।५०॥
अक्षौहिण्या परिवृतं सुवास:समलङ्कृतम्। सपत्नीकं पुरस्कृत्य ययौ रुद्रानुमोदित: । ५१1
विवेश शङ्खानकदुन्दुभिस्वनैरभ्युद्यत: पौरसुहृद्द्विजातिभि: 1421

Obtaining this assurance of security, the said demon saluted Si Krsna with his head
(bent low) and duly brought Aniruddha back together with his bride (Usa), placing them on
a chariot. (50) (Thereupon) with Bhagavan Sankara's congratulation Sri Krsna departed
placing in the van Aniruddha and his wife—who were finely dressed and fully adorned with
ornaments—and were followed by an army consisting of one Aksauhini. (51) Sri Krsna
entered His capita!—artistically decorated with flags and ornamental arches, with its streets
and quadrangles sprinkled with water—and was met by the citizens, His (own) relations and
Brahmanas, who came forth to receive Him with the sounding of conchs, drums and
kettledrums. (52)

य एवं कृष्णविजयं aR च संयुगम्। संस्मरेत् प्रातरुत्थाय न तस्य स्यात् पराजय: 1431
इति श्रीमद्भागवते महापुराणे पारमहंस्यां संहितायां ददामस्कन्धे उत्तरार्धेऽनिरुद्धानवनं नाम त्रिषष्टितमोऽध्याय: 1631
