Dis. 26] BOOK FIVE 547
BBB Br BOCES PORE Eee irre it soa ee einen iio sot sen arti
‘Bitrir trererere ere tara fa Ae eer eae WT TIE ern ROTOR In rer SFr rer

form oftroops of Raksasas in the abode of Yama (in the hell knownas Raksoganabhojana)and,
cutting up those men and women into slices with their sword like butchers, drink their hot
blood and dance and sing in (great) merriment even as those (very) men and women who
ate (the meat of) their human victims did here. (31) Again, they who actually torture here
(either) in the woods or in their village (itself) innocent creatures, anxious to survive—
inspiring them with confidence by allurement (of various kind) when they have come near;
and treating them as playthings when they have been transfixed with an iron pin or tied with
a thread—recollect their sin when their bodies too are transfixed with stakes etc., in the
course of tortures inflicted by Yama (in the hell called Stlaprota) on their death, and they are
further tormented with hunger and thirst and are assailed on every side at every step by
buzzards, quails and other birds with pointed bills. (32)

ये त्विह वै भूतान्युद्वेजयन्ति नरा उल्बणस्वभावा यथा दन्दशूकास्तेऽपि प्रेत्य नरके दन्तशूकाख्ये
निपतन्ति यत्र नृप दन्दशूका: पञ्चमुखा: सप्तमुखा उपसृत्य ग्रसन्ति यथा बिलेशयान्। 3319 त्विह वा
अन्धावटकुसूलगुहादिषु भूतानि निरुन्धन्ति तथामुत्र तेष्वेवोपवेश्य सगरेण वह्निना धूमेन निरुन्धन्ति । ३४॥
यस्त्विह वा अतिथीनभ्यागतान् वा गृहपतिरसकृदुपगतमन्युर्दिधक्षुरिव पापेन were निरीक्षते तस्य चापि
निरये पापदृष्टेरक्षिणी वज्रतुण्डा गृध्रा: कङ्ककाकवटादय: प्रसह्योरुबलादुत्पाटयन्ति। 34 यस्त्विह वा
निर्वृतिमनवगतो ग्रह इवार्थमभिरक्षति स चापि प्रेत्य तदुत्पादनोत्कषर्णसंरक्षणशमलग्रह: सूचीमुखे नरके
निपतति aa ह वित्तग्रहं पापपुरुषं धर्मराजपुरुषा वायका ga सर्वतोऽङ्गेषु Wa: परिवयन्ति।३६ |

Again, those men who, fierce by nature like serpents, actually molest (other) living beings
here, themselves fall after their death into the hell called Dandaguka, where, 0 king
(Pariksit), serpents with five and even seven heads approach and devour them as they would
devour rats. (33) As regards these who actually shut up living beings here in dark holes,
granaries and caves etc., the servants of Yama likewise thrust them (in their turn) into holes
etc., in the other world (in the hell called Avatanirodhana) and confine them there with
poisonous fire and smoke. (34) Again, vultures, buzzards, crows, quails and other birds with
adamantine bills forcibly pluck out with great might in the infernal region (called Paryavartana)
the eyes of that sinful-eyed householder himself who, full of wrath, looks on strangers or
(other) known visitors here with a malicious eye again and again as if he would actually burn
them. (35) Again, he who, proud of his opulence and full of egotism, looks askance at others.
and distrusts all (including his elders), and who, with his heart and face withering through
anxiety about his wealth being exhausted or lost and himself knowing no peace of mind,
guards his treasure like a devil, accumulates sin in the process of earning, augmenting and
preserving wealth and (consequently) falls after his death into the hell called Sicimukha,
where, it is said, the servants of Yama (the deity presiding over righteousness), like tailors,

Stitch, all over, the body of the sinful man, clinging to wealth like a demon. (36)

एवंविधा नरका यमालये सन्ति शतश: सहस्त्रशस्तेषु way च सर्वं एवाधर्मवर्तिनो ये
केचिदिहोदिता अनुदिताश्चावनिपते पर्यायेण विशन्ति ada धर्मानुवर्तिन इतरत्र इह a पुनर्भवे त
उभयशेषाभ्यां निविशान्ति। ३७॥

There are hundreds and thousands of such infernal spots in the abode of Yama; and all
those treading the path of unrighteousness—whosoever have been spoken of here as well
as those that have been left unmentioned—enter all these spots one after another, O ruler
of the earth. And even so those following the path of virtue enter other regions (heaven etc.):
and with the residue of both virtue and sin (when the fruit of the bulk of their stock has been
reaped) they both (the virtuous as well as the sinful) return to this land of Bharatavarsa (the
land of rebirth). (37)
