100 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 1
Ee ee a teh ttre

PRAHA HHA T RR EETEL GH HSER २२२२ च चै SEER Re CHa e eee eee EET REET

created beings), returned to his exalted abode. (26)

यदुपतिर्मथुरामावसन् पुरीम्।माथुराञ्छूरसेनांश्च विषयान् बुभुजे पुरा । २७।
राजधानी तत: साभूत् सर्वयादवभूभुजाम्। मथुरा भगवान् यत्र नित्यं संनिहितो हरि: ।२८॥
Tet तु कर्हिचिच्छौरिर्वसुदेव: कृतोद्वह: । देवक्या सूर्यया सार्धं प्रयाणे रथमारुहत्।२९॥
उग्रसेनसुत: कंस: स्वसु: प्रियचिकीर्षया । रश्मीन् हयानां जग्राह det रथञतैर्वृत: ।३०॥
Wad पारिबर्हं गजानां हेममालिनाम्।अश्वानामयुतं at रथानां च TAT । ३१॥
दासीनां सुकुमारीणां द्वे za समलङ्कृते । दुहित्रे देवक: wee याने दुहितृवत्सल: 1321
शङ्खतूर्यमृदङ्गाश्च मेदुर्दुन्दुभय: समम्। प्रयाणप्रक्रमे तावद् वरवध्वो: सुमङ्गलम् ।३३॥
पथि safer कंसमाभाष्याहाशरीरवाक् । अस्यास्त्वामष्टमो TH हन्ता यां वहसेऽबुध ।३४॥
इत्युक्त स खल: पापो भोजानां कुलपांसन: | भगिनीं हन्तुमारब्ध: खड्गपाणि: कचेऽग्रहीत् । ३५1
तं जुगुप्सितकर्माणं at निरपत्रपम् । वसुदेवो महाभाग उवाच परिसान्त्वयन् ।३६॥

Of yore Surasena, the chief of the Yadus, 1860 the principalities of Mathura and
Strasena, (himself) residing in the city of Mathura (his capital). (27) Since then the said
Mathura, in which Lord Sri Hari is ever Present, continued to be the capital of all Yadava
kings. (28) Having gone through his wedding ceremony indeed in that city, one day,
Vasudeva, son of Stra (a noble man of the kingdom of Mathura), mounted the chariot
alongwith his newly wedded wife, Devaki, while departing (for his home). (29) Surrounded
by hundreds of chariots plated with gold, Prince Karnsa, the (eldest) son of King Ugrasena
(the then ruler of Mathura) held the reins of the horses (assumed the role of a charioteer) in
order to oblige his cousin (Devaki). (30) At the time of their departure Devaka (the younger
brother of Ugrasena), who was (so) fond of his daughter gave away to his daughter by way
of dowry four hundred elephants decked with necklaces of gold, fifteen thousand horses, eighteen
hundred chariots and two hundred graceful servant-maids profusely adomed. (31-32) As the
Procession of the bride and the bridegroom was just going to start, conchs, clarionets, clay
tomtoms and kettledrums sounded all at once in a most auspicious manner. (33) Addressing
Karhsa, who held the reins while on the way, an incorporeal voice said, "O foolish one! the
eighth chitd of this girl, whom you are (now) conducting, will slay you." (34) Told thus, that
wicked and sinful fellow, the disgrace of the Bhojas, seized his cousin by the hair, sword in
hand, and proceeded to kill her. (35) The highly blessed Vasudeva pleaded with that hard-
hearted and shameless fellow of detestable deeds, trying to appease him (as follows). (36)

aged sara

श्लाघनीयगुण: जशूरैर्भवान् भोजयरास्कर: । स कथं भगिनीं हन्यात् स्रियमुद्बाहपर्वणि । ३७॥
मृत्युर्जन्मवतां वीर देहेन सह जायते । अद्य areas वा मृत्युर्वै प्राणिनां ध्रुव: ।३८॥
RQ पञ्चत्वमापन्ने देही कर्मानुगोऽवशा: । देहान्तरमनुप्राप्य sm त्यजते aq: 1381
wie, पदैकेन यथैवैकेन गच्छति। यथा तृणजलूकॆवं देही कर्मगतिं गत: ।४०॥

स्वप्ने यथा पद्यति देहमीदृशं मनोरथेनाभिनिविष्टचेतन: ।

wera मनसानुचिन्तयन् प्रपद्यते तत् किमपि ह्यपस्मृति: rel

यतो यतो धावति दैवचोदितं मनो विकारात्मकमाप पञ्चसु ।

गुणेषु मायारचितेषु tat scm: we तेन जायते ॥४२॥
