08.12] . BOOK THREE 187

ee eee EMCECCLMTEAS Hee eer eEEE EEE Thee EEE ett trninink tot totes a tetova
त्र्त्त ज व ह

may be got without asking) and Siloficha (living on foodgrains found scattered and gleaned
from the fields after the harvest has been reaped or from the grain market when the stock
has either been sold or removed)—these are the four means of livelihood prescribed for
a (Brahmana) householder. (42) Similarly Vaikhanasas (those living on the produce of
uncultivated land), Valakhilyas (those who give away the old stock of foodgrains on
receiving a new one), Audumbaras (those who live on fruits etc., brought exclusively from
the quarter which they happen to face when quitting their bed after a night's rest) and
Phenapas (those who live on fruits etc., dropped from trees of their own accord) are the
four types of Vanaprasthas (anchorites dwelling in the forest in the third stage of their life).
And the Kuticaka (he who lives in a thatched hut at one place, fully observing the rules of
conduct prescribed for a recluse), the BahUdaka (he who regards the rules of conduct as
of secondary importance and accords a superior place to knowledge), the Hamsa (he who
treads the path of knowledge) and the Niskriya or Paramahamsa (he who has attained
spiritual wisdom and Jivanmukti or liberation in this very life)—these are the four types of
Samnyasis or recluses (those who have renounced their hearth and home in the fourth or
last Stage of their life). (43) Even so the four branches of knowledge, viz., Anviksiki (the
knowledge of the Spirit, which is conducive to liberation), Trayi (the knowledge of the ritual,
which leads to enjoyment in heaven), Varta (the technical knowledge of agriculture,
commerce, etc.), and Dandaniti (political science), and the four Vyahrtis or mystical
formulae uttered at the beginning of the Gayatri (BhGh, Bhuvah, Swah, and the combina-
tion of the three, viz., Bhurbhuvahswah) issued from his mouths in the same order; while
Pranava (the mystic syllable OM) flowed from the cavity of his heart. (44) Again, the Vedic
metre of Usnik appeared from the hair on the body of the all-powerful creator, and Gayatri
(another Vedic metre) from his skin. The Tristubh metre emerged from his flesh, Anustubh
from his sinews and Jagati from the bones of the lord of creation. (45) From his marrow
emanated Pankti, while Brhati came forth from his breath. Similarly his consciousness
came to be the hard consonants, while his body itself passed by the name of vowels. (46)
His Indriyas are termed as the sibilants (the sounds represented by the letters Sa, Sa, Sa
and Ha), while his physical strength goes by the name of Antahsthas or semi-vowels (the
sounds represented by the letters Ya,Ra,La and Wa. And the seven notes of the gamut
(Sadja, Rsabha, Gandhara, Madhyama, Paficama, Dhaivata and Nisada) proceeded from
the recreation of the lord of created beings. (47) Being Sabdabrahma (Veda or sound)
personified, Brahma is manifest in the form of Vaikhari (articulate utterance) and unmanifest
in the form of Pranava. Beyond him shines the Supreme, who pervades everything as
Brahma (the Infinite) and is possessed of various potencies as the almighty Lord. (48)

ततोऽपरामुपादाय स aM मनो दधे। ऋषीणां भूरिवीर्याणामपि सर्गमविस्तृतम् ।४९।
Wel waged भूयश्चिन्तयामास कौरव । अहो अद्भुतमेतन्मे व्यापृतस्यापि नित्यदा । ५०।
न ह्येधन्ते प्रजा नूनं दैवमत्र विघातकम्।एवं युक्तकृतस्तस्य दैवं चावेक्षतस्तदा uel
कस्य SUNG a यत्कायमभिचक्षते। ताभ्याँ रूपविभागाभ्याँ मिथुनं समपद्यत । ५२।
यस्तु TA पुमान् सोऽभून्मनु: स्वायम्भुव: BUS | Git चाऽऽसीच्छतरूपाख्या महिष्यस्य महात्मन: । ५३
तदा मिथुनधर्मेण प्रजा ह्येधाम्बभूविरे। स चापि झतरूपायां पञ्चापत्यान्यजीजनत् । ५४॥।
प्रियव्रतोत्तानपादौ fra: कन्याश्च भारत। आकूतिर्देवहूतिश्च प्रसूतिरिति सत्तम । ५५।
आकूतिं रुचये प्रादात्कर्दमाय तु मध्यमाम्। दक्षायादात्प्रसूतिं च यत आपूरितं जगत् ।५६॥
इति श्रीमद्भागवते महापुराणे पारमहंस्यां संहितायां तृतीयस्कन्धे SSMS: 1221
(Having cast off his previous body, which had been defiled by sinful thought and which
