438 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 75

EEK ee ete Tees eee Ne eee व मियै ने न व न दि व २8 दि वित् तन्कोकवैवगी

warriors to Dwaraka, the Almighty Lord stayed there with a view to pleasing the king. (29)
Thus having realized with the help of Sri Krsna, the long-cherished ambition of performing
the Rajasuya sacrifice, which was as difficult to realize as it is to cross of ocean, Yudhisthira
now heaved a sigh of relief. (30) ॥
एकदान्त-पुरे तस्य वीक्ष्य दुर्योधन: Bem अतप्यद् राजसूयस्य महित्वं चाच्युतात्मन: ।३१॥

यस्मिम् नरैन्द्रदितिजेद्घस्रुरैन्द्रलर्व्य! विभान्ति किल 'ळ्ळि’ब’श्वसृजां'पक्कप्ताप् १

ताभि: पतीन् द्रुपदराजसुतोपतस्थे यस्यां विषक्तहृदय: कुरुराडतप्यत् ।३२॥

mal सुचारु ङ्कृवुभ्ङ्कुफ्शोणह्मा श्रीमन्मुखं प्रचलकुण्डलकुन्तलाढ्यम् 133 1

On a certain day, Duryodhana felt greatly troubled at heart at the sight of Yudhisthira’s

splendour in his palace and the greatness attained by him, a great devotee of God, through
the performance of the Rajasuya sacrifice. (31) The palace contained all the wealth and royal
splendours of earthly monarchs, demon kings and lords of celestials, got together by the
demon Maya, who had built it. Queen Draupadi waited upon her consorts with all these
materials and it was mainly due to his attachment for her that Duryodhana was filled with
jealousy. (32) More than a thousand consorts of Bhagavan Sri Krsna lived in that palace at
the time. The anklets at their feet charmingly jingled when they walked with slow paces on
account of their bulky hips. They were slender-waisted and the saffron on their breast made
their white necklace of pearls appear red. Rocking ear-rings and flowing locks enhanced the
beauty of their faces. (33)

सभायां मयक्रृप्तायां क्वापि धर्मसुतोऽधिराट्। वृतोऽनुजैर्बन्धुभिश्च कृष्णेनापि स्वचक्षुषा ।३४॥
आसीन: काञ्चने साक्षादासने मघवानिव । पारमेष्ठ्यश्रिया जुष्ट: स्तूयमानश्च वन्दिभि: ।३५॥
wa दुर्योधनो मानी परीतो भ्रातृभिर्नृप। किरीटमाली न्यविशदसिहस्त: fare रुषा ।३६॥
स्थलेऽभ्यगृह्णाद् Ta जलं मत्वा स्थलेऽपतत् । जले च स्थलवद् MRT मयमायाविमोहित: ।३७॥
जहास भीमस्तं apr स्रियो नृपतयोऽपरे। निवार्यमाणा अप्यङ्गं राज्ञा कृष्णानुमोदिता: । ३८॥

स व्रीडितोऽवाग्वदनो रुषा ज्वलन् निष्क्रम्य तूष्णीं प्रययो गजाह्वयम् ।

wet शब्द सुमहानभूत् सतामजातशत्रुर्विमना इवाभवत्।

aye तृष्णीं भगवान् ya wt समुजिहीर्षुरभ्रमति स्म चददृशा ।३९॥
एतत्तेऽभिहितं राजन् यत् पृष्टोऽहमिह त्ववा । सुयोधनस्य she राजसूये महाक्रतौ ॥४०॥
इति श्रीमद्भागवते महापुराणे पारमहंस्यां संहितायां दमस्कन्धे उततरार्धे दुर्योधनमानभङ्खो नाम पञ्चसप्ततितमोऽध्याय: ॥७५॥

In a part of the Hall constructed by Maya, Emperor Yudhisthira, invested with imperial
glory, was once seated ona throne of gold. Surrounded by his brother and kinsmen, and his
guide, Bhagavan Sri Krsna, and extolled by bards, he looked like Indra. (34-35) Proud
Duryodhana accompanied by his brothers appeared there, sword in hand, with a crown on
his head and a necklace hanging on his breast. He angrily scolded the guards at the gate
as he entered. (36) Deluded by the superb skill of Maya, he drew up his skirts mistaking a
certain part of the floor for a sheet of water; and proceeding further he stumbled into water
mistaking it for the bare floor. (37) Dear Pariksit ! Bhima, the royal ladies and other princes
laughed when they saw him fall, notwithstanding Yudhisthira’s remonstrances, being
encouraged by a gesture from Sri Krsna. (38) Duryodhana was abashedatthis discomfiture.
Burning with rage, and with his face cast down, he silently left the Hall and immediately
