290 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 1

PHVAESKHAHMHHR HEHE को KEL E ONL SS OOOH THK Eee EHE RE SOUR RAEN OEE EA AETV RAH SM TEE

rocks), the sage subjugated his mind by means of Pranayama (breath-control) and remained
standing on one foot for a full century, subsisting on the air and defying cold and heat and
other such pairs of opposites. (18-19) The thought which was foremost in his mind (all the
time) was : "I resort for protection to Him who is the Lord of the (whole) universe. May He
bless me with offspring like Himself."(20)

तप्यमानं त्रिभुवनं प्राणायामैधसाग्निना । निर्गतेन wid: समीक्ष्य प्रभवस्त्रय: 1221
अप्सरोमुनिगन्धर्वसिद्धविद्याधरोरगै: | वितायमानयदासस्तदाश्रमपदं WI: । २२॥
तत्मादुर्भावसंयोगविद्योतितमना aft: । उत्तिष्ठन्नेकपादेन ददर्श विबुधर्षभान् 1231
प्रणम्य दण्डवद्भूमावुपतस्थेऽर्हणाञ्जलि: | वृषहंससुपर्णस्थान् स्वै: स्वैश्चिह्नैश्च चिह्नितान् । zs

कृपाबलोकेन हसद्वदनेनोपलम्भितान् । तद्रोचिषाप्रतिहते निमील्य मुनिरक्षिणी ।२५॥
चैतस्तत्प्रवणं युञ्जन्नस्तावीत्संहताञ्जलि: | श्लक्ष्णया सूक्तया वाचा सर्वलोकगरीयस: । २६॥

Seeing the three worlds being tormented with the fire produced by the fuel of Pranayama
and issuing from the crown of the sage's head, all the three lords (Brahma, Visnu and Siva)
went to his hermitage. Their glory was being sung (all the time) by Apsaras (celestial
nymphs), sages, Gandharvas (celestial musicians) and (other demigods such as)
Siddhas, Vidyadharas and Nagas. (21-22) His mind being flooded with light by their
simultaneous appearance, the sage stretched himself up even on one leg and saw the three
foremost gods seated severally on a swan, Garuda (the king of the birds) and a bull (Nandi
and distinguished by their characteristic marks (a Kamandalu or water-pot, a discus and a
trident and so on). He greeted them by falling prostrate on the ground and paid them homage
with articles of worship (such as water, flowers and so on) in the hollow of his palms, their
gracious look and smiling faces bearing testimony to their pleasure. The sage closed his
eyes, which were dazzled by Their splendour, and collecting his mind, which had conceived
a fondness for them, extolled with joined palms andin sweet and significant words, the three
gods, who were the greatest of all in the whole universe. (23—26)

lod

अन्ररुवाच

ते ब्रह्मविष्णुगिरिशा: प्रणतोऽस्म्यहं वस्तेभ्य: क एव भवतां म इहोपहूत: 1201

Wal मयेह भगवान् विब्रुधप्रधानैश्चित्तीकृत: प्रजननाय कथं नु यूयम्।

अत्रागतास्तनुभृतां मनसोऽपि दूराद् Aa प्रसीदत महानिह विस्मयो FRc

Atri said : Youare (evidently) Brahma, Visnu and Siva, who assume a personality at the

beginning of every Kalpa (round of creation) with the help of the three Gunas (modes) of
Maya (Prakrti), divided for the purpose of creation, preservation and destruction of the
universe. | bow to You all. (Pray tell me,) of You three, who was called by me here? (27) It
was the one (supreme) Lord, the foremost of all the gods, whose presence here was invoked
by me in order to be able to beget children. How, then, did You all (condescend to) come
here—You, who are beyond the reach even of the mind of embodied beings ? Be pleased
to tell me-(the secret of it); for great is my wonder at this. (28)

मैत्रेय उवाच

इति तस्य aa: Ye त्रयस्ते विव्रुधर्षभा: | प्रत्याहु: श्लक्ष्णया वाचा प्रहस्य तमृषिं प्रभो 1281
Maitreya went on : Hearing these words of Atri, the three foremost divinities laughed
and replied to the sage in sweet accents as follows, O mighty Vidura. (29)

त टि व ay: १ By
यथा कृतस्ते संकल्पो Wel तेनैव नान्यथा | सत्सङ्कल्पस्य ते ब्रह्मन् यद्वै ध्यायति ते वयम् 1301
