Dis. 8 ] BOOK ONE 31

BBB BR Ge BRA ROR RT Be RNa a Br BR et th AR BB BR ROR ROR ROR ROR RE BORIC IIR ROE ROR ROR ARE IDR OR Iota tit
ee S930. STRESS EE SST BE BE BOAT Me Se He BY

groaning under a heavy load like a vessel sinking in the sea. (34) Some others maintain that
You have descended on earth with the intention of performing deeds fit to be heard of or dwelt
upon by those who are being tormented in this world by ignorance, desire and selfish
acts.(35) That is why Your devotees constantly listen to, sing, repeat to others and
contemplate on Your stories and rejoice; and it is they alone who behold before long Your
lotus-feet that put an endto the stream of births and deaths. (36) O Lord, (we know) You have
always granted the wishes of Your own people. Is it a fact, then, that You intend this very day
to leave us, Your relations, who exclusively depend on You and who have no asylum other
thanYour lotus-feet, having alienated other monarchs by inflicting suffering on them ? (37)
When You are out of sight, the Yadus and ourselves, the Pandavas, are of no more
consequence in name or form than the senses when their ruler, the soul, has quitted them.
(38) This earth will not look so bright then, O Wielder of a mace, as it does now, adorned by
Your foot-prints, which are easily distinguished by their characteristic marks (of a lotus,
thunderbolt, banner and goad éetc.).(39) These territories, so highly prosperous and so rich
in their ripe crops and vegetation, ds well as these woodlands and hills, rivers and oceans,
flourish only under Your benign looks. (40) O Lord, You are not only the Ruler and the Soul
of the universe but the universe itself; kindly cut asunder the strong bond of affection that
binds me with my own people, the Pandus and the Vrsnis (the Yadus). (41) Even as the
Ganga incessantly pours its waters into the ocean, so let my thought, O Lord of the Madhus,
constantly and exclusively find delight in You. (42) O glorious Krsna, friend of Arjuna,
foremost among the Vrsnis, You are fire as it were to burn the whole race of princes who are
proving the bane of the earth. Your prowess is infinite. Govinda, Your descent on this earth
is intended only to relieve the distress of the cows, the Brahmanas and the gods. Obeisance
to You, O Master of Yoga, O divine Teacher of the universe!" (43)

सूत उवाच
पृथयेत्थॆ ome: परिणूताखिलोदय: iad जहास वैकुण्ठो मोहयन्निव मायया ।४४॥
तां meus प्रविर्य गजसाह्वयम्। स्रियश्च स्वपुरं यास्यन् प्रेम्णा राज्ञा निवारित: ।४५॥
व्यासाद्यैरीश्वरेहाज्ञै: कृष्णेनाद्भुतकर्मणा | प्रबोधितोऽपीतिहासैर्नाबुध्यत शुचार्पित: ।`४६॥
ame राजा धर्मसुतश्चिन्तयन् सुहृदां ae प्राकृतेनात्मना विप्रा: स्नेहमोहवशं गत: iv!
अहो मे uaa ge रूढं दुरात्मन: | पारक्यस्यैव देहस्य बह्वयो मेऽक्षौहिणीर्हता: isc!
बालद्विजसुहन्मित्रपितृभ्रातृगुरुद्गुह: । न मे स्यान्निरयान्मोक्षो ह्यपि वर्षायुतायुते: xe
नैनो wa: प्रजाभर्तुर्धर्मयुद्धे वधो द्विषाम्। sf मे न तु बोधाय कल्पते शासनं वच: 1401
aint मद्धतबन्धूनां द्रोहो योऽसाविहोत्थित: | कर्मभिर्गृहमेधीयैर्नाहं कल्पो व्यपोहितुम् । ५१।
यथा पषङ्केन पङ्काम्भ: सुरया वा सुराकृतम्।भूतहत्यां तथैवैकां aig 1421

इति श्रीमद्भागवते महापुराणे पारमहंस्यां संहितायां प्रथमस्कन्धे कुन्तीस्तुतिर्युधिष्ठिरानुतापो नामाष्टमोऽध्याय: ।८।

Sita went on: In this way when Prtha (Kunti) extolled in sweet words the consummate
glory of Lord Vaikuntha (Sri Krsna), He gently smiled as if bewitching her by His Maya
(deluding potency). (44) "So be it," said Sri Krsna and, taking leave of her,entered the city
of Hastinapura once again; then, after bidding adieu to the other ladies as well, He was about
to leave for Dwaraka when king Yudhisthira detained Him out of love. (45) The king, who was
seized with remorse (for his having been instrumental in bringing about the destruction of
his own kinsmen), could not be consoled even though Vyasa and others, who understood

the ways of Providence, and even Sri Krsna of marvellous deeds comforted him by means
of legends.(46) Brooding over the death of his kinsmen with a bewildered mind, O holy
