686 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 6

SEMA ARE RT HL HERRERA RRR MEARE RR RRR EO EMT TR ETN FOL A NAILER LAA LAH

(Himself). (10) "| am Brahma, the supreme support, and Brahma, the highest goal am | !"
Thus identifying yourself with the Absolute (your very Self), and realizing your true nature,
you will behold neither the serpent Taksaka biting you at your feet with its poisonous fangs
nor your body nor the universe as apart from you. (11-12) (All) this has been narrated to you
(by me), O dear Pariksit ! in response to what you, my very self, inquired concerning the
pastimes of Lord Sri Hari, the Soul of the universe, O protector of men! What more do you
desire to hear ? (13)

Thus ends the fifth discourse in Book Twelve of the great and
glorious Bhagavata-Purana, otherwise known
as the Paramaharhsa-Samhila.

Kitt Pvt hs
PITRE rce

अथ षष्ठोऽध्याय:

Discourse VI
(Pariksit attains the supreme goal and Janamejaya commences a snake-
sacrifice;) Classification of the Vedas into so many Sakhas or schools
सूत उवाच

एतन्निशम्य मुनिनाभिहितं परीक्षिद् व्यासात्मजेन निखिलात्मदृशा समेन |

तत्पादमूलमुपसृत्य नतेन yal बद्धाञ्जलिस्तमिदमाह स विष्णुरात: । १ ।
Sita began again ; Having heard this discourse of the sage Suka (the son of Vyasa),

who beheld the universe within himself and looked upon all with an equal eye, the said

Pariksit, who had been granted his life by the Lord, approached the soles of the sage’s feet
and with bent head and joined palms spoke thus. (1)

राजोवाच

सिद्धोऽस्म्यनुगृहीतोऽस्मि भवता करुणात्मना soft यच्च मे साक्षादनादिनिधनो af: । २ |

नात्यद्भुतमहं मन्ये महतामच्युतात्मनाम्। अज्ञेषु तापतप्तेषु भूतेषु यदनुग्रह: । ३ ।

पुराणसंहितामेतामश्रौष्ष भवतो वयम्।यस्यां खलूत्तमह्लोको भगवाननुवर्ण्यते । ४ |

भगवंस्तक्षकादिभ्यो मृत्युभ्यो न बिभेम्यहम्। प्रविष्टो wa निर्वाणमभयं दर्शितं त्वया । ५ |

अनुजानीहि मां wa, वाचं यच्छाम्यधोक्षजे। मुक्तकामादायं da: wage व्रिसृजाम्यसून्। ६ |

अज्ञानं च fet मे ज्ञानविज्ञाननिष्ठया । भवता दर्शितं aa at भगवत: पदम्। ७ |
The king (Pariksit) submitted ; | stand accomplished of purpose and have been
favoured by your gracious self in that | have been directly told of Sri Hari, who has no
beginning or end, as well as of the means of attaining Him. (2) ! do not consider it surprising
that the grace of exalted souls, who have given their mind to Sri Hari (the immortal Lord),
descends on the ignorant creatures tormented by agonies. (3) We have heard from you the
compilation in the form of this Purana, in which the most illustrious Lord has been described

as a matter of fact. (4) Lord! 1 am afraid neither of Taksaka nor of other agencies of death,
since | have (now) entered the fearless and all-blissful state of oneness with Brahma (the
