Dis. 23] BOOK FOUR 393

Zenon दो icine कहं ऊ कैजौत्धत्र त्रो रा तज्त्येशे an त्रीद्वी क जो चो पोडं teins he trent aa rerio er eto iri
त्त्रन्र

guarded. (59) Like the wind-god he could move everywhere and matched him in strength (of
body), vitality and prowess; while in irresistibility he vied with Lord Siva (the Ruler of the
ghosts). (60) In comeliness of form he matched the god of love and was full of spirit as a lion.
In paternal affection he equalled Swayambhuva Manu, while in lordship over men he was
like Brahma (the birthless creator). (61) In expounding the Vedas he was (another) Brhaspati
(the preceptor of the gods), while in self-control he was (as good as) Sri Hari Himself. And
in devotion to the cow, the preceptor and the Brahmanas as well as to the votaries of Lord
Visnu, and (even so) in modesty, humility and amiability as well as in his efforts for (the
benefit of) others he was his own equal (peerless). (62) Through his glory, sung by the people
everywhere in the three worlds, he had reached the ears of women evenas Sri Rama entered
the ears of pious men. (63)

Thus ends the twenty-second discourse, forming part of the Story of king
Prthu, in Book Four of the great and glorious Bhagavata-Purana,
otherwise known as the Paramahamsa-Samhita. -

CREST ESTES
PDO EPEC A CD

अथ त्रयोविंशोऽध्याय:

Discourse XXIll
King Prthu practises asceticism and departs for the other world
Taq उवाच
SPs प्रवयसमेकदा ay आत्मवान्। आत्मना वर्धिताशेषस्वानुसर्ग: प्रजापति: । १ |
जगतस्तस्थुषश्चापि वृत्तिदो धर्मभृत्सताम्। निष्पादितेश्वरादेशो यदर्थमिह जज्ञिवान् 2 |
आत्मजेष्नात्मजां न्यस्य विरहाद्रुदतीमिव । प्रजासु विमन:स्वेक: सदारोऽगात्तपोवनम् । ३ |

तत्राप्यदाभ्यनियमो वैखानससुसम्पते। आरब्ध उग्रतपसि यथा स्वविजये पुरा । ४ |
कन्दमूलफलाहार: BEATA: क्वचित्। अब्भक्ष: कतिचित्पक्षान् वायुभक्षस्तत: परम् । ५ |
are पञ्चतपा वीरो वर्षास्वासारषाण्मुनि: | आकण्ठमग्न: शिशिरे उदके स्थण्डिलेराय: | ६ |

तितिक्षुर्यतवाग्दान्त ऊर्ध्वरता जितानिल: । आरिराधयिषु:३ कृष्णमचरत्तप उत्तमम् । ७ ।

तेन क्रमानुसिद्धेन ध्वस्तकर्मामलाराय: ioe: संनिरुद्भुषड्वर्गङ्छिन्नबन्धन: | ८ |

सनत्कुमारो भगवान् यदाहाध्यात्मिकं aa तेनैव पुरुषमभजत्पुरुषर्षभ: । ९ |

भगवद्धर्मिण: साधो: MEM यतत: Berl भक्तिर्भगवरति ब्रह्मण्यनन्यविषयाभ्वत् । १० |
Maitreya began again : A man of (great) self-control and a (true) protector of his
subjects, Prthu (the son of Vena) had himself fostered his own creation ( in the shape of the
various crops and the numerous towns and villages founded and populated by him), made
(necessary) provision for the maintenance of (all) mobile (animate) and immobile
(inanimate) creatures, lent his support to the practice of virtue by the virtuous and (fully)
discharged the commission of the Lord, for which he was born on this earth. Realizing, one
day, that he had grown old, he entrusted the earth, (who was a daughter to him and) who was
weeping as it were outof grief at her separation (from him), to the care of his sons and repaired
unattended to a hermitage alongwith his consort, while his subjects stood disconsolate. (1—3)

[564] B. M. 15—
