Dis. 7] “BOOK TWO - 113

LHEEELA LAR HASSLES EE LRAN HSE EEE ARE HHS Were re EA RES Et IE EHH RH
Sn EHR न SF

happened to be the leader of hisherd) felt much distressed and, holding up a lotus inhis trunk,
called out thus: "O Primal Person, O Protector of all the worlds, O Lord of sacred renown,
Whose names are auspicious to hear !" (15) Hearing his invocation, the infinite Lord SriHari
appeared on the scene, armed with His celebrated discus (Sudargana) and mounted on the
shoulders of Garuda (the king of the birds). He severed the head of the alligator with the
discus and, taking the elephant, who sought His protection, by his trunk graciously rescued
him (from the enemy's mortal grip). (16)

ज्यायान् गुणैरवरजोऽप्यदिते: सुतानां लोकान् विचक्रम इमान् यदथाधियज्ञ: |
ant वामनेन जगृहे त्रिपदच्छलेन चाच्ञामृते पथि चरन् प्रभुभिर्न चाल्य: । १७॥
Tat बलेरयमुरुक्रमपादशौचमाप: शिखा धृतवतो विबुधाधिपत्यम् ।
यो वै प्रतिश्रुतमृते न चिकीर्षदन्यदात्मानमङ्ग शिरसा हरयेऽभिमेने ie

Though the youngest of all the (twelve) sons of Aditi, Lord Visnu (the Deity presiding over
sacrifices) was the foremost among them in point of virtues, as is evidenced by the fact that
He covered all the three worlds by His strides the moment king Bali gave Him the promise
to grant Him land (measuring three paces). Although in the form of a dwarf He thus wrested
the earth (from Bali) under the pretext of asking for land measuring three paces, He
demonstrated to the world at large (by His example) that a man who sticks to the path of
righteousness cannot be overthrown even by the all-powerful except through solicitation.(17)
Dear Narada, to acquire sovereignty over the gods (the position of Indra)—this was not the
object sought for by Bali, who placed on the crown of his head (as a token of reverence) the
water in which the foot of the Lord (who had taken strides to measure the three worlds) had
been washed, nay, who was not the least inclined to do anything other than that which he
had solemnly undertaken (even though warmed and cursed by his own preceptor, Sukracarya)
but offered to Sri Hari his own body (to be measured as the third step) by placing his head
at the Lord's feet. (18)

तुभ्यं च नारद भृशं भगवान् विवृद्धभावेन साधुपरितुष्ट उवाच योगम् ।
Ww च भागवतमात्मसतत्त्वदीपं यद्वासुदेवश्रणा विदुरञ्जसैव ies
चक्रं च दिक्ष्वविहतं दशसु स्वतेजो मन्वन्तरेषु मनुवंशाधरो बिभर्ति |
दुष्टेषु राजसु दमं व्यदधात् wail सत्ये figs sedi प्रथयंश्चरित्रै: 1201

Immensely pleased with your highly developed devotion, O Narada, the Lord (appearing
as the divine Hamsa) taught you the Yoga of Devotion as well as the divine wisdom, which
is like a lamp to reveal the truth of the Spirit and which only men who have taken refuge in
Lord Vasudeva can easily grasp.(19) In the various Manvantaras the Lord (appearing as the
Manu) preserves the race of the Manus and wields His authority over all the ten directions—
an authority which is unobstructed like the discus of Lord Visnu (Sudargsana)—spreading by
His exploits His charming glory up to the highest heaven, Satyaloka, which lies even beyond
Maharloka, Janaloka and Tapoloka, and inflicting punishment (in the capacity of Manu) on
the wicked kings (from time to time). (20)

धन्वन्तरिश्च भगवान् waka कीर्तिर्नाम्ना नृणां पुरुरुजां रुज आशु हन्ति ।
at च भागममृतायुरवावरुन्ध आयुश्च वेदमनुशास्त्यवतीर्य लोके 1221

And, descending into this worlds as Dhanvantari (a king of Kasi), whois glory itself, the Lord,
on the very utterance of His name, immediately cures the diseases of men who suffer from
numerous ailments. Nay, He won the rank ofimmortals and got a sharein the sacrificial offerings.*

* The story of king Dhanvantari has been told at length in Harivarnga (Harivarng$a-Parva, 29) and there is a passing
ference to Him in Srimad Bhagavata (IX.xvii. 4—29).
