718 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 13

PRR BEAR HET 8 A AE RHEE EMH FEE SE Fo TEE BE RR RR

(rightful) owner, another may usurp even his hard-earned wealth like the honey that has been
collected (by the bee) with great pains. (In this way) aversion from all objects of desire has
been learnt by me from the bee. (35) (Just) like a python | remain effortless and contented
in mind with whatever is got by chance. (Even) if | get nothing, | remain lying (without food)
for many days, depending on my own strength (power of resistance). (36) Now| eata scanty
fare and now plentiful, no matter whether it is delicious or tasteless; now | partake of a meal
rich in many qualities and now gulp worthless provender. (37) Sometime | eat food offered
with reverence , while at other times | (am compelled to) eat food which is served without (any
tinge of) honour. Atsome places | eat even after having eaten (once); while (at other places)
| eat by day or by night according to chance. (38) Enjoying what is ordained by fate and
contented in mind | put on silk or linen, deerskin or rags, the bark of trees or even (any) other
fabric that may be easily obtained. (39) Now | lie down.on the earth’s surface (bare ground)
and now on straws, leaves a slab of stone or ashes. (And) now | repose ona quilt stretched
on a bedstead inside a palace in compliance with another's will. (40) Sometimes having
bathed and besmeared my body with sandal-paste and finely dressed, nay, wearing a
garland and decked with jewels, | drive in a chariot, or ride on horse-back or on an elephant;
while at other times, O king, | roam (about) stark-naked like an evil spirit. (41) | neither revile
nor eulogize men who are diverse of disposition (due to the predominance of any one of the
three modes of Prakrti, viz., Sattva, Rajas and Tamas). On the other hand, | (only) wish them
welfare in the shape of (their) unity of being with Lord Visnu (the supreme Spirit). (42)
विकल्पं जुहुयाच्चित्तौ at मनस्यर्थविभ्रमे। मनो वैकारिके हुत्वा तन्मायायां जुहोत्यनु ४३1
आत्मानुभूतौ At मायां जुहुयात् सत्यदूङ्मुनि: | ततो निरीहो विरमेत् स्वानुभूत्याऽऽत्मनि स्थित: ree
स्वात्मवृत्तं मयेत्थं a सुगुप्नमपि वर्णितम्। व्यपेतं लोकशास्त्राभ्यां var fe भगवत्पर: 1s!

(In order to attain such a state) one should (mentally) merge the notion of diversity in the
mental faculty of perceiving such diversity and that faculty (itself) in the mind, which is
responsible for our misconception of things (mistaking the body for the Self). (Again)
merging the mind in the Sattvika aspect of the Ego, he should then merge the latter (through
the Mahat-tattva) into the Maya (Prakrti or primordial Matter). (43) A contemplative soul
should merge the said Maya in the (Self-conscious) Brahma and then, fixing his eyes on the
(supreme) Reality and established in that self-conscious (supreme) Spirit and devoid of
effort, he should become actionless. (44) In this way, since you are beloved of the Lord, |
have told you about my own conduct, although it is very mysterious and repugnant to (all)
secular and Vedic (religious) canons. (45)

ARG उवाच
धर्म पारमहंस्यं 8 मुने: भ्रुत्वासुरेश्वर: । पूजयित्वा तत: sid sees प्रययो गृहम् ।४६॥

Narada went on: Having (thus) attentively heard from (the lips of) the sage (Dattatreya)
an account of the course of conduct prescribed for ascetics of the highest order and after
(duly) worshipping him and taking his permission, Prahrada (the lord of the Asuras) returned
thence to his home, full of delight. (46)

Thus ends the thirteenth discourse, forming part of the dialogue between Emperor
Yudhisthira and the sage Narada and bearing on the course of
conduct prescribed for a recluse, in Book Seven of the
great and glorious Bhagavata-Purana, otherwise
known as the Paramahamsa-Samhila.

ne
Pro IESE Si pore
