356 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 14

RHRKKERA HHSC HHEH AK क कक पि EKER KLEE EEL CEH HL ETVE LTH CEL TEESE SHEE HEE HRA He

Sa वेनं सान्त्वयित्वा च सामभि: 1231

Observing the conduct of Vena, who had taken to evil ways, and pondering the calamity
of the people, the sages assembled at a sacrificial session and compassionately said : (7)
"Oh ! a terrible calamity has befallen the people from both sides, viz., from the thieves (on
the one hand) and the ruler (on the other), even as ants etc., inhabiting a piece of wood
lighted at both ends find themselves in great peril. (8) For fear of anarchy this undeserving
fellow was installed on the throne; but he himself is proving a source of terror. How can
embodied beings live in safety now ? (9) Just as nourishing a snake with milk is fraught with
danger to the very man who nourishes it, Vena, who was born of Sunitha and wicked by his
very nature, seeks to destroy the people themselves now that he has been appointed their
ruler. Nevertheless let us (try to) bring him round through persuasion, so that his sin may not
touchus. (10-11) For Vena, who was addicted to evil ways, was made king by us even though
we were aware of his sins. lf, however, the unrighteous fellow does not accept our advice
even when kindly addressed, we shall burn him with our spiritual fire, burnt as he already is
by popular reproach. "Thus resolved, the sages approached Vena, concealing their anger,
and, after soothing him with kind words, spoke to him (as follows). (12-13)

मुनय ऊचु:

नृपवर्य निबोधैतद्यत्ते विज्ञापयाम भो:। आयु:श्रीबलकीर्तीनां aa aa विवर्धनम् । १४॥

ad areata: पुंसां वाङ्मन:कायबुद्धिभि: | लोकान् विशोकान् वितरत्यथानन्त्यमसङ्घिनाम् । १५ ॥

स ते far प्रजानां क्षेमलक्षण: । यस्मिन् विनष्टे नॄपतिरैश्चर्यादवरोहति ec

राजन्नसाध्वमात्येभ्यश्चोरादिभ्य: प्रजा नृप: । रक्षन् यथा बलिं गृह्णन्निह Fear च मोदते ey

Ta Ua महाभाग भगवान् yaaa: i परितुष्यति विश्वात्मा तिष्ठतो निजशासने ee

तस्मिंस्तुष्टे किमप्राप्यं जगतामीश्वरेश्वरे। लोका: सपाला ह्येतस्मै हरन्ति बलिमादृता: 1201

यज्ञैर्विचित्रैर्यजतो wae ते राजन् स्वदेशाननुरोद्धुमर्हसि । २१|

The sages said : Listen, 0 chief of kings, to that which we urge for your consideration,
and which, dear child, is calculated to prolong your life and enhance your fortune, strength
and glory. (14) Duty performed with mind, speech, body and intellect bestows on men (after
death an abode in) worlds which are free from sorrow, nay,-even the eternal state on those
who are free from attachment. (15) Let not that duty, which consists in your case in ensuring
happiness and security to the people, be abandoned by you, O valiant monarch! For, when
this duty is neglected, a king (surely) falls from his royal splendour. (16) A monarch, O king,
who protects the people against (the tyranny of) wicked ministers, thieves and so on—and
takes revenue from them as enjoined by the scriptures enjoys happiness here as well as
hereafter. (17) The Lord, who is the Protector of (all) living beings and the soul of the
universe, O noble king, is immensely pleased with the monarch who abides by His laws and
in whose dominion and capital the very same Lord, who is also the Deity presiding over
sacrifices, is worshipped by the people through (devotion to) their duty, following the (rules
of) their (own) Varna (grade in society) and Asrama (stage in life). (18-19) What remains
unattainable when that Lord, whois the Sovereign (even) of the Rulers of the worlds (Brahma
