730 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA { Dis. 15

उत्त यडी EAAEAEAHERA HEHE SELAH E LEH EET कौजा तिति CERES EEE EEE EEE RE eee eee ङजाने

of Pitryana or DhUmamarga, the Dark Path), characterized by rebirth. Having gone through
each one of these stages in the order mentioned above, the soul is reborn on this earth. (50-51)
(Only) a member of the twice-born classes (duly) consecrated by (all) the purificatory rites
from Garbhadhana (the ceremony of impregnation performed before conception) down to
Antyesti (the funeral rites perfomed at the crematory) follows this course. Those devoted to
Nivrtta Karma (on the other hand) offer sacrifices in the form of ritual acts (themselves) into
(the fire of) the senses lighted by Knowledge (of the Self). (In other words, they look upon
the functions of the senses-as the manifestation of the senses themselves). (52) (Again,)
such a man merges his senses in the mind, representing the thinking faculty; the mind, full
of morbid thoughts, in speech (because it is speech in the form of scriptural ordinance etc,
that propels the mind to pose as the doer and so on, which is truly speaking only an
aberration); speech, in the body of articulate sounds (because itis in these specific forms that
speech reveals itself); the latter, in the compound vowel sound OM; (the mystical sound) OM,
in (what is known by the name of) Bindu (the nasal sound); the latter (again) in Nada (the
echo); Nada, in Prana (the Jiva as associated with the vital air); and the last-named, in
Brahma (the all-pervading Spirit). (53) (The deities presiding over) fire, the sun, the day-time,
the close of day (eventide), the bright fortnight, the full moon (the closing day of a bright
fortnight), the summer half-year (representing the progress of the sun to the north of the
equator) and Brahma* (that mark the ascent of the departed soul to Brahmaloka, the realm
of Brahma, the uppermost and the subtlest sphere of this material universe and representing
the climax of material enjoyment), the Viswa (the soul identifying itself with gross matter),
Taijasa (the soul identified with subtle matter), the Prajfia (the soul indentified with the causal
matter), the Turya (the soul standing as a witness of all these states), so-called because of
its being associated with each of these states (as its witness), and Atma (the pure Spirit)—
the Vedas speak of these as (marking) the path of the gods (also known by the name
of Arcirmarga or the Bright Path, which culminates in Liberation). Going through (all)
these stages one after another, the tranquil-minded votary of the (supreme) Spirit (God),
established in the Self, never returns (to this world). (54-55)

* Verse 54 likewise delineates the path of the human soul devoted to Nivrtta Karma. Here the soul of the deceased
gradually ascends to the abode of Brahma (the creator), being conducted on the way by the deities presiding over fire, the sun,
the day-time, eventide, the bright fortnight, the full moon and the summer half-year. There it enjoys the luxuries of that realm
and finally attains Liberation along with Brahma. The latter half of this verse outlines the process of Liberation, which
commences with the soul, which was till now known by the name of Viswa, merging Its physical body in the astral and remaining
identified with the latter, when itis designated as Taijasa. The Taijasa merges its astral body in the causal sheath and enjoys
the title of Prajfia so long as it remains identified with the causal frame. Then, merging the causal sheath in the all-witnessing
Self, which is united with all bodies, it assumes the title of Turya; and finally casting off the role of a witness too, it remains in
its primary state as the pure Self or Absolute. In other words, it is shorn of all adjuncts and gets liberated.

This Is corroborated by the following texts of the Chandogya Upanisad :—

तद्य इत्थं fag: ये चे मेऽरण्ये श्रद्धा तप इत्युपासते तेऽर्चिषमभिसम्भवन्त्यर्चिषोऽहरह्न आपूर्यमाणपक्षमापूर्यमाणपक्षाद्यान्यडुदङ्ङेति मासा स्तान्॥ 8
भासेभ्य: dant, संवत्सरादादित्वमादित्याच्चन्द्रमसं चन्द्रमसो विद्युतं तत्पुरुषोऽमानव: स एनान्त्रह्म गमयत्येष देवयान: पन्था इति॥ २॥

Also compare the following couplet of the Bhagavadgita:—
Sfrediiere: शुक्ल: षण्मासा उत्तरायणम् Wa प्रयाता गच्छन्ति व्रह्म ब्रह्मविदो जना:॥ (VII.24)

"(Of the two paths) the one is that in which are stationed the all-etfulgent fire-god and the deities presiding over daylight,
the bright fortnight and the six months of the northward course of the sun respectively, proceeding along it after death Yogis,
who have known Brahma, being successively led by the above gods, finally reach Brahma."
