Dis. 6] BOOK SEVEN 673

SEO ST Be RSE BSR Br 8 BBP fe Sf BB tS de Better ttt titi Rinse frie rir drfrteaea arate

wa fart अनुकम्पिताया: ag we रुचिरांश्च मन्त्रान्।
Wea च स्नेहसितर || at | कलाक्षराणामनुरक्तचित्त: 1221
पुत्रान्स्मरंस्ता gee भ्रातॄन् स्वसूर्वा पितरौ च दीनौ ।
गृहान् मनोज्ञोरुपरिचछदांश्च वृत्तीश्च gem पशुभृत्यवर्गान् ।१२॥
त्यजेत कोशस्कृदिवेहमान: कर्माणि लोभादवितृप्तकाम: |
- औपस्थ्यजैह्वयं बहु मन्यमान: at विरज्येत दुरन्तमोह: 1231
कुटुम्बपोषाय वियन् निजायुर्न बुध्यतेऽर्थं विहतं प्रमत्त: ।
सर्वत्र तापत्रयदु:खितात्मा निर्बिद्यते न स्वकुटुम्बराम: । १४॥
प्रेत्येह चाथाप्यजितेन्द्रियस्तदशान्तकामो हरते Hea । १५॥
विद्वानपीत्थं दनुजा: कुटुम्बं पुष्णन्स्वलोकाय न कल्पते चै ।
य: स्वीयपारक्यविभिन्नभावस्तम: प्रपद्येते चथा विमूढ: । १६॥
यतो न ai wm च कुत्रचिद् वा दीन: स्वमात्मानमलं समर्थ: ।
विमोचितुं कामदृशां विहारक्रीडामृगो यन्निगडो विसर्ग: । १७॥
उपेत नारायणमादिदेवं स मुक्तसङ्गैरिषितोऽपवर्गं: । १८॥

What man whose senses have not (yet) been conquered can hope to liberate his own
self, attached to his home and bound with the powerful cords of affection ? (9) Who indeed
can give up the thirst for wealth, which is coveted more than life itself and which a thief as
well asa servant and a merchant purchases even in exchange for his most beloved life? (10)
With his mind attached to his relatives and bound by the affection of lisping children, how can
a man forgo the private company and sweet friendly counsel of his sympathetic wife? (11)
Remembering his sons and those beloved daughters (living at their father-in-law's place),
brothers and sisters as well as his helpless (decrepit) parents, and dwellings provided with
abundant articles of attractive furniture, hereditary vocations, animals and servants, how
can. he renounce them ? (Nay,) pursuing actions (of different categories) out of greed (for
rewards of various kinds) like a silk-worm (which builds a nest in whichit gets imprisoned due
to its leaving no outlet from it) and thinking highly of the pleasures relating to sex and the
palate, how can he feel disgusted with them, his desires remaining (still) unsated and his
infatuation knowing no bounds? (12-13) Fond of his family, the careless fellow does not
perceive his life wearing away in the endeavour to maintain his family nor his (real) purpose
(in the shape of God-Realization) frustrated; and even though his mind remains afflicted by
the three kinds of agony everywhere, he never gets sick of them. (14) Though knowing the
sin attaching here as well as hereafter to the man misappropriating others' wealth, the
householder whose mind is ever intent on (accumulating) riches nevertheless takes away
others’ wealth, his senses being uncontrolled andhis desires unsatisfied. (15) Indeed he who
has a differential outlook, regarding this as his own and that as belonging to another, is not
able to realize the Self while maintaining his family inthe aforesaid manner, Oscions of Danu,
even though he may be learned (in the Scriptures). (On the other hand,) he is likely to enter
the dark region (of hell) even like a deluded person. (16) Since none who is extremely
passionate and a (veritable) toydeer for the diversion of lustful women, in whom are forged
fetters in the form of offspring, is ever and anywhere capable of liberating his soul, therefore,

