Dis. 76 ] BOOK TEN 439

Rh RENEE Ee ee EEE EN ENS CETTEN TEC HEEESTCEMER EME TEAC EERE ECE E TEE eR

departed for Hastinapura. The incident raised a cry of dismay from all good people and
Yudhisthira felt perturbed over it as it were. Bhagavan Sri Krsna, however, kept quiet over
the incident, intent as He was upon relieving the burden of the earth. In fact, it was His
enchanting look which threw Duryodhana into confusion and brought about the incident. (39)
Pariksit, you asked me on this occasion how at the great Rajasuya sacrifice Duryodhana
developed his intense ill-will against the Pandavas. | have told you the secret of it. (40)

Thus ends the seventy-fifth discourse entitled “ Duryodhana's Humiliation" in the
latter half of Book Ten of the great and glorious Bhagavata-Purana,
otherwise known as the Paramaharnsa-Samnhita.

25 २९० ३अ
eS Sirs

अथ षटद्सप्ततितमोऽध्याय:
Discourse LXXVI

Salva's Encounter with the Yadavas
SRF उवाच
अधान्यदपि कृष्णस्य शृणु कर्माद्धुतं नृप। क्रीडानरशरीरस्य यथा सौभपतिर्हत: । १ ।
शिशुपालसख: ज्ञाल्वो रुक्मिण्युद्वाह आगत: । यदुभिर्निर्जित संख्ये जरासन्धादयस्तथा | २ ।
शाल्व: प्रतिज्ञामकरोत् श्रृण्वतां सर्वभूभुजाम्। अयादवीं क्ष्मां करिष्ये पौरुषं मम पर्यत । ३ ।
gia qe: प्रतिज्ञाय देवं पशुपतिं प्रभुम्। आराधयामास Fe पांसुमुष्टिं सकृद् ग्रसन्। ४ |
संवत्सरान्ते ower उमापति: । वरेणच्छन्दयामास Ted झरणमागतम्। ५ ।
देवासुरमनुष्याणां गन्धर्वोरगरक्षसाम् । अभेद्यं कामगं वव्रे स aM वृष्णिभीषणम्। ६ ।
तथेति गिरिशादिष्टो मय: परपुरञ्जय: । पुरं निर्माय area प्रादात्सोभमयस्मयम् । ७ ।
स लब्ध्वा कामगं यानं तमोधाम दुरासदम्। ययौ द्वारवतीं शाल्वो at वृष्णिकृतं स्मरन्। ८ |
SriSuka began again: Pariksit, now hear the story of still another wonderful achievement
of Bhagavan Sri Krsna, who had sportfully assumed a human semblance. This relates to the
death of Salva, owner of the celebrated aerial car called Saubha. (1) Salva was a friend of
Sigupala and accompanied the latter (as a member of the bridegroom's party) for his
(proposed) wedding with Rukmini. At that time he, alongwith Jarasandha and others, was
completely routed in battle by the Yadus. (2) Within the hearing of all the princes (assembled
there) Salva took a vow saying, ” | shall rid the earth of the Yadavas; you will then witness
my prowess.” (3) Parikgit, having thus p ledged himself, the fool began to worship the god of
gods, Sankara, taking by way of nourishment only a handful of dust once a day. (4) At the
end of a year the almighty Spouse of Uma, Lord Sankara, (who is propitiated very soon),
offered to confer a boon on Salva, who had sought his protection. (5) Salva requested the
Lord to confer on him an aerial car which could be taken wherever he liked, and which could
not be broken by the gods, Asuras, men, Gandharvas and Raksasas, and which would be
a terror to the Yadus. (6) Sankara said, “Be it so !" Under his command, the demon Maya,
who could (easily) bring about the fall of an enemy's stronghold, constructed an aerial car,
called Saubha, which was made of steel, and handed it over to Salva. It was nota car, but
a city in miniature. (7) Full of darkness within, it was inaccessible (to others). \tcould be taken
wherever one liked. Obtaining this car, Salva proceeded against Dwaraka remembering the
old grudge against the Yadus. (8)
