28 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 8

.६.३.७.३.३.३.३.३.३.३..३..१.६.३..७..३.७..३..६.३.३..३.३.३.:३. ३३३३ 3६७3 ६ . HERR HY Me HERA RE RCN MRM AE AT HEHE AT MEMT HORE He BE BTM RE HE HORT HOM RE OR HOME

Krsna, all of whom had lost their kith and kin, and were sitting there plunged in grief.(3-4)
साधयित्वाजातशत्रो:; स्वं wel कितवैर्हतम्।घातयित्वासतो wa: कचस्पर्शक्षतायुष: । ५ |
याजयित्वाश्वमेधैस्तं त्रिभिरुत्तमकल्पकॆ: | तद्यश: पावनं दिक्षु शतमन्योरिवातनोत् । ६ ।
area पाण्डुपुत्रांश्च हौनेयोद्धवसंयुत: । द्वैपायनादिभिर्विप्रैर पूजितै: प्रतिपूजित: । ७ ।

Tw] कृतमतिर्व्रह्मन् द्वारकां रथमास्थित: । उपलेभेऽभिधावन्तीमुत्तरां भयविह्वलाम् । ८ |
Having secured to king Yudhisthira (to whom no enemy was ever born, in other words,
who was too good to regard anyone as his enemy) his own kingdom, that had been usurped
by gamblers, and brought about the destruction of wicked kings, whose span of life had been
cut short by touching Draupadi's hair, and having helped him to perform as many as three

Aswamedha Sacrifices with the best possible materials and with the aid of the best available

priests, He caused his sacred renown to spreadin all directions like that of Indra (whois raised

to this exalted position only after performing a hundred ASwamedha sacrifices). (5-6) Having
taken leave of Pandu's sons and paid His respects to holy Brahmanas like Dwaipayana

(Vyasa), who did their homage to Him in return, He mounted His chariot and was just

intending to leave for Dwaraka along with Satyaki and Uddhava when, O Saunaka, He

perceived Uttara (widow of Abhimanyu, Arjuna's deceased son) rushing towards Him,

stricken with fear. (7-8)

उत्तरोवाच

पाहि पाहि महायोगिन् देवदेव जगत्पते । नान्यं wend wed यत्र पृत्यु: परस्परम्। ९ |
अभिद्रवति मामीश हारस्तप्तायसो विभो । कामं दहतु मां नाथ मा मे रार्भो निपात्यताम् । १०॥

Uttara said : Protect me, 0 great Yogi; save me, O supreme Deity ! O Lord of the
universe,| see no asylum other than You in this world, where everyone is death to another.(9)
This dart of burning steel is pursuing me, O almighty Lord ! Let it burn me by all means, my
master; but Jet it not kill the child in my womb. (10)

qd उवाच
उपधार्य वचस्तस्या भगवान् भक्तवत्सल:। अपाण्डवमिदं कर्तुं द्रौणेरस्त्रमनुध्यत 129
तर्ह्यवाथ मुनिश्रेष्ठ पाण्डवा: पञ्च सायकान्। आत्मनोऽभिमुखान्दीप्तानालक्ष्यासत्राण्युपाददु: ।१२॥
व्यसनं वीक्ष्य तत्तेषामनन्यविषयात्मनाम् । सुदर्शानेन स्वास्त्रेण स्वानां रक्षां व्यधाद्बिभु: । १३।
अन्त:स्थ: सर्वभूतानामात्मा are eft: । स्वमाययाऽऽवृणोद्गर्भं वैराट्या: कुरुतन्तवे । १४॥
werd ब्रह्मशिरस्त्वमोघं चाप्रतिक्रियम्।वैष्णवं तेज आसाद्य समशाम्यद् भृगूद्वह । १५॥
मा ten ह्येतदाश्चर्यं सर्वाश्चर्यमयेऽच्युते । य इदं मायया ten सृजत्यवति हन्त्यज: । १६॥
ब्रह्मतेजोविनिर्मुक्तैरात्मजे:र सह कृष्णया । प्रयाणाभिमुखं कृष्णामिदमाह yen सती । १७॥

Sita says : Hearing her words, the Lord, whois so fond of His devotees, understood that
it was a missile discharged by ASwatthama (son of Dronacarya) in order to exterminate the
line of the Pandavas (sons of Pandu). (11) Thai very moment. O chief of the sages, the sons
of Pandu also saw five burning shafts coming towards them, and took up their own missiles
(arrows). (12) Perceiving the calamity of his kinsmen, who thought of none else than Him,
the almighty Lord protected them with His own discus, SudarSana. (13) Sri Hari, the Master
of Yoga, who is the very Self dwelling in the heart of all living beings, enveloped the womb
of Uttara (the daughter of king Virata) by His own Maya (Yogic power) in order to preserve
the line of Kuru. (14) Even though the missile presided over by Brahma is unfailing and

irresistible, it proved ineffectual when it met the effulgence of Bhagavan Visnu (Sri Krsna),
O chief of the Bhrgus. (15) Deem this not as a miracle on the part of Lord Acyuta (Sri Krsna),
