102 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 5.

PAARL HH ETERS NOLES HEHE ELTERL EK SOT HEHE TSEC EE THe KKH ee HHT HHRL RH Hee Kee hHeTh
प्तणर्त्त जन

| may follow your teachings correctly. (8)
ब्रह्मोवाच
सम्यक् कारुणिकस्येदं वत्स a विचिकित्सितम् । यदहँ ales: सौम्य भगवद्वीर्यदर्शने । ९।
ara तव तच्चापि यथा at प्रव्रवीषि भो: । अविज्ञाय परं मत्त एतावत्त्वं यतो fe मे ।१०॥
a स्वरोचिषा fad रोचितं रोचयाम्यहम्। यथार्कोऽग्निर्यथा सोमो यथर्क्षगहतारका: ।११॥
we नमो भगवते वासुदेवाय धीमहि । यन्मायया दुर्जयया मां ब्रुवन्ति जगद्गुरुम् ।१२।
विलज्जमानया यस्य स्थातुमीक्षापथेऽमुया | विमोहिता विकत्थन्ते ममाहमिति दुर्धिय: । १३॥
द्रव्यं कर्म च कालश्च स्वभावो जीव wa च । वासुदेवात्परो ब्रह्मन्न चान्योऽर्थोऽस्ति तत्त्वत: । १४॥
नारायणपरा वेदा देवा नारायणाङ्खजा:। नारायणपरा लोका नारायणपरा मखा: ।1१५॥
नारायणपरॊ योगो नारायणपरॆ तप:।नारायणपरं ज्ञानं नारायणपरा fa: । १६॥
तस्यापि द्रष्टुरीशस्य कूटस्थस्याखिलात्मन: | सृज्यं सृजामि सृष्टोऽहमीक्षयैवाभिचोदित: 1201
wa wen इति निर्गुणस्य गुणास्त्रय: | स्थितिसर्गनिरोधेषु गृहीता मायया विभो: ie
कार्यकारणकर्तृत्वे द्रव्यज्ञानक्रियाश्रया: | बध्नन्ति नित्यदा मुक्तं मायिनं पुरुषं गुणा: 1281
स एष भगवाँल्लिङ्गैस्रिभिरेभिरधोक्षज: । स्वलक्षितगतिर्ब्रह्मम् सर्वेषां मम dar: 1201

डिव।।।व्॥82॥86; Laudable is this enquiry of yours, dearchild, who are full of compassion
to all; for you have thereby urged me to reveal the Lord's glory. (9) Itis not without truth either
what you have spoken about me, my son. For, until one has come to know Him who is even
greater than me, all this greatness appears as belonging to me. (10) | (seem to) manifest
(bring forth) the universe, which stands manifested by the self-effulgent Lord, much in the
same way as the sun and fire, the moon and the other planets as well as the other stars and
the lunar mansions (seem to) illumine it (the universe) even though it stands illumined by the
Lord. (11) । bow to the same Lord Vasudeva and meditate on Him. Deluded by His Maya,
whichis so difficult to conquer, people (like you) speak of me as the father of the universe.(12)
Nay, bewildered by that Maya, fools vauntingly speak of the body as their self (‘I’) and of all
that belongs to it as 'mine’, although this Maya is too shy even to stand the Lord’s look. (13)
In reality, O divine sage, there is no substance other than Lord Vasudeva—neither the
elements nor Karma (destiny) nor Time nor Swabhava (nature) nor the individual soul. (14)
Narayana (Lord Visnu) is the goal of the Vedas; the gods have sprung from the limbs of
Narayana; the sacrifices are meant to please Narayana and the worlds attained through such
sacrifices are so many limbs of Narayana’s Cosmic Body. (15) Narayana is the ultimate
object of all Yoga (concentration of mind); all austere penance is intended to propitiate
Narayana. All wisdom is directed towards Narayana and all paths lead to Narayana. (16) He
is atonce the Seer andthe Ruler; though immutable, He is all-embracing. Itis He who created
me; and, encouraged by His glance, | evolve this creation. (17) The Lord is infinite and
beyond the three Gunas (modes of Prakrti); it is His Maya that has assumed these three’
Gunas—Sattva, Rajas and Tamas—for the purpose of creation, preservation and destruc-
tion.(18) Through the agency of the elements, the senses and the gods presiding over the’
senses, these Gunas (modes of Prakrti) bind the individual soul who is subject to Maya,”
though ever free in essence, with the consciousness that he is the physical body, the senses
and the mind, all in one. (19) The selfsame Lord, who transcends sense-perception,
envelops Himself beyond recognition with these three sheaths of matter. He is the Ruler of.
all beings as well as of myself, O Narada ! (20)
