Dis. 11] BOOK SIX 605

अन्रे री KEK eee ee Te Hee क ज ककक ङीतदि प्रैप्नेप्रेप्रैप्रैप्रंघेग्रेप्रैश्चेश्चेर्णेघेघेश्चेप्नेप्रैप्रंप्रैगैप्रै’श्चेप्रैगेगेक्लीप्रंघंर्व्यश्रींर्धीर्व्यर्धंकैधंभंर्किघेघेघे…घेर्घभ्रेधं

दिष्ट्यानृणोऽद्याहमसत्तम त्वया मच्छूलनिर्भिन्नदृषद्धृदाचिरात् । १४॥
चो नोऽग्रजस्यात्मविदो द्विजातेर्गुरोरपापस्य च दीक्षितस्य ।
विश्रभ्य owe शिरांस्यवृश्चत् पञ्चोरिवाकरुण: स्वर्गकाम: । १५॥
ह्रीश्रीदयाकीर्तिभिरुज्झितं त्वा स्वकर्मणा पुरुषादैश्च गर्ह्यम्।
कृच्छ्रेण मच्छूलविभिन्नदेहमस्पृष्टबह्निं समदन्ति गृध्रा: ।१६॥
’अन्येऽनुयेत्वेहनृज्ञंसमज्ञायेह्युद्यतक्या:प्नहरन्तिमह्यम्।
तैर्भूतनाथान् सगणान् निशातत्रिशूलनिर्भिन्नगलैर्यजामि । १७॥
अथो हरे मे gee dk owt प्रमथ्यैव fir यदीह ।
wr भूतबलिं विधाय मनस्विनां पादरज: प्रपत्स्ये । १८॥
मा संशयिष्ठा न गदेव वज्रं स्यान्निष्फलं ound याच्ञा ।१९॥
नन्वेष वज्रस्तव ow तेजसा हरेर्दधीचेस्तपसा च तेजित: ।
ara शत्रुं जहि विष्णुयन्रितो यतो हरिर्विजय: श्रीर्गुणास्तत: 1201
ae समाधाय मनो यथाऽह सङ्कुर्षणस्तच्चरणारविन्दे ।
त्वद्वज्ररंहोलुलितग्राम्यपाशो गतिं मुनेर्याम्यपविद्धलोक: 1221
न राति aq द्वेष san आधिर्मद: कलिर्व्यसनं संप्रयास: 1221
ततोऽनुमेयो भगवत्प्रसादो al दुर्लभोऽकिञ्चनगोचरोऽन्यै: 1231

Vrtra said : Luckily enough (for me) you, who slewa Brahmana, your (own) preceptor and
my brother (all in the person of Viswartpa), have firmly stood before me as my adversary. How
glad am | that through you, O most wicked one, when your stone-like heart has been pierced
through before long by my trident, | shall have discharged my debt (to my brother) today. (14)
You ruthlessly lopped off with a sword the heads of my innocent brother—who besides being
a Brahmana and your preceptor, had realized the Self and reposing (full) confidence in you, was
(duly) engaged in a sacrifice (on your behalf), (even) as one aspiring to (an abode in) heaven
would sever the head of an animal to be sacrificed. (15) When your body has been tom asunder
by my trident, vultures will feast (before long) on you—forsaken as you are by shame, grace,
compassion and glory and fit to be censured (even) by Raksasas (who devour human beings)
because of your sinful deeds—since you will get no fire (to burn you). (16) Nay, | shall indeed
propitiate the god Bhairava and others (the leaders of ghosts) with their retinue through (the
blood of) those other foolish gods who, following (the lead of) your cruel self, have raised their
missiles to strike me on this field of battle and whose neck will be (presently) pierced through with
my sharpened trident. (17) If, on the otherhand, O valiant Indra, you actually succeed in crushing
my army and severing my (own) head with your thunderboltin this encounter, | shall in that case
offer my body as a (propitiatory) oblation to birds and beasts (such as vultures and jackals) and
(thus) freed from all debts (of Karma), attain to the dust of feet (destiny or abode) of enlightened
souls (Narada and others). (18) O ruler of gods, wherefore do you not hurl your unfailing
thunderbolt at me, your enemy, stationed before you? (Pray) do not entertain any misgiving (in
your mind). (Rest assured that) the thunderbolt will not prove ineffectual as your mace or as an

