Dis. 7

beer deer eee
ae

ntiring
'). (32)
moon,
longed
}ऽ (and
endant
j them)
form of
ljephant
Earth),
real Sri
salwala,
daratha
jas, the
| appear
ssumed
35)

iecomes
—which
imself in
} of Veda

१8 Vedas,
aya (their
alluring to
are will be
-born (the
ill become
| be heard
ie manes),

oe
:2 took place,
sing reference

that is offered to

Dis. 7] ++ BOOK TWO

hae rid trmmanenre de reseomennerennnns rsh ewes ASSETS SSSI AREERE Heer eee ed

See a: Sigareae fags Tea, PrarraatIgenararay Iso |
ami faanaeh WRIsTaTA ATA FETE asa a
TE TOT SATA See: SATS ATA ATTA ATT TALS |
aut @ va Tard eadera: walernsstiraaat ae Preacer |
a geumiaatta a Barat Sat aerate af: श्वश्रृगालभक्ष्ये 1S? |
aqerg wore fe deem qo vag sree cea |
ad wt: Fa Wag wees weraieyy It TIT SR!
इक्ष्वाकुरैलमुचुकुन्दविदेहगाधिरघ्वम्बरीषसगरा गयनाहुषाद्या: |
मान्धात्रलर्कशतधन्वनुरन्तिदेवा देवब्रतो बलिरमूर्त्तयो दिलीप: ।४४॥

येऽन्ये विभौषणहृत्रूप्रद्रुपेन्द्रदत्तागर्धाष्टिंवेपांविदुरश्रुत्तदेवबर्यां:।४५।
तेवैविदन्त्यत्तितरंन्तिचदेबपायांस्रीन्नूद्रहूं]क्काअपिपापजीवा:।

यद्यद्धुतक्रमपरायणशीलशिक्षास्तिर्यग्जना अपि किमु श्रुतधारणा ये । ४६1

itis the same Lord of infinite powers who manifests the glories of His Maya (
creative faculty) in the form of austere penance, myself (Brahma) and the nine se:
the lords of created beings, at the time of creation, in the form of Dharma (the go
Lord Visnu (the Deity presiding over sacrifices), the fourteen Manus (the prog
protectors of mankind), the immortals and the rulers of the earth, at the time of p
and in the form of Adharma (the spirit of unrighteousness), Hara (the god of dest
class of serpents (residing in the nethermost regions) known by the name of NV
and demons etc., atthe time of dissolution of the universe. (39) What man, gifted
in this world could catalogue the powers of Lord Visnu, even though he might hé
all the particles of dust on the earth ? (As the Lord proceeded to measure the t
with His strides), He raised His legs with such irresistible force that the whole ut
the outermost sheath of Prakrti (primordial matter) to the highest heaven (Satya
to shake violently, when He supported it by His own might. (40) ( O Narada !) ne
nor those elder brothers of yours (Sanaka and others) know the whole truth abc
who is a storehouse of innumerable potencies, Maya (who brings forth and wi
herself the entire creation) being one of them. How, then, could others know ।
Primal Deity, Lord Sesa (the serpent-god); who is possessed of a thousand mo
reach His end even to this day, though he has been singing His praises (from ६
They alone are able to cross the Lord's Maya (deluding potency), SO difficult to (
know it in reality, to whom that infinite Lord extends His grace, which is possib
they take refuge in His feet with their whole being andina guileless manner. A
alone who cease to look upon their body, which is the food of dogs and jackals
or as their own. (42) Dear Narada, it is | who know the wonderful creative ६
Supreme Being, and so do you and your elder brothers (Sanaka and others)
(Siva), Prahlada (the foremost of the Daityas), the celebrated Swayambhuva |
wife (Satarupa), as well as their sons and daughters, kings Pracinabarhi, Rbl
Dhruva; even so kings Ikswaku (the eldest son of Vaivaswata Manu), Purura’
la), Mucukunda, Videha (Janaka), Gadhi (father of the celebrated sage Viswar
Ambarisa, Sagara, Gaya, Yayati (the son of Nahusa) and others; and s
Mandhata, Alarka, Satadhanu, Anu and Rantideva; Devavrata (Bhisma), the
Bali as well as kings Amurtaraya and Dilipa; the sages Saubhari. Utta
Pippalada, Saraswata and Paragara as well as kings Sibi and Bharisena and
