838 — SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 24

Battie tirininink tot intoininh tiinin tniin inint th iniiciinicinh & fon iin iin tintin tin tintin

of being sought for (by all)—for instruction. (Kindly, therefore,) cut asunder, O Lord, with
Your words throwing light on the (highest) truth, the knots (in the shape of egotism and so
on) existing in the heart and reveal Your own Self (to me).(53)

श्रीगुक उवाच

इत्युक्तवन्तं नृपति भगवानादिपूरुष: । मत्स्यरूपी महाम्भोधौ विहरंस्तत्त्वमब्रवीत् । ५४॥
पुराणसंहितां दिव्यां सांख्ययोगक्रियावतीम्। सत्यव्रतस्य राजर्षेरात्मगुह्यमशेषत: 144 |
अश्रौषीदूषिभि॥ साकमांत्मतत्त्वमसंशायम्।नाव्यासीनो भगवता प्रोक्तं Wel सनातनम् । ५६॥
अतीतप्रलयापाय उत्थिताय स वेधसे।हत्वासुरं हयग्रीवं वेदान् प्रत्याहरद्भधरि: । ५७।
स तु सत्यव्रतो राजा ज्ञानविज्ञानसंयुत: | विष्णो: प्रसादात् कल्पेऽस्मिन्नासीद वैवस्वतो मनु: । ५८।
सत्यव्रतस्य राजर्षेर्मायामत्स्यस्य anism: | dare महदाख्यानं श्रुत्वा मुच्येत किल्लिषात् 148 |
अवतारॊ हरेर्योऽयं कीर्तयेदन्वहं नर: । सङ्घुल्पास्तस्य सिध्यन्ति स याति परमां रातिम् । ६०॥

प्रलयपयसि aa: सुप्तशाक्तेर्मुखेभ्य: श्रुतिगणमपनीतं प्रत्युपादत्त हत्वा |

दितिजमकथयद् यो ब्रह्म सत्यव्रतानां तमहमरखिलहेतुं जिह्ममीनं नतोऽस्मि । ६१॥

मत्स्यावतारचरितानुवर्णनं नाम चतुर्विंशोऽध्याय: 12% |
इत्यष्टम: Chet: समाप्त:

न्न्न्

Sri Suka went on: Sporting in that vast expanse of water in the form of a whale, Lord
Visnu (the most ancient Person) taught the (highest) truth to the king, when he had thus
prayed. (54) He (further) revealed to the royal sage Satyavrata in its entirety the mystery of
His own Self in the form of a divine collection of Pauranika lore (called Matsyapurana), (a
book) dealing with Sankhya philosophy (which teaches us how to differentiate between
Prakrti and Purusa (Matter and Spirit), Yoga (union with the Lord through Devotion) and
rituals.(55) Seated on board the vessel with the (seven) seers, the king listened to the
discourse on the truth of the Self, (which is the same as) the eternal Brahma (the Infinite),
delivered by the Lord (in the form of the divine Fish), so (attentively) as to leave no doubt (in
his mind).(56) Having (already) killed the demon Hayagriva (and recovered the Vedas), He
restored the Vedas to Brahma (the creator) when the latter rose (from his slumber) at the end
of the Pralaya (dissolution) that (immediately) preceded the current Kalpa (known as the
Sweta-Varaha Kalpa).(57) The same king Satyavrata, who was (thus) endued (both) with
spiritual knowledge (as derived from the scriptures) and wisdom (Self-Realization) by the
grace of Lord Visnu, figured in the present Kalpa as the Vaivaswata Manu (so-called because
he was bornasa son of the sun-god, and was also known by the name of Sraddhadeva).(58)
` Aman is (surely) rid of (all) sin by hearing this great story consisting of the (foregoing)
dialogue between the royal sage Satyavrata and Lord Visnu (the Wielder of a bow made of
horn), disguised as a fish through His creative energy. (59) He who recites from day to day
the story of that which is spoken of as the descent of Sri Hariin the form of a whale attains
