658 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 29

११११ eM eakohansesannnanasnanasoanseennanesonsarenonannenentnasnennnnnennnnenannesan

Sri Suka went on: Hearing the discourse of Sri Krsna of excellent renown, Uddhava,
who had thus been shown the path of Yoga (union with the Lord), stood with joined palms,
his eyes overflowing with tears, and could not at that time utter a word (in return) as his
throat was choked with emotion. (35) Controlling his mind, agitated through affection, by
firmness, 0 king, and accounting himself blessed, he (now) replied (as follows) to Sri
Krsna (the greatest hero among the Yadus) with joined palms, touching His lotus- feet with
his head. (36)

FEF उवाच
विद्रावितो मोहमहान्धकारो य आश्रितो मे aa संनिधानात् ।
विभावसो: fe नु समीपगस्य ate at भी: प्रभवन्त्यजाद्य । ३७1
प्रत्यर्पितो मे भवतानुकम्पिना भृत्याय विज्ञानमय: प्रदीप: ।
हित्वा कृतज्ञस्तव Tey कोऽन्यत् समीयाच्छरणं त्वदीयम् ।३८॥
वृक्णश्च मे सुदृढ: स्रेहपाशो दाशणार्हवृष्ण्यधधकसात्वतेषु ।
waa: सृष्टिविवृद्धये त्वया स्वमायया ह्यात्मसुबोधहेतिना 13¢1
THis ते महायोगिन् प्रपन्नमनुशाधि माम्। यथा त्वच्चरणाम्भोजे रति: स्याद्नपायिनी xo!

Uddhava submitted : The thick darkness of ignorance that had been hugged by me
has been dispersed by Your teaching. Can cold and darkness or the fear born of these
possibly prevail against a man who has sought the presence of fire, O Creator (even) of
Brahma ? (37) The lamp of wisdom (that had been snatched away by Your Maya) has been
restored to me, Your servant, by You, compassionate as You are. Leaving the soles of Your
feet, what grateful man would seek any other asylum ? (38) Nay, the most tough snare of my
Affection for the Dasarhas, the Vrsnis, the Andhakas and the Satvatas, that had been spread
by You through Your deluding potency for the propagation of species, has actually been torn
asunder by Youwith the sword of Self-Realization, (39) (My) salutation be to You, O Supreme
Master of Yoga! (Pray,) instruct me, who have come to You for protection, so that unceasing
love for Your lotus-feet may abide in my heart. (40)

श्रीभगवानुवाच
गच्छोद्धव मयाऽऽदिष्टो बदर्याख्यं ममाश्रमम्। aa मत्पादतीथेदि स्नानोपस्पर्शानै: gfe: ives
ईक्षयालकनन्दाया विधूताहोषकल्मष: | वसानो वल्कलान्यङ्ग वन्यभुक् सुखनि:स्पृह: ।४२।
तिकिकषुर्द्वन्दमात्राणां सुशील: संयतेन्द्रिय: । शान्त: समाहितधिया ज्ञानविज्ञानसंयुत: ॥४३॥
मत्तोऽनुशिक्षितं यत्ते विविक्तमनुभावयन्। मय्यावेशितवाक्चित्तो मद्धर्मनिरतो भव ।
अतिव्रज्य गतीस्तिस्रो मामेष्यसि aa: परम् ।४४॥

The glorious Lord replied ; Enjoined by Me, 0 Uddhava | proceed to My hermitage,
called by the name of Badarikasrama. Hallowed there by bathing in and drinking the water
of the (holy) Ganga (which has washed My feet and acquired sanctity thereby), nay, purged
of all impurities by the (very) sight of the Alakananda (a tributary of the Ganga), wearing the
bark of trees, O dear one! living on wild fruits and free from (all) ‘hankering for pleasure,
enduring all experiences in the form of pairs of opposites (such as cold and heat), amiable
of disposition, with your senses fully controlled, calm and possessed of a collected mind,
endowed with wisdom and Self-Realization, ruminating most thoughtfully upon whatever you
have learnt from Me and devoting your speech and mind to Me, remain assiduously engaged
in duties pleasing to Me. Transcending the three courses of destiny, (viz., ascent to heaven
in a celestial form, rebirth as a human being and being cast into the womb of any subhuman
