410 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 26

CHRHHR AEH EH AATEC AEEAAHAN AEH Se CELTS H A eee HHHHEHEOCERKE LESOTHO HHS IH
wa कर्मसु dan: कामात्मा वञ्चितोऽत्रुध: | महिषी यद्यदीहेत तत्तदेवान्त्रवर्तत 146!
afar पिबति मदिरां मदबिह्वल: । अश्नन्त्यां क्कचिदश्नाति जक्षत्यां सह जक्षति । ५७।
क्वचिद्गायति Wart we eda क्वचित्। whee हसति जल्पन्त्यामनु जल्पति ।५८।
क्वचिद्धावति धावन्त्यां तिष्ठन्त्यामनु तिष्ठति । अनु aa शयानायामन्वास्ते क्वचिदासतीम् । ५९1
क्वचिच्छुणोति Yara पर्यन्त्यामनु पह्यति । क्वचिज्जिघ्रति जिघ्रन्त्यां स्पृशान्त्यां स्पृशति क्वचित् । ६० |
क्वचिच्च शोचतीं जायामनुशोचति दीनवत्। अनु हृष्यति were मुदितामनु मोदते । ६१1
विप्रलब्धो महिष्यैवं सर्वप्रकृतिवञ्जित: । नेच्छन्ननुकरोत्यज्ञ: क्लैव्यात्क्रीडामृगो यथा । ६२॥

Whenever he went to the gynaeceum, accompanied by ४1ऽपलाव् (the principal waiter in
the gynaeceum), he gave way toinfatuation, complacence and joy induced by (the presence
of) his wife and children. (55) Thus deeply attached to action and beguiled (by his wife), the
foolish king (Purafijana), whose mind was given over to sense-gratification, did exactly what
the queen did. (56) Now, on her drinking wine, he too drank wine and was overcome with
intoxication: and now, on her dining, he (too) took his dinner and on her proceeding to eat
something crisp, he too ate it along with her. (57) Sometimes, when she sang, he (too) sang
andonother occasions, when she wept, he (too) wept. Again, onher laughing, he (too) laughed
and, on her prattling, he too prattled like her. (58) Now, when she ran, he (too) ran; (and) on
herstanding, he (too) likewise remained standing. Onher going to bed he (too) similarly went
to bed and now, on her sitting down, he (too) likewise sat down. (59) Sometimes, when
she listened, he (too) listened and, on her seeing (something), he too saw the same thing.

Again, on her proceeding to smell (something), he (too) smelt it and on some occasions,

when she touched (anything), he (too) touched it. (60) Now, when his wife appeared

sorrowful, he (too) became sorrowful after her like one afflicted. On her rejoicing he too
similarly rejoiced and on her feeling happy he too (likewise) felt happy. (61) Thus deluded

by the queen and having completely lost his nature, the foolish king (Puranjana) helplessly
and involuntarily imitated (the doings of) his wife like a monkey kept for amusement. (62)

Thus ends the twenty-fifth discourse forming part of the parable of Purafjana,
in Book Four of the great and glorious Bhagavata-Purana, otherwise
known as the Paramahamsa-Samhita.

द् न्न् £5
ODODE ON BLA LD

अथ षड्विंशोऽध्याय:
Discourse XXVI
Purafijana goes a hunting to the forest and the
queen gets angry with him
ARG उवाच

स एकदा महेष्नासो wi पञ्चाश्वमाशुगम्।द्वीपं द्विचक्रमेकाक्षं त्रिवेणुं पञ्चबन्धुरम्। १ ।
एकरह्म्येकदमनमेकनीडं द्विकूबरम्। पञ्चप्रहरणं सप्तवरूथं पञ्चविक्रमम् । २ ।
हैमोपस्करमारुह्य स्वर्णवर्माक्षयेषुधि: । एकादशचमूनाथ: पञ्चप्रस्थमगाद्बनम् | ३ |
चचार मृगयां तत्र दूप्त आन्तेषुकार्मुक: | विहाय जायामतदर्हा मृगव्यसनलालस: । ४ ।

