70 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 17 `

BRR RENAE: ten Er RIMINI iin rei ini Refi irene i ff feirieetoin i ty  BSein iran tres tomnm ereet th fii etotririh

RMR RC ती ती वी HN शा वा वं व व प चवा व वजजा जाजा ज्जव्या

Sita said There (on the bank of the Saraswati) the king (Pariksit) saw a Sudra,
bearing the insignia of royalty, and with a club in his hand belabouring a cow and a bull
as though they had no protector. (1) The bull, who was white as a lotus stalk and stood
with difficulty on one leg alone, was seen trembling and urinating as it were with fear while
being beaten by the Stidra. (2) As for the cow, who yields materials (in the shape of milk,
ghee etc.) useful for religious acts (such as the performance of sacrifices etc.), the king
found her most miserable, being kicked by the Sddra and bereft of her calf. Her cheeks
were bathed in tears, and she had grown very lean and thin and was hungry. (3) Mounted
on his gold-plated car and stringing his bow, he challenged the tyrant in accents deep
as the rumbling of a cloud:— (4) "Who are you that are powerful enough to strike the
weak so violently in this land protected by me ?" Like an actor on the stage you have
put on the garb of a king; but by your action you are a Sidra. (5) By striking harmless
creatures in a lonely place and at a time when Sri Krsna has gone far away (ascended
to His divine Abode) along with Arjuna (the wielder of the Gandiva bow), you have proved
yourself to be an offender and therefore, deserve to be slain. (6)

त्वं वा मृणालधवल: were: पदा चरन्।वृषरूपेण किं कश्चिद् देवो न: परिखेदयन्। ७ ।
न ma cheat दोर्दण्डपरिरम्भिते। भूतलेऽनुपतन्त्यस्मिन् विना ते प्राणिनां qe । ८ |
मा सौरभेयानुशुचो aq ते वृषलाद भयम्। मा रोदीरम्ब भद्रं a खलानां मयि wee । ९ ।
यस्यराष्टेप्रजा:सवस्रिस्यन्तेसाध्व्यसाधुंभि:।तस्यमत्तस्यनश्यन्तिकॊर्तिर।युर्भर्गोगति:।१॰।
we wat परो धर्मो ह्यार्तानामार्तिनिग्रह: । अत एनं वधिष्यामि भूतद्गुहमसत्तमम् । ११
कोऽवृश्चत् तव Were सौरभेय चतुष्पद | मा भूवंस्त्वादृशा TS राज्ञां कृष्णानुवर्तिनाम् । १२।
आख्याहि ga भद्रं a: साधूनामकृतागसाम्। आत्मवैरूप्यकर्तारं पार्थानां कीर्तिदूषणम् । १३।
जनेऽनागस्यघं युञ्जन् सर्वतोऽस्य च मद्भयम्।साधूनां भद्रमेव स्यादसाधुदमने कृते । १४॥
अनागस्स्वह भूतेषु य आगस्कृन्निरङ्कुश: | आहर्तास्मि भुजं साक्षादमर्त्यस्यापि साङ्गदम् । १५।
ua fe परमो धर्म: स्वधर्मस्थानुपालनम्।शासतोऽन्यान् यथादासत्रमनापद्युत्पथानिह 126 |

(Turning to the bull, he went on:) “As for yourself, are you some divinity in the guise
of a bull, white as a lotus stalk and moving on one foot only, having lost your other three
feet, and thus causing us great sorrow? (7) On this earth, securely guarded by the stout
arms of the Paurava kings, tears were never seen to drop from the eyes of creatures
other than you. (8) Grieve no more, O bull; let your fear of the Sidra be gone. Weep
not, mother; may all be well with you so long as | am here to punish the evil-doer. (9)
The good reputation, longevity, fortune and prospects in the other world of that wild king
go to the dogs, in whose dominion, O virtuous one, the people are indiscriminately
oppressed by the impious. (10) To put an end to the suffering of the distressed, this indeed
is the foremost duty of kings.Therefore, | shall slay this most wicked fellow, and enemy
of living beings that he is. (11) Who is it that amputated your three feet, O bull, a
quadruped as you are ? Let there be no afflicted souls like you in the realm of kings who
are votaries of Sri Krsna. (12) Tell me, O bull, who it was that mutilated innocent and
good souls like you, and thus sullied the fair name of the Pandavas (the sons of Prtha).
May good come to you. (13) He who does evil to an innocent creature must have fear
from me on all sides. Pious souls are surely benefited when vile creatures are subdued.(14)
| shall certainly cut off the arm, along with the armlet adoring it, of the individual, be he
a veritable god, who in his unbridled madness inflicts injury on harmless creatures. (15)
It is, indeed, the paramount duty of a monarch to protect those who stick to their own
Dharma. Punishing according to the injunctions of the scriptures those other people who
