Dis. 5] SRIMAD BHAGAVATA-MAHATMYA 35
REPRE BERR TOME REMC LOR RE HE ATR Me MRT HRY HGR HR He जरो ROR HT RE डत्त BY MER RAT He HE BY AH BER Bo BONE HEB BERT AM Be BET eH व
seven days' exposition of Srimad Bhagavata is heard.(65) When the sacred water in the
shape of such exposition—which is highly efficacious in washing off the stain occasioned
by the mud (sins) of worldly life—gets treasured up in the mind, Mukti (final beatitude) is
declared by the wise as insured. (66)

एवं ब्रुवति वै तस्मिन् विमानमागमनत्तदा । वैकुण्ठवासिभिर्युक्तं प्रस्फुरद्दीप्तिमण्डलम् eis!

सर्वेषां पश्यतां भेजे विमानं धुन्धुलीसुत: | विमाने वैष्णवान् वीक्ष्य गोकर्णो वाक्यमब्रवीत् । ६८॥
(Even) while the spirit was speaking in this strain they say, there arrived on that (very)
occasion an aerial car manned by denizens of Vaikuntha and invested with a dazzling halo. (67)
(The spirit of ) Dhundhukari (the son of Dhundhuli) boarded the aerial car while everyone
looked on. Beholding the attendants of Lord Visnu in the aerial car Gokarna spoke (to them)
as follows: (68) ।

गोकर्ण उवाच

अत्रैव aga: सन्ति श्रोतारो मम निर्मला: | आनीतानि विमानानि न तेषां युगपत्कुत: 1681
श्रवणं समभागेन सर्वेषामिह दृश्यते। फलभेद: Gel जात: Naa” हरिप्रिया: 10!

Gokarna submitted : On this very spot there are many sinless souls that have listened
to my discourse. How is it that aerial cars have not been synchronously brought (by you) for
them ? (69) It appears thatall those assembled here have listened in an equal measure, how
(then) has disparity come about in the matter of reward ? (Kindly) explain this, O beloved
servants of Sri Hari ! (70)

हरिदासा Hy:
श्रवणस्य विभेदेन फलभेदोऽत्र संस्थित: i श्रवणं तु कृतं add तथा मननं कृतम् ।
फलभेदस्ततो जातो भजनादपि मानद 1192 |
सप्तरात्रमुपोष्यैव प्रेतेन श्रवणं कृतम्।मननादि तथा तेन स्थिरचित्ते कृतं भृशम् ।७२।
age च हतं ज्ञानं प्रमादेन हतं श्रुतम् । संदिग्धो fe हतो मन्त्रो व्यग्रचित्तो हतो जप: 1031
अवैष्णवो at Sa ed श्राद्धमपात्रकम्।हतमश्रोत्रिये दानमनाचारं हतं कुलम् ।७४।
विश्वासो गुरुवाक्येषु स्वस्मिन्दीनत्वभावना i मनोदोषजयश्चैव कथायां निश्चला मति: ।७५॥
एवमादि कृतं चेत्स्यात्तदा बै श्रवणे फलम्। पुन: श्रवान्ते सर्वेषां वैकुण्ठे वसतिर्धुवम् is!
Tenet Ta गोबिन्दो गोलोकं दास्यति wa! एवमुक्त्वा aq: wd वैकुण्ठं हरिकीर्तना: । ७७1

The servants of Sri Hari replied : "The disparity in the matter of reward here has come
about on account of diversity in hearing the exposition. Though it has been heard by all, ithas
not been reflected upon in an equal degree (of intensity by everyone). Therefore has this
disparity resulted in the matter of reward in spite of their (common) devotion (in the shape
of hearing the Lord’s stories), O bestower of honour (on others) ! (71) The exposition was
heard by the spirit (of Dhundhukari) while abstaining from food and drink for seven (days and)
nights together. Cogitation etc., was also thoroughly done by him witha composed mind. (72)
Infructuous is spiritual wisdom which is not firmly rooted; hearing of scriptures is marred
through listlessness; counsel which is received with a doubting mind is lost and fruitless is
the muttering of a sacred text done with a restless mind. (73) Damned is a tract of land
destitute of devotees, food offered for the benefit of a departed ancestor or relative to an
unworthy recipient is lost; a gift made to one not versed in the Veda goes in vain and a race
which is devoid of good conduct is ruined. (74) Faith in the words of a preceptor, the thought
