574 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 5
SEAR AAAREERRER EERE EERER EERE REEL EEE EE EERE EL ERE RE EEE EERE SERENE EE WEA LEAL DONE

frre tier SRAREEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEE ECHR HHS EAA OE
नानारूपाऽऽत्मनो gfe: स्वैरिणीव गुणान्विता । तन्निष्ठामगतस्येह किमसत्कर्मभिर्भवेत् । १४॥
तत्सङ्गभ्रंशितैश्चर्य dad कुभार्यवत्।तद्गतीरबुधस्येह किमसत्कर्मभिर्भवेत् 124 |
सृष्ट्यप्ययकरीं मायां वेलाकूलान्तवेगिताम्। मत्तस्य तामविज्ञस्य किमसत्कर्मभिर्भवेत् ।१६॥
पञ्चविंशतितत्त्वानां पुरुषोऽद्भुतदर्पणम्। अध्यात्ममबुधस्येह किमसत्कर्मभिर्भवेत् । १७॥
tet जास्त्रमुत्सज्य बन्धमोक्षानुदर्शनम्।विविक्तपदमज्ञाय किमसत्कर्मभिर्भवेत् ।१८|।
कालचक्रं भ्रमिस्तीक्ष्णं ad निष्कर्षयज्जगत्। स्वतन्त्रमलुधस्येह किमसत्कर्मभिर्भवेत् । १९1
area figquest यो न ae निवर्तकम्। कथं तदनुरूपाय गुणविश्रम्भ्युपक्रमेत् । २०॥
इति व्यवसिता we gd एकचेतस:। sage परिक्रम्य पन्थानमनिवर्तनम् ।२१॥
स्वरब्रह्मणि निर्भातह्रषीकेशपदाम्बुजे। अखण्डं चित्तमावेश्य लोकाननुचरन्मुनि: 1221
Sri Suka continued : Hearing these enigmatic words of Narada (the celestial sage), the
Haryasgwas themselves presently pondered over them with their own intellect, which was
endowed with innate quickness of perception. (10) (They said to themselves): "The earth
(referred to by the celestial sage) is (no other than) the field (in the shape of the subtle body,
yielding the crop of merit and sin, happiness and misery etc., and) known as the Jiva
(because conditioning it), which has existed from remote antiquity and serves as a fetter for
the soul. Without seeing its extinction what is to be gained through useless actions (actions
not conducive to Liberation)? (11)The Lord is the sole (almighty) Ruler (of the country in the
shape of this universe), the witness of all the three states of the mind (the waking state, the
dream state and the state of deep sleep) and hence known as the fourth or transcendent
principle, who is supported by (none else than) His own Self and is higher than (the cause
of) all. Without seeing Him who is eternally free from birth (and death), what purpose can
be achieved by man through useless activities (which are not dedicated to Him)? (12) What
is to be achieved in this world through useless acts (serving as a means for the attainment
of heavenly bliss and other enjoyments of a transitory nature) by him who has not realized
the self-effulgent Brahma, on attaining which a man does not return (to this mortal plane)
any more than one who has reached the heaven-like subterranean regions returns to the
earth (in the same life). (13) The intellect of a Jiva, which is imbued with the three Gunas
(Sattva, Rajas and Tamas) and which takes the shape of the various objects of senses
(colour, taste and so on) is like a wanton woman appearing in various (attractive) guises and
possessed of (many alluring) qualities. What can be gained in this world through useless
(feverish) activities by him who has not risen above such a diversified intellect (and attained
discrimination)? (14) (Again,) what is to be gained here through useless (indiscriminate) acts
by the man who does not recognize himself as having fallen from his greatness through
identification with such an intellect and follows, like the husband of an unchaste woman, its
courses (in the shape of joy and sorrow and so on)? (15) What can be achieved through
useless actions by the man who is so forgetful (under the sway of Maya) that he fails to
recognize the frightfulness of (the river of) Maya, that (alternately) brings about (both) creation
and destruction (thus flowing both forward and backward) and acquires (great) impetuosity (in
the shape of an unusual outburst of anger, pride and other undesirable impulses) near the
ghats and banks of its stream (in the shape of meditation, worship and other spiritual
practices). (16) The Purusa (the Lord dwelling in the body of every human being as the Inner
Controller) is the wonderful mirror (ground and illuminator) of the twenty-five categories
(constituting the human personality, viz., the soul, the Unmanifest or primordia! matter, the
Mahat-tattva or the principle of cosmic intelligence, the ego, the five subtle elements, the mind
and the ten Indriyas and the five gross elements). Without knowing Him as presiding over the

