434 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 74

SUE SUC © sar etc hts te eee SS OEE Petree ee ee 2 een eer ee

Sigupala for his unjustifiable remarks. (39) (There was reason for this.) For, Pariksit, he who,
on hearing aspersions cast upon God or upon His devotee, does not leave the spot, loses
his merit and goes down to hell. (40)
तत: पाण्डुसुता: क्रुद्धा मत्स्यकैकयसृञ्जया: । उदायुधा: समुत्तस्थु: शिशुपालजिघांसव: ।४१॥
ततश्चैद्यस्त्वसम्भ्रान्तो जगृहे खड्गचर्मणी । भर्त्सयन् कृष्णपक्षीयान् Ta: सदसि भारत ।४२॥
तावदुत्थाय भगवान् स्वान् fart we wari शिर: क्षुरान्तचक्रेण जहारापततो रिपो: ।४३॥

:.. UR कोलाहलोऽप्यासीत् Ts हते महान् । तस्यानुयायिनो भूपा दुद्रुवुर्जीवितैषिण: ।॥४४॥ .
चैद्यदेहोत्थितं ज्योतिर्वासुदेवमुपाविदत् । पश्यतां सर्वभूतानामुल्केव भुवि खाच्च्युता ॥४५॥ .
जन्मत्रयानुगुणितवैरसंरब्धया धिया | ध्यायंस्तन्मयतां यातो भावो हि भवकारणम्।४६॥
ऋत्विगथ्य: ससदस्येभ्यो दक्षिणां विपुलामदात्। सर्वान् सम्पूज्य विधिवच्चक्रेऽवभृथमेकराट् ।४७॥

Now, the Pandavas, Matsyas, Kaikayas and Srijayas stood up in rage with uplifted
weapons, determined to make short work of Sigupala. (41) Undaunted by the threat, the latter
took up his sword and shield and rebuked the princes whosided with $n Krsna inthe assembly.
(42) (Observing both the sides prepared for a combat,) Bhagavan Sri Krsna stood up and
pacified the rulers who sided with Him, and exhibiting some anger out off with His sharp-edged
discus the head of Sigupala, who had in the meantime swooped on Him. (43) Great and
tumultuous was the uproar in the assembly when Sigupdla fell down dead. The princes who
followed him took to their heels to save their lives. (44) Just as a meteor dropping from the sky
gets absorbed into the earth, even so all people witnessed a column of light emanating from
Sisupala's body enter Sri Krsna and merge into Him. (45) Pariksit, contemplating on the Lord
with thoughts of hatred and anger fostered for three consecutive lives, Sigupala became one
with Him, and was restored tohis original place asan attendantof the Lord. Thusitis the thought
of the individual which determines his future state. (46) After Sigup4la's deliverance, Emperor
Yudhisthira gave sacrificial fees on a liberal scale to the priests and supervisors of the sacrifice
and honoured all who attended it. Thereafter he performed ablutions betokening the comple-
tion of the sacrifice, according to the scriptural injunctions. (47)

साधयित्वा क्रतुं Te: FEN aaa: । उवास कतिचिन्मासान् सुहृद्भिरभियाचित: vel
ततोऽनुज्ञापष्य राजानमनिच्छन्तमपीश्वर: । ययौ सभार्य: सामात्य: स्वपुरं देवकीसुत: 1४९1
वर्णितं तदुपाख्यानं मया ते बहुविस्तरम्।वैकुण्ठवासिनोर्जन्म विप्रश्ञापात् पुन: पुन: । ५०॥
राजसूयावभृथ्येन स्नातो राजा युधिष्ठिर: । ब्रह्मक्षत्रसभामध्ये जशुशुभे सुरराड्वि ५१
Ta सभाजिता: सर्वे सुरमानवखेचरा: । कृष्णं क्रतुं च ज्ञंसन्त: स्वधामानि ययुर्मुदा । ५२।
दुर्योधनमृते पापं कलिं कुरुकुलामयम्। यो न सेहे श्रियं स्फीतां Ser पाण्डुसुतस्य ताम् 1५३1

Pariksit, having thus brought the Rajastya sacrifice of Yudhisthira to a successful
conclusion, Bhagavan Sri Krsna, the Supreme Lord of all masters of Yoga, spent some
months at Indraprastha at the request of His friends and relations. (48) Then the Almighty
Lord took leave of Yudhisthira, who was reluctant to allow Him to go, and left for Dwaraka
with His consorts and ministers. (49) Pariksit, | have already narrated to you at considerable
length (in Skandha VII) how under the curse of Sanaka and his brothers Jaya ano Vijaya, the
two attendants of the Lord at Vaikuntha, had to take repeated births on earth. (50) Having
finished the ablutions at the close of the Rajasulya sacrifice, Yudhisthira shone like Indra (the
king of gods) in the assembly of Brahmanas and Ksatriyas. (51) Honoured by Yudhisthira
all the gods, men and ethereal beings gladly returned to their respective abodes glorifying
Bhagavan SriKrsna and the sacrifice performed by King Yudhisthira. (52) Duryodhana alone
