Dis. 2] BOOK FOUR 297

FRCHKAAAARE NAHE HET ETE E HH CECE EAHA ETER ERAT SEERA EEE TEE HARA AH EHERA HA HERE
eee व न

wed ददत: a श्रुत्वा द्विजकुलाय वै। भृगु: प्रत्यसृजच्छापं ब्रह्मदण्डं दुरत्ययम् । २७
WaT ये च ये च तान् समनुव्रता: । पाखण्डिनस्ते भवन्तु सच्छास्त्रपरिपन्थिन: 1221
नष्टगौचा मूढधियो जटाभस्मास्थिधारिण: | विशान्तु शिवदीक्षायां aa दैवं सुरासवम् ।२९॥
wa च ब्राह्मणांश्चैव aq परिनिन्दथ । aq विधारणं पुंसामत: पाखण्डमाश्रिता: 1301
एष एव fe लोकानां fra: पन्था: सनातन:। यं पूर्वे चानुसंतस्थुर्यत्रमाणं जनार्दन: 1321
Te परमं Ys सतां वर्त्म सनातनम्।विगर्ह्य यात पाखण्डं दैवं वो यत्र yee ।३२॥
Hearing him thus pronounce a curse upon the Brahmana race, the sage Bhrgu uttered
a counter-curse, which was difficult to revoke, being the punishment inflicted by a
Brahmana:—(27) "They who observe vows sacred to Bhava and (likewise) those who
follow there latter shall become heretics and act contrary to (the injunctions of) the true
scriptures.(28) Only those who have cast all purity to the winds, are silly-minded and wear
matted locks, ashes and bones shall get themselves initiated in the cult of Siva-worship,
where wine and other spirituous liquor will be held in high esteem. (29) Because you
denounce the Vedas, which lay down the bounds of propriety for men (following the conduct
prescribed for the different grades of society and stages in life) and thereby preserve the
society (from disruption), as well as the Brahmanas (the custodians of the Vedas), therefore
(itseems) you have embraced the creed of heretics. (30) The path chalked out by the Vedas
is the eternal and the only blessed path for the people—a path which has been trodden by
the ancients and has the authority of Janardana (Lord Visnu). (31) Condemning as you do
the Vedas, which constitute the supremely faultless and eternal path of the virtuous, do you
take to the path of heretics, where that lord of the ghosts is the Deity.” (32)

मैत्रेय sara
तस्यैवं वद्त: UM भृगो: स भगवान् भव:।निश्चक्राम wa: किञ्चिद्विमना इव सानुग: 1331
ast विश्वसृज: wa सहस्रपरिवत्सरान्। dana wey wea met aft: ।३४॥
आप्रुत्यावभृथं यत्र गङ्गा यमुनयान्विता । विरजेनात्मना at स्वं स्वं धाम ययुस्तत: 1341

Maitreya went on : While Bhrgu was thus uttering his imprecation, Lord Bhava along
with his retinue left the assembly hall, a bit disconsolate at heart as it were. (33) The lords
of created beings, O Vidura (a great archer), duly carried on the sacrifice for a thousand
years—the sacrifice in which Sri Hari, the Supreme Being, was the Deity worshipped. (34)
At the conclusion of the sacrifice they took their bath in the Gariga where it is joined by the
Yamuna and, with their mind and body cleansed of all impurities, they all returned therefrom
each to his own abode. (35)

Thus ends the second discourse entitled “Daksa's Imprecation"
in Book Four of the great and glorious Bhagavata-Purana,
otherwise known as the Paramahamsa-Samhita.

Be ea ।
ISIN Sie cs

[564] B. M. 12—
