Dis. 6] BOOK ONE 19

Join 8 Se nininict fa io ioint ta a io trier ae Rt tntotnih ff finite iRi oi Rtotot i ih Stine noi a otpintot a tr ipininire eee tree

प्रे अथ षष्ठोऽध्याय:

Discourse VI
The rest of the story of Narada's previous birth
Yd उवाच
एवं Fara भगवान्देवर्षेर्जम md ai ya: पप्रच्छ तं ब्रह्मन् व्यास: सत्यवतीसुत: 1 १ ।
Siita says : 0 Saunaka, having thus heard the story of the Devarsi's birth and spiritual
endeavours, Maharsi Vyasa, the son of Satyavati, again enquired of him as follows : (1)
व्यास उवाच

भिक्षुभिर्विप्रवसिते विज्ञानादेष्टृभिस्तव । वर्तमानो वयस्याद्ये तत: किमरोद्भवान् 2 |
स्वायम्भुव wa Gen वर्तितं ते at वय: । कथं चेदमुदस्राक्षी: काले प्राप्ते कलेवरम् । ३ ।
प्राक्कल्पविषयामेतां स्मृतिं ते सुरसत्तम। न ह्येष व्यवधात्काल एष सर्व्रनिराकृति: । ४ |
Vyasa said : When the ascetics who instructed you in spiritual wisdom had departed,
what did you do, since you happened to be a mere child at that time ? (2) In what manner,
O son of Brahma (the self-born), did you spend the rest of your life ? And how did you cast
off your mortal coil when the time came? (3) Foremost of heavenly beings, how did time,
which obliterates everything, fail to obscure the memory of your existence in the preceding
Kalpa? (4)
ARG उवाच

भिक्षुभिर्विप्रवसिते विज्ञानादेष्टृभिर्मम । वर्त्तमानो वयस्याद्ये तत एतदकारषम्। ५ ।
एकात्मजा मे जननी योषिन्मूढा च किंकरी । मय्यात्मजेऽनन्यगतौ wh स्नेहानुबन्धनम् । ६ |
सास्वतन्त्रा न कल्पाऽऽसीद्योगक्षेमं ममेच्छती । Serer fe ast लोको योषा दारुमयी यथा । ७ |
अह च तद्व्रह्यकुले ऊषिवांस्तदपेक्षया। दिन्देरें।क।लाव्यृत्मत्रो बालक: पञ्चहायन: | ८ |
एकदा निर्गतां tage? निशि गां पथि। सर्पोऽदशत्पदा we: sou कालचोदित: । ९ |
तदा तदहमीरास्य भक्तानां शमभीप्सत: । अनुग्रहं मन्यमान: प्रातिष्ठं दिरामुत्तराम् । १०।
Narada replied : When the ascetics who instructed me in spiritual wisdom had left, |
proceeded to do this (what follows), tender of age as | was. (5) | was the only issue of my
mother, who was anignorant woman anda servant-maid to boot. She had bound herself with
ties of affection to me, her son, who solely depended on her. (6) Muchas she liked to supply
my wants and to provide against my future, she failed to do so, dependent as she was. The
world is indeed subject to the control of its Ruler (God ) even as a puppet is controlled by
the wire-puller. (7) Out of regard for her | continued in that locality of the Brahmanas. Being
only five years of age, | had no idea then of the four quarters or even of space and time.(8)
Once during the night she left her house to milk a cow. While on her way she trod on a snake
which, as fate would have it, bit the helpless woman (and this brought about her untimely
end). (9) | took it as a boon from the Lord, whois solicitous for the welfare of His devotees,
and then set out in a northerly direction.(10) ऎ

स्फीताञ्जनपदांस्तत्र पुरग्रामव्रजाकरान्। खेटखर्वटवाटीश्च व्रनान्युपव्नानि च ।११।

format: पत्ररथैर्विभ्रमद् भ्रमरश्रिय: | नलवेणुशरस्तम्बकुहशाकीच्कगह्वरम् rey
एक एवातियातोऽहमद्राक्षॆ विपिनं महत्।घोरं प्रतिभयाकारं व्यालोलूकशिवाजिरम् i ex
