Dis. 1] BOOK NINE

EEE eee ee ee EEE ESTE RES HERES ELEN FECELERE STEERS EEE EERE REA TET HH

be a daughter, who was named as Ila. Not much pleased at heart so see her, the Manu
submitted (as follows) to his preceptor (the sage Vasistha) :—(16) "O glorious sage, how has
this ritual conducted by you, exponents of the Veda, yielded such a contrary result ? Oh, what
a pity ! Such a reversal of the fruit of the Vedic Mantras should not have taken place. (17)
You are (all) well-versed in the (proper use of) the Mantras and (thoroughly) disciplined and
have (all) your impurities burnt by austerities. How (then) could this frustration of your
purpose be expected as untruth in gods (whichis impossible) ?” (18) On hearing this question
of Vaivaswata Manu the glorious sage Vasistha (the grandfather of my grandfather’) came
to know of the deviation made by the Hota and replied (as follows) to Sraddhadeva (son of
the sun-god). (19) “This frustration of you purpose has been brought about by the contrary
intention of the Hota. Yet by virtue of my own spiritual glory | shall confer on you the privilege
of having a good (male) progeny.” (20) Thus resolved, O king, the glorious sage (Vasistha)
of extraordinary fame, extolled Lord Visnu (the most ancient Person) with the desire of
transforming Ila intoa male child. (21) Pleased with him, the almighty Lord Sri Hari bestowed
on the sage Vasistha the desired boon (of manhood for Il&). (And) thereby Ila (the daughter
of Vaivaswata Manu) became Sudyumna, the foremost of men. (22)

स एकदा महाराज विचरन् मृगयां वने। वृत: कतिपयामात्यैरश्वमारुह्य सैन्धवम् 1231
प्रागृह्य रुचिरं चापं aig परमाद्भुतान्। दंशितोऽनुमृगं वीरो जगाम दिशमुत्तराम् ies!
स कुमारो वनं मेरोरधस्तात् प्रविवेश elas भगवाञ्छर्वो रममाण: सहोमया । २५|
तस्मिन् sfae एवासो aga: परवीरहा। अपद्यत् स्रियमात्मानमश्वं च वडवां नृप ।२६॥

तथा तदनुगा: wa आत्मलिङ्गविपर्ययम्। eg विमनसोऽभूवन् वीक्षमाणा: परस्परम् । २७।

Taking up a charming bow and most wonderful arrows and protected by an armour, and
surrounded (accompanied) by a few followers, the hero (Sudyumna) rode a hunting on one
occasion, O great king, through a forest on (the back of) a horse of the Saindhava breed
(peculiar to Sindha) and proceeded in pursuit of a game in a northerly direction. (23-24) The
aforesaid prince, it is said, entered a forest at the foot of Mount Meru, where Lord Rudra was
carrying on (amorous) sports with (His divine Spouse) Goddess Uma (Parvati). (25) The
moment Sudyumna, the slayer of hostile warriors, made his way into that forest, he found
himself (turned into) a woman and his horse (into) a mare, O protector of human beings. (26)
Similarly all his followers felt disconcerted to see the transformation of their sex, and stared
at one another. (27)

राजावाच
कथमेवंगुणो देश: केन वा भगवन् कृत: । SA wired परं कौतूहलं हि न: । २८॥
The king (Pariksit) submitted : How could there be a land possessed of such a
(wonderful) potency (of changing the sex of an individual as soon as one entered it) and by

whom was it rendered such O worshipful sage? (Kindly) answer fully this question (of ours);
(for) great is our curiosity (about it). (28)

* The pedigree of the sage Suka has been clearly delineated in the following well-known couptet in praise of
Vedavyasa —

व्यासं असिष्ठनतारं ae: घीतमच्त्मयम् । यनशरात्मजं वन्दे शुकरतातं तपोनिधिम्॥
“I bow to that storehouse of asceticism, the sinless Vedavyasa, the great grandson of the sage Vasistha, grandson of Sakti
(Vasistha’s son), son of Paragara (son of Sakti) and father of Suka.”
