438 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA. [ Dis. 31

136 ere nd en nmenentnennnete heh itt teee ghee ee eCe Pee eee ee Pee TERE RES ESTE EASES S EE

यो नारदादात्मविद्यामधिगम्य घुनर्महीम्।भुंक्ताविभज्यंपुंत्रेभ्यऐश्वरं समगात्पदम् 1219 |

Sri Suka continued : | have thus told you (all) about the posterity of Uttanapada, the
(younger) son of Swayambhuva Manu. (Now) O jewel of kings, hear about the line of
Priyavrata (his elder son) as well, who, having received instruction in spiritual lore from
Narada, and stibsequently enjoyed the sovereignty of the globe, divided the same
among his sons and duly attained to the divine Abode. (26-27)

प्रवृद्धभावोऽश्रुकलाकुलो मुनेर्दंधार मूर्तां चरणं हृदा हरे: ।२८॥

Vidura was overwhelmed with emotion when he heard the sacred story, interspersed
with an account of the invincible Lord Sri Hari, as told by the sage Maitreya (the son of
Kusaru). With his eyes full of tears he bore the sage’'s feet onhisheadand installed (animage
of) Sri Hari's feet in his heart. (28)

। विदुर उवाच .
सोऽयमद्य महायोगिन् भवता करुणात्मना | दर्शितस्तमस: पारो यत्राकिञ्चनगो हरि: ।२९॥
Vidura said : Your merciful self, 0 great Yogi, has brought me within sight of the other

shore of (the ocean of) ignorance, where dwells Sri Hari, who (Himself) goes to meet those
that have nothing to call their own. (29)

इत्यानम्य तमामन्त्य विदुरो गजसाह्वयम् । स्वानां दिदृक्षु: प्रययौ ज्ञातीनां निर्वृताशय: 10 |

खयो साहताला ’पयुंथ्प्शृन’॰’र्ग्र

प्रचेन-”ऽन्ग्ग्त्थ।-॰ध् aA aie शाऽध्याय: 1321

Hx

ada: स्कन्ध: समाप्त:

इत् Suka went on : With these (polite) words (expressive of gratitude) Vidura bowed low
(to Maitreya) and, taking leave of him, proceeded with a peaceful mind to Hastinapura with
intent to see his own kith and kin (and bless them by his hloy company). (30) He who listens,
Oking, to this narrative of kings who had given their mindto Sri Hari, should (bids fair to) attain
longevity, affluence, glory, security, the way to (eternal) happiness as well as worldly power
and prosperity. (31)

Thus ends the thirty-first discourse entitled “The story of the Pracetas”, in Book
Four of the great and glorious Bhagavata-Purana. otherwise
known as the Paramahamsa-Samnita, composed
by the sage Vedavyasa and consisting of
eighteen thousand Slokas.

SPINEINE १७
ru rvERSrury

४ END OF BOOK FOUR

te Sr
Pp od प्रे erry
