102 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 1

REASCRNA HASSE AERA T SEER CERES SLEEK ERS RESSHENO RE HERES ONHTEEE न्विक्त

प्रसन्नवदनाम्भोजो नृशंसं निरपत्रपम् । मनसा दूयमानेन विहसन्निदमब्रवीत्॥५३॥

Sti Suka went on: Even though admonished through conciliatory words and those
inspiring fear as aforesaid, Karhsa, who was heartless (by nature) and followed the
ways of ogres (besides), did not desist (from his purpose), O Pariksit (a scion of
Kuru)!(46) Perceiving such obstinacy of his (in the matter of slaying Devaki) and
contemplating how to avert her imminent death, Anakadundubhi (Vasudeva) resolved
upon the following expedient in that behalf. (47) (He said to himself,) “Death should be
warded off by a wise man so long as his reason and might are intact. If, however, death
does not turn back there is nothing wrong on the part of the embodied soul. (48)
Promising to hand over sons (that may be born to Devaki) to Karnsa (who is death
personified), | ought to rescue this helpless girl and | shall have to forgo my sons only
in case they are actually born (hereafter) and provided Karhsa (himself) does not expire
(in the meantime). (49) Or might not the contrary happen (i.e., might not Karhsa himself
suffer death at the hands of my sons); (for) the ways of Providence are hard to
comprehend. What is imminent may turn away and what has turned away may appear
again. (50) (Just) as in the case of a (forest) fire there is no cause other than destiny
for its coming into contact with a (particular) tree (however distant it may be) and its
remaining aloof from another (though quite near to it), so indeed in the case (even) of
a living being the ground (other than destiny) of its being connected with or dissociated
from a (particular) body is difficult to conceive.” (51) Having thus pondered to the best
of his intellectual acumen, Vasudeva (the son of Stra) actually eulogized that sinful
fellow with great esteem. (52) With @ blooming lotus-like countenance, yet with an aching
heart, he smilingly addressed the following words to that hard hearted wretch. (53)

वसुदेव उवाच

न ह्यस्यास्ते भयं सौम्य यद् वागाहाशरीरिणी | पुत्रान् समर्पयिष्येऽस्या यतस्ते भयमुत्थितम्। ५४॥

Vasudeva observed ; Indeed there is no fear to you, 0 gentle one, from this girl
as the incorporeal voice (from heaven) has conveyed (to you). | shall (accordingly)
make over (to you) her sons, from whom fear has arisen in you. (54)

स्वसुर्वधान्निववृते कंसस्तद्वाक्यसारवित् | वसुदेवोऽपि तं प्रीत: प्रशस्य प्राविशद् गृहम्। Gh |

अथ काल उपावृत्ते देवकी सर्वदेवता । पुत्रान् प्रसुषुवे चाष्टौ कन्यां चैवानुवत्सरम्।५६॥

कीर्तिमन्तं प्रथमजं कंसायानकदुन्दुभि: । अर्पयामास peso सोऽनृतादतिविह्वल:। ५७॥

fe दु:सहं नु साधूनां विदुषां किमपेक्षितम् । किमकार्यं कदर्याणां दुस्त्वजं किं धृतात्मनाम्। ५८ |

दृष्ट्वा समत्वं तच्छौरे: सत्ये चैव व्यवस्थितिम् । कंसस्तुष्टमना राजन् प्रहसन्निदमब्रवीत्।५९॥

प्रतियातु कुमारोऽयं न ह्यस्मादस्ति मे wai अष्टमाद् युवयोर्गर्भान्मृत्युर्मे विहित: किल। ६०॥

wife सुतमादाय ययावानकदुन्दुभि: । नाभ्वनन्दत तद्वाक्यमसतोऽविजितात्मन:। ६१1

Sri Suka continued : Karhsa, who knew the truthfulness of Vasudeva’s words, ceased
from killing Devaki (his own cousin). Applauding him, Vasudeva too reached home iull of
delight. (65) Now, when the time came, Devaki, who (being the abode of Sri Hari) represented
all the gods (on her person), (successively) brought forth eight sons and a daughter too
(Subhadra by name) besides, one every year. (56) Much afraid of falsehood, Vasudeva
handed over to Karhsa with (great) difficulty his first-born son, Kirtiman (by name). (57)
Indeed what is difficult to endure in the eyes of the righteous? What is needed by the wise?
What is unworthy in the eyes of the depraved? And what is difficult to renounce for those
who have cherished Sri Hari (the Self of all)? (58) Rejoiced at heart to perceive such

