Dis. 11] BOOK ELEVEN 563

7 geeemed च भार्या देहं पराधीनमसत्प्रजां च ।
वित्तं त्वतीर्थीकृतमङ्ग वाचं हीनां मया रक्षति दु:खदु:खी ।१९।
ai न मे पावनमङ्ग कर्म स्थित्युद्धवप्राणनिरोधमस्य ।
लीलावतारेप्सितजन्म वा स्याद् वन्ध्यां गिरं at fayara धीर: 1201

lf one, though well-versed in the Veda (the Supreme revealed in the form of word), has
not attained perfection in the Knowledge (realization) of the supreme (Brahma), his labour
(on the study of the Vedas) has ended in labour alone like that of a man who tends a dry
cow.(18) The man who maintains a cow that has been milked for good (offers no more
prospect of yielding milk), a false wife, a body depending (for its support) on another and
an unworthy son, nay, who guards wealth which is not bestowed on worthy recipients and
cuitivates, O dear Uddhava ! speech which does not glorify Me reaps misery after
misery.(19) A wise man ought not to cultivate such barren speech as does not glorify, O
dear Uddhava, My purifying activity responsible for the appearance, continuance and
extinction of this universe and does not describe My advent {in the form) of Sri Rama, Sri
Krsna and so on), which is so dear to the world, among My (numerous) descents taken for
the sake of sport.(20)

एवं जिज्ञासयापोह्य नानात्वभ्रममात्मनि । उपारमेत fast मनो wae adiiees
ant धारयितुं मनो ब्रह्मणि निश्चलम्। मयि सर्वाणि कर्माणि निरपेक्ष: समाचर ।२२।
श्रद्धालुर्मे कथा: श्रृण्वन् सुभद्रा लोकपावनी: । गायन्ननुस्मरन् कर्म जन्म चाभिनयन् मुहु: 1231
wef धर्मकामार्थानाचरन् मदपाश्रय:। लभते निश्चलां भक्तिं मय्युद्धव सनातने । २४॥

भक्त्या मयि ula उपासिता । स a a दर्शितं सद्भिरञ्जसा विन्दते पदम् । २५॥

Having cast aside, through inquiry on the lines indicated in the foregoing verses, the
mistaken notion of diversity with respect to the soul, and focussed one’s mind, free from (all)
impurities, on Me, the omnipresent Lord, one should retire (from all activity). (21) If (however)
you are unable to fix your mind irrevocably on Brahma, do all your (allotted) duties efficiently
in adisinterested spirit for My sake. (22) Hearing with reverence My stories, which bring merit
(to the hearer) and purify the worlds, chanting them (if there is someone to hear) and
constantly recalling them (even when there is none to chant or hear them), arranging
dramatic representation of My advent and pastimes again and again, (nay,) pursuing
righteousness, enjoyment and wealth for My sake and depending on Me, 0 Uddhava । one
develops unflinching devotion to Me, the Eternal. (23-24) Equipped with Devotion acquired
through the fellowship of saints, he becomes My worshipper. (And) such a worshipper
undoubtedly attains with ease to My state as shown by the righteous. (25)

उद्धव उवाच
साधुस्तवोत्तमश्लोक मत: कीदृग्विध: प्रभो । भक्तिस्त्वय्युपयुज्येत age सद्भिरादृता 126!
Ta पुरुषाध्यक्षॆ लोकाध्यक्ष जगत्प्रभो। प्रणतायानुरक्ताय प्रपन्नाय च कथ्यताम् । २७।
त्वं wa परमं व्योम पुरुष: प्रकृते: पर: । अवतीर्णोऽसि भगवन् स्वेच्छोपात्तपृथग्वपु: ।२८॥

Uddhava submitted : What kind of man is considered by You to be a pious soul, 0
illustrious Lord ? And what kind of devotion has been esteemed by the righteous and may
be directed towards You ? (26) Let this be pointed out to me, bent low (before You), devoted
(to You) and fallen at Your feet. O Ruler (even) of Brahma and others (the highest souls), the
Controller of the spheres, the Lord of the (entire) creation ! (27) You are the supreme Brahma,

taintless like the sky, the Spirit beyond Prakrti; yet, O Lord ! You have descended (on this
earth) having assumed a distinct (finite) personality at Your own (sweet) will. (28)

