Dis. 41 ] BOOK TEN 275

ORR SRO ICR ORES Ee ovens Soe gos Serer ee re wer rss EE A MH RHA

Yadus, O Narayana of excellent renown ! (16)

श्रीभगवानुवाच
आयास्ये भवतो गेहमहमार्यसमन्वित: aga «ore वितरिष्ये सुहृत्प्रियम् ।१७।

The glorious Lord said : Accompanied by My elder brother, | shall visit your house (only)
when | have slain Karnsa (the enemy of Yadu's race), and bring delight to My (other) relations
(as well). (17)

एवमुक्तो भगवता सोऽक्रूरो विमना इव । पुरीं प्रविष्ट: कंसाय कर्मावेद्य गृहं ययौ ।१८॥
अथापराह्णे भगवान् कृष्ण: सङ्कुर्षणान्वित: । मथुरां प्राविशद् गोपैर्दिदृक्षु: परिवारित: 1१९1
eat at 0 स्फाटिकतुङ्गगोपुरद्वारां बृहद्धेमकपाटतोरणाम्।
ताम्रारकोष्ठां परिखादुरासदामुद्यानरम्योपवनोपश्ञोभिताम् । २० |

7 रीलविदरमैर्मुक्ताहरिद्भिर्बलभी जन

सवृन्दरम्भाक्रमुकै: wage:  स्वलङ्कृतद्दारगृहां सपट्टिकै: 1231

Sri Suka continued ; Thus spoken to by the Lord, the aforesaid AkrUra entered the city
like one sad at heart and, having apprised Karhsa of what he had done, returned home. (18)
Accompanied by Sankarsana (Balarama) and surrounded by the (other) cowherds, Lord Sri
Krsna, who was eager to have a look at the city, fearlessly entered Mathura the next
afternoon. (19) (Presently) He saw the city with high gateways (in its fortification wall) and
portals (of its houses), made of crystal and fitted with huge doors of gold and embellished
with ornamental arches—also of gold—over them. It had granaries etc., of copper and brass,
had been rendered difficult of access by a moat and was adorned with gardens and delightful
parks. (20) It was (further) graced with sheds of gold erected on the cross roads, mansions
and rest-houses also of gold, halls for the meeting together of individuals following a
particular trade and other (public) buildings. and was resonant with the noise of pigeons and
peacocks perched on small wooden sheds erected in front of houses, platforms under them
air-holes and pavements, (all) inlaid with cat's-eyes, diamonds, crystals, sapphires, Corals,
pearls and emeralds. lts roads, market-places, streets and quadrangles were profusely
sprinkled with water and it was strewn with flowers, sprouts (of barley), parched paddy and
rice-grains. (21-22) The entrances ofits houses were artistically adorned (on both sides) with
a pitcher full of water and sprinkled with curds and sandal-paste, (nay.) surrounded with rows
of flowers and crowned with rows of lights, with (bunches of) leaves thrust into their mouth
and strips of silk tied round their necks and with (trunks of) plantain, and areca-nut trees
alongwith bunches of fruits fixed beside them and (festive) flags hoisted near them. (23)

ai a न २ बृर्तौ …\प्॰टै fat ।
