SRIMAD BHAGAVATA-MAHATMYA [ Dis. 1

MAEM ARAMA AAA AR ARR RAM BC AER MA AM RE MBA RH RRR te BORA BR ESE BS AE ERE ME BORER ROR HERE HE

ARG उवाच
अहं तु पृथिवीं यातो ज्ञात्वा सर्वोत्तमामिति । पुष्करं च samt च aneff गोदावरीं तथा 2c!
हरिक्षेत्रॆ कुरुक्षेत्रॆ श्रीरङ्गं सेतुबन्धनम्।एवमादिषु तीर्थेषु भ्रममाण इतस्तत: ।२९।
ama. कुत्रचिच्छर्मं मन:संतोषकारकम्। कलिनाधर्ममित्रेण धरेयं afer 1301
सत्यं नास्ति aa: ahd दया दानं न विद्यते । उदरम्भरिणो sitar वराका: कूटभाषिण: ।३१॥
ae: सुमन्दमतयो मन्दभाग्या ह्युपद्गुता: । पाखण्डनिरता: सन्तो विरक्ता: सपरिग्रहा: ।३२॥
तरुणीप्रभुता गेहे शयालको बुद्धिदायक: | कन्याविक्रयिणो लोभाद्दम्पतीनां च कल्कनम् । ३३।
arm «aah रुद्धास्तीर्थानि सरितस्तथा । देवतायतनान्यत्र दुष्टैर्नष्टानि भूरिश: ।३४।॥
न योगी नैव सिद्धो वा न ज्ञानी सत्क्रियो नर: । कलिदावानलेनाद्य साधनं AeA गतम्।३५॥
॥॥ अट्टठलशूला जनपदा: शिवशूला द्विजातय: | कामिन्य: केशशूलिन्य: सम्भवन्ति कलाविह 136 |
¥ Narada submitted : Knowing the earth to be the best of all (spheres) as a matter of fact
| came here, and visited Puskara and Prayaga, Kasi and Godavari (Nasika), Haridwara,
Kuruksetra, Srirafhgam and Setubandha (Rameswaram). Though wandering hither and
thither in these and other places of pilgrimage, | found nowhere such a joy as would cause
satisfaction to my mind. This earth stands assailed at present by the age of Kali, the helpmate
of unrighteousness. (28—30) There is notruthfulness, askesis, purity (of body and mind) and
compassion, nor there is liberality (to the poor). The people are wretched and engaged (only)
in filling their bellies. They make false statements.(31) They are indeed slow, extremely dull-
witted, of poor luck and afflicted. Those who pose as saints are constantly engaged in
preaching false doctrines. Those who have (apparently) renounced the world are rich in
worldly possessions and have become family men. (32) Women rule the house. Brothers
of one's wife are the (only) counsellors. Out of greed people sell their daughters. There are
(frequent) quarrels between husband and wife. (33) Hermitages, places of pilgrimage and
rivers are controlled by foreigners and temples here have been destroyed in large numbers
by those wicked people. (34) There is no Yogi, nor one who has attained perfection, no
enlightened soul and no man performing righteous deeds. All spiritual discipline stands
consumed by the wild fire of Kaliyuga. (35) In this age of Kali people (at large) take to (the
vocation of ) selling food-grains, Brahmanas sell (the knowledge of) the Vedas and women
make their living by prostitution.(36)

wa पश्यन् कलेर्दोषान् पर्यटन्नवनीमहम्। यामुनं तटमापन्नो यत्र लीला हरेरभूत् । ३७॥
तत्राश्चर्यं मया ge श्रूयतां तन्मुनीश्वरा: । एका तु तरुणी aa निषण्णा खिन्नमानसा । ३८
वृद्धौ a पतितौ wet नि:श्वसन्तावचेतनौ । शुश्रूषन्ती प्रबोधन्ती रुदती च तयो: पुर: 1381
दशदिक्षु निरीक्षन्ती vat fet वपु: । वीज्यमाना हातस्रीभिर्बोध्यमाना मुहुर्मुहु: ॥४०॥
SB दूराद्गत: सोऽहं कौतुकेन तदन्तिकम् ai ay चोत्थिता aren विह्वला चाब्रवीद्वच: ।४१॥

Observing the evils of Kaliyuga as aforesaid while touring round the earth, | (at fast)
reached the bank of the Yamuna, the scene of the pastimes of Sri Krsna.(37) There | saw
a wonderful phenomenon; (pray,) hear of it, O great sages ! A young woman was (found)
sitting there distressed at heart. (38) Two old men were lying unconscious by her side
breathing hard. The young woman was nursing them; she tried (sometimes) to bring them to
