Dis. 22] BOOK FOUR 389

ELRHVKAEKHLEL HATHA LEA EKA AH HEEE KATE LEY BOI नो यज EH HOTA BR By POE LS HO चज्यजये

and intense love for one's real Self, the attributeless Brahma, have been finally concluded
to be the only way to salvation for men. (21) That love for the attributeless Brahma as well
as the absence of attachment to the world of matter, both as cause and effect, is easily
developed through (intense) faith, through the discharge of duties consecrated to the Lord,
through a desire to know the higher truths and by being firmly established in the Yoga of
Knowledge, through worship of the Lord of Yoga and by ever listening to the hallowed stories
of the Lord of sacred renown, through a distaste for the company of those delighting in lucre
and sense-enjoyments and by eschewing wealth and sense-gratification esteemed by such
people, through love for seclusion when finding delight in the Self, but not such occasions
when a potion of the nectarine drink of Sri Hari's glories is had, through harmlessness and
by living the life of an ascetic, through an enquiry into that which is conducive to one's spiritual
welfare and by drinking the peerless nectar of Lord Mukunda's glories, by practising the
twelve forms of self-discipline, (viz., non-violence, truthfulness, non-thieving, absence of
attachment, modesty, non-accumulation of wealth and luxuries except in the interests of
others, belief in God, continence, habit of meditation on God, firmness, forgiveness and
fearlessness) and observing the twelve religious vows (of internal and external purity,
muttering the divine names and sacred texts, austerity, offering oblations into the sacred fire,
reverence, worship of the Lord, pilgrimage to holy places, endeavour for the good of others,
contentment and waiting upon the preceptor * ) by refraining from calumny and abandoning
all activity (for the acquisition and preservation of worldly goods), by enduring pairs of
opposites (like heat and cold etc.), and by devotion to Sri Hari, growing through the utterance
of His praises, which (ever) adorn the ears of His devotees. (22—-25) When this love for
Brahma gets firmly rooted, man resorts to a (worthy) preceptor and, like the fire consuming
the very source whence it originates, he dissolves his subtle body, mainly consisting of the
five subtle elements and enveloping his pure self (in the form of the ego), when the same
has been freed from its latent desires by the force of wisdom and dispassion. (26) When the
envelope (in the shape of the subtle body) that wraps the pure Self and which stood
heretofore between the soul and the Oversoul has (thus) been dissolved, the embodied soul
sheds all the attributes of that envelope and no longer perceives that which is external to the
self nor his subjective states, just as a dreaming man no longer sees the things of his dream
when it has been broken. (27)

आत्मानमिन्द्रियार्थं च परं यदुभयोरपि। सत्याशय उपाधो वै पुमान् पश्यति नान्यदा । २८।
निमित्ते सति wan जलादावपि पूरुष:। आत्मनश्च परस्यापि भिदां पश्यति नान्यदा । २९।
इन्दरियैर्विषयाकृष्टैराक्षिप्ते ध्यायतां मन: । चेतनां हरते बुद्धे: स्तम्बस्तोयमिव ह्रुदात् । ३०।
भ्र्यत्यनुस्मृतिश्चित्तं ज्ञानभ्रंश: स्मृतिक्षये। asd कवय: प्राहुरात्मापह्नवमात्मन: 1321
नात: परतरो लोके पुंस: स्वार्थव्यतिक्रम: | यदध्यन्यस्य प्रेयस्त्वमात्मन: स्वव्यतिक्रमात् । ३२॥
अर्थेन्द्रियार्थाभिध्यानं सर्वार्थापह्नवो qo wire ज्ञानविज्ञानाद्येनाविशाति मुख्यताम् । ३३॥
न कुर्यात्कर्हिचित्सङ्गे तमस्तीव्रं तितीरिषु: | धर्मार्थकाममोक्षाणां यदत्यन्तविघातकम् ay!
तत्रापि मोक्ष vari आत्यन्तिकतयेष्यते i sania यतो fet कृतान्तभयसंयुत: 1341

परेऽवरे च a we गुणव्यतिकरादनु । न तेषां विद्यते क्षेममीराविध्वंसिताशिषाम् । ३६॥
तत् त्वं AS जगतामथ तस्थुषां च देहेन्द्रियासुधिषणात्मभिरावृतानाम् |
a: क्षेत्रवित्तपतया ee विश्वगावि: seep चकास्ति भगवांस्तमवेहि सोऽस्मि ।३७॥

* Vide Srimad Bhagavata XI. xix. 33—35.
