104 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 2

MAPLEKHALACCCTKALECe OK HHH aoe ese eee oKeseetereheteetrrbtseweceetrersceenyenhanniha

अथ द्वितीयोऽध्याय:

Discourse Il

The Lord enters the womb of Devaki and is extolled by the gods
श्रीयुक उवाच

प्रलम्बबकचाणूरतृणावर्तमहाहानै: | मुष्टिकारिष्टद्विविदपूतनाकेशिधेनुकै: । १ ।

अन्यैश्चासुरभूपालैर्बाणभोमादिभिर्युत: । यदूनां कदनं चक्रे act मागधसंश्रय: । २ ।

a पीडिता निविविशु: कुरुपञ्चालकेकयान्। wear विदर्भान् निषधान् विदेहान् कोसलानपि । ३ ।

एके तमनुरुन्धाना wea: पर्युपासते । हतेषु seq बालेषु देवक्या ओऔग्रसेनिना । ४ ।

art amd am meat प्रचक्षते।गर्भो aya देवक्या हर्षशोकविवर्धन: । ५ ।

Sri Suka resumed : Conjoined with Pralamba, Baka, Cantira, Trnavarta and Aghasura
(who in the form ofa python ate much), Mustika, Arista, Dwivida, Putana, Kesiand Dhenuka,
as well as with other demon kings, the foremost of whom were Bana and Bhauma, and with
Jarasandha (the ruler of Magadha, whose two daughters had been married to him) as his
ally, the powerful Karhsa set about (the task of) destroying the Yadus. (1-2) Hard pressed,
they migrated to the territories of the Kurus, Paficalas and Kekayas, Salvas, Vidarbhas,
Nisadhas, Videhas and Kosalas too. (3) Remaining faithful to him, a few kinsmen (of theirs,
however,) continued to serve him. When six boys of Devaki had been killed by Karhsa (the
son of Ugrasena), a ray of Lord Visnu, whom the devotees speak of as Lord Ananta, entered
the womb of Devaki as her seventh child, that went to enhance her delight and grief at the
same time. (4-5)

भगवानपि विश्वात्मा विदित्वा कंसजं भयम्। यदूनां निजनाथानां योगमायां समादिशत् । ६ |
गच्छ देवि mi ow गोपगोभिरल्ङ्कृत्तम्।रौहिणीबसुदेवस्यभार्यांऽऽस्तेनन्दपोक्तो।
अन्याश्च Sadie विवरेषु वसन्ति हि । ७ ।
देवक्या Wet ae ङेषाख्यं am मामकम्।तत् संनिकृष्य रोहिण्या उदरे संनिवेशाय । ८ ।
अथाहमंशभागेन देवक्या: wat शुभे। प्राप्स्यामि त्वं यञ्ञोदायां नन्दपत्न्यां भविष्यसि । ९ ।
अर्चिष्यन्ति मनुष्यास्त्वां सर्वकामवरेश्वरीम्। धूपोपहारबलिभि: सर्वकामवरप्रदाम् ।१०॥
नामधेयानि कुर्वन्ति स्थानानि च नरा भुवि । दुर्गेति भद्रकालीति विजया aot च । ११
कुमुदा चण्डिका pon माधवी कन्यकेति च । माया नारायणीशानी जञारदेत्यम्बिकेति च । १२
गर्भरसंकर्षणात् तं वै og: संकर्षणं भुवि । रामेति लोकरमणाद् बलं बलवदुच्छ्रयात् ।१३॥
Perceiving the fear born of Karhsa to the Yadus, His proteges, the Lord too, the Sou! of
the universe, commanded (as follows) Yogamaya (His transcendent creative energy):—(6)
"Proceed, O good goddess, to Vraja enriched by cowherds and cows. Rohini, Vasudeva’s
wife, is staying in the village of Gokula owned by Nanda; and, afraid of Karnsa, his other wives
too are residing in secret places. (7) There exists in Devaki's womb, in the form of an embryo,
My own part manifestation known by the name of Sesa (the serpent-god). Taking it out, place
it in the womb of Rohini. (8) Then | shall assume the role of a son of Devaki with all My divine
potencies, which constitute so many parts of My being as it were, O blessed lady; while you

shall be born of Yasoda, the wife of Nanda. (9) Peopte will worship you by means of incense,
offerings of food and other presents, recognizing you as the supreme controller (of the
