Dis. 1 ] BOOK SIX 553

जद्या ह्याजाक्तै त्तल्जा वज EEESEEEREEREE …श्चैघेक्लीप्ते**द्वैर्व्यगे*ध्रे*गै**घै*ध्रे**मे*भे*……गैक्लीट्टेग्नौघे…र्व्यक्लीर्व्य*

(words) to them in a voice (deep) as the rumbling of clouds. (37)
विष्णुदूता ऊचु:
wa धर्मराजस्य यदि निर्देशकारिण: ag धर्मस्य नस्तत्त्वं यच्च धर्मस्य लक्षणम् । ३८॥
कथंस्विद् fied aus: किं वास्य स्थानमीप्सितम्। दण्ड्या: fe कारिण: wa आहोस्वित्कतिचिन्नृणाम् । ३९1
The messengers of Visnu said : If you are really servants of Yama (the deity presiding
over righteousness), (please) tell us the true character of virtue and also the means of

ascertaining it. (38) How is punishment meted out and who is intended to be its object? Are
all the doers subject to punishment or (only) some (doers) of the human species? (39)

TAG HE:
वेदप्रणिहितो धर्मो ह्यधर्मस्तद्विपर्यय: 1 वेदो नारायण: साक्षात्स्वयम्भूरिति शुश्रुम ॥४०॥
येन स्वधाम्न्यमी wer रज:सत्त्वतमोमया: | गुणनामक्रियारूपैर्विभाव्यन्ते यथातथम् ।४१॥
waist: खं मरुद्गाव: ra: सन्ध्याहनी fen: | कं कु: कालो धर्म इति ह्येते दैह्यस्य साक्षिण: 1x2 |
एतैरधर्मो विज्ञात: स्थानं दण्डस्य युज्यते । सर्वे कर्मानुरोधेन दण्डमर्हन्ति कारिण: ।४३॥
सम्भवन्ति हि भद्राणिविपरीतानिचानघा:।कारिणांगुणानङ्गोऽस्तिदेहबान्नह्यकर्मंकृत्।ह्मां।
वेनयावान्यथाध्रर्पोध्रर्पोवेहसमीहित:।सएव्रतत्फलंभुक्तेतथातावदमुत्रवैन्धिंणां
यथेह देवप्रवरासत्रैविध्यमुपलभ्यते | भूतेषु गुणवैचित्र्यात्तथान्यत्रानुमीयते |e |
वर्तमानोऽन्ययो: कालो गुणाभिज्ञापको यथा । एवं जन्मान्ययोरेतद्धर्माधर्मनिदर्शानम् । ४७।
mma पुरे देव: पूर्वरूपं विपङ्यति । अनुमीमांसतेऽपूर्वं मनसा भगवानज: xc
यथाज्ञस्तमसा GR उपास्ते व्यक्तमेव हि।न ae पूर्वमपरं नष्टजन्मस्मृतिस्तथा ।४९॥
पञ्चभि: कुरुते स्वार्थान् पञ्च वेदाथ पञ्चभि: । एकस्तु षोडरोन त्रीन् स्वयं सप्तदशोऽश्नुते । ५०।
तदेतत् षोडशकलं fog afer महत्। धत्तेऽनुसंसृतिं पुंसि हर्षश्ञोकभयार्तिदाम् ।५१।
देह्यज्ञोऽजितषड्वर्गो नेच्छन् कर्माणि कार्यते | कोशकार इवात्मानं कर्मणाऽऽच्छाद्य मुह्यति । ५२
न fe कश्चितक्षणमपि जातु तिष्ठत्यकर्मकृत्। कार्यते were: कर्म गुणै: स्वाभाविकैर्बलात् 143 |
लब्ध्वा निमित्तमव्यक्तं व्यक्ताव्यक्तं भवत्युत। यथायोनि यथाबीजं स्वभावेन बलीयसा । ५४॥
एष प्रकृतिसङ्गेन पुरुषस्य विपर्यय:। आसीत् स एव नचिरादीशसङ्गाद्बविलीयते । ५५॥

The messengers of Yama replied : Dharma (righteousness) is (that which is) enjoined
by the Veda and the reverse of it (that which is forbidden by the Veda) is Adharma
(unrighteousness). And we have heard (from Yama and others) that the Veda is Bhagavan
Narayana Himself (from whom it has emanated) and self-born (inthe sense thatit flows from
His nostrils by way of respiration without any conscious effort on His part). (40) ॥ is by
Narayana that all these existences (living beings) made up of (the three modes of Prakrti,
viz.,) Sattva, Rajas and Tamas, are duly evolved in His own being with (their distinctive)
qualities, denominations, activities and forms. (41) The sun, the fire, the sky, the air, the
Indriyas (the senses of perception and the organs of action), the moon, the morning and
evening twilights, day and night, the (four) quarters, water, the earth, Time and Dharma (the”
god of piety)—these indeed are the witnesses of (the good and evil actions of) a Jiva (an
embodied soul). (42) Unrighteousness as ascertained by (the evidence of) these are
determined to be a fit occasion for punishment. And all doers (without distinction) deserve ©
punishment in consideration of their (sinful) actions. (43) For good as well as evil deeds are
capable of being done by men given to action, O sinless ones, inasmuch as they are (ever)

[564] B. M. 20— .
