602 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 10

REL SARA AREAL ER ARES SASSER ERLE ERASE ERES SARE AS ERATE ALLER AD ARERR RR Rte he et tee

celestial physicians), the manes, the gods offire, the Maruts (the wind-gods), the Rbhus, the
Sadhyas and the Vigwedevas. (17-18) Namuci, Sambara, Anarva, Dwimardha (who hada
pair of heads), Rsabha, Ambara, Hayagriva (so-called because he was endowed with a
horse's head), Sankusira (lit., spear-headed), Vipracitti, Ayomukha (who was endowed with
a snout of iron), Puloma, Vrsaparva, Praheti, Heti and Utkala, and (other) Daityas (sons of
Diti) and Danavas (sons of Danu), Yaksas and Raksasas (ogres)—led by Sumali and Mali—
who numbered several thousand and were adorned with gold ornaments resisted and
harassed the vanguard of Indra's army, which was difficult to approach even for Death. With
a lion's roar the furious demons, who were not the least agitated, (virtually) covered the
generals of the celestial army on all sides with showers of maces, iron bludgeons, arrows,

barbed darts, Mudgaras (a kind of hammer-like weapon), lances, pikes, axes, swords,
Sataghnis* ( a cylindrical piece of wood four cubits long and studded with iron spikes),
Bhusundis (another similar weapon with iron spikes one exceeding the other in length) and
other weapons and missiles. (19—23) Completely screened all round with volleys of arrows,
each of which got stuck into the shaft of another, they (the celestial generals) could not be
seen like luminaries hidden by clouds in the sky. (24) Torn in thousands of pieces (even) in
the air by the gods, who were skilled archers, those volleys of missiles and weapons surely
did not reach (touch) the celestial troops at all. (25) Their stock of missiles and weapons
being depleted, they now showered mountainpeaks, trees and stones on the celestial host
and the gods split them as before. (26)

तानक्षतान् स्वस्तिमतो निशाम्य erage वृत्रनाथा: |
द्रुमैर्दृषद्भिर्विविधाद्रिशृङ्गैरविक्षतांस्तत्रसुरिन्द्रसैनिकान् 1291
कृष्णानुकूलेषु यथा महत्सु at: प्रयुक्ता रुशती रुक्षवाच: ।२८॥
7+ woe वितथं fier हरावभक्ता हतयुद्धदर्पा: |
पलायनायाजिमुखे विसृज्य पति मनस्ते दधुरात्तसारा: 1२९॥
वृत्रोऽसुरांस्ताननुगान् wet प्रधावत: Bex awe wal
पलायितं set as च wt waa dan विहस्य adit: 1301
2 fast नमुचे पुलोमन् मयानर्वञ्छम्बर मे शृणुध्वम् ।३१॥
जातस्य Fada एष सर्वत: प्रतिक्रिया यस्य न चेह ger!
लोको aga ततो यदि ह्यमुं को am yet न guia युक्तम् । ३२।
कलेवरं योगरतो विजह्याद् यदग्रणीर्वीरशयेऽनिवृत्त: 133 |
Finding the aforesaid warriors of Indra secure and unhurt by their volleys of weapons
and missiles and unscathed even by the trees, stones and peaks of mountains of every
description (hurled by them), the demons led by Vrtra were filled with dismay. (27) All the

efforts repeatedly made by the demons (the sons of Diti) against the gods, to whom the all-
blissful Lord was favourably disposed, proved entirely infructuous even as the maledictory

* Stidnara Swami in his well-known commentary on Srimad Bhagavata quotes the following couplet from a lexicon in
order to show that a Sataghni and a Bhugundi are almost similar in appearance:—
Vee चच चतहंस्ता लोहकण्टकसंचिता। भशण्डी सवंता लोह्कण्टकानक्रमान्नता ।
