2 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA-MAHATMYA [ Dis. 1
BEM HEME GEREN MERE HOMER AE REMOAN GM REREAD BAA AE RCE RS CRORE ATOM ONC RT REACRORE RL ROR EAC HOR RE He HOMER Re IHN BEBO. MACH Me HOME Rr Retr
power of discernment— (which is) obtained through Devotion, spiritual enlightenment and
dispassion—grow and how are delusion and infatuation got rid of by the devotees of Lord
Visnu ? (5) In this terrible age of Kali living beings (men) have mostly acquired a diabolical
nature. What is the royal road to their purification, assailed as they are by (the fivefold)
afflictions (in the form of nescience, egotism, likes, dislikes and fear of death) ? (6) (Pray, )
point out (to us) now the means which may ever prove to be the best of (all) expedients
conducive to blessedness, the most purifying of (all) purifying agencies and which may lead
to the attainment of Sri Krsna. (7) The Cintamani (a gem reputed to be capable of granting
all one's desires) can provide (only) worldly enjoyment and the (wish-yielding) tree of the
gods, the riches of heaven. A (worthy) preceptor (however), when pleased, is capable of
granting the title to attain Vaikuntha (the realm of Visnu), hard to win (even) for the Yogis.(8)

सूत उवाच
Tift: शौनक चित्ते ते ह्यतो वच्मि विचार्यं च । सर्वसिद्धान्तनिष्पन्नं संसारभयनाहानम् । ९ ।
भक्त्योघवर्धनं यच्च कृष्णसंतोषहेतुकम्।ततदहं तेऽभिधास्यामि सावधानतया Wy । १०॥
कालव्यालमुखग्रासत्रासनिर्णाशाहेतव्रे । श्रीमद्धागवतं शासत्रं कलौ कीरेण भाषितम् । ११।
एतस्मादपरं किञ्चिन्मन:शुद्ध्यै न विद्यते । wart भवेत्पुण्यं तदा भागवतं लभेत् । १२।
परीक्षिते कथां वक्तुं सभायां संस्थिते शुके । सुधाकुम्भं गृहीत्वैव देवास्तत्र समागमन् ।१३।
Ue नत्वावदन् ad स्वकार्यकुशला: सुरा: । कथासुधां प्रयच्छस्व गृहीत्वैव सुधामिमाम् । १४॥
एवं विनिमये जाते सुधा राज्ञा प्रपीयताम्। प्रपास्यामो ad ad श्रीमद्भागवतामृतम् eu!
क्व सुधा क्व HM लोके क्व काच: क्व मणिर्महान् werd विचार्यैवं तदा देवाञ्जहास ह ।१६॥
अभक्तांस्तांश्च विज्ञाय न at स कथामृतम्। श्रीमद्भागवती at सुराणामपि दुर्लभा । १७॥

Sita replied : Saunaka! surely there is love in your heart (for the Lord) and therefore
after (due) deliberation | shall disclose that which is the essence of all established
conclusions. (Nay,) | shall tell you that which is capable of dispelling the fear of
transmigration, is prone to swell the tide of Devotion and conducive to the gratification
of Sri Krsna (Pray,) hear it attentively. (9-10) The (holy) scripture known by the name of
Srimad Bhagavata was expound in ( this age of) Kali by the sage Suka with the object of
completely destroying the fear of being caught in the jaws of the serpent of Time. (11)
There is no means other than this conducive to the purification of the mind. One gets (to
hear) Srimad Bhagavata (only) when there is virtue earned in (one's) past lives.(12) When
the sage Suka had taken his seat in the assembly of sages in order to give his exposition
(of the holy scripture) to (the royal sage) Pariksit, the gods arrived there in a body actually
holding a pitcher full of nectar. (13) Bowing to Sri Suka the gods, who are all skilled in
accomplishing their end, submitted, “Accepting this nectar (brought by us, pray,) vouchsafe
to us in exchange the nectar of your discourse. (14) When this barter is made, let the
celestial beverage be quaffed by the king (Pariksit), while we shall all drink deep of the
nectar in the shape of Srimad Bhagavata." (15) "The beverage of the gods and an
exposition of this holy scripture bear no comparison with each other in this world any more
than a piece of glass and a precious gem can be likened to each other." Thinking thus, Sri
Suka (fo whom the knowledge of Brahma stood revealed) laughed away the gods on that
occasion: so the tradition goes. (16) Knowing them to be anything but devotees, he did not
confer on them the nectar in the shape of an exposition of the holy scripture. (Thus) the
story of Srimad Bhagavata is a rarity even for the gods.(17)

