Dis. 51 ] BOOK TEN 325

Sates Jane eer nee oes eeEEtE serene [Ten rere iii ee er rervea at HT

andnone else, and resolving that since He was armless and was going on foot, he (too) must
encounter Him unarmed (and unmounted), the Yavana pursued Him with intent to overtake
Him while He was running fast with His back turned against him although He is not within easy
reach even of those adeptin Yoga. (4—6) The Yavana chief was lured far away toa mountain
cave by Sri Krsna, who showed Himself at every step as though within grasp. (7) Though
(still) at His heels, reproaching Him in the words "It does not become you, born (as you are}
in the race of Yadu, to run away (before an adversary)", he could not get at Him, his evil
destiny (that prevented him from touching the Lord's sacred person) having not (yet) been
exhausted. (8) Even though censured in this way, the Lord entered deep into the mountain
cave. Having penetrated it himself, the Yavana found another man lying asleep there. (9)
"Surely, having brought me (so) far away, the fellow is lying here like an innocent man !"
Saying thus to himself and taking him to be Sri Krsna (the immortal Lord), the stupid fellow
struck him freely with his foot. (10) Waking up and slowly opening his eyes, the man, who
had been long asleep, gazed all round and beheld the Yavana standing by his side. (11) Burnt
by the fire produced out of the Yavana’s (own) body even as the look of the lying man—who
felt enraged (on his having been awakened so rudely and abrupily)—fell on him, he was
reduced to ashes in an instant, O Pariksit (a scion of Bharata)! (12)

राजावाच
कोनापसपुंपान्व्रह्मन्कस्पक्तिंग्र्यंएवच।कस्माद्गुहांगत:शिरुयेक्रिन्तैजौयक्मग्र्दन: । १३॥
The king said ; What was that man called, who killed the Yavana (thus), O holy
Brahmana, and to whose race did he belong ? What (kind of) prowess did he possess in

reality ? Wherefore did he go to sleep in the (said) cave and whose seed was he ? (13)
रीगुक उवाच

स इक्ष्वाकुकुले जातो मान्धातृतनयो महान्। Gage इति ख्यातो ब्रह्मण्य: सत्यसङ्गर: ।१४।
स याचि सुरगणैरिन्दाद्यैरात्मरक्षणे। असुरेभ्य: परित्रस्तैस्तद्रक्षां सोऽकरोच्चिरम् । १५॥

लब्ध्वा गुहं ते स्व:पालं Aare | राजन् विरमतां Hag भवान् न: परिपालनात् । १६1
नरलोके परित्यज्य us निहतकण्टकम्। अस्मान्पालयतो वीर कामास्ते सर्व उज्झिता: 1१७1
am महिष्यो भवतो ज्ञातयोऽमात्यमन्तिण: | प्रजाश्च तुल्यकालीया नाधुना सन्ति कालिता: 1१८1
कालो बलीयान् बलिनां भगवानीश्वरोऽव्यय: । प्रजा: कालयते क्रीडन् पशुपालो यथा पदून् । १९1
at gig wi a ऋते कैवल्यमद्य न:। एक Gate भगवान् विष्णुरव्यय: iol
ta: स वै देवानभिवन्द्य महायञा:। अज्ञयिष्ट गुहाविष्टो निद्रया देवदत्तया ।२१।
स्वापं यातं यस्तु wa बोधयेत्त्वामचेतन: । स Sa दृष्टमात्रस्तु भस्मीभवतु तत्क्षणात् ।२२॥

Sri Suka replied : Bom in the race of IkswAku and an eminent son of Mandhata, he was
known as Mucukunda and was not only (supremely) devoted to the Brahmanas but true to
his promise (too). (14) He was entreated for their protection by the hosts of gods led by Indra,
who were terribly afraid of the demons; and (accordingly) he ensured their safety for a long
time. (15) Having found in Guha (the younger son of Lord Siva), a guardian of heaven, they
now said to Mucukunda, "O king, cease you (now) from the uphill task of protecting us on all
sides. (16) Since you have been (busy) protecting us (all along), having completely
renounced your kingdom on the mortal plane—which had all) its enemies wiped out (by

you)}—all your enjoyments have ceased. (17) Nay.) your sons and wives and (other)
relations, ministers and counsellors, and even the people of your time survive no more
