Dis, 22] BOOK ELEVEN 621

SERRAT CRT EH EM ANKE UR AACE AAS TENTH EA KEK SOMO ANNeHTe HK NAN HANAN TORT ATER TONE NET

determines the nature of future existence), the mind contemplates (at the dying moment)
objects (actually) seen or heard of (promised in the Vedas and brought to the forefront by the
said destiny) and, being reborn in the midst of those (contemplated) objects, gets insensible
to his present surroundings. The memory (too of his present life) ceases thereafter. (37)
When through deep attachment for (identification with) a new body'the mind no longer
remembers the previous body, this complete forgetfulness of a Jiva (about the body with
which he was identified till the last moment), brought about by some reason (or other in the
shape of the Prarabdha which kept him tied down to the previous body having been
exhausted) constitutes his death (in relation to that body). (38) And the wise declare the birth
of a Jiva to consist in completely identifying himself with a particular body just as a dream
and a reverie consist in one's identifying oneself with the body appearing in a dream or a
reverie, O giver of plenty ! (39) Just as the Jiva identified with the present body no longer
remembers the preceding one, the dreaming soul or the soul drowned ina reverie no longer
remembers (the body of) a preceding dream or a preceding reverie; nay, he visualizes his
self, though old (existing from before) as ifit had newly come into existence. (40) Due to the
coming into existence of a body (the seat of the ten Indriyas) or due to the appearance in
another setting of the mind (which forms the background of the ten Indriyas) a threefold
distinction (in the form of the mind, senses and body) appears in the (one) Self (the only
reality), as a result of which the Self becomes the occasion for internal and external
differences, just as a Jiva assumes a number of undesirable bodies in the course ofa dream
and appears manifold or just as a man begetting a number of wicked children, though one,
assumes different relations with reference to the friends and enemies etc., of those children
and appears diversified. (41) As a matter of fact, O dear Uddhava, (the bodies of) created
beings come into existence and perish every moment by action of Time, whose velocity is
too subtle to be perceived, and it is due to this subtlety that their appearance and
disappearance in quick succession every momentare not seen. (42) Asin the case of flames
of lamps, the currents of streams and the fruits of a tree, so in the case of all created beings
theirage, condition etc., are determined (by Time). (43) (Just) as the notion (entertained) and
assertion (made) about (a series of) flames (arising and disappearing in place of one
another) that this is the same flame, or about the particles of water following one after another
in a stream that this is the same water are false, so itis the unwise alone (whose life is spent
in vain) that entertain the notion and make the assertion about bodies arising and
disappearing in place of one another at the same spot that this is the same body. (44) Even
such (an ignorant) Jiva is neither born nor dies as a result of its Karma continuing in the form
ofa seed. Yet through illusion (in the form of false identification with the body etc.), itappears
to be born (though really unborn) and also dies as it were (though immortal), (just) as fire
(though abiding in the form of an element till the end of the Kalpa) appears to come into
existence and die through illusion (as a result of contact with fire-wood and the cessation of
such contact respectively), (45)

निषेकगर्भजन्मानि बाल्यकौमारयौवनम्। वयोमध्यं जरा मृत्युरित्यवस्थास्तनोर्नव ive |
एता मनोरथमयीर्ह्यन्यस्योच्चावचास्तनू: । गुणसङ्गादुपादत्ते क्वचित् कश्चिजहाति च ive
ae:  पितृपुत्राभ्यामनुमेयौ भवाप्ययौ । न भवाप्ययवस्तूनामभिज्ञो द्दयलक्षण: ।४८॥
तरोर्बीजविपाकाभ्यां यो विद्वाञ्जन्मसंयमौ । तरोर्विलक्षणो ser एवं द्रष्टा तनो: पृथक् ।४९॥
प्रकृतेरेवमात्मानमविविच्याबुघ: पुमान् । तत्त्वेन स्पर्शसम्पूढ: संसारं प्रतिपद्यते iyo!
सत्त्वसङ्गादूषीन् देवान् रजसासुरमानुषान्। तमसा भूततिर्यक्त्वं भ्रामितो anf कर्मभि: । ५१
जृत्यतो गायत: पड्यन् यथैवानुकरोति तान्। एवं बुद्धिगुणान् पङ्यन्ननीहोऽप्यनुकार्यते 1421
