Dis. 2] BOOK NINE

PRENEGR NRE RENE PE Ee eS eS Hee SESE ESSE ES SEREHMUHEEELEAE THESE SERA AER SEER H EH HH

the Ksatriyas known as the Kariisas took their descent, Devoted to the Brahmanas and
(themselves great) lovers of righteousness, they became rulers of the northern regions. (16)
From Dhrsta sprang up the Ksatriya clan called the Dharstas, who attained Brahmanhood
on (this very) earth (during their lifetime). Nrga’s son was Sumati and Sumati's son was
Bhitajyoti and from (the loins of) Bhitajyoti Vasu was born. (17) From (the loins of) Vasu
sprang up Pratika and Pratika’s son was Oghavan, who was the father of (ason of the same
name,) Oghavan. A daughter (too), Oghavati by name, was born of Oghavan. (A certain)
Sudargana married her. (18) Citrasena sprang up from (the loins of) Narisyanta and Daksa
was the son of Citrasena. The son of Daksa was (one) Midhvan, of whom Kirca was born,
and Indrasena was the son of Kirca. (19) (Again,) Vitihotra was born of Indrasena, whose
son was Satyagrava. Urugrava was the son of Satyagrava and Devadatta was born of
Urugrava. (20) From (the loins of) Devadatta sprang up a son Agnivesya (by name), who
was no other than the glorious Agni (the god of fire). It was he who came to be known
(afterwards) as the great seer Kanina or Jatikarnya. (21) From Agnivesya originated the
race of the Brahmanas called the Agnivesyayanas (scions of Agnivesya), O protector of men!
The posterity of Narisyanta has (thus) been told; now hear (an account) of the line of
Dista.(22)
जाभागो दिष्टपुत्रोऽन्य: कर्मणा वैश्यतां गत: । भलन्दन: सुतस्तस्य वत्सप्रीतिर्भलन्दनात् 1231
वत्सप्रीते: सुत: प्रांशुस्तत्सुतं weft विदु: । खनित्र: प्रमतेस्तस्माच्चाक्षुषोऽथ विविंशाति: ।२४॥
विविंशतिसुतो रम्भ: खनिनेत्रोऽस्य धार्मिक:। करन्धमो महाराज तस्यासीदात्मजो FRG
तस्यावीक्षित् सुतो we मरुत्तश्चक्रवर्त्यभूत्। संवर्तोऽयाजयद् यं वै महायोग्यङ्घिर:सुत: 1261
ae यथा यज्ञो न तथान्यस्य कश्चन। ad feo ania किञ्चिच्चास्य शोभनम् । २७।
अमाद्यदिन्द्ररा सोमेन दक्षिणाभिरद्विजातय: । मरुत: परिवेष्टारो विश्वेदेव: सभासद: ।२८।
Dista’s son Nabhaga, who is other than the one going to be mentioned hereafter, was
degraded to the position of a Vaisya on the ground of his pursuits (such as agriculture etc.).
His son was Bhalandana, of whom Vatsapriti was born. (23) Vatsapriti’s son was Prarhsu;
the learned remember his son as Pramati. Of Pramati Khanitra was born; from (the loins of)
Khanitra sprang up Caksusa and from Caksusa, VivirhSati. (24) VivimSat’'s son was
Rambha, whosé son was the virtuous Khaninetra. (And) Karandhama, O great king, was
the sonof the last-named, O protector of human beings. (25) His son was Aviksit, whose son,
Marutta, became an emperor—the same Marutta whom the great Yogi Samvarta, son of the
sage Angira, helped to perform a sacrifice . (26) No sacrificial performance of anyone else
was so grand as that of Marutta. Every utensil etc., was actually of gold and whatever else
there was in his sacrifice was commendable. (27) (In that sacrifice) Indra (the ruler of the
gods) felt inebriated by (draughts of) the Soma juice and the Brahmanas were sated with gifts
of money. The (forty-nine) Maruts (wind-gods) performed the duty of serving up food (to the
invitees), while (the class of gods known as) the Viswedevas (actually) took part in the
deliberations of the assemblies. (28)

मुत्तस्य दम: पुत्रस्तस्यासीद् राज्यवर्धन: । सुधृतिस्तत्सुतो जज्ञे mga नर: सुत: ।२९॥
तत्सुत: केवलस्तस्माद् बन्धुमान् वेगवांस्तत: । बन्धुस्तस्याभवद् यस्य तृणबिन्दुर्महीपति: 1201
तं भेजेऽलम्बुषा देवी भजनीयगुणालयम् । वराप्सरा यत: पुत्रा: कन्या चेडविडाभवत् । ३१1
तस्यामुत्यादयामास «fas धनदं सुतम्।प्रादाय विद्यां परमामृषिर्योगेश्वरात् पितु: 1321
विश्ञाल: जयुत्यबन्धुश्च धूम्रकेतुश्च तत्सुता: | विज्ञालो बंदयकृद् राजा वैजालीं निर्ममे पुरीम् 1३३1
Ques: सुतस्तस्य धूम्राक्षस्तस्य चात्मज: | तत्पुत्रात् संयमादासीत् कृशाश्व: सहदेवज: ।३४॥
