630 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 23

TAREE FTES OTA NSE HD OE THEE CCE HENNE HONE EE FUR NNO १ K EE HER AOE RENEE REAR १०१० ७

a particle of it. (Nay, the soul is the same as the Supreme and) there can be no pair of
contraries (e.g. joy and sorrow) to the Supreme. (Such being the case.) at whom should one
be angry ? (56) Through (the agency or instrumentality of) none and at no place or time and
on no account can there be any connection of the Self—which lies beyond Prakrti (the ultimate
cause of the universe)—with the pairs of opposites (such as joy and sorrow) as there is in
the case of Ahankara (the ego-sense), which reveals the world (even though it does not exist
in the Self). (Hence) he who has awakened to this truth has no fear from (other) created
beings. (57) Embracing the aforesaid conclusion regarding the Supreme Spirit, adopted by
the most ancient and eminent seers, |, such as ! am, shall get over this mundane existence
(having its root in the darkness of ignorance—which is (so) difficult to cross—through
worship of the feet of Sri Krsna (the Bestower of Liberation) alone. (58)

श्रीभगवानुवाच
निर्विद्य नटष्टद्रविणो wage: प्रव्रज्य गां owen इत्थम्।
निराकृतोऽसद्भिरपि स्वधर्मादकम्पितोऽमुं मुनिराह गाथाम् 1५९1
सुखदु:खप्रदो नान्य: पुरुषस्यात्मविभ्रम: | मित्रोदासीनरिपव: संसारस्तमस: FA: । ६०॥
तस्मात् सर्वात्मना ata निगृहाण मनो धिया । मय्यावेशितया युक्त एतावान् योगसंग्रह: 1621
च एतां भिक्षुणा गीतां ब्रह्मनिष्ठां समाहित: | धारयञ्छावयञ्छृण्वन् द्वन्दैर्नैवाभिभूयते ॥६२॥

The glorious Lord went on: Getting disgusted with the pleasures of sense and leaving
his home and wandering over the earth, the ascetic—whose depression of spirits was gone
even though he had lost his fortune, and who did not budge from his righteous course of
conduct though ill-treated as aforesaid by the wicked—chanted the foregoing song. (59)
None other brings joy or sorrow to the Jiva (embodied soul). Frends, neutrals and foes, nay,
the (whole) world is an illusion of the mind, engendered by ignorance (about the Self). (60)
Endowed with an intelleet focussed on Me, therefore, O dear Uddhava, control the mind by
all means, such is the highest consummation of Yoga (wisdom). (61) He who hears or
repeats (to others) or remembers with a concentrated mind this song chanted by the
(aforesaid) mendicant, bearing as it does on absorption in Brahma, is never overpowered
by pairs of opposites (such as joy and sorrow). (62)

Thus ends the twenty-third discourse in Book Eleven of the great
and glorious Bhagavata-Purana, otherwise known
as the Paramahamsa-Samiita.

Set NREL:
ODODE SELES OD
