Dis. 20] BOOK THREE 225

SRKEKKHREHEEHARECCHSHERAEECESAKAHHEPCEREEREHHNE TEES KE SHG TEA eH Hee
च्त् न Be Gr Sr न Bt we a

सोऽवधार्यास्य कार्पण्यं विविक्ताध्यात्मदर्शन: । विमुञ्जात्मतनुं घोरामित्युक्तो विमुमोच 21221
The Lord who can distinctly see the mind of others, perceived Brahma's distress
and said to him, "Cast off this impure body of yours (impure because it has produced
the libidinous Asuras and excited their passion)!" Thus commanded by the Lord, he
dropped it. (28)
a क्वणच्चरणाम्भोजां मदबिह्वललोचनाम्।काञ्चीकलापविलसद्दुकूलच्छन्नरोधसम् 1281
अन्योन्यश्लेषयोत्तुङ्गनिरन्तरपयोधराम् । सुनासां सुद्विजां स्निग्धहासलीलाबलोकनाम् 130 |
गूहन्तीं व्रीडयाऽत्मानं नीलालकवसर्थिनीम्। उपलभ्यासुरा md सर्वे सम्मुमुहु: स्रियम् ।३१।
अहो रूपमहो धैर्यमहो अस्या ad वय:। मध्ये कामयमानानामकामेव विसर्पति 1321
(The body thus shuffled off by Brahma took the form of the evening twilight, when the
day and night meet, and which kindles passion. The Asuras, who are passionate by nature,
dominated as they are by the element of Rajas, took it for a damsel) whose lotus-feet
resounded with the tinkling of anklets, whose eyes were wild with intoxication and whose
hips were covered by a fine cloth, over which shone a girdle. (29) Her breasts were
projecting upwards because of their clinging to each other, and were too contiguous to
admit of any intervening space. She had a shapely nose and beautiful rows of teeth; nay,
a lovely smile played on her lips and she cast a sportful glance (at the Asuras). (30)
Adorned with dark tresses, she was hiding herself as it were out of shyness. Perceiving
that girl, O Vidura (an incarnation of Dharma, the god of virtue), the Asuras were all
infatuated with love. (31) "Oh ! what a beauty ! what a rare self-control! what a budding
youth ! In the midst of us all, who are passionately longing for her, she is moving about
like one absolutely free from passion !" (32)
वितर्कयन्तो ager at सन्ध्यां प्रमदाकृतिम्। अभिसम्भाव्य विश्रम्भात्पर्यपृच्छन् कुमेधस: 1331
कासि कस्यासि रम्भोरु को वार्थस्तेऽत्र भामिनि | रूपद्रविणपण्येन दुर्भगान्नो विबाधसे । ३४॥
या वा काचित्त्वमबले दिष्ट्या सन्दर्शनं तव । उत्सुनोषीक्षमाणानां कन्दुकक्रीडया मन: 1341
नैकत्र ते जयति aie पादपद्मं we WE: करतलेन पतत्पतङ्गम् ।
meq विषीदति बृहत्स्तनभारभीतं झान्तेव दृष्टिरमला सुशिखासमूह: ।३६॥
sit सायन्तनीं सन्ध्यामसुरा: प्रमदायतीम् । प्रलोभयन्तीं जगृहुर्मत्वा मूढधिय: स्रियम् । ३७॥
Indulging in speculations of various kinds about the evening twilight, that appeared to
them as endowed with the form of a young woman, the Asuras of wicked mind treated her
with respect and fondly asked her:—(33) "Who are you (by birth)? Whose daughter may you
be, Opretty one (lit., having thighs smooth and tapering like the stem of a plantain tree)? And
what can be the object of your coming over here, O proud damsel? Why do you tantalize us,
luckless as we are, with the priceless commodity of your beauty ? (84) Whosoever you may
be, O tender girl, we are fortunate in having been able to see you. While playing with a ball
you agitate the mind of the lookers-on. (35) When you strike the bouncing ball against the
ground with your hand again and again, O praiseworthy woman, your lotus-feet stay not at
one place; oppressed by the weight of your full breasts, your waist gets fatigued and your
clear vision grows dull as it were. Pray, braid your comely hair." (36) Thus the Asuras of
clouded understanding took the evening twilight, that showed itself in the form of a young
woman, for an alluring damsel and seized her. (37)

प्रहस्य TST जिघ्रन्त्यात्मानमात्मना | कान्त्या ससर्ज भगवान् गन्धर्वाप्सरसां गणान् । ३८॥
