600 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 10
AAR SARE HEE EEEM YER OKKERER HS ee Sere herk yeti rteeter eee tee hie ee ee eee thier
Thus ends the ninth discourse, in Book Six of the great
and glorious Bhagavata-Purana, otherwise known
as the Paramahamsa-Samhita.

OPCS
PIs Sere

अथ दशमोऽध्याय:

Discourse X
An account of the conflict between Indra and Vrtra
श्रीरुक उवाच
gana समादिश्य भगवान् विश्वभावन: । पश्यतामनिमेषाणां तत्रैवान्तर्दथे हरि: । १ ।
तथाभियाचितो देवैर्ऋषिराथर्वणो महान्।मोदमान saree प्रहसन्निव भारत । २ ।
अपि ger यूयं न जानीथ हारीरिणाम्। संस्थायां यस्त्वभिद्रोहो दु:सहसश्चेतनापह: । ३ |
जिजेविषूणां जीव्रानामात्मा प्रेष्ठ इहेप्सित: । क उत्सहेत तं ad भिक्षमाणाय विष्णवे । ४ ।

Sri Suka began again : Having thus fully instructed Indra, Lord Sri Hari, the Protector
of the universe, disappeared on that very spot, while the gods (who are noted for their
unwinking eyes) kept looking on. (1) Solicited by the gods in the aforesaid manner (as
instructed by the Lord), and (greatly) rejoicing, the magnanimous sage Dadhici (the son of
Atharva) replied as follows, as though jesting, O Pariksit (a scion of Bharata) :— (2) "O gods,
have you no idea of the pain thatis actually caused to embodied beingsat the time of death—
a pain so hard to bear that it robs them (even) of their consciousness ? (3) The body is the

dearest objectin this life, (particularly) sought after by living beings that are eager to survive.
Who would have the courage to part with it even for Lord Visnu, should He ask for it ?" (4)

किं नु तद दुस्त्यजं ब्रह्मन् पुंसां भूतानुकम्पिनाम्। भवद्विधानां महतां पुण्यश्लोकेड्यकर्मणाम्। ५ |
ननु स्वार्थपरो लोको न ae परसंकटम्।यदि वेद न ara नेति are यदीश्वर: । ६ ।
The gods replied : Now what is that which is difficult to part with, 0 (holy) Brahmana,
for magnanimous souls like you, who are compassionate to (all) living beings and whose
(noble) deeds are extolled (even) by men of sacred renown? (5) Surely selfish people do not
realize the difficulty of the donor; if they knowit, they would not ask a gift (of him). And adonor
(too) would not say "No", when capable of granting their request. (6)

धर्म a: श्रोतुकामेन यूयं मे प्रत्युदाहता: । एष a: प्रियमात्मानं त्यजन्तं संत्यजाम्यहम् । ७ ।
योऽध्रुवेणात्मना नाथा न धर्मं न यश: पुमान्। ईहेत भूतदयया स जोच्य: स्थावरैरपि । ८ ।
Ware धर्म: पुण्यङ्लोकैरुपासित: | यो भूतशोकहर्षाभ्यामात्मा श्ञोचति हृष्यति । ९ ।
अहौ दैन्यमहो कष्टं OTe: HOTTER: । यन्न`त्मकुय॰|दस्व|थै॰र्मत्य'॰: त्वज्ञालित्निग्रहै: । १०॥
The sage (Dadhici) said : | replied to you (as | have done) only because | wished to
hear from you about Dharma (righteousness), Here do | cast off this body, which is (so) dear
to you (coveted by you) and which is sure to leave me (one day). (7) The man who fails to

earn by means of his transient body, O lords, neither religious merit nor fame through
kindness to living beings deserves to be pitied even by immobile creatures (trees, plants and
