Dis. 7 ] BOOK ELEVEN 545

SAO EDENTON EL TROT NNO TE On HOOKER ENTE RANE HOHE HANNE HET ०292 मम9 ७8१७ ० # 9७ # 8

by Me it will be assailed by Kali (the Dark Age) and before long, O pious one, all its
auspiciousness will be gone. (4) You should in no case live on this terrestrial globe when
abandoned by Me; for the Kali age having set in (then), O good Uddhava, people will
conceive a liking for unrighteous ways. (5) Completely shaking off all attachment for your own
people and kinsmen and fully concentrating your mind on Me, for your part, go you about the
earth looking upon al! with an equal eye. (6) Whatever is being apprehended with the mind, .
speech, eyes, ears etc., know it to be a creation of the mind and therefore (merely) illusory
and transient. (7) A man with an unsteady (wandering) mind falls a prey to misapprehension
consisting in the perception of diversity,which (in its turn) leads to the sense of good and evil;
and in the eyes of an individual having the notion of good and evil there exists the distinction
of prescribed action, inaction and prohibited action. (8) Therefore, having controlled your
mind and senses, visualize this world (of senses) as projected in the Self and see your own
self existing in Me, the Supreme Lord (as one with Me). (9) Possessed of knowledge (of the
meaning of the Vedas) and realization (of what has been taught by them) and with your mind
sated through Self-Realization and becoming one with the self of (all) embodied beings, you
will no longer be baulked by (any) impediments. (10) He who has transcended the sense of
good and evil does not refrain from wrong-doing because he perceives any evil init; nor does
he perform prescribed duties because he thinks well of it; he (merely) acts (by force of habit)
like a child (whose actions are never premeditated). (11) He who has gained certitude about
the Self through knowledge (of the true spirit of the Vedas) coupled with realization (of the
Truth), who is a friend to all created beings, whois fullof peace, and who beholds the universe
as one with Me, never undergoes suffering (in the form of transmigration). (12)
SRR उवाच
इत्यादिष्टो भगवता महाभागवतो नृप।उद्धुव: प्रणिपत्याह तत्त्वजिज्ञासुरच्युतम् 1231

Sri Suka resumed : Thus instructed by the Lord, Uddhava, the great devotee of the Lord,
O protector of men, fell prostrate before Him and, being eager to know the truth, spoke toHim
(as follows). (13)

उद्धव उवाच

योगेश योगविन्यास योगात्मन् योगसम्भव । नि:श्रेयसाय मे प्रोक्तस्याग: संन्यासलक्षण: । १४॥
त्यागोऽयं दुष्करो भूमन् कामानां विषयात्मभि: । सुतरां त्वयि सर्वात्मन्नभक्तैरिति मे मति: । १५॥
सोऽहं ममाहमिति मूढमतिर्विगाढस्त्वन्मायया विरचितात्मनि सानुबन्धे ।
amaze निगदितं भवता यथाहं संसाधयामि भगवन्ननुशाधि भृत्यम् । १६1
सत्यस्य ते स्वदूशा आत्मन आत्मनोऽन्यं वक्तारमीश विबुधेष्नपि नानुचक्षे ।
सर्वे विमोहितधियस्तव माययेमे ब्रह्मादयस्तनुभृतो बहिरर्थभावा: 1201
तस्माद् भवन्तमनवद्यमनन्तपारं सर्वज्ञमीश्वरमकुण्ठविकुण्ठधिष्ण्यम् ।
निर्विण्णधीरहमु ह वृजिनाभितप्तो नारायणं नरसखं ae प्रपद्ये ।१८॥

Uddhava submitted ; 0 Lord (Rewarder} of Yoga, O the ultimate end and support of
Yoga, O the embodiment of Yoga ! O the Fountainhead of Yoga! (it is) for my highest good
that this cult of renunciation without any expectation of return has been preached by You.(14)
O all-pervading and all-embracing Lord ! such renunciation of the pleasures of sense is
difficult (nay, well-nigh impossible) for those attached to sense-enjoyment; and more so for
those who are not devoted to You: such is my conviction. (15) | am ignorant, O Lord; for lam

attached to this body and children, which are the creation of Your Maya. | am immersed in
the notion of 'l' and ‘Mine’. Therefore, instruct me, Your servant, that | may easily attain to that
