244 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 24

POURRA SAN SENG PETE EER ERLE eee ee ee eee HEE He eee oe etn tft hte edo
ees eee ee eee

along with Marici and the other sages to that (celebrated) hermitage of Kardama
surrounded by the river Saraswati. (9) Brahma, who is naturally possessed of true
wisdom, already knew that the Lord, who is no other than the supreme Brahma, had
descended through pure Sattva for imparting the knowledge of the Sankhya system of
philosophy (which determines the nature of the fundamental principles), O vanquisher
of foes. (10) Welcoming with a guileless mind the intention of the Lord, the creator spoke thus
to Kardama and Devahiti with all his senses greatly delighted. (11)

.

ब्रह्मावाच
त्वया मेऽपचितिस्तात कल्पिता निर्व्यलीकत: । यन्मे Gane वाक्यं भवान्मानद मानयन् ।१२॥
एतावत्येव aye कार्या पितरि पुत्रकै: । बाढमित्यनुमन्येत गौरवेण गुरोर्वच: ।१३॥
इमा दुहितर: wa तव वत्स सुमध्यमा:। सर्गमेते sua: स्वैर्वृहयिष्यन्त्यनेकधा ।१४॥
अतस्त्वमृषिमुख्येभ्यो यथाशीलं यथारुचि । आत्मजा: परिदेह्यद्य विस्तृणीहि यशो भुवि req
वेदाहमाद्यं पुरुषमवतीर्णं स्वमायया । भूतानां afer देहं बिभ्राणं कपिलं मुने । १६
ज्ञानविज्ञानयोगेन कर्मणामुद्धन् जटा:।हिरण्यकेश: पद्माक्ष: पद्ममुद्रापदाम्बुज: 1901
we मानवि a mi प्रविष्ट: केटभार्दन: | अविद्यासंशयग्रन्थिं छित्त्वा गां विचरिष्यति । १८॥
अयं सिद्धगणाधीरशा: साङ्ख्याचार्यै: सुसम्मत: | लोके कपिल इत्याख्यां गन्ता ते कीर्तिवर्धन: ।१९॥
Brahma said : You have truly worshipped me, dear son, in that you reverently carried
out my behest, O respecter (of elders)! (12) This is the service that ought to be rendered
by the sons to their father, viz., that they should bow to the command of their father with due
deference, saying "Very well !" (13) These slender-waisted daughters of yours, my worthy
child, will multiply this creation manifold through their descendants. (14) Therefore, give
away your daughters this very day to the foremost of the sages with due regard to the girls'
temperament and liking, and thereby spread your fame all over the globe. (15) | know the
most ancient Person, the bestower of all boons on living beings, has descended through
His own Maya (wonderful creative energy) in the person of Kapila, O Kardama. (16)
(Turning to Devahiti, he said,) with golden hair, lotus-like eyes and lotus-feet, whose soles
bear the mark ofa lotus, it is Lord Visnu (the Slayer of the demon Kaitabha) who has been
born of you, O Devahuti (daughter of Swayambhuva Manu), to tear up the roots of Karma
( the form of latent desires) through the instrumentality of Sastriya knowledge and
realization. Having cut the knot of ignorance and misapprehension, He will roam about the
earth. (17-18) He will be the Lord of the Siddhas, heldin great esteem by the teachers of the
Sankhya system of philosophy. He will be known all over the world by the name of Kapila and
will spread your fame. (19)
मैत्रेय उवाच
तावाश्वास्य SET कुमारै: सहनारद:।हंसो हंसेन यानेन त्रिधामपरमं ययो । २०॥
गते Taya ae: कर्दमस्तेन चोदित: । चथोदितं स्वदुहितृ: प्रादाद्विश्रसृजां तत: । २१।
Wee fet प्रादादनसूयामथात्रये। श्रद्धामङ्गिरसेऽयच्छत्पुलस्याय हविर्भुवम् । २२।
पुलहाय whet युक्तां क्रतवे च क्रियां adm ख्यातिं च भृगवेऽयच्छद्वसिष्ठायाप्यरुन्धतीम् 23
अधर्वणेऽददाच्छान्तिं यया am वितन्यते । विप्रर्षभान् Hager, सदारान् समलालयत् | २४।
ततस्त ऋषय: क्षत्त: कृतदारा निमन्त्य तम्। प्रातिष्ठन्नन्दिमापन्ना: स्वं स्वमाश्रममण्डलम् । 241
Maitreya continued : Having thus reassured the couple, Brahma. the creator of the
universe, rode on his mount, the swan. and returned to Satyaloka (the highest of the spheres
