Dis. 67 ] BOOK TEN 403

deri erin irre rere ree ioe nator tet Sere 28 Tee LENSE LOTTE LTT ES

कदर्थीकृत्य बलवान् विप्रचक्रे मदोद्धृत: । तं तस्याविनयं दृष्टा देशांश्च तदुपद्गुतान् । १६
Fal मुसलमादत्त we चारिजिघांसया । द्विविदोऽपि महावीर्य: शालमुद्यम्य पाणिना । १७॥
aaa aa तेन बलं मूर्धन्यताडयत्।तं तु सङ्कुर्षणो aft पतन्तमचलो यथा ।१८॥
प्रतिजग्राहं बलवान् सुनन्देनाहनच्च तम्।मुसलाहतमस्तिष्को विरेजे रक्तधारया 1°81
fifein गैरिकया wet नानुचिन्तयन्। पुनरन्यं waters कृत्वा निष्पत्रमोजसा । २०॥
तेनाहनत् - सुसंक्रुद्धस्तं बल: जतधाच्छिनत्। ततोऽन्येन रुषा जघ्ने तं चापि झतधाच्छिनत् । २१1
एवं युध्यन् भगवता भग्ने भग्ने पुन: पुन: | आकृष्य सर्वतो वृक्षान् निर्वृक्षमकरोद् वनम् । २२॥
ततोऽमुञ्चच्छिलावर्षं बलस्योपर्यमर्षित: aa, wa चूर्णयामास लीलया मुसलायुध: 1231
a ag तालसङ्काशौ मुष्टीकृत्य कपीश्वर: | आसाद्य रोहिणीपुत्रं ताभ्यां वक्षस्यरूरुजत् । २४॥
चादवेन्द्रोऽपि तं deat त्यक्त्वा मुसललाङ्गले । जत्रावभ्यर्दयत्कुद्ध: सोऽपतद् रुधिरं वमन् ।२५॥
चकम्पे तेन uaa weg. सवनस्पति: । पर्वत: कुरुशार्दूल वायुना नौरिवाम्भसि । २६
जयशब्दो wae: ay साध्विति are सुरसिद्धमुनीन्द्राणामासीत् कुसुमवर्षिणाम् । २७
एवं निहत्य fe जगद्व्यतिकरावहम्। संस्तूयमानो भगवाञ्जनै: स्वपुरमाविरात् । २८॥
इति श्रीमद्भागवते महापुराणे पासमहंस्यां संहितायां दमस्कन्धे उत्तरार्धे द्रिविदवघो नाम सप्तषष्टितमोऽध्याय: te!

There he saw Balarama, the protector of the Yadus, most charming in every limb and
decked with a garland of lotuses, standing in the midst ofa bevy of young girls. (9) Drunk with
Varuni, He was singing (beautifully) with eyes swimming in intoxication and with His glowing
body looked like an elephant in rut. (10) Climbing up branches of trees the wicked monkey
shook the trees and in order to attract notice loudly chattered.(11) Observing the impudence
onthe part ofthat monkey, the young girls, who were fondoffun and sportive by nature, loudly
laughed. Being under the protection of उत्त Balarama, they had no fear. (12) Under the very
eyes of Balarama the monkey began to insult the girls by twisting his eyebrows, making wry
faces and showing them his hind part. (13) Full of rage, Balarama, the foremost of warriors,
hit him with a slab of stone: the crafty monkey (however) evaded itand (hastily coming down
the tree) took up the pot of Varuni and defied Balarama by grinning at him and provoking him
(thereby). The wicked monkey then smashed the pot of Varuni, tore the clothes of the women
and caused (infinite) annoyance to Sri Balarama and, puffed up with pride, showed
disrespect to Him. Observing such defiant attitude of his and remembering how he made
havocof the country, Balarama got enragedandtookup (His weapons) the pestle and plough
with intent to kill him. Dwivida also, being very powerful, lifted up a sal tree with one hand and
rushing with (great) vehemence, hit Balarama with it on His head. The mighty Balarama,
however, remained immovable like a rock and, holding up with one hand the tree even as
it came flying towards his head, struck the monkey with His pestle called Sunanda. With his
brain crushed by the pestle and covered with a stream of blood, Dwivida shone like a
mountain covered with a solution of red chalk. But. unmindful of the stroke, he in extreme
rage pulled out yet another tree and, removing all its leaves, hit Balarama with it violently.
Balarama split the tree into a hundred pieces. The monkey struck Balarama with another in
great rage; but the latter split that too into a hundred pieces. (14--21) Thus he fought on.
Each time a tree was smashed (by Balarama), the monkey pulled out another. (Thus)
uprooting the trees (one by one) he denuded the forest of its trees on all sides. (22) The
enraged monkey thereupon began to rain slabs of stone on Balarama; but these also the
latter, as a matter of sport, reduced to powder with His pestle. (23) (Finally) clenching his
arms, which were as longas apalm tree, the great monkey went up to Balarama and struck

