Dis. 22] BOOK FOUR . 387

RATATAT HH HERKEN TEETER EHO EEMAAHK CETERA HTH OHAE HMM EONAR EH EEE HR Re

recognized (to be no other than Sanaka and his three brothers) through their splendour,
which dispelled the sins of the spheres (through which they passed). (2) King Prthu
(instantly) rose with his courtiers and all others present there, as if eager to seize back his
life-breath, that had shot forth (to meet those sages) at their very sight *, even as the mind
runs forth to meet the objects of sense-enjoyment. (3) When they had accepted the Arghya
(water offered for washing the hands of a distinguished guest) and taken their seat, the king,
who was (most) urbane (in manners) and was overwhelmed by his esteem for them,
worshipped them with due ceremony, his head bent low with modesty. (4) He (then) sprinkled
his tuft of hair with the hallowed drops of water wherewith he had washed their feet, thus duly
following the ways of the virtuous, as if in order to evince his respect for the same. (5)
Endowed with reverence and self-discipline, and full of delight, he addressed those sages,
the elder brothers (even) of Lord Siva—who, when installed on seats of gold, shone like the
sacrificial fires in their proper places. (6)
पृथुरुवाच

aa आचरितं किं मे मङ्गलं मङ्गलायना: । यस्य वो दर्शनं ह्यासीदुर्दर्शानां च योगिभि: । ७ ।

किं wa दुर्लभतरमिह लोके wa च । यस्य विप्रा: प्रसीदन्ति शिवो विष्णुश्च सानुग: । ८ ।

नैव लक्षयते लोको लोकान् पर्यटतोऽपि चान्। यथा सर्वदृशं ad आत्मानं ase हेतव: । ९ ।

ae aft ते धन्या: साधवो गृहमेधिन: | यद्गृहा ह्यर्हवर्याम्बुतृणभूमीश्वरावरा: । १०॥

व्यालालयद्रुमा व्रै तेऽप्यरिक्ताखिलसम्पद: | यद्गृहास्तीर्थपादीयपादतीर्थविवर्जिता: । ११

ward oat द्विजश्रेष्ठा agatha मुमुक्षव: । चरन्ति श्रद्धया धीरा बाला wa बृहन्ति च ।१२।

aa: कुशलं नाथा इन्दियार्थार्थवेदिनाम् । व्यसनावाप एतस्मिन् पतितानां स्वकर्मभि: 1231

भवत्सुं PUTT आत्मारामेषु नेष्यते। कुशलाकुशला यत्र न सन्ति मतिवृत्तय: । १४॥

ae Pa: «Yee वस्तपस्विनाम्। संपृच्छे भव एतस्मिन् क्षेम: केनाञ्जसा भवेत् 124 |

व्यक्तमात्मवतामात्मा भगवानात्मभावन: । स्वानामनुग्रहायेमां सिद्धरूपी चरत्यज: ।१६॥

Prthu said : Oh ,what meritorious acts have | performed, O abodes of auspiciousness,
that | have been blessed with your sight, whom even Yogis (men possessed of mystic
powers) find it difficult to perceive? (7) There is nothing very difficult to attain in this world or
the next for him with whom Brahmanas (like you) and Lord Siva and Visnu and their
attendants are pleased. (8) The world does not perceive you, even though you range
through the various regions, just as the visible creation and Mahattattva (the principle of
cosmic intelligence) etc., which are the causes of this world, are unable to perceive the
all-seeing self. (9) Though poor, those pious householders are (indeed) blessed, whose
house contains water, (a mat of) straw or (bare) ground, the master himself and his servants
etc., worthy of acceptance by venerable souls (like you). (10) (Worthless) like the trees
harbouring (venomous) serpents are those houses which, though replete with all kinds of
riches, are not hallowed by the holy water washing the feet of the Lord's devotees. (11)
Welcome is your visit to this place, O exalted Brahmanas; for despite your juvenility you are
ever self-controlled and reverently observe great vows (of perpetual celibacy and so on),
following the ways of seekers after liberation. (12) Is there (any hope of) good for us, who
know the objects of senses to be the only thing worth coveting and have fallen, through our
* Our scriptures maintain that the life-breath of a young man goes forth to meet his elders when the latter pay him a visit
and that it is only when he rises and bows to them that tha life-breath returns :-—
wea प्राणा ह्युत्रामन्ति Ga: स्थविर state
प्रत्युत्थानाभिवादाध्यां पुनस्तान् प्रतिपद्यते॥
