662 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA { Dis. 30

SACRO OEFER REE TY HHTATEHEK HHO RET TERS N HET E MAE RHEE OOHECE GEER E CRON K ENERO AKANE न

affection to the winds, then, the Dasgarhas, Vrsnis, Andhakas, Bhojas and Satvatas, the Madhus
and the Arbudas, the Mathuras and the Strasenas, the Visarjanas, the Kukuras and the Kuntis—
these contended withone another. (18) Sons fought with their fathers and brothers with brothers;
while maternal uncles, maternal grandfathers, nephews and sister's sons severally crossed
their swords with their sister's sons, daughter's sons, uncles and maternal uncles. (Likewise)
friends contended with friends, and relations with relations; while kinsmen killed kinsmen,
deluded as they (all) were. (19) When (the stocks of) arrows began to be exhausted, bows
began to be broken (when used as cudgels) and (ihe stocks of) weapons began to be
depleted, they tore up with their clenched hands blades of Eraka* grass. (20) Held by the
clenched hand they turned into (so many) clubs studded with iron, (which were) almost as
hard as adamant. They (now) began to strike their ememies with them, and, being checked
by Sri Krsna, they took Him as well as Balabhadra to be their adversary, deluded as they
were. (Nay,) resolved to kill Them, the desperadoes came up (before Them), O king ! (21-22)
Highly irritated, They too took up handfuls of Eraka grass, (presently) converted into
clubs, O delight of the Kurus, and struck them (in return with those clubs) moving (from one
place to another).(23) The fury, engendered by rivalry, of those warriors, who were
possessed (as it were) by the curse of the Brahmanas and whose judgment had been
obscured by the deluding potency of Sri Krsna, brought about their destruction (even) as
fire (produced by the friction) of bamboos would consume a (whole) forest. (24) All His own
people as well as Clans having thus perished, Sri Krsna (the Ruler even of Brahmaand Siva)
concluded that the remaining burden of the earth was (also) removed.(25)
राम: समुद्रवेलायां योगमास्थाय पौरुषम् । तत्याज लोकं मानुष्यं संयोज्यात्मानमात्मनि 1261
रामनिर्याणमालोक्य भगवान् देवकीसुत: | निषसाद धरोपस्थे तूष्णीमासाद्य पिप्पलम् 1201
बिभ्र्चतुर्भुजं रूपं भ्राजिष्णु प्रभया wari fest वितिमिरा: कुर्वन् विधूम sa पावक: । २८॥
श्रीवत्साङ्कं घनश्यामं तप्तहाटकवर्चसम्। कौङोयाम्बरयुग्मेन परिवीतं सुमङ्गलम् 1२९॥
सुन्दरस्मितवक्त्राब्जं नीलकुन्तलमण्डितम् | पुण्डरीकाभिरामाक्षं स्फुरन्मकरकुण्डलम् । ३०॥
कटिसूत्रब्रह्मसूत्रकिरीटकटकाङ्गदै: 1 हारनूपुरमुद्राभि: कोस्तुभेन विराजितम् 321
वनमालापरीताङ्खं मूर्तिमद्धिर्निजायुधै: | कृत्वोरौ afar पादमासीनं पङ्कजारुणम् 1321
Resorting at the seashore to Yoga in the form of concentration of mind on the Supreme
Person, i.e., (in other words) identifying his self with the (Supreme) Spirit Balarama cast off
the human semblance. (26) Perceiving the ascent of Balarama (to His own realm Patala),
Lord Sri Krsna (Son of Devaki) went up to a peepul (the sacred fig tree) and sat down quietly
on the ground (resting His back against its trunk). (27) He revealed His resplendent four-
armed form and, like a smokeless fire, dispelled by His own effulgence the gloom of (all) the
quarters. (28) It bore the mark of Srivatsa (a curl of white hair on the breast), was dark-brown
(of hue) like a (rainy) cloud, was wrapped in a pair of silk pieces and (thereby) shone like
burnished gold and was most auspicious (to look at). (29) Ithad a lotus-like countenance with
a lovely smile playing on it, was graced with dark hair, had a pair of delightfut lotus-like eyes
and was adorned with a shining pair of alligator-shaped ear-rings. (30) It was decked with
a girdle, the sacred thread, a diadem, a pair of bracelets and armlets as well as with a pearl
necklace, a pair of anklets and rings and the Kaustubha gem. (31) Its limbs were encircled
by agarland of sylvan flowers; (nay,) It was waited upon by His own weapons (discus, mace
and the Sarnga bow etc.), ina living form and was seated placing the left-foot, (with Its sole)

ruddy as a lotus, on the right thigh. (32)
ou ==-

* It will be remembered thal when the steel Pestle generated by the curse of Brahmanas had been crushed into powder
and cast into the sea, the particles of the powder were bome by the waves to and deposited on Ihe shore, where they grew inlo
३ grass named Eraka (vide verses 21 and 22 of Discourse । above)
