aa कृपण: सुभ्रु भवत्या: प्रेमयन्तित: । आत्मानं नाभिजानामि मोहितस्तव मायया । १२
यत् पृथिव्यां ब्रीहियवं हिरण्यं vga: स्रिय: । न दुह्यन्ति मन:प्रीतिं Ga: कामहतस्य ते ।१३॥
न जातु काम: कामानामुपभोगेन जाम्यति । हविषा कृष्णवर्त्मव yo एवाभिवर्धते । १४॥
चदा न कुरुते भावं सर्वभूतेष्मङ्गलम्। समदृष्टेस्तदा Ga: wal सुखमया few ।१५॥
चा gen दुर्मतिभिर्जीर्वतो चा न जीर्यते। at gent दु:खनिवहां शर्मकामो द्रुतं त्यजेत् । १६॥
मात्रा Set दुहित्रा वा नाविविक्तासनो भवेत्। बलवानिन्दियग्रामो विद्वांसमपि कर्षति । १७॥
wi वर्षसहस्रं मे विषयान् सेवतोऽसकृत्। तथापि चानुसवनं gen तेषूपजायते ।१८॥
तस्मादेतामहं त्यक्त्वा ब्रह्मण्याघाय मानसम्। Peat निरहंकारश्चरिष्यामि मृगै: सह ।१९।
दृष्टं श्रुतमसद बुद्ध्वा नानुध्यायेन्न संविशेत् । संसृतिं चात्मनारां च तत्र विद्वान् स आत्मदृक् 1201

Sri Suka resumed : Thus enjoying the pleasures of sense, Yayati, who had been
enslaved by his wife, woke up to his spiritual fall and, disgusted with the world narrated the
following (story in the form of a ) parable to Devayani (his beloved wife). (1) "Listen, O
Devayani (a scion of the sage Bhrgu), the true story of one on this earth who had a conduct
similar to mine and who was full of lust (lit, lived in a village), yet for whom (and others like
him) the wise residing in the woods constantly grieve. (2) Hunting for his beloved object in
a forest all alone, a certain goat saw a she-goat fallen in a well, subject (as she was) to her
own destiny. (3) Intently thinking of a means of rescuing the she-goat, the passionate goat
created an outlet (for her) by digging out the earth at the brim with the end of his horns. (4)
Coming out of the well, that beautiful she-goat, it is said, fell in love with that very goat.
Observing him selected by her—stout, mature, most lovable, capable of procreation and
expert in the art of copulation as he was—many more she-goats, who longed for a beloved
companion, also conceived a passion for the goat. Enhancing the delight of those numerous
she-goats, that king of goats revelled with them alone and ceased to think of himself,
possessed as he was by the devil of concupiscence. (5-6) Perceiving that very goat enjoying
himself with another most beloved she-goat, the one that had fallen into the well and
(consequently) got bewildered, could not brook that act of the goat. (7) Deserting that lustful
goat, who though disguised as a friend had played her false and whose love was (only)
momentary, given as he was to the gratification of his senses, the she-goat returned full of
agony to her owner. (8) The goat too, a slave of his beloved she-goat, felt (very) wretched
and followed her, uttering a bleat all the way in order to pacify her, but could not reconcile
her. (9) There (in her owner's house) a certain Brahmana, who was her owner, amputated,
in anger, his dangling scrotum and rejoined it in the interest of the she-goat (herself),
proficient as he was in (all) such expedients. (10) With his scrotum restored, the goat too
revelled for along time indeed with the she-goat that had been found (by him) in the well,
O dear one! But he does not feel satiated with sense-enjoyments till this day. (11) Bound in
the same way with the cords of your fove and deluded by your charm, O pretty one, | fail to
recognize my own self, wretched as | am. (12) (All) the rice and barley, gold, animals and
women that exist on earth—they cannot yield satisfaction to the mind of a man who is
buffeted by lust. (13) The craving for sense-gratification never ceases with the enjoyment of
sense-objects. On the other hand it grows stronger and stronger like fire fed by ghee. (14)
When aman does not entertain the notion of diversity (in the form of likes and dislikes, which
are undesirable,) with regard to any living being, then to such a man, looking upon all with

