Dis. 8] . BOOK-THREE 165

LEORHERATERORELE ERNE EAECEEE EL LERERES HAH ER RR ARE eee eS HH Re

IE: स्वजटाकलापैरुपस्पृशन्तश्चरणोपधानम् |
Tt यदर्चन्त्यहिराजकन्या:: सप्रेमे नाना बळिभिर्वरार्था: । ५ |
मुहुर्गृणन्तो वचसानुरागस्खलत्पदेनास्य कृतानि aT ।
किरीटसाहस्रमणिप्रवेकप्रद्योतितोद्दामफणासहस्रम् । ६ ।

Naitreya said : Oh! the race of Piru has become worthy of adoration even by noble men
ever since you were born into it—you, who are no other than the god Yama (one of the
protectors of the world), so devoted to the Lord; and you lend fresher and newer charm at
every step and every moment to the garland of Sri Hari's glories (by your pertinent
questions). (1) Now, in order to relieve the great woe of men who fall into it in their search
for trivial delights (of sense), | commence the Bhagavata-Purana, which Lord Sankarsana
(Sega) himself was pleased to teach the seers (Sanaka and others). (2) Eager to know the
truth about the Lord whois even higher than Sankarsana, Sanatkumara and the other sages
approached and questioned Lord Sankarsana, the first among the gods, whose wisdom
knows no obstruction and who had ensconced himself in the subterranean region (of
Patala).(3) Sankarsana was (at that time) engaged in offering (mental) worship to his own
(source and) stay, whom the Vedas call by the name of Lord Vasudeva: and in order to afford
delight to the sages (Sanatkumara and others) he had now partially opened his eyes, that
resembled a pair of lotus buds and which he had turned inward till then. (4) The sages
(reverentially) touched with their matted locks, drenched* by the water of the heavenly river
(Ganga), the lotus that served as a support for his feet, and which daughters of the serpent
chiefs, lovingly worshipped through various offerings with a longing to obtain a suitable
match. (5) The sages, who were conversant with his doings, repeatedly extolled them in
accents that faltered on account of affection. The thousand noble hoods of the serpent-god
were brightened by superb gems set in his thousand crowns. (6)

प्रोक्तं किलैतद्धगवत्तमेन निवृत्तिधर्माभिरताय तेन ।
सनत्कुमाराय स चाह पृष्ट, सांख्यायनायाङ्घ धृतव्रताय । ७ |
सांख्यायन: पारमहंस्यमुख्यो विवक्षमाणो भगवद्बिभूती: |
जगाद सोऽस्मद्गुरवेऽन्विताय पराशरायाथ बृहस्पतेश्च | ८ ।
प्रोवाच मह्यं स दयालुरुक्तो मुनि: पुलस्त्येन पुराणमाद्यम्।
aise तवैतत्कथयामि वत्स श्रद्धालवे नित्यमनुव्रताय । ९ ।

Tradition says that the mostworshipful Sankarsana taught this '‘Bhagavata’ to Sanatkumara,
who is devoted to the path of renunciation; and the latter in his turn, O dear Vidura, imparted
it to Sankhyayana, who had taken a vow (of strict celibacy) and asked him questions about the
same. (7) Sankhyayana, the foremost among those who had realized the truth, in his
eagerness to recount the glories of the Lord, repeatedit to his devoted pupil and our preceptor,
ParaSara, and then to the sage Brhaspati. (8) Urged by Pulastya, the gracious sage Parasara

reproduced that foremost Purana (Srimad Bhagavata) to me; and | now proceed to teach the
same to you, dear child, who are so reverent and ever devoted to me.(9)

Sarg विश्वमिदं तदाऽऽसीद् यतन्निद्रयामीलितदूङ् न्यमीलयत् ।
Som २
अहीन्द्रतल्पेऽधिशयान एक: कृतक्षण: स्वात्मरतौ निरीह: 1201
"While coming from the highest heaven, Satyaloka, to the nethermost region of Patala, it seems, Sanatkumara and
others had coursed through the stream of the Gariga, which flows from Satyaloka right up to Patéla washing on its way all the

other celestial spheres, the atmosphere, the surface of the earth and all the other terrestrial regions. This obviously accounts
for the wetness of their matted locks.

