628 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 16
SEAR SHREAAAHHERA SAN SRR EH Sot oeR SoTL ee eee Severe beer hehehe eirreet ore
RESESSPSES SEP ETS STH CREED TOR EER TONER ED ERE SOR Hebb heh irk eeh ihren eee Erie ene

fruit and is fraught with sin (in the shape of violence etc.). (41) What good can be expected
either to oneself or to another and what object can be gained through a ritual which is
harmful to one's own self as well as to others? On the other hand, painis inflicted on You*
through self-mortification and sin is also incurred (as well as Your displeasure) through
persecution of another. (42) Your point of view (viz., that people should achieve the object
of their life through devotion to You), with which as a matter of fact You preached the cult
of Devotion—the cult which is exclusively followed by the worthy who regard the
multitudes of living beings, both mobile and immobile, as their very self—is never
belied. (43) Itis not at all impossible, O Lord, that all the sins of men should be wiped out
by Your (very) sight, when (it is known that) even an outcaste is freed from (the bondage
of) birth and death by hearing Yourname (only) once. (44) Therefore, O Lord, we now have
(all) the impurities of (our) heart (in the shape of sins and evil Proclivities) wiped off by Your
(very) sight. How could that which was predicted by the divine sage (Narada) Your
(celebrated) devotee, be otherwise? (45) All that is done by the people in this world, O
infinite Lord, is known to You, the Soul of the universe. There is nothing in particular to be
revealed to You, the Supreme Preceptor, just as there is nothing to be shown to the sun by
fire-flies. (46) Hail to You, the almighty God, the Controller of the creation, maintenance
and dissolution of the universe, the purest of the pure, whose true nature cannot easily be
understood by the sensually-minded strivers due to their notion of difference. (47) The
creators of the universe (Brahma and the other lords of creation) are active (only) when
You (the Cosmic Person) are active (inspire them with activity); the senses of perception
are able to perceive their objects (only) when You (their Controller) are disposed to
perceive (the objective world); (and) the terrestrial globe appears on one of Your heads
like a mustard seed. Obeisance be to You, that (celebrated) Lord with a thousand

heads.(48) 7
श्रीगुक उवाच
संस्तुतो भगवानेवमनन्तस्तमभाषत | विद्याधरपति प्रीतश्चित्रकेतुं RSE XR

Sri Suka went on : Duly extolled in this way and (highly) pleased, Lord Ananta spoke (as
follows) to the said Citraketu, the chief of the Vidyadharas, O Pariksit (a scion of Kuru). (49)

4

श्रीभगवानुवाच
यन्नारदाङ्निरोभ्यां ते व्याहतं मेऽनुशासनम्। संसिद्धोऽसि war राजन् विद्यया दर्शानाच्च मे । ५०॥
ae a सर्वभूतानि भूतात्मा भूतभावन: । शब्दब्रह्म परं ब्रह्म ममोभे Mad तनू । ५१।
wre विततमात्मानं लोकं चात्मनि सन्ततम्। उभयं च मया व्याप्तं मयि चैवोभवं कृतम् । ५२।
यथा सुषुप्त: पुरुषो fad पर्यति चात्मनि । आत्मानमेकदेशस्थं मन्यते we उत्थित: 1431
एवं जागरणादीनि जीवस्थानानि चात्मन: | मायामात्राणि विज्ञाय तद्द्रष्टारुं परं स्मरेत् । ५४
येन प्रसुप्त: पुरुष: स्वापं वेदात्मनस्तदा ge च निर्गुणं ब्रह्म तमात्मानमवेहि माम् । ५५॥
Sy स्मरत: पुंस: प्रस्वापप्रतिबोधयो: | अन्वेति व्यतिरिच्येत तज्ञानं wel तत् परम् । ५६॥
यदेतद्बिस्मृतं पुंसो मद्भावं भिन्नमात्मन: । तत: संसार एतस्य देहाद्देहो मृतेर्मृति: iu
* The Lord says in Srimad Bhagavadgita :--
कर्शयन्त: शरीरस्थं भूतग्राममचेत्तस:। मां चैवान्त:शरीरस्थं तान् विद्ध्यासुरनिश्चयान्॥
(XVIL. 6)

"Men who emaciate the elements constituting their body as well as Me, the Supreme Spirit, dwelling in their heart—know
these senseless people as having a demoniac disposition.”
