Dis. 2] SRIMAD BHAGAVATA-MAHATMYA 11
व्योमवाणी तदैवाभून्मा wet खिद्यतामिति । उद्यम: सफलस्तेऽयं भविष्यति न dara: ।३१॥
एतदर्थं तु ved सुरर्षे त्वं amet तत्ते कर्माभिधास्यन्ति wea: साधुभूषणा: 1321
सत्कर्मणि कृते तस्मिन् सनिद्रा वृद्धतानयो: । गमिष्यति क्षणाद्भक्ति: ada: प्रसरिष्यति 133i
इत्याकाशवच: we तत्सर्वैरपि विश्रुतम्। नारदो विस्मयं लेभे नेदं ज्ञातमिति gaia

५ Sita continued : Narada was filled with compassion to hear the appeal of Bhakti, and
began to rouse them, pressing them with his fingers. (25) Taking his mouth near their ears
he shouted clearly as follows :—"O Jana, wake up at once ! 0 Vairagya, wake up |" (26)
Being roused again and again on that occasion by him through the chanting of Vedic and
Upanishadic texts, recitations of the Gita and so on, they rose some-how with (great)
exertion.(27) Full of languor as they were, both began to yawn and could not open their eyes
to see. Their hair had grown white like (the down of ) a heron and their limbs (reduced to a
bare skeleton) looked like pieces of dry wood. (28) The moment he perceived them
emaciated by hunger and inclined to fall asleep again, the sage (Narada) felt worried and
said to himself, "What should be done by me (now)? (29) Oh, how can their sleepiness and
old age, which is (even) more formidable, disappear?" Pondering thus, O Saunaka (a scion
of Bhrgu)! he (Narada) put himself in mind of Sri Krsna (the Protector of cows). (30)
Presently a voice was heard from the heavens saying : "O sage, do not feel dejected. This
effort of yours will prove fruitful no doubt. (31) For this, however, O celestial sage ! perform
you duly a righteous act. Saints who are the holiest of the holy will point out to you that
act.(32) When that noble act is performed, their old age including their sleep will
disappear in amoment and Bhakti will spread all round." (33) The voice from the heavens
to this effect was clearly and perceptibly heard by all. Narada was struck with wonder and
said. "What it means is not understood." (34)

ARG उवाच
अनयाऽऽकाशवाण्यापि गोप्यत्वेन निरूपितम्। किं वा तत्साधनं ard येन कार्य भवेत्तयो: 1341
क्व भविष्यन्ति सन्तस्ते कथं दास्यन्ति साधनम्। मयात्र किं प्रकर्तव्यं यदुक्तं व्योमभाषया ।३६॥
Narada said : The voice from the sky too has spoken in a mysterious way.| wonder what
may be the act which will have to be performed in order that the object of these two may be
accomplished! (35) Where will those saints be (found) and how will they impart the

knowledge of that practice ? What should be done by me at the present moment as enjoined
by the voice from the heavens? (36)

Ud उवाच
तत्र द्वावपि संस्थाप्य निर्गतो नारदो मुनि: । तीर्थं did विनिष्क्रम्य पृच्छन्मार्गे मुनीश्वरान् 13
वृत्तान्त: श्रूयते सर्वै: किंचिन्निश्चित्य area असाध्यं केचन sheaf चापरे ।
मूकीभूतास्तथान्ये तु कियन्तस्तु पलायिता: । ३८।
हाहाकारो dernier विस्मयावह: | वेदवेदान्तघोषैश्च गीतापाटैर्विबोधितम् । ३९1
भक्तिज्ञानविरागाणां नोदतिष्ठत्निकॆ यदा । उपायो नापरोऽस्तीति कर्णे कर्णेऽजपञ्जना: ।४०॥
afm नारदेनापि स्वयं न ज्ञायते तु यत्।तत्कथं wet वक्तुमितरैरिह मानुषै: ives
एवमृषिगणै: पृष्टैर्निर्णीयोक्तं दुरासदम् ।४१२।

Sita went on : Leaving both there, the sage Narada departed (thence) going forth from
