Dis. 71} BOOK TEN 419

ट्जन्र RECEP ERE ER CHE He EE EPRESES ES Ea EES SEES EEHERSE SH SESHE क रे AH आ

help Your cousin, who intends to perform the Rajastya sacrifice, and should also protect
those who seek Your protection. (2) A Rajasuya sacrifice (however) is capable of being
performed, O almighty Lord ! only by one who has conquered all the quarters. | am
therefore driven to the conclusion that both these objects, can be gained by the
overthrow of Jarasandha. (3) Indeed great will be our advantage, O Protector of cows,
if we simply succeed in accomplishing this; and Your restoring the imprisoned kings to
freedom will bring glory to You. (4) Possessing (as he does) the strength of ten thousand
elephants, king Jarasancha is as a matter of fact not very easy to resist even for giants
other than Bhima, who is his equal in strength. (5) He should, however, be vanquished
in a duel and not otherwise; for he has an army consisting of a hundred Aksauhinis. He
is a devotee of the Brahmanas and never spurns the request of Brahmanas. (6)
{Therefore,) let Bhima approach him in the guise of a Brahmana and ask of him the
boon of a single combat. In Your presence he will no doubt succeed in killing him in a
duel. (7) Lord, You are the almighty, formless Time. The creation and destruction of the
universe take place through Your power. Brahma and Sankara are mere instruments (in
carrying out the design). (8) {After the destruction of Jarasandha) the consorts of the
kings {imprisoned by him) would sing in their (respective) homes of Your glorious act of
destroying their common enemy and bringing about the release of their (respective)
husbands {who are dear to them as their own selves), even as the cowherdesses (of
Vraja) sing of Your having delivered them (from the clutches of the demon Sankhactida),
the sages who have taken refuge in You celebrate the rescue of the king of elephants
and of Sita {the Daughter of king Janaka), and we sing of Your having released Your
parents (from Karnsa’s captivity). (9) Thus, O Krsna, the destruction of Jarasandha will
serve many a great purpose. As the merits of the imprisoned kings and the sins of
Jarasandha are going to bear fruit thereby, the performance of the Rajasiya sacrifice
is in a large measure liked by You also. (10)

AYE उवाच
इत्युद्धववचो राजन् सर्वतोभद्रमच्युतम् । देवर्षिर्यदुवृद्धाश्च कृष्णश्च प्रत्यपूजयन्।११।
अथादिशत् प्रयाणाय भगवान् देवकीसुत: । भृत्यान् दारुकजैत्रादीननुज्ञाप्य गुरून् विभु:। १२।
निर्गमय्यावरोधान् tar, ससुतान् सपरिच्छदान् । सङ्कर्षणमनुज्ञाप्य चदुराजं च शत्रुहन्।
सूतोपनीतं स्वरथमारुहद् गरुडध्वजम्। १३॥
at रथद्विपभटसादिनायकै: करालया परिवृत आत्मसेनया।
मृदङ्गभेर्यानकशङ्खगोमुखै: प्रघोषघोषितककुभो निराक्रमत्। १४॥
नूवाजिकाञ्जनशिबिकाभिरच्युतं सहात्मजा: पतिमनु सुव्रता ययु:।
वराम्बराभरणविलेपनस्रज: सुसंवृता नृभिरसिचर्मपाणिभि:। १५॥
नरोष्टृगोमहिषखराश्वतर्यन:करेणुभि: परिजनवारयोषित:।
स्वलक्कता कटकुटिकम्बलाम्बराद्युपस्करा ययुरधियुज्य सर्वत:। ke 1
बृहद्ध्वजपटछत्रचामरैर्वरायुधाभरणकिरीटवर्मभि: ।
दिवाशुंभिस्तुमुलरव बभौ सरवैर्यथार्णव: क्षुभिततिमिङ्घिलोर्मिभि: । १७॥
अथो मुनिर्यदुपतिना सभाजित: प्रणम्य तं ga विदधद् विहायसा।
निशम्य तद्व्यवसितमाह्तार्हणो मुकुन्दसन्दर्शननिर्वृतेन्द्रिय: | १८

Sri Suka went on : Pariksit, the aforesaid counsel of Uddhava was faultless and good
in every respect. The Devarsi, the elderly Yadavas and Sri Krsna too approved of it. (11)
Now, with the approval of elders (Vasudeva and others) the almighty Lord Sri Krsna
