384 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 62

लोत्जा

चित्रलेखोवाच
व्यसनं तेऽपकर्षामि त्रिलोक्यां ale भाव्यते । तमानेष्ये at यस्ते मनोहर्ता तमादिश ।१८॥
इत्युक्त्वा देवगन्धर्वसिद्धचारणपन्नगान् | दैत्यविद्याधरान् यक्षान् मनुजांश्च यथालिखत् ।१९॥
मनुजेषु च सा वृष्णीन् दयूरमानकदुन्दुभिम्। व्यलिखद् रामकृष्णौ च प्रदयुम्नं वीक्ष्य लज्जिता । २०1
अनिरुद्धुं विलिखितं वीक्ष्योषावाङ्मुखी ह्रिया । सोऽसावसाविति प्राह स्मयमाना महीपते 1221

Citralekha said : "I shall bringthe youth who has stolen your heart, ifhe is traced (by you)
in the three worlds (the elite of which are going to be depicted by me), and dispel your agony
(thereby). Point him out." (18) Having said so, she drew faithful sketches of gods,
Gandharvas (heavenly musicians), Siddhas (a class of superhuman beings endowed with
mystic powers), Caranas (celestial bards), Nagas (aclass of superhuman beings—half men
and half serpents), Daityas (demons), Vidyadharas (artistes of gods), Yaksas (a class of
demigods) and human beings. (19) Among men she portrayed the Vrsnis, viz., Sura,
Vasudeva, Balarama and Sri Krsna. Perceiving Pradyumna, Usa blushed. (20) Beholding
Aniruddha portrayed with particular care, Usa cast down her face through shyness, O king,
and smilingly exclaimed: “It is he, itis he !" (21)

चित्रलेखा तमाज्ञाय पौत्रं कृष्णस्य चोगिनी । ययौ विहायसा राजन् द्वारकां कृष्णपालिताम् 1221
सा च तं सुन्दरवरं विलोक्य मुदितानना | दुष्पेक्ष्ये STE पुम्भी TA प्राद्युम्निना समम् । २४॥
परार्घ्यवास-:स्रगान्धधूपदीपासनादिभि: 1 पानभोजनभ्क्ष्यश्च वाक्ये: जुश्रूषयार्चित: । २५॥
गूढ: कन्यापुरे हश्वत्प्रवृद्धस्नेहवा ता । नाहर्गणान् a बुबुधे ऊषयापहतेन्द्विय: 126 |

Concluding him to be Sri Krsna's grandson, Citralekha, who possessed Yogic powers,
journeyed, O king, through the air to Dwaraka protected by Sri Krsna (Himself). (22)
Resorting to her Yogic powers. she bore away Aniruddha (son of Pradyumna), (who had
been) lying asleep there on a beautiful bed, to Sonitapura and showed her friend the object
of her love. (23) With her face lit up with joy to behold the loveliest of the lovely, she enjoyed
life with him in her palace, which could not be easily peeped into by males. (24) Honoured
with exquisite raiment, garlands, sandal-paste, incense, lights. seats etc., drinks, food and
other edibles. as well as with (loving) words and (bodily) service, and remaining concealed
in the maidens’ apartments, with his mind captivated by the said Usa—whose love (for
him)was constantly increasing by leaps and bounds—Aniruddha had no idea of the number
of days (that slipped away). (25-26)

at तथा यदुवीरेण भुज्यमानां हतव्रताम्। हेतुभिर्लक्षयाञ्चक्रुराप्रीतां RSG: 121
भटा आवेदयाञ्चक्रू wie दुहितुर्वयम्। विचेष्टितं लक्षयाम: कन्याया: कुलदूषणम् । २८॥
अनपायिभिरस्माभिर्गुप्तायाश्च गृहे UT कन्याया दूषणं पुम्भिर्दुष्पेक्षाया न विद्महे ।२९।

While she was being thus (secretly) enjoyed by Aniruddha (the hero of Yadu's race) and
