Dis. 87 ] BOOK TEN 497

PERLE स्ना क ह #न गक Nhe # # 9888 in eeKe enn RoE 4८ Ne

त्वदवगमी न वेत्ति भवदुत्थशुभाशुभयोर्गुणविगुणान्वयांस्तर्हि देहभृतां च fie: ।

ase सगुण गीतपरम्परया श्रवणभृतो यतस्त्वमपवर्गगतिर्मनुजै: ।४०।

qaqa wa ते न ययुरन्तमनन्ततया त्वमपि यदन्तराण्डनिचया ननु सावरणा: |

ख इव रजांसि वान्ति वयसा सह यच्छुतयस्त्वयि fe फलन्त्यतन्निरसनेन भवन्निधना: । ४१1

He who has come to know You (in reality) no longer feels the impact of joys and sorrows

that follow from good and evil acts (committed in past lives and) coming in relief by Your will
(prone as You are to requite them according to their merit or demerit); nor does he recognize
in that state the commandments (of the Vedas, which are no longer binding on him inasmuch
as he has risen above them by virtue of his being nolonger identified with his psycho-physical
organism), intended as they are (only) for those identified with their body. (This is but
natural;) for, ushered (into the heart) through the ears (even) by men (who have not realized
Your truth) day after day with the help of teachings handed down from age to age to all, O
Lord with (sixfold) divine properties, You are (eventually) attained by them in the form of final
beatitude. (40) Even Brahma and others (the rulers of the heavenly regions) could not reach
Your limit (farthest end), nor even You, because of Your being limitless—You, in whom,
indeed, driven by time, float together, like particles of dust in the air, multitudes of cosmic
eggs alongwith their (seven) sheaths ( viz., earth and so on, each of which is ten times as
large as the one enclosed by it)! Thatis why we, Srutis, finding our end (goal) in You, become
fruitful in You, (describing You indirectly as we do) by negating everything other than You
(including ourselves). (41)

श्रीभगवानुवाच
इत्येतद् ब्रह्मण: पुत्रा आश्रुत्यात्मानुशासनम् | Baa: सिद्धा ज्ञात्वाऽत्मनो गतिम् ।४२।
इत्यशेषसमाम्नायपुराणोपनिषद्रस: | समुद्धृत: पूर्वजातैर्व्यमयानैर्महात्मभि: । ४३1

त्वं चैतद ब्रह्मदायाद श्रद्धयाऽऽत्मानुशासनम्। धारयंश्चर गां कामं कामानां भर्जनं नॄणाम् । ४४1

The Lord (the divine Sage Narayana) continued : Having heard in this way the
aforesaid exposition regarding the Self (in the shape of the eulogy uttered by the Vedas in
their living form) and realized the (true) nature of the Self, and (thereby) achieved their end
(as it were), Sanaka and others (the celebrated mind-born sons of Brahma, who were already
accomplished of their purpose) now paid their homage to Sanandana (their preceptor for the
time being). (42) In this way was churned out by the exalted souls (Sanaka and others)—who
are the earliest born (among the entire creation) and course through the air (unconcerned
as they are with everything}—the essence of all the Vedas (their earlier portion, consisting
of the Samhitas and their exegesis, the Brahmanas), the Puranas and the Upanisads (the
later portion and the crown of the Vedas). (43) Cherishing with faith, O Narada (son of
Brahma), this exposition relating to the Self—(which is) capable of burning out (all) the
desires of men—perambulate you at will the globe (as well as the other spheres typified by
it). (44)

श्रीरुक उवाच
एवं स ॠषिणाऽऽदिष्टं गृहीत्वा श्रद्धयाऽऽत्मवान्। पूर्ण: श्रुतधरो राजन्नाह वीरव्रतो AP ४५1
Sri Suka went on : Receiving thus with reverence what was imparted by the divine
Seer (Narayana), the sage (Narada)—who had (full) control over his self, who was (fully)
accomplished of his purpose, (nay,) who (ever) bears in mind the teachings of the

scriptures and observes the heroic vow of perpetual celibacy, submitted (to Him), O king!
(as follows):—{(45)
