Dis. 8 } BOOK SEVEN ह 685

श्री कधिकिज्छतितरि के छो डौ ती ङनो डौ ङी रै कच वयै कौढीज्येत्छजयै HEE व्य कोज्यै-तौ-कि री डिच्छज्योङी ATHENA HH OHARA H RE HH HH EH BH

at: सभायामुपविष्टमुत्तमे yd dyad = fay
अलक्षितद्वैरथमत्यमर्षण प्रचण्डवक्तरं न बभाज कश्चन ।३४॥

Shaken by His hair, clouds began to scatter away and the planets were robbed of their
lustre by His (very) glances. Tossed by His breath, the oceans grew turbulent and, frightened
by His roar, the elephants guarding the quarters trumpeted. (32) The firmament was
overcrowded with aerial cars thrown up (from below) by His hair and, sore pressed by His
feet, the earth was shaken from its foundations. Mountains flew as a result of His rapid
movement, while the sky and the quarters were eclipsed by His splendour. (33) Nobody
dared approach the almighty Lord, who had then taken His seat on the excellent royal
throne in the courtand had collected His (consummate) brilliance (in that person), (nay,) who
was (yet) furious, even though no adversary was visible, and wore a most dreadful
countenance.(34)

निशम्य लोकत्रयमस्तकज्वरं तमादिदेत्यं हरिणा हते मृधे ।
प्रहर्षवेगोत्कलितानना मुहु: प्रसूनवर्षैर्ववृषु: Area: 134 |
तदा विमानावलिभिर्नभस्तलें दिदृक्षतां सङ्कुलमास नाकिनाम्।

सुरानका दुन्दुभयोऽथ wt गन्धर्वमुख्या ननृतुर्जगु: fea: 136!
तत्रोपव्रज्य विबुधा ब्रह्मेन्द्रगिरिशादय:। ऋषय: पितर: सिद्धा विद्याधरमहोरगा: 1301

मनव: प्रजानां पतयो गन्धर्वाप्सरचारणा: | यक्षा: किम्पुरुषास्तात वेताला: सिद्धकिन्नरा: । ३८।
a विष्णुपार्षदा: सर्वे सुनन्दकुमुदादय: । qi बद्धाञ्जलिपुटा आसीनं तीव्रतेजसम् ।
ईडिरे नरशार्दूलं नातिदूरचरा: पृथक । ३९1

Hearing that the celebrated Hiranyakasipu (the first and foremost son of Diti), the
headache of (all) the three worlds, had been killed in a combat by Lord Sri Hari, celestial
women, whose faces were blooming with an outburst of joy, sent down showers of flowers
upon Him again and again. (35) At that time the sky was crammed with rows of aerial cars
of heavenly beings eager to have a look (at the Lord). The tabors and drums of the gods were
then sounded; while the foremost of the Gandharvas (celestial musicians) sang and their
wives (the celestial nymphs) danced. (36) Resorting to that place (the court of Hiranyaka$ipu),
gods like Brahma (the creator), Indra (the ruler of the gods) and Lord Siva (who lives on Mount
Kailasa), Rsis (seers), manes, Siddhas (a class of demigods endowed with mystic powers
from their very birth), Vidyadharas (heavenly artistes), mighty Nagas (serpent-demons,
having a human face with a serpent-like lower end), the Manus (progenitors of mankind, each
presiding over a whole Manvantara), Prajapatis (the lords of creation), Gandharvas, Apsaras
and Caranas (heavenly bards), Yaksas (attendants of Kubera, the god of riches), Kimpurusas
(another class of demigods), Vetalas (celestial minstrels) and accomplished Kinnaras (a
class of demigods with a human figure and the head of a horse and celebrated as musicians),
as well as all those attendants of Lord Visnu such as Sunanda and Kumuda severally
hymned Lord Nrsimha (the Man-Lion) of dazzling splendour, seated there, with the hollows
of their palms joined together on the head and remaining at a short distance (from Him), O
dear one ! (37—39)

ब्रह्मोवाच
नतोऽस्म्यनन्ताय दुरन्तशक्तये विचित्रवीर्याय पवित्रकर्मणे ।
fase सर्गस्थितिसंयमान् गुणै: स्वलीलया संदधतेऽव्ययात्मने ।४०॥
Brahma said : । bow down to please the infinite Lord of wonderful prowess and holy

deeds, whose potency is hard to fathom, (nay,) who duly carries on by way of His sport
through the (three) Gunas (Sattva etc.) the creation, preservation and dissolution of the
