Dis. 18 ] BOOK EIGHT 809

SEROVAR HR EARL AAT SLACAAMTKANAA THEN H A eee TRT eee NeEEEhARhheheaaeh

and with the (celebrated) Kaustubha gem suspended from His neck, Sri Hari dispersed the
gloom of the house of Kasyapa (a lord of created beings) by His own radiance. (3) At that
time the quarters brightened up and the lakes and ponds etc., became clear, created beings
felt much delighted, and (all the six) seasons exhibited their (own) characteristics (in the
shape of fruits and flowers of every description). Heaven, earth and the aerial region, the
gods (having the flames of fire for their tongues), the cows and the Brahmanas as well as
mountains were transported with joy.(4)
श्रोणायां- श्रवणद्वादश्यां मुहूर्तेऽभिजिति प्रभु: | सर्वे नक्षत्रताराद्याश्चक्रुस्तजन्म दक्षिणम्। ५ |
द्वादश्यां सवितातिष्ठन्मध्यंदिनगतो नृप । विजया नाम सा प्रोक्ता यस्यां जन्म fae: । ६ ।
शङ्खदुन्दुभयो नेदुर्मृदङ्गपणवानका: | चित्रवादित्रतूर्याणां निर्घोषस्तुमुलोऽभवत् । ७ |
प्रीताश्चाप्सरसोऽनृत्यन्गन्धर्वप्रवरा जगु: । aaa देवा waa: पितरोऽग्नय: । ८ ।
सिद्धविद्याधरगणा: सकिम्पुरुषकिन्नरा: । चारणा यक्षरक्षांसि सुपर्णा भुजगोत्तमा: । ९ ।
गायन्तोऽतिप्रश्रंसन्तो नृत्यन्तो विबुधानुगा: | आदित्या आश्रमपदं कुसुमै: समवाकिरन् । १०
The Lord appeared on the Sravana-Dwadaéi (the twelfth day of the bright half of
Bhadrapada) when the moon happened to be in the mansion called Srona (Sravana) andin
an hour known by the name of Abhijit (which is conducive to victory on all sides); (nay,) all
the lunar mansions and other stars as well as the planets (the sun and so on) rendered His
birth (most) propitious (by their benign influence). (5) The sun happened tobe at the meridian
(the point reached by it at midday), O protector of men ! The twelfth day (of the bright half
of Bhadrapada), on which the learned know the birth of Sri Hari to have taken place is called
by the name of Vijaya-Dwadagi. (6) Conchs and kettledrums (as well as) clay tomtoms,
tabors and double drums sounded. (And) there arose a tumultuous din of various wind-
instruments and other musical instruments. (7) Full of joy, Apsaras danced and the chief of
the Gandharvas sang; while sages and gods, the Manus, the manes and the fire-gods, hosts
of Siddhas and Vidyadharas along with Kimpurusas and Kinnaras, as well as Caranas,
Yaksas and Raksasas, Suparnas (the secretary birds) and the foremost of Nagas (too)
uttered praises. (8-9) (And) attendants of gods covered the hermitage of Aditi includirig the
Surrounding grounds with showers of flowers, singing and dancing and loud in their

praises.(10) ०
गृहीतदेहें निजयोगमायया प्रजापतिश्चाह जयेति विस्मित: ie
यत् तद् वपुर्भाति विभूषणायुधैरव्यक्तचिद् व्यक्तमधारयद्भरि: |
aya wa स वामनो ae: संपञ्यतोर्दिव्यगतिर्यथा नट: ।१२॥

Astonished to see that supreme Person having assumed a personality by His wonderful
creative energy and sprung from her own womb, Aditi experienced (abundant) joy and
the lord of created beings (the sage Kasyapa too) was filled with (great) wonder and
exclaimed: "May You be victorious !“ (11) In that very form which Lord Sri Hari—who is
unembodied consciousness—had assumed and which (only a short while ago) was
obviously resplendent with jewels and weapons, He, like an actor of wonderful movements,
became a short-statured Brahmana boy, (even) while the couple stood gazing. (12)

तं ag वामनं दृष्टा मोदमाना veda: । कर्माणि कारयामासु: पुरस्कृत्य प्रजापतिम् ies

तस्योपनीयमानस्य सावित्रीं सविताब्रवीत् । बृहस्पतिर्ब्रह्मसूत्रं मेखलां कश्यपोऽददात् । १४॥

ददौ कृष्णाजिनं भूमिर्दण्डं सोमो वनस्पति: । कौपीनाच्छादनं माता द्यौर्छत्रं जगत: wa: ।१५॥
[564] B. M. 28—
