=

Dis. 14 ] BOOK SIX 617
HARKER EAAE EAHA HAY CEES HE CECE EH HEEL EL HH ECE LEME HE BOW HH HPT BR PR Ee
मातुस्त्वतितरां पुत्रे स्नेहो मोहसमुद्भव: । कृतद्युते; सपत्नीनां प्रजाकामज्वरोऽभवत् । ३७॥
चित्रकेतोरतिप्रीतिर्यथा दारे प्रजावति । न तथान्येषु सञ्जज्ञे बालं लालयतोऽन्वहम् । ३८।

ता: Wada गर्हयन्त्योऽभ्यसूयया। आनपत्येन दु:खेन राज्ञोऽनादरणेन च ।३९।॥
धिगप्रजां स्रियं पापां पत्युश्चागृहसम्मताम्। सुप्रजाभि: सपत्नीभिर्दासीमिव तिरस्कृताम् xo!
दासीनां को नु सन्ताप: स्वामिन: परिचर्यया i अभीक्ष्णं लब्धमानानां दास्या दासीव दुर्भगा: ।४१।
एवं सन्दह्यमानानां सपत्नया: GUE राज्ञोऽसम्मतवृत्तीनां विट्वेषो बलवानभूत् ।४२।
विद्वेषनष्टमतय: स्रियो दारुणचेतस:। गरं ददु: कुमाराय दुर्मर्षा नृपतिं प्रति set
कृतद्युतिरजानन्ती सपत्नीनामघं महत्। सुप्त एवेति ofa निरीक्ष्य व्यचरद् गृहे ev
we Bet बालमुपधार्य मनीषिणी । पुत्रमानय a भद्रे इति धात्रीमचोदयत् ।४५॥

सा TIA दृष्टा चोत्तारलोचनम्। shame हतास्मीत्यपतद्भुवि ॥४६॥

Now, when the time (of delivery came, a son was duly born, causing supreme delight to
(all) the inhabitants of the Strasena territory, who heard of it. (32) The king, who felt (much)
delighted (at the news), took his bath and, (thus) purified, he adorned himself with
ornaments. Then, getting the Brahmanas to pronounce benedictions (on the babe), he
caused the rite called Jatakarma (the ceremony of touching a new-born babe's tongue thrice
with ghee after appropriate prayers) to be performed (for the purification of the child). (33)
Tothe Brahmanas he gifted gold and silver, clothes and ornaments, and villages, horses and
elephants and sixty million cows. (34) Like a rain-cloud sending down showers according
to the will of the people, the generous king (Citraketu) gratified the desire of other men (as
well) by making gifts calculated to bring riches, glory and longevity to the babe. (35) The
affection of the father, the royal sage (Citraketu), for his son, who had been got after great
hardship, constantly grew from day to day like the love of a pauper for his hard-earned
money. (36) The attachment of the mother to her son, however, grew to an excessive
degree, caused as it was by infatuation; while agony in the shape of longing for a son
appeared in the heart of the co-wives of queen Krtadyuti. (37) Even as Citraketu fondled the
babe everyday, no such type of excessive fondness appeared in his heart for his other wives
as he developed for the one who was blessed with a son. (38) Reproaching themselves
through jealousy, they felt agonized (in their heart) due to the grief caused by issuelessness
and the indifference shown to them by the king (their husband). (39) Fie upon the accursed
woman without a child, (who is) not esteemed at home by her husband and is insulted like
a maid-servant by her co-wives blessed with good children. (40) What agony can be the lot
of maid-servants (who are) constantly honoured because of their service rendered to the
master ? We wretched women (however) are (no better than) the maid-servant of a maid-
servant (worse even than amaid-servant). (41) In this way there sprang up (a feeling of) bitter
hatred in the heart of those queens whose life was neglected by the king and who were fully
burning with jealousy at the fortune of their co-wife in the shape of a son. (42) The cruel-
hearted ladies, who had lost their good sense through deep malice and were full of
resentment towards the king, administered poison to the babe. (43) Queen Krtadyuti, who
had no idea of the grievous misdeed of her co-wives, thought on looking at it that the babe
was asleep, and went aboutin the palace. (44) Perceiving (however) that the babe had been
sleeping too long, the wise queen commanded the nurse who suckled the child in the
following words: "Bring me the babe, O good woman !" (45) When (however) she went near
the babe lying in bed, and found that the pupils of its eyes had turned upwards and thatlife,
the senses and other faculties and the soul (too) had quitted it, she cried "I am finished !"
and dropped on the ground. (46)

[564] B. M, 22—
