514 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 19

। ८ ८ ८ ०७७ RETR Bette ३6 Oe. Be Pod ad Pld had Raed ad nd iad Seka fe Dnt Pat Pi Pi Med dnl ind a ial il nk ins Mins Rs Bhd el nt Min Resting ki i Bi Si i SSA 2M a gl LL

शैलास्तेषां नितम्बप्रभवा नदा नद्यश्च सन्त्यसङ्ख्याता: 1 2G | एतासामपो भारत्य: प्रजा नामभिरेव पुनन्तीनामात्मना

~ १ =-

चोपस्पृशन्ति। १७ । चन्द्रवसा ताम्रपणीं अवटोदा कृतमाला वैहायसी कावेरी वेणी पयस्विनी शर्करावर्ता
`तुङ्गभद्रा कृष्णा वेण्या भीमरथी गोदावरी निर्विन्ध्या पयोष्णी त्तापी Tar सुरसा नर्मदा चर्मण्वती सिन्धुरन्ध:
शोणश्च नदौ महानदी वेदस्मृतिर्ऋषिकुल्या त्रिसामा कौशिकी मन्दाकिनी यमुना सरस्वती दृषद्वती गोमती
सस्थूराधस्त्रतौसप्तबतासफ्याशत्तद्रश्चन्द्रभन्धांमरग्द्र्वृध्रावितस्ताआसकाळावश्वप्तमहानद्य । १८ ॥
अस्मिन्नेव at पुरुषैर्लब्धजन्मभि: शुक्ललोहितकृष्णवर्णेन स्वारब्धेन कर्मणा दिव्यमानुघनारकगतयो
बह्नद्यंआत्मनआंनुंपूव्येणसवाह्यवसर्वेपागृवध्रग्र्यन्तयंथावणाबध्रानफ्फवण्यचापिभवति। १९ । योऽसौ
भगवति सर्वभूतात्मन्यात्म्येऽनिरुक्तेऽनिलबने परमात्मनि वासुदेवेऽनन्यनिमित्तभक्तियोगलक्षणो
नानागतिनिमित्ताविद्याग्रन्थिरन्धनद्वारेण यदा fe महापुरुषपुरुषप्रसङ्घ: | २० |
In this Bharatavarsa too there are a number of rivers and mountains, viz., Malaya,
Mangalaprastha, Mainaka, Trikita, Rsabha, KUtaka, Kollaka, Sahya, Devagiri, Rsyamuka,
‘Srigaila, Venkata, Mahendra, Varidhara, Vindhya, Suktiman, Rksagiri,. Pariyatra, Drona,
Citrakuta, Govardhana, Raivataka, Kakubha, Nila, Gokamukha, Indrakila and Kamagiri, and
other hundreds and thousands of mountains and there are countless big and small rivers
flowing from their sides. (16) The people of Bharatavarsa touch with their body too the water
of these rivers, which purify them by their very names. (17) Candravasa Tamraparni,
Avatoda, Krtamala, Vaihayasi, Kaveri, Veni, Payaswinl, Sarkaravarta, Tungabhadra, Krsna,
Venya, Bhimarathi, Godavari, Nirvindhya, Payosni, Tapi, Reva, Surasa, Narmada Carmanvati
(and) Sindhu, two big rivers—Andha (Brahmaputra) and Sona (Sone)—Mahanadi, Vedasmrii,
Rsikulya, Trisama, Kausiki, Mandakini, Yamuna, Saraswati, Drsadvati, Gomati, Sarayd,
Rodhaswati Saptavati, Susoma, Satadri, Candrabhaga, Marudvrdha, Vitasta, Asikni (and)
Vigwa are (the names of) the principal rivers. (18) It is by men born in this Varsa alone that
manifold states of existence—celestial, human and infernal—are earned for the soul
through actions of a Sattvika, Rajasika and Tamasika character respectively, performed by
themselves; for all forms of existence can be attained by all according to (the quality of) their
actions and fina! beatitude can also be achieved (by them) by discharging (in a disinterested
spirit) the duties prescribed for each Varna or grade of society—final beatitude, which
consists in an incessant flow of motiveless devotion to Lord Vasudeva, the Supreme Spirit,
the Inner Controller of all living beings, who is free from partiality (and prejudice etc.), is
beyond the range of speech and has nothing to rest on. It appears only when (the rare
privilege of) close (loving) association with the servants of Lord Visnu (the Supreme Person)
is had, which (again) is possible only when the knot of ignorance. the occasion for the various
states of (mundane) existence, is cut asunder. (19-20)

Ria wet FU भारताजिरे मुकुन्दसेवौपयिकं wer fe 4:1281
Sie gene: क्रतुभिस्तपोव्रतैर्दानादिभिवाँ द्युजयेन फल्गुना।
न ae नारायणपादषङ्कजस्मृतिर प्रमुष्टातिशयेन्दियोत्सवात्।२२॥
कल्पायुषां स्थानजयात्पुनर्भवात् क्षणायुषां भारतभूजयो वरम्।
