Dis. 3] BOOK SIX 561

.७.७.३.३.७.३..३.३.३.३ १७७ EERE ESHER EERE ADHHEEREEEAARE ELE ANSE ATER HER HHH ३६६३ Ke

‘In this way that Brahmana, who, consequent on his having kept a woman of the
menial class had transgressed all his sacred duties and broken his vows (of fidelity to
his wife and so on) and who had not only fallen (from his Brahmanhood) due to his
reprehensible conduct but was going to be cast to hell (by the servants of Yama), was
at once completely freed (from the noose of Yama) by uttering the Divine Name. (45) For
those seeking liberation there is nothing more efficacious in cutting the root of sin (in the
form of identification with the body) than chanting the Name and glories of Lord Visnu
(whose feet purify those who resort to them). Thanks to the chanting of His names, the
mind does not (ordinarily) get attached to (sinful) actions again, whereas it remains
tainted with Rajas and Tamas (even) after purificatory processes other than this have
been gone through. (46)

य एवं परमं गुह्यमितिहासमघापहम्। ware युक्तो यश्च भक्त्यानुकीर्तयेत् ।४७।
a3 स am ofa नेक्षितो यमकिङ्करै: । यद्यप्यमङ्गलो waf विष्णुलोके महीयते tcl
म्रियमाणो हरेर्नाम गृणन् पुत्रोपचारितम्। अजामिलोऽप्यगाद्धाम किं पुन: sear गृणन् ।४९॥

He who, full of reverence hears this legend, which is a most profound secret (of the
scriptures) and is capable of destroying (all) one's sins, as well as he who repeats it with
devotion (after hearing it) never goes to hell nor dare the servants of Yama look at him.
However accursed (sinful) he may have been, such a mortal is adored (hereafter) in
Vaikuntha (the realm of Lord Visnu). (47-48) Even (a great sinner like) Ajamila, who
uttered, while dying (ina helpless state without reverence) the name of Sri Hari and that
too in its secondary application as denoting his son, ascended to the Lord's (divine)
Abode ! What wonder, then, if one who pronounces it with reverence should attain to His
Abode? (49)

Thus ends the second discourse, forming part of the story of Ajamila,
in Book Six of the great and glorious Bhagavata-Purana,
otherwise Known as the Paramahamsa-Samhita.

SEPT:
CIPI Sieve

अथ तृतीयोऽध्याय:

Discourse Il
A dialogue between Yama (the god of retribution) and his messengers

निशम्य देव: स्वभटोपवर्णितं sere fe तान् प्रति धर्मराज: |
एवं हताज्ञो विहतान्मुरारेर्नैदेशिकैर्यस्य TTS १ I
we देवस्य न meg: कुतश्चनर्षे sage आसीत्।
एतन्मुने वृश्चति लोकसंशयं न fe त्वदन्य इति मे विनिश्चितम्। २ |

The king (Pariksit) said : What did the god Yama (the deity presiding over righteous-
ness), under whose sway all this (animate) creation is and whose authority was thus
