Dis. 22 ] BOOK ELEVEN 619

जजाजा ROTOR मारा ROI IORI COIR शाक 468६ 88 शाल् BOR IO 8क-श-ल899- 69७

mentioned in verse 2, recognizing nine categories only) the eight causal principies* (viz, the
five elements, the mind, the intellect and the ego) and Purusa (the Spirith—these are the nine
categories (the evolutes being included in the causal principles). (24) Thus the fundamental
principles have been reckoned in different ways by the seers. All that reckoning is justified
supported, as it is by reason. What is there unbecoming on the part éf the wise ? (25)

उद्ध्व उवाच
weft: पुरुषश्चोभो यद्यप्यात्मविलक्षणौ | अन्योन्यापाश्रयात् कृष्ण दृश्यते न भिदा तयो: । २६॥
प्रकृतो लक्ष्यते ह्यात्मा प्रकृतिश्च तथाऽऽत्मनि । एवं A पुण्डरीकाक्ष werd dari aes
छेत्तुमर्हसि ada वचोभिर्नयनैपुणै: 1291
त्वत्तो ज्ञानं fe जीवानां प्रमोषस्तेऽत्र हाक्तित: । त्वमेव ह्यात्ममायाया गतिं वेत्थ न चापर: 1201

Uddhava submitted : Although both Praksti (Primordial Matter) and Purusa (the Spirit)
are essentially distinct (one from the other), their diversity is not perceived, O Krsna, because
of their inter-relation. (26) The Spirit is seen in (and through) the body (a product of Matter)
alone and Prakrti (body) too is seen in (as identical with) the Self. Be pleased (therefore), O
lotus-eyed One, to resolve the grave doubt in my mind in this matter by Your clever words
supported with reason, O omniscient Lord t (27) Since enlightenment in this world comes to
the Jivas (embodied souls) through You (alone), and the obscuration of knowledge (too)
follows from Your energy (in the shape of Avidya or Nescience), therefore You alone know
the course of Your own Maya, and none else. (28)

श्रीभगवानुवाच
wef: पुरुषश्चेति विकल्प: पुरुषर्षभ। एष वैकारिक: सर्गो गुणव्यतिकरात्मक: ।२९॥
ममाङ्ग माया गुणमय्यनेकधा विकल्पबुद्धीश्च गुणैर्विधत्ते ।
वैकारिकस्रिविघोऽध्यात्ममेकमथाधिदैवमधिभूतमन्यत् 1301
7 रूपमार्कं aq Wwe faa a स्वत: Gi
आत्मा यदेषामपरो च आद्य: स्वयानुभूत्याखिलसिद्धसिद्धि: |
एवं त्वगादि श्रवणादि चक्षुर्जिह्वादि नासादि च चित्तयुक्तम् । ३१
योऽसौ गुणक्षोभकृतो विकार: प्रधानमूलान्महत: प्रसूत: |
अहं त्रिवृन्मोहविकल्पहेतुर्वैकारिकस्तामस ऐन्दियश्च 1321
आत्मा परिज्ञानमयो विवादो ह्यस्तीति नास्तीति भिदार्थनिष्ठ: ।
व्यर्थोऽपि नैवोपरमेत पुंसां मत्त परावृत्तधियां स्वलोकात् ।३३॥

The glorious Lord replied : Prakrti (the body) and Purusa (the soul)—there is radical
difference between the two, O jewel among men! This psycho-physical organism (which is
a product of Prakrti) undergoes numerous changes (in the course of its existence) inasmuch
as it owes its existence to a disturbance in the equilibrium of the three Gunas (while the soul
is absolutely changeless). (29) My Maya (enchanting potency), O loved one, consisting as
it does of the three Gunas, creates by means of those (very) Gunas differences as well as
the manifold notions difference. (Though limitless in variety) this changeable universe is
(broadly speaking) threefold (in character); one (such) variety is Adhyatma, the next (in
order) is Adhidaiva and the other is Adhibhuta. (30) The sense of sight (for example) falls
under the category of Adhyatma; colour (its object) is Adhibhuta and the solar element

* Ct Bhagavadaita VII, 4-—
भूमिगपोऽनलॊ वायु: खं मनो afta च। अहंकार इतीयं मं भिन्ना प्रकृतिरष्टधा॥
