Dis. 15] BOOK NINE 59

hbk hare w ene eee ESP eee eee ee eee ease २ न चेन्निनननजननन२ २२०२ २ ००२२२२ २२२२ १२२२ २ २२२१

wa विज्ञाय मुनि: प्राह पत्नीं कष्टमकारषी: । घोरो दण्डधर: पुत्रो भ्राता ते ब्रह्मवित्तम: 1201
प्रसादित: सत्यवत्या aa भूदिति भार्शव: । अथ aff waa, पोत्रो जमदग्निस्ततोऽभवत् । ११॥
सा चाभूत् सुमहापुण्या कौशिकी लोकपाव्रनी । रेणो: सुतां रेणुकां वै जमदग्निरुवाह याम् । १२॥
तस्याँ वै भार्गवक्रषे: ga वसुमदादय:। यवीयाङ्मज्ञ wat राम इत्यभिविश्रुत: 1१३॥
यमाहुर्वासुदेवांश् हैहयानां कुलान्तकम्। त्रि:सप्तकृत्वो य gat चक्रे नि:क्षत्रियां महीम् । १४॥
Bow wt भारमब्रह्मण्यमनीनशत्।रजस्तमोवृतमहन् फल्गुन्यपि कृतेंऽहसि ।१५॥
ABrahmana, the sage Reika, asked in marriage Gadhi's daughter, Satyavati. Considering
him to be an unworthy match, Gadhi spoke to Reika (a scion of the sage Bhrgu, as
follows):— (5) “Let a thousand horses, white as the moon, (each) having one black ear, be
given as the price of the girl; (for) we belong to the race of Kusika (renowned for our noble
pedigree).” (6) Thus spoken to and having come to know his mind, the sage sought the
presence of Varuna (the god of water) and, having brought and delivered the horses of the
aforesaid description, married that lovely princess. (7) Entreated by his wife (Satyavati) as
well as by his mother-in-law, each of whom was desirous of (having) a son, he prepared a
Caru (an oblation of rice, barley and pulse boiled with butter and milk for presentation to the
gods), uttering both kinds of Mantras (those invoking the birth of a Brahmana for his wife
and that of a Ksatriya for his mother-in-law), and went out to bathe. (8) Meanwhile, being
solicited by her aforesaid mother, who (naturally) thought the Caru prepared forher daughter
as superior (because of the sage’s affection for her), Satyavati (the sage’s wife) gave the
Caru meant for herself to her mother and herself ate that intended for her mother. (9) The
sage having understood this (exchange of Caru between his wife and mother-in-law) politely
said to his wife, "You have committed a grave blunder. Your son will be a cruel chastiser (of
foes); (while) yourbrother will be one foremost among the knowers of Brahma.” (10) Implored
by Satyavait in the words "Let this not be", the sage Rika (a scion of the sage Bhrgu) said,
"If so, then your grandson will be such. Accordingly Jamadagni was born (of Satyavati). (11)
And Satyavati became transformed into the most sacred river Kausiki (Kosi), capable of
sanctifying the (whole) world. Indeed, of the sage Jamadagni were born through Renuka, the
daughter of Renu—whom the aforesaid sage had duly married—(a number of) sons,
Vasuman and others. The youngest of these became widely celebrated under the name of
Rama (Paragurama), whom the leamed speak of as a part manifestation of Lord Vasudeva
(Visnu) and the destroyer of the race of the Haihayas, (nay) who divested this earth of the
Ksatriya race thrice seven (twenty-one) times and struck and exterminated the wicked
Ksatriyas, that had turned hostile to the Brahmanas and constituted a (veritable) burden on
the earth—enveloped (overcome) as they were by the (element of) Rajas (passion) and
Tamas (ignorance)—even though they committed the slightest offence. (12—15)

उ

fe aa भगव्रतो राजन्यैरजितात्पभि: । कृतं येन कुलं नष्टं क्षत्रियाणामभीक्ष्णश: 1241
The king (Pariksit) submitted ; What was that offence which was committed against
the glorious sage (Paragurama) by Ksatrlyas of uncontrolled mind, for which (the entire) race
of the Kgatriyas was wiped out (by him) time and again ? (16)

AYE उवाच
हैहयानामधिपतिरर्जुन: क्षत्रियर्षभ: । दत्तं नारायणस्यांशमाराध्य परिकर्मभि: ।१७॥
बाहून् owed लेभे दुर्धर्षत्वमरातिषु । अव्याहतेन्द्रयौज:श्रीतेजोवीर्ययक्चोबलम् ।१८॥

Stewie गुणा यत्राणिमाद्य: । चचाराव्याहतगतिर्लोकेषु पवनो यथा ।१९॥
