३24 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA Dis. 51

SCREW STW i SPR Rr ae Se OPT PEE BE SR ER REI IO i re tae शाजजा ककक

themselves. (56) Sri Hari Himself having come down to the earth (in the form of Sri Krsna),
O protector of men, others (such as the Siddhas too) returned (to Him) in toto whatever
lordship had been granted (in their favour) by the Lord for the (successful) execution of their
charge. (57) Transferring all the people (of Mathura) to that retreat by dint of Yoga (His
supernatural power), and having duly conferred with Balarama, who was looking after (the
rest of) the people (at Mathura), Sri Krsna, the Dispeller of the agony of His devotees, issued
out of the city gate, wearing a garland of lotuses and unarmed. (58)

Thus ends the fiftieth discourse entitled "The Lord ensconces Himself
in a fortress", in the latter half of Book Ten of the great
and glorious Bhagavata-Purana, otherwise
known as the Paramaharhsa-Samhita.

—
Peete es

अथैकपञ्चाशत्तमोऽध्याय:

Discourse LI

(Kalayavana gets burnt and) King Mucukunda glorifies the Lord
श्रीगुक उवाच

तं बिलोक्य विनिष्क्रान्तमुज्जिहानमिवोडुपम्। दर्शनीवतमं rani पीतकौशेयवाससम् । १ ।

श्रीवत्सवक्षसं भ्राजल्फौस्तुध्रापुक्कारम्।पृथुदीर्घचतुर्वाहु मनवकञ्जारुणेक्षणम् । २ ।

नित्यप्रमुदितं श्रीमत्सुकपोलं दुचिस्मितम्।मुखारविन्दं बिभ्राणं स्फुरन्मकरकुण्डलम् । ३ ।

वासुदेवो ह्ययमिति पुमाञ्छीवत्सलाञ्छन: । चतुर्भुजोऽरविन्दाक्षो वनमाल्यतिसुन्दर: । ४ ।

लक्षणैर्नारदप्रोक्तैर्नान्यो भवितुमर्हति | निरायुधश्चलन् पद्भ्यां योत्स्येऽनेन निरायुध: । ५ ।

gia निश्चित्य यवन: प्राद्रवन्तं पराङ्मुखम्। अन्वधावज्जिघृक्षुस्तं दुरापमपि योगिनाम्। ६ ।

हस्तप्राप्तमिवात्मानं हरिणा स पदे पदे।नीतो alam दूरं यवनेज्ञोऽद्रिकन्दरम्। ७ ।

पल।यमंयदुटौजातस्यतवनोचित्तम्।इत्तिश्लिपत्रमुगतोनैनंप्रापाहत्ताशुभ:।८।

एवं क्षिप्तोऽपि भगवान् प्राविशद् गिरिकन्दरम्। dist प्रविष्टस्तत्रान्यं wart ददूशे नरम् । ९ 1

नन्वसौदूरगानीयज्ञेतेपामिहसाध्रुबत्।इतिफ्त्वाव्यृ,तंमूढस्तंपदासपताडक्तू।श्॰।

स उत्थाय fat qa: शनैरुन्मील्य लोचने। दिशो fete, of तमद्राक्षीदवस्थितम् ee

. स ware ese दृष्टिपातेन भारत। देहजेनामिना दग्धो भस्मसादभवत् क्षणात् । १२।
SriSuka began again : The Yavana (Kalayavana) beheld Sri Krsna fully emerged (from
the city gate) like the rising moon—most charming to look at, dark brown (of hue), clad in
yellow silk, with a white curl of hair (known by the name of Srivatsa) on His bosom and His
neck adored with the brilliant Kaustubha gem, endowed with four massive and long arms
and eyes ruddy as a fresh-blown lotus, and wearing a lotus-like face, ever full of excessive
joy, with beautiful and splendid cheeks anda bright smile and adorned with brilliant alligator-
shaped ear-rings. (i—3) Concluding from the characteristics pointed out by Narada that this

most handsome man with four arms and lotus-like eyes and distinguished with the mark of
Srivatsa and adomed with a garland of sylvan flowers must be Sri Krsna (son of Vasudeva)
