Dis. 44] BOOK TEN 289

त्न्दिन्र SEER TRE NET TE न न a RR HAR THAT HT

वसुदेवस्तु दुर्मेधा हन्यतामाश्वसत्तम: । उग्रसेन- पिता चापि सानुग: परपक्षग: ।३३॥
wa विकत्थमाने वै कंसे प्रकुपितोऽव्यय: । लघिम्नोत्पत्य तरसा मञ्चमुत्तुङ्वमारुहत् । ३४॥
तमाविजान्तमालोक्य FGA आसनात्। मनस्वी सहसोत्थाय जगृहे सोऽसिचर्मणी ।३५॥
4 want fe ङ्येनं यथा दक्षिणसव्यमम्बरे ।
समग्रहीद् दुर्विषहोत्रतजा यथोरगं TA: प्रसह्य । ३६॥
- प्रगृह्य क्ताषु` न ase निपात्य wa war |
तस्योपरिष्टात् wane: wie faa आत्मतन्त्र: 1391
हाहेति शब्द: सुमहांस्तदाभूदुदीरित: सर्वजनैर्नरेन्द्र ।३८॥
a नित्यदोड्टिम्नधिया तमीश्वरं पिबन् वदन् वा विचरन् स्वपञ्छ्वसन्।
ददर्श चक्रायुधमग्रतो यतस्तदेव स्वपं दुरवापमाप । ३९1
With the exception of Karhsa all the people (present there) exceedingly rejoiced over the
achievement of Balarama and Sri Krsna. And pious men, including the foremost of the
Brahmanas, exclaimed, “Well done ! bravo !!" (30) The chief of the wrestlers having been
struck down and the rest having fled away, Karhsa (the ruler of the Bhojas) stopped (the
flourish of) his trumpets and, so the tradition goes, uttered the following injunctions:—(31)
"Drive out of the city the two ill-behaved sons of Vasudeva; confiscate the wealth of the
Gopas and put in bonds the wicked Nanda. (32) On the other hand, let Vasudeva of evil
mind, the vilest of ail, be made short work of at once and so also Ugrasena, my father, who
has sided with my enemy, alongwith his followers." (33) While Karnsa was bragging thus,
Sri Krsna (the unwearied Lord) flew into a rage and, springing with agility, speedily
ascended the elevated dais (which Karnsa was occupying). (34) Seeing Sri Krsna
approaching as his very death, the heroic Karnsa rose at once from his seat and snatched
up his sword and shield. (35) Sri Krsna (who was possessed of formidable and terribie
energy) quickly caught hold with a firm hand of Karnsa—who was moving right and left as
a hawk in the air, sword in hand—(even) as Garuda (son of KaSyapa) would forcibly seize
a serpent. (36) Grasping him tightly by the hair, his diadem slipping off (even in the course
of his being caught), and hurling him from the lofty dais to (the floor of) the arena, Lord Sri
Krsna (who was no other than Lord Visnu with a lotus sprung from His navel), the Support
of the universe, depending on none other than Himself, jumped down in person upon
him.(37) (Nay,) He dragged him hard, though fully dead, along the ground, the world
witnessing it, (even) as a lion would drag an elephant. Very loud cries of "Alas ! Welladay !"
uttered by all the people, O ruler of men, then arose (and rent the air). (38) Since with a
mind full of dismay he ever saw (before his mental eyes) that very Lord armed witha discus
while drinking or speaking, walking to and fro or lying asleep, nay, even while breathing,
he attained (after death) that very form (so) difficult to attain. (39)

तस्यानुजा भ्रातरोऽष्टौ कङ्कन्यग्रोधकादय: । अभ्यधावन्नभिक्रुद्धा भ्रातुर्निर्वेशकारिण: ।४०॥
तथातिरभसांस्तांस्तु संयत्तान् रोहिणीसुंत: । अहन् परिघमुद्यम्य पशूनिव मृगाधिप: se)
aut feet महाराज सुहृन्मरणदु:खिता: aright: ङीर्षाण्यश्रुविलोचना: rg
शयानान् वीरशय्यायां पतीनालिङ्ग्य sect: । विलेपु: सुस्वरं नार्यो विसृजन्त्यो मुहु: Ts: ।४४॥
हा नाथ fa धर्मज्ञ करुणानाथवत्सल । त्वबा हतेन निहता aa ते सगृहप्रजा: sh!
