Dis. 17] ~ “BOOKONE . 69

BRR RR RE RRR BRR Oe BY ROR WE REM We A BC RE REN A He RT BE RRR ERR RT RR RR RR RE RRR RR RE RRR ROR RT RR RE a RR RRR HR We Re Rr He a BY ae ॥
ee ee eee Ee Le ee eee ee

exclusively devoted to the Lord, Brahma and the other gods practised austere penance
for a long time in order to secure a kind look from Sri (the goddess of prosperity). Even
that Sri seeks with excessive fondness the lovely shade of His feet, leaving Her home
in the bed of lotuses. (32) Exquisitely adorned by the glorious feet of the same divine
Lord, that bore the marks of a lotus, thunderbolt, goad and flag, and deriving great
splendour through them, | once outshone all the three worlds; and when that good luck
ceased, He forsook me, proud as | was (of my great good fortune). (33) Absolutely
independent as He is, He assumed a charming personality in the race of Yadu in order
to make you whole (with all your feet restored) as a part of His own Being* by His own
might, finding you grieved at the loss of your two feet. Nay, He removed my oppressive
burden in the shape of a hundred Aksauhinis of kings who belonged to the demon race
in their previous incarnation. (34) What woman could bear separation from that Supreme ~
Person, who stole away by His endearing looks, bright smiles and sweet words the
patience as well as the pride of loving and proud ladies (like Satyabhama and others),
and adorned by whose footprints । felt a thrill of joy?” (35) As mother Earth and Dharma
(the god of virtue) were thus talking, the royal sage Pariksit arrived at the bank of the
Saraswati where it flows towards the east. (36)

Thus ends the sixteenth discourse entitled "The Dialogue between goddess Earth and
Dharma", in Book One of the great and glorious Bhagavata-Purana,
otherwise known as the Paramahamsa-Samhita.

PII Si ees

अथ सप्तदशोऽध्याय:

Discourse XVII
King Pariksit subdues Kali

सूत उवाच
तत्र OT राजा हन्यमानमनाथवत्।दण्डहस्तं च वृषलं SSN नृपलाञ्छनम् । १ |
qt मृणालधवलं मेहन्तमिव बिभ्यतम्।वेपमानं पदॆकेन सीदन्तं शूद्रताडितम् । २ ।
गां च धर्मदुघां dat yet शूद्रपदाहताम्। विवत्सां साश्रुवदनां ami यवसमिच्छतीम् । ३ |
ues रथमारूढ: कार्तस्वरपरिच्छदम्।मेघगम्भीरया वाचा समारोपितकार्मुक: । ४ ।
कस्त्वं मच्छरणे लोके बलाद्धंस्यबलान् बली । नरदेवोऽसि वेषेण नटवत्कर्मणाद्विज: । ५ |
कस्त्वं कृष्णे गते दूरं सह Maat! Westar रहसि प्रहरन् वधमर्हसि । ६ |

* The term 'Bhaga’ has been defined in our scriptures as below ;-~-

ऐश्वर्यस्य समग्रस्य धर्मस्य यशस: श्रिय:। ज्ञानवैराग्ययोश्चैव षण्णां भग इतीरणा ॥

“The word ‘Bhaga' denotes power, virtue, fame, affluence, wisdom and dispassion, each in its fullest measure."

Sri Krsna, who has been referred to earlier as Bhagavan Himself (कृष्णस्तु भगवान् स्ववम्) naturally possessed all these six
atinbutes i in their entirety, Dharma (virtue) as part of these six attributes thus existed In Him complete in all its limbs, although

n the Dwapara age, when the Lord appeared on earth, it had lost two of its limbs. This is what mother Earth seeks to convey
n the above lines.

