Dis. 24] BOOK TEN 209

Pe ey ree rr oe ee VEE i ccc ce Oe ee

(for it). Indeed no undertaking, in this world, of pious souls—who look upon all as their own
self, in whose eyes none is their own or alien and who have no friend, neutral or enemy—
is secret. (Of course, where this is not the case) a neutral (too) ought to be shunned like an
enemy, whereas a friend has been declared to be as good as one’s own self (and hence
nothing should be kept secret from him). (4-5) People perform-actions either deliberately
(after weighing their consequences) or without deliberation. But success does not attend the
actions of a thoughtless man as it crowns those of a thoughtful person. (6) Of such actions,
then, has this expedient in the form of ritual been considered by you ? Or, does it follow the
course of the world ? (Pray,) explain this fully to me, inquisitive as | am.” (7)

नन्द उवाच
पर्जन्यो भगवानिन्द्रो मेघास्तस्यात्ममूर्तय: । तेऽभिवर्षन्ति भूतानां प्रीणनं जीवनं पय: । ८ ।
तं तात वयमन्ये च वार्मुचां पतिमीश्वरम्। द्रव्यैस्तद्रेससा सिद्धैर्यजन्ते क्रतुभिर्नरा: । ९ |
तच्छेषेणोपजीवन्ति त्रिवर्गफलहेतवे । पुंसां पुरुषकाराणां पर्जन्य: फलभावन: 1201

य एवं विसृजेद् ad पारम्पर्यागतं नर: । कामाल्लोभाद्भयाद्द्वेषात्स वै नाप्नोति छोभनम् । ११॥

Nanda replied : The all-powerful Indra is the god of rain, the clouds being his (So many)
manifestations dear as his own self. They pour forth water, which is the delight and life of
living beings. (8) We and other men, O darling, worship the aforesaid almighty ruler of the
clouds through sacrificial performances conducted by means of substances produced with
the water discharged by him, and subsist on the remains of such sacrifices for the attainment
of the threefold reward in the shape of religious merit, enjoyment and worldly possessions.
(In this way) it is Indra who yields the fruit (in the shape of a bumper crop) of men’s efforts
(in the form of agriculture). (9-10) The man who relinquishes a religious practice that has
come down thus through successive generations from love of enjoyment, greed, fear (of
opposition) or prejudice. surely does not achieve good results. (11)

वचो feng नन्दस्य तथान्येषां व्रजौकसाम्।इन्द्राय मन्युं aay, पितरं प्राहं Shaves: 1१२॥
Sri Suka continued : Hearing the reply of Nanda and the other inhabitants of Vraja, Lord

Sri Krsna (the Ruler even of Brahma and Siva) addressed His father (as follows) in order to
rouse the anger of Indra (and thereby crush his pride). (12)

श्रीभगवानुवाच
कर्मणा जायते we: कर्मणैव विलीयते । qe दु:खं भयं क्षेमं कर्मणैवाभिपद्यते । १३।
अस्ति चेदीश्वर: कश्चित् फलरूप्यन्यकर्मणाम् watt भजते सोऽपि न ह्यकर्तु: syle a ex
किमिन्द्रेणेह भूतानां स्वस्वकर्मानुवर्तिनाम्। अनीहोनान्यथा कर्तुं स्वभावविहितं नॄणाम् । १५॥
स्वभावतन्त्रो हि जन: स्वभावमनुवर्तते। स्वभावस्थमिदं ws सदेवासुरमानुषम् ।१६॥
देहानुच्चावचाञ्जन्तु प्राप्योत्सृजति कर्मणा agin: कर्मैव गुरुरीश्वर: ।१७॥
तस्मात् सम्पूजयेत् SH स्वभावस्थ: स्वकर्मकृत् । अञ्जसा येन ada तदेवास्य हि दैवतम् ।१८।
आजीव्यैकतरं owe यस्त्वन्यमुपजीवति । न dene fed att जारं नार्यसती यथा 1१९1
ada ब्रह्मणा fat राजन्यो रक्षया भुव: । वैर्यस्तु वार्तया sides द्विजसेवया । २०।
कृषिवाणिज्यगोरक्षा कुसीदं तुर्यमुच्यते। वार्तां चतुर्विधा तत्र वयं गोवृत्तयोऽनिशाम् ize)
