Dis. 46] BOOK TEN 299

Sree (tee ee ees eee hee जन जन जनन्र २०२२ २२ २२२२ २२२ २२२ २२ २२२ २२२ hh th

excessive longing and overwhelmed with a flood of love. (27) Hearing of her Son's exploits
being recounted (as aforesaid), YaSoda too shed tears (of love), her breasts overflowing with
(maternal) affection. (28) Perceiving such supreme love of Nanda and Yasoda for Lord Sri
Krsna Uddhava joyfully spoke to Nanda (as follows). (29)
उद्धव उवाच ।
gat ङ्लाघ्यतमौ qo देहिनामिह मानद।नारायणेऽखिलगुरौ यत्कृता मतिरीदृरी । ३०1
wt हि विश्वस्य च बीजयोनी wi मुकुन्द: ges प्रधानम्।
अन्वीय wg बविलक्षणस्य ज्ञानस्य sea इमौ पुराणौ । ३१1
चस्मिञ्जन: प्राणवियोगकाले क्षणं समावेश्य मनो विदुद्धम्।
féa कर्माशयमाशु याति परां गति ब्रह्ममयोऽर्कवर्ण: ।३२॥
तस्मिन् भवन्तावखिलात्महेतौ नारायणे कारणमर्त्यमूर्तौ ।
भावं विधत्तां नितरां महात्मन् किं वावशिष्टं gaa: सुकृत्यम् ।३३॥
आगमिष्यत्यदीर्घेण कालेन व्रजमच्युत: | प्रियं विधास्यते पित्रोर्भगवान् सात्वतां पति: । ३४॥
हत्वा कंसं weet प्रतीपं सर्वसात्वताम्।यदाहं व: समागत्य HOT: सत्यं करोति तत् । ३५1
मा खिद्यतं महाभागौ द्रक्ष्यथ: कृष्णमन्तिके are स भूतानामास्ते ज्योतिरिवैधसि । ३६1
न wena fra: कश्चिन्नाप्रियो वास्त्यमानिन: । नोत्तमो नाधमो नापि समानस्यासमोऽपि वा 1३७1
न माता न पिता तस्य न भार्या न सुतादय: । नात्मीयो न परश्चापि न देहो जन्म एव च ।३८॥
न चास्य कर्म वा लोके सदसन्मिश्रयोनिषु । क्रीडार्थ: सोऽपि साधूनां परित्राणाय Hew ।३९1
ad wen sf भजते निर्गुणो गुणान्। क्रीडन्नतीतोऽत्र ah: सृजत्यवति हन्त्यज: ॥४०॥
यथा भ्रमरिकादृष्ट्या भ्राम्यतीव महीयते । चित्ते कर्तरि caren कर्तेवाहंधिया स्मृत: sel
चुवयोरेव नैवायमात्मजो भगवान् हरि: । सर्वेषामात्मजो ह्यात्मा पिता माता स ईश्चर: ।४२।
तरां न at a एवं सर्वं परमार्थभूत: ।४३॥

Uddhava said : Indeed you two (Yasoda and Nanda) are the most praiseworthy of (all)
embodied beings here (on this earth), O bestower of honour (on us all, of being the servants
of the Lord, who has been made available to us only through you), in that such (unique) love
has been conceived by you for Sri Krsna (who is no other than Lord Narayana), the Father
and Controller ofall. (30) Indeed Balarama and Sri Krsna (the Bestower of Liberation)—They
are (both) the material and the efficient cause of the universe; They are also the Purusa
(individual soul) and Pradhana (primordial Matter). (Nay,) entering into the (various) living
organisms They control the various types of consciousness (in the form of the individual soul
conditioned by those organisms), eternal (beginningless) as They are. (31) Focussing (even)
one’s impure mind on Sri Krsna (merely) for an instant at the time of death one speedily
attains the supreme goal, burning the store of Karma and becoming one with Brahma (the
Absolute) and attaining a form consisting of Sattva unmixed with Rajas and Tamas. (32) You
cherish (such) great devotion to that Supreme Spirit, Lord Narayana, the Soulas wellas the
Source of all, who has assumed a human semblance for some purpose. What meritorious
act remains to be done by you two (under the circumstances)? (33) At no distant date will

the divine Sri Krsna (the immortal Lord), the Protector of the Yadus, come (back) to Vraja and
bring delight to (you) His parents. (34) Sri Krsna will make good what He told you* on coming

न्न्

7 Vide verse 23 of Discourse XLV above.
