Dis. 31] BOOK ELEVEN 665

जन TAREE A TERA AAH HT ARARAH CHEER RANE ONE HAH EK KARE ७ ००9७ १52 9४ ##.म## ०७ ००० # 29 न न % 8

aay: पुष्पवर्षाणि विमानावलिभिर्नभ;।कुर्वत्त;सङ्कुक्तंराजन्भक्तापरफ्यायुता: । ४ ।
भगवान् पितामहं वीक्ष्य विभूतीरात्मनो fay: संयोज्यात्मनि चात्पानं पद्मनेत्रे न्यमीलयत् । ५ ।
लोकाभिरामां स्वतनुं धारणाध्यानमङ्गलम्। योगधारणयाऽऽग्नेय्यादग्ध्वा धामाविदात् स्वकम् । ६ ।
दिवि दुन्दुभयो नेदु: पेतु: सुमनसश्च aM! सत्यं धर्मो धृतिर्भूमे: कीर्ति: श्रीश्चानु तं ययु: । ७ ।
देवादयो ब्रह्ममुख्या न विशन्तं स्वधामनि । अविज्ञातगतिं कृष्णं ददूशुश्चातिविस्मिता: । ८ ।
सौदामन्या यथाऽऽकादो aren हित्वाभ्रमण्डलम् । गतिर्न लक्ष्यते म्त्यैस्तथा कृष्णस्य दैवतै: । ९ ।
ब्रह्मरुद्रादयस्ते तु a योगगतिं हरे: । विस्मितास्तां ste: स्वं स्वं लोकं ययुस्तदा । १०
SriSuka began again: Now (after the departure of Daruka) there appearedon the scene
Brahma (the creator) as weil as Lord Siva (the Source of the universe) alongwith His (divine)
Spouse (Goddess Parvati), (other) gods led by the great Indra (the ruler of the gods), sages
accompanied by the lords of creation, manes, Siddhas and Gandharvas, Vidyadharas and
great Nagas, Caranas, Yaksas and Raksasas, Kinnaras and Apsaras and Brahmanas (like
Maitreya or birds belonging to the realm of Garuda), full of great longing andkeen to witness
the Lord's Ascent (to His realm), and celebrating and narrating the exploits as well as the
Story of the advent of Lord Sri Krsna (a scion of Surasena). (1—3) Full of highest
devotion, they rained showers of flowers, crowding the heavens with their rows of aerial
cars, O Pariksit ! (4) Casting His glance on Brahma (the grandfather or forbear of the entire
creation, the sages Marici and others being its fathers) as well as on the (other) gods (His
own glorious manifestations) and fixing His mind on His own (divine) essence, the all-
pervading Lord closed His lotus-eyes. (5) Not consuming, through concentration of mind on
the element of fire, His own (divine) body, which sustains the (entire) universe and is the all-
blissful object of meditation and concentration, He (bodily) ascended to His own (divine)
realm. (6) Kettledrums sounded in heaven and flowers rained from the sky. Truth, piety,
fortitude, glory and prosperity departed from the earth alongwith Him. (7) Gods and others,
Brahma being the foremost of them, did not behold Sri Krsna, whose ways are unknown (to
all), entering His own (divine) reaim; while some of them (who were more fortunate than the
rest) did perceive Him and felt much astonished. (8) The movements of Sri Krsna cannot be
perceived by the gods any more than those of lightning disappearing into the sky leaving a,
mass of clouds. (9) Amazed to witness the aforesaid disappearance of Sri Hari by dint of His
(wonderful) Yogic power, and extolling it, the said gods, Brahma, Siva and others, for their
part, presently withdrew each to his own realm. (10)

राजन् परस्य तनुभृज्जननाप्ययेहा मायाविडम्बनमवेहि यथा नटस्य ।
सृष्टाऽऽत्मनेदमनुविर्य विहृत्य art dea चात्पमहिमोपरत: स आस्ते । ११॥
nea यो गुरुसुतं यमलोकनीतं ai चानयच्छरणद: परमास्त्रदग्धम् ।
जिग्येऽन्तकान्तकमपीदशमसावनीश: किं स्वावने स्वरनयन्मृगयुं सदेहम् । १२॥
तथाप्यरोषस्थितिसम्भवाप्ययेष्वनन्यहेतुर्यदशेषशक्तिधृक ।
नैच्छत् प्रणेतुं aga झेषितं ada . किं स्वस्थगतिं प्रदर्शयन् । १३

य एतां प्रातरुत्थाय कृष्णस्य पदवीं पराम्। प्रयत: Shae wae तामेवाप्नोत्यनुत्तमाम् । १४॥

Know the advent, sports and disappearance of the Supreme Lord among embodied
(human) beings, O king, to be a (mere) acting by dint of His Maya (deluding potency) as that
of adramatic performer. Havingcreated this universe by Himself (unaided by others andwith
no matenal other than His own volition) and then entered it (as its Inner Controller), sported
(in it) and withdrawn it (into Himself) at the end (at the time of final dissolution) and retired

{565) B.M. Part Il~50

