168 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 8

Sree & kok we Perey Horn चि rt es SE SRE AH GEL ERE EEE HERE SEH EH HR GE HH He RETR BR

Reasoning thus, he dived into the water through the pores in the stalk of that lotus. But
much as he strove to find out the base of the lotus stalk, Brahma (the unborn) failed to get at
it then, even though he approached it. (19) While he thus looked about for his own source in
that impenetrable darkness, O Vidura, there elapsed a very long time—time, which is nothing
but the Lord's discus (Sudarsana), that inspires terror in the heart of living creatures and cuts
short the allotted span of their life (every moment). (20) At last he gave up the search without
achieving the object of his desire; and, returning to his resting-place, the deity gradually
controlled his breath, withdrew his mind from everything else and sat down in Samadhi (deep
meditation on the Lord). (21) When he had unremittingly practised Yoga for a hundred years
(the full life-span of a healthy man) the light of wisdom dawned on him and he saw revealed
in his heart of its own accord that which he had failed to perceive before. (22) On the waters
that had submerged the whole universe during the period of universal destruction Brahma
beheld the one Supreme Person (Lord Narayana) lying on the huge body of Sesa, which was
white as a lotus fibre, and served as a bed for Him. The (extensive) hoods of the serpent-god,
numbering ten thousand, served as so many umbrellas for the Lord and the gems set on his
(myriad) crowns dispelled by their brilliance the darkness all round. (23) (By the effulgence of
His swarthy person) He obscured the splendour of a mountain of emerald; (by His yellow loin-
cloth) He outshone the bright evening clouds hanging round the sides of such a mountain; (by
the brilliant crown adorning His head) He stole the charm of its many peaks of gold; (by His
wreath of sylvan flowers) He eclipsed the beauty of the gems, rills, shining herbs and flowers
adorning the breast of such a mountain; (by His shapely arms) He excelled the bamboos
looking like the arms of that mountain and (by His beautiful legs) He threw into the background
the trees constituting its legs. (24) His person, which contained all the three worlds, was its own
compeer both in length and breadth; even though it added grace to the wonderful divine
Ornaments and robes themselves, yet He had chosen to adorn it with the same. (25) He
graciously showed (by placing them in a prominent position) His wish-yielding lotus-feet to
devotees that worshipped Him through faultless processes for the gratification of their own
desire—lotus-feet whose petals in the shape of toes could be distinctly seen (though closely
united with one another) through the rays of their moon-like nails. (26) Nay, He greeted His
worshippers with His countenance, which was endowed with a beautiful nose and graceful
eyebrows and lit up with a smile that was enough to relieve the agony of the whole world, and
which was graced with brilliant ear-rings and reflected the ruddy lustre of His lips, that
resembled a ripe Bimba fruit. (27) His buttocks were adorned with a loin-cloth yellow as the
filaments of a Kadamba flower, as well as with a girdle; while His bosom, dear son, was marked
with a golden streak and graced with its favourite necklace, which was invaluable. (28) In the
shape of the fourteen worlds He is like a sandal tree, the king of trees, with His pairofstoutarms,
adorned with most precious armlets and the best of gems, for its numberless boughs, with its
root unknown (because it has no root other than itself} and with the hoods of Sesa (the lord of
serpents) coiled about its trunk. (29) (Lying in the midst of the ocean) the Lord further looked
like a mountain surrounded by water. Even as a mountain affords shelter to both animate and
inanimate beings, the Lord is the resting-place of the whole animate and inanimate creation.
Even as a mountain is friendly (hospitable) to large serpents, the Lord is a friend of Sesa (the
lord of serpents). The thousands of diadems that adorned the hoods of Sesa appeared like
so many peaks of gold; while the diamond called Kaustubha that shone on the bosom of the
Lord looked like a gem emerging from the heart of a mountain. (30) Brahma now had a clear
view of Sri Hari, who wore round His neck a wreath of sylvan flowérs, that represented
His glory and was graced by the Vedas that had taken the form of bees to hymn His praises. He
was inaccessible even to the sun, the moon, the air and fire, and could hardly be approached
