Dis. 10 ] BOOK FOUR 339

PARE LE EEE LAA AEE ETEK EEE EEE EER HHA EEL KATHE SEH HEEL EEE Ae AH Or HH क

(the attendants of Lord Rudra). (5) The stout-armed Dhruva blew his conch, causing the
heavens as well as the quarters to resound, and the women of the demigods, O Vidura, were
greatly alarmed at the sound and cast a bewildered look. (6)

aa निष्क्रम्य बलिन उपदेवमहाभटा: | असहन्तस्तन्निनादमभिपेतुरुदायुधा: । ७ ।
स तानापततो वीर Soe महारथ: | एकैकं युगपत्सर्वानहन् बाणैस्रिभिस्रिभि: । ८ ।
a a ललाटलमैस्तैरिषुभि: ad wa fei मत्वा निरस्तमात्मानमाशंसन् कर्म तस्य ads ९ |
ast amg: पादस्पर्शमिवोरगा: । शरैरविध्यन् युगपद द्विगुणं प्रचिकीर्षव: 1901
aa: परिघनिस्रिंशैश प्रासदूलपरश्वथै:। शक्त्यृष्टिभिर्भुशुण्डीभिश्चित्रवाजै: ङारैरपि ee
अभ्यवर्षन् प्रकुपिता: सरथं सहसारथिम्। इच्छन्तस्तत्प्रतीकर्तुमयुतानि FAST 1221
ओत्तानपादि: स तदा शस्त्रवर्षेण भूरिणा । न उपादृश्यतच्छन्न आसारेण यथा गिरि: 12931
हाहाकारस्तदेवासीत्सिद्धानां fafa परयताम्।हतोऽयं मानव: सूर्यो wa: पुण्यजनार्णवे । १४॥
जयकाशिष्थो मृधे। उदतिष्ठद्रथस्तस्य नीहारादिव भास्कर: । १५॥
Impatient at the blast, the mighty and great warriors among the demigods sallied forth
from their stronghold with uplifted weapons and proceeded (against Dhruva). (7) As they
rushed towards him, O valiant Vidura, Dhruva (the great car-warrior), who was armed with
a fierce bow, hit them all at once with three shafts each. (8) With the arrows planted in their
brow, they all thought themselves vanquished and applauded that feat of his. (9) Intolerant
of his valour like serpents, who cannot tolerate being trodden on, they in their anxiety to
achieve twice as muchas he had done simultaneously struck him (with six arrows each). (10)
Full of rage and eager to return his volleys, the Yaksas, numbering one hundred and thirty
thousand, rained on him as well as on his car and charioteer iron clubs, swords, lances, pikes
and axes, javelins, double-edged swords, Bhusundis and arrows with many-coloured
feathers. (11-12) Screened with the thick volley of weapons, even as a hill is covered with
a torrential shower. Dhruva (the son of Uttanapada) could not be seen at that time. (13) That
very moment arose a plaintive cry raised by the Siddhas who had been witnessing the scene
from heaven: “Drowned in the sea of the Punyajana (Yaksa) host, this sun of Manu’s race
has set !" (14) Then, in the midst of the roaring of the Raksasas (Yaksas) * who were
proclaiming their own triumph on the field of battle, Dnruva's car came into view, like the sun
from behind (a cloud of) mist. (15)
तस्य a चापनिर्मुक्ता भित्त्वा वर्माणि रक्षसाम्। कायानाविविशुस्तिग्मा गिरीनशानयो यथा । १७।
भल्लै: संछिद्यमानानां शिरोभिश्चारुकुण्डले: | ऊरुभिर्हेमतालाभैर्दोर्भिर्वलयवल्गुभि: ।१८॥
हारकेयूरमुकुटैरुष्णीषैश्च महाधनै: | आस्तृतास्ता रणभुवो रेजुर्वीरमनोहरा: 1281
Twanging his celestial bow and inspiring terror into (the heart of) the enemies, Dhruva
tore to pieces their host of missiles even as a blast disperses an army of clouds. (16) Piercing
the armour of the Raksasas, the sharp arrows discharged from his bow disappeared into
their bodies as thunderbolts into mountains. (17) Strewn allover with the heads adorned with
beautiful ear-rings, thighs resembling gold palmyras, arms graced with bracelets as well as
with the necklaces, armlets, diadems and costly turbans of the enemies, who were being
mowed down with the shafts (of Dhruva), the fields of battle, which ravished the mind of
heroes, looked very charming. (18-19)

“ Here as well as in the subsequent verses the Yaksas have been promiscuously referred to as 'Raksasas' and ‘Asuras+
obviously because all these species are akin to one another and the population of Alaka was a mixture of all these.
