Dis. 14] BOOK SIX 615

SERAHAKKK NESS S SESS oAKeAHAKEAHHKKE HH HHL KLE HeTeseerereseseARehaKhanherageerenenAn

तस्यैकदा तु भवनमङ्गिरा भगवानृषि: | लोकाननुचरन्नेतानुपागच्छद्यदृच्छया । १४ ॥
तं पूजयित्वा विधिवत्प्रत्युत्थानार्हणादिभि: | कृतातिथ्यमुपासीदत्सुखासीनं समाहित: । १५॥
महर्षिस्तमुपासीनं प्रश्रयावनतं क्षितौ । प्रतिपूज्य महाराज समाभाष्येदमब्रवीत् ee
Sri Suka said : Hear attentively, O king, the following legend as heard (by me) from the
mouth of (my father,) the sage Vedavyasa (who was born in an island), as well as from the
sages Narada and Devala. (9) In the Surasena country (the tract lying about the city of
Mathura), so-the tradition goes, there was a king, called by the name of Citraketu, O Pariksit,
who ruled over the entire globe and to whom the earth yielded everything sought after (by
him). (10) He had a crore wives; but, though capable of procreation, the emperor got noissue
by (any of) them. (11) Anxiety now laid hold of Citraketu, who, though (fully) endowed with
beauty, generosity, youth, noble lineage, learning, (universal) sovereignty, imperial fortune
and all other virtues, was (yet) the husband of barren ladies. (12) All his riches, fair-eyed
queens and (even the sovereignty of) this earth did not prove a source of delight to that ruler
of the entire globe. (13) Ranging through these worlds, however, the glorious sage Angira
on one occasion came to his house by chance. (14) Having honoured him with due
ceremony by rising to greet him and offering him articles of worship etc., the emperor sat with
a collected mind near the sage, who was now comfortably seated, having been (fully)
entertained as a guest. (15) The great sage (Angira). O emperor, showed every courtesy
and consideration in return to Citraketu, who sat close to him on the (bare) ground, bent low
with modesty, and, calling his attention (to him), spoke the following words. (16)

अङ्गिरा उवाच
अपि तेऽनामयं स्वस्ति प्रकृतीनां तथाऽऽत्पन: । यथा प्रकृतिभिर्गुप्त: पुमान् राजापि सप्तभि: । १७॥
आत्मानं प्रकृतिष्द्धा निधाय sa आप्नुयात्।राज्ञा तथा प्रकृतयो नरदेवाहिताधय: । १८।
अपि दारा: प्रजामात्या भृत्या: श्रेण्योऽथ AAT: । पौरा जानपदा भूपा आत्मजा वहावर्तिन: । १९॥
यस्यात्मानुवशश्चेत्स्यात्सर्वे तद्दशगा SA । लोका: सपाला यच्छन्ति सर्वे बलिमतन्दरिता: 1201
आत्मन: प्रीयते नात्मा परत: स्वत एव वा । लक्षयेऽलब्धकामं त्वां चिन्तया शबलं मुखम् । २१
एवं विकल्पितो राजन् विदुषा मुनिनापि स: । प्रश्रयावनतोऽभ्याह प्रजाकामस्ततो मुनिम् । २२।

Angira said : Is everything well with your person as well as with your Prakrtis (the
constituent elements of a state, viz., the high priest, the chief minister, the territories, i.e., the
people, the fortresses, the treasury, the police and army—that enforce law and order—and
the allies ) and are you enjoying a sound health—you as well as your Prakrtis ? (Even) as
a Jiva (the embodied soul) is protected by the seven material sheaths (viz., Mahattattva or
the principle of cosmic intelligence, the ego and the five subtle elements), so the king too
is protected by the (aforesaid) seven constituent elements. (17) A king can enjoy the
blessings of sovereignty by actually placing himself under the control of his Prakrtis; (and)
the Prakrtis are likewise enriched by the king (by following his will and carrying out his
commands), O ruler of men. (18) Are your wives, subjects, ministers, servants, people
following particular trades, counsellors, citizens and inhabitants of the other parts (of your
State), tributary chiefs and offspring obedient to your will ? (19) All these (unquestionably)
follow the will of the man whose mind is under his control. (Nay,) all the worlds along with
their guardian deities dutifully offer tribute to him. (20) (It seems to me that) your mind is not
pleased either with others or with your own self. (For) | find your face discoloured with
anxiety, and (thereby) conclude that you have not attained the object of your desire. (21)
Subjected thus, O Pariksit, to various presumptions by the sage, even though the latter knew
everything (by intuition), Citraketu, who was full of longing for ason, and was bent low with

