390 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 22

{eh tee terttrt torneo nmin hin ot fee ee tore) some tt ere oie sen sien ee
a नित्यमुक्तपरिशुद्धविबुद्धतत्तवं प्रत्यूढकर्मकलिलप्रकृतिं प्रपद्ये । ३८
यत्प!दपङ्कजपलारें।विल।सभक्ता। Haig aiaaqenaara सन्त: |
तद्वन्न रिक्तमतयो यतयोऽपि रुद्धस्रोतोगणास्तमरणं भज वासुदेवम् । ३९
eel महानिह भवार्णवमप्रुवेशां षड्वर्गनक्रमसुखेन तितीरषन्ति ।
तत् त्वं erat we कृत्वोडुपं व्यसनमुत्तर दुस्तरार्णम् ।४०॥

Only so long as this conditioning mind-substance (the principal constituent of the subtle
body) persists (i.e., in the waking and dream states) man perceives his own self, the objects
of Sense and that which connects the self with these latter (viz., the ego), and not at any other
time (e. g., in the state of deep sleep). (28) Everywhere (in the external world too) it is only
when water or a mirror or any other condition is present that a man perceives the difference
between one's own Self and that which is external to oneself (viz., one's reflected image),
and not at other times (when the condition is absent). (29) Distracted by the senses, which
are themselves drawn towards their objects, the mind of those that (ever) muse on such
objects (as worth attaining), takes away the power of discrimination of the intellect (as
imperceptibly) as a clump of grass sucks up water from a pool (through its roots). (30)
Consequent on the loss of reason, memory fails; loss of memory is followed by loss of
wisdom and the sages refer to loss of wisdom as the ruination of the self through one's own
self. (81) There canbe no greater loss in the world toa man than the ruination, through one's
own self, of the soul, for whose sake everything else becomes dear’. (32) Constant
preoccupation with wealth and the objects of sense means the ruination of all the interests
of men. Deprived of his knowledge and wisdom through such preoccupation, manis reborn
in the immobile creation (the vegetable or mineral kingdom). (33) Whoever is keen to cross
and reach the other end of the impenetrable gloom in the form of ignorance (the root of
transmigration) should never conceive an attachment to that which is most detrimental to
(the attainment of) religious merit, worldly possessions, gratification of the senses and
liberation. (34) Of these four too, liberation alone is acknowledged as the highest purpose
of life; for everything falling under the category of the other three objects of human pursuit
is ever exposed to the fear of death. (35) There can be no stability in (the life of) the higher
and the lower orders of creation that have come into existence ever since the equilibrium of
the three modes of Prakrti (Sattva, Rajas and Tamas) was disturbed (at the dawn of
creation); for their hopes (to survive) have always been blasted by the all-powerful Time. (36)
Therefore, O king, know Him to be your very Self—the Lord who perceptibly and inwardly
shines as the all-pervading Ruler of the Jiva (the conscious principle in the psycho-physical
organism) in the heart of (all) mobile (animate) and immobile (inanimate) beings invested
with a body, the senses, the vital airs, the intellect and the ego. Him do | resort to (for
protection)—the ever free, taintless and enlightened principle—who has set aside Prakrti
(Primordial Nature) defiled by the Karmas (of the various Jivas) and in whom appears this
phantom of the universe both as cause and effect, vanishing on the dawn of discriminating

“wisdom even like the (false) notion of a serpent with regard to a wreath of flowers. (37-38)

Resort (then) as your (sole) refuge to Lord Vasudeva, by fixing the thought on the splendour

of the very toes of whose lotus-feet pious souls cut asunder the knot of egotism (which is

nothing but a conglomerate of tendencies to action) formed (by Karmas themselves), in a

manner that even recluses who have emptied their mind (of all thoughts of the world), having

withdrawn their senses (from their objects) are not able to do. (39) Great agony is
* Cf. Brhadaranyaka Upanisad IV. v. 6.

