SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 8

120 ennensnenntentenntenh eonneeht sunt ths tAeeOees SEES Set eeeeeSSES SS wore a rere eS

ri the limbs of the Supreme Person, and then again they were conceived as His

imbs. (14

area eh Ree AT TAT TAS TAT | IIMA TEA च यत् सत: 122!
कालस्यानुगतिर्या तु लक्ष्यतेऽण्वी बृहत्यपि | यावत्य: कर्मगतयो चयादृशीद्विजसत्तम ।१३॥
यस्मिन्कर्मप्तमांबायोयध्रायनौपगृह्यत्ते` ।गुणापांगुगिलांचैवपरिंणाग्ममभोम्सतष्म।९४।
भूपातालककुव्व्योमग्रहनक्षत्रभूभृताम् । सरित्समुद्रद्वीपानां सम्भवश्चैतदोकसाम् 184!
प्रमाणमण्डकोशस्य बाह्याभ्यन्तरभेदत: । महता चानुचस्तिं वर्णाश्रमविनिश्चय: । १६1
वुपापिवुफ्फ।नंचधर्पोयश्चवुगेवुगे।उत्वतप्तानुचस्तिं चदाश्चर्यतमॆ हरे: NI
qo साधारणो धर्म: सविशेषश्च यम्यादृछा:।श्नेणीनांरृ।जर्षीणांचधर्म:कृच्छेबुजीक्ताम्।क्ष्य।
तत्त्वाना परिसंख्यानं लक्षणं हेतुलक्षणम्।पुंरुषाराधनाच्चिध्रियंरिप्त्यग्ध्यात्मिकस्य च 1१९1
योगेश्वरैश्वर्यगतिर्लिङ्गभङ्गस्तु योगिनाम् | वेदोपवेदधर्माणामितिहासपुराणया: ।२०॥
aya: सर्वभूतानां विक्रम: प्नतिसंक्रप:।इष्ठापूर्तंस्यकाम्यानांव्रिबर्गस्यचयोव्रिधि:।रशा
यश्चानुशायिनां at: पाखण्डस्य च सम्भव: | आत्मनो बन्धमोक्षो च व्यवस्थानं स्वरूपत: ।२२॥
यथाऽऽत्मतन्रो भगवान् विक्रौडत्थात्मपायया।विसृज्यंवायथांमत्थापुदास्तेसाक्षिवद्विभुं: 1231
सर्वमेतच्च भगवन् पृच्छते मेऽनुपूर्वश: । तत्त्वतोऽर्हस्युदाहर्तुं प्रपन्नाय महामुने 12%!

न मेऽसव: परायन्ति ब्रह्मन्ननशनादमी | पिबतोऽच्युतपीयूषमन्यत्र कुपिताद् ESTA NRE!

Whatis the length of a Mahakalpa and smaller Kalpas (Vikalpas) ? How is (the passage
of) time which is referred to by the words ‘past, 'future’ and ‘present to be known ? And what
is the allotted span of life of creatures that have identified themselves with their physical
body? (12) Again, how can the subtle and long movements of time be perceived ? And how
many destinies are there to be reached through Karma (action) and whatis their character,
O noblest sage ? (13) Of the Jivas (embodied souls) who seek the fruit of the three Gunas
(in the shape of birth in the higher or lower species of life) what type of Jivas resort to whal
kind of action in what manner and for what kind of fruit १ (14) How do the earth and Patale
(the nethermost sphere), the four quarters and the sky, the planets and the stars, the
mountains and rivers, Seas and islands and the creatures inhabiting these come intc
existence ? (15) What are the dimensions of the egg-shaped universe, within and without ‘
Pray, tell me also the stories of exalted souls and the distinctive character of the differen
Varnas (grades of society) and Agramas (stages of life). (16) Kindly also let me know the
characteristics of the various Yugas, the duration ofeach and the course of duties prescriber
for each, on the one hand, and the most wonderful stories of Sri Hari's descent (in the worl
of matter) on the other. (17) What are the common duties enjoined on men (in general) an
what are their special duties ? Again, what are the duties peculiar to men following th
different trades ? Further let me know the duties of royal sages as well as of men living i
adverse circumstances. (18) Kindly also tell me the number of the various categorie
(ultimate principles), their distinctive characteras also their characteristic causality in respe:
of certain other categories, the method of worshipping the Supreme Person as wellas of tr
Yoga taught by the sage Patafjali (whatis known as the Astangayoga or Yoga with its eig
limbs). (19) Again, what are the powers acquired by masters of Yoga and what is the
destiny? And how does the Linga Sarira (subtle body) of the Yogis dissolve ? Again, wh

- ig the distinctive character and the theme of the Vedas and the subsidiary Vedas (such `
