472 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 9

LARA ATENTREHHAA EKO EERE OHELEDE LEE HASHES EEE EEK EEE EEE eee eee thks
ज्ज्ज्

भर्तृकर्मनिष्पत्तिं मन्यमाना बद्ध्वा रशनया चण्डिकागृहमुपनिन्युर्मुदा विकसितवदना:। ९४॥

Now onacertain occasion a chieftain of the Sidras (thieves), desirous of anissue (amale
child), proceeded to behead a human victim (as a sacrifice) to Goddess Bhadrakali. (12)
Pursuing at dead of night the tracks of the man intended to be sacrificed, who had
providentially escaped, the servants of that chieftain were unable to find him out in that dark
night and by chance saw Bharata (the son of a Brahmana who was foremost in the line of
the sage Angira), busy guarding the fields against (the intrusion of) deer, boars etc., froma
shed overlooking the fields. (13) Finding him faultless in every limb and (thus) feeling assured
that the purpose of their master would be accomplished, they bound the sage with a rope and
took him to the shrine of Goddess Candika, their faces blooming with joy. (14)

अथ पणयस्तं स्वविधिनाभिषिच्याहतेन वाससाऽऽच्छाद्य भूषणालेपस्त्रक्तिलकादिभिरुपस्कृतं
सा रि —" Po रीतस्तरि । गोवे
च पुरुषपशुं भद्रकाल्या: UTA उपवेशयामासु:। १५ | अथ वृषलराजपणि: पुरुषपशोरसृगासवेन देवीं
भद्रकालीं यक्ष्यमाणस्तदभिमन्तरितमसिमतिकरालनिशितमुपाददे । १६ I

Then the burglars washed him according to their own traditional usage, provided him with
anew piece of cloth and graced him with jewels, sandal paste, a wreath of flowers, a sacred
mark on the forehead and so on, and, when he had had his meal, they seated the human
victim (with his head bentlow) in front of Goddess Bhadrakali according to the standard rules
of animal sacrifice, offering incense, light, a wreath of flowers, parched grains of paddy,
young leaves, sprouts, fruits and sweets etc., (to the goddess) and loudly singing (devo-
tional) songs and hymns and sounding clay and wooden tomtoms (as an accompaniment
to their music). (15) Then the thief officiating as a priest to the chieftain of the SUdras took
up a most fearful and sharp-edged sword, that had been (duly) consecrated by pronouncing
On ita Mantra sacred to Goddess Bhadrakali, with a view to sating Her with the inebriating
blood of a human victim. (16)

इतितेषां वृषलानां रजस्तम:प्रकृतीनां धनमदरजडत्सिक्तमनसां भगबत्वालावारङ्कृक्तार्थीकृल्योंत्पधेन
भद्रकाली। V9! भृशग्ममर्षराषष्वक्काभ्रसबिलसितभ्रकुटिविट्यकुक्लिदष्टारुणेक्षणाटोपातिभ्श्यांनक्काना
हन्तुकामेवेदं महाट्टहासमतिसंरम्भेण fad तत उत्पत्य पापीयसां दुष्टानां तेनैवासिना fagaorsitant
गलात्स्रवन्तमसृगासवमत्युष्णं सह गणेन निपीयातिपानमदविह्वलोच्चैस्तरां स्वपार्षदै: we जगौ wad च
fasten च शिर:कन्दुकलीलया | १८ | एवमेव खलु महदभिचारातिक्रम: कात्स्न्येनात्मने फलति । १९ । न वा
एतद्विष्णुदत्त महदद्भुतं यदसम्भ्रम: स्वशिरष्छेदन आपतितेऽपि विमुक्तदेहाद्यात्मभावसुदृढहृदयग्नन्धीनां
सर्वसत्त्वसुहृदात्मनां निर्वैराणां साक्षाद्भगवतानिमिषारिवरायुधेनाप्रमत्तेन तैस्तैर्भावै: परिरक्ष्यमाणानां
तत्पादमूलमकुतश्चिद्भयमुपसृतानां भागवतपरमहंसानाम्। २० |

इति श्रीमद्भागवते महापुराणे पारमहंस्यां संहितायां पञ्चमस्कन्धे जडभरतचरिते नवमोऽध्याय:। ९ ।

Perceiving the immolation, not permitted even when fallingin the category of a slaughter
permissible in the face of imminent danger to life, of the son of a Brahmana sage, who had
actually become one with the Infinite, and who not only bore enmity to none but was friendly
to all living beings—a most horrible act on the part of those Sidras, in whom the qualities of
Rajas and Tamas naturally predominated, nay, whose mind had been puffed up with the
pride of wealth, which taints one's souls, and who wilfully trod the evil path, disregarding the
Brahmana race—who represent a ray of the Lord—and delighted in acts of violence, the
same Goddess Bhadrakali suddenly emerged (from the image), Her (divine) body severely
burning with the spiritual glory of the Brahmana, most difficult to bear. (17) With Her arched
