24 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA-MAHATMYA [Dis. 4

॥:३:३ १३०३ ३२ ३०3५ 2३० 2 a a ee a ed aetna ek ok a Aa ae hoa ३2३० ae it etn aint

The Kumaras said : Those men who constantly perpetrate sinful deeds, who are
ever addicted to immoral practices, who take to evil ways, who are consumed by the fire
of anger, and who are wicked and full of passion are purified in Kaliyuga through a seven
days’ Yajnia (as aforesaid). (11) Even those who are devoid of truthfulness, who revile
their parents, who are restless due to thirst for pleasures, who do not follow the duties
of their ASrama, who are hypocrites, who are jealous (of the achievements of others),
who take delight in destruction of life become holy through a seven days’ Yajfia in
Kaliyuga. (12) Those who commit the five great sins (drinking, killing a Brahmana, stealing
gold, having intercourse with the wife of one’s preceptor and treachery), who are (ever)
engaged in practising deception and chicanery, who are cruel and merciless like demons,
who have grown fat with the money of Brahmanas, who commit adultery, are all purified
in Kaliyuga through a seven days’ Yajfia. (13) The fools who are ever obstinately engaged
in committing sins by thought, word and deed, who are parasites, whose mind is impure
and whose heart in wicked, they all attain purity through a seven days’ Yajfia. (14)

aa a कीर्तयिष्याम gerd पुरातनम् । यस्य श्रवणमात्रेण पापहानि: प्रजायते। eu |
तुङ्गभद्रातटे पूर्वमभूत्पत्तनमुत्तमम् । यत्र वर्णा: स्वधर्मेण सत्यसत्कर्मतत्परा: । १६॥

area: पुरे तस्मिन् सर्ववेदविशारद:। श्रौतस्मार्तेषु निष्णातो द्वितीय ga भास्कर: । १७।
भिक्षुकोवित्तवाद्न्तोकेतत्पिया धुन्धुली स्मृता | स्ववाक्यस्थापिका Pret Gat सुकुलोद्भवा । १८।
लोकवार्तारता क्रूरा प्रायशो बहुजल्पिका । शूरा च गृहकृत्येषु कृपणा कलहप्रिया। १९॥
एवं निवसतो: प्रेम्णा दम्पत्यो रममाणयो: | अर्था: कामास्तयोरासन्न सुखाय गृहादिकम्। Ro |
Wang: समारब्धास्ताभ्यां संतानहेतवे | गोभूहिरण्यवासांसि दीनेभ्यो यच्छत: सदा। २१॥
धनार्धं धर्ममार्गेण ताभ्यां नीतं तथापि च । न पुत्रो नापि वा पुत्री ततश्चिन्तातुरो भृशम्। 221

(Narada,) we now relate to you an old historical legend. Sins are destroyed by merely
listening to it. (15) In days gone by a beautiful town was situated on the bank of the
Tungabhadra. All the residents of that town performed the duties of their caste, spoke the
truth and engaged themselves in righteous acts. (16) There lived in that town a Brahmana
named Atmadeva, who was well-versed in all the Vedas and proficient in performing rites
laid down in the Srutis and the Smrtis. He was glorious like a second sun. (17) Though
rich he made his living by alms. His wife called Dhundhuli was of good parentage and
good looking; but she always ruled over her husband. (18) She indulged in worldly gossip,
mostly talked a lot, was cruel and miserly and expert in household duties, though
quarrelsome. (19) So the Brahmana couple lived together affectionately and enjoyed life.
They had enough to satisfy their desires and achieve their objects. They had a good
house to live in yet they were not happy. (20) When they became aged they commenced
righteous deeds with the object of having an issue. They started gifting everyday cows,
land, gold and cloth to the needy. (21) In this manner they spent half their fortune on
righteous deeds, yet they did not get a son or even a daughter. This greatly worried the
Brahmana. (22)

एकदा स द्विजो gle गृहं त्यक्त्वा वनं Ta: | मध्याह्ने तृषितो जातस्तडागं समुपेयिवान्। 23 1
that जलं निषण्णस्तु प्रजादु:खेन कर्शित: । मुहूर्तादपि तत्रैव संन्यासी कश्चिदागत:। २४॥
gear पीतजलं तं तु विप्रो यातस्तदन्तिकम् । नत्वा च पादयोस्तस्य नि:श्वसन् संस्थित: पुर: । २५ |

