254 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 36

TEOMA EES eee EEE Nhe eke ete hee tere het ee wert te tie? ee eek

there reside the two sons of Anakadundubhi (Vasudeva). (Please) bring them both here in
this chariot; let there be no delay. (30) My death, । understand, has been pre-ordained at the
hands of the younger one by the gods, whohave their (sole) refuge in Visnu. (Therefore) fetch
them alongwith the Gopas headed by Nanda and equipped with tributes of various kinds. (31)
| shall have them despatched, when brought down here, by my elephant (Kuvalayapida),
who is as good as Death (himself). If (however) they escape it, | shall get them killed by
wrestlers (fierce) like thunderbolts. (82) On the two brothers having been killed | shall do
away with their afflicted kinsmen—the Vrsnis, the Bhojas and the Dasarhas—headed by
Vasudeva, as well as my aged father, Ugrasena, who is anxious to regain his sovereignty,
his (younger) brother, Devaka, and whoever else are my enemies. (33-34) And then this
earth, O friend, will be rid of (all its) thorns, Jarasandha is (my father-in-law and therefore as
good as) my father; while Dwivida (the monkey-chief) is my beloved friend. (35) (Even so)
Sambara, Naraka and Bana have (all) entered into alliance with me. Destroying with their
help all) kings who are siding with the gods, | shall rule over the (entire) globe (myself). (36)
Knowing this (but not disclosing my intention to the people of Vraja), fetch the two youngsters,
Balarama and Krsna, here at once so as to enable them to witness the bow-sacrifice as well
as to behold the splendour of Mathura (the capital of the Yadus)." (37)

अक्रूर उवाच
राजन् मनीषितं TR तव स्वावद्यमार्जनम् । सिद्ध्यसिद्ध्यो: समं कुर्याद्दैवं fe फलसाधनम् । ३८1
मनोरथान् ates दैवहतानपि । युज्यते हर्षशोकाभ्यां तथाप्याज्ञां करोमि ते । ३९॥
Akrdra replied : Well-thought out is your remedy against the evil that stares you in the
face. One should (however) keep one's mind balanced in success and failure; for it is
Providence that procures the fruit of our endeavours. (38) Man entertains high aspirations,

even though they are thwarted by Providence, and (thus) meets with joy and grief.
Nevertheless | shall do your bidding. (39)

SYS उवाच
एवमादिश्य चाक्रूरं मन्त्रिणश्च विसृज्य स: । प्रविवेश गृहं कंसस्तथाक्रूर: स्वमालयम् Io |

Sri Suka continued: Having thus instructed Akriira and sent away his counsellors,
Karhsa retired into the gynaeceum and Akrara too returned to his house. (40)

Thus ends the thirty-sixth discourse entitled “Karhsa despatches Akrara (to Vraja)”,
in the first half of Book Ten of the great and glorious Bhagavata-Purana,
otherwise known as the Paramahamsa-Samhita.

CAINS PTS
PISS or
