Dis. 14] ~ BOOK THREE 199

LERHALLAARA KEL S TEV EHR EREL STH HSH LERTEATEEH HSER ATA E HAH AR eH KEAHKHHKRHHAHHKAGH HHH

योगैर्हेमेव दुर्वर्णं भावयिष्यन्ति साधव: । निर्वैरादिभिरात्मानं यच्छीलमनुवर्तितुम् ।४५॥
यत्प्रसादादिदं fay प्रसीदति यदात्मकम्। स स्वदृग्भगवान् यस्य तोष्यतेऽनन्यया FM ।४६॥
स @ महाभागवतो महात्मा महानुभावो महतां महिष्ठ: |
प्रवृद्धभक्त्या ह्यनुभाविताशाये fae वैकुण्ठमिमं विहास्यति ive
अलम्पट: जीलधरो गुणाकरो हृष्ट: परद्धर्या व्यथितो दु:खितेषु ।
-अभूतशत्रुर्जगत: श्ञोकहर्ता नैदाघिकं तापमिवोडुराज: xe
अन्तर्बहिश्चामलमव्जनेत्रं स्वपूरुषेच्छानुगृहीतरूपम् |
पौत्रस्तव श्रीललनाललामं द्रष्टा स्फुरत्कुण्डलमण्डिताननम् ।४९॥

Kasyapa said : Since you feel sorry and are full of remorse for what you have done and
right judgment has soon reverted to you, and since you cherish extreme reverence for Lord
Visnu and deep regard for Lord Bhava (Siva) and myself too, one of the four sons of your
elder son will prove worthy of esteem even for holy men; nay, people will sing his fair renown
along with the Lord's own glory. (43-44) Even as gold of inferior quality is purified by being
heated in fire, pious souls will cleanse their heart through disciplines (of various kinds) such
as freedom from animosity in order to emulate his noble disposition and character. (45) The
Lord, who is the witness of His own Self and whose grace alone brings happiness to this
universe, consisting of Himself, will be gratified with his exclusive view (that the Lord alone
is true). (46) He will be a great devotee of the Lord, magnanimous, high-souled and the
noblest of the noble. Installing Lord Visnu in his heart, purified through intense Devotion, he
will give up his (false) identification with the body. (47) A mine of good qualities, he will have
no attachment to the pleasures of sense, and will be steadfast in virtue. He will fee! delighted
at the prosperity of others and will be grieved to see others in trouble. Regarding none as his
enemy, he will rid the world of its sorrows even as the moon relieves the heat of summer. (48)
Nay, your grandson will behold, in his heart (through meditation) as well as outside, the lotus-
eyed Lord, who is immaculate (by nature), who assumes forms according to the wishes of
His own devotees, whose countenance is adorned with brilliant ear-rings and who is the
ornament of Goddess Sri, the embodiment of womanly charms. (49)

उवाच
श्रुत्वा भागवतं पोत्रममोदत दितिर्भृराम्। पुत्रयोश्च ad कृष्णाद्विदित्वाऽऽसीन्प्रहामना: 140 |
इति श्रीमद्घागवत महापुराणे पारमहंस्यां संहितायां तृतीयस्कन्धे दितिकञ्यपसंवादे चतुर्दशोऽध्याय: ।१४॥

Maitreya continued : Diti felt much delighted to hear that her grandson would be a
(great) devotee of the Lord, and was proud to learn that her sons would meet their death at
the hands of Sri Krsna (Lord Visnu) Himself. (50)

Thus ends the fourteenth discourse in Book Three, comprising among
other things the dialogue between Diti and Kasyapa, of the
great and glorious Bhagavata-Purana, otherwise
known as the Paramahamsa-Samhita.

co thot tie $3
CDSE NES OD
