Dis. 47] - BOOK TEN 309

WMA ROR ARERR OE EO OSES CONES OES Tee 8 ET ee Pee ee ee ee oe

neglecting their own people as well as the path trodden by the virtuous, (both of) which are
(so) difficult to abandon (for a chaste woman). (61) (Nay,) these Gopis completely shook off
their agony (of separation from the Lord), embracing (as they did) those lotus-feet of the
divine Sri Krsna which are actually fondled by Goddess Sri and mentally adored by (great
gods like) Brahma and others, sages that have (all) their desires fulfilled (and are therefore
free from all cravings), (nay,) even by masters of Yoga (like Siva, Sanaka and Narada), and
which were (lovingly) placed (by the Lord) on their bosom in the gathering (of women) on the
occasion of the Rasa dance! (62) । repeatedly salute the dust of feet of the (blessed) women
of Nanda's Vraja, whose loud singing of the stories of Sri Krsna (who captivates all) purifies
the three worlds.” (63)

ae उवाच
aa गोपीरनुज्ञाप्य चज्ञोदां नन्दमेव च । गोपानामन्त्य दाशार्हो यास्यन्नारुरुहे रथम् ॥६४॥
तं निर्गतं समासाद्य नानोपायनपाणय: । नन्दादयोऽनुरागेण प्रावोचन्नश्रुलोचना: 1६५1

मनसो वृत्तवो न: स्यु: कृष्णपादाम्बुजाश्रया: | वाचोऽभिधायिनीर्नाम्नां कायस्तत्प्रह्वणादिषु । ६६1
कर्मभिरथ्राम्यमाणानां चत्र क्वापीश्चरेच्छया । मङ्गलाचरितैर्दाने vad: कृष्ण Fat ६७1
एवं सभाजितो गोपै: कृष्णभक्त्या aOR । उद्धव: पुनरागच्छन्मथुरां कृष्णपालिताम् । ६८॥
कृष्णाय प्रणिपत्याह wah ब्रजौकसाम्। वसुदेवाय TTS राज्ञे चोपायनान्यदात् 1६९1

इति श्रीमद्धागवते महापुराणे पारमहंस्यां संहितायां coe पूर्वार्घे उद्धवप्रतियाने सप्तचत्वारिंशोऽध्याय: PS!

उत्त Suka proceeded further : Seeking the permission of the cowherd women as well
as of Yagoda and Nanda, and taking leave of the cowherds, Uddhava (a scion of Dasarha),
now ready to depart (for Mathura) mounted the chariot. (64) Duly approaching him, when he
had (just) stepped out (of Nanda's mansion), with various presents (intended for Sri Krsna
and Balarama) in their hands, Nanda and others lovingly addressed him in feeling terms (as
follows) with tears in their eyes:—(65) “Let (all) the activities of our mind (ever) hinge on the
lotus-feet of Sri Krsna. Let our speech utter His names (alone) and let our body remain
engaged in bending before Him and so on. (66) Being tossed by our (past) actions coupled
with the will of Providence (as guided by those actions) wherever (inwhatever species of life)
we may be, let our delight be (ever) found in the almighty Sri Krsna as a result of our virtuous
actions and charitable gifts (that may have been performed by usin ourpast lives)." (67) Thus
honoured by the cowherds out of devotion to Sri Krsna, O ruler of men, Uddhava came back
to Mathura (which was now) protected by (the same Lord) Sri Krsna. (68) Falling prostrate
before Sri Krsna he spoke (to Him) of the plenitude of devotion (to His feet) of the people of
Vraja and handed over the presents (sent by Nanda) to Him as well as to Vasudeva,
Balarama and the king (Ugrasena). (69)

Thus ends the forty-seventh discourse, bearing on the return of Uddhava (to Mathura),
in the first half of Book Ten of the great and glorious Bhagavata-Purana,
othenvise known as the Paramaharhsa-Samhita.

सुकर्त्त
PIOPE IEEE OID
