74 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 19

APKC eee ee ee eRe Hee ee eee eeeet eee Se eereeTte wy ehh t eee eer hee eee ree

the same eye, all the quarters turn blissful. (15) One desirous of happiness should speedily
get rid of the thirst for pleasure, which is productive of sorrow, nay, which cannot be easily
given up by the evil-minded and which does not get worn out even though one’s body grows
old. (16) Aman should not sit close (even) to his mother, sister or daughter. (For) the powerful
senses lead astray even alearned man. (17) Full one thousand years have slipped by while
| have been busy repeatedly enjoying the pleasures of sense. And yet each time (I enjoy
them) my thirst for them is renewed. (18) Therefore, giving up this (thirst for pleasure) and
fixing my mind on the Absolute, | shall roam about with deer, being rid of the pairs of opposites
(such as joy and sorrow) and free from egotism. (19) Knowing both that is seen and heard
of as unreal and foreseeing transmigration and the degradation of his soul to follow from their
thought (etc.), he who neither thinks of nor enjoys them is the knower of his self." (20)

इत्युक्त्वा नाहुषो wat तदीयं Ga वय: । दत्त्वा wl जरसं तस्मादाददे विगतस्पृह: 1221
दिशि दक्षिणपूर्वस्यां द्रुह्युं दक्षिणतो यदुम्। प्रतीच्यां तुर्वसुं चक्र उदीच्यामनुमीश्वरम् ।२२॥
भूमण्डलस्य we पूरुमर्हत्तमं fem अभिषिच्याग्रजांस्तस्य ast स्थाप्य ad ययौ 1231
आसेवितं वर्षपूगान् षड्वर्गं विषयेषु स:। क्षणेन मुमुचे नीडं जातपक्ष ga द्विज: 1२४॥
a ow finer आत्मानुभूत्या विधुतत्रिलिङ्ग: ।
mse ब्रह्मणि वासुदेवे लेभे am भागवतीं प्रतीत: 1241
श्रुत्वा mat देवयानी मेने प्रस्तोभमात्मन: ete: स्नेहवैक्लब्यात् परिहासमिवेरितम् ।२६॥
सा संनिवासं gel प्रपायामिव गच्छताम्। विज्ञायेश्वरतन्राणां मायाविरचितं प्रभो: 1201
सर्वत्र सङ्गमुत्सृज्य स्वप्नोपम्येन भार्गव्री । कृष्णे मन: समावेह्य व्यधुनोल्लिङ्गमात्मन: ।२८॥
नमस्तुभ्यं भगवते वासुदेवाय वेधसे। सर्वभूताधिवासाय जझान्ताय बृहते नम: 1281
इति श्रीमद्भागवते महापुराणे पारमहंस्यां संहितायां नवमस्कन्धे एकोनविंशोऽध्याय: ।१९]

Having spoken thus to his wife (Devay&ni) and returned Puru's youth to him, Yayati
received (back) his own old age (from him), all craving for enjoyment having left him for
good.(21) He appointed Druhyu as the ruler in the south-eastern quarter, Yadu in the south,
Turvasu in the west and Anu in the north. (22) Having duly installed (on the throne) Piru, the
worthiest, (though the youngest, of all his sons) as the suzerain lord of the entire globe and
master of its wealth, and placing his elder brothers (Yadu and others) under his control,
Yayati retired to the forest. (23) He renounced in a moment the pleasures of the six senses
(including the mind), constantly enjoyed (by him) for very many years through their objects,
(even) as a bird leaves its nest when fledged. (24) Having totally shaken off all attachment
(to the body and whatever is connected with it) and dissociated himself from his subtle body
(a product of the three Gunas), by virtue of his self-realization in that forest, the celebrated
Yayati attained absorption into the supreme Brahma, known by the name of Vasudeva,
which is free from the taint of Maya—a state which is obtainable (only) through devotion to
the Lord. (25) Hearing the (aforesaid) parable, DevayAni took it as a taunt to herself, (nay)
she thought it to be a joke uttered (by her husband) in the agony of love subsisting between
a husband and a wife. (26) Realizing the association of near and dear ones, who are (all)
subject to the control of the Lord, as akin to the gathering of travellers in a place where water
is supplied to the passers-by, and as having been brought about by the Lord's will (guided
by their past Karma), Devayani (a scion of Bhrgu) renounced attachment to everything,
regarding all to be as unreal as a dream, and focussing her mind on Sri Krsna, gave up her
subtle body (attained Liberation like her husband). (27-28) Hail, hail to You, the all-tranquil
and all-pervading Lord Vasudeva, the Maker of this universe, the Indweller of all created

=
