Dis. 23 ] BOOK TEN 205

AAO Itoi 8 xo ree ee i 8 ite 2 ent rar re eR ee eet RRR BT

food of four* kinds, they all marched towards their beloved Lord, like rivers flowing towards
the ocean, even though they were being stopped by their husbands, brothers and other
relations, as well as by theirsons, their mind being set on the illustrious Lord because of their
having heard of Him for a long time. (19-20) The ladies (presently) beheld Sri Krsna
sauntering in a grove on the bank of the Yamuna—beautified by frésh leaves of Asoka
trees— surrounded by (other) cowherd boys and accompanied by His elder brother.(21)
Dark-brown of hue He had about His loins a golden piece of silk; adorned with a garland of
sylvan flowers, peacock feathers and tender leaves and painted with minerals, He presented
the appearance of an actor (on the stage); He rested one hand on the shoulder of a devoted
companion and was swinging a lotus with the other; He wore a pair of water-lilies on His ears
anda smile on His lotus-face, His curly locks hanging on His cheeks. (22) Ushering into their
heart by the gates of their eyes Him on whom they had set their mind through the glories of
that most loved One—which they had often heard and which had served as an embellish-
ment for their ears—and embracing Him (there) for a pretty long time, they shook off their
agony (of separation from Him), even as men with an egotistic turn of mind are rid of their
anguish on embracing an enlightened soul, O ruler of men ! (23)

त्तास्तथा Sas: प्राप्ता आत्मदिदृक्षया । विज्ञायाखिलदृग्द्रष्टा we प्रहसितानन: 1261

warm at महाभागा आस्यतां करवाम किम्। gat दिदृक्षया प्राप्ता उपपन्नमिदं fe व: 1241

नन्वद्धा मयि कुर्वन्ति कुशला: स्वार्थदर्शना: | अहैतुक्यव्यवहितां भक्तिमात्मप्रिये यथा । २६।

प्राणबुद्धिमन:स्वात्मदारापत्यधनाद्य: । यत्सम्पर्कात् प्रिया आसंस्तत: को न्वपर: प्रिय: । २७

aa om देवयजनं पतयो वो द्विजातय: । स्वसत्रं पारविष्यन्ति युष्पाभिर्गृहमेधिन: 1२८1

Even though He had come to know that they had arrived (there) under the aforesaid

circumstances (in the teeth of opposition of all their people) with the (sole) desire to see Him
and having given up all hopes (of returning to their home and being welcomed again by their
husbands and other relations), Sri Krsna (the Witness of all minds) addressed them as
follows with a smiling face:—(24) "Welcome is your visit (to this place), O highly blessed
ladies ! Let yourselves be (comfortably) seated. What can We do for you ? It is but proper
for you that you have come with a longing to see Me (disregarding all impediments). (25)
Surely the wise, who realize their owninterests, duly practise disinterested and uninterrupted
devotion direct to Me, their own beloved Self. (26) Indeed, who else could be dearer than
one's own self, through contact with whom life and intellect, mind and body, kinsfolk, wife,
progeny and wealth etc., are dear ? (27) Therefore, return to the sacrificial hall, where your
husbands—who are Brahmana householders—will successfully, conclude their sacrificial
session with your help." (28)

प्राप्ता ad तुलसिदाम पदावसृष्टं केतनैर्निवोढुमतिलङ्घ्य समस्तबन्धून् । २९1

गृह्णन्ति नो न पतय: पितरौ सुता वा न भ्रातृबन्धुसुहृद: कुत wa चान्ये ।
तस्माद् vase: पतितात्मनां नो नान्या wae गतिरस्न्दिम तद् विधेहि । ३०।

* The four kinds of food mentioned in our scriptures are:-—
(1) 43, that which can be easily gulped. such as porridge;
(2) घोज्य, that which has to be masticated before it can be swaltowed:
(3) लह्य, that which can be licked. e. ए.. chutney and
(4) SPs, that which is sucked, e.g., an orange or sugarcane.
