588 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 16

CO १ २त् EEE EERE OE RE OF RHE EET EE OEE RESTORED OTE OE DOS OOOH का ता ERENT ORE HEE क ०० ENE

of the Apsaras (celestial nymphs). | am the firmness of mountains (and) the (pure) odour
(characteristic) of the earth. (33) | am the sweet taste (characteristic) of water, of the most
glorious | am (the god of) fire. । am the brilliant light in the sun, the moon and the stars; am
sound, the distinguishing property of ether. (34) | am Bali among those devoted to the
Brahmanas; of the valiant, | am Arjuna. । am the genesis, existence and final dissolution of
created beings. (35) | am (the functions of) locomotion, speech, defecation, grasping and
enjoyment (of the organs of action) and touching, seeing, tasting, hearing and smelling (of
the senses of perception), as well as the faculty (of perceiving the sense-objects) inhering
in all the senses of perception. (36) | am (the seven categories which are both of the nature
of cause and effect, viz., the subtle elements of) earth, the air, ether, water, fire; the (cosmic)
Ego and Mahat-tattva (the principle of cosmic intelligence); (sixteen categories which are)
modifications (alone, viz., the five gross elements and the eleven Indriyas), the soul (which
is neither a cause nor an effect), the Unmanifest (primordial Matter’, which is a cause alone),
(the three modes of Prakrti, viz.,) Rajas, Sattva and Tamas as well as Brahma (the Absolute).
(37) (Nay,) । am the numbering of these categories, their (distinguishing) knowledge (by
means of their characteristics) and the (resultant) Realization of Truth. Nothing exists
anywhere apart from Me, who am God as well as Jiva (the individual soul), the (three) Gunas
(modes of Prakrti) as well as the categories made up of the (three) Gunas {viz., the Mahat-
tattva and so on), (nay,) who am the Inner Controller of all as well as all. (38) The reckoning
of atoms can be done by Me in course of time, but not so of My glorious manifestations (which
are endless) as | evoive universes in tens of millions. (39) Wherever there is glory, affluence,
renown, authority, modesty, liberality, elegance, good luck, valour, endurance and knowl-
edge of Truth, that is (indeed) My part manifestation. (40) These are all My glorious
manifestations made known to you in brief. They are (however) mere caprices of the mind
(and not real); they are like something merely expressed in words. (41) (Therefore,) restrain
(your) speech, curb {your) mind, control (your) breath, tame (your) senses and conquer your ।
intellect with your (Sattvika) intellect and you will no longer be liable to return to the path of *
transmigration. (42) The sacred vows, austerities and liberality of the Yogi who does not duly
subdue his speech and mind with his reason leak out (unnoticed) as water from an unbaked
jar. (43) Therefore, keeping his eyes fixed on Me as his goal, aman should control his mind,
speech and breath by means of his intellect full of devotion to Me; thereby he will have
reached the end of his journey. (44)

Thus ends the sixteenth discourse in Book Eleven of the great and glorious
Bhagavata-Purana, otherwise known as the
Paramahmsa-Samhita.

sti ating st.
PIOLDE ELEN

*Cf Sankhya-Karika of Iswara Krsna, which says‘ —

मृलप्रकृतिरविकृतिर्महदाद्या: पकूतिविकृतय: सप्त । पोडशकस्तु विकारो न पकूतिर्नीविकृति: पुरुप: ॥
