Dis. 11 ] BOOK EIGHT 783

१३७३ .३.३.३१३.६..३..६.३ ३ गेद्वैष्टेश्चे'र्गृ’.’प्रै’प्नेग्नेद्वैग्नेथेभेर्घंष्ट्रभेप्नेग्नेञ्चंध्रेघेर्व्यक्लीर्व्यर्व्यर्व्यश्वंघेर्व्यफे*ह्यै…र्यैर्षार्धीघंध्रेर्व्यर्घर्ब्र .३..३.३.३.३..३.३..३.३..३.३..५

Hearing from (the lips of) the sage Narada about Jambha having been slain (by Indra),
his kinsmen, Namuci, Bala and Paka, arrived there in (great) haste. (19) Stinging Indra to the
quick with their pungent words, they struck him repeatedly with arrows even as clouds would
assail a mountain with torrents.(20) The swift-handed Bala simultaneously struck in battle
(all) the thousand horses of Haryaswa (Indra) with as many arrows.(21) With a hundred
arrows each (the demon) Paka struck separately Matali (the charioteer) and the chariot with
(all) its parts by fitting to the bow and discharging (all) the arrows at one and the same time.
That was (indeed) a (great) marvel in that battle. (22) Piercing Indra with fifteen large arrows
furnished with hilts of gold, (the demon) Namuci roared on the field of battle like a cloud
charged with water. (23) The demons covered Sakra (Indra) including his chariot and
charioteer on all sides with a network of arrows (even) as clouds would obscure the sun in
the rains. (24) Not perceiving him (on the battle-field) and extremely perturbed, the celestial
troops with their retinue, who were (now) left without a leader and were utterly vanquished
by the enemy, uttered a plaintive cry like merchants whose ship had been wrecked in mid-
ocean. (25) Presently Indra (who was capable of overpowering the mighty) issued out of the
cage of arrows along with the horses, chariot, flag and charioteer. Illuminating the quarters,
sky and earth with his splendour, he shone like the sun at the close of night.(26) Observing
his army overpowered by the enemies (the demons) in battle, the god (Indra), the wielder of
the thunderbolt, lifted his thunderbolt in anger with intent to slay his enemy. (27) With the
same eight-edged weapon he severed the heads of (both) Bala and Paka, inspiring terror
in (the heart of) their kinsfolk, who stood looking on, O Pariksit ! (28)

नमुचिस्तद्दधं दृध्टा जोकामर्षरुषान्वित: freight नृपते चकार परमोद्यमम् ।२९॥
अश्मसारमयं YS घण्टावद्धेमभूषणम् | प्रगृह्याभ्यद्रवरत् क्रुद्धो हतोऽसीति वितर्जयन् ।
प्राहिणोद् देवराजाय निनदन् मृगराडिवि । ३० |
तदापतद् गगनतले महाजवं विचिच्छिदे हरिरिषुभि: सहस्रधा ।
तमाहनन्नृप कुलिशेन कन्धरे रुषान्वितस्रिदशापति: रिरो हरन् । ३१॥

न तस्य fe men an ऊर्जितो fade a: सुरपतिनौजसेरित: |
wag? परमतिवीर्यवृत्रभित् तिरस्कृतो नमुचिशिरोधरत्वचा 1321
तस्मादिन्द्रोऽबिभेच्छत्रोर्वज्र॥ प्रतिहतो यत:। किमिदं दैवयोगेन भूतं लोकविमोहनम् । ३३॥
चेन मे पूर्वमद्रीणां पक्षच्छेद: प्रजात्यये pat निविशतां भारै: पतत्नै: पततां भुवि । ३४॥
तप:सारमयं Se gat येन विपाटित: । अन्ये चापि बलोपेता: सर्वास्रैरक्षयत्वच: 1341
सोऽयं प्रतिहतो वज्रो मया मुक्तोऽसुरेऽल्पके । नाहं तदाददे ae ब्रह्मतेजोऽप्यकारणम् । ३६॥
इति शक्रं विषीदन्तमाह वागङझारीरिणी । नायं झजुष्कैरथो नारद्रैर्वधमर्हति दानव: 1300
ware ae at at मृत्युर्नैवार्द्रशुष्कयो: | अतोऽन्यश्चिन्तनीयस्ते उपायो मघवन् fit: । ३८॥
a दैवीं गिरमाकर्ण्य मघवान्सुसमाहित: । ध्यायन् फेनमथापङ्यदुपायमुभयात्मकम् ।३९॥
न शुष्केण न ar जहार aga: शिर: । तं तुष्टुवुर्मुनिगणा माल्यैश्चावाकिरन् विभुम् ।४०॥
गन्धर्वमुख्यो जगतुर्विश्चावसुपरावसू | देवदुन्दुभबो | ghia ननृतुर्मुदा re
अन्येऽप्येवं प्रतिद्वन्दवान्वाय्वग्निवरुणादय: | सूदयामासुरस्रौघैर्मृगान्केसरिणो यथा 182 |
mem प्रेषितो देवान्देवर्षिर्नारदो नृप।वारयामास विबुधान्दूष्टा दानवसंक्षयम् x3 |
Perceiving their death, Namuci was filled with grief, indignation and rage; and in his

eagerness to kill Indra, O ruler of men, he put forth his best energy. (29) Taking up a lance
of steel, furnished with bells and adorned with gold ornaments he darted, full of rage,
