48 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 12

HAMM MEE RENAE RE MARR RR KON SERRE HE RCRA AH ROR ती ARR ROR RBH Be BT HEHE He डो आ REBT BEBE ST Ar eRe trate Wem RE Ras Re Re te ea ae ee i as Be ee

PARMA A IAA SEY AHN IR ION SRR AE RESET ह्वा OE श्व a

As a leader of bowmen, he will be a match for both the Arjunas (Sahasrabahu and his own
grandfather); nay, he will be unassailable as fire and unconquerable as the ocean. (21) He
will be heroic as a lion (the king of beasts), worth resorting to as the Himalayas, enduring
as the earth and forbearing like parents. (22) In even-mindedness he will compare with
Brahma (the Creator) himself; while in graciousness of disposition he will be equal to Lord
Siva. And he will be the support of all living beings like God Visnu (the Abode of Rama, the
Goddess of Prosperity). (23) Inhigh-mindedness accompanied with excellent virtues, he will
follow the example of Sri Krsna; he will be generous as king Rantideva and pious like
Yayati.(24) He will be equal to Bali in firmness, and unflinching in his devotion to Sri Krsna
as Prahlada. He will perform a number of ASwamedha sacrifices and will wait upon the
aged.(25) He will be the progenitor of a race of royal sages and chastiser of those who stray
from the path of virtue. Nay, he will subdue Kali (the spirit presiding over the Kali age) in the
interest of mother Earth as well as of righteousness. (26) Hearing of his impending death at
the hands of Taksaka (a chief of the Nagas), impelled by the curse of a Brahmana's son, he
will renounce all attachment and take refuge in the feet of Sri Hari. (27) Having ascertained
the truth about the Spirit from the sage Sukadeva (the son of Vyasa), he will cast off his mortal
coil, O king, on the bank of Ganga and attain the fearless state (the state of blessedness).(28)

इति wa उपादिश्य विप्रा जातककोविदा: | लब्धापचितय: सर्वे प्रतिजग्मु: स्वकान् गृहान् 128 |

awa लोके विख्यात: परीक्षिदिति यत्प्रभु: । गर्भे दृष्टमनुध्यायन् परीक्षेत नरेष्विह । ३०॥

स राजपुत्रो ववृधथे आशु Ue इवोडुप: । आपूर्यमाण: पितृभि: काष्ठाभिरिव सोऽन्वहम् । ३१1

यक्ष्यमाणोऽश्वमेधेन ज्ञातिद्रोहजिहासया । राजालब्धधनो दध्यावन्यत्र करदण्डयो: 1321

तदभिप्रेतमालक्ष्य भ्रातरोऽच्युतचोदिता: । धनं प्रहीणमाजह्रुरुदीच्यां दिझि aftr: 1331

तेन सम्भृतसम्भारो धर्मपुत्रो युधिष्ठिर: । वाजिमेधैस्रिभिर्भीतो यज्ञै: समयजद्धरिम् । ३४॥

आहूतो भगवान् राज्ञा याजयित्वा द्विजैर्नृपम् sara कतिचिन्मासान् सुहृदां प्रियकाम्यया ।३५॥

ततो राज्ञाभ्यनुज्ञात: कृष्णया सह बन्धुभि: । ययौ द्वारवतीं ब्रह्मन् सार्जुनो यदुभिर्वृत: ।३६॥

इति श्रीमद्भागवते महापुराणे पारमहंस्यां संहितायां प्रथमस्कन्धे नैमिषीयोपाख्याने
परीक्षिज्जन्माद्युत्कर्षो नाम द्वादशोऽध्याय: । १२1

Having thus told the king (about the future of the new-born babe), the Brahmanas, who
were all well-versed in astrology, returned each to his own home after receiving their fee. (29)
It was this very child who was known all over the world by the name of Pariksit, because this
gifted boy used to look for, among those whom he saw, the Person whom he had perceived
in his mother’s womb and who always lingered in his thought. (30) Being fostered everyday
by (the love of) his grandparents, the prince (Pariksit) grew up very soon, even as the orb
of the moon, waxing by degrees in a bright fortnight everyday, becomes full very soon. (31)
The king now made up his mind to propitiate the Lord through the performance of a horse-
sacrifice in order to atone for his hostile conduct towards his own kith and kin; but since he had
no money (to defray the expenses of the sacrifice) other than that collected as revenue orfines
(which was evidently not much), he became thoughtful. (32) Perceiving what was in his mind,

his younger brothers, at the instance of Acyuta (the immortal Lord SriKrsna) fetched abundant
riches that had been left in the north (by king Marutta and his priests*). (83) Having thus

* Inthe line of Dista (the fourth of the ten sons of Vaivaswata Manu, the Manu presiding over the present Manwantara)
there flourished a universal monarch, Marutta by name, who performeda sacrifice which was unequalled by any other sacrifice.
All the vessel used in that sacrifice were made of gold and most beautiful in shape (vide Srimad Bhagavata IX. ji. 27). At the
conclusion of the sacrifice the king had all the vessels thrown in the north. Besides, he gave untold wealth to the priests by
