Dis. 27 ] BOOK ELEVEN 647

SE OO HR ल्शाक डशा आ आशा शाशा ल् ल्मा en ENE Henne

northern end, uttering the formulas ' प्रजापतयेस्वाहा `छां`इन्रायस्वाहा) and two (more) offerings known
by the name of Ajyabhagas (and consisting of pouring ghee into the sacred fire uttering the
formulas ` अग्रये स्वाहा` and `सोमाय स्वाहा` respectively), should offer oblations soaked in ghee,
uttering the fundamental Mantra (3% नमो नारायणाय) and then the hymn known by the name of
Purusa-Sukta (consisting of sixteen Mantras); taking a fresh oblation (in a limited quantity
with every utterance). The knowing devotee should (further) offer oblations (through the fire)
to Dharma and others in the order mentioned before (in verse 25 above), uttering the name
of the deity with the indeclinable "Swaha" added to it and (then) the oblation known as
"Swistakrt" (which is offered at the end of a sacrifice with the formula’ अग्नये स्विष्टकृतॆ स्वाहा` and
is so-called because it is believed to turn the sacrifice into a success). (40-41)

aegaig नमस्कृत्य पार्षदेभ्यो बलिं हरेत्। मूलमन्त्रं जपेद् ब्रह्म स्मरन्नारायणात्मकम् Ise!
दत्त्वाऽचमनमुच्छेषं विघ्वक्सेनाय कल्पयेत्। मुखवासं सुरभिमत् ताम्बूलाद्यमथार्हयेत् ।४३॥
उपगायन् Tor, Fer कर्माण्यभिनयन् मम । मत्कथा: श्रावयञ्छृण्वन् मुहूर्तंक्षणिको भवेत् । ४४
स्तवैरुच्चावचै: FS: पोराणै: प्राकृतैरपि । स्तुत्वा wale भगवन्निति वन्देत दण्डवत् ।४५॥
शिरो मत्पादयो: कृत्वा बाहुभ्यां च परस्परम्। प्रपन्नं पाहि मामीश भीतं मृत्युग्रहार्णवात् ।४६॥
इति fat मया दत्तां शिरस्याधाय सादरम् । उद्वासयेच्चेदुद्वास्यं ज्योतिरज्योतिषि तत् पुन: Ise!
अर्चादिषु aa aa श्रद्धा मां aa चार्चयेत् । सर्वभूतेष्वात्मनि च सर्वात्माहमवस्थित: ।४८॥

Having worshipped Me (as indwelling the fire) and saluted Me, the votary should offer
oblations {in the eight directions) to My attendants (Nanda and others, mentioned in verse
28 above) and (then returning to the place of worship and taking his seat before Me), should
repeat the Mula (principal) Mantra (as long as possible), contemplating (all the while) on the
Infinite in the form of Lord Narayana. (42)(Then, visualizing Me as having finished My dinner
in the meantime,) he should offer water {to Me) for rinsing My mouth with and (again inviting
Me back to My seat) should make over the remnants to Viswaksena (the foremost attendant
to the Lord). (Again,) offering betel-leaves etc., containing aromatic substances, intended to
perfume the mouth, he should then conclude the worship (by showering on Me flowers
placed in the hollow of one's joined palms). (43) (Then) celebrating, recounting and
dramatically representing My exploits, dancing (out of joy while doing so) and narrating or
listening to My stories, one should remain immersed in joy awhile. (44) Glorifying Me through
long or short hymns found in ancient works (such as the Vedas and Puranas) as well as
through those composed by human beings, and praying in the words “Be pleased, O Lord !"
he should salute Me falling flat (on the ground) like a log, placing his head at My feet and with
his arms joined together {at his back after the fashion of a criminal) and saying, "O Lord,
protect me, afraid (as | am) of the ocean of worldly existence rendered all the more fearful
by the presence of the alligator in the shape of death, and {as such) come to You (for
protection)." (45-46) Praying thus he should respectfully place on his head as if given by Me
the flowers etc., offered to Me and in case he must send back the deity (from the image in
the event of its being intended for temporary worship); the (divine) effulgence invoked into
the image should be drawn back (from it and merged) into the (divine) flame burning in the
lotus of the heart {and the image deposited into some holy tank or river).(47) One can worship
Me through whichever of the media (enumerated in verse 9 above), e. g., an image, he
conceives a reverence for on a particular occasion; for, being the Soul of the universe. | dwell
in all created beings as well as in the self (of the worshipper himself). (48)

एवं क्रियायोगपथै: पुमान् वैदिकतान्त्रिकै: | अर्चन्नुभयत: सिद्धिं मत्तो विन्दत्यभीप्सिताम् ise
मदर्चा सम्प्रतिष्ठाप्य मन्दिरं कारयेद दृढम्। पुष्पोद्यानानि रम्याणि पूजायात्रोत्सवाश्रितान् । ५०॥
