782 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 11

AHEAD ती जज कौरडी ज रीं फि कीं कक OEHHA LEA TEAKEE TOOL EEEHETHAEE LENT REEL OHH कोडार्या क ङडौ HEATER HAHAH HAAS

प्राहरत् कुलिशं wen अमोघं परमर्दन: | सयानो न्यपतद् भूमौ छिन्नपक्ष इवाचल: 122)
सखायं पतितं aI जम्भो बलिसख: Yel! अभ्ययात् Bee सख्युर्हतस्यापि समाचरन् 123!
a सिंहवाह आसाद्य गदामुद्यम्य रंहसा। जत्रावताडयच्छक्रं TH च सुमहाबल: ।१४॥
गदाप्रहारव्यथितो wei बिह्वलितो गज:। जानुभ्यां ai wp aes परमं ययो eu)
ततो रथो मातलिना हरिभिर्दशशतैर्वृत: | आनीतो द्विपमुत्सृज्य रथामारुरुहे fay: । १६॥
तस्य तत् पूजयन् कर्म- यन्तुर्दानवसत्तम: । शूलेन ज्वलता तं तु स्मयमानोऽहनन्मृथे । १७।
ae रुजं सुदुर्मर्षां सत्त्वमालम्ब्य मातलि:। इन्द्रो were संक्रुद्धो वज्रेणापाहरच्छिर: ।१८|॥

Sri Suka went on: Having thus twitted the powerful god (Indra) the valiant Bali, the
vanquisher of heroes (in battle), struck him again with arrows pulled (right) up to the ear—
him who had (already) been stung with taunts. (10) Thus reproached by the enemy, who
spoke the truth (all the same), the god (Indra) could not bear his insulting speech any more
than an elephant pricked with a goad. (11) Indra (the vanquisher of foes) hurled (his) unfailing
thunderbolt against him so that, like a mountain that had its wings * clipped, Bali fell to the
ground, car andall.(12) Finding his friend (Bali) fallen (in battle), the demon Jambha, a (great)
friend and well-wisher of Bali, assailed Indra, (thus) rendering good offices even to his fallen
friend.(13) Riding on a lion, Jambha, who was possessed of great might, approached Indra
and, lifting his mace, struck him with (great) impetuousity on the collar-bone, as well as his
elephant (Airavata). (14) Tormented by the stroke of the mace and utterly confounded, the
elephant touched the ground with its knees and fell into-a deep swoon. (15)Thereupon was
brought by Matali (Indra's charioteer) a chariot drawn by a thousand horses; and, leaving the
elephant, the mighty god mounted the chariot. (16) Admiring that (prompt) action of the
charioteer and smiling too, Jambha (the foremost of the Danavas) struck the latter with a
burning dart in battle. (17) Taking recourse to fortitude, Matali bore the pain (caused by the
dart), which was most difficult to endure; and (greatly) enraged, Indra severed Jambha’s
head by means of his thunderbolt. (18)

जम्भं श्रुत्वा हतं तस्य ज्ञातयो नारदादृषे: । नमुचिश्च बल: पाकस्तत्रापेतुस्त्वरान्विता: ।१९॥
aa: परुषैरिन्द्रमर्दयन्तोऽस्य मर्मसु। शररवाकिरन् मेघा धाराभिरिव पर्वतम् । २०॥
हरीन्दशशतान्याजो wea बल: wt: | तावद्भिरर्दयामास युगपल्लघुहस्तवान् ।२१॥

RANA मातलिं पाको Wel सावयवं पृथक | सकृत्सन्धानमोक्षेण तदद्भुतमभूद् रणे ।२२॥
ada: शरकूटेन शक्रं सरथसारथिम्।छादयामासुरसुरार प्रावृदसूर्यमिवाम्बुदा: ।२४॥
अनायका: शत्रुब्रलेन निर्जिता वणिक्पथा भिन्ननवो यथार्णव 124)
ततस्तुराषाडिषुबद्धपञ्जराद् विनिर्गत: साश्वरथध्वजाग्रणी: ।
at fer: खं पृथिवीं च रोचयन् स्वतेजसा सूर्य इव क्षपात्यये । २६॥
निरीक्ष्य पृतनां देव: परैरभ्यर्दितां रणे । उदयच्छद् रिपुं हन्तुं वज्रं वज्रधरो रुषा । २७॥
स तेनैवाष्टधारेण ett बलपाकयो:।ज्ञातीनां wad West जनयन्भयम् । २८|॥

*We read inthe Puranas that mountains had wingsin the earliest times and could fly and settle down wherever they would.
Finding them a great menace to organiclife, Indra clipped their wings and thus rendered them incapable of motion for all times.
