414 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 70
patter totrtre

fitters reriiwtrstetretrereshetrentrteerthrhttreerenimtererennrene reese

ater तथाऽऽदर्शं गोवृषद्विजदेवता: | कामांश्च सर्ववर्णानां पौरान्त:पुरचारिणाम्।
प्रदाप्य प्रकृती: कामै: NET NSA ।१२॥
संविभज्याग्रतो विप्रान् स्रक्ताम्बूलानुलेप्नै: | सुहृद: प्रकृतीर्दारानुपायुङ्क्त wa: स्वयम् । १३॥
तावत् Yt उपानीय स्यन्दनं परमाद्भुतम्। सुग्रीवाद्यैर्हयैर्युक्तं प्रणम्यावस्थितोऽग्रत: ।१४॥
गृहीत्वा पाणिना पाणी सारथेस्तमथारुहत्। सात्यक्युद्धवसंयुक्त: पूर्वाद्रिमिव ome ।१५॥ -
ईक्षितोऽन्तपुरस्रीणां - सव्रीडेमवीक्षितै: | gene विसृष्टो निरगाज्ञातहासो हरन् मन: ।१६॥

Sri Suka began again ; As the dawn approached, Sri Krsna's wives each sleeping with
the arms of her husband about her neck would reproach the cocks that crowed for fear of
being separated from Him. (1) Roused from sleep by the breeze blowing through the
Mandara grove in the midst of humming bees, birds sang loudly like bards as if in order to
wake up Sri Krsna. (2) Clasped between His arms Rukmini would not welcome this sacred
hour for fear of being tom away from His embrace. (3) Waking up about two hours and a half
before sunrise, Sri Krsna would first wash His hands and feet and rinse His mouth, and with
aserenemind meditate on the Self beyond (the realm of) Prakrti, thatis one withouta second,
self-luminous and indestructible, which is by virtue of its own nature eternally free from the
taint of Avidya (nescience), which goes by thename of Brahma, whose existence and blissful
nature are indicated by His own potencies (under the names of Brahma, Visnu and Rudra)
that are responsible for the appearance (maintenance) and destruction of the universe. (4-5)
After this Sri Krsna (the foremost among the righteous) would take a plunge bath in pure
water, puton two (clean) pieces of cloth, perform according to the injunctions of the scriptures
Sandhya and other (obligatory) rites and having poured oblations into the sacred fire, would
silently repeat the (sacred) Gayatri-Mantra. (6) He would stand before the rising sun and offer
prayers to the sun-god and handfuls of water to the gods, Rsis and manes, His own rays.
Then having worshipped the elders of His family as well as Brahmanas with due ceremony,
the vigilant Lord would give away from day to day, to well-adorned Brahmanas together with
silk clothes, deer-skin and sesamum seeds, thirteen thousand and eighty-four freshly calved
and beautifully caparisoned cows, docile by nature, yielding abundant milk and accompanied
with their calf, with their hors plated with gold, and hoofs with silver, and with their necks
decked with pearl necklaces. (7--9) He would then salute cows, Brahmanas, gods, elders,
preceptors and all created beings, who were but manifestations of His own Self, and would
duly touch auspicious things. (10) He would then adorn Himself, the one ornament of the
human world, with clothes and ornaments, peculiarly His own, as well as with excellent
garlands and pigments. (11) (Then,) looking into (liquid) ghee and a mirror, He would (first)
havea look at the cows and bulls, Brahmana and (images of) gods. Thereafter He would take
delight in causing boons to be conferred on all classes of people dwelling in the city and in
the gynaeceum and gratifying His other subjects by granting their desires. (12) Presenting
first (of all) the Brahmanas, (then) His friends and relations, (then) His ministers and
counsellors, and (then) His consorts with garlands, betel leaves and pigments, He would last
ofall accept them for Himself. (13) By that time His charioteer, (Daruka) would bring His most
wonderiul chariot drawn by Sugriva and other horses and, saluting the Lord, would stand
before Him. (14) Holding the charioteer's hands in His own hand, Sri Krsna would then

“(proceed to) mount the chariot accompanied by Satyaki and Uddhava, even as the sun
ascends the easter hills. (15) Watched with bashful and affectionate glances by the ladies
of the gynaeceum and reluctantly permitted by them to go, the Lord would smilé at them (for
a momeni) and, thus captivating their heart, would sally forth (to the Council Hall). (16)

सुधर्माख्यां सभां सर्वैर्वृष्णिभि: परिवारित: । प्राविशद् यन्निविष्टानां न सन्त्यङ्ग षडूर्मय: । १७॥

