660 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 30

SEERA MEME HERON TER ER OT OR ना न NET TOOT COREE शाल् न NEE RR METER HE Een

अथ त्रिंशोऽध्याय:

Discourse XXX

Holocaust of Yadu's Race
राजोवाच-
aa महाभागवत उद्ध्वे fla वनम्।द्वारवत्यां किमकरोद् भगवान् भूतभावन: । १ |
ब्रह्मशापोपसंसृष्टे स्वकुले यादवर्षभ: Sadi सर्वनेत्राणां तनुं स कथमत्यजत् । २ ।
प्रत्याक्रष्टुं नयनमबला यत्र लग्नं न We: कर्णाविष्टं न सरति ad यत् सतामात्मलग्नम् ।
यच्छीर्वाचां जनयति va fe नु मानं कवीनां दृष्टा जिष्णोर्युधि रथगतं wa तत्साम्यमीयु: । ३ ।
The king (Pariksit) submitted : Uddhava, a great devotee of the Lord, having
proceeded to the woodland (of BadarikaSrama), what did the Lord, the father of (all) created
beings, do next in Dwaraka ? (1) His (own) race having been wiped out through the curse
of Brahmanas, how did Sri Krsna (the foremost of the Yadus) cast off His body, the most
beloved of the eyes of all, from which ladies could not withdraw their eyes (once) riveted on
it, which, having (once) entered the ears of the virtuous and (then) clung to their mind
(through the passage of the ears), never departs from it; whose splendour (when glorified
by poets) gives a delightful character to their speech and what goes without saying, brings

honour to them, and looking on which, (when) seated in the car of (the all-victorious) Arjuna,
warriors (who fell in battle) attained similarity to it | (2-3)
ऋषिरुवाच

दिवि भुव्यन्तरिक्षे च महोत्पातान् समुत्थितान्। दृष्टाऽऽसीनान् सुधर्मायां gen: प्राह यदूनिदम् । ४ ।
एते घोरा महोत्पाता द्वार्वत्यां यमकेतव: । gene न स्थेयमत्र नो यदुपुङ्खवा: । ५ ।
स्रियो बालाश्च वृद्धाश्च शङ्खोद्धारं व्रजन्तित: । ad sare यास्यामो aa see सरस्वती । ६ ।
तत्राभिषिच्य yaa उपोष्य सुसमाहिता: । देवता: पूजयिष्याम: स्नपनालेपनार्हणै: । ७ ।
ब्राह्मणांस्तु महाभागान् कृतस्वस्त्ययना वयम्। गोभूहिरण्यवासोभिर्गजाश्वरथवेह्मभि: । ८ ।
विधिरेष ह्यरिष्टघ्रो मङ्गलायनमुत्तमम् । देवद्विजगवां पूजा भूतेषु परमो भव: । ९ ।

The sage (Sri Suka) replied : Seeing evil portents of a grave nature manifest in the
heavens andon earth as well asin the air, SriKrsna spoke thus to the Yadus sitting (together)
in (the assembly hall known by the name of) Sudharma. (4) “These grave portents of a terrible
nature appearing in Dwaraka are indications of a holocaust. We should not (therefore) stay
here even for anhour, O leaders of the Yadus ! (5) Let the womenfolk, infants and aged men
move from this place to (the sacred spot called) Sankhoddhara, while we shall proceed to
Prabhasa, where the river Saraswati flows towards the west (and joins the sea). (6) Having
bathed in that river and (thus) purified, and remaining without food, we shall (all) worship the
(images of) gods with a fully concentrated mind by bathing them, daubing them with sandal-
paste and offering (other) articles of worship. (7) Having been blessed (by the Brahmanas)
through the recitation of benedictory Mantras (sacred texts) and offering of flowers etc., we
shall also honour the highly blessed Brahmanas by gifting them cows. lands, gold and
raiments as well as elephants, horses, chariots and dwellings. (8) That is the surest way of
dispersing evil and the best means of securing happiness. Worship of gods. the Brahmanas
and cows brings supreme exaltation to men." (9)

इति सर्वे समाकर्ण्य यदुवृद्धा मधुद्विष: । तथेति नौभित्तीर्य प्रभासं प्रययू रथै: ।१०॥
तस्मिन् भगवताऽऽदिष्टं यदुदेवेन यादवा: । चक्रु: परमया भक्त्या सर्वश्रेयोपबृंहितम् । ११।
