Dis. 12] BOOK FIVE ~ 481

REREHEREEESELEKENE EHH EEE EES ६.३.३.३.३.३.३.३ HEH PRECERSES EEE SHAE AH EH EAH EOE EH HER EEE RENTER
—reeo SN न ना ह ता ता ता ती दौड TEEN

able to recognize the said mind—a conditioning vesture of the soul, which brings with it an
uninterrupted succession of grief, infatuation, disease, attachment, greed and animosity and
occasions a feeling of mineness —as a fertile soil yielding the agonies of birth and death for
man. (15-16) Therefore, (ever) circumspect and armed with the worship of the (holy) feet of
Lord Sri Hari in the form of your preceptor, get rid of this enemy (in the shape of the mind),
that possesses enormous strength and has grown very insolent through (your) connivance,
and, which though illusory in itself, yet robs you of your very self (true nature). (17)

Thus ends the eleventh discourse, forming part of the Dialogue between the Brahmana
(Bharata) and king Rahigana, in Book Five of the great and glorious Bhagavata-
Purana, otherwise known as the Paramaharmsa-Samhita.

SPEECH
ISIS ees

अथ द्वादशोऽध्याय:

Discourse XIl
Bharata answers the query of Rahigana

रहूगण उवाच

नमो नम: कारणविग्रहाय स्वरूपतुच्छीकृतविग्रहाय।
नमोऽवधूत द्विजबन्धुलिङ्गनिगूढनित्यानुभवाय तुभ्यम्। १॥
ज्वरामयार्तस्य यथागदं सन्निदाघदग्धस्य यथा ह्रिमाम्भ:।
`कुदेहमानाहिविदष्टदृष्टे: ब्रह्मन् वचस्तेऽमृतमौषधं Ai
अध्यात्मयोगग्रथितं तवोक्तमाख्याहि कौतूहलचेतसो मे। ३।

= . गि :
न ह्यञ्जसा तत्त्वविमर्शनाय भवानमुष्मिन् owed मनो मे।४।

Rahugana said : Hail, hail to you, who have taken this godlike form (for the protection
of the world) and have ignored your body in (the supreme bliss of ) Self-Realization ! Hail to
you, O master of Yoga, who have concealed your realization of Eternal Truth under the garb
of an unworthy Brahmana (a Brahmana only in name). (1) Like a palatable medicine to one
suffering from the disease of fever, or like cold water to one scorched by the heat (of the sun),
your word, O holy Brahmana, has proved a nectar-like remedy to me, whose vision
(judgment) has been bitten (warped) by the serpent of self-identification with this worthless
(perishable) body. (2) | shall, therefore, refer my doubt to you later; (kindly) explain to me
(just) at— present—inquisitive as | am—your teaching, which is pregnant with deep spiritual
import, in such a way as to make it easily intelligible. (3) My mind is bewildered by the
statement, you have made, O master of Yoga, that actions (such as carrying a load and so
on) and their visible effects (on the doer in the shape of fatigue etc.), though not illusory, are
(only) relative and cannot easily stand a sifting enquiry into the Truth (are not fit to be
recognized as the absolute truth). (4)

ब्राह्मण उवाच
ae जनो am चलन् पृथिव्यां a: पार्थिव: पार्थिव कस्य हेतो:।
तस्यापि चाङ्ग्रयोरधि गुल्फजङ्घाजानूरुमध्योरशिरोधरांसा:। ५।
