OS: he:
अथ प्रथमोऽध्याय:

Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana
Book Six

Discourse |
The introductory part of the story of Ajamila
राजोवाच

निवृत्तिमार्ग: कथित आदौ भगवता यथा। क्रमयोगोपलब्धेन ब्रह्मणा यदसंसृति: । १ ।
प्रवृत्तिलक्षणश्चैव apart मुने । योऽसावलीनप्रकृतेर्गुणसर्ग: पुन: पुन: । २ ।
अधर्मलक्षणा नाना नरकाश्चानुवर्णिता: | मन्वन्तरश्च व्याख्यात आद्य: स्वायम्भुवो यत: । ३ ।

प्रियव्रतोत्तानपदोर्वशस्तच्चरितानि च | द्वीपवर्षसमुद्राद्रिनद्युद्यानवनस्पतीन् Iv
धरामण्डलसंस्थानं भागलक्षणमानत: | ज्योतिषां विवराणां च यथेदमसृजद्बिभु: । ५ |
age महाभाग यथैव नरकान्नर: । नानोग्रयातनान्नेयात्तनमे व्याख्यातुमर्हसि । ६ ।

The king (Pariksit) said : The path of Nivrtti (cessation from worldly activity)has been
duly delineated by your revered self, following which final beatitude (in the form of non-return
to this world) is attained along with Brahma (the creator) when He (Brahma) has been
reached by gradual stages (such as the attainment of the abode of the fire-god). (1) And the
path characterized by worldly activity has also been described (by you in Book Ill), 0
(venerable) sage—the path which has for its goal (the attainment of) heavenly and other
sense-delights (the product of the three Gunas) and which leads to repeated embodiment
through the (same) Gunas (for the enjoyment of such pleasures) in the case of the Jivas on
whom Prakrti has not ceased her hold.(2) The various regions of hell, which are symbolic
of unrighteousness, have also been depicted by you. Andso has been toldat length (by you
in Book IV) the story of the first Manvantara, over which presided (the Manu called)
Swayambhuva (son of Brahma, the self-born), and so the posterity of Priyavrata and
Uttanapada as well as the story of (both) these kings. You have also narrated how the
almighty Lord brought into existence the (seven) Dwipas (the principal divisions of the
earth's surface) and (as many) oceans, as well as the mountains and rivers, gardens and
trees, the disposition of the terrestrial globe—with (special) reference to its divisions, their
distinctive character and extent—and (likewise) of the luminaries and the subterranean
regions. (3—5) Now be pleased to explain to me, O highly blessed one, how a man in this
world can (manage to) escape from hell, full of various horrible tortures. (6)
