Dis. 1] BOOK TEN

OPRAH ARE EMEA CHES ERS CER THE CEAEREL SAE TETAS ERER SSHRC Hea H SERCH HAH SHAH EERE

भूमिर्दृप्तनृपव्याजदैत्यानीकशातायुतै: । आक्रान्ता भूरिभारेण wane शरणं ययौ । १७॥
गौर्भूत्वाश्रुमुखी fast क्रन्दन्ती करुणं विभो: । उपस्थितान्तिके तस्मै व्यसनं स्वमवोचत eel
ब्रह्मा तदुपधार्याथ we देवैस्तवा सह।जगाम सनत्रिनयनस्तीरे क्षीरपयोनिधे: ee
तत्र Te जगन्नाथं देवदेवें वृषाकपिम्।पुरुषं पुरुषसूक्तेन उपतस्थे समाहित: 1201

fe amt गगने समीरितां fera वेधास्रिदशानुवाच ह।

सो Ue मे sperm: पुनर्विधीयतामाशु ada मा चिरम् ।२१॥

पुरव पुंसावधृतो भधराज्वरो भवद्धिरंशैर्यदुषूपजन्यताम् |

a qagat भरमीश्वरेश्वर: स्वकालदक्त्या क्षपयंश्चरेदु भुवि ।२२॥
वसुदेवगृहे साक्षाद् भगवान् पुरुष: पर:। जनिष्यते afd सम्भवन्तु सुरस्तिय: ।२३॥
वासुदेवकलानन्त सहस्रवदन: स्वराट्। अग्रतो भविता देवो हरे: प्रियचिकीर्षया ies
विष्णोर्माया भगवती war सम्मोहितं जगत्। आदिष्टा sams कार्यार्थे सम्भविष्यति 1241

Sri Suka replied : Your mind has arrived at a right conclusion, 0 jewel among royal
sages, as a sequal to which lasting devotion to the story of Lord Vasudeva has sprung up
in your heart. (15) An inquiry concerning the story of Lord Vasudeva indeed purifies all the
three persons, viz., the reciter, the interlocator and the audience (even) as the water touched
by the Lord's feet (the water in which an image of the Lord has been washed or the Ganga)
hallows all. (16) Oppressed with stupendous weight by millions of detachments of Daityas
in the disguise of arrogant kings, Mother Earth sought Brahma (the creator) as her
refuge.(17) Appearing as a disconsolate cow, its face wet with tears and piteously lowing,
she sought the presence of Brahma (the supreme ruler) and told him of her distress. (18)
Realizing her calamity, Brahma accompanied by Lord Siva (the three-eyed One) forthwith
proceeded to the shore of the ocean of milk (the abode of Lord Visnu) alongwith the (other)
gods as well as with her. (19) Having arrived there and fully collected (in mind), Brahma
prayed to Lord Visnu, the Supreme Person, the Ruler of the universe, the adored (even) of
the gods, in the terms of the Purusa-Stkta (a celebrated Vedic hymn addressed to the
Supreme Person). (20) Hearing in the course of a trance (state of complete absorption) a
voice uttered in the sky (the source of which was invisible), the creator clearly said to the gods
(as follows): "Hear from me, O gods, the word of the Supreme Person, and then do
accordingly at once; let there be no delay. (21) The affliction of Mother Earth had already
been known by the Supreme Person. (Therefore) let yourselves be bom among the Yadus
in part manifestation (and continue there) till that suzerain Lord walks on earth, reducing the
burden of Mother Earth through His own (Divine) Energy in the shape of Time. (22) Lord
Visnu Himself (the glorious Supreme Person) will be manifested in the house of Vasudeva,
let celestial women (also therefore) be born for His pleasure. (23) With intent to do what
pleases Sri Hari, the thousand-headed and self-effulgent Lord Ananta (the serpent-god
Sega), a part manifestation of Lord Vasudeva, will precede Him (as His elder brother). (24)
Commanded by the Lord, the Divine Maya (enchanting potency) of Lord Visnu, by whom the
(whole) universe stands bewitched, will (also) be bom in part manifestation for the purpose
of doing His work." (25)

श्रीगुक उवाच
. इत्यादिश्यामरगणान् प्रजापतिपतिर्बिभु: । आश्वास्य च महीं गीर्भि: स्वधाम परमं ययौ । २६॥
SriSuka resumed : Having thus directed the hosts of gods and reassured Mother Earth
with His (comforting) words, Brahma (the supreme lord), the ruler of Prajapatis (lords of
