40 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 10
RRR Bere tr

KHAN See eR Eke व व २२4० TEETH SPE SE देरे प्तै २ २२०२ २२२ २०२२ २२२२ २० २२२२

त्रस्ताब्धिर्बद्धसेतु: खलदवदहन: कोसलेन्दोऽवतान्न: । ४ ।

Sri Suka resumed : From (the loins of) Knatwanga sprang up Dirghabahu (the long-
armed one), of whom was born Raghu of wide renown. From (the loins of) the latter sprang
up the great king Aja, of whom Dasaratha was born. (1) Again entreated by the gods, Lord
Sri Hari Himself (who has already been seen by you in your mother's womb and) who is
(entirely) constituted of Brahma (the Absolute), assumed the role of a son to (the blessed)
Dagaratha—appearing in (as many as) four forms under the names of Sti Rama, Bharata,
Laksmana and Satrughna—Himself in His entirety and His brothers as His part
manifestation.(2) The story in the form of a chronicle of the aforesaid Sri Rama (the Spouse
of Sita) has (already) been narrated in detail, O Pariksit, by seers (like Valmiki) who had
realized the truth, and has undoubtedly been heard by you time and again. (I shall
accordingly content myself with reproducing it only ina nutshell.) (3) Having abandoned for
the sake of (redeeming the pledge of) His father (King Dagaratha) (His title to) kingship, He
roamed about from forest to forest by His lotus-feet, which were too soft (even) for the touch
of the (petal-like) hands of His beloved Consort (Sita), His fatigue from the journey being
relieved (now and again) by (the blessed) Hanuman (the monkey chief) and His own younger
brother (Laksmana, who accompanied Him to the forest and kneaded His feet and other
limbs alongwith Hanuman). (The deity presiding over) the ocean was terrified by the (very)
display of His brows knit in anger excited by the (grievous) separation from His Darling (Sita),
which had been brought about by the mutilation of SGrpanakha (sister of Ravana, the demon
king of Lanka, so-called because she had nails as big as a winnowing basket, nay, whose
nose and ears were chopped off by Laksmana atthe instance of SriRama, anincident which
provoked Ravana to steal away Sita in the absence of Sri Rama and Laksmana). May that
Lord of Kosala (Oudh)—who (subsequently) caused a bridge to be built across the sea and
exterminated the host of wicked demons (including Ravana) even as a wild fire consumes
a (whole) forest—protect us! (4)

विश्वामित्राध्वरे a4 मारीचाद्या fave: । पर्यतो लक्ष्मणस्यैव हता नैर्ऋतपुङ्खवा: । ५ ।
यो creda धनुरैशमुग्रं सीतास्वयंवरगृहे त्रिशतोपनीतम्।
आदाय बालगजलील इवेक्षुयष्टिं सजीकृतं नृप विकृष्य बभञ्ज मध्ये । ६ ।
जित्वानुरूपगुणशीलवयोऽङ्गरूपां सीताभिधां श्रियमुरस्यभिलब्धमानाम् |
art ब्रजन् भृगुपतेर्व्यनयत् see दर्पं महीमकृत यस्तिरराजबीजाम् 9 |
a: सत्यपाशपरिवीतपितुर्निदेशं स्रैणस्य चापि शिरसा aye सभार्य: |
राज्यं fri प्रणयिन: सुहृदो निवासं त्यक्त्वा ययौ वनमसूनिव मुक्तसङ्घ: । ८ ।
रक्ष:स्वसुर्व्यकृत STE: खरत्रिशिरदूषणमुख्यबन्धून्।

जघ्नेऽद्भुतेणवपुषाऽऽश्रमतोऽपकृष्ठटो Ata farsa यथा कमुग्र: ।१०॥
ait at कृपणवत् प्रियया वियुक्त: स्रीसङ्घिनां गतिमिति प्रथयंश्चचार 1221
बुद्ध्वाथ वालिनि हते प्लवगेन्द्र सैन्यैर्वेलामगात् स मनुजोऽजभवार्चिताङ्घ्रि: ।१२॥
