774 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 9

HPOHHAAHKEKEAEHACHAATH LEC EOREERAECHEAEE LEH OK ELLE HE EEAOHEKTENCECEHA EL OHTA व त् AEN

the leaders of the Asuras, who had no idea of Her greatness, agreed to Her condition, saying
"Be it so”. (13)

अथोपोष्य कृतस्नाना हुत्वा च awe aan गोविप्रभूतेभ्य: कृतस्वस्त्ययना द्विजै: 1 ex
यथोपजोषं वासांसि परिधायाहतानि ते। ery प्राविशन्सर्वे प्रागग्रेषभिभूषिता: ।१५॥
प्राङ्मुखेषूपविष्टेषु सुरेषु दितिजेषु च ।धूपामोदितशालायां जुष्टायां माल्यदीपके: ।१६॥

wet Re  करभोरुरुशद्दुकूलश्रोणीतटालसगतिर्मदविह्वलाक्षी |

सा कूजती कनकनूपुरशिञ्जितेन कुम्भस्तनी कलशपाणिरथाविवेश । १७॥

संवीक्ष्य सम्मुमुहुरुत्स्मितवीक्षणेन देवासुरा विगळलितस्तनपट्टिकान्ताम् । १८॥
असुराणां सुधादानं सर्पाणामिव दुर्नयम्।मत्वा जातिनृशंसानां न at व्यभजद्च्युत: ।१९॥
कल्पयित्वा पृथक् पङ्क्तीरुभयेषां जगत्पति: | तांश्चोपवेशायामास स्वेषु स्वेषु च पङ्क्तिषु 1201
दैत्यान्गृहीतकलशो वञ्चयन्नुपसञ्चरै: | दूरस्थान् पाययामास जरामृत्युहरां सुधाम् । २१।
a पालयन्त: समयमसुरा: स्वकृतं नृप।तूष्णीमासन्कृतस्नेहा: स्रीविवादजुगुप्सया । २२।
तस्यां कृतातिप्रणया: प्रणयापायकातरा: | बहुमानेन चाबद्धा Are: किञ्चन विप्रियम् । २३॥
॰देवलिङ्गंप्नतिच्छन्न: स्वर्भानुर्देवसंसदि i प्रविष्ट: सोममपिबच्चन्द्रार्काभ्यां च सूचित: । २४॥।
= चक्रेण क्षुरधारेण जहार पिबत: fre efter कबन्धस्तु सुधयाप्लावितोऽपतत् । २५॥
शिरस्त्वमरतां नीतमजो ग्रहमचीक्नुपत्। ag पर्वणि चन्दरार्कावभिधावति वैरधी: 1261
पीतप्रायेऽमृते देवैर्भगवाँल्लोकभावन: | पर्यतामसुरेन्द्राणां स्वं रूपं जगृहे हरि: 1201

ata ae wala यत् क्रियतेऽपृथक्त्वात् सर्वस्य तद् भवति मूलनिषेचनं यत् । २९॥
इति श्रीमद्भागवते महापुराणे पारमहंस्यां संहितायामष्टमस्कन्घेऽमृतमथने नवमोऽध्याय: ।९।

Then, having fasted (for a day) and finished (their) bath, (nay,) propitiated the fire through
sacrificial offerings and bestowed (appropriate) gifts on cows and the Brahmanas as well as
on (other) living beings, they had auspicious rites (such as the recitation of benedictory
prayers) performed (for their success) by Brahmanas. (14) (Again,) putting on a set ofclothes
altogether new according.to their pleasure, and graced with ornaments in every limb, they
all squatted on blades of Kuga grass that had their ends pointing to the east.(15) When the
gods as well as the Daityas (the sons of Diti) had taken their seat, with their faces turned
towards the east, in a hall scented with fragrant fumes and adorned with wreaths of flowers
and lights; that beautiful damsel, slow of gait due to her bulky hips, that were covered over
with a charming piece of linen, with eyes swimming (as if) under intoxication and breasts
resembling a pair of (small) vases, forthwith made her way into that chamber, jarin her hands,
and warbling (as it were) through the jingling of her gold anklets, O ruler of men ! (16-17)
Looking intently at her, who was no other then the supreme Deity and a counterpart of
Goddess Sri (Beauty personified), (nay,) who was adorned with a pair of gold ear-rings and
had charming ears, nose, cheeks and mouth and from over whose breasts the end ofthe strip
of cloth covering them had slightly slipped (thus partially exposing them), the gods and
Asuras felt completely enchanted (particularly) by her glances accompanied witha smile.(18)
