522 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 20

SR जा कक RR Wr FWY eR RR RR Re RT ET eT TH कौ जीनची क क

ये द्विरदपतय ऋॠषभ: पुष्करचूडो वामनोऽपराजित इति सकललोकस्थितिहेतव: | ३९ । तेषां स्वविभूतीनां
लोकपालानां च विविधवीर्योपबृंहणाय भगवान् परममहापुरुषो महाविभूतिपतिरन्तर्याम्यात्मनो विशुद्धसत्त्वं
धर्मज्ञानवैराग्यैश्वर्याद्यष्टमहासिद्धयुपलक्षणं विष्वक्सेनादिभि३ स्वपार्षदप्रवर: परिवारितो
निजवरायुधोपशोभितैर्निजभुजदण्डैर सन्धारयमाणस्तस्मिन् गिरिवरे समन्तात्सकललोकस्वस्तय

आस्ते।४०॥। आकल्पमेवं ad wa wa भगवानात्मयोगमायया विरचितविविधलोक-
यात्रा गोपीथायेत्यर्थ:।४१॥। योऽन्तर्बिस्तार एतेन ह्यलोकपरिमाणं च व्याख्यातं
यद्वहिर्लोकालोकाचलात्। तत: परस्ताद्योगेश्वरगतिं विशुद्धामुदाहरन्ति। ४२॥

Thus far has been reckoned to be the disposition of the terrestrial world by the learned
with (particular) reference to the extent, distinctive character and configuration (of its
various parts). As for the region extending from Mount Sumeru to the aforesaid Lokaloka
mountain, it covers a quarter of the entire diameter of the terrestrial globe, which is
calculated to be fifty crore Yojanas (or four thousand million miles).(38) Beyond that
mountain live the (four) great elephants—Rsabha, Puskaracida, Vamana and Aparajita
by name—that have been posted in the four quarters by Brahma (the self-born), the
adored of the whole universe, and are (held) responsible for maintaining (the balance of)
the entire globe. (39) By way of augmenting the various powers of those elephants as well
as of the guardians of the world (Indra and others)—who are (partial) manifestations of the
Lord's own glory—and for the welfare of all the worlds, the almighty Lord, the supremely
exalted Person, the Possessor of the highest glory, the Inner Controller, dwells on all sides
on this great mountain, surrounded by His foremost attendants, Viswaksena and others,
and manifesting His divine form (consisting of Sattva unmixed with Rajas and Tamas),
characterized by (Supreme) virtue, omniscience, (the highest form of) dispassion,
omnipotence and other divine attributes as well as by the eight superhuman powers (Such
as that of assuming a form as minute as an atom) and distinguished by His (four) stout
arms—adorned with His own (characteristic) weapons (conch, discus and others). (40)
What | mean is that the Lord has assumed the aforesaid form for the maintenance of the
career of the various worlds evolved by His own Yogamaya (wonderful creative energy).(41)
The extent of Aloka (the region not illuminated by the sun's rays) too, which stretches on
the other side of the Lokaloka mountain, has been explained by (as equal to) the extent
of the area falling on this side (of the said mountain). Beyond Aloka the learned declare
(the existence of) the sacred region which canbe traversed only by Masters of Yoga (divine
personages). (42)

अण्डमध्यगत: सूर्यो द्यावाभूम्योर्यदन्तरम्। सूर्वाण्डगोलयोर्मध्ये Hier: स्यु: पञ्चविंशति:।४३॥
FAS एष एतस्मिन् चदभूत्ततो मार्तण्ड sia व्यपदेश:। हिरण्यगर्भं gia चद्धिरण्याण्डसमुद्धव:। ४४

सूर्येण fe विभज्यन्ते दिश: खं द्यौर्मही भिदा । स्वर्गांपव्गो नरका रसौकांसि च सर्वशा:। ४५

देवतिर्यङ्मनुष्याणां सरीसृपसवीरुधाम् | सर्वजीवनिकयानां सूर्य आत्मा दृगीश्वर:। ४६ |

इति श्रीयद्भागवते महापुराणे पारमहंस्यां संहितायां पञ्चसस्कन्धे Ya HTT
समुद्रवषसंनिवेशपरिमाणलक्षणा विंशोऽध्वाय:। २० ।

(The orb of) the sun is located in the middle of the egg (of this universe), which
corresponds to the centre of space lying between the upper and lower shells of the cosmic
egg. The (extent of) space between (the orb of) the sun and (the outer shell of) the cosmic
egg (onall sides) is twenty-five crore Yojanas (or two thousand million miles). (43) Because
