292 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 1

We Me Re POW VN TRAN Se RRO A KOH EH SHREK HHH CTH ७.६.३.३.३.३.3.७.६.३.३.३.३..७.३.३.३.३.३.७.३.३.३ ३ .3.3.३..३.७.७.३.३..३..३.३.३.३.३..३..७..३..५

as Aswasira, who had taken a vow of austere penance. (Now) hear from me of Bhrgu's
race. (42)

भृगु: ख्यात्यां महाभाग: पत्यां पुत्रानजीजनत्। धातारं च विधातारं Ber च भगवत्पराम् ।४३॥

आयतिं नियति da सुते मेरुस्तयोरदात्।ताभ्याँ तयोरभवतां मृकण्ड: प्राण एव च ।४४॥

मार्कण्डेयो मृकण्डस्य sneer a: कविश्च भार्गवो यस्य भगवानुशना सुत: ।४५॥

त एते मुनय: क्षत्तर्लोकान् aioe iw कर्दमदौहित्रसंतान- कथितस्तव ।
श्रृण्वत: HEME सद्य: पापहर: पर: ।४६॥

The illustrious sage Bhrgu begot through his wife, Khyati, two sons, Dhata and Vidhata,
and a daughter named Sri (a part manifestation of goddess Laksmi), who was devoted to
the Lord. (43) The sage Meru severally gave away his two daughters, Ayati and Niyati, to
these (two sons of Bhrgu). By them (Ayati and Niyati) Dnata and Vidhata severally had (two
sons) Mrkanda and Prana. (44) (The celebrated sage) Markandeya was the son of Mrkanda,.
while the sage Vedasira was sprung from the loins of Prana. The sage Bhrgu had one more
son, Kavi by name, who had the worshipful USana (the sage Sukracarya, the preceptor of
the demons), for his son. (45) The above-mentioned sages too (in their turn) peopled the
(different) worlds with their descendants, O Vidura. | have thus given you an account of the
progeny of Kardama's grandsons (daughters’ sons), which is the best and quickest means
of driving away the sins of a man who would listen to it with reverence. (46)

प्रसूतिं मानवीं दक्ष उपयेमे ह्यजात्मज:। तस्यां ससर्ज दुहितॄ: षोडशामललोचना: ive!
त्रयोदशादाद्धर्माय तथैकामग्नये विभु: । पितृभ्य wat युक्तेभ्यो भवायैकां भवच्छिदे ॥४८॥
sega at tat प्रसादमभयं ciate: qe मुदं ae: स्मयं पुष्टिरसूयत ito!
योगं क्रियोन्नतिर्दर्पमर्थं बुद्धिरसूयत | मेधा स्मृतिं तितिक्षा तु क्षेमं ह्री: प्रश्रयं सुतम् । ५१॥
मूर्ति: सर्वगुणोत्पत्तिर्नरनारायणावृषी 142 |
ययोर्जन्मन्यदो विश्वमभ्यनन्दत्सुनिर्वृतम् । मनांसि ककुभो वाता: wag: सरितोऽद्रय: 1431
दिव्यवाद्यन्त तूर्याणि पेतु: कुसुमवृष्टय: | मुनयस्तुष्टुवरुस्तुष्टा जगुर्गन्धर्वकिन्नरा: । ५४
Jaa स्म स्रियो ta आसीत्परममङ्गलम्।देवा ब्रह्मादय: सर्वे उपतस्थुरभिष्टवै: । ५५॥

Daksa, another (mind-born) son of Brahma, accepted the hand of Prasuti, (the third)
daughter of Swayambhuva Manu (as already mentionedin verse 11 above), and through her
he begot sixteen fair-eyed daughters. (47) Daksa gave away thirteen (of them) to Dharma
(the god of piety), another to Agni (the fire-god), still another to (all) the Pitrs (manes)
combined and the last one to Bhava (Lord Siva), who cuts asunder the bonds of worldly
life.(48) Sraddha, Maitri, Daya, Santi, Tusti, Pusti, Kriya, Unnati, Buddhi, Medha, Titiksa, Hri
and Murti are (the names of) Dharma’s wives. (49) (Of these) Sraddha bore Subha; Maitri,
Prasada; Daya, Abhaya; Santi, Sukha; Tusti, Mud (a daughter); and Pusti gave birth to
Smaya. (50) (Even so) Kriya broughtforth Yoga; Unnati, Darpa; Buddhi, Artha; Medha, Smrti
(a female child); Titiksa, Ksema; Hri a son called Pragraya. (51) And Murti, who is a mine
of all virtues, bore the (divine) sages Nara and Narayana, on (the occasion of) whose descent
(on earth) the whole world rejoiced, highly pleased, and the minds (of the people) as well as

* Twelve of the thirteen wives of Dharma are the deities presiding over virtues and mental states and other phenomena
of the same name, viz., reverence, friendliness (towards all), compassion, calmness of mind, complacence, prosperity, formal
worship, advancement, prudence, intelligence, forbearance and modesty. The progeny of these are also embodiments of
similar other virtues, mental states and phenomena which are the direct outcome of the previous ones. They are in order good
fortune, placidity, fearlessness, happiness, joy, pride, concentration of mind, arrogance, opulence, understanding, peace of
mind and civility.
