Dis. 11] BOOK:‘ONE 41

BERRA RR RRR RHE Re ROR HE RTH RONEN BE BCE NT RAY Be ROT RT WT BEM BY MERA NT BBL RE WT AE Wie WT SY RR REM RW RE HRTEM Re RE ROOM MR RE

मरुधन्वमतिक्रम्य सौवीराभीरयो: परान्। आनर्तान् भार्गवोपागाच्छान्तवाहो मनाग्विभु: 1341
तत्र तत्र ह तत्रत्यैर्हरि: प्रत्युद्यतार्हण: । सायं भेजे दिशं पश्चाद्गविष्ठो गां गतस्तदा 1361
इति श्रीमद्भागवते महापुराणे पारमहंस्यां संहितायां प्रथमस्कन्धे नैमिषीयोपाख्याने श्रीकृष्णद्वारकागमनं नाम दहामोऽध्याय: ।१०॥

While the womenfolk of Hastinapura were uttering such words, Sri Hari (Sri Krsna) went
His way, greeting them by His smiling looks. (31) Apprehending danger from His foes, king
Yudhisthira despatched out of sheer affection an army consisting of all the four limbs, (viz.,
elephants, horses, chariots and foot soldiers) to serve as an escort for Sri Krsna (the Slayer
of the demon Madhu). (32) Sri Krsna (the grandson of Strasena) now sent back the
Pandavas (the descendants of Kuru), who being strongly attached to Him had come very far,
distressed at the thought of separation from Him. He then departed for His own city
(Dwaéraka) with His favourite companions (Uddhava, Satyaki and others). (33) Passing
through the territories of Kuru-Jangala, Pafcala and Sdrasena (Mathura) and the tract
stretching along the banks of the Yamuna, as well as Brahmavarta and Kuruksetra, the
kingdoms of Matsya and Saraswata (the territory stretching along the banks of the
Saraswati) and Marudhanwa, the Lord reached the kingdom of Anaria (Gujarat), lying
beyond the principalities of Sauvira and Abhira, O Saunaka, His horses being a bit
exhausted by that time. (34-35) In every part of the country He passed through, the people
residing there honoured Sri Hari (Sri Krsna) with presents (of various kinds). At dusk He
would alight from His car and, repairing to some lake, say His Sandhya prayers. (36)

Thus ends the tenth discourse entitled "Sri Krsna's Return to Dwaraka", forming
part of the story relating to the Naimisa forest, in Book One of the
great and glorious Bhagavata-Purana, otherwise known
as the Paramahamsa-Samhita.

२ १३०२ १
re Si ere

अथैकादशोऽध्याय:

Discourse XI
Right royal reception of Sri Krsna at Dwaraka
सूत उवाच
आनर्तान् स उपव्रज्य स्वृद्धाञ्जनपदान् स्वकान्। दध्मौ दरवरं तेषां विषादं शमयन्निव । १ ।
a wert धवलोदरो दरोऽप्युरुक्रमस्याधरञ्चोणशोणिमा |
दाध्मायमान: करकञ्जसम्पुटे यथाब्जखण्डे कलहंस उत्स्वन: । २ ।
तमुपश्रुत्य निनदॆ जगद्भयभयावहम्। प्रत्युद्ययु: प्रजा: सर्वा भर्तृदर्शनलालसा: । ३ ।
तत्रोपनीतबलयो रवनेर्दीपमिवादृता: | आत्मारामं पूर्णकामं निजलाभेन नित्यदा । ४ |
प्रीत्युत्कुल्लमुखा: प्रोच्युर्हर्षगद्गदया गिरा frat सर्वसुहृदमवितारमिवार्भका: । ५ ।
Sita continued : Reaching His highly prosperous territory of Anarta, Sti Krsna blew His
great conch (Paficajanya) to soothe as it were the grief of His people (caused by His long
absence). (1) Being thus blown, the conch, with its white bulb turned red on account of its
contact with the rosy lips of the almighty Lord, shone resplendent in His lotus palms like a
loudly singing swan perched on a pair of red lotuses. (2) Hearing that (familiar) blast, which
scared away the terror of the world, the entire population (of Dwaraka) sallied forth to meet
[564] B. M. 4—
