268 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 39

Seb a RA Oe Ob eH EE SENSE H ETEK E AHEM S Re HSH E woe ल्जन्र Re

तत्रापि च यथापूर्वमासीनौ पुनरेव स: । न्यमजद् दर्शनं यन्मे मृषा किं सलिले तयो: ।४३॥

भूयस्तत्रापि सोऽद्राक्षीत् स्तूयमानमहीश्वरम्। सिद्धचारणगन्धर्वैरसुरैर्नतकन्धरै: 1४४॥
सहस्रशिरसं “देवे सहस्रफणमौलिनम्।नीलाम्बरं बिसश्वेतं शृङ्गै: श्चेतमिव स्थितम् ।४५॥
तस्योत्सङ्गे घनड्यामं पीतकोहेयवाससम्। पुरुषं चतुर्भुजं झान्तं पद्मपत्रारुणेक्षणम् sa
चारुप्रसन्नवदनं _चारुहासनिरीक्षणम्। सुभ्रून्नसं चारुकर्णं सुकपोलारुणाधरम् ।४७॥

प्रलम्बपीवरभुजं तुङ्गांसोर:स्थलश्रियम्। कम्बुकण्ठं निम्ननाभिं वलिमत्पल्लवोदरम् ।४८॥
बृहत्कटितटश्रोणिकरभोरुद्वयान्वितम् । चारुजानुयुगं चारुजङ्घायुगलसंयुतम् ।४९॥
तुङ्गगुल्फारुणनखव्रातदीधितिभिर्वृतम् | नवाङ्गुल्यङ्गुष्ठदलैर्विलसत्पादपङ्कजम् ।५०॥
सुमहार्हमणिव्रातकिरीटकटकाङ्गदै: | कटिसूत्रब्रह्मसूत्रहारनूपुरकुण्डलै: 1५१॥
भ्राजमानं पद्मकरं शङ्खचक्रगदाधरम् । श्रीवत्सवक्षसं भ्राजत्कौस्तुभं वनमालिनम् ।५२।
सुनन्दनन्दप्रमुखैर पार्षदै: सनकादिभि: । सुरेरैर्ब्रह्मरुद्राद्यैर्नवभिश्च द्विजोत्तमै: 1431
प्रह्रादनारदवसुप्रमुखैर्भागवतोत्तमै: veg पृथग्भावैर्वचोभिरमलात्मभि: । ५४
श्रिया पुष्ट्या गिरा कान्त्या stat तुष्टद्येलयोर्जया | विद्ययाविद्यया हाक्त्या मायया च निषेवितम् । ५५1

(On this side) the Lord, for His part, safely reached (about noon) with Balarama and
Akrdra, O protector of men, (the bank of) the Kalindi, that washes off (all) sin, in His chariot,
swift as wind. (38) Washing there His hands and feet etc., and drinking of its sweet water
green as an emerald, He went near a cluster of trees (where the chariot was made to stand)
and got into the chariot alongwith Balarama. (39) Helping the two Brothers to get into the
chariot and taking feave of Them, AkrGra returned (for his midday devotions) to the pool
(known by the name of Ananta-Tirtha or Brahmahrada) in the Yamuna and performed his
ablutions with due ceremony. (40) Plunging in that water and muttering the (holy) Gayatri-
Mantra (the essence of the eternal Veda), Akrira beheld (in the water) the same Balarama
and Sri Krsna seated together. (41) (He said to Himself), "How can the two Sons of
Anakadundubhi, who are seated in the chariot, be here ? In that case (if they are really here),
they should not be in the chariot." Saying so he emerged from the water and perceived the
two Brothers seated even there (in the chariot) as heretofore. He (therefore) took a plunge
again saying (to himself), "Is my having seen Them in the water false?" (42-43) This time he
saw in that very water, being glorified by Siddhas, Caranas, Gandharvas and Asuras with
bent heads, the thousand-headed god Sesa (the lord of serpents) —with his thousand hoods
protected by (the same number of) diadems—clad in blue (silk), (himself) white as a lotus
fibre and rooted (there) like Mount Kailasa (the silvery mountain) with its (golden) peaks
(corresponding to the diadems of Sesa). (44-45) He (further) beheld on the coils of the
serpent-god Lord Visnu (the Supreme Person), dark-brown as a cloud, clad in yellow silk,
possessed of four arms and eyes reddish like fotus petals, and looking (very) serene. (46)
He wore a lovely and cheerful countenance with winsome smiles and glances, shapely
eyebrows, a prominent nose, beautiful ears, charming cheeks and ruddy lips. (47) He had
pretty long and plump arms, high shoulders, a breast which is the abode of Sri, a conch-
shaped neck, a deep navel and a belly shaped like a leaf (of the Indian fig tree) and marked
with folds. (48) He had bulky buttocks and hips and a pair of thighs, tapering like the outer
edge of the hand from the wrist to the root of the little finger, a pair of well-formed knees as
well as a pair of shapely shanks. (49) He had prominent ankles and was enveloped with rays
of light radiating from the ruddy nails (of His toes) and had lotus-like feet charming with toes
