204 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 23

CRIN EAI SOIR nod Eee eee OES Tee CLEEHESCeHHS TOPS C EME SEL eRe Ee eH eT

righteousness). (7) Indeed anyone eating the food cooked in the house even of a house-
holder consecrated fora sacrifice other than the one involving animal slaughter and different
from a sacrifice known by the name of Sautramani, O most righteous souls, is not defiled
(thereby).” (8) Though listening to the aforesaid solicitation of the Lord, the Brahmanas paid
no heed to it, cherishing as they did petty hopes (of ascending to heaven from which one is
sure to fall one day) though engaged in elaborate undertakings, and ignorant as they were,
though accounting themselves advanced (in knowledge). (9) The foolish Brahmanas, who
regarded the mortal body as their own self, took no notice of Sri Krsna—who was no other
than the almighty Lord Visnu, the supreme Reality, constituting as He does the place and time
(for the performance of a sacrifice), the diverse substance (for being offered to the sacrificial
fire), the mystic formulas (employed in invoking the various deities and recited at the time of
pouring oblations), the procedure (laid down for conducting a sacrifice), the priests (officiating
ata sacrifice), the (sacrificial) fires, the divinities (intended to be propitiated through a sacrifice),
the sacrificer, the act of sacrifice (itself) as well as the religious merit (resulting from the
performance of a sacrifice) looking upon Him as a mere human being. (10-11) When the
Brahmanas neither said "yes" nor did they say "no", 0 chastiser of foes, the cowherd boys
returned disappointed and informed Sri Krsna and Balarama accordingly. (12) On hearing
of it the almighty Lord of the universe burst into laughter and spoke to the Gopas again (as
follows) in order to show (to them) the conduct of the worldly people (who would) not feel
humiliated much less relax their effort even when their prayer was turned down once):—(13)
"Communicate to their wives the fact of my having arrived (here) alongwith Sankarsana
(Balarama). They will give you food according to your desire, affectionate as they are (by
nature) and living as they do in me through their mind." (14)
गत्वाथ पत्नीशालायां दृष्टाऽसीना: स्वलङ्कृता: | नत्वा द्विजसतीर्गोपा: प्रश्रिता इदमनब्रुवन् ।१५।
नमो at विप्रपत्नीभ्यो निबोधत वचांसि न: i इतोऽविदूरे arm कृष्णेनेहेषिता वयम्।१६॥
TTS, WATS: सरामो दूरमागत: । बुभुक्षितस्य तस्यान्नं सानुगस्य प्रदीयताम् ।१७।
श्रुत्वाच्युतमुपायातं नित्यं तद्दर्शनोत्सुका: । तत्कथाक्षिप्तमनसो वभूवुर्जातसम्भ्रमा: 1१८1
चतुर्विधं बहुगुणमन्नमादाय भाजनै: । अभिसस्रु: प्रियं सर्वा: समुद्रमिव निम्नगा: ।१९॥
निषिध्यमाना: पतिभिरभ्रातृभिर्बन्धुभि: qa: । भगवत्युत्तमरलोके दीर्घश्रुतधृताशया: 1२०॥
यमुनोपवनेऽशोकनवपल्लवमण्डिते । विचरन्तं ga गोपै: साग्रजं ददृशु: स्रिय: ।२१॥
art हिरण्यपरिधिं वनमाल्यवर्हधातुप्रवालनटवेषमनुव्रतांसे |
विन्यस्तहस्तमितरेण घुनम्यानफ्या कणत्पिलालक्कपोलघुखाळाहम्सम्। २२॥
अन्त;प्नवेइयसुस्रिरंपरिंरभ्यंतापंप्राज्ञंयथाभिपतयोविजद्दु’रिन्द्र।२३।

Presently the cowherd boys went and found the virtuous wives of the Brahmanas seated
in the apartment reserved for the wives of the sacrificers, well adorned and, bowing to them,
submissively spoke as follows:—(15) “Hail to you, Brahmana ladies ! (Pray) listen to our
words. We have been sent here by Sri Krsna, whois rambling not very far from this place.(16)
Pasturing the cows in the company of (other) cowherd boys and accompanied by Balarama,
he has come far away (from home). Let some food be given to him, hungry as he is alongwith
his followers." (17) Hearing of Sri Krsna (the immortal Lord) having come (so) near, the
Brahmanaladies— who had been ever anxious to have a look at Him, their mind having been
lured by His stories—were seized with a flurry. (18) Taking (with them) in vessels excellent
