792 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 13

REMHHHHKHLEOHH KEL AHHH HEHE SARACEN EACH ESHER ESTHRE CEA CCH LEENA ETH HEE TH HERE HOH RHR
प्तर्तर्त्त

become the Manu (in relation to that Manvantara); and Nirmoka, Virajaska and others will
be the sons of Savarni, O protector of human beings! (11) In that (the eighth) Manvantara,
the Sutapas,(the Virajas and the Amrtaprabhas will be the (three orders of) gods (in office);
and the demon Bali, the son of Virocana (Prahrada's son) will be their Indra (ruler).(12)
Having (already) gifted (in the current Manvantara the whole of) this earth to Lord Visnu (in
the form of the divine Dwarf) when the latter asked for land measuring (not more than) three
paces, and relinquishing the office of Indra (which will be) attained by him (through the grace
of the Lord in the next Manvantara), he will then achieve perfection (in the form of final
beatitude). (13) He is the same Bali who was (first) bound by the Lord asa token of pleasures
and then installed in (the subterranean region of) Sutala, which is (even) richer than heaven,
and where he continues to this day like (another) Indra.* (14)Galava, Diptiman, Rama
(Paragurama), ASwatthama (the son of Dronacarya, a preceptor of the Kauravas), Krpacarya
(another preceptor of the Kauravas), Rsya$rnga (who officiated at the sacrifice performed
by Emperor DaSaratha for obtaining progeny) and our father, the divine Vedavyasa (who has
his abode in a grove of jujube trees)—these will be the seven seers in that (the eighth)
Manvantara by virtue of their Yogic attainments. At present they are (all) living each in his
own hermitage. (15-16) Sprung from the loins of Devaguhya through Saraswati, the Lord will
be known as Sarvabhauma. Wresting the throne (of heaven) from Purandara (the present
Indra), the all-powerful Lord will bestow it on Bali. (17)

नवमो दक्षसावर्णिर्मनुर्वरुणसम्भव: | भूतकेतुर्दीप्तकेतुरित्याद्यास्तत्सुता नृप । १८।

Unt मरीचिगर्भाद्या देवा इन्द्रोऽद्भुत: Wa: । द्युतिमत्प्रमुखास्तत्र भविष्यन्त्यृषयस्तत: ।१९॥

आयुष्मतोऽप्बुधारायामृषभो भगवत्कला | भविता येन संराद्धां त्रिलोकीं भोक्ष्यतेऽद्भुत: 1201

Daksasavarni, son of Varuna (the god of water) will be the ninth Manu. Bhitaketu,

Diptaketu and others will be his sons, O protector of human beings.(18) The Paras, the
Maricigarbhas and so on will be the (orders of) gods and Adbhuta has been declared to be
their Indra (ruler). Again, Dyutiman and otherst will be the (seven) seers in that Manvantara.(19)
Sprung from (the loins of) Ayusman through Ambudhara, an emanation of the Lord will
appear under the name of Rsabha. (And) Adbhuta will rule over the three worlds conquered
(on his behalf) by (the said) Rsabha. (20)

ब्रह्मसावर्णिरुपश्लोकसुतो महान्।तत्सुता भूरिषेणाद्या हविष्मत्प्रमुखा द्विजा: 1281

हविष्मान्सुकृति: सत्यो जयो मूर्तिस्तदा द्विजा: । सुवासनविरुद्धाद्या देवा: ay: सुरेश्वर: 1221

विघ्वक्सेनो विषूच्यां तु शम्भो: सख्यं करिष्यति । जात: स्वांशेन भगवान्गृहे विश्चसृजो fay: 1221
The great Brahmasavarni, son of Upasloka, will be the tenth Manu. Bhurisena and others
willbe his sons and Havisman and so onwill be the (seven) Brahmana sages. (21) Havisman,
Sukrti, Satya, Jaya and Murti will be (the names of some of) the Brahmana sages in that
Manvantara. The Suvasanas and the Viruddhas will be the (orders of) gods (in office) and
Sambhu will be the Indra (the ruler of the gods). (22) Born with a part of His divine essence
in the house of Viswasrk through Vistci under the name of Viswaksena, the almighty Lord

will actually make friends with Sambhu (the then Indra). (23)

मनुर्वै धर्मसावर्णिरेकादशम आत्मवान्। अनागतास्तत्सुताश्च सत्यधर्मादयो दश 121
विहङ्मा: कामगमा निर्वाणरुचय: सुरा: | इन्द्रश्च वैधृतस्तेषामृषयश्चारुणादय: 124 |

* Areference to the story of Bali's overthrow, told atlengthin Discourses XIX to XXII below, will show that the Lord divested
Bali of his sovereignty of the three worlds only in order to shower His grace on him.

t According to the Harivarnsa, Savana, Dyutiman, Harvya, Vasu, Medhatithi, Jyotisman and Satya are the names of the
seven seers holding office in the ninth Manvantara.
