Dis. 27 ] BOOK THREE 261

BEAK HKHAREK SEY OK ह क को YEU EH EHH ON ee eee eae He BERGE He Beate ae Re We Bs BeBe BT BBR RR HH Re Re Re Re Re Be He A

प्रकृति: पुरुषस्येह दह्यमाना त्वहर्निशम्। तिरोभवित्री शनकैरम्नेर्योनिरिवारणि: 123 |
भुक्तभोगा परित्यक्ता दृष्टदोषा च fee: । नेश्वरस्याशुभं धत्ते a महिम्नि स्थितस्य च । २४।
यथा ह्यप्रतिबुद्धस्य प्रस्वापो बअह्वनर्थभृत्। स wa प्रतिबुद्धस्य न a मोहाय कल्पते । २५॥
एवं विदिततत्त्वस्य प्रकृतिर्मयि मानसम्। युञ्जतो नापकुरुत आत्मारामस्य कर्हिचित् 1261
यदैवमध्यात्मरतर कालेन बहुजन्मना। सर्वत्र जातव्रैराग्य आब्रह्मभुवनान्मुनि: 12001

मद्भक्त: प्रतिबुद्धार्थो मत्प्रसादेन भूयसा । नि:श्रेयसं स्वसंस्थानं कैवरल्याख्यं मदाश्रयम् । २८।
प्राप्नोतीहाञ्जसा धीर: स्वदृशा छिन्नसंशाय: । यद्गत्वा न निवर्तेत योगी लिङ्गाद्बिनिर्गमे । २९।
यदा न योगोपचितासु -चेतो मायासु सिद्धस्य विषज्जतेऽङ्व |

अनन्यहेतुषथ मे गति: स्याद् आत्यन्तिकी यत्र न मृत्युहास: 1301
इति श्रीमद्भागवते महापुराणे पारमहंस्यां संहितायां तृतीयस्कन्धे कापिलेयोपाख्याने सप्तविंशोऽध्याय: ।२७॥

The Lord replied : Assailed day and night by intense devotion to Me—developed by
hearing My stories for a long time with a heart purified by doing one's duties ina disinterested
spirit—by spiritual enlightenment which enables one to perceive the truth, by strong
dispassion, by practice of meditation accompanied by sacred vows and religious
observances, and by thorough concentration of mind, Prakrti, which binds the soul, gradually
withdraws, even as the wooden stick used for kindling the sacred fire by attritionis consumed
by the very fire it produces.(21—23) Ever recognized to be a source of evil and abandoned
after enjoyment, she no longer does any harm to the soul, who stands supreme in his glory
(blissful nature) and is now absolutely independent. (24) Just as the dream of a sleeping man
is fraught with many evils, but the same does not conduce to his infatuation once he is
awake, So Prakrti can never do any harm to him who, having realized the truth, ever keeps
his mind fixed on Me and who (consequently) delights in his own Self.(25-26) When a man
who is given to contemplation remains absorbed (as aforesaid) in (meditation on) the Self
for a period extending over many births, he develops a distaste for everything as far as (the
enjoyments of) Brahmaloka (the highest heaven, the abode of Brahma). (27) Having
realized the Self by My abundant grace, that strong-minded devotee of Mine has all his
doubts resolved by Self-vision and, when freed from his astral body, easily attains in that very
life the supremely blissful state known by the name of final beatitude, which is his essential
character and rests on Me, and having attained which a Yogi never returns to (the cycle of)
birth and death.(28-29) If the mind of the accomplished YogI, O beloved mother, does not
getattached to the (eight kinds of) superhuman powers (such as the faculty of reducing one's
body to the size of an atom andso on, which are products of Maya), developed through Yoga,
which is the only means of acquiring them, heis sure to attain My immortal state, where death
has no power. (30)

Thus ends the twenty-seventh discourse, forming part of the “Story of Lord Kapila"
in Book Three of the great and glorious Bhagavata-Purana,
otherwise known as the Paramahamsa-Samhita.

SCRE EE
PDOAD RPE EELS OD
