Dis. 9 ] BOOK SEVEN ‘693

ज् ह ती वी ती डौ डौ ता कौत्जा ॐ को धी दीक् त्थ HK HC CCE HAR LTAAAAH CEE TET AHH OR ERY OH SR RE

sensuous pleasures, including those enjoyed by Brahma (the creator)—not even mystic
powers, crushed by You in the form of the mighty Kala (Time-Spirit), knowing as | do their
real worth. (Only be pleased to) place me by the side of Your servants. (24) How
unsubstantial are the enjoyments (of this world), which are (only) pleasantto hear of andare
of the nature of a mirage (tantalizing in character); and on the other hand, how frail is this
body, the hotbed of all (kinds of) diseases ! (It is absurd to think of enjoying such pleasures
through such a body.) Though knowing this, people do not feel disgusted with them, busy
as they are quenching the fire of desire with drops of honey (in the shape of trivial and
momentary pleasures), (So) difficult to procure. (25) How undeserving of compassion, O
Lord, am |, a creature of Rajas, born in this race of demons, characterized by an excess of
Tamoguna; and how unsparing (on the other hand) is Your mercy, prompted by which You
have placed on my head as a token of favour Your lotus hand, placed (heretofore) neither
on Brahma’s nor on Siva's nor again on Laksmi’s head. (26) Surely such a notion of
superiority and inferiority as that found in a worldly creature could not exist in You, the
(disinterested) friend, nay, the very Self of the (entire) universe. Yet Your grace, like that of
a celestial (wish-yielding) tree, could be secured only through devoted service; and the fruit
(enjoyed by Your devotees) varies according to (the measure of) the service rendered by
them, superiority or inferiority (of the devotee) having nothing to do with it. (27) Indeed how
can | (afford to) give up the service of Your servants (devotees)—the self-same |, who was,
O Lord, favoured by the celestial sage (Narada), after being accepted as his own, in this way
(so as to ensure Your grace even during the period of my gestation) while | was about to fall
headlong through excessive fondness into the (deep) well of metempsychosis inhabited by
a (deadly) python (in the shape of Death), following the example of people hankering after
the pleasures of sense (generally sought after) and (already) fallen into it (in quest of such
pleasures). (28) The act of rescuing of my life as well as the slaughter of my father was done
by You, O immortal Lord, in order to vindicate the words of the sages (Sanaka and his three
brothers), Your devotees, when, taking up his sword, my father (Hiranyakasipu), who sought
to do violence (to me), said, “If there is any God other than me, let him save you; | (hereby)
sever your head !" (29) Indeed You alone constitute this universe, since itis You who exist
apart (from the world) at its beginning (before its creation) as well as at its end (after its
dissolution) and (hence) at the middle (in the form of the universe too). Having evolved by
Your Maya (creative will) this cosmos (which is a modification of the three Gunas or modes
of Prakrti—viz., Sattva, Rajas and Tamas), and forthwith entered it (as its Inner Controller).
You appear as many (as its Creator, Preserver and Destroyer) through (association with)
these Gunas. (30) This universe, consisting of (both) causes and effects, O Lord, is as a
matter of fact the same as You; while Youare different fromit (existing as You do even before
and after it). Because it is so, the notion that he is one's own and he is another is indeed
meaningless and illusory. A thing is actually the same as that from which it originates and
comes to light, in which it lives and into which it gets dissolved, just as a tree is essentially
the same as its seed and a seed is identical with (its cause) earth (which is a product of and
therefore identical with odour). (31)

न्यस्येदमात्मनि जगद् विलयाम्बुमध्ये ङेषेऽऽत्मना निजसुखानुभवो निरीह: |
योगेन मीलितदृगात्मनिपीतनिद्रस्तुर्ये स्थितो न तु ai न गुणांश्च युङ्क्षे 132
waa ते aghé निजकालशक्त्या सञ्चोदितप्रकृतिधर्मण sere
अम्भस्यनन्तशयनाद् विरमत्समाधेर्नाभेरभूत् स्वकणिकावटवन्महाब्जम् 133 |
तत्सम्भव: कविरतोऽन्यदपर्यमानस्त्वां बीजमात्मनि ad स्वबहिर्विचिन्त्य ।
नाविन्ददब्दशातमप्सु निमज्जमानो जातेङ्कुर कथमुहोपलभेत बीजम् ।३४॥
