Dis. 85] BOOK TEN 481

SE a Hae RON Ee EAE A RA TRT AREA TTA OTE माशा शाक NTE He Ae

देवक्युवाच
Ta रामाप्रमेयात्मन् कृष्ण योगेश्वरेश्व । वेदाहं वां विश्वसृजामीश्वरावादिपूरुषौ । २९।
।।। व मुच्छास्त्र र्तिना it A ARTA किलाद्य मे । ३०॥

विश्वोत्पत्तिलयोदया: | भवन्ति किल विश्वात्मंस्तं त्वाद्याहं गतिं गता । ३१।

चिरान्मृतसुतादाने गुरुणा कालचोदितौ । आनिन्यथु: पितृस्थानाद् गुरवे गुरुदक्षिणाम् 1321

an मे ged कामं युवां योगेश्वरेश्चरौ । भोजराजहतान् पुत्रान् कामये द्रष्टुमाहतान् । ३३॥
Devaki said : 0 Balarama, the delighter of hearts, Your nature is beyond the ken of
mind and speech, O Krsna, You are the supreme Lord even of great masters of Yoga. |
know You to be the rulers of even Prajapatis {the progenitors of all creation) and
manifestations of the most ancient Being (Sri Narayana Himself).(29) They say You have
descended on earth through me this time for the destruction of kings who having lost
through flux of time their virtues and excellences are transgressing the injunctions of the
scriptures and have, therefore, become a burden to the earth. (30) O Soul of the universe,
itis well-known that from Your part manifestation in the form of the Spirit proceeds Maya
and from Maya, the three Gunas—Sattva, Rajas and Tamas, and from a particle of these
Gunas, proceed the creation, growth and dissolution of the universe. Today, I resort to You
for protection. (31) | have heard that being urged by Your preceptor, Sandipani, and guided
by Providence, You brought back his son, who had died long before, from the abode of
Death, and thereby discharged Your debt to the preceptor. (32) The Lords (even) of
masters of Yoga as You are, | desire that You should similarly grant my desire also, and
bring my sons, who had been done to death by Karnsa so that । may see them (and bring

satisfaction to my eyes). (33)

ऋषिरुवाच
एवं सञ्चोदितौ मात्रा राम: कृष्णश्च भारत । सुतलं संविविशतुर्योगमायामुपाश्रितौ । ३४॥
तस्मिन् प्रविष्टावुपलभ्य fang विश्वात्मदैवं सुतरां तथाऽऽत्मन: |
तद्दश प्ग्॥ह्लादर्घाऎप्नुत॰।ज्ञय`= १ a: समुत्थाय ननाम सान्वय: 1341
wa: समानीय वरासनं मुदा निविष्टयोस्तत्र महात्मनोस्तयो: |
an पादाववनिज्य ass सवृन्द WAM पुनद् यदम्बु ह ।३६॥
समर्हयामास स at विभूतिभिर्महार्हवस्त्राभरणानुलेपनै: |
ताम्बूलदीपामृतभक्षणादिभि: स्वगोत्रवित्तात्मसमर्पणेन च ।३७॥
स इन्द्रसेनो maces frag: प्रेमविभिन्नया धिया ।
उवाच हानन्दजलाकुलेक्षण:उ प्रहष्टगेमा नृप गद्गदाक्षरम् ।३८॥

Sri Suka went on: Thus directed by Their mother, 0 scion of Bharata, both Sri Krsna
and Balarama, with the help of Their Yogamaya, (divine power), entered (the subterranean
region of) Sutala. (34) When Bali (the king of demons) saw the Soul and adorable object of
the universe as well as of his own (manifested in the dual form of Sri Krsna and Balarama)
enter Sutala, he sprang at once from his seat and with a heart overflowing with joy at Their
sight, greeted Them alongwith his family. (35) Full of delight he offered them excellent seats
and, when both these divine personages were seated on them, so the tradition goes, washed
Their feet and sprinkled on his head as well as on all the members of his family that water
which purifies the whole universe from Brahma downwards. (36) (Then) Bali duly worshipped
Them by offering Them valuable clothes, ornaments, sandal-paste, betel-leaves, lights,
dishes sweet as nectar and other sumptuous articles, and surrendering (his all, including)

his family, wealth and (even) his self (to Them). (37) Witha heart saturated with love he bore
the Lord's lotus-feet again and again (on his bosom and on his head), so the tradition goes,
