Dis. 8 } BOOK FOUR 323
PRELE ECAR EERO TOES CEE REELS SSAEP ONE Ree E TTA E ee eR HART eee PALA AHH BRR He hy
HEHEHE ARGLE SERA TEL RARE HE

एवं दाक्षायणी हित्वा सती पूर्वकलेवरम्। जज्ञे हिमवत: a8 मेनायामिति WA । ५८॥
wea दयितं ya आवूङ्के पतिमम्बिका । अनन्यभावैकगतिं afer: सुप्तेव पूरुषम् ।५९।॥
एतद्भगवत: शम्भो: कर्म दक्षाध्वरद्रुह: । श्रुतं भागवताच्छिष्यादुद्धवान्मे बृहस्पते: । ६०॥
इदं पवित्रं परमीशाचेष्टितं यशस्यमायुष्यमघोघमर्षणम् ।
यो नित्यदाऽऽकर्ण्य नरोऽनुकीर्तयेद धुनोत्यघं कौरव भक्तिभावत: । ६१।

इति श्रीमद्भागवते महापुराणे पारमहंस्यां संहितायां चतुर्थस्कन्धे दक्षयज्ञसंधानं नाम सप्तमोऽध्याय: 101

Having thus cast off her previous body, Sati, daughter of Daksa, was reborn through
Mena, the spouse of Himavan (the deity presiding over the Himalaya mountains) : this
is what we have heard. (58) Just as having lain dormant (during the final Dissolution), the
Divine Energy, embraces the Lord (at the dawn of the next creation), Ambika (mother Sat)
sought union once more with her beloved Spouse (Lord Siva), her only resort, exclusively
devoted as she was to Him. (59) This story of Lord Siva (the Source of Bliss), who wrecked
Daksa’s sacrificial performance, was heard by me from the (great) devotee of the Lord,
Uddhava, a disciple of the sage Brhaspati (the preceptor of the gods). (60) The man whowith
a feeling of devotion daily listens to and repeats this (most) sanctifying story of Lord Siva—
which confers renown and longevity and wipes out a multitude of sins—shakes off all sin,
O Vidura ( a descendant of Kuru). (61)

Thus ends the seventh discourse entitled "The revival of Daksa's sacrificial performance",
in Book Four of the great and glorious Bhagavata-Purana,
otherwise known as the Paramahanisa-Samnhita.

Sot Pat १
PICT Siege

अथाष्टमोऽध्याय:

Discourse VIII

Dhruva's departure for the woods
मैत्रेय उवाच

सनकाद्या नारदश्च ऋभुर्हसोऽरुणिर्यति: । नैते गृहान् ब्रह्मसुता ह्यावसन्नूर्ध्वरेतस: । १ ।

मृषाधर्मस्य भार्याऽऽसीददश्भं wai च aa असूत मिथुनं aq निर्ऋतिर्जगृहेऽप्रज: । २ ।

तयो समभवल्लोभो निकृतिश्च भहामते | ताभ्यां क्रोधश्च हिंसा च यद्दुरुक्ति: स्वसा कलि: । ३ ।

gent कलिराधत्त भयं मृत्युं च सत्तम । तयोश्च मिथुनं जज्ञे यातना निरयस्तथा । ४ |

संग्रहेण मयाऽऽख्यात: प्रतिसर्गस्तवानघ | त्रि:श्रुत्वैतत्पुमान् पुण्यं विधुनोत्यात्मनो मलम् । ५ ।
Maitreya continued : Sanaka and his three brothers (Sanandana, Sanatana and
Sanatkumara), Narada, Rbhu, Hamsa, Aruni and Yati—these sons of Brahma (the creator)
did not enter the life of a householder, since they had vowed themselves to a life of perpetual
celibacy. (1) Mrsa (the female spirit presiding over falsehood), who was the wife of Adharma

(the spirit presiding over unrighteousness, another son of Brahma gave birth, O Vidura
(destroyer of enemies), to Dambha (the spirit presiding: over dissimulation) and Maya (the
