Dis. 31] BOOK THREE 279

EREOHEALAAAEHA HELE LATE EREAEER ETHER Sees heteee ट LEAHAARALHEM KAR वी डौ HI

women, whom the scriptures declare as a gate to hell for him.(39) Womanisa personification
of Maya (illusion) created by the Lord and slowly entraps man (under the pretext of service
etc.). One should, therefore, regard her as death to oneself, even as a well whose mouth is
covered with grass (is to an unwary traveller). (40)

यां मन्यते पतिं मोहान्मन्मायामृषभायतीम् aie स्रीसङ्घत: प्राप्तो वित्तापत्यगृहप्रदम् ।४१॥

तामात्मनो विजानीयात्पत्यपत्यगृहात्मकम् । दॆवोपसादितं yet मृगयोर्गायनं यथा ।४२॥

देहेन ज्रीवभूतेन लोकाल्लोकमनुब्रजन्। YS एव कर्माणि करोत्यविरतं पुमान् ies!

जीवो ह्यस्यानुगो देहो भूतेन्द्रियमनोमय: । तन्निरोधोऽस्य मरणमाविर्भावस्तु सम्भव: ।४४॥

द्रव्योपलब्धिस्थानस्य द्रव्येक्षायोग्यता यदा। तत्पञ्चत्वमहंमानादुत्पत्तिर्द्रव्यदर्शनम् Ie |

यथाक्ष्णोर्द्रव्यावयवदर्शनायोग्यता यदा । तदॆव चक्षुषो द्रषटुर्द्रष्टत्वायोग्यतानयो: ।४६॥

तस्मान्न कार्य: सन्त्रासो न कार्पण्यं न सम्भ्रम: | बुद्ध्वा जीवगति धीरो मुक्तसङ्घश्चरेदिह ix

सम्यग्दर्शनया Get योगवैराग्ययुक्तया । मायाविरचिते लोके ater कलेवरम् ।४८।

इति . भ्॥. ae z ~ 3 = ॰ट्टु त त ` ~ ft a 4 १
जीवगतिर्नामैकत्रिंशोऽध्याय: ।३१1

Similarly the Jiva who has been endowed with the form of a women as a result of
attachment to a woman (in his previous life) foolishly looks upon My Maya, figuring as aman,
as her husband, the bestower of wealth, progeny, house and so on.(41) A woman should,
therefore, know that Maya as veritable death to her—in the form of a husband, progeny and
house etc.—preordained by Fate, even as the song of a hunter (is to the deer).(42) Moving
from one sphere (the earth) to another (heaven or hell) with the subtle body, whichis (falsely)
recognized as the very self of a Jiva, the human soul goes on reaping the fruit of his actions
(performed in previous existences) and unceasingly at the same time performing fresh
actions (thus paving the way for future births).(43) The subtle body (which is an adjunct of
the Jiva) and that which accompanies it (viz., the physical body)—both these go to make the
psycho-physical organism, which is constituted of the gross and subtle elements, the ten
Indriyas and the mind. When this organism ceases to function as a whole, it is known as the
death of a Jiva; while its beginning to function as a whole is spoken of as his birth.(44) Just
as when the eyes lose their capacity to see colour etc. (due to a morbid affection of the optic
nerve or other such diseases), the sense of sight also gets deadened that very moment and
the Jiva too, the seer of both (the eyes as well as the sense of sight), loses its power of sight,
similarly when the physical body(the place where the perception of objects takes place) is
rendered incapable of perceiving them, that is known as death (because when the physical
body ceases to function, the subtle body too is no longer there to function); and when one
begins to view the physical body as one's very self, that is called birth. (45-46) Therefore,
a man should neither view death with horror nor have recourse to stinginess in life nor give
way to infatuation. Realizing the true nature of the Jiva, he should move about in this world
free from attachment and steadfast of purpose. (47) Nay, he should relegate his body to this
illusory world through his reason endowed with right vision and strengthened by Yoga
(concentration of mind) and dispassion, and move about (unconcerned).(48)

Thus ends the thiry-first discourse entitled "The Fate of the Jiva", forming part of the
“Story of Lord Kapila’, in Book Three of the great and glorious Bhagavata-
Purana, otherwise known as the Paramahamsa-Samhita.

SIRT SS
CDOS RENEE SI OD
