592 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 17

BESTE ORE TE ७२ ५ १ OE EET Oe न २ EOE TEE OT शाक कगुण TOR OREN ETE TEH ल्कक माश्वक ककक शा दाक

standing (when he is comfortably seated) not far from him.(29) Conducting himself as
aforesaid and maintaining his vow (of celibacy uninterrupted till his course of learning is
completed, he should (continue to) live in the preceptor's house, completely weaned from
all luxuries. (30)
यद्यसौ छन्दसां लोकमारोक्ष्यन् ब्रह्मविष्टपम् qa विन्यसेद् देहं स्वाध्यायार्थं बृहद्व्रत: । ३१।
अग्नौ गुरावात्मनि च सर्वभूतेषु मां परम्। अपृथग्धीरुपासीत ब्रह्मवर्चस्व्यकल्मष: 1321
स्रीणां निरीक्षणस्पर्शससंलापक्ष्वेलनादिकम्। प्राणिनो मिथुनीभूतानगृहस्थोऽग्रतस्त्यजेत् 133 |
Tear स्नानं सन्ध्योपासनमार्जवम् dike जपोऽस्पृश्याभक्ष्यासंभाष्यवर्जनम् ।३४॥
सर्वाश्रमप्रयुक्तोऽयं नियम: कुलनन्दन। eta: सर्वभूतेषु मनोवाक्कायसंयम: ।३५॥
एवं बृहद्व्रतधरो ब्राह्मणोऽग्निरिव ज्वलन्। मद्धक्तस्तीव्रतपसा दग्धकर्माशयोऽमल: ।३६॥

If the student seeks to ascend (after death) to (the highest heaven, viz..) Satyaloka (the
realm of Brahma),” the home of the Vedas (living in a personal form), he should completely
dedicate his body (life) to the preceptor for (further) study of the Vedas (as well as to repay
his debt to the preceptor), observing the vow of lifelong celibacy. (31) Full of splendour born
of a study of the Vedas and devoid of (all) sin, the Brahmacari should have no sense of
diversity (left in him) and should worship Me, the Supreme. (alone) in (the sacred) fire, the
preceptor, his own Self and in all created beings. (32) He who is not a householder (a
Brahmacari, an anchorite or a recluse) should give up the sight and touch of womankind.
conversation and joking etc., with them and should (even) avoid coming face to face with
living beings sexually united. (33) Purity (of body and mind), rinsing one’s mouth with water
(after answering the calls of nature and taking one’s meals or refreshment and sipping water
before commencing a sacred rite or devotions or taking one's meals etc.), bathing (after
passing stool and shaving oneself and on ceremonial occasions as well as on touching an
untouchable person or object, and on the expiry of a period of impurity caused by birth or
death in one’s family and so on), saying the Sandhya prayers (both morning and evening as
well as at midday), straightforwardness, resorting to holy places and sacred waters,
muttering sacred texts (such as the Gayatri) and keeping aloof from untouchable persons
and objects. prohibited food (and drink) and people who are not worth speaking to, looking
upon all created beings as (no other than) Myself and control of mind, speech and body—
this constitutes the Dharma (sacred duty) prescribed for all the Agramas (stages of life
pertaining to the first three Varnas), O Uddhava (the delight of your race )! (34-35) Having
mastered the Vedas and with the seeds of his Karma burnt by intense Tapas (askesis), the
Brahmacan observing the vow of perpetual celibacy and resplendent like fire becomes My
devotee (and attains to Me) :fhe is devoid of impurity (in the shape of interested motives).(36)

अथानन्तरमावेक्ष्यन् यथा जिज्ञासितागम: । गुरवे दक्षिणां दत्त्वा स्नायाद् गुर्वनुमोदित: 1291
गृहं वनं वोपविशेत् प्रव्रजेद वा द्विजोत्तम: । आश्रमादाश्रमं गच्छेन्नान्यथा मत्परश्चरेत् 3c!
गृहार्थी owe भार्यामुद्वहेदजुगुप्सिताम्। यवीयसीं तु वयसा at सवर्णामनुक्रमात् ।३९॥
इज्याध्ययनदानानि सर्वेषां च द्विजन्मनाम् । प्रतिग्रहोऽध्यापनं च ब्राह्यणायब याजनम् sot
प्रतिग्रहं मन्यमानस्तपस्तेजोयज्ञोनुदम् | अन्याभ्यामेव जीवेत झिरलैर्वा दोषदृक aa: ।४१॥
ब्राह्मणस्य fg देहोऽयं क्षुदकामाय नेष्यते। pea तपसे चेह प्रेत्यानन्तसुखाय च ।४२॥
मय्यर्पितात्मा गृहं wa तिष्ठन्नातिप्रसक्त समुपैति शान्तिम् ।४३॥

* Vide verse 5 above
