22 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 7

ERC Be MRT Hy RE Re HERE RE PERT HY HOME RB RRO Re By RR ey er RO PS ERT Ry By arate Rr ee a aie eR Bye eR Re 03३2 BB Ber RR BY Pe

सूत are
एवं सम्भाष्य भगवान्नारदो वासवीसुतम्। आमन्त्य dont रणयन्ययो यादृच्छिको मुनि: 130
अहो देवर्षिर्धन्योऽयं यत्कीर्तिं शार्ङ्गधधन्वन: | गायन्म्राद्यन्निदं Te रमयत्यातुरं जगत् । ३९1
इति श्रीमद्भागवते महापुराणे पारमहंस्यां संहितायां प्रथमस्कन्धे व्यासनारदसंवादे षष्ठोऽध्याय: ।६।
Sita says : Having thus spoken to Vyasa (the son of Satyavati), the divine sage Narada
took his leave and, playing upon his lute, went his way, having no object of his own to
accomplish. (38) Ah! blessedis this celestial sage, who, while singing the glory of Lord Visnu

(the Wielder of the Sarriga bow ) to the accompaniment of his lute, feels not only intoxicated
himself but delights the unhappy world as well. (39)

Thus ends the sixth discourse, forming part of the dialogue between Vyasa and
Narada, in Book One of the great and glorious Bhagavata-Purana,
otherwise known as the Paramahamsa-Samhita.

aera
PII Siege

:^/ अथ सप्तमोऽध्याय:

Discourse VII
Aswatthama assassinates Draupadi's sons and Arjuna
in his turn curbs his pride
उवाच
निर्गते ane ga भगवान् बादरायण: । श्रुतवांस्तदभिप्रेते तत: किमकरोद्बिभु: । १ ।
Saunaka said ; On the departure of Narada, what did the divine and all-powerful Vyasa
do, after hearing that which was in the mind of the celestial sage? (1)
Yd उवाच

ब्रह्मनद्यां सरस्वत्यामाश्रम: पश्चिमे ae । शम्याप्रास इति प्रोक्त ऋषीणां सत्रवर्धन: । २ ।

तस्मिन् स्व आश्रमे व्यासो बदरीषण्डमण्डिते । आसीनोऽप sages प्रणिदध्यो मन: स्वयम् । ३ ।

भक्तियोगेन मनसि सम्यक् प्रणिहितेऽमले | अपड्यत्पुरुषं ya मायां च तदपाश्रयाम् । ४ |

यया सम्मोहितो site आत्मानं त्रिगुणात्मकम्। परोऽपि मनुतेऽनर्थं तत्कृतं चाभिपद्यते। ५ |

अनर्थोपशमं साक्षाद्भक्तियोगमधोक्षजे । लोकस्याजानतो विद्वांश्चक्रे सात्वतसंहिताम् । ६ |

यस्यां वै श्रूयमाणायां कृष्णे परमपूरुषे।भक्तिरुत्पद्यते पुंस: ञोकमोहभयापहा । ७ |

a संहितां भागवतीं कृत्वानुक्रम्य चात्मजम्। शुकमध्यापयामास निवृत्तिनिरतं मुनि: । ८ ।

Sita replied : On the western bank of the Saraswati river, presided over by Brahma,

there is a hermitage called Samyaprasa, which promotes the sacrificial activities of the
sages. (2) In that hermitage, which was Vyasa's own abode and was surrounded by.a grove .
of jujube trees, the sage Vyasa sat down and, after sipping a little water, collected his mind
by self-effort. (3) In his sinless mind, which had been perfectly concentrated through the
practice of Devotion, he saw the Primal Person as well as Maya, who depends for her very
existence on Him. (4) Deluded by this Maya, the individual soul, though beyond the three
Gunas, thinks itself as consisting of the three Gunas and suffers the evil consequences
brought about by this identification. (5) Knowing that the practice of Devotion to the Lord, who
is beyond sense-perception, is the direct means of counteracting these evils, the sage

composed Srimad Bhagavata (the book of the Vaisnavas) for the use of the common people,
who are ignorant of this fact. (6) Even as a man listens to this work recited, Devotion to Sri
