342 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 11

POTEET HAE RHA AHHH AHH HES ESS e HP १६१६ ६३ 32 RES HEKHEAPEHEAHSSEEECEAE SHS HSIEH

number of sages and spoke to the son of Uttanapada (as follows). (6)

मनुरुवाच
अलं वत्सातिरोषेण तमोद्वारेण पाप्मना । येन पुण्यजनानेतानवधीस्त्वमनागस: । ७ ।
नास्मत्कुलोचितं तात कर्मैतत्सद्विगर्हितम्। वधो यदुपदेवानामारब्धस्तेऽकृतैनसाम् । ८ |

नन्वेकस्यापराधेन प्रसङ्गाद् बहवो हता:। भ्रातुर्वधाभितप्तेन त्वयाङ्ग भ्रातृवत्सल । ९ ।
नप्यणार्मेहिसाश्लाहृषीकेशात्रुबर्तिन'म्पू।यदात्यान पराग्गृह्य पशुवद्भूतवैशसम् । १०॥
सर्वभूतात्मभावेन भूतावासं हरि भवान्। आराध्याप दुराराध्यं विष्णोस्तत्परमं पदम् । ११
a त्वं हरेरनुध्यातस्तत्पुसामपि wea: कथं त्ववद्यं कृतवाननुशिक्षन् सतां व्रतम् ।१२।
तितिक्षया करुणया tan चाखिलजन्तुषु । समत्वेन च सर्वात्मा भगवान् सम्प्रसीदति 1231
सम्प्रसन्ने भगवति पुरुष: प्राकृतैर्गुणै: । विमुक्तो जीवनिर्मुक्तो awe निर्वाणमृच्छति ।१४॥

Manu said ; Have done, dear child, with this sinful rage, a gateway to hell, swayed by
which you have slain (all) these innocent Punyajanas. (7) The carnage of innocent demigods
which you have embarked upon is not becoming of our race, dear son; for such an act is
denounced by the righteous.(8) Indeed for the fault of one many have been killed by you
because of their connection with the offender, highly perturbed as you were by the death of
your brother, whom you loved so dearly, my darling. (9) That one should destroy living beings
after the manner of the beasts, taking the body-which is external to the mind—as one's own
self, surely this is not the way of the righteous, who are devoted to the Lord (the Ruler of our
senses). (10) Having adored (in your very childhood) Sri Hari, the abode of all living beings,
who is so difficult to propitiate, regarding all creatures as your own self, you have secured
(for yourself) that supreme realm of Lord Visnu ! (11) Constantly abiding in the thought of Sri
Hari and esteemed even by His devotees, how did you perpetrate this reprehensible act—
you who oughit to instruct others in the ways of the righteous ? (12) Itis through forbearance
(towards our elders), compassion (towards our inferiors), friendliness (towards our equals)
and even-mindedness towards all living beings that the Lord, the Universal Spirit, is
thoroughly pleased (with us). (13) On the Lord being thoroughly pleased a man is rid of the
three modes of Prakrti (Sattva etc.,) and of their evolute, the subtle body, and becomes.one

with the all-blissful Brahma. (14)
a: 3 wa हि । तयोर्व्यवायात्सम्भूतिर्योषित्पुरुषयोरिह gu!
wa प्रवर्तते at: स्थिति: संयम w Bl गुणव्यतिकराद्राजन् मायया परमात्मन: 188 |
fifi = aareitferi: पुरुषर्षभ: । व्यक्ताव्यक्तमिदं विश्वं यत्र भ्रमति लोहवत् । १७॥
स खल्विदं भगवान् aera गुणप्रवाहेण विभक्तवीर्य: |
maa निहन्त्यहन्ता चेष्टा faye: we दुर्विभाव्या । १८।
सोऽनन्तोऽन्तकर: कालोऽनादिरादिकृदव्यय: । जन जनेन जनयन्मारयन्मृत्युंनान्तकम् ।१९।
न वै स्वपक्षोऽस्य विषक्ष wa वा परस्य मृत्योर्विशात: ad प्रजा: |
तं धावमानमनुधावन्त्यनीशा यथा रजांस्यनिलं भूतसङ्घा: ।२०॥
आयुषोऽपचयं जन्तोस्तथैवोपचयं fay: | उभाभ्यां रहित: स्वस्थो दु:स्थस्य विदधात्यसौ । २१।
केचित्कर्म वदन्त्येने स्वभावमपरे नृप। एके कालं परे दैवं पुंस: काममुतापरे 1221
च । न वै चिकीर्षितं aa को वेदाथ स्वसम्भवम् । २३॥

नानाशक्त्युदयस्य । ।
The male and the female are products of the five gross elements developed in the form
of a gross body and from their copulation spring up other men and women in the world. (15)
