486 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 86

न न मामाकक शाशा शाक ककक शाक न शजशनताकत ना श क क शाश्वग नमर१ 8 १45१ ०८

Madhu, Kekaya, Kosala, Ara and those belonging to other territories drank with their eyes
the nectarine beauty of His lotus-like countenance enlivened by His winsome smiles and
loving glances. (20) On those people, from whose eyes the scales of ignorance had
completely fallen through His sight, Sri Krsna (the Teacher of the three worlds), conferred
(by His very look) insight into the Truth as well as final beatitude (the fruit of such insight)
and hearing (even as He advanced) His own glory, sung by gods and men, which illumined
the quarters and drove away all evil. (In this way) the Lord slowly journeyed to Videha. (21)
तेऽच्युतं प्राप्तमाकर्ण्य पौरा जानपदा नृप । अभीयुर्मुदितास्तस्मै गृहीतार्हणपाणय: 1221
ae त उत्तमङ्लोकं प्रीत्युस्फूल्यानृनम्राया:।कैर्घृत्मञ्जलिभिर्नैमु: श्रुतपूर्वास्तथा मुनीन् ।२३॥
स्वानुग्रहाय wad मन्वानौ तं जगद्गुरुम्। मैथिल: श्रुतदेवश्च पादयो: पेततु: wit: ।२४॥
न्यमन्त्रयेतां दाशार्हमातिथ्येन सह द्विजै: ।मैथिल: श्रुतदेवश्च युगपत् संहताञ्जली ।२५॥
भगवांस्तदभिप्रेत्य gt: प्रियचिकीर्षया । उभयोराविशद् गेहमुभाभ्यां तदलक्षित्त: ।२६॥
श्रोतुमप्यसतां दूरान् जनक: स्वगृहागतान्। आनीतेघ्वासनाग्र्येषु सुखासीनान् महामना: ।२७॥
प्रवृद्धभक्त्या उद्धर्षहृदयास्त्राविलेक्षण: | नत्वा तदङ्घ्रीन् प्रक्षाल्य तदपो लोकपावनी: । २८।
सकुटुम्बो वहन् मूर्धा पूजयाञ्चक्र ईश्वरान्। गन्धमाल्याम्बराकल्पधूपदीपार्घ्यगोवृषै: ।२९॥
वबाचा मधुरया प्रीणन्निदमाहान्नतर्पितान्। पादावङ्कगतौ विष्णो: संस्पृशञ्छनकैर्मुदा ।३०॥
Pariksit ! delighted to hear of the arrival of Sri Krsna (the immortal Lord), the people of
the city of Mithila and of the adjoining villages (all) came forth to receive Him with offerings
in their hands. (22) At the sight of the glorious Lord, their faces brightened and the buds of
their hearts opened through ecstasy. With their heads bent low and with their palms joined
on them they greeted the Lord and His companions) the sages, of whom they had (only)
heard before. (23) Realizing that Sri Krsna, the Teacher of the world, had come to shower
His grace on them, the king of Mithila as well as Srutadeva, fell at the feet of the Lord. (24)
With joined palms they both simultaneously invited Sri Krsna (a scion of Dasarha) alongwith
the sages to partake of their hospitality. (25) Accepting their invitation, and with intent to
please them both, the Lord (simultaneously) entered the residence of both in two separate
forms, unperceived by’ the other one. (26) The king of Videha, Bahulaswa, was a high-
minded prince. Finding that Sri Krsna and others, whose very name could not reach the ears
of the unrighteous, had called at his house (uninvited), brought (excellent) seats for them and
seated them (all) comfortably on them. (27) His heart leapt for joy through intense devotion,
and his eyes were bedimmed with tears. Bowing to them, he washed their feet and sprinkled
that all purifying water on his head and on his relatives and worshipped the Lord as well as
the divine sages by offering them sandal-paste, flowers, textiles, ornaments, scented fumes,
lights, oblations of water, cows and oxen. (28-29) After they had been heartily fed, Bahulaswa
placed the feet of SriKrsna (who was no other than Lord Visnu) on his lap and gently pressing
them, and delighting Him with sweet words, joyously prayed (as follows) . (30)
राजोवाच

भवान् हि सर्वभूतानामात्मा साक्षी स्वदृग् विभो । अथ नस्त्वत्पदाम्भोजं स्मरतां दर्शनं गत: 13k)
waded कर्तुमस्मद्दृग्गोचरो भवान्।यदात्थैकान्तभक्तान् मे नानन्त: श्रीरज: fra: 1321
को नु त्वच्चरणाम्भोजमेवंविद् विसृजेत् पुमान्। निष्किञ्चनानां दान्तानां मुनीनां यस्त्वमात्मद: 1331
योऽवतीर्य watt zor संसरतामिह। at वितेने तच्छान्त्यै त्रैलोक्यवृजिनापहम् 13%
नमस्तुभ्यं भगवते कृष्णायाकुण्ठमेधसे। नारायणाय ऋषये gaat तप ईयुषे । ३५॥
दिनानि कतिचिद् भूमन् गृहान् नो निवस द्विजै: । समेत: षादरजसा पुनीहीदं निमे: कुलम् 1३६1
