Dis. 3] BOOK TEN 109

ewer rere aAhe weer nse कीकर ३३88 99 % 8६ nwt sweet

death (by persecuting you and your husbanq); (for) your (prospective) son will prove to be
the Protector of the Yadus.” (41)
श्रीगुक उवाच
इत्यभिष्टूय पुरुषं यद्रूपमनिदं यथा।ब्रह्मेशानौ पुरोधाय देवा: प्रतिययुर्दिवम् ॥४२॥
Sri Suka went on : Having thus glorified the Supreme Person, whose essences, really

speaking, other than (different from) this visible universe, and placing Brahma and Siva at
their heads, the gods returned to heaven. (42)

Thus ends the second discourse entitled “Eulogy of Lord Visnu in Devakl's womb addressed
by Brahma and others", in Book Ten of the great and glorious Bhagavata-Purana,
otherwise known as the Paramahamsa-Samhila.

Set Pat hs
२ ल्लिंट्टुट्टुङ्कुछैष् StS ee

अथ तृतीयोऽध्याय:

Discourse Ill

Advent of Lord Sri Krsna
SYR उवाच
ay सर्वगुणोपेत: काल: eee: | यर्ह्यवाजनजन्मर्क्ष शान्तर्क्षग्रहतारकम् । १ ।
fer: प्रसेदुर्गगनं निर्मलोडुगणोदयम्। मही मङ्गलभूयिष्ठपुरग्रामव्रजाकरा । २ ।
नद्य: प्रसन्नसलिला gel जलरुहश्रिव: | द्विजालिकुलसंनादस्तबका वनराजय: । ३ ।
wat वायु: सुखस्पर्श: पुण्यगन्धवह: ale: । अद्मयश्च द्विजातीनां जान्तास्तत्र समिन्धत । ४ ।
मनांस्यासन् प्रसन्नानि साधूनामसुरद्गुहाम्। जायमानेऽजने तस्मिन् नेदुर्दुन्दुभयो दिवि । ५ ।
ay; किन्नरगन्धर्वास्तुष्टुवु: सिद्धचारणा: । विद्याधर्यश्च ननृतुरप्सरोभि: समं तदा । ६ |
aga! देवा: सुमनांसि मुदान्विता:। मन्दं we जलधरा जगर्जुरनुसागरम्। ७ |
Paha तम ge जायमाने जनार्दने। देवक्यां देवरूपिण्यां विष्णु: सर्वगुहाशाय: |
आविरासीद् यथा प्राच्यां दिशीन्दुरिव पुष्कल: । ८ |
Sri Suka resumed : Now came the most delightful hour, fraught with all blessings, when
precisely the asterisk Rohini (presided over by Brahma, son of the birthless Lord Visnu) was
at the ascendant and when (the rest of) the asterisks, planets and (other) stars bore a gentle
aspect. (1) The quarters became clear (of clouds as though it were autumn, although the
rainy season had not yet ended); while the firmament was marked with the presence of
multitudes of stars shining unobscured. The earth was seen with its towns, villages, stations
of cowherds and mines full of festivities. (2) The rivers flowed in a limpid stream; ponds
bloomed with lotuses; rows of forest-trees laden with bunches of flowers rang with the sweet
noise of birds and swarms of bees. (3) A hallowed breeze (coming as it did from the direction

of the holy Yamuna) and wafting a sweet fragrance, blew delightful to the touch; the sacred
fires of the twice-born (that had been extinguished due to Karhsa’s persecution) burst into
