590 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 17

EE EET ERR EET व ककक माशाय HOC ETE EGO NC HOOT HES न मागा गक TENT ECRES HUE HS ERNE RENE ea

वर्णानामाश्रमाणां च जन्मभूम्यनुसारिणी: । आसन् प्रकृतयो नॄणां नीचैर्नीचोत्तमोत्तमा: 1241
शामो दमस्तप: ahd सन्तोष: क्षान्तिरार्जवम्। मद्धक्तिश्च दया सत्यं ब्रह्मप्रकृतयस्त्विमा: 1261
तेज्ञाबल gfa: ani तितिक्षौदार्यमुद्यम: । स्थैर्यं ब्रह्मण्यतैश्चर्य क्षत्रप्रकृतयस्त्विमा: ।९७॥

आस्तिक्यं दाननिष्ठा च अदम्भो ब्रह्मसेवनम्। अतुष्टिरर्थोपचयैर्वैश्यप्रकृतयस्त्वमा: । १८॥
शुश्रूषणं द्विजगवां देवानां चाप्यमायया । तत्र लब्धेन सन्तोष: शूद्रप्रकृतयस्त्वमा: ।१९।
अशौचमनृतं स्तेयं नास्तिक्यं yenfane: | काम: क्रोधश्च तर्षश्चस्वभावोऽन्तेवसायिनाम् 1201
अहिंसा सत्यमस्तेयमकामक्रोधलोभता | भूतप्रियहितेहा च धर्मोऽयं सार्ववर्णिक: ।२१।

The glorious Lord began again: This question of yours is full of righteousness in that
It leads to Devotion (which is conducive to the highest good of men). (Now) hear from Me
(something) about the righteous course followed by those observing the rules prescribed for
the (four) Varnas (grades of society) and Asramas (stages in life). (9) In the (very) first Satya
Yuga (of the present Kalpa) the caste of men was (only one and) known by the name of
Hamsa. People had their object (of life) accomplished by virtue of their (very) birth; hence
they understood it by the name of Krtayuga (the aeon of blessedness). (10) In the beginning
Pranava (the mystic syllable OM) alone formed (the text of) the Veda: while | (alone as
existing in their thought) constituted their piety appearing in the form of a bull (standing on
allits four feet). Firm in askesis (in the shape of one-pointedness* of mind and senses) and
free from sin they contemplated on Me, the immaculate Lord. (11) At the beginning of (the
next Yuga known by the name of) Treta (after the expiry of Krtayuga), O highly blessed
Uddhava, was revealed from My heart through My respiration the threefold Veda (knowledge
cosisting of three limbs in the shape of Rk, Sama and Yajus); (and) from the latter appeared
। as (the institution of) sacrifice+ with its triple functions (of a Hota. Adhwaryu and
Udgata).(12) (Again) from Brahma (born of the Cosmic Person) appeared the (four grades
of society under the names of) Brahmanas, the Ksatriyas. the Vaisyas and the Sudras,
evolved (respectively) from His mouth, arms, thighs and feet and distinguished by their own
(respective) conduct. (13) The householder’s order appeared from My hips and loins; the
order of (lifelong) celibates, from My heart; forest-life (the order of anchorites) from My chest
(below the heart); while the order of recluses (Samnyasa) was located in (sprang from the)
crown of My head (14) The nature of men belonging to the (different) Varnas and Asramas
developed according tothe character of their place of origin (the limbof the cosmic body from
which they sprang up)—low in the case of those of a low origin and lofty in the case of those
sprung of high origin. (15) Control of mind and the senses, meditation. (external as well as
internal) purity, contentment, forgiveness, straightforwardness. devotion to Me, compassion
and truthfulness—these are the natural traits of a Brahmana.(16) Majesty. strength,
fortitude, valour, forbearance, liberality, industry. firmness. devotion to the Brahmanas and
rulership—these are the (distinguishing) traits of a Ksatriya. (17) Faith (in the scnptures as
well as in the words of one's preceptor). firm adherence to liberality. sincerity (absence of
hypocrisy) service to the Brahmanas and remaining dissatisfied with hoards of money—
these are the inborn characteristics of a Vaisya (18) Sincere (guileless) service to the
Brahmana, the cow and the gods too and contentment with whatever Is obtained through
suchservice—these are the inborn characteristics of a Sudra. (19) Impurity. mendacity. thieving.

apa च ea परमं तप:।
+ The Srulisays -`यज्ञां A विण्णु: ।`
