Dis. 9] BOOK ELEVEN 555

न ग्न ROE ककक ROR SOPOT OR ROR FOTO RO POE Eee re EH कन्र ज SO ICT ER EL १5 ४५5

अन्वशिक्षमिमं तस्या उपदेशमरिन्दम । लोकाननुचरन्नेताँल्लोकतत्त्वविवित्सया । ९ ।
वासे बहूनां meet wae वार्ता द्वयोरपि । एक va चरेत्तस्मात् कुमार्या इव कङ्कण: । १०॥

The Brahmana said : The source of misery is indeed the acquisition of whatever men
love most. One who knows this and desires no acquisition enjoys everlasting happiness. (1)
The stronger ospreys which had no flesh attacked the osprey which had it. The latter then
dropped the piece of flesh and felt happy. (2) | feel neither honour nor dishonour; | have no
care which householders have for home and children. Like a child (free from care) | wander
in the world sporting in the Self and devoted to it. (3) Only two are free from cares and
anxieties and are immersed in supreme bliss—the ignorant and guileless child and he who
has transcended the three Gunas (and realized the Supreme Being). (4) Ina certain place,
a maiden herself had to attend to the comforts of those who came to her house to choose
her for a bride when her relations had gone away to some other place. (5) O king, while she
was pounding paddy aside to provide them food, the bangles of shells on her wrists made
a loud jingling sound. (6) The (wise) girl, feeling much ashamed of doing the humiliating task
herself, broke the bangles one by one, and retained only two each on her wrists. (7) Even the
two bangles produced sound as she pounded (the paddy), she again broke one each (so
that) the remaining one each did not produce any sound. (8) And the following lesson | learnt
fromher, O subduer of enemies, as | wandered in this wide world to know what was desirable
and what was to be shunned. (9) Where many dwell together quarrel would ensue, even
between two living together there is talk. Therefore one should wander alone as the single
bangle on the wrists of the maiden. (10)

wa एकत्र संयुज्याज्जितश्चासो जितासन: । वैराग्याभ्यासयोगेन ध्रियमाणमतन्दित: । ११।
wa वृद्धेने रजस्तमश्च विधूय निर्वाणमुपैत्यनिन्धनम् ie?
तदैवमात्मन्यवरुद्धचित्तो न वेद किञ्चिद् बहिरन्तरुं वा ।
यथेषुकारो नृपति व्रजन्तमिषौ गतात्मा न ददर्श fie

`एकचार्यनिकेतर स्यादप्रमत्तो गुहाशय: | अलक्ष्यमाण आचारैर्मुनिरेकोऽल्पभाषण: ।१४॥

गृहारम्भोऽतिदु:खाय विफलश्चाध्रुवात्मन: (ad: परकृतं ae fags सुखमेधते ।१५॥

एको anit देव: पूर्वसृष्टं स्वमायया । संहत्य कालकलया कल्पान्त इदमीश्वर: । १६॥

एक एवाद्दितीयोऽभूदात्माधारोऽखिलाश्रय: । कालेनात्मानुभावेन साम्यं नीतासु हाक्तिषु ।

सत्त्वादिषादिपुरुष: प्रधानपुरुषेश्वर: । १७।

Woe परम आस्ते कैवल्यसंज्ञित: | केवलानुभवानन्दसन्दोहो निरुपाधिक: 1921

केवलात्मानुभावेन स्वमायां त्रिगुणात्मिकाम्। संक्षोभयन् सृजत्यादौ तया सूत्रमरिन्दम ।१९।

तामाहुस्रिगुणव्यक्तिं सृजन्तीं विश्वतोमुखम् । यस्मिन् घ्रोतमिदं fad येन संसरते GAR ।२०।

यथोर्णनाभिर्हृदयादूर्णां सन्तत्य ववक्त्रत: । तया fae भूयस्तां ग्रसत्येवं महेश्वर: ।२१।

यत्र यत्र Tal देही धारयेत् सकलं धिया । स्नेहादद्वेषाद्भयाद्वापि याति तत्तत्सरूपताम् । २२।

कीट: पेशस्कृतं ध्यायन् Heat aa प्रवेशित: । याति तत्सात्मतां राजन् पूर्वरूपमसन्त्यजन् । २३।

एवं गुरुभ्य we wn मे शिक्षिता मति: । स्वात्मोपशिक्षितां बुद्धिं शृणु मे वदत: प्रभो । २४॥
देहो गुरुर्मम विरक्तिविवेकहेतुर्बिभ्रत् स्म सत्त्वनिधनं सततार्त्यदर्कम् ।
तत्त्वान्यनेन fag यथा तथापि पारक्यमित्यवसितो विचराम्यसङ्घ: 1241

