416 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 28

RORCEPEM RES Be RARER DEE OR Te ER TH ITM SAKE E TAO ETRE EEE ETON EK A HH RH ee

अथाष्टाविंशोऽध्याय:

Discourse XXVIII
Purafijana is reborn as a woman and attains liberation through the
teaching of his friend, Avijfata

॥ नारद उवाच
सैनिका भयनाम्नो 2 afer दिष्टकारिण: । प्रज्वारकालकन्याभ्यां विचेरुरवनीमिमाम्। १ |
a एकदा तु wa पुरञ्जनपुरीं नृप। रुरुधुर्भीमभोगाढ्यां जरत्पन्नगपालिताम्। २ |

कालकन्यापि ay पुरञ्जनपुरे बलात्। ययाभिभूत: पुरुष: सद्यो नि:सारतामियात्। ३ |

तयोपभुज्यमानां a यवना: सर्वतोदिशम् ahh: प्रविश्य सुभृशं wea सकलां पुरीम् । ४ |

तस्यां प्रपीड्यमानायामभिमानी पुरञ्जन: | अवापोरुविधांस्तापान् कुटुम्बी ममताकुल: । ५ |

Narada continued : Accompanied by Prajwara and the daughter of Kala; the hordes of

the lord of the Yavanas, Bhaya by name, who were the agents of fate, O Barhisman, ranged
over this globe.(1) On a certain day, O king, they besieged with (great) speed the capital of
Purafjana, rich in (all) earthly enjoyments and guarded by the old serpent (Prajagara). (2)
The daughter of Kala too took possession of the city of Puranjana by force. Overcome by
her, any man would become powerless at once. (3) The Yavanas (the troops of Bhaya)
entered the city, which was (thus) being forcibly enjoyed by her, through the (various)
entrances on all sides and oppressed the entire population very much. (4) The city being thus
tormented, Purafijana, who loved it as his own self, and who had a large family and was
troubled with the feeling of mineness, fell a prey to manifold agonies. (5)

कन्योपगूढो नष्टश्री: कृपणो विषयात्मक: । नष्टप्रज्ञो हृतैश्चर्यो गन्धर्वयवनेर्बलात् । ६ ।

विशीर्णां wat वीक्ष्य प्रळ्ळिननादृताम्।पुत्रान्पौत्रानुगापात्याञ्जत्यांचगतसौहृदाम्।\भ्।

आत्मानं कन्यया we पञ्चालानरिदूषितान्। दुरन्तचिन्तामापन्नो न लेभे तत्प्रतिक्रियाम् । ८ |

कामानभिलषन्दीनो चातयामांश्च कन्यया । विगतात्मगतिस्त्रेहह पुत्रदारांश्च लालयन्। ९ |

गन्धर्वयवनाक्रान्तां कालकन्योपमर्दिताम् | हातुं प्रचक्रमे राजा at पुरीमनिकामत: 10!

भयनाम्नोऽग्रजो भ्राता प्रज्वार: प्रत्युपस्थित: । ददाह तां पुरीं कृत्स्नां भ्रातु: प्रियचिकीर्षया ।११।

Embraced by that maid (the daughter of Kala) and divested of (his) glory, Purafjana felt

(very) wretched, his mind being engrossed in the pleasures of sense. Nay, forcibly robbed
of his power and affluence by the Gandharvas and the Yavanas, he lost his power of
discrimination (too). (6) Seeing his city destroyed, his sons and grandsons, servants and
ministers rebellious and disrespectful, his wife cold and indifferent, his body caught in the
snares of that maid and the land of Paficadla overrun by the enemy, he was plunged in
anxiety which was hard to overcome, and found no remedy for it.(7-8) Miserably hankering
after the objects of enjoyment, rendered insipid by that maid, and affectionately taking care
of his progeny and wife, the king lost his spiritual moorings as well as the affection of his
people and reluctantly proceeded to quit that city, which had (now) been taken possession
of by the Gandharvas and Yavanas and devastated by the daughter of Kala. (9-10) (In the
meantime) Prajwara, the elder brother of the lord of the Yavanas, who bore the name of
Bhaya, made his appearance (there) and set fire to the entire city with intent to please his
brother. (11)

ae सन्दह्यमानायां सपौर: सपरिच्छद: | कोटुम्बिक: कुटुम्बिन्या उपातप्यत सान्वय: 122!
