Dis. 11] BOOK TWELVE 71

RRR AA HRA AAA ARAN ALBA AAR ASAI ASAE AEE ARIA EAL BARE RSI AAL IAA AAA AB AAS ASA AAI A GAM

Asadha. (36) Indra, Pramloea, Varya, Elapatra, Srota, Angira and Viswavasu—these run the
month of Sravana. (37) Vivaswan, Anumloca, Vyaghra, Sankhapala, Asarana, Bhrgu and
Ugrasena—these run the month called Bhadrapada. (38) Pisa, Ghrtaci, Vata, Dhanafijaya,
Suruci, Gautama and Susena—these run the month of Magha. (39) Parjanya, Senajit,
Varea, Airavata, Kratu, Bharadwaja and Viswa—these run the month named Phalgunaa. (40)
Again, Arhsu, Urvasi, Vidyuechatru, Mahasgankha, Tarksya, Kagyapa and Rtasena—these
run the month of Margasirsa. (41) Bhaga, Purvacitti, Sphurja, Karkotaka, Urna, Ayu and
Aristanemi—these run the month of Pausa. (42) Again, Twasta, Tilottama, Brahmapeta,
Kambala, Satajit, Jamadagni and Dhrtarastra are the guardians of the month of Agwina. (43)
Visnu, Rambha, Makhapeta, Aswatara, Satyajit, Viswamitra and Siryavarca—these run the
month of Kartika. (44)

एता भगवतो विष्णोरादित्यस्य विभूतय: । स्मरतां सन्ध्ययोर्नृणां weet दिने दिने ।४५।
द्वादशस्वपि मासेषु देवोऽसौ षड्भिरस्य वै। चरन् समन्तात्तनुते wae च सन्मतिम् ।४६।
सामर्ग्यजुर्भिस्तल्लिङ्गैर्षय: संस्तुवन्त्यमुम्। गन्धर्वास्तं प्रगायन्ति नॄत्यन्त्यप्सरसोऽग्रत: 1४७।
उन्नह्यन्ति रथं नागा प्रामण्यो रथयोजका:। चोदयन्ति wt पृष्ठे नैर्ऋता बलशालिन: ॥४८॥
वालखिल्या: सहस्राणि षष्टिर्ब्रह्मर्षयोऽमला: । पुरतोऽभिमुखं यान्ति स्तुवन्ति स्तुतिभिर्विभुम् । ४९1
एवं ह्यनादिनिधनो भगवान् हरिरीश्वर: । aed aed स्वमात्मानं व्यूह्य लोकानवत्यज: ।५०।

इति श्रीमद्भागवते महापुराणे पारमहंस्यां संहितायां द्वादशास्कन्धे आदित्यव्यूहविवरणं नामैकादशोऽध्याय: 122!

These constitute the glory of the Sun-god, who is none other than Lord Visnu. They take
away the sin of those who remember them morning and evening both day after day. (45)
Coursing round (the universe) all the twelve months (of a year) alongwith His six attendants
(enumerated in the foregoing verses) the sald Deity unquestionably awakens good sense
in the mind of His votary both here and hereafter. (46) The sages (forming the entourage of
the Sun-god) duly extol Him through hymns, of Samaveda, Rgveda and Yajurveda revealing
His glory; the Gandharvas sing His praises, while the Apsaras dance before him. (47) The
Nagas serve the purpose of keeping the parts of the chariot together; the Yaksas make his
chariot ready for service, while the mighty Raksasas push the chariot from behind. (48) Sixty
thousand pure-minded Brahmana sages, (collectively) known as the Valakhilyas, walk
ahead facing the Sun-god (all the twelve months) and celebrate the Deity through laudatory
Mantras. (49) Dividing Himself (into twelve, each form presiding over the sun for one month),
the almighty Lord Sri Hari, who is without beginning or end, and is (therefore) birthless,
protects the worlds as aforesaid in every Kalpa. (50)

Thus ends the eleventh discourse entitled "A description of the Sun-god
(presiding under different names over the twelve months of a year)
with His entourage” in Book Twelve of the great and glorious
Bhagavata-Purana, otherwise known as
the Paramaharisa-Samhita.

tnt:
RISER Siro
