836 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 24
SOIR Rtn eek teint h soe’ sine eet ee ee ee eee eee tee eeN eee He AEH HAE EEOHaP
SOR hereg rin h Sree hire beret शाशा ree eee hee eee teh ren ieee here a ener eh

The glorious Lord said : "On the seventh day following this day, O subduer of foes, (all)
these three worlds—Bhiloka (the terrestrial region), the Bhuvarloka (the aerial region) and
heaven—will be submerged in the ocean rising for the dissolution of the universe. (32) When
the three worlds are actually going to be submerged in the deluge water, a mysterious and
spacious boat, sent by Me, will approach you. (33) Take (with you) in the meanwhile all the
herbs and annual plants as well as seeds of all types (both great and small) and, surrounded
by the seven seers, and accompanied by all (varieties of) animals, you shall board that
commodious vessel and sail about undaunted in that undivided expanse of water devoid of
light, guided by the effulgence of the Rsis alone. (34-35) Attach that vessel—tossed about
by a mighty gale—by means of the great serpent (Vasuki) to My horn as | shall be present
by your side (at that time). (36) Pulling you, boat and all, along with the (seven) seers, | shall
roam about in the vast expanse of water as long as the night of Brahma (which is of the same
‘duration as his day) lasts, O king!" (37) And (at that time) you will (come to) realize My glory—
designated by the name of Para Brahma (the transcendent Reality)—revealed by Me in your
heart through (answer to) your questions, though (actually) imparted by My grace. (38)

इत्थमादिश्य राजानं हरिरन्तरधीयत | सोऽन्ववैक्षत तं कालं यं हृषीकेश आदिशत् । ३९
आस्तीर्य दर्भान् प्राक्कूलान् राजर्षि: प्रागुदङ्मुख: | निषसाद हरे: पादौ चिन्तयन् मत्स्यरूपिण: ।४०॥
तत: समुद्र see: Waa: Wea महीम्। वर्धमानो महामेघेर्वर्षद्भि: AAA । ४१॥
ध्यायन् भगवदादेशं ददृशे नावमागताम्। तामारुरोह विप्रेन्रैरादायौषधिवीरुध: ।४२॥
तमूचुर्मुनय: प्रीता राजन् ध्यायस्व केशवम्। स a a: संकटादस्मादविता at विधास्यति ।`४३॥
सोऽनुध्यातस्ततो राज्ञा प्रादुरासीन्महार्णवे wee मत्स्यो हैमो नियुतयोजन: ।४४॥
निबध्य wa weg यथोक्तो हरिणा पुरा। वरत्रेणाहिना qe मधुसूदनम् ।॥४५॥
Having thus instructed the king (Satyavrata), Sri Hari disappeared; (while) the former
awaited the time which Lord Visnu (the Controller of our senses) had already told him’. (39)
Spreading (on the ground) blades of (the sacred) KuSa grass with their ends pointing towards
the east, the royal sage sat down with his face turned towards the north-east, contemplating
on the feet of Lord Sri Hari disguised as the divine Fish. (40) Then was the ocean clearly seen
rising high on account of huge clouds pouring down (heavy) rain and (consequently)
overflowing its limits and inundating the earth on all sides.(41) Revolving in his mind the
command of the Lord, the king perceived the vessel arrived (by his side). Taking the herbs
and plants (collected by him), he boarded it along with the great sages. (42) The sages
lovingly said to him, "Meditate on Lord Visnu (the Ruler of Brahma and Lord Siva as well),
O (good) king! He will surely deliver us from this calamity and bring happiness (to us)." (43)
Thought of uninterruptedly by the king, the Lord then appeared in that vast expanse of water
in the form of a golden (effulgent) whale, possessed of a horn and extending over an area
of one lakh Yojanas (or eight lakh miles).(44) Fastening the boat to the horn of the divine
whale with the king of serpents for a rope, as already enjoined by Sri Hari, king Satyavrata,
full of joy, hymned (in the following words) Lord Visnu (the Slayer of the demon Madhu). (45)

यदृच्छयेहोपसृता यमाप्नुयुर्विमुक्तिदो न: परमो गुरुर्भवान् ।४६॥
जनोऽब्रुधोऽयं निजकर्मबन्धन: सुखेच्छया ad समीहतेऽसुखम्।
यत्सेवया at विधुनोत्यसन्मतिं aft स fenged स नो गुरु: ive!

* Vide verse 32 above.
