138 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 1

REAM O ERASER SWE HoH EREHOHATAEAATEEAHKAAEH HAHA कोको कचक कौदौ ळ कौत् ककक व EEE

यमावुतस्वित्तनयौ पृथाया: पार्थैर्वृतो पक्ष्मभिरक्षिणीव |
रेमात उद्दाय qe स्वरिक्थं परात्सुपर्णाविव वज्रिवक्तरात् 138!
यस्त्वेकवीरोऽधिरथो विजिग्ये धनुर्दितीय: ककुभश्चतस्र: 1¥0 |
सौम्यानुञ्ञोचे तमध:पतन्ते i परेताय विदुद्बहहे य: ।
निर्यापितो येन सुहृत्वपुर्यां अहं स्वपुत्रान् समनुव्रतेन Iv
ase widest oat yt चालयतो विधातु: |
नान्योपलक्ष्यय vedi प्रसादाच्चरामि पर्यन् गतविस्मयोऽत्र ॥४२॥
नूने नृपाणां त्रिमदोत्पथानां महीं मुहुश्चालयतां चमूभि: |
वधात्प्रपन्नार्तिजिहीर्षयेशोऽप्युपेक्षताघं भगवान् कुरूणाम् ।४३॥
अजस्य जन्मोत्पथनाशनाय कर्माण्यकर्तुर्गरहणाय पुंसाम् ।
नन्वन्यथा कोऽर्हति देहयोगं परो गुणानामुत कर्मतन्त्रम् Is I
तस्य प्रपन्नाखिललोकपानामवस्थितानामनुशासने स्वे ।
अर्थाय जातस्य aap वार्तां सखे ada तीर्थकीर्ते: ॥४५॥
इति श्रीमद्भागवते महापुराणे पारमहंस्यां संहितायां तृतीयस्कन्धे विदुरोद्धवसंवादे प्रथमोऽध्याय: ।१।

“Does king Yudhisthira (who is virtue personified) protect the law according to the
principles of righteousness with the help of his two arms—Vijaya (Arjuna) and Acyuta (Lord
Sri Krsna)—Yudhisthira, at the sight of whose imperial fortune and attendant glory in the
court built by Maya (the architect of the demons) Duryodhana burned with jealousy ? (36)
Has Bhima, who is most relentless like a serpent, given up his long-standing grudge against
those who wronged him, viz., the Kauravas—Bhima, whose tread the earth could not bear
as he moved about on the battle-field revolving his mace in a variety of ways (while actually
engagedina fight)? (37) Is Arjuna (the wielder of the Gandiva bow), the most renowned of
leading car-warriors, now at peace with his enemies, (having subdued or destroyed them
all)— Arjuna, who won the pleasure of Lord Siva, disguised as a Kirata (hunter) beyond all
recognition, by hiding Him with a volley of his arrows ?(38) Do the twin brothers (Nakula and
Sahadeva), the foster-sons of Prtha—who enjoy the protection of their half-brothers (the
sons of Prtha) even as the eye-balls are protected by the eyelashes—rejoice after recovering
their ancestral share from the enemy's hands through the arbitrament of war as though a pair
of Garudas had snatched nectar from the mouth of Indra (the wielder of a thunderbolt)? (39)
Oh, Prtha (my sister-in-law) is surviving merely for the sake of her children, though bereaved
of Pandu (that foremost of royal sages), who, a matchless hero and foremost car-warrior that
he was, had conquered all the four quarters with no other companion than his bow. (40) | feel
concerned, O gentle Uddhava, for that brother of mine (Dhrtarastra), who is paving his way
for hell, inasmuch as he wronged his own deceased half-brother (Pandu) in the person of his
sons (the Pandavas), and who banished me, his well-wisher, from his capital (Hastinapura),
having yielded completely to the will of his sons.(41) | am, however, not the least surprised
or sorry (for his behaviour towards me); for it is Sri Hari (Sri Krsna), the Supreme Ruler (of
this universe), who bewilders the intellect of men by following the ways of mortals. | am, there-
fore, moving about in this world, unperceived by others, observing His glory by His grace. (42)
The Lord overlooked (for the time being) the wrongdoings of the Kauravas, though capable of
punishing them then and there; for He sought to relieve the distress of those who had taken
shelter in Him by exterminating with them other monarchs too, who in their threefold pride
(of birth, wealth and learning) had strayed from the path of virtue and shook the earth with

