Dis. 28] BOOK ELEVEN 649

SEARS STOR OED CR ERE OREO OHH EM ERAN RER RCC RENE O RRR RoE NERA NEE न ८ क्त २२४२

छायाप्रत्याह्ववाभासा ह्यसन्तोऽप्यर्थकारिण: | एवं देहादयो भावा यच्छन्त्या मृत्युतो भयम् । ५ ।

आत्येंवतदिदंविश्वंसृज्यतेसृजतिप्रथु:।त्रम्यतेन्रातिविश्वफ्याह्रियतेहरतॊश्वर;।६।

तस्माञह्यात्मनोऽन्यस्मादन्दोभाबोनिरूपित:।निरूपितैयंप्रिबिध्रानिर्मूलाधात्तिरात्मनि।
इदं गुणमयं विद्धि त्रिविधं मायया कृतम् । ७ ।

We विद्वान् मदुदितं ज्ञानविज्ञाननैपुणम्। न निन्दति न च स्तौति लोके चरति सूर्यवत् । ८ ।

प्रत्यक्षेणानुमानेन निगमेनात्मसंविदा । आद्यन्तवदसज्ञात्वा नि:सङ्गो विचरेदिह । ९ ।

The glorious Lord began again: Visualizing the universe—though brought about by
(the co-operation of) Prakrti (Matter) and Purusa (the Spirit)—as one in substance (asa
manifestation of Brahma or the Absolute), one should neither praise nor condemn the
(tranquil, vehement or torpid) nature and (corresponding) actions of others. (1) He who
eulogizes or denounces the natural bent of mind and actions of others quickly strays from
his (real) purpose (of Self-Knowledge) on account of his clinging to duality (which is
unrea!).(2) On the senses (evolved from the Rajasika ego) being overpowered with sleep the
soul imprisoned in the body enters the realm of Maya (illusion in the shape of the dream state
in the eventof the mind continuing to function) and having lost its consciousness (of the body
and its surroundings later on when the mind too becomes torpid) reaches the state of deep
sleep (which has been likened to death). So does the man perceiving many things (instead
of the one real substance) experience distraction on coming in contact with the pleasures of
sense andlater on finds himself sunk into the depths of ignorance). (3) In the midst of duality,
which is unreal (the question does not arise) what is good (praiseworthy) and what is evil
(deprecable) and to what extent a (particular) thing is good or bad; (for) whatever is
expressed through word (i.e., whatever is grasped through the senses) as well as whatever
is contemplated with the mind is false. (4) A reflection, an echo and an illusory object (such
as a mother of pearl presenting the appearance of silver), though unreal, react on us (as
though they were real). So do the body and other entities (continue to) inspire fear till they
disappear (into their one substratum, viz., Brahma). (5) Therefore, this universe is (no other
than) the (Supreme) Spirit, inasmuch as It is capable of assuming all forms and almighty
(capable of evolving everything). It is that (Universal) Spirit (alone) which creates and is
Created, protects and is protected, destroys and is destroyed. (It is both the subject and the
object). (6) Therefore, no entity other than the Self existing apart from that which is created
and so on has been posited (by the Vedas).This threefold appearance (in the shape of
creation, continuance and destruction of the universe) in the Self has been declared (by the
wise) as baseless. Know the threefold existence (in the shape of the perceiver, the perceived
and the act of perception), being a product of the three Gunas, as brought about by Maya
(My deluding potency) . (7) He who comes to know (what is meant by) this ripeness of JAdna
and Vijfiana as taught by Me would neither extol nor revile anyone and would move about
in the world (free from partiality and prejudice) as the sun. (8) Realizing this world as having
a beginning and an end and (therefore) unreal {when conceived as apart from the Spirit) by
means of perception, inference, the authority-of the scriptures and one’s own direct
experience, one should move about in this world unattached. (9)

उद्धव उवाच
नैवात्मनो न देहस्य संसृतिर्द्रष्टदृश्ययो: | अनात्मस्वदृशोरीशा कस्य स्यादुपलभ्यते ।१०॥
आत्माव्ययोऽगुण: शुद्ध: स्वयंज्योतिरनावृत: । अग्निवद्दारुवदचिद्देहह कस्येह संसृति: ।११।
