Dis. 20] BOOK FIVE 521
गंगेर्पोभंणंगेगंणेषींर्पोगैगेभेफ्रिषींगेगे*ग्धाश्वैधंर्षाप्रंष्टांद्यंद्म गेगेमॆप्श्घं‘;र्व्यघंप्रंघ्रंस्मिँग्भिप्नेघंगंभंप्घंयांग्'गंगेर्पोघंर्व्यघ्नंगंभं*षींप्नेर्षाणंर्क्षगंक्रैषींघेर्भेशगंभंषींच्चैळंमाँ
EET FI EE EE Rr a or श्वं

Even so, extending beyond the ocean of fluid curds and encircling it (on one side) lies
the Puskaradwipa, double in width as compared to it and surrounded on the other side by
an equally wide ocean of fresh water. In that Dwipa stands a gigantic lotus with hundreds
of millions of gold petals bright as the flames ofa blazing fire, which is intended to be the seat
of the glorious Brahma (who is universally known as having a lotus for his seat). (29) In the
middle of that Dwipa rises only one mountain-range, named Manasottara, which forms the
boundary of the inner and outer Varsas and possesses a height as well as a width of ten
thousand Yojanas (eighty thousand miles). On this mountain stand (built) inthe four quarters
the four cities of Indra and (three) other guardians of the world (Yama, Varuna and Soma)
(and) over it revolves the (other) wheel—in the form of a year—of the sun-god's chariot,
going round Mount Meru (to which the first wheel stands fastened) in the space of a day and
a night of the gods (which correspond to the northern and southern courses of the sun). (30)
The (first) ruler of the aforementioned Dwipa as well was a (the seventh) son of Priyavrata,
Vitihotra by name. Having appointed his two sons, Ramanaka and Dhataki by name, as the
rulers of the two Varsas (comprised in his Dwipa), he himself took solely to the service
(worship) of the Lord, like his elder brothers. (31) The people of these two Varsas worship
the Lord in the form of Brahma (the Creator) through rituals leading to (the attainment of)
Brahma's heaven and other such rewards (which are achieved through actions alone) and
repeat the following (prayer):—(32)"Hail to that glorious, yet tranquil form (of the Lord), which
is attained through (meritorious) acts and by resorting to which (the truth about) Brahma can
be known, which men worship (as Brahma), (and) which has the one supreme Reality for its
goal and is (therefore essentially) one without a second." (33)

ऋषिरुवाच
तत: परस्ताल्लोकालोकनामाचलोलोकालोकयोरन्तराले परित उपक्षिप्त: । ३४ ।यावन्मानसोत्तरमेर्वोरन्तरं
तावती भूमि: काञ्चन्यन्याऽऽदशतलोपमा यस्यां प्रहित: पदार्थो न कथञ्चित्पुन: प्रत्युपलभ्यते तस्मात्सर्व-
सत्त्वपरिहृताऽऽसीत्। ३५ | लोकालोक इति समाख्या यदनेनाचलेन लोकालोकस्यान्तर्वर्तिनावस्थाप्यते। ३६ ।
स लोकत्रयान्ते outa ईश्वरेण विहितो यस्मात्सूर्यादीनां ध्रुवापवर्गाणां ज्योतिर्गणानां
गभस्तयोऽवांचीनांस्त्राल्लोकानावितन्वाना न कदाचित्पराचीना भवितुमुत्सहन्ते तावदुन्नहनायाम:। ३७

The sage (Sri Suka) went on :— Beyond that (the ocean of fresh water) stands in the
form of a ring the mountain-range called Lokdloka, which constitutes the dividing line
between the region lighted (by the sun) and that which is not so lighted. (34) (A stretch of)
land as wide as that lying between the Manasottara and Meru mountains extends (on the
other side of the ocean of fresh water). Beyond that there is another (tract of) land with a
surface of gold and (bright) like a sheet of mirror. Anything dropped there is on no account
to be found again (apparently because it is changed into gold and assimilated with the
surface): hence it is shunned by all (earthly) life. (35) The mountain-range referred to above
is rightly called ‘Lokaloka' inasmuch as ‘Loka' (the region lighted by the sun) and ‘Aloka’ (that
screened from the sun's rays) are clearly defined byit, standing as it does between them.(36)
That mountain has been placed by the Almighty beyond the three worlds (heaven, earth and
the intermediate region) as a boundary extending on all sides. And it is so high and
extensive that the rays of the multitudes of heavenly bodies from the sun (right) up to the
pole-star, enveloping (illuminating) as they do (all) the three worlds on this side, are never
able to reach the other side. (37)

एतावाँल्लोकविन्यासोमानलक्षणसंस्थाभिर्विचिन्तित:कविभि: सतुपञ्चाशत्कोटिगणितस्य भूगोलस्य
तुरीयभागोऽयं लोकालोकाचल: 1 ३८ | तदुपरिष्टाच्चतसृष्वाशास्वात्मयोनिनाखिलजगद्गुरुणाधिनिवेशिता

[564] B. M. 19—
