742 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA Dis. 2

PANAMA KEAN HAHAH HALEN ER OLEH ELE HE CELE ALAA EHTEL SHEE AEH eee

elephants as well as their youngs with drops of water drawn by its own trunk and making them
drink it, full of compassion (as it was for its herd), like a householder, the proud elephant,
infatuated by the deluding potency of the eternal Lord, did not foresee the (impending)

peril.(26)
a ow कश्चिन्नृपं cadet met बलीयांश्चरणे रुषाग्रहीत्।
यदृच्छयैवं व्यसनं TH गजो चथाबलं सोऽतिबलो विचक्रमे । २७॥
विचुक्रुशुर्दीनधियोऽपरे गजा: ofeiner न चाशकन् । २८
नियुध्यतोरेवमिभेन्द्रनक्रयोर्विकर्षतोरन्तरतो बहिर्मिथ: |
am: Wea व्यगमन् महीपते सप्राणयोश्चित्रममंसतामरा: 12°!

Directed by destiny, O protector of men, some very powerful alligator indignantly seized
the elephant by the foot in that lake. Thus fallen into adversity by the will of Providence, that
mighty elephant struggled to the utmost of its strength (to shake off the enemy's hold). (27)
Perceiving the leader of their herd being thus forcibly dragged by the mighty foe, and unable
to help itself, the female elephants, whose mind was (greatly) perplexed, (merely) shrieked;
while the other elephants, even though they tried (their utmost) to help their leader (from
behind), could not liberate it. (28) While the lord of elephants and the alligator were thus

contending and pulling each other, the one outside and the other inside, both remaining
alive, a thousand years rolled by, O ruler of the earth. The gods (too) looked upon this (event)

as (something) strange. (29) ॥

विकृष्यमाणस्य जलेऽवसीदतो विपर्ययोऽभूत् wae जलौकस: 1301

ya Ws: स यदाऽऽप संकटं प्राणस्य देही विवशो यदृच्छया ।

अपारयन्नात्मव्रिमोक्षणे चिरॆ दध्याविमाँ बुद्धिमथाभ्यपद्यत । ३१1

न मामिमे ज्ञातय stat गजा: ga: करिण्य: प्रभवन्ति मोचितुम्।

Ten पाशेन विधातुरावृतोऽप्यहं च तं चामि परं परायणम् ।३२॥

a: कश्चनेशो बलिनोऽन्तकोरगात् प्रचण्डवेगादभिधावतो yar

wd wot परिपाति arg: seat तमॊमहि 133

After this (due to lack of nourishment, however,) there came about a great depletion

of spirit, strength and vitality of the king of elephants, as it was being dragged in water for
(such) a long time and was now languishing; while in the case of the alligator (that had its
abode in water and derived its nourishment from water) all this (strength etc.), turned out to
be otherwise (came to be redoubled). (30)When the lord of elephants, that looked upon the
body (alone) as its self, unexpectedly came face to face with this danger to life and felt
(absolutely) powerless, and incapable of liberating itself (from the hold of its enemy), it
pondered for a long time and presently arrived at the following conclusion.(31) (The elephant
said to itself,) "These, my kith and kin, have no power to extricate me, fallen in distress (as
lam); how (then) can the female elephants doit? (Therefore,) entrapped as | amin the snare
of Providence in the shape of the alligator, even | (a beast) flee (for protection) to the
Supreme, the ultimate refuge (of all). (32) Whosoever being the almighty Lord Protects on

every side a suppliant very much afraid of the powerful serpent in the form of Death,
possessed of terrible speed and advancing in every direction, and from fear of whom Death

