134 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 1

SRR MAH RACE HM WY आ शाजा ता ता ह RENN RM MRE RCM VERE SE LESTE NONE HR NE ETNA EEE EL MRR OT NRE HH RCE ONE

a

भ्रातुर्यविष्ठस्य सुतान् विबन्धून् प्रवेश्य लाक्षाभवने ददाह | ६ |
यदा त .. आ : + fot १ ग्।र्ह्यम्।

न याचतोऽदात्समयेन odd तमो जुषाणो यदजातशात्रो: । ८ ।
aq च west: eat जगद्गुरर्यानि जगाद कृष्ण: ।
न तानि पुंसाममृतायनानि wie मेने क्षतपुण्यलेश: । ९ |
यदोपहूतो भवनं प्रविष्टो ma Ue: fae पूर्वजेन ।
अथाह तन्मन्त्रदृशां वरीयान् aT ag वदन्ति 120!

Sri Suka proceeded : You know how king Dhrtarastra, who was not only blind but had
alsolosthis right judgment and supported his wickedsons through unrighteousness (in their
unrighteous ways), had his younger brother's fatherless sons (Yudhisthira and others)
lodged in a house of lac and the same set on fire. (6) Nay, when in open court his second
son (Duhgasana) dragged by the hair Dhrtarastra's own daughter-in-law and the spouse of
king Yudhisthira (queen Draupadi), whose tears washed off the saffron painted onher bosom
(she being covered by a single cloth), the king failed to stop that abominable act of his son.
(7) The guileless king Yudhisthira, who was devoted to truth and regarded none as his
enemy, was worsted in a gambling bout by unfair means (and sent in exile to the forest for
a period of thirteen years); but when (on expiry of the term of exile) he returned from the
forest, and asked back his share according to the terms of the agreement, Duryodhana
refused to part with it, blinded as he was by infatuation. (8) When Sri Krsna, the Preceptor
of the universe, was sent by Yudhisthira to the Kaurava court, He spoke there words which
were full of nectar to His devotees (Bhisma and others); but the king (Duryodhana) attached
no importance to them, since all his stock of merits had been exhausted. (9) Again, when,
invited by his elder brother (Dhrtarastra), Vidura entered the latter's private chamber and was
asked to give his advice, that crest-jewel of wise counsellors gave a piece of advice, which
politicians still speak of (with reverence) as 'Viduraniti’ (the Counsel of Vidura). (10)

सहानुजो चत्र वृकोदराहि: श्वसन् रुषा यत्त्वमलं बिभेषि ।११॥
पार्थास्तु देवो भगवाप्मुकुद्बदौ गृहं।तवाम् स क्षितिदेवदेव: |
आस्ते = area
स ow दोष: पुरुषद्विडास्ते गृहान् प्रविष्टो यमपत्यमत्या ।
पुष्णासि कृष्णाद्दिमुखो गतश्रीस्त्यजाश्वौवं कुलकौशलाय ।१३॥
इत्यूचिवांस्तत्र सुयोधनेन प्रवृद्धकोपस्फुरिताधरेण |
saga: सत्स्पृहणीयशील: क्षत्ता सकर्णानुजसौबलेन ।१४॥
क एनमत्रोपजुहाव fi cer a aera पुष्ट: ।
तस्मिन् mda: परकृत्य आस्ते निर्वास्यतामाशु पुराच्छ्वसान: ।१५॥
स इत्थमत्युल्बणकर्णबाणैरभ्रतुर पुरो मर्मसु ताडितोऽपि ।
wa धनुर्द्दरिं निधाय मायाँ गतव्यथोऽयादुरु मानयान: ।१६॥
