Dis. 74] BOOK TEN 421

Seer era e ene ENE T TEE २२२२ २२२२ Feet rege Pe ee ete ee Te Ae TECH RS AOE eR

through the kingdoms of Paficala and Matsya and finally reached Indraprastha. (22) Pariksit,
the sight of Sri Krsna is a rare boon. king Yudhisthira was delighted to hear the news of His
arrival and marched out of the city with his priests, friends and relations. (23) Amidst the
singing of auspicious songs, sounds of trumpets and other musical instruments, and loud
recitation of the Vedas by Brahmanas, he went forth with great zeal to receive the Lord, just
as the senses begin to function as soon as the life-breath returns. (24) At the sight of Sri
Krsna, whom he had seen after a long time, the heart of Yudhisthira overflowed with emotion
and he embraced the Lord, his most beloved friend, again and again.{25) Encircling with his
arms the person of Sri Krsna, the sacred abode of Laksmi (the goddess of beauty), the king
was rid of all evils and felt extremely delighted. With tears in his eyes and hair standing on
end, he forgot all about this delusive world. (26) Bhima too was transported with joy when
he embraced his dear cousin with a broad smile on his lips and his heart overwhelmed with
an outburst of emotion. Similarly, Arjuna and the twins, Nakula and Sahadeva, with profuse
tears of joy, embraced the immortal Lord, their best friend and well-wisher. (27) Embraced
by Arjuna (for a second time), and hailed by Nakula and Sahadeva (the twin brothers), Sri
Krsna Himself bowed to the Brahmanas and the elder (among the Kurus) in the order of their
age and seniority. (28) Honoured by the Kurus, Srijayas and Kaikayas, the Lord also duly
returned them honours. Sitas (chroniclers), Magadhas (panegyrists), Gandharvas
(songsters), bards and court jesters sang and danced to the accompaniment of musical
instruments, such as Mrdangas, conchs, tabors, lutes, drums and trumpets and the
Brahmanas uttered their praises. (29-30) Thus surrounded by friends and well-wishers, the
blessed Lord, the foremost among those of sacred renown, entered the decorated city
amidst the praises and acclamations of the people. (31)

if j रिणां a8 3. नो दि ।

मृष्टात्मभिर्नवदुकूलविभूषणस्रग्गन्धैर्नृभिर्युवतिभिश्च विराजमानम् 1321
उद्दीप्तदीपबलिभि: प्रतिसद्मजालनिर्यातधूपरुचिरं विलसत्पताकम्।

मूर्धन्यहेमकलतौ owes ददर्श Wad: कुरुराजधाम 1321
wat विसृज्य गृहकर्म पतींश्च तल्पे द्रष्टुं ययुर्युवतय: स्म नरेन्द्रमार्गे । ३४॥
afer सुसङ्कुल इभाश्वरथद्विपद्भि: कृष्णं सभार्यमुपलभ्य गृहाधिरूढा: |

नार्यो faa कुसुमैर्मनसोपगुह्य सुस्वागतं विदधुरुत्स्मयवीक्षितेन ।३५॥
ऊचु: स्रिय: uf निरीक्ष्य मुकुन्दपत्नीस्तारा यथोडुपसहा: किमकार्यमूभि: ।

यच्चक्षुषां पुरुषमौलिरुदारहासलीलावलोककलयोत्सवमातनोति ।३६॥

तत्र तत्रोपसङ्गम्य पौरा मङ्गलपाणय:। चक्रु: सपर्यां कृष्णाय श्रेणीमुख्या हतैनस: ।३७॥

The roads of the city of Indraprastha were sprinkled with the juice flowing from the
temples of elephants in rut as well as scented water, wonderful many-coloured flags flapped
(at every step), temporary arches of gold were erected and gold pots filled with water were
placed (at the entrance of houses). Having washed and scented themselves and putting on
new garments, ornaments and garlands, the citizens, men and women, came out of their
. houses and crowded the streets. (32) Lights were kindled and offerings of flowers made in
front of all houses; and scented fumes escaped from the lattices of their windows presenting
an agreeable sight. The houses were decorated with buntings and domes of gold with silver

bases adorned every house-top. Bhagavan Sri Krsna observed this beauty of the Kaurava
capital as He proceeded through its streets. (33) On hearing of His arrival, damsels hurriedly
