Dis. 7 ] BOOK TEN 129

SROTTAEHE HER HERENEHEREE EERE ED SEL CEHHECEREE HEBEL EEE HELE CEES EES EER ७५७६ ^४:७-# ८ 9६७ ७१84

ऊचुरव्यवसितमतीन् गोपान् गोपीश्च बालका: । रुदतानेन पादेन क्षिप्तमेतन्नञ संशाय: । ९ ।
न a seit गोपा बालभाषितमित्युत asta बलं तस्य बालकस्य न ते fag: ।॥१०॥

Sri Suka resumed : Once on the occasion of the ceremonial ablution (of the infant Sri
Krsna) to commemorate His turning in the bed (which generally takes place at the end of
three months), when the (same) constellation (Rohini) under which He was born happened
to be at the ascendant, Yagoda (the good old mother of Sri Krsna) performed in the midst
of the ladies assembled (at her residence) the rite of sprinkling her son with water,
accompanied by the playing of musical instruments, songs and the chanting of sacred texts
done by the Brahmanas. (4) When the ablution etc., of Sri Krsna had been finished and the
ceremony of invoking blessings on Him performed by the Brahmanas that had (already) been
duly honoured with gifts of cooked food and raw articles of food, raiment, garlands, boons
sought by them and cows, and when drowsiness was fully manifested in His eyes, Nanda’s
wife gently put Him to sleep (on a cradle or a cot underneath a cart). (5) Busy honouring the
inhabitants of Vraja assembled (for the occasion) with a mind full of zeal over the festival
commemorating Sri Krsna’s turning in the bed, the noble-minded Yasoda did not at all hear
the cry of her son, who, while actually crying for a suck, tossed up His feet (in an angry
mood).(6) Hit by the tiny feet, tender as a leaf, of the Babe, lying beneath, the cart turned*
upside down with the result that the metal jars (placed on it and) containing various delicious
substances (such as milk, curds and ghee) were crushed, its wheels and axle-tree inverted
and its pole shattered. (7) Perceiving it (in that topsyturvy condition), the women of
Vraja—that had gathered (at Nanda's residence) for the festival commemorating the turning
of Sri Krsna in the bed—headed by Yagoda, as well as Nanda and others, who were
perplexed at that amazing sight, wondered how the cart had actually turned upside down by
itself. (8) Boys (who were playing there when the cart turned turtle) told the (wondering)
cowherds and cowherdesses—whose mind was uncertain (as to who was really responsible
for upturning the cart)}—that the cart had been knocked down with His foot by $ri Krsna while
crying (for His mother's breast): there was no doubt (about it). (9) Those cowherds (however)
did not believe it, taking it to be the (mere) talk of children and (therefore) doubting it; for they
did not know the immeasurable strength of that Boy. (10)

wed सुतमादाय यजञ्ञोदा भ्रहशाङ्किता । कृतस्वस्त्ययनं fad: सूक्तै: स्तनमपाययत् ee I
पूर्ववत् स्थापितं गोपैर्बलिभि: सपरिच्छदम्। विप्रा हुत्वार्चयाञ्चक्रुर्दध्यक्षतकुशाम्बुभि: 1221
येऽसूयानृतदम्भेर्याहिसामानविवर्जिता: । न तेषां सत्यशीलानामारिषो विफला: Far: । १३॥
इति बालकमादाय सामर्ग्यजुरुपाकृतै: । जलै: पवित्रौषधिभिरभिषिच्य द्विजोत्तमै: । १४॥
वाचयित्वा wert नन्दगोप: समाहित: । हुत्वा चाग्मिं द्विजातिभ्य: प्रादादन्नं महागुणम् । १५॥

Ta: सर्वगुणोपेता वासर:स्रग्रुक्ममालिनी: । आत्मजाभ्युदयार्थाय प्रादात्ते चान्वयुञ्जत । १६॥
fam मन्त्रविदो युक्तास्तैर्या: प्रोक्तास्तथाऽऽस्लिष: | ता निष्फला भविष्यन्ति न कदाचिदपि स्फुटम् ।१७॥

*The great demon Hiranyaksa, who was stain by the Lord disguised as a boar (vide Discourses XVII to XIX of Book Ill),
had a son, Utkaca by name.He wes exceedingly powerful end well-built. In the course of his peregrnations he once crushed
the trees of the hermitage ol the sage Lomasa, who pronounced on him ecurse that he would thencetorth remain disembodied
He felt that his physical sheath wes ebout to fall off like slough. He fell prostrate at the feet of the sage and asked his lorgiveness.
Appeased by his penitent behaviour, ihe sage blessed him that in the course of the Vaivaswala Manvantara he would be
liberated by the touch of the feet of Lord Sn Krsna. !t was Utkaca that had entered the cart in Nanda's residence in his
disembodied state and wes forthwith liberated by the tough ot the Lord's feet.
