Dis. 55] BOOK TEN 347°

PL ee eee ee 8

the Yadus), who cherished exclusive devotion to Sri Krsna, the Ruler of the Yadus, O
protector of men ! (54) Full of joy and adorned with ear-rings made of highly polished gems,
men as well as women brought (valuable) presents for the bride and the Bridegroom, who
were clad in picturesque (bridal) attire. (65) That city of the Vrsnis put up a smart appearance
with flags raised in honour of Indra, picturesque wreaths, tapestries and bejewelled
omamental arches, auspicious articles (such as fried grains of paddy, sprouts of barley and
flowers etc.) placed in front of every door as well as with pitchers full of water, aloe-wood
burning as incense and lights. (56) It had its roads moistened by the elephants, shedding
temporal juice, of invited friendly kings, and was graced with tall plantain and areca-nuttrees
set up at the entrances. (57) Among those running to and fro through excitement in that city
the Kurus, the Srfijayas, the Kaikeyas, the Vidarbhas, the Yadus and the Kuntis rejoiced to
meet one another. (58) Hearing the story how Rukmini was carried off (by Sri Krsna), which
was being sung at every place, the (assembled) princes and princesses felt greatly
astonished. (59) Great was the jubilation, O king, among the citizens in Dwaraka at the sight
of Sri Krsna, the Spouse of Sri (the goddess of beauty and prosperity), united (in wedlock)
with Rukmini, who was no other than (the said) Goddess Laksmi. (60)

Thus ends ihe fifty-fourth discourse, forming part of the story of Rukmini's wedding,
in the latter half of Book Ten of the great and glorious Bhagavata-Purana,
otherwise known as the Paramahamsa-Samhita.

sSinsting

अथ पञ्चपञ्चाहात्तमोऽध्याय:

Discourse LV
The story of Pradyumna's birth (and the destruction
of the demon Sambara)
SR उवाच
Bow जातो aut कृष्णवीर्यसमुद्धव: । प्रद्युम्न इति विख्यात: सर्वतोऽनवम: fig: 1 २ |
तं ज्ञम्बर: कामरूपी gal तोकमनिर्दंशम्। स विदित्वाऽऽत्मन: दात्रुं प्रास्योदन्वत्यगाद् गृहम् । ३ ।
a ower कैवर्ता उपाजह्रुरुपायनम् gel महानसं नीत्वावद्यन् स्वधितिनाद्भुतम्। ५ |
alee तत्त्वमुत्पत्तिं मत्स्यादरनिवेशनम् । ६ ।

सा च कामस्य वै पत्नी tem यणस्विनी । पत्युर्निर्दग्धदेहस्य देहोत्पत्तिं प्रतीक्षती । ७ ।
निरूपिता oma सा सूपोदनसाधने। कामदेवं fe बुद्ध्वा चक्रे स्नेहं तदार्भके । ८ ।
नातिदीर्घेण कालेन a awl रूढ्यौवन: । जनयामास नारीणां वीक्षन्तीनां च विभ्रमम् । ९ ।

सा तं oom पद्मदलायतेक्षणं प्रलम्बबाहुं नरलोकसुन्दरम् ।

सव्रीडहासोत्तभितभ्रुवेक्षती प्रीत्योपतस्थे ting सौरतै: 1201
