636 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 25

न न न KEEN न न न MORE MECH M ANAK EK ENKE NCE का न कक ककक श्र व मा ग जन न ४9० nme ८८

of Prakrti), viz., Sattva, Rajas and Tamas, affect the Jiva (embodied soul) alone and not Me,
inasmuch as they appear (only) in the mind of the former and because itis the Jiva alone that
is bound (to this mundane existence) through them, getting attached to the elements (in the
form of the body, senses, mind and the objects of the senses). (12) When Sattva, which is
illuminating, transparent and tranquil, prevails over the other two Gunas (viz., Rajas and
Tamas), a man is characterized by wisdom, piety and happiness etc., respectively. (13)
When (on the other hand) Rajas—which gives rise to attachment and the notion of diversity
and spurs one to activity—gets the better of Tamas and Sattva, then one is sized with a
craving for glory and fortune and is characterized by unhappiness and activity. (14) When
(however) Tamas—which perverts one's judgment, clouds one's vision and induces
duliness—dominates Rajas and Sattva, a man is characterized by grief, infatuation and
violence (as a result of perverted judgment), (excessive) sleep (through obscurity of the
mind) and by expectation of help from others (through indolence caused by dullness).(15)
When the mind ts lucid and the senses recoil from their objects, (nay,) when there is
fearlessness in relation to the body and the mind is free from (all) attachment, know that
Sattva, which is conducive to My realization, is predominant at that time. (16) When, getting
agitated through activity a man finds his intellect distracted on all sides, (nay.) his senses
know no rest, the organs of action are not quite at ease and the mind is confused, conclude
from these symptoms that Rajas holds sway. (17) When, getting obscured and (therefore)
in capable of being moulded into the spiritual substance, the faculty of reason ceases to
function and the mind (too) has its activity suspended, and when ignorance and gloom
prevail, know that Tamas is in the ascendant. (18)

एधमाने गुणे aa देवानां बलमेधते। असुराणां च रजसि तमस्युद्धव रक्षसाम् ।१९।

सत्त्वाजागरणं विद्याद् wer स्वप्नमादिहोत्। प्रस्वापं तमसा जन्तोस्तुरीयं fy सन्ततम् । २०॥

उपर्युपरि गच्छन्ति सत्त्वेन ब्राह्मणा SAT: | तमसाधोऽध आमुख्याद् रजसान्तरचारिण: 1221

aa प्रलीना: स्वर्यान्ति नरलोके रजोलया: । तमोलयास्तु fra यान्ति मामेव निर्गुणा: 1221

मदर्पणं निष्फलं वा aan निजकर्म तत्। राजसं फलसङ्कुल्पं हिंसाप्रायादि तामसम् । २३

कैवल्यं सात्विकं ज्ञानं रजो वैकल्पिकं च यत् । प्राकृतं तामसं ज्ञानं मन्निष्ठं निर्गुणं स्मृतम् । २४॥

वनं तु Whaat वासो ant राजस उच्यते। तामसं द्यूतसदनं मन्निकेतं तु निर्गुणम् ।२५॥

सात्विक: कारकोऽसङ्गो रागान्धो राजस: स्मृत: । तामस: स्मृतिविभ्रष्टो निर्गुणो मदपाश्रय: 126 |

सात्विक्याध्यात्मिकी श्रद्धा कर्मश्रद्धा तु राजसी । तामस्यधर्मे या श्रद्धा मत्सेवायां तु निर्गुणा । २७।

qa पूतमनायस्तमाहार्यं सात्तविकं स्मृतम्।राजसं चेन्दरियप्रेष्ठं तामसं चार्तिदादुचि । २८॥

सात्विकं सुखमात्मोत्थं विषयोत्थं तु राजसम्। तामसं मोहदैन्योत्थं निर्गुणे मदपाश्रयम् 1281
When Sattvaguna is on the increase, the strength of the gods increases, that of the
Asuras, when Rajas is in the ascendant; and that of the Raksasas’ when Tamas 1s
predominant, O Uddhava ! (19) One should trace the waking state of a man from Sattva,
attribute his dream state to Rajas and deep slumber to Tamas and declare the fourth
(transcendent) state (which is no other than the Self) as (uniformly) running through (all) the
three (aforementioned) states (of consciousness). (20) Men following the courses of

conduct prescribed in the Vedas go higher and (still) higher through Sattva by recourse to
Tamas they descend lower and (still) lower, embracing even inanimate life, while by recourse

* Itus the indriyas given over to other-worldliness, worldly achvily and infatuation respeciively that are referred lo here by
Ihe appellation of gods. Asuras (demons) and Raksasas (ogres).
