ad

Dis. 5] BOOK ELEVEN 537

न ह्यत: परमो लाभो देहिनां भ्राम्यतामिह | यतो विन्देत परमां शान्तिं नह्यति संसृति: 1301

कृतादिषु प्रजा राजन् कलाविच्छन्ति सम्भवम्। कलौ खलु भविष्यन्ति नारायणपरायणा: ।३८॥

aha क्वचिन्महाराज द्रविडेषु च aftr: । ताम्रपर्णी नदी aa कृतमाला पयस्विनी 1३९1

aad च vege प्रतीची च महानदी। ये पिबन्ति जलं तासां मनुजा मनुजेश्वर ।
प्रायो भक्ता भगवति वासुदेवेऽमलाशया: ।४०॥

देवर्षिभूताप्तनणां  पितॄणां न किङ्करे नायमृणी च राजन्।
wale य: ङारणं शरण्यं गतो मुकुन्दं परिहत्य कर्तम् ॥४१।
aes ome: fa त्यक्तान्यभावस्य aft wat
विकर्म यच्चोत्पतितं कथञ्चिद् धुनोति ad हृदि सन्निविष्ट: ।४२॥

Thus, O king, Lord Sri Hari— the Bestower of (all) blessings (including Liberation)—is
worshipped by men belonging to different Yugas under a name and in a form appropriate to
the age. (35) Elderly and discriminating persons who appreciate the merits of the Kali age
and choose the essence of things, extol this age, in which by merely chanting the names of
the Lord one can attain all the desired objects (which could otherwise be had through many
virtues only). (36) (Therefore,) for men {ost in this world indeed there is no higher gain than
the chanting of His names, whereby one attains to perfect peace and as a sequel to which
the cycle of birth and death comes to an end. (37) (For this reason) O king, those living in
the ages of Satya, Treta and Owapara seek birth in the Kali age. O great king, in the Kali age
(only) here and there men will be devoted to Lord Narayana; but their number will be large
in the Dravida territory, wherein flow the rivers Tamraparni, Krtamala, Payaswini, the most
sacred Kaveri, Mahanadi and Pratici. O great king, men who drink their waters generally
become pure-minded devotees of Lord Vasudeva. (38—40) O king, renouncing all
obligation (or the notion of separateness from the Lord), he who whole-heartedly and
completely resorts for protection to the protecting Lord is no more a servant of or debtor to
the deities, Rsis or other creatures, relations or other men (newcomers) and deceased
ancestors, (Such a person discharges all his responsibilities merly by seeking refuge in the
Lord.) (41) Ifa beloved devotee who has forsaken all other attachments and sought shelter
in the soles of feet of the Lord incurs any sin णि any reason (although as a rule he is incapable
of sin), the Supreme Lord, Sri Hari, enshrined in his heart, washes off all that sin. (42)

ARG उवाच

धर्मान् भागवतानित्थं श्रुत्वाथ मिथिलेश्वर: । जायन्तेयान् मुनीन् प्रीत: सोपाध्यायो ह्यपूजयत् ।४३॥
ततोऽन्तर्दधिरे fag: सर्वलोकस्य पठ्यत:। राजा धर्मानुपातिष्ठन्नवाप परमां गतिम् ।४४॥
त्वमप्येतान् महाभाग श्य{न्भम्राग्च्छुतम्।आस्लि:श्रद्धयायुक्तोनि:सङ्गोयल्मसेपाम्।४५।
युवयो: we दम्पत्योर्यगासा ghd जगत्। पुत्रतामगमद् ae वां भगवानीश्वरो हरि: ।४६॥
दर्शनालिङ्गनालापै: झयनासनभोजनै: | आत्मा वां पावित: Hel पुत्रस्नेहं प्रकुर्वतो: । ४७1

Ru यं नृपतय: शिदुपालपौण्ड्रशाल्वाद्यो गतिविलासविलोकनाद्यै: |

ध्यायन्त आकृतधिय: दायनासनादौ तत्साम्यमापुरनुरक्तधियां पुन: किम् ।४८॥
मापत्यबुद्धिमकृथा: कृष्णे सर्वात्मनीश्वरे। मायामनुष्यभावेन yest परेऽव्यये ive
भूभारासुरराजन्यहन्तवे गुप्तये सताम्।अवतीर्णस्य del aan लोके वितन्यते ।५०॥

The sage Narada resumed : Hearing (the exposition) of these courses of conduct
pleasing to the Lord, Nimi (the king of Mithila) with his priests and preceptors delightedly
(565) B.M. Part II—46 |

