Dis. 79 ] BOOK TEN 451

न माल्कजा कक RENEE KEES EKER श्रन्र AA ORHEKEHEENE NES SEN SER १ # ०

rivers, He entered the Dandaka forest. (20) (From there) He went to the bank of the Narbada,
where stands the city of Mahismati, and after bathing in the Manutirtha returned to
Prabhasa.(21) There He heard from the mouth of Brahmanas that in the historic fight
between the Kurus and the Pandavas (almost) all the Ksatriyas had lost their lives. He felt
that the burden of the earth had been (greatly) relieved (by that terrible war). (22) On the day
Bhima and Duryodhana were engagedina single combat with their maces on thebattle-field,
Sri Balarama reached Kuruksetra to prevent their fight. (23)

सुधिष्ठिरस्तु तं दृष्टा यमौ कृष्णार्जुनावपि । अभिवाद्याभवंस्तूष्णीं किं विवक्षुरिहागत: ।२४॥
गदापाणी set. eer संरब्धौ विजयैषिणौ । मण्डलानि विचित्राणि चरन्ताविदमब्रवीत् 1241
युवां तुल्यबरल्रौ वीरौ हे राजन् हे वृकोदर । एकं प्राणाधिकं मन्ये उत्तैकं शिक्षयाधिकम् । २६
तस्मादेकतरस्येह 9 gaat: समवीर्ययो: । न लक्ष्यते जयोऽन्यो वा विरमत्वफलो रण: 1281
न weet जगृहतुर्बद्धवैरौ नॄपार्थवत्। अनुस्मरन्तावन्योन्यं दुरुक्तं दुष्कृतानि च । २८।
fe तदनुमन्वानो रामो द्वारवतीं ययौ । उग्रसेनादिभि: प्रीतैर्जातिभि:; समुपागत: ।२९॥
तं पुनर्नैमिषं प्राप्तमृषयोऽयाजयन् मुदा। क्रत्वङ्गं क्रतुभि: सर्वैर्निवृत्ताखिलविग्रहम् । ३०1
तेभ्यो विशुद्धविज्ञानं भगवान् व्यतरद् विभु: । येनैवात्मन्यदो विश्वमात्मानं विश्वगं fag: । ३१॥
स्वपत्न्यावभृथस्नातो ज्ञातिबन्धुसुहृदवृत: | रेजे स्वज्योत्स्नयेवेन्दु: सुवासा: सुष्वलङ्कृत: 132!
ईदृग्विधान्यसंख्यानि बलस्य बलशालिन: । अनन्तस्याप्रमेयस्य मायामर्त्यस्य सन्ति fe । ३३1
योऽनुस्मरेत रामस्य कर्माण्यद्भुतकर्मण: | सायं प्रातरनन्तस्य विष्णो: स दयितो भवेत् । ३४
इति श्रीमद्भागवते महापुराणे पारमहंस्यां संहितायां दशमस्कन्धे बलदेवतीर्थयात्रानिरूपणं नामैकोनाङ्चीतितमोऽध्याय: ।७९1

Yudhisthira, for his part, Nakula, Sahadeva, Bhagavan Sri Krsna and Arjuna, ali bowed
to Him, as soon as they saw Him, and stood silent anxious to know the mission which had
brought Him there. (24) Bhima and Duryodhana, burning with rage, were then performing,
mace in hand, their wonderful manoeuvres with a view to overthrowing one another. Seeing
them thus engaged, Balarama said. (25) "King Duryodhana and Bhimasena, both of youare
(renowned) warriors equally matched In strength. If Bhimasena is superior in strength,
Duryodhana is more skilful in wielding the mace. (26) To my mind, neither of you is likely to
win or be vanquished, since you possess equal energy. Therefore, let this useless fight
cease." (27) Though this advice of Sri Balarama was salutary (to both), the enmity which they
bore to each other was so deep-seated that they could not accept the same. They could not
forget the offensive words and malevolent acts of each other. (28) Balarama thought they
were being driven to their fate by destiny; therefore (without making further attempt at a
compromise) He returned to Dwaraka. There He was welcomed by Ugrasena and other
relations who were all delighted at His arrival. (29) (Thence) Sri Balarama went to the
Naimisa forest for the second time.There the sages, (acting as priests) gladly assisted Sri
Balarama, who had kept Himself aloof from hostility and war, in performing all the sacrifices.
Pariksit, (really speaking) all sacrifices are but part and parcel of Sri Balarama (and yet He
performed themin order to teacha lesson to the world). (30) Thealmighty Balarama imparted
pure wisdom to the sages, by virtue of which they realized the whole universe in themselves,
and the Self as permeating the whole universe. (31) Then, performing the concluding
ablutions with His consort, Revati, and adorned with fine clothes and beautiful ornaments,
He tooked amidst friends and relations just like the moon accompanied by moonlight (in the
midst of stars). (32) Pariksit, almighty Bhagavan Sri Balarama is the infinite Lord Himself,
His nature is incomprehensible. He had assumed a human semblance simply out of sport.
