Dis. 20] BOOK NINE 75

PRR ER ee ET ET न चिचि २२२ २२२२ २२२ २०२२ २२२२ २२२२ २ न

beings. (29)

Thus ends the nineteenth discourse, in Book Nine of the great and
glorious Bhagavata-Purana, otherwise known
as the Paramaharsa-Samhita.

भ् न
eS ies

अथ बिंशोऽध्याय:
Discourse XX

The posterity of Piru and the stories of Dusyanta and Bharata
श्रीगुक उवाच

git प्रवक्ष्यामि चत्र जातोऽसि भारत। यत्र राजर्षयो dea ब्रह्मवंश्याश्च जज्ञिरे । १ |
जनमेजयो ह्यभूत् पूरो: प्रचिन्वांस्तत्सुतस्तत: । प्रवीरोऽथ नमस्युर्वै तस्माद्यारुपदोऽभवत्। २ |
तस्य सुद्युरभूत् पुत्रस्तस्माद् बहुगवस्तत: । संबातिस्तस्याहंयाती रौद्राश्वस्तत्सुत: स्मृत: । ३ ।
Tee कुक्षेयु: स्थण्डिलेबु: कृतेयुक:। जलेयुर॥ सन्ततेयुश्च धर्मसत्यव्रतेयव: । |
masa: पुत्रा वनेयुश्चावम: स्मृत: । घृताच्यामिन्दियाणीव मुख्यस्य जगदात्मन: । ५ ।
aaa रन्तिभारोऽभूत् त्रयस्तस्यात्मजा नृप। सुमतिर्धुवोऽप्रतिरथ: कण्वोऽप्रतिरथात्मज: । ६ |
wer मेधातिथिस्तस्मात् प्रस्कण्वाद्या द्विजातय: । पुत्रोऽभूत् सुमते रैभ्यो दुष्यन्तस्तत्सुतो Aa: । ७ ।

Sri Suka resumed : | shall (now) give a detailed account of the line of Piru, in which you
were born, O scion of Bharata, and in which (many) royal sages and Brahmanas, each
propagating his line, appeared. (1) Now, Janmejaya was born of Paru and Janmejaya's son
was Pracinvan, from whose loins appeared Pravira. From him indeed followed Namasyu
(and) to him was born Carupada. (2) From his loins appeared a son named Sudyu, of whom
was born Bahugava, and from him followed Samyati. His son was Ahamyati, whose son was
called Raudrasgwa. (3) Rteyu, Kukseyu, Sthandileyu, Krieyu, Jaleyu and Santateyu,
Dharmeyu, Satyeyu, Vrateyu and the youngest known as Vaneyu—these ten were the sons
of Raudrasgwa, born of the celestialnymph Ghrtaci, (even) as the ten Indriyas (the five senses
of perception and the five organs of action) are evolved from Prana, the chief of the five vital
airs (viz., Prana, Apana, Vyana, Udana and Samana), the life of the microcosm. (4-5)
Rteyu's son was Rantibhara, who had three sons—Sumati, Dhruva and Apratiratha, 0
protector of men ! Apratiratha’s son was Kanva. (6) His son was Medhatithi, from whom
originated the Brahmanas, Praskanva and others. Sumati’s son was Raibhya, (and)
Dusyanta is held to be his son. (7)

दुष्यन्तो मृगयां यात: कण्वाश्रमपदं गत:। तत्रासीनां स्वप्रभया मण्डयन्तीं रमामिव । ८ ।
विलोक्य welt मुमुहे देवमावामिव स्रियम्।ब्रभाषे at वरारोहां ve: कतिपयैर्वृत: । ९ ।
तद्दर्शनप्रमुदित: संनिवृत्तपरिश्रम: | पप्रच्छ कामसन्तप्त: प्रहसन् इलक्ष्णया गिरा । १०॥
का त्वं कमलपत्राक्षि कस्यासि हृदयङ्गमे। किं वा चिकीर्षितं त्वत्र भवत्या निर्जमे वने ।११॥
wr राजन्यतनयां वेद्म्यहं wt सुमध्यमे। न हि चेत: पौरवाणामधर्मे we क्वचित्।१२॥
(One day,) surrounded (accompanied) by a few bodyguards, Dusyanta, who had gone
a hunting, arrived at the hermitage of Kanva. He saw sitting there a charming damsel, who

was a compeer of Rama (the goddess presiding over beauty and prosperity) and a
personification as it were of the enchanting potency of the Lord, and was illuminating the
