56 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 14

कज् ज्जत्त rereredserserererarseherevere rest srs + ११6 १अअ ककक २69 क

यद्बिश्रम्भादहं नष्टा हतापत्या च दस्युभि: । a: होते निशि संत्रस्तो यथा नारी दिवा पुमान् । २९।
gia वाक्सायकैर्विद्ध: प्रतोत्रैरिव कुञ्जर: । निशि निस्रिंशमादाय विवसत्रोऽभ्यद्रवद् रुषा ।३०॥
ते विसृज्योरणौ त्त्र व्यद्योतन्त स्म विद्युत:। आदाय मेषावायान्तं नग्नमैक्षत सा पतिम् 1३१1

Urvaéi replied ; Whose mind and eyes will not be riveted on you, O handsome prince?
Lo! on (mentally) reaching your bosom, my presence of mind leaves me, seized as | am with
alonging to enjoy life with you. (20) Please take care, O king showing honour to others, of
these two rams as my pledges. (Till then) | shall revel with you; (for) he who is praiseworthy
(from the point of view of comeliness and other virtues) has been declared as acceptable to
women. (21) Ghee (alone) will be my food, O valiant one, and | should not see you unclothed
except during coition. Full of great joy, the king accepted (all) these conditions, saying,
"Amen"! (22) "What wonderful beauty, what lovely gesture, that ravish humanity! What
human being would not accept you, a celestial lady, come of her own accord?" (23) Along-
with her, who delighted him (in everyway) in a befitting manner that jewel among men
revelled at will in the pleasure-gardens of the gods such as the Caitraratha (the garden of
Kubera). (24) Revelling with that celestial nymph emitting the fragrance of lotus filaments
and captivated by the (sweet) odour ofher mouth, Purdirava rejoiced for many years. (25) Not
finding Urvagi (in his court) Indra earnestly urged the Gandharvas to look for her, saying:—
"Bereft of Urvasi, my court does not look very charming." (26) Approaching at dead of night,
when darkness fully prevailed, they stole away the two rams pledged with the king by his wife
Urvaéi. (27) Hearing the scream of the two rams (who were dear as sons), while they were
being carried away, Urvaéi(the celestial lady) exclaimed:—"I am robbed of my life (as itwere)
by my unworthy husband, fackingin manliness though accounting himself a (great) hero. (28)
By putting faith in him, |am ruined and have been despoiled by robbers of my rams (who were
dear as my own progeny). At night he sleeps in fright like a woman and behaves as a man
during the day time.” (29) Thus pierced with arrows in the form of pungent words as an
elephant with goads, and seizing a sword, Purdirava angrily rushed forth in (that dark) night
with no clothes on. (30) Leaving the rams on that (very) spot, the Gandharvas shone brightly
like flashes of lightning, so that (in the light shed by them) Urvasi saw her husband coming
back in state of nature taking the rams (with him) and left for heaven. (31)

ऐलोऽपि शयने जायामपद्यन् विमना gai तच्चित्तो विह्वल: छोचन् बभ्रामोन्मत्तवन्महीम् । ३२॥
स at वीक्ष्य Sees सरस्वत्यां च aaa: । पञ्च प्रहृष्टवदना: प्राहं सूक्तं पुरूरवा: 1331
aa जाये fig fig घोरे न त्यक्तुमर्हसि । मां त्वमद्याप्यनिर्वृत्य वचांसि कृणवावहै ।३४॥

सुदेहोऽयं पतत्यत्र ef et हृतस्त्वया । खादन्त्येनं Gal गृध्रास्त्वत्प्रसादस्य नास्पदम् 1341

Not finding his wife in the bed, Purtirava (the son of Ila) appeared like one out of wits, his
mind being fixed on her. Restless and grieving for her, he ranged over the globe like a
madman. (32) Seeingher as well as her five female companions with their faces lit with keen
delight (on one occasion) at Kuruksetra on the bank ofthe Saraswatl, Purdrava uttered the
(following) adaptation of a famous Vedic text:—(33) Oh! my darling, Stop! Stop!! Having
remained ungratified (yourself) till now, you ought not to consign me (as well) to misery. Let
us have a (heart-to-heart) talk. (34) Drawn away too far, this charming body, of mine will fall
here, O celestial lady ! (Nay,) wolves and vultures will devour it since it is no longer the
recipient of your favour. (35)

उर्वर्युवाच
मा मृथा: पुरुषोऽसि त्वं मा स्म त्वाद्युर्वृका इमे । क्वापि सख्यं न वै स्रीणां वृकाणां हृदयं यथा । ३६1
स्रियो ह्यकरुणा: क्रूरा दुर्मर्षा: प्रियसाहसा: । घ्नन्त्यल्पार्थैऽपि विश्रब्धं पतिं भ्रातरमप्युत ।३७॥

