Dis. 4] BOOK FIVE 451

घेध्रे…गैघेर्व्यघेघेष्पैप्नेघेघै’घेघेर्व्यघ्रेर्व्यघेघेघेघेघेघेघेभेघ्रेमै…ग्निं……र्व्यघेथेध्रेभ्रेघेप्नेघेध्रेधैभे…र्व्यर्धंघं…घेग्नेघेघेध्रेग्ने
च्वाव्याजा ज शे सिश्त्रीद वात्रर्त्त कड्यीज्यी

following words. (16)

a

श्रीभगवानुवाच

अहो बताहमृषयो भवद्भिरवितथगीर्भिर्वरमसुलभमभियाचितो यदमुष्यात्मजो मया सदृशो भूयादिति `
ममाहमेवाभिरूप: कैवल्यादधापि ब्रह्मवादो न मृषा भवितुमर्हति ममैव fe मुखं aq द्विजदेवकुलम् eo तत .
आग्नीध्रीयेंऽशकलयावतरिष्याम्यात्मतुल्यमनुपलभमान: 1 १८ । ।
The Lord said : Oh, sages, (you have indeed placed Me ina difficult predicament in that)
you, whose speech is infallible, have asked Me the rare boon that a son like Me may be born
to this royal sage; (for you know) | alone am My compeer, matchless as | am. Nonetheless
the words of Brahmanas should not prove false either, inasmuch as it is My own mouth that
is represented by the Brahmana race (the adored of all the other twice-born classes). (17)
Therefore, not finding My equal (anywhere), | shall descend (on earth) through Nabhi (the

son of Agnidhra), exhibiting a part of My own. (18)

श्रीशुक उवाच
इति निशामयन्त्या मेरुदेव्या: पतिमभिधायान्तर्दधे भगवान्। १९ । बर्हिषि तस्मिन्नेव विष्णुदत्त भगवान्
श्रमणानामृषीणामूर्ध्वमन्थिनां शुक्लया तनुवावततार। २०

Sri Suka went on: Having thus addressed the consort of queen Merudevi within her
hearing, the Lord disappeared (then and there). (19) Propitiated by great seers at that very
sacrifice, O Pariksit (who had been restored to life by Lord Sri Krsna, manifestation of Lord
- Visnu—vide |. xii. 7—10), the Lord descended (on earth) in the gynaeceum of king Nabhi
in a divine form (consisting of Sattva unmixed with Rajas and Tamas) with a view to obliging
that monarch and (also) with intent to teach to the world (by personal example) the sacred
vows observed by sages that have no covering on their body except the atmosphere, lead
an ascetic life and are pledged to perpetual celibacy (lit., have directed the flow of their
generative fluid upwards). (20)

Thus ends the third discourse entitled "The descent of Lord Rsabha", forming
part of the narrative of king Nabhi, in Book Five of the great and glorious
Bhagavata-Purana, othenvise known as the Paramahamsa-Samhita.

CRETE १४
PII REE ICS

अथ चतुर्थोऽध्याय:

Discourse IV
The sovereignty of Rsabha
श्रीशुक उवाच
ome sont [साम्योषशमवेरास्यैश्वर्येमहाविभूतिभिरतुदिनरे ।
प्रकृतय: WT AON देवताश्चावनितलसमवनायातितरां APY: 181 तस्य ह वा set auton वरीयसा
बृहच्छ्लोकेन चौजसा बलेन श्रिया यशसा वीर्यशौर्चाभ्यां च पिता ॠषभ इतीदं नाम चकार। २।
