234 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 31

TORO YESHICIRT I AAIICE ICICI Re 88 ESS SI re EERIE IE oe et ee tee eis ee

शरदुदाशाये साधुजातसत्सरसिजोदरश्रीमुषा दृशा ।
gemma तेऽशुल्कदासिका वरद edt नेहं किं वध: । २ ।
टि + 3 1
वृषमयात्मजाद् विश्वतोभयादृषभ ते at रक्षिता मुहु: । ३ ।
न खलु गोपिकानन्दनो भवानखिलदेहिनामन्तरात्मदृक् |
विखनसार्थितो faa wa sien सात्वतां कुले । ४ ।

The Gopis sang : Vraja shines all the more brightly by Your descent (in the house of
Nanda and Yagoda); for Laksmi (the goddess of beauty and prosperity) constantly dwells
here (from that time in order to catch Your glimpse). O beloved Lord! please (reveal Yourself
and) see how Your sweethearts, who have centred their life in You, are searching for You
in every quarter. (1) Is itno massacring here on Your part, O Granter of boons, who kill us,
Your gratuitous slaves, O Bestower of enjoyment, by Your (shaft-like) eyes, that steal the
splendour of the interior of a lovely and full-blown lotus growing in an autumnal pond ? (2)
We have been saved by You time and again, O jewel among men, from death through
poisonous water, from (the clutches of) a demon disguised as a snake (Aghasura by name),
from showers and storm as well as from strokes of lightning, from the demon that appeared
in the form of a calf (the young of a bull) as well as from Vyomasura * (the son of the demon
Maya), nay, from every (other) peril. (3) Surely You are no (mere) son of a cowherd woman
(Yagoda), being the witness of the internal sense (viz., the mind) of all embodied souls.
Solicited by Brahma, You appeared, O Friend, in the race of the Yadus for the protection of
the universe. (4)

विरचि ॥ ष्णाधर्व ते oun ata

करसरोरुहं कान्त कामदं शिरसि af न: श्रीकरग्रहम् 4
भज wa भवत्किङ्करी: स्म नो जलरुहाननं oe दर्श्यय । ६ ।
फणिफणार्पितं ते पदाम्बुजं कृणु कुचेषु न: कृन्धि हृच्छयम्। ७ ।
विधिकरीरिमा वीर मुह्यतीरधरसीधुनाऽऽप्वाययस्व न: । ८ ।

wa diet या हृदिस्पृश्र: कुहक नो मन: क्षोभयन्ति हि । १०॥
चलसि यद् SR We नलिनसुन्दरुं नाथ ते पदम्।
शिलतृणाङ्कुरे: सीदतीति a: कलळिलितां wa: कान्त गच्छति ।११॥
दिनपरिक्षये व केदेनरुहाननं वि ।

घनरजस्वलं दर्शयन् मुहुर्ममसि न: wt वीर वयच्छसि ।१२॥

* Vide Discourse XXXVI! below. According toa leamed and saintly commentator the incident ralating to Vyomasura took
place before the Rasa-Lilé even though it is described by the sage Suka !ater.
