Dis. 18] BOOK FOUR 371

PREKAKKHLHKLE प्रिङ व्येक EHARE HE HET HEE EK HAHAHEEEAEEE RSL EHO EO AE LEER EE eA eee eee ET

The Siddhas (another class of heavenly beings) made a calf of the sage Kapila and obtained
in the (concave) cup of the welkin mysterious powers (of becoming as small as an atom and
SO on), powers which could be exercised by mere will; while the demigods such as the
Vidyadharas used the same sage for their calf and the same pot and obtained the art of
treading the air. (19) Others (such as the Kirnpurusas, an order of swift and quickly-moving
superhuman beings), who were adept in conjuring tricks, made a calf of Maya (the great
demon architect and conjurer) and obtained the magic art of those wonderful beings who can
disappear (in an instant to the astonishment of the spectators)—an art which could be
exhibited by mere wish or thought. (20)

यक्षरक्षांसि भूतानि पिशाचा: पिशिताशना: । भूतेशवत्सा दुदुहु: कपाले क्षतजासवम् । २१॥

तथाहयो Saye: सर्पा arms तक्षकम्। विधाय ववत्सं दुदुहुर्बिलपात्रे fad पय: 1221

Waal यवसं at वत्सं कृत्वा च गोवृषम्। अरण्यपात्रे चाधुक्षन्मृगेद्रेण च afer: 1231

क्रव्यादा: प्राणिन: क्रव्यं दुदुहु: स्वे कलेवरे। सुपर्णवत्सा faemst चाचरमेव Tei

वटवत्सा वनस्पतय: पृथग्रसमयं पय:। गिरयो हिमवद्वत्सा नानाधातून् स्वसानुषु । २५।

सर्वे स्वमुख्यवत्सेन स्वे स्वे पात्रे ey पय: । सर्वकामदुघां पृथ्वीं दुदुहु: पृथुभाविताम् । २६॥

एवं पृथ्वादय: पृथ्वीमन्नादा: स्वन्नमात्मन: । दोहवत्सादिभेदेन क्षीरभेदं कुरूद्वह । २७॥

(Similarly) the Yaksas, the Raksasas (the night-wandering ogres), the ghosts, the

detestably ugly fiendish creatures known as Pisacas, all of whom feed on raw flesh, made
a calf of Rudra (the Lord of the ghosts), and drew the beer of blood in a skull for a pot. (21)
Even so the serpents with and without hood, the snakes and other poisonous creatures
(such as the scorpions) made a calf of Taksaka (the chief of the snakes and serpents) and
drew poison in their mouth for the vessel. (22) The (graminivorous) beasts made a calf of
the Bull of Lord Siva and obtained the grasses for milk in the vessel of the forest. Again, the
(ferocious) flesh-eating beasts with sharp teeth made use of the lion (the king of beasts) as
the calf and got flesh for milk in the pot of their body. The birds made a calf of Garuda (their
king) and got mobile creatures (such as moths and insects) as well as immobile creatures
(fruits etc.) for milk. (23-24) With the Banyan for the calf the trees got different kinds of saps
for milk. The mountains used the Himdlaya as the calf and obtained the various minerals (for
milk) in the basins of their ridges. (25) Earth is a wish-yielding cow. Now that she had been
(tamed and) made available for milking by king Prthu, all the species of living beings milked
her each with its own chief as the calf and obtained milk in various forms and held it in their
own vessel (suitable for it). (26) In this way, O descendant of Kuru, king Prthu and others,
who sought food for themselves to eat, milked the cow and got different kinds of milk in the
form of their own food with different calves and cups (to hold it). (27)

ततो महीपति: प्रीत: सर्वकामदुघां gy: igeqa चकारेमां प्रेम्णा दुहितृवत्सल: 1221
चूर्णयन् स्वधनुष्कोट्या गिरिकूटानि wre भूमण्डलमिदं वैन्य: प्रायश्चक्रे समं fay: । २९॥
अथास्मिन् भगवान् Sa: प्रजानां वृत्तिद: fret | निवासान् कल्पयाञ्चक्रे तत्र तत्र यथार्हत: 1301
ग्रामान् पुर: पत्तनानि दुर्गाणि विविधानि च । घोषान्व्रजान्सशिबिरानाकरान्खेटखर्वटान् 138 |
प्राक्पृथोरिह Fa पुरग्रामादिकल्पना । यथासुखं aah स्म तत्र तत्राकुतोभया: 1321
Thereafter king Prthu became pleased with goddess Earth, who now yielded all the

objects of one’s desire, and fondly accepted her as a daughter, feeling paternal love for her.
(28) Prthu (the son of Vena), the almighty king of kings, crushed the crests of mountains with
