20 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA-MAHATMYA [ Dis. 3

त्मा AMEE MERE RES LR RRR RC LEDERER ROR ROR RE ता MARE RAIA BRACE NCR ROR HEME RE ETT HE TL AMA RA GME ME BBA जीत्की RL क्त HC CE त् Re ECA नौ ती हं

enlightenment. What shall we say ofits superiority ? Oh, the wonder of itis that itis superior
to everything (else) | (52)
Bee उवाच

साश्चर्यमेतत्कथितं कथानकं ज्ञानादिधर्मान् fer साम्प्रतम्।
fsa भागवतं पुराणं wa pm योगविदादिसूचकम् । ५३
Saunaka submitted : This story told by you is (really) wonderful. (But) how has the
Bhagavata-Purana, revealing as it does the true nature of Lord Narayana (the cause even
of Brahma, a master of Yoga), proved efficacious at the present moment as a means to final
beatitude, superseding (all other) disciplines such as spiritual enlightenment ? (53)
Yd उवाच
यदा कृष्णो धरां Waal स्वपदं गन्तुमुद्यत: | एकादशं परिश्रुत्याप्युद्धबो वाक्यमब्रवीत् ।५४।

Sita replied : When Sri Krsna was ready to ascend to His own (divine) realm, leaving
this earth, Uddhava, even after hearing (His teaching contained in) Book Eleven of Srimad
Bhagavata, addressed the following words to Him: (54)

SEF उवाच
त्वं तु यास्यसि गोविन्द भक्तकार्यं विधाय च । ated महती चिन्ता तां श्रुत्वा सुखमावह । ५५।
आगतोऽयं कलिर्घोरो भविष्यन्ति पुन: खला: । तत्सङ्गेनैव सन्तोऽपि गमिष्यन्त्युग्रतां यदा । ५६॥
तदा भारवती भूमिर्गोरूपेयं कमाश्रयेत्। अन्यो न दृश्यते त्राता त्वत्त: कमललोचन ।५७।
अत: सत्सु दयां कृत्वा भक्तवत्सल मा AT भक्तार्थं सगुणो जातो निराकारोऽपि चिन्मय: । ५८।
afar ते भक्ता: कथं स्थास्यन्ति भूतले । निर्गुणोपासने कष्टमत: किंचिद्दिचारय 148)

/४( Uddhava said : Having accomplished the object of Your devotees, O Krsna (the
Protector of cows) ! You are going away. There is (however) great anxiety in my mind. (Pray)
give ear to it and make me happy. (55) The terrible Kaliyuga is imminent. Wicked people
will agpear again. When sheerly due to their fellowship even the virtuous develop ferocity,
whom will this earth, bearing a (heavy) burden (in the shape of sinners on her bosom), resort
to in the form of a cow ? No protector other than You, O lotus-eyed One! is in sight. (56-57)
Therefore, taking compassion on the virtuous, O Love of (Your) devotees, (pray) do not go.
Itis for the sake of (Your) devotees that You have appeared in a qualified (personal) form,
though formless and all consciousness. (58) How will those devotees live on earth, when
separated from You? There is (great) hardship in worshipping God without attributes. Here
ponder a little (again). (59)

इत्युद्धबवच: श्रुत्वा प्रभासेऽचिन्तयद्धरि: । भक्तावलम्बनार्थाय fe विधेयं मयेति च । ६०॥

we यद्धवेत्तेजस्तच्च भागवतेऽदधात्। तिरोधाय प्रविष्टोऽयं श्रीमद्भागवतार्णवम् । ६१॥

तेनेयं वाङ्मयी मूर्ति: प्रत्यक्षा ada हरे: | सेवनाच्छ्रवणात्पाठाद्दर्शनात्पापनाशिनी 1821

सप्ताहश्रवणं तेन सर्वेभ्योऽप्यधिकं कृतम्।साधनानि तिरस्कृत्य कलौ धर्मोऽयमीरित: 1831

दु:खदारिद्र्यदौर्भाग्यपापप्रक्षालनाय च । कामक्रोधजयार्थं fe कलौ धर्मोऽयमीरित: vex!

अन्यथा वैष्णवी माया देवैरपि सुदुस्त्यजा | कथंत्याज्या भवेत्पुम्भि: सप्ताहोऽत: प्रकीर्तित: । ६५1
Hearing this submission of Uddhava on the holy site of Prabhasa, Sri Hari thought (within
Himself): "What should be done by Me for sustaining My devotees ?"(60) The Lord infused
