ee

Dis. 88 } BOOK TEN 501

जग RR RESO क्रा का का ROR OE माआण EE OR SOR rR ROO,

out of despair, on the seventh day, to lop off with his sword his (very) head, the hair on which
were wetted through a dip in the holy waters of that place, (and offer it as an oblation to Lord
Siva). (18) (O King |) the highly merciful Lord Siva (who wears matted locks on His head) rose
out of the flames, (brilliant) like the god of fire, and, holding Vrka by the arms with His own,
deterred the latter (from that terrible act) even as we would deter a friend from committing
suicide. Through His blessed touch the demon was whole again. (19) The Lord said to him,
"O dear one, enough of this, no more of this. Ask of Me any boon of your choice, (and) | shall
grant it to you. | should be pleased with (a little) water offered by men who resort to Me. Oh,
in vain is this body tormented by you (so) cruelly." (20) The highly wicked demon (thereupon)
sought from the Lard a boon which was terrifying to all beings. (He said,) "On whosesoever
head I should place my hand, let him die." (21) Hearing that request, O scion of Bharata, Lord
Rudra looked grave as it were (for a moment), and (then) laughingly said, " Ament” He thus
conferred on him a boon, which was as good as giving milk to a serpent. (22)
sa: सोऽसुरो A गौरीहरणलालस:। स तद्वरपरीक्षार्थं weiniid forge ।
स्वहस्तं धातुमारेभे सोऽबिभ्यत् स्वकृताच्छिव: 1231
तेनोषसृष्ट dae: पराधावन् सवेपथु:। यावदन्तं feat भूमे: काष्ठानामुदगादुदक ।२४॥
अजानन्त: प्रतिविधिं तूष्णीमासन् सुरेश्वरा: । ततो वैकुण्ठमगमद् भास्वरं तमस: परम् । २५॥
यत्र नारायण: साक्षात्र्यासिनां परमा गति: । a न्यस्तदण्डानां यतो नावर्तते गत: 1261
!तं तथा व्यसनं eet भगवान् वृजिनार्दन: | दूरात् प्रत्युदियाद् YT वटुको योगमायया 1291
ज्वलन्। अभिवादयामास च तं कुरापाणिर्विनीतवत् 1241
Thus assured (by the Lord), the said demon was as a matter of fact possessed with the
desire of laying his hands on (Goddess) Parvati; and in order to test (the efficacy of) the
boon, the demon, it is said, proceeded to place his hand on the head of Lord Sankara
(Himself). The all-blissful Lord (now) got dismayed at His own act (of granting that boon). (23)
Trembling in great fear, He fled before the Asura, who now pursued Him. He covered the
whole length of the earth and heavens and reached the very end of the cardinal points; but
(finding the Asura still pursuing Him) ran (further) in a northerly direction. (24) Finding no
remedy for the trouble, all the great gods kept quiet. Finally Bhagavan Sankara went to the
shining region of Vaikuntha, lying beyond the sphere of Prakrti. (25) It is the realm of
Bhagavan Narayana, the supreme resort of recluses who, having taken a vow of complete
non-violence have aitained perfect tranquillity of mind. On reaching this region one does not
return to mundane life. (26) Seeing Siva in that miserable plight, from a distance, Bhagavan
Narayana, who removes all affliction, assumed the form of a young Brahmacari (religious
student) by dint of His Yogamaya (wonderful creative power) and appeared before
Vrkasura.(27) Adorned with a girdle made of Mufija grass, (black) deer-skin, a staff anda
rosary of Rudraksa beads, He shone by His lustre like the fire. Holding a (bunch of) Kusa
grass in His hand, He hailed the Asura like a humble student. (28)

श्रीभगवानुवाच
wpa भवान् व्यक्तं श्रान्त: fe दूरमागत: | aol विश्रम्यतां qa आत्मायं सर्वकामधुक् 1281
यदि न: श्रवणायालं युष्मद्व्यवसितं विभो । भण्यतां प्रायदा: पुम्भिर्धृतै: स्वार्थान् समीहते 1301

The Lord (disguised as a Brahmacari) said ; 0 Vrkasura, evidently you are (much)
fatigued. Have you covered a long distance? Rest Yourself awhile. This body is the source
