Dis. 9 ] BOOK FIVE ` 469

LARK ड कौज्ज SHA HARSH HE क इ ज क य तं क क्तैत् कौत् कौत् REESE EAE RAE TEE OHERHEHEEEAEHN REET HEE
णात्तर्त्त

as follows):— (28) "Oh, how painful it is that | have strayed from the path trodden by the self-
poised in that, even though | had completely shaken off all attachments, and, strong-willed
as | was, had retired to a lonely and holy forest, my mind—which had been wholly devoted
to and thoroughly concentrated in Lord Vasudeva, the Self ofall (individual) selves, incourse
of time, every hour of which was (fully) utilized through diligent application to sacred pursuits
such as constantly listening to, fixing one’s mind on and duly chanting His names and
praises, worshipping Him and incessantly thinking of Him—slipped inno time after the young
of a deer, a fool that | was.” (29)

पुलस्त्यपुलहाश्रमं कालञ्जरात्प्रत्याजगाम। ३० | तस्मिन्नपि कालं प्रतीक्षमाण: सङ्गाच्च भृशमुद्बिग्न आत्मसहचर:
शुष्कपर्णतृणवीरुधा वर्तमानो मृगत्वनिमित्तावसानमेव गणयन्मृगशरीरं तीर्थोदकक्लिन्नमुत्ससर्ज | ३१ I
इति श्रीमद्भागवते महापुराणे पारमहंस्यां संहितायां पञ्चमस्कन्घे भरतचरितेऽष्टमोऽध्याय:। ८।

With this feeling of remorse fully disguised, Bharata (reincarnated as a deer) forsook his
mother (the doe) and returned from (the mountain of) Kalafijara (his birth-place) to the
hermitage of the sage Pulastya and Pulaha, also known by the name of Salagrama-Ksetra,
a site consecrated to the Lord and a favourite resort of hermits naturally given to self-
control.(30) Awaiting his death (every moment) and terribly afraid of attachment, he lived
there too all by himself, subsisting on dry leaves, blades of grass and low shrubs and looking
forward to the exhaustion of the stock of Karma responsible for his birth as a deer, and
(eventually, when the hour of death arrived) cast off his bestial form, a partof which had been
laid* (by him) under the water of the holy river (Gandaki). (31)

Thus ends the eighth discourse, forming part of the story of Bharata,
in Book Five of the great and glorious Bhagavata-Purana,
otherwise known as the Paramahamsa-Samhita.

१२ १० ५
IPI ies

अथ नवमोऽध्याय:

Discourse IX
Bharata reborn for a second time in a Brahmana family

श्रीशुक उवाच

अङ्गजा बभूवुर्मिथुनं च चयवीयस्यां भार्यायाम्।१। wa पुमांस्तं परमभागवतं राजर्थिप्रवरे
भरतमुत्सृष्टमृगशरीरं चरमशरीरेण विप्रत्वं गतमाहु:। २। तत्रापि स्वजनसङ्गाच्य भृशमुद्विजमानो भगवत:
कर्मबन्धविध्वंसनश्रवणस्मरणगुणविवरणचरणारविन्दयुगलं मनसा विदधदात्मन: प्रतिघातमाशङ्कमानो
भगवदनुग्रहेणानुस्मृतस्वपूर्वजन्मावलिरात्मानमुन्मत्तजडान्धबधिरस्वरूपेण दर्शयामास लोकस्य । ३ I

* Death with half of one’s body immersed in the water of a holy river orlake or the ocean is believed to confer great religious

merit on the dying soul and the posture has been referred to in the scriptures under the name of Ardhajala. The great Bharata
was evidently put in mind of this purificatory process while casting off the form of a deer.

