280 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 42

SNORE RH ION ROR EO soa toe srr Se RR OE TEE TT ET म्मि

thus, while Balarama stood looking on, SriKrsna gazed on the latter's face as well as on that
of His followers and laughingly replied to her as follows:—({11)"Having accomplished my
errand | shall call at your house, which assuages the agony of men, 0 pretty girl; (for) you
are the last refuge of us shelterless wayfarers." (12) Dismissing her with honeyed words and
proceeding (further) along the road, Sri Krsna alongwith Balarama (His elder brother) was
honoured by those following the trade of a merchant with various presents, betel-leaves
seasoned with catechu, lime and areca-nut parings, garlands and sandal-paste. (13) Due to
agitation (of mind) caused by love at His sight, the women (of Mathura) forgot (all about)
themselves. (Standing spell-bound) with their garments unsettled, bangles slipped off and
braids loosened, they looked like painted figures. (14)
aa: पौरान् पृच्छमानो धनुष: स्थानमच्युत: । तस्मिन् प्रविष्टो ददृशे धनुरैन्द्रमिवाद्भुतम् ।१५॥
पुरुषैर्बहुभिर्गुप्तमर्चितं परमद्धिमत्। वार्यमाणो नृभि: कृष्ण: प्रसह्य धनुराददे । १६॥
करेण aaa सलीलमुद्धृतं wa च कृत्वा निमिषेण waa
नॄणां विकृष्य प्रबभञ्ज मध्यतो यथेक्षुदण्डं मदकर्युरुक्रम: 1१७॥
धनुषो भज्यमानस्य wee: खं रोदसी fei पूरयामास यं श्रुत्वा कंसस्त्रासमुपागमत् ।१८॥
तद्रक्षिण: सानुचरा: कुपिता आतताविन: । ग्रहीतुकामा आवव्रुर्गृह्यतां बध्यतामिति ।१९॥
ae am, दुरभिप्रायान् विलोक्य बलकेशवो | Fal धन्वन आदाय WHS तांश्च जघ्नतु: 1201
ao च कंसप्रहितं हत्वा ज्ञालामुखात्तत: । निष्क्रम्य चेरतुर्हृष्टौ निरीक्ष्य पुरसम्पद: ।२१॥
तयोस्तदद्भुतं वीर्यं fare पुरवासिन: 1 तेज: प्रागल्भ्यं रूपं च मेनिरे विबुधोत्तमौ 1221
Wet मुकुन्दविगमे विरहातुरा या आश्यासतारिष ऋता मधुपुर्यभूवन्।
सम्पश्यतां पुरुषभूषणगात्रलक्ष्मीं हित्वेतरान् नु भजतश्चकमेऽयनं श्री: 1२४॥
अवनिक्ताङ्धियुगलौ भुक्त्वा क्षीरोपसेचनम्। ऊषतुस्तां qe रात्रिं ज्ञात्वा कंसचिकीर्षितम् 1241
Enquiring of the citizens about the place where the bow had been kept (for the purpose
of a bow-sacrifice), Sri Krsna (the immortal Lord) then entered the sacrificial hall and beheld
(there) the wonderful bow—which resembled the rainbow (in point of size and picture sque-
ness, studded as it was with jewels of various colours), was guarded by many men, had been
(duly) worshipped and was attended with a large fortune (in the shape of valuable gold
ornaments)—and, even though being stopped by the men, He forcibly seized it. (15-16)
Having strung the bow, which had (already) been playfully lifted (by Him) with His left hand,
and pulling the string to its utmost capacity, Lord SriKrsna (of immeasurable prowess) broke .
it in two in the middle in the twinkling of an eye—while the men (guarding the bow) stood
looking on—{even)as an elephant in rut would snap a sugar-cane. (17) The crash of the bow,
while it was being broken, filled heaven and earth and the intermediate region as well as the
(four) quarters. Hearingit Karhsa was seized with consternation. (18) Full of wrath and eager
to apprehend the Lord, the custodians of the bow alongwith their followers surrounded Him
with their bows drawn (in order to kill Him), exclaiming; “Let the intruder be seized, let him
be bound!" (19) Immediately perceiving them to be of wicked intent, Balarama and Srikrsna
(the Ruler even of Brahma and Lord Siva) grew angry and, seizing the two pieces of the
(broken) bow, made short work of them. (20) Having also destroyed a detachment sent by
Karhsa the two Brothers came away through the entrance of the amphitheatre and roamed

about delighted to witness the wealth of the city. (21) Perceiving such wondertul prowess,
indomitable spirit, intrepidity and comeliness of the two Brothers, the citizens thought them
