466 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 83

PETE H TEN ALENT एकक जग गक ककक RETEST ककक शाशा # कक

flows out through their lips (in the form of the stories of Your enchanting sports). Those who
quaff this nectar to their heart's fill with the cup of their ears are rid of all ignorance in respect
of You—ignorance, whichis the root of corporeal existence of all embodied beings. How can
any evil befall them? (3) Lord, You are an embodiment of unfailing wisdom and a perfect
ocean of Bliss. The three states of the soul occasioned by its contact with the mind (viz.,
wakefulness, dream and dreamless sleep) cannot touch even the fringe of Your effulgent
Being and melt away evenin Its proximity. You are the sole resort of recluses, who have lost
all consciousness of the world. You have assumed a human semblance through Your own
inconceivable Yogamaya (enchanting power) in order to protect the Vedas whose influence
had waned through the force of time. We offer our obeisances to You.” (4)

ऋषिरुवाच

ma गोविन्दकथा मिथोऽगृणंस्रिलोकगीता: yy वर्णयामि ते । ५ ।

Sri Suka continued : (Pariksit!) when Yudhisthira and others were thus extolling the
most glorious Lord (Bhagavan Sri Krsna), ladies of the Yadava and Kaurava families met
together and began to relate to one another the stories of Bhagavan Sri Krsna sung
throughout the three worlds. | shall now tell you (in detail) what they said. Please listen. (5)

द्रोपद्युवाच
हे वैदर्थ्यच्युतो भद्रे हे जाम्बवति कौसले । हे सत्यभामे कालिन्दि दौब्ये रोहिणि लक्ष्मणे । ६ ।
हे कृष्णपत्न्य एतन्नो ब्रूत वो भगवान् स्वयम्। उपयेमे यथा लोकमनुकुर्वन् स्वमायया । ७ |

Draupadi said ; Rukmini, Bhadra, Jambavati, Satya, Satyabhama, Kalindi, Saibya,
Laksmana, Rohini and other consorts of Bhagavan Sri Krsna, (please) tell me how the
glorious Lord Bhagavan Sn Krsna espoused you. Though God Himself, He behaves like a
mortal through His own Maya (enchanting power).” (6-7)

रुक्मिण्युवाच
चैद्याय मार्पयितुमुद्यतकार्मुकेषु राजस्वजेयभददेखस्ताङभ्निरेणु: |
निन्ये मृगेन्द्र ga भागमजावियूथात् तच्छवीनिकेतचरणोऽस्तु ममार्चनाय । ८ ।

Rukmini said : (Draupadi,) Jarasandha and the other kings wanted that! should be given
in marriage to Sigupala. They came armed for a fight to carry out this intention of theirs. But
the Lord took me away from their midst even as a lion carries away its prey from a herd of
goats and sheep. (It is no wonder that He should do so; for) even invincible warriors bear the
dust of His feet on their crowns. (Dear Draupadi, | sincerely wish that) the lotus-feet of my
Lord, the repository of all prosperity and beauty, may be available to me for worship from

(birth to birth). (8)
सत्यभामोवाच
यो मे सनाभिवधतप्नहदा ततेनलिप्ताभिद्ञापमपमारङ्टुमुपाजहार ।
जित्वर्क्षराजमथ vane स aa भीत: पितादिशत मां प्रभवेऽपि दत्ताम् । ९ ।

Satyabhama said ; (Draupadi,) my father was sorely grieved at the death of his brother
(Prasena); he, therefore, charged the Lord with Prasena’s murder. In order to wipe off this
stigma cast on Him, the Lord vanquished the lord of bears, Jambavan, (in battle) and winning
