Dis. 29] BOOK THREE 269

PRAHA रो य क्तै क AAW CHEAA KERALA EE HOTELS NAAT HEE HAAR AKER AH HAHAH HS EHH I
निषेवितेनानिमित्तेन स्वधर्मेण महीयसा। क्रियायोगेन aaa नातिहिंस्रेण fre: 1241
मद्धिष्ण्यदर्शनस्पर्शपूजास्तुत्यभिवन्दनै: । भूतेषु मद्भावनया सत्त्वेनासङ्गमेन च ।१६॥
महता बअहुमानेन दीनानामनुकम्पया ।मैत्र्या च्चैवात्मतुल्येषु यमेन नियमेन च ।१७॥
आध्यात्मिकानुश्रवणान्नामसङ्कीर्तनाच्च मे। आर्जवेनार्यसङ्गेन निरहंक्रियया तथा 1१८1
भद्धर्मणो गुणैरेतै: परिसंशुद्धे आशय: । पुरुषस्याञ्जसाभ्येति श्रुतमात्रगुणं fe माम् ।१९॥

By devoutly performing one’s duties (both of an obligatory nature and those arising out
of a special occasion) in a disinterested spirit; by following everyday a course of worship
(enjoined by the Paficaratra and other sacred works) involving no destruction of life and
actuated by no worldly desire; by beholding, touching, adoring, extolling and bowing to My
images etc., by regarding allliving beings as My own manifestations; by resorting to patience
and dispassion; by showing great respect to exalted souls, commiserating with the afflicted
and behaving in a friendly manner with one's equals; by practising the five Yamas (non-
violence, truthfulness, non-thieving, abstaining from sexual commerce and possessing
things not exceeding the bare necessaries of life) and the five Niyamas (viz., external and
internal purity, contentment, undergoing penance, study of sacred texts and meditation on
God); by hearing spiritual discourses and chanting the divine names; by unity of mind,
speech and body, fellowship with holy men and absence of egotism, the mind of the man.

engaged in activities intended to please Me gets thoroughly purified and conceives a liking
for Me without any effort the moment My virtues enter his ears. (15—19)

यथा वातरथो घ्राणमावृङ्क्ते TWA आशयात्। एवं योगरतं da आत्मानमविकारि यत् ।२०॥
ae सर्वेषु भूतेषु भूतात्मावस्थित: सदा।तमवज्ञाय मां uel: कुरुतेऽर्चाविडम्बनम् 1२१1
यो oat सर्वेषु भूतेषु सन्तमात्मानमीश्वरम् । हित्वार्चां भजते माढ्याद्भस्मन्येव जुहोति a: 1221
fara: परकाये at मानिनो भिन्नदर्शिन: । भूतेषु agave न मन: शान्तिमृच्छति 1231
अहमुच्चावचैर्द्रव्यै: क्रिययोत्पन्नयानघे । नैव तुष्येऽर्चितोऽर्चायां भूतग्रामावमानिन: ।२४॥
अर्चादावर्चयेत्तावदीश्वरं मां स्वकर्मकृत्। यावन्न वेद ele सर्वभूतेष्ठवस्थितम् 1241
आत्मनश्च went a: करोत्यन्तरोदरम्।तस्य भिन्नदृशो मृत्युर्विदधे भयमुल्बणम् ।२६॥
अथ मां सर्वभूतेषु भूतात्मानं कृतालयम्। अर्हयेद्दानमानाभ्यां मैत्र्याभिन्नेन चक्षुषा 1२७॥

Just as odour wafted from its source through the vehicle of a breeze catches the olfactory
sense, so an equipoised mind engaged in the pursuit of Yoga (Devotion) embraces Me. (20)
!am ever present in all living beings as their very Self (Inner Controller). A man (therefore)
who worships Me through an idol, showing disrespect to Me (as abiding in all creatures),
makes a travesty of worship. (21) Ignoring Me, the Supreme Ruler, the Self present in all
living beings, he who stupidly resorts to idol-worship alone throws oblations into the
ashes.(22)The mind of a man who, full of pride, hates Me, abiding in the body of another,
views Meas distinct from himself and bears deep-rooted malice to living creatures can never
find peace.(23) | am not pleased, even though adored through an image by means of formal
worship carried on with costly or cheap materials, O sinless mother, by a man slighting other
creatures. (24) Performing his (allotted) duties, a man should worship Me, the Supreme
Ruler, through images etc., only so long as he does not realize Me as presentin his own heart
as well as in (the heart of) other living beings. (25) Figuring as Death, । cause great fear to
him who makes the least discrimination between himself and another because of his
differential outlook.(26) Therefore, through charitable gifts and attentions as well as through
friendly behaviour and by viewing all alike, one should propitiate Me, abiding in all creatures
as their very Self. (27)
