Dis. 18] BOOK ELEVEN 597

ROIS TO on nor er eR OER OSE शा न TEE Tee ONE es fee Neo eT HEH OHHH

and Sakamedha) have been enjoined on an anchorite as in the case ofa householder by the
exponents of the Vedas. (8) Having propitiated Me, the embodiment of wisdom, through
austerities undergone by him thus, a hermit reduced toa (mere) skeleton (lit., spread all over
with protruding veins for want of flesh) comes to Me (through successive stages) from
Maharloka’ (the realm of the Rsis, to which he ascends in the ordinary course after death).(9)
Who could be more stupid than him who would divert such great Tapas, performed with
(great) hardship and calculated to secure the highest good, to the fulfilment of a paltry desire
(viz., the desire for any material or ethereal fruit up to the attainment of Brahmaloka) 2 (10)
When the ascetic, shaking with old age, is incapable of observing any longer the sacred vow
(to which he has pledged himself), he may withdraw the (three) sacred fires (known by the
names of Ahavaniya, Garhapatya and Daksina, thathe has been maintaining and worshipping)
into himself and, with his mind fixed on Me, enter + the fire (burn himself to death). (11) When
(however) he develops a thorough distaste for the higher worlds (upto the realm of Brahma,
the creator) as a reward of pious acts (done from an interested motive), though (as a matter
of fact) no better than hell (abounding as they do in sorrows), he may, on the sacred fires
having been withdrawn (into himself), renounce the world and go about as a mendicant
recluse from the very Agrama in which he may be stationed. ¢ (12) Having propitiated Me
according to precept (through the Prajapatya sacrifice after performing the eight types of
Sraddha incumbenton him who is going to renounce the world), if he is free from (all) desires,
and given everything to the officiating priest and having withdrawn the sacred fire into his own
breath, the hermit may enter the order of recluses. (13) In the way of a Brahmana who is
actually going to renounce the world the gods in the garb (through the agency) of his wife and
so on place obstacles, for fear |est he should outstrip them and attain to the Supreme. (One
whois bent on attaining final beatitude should not, however, be deterred by such obstacles).
(14) If at all a recluse would have a covering (for his body), he should wear a piece of cloth
barely enough to cover the strip of cloth used by him to hide his private parts with. Nor should
he retain (in his possession) anything renounced by him (at the time of entering the order of
Sarhnyasa) other than a staff (used as a token of Sarnnyasa) anda Kamandalu (a water-pot
made of the shell of a wild cocoanut) otherwise than ina critical plight. (15) He should take
(every) step (only) after the ground he is going to tread has been scanned with his eyes (lest
he should unwittingly trample any creature); he should drink water strained with (a piece of)
cloth, utter words tested on the touchstone of truth and do that which has been found correct
by reference to his conscience. (16) Silence is the cudgel to control one’s speech; abstinence
from interested action, the one to control one’s body; and Pranayama (breath-control) is the
cudgel to curb one's mind. He who does not wield these (cudgels) cannot be (held to be) a
recluse by (mere) bamboo-staves carried on his person. (17) Arecluse should resort for alms
to the four types of Brahmanas alone (those living by gifts received, teaching, officiating at
sacrifices and gleaning food-grains from fields and grain-markets), avoiding those of
reproachful conduct and visit only seven houses not specified before, and should remain

a

* As regards Ihe devotee whose mind has been thoroughly purified Ihrough the disinterested practice of devotion, he gels
liberated even before death. a
+ An ascetic who prosecules his euslenties Iill the end of his life is sure to altain Moksa; while he who observes the rules
laid down for an anchonte Iill Ine end of Ihe third stage of his life earns the title to enter the order of Sarnnyasa even if he has
not developed tull Vairagya. The course recommended in this verse is only intended for him who is unable to carry on his
austerilies till Ihe end ol the Ihird slage on accounl of a weak constitution end has not Ihe requisite Vairagya to qualify him for
Sarhnyasa.
+ The Sruh lays down thal a Brahmana may lurn out lo be a recluse whenever true Vairagya eppears in him, in whalever

stage of lite he may ०९--`यदहरेव विरजेत्तदहरेव प्रव्रजेत्`,
