Dis. 4} BOOK NINE 17

LKeveeethetregetecstreckesenhhreeetrteesheresstveecseeveses fetter ye ntetenn erred

Visnu, and looking upon himself as all-powerful, in that having invited me, arrived (athis door)
as anewcomer, to accept his hospitality, has broken his fast without offering food to me !
(Turning to the king himself,) | shall forthwith show you as such the consequences (of your
unrighteous act).” (44-45) Speaking thus and pulling a matted lock (from his head), the sage,
who was inflamed with anger, created by means of it a female evil spirit (Krtya), akin to the
fire seen at the time of universal dissolution, in order to get rid of Ambarisa. (46) Though
clearly perceiving her overhead, emitting flames and rushing (toward him), sword in hand,
making the earth quake under her feet, the emperor did not stir from his place. (47) Already*
told off by Lord Visnu (the supreme Person), the universal Spirit, for the protection of His
devotee (King Ambarisa), the discus (Sudarsana) burnt the aforesaid Krtya (even) as fire
would burn an angry serpent. (48) Frightened to see over his head the discus rushing
towards himself (after burning the Krtya) and his own endeavour (to kill Ambarisa)
infructuous, the sage rad in his anxiety to save his life in different directions. (49) Sudargana
(the discus of the Lord) pursued him (even) as a wild fire with its flames thrown upwards
(by the wind) would chase a serpent. Observing the discus close upon his heels as aforesaid,
the sage fled in his eagerness to enter a cave of Mount Meru. (50) (Flying in this way)
Durvasa betook himself to (all) the quarters, the sky (the aerial region), (the various parts of)
the terrestrial world, the subterranean regions, the (seven) oceans, the (different) spheres
as wellas their guardians and heaven (too). (But) Whithersoever he fled, he saw (at his back)
in each such region the formidable Sudarsana. (51) When (however) no protector was found
by him anywhere, he got frightened at heart and, seeking an asylum, approached the
glorious Brahma (the creator) andprayed (as follows): "O maker (of the universe), 0 Brahma
(the self born), protect me from the might (in the form of the discus) of Lord Visnu (who is
conquered by none).” (52)

+

ब्रह्मावाच

स्थानं मदीयं सहविश्चमेतत् क्रीडावसाने द्विपरार्धसंज्ञे ।

भ्रूभङ्गमात्रेण हि devel: कालात्मनो यस्य तिरोभविष्यति 1५३1

अहं भवो दक्षभृगुप्रधाना: प्रजेशभूतेशसुरेशमुख्या: |

wd aq यन्नियमं som qed लोकहितं वहाम: tux

प्रत्याख्यातो विरिञ्चेन विष्णुचक्रोपतापित: । दुर्वासा: हारणं यात: शार्वं कैलासवासिनम् 1441
Brahmé observed : After a period of two Parardhas, when the pastime (of the Lord in
the shape of creation etc., of the universe) is over, my sphere alongwith (the rest of) the
universe will surely vanish as a result of the mere contraction of brows on the part of the Lord
in the form of the Time-Spirit, eager to burn away (all) this (objective universe). (53) Myself,
Lord Siva (the source of the universe) and others with Daksa and Bhrgu at their head—the
foremost of Prajapatis (lords of created beings), Bhitapatis (the lords of ghosts and other
evil spirits) and the chief of the gods (such as Indra}—we all submissively obey His Law,
beneficial to the (whole) world, as aburden placedonourhead. (Hence we are unable to
protect you against His wrath). (54) (Thus) refused by Brahma (the creator) and scorched
by SudarSana (the discus of Lord Visnu), the sage Durvasa sought as his shelter Lord Siva
(the Destroyer of the universe), who lives on Mount Kailasa. (55)
श्रीरुद्र उवाच
wa न aa प्रभवाम भूम्नि यस्मिन् परेऽन्येऽप्यजजीवकोजा: |
भवन्ति ae न vara dem: dest यत्र वयं भ्रमाम: 1५६1

* Vide verse 28 above.
