114 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA Dis. 3

LEAR ETRE S OE CEE HEH NEHA ESOS SEEK ENT ME KE Ne ङ गकजा माआ 2८

as a son of you both as aforesaid, | was born of Aditi (an incarnation of PrSni) through the sage
Kasyapa (an incarnation of Sutapa) and came to be known as Upendra (Indra's younger
brother) and (also) as Vamana because of My dwarf-like form. (42) Indeed in this third
incarnation of you both as such, | am again bor at this moment in the same (four-armed) form
(as was revealed to you before); (for) My word is (always) true, O good lady ! (43) This
(four-armed) form has been revealed to you {again) for reminding you of My previous
descents; (for) knowledge of My identity is not had otherwise through a mortal sem-blance.
(Now of course | will assume the form of a human babe as desired by you). (44) Constantly
thinking of Me as ason and (also) as Brahma (the all-pervading Lord), and having bestowed
(your) love on Me, you both will attain the highest state of union with Me {in the form of co-
residence with Me in My divine Abode). (45)

श्रीगुक उवाच
इत्युक्त्वाऽऽसीद्धरिस्तूष्णीं भगवानात्ममायया | पित्रो: सम्पज्यतो: सद्यो बभूव प्राकृत: AI: ।४६॥
wag झरिर्भगवत्प्रचोदित: सुतं wma a सूतिकागृहात् ।
यदा बहिर्गन्तुमियेष तर्ह्यजा या योगमायाजनि नन्दजायया iv
तया हतप्रत्ययसर्ववृत्तिषु द्वा:स्थेषु पौरेषपि जायितेष्यथ ।
aq सर्वा: पिहिता दुरत्यया बृहत्कपाटायसकीलशृङ्खलै: 161
ता: कृष्णवाहे वसुदेव ama स्वयं व्यवर्यन्त यथा at wa:
ववर्षं पर्जन्य उपांशुगर्जित: होषोऽन्वगाद् aft निवारयन् फणै: xe
मघोनि वर्षत्यसकृद् यमानुजा गम्भीरतोयौघजवोर्मिफेनिला ।
भयानकावर्तशताकुला नदी मार्गं et fafa श्रिय: पते: iyo!
नन्दव्रजे otifteta तत्र तान् गोपान् प्रसुप्तानुपलभ्य fem
सुतं oar fee तत्सुतामुपादाय पुनर्गृहानगात् ।५१॥
देवक्या: A न्यस्य वसुदेवोऽथ दारिकाम्। प्रतिमुच्य पदोर्लोहमास्ते पूर्ववदावृत: । ५२1
ata नन्दपत्नी च wa परमबुध्यत। न dees परिश्रान्ता निद्रयापगतस्मृति: । ५३॥

Sri Suka continued ; Having thus spoken, Lord Sri Hari, became silent and instantly
assumed the form of an ordinary child by His own free will, His parents gazing (with
wonder).(46) Thereupon as the aforesaid Vasudeva (the son of Sura, who suddenly found
his fetters loosened) felf inclined to step out of the lying-in-chamber, taking his son securely
(in a winnowing basket covered with soft linen), as urged by the Lord, that (very) moment
Yogamaya, who is nick-named Aja (birthless), was born through the wife of Nanda (at
Gokula). (47) Now the gate-keepers having been deprived (for the time being) of all their
cognitive faculties and the citizens too having been sent to sleep by Her (Yogamaya), all the
gates (of the palace), even though they had been closed by means of huge doors as well as
with steel bolts and chains, and were (thus) hard to penetrate, flew open by themselves the
moment Vasudeva arrived (near) carrying Lord SriKrsna (on his head), (even) as darkness
would disperse with the appearance of the sun. (At that time) clouds rained with a gentle
rumbling; while Sega followed (at the heels of Vasudeva), warding off the rain by means of

his (thousand) hoods (spread as an umbrella over His head). (48-49) While Indra (the rain-
god) was pouring showers frequently (in order to avert the popular gaze and allowing a
