Dis. 84 ] BOOK TEN 475

AHUNt te KH EKKe ben ककक शामा माआजा 9 स्नामा

eye of the Sastras, the all-knowing sages have declared it to be the easiest means of attaining
tranquillity of mind, and a sacred duty the performance of which brings delight to the
heart.(36) For the twice-born househotder the most propitious course is to perform with
reverence the worship of the Supreme Person expending (liberal sums of) money earned by
fair means. (37) O Vasudeva, a wise man should get rid of his thirst for wealth by performing
sacrifices and making gifts, his craving for wife and children by enjoying the pleasures of a
married fife, and his desire for the enjoyment of the higher worlds etc., by thoughts of their
being subject to the ravages of Time, Having (thus) renounced ail (the three types of) desires
even at home, the wise proceeded to the forest for askesis. (38) O Vasudeva, the Brahmana,
the Ksatriya and the Vaisya are born with debts to gods, the Rsis and the manes. He who
renounces the home without discharging these debts through the performance of sacrifices,
study of the scriptures and by begetting a son respectively (surely) falls. (39) (O wise
Vasudeva,) you are as a matter of fact free from your debts to the Rsis and the manes now.
Pay off your debt to the gods (too) through the performance of sacrifices, and thus freed from
all obtigations you may quit the home. (40) Vasudeva, you have surely worshipped Sri Hari,
the Lord of the universe, with supreme devotion. That is why He has accepted the role of a

son to you. (41)
SR उवाच
इति तद्वचनं श्रुत्वा वसुदेवो महामना: | तानृषीनृत्विजो ad मूर्धाऽऽनम्य प्रसाद्य च ।४२॥
a एनमृषयो राजन् वृता धर्मेण धार्मिकम्।तस्मिन्नयाजयन् क्षेत्रे मखैरुत्तमकल्पकै: 1431
तद्दीक्षायां प्रवृत्तायां वृष्णय: पुष्करस्रज: । स्नाता: सुवाससो राजन् राजान: ACHAT: | |
तन्पहिष्यश्च मुदिता निष्ककण्ठ्य: सुवासस: । दीक्षाशालामुपाजग्मुरालिप्ता वस्तुपाणय: ।॥४५॥
नेदुर्मृदङ्गपटहशङ्खभेर्यानकादय: । नमृतुर्नटनर्तक्यस्तुष्टुवु: सूतमागधा: |
जगु: Gavan गन्धर्व्य: asta सहभर्तृका: (xe |
तमभ्यषिञ्चन् विघिवदक्तपभ्यक्तमृळ्ळि:।पत्नीभिरष्टादज्ञभि: सोमराजमिवोडुभि: ive
ताभिर्दुकूलवलयैर्हारनूपुरकुण्डलै: । स्वलङ्कृताभिर्विबभौ =दीक्षितोऽजिनसंवृत: ।॥४८॥
तस्यत्विजो महाराज wala: i ससदस्या विरेजुस्ते यथा वृत्रहणोऽध्वरे ॥४९॥
wa रामश्च कृष्णश्च स्वै: स्वैर्बन्धुभिरन्वितौ ।रेजतु: स्वसुतैर्दारैर्जीवेशौ स्वविभूतिभि: 1401

Sri Suka went on : (Pariksit,) hearing the aforesaid words of the Rsis the high-minded
Vasudeva sought their favour by saluting them with his head bent ow and appinted them to
Officiate as priests at his sacrificial performance.(42) Duly appointed as priests, O king, the
Rsis helped the pious Vasudeva in performing a number of sacrifices on the largest scale
in that holy place. (43) On Vasudeva being initiated for the sacrifice, the Yadus and (other)
kings took their bath, put on their best attire and ornaments and adorned themselves with
garlands of lotuses. (44) The consorts of Vasudeva too adorned themselves with gold
necklaces and besmeared their bodies with sandal-paste and, clad in their best attire,
joyously entered the sacrificial hall with offerings in their hands. (45) Clay tomtoms, tabors,
conchs, drums, kettledrums and other musical instruments were sounded (at the time);
dancers, both male and female danced; bards and panegyrists uttered praises; Gandharva
women with their husbands sang beautiful songs. (46) Vasudeva applied collyrium to his

.eyes and anointed his body with butter. The priests (then) consecrated him alongwith his

eighteen wives by sprinkling water on them, justas (in the ancient times) the moon andthe stars
were consecrated. (47) initiated for the sacrifice and clad in deer skin Vasudeva looked most
charming with his wives who were ail dressed in (beautiful) saris and adorned with bracelets,
