202 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA { Dis. 22

RO REP SASSER RE REPL ROPER M NOPE SIREN IE 9, SK, BEBE EET 9 068 CIEE EO SES Ee ee eta RH sty |

ara:

अथ परिवृतो भगवान् देवकीसुत: | वृन्दावनाद् Wal दूरं चारयन् गा: सहाग्रज: । २९॥
पिंदाघार्कातपे तिग्मे छायाभि: स्वाभिरात्मन: | आतपत्रायितान् वीक्ष्य द्रुमानाह व्रजौकस: 1201
हे स्तोककृष्ण हे ih श्रीदामन् सुबलार्जुन i विज्ञालर्षभ तेजस्विन् देवप्रस्थ ae ।३१॥
पश्यतैतान् महाभ्रागान् परार्थैकान्तजीवितान् | वातवर्षातपहिमान् सहन्तो वारयन्ति न: 1321
अहो wt at जन्म सर्वप्राण्युपजीवनम्। सुजनस्येव aut वै विमुखा यान्ति नार्थिन: 1331
पत्रपुष्पफलच्छायामूलवल्कलदारुभि: । गन्धनिर्यासभस्मास्थितोक्मे: कामान् वितन्वते । ३४॥
एतावजन्मसाफल्ये देहिनामिह देहिषु। प्राणैरर्थैर्धियावाचा श्रेय एवाचरेत् सदा 1341
इति प्रवालस्तबकफलपुष्पदलोत्करै: | तरूणां नम्रशाखानां मध्येन चमुनां गत: ।३६॥
तत्र गा: पाययित्वाप: सुमृष्टा: siren: शिवा: । ततो नृप स्वयं गोपा: कामं स्वादु पपुर्जलम् ।३७॥
तस्या उपवने कामं चारयन्त: wa नृप । कृष्णरामावुपागम्य क्षुधार्ता इदमब्रुवन् । ३८॥
Accompanied by cowherd boys and pasiuring the cows Lord Sri Krsna (the Son of
Devaki), one day (during the following hot weather), went far away from Vmndavana along-
with His elder brother (Balarama). (29) Perceiving the trees, which played the role of
umbrellas to Him with their shade in the scorching rays of the summer sun, the Lord
addressed the cowherd boys of Vraja (as follows):—(30) O Stokakrsna, Arhgu, Sridama,
Subala, Arjuna, Visala, Rsabha, Tejasvi, Devaprastha and Variithapa, look at these highly
blessed beings that live solely for others; enduring storm, showers, sunshine and snow
(themselves) they ward them off from us ! (31-32) Oh ! enviable is the birth—serving as a
means of subsistence to all animate beings—of these trees, approaching which suppliants
never return disappointed any more than those that seek a benevolent man. (33) By means
of (their) leaves, flowers, fruits, shade, roots, bark and wood as well as with their fragrance,
exudation, ashes, coal and tender leaves they gratify the desires of others. (34) This much
is the fruitfulness of the birth of embodied creatures in this world that they should constantly
do good alone to (other) embodied souls through their life, wealth, intellect and speech. (35)
Saying so the Lord arrived at the Yamuna passing through rows of trees whose boughs were
bent low with clusters of young leaves, fruits and blossoms as well as with bunches of (other)
leaves. (36) Prompting the cows to drink of the very sweet, cool and wholesome waters (of
the Yamuna), the cowherd boys then drank, O protector of men, to their heart's content the
tasteful water themselves. (37) ) Pasturing the cattle at will in the grove on the bank of the
Yamuna, O king , they approached Sri Krsna and Balarama and, pinched with hunger, spoke
as follows. (38)

Thus ends ihe twenty-second discourse entitled, "The Lord steals away the garments of the
cowherd maids’, in the first half of Book Ten of the great and glorious Bhagavata-
Purana, othenvise known as the Paramaharhsa-Samnita.

सि न्न्
PHOT NSO OD
