606 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 20

CEE EOE CONE EHO RELOR ED TAD TORN O FONT TOON OT EL व माय आमा प EEO KOON SE TANTS

objects of sense; and he who is attached to the pleasures of sense is the opposite of a master
(.e., a slave). (44) These questions of yours have all been duly answered. What is to be
gained by elaborate discussion ? The definition of good and evil (ina nutshell) is as follows.
To direct one’s eyes to the virtues and faults (of others) is evil, while virtues lies in
developing a disposition entirely free from the habit of seeing the merits and demerits of
others, O Uddhava ! (45)

Thus ends the nineteenth discourse in Book Eleven of the great and glorious
Bhagavata-Purana, otherwise known as the
Paramahamsa-Samhita.

sdtndinegs:
ODODE ELI OS

अथ विंशोऽध्याय:

Discourse XX
Jfianayoga, Karmayoga and Bhaktiyoga analysed

उद्धव उवाच
विधिश्च प्रतिषेधश्च निगमो dare ai अवेक्षतेऽरविन्दाक्ष qui da च कर्मणाम् । १ ।
वर्णाश्रमविकल्पे च प्रतिलोमानुलोमजम् । द्रव्यदेशवय:कालान् स्वर्गं नरकमेव च । २ ।
गुणदोषभिदादृष्टिमन्तरेण वचस्तव | नि:श्रेयसं कथं नॄणां निषेधविधिलक्षणम् । ३ |
पितृदेवमनुष्याणां वेदश्चक्षुस्तवेश्वर | श्रेयस्त्वनुपलब्धेऽर्थे साध्यसाधनयोरपि । ४ ।
गुणदोषभिदादृष्टिर्निगमात्ते न fe स्वत: । निगमेनापवादश्च भिदाया इति ह भ्रम: । ५ ।

Uddhava submitted : The command of the almighty Lord. viz.. Yourself. (which goes
by the name of Veda) consists of (both) injunctions and interdictions, and (thus) takes into
account the good and evil nature of actions (as determined by their good and evil
consequences), O lotus-eyed One ! (1) The Veda further cognizes the distinction of the
Varnas and Asramas (based on their virtues and faults); the merits and demerits of those
born in the irregular course (of the union of a man of a lower order with a woman of a higher
grade) and those regularly born (of the union of a man of a higher order with a woman of lower
grade); the substance, place, age and time (suitable or otherwise for a sacrifice) as well as
(the existence of) heaven and hell (attainedas a result of virtuous and sinful actions). (2) How
can Your word (in the form of the Vedas), consisting as it does of injunctions and interdictions.
lead to final beatitude without taking into consideration the distinction of good and bad
(actions)? (3) Your word in the form of Veda is the (one) excellent eye possessed by the
manes, gods and human beings, enabling them to obtain insight into the unseen purpose (of
life, viz., final beatitude, heavenly bliss and so on) as well as into the end (to be attained in
this very life) andthe means (of attaining it), O almighty Lord ! (4) Knowledge of the distinction
between good and evil is derived from Your command (the Veda), and not by itself. And it
is by Your word (alone) that this distinction is negatived. This obviously causes bewilderment
(in my mind). (Be pleased to set it at rest). (5)

श्रीभगवानुवाच
योगास्त्रयो मया प्रोक्ता qo श्रेयोविधित्सया । ज्ञानं कर्म च भक्तिश्च नोपायोऽन्योऽस्ति कुत्रचित् । ६ ।
