Dis. 25] BOOK THREE 249

HER Re we We tear ee वी ती ee जाप्त ee ee Ee oI ee
न युज्यमानया ween भगवत्यखिलात्मनि | सदृशोऽस्ति fra: cen योगिनां ब्रह्मसिद्धये 1e¢
Taga पाशमात्मन: कवयो विदु:। स एवं साधुषु कृतो मोक्षद्वारमपावृतम् । २०॥

The Lord said : In my opinion the only means to final beatitude is Yoga in the form of
contemplation on the Supreme Spirit, which is characterized by absolute cessation of both
joy and sorrow. (13) | shall now explain to you that very Yoga, which is perfect in every limb,
and which | taught of yore to sages (like Narada), who were keen to hear of it, O virtuous
lady. (14) Mind alone is held responsible for the bondage and emancipation of the soul.
Attached to the objects of senses, it leads to bondage; when, however, it develops affinity
to the Supreme Person, it brings liberation to the soul. (15) When the mind is purged of its
impurities in the form of lust, greed etc.—which have their root in the sense of I-ness and
mine-ness—and becomes pure, it grows indifferent to pleasure and pain and gets
equipoised. (16) With a mind equipped with true knowledge and dispassion as well as with
Devotion, the Jiva (individual soul) then perceives the Self as one (without a second),
undifferentiated, self-effulgent, subtle, indivisible, unattached and beyond Prakrti (Matter),
and Prakrti as reduced in strength. (17-18) For striving souls there is no blissful road to God-
Realization like Devotion directed towards the Lord, whois the Soul of the universe. (19) The
wise consider attachment as an unyielding fetter for the soul. The same, however, serves
as an open door to liberation, when it is directed towards saints. (20)

तितिक्षव: कारुणिका: gee: सर्वदेहिनाम्। अजातशत्रव: BPA: साधव: साधुभूषणा: 1221
मय्यनन्येन भावेन भक्तिं कुर्वन्ति ये दृढाम्।मत्कृते त्यक्तकर्माणस्त्यक्तस्वजनबान्धवा: 1221
मदाश्रया: कथा मृष्टा: शृण्वन्ति कथयन्ति ai तपन्ति विविधास्तापा नैतान्मद्गूतचेतस: 1231
a एते wea: साध्वि सर्वसङ्गविवर्जिता: । सङ्गस्तेष्रथ ते wed: सङ्घदोषहरा fe Fev

सतां प्रसङ्घान्मम वीर्यसंविदो भविन्त हत्कर्णरसायना: कथा: |

तज्जोषणादाश्चपवर्गवर्त्मनि श्रद्धा रतिर्भक्तिरनुक्रमिष्यति । २५1

we पुमाञ्जातविराग ऐन्द्रयाद् दृष्टश्रुतान्मद्रचनानुचिन्तया |

चित्तस्य aa wet योगयुक्तो यतिष्यते ऋजुभिर्योगमार्गे: । २६|

योगेन waa च we मां प्रत्यगात्मानमिहावरुन्धे 1201

Saints are forbearing, compassionate and composed; they are friendly to all living beings
and inimical to none and follow the injunctions of the Sastras. Their good disposition itself
serves as an ornament to them. (21) With an undivided heart they practise unflinching
devotion to Me; and for My sake they abandon even their obligatory duties and forsake their
kinsmen and relatives. (22) Nay, they listen to and narrate delightful stories relating to Me,
their mind ever set on Me. Afflictions of various kinds, therefore, never torment such
people. (23) Such are holy men, free from all attachment, O virtuous lady. Attachment tosuch
holy men must be sought for by you; for they counteract the pernicious effects of
attachment.(24) Through the fellowship of saints one gets to hear My stories, leading to a
correct and full knowledge of My glory and pleasing to the heart as well as to the ear. By
hearing such stories one is sure to develop one after another reverence and fondness for and
Devotion to the Lord, whose realization is preceded by the cessation of ignorance. (25)
Developing distaste for the pleasures of sense, belonging to this world as well as to the next,
through Devotion engendered by contemplation on My pastimes connected with the creation,
preservation and dissolution of the universe, the man who enjoys the fellowship of saints will
diligently and devoutly strive to subdue his mind through easy processes of Yoga (Devotion).(26)
