Dis. 25 ] BOOK ELEVEN 635

ककक एक TOI IO On tof ton tron शाशा 8 he ren ron er OEE OE ON EOE HE

judgment, askesis (in the form of strict adherence to one's prescribed course of conduct),
truthfulness, compassion, retentive power, contentment, self-abnegation, absence of thirst
for the pleasures of sense, belief in God, life after death and so on, modesty and shrinking
from unrighteous acts, liberality etc., and remaining delighted in the self (forming the first
group); hankering after the pleasures of sense, (self-centred) activity, arrogance, insatiability,
inflexibility, seeking after blessings (from gods etc.), differentiation (between one's own self
and others), self-gratification, bellicosity through arrogance, love of praise, jocularity, display
of valour and exertion through might (forming the second group); and intolerance, stinginess,
mendacity, malevolence, mendicancy, hypocrisy, languor, discord, grief and delusion,
gloom and wretchedness, drowsiness, expectation, fear and indolence (forming the third
group);-— these are severally the effects of Sattva, Rajas and Tamas, enumerated (by Me)
almost exhaustively, Now hear (from Me) the combined effect (of the three Gunas). (2—5)
The notion which is expressed in the words "lam (tranquil, passionate or angry)" and “These
(traits such as tranquillity, lust and anger) belong to me" is as a matter of fact a combined
effect (of the three Gunas); and whatever is done with the mind, the objects of the senses
(viz., sound, touch, sight, taste and smell), the senses (themselves) and the vital airs
(conjointly) is also a combined effect of the three Gunas (since all these instruments are
themselves a product of the three Gunas and all action is preceded by the feeling of !-ness
and my-ness). (6) When aman is keenly devoted to religious merit, material possessions and
sense-gratification, this (keen devotion of his also) is a combined effect of the three Gunas
(inasmuch as Dharma etc., are themselves a product of the three Gunas) and conduce to
reverence, wealth and sense-gratification respectively. (7) When a man is devoted to holy
rites performed with interested motives and when he sticks to the life of a householder and
later on adheres to his (obligatory and occasional) duty, such devotion etc., (as well) on his
part is indeed a combined effect of the three Gunas (inasmuch as devotion to holy rites
performed with interested motives, attachment to the household and devotion to one’s
allotted duty are products of Rajas, Tamas and Sattva respectively). (8)

पुरुषं सत्त्वसंयुक्तमनुमीयाच्छमादिभि: | कामादिभी रजोयुक्तं क्रोधाद्यैस्तमसा युतम् । ९ ।
यदा भजति मां भक्त्या निरपेक्ष: स्वकर्मभि: । तं सत्त्वप्रकृतिं विद्यात् ged स्रियमेव वा ।१०॥
यदा safe sere भां भजेत स्वकर्मभि: । तं रज:प्रकृतिं विद्याद्भिंसामाशास्य तामसम् । ११।
ae रजस्तम sf गुणा जीवस्य नैव मे । चित्तजा यैस्तु भूतानां सज्जमानो freed 1221
यदेतरौ waa सत्त्वं भास्वरं विशदं शिवम्। तदा सुखेन युज्येत धर्मज्ञानादिभि: पुमान् । १३|
यदा जयेत्तम: सत्त्वं रज: ag भिदा चलम्। तदा दु:खेन युज्येत कर्मणा यदासा श्रिया evi
यदा Wie रज: सत्त्वं तमो मूढं लयं जडम्। युज्येत छोकमोहाभ्यां निद्रयाहिंसयाऽऽदाया । १५
यदा fad प्रसीदेत sharon च निर्वृति: । देहेऽभयं मनोऽसङ्गं aa ara fats मत्पदम् ।१६॥
विकुर्वन् क्रियया चाधीरनिर्वृत्तिश्च aaa गात्रास्वारर्थ्य मनो भ्रान्तं रज एतैर्निशामय ie
सीदच्चित्तं विलीयेत चेतसो ग्रहणेऽक्षमम्।मनो नष्टं तमो ग्लानिस्तमस्तदुपधारय ।१८॥

From virtues like self-control one should conclude a man to be endowed (predominantly)
with Sattva; from passion etc., one should know him to be (principally) full of Rajas and from
anger and other characteristics he should infer him to be full of Tamas. (9) When a person
worships Me disinterestedly with devotion through (the performance of) his duties one
should know that man or woman too to be endowed with a Sattvika disposition.(10) When
aman seeking the pleasures of sense worships Me through his actions, one should know
him to be of Rajasika disposition; and when he does so expecting injury to others (his
adversaries etc.), one should know him to be Tamasika (by nature). (11) The Gunas (modes
