Dis. 81] BOOK TEN 459

ACME RAMA O CAAT TE KNEE eRe NA 999 929 AA #9 39 9699 ###६% २98 ## AEA Ate

स्वच्छस्फटिककुड्येषु महामारकतेषु च।रत्नदीपा भ्राजमाना ललनारत्नसंयुता: 138 1

विलोक्य ब्राह्मणस्तत्र समृद्धी: सर्वसम्पदाम्। तर्कयामास निर्व्यग्र: स्वसमृद्धिमहैतुकीम् 132!
नूनं aaa दुर्भगस्य शश्वद्दरिद्रस्य समृद्धिहेतु: ।
महाविभूतेरवलोकतोऽन्यो नैवोपपद्येत यदूत्तमस्य 1231
नन्वब्रुवाणो fea an याचिष्णवे भूर्यपि भूरिभोज: ।
पर्जन्यवत्तत् स्वयमीक्षमाणो दाशार्हकाणामृषभ: सखा मे ।३४॥
किञ्चित्करोत्युर्वपि यत् at et wea भूरिकारी ।
मर्योपनीतं पृथुकैकमुष्टिं प्रत्यग्रहीत् प्रीतियुतो महात्मा ।३५॥
तस्यैव मे सौहदसख्यमैत्री da पुनर्जन्मनि जन्मनि um
महानुभावेन गुणालयेन विषज्जतस्तत्पुरुषप्रसङ्ग: 1261
भक्ताय fan wer fe सम्पदो we विभूतीर्न समर्धयत्यज: |
अदीर्घबोधाय विचक्षण: waa पद्यन् fod धनिनां मदोद्धवम् ।३७॥

इत्थं व्यवसितो बुद्ध्या भक्तोऽतीव जनार्दने। विषयाञ्जायया त्यक्ष्यन् बुभुजे नातिलम्पट: ।३८॥

The Brahmana was astonished to see his wife brilliant like a celestial lady and shining
in the midst of maid-servants adomed with necklaces of gold. (27) Followed by her he now
joyfully entered his own house, which contained hundreds of columns of gems and looked
like the abode of the celestial king, Indra. (28) It was furnished with bedsteads made of ivory
and plated with gold, the beds on which were spread sheets as white and soft as the foam
of milk. Chowries with gold handles were hanging here and there. (29) There were seats of
gold provided with soft cushions and strings of pearls hung from brilliant canopies. (30) The
walls made of clear crystal were inlaid with emeralds, and excellent images of women made
of precious stones held dazzling jewels in their hands to light up the rooms. (31) Seeing there
such abundance of riches of all kinds come to him without any ostensible cause, the
Brahmana reflected on this windfall witha calm mind: (32) "| am poor and unluckly from birth;
Oh, wherefrom could this wonderful fortune come to me? Nothing but the (gracious look) of
Bhagavan Sri Krsna, the crown-jewel of Yadus and the possessor of untold riches, could be
the cause of this. (33) Sri Krsna (the Lord of the goddess of wealth and perfect in everyway),
has infinite objects of enjoyment always at His disposal. Therefore, knowing the mind of His
suppliant devotee, He gives in abundance to the latter, though He regards the gift as very
insignificant and does not mention it to the devotee. My friend, the crest-jewel of Yadus, is
generous like the cloud, (which though capable of filling up the ocean, sometimes does not
choose to rain in the presence of the peasant, but inundates his fields at night when he is a
sleep, and yet considers the gift as inadequate). (34) Though underrating His own abundant
gifts, He makes much even of a small present by His devotee. The noble-minded Lord
accepted with great delight the handfuls of beaten rice | took for Him. (35) May | secure from
birth to birth His good-will, love, friendship and service. (| have no need for wealth.) May |
cherish ever-growing devotion to the lotus-feet of the glorious Lord, Bhagavan Sri Krsna, the
one abode of excellent qualities, and obtain association with His devotees! (36) Bhagavan
Sri Krsna, who is ever free from the shackles of birth and death, is acquainted with the evil
underlying worldly prosperity. He knows how the intoxication of wealth and power brings
about the fall of many a wealthy man. That is why (out of compassion) He very often refuses
to grant the prayer for wealth, kingdom and power of short-sighted devotees.” (37) (Pariksit!)
having reached this conclusion by force of his reason, the Brahmana in conjunction with his

