Dis. 3] SRIMAD BHAGAVATA-MAHATMYA 15

जा १६ शा BE BEER RE BERTHS जा न SE RE ROR OR HEM REE ERE त्रीया ARR BOR A RRM ROR REE TORE BR ICR BRC ROROR EOE ROR ROR BER Ay BME R GOR He BENE He He
च व प न OY न He HY He

wie बहुजन्मसमर्जितेन waa च लभते पुरुषो wer a
अज्ञानहेतुकृतमोहमदान्धकारनाशं fae fe तदोदयते fade: ive!
इति श्रीपद्मपुराणे उत्तरखण्डे श्रीमद्भागवतमाहात्म्ये कुमारनारदसंवादो नाम द्वितीयोऽध्याय: 121

_ Narada submitted : O great sages, who are solely engaged ‘in drinking the story, (of
Srimad Bhagavata), sung with all his (thousand) mouths by Lord Sesa (the serpent-god)! |
have sought refuge in you in order that you may diffuse the light of (divine) love—you, whose
(very) sight eradicates at once (all) evils and brings happiness to those tormented by the wild
fire of worldly sorrows. (75) When due to rise of the tide of fortune accumulated in the course
of many (past) lives a man actually secures the fellowship of saints, it is then alone that
wisdom dawns (on him) dispersing the darkness of infatuation and pride occasioned through
the agency of ignorance. (76)

Thus ends the second discourse entitled "A Dialogue between the Kumaras
and Narada", forming part of the "Glory of Srimad Bhagavata"
in the Utlara-Khanda of the glorious Padma-Purana.

Sate
ITI Sie ey

अथ तृतीयोऽध्याय:

Discourse Ill
Cessation of Bhakti's Suffering

ARG उवाच

ज्ञानयज्ञं करिष्यामि शुकशासत्रकथोज्ज्वलम्। भक्तिज्ञानविरागाणां स्थापनार्थं प्रयत्नत: 1 १ |

कुत्र कार्यो aa यज्ञ: wes तद्वाच्यतामिह। महिमा ae awed वेदपारगै: । २ |

कियद्भिर्दिवसै: श्राव्या श्रीमद्भागवती कथा । को विधिस्तत्र कर्तव्यो wae ब्रुवतामित: । ३ ।
Narada submitted : With the object of stabilizing Bhakti, Jfiana and Vairagya | shall now
zealously perform a Jfiana-Yajfia (Sacrifice for the dissemination of Knowledge) illumined
by a reading of Srimad Bhagavata (the scripture expounded by the sage Suka). (1) The place
where this sacrifice should be performed by me may now (kindly) be pointed out (to me). The
glory of Srimad Bhagavata may (also) be stated by you, masters of the Veda.(2) Inhow many

days shoulda reading of Srimad Bhagavata be heard and what procedure should be adopted
in it: (pray) tell me that on this occasion. (3)

PAR HF:
TY नारद वक्ष्यामो विनम्राय विवेकिने । गङ्गाद्वारसमीपे तु enemy |
नानाऋषिगणैर्जुष्टं देवसिद्धनिषेवितम्। नानातरुलताकीर्ण नवकोमलवालुकम्। ५ ।
रम्यमेकान्तदेशस्थं हेमपद्मसुसौरभम् । यत्समीपस्थजीवानां at चेतसि न fermi ६ ।
ज्ञानयज्ञस्त्वया त्त्र adel ह्यप्रयत्नत: । अपूर्वरसरूपा च me at भविष्यति । ७ |
Te fds da जराजीर्णकलेवरम्।तद्द्वयं च पुरस्कृत्य भक्तिस्तत्रागमिष्यति । ८ ।
यत्र भागवती वार्तां aa भक्त्यादिकं व्रजेत्। कथाशब्दुं समाकर्ण्य af तरुणायते । ९ |
