808 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 18

ERAHHORN HOKE CEE ECHOES R क याष्ट KES ELEN EH ECEE EEO KEELE RSET HEHEHE eRe ee HEHEHE
eee eee SO SE SN Be Ser a Sr Or ee ee HEY

Brahma prayed : May You triumph, O Lord hymned by many ! Let my salutation be to
You, O Lord of mighty valour !! My greetings to the Lord whois friendly to the Brahmanas! Hail,
hail to the Controller of the three Gunas (modes of Prakrti)!! (25) Salutations to You, the
Maker (of all), who were born of Prsni (the previous incarnation of Aditi) and are revealed in
the Vedas, who hold the three worlds (earth, heaven and the middle region) in Your navel,
and (at the same time) stand above the three worlds; (nay,) who have entered all embodied
beings as their Inner Controller and are all-pervading. (26) You, whom the Vadas refer to as
the supreme Person of unlimited powers, are the beginning, end and middle of the universe.
As the Time-Spirit, O Lord, You draw the universe (after You) even as a deep stream draws
(after it) whatever has fallen into it. (27) Indeed You are the Creator of (all) created beings,
(both) immobile (inanimate) and mobile (animate), as well as of the lords of creation. (Hence)
You are the supreme refuge, O Lord, of heavenly beings (lit., the denizens of heaven) fallen
from heaven, even as a boat is for one about to be drowned in water.(28)

Thus ends the seventeenth discourse, hinging on the story of the descent of
Lord Vamana, in Book Eight of the great and glorious Bhagavata-
Purana, otherwise known as the Paramahamsa-Samhita.

PISSED

अथाष्टादशोऽध्याय:

Discourse XVIII

The Lord appears as the divine Dwarf and visits
the sacrificial performance of Bali

a
sa विरिञ्चस्तुतकर्मवीर्य: प्रादुर्बभूवामृतभूरदित्याम् ।
चतुर्भुजज शङ्खगदाब्जचक्र पिशङ्खवासा नलिनायतेक्षण: । १ ।
श्यामावदातो झषराजकुण्डलत्विषोल्लसच्छीवदनाम्बुज: पुमान् ।
श्रीवत्सवक्षा वबलयाङ्गदोल्लसत्किरीटकाञ्चीगुणचारुनूपुर: । २ ।
मधुव्रतव्रातविघुष्टया स्वया विराजित: श्रीवनमालया हरि: |
प्रजापतेर्वेश्मतम: स्वरोचिषा विनाशयन् कण्ठनिबिष्टकौ॰स्तुभ: igs) ।
fat: प्रसेदु: सलिलाहायास्तदा प्रजा: wept ॠऋतवो गुणान्विता: !
द्यौरन्तरिक्षॆ क्षितिरम्निजिह्वा गावो fag: संजहषुर्नगाश्च । ४ ।

Sri Suka resumed : The Lord, whose exploits and glory were thus celebrated by Brahma
(the creator) and who is the Fountain-head of immortality (final beatitude), took His descent
from Aditi. He was endowed with four arms—in which He carried a conch, a mace, a lotus
and a discus—was Clad in yellow and had eyes big as a pair of lotuses.(1) Bright dark-brown
of hue, the supreme Person bore the mark of Srivatsa (a white curl of hair) on His bosom.
The lustre of His lotus countenance was augmented by the brilliance of His alligator-shaped
ear-rings; and a diadem, girdle strings and a charming pair of anklets shone (on His person)

along with a pair each of wristlets and armlets. (2) Adorned with His (characteristic and)
splendid wreath of sylvan flowers deeply resonant with the humming of swarms of black bees
