Dis. 25] BOOK FIVE 539

थेत् उ तं वी वी HEH SM EKEHHEKHELHHE HEA HENEHOHEEVERRHAeHKE TEE EE ..३.६.३.३ ३३७ .३.३.३.६.३.३.६.१.६.३.३.३..३.७..३..।

करुणावलोकनयनवदनारविन्दं सव्रीडं किल विलोकयन्ति। ५ । स एव भगवाननन्तोऽनन्तगुणार्णव आदिदेव

Sri Suka resumed : At a distance of thirty thousand Yojanas below (the region of)
Patala, resides that part manifestation of the Lord, presiding over destruction (a function of
Tamoguna), who is known as Lord Ananta, and whom the followers of the Satvata
(Vaisnava) cult speak of as Sankarsana because it is He who fully draws together (perfectly
unites or identifies) the subject—the perceiver—and the object—that which is perceived —
by presiding over the ego and is characterized by the I-consciousness (with respect to the
body, senses and so on). (1) Being (actually) supported on only one of the heads of the Lord
appearing in the form of Ananta (Sesa) with a thousand heads, this terrestrial globe looks
like a mustard seed. (2) From between the agitated eye-brows—knit in anger, yet possessing
a peculiar charm—of the same Lord, when He intends to dissolve this universe at the proper
time (the time appointed for its destruction), springs up the god of destruction called
Sankarsana (one born of Sankarsana) appearing in eleven (different) forms, with three eyes
and holding up a trident. (3) Bowing (at His feet) alongwith the foremost of devotees with
exclusive and intense devotion, the lord of the serpent-demons indeed behold, in the ruddy
and spherical nails—bright as rubies—of His pair of lotus-feet, their most charming faces
with the cheeks brightened by the sheen of their brilliant ear-rings, the sight of which fills their
mind with rapture. (4) Painting with the pigment-like paste of aloe-wood, sandal-wood and
saffron the bright, long, snow-white, elegant and charming arm—strikingly set in the lovely
sphere of His body like silver pillars—and seeking blessings—(of Him), the unmarried
princesses of the serpent-demons, it is said, put on winsome and graceful smiles under the
sway Of love stealing into their hearts thrilled with the touch of His person, and bashfully look
at His lotus-like face, delighted through love and inebriety, with His ruddy eyes swimming
through intoxication and casting a merciful look at them. (5) The selfsame Lord Ananta, an
ocean of endless virtues, the most ancient deity, resides (there) for the welfare of (all) the
worlds, having restrained the force of His indignation and wrath (as appropriate to the
occasion of destruction of the world but inopportune at other times). (6)

ध्यायमान: १
aw नस्वा 1 नी व रि १
भगवान्माहेन्द्रो वारणेन्द्र Fa Tat कक्षामुदारलीलो बिभर्ति । ७।

He is being meditated upon by hosts of gods and demons, Nagas and Siddhas,
Gandharvas and Vidyadharas and hermits, and is ever cheerful through inebriety has rolling
and restless eyes, and continues to delight His (own) attendants as well as the leaders of
the heavenly hosts (waiting upon Him) with the nectar of His most charming speech. Clad
in blue, and having only one ear-ring (in one of His ears), He has one of His graceful and
beautiful hands placed on the top of a plough (His favourite weapon) and, (while) like the
great elephant (known by the name of Airavata) of the mighty Indra wearing (its) girth of gold,
Lord Sankarsana of beneficent activity wears (on His person) His own sylvan wreath, (called)
Vaijayanti, whose elegance is enhanced by the melodious humming (all about it) of swarms
of bees drunk with the fragrant and sweet honey of the new Tulasi (basil) blossoms of
unfading loveliness. (7)
