Dis. 27 ] BOOK TEN 219

Jerre ata Soro nr sogon Onn yrs ee ee tree 6 ne १११२ २२२२ २२२२ २२११
Eu
7a m9 a.
एवं सङ्कीर्तित: कृष्णो मघोना भगवानमुम्। मेघगम्भीरया वाचा प्रहसन्निदमब्रवीत् । १४॥

इत् Suka continued : Thus glorified by Indra, Lord Sri Krsna heartily laughed and spoke
to him as follows in a voice deep as the rumbling of clouds. (14)

- श्रीभगवानुवाच
मया तेऽकारि मघवन् मखभङ्गोऽनुगृह्णता । मदनुस्मृतये नित्यं मत्तस्येन्द्रश्रिया भृदाम् । १५॥
मामैश्चर्यश्रीमदान्धो दण्डपाणिं न usaf । तं deen सम्पद्भ्यो यस्य चेच्छाम्यनुग्रहम् 126 |
Taal ah भद्रं a: क्रियतां मेऽनुशासनम् । स्थीयतां स्वाधिकारेषु युक्तैर्व: स्तम्भवर्जितै: 1201
The glorious Lord said : ॥ was in order to shower My grace on you and to put you
incessantly in mind of Me, highly intoxicated as you were with the fortune of Indra, that the
interruption of your worship was brought about by Me, 0 god of rain. (15) Blinded with the
pride of power and wealth, one takes no notice of Me, who wield the rod of punishment. Him
(alone) do! cast down from an affluent state, on whom | intend to shower My grace. (16) You
may go now, O Indra; may all be well with you! Let My injunctions be followed. Devoted to
your duty and free from egotism, hold on to your offices (as before). (17)

ame सुरभि: कृष्णमभिवन्द्य मनस्विनी । स्वसन्तानैरुपामन्त्य गोपरूपिणमीश्वरम् । १८।

Hailing and accosting Sri Krsna, the supreme Lord disguised as a cowherd boy, along-
with her progeny, the high-minded cow of plenty now spoke to Him (thus). (18)

सुरभिरुवाच
कृष्ण कृष्णा महायोगिन् विश्चात्मन् विश्वसम्भव | भवता लोकनाथेन सनाथा वयमच्युत ।१९॥
त्वं न: was दैवं त्वं न इन्द्रो जगत्पते। भवाय va गोविप्रदेवानां ये च साधव: ।२०॥
इन्द्रं नस्त्वाभिषेक्ष्यामो ब्रह्मणा नोदिता seq अवतीर्णोऽसि विश्वात्मन् भूमेर्भारापनुत्तये । २१1

Surabhi said ; © Krsna, the Enchanter of souls, 0 great Yogi, 0 Inner Controller and
Source of the universe ! we have been favoured by You, the Protector of the worlds, ७
immortal Lord ! (19) You are our supreme Deity. For the prosperity of the bovine race, the
Brahmanas and the gods as well as of those who are pious-minded, be You our Ruler
(henceforth), O Lord of the universe ! (20) Directed by Brahma we shall crown You as our
king, since You have come down to this earth for relieving the burden of the earth, O Sout
of the universe ! (21)

aie उवाच
एवं wT सुरभि: पयसाऽऽत्मन: | ETHIE TTT ऐरावतकरोदधृतै: 1221
we: सुरर्षिभि: साकं नोदितो देवमातृभि: | अभ्यषिञ्चत दाशार्हं गोविन्द इति चाभ्यधात् । २३॥
तत्रागतास्तुम्बुरुनारदादयो गन्धर्वविद्याधरसिद्धचारणा: |
जगुर्यशो लोकमलापहं हरे:र सुराङ्गना: संननृतुर्मुदान्विता: ।२४॥
