428 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 73

denon Henn con innhs snrhterteemmrecertenmrsesnnrerrtes tere rhe Heese ee

were washed away at His very sight. They bowed to the Lord, touching. His blessed feet with
their heads. (2—6) The joy derived through Bhagavan Sri Krsna’s sight removed the languor
caused by their confinement. With joined palms, they offered their praises to the Lord in the
following words. (7)
WH FF:
नमस्ते देवदेवेश प्रपन्नार्तिहराव्यय | प्रपन्नान्पाहि a: कृष्ण निर्विण्णान्घोरसंसृते: । ८ ।
नैनं नाथान्वसूयामो मागधं मधुसूदन | अनुग्रहो Ae भवतो Tat राज्यच्युतिर्विभो । ९ ।
राज्यैश्वर्यमदोन्नद्धो न श्रेयो feed qa: त्वन्मायामोहितोऽनित्या मन्यते सम्पदोऽचला: 1X0!
मृगत्तृष्यांयथाक्तामन्यन्तउदकाज्ञयम्।एवंवैकांरिकींमायम्पयुक्तावातुचक्षते।प्त।
वयं पुरा श्रीमदनष्टदृष्टयो जिगीषयास्य इतरेतरस्पृध: ।
घ्नन्त: प्रजा: स्वा अतिनिर्घृणा: wat मृत्युं परस्त्वाविगणय्य दुर्मदा: ॥१२॥
a एव कृष्णाद्य गभीररंहसा दुरन्तवीर्येण विचालिता: श्रिय: ।
कालेन oan भवतोऽनुकम्पया विनष्टदर्पाश्चरणौ स्मराम ते ।१३॥
अथो न wa मृगतृष्णिरूपितं देहेन aaa पतता रुजां भुवा ।
उपासितव्यं स्पृहयामहॆ विभो क्रियाफलं fa च कर्णरोचनम् ।१४॥
तं न: समादिशोपायं a ते चरणाब्जयो: । स्मृतिर्यथा न विरमेदपि संसरतामिह । १५।
कृष्णाय वासुदेवाय हरये परमात्मने। प्रणतक्लेशनाशाय गोविन्दाय नमो नम: ।१६॥

The kings prayed : 0 God of gods, remover of the distress of those who take refuge in
You, O Imperishable Lord, we offer our salutations to You. Disgusted with the bitter
experience of this fearful scourge of transmigration, we seek refuge in You: pray protect
us.(8) Krsna, we have no grudge against Jarasandha,; in fact, it was through Your grace that
we were deprived of our kingdoms. (9) Puffed up with the pride of sovereignty and power,
aking is generally deprived of true happiness; for, deluded by Your Maya, he comes toregard
worldly fortune as permanent. (10) Just as the ignorant take the mirage for a sheet of water,
even so the unwise attached to the senses regard the ever changing Maya as reality. (11)
Lord, blinded by the intoxication of wealth and power, at one time we vied with one another
in our lust for conquering the world and mercilessly brought about the destruction of our own
people in pursuing our mad projects. We were so arrogant that we took no notice of You
standing before us as Death itself. (12) Krsna, mysterious are the ways of Time. Its potency
is unfathomable; for it is one of Your many forms. It has deprived us of our fortune, and our
pride has been shattered through Your grace. We now contemplate on Your sacred feet. (13)
Lord, we no longer seek the boon of sovereignty enjoyable through this ever decaying body,
the nursery of ailments. We have realized that the pleasures of sovereignty are like a mirage.
Nor do we crave for the posthumous enjoyments of heaven which sound attractive only to
the ear. (14) Pray tell us now the means whereby we may constantly remember You lotus-
like feet, even though we may have to undergo a series of births. (15) Krsna, You have
descended on this earth through the agency of Vasudeva. You destroy the sins of those who
come in contact with You and bring them deliverance. You are the Supreme Spirit. You
exterminate the sufferings of those who bend low before You. O Govinda, the protector of
cows, we offer our obeisances to You. (16)

a उवाच
संस्तूयमानो भगवान् राजभिर्मुक्तबन्धनै: | तानाह करुणस्तात झरण्य: TANT गिरा ।१७॥
