Dis. 57 ] BOOK TEN 357

shone re ern Shen nee we eae et ककक ene nen chee ne neansnshennnny ess eneennniitin

तं am सहसोत्थाय मैथिल: प्रीतमानस:। अर्हयामास विधिवदर्हणीयं समर्हणे: 124
उव्रास तस्यां कतिचिन्मिथिलायां समा fay: । मानित: प्रीतियुक्तेन जनकेन महात्मना ।
ततोऽशिक्षद् गदां काले धार्तराष्टर: सुयोधन: । २६॥

केशवो द्वारकामेत्य fet ङातधन्वन: | अप्राप्तिंचमणे:प्राहप्रियाया: प्रियकृद्विभु: । २७॥
aa: स कारयामास fen बन्धोर्हतस्य वै। साकं सुहृद्भिर्भगवान्या या: स्यु:साम्परायिका: 121

Mounting Their car with a flag bearing the device of Garuda (the king of birds) and drawn
by four horses possessing extraordinary speed, O king, Balarama and Sri Krsna (who is
solicited by all men) drove in pursuit of Satadhanva (the slayer of Their father-in-law). (19)
Leaving the horse, that dropped down (exhausted) in an orchard in the outskirts of Mithila (the
capital of the Janakas), Satadhanva took to his heels, greatly alarmed; and Sri Krsna too
chased him in rage. (20) Lopping off his head with His sharp-edged discus, the Lord, (also)
moving on foot in fairness to the enemy, who was going on foot, looked for the gem in his upper
and lower garments. (21) Sri Krsna, by whom the gem could not be found (with the slain),
returned (to Their car) and said to His elder Brother (Balarama), "In vain has Satadhanva been
killed (by Me); for the gem is not with him !" (22) Thereupon Balarama replied, "Surely that gem
must have been deposited by Satadhanva with somebody (at Dwaraka). (Therefore) return to
Dwaraka (and) trace him. (23) | (for my part) long to see the king of the Videha territory, my most
beloved friend.” Observing thus, Balarama (a scion cf Yadu) entered Mithila, O Pariksit ! (24)
Delighted at heart to see him, the king of Mithila rose ail of a sudden (from his seat) and
worshipped Balarama (who was worthy of adoration) accordingtothe scriptural ordinance with
appropriate presents. (25) Honoured by the high-souled Janaka, who was full of love (for him),
Balarama (who was of an independent mind) sojourned in the aforesaid city for a number of
years. (Later on) at the opportune time Suyodhana, the (eldest) son of Dhrtarastra (and the
leader of the Kauravas), leamt the use of a mace at his feet. (26) Reaching Dwaraka (on the
other side), Lord Sri Krsna related to Satyabhama (His beloved spouse) the story of His having
slain Satadhanva and (nevertheless) of His not finding the gem (with him), anxious as Fle was
to please her (with that comforting news). (27) Then. with the co-operation of His kinsmen, the
aforesaid Lord caused to be performed in an appropriate manner all the obsequies that were
conducive to the welfare in the other worid of His murdered father-in-law. (28)

ag: कृतवर्मा च श्रुत्वा शतधनोर्वधम् । व्यूषतुर्भयवित्रस्तौ द्वारकाया: प्रयोजकौ । २९
अक्रूरे प्रोषितेऽरिष्टान्यासन् वै द्वारकौकसाम्। शारीरा मानसास्तापा मुहुर्दैविकभौतिका: 130 |
इत्यङ्गोपदिशन्त्येके fae प्रागुदाहृतम्। मुनिवासनिवासे किं घटेतारिष्टदर्शनम् । ३१॥
देवेऽवर्षति काशीश: श्वफल्कायाग्रताय वै। स्वसुतां गान्दिनीं प्रादात्ततोऽवर्षत् स्म काशिषु 1321
तत्सुतस्तत्प्रभावोऽसाव्रक्रूरो यत्र यत्र ह। दॆवोऽभिवर्षते तत्र नोपतापा न मारिका: 1331
इति वृद्धवच: श्रुत्वा नैतावदिह कारणम्।इति मत्वा समानाव्य प्राहाक्रूरं जनार्दन: । ३४॥
पूजयित्वाभिभाष्यैनं कथयित्वा fen: कथा: । विज्ञाताखिलचित्तज्: स्मयमान उवाच ह ।३५॥
ननु दानपते न्यस्तस्त्वय्यास्ते हातधन्वना । स्यमन्तको मणि: श्रीमान् विदित: पूर्वमेव a: 1361
सत्राजितोऽनपत्यत्वाद् गृह्णीयुर्दुहितु: सुता: । दायं निनीयाप: पिण्डान् विमुच्यर्णं च steer । ३७।
तथापि दुर्धरस्त्वन्यैस्त्वय्यास्तां सुव्रते मणि: । किन्तु मामग्रज: were न प्रत्येति मणिं प्रति acl
दर्शयस्व महाभाग बन्धूनां ज्ञान्तिमावह। अव्युच्छिन्ना मखास्तेऽद्य वर्तन्ते रुक्मवेदय: 1221
एवं wines: श्वफल्कतनयो मणिम्। आदाय वाससाच्छन्नं ददौ सूर्यसमप्रभम् vol
