724 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA { Dis. 13

क्तन्र RR ARR AA EME IR EAA ATE RADNER AEE IRA AR KORG BOBS AR RTH ARTE AE

(Now) hear (from me) the number of Slokas comprised in each Purana as well as their
aggregate, the theme and object of this work (Srimad Bhagavata), the procedure to be followed
in gifting (a copy of) it, the value of givingit away as wellas of readingitandso on.{3) The Brahma-
Purana comprises ten thousand Slokas; the Padma-Purana, fifty-five thousand; the Srivisnu-
Purana, twenty three thousand; the Siva-Purana, twenty-four thousand. (4) The Srimad
Bhagavata consists of eighteen thousand; the Narada-Purana, of twenty-five thousand; the
Markandeya-Purana, of nine thousand and the Agni- -Purana, of fifteen thousand and four
hundred. (5) (Even) so the Bhavisya-Purana consists of fourteen thousand and five hundred
Slokas and Brahmavaivarta- Purana, of eighteen thousand; while the Linga-Purana comprises
eleven thousand only. (6) The Varaha-Purana comprises twenty-four thousand Slokas; the
Skanda-Purana, eighty-one thousand and one hundred; (and) the Vamana-Purana is reputed
to consist of ten thousand Slokas. (7) The Kiirma- Purana has been declared as consisting
of seventeen thousand Slokas; the Matsya-Purana, of fourteen thousand; the Garuda-Purana
of nineteen thousand; while the Brahmanda-Purana comprises only twelve thousand
Slokas. (8) Inthis way the extent of (all) the Puranas taken together has been declared tobe four
hundred thousand Slokas. Of them (as has already been stated) Srimad Bhagavata is
recognized as consisting of eighteen thousand Slokas. (9)

इदं भगवता पूर्वं ब्रह्मणे नाभिषङ्कजे। स्थिताय भवभीताय कारुण्यात्सम्प्रकाशितम् ।१०॥
आदिमध्यावसानेषु वैराग्याख्यानसंयुतम् | हरिलीलाकथान्रातामृतानन्दितसत्सुरम् । ११॥
wade यद् ब्रह्मात्मैकत्वलक्षणम्।वस्त्वद्वितीयं तन्निष्ठं कैवल्यैकप्रयोजनम् । १२॥

The Bhagavata-Purana was graciously revealed by the almighty Lord for the first time to
Brahma (the creator), seated on the lotus sprung from His navel and afraid of transmigration
(and hence earned the title of "Bhagavata’).(10) It has been enrichedat the beginning, inthe
middle and at the end with legends illustrating the glory of Dispassion and has been
delighting the righteous as well as the gods with its nectar-like stories describing the
pastimes of Lord Sri Hari. (11) It has for its theme that one reality without a second—which
is the sum and substance of all the Upanisads (which are the culmination of the Vedas) and
has been characterized as the oneness of Brahma (the Absolute) and the (individual) soul—
and has detachment of the Spirit from Matter as its only object. (12)

प्रौष्ठपद्यां पौर्णमास्याँ हेमसिंहसमन्वितम्। ददाति यो भागवतं स याति परमां गतिम् । १३॥
we wae पुराणानि सतां गणे। यावन्न gad साक्षाच्छीमद्धागवतं परम् । १४॥
सर्ववेदान्तसारं हि श्रीभागवतमिष्यते। तद्रसामृततृप्तस्य नान्यत्र स्याद्रति: क्वचित् । १५॥
निम्नगानां यथा गङ्गा देवानामच्युतो यथा । वैष्णवानां यथा ङम्भु: पुराणानामिदं तथा । १६।
dant चैव सर्वेषां यथा ait ह्यनुत्तमा: । तथा पुराणव्रातानां श्रीमद्भागवतं द्विजा: । १७
aa ज्ञानविरागभक्तिसहितं नैष्कर्म्यमाविष्कृतं तच्छृण्वन् विपठन् विचारणपरो भक्त्या विमुच्येन्नर: ।१८॥

He who, on the full moon of (the month of) Bhadrapada (roughly corresponding to August
of the English calendar) gifts (a copy of) the Bhagavata, placed on a throne of gold, attains the
highest goal (after death). (13) The other Puranas spread their lustre in an assemblage of the
righteous (only) so long as the great and glorious Bhagavata is not directly visible. (14) The
glorious Bhagavata is surely considered to be the cream of the Upanisads. A man sated with
its nectarine flavour will not find delight anywhere else. (15) It occupies the same (pride of)

place among the Puranas as the holy Ganga among the rivers, Visnu (the immortal Lord)
among the gods, and Lord Siva (the Source of all blessings) among the votaries of Lord
