Dis. 21]... “BOOK THREE 207

SRA AAA He A AAR ER EEE ELE AH UNECE HEHE OE LEA REE . ६.३.३.३.७&.७.३.३३..३.७.७.३.३.३.३.३...७.६.३.३.७.३.३
ज्र्त्त

dilated in the form of hood. (48)
स आत्मानं मन्यमान: कृतकृत्यमिवात्मभू: | तदा मनून् ससर्जान्ते मनसा लोकभावनान् 1X81
तेभ्य: सोऽत्यसृजत्स्वीयं yt पुरुषमात्मवान्। तान् दृष्टा ये पुरा सृष्टा: प्रशशंसु: प्रजापतिम् । ५०॥
अहो एतज्जगत्स्नरष्ट: सुकृतं बत a Haq प्रतिष्ठिता: क्रिया यस्मिन् साकमन्नमदामहे 1421
तपसा fare युक्तो योगेन सुसमाधिना । ऋषीनृषिर्हृषीकेश: ससर्जाभिमता: प्रजा: 1421
तेभ्यश्चैकैकश: स्वस्य देहस्यांशमदादज: । यत्तत्समाधियोगरद्धितपोविद्याविरक्तिमत् ।५३॥

One day, Brahma (the self-born creator) felt as if the object of his life had been
accomplished; at that time he evolved out of his mind, last of all, the Manus, who promote
the welfare of the world. (49) To them the self-possessed creator gave his own human form.
On seeing them (the Manus) those who had been created earlier (viz., the gods, the
Gandharvas and so on) applauded Brahma (the lord of created beings). (50) “Oh,.creator
of the universe ! we are glad what you have producedis well done. Since (all) ritual acts (such
as pouring oblations into the sacred fire) have been placed on a sound footing in this human
form, we shall all share the sacrificial oblations with it." (51) Having equipped himself with
austere penance, adoration, Yoga (concentration of mind) and Samadhi (deep meditation)
accompanied by dispassion etc., and having controlled his senses, Brahma (the first seer)
evolved the Rsis, his beloved sons. (52) To each one of these the unborn creator gave a part
of his own body, which was characterized by deep meditation, concentration of mind,
supernatural power, austerity, adoration and dispassion. (53)

Thus ends the twentieth discourse in Book Three of the great
and glorious Bhagavata-Purana, otherwise known
as the Paramaharmsa-Samhila.

ST PST ENT २५
CP OD EEN CD OD

Discourse XXI
The sage Kardama practises austere penance and the
Lord confers a boon on him
विदुर Jara
स्वायम्भुवस्य च मनोर्वंश: परमसम्मत:। कथ्यतां भगवन् am मैथुनेनैधिरे प्रजा: । १ ।
प्रियव्रतोत्तानपादॊ सुतौ स्वायम्भुवस्य वै। यथाधर्मं जुगुपतु: सप्तद्वीपवतीं महीम्। २ ।
wa a दुहिता ब्रह्मन्देवहूतीति विश्रुता । पत्नी प्रजापतेरुक्ता कर्दमस्य त्वयानघ । ३ |
wa स वै महायोगी युक्तायां योगलक्षणै: west कतिधा वीर्यं wy aes वद । ४ ।
रुचिर्यो भगवान् ब्रह्मन्दक्षो वा व्रह्मण: Ya: । यथा ससर्ज भूतानि लब्ध्वा भार्यां च मानवीम् । ५ ।
Vidura said : The line of Swayambhuva Manu was the one most esteemed (by all): Pray,

give me, O worshipful sage, an account of that race, the progeny of which multiplied through
sexual union. (1) (You have already told us that) the two sons of Swayambhuva, Priyavrata
