188 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 18

जजजा माप ककक ew ete Se ee माजा

तत्र चक्रु: परिवृढौ गोपा रामजनार्दनो । कृष्णसंघट्टिन: केचिदासन् रामस्य चापरे । २०॥
आचेरुर्विविधा: क्रीडा वाह्यवाहकलक्षणा: । यत्रारोहन्ति जेतारो वहन्ति च पराजिता: ।२१॥
Sen वाह्यमानाश्च चारयन्तश्च गोधनम्।भाण्डीरकं नाम वटं जग्मु: कृष्णपुरोगमा: ।२२॥

(One day) while Balarama and Sri Krsna were grazing the cattle in that forest in the
company of (other) cowherds, a demon named Pralamba arrived there in the guise of a
cowherd boy with intent to kidnap the two Brothers. (17) Though knowing him (his real
character), the all-perceiving Lord, who had appeared in the race of the Dasarhas, approved
of his friendship, contemplating the means of killing him. (18) Calling by his side to that spot
(all) the cowherds, Sr Krsna, who was well-versedin play, said, "O cowherd boys, letus play
{this time) dividing ourselves suitably into two camps.” (1 9) In that game, the cowherd boys
made Balarama and Sri Krsna (lit., He who is solicited by the people) their leader; some (of
them) joined the group of Sri Krsna, while others took the side of Balarama. (20) They played
various games which were characterized by the role of mounts (in the case of one party) and
that of riders (in the case of the other party). In these games those who won rode, while the
worsted ones carried the former. (21) (Thus) carrying and being carried, and pasturing their
cattle-wealth, they (all) with Sri Krsna going ahead reached a banyan tree, Bhandiraka by
name. (22)

रामसङ्घट्टिनो यर्हि श्रीदामवृषभादव: । क्रीडायाँ जयिनस्तांस्तानूहु: कृष्णाद्यो नृप 1२३1
उवाह कृष्णो भगवान् श्रीदामानं पराजित:। वृषभं भद्रसेनस्तु प्रलम्बो रोहिणीसुतम् । २४॥
अविषह्यं मन्यमान: कृष्णे दानवपुङ्खव:। वहन् द्रुततरं प्रागादवरोहणत: परम् ।२५॥
स आस्थिक: पुरटपरिच्छदो बभौ तदडिद्युमानुडुपतिवाडिवाम्बुद: 1261
निरीक्ष्य तद्वपुरलमम्बरे चरत् प्रदीप्तदृग् भ्रुकुटितटोग्रदंष्टूकम्।
ज्वलच्छिखं कटककिरीटकुण्डलत्विषाद्भुतं हलधर ईषदत्रसत् IRV!
अथागतस्मृतिरभयो रिपुं बलो विह्मयसार्थमिव हरन्तमात्मन: |
रुषाहनच्छिरसि दृढेन मुष्टिना सुराधिपो गिरिमिव वज्ररंहसा 1२८॥
स आहत: सपदि विज्ञीर्णमस्तको मुखाद् वमन् रुधिरमपस्मृतोऽसुर: |
महारवं व्यसुरपतन्॰प्तपीरयन् गिरिर्वथा मघवत आयुधाहत: 1281

When (on one occasion) Sridama, Vrsabha and others, who had taken the side of
Balarama, had the upper handin the game, Sri Krsna and others, O protector of men, carried
them. (23) Having been worsted, Lord Sri Krsna bore Sidama; Bhadrasena, Vrsabha; and
Pralamba, Balarama (the son of Rohini). (24) Thinking Sri Krsna to be unbearable (for him,
he chose to remain on His side) and acting as a mount for Balarama, Pralamba (the foremost
among the Danavas) ran posthaste beyond the limit fixed for demounting the riders. (25)
Bearing on his back Balarama, who had assumed the weight of Mount Meru (the chief of the
mountains),the mighty demon found that his speed had altogether disappeared and, having
resumed his own (demoniac) form and, adorned with gold ornaments, he shone like a cloud
illumined with flashes of lightning and bearing the moon (the ruler of thestars) on its back. (26)
Balarama (the wielder of a plough for a weapon) felta bit afraid to perceive that body soaring
in the skies at a great speed with burning eyes and hair glowing as flames and with its fearful
tusks reaching the end of its contracted eye-brows and looking uncanny with the splendour
of its bracelets, coronet and ear-rings. (27) Balarama, to whom self-consciousness (the
knowledge of His divinity) had returned the very next moment and who had (consequently)

