576 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 5

सध्रीचीनं प्रतीचीनं परस्यानुपथं गता:। नाद्यापि ते निवर्तन्ते पश्चिमा यामिनीरिव 1331
एतस्मिन् काल उत्पातान् बहून् पह्यन् प्रजापति: | पूर्ववन्नारदकृतं पुत्रनाहामुपाश्रृणोत् । ३४॥
gaa नारदायासौ पुत्रशोकविमूर्चित: | देवर्षिमुपलभ्याह रोषाद्विस्कुरिताधर: 1341

Having heard of the straying of his virtuous sons (from the path of worldly activity) at the
instigation of Narada, Daksa fell a sorrowing and felt (much) distressed. (Indeed) itis a source
of grief to have good children. (23) Fully consoled by Brahma (who was not born of a mother's
womb), Daksa begot through Paficajani (his wife) a thousand sons more, known as the
Sabalaswas. (24) Expressly enjoined by (their) father to beget children, they made a firm
resolve to practise austerities and repaired to (the lake) Narayanasara, where their elder
brothers had achieved their object (in the shape of God-Realization or divine love). (25) Their
mind thoroughly cleansed of (all) impurities through a mere bath in that lake, they practised
great austerity there, muttering the most sacred syllable 'OM' (a symbol or appellation of the
highest Reality). (26) Living for some months on water (alone) and subsisting for several
months on (nothing but) air, they worshipped Bhagavan Visnu (the Lord of all sacred texts),
repeating the following sacred formula : (27) "We make obeisance to Lord Narayana (the goal
of all the Jivas), denoted by the mystical syllable OM, the highest Person the Supreme Spirit,
appearing in a form made up of Sattva unmixed with Rajas and Tamas, the purest of the
pure."(28) The sage Narada, O Pariksit (a King of kings), approached those (other) princes
also, who were thus intent on renewing the creation, and addressed to them enigmatic words
similar to those addressed (to their elder brothers) before:—(29) "Duly hear from me as | tell
you, O sons of Daksa, the following precept. (Try to) discover the path trodden by your (elder)
brothers, for whom you cherish such (great) affection. (30) A brother who knows his duty
(towards his brothers) and follows the exalted path of his brothers, and who is followed
(everywhere) by his virtue rejoices (in the realm of the Maruts) along with the Maruts (the forty-
nine wind-gods, who are all excessively fond of their brothers)". (31) Saying this much, the
sage Narada, whose sight never fails to bring its reward, withdrew; and they too followed the
path of their brothers alone, O noble one ! (32) Having taken to the noble and agreeable path
leading to (the realization of) the Supreme—a path which can be reached only by those whose
thought is turned onward (away from the world)—they, like the bygone nights, do not return
even to this day. (33) Seeing many an evil portent at this time, the Prajapati (Daksa) heard of
the ruination of his sons at the hands of the sage Narada as before. (34) Overpowered with
grief for his sons, he got angry with Narada; and, on meeting with the sage, addressed him
(as follows), his lips quivering through rage. (35)

दक्ष उवाच
aa असाधो साधूनां साधुलिङ्गेन नस्त्वया। असाध्वकार्यर्भकाणां भिक्षोर्मार्ग: प्रदर्शित: । ३६1
ऋणैस्रिभिरमुक्तानाममीमांसितकर्मणाम् | विघात: श्रेयस: पाप लोकयोरुभयो: Fa: 1391
एवं त्वं निरनुक्रोशो बालानां मतिभिद्धरे: । पार्षदमध्ये चरसि aera: निरपएत्रप: । ३८
ननु भागवता नित्यं भूतानुग्रहकातरा:। ॠते त्वां सौहदघ्नं वै वैरङ्करमवैरिणाम् ।३९॥
नेत्थं Gat विराग: स्यात् त्वया केवलिना मृषा । मन्यसे यद्युपशमं स्नेहपाशनिकृन्तनम् ।४०॥
नानुभूय न जानाति पुमान् विषयतीक्ष्णताम् । निर्विद्येत स्वयं तस्मान्न तथा भिन्नधी: परै: ।४१॥
यन्नस्त्वं कर्मसन्धानां साधूनां गृहमेधिनाम्। कृतवानसि दुर्मर्षं विप्रियं aa मर्षितम् sz
तन्तुकृन्तन यन्नस्त्वमभद्रमचर: पुन:। तस्माल्लोकेषु ते मूढ न भवेद भ्रमत: पदम् ।४३॥

Daksa said : Ah, appearing in the garb of a holy man, O wicked one, you have done a

(great) disservice to our youngsters—who were (all) virtuous—in that you showed them the

