244 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 34

SER RARE SE BER ORS ERIE SPER Ot 9 SRI Ste चि Sn वित्रन्र त्मा

त्रयस्रिंशोऽध्याय: 1331
He who full of reverence hears in the proper order of sequence or recounts the story of
the aforesaid amorous pastime of Sri Krsna (who was no other than the all-pervading Lord

Visnu) with the women of Vraja is blessed with supreme devotion to the Lord and, becoming
amaster of his self before long, speedily overcomes lust (which is a malady of the mind). (40)

Thus ends the thirty-third discourse entitled "A Description of the (actual)Rasa-Play",
in the first half of Book Ten of the great and glorious Bhagavata-Purana,
otherwise known as the Paramahamsa-Samhita.

RENAINST:
PSE yrs धु

अथ चतुस्रिशोऽध्याय:

Discourse XXXIV
The Lord makes short work of Sankhaciida

ES

al उ

एकदा देवयात्रायां गोपाला जातकौतुका: । अनोभिरनडुद्युक्तैश प्रवयुस्तेऽम्बिकावनम् । १ ।

तत्र स्नात्वा सरस्वत्यां देवं wyatt विभुम्। sedate देवीं च नृपतेऽम्विकाम् । २ ।

गावो हिरण्यं वासांसि ay मध्वन्नमादृता: | ब्राह्मणेभ्यो ददु: we देवो a: प्रीयतामिति । ३ ।

ऊषु: सरस्वतीतीरे जलं wea धृतव्रता: ! रजनीं तां महाभागा नन्दसुनन्दकाद्य: । ४ ।
SriSuka began again: Their interest having been aroused in (undertaking) a pilgrimage
for the worship of a god on a certain occasion, the cowherds (of Vraja) rode in their carts
drawn by bullocks to (a forest known as) Ambika Vana (which was sacred to Goddess
Parvati, the Mother of the universe). (1) Having bathed in the Saraswati river there, they
worshipped the almighty Lord Siva as well as Goddess Ambika (His Consort) with devotion
through (various) articles of worship, O protector of men! (2) Full of reverence they all gifted
to the Brahmans cows, gold, clothes, sweets and rice boiled with honey praying "May the
Lord be propitious to us !" (3) Having undertaken sacred vows and subsisting on water (alone

for the whole day); the highly blessed ones, Nanda, Sunanda (his younger brother) and
others, spent that night on the bank of the Saraswati. (4)

कश्चिन्महानहिस्तस्मिन् विपिनेऽतिबुभुक्षित: ! यदृच्छयाऽऽगतो नन्दं झवानमुरगोऽग्रसीत् । ५ ।
स चुक्रोशाहिना Fe: कृष्ण कृष्ण महानयम् । सर्पो मां ग्रसते तात sod परिमोचय । ६ ।
तस्य चाक्रन्दितं श्रुत्वा गोपाला: सहसोत्थिता: । ग्रस्तं च दृष्टा विभ्रान्ता: सर्पं विव्यधुरुल्मुकै: । ७ |
अलातैर्दह्यमानोऽपि नामुञ्चत्तमुरङ्वम: | तमस्पृशत् पदाभ्येत्य भगवान् सात्वतां पति: । ८ ।
स a भगवत: श्रीमत्यादस्पर्शहताशुभ: । भेजे सर्पवपुर्हित्वा रूपं विद्याधरार्चितम् । ९ ।
तमपृच्छदधृषीकेश: प्रणतं समुपस्थितम्। dea वपुषा ost हेममालिनम् ।१०॥
को भवान् परया Baa रोचतेऽद्भुतदर्शन: ! कथं जुगुप्सितामेतां गतिं वा प्रापितोऽवद: । ११॥
