724 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 15-

PB RRR BOR ORT RE HR AOR RR ER CARE HEE EHO HEHE CECH HKU TRH HHO HEE कौ कौ को वी ती जत्री Ae ee

Narada began again : Some Brahmanas are devoted to rituals (laid down in the
scriptures as pertaining to their grade in society and stage in life), while others , O ruler of
men, are intent on (the practice of) austerities. (Still) others are those that have pinned their
faith in the study and teaching of the Vedas and other scriptures; while (yet) others are given
to the pursuit of JAana (spiritual enlightenment) and Yoga or Devotion (each succeeding
class being regarded as superior to the preceding one). (1) By one seeking immortality (for
oneself or for the departed soul), oblations of food etc., intended for the spirit of a deceased
relation (on the occasion of a Sraddha) as well as for gods in a ritual intended to propitiate
the gods should be offered to one devoted to the pursuit of spiritual enlightenment. In the
absence of such a Brahmana (of course) the offering may be given to others (those devoted
to rituals etc,) according to their merit (giving preference to the higher types if a choice has
to be made). (2) One should feed (only) two Brahmanas in the course of a rite intended to
propitiate the gods and three ina ceremony (Sraddha) in the interest of a deceased relative
or (only) one on either occasion. Though very rich, a householder should not invite a large
number (of Brahmanas) during a Sraddha feast. (3) (For) due to (his) feeding alarge number
and offering food to his relatives, (the amount of) reverence befitting the place and time (of
the ceremony) the (quality of) materials (of food etc, used on the occasion), a worthy recipient
(for the offerings) and (the correct procedure of) worship—(all) these cannot be adequately
ensured. (4) When a (proper) place and time are available, food fit for (the consumption of)
hermits (such as wild rice), offered (in the first instance) to Sri Hari and (then) served with
(due) reverence and in accordance with the scriptural ordinance to a worthy recipient yields
the desired fruit (to those who crave for it) and proves (to be a source of) everlasting (good
to a seeker of blessedness). (5) Duly distributing the food (cooked on such occasions)
among the gods, the Rsis (the seers), the manes and other living beings, one's own self
and one's relatives, one should look upon all these as (so many) forms of the Supreme
Person. (6)

न दद्यादामिषं श्राद्धे न चाद्याद् धर्मतत्त्ववित् । मुन्यन्नै: स्यात्परा प्रीतिर्यथा न पशुहिंसया । ७ |
नैतादृश: परो धर्मो qo सद्धर्ममिच्छताम्। न्यासो दण्डस्य भूतेषु मनोवाक्कायजस्य य: । ८ ।
एके कर्ममयान् यज्ञान् ज्ञानिनो यज्ञवित्तमा: । आत्मसंयमनेऽनीहा जुह्वति ज्ञानदीपिते। ९ ।
द्रव्ययज्ञैर्यक्ष्यमाणं दृध्टा भूतानि बिभ्यति । एष माकरुणो हन्यादतज्ञो MAA, ध्रुवम् । १०।
तस्माद् दॆवोपपन्नेन मुन्यन्नेनापि धर्मवित्। सन्तुष्ठोऽहरह: कुर्यान्नित्यनैमित्तिकी: क्रिया: ।११॥
विधर्म: परधर्मश्च आभास उपमा oe: | अधर्मशाखा: पञ्चेमा धर्मज्ञोऽधर्मवत् त्यजेत् । १२।
धर्मबाधो विधर्म: स्यात् परधर्मोऽन्यचोदित: | उपधर्मस्तु पाखण्डो दम्भो वा शाब्दभिच्छल: 1231
ahaa cha: पुम्भिराभासो ह्याश्रमात् gay | स्वभावविहितो धर्म: कस्य AB: प्रशान्तये । १४॥

One who knows the essence of piety should not offer meat (to the manes) ina Sraddha
ceremony nor should he eat it (himself). The type of supreme gratification caused (to the
manes as well as to the Lord Himself) through cereals fit for (the consumption of) anchorites
(because involving no destruction of life) is never brought about through (meat etc., obtained
by) the killing of animals. (7) For men seeking true piety there is no other such virtue as
abstinence from violence to living beings, perpetrated through mind, speech and body. (8)
(That is why) some wise men, (who are) foremost among the knowers of the truth about
-gacrifices and free from desire offer sacrifices consisting of rituals into the fire of self-control
kindled by Knowledge (of the Self). (That is to say, they completely withdraw themselves

from external rituals.) (9) Seeing one proceeding to propitiate the Lord through sacrifices
conducted with material substances, animals grow apprehensive lest the merciless fellow,
