82 SRIMAD, BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 19

तत्राभवद्भगवान् व्यासपुत्रो यदृच्छया गामटमानोऽनपेक्ष: |
अनक्ष्यलिङ्गो निजलाभतुष्टो वृतश्च बालैरवधूतवेष: । २५॥
तं द्वयष्टवर्षं सुकुमारपादकरोरुबाह्वंसकपोलगात्रम् |
चार्बायताक्षोन्नसतुल्यकर्णसुभ्र्वाननं कम्बुसुजातकण्ठम् | २६॥
निगूढजत्रुं पृथुतुङ्गवक्षसमावर्तनाभिं वलिवल्गूदरं च ।
दिगम्बं वक्त्रविकीर्णकेशं प्रलम्बबाहुं स्वमरोत्तमाभम् । २७।
प्रत्युत्थितास्ते मुनय: स्वासनेभ्यस्तल्लक्षणज्ञा अपि गूढवर्चसम् 2c

"O chief of royal sages, this is no wonder in you (the scions of Pandu), devoted as
you are to Sri Krsna; for, in your eagerness to attain proximity to the Lord you have
speedily renounced the imperial throne against which kings robbed their crowns. (20) Now
we shall all remain here till this king, who is foremost among the devotees of the Lord,
has cast off his mortal coil and ascended to the highest abode (of the Lord), which is
beyond the reach of Maya and free from sorrow." (21) On hearing these words of the
sages—impartial, sweet, full of deep significance and true—Pariksit greeted the sages,
who had all become one with the Supreme Spirit; and, eager to hear the stories of Lord
Visnu (Sri Krsna), replied to them as follows :— (22) "Shining like the Vedas, that abide
in visible form in the highest heaven (the Satyaloka, Brahma's abode), you have all come
together from every quarter. And you have no purpose of your own (to achieve) in this
world or the next, except doing good to others, which is your innate disposition. (23)
Reposing faith in you, therefore, O Brahmanas, | ask you this question—which is the only
question worth asking—in regard to my duty. Tell me, O learned sages, after due
deliberation, what innocent course should be pursued by all under every circumstance
and in particular, by those who are about to die*" (24) Meanwhile there arrived on the
scene wandering about on the earth at will, the divine Suka (the son of Vyasa) who was
indifferent to the world and had no visible marks of any particular Varna (grade of society)
or Asrama (stage of life) on his person, who was contented with the realization of his
own Self and was surrounded by. women and children and who wore the appearance of
an ascetic that had renounced all worldly attachments and connections. (25) Sixteen
years of age, with tender feet, hands, thighs, arms, shoulders, cheeks and frame, he had
a lovely countenance with large eyes, a prominent nose, symmetrical ears, beautiful
eyebrows and a conch-like shapely neck. (26) His coliar-bone was hidden within a fleshy
frame; his chest was broad and prominent, his navel deep and spiral like an eddy and
his belly looked charming with its three folds. He was stark naked, with hair flung about
his face, had long arms and shone like one of the highest gods. (27) He possessed a
swarthy complexion and captivated the heart of women by his charming youth, graceful
limbs and winsome smiles. Although he had concealed his spiritual glow (behind a crazy
appearance), the sages (present there) recognized him by his characteristic features and
rose from their seats to receive him. (28)

“ King Pariksit asks here the following two questions:—

(1) What should a mortal do at all times and under all circumstances ?

(2) What is the duty of a man who is about to die ?

He puts these very question to the sage Suka later on; and as a matter of fact, it Is these two questions that have
been answered at length by the latter in the course of the following eleven books of the Srimad Bhagavata.
