Dis. 2] BOOK FIVE 447

epee en fee Saree ie reese bene Thee 40 Far eeecere ate ees i.
Woes Ss a RE AE OE BOSE S RTT वज Bs BE RT

senses) in the forest ? (7) (Pointing to her shaftlike sidelong glances) These two arrows of
your worshipful self, winged as they are with lotus-petals (in the shape of eyes), are (very)
gentle and lovely (even) without hilt, yet extremely sharp-pointed. We wonder whom you
intend to aim them at, wandering as you do in the forest. May this expedition (valour) of yours
conduce to the good of us dull-witted creatures. (8) (Pointing to the bees hovering about her)
These pupils of your worshipfu! self are chanting about you the (hymns of ) Samaveda
alongwith the Upanisads (embodying its esoteric teaching) and incessantly glorifying the
Lord (thereby). They (eagerly) resort to the showers of flowers dropped from your locks even
as hosts of Rsis (holy sages) accept the recensions of the Veda traditionally followed by their
own school. (9) (Pointing to the sweet jingling of her anklets) We simply hear, O sage, the
(dulcet) notes of the partridges locked up in the cages of your feet—notes which are distinctly
heard though (their source in the shape of the birds is) invisible. (Referring to her loin cloth)
Wherefrom did you get the yellow splendour resembling that of a Kadamba flower on your
beautiful circular hips? (Pointing to the girdle) They are (also) girdled with a belt of fire ! But
(by the by) where is your bark-covering ? (10) (Pointing to her conical breasts) What lies
treasured up, O holy Brahmana, in (yonder) two horns of yours, which you carry (in your
bosom)—though you are (so) slender at your waist—and upon which my eyes are riveted ?
(Again) unique is the scarlet and fragrant paste on your horns, with which, O beautiful one,
you are perfuming my hermitage ! (11) Be pleased to show me your native place, O great
friend, the inhabitants of which carry on their bosom in this way such a strange pair of limbs
that agitate the mind of people like me, and many a wonderful treasure like sweetness (in
the shape of sweet words), amorous gestures and nectar (flowing from their lips) in their
mouth. (12) (Pointing to the betel leaves that were being chewed by her) What is the (kind
of) food with which you nourish your body ? For from the chewing thereof, O dear one, issues
(from your mouth) an aroma as of oblations poured into the sacred fire. Surely you are a ray
of Lord Visnu (the Protector of the universe); that is why your ears (like His) are adorned with
brilliant ear-rings resembling two unwinking alligators. (And) your countenance is akin to a
lake with its bewildered eyes resembling two leaping fish, its snow-white rows of teeth
corresponding to swans and its mass of curly hair appearing like swarms of honey-bees
hovering close at hand. (13) The yonder ball, which when struck by your lotus-like hand flies
aboutin all directions, makes my eyes roll about, my mind being (already) confounded. (Oh),
‘do you not mind your unloosed braid of curly locks ? (And) !o ! this mischievous and lustful
breeze is blowing off your lower garment. (14) Through what (kind of) austerities did you
secure this beautiful form, O great ascetic, wrecking as it does the austerities of others
practising them ? You ought to practise asceticism with me, O friend ! Or may be Brahma
himself (who is intent on extending his creation) has shown his grace to me (by sending you
to me for a wife). (15) | shall not forgo you, my beloved friend, who have been conferred on
me by Brahma (lit., the adored of the twice-born). Neither my mind nor my eyes turn away
(from you), fastened as they are on you. Be pleased (therefore) to take me, your servant,
O fair-bosomed damsel ! wheresoever you please, and let these obedient companions (of

yours) follow me. (16)
aR उवाच

इति ललनानुनयातिविशारदो ग्राम्यवैदग्ध्यया परिभाषया at विबुधवधूं विवुधमतिर-धि
सभाजयामास। VS! सा च ततस्तस्य वीरयूथपतेर्बुद्धिशीलरूपवय:थ्रियौदार्येण पराक्षिप्तमनास्तेन
सहायुतायुतपरिवत्सरोपलक्षणं कालं जम्बूद्बीपपतिना भौमस्वर्गभोगान् बुभुजे। १८ तस्यामु ह वा
आत्मजान् स राजवर आग्नीध्रो नाभिकिम्पुरुषहरिवर्षेलावृतरम्यकहिरण्मयकुरुभद्राश्वकेतुमालसंज्ञान्नव
पुत्रानजनयत्। १९ ।
