Dis. 2] BOOK FIVE — 445

RESLORHHEHHEHHHLERAUVECLHE AH TE SESSA H HAHAHA EEAAAH ENTER ER HSA HARE EHH AH
RS व य ह ज हो य तं

“Who else than the almighty Lord could do the work accomplished by Priyavrata, who in
his attempt to disperse the darkness (of night) produced the seven oceans out of the tracks
sunk by the fellies (of the wheels of his chariot), nay, who divided the earth (into so many
Dwipas) for the convenience of living beings (inhabiting the same) and fixed the limits of
every Dwipa by allocating separate rivers, mountains and forests (to each). (39-40) Devoted
to the servants of the Supreme Person, he looked upon as akin to hell the fortunes of the
subterranean worlds, the heavenly regions and the terrestrial globe as well as those acquired
through actions (performed ina previous existence) or Yoga (concentration of mind or mystic
powers)." (41)

Thus ends the first discourse, forming part of the story of Priyavrata's conquest,
in Book Five of the great and glorious Bhagavata-Purana,
otherwise known as the Paramahamsa-Samhita.

thet tick
PICS SS ey

Discourse Il
An account of Agnidhra
श्रीशुक उवाच
एवं frat सम्प्रवृत्ते तदनुशासने adam आग्नीध्रो जम्बूद्वीपौकस: प्रजा औरसवद्धर्मावेक्षमाण:
पर्यगोपायत्।१। स च कदाचित्पितृलोककाम: सुरवरवनिताक्रीडाचलद्रोण्यां भगवन्तं विश्वसृजां
पतिमाभृतपस्विर्योपकाणआत्येकाग्र्यणतफ्रव्यारथिंयाम्बभ्ख।र।तदुपलम्यभगबानादिघुप्तष सदसि
गायन्तीं पूर्वचित्तिं नत्माप्प्तरसपभियापयम्पास।इ। सा च तदाश्रमोपवनमतिरमणीयं

निजमुखविगलितामृतासवसहासभाषणामोदमदान्धमधुकरनिकरोपरोधेन
द्रुतपदविन्यासेनवल्गुस्पन्दनस्तनकलशकबरभाररशनां Sat तदवलोकनेन विवृतावसरस्य भगवतो मकरघ्वजस्य
वशमुपनीतो जडवदिति होवाच। ६ |

Sri Suka began again : His father (Priyavrata) being thus engaged (in the practice of
Devotion), Agnidhra, who followed his commands, duly protected the people of Jambudwipa
as his own progeny, keeping his eye on Dharma (righteousness). (1) Seeking (an abode in)
the realm of the manes (i.e., desirous of getting a worthy son), he collected (all) the requisites
for worship and with (deep) concentration of mind and asceticism adored the glorious
Brahma (the ruler of lords of created beings) in a valley of Mount Mandara (the pleasure-
ground of celestial damsels). (2) Having come to know this, the glorious Brahma (the
foremost of all created beings) sent down (to him) an Apsara (celestial nymph), Purvacitti by
name, who used to sing in his court. (3) There was a most delightful garden attached to his
hermitage. It contained ponds and lakes (full of lotus beds) that charmingly resounded with
the cnes of waterfowls, Karandavas (a species of ducks), swans and the like, that were
