242 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 23

Having shown to his wife the whole extent of the terrestrial globe, which is full of many
wonders because of its arrangement (into so many Dwipas and Varsas etc.), Kardama (the
great Yogi) returned to his own hermitage. (43) In order to delight his spouse Devahiti (the
daughter of Swayambhuva Manu), who longed for sexual pleasure, the sage divided his
self into nine (assumed nine forms) and enjoyed himself (with her) for years together as
if it was for an hour only. (44) Sharing with her most handsome lord the excellent and
delightful bed in that aerial mansion, she did not notice (the passing away of) that (long)
period. (45) While the couple, who eagerly jonged for the pleasures of sense, were thus
enjoying themselves by virtue of Yogic powers, a hundred autumns passed like a brief
space of time. (46) Lovingly regarding her as a counterpart of his own self, the enlightened
sage, who could read the thoughts of all and was also capable of granting their wishes,
divided his self into nine and impregnated her. (47) Immediately afterwards the said
Devahiti bore on the same day (nine) female issues, who were all charming of every limb
and breathed the fragrance of a red lotus. (48) Thereafter when she found her lord about
to leave the home as a recluse (according to the understanding at the time of wedding),
the virtuous lady, who yet longed for a male child, scratched the ground with her foot,
radiant with the lustre of its gem-like nails, her head bent low; and, suppressing her tears,
she spoke in slow yet winning accents with an agitated and aching heart, though wearing

a smile on her face. (49-50) ॥
देवहूतिरुवाच
wa तद्भगवान्मह्यमुपोवाह प्रतिश्रुतम्। अथापि मे प्रपन्नाया अभयं दातुमर्हसि । ५१॥
ब्रह्मन्दुहितृभिस्तुभ्यं विमृग्या: पतय: समा: | कश्चित्स्यान्मे विशोकाय त्वयि प्रव्रजिते वनम् 1 ५२॥
Wades कालेन व्यतिक्रान्तेन मे प्रभो । इन्दियार्थप्रसङ्घेन परित्यक्तपरात्मन: 143 |
grog Geren प्रसङ्घस्त्वयि मे कृत: । अजानन्त्या परं भावं तथाप्यस्त्वभयाय मे । ५४॥
ag य: संसृतेर्हेतुरसत्सु विहितोऽधिया। स wa साधुषु कृतो नि:सङ्घत्वाय कल्पते । ५५॥
नेह यत्कर्म धर्माय न विरागाय कल्पते । न तीर्थपदसेवायै जीवन्नपि मृतो fe a: । ५६॥
ae भगवतो नूनं afar मायया gel यत्त्वां विमुक्तिदं प्राप्य न मुमुक्षेय बन्धनात् । ५७।

Devahiuti said : Your venerable self has redeemed all the promises made to me; yet
be pleased to grant me immunity from fear, since | have taken refuge in you. (51) Your
daughters, O holy sage, will have to find a suitable match for themselves; and there must
be someone to rid me of sorrow when you have left for the woods. (52) Enough with the time
that has so far been spent by me in enjoying the objects of senses, ignoring the Supreme
Spirit.(53) Not knowing your transcendent glory, | have loved you, while remaining attached
to the objects of senses. Let the affinity | have borne to you nonetheless rid me of all fear.(54)
The same love which, when bestowed on the wicked through ignorance, is conducive to
rebirth, rids one of all attachment when it is directed towards holy men. (55) He whose
activity in this world neither tends to religious merit nor to dispassion, nor to the service of
the Lord whose feet are the source of all sacred places, is verily dead, though living. (56)
Indeed | have been badly deceived by the Lord's Maya (deluding potency) in that | failed
to seek liberation from the bondage of mundane life even after securing you, the bestower
of final beatitude. (57)

Thus ends the twenty-third discourse, forming part of the narrative of Lord Kapila,
in Book Three of the great and glorious Bhagavata-Purana,
otherwise known as the Paramahamsa-Samnita.

Sati nst tet:
LOD LOD OEE PLS Fd

