Dis. 29 ] BOOK ELEVEN 659

SCE HE OE NOE EN TRE ORO ER RE OE OR HER EERE EEE OE EERE T TOR EOE AEE CERECOME ERE

creature, according to the predominance of Sattva, Rajas and Tamas respectively), you will
then attain to Me. (41—44)

siege उवाच
a एवमुक्तो हरिमेधसोद्धव: प्रदक्षिणे a परिसृत्य पादयो: ।
शिरो निधायाश्रुकलाभिरार्द्रधीर्न्यषिञ्चदद्वन्द्रपरोऽप्यपक्रमे ।४५॥

सुदुस्त्यजस्न्रेहवियो कातरो न शक्नुवंस्तं परिहातुमातुर: ।
wep wat मूर्धनि भर्तृपादुके बिभ्रन्नमस्कृत्य ययो पुन: पुन: ।४६1
ततस्तमन्तर्हदि संनिवेश्य गतो महाभागवतो विशालाम्।
यथोपदिष्टां जगदेकबन्धुना तप: समास्थाय हरेरगाद् गतिम्॥४७।
य एतदानन्दसमुद्रसम्भृते owed भागवताय भाषितम् ।
कृष्णेन योगेश्वरसेविताङ्ध्रिणा सच्छ्रद्धयाऽऽसेव्य जगद् विमुच्यते ॥४८॥
भवभयमपहन्तुं ज्ञानविज्ञानसारं निगमकृदुपजह्रे भृङ्गवद् वेदसारम्।
अमृतमुदधितश्चापाययद् भृत्यवर्गान् पुरुषमृषभमाद्यं कृष्णसंज्ञं नतोऽस्मि ।४९॥
इति श्रीमद्भागवते महापुराणे पारमहंस्यां संहितायामेकाददास्कन्धे एकोमत्रिंशोऽध्याय: ।२९1
Sri Suka resumed : Instructed thus by Sri Krsna (devotion to whom puts an end to
metempsychosis), Uddhava went round the Lord keeping Him always to his right (so as to
ensure His constant goodwill) and, placing his head on His feet while departing, bathed them
with drops of tears, his mind (too) being moistened with emotion, even though he had
transcended the pairs of opposites {in the form of joy and sorrow etc., as a result of the Lord's
teaching). (45) Alarmed at his (impending) separation from Sri Krsna— whose affection was
most difficult to turn one's back upon—and unable to leave Him, Uddhava felt ill at ease and
suffered (great) agony. (Then) bearing on his head the pair of wooden sandals belonging to
his Master (and gifted by Himself as a token of His pleasure) and bowing to Him again and
again, he departed. (46) Having firmly installed the Lord in the inrnost of his heart, the great
votary of the Lord then reached Viéala (another name of Badarikagrama), and, practising
austerities according to rules, attained to the state of Sri Hari as taught by Sri Krsna” (the sole
Befriender of the universe). (47) He who tastes ever so little with real reverence this nectar
of wisdom, churned out of the ocean of bliss (in the shape of the Upanisads, so-called
because they reveal the nature of Brahma, which is all bliss) and taught to Uddhava (a great
devotee of the Lord) by (no less a personage than) Sri Krsna, whose (lotus) feet are resorted
to (even) by masters of Yoga (like Lord Siva), is not only liberated himself but the world (at
large) gets liberated (through his fellowship). (48) | bow to the Supreme Person known by
the name of Sri Krsna, the First Cause, the Author of the Vedas, who in order to put an end
to rebirth (in the case of devotees that have turned their face from the world) and the fear of
old age and disease etc., {in the case of those following the ways of the world) extracted like
a bee (the twofold) nectar, viz., 1-the quintessence of the Vedas in the form of Jfiana (Self-
Knowledge) and Vijfiana (God-Realization)— which are the only valuable things (in life)—
and 2-the immortalizing beverage of the gods (churned) out of the ocean, and gave the
(twofold) nectar to the (aforementioned two) classes of His devotees to drink. (49)

Thus ends the twenty-ninth discourse in Book Eleven of the
great and glorious Bhagavata-Purana, otherwise
known as the Paramahamsa-Samnita.
rat Eo ety

#
CDOT iid

I

* Vide verse 34 above.

