Dis. 3] BOOK ELEVEN 527

SENN ENTE PERE NEA ENTE OE CNET ORT eee EE न आशा सा न कमरस म् स न झ ता

should learn to hear, sing and dwell on the story of the advent, pastimes and excellences of
Lord Sri Hari of wonderful deeds and to do everything for (pleasing) Him. (27) He should
(further) learn to offer to the supreme Lord all his sacrificial activities, gifts, austerities,
repetition of the sacred syllables, righteous conduct, and all that he likes for himself, (nay,)
his wife, children, house and his very life. (28) He should also learn to love devotedly those
persons who have realized Sri Krsna as their own Self and as the Lord of their life; to serve
the mobile and immobile creatures (as the embodiments of the Lord); and (specially) toserve
human beings and among them more specially those who adhere to their own duty and are
devotees of the Lord. (29) He should (further) learn to expound and discuss among the
devotees the sacred glory of the Lord, and in association with others find delight and
satisfaction resulting in the freedom of the mind from egotism. (30) (Thus) remembering and
reminding one another of Sri Hari, who destroys innumerable sins (in an instant), their
devotion turning into divine love, the devotees filled with rapture experience a thrill ofjoy.(31}
Sometimes they weep due to the anguish of separation from Sri Hari, sometimes they laugh
and rejoice and address Him (as if He were present by their side), indulge (joyfully) in dancing
and singing, and sometimes thinking of the birthless Lord feel that they have reached the
Supreme Person, and (thereby) become peaceful and silent. tn this way their behaviour
becomes altogether unconventional. (32) Thus learning (and following) the ways of life of the
Lord's devotees and devoted to Him, his devotion developing into divine love, the devotee
easily crosses the unfathomable Maya. (33)

नारायणाभिधानस्य ब्रह्मण: परमात्मन: । निष्ठामर्हथ नो वक्तुं यूयं हि ब्रह्मवित्तमा: ।३४॥
The king (Nimi) said : O sages, since you are foremost among those who have realized
Brahma (the Ultimate Reality), pray, explain to us the real nature of Paramatma or Brahma,
who is called by the name of Narayana. (34)

पिप्पलायन उवाच
स्थित्युद्धवप्रलयहेतुरहेतुरस्य यत् स्वप्नजागरसुषुप्तिषु सद् बहिंश्च |
देहेन्दियासुहृदयानि चरन्ति येन सञ्जीवितानि तदवेहि परं नरेन्द्र ।३५॥
मैतन्मनो विदाति वागुत चक्षुरात्मा प्राणेन्द्रयाणि च यथानलमर्चिष: स्वा: ।
शब्दोऽपि बोधकनिषेधतयाऽऽत्ममूलमर्थोक्तमाह at न निषेधसिद्धि: 1361
wea रजस्तम इति त्रिवृदेकमादौ qa महानहमिति प्रवदन्ति जीवम् ।
ज्ञानक्रियार्थफलसूपतयोरुशक्ति Aa भाति सदसच्च तयो: wt यत् । ३७1
Wan जजान न मरिष्यति नैधतेऽसौ न क्षीयते सवनविद् व्यभिचारिणां हि ।
wa ङाश्वदनपाय्युपलब्धिमात्रं प्राणो यथेन्द्रियबलेन विकल्पितं सत् । ३८॥
अण्डेषु पेझषिषु तरुध्वविनिश्चितेषु sot fe जीवमुपधावति aa तत्र ।
wa यदिन्द्रियगणेऽहमि च प्रसुप्ते Heer आशयमृते तदनुस्मृतिर्न: ।३९॥
यर्ह्यब्ननाभचरणैषणयोरुभक्त्या चेतोमलानि विधमेद् गुणकर्मजानि |
तस्मिन् विशुद्ध उपलभ्यत आत्मतत्त्वं साक्षाद् Tae: सवितृप्रकाटा: ।॥४०॥

Pippalayana said : 0 ruler of men, know that to be the supreme Reality, which is
responsible for the creation, sustenance and dissolution of this universe; and itself has no
cause of its own; and that which exists in (all the three states of consciousness—) waking
life, dream and deep sleep, as well as in the supra-conscious state. (beyond the aforesaid
three states), and animated by which the body, senses, breath and the inner mind (existand)
