Dis. 53] BOOK TEN 339

FOR WE OE EON EES Ce OEY EOE SENT EL ESE SEEKS eE KEEN कककजा

apprised her of Sri Krsna (a scion of Yadu) having come, and (further) conveyed to her the
unfailing assurance* given (by the Lord) about taking her (to His home at Dwaraka. (30)
Delighted at heart to know for certain the fact of His having arrived (at Kundinapura) and
seeing no other boon worth conferring on the Brahmana (in return for his unique service in
the form of bringing Sri Krsna to her), the said Rukmini (the princess of Vidarbha) bowed to
him (and thereby expressed her lasting indebtedness to him, which automatically entitled
him to infinitely more than the wealth of the entire universe, She being no other than Laksmi,
the goddess of-wealth and prosperity). (31)

aH श्रुत्वा स्वदुहितुरुद्बाहप्रेक्षणोत्सुकौ । अभ्ययात्तूर्यघोषेण रामकृष्णौ समर्हणै: 1321
मधुपर्कमुपानीय वासांसि विरजांसि स: । उपायनान्यभीष्टानि विधिवत् समपूजयत् ।३३॥
तयोर्निवेशने श्रीमदुपकल्य महामति: | ससैन्ययो: सानुगयोरातिथ्यं विदधे यथा ax)
एवं राज्ञां समेतानां यथावीर्यं यथावय: । यथावलं यथावित्तं ad: कामै: समर्हयत् ।३५॥
कृष्णमागतमाकर्ण्य विदर्भपुरवासिन: | आगत्य नेत्राञ्जलिभि: पपुस्तन्मुखपङ्कजम् ।३६॥
अस्यैव भार्या भवितुं रुक्मिण्यर्हति नापरा । असावप्यनवद्यात्या Sea: समुचित: ofa: 1391
किञ्चित्सुचरितं यन्नस्तेन तुष्टस्रिलोककृत्। अनुगृह्णातु गृह्णातु set: पाणिमच्युत: ।३८॥

Hearing of Balarama and Sri Krsna having arrived (in Kundinapura) eager to witness the
wedding of his daughter, Bhismaka went forth to meet Them with a flourish of trumpets and
excellent articles of worship. (32) Offering Madhuparkat (a delicious and refreshing
preparation made of curds and honey and offered to an esteemed guest or the bridegroom
on the latter's arrival at the door of the bride's father), immaculate garments and welcome
presents (of various kinds}, he duly worshipped Them in accordance with the scriptural
ordinance. (33) Assigning Them alongwith Their troops and retinue an abode equipped with
(all) luxuries and amenities, the highly intelligent monarch (who could easily perceive in no
time that Sri Krsna had arrived with the intention of marrying Rukminl) offered hospitality (to
all) in a befitting manner. (34) He likewise duly entertained (all) the assembled kings by
supplying them with all the objects of their desire with due regard to the prowess, age, might
and financial status of each. (35) Hearing of Sri Krsna having arrived (there), the residents
of Kundinapura (the capital of Vidarbha) came (out of their houses to see Him) and enjoyed
(to their heart's content) the beauty of His lotus-like countenance with both their eyes
together (even) as one would quaff honey with the hollow of one's joined palms. (36) (They
said to one another,) "Rukminialone andno other girl deserves to be his consort and he alone
of faultless limbs is the most worthy match for Rukmini (the daughter of Bhisma). (37)
Pleased with whatever meritorious deed has been performed by us (in this or any previous
existence), may God (the Maker of the three worlds) show His grace (to us) and let Sri Krsna
and none else marry the princess of Vidarbha (through such grace)." (38)

एवं प्रेमकलाबद्धा वदन्ति स्म पुरौकस: | कन्या चान्त:पुरात् प्रागाद् भटैर्गुप्ताम्बिकालयम् । ३९॥
पद्भ्यां विनिर्ययौ द्रष्टुं भवान्या: पादपल्लवम् । सा चानुध्यायती सम्यङ्मुकुन्दचरणाम्बुजम् ।`४०॥

मृदङ्वशङ्खपणवास्तूर्यभेर्यश्च जघ्निरे se

“Vide verse 3 above.
PUYER च सक्षौट्रं ci प्राज्ञं मतोषाभि:।

By offering Madhuparka to Sri Krsna Bhismaka indirectly expressed his willingness to give away his daughter to Him.
