Dis. 24 ] BOOK FOUR 397

RRAAOA OEE HATERS HEA HHT SE TE CEA HEE MA PRR AR RH 8 ORO Be HE Re

children, ifissueless and becomes the wealthiest if destitute. (33) An obscure person attains
good reputation and a dunce turns out to be a learned man. It is a source of good fortune
to men and wards off inauspiciousness. (34) Besides bringing wealth, reputation, longevity
and heavenly bliss, it wipes out the impurities of the Kali age. By those who are particularly
keen to acquire religious merit, wealth, enjoymentand liberation, the story should be listened
to with reverence, being the best means of achieving these four (purposes of life). (85) The
kings against whom a monarch, out to conquer (lands), marches after listening to this
narrative bring tributes before him even as they did before Prthu. (36) Free from attachment
to everything else and cherishing unalloyed devotion to the Lord, one should listen to, narrate
or read the sacred story of Prthu (the son of Vena). (37) | have told you, O Vidura (son of
Vicitravirya), this narrative revealing the Lord's glory. A man fixing his thought thereon should
attain to the goal reached by Prthu. (38) A man who, devoid of all attachment, daily listens
to or narrates with reverence this story of Prthu develops unflinching devotion to the Lord,
whose feet serve as a bark to take one across the ocean of mundane existence. (39)

Thus ends the twenty-third discourse in Book Four of the
great and glorious Bhagavata-Purana, otherwise
known as the Paramahamsa-Samhita.

se ttt yeh hy

अथ चतुर्विंशोऽध्याय:

Discourse XXIV
The hymn sung by Lord Siva (and taught to the Pracetas)
मेत्रेय उवाच

विजिताश्वोऽधिराजाऽऽसीत्पृथुपुत्र: पृथुश्रवा: | यवीयोभ्योऽददात्काष्ठा भ्रातृभ्यो भ्रातृवत्सल: । १ |
हर्यक्षायादिशत्प्राचां धूम्रकेशाय दक्षिणाम्। प्रतीचीं वृकसंज्ञाय तुर्यां द्रविणसे fay: । २ ।
अन्तर्धानगति शक्राल्लब्ध्वान्तर्धानसंज्ञित: | अपत्यत्रयमाधत्त शिखण्डिन्यां सुसम्मतम् 2 |
पावक: way wet: पुरा । वसिष्ठशापादुत्पन्ना:; पुनर्योगगति गता: । ४ ।

Maitreya began again : (Now) Prthu’s son, Vijitaswa of great renown, became the
emperor. Full of fraternal love, he gave to his younger brothers a quarter each of the earth's
surface (to rule over).(1) To Haryaksa, the emperor assigned the eastern quarter; to
Dhtmrake§a, the southern; to the one known as Vrka, the western, and the fourth (viz., the
northern) to Dravina. (2) Having acquired from Indra (the lord of paradise) the secret of
invisibility, he earned the surname of Antardhana. Through (his wife) Sikhandini he begot
three sons, who were highly esteemed (by all). (3) Pavaka, Pavamana and Suci (by name),
they were fire-gods (bearing the same names) formerly (in their previous incarnation), born
(as human beings) under the curse of the sage Vasistha, they (eventually) attained once
more to the glorious state of fire-gods by practising Yoga. (4)

अन्तर्धानो नभस्वत्यां हविर्धानमविन्दत। य इन्द्रमश्वहर्तारं विद्वानपि न जघ्निवान्। ५ |
um वृत्तिं करादानदण्डशुल्कादिदारुणाम्। मन्यमानो दीर्घसत्रव्याजेन विससर्ज ह । ६ ।
तत्रापि हंसं पुरुषं परमात्मानमात्मदृक्। यजंस्तल्लोकतामाप कुरालेन समाधिना । ७ ।
