Dis. 6] BOOK FIVE i 461

को कौज्जयो इ KH AOOR EH HEHEHE EEE हीं जज दो HE HAASE ERE ARE EAA AHHH ES HEE HEAR कौ ee कौ Hie

समीरवेगविधूतवेणुविकर्षणजातोग्रदावानलस्तद्वनमालेलिहान: सह तेन ददाह । ८

Lord Rsabhadeva was the very ornament of the protectors of the world (Indra and the
other gods); yet His divine glory could not be perceived on account of His behaving as
aforesaid like a stupid fellow and because He had adopted the weird appearance, speech
and conduct of one who has renounced all worldly attachments and connections. Now, in
order to teach to the Yogis the process of giving up the ghost He thought of quitting
(concealing) His body and, constantly viewing the Supreme Spirit—who was directly present
in Him—as (absolutely) identical (with Himself), ceased to think of His body and gave up His
identification (even) with the subtle body. (6) When Lord Rsabhadeva was thus rid of (His
identification with) the subtle body, His visible form continued to wander over this globe due
to seeming egotism induced by the vestiges of Yogamaya (the divine will to carry on the sport
of roaming about the earth as a wandering recluse) and, visiting as directed by Providence
the territories of Konka, Venka, Kutaka and South Karnataka, traversed the forest of the
Kutaka mountain stark naked, like a madman, with dishevelled hair and with a piece of stone
in His mouth. (7) Meanwhile a fierce forest conflagration broke out due to the friction of
bamboos tossed about by the force of wind and, enveloping the forest on all sides, consumed
the body of Rsabhadeva too alongwith the forest. (8)

ब्रह्मन्राह्मणयज्ञपुरुषलोकविदूषका:
निजलोकयात्रयान्धपरम्परयाऽऽश्वस्तास्तमस्यन्धे स्वयमेव प्रपतिष्यन्ति। ११ ।

On hearing about His (queer) ways and imitating them, and deluded by what was
destined to happen, a foolish ruler of the territories of Konka, Venka and Kutaka—Arhat by
name—appearing in the Kali age, when unrighteousness will be on the rise, will actually
abandon the course of his own duty, which is free from risk in everyway, and duly propagate
according to his own whims an absurd, wrong and heretical creed. (9) Led by him an
infatuated by the deluding potency of the Lord, many an accursed soul will fall from the
standards of personal purity and good conduct enjoined upon them by scriptural ordinance
and, adopting of their own free will impious vows constituting an offence against the gods—
such as abstaining from bath and Acamana (rinsing the mouth), neglecting personal
cleanliness and pulling out the hair and so on—will more often than not condemn the Veda,
the Brahmanas, Lord Visnu (the Deity presiding over the sacrifices) and His devotees, their
judgment being warped by the Kali age, which is dominated by unrighteousness. (10) And
assured (of their salvation) by their own arbitrary mode of life—which is not supported by the
Vedas and which has been indiscriminately followed (as one blind man follows another)—
they will descend into the dark abyss of hell by their own choice. (11)

अयमवतारो रजसोपप्लुतकैवल्योपशिक्षणार्थ:। १२॥ तस्यानुगुणान् श्लोकान् गायन्ति--
गायन्ति यत्रत्यजना मुरारे: कर्माणि भद्राण्यवतारवन्ति।१३॥
aa नु वंशो यशसावदात: प्रैयव्रतो यत्र पुमान् पुराण:।
कृतावतार: «Gee: स आद्यश्चचार धर्मं यदकर्महेतुम्।१४॥
को awa काष्ठामपरोऽनुगच्छेन्मनोरथेनाप्यभवस्य योगी।
चो योगमाया: स्पृहयत्युदस्ता ह्यसत्तया येन कृतप्रयत्ना:।१५॥
