536 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA { Dis. 24

SEAR SEA AA AAI OE RTT HA SHH SHEE HH E AHS AHR EER ETE SHH AEONAH OHNE EH ७३३७ eH
ज्र्त्त

Bhavani (His Consort), where fire, kindled by the wind, absorbs with (great) vigour the water
(of the river), and the same, thrown out (in the form of froth), is condensed into (the variety
of) gold, known by the name of Hataka which both males and females (who are equally
strong) in the gynaeceums of the Asura chiefs wear (on their person) in the form of
ornaments. (17)

ततोऽधस्तात्सुतले उदारश्रवा: पुण्यश्लोको विरोचनात्मजो बलिर्भगवता महेन्द्रस्य fird
चिकीर्षमाणेनादितेर्लब्धकायो भूत्वा वटुवामनरूपेण पराक्षिप्तलोकत्रयो भगवदनुकम्पयैव पुन: प्रवेशित
इन्द्रादिष्वविद्यमानचा सुसमृद्धया श्रियाभिजुष्ट : स्वधर्मेणाराधयंस्तमेव भगवन्तमाराधनीयमपगतसाध्वस
आस्तेऽधुनापि। १८ । नो एवैतत्साक्षात्कारो भूमिदानस्य यत्तद्भगवत्यशेषजीवनिकायानां जीवभूतात्मभूते
परमात्मनि वासुदेवे तीर्थतमे पात्र उपपन्ने परया श्रद्धया परमादरसमाहितमनसा सम्प्रतिपादितस्य
साक्षादपवर्गद्वारस्ययद्विलनिलयैश्वर्यम् | १९ ।यस्य ह वाव क्षुतपतनप्रस्खलनादिषु विवश: सकृन्नामाभिगृणन्
पुरुष: कर्मबन्धनमञ्जसा विधुनोति यस्य ta प्रतिवाधनं मुमुक्षवोऽन्यथैवोपलभन्ते। 01
तद्भक्तानामात्मवतां सर्वेघामात्मन्यात्मद आत्मतयैव | २१ न वै भगवान्नूनममुष्यानुजग्राह यदुत
पुनरात्मानुस्मृतिमोषणं मायामयभोगैश्वर्यमेवातनुतेति। २२ चयत्तद्भगवतानधिगतान्योषायेन
याच्ञाच्छलेनापहृतस्वशरीरावशेषितलोकत्रयो वरुणपाशैश्च सम्प्रतिमुक्तो गिरिदर्यां चापविद्ध इति
होवाच । २३ । नूनं बतायं भगवानर्थेषु न निष्णातो चोऽसाविन्द्रो यस्य सचिवो मन्त्राय ga एकान्ततो
बृहस्पतिस्तमतिहायस्वयमुपेन्द्रेणात्मानमयाचतात्मनश्चाशिषो नो एव तद्दास्यमतिगम्भीरवयस: कालस्य
मन्वन्तरपरिव्रत्तं कियल्लोकत्रयमिदम्। २४॥ यस्यानुदास्यमेवास्मत्पितामह: faa ad न तु स्वपित्र्यं
यदुताकुतोभयं पदं दीयमानं भगवत: परमिति भगवतोपरते खलु स्वपितरि । २५॥ तस्य
महानुभावस्यानुपथममृजितकषाय: को वास्मद्विध: परिहीणभगवदनुग्रह उपजिगमिषतीति। २६ 1
तस्यानुचरितमुपरिष्टाद्विस्तरिष्यते यस्य भगवान् स्वयमांख(नजगद्गुरुना॰रायण्मॆ gift गदापाणिरवतिष्ठते
निजजनानुकम्पितहृदयो Sarg Ba पदा दशकन्धरो योजनायुतायुतं दिग्विजय Tented: । २७॥
Below that, in (the region of) Sutala, resides, free from (all) fear, even to this day (the
demon king) Bali of sacred renown, the illustrious son of Virocana. (Once) robbed of (the
sovereignty of all) the three worlds (heaven, earth and the intermediate region) by the Lord—
who in order to please the mighty Indra (the chief of the gods) descended through (the womb
of) Aditi (the mother of the gods and a wife of the sage Kasyapa) and appeared (before him)
in the form of a celibate dwarf—he was admitted (into this realm) through the Lord's very
grace and endowed once more with overflowing wealth, (the like of) which is not forthcoming
even with Indra and others, and continues to worship the same adorable Lord through (the
performance of) his duty. (18) The (great) fortune which is enjoyed by Bali in the subterranean
region of Sutala is certainly not the direct result of the gift (made by him) of land (in the
shape of the sovereignty of the three worlds), inasmuch as it was duly bestowed, with
supreme piety and with a calm and composed mind full of highest regard, on the celebrated
Lord Vasudeva (the Abode of the whole universe)—the Supreme Spirit, the very life
(animating principle) and Soul (the Inner Controller) of all species of living beings, the holiest
recipient presenting Himself (before him)—and was (therefore) directly conducive to final
beatitude. (19) A man helplessly (involuntarily) uttering His Name (only) once (even) while
sneezing, falling down or stumbling and on other (such) occasions actually shakes off
without delay, itis said, the shackles of Karma (that kept him tied down to worldly existence),
the means of overcoming which the seekers of liberation find in altogether different
processes (courses of spiritual disciplines other than the repetition of the Divine Name, such
as Karmayoga, JAanayoga and Dhyanayoga, which are so difficult to follow). (20) Hence the
fortune (referred to above) could not be the fruit of the gift (of land) made—as to one's own
self—to the Lord, whois the very Self ofall (living beings), (particularly) of those who have attained
