Dis. 18] BOOK ELEVEN 599

CUR En CET RENE TTS oe RENATO RE Ce ToT TT foie et eee en ea १८ न

the Vedas treating of ritual acts, nor should he observe any rules of conduct opposed to the
injunctions of the Vedas and the Smrti texts, nor should he be devoted to (empty)
ratiocination, nor again should he take any side ina fruitless discussion. (30) He should not
be annoyed with anyone nor should he annoy anyone with his mind (fully) controlled he
should put up with abuses and should never show disrespect to anyone, nor should he for
the sake of his body make enemies with anyone like a brute. (31) For, (just) as the same moon
gets reflected in (a number of) vessels holding water, the same transcendent Self is present
in (all) created beings as well as in one's own body (so that there is no ground for enmity
whatsoever from the point of view of the spirit) and the bodies (too) are essentially one
constituted as they are of the same gross elements (so that enmity with any being
whatsoever is enmity with one's own Self). (32)

अलब्ध्वा न विषीदेत काले Hee क्वचित् । लब्ध्वा न eee, धृतिमानुभयं दैवतन्तितम् । ३३।
आहारार्थं समीहेत aa तत् प्राणधारणम्। तत्त्वं विमृङ्यते तेन ae विज्ञाय विमुच्यते । ३४॥
यदृच्छयोपपन्नान्नमद्याच्छेष्ठमुतापरम् । तथा वासस्तथा Beat प्राप्तं प्राप्ते भजेन्मुनि: । ३५॥
ज्ञौचमाचमनं a न तु चोदनया चरेत्।अन्यांश्च नियमान् ज्ञानी यथाहं लीलयेश्वर: । ३६1
न fe we विकल्पाख्या या च मद्बीक्षया हता । आदेहान्तात्क्कचित् ख्यातिस्तत: सम्पद्यते मया ।३७॥

Full of fortitude a Sarhnyasi should not get dejected on not getting food in time on any
occasion nor should he feel rejoiced to get it; (for) both (his getting and not getting it) lie in
the hands of Providence. (33) (This should not lead one to think that a Samnyasi need not
even go out to beg food.) He must exert himself to procure food; for an attempt on his part
to sustain life would be (quite) justified; (for) by sustaining life truth is investigated by him and
realizing the truth thereby he will get liberated for all time to come. (34) A recluse should eat
the food, whether excellent or of the worst type, obtained by the will of Providence and (also)
accept whatever clothing and bed is got (by him). (35) Aman of wisdom should cultivate the
habits of cleanliness, rinsing the mouth (after answering the calls of nature, taking food or
even light refreshment such as milk and fruits and sipping water before meals etc.), and
bathing (thrice everyday) and observe other rules of conduct (mentioned heretofore) by way
of sport, as I, the almighty Lord, do, but not in compliance with scriptural ordinance (which
is no longer binding on him). (36) For there is no longer any perception of difference in him;
whatever there was has been uprooted by My realization (as the Self of all). What does
appear (in him) at times (e.g., at the time of begging alms and taking meals etc., even now
as a recurrence of what has already been set aside) will continue (by force of Prarabdha) till
death. Thereafter he will get (indissolubly) united with Me. (37)

दु:खोदर्केषु कामेषु जातनिर्वेद आत्मवान्। अजिज्ञासितमद्धर्मो गुरुं मुनिमुपाव्रजेत् ।३८॥
तावत् परिचरेद् भक्त: श्रद्धावाननसूयक: | यावद् ब्रह्म विजानीयान्मामेव गुरुमादृत: 1381
यस्त्वसंयतषड्वर्ग: प्रचण्डेन्द्वियसारथि: | ज्ञानवैराग्यरहितस्तिदण्डमुपजीवति ol
सुरानात्मानमात्मस्थं निहनुते मां च धर्महा । अविपक्वकषायोऽस्मादमुष्माच्च विहीयते ise!
भिक्षोर्धर्म: दमोऽहिंसा aa ईक्षा वनौकस: । गृहिणो भूतरक्षेज्या द्विजस्याचार्यसेवनम् ।४२।
ब्रह्मचर्यं तप: ie सन्तोषो भूतसौहदम्। गृहस्थस्याप्यृतौ गन्तु: सर्वेषां मदुपासनम् ।४३॥
इति मां य: स्वधर्मेण भजन् नित्यमनन्यभाक् । सर्वभूतेषु मद्भावो मद्भक्तिं विन्दते दृढाम् ।४४॥
भक्त्योद्धवानपायिन्या सर्वलोकमहेश्वरम् । सर्वोत्पत्त्यप्ययं wa कारणं मोपयाति स: ।४५॥
इति स्वधर्मनिर्णिक्तसत्त्वो निर्जातमद्गति: । ज्ञानविज्ञानसम्पन्नो नचिरात् समुपैति माम् se!
वर्णाश्रमवतां धर्म एष आचारलक्षण:। स एव मद्भक्तियुतो नि:श्रेयसकर: पर: Iso!
