646 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA { Dis. 27

SHER RRERAAAAATRE RANA ROHE HRA १999 9 १9:### 89 #^ # ^# ERA RAORERAREDRERE NN ARE NER ERE RH # 8०१ ०

the words सुवर्णं घर्मम् etc.), the Mahapurusavidya* (a sacred text sacred to Lord Visnu, the
Supreme Person), the Purusa-Suktat and the texts of Samaveda such as the Rajana Sama
and the Rauhina Sama. (30-31) My devotee should (also) lovingly set Me off in the proper
way with raiments, the sacred thread, jewels, wreaths of basil leaves, scents and sandal-
Paste. (32) The worshipper should (then) reverently offer to Me water to wash My feet and
rinse My mouth with, sandal-paste flowers and grains of unbroken rice (for decoration),
incense, light and articles of food. (33) If there be wealth, one should offer as food (to Me daily
or at least on festive occasions) jaggery (or sugar), rice boiled in milk and sweetened with
sugar, ghee; large round cakes of ground rice, sugar and sesamum seeds and cooked in
oil; piles of sweet cakes made of meal and sugar and fried in ghee; lumps of sweets
composed of meal cooked in ghee; a kind of porridge made of wheat flour with ghee, milk
and molasses; curds and seasoned soup of pulses.(34) Offering a brush (made of a small
green twig with one of its ends crushed) for cleansing My teeth, perfumed oil for anointing
My body with, a paste (of saffron and camphor powder) for being rubbed on the various parts
of My body in order to free it from dirt; (bathing My image with a preparation composed of
milk, curds, ghee, honey and sugar as well as with scented water; clothing Me with costly silk
and adorning Me with jewels, sandal-paste and wreaths etc.), and putting a mirror before Me
{in order to show Me how | fook); offering Me food which could be (easily) swallowed (without
mastication) as well as that needing mastication (together with fragrant water, betel leaves,
a bed of flowers etc.), and (also) singing songs and dancing etc., should be arranged (at
least) on a sacred day (e.g., Ekadagi or the full moon), and preferably everyday (if one's
means allow it). (35)

विधिना fafet कुण्डे मेखलागर्तवेदिभि: । अग्निमाधाय ofa: समूहेत् पाणिनोदितम् । ३६॥
परिस्तीर्याथ पर्युक्षेदन्वाधाय यथाविधि । प्रोक्षण्याऽऽसाद्य द्रव्याणि प्रोक्ष्याम्नौ भावयेत माम् । ३७॥
तप्तजाम्बूनदप्रख्यं शङ्खचक्रगदाम्बुजै: । लसच्चतुर्भुजं शान्तं पद्मकिञ्जल्कवाससम् । ३८1
स्फुरत्किरीटकटककटिसूत्रवराङ्गदम् । श्रीवत्सवक्षसं भ्राजत्कौस्तुभं वनमालिनम् । ३९॥
ध्यायन्नभ्यर्च्य दारूणि हविषाभिघृतानि च । प्रास्याज्यभागावाघारौ दत्त्वा Says हवि: ।४०॥

षोडशर्चावदानत: | धर्मादिभ्यो यथान्यायं wd: स्विष्टकृतं ger ।४१॥

Depositing fire in a sacrificial pit, dug and constructed with due ceremony alongwith
(three) zone-like constructions, a hollow and a raised ground, one should collect and
Concentrate it with the hand once it has been kindled (by fanning it).(36) Then enclosing it
on all sides with twenty blades of Kuga grass, one should sprinkle water on the Kuga blades
all round and, duly replenishing it with fuel while uttering the Vyahrtis (4:, ¥a:and so on) and
placing (to the north of the sacred fire) articles to be offered to the fire and sprinkling them
with water taken from the consecrating vessel, should contemplate Me in the fire as shining
brightly like molten gold, distinguished by four arms resplendent with a conch, discus, mace
and lotus, calm (and composed), cladin silk possessing the (golden) hue of the filaments of
a lotus, adorned with a brilliant diadem, bangles, a girdle (round My waist) and excellent
armlets, bearing the mark of Srivatsa on My bosom, distinguished with the lustrous
Kaustubha gem and.with a garland of sylvan flowers. (37—39) Visualizing and worshipping
Me (as such) and casting (into the fire) sacrificial sticks soaked in ghee and having made
the two offerings of ghee known by the name of Agharas (and consisting of sprinkling ghee
across the sacrificial pit from the northern to the southern end and from the southern to the

* जतं ते पुण्डरीकाश्ष नमस्ते विश्वभावन। सुव्रह्मण्य नमस्तेऽस्तु महापुरुषपूर्वज॥
t Tha 16 Mantras of Rgveda X. xc; Aiharva. XIX. vi; the first 16 Mantras of Sukla Yayurveda XXXI and Krsna Yajurveda
Il. xi; Samaveda 617—621
