376 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 60

SOMONE MAREN SSE XOS CTEM SORE RE ROR EI ORE SORE SORE RRO SE ORO SRE RY RRS ECE SOOO SOOO ONO A me NCB ORE

through (repeated) births. (43) O infallible One, O Destroyer of foes, let the kings (Sisupala
and others) suggested by You be the choice of that woman into whose ears has not entered
a lay pertaining to You and sung in the courts of Siva and Brahma. Within their homes those
kings behave towards the ladies like a donkey, an ox, a dog, a cat anda slave. (44) This
human body, the interior of which contains (nothing but) flesh, bones, blood, worms, excreta,
phlegm, bile and wind, is covered with skin, moustaches, nails and hair on the body and head,
is a living corpse. That stupid woman alone serves such a body as a husband, who has never
enjoyed the fragrance of honey in the lotus of Your feet. (45) | wish to burn with love for Your
feet, O lotus-eyed One, who delight in Your own self and do not see anything extraordinary
in me ! When for the advancement of this world You cast Your glance on me (as Prakrti),
assuming a superabundance of Rajas, that alone constitutes, as a matter of fact, (an act of)
supreme grace on me. (46) (When You ask me to chaose another partner even now,) O
slayer of the demon Madhu, | do not regard Your words as without meaning; for sometimes,
surely enough, there are girls who like Amba’ (the daughter of the celebrated king of Kasi),
cherish love for somebody else (than the one by whom they have been won). (47) The mind
ofa woman of easy virtue, though married, is always attracted towards a new person. A wise
man should not (therefore) maintain such an unchaste woman: for by doing so he falls both
here and hereafter. (48)

श्रीभगवानुवाच

साध्व्येतच्झेतुकामैस्त्वं राजपुत्रि प्रलम्भिता । मयोदितं चदन्वात्थ wd aq सत्यमेव हि ।४९॥
यान्यान्कामयसे कामान्मय्यकामाय भामिनि | सन्ति ह्येकान्तभक्तायास्तव कल्याणि नित्यदा । ५०1
उपलब्थं पतिप्रेम पातिव्रत्यं च तेऽनघे । यद्वाक्यैश्चात्यमानाया न धीर्मय्यपकर्षिता ee |
येमांभजन्तिदाम्पत्येतपसान्रनन्रर्यया।कम्पात्मघ्योऽपर्वाशिंर्पमह्रेतामपमाक्या।५२।

मां प्राप्य मानिन्यपवर्गसम्पदं वाञ्छन्ति ये ume wa afm
ते मन्दभाग्या fash चे yor मात्रात्मकत्वान्निरब: सुसङ्घम: 1431
सुदुष्करासी सुतरां gif ह्यसुम्भराया निकृतिञ्जुष: स्रिया: । ५४
न त्वादृशीं प्रणयिनीं गृहिणीं गृहेषु grate मानिनि यया स्वविवाहकाले !
प्राप्तान् नृपानवगणय्य wet मे प्रस्थापितो द्विज उपश्रुतसत्कथस्य yy
दु:खं समुत्थमसहोऽस्मदयोगभीत्या नैवाव्रवी: किमपि तेन aa जितास्ते ua)
दूतस्त्वयाऽऽत्मलभने सुविविक्तमन्त्र: प्रस्थापितो मयि चिरायति शून्यमेतत् ।
मत्वा जिहास इदमङ्गमनन्ययोग्यं तिष्ठेत तत्त्वयि ad प्रतिनन्दयाम: ue)

The glorious Lord replied : O virtuous lady ! it was with intent to hear you speak in this
strain, O princess, that you were subject to a joke by Me. In fact, the interpretation you have
put on My words is wholly and literally true. (49) Whatever blessings you seek from Me are

* We are told in the Mahabharata how the three daughters of the Ihan king of Kasi were conquered in an open contest
by Bhisma for the sake of his cousins. C: gada and Vicitravirya. and hew Amba, the eldest of them, who had set her heart
upon Salva. was. when she opened her mind before Bhisma. allowed by the latter to seek the company of Salva.

