Dis. 33 ] BOOK TEN 243

नैतत् समाचरेजातु मतसापि ह्यनीश्वर: | विनङ्वत्याचरन्मोढ्याद्यथारुद्रोऽब्धिजं विषम् । ३१1
gmt ae: aad तथैवाचरितं क्वचित्। तेषां यत् स्ववचोयुक्तं बुद्धिमांस्तत् समाचरेत् 1321
कुशलाचस्तिनैषामिह स्वार्थो न विद्यते। विपर्ययेण वानर्थो निरहंकारिणां प्रभो । ३३॥

किमुताखिलसत्त्वानां तिर्यङ्घर्त्यदिवौकसाम्। ईझितुश्चेशितव्यानां कुशलाकुशालान्वय: ।३४॥

-स्वैरॆ चरन्ति मुनयोऽपि न नह्यमानास्तस्येच्छयाऽऽत्तवपुष: GA Wa बन्ध: 134)
गोपीनां तत्पतीनां च सर्वेषामेव देहिनाम्। योऽन्तश्चरति सोऽध्यक्ष: क्रीडनेनेह देहभाक 1361
अनुग्रहाय भूतानां मानुषं देहमास्थित: । भजते तादृशी: क्रीडा या: श्रुत्वा तत्परो भवेत् ।३७।
नासूयन् खलु कृष्णाय मोहितास्तस्य मायया | मन्यमाना: स्वपार्श्वस्थान्स्वान् स्वान्दारान्व्रजौकस: । ३८1
ब्रह्मरात्र उपावृत्ते वासुदेवानुमोदिता:। अनिच्छन्त्यो ययुर्गोप्य: स्वगृहान् भगवत्पिया: । ३९1
Sri Suka replied : Violation of Dharma (the principles of righteousness) and overboldness
(too) is (occasionally) witnessed on the part of the mighty. It does not (however) bring (any)
sin on those possessed of exceptional glory asin the case of fire, that consumes everything
(including even impure substances such as filth and corpses). (30) He (however) who is not
(so) powerful {and is bound by his Karma) should never deliberately attempt this even
mentally; for he who does so through folly (recognizing himself as powerful) will (surely) meet
his ruin even as anyone other than Rudra would if he were to swallow the poison churned
out of the ocean. (31) A precept (alone) of the mighty (those possessed of wisdom,
dispassion and so on) is authoritative (and therefore worth following, if uttered in right earnest
and not as a test of our wisdom). Their conduct (however) is worth imitating on certain
occasions only. (Therefore,) an intelligent man should follow only such conduct as_ is
consistent with their own precept. (32) There is no personal gain to be achieved here through
such virtuous conduct by egoless people, nor does any harm come to them through the
reverse of such actions, O king! (33) How, then, could any virtue or sin binding those that
are subject to His contro! attach to the (supreme) Ruler of all creatures, viz., sub-human
creatures, human beings and gods. (34) Whence indeed could there be any bondage for the
Lord, who assumeda personality of His own free will, when those who are sated (in the sense
that they have no desire left in them) by enjoying the pollen of His lotus-feet as also those
who have shaken off all their ties of Karma by virtue of their Yoga (mental union with God)
and (even so) those who are given to contemplation on their identity with the Universal Spirit
conduct themselves freely (in this world) and are never bound (by their actions) ? (35) He
(alone) who indwelt (as the Inner Controller) not only the cowherd women and their husbands
but all embodied souls {as a matter of fact), (nay), who is the Witness (of all minds etc.)
sportfully assumed a personality (and manifested Himself as Sri Krsna) in this world (of
matter). (36) Having assumed a human semblance in order to shower His grace on (and
attract solely towards Him) created beings, the Lord indulges in sports like the Rasa-Play,
hearing of which man may get exclusively devoted to Him. (37) Deluded by His Maya the men
of Vraja did not regard Sri Krsna with jealousy; (for) each of them took his womenkind to be
present by his side. (38) When the early hours of the morning approached (at the close of
a whole night of Brahma) the Gopis, who were (so) beloved of the Lord, returned to their
homes, though reluctanily, with the approval of Sri Krsna (Son of Vasudeva). (39)

विक्रीडितं व्रजवधूभिरिदं च विष्णो: श्रद्धान्वितोऽनुश्रृणुयादथ वर्णयेद् a: 1
भक्तिं wt भगवति प्रतिलभ्य ar हृद्रोगमाश्वपहिनोत्यचिरेण धीर: sol
