352 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 13
Sew HA A ee ae er eT a 33 POMEL KHe eee eee EHH eeeecee ere there ster eetocerars as Lee S ee eERAHH

gag aq: कुपिता वाग्वज्रा yaa: किल । गतासोस्तस्य yout ममन्धुर्दक्षिणं करम् ।१९।
अराजके तदा लोके दस्युभि: पीडिता: प्रजा: । जातो नारायणांहेन पृथुराद्य: क्षितीश्वर: 1201
Swarvithi (who presided over the milky way), the beloved spouse of Vatsara (a year),
brought forth six sons, Pusparna, Tigmaketu, Isa, Urja, Vasu and Jaya (by name). (12)
Pusparna had twowives—Prabha (daylight) and Dosa (night). Pratah (morning), Madhyandina |
(midday) and Sayam (evening) were the sons born of Prabha. (18) (Similarly) Pradosa
(nightfall or the first part of night) Nigitha (midnight) and Vyusta (the close of night or dawn)
were the three sons of Dosa. (Of these,) Vyusta begot through Puskarini (his wife) a son
(named) Sarvateja. (14) The latter got through his wife, Akiti, a son, Caksu (by name),
who was appointed as Manu (in the sixth Manvantara, called the Caksusa Manvantara
after him). The Manu’s consort, Nadwaila, bore (twelve) faultless sons named Puru, Kutsa,
Trita, Dyumna, Satyavan, Rta, Vrata, Agnistoma, Atiratra, Pradyumna, Sibi and
Ulmuka. (15-16) Ulmuka begot through his wife, Puskarini, six excellent sons, Anga,
Sumani, Khyati, Kratu, Angira and Gaya (by name). (17) Sunitha, who was Anga's wife,
gave birth to the evil-minded Vena, fed up with whose wickedness that royal sage (Anga)
left his capital (for the woods). (18) Angered by him, the sages, whose words were
(unfailing) like a thunderbolt, pronounced a curse against him, O dear Vidura; and when
(as a result of the curse) they died, they then churned his right hand (arm). (19) For, the
world having been left without a ruler then, the people were harassed by robbers. (Now, -
as a result of the churning), there appeared the very first* ruler of the earth, Prthu, who
embodied a ray of Lord Narayana. (20)
fag sara

तस्य ज्ञीलनिधै: साधोर्ब्रह्मण्यस्य महात्मन: ce: कथमभूद्दुष्टा प्रजा यद्विमना aa । २१।

fe वांहो aa उद्दिश्य ब्रह्मदण्डमयूयुजन्। दण्डव्रतधरे राज्ञि मुनयो धर्मकोविदा: 1221

नावध्येय:र प्रजापाल: प्रजाभिरघवानपि । यदसौ लोकपालानां बिभर्त्यज: स्वतेजसा 123!

एतदाख्याहि मे ब्रह्मन् सुनीथात्पजचेष्टितम्। श्रददधानाय भक्ताय त्वं परावरवित्तम: 12

Vidura said : How did that pious and high-souled monarch, who was a very storehouse

of virtue and devoted to the Brahmanas, get a wicked son, on account of which he had to
depart (for the woods), full of grief? (21) And for what offence did the sages, who knew what
was right, employ a curse against a sovereign who had taken a vow of punishing (the evil-
doer)? (22) A ruler of the people, even though guilty, should not be treated with disrespect
by the people inasmuch as he wields by his own glory the might of Indra and others (the
protectors of the world). (23) Narrate to me, your trustful devotee, all the doings of Vena (the
son of Sunitha), O holy Brahmana—you who are the foremost of those possessing the
knowledge of the past as well as of the future. (24)

an

TAG उवाच
अङ्गोऽश्चमेधं राजर्षिराजहार महाक्रतुम् । नाजग्मुर्देवतास्तस्मिन्नाहूता ब्रह्मवादिभि: 1241
तमूचुर्विस्मितास्तत्र चजमानमधथ्त्विज: | हवींषि हूयमानानि न ते गृह्णन्ति देवता: ।२६॥
राजन् हवींष्यदुष्टानि श्रद्ध्याऽऽसादितानि ते । छन्दांस्ययातयामानि योजितानि Yaad: 129 |
न fate देवानां हेलनं वयमण्वपि । यन्नगृह्णन्ति भागान्स्वान्येदेवा: कर्मसाक्षिण: ।२८।

Maitreya said : The royal sage Anga (once) performed a great horse-sacrifice, in which

* (twas Prihu who for the first time organized the population of the entire globe and founded cities, towns and villages. Hence
he has been referred to in the above verse as the first ruler of the earth.
