Dis. 6] BOOK FOUR 311

REET SLE क पि कके NE LEH H RHEE SHALE LEAH ECEE EATER ALAA H HEMEL A SEEKER ERAR EL

The mountain is adorned with (celestial trees such as) Mandaras and Parijatas, as well
as with (other trees such as ) Saralas (a species of pines), Tamalas, Salas and Palmyras,
Kovidaras, Asanas and Arjunas. (14) Itis further beautified with mango trees, Kadambas and
Nipas, Nagas, Punnagas and Campakas, Patalas ( trees bearing the trumpet flowers),
ASokas and Bakulas, Kundas (a species of jasmine) as wellas Kurabakas (trees bearing the
red amaranth flower), golden lotuses, creepers bearing cardamoms, Malatis, Kubjas,
Mallikas and Madhavis. (15-16) Nay, its beauty is enhanced by breadfruit trees. Udumbaras,
the holy fig trees, Plaksas (the waved-leaf fig trees), banyans and bdelliums, birches, annual
trees (such as the banana, which are cut down after they have borne fruit), betel-nut trees,
Rajapugas (a species of areca-nut palms) and rose-apple trees, date-palms, hog-plums,
Amras ( a species of mango trees) and so on, Priyalas, Madhukas and soap-nut trees
and other varieties of trees, and clusters of bamboos—both of the hollow and solid
types. (17-18) It is further graced with swarms of birds sweetly warbling on the margin of its
ponds rich in their beds of lilies and lotuses of various kinds. (19) It is infested with deer,
monkeys; boars, lions, bears and porcupines, Gayals, Sarabhas (a species of eight-footed
animals now extinct), tigers, Rurus (a species of black antelopes), wild buffaloes and other
wild beasts as well as with Karnantras, Ekapadas (a species of one-footed animals)
Aswamukhas, wolves and musk-deer; and the strands of its ponds look charming with the
clusters of banana trees surrounding them. (20-21) It is hemmed in by the river Nanda (the
holy Ganga), whose waters have been hallowed by the touch of Sati (the deceased consort
of Lord Siva), who bathed init. The gods felt astonished to see (the beauty of) Mount Kailasa,
the abode of Lord Siva (the lord of ghosts). (22)

Sea ते रम्यामलकों नाम 4 पुरीम्। ad सौगन्धिकं चापि aa तन्नाम पङ्कजम् ।२३॥
नन्दा चालकनन्दा च afd बाह्यत: पुर: | तीर्थपादपदाम्भोजरजसातीव पावने । २४॥
यया सुरस्रिय: क्षत्तरवरुह्य स्वधिष्ण्यत: | क्रीडन्ति पुंस: सिञ्चन्त्यो विगाह्य रतिकर्शिता: 1241

। वितृषोऽपि पिबन्त्यम्भ: पाययन्तो गजा गजी: 126 |

There (on that mountain) they saw the celebrated and beautiful city of Alaka (the capital
of Kubera, the lord of the Yaksas) as well as the garden named Saugandhika, where can be
seen a species of lotuses bearing the same name ( and singularly noted for their
fragrance).(23) Along the outskirts of the city flow the two rivers Nanda and Alakananda, both
of which have derived utmost sanctity from (their contact with) the dust of the feet of Lord
Visnu (which are the abode of all sanctity). (24) Descending from their aerial cars, O Vidura,
celestial women, exhausted by their amorous dalliance, take a plunge into these streams
and sport therein, sprinkling their mates with water. (25) The water of these rivers gets
coloured by the saffron washed (from their bosom) during their ablutions, and (tempted by
its delicious fragrance) elephants drink it, even though they have no thirst, and give the same
to the she-elephants also to drink. (26)

तारहेममहारत्नविमानशतसंकुलाम् । जुष्टां पुण्यजनस्त्रीभिर्यथा खं सतडिद्घनम् i291
हित्वा यक्षेश्वरपुरीं वनं सौगन्धिकं च aig: कामदुघैर्हृद्यं चित्रमाल्यफलच्छदै: । २८॥
रक्तकण्ठखगानीकस्वरमण्डितषट्पदम् | कलहंसकुलप्रेष्ठं खरदण्डजलाशयम् । 28 1
वनकुञ्जरसंघृष्टहरिचन्दनवायुना । अधि पुण्यजनस्त्रीणां मुहुरुन्मथयन्मन: 1301
वैदूर्यकृतसोपाना वाप्य उत्पलमालिनी: । प्राप्तं किम्पुरुषैर्दृङ्टा त आराद्ददृशुर्वटम् 1321

Crowded with hundreds of aerial cars made of silver, gold and most precious jewels, and
