604 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 19

कक ल्आ # # EERO RT HN ROK क्रा es Hen A Ret NRE eee HS TREE EH hee ee

यदाऽऽत्मन्यर्पितं fad wei सत्त्वोपबृंहितम्। धर्म wa सवैराग्यमैश्चर्यं चाभिपद्यते । २५॥
यदर्पितॆ aq विकल्पे shea: परिधावति । रजस्वलं चासन्निष्ठं fad विद्धि विपर्ययम् ie!
धर्मो मद्धक्तिकृत् प्रोक्तो ज्ञानं चैकात्स्यदर्शनम्। gag? वैराग्यमैश्वर्य चाणिमादय: 1291

When the mind, equipped with Sattva and (therefore) tranquil, is devoted to Me, man
(automatically) acquires piety, wisdom coupled with dispassion and divine powers. (25)
When (however) the aforesaid mind is set on various objects (tho body, dwelling etc.), it
wanders alongwith the senses and gets all the more stained with Rajas and addicted to evil
and then know it (for certain) that a man develops the reverse of piety etc., (viz.,
unrighteousness, ignorance, passion and lack of divinity). (26) That (alone) which engenders
devotion to Me is extolled (in the scriptures) as Dharma (piety); that (alone) which enables
one to perceive unity (everywhere) is glorified as wisdom, a distaste for the pleasures of
sense is spoken highly of as dispassion and mystic powers (such as the capacity to assume
the size of an atom) are extolled as divine powers. (27)

उद्धव उवाच
aa: कतिविध: प्रोक्तो नियमो वारिकर्शान । क: झम: को दम: कृष्ण का तितिक्षा धृति: प्रभो । २८॥
किं दानं fe aa: ard fe सत्यमृतमुच्यते । कस्त्याग: किं धनं चेष्टं को aa: का च दक्षिणा । २९1
Wa: किंस्विद् बलं श्रीमन् भगो लाभश्च ahaa | का विद्या ह्री: परा का श्री: किं सुखं दु:खमेव च 1301
क: षण्डित: कश्च मूर्ख: क: पन्था उत्पथश्च क: । क: स्वर्गो नरक: क: स्वित् को बन्धुरुत किं गृहम् । ३१॥
क आढ्य: को दरिद्रो वा कृपण: क: क Sat: । एतान् प्रश्नान् मम ब्रूहि विपरीतांश्च सत्पते 1321

Uddhava submitted : Of how many varieties is Yama (self-control) declared to consist
and of how many types is Niyama (self-discipline) declared to be, O Chastiser of foes ?
Whatis Sama ? Whatdoes Damaconsist in, O Enchanter of beings? Whatis (the definition
of) Titiksa (and) what is firmness, O Lord ? (28) What is charity ? What is Tapas ? What
is valour ? What is truthfulness and what is called (by the name of) Rta ? What is (known as)
Tyaga ? What is the esteemed wealth ? What is Yajhia and what goes by the name of
Daksina ? (29) What is the strength of men, O glorious One ? What is fortune and what is
the gain, O Ruler (even) of Brahma and Siva ? Whatis supreme Wisdom ? What is Hr? What
is adornment? What is happiness and what is misery ? (30) Who is a man of erudition and
who isa fool ? Whatis the path (of virtue) and whatis the wrong way ? Whatis heaven ? What
is hell ? Who is a friend and what is the home ? (31) Who is opulent and who is a destitute?
Who is pitiable and who is the master of his self ? (Pray,) answer these questions of mine
and (also) define the contraries (of what has been asked), O Protector of the virtuous ? (32)

श्रीभगवानुवाच
अहिंसा सत्यमस्तेयमसङ्गो ह्रीरसञ्जय: | आस्तिक्यं werd च मोनं स्थैर्य क्षमाभयम् ।३३॥
aid जपस्तपो होम: श्रद्धाऽतिथ्यं मदर्चनम् । तीर्थाटनं परार्थेहा तुष्टिराचार्यसेवनम् । ३४॥
एते यमा: सनियमा swatgien स्मृता: । पुंसामुपासितास्तात यथाकामं दुहन्ति हि । ३५1
am मन्निष्ठता बुद्धेर्दम इन्द्रियसंयम: । तितिक्षा दु:खसंमर्षो जिह्वोपस्थजयो धृति: ।३६॥
दण्डन्यास: ut दानं कामत्यागस्तप: स्मृतम्। स्वभावविजय: wel wal च समदर्शनम् ।३७।
waa सूनृता वाणी कविभि: परिकीर्तिता । कर्मस्वसङ्घम: wre am: संन्यास उच्यते । ३८॥
at इष्टं धनं qo यज्ञोऽहं भगवत्तम: | दक्षिणा ज्ञानसन्देश: प्राणायाम: परं बलम् ।३९॥
भगो म tat wat ont मद्धक्तिरुत्तम: | विद्याऽऽत्मनि भिदाबाधो जुगुप्सा ह्रीरकर्मसु ॥४०॥
