Dis. 27 ] BOOK TEN 217

SMM CAME TER ROR EO NE NORE OR ER STI SOE Om eR seven a

Having heard the aforesaid statement of Nanda recapitulating the words of Garga, the
inhabitants of Vraja, who had already witnessed and heard of the glory of Sri Krsna,
possessed as he was of infinite energy, felt rejoiced and worshipped Nanda as well as Sri
Krsna, now that there astonishment was gone. (24) May Sri Krsna (the Ruler of cows) be
gracious to us—Sri Krsna, who, when Indra (the god of rain), enraged at the interruption of
his worship, sent down (heavy) showers accompanied by strokes of lightning, hailstorms and
tempestuous winds, was moved with pity to see (the whole of) Vraja with its cowherds, cattle
and womenfalk in distress and depending (solely) on Himself and, smilingly uprooting with
one hand mount Govardhana, even asa child would pull up a mushroom, heldit up and (thus)
protected Vraja, (thereby) crushing the pride of the mighty Indra ! (25)

Thus ends the twenty-sixth discourse in the first half of Book Ten
of the great and glorious Bhagavata-Purana, otherwise
known as the Paramahamsa-Samhita.

sais tees;

अथ सप्तविंशोऽध्याय:

Discourse XXVII

Indra extols Sri Krsna

ale उवाच
गोवर्धने ga ae आसाराद् रक्षिते ब्रजे tere कृष्णं सुरभि: दाक्र एव च । १ ।
विविक्त उपसङ्गम्य व्रीडित: कृतहेलन: । पस्पर्शं पादयोरेने किरीटेनार्कवर्चसा । २ |
दृष्टश्रुतानुभावोऽस्य कृष्णस्यामिततेजस: । नष्टत्रिलोकेशमद इन्द्र आह कृताञ्जलि: । ३ ।

Sri Suka began again : When Govardhana was held up and Vraja was protected
(thereby) from torrential rain, Surabhi (the celestial cow of plenty) sought Sri Krsna from
Goloka (the home of cows in heaven) and so did Indra from paradise. (1) Full of shame for
his having shown disrespect (to the Lord), he approached the latter in a secluded place and
touched His feet with his diadem possessing the splendour of the sun. (2) Indra—who had
not only heard but (actually) witnessed the glory of the aforesaid Sri Krsna of unlimited
energy, and whose pride as the ruler of (all) the three worlds had been crushed—spoke with
joined palms (as follows).(3)

इन्द्र उवाच
विशुद्धसत्त्वं तव धाम जशञान्तं तपोमयं ध्वस्तरजस्तमस्कम्।
मायामयोऽव गुणसम्प्रवाहो न विद्यते तेऽग्रहणानुबन्ध: । ४ ।
कुतो नु तद्धेतव ईश तत्कृता लोभादयो येऽबुधलिङ्गभावा: |
aa =e भगवान् बिभर्ति धर्मस्य ta खलनिग्रहाय । ५ ।
पिता गुरुस्त्वं जगतामधीञ्ञो दुरत्ययर काल उपात्तदण्ड: ।
हिताय Som: समीहसे मानं विधुन्वञ्जगदीशमानिनाम् । ६ ।
[565] B.M. Part ।--36
