510 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 18

,.३.३.३ १३.३..३.३..३.४३.३..३..३..३.११ SHO HOMO ONCEKEN KKH ETOH H TEES EEK EK EE KOC EHS EYEE EHH HEH HUHNE HOE EHO ee

other than You, the embodiment of true wisdom. Hail to You !" (33)
उत्तरेषु च Hey भगवान् यज्ञपुरुष: कृतवराहसूप आस्ते तं तु eat FT भू: सह
कुरुभिरस्खलितभक्तियोगेनोपधावति gat च परमामुपनिषदमावर्तयति। ३४॥ ॐ नमो भगवते
मन्त्रतत्त्वलिङ्गाय यज्ञक्रतवे महाध्वरावयवाय महापुरुषाय नम: कर्मशुक्लाय त्रियुगाय नमस्ते । ३५
In the land of the northern Kurus (the subdivision of the terrestrial world known by this
name) the Lord presiding over sacrifices dwells (is worshipped) in the form of the divine Boar.
Alongwith the Kurus (the denizens of this subdivision) this Goddess Earth (that serves as
our abode) adores Him through an incessant flow of unfaltering devotion and repeats the
following supremely esoteric prayer:—(34) "Hail to the divine Boar, denoted by the mystical
syllable OM, truly known (only) through the Mantras (sacred texts of the Vedas), the Deity
presiding over sacrifices both without and with a sacrificial post, (nay,) whose (divine) Body
is constituted of the (varieties of) great sacrifices ! (vide III. xiii. 38) ! Hail to the Supreme
Person !! Hail to You who (in the form of a sacrificer) are pure* of actions, and who manifest
Yourself (in the form of sacrifices) only in the (last) three Yugas.”+ (35)

vata cer मनसा fegeat qe क्रियार्थैर्ननं ईरितात्मने। ३६1
क्रियाहेत्वबनेशकर्तभिर्मायागणैर्वस्तनिरीक्षितात्मने ।
अन्वीक्षयाङ्गातिशयात्मबुद्धिभिर्निरस्तमायाकृतये नमो नम:। ३७॥
माया यथायो भ्रमते तदाश्रयं ग्राव्णो नमस्ते गुणकर्मसाक्षिणे। 3c 1
प्रमध्य दैत्यं प्रतिवारणं मृधे यो मां रसाया जगदादिसूकर:।
कृत्वाग्रदंष्टे निरगादुदन्वत: क्रीडन्निवेभ: woos तं विभुमिति।३९।

इति श्रीमद्भागवते महापुराणे पारमहंस्यां संहितायां पञ्चमस्कन्घे भुवनकोशवर्णनं नामाष्टादशोऽध्याय:। १८ I

"Even as those well-versed in rituals churn out the fire hidden in pieces of (sacrificial)
wood with the help of the fire-producing wooden stick, so the wise, keen to perceive Your
reality, obscured by (attachment to) actions and their fruits, try to discover it (as the all-
pervading self) in the discipline of their body and senses etc., (which are products of matter)
with the help of (their) discriminating mind (reason). Hail to You who reveal Yourself through
this process (of chastening the body and senses). (36) By them whose intellect has become
capable of keen discernment through reflection as well as through (the practice of) the (eight)
limbs of Yoga (Yama, Niyama and so on). You, the Supreme Self, are truly and directly
perceived alongwith (as distinguished from) the attributes of Maya (Prakrti), viz., the gross
elements, the organs of action, the senses of perception, the all-powerful Kala (the Time-
Spirit) and the doer (the ego). Hail to You as such and hail to You, whose form is not the
creation of Maya (Prakrti) ! (37) Even as a piece of iron moves due to (the very presence of)
aloadstone, turning its face towards the latter, Your Maya carries on through the three Gunas
(Sattva, Rajas and Tamas) the creation, preservation and dissolution of the universe—
sought after (by You for the evolution of the Jivas) though not desired (by You for Your own

* The Lord Himself declares in the Bhagavadgila that the performance of sacrifices and the practice of charity and

austerities are conducive to purity—
चज्ञो दानं तपश्चैव पावनानि मनीषिणाम् । (XVIII. 5)
t That is because no sacrifices are performed in the first Yuga, the Satyayuga or because according to another
interpretation, the Lord remains unmanifest in Kali age.

