210 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 16

। । ८ ७१७० ७ 3० ७ AHH EME NCHA EEEEEH EERE HEEL EEL HHA EE EHO REE AHEHELHTEHTOHECHEOAHERE

three ages, the fourth viz., truthfulness, being present even in Kali, though in an attenuated
form,) this universe, consisting of animate and inanimate beings, for the sake of the gods and
the Brahmanas. Kindly drive away by Your (divine) personality, which consists of pure
(immaterial) Sattva and is the bestower of all blessings, the elements of Rajas and Tamas in us,
inimical as they are to virtue. (22) If You, who are Dharma personified, cease to protect the
Brahmana race, (with is the foremost of all the twice-born classes and) which deserves to be
protected by You, through loving worship and polite words, the blessed path (of the Vedas)
chalked out by You, O Lord, will forthwith disappear from the world; for the people would accept
as their standard that conduct (viz., ceasing to worship and speak polite words to the Brahmanas)
of Yours, who are the Supreme Person. (23) This can never be to Your liking; for You, being the
storehouse of Sattva (goodness), are ever intent on doing what is good to the people and uproot
the enemies of virtue through the agency of kings that represent Your power. Since You
are the suzerain lord of all the three worlds (the entire creation) andthe protector of the whole
universe, Your glory is not at all diminished by Your mere stooping down (before the
Brahmanas); for that is a mere sport‘on Your part. (24) Nay, we accord our hearty approval
to any other punishment that You may choose to inflict on them, O universal Lord, or to any
(additional) subsistence You may be pleased to confer on them (allowing them to continue
in Your service). Or You may mete out tous any punishment that may be suitable for us, since
we have pronounced a curse against Your innocent servants. (25)

श्रीभगवानुवाच
भूय: सकादमुपयास्यत आशु यो a: ञ्ञापो मयैव निमितस्तदवैत विप्रा: । २६॥
The Lord replied : Know that the imprecation uttered by you was ordained by Myself,
O holy Brahmanas! Therefore, being born before long into the demoniac species, and firmly
united in thought with Me through concentration of mind intensified by anger (hatred), they
will return to My presence shortly afterwards. (26)

aa ते मुनयो दृष्टा नयनानन्दभाजनम्।वैकुण्ठं तदधिष्ठानं विकुण्ठं च स्वयंप्रभम् 1201
wed परिक्रम्य प्रणिपत्यानुमान्यं च । प्रतिजग्मु: प्रमुदिता: हांसन्तो वैष्णवीं श्रियम् 1261
भगवाननुगावाह यातं मा भैष्टमस्तु Wi ब्रह्मतेज: समर्थोऽपि हन्तुं नेच्छे मतं तु मे ।२९॥
waa fee रमया gem यदा । पुरापवारिता द्वारि feat मय्युपारते । ३०1
afa संरम्भयोगेन fet ब्रह्महेलनम् seed निकाशं मे कालेनाल्पीयसा पुन: 1381
द्वा:स्थावादिश्य भगवान् विमानश्रेणिभूषणम् । सर्वातिशायया wan ae स्वं धिष्ण्यमाविशत् 132 |
तौ तु गीर्वाणऋषभौ दुस्तराद्धरिलोकत:।हतश्रियौ ब्रह्मशापादभूतां विगतस्मयो 1231
तदा विकुण्ठधिषणात्तयोर्निपतमानयो: | हाहाकारो महानासीद्दिमानाग्रयेषु पुत्रका: । ३४॥
waa ह्यधुना प्राप्तौ पार्षदप्रवरो हरे: । दितेर्जठरनिर्विष्टं amd तेज उल्बणम् ।३५॥
wage तेजसा ane व:। आफक्षिप्तं an एतर्हि भगवांस्तद्विधित्सति । ३६॥
विश्वय य: स्थितिलयोद्धवहेतुराद्यो योगेश्वररपि दुरत्यययोगमाय: |
au विधास्यति स नो भगवांस्त्यधीहास्तत्रास्मदीयविमृशेन कियानिहार्थ: 13191
Brahma continued : Having seen Lord Visnu, who was so delightful to the eyes, and His
self-effulgent Abode, Vaikuntha, the sages now went round the Lord (as a mark of respect) anc
