756 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 5
BACH BLAH डा ह Re AT He ती वी जो ती A HY HR a Re te ee: fe to ete Ro FOR चोजा
प्तर्त्त ज व त्र न

nectarean rays) and the father of created beings (in that itis favourable to the growth 0 corn
etc., which contain the germ of life)—as His mind. May that Lord possessed of boundless
power be gracious to us. (34) Again, fire—which conveys (to the gods, for whom it is
intended) whatever is poured into it (by way of oblation), nay, which was brought into
existence for the sake of rituals alone (mentioned in the part of the Veda bearing on the same)
and which (in the form of gastric fire) constantly assimilates digestible substances (thrown
into it and in the form of submarine fire ever consumes the water of the ocean)— came to
be His mouth (in the cosmic Body). May that Lord possessed of infinite power be gracious
to us ! (35) (Again,) the celebrated sun-god —who figures on the path of the gods (or the
bright path, leading gradually to the divine Abode of the Lord), whose body is constituted of
the three Vedas (Rk, Yajus and Sama),(nay,) who is (recognized as) a seat of Brahma (in
relation toyavyhom Brahma is contemplated upon), who (figuring as he does on the path of the
gods) not only represents the door to Liberation, but (as a manifestation of the supreme
Deity) is immortality itself and who (being a symbol or Kala or the god of destruction) is
characterized as Death (as well)-constitutes His eye. May that Lord possessed of infinite
glory be gracious to us. (36) May He propitious to us, the Lord possessed of infinite
splendour, frorn whose life-breath proceeded the air, which, (when manifested) as Prana
(the vital air) in relation to the mobile and immobile creation constitutes their strength of mind
and body and potency of the Indriyas, and which we (Brahma and others, the deities
presiding over the intellect etc) have (always) followed as servants would follow an
emperor.(37) May He be favourably disposed towards us—the supreme Person possessed
of unbounded power, from whose auditory sense sprang up the (four) quarters, (nay,) from
(the cavity of whose heart emanated the (various) appertures in the body and from whose
navel issued forth the (fivefold) vital air, the (ten) Indriyas (the five senses of perception and
the five organs of action), the inner sense, the (other five)airs* functioning in the body (viz.,
Naga, Karma, Krkala Devadatta and Dhanafjaya), the body (itself) as well as the ground of
(all) these, the ether. (38) May He be favourably inclined towards us—the Lord possessed
of unbounded glory, from whose strength sprang up the mighty Indra (the lord of paradise);

from whose grace, the gods; from whose wrath, Lord Siva (the Lord of Mount Kailasa); from
whose intellect, Brahma (the creator); from whose appertures in the body, the (various Vedic)
metres (Gayatri and so on) as well as the Rsis (seers) and from whose membrum virile,

emanated Prajapati (the deity presiding over procreation). (39) May He be propitious to us—
the Lord possessed of infinite glory, from whose bosom issued forth Sri (the goddess of
fortune and beauty); by whose shadow were brought forth the manes; from whose breast
sprang up Dharma (the god of piety), from whose back, Adharma (the spirit presiding over
unrighteousness), from whose head, heaven; and from whose recreation, proceeded the
Apsaras (celestial nymphs). (40) May He be gracious to us—the Lord possessed of infinite
power, from whose mouth sprang up the Brahmana (the sacerdotal class) as well as the
Veda treating of subjects falling beyond the scope of the senses; from whose arms, the
Ksatriya (the’martial class) as well as the strength(the capacity to rule); from whose thighs,
the VaiSya (the trading and agricultural class) and the skill in business; and from whose feet
emanated (the vocation of) service (which has been excluded from the range of the study
of the Vedas) and the Sudra (the labouring and the artisan class, which has been declared
fit for this vocation). (41) May He be favourably inclined to us— the Lord possessed of infinite
glory, from whose lower lip emanated greed; from whose upper lip, love; from whose nose,
splendour, by whose touch was engendered concupiscence, which is (so) agreeable to
animals and those akin to them; from whose eyebrows; sprang up Yama ( the god of

* Fora detailed description of the ten vital airs vide foot-note to IIL. vi. 9.
