270 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 40

स्वेन्दियार्था fans we 8 हेतवस्ते जगतोऽङ्नभूता: । २ ।

asses: स गुणैरजाया गुणात् परं वेद न ते स्वरूपम् । ३ |
mt योगिनो यजन्त्यद्धा महापुरुषमीश्वरम्। साध्यात्मं साधिभूतं च साधिदैवं च साधव: । ४ ।
त्रव्या च fern केचित् त्वां वै वैतानिका द्विजा:। यजन्ते `विततैर्यज्ञैर्नानारूपामराख्यया । ५ ।
एके त्वाखिलकर्माणि dread गता:।ज्ञानिनो ज्ञानयज्ञेन यजन्ति ज्ञानविग्रहम्। ६ |
अन्ये च संस्कृतात्मानो विधिनाभिहितेन ते । यजन्ति त्वन्मयास्त्वाँ वै बहुमूरत्यैकमूर्तिकम् । ७ ।
त्वामेवान्ये शिवोक्तेन मार्गेण शिवरूपिणम्। बह्वाचार्यविभेदेन भगवन् समुपासते । ८ |
सर्वं एव यजन्ति ai were येऽप्यन्यदेवताभक्ता यद्यप्यन्यधिय: प्रभो । ९ ।
यथाद्रिप्रभवा नद्य: पर्जन्यापूरिता: प्रभो । विहान्ति ada: सिन्धुं aera गतयोऽन्तत: 1201

Akriira prayed : | bow to You, Lord Narayana, the most ancient and undecaying Person,
the Cause of all causes (the Mahat-tattva and so on), from the lotus bud sprung from whose
navel emerged Brahma, from whom evolved this creation (both animate and inanimate)! (1)
Whatever causes there are, viz., the earth, water, fire, the air, ether andits cause (Ahankara),
the Mahat-tattva (the principle of cosmic intelligence), Prakrti (primordial Matter) as well as
its Cause (the Spirit), the mind, the Indriyas (the five senses of perception and the five organs
of action), the objects of all the (five) senses as well as the deities (presiding over them) have
all evolved from Your (divine) Person.(2) (All) these (causes), Prakrti and so on, which are
(objectively) perceived, fail to know Your essential character because of their being material
(other than the Spirit); while You are the Spirit. The celebrated Brahma (too) who is
conditioned by the modes of Prakrti, is unable to know Your reality, which lies beyond the
three Gunas. (3) (Yet) pious Yogis (those given to contemplation) directly worship (and
thereby seek to attain) You as indwelling the (diverse) limbs of the body (the eye, the heart
and soon), (nay,) informing all material bodies and presiding over the bodies of the (various)
gods, the Inner Controller and Ruler of the universe. (4) Some Brahmanas given to sacrificial
performance worship You alone under the name of gods invested with different forms,
through extensive sacrifices as revealed by the three Vedas (Rk, Yajus and Sama). (5) Some
men of wisdom, who have developed dispassion, worship You, the embodiment of (pure)
consciousness, through sacrifice in the form of spiritual enlightenment (consisting of
absorption in to the Self), renouncing all actions (in the form of worldly as well as religious
duties). (6) And, having consecrated themselves (through initiation in the various forms of
worship), and (fully) absorbed in You, others worship You in a plurality of forms (viz.,
Vasudeva, Sankarsana, Pradyumna and Aniruddha) or in one form (that of Narayana)
according to the procedure taught by Yourself (in Tantric works such as the Paficaratra). (7)
Others (the votaries of Lord Siva) duly worship You alone in the form of Siva along the lines
recommended by Siva (Himself), (of course.) differing in detail according to the teachings of
a plurality of teachers, O almighty Lord ! (8) Even those who are devoted to other (minor)
deities, although they look upon those gods as other than You, O Lord, all worship Youalone,
the almighty God representing all the gods (in Your Person). (9) (Just) as rivers having their
source in a mountain and made full by the god of rain (and branching forth into so many
streams), O Lord, find their way into the ocean from all sides. so do all paths ultimately lead
to You alone. (10)

