Dis. 90 ] BOOK TEN 513

ctnnentnenere SESE CLES SOTA HUE NEOORERENM TERN ND NT ENEHENHRNNEKO NE HENtERRONEKCOREEEREe

love ?) (24)

sign भावेन कृष्णे योगेश्वरेश्वरे । क्रियमाणेन माधव्यो लेभिरे परमां गतिम् । २५॥

श्रुतमात्रोऽपि a: स्रीणां प्रसह्याकर्षते मन: । उरुगायोरुगीतो वा पर्यन्तीनां कुत: पुन: 1261

a: सम्पर्यचरन् प्रेष्णा पादसंवाहनादिभि: + । जगद्गुरुं भर्तृबुद्ध्या तासां किं वर्ण्यते तप: 1201

(Pariksit!) such was the (depth of) love and devotion which the consorts of Sri Krsna

cherished for their husband, the Supreme Lord of great masters of Yoga; and through that
they attained the supreme state. (25) The sports of the Lord have been sung in various ways
through exquisite songs and poetry. (They are so sweet, so captivating that) they irresistibly
draw the mind (and heart) of women when they hear them. How much greater, then, should
be the attraction of those who (are privileged to) see Him (with their own eyes !) (26) Andhow
could one form an estimate of the austerities performed by those (privileged) women who,
regarding the (Supreme) Teacher of the world (Bhagavan Sri Krsna) as their husband,
kneaded His feet, washed His body, fed Him and served Him with other kinds of loving -
attentions. (27)

एवं वेदोदितं धर्ममनुतिष्ठन् wat गति: । गृहं धर्मार्थकामानां मुहुश्चादर्शयत् पदम् । २८॥

आस्थितस्य wt ai कृष्णस्य गृहमेधिनाम्। आसन् षोडदशसाहस्रं महिष्यश्च शताधिकम् । २९॥

तासां स्रीरत्नभूतानामष्टो a: प्रागुदाहदा: । रुक्मिणीप्रमुखा राजंस्तत्पुत्राश्चानुपूर्वहा: 1301

एकैकस्यां दशं दश कृष्णोऽजीजनदात्मजान् । यावत्य आत्मनो भार्या अमोघगतिरीश्वर: 1321

तेषामुद्दामवीर्याणामष्टादश महारथा: | आसन्नुदारयदासस्तेषां नामानि मे श्रृणु ।३२॥

प्रद्युम्नश्चानिरुद्धश्च दीप्तिमान् भानुरेव ai साम्बो मधुर्वृहद्भानुश्चित्रभानुर्वृकोऽरुण: । ३३

पुष्करो dees श्रुतदेव: सुनन्दन: । चित्रबाहुर्विरूपश्च कविर्न्यग्रोध wa च 1३४॥

एतेषामपि ws तनुजानां मधुद्विष: | प्रद्युम्न आसीत् प्रथम: पितृवद् रुक्मिणीसुत: । ३५॥

स रुक्मिणो दुहितरमुपयेमे महारथ: । तस्मात् सुतोऽनिरुद्धोऽभून्नागायुतबलान्वित: । ३६

स चापि रुक्मिण: पौत्रीं दौहित्रो जगृहे तत: । वज्रस्तस्याभवद् यस्तु मौसलादवदोषित: 1300 |

प्रतिबाहुरभूत्तस्मात् सुबाहुस्तस्य चात्मज: | सुबाहो: शान्तसेनोऽभूच्छतसेनस्तु तत्सुत: ।३८॥

न ह्येतस्मिन् कुले जाता अधेना अबहुप्रजा: । अल्पायुषोऽल्पवीर्याश्च अब्रह्मण्याश्च जज्ञिरे 1381

यदुवंशप्रसूतानां पुंसां विख्यातकर्मणाम्।संख्या न झक्यते कर्तुमपि वर्षायुतैर्नृप ।॥४०॥

fra: Ser: सहस्राणामष्टाश्चीतिरातानि च । आसन्यदुकुलाचार्या: कुमाराणामिति श्रुतम् ।४१॥

संख्यानं यादवानां क: करिष्यति महात्मनाम् । यत्रायुतानामयुतलक्षेणास्ते स आहुक: ॥४२॥
(Pariksit!) Bhagavan Sri Krsnais the (sole) refuge of (all) virtuous souls. Practising virtue
as enjoined by the Vedas, He clearly demonstrated (to the world) more than once how (the
three objects offlife, viz.,) religious merit, Prosperity and enjoyment of worldly pleasures could
be attained by leading the life of a householder. (28) That is why He had adopted the supreme
way of life of a householder. (O king, | have already told you that) the number of Sri Krsna's
consorts was sixteen thousand, one hundred and eight; the principal eight of those jewels
among women, Rukmini and others, as well as their offspring have already been named in
order of sequence. (29-30) The wives of Bhagavan SriKrsna (other thanthese eight too) bore
Him ten sons each. This should cause on wonder; the Lord is Almighty and of unfailing

resolution.(31) Of those sons of Sri Krsna, all of whom possessed unbounded valour,
eighteen were warriors of foremost rank and possessed excellent renown. Hear their names
