Dis. 10 BOOK NINE 45
SEPEEE ESSELTE ETE ES EAE EERE EEE

आमा र्म 8889 १२३२ १० २२२२ २२ २२९

love, and stood with joined palms and eyes full of tears. Keeping him folded in His arms for
a long time and bathing him with tears flowing from His eyes, Sri Rama Himself alongwith
Laksmana and Sita offered His greetings to the Brahmanas as well as to those (others) who
were most deserving of honour and was (in His turn) saluted by the people. (30—41)
Observing their lord returned (home) after along time, the inhabitants of north Kosala joyfully
danced, waving their upper cloths and showering flowers on Him. (42) Bharata took His pair
of wooden sandals; Vibhisana alongwith Sugriva (who stood severally on His right and left),
achowrie and an excellent fan (respectively); and Hanuman (son of the wind-god, who stood
behind the Lord) held the white umbrella (over Him). (43) Satrughna (the youngest brother
of Sri Rama) bore His bow and the pair of quivers; Sita held the Kamandalu (water-pot of
cocoanut-shel!l) containing the water of sacred lakes and rivers; Angada carried His sword
and Jambavan (the king of the bears), His shield of gold, O protector of men! (44) Seated
in (the aerial car named) Puspaka, attended by (the aforesaid dancing) women and
panegyrized by bards, the Lord shone brightly, O king, like the rising moon in the midst of
minor planets. (45)

भ्रातृभिर्नन्दित: सोऽपि सोत्सवां प्राविदत् पुरीम्। Sasa राजभवनं गुरुपत्नी: स्वमातरम् WEI

TE वयस्यावरजान् पूजित: प्रत्यपूजयत्। वैदेही लक्ष्मणश्चैव यथावत् समुपेयतु: Ive!

पुत्रान् स्वमातरस्तास्तु प्राणांस्तन्व इवोत्थिता: | आरोप्याङ्केऽभिषिञ्जन्यो बाष्पौघैर्विजहु: शुच: 1४८1

wa निर्मुच्च विधिवत् कुलवृद्धै: समं गुरु: । अभ्यषिञ्चद adds चतु:सिन्धुजलादिभि: ve

एवं कृतशिर:स्नान: सुवासा: स्रग्व्यलङ्कृत: । स्वलङ्कृतै: सुवासोभिरभ्रातूभिर्भार्यया mit 1401

amet भ्रात्रा प्रणिपत्य प्रसादित:। प्रजा: स्वधर्मनिरता वर्णाश्रमगुणान्विता: ।
जुगोप पितॄवद् रामो मेनिरे पितरं च तम् ।५१॥

त्रेतायां वर्तमानायां are: कृतसमोऽभवत्।रामे राजनि धर्मज्ञे सर्वभूतसुखावहे ।५२।

वनानि नद्यो frat वर्षाणि द्वीपसिन्धव: । सर्वे कामदुघा आसन् प्रजानां भरतर्षभ 1431

नाधिव्याधिजराग्लानिदु:खशोकभवक्मा: ।। मृत्युश्चानिच्छतां नासीद् रामे राजन्यघोक्षजे ॥५४॥

= राजर्षिचरित शुचि: । स्वधर्मं गृहमेधीयं शिक्षयन् स्वयमाचरत् 1५५1

ater प्रश्नयावनता aati धिया fear च भावज्ञा भर्तु: सीताहरन्मन: । ५६1

इतिश्नामद्भप्ताक्तमहापुखणफ्याहस्याक्कानत्रक्कोरामग्स्लिव्यामाऽथ्याय [gol

Welcomed by His (younger) brothers, the Lord 100 entered the festive city and, on
entering the royal palace, duly honoured His stepmothers (Kaikeyl and so on), His own
mother (the blessed Kausalya), preceptors (Vasistha and others), His equals in age as well
as those younger than He, and was honoured (in return) by them. (Likewise) Sita and
Laksmana too met them in a befitting manner. (46-47) Rising (from their seats), like dead
bodies returning to life, the aforesaid mothers of these princes placed their sons on their lap
and, bathing them all over with a flood of tears, shed their grief (of separation from them).(48)
Causing the matted locks (of Sri Rama) to be unravelled, the sage Vasistha (His preceptor)
alongwith the elders of His race (the Raghus) bathed Him with the water of (all) the four
oceans (in the four quarters) and other (sacred) waters (even) as the sage Brhaspati (the
preceptor of the gods) bathed Indra (the ruler of the gods). (49) Having thus washed His
whole body including His head, nay, clad in beautiful attire and adorned with wreaths of
flowers and ornaments, the Lord shone with His (younger) brothers (Bharata, Laksmana and

Satrughna) and (divine) Consort (Sita), who were (all) well-adorned (with jewels) and
elegantly dressed. (50) Won over by His brother (Bharata) through prostrations, Sri Rama
