454 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis.5 `

ग्निंष्टेघेर्व्यक्लीभ्रेघेभैभैभे…र्व्यघैष्पैद्येर्व्यध्रेग्रैद्वै PERAK L SPECHT आजा ककक तिकी ELE HHH दो क व H EAA OHHH ESHA

worshipped the Lord (strictly) according to precept through all (kinds of) sacrifices, performed
a hundred times each and provided with (all requisites in the shape of appropriate) materials,
place, time, age (of the sacrificer), faith and (the guidance of) priests and intended to
propitiate different gods. (17) In this land (subsequently known by the name of Bharatavarsa),

(when it was) ruled over by Lord Rsabhadeva, nobody ever sought for one’s own use on any
account anything whatsoever from another—any more than one would have a thing
(altogether) non-existent—except an incessantly growing and profound love for their Ruler;

nor did anyone cast a (wistful) look on another's property. (18) On a certain occasion, while
touring (over His kingdom), Lord Rsabhadeva happened to be in Brahmavarta and (there),

in a gathering of the foremost Brahmana sages, He thus addressed His own sons—even
though they were (fully) self-controlled and thoroughly disciplined by virtue of their modesty
and excessive devotion (to their divine Father)—with a view to admonishing them within
the hearing (in the presence) of His subjects. (19)

Thus ends the fourth discourse, in Book Five of the great and
glorious Bhagavata-Purana, otherwise known as
the Paramahamsa-Samhita.

Boat feet!
PIS Sieg es

अथ पञ्चमोऽध्याय:

Discourse ४
Lord Rsabhadeva instructs His sons and Himself takes to the life of an
ascetic who has shaken off worldly feeling and obligation

ऋषभ उवाच
नायं देहो देहभाजां eich कष्टान् कामानर्हंते विड्भुजां ये।
mat feet पुत्रका येन सत्त्वं शुद्धयेद्यस्माद् ब्रह्मसौख्यं त्वनन्तम्।१।
महान्तस्ते समचित्ता: प्रशान्ता विमन्यव: age: साधवो चे।२।
a वा मयीशे कृतसौहृदार्थां जनेषु देहम्भरवार्तिकेषु।
गृहेषु जायात्मजरातिमत्सु न प्रीतियुक्ता यावदर्थाश्च लोके।३।
न Wy मन्ये ga आत्मनोऽयमसन्तपि क्लेशद आस देह:।४॥
पराभवस्तावदबोधजातो यावन्न जिज्ञासत आत्मतत्त्वम्।
यावत्क्रियास्तावदिदं wt & ania येन शरीरबन्ध:।५॥।
एवं मन: कर्मवशं wae अविद्ययाऽऽत्मन्युपधीयमाने।
wit यावन्मयि वासुदेवे न मुच्यते देहयोगेन तावत्।1६।
यदा न पश्यत्ययथा गुणेहां स्वार्थे wre: wear विपश्चित्।
गतस्मृतिर्विन्दति तत्र तापानासाद्य मैथुन्यमगारमज्ञ: 119 1
