Dis. 9 ] ~* BOOK THREE ॥ 173

प्तै व PR Re He ज चक्तै पि वी क्तत् ER A क त्र ज्यो जज ET BG, HG BENS HH Be RAT ER ROT कक HOH पि री A RE eRe WH

from the pool of Your navel even while You, the Supreme Person, slept on these waters.
Therefore, as | proceed to bring to light the wonderful creation, which will be Your own
manifestation, let not my utterance of the Vedic words fail. (24) You are the most ancient
Person possessing infinite grace. Be pleased, O Lord, to open Your lotus eyes with a smile
expressive of abundant love; and, rising (from Your bed in the shape of the serpent-god) for
the creation of the universe, dispel my despondency by Your mellifluous speech. (25)

as

मेत्रेय उवाच
wes fara तपोविद्यासमाधिभि: | यावन्मनोवच: स्तुत्वा विरराम a खिन्नवत् । २६॥
अथाभिप्रेतमन्वीक्ष्य ब्रह्मणो मधुसूदन:।विषण्णचेतसं तेन कल्पव्यतिकराम्भसा । २७
लोकसंस्थानविज्ञान आत्मन: परिखिद्यत: । तमाहागाधया वाचा wea ङामयन्निव । २८1

Maitreya continued : Having thus beheld his Father by dint of austere penance, worship
and abstract meditation, Brahma extolled Him as best as his mind and speech allowed him
to do, and then stood silent, as though exhausted. (26) When Lord Visnu (the Slayer of the
demon Madhu) came to know the intention of Brahma, who was depressed in spirits at the
sight of the waters surging all round during that period of universal dissolution, and was at
aloss to know the relative position of the various worlds (to be created by him), He addressed
Him in deep accents as though removing his faint-heartedness. (27-28)

मा aad mest ot उद्यममावह ।तन्मयाऽऽपादितं wa यन्मां प्रार्थयते भवान् ।२९॥

भूयस्त्वे तप आतिष्ठ विद्यां wa मदाश्रयाम्।ताभ्यामन्तर्हृदि AeA, लोकान्द्रक्ष्यस्यपावृतान् 130!

तत आत्मनि लोके च भक्तियुक्त: समाहित: । द्रष्टासि मां ad ब्रह्मन्मयि लोकांस्त्वमात्मन: 1321

यदा तु सर्वभूतेषु दारुष्ठभ्रिमिव स्थितम्। प्रतिचक्षीत मां लोको जह्यात्तर्ह्यव कश्मलम् ।३२॥

यदा रहितमात्मानं भूतेन्द्रियगुणाशयै: । स्वरूपेण मयोपेतं wea, स्वाराज्यमृच्छति 133!

am कर्मवितानेन प्रजा adi: सिसृक्षत: | नात्मावसीदत्यस्मिस्ते वर्षीयान्मदनुग्रह: 13% |

ऋषिमाद्यं न बध्नाति पापीयांस्त्वां रजोगुण: । यन्मनो मयि frets प्रजा: संसृजतोऽपि ते 1341

ज्ञातोऽहं Wan त्वद्य दुर्विज्ञेयोऽपि देहिनाम् aa त्वं मन्यसेऽयुक्तं भूतेन्द्रियगुणात्मभि: 1381

तुभ्यं मद्दिचिकित्सायामात्मा मे दर्शितोऽबहि: । नालेन सलिले मूलं पुष्करस्य विचिन्वत: 1301
The Lord said : Do not fall a prey to lassitude (born of despair), 0 Brahma (repository
of the Vedas); exert yourself for creation. | have already arranged what you ask of Me. (29)
Practise penance once more and offer worship through Mantras sacred to Me; thereby, O
Brahma, you shall find the worlds revealed in your heart. (30) Then, full of devotion and
concentrated in mind, O Brahma, you will find Me pervading yourself as well as the whole
universe, and will see the worlds as well as the Jivas (embodied souls) resting in Me. (31)
The very moment a man finds Me present in all beings as fire in every piece of wood, he is
rid of all infatuation. (32) And, when he realizes himself as devoid of the five elements, the
indriyas (the five senses of perception and the five organs of action), the Gunas (the modes
of Prakrti) and the inner sense, and identical with Me, his very Self, he attains liberation. (33)
Even though you desire to evolve innumerable creatures according to the stock of their past
Karma, your mind does not fee! perplexedin regard to this matter; that is because you have
My grace in abundance. (34) The wicked Rajoguna (the principle of activity) will not bind you,
the first seer, since your mind will remain attached to Me even while you are occupied with
the work of evolving the creation. (35) Today you have come to know Me, even though living

beings find it difficult to know Me; for you regard Me as free from the five elements, the
Indriyas, the Gunas and the inner sense. (36) Doubting My existence, when you proceeded
