Dis. 3 ] BOOK SIX 565

CRAKS HEOARH KOSH HATHECEKRAEUCEK SEALER रोक्तयो कचक TEV ELENTEHEE KE TERE AHA वज LAER ARA EHH AH

heaven)—generally does not realize the aforesaid glory of the Divine Name, and remains
engaged in grand sacrificial undertakings. (25)
एवं fe सुधियो भगवत्यनन्ते सर्वात्मना विदधते खलु भावयोगम्।
मे न wendy यद्यमोषां स्यात् Waa तदपि हन्त्युरुगायवाद: 1261
a देवसिद्धपरिगीतपवित्रगाथा ये साधव: Ag भगवत्प्रपन्ना: |
am, नोपसीदत हरेर्गदयाभिगुप्तान् नैषां ad न च aa: प्रभवाम दण्डे । २७॥
तानानयध्वमसतो विमुखान् मुकुन्दपादारविन्दमकरन्दरसादजस्रम् |
fies: परमहंसकुले Wane ye निरयवर्त्मनि बद्धतृष्णान् ic
frat न ake भगवद्गुणनामधेयं das न स्मरति तच्चरणारविन्दम्।
कृष्णाय नो नमति afer एकदापि तानानयध्वमसतोऽकृतविष्णुकृत्यान् । २९॥
तत् क्षम्यतां स भगवान् पुरुष: पुराणो नारायण: स्वपुरुषैर्यदसत्कृतं न: ।
स्वानामहो न विदुषां रचिताञ्जलीनां क्षान्तिर्गरीयसि नम: पुरुषाय भूम्ने igo
Pondering thus, the wise indeed resort with an undivided mind to the practices (the chanting
of the Divine Name andso on) making for loving Devotion to the Lord possessing infinite virtues.
They do not merit punishment at my hands (because ordinarily there can be no question of their
committing sins). Even if a sin is ever committed by them (through inadvertence), the (very)
utterance of the Name of Lord (whois widely sung) obliterates it. (26) The sacred stories of those
pious souls who regard all with the same eye and have taken refuge in the Lord are constantly
sung even by the gods and Siddhas. Never approach such men, protected as they are by the
mace of Sri Hari. Neither we nor the Time-Spirit has the power to punish them. (27) Bring those
impious men (alone to me) who are averse to the joy inhering in the honey-like sweetness of
the lotus-feet of Lord Visnu (the Bestower of Liberation)—incessantly tasted by flocks of
noblest swans in the form of ascetics of the highest order, who have nothing to call their own
and who are connoisseurs of sweetness—and have given their heart to the delights of home
life, which lead one to hell. (28) (Further,) bring those wicked fellows (for punishment to me)
whose tongue neither recounts the virtues nor utters the name of the Lord, whose mind never
contemplates on His lotus-feet and whose head does not bow even once to SriKrsna, andwho
have never rendered (any) service to Lord Visnu (in their whole life). (29) Ah, may that most
ancient Person, Bhagavan Narayana, put up with the offence* committed, through the
instrumentality of our messengers, by ourselves, His ignorant servants, who crave His
forgiveness with joined palms; for forgiveness (alone) becomes the greatest of the great, Hail
to the all-pervading Supreme Person ! (30)

तस्मात् सङ्कीर्तनं विष्णोर्जगन्पङ्गलमंहसाम् । महतामपि कौरव्य विद्ध्यैकान्तिकनिष्कृतिम् । ३१।
sua गृणतां वीर्याण्युद्दामानि हेरेर्मुहु: | यथा सुजातया भक्त्या शुद्ध्येन्नात्मा व्रतादिभि: 1321
कृष्णाङ्ध्रिपद्ममधुलिण् न पुनर्विसृष्टमायागुणेषु wa वृजिनावहेषु |
अन्यस्तु कामहत आत्मरज: प्रमार्दुमीहेत कर्म यत Va Tt: पुन: स्यात् । ३३
Therefore, O Pariksit ( a scion of Kuru); know the chanting of the names and praises of
Lord Visnu as a source of blessing to the (whole) world and the complete atonement for the

greatest sins. (31) The mind is not purified so well through fasting and other means as
through Devotion easily engendered in the heart of those who repeatedly hear or narrate

* The messengers of Yama argued with the servants of Lord Visnu and insisted on taking away the soul of Ajamila to
the abode of Yama not with standing their remonstrances. Thisis evidently regarded by Yama as an offence against the Lord,
for which he seeks His forgiveness here.
