32 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA-MAHATMYA [ Dis. 5
WER RM ROR RE WENO RL HEL HEB HR Hh TE RRR Ne Me BY RR AR BY He SoM ROW BT Ms Me We We He Re WERT RR RY Re BY RY EHH RH BS BOR RORY Be He ERR He He HH RY

The spirit submitted : "| am (no other than) your (own) brother, Dhundhukari by name.
The status of a Brahmana was forfeited by me through my own fault. (27) Numberless sins
were committed by me, revolving in the plane of rank ignorance. | killed (many) men and as
such was (in my turn) tortured to death by (public) women. (28) Attaining the form of a spirit
in consequence of this, | am undergoing a miserable plight. As my sinful deeds are fructifying
now as ordained by providence, | subsist on the air (alone). (29) Oh friend, O brother, ocean
of compassion (as you are), redeem me soon." Hearing his appeal Gokarna forthwith spoke
to him as follows: (30)

गोकर्ण उवाच
wed तु गयापिण्डो मया दत्तो व्रिधानत: । तत्कथं नैव मुक्तोऽसि ममाश्चर्यमिदं महत् । ३१॥
गयाश्राद्धान्न मुंक्तिश्चेद्दुपल्यों aratteae | किं विधेयं मया da तत्त्वं ae सविस्तरम् 1321

Gokarna said : Oblation (in the form of balls of cooked rice etc.), has been made by me
for your benefit in accordance with the scriptural ordinance at Gaya. Itis a matter for great
surprise to me how you have not been liberated in spite of that ? (31) ॥ no redemption has
been brought about (even) through Sraddha at Gaya, there is no other remedy in this behalf
| am afraid. Point you out in detail, O spirit, what should be done by me (now ).(32)

प्रेत उवाच
Testa मुक्तिर्मे न भविष्यति । उपायमपरं afer fae साम्प्रतम् । ३३॥
The spirit submitted : My redemption will not be brought about even through hundreds
of Sraddhas done at Gaya. Think you of some other remedy now.(33)
इति तद्वाक्यमाकर्ण्य गोकर्णो विस्मयं गत: । झतश्राद्धैर्न मुक्तिश्चेदसाध्यं मोचनं aa ।३४॥
इदानीं तु निजं स्थानमातिष्ठं प्रेत निर्भय: । त्वन्मुक्तिसाधकं किंचिदाचरिष्ये विचार्य च aul

Gokarna was struck with wonder to hear that reply of his and said, "If your redemption
cannot be brought about (even) through hundreds of Sraddhas (done at Gaya), your
liberation (| am afraid) is impossible. Nevertheless at present, O spirit! stay in your abode
free from fear. Pondering over this question, | shall do something conducive to your
liberation.” (34-35)

धुन्धुकारी निजस्थानं तेनादिष्टस्ततो गत: । गोकर्णश्चिन्तयामास तां रात्रिं न तदध्यगात् 1361
प्रातस्तमागतं दृष्टा लोका: प्रीत्या समागता: । तत्सर्वं कथितं तेन यज्जातं च ae Pie । ३७।
विद्वांसो योगनिष्ठाश्च ज्ञानिनो ब्रह्मवादिन: । तन्मुक्तिं नैव तेऽपह्यन् पङ्यन्त: शास्त्रसंचयान् । ३८।
aa: सर्वै: सूर्यवाक्यं तन्मुक्तौ स्थापितं परम्। गोकर्ण: स्तम्भनं ah सूर्यवेगस्य a तदा । ३९
तुभ्यं नमो जगत्साक्षिन् ब्रूहि मे मुक्तिहेतुकम्।तच्छुत्वा दूरत: सूर्य: स्फुटमित्यभ्यभाषत ।४०॥
श्रीमद्धागवतान्मुक्ति: सप्ताहं वाचनं geist सूर्यवच: सर्वैर्धर्मरूपं तु विश्रुतम् ॥४१॥
सर्वॆऽब्रुवन् प्रयत्नेन कर्तव्यं सुकरं त्विदम्। tent निश्चयं कृत्वा वाचनार्थं प्रवर्तित: ।४२॥

As instructed by him Dhundhukari departed thence to his own abode. Gokarna taxed his
brain (over the problem) the whole night, but could not strike upon any expedient. Seeing him
come, people called on him in the morning out of affection. He related (to them) all that had
occurred the previous night and how. (36-37) Men of learning, those established in Yoga
(union with God), enlightened souls and exponents of Veda, even though they ransacked

heaps of sacred books, did not see his liberation through any expedient. (38) Thereupon on
the question of his liberation the verdict of the sun-god was accorded the supreme place by
