550 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA ( Dis. 7

4१ २२० EEE १ ०० ० ७२ # १२ 4७० # 9 4 ESE EE ESHER EEK EEE NEESER EEN HEE 9७०७ ७१७ १6० २० ७७२ 9२48 # ८4 49 # 4७८८

understanding, eye with eye and body with body. (54) Free from fear or reserve (in relation
to one another), they slept, sat, flew about, stood, chatted, sported and ate together in the
rows of trees of that forest. (55) The male dove, whose senses were out of its control,
procured even with (great) hardship whatever enjoyment its mate craved for, inasmuch as
the latter gratified it (in every way) and was (in turn) treated with (great) sympathy. (56)
Conceiving for the first time, the female bird, who was devoted to the male, laid eggs, when
the time came, in the nest by the side ofits mate. (57) At the proper time there emerged from
the eggs fledglings with delicate limbs (fully) evolved by the inconceivable potencies of Lord
Sri Hari (in the form of the Time-Spirit, destiny, nature and so on), and covered with soft
down.(58) Hearing their cooing and delighted by their sweet chirping, the pair, fond as they
were of their offsprings, nourished them with (great) affection. (59) The parents derived
(great) joy through (the touch of) the feathers, (so) pleasant to touch, (sweet) chirps and
charming movements of their happy youngs and their coming forth to meet them. (60) With
their hearts knit together by mutual affection and deluded by the Maya (enchanting potency)
of Lord Visnu, the parent birds brought up their young brood with their mind (ever) distracted
(through solicitude for them). (61) Desiring food for their offsprings, the pair, that now had
a (large) family (to support) went out in search of it, and wandered all about the forest for
long.(62) A fowler,who roamed about in the forest, appeared there by chance and, seeing
the little birds sporting near their own nest, spread his net and caught them. (63) (Meanwhile)
the male and the female doves, which were always anxious to nourish their progeny and had
gone out (in search of nourishment), returned to their nest with the nourishment. (64)
Perceiving its young brood caught in the net and wailing, the female dove felt extremely
miserable and flew to them screaming. (65) Bound by (ties of) affection bestowed (on them)
more than once through the Maya of the birthless Lord, the female dove, afflicted in mind as
she was, forgot that it might likewise be caught in the trap and (even though) seeing the little
ones entangled, was caughtin the trap itself. (66) Sore distressed to find its offsprings, dearer
than itself, caught alongwith its mate, which was as dear (toit) as its own self, the male dove
helplessly wailed (as follows):—(67) "Oh ! behold my ruin, scanty of virtue and evil-minded
as lam. Though|am (still) unsatiated (with the pleasures of sense) andam yet unaccomplished
of purpose, my household life, which was the (only) means of realizing the threefold object
of life has been brought to an (abrupt) end. (68) My mate—that looked upon me as its object
of veneration, was agreeable (to me in everyway) and was a match for me (in every
respect)—is going to heaven with its innocent (guileless) offsprings, leaving me once for all
in this desolate dwelling. (69) Such as | am, whose mate and progeny are no more, what for
should | seek to survive as a wretched widower leading a miserable life in my deserted
habitat ?“ (70) Seeing them entangled in the net and struggling in the jaws of death, the
foolish and feebleminded dove likewise fell into the trap of its own accord. (71) Having (thus)
secured the male dove, the master of its household, as well as its mate and progeny (the
young doves), and accomplished of purpose, the cruel fowler returned home. (72) Maintain-
ing his family in the aforesaid manner, any householder of unquiet mind, revelling in the pairs
of Opposites (such as joys and sorrows) and attached to the pleasures of sense comes to
grief, like the aforesaid dove, with (all) those connected with him (viz., his wife and
children).(73) The wise recognize him as having fallen from a height on (once) climbing up
toit, who, having attained a human body, which is an open door (as it were) to (the mansion
of) final beatitude, remains attached, like the (aforesaid) dove, to his household. (74)
Thus ends the seventh discourse in Book Eleven of the great and glorious
S&hagavata-Purana, otherwise known as the
Paramahamsa-Samnhita.

५९६४ ६०5 १०
mI Sirs
