706 . SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 11

RRA RAE AEE A EEO AEE EEE EEE EEL EERE EROS HAA HEARS tee Pie ite

Dharma (righteousness) really are Lord Sri Hari, the embodiment of all the (four) Vedas, the
body of Codes handed down by those well-versed in the Vedas, O Yudhisthira, and the
feeling of self-satisfaction (that by which the mind derives real satisfaction) as well as the
conduct (example) of the virtuous*. (7)

सत्यं दया तप: ज्ञौचं तितिक्षेक्षा शमो दम: 1 अहिंसा ब्रह्मचर्यं च त्याग: स्वाध्याय आर्जवम् । ८ ।

सन्तोष: समदूक सेवा ग्राम्येहोपरम: हानै: । नृणां विपर्ययेहेक्षा मोनमात्मविमर्छषनम् । ९ |

अन्नाद्यादे: संविभागो भूतेभ्यश्च यथार्हत: । तेष्वात्मदेवताबुद्धि: सुतरां नृषु पाण्डव ।१०॥

श्रवणं कीर्तनं चास्य स्मरणं महतां wa: । सेवेज्यावनतिर्दास्यं सख्यमात्मसमर्पणम् ।११॥

pred परो धर्म: सर्वेषां समुदाहत: ! त्रिंशल्लक्षणवान्राजन्सर्वात्मा येन तुष्यति 1221

The highest virtue of all men, by which the Lord (the Soul of the universe) is pleased,

has been duly proclaimed, O king, as consisting of the following thirty features, viz., (1)
truthfulness, (2) compassion, (3) austerity (fasting etc.), (4) purity (of body), (5)
endurance (of heat and cold etc.) (6) discrimination (the power of distinguishing right
from wrong), (7-8) control of mind and the senses, (9) non-violence, (10) continence, (11)
charity, (12) muttering prayers, (13) straightforwardness, (14) contentment, (15) service of
those who look upon all with the same eye, (16) gradually withdrawing from (all) mundane
activity, (17) pondering the contrary result of men’s (egotistic) actions, (18) refraining from
useless talk, (19) inquiry into the Self (as distinguished from body etc.), (20) equitable
distribution among created .beings, according to their worth, of rice and other eatables
etc.,(21) and regarding them, particularly human beings, as one’s own self or deity, O
Yudhisthira (son of Pandu), (22) the hearing and (23) chanting of and (24) dwelling on the
names and glories of, (25) waiting upon, (26) worshipping, and (27) bowing to, (28) offering
the fruit of one's action performed in the spirit of service to, (29) treating as one’s bosom
friend, and (30) dedicating oneself (one’s body and all) to, the Lord, the goal of exalted
souls. (8B—12)

संस्कारा यदविच्छिन्ना: स द्विजोऽजो जगाद यम् । इज्याध्ययनदानानि विहितानि द्विजन्मनाम् ।
जन्मकर्मावदातानां क्रियाश्चाश्रमचोदिता: । १३॥

विप्रस्याध्ययनादीनि षडन्यस्याप्रतिग्रह: | राज्ञो वृत्ति: प्रजागोप्तुरविप्राद् वा करादिभि: । १४॥

वैश्यस्तु वार्तावृत्तिश्च नित्यं ब्रह्मकुलानुग: । शूद्रस्य द्विजशुश्रूषा वृत्तिश्च स्वामिनो भवेत् ।१५॥

A Dwijat or twice-born (a member of the first three classes of Hindu society, viz., the
Brahmanas, Ksatriyas and the Vaisyas, so-called because of their investiture with the sacred
thread, which is said to constitute their second birth or regeneration) is he in whose family
the (sixteen) purificatory rites (accompanied by the recitation of Mantras or sacred texts)
have been performed in unbroken succession and whom Brahma (the birthless creator)
has denominated as such (through the Vedas and other scriptures). Performance of
sacrifices, study (of the Vedas and other sacred books) and charity as well as the duties
prescribed for the (four) Agramas (stages in life, viz., Brahmacarya or studentlife, Garhasthya
or the life of a householder, Vanaprastha or the life of an anchorite and Samyasa or the life
of a recluse) have been enjoined on the twice-born that are pure by birth and conduct. (13)

* A similar idea is brought out In the following verse of the Manusmrti :—

वेदोऽखिलो धर्ममूलं स्मृतिशीले च तद्विदाम्। आचारश्चैव साधूनामात्मनस्तुष्टिरव च॥
"The authority on Dharma are the entire body of the Vedas and the Codes of law handed down by those well-versed
in the latter as well as their natural way of living, and the conduct of the virtuous as well as one's own satisfaction."

t A Sadra Is not called upon to undergo any such purificatory rite other than the nuptial rites as the Smrti says :-—

विवाहमात्रसंस्कारं शद्रोऽपि लभतां सदा।
