९

Dis. 6] BOOK TWELVE 689

ज्जकर्त्त गा RAAB RB AEAH IAB LRA A PASSES AAPA A BA MIA AAA HRB IAA AAS A AA REAL

Sita resumed ; Thus advised, King Janamejaya said “Amen !“ (Nay.,) respecting the
remonstrance of the great sage, he desisted from the snake-sacrifice, and (duly) worshipped
Brhaspati (the master of eloquence). (28) Such is the well-known, though inconceivable,
great Maya (enchanting potency) of Lord Visnu. Due to this Maya, which cannot be (easily)
set aside, living beings, that are His (own) particles, fall foul of their fellow-beings under the
force of passions (such as anger, which are the outcome of the three Gunas). (29) Maya,
which repeatedly flashes on the mind through the notion, ’A is a wily man’, does not boldly
reveal itself in God when (the nature of) the Self is being inquired into by the exponents of
the Self (but is shown to exist somehow like one in great fear without discharging its function
of enchanting others). (Nay,) in relation to Him there is no room for wordy wartare of various
description originating from Maya nor does the mind with its functions of ideation and doubt
operate with regard to Him. (30) In relation to Him there does not exist any Karma (belonging
to the category of virtue or sin) with factors responsible for it nor the fruit (in the shape of joy
or sorrow) to be attained through both nor the ego, the adjunct of a Jiva, accompanied by the
three above-named (viz., Karma, the factors responsible for it and the fruit of it). Such is the
nature of God, who is neither capable of being opposed by nor of opposing anyone.
(Therefore) renouncing the ego etc., (which are like so many waves of Maya), a sage should
himself specifically revel in the Self. (31) Yogis who have given up (false) identification with
the body and the feeling of meum with regard to those connected with it and are exclusively
‘devoted to God, and who are (therefore) keen to reject everything other than God as "not
that", "not that", declare the aforesaid to be the supreme essence of the all-pervading Lord.
(Nay,) it has been concluded to be such by those who, having embraced it with their heart
(through meditation), have been able to control their mind, senses and body. (32) They
(alone) are able to attain this supreme state of Lord Visnu, who are free from the evil notion
of ‘I’ and ’mine' with regard to their body and home (etc., respectively). (33) One should put
up with abusive words, and show disrespect to none, nor should one enter into hostility with
anyone for the sake of this (perishable) body. (34) Salutation to the illustrious Lord Sri Krsna
of infinite intelligence, through meditation on whose lotus feet | learnt this compilation (in the
form of Srimad Bhagavata) ! (35)

शौनक उवाच
पैलादिभिर्व्यसशिष्यैर्वेदाचार्यैर्महात्मभि: । वेदाश्च कतिथधा व्यस्ता एतत् सौम्याभिधेहि a: । ३६

Saunaka submitted : Intohow many schools were the Vedas divided by Paila and other
great souls, teachers of the Vedas and pupils of Vedavyasa ? (Pray) relate this to us. (36)

।

सूत उवाच
समाहितात्मनो ब्रह्मन् ब्रह्मण: परमेष्ठिन: | हृद्याकाशादभून्नादो वृत्तिरोधाद् विभाव्यते ise!
यदुपासनया ब्रह्मम् योगिनो मलमात्मन: | द्रव्यक्रियाकारकाख्यं धूत्वा यान्त्यपुनर्भवम् । ३८॥
ततोऽभूत्तिवृदोङ्कारो योऽव्यक्तप्रभव: स्वराट्। यत्तल्लिङ्गे भगवतो ब्रह्मण: परमात्मन: 1३९1
शृणोति य इमं स्फोटं सुप्तश्रोत्रे च शून्यदृक् | येनवाग्व्यज्यते यस्य व्यक्तिराकारा आत्मन: ।४०।
स्वधाम्नो ब्रह्मण: साक्षाद् वाचक: परमात्मन:। स सर्वमन्त्रोपनिषद्वेदबीजं सनातनम् ।४१॥

Suta replied : From the cavity in the heart of Brahma (the creator}, who occupies the

highest position (in the universe), while his mind was composed (through meditation), O

Saunaka ! there arose a sound, which can be distinctly perceived (by all} through control of
the function of hearing (by closing one's ears), and by focussing one’s mind on which, O
