576 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 14

RHE O NNER T ETE NNN TONNER ONT TONE TET RES HO TET शाशा क ENT HOMME NOE O RATT SON HEHEHE OHNE

Kinnaras* Nagas,Raksasas, Kimpurusast and others received it. Diverse are the natural
tendencies of the aforementioned, born as they are of (varied proportions of) Rajas, Sattva
and Tamas, due to which created beings and their thoughts (too) differ, and in conformity with
their nature indeed diverse interpretations of the Vedas flow from (the mouths of) them
all. (5—7) In this way what with diversity of disposition and what with the oral teaching
imparted from father to son the minds of some men get perverted, while others embrace
heretic views.(8) With their judgment clouded by My deluding potency, O jewel among men,
people speak of different ways to attain blessedness according to their own past Karma and
taste. (9) Some (viz., the advocates of Karma-Mimamsa) declare it to be Dharma (religious
merit); others (the poets) call it renown; (still) others (such as Vatsyayana) name it as sexual
enjoyment; some (the advocates of Yoga) designate it as truthfulness, control of the senses
and mind-control. Others (such as politicians) speak of wealth and power as their well-
known end (and the policies of conciliation etc., as the means to that end). Advocates of
renunciation declare it as renunciation, while hedonists call it sensuous enjoyment. (10)
Some call it Yajiia (worship of gods); while others speak of it as austerity, liberality, sacred
vows, observances and the five forms of self-abnegation. The rewards of these are indeed
such as have a beginning and an end, fruits as they are of (human) endeavour. They bring
sorrow in their train, culminate in ignorance, afford trivial delight and are attended with grief
(even while they are being enjoyed). (11)

६

मय्यर्पितात्मन: ma निरपेक्षस्य सर्वत: ।मयाऽऽत्मनासुखंयत्तत्कुत: स्याद्विषयात्मनाम। १२ ।
अकिञ्चनस्य दान्तस्य शान्तस्य समचेतस:।मया सन्तुष्टमनस: सर्वा: सुखमया दिश:।१३॥
न unas न महेन्द्रधिष्ण्यं न सार्वभौमं न रसाधिपत्यम्
न योगसिद्धीरपुनर्भवं वा मव्यार्पितात्मेच्छति मद्बिनान्यत् । १४॥
न तथा मे प्रियतम आत्मयोनिर्न wee । न च सङ्कुर्षणो न श्रीर्नैवात्मा च यथा भवान् । १५॥
fra मुनिं शान्तं fat समदर्शनम्। अनुव्रजाम्यहं fet पूयेयेत्यङ्घ्रिरेणुभि: ।१६॥
fies मय्यनुरक्तचेतस: जशान्ता महान्तोऽखिलजीववत्सला: |
कामैरनालब्धधियो जुषन्ति यत् तन्नैरपेक्ष्यं न fae सुखं मम । १७
How could that happiness fall to the lot of thase who have set their mind on sense-
delights—the happiness which is enjoyed with Me as his self, O noble one, by him who has
fixed his mind on Me and expects no gratification from any (other) source ? (12) All the (four)
quarters are full of joy to him who has nothing to call his own, has (fully) subdued his senses
and mind, (nay,) whose mind is equipoised (free from likes and dislikes) and fully gratified
with Me. (13) He who has bestowed his mind on Me no more aspires for the position of
Brahma (the highest functionary in the administration of the universe), much less for the
realm of the great Indra (the ruler of paradise), still less for sovereignty over the entire globe,
rulers hip of the subterranean worlds or mystic powers acquired through the practice of
Yoga, nor does he seek (even) final beatitude (lit., cessation of rebirth for all time to come)
divorced from Me.(14) Neither Brahma (My own son) nor Lord Siva (who is My own Self) nor
again Lord Balarama (My own elder brother) nor Goddess Sri {My better half) nor My own
(divine) personality is so very dear to Me as (a devotee like) you. (15) lever dog the footsteps
of him who is free from (all) expectation, is given to contemplation (on Me), composed, free
from animosity and sees unity everywhere, in order that | may be cleansed (absolved from

* The Kinnaras (किंचित्रग इव। are so-called because they partially resemble human beings in their lorm or lacial structures
+The Kimpurusas (किचित् पुरुषा इव) are another class ol semi-human beings partly resembling human beings and एक
