Dis. 70 J BOOK TEN 413

RIMES Ofer tT nea Sriornirorrrerr ini ein nnn Sor reer sore ene atg e
ante विश्वविलयोद्भववृत्तिहेतुर कर्माण्यनन्यविषयाणि हरिं
wag गायति श्रृणोत्यनुमोदते वा भक्तिर्भवेद् भगवति ह्यपवर्गमागे isu

ति श्रीमद्भागवते महापुराणे पारमहंस्यां संहितायां दशमस्कन्घे saad कृष्णगार्हस्थ्यदर्शनं नामैकोनसप्ततितमोऽध्याय: 185 |

Sri$uka wenton: Thus, they say, the Devarsi 8३ oneandthe same Sri Krsna (present
in all the mansions of His consorts) performing the pious duties of householders which lead
to their purification. (41) Seeing again and again, the vast display of the wonderful Yogic power
of Sri Krsna, who had infinite prowess, the curious sage was filled with astonishment.(42)
Duly honoured by Sri Krsna who (behaved as though He) made much of (the first three
objects of human pursuit viz.,) Dharma (virtue), Artha (wealth) and Kama (enjoyment of life),
the Devarsi felt (much) delighted and went away constantly thinking of Him alone. (43) For
the good of the world O dear one, Lord Narayana takes the help of His (inconceivable)
Yogamaya and begins to sport as a human being. Greeted with their bashful looks and
friendly smiles by (more than) sixteen thousand noble wives, the Lord thus delightfully spent
His days (at Dwaraka). (44) O Pariksit ! he who for his part celebrates theinimitable exploits
performed by Sri Krsna—who is the (supreme) Cause of the evolution,continuance and
dissolution of the universe—or heave of them, or views with approbation their singing and
hearing, attains (loving) devotion to the almighty Lord, the Bestower of Liberation. (45)

Thus ends the sixty-ninth discourse entitled, “A Glimpse into the household life of Sri Krsna,"
in the latter half of Book Ten of the great and glorious Bhagavata-Purana.
otherwise known as the Paramahamsa-Samhita

Stine inet:
CIDOD PEELE OLS OD

अथ सप्ततितमोऽध्याय:

Discourse LXX

Sri Krsna's Daily Routine; Kings taken captive by Jarasandha
send their Messenger to Sri Krsna

श्रीगुक sara
अथोषस्युपवृत्तावां कुक्कुटान् कूजतोऽहापन्। गृहीतकण्ठ्य: पतिभिर्माधव्यो विरहातुरा: । १ ।
वयांस्यरूरुवन् कृष्णं बोधवन्तीव वन्दिन: । गायत्स्वलिष्निन्द्रणि मन्दारवनवायुभि: | २ |
मुदूप्द्धृतंतुबैदर्भीनापृष्यटनिद्योभनम्।परिंस्पाणक्खिषात्प्रियबाह्वन्तरंगप्ता।इ।
ब्राह्येमुर्ह्यउत्थायवायुपस्मृरैचमाघव।दध्याप्नसन्नकाणफ्यातग्मस पसम् । ४ |

एकं wef wea नित्यनिरस्तकल्मषम् ।
ब्रह्माख्यमस्योद्भवनाशहेतुभि स्वशक्तिभिर्लक्षितभावनिर्वृतिम् । ५ ।

अथाप्रुतोऽभ्भस्यमले यथाविधि क्रियाकलापं परिधाय वाससी ।

wen सन्ध्योपगमादि सत्तमो हुतानलो ब्रह्म जजाप वाग्यत: । ६ |
उपस्थायार्कमुद्यन्तं तर्पयित्वाऽऽत्मन: क्ता:।देव]नृषीन्पिनॄन्बृद्धान्विप्नग्नभ्यर्च्यचल्मव।म्!७।
ददौरूप्यखुरग्र्यष्णाक्षोमांनिनतिलसयअलङ्कृत्तभ्यांविप्नभ्योबद्व्रबद्बदिनेदिने'शा
गोविप्रदेवतावृद्धगुरून् भूतानि सर्वरश: । नमस्कृत्यात्मसम्भूतीर्मङ्घलानि समस्पृशत् 01
aa भूषयामास नरलोकविभूषणम्। वासोभिर्भूषणै: स्वीयैर्दिव्यस्नगनुलेपनै: १११1
