832 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 24

DAA eee eH HHH eHeweHerHsettreecenheteerkwrenkerecerenkhetrerherst ewer

BERR ARELAERER AAA ती क HANES eee

wealth and fame,of (all) blessings and sacred vows, nay, of heaven and final beatitude (too),
capable as He was to protect them (all). On that occasion all created being rejoiced much,
O protector of human beings ! (22-23) Then, permitted by Brahma (the creator), Indra along
with the (other) guardians of the (different) worlds placed the divine Dwarf before him and
actually took Him in a heavenly car to heaven.(24) Having recovered (the sovereignty of) all
the three worlds, Indra, whose fear was (now) gone, protected as he was by the arms of Lord
Vamana (his younger Brother), was invested with supreme glory and rejoiced. (25) Brahma,
Lord Siva (the Destroyer of the universe) and Sanatkumara, sages headed by Bhrgu, O
protector of men, the manes andall (other) created beings, the Siddhas and whatever (other)
heavenly beings (moving about in aerial cars) there were, (all) returned each to his own
sphere, celebrating the aforesaid extraordinary and most wonderful deed of Lord Visnu, and
extolled Aditi (as well). (26-27) -

सर्वमेतन्मयाऽऽख्यातं भवत: कुलनन्दन।उरुक्रमस्य चरिते श्रोतॄणामघमोचनम् । २८|

किं जायमान sa जात उपैति मर्त्य sare मन्त्रदृगृषि: पुरुषस्य यस्य ।२९॥
य इदं देवदेवस्य हरेरद्भुतकर्मण: । अवतारानुचरितं sad याति परां गतिम् 1301
क्रियमाणे कर्मणीदं दैवे पित्र्येऽथ मानुषे। यत्र यत्रानुकीर्त्यत aa तेषां सुकृतं fag: 1321
All the story of Lord Visnu of wide strides, which takes away the sins of those who

listen to it, has been narrated to you, 0 delight of your race ! (28) The mortal who
presumes to describe the fullest extent of the glory of Lord Visnu (who took long strides as
aforementioned) must as well (be said to) have counted the particles of dust of the (entire)
globe (which is impossible). Can any mortal (already) born or going to be born (hereafter)
reach the end of the glory of that perfect Person?—so says the seer Vasistha. (29)
Whosoever hears (or recites or remembers) this story of the descent (as Vamana) of SriHari,
the god of gods, of marvellous deeds attains the highest (divine) state. (30) In the course of
whatever religious performance, intended to propitrate the gods, the manes or any human
being (such as one's own preceptor) this story will be repeatedly recited by the performers,
the wise declare that performance of theirs as well-executed. (31)

Thus ends the twenty-third discourse, comprised in the story of
the descent of the divine Dwarf, in Book Eight of the
great and glorious Bhagavata-Purana, otherwise
known as the Paramaharhsa-Samhita.

CITE १५
PID EEE NRE OD OD

अथ चतुर्विंशोऽध्याय:
Discourse XXIV

The story of the descent of the divine Fish recounted
