628 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 23

वज AN TEM EAHA OHHH EERE KN ALT HORT NENT ONE CHER ECE CET CHEN RTE २ म न मा CN २ न २१ त्

जनस्तु ot: सुखदु:खयोश्चेत् किमात्मनश्चात्र ह भौमयोस्तत् ।

जिह्वां af संदशति स्वदद्धिस्तद्वेदनायां कतमाय कुप्येत् ।५१।

दु:खस्य हेतुर्यदि देवतास्तु किमात्मनस्तत्र विकारयोस्तत्।

यद्ङ्गमङ्गेन निहन्यते क्वचित् pelt कस्मै पुरुष: स्वदेहे ।५२।

आत्मा यदि स्यात् सुखदु:खहेतु: किमन्यतस्तत्र निजस्वभाव: |

न ह्यात्मनोऽन्यद् af तन्पृषा स्यात् क्रुध्येत कस्मान्न सुखं न दु:खम् 1५३1

अहा निमित्तं सुखदु:खयोश्चेत् किमात्मनोऽजस्य जनस्य ते वै ।

अहैर्ग्रहस्यैव वदन्ति पीडां क्रुध्येत कस्मै पुरुषस्ततोऽन्य: ।५४॥

कर्मास्तु @: सुखदु:खयोश्चेत् किमात्मनस्तद्धि जडाजडत्वे ।

देहस्त्वचित् पुरुषोऽयं सुपर्ण: क्रुध्येत कस्मै न fe कर्ममूलम् । ५५1

कालस्तु हेतु सुखदु:खयोश्चेत् किमात्मनस्तत्र तदात्मकोऽसौ ।

नाम्नेर्हि तापो न हिमस्य ad स्यात् क्रुध्येत HH न परस्य द्वन्द्वम् ।५६॥

न केनचित् af कथञ्चनास्य goo: wea: wel

यथाहम: संसृतिरूपिण: स्यादेवं wat न बिभेति भूतै; । ५७॥

Wi स आस्थाय परात्मनिष्ठामध्यासिताँ पूर्वतमैर्महर्षिभि: ।

ae तरिष्यामि et तमो मुकुन्दाङ्ध्रिनिषेवयैव uc

The Brahmana said : Neither these people nor any deity nor the self nor the stars nor

Karma nor the Time-Spirit is responsible for my joys and sorrows. The Sruti texts declare
the mind alone to be the cause (of our joys and sorrows)—the (same) mind which sets
going the course of worldly existence. (43) The powerful mind indeed sets into operation
the three Gunas (by giving rise to attachment and aversion etc.), and from the latter
proceed actions of various kinds—immaculate (Sattvika or virtuous), black (Tamasika or
sinful) and bright (Rajasika or of a mixed type—virtuous as well as sinful); thence crop up
(the various) states of existence conforming to the colour (character) of those actions. (44)
Co-existing with the thinking mind (as the Inner Controller), yet unattached to its
Operations, and full of wisdom, God, who is a friend (director) of mine (the Jiva), merely
looks on with His unclouded vision. Accepting as its own self the mind, which unfolds the
universe within itself, and enjoying the objects of the senses through attachment with the
three Gunas, the Jiva (individual sou!) gets bound. (45) Liberality (to the poor), devotion
to one's allotted duty, observance of the five Niyamas (viz., 1-external purity, 2-content-
ment, 3-austerity, 4-study of the scriptures and chanting of the Divine Name and 5-self-
surrender to God) and the five Yamas (viz., 1-non-violence. 2-truthfulness, 3-non-
thieving, 4-continence and 5-non-acquisition of property), learning, meritorious acts and
noble vows—all find their culmination in control of the mind; for subjugation of the mind
(alone) constitutes the highest Yoga (wisdom). (46) Say whatis there to be accomplished
through charitable gifts etc., by him whose mind is perfectly calm and collected ? And
what other object can be achieved through these gifts etc., by him whose mind is
uncontrolled or inert (through languor etc.) ? (47) Indeed others, i.e.. the senses (or even
the gods presiding over them—viz., Brahma and others) are under the control of the
mind. But the mind does not readily come under the control of anyone else; for the god
(of a mind) is redoubtable (being the cause of the manifold worldly sufferings) and more
powerful than the powerful, so that he who is able to bring it under contro! is adorable
