Dis. 21 ] BOOK FOUR । 383 .

धैप्तंघंघ्नंर्षं/ग्नील्किप्नेप्रेधैक्तुं’श्चंघ्नंर्व्यछै॰.’ध्रेर्व्यच्चग्रे"छांज्यॆफ्रिग्नेग्रेर्ग्रर्व्यप्रंईं{घेभेघैप्नेप्रेव्योघ्नंर्णैक्विर्घोग्भिरींप्नेप्रेर्व्यप्ने…च्चर्णैर्धघंछांध्रेक्लीघ्नंर्णेर्मीघंध्नीयींर्हीधं*‘!'/ Bee Ht

२.

. राजावाच
सभ्या: YA WE a: साधवो a इहागता: । सत्सु जिज्ञासुभिर्धर्ममावेद्यं स्वमनीषितम् । २१।
ae दण्डधरो राजा प्रजानामिह योजित: । tan वृत्तिद: स्वेषु सेतुषु स्थापिता gue । २२।
तस्य मे तदनुष्ठानाद्यानाहुर्ब्रह्मवादिन: | लोका: स्यु: कामसन्दोहा यस्य तुष्यति दिष्टदृक 1221
य उद्धेरेत्करुं राजा se धर्मेष्शिक्षयन्।प्रजानां शमलं भुङ्के भगं च स्वं जहाति स: । २४
तत् प्रंजा भर्तृपिण्डार्थं स्वार्थमेवानसूयव: | कुरुताधोक्षजधियस्तर्हि मेऽनुग्रह: कृत: ।२५॥
यूयं तदनुमोदध्वं पितृदेवर्षयोऽमला: । कर्तु: दास्तुरनुज्ञातुस्तुल्यं Te तत्फलम् । २६॥
अस्ति यज्ञपतिर्नाम केषाञ्चिदर्हसत्तमा: । इहामुत्र च लक्ष्यन्ते ज्योत्स्नावत्य: क्वचिद्भुव: 1201
मनोरुत्तानपादस्य ध्रुवस्यापि महीपते: | प्रियव्रतस्य राजर्षेरङ्गस्यास्मत्पितु पितु: । २८।
ईदूशानामथान्येषामजस्य च भवस्य gree बलेश्चापि कृत्यमस्ति गदाभृता । २९॥
दौहित्रादीनृते yer: शोच्यान् धर्मविमोहितान्। वर्गस्वर्गापवर्गाणां प्रायेणैकात्म्यहेतुना 13.0 |
The king said : Worthies present here, may you all be blessed. Pious souls gathered
here, pray listen ! Those who are eager to know what Dharma (righteousness) is ought to
submit their own conception (about it) before the wise. (21) As a ruler on this earth | have
been assigned the role of punishing the evil-doers, protecting the people (against calami-
ties); affording them means of subsistence and keeping them severally within their bounds
(the spheres allotted to them by the Sastras). (22) By discharging these functions | as such
hope to attain those realms which yield what one desires and which—as the expounders of
the Vedas declare—are earned by him who wins the pleasure of God (who has the record
of all our past doings before His very eyes). (23) A sovereign who levies taxes but fails to
teach the people their sacred duties (merely) reaps their sin and forfeits his fortune. (24) Free
from acarping spirit and with your mind fixed on Lord Visnu (whois above sense-perception),
therefore, my (beloved) subjects, do your own duty for the good in the other world of your
ruler (myself); (for) therein lies your own interest and thereby you will have done a (great)
favour to me. (25) Kindly lend your hearty support to this (prayer of mine), O pure-hearted
manes, gods and sages for the fruit which accrues hereafter to the doer, the instructor and
the countenancer is (just) the same. (26) In the opinion of some (believing souls); O most
worthy ones; there is a God (who dispenses the fruit of all actions); for both here and
hereafter can be seen in some rare cases places of enjoyment as well as bodies which are
endowed with (uncommon) brilliance. (27) In the opinion of Swayambhuva Manu (the first
ruler of the earth), Uttanapada (his younger son), king Dhruva (Uttanapada's illustrious son),
the royal sage Priyavrata ( Swayambhuva's elder son), my grandfather, Anga, nay, of
Brahma (the birthless creator) and Lord Siva (the Progenitor of the universe), as well as of
(the demon kings) Prahrada and Bali (Praharada's grandson) and others like those
enumerated above, one has to do with (it is necessary to postulate the existence of)
Bhagavan Narayana (the Wielder of a mace), the sole independent means of securing the
three objects of human pursuit (viz., religious merit, earthly possessions and sense—
gratification) as well as heavenly bliss and final beatitude, the only dissenters being (my
father) Vena (the grandson of Death) and ( a few) others, who were deluded in the matter
of righteousness and (therefore) deserve to be pitied. (28—30)

we: क्षिणोत्यन्वहमेधती ot यथा पदाङ्गुष्ठविनि:सूता सरित् ।३१॥
यदङ्धिमूले कृतकेतन: पुन: न संसृति क्लेशवहां प्रपद्यते । ३२॥
