694 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 7

जशाक EEE RT माशा यशा RR RR TTR RTT BRM ARTE ROR RRO RINE

pupil of Hiranyanabha, taught twenty-four collections to his (own) pupils; while Avantya,
(who was) a man of self-control, taught the rest to his. (80)

Thus ends the six discourse entitled "The classification of the Vedas into (so many)
Sakhas schools", in Book Twelve of the great and glorious Bhagavata-Purana,
otherwise known as the Paramahamsa-Samhita.

ISR Erry

अथ सप्तमोऽध्याय:

Discourse VII

Different Schools of Atharvaveda and the Characteristics of the Puranas
सूत उवाच
अथर्ववित् सुमन्तुश्च शिष्यमध्यापयत् wan । संहितां सोऽपि पथ्याय वेददर्शाय चोक्तवान्। १ ।
शौक्कायनिर्ब्रह्मवलिर्मोदोष: पिप्पलायनि: । वेददर्शस्य free पथ्यश्ञिष्यानथो श्रृणु । २ ।
कुमुद: शुनको wer जाजलिश्चाप्यथर्ववित्। ay: शिष्योऽथाङ्गिरस: सैन्धवायन wa च ।
अधीयेतां संहिते द्वे सावर्ण्यद्यास्तथापरे । ३ |
नक्षत्रकल्प aha कर्यपाङ्गिरसादय: | एते आधर्वणाचार्या: शृणु पौराणिकान् मुने । ४ ।

Sita began again : Sumantu versed in Atharva-Veda, taught his collection to his pupil
(Kabandha*) who in his turn taught it (in two parts) to (his pupils) Pathya and Vedadarsa.
(1) Sauklayani, Brahmabali, Modosa and Pippalayani were the pupils of Vedadarga (who
taught them his collection in four parts); now hear the names of Pathya’s pupils: Kumuda,
Sunaka and Jajali, a master of Atharvaveda, O Brahmana sage! (were the pupils of Pathya,
from whom they received his collection in three parts). Babhru, a pupil of Sunaka (born in
the line of Angira), and Saindhavayana (another pupil) studied two (separate) collections
(at the feet of their master); (while) Savarnya and others were the pupils of Babhru and
Saindhavayana. Even so there were others, e. g., Naksatrakalpa and Santi (the authors
of Kalpas or tretises of these very names on ritual acts, giving rules for them), KaSyapa and
Angirasa. These were the teachers of Atharva-Veda; (now) hear of.the teachers of the
Puranas, O Saunaka ! (2—4)

Tait: कश्यपश्च सावर्णिरकृतव्रण: । वैशम्पायनहारीतौ ve वै पौराणिका इमे । ५ ।
अधीयन्त व्यासशिष्यात् deat मत्पितुर्मुखात्। एकैकामहमेतेषां शिष्य: सर्वा: समध्यगाम् । ६ |
कश्यपोऽहं च सावर्णी रामशिष्योऽकृतव्रण: | अधीमहि व्यासरिष्याच्चतस्रो मूलसंहिता: । ७ |

Trayyaruni, KaSyapa, Savarni, Akrtavrana, Vaisampayana and Harita—these, as a
matter of fact, are the six teachers of the Puranas. (5) They learnt one collection each from

"Vide Visnu-Purana, which says:.
ave स  मुनि: | सुमन्तुरमितद्युति:।
शिष्यमध्यापयामास कवन्धं asf च द्विधा॥
Fa q लददर्शाय तथा WA तवान्।

