Dis. 10] BOOK SEVEN 701

SERA EARAAREAE OEE E LE REA THA ENCE TES EERE fh ah ft irri it tah eirerint:

duly attained to You. (28) This (divine) form of Yours, O Lord, is capable of protecting from
all dangers, nay, even from Death bent on destruction, anyone who contemplates on It and
whose mind is completely subdued. (29)

मैवं वरोऽसुराणां ते sea: पद्मसम्भव। वर: क्रूरनिसर्गाणामहीनाममृतं यथा । ३०॥
Lord Nrsimha said : No more boon of this kind ought to be bestowed by you on the

Asuras, O Brahma (sprung from a lotus). A boon conferred on those who are cruel by nature
proves harmful as milk given to serpents. (30)

ARG उवाच
इत्युक्त्वा भगवान् राजंस्तत्रैवान्तर्दधे हरि: । अदृश्य: सर्वभूतानां पूजित: परमेष्ठिना । ३१॥
तत: WR शिरसा arg परमेष्ठिनम्। भवं प्रजापतीन्देवान्प्रह्रादो भगवत्कला: 1321
aa: काव्यादिभि: सार्धं मुनिभि: कमलासन: | दैत्यानां दानवानां च प्रह्रादमकरोत् पतिम् ।३३॥
sire ततो देवा: प्रयुज्य परमाशिष: । स्वधामानि aq राजन्ब्रह्माद्या: प्रतिपूजिता: । ३४॥

Narada went on: Having spoken thus, O Yudhisthira, and worshipped by Brahma
(the highest god), Lord Sri Hari, who cannot (ordinarily) be seen by all created beings
disappeared on that very spot. (31) Then, duly worshipping Brahma (the creator), Lord Siva
(the Source of the universe), the lords of creation (Marici and others) and the gods (Indra and
others), who are (So many) rays (as it were) of the Lord, Prahrada made obeisance (to them)
with his head (bent low). (32) After that, along with the sages headed by Kavya (the-sage
Sukra, the preceptor of the demon race), Brahma (who has his seat on a lotus) installed
Prahrada as the ruler of the Daityas and the Danavas. (33) Then, felicitating Prahrada and
invoking the choicest blessings (on him), and honoured (by him) in return, the gods, headed
by Brahma, returned to their (respective) abodes, O king (Yudhisthira) ! (34)

पुनश्च व्रिप्रशापेन राक्षसौ तौ बभूवतु: । कुम्भकर्णदशग्रीवो wit at रामविक्रमै: । ३६॥
wart युधि निर्भिन्नहदयो रामसायकै: । तच्चित्तौ जहतुर्देहें यथा प्राक्तनजन्मनि 1३७1
ताबिहाथ = Gait शिशुपालकरूषजौ । हरो वैरानुबन्धेन पश्यतस्ते समीयतु: । ३८॥
एन: पूर्वकृतं यत् ae राजान: कृष्णवैरिण: | जहुस्त्वन्ते तदात्मान: कीट: tera यथा । ३९
यथा यथा भगवतो wee परमयाभिदा । नृपाश्चैद्यादय: wet staf ययु: ।`४०॥

In this way those two attendants of Lord Visnu (viz., Jaya and Vijaya) were reduced to
the state of Daityas (sons of Diti) under the imprecation of the Brahmanas (the sages Sanaka
and his three brothers). (And) due to their hostile feeling they were slain by Sri Hari, present
in their heart. Again they appeared as a pair of Raksasas (ogres), Kumbhakarna (one having
ears as big as jars) and Ravana (a ten-headed monster). They were disposed of by the
prowess of Sri Rama. (35-36) Lying on the battle-field with theirheart torn open by the arrows
of Sri Rama, they shed their body as in their previous birth, their mind fixed on Him. (37)
Further, reborn as Sigupala and Dantavaktra (the son of Kartisa) in this life, the two got
merged in Sri Hari by virtue of their deep-rooted enmity as you have seen (for yourself). (38)
Becoming one with Him at the last moment (by fixing their mind on Him), evenasa caterpillar
gets transformed into a wasp through contemplation on the wasp, princes inimical to Sti
Krsna got rid (through such meditation) of whatever sin had been committed (by them)
before (their death). (39) Even as devotees attained similarity of form with the Lord (by
contemplating on Him) through supreme Devotion characterized by a feeling of identity (with
