Dis. 8] BOOK SIX 587

RHEE HSAAK LL ३ .६ .३..६..३.३.३.७-३-३.३.३.३.३.३.७.३...३.३.३.३.३ ७७७ LLL LEK KAHANE SOK ELH .. ३.३.३.३.३..३.३..३..३.३.३ ८.६ .३.३.३.३.३
श्रीगुक उवाच
qa: पुरोहितस्त्वाष्टो महेन्द्रायानुपृच्छते। नारायणाख्यं वर्माह तदिहैकमना: श्रृणु । ३ ।
Sri Suka replied : Appointed as a priest, Viswardipa (son of Twasta) taught the Kavaca
(prayer serving as a protection), named after Lord Narayana, to the great Indra, who had

inquired about it. Listen to it with undivided attention on this occasion. (3)
विश्वरूप उवाच
धौताङ्ध्रिपाणिराचम्य सपवित्र उदङ्मुख: | कृतस्वाङ्गकरन्यासो मन्त्राभ्यां वाग्यत: शुचि: । ४ ।
नारायणमयं वर्म सन्नह्येदे भय AMT | पादयोर्जानुनोरूर्वोरुदरे हृद्यथोरसि । ५ ।
मुखे शिरस्यानुपूर्व्यदोङ्कारादीनि विन्यसेत्। ॐ नमो नारायणायेति विपर्ययमथापि वा । ६ ।
करन्यासं तत: pale द्वादशाक्षरविद्यया। प्रणवादियकारान्तमङ्गुल्यङ्गुष्ठपर्वसु । ७ ।
न्यसेद्धृदय ओडङ्कारं विकारमनु मूर्धनि । षकारं तु भ्रुवोर्मध्ये णकारं शिखया दिरोत् । ८ ।
वेकारं नेत्रयोर्युञ्ज्यान्नकारं सर्वसन्धिषु । मकारमस्त्रमुद्दिषय मन्त्रमूर्तिर्भवेद् बुध: । ९ ।
सविसर्गं फडन्तं तत् सर्वदिक्षु विनिर्दिशोत्। ॐ विष्णवे नम इति । १०॥
आत्मानं परमं ध्यायेद ध्येयं षट्शक्तिभिर्युतम् । विद्यातेजस्तपोमूर्तिमिमं मन्त्रमुदाहरेत् 1221
ViSwarupa began ; In the face of danger, a devotee who has finished his bath and
other purificatory rites (such as Sandhya) should wash his hands and feet, (thrice) sip
a little water (with the Lord's names KeSava, Narayana and Madhava on his lips) and,
(thus) purified, squat (on a proper seat) with his face (turned) towards the north and
wearing a ring of the sacred KuSa grass (on the ring finger of each hand). (And) after
silently performing (what is known as) the Nyasa (consecration or spiritualization) of the
(various) members of his body and hands with the two Mantras (sacred formulas
mentioned hereafter), he should arm himself with the protective covering (in the shape
of the following prayer) sacred to Lord Narayana. (To commence the rite of Nyasa or
consecration) he should (first of all mentally) locate the syllables of the (eight-syllabled
Mantra) "OM Namo Narayanaya"—OM and so on—in order of sequence in his feet, knee-
joints, thighs, belly, region of the heart, chest, mouth and (crown of) the head (thus identifying
his body with the Mantra and thereby spiritualizing it and making it fit for putting on the divine
armour), or even in the reverse order (known as the Samhara-Nyasa, as opposed to the
Utpatti-Nyasa, placing the syllables 'YA' and so on—followed by an Anuswara or nasal
sound represented by the letter '‘m'—in his head, mouth etc.). (4—6) Thereafter he should
perform the Karanyasa (consecration or spiritualization of the parts of both his hands) with
the twelve-syllabled Mantra (OM Namo Bhagavate Vasudevaya), locating the syllables
beginning with OM and ending with 'YA' in his (eight) fingers and (upper and lower) thumb-
joints. (7) (Thirdly) he should place the (first) syllable 'OM' of the following Mantra "OM
Visnave Namah" in his heart, then 'Vi' (the first letter of the second syllable) in the crown of
his head, and 'S' (the second letter of the same syllable) in the middle of his eye-brows, and
the (third) syllable 'Na’ in the Sikhan (the tuft of hair more or less in the rear of the crown).
(8) He should (mentally) unite (identify) the (fourth) syllable 'Ve' with his eyes and the (fifth)
syllable ‘Na’ with all the joints (of his body). Then putting the (last) syllable ‘Ma'—followed
by a Visarga (a distinct hard aspiration, represented by the letter 'h') and the interjection
‘Phat'—to the use of driving away evil spirits, he should assign it to all the (ten) directions
(in order to block them against the inroads of evil spirits and demons etc., repeating the
formula "Mah Astraya Phat" and snapping the thumb and the middle finger together
successively in each direction sought to be so blocked). (In this way) the wise devotee

