Dis. 58] BOOK TEN 361

न्विने EI EE Te OE EE EE TER TN ON

POAT

we देवस्य सवितुर्दुहिता पतिमिच्छती । विष्णुं वरेण्यं वरदं तप: परममास्थिता । २०॥
ara uff वृणे a aya श्रीनिकेतनम्। deat मे स भगवान् मुकुन्दोऽनाथसंश्रय: 1221
कालिन्दीति समाख्याता वसामि यमुनाजले । निर्मिते भवने fom यावदच्युतदर्शनम् 122
तथावदद् गुडाकेशो वासुदेवाय सोऽपि ताम्।रथमारोप्य ae विद्वान् धर्मराजमुपागमत् 1231
aed कृष्ण: Be: पार्थानां परमाद्भुतम्। कारबामास नगरं विचित्रं विश्वकर्मणा ex)

भगवांस्तत्र निवसन् स्वानां प्रियचिकीर्षया । अग्नये खाण्डवं दातुमर्जुनस्यास सारथि: । २५॥
सोऽग्निरतुष्टौ धनुरदाद्धयाञ्छ्वेतान् रथं नृप । अर्जुनावाक्षयो qu वर्म चाभेद्यमस्रिभि: 1261
wag मोचितो ag: सभां सख्य उपाहरत्। यस्मिन् दुर्योधनस्यासीज्जलस्थलदृशिभ्रम: 1201

वा (for such was her name) replied : Daughter of the glorious sun-god, | seek Lord
Visnu, the Bestower of boons of one’s choice, who is worth wooing (in everyway), for my
husband and am (accordingly) engaged in the severest (form of) austerities. (20) | would
choose for my spouse none else than that Abode of Sri (the goddess of fortune), O gallant
one ! May that Lord, the Bestower of Liberation and the Refuge of the helpless, be propitious
to me. (21) Known by the name of Kalindi, | dwell in a palace constructed by my father under
the water of the Yamuna and propose to stay there till |am able to see that immortal Lord." (22)
Arjuna (who had conquered sleep) spoke accordingly to Sri Krsna (son of Vasudeva) and He
too, who knew of it (already), picked her up into the chariot and drove (back) intothe presence
of the king (Yudhisthira). (23) Sri Krsna had, as soon as requested, got built (long ago) by
Vigwakarma (the architect of the gods) a most wonderful and picturesque city for the sons
of Pandu. (24) Residing there in order to oblige His own people (the Pandavas as well as their
mother and wife), the Lord had (some time before) acted as the charioteer of Arjuna in order
to consign (the forest of) Knandava (owned by Indra) to the god of fire. (25) Pleased (with
the aforesaid service), the said god of fire had conferred on Arjuna, O king, the bow
(G&ndiva), (four) white horses as well as a chariot (drawn by them), a pair of inexhaustible
quivers and an armour which could not be pierced by archers. (26) Nay, rescued from the
(said) conflagration (which consumed the forest of Knandava), Maya (the architect of the
demons) had (built and) presented (as a token of gratitude) to his friend (and benefactor,
Arjuna) an assembly hall, in which optic illusion seized Duryodhana, who mistook a sheet
of water for a paved floor and vice versa. (27)

स तेन waa: सुहृद्धिश्चानुमोदित: | आययो द्वारकां भूय: सात्यकिप्रमुखैर्वृत: । २८॥
अथोपयेमे कालिन्दीं qyrada ऊर्जिते। वितन्वन् परमानन्दं स्वानां परममङ्गलम् ।२९॥

Duly permitted by Arjuna and with the consent of His (other) friends and relatives
(Emperor Yudhisthira and so on), the Lord, accompanied by Satyak! and others, returned to
Dwaraka. (28) Now, on a certain day, when the planets exerted a favourable influence and
when the season (too) was most propitious and a most auspicious star was in the ascendant,
the Lord, who was supreme felicity (personified), espoused K&lindi, (thereby) bringing
highest joy to His own people. (29)

विन्दानुविन्दावावन्त्यौ दुर्योधनवज्ञानुगौ । स्वयंवरे स्वभगिनीं कृष्णे सक्तां न्यषेधताम् 1301
राजाधिदेव्यास्तनया मित्रविन्दां पितृष्सु: । प्रसह्य हृतवान् कृष्णो राजन् Tal प्रपङ्यताम् । ३१॥

