Dis. 2 } BOOK TWELVE 673

PME EEO EEE EEE SOS OE OE CELE HOE न न वन्र

their wealth and women by greedy and merciless Ksatriyas, behaving like robbers, people
will resort to mountains and forests and subsist on leaves, roots, meat, honey, fruits, flowers
and seeds. (7—9) (Already) oppressed by famine and (heavy) taxation, people will perish
through drought, (excessive) cold, storms, (scorching) sunshine,(heavy) rain, snowfall and
mutual conflict. (10) In the age of Kali men will be tormented by hunger and thirst, ailments
and worry and their maximum age will be only twenty to thirty years. (11) When through the
evil effect of Kali the bodies of men get reduced in size and emaciated, the righteous course
chalked out by the Vedas for men fo!lowing the system of Varnas (grades of society) and
Aéramas (stages in life) gets lost, when religion is replaced by heresy to a large extent and
rulers mostly turn out to be thieves, when men take to various pursuits like theft, mendacity,
wanton destruction of life and so on; when members of the three (higher) castes are mostly
converted into Sudras and cows are reduced to the size of she-goats and begin to yield as
much milk; when people belonging to the four Asramas mostly become householders and
the conotation of relationship will extend only to the relatives of one's wife; annual plants get
stunted in growth and trees are mostly reduced to the size of a Sami (a small tree); clouds
will mostly end in flashes of lightning (rather than pour rain) and dwellings will mostly look
desolate (for want of hospitality to strangers); in this way when the Kali age, whose career
is so severe to the people, is well-nigh past, the Lord willappear in His divine form (consisting
of Sattva alone) for the protection of virtue. (12—16)

श्वरस्याखिलात्मन: । धर्मत्राणाय साधूनां जन्म कर्मापनुत्तये igo!
सम्भलग्राममुख्यस्य व्राह्मणस्य महात्मन: | भवने विष्णुयशस: कल्कि: प्रादुर्भविष्यति । १८|
sae देवदत्तं जगत्पति: | असिनासाधुदमनमष्टैश्वर्यगुणान्वित: 1१९॥
विचरन्नाशुना क्षोण्यां हयेनाप्रतिमद्युति: । नृपलिङ्गळ्छदो दस्यून् कोटिञो निहनिष्यति । २०

Lord Visnu, adored of the whole animate and inanimate creation, and the Soul of the
universe, appears (in this world of matter) for protecting the virtue of the righteous and
wiping out (the entire stock of) their Karma (and thereby liberating them). (17) The Lord will
appear under the name of Kalki in the house of the high-souled Visnuyasa—the foremost
Brahmana of the village of Sambhala. (18) Riding a fleet horse named Devadaita
(obviously because it will be presented to Him by the gods) and capable of subduing the
wicked, the Lord of the universe, wielding (the well-known) eight divine powers (Anima and
$0 on) and possessed of (endless) virtues and matchless splendour, will traverse the globe
on that swift horse and exterminate with His sword in tens of millions robbers wearing the
insignia of royalty. (19-20)

अथ aut भविष्यन्ति मनांसि विहादानि वै । वासुदेवाङ्गरागातिपुण्यगन्धानिलस्पृशाम् ।
पौरजानपदानां वे हतेष्खिलदम्युषु । २१॥

तेषां प्रजाविसर्गश्च स्थविष्ठ: सम्भविष्यति । वासुदेवे भगवति सत्त्वमूर्तौ हदि स्थिते । २२।

यदावतीर्णो भगवान् कल्किर्धर्मपतिर्हरि: । कृतं भविष्यति तदा प्रजासुतिश्च सात्विकी । २३।

दा aes wig तथा तिष्यबृहस्पती । एकगञ्ञो समेष्यन्ति तदा भवति तत् कृतम् । २४।

Now when ail the robbers are (thus) exterminated, the minds of the people of the cities
and the countryside will become pure indeed because of their enjoying the breezes wafting
the most sacred fragrance of pigments on the person of Lord Vasudeva (21) With Lord
Vasudeva, the embodiment of strength, in their heart their progeny will grow exceedingly
strong (as before).(22) When Lord Sri Hari, the Protector of Dharma, appears as Kalki,
Satyayuga will prevail (once more) at that time and the progeny of the people will be of a
Sattvika (virtuous) disposition. (23) When the moon, the sun and the Jupiter rise together
