374 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 19

PRA RR RE A RHEE EAHA AER AER ETHER EAEHOK HEHE TALEO ELSE HEAR E LEH I He

वीरश्चाश्वमुपादाय पितृयज्ञमथाव्रजत् । तदवद्यं हरे रूपं जगृहुर्नानदुर्बला: 1221
am रूपाणि जगृहे sat हयजिहीर्षया । तानि पापस्य खण्डानि लिङ्गं खण्डमिहोच्यते 1231
एवमिन्रे Read वेन्ययज्ञजिघांसया । तद्गृहीतविसृष्टेषु पाखण्डेषु मतिर्नृणाम् । २४॥
धर्म इत्युपधर्मेषु नग्नरक्तपटादिषु | प्रायेण सज्जते VAT पेशलेषु च वाग्मिषु 124)

Creating a thick mass of darkness, the mighty Indra stole once more under cover of
it the horse, tied with the gold chain, from the sacrificial post and the wooden ring placed
in front of it (to which the horse had been secured). (19) As Indra was hurriedly passing
through the skies Atri directed the attention (of Vijitaswa). The hero, however, did not
obstruct him, holding as he did (in his hand) a staff with a skull on its top. (20) Urged,
however, by Atri, he set an arrow to his bowstring in indignation and aimed it at him. Indra
(thereupon) gave up the horse as well as his garb and stood invisible. (21) The hero too
thereupon returned to (the scene of) his father’s sacrifice, taking the horse (with him): It
was (some) weak-minded people who accepted as their own the reproachful garb
assumed and shed by Indra. (22) The hypocritical garbs and appearances that Indra
assumed with the intention of stealing away the horse (came to be known by the name of
'‘Pakhanda' inasmuch as they) were the marks ofa sinful propensity (पापस्य खण्डानि). The word
'‘Khanda’ has been used here in the sense of a mark. (23) In this way the mind of men was
(foolishly) attracted towards the deceitful garbs assumed and dropped by him (Indra) when
he stole away the horse with the motive of interrupting the sacrificial performance of Prthu,
as well as towards false creeds passing as true religion under the attractive labels of
‘Nagnas (a fraternity of naked mendicants), Raktapatas (monks with red robes) and so on,
and preached with exceptional eloquence. (24-25)

तदभिज्ञाय भगवान् पृथु: पृथुपराक्रम:।इन्द्रय कुपितो बाणमादत्तोद्यतकार्मुक: 126 |
तमृत्विज: शक्रवधाभिसन्धितं विचक्ष्य दुष्प्रेक्ष्यमसह्यरंहसम् ।
निवारयामासुरहो महामते न युज्यतेऽत्रान्यवध: प्रचोदितात् ।२७॥
अयातयामोपहवैरनन्तरं प्रसह्य राजन् जुहवाम तेऽहितम् RCI
When the venerable Prthu, who possessed extraordinary prowess, came to know this,
he lifted his bow and took up an arrow in (great) indignation to strike at Indra. (26) Prthu's
might and rapidity of movement were irresistible; he was terrible to look at (on account of his
great fury). When the priests officiating at the sacrifice saw that he had made up his mind
to kill Indra, they prevented him, saying, O king of great wisdom, it is not worthy of you to kill
anyone other than the beast approved of (by the scriptures) on this (sacred) occasion. (27)
We will invoke to this very place through powerful spells Indra, who has thwarted your

purpose and has been eclipsed by your glory, and will without delay forcibly throw your
enemy, O king, (as an oblation) into the fire. (28)

इत्यामन्त्य क्रतुपतिं विदुरास्यत्विजो रुषा । स्रुग्घस्ताञ्जुह्वतोऽभ्येत्य way: प्रत्यषेधत 129!
न aa भवतामिन्द्रो यद्यज्ञो भगवत्तनु: । यं जिघांसथ यज्ञेन यस्येष्टास्तनव: सुरा: ।३०॥
यदिदं uaa महद्धर्मव्यतिकरं fami इन्द्रेणानुष्ठितं wa: कर्मैतद्विजिघांसता । ३१1
न्नैवात्मने महेन्द्रय रोषमाहर्तुमर्हसि । उभावपि हि GE त उत्तमश्लोकविग्रहौ 1331

