450 १ SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 3

SRRRERE AAAS SEARCHES HSER EH SH SORES TELE ES EH EA ESE EHLERS ENE eee Ieee eRe

ay कथञ्चित्स्खलनक्षुत्पतनजृम्भणदुरवस्थानादिषु विवशानां 4: स्मरणाय ज्वरमरणदशायामपि
सकलकश्मलनिरसनानि तव गुणकृतनामधेयानि वचनगोचराणि भवन्तु । १२।

Otherwise we do not perceive any gain worth the name to You even through this
sacrifice—cumbrous with elaborate details—(being carried on) here inasmuch as You are
the very embodiment ofall the (four) objects of human pursuit perennially and directly flowing
in an abundant degree from Your own Self and not conflicting with each other. In our case,
however, who seek blessing (of various kinds), O Lord, this (sacrifice) should only prove to
be a means of propitiating You (and thereby fetching the desired boon). (7-8) That is why,
out of abundant compassion for us, ignorant as we are of our highest good, O Supreme
Person, who are greater than the greatest. You have appeared here of Your own accord like
one expecting homage, with intent to reveal to us Your own glory known by the name of final
beatitude as well as to bestow (on us) our desired blessings—even though You have not
been (properly) worshipped—just as a sage would approach ignorant people of his own
accord. (9) Now that You—the foremost of those who grant boons (to their votaries)—have
manifested Yourself before the eyes of Your own devotees at the sacrificial performance of
this royal sage (Nabhi), this itself constitutes a (unique) benediction, O most adorable
one.(10) O Lord, Your hosts of virtues are incessantly recounted (even) by sages revelling
in the Self—who have burnt all their sins with the fire of wisdom fanned by detachment
(dispassion) and who have (as a consequence) imbibed Your nature—inasmuch as the
uttering of Your praises is the (only) source of the highest blessings for them (since they too
are not easily graced with Your sight). (11) Therefore, while stumbling, sneezing, fallingdown
and yawning, when placed in a sad plight and so on even in (high) fever and while dying—
when we are powerless to remember You—let Your name descriptive of Your virtues and
dispelling (all) our sins somehow appear on our tongue. (12)

प्रजायामर्थप्रत्ययो धनदमिवाधन: फलीकरणम्। 231 को वा इह तेऽपराजितोऽपराजितया माययानवसित-
नु :1१४॥ Gg ह वाव aa पुनरदभ्रकर्तरिह

Moreover, this royal sage (Nabhi), who is desirous of (obtaining) progeny, has resorted
to You—competent as You are to grant (all) desired boons, including (an abode in) heaven
and (even) release (from the toils of birth and death)—with the hope of (having) a son like
You, and regarding progeny as the (highest) object of human pursuit, evenasa pauper would
approach Kubera (the god of riches) with the hope of obtaining husk. (13) Who is there on
this earth that has not waited on the feet of exalted souls and (yet) who has not been worsted
by Your invincible and inscrutable Maya, whose understanding has (accordingly) not been
clouded by that Maya and whose nature has not been obscured by the vehemence of poison
in the shape of pleasures of sense? (14) Be pleased to ignore, by (Your) undifferentiating
outlook towards all, O God of gods, the disrespect shown by us ignorant people to You, the
Supreme Deity, in the sense that You, O Lord of unlimited activity, have been duly
(respectfully) called here by us, who are so stupid as to look upon progeny as the (highest)
object of human pursuit. (15)

श्रीजुक उवाच
इति निगदेनाभिडूयमज्ञो भगवाननिमिषर्षभो वर्षधराभिवादिताभिवन्दितचरण: सदयमिदमाह Le |
डा Suka resumed : While He was thus being extolled through a hymn couched in prose,

and when those priests (the adored of king Nabhi, the ruler of an entire subdivision of
Jambtdwipa) bowed at His feet, Lord Visnu (the foremost of the gods) graciously spoke the
