Dis. 18 ] .BOOK FOUR 369

RHKEAHHHHEHAAHHKLLERAHKAUHLEREEKMTSEHREEKCOCHHEEKE RL ERRATA TH EKA HMR AA Hee re a

Supreme Person, the Maker (of the universe), who (when necessary) brings into play and
then withdraws into Himself His (manifold) potencies and who brings about the creation,
preservation and dissolution of this universe by means of His potencies in the shape of the
five gross elements, the ten Indriyas and the deities presiding over them, the faculty of
understanding and egotism. (33) Itis You, O birthless Lord, who, in order to place on a sound
footing the creation brought forth by You and consisting of the five gross elements, the
Indriyas and the inner sense, lifted me up from the depths of the ocean and took me out of
water assuming the form of the primaeval Boar. (34) Appearing in the form of a hero, You,
who once played the role of lifting up the earth, now seek to kill me with Your fierce arrows
for the sake of milk, keen as You are to protect (all) created beings who have taken up their
abode in me as in a boat on the surface of water ! (35) Surely the doings of divine
personages (like You) cannot be known by people of my ilk, whose mental horizonis clouded
by Your Maya (deluding potency), which brings forth this creation made up of the three
Gunas. Hail to such personages, who bring renown to heroes themselves ! (36)

Thus ends the seventeenth discourse entitled "The Taming of Earth" forming part of the
"Conquest of Prthu", in Book Four of the great and glorious Bhagavata-Purana,
otherwise known as the Paramahamsa-Samhita.

cat Peet fea $5
mcs Sieve

अथाष्टादशोऽध्याय:

Discourse XVIII
King Prthu milks goddess Earth in the form of a cow
मेत्रेय उवाच

sa पृथुमभिष्ट्यं रुषा प्रस्फुरिताधरम्। पुनराहावनिर्भीता संस्तभ्यात्मानमात्मना । १ ।

संनियच्छाभिभो मन्युं निबोध श्रावितं च मे। सर्वत: सारमादत्ते यथा मधुकरो बुध: । २ ।

अस्मिँल्लोकेऽथवामुष्मिन्मुनिभिस्तत्त्वदर्शिभि: । दृष्टा योगा: प्रयुक्ताश्च पुंसां sa: प्रसिद्धये । ३ ।

तानातिष्ठति a: सम्यगुपायान् पूर्वदर्शितान्। अवर: sega stem विन्दतेऽञ्जसा । ४ ।

ताननादृत्य यो विद्वानर्थानारभते स्वयम्।तस्य व्यभिचरन्त्यर्था आरब्धाश्च Wa: पुन: । ५ I

Ga सृष्टा ह्योषधयो ब्रह्मणा या विशाम्पते। भुज्यमाना मया दृष्टां असद्भिरधृतव्रतै: । ६ |

अपालितानादृता च भवद्भिर्लोकपालकै: । चोरीभूतेऽथ लोकेऽहं यज्ञार्थेऽग्रसमोषधी: । ७ ।

नूनं ता वीरुध: क्षीणा मयि कालेन भूयसा।तत्र योगेन दृष्टेन भवानादातुमर्हति । ८ |

aa कल्पय मे ak येनाहं वत्सला vai del क्षीरमयान् कोमाननुरूपं च दोहनम्। ९ ।

दोग्धारं च महाबाहो भूतानां भूतभावन। अन्नमीप्सितमूर्जस्वद्भगवान् वाञ्छते यदि । १०॥

Wa च He मां राजन्देववृष्टं यथा पय:। अपर्तावपि ws a उपावर्तेत A विभो ।११॥
Maitreya continued : It was thus that goddess Earth glorified Prthu, whose lips were
quivering through anger. She was frightened; but she made herself quite and steady with an
effort of her will and spoke again:—(1) "O Lord ! You possess power to do anything that You
please; kindly control Your wrath and consider what | tell You (in humble submission). Like

the bee, a wise man takes the essence from everything. (2) Sages who have realized the
Truth have discovered and tested methods for the realization of human ends here as well
