Dis. 14] BOOK NINE 57

त्क ee ARETEE EEE PSA SAA SPER २१ २२२२ २२२२ २२१२ २२२२ ११२२ १

विधायालीकविश्रम्भमज्ञेषु त्यक्तसौहदा: । नवं नवमभीप्सन्त्य: पुंश्चल्य: स्वैरवृत्तय: ।३८।
संवत्सरान्ते हि भवानेकरात्रं मयेश्चर । वत्स्यत्यपत्यानि च a भविघ्यन्त्यपराणि भो: । ३९॥

Urvasi replied : Do not die, a man that you are; nor let these wolves (in the form of the
turbulent senses) eat you up. Indeed there is no friendly feeling for anyone in women, their
heart being akin to that of wolves. (36) Women kill for the sake of even a trifle their trusting
husband or even a brother; for they are merciless, cruel, not easily forgiving, (and) ready to
take great risks for their beloved objects. (37) Having cast away (all) friendly feeling after
inspiring confidence in ignorant people through deceit and ever longing newer and newer
lovers, immoral women lead a wanton life. (38) Atthe end of a year you will cohabit with me
for a single night, O powerful lord; and you will have other issues too (in addition to the one
already conceived by me through union with you). (39)

अन्तर्वत्नीमुपालक्ष्य देवीं स प्रययौ पुरम्। पुनस्तत्र गतोऽब्दान्त sdeff वीरमातरम्।४०।
उपलभ्य मुदा युक्त: समुवास war Pam अथैनमुर्वशी प्राह कृपणं विरहातुरम् ॥४१॥।
गन्धर्वानुपधावेमांस्तुभ्यं दास्यन्ति मामिति । तस्य संस्तुवतस्तुष्टा अग्निस्थालीं ददुर्नृप ।
saait मन्यमानस्तां सोऽबुध्यत चरन् वने ।॥४२1
wet न्यस्य वने रात्वा गृहानाध्यायतो निझि । त्रेतायाँ संप्रवृत्तायाँ मनसि त्रय्यवर्तत ।४३।
स्थालीस्थानं गतोऽश्वत्थं aim विलक्ष्य स: । तेन द्वे अरणी कृत्वा उर्वशीलोककाम्यया ।४४॥
उर्वशीं मन्त्रतो ध्यायन्नधरारणिमुत्तराम्। आत्मानमुभयोर्मध्ये यत् तत् प्रजननं प्रभु: ISG
awe निर्मन्थनाज्जातो जातवेदा विभावसु: । त्रव्या स विद्यया राज्ञा पुत्रत्वे कल्पितस्तिवृत् । ४६।
तेनायजत GSS भगवन्तमधोक्षजम्।उर्वज्ञीलोकमन्विच्छन् सर्वदेवमयं हरिम् Ivo!
एक wa पुरा a: प्रणव: सर्ववाङ्मय: । देवो नारायणो नान्य एकोऽग्निर्वर्ण wa च scl
पुरुरवस एवासीत् त्रयी त्रेतामुखे नृप । अग्निना प्रजया राजा लोकं गान्धर्वमेयिवान् ।४९।
इति श्रीमद्भागवते महापुराणे पारमहंस्यां संहितायां नवमस्कन्धे ऐलोपाख्याने चतुर्दशोऽध्याय: ॥१४।

Perceiving Urvasi (the celestial lady) to be gravid, Purirava returned to his capital. Going
there (to Kuruksetra) once more at the end of a year, he found Urvasi the mother of a hero
and, full of joy, cohabited with her for the night. Finding him impatient at his separation from
her and (therefore) afflicted, (the next day), Urvasi lovingly said to him as follows:—
"Propitiate these Gandharvas (by means of prayer and so on) and they will hand me over to
you."(40-41) Pleased with him (even) while he was glorifying them, they bestowed on him,
O protector of men, a vessel holding fire (for the purpose of propitiating it and thereby
attaining to the realm of Urvasi). Thinking the vessel to be Urvaéi (blinded as he was with
passion), and roaming about'n the forest with that vessel, he discovered the reality of the
vessel (when he was just going to embrace it sexually, taking it to be Urvasi). (42) Leaving
the vessel in the forest, he returned home and began contemplating on Urvasi at night. (In
the meantime) when the Treta age commenced (at the end of Satyayuga), the knowledge
of the science of rituals (as represented by the three Vedas—Rk, Yajus and Sama), dawned
on his mind. (43) Going to the spot where he had left the vessel, and perceiving (there) a
peepul tree sprouting from inside a Sami tree, he hewed out of ita pair of Aranis (churning
sticks) for kindling fire by attrition. (44) (Then) visualizing the lower Arani to be Urvasi, and
the upper one as his own self and the piece that intervened the two as their son, the king
churned them with a longing to reach the realm of Urvaii, uttering sacred texts (detailing the
procedure of producing fire through such churning). (45) As a result of his churning was
produced a flame of fire. which is known by the name of Jataveda (that which has everything

[565] B.M. Part II—31

