Dis. 5] BOOK TEN 121

PRT ERENCE REA ETRE ENA RAE RAE RAARER OER ALERTERERAARERA RAR OERE RATED SERED

गोप्यश्चाकर्ण्य मुदिता यशोदाया: सुतोद्धवम्। आत्मानं भूषयाञ्चक्रुर्वसत्राकल्पाञ्जनादिभि: । ९ ।
नवकुङ्कुमकिञ्जल्कमुखपङ्कजभूतय: । बलिभिस्त्वरितं जग्मु: पृथुश्रोण्यश्चलत्कुचा: । १०।

नन्दालय सवलया व्रजतीर्विरेजुर्व्यलोलकुण्डलपयोधरहारशोभा ।११॥
ता ania: प्रयुञ्जानाश्चिरं पाहीति बालके । हरिद्राचूर्णतैलाद्भि:; सिञ्चन्त्यो जनमुजगु: 1°21
Rejoiced to hear of the birth of a son to YaSoda, cowherd women too beautified their
person with clothes, ornaments, collyrium and so on. (9) The charm of their lotus face
heightened by (decorations of) fresh saffron paste, corresponding to the filaments of alotus,
they despite their bulky buttocks walked hurriedly with presents (in the shape of gold-rings,
necklaces of jewels, raiments, fruits and blades of panic grass etc.,) their breasts shaking
(on account of their rapid movement). (10) Adorned with well-polished bejewelled ear-rings
anda string of gold coins worn about their neck as well as with bangles, and clad in raiments
of various colours, the cowherd women shone brightly while proceeding to the palace of
Nanda, flowers fallen from their braids being strewn in a shower on the way, and looked
graceful with the ear-rings and the necklaces, hanging on their breasts, swinging about
rapidly. (11) Invoking (divine) blessings on the boy in the words "May You protect the babe
for long (O Lord !}” and sprinkling the multitude with water mixed with turmeric powder and
oil, they sang in a high pitch. (12)
अवाद्यन्त विचित्राणि वादित्राणि महोत्सवे । कृष्णे विश्वेश्वरेऽनन्ते नन्दस्य व्रजमागते ।१३।
गोपा: परस्परं हृष्टा दधिक्षीरघृताम्बुभि: | आसिञ्चन्तो विलिम्पन्तो नवनीतैश्च चिक्षिपु: । १४॥
नन्दो महामनास्तेभ्यो वासोऽलङ्कारगोधनम्। सूतमागधवन्दिभ्यो येऽन्ये विद्योपजीविन: igus
aa: कामैरदीनात्मा यथोचितमपूजयत्। विष्णोराराधनार्थाय स्वपुत्रस्योदयाय च ।१६॥
रोहिणी च महाभागा नन्दगोपाभिनन्दिता। व्यचरद् दिव्यवास:स्रक्कण्ठाभरणभूषिता । १७॥

तत आरभ्य नन्दस्य aa: सर्वसमृद्धिमान्। हरेर्निवासात्मगुणै रमाक्रीडमभून्नृप । १८।

Now that the immortal Lord Sri Krsna, the Ruler of the universe, had come down to Vraja,
musical instruments of various kinds were played upon on that occasion of great rejoicing.(13)
Spraying with curds, milk, clarified butter and water and besmearing (the face of) one another
with handfuls of fresh butter, the merry cowherds threw one another of the feet (in mirth). (14)
For the purpose of propitiating Lord Visnu as well as for the welfare of his son, the high-souled
and liberal-minded Nanda conferred on them as well as on the Sutas, the Magadhas and the
Vandis and others who lived by their art or science (such as musicians, physicians,
astrologers, dancers and interpreters of omens) raiment, ornaments and cattle-wealth, and
suitably honoured them with gifts desired by them. (15-16) Felicitated by Nanda, the cowherd
chief, the highly blessed Rohini too (who excelled all the other wives of Vasudeva in that she
had the rare good fortune of witnessing the childlike pastimes of Sri Krsna) moved about as
the virtual mistress of Nanda's household (receiving female guests and ordering servants),
decked with supernal clothes, garlands and necklaces (forgetting the distress of her captive
husband). (17) Thenceforward Nanda’s Vraja became the seat of all prosperity turning into
the (very) playground of Goddess Rama by virtue of its native excellences peculiar to an
abode of Lord Sri Hari, O protector of men! (18)

गोपान् गोकुलरक्षायां निरूप्य मथुरां गत:। नन्द: कंसस्य वार्षिक्यं करं दातुं कुरूद्धह ।१९॥

वसुदेव उपश्रुत्य भ्रातरं नन्दमागतम्।ज्ञात्वा दत्तकरं राज्ञे ययौ तदवमोकच्नम् । २०॥

तं ge सहसोत्थाय देह: प्राणमिवागतम् sta: प्रियतमं deal सस्वजे प्रेमविह्वल: । २१।
[565] B.M. Part II—33

