254 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 26

यत्तत्सत्त्वगुणं Wes Wd भगवत: पदम्।यदाहुर्वासुदेवाख्यं चित्तं तन्महदात्मकम् । २१॥
emanate हान्तत्वमिति चेतस: । वृत्तिभिर्लक्षणं प्रोक्तं यथापां प्रकृति: परा 1२२1
महत्तत्त्वाद्विकुर्वाणाद्भगवद्वीर्यसम्भवात् | क्रियाशक्तिरहङ्कारस्रिविध: समपद्यत 1231
वैकारिकस्तैजसश्च तामसश्च at भव:।मनसश्चेन्द्वयाणां च भूतानां महतामपि ।२४॥
सहस्रशिरसं साक्षाद्यमनन्तं प्रचक्षते। सङ्कर्षणाख्यं पुरुषं भूतेन्द्रियमनोमयम् ।२५॥
aia करणत्वं च कार्यत्वं चेति लक्षणम्।जान्तघोरविमूढत्वमिति वा स्यादहंकृते: ।२६॥
वैकारिकाद्बिकुर्वाणान्मनस्तत्त्वमजायत । यत्सङ्कल्पविकल्पाभ्यां add कामसम्भव: 1291
यद्विदुर्ह्यनिरुद्धाख्यं हृषीकाणामधीश्वरम् । शारदेन्दीवरह्यामं संराध्यं योगिभि: ard: 1201
तैजसात्तु विकुर्वाणाद् बुद्धितत्त्वमभूत्सति | द्रव्यस्फुरणविज्ञानमिन्द्रियाणामनुग्रह: । २९॥
संशयोऽथ विपर्यासो निश्चय: afta च । स्वाप इत्युच्यते बुद्धेर्लक्षणं वृत्तित: yaw 130!
तैजसानीन्द्रियाण्येव क्रियाज्ञानविभाग: । प्राणस्य fe क्रिया शाक्तिर्बुद्धेर्विज्ञानशक्तिता । ३१1

Citta (the faculty of reason)—which abounds in the quality of Sattva, is pure and free from
passion and is the place where one can realize God—is spoken of as the Mahat-tattva and
is also called by the name of Vasudeva (because it is through the cosmic Citta that they
worship Vasudeva, the foremost of the Lord's four forms).(21) Just as water in its natural
state {when itis free from foam and ripples etc.), before its coming in contact with earth etc.,
is clear (as crystal), sweet and unruffled, even so transparency, freedom from languor and
distraction etc., and serenity are predicated of Citta (reason) as its characteristic traits.(22)
From the Mahat-tattva, evolved from the Lord’s own energy (in the form of Cit-Sakti or the
power of intelligence), as it underwent transformation, sprang up Ahankara (the Ego), which
is predominantly endowed with active power and is of three kinds—Sattvika, Rajasika and
Tamasika. From these three types of Ahankara were severally evolved the mind,
the Indriyas (the senses of perception as well as the organs of action) and the gross
elements. (23-24) This (threefold) Anankara—the source of the gross elements, the Indriyas
and the mind, and hence identical with them (because it is the cause which reproduces itself
as the effect)—is the same as (symbolic of) the Purusa called Sankarsana (the second of the
four forms of the Lord), whom the Vaisnavas speak of as no other than Lord Ananta with a
thousand heads.(25) The Ahankara is characterized as a doer (when conceived in the fotm
ofdeities presiding over the Indriyas andthe mind), aninstrument (in the form of the Indriyas)
and an effect (in the form of the gross elements). Itis further characterized as serene, active
or dull (according as itis Sattvika, Rajasika or Tamasika). (26) From the Vaikarika (Sattvika)
type of Ahankara, as it underwent transformation, was evolved the mind, whose thoughts
and reflections give rise to desire.(27) It is mind which is known by the name (recognized as
a symbol) of Lord Aniruddha (the fourth of the four forms of the Lord), the supreme Ruler of
the Indriyas, who is possessed of a form swarthy as the blue lotus growing in autumn, and
who is slowly won by the Yogis.(28) From the Rajasika ego, as it underwent transformation
sprang up the principle of Buddhi (understanding), O virtuous lady. Ascertaining the nature
of objects on their-coming to view and helping the senses (in their work of perceiving
objects)—these are the functions of Buddhi (known by the name of Pradyumna, the third form
of the Lord). (29) Doubt, misapprehension, correct apprehension, memory and sleep are
said to be the distinct characteristics of Buddhi as determined by their functions”. (30) The
senses of perception as well as the organs of action—both the types of Indriyas too are

* Maharsi Patafjali too attributes the same functions to Buddhi in his "Aphorisms on Yoga":—

``प्रमाणविपर्यवविकल्पनिद्रास्मृतय:।`` (1. 1.6)

