Dis. 7 ] BOOK FOUR . 317

Ret ted; PRR SEE SE AAT IESE SET ATTRITION BECERRA RR RSet erie inte Bree

desired blessings on His devotees) and obtained leave of Brahma (the creator), he (Daksa)
had the ritual recommenced by thé preceptor, priests and others. (16) For the removal of (the
pollution caused by) the touch of the Pramathas (attendants of Rudra) and with a view to the
continuity of the sacrifice, the good Brahmanas offered (to the sacred fifé) the oblation called
Purodasa.* which was intended for Lord Visnu and placed in three separate recepta-
cles.(17) Even as the sacrificer (Daksa), 0 Vidura (lit., a ruler of ment)! contemplated (on
the Lord) with a guileless mind along with the Adhwaryu, who stood holding the oblation in
his hand, Sri Hari appeared (in person before his eyes). (18) Eclipsing the splendour of those
present there by His own brilliance, which illumined all the ten quarters, the Lord was
forthwith borne (to that assembly) by Tarksya (Garuda), who has the two types of Samas or
metrical hymns (viz., Brhat and Rathantara) for his wings. (19) Swarthy of hue with a girdle
of gold (and a golden piece of cloth wrapped about His lions), He was adorned by a crown
shining like the sun; while His (lotus-like) countenance was graced with locks dark as bees,
as well as with ear-rings. With His (eight) arms that severally bore a conch, a lotus, a discus,
a shaft,.a bow, a mace, a sword anda shieldand were (ever) eager (to protect His devotees),
and which shone (with gold ornaments), He looked like a blossoming Karnikara tree. (20)
With Goddess Laksmi (His Spouse) lodged on His bosom (in the form of a golden curl of hair
known as the mark of Srivatsa, and adorned witha garland of sylvan flowers, He enraptured
the whole world with His winsome smiles and glances. Fans and chowries, which looked like
Swans, were waving on both His sides, and He shone splendid with a moon-like white
umbrella (spread) over His head. (21)

तमुपागतमालक्ष्य सर्वे सुरगणादय:। erg: सहसोत्थाय ब्रह्मेन्द्र्यक्षनायका: 1221

तत्तेजसा हतरुच: सन्नजिह्वा: ससाध्वसा: । gat धृताञ्जलिपुटा उपतस्थुरधोक्षजम् ।२३॥

अप्यर्वाग्वृत्तयो यस्य महि त्वात्मभुवादव: । यथामति गृणन्ति स्म कृतानुग्रहविग्रहम् । २४॥

दक्षो गृहीतार्हणसादनोत्तमं यज्ञेश्वं विश्वसृजां परं aT
Seeing Him arrived near, all the hosts of divinities and other beings under the leadership

of Brahma (the creator), Indra (the lord of paradise and the ruler of the gods) and Lord Siva
(who is possessed of three eyes) instantly rose (from their seats) and bowed low to Him. (22)
Their splendour obscured by His brilliance, they stood dumbfounded and struck with awe;
and with their palms joined over their head they approached Lord Visnu (who is beyond
sense-perception) in a prayerful mood. (23) Even though their mind and speech had no
access to His glory, Brahma and others began to the best of their ability to glorify the Lord,
who had manifested His form in order to shower His blessings (on those present there). (24)
Gladly extolling the Lord with joined palms and a concentrated mind, Daksa sought the
protection of the Lord, the supreme Teacher of the Prajapatis (the progenitors of the world),
who is the Enjoyer as well as the Bestower of the fruit of (all) sacrifices and was surrounded
by Sunanda, Nanda and other attendants, and who had (graciously) taken the excellent
receptacle of presents (from Daksa's hands). (25)

Ta उवाच
शुद्धं स्वधाम्न्युपरताखिलबुद्ध्यवस्थं चिन्मात्रमेकमभयं प्रतिषिध्य मायाम् ।
तिष्ठंस्तयैव पुरुषत्वमुपेत्य तस्यामास्ते भवानपरिशुद्धे इवात्मतन्त्र: 1241

* Amass of ground rice rounded into a kind of cake.
“Being of royal descent, Vidura is addressed here as a ruler of men.
