802 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 16

LRAEEHORREOAH LET OE KET H ER THERES HHSEEE SEEN eCOREKHE ECE Ree eee Hees or ee ee eo
प्तप्तर्त्त

नमोऽव्यक्ताय सूक्ष्माय प्रधानपुरुषाय च । चतुर्विंशद्रुणज्ञाय गुणसंख्यानहेतवे 130 |
नमो feet fut चतु:शृङ्गाय तन्तवे। सप्तहस्ताय यज्ञाय त्रयीविद्यात्मने नम: 1321
aa: शिवाय रुद्राय नम: aera च । सर्वविद्याधिपतये भूतानां पतये नम: 1321
नमो हिरण्यगर्भाय sora जगदात्मने । योगैश्वर्यगशारीराय नमस्ते चोगहेतवे 1331
नमस्त आदिदेवाय साक्षिभूताय ते नम:। नारायणाय ऋषये नराय हरये नम: ।३४॥
नमो `भरकतर्यामवपुषेऽधिगतश्रिये | केशववाय नमस्तुभ्यं नमस्ते पीतवाससे ।३५॥
त्वं सर्ववरद: dai awa वरदर्षभ । अतस्ते श्रेयसे धीरा: पादरेणुमुपासते ।३६॥
अन्ववर्तन्त चं देवा: श्रीश्च तत्पादपद्मवो: | स्पृहयन्त इवामोदं भगवान्मे प्रसीदताम् ।३७॥

“Hail to You, Lord Vasudeva, the supreme Person, the greatest of the great, the abode
of all created beings, the Witness. (29) Salutation to the Lord who is unmanifest and most
subtle, who is (both) Pradhana (primordial Matter) and Purusa (Spirit), the Knower of the
twenty-four categories (besides) the Purusa, the twenty-fifth, recognized in the Sankhya
system of philosophy), the founder of the Sankhya philosophy (which enumerates the
twenty-five categories or ultimate principles into which the entire range of existence can be
reduced). (30) Hail to You as the deity presiding over sacrifices— endowed with a couple of
heads (in the form of the rites known as the Prayaniya and Udayaniya, which are performed
at the beginning and the end of a sacrifice respectively), three feet (in the form of Savana or
the pressing out of the Soma juice, which is done thrice a day, viz., in the morning, at midday
and in the evening), four horns (in the form of the four Vedas, Rk, Sama ,Yajus and Atharva)
and seven arms (in the form of the seven Vedic metres, Gayatri, Tristubh, Anustubh, Brhati,
Pankti, Jagati and Usnik)—the Bestower of rewards of sacrifices, whose essential nature
has been described in the three Vedas (treating mainly of rituals). (31) Salutation to You as
(the all-blissful) Lord Siva and Rudra (the Destroyer of the universe), the Wielder of (all)
power! Hail, hail to the Master of all sciences, the Ruler of ghosts !!(32) Salutation to You as
Hiranyagarbha (Brahma), the Sutratma (consciousness identifying itself with the cosmic
subtle body), the Soul of the universe | Hail to You, who are an embodiment of the mystic
powers acquired through (the practice of) Yoga, nay, who are the very Source of (all)
Yoga!!(33) Salutation to You, the first Deity! Hail to You standing as a witness !! Hail to Sri
Hari appearing as the (divine) sage Narayana and (His younger brother) Nara !I! (34)
Salutation to You, who are endowed with a body dark green as the emerald, and have won
(for Your Spouse) Sri (the goddess of prosperity and beauty)! Hail to You as Lord Kegava
(the Ruler even of Brahma and Siva)!! Salutation to You who are clad in yellow!!! (35) You
are the Granter of all boons to the people, O Lord who are sought after by all, Chief of the
bestowers of boons! It is therefore that the wise adore the dust of Your feet for (attaining)
blessedness. (36) May that Lord be gracious to me, whom the gods as well as Sri have (all
along) served as though seeking the fragrance of His lotus-feet.” (37)

एतैर्मन्रैर्हृषीकेशमावाहनपुरस्कृतम् | अर्चयेच्छ्द्धया युक्त: पाद्योपस्पर्शनादिभि: । ३८॥
गन्धधूपादिभिश्चार्चेद द्वादशाक्षरविद्यया 13° |

4 पयसि नैवेद्यं meri विभवे सति । ससर्पि: सगुडं aa जुहुयान्मूलविद्यया xo!

निवेदितं aq भक्ताय care भुञ्जीत वा स्वयम् । दत्त्वाऽऽचमनमर्चित्वा ताम्बूलं च निवेदयेत् ।`४१॥

जपेदष्टोत्तरशतं स्तुवीत स्तुतिभि: प्रभुम्।कृत्वा प्रदक्षिणं भूमौ प्रणमेद दण्डवन्मुदा 1x2 |

कृत्वा शिरसि तच्छेषां देवमुद्वासयेत् aa: । eine विप्रान्पायसेन यथोचितम् 1x3 |
