272 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA Dis. 40

{ints ree th eter eh ee eee ee hee VETS SEL e SAREE २२२२ SEL SRARE AIA २२२२ १२२२ २२२१ न

the form of a weird lion (half man and half lion), O Dispeller of the fears of the righteous!
Salutation to You, again, as the divine Dwarf, who covered (all) the three worlds in one
stride.(19) Hail to You in the form of Parasurama (the Lord of the Bhrgus), who cut down
the forest of haughty Ksatriyas ! Salutation to You as Sri Rama (the Chief of the Raghus),
who put an end to Ravana ! (20) Hail, hail to You, manifested in the (four divine) forms of
Vasudeva (Sri Krsna), Sankarsana (Balarama), Pradyumna* (Sri Krsna's Son) and
Aniruddha (Pradyumna's Son) ! Salutation to You, the Protector of the Satvatas. (21) Hail
to You as Lord Buddha, who was (altogether) faultless (though His gospel ran counter to the
teachings of the Vedas) and who deluded the Daityas and the Danavas (by preaching an anti-
Vedic doctrine) | Salutation to You in the form of Lord Kalki, (who is going to appear towards
the end of Kaliyuga as) the Destroyer of Ksatriyas, who will have well-nigh been reduced to
the position of Mlecchas ! तं (22)

भगवञ्जीवलोकोऽयं मोहितस्तव मायया। अहं ममेत्यसद्ग्राहो भ्राम्यते कर्मवर्त्मसु 1231
अहं चात्मात्मजागारदारार्थस्वजनादिषु | भ्रमामि स्वप्नकल्पेषु ys: सत्यधिया fast । २४॥
अपिंत्यप्तात्यदुंदुंखेषु विपर्ययमतिर्ह्यहम् | दन्द्वारामस्तमोविष्टो न जाने त्वाऽऽत्मन: प्रियम् । २५॥
यथाबुधो जलं हित्वा प्रतिच्छन्नं तदुद्धवै: । अभ्येति मृगतृष्णां वै age पराङ्मुख: ।२६॥
नोत्सहेऽहुं कृपणधी: कामकर्महतं मन:। रोद्धुं प्रमाथिभिश्चाक्षैर्हियमाणमितस्तत: 1201
पुंसो wae of संसरणापवर्गस्त्वय्यब्जनाभ सदुपासनया मति: स्यात्।२८॥
नमो विज्ञानमात्राय सर्वप्रत्ययहेतव्रे। पुरुषेशप्रधानाय ब्रह्मणेऽनन्तशक्तये 1२९1
नमस्ते वासुदेवाय सर्वभूतक्षयाय च । हृषीकेश नमस्तुभ्यं प्रपन्नं पाहि AT प्रभो 1३०॥
इति श्रीमद्भागवते महापुराणे पारमहंस्यां संहितायां ददामस्कन्धे पूर्वर्धेऽक्रूरस्तुतिर्नाम चत्वारिशाऽध्याय: 1४०1

O Lord, infatuated by Your Maya (deluding potency) and (consequently) clinging to the
body and those connected with it (which are all devoid of reality) as the very self and as one's
own (respectively), this (entire) world of living beings is made to revolve in the maze of
Karma.(23) | too revolve in the domain of the body, offspring, homestead, wife, wealth,
relations and so on—which are all (false) like a dream—thinking them to be real, a fool that
| am, 0 almighty Lord ! (24) Holding as a matter of fact a contrary view with regard to the
transient and to that which is not the Self as well as about that which is rooted in sorrow (or
in other words mistaking that which is transient to be eternal, that which is not the ऽ 85 one's
own self and that which is full of sorrow as an embodiment of joy) and taking delight in pairs
of opposites | am unable to know You, who are dear to me, enveloped as | amin (the darkness
of) ignorance. (25) (Even) as an ignorant person would actually run after a mirage,
abandoning water screened by its own products (viz., duck-weeds and other aquatic plants),
so have | turned my face towards the body etc., leaving You. (26) Possessed of a poor
understanding (clouded by an appetite for sensuous pleasures), | am not able to restrain my
mind, agitated as itis by cravings and activities (of various kinds) and dragged here and there
by the turbulent senses. (27) As such | have sought as my refuge Your feet, which are (so)

* Even though Pradyumna and Aniruddha were not yet bom, Akrira refers here to Their etemal forms which are only
brought to light during Their descent in the world of matter.
+ A Mleccha has been characterized by Baudhayana, a Hindu law-giver, as follows:—
“He who eats beef and indulges in self-contradictory statements, and is devoid of righteousness and purity of conduct
ss called a Mleccha.”
