404 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 24

कस्त्वत्पदाब्जं विजहाति पण्डितो यस्तेऽवमानव्ययमानकेतन: |

विशङ्कयास्मद्गुरुर्चति wm ae विनोपपत्तिं मनवश्चतुर्दश । ६७॥
अथ त्वमसि नो ब्रह्मन् परमात्मन् विपश्चिताम्। विश्वं रुद्रभयध्वस्तमकुतश्चिद्भया गति: । ६८1
इदं जपत ws at faye नृपनन्दना: | स्वधर्ममनुतिष्ठन्तो भगवत्यर्पिताशाया: । ६९1
तमेवात्मानमात्मस्थं सर्वभूतेष्वस्थितम् | पूजयध्वं गृणन्तश्च ध्यायन्तश्चासकृद्धरिम् 1901
योगादेशमुपासाद्य धारयन्तो मुनिव्रता: | समाहितधिय: सर्व एतदभ्यसतादृता: 1021
इदमाह पुरास्माकं भगवान् विश्वसृक्पति: | भृग्वादीनामात्मजानां सिसृक्षु: संसिसृक्षताम् 162!
a aa नोदिता: सर्वे प्रजासर्गे प्रजेश्वरा: | अनेन ध्वस्ततमस: सिसृक्ष्मो विविधा: प्रजा: । ७३1
अथेदं feat युक्तो जपन्नवहित: पुमान्। अचिराच्छ्य आप्नोति वासुदेवपरायण: ।७४॥
श्रेयसामिह सर्वेषां ज्ञानं नि:श्रेयसं परम्। सुखं ata दुष्पारं ज्ञाननौर्व्यसनार्णवम् ।७५।
य इमं श्रद्धया युक्तो weld भगवत्स्तवम्। अधीयानो दुराराध्यं हरिमाराधयत्यसौ ve
विन्दते पुरुषोऽमुष्माद्यद्यदिच्छत्यसत्वरम् | मद्गीतगीतात्सुप्रीताच्छ्यसामेकवल्लभात् ।७७॥1
इदं य: कल्य उत्थाय wale: श्रद्धयान्वित: । शृणुयाच्छावयेन्मर्यो मुच्यते ade: ic!

जपन्त एकाग्रधियस्तपो महच्चरध्वमन्ते तत आप्स्यथेप्सितम्।७९।

इति श्रीमद्भागवते महापुराणे पारमहंस्यां संहितायां चतुर्थस्कन्धे रुद्रगीतं नाम चतुर्विंशोऽध्याय: ।२४॥

"Your true nature can (only) be inferred (and not directly perceived). Possessed of most
tremendous velocity and irresistible like a hurricane, it is You who destroy the (various)
worlds, sweeping off the various creatures by the creatures (themselves) even as the wind
sweeps off the clouds. (65) Alert as the serpent that grabs a rat, licking the ends of its lips
through hunger, You as Death suddenly overtake the Jiva (an embodied soul) who is utterly
careless (about his goal), engrossed as he is in the thought of his (worldly) projects, and,
being totally given up to the pleasures of sense, is seized with inordinate greed. (66) What
wise man, who regards his body (life) as wearing away (in vain) through neglect of You,
would abandon Your lotus-feet, which our ancestor (Brahma) has adored through fear of
bondage in the shape of worldly existence, and which the fourteen Manus (from Swayambhuva
onwards) have worshipped without reasoning (with unquestioning faith). (67) The (whole)
universe is (almost) dead through fear of Lord Rudra (the god of destruction). Therefore, to
us, who know this, O all-pervading Supreme Spirit, You are the (only) fearless resort." (68)
Go on repeating this hymn with the purest of motives, O princes, (duly) discharging your
sacred duties with your mind set on the Lord; this will do you good. (69) Worship Sri Hari
alone—the (Supreme) Spirit dwelling in your heart and (equally) present in all creatures—
extolling and meditating on Him again and again : (70) Having received this hymn called
YogadeSa as imparted by Me and retaining it (in your memory), repeat it reverently all of
You with a concentrated mind, observing the vow of hermits. (71) Intent on multiplying
his progeny, it was the glorious Brahma (the lord of progenitors of the universe) who taught
it at the dawn of creation to us, his (mind-born) sons, Bhrgu and others, all of whom were
(equally) keen to push on (the work of) creation. (72) Enjoined to proceed with the task of
procreation, we lords of created beings all evolved various species of living beings, having
got rid of ignorance through this very hymn. (73) Even nowa man devoted to Lord Vasudeva,
and ever repeating it with an attentive and absorbed mind, attains blessedness before

