Dis. 37 BOOK TEN 257

HE ERO वित्न्र दे ` च त्दे व चिन

अथ 3 meena क्षपयिष्णोरमुष्य वै। अक्षौहिणीनां निधनं द्रक्ष्याम्यर्जुनसारथे: 1221

The day after tomorrow | shall see Canura and Mustika and other wrestlers as well as
the elephant (Kuvalayapida) and Karhsa (himself) slain by You, O almighty Lord! (4 6) After
that | shall witness the death (at Your hands) of the demon Paficajana (living in the form of
aconch), the lonian hero (Kalayavana) and the demon Mura as well as of Naraka and (also)
the carrying off (from heaven) of the (celestial) Parijata tree and the discomfiture of Indra
(who will try to thwart Your purpose). (17) | shall also behold the espousal (by You) of the
daughters of heroes—which will be distinguished by the fact that show of valour will be the
(only) price paid by You (for the same) and so on, and shall (further) witness the deliverance
of King Nrga at Dwaraka from sin (in the shape of unwittingly giving away a Brahmana's
cow as his own, for which he was hurled into the womb of a chameleon), O Lord of the
universe! (18) | shall also witness the acceptance (by You) of the (brilliant) gem Syamantaka
alongwith Jambavati (for Your wife from the bear chiet Jambavan) as well as the restoration
to a Brahmana of his deceased son to be brought by You from Your own divine Abode (the
realm of Mahakala). (19) | shall (further) witness the destruction (by You) of King Paundraka
and later on the setting on fire of the city of Kast (the modern Varanasi) and (even so) the
death (at Your hands) of Dantavaktra and (earlier) of SiSupala (the king of Cedi) inthe course
ofa great sacrifice (viz., the Rajasuya sacrifice tobe performed by Emperor Yudhisthira). (20)
| shall also witness those feats of valour that You will perform while residing in Dwaraka and
which will be celebrated in song by the poets on earth. (21) | shall then behold the
extermination of a number of Aksauhinis (in the course of the great Mahabharata war) by
Yourself as Arjuna's charioteer and assuming the role of Kala (the Time-Spirit) actually bent
on the dissolution of this (visible) universe. (22)

विशुद्धविज्ञानघनं स्वसंस्थया समाप्तसर्वार्थममोघवाञ्छितम् ।
स्वतेजसा नित्यनिव्त्तमायागुणप्रवाहं भगवन्तमीमहि 123 1
त्वामीश्वरं स्वाश्रयमात्ममायवा विनिर्मितारोषविदोषकल्पनम् |
क्रीडार्थमद्यात्तमनुष्यविग्रहं नतोऽस्मि धुर्य यदुवृष्णिसात्वताम् । २४॥

We approach (for protection) the almighty Lord (in You), who is pure consciousness
personified, who has fully achieved all His ends by virtue of His being established in His own
(blissful) existence, whose desire never fails to yield its fruit and by whose effulgence (in the
form of consciousness) the stream of the three Gunas (in the shape of the world-process),
having its origin in Maya, is ever shut out from Him. (23) | bow to You, the self-dependent
almighty Lord who has evolved this (varied) creation out ofall these differentiated categories
(the Mahat-tattva etc.) brought forth by His own Maya (creative energy}, and who has now
forthe sake of sport assumed a human semblance as the foremost of the Yadus, the Vrsnis
and the Satvatas. (24)

एवं चदुपतिं कृष्णं भागवतप्रवरो मुनि: । प्रणिपत्याभ्यनुज्ञातौ ययौ तद्दर्शनोत्सव: 124
भगवानपि गोविन्दो इत्वा केशिनमाहवे । पद्यूनपालयत् पालै: प्रीतैर्व्रजसुखावह: 1261

wr ते AL पालाश्चारयन्तोऽद्रिसानुषु | चक्रुर्निलायनक्रीडाश्चोरपालापदेशत: । २७॥
तत्रासन् कतिचिच्चोरा: पालाश्च कतिचिन्नृप । मेषायिताश्च तत्रैके विजह्रुरकुतोभया: 1261
mega महामायो व्योमो गोपालवेषधूक् | मेघायितानपोवाह प्रायश्चोरायितो बहून् । २९॥
शगरिदर्यां fairer नीतं नीतं महासुर: । fren पिदधे द्वारं चतु:पञ्चावशेषिता: 1३०1
