Dis. 2 ] BOOK SIX 559
SHAH HAM WREST EEE TEE LE EEE EEE HET ECESS EAE EEE ROKER ECHO HA eee HH
spot, even as he looked on, O sinless one! (23) Having heard from the mouth severally of
the messengers of Sri Krsna (Lord Visnu) and Yama an exposition of the cult of Devotion
to the Lord—which is untainted by the three Gunas (inasmuch as it is concerned from the
beginning to the end with the worship of the Lord, who is entirely beyond the realm of the
three Gunas and takes one beyond the world of matter, which is a product of the three
Gunas)—and the path of worldly activity (which is mainly concerned with the world of matter
and holds out the promise of heavenly bliss, a product of the three Gunas, and has been)
taught by the three Vedas (which mainly deal with rituals), Ajamila too now soon conceived
devotion to the Lord as a result of hearing the glories of Sri Hari (the Destroyer of all sins)
and great was his repentance as he recollected his (past) sin. (24-25) (He said to himself,)
"Oh, it was the worst tragedy for me, who forfeited my Brahmanhood by being born*
(reproduced in the form of sons) through a Sidra woman, because of my being unable to
curb my (lower) self (animal passions) ! (26) Fie upon my wicked self, condemned by (all)
good men, the blot of my race, who kept an unchaste wench given to drinking, having
abandoned a faithful wife who was yet very young. (27) Oh, my aged parents, who were
without a protector and had no other relation (such as a son) and were much afflicted
(because of me), were forthwith deserted by my ungrateful self as by a vile man. (28) As such
| shall surely fall into a most dreadful hell, where lustful men, who have violated Dharma
(righteousness) suffer tortures inflicted by Yama. (29)

किमिदं was आहोस्वित् साक्षाददृष्टमिहाद्भुतम्। a याता अद्य ते ये मां व्यकर्षन् पाशपाणय: 130 |
अथ a क्व गता: सिद्धाश्चत्वारश्चारुदर्शना: | व्यमोचयन्नीयमानं बद्ध्वा UN Ya: 1381
अथापि मे दुर्भगस्य विबुधोत्तमदर्शने। भवितव्यं ages येनात्मा A प्रसीदति 1321
अन्यथा म्रियमाणस्य नाशुचेर्वृषलीपते: | वैकुण्ठनाम ग्रहणं जिह्वा वक्तुमिहार्हति 1331
क्व ue कितव: पापो ब्रह्मघ्नो निरपत्रप:। क्क च नारायणेत्येतद्भधगवन्नाम मङ्गलम् ।३४॥
as an यतिष्यामि यतचित्तेन्द्रियानिल: । यथा न ya आत्मानमन्धे तमसि मज्जये । ३५॥
विमुच्यच तमिमं बन्धमविद्याकामकर्मजम् । सर्वभूतसुहृच्छान्तो Aa: करुण आत्मवान् 136!
मोचये ग्रस्तमात्मानं योषिन्मय्याऽऽत्ममायया i विक्रीडितो ययैवाहं क्रीडामृग इवाधम: 1301
ममाहमिति देहादौ हित्वामिथ्यार्थधीर्मतिम्। ara मनो भगवति ag तत्कीर्तनादिभि: । ३८॥

"Was (all) this wonder seen by me in a dream or with my own eyes here (in waking life)?
Where have they now gone, who proceeded to tear me (my life) from my body, noose in
hand? (30) Again, where have those four angelic persons gone, who were (so) good-looking
and got me released while | was being taken to the infernal regions (situated below the
earth), fastened with nooses? (31) Though | have been so accursed (in my present birth),
yet | must have earned (in my previous lives some) extraordinary merit which blessed me
with the sight of those foremost gods, as a result of which my mind is so calm and cheerful
(today). (82) Otherwise (but for such extraordinary merit) my tongue, the tongue of an
impious fellow, who kept a Sidra woman, was not fit to utter the name of Lord Visnu—the
only means of capturing Him—in this helpless state and at a time when | was on the verge
of death.(33) The two stood poles asunder—myself, a wicked swindler, lost to (all) shame,
who violated his Brahmanhood, and the (most) auspicious name of the Lord, 'Narayana’.(34)
Having controlled my mind, Indriyas (the senses of perception as well as the organs of
action) and breath, | shall as such so endeavour that | may not drown myself in the

* There is a Sruti text declaring that a man himself is born for a second time in the form of a son through his wife, thus
accounting for the epithet ‘Jaya’ used with reference to a wife :-—
तज्जाया जावां भवति चदस्यां जायते पुन:।
