78 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 20
नकननननन कक न क

PEAAARARTTAAR RET EHR A LORLELEERE ELLE REA HELEREDERELERERLE DES 3 # #%#२-8;#°२-ॐ-#`

(everywhere), nay, (his) life (itself) to be unreal, the aforesaid emperor withdrew himself from
the world. (33)

तस्यासन् a dad: पत्न्यस्तिस्र: सुसम्मता: | WERT, पुत्रान् नानुरूपा इतीरिते । ३४॥
ade वितथे a तदर्थं यजत: सुतम्।मरुत्स्तोमेन मरुतो भरद्दाजमुपाददु: 1341
अन्तर्वल्यां west मैथुनाय बृहस्पति: । प्रवृत्तो वारितो गर्भं seat वीर्यमवासृजत् ।३६॥
तं त्यक्तुकामां ममतां भर्तृत्यागविशङ्किताम्। नामनिर्वचनं तस्य wise qu जगु: 1301
भूढे wm द्वाजमिमं wm द्वाजं बृहस्पते। यातो यदुक्त्वा पितरौ भरद्वाजस्ततस्त्वयम् ।३८॥
चोद्यमाना सुरैरेवं मत्वा वितथमात्मजम्। व्यसृजन् मरुतोऽबिभ्रन् दत्तोऽयं वितथेऽन्वये 1391
Bharata had three beloved wives, (all of them) daughters of the king of Vidarbha, 0
protector of men ! They disposed of their own sons for fear of being forsaken by their
husband, because it was remarked (by him) that the sons were not after him. (34) On his
race being thus threatened with extinction, the Maruts (wind-gods) handed over a son,
Bharadwaja by name, to the emperor, who was propitiating them through (a sacrifice known
by the name of) Marutstoma. (35) Proceeding to copulate with his brother's wife (Mamata),
who was (already) pregnant, Brhaspati forcibly discharged his seed (in her womb), cursing
the foetus* by which he was stopped. (36) Addressing Mamata (as well as Brhaspati), who
was inclined to abandon the child (into which the seed was immediately transformed),
terribly afraid as she was of being forsaken by her husband (Utathya), the gods uttered the
following couplet, explaining the etymology of the child's name (and giving utterance to a
disputation between Brhaspati and Mamata):—{37) (Says Brhaspati to Mamata): "O foolish
one, nourish (Bhara) this child, born of two, (viz., my brother and myself, because begotten
by me through my brother's wife)." (Mamata replied:) "O Brhaspati ! nourish this child
(yourself), born (as it is) of us two (and particularly because | was forcibly impregnated by
you).” Since, having spoken thus, the two (father and mother) went away (leaving the child),
hence this child is (named) Bharadwaja. (38) (Though) urged by the gods in this way (in order
to absolve Mamata of guilt in the eyes of her husband and thus disarm her fear of being
forsaken by her husband), Mamata (as well as Brhaspati) abandoned the son (Bharadwaja),
regarding him as useless (because born of an illicit union and hence a source of infamy). The
Maruts (however) brought him up and (by them) he was handed over to Bharata on the
latter's line being threatened with extinction. (39)

Thus ends the twentieth discourse in Book Nine of the great and
glorious Bhagavata-Purana, otherwise known
as the Paramaharhsa-Samhita.

SENS INS
PIPES EE ICS

* This forcible impregnation resulted firstly In the child In the womb (named afterwards as Dirghatama) getting blind
through the curse of Brhaspati and secondly in the seed discharged by the latter being kicked out by the foetus and assuming
the form of a fully developed male child as soon as it dropped on the ground.
