84 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA { Dis. 22

PRAHA Hh eee SoHo ELSA HAE HERE ERE LEAL EEA LE AGELESS Se Set ee rere ree ihe

you) enjoys sovereignty first (in the presence of his elder brother) falls under the category
of Parivetta* (and is therefore a sinner in the eyes of the Sastras). (Hence) return the
kingdom at once to your elder brother (Devapi) for the prosperity of the city as well as of
the state (which depends on a good rainfall, the latter having been obstructed by your
aforesaid sin)." ({3—15) Thus exhorted by the Brahmanas, Santanu (approached and)
tried to persuade his elder brother (Devapi) to accept the throne. Having (already) been
led away from (the path of) the Vedas by Brahmanas—sent (to him in advance) by
Santanu's minister (ASmarata)—through their speech (expressing heretical views),
Devapi, however, spoke words blaspheming the teachings of the Vedas. Itis then that the
god of rain released showers (because Devapi now became disqualified for the throne
due to his apostasy and Santanu ceased to be guilty any more). Devapi (who was
eventually disillusioned) took to (the practice of) Yoga andtookup his abode in Kalapagrama
(where he's still residing). (16-17) When the lunar dynasty gets extinct in Kaliyuga, he will
revive it at the dawn of (the following) Satyayuga. From (the loins of) Bahlika (Santanu's
younger brother) appeared Somadutta, from whom followed Bhiri, Bhdrigrava and Sala.
Santanu's son by (the goddess presiding over the holy) Ganga (who under a curse from
Brahma got a human form and chose Santanu for her husband) was Bhisma, a man of
(perfect) self-control, the foremost among those who knew what is right, a great devotee
of the Lord (and) spiritually enlightened (too). (18-19) He was a (recognized) leader of
troops of heroes, by whom even Parasurama (his own Guru and a world-renowned
warrior) was pleased in battle. From (the loins of) Santanu through (his other wife)
Satyavati (the foster-daughter of a chieft of Dagas or ferrymen) appeared a son (named)
Citrangada, and (also) a younger son, Vicitravirya (by name). Citrafgada was killed in battle,
(while he was still unmarried, by a Gandharva of the same name). Through the same
Satyavati (before she was married to Santanu) appeared, from the loins of Parasara, a ray
of Sri Hari Himself in the person of the sage Krsna (better known as Krsna-Dwaipayana), by
whom the Vedas have been (duly) preserved (by being divided into four books viz., Rk,
Yajus, Sama and Atharva) and from whom | learnt this (Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana,
which | am reciting to you). In preference to his own pupils, Paila and others, the divine
Badarayana taught this supremely esoteric poem (embodying the quintessence of all the
Vedas and Itihasas) to me, his son, tranquil (by nature) as | was. Now, Vicitravirya married
Ambika and Ambalika, the two daughters of the king of Kasi (the modern Banaras), both of
whom were carried away by force from the gathering of princes convened (by their father )
to give them an opportunity to elect their husband. (With his heart strongly attached to them)
Vicitravirya was caught in the grip of phthisis and died (very young). (20—24) Enjoined by
the mother (Satyavati), the sage Badarayana begot through the wives of his half-brother
(Vicitravirya) Dhrtarastra and Pandu (the former through Ambika and the latter through
Ambalika) as well as Vidura (through a maid-servant). (25)

* The Smrti says:—
whew स विज्ञैय: परिवित्तिस्तु पूर्वज:॥
“He who marries or instals the sacred fire (offering oblations Jo it thrice everyday) in the presence of (before) an elder
brother should be recognized as a Parivetta and the elder brother so ignored should be called a Parivitti.”

+ Satyavati (alsoknown as Matsyagandha or Yojanagandha) was reallya daughler of Uparicara Vasu (mentionedin verse
5 above), whose seed was swallowed by a fish and ultimately developed inlo a human foetus, which was cut out of Ihe belly
of the fish by the aforesaid ferrymen and presented to Iheir chief, who brought il up as his own child.

+ For their names vide I. Iv. 21-22.
