Dis. 17] BOOK ELEVEN 591

PBN EE EOD NEE ए मामा य ग य ERE TATE TER OR MEH eee

want of faith, quarrelling without cause, concupiscence, anger and Cupidity are the inborn
characteristics of the casteless.(20) Non-violence, truthfulness, abstaining from theft,
freedom from lust, anger and greed and doing what is pleasing and good to living beings—
this constitutes the sacred duty of all the Varnas (grades of society). (21)
द्वितीयं प्राप्यानुपूर्व्यज्जन्मोपनयनं द्विज: | वसन् गुरुकुले दान्तो ब्रह्माधीयीत चाहुत: 1221
मेखलाजिनदण्डाक्षब्रह्मसूत्रकमण्डलून् | जटिलोऽधौतदद्वासोऽरक्तपीठ: कुशान् दधत् ।२३।
स्नानभोजनहोमेषु जपोच्चारे च वाग्यत: । न च्छिद्यान्नखरोमाणि कक्षोपस्थगतान्यपि । २४॥
wt नावकिरेजातु ब्रह्मव्रतधर: स्वयम् । अवकीर्णेऽवगाह्याप्सु यतासुस्रिपदीं जपेत् । २५1
अग्न्यर्काचार्यगोविप्रगुरुवृद्धसुराञ्छुचि: । समाहित उपासीत सन्ध्ये च यतवाग् जपन् । २६॥
आचार्यं मां विजानीयान्नावमन्येत कर्हिचित्। न मर्त्यबुद्ध्यासूयेत सर्वदेवमयो TH: 1291
सायं प्रातरुपानीय fet तस्मै निवेदयेत् । यच्चान्यदप्यनुज्ञातमुपयुञ्जीत संयत: 1261
शुश्रूषमाण आचार्यं सदोपासीत नीचवत्।यानशाय्यासनस्थानैर्नातिदूरे कृताञ्जलि: ।२९॥
Taga गुरुकुले वसेद् भोगविवर्जित: । विद्या समाप्यते यावद् बिभ्रद् व्रतमखण्डितम् ।३०॥
Having undergone in due course (viz., after the purificatory rites relating to birthetc., have
been gone through) a second birth in the shape of investiture with the sacred thread, and
dwelling in the house of a preceptor with his senses (duly) controlled, the twice-born (male
child) should (learn to) recite the Vedas (with due intonation) and reflect on their meaning
(with the help of the guru) when calted upon (todo so). (22) A Brahmacari (religious student)
should wear a girdle (of Mufja grass) and deerskin (round his loins), a string of Rudraksa
beads (about his neck) and the sacred thread (baldric-wise across his left shoulder), should
carry a staff (of the Palasa tree) and a water-pot (made of the shell of a wild cocoanut or
gourd) and a bunch of Kuga grass (in the palm of his hand) and grow matted locks (for want
of proper care). He should never scrub his teeth (with a brush etc.) nor apply soap etc., to
his clothes and should never use a coloured seat. (23) He should remain silent while bathing,
taking his meals, pouring oblations into the sacred fire, doing Japa (muttering a prayer) and
answering the cails of nature. He should never pare his nails nor remove the hair even in his
arm-pits and on his private parts. (24) Observing a (strict) vow of celibacy,) he should never
voluntarily allow his seed to escape; and if it (ever) escapes anyhow (in spite of himself in
a dream etc.), he should (proceed to) take a plunge bath and, going through a course of
Pranayama (inhaling the air through his right nostril, holding it as long as one can and
exhaling it through the left), should repeat the Gayatri-Mantra (at least 108 times on his
rosary).(25) Pure of body and calm of mind he should (both morning and evening) worship
the fire (by pouring oblations into it), the sun-god (by offering Arghya or oblations of water
to him). the Acarya (who has invested him with the sacred thread and taught him the Gayatri),
the cow (by offering handfuls of grass to her), the Brahmanas, the preceptor (who has merely
instructed him in the Sastras), the elders and the gods and should wait upon both the
twilights, silently muttering the Gayatn-Mantra.(26) He should know the Acarya to be (no
other than) Myself (the Supreme Lord) and should never disregard him nor should he pry into
his faults taking him to be a mortal; for the preceptor represents all the gods (in his
person).(27) Bringing alms (from other houses) (both) morning and evening, he should offer
it to the preceptor as also whatever else he mighthave recived and make use of only what
is permitted (by the preceptor) keeping himself fully under control.(28) Doing service to the
preceptor. the student should always wait upon him with joined palms like a menial by
following him (wherever he goes), lying down (full of vigilance when he is asleep), sitting
(when he Is taking rest after being relieved of his fatigue by kneading his feet etc.) and
