‘B16 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 19

KHAKERHORALHHEREH PRESE EEE SHEMET ARENA TEREA SSE SOCCER ERE HRAKVWKAKEKMHEHKERHLEASHEHEAHH

LHEKKHERHCEHRARRASR Hee eee SATS MACKHHPRERKRER LOMA LEY ET TO eee,

with the universe, He will cover (all) these (three) worlds (viz., heaven, earth and the
intermediate region) in three strides. Giving away (your) all to Visnu, how will you (be able
to) keep your body and soul together, O fool? (33) Where will place be found for the third
stride of the all-pervading Lord, who will cover the (whole) earth with one colossal stride,
heaven with the second and the intervening space with His gigantic person ? (34) For
yourself, who will (thus) prove unable to redeem your promise, and fail to make the promised
gift, । foresee a firm footing in the infernal region (alone). (35) The wise do not commend that
gift (on the part of a donor) through which one's (own) living is lost. For in this world charity,
sacrificial performances, austerity and other (righteous) acts are possible forhim (alone) who
has a means of subsistence.(36) A householder dividing his income into five parts (and
utilizing it) for the purposes of (1) (acquiring) religious merit and (2) celebrity, (3) (earning
more) wealth, (4) enjoying pleasures and (5) maintaining his own people rejoices in this as
wellas in the life beyond.(37) On this point (viz., the question of truth and falsehood) too hear
from me, O chief of the Asuras, the verdict of the Bahvrcas (the seers of Rqveda): "Whatever
is expressed in terms of 'yes' (with reference to the prayer of a petitioner) is truth; (while) that
which one utters in terms of 'no' is indeed untruth. (38) One should understand truth to be
the flower and fruit of the tree of the body; for it is declared as such (by the Sruti texts). In the
event of the tree (itself) not surviving, the fruit and flower (too) will vanish. (And) falsehood
(refusal to part with one's possessions) is the secret of preserving one's body (life). (39)
Therefore, (just) as a tree that has been uprooted withers up and falls to the ground not long
afterwards, so does a body that has lost its support in the shape of falsehood soon dry up:
there is no doubt aboutit. (40) That which is expressed by the syllable ‘Orn' (yes) (really) takes
away wealth to a long distance and (therefore) leaves one devoid of wealth and unsatiated
(too). For a man is certainly deprived of that (much of) wealth which—however little it may
be—he agrees to part with, saying ’yes'. And he who consents to give everything to a
mendicant does not find adequate enjoyment for himself. (41) Therefore, the false statement
saying "No" not only keeps one full but also attracts the wealth of others to oneself. But he
who utters the falsehood that he has nothing at all (to give) incurs a bad reputation and is
(virtually) dead, though breathing. (42) (Uttering) falsehood is not (so) blameworthy (1) in
relation to women (while courting them), (2) in jest, (3) during a wedding (while extolling the
bridegroom etc.), (4) for the sake of keeping one's body and soul together, (5) in the face of
danger to one's life, (6) in the interest of cows and the Brahmanas and (7) where violence
(to another)is apprehended." (43)

Thus ends the nineteenth discourse, in continuation of the story of the
descent of Lord Vamana (the divine Dwarf) in Book Eight of
the great and glorious Bhagavata-Purana, otherwise
known as the Paramahamsa-Samhita.

SEINE EET
FIED EEE ED OD
