Dis. 5] BOOK THREE 151

कूजहं ज ज ज उ कक आय पि क SEH CHHK TEESE HK CVE EHHA त्याजा HAE ENE को COME HH OAT BRAT HR HHH PP eT

यथा Ww: स्वे ख x fae aa ai a निवृत्तवृत्ति: ।

कस्तृप्नुयात्तीर्थथदोऽभिधानात् wag a: सूरिभिरीड्यमानात्।
य: कर्णनाडीं पुरुषस्य यातो भवप्रदां गेहरति छिनत्ति ।११।
मुनिर्विवक्षुर्भगवद्गुणानां सखापि ते भारतमाह कृष्ण: ।
यस्मिन्नृणां ग्राम्यसुखानुवादैर्मतिर्गृहीता नु हरे: कथायाम्।१२।
सा श्रद्दधानस्य विवर्धमाना विरक्तिमन्यत्र करोति पुंस: ।
हरे: पदानुस्मृतिनिर्वृतस्य समस्तदु:खात्ययमाशु धत्ते । १३ ।
ताञ्छोच्यशोच्यानविदोऽनुशोचे wR meat विमुखानघेन ।
क्षिणोति देवोऽनिमिषस्तु येषामायुर्वृथावादगतिस्मृतीनाम् | 8% |
qe कौषारव wie: कथामेव sag सारम्।
mye yea इवार्तबन्धो fara a: कीर्तय तीर्थकीर्ते: 194
a - विश्वजन्मस्थितिसंयमार्थे कृतावतार: प्रगृहीतशक्ति: ।
चकार कर्माण्यतिपूरुषाणि apie: aida तानि मह्यम् ।१६॥

Vidura said : People perform actions for the sake of happiness; but they neither attain
happiness nor succeed in ending their sorrow thereby. On the other hand, they undergo
suffering again and again as a result of those acts. Therefore, O worshipful sage, be
pleased to tell me what is advisable under the circumstances. (2) The blessed devotees
of Lord Janardana (Sri Krsna) move about in this world just in order to shower their grace
on men who have through ill luck turned their face away from Sri Krsna and are given to
unrighteousness and are therefore extremely miserable. (3) Be pleased to point outto me,
O foremost saint, that blessed path by following which people succeed in propitiating the
Lord, who in His turn settles in their heart, purified by devotion, and bestows on them the
most ancient wisdom, which brings with it the realization of Truth. (4) Kindly also tell me
what kind of deeds are performed by the Lord, who is the Ruler of all the three worlds and
absolutely independent, when He descends into the world of matter; how, though
actionless, He brought forth this universe at the dawn of creation; how, having established
it on a firm footing, He provides a means of subsistence for all created beings; and how
again, having withdrawn it into the cavity of His heart and refraining from all activity, He
retires into communion with His Yogamaya; and finally how, having (created this universe
