Dis. 12], BOOK ONE 47

SALEM, BEE REREREW Ke We Ve Me EM HE MY Bt MY Ht eB BYE ee He BRE RE HT Hee He BE Re RT RH Fe Rr MT BY RE WY RE Re Be WOME WER HY SERENE WWE A RRR BR Bs
re

Then, at an hour which was favourable for the development of all noble traits and when
the stars in the ascendant were propitious, was born that child, who maintained the thread
of Pandu's line and was another Pandu as it were in bodily strength. (12) Delighted at heart
(at the news of his birth), the king had benedictory hymns recited and rites connected with
the birth of a child performed by holy Brahmanas like Dnaumya, Krpa and others. (13) The
king, who knew the right moment for making gifts, bestowed at the sacred hour of the birth*
of Pariksit (before the navel-stringis cut) gold, cows, lands, villages (as revenue-free grants),
excellent elephants and horses and the best foodgrains on the Brahmanas. (14) Pleased
with the gifts, the Brahmanas addressed the king, who was all humility, as follows:—"O jewel
of the Pauravas (descendants of king Puru), by the will of Providence, which cannot be
balked, this stainless race of the Purus had all but died out; yet the almighty Lord Visnu (Sri
Krsna), in order to shower His grace on you, preserved it by saving this child. (15-16) Hence
he will be known in this world by the name of Visnurata (one who has been saved by Lord
Visnu). His fame will extend far and wide and he will undoubtedly turn out to be a great
devotee of God and an exalted soul. (17)

युधिष्ठिर उवाच
अप्येष वंश्यान् राजर्षीन् पुण्यर्लोकान्महात्मन: | अनुवर्तिता स्विद्यशसा साधुवादेन सत्तमा: । १८।
Yudhisthira asked : Will this child share the good reputation of the glorious and high-
souled royal sages of his own line, O most worthy souls? (18)

MAM HY:
पार्थ प्रजाविता साक्षादिक्ष्वाकुरिव मानव:। ब्रह्मण्य: सत्यसंधश्च रामो arenfedar । १९।
एष दाता aay यथा ह्यौञ्चीनर: शिबि: । aan वितनिता स्वानां दौष्यन्तिरिव यज्वनाम् । २०।
धन्विनामग्रणीरेष तुल्यश्चार्जुनयोर्द्वयो: | हुताशा इव eet: समुद्र इव दुस्तर: । २१।
मृगेनद्र इव विक्रान्तो निषेव्यो हिमवानिव । तितिक्षुर्वसुधेवासौ सहिष्णु: पितराविव 1221
पितामहसम: साम्ये प्रसादे गिरिशोपम: | आश्रय: सर्वभूतानां यथा देवो रमाश्रय: 1231
सर्वसद्गुणमाहात्ये एष कृष्णमनुव्रत: | रन्तिदेव इवोदारो ययातिरिव धार्मिक: । ex
धृत्या बलिसम: कृष्णे wee sa सद्ग्रह: | आह्तैषोऽश्वमेधानां वृद्धानां पर्युपासक: 124 |
राजर्षीणां जनयिता aren चोत्पथगामिनाम्। निग्रहीता कलेरेष yal धर्मस्य कारणात् ।२६॥
तक्षकादात्मनो मृत्युं द्विजपुत्रोपसर्जितात्। प्रपत्स्यत उपश्रुत्य मुक्तसङ्ग: पदं हरे: 1201
जिज्ञासितात्मयाधात्म्यो मुनेर्व्यससुतादसो | हित्वेदं नृप गङ्गायां यास्यत्यद्धाकुतोभयम् । २८।

The Brahmanas replied : O Yudhisthira (son of Prtha), this grandson of yours will
protect his subjects just like Ikswaku, the eldest son of Vaivaswata Manu (who presides over
the present Manwantara), and will be devoted to the Brahmanas and true to his word like Sri
Rama, the celebrated son of DaSaratha. (19) He will be munificent and kind to those who
seek his protection like Sibi, the king of the Uginaras; and, like Bharata (the son of Dusyanta),
he will extend the fame of his own people as well as of those who perform sacrifices. (20)

" The scripture says :—

यावन्नच्छिद्यते नालं तावन्नाप्नोति सूतकम् । छिने नाले तत: पश्चात् सूतकं तु विधीयते॥

“A family does not contract Sttaka (impurity caused by childbirth) till the navel string is cut. It is only after the
umbilical cord Is cut that the Sdtaka actually commences as a rule."

A gift made before this operation brings an inexhaustible store of merit to the donor. The Smrti says :—
