108 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 2

SPESEESCEPEEEEHATELAEEERERERAR EHH ES ERSEHPEE REE Reh hh esehisesereceree दे दि

with intelligence) cross the ocean of mundane existence like the foot-print of a calf with the
help of the vessel in the form of Your feet, made available (shown) by the exalted. (30) Having
themselves duly crossed the terrible ocean of metempsychosis, (so) very difficult to cross,
O self-effulgent Lord, and leaving behind the bark of Your lotus-feet (setting an example of
their devotion) here (on this side of the ocean) the aforesaid (wise men), full of unbounded
compassion (for the afflicted), have reached the other shore (without any exertion), gracious
as You are to the righteous. (31) Others (those treading the path of Knowledge unmixed with
Devotion), who regard themselves as liberated, O lotus-eyed One, and whose mind is not
very pure due to lack of devotion to You and because they have failed to adore Your feet,
fall down from their position even on attaining with (great) difficulty a high state (in the form
of noble birth, learning and asceticism, so favourable to Liberation.) (32)Those devotees of
Yours, who have fastened their (deep) affection on You, O Spouse of Laksmi, do not, under
any Circumstance, stray in that way from the path (of Devotion). Protected on all sides by
You and therefore rid of all fear (on the other hand), O Lord, they move about freely, setting
their foot on the heads of the commanders of gods presiding over obstacles. (33) For the
continuance of the world You assume (reveal) a form—consisting of pure Sattva and
dispensing the fruit of actions of embodied beings—through the medium of which people
(belonging to the four Agramas or stages of life) offer worship to You (severally) through (a
study of) the Vedas, the practice of rituals, asceticism and concentration of mind. (34) Had
this (divine) personality of Yours, consisting of Sattva (unmixed with Rajas and Tamas) not
been manifest, O Maker of the universe, saving knowledge, which wipes out ignorance and
the (resulting) notion of diversity (and which follows from the worship of Your personality)
would not have been possible (at all). (If it is urged that the existence of Brahma would still
be concluded from the light shed by the intellect and other faculties which, being material,
possess only reflected light, our reply is that) You are only inferred (but not directly
perceived), through the light shed by material organs, as one in relation to whom and
presided over by whom the material organs shed their light. (Through Your worship however,
the mind gets attuned with You and Your truthis realized by Your grace). (35) O self-effulgent
Lord, who are the witness of the mind etc., and the means of whose realization can (only)
be guessed, Your names and forms, associated with Your excellences, births and deeds,
can neither be conceived with the mind nor extolled in words. Nevertheless, as is well-known,
those engaged in the act of Your worship do recite Your names and perceive Your forms.
(36) Hearing and reciting, contemplating on and helping others remember Your auspicious
names and forms, he whose mind is fixed on Your lotus-feet (even) when he is engaged in
activities (of various kinds) no longer deserves to be reborn. (37) Happily, O Hari, the burden
of this earth, which represents Your feet, has been removed by Your (very) descent. Luckily
(enough), we shall perceive the earth and heaven adorned with Your lovely footprints bearing
auspicious marks and (thus) favoured by You, its (supreme) Ruler. (38) O Lord, that
constitutes a haven free from (all) fear, we conceive no ground for Your descent other than
love for sport, birthless as You are; for birth, life and death are attributed (even) to the
(individual) soul through ignorance about You. (39) 0 Lord, relieve the burden of the earth
on this occasion (even) as You have protected us as well as (all) the three worlds (at other
times), having descended in the form of a fish, a horse (Lord Hayagriva), tortoise, man-lion,
boar, swan, Ksatriya prince (Sri Rama), a Brahmana (Lord Paragurama) and a god (the
divine Dwarf), Hail to You, O Jewel among the Yadus! (40) (Addressing Devaki, they said),

fortunately, O mother, the almighty Lord, the Supreme Person has Himself entered your
womb alongwith (all) His (divine) potencies (constituting so many parts of His being) for our
welfare. Let there be no more fear of Karnsa (the chief of the Bhojas), who is courting his own
