32 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 9
RR AAR RT RE ROR ROR RRR RR Rr Me Re Ree Re By ee ae Re Be Re Ne BeBe Br Re A HY Hr Be Re Re Ne ate By Re Re Re ae he He Re Be Re Be Me Be We Be Me Be He Ae Hr He We Hi He He HY Re Be Be Be
Brahmanas, and overpowered by affection and infatuation, king Yudhisthira (the son of
Dharma, the god of righteousness) said:—(47) “Oh, look at this ignorance rooted in my
heart! Evil-minded as | am, | brought about the destruction of many Aksauhinis* for the
sake of this body, which is the food of other creatures (such as jackals and dogs). (48)
There can be no redemption from hell even after millions and millions of years for me,
an enemy of children, Brahmanas, my own kith and kin, friends, uncles, cousins and
preceptors. (49) The saving clause found in the scriptures that the destruction of enemies
in a righteous war on the part of a monarch seeking the protection of his subjects is no
sin, fails to satisfy me. (50) The wrong that | have done in this life to the womenfolk whose
husbands and other relations have been slain by me or on my account | shall not be able
to expiate through sacrificial performances enjoined on a householder. (51) One cannot
atone for the destruction of a single life by any number of sacrifices (that involve the wilful
slaughter of animals), any more than one can purify muddy water by dissolving more mud
into it or counteract the pollution caused by spirituous liquor by adding more to it. (52)
Thus ends the eighth discourse entitled “Kunti’s Song of Praise and Yudhisthira’s
Remorse” in Book One of the great and glorious Bhagavata-Purana,
otherwise known as the Paramaharhsa-Samhita.

cans twat tiviet he

3९ अथ नवमोऽध्याय:
Discourse IX

Yudhisthira and others call on Bhisma and the latter drops
his mortal coil, extolling Sri Krsna
a उवाप

इति ita: प्रजाद्रोहात्सर्वधर्मविवित्सया | ततो विनशनं प्रागाद् aa देवव्रतोऽपतत्। १ |
तदा ते भ्रातर: सर्वे सदश्वै: स्वर्णभूषितै:। अन्वगच्छन् Wa व्यासधौम्यादयस्तथा। २ ।
भगवानपि fat Wa सधनञ्जय:। स तैर्व्यरोचत yo: कुबेर ya Tea! ३ ।
aero निपतितं भूमौ दिवश्च्युतमिवामरम्। प्रणेमु: पाण्डवा भीष्मं सानुगा: सहचक्रिणा। ४ ।
wa omega: सर्वे देवर्षयश्च सत्तम। राजर्षयश्च तत्रासन् द्रष्टुं भरतपुङ्खवम्। ५ |
पर्वतो नारदो धौम्यो भगवान् बादरायण:। बृहदश्वो भरद्वाज: सशिष्यो रेणुकासुत:। ६ |
वसिष्ठ इन्द्रप्रमदस्त्रितो गृत्समदोऽसित:। कक्षीवान्गौतमोऽत्रिश्चकौशिकोऽथ सुदर्शन:। ७ |
अन्ये च मुनयो ब्रह्मन् ब्रह्मरातादयोऽमला:। शिष्यैरुपेता आजग्मु: कश्यपाङ्गिरसादय:। ८ |
ay समेतान् महाभागानुपलभ्य वसूत्तम:। पूजयामास धर्मज्ञो देशकालविभागवित्। ९ |
कृष्णं च तत्प्रभावज्ञ amt जगदीश्वरम्। हृदिस्थं पूजयामास माययोपात्तविग्रहम्।१०॥।

Stta went on: Thus afraid of the wrongs perpetrated against humanity, king Yudhisthira
thereafter proceeded to Vinasana (the battle-field of Kuruksetra)—where Devavrata (Bhisma)
lay (on his bed of arrows), seeking enlightenment about all sacred duties. (1) Thereupon all
his celebrated brothers (Bhima and others) followed him, O holy Brahmanas, in chariots

* An Aksauhini consists of 21,870 chariots, an equal number of elephants, 1,09,350 toot and 65,610 horses.

