। १० ळा

Dis. 13] BOOK TWELVE 725

SRE REAR RRB ACR ER RARE RAR RRR ERA RAH ERIE EE ELLE LAE LEE AERA AAAI DARA BARR RH

Visnu.(16) Again, Srimad Bhagavata is certrainly unexcelled among the Puranic collections in
the same way, O Bralhmana sages | as Kasiis really unsurpassed among holy places. (17) The
glorious Bhagavata is a faultless Purana, which is beloved of the Vaisnavas, (nay,) in which
stands celebrated the one supreme Reality, which is all consciousness (as well as all truth and
all bliss), free from (all) impurity (in the form of contact with Maya) and which is the goal of
Paramaharsas (ascetics of the highest order). In this Purana withdrawal from (all) activity,
coupled with spiritual enlightenment, dispassion and Devotion, has been expounded. Aman
devoutly listening to it, carefully readingitand given to pondering itbids fair to get liberated.(18)

कस्मै येन विभासितोऽयमतुलो ज्ञानप्रदीप: पुरा तद्रूपेण च नारदाय मुनये कृष्णाय तद्रूपिणा ।

anita तदात्मनाथ भगवद्राताय कारुण्यतस्तच्छुद्धं विमलं विद्लोकममृतं सत्यं at धीमहि । १९1
नमस्तस्मै भगवते वासुदेवाय साक्षिणे। य इदं कृपया कस्मै व्याचचक्षे मुमुक्षवे । २०।
aris नमस्तस्मै yar ब्रह्मरूपिणे । संसारसर्पदष्टुं यो विष्णुरातममूमुचत् ।२१॥
wa wa यथा भक्ति: पादयोस्तव जायते aa Hey देवेश नाथस्त्वं नो यत्त: प्रभो ।२२।
नामसङ्कीर्तते यस्य सर्वपापप्रणाशानम्।प्रणामो दु:खशमनस्तं नमामि हरिं परम् । २३1

We meditate on that pure, taintless, immortal and highest Reality which is untouched by
sorrow and by which (manifested in the form of Lord Narayana) was graciously brought to
light at the beginning of creation this matchless lamp of wisdom to Brahma (the creator) and
as Brahma to (the celestial sage) Narada, as Narada to the sage Krsna (Vedavyasa) and as
the latter to the sage Suka (the prince among the Yogis) and in the form of Suka, to King
Pariksit (the favoured of the Lord). (19) Hail to the celebrated Lord Vasudeva, the Witness
(of all), who (for the first time) taught this Purana out of grace to Brahma, who was keen to
get liberated. (20) Hail to the sage Suka, that prince among the Yogis, the revealer of
Brahma, who redeemed King Pariksit (the favoured of Lord Visnu), bitten by the serpent in
the form of (fear of) rebirth, (21) (Pray,) so ordain, O Ruler of the gods! that devotion to Your
feet may sprout (in my heart) in every birth (that | may have to take); for You are our protector,
O Lord | (22) | salute Sri Hari (the Dispeller of all fears and agony), the Supreme Lord, the
loud chanting of whose Names is the (most efficacious and easiest) way to wipe out all sin
and respectful salutation to whom alleviates (all) suffering. (23)

Thus ends the thirteenth discourse in Book Twelve of the great and glorious
Bhagavata-Purana, otherwise known as the Paramahamsa-Samhita,
composed by the sage Vedavyasa and consisting
of eighteen thousand Stokas.

सुर्त्त
rer verry

END OF BOOK TWELVE

सि
ESS rs
