Dis. 1 ] BOOK SEVEN 649

KEKK CHK KATE KSA क्तयजा व्ये क कौ द् व्य छ तं गरोत्त REKCEEEKAASECEEAHEKELEEK ARK विश्वय AE KAHA ACOH OHAE RTH

मातृष्रसेयो वश्चैद्यो दन्तवक्त्रश्च पाण्डव। पार्षदप्रवरौ विष्णोर्विप्रशापात्पदाच्च्युतौ 1321

Narada said : The body is brought into being through lack of discrimination, O king,
between Prakrti (Matter) and Purusa (the Spirit, which lies beyond Prakrti) for (experiencing
pleasure and pain through) calumny and eulogy, honour and contumely. (22) Just as due to
identification with this body appears in (the mind of) living beings in this world differentiation
in the shape of “I” and "mine" and there (also) arises (a feeling of) pain as a result of resort
to force and reproachful language, and evenas the destruction of living beings is (considered
as) non-different from the destruction of the body to which attaches the aforesaid notion (of
"I" and "mine"), there isno such notion (of identity) in Sri Krsna, the Universal Spirit, because
of His being One without a second. On what ground, then, can violence be ascribed to Him,
who was indeed the chastiser of His foes (in their own interests)? (23-24) Therefore, one
should (anyhow) fix one's mind on Him either through constant enmity or through devotion
(which is free from enmity towards any creature whatsoever) or fear or affection or love. By
doing so he will in no way perceive anything else (than the Lord). (25) A mortal may not attain
such absorption into Him by fixing his mind on Him through devotion as through constant
hostility: such is my conclusion. (26) The caterpillar imprisoned by a wasp in (its nest on) a
wall and constantly thinking of the latter through (intensity of) hatred and fear attains a form
similar to the wasp. (27) With their sins thus washed off by constant contemplation through
animosity on the almighty Lord Sri Krsna, who appeared as a human being by His own will,
people attained to Him (easily and speedily too). (28) Fixing their mind on the almighty Lord
through concupiscence, hatred, fear or attachment as through devotion, and getting rid of
their sin standing as a barrier against His realization, many attained union with Him. (29) The
cowherd women (of Vraja) attained to Him through concupiscence; Karnsa, through fear;
Sigupala (the ruler of the Cedis) and other kings (like him), through hatred; the Vrsnis (the
kinsmen of Lord Sri Krsna), through kinship; you (the Pandava brothers), through attachment
and we (the sage Narada and others), through devotion, O lord ! (30) Vena (stood no chance
of attaining to the Lord inasmuch as he) did not fall under any of the five categories
(mentioned in verse 29) of those contemplating on the Lord. Hence by any means
whatsoever one should fix one's mind on Sri Krsna (the all-enchanting Supreme Deity). (31)
Sisupala (the ruler of the Cedis), your maternal aunt's son, as well as Dantavaktra (son of
another maternal aunt of yours), O Yudhisthira (son of Pandu), were (no other than) the two
foremost attendants (Jaya and Vijaya) of Lord Visnu, (that had been) hurled down from their
(divine) abode (Vaikuntha) under the curse of the Brahmana sages. (32)

युधिष्ठिर उवाच
wet: कस्य वा a हरिदासाभिमर्शन: । sega इवाभाति हरेरेकान्तिनां wa: 1331
देहेन्द्रयासुहीनानां वैकुण्ठपुरवासिनाम् | देहसम्बन्धसम्बद्धमेतदाख्यातुमर्हसि । ३४॥

Yudhisthira said ; What kind of and whose curse was it that prevailed (even) against
the servants of Lord Sri Hari ? The incarnation of those exclusively devoted to Sri Hari
appears as something incredible. (33) Be pleased to narrate the episode connected with the
corporeal existence of the denizens of Vaikunthapura (the abode of Lord Visnu), devoid (as
they are) of a (material) body, Indriyas and life-breath. (34)

ARG उवाच
एकदा Fan: पुत्रा विष्णोर्लोके यदृच्छया । सनन्दनादयो जग्मुश्चरन्तो भुवनत्रयम् । ३५॥
usages: पूर्वेषामपि पूर्वजा: । दिग्वासस:शिशून्मत्वाद्वा:स्थौ तान्प्रत्यषेधताम् । ३६॥
ar, कुपिता एवं gat वासं न चार्हथ: । रजस्तमोभ्यां रहिते पादमूले मधुद्विष: ।
पापिष्ठामासुरीं चोनिं बालिशौ यातमाश्वत: 1319 |

(564] B. M. 23—
