Dis. 8 ] BOOK FOUR 329
RESPRPATAATEARERERTAR AACR ER ERE Sete tir eee emer na RTARAne eA ade

(religious merit) and the other objects of human persuit. (59-60) If the devotee is averse to
sensuous enjoyment, he should wait upon the Lord Himself with an intense practice of
Devotion carried on uninterruptedly for the sake of final beatitude. (61)

इत्युक्तस्तं परिक्रम्य प्रणम्य च नृपार्भक:। ययो मधुवनं पुण्यं हरेश्चरणचर्चितम् । ६२॥

Wiest गते तस्मिन्प्रविष्टोऽन्त:पुरुं मुनि: । अर्हितार्हणको राज्ञा सुखासीन उवाच तम् । ६३1

Thus instructed (by the sage), the prince (Dhruva) went round the sage (as a mark of

respect) and, bowing low to him, proceeded to the holy tract of Madhuvana, adorned with
the footprints of Sri Hari. (62) When he had lett for the forest so suitable for austere penance,
the sage (Narada) made his way to the gynaeceum (of King Uttanapada); and when the king
had offered him worship (in the form of water to wash his hands and SO on) and he was
comfortably seated, he spoke to the king (as follows) :—(63)

ING उवाच
राजन् fe ध्यायसे दीर्घं मुखेन परिशुष्यता । किं वा न fed कामो धर्मो वार्थेन संयुत: । ६४॥
Narada said : With a withering face what are you brooding over so deeply ? | hope
neither your luxuries nor your religious merit nor again your wealth has suffered any

diminution ? (64)
राजोवाच

सुतो मे बालको ब्रह्मन् स्रैणेनाकरुणात्मना | निर्वासित: पञ्चवर्ष: सह मात्रा महान्कवि: । ६५॥
अप्यनाथं वने ब्रह्मन्मास्मादन्त्यर्भकं वृका: । श्रान्तं शयानं क्षुधितं परिम्लानमुखाम्बुजम् । ६६॥
we मे aa दौरात्म्यं स्रीजितस्योपधारय । योऽङ्कं प्रेम्णाऽऽरुरुक्षन्तं नाभ्यनन्दमसत्तम: । ६७।

The king said : Uxorious and merciless as | am, 0 sage, | exiled my son, a child of five
years, who was very noble and wise, along with his mother. (65) Wolves, O holy Brahmana,
may not eat up the helpless child, who may be lying (somewhere) in the forest, fatigued and
famished, with his lotus-like face faded. (66) Oh, just imagine the wickedness of my uxorious
self, who did not greet the child while he was climbing up my lap with affection, extremely

vile as | am ! (67)
ARG उवाच

मा मा शुच: स्वतनयंदेबगुप्तंविशांम्पते।तत्मभावपबिज्ञायप्राबृक्केयद्यज्ञोजगत्।६८।
सुदुष्करं at कृत्वा लोकपालैरपि sy: एष्यत्यचिरतो राजन् यज्ञो विपुलयंस्तव । ६९॥
Narada said: No, sorrow not for your child, who enjoys the protection of the Lord, O ruler
of the people, and whose glory shall pervade the (whole) world; for you know not his
greatness. (68) Having wrought an achievement which even the protectors of the world find

it difficult to perform, the glorious child shall return before long, O king, enhancing your
reputation. (69

मैत्रेय उवाच
इति देवर्षिणा प्रोक्तं fase जगतीपति: | राजलक्ष्मीमनादृत्य पुत्रमेवान्वचिन्तयत् go |
तत्राभिषिक्त: प्रयतस्तामुपोष्य विभावरीम्। समाहित: पर्यचरदृष्यादेशेन पूरुषम् ।७१॥
त्रिरात्रान्ते fra कपित्थबदरारान:। आत्मवृत्त्यनुसारेण मासं निन्येऽर्चयन्हरिम् 1192 1
द्वितीयं च तथा मासं षट्टे षष्ठेऽर्भको दिने | तृणपर्णादिभि: ज्ञीर्णै: कृतान्नोऽभ्यर्चयद्विभुम् 03 |
wr चानयन्पासं नवमे नवमेऽहनि । अब्भक्ष उत्तमश्लोकमुपाधावत्समाधिना । ७४1
चतुर्थमपि a मासं द्वादशे द्वादरोऽहनि । वायुभक्षो जितश्वासो ध्यायन्देवमधारयत् 119% |
[564] B. M. 13—
