752 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 5:

ROKK AAHHA LAMAR AK EHH HEHE REECE ESE EHH SEH CESSES HESS SOC क क त्ती ह TELA PEPE कके वी व प्रित्

(revealed). (5) His glory and excellences (such as devotion to the Brahmanas) as well as
(His) supreme elevation have(already) been recounted * He who would (undertake to)
exhaust the virtues of Lord Visnu might (as well) count the particles of dust of the (entire)
globe. (6)
WES Was: YAMIN नाम बै मनु: | पूरुपूरुषसुद्युम्नप्रमुखाश्चाक्षुषात्मजा: 9 |
इन्द्रो मन्त्रद्रुमस्तत्र देवा आप्यादयो गणा:। मुनयस्तत्र वै राजन्हविष्मद्वीरकादय: । ८।
तत्रापि देव: सम्भूत्यां वैराजस्याभवत् सुत: । अजितो नाम भगवानंशेन जगत: पति: । ९ ।
पयोधिं येन निर्मथ्य सुराणां साधिता सुधा । भ्रममाणोऽम्भसि ga: कूर्मरूपेण मन्दर: 1201
Indeed, the sixth Manu was son of Caksu, Caksusa by name; while Puru, Purusa,
Sudyumna and others were the sons of Chaksusa.(7) Mantradruma was (the name of) the
Indra during the Caksusa Manvantara; while Apyas and others were the hosts of the gods.
Similarly Havisman, Viraka and otherst were the (seven) seers in that Manvantara, O king! (8)
In that very Manvantara the divine Lord, the Protector of the universe, appeared in His partial
being as the son of Vairaja through the latter's wife, Sambhtti, under the name of Ajita, by

whom nectar was made available to the gods after churning the ocean (of milk) and by whom,
in the form of the (divine) Tortoise, Mount Mandara revolving in the water was supported (on

His back).(9-10)

यथा भगवरता ब्रह्मन्मधित: क्षीरसागर:। यदर्थं वा यतश्चाद्रि दधाराम्बुचरात्मना 122.1
यथामृतं सुरे प्राप्ते किञ्चान्यदभवत् तत:। एतद् भगवत: ad aaa परमाद्भुतम् । १२।
त्वया agers महिम्ना सात्वतां पते: । नातितृप्यति a fed सुचिरं तापतापितम् 1१३
The king (Pariksit) submitted : (Pray). describe (to me) that most marvellous feat of the
almighty Lord, how and what for the ocean of milk was churned by the Lord, O (holy)
Brahmana; wherefore He, in the form of an aquatic animal (tortoise), propped up Mount
Mandara (on His back); how nectar was obtained by the gods and what else than this
happened (on the said occasion). (11-12) My mind, afflicted by (the threefold) agony for a
pretty long time, does not feel sated with the glory of Sri Krsna (the Lord of the Yadus), which
is being told at length by you (and which is so charming). (13)
Sard

सम्पृष्टो भगवानेवं द्वैपायनसुतो द्विजा:। अभिनन्द्य हरेर्वीर्यमभ्याचष्टुं प्रचक्रमे ex!
Sita went on: Implored thus (by Pariksit), O Brahmanas, and welcoming his inquiry, the
omniscient sage Suka (son of Dwaipayana), proceeded to describe in detail (as follows) the
feat of Sri Hari (in the form of the churning of the ocean).(14).

श्रीरुक उवाच
यदा युद्धेऽसुरैर्देवा बाध्यमाना: शितायुधै: । गतासवो निपतिता नोत्तिष्ठेरन्म भूयश: ।१५॥
यदा दुर्वासस: sored, सेन्द्रा लोकास्त्रयो नृप । नि:श्रीकाश्चाभेवंस्तत्र नेशुरिज्यादय: क्रिया: । १६॥
fare सुरगणा महेन्द्रवरुणादय: |e मन्रैर्मन्त्रयन्तो विनिश्चयम् । १७
ततो ब्रह्मसभां जग्मुर्मेरोर्मूर्धनि सर्वश:। सर्वं विज्ञापयाञ्चक्रु: प्रणता: परमेष्ठिने । १८॥
स विलोक्येन्द्रवाय्वादीन् नि:सत्त्वान्विगतप्रभान् | लोकानमङ्गलप्रायानसुरानयथा fay: 1१९1

* Vide Book Ill.
+ The names of the other five seers, as gathered from the HarivarhSa, are: Sumedha, Uttama, Madhu, Atinama and
Sahisnu.

