Dis. 78 ] BOOK TEN 447

AEAPATE ATOR TKE ERA hse Cee TLE rte ह क 9७ ककक #5##8 # 2३८8 #४-8ग-सश स्र सा # स १ म १8 १९

सोऽर्चिततर सपरीवार: कृतासनपरिग्रह: | रोमहर्षणमासीनं महर्षे दशिष्यमेक्षत 1221
अप्रत्युत्थायिनं सूतमकृतप्रह्वणाञ्जलिम् | अध्यासीनं च तान् विप्रांश्चुकोपोद्बीक्ष्य माधव: 1231
कस्मादसाविमान् विप्रानध्यास्ते प्रतिलोमज: । धर्मपालांस्तथैवास्मान् वधमर्हति दुर्मति: ।२४॥
ऋषेर्भगवतो भूत्वा शिष्योऽधीत्य बहूनि च । सेतिहासपुराणानि धर्मज्ञास्राणि ada: 1241
अदान्तस्याविनीतस्य वृथा पण्डितमानिन: । न गुणाय भवन्ति स्म नटस्येवाजितात्मन: 1261
एतदर्थो fe लोकेऽस्मिन्नवतारो मया aa: । वध्या मे धर्मध्वजिनस्ते हि पातकिनोऽधिका: 1201
wage भगवान् निवृत्तोऽसद्वधादपि । भावित्वात् तं कुशाग्रेण करस्थेनाहनत् प्रभु: । २८॥
wea वादिन: र्वे मुनय: रखिन्नमानसा:। ऊचु: सङ्कुर्षणं देवमधर्मस्ते कृत: प्रभो ।२९॥
अस्य ब्रह्मासनं दत्तमस्माभिर्यदुनन्दन | आयुश्चात्माक्कमं तावद् यावत् सत्रं समाप्यते 1301
अजानतैवाचरितस्त्वया ब्रह्मवधो यथा योगेश्वरस्य भवतो नाम्नायोऽपि नियामक: 1321
यद्येतद् ब्रह्महत्याया: Wed लोकपावन।चरिष्यति भवाँल्लोकसङ्ग्रहोऽनन्यचोदित: 1321
SriBalarama presently heard of the preparations of the Kurus for war with the Pandavas.
He desired to remain neutral and therefore left Dwaraka on the pretext of going out for a dip
in sacred waters. (17) He first wentto Prabhasa, took a plunge in the sea there andpropitiated
the gods, Rsis and manes by offering them water and human beings by feeding them. Thus,
accompanied by (some) Brahmanas, He proceeded along the bank of the Saraswati in an
upward journey, in the course of which He visited Prthidaka, Bindusara, Tritakupa,
Sudarsana, Visala, Brahmatirtha, Cakratirtha and the spot where the Saraswati turns
towards the east. (18-19) Thereafter, passing through the important places on the Jamuna
and the Ganga, He came to Naimisaranya, where the sages were holding a religious
concourse. They had taken a vow of prolonged Satsanga. (20) When they saw Sri Balarama
in their midst, the sages rose from their seats, welcomed Him, bowed to Him or blessed Him,
according as it became their position, and worshipped Him. (21) Honoured thus, when He
had taken His seat alongwith His followers, Sri Balarama observed Romaharsana, the
disciple of the great sage Vyasa, seated on the elevated seat meant for one who holds a
discourse. (22) Thougha Stta by caste, he occupied a seat higher than the Brahmanas and
neither rose from his seat, nor bowed to Him with joined palms. Getting angry at the sight,
Sri Balarama said to the Brahmanas there. (23) "Howhaas this Suta, born as he is of an illegal
union, viz., of a Ksatriya father anda Brahmana mother, taken into his head to occupy a seat
higher than the Brahmanas and custodians of law like ourselves. The fool, therefore,
deserves to be done to death. (24) Being a disciple of the great sage Vyasa, under whom
he has studied all the books on law, including the Itihasas and Puranas, he cannot plead
ignorance either.(25) Uncultured and arrogant, he falsely pretends to be a learned man.
Since he has not been able to discipline his self, the instruction he has received is just like
the part played by an actor on the stage. It can do no good to him not to anybody else. (26)
Those who make a show of righteousness, though not actually righteous, are more sinful
than the unrighteous and deserve death at My hands. It is precisely for killing such people
that] have descendedon earth.” (27) Being ona pilgrimage, Sri Balarama had desisted even
from the work of slaying the unrighteous in battle. Yet, with these words He struck the Sita
- with the end of a KuSa grass, which He held in His hand, which caused the instantaneous
death of the Suta. This was how it was destined to be; nobody could avert it. (28) Allthe sages
cried out in distress when they saw the 308 fall before them. Addressing Sri Balarama, who
was another manifestation of the Supreme Deity, they said,” 0 Lord, You have committed
an unrighteous act. (29) It was we who offered him the elevated seat of a Brahmana and

