Dis. 10 ] BOOK THREE . 77

ROR RT tr WORST 8 Ke te RSE Er Ue दा सा राजा Ee ETRY क TET Be OM TET

wanting in sensibility, have an inward feeling of touch alone and possess some peculiarity
of their own. (19) The eighth is the creation of animals (lit., living beings that draw their
nutriment horizontally). They are believed to have as many as twenty-eight varieties, have
no sense of time, are irrational (led by instinct alone), can perceive (what is desirable for
them) with their olfactory sense, and cannot take a long view of things. (20) Of these, the
bovine class, the goat, the buffalo, the black antelope, the swine, the Gavaya (a wild animal
very closely resembling the cow), the Ruru (a species of deer), the sheep and the camel, O
noblest of men, belong to the category of cloven-hocfed beasts. (21) The donkey, the horse,
the mule, the Gaura ( a white antelope), Sarabha (an eight-legged animal extinct now) and
the yak (a kind of wild ox, the bushy end of whose tail is employed as Chowrie)—all these
are classed as the whole—hoofed beasts. Now hear, O Vidura, the names of the beasts who
are endowed with five claws. (22) They are: the dog, the jackal, the wolf, the tiger, the cat,
the hare, the hedgehog, the lion, the monkey, the elephant, the tortoise, the iguana (a large
arboreal lizard) and the alligator etc. (23) The heron, the vulture, the quail, the hawk, the
Bhasa (a bird of prey), the Bhallka, the peacock, the swan, the crane, the Cakrawaka, the
crow, the owl etc., are birds moving in the air. (24) The ninth is the creation of the human
species, which, O Vidura, is only of one kind and whose current of nutriment tends
downwards. Human beings have an abundance of Rajas (the principle of activity), are active
by nature and take delight in the pleasures of sense, which are rooted in sorrow. (25) All these
three (viz., the immobile creation, the beasts and birds and the human species) as well as
the creation of the gods (to be discussed hereafter), O noblest of men, are creations that
have proceeded from Brahma. As for the deities (presiding over the Indriyas and) born of
the Sattvika ego they have already been dealt with (in verse 16 above under the category
of the creation proceeding from God); while the creation of the sages Sanaka and others is
classed as proceeding from God and Brahma both.* (26)

देवसर्गश्चाष्टविधो faq: पितरोऽसुरा: । गन्धर्वाप्सरस: सिद्धा यक्षरक्षांसि चारणा: 1201

भूतप्रेतपिशाचाश्च विद्याध्रा: किन्नरादय: । art विदुराख्याता: aie विश्वसृक्कृता: । २८।

अत: परं प्रवक्ष्यामि वंशान्मन्वन्तराणि च । एवं Wye: ABT कल्पादिषात्मभूर्हरि: ।

सृजत्यमोघसङ्कल्प आत्मैवात्मानमात्मना 129 |
इति श्रीमद्भागवते महापुराणे पारमहंस्यां संहितायां तृतीयस्कन्धे दशमोऽध्याय: ।१०॥

The creation of heavenly beings consists of eight varieties, viz., the gods; the manes; the
demons; the Gandharvas (celestial musicians) and the Apsaras (celestial dancing girls); the
Yaksas and the Raksasas; the Siddhas (a class of heavenly beings endowed with
supernatural powers), the Caranas (the celestial bards) and the Vidyadharas; the Bhutas
(ghosts), Pretas (spirits) and Pisacas (fiends); the Kinnaras, Kimpurusas and ASwamukhas.
| have thus told you, O Vidura, the ten creations evolved by the Lord personally as well as
in the form of Brahma (the Creator of the universe). (27-28) After this | shall speak to you
of the ruling dynasties as well as the periods presided over by the Manus, United with Rajas
(the principle of activity) as the self-born Brahma, the creator, none other than Sri Hari of
unfailing resolve thus projects Himself (in the form of the universe) by Himself at the
beginning of every Kalpa. (29)

Thus ends the tenth discourse in Book Three of the great
and glorious Bhagavata-Purana, otherwise known
as the Paramahamsa-Samnhita.
MEENA ENTS:
LDOD OREN EMESIS

ee नन्रतिति। त्रा ।यिहिरि।  । ॥ ता त् ता वित्
*Sanaka and others, being the mind-born sons of Brahma, obviously belang to the creation proceeding from Brahma.
But having been created before all others, even before Rudra and the Prajapatis (the progenitors of all created beings), they

are also classed as a creation proceeding from God Himself.
