ना

Dis. 28] BOOK ELEVEN 653

. न ROI RRR ORO न न ORL ल्कक REESE OR FOE ROE OEE OR FEU Oe BO EE ECE EO Ee

destiny etc.), the ignorant man performs actions till his death and is subjected to joy and
sorrow (undergoes transmigration thereby).The enlightened soul (however) is not so
subjected, though seated in the body (a product of Matter), his thirst (for the pleasures of
sense) having ceased due to his enjoying the bliss of Self-Realization (and hence does not
undergo transmigation through performing actions all his life). (30) He whose mind is fixed
on the Self is not aware of the body whether it is standing or sitting, walking or lying down,
answering the calls of nature or masticating food or pursuing any other natural activity. (31)
If at all a man of wisdom perceives the various objects of his extroverted senses, he does
not recognize as real anything other than the Self—for such a thing would be contrary to
reason — any more thanaman rising from sleep recognizes as real an objectseeninadream
and as such vanishing. (32) This psycho-physical organism (a product of ignorance),
wonderfully wrought by the three Gunas (modes of Prakrti} and Karmas (conforming to those
Gunas), which was formerly (in the state of bondage) perceived as non-distinct from the Self,
O dear Uddhava, now disappears in the light of Self-Knowledge. The Self (however) can
neither be apprehended nor rejected. (33) Justas the emergence of the sun (only) disperses
the darkness screening the human eyes, but does not create (anew) what has already been
there, so My consummate and true realization dispels the darkness enveloping the mind of
man. (34) The Self is never hidden from our view (but ever directly perceptible). It is self-
luminous, beyond birth (and death etc.), beyond all proof, unlimited in point of time and space
etc. (and therefore beyond all change), comprising all sorts of experiences, and remaining
one (without a second) when all words cease to describe it. Speech and the senses function
(only) when impelled by It.(35)

एतावानात्मसंमोहो ae विकल्पस्तु केवले । आत्मन्नृते स्वमात्मानमवलम्बो न यस्य fe 1341
यन्नामाकृतिभिरग्राह्यं पञ्चवर्णमबाधितम् | व्यर्थेनाप्यर्थवादोऽयं ga पण्डितमानिनाम् 1391
The notion of difference in the absolute Self is entirely a delusion of the mind; for other
than one's own self there is no ground for this difference. (36) The view of some self-
conceited men that the duality (in the form of the body etc.), perceptible (with the senses) in

the form of (so many) names and forms and consisting of the five (gross) elements cannot
be refuted is a meaningless tall talk. (37)

योगिनोऽपक्वयोगस्य gaa: काय उत्थितै: । soatidesta तत्रायं विहितो विधि: ।३८॥
योगधारणया कांश्चिदासनैर्धारणान्वितै: । तपोमन्त्रौषधै: कोंश्चिदुपसर्गान् विनिर्दहेत् ia
कांश्चिन्ममानुध्यानेन नामसङ्कीर्तनादिभि: । योगेश्वरानुवृत्या वा हन्यादशुभदाञ्छनै: Ko |
fag देहमिमं धीरा: सुकल्पं वयसि स्थिरम् । विधाय विविधोपायैरथ gata सिद्धये ।४१॥
न हि तत् pred तदायासो ह्यपार्थक: । अन्तवत्त्वाच्छरीरस्य फलस्येव वनस्पते: ।४२॥
am निषेवतो fra कायश्चैत् कल्पतामियात् । तच्छ्रद्ध्यान्न मतिमान् योगमुत्सृज्य मत्पर: 1x31
योगचर्यामिमां योगी विचरन् मदपाश्रय: । नान्तरायैर्विहन्येत नि:स्पृह: स्वसुखानुभू: ।४४॥

If the body of a Yogi who has not yet achieved perfection in Yoga and who is still striving
is visited by (some) calamities (ailments etc.), appearing all of a sudden, the following is
prescribed as a remedy. (38) One should get rid of some obstacles (such as heat and cold)
through Yogic concentration (severally on the moon and the sun), others (viz., flatulence and
other ailments) by means of Yogic postures accompanied by concentration on the air and
