178 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 11

अथैकादशोऽध्याय:

Discourse XI

Divisions of Time such as Manvantara and so on
मैत्रेय उवाच
amy: सद्बिशेषाणामनेकोऽसंबुततर सदा। परमाणु: स विज्ञेयो नॄणामैक्यभ्रमो aa: । १ |
सत wa पदार्थस्य स्वरूपावस्थितस्य यत्।कैवल्ये परममहानविलेषो निरन्तर: । २ ।
एवं कालोऽप्यनुमित: सोक्ष्म्ये स्थौल्ये च सत्तम | संस्थानभुक्त्या भगवानव्यक्तो व्यक्तभुग्विभु: । ३ ।
स काल: परमाणुर्वै यो भुङ्क्ते परमाणुताम्। सतोऽविशेषभुग्यस्तु स काल: UTA महान् । ४ |
Maitreya continued : The minutest particle of material substance (which cannot be
further divided), which has not yet evolved, nay, not even been combined with other similar
particles and hence eternally exists (in that causal state) should be known by the name of
Paramanu. Itis the combination of more than one such Paramanus that creates in the mind
of men the illusory notion of a unit. (1) Even so the entire range of material substances taken
as an unspecified and undifferentiated whole, before it undergoes further transformation,
i.e., returns to its ultimate source (Prakrti), constitutes what is known as the largest size. (2)
(Just as the minutest particle of a material substance such as earth and so on leads us to
postulate the existence of a Paramanu, and the combination of material substances to that
of the largest size), so can we infer the long and short measures of time, which (being a
potency of the Lord) is the same as the Lord, all-pervading and unmanifest, and which is the
circumscriber of finite objects inasmuch as (in the form of the sun) it travels across the large
and small dimensions of things. (3) The measure of time which (in the form of the sun) flits
across the smallest particle of matter is called a Paramanu; while that which extends over
the whole life-span of the universe (viz., from its creation to dissolution) is the longest
measure of time (in relation to the cosmos, viz., a couple of Parardhas, constituting the life-
span of Brahma). (4)

BE परमाणू स्यात्त्रसरेणुस्त्रय: स्मृत:। जालार्करम्यवगत: सखमेवानुपतन्नगात्। ५ |
त्रसरेणुत्रिकं भुङ्क्ते य: काल: स त्रुटि: Wa: | शतभागस्तु वेध: स्यात्तैस्रिभिस्तु wa: स्मृत: । ६ |
निमेषस्रिलवो ज्ञेय आम्नातस्ते Fa: क्षण: । क्षणान् पञ्च fae: काष्ठां लघु ता दश पञ्च च । ७ |
लघूनि a समाम्नाता दश ce च नाडिका । ते द्वे मुहूर्त: प्रहर: षड्याम: सप्त वा नॄणाम् । ८ ।
द्वादशार्धपलोन्मानं चतुर्भिश्चतुरङ्गुलै: | स्वर्णमाषै: कृतच्छिद्रं यावत्प्रस्थजलप्नुतम् । ९ ।
यामाश्चत्वारश्चत्वारो atime उभे। पक्ष: पञ्चदशाहानि WE: कृष्णश्च मानद ।१०॥
तयो: समुच्चयो मास: पितॄणां तदहर्निशम्। द्वौ तावृतु: षडयनं दक्षिणं चोत्तरं दिवि । ११
अयने चाहनी प्राहुर्वत्सरो द्वादश स्मृत: । संवत्सरशतं नॄणां परमायुर्निरूपितम् ।१२।
अहर्क्षताराचक्रस्थ: परमाण्वादिना जगत्।संवत्सरावसानेन पर्येत्यनिमिषो fay: ।१३॥
संवत्सर: Ua इडावत्सर WE च। अनुवत्सरो वत्सरश्च विदुरैवं प्रभाष्यते । १४॥
य: सृज्यशाक्तिमुरुधोच्छ्वसयन् स्वदाक्त्या पुंसोऽभ्रमाय दिवि धावति भूतभेद: |
कालाख्यया गुणमयं क्रतुभिर्वितन्वंस्तस्मै बलिं हरत वत्सरपञ्चकाय । १५॥

Two Paramanus make one Anu (an atom); while three Anus constitute a Trasarenu* (the

“The words 'Anu' and 'Trasarenu' though primarily denoting the dimensions of material objects, also signify the measure
of time taken by the sun to travel across the aforesaid dimensions.
