274 ॥ SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 41

BAER SEAN 8 SB ESOS A Se 2 ETE Eee S eee er enn Soret fare

भवान् प्रविशतामग्रे सहयान: पुरीं गृहम्। ad त्विहावमुच्याथ ततो द्रक्ष्यामहे पुरीम् igo!

Akrira replied ; "Whatever wonders there are on this earth, in the firmament or in water
exist in You (alone), who ensoul the universe. What wonder can, therefore, remain unseen
by me, when | am directly looking at You ? (4) When । am gazing on Yourself, in whom all
marvels exist, O infinite Lord, what miracle could have been seen by me (elsewhere, viz.,)
on this earth, in the sky or in water ?“ (5) Observing thus, Akriira (the son of Gandini* ) drove
his chariot and brought Balarama and Sri Krsna to Mathura at the decline of day. (6) People
irom the country, O king, who flocked at every stage on the road, felt delighted to behold the
two Sons of Vasudeva and could not withdraw their eyes (from Them). (7) Meanwhile the
people of Vraja, headed by Nanda, the chief of the cowherds, (who had left the main road
when they found Akrira tarrying on the bank of the Yamuna, and taken a shorter route)
reached agarden in the precincts of the city in advance and stood waiting (there for Balarama
and Sri Krsna). (8) Having joined them, Lord Sri Krsna (the Ruler of the universe) clasped
with His own hand the hand of Akrira, who stood bent low with reverence, and spoke to him
as though laughing heartily :—(9)"Enter you the city in advance with the chariot and return
home. We, however, shall presently take down our things here and having rested awhile shall
then visit the city.” (10)

अक्रूर उवाच
नाहं भवद्भ्यां ted: प्रवेक्ष्ये मथुरां प्रभो ।त्यक्तुं नार्हसि मां नाथ भक्तं ते भक्तवत्सल ee!
आगच्छ याम गेहान् न: सनाथान् कुर्वधोक्षज | सहाग्रज: सगोपालै: सुहृद्धिश्च सुहृत्तम ।१२॥
पुनीहि पादरजसा गृहान् नो गृहमेधिनाम् । यच्छौचेनानुतृप्यन्ति पितर: साम्नय: सुरा: 123!
अवनिज्याङ्घ्रियुगलमासीच्छलोक्यो बलिर्महान् । ऐश्चर्यमतुलं लेभे a चैकान्तिनां तु या । १४॥
आपस्तेऽङ्छ्बवनेजन्यस्त्रील्लोकाञ्छुचयोऽपुनन् | शिरसाधत्त at: aed: स्वर्याता: सगरात्मजा: 1१५॥ .
देवदेव जगन्नाथ पुण्यश्रवणकीर्तन । यदूत्तमोत्तमश्लोक नारायण नमोऽस्तु ते ।१६॥
Akrira submitted : Bereft of You both | shall not enter Mathura, O Lord! You ought not
to abandon me, Your devotee, my master, (so) fond of Your votaries. (11) Come, let us (all)
go (together). (Pray,) grace our house, O Lord, who are above sense-perception, with the
presence of its master (in You), visiting it alongwith Balarama (Your elder Brother) as well
as with Your near and dear ones and (other) cowherds, O best Friend ! (12) (Please) sanctify
our house, householders as we are, with the dust of Your feet. With the water washing Your
feet (and collected in a basin in one’s house or flowing in the form of the holy Ganga) the
manes as well as the gods including the fire-god get eternally propitiated (if it is offered to
them by way of Tarpana). (13) (Nay,) by washing both Your feet (the celebrated demon king)
Bali not only became worthy of (sacred) renown and great (in point of merits) but (also)
attained incomparable affluence and power as well as the goal which is reached by those
exclusively devoted to You. (14) The waters that washed Your feet (when You measured the
earth and heaven ina couple of strides, and which flowed in the form of the holy Ganga) and
were (thus) hallowed (beyond all measure) sanctified all the three worlds (through which the
Ganga flows), the (great) Lord Siva (the Destroyer of the universe) bore+ them on His head
and the (famous) sons of Sagara ascended to heaven (by contact of their remains with those
sacred waters). (15) (My) salutation be to You, O Lord of the universe, adored (even) by the
gods, the hearing and recital of whose praises brings (supreme) merit, O jewel among the

~ The name of Akrira’s mother.
+ Vide IX. ix. 9.
