274° SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 31

SHEA AKOH RLM HTH HEHE HECKLER ARE AEEOH EA CORH EAE HE RA ERE Here het eh te hi ere
ज्

it), and he is subjected to torment by serpents, scorpions, gnats etc., that bite (or sting)
him (26) Nay, his limbs are lopped of one by one and rent asunder by elephants;(in some
cases) he is hurled down from hill-tops and is also held up either in water or in a cave. (27)
Whether man or woman, one has to suffer in the regions of hell known by the names of
Tamisra, Andhatamisra, Raurava and so on (enumerated hereafter in Book Five), tortures
brought about by association with one another in sinful acts. (28)Some people aver that
heaven and hell exist in this very world, O mother; for the tortures which are experienced in
hell are seen even here.(29)

एवं seat बिभ्राण उदरम्भर wa वा । विसृज्येहोभयं प्रेत्य भुङ्क्ते तत्फलमीदृशम् i301
एक: प्रपद्यते ध्वान्तं हित्वेदं स्वकलेवरम्। कुशलेतरपाथेयो भूतद्रोहेण aq भृतम् ।३१॥
दैवेनासादितं तस्य शमलं निरये पुमान्। भुङ्क्ते कुटुम्बपोषस्य हृतवित्त इवातुर: ।३२॥
केवबलेन ह्यधर्मेण कुटुम्बभरणोत्सुक: । याति जीवोऽन्धतामिस्रं चरमं तमस: पदम् । ३३॥
अधस्तान्नरलोकस्य यावतीर्यातनादय: | क्रमश: समनुक्रम्य पुनरत्राव्रजेच्छुचि: । ३४॥

He who supports his family in the aforesaid manner (vide verses 7,10 and 11 above)
or simply nourishes his own body leaves both (his family as well as his body) here and,
departing hence, reaps the fruit of his actions as indicated above (in verses 20 to 28). (30)
Shuffling off his body, which he nourished by marring the interests of other creatures, he
goes down to the dark region of hell alone, carrying a wallet of sins (on his head). (31) Man
reaps in hell the evil consequences, inflicted by Providence, of (the sins committed by him
in) maintaining his family, and feels distressed like a man who has lost his wealth.(32)The
man who is keen to support his family by recourse to purely unrighteous ways goes to the
darkest region of hell known by the name of Andhatamisra.(33) Having gone through in a
regular order all the tortures of hell and passed through the lowest forms of animal life
preceding human birth (such as that of a dog, swine and so on), and thus purged of his sins,
he is reborn as a human being on this earth.(34)

Thus ends the thirtieth discourse entitled “the fruit of actions pursuing those who
commit them through subsequent existences", forming part of the "Story of
Lord Kapila’, in Book Three of the great and glorious Bhagavata-
Purana, otherwise known as the Paramahamsa-Samhita.

३०२२ न
PICS Sirs

अथैकत्रिंशोऽध्याय:

Discourse XXX!
The stages of growth of a human embryo

श्रीभगवानुवाच
कर्मणा दैवनेत्रेण जन्तुर्देहोपपत्तये । स्रिया: प्रविष्ट उदरं yet रेत:कणाश्रय: 121
moe त्वेकरात्रेण पञ्चरात्रेण बुदबुदम्। दशाहेन तु कर्कन्धू: पेश्यण्डं वा aa: परम् । २।

