Dis. 58 ] BOOK TEN 363

SEUKCE eee Et Re We EEE CEST ELV Te sees eeteente resets teeter

we याच्ञा कविभिर्विगर्हिता राजन्यबन्धोर्निजधर्मवर्तिन: ।
तथापि aa तव सोहदेच्छया कन्यां त्वदीयां न हि शुल्कदा वयम् ।४०॥
The Lord said : Solicitation has been condemned by the wise on the part of the humblest
Ksatriya, sticking to his own duty, O ruler of men ! Yet in My eagerness to secure your

friendship | ask (of you) your daughter, since we are not prepared to pay any price (for the
match). (40)-

+

राजोवाच

कोऽन्यस्तेऽभ्यधिको नाथ कन्यावर इहेप्सित: । गुणैकधाम्नो यस्याङ्गे श्रीर्वसत्यनपायिनी xe

किं त्वस्माभि: कृत: पूर्वं समय: सात्वतर्षभ । पुंसां वीर्यपरीक्षार्थं कन्यावरपरीप्सया ।४२॥

सप्तैते गोवृषा dk ein दुरवग्रहा: । एतैर्भग्ना: सुबहवो fern नृपात्मजा: ive!

यदिमे निगृहीता: Gea यदुनन्दन । वरो भवानभिमतो दुहितुर्मे Bre: wise

एवं समयमाकर्ण्य बद्ध्वा परिकरं oy: | आत्मानं सप्तधा कृत्वा न्यगृह्णाल्लीलयैव तान् ।४५॥

बद्ध्वा तान् दामभि: छौरिर्भग्नदर्पान् gaia: । व्यकर्षल्लीलया बद्धान् बालो दारुमयान्यथा 1४६1

तत: Ma: सुतां राजा ददौ कृष्णाय विस्मित: | at प्रत्यगृह्णादू भगवान् विधिवत् wea प्रभु: rvs

राजपत्न्यश्च दुहितु: कृष्णं लब्ध्वा प्रियं ca SR परमानन्दं aay परमोत्सव: ।४८॥

शङ्खभेर्यानका नेदुर्गीतवाद्यद्विजाशिष: । नरा नार्य: प्रमुदिता: सुवास-स्रगलङ्कृता: ।४९॥

दशधेनुसहस्राणि पारिबर्हुमदाद् विभु:। युवतीनां त्रिसाहस्रं निष्कग्रीवसुवाससाम् ito!

नवनागसहस्राणि नागाच्छतगुणान् रथान्। रथाच्छतगुणानश्चानश्वाच्छतगुणान् नरान् ।५१॥

दम्पती रथमारोप्य महत्या सेनया वृतौ ।स्रेहप्रक्लिन्नहदयो यापयामास कोसल: 1421
The king replied: "Who else canbe amore welcome match for my girl, O Lord, than You,
the one Abode of (all) excellences, on whose bosom dwells Sri (the goddess of beauty and
fortune) as an inseparable companion. (41) With intent, however, to secure a (good) match
for our daughter a vow has already been made by us, O Chief of the Yadus, for testing the
prowess of suitors. (42) Here are seven excellent bulls, O gallant One, {so) difficult to tame
and (so) hard to hold in check. Good many princes have been worsted by them and have had
their limbs broken. (43) Since these animals must be curbed by You alone, 0 Scion of
Yadu, You will be the acknowledged bridegroom for my daughter, O Spouse of Sri!" (44)
Hearing of this vow and tightening His girdle, nay, revealing Himself in seven forms, the
Lord brought them (all) under His contro! by way of sport. (45) Tying them with cords (after
passing them through their nose), now that their pride had been curbed and their spirit
broken, Sri Krsna (a scion of Sia), drew them, when tied, by way of sport even as a child
would draw toy-bulls made of wood. (46) Amazed and delighted at that (feat), the king gave
away his daughter to Sri Krsna; and the almighty Lord (too) espoused her with due
ceremony, worthy as she was of Him. (47) Having secured Sri Krsna as the beloved
husband of their daughter, the queens too derived supreme joy and there was great
rejoicing (over this happy event). (48) Conchs, kettledrums and big drums sounded; there
was vocal and instrumental music and the benedictions of Brahmanas {the sacerdotal
class) were pronounced. Men and women clad in fine clothes and decked with garlands
felt highly rejoiced. (49) The king gave away as dowry ten thousand newly calved cows and
three thousand finely dressed young maid-servants decked with a string of gold coins, nine
thousand elephants, a hundred times as many chariots, horses a hundred times the
