28 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA-MAHATMYA ‘[Dis. 4

HORE GORHAM ३.७.६.७.७.७.७.७.७.७.६.३.३. ७७३ He HREM MEAT RE ACHE RORERER HH FEE SBR ARCA RON NONOR OOH BERR A BREA RE BORONONE EEE ME ME DED AAA HOME M R ७३3१

GRAM ED ALM AERA LAE MARAE MIA MAAR IONS ESA AS IEE errr eee eee

Three months later the cow also gave birth to a human child. Alt its limbs were well-
formed. It was god-like, spotless and shone like gold. (62) The Brahmana was delighted to
see the child and he himself performed (all) the purificatory rites connected with it. People
took it as a wonderful phenomenon and all came to see the child. (63) They said to
themselves, "Look here: fortune has (indeed) smiled on Atmadeva atthe present moment. |
It is (really) wonderful that even a cow should fetch him such a god-like child." (64) By the
dispensation of fate no one came to know of the secret. Seeing thatthe ears of that child were
like those of a cow, Atmadeva named it 'Gokarna’. (65)

कियत्कालेन तौ जातौ तरुणौ तनयावुभौ । गोकर्ण: षण्डितो ज्ञानी धुन्धुकारी महाखल: । ६६1
स्नानशौचक्रियाहीनो दुर्भक्षी क्रोधवर्धित: । दुष्परिग्रहकर्ता च ङावहस्तेन भोजनम् । ६७।
at: सर्वजनद्वेषी परवेश्मप्रदीपक:। लालनायार्भकान्धृत्वा सद्य: कूपे न्यपातयत् । ६८1
हिंसक: weardt च दीनान्धानां wise: । चाण्डालाभिरतो नित्यं पाशहस्त: wera: ।६९।
aa वेह्याकुसङ्गेन पित्र्यं वित्तं तु नाशितम्। एकदा पितरौ wer पात्राणि स्वयमाहरत् ।७०।

With the passage of time the two boys grew to manhood. (Of them) Gokarna was learned
and wise, while Dnundhukari was very wicked. (66) He never washed himself nor did he
observe cleanliness and other rules of good conduct (appropriate to a Brahmana). He ate
undesirable things. His anger knew no bounds. He possessed evil things and even ate food
touched by the hands of a dead body. (67) He committed thefts and bore ill-will to all. He set
fire to others' houses. He took children in his arms (apparently) in order to fondle them and
immediately threw them into a well. (68) He took delight in killing and moved about armed.
He oppressed the miserable and the blind. He delighted in the company of members of the
lowest caste and used to wander about, noose in hand, with dogs (in search of game).(69)
Falling in the evil company of prostitutes he squandered (all) his paternal fortune. One day
he cudgelled his parents and himself took away (even) the utensils (from the house). (70)

तत्पिता कृपण: प्रोच्चैर्धनहीनो wile ह । वन्ध्यत्वं तु समीचीनं कुपुत्रो दु:खदायक: 108!
क्व तिष्ठामि am गच्छामि को मे दु:खं व्यपोहयेत्। प्राणांस्त्यजामि दु:रेन हा कष्टं मम संस्थितम् । ७२1
तदानीं तु समागत्य गोकर्णो ज्ञानसंयुत: । बोधयामास जनकं वैराग्यं परिदर्शयन् 108 |
असार: खलु संसारो दु:खरूपी विमोहक: | सुत: कस्य धनं कस्य स्नेहवाञ्ज्वलतेऽनिशम् 19% |
न चेन्द्रस्य ad किंचिन्न qe चक्रवर्तिन: । सुखमस्ति विरक्तस्य मुनेरेकान्तजीविन: ।७५।
मुञ्चाज्ञानं प्रजारूपं मोहतो नरके गति: | निपतिष्यति देहोऽयं wa त्यक्त्वा वनं AT ।७६॥

When all his property was thus lost, the miserly father of Dhundhukari began to wail at
the top of his voice: so the tradition goes. He said, “It would have been much better if his
mother remainedissueless. An evil sonis a source of agony. (71) Where should | live? Where
should | go? Who will alleviate this distress of mine? Ah, a great calamity has befallen me.
This suffering will prove to be the cause of my death!" (72) That (very) moment the wise
Gokarna arrived there. Revealing the glory of dispassion, he tried to openhis father's eyes. (73)
(He said) “There is no substance in this world. It is full of misery and is a source of great
infatuation. Neither son nor wealth (really) belongs to us. Amanattached to these has to burn
day and night (on their account). (74) Happiness neither belongs to Indra (the king of gods)
nor to a universal monarch. He alone who is disgusted with the pleasures of sense, is given
to contemplation and lives in seclusion is (really) happy. (75) Give up the silly notion that
Dhundhukari is your son. Through infatuation one's lot is cast in hell. This body (of yours) is
