Dis. 22 ] BOOK TEN - 201

श्लि EAA Ee CE Ree eee EE CHS Ce ETS HR EH HES

wo प्रलव्धासत्रपया च हापिता: प्रस्तोभिता: क्रीडनवच्च कारिता: |

वसत्राणि चैवापहृतान्यथाप्यमुं ता नाभ्यसूयन् प्रियसङ्घनिर्वृता: ।२२॥
परिधाय स्ववासांसि प्रेष्ठसङ्घमसज्जिता: । गृहीतचित्ता नो चेलुस्तस्मिँल्लज्जायितेक्षणा: 1231

The glorious Lord said: "If you are my servants andif you will domy bidding, come here
and receive (from me) your clothes wearing a bright smile (on your lips).” (16) Shivering with
cold all the maidens thereupon emerged from the river, shrunk with cold and covering their
privy parts with the palms. (17) Perceiving them as good as dead (through great shame), and
pleased with their pure heart, the Lord placed the clothes (kept so far on the tree) on His
shoulder and, full of love, smilingly said:—(18) "Since, having undertaken a (sacred) vow,
you took a dip in the waters in a nude state, that has indeed been an offence on your part
against the god of water (which has gone a long way to violate the sanctity of your vow);
(therefore), receive your raiment (only) after joining your palms on the crown of your head
and bowing low for the expiation of that sin." (19) Realizing their act of plunging in water in
anude state to be a violation of their vow as pointed out in the aforesaid words by SriKrsna
(the immortal Lord), and seeking the fulfilment of that vow, the maidens of Vraja bowed to
Sri Krsna (who embodies the fruit of that as well as of all other religious rites); for itis He who
washes away all transgressions. (20) Seeing them bent in the aforesaid manner and
propitiated through such salutation, the all-merciful Lord Sri Krsna (the Son of Devaki)
returned their clothes. (21) Even though they were badly taken in, nay, stripped of (all)
shame, ridiculed and treated as toys, and their clothes too were stolen away, yet they did not
find fault with Him, (highly) gratified as they were through the company of their beloved
Lord.(22) Having put on their clothes they riveted their bashful looks on Sri Krsna and could
not stir (from that place), enthralled as they were by their meeting with their most beloved
Lord and their mind having been captivated (by Him). (23)

ara विज्ञाय भगवान् स्वपादस्पर्शकाम्यया | धृतव्रतानां संकल्पमाह दामोदरोऽबला: । २४॥
संकल्पो विदित: साध्व्यो भवतीनां wea । मयानुमोदित: सोऽसौ सत्यो भवितुमर्हति 1241
न मय्यावेशितधिवां काम: कामाय कल्पते । भर्जिता क्वथिता धाना प्रायो बीजाय नेष्यते । २६।
चाताबला ब्रजं fag मयेमा रंस्यथ क्षपा: । यदुहिश्य व्रतमिदं चेररार्यार्चनं सती: । २७।

Perceiving the intention of those maidens, that had undertaken the aforesaid vow with
a longing to touch His feet, Lord Sri Krsna (who had once allowed Himself to be tied with
a cord at the abdomen by His mother and thus demonstrated His love for His devotees)
addressed the girls (as follows):—{24) “Your desire, O chaste girls, in the shape of
eagerness to worship Me is (already) known to Me. (Nay,) it has been approved of by Me;
(hence) it deserves to materialize. (25) The craving for enjoyment on the part of those
whose mind is devoted to Me cannot lead to (further) enjoyment even as seeds of grain
(once) fried or boiled are not as a general rule intended to be sown. (26) Go (back), O
damsels, to Vraja. You stand accomplished of your purpose and will sport with Me during
the coming (autumnal) nights, for which perpose you have observed this vow in the form
of worship of the Goddess, O virtuous girls !" (27)

श्रीरुक उवाच
इत्यादिष्टा भगवता लब्धकामा: कुमारिका: | ध्यायन्त्यस्तत्पदाम्भोजं कृच्छान्निर्विविशुर्व्रजम् । २८॥
Sri Suka continued : Thus commanded by the Lord and having (virtually) realized

their ambition, the maidens returned to Vraja with great difficulty, contemplating on His
lotus-feet. (28)
