186 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA { Dis. 12

ae we OEE HES हा वा दा व UYU CVHHSTCVCETeeVVErecewe TC eH HCMCEKANTLSeKREVELECECHRHALAHH AKL

elaborate procedure of performing sacrifices, the four pillars of virtue, the four ASramas
(stages of life) and the duties assigned to each also appeared from his mouths. (35)
विदुर sara
a 4 विश्वसृजामीशो वेदादीन् मुखतोऽसृजत्। ae ae येनासृजद देवस्तन्मे ब्रूहि तपोधन 1361
Vidura said: When that lord of the Prajapatis (the progenitors of the world) evolved from
his mouths the Vedas and other things (enumerated by you), tell me, in detail, O great
ascetic, what did he produce from which mouth or other organ? (36)
ऋॠग्यजु: सामाथर्वाख्यान् वेदान् पूर्वादिभिर्मुखै: | शरत्रमिज्यां स्तुतिस्तोमं प्रायश्चित्तं व्यधात्क्रमात् | ३७1
am धनुर्वॆदॆ गान्धर्वं वेदमात्मन: । स्थापत्यं चासृजद् वेदं क्रमात्पूर्वादिभिर्मुखै: ।३८।
इतिहासपुराणानि पञ्चमं वेदमीश्वर: । सर्वेभ्य एवं वक्त्रेभ्य: ससृजे सर्वदर्शन: 1281
षोडश्युक्थौ पूर्ववक्रात्पुरीष्यग्निष्टुतावथ | आप्तोर्यामातिरात्रौ च वाजपेयं सगोसवम् iso
विद्या at aa: सत्यं धर्मस्येति पदानि च । आश्रमांश्च यथासंख्यमसृजत्सह वृत्तिभि: ।४१॥
सावित्रं प्राजापत्यं च ब्राह्मं चाथ बृहत्तथा । वार्तासञ्चयशालीनशिलोञ्छ इति वै गृहे ।४२।
वैखानसा वालखिल्यौदुम्बरा: फेनपा वने । न्यासे कुटीचक: पूर्वं बह्वोदो हंसनिष्क्रियौ ।४३॥
आन्वीक्षिकी त्रयी वार्ता दण्डनीतिस्तथैव च । एवं व्याहतयश्चासन् प्रणवो ह्यस्य दहरुत: ।४४॥
तस्योष्णिगासील्लोमभ्यो गायत्री च त्वचो विभो: 1 त्रिष्टुम्मांसात्स्नुतोऽनुष्टुब्जगत्यस्थ्र:  प्रजापते: ।४५॥
TST: पङ्क्तिरुत्पन्ना बृहती प्राणतोऽभवत्। स्पर्शस्तस्याभवज्जीव: स्वरो देह उदाहत: ।४६1
ऊष्माणमिन्दियाण्याहुरन्तस्था बलमात्मन: । स्वरा: सप्त विहारेण भवन्ति स्म प्रजापते: 1४७1
शब्दब्रह्मात्मनस्तस्य व्यक्ताव्यक्तात्मन: पर:। ब्रह्मावभाति विततो नाना ङाक्त्युपबृंहित: ।४८।
Maitreya replied : Brahma brought out the four Vedas called the Rgveda, the Yajurveda,
the Samaveda and the Atharvaveda severally from his mouths facing the east, south, west
and north; and in the same order did he create Sastra (the duty of the priest called Hota)
jya (the duty of the Adhwaryu), Stutistoma (the duty of the Udgata) and Prayascitta (the duty
of the Brahma). (37) In the same way he released Ayurveda (the science of medicine),
Dhanurveda (the science of archery), Gandharvaveda (the science of music) and
Sthapatyaveda (the science of architecture) severally from his easterly and other mouths.(38)
The all-seeing Brahma then discharged from all his four mouths the class of literature known
by the name of Itinasa and Purana, which is recognized as the fifth Veda. (39) Similarly
he sent out a pair of sacrifices from each of his easterly and other mouths, viz., Sodasi
and Uktha from the eastern, Purisi and Agnistoma from the southern, Aptoryama and
Atiratra from the western, and Vajapeya and Gosava from his northern mouth. (40) Inthe
same order he evolved the four pillars of virtue, viz., Vidya (purity acquired through
knowledge of God), Dana (charity prompted by compassion), Tapas (austerity) and Satya
(truthfulness) as well as the four ASramas or stages of life and the mode of life prescribed
for each.(41) The Savitra (a vow of purity undertaken for a period of three days following
the ceremony of Upanayana or investiture with the sacred thread for the Japa of the
Gayatri), the Prajapatya (a vow of celibacy undertaken for a period of one year), the
Brahma (a vow of celibacy undertaken for the entire period of prosecuting the study of the
Vedas) and the Brhat ( a vow of lifelong celibacy), are the four modes of life prescribed for

a Brahmacari (religious student). Even so Varia (agriculture and other vocations sanctioned
by the Sastras), Saficaya (officiating at sacrificial performances), Salina (living on whatever
