Dis. 17 } BOOK ELEVEN 593

ARI IIHT ER SOEUR COIR IOI ROR त्शा शाक ककक सा fon 6 8 nC ne eee म१ 9

ayes a fai died मत्परायणम् । तानुद्धरिष्ये नचिरादापद्भ्यो नौरिवार्णवात् । ४४।
wal: समुद्धेरेद राजा fata व्यसनात् प्रजा: । आत्मानमात्मना धीरो यथा गजपतिर्गजान् ।४५॥
एवंविधो नरपतिर्विमानेनार्कवर्चसा | विधूयेहाशुभं कृत्स्नमिन्रेण सह मोदते ।४६॥
सीदन् fast aforgen पण्यैरेवापदं तरेत्। खड्गेन वाऽऽपदाक्रान्तो न श्ववृत्या कथञ्चन ।४७।
वैश्यवृत्या तु राजन्यो जीवेन्मृगययाऽऽपदि । चरेद वा faved न aque कथञ्चन vel
शूद्रवृत्तिं भजेद् dea: शूद्र: कारुकटक्रियाम् | कृच्छ्रान्मुक्तो न गर्ह्यण वृत्तिं लिप्सेत कर्मणा eet
वेदाध्यायस्वधास्वाहाबल्यन्नाद्यैर्यथोदयम् । देवर्षिपितृभूतानि मद्रूपाण्यन्वहें यजेत् ।५०॥
यदृच्छयोपपन्नेन शुक्लेनोपार्जितेन वा । धनेनापीडयन् भृत्यान् न्यायेनैवाहरेत् क्रतून् ।५१।

He who, having duly investigated the purport of the Vedas, forthwith seeks to enter the
next Agrama (stage of life, viz., the life of a householder) should after offering Daksina {a
parting present by way of gratitude) to the preceptor perform the ceremony known as the
Samavartana-Sarnskara (marking the completion of his studies and coming back home from
the preceptor’s house) with the approval of the preceptor. (37) A Brahmacari may enter the
life of a householder (if he has the sexual urge) or the life of an anchorite (if he is keen on
self-purification) or (if he is pure-minded already and), if he is a Brahmana (the foremost of
the twice-born classes), he may (even) renounce the world and go about as a mendicant
recluse. (Or) he should (in the regular course) pass from one stage to another. He who is
devoted to Me* should in no case act otherwise (i.e.,remain without embracing any Agrama
or return from a higher Agrama to a lower one). (38) A Brahmacari desiring to enter the life
of a householder should take a wife belonging io his own Varna (grade of society);
Unblemished (in point of pedigree and bodily and other characteristics), and younger (than
himself) in age. If, however, he takes a wife belonging to a Varna different from his own, he
should marry her after he has espoused a girl belonging to the same Varna as his won and
that too in the proper order. (39) Performance of sacrifices, study of the Vedas and bestowal
of gifts are the duties of all the twice-born; whereas to accept gifts, to teach the Vedas and
to officiate as a priest in sacrifices constitute the vocation of a Brahmana alone. (40) Looking
upon acceptance of gifts as (something) detracting from his austerity, (Brahmanical) glory
and renown, a Brahmana should live by the other two (vocations) alone or, perceiving the
drawbacks of those vocations (too), should live by (gleaning) the food-grains left by the
owner of a field after reaping the crop. (41} This body of a Brahmana is surely not intended
for trivial enjoyment but for (undergoing) hardship and investigation of truth in this life and
for (attaining) everlasting happiness (in the shape of final beatitude) after death. (42) With
his mind fully satisfied by living on the food-grains gleaned (partly) from the fields and (partly)
from the grain market (when the stock has been removed or sold at the end of a day), and
with his soul dedicated to Me, nay, following his noble duty (of a householder in the shape
of entertaning a newcomer and so on) in a disinterested spirit and continuing to live at home,
though never deeply attached (to its inmates or things), a Brahmana duly attains (abiding)
peace. (43) (Even) as a vessel rescues a drowning man from the sea, | deliver without delay
from straits those who duly redeem a Brahmana or (for that matter) anyone (solely) depending
on Me and suffering hardship. (44) (Just) as a father would save his progeny from woes (of
SSS त्सि

* According to another interpretation the words 27a मत्पर: should be spilt up as अन्यथा अमत्पर taking the intervening ‘3’
as dropped according tothe rulesot Sandht That would mean that Ihe interdictionis binding only on these who are not devotees,
uevotees being exempted from this rule
