238 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 32

SERNA rete oreo rien sor ot terror ttle eer © OTE ROI ROTOR Were

heartache (caused by their separation from the Lord) had been dissipated by the joy flowing
from His sight, attained the end of their desire even as the Srutis (Vedic texts dealing with
rituals performed from some interested motive, and thus failing to perceive God) transcend
the realm of desire (when they pass on to the topic of Jana or God-Realization and achieve
their real purpose). (Now) they prepared a seat for Sri Krsna (the Friend of their soul) with
their scarfs spotted with the saffron paint on their bosom. (13) Seated there and honoured
by them, the aforesaid almighty Lord, who stands enthroned in the heart of masters of Yoga,
shone in the midst of that bevy of the Gopis, revealing a personality which is the one abode
of loveliness spread through (alt) the three worlds. (14) Greeting Sri Krsna—who had kindled
love in their breast—with their eye-brows, whose grace fulness was heightened by their
sportful glances accompanied by (bright) smiles, and warmly praising Him while pressing His
hands and feet placed in their lap, they spoke (as follows) feeling a bit enraged. (15)

WTS ऊचु:
भजतोऽनुभजन्वेक एक एतद्विपर्ययम्। नोभयांश्च sores एतन्नो ale साधु भो: 126
The Gopis said ; Some love in return those who love them; while others do (just) the
reverse of it (i.e., love even those that do not love them in return). Still others do not love
either. Kindly explain this clearly to us, O Lord ! (46)
श्रीभगवानुवाच
fae भजन्ति a सख्व: स्वार्थैकान्तोद्यमा हि ते । न तत्र सौहृदं धर्म: स्वार्थार्थं तद्धि नान्यथा । १७
भजन्त्यभजतो ये वै करुणा: पितरो चथा । धर्मो निरपवादोऽत्र aed च सुमध्यमा: ।१८॥
भजतोऽपि न वै केचिद् भजन्त्यभजत: Ha: | आत्मारामा ह्याप्तकामा अकृतज्ञा BRE: ।१९॥
नाहं तु wet भजतोऽपि जन्तून् भजाम्यमीषामनुवृत्तिवृत्तये ।
weet लब्धधने fae तच्चिन्तवान्यन्निभृतो न वेद ।२०॥
एवं मदर्थोज्झितलोकवेदस्वानां हि चो मस्यनुवृत्तयेऽवबला: |
न ues निरवद्यसंबुजां स्वसाधुकृत्यं विवुधायुषापि व: ।
या माभजन् दुर्जरगेहशृङ्खला: dara aq व: प्रतियातु साधुना 1२२।

इति श्रीमद्धागवते महापुराणे पाग्महंस्यां संहितायां ददामम्कन्धे पूर्वार्धे रासक्रीडायाँ

The glorious Lord replied : They who love one another (for mutual benefit), O friends,
(really love their own self and none other; for) their endeavour indeed is solely actuated by
self-interest. Neither goodwill nor virtue plays any part there; for such love has a (purely)
selfish motive and not otherwise. (17) They who actually love even those that do not love
them (in return) are compassionate (and loving too) like one's parents. There is blameless
virtue as well as goodwill operating here, O charming girls ! (18) Some indeed do not love
even those that love them, much less those that do not love them. They are either sages
revelling in their own self (and having no knowledge of the external world) or those who have
realized their ambition (and are therefore free from all craving for enjoyment, though
conscious of external objects) or dullards (who are incapable of appreciating a good turn
done to them) or ungrateful people (who bear enmity to their own benefactors that are as
good as their father, though conscious of their services). (19) I, for my part, O friends, (do
not come under any of these categories, being supremely compassionate and friendly,

