88 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 23

CRESTS CERES EEE Cee SESE EEE EERE ERERE A CEERAERSEERESER RATER STEVE RECEH RE LAER EAR AEE

Sri Suka resumed : Sabhanara, Caksu and Paroksa were the three sons of Anu. From
(the loins of) Sabhanara appeared Kalanara and his son was Srfjaya. From him followed
Janamejaya, whose son was Mahasila and his son was Mahamana. Usinara and Titiksu
were the sons of Mahamana. (1-2) Sibi, Vana, Sami and Daksa—were the four sons of
Usinara. (Similarly) Vrsadarbha, Suvira, Madra and Kaikeya were the only four sons of Sibi.
And Titiksu's son was Rusadratha, of whom was born Hema; and then came Sutapa, whose
son was Bali. (3-4) Through the wife of Bali (who evidently remained issueless) appeared
from (the loins of) the sage Dirghatama (six) sons—all rulers of the earth—bearing the
names of Anga, Vanga, Kalifga, Suhma, Pundra and Andhra, the first three being the
foremost of them. (5) They founded after their own names six principalities, (all) lying in the
east. Of Anga (the eldest of them) was born Khanapana, from whom followed Diviratha; and
from Diviratha followed his son Dharmaratha, of whom was born Citraratha, who had no
issue and was (better) known as Romapada. To him, his friend, the (celebrated) King
Dagaratha (the father of Lord Sri Rama) gave in adoption his own daughter Santa: the sage
Rsyasrnga married her. On Indra (the god of rain) withholding showers, courtezans drew (to
the Anga territory) the sage Rsyasrnga (born of a deer) by their dance and music, (both) vocal
and instrumental, as well as by their coquetry, (loving) embrace and presents (of various
kinds), Conducting a sacrifice in honour of Indra, the sage also secured progeny for the
issueless king (Romapada). And through a similar sacrifice conducted by him the issueless
Emperor DaSaratha (too) got (four celebrated) sons. Of Romapada was born Caturangaand
his son was Prthulaksa. (6—10) Prthulaksa's sons were Brhadratha, Brhatkarma and
Brhadbhanu. From (the loins of) the eldest (Brhadratha) appeared Brhanmana, the son born
of whom was called Jayadratha. (11) His son by (his wife) Sambhiti was Vijaya, of whom
was born Dhrti. From Dhrti followed Dhrtavrata, whose son was Satkarma and from (the loins
of) the latter appeared Adhiratha. (12) While sporting on the bank of the (holy) Ganga, the
latter, wno was issueless, (caught hold of and) adopted as his son the baby (Karna) bern of
Kunti (while she was still unmarried) and (therefore) abandoned by her (for fear of obloquy),
enclosed ina box. (13) Vrsasena was the son of the aforesaid Karna, who (eventually)
became a king. Again, Babhru was the son of Druhyu and Babhru's son was Setu. Of him
was born Arabdha, whose son was Gandhara and Gandhara’s son was Dharma. From him
followed Dhrta and Dhrta's son was Durmana. From (the loins of} the latter appeared
Praceta. The hundred sons of Praceta became the rulers of Mlecchas (barbarians) and
settled in the northern quarter. Again Vahni was the son of Turvasu and Vahni's son was
Bharga, from whom followed Bhanuman. (14—16) His son was Tribhanu and Tribhanu's
son, again, was the generous-minded Karandhama. His son was Maruta, who, being
issueless, adopted as his son Dusyanta (a scion of Piru). (17)

wrt: स पुनर्भेजे स्वं वंशं राज्यकामुक: idaeeisge aed नरर्षभ । १८1
वर्णयामि महापुण्यं सर्वपापहरं um aati नर: श्रुत्वा सर्वपापै: प्रमुच्यते । १९॥
यत्रावतीर्णो भगवान् परमात्मा नराकृति: | यदो: सहस्रजित्क्रोष्टा नलो रिपुरिति श्रुता: 1201
चत्वार: सूनवस्तत्र शतजित् प्रथमात्मज: i महाहयो वेणुहयो हैहयश्चेति तत्सुता: 1221
धर्मस्तु हैहयसुतो नेत्र: ged: पिता aa: सोहञ्जिरभवत् कुन्तेर्महिष्पान् भद्रसेनक: 1221
दुर्मदो भद्रसेनस्य धनक: कृतवीर्यसू: | कृताग्नि: कृतवर्मा च कृतौजा धनकात्मजा: 1231
अर्जुन कृतवीर्यस्य सप्तद्वीपेश्वरोऽभवत्। दततान्रेयाद्धरेरशात् प्राप्तयोगमहागुण: । २४॥
न नूनं कार्तवीर्यस्य aff यास्यन्ति पार्थिवा: । यज्ञदानतपोयोगश्नुतवीर्यजयादिभि: ।२५॥
