Dis. 3] BOOK EIGHT 745
TEES ARERR UAASSUTENEERSE TORRES ETON HEREEDR LTTE eREEENhNKHCCEReeneCHRAhanEHnEReed

in whom there is neither merit nor demerit, nevertheless who assumes (all) these from time
to time (according to the exigencies of time) by His own Maya (will-power) for the destruction
and Creation of the world. (8-9) Salutations to the supreme Spirit who is revealed by His own
Self (requires no other light to reveal Himself) and stands as the witness (of all) ! Greetings
to Him who is entirely beyond (the ken of) speech and mind and the (diverse) faculties of
mind !1 (10) (My) bow to Him whois attainable by a wise man through purity of mind acquired
by means of cessation from worldly activity (and by means of devotional! practices), who is
the Lord (Bestowen) of final beatitude and (also) constitutes the realization of the bliss of final
beatitude. (11) Hail to Him who having adopted the characteristics of the (three)modes of
Prakrti, (severally) appears as serene, dreadful and infatuated, but who is (really) destitute
of (all) difference and uniform (in every respect). Hail to Him who is wisdom crystallized (as
distinguished from Prakrti, which, though undifferentiated and uniform like Him, is devoid of
consciousness).(12) (My) bow to You, the Knower of (all) psycho-physical organisms, the
Ruler and Witness of all ! Salutations to the Source of all Jivas (embodied souls) as well as
of Prakrti (the ultimate cause of the universe), because existent before them all.(13) (My)
greetings to You, the Perceiver of all the senses of perception as well as of their objects, the
Source of all (the varieties of) cognitions, who are indicated (even as a material body by its
reflection) by the phenomenal existence (in the shape of the psycho-physical organism) as
well as by Nescience (the root of all phenomena) inasmuch as itis You who are reflected in
the shape of existence (in every phenomena).(14) Hail, hail to You, the Cause of all (effects),
Yours If without a cause, anda wondrous cause (in the sense that unlike other causes You
remain unchanged even though assuming the form of the universe). Salutations to You,
constituting the great ocean to which all Tantras (such as the Paficaratra) and Vedas
(like So many streams) are directed, the embodiment of final beatitude, the refuge of the
great !! (15) | bow to the Lord, who is the fire of Consciousness hidden in the Aranis (pieces
of wood used for kindling fire by attrition) of the Gunas (the modes of Prakrti), whose creative
will is aroused when the equilibrium of the Gunas is disturbed, and who reveals Himself of
His own accord to (the mind of) those ( enlightened souls) who have kept at a distance (the
injunctions and interdictions of) the Sastras by dint of contemplation on the truth of the
Spirit.(16)

अत्यद्भुतं तच्चरितं सुमङ्गलं गायन्त आनन्दसमुद्रमग्ना: 120 |

तमक्षरं ब्रह्म परं परेशमव्यक्तमाध्यात्मिकयोगगम्यम् ।

अत्तीन्दियं सूक्ष्ममिवातिदूरमनन्तमाद्यं परिपूर्णमीडे 1291

(My) bow to the Lord of boundless compassion who is not only ever free (Himself) but

is also capable of finally undoing the cords(of ignorance) binding the beast-like (ignorant)
souls akin to me fallen at His mercy, nay, who knows no weariness (in doing this work )! (My
greetings to You, the almighty and infinite Lord, who by a part of Your being appear as the
Inner Controller in the mind of all embodied souls !!(17) Hail to the all-powerful Lord Who,
[564] B. M. 26— `
