786 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA Dis. 12.

ROR डी क आत्रो OR FE OTA HOR HAA OAR ॐ क्षी ती REHASH AA TORE EH CHET EERO NESE CECH वी व ज डौ क्त HEH

अन्येऽवयन्ति नवशक्तियुतं ut त्वां केचिन्महापुरुषमव्ययमात्मतन्त्रम् । २ ।

यन्मायया मुषितचेतस ईश दैत्यमर्त्यदय: किमुत ङहाश्वदभद्रवृत्ता: ।१०॥ -

स त्वं समीहितमद: स्थितिजन्मनाशं भूतेहितं च जगतो भवबन्धमोक्षौ |

arden विशति खं च चराचराख्यं wa तदात्मकतयावगमोऽवरुन्त्से 1281
अवतारा मया दृष्टा रममाणस्य ते गुणै: । सोऽहं तद् द्रुष्टुमिच्छामि यत् ते योषिद्वपुर्धृतम् । १२।
aa सम्मोहिता दैत्या: पायिताश्चामृतं सुरा: । ae दिदृक्षव आयाता: परं कौतूहलं हि न: 1231

Sri Mahadeva (the great god) prayed: 0 god of gods, O Lord pervading and
constituting the universe, O Ruler of the universe ! You are the Cause as wellasthe Controller
of all substances, the (universal) Spirit. (4) You are that Brahma which is all truth and all
consciousness; from which are traceable the beginning (appearance) and end (dissolution)
as well as what they call the middle (life) of this (objective) universe, and (yet) to which—
unchangeable as it is—(all) these (states) cannot be attributed; (nay,) which constitutes this
(the visible universe) as well as the ego (the subject), that which lies outside (is enjoyed with
the senses) as well as the other (the enjoyer). (5) Sages seeking blessedness and devoid
of all (other) aspirations duly worship Your lotus-feet alone, giving up attachmentto both (this
and the other world). (6) You are the all-perfect, immortal, attributeless and immutable
Brahma ( Infinite), whichis not only devoid of sorrow butis also of the nature of absolute bliss,
and which, though without a second, is (yet) distinct (from everything else). You are (at the
same time) the Cause of the appearance, continuance and dissolution of the universe, and
the Ruler of all Jivas (embodied souls)—sought after by them (all), though seeking nothing
(Yourself). (7) You alone are both cause and effect and neither of the two (being the ultimate
cause of both). Gold moulded (into the shape of an ornament) and unmoulded (too) is gold
(alone); there is no difference of substance between the two: Itis through ignorance (of Your
essential nature) that diversity has been attributed to You by men. For, diversity in You, who
are free from (all) adjuncts, is due (only) to (Your association with) the (three) Gunas (modes
of Prakrti). (8) Some (viz., the Vedantis) know You to be Brahma (the Absolute); while others
(the Mimamsakas) recognize You as Dharma (virtue). Some (viz., the followers of the
Sankhya school of philosophy) regard You, the supreme Lord, as transcending both Prakrti
(matter) and Purusa (spirit); while others (the followers of the Paficaratra school of the
Vaisnavas) know You to be the Supreme endowed with the nine divine potencies (viz.,
Vimala, Utkarsini, Jfiana, Kriya, Yoga, Prahvi, Satya, ISana and Anugraha) and (still) others
(viz., the followers of the Yoga system of philosophy) recognize You to be the foremost
Purusa, changeless and independent. (9) Neither | (Siva) nor Brahma (whose life extends
to a couple of Parardhas or 31, 10, 40, 00, 00, 00, 000 human years) nor indeed sages
headed by Marici (one of the mind-born sons of Brahma)—who are (all) creations of Sativa,
(yet) whose understanding is obscured by Your Maya— are able to know (the true nature of)
the universe created by You (much less Your own essential nature), O Lord ! How, then, can
the demons, human beings and others—who are ever engaged in activities of a Rajasika or
Tamasika character—knowit ? (10) As such You, who are consciousness (itself), know Your
own activity as well as that of (all) created beings, the appearance, continuance and
dissolution of this universe, the bondage of mundane existence and release from it. (Nay,
even) as the air pervades the multitudes of mobile and immobile beings as well as the sky,
