Dis. 10] BOOK TWO 127

LASHES मो त्रो जो डो ENCES Ho ee CEHAHE HHO WE EH ER TORO Ha RR HHH ज
ee ee eee ee a Se Re

conduct, modesty and self-control. (40-41) Finding his father (Brahma), the forbear of the
entire creation, pleased (with him), the celestial sage humbly asked him the same questions
that you have asked me. (42) Delighted (all the more by his questions) Brahma (the Creator
of beings) repeated to his son (Narada), this very Bhagavata-Purana containing ten
distinctive features, which was taught to him by the Lord Himself. (43) Narada (in his turn),
O king, imparted the same to the sage Vyasa (my father) of boundless glory, while the latter
was meditating on the supreme Brahma on the bank of the river Saraswati (vide I.v.
above).(44) । shall (presently) tell you (in the form of the same Bhagavata-Purana) in reply
to your questions on the subject, how this universe emanated from the Cosmic Being, and
answer all your other questions too (through the same Purana). (45)

Thus ends the ninth discourse in Book Two of the great
and glorious Bhagavata-Purana, otherwise known
as the Paramahamsa-Samnhita.

२१२३ ९१ टंळं
CD OD ESA ECS

अथ दशमोऽध्याय:
Discourse X
The ten characteristic features of the Bhagavata

श्रीरुक उवाच
aa सर्गो विसर्गश्च स्थानं पोषणमूतय:। मन्वन्तरेशानुकथा निरोधो मुक्तिराश्रय: । १ ।
दशमस्य विशुद्ध्यर्थं नवानामिह लक्षणम्।वर्णयन्ति महात्मान: श्रुतेनार्थेन चाञ्जसा । २ |
भूतमात्रेन्द्रिधियां जन्म सर्ग उदाहृत: | ब्रह्मणो गुणवैषम्याद् विसर्ग: पौरुष: Ba: । ३ ।
स्थितिर्वैकुण्ठविजय: पोषणं तदनुग्रह: । मन्वन्तराणि aa ऊतय: कर्मवासना: । ४ |
अवतारानुचरितं हरेश्चास्यानुवर्तिनाम् | सतामीशाकथा: प्रोक्ता नानाख्यानोपबृंहिता: । ५ ।
निरोधोऽस्यानुशायनमात्मन: सह ङक्तिभि: । मुक्तिर्हित्वान्यथारूपं स्वरूपेण व्यवस्थिति: । ६ |
आभासश्च निरोधश्च यतश्चाध्यव्सीयते। स आश्रय: ut ब्रह्म परमात्मेति see । ७ |
योऽध्यात्मिकोऽयं पुरुष: सोऽसावेवाधिदैविक: | यस्तत्रोभयविच्छेद: पुरुषो ह्याधिभौतिक: । ८ ।
एकमेकतराभावे यदा नोपलभामहे | त्रितयं aa यो वेद स आत्मा स्वाश्रयाश्रय: । ९ ।

Sri Suka continued: Sarga, Visarga, Sthana, Posana, the Utis, the Manvantaras,
ISAnukathas, Nirodha, Mukti and Agraya; these are the ten topics discussed in this
Bhagavata-Purana. (1) Men of true knowledge aver that the first nine topics have been
discussed in this Purana only in order to present a clear conception of the tenth or the last
(viz., ASraya, i.e., the all supporting Brahma). This they have deduced in some cases from

the actual words of the text itself and in other cases from their purport. (2) The creation (in
the reverse order) of the gross and subtle elements, the senses of perception and the organs

शौचर्सतोषतपश:स्वाध्यायेश्वरप्रणिधानानि नियमा:। (IT. 32)

“Purity of mind and body, contentment, austerity, study of the Vedas or repetition of the Divine Name and
meditation on God are the five Niyamas.”
