66 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 16

PRAMS MAR IRR ARAN ROTO AIBOR RIOR IIE RRS ROI ROI TITRE RR Ra teat Ret te soar te React we Bt tr
न कश्चिन्मरियते तावद् यावदास्त इहान्तक: । ued fe भगवानाहूत: परमपर्षिभि: ।
अहो Fars पीयेत हरिलीलामृतं वच: । ८ ।
मन्दस्य मन्दप्रज्रस्य वयो मन्दायुषश्च वै । निद्रया ह्रियते नक्तं दिवा च व्यर्थकर्मभि: । ९ ।
Saunaka said : Why did the king (merely) subdue the spirit of the Kali age in the
course of his conquest (instead of killing him outright and thus ridding humanity of his
evil influence, once for all) ? For, though disguised as a prince, he was after all a vile
Stidra, who took it into his head to strike a cow and a bull with his foot. Therefore, O
blessed one, tell me all that, if it is connected with the story of Sri Krsna or with that of
saints who taste the honey flowing from His lotus-feet (are devoted to Him). Of what avail
are other idle discourses, in which life is wantonly spent ? (5-6) For the good of mortal
men who, though shortlived, are yet eager to realize the Truth, the all-powerful god of
death has been invited here to perform propitiatory rites. (7) Nobody will die so long as
the god of death is here. That all-powerful god has been invited by the great sages so
that even in this mortal world people may get to hear and enjoy the ambrosial discourses
depicting the sports of Sri Hari. (8) The life-span of the unfortunate men of this world,
who are dull of understanding and shortlived too, is frittered away in sleep by night and
in frivolous pursuits by day. (9)
सूत उवाच
निशम्य वार्तामनतिप्रियाँ तत: ङारासनं संयुगौण्डिराददे igo
wept wma wi ree: GT
qa रथाश्वद्विपपत्तियुक्तया स्वसेनया दिग्विजयाय निर्गत: 1221
Wa केतुमालं च und चोत्तरान् He! किम्पुरुषादीनि वर्षाणि विजित्य जगृहे बलिम् । १२॥
wa तत्रोपशृण्वान: स्वपूर्वेषां महात्मनाम् । प्रगीयमाणं च ae: कृष्णमाहात्म्यसूचकम् 1231
aan च परित्रातमश्चत्थाम्नोऽस्रतेजस: | ae च वृष्णिपार्थानां तेषां भक्तिं च केशवे । १४॥।
aa: परमसंतुष्ट: प्रीत्युजृम्भितलोचन: । महाधनानि वासांसि eet हारान् महामना: 1241
सारथ्यपारषदसेवनसख्यदौत्यवीरासनानुगमनस्तवनप्रणामान् ।
स्निग्धेषु पाण्डुषु जगत्प्रणतिं च विष्णोर्भक्तिं करोति नृपतिश्चरणारविन्दे । १६1
waa वर्तमानस्य पूर्वेषां वृत्तिमन्वहम्। नातिदूरे किलाश्चर्यं यदासीत् तन्निबोध मे 1201
ad: पदॆकेन चरन् विच्छायामुपलभ्य mH पृच्छति स्माश्रुवदनां विवत्सामिव मातरम् । १८॥

Sita said : While Pariksit was living in the Kuru-Jangala country, he heard the
unpalatable news that Kali had entered the territories protected by his army, and
accordingly took his bow, fond of war as he was. (10) Mounting his well-decorated car,
driven by dark horses and bearing an ensign with the device of a lion, he sallied forth
from his capital for the conquest of the world, surrounded by his own army consisting
of chariots and elephants, horse and foot. (11) Having conquered Bhadraswa, Ketumala,
Bharata, the northern Kurus, Kimpurusa and other countries, he levied tribute from
them.(12) Everywhere he heard the people sing the praises of his high-souled forbears
(the Pandavas), revealing at the same time the glory of Sri Krsna. (13) He also heard
the story of his own deliverance (at the hands of Sri Krsna) from the fire of the missile
discharged by Aswatthama (the son of Drona), as well as of the cordial relations existing
between the Vrsnis (the Yadavas) and the sons of Prtha (Kunti) and of the latters' devotion
