722 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 14

BeBe Me Bs Re MEW वी त्ती लो ज तीत्री RR EE Re वी Ree RT RR त्ती रीयो ET I OTTO HR THT, भोन्र वनछित्का
ee

नैमिषं फाल्गुनं सेतु: प्रभासोऽथ कुशस्थली। वाराणसी मधुपुरी पम्पा बिन्दुसरस्तथा । ३१॥

नारायणाश्रमो नन्दा सीतारामाश्रमादय:।सर्वे कुलाचला राजन्महेन्द्रमलयादय: । ३२॥

wt पुण्यतमा देशा हरेरर्चाश्रिताश्च ये । एतान्देशान् निषेवेत श्रेयस्कामो aster: |
धर्मो ह्यत्रेहित: पुंसां सहस्राधिफलोदय: 1331

Now | shall fully enumerate the places conducive to religious merit and other good. That
is unquestionably the most sacred tract where can be found a worthy man, the (very)
likeness of the almighty Lord—in whom dwells the whole of this creation, animate as well as
inanimate—and where stays the Brahmana race endowed with austerity, learning and
compassion. (27-28) (Again,) that area is the abode of (all) blessings, wherever there is an
image of Sri Hari, and where there are rivers like the (holy) Ganga celebrated in the Puranas
and other sacred works. (29) Lakes such as Puskara and sacred spots inhabited by
venerable souls Kuruksetra, Gaya (the spot where fell the head of the demon Gaya),
Prayaga (the confluence of the Ganga and the Yamuna rivers), the hermitage (known by the
name of Salagrama-Ksetra). of the sage Pulaha, (the forest of) Naimisa (the modern Nim-
sar or Misrikh), Phalguna (the Kanyatirtha, now known as Cape Comerin), the (holy) bridge
(attributed to Sri Rama and existing at Rameswaram), Prabhasa (also known by the name
of Sankhoddhara and famous for its historical shrine of Somanatha) and Kugasthali
(Dwaraka), Varanasi (the modern Banaras), Mathura (the capital of the demon chief
Madhu, killed by Satrughna, Sri Rama’s youngest brother, and the birth-place of Lord Sri
Krsna), lake Pampa and Bindusara (on whose strand stood the hermitage of the sage
Kardama, father of Lord Kapila), BadarikaSrama (the modern Badrinatha, the hermitage of
the sage Narayana), the river Nanda (better knownas Alakananda), Citrakuta (the hermitage
of Sita andRama) andsoon, Oking, andall the principal mountain-ranges such as Mahendra
and Malaya and places which are consecrated by the (fixed) idols of Sri Hari—these are
(by far) the holiest tracts. Surely one desirous of blessedness should repeatedly sojourn in
these places. For virtue practised here yields fruit a thousand times more than at other
places.(830—33)

पात्रं wa fren a कविभि: पात्रवित्तमे: i हरिवैक उर्वीशा यन्मयं a चराचरम् ।३४॥

wee चै सत्सु तत्र ब्रह्मात्मजादिषु । राजन्यदग्रपूजायां मत: पात्रतयाच्युत: ।३५॥

जीवराशिभिराकोर्ण आण्डकोशाङ्घ्रिपो महान्। तन्मूलत्वादच्युतेज्या सर्वज्ञीवात्मतर्पणम् 13 & |
पुराण्यनेन सृष्टानि नॄतिर्यगृषिदेवता: । शेते जीवेन रूपेण पुरेषु पुरुषो ह्यसौ 1301
aay भगवान्राजंस्तारतम्येन वर्तते | तस्मात् पात्रं fe पुरुषो यावानात्मा यथेयते 1221

By the seers standing foremost among the judges of worthy souls, indeed, Sri Hari and
Sri Hari alone, of whom the mobile and immobile creation is surely constituted, O ruler of the
earth, has been concluded to be really worthy of honour in this world. (34) For in that
(Rajastya) sacrifice (performed by you the other day), in the presence even of gods, Rsis
(seers) and adepts (in austerity and Yoga etc.) such as Sanaka and his (three) brothers (the
mind-born sons of Brahma, the creator), O king, Sri Krsna (the immortal Lord) was
recognized as worthy of being adored in the first instance. (35) The great tree in the shape
of the egg:shaped universe is crowded with multitudes of Jivas (embodied souls). He being
the root of this tree, to worship Sri Krsna (the Immortal Lord) is to gratify all living beings as
wellas one's own self. (36) The (varied) dwellings in the form of (the bodies of) human beings.
animals, Rsis (the mind-born sons of Brahma, the creator) and gods have been evolved by
Him. He is (known as) the Purusa (the dweller in these habitations) inasmuch as He dwells
in these abodes in the form of the embodied soul (and also as their Inner Controller). (37)
