Dis. 18 ] BOOK SIX 635

heen Skteewettrerecetrere meee He steht tre rte HKHAHHCHKK HE Stee tat eae ३८३

presiding over the three sacrifices of the same name performed at the beginning of the three
seasons offour months each) andthe five deities presiding over thefive great daily sacrifices
enjoined on every householder of the three twice-born classes (viz., Devayajfia, Rsiyajfia,
Pitryajfia, Manusyayajfia and Bhutayajfia)? (And) Siddhi, the spouse-of Bhaga (the sixth
son of Aditi), dear Pariksit, bore (three sons,) Mahima, Vibhu and Prabhu and a beautiful and
virtuous daughter, Agisa (by name). (1-2) The (four) wives of Dhata (the seventh son of
Aditi)—Kuhoi (the deity presiding over the last night of a dark fortnight), Sinivali (the deity
presiding over the fourteenth night of a dark fortnight), Raka (the deity presiding over the last
night of a bright fortnight) and Anumati (the deity presiding over the fourteenth night of a
bright fortnight) severally gave birth to (four sons) Sayam (the deity presiding over dusk),
DarSa (the deity presiding over the last day of a dark fortnight), Pratah (the deity presiding
over the morning) and Purnamasa (the deity presiding over the last day of a bright fortnight).
(3) Vidhata (the next or eighth son of Aditi) begot through (his wife) Kriya the (five) deities
presiding over the sacred fires bearing the name of Purisya. (And) the spouse of Varuna (the
god of water and the ninth son of Aditi) was Cargsani, of whom was reborn the sage Bhrgu
(a mind-born son of Brahma). (4) And the great Yogi Valmiki (another son of Varuna and the
celebrated author of the Ramayana) Sprang up, itis said, from an ant-hill (Valmika); while
the sages Agastya and Vasistha (the sons of the sage Pulastya and Brahma respectively)
were reborn as the sons of the gods Mitra (the tenthsonof Aditi) and Varuna, who discharged
in a jar their vital fluid, that had escaped in the’presence of (the celestial nymph) Urvasi. The
god Mitra (further) begot through (his spouse) Rewati (three sons, viz.,) Utsarga, Arista and
Pippala. (5-6) Indra, the lord of paradise (and the eleventh son of Aditi), procreated through
(his wife) Saci (the daughter of the demon Puloma) three sons, O dear Pariksit—Jayanta,
Rsabha and Midhwan, (who constituted) the third: this is what we have heard. (7) From (the
loins of) Lord Upendra (the twelfth and youngest son of Aditi, who took colossal strides in
Order to measure three paces of land promised to Him by the demon king Bali and) who
(originally) assumed the form of the divine Dwarf by His (own) Maya (creative will), through
His spouse Kirti, sprang up (a son) Brhacchloka (by name); and from (the loins of) the
latter sprang up Saubhaga and other sons. (8) We shall recount later on (in Book VIII) the
distinguished achievements, excellences and deeds of valour of that high-souled son of
the sage Kasyapa and (also) how He actually descended (on the meterial plane) through
Aditi. (9)
अथ कश्यपदायादान् दॆतेयान् कीर्तयामि ते । aa भागवत: श्रीमान् weet बलिरेव च । १०
दितेर्द्दवेव दायादौ दैत्यदानवबन्दितौ | हिरण्यकशिपुर्नाम हिरण्याक्षश्च कीर्तितौ । ११।
हिरण्यकशिपोर्भार्या कयाधुर्नाम दानवी । जम्भस्य तनया दत्ता सुषुवे चतुर: सुतान् । १२।
Hee प्रागनुह्रादं ह्रादं प्रह्रादमेव च ।तत्स्वसा सिंहिका नाम राहुं विप्रचितोऽग्रहीत् । १३
`शिरोऽहरद्यस्य हरिश्चक्रेण पिबतोऽमृतम्। संह्रादस्य कृतिर्भार्यासूत पञ्चजनं aa: । १४॥
eee धमनिर्भार्यासूत वातापिमिल्वलम्।योऽगस्त्याय त्वतिथये ta वातापिमिल्वल: । १५॥
अनुह्रादस्य सूर्म्ययां बाष्कलो महिषस्तथा। विरोचनस्तु प्राह्वादिर्देव्यास्तस्याभवद्बलि: । १६॥
बाणज्येष्ठं पुत्रशतमशनायां ततोऽभवत्।तस्यानुभाव: सुश्लोक्य: पश्चादेवाभिधास्यते । १७॥
बाण amma fier लेभे तद्गणमुख्यताम्। zene भगवानास्ते ह्यद्यापि पुरपालक: 1241
मरुतश्च दिते: पुत्राश्चत्वारिशन्नवाधिका: | त आसन्नप्रजा: oa नीता इन्द्रेण सात्मताम् 1281

| now (proceed to) tell you about the scions of the sage Kasyapa by Diti, among whom was

* A detailed account of these sacrifices has already been given in the foot-note below ४. xxvi, 18.
