666 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 31

१११ गक 396 487१ ४६४6 ४४89 OHO शाक HET OPER ONE ८कजा H ht HECKER EL On १० ETS HORS

(from alt activity). He remains established in His own glory. (11) Could He have been
incapable of protecting Himself (preserving intact His own divine Personality)— He, who
brought back in his mortal frame the son of His (own) teacher (Sandipani), that had been
taken to the realm of Death, and revived you (O Pariksit), that had been burnt to death (within
your mother's womb) by the supreme missile (presided over by Brahma and discharged by
Asgwatthama, the son of Dronacarya), and (thereby) gave relief (to your mother, who had
sought refuge with Him), (nay,) who conquered even Lord Siva (the Destroyer of Death
himself), and bodily transferred to heaven the hunter (Jara by name, that had struck the Lord
with a shaft in the sole of His foot) ?* (12) Though being the independent Cause of the
evolution, continuance and destruction of the whole universe, wielding as He does all
powers, the Lord did not, however, choose to retain His body here (on earth) demonstrating
thereby (to the world) the sublimity of the ways of those established in the Self and showing
their unconcernedness about the mortal body. (13) He who, rising (from his bed) in the
morning, sings, with devotion and full of self-control, the story of the aforesaid transcendent
voyage of Sri Krsna (to His own divine realm) will attain to the same highest destiny. (14)
वसुदेवोग्रसेनयो: । पतित्वा चरणावस्रैर्न्यषिञ्चत् कृष्णविच्युत: । १५।
कथयामास निधनं वृष्णीनां कृत्स्नशो नृप ।तच्छुत्वोद्विग्नहदया जना: शोकविमूर्चिता: ।१६॥
तत्र स्म त्वरिता aq: कृष्णविङ्लेषविह्वला: | व्यसव: aa यत्र ज्ञातयो WA आननम् । १७॥
देवकी रोहिणी चैव वसुदेवस्तथा सुतो । कृष्णरामावप्यन्त: sina विजहु: स्मृतिम् ।१८।
प्राणांश्च विजहरुस्तत्र भगवद्बिरहातुरा: । उपगुह्य पतींस्तात चितामारुरुहु: स्रिय: ।१९।
रामपल्यश्च तद्देहमुपगुह्याम्निमाविहान् | वसुदेवपल्न्यस्तद्गात्रं प्रद्युम्नादीन् हरे: स्नुषा: ।
POU staat रुक्मिण्याद्यास्तदात्मिका: 120 |
Returning to Dwaraka and falling at the feet of Vasudeva and Ugrasena (the king of
Dwaraka), Daruka (the charioteer of Lord Sri Krsna), (now) bereft of Sri Krsna, bathed their
feet with (his) tears.(15) He narrated the story of the wholesale destruction of the Vrsnis,O
Pariksit. Grieved at heart to hear of it, the people (of Dwaraka) fainted with grief. (16) Upset
at (the news of) their separation from Sri Krsna, they hastened, beating their heads (all the
way), to the spot where their kinsmen had been lying (dead). (17) Stricken with grief not to
perceive their Sons, Sri Krsna and Balarama, Devaki (Sri Krsna’s mother) and Rohini
(Balarama's mother) as well as (Their father) Vasudeva lost their consciousness. (18) Nay,
afflicted at their separation from the Lord, they gave up the ghost on that (very) spot. The
womenfolk ascended the funerat pile and, hugging each her own husband, entered the
fire.(19) The wives of Balarama entered the fire, embracing the (dead) body of Balarama; the
wives of Vasudeva followed suit, hugging the latter's body, and the daughters-in-law of Sri
Krsna did the same, clasping to their bosom Pradyumna and others (the sons of the Lord).
Similarly Rukmini and others, the Spouses of SriKrsna, entered the fire with their mind fixed
on the latter. (20)

अर्जुन: fae: सख्यु: कृष्णस्य विरहातुर: | आत्मानं सान्त्वयामास कृष्णगीतै: सदुक्तिभि: । २१1
बन्धूनां नष्टगोत्राणामर्जुन: साम्परायिकम्।हतानां कारयामास यथावदनुपूर्वश: 1221
द्वारकां हरिणा त्यक्तां समुद्रोऽप्नावयत् क्षणात्। वर्जयित्वा महाराज श्रीमद्धगवदालयम् ।२३॥
नित्यं सन्निहितस्तत्र भगवान् मधुसूदन: | eae सर्वमङ्गलमङ्गलम् । २४।

* Vide verse 33 of Oiscourse XXX above
