308 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 5

PATS ARE EEA AEE AEE EAH EK HEELERS LEHR LCE TELE EEAH ELT ETE E LEELA EEKE EER HEH

While the people were saying many such things with perturbation in their eyes, there
appeared on all sides in the heavens as well as on earth again and again thousands of ill-
. omens of the worst type, causing fear even to the strong-minded Daksa. (12) By this time,
O Vidura, the followers of Rudra, who were (all) armed with various uplifted weapons and
were dwarfish in stature, some red-brown and other tawny of hue, and had bellies and faces
resembling those of an alligator, ran up in all directions and surrounded that spacious
sacrificial ground. (13) Some broke the beam resting on the eastern and western pillars (of
the sacrificial hall), while others destroyed the apartment reserved for the wives of the
sacrificer and the priests (to the west of the sacrificial hall) as well as the assembly-hall (in
front of the sacrificial hall), the cottage (in front of the assembly-hall) where clarified butter
and other substances poured into the sacrificial fire are stored, the hut occupied by the
sacrificer himself and the kitchen. (14) Some smashed the sacrificial vessels and extin-
guished the sacred fires, while others urinated in the sacrificial pits and snapped the cotton
threads marking the boundaries of the sacrificial dais (in the north). (15) Some molested the
hermits, while others threatened the wives (of the sacrificer and the priests) and still others
seized the divinities who were sitting close to them, even though they tried to run away. (16)
Maniman bound the sage Bhrgu; Virabhadra, Daksa (the lord of created beings) himself;
Candi§a, the god Pusa (one of the twelve sons of Aditi who preside over the sun month by
- month) and Nandiswara seized Bhaga (another god presiding over the sun). (17)

ad wafdst दृष्टा सदस्या: सदिवौकस: । aia: «que ग्रावभिर्नैकधाद्रवन् ।१८॥

जुह्वत: स्रुवहस्तस्य इमश्रूणि भगवान् भव: । widest सदसि योऽहसच्छ्मश्रु दर्शयन् ।१९।

wre A भगवान् पातितस्य रुषा yal उज्जहार सद:स्थोऽक्ष्णा य: हापन्तमसूसुचत् ।२०।

पूष्णश्चापातयद्दन्तान् कालिङ्गस्य यथा बल:। wea गरिमणि योऽहसद्दर्शयन्दत: 1281

आक्रम्योरसि दक्षस्य fame हेतिना । छिन्दन्नपि तदुद्धर्तुं नाशाक्नोत् त्र्यम्बकस्तदा । २२।

शस्त्रैरस्रान्वितैरेवमनिर्भिन्नत्वचं हर: । विस्मयं परमापन्नो cent पशुपतिश्चिरम् 1231

ae संज्ञपने योगं पशूनां a पतिर्मखे। यजमानपञो: कस्य कायात्तेनाहरच्छिर: । २४॥

साधुवादस्तदा तेषां कर्म तत्तस्य शंसताम्। भूतप्रेतपिशाचानामन्येषां तद्विपर्यय: 1241

जुहावैतच्छिरस्तस्मिन्दक्षिणाम्नावमर्षित: । तद्देवयजनं दग्ध्वा प्रातिष्ठद गुह्यकालयम् । २६॥

इति श्रीमद्भागवते महापुराणे पारमहंस्यां संहितायां चतुर्थस्कन्धे दक्षयज्ञविध्वंसो नाम पञ्चमोऽध्याय: 14 |

Seeing this (outrage) and being most severely pelted with stones by these (attendants
of Siva), all the priests officiating at the sacrifice as well as those assembled there, including
the heavenly beings, ran in various directions. (18) The worshipful Virabhadra (a part
manifestation of Lord Bhava) pulled up the moustaches and beard of Bhrgu, who was
pouring oblations into the sacrificial fire, holding the sacrificial ladle in his hand, and who had
laughed (at Lord Siva) in open assembly, (proudly) displaying his moustaches. (19) Lord
Virabhadra angrily knocked down Bhaga to the ground and plucked his eyes inasmuch as
he had in the assembly (of the lords of created beings) countenanced Daksa in his
calumniation of Lord Siva by blinking. (20) Even as Lord Balarama knocked * down the teeth
of the king of the Kalingas (during the wedding of Aniruddha, Sri Krsna's grandson), so
Virabhadra dashed off the teeth of Psa, who had laughed showing his teeth while Siva (the
most adorable) was being vilified (by Daksa). (21) Setting his foot on Daksa's breast (after

knocking him down), the three-eyed Virabhadra proceeded to cut off his head with a sharp-
edged weapon but failed to sever it then. (22) Virabhadra, who was no other than Lord Siva

* Vide verse 37 Of Discourse LXI of Book X.
