Dis. 76] BOOK TEN 441

frinim es dere err rest मादा Fe ee Pe RS ES २२२२ TAS OLD

now flew into the air, now perched on the summit of a hill, and now began to float on water.
Like a rotating firebrand it went round and round hardly stopping at any point. (22)
Wherever Saiva with his car and soldiers came within their sight, the generals of the
Yadava army showered their arrows on them. (23) Struck by those arrows, which burned
like the sun and fire and were unapproachable like venomous snakes, SAalva’s floating city
and army sustained a severe blow, and Salva himself fainted. (24)
घैर्वृष्णिवी भृशार्दिता: । न aay रणं स्वं स्वं लोकद्वयजिगीषव: 1241
शञाल्वामात्यो द्युमान् नाम WES प्राक्प्रपीडित: | आसाद्य गदया Heat व्याहत्य व्यनदद् बली ।२६॥
wet गदया जीर्णवक्ष:स्थलमरिन्दमम्। अपोवाह रणात् सूतो धर्मविद दारुकात्मज: ।२७॥
लब्धसंज्ञो मुहूर्तेन aries: सारथिमब्रवीत्। अहो असाध्विदं सूत यद रणान्मेऽपसर्पणम् । २८॥
न यदूनां कुले जात: श्रूयते रणविच्युत: | विना मत् क्लीबचित्तेन सूतेन प्राप्तकिल्बिषात् । २९1
fe नु वक्ष्येऽभिसङ्गम्य पितरौ रामकेशवो । युद्धात् सम्वगपक्रान्त: पृष्टस्तत्रात्मन: क्षमम् । ३०1
ans मे कथयिष्यन्ति हसन्त्यो भ्रातृजामय: । sea कथं कथं वीर तवान्यै: कथ्यतां मृधे ।३१॥
(Pariksit,) the Yadava warriors too were equally harassed by the volleys of arms showered
by the generals of Saiva's army; but they did not abandon their respective positions on the
battle-field: for they thought that death in battle would secure happiness in the other world,
whereas victory would establish their supremacy on the earth. (25) (Pariksit), there was a
minister of Salva (and a mighty warrior) Dyuman by name, to whom Pradyumna had previously
dealt severe blows; he now suddenly attacked Pradyumna with a steel mace and striking a
heavy blow with it gave a loud roar. (26) The blow smashed the chest of Pradyumna, the
chastiser of foes. Thereupon Daruka’s son, his charioteer, knowing the canons of warfare,
cartied him away from the field. (27) Regainingconsciousness after aboutan hour, Pradyumna
said to his charioteer, “ Oh, charioteer, you have done me a disservice by removing me from
the field of battle. (28) No one born in Yadu's race except me is known to have abandoned the
battle-field. You are a weak-minded charioteer: you have certainly wronged me. (29) What
reply befitting my position shall | give to my uncle, Sri Balarama, and my father, Sri Krsna, when
| see them and when they question me, now that | have cleverly managed to flee away from
the battle-field? (30) My sisters-in-law will laugh at me and openly say, ‘Please do tell us, 0
warrior, how you lost your manliness in the encounter with your enemy’. (31)

सारधिरुवाच
et विजानताऽऽयुष्मन् कृतमेतन्मया विभो । सूत: कृच्छ्रगतं we रथिनं सारथिं रथी ।३२॥
ag विदित्वा तु भवान् मयापोवाहितो रणात्। उपसृष्ट: परेणेति मूर्छितो गदया हत: ।३३॥
इति श्रीमद्भागवंत महापुराणे पारमहंस्यां संहितायां दशमस्कन्धे उत्तरार्घे शाल्वयुद्धे षट्सप्ततितमोऽध्याय: ॥७६॥

The charioteer replied : 0 long-lived one, | did all this knowingly, considering it to be
the proper duty of a charioteer. Lord, the rule of battle is that the charioteer should come to
the rescue of the warrior when the latter's life is in danger, and similarly the warrior should
save the life of the charioteer in peril. (32) Cognizant of this rule, | removed you from the
battle-field when | found that, struck by the enemy with a mace, you had sustained a fatal
injury and fainted. (33)

Thus ends the seventy-sixth discourse, bearing on the (Yadus') encounter with Salva,
in the latter half of Book Ten of the great and glorious Bhagavata-Purana,
otherwise known as the Paramaharhsa-Samnita.

sernetnet:
PSS ees

[565] B.M. Part II—43
