600 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 18

१ व व त् ee ee ee tend २१० ४३ न EEE TUE क ET OER ENE ROLES CREO ETE TE TEE CEE २० १५ २ ११५० १० ११० ०

एतनत्तेऽभिहितं साधो भवान् पृच्छति यच्च माम् । यथा स्वधर्मसंयुक्तो भक्तो मां समियात् परम् ।४८।

A man of self-control who has got disgusted with the pleasures of sense, which are
(invariably) attended with sorrow, but who has not (yet) been instructed in the duties that
enable one to realize Me should betake himself to a teacher given to contemplation. (38) Full
of reverence and devotion and free from censoriousness he should do service to the
preceptor in a respectful mood, knowing him really to be Myself, till he realizes Brahma. (39)
He, however, who has not (yet) been able to control his six senses (including the mind, the
internal sense); whose intellect, the controller of his senses, (too) is intensely fond of the
pleasures of sense: who is destitute of wisdom and dispassion and (simply) makes his living
by the triple staff (the emblem of a recluse); the impurities of whose heart have not yet been
fully burnt and who has (thus) violated the duties of a Sarnnyasi and is deceiving the gods
(by his ceasing to propitiate them through sacrificial performances which he would have
otherwise done), his own self {by depriving himself of luxuries which he would have freely
enjoyed as a householder) as well as Myself, dwelling in his heart, (by failing tc realize Me)
is deprived of this world as well as of the next. (40-41) (To sum up.) control of the mind and
{he senses and harmlessness (mainly) constitute the righteous course of a mendicant
(recluse); enduring hardships prescribed by the Sastras and inquiry into the truth, of an
anchorite (dewelling in the woods): protection of living beings and performance of (the five
great) sacrifices, of ahouseholder; and rendering service to the preceptor, that of the celibate
(who has gone through a second birth by being invested with the sacred thread and taught
the Gayatri). (42) Observing chastity (during the nights other than those in which he is
permitted to copulate with his wedded wife), enduring hardships involved in the discharge
of his rightful duties, purity (of body and mind), contentment and kindness to (all) created
beings (—these) constitute the sacred duty even of a householder who seeks the bed of his
wife (only) during the period following the courses favourable for conception (sixteen nights
after their appearance); (whereas) My worship s the pious duty common to all. (43) He who
constantly worships Me through the pertormance of his duty as aforesaid, seeking no other
reward (beyond My pleasure) begins to look upon all created beings as Myself and attains
firm devotion to Me. (44) Through unceasing Devotion, O Uddhava, he attains to Me, the
supreme Ruler of all the worlds. responsible for the creation and destruction of all, the Source
of the Vedas. (45) He whose mind has thus been purified through the performance of his own
duty and who has fully realized My divine character is equipped with (both) indirect and direct
knowledge concerning Me and (eventually) attains to Me before long (46) This Is the
righteous course of those affiliated to a particular Varna (grade of society) and Asrama (stage
inlife), consisting of certain (definite) rules of conduct. The same Dharma, when characterized
by devotion to Me (i.e., pursued as an offering to Me) proves to be of supreme value as a
means to final beatitude. (47) (Thus) | have told you, O good one. how a man wedded to his
righteous course turns out to be a devotee and duly attains to Me, the Supreme And this Is
what you asked Me (in particular). (48)

Thus ends the eighteenth discourse in Book Eleven of the great and glorious
Bhagavata-Purana. otherwise known as the
Paramahamsa-Samhita.

PCa alate.
CLO EE OID
