Dis. 53] BOOK TEN 341

See ieee nee nee penne ns cernnerres ण व petenens prereset. cerrennnnrenerene

zat | नितम्बार्पितरत्नमेखलां व्यञ्जत्स्तनीं कुन्तलशाङ्कितेक्षणाम् 4!
चिस्मितां ठि न दि ।

पदा चलन्तीं कलहंसगामिनीं सिञ्जत्कलानूपुरधामञ्ञोभिना ।
विलोक्य वीरा मुमुहु: समागता यजझस्विनस्तत्कृतहृच्छयार्दिता: 1421
यां वीक्ष्य ते नृपतयस्तदुदारहासव्रीडावलोकहृतचेतस उज्झितास्त्रा: ।
ऐतु: क्षितौ गजरथाश्वगता विमूढा चात्राच्छलेन हरयेऽर्पयतीं weit । ५३।
Sard वामकरजैरलकानपाङ्गै: प्राप्तान् ह्रियैक्षत FIM, ददृशोऽच्युतं सा uy
al wie रथमारुरुक्षतीं जहार कृष्णो द्विषतां समीक्षताम्।
wa ware सुपर्णलक्षणं राजन्यचक्रं परिभूय mea uu
ततो चयौ रामपुरोगमै: =: सृगालमध्यादिव भागहद्धरि: 14a!
a oma: स्वाभिभवं are परे जरासन्धवशा न सेहिरे ।
aa धिगस्मान् यश आत्तधन्वनां गोपैर्हृते केसरिणां मृगैरिव 1५७1

Smitten with love kindled (in their breast) by her, the illustrious warriors assembled
(there) felt bewildered to behold the princess, who was possessed of a shapely (slender)
waist and had not yet attained puberty, and who had a girdle of jewels thrown about her hips
and in whom signs of womanhood were (just) manifesting themselves, whose (charming)
countenance was graced with ear-rings and whose eyes were moving as though afraid of
her curly locks (that overhung her face), who had a bright smile playing on her lips and whose
teeth—white as jasmine buds—looked red due to the lustre ofherlips, cherry as a ripe Bimba
fruit (being transferred to them when she smiled), who possessed the gait of a female swan
and was walking with her feet shining by the splendour of brilliant jingling anklets and who
cast her spell (even) on heroes as though she were the very Maya (enchanting potency) of
the Lord. (51-52) Stupefied to perceive Rukmini, who under the pretext of going out in a
procession (to the temple) had (all the time) been offering her loveliness to Sri Krsna, the
aforesaid kings—whose mind was captivated by her winsome smiles and bashful glances
and who had (unconsciously) dropped their weapons—({themselves) fell to the ground,
mounted as they were on elephants and horses as well as in chariots. (53) Eagerly looking
forward to the arrival of the Lord at that time and therefore slowly moving as aforesaid her
feet, that resembled a pair of mobile lotus buds, and removing her (flowing) locks (off her
eyes) with her left hand fingers, the princess coyly looked with the corners of her eyes at the
kings arrived (on the occasion) and (while doing so) espied Sti Krsna (the immortal Lord). (54)
Sri Krsna snatched away the princess even as she sought to mount her chariot, unmindful
of His adversaries (Sigupala, Jarasandha and others), who stood gazing, and, having
comfortably seated herin His (own) chariot bearing the emblem of Garuda (the carrier of Lord
Visnu), and setting at naught the whole host of Ksatriyas (present there), Sri Krsna (the
Spouse of Laksmi) then slowly departed (to Dwaraka) alongwith others headed by Balarama,
even as a lion would carry off its game from the midst of jackals. (55-56) His proud
adversaries, who were (all) under the domination of Jarasandha, did not brook that
discomfiture (of theirs) and (consequent) loss of reputation. (They said to one another), “Fie
upon us in that our glory, although we continued to wield our bow and were as good as lions,
