Dis. 15 ] BOOK FIVE 495

LHKENHK TES HAS eee ELE Ss Hee! ee Ce ee 8 eben foo een in soto een sion tt eet
eee ee eee

realized (their oneness with) Brahma. In that mind, which had now been (completely) rid of
all identification with the body (which is other than the self), he realized his oneness with
Brahma (the Supreme Spirit), whose presence was felt therein as a matter of course (without
any conscious effort on his part). Yet he had no pride in him and as such (in such an
unegoistic spirit) he protected (ruled over) the (entire) globe. (7)

`तस्येमां गाथां पाण्डवेय पुराविद उपगायन्ति। 2)

Te नृप: क: प्रतियाति कर्मभिर्यज्वाभिमानी बहुविद्धर्मगोप्ता।

wards: सदसस्पति: सतां सत्सेवकोऽन्यो भगवत्कलामृते। ९ ।

amas परया मुदा सती: सत्वाशिषो दक्षकन्या: सरिद्भि:।

aa wat दुदुहे धराऽऽशिषो निराशिषो गुणवत्सस्नुतोधा:।१०॥

प्रत्यञ्चिता चयुधि धर्मेण विप्रा यदाशिषां षष्ठमंशं Tee I

# x ay

यस्याध्वर भगवानध्वरात्मा Tart माद्यत्युरुसामपाथं।

a)

Waa wa: स ह विश्वजीव: dra: waa प्रीतिमगाद्गयस्य। १३

The knowers of the past (those well-versed in the Pauranika lore), chant the following
verses in praise of Gaya:— (8)

What king, other than a part manifestation of the Lord could (dare) emulate by
his deeds Gaya—be he a (great) sacrificer (one who has performed a number of great
sacrifices),a high-souled man of extensive knowledge, a defender of righteousness, one
who is wooed by the Goddess of Fortune, the leader of an assembly of holy men anda (true)
servant of pious souls ? (9) It was him that the pious daughters of Daksa (Sraddha, Maitri,
Daya and so on)—whose benedictions (always) come true—along with (the deities
presiding over a number of holy) rivers (such as Ganga) sprinkled with water (at the time
of his coronation) in supreme (ecstasy of) joy. And attracted by his virtues, like a cow whose
udders begin to flow at the sight of her calf, mother Earth yielded to his subjects (all their)
desired objects, even though he(himself) had no desire (whatsoever). (10) The Vedas (that
had been duly propitiated by him through a reverential and devoted study) as well as the
Vedic rites (scrupulously and diligently performed by him) yielded to him all (sensuous)
enjoyments even though he was free from (all) cravings. Again, honoured (by him with
volleys of arrows) on the battle-field, (hostile) kings brought him (rich) tributes; while the
Brahmanas, when propitiated with righteousness (the scrupulous performance of his sacred
duties), yielded to him in the other world one-sixth of the blessings (earned by them through
their religious austerities and sacrificial performances). (11) While Indra (the chief of the
gods and the lord of paradise) got inebriate at his sacrificial performance, where copious
libations of the (intoxicating drink called) Soma were offered (to the gods entitled to a share
in the sacrificial offerings), the Lord (Himself), who is the Soul of (all) sacrifices, accepted (in
person) the reward of the sacrifice (in the form of religious merit), duly offered (by him) with
reverence and in a spirit of pure (unalloyed) and unflinching Devotion. (12) By propitiating
the Lord, the entire creation from Brahma (the creator) down to the (other gods), men and
the sub-human species of animate life as well as plants, including the smallest blade of grass
is at once gratified. The selfsame Lord (the Soul of the universe), who is (ever) pleased (all-
blissful by nature), Himself felt palpably gratified at the sacrificial performance of Gaya! (13)
