502 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 88

Pee a nun eee ne ee SERS ERN TONNES CLOSET HOC RAST SCO L MENS HUHHLESHATHENLENTTT TESTS

of all blessings. (Why do you put it to unnecessary exertion ?) (29) Mighty as you are, please
tell me, if the matters fit for our ears, what you have set your mind upon. For people generally
seek to accomplish their object through persons choosen for their help. (30)

श्रीशुक उवाच
एवं भगवता पृष्ठटो वचसामृतवर्षिणा । गतक्लमोऽत्रवीत्तस्मै यथापूर्वमनुष्ठितम् । ३१1

Sri Suka went on : (Pariksit !) thus questioned by the Lord in words raining nectar (as
it were) the Asura felt refreshed and related to Him in order of sequence all that he had
done.(31)

श्रीभगवानुवाच
एवं चेत्तर्हि तद्वाक्यं न वं श्रद्दधीमहि । यो दक्षशापात् पैशाच्यं प्राप्त: प्रेतपिञ्ञाचराट् । ३२1
a aaa विश्रम्भो दानवेन्द्र जगद्गुरौ । adgry स्वशिरसि हस्तं न्यस्य प्रतीयताम् ।३३॥
यद्यसत्यं वच: wet: कथञ्चिद् दानवर्षभ । तदैनं जह्यसद्वाचं न aq वक्तानृतं पुन: । ३४॥
a भगवतश्चित्रैर्वचोभि: स सुपेशलै: । भिन्नधीर्विस्मृत: sitet स्वहस्तं कुमतिर्व्यधात् 1341
अथापतद् भिन्नशिरा वज्राहत इव क्षणात्। जयशाब्दो नम:शब्द: साधुशब्दोऽभवद् fafa । ३६॥
मुमुचु: पुष्पवर्षाणि हते पापे वृकासुरे। देवर्षिपितृगन्धर्वा मोचित: सङ्कटाच्छिव: ।३७॥
aps गिरिशमभ्याह भगवान् पुरुषोत्तम:। अहो देव महादेव पापोऽयं स्वेन पाप्मना । ३८॥
wa. को नु महत्स्वीञ्ञ जन्तुर्वै कृतकिल्बिष: । क्षेमी स्यात् किमु विश्वेशे कृतागस्को जगद्गुरौ । ३९1

The Lord said : "If itis so, then we do not believe his words. Do you not know that under
the curse of Daksa He has adopted the ways of Pisacas (evil spirits)? He is now the ruler of
Pretas (genii) and Pigacas. (32) O lord of demons, if you still repose faith in Sankara as the
Teacher of the world, the truth may be verified (by you) this very instant, O dear friend, by
placing your hand on your own head. (33) Ochief of Asuras, if the words of Sankara are found
to deviate from truth in any wise, you had better do away with that liar so that he may not (live
to) utter a falsehood again." (34) The words spoken by the Lord were so very sweet and cast
such a magic spell on him that he lost his reasoning power, and the wicked Asura in utter
forgetfulness placed his hand on his own head. (35) Instantaneously he fell down with his
head split as if by a stroke of lightning; and shouts of triumph, salutations and applause were
raised (by the gods) in heaven. (36) On the sinful Vrkasura rained having been killed, gods,
manes and Gandharvas showers of flowers, and Bhagavan Sankara was redeemed from a
precarious situation. (37) The almighty Lord Visnu (thereupon) said to Sankara, who was
(now) free, " O Lord ! 0 supreme Deity, this wicked Asura has been killed by his own sins.
O_Lord, having actually sinned against the great who can possibly be happy? Much less could
he be happy who did wrong to You the Lord and preceptor of the universe". (38-39)

य एवमव्याकृतशक्त्युदन्वत: परस्य साक्षात् परमात्मनो हरे: ।
fafa कथयेच्छृणोति वा विमुच्यते संसृतिभिस्तथारिभि: ।४०॥

Sr Hari is an ocean of powers, which are both incomprehensible and beyond the range
of speech, He is no other than the Supreme Spirit beyond Prakrti. He who relates or listens
