412 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 69

वित् व RR ER EE ETE EE EE SE ER a Raa A a

observance of Dharma. At a third place Narade found him (engaged in) devising ways and
means of accumulating wealth, and at another (in) enjoying the pleasures of sense permitted
for a householder. (29) At one place, the Devarsi saw Him seated all by Himself
contemplating on the Supreme Person beyond Prakrti, and at another doing service to the
elders by offering them the desired objects of enjoyment and worship. (30) At one piace, he
found Sri Krsna preparing for war against some enemies, and at another discussing terms
ofpeace. Here the Devarsi saw Him devising-with Balarama the ways and means of ensuring
the well-being of the virtuous, and there performing with grandeur the wedding with due
ceremony of sons and daughters with brides and bridegrooms worthy of them.(31-32) Here
he found Him conducting festivities on a large scale while sending off a married girl (to her
husband) and receiving another (on return from her husband's house). People wondered
to see these grand festal activities of Bhagavan $ri Krsna (the Lord of masters of Yoga). (33)
Somewhere he saw Him offering worship to (the various) gods, his own rays, by means of
grand sacrifices, and elsewhere observing piety through the construction of wells, gardens
and temples etc., for public good. (34) Here he found Him riding on a horse born in the Indus
valley, followed by prominent Yadavas, in pursuit of game and killing animals fit for sacrifice
in the course of such chase. (35) Atone place he saw Sri Krsna (the Master of Yoga) moving
incognito among the people as well as in the mansions of the palace etc., for ascertaining ,
the inward feelings of their inmates as well as of the people. (36)

अधोवाच हषीकेज्ञे नारद: प्रहसन्निव । योगमायोदयं वीक्ष्य मानुषीमीयुषो गतिम् 1३७।
fem चोगमायास्ते gat अपि मायिनाम्। योगेश्वरात्मन् निर्भाता भवत्पादनिषेवया । ३८1

अनुजानीहि मां देव लोकांस्ते चश्रसाऽऽप्रुतान्। पर्वटामि तवोद्गावन् लीलां भुवनपावनीम् 1३९1

Having witnessed the display of wonderful powers of Yogaby Sri Krsna, though following
the ways of a human being, Narada spoke to Him as though laughing heartily. (37) O Master
of Yoga, we know (the secret of) Your worderful powers of Yoga which cannot be easily seen
even by wielders of Maya (like Brahma) and which have been revealed to our mind through
the worship of Your lotus-feet. (8) Pray. give me leave, O Lord, to go, so that । may move
about the (fourteen) worlds flooded with Your glory, singing loudly the story of Your pastimes,
which is caoable of purifying the (whole) world. (39)

श्रीभगवानुवाच
Fe धर्मस्य वक्ताहं कर्ता तदनुमोदिता । तच्छिक्षयल्लोकमिममास्थित: पुत्र मा fae: ।४०॥

The Lord replied : O sage, | amnotonly the Teacher of Dharma, but | practise it Myself,
and lend countenance to (those who practise) it. | follow the path of Dharma in order to teach
the world (by My example). (Therefore,) do not get perplexed, My son, (at the sight of this
My Yogamaya). (40)

इत्याचरन्तं सद्धर्मान् पावनान् गृहमेधिनाम्।ततमेव asaya ददर्श ह ॥४१॥

कृष्णस्यानन्तवीर्यस्य योगमायामहोदयम् | geen ऋषिरभूद् विस्मितो जातकौतुक: ।४२॥

इत्यर्थकामधर्मेषु कृष्णेन श्रद्धितात्मना | ere सभाजित: प्रीतस्तमेवानुस्मरन् ययौ 1४३1
एवं मनुष्यपदवीमनुवर्ततमानो नारायणोऽखिलभवाय गृहीतशक्ति: |

Tg षोडशसहस्रवराङ्गनानां सव्रीडसोहदनिरीक्षणहासजुष्ट: ॥४४॥
