826 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 22

AMOKAARETAKEHHHLESHNA ECHR LEENELECHEHERECORERTE THE CEEHEEN EEE EEA Eh eee

(mere) waste of one's lifetime." (9) Having concluded thus, the aforesaid Prahrada (my
grandfather); an exalted soul possessed of unfathomable wisdom and the foremost of the
virtuous, took shelterin Your lotus-feet— which are eternal and have no fear from any quarter
(whatsoever), eventhough You destroyed his own kinsmen (the demons)—afraid as he was
of (the company of) worldly people. (10) And | too have been brought to Your presence by
(a propitious) fate, even though You pose as my enemy, and have been forcibly robbed of
my fortune; for a man whose understanding has been rendered obtuse by wealth does not
recognize this life, which is (always) within easy reach of Death, as uncertain.(11)
श्रीगुक उवाच
Tae भ्राषमाणस्य प्रह्रादो भगवत्पिय: । आजगाम कुरुश्रेष्ठ राकापतिरिवोत्थित: ।१२॥

तमिन्द्रसेनन wit fro विराजमानं नलिनायतेक्षणम् ।

प्राशुं पिशङ्गाम्बरमञ्जनत्विषं प्रलम्बबाहुं सुभगं समैक्षत । १३|

wa बलिर्वारुणपाशयन्रितत समर्हणं नोपजहार पूर्ववत्।

ननाम मूर्धनाश्रुविलोललोचन: सन्रीडनीचीनमुखो बभूव ह ।१४॥

a तत्र हासीनमुदीक्ष्य सत्पति सुनन्दनन्दाद्यनुगैरुपासितम् ।

eat ewer ननाम मूर्धां पुलकाश्रुविक्व: eu!

Sri Suka continued: While he was thus speaking, Prahrada, the beloved of the Lord,
appeared (there), O chief of the Kurus, as the moon above the horizon. (12) Indrasena (Bali)
observed Prahrada (his own grand-father)—tall and handsome, though dark as collyrium,
clad in yellow, with eyes big as (a pair of) lotuses and pretty long arms, and shining brightly
with (his native) glory. (13) Bound with the cords of Varuna, Bali could not offer due worship
to him as he used to do before. He (simply) bowed with his head (bent low), his eyes
confounded with tears (brought by the thought of the insolent language used by him with
reference to the-Lord), and remained with his head hung down evidently with shame. (14)
Seeing the Lord (who is the Protector of the virtuous) sitting there and waited upon by His
attendants, Sunanda, Nanda and others, the high-minded Prahrada was overwhelmed with
tears and a thrill (of joy). He approached Him with head bent low and bowed with his head
placed on the ground. (15)

प्रह्राद उवाच
ष्टे\ दत्तं ~> isi + wa x २ शो ।
मन्ये महानस्य at ह्यनुग्रहो बिभ्रंशितो यच्छिय आत्ममोहनात्।१६॥
aa fe विद्वानपि मुह्यते यतस्तत् को विचष्टे गतिमात्मनो यथा ।
7a नमस्ते जगदीश्वराय वै नारायणायाखिललोकसाक्षिणे । १७॥

Prahrada submitted: It was by You alone that this exalted position of Indra (the lord of
paradise) was conferred (on him as a reward for the Viswajit sacrifice performed by him to
propitiate You) and it has likewise been taken away by You today. (in other words You have
only accepted what was Yours). | consider that alone (which You have been pleased to do)
to be good (for him). Indeed a great favour has been done to himin that he has been deprived
of (his) fortune, which is (so) instrumental in infatuating the soul. (16) Who can truly perceive
the essential nature of his self despite such wealth, under the influence of which even a
learned and self-controlled man falls a prey to delusion. Hail to that Lordin You, the Lord who
has His abode in water, the undisputed Ruler of the universe and the Witness of all the
worlds.(17)
