Dis. 4 ] BOOK FIVE 453

PREHEAT A A SHR O HHS १६8 EES HAHA E EEE AHH TEE EERHA HE ACHE AA AHHH HHH RHEE eee
ज्र्त्त

कविर्हरिरन्तरिक्ष: प्रबुद्ध: पिप्पलायन:। आविर्होत्रोऽथ द्रुमिलश्चमस: करभाजन:। ११।

इति भागवतधर्मदर्शना नव महाभागवतास्तेषां सुचरितं भगवन्महिमोपबृंहितं वसुदेवनारदसंवाद-
मुपशमायनमुपरिष्टाद्वर्णयिष्याम:।१२॥। यवीयांस एकाशीतिर्जायन्तेया: पितुरादेशकरा महाशालीना
महाश्रोत्रिया यज्ञशीला: कर्मविशुद्धा ब्राह्मणा ATA: । १३ 1

Now indeed Lord Rsabhadeva, who knew His land to be the land of action, showed (by
His own example) how one shouldlive at the residence of one's preceptor. (Again,) permitted
(to marry) by His preceptors, who had received (from Him) the boons of their choice (by way
of the teacher's fees), and teaching (to the world) the duties of householders, he performed
both the types of religious rites ordained by the scriptures (viz., those enjoined by the Vedas
and those prescribed by traditional law) and begot through ( His consort) Jayanti, bestowed
on Him by Indra, a hundred sons, who were His own replicas. (8) Of them the eldest and the
one possessed of the highest attributes was Bharata, who was indeed a great adept in Yoga
and after whom they speak of this landas Bharatavarsa (the land of Bharata). (9) Next to him
came the nine (brothers)—Kusavarta, llavarta, Brahmavarta, Malaya, Ketu, Bhadrasena,
Indrasprk, Vidarbha and Kikata—who led the (other) ninety. (10) Kavi, Hari, Antariksa,
Prabuddha, Pippalayana, Avirhotra, Drumila, Camasa and Karabhajana—these nine were
eminent devotees of the Lord who taught (to the world) the conduct prescribed for the
votaries of the Lord. We shall narrate hereafter (in Book X!), in the form of a dialogue between
‘Vasudeva (the father of Lord Sri Krsna) and the sage Narada, their sacred story imbued with
the Lord's own glory and (thus) inducing peace of mind. (11-12) The (remaining) eighty-one
sons of Jayanti, who were still younger, were obedient to their father, very modest, highly
well-versed in the Vedas and habitually engaged in performing sacrifices. Purified by their
(pious) conduct, they passed for Brahmanas. (13)

भगवानृषभसंज्ञ आत्मतन्त्र: स्वयं नित्वनिवृत्तानर्थपरम्पर: केवलानन्दानुभव yyat wa
विपरीतवत्कर्माण्यारभमाण: कालेनानुगतं धर्ममाचरणेनोपशिक्षयन्नतद्विदां AA उपशान्तोमैत्र: कारुणिको
धर्मार्थयश-:प्रजानन्दामृतावरोधेन गृहेषु लोकं नियमयत्। १४ ॥यद् यच्छीर्षण्याचरितं तत्तदनुवर्तते लोक: । १५ |
यद्यपि स्वविदितं सकलधर्मं ara गुह्यं ब्राह्मणैर्दर्शितमार्गेण सामादिभिरुपायैर्जनतामनुशशास। १६॥
द्रव्यदेशकालवय:श्रद्धत्विग्विविधोद्देशोपचितै: सर्वैरपि क्रतुभिर्यथोपदेशं Maha sara | १७ ।भगवतर्षभेण
परिरक्ष्यमाण एतस्मिन् वर्षे न aye पुरुषो वाञ्छत्यविद्यमानमिवात्मनोऽन्यस्मात्कथञ्चन किमपि
कहिंचिदवेक्षते भर्तर्यनुसवनं विजृम्भितस्नेहातिशयमन्तरेण। १८॥ स कदाचिदटमानो भगवानृषभो
ब्रह्मावर्तगतो ब्रह्मर्षिप्रवरसभायां प्रजानां निशामयन्तीनामात्मजानवह्रितात्मन:
प्रश्नयप्रणयभरसुयन्तरितानप्युपशिक्षयन्निति STATA | १९ I

इति श्रीमद्भागवते महापुराणे पारमहंस्यां संहितायां पञ्चमस्कन्धे चतुर्थोऽध्याय:। ४।

The Lord, who was (rightly) called Rsabha (the foremost), was God Himself—
(altogether) independent, eternally free from all evils by His very nature and (ever) enjoying
absolute bliss (which constitutes His very essence). Yet, performing actions like an ordinary
mortal, He taught to the ignorant by His own example the duties that had been forgotten
through (passage of) time; and, remaining equipoised, calm and controlled, friendly
disposed (towards all) and full of compassion. He ordained the people in household life by
acquiring religious merit, worldly possessions and fame, begetting children, enjoying the
pleasures of sense and attaining final beatitude. (14) (For, as a rule,) the world (blindly)
follows whatever is done by men of topmost rank (in society). (15) Although He Himself knew
the hidden truths of the Vedas, which represent the essence of all Dharmas (rules of good
conduct) He ruled over the people according to the (four recognized) policies of persuasion
etc., following the line of conduct chalked out (for Him) by the Brahmanas. (16) He
