416 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [Dis. 70

SESHAEEEREN AREA AEE CE EEEREEREEL ERE EES EECEEEEEER SEES SEE CRATTE ES CEH HEERE EE EAE EEE OHS

are intensely addicted to prohibited acts or those actuated by self-interest and are
indifferent to Your worship, which is the only auspicious act enjoined on them by You.
(Dogging their foot-steps) in the form of all powerful and ever vigilant Time in the
meantime (however,) You suddenly uproot their hope of life. We bow to You (as
such).(26) You are the Lord of the Universe, who have appeared on earth with Your part
manifestation (viz., Balarama) for protecting the virtuous and chastising the wicked. O
Lord, we are (therefore) at a loss to understand how anyone other than You (be it
Jarasandha or anyone else) can transgress Your command (and tyrannize over us).
Nor do we understand how men who have taken refuge in You (like us) can reap the
fruit of their past actions (in the form of suffering). (27) O Lord, (we are aware that) the
joy of rulership is dependent on others and is as unreal as a dream. (Moreover,) it is with
this body, which is virtually dead and is subject to constant fear, that we bear (so many)
burdens (of the world), having abandoned the joy existing in the self and obtained from
You by disinterested people. Foolish as we are, we are suffering in this world due to
Your Maya. (28) O Lord, Your feet remove the grief of those who fall at them. Therefore,
kindly release us, who are bound with the rope of Karma in the form of this Jarasandha.
Possessing the strength of ten thousand elephants himself he has imprisoned us kings
in his palace even as the lion would round up (a flock of} sheep. (29) O wielder of the
discus, You fought Jarasandha eighteen times, vanquishing him in all battles except one.
We know that Your power and strength are unlimited; and yet, behaving as You did like
a human being, You allowed Yourself to be defeated by him once. This has aggravated
his insolence. He now persecutes us knowing us to be Your servants. O invincible Lord,
now do whatever You deem fit under the circumstances.” (30)
oa उवाच

इति मागधसंरुद्धा भवद्दर्शनकाङ्क्षिण: । प्रपन्ना: पादमूलं ते दीनानां शं विधीयताम्। ३१।

The messenger said : (Lord,} with words these the kings imprisoned by Jarasandha
have sought shelter under Your feet, eager to see You. May those helpless kings be
blessed (with Your presence). (31)

aye उवाच

wage ब्रुवत्येवं gaff: परमद्युति: । बिभ्रत् पिङ्गजटाभारं प्रादुरासीद् यथा रवि: 321

तं दृष्ट्वा भगवान् कृष्ण: सर्वलोकेश्वरेश्वर: | ववन्द उत्थित: sitet ससभ्य: सानुगो मुदा। ३३ 1

सभाजयित्वा विधिवत् कृतासनपरिग्रहम् । बभाषे सूनृतैर्वाक्यै: श्रद्धया तर्पयन् मुनिम्। ३४॥

ata स्विदद्य लोकानां त्रयाणामकुतोभयम् । ननु भूयान् भगवतो लोकान् पर्यटतो गुण:। ३५॥

न fe तेऽविदितं किञ्चिल्लोकेष्वीश्वरकर्तृषु 1 अथ पृच्छामहे युष्मान् पाण्डवानां चिकीर्षितम्। ३६ |

Sri Suka resumed : (Panksit!) when the messenger of the kings was thus
delivering the message (of the kings), the celestial sage (Narada) appeared (on the
scene) wearing a mass of golden matted locks, and dazzling like the sun. (32) Seeing
the sage the almighty Sri Krsna, the suzerain Lord of all the worlds, rose (from His
seat) with His councillors and attendants and joyfully bowed to the Devarsi with His
head bent low. (33) The Devarsi having taken his seat, the Lord worshipped him with
due honour and, bringing delight to the sage with His reverence spoke to him in the
following sweet words. (34) “O sage, are all the three worlds now free from fear?
Your constantly going about the three worlds surely constitutes a great gain to us
(inasmuch as we receive all the news of the world through you). (35) Nothing in (all)
the worlds of God's creation is unknown to you. We, therefore, enquire of you what
the Pandavas and others intend to do (at present).” (36)
