302 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 4
SS ee ee RAE AAAS. A RAREST AL AAR EEE CEASERS CCE RAE AOE SSE SS
anger, Sati (the spouse of Lord Bhava) looked at her peerless lord, Bhava, as if she would
burn Him. (2) Thereafter, with a heart tormented by grief and anger and her judgment
clouded by her womanish nature, and heaving deep sighs, she proceeded to her parents’
home, leaving Lord Sankara, the beloved of the saints, who had fondly given her half of His
body. (3) The servants of Lord Siva (who is characterized by three eyes)—Maniman, Mada
and others—accompanied by His own personal attendants and Yaksas, followed her apace
in thousands, placing Nandigwara (the chief of the bulls, the mount of Lord Siva) at their head
and free from remorse (at theirparting from the Lord, because they could not bear to see Sati
going without escort). (4) Placing her on (the back of) the chief of the bulls, they travelled (as
her escort), duly equipped with her Sarika (a thrushlike bird generally brought up as a pet
by ladies of high rank), ball (to play with), looking-glass and lotus flower, white umbrella,
chowrie and wreath etc., (as insignia of royalty) * and kettledrums, conchs, flutes and other
accompaniments of music. (5) Sati (presently reached her destination and) entered the
sacrificial grounds, where Vedic hymns were being chanted in every direction, giving rise to
a keen contest (among the Brahmanas reciting the Vedas), nay, which were crowded with
Brahmana seers and divinities on all sides and strewn with utensils of clay, wood, iron, gold,
Ku§a grass and hides. (6) Afraid of Daksa (the sacrificer), who treated her with disrespect,
nobody bestowed any attention on her when she arrived there, excepting of course her
sisters and mother, who gladly and fondly embraced her, their throats choked with tears of
love. (7) Not addressed kindly by her father, Sati did not accept the presents or the exalted
seat lovingly offered by her mother and mother's sisters; nor did she receive (with a glad
heart) the enquiries of her sisters about her health, even though they were couched ina most
appropriate language. (8)
अरुद्रभागं तमवेक्ष्य चाध्वरं पित्रा च देवे कृतहेलनं विभौ ।
sae यज्ञसदस्यधीश्वी चुकोप लोकानिव धक्ष्यती रुषा । ९ ।
a सामर्षविपन्नया गिरा fae धूमपथश्रमस्मयम्।

स्वतेजसा भूतगणान् समुत्थितान् निगृह्य देवी जगतोऽभिशृण्वत: 1201
Seeing that no share of the sacrificial offerings had been allotted to Rudra (Lord Siva)
and that her father (Daksa) had shown great disrespect towards the omniscient Lord, and
herself slighted in the sacrificial assembly, Sati (a lady in supreme authority) flew into a rage
as if she would burn (all) the worlds with her fury. (9) Controlling by her command the hosts
of ghosts (that had accompanied her and) who had sprung on their feet (to kill Daksa), she
proceeded to reproach that enemy of Lord Siva—whose vanity had been tickled by his
proficiency in the ritual—in accents faltering with anger within the hearing of the whole world
(all those assembled there). (10)
as

न यस्य लोकेऽस्त्यतिशायन: प्रियस्तथाप्रियो देहभृतां प्रियात्मन: |

तस्मिन् समस्तात्मनि मुक्तवैरके ऋते भवन्तं कतम: प्रतीपयेत् ।११।

दोषान् wet हि Wey साधवो गृह्णन्ति केचिन्न ware द्विज ।

सेर्ष्य महापूरुषपादपांसुभिर्निरस्ततेज:सु तदेव शोभनम् । १३॥

* Lord Siva being one of the eight Lokapalas (regents of the quarters), Sail is depicted here as enjoying royal honours.

