420 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 71

SHAMS aN H ERA ASHE CEASE 3 3२२ NEHA Hee Lee र्वि Sthnat hires thee tick

(Son of Devaki) ordered His servants—Daruka, Jaitra and others—to prepare for the
journey.(12) With the permission of Ugrasena and Balarama, O destroyer of foes, the
Lord sent His consorts and sons with the retinue and luggage (in advance) and mounted
His own chariot brought by Daruka and distinguished by its banner bearing the device
of Garuda.(13) He set out with His formidable army—consisting of chariots, elephants,
cavalry and footmen and led by its numerous generals—filling the quarters with the
tumultuous sound produced by clay tomtoms, kettle-drums, tabors, conchs and
trumpets. (14) Clad in the best attire and adomed with ornaments, sandal-paste and
garlands and strongly guarded by men armed with a sword and shield, devoted consorts
of the Lord (Rukmini and others) with their children followed their husband, the immortal
Lord, in litters, chariots drawn.by horses and gold palanquins. (15) Then followed (the
trains of) servants’ wives and courtesans, all richly adorned, with portable shelters of
mats, woollen blankets and clothes and other appurtenances secured on all sides on
oxen, buifaloes, donkeys and mules and themselves jcurneying in carts or litters or on
the back of camels and elephants. (16) That huge army, full of tumultuous noises, shone
during the daytime with its lofty flags, umbrellas, chowries, excellent weapons, ornaments,
crowns and armours, under the rays of the sun, like the sea with its agitated waves and —
whales. (17) The sage (Narada) was delighted at heart at the sight of Si Krsna (the
Bestower of Liberation). Honoured by the Lord of the Yadus and hearing His decision,
the sage bowed to Him. The Lord offered him worship at the time of his departure and
the sage ‘eft Dwaraka by air treasuring the Lord’s Form in his heart. (18)
राजदूतमुवाचेदं भगवान् प्रीणयन् गिरा । मा भैष्ट दूत भद्रं वो घातयिष्यामि मागधम्। १९॥
yee: प्रस्थितो दूतो यथावदवदन्नृपान् | तेऽपि सन्दर्शनं शौरे: प्रत्यैक्षन् ययन्मुमुक्षव:। २०॥
Then, turning to the messenger of the imprisoned kings, Bhagavan Sri Krsna spoke
to him in pleasing words: “Messenger, go and tell the kings that they should fear no
more. Causing the death of Jarasandha, | shall bring them freedom soon. (19) Thus
commanded by the Lord, the messenger departed and duly conveyed His message to
the kings, who, yearning for their release, eagerly looked forward to Bhagavan Sri
Krsna’s appearance on the spot. (20)
आनर्तसौवीरमसरूंस्तीर्वा विनशनं हरि: । गिरीन् नदीरतीयाय पुरग्रामव्रजाकरान्। 2
aa दृषद्वतीं dat मुकुन्दोऽथ `सरस्वतीम् | पञ्चालानथ मत्स्यांश्च शक्रप्रस्थमथागमत्। 221
तमुपागतमाकर्ण्य प्रीतो दुर्दर्शनं नॄणाम् । अजातशत्रुर्निरगात् सोपाध्याय: सुहृद्वृत:। 231
शीतवादित्रघोषेण ब्रह्मघोषेण भूयसा | अभ्ययात् स हषीकेशं प्राणा: प्राणमिवादृत:। २४॥
qeal विक्लिन्नहृदय: कृष्णं स्नेहेन पाण्डव:। चिराद् दृष्टं fant सस्वजेऽथ पुन: पुन:। २५॥
लेभे परां निर्वृतिमश्रुलोचनो हष्वत्तनुर्विस्मृतलोकविभ्रम:। २६॥
ait किरीटी च demi मुदा प्रवृद्धबाष्पा: परिरिभिरेऽच्युतम्। २७॥
ana परिष्वक्तो यमाभ्यामभिवादित: । ब्राह्मणेभ्यो नमस्कृत्य वृद्धेभ्यश्च यथार्हत:। २८॥
wet मानयामास कुरुसृञ्जयकैकयान् । सूतमागधगन्धर्वा वन्दिनश्चोपमन्तिण:। ee
मृदङ्घशङ्खपटहवीणापणवगोमुखै: । ब्राह्मणाश्चारविन्दाक्षं तुष्टुवुर्ननृतुर्जगु: । ३०॥
एवं सुहृद्धि: whe: पुण्यश्लोकशिखामणि: । संस्तूयमानो भगवान् विवेशालङ्कृतं पुरम्। ३१।
Passing through the lands of Anarta,Sauvira, Maru, and Kuruksetra and crossing many

hills and rivers, Bhagavan Sri Krsna went past many towns, villages, cowherds, hamlets,
mines and quarries. (21) Then, crossing the Drsadvati and Saraswati rivers, He passed
