738 ॥ SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 1

PROTA AAAERAHREHE HEA KRHA LOO जी वी करक्छाषी AAS EEK ER AT LOK KH ELSES Hee eHEHELHEKM ERS eM OTHE ङ OMW IH Thy

ॠषेस्तु वेदशिरसस्तुषिता नाम ULI ae जज्ञे ततो tat विभुरित्यभिविश्रुत: 1221
अष्टाशीतिसहस्राणि wat ये धृतव्रता: । अन्वशिक्षन्व्रतं तस्य कोमारब्रह्मचारिण: 1221
Now Swarocisa was( the name of) the second Manu,( who was) a son of Agni (the god
of fire); while Dyuman, Susena, and Rocisman were the chief among his sons. (19) In that
(Swarocisa) Manvantara, of course, the Indra was known by the name of) Rocana; while
Tusita and others (viz., Tosa, Pratosa, Santosa Bhadra, Santi, ldaspati, Idhma, Kavi, Vibhu,
Swahna and Sudeva) were the gods. Urja (son of Vasistha) Stambha (son of KaSyapa, a lord
of created beings) and others (namely, Prana, Brhaspati, Atri, Datta, also known as
Dattatreya, son of Atri, and Cyavana) were the seven seers, (all) expositors of the Vedas.(20)
Again, the wife of the sage Vedasira was named Tusita. Through her from (the loins of) that
sage appeared the Lord Himself, known all over by the name of Vibhu. (21) Eighty-eight
thousand sages, who had(all) undertaken a vow of austerity, followed the example of the
aforesaid Lord, who had remained a bachelor since His (very) boyhood.(22)

तृतीय उत्तमो am प्रियव्रतसुतो मनु:। पवन: सृञ्जयो यज्ञहोत्राद्यास्तत्सुता नृप । २३
वसिष्ठतनया: GH wea: प्रमदादय: | सत्या वेदश्रुता vat tar इन्द्रस्तु सत्यजित् । २४
ada सूनृतायां तु भगवान्पुरुषोत्तम: | सत्यसेन sid ख्यातो जात: सत्यव्रते: सह eu!
सोऽनृतव्रतदु:शीलानसतो यक्षराक्षसान्। Yas भूतगणांस्त्ववधीत् सत्यजित्सख: ।२६॥

The third Manu, son of (the celebrated Emperor)Priyavrata, was known as Uttama.
Pavana, Srfijaya, Yajfiahotra and others were his sons, O Pariksit! (23)Pramada and others,
sons of Vasistha, were the seven seers. The Satyas, he Vedasrutas and the Bhadras were
the (names of the three groups of) gods; while the Indra was (known by the name of)
Satyajit.(24) Again,from (the loins of) Dharma (the god of piety) through (his wife) Sunrta
appeared along with (the class of gods known as) the Satyavratas, the Supreme Person
(Himself) celebrated by the name of Lord Satyasena. (25) And with Satyajit (the then Indra)
as His helpmate. He killed the wicked Yaksas and Raksasas, who were vowed to mendacity
and given to evil ways, as well as hosts of evil spirits who were enemies of created
beings.(26)

wad उत्तमभ्राता मनुर्नाम्ना च तामस: । पृथु: ख्यातिर्नर: केतुरित्याद्या दश तत्सुता: 1291

wan वीरा देवास्तिशिख ईश्वर: । ज्योतिर्धामादय: A ऋषयस्तामसेऽन्तरे । २८।
देवा वैधृतयो aa विधृतेस्तनया नृप। नष्टा: कालेन यैर्वेदा faye: स्वेन तेजसा ।२९॥
तत्रापि wa भगवान्हरिण्यां हरिमेधस:। हरिरित्याहतो येन गजेन्द्रो मोचितो ग्रहात् । ३०॥

The fourth Manu, Tamasa by name, was a brother of Uttama. Prthu, Khyati, Nara, Ketu
and others were his ten sons. (27) The Satyakas, the Haris and the Viras were (the three
groups of) the gods; Trisikha was (the name of) their ruler (Indra); while Jyotirdhama and
others (viz., Prthu, Kavya or Sukracraya, Caitra, Agni, Dhanada and Pivara) were the seven
seers in that Manvantara, which went by the name of Tamasa.(28) The (other) gods (in that
Manvantara), Vaidhrtis by name, were the sons of Vidhrti, by whom the Vedas, that had
been lost (forgotten) in course of time, were preserved (retained in their memory) by their
own intellectual calibre, O king !(29) In that Manvantara the Lord too was born through
Harini from (the loins of ) the sage Harimedha ( her husband) and was named Sri Hari, by
whom the (celebrated) leader of (a herd of) elephants was extricated from (the grip of) an
alligator. (30)
