Dis. 14] BOOK FOUR 357

ARR e eR rinink Sotrtnt srt ote init fine ere ee tine ine to fii ttn eo st fret e eit

and others), is pleased ? It is to Him that (all) the worlds along with their guardian deities
devoutly offer their tribute. (20) It behoves you, O king, to win the affection of your nationals,
who for your welfare worship through (the performance of) various sacrifices Him who is the
Controller of the worlds as well as of the divinities (ruling over them) and even so of sacrificial
performances (through which one attains to the position of those divinities), nay, who is the
one subject of the three Vedas (Rgveda, Samaveda and Yajurveda), who takes the form of
material substances (clarified butter etc., poured into the sacred fire in the course of a
sacrifice) andto whom all austere penance is directed. (21) Duly worshipped and thoroughly
propitiated by means of sacrifices performed in your dominion by the Brahmanas, the gods,
who are so many rays of Lord Sri Hari (Himself), shall confer (on you) the desired boon.
(Therefore) it does not behove you, O valiant monarch, to show disrespect to the gods (by
banning the performance of sacrifices and other religious rites). (22)
वेन उवाच

बालिशा aa qt वा aed धर्ममानिन: । ये वृत्तिदं पतिं fear जारं पतिमुपासते 1231

अवजानन्त्यमी मूढा नृपरूपिणमीश्वरम्।नानुविन्दन्ति a भद्रमिह लोके परत्र च । २४॥

को यज्ञपुरुषो नाम wa at भक्तिरीदृशी | भर्तृस्नेहविदूराणां यथा जारे कुयोषिताम् । २५॥

विष्णुर्विरिञ्जो fit इन्द्रो वायुर्यमो रवि: । पर्जन्यो धनद: am: क्षितिरग्निरपाम्पति: 126!

एते चान्ये च विबुधा: प्रभवो वरशापयो: । देहे भवन्ति qua: सर्वदेवमयो नृप: 1201

तस्मान्मां कर्मभिर्विप्रा यजध्वं गतमत्सरा: | बलिं च मह्यं हरत मत्तोऽन्य: कोऽग्रभुक पुमान् । २८।

Vena said: You are foolish indeed, mistaking as you do unrighteousness for righteous-
ness. For, ignoring the very lord who maintains you, you wait upon a paramour. Oh, what
a pity ! (23) The fools who disregard God in the form of a king can never attain happiness
either in this world or in the next.(24) Who is that Yajnapurusa (the deity presiding over
sacrifices) for whom you cherish such (intense) devotion as corrupt women, to whom love
for their husband is unknown, have for their paramour ? (25) Visnu, Brahma (the creator),
Lord Siva (who has His abode on Mount Kaildsa). Indra (the lord of paradise), Vayu (the
wind-god), Yama (the god of punishment), Ravi (the sun-god), Parjanya (the god of rain),
Kubera (the bestower of riches), Soma (the moon-god), Ksiti (the goddess presiding over
the earth), Agni (the god of fire), Varuna (the lord of waters)—these as well as the other gods,
who are capable of granting boons and pronouncing curses too, abide on the person of a
monarch; fora sovereign represents all the gods (inhis person). (26-27) Therefore, free from
jealousy, worship me, O Brahmanas, through religious performances and bear offerings to
me. For, what person other than me deserves your worship? (28)
मैत्रेय उवाच

sea विपर्ययमति: पापीयानुत्पथं गत: | SATS न चक्रे भ्रष्टमङ्गल: 1281
इति तेऽसत्कृतास्तेन द्विजा: पण्डितमानिना । भग्नायां भव्ययाच्ञायां wet विदुर चषुक्रुधु: 1301

हन्यतां हन्यतामेष पाप: प्रकृतिदारुण: | जीवञ्जगदसावाशु Hed भस्मसाद् ध्रुवम् । ३१॥
नायमर्हत्यसदवृत्तो नरदेववरासनम् । योऽधियज्ञपति विष्णुं विनिन्दत्यनपत्रप: 1321

को af परिचक्षीत व्रेनमेकमृतेऽशुभम्। प्राप्न ईदृशमेश्वर्य यदनुग्रहभाजन: 1331
Maitreya went on : Even when thus supplicated (by the sages), that highly wicked soul,
whose reason had got perverted and who had strayed from the path of virtue, did not accede
to their prayer, all good luck having left him (for good). (29) Slighted thus by that conceited
foo! (who accounted himself wise), those Brahmanas got angry with him, O blessed Vidura,
