Dis. 13] BOOK NINE 51
१<.<<-^-^.५.७.०.८

२२२२ २२१२ २२२२ १०२२२२ २२२२ १ १ चच न्विने वथ व

इक्ष्वाकूणामयं de: सुमित्रान्तो भविष्यति । यतस्तं sre राजानं संस्थां प्राप्स्यति वै कलौ 1१६1

These are all the past kings of Ikswaku's line; (now) hear (the names) of the coming ones.
Brhadbala's son will be named Brhadrana, of whom will be born urukriya and from (the loins
of) the latter will spring up Vatsavrddha. Of the latter will be born Prativyoma; from
Prativyoma Bhanu and from him will follow Divaka, a (great) general. (9-10) Of him will be
born the valiant Sahadeva. Brhadaswa will be the son of Sahadeva and Bhanuman, of
Brhadaswa. Bhanumén's son will be Pratikagwa and the latter's son will be Supratika. (1 1)
Then will follow Marudeva; from Marudeva, Sunaksatra and Sunaksatra's son will be
Puskara, Puskara’s son will be Antariksa; Antariksa's son will be Sutapa and the latter's
Amitrajit. (12) Again, Brhadraja will be the son of Amitrajit; Barhi of Brhadraja and from the
latter will follow Krtafijaya. His son will be Ranafijaya and from {the loins of) Ranafjaya will
spring up Safijaya. (13) From the latter will follow Sakya; from Sakya, Suddhoda and his
son will be called Langala. Of him will be born Prasenajit and from Prasenajit will follow
Ksudraka. (14) From (the loins of ) Ksudraka will spring up Ranaka and of the latter will
be born a son, Suratha (by name). From Suratha will follow a son, Sumitra by name, who
will be the last of his line. These are (all) the scions of Brhadbala. (15) This race of the
Ikgwakus will have its end in Sumitra; for, having reached this king, the line will actually
terminate in the Kali Yuga. (16)

Thus ends the twelfth discourse, “A genealogy of (the remaining kings of) kswaku's line”
in Book Nine of the great and glorious Bhagavata-Purana,
otherwise known as the Paramaharhsa-Samhita.

विल्
त्ल् Ny

अथ त्रयोदशोऽध्याय:

Discourse XIll

The posterity of Nimi described
SRR उवाच
निमिरिक्ष्वाकुतनयो वसिष्ठमवृतर्विजम्। आरभ्य सत्रं सोऽप्याह शक्रेण प्राग्वृतोऽस्मि भो: । १ ।
तं निर्वर्त्यगमिष्यामि cet प्रतिपालय । तूष्णीमासीद्गृहपति:सोऽपीन्द्रस्याकरोन्मखम् । २ ।
निमिश्चलमिदं विद्वान् सत्रमारभतात्मवान्। ऋत्विग्भिरपरैस्तावन्नागमद् यावता गुरु: । ३ ।
शिष्यव्यतिक्रमं dea faded गुरुरागत: । ora game देहो निमे: पण्डितमानिन: । ४ ।
fafa: प्रतिददौ शापं गुरवेऽधर्मवर्तिने। तवापि पत्तताद् देहो लोभाद् धर्ममजानत: । ५ ।
इत्युत्ससर्ज स्वं देहं निमिरध्यात्मकोविद: | मित्रावरुणयोर्जज्ञे उर्वह्यां प्रपितामह: । ६ ।
गन्धवस्तुषु wee fea मुनिसत्तमा: । समाप्ते सत्रयागेऽथ देवानूचु: समागतान्। ७ |
राज्ञो जीवतु देहोऽयं प्रसन्ना: sweat ai ade निमि: प्राह मा भून्मे देहबन्धनम् । ८ ।
यस्य योगं न वाञ्छन्ति वियोगभयवकातरा: । भजन्ति चरणाम्भोजं मुनयो हरिमेधस: । ९ |
देहं नावरुरुत्सेऽडं दु:खञ्ञोकभयावहम्। सर्वत्रास्य यतो मृत्युर्मत्स्यानामुदके यथा ।१०॥
