`288 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 44

Giicietdie Sicerdiet teren init eerie gest ere ce sews CUTE NET EERSTE SESE See eee ed

भगवद्गात्रनिष्पातैर्वज्रनिष्येषनिष्ठुरै: । चाणूरो भज्यमानाङ्खो मुहुर्लानिमवाप ह ।२०॥

स waa उत्पत्य Wiss करावुभो।भगवन्तं वासुदेवं क्रुद्धो वक्षस्यबाधत ।२१॥

नाचलत्तत्प्रहरेण मालाहत इव द्विप: । बाह्वोर्निगृह्य चाणूरं बहुशो भ्रामयन् हरि: 1221

भूपृष्ठे पोथयामास तरसा क्षीणजीवितम् । विस्रस्ताकल्पकेशस्त्रगिन्द्रध्वज इवापतत् ।२३॥

ada मुष्टिक: पूर्वं स्वमुष्ट्याभिहतेन Sisco बलिना तलेनाभिहतो भृशम् ।२४॥

परवेपित:र स रुधिरमुद्वमन् मुखतोऽर्दित: । व्यसु: पपातोर्वयुपस्थे वाताहत इवाङ्ध्रिप: ।२५॥

तत: REAM राम: प्रहर्तां वर: । अवधील्लीलया राजन् सावज्ञं वाममुष्टिना ।२६॥

ada हि we: कृष्णपदापहतशीर्षक: । द्विधा विदीर्णस्तोशालक उभावपि निपेततु: 1291

चाणूरे मुष्टिके कूटे शले dee elite प्रदुद्रवुर्मल्ला: ad प्राणपरीप्सव: ।२८।

मोपान् वयस्यानाकृष्य तै: de विजह्रतु: । वाद्यमानेषु Ty वल्गन्तौ सरुतनूपुरौ ।२९॥
While the women (of Mathura) were thus talking (with one another) in anxious tones as
aforesaid, Lord Sri Hari, the Master of Yoga (and therefore able to read others’ thoughts),
made up His mind to get rid of His opponent (Caniira), O jewel among the Bharatas ! (17)
Hearing the aforesaid remarks—full of apprehension—of those women, His parents (Vasudeva
and Devaki), who were unaware of their Son's strength and (consequently) overwhelmed
with anxiety out of affection for Them, were filled with remorse (at their not having asked
Akrira to desist from bringing Balarama and Sri Krsna to Mathura).(18) (Even) as Sri Krsna
(the immortal Lord) and His antagonist (Cantra) contended with each other according to the
various popular modes of wrestling, in that very manner did Balarama and Mustika struggle
with each other. (19) His limbs being shattered by the hits of the Lord's limbs, which were as
hard as strokes of lightning, Canura—so the tradition goes—fainted again and again. (20)
Springing with the swiftness of a hawk and clenching the fingers of both his hands into fists,
the latter, full of anger, struck Lord Sri Krsna (Son of Vasudeva) on the chest. (21) The Lord
(however) did not stir (even one inch from His position) under his blow, any more than an
elephant would when struck with a garland. (On the other hand) Sri Hari caught hold of
Cantra by his arms and, whirling him several times, dashed him to the ground, his life having
become extinct (even) as a result of his being whirled with vehemence. His ornaments and
garlands having fallen off and his locks dishevelled, the wrestler fell like a thunderbolt (the
likeness of which is borne as an emblem on the ensign of Indra). (22-23) Precisely in the
same manner was Mustika struck violently with his palm by the mighty Balabhadra, who had
also been struck with his fist by the latter in the first instance. (24) Violently shaken and sore
afflicted, and vomiting blood from his mouth, he dropped lifeless on the ground like a tree
blown down by the wind. (25) Balarama, the foremost of warriors, playfully and scornfully
slew with his left fist Kita (another reputed wrestler), who came up next (to wrestle). (26) That
very moment Sala (another of Karnsa’s wrestlers) had his head knocked off with Sri Krsna’s
foot, while ToSala (the other wrestler of repute) was split into two (like a blade of grass) and
both fell down (dead). (27) Cantira, Mustika, Kuta. Sala and Togala, having (thus) been
despatched, all the remaining wrestlers ran away anxious to save their life. (28) Drawing near
them Their cowherd mates and closing with them, the two Brothers sported (in the arena),
while the trumpets were being sounded, dancing (at intervals) with Their anklets jingling. (29)

जना: प्रजहृषु: ad कर्मणा रामकृष्णयो: | ऋते कंसं विप्रमुख्या: साधव: साधु साध्विति । ३०
wy मल्लवर्येषु fag च aN | न्यवारयत् स्वतूर्याणि वाक्यं चेदमुवाच ह ।३१॥
नि:सारयत gat वसुदेवात्मजौ पुरात्। धनं हरत गोपानां नन्दं बध्नीत दुर्मतिम् । ३२।

