Dis. 4} BOOK TWELVE 683

HRM RELRE WR RESSHORERACR ARERR H BIH ISE A LRA RA AAA MAGA SII AA III IES AI IEA IEA ISIS IA AIL BIA AIA IM HIME

one ! (27) Whatever is perceived as a cause or an effect is an illusion, because a cause and
an effect are correlated to one another. Therefore, all that has a beginning and an end is
unreal. (28) Though manifest (to us), the phenomenal world cannot be explained in the least
degree independently of the Self. Ifit were (at all) capable of being so explained, it would turn
out to be (self-effulgent) like the conscious Self and (as such) unitary as the Self. (29) There
can be no diversity in that whichis real. If an ignorant man were to recognize ( Be Sh
it would be (unreal) like the distinction between the space enclosed by a pitcher and the
infinite (expanse of the) sky, between the sun and its reflection in water, or between the air
outside and inside the body. (30)

यथा fad बहुधा सम्रीयते नृभि: क्रियाभिर्व्यवहारवर्त्मसु ।

एवं वचोभिर्भगवानधोक्षजो व्याख्यायते लौकिकवैदिकैर्जनै: 131
यथा घनोऽर्कप्रभवोऽर्कदर्शितो may च चक्षुषस्तम: |
एवं we ब्रह्मगुणस्तदीक्षितो ब्रह्मांशाकस्यात्मम आत्मबन्धन: ।३२॥

घनो यदार्कप्रभवो विदीर्यते wa: wed darter तदा ।
यदा weet उपाधिरात्मनो जिज्ञासया नर्यति तर्ह्यनुस्मरेत् 133
यदैवमेतेन विवेकहेतिना मायामयाहङ्करणात्मबन्धनम् |
छित्त्वाच्युतात्मानुभवोऽवतिष्ठते तमाहुरात्यन्तिकमङ्ग सम्प्रवम् । ३४॥

Even as in practical use gold is fouhd by men wrought in numerous forms (ornaments)
according to various processes, so the Lord, who is above sense-perception, is described
by (egotistic) men (in different ways) in secular as well as Vedic parlance. (31) (Just) as a
cloud, though born of the sun and revealed by (the light of) the sun, prevents the eye, which
is a part of the sun, from beholding the sun, so does the ego, which has its source in Brahma
and is illumined by Brahma, stand in the way of the Jiva, a particle of Brahma, realizing
Brahma; which is the same as the Jiva. (32) As soon as the cloud born of the sunis scatiered
the eye sees the sun, which is its own self. (Similarly) the moment the ego, which veils (the
true nature of) the soul, yields to inquiry (about the Self), the soul realizes its identity with
Brahma. (33) When, having tom—in the aforesaid manner with this dagger of wisdom,
Ahankara, a product of Maya, which veils (the true nature of) the soul, and realized the all-
perfect Self, the Jiva stands fulfilled, they cal] such a state the everlasting Dissolution, O dear
Pariksit ! (34)

नित्यदा सर्वभूतानां ब्रह्मादीनां Ui उत्पत्तिप्रलयावेके सूक्ष्मज्ञा: सम्प्रचक्षते 1341
कालस्रोत्तोजवेनाशु ह्रियमाणस्य नित्यदा। परिणामिनामवस्थास्ता जन्मप्रलयहेतव: 1361
अनाद्यन्तवतानेन कालेनेश्वरमूर्तिना | अवस्था नैव ead वियति ज्योतिषामिव । ३७॥
frat नैमित्तिकश्चैव तथा प्राकृतिको लय: । आत्यन्तिकश्च कथित: कालस्य गतिरीदूशी act

Some men, knowing the subile state of things, O tormentor of foes ! declare the creation
and dissolution of all created beings from Brahma downward as going on all the time (every
moment). (85) The successive stages that are gone through by (all) changing things (such
as a stream or the flame of a lamp) serve as afi index of the constant appearance and
dissolution of the body etc., (of a created being), which are being rapidly worn away (every
moment) by force of the stream of Time. (36) The (successive) stages (of growth and decay
etc., of created beings) brought about by the aforementioned Time, a manifestation of the
Almighty, which has no beginning or end, are certainly not perceived (even) as the stages
of movement of luminaries (coursing) in the heavens. (37) (In this way) the Nitya (constant)
as well as the Naimittika (occasional), nay, the Prakrtika (or final) and Atyantika (everlasting)
