810 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 18

PO a EE EH HHH HEE SHE POH HEE HS EEE ELE OEE SE HS Ee NH EEK Re
कमण्डलुं वेदगर्भ: | HT ae: अक्षमालां महाराज सरस्वत्यव्ययात्मन: 128 1
तस्मा इत्युपनीताय यक्षराद् पात्रिकामदात्। Het भगवती साक्षादुमादादम्बिका सती 1291
स ब्रह्मवर्चसेनैवं सभां संभावितो ag: । ब्रह्मर्षिगणसञ्जुष्टामत्यरोचत मारिष: । १८॥
aged a कृत्वा परिसमूहनम्।परिस्तीर्य समभ्यर्च्य समिद्भिरजुहोद द्विज: ।१९॥

(Greatly) rejoicing to see (the Lord in the form of) that dwarfish Brahmana boy, eminent
sages placed the lord of created beings (the sage KaSyapa) at their head and had (all) sacred
rites (with respect to that divine Boy) performed (with due ceremony). (13) To Him, when
being invested with the sacred thread, Savita (the sun-god, the deity presiding over and
invoked through the sacred Gayatri-Mantra) taught the (famous) Gayatri-Mantra (a prayer
to the sun-god, which every Dwija is acquired to learn and mutter everyday without fail); the
sage Brhaspati (the preceptor of the gods) gave Him the sacred thread (to be worn baldric
wise at all times) and the sage Kasyapa (His own father), a sacred cord made of Mufja grass
(which every Brahmacari is expected to wear round his waist all the time and from which is
suspended the strip of cloth covering his privy parts). (14) Goddess Earth gave to the Lord
of the universe a deerskin and Soma (the moon-god), the lord of the vegetable kingdom, the
sacred staff (which a Brahmacari must always carry in his hand). His mother (Aditi) gave Him
a strip of cloth to cover His privy parts with as well as a piece of cloth (to be wrapped about
His loins) and Dyauh (the deity presiding over the sky), an umbrella. (15) Brahma (the
repository of Veda) gave to the immortal lord a Kamandalu (a vessel of wood or cocoanut-
shell for carrying water); the seven seers, blades of the (sacred) Kusa grass and Saraswati
(the goddess of speech and learning), a rosary of Aksa seeds, O great king ! (16) To Him,
when invested with the sacred thread, Kubera (the lord of the Yaksas) gave a small vessel
for (receiving and holding alms); while the all-virtuous Goddess Uma, the Mother of the
universe, Her-self gave Him alms*. (17) Thus honoured (by all those assembled in the
hermitage of the sage Kasyapa), that most worthy Brahmana Boy outshone by His
Brahmanical glory the assembly graced by hosts of Brahmana sages.(18) Having swept the
Vedi (raised ground for placing the sacred fire) with blades of KuSa grass (in order to drive
away insects) and installing the sacred fire, and having strewn (other) blades of Kusa round
it (in the prescribed manner by way of protection against evil spirits) and (then) fully lighting
the fire, the Brahmana (boy) duly worshippedit in €veryway and fed it by means of sacrificial
sticks (daubed with clarified butter).(19)

जगाम तत्राखिलसारसंभृतो भारेण गां सन्नमयन्पदे RO!

a नर्मदायास्तट st ad ऋत्विजस्ते भृगुकच्छसंज्ञके |

प्रवर्तयन्तो भृगव: «aq व्यचक्षतारादुदितॆ यथा रविम् । २१।

त ऋत्विजो wm: सदस्या हतत्विषो वामनतेजसा नृप ।

सूर्य: किलायात्युतं वा विभावसु: सनत्कुमारोऽथ दिदृक्षया mat: 1221

wt wes we कमण्डलुं fea बिभ्रद्ध्यमेधवाटम् 1221
मौञ्ज्या मेखलया व्रीतमुपव्रीताजिनोत्तरम्। जटिलं वामनं fas मायामाणवकं हरिम् ।२४॥

* A Brahmacari (religious student) is enjoined to beg his food daily from the mothers of a number of families of the twice-
born classes and begins this routine from the very day he is invested with the sacred thread, when he receives his very first
round of alms from an elderly and respectable female relation whose husband is alive.
