Dis. 60] BOOK TEN 377

AMheeVoteesgerheceystrestesseereereertrtpstreesresvs|trrerssrertertreerteryertw दाशा

undoubtedly ever possessed by you, who are solely devoted to Me, O blessed one ! And
blessings sought from Me leadto freedom from desires, i.e., Liberation. (50) O faultless one,
Ihave come to know yourlove and fidelity to Me. For, though | tried to shake you by My words,
your mind could not be estranged from Me. (51) They who propitiate Me, the Bestower of
Liberation, for conjugal pleasures through austerities and vows have given their heart to
sensuous enjoyments and are deluded by Maya. (52) Having obtained (propitiated) Me, the
Source and Bestower of Liberation as well as of worldly riches, O proud lady, they who seek
after the fatter only are unfortunate (as a matter of fact), inasmuch as these can be obtained
even in the lowest species of life (which are compared with hell). To such men (however}
whose mindis given to the pleasures of sense (even) hell appears to bea pleasantresort.(53)
Wellitis, O mistress of My household, that you have practised constant devotion to Me, which
tids one of worldly bondage, and which is (so) very hard to practise for the wicked and more
so for a deceitful woman reeking with unclean desires and given to sense-gratification
only. (54) In the whole of My houshold | do not see a house-wife affectioate like yourself,
O proud tady, who, ignoring all the kings assembled on the occasion of your marriage, sent
a Brahmana carrying a confidential message to Me, of whom you had (only) heard good
accounts (and whom you had never personally known). (55) You put up with the disfiguration
of your brother vanquished in battle, nay, his death* (too at the hands of Balarama) on the
happy occasion of (Aniruddha's) wedding in a tournament of dice-playing, and the grief
repeatedly caused by the memory of these (unpleasant) incidents. You (however) never
spoke a word (about these things) for fear of separation from Us. By this conduct of yours
you have (completely) won Me over. (56) A messenger was sent by you with a most
judiciously-worded message in order to secure My hand. While | was tarrying, you looked
upon this world (full of relatives and friends) as void and (even) sought to cast off this
(charming) body of yours, which you did not consider as worthy of anyone else. Let that
(unique) love of yours stand to your credit. (Unable to repay it) We (only) hail it with joy. (57)

श्रीरुक उवाच
एवं सौरतसंलापैर्भगवाञ्जगदीश्वर: । स्वरतो wat रेमे नरलोके विडम्बयन् । ५८।
तथान्यासामपि विभुर्गृहेषु गृहवानिव । आस्थितो गृहमेधीयान् धर्माक्लोकगुरुर्हरि: ।५९।

Sri Suka continued ; in this way the almighty Lord of the universe, though immersed in
the Bliss of Self, sported with Laksmi (in the form of Rukmini) by indulging in amorous talks
(with her) imitating the ways of humanity. (58) So did the all-pervading Lord Sri Krsna, the
Preceptor of the universe, sported (simultaneously) in the mansions of His other spouses
too, discharging His household duties like a (common) householder. (59)

Thus ends the sixtieth discourse entitled "A dialogue between Sri Krsna and Rukmini,”
in the latter half of Book Ten of the great and glorious Bhagavata-Purana,
otherwise known as the Paramahamsa-Samhita.

cf?uctiwtt:
PIES Sess

* Described later in verse 36 of Oiscourse LXI, though the incident presumably occurred earlier.

[565] B.M. Part li—41
