Dis. 3] BOOK FIVE 449

REAR AH HHH EH CHEE GHC HKEETEKERE HELE RHEL H HEEL KHER EM SEEK CER HAHAH HET OOH त् कौ कीं क्तय

Sri Suka began again : Desirous of obtaining progeny, king Nabhi alongwith (his wife)
queen Merudevi, who had no issue, worshipped with a concentrated mind Lord Visnu (the
Deity presiding over sacrifices). (1) The Lord, who is’ possessed of a (most) charming
personality, is difficult to attain even when (all) the means (of propitiating Him)—such as the
materials, place and time (of worship), the prayers (muttered in the course of worship), the
priests conducting the worship, the fees paid to them and (the due observance of) the
procedure (laid down for the worship)—are fully employed. Yet, while Nabhi was (thus)
reverently (engaged in) worshipping Him with a pure (devout) heart and while the rites known
by the name of Pravargya (which serve as a prelude to the performance of a Soma sacrifice)
were proceeding, the heart of the Lord was seized with a longing to accomplish the desired
object of His servant because of His affection for His devotees, and He revealed before him
His most independent captivating form, which ravished the soul by its limbs, which were
(individually most) pleasing to the mind and eyes. (2) The Lord actually appeared with two
pairs of arms, was clad in tawny silk and had the splendid Srivatsa mark on His bosom. He
was distinguished by His peerless conch, lotus, wreath of sylvan flowers, discus, the
Kaustubha gem, mace and so on and adorned with a crown, ear-rings, bracelets, girdle,
necklace, armlets, anklets and other (such) ornaments of the body, all made of radiant
jewels. Seeing the all-effulgent Supreme Person, the priests officiating at the sacrifice as well
as the directors of the sacrifice and the sacrificer (himself) waited upon Him, their heads bent
low, with water to wash His hands with (as a mark of respect), receiving Him with the same
high regard as penniless people would receive a rich treasure. (3)

ऋत्विज FY:

संशब्दसलिलसितकिसलयतुलसिकादूर्वाङ्कैररपि सम्भृतया सपर्यया किल परम परितुष्यसि।६।

The priests said : (Though self-perfect in everyway,) be pleased, O most adorable One,
to accept again and again (by Your own grace) the homage offered by us, Your servants.
(Incapable of extolling You,) we have been taught by worthy souls only to repeat the word
‘Namah' (Obeisance to You). (As a matter of fact,) what man whose mind is engrossed in the
phenomenal world (which is a modification of the modes of Prakrti) and who is (therefore)
powerless can hope to determine Your essential character with the help of the names and
colours and forms of this material universe (which cannot even touch the fringe of Your
being)—You who are the Supreme Lord transcending (both) Prakrti (Matter) and Purusa
(Spirit). (4) The utmost he can do is to recount a part of Your multitudinous excellent virtues,
which drive away the sins of all mankind and are most auspicious (by nature). (5) On the other
hand, O Supreme One, You are propitiated in everyway through worship offered even with
prayers lovingly uttered by your servants in a faltering voice, water, undefiled young leaves,
(particularly) leaves of the holy basil plant and sprouts of panic grass. (6)

अथानवापि न waa इज्ययोरुभारभरया समुचितमर्थमिहोपलभामहे।७॥। आत्मन
भवितुमर्हति । ८ । तद्यथा बालिशानां स्वयमात्मन: sta: परमविदुषां परमपरमपुरुष प्रकर्षकरुणया स्वमहिमानं
चम्पबगाख्यामुपक्रल्ययिष्यन्स्वयनापचितएक्तरवदिंहापलक्षित।९।3ग्धायमेववरोह्यर्हत्तमयर्हिबर्हिषि
राजर्षेर्वरदर्षभो भवान्निजपुरुषेक्षणविषय आसीत्।१०॥ असङ्गनिशितज्ञानानलविधूताशेषमलानां
भवत्स्वभावानामात्मारामाणां मुनीनामनवरतपरिगुणितगुणगणपरममङ्गलायनगुणगणकथनोऽसि। ११
