12 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA-MAHATMYA [ Dis. 2

जोजाजा MOREE BORE जा आ आड ४7 MARAE MERE सा CORAM HR He AMAR ORR MAO HNMR का AMR AHEM He HONE MERC DERE ह रा न ना HE HE HC HMMS HEM

one sacred place to another and making inquiries of the great sages on the way (about the
virtuous act hinted at by the voice from the heavens). (37) The story was heard by all; no
conclusive reply was (however) given (by any). Some declared the malady as incurable;
while others said the remedy was difficult to ascertain. Still others, on the other hand,
remained mute; while some (evaded the issue and ) slipped past (thinking it imprudent to
hazard a statement). (38) A tumultuous uproar, causing wonder (to all) rose in (all) the three
worlds.People whispered from ear to ear: "When the trio consisting of Bhakti, Jana and
Vairagya did not rise (even) though awakened through the chanting of the Vedas and
Upanisads and recitations from the Gita, there is no other remedy. (39-40) How can that
which is not personally known as a matter of fact even to Narada be pointed out by ordinary
human beings here (on earth) ?" (41) In this way by the hosts of seers questioned ( on this
point) the remedy was declared after (due) deliberation as difficult to make out. (42)

ततश्चिन्तातु: asa बदरीवनमागत:। तपश्चरामि चात्रेति तदर्थं . कृतनिश्चय: ।४३।

तावद्ददर्शं पुरत: सनकादीन्मुनीश्वरान्। कोटिसूर्यसमाभासानुवाच मुनिसत्तम: ।४४।
Tormented with anxiety, Narada thereupon came forthwith to Badarikasrama. (There) he
said to himself, "| shall practise askesis here !" and made up his mind to gain that object. (43)

Meanwhile Narada (the foremost of sages) saw in front cf him the great sages Sanaka and
his three brothers, shining like millions of suns, and spoke to them (as follows) : (44)

ARG उवाच
इदानीं भूर्भाग्येन भवद्भि: संगमोऽभवत्। कुमारा ब्रुवतां ei कृपां Fer ममोपरि ivy)
भवन्तो योगिन: सर्वे बुद्धिमन्तो बहुश्रुता: । पञ्चहायनसंयुक्ता: पूर्वेषामपि पूर्वजा: ।४६॥
सदा वैकुण्ठनिलया हरिकीर्तनतत्परा: । लीलामृतरसोन्मत्ता: कथामात्रैकजीविन: ।४७।
ak: ज्ञरणमेवं fe fret येषां मुखे वच: । अत: कालसमादिष्टा जरा युष्मान्न बाधते ।४८1।
येषां भ्रूभङ्गमात्रेण द्वारपालौ हरे: पुरा । भूमौ निपतितो सद्यो यत्कृपात: ge गतौ ise!
अहो भाग्यस्य योगेन aft भवतामिह। अनुग्रहस्तु कर्तव्यो of दीने दयापरै: । ५०।
अशरीरगिरोक्तं ai साधनमुच्यताम्। अनुष्ठेयं mea तावत्प्रब्रुवन्तु सविस्तरम् । ५१1
भक्तिज्ञानविरागाणां सुखमुत्पद्यते कथम्।स्थापनं सर्ववर्णेषु प्रेमपूर्वं प्रयत्नत: 1421

Narada submitted : 0 juvenile sages! my meeting has taken place with you through
great good luck. (Pray) have compassion on me and tell me quickly what | should do. (45)
You are all (great) Yogis, highly learned and wise. Though looking five years of age each,
you are older than the oldest.(46) Having your permanent abode in Vaikuntha you remain
constantly engaged in chanting the names and glories of Sri Hari. Drunk with the charm of
the nectar-like stories ofthe Lord's pastimes, you subsist on suchstories alone. (47) “Sri Hari
(alone) is my Saviour!" this formula ever plays on your lips as a matter of fact; hence old age
as directed by Kala (the Time-Spirit) does not harass you. (48) At the mere contraction of
your eyebrows in the days gone by Jaya and Vijaya, porters of Sri Hari, sank down at once
to the earth and it was by your grace that they rose back to Vaikuntha. (49) Oh, your sight
at this juncture has been secured through (great) good luck. Favour must be done by your
gracious selves to me, wretched as | am. (50) (Pray) tell me what may be the spiritual
practice that was hinted at by the voice from the heavens and how It should be gone through
(by me). (Kindly) describe it in detail. How can satisfaction be caused to Bhakti, Jana and
Vairagya and in what manner can they be lovingly and diligently established in all grades of
society ? (51-52)
