824 °. SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 22

MOO ececenrahte heents Woz WirtSes sees SESESESES

विप्रलब्धो ददामीति त्वयाहं चाढ्यमानिना | aa: 5 भुङ्क्ष्व निरयं कतिचित् समा: 12% |

Sri Suka continued : Hearing the (aforesaid) speech of their master (Bali), the Daitya
and Danava generals, beaten by the attendants of Lord Visnu, withdrew to the nether world,
O king ! (25) Thereupon Garuda (the ruler of the feathered kingdom), son of Tarksya (the
sage Kasyapa), knowing (as he did) the intention of his Master, bound Bali with cords of
Varuna (the god of water) on the day fixed for extracting the juice of the Soma plant in the
course of that sacrificial performance. (26) On Bali (the lord of the Asuras) being taken
prisoner by the all-powerful Lord Visnu, there was 4 loud wailing on earth and in heaven as
well as in all the (four) quarters. (27) The divine Dwarf (then) spoke (as follows) to Bali, of
wide renown, who had (in this way) lost his fortune and was bound with the cords of Varuna,
yet whose presence of mind was unshaken, O protector of human beings | (28) "Three paces
ofland were alienated by you in My favour, O Asura. In two strides the whole earth (including
heaven) has been covered; (now) show Me ground for the third. (29) The entire extent of this
earth, whichthe sun warms withits rays, (nay,) which the moon along withthe lunar mansions
illuminates and which the god of rain pours showers upon, was yours. (30) In one footstep
has been covered by Me (the whole of) the terrestrial region; the sky (the aerial region) as
wellas the (four) quarters, by My body (because the land granted by you must include space
enough to allow My whole body to stand onit) and the celestial region, inthe second footstep.
In this way before your (very) eyes whatever was yours has been occupied by My all-
pervading Self. (31) Aplace is (accordingly) decreed in the infernal region for you, who have
failed to give what was promised by you. For this reason as well as because you have been
recommended (for it) by your preceptor (too), enter you the infernal region.(32) His
aspirations (for happiness here) fall to the ground, and heaven remains a far cry for him, (on
the other hand,) he descends into hell, who plays a petitioner false by failing to give the
promised gift. (33) | too have (likewise) been deceived by you—proud as you were of being
rich—with the words ‘I shall give (you the desired land)." Therefore, reap the fruit of uttering
a falsehood in the shape of damnation for some years. (34)

Thus ends the twenty-first discourse entitled "Bali put in bonds", bearing on the story of the
descent of the divine Dwart, in Book Eight of the great and glorious Bhagavata-
Purana, otherwise Known as the Paramaharhsa-Samhita.

cttwe tests
CDOS EEN OD OF

अथ द्वाविंशोऽध्याय:

Discourse XxXiIl

A dialogue between king Bali and Lord Vamana
ye उवाच
एवं fared राजन् बलिर्भगबतांप्तुंर:।श्छिमानोऽप्यभित्रत्माप्नत्याहांत्निक्कवंबच:।शा
Sri Sukaresumed: Thus subjected to contumely by the Lord, OPariksit, Bali, the demon
chief—who remained unagitated in mind, even though the Lord tried to unnerve him (in order

to demonstrate to the world his strength of resolution and thereby enhance his reputation)—
gave the following calm reply. (1)
