Dis. 4] BOOK SIX 571

PRSRLALLSL LS SCRSAROCESASSASSARERAATOSSERE SOSA S OTIS ESSER SRE EEO EEE TTT
पीतवासा घनश्याम: प्रसन्नवदनेक्षण: | ending लसच्छ्रीवत्सकौस्तुभ: 1301

महाकिरीटकटक: स्फुरन्मकरकुण्डल: | काञ्च्यङ्गुलीयवलयनूपुराङ्गदभूषित: । ३८॥

त्रैलोक्यमोहनं रूपं बिभ्रत् त्रिभुवनेश्वर: । वृतो नारदनन्दाद्यै: oe: सुरयूथपै: acl

स्तूयमानोऽनुगायद्भि: सिद्धगन्धर्वचारणै: । रूपं तन्महदाश्चर्यं विचक्ष्यागतसाध्वस: xo!

ननाम दण्डवद् भूमौ प्रहृष्टात्मा प्रजापति: । न किञ्चनोदीरयितुमशकत् तीव्रया मुदा ।

- आपूरितमनोद्वारैर्हृदिन्य ga निर्झरे: xe
तं तथावनतं भक्तं प्रजाकामं प्रजापतिम्। चित्तज्तञ सर्वभूतानामिदमाह = Fares: 1x21
Sri Suka continued : Thus extolled, the celebrated Lord, whois (extremely) fond of His

devotees, appeared (in person), O Pariksit (the foremost of the Kurus), before Daksa (even
while he was glorifying Him) on the strand of that sacred lake called Aghamarsana. (35) He
had His feet (legs) flung across the shoulders of Garuda (the king of the birds) and was
possessed of eight mighty and exceptionally long arms, in which He carried a discus, a
conch, a sword, a shield, an arrow, a bow, a noose anda mace. (36) Clad in yellow and
dark-brown as a cloud, He hada cheerful countenance and eyes sparkling with joy. His body
was adorned with a garland of sylvan flowers (extending up to His feet) and bore the brilliant
mark of Srivatsa (a curl of hair covering the footprint of Bhrgu) and the (famous) Kaustubha
gem. (37) He wore a large crown (on His head) and precious bangles (about His ankles) and
a shining pair of illigator-shaped ear-rings, and was (further) adorned with a girdle, rings,
bracelets, anklets and armlets. (38) Possessed of a form that captivated (the people of) all
the three worlds, the Lord of the whole universe (consisting of the three spheres, viz., earth,
heaven and the intermediate region) was surrounded by His (own) attendants—Narada,
Nanda, and so on—as well as by the chief among the gods (the guardians of the spheres)
and extolled by Siddhas (a class of demigods possessed of mystic powers from their very
birth), Gandharvas (heavenly musicians) and Caranas (celestial bards), who were singing
songs (of praise) behind Him. Filled with awe and yet extremely rejoiced at heart to behold
that most wonderful beauty, Daksa (a lord of created beings) fell prostrate on the ground and
could not speak anything because of his senses (the channels for the outflow of the mind)
being flooded with intense delight as rivers with mountain-torrents. (39—41) To that
Prajapati, who was a (great) devotee (of the Lord) and desired to be blessed with progeny,
and who was (still) crouching as aforesaid, Lord Visnu (who is supplicated by men), the
Knower of the mind of all living beings, spoke as follows. (42)

श्रीभगवानुवाच
प्राचेतस महाभाग संसिद्धस्तपसा भवान्।यच्छूद्धया मत्परया मयि भावं परं गत: ।४३॥
प्रीतोऽहं ते प्रजानाथ यत्तेऽस्योद्बृंहणं तप: । ममेष कामो भूतानां ae भूयासुर्विभूतय: ।४४॥
wea भवो भवन्तश्च मनवो विबुधेश्वरा: । विभूतयो मम wat भूतानां भूततिहेतव: ।४५॥
तपो मे हृदयं ब्रह्मंस्तनुर्विद्या क्रियाऽऽकृति: | अङ्गानि क्रतवो जाता end आत्मासव: GU: ।४६॥
अहमेवासमेवाग्रे नान्यत् किञ्चान्तरं बहि: । संज्ञानमात्रमव्यक्तं प्रसुप्तमिव विश्वत: ।४७॥
मय्यनन्तगुणेऽनन्ते गुणतो गुणविग्रह: | यदाऽऽसीत्तत एवाद्य: स्वयम्भू: समभूदज: ।४८॥
a बै यदा महादेवो मम वीर्योपबृंहित: । मेने खिलमिवात्मानमुद्यत: सर्गकर्मणि ive
अथ मेऽभिहितो देवस्तपोऽतप्यत दारुणम्। नव विश्वसृजो gem येनादावसृजद्बिभु: । ५०॥
एषा पञ्चजनस्याङ्ग gem वै प्रजापते: । असिक्नी am पत्नीत्वे wae प्रतिगृह्यताम् ।५१।
मिथुनव्यवायधर्मस्त्वं प्रजासर्गमिमं पुन: । मिथुनव्यवायधर्मिण्यां afte भावयिष्यसि । ५२॥

