482 SHIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 85

त्त शामा AHEM HERE NTT! MERON THERE ENED नलं CECE EME MES HE NE RHEE न्नान क ०७१० =

his eyes bedimmed with tears of joy, and his hair standing on their ends; and in a voice
choked with emotion he prayed to the Lord (as follows), O protector of men! (38)

बलिरुवाच

नमोऽनन्ताय बृहते नम: कृष्णाय वेधसे। सांख्ययोगवितानाय want परमात्मने 1321
ah वां हि भूतानां quad चाप्यदुर्लभम् । रजस्तम:स्वभावानां यन्न: oi यदृच्छया ।४०॥
दैत्यदानवगन्धर्वा: सिद्धविद्याध्रचारणा: | यक्षरक्ष:पिशाचाश्च भूतप्रमथनायका: ।४१॥
विशुद्धसत्त्वधाम्न्यद्धा त्वयि शास्त्रशरीरिणि | नित्यं निबद्धवैरास्ते ad चान्ये च age: ।४२॥
केचनोद्बद्धवैरेण भक्त्या केचन, कामत:। न तथा सत्त्वसंरब्धा: सन्निकूष्टा: सुरादय: ।४३॥
इदमित्थमिति प्रायस्तव atten । न विदन्त्यपि atten योगमायां कुतो वयम् ret

vw प्रसीद निरपेक्षविमृग्ययुष्मत्पादारविन्दधिषणान्यगृहान्धकूपात् |

निष्क्रम्य विश्वशारणाङ्घ्रयुपलब्धवृत्ति: at ada उत सर्वसखैश्चरामि ।४५॥
Terriers निष्पापान् कुरु न: प्रभो । पुमान् यच्छ्रद्धयाऽऽतिष्ठंश्चोदनाया विमुच्यते xe)

Bali said ; 0 Rama, You are infinite. You are (so) great (that manifestations like Sesa
are all included in You). O Krsna (embodiment of Truth, Knowledge and Bliss)! You are the
Creator of the universe. The path of Knowledge and the path of Devotion have both been
originated by You. Youare the Absolute, the Supreme Spirit. (39) Surely Your sight cannot
be easily obtained by ordinary beings; (through their own effort) and yet (through Your
grace) it is so easy to gain. For You have (today) of Your own accord vouchsafed that to
us, whose temperament is predominantly Rajasika and Tamasika. (40) O Lord, we and
other beings similar to us, viz., Daityas, Danavas, Gandharvas, Siddhas, Vidyadharas,
Caranas, Yaksas, Raksasas, Pigacas, Bhutas and the leaders of Pramathas (instead of
adoring You through devotion) constantly bear deep-seated grudge to You, whose Form
is the very embodiment of the Vedas, a manifestation of the purest form of Sattva. (41-42)
That is why some of us through inveterate hatred, and others through devotion with some
interested motive, have been so closely united with You as has not been possible even for
gods possessed of a Sattvika nature. (43) O Lord of masters of Yoga, even great Yogis
often fail to comprehend the true nature and mode of operation of Your Yogamaya. How,
then, can we be expected to know it ? (44) Therefore ( O Lord,) be pleased to grant that
my mind may obtain a firm hold on Your (lotus) feet, which are sought after even by those
who are free from all desires, so that by resorting to them । may be able to get out of this
dark well of a householder's life, and under the shelter of those feet, which are the sole
retuge of the world, may attain peace and tranquillity and move in the world without any
company. And if! have to associate at all with anybody, let it be with those saints, who are
friends of all. (45) Lord! You are the Ruler of all beings in creation. Pray, make us sinless
and advise us that course by following which with faith man acquires immunity from
injunctions and interdictions. (46)

श्रीभगवानुवाच
आसन् We: we पुत्रा ऊर्णायां प्रथमेऽन्तरे। देवा: के जहसुर्वीक्ष्य gai यभितुमुद्यतम् ive |
तेनासुरीमगन् योनिमधुनावद्यकर्मणा | हिरण्यकशिपोर्जाता नीतास्ते योगमायया isc
देवक्या उदरे जाता राजन् केसविहिंसिता । सा ताञ्छोचत्यात्मजान् स्वांस्त इमेऽध्यासतेऽन्तिके ive
इत एतान् प्रणेष्यामो मातृशोकापनुत्तये | aa: arene fafa atch यास्यन्ति विज्वरा: । ५० |
स्मरोद्बीथ: परिष्ङ्ख: पतङ्ग: क्षुद्रभूद् घृणी । षड्मि मत्प्रसादेन पुनर्यास्यन्ति सद्गतिम् । ५१॥
