564 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA * [Dis. 11

SODHOPE HAMEL ATER EREN ENE शा 9 HORFEROOELORER ER EAE DOE RT ERA KORN EAN 4० मामा न ७ २१ २११ 89

श्रीभगवानुवाच
कृपालुरकृतद्रहस्तितिक्षु: सर्वदेहिनाम् । सत्यसारोऽनवद्यात्मा सम: सर्वोपकारक: 128 |
कामैरहतधीर्दान्तो ye: चिरकिञ्चन: | अनीहो मितभुक ara: स्थिरो मच्छरणो मुनि: 1301
अप्रमत्तो गभीरात्मा धृतिमाञ्जितषड्गुण: | अमानी are: कल्पोमैत्र: कारुणिक: कवि: । ३१1
आज्ञायैवं गुणान् दोषान् मयाऽऽदिष्टानपि स्वकान् | धर्मान् सन्त्यज्य य: सर्वान् मां भजेत स सत्तम: 1321
ज्ञात्वाज्ञात्वाथ ये वै मां यावान् यश्चास्मि aga: । भजन्त्यनन्यभावेन ते A भक्ततमा मता: ।३३॥

The gtorious Lord replied : A pious soul is compassionate to all embodied souls, harms
none, is forbearing, has truthfulness for his strength, faultless of mind, equipoised {in joy and
sorrow) and beneticent to all; his judgment is never clouded by (attachment to) the pleasures
of sense; he is self-disciplined, soft (by nature), pure (perfectly moral in his dealings),
resourceless and effortless, lives ona scanty meal, is free from passions and constant, solely
depends on Me and is given to contemplation and vigilant, remains unexcited (even when
there is room for excitement) and firm (even in adversity); he must have conquered the six
waves (viz., cold and heat, greed and infatuation, hunger and thirst), does not seek honour,
though bestowing it (on others), is capable of imparting knowledge to others, sincere altruistic
and possessed of right knowledge. (29—31). He (too) is (likewise) the best of (all) virtuous
men, who—having completely neglected all his duties, though prescribed by Me, while
knowing full well the virtues (resulting from the performance of duty) and sins (incurred by
neglecting them)—worships Me (alone). (32) They are considered by Me to be the foremost
of {all) devotees, who worship Me with exclusive devotion, knowing in reality how great lam,
what | am and what like | am, or (even) not knowing this. (33)

३ । परिचर्या स्तुति: प्रह्वगुणकर्मानुकीर्तनम् । ३४॥
मत्कथाश्रवणे sel मदनुध्यानमुद्धव | सर्वलाभोपहरणं .दास्येनात्मनिवेदनम् । ३५॥
मज्जन्मकर्मकथनं मम पर्वानुमोदनम्। गीतताण्डववादित्रगोष्ठीभिर्मद्गृहोत्सव: 138)
यात्रा बलिविधानं च सर्ववार्षिकपर्वसु । वैदिकी तान्निकी den मदीयव्रतधारणम् । ३७॥
ममार्चास्थापने श्रद्धा स्वत: संहत्य चोद्यम: | उद्यानोपवनाक्रीडपुरमन्दिरकर्मणि । ३८॥
सम्मार्जनोपलेपाभ्यां सेकमण्डलवर्तनै: | गृहणुश्रूषणं मह्यं दासवद् यदमायया 13
अमानित्वमदम्भित्वं कृतस्यापरिकीर्तनम् । अपि दीपावलोकं मे नोपयुञ्ज्यान्निवेदितम् ive!
aq यदिष्टतमं लोके यच्चातिप्रियमात्मन: । तत्तन्निवेदयेन्मह्यं तदानन्य्याय कल्पते wR

Devotion to Me consists, 0 Uddhava ! in beholding, touching and worshipping My
representations of (in the form of images etc.,) and people devoted to Me, rendering (bodily)
service to them (such as kneading their teet), extolling them, bowing to them and repeatedly
recounting My excellences and exploits; developing reverence for hearing My stories,
practising contemplation on Me, offering all one’s gains to Me, ottering one's body (to Me)
for service; narrating the stories of My advent and recounting My deeds, celebrating festivals
connected with Me (such as the Janmastami festival connected with My advent) and
conducting testivities in My temples with vocal and instrumental music, dance and Puranic
discourses; visiting holy places in procession and conducting (special) worship (with
tlowers etc.,) on all annual festive occasions (particularly on every Ekadagi during the four
rainy months), initiating men into certain forms of Vedic and Tantrika worship etc., and
undertaking vows sacred to Me (such as fasting on Ekadasi days); enthusiasm in installing
My images (in temples specially built for the purpose) and individual as well as collective
effort for laying out gardens, orchards and pleasances, erecting boundary walls round towns
