72 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 17

ROR BER HW ET ETH HBL TRE BEAT RR HT We MR BTR Pe By OLR He RE RE BE BER BE RE HERE Be WBE CR RR RRR Re RR BR RR RR oT
eee re

इति धर्मं wd da सान्त्वयित्वा महारथ:। निशातमाददे खड्गं कलयेऽधर्महेतवे ।२८॥
तं जिघांसुमभिप्रेत्य विहाय नृपलाञ्छनम्।तत्पादमूलं fen समगाद् भयविह्वल: ।२९॥
पतितं पादयोर्वीर: कृपया दीनवत्सल: | aval नावधीच्छ्लोक्य आह चेदं हसन्निव 130!

Having thus comforted Dharma as well as mother Earth, Pariksit (who was a great
car-warrior) drew his sharp-edged sword in order to dispose of Kali, the spring of
unrighteousness. (28) Perceiving that the king was bent upon killing him, he threw off
his insignia of royalty and placed his head at the king's feet, overwhelmed with fear. (29)
The praiseworthy hero (Pariksit), who was kind to the meek and hospitable to those who
sought his protection, took compassion on Kali, who had fallen at his feet, and did not
slay him, but smilingly spoke thus: (30)

न ते गुडाकेशयञ्ञोधराणां बद्धाञ्जलेर्वै भयमस्ति किंचित् ।
न वर्तितव्यं wan कथंचन at मदीये त्वमधर्मबन्धु: 1321
a ह

कामानमोघान् स्थिरजङ्घमानामन्तर्बहिर्वायुरिवैष आत्मा ।३४॥

The king said : You have no cause for fear when you have joined your palms before
us, that have inherited the glorious traditions of Arjuna (who had overcome sloth). But
on no account should you stay in my realm, a friend as you are of unrighteousness. (31)
Ever since you took up your abode in the body of kings (gods among men), these
numerous vices—greed, falsehood, thieving, wickedness, proneness to sin, poverty, wile,
cantankerousness and hypocrisy—have followed you. (82) Therefore, O ally of
unrighteousness, you should not remain in Brahmavarta, which is a fit abode for piety
+ and truth, and where Brahmanas well-versed in the elaborate ritual propitiate the Lord
of sacrifices through sacrificial performances. (33) In this land ( of Brahmavarta) Lord Sri
Hari abides in the form of sacrifices and blesses His votaries. Nay, moving inside as well
as outside all animate and inanimate beings like the air, that Universal Soul grants all
their desires. (34)

qd saa
परीक्षितॆवमादिष्ट॥ a कलिर्जातव्रेपथु: । aqeafaned दण्डपाणिमिवोद्यतम् । ३५॥

Suta continued : Kali trembled to hear this command of king Pariksit. He made the
following request to the king, who stood ready to strike with his uplifted sword, as Yama
with his rod of punishment. (35)

कळिरुवाच

यत्र क्वचन ae सार्वभोम तवाज्ञया। लक्षये at तत्रापि त्वामात्तेषुशारासनम् । ३६॥
तन्मे धर्मभृतां se we निर्देष्टुमर्हसि । aa नियतो वत्स्य आतिष्ठंस्तेऽनुशासनम् 1301
Kali said : Wherever | think of taking up my abode in obedience to your command,

O emperor, | find you bow and arrow in hand. (36) Therefore, O jewel among champions
of righteousness, it behoves you to tell me the place where | may settle down permanently

