Dis. 1] BOOK THREE 137

त्याजा का सा च RT tT EB IT HE TE ESE Re Re A BT EET RE ET COT A ET He FERRO EE TIER RTE HE
सि य ण जलं

अपिस्विदन्ये च निजात्मदॆवमनन्यवृत्या समनुव्रता ये ।
हृदीकसत्यात्मजचारुदेष्णगदादय: स्वस्ति चरन्ति सौम्य ।३५॥

"The two Primal Persons (Sri Balarama and Sri Krsna) appeared (in human semblance) on
this globe in response to the prayer of Brahma, who was born of the very lotus that had sprung
from the Lord's own navel. Having relieved the earth of its burden and brought delight to the whole
world, are they doing well in the house of Strasena (the father of Vasudeva)? (26) Dear
Uddhava, is cur brother-in-law (sister's husband)*, Vasudeva (son of Sdrasena), quite happy—
Vasudeva, who is the greatest friend and well-wisher of the Kurus, and who, like a father,
liberally bestows on his sisters (Kunti and others) the gifts of their choice, bringing satisfaction
(by offering rich presents) even to their husbands ? (27) Again, dear friend, is that heroic
Pradyumna, the generalissimo of the Yadava forces, quite well—Pradyumna, who was no
other than the god of love in his previous incarnation and whom his mother Rukmini secured
from the Lord by propitiating the Brahmanas? (28) Is Ugrasena, the ruler of the Satvatas,
Vrsnis, Bhojas and Dasarhas, prospering—Ugrasena, whom the lotus-eyed Lord (Sri Krsna)
installed (on the throne of Mathura), even though he had stood aloof, having lost all hope of
regaining the throne ? (29) Is SriHari's (SriKrsna’s) son, Samba, whois the equal ofhis Father
and the foremost of car-warriors, faring well, O gentle Uddhava—Samba, whois no other than
the god Guha, whom Goddess Ambika (Parvati) bore in Her womb in the past and to whom
Jambavati (the daughter of Jambavan and one of the eight principal consorts of Lord Sri Krsna)
gave birth (once again) asa fruit of her religious observances? (30) Is that Yuyudhana (Satyaki)
quite happy, who received the secrets of bowmanship from Phalguna (Arjuna) and who easily
secured through the mere service of Lord Adhoksaja (Sri Krsna) the position of His devotees,
which is difficult of attainment even for ascetics ? (31) Is the wise and sinless Akrura (son of
Swaphalka) quite healthy—Akrura who is devoted to the Lord and who, beside himself with
love, rolled about in the dust of the road marked with the footprints of Lord Sri Krsna ? (32) Is
all well with Devaki (daughter of Devaka, the chief of the Bhoja clan of Ksatriyas), who is as
good a mother of Lord Visnu as Aditi (the mother of the gods), and who bore the Lord in her
womb even as the three Vedas bear the extensive ritual (the elaborate details and procedure
of the various sacrifices) as their import ? (33) Is the divine Aniruddha (the grandson of Lord
Sri Krsna) perfectly all right—Aniruddha, who grants the desires of His worshippers like you
and whom the scriptures have declared as the source of the Vedas and the deity presiding over
the mind (Manas), which constitutes the fourth part of the inner sense (which is a composite
of four elements, viz., Citta, Ahankara, Buddhi and Manas)? (34) And are other people such
as Hrdika, (a Yadava chief), the sons of Satyabhama, Carudesna (Pradyumna's real brother)
and Gada (a brother of Sri Krsna) faring well, O gentle Uddhava—people who are exclusively
and fully devoted to Sri Krsna (the lord of their heart)? (35)

af west विजयाच्युताभ्यां धर्मेण धर्म: परिपाति सेतुम्।
geist यत्सभायाँ साम्राज्यलक्ष्या विजयानुवृत्त्या ae!
fe वा garage भीमोऽहिवद्दीर्घतमं व्यमुञ्चत् ।

यस्याङ्ध्रिपाते रणभूर्न सेहे मार्गं गदायाश्चरतो विचित्रम् । ३७॥
कच्चिद्यशोधा रथयूथपानां गाण्डीवधन्वोपरतारिरास्ते ।
अलक्षितो यच्छरकूटगूढो मायाकिरातो गिरिशस्तुतोष । ३८।

"Vasudeva had a number ol wives, one of them—Pauravi by name—beinga cousin of Dhrtarastra. Hence Vidura speaks
of Vasudeva as his sister's husband.

[564] B. M. 7—
