12 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 4

SESE SE SESS EES US UESLEUNRERE DHERCS SESE आ प २२ वयै च व वर्त्त

HY चतुर्थोऽध्याय:

Discourse IV

The stories of Nabhaga and King Ambarisa
श्रीगरुक उवाच

नाभागो नभगापत्यं Goad wet: कविम्। यविष्टं व्यभजन् et ब्रह्मचारिणमागतम् । १ ।

भ्रातरोऽभाइत्त किं मह्यं भजाम पितरं तव । त्वां ममार्यास्तताभाङ्क्षुर्मां पुत्रक तदादृथा: । २ ।

इमे अङ्गिरस: सनत्रमासतेऽद्य सुमेधस: । षष्ठं षष्ठमुपेत्याह कवे मुह्यन्ति कर्मणि । ३ ।

aka wea सूक्ते द्वे वैश्वदेवे महात्मन: । ते स्वर्यन्तो धनं सनत्रपरिलोषितमात्मन: । ४ ।

दास्यन्ति तेऽथ तान् गच्छ AM A कृतवान् यथा । तस्मै दत्त्वा aq: स्वर्गं ते सत्रपरिशेषितम् । ५ ।

SriSuka resumed : A son of Nabhaga (anotherson of Vaivaswata Manu) was Nabhaga,

to whom, the youngest (of his brothers) and (most) learned—(just) returned (from the house
of his preceptor after an unusually long period) as a religious student—his (elder) brothers
assigned (the maintenance of their (aged) father (Nabhaga) for his share of the ancestral
property (which they had already divided among themselves, leaving nothing for Nabhaga,
who they thought would remain a lifelong celibate). (1) "Brothers, what have you set apart
for me ?“ (he said.) "We (hereby) allot our father to you," (they replied). (Nabhaga then
approached his father and said,) “The elder brothers have given you as my share, O dear
father !" "Pay no heed to their word, dear child !" (he replied). (2) “These (neighbouring)
Brahmanas, scions of the sage Angira, are performing at present a (big) sacrifice. Coming:
(however) to the ritualistic course for every sixth day, the wise ones commit errors in that
course, my learned son ! (3) Teach those noble souls a couple of Siktas (hymns) in
propitiation of (the gods called) the Vigwedevas. While ascending to heaven (on the
completion of the sacrifice) they will bestow on you (all) their wealth that may be left after
the sacrifice. Therefore, approach them." Then he did in the same way as he was told and
the (said) Brahmanas rose to heaven having bestowed on him whatever was left after the
sacrifice. (4-5)

a कश्चित् स्वीकरिष्यन्तं पुरुष: कृष्णदर्शन: । उवाचोत्तरतोऽभ्येत्व ममेदं age वसु । ६ |

Coming up from the north, a certain dark-looking person (who was no other than Rudra,

the god of destruction) said to Nabhaga while he was about to appropriate that wealth, “(All)
this wealth left on the sacrificial grounds is mine.” (6)

ममेदमृषिभिर्दत्तमिति तर्हि स्म मानव: । स्यान्नो ते पितरि प्रश्न: पृष्टवान् पितरं तथा । ७ |
यज्ञवास्तुगतं सर्वमुच्छिष्टमृषव: क्वचित्।चक्रुर्विभागं रुद्राय a देव: सर्वमर्हति । ८ ।
नाभागस्तं प्रणम्याह तवेश किल वास्तुकम्।इत्याह मे पिता ब्रह्मञ्छिरसा wi प्रसादये । ९ |
यत् ते पितावदद् at त्वं च सत्यं प्रभाषसे । ददामि ते मन्त्रदृशे ज्ञानं ब्रह्म सनातनम् ।१०॥
गृहाण द्रवरिणं दत्तं मत्सत्रे परिहोषितम् । इत्युक्त्वान्तर्हितो रुद्रो भगवान् सत्यवत्सल: ।११॥
च एतत् संस्मरेत् Sa: सायं च सुसमाहित: | कविर्भवति मन्त्रज्ञो गतिं चैव तथाऽऽत्मन: 1221

षोऽभून्भहाभागवत: कृतो | नास्पृशाद् ब्रह्मशापोऽपि यं न प्रतिहत: क्वचित् । १३॥

Nabhaga (the scion of Vaivaswata Manu) thereupon returned:—"This is mine, (inasmuch
as it has been) vouchsafed to me by the sages (who performed this sacrifice)." "Let our
question be referred to your father !" (Rudra rejoined.) Nabhaga (approached and) asked his
