324 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 8

PAH क ङक्षो डज्ज उ क LAOH इ ज् ह ठि इ ष्पि EL SEE EHK EER EOTE ALCS NTR ङ ह विथार्त्त HELA HAO HHA ee

female spirit presiding over deceit); and Nirrti (the demon presiding over the south-west),
who was issueless, adopted the couple (as his son and daughter-in-law). (2) Of these two
(Dambha and Maya) were born Lobha (the spirit presiding over greed) and Nikrti (the female
spirit presiding over wickedness), O Vidura (.a man of great wisdom); and of these latter
came into being Krodha (the spirit presiding over anger) and Hirhsa (the female spirit
presiding over violence), from whom again, were sprung Kali (the spirit presiding over strife)
and his sister Durukti (the female spirit presiding over abusive speech). (3) Kali (in his turn)
begot, through Durukti, Bhaya (the spirit presiding over fear) and Mrtyu (the female spirit
presiding over death), O Vidura ( a noble soul); and of these two were born Niraya (the spirit
presiding over hell) and Yatana (the female spirit presiding over the tortures of hell). (4)
(Thus) briefly have | told you, O sinless Vidura, about the family of Adharma (which leads
to the dissolution of the universe). By hearing this genealogy, which sanctifies a man (by
helping him in eschewing all these), thrice repeated, a man shakes off the impurity of his
mind. (5) Well, | shall nowdescribe the line of Swayambhuva Manu of sacred renown, sprung
from a part (the right half) of Brahma, himself a ray of Sri Han, O scion of Kuru. (6)

प्रियव्रतोत्तानपादौ जतरूपापते: सुतौ । वासुदेवस्य कलया aval जगत: स्थितौ । ७ ।
wa उत्तानपादस्य सुनीति: सुरुचिस्तयो: । सुरुचि: प्रेयसी पत्युर्नेतरा यत्सुतो ध्रुव: । ८ ।

Priyavrata and Uttanapada, the two sons of Satardpa's lord (Manu), were (ever) intent
on the protection of the world, endowed as they were with a ray (of the protective energy)
of Lord Vasudeva. (7) Suniti and Suruci were the two wives of Uttanapada, of these, Suruci
(the younger one) was the more beloved of her lord, but not so the other one ( Suniti), whose
son was (the celebrated) Dhruva. (8)

Ted सुरुचे: पुत्रमङ्कमारोप्य लालयन्। उत्तमं नारुरुक्षन्तं gd राजाभ्यनन्दत । ९ ।
am चिकीर्षमाणं तं सपत्यास्तनयं ध्रुवम्। सुरुचि: शृण्वतो राज्ञ: सेर्ष्यमाहातिगर्बिता । १०॥
न aa नॄपतेर्धिष्णयं भवानारोढुमर्हति । न गृहीतो मया यत्त्वं कुक्षावपि नृपात्मज: 1221
बालोऽसि aa नात्मानमन्यस्त्रीगर्भसम्भृतम् । नूनं वेद wary यस्य दुर्लभेऽर्थे मनोरथ: ।१२॥
तपसाऽऽराध्यं पुरुषं तस्यैवानुग्रहेण मे। गर्भे त्वं साधयात्मानं यदीच्छसि नृपासनम् 123 |
On a certain day, while fondling Suruci’s son, prince Uttama, whom he had seated on
his lap, the king (Uttanapada) did not welcome Dhruva, who too sought to climb to his lap.(9)
To Dhruva, her co-wife's son, thus striving, Suruci, who was exceedingly proud (of the king's
attentions), spitefully spoke (as follows), the king (quietly) listening :— (10) "O child, you are
not fit to ascend the royal throne, inasmuch as, though sprung from the king’s loins, you were
not conceived by me. (11) Alas! you are yet a child and surely know not that you were borne
in the womb of another woman; that is why you aspire for an object so difficult to attain. (12)
Propitiating the Supreme Person through austere penance, seek (rebirth through) my womb
by His grace if you covet the king's throne." (13)
Wd: Buen: a दुरुक्तिविद्ध: war रुषा दण्डहतो यथाहि: |
feat foot fart सन्नवाचं जगाम Ag: Weed सकाशम् ।१४॥
4 fae स्फुरिताधरोष्ठं सुनीतिरुत्सङ्ग उदूह्य ae!

निशम्य तत्पौरमुखान्नितान्तं सा विव्यथे यद्गदितं सपत्या ।१५॥

at सपत्या: स्मरती सरोजश्रिया दृशा वाष्पकलामुवाह 126!
