Dis. 15] BOOK EIGHT 795
SREPRACHEAAAEEAESOAARTHAAGEAREAAAREAHHATRA SL oA HITE EeR OHA eHeeAneeeReHEnhee
ATER ES Hee ee ee eee te trinie

The protectors of created beings (viz., the sons of a Manu along with their descendants from
generation to generation) protect religion (as well as the earth) till the end (of a Manvantara)
by parts (each generation carrying on the work of protection for a part of the Manvantara
alone). And the gods along with those (others, viz., the Rsis, the Pitr$,human beings and
other living beings) that are connected with the Performance of (the five great) sacrifices
enjoy a share in the sacrificial offerings (and thus they too protect religion). (6) Enjoying the
limitless wealth of (all) the three worlds (heaven, earth and the intermediate region),
conferred (or him) by the Lord, Indra protects those three worlds and sends down profuse
showers in the world according to his will.(7) Nay, assuming the form of Siddhas (perfect
beings like the sage Sanaka andhis three brothers—Sanandana, Sanatana and Sanatkuméara)
Sri Hari imparts wisdom in every Yuga; taking the form of Rsis (seers like the sage
Yajfavalkya) He preaches (the cult of) rituals and, appearing in the form of Masters of Yoga
(like Dattatreya) it is He who teaches (the methods of) Yoga (to the world). (8) (Appearing)
in the form of lords of created beings (like the sage Marici), He carries on creation; taking the
form of an independent ruler, He destroys robbers; (and) assuming diverse characteristics
(such as heat and cold) in the form of Time, itis He who makes for the disappearance ofall.(9)
Though depicted (diversely) by these (so-called learned) people— whose understanding is
(as a matter of fact) deluded by Maya, consisting of (so many) names and forms— through
different systems of philosophy, the Lord is (actually) not perceived (by them). (10)
एतत् कल्पविकल्पस्य प्रमाणं परिकीर्तितम्। यत्र मन्वन्तराण्याहुश्चतुर्दशा पुराविद: ।११॥
इति श्रीमद्भागवते महापुराणे पारमहंस्यां संहितायामट्टमस्कन्धे चतुर्दशोऽध्याय: ।१४॥

The aforesaid has been precisely declared to be the duration of a minor Kalpa (covering
a day of Brahma and) forming part of a Mahakalpa (covering the whole lifetime of Brahma).
In this Kalpa, those well-versed in the ancient lore Say, are comprised fourteen
Manvantaras.(11)

Thus ends the fourteenth discourse in Book Eight of the great and
glorious Bhagavata-Purana, otherwise known as the
Paramahamsa-Samhita.

CE ENE १ 8
PII ire

अथ पञ्चदशोऽध्याय:

Discourse XV

Conquest of heaven by Bali

ae: wert wa: कस्माद्धरिरयाचत | भूत्वेश्वर: कृपणवल्लब्धार्थोऽपि बबन्ध तम् । १ ।

Wie वेदितुमिच्छामो महत् aed हि न: । यज्ञेश्वस्य whe बन्धनं चाप्यनागस: । २ ।
The king (Pariksit) submitted: (Himself) being the almighty Lord, wherefore did Sri
Hari ask, like a miserable person, three paces of land of the demon Bali? (And) why did
He bind him even though He hadattained the object sought for (by Him)? (1) This we desire
to know (from you); for the very fact that the Lord of sacrifices, who is perfect (in Himself),
should have asked something of Bali and then bound the innocent demonis a great wonder
to us. (2)
