408 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 25
SEEPAREA ETCH TARA METH HHS HeHMCeeE ede eHhekembhereereenseeherserhevgecnhaneehh

myself, an eminent hero of extraordinary prowess, evenas Sri (the goddess of beauty and
prosperity) adorns the transcendental realm (of Vaikuntha) with (Her Consort) Lord Visnu
(the Soul of sacrifices). (29) Instigated by you through (the movements of) your playful
eyebrows conspiring with your bashful and loving smiles, the all-powerful Love is harassing
me, whose mind has been distracted by your side-long glances ! Therefore, (pray,) show
your grace to me, O beautiful one ! (30) (Just) raise and show me your sweet-tongued
countenance—with its charming eyebrows and eyes possessed of lovely pupils—which is
screened by dark tresses hanging low, and not facing me through bashfulness, O damsel
with bright smiles !" (31)
ARG Sarg

इत्थं पुरञ्जनं नारी याचमानमधीरवत्। अभ्यनन्दत तं वीरं हसन्ती dh मोहिता 1321
न विदाम वरयं सम्यक्कर्तारे पुरुषर्षभ। आत्मनश्च परस्यापि गोत्रं नाम च यत्कृतम् ।३३॥
इहाद्य सन्तमात्मानं विदाम न aa: परम्। येनेयं निर्मिता dk पुरी झरणमात्मन: । ३४
एते सखाय: wet मे नरा नार्यश्च ame सुप्तानां मयि जगर्ति नागोऽयं पालयन् पुरीम् ।३५॥
दिष्टचाऽऽगतोऽसि भद्रं ते ग्राम्यान् कामानभीप्ससे | उद्वहिष्यामि तांस्तेऽहं स्वबन्धुभिररिन्दम् ।३६॥
इमां त्वमधितिष्ठस्व पुरीं नवमुखीं विभो । मयोपनीतान् गृह्णान: कामभोगान्झतं समा: 1301
e नु त्वदन्यं रमये ह्यरतिज्ञमकोविदम्। असम्परायाभिमुखमश्वस्तनविदं पशुम् । ३८।
धर्मो ह्यत्रार्थकामौ च प्रजानन्दोऽमृतं ae: | लोकाविज्ञोका विरजायान्नकेवलिनो fe: 13¢ |
पितृदेवर्षिमर्त्यनां भूतानामात्मनश्च Bl क्षेम्यं वदन्ति शरणं भवेऽस्मिन् यद्गृहाश्रम: ।४०॥
का नाम वीर विख्यातं वदान्यं प्रियदर्शनम् a वृणीत प्रियं प्राप्तं मादृशी त्वादूशं पतिम् ।४१।
कस्या मनस्ते भुवि भोगिभोगयो: स्रिया न सज्जेद्धुजयोर्महाभुज |
योऽनाथवर्गाधिमलं घृणोद्धतस्मितावलोकेन चरत्यपोहितुम् । ४२

Narada continued ; Enamoured of the heroic Purafijana, who thus courted her like one
who had lost one's patience, the girl smilingly greeted him (in the following words), O valiant
monarch ! (32) "We are not fully aware of our own progenitor, O ornament among men, nor
do we know the progenitor of anyone else (yourself), who is responsible for the family name
no less than for the name of the progeny. (33) We only know our being present here today,
(and) nothing beyond that. Nor do we know him who built this city for our abode, O brave
one ! (34) These men and women are my male and female companions, O courteous one!
When | am asleep, this serpent keeps awake, guarding the city. (35) Thank heaven, you
have come; may all be well with you ! With the help of my kinsfolk | shall secure for you (all)
the sensuous pleasures you long to obtain, O vanquisher of foes ! (36) Occupy you this city
with nine gates, O lord, enjoying for a hundred years the sensuous pleasures made available
by me. (37) Whom else save you should | delight—him whois ignorant of enjoyment, unwise,
unmindful of the future life and heedless about his duty for the morrow—a mere brute? (38)
It is here (in the life of a householder) indeed that one attains religious merit, worldly riches
and sense-gratification, the joy of having a son, the privilege of eating the leavings of a
sacrifice (which confer immortality on the eater) and fame as well as worlds that are free from
misery and sin (and are attainable through sacrifices), all of which are unknown to
recluses.(39) The wise declare the life of a householder as the asylum affording protection
in this world to the manes, gods, Rsis, human beings and other living beings, as well as to
the householder himself. (40) What woman of my category, O brave one, would not accept
for her husband a renowned, generous, charming and beloved personality like you? (41)
