444 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA  [Dis.1

RHA EMHRAEDLETHANRAAAOHH ETEK EHH HEELERS EESTEKEREEUCERELEVERALEMHARLEAHAE HEE

each of the seven Dwipas severally.* Priyavrata (the spouse of queen Barhismati) severally
made his dutiful sons—Agnidhra, Idhmajihva, Yajfabahu, Hiranyareta, Ghrtaprstha,
Medhatithi and Vitinotra by name, each the ruler of one of these divisions—Jambudwipa and
so on. (33) And his daughter, Urjaswati by name, he gave away to Usana (the sage
Sukracarya, the preceptor of the Asura kings); it was of her that Devayani, the celebrated
daughter of Sukracarya (nicknamed as Kavya or Kavi) was born. (34) Such an achievement
on the part of devotees of the Lord (who measured the three worlds in a couple of strides)—
devotees who by resorting to the dust of His feet have been able to conquer the six senses
(the five senses and the mind)—is not to be wondered at; for even a pariah immediately
shakes off his bondage if he Utters the Lord’ s Name only once. (35) _
सएवमपरिमितब्रलपराक्रम एकदा तु दॆ

मन्यमान आत्मनिर्वेद इदमाह।३६॥। अहो असाध्वनुष्ठितं चयदभिनिवेशितोऽहमिन्दियै-

रविद्यारचितविषमविषयान्धकूपे तदलमलममुष्या वनिताया विनोदमृगं मां धिग्धिगिति गर्हयाञ्छकार | ३७।

परदेवताप्रसादाधिगतात्मप्रत्यवमर्शेनानुप्रवृत्तेभ्य: पुत्रेभ्य इमां यथादायं विभज्य भुक्तभोगां च महिषीं

पुनरेवानुससार | ३८ |

Thus possessed of immeasurable strength and prowess, king Priyavrata once felt

(much) disgusted at heart since he regarded himself very unhappy as it were on account of
his contact with the world of master (a product of the three Gunas), which dogged him even
after he had taken shelter under the feet of the celestial sage (Narada), and said this (to
himself); (36) “Oh, what a wrong | have done in that | have (allowed) myself to be hurled by
the senses into the terrible and deceptive pit of sensuous pleasures—which are products of
Avidya (nescience) ! Therefore enough, enough of these! Fie upon me, a veritable ape for
the amusement of this woman!" In this way he condemned himself. (37) In the light of
wisdom, recovered by the grace of the Supreme Deity, he proportionately divided the earth
among his devoted sons and abandoned the queen, whom he had enjoyed as a source of
pleasure, along with the imperial fortune, like a dead body; and, disgusted at heart (with this
world) he followed once again the path (of renunciation) chalked out for him by the divine
sage Narada, realizing in his heart the glory of the pastimes of Sri Hari (that had given him
the strength to renounce his all). (38)

we ह वा एते श्लोका:--
प्रियव्रतकृतं कर्म को नु कुर्याद्बिनेश्वरम् । यो नेमिनिम्नैरकरोच्छायां घ्नन् सप्त वारिधीन्।३९॥।
wert कृतं येन सरिद्गिरिवनादिभि: । सीमा च भूतनिर्वृत्यै gra gra fem: i xo |
भौमं दिव्यं मानुषं च महित्वं कर्मयोगजम् aya निरयौपम्यं पुरुषानुजनप्रिय:।४१।
इति श्रीमद्भागवते महापुराणे पारमहंस्यां संहितायां पञ्चमस्कन्धे प्रियव्रतविजये प्रथमोऽध्याय:। १।
These are the verses actually sung of old in praise of Emperor Priyavrata :—

* The relative position of the seven Dwipas and the seven oceans should be understood as given below. The first in
orderis Jambudwipa, which has a width of 8,00,000 miles andis girded by an ocean of salt water, equal in width to Jambudwipa.
Beyond the ocean of salt water and twice as much in width (i. e., 16,00,000 miles wide) is Plaksadwipa, which is in its turn
enclosed by an ocean containing the juice of sugar-cane and equal i in width to the latter. On the other side of this ocean and
twice as large in extent (i.e., 32,00,000 miles wide) is SAlmalidwipa, encircled by an ocean of wine as large as the Dwipa itself.
Lying immediately after the ocean of wine and twice as large (or 64,00.000 miles wide) is KuSadwipa, surrounded by an ocean
of clarified butter equal in width to Kugadwipa. On the outer coast of the ocean of clarified butter and twice as large (i.e.,
1,28,00,000 miles wide) Is Krauficadwipa, girded by an ocean of milk equal in width to the latter. Beyond the ocean of milk and
twice as large in extent (i.e., 2,56,00,000 miles wide) is SAkadwipa, enclosed in its turn by an ocean of fluid curds as large as
the Dwipa itself. On the other side of the ocean of fluid curds and twice as large (i.e., 5,12,00,000 miles wide) is Puskaradwipa,
itself encircled by an ocean of pure water equal in width to the latter.
