124 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 9 .

SRR Oe ER EN eee eH Ase eee heer tesaeereerteserenterenh terete he eee

ननाम पादाम्बुजमस्य विश्वसृग् यत् पारमहंस्येन पथाधिगम्यते । १७।
तं प्रीयमाणं समुपस्थितं aa प्रजाविसर्गे निजजासनार्हणम्।
awe ईषत्सितशोचिषा गिरा fra: प्रियं प्रीतमना: wt Wage

Brahma beheld there the Protector of all His devotees, the Lord of Sri, the enjoyer of
sacrifices, the omnipresent Ruler of the whole universe, being waited upon by the foremost
of His personal attendants, Sunanda, Nanda, Prabala, Arhana and others. (14) Ever
disposed to shower His grace on His servants, He bears nectar in His look and wears a
gracious smile on His countenance. He has reddish eyes, is adorned with a crown and ear-
rings, is ever clad in yellow and can be easily distinguished by His four arms as also by a
golden streak borne on His (right) breast as a symbol of (His beloved Consort) Goddess
Laksmi. (15) That universal Lord occupies an excellent and most valuable throne, is
surrounded by His twenty-five Saktis or potencies (viz., the Spirit, Prakrti, the Mahat-tattva,
the ego, the mind, the ten Indriyas, the five subtle elements and the five gross elements, all
in a personal form); and endoweg with His six eternal and divine attributes (viz., lordship,
righteousness, renown, prosperity, wisdom and dispassion—all in their fullest measure),
which are incidental in others, He (constantly) revels in His own blissful essence. (16)
Brahma's heart was flooded with rapture at the sight of the Lord: the hair stood erect on his
person andtears rushed to his eyes due to excess oflove. The Creator of the universe bowed
to His lotus-feet, which are attained by pursuing the path of the Paramahamsas (those who
have renounced the world). (17) The Lord, who had evoked Brahma’s love, was delighted
at heart to see His beloved Brahma standing before Him in a suppliant mood, full of love and
joy, and fit to receive His commands for the creation of living beings. He took Brahma by
the hand and then addressed him in accents illumined witha gentle smile. (18)

Ea

श्रीभगवानुवाच
wae तोषित: wer वेदगर्भ सिसृक्षया। चिरं yaa तपसा दुस्तोष: कूटयोगिनाम् । १९
a aa we ते ate माभिवाञ्छितम्। ब्रह्मञ्छेय: परिश्राम: पुंसो मद्दर्शनावधि: 1201
मनीषितानुभावोऽयं मम लोकावलोकनम्।यदुपश्रुत्य wef amet परमं तप: ।1२१॥
wares मया aa त्वयि कर्मविमोहिते । तपो मे wea arated तपसोऽनघं 1221
सृजामि तपसैवेदं ग्रसामि तपसा पुन:। बिभर्मि तपसा fad dt मे ast तप: 1231

The Lord said : With the knowledge of all the Vedas stored up in your heart you have
thoroughly pleased Me by your prolonged penance carried on with the intention of creating
the universe. (You know) hypocritical Yogis can hardly please Me. (19) Ask of Me, the
Bestower of all blessings, your cherished boon and you will be blessed (with that). The pains
that men take for the good of their soul, O Brahma, reach their fruition in My sight. (20) You
practised such supreme penance only on hearing My command in the lonely waters (without
seeing Me). That is why you have been blessed with the sight of My divine Abode according
to My wishes. (21) | commanded you (to do penance) on that occasion only because you did
not know how to proceed with the work of creation. Penance (you know) is My very heart (very
dear to Me), O sinless one; while | am the very soul (essence) of penance. (22) It is by dint
of penance alone that | create this universe and through penance | maintain it; and it is
through penance, again, that! absorbit (within Myself). Nay, Mystrengthconsists in Penang
which is hard to practise. (23) ।
