Dis. 9 BOOK TWELVE 705

RRMA REM वित् CREAN वित्

darkness by its splendour. Markandeya (the foremost of the Brahmanas) was amazed to
behold the babe, which possessed the dark-green hue of a precious emeraled, had a
beautiful lotus-like countenance, a conch-shaped neck, a broad chest, a shapely nose and
charming eyebrows, and was graced with locks waving under the impact of its breaths. Its
ears, shaped like the opening of a conch, were decked with the blossoms of pomegranate;
its milk-like bright smiles were rendered rosy by the (crimson) lustre ofits coral-hued lips. The
ends ofits eyes were reddish like the interior of alotus; its glances were enlivened witha smile
that captivated one’s heart; its deep navel throbbed alongwith the folds of its belly—shaped
like a leaf of the sacred fig-tree—that heaved with its breaths. The babe had placed its lotus-
like foot into its mouth, lifting it up with its hands, that had charming fingers, and was sucking

it. (21—25)
वीतपरिश्रमो मुदा प्रोत्फुल्लहृत्पद्मविलोचनाम्बुज: ।
TERE: प्रष्टुं पुरस्ते प्रससार बालकम्।२६॥
तावच्छिशोर्वै श्वसितेन भार्गव: सोऽन्तशरीरं मशको saree
त्त्राप्यदो न्यस्तमचष्टु कृत्स्नलो यथा पुरामुह्यदतीव = fafa: 1२७॥
सं रोदसी भगणानद्रिसागरान् द्वीपान् सवर्षान् ककुभ: सुरासुरान्।
वनानि देशान् afta: पुराकरान् खेटान् व्रजानाश्रमवर्णवृत्तय: 1241
महान्ति भूतान्यथ भौतिकान्यसो ar च नानायुगकल्पकल्पनम्।
यत् किञ्चिदन्यद् व्यवहारकारणं ei fad सदिवावभासितम्।२९॥
fered पुष्पवहां च oat नदीं निजाश्रमं तत्र ऋषीनपश्यत्।
fed  विपङ्यञ्छ्वसिताच्छिशोर्वै बहिर्निरस्तो न्यपतल्लयाब्धौ ।३०॥
तस्मिन् पृथिव्या: ककुदि प्ररूढुं ae च तत्पर्णपुटे दायानम्।
ae च wang निरीक्षितोऽपाङ्गनिरीक्षणेन 1391
अथ तं बालकं dea नेत्राभ्याँ धिष्टितं हृदि। अभ्ययादतिसंक्लिष्ट: परिष्वक्तुमधोक्षजम् 1321
तावत् स भगवान् साक्षाद् योगाधीक्षो गुहाशय: । अन्तर्दध ऋषे: सद्यो यथेहानीशनिर्मिता 1331
तमन्वथ aa ब्रह्मम् ales लोकसम्प्रव: | तिरोधायि क्षणादस्य स्वाश्रमे पूर्ववत् स्थित: ।३४॥
इति श्रीमद्भागवते महापुराणे पारमहंस्यां संहितायां द्वादशस्कन्धे मायादर्शनं नाम नवमोऽध्याय: 12 1
At the (very) sight of the babe the fatigue of the sage altogether disappeared, the lotuses
of his heart and eyes opened for (very) joy, the hair of his body stood on end and the sage
headed towards the babe in order to make inquiries of it, though filled with awe at the sight
ofits wonderful form. (26) Meanwhile, (even) like a mosquito, Markandeya (a scion of Bhrgu)
entered into the body of the babe alongwith its breath. There (inside the belly of the babe)
too he saw the universe in its entirety (systematically) arranged as before (the deluge) and
felt astonished and perplexed. (27} He saw (there) the aerial region, heaven and earth, the
hosts of luminaries, the mountains and seas, the broad divisions of the earth including their
subdivisions, the quarters, the gods and the demons, forests, countries and rivers, towns and
mines, residences of peasants and farmers, stations of herdsmen, the (four) Varnas (grades
. of society) and Asramas (stages in life) as well as their functions; the five gross elements as
well as their products, Time with the various (divisions such as) Yugas and Kalpas conceived
init, nay, whatever else makes woridly life possible, in short, the whole universe, presented

as though real. (28-29) He (further) saw the Himalaya mountain, the same river Puspabhadra,
his own hermitage (on its bank) and the sages dwelling there. (Even) while he was perceiving
