260 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 38

SEAANHAEAS ERENCES ASHEN EA TREAT AAR TS HS eH Tee e eee eV eH he ete eA eee eee

free will assumed a human semblance for relieving the burden of the earth, there is no
denying the fact that my eyes will have easily attained the fruit of their existence. (10) He is
the Spectator of the cause as well as of the effect, though (entirely) free from egotism; in Him
ignorance (veiling one's real character) as well as the notion of difference (resulting from it)
and the misconception arising from sucha notion stand eliminated by His own effulgence (in
the form of eternal realization of His own essential character) and He is seen (sporting) in
arbours (or the dwellings of the Gopis of Vraja) in the company of Jivas (embodied souls)
endowed with the vital principle, senses and mind and evolved in His own Self by His Maya
(creative energy) under His own supervision. (11)

प्राणन्ति शुम्भन्ति पुनन्ति वै जगद् यास्तद्विरक्ता: ञञवज्ञोभना मता: 1221
स ome: fee सात्वतान्वये स्वसेतुपालामरवर्यशार्मकृत्।
ग्रज्ञोवितन्वन्न्रजआस्तईंश्वरोगायन्तिदेवायदज्ञेषग्मङ्गक्तम्।१३।
wt दधानं fre ईप्सितास्पदं द्रक्ष्ये ममासन्नुषस: सुदर्शाना: ies
(Nay,) utterances connected with His excellences (compassion etc.), exploits and
descents that wipe out the sins of all and are attended with (all) excellent blessings actually
give (new) life and grace and lend sanctity to the universe while those removed from them
are (though adorned with figures of speech and other elegances) considered to be as good
as a (finely dressed and well-adorned) corpse. (12) Descended, as | understand in the race
of the Satvatas (Yadus) in order to bring happiness to the foremost of the immortals
maintaining the ethical standards set up by Himself, the same Lord is living (at present) in
Vraja, spreading (far and wide) His glory which the gods (ever) celebrate in song as the
source of all blessings. (13) | shall surely behold today that very Lord, who is the goal of
exalted souls and the preceptor (of the whole universe) and exhibits a form which is loved
by (all) the three worlds, provides a grand feast to those that have eyes and is the coveted

Abode of Sri (the goddess of beauty and prosperity); (for) all these mornings have revealed
good omens to me. (14)

अथावरूढ: WE रथात् प्रधानपुंसांश्चरणं स्वलब्धये ।
धिया धृतं योगिभिरप्यहं ga are आभ्यां च सखीन् वनौकस: ।१५॥
अप्यङ्ध्रिमूले पतितस्य मे fay: शिरस्यधास्यन्निजहस्तपङ्कजम् ।
दत्ताभयं कालभुजङ्गरंहसा प्रोद्वेजितानां हरणैषिणां que
wal यन्र निधाय alfa बलिश्चाप जगत्त्रयेन्द्रताम् ।
यद् वा fat व्रजयोषितां श्रमं स्पर्शेन सौगन्धिकगन्ध्यपानुदत् । १७
न मव्युपैष्यत्यरिबुद्धिमच्युत: कंसस्य दूत: प्रहितोऽपि विश्वदृक् ।
योऽन्तर्बहिश्चेतस एतदीहितं adam ईक्षत्यमलेन चक्षुषा । १८॥
सपद्यपध्वस्तसमस्तकिल्बिषो बोढा मुदं वीतविशङ्क ऊर्जिताम् ।१९॥
सुहत्तमं ज्ञातिमनन्यदैवतं deal बृहद्भ्याँ परिरप्स्यतेऽथ माम् ।
आत्मा fg तीर्थीक्रियते aaa A बन्धश्च कर्मात्मक उच्छ्वसित्यत: 1201
