Dis. 30] BOOK FOUR 431

SERRE MEMES SEEM MEME वा OMRON EME ह ता च ता व च शा OE ME IE क तं TE ERIN PME ERE REN TOR RENE LEME REE ROMEO WORE HONE RE HERERERORORE HE REHM

rumbling of clouds (as follows), casting a merciful look at them. (7)
श्रीभगवानुवाच
a quia भद्रं वो qa मे नृपनन्दना: | सोह्र।॰द॰नापृथग्धम॰क्त…ष्टोण्डं सौहृदेन ल: । ८ ।
योऽनुस्मरति सन्ध्यायां युष्माननुदिनं नर: । तस्य भ्रातृष्नात्मसाम्यं तथा भूतेषु सौहदम् । ९ ।
ये तु मां रुद्रगीतेन सायं प्रात: समाहिता: | स्तुवन्त्यहं कामवरान्दास्ये प्रज्ञां च शोभनाम् । १०
यद्यूयं . पितुरादेशमग्रहीष्ट मुदान्विता: | अथो व sant कीर्तिर्लोकाननु भविष्यति ee
भविता विश्रुत: पुत्रोऽनवमो व्रह्मणो गुणै: । य एतामात्मव्रीर्येण त्रिलोकीं पूरयिष्यति । १२॥

The glorious Lord said : Seek you from Me any boon you choose. God bless you, 0
princes, observing as you do the same sacred vows by virtue of your amity. | am (really)
pleased with your mutual affection. (8) The man who.will remember you everyday at dusk
willnot only have the same affection for his brothers as for his own self but will cherish friendly
feelings for (all) living beings. (9) And | will confer the desired blessing as well as a brilliant
intellect (even) on them who will glorify Me every morning and evening with a concentrated
mind through the hymn taught by Sri Rudra. (10) Inasmuch as you have joyfully carried out
the command of your father, your bright renown will accordingly pervade all the (different)
worlds (comprised in this universe). (11) An illustrious son will be born to you, who will be
in noway inferior to Brahma (the creator) in point of virtues and whowill fill allthe three worlds
with his progeny. (12)

कण्डो: प्रम्लोचया लब्धा BM कमललोचना | तां चापविद्धां जगृहुर्भूरुहा नृपनन्दना: 1231
क्षुतक्षामाया FS राजा सोम: पीयूषवर्षिणीम् seri रोदमानाया निदधे a दयान्वित: । १४॥
प्रजाविसर्ग आदिष्टा: पित्रा मामनुवर्तता। तत्र कन्यां वरारोहां aga माचिरम् ।१५॥
अपृथग्धर्मशीलानां सर्वेषां a: सुपध्यमा।अपृथग्धमज्ञालय भूयात्पत्न्यर्पिताराया ।१६॥

दिव्यवर्षसहस्राणां सहस्रमहतौजस: | भोमान् भोक्ष्यथ भोगान् वै दिव्यांश्चानुग्रहान्मम । १७।
अथ मय्यनपायिन्या भक्त्या VaR: । उपयास्यथ मद्धाम निर्बिद्य निरयादत: ।१८॥
गृहेषाविशतां चापि पुंसां कुशालकर्मणाम् । मद्वार्तायातयामानां न बन्धाय गृहा मता: ।१९॥

नव्यवदधृदये यज्ञो व्रह्मॆतद्ब्रह्मवादिभि: । न मुह्यन्ति न शोचन्ति न हृष्यन्तिं यतो गता: 1201

The sage Kandu gota girl with eyes charming as the lotus through Pramloca (a celestial
nymph). And the (spirits presiding over) trees, O princes, took charge of the girl, who had
been abandoned (by the nymph). (13) Moved with compassion, the celebrated moon-god,
the king (of herbs and annual plants), put his index finger, dripping with nectar, in the mouth
of that girl, who was oppressed with hunger and crying. (14) Commanded by your father—
who is (now) devoted to My path—to beget children, marry that girl with lovely hips without
delay for the said purpose. (15) Let that girl with a lovely (slender) waist be a wife, (equally)
devoted to you all, who are observing the same vows and are possessed of a similar
disposition; and she too (। am sure) will observe the same vows as you all and is possessed
of a similar disposition (so that there will be no fear of conflict either between yourselves or
between you and her and you married life will be quite happy). (16) For a million celestial
years with undiminished strength of body you will enjoy by My grace earthly as well as
heavenly pleasures. (17) Thereafter, with the impurities of your heart (in the shape of lust.
anger and so on) burnt through unceasing devotion to Me, and recoiling in disgust from those
hell-like pleasures, you will ascend to My (divine) Abode. (18) In the case of those whose
actions are dedicated to Me and whose hours are spent in talks relating to Me, even though
they have entered the life of a householder, home life is not recognized to be a source of
bondage. (19) For, through the aforesaid talks, given by the expositors of the Vedas. |. the
