“406 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 25

डक ज् द्ये जैकितीतपि EERE EPH फ्रिक्लिभेक्खि…प्रेग्भिर्कोर्णां…र्व्य…र्णिब्दे…र्व्यश्लोघेध्विप्रे…ध्रेक्सिद्वैर्धंद्वै

the highest good, and wanders in the path-ways leading to transmigration. (6)

ARG Sara
भो भो: प्रजापते राजन् पशून् पर्य त्वयाध्वरे | संज्ञापिताञ्जीवसङ्घान्निर्घृणेन सहस्रश: । ७ ।
एते at सम्प्रतीक्षन्ते स्मरन्तो वैशसं तव । सम्परेतमय:कूटैरिछिन्दन्त्युत्थितमन्यव: । ८ ।
aa ते कथयिष्येऽमुमितिहासं पुरातनम्।पुरञ्जनस्य चरितं fats गदतो मम । ९ ।
आसीत्पुरञ्जनो नाम राजा राजन् बृहच्छ्रवा: | तस्याविज्ञातनामाऽऽसीत्सखाविज्ञातचेष्टित: ।१०॥

सोऽन्वेषमाण: wo बभ्राम पृथिवीं प्रभु:। नानुरूपं यदाविन्ददभूत्स विमना इव ।११॥ `
न साधु मेने a: सर्वा भूतले यावती: पुर: । कामान् कामयमानोऽसौ तस्य तस्योपपत्तये 1221

Narada said : O ruler of men, Oking, behold the multitudes of creatures slaughtered by
you in thousands as animals for sacrifice, merciless that you are. (7) Retaining the memory
of your cruelty, they eagerly wait for you, their anger having been roused (by the recollection),
and will tear you with their horns, made of steel, when you have departed to the other
world.(8) In this connection | will narrate to you the following old legend. Hear from me as
| tell you the story of Purafijana. (9) O king, there was a monarch of wide renown, Purafjana
by name. He had a friend named Avijfiata (unknown), so-called because his activities were
unknown.(10) Searching for an abode, the king ranged over the (entire) globe. When
(however) he did not find a suitable place, he felt dejected as it were. (11) Seeking after
pleasures, he rejected as many cities as there existed on the earth’s surface, holding them
unfit to yield such enjoyments. (12)

a एकदा हिमवतो दक्षिणेष्लथ सानुषु। ददर्शं नवभिर्द्वर्भि: gi लक्षितलक्षणाम् । १३॥
प्राकारोषवनाट्टालपरिखैरक्षतोरणै: । स्वर्णरोप्यायसै: शृङ्गै: संकुलां सर्वतो WE: । १४॥
नीलस्फटिकवैदूर्यमुक्तामरकतारुणै: । क्रृप्तहर्म्यस्थलीं दीप्तां fren भोगवतीमिव ।१५॥
सभाचत्वररथ्याभिराक्रीडायतनापणै: । चैत्यध्वजपताकाभिर्युक्तां विद्रुमवेदिभि: । १६॥

One day he saw on the southern ridges of the Himalayan range (in the land of
Bharatavarsa) a city provided with nine gates and exhibiting all the marks (of a good
city).(13) Surrounded by a defensive wall, groves, watch-towers and moats, eye-holes and
arched gateways, it was dense on all sides with houses having turrets of gold, silver and
Steel. (14) The floor of its mansions being paved with sapphires, crystals, cat's-eye gems,
pearls, emeralds and rubies, the city was radiant with splendour as Bhogavati (the city of the
Nagas in the subterranean regions). (15) It was provided with assembly halls, cross roads
and highways, gambling-houses, bazaars and rest-houses, banners waving from flag-staffs
and terraces built of coral. (16)

पुर्यास्तु बाह्योपवने दिब्यद्रुमलताकुले | नदद्विहङ्गालिकुलकोलाहलजलाराये ।१७॥
हिमनिर्झरविप्रुष्मत्कुसुमाकरवायुना | चलत्प्रवालविटपनलिनीतटसम्पदि । १८॥
नानारण्यमृगव्रातैरनाबाधे मुनिव्रतै: | आहूतं मन्यते पान्थो aa कोकिलकूजितै: ।१९॥

Now, there was a park in the outskirts of the city, which was full of celestial trees and
creepers and spotted with lakes echoing the noise of warbling birds and humming
bees.(17) The margin of its lotus ponds was enriched with trees whose boughs and
young leaves waved gently in the breeze blowing from flower-beds and charged with the
spray from cool cascades. (18) There was no molestation caused in that park by the
various species of wild animals, that were (all) wedded to non-violence like hermits. The
passer-by thought himself invited to that place by the notes of (its) cuckoos. (19)
