Dis. 20 ] BOOK ELEVEN 607

LOMA AMAT EAR EE IT RN CONTA TARTRATE EOE ET OETA EM ORE TORO eR A

निर्विण्णानां ज्ञानयोगो न्यासिनामिह कर्मसु । aghfdonfaat कर्मयोगस्तु कामिनाम् । ७ ।
यदृच्छया मत्कथादौ जातश्रद्धस्तु य: पुमान्। ननिर्विण्णो नातिसक्तो भक्तियोगोऽस्य सिद्धिद: । ८ ।
तावत् कर्माणि कुर्वीत न निर्बिद्येत यावता । मत्कथाश्रवणादौ वा श्रद्धा यावन्न जायते । ९ ।
स्वधर्मस्थो यजन् यज्ञैरनाशी:काम उद्धव । न af स्वर्गनरकौ aca समाचरेत् ।१०॥
अस्मिँल्लोके वर्तमान: स्वधर्मस्थोऽनघ: ofa: । ज्ञानं विशुद्धमाप्नोति मद्भक्तिं वा यदृच्छया ।११॥
स्वर्गिणोऽप्येतमिच्छन्ति लोकं निरयिणस्तथा । साधकं ज्ञानभक्तिभ्यामुभयं तदसाधकम् । १२॥
न नर: स्वर्गतिं काङ्खेन्नारकीं वा विचक्षण: । नेमं लोकं च काङ्खेत देहावेशात् प्रमाद्यति 1231
एतद् विद्वान् पुरा मृत्योरभवाय घटेत स:। अप्रमत्त इदं ज्ञात्वा मर्त्यमप्यर्थसिद्धिदम् ।१४॥
छिद्यमानं यमैरेतै: कृतनीडं वनस्पतिम्। खग: स्वकेतमुत्सृज्य क्षेमं याति ह्यलम्पट: 1041
अहोरात्रैर्छिद्यमानं बुद्ध्वाऽऽयुर्भयवेपथु: । मुक्तसङ्ग: परं बुद्ध्वा निरीह उपशाम्यति ie)

— । it oud ॥ । ।

मयानुकूलेन नभस्वतेरितं पुमान् wafer न तरेत् a आत्महा ।१७॥

The glorious Lord replied : ।।76९\०985(ठ500]7680] paths) in the shape of (spiritual)
enlightenment, (disinterested) action and Devotion have been taught by Me (in the sections
of the Veda treating of Brahma, ritual acts and worship of gods respectively) with intent to
ensure the highest good of men (in the shape of Liberation). No other way is found anywhere
(in the scriptures). (6) Out of these the path of JAana is efficacious for those who have lost
(all) charm for (the fruit of) ritual acts (considering it to be full of sorrow) and (accordingly)
abandoned such acts; whereas the path of Action is effectual for those who hanker after their
fruit and whose mind has not (therefore) recoiled from such acts (as full of sorrow). (7) To
the man, however, in whom has sprouted by (some) stroke of (good) fortune a zeal for
(hearing) My stories (and chanting My name) etc., and who is neither disgusted with the
pleasures of sense nor deeply attached to them, the path of Devotion brings success (in the
form of God-Realization). (8) A man should (continue to) do his duties (enjoined upon him
by the Sastras—whether of an obligatory nature or those of an occasional type) so long as
he does not get disgusted with the pleasures of sense or so long as keenness does not
appear in him for listening to My stories etc. (9) A man adhering to his course of conduct
and propitiating Me through sacrificial performances, but never hankering for their fruit,
O Uddhava, neither ascends to heaven nor goes down to perdition unless he perpetrates a
prohibited act. (10) (Nay,) continuing in this body and sticking to his own righteous course,
abstaining from sin and (thus) purged of (all) impurities (in the shape of attachment etc.), he
automatically attains pure wisdom (in the form of Self-Realization) or (even) devotion to Me
(which is superior to Self-Realization) by My grace. (11) In the same way as the denizens of
hell heavenly beings too covet (an abode in) this world, which is favourable for the attainment
of wisdom and Devotion (both), whereas both the aforesaid realms are unhelpful to it. (12)
A wise man should not long for heaven any more than he should for hell, nor should he long
even for (being reborn in) this world (as a human being). (For) through attachment to a
particular body one (generally) neglects one's (true) interests. (13) Alive to this truth he
should diligently strive for Liberation (lit, cessation of transmigration) before death (over-
takes him), knowing this body to be mortal, though helpful to the attainment of his goal. (14)
A bird which is unattached (to its abode) surely attains happiness on abandoning its abode
in the form of the tree on which it has built its nest, which is being cut down by these agents
of Death. (15) Shuddering with fear to perceive his life being cut short by {the passage of)
days and nights, and free from attachment, the man who has no desire (likewise) attains

