652 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 28

PEMA TH न न TOOK TNR SNORE TER श्र एक NT OE ERT TRTR OKA ER ORG ETN ONS ROEM TOMER TACOS TEE ROLES

aforesaid means of clearly distinguishing Brahma (vide verse 18 above) and by rejecting the
possibility of the body etc., (which are other than the Self) being recognized as the Self and
by the grace of a wise preceptor, and sated with the bliss of Self-Realization, one should
dissociate oneself from all the senses etc., (thirsting after enjoyment). (23) Indeed the body,
(which is) a product of the earth, the senses, the deities presiding over them, life-breath, the
air, water, fire and the mind, which is sustained by food, reason and the intellect, the ego,
ether, earth, the (five) objects of the senses and Prakrti (the state of equilibrium of the three
Gunas) are not the Self (since they are all material). (24) What gain can there be to him who
has fully realized My Truth through his senses, made up of the three Gunas, beingcomposed
or, say, what harm can befall him through his senses being tossed about ? What gain or loss
can accrue to the sun through the clouds having gathered aboutit or dispersed ? (25) (Even)
as the sky is not affected by the (drying, burning, drenching and soiling) properties of the air,
fire, water and earth or by the peculiarities, that come and go, of the various seasons, so the
transcendent Indestructible is never contaminated by the impurities (impure tendencies and
actions) of Sattva, Rajas and Tamas, which bring about the transmigration of one who looks
upon the body as his self. (26) All the same attachment to the pleasures of sense, which are
the creations of Maya (Prakrti) should be completely eschewed until the impurity attaching
to the mind in the form of passion is shaken off through the intense practice of Devotion. (27)

यथाऽऽमयोऽसाधुचिकित्सितो नृणां पुन: wa: संतुदति प्ररोहन्।
एवं मनोऽपक्वकषायकर्मं gar विध्यति सर्वसङ्गम् ec!
कुयोगिनो a विहितान्तरायैर्मनुष्यभूतैस्रिदशोपसृष्टै: |
a प्राक्तनाभ्यासबलेन भूयो gata योगं न तु कर्मतन्त्रम् ।२९।
करोति कर्म feat च owe: केनाप्यसौ चोदित आनिपातात्।
न त्त्र विद्वान् प्रकृतौ स्थितोऽपि निवृत्ततृष्ण: स्वसुखानुभूत्या ।३०॥
तिष्ठन्तमासीनमुत व्रजन्तं शयानमुक्षन्तमदन्तमन्नम् ।
स्वभावमन्यत् किमपीहमानमात्मानमात्मस्थमतिर्न az । ३१॥
ae स्म पड्यत्यसदिन्दियार्थं नानानुमानेन विरुद्धमन्यत् ।
न मन्यते वस्तुतया मनीषी स्वाप्नं यथोत्थाय तिरोदधानम् । ३२॥
पूर्व Weta शुणकर्मचित्रमज्ञानमात्मन्यविविक्तमङ्ग ।
निवर्तते तत् पुनरीक्षयैव न गृह्यते नापि विसृज्य आत्मा 1331
यथा हि भानोरुदयो नृचक्षुषां aa निहन्यान्न तु ae विधत्ते ।
एवं atte निपुणा सतो मे waist पुरुषस्य ge: ।३४॥
एष स्वयंज्योतिरजोऽप्रमेयो महानुभूति: सकलानुभूति: ।
एकोऽद्वितीयो वचसां विरामे येनेषिता वागसवश्चरन्ति । ३५॥

(Just) as a disease in men sprouts again and again, if treated improperly, and causes much
pain, so does the mind whose passions and (the latencies of) Karma to which they are traceable
have not been burnt and which has conceived an attachment for all (wealth, sons, wife and so
on) brings about the fall of one who has not attained perfection in Yoga (wisdom). (28) Those
imperfect Yogis who are (thus) frustrated by (living) impediments in the form of human
beings (such as wife and sons, kinsfolk and disciples) placed by the gods take once more

to (the practice of) Yoga, by force of the habit acquired in previous births, but never to the
elaborate course of action. (29) Impelled by some agency (the Inner Controller or force of
