Dis. 4] BOOK EIGHT -- 749

See Leake ee REELS Tete TAT EET TT TTT TTT TT eT Te Te eee TT TT TTT
ss त
स एकदाऽऽराधनकाल आत्मवान् गृहीतमोनब्रत ईश्चरं हरिम् ।
त .
जटाधरस्तापस आप्लुतोऽच्युतुं समर्चयामास कुलाचलाश्रम: । ८ |

तं वीक्ष्य तूष्णीमकृतार्हणादिकं रहस्युपासीनमृषिश्चुकोप ह । ९ ।
तस्मा इमं शापमदादसाधुरयं दुरात्माकृतबुद्धिरद्य |
विप्रावमन्ता विशतां mist यथा na: स्तब्धमति: a Wa ।१०॥

Freed for ever from the bondage of ignorance through the touch of the Lord, the leader
of (the herd of) elephants (in his turn) attained a form similar to the Lord's, being clad in yellow
and endowed with four arms.(6) Indeedthe elephant wasin its previous birtha Pandya king,*
known by the name of Indradyumna, the foremost of the people of the Dravida country (now
known by the name of Tamilnadu), and devoted to the worship of Lord Visnu.(7) The
monarch, who had turned an ascetic, wearing matted locks on his head, and having his
hermitage on the Kulacala mountain, nay, who had taken a vow of silence and subjugatéd
his mind (too) once proceeded to worship the almighty and immortal Lord Sri Hari with due
ceremony at the hour appointed for devotions, having finished his bath (beforehand).(8)By
chance there arrived on the spot the sage Agastya of surpassing glory, accompanied by
hosts of (his) pupils. Finding him mute (lacking even in polite words) and waiting upon the
Lord in seclusion, and perceiving that the king had neglected to offer (him) water to wash his
hands with and other articles of worship (to which he was entitledas a venerable newcomer),
the sage grew indignant as the Story goes. (9) On Indradyumna he pronounced the following
imprecation: "This impious, evil-minded and uncultured fellow has insulted a Brahmana (in
me) at this moment. Let him (therefore) be steepedin blinding ignorance; and since he is dull-
minded like an elephant, let him be born as an elephant." (10)

HE उवाच
एवं शप्त्वा गतोऽगस्त्यो भगवान् नृप सानुग: । इन्द्युम्नोऽपि राजर्षिर्दिष्टं तदुपधारयन् 122 1
आपन्न: कोञ्जरीं योनिमात्मस्मृतिविनाशिनीम् । हर्यर्चनानुभावेन यद्गजत्वेऽप्यनुस्मृति: । १२।
एवं विमोक्ष्य गजयूथपमव्जनाभस्तेनापि पार्षदगतिं गमितेन युक्त: ।
गन्धर्वसिद्धविबुधैरुपगीयमानकर्माद्भुतं स्वभवनं गरुडासनोऽगात् । १३
एतन्महाराज तवेरितो मया कृष्णानुभावो गजराजमोक्षणम् ।
wd यशस्यं कलिकल्मषापहं sari कुरुवर्य श्वृण्वताम् । १४॥
यथानुकीर्तयन्त्येतच्छ्रयस्कामा द्विजातय: । शुचय: प्रातरुत्थाय दु:स्वप्नाद्युप्ञान्तये । eu |
इदमाह हरि: प्रीतो गजेन्द्रें कुरुसत्तम। शृण्वतां सर्वभूतानां सर्वभूतमयो fay: । १६॥

Sri Suka continued: Having cursed Indradyumna as aforesaid, the glorious Agastya
went his way along with his followers, O Pariksit ! Taking the curse to be a freak of (his own)
destiny, the royal sage Indradyumna too entered the womb of an elephant, that obliterates
the consciousness of the Self. It was by virtue of (his) adoration of Sri Hari that God-
remembrance was awakened in him at the right moment even in the body of an elephant.(1 1-12)

Having thus liberated once for all the leader of the herd of elephants and accompanied
even by that elephant—(immediately) transformed into the state of a divine attendant—and

* The Pandyas were a race of Ksatriyas that ruled over the land called Dravida De$a in South India.
