Dis. 6 ] *« BOOK FOUR :,, - 309

PRA LER EEE REL EREEEE EE LENE KEKEERECESEAE EEE व EES HASHES MEERA AAA १९ 3३६3 ३३ .६ .३.६.६.॥

(the Destroyer of the universe), was filled with great wonder when he found that no weapon
or missile could even cut Daksa’s skin that way, and pondered for a long time. (23) Observing
the way in which animals were being slaughtered for the sacrifice, Virabhadra severed the
head of Daksa from his body in the same way, treating the sacrificer as an animal to be
sacrificed. (24) There arose a shout of applause from the ghosts, spirits and fiends, who
extolled that achievement of Virabhadra; while others (those belonging to Daksa's party)
raised and outcry against the same. (25) Full of anger, Virabhadra threw Daksa’s head as
an offering into the sacrificial fire called Daksinagni; and , setting fire to that sacrificial edifice,
left for Mount Kailasa (the abode of the Yaksas, Kubera’s attendants). (26)

Thus ends the fifth discourse entitled "The Destruction of Daksa’s sacrifice"
in Book Four of the great and glorious Bhagavata-Purana,
otherwise known as the Paramaharisa-Samhita.

At POAT,
CIPS pg

अथ षष्ठोऽध्याय:

Discourse VI

Brahma and the other gods proceed to Kailasa and appease Lord Siva

अथ देवगणा: ad रुद्रानीकै: पराजिता: | श्यूलपट्टिशनिस्रिंशगदापरिघमुद्गरै: । १ ।
संछिन्नभिन्नसर्वाङ्गा: aldara भयाकुला: । स्वयम्भुवे नमस्कृत्य कात्सर्न्यनैतन्न्यवेदयन् । २ |
उपलभ्य पुरैवैतद्भगवानव्जसम्भव: । नारायणश्च विश्वात्मा न `कस्याध्वरमीयतु: । ३ ।

तदाकर्ण्य fay: sme तेजीयसि parma ara aa सा भूयान्न प्रायेण ब्रुभूषताम् x |
अथापि यूयं कृतकिल्बिषा wa ये बर्हिषो भागभाजं परादु: ।
प्रसादयध्वे परिशुद्धचेतसा क्षिप्रप्रसादुं प्रगृहीताङ्घ्रिपद्मम् । ५ ।
आशासाना जीवितमध्वरस्य ote: सपाल: ofa न afer
तमाञ्जु देवं प्रियया fad क्षमापयध्वं हृदि fs दुरुक्तै: । ६ ।
नाहं न at न च ya a देहभाजो मुनयश्च aa
fag: प्रमाणं बलवीर्ययोर्वा यस्यात्मतन्त्रस्य क उपायं विधित्सेत्। |
Maitreya went on: Worsted by the forces of Rudra and stricken with fear, and having
all their limbs mangled and broken by (the blows of ) their tridents, Pattisas ( a kind of
spear),swords, maces, iron clubs and mallets, the hosts of divinities along with the priests
officiating and assisting at the sacrifice (approached and) bowed to Brahma (the self-born)
and narrated the story to him in all details. (1-2) The worshipful Brahma (the lotus-born
creator) and Lord Narayana, the Soul of the universe, who had foreseen this, did not attend
Daksa’s sacrifice. (3) Hearing their story, Brahma said, "On the part of those wishing to get
square with a person possessed of great power, who has given them cause for offence, such
a desire does not generally conduce to their welfare. (4) You were, on the other hand,
actually guilty of offence against Lord Sivain that you deprived Him ofa share in the sacrificial
offerings, to which He had a rightful claim. You, however, (go and) invoke His favour by
clasping His lotus-feet with a guileless heart; for He can be speedily propitiated. (5) If you
