Dis. 8] BOOK FIVE 467

EAA HKEH EAE THESE ARE EHELEK EEE ER EE CERLEREREREEREAEHEOHAEREA ३३६ ३.२.३.३.७.७.६.३.३.३.३.७.७.॥

thought of fetching (blades of) Kusa grass, flowers, sticks for the sacrificial fire, leaves, fruits,
roots or water, he repaired to the woods alongwith the young deer, apprehending danger
from wolves and dogs and other (carnivorous) animals. (12) Nay, when due toits innocence
it got stuck up at some place on the wayside, he picked it up and bore it on his shoulder out
of tenderness with a heart full of great affection and, holding it thus on his lap and bosom,
experienced supreme felicity in fondling it. (13) Even while (actually) performing (some) ritual
act, the emperor would rise at frequent intervals (to cast a look at it); and, when he had seen
it, he pronounced his benedictions on it with a reassured mind, saying "May you be safe on
all sides, my darling !" (14)
अन्यदा भृशमुद्दिग्नमना नष्टद्रविण इव कृपण: सकरुणमतितर्षेण
हरिणकुणकबिरहविह्वलहदयसन्तापस्तमेवानुशौचन् किल कश्मलं महदभिरम्भित sft BATT १५ |
अपि aa स वै कृपण एणबालको मृतहरिणीसुतोऽहो ममानार्यस्य शठकिरातमतेरकृतसुकृतस्य
कृतविस्रम्भं आत्मप्रत्ययेन तदविगणयन् सुजन इवागमिष्यति। १६ अपि क्षेमेणास्मिन्नाश्रमोपवने
शष्पाणि चरन्तं देवगुप्तं द्रक्ष्यामि। १७ ॥ अपि च न GH: सालावृकोऽन्यतमो वा Achat एकचरो वा
भक्षयति। १८॥ निम्लोचति ह भगवान् सकलजगत्क्षेमोदयस्त्रय्यात्माद्यापि मम न मृगवधून्यास
आगच्छति। १९ अपिस्विदकृतसुकृतमागत्य मां सुखयिष्यति हरिणराजकुमारो विविधरुचिरदर्शनीय-
निजमृगदारकविनोदैरसन्तोषं स्वानामपनुदन्। २० । क्ष्वेलिकायां मां मृषासमाधिनाऽऽमीलितदृशं प्रेमसंरम्भेण
चकितचकित आगत्य पृषदपरुषविषाणाग्रेण लुठति। २९॥ आसादिततहविषि बर्हिषि
दूषिते मयोपालब्धो भीतभीत: सपद्युपरतरास ॠषिकुमारवदवहितकरणकलाप आस्ते । २२॥

At othertimes (wheneverhe failed to see it) he would feel extremely perturbed like a miser
who_ had lost his fortune and, sorrowing for it alone with a heart full of agony and
overwhelmed with grief at his separation from that young deer, and actually infatuated by an
inordinate longing to see it, pitifully exclaimed, itis said, as follows:—(15) "Oh, will that poor
young deer, the offspring of a deceased mother, return (to this spot), reposing confidence
by virtue of its own credulity in me—a wicked and unlucky soul, deceitful as a cheat and hard-
hearted like a hunter—and overlooking like a saint my wicked nature ? (16) Shall | see it (once
more) grazing in safety tender blades of grass in the grove of this hermitage, protected by
Providence ? (17) May it not be that a wolf or a dog or any other (carnivorous) beast roaming
all alone (such as the tiger) or going about in herds (as for instance the boar ) will devour it ?(18)
Lo! the Lord (the sun-god) who has the three Vedas for His body and who rises forthe welfare
of the whole world is going down; but the pledge of the doe is not yet returning to me. (19)
Will that prince of a deer (ever) come back and delight me—an unlucky soul relieving the.
sorrow of its kith and kin by its manifold, delightful and charming fawn-like sports ? (20) When
| closed my eyes in jest putting up a false show of meditation, it would approach me greatly
agitated and, feeling indignant through love, would strike me with the end of its horns, soft
as a drop of water. (21) When, on the Kusa grass—with the offering for the sacred fire placed
on it—being polluted (by it through the impure touch of its mouth), it was scolded by me, it
got much frightened and instantly abandoning (its) playfulness, would sit (motionless) like
a young hermit with all its senses fully controlled. (22)

fe वा at आचरितं तपस्तपस्विन्यानया यदियमवनि: सविनयकृष्णसारतनयतनु-
तरसुभगशिवतमाखरखुरपदपङ्क्तिभिर्द्रविणविधुरातुरस्य कृपणस्य मम द्रविणपदवीं सूचयन्त्यात्मानं च सर्वत:
कृतकौतुकं द्विजानां स्वर्गापवर्गकामानां aad करोति। 221 अपिस्विदसौ भगवानुडुपतिरेनं
भृगपतिभयान्मृतमातरं मृगबालकं स्वाश्रमपरिभ्रष्टमनुकम्पया कृपणजनवत्सल: परिपाति।२४॥ किं
वाऽऽत्मजविश्लेषज्वरदवदहनशिखाभिरुपतप्यमानहदयस्थलनलिनीकं मामुपसृतमृगीतनयं
शिशिरशान्तानुरागगुणितनिजवदनसलिलामृतमयगभस्तिभि: स्वधयतीति च । २५ ॥

"Oh, what austerities have been performed by this fortunate Earth, who by the series of
