Dis. 10] BOOK NINE 39

HIRT HAE TESTES eee Hee REST SEE SESH ETE ETE SH SEA STEREOS HAE R EAH स्रे AREA RSE

extermination of the Ksatriya race by Parasurama), it was he who served as the stock of the
regenerated Ksairiya race. (Hence he became known as Millaka). (40) Of Millaka, Dasaratha
was born and from (the loins of) the latter sprang up a son, Aidavida (by name). Of Aidavida
(again) was born ViSwasaha, whose son, Khaiwanga, turned out to be a universal
monarch.(41) Hard to conquer (himself), he slew demons in baitle at the entreaty of the gods.
On coming to know (at the conclusion of the batile) that (only) an hour's life was left (to him),
he forthwith returned to his capital (by an aerial car lent to him by the gods) and concentrated
his mind (on-God). (42) (He said to himself,} “Neither life nor sons nor riches nor earth nor
kingship nor wife is dearer to me than the Brahmana race, the adored of my family. Even
during my childhood my mind never took delight under any circumstance in
untighteousness.Nor did | (ever) find any other reality than the Lord of excellent
renown. (43-44) Although a boon of my choice was offered to me by the gods, the rulers of
(all) the three worlds (heaven, earth and the intermediate region), I did not hanker after such
enjoyment, engrossed as | was inthe thought of Lord Visnu (the Maker and Protector of
all beings). (45) (Even) the aforesaid gods, whose senses and mind (too) are bewildered (by
the objecis of senses) fail 10 discover their beloved Lord, ever present in their own heart as
their very self; how, then, could others know Him? (46) Therefore, shaking off, by means of
Devotion to the Maker of the universe, the attachment, rooted by the very nature of things
in the mind, for the objects of senses (which are products of the three Gunas or modes of
Prakrti), produced by the Maya (creative energy) of the Lord andno more real than a fanciful
project, | (hereby) betake myself to Him.” (47) Having thus resolved by force of his reason,
which was drawn towards Himself by Lord Visnu (who has His abode in water), and shedding
his ignorance in the form of identification with the body and so on (which are other than the
self), Knatwanga forthwith regained his essential character (divine state), which is the same
as that transcendent Absolute, which, though not unsubstantial, is conceived as intangible
(because lying beyoud the range of speech and other organs) andis (very) subtle (too), (nay,)
which devotees of God undoubtedly refer to as the almighty Lord Vasudeva. (48-49)

Thus ends the ninth discourse, forming part of an account of the solar dynasty,
in Book Nine of the great and glorious Bhagavata-Purana,
otherwise known as the Paramahamsa-Samnita.

gt RENEE,
PIFIE RE RE NOI OD

अथ दहमोऽध्याय:

Discourse X
An account of Sri Rama's pastimes
SF उवाच
खटद्वाङ्गाद् दीर्घबाहुश्च रघुस्तस्मात् पृथुश्रवा: | अजस्ततो महाराजस्तस्माद् दशरथोऽभवत्। १ ।
तस्यापि भगवानेष साक्षाद् ब्रह्ममयो हरि: । अंशांशेन चतुर्धागात् पुत्रत्वं प्रार्थित: सुरै: ।
रामलक्ष्मणभरतरात्रुघ्ना इति संज्ञया । २ ।
तस्यानुचरितं राजन्नृषिभिस्तत्त्वदर्शिभि: । श्रुतं हि वर्णितं af त्वया सीतापतेर्मुहु: । ३ ।
wi त्यक्तराज्यो amet weet प्रियाया:
पाणिस्पर्शाक्षमाभ्यां मृजितपथरुजो यो हरीन्दानुजाभ्याम्।
