Dis. 8] BOOK SEVEN 687 `

ग्भि…पैघैन्धिंष्ठेघेगैर्व्यप्तेघेष्ठेग्नेद्वैप्नेघेफ्रिघेर्व्यश्रेभैध्रेप्रेंप्रेर्व्यक्खिघ्रंप्रेप्रेंप्रैर्हीघ्रेघेर्धेर्व्यघेभेगैदींप्नेघेभे॰ग्रैर्व्यषींघेर्दीणैघेधीद्वैध्रे
विद्याधरा ऊचु:
विद्यां पृथग्धारणयानुराद्धां न्यषेधदज्ञो बलवीर्यदृप्त: |
a येन Fe wes मायानृसिंहं som: स्म नित्यम् ।४६॥

The Vidyadharas said : Proud of his bodily strength and valour, this fool banned (the
practice of) our art (of becoming invisible and so on) cultivated (by us) through concentration
of mind on diverse objects. We ever bow low to the Lord, appearing in the form of aman-lion
by way of sport, by whom the fellow has been killed in an encounter even as a beast. (46)

a पापेन wiht स्रीरत्नानि हतानि न: । तद्बक्ष-पाटनेनासां दत्तानन्द नमोऽस्तु ते ।४७॥
The Nagas said : Our salutation be to You, O Lord, who have afforded delight to our
wives (who are jewels among women) by splitting open the breast of this wicked fellow, by
whom they had been abducted and our jewels (too) wrested ! (47)

mat ad wa निदेशकारिणो दितिजेन देव पतिभूतसेतव: |
भवता We: स उपसंहत: प्रभो करवाम ते किमनुशाधि किङ्करान् ।४८॥
The Manus said : We are Manus—(ever) disposed to do Your bidding—the bounds of
morality fixed by whom were set at nought, O god of gods, by this demon. That wicked fellow

has been made short work of byYou, O Lord! Whatcan we do for You (now) ? (Pray,) instruct
(us,) Your servants. (48)

प्रजापतय ऊचु:
प्रजेशा ad ते परेशाभिसृष्टां न चेन प्रजा a gama निषिद्धा: |
aw am भिन्नवक्षा yaa जगन्मङ्गलं सत्त्वमूर्तेऽवतार: ।४९॥

The Prajapatis said : We are Prajapatis (lords of created beings) evolved by You, 0
supreme Ruler ! This fellow, prohibited by whom we procreate no more progeny, surely lies
(before us) with his bosom split open by You. Your descent, 0 Embodiment of Sattva
(unmixed with Rajas and Tamas), is conducive to the good of the world. (49)

aa fast ते नटनाट्यगायका येनात्मसाद् वरीर्यबलौजसा कृता: |
स एष नीतो भवता दश्ञामिमां किमुत्पथस्थ: कुशलाय कल्पते । ५० ॥

The Gandharvas said : We, 0 almighty Lord, are Your dancers and singers in dramatic
performances. This fellow, by whom we were brought into subjection by dint of valour,
physical strength and organic power, has been reduced to this plight by You ! Can one who
has taken to evil ways attain happiness? (50)

चार्णा ऊचु:
हरे तवाङ्ध्रिपङ्कजं भवापवर्गमाश्रिता:। यदेष साधुहृच्छयस्त्वयासुर: समापित: ।५१॥

The Caranas said : We have (once more freely) taken shelter under Your lotus-feet,
which rid one of transmigration, now that this demon a thorn in the heart of pious souls, has
been disposed of by You. (51)

Fa BY!
स तु जनपरितापं तत्कृतं जानता a नरहर उपनीत: पञ्चतां पञ्चविंशा । ५२॥

The Yaksas said : We, who are well-known as the chief among Your servants by virtue
