Dis. 11 ] BOOK SEVEN 709

BAR AT we ME RT Re Be Me He We RT BET eRe BT ee ER EW Wee RT HE HE He RT TO Re

not coveting even that which is available (to her), diligent, conversant with Dharma (what is
right), agreeable and truthful of speech (not only to her husband but to all), vigilant, pure (of
body) and full of affection, she should gratify her husband unless he is fallen* (guilty of any
of the five major sins). (28) A wife who serves her husband, regarding him as an image of
Sri Hari (Lord Visnu) and devoted to him as Goddess Laksmi is to Her Consort, rejoices in
Vaikuntha (the realm of Sri Hari) like Sri (Laksmi) in the company of her husband, who (by
virtue of her devotion) i is sure to attain a form similar to that of Sri Hari (Himself). (29)

aft: सङ्करजातीनां तत्तत्कुलकृता भवेत्। अचौराणामपापानामन्त्यजान्तेऽवसायिनाम् ।३०॥
wa: स्वभावविहितो yor धर्मो qt qi वेददृग्भि: qa राजन्प्रेत्य चेह च aig । ३१॥
a स्वभावकृतया वर्तमान: स्वकर्मकृत्।हित्वा स्वभावजं कर्म हानैर्निर्गुणतामियात् । ३२॥

उप्यमानं मुहु: क्षेत्रं wa निर्वीर्यतामियात्। न कल्पते पुन: Gen उप्तं बीजं च नश्यति 1331
एवं arm चित्तं कामानामतिसेवया । विरज्येत यथा राजन्नाग्निवत् कामबिन्दुभि: । ३४॥
यस्य यल्लक्षणं प्रोक्तं पुंसो वर्णाभिव्यञ्जकम्। यदन्यत्रापि asda aq तेनैव विनिर्दिरोत् । ३५॥

The calling of mixed? races such as the Antyajas + (those belonging to the lowest grade
in society) and Antevasayis* (lit., those living at the end ofa townor village ), other than those
who are thieves and given to (other) sinful pursuits, should be the same as has been
(hereditarily) followed in their respective families. (30) Generally the course of conduct
determined by the innate disposition (according as it is Sattvika, Rajasiks or Tamasika) of
men (belonging to the various grades of society and stages in life) in all ages has been
declared by men whose eye is the Veda as conducive to happiness both here andhereatfter,
O Yudhisthira ! (31) A man following a vocation determined by his natural disposition (as
revealed by his birth) and (scrupulously) discharging his duties bids fair to attain by degrees
the state of a Gunatita (one who has transcended the three Gunas or modes of Prakriti),
relinquishing (later on) his natural pursuits (as well). (82) Being repeatedly sown (with
seeds), a field will automatically become sterile (one day). It will no more be capable of
yielding any crops; may, (even) the seed sown (in it) will perish. (33) (Even) so by over-
indulgence in the objects of senses the mind, the seat of desires (in their latent form) is sure
to get fully disgusted (with them), O king, but not so by driblets of enjoyment, like fire (that
is extinguished by pouring large quantities of ghee but not so by drops of it). (34) If what

* The five major sins are :— (1) killing a Brahmana, (2) drinking intoxicating liquors, (3) thieving, (4) committing adultery
with the wife of one's preceptor and (5) fellowship with anyone guilty of one or more of these crimes.

t Mixed races are of two kinds : (1) Pratilomajas or those sprung from the union of a female of a higher caste with a
male belonging to a lower grade in society, which is considered as quite the reverse of the natural order: and (2) Anulomajas
or those sprung from the union of a male belonging to a higher caste with a female of a lower grade, which is not considered
so bad. The former are naturally regarded as the most low-born in society.

३ (1)Washermen, (2) Carmakaras (workers in leather), (3) Natas (rope-dancers) (4)Burudas (basket-makers),
(5)Kaivartas (fishermen), (6) Medas (those living by any degrading profession) and (7) Bhillas (Bhils, a wild mountain race}-—
these are the seven tribes known by the name of Antyajas.

% The Antevasayis are regarded as even lower than the Antyaias and comprise the Candalas, the Pulkasas, the
atangas and so on. All these mintue details show to what inconceivable lengths the science of ethnology was developed by
the Hindus and what great value they attached to racial purity, which is so very essential for moral and spiritual evolution.

S Possessed as he is by innumerable cravings of a latent type Is not possible for a man to conquer his desires all at
once. If, however, he enjoys a variety of sensuous pleasures according to the restriction laid down In the Vedas, he is likely
ta get disgusted with them in course of time even as his mind gets purified by the performance of obligatory and other incidental
