644 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 19
ee a cararececectctctr teint tir tretetntctnkr trie tt itt tctctr et eth eth et epti teeter eft eH ee eee eee eS SSSR SELES
A man observing this vow sacred to Lord Visnu should not break it under any circumstance
whatsoever. (Thus) observing (strict) discipline, one should worship everyday with devotion
the Brahmanas as well as women whose husbands are (still) living by offering them wreaths
of flowers, sandal-paste, (articles of) cooked food andornaments, and should (also) worship
the Deity (Lord Visnu). (19) Having requested the Deity (as devoutly as He had been
invoked) to retire to His (divine) Abode one should eat what was offered to Him, after feeding
in the first instance one’s preceptor and others, for the purification of one's mind as well as
for the gratification of all one's desires. (20) After spending a year of twelve months (an year
other than an intercalary year) according to this (aforementioned) process of worship, a
pious wife should observe a faston the lastday of (the monthof) Kartika (the day immediately
preceding the bright half of Margasirsa). (21) Having bathed atsunrise on the following day
and worshipped Lord Visnu (the Enchanter of all) as before, the husband alone should
pour into the sacred fire twelve oblations of rice boiled in milk and mixed with clarified
butter according to the procedure laid down for a Pakayajfia (a veriety of sacrificial
performances mentioned in the Grhya-Sitras). (22) Receiving with his head bent low the
benedictions duly pronounced by the Brahmanas, (highly) pleased with him, and devoutly
greeting them with bowed head, he should silently take his meal with their permission
along with his kinsmen after feeding his preceptor in the first instance. He should (then)
give to his wife the remnant of the sacrificial offering, which ensures a good progeny and
the height of good fortune. (23-24)

एतच्चरित्वा विधिवद्द्वतं विभोरभीप्सितार्थं लभते पुमानिह।
स्री त्वेतदास्थाय लभेत सौभगं श्रियं wat जीवपतिं यशो गृहम् । २५।
कन्या च विन्देत समग्रलक्षणं at त्ववीरा हतकिल्बिषा गतिम्।
मृतप्रजा जीवसुता धनेश्वी सुदुर्भगा सुभगा रूपमग्रयम् ।२६॥
विन्देद्विरूपाविक्ताविमुव्यतेयआपयज्ञीद्रियक्कादेहम्।
एतत्पठन्नभ्युदये च कर्मण्यनन्ततृप्ति: पितृदेवतानाम् । २७।
तुष्टा:प्नयच्छन्तिसपस्तकामान्होपाव्रसानेट्टुतभुकृश्रीर्हरिंश्च।
राजन् महन्मरुतां जन्म पुण्यं दितिर्व्रतं चाभिहितं Ted 1221
षष्ठस्कन्धे पुंसवनव्रतकथनं नामैकानविंशोऽध्याय: 128 |

न्ना

इति षष्ठ: स्कन्ध: समाप्त:

Duly observing this vow, sacred to the Lord, a man attains his coveted object during his
(very) lifetime; while a wife, undertaking it, should secure good fortune, affluence, progeny,
the longevity of her husband, glory and a (comfortable) house. (25) Nay, a maid should
secure a match endowed with all good characteristics, while a widow should attain final
beatitude after being rid of (all) sins. A woman who has lost her issue should get long-lived
progeny; a woman who, though owning a large property, is highly ill-fated is blessed with
good fortune; andan ugly-looking girl is endowed with exquisite beauty. He who is suffering
froma malady is rid of his acute illness andis blessed witha sound body and healthy Indriyas.
