298 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 3

RAP HAHEHAAHNREA EERE HEKRE SH KEE EEA LAE AECEAAA LE AAA ERKH ESA ELELE HATA AHHH HEH

अथ तृतीयोऽध्याय:

Discourse Ill

Sati insists on joining the sacrificial festival at her father's
मैत्रेय उवाच
सदा बिद्विषतोरेवे कालो & ध्रियमाणयो:। जामातु: श्वशुरस्यापि सुमहानतिचक्रमे । १ ।
यदाभिषिक्तो दक्षस्तु ब्रह्मणा परमेष्ठिना। प्रजापतीनां सर्वेषामाधिपत्ये स्मयोऽभवत्। २ |
SI स वाजपेयेन ब्रह्मिष्ठानभिभूय च । बृहस्पतिसवं नाम समारेभे क्रतूत्तमम् । ३ ।
तस्मिन् ब्रह्मर्षय: सर्वे देवर्षिपितृदेवता: | आसन् कृतस्वस्त्ययनास्तत्पत्न्यश्च सभर्तृका: । ४ |
aay नभसि खेचराणां प्रजल्पताम्। सती दाक्षायणी देवी पितुर्यज्ञमहोत्सवम् । ५ |
Aaa: सर्वतो दिग्भ्य उपदेववरस्रिय: | व्रिमानयाना: ase निष्ककण्ठी: सुवासस: । ६ |
qe स्वनिलयाभ्याशे लोलाक्षीर्मृष्टकुण्डला: । पतिं भूतपति देवमौत्सुक्यादभ्यभाषत । ७ ।
Maitreya resumed: While Lord Siva (the son-in-law) and Daksa (the father-in-law) thus
continued to bear lasting enmity to each other, avery long time elapsed. (1) Now that Daksa
was installed by Brahma, the highest of the gods, as the chief of all the lords of created
beings, he was puffed up with pride. (2) Having performed a Vajapeya sacrifice, and insulted
(by his overbearing demeanour) those who were most skilled in sacred knowledge, he (now)
commenced the greatest of all sacrifices, known by the name of Brhaspati-Sava.* (3) In that
sacrifice all the Brahmana seers as well as celestial sages, manes and gods were adorned
with all kinds of jewels; and their wives too were similarly adorned along with their
husbands.(4) At that time Goddess Sati, daughter of Daksa, heard of the great sacrificial
festival at her father's from the mouth of heavenly beings who were passing through the air
and talking loudly (of that festival). (5) She also saw charming spouses of demigods
(Gandharvas and Yaksas) with rolling eyes, dressed in fine costumes and adorned with
polished ear-rings and wearing gold ornaments round their necks, flying in their aerial cars
with their husbands from all directions past her own abode. In her eagerness (to join the
festival) she (thus) spoke to her Consort, God Siva (the lord of the ghosts). (6-7)

सत्युवाच
ad च ania am ते यद्यर्थितामी faq asia हि । ८ ।
तस्मिन् भगिन्यो oan भर्तृभि: anda गमिष्यन्ति सुहृद्दिदृक्षव: |
ae च तस्मिन् भवताभिकामये सहोपनीतं परिबर्हमर्हितुम्। ९ ।
तत्र स्वसूर्मे aq भर्तृसम्मिता मातृष्ठसृ: क्लिन्नधियं च मातरम्।

द्रक्ष्ये चिरोत्कण्ठमना महर्षिभिरुन्नीयमानॆ च मृडाध्वरध्वजम् ।१०॥
त्वय्येतदाश्चर्यमजात्ममायया विनिर्मितॆ भाति eee

तथाप्यहं योषिदतत्त्वविद्च a dar feet wa मे भवक्षितिम् । ११।

* Itis laid down In the Srutis that after performing a Vajapeya sacrifice one should next undertake what is known as a

8]#85[एक]-828४६--`वाजपेयेनेष्टा वृहस्पतिसवॆन वजेत।`
