Dis. 19 ] BOOK SIX 643 .

SHEESH HEHEHE LE SAA AEE ELEREREA EET EEE Soe Ree Re He ini ee hire es ea re

युवां तु fave fay जगत: कारणं om sa fe प्रकृति: सूक्ष्मा मायाङक्तिर्दुरत्यया 1221

तस्या अधीश्वर: साक्षात्त्वमेव पुरुष: पर:। त्वं सर्वयज्ञ इज्येयं क्रियेयं फलभुग्भवान् ।१२।

गुणव्यक्तिरियं देवी व्यञ्जको गुणभुग्भवान्।त्वं fe सर्वशरीर्यात्मा of: झरीरेन्द्रयाशया |
नामरूपे भगवती प्रत्ययस्त्वमपाश्रय: 123 |

यथा gat त्रिलोकस्य at परमेष्ठिनो । तथा म उत्तमह्लोक सन्तु सत्या महाशिष: । १४॥

“You are the Sovereigns of the universe as well as the ultimate cause of the world. (And)
She (Mahalaksmi) is undoubtedly the unmanifest Prakrti (primordial matter), as well as the
deluding potency, (so) difficult to overcome. (11) You (O Lord) are no other than the
Supreme Person, the very Controller of Prakrti. You embody all sacrificial performances;
while She is an embodiment of faith (that inspires and sustains all human endeavours to
carry on such sacrificial activities). While She is (worldly) activity, You are the enjoyer of its
fruit. (12) This goddess is the manifestation of the (three) Gunas (in the form of the universe);
while You are the Time-Spirit (that prompts the three Gunas to manifest themselves in this
way) as well as the Cosmic Person (who enjoys the Gunas so manifested). (Again,) You are
the Soul of all embodied beings; while Goddess Sri represents their body, the senses and
the inner sense. (Nay,) the almighty goddess represents the various names and forms
(constituting the universe); while You are their illuminator and ground. (13) (Just) as You
are the supreme Rulers of (all) the three worlds, conferring boons on Your devotees, so let
my lofty aspirations prove true, O Lord of excellent renown." (14)

yafga वरदं श्रीनिवासं श्रिया सह।तन्नि:सार्योपहरणं दत्त्वाऽऽचमनमर्चयेत् ।१५।
aa: Batt स्तोत्रेण भक्तिप्रह्वेण चेतसा । यज्ञोच्छिष्टमवघ्राय पुनरभ्यर्चयेद्धरिम् । १६
पति च परया भक्त्या महापुरुष्रेतसा । प्रियैस्तैस्तैरुपनमेत् प्रेमशील: स्वयं पति: ।
बिभृयात् सर्वकर्माणि ea उच्चावचानि च । १७॥
कृतमेकतरेणापि दम्पत्योरुभयोरपि । पत्यां कुर्यादनर्हायां पतिरेतत् समाहित: । १८॥
विष्णोर्व्रतमिदं बिभ्रन्न विहन्यात् कथञ्चन fas स्रियो वीरवती: स्रग्गन्धबलिमण्डनै: |
अर्चेदहरहर्भक्त्या देवं नियममास्थित: । १९॥
उद्दास्य देवं स्वे धाम्नि तन्निवेदितमग्रत: | अद्यादात्मविशुद्ध्यर्थं सर्वकामर्द्धये तथा io!
एतेन पूजाविधिना मासान् द्वादश हायनम्।नीत्वाथोपचरेत्साध्वी कार्तिके चरमेऽहनि ize
श्वोभूतेऽप उपस्पृश्य कृष्णमभ्यर्च्य पूर्ववत्। पय:शृतेन Weare सह सर्पिषा ।
पाकयज्ञविधानेन gesagt: पति: 1221
sre: शिरसाऽऽदाय fest: site: समीरिता: । प्रणम्य शिरसा wae भुञ्जीत तदनुज्ञया 1231
आचार्यमग्रत: कृत्वा वाग्यत: सह बन्धुभि: | दद्यात्पत्न्यै चरो: Me सुप्रजस्त्वं सुसौभगम् । २४॥
Having thus extolled Lord Visnu (the Abode of Sri, the goddess of beauty and prosperity),
the Bestower of boons (on His devotees), along with Goddess Sri, and after removing the
food (served before Them) and offering Them water to rinse their mouth, one should
(continue to) worship Them (by offering betel leaves etc.). (15) Then with a mind humble
through devotion one should extol Him by means ofa hymn and, aftersmelling the remnants
of the offerings, should duly worship Sri Hari once more. (16) The woman should serve her
husband too with supreme devotion, offering him his beloved objects and accounting him
the Supreme Person (Himself); while the loving husband should personally assist in all the
duties of his wife, high and low (alike). (17) A thing done by even one (member) ofa married

couple is conducive to the benefit of both. (Therefore,) in the event of the wife being unfit (due
to illness or menstruation etc.) the husband should do (all) this with a concentrated mind. (18)

