206 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA { Dis. 23

SRAM EAH RT ककक TAA ELE EE AEE ETE ETT IRON ERR ELH HK RRA He et

The wives (of the Brahmanas) said : Itis not becoming of You, O almighty Lord, to utter
such cruel words. (Pray) vindicate the Vedic dictum, “One does not return™ (on having
attained to Me). Ignoring all our near and dear ones we have sought the soles of Your feet
in order to wear on our locks the wreath of Tulasi leaves kicked off (even indifferently at us)
by You. (29) Neither our husbands, parents, and sons, nor our brothers, kinsmenand other
relations would accept us; how, then, would others receive us ? Therefore, (pray) so ordain,
O subduer of foes, that no other asylum may be left to us, whose body has fallen down at
the fore part of Your feet. (30}

श्रीभगवानुवाच
पतयो नाभ्यसूयेरन् पितॄभ्रातृसुतादय:। लोकाश्च वो मयोपेता देवा अप्यनुमन्वते 1321
न प्रीतयेऽनुरागाय ह्यङ्गसङ्गो नृणामिह। तन्मनो af युञ्जाना अचिरान्मामवाप्स्यथ 1321
The glorious Lord said ; Your husbands, parents, brothers, sons and other people will
not be angry with you since you have been favoured by Me; (nay) even the gods (over there)
‘approve of your conduct. (31) Indeed bodily contact (with Me) does not tend to the
gratification or to heighten the love of men in this world. Therefore, devoting your mind to Me
you will attain to Me before long. (32)

STR उवाच
इत्युक्ता द्विजपत्न्यस्ता यज्ञवाटं पुनर्गता: | ते चानसूयव: स्वाभि: स्रीभि: सन्रमपारयन् 1331
went विधृता wat भगवन्तं यथाश्रुतम्।हृदोपगुह्य fare देहं कर्मानुबन्धनम् ।३४॥
भगवानपि गोविन्दस्तेनैवान्नेन गोपकान्।चतुर्विधेनाशयित्वा स्वयं च बुभुजे प्रभु: ।३५॥
एवं लीलानरवपुर्नृलोकमनुशीलयन्। रेमे गोगोपगोपीनां रमयन् रूपवाक्कृतै: 1361
Sri Suka continued ; Thus addressed (by the Lord), the sages’ wives mentioned
before returned to the sacrificial grounds. (Nay,) not finding fault with them, the sages
too successfully concluded the sacrificial session with the help of their wives. (33) One
of those ladies, who was (forcibly) held back by her husband, mentally embraced the
Lord even as she had heard of Him, and cast off the body, that had been brought about
as a result of her (past) actions. (24) Having fed the cowherd boys with the same food
of four kinds, Lord Sri Krsna (the Protector of cows) too, though all powerful Himself,
partook of it (in the end). (35) Thus imitating the ways of men and delighting the cows
and cowherds as well as the cowherdesses by His personal charm, speech and doings,
Lord Sri Krsna (who had assumed a human semblance for the sake of sport) carried on
His pastimes (in Vraja). (36)

अधानुस्मृत्य विप्रास्ते अन्वतप्यन् कृतागस: । वद् विश्वेश्वरयोर्याच्ञामहन्प नृविडम्बयो: 1301
दृष्टा स्रीणां भगवति कृष्णे भक्तिमलोकिकीम्। आत्मानं च तया हीनमनुतप्ता व्यगर्हयन् ।३८॥
धिग् जन्म नख्रिवृद ferent धिग् व्रतं धिग् agra धिक् कुलं धिक क्रियादाक्ष्यं विमुखा a त्वधोक्षजे |
नूनं भगवतो माया योगिनामपि मोहिनी । यद् वयं गुरवो aot स्वार्थे मुह्यामहे द्विजा: ive
aa पड्यत नारीणामपि कृष्णे जगद्गुरौ । दुरन्तभावं योऽविध्यन्मृत्युपाशान् गृहाभिधान् ।४१॥
नासां द्विजातिसंस्कारो न निवासो गुरावपि । न तपो नात्ममीमांसा न शौचं न क्रिया: शुभा: ।४२॥
अथापि ह्युत्तमर्लोके कृष्णे योगेश्वरेश्वरे। भक्तिर्दृढा न चास्माकं संस्कारादिमतामपि ।४३।

*न स पुनरावर्तते।
