804 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 16

वी कौ ती क्तै ORY CEE री AMER TON eee eee eee LATE TEE NTR AA NTE LETHE EER HE He er
Eee ee व वज

दक्षिणां गुरवे दद्यादृत्विग्भ्यश्च यथार्हत: । अन्नाद्येनाश्चपाकांश्च प्रीणयेत्समुपागतान्।५५॥
भुक्तवत्सु च सर्वेषु दीनान्धकृपणेषु a विष्णोस्तत्परीणनं विद्वान्भुञ्जीत सह बन्धुभि: । ५६॥
नृत्यवादित्रगीतैश्च स्तुतिभि: स्वस्तिवाचकै: | कारयेत्तत्कथाभिश्च पूजां भगवतोऽन्वहम् । ५७।
From the first day till the thirteenth of the bright fortnight (of Phalguna) he should observe
(a vow of strict) continence, sleep on the ground and bathe thrice (everyday, viz., in the
morning, at midday and in the evening). (48) Harmless to all living beings and devoted to Lord
Vasudeva, he should avoid falking with the vile as well as on unholy topics and abstain from
luxuries (of every description), whether great or small.(49) Now, on the thirteenth he should
arrange a bath of Lord Visnu with five substances (viz., milk, curds, clarified butter, honey
and sugar) according to the procedure found in the scriptures, under the direction of those
conversant with such procedure.(50) And absolutely free from (the fault of) niggardliness, he
should perform a grand worship of the Lord. Preparing an oblation (intended) for Lord Visnu,
(who is encircled by rays of light), he should with a fully concentrated mind propitiate the
supreme Person by means of that oblation boiled in milk (and poured into the sacred fire)
and (also) Affer to Him by way of repast excellent food that may be gratifying to the Lord (by
its appetizing flavour and freedom from impure ingredients such as animal food).(51-52) He
should (then) gratify the learned and wise Acarya (preceptor conducting the worship) as well
as the other priests with (gifts of) raiment, jewels and cows. (For) know their gratification to
be the propitiation of Sri Hari (Himself). (53) He should (also) entertain them as well as the
other Brahmanas and whoever else might have gathered there with delicious and pure food
according to his means, O (good) lady with innocent smiles ! (54) (Nay,) he should offer
according to merit Daksina (sacrificial fees) to the preceptor and the priests and gratify with
cooked and other articles of food all those assembled including Candalas (those who cook
the flesh of dogs). (55) Allincluding the destitute, blind and miserable having taken their food,
and knowing their gratification to be the propitiation of Lord Visnu Himself, he should partake
of that food (himself) along with his relatives and friends.(56) (In this way) he should have
the worship of the Lord conducted everyday with dances and music, (both) instrumental and
vocal, as well as with the recitation of hymns, performance of auspicious rites and the
narration of His stories. (57)
West «= नाम पुरुषाराधनं परम्। पितामहेनाभिहितं मया ते समुदाहृतम् । ५८।
त्वं चानेन महाभागे सम्यक्चीर्णेन केशवम्। आत्मना शुद्धभावेन नियतात्मा भजाव्ययम् । ५९
aa a सर्वयज्ञाख्य: सर्वव्रतमिति स्मृतम्। तप:सारमिदं भद्रे दानं चेश्वरतर्पणम् । ६०॥
त एव नियमा: साक्षात्त Wa च यमोत्तमा: । तपो दानं व्रतं यज्ञो येन तुष्यत्यधोक्षज: 1621
Tag भद्रे प्रयता श्रद्धया चर।भगवान्परितुष्टस्ते वरानाशु विधास्यति । ६२।
This supreme vow known by the name of Payovrata, which is intended to propitiate the
supreme Person, was revealed (to me) by Brahma (my grandfather) and has (now) been
made known to you in detail by me. (58) And, having fully controlled your mind, adore you
the immortal Lord KeSava (the Ruler even of Brahma and Siva) with an intellect full of pure
Devotion by means of this vow duly observed, O noble lady. (59) This is known as a universal
sacrifice (yielding the fruit of all sacrifices) and is further called a universal vow (ensuring the
reward of all vows). It is the quintessence of all austerities, O good lady, and a gift conducive
to the gratification of God (Himself). (60) They alone are real religious observances and they
alone are the best of all disciplines; (nay,) that aloneis austerity, gift, vow, and sacrifice (worth
the name), by means of which Lord Visnu (who is above sense-perception) is gratified. (61)
