226 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 29

pee Rae eee ke eee eee ee ee ee ee ne ree
aa विमृज्य रुदितोपहते स्म किञ्चित्संरम्भगद्गदगिरोऽन्रुवतानुरक्ता: 1301

Sri Suka continued: Hearing the foregoing speech of Sri Krsna (the Protector of cows),
which was so unpleasant (to hear), the Gopis felt despondent and, finding their designs
frustrated, were plunged into deep anxiety (that could not be easily overcome). (28) Casting
down their faces with lips, cherry as a ripe Bimba fruit, parched up by their breaths hot with
grief, and scratching the ground with their toe, they stood silent under the heavy load of their
sorrow, washing the saffron painted on their breasts with tears mixed with the collyrium of
their eyes. (29) Wiping their eyes bedimmed by weeping, the Gopis, who had given up all
(other) cravings for the sake of the Lord, full of love as they were (for Him), spoke (thus) to
Sri Krsna, their most beloved One—who was talking like one who had no love for them, as
though rejecting their offer of love—in a voice choked with mild anger. (30)

गोप्य ऊचु:

भक्ता भजस्व दुरवग्रह मा त्यजास्मान् देवो बथाऽऽदिपुरुषो भजते मुमुक्षून् 1३१।
पिक sud i इति धर्मदि व 1
अस्त्वेवमेतदुपदेशपदे watt प्रेष्ठो भवांस्तनुभृतां किल वन्धुरात्मा i321
कुर्वन्ति हित्वयि रतिं कुशाला: स्व आत्मन्नित्यप्रिये पतिसुतादिभिरार्तिदॆ: किम् ।
wa: प्रसीद परमेश्वर मा स्म fen ora भृतां त्वथि चिरादरविन्दनेत्र । ३३॥
चित्तं सुखेन weed गृहेषु यन्निर्विशत्युत करावपि गृह्यकृत्ये ।
पादौपदंनचलत्तस्तवपादपृलाद्यत्मकथंक्काधोकाचापकिंवा।इप्ता
— 5 A A pani
नो oe ad विरहजाग्न्युपयुक्तदेहा ध्यानेन ae पदयो: vedi wa ते 1३५1
The Gopis said : You ought notto speak so cruelly to us. Kindly take in Your service us,
that have sought the soles of Your feet renouncing all (other) objects, (even) as Lord
Narayana (the most ancient Person) accepts (the worship of) those that seek Liberation.
(Pray,) donotabandon us, O Lord whoare (so) hardtowin over! (31) Asithas been observed
by You, the Knower of Dharma (the principles of righteousness), that the natural duty of
women is to render service to their husband and children as well as to the relations of their
husband, O beloved One, let such service be done to You, the almighty Lord, the (central)
theme of all teachings; for You are the most beloved Friend, (nay) the (very) Self of all
embodied souls (so that service rendered to You will redound to the gratification of all, even
as by watering the roots of a tree all its limbs get nourished of their own accord). (32) Those
well-versed in the sacred lore surely find delight in You (alone), their own eternally beloved
Self; what purpose could be gained through a husband, children and others, who are sources
of agony ? Therefore, be gracious to us, O supreme Lord; (pray,) do not frustrate our hopes
centred in You for a long time, O lotus-eyed One ? (33) Our mind, which found delight
(heretofore) in the home, has been easily lured away by You; and our hands too, that
remained engagedin household duties, have been robbed of their capacity for work. Our feet
(likewise) do not recede even a step from the soles of Your feet. How, then, can we return
to Vraja or (even if we manage somehow to go there) what (useful work) shall we do there

(when our mind and other internal organs have ceased functioning altogether)? (34) Quench
with the flood of nectar flowing from Your lips the fire of passion kindled (in ourbreast) by Your
