Dis. 21 ] BOOK TEN 197

श्लि sh ais gg व See eer severe mee a ree te ae BR IED PIR A I

tied by His mother with a cord at the belly)—though a monopoly of the Gopis—so that nothing
but sweetness is left behind (in those lips) ! (Lo !) the rivers (by whose waters its parent
stock—the bamboo—was nourished) appear with their hair standing on end (in the form of
the blooming lotuses through rapture), while the (bamboo) trees (themselves) are shedding
tears (of joy in the shape of honey) even as the elders of a family are delighted to find their
child enjoying the grace of the Lord. (9)

+ afta भुवो वितनोति कीर्तिं aq देवकीसुतपदाम्बुजलवब्धलक्षम ।
“ शोविन्दवेणुमनुमत्तमयूरनृत्यं प्रेक्ष्याद्रिसान्वपरतान्यसमस्तसत्त्वम् | १०॥

देव्यो विमानगतय: स्मरनुन्नसारा भ्रज्यत्रसूनकबरा मुमुहुर्विनीव्य: ।१२।
गावश्च रीतपी टै: पिबन्त्य: |
SUSI: स्नुतस्तनपय:कवला: स्म तस्थुर्गोविन्दमात्मनि दृशाश्रुकला: स्पृदान्त्य: ।१३।

(The soil of) Vindavana, 0 friend, enhances the glory of the earth (so as to make it
outshine even the heavenly regions) in that the soil has been graced by the lotus-feet of Sri
Krsna (the son of Yasoda*) and (further) because, witnessing the dance of peacocks
enraptured to hear (the music of) Sri Krsna's flute (which they mistake for the low rumbling
ofclouds) all other creatures on the summits of Mount Govardhana cease from every activity
(and stand motionless—a thing which is not seen in any other sphere).(10) Blessed indeed
are these female deer, though stupid of mind—that, on hearing the music of the flute, offered
in the company of the male deer (the black antelopes) worship, performed through their
loving glances, to the darling of Nanda, who has put ona wonderful garb. (11) Gazing on Si
Krsna, whose comeliness and amiable disposition are a source of joy to the fair sex, and
hearing the weird notes of the flute played on by Him, celestial women riding in aerial cars
(and embraced by their spouses) stood infatuated, deprived of their presence of mind
through love, flowers dropping from their braids and their skirts unsettled. (12) Drinking with
the cup of their ears, standing erect, the nectar-like music of flute flowing from Sri Krsna's
lips and hugging Sri Krsna (the Protector of cows) in their mind on His entering it through their
eyes, the cows as well as their calves (that had just been let loose to be suckled by their
mothers) stood motionless with drops of tears (in their eyes), the mouths of the latter
remaining filled with the draught of milk flowing from the dripping udders (of their mothers),
having no strength left in them to swallow the milk). (13) In all probability, Oh mothert, the
birds (dwelling) in this forest are (no other than) sages, who—having perched on the boughs
of trees clothed with charming foliage (devoid of fruits and flowers) so that they may be able
to behold Sri Krsna (without any hindrance) and (since they have no attraction for such fruits
and flowers)—hear the dulcet music of the flute poured forth by Him with unwinking

“The word ‘Devaki' occurring in the above verse evidently stands for YaSoda inasmuch as the people of Vraja—and even
the outside worid—iill the death of Karisa took Siri Krsna to be the son of Yasoda alone, and we have the evidence of the
Visnupurana to show that YaSoda bore the name of Devaki too नाम्नी नन्दजायाया यशोदा देवकीत्यपि.`

त॥ 15 usual with Indian women to address their female companions as mother in moments of ecstasy and specially while
pouring out their heart through 2 song.
