644 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 27

Cee PRERRne ant sneReeRRERAAERREPSOREERESSERSEESAERSHESSERSEORSRAHSRERSEF ASSESSOR ESSM

inasacredfire, (the offering of) oblations soaked in ghee; in the sun, respect shown (to the sun-
god in the form of offering Arghya and waiting upon Him with prayers) and in water, worship
through (gratification by offering) water etc., is considered most desirable. Even water offered
with reverence by a devotee is most pleasing to Me; how much more, then, are sandal-paste,
incense, flowers, light and food etc., dear to Me ? On the other hand, anything offered by one
who is not a devotee does not contribute to My pleasure even if it is abundant. (16—18)

Qfa: सम्भृतसम्भार: sed: कल्पितासन: | आसीन: प्रागुदग् वार्चेदर्चायामथ सम्मुख: 1281
कृतन्यास: कृतन्यासां मदर्चां पाणिना मृजेत्। कलशं प्रोक्षणीयं च यथावदुपसाधयेत् | २०॥
तदद्भिर्देवयजनं द्रव्याण्यात्पानमेव च । प्रोक्ष्य पात्राणि त्रीण्यद्भिस्तैस्तैर्दरव्यैश्च साधयेत् 1281
पाद्यार्घ्यचमनीयार्थं त्रीणि पात्राणि दैशिक: । eat ङीरष्णाथ शिखया गायत्र्या चाभिमन्त्रयेत् 1221
पिण्डे वाय्वग्रिसंशुद्धे हृत्पद्मस्थां परां मम । अण्वीं जीवकलां ध्यायेन्नादान्ते सिद्धभाविताम् 1231
massage पिण्डे व्याप्ते सम्पूज्य तन्मय: | आवाह्यार्चादिषु स्थाप्य न्यस्ताङ्गं मां प्रपूजयेत् । २४॥
पाद्योपस्पर्शार्हणादीनुपचारान् प्रकल्पयेत् । धर्मादिभिश्च नवभि: कल्पयित्वाऽऽसनं मम 124!
wns तत्र कर्णिकाकेसरोज्ज्वलम्। उभाभ्यां वेदतन्त्राभ्यां मह्यं तूभयसिद्धये । २६॥
सुदर्शनं पाञ्जजन्ये गदासीषुधनुर्हलान्। मुसलं कौस्तुभं मालां श्रीवत्सं चानुपूजयेत् 1291
ai सुनन्दं गरुडं प्रचण्डं चण्डमेव च । महाबलं Ts चैव कुमुदं कुमुदेक्षणम् ।२८॥
ani विनायकं व्यासं विघ्नक्सेनं Te सुरान्। स्वे स्वे स्थाने त्वभिमुखान् पूजयेत् प्रोक्षणादिभि: । २९॥
Having got together (all) requisites (articles of worship etc.), and prepared a seat with
blades of Darbha grass pointing to the east, and sitting (on it) with his face turned towards
the east or the northor in front of the image (to be worshipped) in the event of the latter being
immovable, and himself pure, the votary should commence worshipping (Me). (19) Having
consecrated himself (by assigning the various syllables of the Mantra to be used in the
worship to the different parts of his hand as wellas to the limbs of his body), he should gently
rub the image (with a view to wiping of the coat of sandle-paste etc., on it) when it has been
similarly consecrated and (then) duly adorn (with sandal-paste and flowers etc.), the pitcher
(full of water to be used for worship from the ‘beginning to the end) and the vessel containing
water for sprinkling (and thereby consecrating) the utensils and articles of worship etc.,
with (20) Consecrating with that water the temple, the articles of worship as well as himself,
the votary should get ready three vessels (filing them with water taken from the pitcher, and
providing them) with (necessary) accessories* (for offering Padya, Arghya and Acamaniya, ie.
water for washing the feet and hands and rinsing the mouth of the Deity respectively). (21) The
worshipper should (then) consecrate the said three vessels (containing water) for washing

the feet and hands and rinsing the mouth of the deity by breathing into them the sacred
formulas connected with the heart, the head and the tuft of hair on the crown (viz., `हदे नम:`,

*The scriplures dealing with the details of worstup tay down thal the following accessories should be used atongwilh water
when washing the leet and hands and rinsing Ihe mouth of Ine deity respectively — a

पाद्ये श्यामाकदूर्वाब्जविष्णुक्रान्तादिरिष्यते। गन्थपुष्पाक्षतयवकुशाग्रतिलसर्षपा:॥

“Grains of Syamaka rice (which are very smalt as compared lo ordinary rice). blades of Durva (panic grass), totus flowers,
akindofherb called Visnukranla etc., are approved for use with the waler intended tor washing Ihe feet of the Lord wilh. Sandal-
paste, llowers unbroken grains of nce. grains of barley, bledes of the sacred KuSa grass. sesamum seeds, muslard seeds and
blades of panic grass—these eight substances have heen prescribed for being used with Ihe waler inlended for washing the
handsof Ihe Oeity with; while Ihe waler intended for rinsing the mouth of the delty should he accompanied by the nulmeg, cloves,
berries of Kankola plant etc.”
