- Dis.\1] BOOK FIVE 441

WMS AH HHH KONA EKER LEE POSSE AEE छ HSE TEL HESS THK COHN OT EHHR या ज OLE SHMUEL ज् ती

waa नाशाय च कर्म wm शोकाय Wert Wer vara

सुखाय दु:खाय च देहयोगमव्यक्तदिष्टं जनताङ्ग TTT BL
we वहामो बलिमीश्वराय प्रोता waa द्विपदे चतुष्पद:।१४।

tof ह्यवरुन्ध्महेऽङ्गे ea qa वा गुणकर्मसङ्गात्।
आस्थाय तत्तद्यदयुङ्क्त नाथश्चक्षुष्मतान्धथा इव नीयमाना:। १५ |

The glorious Brahma said : Listen, dear child : | speak this truth to you. You ought not
to find fault with the Lord, who cannot be known through the ordinary means of cognition, and
whose bidding we all compulsorily obey—I as well as Lord Siva (the Source of the entire
universe), your father (Swayambhuva Manu) and this great seer (Narada, your preceptor).(1 1)
No embodied creature is capable of undoing what He has ordained, through asceticism or
erudition, through Yogic power or intellectual acumen, through affluence or religious merit,
with the help of another or by oneself. (12) Living beings, dear Priyavrata, ever maintain their
connection with a body, bestowed on them by the unmanifest Lord, for (going through the
experiences of) birth and death, grief, infatuation and fear, joy and sorrow, as wellas for doing
work. (13) Fastened strongly, dear child, to a big rope in the form of the Word of God with
the tight strings of the three Gunas (modes of Prakrti), as well as of duties and denominations
bearing the stamp of these Gunas, we all bear offerings to God even as quadrupeds with a
string passed through their nostrils bear loads for human beings. (14) Taking whatever form
the Lord has ordained for us according to our attachment to actions dominated by a particular
Guna (mode of Prakrti), and conducted by Him even as the blind are led by one endowed
with vision, we undergo pleasurable or painful experiences decreed by God, O dear
Priyavrata. (15)

मुक्तोऽपि तावद्विभृयात्स्वदेहमारब्धमश्नन्नभिमानशून्य:।
यथानुभूतं प्रतियातनिद्र किं त्वन्यदेहाय गुणान्न वृङ्क्ते। १६॥
भवं प्रमत्तस्य aa ered: a आस्ते सहषद्सपत्न:।
जितेन्द्रियस्यात्मरतेर्बुधस्वय गृहाश्रम: कि नु करोत्यवद्यम्।१७॥
a: षट्सपत्नान् विजिगीषमाणो गृहेषु निर्विश्य ada पूर्वम्।
अत्येति दुर्गाश्रितं ऊर्जितारीन् क्षीणेषु कामं विचरेद्विपश्चित्।१८॥
त्वं त्वब्जनाभाङ्ध्रिसरोजकोशादुर्गाश्रितो निर्जितषट्सपत्न:।
भुङ्क्ष्वेह भोगान् पुरुषातिदिष्टान् विमुक्तसङ्ग: प्रकृतिं भजस्व।१९।

Reaping the fruit of his destiny without identifying himself with the body, even a liberated
soul maintains it till that destiny has been reaped, even as one who has woke up from sleep
still remembers what one experienced in a dream; but he no longer indulges in actions or
cravings which may invest him with another body. (16) He who has not been able to subdue
his senses is exposed to the fear of rebirth even though he may roam about from forest to
forest; for the six (internal) foes (in the shape of the five senses and the mind that have not
been controlled) are (ever) with him. (On the other hand,) what harm can the home do to
the wise man who has subdued his senses and delights in the Self ? (17) He who is keen
to subdue the (above-mentioned) six foes should in the first instance strive to conquer them
while remaining at home; for he alone who has ensconced himself in a stronghold is able to
overcome even powerful enemies. When these (internal) foes grow weak, the wise man may
roam about at will. (18) Resorting to the citadel of the lotus-like feet of the Lord whose navel
