Dis. 13]. BOOK THREE 189

HHRERKTAAKAKH HH CEC EEE HE PRATT EEE EES PE Ht SR HH ET A ICR IRI tte to tear aie

Vidura said ; Having secured a spouse after his own heart 0 sage, what did Emperor
Swayambhuva, the beloved son of Brahma (the self-bom), do next? (2) Full of reverence as
। am, please narrate to me, O most pious Maitreya, the story of that royal sage, the first
sovereign (of the globe), since he had taken refuge in Viswaksena (Lord Visnu, lit., the
universal lord or He who exerts His power all round). (3) The highest reward, commended
by the wise, of learning acquired by men with great pains extending over a long period, is
to hear the praises of those who have installed the lotus-feet of Lord Sti Krsna (the Bestower
of Liberation) in their heart. (4)

श्रीरुक उवाच

प्रहृष्टरोमा भगवत्कथायां प्रणीयमानो मुनिरभ्यचष्ट । ५ ।

Sri Suka went on: When Vidura, who was full of modesty and had had the honour of
bearingin his lap the feet of SriKrsna (who was no other than the thousand-headed Purusa),
spoke thus and urged Maitreya to the narration of the Lord's stories, the sage's hair stood
erect and he replied to him as follows. (5)

मॆत्रेय उवाच
यदा स्वभार्यया साकं जात: स्वायम्भुवो मनु:। i mais: प्रणतश्चेदं वेदगर्भमभाषत । ६ |
त्वमेक: सर्वभूतानां जन्मकृद् वृत्तिद: पिता । अथापि न: प्रजानां ते शुश्रूषा केन वा भवेत् । |
तद्विधेहि नमस्तुभ्यं कर्मस्वीड्यात्मशाक्तिषु । यत्कृत्वेह set विघ्ठगमुत्र च wash । ८ ।

_ Maitreya said : When Swayambhuva Manu came into existence with his consort
(Satarpa), he bowed respectfully to Brahma ( the repository of the Vedas) and addressed
him thus with joined palms : (6) "You are the one (undisputed) father—progenitor as well as
suStainer—of all living beings. Yet in what way can we, your children, be of service to you?
(7) We make obeisance to you, O praiseworthy father; from among duties we may be found
capable of kindly prescribe that by discharging which we may enjoy celebrity all round in this
world and a happy destiny in the other.” (8)

ब्रह्मोवाच

प्रीतस्तुभ्यमहं तात स्वस्ति स्ताद्वां क्षितीश्वर । यन्निर्व्यलीकेन हृदा शाधि मेत्यात्मनार्पितम्। ९ ।

एतावत्यात्मजैर्वीर कार्या ह्यपचितिर्गुरौ । शक्त्याप्रमत्तैर्गृह्येते सादरं गतमत्सरै: 1201

स त्वमस्यामपत्यानि सदृशान्यात्मनो गुणै: | उत्पाद्य ज्ञास धर्मेण गां यज्ञै: पुरुषं यज ।११॥

परं WM मह्यं स्यात्प्रजारक्षया Wisma प्रजाभर्तुर्हृषीकेशोऽनुतुष्यति 122 |

येषां न तुष्टो भगवान् यज्ञलिङ्गो जनार्दन: । तेषां श्रमो ह्यपार्थाय यदात्मा नादृत: स्वयम् । १३॥
Brahma replied : May all be well with both of you, O sovereign of the globe.| am pleased
with you, my son, since with a guileless heart you have of your own accord surrendered
yourself to me with the words "Enjoin me (what to do).” (9) The way in which sons should offer
worship to their father, my valiant son, is only this that, free from jealousy (towards their
brothers), they should reverently and dutifully carry out his behest to the best of their ability.
(10) Begetting, through her, issues that may prove to be your compeers in virtues, therefore,
rule over the earth with righteousness and worship the Supreme Person through sacrificial
performances. (11) The best service you will be doing to me will be through the governance
of the people, O ruler on men. Lord Sri Hari (the Controller of the senses) will be pleased
with you when He sees you looking after your subjects. (12) Theirlabours prove oflitile avail,
who fail to win the pleasure of Lord Janardana, who reveals Himself in the form of sacrifices;
