636 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 18

PRAHA कौय पि क प रैज न व कौत् कक कौ दे TEENA ELEC RECEE EK ACEH SEAHEC व द् क डौ दौ व क

born the illustrious devotee of the Lord, Prahrada, and even so Bali (Prahrada’s grand-
son).(10) Diti (at first) had only two sons, adored by the Daityas and the Danavas (alike), who
have (already) been spoken of under the name of Hiranyakasipu and Hiranyaksa (in Book
IIl).(11) Hiranyakasipu's wife, Kayadhu byname, who was a daughter of Jambha by Danuand
had been given away by the former (to Hirnayakasipu), gave birth to four sons—Samhrada,
in the first instance, and (then in order) Anuhrada, Hrada and Prahrada as well. Their sister,
Sirnhika by name, got from (her husband, the demon) Vipracitti (a son named) Rahu, whose
head, even while he was drinking nectar (disguised as a god in the assembly of the gods),
Sri Hari lopped off with His discus (vide VIII. ix. 24-25). Krti, the wife of Sarnhrada
(Hiranyakasipu’s eldest son) bore through him (a son named) Paficajana. (12—14) Dnamani,
the wife of Hrada (HiranyakaSsipu's third son) brought forth (two sons) Vatapi and llwala. Itwas
Ilwala who cooked (his brother) Vatapi (in the form of a ram) forthe sake of his (honoured guest,
(the celebrated sage) Agastya. (15) Baskala and Mahisa were the two sons of Anuhrada
(Hiranyakasipu’s second son) by (his wife) Sdrmya; while Virocana was the son of Prahrada,
and Bali was the son of Virocana by (his wife) Devi. (16) From (the loins of) Bali through (his
wife) ASanaya (the deity presiding over hunger), were born ahundred sons, the eldest of whom
was Bana. The glory of Bali, which deserves to be celebrated in beautiful verse, will be
recounted only hereafter (in Book VIII). (17) Having propitiated Lord Siva (who has His abode
on Mount Kailasa), the demon Bana attained the first place among His attendants. As the
guardian of his capital, the Lord actually stays near him even today. (18) (Besides
Hiranyakasipu and Hiranyaksa) Diti had forty-nine more sons, (known as) the Maruts (wind-
gods). They all remained issueless and were converted into his own class (godhood) by
Indra (the ruler of the gods). (19)
राजोवाच
कथं a आसुरं भावमपोह्यौत्पत्तिकं गुरो । इन्रेण प्रापिता: सात्म्यं किं तत्साधु Ha हि तै: 1201
इमेंश्रद्दधतेंब्रह्यन्नृषयोहिमयासहापरिंज्ञप्तायभगवंस्तन्नोव्यग्रव्यन्तुपर्हसिरिंश्।

The king (Pariksit) said : Having rid them of their demoniac disposition, which was innate
to them, O (my) preceptor, how were they converted into godhood by Indra? What good offices
did they render to him (which prompted him to bring about this change in them)? (20) Even
these seers, O (holy) Brahmana, are keen to know this truth along with me. Therefore, be
pleased, O worshipful sage, to explain this to us. (21)

. सूत उवाच

तद्बिष्णुरातस्य स बादरायणिर्वचो निहाम्यादृतमल्पमर्थवत् |
सभाजयन् संनिभृतेन चेतसा जगाद सत्रायण सर्वदर्शन: 1221

Sita continued ; Having heard this reverent, brief and (yet) significant inquiry of king
Pariksit (who had been protected by Lord Visnu Himself in the form of Sri Krsna), and
welcoming it with a heart full of joy, the omniscient and well-known sage Suka (the son of
Badarayana, more popularly known as Vedavyasa), spoke (as follows), O Saunaka (who
stand vowed to a long course of sacrifices) ! (22)

Sy उवाच
हतपुत्रा दिति: हक्रपार्णिग्राहेण विष्णुना । मन्युना शोकदीप्तेन ज्वलन्ती पर्यचिन्तयत् 122!
कदा नु भ्रातृहन्तारमिन्दियाराममुल्बणम्। अक्लिन्नहदयं पापं घातयित्वा TA YAN’!
कृमिविड्भस्मसंज्ञाऽऽसीद्यस्येशाभिहितस्य च । भूतध्रुक तत्कृते wre किं वेद निरयो aa: 1241
SENG तस्येदे ध्रुवमुन्नद्ध्चेतस: । मदशोषक इन्द्रस्य भूयाद्येन सुतो fe मे ।२६॥
