126 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 6

# ^> न # #न RAE LAER ROTRORGEH HERE HERE SRAREHERERENOEEERERAHEREERARENENEKERHE RENEE १9

ब्रजन्तमव्याद् वैकुण्ठ आसीनं त्वां श्रिय: पति: । भुञ्जानं यज्ञभुक पातु सर्वग्रहभयङ्कर: 1261
डाकिन्यो यातुधान्यश्च कूष्पाण्डा येऽर्भकग्रहा: । भूतप्रेतपिशाचाश्च यक्षरक्षोविनायका: 1291
कोटरा रेवती ज्येष्ठा पूतना मातृकादय:। उन्मादा A ह्यपस्मारा देहप्राणेद्द्रियद्गुह: । २८॥

egy महोत्पाता वृद्धबालग्रहाश्च ये।सर्वे नह्यन्तु ते विष्णोर्नामग्रहणभीरव: ।२९॥

(They said:—) "May Aja (the birthless Lord) protect your feet, Maniman (the Lord
adorned with the Kaustubha gem), your knees and Yajfia (the Deity presiding over
sacrifices), your thighs; Acyuta (the immortal Lord), your loins; Hayagriva (the Lord endowed
with the head of a horse), your abdomen; Kegava (the Ruler even of Brahma and Siva), your
heart; $a (the almighty Lord), your bosom and Ina (the Master), your throat; Visnu (the all-
pervading Lord), your arms; Urukrama (the Lord with long strides), your mouth and ISwara
(the Supreme Lord), your head. (22) May the wielder of a discus stand (as your protector)
before you and Sri Hari, endowed with a mace, behind you; the Slayer of Madhu and Ajana
(the birthless Lord), wielding (severally) a bow and a sword, stand on your two sides; Urugaya
(sung by many), the wielder of a conch, at the (four) points intervening between the quarters;
Lord Vamana (the younger Brother of Indra), overhead; the Rider of Garuda, on the ground
and the Supreme Person (Lord Sankarsana) wielding a plough, on all sides. (23) May
Hrsikesa protect your Indriyas; Narayana, your vital airs: Vasudeva (the Lord ofSwetadwipa), .
your intellect; Aniruddha (the Master of Yoga), your mind; Prsnigarbha (Pradyumna),
understanding and Sankarsana (the all-destroying Lord), your Ahankara (ego). May
Govinda (who sports in the senses) protect you while you are at play, Madhava, while lying
down; Vaikuntha, while walking; the Lord of Sri, while seated; and the Enjoyer of sacrifices,
inspiring terror in all evil spirits, while you are dining (24—26) (Malevolent spirits such as)
Dakinis, Yatudhanis and Kismandas evilspirits that seize their victims taking the form of
babes, Bhutas, Pretas and Pigacas, Yaksas, Raksasas and Vinayakas, Kotara, Revati,
Jyestha, Pdtana, (the sixteen) Matrkas and others (such as Caraki and Jwalamukha),
Unmadas (evil spirits causing insanity) and Apasmaras (those inducing apoplexy), that
actually torment the body and the Indriyas and interfere with the vital functions, those
responsible for evil portents of a grave nature seen in dreams and those that seize the aged
as well as youngsters (alike)—terrified at the mention of the names of Lord Visnu, may all
these (evil spirits) die out. (27—29)

श्रीशुक उवाच
इति प्रणयबद्धाभिर्गोपीभि: कृतरक्षणम्। पाययित्वा स्तनं माता संन्यवेशयदात्पजम् ।३०॥
तावन्नन्दादयो गोपा aya a गता:। विलोक्य पूतनादेहं बभूवुरतिविस्मिता: 1321
i बतर्षि: संजातो ath वा समास स:। स wa दृष्टो ह्युत्पातो यदाहानकदुन्दुभि: 1३२॥
woot परशुभिर्छित्वा तत्ते ब्रजोकस: । दूरे क्षिप्त्वावयवश्रो न्यदहन् काष्ठधिष्ठितम् ।३३॥
दह्यमानस्य देहस्य धूमश्चागुरुसौरभ: | उत्थित: कृष्णनिर्भुक्तसपद्याहतपाप्मन: 13% |
पूतना लोकबालघ्नी राक्षसी रुधिराहाना । जिघांसयापि हरये स्तनं दत्त्वाऽऽप aah ।३५॥
fe पुन: श्रद्धया भक्त्या कृष्णाय परमात्मने | यच्छन् प्रियतमं किं नु रक्तास्तन्मातरो यथा ।३६॥
पद्भ्यां भक्तहदिस्थाभ्यां aaa लोकवन्दित: | अङ्गं यस्या: समाक्रम्य भगवानपिबत् स्तनम् । ३७1
यातुधान्यपि सा स्वर्गमवाप जननीगतिम्। कृष्णभुक्तस्तनक्षीरा: किमु गावो नु मातर: ।३८॥
wafa यासामपिबत् पुत्रस्नेहस्नुतान्यलम्। भगवान् देवकीपुत्र: कैवल्याद्यखिलप्रद: 1381
तासामविरतं कृष्णे कुर्वतीनां सुतेक्षणम्। न पुन: कल्पते राजन् संसारोऽज्ञानसम्भव: ॥४०॥
