Dis. 6 ] SRIMAD BHAGAVATA-MAHATMYA 45

BERR MEME BEM MEME MAE MEM HA ह्रनसो HERR ROB Be LER RI BERT OR RTH AM HER HOMER RONEN TR ROR TROT ROR RR Ree RH He BMH AR HORE WE
tag जन Be BE OE ME HY We Re RE Ae

धर्म: प्रोज्झितकैतवोऽत्र परमो निर्मत्सराणां wat वेद्यं वास्तवमत्र वस्तु शिवदं तापत्रयोन्मूलनम् |

श्रीमद्भागवते महामुनिकृते किं वा परैरीश्वर: सद्यो हृद्यवरुध्यतेऽत्र कृतिभि: शुश्रूषुभिस्तत्क्षणात् । ८१।
यत्र ज्ञानविरागभक्तिसहितं नैष्कर्म्यमाविष्कृतं तच्छृण्वन् प्रपठन् व्रिचारणपरो भक्त्या विमुच्येन्नर: । ८२1
स्वर्गे सत्ये च कैलासे बैकुण्ठे नास्त्ययं Ta: | अत: पिबन्तु सद्भाग्या मा मा मुञ्चत कर्हिचित् । ८३1

Sri Suka said : 0 you devotees, possessing a taste for divine joy, Srimad Bhagavata is
the fruit (essence) of the wish-yielding tree of Veda, dropped on earth from the mouth of the
parrot-like* sage Suka, and is full of the nectar of supreme bliss. It is unmixed sweetness
(devoid of rind, seed or other superfluous matter). Go on drinking this divine nectar, again
and again, till your body-consciousness ceases. (80) In this glorious Bhagavata, produced
by Vedavyasa (the great sage), has been taught that supreme Religion (the Religion of God-
worship, the Bhagavata-Dharma as it is called) which is entirely free from all self-deception
(in the shape of desire including the desire for Moksa or Liberation). Nay, in this has been
expounded that absolute Reality which can be known only by saints who are free from
malice, nay which is the bestower of (supreme) bliss and uproots the threefold agony (1—
the agony caused by bodily distemper, 2—that which is attrioutable to natural agencies
and 3—that inflicted by a fellow being).While it is doubtful that God can be speedily captured
in one's heart by other means, He can be instantly seized through this work by those blessed
persons who have a keen desire to hear it recited. (81)The glorious Bhagavata is the
ornament of the Puranas and the wealth of the Vaisnavas; in it stands celebrated the (one)
supreme Reality, which is all consciousness (as well as all truth and all bliss), free from (all)
impurity (in the form of contact with Maya) and which is the goal of Paramaharhsas (ascetics
of the highest order) alone. In this Purana withdrawal from (all) activity, coupled with spiritual
enlightenment, dispassion and Devotion, has been expounded. A man devoutly listening to
it, carefully reading it and given to pondering it bids fair to get liberated. (82) This nectar (in
the shape of the story of Srimad Bhagavata) does not exist in paradise, in Satyaloka (the
highest heaven, the realm of Brahma, the creator), in Kailasa (the realm of Lord Siva) and
(even) in Vaikuntha (the realm of Lord Visnu).Therefore quaff it, highly fortunate ones |
Never, O never cease taking it. (83)

सूत उवाच

एवं ब्रुवाणे सति बादरायणौ मध्ये सभायां हरिराविरासीत् ।

प्रह्रादबल्युद्धवफाल्गुनादिभिर्वृत: सुरर्षिस्तमपूजयच्च तान् । ८४1

a ovat महदासने ek ते चक्रिरे कीर्तनमग्रतस्तदा ।

भवो भवान्या कमलासनस्तु तत्रागमत्कीर्तनदर्शनाय । ८५॥
प्रह्रादस्तालधारी तरलगतितया Bega: कांस्यधारी वीणाधारी सुरर्षि: स्वरकुशलतया रागकर्तार्जुनोऽभूत् |
इन्रोऽवादीन्मृदङ्गं जयजयसुकरा: कीर्तने ते कुमारा यत्राग्रे भाववक्ता सरसरचनया व्यासपुत्रो बभूव । ८६

ननर्त मध्ये त्रिकमेव तत्र भक्त्यादिकानां नटवत्सुतेजसाम् ।

अलौकिकं कीर्तनमेतदीक्ष्य «aft: प्रसन्नोऽपि वचोऽब्रवीत्तत् । ८७।

“॥1ऽ३ well-known truth thata fruit bitten by a parrot is exceptionally sweet. There is a punon the word "Suka’ in this verse,
which aiso means parrot.
