Dis. 7 ] BOOK ONE 23

BeBe Me Bt Br he er Hert Be Be Be Be Be eH We Me Be RET WON A we BERNE NE Re MH Ry RSH Pe BR Rae He We A Se Bs BERT IR RH He BEET RR Re He Be BTR ETA He BBB BOR RR are He He

Krsna, the Supreme Person, wells up in his heart—Devotion that dispels grief, infatuation
and fear. (7) Having produced and revised the Bhagavata-Samnhita, the sage (Vedavyasa)
taught it to his son Suka, who loved to live in retirement. (8)

Sard

a a निवृत्तिनिरत: सर्वत्रोपेक्षको मुनि: । कंस्य वा बृहतीमेतामात्माराम: समभ्यसत्। ९ ।
Saunaka said: The sage Suka is a lover of quietism and, indifferent to everything
(belonging to this world), he delights only in his Self. What was his motive, then, inmastering
this voluminous work ? (9)
Ud उवाच
आत्मारामाश्च मुनयो fan अप्युरुक्रमे। कुर्वन्त्यहेतुकीं भक्तिमित्थम्भूतगुणो aft: 1201
हरेर्गुणाक्षिप्तमतिर्भगवान् बादरायणि: । अध्यगान्महदाख्यानं नित्यं विष्णुजनप्रिय: । ११
Suta replied : Even sages who delight in the Self alone and the knot of whose ignorance
has been cut asunder practise disinterested devotion to Sri Hari: such are His virtues. (10)
This was true all the more of the divine sage Sukadeva, son of Badarayana (Vedavyasa) and
the beloved of Lord Visnu's own people, who studied this great chronicle everyday, his mind
having been captivated by Sri Hari 's excellences. (11)
परीक्षितोऽथ राजर्षेर्जन्मकर्मविलापनम् | संस्थां च पाण्डुपुत्राणां वक्ष्ये कृष्णकथोदयम् । १२।
चदा मृधे कौरवसृञ्जयानां वीरेष्रथो वीरगति गतेषु ।
वृकोदराविद्धगदाभिमर्छाभग्नोरुदण्डे धृतराष्ट्रपुत्रे 123 |
we: fa द्रोणिरिति स्म पर्यन् कृष्णासुतानां स्वपतां शिरांसि ।
उपाहरद् विप्रियमेवर wa जुगुप्सितॆ कर्म विगर्हयन्ति ।१४॥
तदारुदद्वाष्यकलाकुलाक्षी तां सान्त्वयन्नाह किरीटमाली । १५॥
aa शुचस्ते sae भद्रे यद्ब्रह्मनन्धो: fax आततायिन: |
गाण्डीवमुक्तैर्विशिखैरुपाहरे त्वाऽऽक्रम्य यत्स्नास्यसि दग्धपुत्रा । १६॥
इति प्रियाँ वल्गुविचित्रजल्पै: स सान्त्वयित्वाच्युतमिन्रसूत: |
अन्वाद्रवद्दशित उग्रधन्वा कपिध्वजो गुरुपुत्रे TAT I
| shall now tell you the story of the birth, exploits and emancipation of the royal sage
Pariksit and the ascent of Pandu's sons to heaven, inasmuch as they serve as a prelude to
the story of Sri Krsna. (12) When in course of the Mahabharata war the warriors of the
Kaurava and Pandava hosts had fallen like heroes and when Duryodhana (son of
Dhrtarastra) had his thigh broken by a stroke of the mace dealt by Bhima (who had the
appetite of a wolf), ASwatthama (the son of Drona) severed the heads of Draupadi 's sons
while they were asleep and presented them to Duryodhana—an act which he imagined
would please his master (Duryodhana) but which really proved most distasteful to him, since
everybody would strongly condemn such an odious act. (13-14) Sore distressed at the news
of the terrible slaughter of her sons, the mother (Draupadi) bitterly wailed, her eyes blinded
with tears. Then Arjuna (who had a many-pointed diadem on his head), comforting her,
said:(15) "Then alone shall | have wiped your tears,my good lady|when | cut off the head of
that fallen Brahmana, that desperado, with the arrows discharged from my GAndiva bow,

and present it to you so that you may set your foot on it and then bathe after the cremation
of your sons." (16) Having thus consoled his wife in sweet and charming words, Arjuna, who
