452 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA Dis. 80

०१११ ०१६ १६४ 4 4०१४ १ २७ १ 49 9६४ ८29 ७११० ५७२8 ५०१७ ७७ ७५५ ७७ ७५७७ ७ ७ ०१५७ ८## २८4 ८७ ८५ ७ 24 ॥७ ७७ ७ ७4 #.# #

His exploits are indeed innumerable. (33) He who contemplates on the wonderful deeds of
the infinite, all-pervading Balarama, both morning and evening, becomes the most beloved
of God. (34)

Thus ends the seventy-ninth discourse entitled “An account of the pilgrimage of Baladeva"
in the latter half of Book Ten of the great and glorious Bhagavata-Purana,
otherwise known as the Paramahamsa-Samnhita.

——_ Sey

ararreitfreii sera:
Discourse LXXX

Sri Krsna's Reception of Sudama
राजोवाच
भगवन् यानि चान्यानि मुकुन्दस्य महात्मन: । वीर्याण्यनन्तवीर्यस्य श्रोतुमिच्छामहे प्रभो । १ ।
को नु श्रुत्वासकृद ब्रह्मन्नुत्तमुलोकसत्कथा: । विरमेत विशोषज्ञो विषण्ण: काममार्गणै: । २ ।
सा am यया तस्य गुणान् गृणीते ad च तत्कर्मकरौ मनश्च ।
ate वसन्तं स्थिरजङ्गमेषु शृणोति तत्पुण्यकथा: स कर्ण: । ३ ।
शिरस्तु तस्योभयळलिङ्गमानमेत्तदेव यत् पङ्यति तद्धि चक्षु: ।
ff विष्णोरथ तज्जनानां पादोदकं af भजन्ति नित्यम् । ४ ।

King Pariksit submitted ; 0 revered sage, Bhagavan Sri Krsna is the same as the
Supreme Spirit. His powers are infinite. Therefore, His sports (which manifest His love and
glory), are also infinite. We wish to hear now of the other glorious sports of the Lord. (1) 0
sage, all beings on earth running after the mirage of worldly enjoyments are sorely afflicted
at heart. The manifold desires pierce them every now and then like the shaft. Under the
circumstance, what man of taste is there on earth, who having heard of the excellent sports
of the most glorious Lord even repeatedly would cease listening to them further ? (2) That
speech alone is worth the name through which one sings His praises; those hands alone
which do service to Him deserve to becalled, hands; that mind aloneis rightly so-called which
constantly remembers the Lord dwelling in all mobile and immobile creatures; and those ears
alone deserve the title which hear the sacred stories of His sports. (3) That head alone
deserves to be styled as such which bows to all mobile and immobile creatures, regarding
them as the very images of God; that eye aloneis the real eye, which sees God in everything:
and those limbs alone are properly so-called, which are daily sprinkled with the waters which
wash the feet of the Lord and of His devotees.(4)

सूत sara
विष्णुरातेन सम्पृष्टो भगवान् बादरायणि: । वासुदेवे भगवति निमग्नहृदयोऽब्रवीत्। ५ ।

Sri Sita resumed : 0 sages, when king Pariksit made this submission to.Sri Suka, the
latter's heart got completely mergedin the thought of Bhagavan Srikrsna. (Then) addressing
the king, he said: (5)
