566 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 12

OF TOS CRETE EERE यमा मामा EOE ENON ETE T HON SE ETE THEN EEO ET EER EE यक न्न् TRE २०५७ १०

(duly) levelled and cleared (through consecration) by means of mystic formulas. In one’s own
body, one should propitiate the soul through amenities (permitted by the Sastras); and in all
created beings one should worship Me as the conscious Self through undifferentiated
vision. (43—45) Through these media one should contemplate and worship with a concen-
trated mind in the aforesaid manner My serene and four-armed personality equipped with
aconch, discus, mace and lotus. (46) He who worships Me as aforesaid with a concentrated
mind through (Vedic) sacrifices and acts of pious liberality (such as the gift of food; enjoined
in the Smrtis) attains true devotion to Me and through service to the righteous follows My
(constant) remembrance (or realization too). (47) Ordinarily there is no royal road (to My
realization) other than the discipline of Devotion preceded by association with the righteous,
O Uddhava; for lam the greatest resort of the righteous. (48) Therefore, hear this (following)
sovereign secret, O scion of Yadu ! । shall tell you even that which deserves to be
scrupulously guarded; (for) you are My servant and sincere friend. (49)

Thus ends the eleventh discourse in Book Eleven of the great and glorious
Bhagavata-Purana, otherwise known as the
Paramahamsa-Samnhita.

# ९२७ १२४5
ODODE SER EOI CYS

अथ द्वादशोऽध्याय:

Discourse XI!
The Glory of Satsanga; how to perform one's prescribed duty
and how to relinquish it ?
श्रीभगवानुवाच
न रोधयति at योगो न सांख्यं ad एव aia स्वाध्यायस्तपस्त्यागो apd न दक्षिणा ।
व्रतानि यज्ञङ्छन्दांसि तीर्थानि नियमा यमा: । यथावरुन्धे wag: adage fe माम् ।
weg fe दैतेया यातुधाना मृगा: wm: । गन्धर्वाप्सरसो नागा: सिद्धाश्चारणगुह्यका: |
विद्याधरा मनुष्येषु aaa: शूद्रा: स्रियोऽन्त्यजा: । रजस्तम:प्रकृतयस्तस्मिंस्तस्मिन् युगेऽनघ ।
बहवो मत्पदं प्राप्तास्त्वाष्टृकायाधवादय: । वृषपर्वा बलिर्बाणो मयश्चाथ विभीषण: |
सुग्रीवो हनुमानृक्षो गजो गृध्रो वणिक्पथ: । ene: कुब्जा AS गोप्यो यज्ञपत्न्यस्तथापरे |
ते नाधीतश्रुतिगणा नोपासितमहत्तमा: | अन्रतातप्ततपस: सत्सङ्गान्मामुपागता: |
केवलेन fe waa गोप्यो गावो नगा मृगा: । येऽन्ये मूढधियो नागा: सिद्धा मामीयुरञ्जसा |
यं न योगेन सांख्येन दानव्रततपोऽध्वरै: | व्यार्यास्वाध्यायसंन्यासै: प्राप्नुयाद्यत्नवानपि ।
रामेण सार्धं मथुरां प्रणीते श्वाफल्किना मय्यनुरक्तचित्ता: ।
विगाढ्भावेन न मे वियोगतीव्राधयोऽन्यँ ददृशुर सुखाय ।१०॥
wet: क्षषा: प्रेष्ठठमेन नीता मयैव वृन्दावनगोचरेण 1
क्षणार्धवत्ता: पुनरङ्ग तासां gat मया कल्पसमा बभूवु: 1११॥
ता नाविदन् मय्यनुषड्गबद्धधिय: स्वमात्मानमदस्तथेदम् |
यथा समाधौ मुनयोऽब्धितोये नद्य: प्रविष्टा इव ART । १२॥

AR 6 ना त K ww vo
