स7

Dis. 59 ] BOOK TEN : 367

Be BEB 91 te te Oe OO ee iio or eH

(even) as it came flying on the battle-field. (Nay,) the invincible Lord lopped offin mere sport with
His discus (all) the (five) heads of the demon as he rushed at Him lifting up his arms. (10) With
his heads severed the demon fell lifeless into the water like a mountain whose crest had been
sundered by the might of Indra. His seven sons, distressedas they were at the death of their
father and impatient to take vengeance, stood fully prepared to give battle. (11) Urged on to
an encounter by the demon Naraka (the son of Mother Earth) and placing Pitha, their
generalissimo, at the head, Tamra, Antariksa, Sravana, Vibhavasu, Vasu, Nabhasvan and
Aruna, the seventh, sallied forth equipped with arms. (12) Coming up, fierce through rage,
they hurled shafts, swords, maces, javelins, spears and pikes at the invincible Lord. Lord Sri
Krsna of unfailing prowess (however), So the tradition goes, cut down with His own shafts
the (whole) body ofarms into pieces as small as the sesamum seed. (13) The Lord sent them
(all), Pitha and others , to the abode of Death,* their heads, thighs, arms, feet and armours
having been lopped off or split open. Enragedto see (from the top of the fortress) the generals
of his army having been killed by the discus (Sudargana) and arrows of Sri Krsna (the
immortal Lord), the demon Naraka, son of Mother Earth, rushed forth with (an army of) sea-
born elephants (whose descent was traceable from Airavata, the king of elephants, the
carrier of Indra). Perceiving Sri Krsna with His spouse (Satyabhama) mounted on Garuda
(the king of birds) like a cloud united with lightning and appearing above the sun, Naraka
hurled at Him the javelin known by the name of Sataghni; (nay,) all his warriors too hit Him
allat once. (14-15) With His sharp arrows endowed with peculiar wings Lord Sri Krsna (elder
Brother of Gada) forthwith hit the troops of Naraka in sucha way as tolop off theirarms, thighs
and necks, and mangle their bodies and kill their horses and elephants. (16)

चानि aa: प्रयुक्तानि हास्त्रास्राणि कुरूद्वह । हरिस्तान्यच्छिनत्तीक्ष्ण: झरैरेकॆकशस्रिभि: । १७॥
उह्यमान: सुपर्णेन पक्षाभ्याँ निघ्नता गजान्। गरुत्मता हन्यमानास्तुण्डपक्षनखैर्गजा: । १८
पुरमेवाविशन्नार्ता नरको युध्ययुध्यत । दृद्वा विद्रावितं Get गरुडेनार्दितं स्वकम् ।१९।
तं भौम: प्राहरच्छक्त्या aa: प्रतिहतो aa: नाकम्पत तया विद्धो मालाहत ga द्विप: । २०1
अपाहरद् गजस्थस्य चक्रेण क्षुरनेमिना । २१।
हाहेति साध्वित्यृषय: gi माल्यैर्मुकुन्दं विकिरन्तं ईडिरि ।२२॥
ततश्च भू कृष्णमुपेत्य कुण्डले प्रतप्तजाम्बूनदरत्नभास्वरे ।
सवैजयन्त्या वनमालयार्पयत् प्राचेतसं छत्रमथो महामणिम् ।२३॥
अस्तौषीदथ eet देवी देववरार्चितम्। orale: प्रणता राजन् भक्तिप्रवणया धिया 12%
Borne by Garuda, who was striking down elephants with his wings (all the way), Sri Krsna
with His sharp arrows, three for one, cut down (a few minutes later), Ojewel among the Kurus,
all the weapons and missiles that were employed by the (hostile) warriors (against Him
before their death). Being struck by Garuda with his bill, wings and claws, the elephants (of
the enemy) in their distress retreated into their city (Praglyotisapura) itself. Seeing his army

put to flight when assailed by Garuda, the demon Naraka fought on (all alone). (17—19) The
son of Mother Earth hit Garuda with the same javelin by which the (very) thunderbolt (of Indra)

~The use of the compound word 47472 in this contextis intended simply to convey that the Lord made shortwork of them,
Obviously those who 020 at the hands of the Lord couid not be expected to have visited the abode of Yama. ‘They must have
attained absorption into the Lord by virtue of that unique privilege
