Dis. 8 ] BOOK SIX 591

REECE AATTELEAHECER AEE SHEE EERA क्तैच्यट त्री केक्तै कक के त्त जजो ER HAA HVOHAAT OMT ANTM द्

Tes भगवान् स्तोत्रस्तोभर्छन्दोमय: WY: रक्षत्वरोषकृच्छ्रभ्यो विघ्क्सेन: स्वनामभि: । २९॥
सर्वापद्भ्यो हरेर्नामरूपयानायुधानि न: । बुद्धीन्द्रयमन:प्राणान् पान्तु पार्षदभूषणा: 1301
यथा हि भगवानेव age: सदसच्च यत्।सत्येनानेन a: सर्वे यान्तु नाशमुपद्रवा: 132!
यथैकात्म्यानुभावानां विकल्परहित: स्वयम्।भूषणायुधलिङ्गाख्या धत्ते शक्ती: स्वमायया ।३२॥
तेनैव सत्यमानेन सर्वज्ञो भगवान् हरि: । पातु wd: wed: सदा सर्वत्र सर्वग: 1331
विदिक्षु दिक्षूर्ध्वमध: समन्तादन्तर्बहिर्भगवान् नारसिंह: ।
प्रहापयँल्लोकभयं स्वनेन स्वतेजसा ग्रस्तसमस्ततेजा: 13% |
From whatever evil spirits, comets and even men, reptiles and other biting (carnivorous)
animals, ghosts or even sins we have had fear, all these and whoever (else) have stood in
the way of our welfare may go to complete destruction through the (mere) utterance of the
(infallible) weapon of the Divine Name. (27-28) May the glorious and mighty Garuda, who
is extolled through hymns (of the Samaveda, such as the Brhad and Rathantara), nay, who
is Veda personified, and (even so) Viswaksena (one of the principal attendants of the Lord)
protect me from all dangers with their (very) names. (29) May (all) the names and forms and
weapons of Sri Hari, and whoever carries Him on his back, protect us from all adversities
and may the foremost of His attendants guard our intellect, Indriyas (the senses of
perception as well as the organs of action), mind and life (itself). (30) "Even as, really
speaking, itis the Lord alone who constitutes whatever there is with form and without form,
may allour troubles come to an endasa corollary to this truth (since this prayer toois inspired
by the Lord and must therefore turn out to be an accomplished fact.) (31) (Nay,) even as the
Lord, though undifferentiated in the eye of those who have realized their identity with Him,
Himself acquires by (dint of) His own Maya (creative energy) potencies (of various kinds)
as well as forms and names, jewels and weapons, may the same omniscient and all-
pervading Lord Sri Hari protect us on the strength of this very fact by all His manifestations
at every place and time. (32-33) (Finally) may Lord Narasimha (the divine Man-Lion) defend
us in (all) the quarters as well as in the intervening corners, above and below and all round,
inside as well as outside, dispelling the fear of (all) His people (devotees) by His roar and
having eclipsed all luminaries by His own (all-absorbing) effulgence." (34)

मघवन्निदमाख्यातं वर्म नारायणात्मकम्।विजेष्यस्यञ्जसा येन दशितोऽसुरयूथपान् । ३५॥

We धारयमाणस्तु यं यं पश्यति चक्षुषा | पदा वा संस्पृशेत् सद्य: साध्वसात् स विमुच्यते । ३६॥

न कुतश्चिद् भयं तस्य विद्यां धारयतो भवेत्। राजदस्युग्रहादिभ्यो व्याघ्रादिभ्यश्च कर्हिचित् । ३७।

इमां विद्यां qu कश्चित् कोशिको धारयन् द्विज: | योगधारणया as wel स मरुधन्वनि । ३८

तस्योपरि विमानेन गन्धर्वपतिरेकदा। ययौ चित्ररथ: स्नीभिर्वृतो यत्र द्विजक्षय: ।३९॥

गगनान्न्यपतत् सद्य: सविमानो ware: । स वालखिल्यवचनादस्थीन्यादाय विस्मित: |
प्रास्य प्राचीसरस्वत्यां स्नात्वा धाम स्वमन्वगात् ।४०॥

O Indra, this prayer, imbued with the spirit of Lord Narayana (and affording protection
even as an armour), has been (duly) taught to you. Protected by this, you will easily and
completely conquer (all) the generals of the demon troops. (35) Anyone whom the man
wearing (protected by) this armour may behold with his eyes or duly touch with his feet, is
immediately and completely rid of (all) fear. (36) (And) no fear from a ruler, robbers, evil
spirits and so on, nor from a tiger and other ferocious animals nor from any other quarter can
ever seize the man who has his mind fixed on this sacred text (prayer). (37) Of yore, a certain

Brahmana, who was a scion of the sage Kusika and had his mind fixed on this sacred text,
cast off his body in a desert through concentration of mind accompained by retention of
