Dis. 21 ] BOOK FOUR 381

BORER ER ROR PRIOR REBORN a eR ee I ORO Fe NTE TE PERO VERE Rae HWE Re RRL ROWE We Be RE Wem Re ME NER HHS BE ON MEH Be BCH

अथैकविंशोऽध्याय:

Discourse XXI
King Prthu's teaching to his subjects

मैत्रेय उवाच
tif: कुसुमस्रम्भिर्दुकूलै:स्वर्णतोरणै: । महासुरभिभिधूपैर्मण्डितं तत्र तत्र वै । १ ।
चन्दनागुरुतोयार्द्रथ्याचत्वरमार्गवत् | पुष्पाक्षतफलैस्तोक्मैलजैरर्चिर्भिरर्चितम् । २ ।

age: meres: gaurd: परिष्कृतम्।तरुपल्लवमालाभि: ada: समलंकृतम्। ३ |
प्रजास्तं दीपबलिभि: सम्भृतारोषमङ्गलै: । अभीयुर्मृष्टकन्याश्च मृष्टकुण्डलपण्डिता: । ४ |
शङ्खदुन्दुभिघोषेण ब्रह्मघोषेण चत्विजाम्।ङ्घिक्य भवनं वीर: स्तूयमानो गतस्मय: । ५ |
पूजित: पूजयामास तत्र तत्र महायशा: | पोराञ्जानपदांस्तांस्तान् प्रीत: प्रियवरप्रद: । ६ ।
स एवमादीन्यनवद्यचेष्टितत कर्माणि भूयांसि महान्महत्तम: |
कुर्वन् शशासावनिमण्डलं ae: स्फीतं eres परं पदम्। |
Maitreya continued : The city was decorated everywhere with (strings of) pearls,
wreaths of flowers, drapery, ornamental arches of gold and highly fragrant incense (burning
in censers). (1) Ithad its streets, quadrangles and high-ways sprinkled with water perfumed
with sandal and aloe, and was adorned with flowers, unbroken rice, fruits, young blades of
barley, parched grains of rice and lights.(2) It was beautified with stems of bananas
containing bunches of flowers and fruits, as wellas with young arecas (uprooted and planted
here and there by way of decoration), and was embellished all round with festoons prepared
with the leaves of various trees (mango etc.). (3) People of the city and (particularly) fair-
looking maids adorned with polished ear-rings advanced to greet him with lights and
presents as well as with all kinds of auspicious substances (such as curds etc.) collected
(for the occasion). (4) Extolled (by bards and minstrels), yet free from pride, the hero entered
the palace in the midst of a flourish of conchs and the crash of kettledrums and the chant
of Vedic hymns by the priests. (5) Greeted everywhere (on the route) and (highly) pleased,
king Prthu of great renown honoured the citizens as well as the different classes of his
subjects hailing from the countryside, by granting them boons which delighted them. (6)
Doing many such deeds (as the milching of Earth), the great monarch of unimpeachable
conduct and the most adored of all ruled over the terrestrial globe and, after establishing an
extensive renown, (eventually) ascended to the highest abode (of the Lord). (7)
Yd sara
am महाभागवत: सदस्पते कोंषारविं se गृणन्तमर्चयन्। ८ |
Sita went on: Vidura, that eminent votary of the Lord, 0 Saunaka (the leader of the
assemblage of sages collected in the forest of Naimisa)! hailed the sage Maitreya (the son
of Kusaru)—as the latter dwelt upon the glory of king Prthu (the first constitutional monarch

on this globe), which had been augmented by excellences of every kind and had won the
homage of men of great virtues—and spoke (as follows). (8)

fagt sara
सोऽभिषिक्त: पृथुर्विप्रैर्लब्धाशोषसुरार्हण: | बिभ्रत् स वैष्णवं तेजो बाह्वोर्याभ्यां दुदोह गाम् । ९ ।
को we कीर्तिं न श्रृणोत्यभिज्ञो यद्विक्रमोच्छिष्टमहोषभूपा: |
we: सपाला उपजीवन्ति काममद्यापि wa aq md Wen । १०॥
