Dis. 75 ] BOOK TEN 435

Serer eee eee ee eee eet eens ent eeee eee eeenet Set ee eee eee eee ee Ce eee ESE REE

of all those who had attended the sacrifice could not bear the sight of the vast fortune and
royal splendour of the Pandavas. For he was sinful and quarrelsome by nature, a veritable
cancer in the body of the Kuru race, brought into being for its destruction. (53)

च इदं aida fawn: ad चैद्यवधादिकम् । राजमोक्षॆ वितानं च सर्वपापै: प्रमुच्यते । ५४1
इति श्रीमद्भागवते महापुराणे पारमहंस्यां संहितायां ददमस्कन्धे उत्तरार्धे शिशुपालवघो नाम चतु-सप्ततितमोऽध्याय: ॥७४1

Pariksit, anyone who sings of this sport of Bhagavan Sri Krsna relating to the destruction
of Sigupala and Jarasandha, the release of the imprisoned kings and performance of the
Rajastya sacrifice by Yudhisthira, will be freed of all sin. (54)

Thus ends the seventy-fourth discourse entitled Sisupala killed (by Sri Krsna), in the
latter half of Book Ten of the great and glorious Bhagavata-Purana,
otherwise known as the Paramahamsa-Samhita.

व न्न्न्
PIR Sees

अथ पञ्चसप्ततितमोऽध्याय:
Discourse LXXV

Duryodhana's Humiliation

+

राजोवाच
अजातक्ञत्रोस्तं दृष्टा राजसूयमहौदयम्।सवेंपुंमुदिरेब्रह्मन्_मृदॆवायेप्तपाग्प्ता:।ष्ट।
दुर्योधनं वर्जयित्वा राजान: सर्षय: सुरा: । इति श्रुतं नो wees कारणमुच्यताम् । २ ।

The king (Pariksit) submitted : Holy sage you told me just now thatall the kings, sages
and gods who had assembled there rejoiced at the grand success of the Rajasuya sacrifice
performed by Yudhisthira and that Duryodhana was the only exception in this matter. O
worshipful one, please tell me the reason of this. (1-2)

ऋषिरुवाच
frre ते यज्ञे राजसूये महात्मन:। बान्धवा: परिचर्यायां तस्यासन् प्रेमबन्धना: । ३ 1
भीमो महानसाध्यक्षो धनाध्यक्ष: सुयोधन:। सहदेवस्तु पूजायां नकुलो द्रव्यसाधने । ४ |
Tepe जिष्णु: कृष्ण: पादावनेजने। atest द्रुपदजा कर्णो दाने महामना: । ५ I
युयुधानो विकर्णश्च हार्दिक्यो विदुरादय: । बाह्लीकपुत्रा भूर्वाद्या ये च सन्तर्दनादय: । ६ 1
निरूपिता महायज्ञे नानाकर्मसु ते तदा। प्रवर्तन्ते स्म राजेन्द्र wa: प्रियचिकीर्षव: । ७ ।

Sri Suka replied : Pariksit, your grandfather, Yudhisthira, was a great soul. Bound to him
with ties of affection all his relations took upon themselves some form of service or other
during the sacrifice. (3) Bhima was placed in charge of the kitchen, Duryodhana was master
of the treasury, Sahadeva was entrusted with the duty of honouring the guests; while Nakuta
had the charge of procuring supplies. (4) Arjuna waited upon the elders, and Sri Krsna took
upon Himself the duty of washing the feet of the guests. Draupadi attended to the work of
serving food, while the magnanimous Karna was entrusted with the duty of bestowing

gifts.(5) Similarly Satyaki, Vikarna, Hardikya, Vidura, BhuriSrava and the other sons of
Bahlika, Santardana and others were entrusted with one duty or other. All of them
