Dis. 13 ] BOOK TWELVE 723

BARBARA ER RASA ARAMA ALARA AAA AAR ADB AAR ARBAB ASB LIS AAA AN SEAS RABBI ARE RASA AA AAAI,

(the realization of) his own blissful character and who has thereby abandoned the thought
of another (the notion of diversity), nevertheless whose firmness was shaken by the
charming stories of the invincible Lord (Visnu) and who graciously dilated upon the
Bhagavata-Purana connected with Him, which reveals the (highest) truth, and (as such)
wiping out the suffering of all. (68)

Thus ends the twelfth discourse entitled "A Synopsis of (all) the twelve
Skandhas,” in Book Twelve of the great and glorious
Bhagavata-Purana, otherwise known
as the Paramahamsa-Samnhita.

ruIrJEREES rey

अथ त्रयोदशोऽध्याय:

Discourse Xill

The extent of the eighteen Puranas and the glory of the Bhagavata
सूत उवाच
4 ब्रह्मा वरुणेन्द्ररुद्रमरुत: स्तुन्वन्ति feel: wade: साङ्गपदक्रमोपनिषदैर्गायन्ति चं सामगा: |
ध्यानावस्थिततद्गतेन मनसा पङ्यन्ति यं चोगिनो यस्यान्तं न fag: सुरासुरगणा देवाय तस्मै नम: । १ ।
पृष्ठे भ्राम्यदमन्दमन्दरगिरिग्रावाग्रकण्डूयनान्निद्रालो: कमठाकृतेर्भगवत: श्वासानिला: पान्तु व: ।
यत्संस्कारकलानुवर्तनवदाद् वेलानिभेनाम्भसां यातायातमतन्दितं जलनिधेर्नाद्यापि विश्राम्यति । २ ।
Siita began again : Hail to the glorious Lord, whom Brahma (the creator), Varuna (the god
presiding over the waters), Indra (the chief of gods), Rudra (the god of destruction), the Maruts
( the wind-gods) extol through heavenly hymns; whom the chanters of the Samaveda glorify
by means of the Vedas including the Angas or branches of knowledge auxilary to the study of
the Vedas (viz., phonetics, grammar prosody, astronomy, etymology and Kalpa or the branch
of knowledge prescribing the ritual and giving rules for ceremonial and sacrificial acts), their
analysis into word marking their sequence and the Upanisads; whom the Yogis perceive with
their mind fixed on Him through meditation; yet whose whole truth neither the hosts of gods nor
of the demons are able to know ! (1) May the (incoming and outgoing breaths of the almighty
Lord assuming the form of the divine Tortoise—who felt sleepy as a result of His being
scratched (and thereby soothed) by the ends of the rocks (forming part) of the colossal Mount
Mandara revolving on His back (while the ocean was being conjointly chumed by the gods and
the demons for the sake of nectar}—protect you ! Responding to the subtle impetus
communicated by those breaths in the guise of the flow-tide and ebb-tide, the constant rise and
fall of the waters of the ocean know no rest till now | (2)
i । दानं दानस्य माहात्म्यं पाठादेश्च निबोधत । ३ ।
awe area पाद्मं पञ्चोनषष्टि च श्रीवैष्णवं त्रयोविंशच्यतुर्विशति हौवकम् । ४ ।
zest श्रीभागवतं नारदं पञ्चविंशति: | मार्कण्डं Fa ae च दशपञ्च चतु:शातम्। ५ ।
चतुर्दशा भविष्यं स्यात्तथा पञ्चशतानि च। दशाष्टो ब्रह्मवैवर्तं लिङ्गमेकादशैव तु । ६ ।
अतुर्विंशति वाराहमेकाशीतिसहस्रकम् | स्कान्दं ad तथा चैकं वामनं दश कीर्तितम् । ७ ।
कौर्मं सप्तदशाख्यातं wet तत्तु sada एकोनविंशत्सौपर्णं was द्वाद्नैव तु । ८ ।
एवं पुराणसन्दोहश्चतुर्लक्ष Slee: । तत्राष्टादशसाहस्रं श्रीभागवतमिष्यते । ९ |
