572 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 4

SAREE AAA OCH EKER ESET EE EEE HHH LCST KEE SCREEN ACOH A RHEE H NAHE केत्त व त्श्री

त्वत्तोऽधस्तात् प्रजा: Gal मिथुनीभूय मायया aden भविष्यन्ति हरिष्यन्ति च मे बलिम् 1431

The Lord said : 0 highly blessed Daksa (the son of the Pracetas), you have fully
achieved your end through asceticism in that you have developed supreme devotion to Me,
thanks to your reverence solely directed towards Me. (43) | am pleased with you, O lord of
created beings, inasmuch as your asceticism is conducive to the growth of this creation; (for) -
itis My wish (too) that all created beings should thrive. (44) Brahma (the creator), Lord Siva
(the source of the universe), yourselves (the lord of created beings), the Manus (the
progenitors of mankind, presiding over different Manvantaras or periods covering seventy-
one and odd revolution of the four Yugas), and the chief of the gods (the guardians of the
spheres, Indra and others)—indeed these are My glorious manifestation making for the
prosperity of (all) created beings. (45) Asceticism (in the form of contemplation accompanied
by the practice of Yamas* and Niyamas) is My (very) heart; worship (in the form of the
muttering of prayers with all auxiliary practices, Nyasa etc.), My body (because it gives a
concrete shape to meditation and serves as a protective covering for it even as the body
protects the heart); the (mental) activity (preliminary to meditation in the shape of forming
a conceptual image of the object to be meditated upon), My exterior, sacrifices well-
performed are the (various) members of My body; the merit resulting from such scrifices, My
mind (which has its seatin the heart, i.e., has its source in meditation); and the gods (enjoying .
a share in the sacrificial oblations) are My vital airs (which are sated through such obla-
tions).(46) Before creation | alone existed and that too in a state of absolute inactivity; there
was nothing else in the form of the perceiving subject or the percieved object. | was mere
consciousness and unmanifest (too); it seemed as if a state of deep sleep prevailed on all
sides. (47) When in My infinite Being, possessed of endless attributes, sprang up through
Maya this cosmos made up of the three Gunas (Sattva, Rajas and Tamas), there arose in that
very cosmos Brahma, (the self-born), the cause (creator) of all, not born of a mother's
womb.(48) When that great god girded up his loins for the work of creation, he as a matter of
fact thought himself unequal to it as it were, though supplemented with My energy. That
all-powerful divinity accordingly practised severe austerities as enjoined by Me, by recourse
to which he evolved at the very outset nine lords of creation including yourself (your previous
incarnation). (49-50) This daughter of Paficajana, a lord of created beings (like you), Asikni
by name, should (now) be accepted (by you), O dear Daksa, as wife.(51) Following the
righteous course of sexual intercourse between a (duly) married couple, you shall again beget
progeny in large numbers through her, who will (also) follow (like you) the prescribed course
of sexual union between a (duly) wedded couple. (52) All created beings (coming) after you
will be born (again in the form of their children) (only) by copulating with My Maya (enchanting
potency in the form of woman) and bear offerings to Me. (53)

श्रीगुक उवाच
इत्युक्त्वा मिषतस्तस्य भगवान् विश्वभावन: । स्वप्नोपलब्धार्थं इव तत्रैवान्तर्दधे aft: 14x!
इति श्रीमद्भागवते महापुराणे पारमहंस्यां संहितायां षष्ठस्कन्धे चतुर्थोऽध्वाय: ।४।

Sri Suka went on : Having spoken thus, Lord Sri Hari, the Promoter of the universe,
disappeared on that very spot, like an object seen in a dream, (even) as Daksa looked
on. (54)

Thus ends the fourth discourse in Book Six of the great and
glorious Bhagavata-Purana, otherwise known as
the Paramahamsa-Samhila.

sat tia tant १५
PD ODENSE AOD OD
व eee eS

* For the import of the Yamas and Niyamas vide IV. xxii. 24.
