352 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 56

दिने दिने स्वर्णभारानष्टौ स सृजति प्रभो । दुर्भिक्षमार्यरिष्टानि सर्पाधिव्याधयोऽशुभा: |
न सन्ति मायिनस्तत्र यत्रास्तेऽभ्यर्चितो मणि: । ११॥
स याचितो मणिं क्वापि यदुराजाय afters नैवार्थकामुक: प्रादाद् याच्ञाभङ्गमतर्कयन् 1821

Sri Suka continued : Sri Krsna (the lotus-eyed One) heartily laughed to hear the report
of those unknowing persons and observed, "He is not the sun-god, itis (only) Satrajit glowing
with his gem." (9) Entering in state his own splendid residence, which had been consecrated
as a mark of festivity, Satrajit caused the gem to be (duly) installed by Brahmanas in the
apartment intended for gods. (10) The gem, O lord, yielded from day to day gold weighing
eight Bharas (equivalent to three maunds and five seers approximately). Famine, pestilence
and (other) calamities, serpents, mental worries and bodily ailments and other evils and
rogues no longer exist where the gem stands worshipped. (11) Though solicited once by Sri
Krsna (who thought that the king was the fittest person to possess such a wonderful gem),
Satrajit, covetous as he was of wealth, did not hand it over to Ugrasena (the ruler of the
Yadus), not foreseeing the (evil) consequences of rejecting the request (of Sri Krsna, the
Supreme Person). (12)

तमेकदा मणिं कण्ठे प्रतिमुच्य महाप्रभम्। प्रसेनो हयमारुह्य Wat व्यचरद् वने 1231

wed owed gat मणिमाच्छिद्य dat fat विशाञ्जाम्बवता निहतो मणिमिच्छता ।१४॥

सोऽपि चक्रे कुमारस्य मणिं क्रीडनकं fae । अपश्यन् भ्रातरं भ्राता सत्राजित् पर्यतप्यत 1१५1

प्राय: कृष्णेन निहतो मणिग्रीवो वनं गत: । भ्राता ममेति तच्छुत्वा कर्णे कर्णेऽजपञ्जना: । १६॥

way eat लिप्तमात्मनि । मारु प्रसेनपदवीमन्वपद्यत नागरै: । १७॥

wowed च वीक्ष्य केसरिणा वने। तं ages निहतमृक्षेण ददृशुर्जना: ec
Wearing that gem of surpassing lustre about his neck, one day, Prasena (brother of
Satrajit) went about a hunting on horseback in the forest. (13) Having killed Prasena, horse
and all, and snatched the gem (out of curiosity because of its uncommon lustre), a lion was,
while entering its mountainous cave, made short work of by Jambavan (the celebrated king
of bears of Ramayana fame), who wished to have it. (14) The latter for his part used the gem
as a plaything for his boy. Not finding his brother (back), Satrajit, the other brother, felt very
miserable. (15) (He said to his own people,) "Surely my brother, who had gone to the forest
with the gem about his neck, has been killed by Sri Krsna !" Hearing that, people (of a
malicious disposition) spread the rumour in a whisper from ear to ear. (16) When the Lord
learnt this, He followed the tracks (of the horse carrying) Prasena alongwith some citizens
(of Dwaraka) in order to wipe off the imputation cast on Him. (17) Discovering (first) Prasena

as well as his horse killed in the forest by a lion, people further saw the lion (itself) killed on
the mountain side by a bear. (18)

ऋक्षराजबिले भीममन्धेन तमसाऽऽवृतम्। एको विवेशा भगवानवस्थाप्य बहि: प्रजा: 1281
wa we मणिश्रेष्ठं बालक्रीडनकं कृतम्।हर्तुं कृतमतिस्तस्मिन्नवतस्थेऽर्भकान्तिके 1201
तमपूर्वं नरं ge धात्री चुक्रोश भीतवत्। तच्छुत्वाभ्यद्रवत् क्रुद्धो जाम्बवान् बलिनां वर: । २१॥
सवैध्रार्वितेग्तेनयुयुंधेस्वाप्रिनाऽप्त्यन:।पुरुषंप्राबृक्तंमत्वाकुपित्तौनानुधाववित्।रर।
द्वन्द्वयुद्धे ` सुतुमुलमुभयोर्विजिगीषतो: | आयुधार्मद्रुमैर्दोर्भि:; क्रव्यार्थे इयेनयोरिव 1231
आसीत्तदष्टाविंशाहमितरेतरमुष्टिभि: | वज्रनिष्येषपरुषैरविश्रममहर्निराम् । २४॥
कृष्णमुष्टिविनिष्पातनिष्पिष्टाङ्गोरुबन्धन: । क्षीणसत्त्व: स्विन्नगात्रस्तमाहातीव विस्मित: 1241

