92 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 24

PAAR AEE AS eee eee SHH RRR EMA २ २स्वि TER eee eee RHEE: font

श्वफल्कश्चित्ररथश्च Wa च श्वफल्कत: । अक्रूरप्रमुखा आसन् पुत्रा द्वादश विश्रुता: ।१५॥
आसङ्ग: सारमेयश्च qed मृदुविद् गिरि: । धर्मवृद्ध: सुकर्मा च क्षेत्रोपेक्षोऽरिमर्दन: 1१६॥
शत्रुघ्नो Temes sires द्वादश । तेषां स्वसा सुचीराख्या द्वावक्रूरसुतावपि ize
देववानुपदेवश्च तथा चित्ररथात्मजा: । पृथुर्विदूरथाद्याश्च बहवो वृष्णिनन्दना: ।१८॥
कुकुरो भजमानश्च ya: कम्बलबर्हिष: । कुकुरस्य wt वह्निर्विलोमा तनयस्तत: eel
कपोतरोमा तस्यानु: सखा यस्य च Gee । अन्धको दुन्दुभिस्तस्मादरिद्योत: पुनर्वसु: 1201
तस्याहुकश्चाहुकी च कन्या चैवाहुकात्मजौ । देवकश्चोग्रसेनश्च चत्वारो देवकात्मजा: 1221
देववानुपदेवश्च सुदेवो देववर्धन: । तेषां GA: सप्तासन् धृतदेवादयो FT 1221
wird च श्रीदेवा देवरक्षिता। सहदेवा देवकी च वसुदेव उवाह ता: ।२३॥
ae: सुनामा न्यग्रोध: कङ्क: Ug: सुहूस्तथा । राष्टरपालोऽथ सृष्टिश्च तुष्टिमानौद्रसेनय: ।२४॥
कंसा केसवती कङ्का By राष्ट्रपालिका । उग्रसेनदुहितरो वसुदेवानुजस्रिय: 1241
Sumitra was the son of Vrsni and (so) Yudhdjit too, 0 chastiser of foes ! Yudhajit's sons
were Sini and Anamitra and Nimna was born of Anamitra. (12) Again, Satrajit and Prasena
were born of Nimna; and Satyaka was the son of Sini, who has been shown above to be the
other son of Anamitra. Theson of Satyakaindeed was Yuyudhdna (also known as Satyaki),
whose son was Jaya, from whom followed Kuni; and of him was born Yugandhara. (Yet)
another son of Anamitra was Vrsni, of whom were born Swaphalka and Citraratha. From (the
loins of) Swaphalka through Gandini were born twelve celebrated sons (besides Akrdra),
Akrira being the foremost of them all. (18—15) The twelve sons were Asanga and
Sarameya, Mrdura, Mrduvid, Giri, Dnarmavrddha and Sukarma, Ksetropeksa, Arimardana
and Satrughna, Gandhamada and Pratibahu. They had a sister (also), bearing the name of
Sucira. Again, Devavan and Upadeva were the two sons of Akrira. Similarly, Prthu,
VidUratha and many others were the sons of Citraratha (the younger brother of Swaphalka),
(all) scions of Vrsni. (16—18) Kukura, Bhajamana, Suci and Kambalabarhisa were the sons
of Andhaka*. Kukura’s son was Vahni, whose son was Viloma and from Viloma followed
Kapotaroma. His son was Anu, whose friend was (the famous Gandharva) Tumburu, a
master of music. Anu's sonwas Andhaka, of whom was born Dundubhi. Then came Aridyota,
whose son was Punarvasu. (19-20) The latter had a son. Ahuka, as well as a daughter,
Ahuki. Again, Devaka and Ugrasena were the two sons of Ahuka. Devavan, Upadeva,
Sudeva and Devavardhana were the four sons of Devaka. They had seven sisters, the
eldest of whom was Dhrtadeva, ७ protector of men ! (21-22) They were (besides
Dhrtadeva) Santideva, Upadeva, Srideva, Devaraksité, Sahadeva and Devaki. Vasudeva
(the father of Sri Krsna) married them (all). (23) Karhsa, Sunama and Nyagrodha, Karka
and Sanku, Suhu, Rastrapala, Srsti and Tustiman were the (nine) sons of Ugrasena. (24)
Karnsa, Karhsavati, Kanka, SGrabht and Rastrapalika were the daughters of Ugrasena, (all)
wives of Vasudeva’s younger brothers (Devabhaga and others). (25)

शूरो विदूरथादासीद् भजमान: सुतस्तत: । शिनिस्तस्मात् स्वयम्भोजो हृदीकस्तत्सुतो मत: 1261
aaa: Ua: Hea तत्सुता: । देवमीढस्य ART मारिषा नाम पत्यभूत्।२७॥

* The Visnupurdna says:—
कुकुरभजमानशुचिकम्बलवर्हिषाख्यास्तथान्धकस्य चत्वार: पुत्रा:। (EV. XIV 12)
{tis on the authority of thls passage in the Visnupurana that Kukura and others have been concluded to be the sons of
Andhaka, although the tatters name has not been mentioned in the text here.

