Dis. 23] BOOK ELEVEN 629

OR IOIHIFEC HIT ION on non SOI of ton en शाकर्गि मा जग

even to the gods. *(48) Unable to conquer that enemy (in the guise of the ming), of irresistible
tempo, which is (so) difficult to conquer (otherwise than by the Lord's grace), and which
torments the (very) vitals, some deluded persons thereupon make friends, neutrals and
enemies of men and wage a wicked warfare in this world. (49) Taking this body (of their
own)—a creation of their mind (alone)—as their very self and the body of their son, wife etc.,
as theirs, men of clouded judgment, labouring under the misapprehension that this is my own
self and he is another, revolve in the world of matter (enveloped in the darkness of
ignorance), the end of which is difficult to reach. (50) If, however, an individual is (held to be)
responsible for our joy and sorrow, even in this case what does it matter to the soul (which is
neither the giver nor the experiencer of joy and sorrow) ? The capacity to give and experience
joy and sorrow indeed belongs to two earthly bodies (and not to the soul, which is devoid of
action and as such incapable of giving or experiencing sorrow). If ever a man (unwittingly)
bites his own tongue with his own teeth, with which of them should he get angry on his
experiencing pain through such biting ? (51) If any god (presiding over any particular Indriya)
is held to be responsible for (our) sorrow (or joy), let it be so. Even then what does it matter
to the soul (which neither inflicts nor suffers pain) ? The capacity to inflict and suffer pain
belongs to the two gods inflicting and suffering pain (through the organs presided over by
them andnotto the soul, which is devoid of form and beyondall change). When a (particular)
limb (presided over by one deity) in one’s own body is (ever) smitten by another (presided
over by a differeent god) at which of the two limbs (or gods) should the man get angry ? (52)
If the sould is responsible (for our joys and sorrows) (even) then what blame attaches to
another, one's own intrinsic nature being responsible for one’s joys and sorrows ? (If,
however, itis argued that others becomes instrumental in such modification of the soul, my
reply is that) there is no entity other than the sou! (which is all comprehensive—' #4 wfeaé
त्रह्म` 85 the Sruti says); if there is (or appears to be), it is illusory. Hene their is neither joy nor
sorrow. Wherefore (then) should one feel angry (at all) ? (53) If the stars (are held to be)
responsible for (one's) joys and sorrows, what responsibility attaches to the soul, which is
birthless? They exert their influence only on a body which is subject to birth (and death).
(Moreover) the astrologers declare the evil (or good) influence exerted by the stars as falling
directly on a (fellow) star (the star which happened to be at the ascendant at the birth of a
man and only indirectly on the personality born at that particular time because of the deity
presiding over that star identifying itself with the said personality). At whom (then) should the
soul, which is other than the star as well as from the body born under its influence, get angry
? (54) If Karma (action done in a previous or even the present life) is (held to be) responsible
for (one's) joys and sorrows, let it be (so). (Even in that case) what responsibility attaches
to the soul ? For, action is possible only in the event of the being a substance (both) material
and conscious. (That alone which is material is subject to change and no one who is not
conscious can engage in a pursuit conducive to one's own interests.) The body, however,
is material (andis not alive to its own interests); while the soul consists of pure wisdom (and
is therefore never liable to change). Hence Karma, which is the root of joy and sorrow, does
not exist (at all). At whom (then) should one feel angry ? (55) If, however, Kala (the Time-
Spirit) is (believed to be) responsible for one’s joy and sorrow, (even) in that case what
responsibility attaches to the soul ? (For) the sdul (being a fragment of Brahma) is the same
as Kala (which is identical with Brahma). No suffering can come to a part from the whole any
more than the heat of fire could burn an individual flame or the coldness of ice could benumb

This 1s an echo of the following Sruti text :--
मनॊ वशं सर्वीमदं बभूव न चान्यस्य मनों वशमन्वियाय। भीष्मा fe देव: सहस: सहोयान्।
