552 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA { Dis. 4

६.३.३.१.३ ७६६३ ६६३ ६६2६ ६ ६३६६ व व व E EERE ELERHAETHEAR CREE ERE EETEHEE EEE EAA HEHEHE SEA HOT

tortured (and put to death) living beings ( and supported his family on their flesh when food
could not be got by other means). (22) As he thus maintained (his) existence, fondling the
(many) offspring of that Sddra woman, O king, a considerable period, equivalent to eighty-
eight years of his life, rolled by. (23) The old man had ten sons (by that woman); he who was
the youngest of them, Narayana by name, was yet a child and was (therefore) greatly loved
by his parents. (24) Having fastened his heart on that sweeily lisping infant, the old fellow
felt extremely delighted while watching its sports. (25) Feeding it while (himself) taking his
meals or chewing anything (by way of refreshment), and giving it water to drink while
(himself) drinking it, bound as he was by (ties of) love to the child, the silly man did not
perceive (the hour of) death, which had (now) arrived. (26)

स एवं वर्तमानोऽज्ञो मृत्युकाल उपस्थिते। मति war wa ae नारायणाह्वये 1201
स पाशाहस्तांस्रीन्दृष्टा पुरुषान् भृशदारुणान्। वक्रतुण्डानूर्ध्वरोम्ण आत्मानं नेतुमागतान् । २८॥
दूरे क्रीडनकासक्तं पुत्रं नारायणाह्वयम्। प्लावितेन स्वरेणोच्चैराजुहावाकुलेन्द्रिय: । २९॥
Fara म्रियमाणस्य ब्रुवतो हरिकीर्तनम्। भर्तुर्नाम महाराज पार्षदा: सहसाऽपतन् । ३०॥
विकर्षतोऽन्तर्हददयाद्दासीपतिमजामिलम् । यमप्रेष्यान् विष्णुदूता वारयामासुरोजसा ।३१॥
ऊचुर्निषेधितास्तांस्ते वैवस्वतपुर:सरा: । के gai प्रतिषेद्धारो धर्मराजस्य area ।३२॥
कस्य वा कुत आयाता: कस्मादस्य निषेधथ । किं देवा उपदेवा वा यूयं किं सिद्धसत्तमा: । ३३
सर्वे पद्मपलाशाक्षा: पीतकौरोयवासस:। किरीटिन: कुण्डलिनो लसत्पुष्करमालिन: । ३४॥

wt च नूत्रवयस: सर्वे चारुचतुर्भुजा:। धनुनिषङ्गग्सिगदावाङ्खचक्राखुजश्रिय: ।३५॥
दिशो विततिमिरालोका: कुर्वन्त: स्वेन रोचिषा । किमर्थं धर्मपालस्य किङ्करान्नो निषेधथ ।३६॥
Thus continuing, the fool thought of his juvenile son, named Narayana, when the hour
of death (actually) arrived. (27) Beholding three most terrible male figures with wry faces
and hair standing on end, that had come to take him, noose in hand, Ajamila, (greatly)
agitated in mind, called by name his son, named Narayana, who was busy with (his)
playthings away at (some) distance (from him), in a loud and lengthened tone. (28-29)
Hearing the loud utterance of Sri Hari’s (blessed name by the dying man (Ajamila), who was
calling (though unconsciously) the name of their Master (Bhagavan Narayana), O greatking,
His attendants rushed to the spot (there) all of a sudden. (30) The messengers of Lord Visnu
stopped by force the servants of Yama, that were (at that moment) tearing (the soul of)
Ajamila, who had kept a maid-servant, from inside his heart. (31) (Thus) forbidden, the
servants of Yama said to them: "Who are you that (thus) interfere with the authority of Yama
(the deity presiding over righteousness)? (32) Whose representatives are you or whence
have you come, and wherefore do you forbid his being taken away (by us)? Are you (some)
gods or demigods or some foremost Siddhas (a class of demigods endowed with mystic
powers by their very birth)? (33) With eyes resembling the petals of alotus and clad in yellow
silk, you are alladorned with a diadem, a pair of ear-rings and a shining wreath of lotuses!(34)
Besides, you are all in the bloom of youth and all possessed of four lovely arms and graced
with a bow, quiver, sword, mace, conch, discus and lotus. (35) Driving away the darkness
of the quarters and overshadowing (all) other (material) lights by your splendour, what for
do you hinder us, the servants of Yama (the protecior of virtue)?" (36)
SYP उवाच
इत्युक्ते यमदूतैस्तैर्वासुदेवोक्तकारिण: । तान् प्रत्यूचु: प्रहस्येदं मेघनिर्हयदया गिरा ig
Sri Suka continued : In reply to the aforesaid questions asked by those messengers
of Yama, the servants of Lord Vasudeva heartily laughed and addressed the following
