132 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA Dis. 8

EES RAHA TANS HE OKO न् न आशा न #७.७ घाआ ४ मकयतनभ आल् ककक ७७

performance etc. (Ista), act of charity or act of benevolence to living beings has been
performed by us due to which the boy, though (virtually) dead, has luckily enough appeared
(in our midst) again, reviving (us,) his kinsfolk? (32) Amazed to see many (more) wonders
(of this kind) at Brhadvana (Gokula), Nanda, the cowherd chief, esteemed the prophecy of
Vasudeva again and again. (33)

एकदार्भकमादाय स्वाङ्कमारोप्य भामिनी iad पाययामास स्तनं स्नेहपरिप्नुता|३४|
पीतप्रम्यस्यजस्मीसात्कस्यब्चिरस्मितम्।मुंखंलन्धांराजह्नुम्भतोददृज्ञेइदम्।इधा
a रोदसी ज्योतिरनीकमाञा: सूर्येन्दुवह्निश्चसनाम्बुधीश्च ।
द्वीपान् नगांस्तद्दुहितूर्वनानि भूतानि यानि स्थिरजङ्गमानि 136)
सा वीक्ष्य fad asm राजन्सञ्जातवेपथु:।सणील्यमृगज्ञत्वाक्षीमेंत्रेआंप्तोत्सुविस्मित्ता । ३७॥

One day, taking up the Babe and placing Him in her lap, the blessed Yasoda,
overwhelmed with affection, made Him suck her breast overflowing with milk. (34)
Caressing the mouth (lips), litup witha charming smile, of the Babe, who had almost finished
sucking, O king, the aforesaid mother sawin His mouth while He was yawning the following,
viz., the sky, the horizon, the host of luminaries, the (four) quarters, the sun, the moon, fire,
the air and the oceans, the broad divisions of the globe, mountains, the rivers (flowing from
them), forests and all created beings, stationary as well as moving. (35-36) Seized with a

tremor to perceive the universe vividly all of a sudden, O Pariksit, (in the mouth of the Babe),

and fully closing her eyes, Yasoda (whose eyes resembled those of a fawn) stood greatly
amazed. (37)

Thus ends the seventh discourse entitled "The deliverance of Trnavana”
in the great and glorious Bhagavata-Purana, otherwise known
as the Paramahamsa-Samnhita.

अथाष्टमोऽध्याय:

Discourse VIII

The Naming Ceremony of the Lord and His Infantile Sports

श्रीगुक उवाच
mH: पुरोहितो राजन् यदूनां सुमहातपा:। iat जगाम नन्दस्य वसुदेवप्रचोदित: । १ ।
7 दृष्टा परमप्रीत: प्रत्युत्थाय कृताञ्जलि: | आनर्चाधोक्षजधिया प्रणिपातपुर:सरम् । २ ।
सूपविष्टं कृतातिथ्यं गिरा सूनृतया मुनिम्। नन्दयित्वाब्रवीद् war पूर्णस्य करवाम किम् । ३ ।
महद्बिचलर्न नृणां गृहिणां दीनचेतसाम् । नि:श्रेसाय भगवन् कल्पते नान्यथा क्वचित् । ४ ।
