710 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 12-

BSR WEB BM OH St Re BB ER HK SHORES ERK ECHR AL EHRE TERE EEA HK HH EEA HAMHOON THT

has been declared to be a characteristic of the grade in society of a (particular) man is
perceived even in another (a man belonging to a different class), the latter should be
distinctively called by that very denomination (caste).* (35)

Thus ends the eleventh discourse entitled “An inquiry into right conduct," forming
part of the dialogue between Emperor Yudhisthira and the sage Narada,
in Book Seven of the great and glorious Bhagavata-Purana,
otherwise known as the Paramahamsa-Samhita.

cP tat tae
PIPITERES Sees

अथ द्वादशोऽध्याय:

Discourse XIl
An inquiry into right conduct (continued)

ARG उवाच

ब्रह्मचारी गुरुकुले वसन्दान्तो गुरोर्हितम्। आचरन्दासवन्नीचो गुरौ सुदृढसौहद: | १ ।

aa प्रातरुपासीत गुर्वग्न्यर्कसुरोत्तमान्। उभे सन्ध्ये च चतवाग् जपन्ब्रह्म समाहित: | २ ।

छन्दांस्यधीयीत weds सुयन्तित: । उपक्रमेऽवसाने च चरणौ ज्ञिरसा नमेत् 3 |

मेखलाजिनवासांसि जटादण्डकमण्डलून्। बिभृयादुपवीते च दर्भपाणिर्यथोदितम् x |

सायं प्रातश्चरेद्धैश्चं गुरवे तन्निवेदयेत्। भुञ्जीत यद्यनुज्ञातो नो चेदुपवसेत् क्वचित् । ५ |

सुशीलो मितभुग् ee: seat जितेन्द्रिय: । यावदर्थं व्यवहरेत् स्त्रीषु स्रीनिर्जितेषु च । ६ |

वर्जयेत् प्रमदागाथामगृहस्थो aga: i इन्द्राणि प्रमाथीनि हरन्त्यपि यतेर्मन: । ७ |

केशप्रसाधनोन्मर्दस्नपनाभ्यञ्जनादिकम् । गुरुस्रीभिर्युवतिभि: कारयेन्नात्मनो gars ८ ।

नन्वग्नि: प्रमदा नाम घृतकुम्भसम: पुमान्।सुतामपि wl जह्यादन्यदा यावदर्थकृत् । ९ |

कल्पयित्वाऽऽत्मना यावदाभासमिदमीश्वर: । द्वैतं aaa विरमेत् ततो ea विपर्यय: । १०।
Narada began again : Dwelling in the house of his teacher, humble as a servant, with
his senses (fully) controlled, and doing him good offices and bearing the strongest affection
for him, a Brahmacari (a celibate student) should worship in the evenings and mornings his
teacher, the sacred fire, the sun-god and Lord Visnu (the Chief of the gods) as well as (the
deities presiding over) both the twilights (and noontide), silently muttering the holy Gayatri-
Mantra with a concentrated mind. (1-2) Well-regulated (in life), he should learn (take his
lessons in) the Vedas from his teacher if (and when) called (by him) and should (invariably)

bow (to him), touching the latter's feet with his head at the beginning as well as at the end
(of his lessons). (3) Carrying (blades of) the (sacred) KuSa grassin his hands, he should wear

duties and he realizes the futility of his pursuit after pleasure evenlike Emperor Yayati and the sage Saubhari, whose accounts
find place in Discourses XVIII. XIX and VI respectively of Book-Nine.

“ What is sought to be conveyed by this assertion is evidently this that if a man belonging to a lower grade in society
evinces the characteristics of a higher grade, he should be accorded the same honour as is due to the members of that higher
caste. But this should in no case be taken to mean he should adopt the vocation of a higher grade, as such deviation will create
confusion.
