-Dis.-2 ] BOOK ONE 5
Be BRE Re Rete Re BCH BL RRB ATR RRB BC RR RRR ROE RR ERS BRR BEET OR OER RES BO RSP ere iene totter
SARS BO 8 Heh Bf Bred ert ert BBR BREA RTE ROIOI AFR IER BIC आ HT 9 आआ शा

Sages, you have done well in asking me a question which is conducive to the welfare of
the world; for your enquiry relates to Sri Krsna, a topic which completely purifies the heart.(5)
That alone is the highest duty of men, from which follows devotion to Sri Krsna—a devotion
which is absolutely motiveless and knows no obstruction, and as a result of which the soul
realizes the all-blissful God and thus attains its object.(6) Contact established with Bhagavan
Vasudeva (Sri Krsna) through Devotion speedily awakens dispassion and immediate
knowledge. (7) A duty well performedis but labour lost, ifit fails to generate love for the stories
of Bhagavan Viswaksena (Sri Krsna). (8) Riches cannot be the end of Dharma (virtue),
which culminates in absolution or final beatitude. Even so wealth is a means of earning
religious merit; sensuous enjoyment has not been recognized as its consummation.(9)
Again, gratification of the senses is not the end of sensuous enjoyment; keeping the body
and soul togetheris the only use of sensuous enjoyment. And enquiry into Truth is the object
of keeping the body and soul together and not the attainment of heaven etc., through the
performance of pious acts.(10) The knowers of Truth declare knowledge alone as the
Reality—that: knowledge which does not admit of duality (the distinction of subject and
object), in other words, which is indivisible and one without a second, and which is called
by different names such as Brahma (the Absolute), Paramatma (the Supreme Spirit or
Oversoul) and Bhagavan (the Deity). (11) Sages who are full of faith perceive that Truth as
their own Self in their own heart through Devotion coupled with Knowledge and Dispassion
and acquired through hearing (of Srimad Bhagavata etc.). (12) Therefore, O noblest of
Brahmanas, the consummation of duties efficiently performed by men according to their
respective Varna (grade in society) and Asrama (stage in life) lies in securing the pleasure
of Sri Hari. (13) Hence with undivided mind one should ever hear and sing the praises of,
meditate upon and worship the Lord, whois the protector of His devotees. (14) The learned,
who are armed with the sword of constant meditation on Him cut asunder the hard knot of
Karma therewith. Who, then, would-not take delight in His stories? (15)

Ve: श्रद्दधानस्य वासुदेवकथारुचि: । स्यान्महत्सेवया विप्रा: पुण्यतीर्थनिषेवणात् i 2g |
sat स्वकथां कृष्ण: पुण्यश्रवणकीर्तन: | हृद्यन्त:स्थो ह्यभद्राणि fae सुहृत्सताम् । १७॥
नष्टप्रायेषुभद्रेषु नित्यँ भागवतसेवया । भगवत्युत्तमर्लोके भक्तिर्भवति नैष्ठिकी ies
तदा रजस्तमोभावा: कामलोभादयश्च aida एतैरनाविद्धं स्थितं wa प्रसीदति ।१९।
एवं प्रसन्नमनसो भगवद्भक्तियोगत: । भगवत्तत्त्वविज्ञानं मुक्तसङ्घस्य जायते । २०।
भिद्यते हदयग्रन्थिख्छिद्यन्ते सर्वसंशाया: | क्षीयन्ते चास्य कर्माणि ae एवात्मनीश्वरे 1221
amt a कवयो नित्यं भक्तिं परमया मुदा। वासुदेवे भगवति कुर्वन्त्यात्मप्रसादनीम् । २२।

By resorting to holy places of pilgrimage, 0 Brahmanas, one obtains the privilege of
waiting on exalted souls and thereby successively develops a desire for hearing the stories
of Bhagavan Vasudeva (Sri Krsna), faith in and a relish for such Stories. (16) Sri Krsna is
a disinterested friend of the virtuous and His praises sanctify those who listen to or sing them.
He abides in the heart of those who hear His stories and uproots the evil propensities of their
mind. (17) When the evil propensities are well-nigh eradicated through the constant service
of His devotees (or the day-to-day study of Srimad Bhagavata), there wells up abiding .
devotion to the Lord of excellent fame. (18) The mind is then freed from passions such as
lust and greed, which have their root in Rajas and Tamas, and established in Sattva, attains
purity. (19) In this way, when one is rid of all worldly attachment through loving devotion to
the Lord, and the mindis filled with delight, one realizes the truth relating to God asa matter
of course.(20)The moment a man sees God ashis very self the knot of ignorance in his heart
is broken asunder, all his doubts are dispersed and the entire stock of his Karmas gets
