Dis. 83] BOOK TEN 467

HAKAN RA AREN Te 999 AAEAEHARERER RAE REAR 985 eRe # eee tee ee ### # # ### # ७8 ८992 # 8892 ॥ #

the jewel from him restored it to my father. Seized with fear on account of the false imputation
made by him, my father bestowed the jewel on the Lord alongwith myself, even though he
had affianced me to another. (9)

जाम्बवत्युवाच
प्राज्ञाय देहकृदमुं निजनाथदेवं सीतापतिं त्रिणवहान्यमुनाभ्ययुध्यत्।
Went परीक्षित उपाहरदर्हणे मां पादौ प्रगृह्य मणिनाहममुष्य दासी igo!

Jambavati said : (Draupadi,) my father (Jambavan, the lord of bears,) was unaware that
my Lord was the same as Sri Rama, (his own lord and deity). (Therefore,) he fought the Lord
for twenty-seven days. After this test when he recognized the Lord (to be SriRama Himself),
he took hold of His feet and offered meas a present, together with the jewel. May I continue
to be His slave (from birth to birth, is my only prayer to the Lord). (10)

aoa
तपश्चरन्तीमाज्ञाय स्वपादस्पर्शनादाया । सख्योपेत्याग्रहीत् पाणिं योऽहं तद्गृहमार्जनी । ११1

Kalindi said : (Draupadi !) when the Lord came to know that I was practising austerities
in the hope of obtaining the privilege to touch His feet, He came with his friend (Arjuna), and
espoused me. । have now the privilege of sweeping His house. (11)

यो मां waar उपेत्य विजित्य भूपान् निन्ये श्वयूथगमिवात्मबलिं द्विपारि: ।
भ्रातॄंश्च मेऽपकुरुत: स्वपुरं श्रियौकस्तस्यास्तु मेऽनुभवमङ्घ्यवनेजनत्वम् | १२
Mitravinda said : (Draupadi !) my father called an assembly of kings at his capital to

enable me to elect my own partner in life. The Lord too attended the assembly and,
vanquishing all the kings (in battle), took me away to His capital (Dwaraka), which is the
abode of all excellence and beauty, even as the lion carries away his prey from a pack of
dogs. My brothers, who offered Him resistance, with a view to delivering me from His hands
and thereby injuring me, were equally worsted in the fight. | now seek that in every life | may
get the privilege of washing His feet. (12)

सत्योवाच
सप्तोक्षणोऽतिबलवीर्यसुतीक्ष्णशृङ्गान् पित्रा कृतान् क्षितिपवीर्यपरीक्षणाय ।
am वीरदुर्मदहनस्तरसा निगृह्य क्रीडन् बबन्ध ह यथा शिहावोऽजतोकान् । १३।
य इत्थं वीर्यशुल्कां मां दासीभिश्चतुरङ्गिणीम्। पथि निर्जित्य राजन्यान् निन्ये तद्दास्यमस्तु मे । १४॥
Satya said : (Draupadi !) in order to test the strength of the kings (who had assembled
to seek my hand), my father had secured seven oxen endowed with inordinate strength and
energy and very sharp horns, These oxen had shattered the pride of many a valiant warrior,

but the Lord playfully and quickly took hold of them, (put strings through their noses) and
brought them under His power in no time, even as children deal with kids. (13) Thus winning

“me as a reward for His strength, my Lord carried me to Dwaraka with all my attendant maids

under the protection of a strong army. He conquered on the way all the princes who tried to
intercept. (O queen, my only desire now is that) | may (always) get the opportunity of serving
Him. (14)
