214 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 25

LAAAIE SARA A ERAN EROE REBEL TERRE AEE TEE ES REE EE EE tee ae a en Be a RH आ

comfortable there) according to the space available alongwith their cattle-wealth, ring of
bullock-carts and dependant (viz., servants , priests and so on). (22) Being (constantly)
gazed upon by the aforesaid inhabitants of Vraja, who stood disregarding the pangs of
hunger and thirst as well as the need for personal comfort, Si Krsna held up the mountain
for a (full) week and did not stir from His position. (23) Much astonished to see that wonderful
power of Sti Krsna, shorn of pride, and thwarted in his purpose, Indra totally stopped his
clouds (from pouring showers). (24) Seeing the sky clear of clouds, the sun risen and the
violent downpour and tempest stopped, Sri Krsna (the Bearer of Govardhana), spoke to the
Gopas (as follows):—(25) "Dismiss (all) fear and go out, ७ cowherds, alongwith your
womenfolk, wealth and children. The storm and rain have ceased and the rivers are almost
emptied of their water." (26) Taking each his own cattle-wealth, the aforesaid cowherds as
well as the womenfolk, children and the aged thereupon gradually issued forth, their goods
loaded on their carts. (27) The almighty Lord too sportfully set down the mountain as before
in its own place, all the creatures looking on (with wonder). (28)
तं प्रेमवेगान्निभृतता व्रजौकसो यथा समीयु: परिरम्भणादिभि: ।
Wag सस्नेहमपूजयन् मुदा दध्यक्षताद्भिर्युयुजु: सदाशिष: 1291
यञ्ञोदा रोहिणी नन्दो रामश्च बलिनां at । कृष्णमालिङ्ग्य युयुजुराशिष: स्नेहकातरा: 1301
fafa देवगणा: साध्या: सिद्धगन्धर्वचारणा: । तुष्टुवुर्मुमुचुस्तुष्टा पुष्पवर्षाणि पार्थिव ।३१॥
शङ्खदुन्दुभयो नेदुर्दिवि देवप्रणोदिता: । जगुर्गन्धर्वपतयस्तुम्बुरुप्रमुखा नूप । ३२॥
ततोऽनुरक्तै: Tae: परिश्रितो राजन् स गोष्ठं सबलोऽव्रजद्धरि: ।
तथाविधान्यस्य कृतानि गोपिका mea ईयुर्मुदिता हृदिस्पृश: 1331
Overflowing with an uprush of love, the people of Vraja approached Him with embraces
and other appropriate (loving) gestures and the Gopis joyously exhibited their loving regard
for Him by sprinkling Him with curds and unbroken rice and showered their choice blessings
(on Him). (29) Overpowered with affection, Yasoda, Rohini, Nanda and Balarama, the
foremost of the powerful, hugged Sri Krsna and pronounced their blessings (on Him). (30)
(Highly) gratified, hosts of gods, the Sadhyas as well as the Siddhas, Gandharvas and
Caranas in heaven glorified Him and showered volleys of flowers (on Him), O ruler of the
earth ! (31) Prompted by the gods conchs and kettledrums sounded in the heavens; while
Gandharva chiefs—the foremost of whom was Tumburu—sang, O protector of men ! (32)
Surrounded by loving cowherds and accompanied by Balarama, O king, the said Sri Hari
went back from that place to Vraja. Full of delight the cowherd women (too) returned (to their
respective homes) celebrating such exploits (as the uplifting of Govardhana) of Sri Krsna
(who had captivated their heart). (33)

Thus ends twenty-fifth discourse in the first half of Book Ten of the
great and glorious Bhagavata-Purana, otherwise
known as the Paramahamsa-Samhita.

Reet व
CIOS NEES OS
