262 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 28

We WOK BeBe WR RHA REAR: डो जज को AH OO RE RN EAH त्ती RHEE EK ER TR HEE EEE EE EHH AER BR HR

अथाष्टाविंशोऽध्याय:

Discourse XXVIII
The process of the eightfold Yoga

श्रीभगवानुवाच
योगस्य लक्षणं aed स्रीजस्य नृपात्मजे । मनो येनैव विधिना yea ala सत्पथम् 2 ।
स्वधर्माचरणं weet farsi निवर्तनम्। दॆवाल्लब्धेन सन्तोष आत्मविच्चरणार्चनम् । २ |
ग्राम्यधर्मनिवृत्तिश्च मोक्षधर्मरतिस्तथा | मितमेध्यादनं शश्वद्दिविक्तक्षेमसेवनम् | ३ ।
अहिंसा सत्यमस्तेयॆ यावदर्थपरिग्रह: | ब्रह्मचर्यं तप: शोचं स्वाध्याय: पुरुषार्चनम् x |
a सदाऽऽसनजयस्थैर्यं प्राणजय: शनै: । प्रत्याहारश्चेन्द्रयाणां विषयान्मनसा हृदि । ५ |
स्वधिष्ण्यानामेकदेशे मनसा प्राणधारणम्।वैकुण्ठलीलाभिध्यानं समाधानं तथाऽऽत्मन: । ६ ।
एतैरन्यैश्च पथिभिर्मनो दुष्टमसत्पथम्। बुद्ध्या युञ्जीत हानकैर्जितप्राणो ह्यतन्दित: । ७ |

The Lord continued : (Now) | shall tell you, O princess, the character of Yoga
(meditation) with some object to rest upon, by practising which—and in no other way—the
mind gets purified and takes to the path of God. (1) To do one's allotted duty to the best of
one's ability and to shrink from prohibited acts; to remain contented with whatever is got as
a dispensation of Providence; to adore the feet of one who has realized the Self and tocease
from duties connected with the pursuit of religious merit, worldly possessions and sensuous
enjoyment; even so to take delight in duties tending to final beatitude; to take pure food in
a measured quantity’; to dwell permanently in a place which is not only secluded but also
free from molestation; to practise non-violence (in thought, word and deed): to speak the
truth, to abstain from thieving, to limit one's possessions to the extent of one's barest needs,
to abstain from sexual commerce, to practise austere penance, to observe purity (of body
and mind), to study the Vedas and other sacred texts, to worship the Deity, to observe
silence, to acquire steadiness by firmness in the very best postures, to control one's breath
by slow degrees, to withdraw one’s senses from their objects and direct them towards the
heart with the help of the mind, to fix one’s mind as well as the vital air on any mystical circle
in one's body, to contemplate without break on the pastimes of Lord Visnu and thereby
to compose one’s mind—by these and other such methods.(e.g., observing fasts, bestowing
gifts and so on) one should diligently control one’s breath and then gradually curb
one's wicked mind, addicted to evil ways,with the help of one's reason and apply it to
contemplation on God.(2—7)

शुचौ देशे प्रतिष्ठाप्य विजितासन आसनम्।तस्मिन्स्वस्तिसमासीनऋजुकाय:समभ्यसेत् । ८ ।
प्राणस्य जझञोधयेन्मार्गं पूरकुम्भकरेचके: । प्रतिकूलेन वा fad यथा स्थिरमचञ्चलम्। ९ |
मनोऽचिरात्स्याद्बिजं जितश्चासस्य योगिन: | वाव्वग्निभ्यां यथा लोहं ad त्यजति वैमलम् ।१०॥

प्राणायामैर्दहेद्देषान्धारणाभिश्च किल्बिषान्। प्रत्याहारेण संसर्गान्ध्यानेनानीश्वरान् गुणान् ।११॥
यदा मन: स्वं विरजं योगेन सुसमाहितम्। काष्ठां भगवतो ध्यायेत्स्वनासाग्रावलोकन: 1221

* The quantity of food one should take has been indicated in the following Smrti-text, quoted by Sridhara Swami:—
Bi anh पूरयेदन्नैस्तायेनैकं प्रपूरयेत्। मारुतस्य प्रचारार्धं चतुर्थमवशेषयेत्॥
"One should fill two quarters of one’s belly with articles of food and one quarter with water. The fourth quarter should
be kept empty for the free passage of air.”
