Dis. 5] BOOK ELEVEN 535

SERCO ORO fom न ककक (on RI or em 96 ne 8 6 Een erent rene rein cencen

permitting sexual commerce with one’s wedded wife, meat-eating at the end of an animal
sacrifice, drinking of wine during a Sautramani sacrifice (in the case of those who are
addicted to these); the (real) intention (of the Sastra) is to turn man away from them. (11) The
only fruit (proper use) of wealth is Dharma or piety which gives knowledge and direct
realization and forthwith leads to supreme peace or Liberation. Those who use wealth
(solely) for their own comfort or of their family forget death, the formidable enemy of their
body. (12) They do not understand the pure essence of their religion. Only the smelling of
wine is sanctioned (ina Sautramani sacrifice) and animal sacrifice is allowed for the adoration
of the deities and itis not permissible to kill them for meat. Similarly, sexual relation with one’s
wife is allowed withthe motive of getting an issue and not for the sake of enjoyment. (13) Those
who are ignorant of this real Dharma and, though wicked and haughty, account themselves
virtuous kill animals without any feeling of remorse or fear of punishment, and are devoured
by those very animals in their next birth. (14) Those who hate others, in whom also dwells
the same Self or Hari, hate Hari Himself and, being deeply attached to their mortal body
and other relations, fall into hell. (15) Those who have not attained the knowledge of real
truth but have passed the stage of utter ignorance, and are attached to the threefold objects
of existence (Dharma, Artha and Kama), but have no time to pursue the path (of Liberation)
are sure to bring about their ruin. (16) They kill their own self, and, being devoid of peace
of mind, regard ignorance as knowledge (confuse action for knowledge). They do not
experience fulfilment and, being frustrated in their aims and thwarted by the Time-Spirit,
become miserable. (17) Those who are averse to the Lord are obliged against their will to
forsake their home, wealth, children and friends, gained with great difficulty, and enter the
dark hell. (18)

राजोवाच
कस्मिन् काले स भगवान् किं aut: कीदृशो नृभि: । नाम्ना वा केन विधिना पूज्यते तदिहोच्यताम् । १९॥
The king (Nimi) submitted : Pray, tell us now in which ages, assuming what forms and
colours and by what names the Lord is known, and by what prescribed rites He is worshipped
by men. (19)
करभाजन उवाच
कृतं त्रेता द्वापरं च कलिरित्येषु केशव:। नानावर्णाभिधाकारो नानैव विधिनेज्यते । २०॥
कृते शुक्लश्चतुर्बाहुर्जटिलो वल्कलाम्बर: | कृष्णाजिनोपवीताक्षान् बिभ्रद् दण्डकमण्डलू । २१।
मनुष्यास्तु तदा झान्ता fea: सुहृद: समा:। यजन्ति तपसा ad waa च दमेन च ।२२॥
हंस: सुपर्णो वैकुण्ठो धर्मो योगेश्वरोऽमल:। gn: पुरुषोऽव्यक्त: परमात्मेति गीयते । २३॥
त्रेतायां रक्तवर्णोऽसौ चतुर्बाहुस्रिमेखल: । हिरण्यकेशस्त्रय्यात्मा स्रुक्स्नुवाद्युपलक्षण: । २४॥
a तदा मनुजा देवं सर्वदेवमयं हरिम्। यजन्ति विद्यया त्रय्या धर्मिष्ठा ब्रह्मवादिन: ।२५॥
विष्णुर्यज्ञ पृश्रिगर्भ: सर्वदेव उरुक्रम: । वृषाकपिर्जयन्तश्च उरुगाय इतीर्यते । २६॥
द्वापरे भगवाञ्छ्याम: पीतवासा निजायुध: । श्रीवत्सादिभिरङ्कैश्च लक्षणैरुपलक्षित: 129 1
a तदा get neal महाराजोपलक्षणम्।यजन्ति वेदतन्त्राभ्यां परं जिज्ञासवो Fa ।२८॥
नमस्ते वासुदेवाय नम: agin च । प्रद्युम्नायानिरुद्धाय तुभ्यं भगवते नम: ।२९॥
नारायणाय ऋॠषये पुरुषाय महात्मने। fader विश्वाय सर्वभूतात्मने नम: ।३०॥
इति द्वापर osdia स्तुवन्ति जगदीश्वरम् । नानातन्त्रविधानेन कलावपि यथा शृणु ।३१॥

The sage Karabhajana replied : Lord KeSava in the ages of Satya, Treta, Dwapara an
