Dis. 7 ] BOOK SEVEN 675

SESSRERASAH LHRH AEAAAMATAAAAT HO HANARLAATAREHHAeehAHHoReHAAReRAURE HEE AEREERAEER ER
SERRE RS SSRS SSS SSSSRAESRERERT TRON AAAAEAE नेम्नि विच्च्
well-known and pure wisdom—which cannot be easily attained—to (the sage) Narada. It
can (however) be (easily) attained by (all) embodied beings who have bathed themselves
in the dust of the lotus-feet of those exclusively devoted to the Lord, and claiming nothing
as their own. (27) This knowledge with the immediate apprehension of truth as well as the
pure (innocent) cult of Devotion to the Lord was received by me in the past through hearing
from the mouth of the sage Narada, who has seen the Lord (with his own eyes). (28)

il gal Hy:
Wee त्वं वयं चापि नर्तेऽन्यं विद्महे गुरुम्। एताभ्यां गुरुपुत्राभ्यां बालानामपि ant । २९॥
बालस्यान्त:पुरस्थस्य महत्सङ्गो दुरन्वय: | छिन्धि a: संशयं सौम्य स्याच्चेद्दिश्रम्भकारणम् 1301
The sons of the Daityas said : Prahrada, you as well as we know no other teacher
except these two sons of Sukra (the preceptor of the Daityas) and indeed these two have
been our masters ever since we were mere infants. (29) (And) association with an exalted
soul (like Narada) was (most) difficult when you were an infant (shut up) within (the four walls

of) the gynaeceum. Resolve our doubt, O gentle one, if there is any (valid) ground for giving
credence to your words. (30)

Thus ends the sixth discourse, forming part of the Narrative of Prahrada
in Book Seven of the great and glorious Bhagavata-Purana,
otherwise known as the Paramahamsa-Samnhita.

ONE २ १
CICS Sie ह

अथ सप्तमोऽध्याय:

Discourse VII

(Prahrada's) teaching to the Daityas' sons
AINE उवाच
एवं दैत्यसुतै: पृष्ठटो महाभागवतोऽसुर: । उवाच स्मयमानस्तान्स्मरन् मदनुभाषितम् । १ ।
Narada resumed : Questioned thus by the Daityas’ sons, the Asura (Prahrada), that
great devotee of the Lord, smilingly addressed them (as follows), calling to mind my teaching
(to him). (1)
अह्राद उवाच
पितरि प्रस्थितेऽस्माकं we मन्दराचलम् । युद्धोद्यमं परं चक्रुर्विबुधा दानवान्प्रति । २ ।
पिपीलिकैरहिरिव fae लोकोपतापन: । पापेन पापोऽभक्षीति वादिनो वासवादय: । ३ ।
तेषामतिबलोद्योगं निशम्यासुरयूथपा: । वध्यमाना: सुरैर्भीता egg: सर्वतोदिशम् । ४ ।
कलत्रपुत्रमित्राप्तान्गृहान्पशुपरिच्छदान् । नावेक्षमाणास्त्वरिता: सर्वे प्राणपरीप्सव: । ५ |
ae, राजशिबिरममरा जयकाङ्खिण: ieee राजमहिषीं mat मम चाग्रहीत् । ६ । `
नीयमानां भयोद्बिम्रां रुदतीं कुररीमिव । यदृच्छयाऽऽगतस्तत्र Sade पथि । ७ ।
प्राह मेनां सुरपते नेतुमर्हस्यनागसम् aS मुञ्च महाभाग सतीं परपरिग्रहम् । ८ |
Prahrada began : Our father (Hiranyakagipu) having left for Mount Mandara to practise

austerities (and having been eaten away by white ants), Indra and the other gods launched
a great military campaign against the Danavas, saying: “Fortunately (for us) the evil one
