Dis. 18 ] BOOK NIN 71

See eee eee २२०७ EEE RHEE eee Es che eee ees se ieee ee nee

ययातर्वाच
अतृप्तोऽस्म्यद्य कामानां ब्रह्मन् दुहितरिं स्म ते। व्यत्यस्यतां यथाकामं वयसा योऽभिधास्यति 1391
इति लब्धव्यवस्थान: wo ज्येष्ठमवोचत । यदो aa प्रतीच्छेमां जरां देहि निजं aa: 131
मातामहकृतां वत्स न तृप्तो विषयेष्नहम्। वयसा भवदीयेन रंस्ये कतिपया: समा: ।३९1
Yayati submitted ; | am unsated till today with sensuous enjoyments in the company
of your daughter, O holy Brahmana! (Sukracarya replied ) "Old age may be exchanged (by
you) at will with the youth of any other who may voluntarily accept it. ” (37) Having obtained
a solution (of his problem) in this form, Yayati (returned to his capital and) said to his eldest
son, “Yadudear, take this old age (of mine), brought about by (the curse of) your grandfather
(mother's father, Sukracarya) and part with your own youth, my darling ! (for) |am not yet
satiated with the pleasures of sense and intend to revel some (more) years with (the help
of) your youth. (38-39)
यदुरुवाच

नोत्सहे जरसा स्थातुमन्तरा प्राप्तया तव । अविदित्वा सुखं आम्यं वैतृष्ण्यं नैति पूरुष: ।४०॥

agi: पित्रा द्रुह्युश्चानुश्च भारत। प्रत्याचस्युरधर्मज्ञा ह्यनित्ये नित्यबुद्धय: ॥४१॥

aye, तनयं पूरुं वयसोनं गुणाधिकम्। न त्वमग्रजवद् वत्स मां प्रत्याख्यातुमर्हसि ।४२॥

Yadu replied : | have no courage to (accept and) live with your old age, got (by you) in
the middle of your life. (For,) having not (actually) tasted the vulgar pleasures a man does
not attain to desirelessness. (40) Though urged by their father, Turvasu and Druhyuand Anu
too declined, O scion of Bharata, since they did not know what was right and looked upon
the transient (body etc.) as eternal. (41) (Now) Yayati asked his son, Paru—who, though
youngest in age, was superior in point of virtues—and added, "Dear one ! like your elder
brothers you should not refuse me." (42)
पूरुरुवाच
को नु लोके मनुष्येन्द्र पितुरात्मकृत: पुमान्। प्रतिकर्तुं क्षमो यस्य प्रसादाद् विन्दते परम् ।४३॥
उत्तमश्चिन्तितं gaia प्रोक्तकारी तु मध्यम:। अधमोऽश्रद्धया कुर्यादकर्तोच्चरिते पितु: nex!
Puru replied : As a matter of fact, what man in this world, O ruler of men ! can requite

his father, the procreator of his body, by whose grace he can attain the highest (object of
his life)? (43) The best son is he who accomplishes (in anticipation) whatever is expected
by his father (without waiting to be told what is wanted by him). A mediocre son is he who
does (only) that which he is (expressly) told to. The lowest is he who does his father's
bidding with irreverence; while he who refuses to do his bidding is (no more than) the
refuse of his father. (44)

इति प्रमुदित: ge: प्रत्यगृह्णाज्जरां पितु: । सोऽपि तद्वयसा कामान् यथावज्जुजुषे नृप ॥४५॥
सप्तद्वीपपति: were पितृवत् पालयन् प्रजा:। यथोपजोषं विषयाञ्जुजुषेऽव्याहतेन्द्रिय: ive)
देवयान्यप्यनुदिनं मनोवाग्देहवस्तुभि: । प्रेयस: परमां प्रीतिमुवाह प्रेयसी रह: rset
अयजद यज्ञपुरुषं क्रतुभिर्भूरिदक्षिणै: । सर्वदेवमयं देवं सर्ववेदमयं हरिम्॥४८।
aise विरचितं व्योम्नीव जलदाबलि: । नानेव भाति नाभाति स्वप्नमायामनोरथ: xe
तमेव ge विन्यस्य weed गुहाशयम्।नारायणमणीयांसं निराशीरयजत् प्रभुम् ।५०॥
एवं वर्षसहस्राणि मनर:षष्ठैर्मन:सुखम्।विदधानोऽपि नातृप्यत् सार्वभौम: कदिन्दियै: 1481

इति श्रीमद्धागवते महापुराणे पारमहंस्यां संहितायां नवमस्कन्धेऽष्टादोऽध्याय: 12.21
