30 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA-MAHATMYA [ Dis. 5
WOW We SHG RE Me MY RAL HEE RE RE ती जो ती क He Be HOSE GE BB Be We Re Re Be WT WWE RE HY UY HTT By Br HORT BL EEG Re BH Gi Bs की कौ BL BEB ज BEBE चो ङ He BORE Me MRA वीत्त
इति तद्वाक्यसंत्रासाज्जनन्या पुत्रदु:खत: । कूपे पात: कृतो रात्रो तेन सा निधनं गता 121
गोकर्णस्तीर्थयात्रार्थं निर्गतो योगसंस्थित: । न ea न सुखं तस्य न at नापि area: 131

Sita began again : His father having retired (to the woods), Dhundhukari severely beat
his mother (one day) and threatened her saying, "Tell me where the money is or else | will
thrash you with a burning stick." (1) Afraid of this threat and grieved by the ill-treatment
received from the son, the mother threw herself into a well at night and died of the fall. (2)
Established in union with God, Gokarna experienced no sorrow or joy. He had no enemy or
friend and left on a pilgrimage.(3)

धुन्धुकारी गृहेऽतिष्ठत्पञ्चपण्यवधूवृत: । अत्युग्रकर्मकर्ता च तत्पोषणविमूढधी: । ४ |

एकदा कुलटास्तास्तु भूषणान्यभिलिप्सव:। तदर्थं निर्गतो गेहात्कामान्धो मृत्युमस्मरन्। ५ |

यतस्ततश्च संहृत्य fad वेश्म gaia: | ताभ्योऽयच्छत्सुवस्त्राणि भूषणानि कियन्ति च । ६ |

बहुवित्तचयं eg wat नार्यो व्यचारयन्।चौर्यं करोत्यसौ नित्यमतो राजा ग्रहीष्यति । ७ |

fi हृत्वा was मारयिष्यति निश्चितम्। अतोऽर्थगुप्तये गूढमस्माभि: fe न हन्यते । ८ ।

निहत्यैनं गृहीत्वार्थं यास्यामो aa कुत्रचित्। इति ता निश्चयं कृत्वा सुप्तं सम्बद्ध्य रर्मिभि: । ९ ।

unt कण्ठे निधायास्य तन्मृत्युमुपचक्रमु:। त्वरितं न ममारासौ चिन्तायुक्तास्तदाभवन् । १०॥

तप्ताङ्गारसमूहांश्च तन्मुखे fe विचिक्षिपु: । अग्निज्वालातिदु:खेन व्याकुलो निधनं गत: ee!

तं देहं मुमुचुर्गर्ते प्राय: साहसिका: स्रिय: । न ज्ञातं तद्रहस्यं तु केनापीदं ada wie

लोकै: YM वदन्ति स्म at यात: प्रियो हि न: । आगमिष्यति वर्षेऽस्मिन् वित्तलोभविकर्षित: । १३1

aint नैव तु विश्वासं दुष्टानां कारयेद्बुध: | विश्वासे य: स्थितो मूढ: स दु:खै: परिभूयते ies!

सुधामयं वचो यासां कामिनां रसवर्धनम्। हृदयं क्षुरधाराभं प्रिय: को ara योषिताम् । eu

संह्य fat ता याता: Hoel बहुभर्तृका: | धुन्धकारी बभूवाथ महान् प्रेत: कुकर्मत: । १६॥

वात्यारूपधरो नित्यं धावन्दशादिशोऽन्तरम्। शीतातपपरिक्लिष्टो निराहार: पिपासित: । १७॥

न लेभे ai क्वापि a दैवेति मुहुर्वदन्। कियत्कालेन गोकर्णो qa लोकादबुध्यत ec

ag तं विदित्वैव गयाश्नाद्धमचीकरत्। यस्मिंस्तीर्थे a संयाति ax श्राद्धमवर्तयत्।१९॥
Dhundhukari stayed in the house with five prostitutes. His understanding having been
confounded by his anxiety to maintain them, he began to perpetrate the most heinous acts. (4)
One day those unchaste women sought ornaments of him. With that end in view he went
out of the house blind with passion and forgetful of his death. (5) Stealing money from here
and there, he returned home and handed over to them costly garments and some gold
ornaments. (6) Seeing a collection of abundant riches the women thought the same night,
“This fellow commits burglary everyday, hence the king will (surely) apprehend him. Nay,
confiscating his wealth the former will also certainly sentence him to death. Therefore, for
the preservation of this wealth, why not secretly kill him ? (7-8) Disposing of him and
appropriating the wealth, let us go wherever we like”. Having resolved thus, they bound him
tightly with cords while asleep and placing a noose round his neck tried to strangle him. He
(however) did not die soon. Then they were filled with anxiety and actually put live coals into
his mouth. Distressed with extreme agony caused by the flames he expired.(9—11) They

consigned the dead body to a pit, as women are generally daring. Nobody could know of this
clandestine act of theirs in its true colours. (12) Questioned by people they gave out that,
