Dis. 11] BOOK TWELVE 711

व ERAN AREA AOR ALLER SELES BSAA ALA SERED BABEL SEEDED OEE BAL AES LEA IIA LBA I AIA DASA र्म्म

limbs, attendants, weapons and ornaments of Lord Visnu (the Lord of Sri, the goddess of
fortune), who is absolute Consciousness, and of what principles do they conceive them
as constituted. (2-3)
सूत उवाच

नमस्कृत्य गुरून् वक्ष्ये विभूतीर्वैष्णवीरपि । या: प्रोक्ता वेदतन्त्राभ्यामाचार्यै: पद्मजादिभि: । ४ ।

मायाद्यैर्नवभिस्तत्वै: a विकारमयो fare निर्मितो aaa aa सचित्के भुवनत्रयम्। ५ |

wat: प्रजननमपानो मृत्युरीशितु: । तद्बाहवो लोकपाला मनश्चन्द्रो yal यम: । ७ ।

लज्जोत्तरोऽधरो लोभो दन्ता ज्योत्स्ना स्मयो भ्रम: । रोमाणि भूरुहा भूम्नो मेघा: पुरुषमूर्धजा: | ८ ।

ard वै yet यावत्या dem मित:। तावानसावपि महापुरुषो लोकसंस्थया । ९ ।

Sita resumed : Bowing to (the feet of) my preceptors, | shall speak (to you all) about the

glorious manifestations even of Lord Visnu (which are so difficult to comprehend and) which
have been discussed at some length by Brahma (the lotus-born creator of the universe) and
other teachers in the light of the Vedas and the Tantras. (4) The well-known cosmic egg is
made up of nine fundamental principles, Maya (Prakrti) and (eight) others (viz., Mahat-tattva
or the principle of cosmic intelligence, Sitra or the active aspect of Mahat-tattva, Ahankara
or the cosmic ego, and the five Tanmatras or subtle elements), as well as of the (sixteen)
Vikaras (or modifications, viz., the mind, the ten Indriyas and the five gross elements). In that
cosmic form as presided over by the Spirit appears the three worlds (viz., heaven, earthand
the intervening space). (5) This as a matter of fact constitutes the Purusa (Cosmic) form of
the Lord. The earth represents His feet; heaven the head; the mid-air region, His navel; the
sun, His eyes; the air, His nostrils; the quarters, His ears; Prajapati (the god presiding over
creation), His generative organ; Death constitutes the Lord's anus; the guardians of the
spheres, His arms; the moon, His mindand Yama (the god of retribution), His eyebrows; Lajja
(the goddess presiding over modesty), His upper and Lobha (Greed), His tower lip;
moonlight, (the brightness of) His teeth; Maya (the deluding potency), His smile; the trees,
the hair on the body of the infinite Lord and clouds, the locks on the head of the Supreme
Person. (6——8) Measured with reference to the disposition of the (various) spheres, the said
Cosmic Person to actually bears the same proportion as this (mortal) man does when
measured with reference to the disposition of his own limbs. (9)

कौस्तुभव्यपदेशेन स्वात्मज्योतिर्बिभर्त्यज: | wena व्यापिनी साक्षात् श्रीवत्समुरसा विभु: 1201
erat वनमालाख्यां नानागुणमयीं दधत्। ceeded पीतं ब्रह्मसूत्रं त्रिवृत् स्वरम् ।११॥
बिभर्ति सांख्यं योगं च देवो मकरकुण्डले। मौलिं पदं पारमेष्टयं सर्वलोकाभयङ्करम् 1१२॥
अव्याकृतमनन्ताख्यमासनं यदधिष्ठित: । धर्मज्ञानादिभिर्युक्तं सत्त्वं पद्ममिहोच्यते ।१३।
ओज-सहोबलयुतं Ward wl दधत्। अपां adi दरवरं trend सुदर्दयनम् ।१४॥
awh नभस्तत्त्वमसिं ud ate कालरूपं धनु: ag तथा कर्ममयेषुधिम् ।१५॥
इन्द्राणि हारानाहुराकूतीरस्य स्यन्दनम्।तन्म्रात्राण्यस्याभिव्यक्तिं मुद्रयार्थक्रियात्मताम् ।१६॥
ques देवयजनं dar deen आत्मन:।परिचर्या भगवत आत्मनो दुरितक्षय: ।१७।

The birthless Lord carries (on His Person) the (pure) consciousness of the Jiva, His own

‘particle, in the form of the Kaustubha gem and itis the diffusive splendour of the fatter which

the Lord actually wears on His (right) breast as (the mark of) Srivatsa. (10) Carrying (on His
person) His own Maya, consisting of various Gunas (or modes of Prakrti) in the form of
Vanamala (a garland of sylvan flowers); a golden piece of linen, consisting of the Vedas,
