Dis. 16] <T*BOOK ONE 65

RRR PROT HREM MRE BEBENE eH GEHL BENT BE HERB, He HME ROR ERE RE REM MR RONEN RE ROR He PRE RERWERE MRE HE RE ROMO WON OM MOMOHE MONE ROR ROMO NE MERON He HOME
ज्न्र

by the manes (who had called there to take him back). (49) Draupadi also, when she
came to know of her lord's indifference (to the world), concentrated her mind on the divine
Sti Krsna (the son of Vasudeva) and attained to Him. (50) He who listens with reverence
to this most sacred and blessed story of the departure in this manner of Pandu's sons,
the beloved of the Lord, develops devotion to Sri Hari (Sri Krsna) and attains perfection
(final beatitude). (51)

Thus ends the fifteenth discourse entitled the "Ascent of the Pandavas to Heaven’,
in Book One of the great and glorious Bhagavata-Purana,
otherwise known as the Paramahamsa-Samhita.

१४२8 St
Pur ire

अथ षोडशोऽध्याय:

Discourse XVI
Conquest of the world by king Pariksit and the dialogue between
Dharma (the god of piety) and Mother Earth
ad उवाच
ad: परीक्षिद् द्विजवर्यशिक्षया महीं महाभागवत: wana =z!
यथा fe सूत्यामभिजातकोविदा: wafer विप्र महद्गूणस्तथा । १ |
स उत्तरस्य तनयामुपयेम इरावतीम्। जनमेजयादींश्चतुरस्तस्यामुत्पादयत् सुतान् 2 |
आजहाराश्वमेधांसत्रीन् गङ्गायां year aed We Het देवा यत्राक्षिगोचरा: । ३ ।
निजग्राहौजसा dk: कलिं दिग्विजये क्वचित्। नृपलिङ्गधरं शूद्रं घ्नन्तं गोमिथुनं पदा । ४ |
Sita continued : After the ascent of the Pandavas to heaven king Pariksit who was
a great devotee of the Lord, ruled over the earth according to the instructions of the
foremost Brahmanas. He possessed, O Saunaka, the same noble virtues as had been
predicted by expert astrologers at the time of his birth.(1) He married lravati, the daughter
of Uttara (his own maternal uncle*) and begot through her four sons, Janamejaya and
others. (2) Taking Krpa (the son of Saradvan) for his Guru (guide), he performed on the
bank of the Ganga three ASwamedhas (horse-sacrifices), offering liberal sacrificial fees
(to the officiating priests). In these sacrifices the gods accepted the offerings before the
eyes of all. (3) Somewhere in the course of his conquest of the world the hero caught

and subdued by his superior might the spirit of the Kali age, who in the form of a Sddra
was disguised as a prince, striking with his foot a cow and a bull. (4)

TA उवाच
कस्य हेतोर्निजग्राह कलिं दिग्विजये qa: । नृदेवचिह्नधृक ye: कोऽसौ गां य: पदाहनत् |
तत्कथ्यतां महाभाग ale कृष्णकथाश्रयम् । ५ |

अथवास्य पदाम्भोजमकरन्दलिहां सताम्।किमन्यैरसदालापैरायुषो यदसद्व्यय: । ६ ।
क्षुद्रायुषां Us मर्त्यनामृतमिच्छताम्। इहोपहूतो भगवान् मृत्यु: झञामित्रकर्मणि । ७ ।

*Itseems it was customary among the princes in those days to marry the daughter of their own maternal uncle (mother's
brother), which is otherwise regarded as incestuous and prohibited by the scriptures.
