Dis. 3] BOOK SEVEN 659

HHHKEEAAROHHKSHLERELHE EEE HR आ क्त क्षी कोको डानोक्तै जो ATE OEE E HE ee Re ee Ot
त्न्रर्त्त

the worlds with his asceticism, like the sun wholly screened by clouds, and spoke laughingly
(as follows). (16)

३

Fears
उत्तिष्ठोत्तिष्ठ भद्रं a तप:सिद्धोऽसि काह्यप । वरदोऽहमनुप्राप्तो ब्रियतामीप्सितो az: । १७॥
अद्राक्षमहमेतत्ते ETE महदद्भुतम्। दंशभक्षितदेहस्य प्राणा ह्यस्थिषु aA । १८॥
नैतत्पूर्वर्षयश्चक्रुर्न करिष्यन्ति चापरे। निरम्बुर्धारयेत्प्राणान् को वै दिव्यसमा: TALI १९।
व्यवसायेन तेऽनेन दुष्करेण मनस्विनाम्।तपोनिष्ठेन भवता जितोऽहं दितिनन्दन । २०।
ate: ame: सर्वा ददाम्यसुरपुङ्खव । nee a अमर्त्यस्य दर्शनं नाफलं मम । २१।

Brahma said: Arise, arise, O son of Kasyapa ! May good betide you; you have achieved
your purpose through austerities. (It is therefore that) |, the bestower of boons, have come
over to you ! Any boon desired by you may (now) be asked. (17) | have witnessed this
extraordinary and marvellous stamina of yours, that your body having been eaten away by
gnats, your life actually hangs an your bones (alone). (18) Neither did the former sages
practise such asceticism nor will the coming ones do it. Indeed, who can support life
without water for a hundred celestial years (or 36,000 human years)? (19) Through this
perseverance of yours, (which is) hard to practise even for those who have controlled their
mind. | have been conquered by you, intent as you are on austerities, O delighter (son) of
Diti. (20) Therefore, | bestow on you all your desired blessings, O chief of the demons. My
sight, immortal as | am, cannot go in vain for you, a mortal. (21)

ANG उवाच
इत्युक्त्वाऽऽदिभवो देवो भक्षिताङ्खं पिपीलिकै: | कमण्डलुजलेनौक्षद्दिव्येनामोघराधसा । २२ ।
स तत्कीचकवल्मीकात् सहञऒजोबलान्वित: । सर्वावयवसम्पन्ना वज्रसंहननो युवा I

उत्थितस्तप्तहेमाभो विभावसुरिवैधस: 123 |
a निरीक्ष्याम्बरे देवं हंसवाहमवस्थितम्।ननाम fice भूमौ तद्दर्शनमहोत्सव: । २४॥
उत्थाय Safe: प्रह्व ईक्षमाणो दृशा विभुम्। हर्षाश्रुपुलकोद्भेदो गिरा गद्गदयाऽगृणात् । २५॥

Narada continued : Having spoken thus, Brahma (the first-born deity) sprinkled the
demon, whose body had been eaten away by ants, with the water of his Kamandalu (a water-
pot made of wood or the hard shell of a coconut)—water which was supernal (in substance
and of unfailing virtue. (22) From the ant-hill covered by bamboos, he then emerged like fire
from fuel, endowed with potency of mind, keenness of the senses and strength of body,
perfect in all limbs, possessed of an adamantine frame, youthful and brilliant as molten
gold.(23) Perceiving the god Brahma (who was mounted on a swan) standing in the air, the
demon greeted him with his head resting on the ground, transported with joy at his sight. (24)
(Then) rising with joined palms in a suppliant posture and gazing at the powerful god with
unwinking eyes, he offered (his) praises in faltering words (as follows) with tears of joy (in
his eyes) and hair standing on end. (25)

हिरण्यकर्चिपुरुवाच
कल्पान्ते कालसृष्टेन A तमसाऽऽव्रतम्। अभिव्यनग् जगदिदं स्वयंज्योति: स्वरोचिषा । २६॥
