590 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 8
REVAL EOKHAKEA AHR EHH EAH KOE CE RHEE RLELEKE LECH LEK EELEKER LETHE LALA EAA EAHA
Spouse of Goddess Laksmi) manifested in three glorious forms (Brahma, Visnu and Siva), at
dusk. May Lord Hrsikesa guard me in the first part of the night (and) Lord Padmanabha (who
has a lotus spring from His navel), alone, during the second part (till midnight) as well as at
midnight (during the third part). (21) May the Lord bearing the mark of Srivatsa (a white curl
of hair representing the foot-print of the sage Bhrgu) on His chest, protect me in the latter
(fourth) part of the night; Lord Janardana (whois supplicated by men), carrying a sword (in His
hand), at the close (during the fifth part) of the night; Damodara (Lord Sri Krsna as bound at
the waist with a string to a wooden mortar used for threshing paddy etc.), by mother Yasoda
as a punishment for His childish pranks), at dawn and Lord ViSweswara (the Ruler of the
universe), manifested as the Time-Spirit (or Death), during both twilights (morning and
evening). (22)

ws युगान्तानलतिग्मनेमि wa समन्ताद् भगवत्प्रयुक्तम् ।

दन्दग्धि दन्दग्ध्यरिसिन्यमाशु कक्षं यथा वातसखो RATT: 123 |

कूष्माण्डवैनायकयक्षरक्षोभूतग्रहांश्चूर्णय चूर्णयारीन् 12% |

a यातुधानप्रमथप्रेतमातृपिशाचविप्रग्रहघोरदृष्टीन् ।

as विद्रावय कृष्णपूरितो भीमस्वनोऽरेर्हृदयानि कम्पयन् । २५॥

a तिग्मधारासिवरारिसैन्यमीशप्रयुक्तो मम छिन्धि fer

wee wears छादय द्विषामघोनां हर पापचक्षुषाम् । २६

(Addressing Sudarsana, a divine attendant of Lord Visnu, who when commanded by Him,

assumes the form of a discus and is employed by Him in destroying His adversaries or the
enemies of His devotees,) Revolving all round, (when) hurled by the Lord in the form of adiscus
with a rim fierce as the fire raging at the time of universal dissolution, (pray,) completely burn,
(O) completely burn (my) enemy's host at once, (even) as fire helped by the wind consumes
(apile of) hay. (23) (Similarly addressing the Lord's mace, Kaumodaki in living form,) Beloved
as You are of the invincible Lord (whose servant | am), and sending forth sparks whose
impact is as deadly as that of a thunderbolt, O mace, (pray), thoroughly crush, (O)
completely pound the Kusmandas (a class of imps), Vainayakas (a class of malevolent
demigods who are living obstacles to all noble and benevolent undertakings), Yaksas (a
species of ghosts), Raksasas (ogres), BhUtas (ghosts) and Grahas (a class of evil demons
who seize upon children); and pulverize, (O) crumble to dust, (my) adversaries. (24)
(Addressing the conch of Sri Krsna, named Paficajanya,) Blown by Sri Krsna and shaking
the hearts of (my) foes with your terrific blast, O lord of conches, may You (be pleased to)
drive away the Yatudhanas (ogres), Pramathas (a class of attendants of Lord Siva), evil
spirits, Matrkas (female imps posing as mothers), goblins, Brahmaraksasas* (the ghosts of
Brahmanas who in their lifetime carry away the wives of others and the property of a
Brahmana) and other evil-eyed spirits. (25) Directed by the Lord, O sharp-edged Nandaka
(the foremost of all swords), may you (be pleased to) cut down, O mow down, my enemies’
host. (Pray,) cover the eyes of (my) wicked foes, O shield with a hundred moon -like buttons!
and blind the eyes of the evil-eyed. (26)

यन्नो Wa ग्रहेभ्योऽभूत् केतुभ्यो नृभ्य एव च । सरीसृषेभ्यो दंष्टिभ्यो भूतेभ्योंऽहोभ्य wa वा । २७।
सर्वाण्येतानि भगवन्नामरूपास्त्रकीर्तनात् | प्रयान्तु संक्षयं सद्यो ये न: श्रेय:प्रतीपका: । २८॥

* परस्य योषितं हत्वा ब्रह्मस्वमपहत्य च। अरण्ये निर्जले SH भवति न्रह्मराक्षस:॥
Also cf. Manusmrti X1l.60. (Yajnavalkya-Smni Ill. 212)
