182 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 12

ड त्री डौ ङी व ATH KH LOCKE LAH HEH HEATH ESO क्तछोजा ELEN EHS SES STE TRAE LENSE REMAH HH ERO He Pe toe
त्प्तन्र eS Be tr

wise recognize as Veda personified. (34) The Kalpa that marked the end of the same
Parardha is called the Padma Kalpa, in which sprang from the pool of Sri Hari's navel the
lotus representing all the worlds. (35) The present has been declared as the opening Kalpa
of the second Parardha, O Vidura, (a scion of Bharata). It is known by the name of Varaha-
Kalpa, inasmuch as Sri Hari took the form of a boar in this Kalpa. (36) The aforesaid period
of two Parardhas is figuratively spoken of as the mere twinkling of an eye of the immutable,
immortal, beginningless Lord, the Soul (origin) of the universe. (37) This all-powerful Time,
ranging from a Paramanu (the smallest measure) to the length of two Parardhas, has no
control over the all-embrdcing Lord; it holds sway only on those who have identified
themselves with the body and all that is associated with it. (38)

fae: सहितो युक्तैर्विशेषादिभिरावृत: | ruses बहिरयं पञ्चाशत्कोटिविस्तृत: 1391

दशोत्तराधिकैर्यत्र 9 wfae: परमाणुवत्।लक्ष्यतेऽन्तर्गताश्चान्ये कोटिशो ह्यण्डराशय: ।४०॥

तदाहुरक्षरं ब्रह्म सर्वकारणकारणम्। विष्णोर्धाम ut साक्षात्पुरुषस्य महात्मन: ।४१॥

This egg-shaped universe, constituted as it is of the eight causal principles (viz.,
Primordial Matter, the Mahat-tattva, the Ego and the five subtle elements) and the sixteen
evolutes (viz., the mind, the five senses of perception, the five organs of action and the five
gross elements, none of which evolves further), has a breadth of five million Yojanas (or forty
million miles) and is covered outside by seven sheaths (viz., earth; water, fire, air, ether, the
Ego and the Mahat-tattva), each of which is ten times larger than the one it surrounds. That
cause of all causes, in which this universe with all its covering sheaths looks like a Paramanu,
and which comprises myriads of other universes, is called the indestructible Brahma; and
that is the transcendent reality of the most ancient Person, Lord Visnu, the Supreme Spirit
in embodied form, (39-41)

Thus ends the eleventh discourse in Book Three of the great and
glorious Bhagavata-Purana, otherwise known as
the Paramahamsa-Samhita.

tT ick bat २६
CDODR EERE SOD

अथ द्वादशोऽध्याय:

Discourse XIl

The multiplication of creation
मैत्रेय उवाच
इति ते वर्णित: क्षत्त: कालाख्य: परमात्मन: । महिमा वेदगर्भोऽथ यथास्राक्षीन्निबोध मे । १ ।
ससजग्रिऽन्धतामिस्रमथ तामिस्रमादिकृत्। महामोहं च मोहं च तमश्चाज्ञानवृत्तय: । २ ।
ae पापीयसीं सृष्टिं नात्मानं वह्वमन्यत। भगवद्ध्यानपूतेन मनसान्यां ततोऽसृजत् । ३ |
we च we च सनातनमथात्मभू: arse च मुनीन्निष्कियानूर्ध्वरेतस: । ४ ।
AM बभाषे BY: पुत्रान् प्रजा: सृजत पुत्रका: । तन्नैच्छन्मोक्षधर्माणो वासुदेवपरायणा: । ५ ।
asa: Oita प्रत्याख्यातानुशासनै:। क्रोधं दुर्विषहं जातं नियन्तुमुषचक्रमे । ६ |
