Dis. 13 ] BOOK FOUR 353

Sth a a SHEE HALES HEE SEES HOKE CIE EKO ETEK EH CEM त्ये री AAT OEA EHH EEA SH HHH
ज्न्र

the gods did not appear (to take their share of offerings) even when invoked by the sages
(who were great exponents of the Vedas). (25) Amazed at this, the priests officiating at the
sacrifice now said to the sacrificer (Emperor Anga), "The gods accept not your oblations,
poured (into the fire by us). (26) (The materials of) your offerings, O king, are pure and have
been procured with reverence. The Vedic texts (recited in the course of the sacrifice) too are
in no way lacking in force, since they are uttered by men who are steadfast of vow. (27) Nor
do we know of the least disrespect shown to the gods in this sacrificial performance, due to
which the gods, who perceive the doings of all, should not accept their shares. (28)

AS

WA उवाच
नागच्छन्त्याहुता देवा न गृह्णन्ति ग्रहानिह । सदसस्पतयो aq किमवद्यं मया कृतम् 1301
Maitreya continued : Having the words of the Brahmanas (priests), the sacrificer,
(Emperor) Anga, felt very sad at heart. With their permission he broke his (vow of) silence
in order to ask the superintending priests the reason of it. (29) "The gods refuse to come,
even though invoked nor do they accept the cups of Soma juice (offered to them) in this
sacrifice. Tell me, O leaders of the (sacrificial) assembly, what offence | have commit-
ted."(30)
नरदेवेह Vad नाघं तावन्मनाकु fermi अस्त्येकं प्राक्तनमघं यदिहेदूकु त्वमप्रज: 1321
तथा साधय भद्रं ते आत्मानं सुप्रजं FI इष्टस्ते पुत्रकामस्य पुत्रं दास्यति यज्ञभुक ।३२॥
तथा स्वभागधेयानि ग्रहीष्यन्ति दिव्रोकस: | यद्यज्ञपुरुष: साक्षादपत्याय हरिर्वृत: 1331
तांस्तान् कामन् हरिर्दद्याद्यान् यान् कामयते जन: | आराधितो तथैवैष यथा पुंसां फलोदय: । ३४॥

The leaders of the assembly said : Not the least sin stands committed by you in this
life, O lord of men! Yet, there is one sin perpetrated in a previous existence, on account of
which you are issueless here, though possessed of such (rare) virtues. (31) (Therefore) with
that end in view (in order to ensure that the gods may accept your offerings) endeavour to
get a worthy son, O king, and God will bless you. Worshipped (by you) with the desire of
obtaining a son, the Lord (who is the Enjoyer of sacrifices) will vouchsafe a son to you. (32)
In that case the denizens of heaven will (surely) accept their shares when (they find that) Sri
Hari, the Deity presiding over sacrifices, Himself is invoked for the sake of a son. (33) Sri Hari
(as a rule) bestows (on His devotee) whatever boons the devotee seeks (from Him). People
are rewarded precisely according as the Lord is worshipped (by them). (34)

इति व्यवसिता विप्रास्तस्य wa: प्रजातये । पुरोडाशं निरवपन् शिपिविष्टाय विष्णवे । ३५॥

तस्मात्पुरुष उत्तस्थो हेममाल्यमलाम्बर: i हिरण्मयेन पात्रेण सिद्धमादाय पायसम् । ३६॥

a विप्रानुमतो राजा गृहीत्वाञ्जलिनौदनम्। अवघ्राय मुदा युक्त: प्रादात्पत्न्या उदारधी: 1301

सा तत्पुंसवनं wit wea वै पत्युरादधे। गर्भं aie उपावृत्ते कुमारं सुषुवेऽप्रजा । ३८॥

स बाल एव पुरुषो मातामहमनुव्रत: । अधर्मांशोद्भवं मृत्युं तेनाभवदधार्मिक: ।३९॥
Thus resolved, the Brahmanas (priests) offered Purodasa ( a mass of ground rice
rounded into a kind of cake) to Lord Visnu, who resides even in the sacrificial animal as the
spirit of sacrifice, in order to secure an offspring to the emperor. (35) From the sacrificial fire
ihere rose a (Superhuman) being, adorned with a gold necklace and clad in spotless white

and bearing in a cup of gold rice ready boiled in milk with sugar. (36) With the permission
of the Brahmanas (priests) the noble-minded king received the boiled rice in the hollow of
