562 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 11

4११ १ १ त न ग CHEE KEEN AKON न ल्कक CERES HOUR शाक कक DONDE NTE ER NET ESET SEH EEE ७९ ७ ७

while the objects of sense—which are no other than modifications of the three Gunas are being
apprehended by the senses, (which are) modifications of the (same) Gunas, he who is
enlightened does not feel that he is apprehending them. *(On the other hand he feels that
itis the Gunas themselves in the form of the senses that apprehend their objects, which are
made up of the same substance). (9) Functioning in this body controlled by his Prarabdha
(destiny), the ignorant Jiva, (however) remains tied to it through the (egotistic) notion that he
is the agent, as a result of actions which are (actually) being performed by the Indriyas (which
are the modifications of the three Gunas and as such identical with them). {(10)

एवं face: wea आसनाटनमज्जने । दर्शनस्पर्शनघ्राणभोजनश्रवणादिषु । ११॥
न त्था बद्ध्यते विद्वांस्तत्र तत्रादयन् गुणान्। प्रकृतिस्थोऽप्यसंसक्तो यथा खं सवितानिल: । १२।
वैशारद्येक्षयासङ्गशितया छिन्नसंशाय: । प्रतिबुद्धं इव स्वप्नान्नानात्वाद् विनिवर्तते 1231

wa स्युर्वीतसङ्कल्पा: प्राणेन्द्रियमनोधियाम् । वृत्तय: a विनिर्मुक्तो देहस्थोऽपि fe तद्गुणे: ।१४॥
यस्यात्मा हिंस्यते हिंस्रैर्येन किञ्चिद् यदृच्छया । अर्च्यते वा क्वचित्तत्र न व्यतिक्रियते qu: । १५॥
न स्तुवीत न fea ada: साध्वसाधु वा । वदतो गुणदोषाभ्यां वर्जित: समदूङ्मुनि: ।१६॥
न कुर्यान्न वदेत् किञ्चिन्न ध्यायेत् साध्वसाधु वा । आत्मारामोऽनया gen विचरेज्जडवन्मुनि: 1901

Thus remaining free from passion while {lying) in bed, sitting. moving about, bathing,
seeing, touching, smelling, eating and hearing etc., and allowing the (three) Gunas (in the
form of the senses) to enjoy the various objects of the senses, the enlightened soul does not
get bound (by such actions) like the ignorant man. Though continuing in his psycho-physical
organism (which is a modification of Prakrti) he remains unattached to tt like the sky, the sun
(which remains unattached to the water in which it is reflected) or the wind (which remains
unattached even though blowing everywhere). (11-12) With (all) his doubts resolved by (the
sword of) his penetrating intellect whetted by (all-round) detachment he turns away from the
sense of diversity. even as one who has woke up from a dream turns away from it. (13) He
whose vital, organic, mental and intellectual functions are absolutely free from deliberate
thought remains as a matter of fact altogether unfettered by the three Gunas operating
through his body, though dwelling in it (14) A wise man is he who is not (adversely or
agreeably) affected when his body is tormented by mischievous persons or by chance
treated somewhat with honour by someone at some place. (15) The sage who has
transcended (the sense of) good and evil and sees equality (everywhere) would neither
praise those that do or say (anything) good nor censure those who do or say (anything)
evil.(16) Revelling in his self, a man given to contemplation should neither do nor contem-
plate nor speak anything good or evil and should roam about like a stupid fellow and live in
the aforesaid manner. (17)

शब्दब्रह्मणि निष्णातो न निष्णायात् परे यदि । श्रमस्तस्य some ह्यधेनुमिव रक्षत: ।१८॥

“Compare Smad Bhagavadgita Ill 28:--

" He however, who has true insight into the respective spheres ol tne |three) Gunas (modes of Prakrt:) and their actions
holding (as he does) thal it 1ऽ the Gunas (in the shape of the senses. mund etc..) that move among the Gunas (objects of
Perception}, does not get attached to them, Arjuna !*

+Cf. Snmad Bhagavaagita Ill 27-—

* Allactlons are being perlormed by the mades of Prak:t (primordial Matter). The tool (however), whose mind, is deluded
by egotism. thinks "| am the doer”
