518 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 20

PAAR ARENA NN EHO ET Ee SER Tee eevee eT EN tire serena

वेदमयं सोममात्मानं वेदेन यजन्ते LI
स्वगोभि: पितृदेवेभ्यो विभजन् कृष्णशुक्लयो:। प्रजानां सर्वासां राजाऽन्ध: सोमो न आस्त्विति। १२।

Even as Plaksadwipa is surrounded by an ocean of sugar-cane juice, equal (in width)
to the Dwipa itself, so does Salmaladwipa, which is double in width (as compared to the
Plaksadwipa) shine as enclosed (on the other side) by an equally wide ocean of wine.(7)
It is a well-known fact that in that Dwipa indeed there is a Salmali (silk- -cotton) tree, of
the same dimensions as the Plaksa tree, on which the learned proclaim the existence
of the abode of the glorious Garuda (the king of birds), who glorifies the Lord by means
of Vedic hymns (which constitute his very limbs*) and this tree is considered as
responsible for the name of the Dwipa. (8) The (first) ruler of that Dwipa, king Yajhabahu,
(the third) son of Priyavrata, divided among his seven sons the seven Varsas (divisions
of this Dwipa) bearing the name of the princes—Surocana, Saumanasya, Ramanaka,
Devavarsa, Paribhadra, Apyayana and Avijfiata. (9) In those Varsas the well-known
mountains demarcating the different Varsas and rivers are (severally) seven only—viz.,
the Swarasa, Satasrnga, Vamadeva, Kunda, Mukunda, Puspavarsa and Sahasrasruti
(mountains) and the Anumati, Sinivali, Saraswati ,Kuhi, Rajani, Nanda and Raka
(rivers). (10) The (four classes of the) people of those Varsas known by the names of
Srutadhara, Viryadhara, Vasundhara and Isandhara, worship with (the recitation of )
Vedic hymns the Lord who is the Soul of the universe in the form of the moon-god—) who
is Veda personified. (11) ) (They repeat the following prayer:—) "May the moon- godt—
who during the dark and bright fortnights distributes by his rays nourishment (in the
shape of nectar) to the manes and the gods as well as to all (other) created beings —
be our ruler (protect us) on all sides !" (12)

एवं सुरोदाद्वहिस्तद्द्विगुण: समानेनावृतो घृतोदेन यथापूर्व: कुशद्वीपो यस्मिन् कुशस्तम्बो
देवकृतस्तद्द्वीपाख्याकरो ज्वलन इवापर: स्वशष्परोचिषा दिशो विराजयति | १३ । तद्द्वीपपति: प्रैयव्रतो राजन्
हिरण्यरेता WA स्वं gt सप्तभ्य: ways यथाभागं fara we तप anfaga
वसुवसुदानदृढरुचिनाभिगुप्तस्तुत्यव्रतविविक्तवामदेवनामभ्य: | १४ । तेषां वर्षॆषु सीमागिरयो नद्यश्चाभिज्ञाता:
सप्त सप्तैव चक्रश्चतु:शृङ्ग: कपिलश्चित्रकूटो देवानीक ऊर्ध्वरोमा द्रविण इति रसकुल्या मधुकुल्या
पित्रविन्वाश्रुतविन्दादवगभाघृतच्यतामन्रमग्लग्त।१५।यम्पापर्तोभ कुशद्वीपौकस:
कुशलकोविदाभियुक्तकुलकसंज्ञा भगवन्तं जातवेदसरूपिणं कर्मकौशलेन AT | १६ |
परस्य ब्रह्मण: साक्षाजातवेदोऽसि हव्यवाट्। देवानां पुरुषाङ्गानां यज्ञेन पुरुषं चजेति। १७॥
Similarly, beyond the ocean of wine and twice as large, the Kugadwipa, which like the
Salmaladwipa, (mentioned in passage 7 above), is encircled (on the other side) by an equally
wide ocean of clarified butter. In that Dwipa there is a clump of KuSa grass, brought into
existence by the Lord (Himself), which is responsible for the name of the Dwipa, and which,
like another (heatless) flaming fire, illuminates the quarters by he effulgence of its (tender)
shoots. (13) Its (first) ruler, O Pariksit, king Hiranyareta by name, (the fourth) son of

* The Sruti texts declare that Garuda represents in his person the various parts of the Vedas -—

Titls believed that the orb of the moon is constituted of nectar. ihe nounshment of the gods and the manes, whichitscatters
by its rays ail the thirty days of a month. The vegetable kingdom, the natural food of earthly creatures, including men. is also
believed to derive its nutritive properties, succulence and savour from the moonbeams. It is in this sense that the moon-god
is declared in the above verse as distributing food to all created beings including the cods ard the manes.

