140 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 2

SANK AHS EHH OVI पा त्जा का क त्यो का य Tee eee eEre ee eh ee eee NTE HER en eee Ny

देवस्य मायया WE ये चान्यदसदाश्रिता: । भ्राम्यते धीर्न तद्वाक्यैरात्मन्युप्तात्मनो हरौ । १०॥
प्रदरर्यातप्ततपसामवितृप्तदृशां नॄणाम्। आदायान्तरधाद्यस्तु Riera लोकलोचनम् ee I
विस्मापनं स्वस्य च aT: परं पदं भूषणभूषणाङ्गम् ।१२।

Uddhava said : The sun in the shape of Sri Krsna having set, our homes of blighted
splendour have been devoured by the python of Time. What shall | say, then, about our
welfare? (7) Alas ! unfortunate is this world and more so the Yadus, who lived with Sri Hari
(SriKrsna) and yet could not recognize Him, even as the fish did not identify the moon (when
she was under water). (8) The Satvatas (Yadavas) could read the mind of another through
external gestures, were highly intelligent and lived and sported with Him at one and the same
place; yetthey accounted Him, the Abode ofall beings, the foremost of the Yadavas alone.(9)
The intellect, however, of aman who has bestowed his heart on Sri Hari, his own Self, cannot
be misguided by the (disrespectful or slanderous) words of those (the Yadus and others) who
are deluded by the Lord's own Maya (deluding potency) or those (Sigupala and others) who
harbour animosity against Him. (10) Having shown His divine form to men who had practised
no penance, He has now screened it from their view, even though their eyes were not sated,
and thus robbed them of their very sight as it were (since they have nothing worth seeing left
with them). (11) The form which He had assumed in order to reveal the power of His Yogamaya
(Divine Energy, which was capable of manifesting such transcendent beauty), and which was
so eminently suited to His pastimes in imitation of men, was an object of wonder not only to the
world but evento Himself, a perfection as it was of abounding grace. It was a form whose limbs

added to the charm even of ornaments. (12)

areia ade wa विधातुरर्वाक्सृतौ कौशालमित्यमन्यत । १३।
यस्यानुरागप्लुतहासरासलीलावलोकप्रतिलब्धमाना: ।
व्रजस्रियो दृग्भिरनुप्रवृत्तधियोऽवतस्थुर॥ fae कृत्यशेषा: evi
स्वशान्तरूपेष्ठितरॆ: स्वस्पैरभ्यरद्यमानेष्नुकम्पितात्मा |
परावरेशो महदंशयुक्तो ह्यजोऽपि जातो भगवान् यथाग्नि: । eu
भां खेदयत्येतदजस्य जन्मविडम्बनं यद्वसुदेवगेहे |
am च वासोऽरिभयादिव aa पुराद् व्यवात्सीद्यदनन्तवीर्य: ।१६॥
दुनोति चेत: स्मरतो ममैतद् यदाह पादावभिबन्द्य पित्रो: ।
ताताम्ब कंसादुरुशाङ्कितानां प्रसीदतं नोऽकृतनिष्कृतीनाम् | १७॥
को वा अमुष्याङ्ध्रिसरोजरेणुं विस्मर्तुमीशीत पुमान् विजिघ्रन् ।
यो विस्फुरद्भ्रूविटपेन भूमेर्भार कृतान्तेन तिरश्चकार IRI
दृष्टा भवद्भिर्ननु राजसूये wea wer द्विषतोऽपि सिद्धि: ।
यां योगिन: संस्पृहयन्ति सम्यग् ata mee | सहेत । १९
wa चान्ये नरलोकवीरा य आहवे कृष्णमुखारविन्दम् ।
नेत्र पिबन्तो नयनाभिरामं = rae: पदमापुरस्य ।२०॥
स्वयं त्वसाम्यातिरायस्त्र्यधीशा: स्वाराज्यलक्ष्म्याप्तसमस्तकाम: ।
बलिं हरद्भिश्चिरलोकपालै: किरीटकोट्येडितपादपीठ: 1221

