Dis. 6] BOOK THREE 157

थ ज्क्रैजयं क री कौ क ज ती ॐह्टोज्येतद क वी डौ त्दा कौ HEATER AKC EGA ATR CE ARE LABS KTH उ ङ डौ HEA REM GEM MEM He He Re Be STR त्क

united them by His active power, stimulating their dormant energy. (3) When they were thus
roused into activity, the twenty-three categories, impelled as they were by God, evolved the
Cosmic Body out of their own parts. (4) In other words, even as the Supreme entered them
that group of twenty-three categories, which had taken upon themselves the work of creating
the universe, partially underwent transformation as a result of mutual co-operation. Itis this
transformation of the twenty-three categories which goes by the name of the Cosmic Body,
the abode of the whole animate and inanimate creation. (5) That all-effulgent Cosmic Being
dwelt with all the Jivas (that lay dormantin an unmanifest state) for a thousand celestial years
(3,60,000 human years) in the space having the shape of the interior of an egg with water
surrounding it on all sides. (6) That Cosmic Body, the evolute of the categories entrusted with
the work of creating the universe, endowed as it was with knowledge, activity and the power
of enjoyment, manifested itself of its own accord as one (the heart), as ten (the ten vital airs)
and as three (Adhyatmika, Adhidaivika and Adhibhautika aspects). (7) (As the totality of all
the Jivas) He is the Soul (support) of all living beings; (as an embodied spirit) He is a part
manifestation of the Supreme Spirit and (as the first manifestation of Reality) He is the prime
Avatara. The entire living creation takes its shape in Him. (8) As possessed of Adhyatma,
Adhidaiva and Adhibhita,* the Cosmic Being is of three kinds; as the Prana, He is of tent
kinds and as the heart, He is only one. (9)

CN २ . सा .

we, विश्वसृजामीशो विज्ञापितमधोक्षज:। विराजमतपत्स्वेन तेजसैषां विवृत्तये 1201

aa तस्याभितप्तस्य कति चायतनानि ह। निरभिद्यन्त देवानां तानि मे गदत: Aue
।। त LN त + .

तस्याग्निरास्यं Ria लोकपालोऽविशत्पदम्। वाचा स्वांशेन वक्तव्यं ययासो प्रतिपद्यते । १२
+ * = २

निर्भिन्नं ae वरुणो लोकपालोऽविशाद्धरे: । frag च रसं ययासौ प्रतिपद्यते ies

RRA set ae विष्णोराविशतां पदम्।घ्राणेनांशेन गन्धस्य प्रतिपत्तिर्यतो भवेत् । १४॥

निर्भिन्ने अक्षिणी wer लोकपालोऽविशाद्विभो: । aaa wort प्रतिपत्तिर्यतो भवेत् । १५॥

LIN .. ५ च २
निर्भिन्नान्यस्य चर्माणि लोकपालोऽनिलोऽविशात् । प्राणेनांशेन संस्पर्शं येनासौ प्रतिपद्यते । १६॥
कर्णावस्य विनिर्भिन्नो धिष्ण्यं स्वं विविदशुर्दिश: । श्रोत्रेणांशेन शब्दस्य सिद्धिं aa प्रपद्यते । १७॥

+ n २ : SY `
were विनिर्भिन्नां विविशुर्धिष्णयमोषधी: | अंशेन रोमभि: awog यैरसो प्रतिपद्यते । १८।
ag तस्य विनिर्भिन्नं स्वधिष्ण्यं क उपाविशत्। रेतसांशेन येनासावानन्दं प्रतिपद्यते । १९1
= + a त a |
Te पुंसो विनिर्भिन्नं मित्रो लोकेश आविशत्। पायुनांशेन येनासौ दिसर्गं प्रतिपद्यते 1201
हस्तावस्य विनिर्भिन्नाविन्द्र: स्वर्पतिराविशत्। वार्तयांशेन yest यया वृत्तिं प्रपद्यते 122!
२ x + त
पादावस्य विनिर्भिन्नो athe विष्णुराविशत्। गत्या स्वांशेन पुरुषो यया प्राप्यं प्रपद्यते 1221
बुद्धिं ore विनिर्भिन्नां वागीशो धिष्णयमाविशत्। बोधेनांशेन बोद्धव्यप्रतिपत्तिर्यतो भवेत् । २३॥
।। a ।। ९ °

wea चास्य निर्भिन्नं चन्द्रमा धिष्ण्यमाविशत्। मनसांशेन येनासौ विक्रियां प्रतिपद्यते । २४॥।

आत्मानं are निर्भिन्नमभिमानोऽविशत्पदम्। कर्मणांशेन येनासौ कर्तव्यं प्रतिपद्यते 1241
* Adhyatma denotes the ten Indriyas (the five senses of perception and the five organs of action) and the mind; Adhidaiva
means the deities presiding over the Indriyas and the mind; and the objects of the senses constitute what is known as Adhibhuta.
+The ten Pranas or vital airs are known by the names of Prana, Apana, Vyana, Udana, Samana, Naga, Kurma, Krkala,
Devadatta and Dhanafijaya. The air which we inhale and exhale either through the nostrils or through the mouth and has its
seat in the lungsis called Prana; that which has a downward course and hasits seatin the anusis known as Apana; that which
has its seat In the navel and is essential to digestion bears the name of Samana; that which has an upward course and has
its seat in the throat is known by the name of Udana; that which circulates in every direction and is diffused through the body
is called Vyana; that which enables us to belch is known as Naga; that which helps us to open our eyes bears the name of

Kuirma; that which excites our hunger is known by the name of Krkala; that which enables us to yawn is called Devadatta and
that which nourishes the body is known as Dhanafjaya.
