RRR RR Ree Ke Be Be RRR Be HY RR A Be .६ Be ee BBE NYRR A He Fe Pe RWW Br RR Be HRN Be BH ORR HE He PME RE HE He He HE Fe HM RH ROE HM RONEN

in this world have strayed from the path of virtue otherwise than in adversity." (16)
धर्म उवाच

एतद् व: पाण्डवेयानां युक्तमार्ताभयं aa: । येषां गुणगणै: कृष्णो दौत्यादौ भगवान् Ha: । १७॥
न ad छ्लेशबीजानि यत: स्यु: पुरुषर्षभ। पुरुषं तं विजानीमो वाक्यभेदव्रिमोहिता: । १८।
केचिद् विकल्पवसना आहुरात्मानमात्मन: । दैवमन्ये at ad स्वभावमपरे प्रभुम् ।१९।
अप्रत्क्यादनिर्देश्यादिति cyt निश्चय:। अत्रानुरूपं राजर्षे विमृशा स्वमनीषया igo!

Dharma replied : "Such an assurance of protection to the distressed is quite
becoming of you, the scions of Pandu, whose hosts of virtues compelled the divine Sri
Krsna to accept the (humble) role of an envoy etc., to you (your forbears). (17) Bewildered
as We afe by the conflicting statements of various thinkers, we know not the person who
is responsible for the causes of suffering, O jewel among men ! (18) Some, who deny
all difference, declare their own self as responsible for their suffering; others attribute it
to Providence; yet others ascribe it to their own doings; a fourth school avers nature to
be the cause of suffering; while still others declare God as the bestower of suffering. (19)
Some, again, hold that the cause of suffering is something beyond the reach of speech
or mind. Now investigate, O royal sage, by your own judgement, which of these views
is sound."(20)

Yd उवाच
एवं af प्रवदति स ame द्विजसत्तम । समाहितेन मनसा विखेद: पर्यचष्टं aie

Sita continued : When Dharma spoke in this strain, Emperor Pariksit, O Saunaka,
was disillusioned and with a calm mind, replied to him as follows: (21)

राजोवाच
aq ब्रवीषि mia धर्मोऽसि वृषरूपधूक । यदधर्मकृत: स्थानं सूचकस्यापि तद्भवेत् । २२॥।
अथवा देवमायाया नूनं गतिरगोचरा। चेतसो वकच्सश्चापि भूतानामिति fea: 1231
तप: ahd am सत्यमिति पादा: कृते कृता: aera भग्ना:; स्मयसङ्गमदैस्तव । २४।
sat oad पादस्ते wa निर्वर्तयेद्यत: । तं जिघृक्षत्यधर्मोऽयमनृतेनेधित: कलि: 124)
इयं च भूर्भगवता न्यासितोरुभरा सती । श्रीमद्भिस्तत्पदन्यासै: सर्वत: कृतकौतुका । २६॥
शोचत्यश्रुकला साध्वी दुर्भगेवोज्झिताधुना । अब्रह्मण्या नॄपव्याजा: Yat भोक्ष्यन्ति मामिति । २७।

The king said: You speak what is right, 0 knower of Dharma (righteousness).
Evidently you are Dharma (the god of virtue) in the guise of a bull. (You refuse to tell
the name of your persecutor) only because (you know that) the lot which falls to a wrong-
doer is also shared by the denouncer. (22) Or the (right) conclusion is that the ways of
the divine Maya (deluding potency) are surely beyond the scope of the mind and speech
of living beings. (23) In the Krta age (Satyayuga) you had four whole feet in the form
of austerity, purity, compassion and truthfulness. Three of them have since been
destroyed by the progeny of unrighteousness, viz., pride, attachment and hauteur. (24)
Now, O Dharma, you have only one foot left in the shape of truthfulness, on which you
are somehow supporting yourself. Yonder unrighteousness in the shape of Kali, however,
seeks to rob you of the same, strengthened as it is by falsehood. (25) And this cow is
no other than the good mother Earth, whose heavy burden was relieved by the Lord and
who was adorned all round by His charming footprints. (26) Forsaken by Him, the holy
mother now grieves like an unlucky woman, with tears in her eyes, to think that Sudras
who hate the Brahmanas and pretend to be kings will rule over her. (27)
