112 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 7

ohne erneaniicie tinh riiOnnrtns wreniiie hike ree rere neers cree Toe A AER SR AAAS SRS ASS

(in the shape of foodgrains etc.) for the benefit of the world. (9)
नाभेरसावृषभ आस सुदेविसूनुर्यो 4 चचार समदृग् जडयोगचर्याम् |
यत्पारमहंस्यमृषय: पदमामनन्ति स्वस्थ: प्रशान्तकरण: परिमुक्तसङ्घ: 120!

He was (further) born of king Nabhi and his wife, Sudevi (Merudevi), as Rsabha, who
having completely rid Himself of all attachment and thoroughly composed His mind and
senses, established Himselfin His spiritual essence and, regarding everything with the same
eye, practised uninterrupted meditation, appearing as an idiot; which state has been spoken

of by great seers as the state of a Paramaharhsa ( one who is ever absorbed in abstract
meditation). (10)

सत्रे ममास war हय zea साक्षात् स यज्ञपुरुषस्तपनीयवर्ण: ।
छन्दोमयो मखमयोऽखिलदेवतात्मा Aa AYR: श्वसतोऽस्य नस्त: ।११।

The same Lord, who presides over and is worshipped in all sacrifices, personally
appeared at my (Brahma's) sacrifice as Hayagriva (one who has the head of a horse), with
a golden complexion, whois Veda personified and represents all the sacrifices and all the
deities in His person and from whose nostrils, even as He breathed, issued forth the holy

Vedas. (11)
मत्स्यो युगान्तसमये मनुनोपलब्ध: क्षोणीमयो निखिलजीवनिकायकेत: |
विस्रंसितग्नुरुभयेप्तलिलेमुखान्येअग्दग्र्यतत्रविजहारहवेंदपर्णान्।शा।

During the universal dissolution (at the end of the sixth or Caksusa Manvantara, that
preceding the presentone) the would-be Manu (king Satyavrata) beheld the Lord inthe form
of the divine Fish, who, being the stay of the earth (that appeared in the form of a boat),
supported all classes of living beings. Picking up the Vedas, that had dropped from my
(Brahma's) mouth into the most dreadful ocean (that had washed away and submerged the
entire creation), He continued to sport therein (till.the next creation). (12)

क्षीरोदधावरमरदानवयूथपानामुन्मश्नताममृतलब्धय आदिदेव: |
पृष्ठेन कच्छपवपुर्विदधार गोत्रं निद्राक्षणोऽद्रिपरिवर्तकषाणकण्डू: 123 |

When the leaders of the immortals and the Danava chiefs commenced churning the
ocean of milk to get nectar out of it, the primal Deity assumed the form of the divine Tortoise
and bore on His back Mount Mandara (which served as the churnin god). Now as the
mountain revolved on His back, the friction relieved the itching thereon and brought Him a
nap. (13)

? टि . a fa . fe . ए ।
दैत्येन्द्रमाशु गदयाभिपतन्तमारादूरौ निपात्य face Fa: स्फुरन्तम् ।१४॥

In order to dispel the great fear of the gods (the denizens of heaven) the Lord assumed
the form of a Man-Lion (Nrsirnha) with a face which looked most frightful on account of His
restless eyebrows and moving jaws. When the demon chief (Hiranyakasipu, elder brother
of Hiranyaksa) assailed Him witha mace froma distance, the Lord quickly (seized and) threw

him down on His thighs; and even as he tried to wriggle out, the Lord ripped up his belly with
His claws. (14)

अन्त:सरस्युरुबलेन पदे गृहीतो ग्राहेण यूथपतिरम्बुजहस्त आर्त: |
आहेदमादिपुरुषाखिललोकना तीर्थश्रवर श्रवणमङ्गलनामधेय 1241
श्रुत्वा हरिस्तमरणार्थिनमप्रमेयश्चक्रायुध: पतगराजभुजाधिरूढ: ।
चक्रेण नक्रवद्नं विनिपाट्यं तस्माद्धस्ते प्रगृह्य भगवान् कृपयोज्जहार । १६|

Seized by the foot inside alake by an alligator of vast strength, the famous elephant (who
