dis. 5] BOOK EIGHT 755

ऊर्वोर्विडोजोऽङ्ध्रिरवेदशूद्रो प्रसीदतां न: a महाबिभूति: ves
लोभोऽधरात् प्रीतिरुपर्यभूद द्युतिर्नस्तत ue: स्पर्शोन काम: ।
भ्रुवोर्यम: पक्ष्मभवस्तु are: प्रसीदतां न: स महाबिभूति: 1४२॥
wae: कर्म गुणान्विशेषं यद्योगमायाविहितान्वदन्ति ।
ae दुर्विभाव्यं प्रबुधापबाधं प्रसीदतां a: स महाविभूति: ।४३॥
नमोऽस्तु तस्मा उपशान्तशक्तये स्वाराज्यलाभप्रतिपूरितात्मने ।
गुणेषु मायारचितेषु वृत्तिभिर्न सज्जमानाय नभस्वदूतये ve

Brahma prayed : We, O Lord, bow to You, the foremost (of all), true (at all times),
shangeless, infinite, most ancient, dwelling in the heart (ofall), unconditioned, incomprehensible
hrough reasoning, quicker than the mind, indescribable through speech and worthy of being
sought for (as one's protector). (26) We resort (for protection) to that all-perfect One, the
‘nower of the vital airs, the mind, the intellect and the ego, and appearing as the senses of
yerception and their objects, who is devoid of sleep (ignorance), bodiless and
ill-pervading (as ether), in whom (both) nescience (which is compared to shade or
jarkness) and saving knowledge (which is compared to sunshine)—the attributes of a Jiva
sharacterized by attachment etc.— are absent and who manifests Himself (only) in the
first)three Yugas (the Kali age being unfavourable to His manifestation). (27) The Vedas
jeclare that the fast rotating wheel (in the shape of the body etc., which are constantly
shanging) owned by the Jiva (who is as a matter of fact devoid of birth and death both), which
३ being set in motion by Maya (the beginningless energy or will-power of the Lord), consists
chiefly) of the mind and is provided with fifteen spokes (in the shape of the ten Indriyas and
he five vital airs), three naves (in the shape of the three modes of Prakrti), eight fellies (in
he shape of the five gross elements, the mind, intellect and the ego), is fleeting as lightning,
ind has God (Himself) for its axle. To Him, the (only) Truth, | fly (for protection). (28) Being
he same as that imperceptible and undifferentiated Reality which is of the nature of absolute
Sonsciousness, beyond (the realm of) Prakrti (ignorance) and unlimited in time and space,
t is He who (as the inner Controller and constant companion and friend) dwells (in every
ieart) by the side of the Jiva and (again) it is Him that the wise seek through the discipline
of Yoga (concentration of mind). (29) Let us bow to that Ruler of the highest gods, moving
2qually in all created beings, whose Maya (deluding potency) nobody can overpass—that
Aaya due to which men get bewildered and are unable to know the truth (their reality) —but
vho has completely subdued that Maya- -Sakti of His own and its properties (in the shape of
3attva, Rajas and Tamas). (30) Though created by means of Sattva (the quality of goodness)
constituting) His favourite body, (even) we, the gods, and the Rsis (seers) are unable to
‘now His subtle essence, manifest within (as the inner light) as well as outside (in the shape
१ existence). How much less can the demons and others, in whom the other qualities
namely, Rajas and Tamas) predominate, do so ? (31) Evolved by Himself, this earth—on
vhich indeed dwells the fourfold living creation (consisting of the viviparous, the oviparous,
he sweat-born and the vegetable kingdoms)—constitutes His feet ! May that supreme
>erson—whois surely self-dependentand possessed of infinite power, nay, whois the same
is Brahma (the Absolute)—be gracious (to us) ! (32) Similarly water, possessed of vast
strength—from which proceed the three worlds (earth, heaven and the intermediate region)
is well as the guardians of all the spheres and on which they (all) subsist and flourish—
-onstitutes His generative fluid. May that Lord possessed of immense glory, who is the same
is Brahma, be gracious(to us)! (33) ( In the same way) the Vedas declare the moon—which
ictually constitutes the food of the gods and (therefore the source of) their strength and
ife,(nay,) which is the ruler (protector) of plants (inasmuch as it nourishes them by its
