Dis. 15] BOOK ELEVEN 583

RRR ERE TRE CNC EEE EO FOE ERE ER RR RHE SE RE OECD NEM OHM ६55९

to Brahma (or any other destination sought to be reached by him), the Yogi should shed the
body (whenever he likes). (24) Seeking to sport in the sport ground of the gods (in heaven),
one should contemplate on Sattva (unmixed with Rajas and Tamas and) constituting My
personality. (As a sequel to this contemplation) Apsaras (celestial damsels), representing
(so many) rays of Sattva, wait on him with aerial cars (ready totake him bodily to heaven).(25)
Devoted to Me and focussing his mind on Me, true of resolve as । am, man duly attains that
(very) object which he seeks with his intellect whenever and in whatever way he wants it. (26)
The command of a man who has acquired My disposition is not flouted anywhere any more
than Mine, the Ruler of all and (absolutely) self-dependent as | am. (27) (Direct) knowledge
of the past, present and future, coupled with (that of) birth and death (etc., as well as of
others’ mind etc.), comes to that Yogi whose mind has been purified through devotion to
Me and who knows how to concentrate his mind (on Me, the Knower of the past, present
and future). (28) Seasoned by Yoga (in the form of concentration on My Personality, which
is incapable of being damaged even slightly by fire etc.) the body of a sage whose mind
has found its repose in concentration on Me cannot (likewise be damaged by fire and other
elements, which cannot harm him any more than water can prove harmful to aquatic
creatures. (29) Contemplating on My glorious manifestations (Avataras) graced with (the
marks of) Srivatsa (etc.), and decked with My weapons (viz., conch etc.), and distinguished
by an ensign, umbrella and chowrie (etc.); the aforesaid sage turns out to be invincible.(30)

उपासकस्य मामेवं योगधारणया मुने:। सिद्धय: पूर्वकथिता उपतिष्ठन्त्यशोषत: 1321
जितेन्द्रियस्य दान्तस्य जितश्वासात्मनो मुने: । मद्धारणां धारयत: का सा सिद्धि: सुदुर्लभा 1321
अन्तरायान् वदन्त्येता युञ्जतो योगमुत्तमम्।मया सम्पद्यमानस्य कालक्षपणहेतव: 1331
जन्मोषधितपोमन्तैर्यावतीरिह सिद्धय: । योगेनाप्नोति ता: सर्वा नान्यैर्योगगतिं व्रजेत् । ३४॥
सर्वासामपि सिद्धीनां हेतु: पतिरहं oy: अहं योगस्य सांख्यस्य धर्मस्य ब्रह्मवादिनाम् 1341
अहमात्माऽऽन्तरो बाह्योऽनावृत: सर्वदेहिनाम्। यथा भूतानि भूतेषु बहिरन्त: स्वयं तथा ।३६॥

इति श्रीमद्भागवते मह्पुराणे पारमहंस्यां संहितायामेकादशम्कन्धे पञ्चदझचोऽध्याय: ।१५॥

The aforesaid Siddhis in their entirety wait upon the sage who worships Me through Yogic
concentration as detailed in the foregoing verses. (31) Whatis that (there is no) Siddhi which
is very difficult to attain for the sage who, having conquered his senses, tamed his mind, and
controlled his breath and body, practises concentration on Me ? (32) The wise (however)
speak of these as obstacles in the path of the man who is practising the highest (form of) Yoga
(such as Jhanayoga or Bhaktiyoga) in that they cause delay in his getting united with Me (his
true goal). (33) One attains here through concentration (as aforesaid on Me) all those Siddhis
that follow from birth, (the use of) drugs, austerity and (the utterance of) spells.” One cannot
(however) obtain the supreme reward (in the shape of residence in the divine realm of the
Lord etc.), of Yoga (concentration on Me) by recourse to other means. (34) | am the Source
(Bestower), | am the Custodian and Controller of all Siddhis, as well as of Yoga (union with
God in the shape of final beatitude), Sankhya (Knowledge leading to such union), Dharma
(piety as taught by the exponents of Veda), nay, of the teachers of Veda (themselves). (35)
| am the Self of all embodied souls, being their inner Controller as well as enclosing them
(from without) though unenclosed Myself, (even) as the (gross) elements both permeate and

* Cf. the following aphorism from the Yoga-Sutras of Patafjah —
