Dis. 25 ] BOOK TEN 213

hentia ne ee tiie geen ey et ees 2s foe ets ast व Stn ett

न हि सद्भावयुक्तानां सुराणामीशविस्मय: । मत्तोऽसतां मानभङ्ग: प्रशमायोपकल्पते । १७॥
तस्मान्मच्छरणं गोष्ठं मन्नाथं मत्परिग्रहम्। गोपाये स्वात्मयोगेन सोऽयं मे व्रत आहित: ।१८॥

Sri Suka resumed : Thus commanded by Indra and completely freed from their binding
chains (which had held them under check till the time of universal destruction), the clouds
started tormenting Nanda's Vraja by their sharp driving showers with (great) violence. (8)
Shining brightly with flashes of lightning and roaring with (rolling) thunders and driven by
tempestuous winds, they showered hail-stones. (9) While the clouds were incessantly
pouring forth torrents thick as columns, the earth being flooded by volumes of flowing water
could not be seen with its distinction of high and low lands. (10) Seized with a shiver through
excessive driving showers and tempestuous gales and afflicted with cold, the cowherds and
the cowherdesses sought Sri Krsna (the Protector of cows) as their refuge. (11) Oppressed
with the torrential downpour and fully covering their head as well as their children with their
trunk, they sought shivering the soles of feet of the Lord (and prayed as follows):—(12} "O
Krsna, 0 Enchanter of souls, O highly blessed Lord, be pleased to protect the bovine race,
which has its protector in You (alone), as well as ourselves from the angry Indra, O Lover of
Your devotees !" (13) Perceiving the animals being beaten by severe hailstorm and getting
benumbed, Sri Hari understood it to be the work of the indignant Indra. (14) (He said to
Himself,) "His own worship having been obstructed by us, Indra is sending down this most
terrible hailstorm accompanied bya tempestuous gale out of season for our destruction. (15)
| shall (presently) employ an effective remedy against this by My own divine power and
(thereby) dispel the ignorance—in the form of pride of wealth—of the gods, who through
infatuation fancy themselves fo be the rulers of the world. (16) Surely the pride of being the
supreme ruler of the world cannot find place in the gods, who are endowed (in a special
degree) with the quality of Sattva; and the humiliation of the vile at My hands conduces to
their peace of mind. (17) | shall accordingly by My own divine power protect Vraja, which has
sought shelter in Me, looks upon Me as its Protector, nay, which constitutes My own family!
(In fact) this is the famous vow taken by Me." (78)

इत्युक्त्वैकेन हस्तेन कृत्वा गोवर्धनाचलम्!दधार लीलया कृष्णश्छत्राकमिव बालक: 1१९1
अथाह भगवान् गोपान् sa तात व्रजौकस: । यथोपजोषं विहात गिरिगर्तं सगोधना: । २०॥
न त्रास इह व: कार्यो मद्धस्ताद्रिनिपातने । वातवर्षभयेनालं तत्राणं विहितं fe a: ।२१।
an निर्विविशुर्गर्तं कृष्णाश्वासितमानसा: । यथावकाशं सधना: सव्रजा: सोपजीविन: 1221
क्षुत्तृदव्यथां सुखापेक्षां feat तैर्व्रजवासिभि: | वीक्ष्यमाणो दधावद्रिं सप्ताहं नाचलत् पदात् । २३॥
कृष्णयोगानुभावं तं निशाम्येन्द्रोऽतिविस्मित: | नि:स्तम्भो भ्रष्टसङ्कुल्प: स्वान् मेघान्संन्यवारयत् । २४।
@ व्यभ्रमुदितादित्यं वातवर्षं च दारुणम्। निशाम्योपरतं गोपान् गोवर्धनधरोऽब्रवीत् ।२५॥
निर्यात त्यजत त्रासं गोपा: सस्रीधनार्भका: । उपारतं वातवर्षं व्युदप्रायाश्च निम्नगा: ।२६॥
ava निर्ययुर्गोपा: स्वं स्वमादाय गोधनम्।शकयेदोपकरणं स्रीबालस्थविरा: wt ।२७॥
भगवानपि तं as स्वस्थाने पूर्ववत् प्रभु: ! पञ्यतां सर्वभूतानां स्थापयामास लीलया । २८
Having observed thus, and uprooting with one hand Mount Govardhana even as a child
would pull out a mushroom, Sri Krsna sportfully lifted it up. (19) Then the Lord said to the
cowherds, “0 mother, father, the people of Vraja, comfortably take shelter in the cavity
beneath the mountain alongwith your cattle-wealth. (20) No fear need be entertained by you
about the fall of the mountain from My hand on this spot. Away with the fear of storm and rain,

since your protection against them has (already) been ensured." (21) Their mind having been
reassured in that way by Sri Krsna, they entered the cavity (and made themselves

