Dis. 22] BOOK THREE 235

Seerer er we wr ती न ec आ ee IO Bese BS हो वाकोय के Tey क्तय Ye ro ve the etn ot PO ae tt tO io trate HN Se aa
प्तर्त्त

of mine, which has been duly recognized in the procedure laid down in your scriptures (for
conducting the nuptials), may be realized through this daughter of yours. Who would not
accept with honour (the hand of) your daughter (Devahuti), who overshadows as it were by
her artless splendour the very lustre of her ornaments? (16) (The other day), when she was
sporting on the top of her royal mansion, following her ball with bewildered eyes, the elegance
of her person heightened by the tinkling of ornaments on her feet, Viswavasu (a Gandharva
well-known for his comeliness) was stupefied with infatuation to see her and fell down from
his aerial car. (17) What wise man would not welcome her, the very ornament of woman-
hood, the beloved daughter of Swayambhuva Manu (yourself) and sister of Uttanapada, who
cannot even be perceived by those that have not adored the gracious feet of the Lord, and
who has come of her own accord, seeking my hand ? (18) Therefore, | shall take to wife this
noble girl on condition that | shall remain with her till she bears (in her womb) through me a
ray of the Supreme Spirit. Thereafter | am thinking of mostly devoting myself to practices (like
self-control) which do not involve destruction of life and characterize the life of a Sarnnyasi
(recluse), and which have been directly taught” (to me) by the Lord Himself. (19) Tome the
highest authority in this behalf is the immortal Lord Sri Hari, the Ruler even of all Prajapatis
(lords of created beings), from whom this wonderful universe has emanated, in whomit rests
and in whom again, it will disappear. (20)

मेत्रेय उवाच
a उग्रधन्वन्नियदेवाबभाष आसीच्च तूष्णीमरविन्दनाभम् ।
धियोपगृह्णन् स्मितशोभितेन मुखेन चेतो लुलुभे देवहूत्या: । २१॥

सोऽनु Wen व्यवसितं महिष्या दुहितु: BREN तस्मै गुणगणाढ्याय ददौ तुल्यां प्रहर्षित: 1221
शतरूपा महाराज्ञी पारिबर्हान्महाधनान्। दम्पत्यो: पर्यदात्प्रीत्या भूषावास:परिच्छदान् 1231
wet दुहितरं सम्रादु सदृक्षाय गतव्यथ: । उपगुह्य च बाहुभ्यामोत्कण्ठयोन्मथिताशय: ।२४॥
अशक्नुवंस्तद्विरहं मुञ्चन् बाष्पकलां मुहु: । आसिञ्चदम्ब वत्सेति नेत्रोदैर्दुहितु: fire: 1241
ara तं मुनिवरमनुज्ञात सहानुग: । प्रतस्थे रथमारुह्य सभार्य: स्वपुरं नृप: 126!
उभयोर्ऋषिकुल्याया: सरस्वत्या: सुरोधसो: । ऋषीणामुपदान्तानां पश्यन्नाश्रमसम्पद: ।२७॥ `
तमायान्तमभिप्रेत्य saad: पतिम्। गीतसंस्तुतिवादित्रै: प्रत्युदीयु: प्रहर्षिता: 1221
वर्हिष्पती नाम पुरी सर्वसम्पत्समन्विता | न्यपतन् aa रोमाणि यज्ञस्याङ्गं विधुन्वत: ।२९॥
कुशा: काशास्त एवासन् हाश्वद्धरितवर्चस:। ऋॠषयो यै: पराभाव्य यज्ञघ्नान् यज्ञमीजिरे 1301
कुशकाशमचं बर्हिरास्तीर्य भगवान्मनु:। अयजद्यज्ञपुरुषं लब्धा स्थानं यतो भुवम् 1381
Maitreya went on: The sage, 0 Vidura (the wielder of a fierce bow), said only this much
and became silent, clinging with his mind to the Lord whose navel is adorned by a lotus. His
countenance, which was graced with a smile, captivated the heart of Devahati. (21) Having
‘urther unmistakably known the mind of the queen as well as of Devahati, the emperor most
cladly gave away to the sage, who was endowed with hosts of virtues, his daughter, who
matched him well. (22) Empress Satariipa lovingly bestowed on the bride and the bride-
room most valuable presents, suited to the occasion in the form of jewellery, raiment and

sner articles intended for household use. (23) Relieved of all agony, the emperor enclosed
within his arms his daughter—who had been bestowed on a suitable person—with a heart

Sedegroom mwvited far the purpose—

Itis this form of marriage which is mosily prevalenl among the twice-born classes in the Hindu society today and is
e2:ed in the Sastras as conferring great religious merit on the bride’s father. Seven more forms of marriages have been
 SsSoned in our scriptures: but they are all more or less prohibited in the Kali age. (Vide Manusmrti, Chap. Ill.)

* Vide verse 31 of Discourse XXI above.
