Dis. 8 ] BOOK NINE

HKG ONS epee Pers vee sey HCE HTERTESS SECS CEE HE CET ESET OE क ETH ETOH H EERIE HH SR KH EN

born of Kesini (another wife of the emperor). And Asamafijasa’s son, who was devoted to the
interests of his grandfather (King Sagara), was named Amsuman. (15) Asamafijasa— who
was given to contemplation in his previous birth, but had strayed from the path of Yoga
through evil association, although he (still) remembered his previous birth—showed himself
as a wicked fellow. (16) He did what was reproachful (in the eyes of the world) and (as such)
unpalatable to his relations (too). (For example) he hurled forth playing children into the
(river) Sarayd, (thus) frightening the people. (17) Conducting himself in this way, he was
actually forsaken (exiled) by his father, who set aside his (parental) affection. Showing (to
his father as alive) the children (that had been drowned in the river and taken for dead) by
virtue of his Yogic power, Asamafijasa departed from that place (Ayodhya). (18) Seeing their
(lost) children as having returned (to life), all the residents of Ayodhya felt (much) amazed,
O Pariksit; and the king (Sagara) too was filled with (great) remorse.(19) Commanded by
the emperor, Amgum&n (Asamafijasa's son) went out in search of the (sacrificial) horse by
the path dug out by his uncles, and discovered the horse near (a number of) heaps of
ashes.(20) Beholding Lord Visnu (who is above sense-perception) seated in the garb of a
sage bearing the name of Kapila, the great AmmgumAn glorified the Lord with a collected mind
(in the following words) bowing down (to Him) with joined palms. (21)
अरुमानुवाच

न ou at परमात्मनोऽजनो न बुध्यतेऽद्यापि समाधियुक्तिभि: ।

wast तस्य मन:ज्चरीरधीविसर्गसृष्टा वयमप्रकादा: 1221

a safes wre faery वा तमश्च ।

यन्मायया मोहितचेतसस्ते विदु: स्वसंस्थं न बहि:प्रकाशा: 1231

तं त्वामहं ज्ञानघनं स्वभावप्रध्वस्तमायागुणभेदमोहै: ।

सनन्दनाद्यैर्मुनिभिर्विभाव्वं कथं हि मूढ: परिभावयामि ।२४॥

प्रशान्तमायागुणकर्मलिङ्गमनामरूपं सदसद्बिमुक्तम् |

wares गृहीतदेहें नमामहे त्वा पुरुषं पुराणम् ।२५॥

त्वन्मायारचिते लोके वस्तुबुद्ध्या गृहादिषु । भ्रमन्ति कामलोभेर्घ्यमोहविभ्रान्तचेतस: 1261
wa न: सर्वभूतात्मन् कामकर्मेन्द्रयाशय: । मोहपाशो zest भगवंस्तव दर्शानात् । २७॥
Arnguman prayed ; (Even) Brahma (who is not born like us) is unable even to this day

to perceive (directly) through Samadhi (abstract meditation of self-absorption) or (even) to
comprehend through reasoning of various kinds You, who are higher than his own self. How
(then) could other living beings—belonging to various species (such as gods, men and sub-
human creatures), evolved (séverally) by his mind, body andintellect (the products of Sattva,
Tamas and Rajas respectively), much less we (youngsters altogether) devoid of light
(wisdom), perceive or know You ? (22) They who are identified with a body and are
(consequently) dominated by the (aforesaid) three Gunas, (nay,) whose intellect is
bewildered by Your Maya (deluding potency) and whose light (of wisdom) illuminates (only)
the objects of senses (which are external tothe mind), perceive (only such) objects of senses
(during their waking and dream states) and (sheer) darkness (total lack of knowledge) in the
other case (during deep sleep). They (however) are unable to realize You (who transcend
the three Gunas), even though You (ever) dwell in them (as their very Self and Inner
Controller too). (23) Such that You are, howcan |, anignorant person, (even) investigate You,

who are knowledge personified (and hence incapable of being known) and are (only) fit to
be contemplated upon by sages like Sanandana, who have by their very birth got rid of the
