476 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 84

Skereniekettenrenaninernnnscerreereneerereerrentnrrereaneneranenenennennnetetne #

necklaces, anklets and ear-rings. (48) Clad in silk and adorned with jewels, the priests and
supervisors of the sacrifice shone like the priests at the sacrifice performed by Indra (the slayer
of Vrtra). (49) Sri Krsna and Balarama, the Rulers of (all) Jivas shone brightly on that occasion
with their retations, consorts and sons, who were Their part manifestations.(50)

ईजेऽनुयज्ञं विधिना अग्निहोत्रादिलक्षणै: 1 प्राकृतैर्वैकृतैर्यज्ञैर्द्रव्यज्ञानक्रियेश्वरम् । ५१॥
अथ्त्विग्भ्योऽददात् काले यथाम्नातं स दक्षिणा: । स्वलङ्कृतेभ्योऽलङ्कृत्य गोभूकन्या महाधना: 142
पत्नीसंयाजावभृथ्यैश्चरित्वा ते महर्षय:। सस्नू mage विप्रा यजमानपुर:सरा: 1431
स्नातोऽलङ्कारवासांसि वन्दिभ्योऽदात्तथ्रा स्रिय: । तत: स्वलङ्कृतो वर्णानाश्वभ्योऽन्नेन पूजयत् ॥५४॥
aR सदारान् ससुतान् पारिबर्हेण भूयसा । विदर्भकोसलकुरून् काशिकेकयसृञ्जयान् । ५५।
सदस्यर्विक्सुरगणान् नृभूतपितृचारणान् । श्रीनिकेतमनुज्ञाप्य शंसन्त: प्रययु: क्रतुम् ।५६॥
धृतराष्ट्टोऽनुज: पार्था steht gor: पृथा यमो । नारदो भगवान् व्यास: सुहत्सम्बन्धिबान्धवा: 1५७1
बन्धून् परिषुज्य यदून् सौहदात् क्लिन्नचेतस: । ययुर्विरहकृच्छ्ण स्वदेशांश्चापरे जना: uc!
नन्दस्तु सह Teen पूजयार्चित: । कृष्णरामोग्रसेनाद्यैर्न्यवात्सीद् बन्धुवत्सल: 148!
वसुदेवोऽञ्जसोत्तीर्य मनोरथमहार्णवम् । सुहृद्वृत: प्रीतमना नन्दमाह Ht WML 1६०1
At the end of each sacrifice, Vasudeva performed, in accordance with the scripturals
ordinance, the Agnihotra and other sacrifices as well as those falling under the category
of Prakrta and Vaikrta sacrifices, and thereby worshipped and propitiated Visnu (the Lord
of all substances, rituals and the Mantras with which they are performed). (51) Then in due
time he adorned the priests well (with clothes and ornaments) and gave them sacrificial
fees and also gifted them duly adorned cow and girls as well as lands and abundant
wealthy as laid down in the scriptures. (52) After going through the ritual of Patnisamyaja
(which is a part of the sacrifice) and the rites connected with the concluding bath, those
great sages who had officiated as priests of the Sacrifice followed Vasudeva to the tank
named after ParaSurama and performed their ablutions there. (53) After taking their bath,
Vasudeva and his wives gave away all their ornaments and clothes to the bards and,
adorning themselves well (with new ornaments and dress) entertained all classes of men
and animals down to the dog. (54) He honoured with extensive presents (all) his relations
alongwith their wives and son as well as the princes of Vidarbha, Kosala, Kuru, Kasi,
Kekaya and Srfijaya, the supervisors of the sacrifice, the priests, hosts of gods, men,
spirits, manes and the celestial bards. They (all) took leave of Sri Krsna (the abode of Sri)
and left for their homes praising the sacrifice. (65-56) (Pariksit,} king Dhrtarastra, Vidura,
Yudhisthira, Bhima, and Arjuna, Bhisma, Drona, Kunti, Nakula, Sahadeva, Devarsi
Narada, Bhagavan Vyasa, and other friends and relations and kinsmen felt the agony of
separation (when leaving their friends, the Yadus). With their hearts moistened through
affection, they embraced the Yadus and departed for their homes with (great difficulty). The
other people also left with them. (57-58) (Pariksit,) honoured with extensive presents by
Sri Krsna, Balarama, Ugrasena and others, Nanda, alongwith the other Gopas, out of love
for them, stayed (there for some time more). (59) (O dear king,) having (thus) easily
realized his great ambition like one who crosses an ocean without much effort, Vasudeva
felt (greatly) delighted at heart. In the midst of his friends and relations he took Nanda by
the hand, and addressed him (thus). (60)

aged sara
भ्रातरीशकृत: oat नॄणां a: स्नेहसंज्ञित: । तं दुस्त्यजमहं मन्ये शूराणामपि योगिनाम् । ६१।
