Dis. 3] BOOK TWELVE 675

RR RE EE OSCR IOROT RI TESORO ORDER ESO शा शाज शा ee ग २ ए ee eS TEE ENC e eee न

aa भूपतयो राजन् भुञ्जन्ति भुवमोजसा । कालेन ते कृता: ad कथामात्रा: कथासु च् set

(Even) as the career of Manu's race on earth has been described (with its ups and downs)
the rise and fall, from age to age, of the Vaigyas, Sudras and Brahmanas (too) should be
similarly understood. (35) Of the high-souled men mentioned heretofore, who are (now)
known (merely) by their names and who survive in the form of (their) stories (only), glory alone
remains on earth. (36) Devapi, brother of Santanu, and Maru of Ikswaku's line, both of whom
are possessed of great powers of Yoga, are (still) alive in the village of Kalapa. (37) Instructed
(and commanded) by Lord Vasudeva (Kalki), both will appear (once more) on earth at the
close of the Kali age, and propagate virtue as before alongwith the institution of Varnas
(grades of society) and Asramas (stages of life). (38) The round of the four Yugas, viz., Satya,
Treta, Dwapara and Kali, runs its course in this order of sequence for (all) living beings on
earth. (39) These rulers of men mentioned by me as also others claimed this earth as their
own, but they had to leave it in the end and died, O king | (40) He who perpetrates violence
against living beings for the sake of this body, which will be ultimately called by the name of
‘worm’, ‘excrement’ or ashes’, no matter if it enjoys the title of ‘king’ (now), is not alive to his
own interests; for such violence (surely) paves the way to hell. (41) "How may this earth, held
(in sovereignty) entirely by my forbears and now enjoyed by me, continue to be in the
possession of my son and grandson and posterity ?“ Indulging in such (anxious) thoughts
rulers wanting in wisdom and looking upon the body, (which is) a product of fire, water and
food, as their own self and the earth as their possession, have eventually quitted both and
vanished (into nothing). (42-43) All those rulers, O king, who by force of their might enjoyed
the sovereignty of the globe have been converted into mere themes of stories narrated in
discourses. (44)

Thus ends the second discourse in Book Twelve of the great and
glorious Bhagavata-Purana, otherwise known
as the Paramahamsa-Samhita.

श्ले
ODODE EEO

अथ तृतीयोऽध्याय:

Discourse Ill
Vanity of kings; righteous conduct for every Yuga; the means to escape the
evils of Kaliyuga—loud chanting of the Divine Name
श्रीमुक उवाच
दृष्राऽऽत्मनि wa व्यग्रान् नृपान् हसति भूरियम् । अहो मा विजिगीषन्ति मृत्यो: क्रीडनका नृपा: । १ ।
काम एष नरेन्द्राणां मोघ: स्याद् विदुषामपि । aa फेनोपमे पिण्डे येऽतिविश्रम्भिता नृपा: । २ |
qa fie vert जेष्यामो राजमन्तिण: । तत: सचिवपौराप्तकरीन्द्रानस्य कण्टकान् । ३ |
एवं क्रमेण जेष्याम: gat सागरमेखलाम् । इत्याराबद्धहदया न पर्यन्त्यन्तिकेऽन्तकम् । ४ ।
समुद्रावरणां frat मां विशन्त्यब्धिमोजसा । कियदात्मजयस्यैतन्मुक्तिरात्मजये फलम् । ५ ।
at विसृज्यैव मनवस्तत्सुताश्च कुरूद्धह।गता यथागतं युद्धे al ai जेष्यन्त्यबुद्धय: । ६ |
मत्कृते पितृपुत्राणां भ्रातॄणां चापि विग्रह: । जायते ह्यसतां राज्ये ममताबद्धचेतसाम् । ७ ।
