Dis. 24] BOOK THREE 245

LHRH CHKH KK OHAOKMCCU HSH CUVCOOKHKECTHEKHKALKOUREECE DE ECTECEE UE HH OTE HE HUI HS FTE HT te

stretching beyond the three worlds) along with Sanaka and his three brothers and
accompanied by Narada (who are all lifelong celibates, leaving behind the other sages,
Marici and the rest, so as to enable them to espouse the hand of Kardama's nine
daughters).(20) After the departure of Brahma, O Vidura, the sage Kardama immediately
gave away his daughters to the lords of created beings (Marici and others), as directed by
the creator, according to the injunctions of the Sastras. (21) He gave (the hand of) Kala to
Marici and Anastya to Atri; Sraddha he gave away to Angira, and Havirbht to Pulastya. (22)
He further gave Gati, who was worthy of Pulaha, to the latter and the virtuous Kriya to Kratu,
Khyati to Bhrgu and even so Arundhati to Vasistha. (23) And to Atharva he gave (the hand
of) Santi, through whom a sacrifice is successfully accomplished. When they were duly
married, Kardama propitiated these foremost sages as well as their wives (with kind
attentions). (24) Being thus married, the sages thereupon took leave of Kardama and
departed, full of joy, each for his own hermitage. (25)

स चावतीर्णं त्रियुगमाज्ञाय विबुधर्षभम्। fafa उपसङ्गम्य प्रणम्य समभाषत 126!
wa पापच्यमानानां fa स्वैरमङ्गले:। कालेन yer नूनं प्रसीदन्तीह देवता: 1201
बहुजन्मविषक्केन सम्यग्योगसमाधिना । द्रष्टुं यतन्ते यतय: जून्यागारेषु यत्पदम् RI
स एवं भगवानद्य हेलनं नगणय्य न: । गृहेषु जातो ग्राम्याणां a: स्वानां Vata: ।२९॥
wa वाक्यमृतं कर्तुमवतीर्णोऽसि मे गृहे। चिकीर्षुर्भगवान् ज्ञानं भक्तानां मानवर्धन: 1301
तान्येव तेऽभिरूपाणि रूपाणि भगवंस्तव । यानि यानि च रोचन्ते स्वजनानामरूपिण: 1321
त्वा सूरिभिस्तत्त्वबुभुत्सयाद्धा सदाभिवादार्हणपादपीठम् |
ऐश्वर्यवैराग्ययञ्ञोऽवबोधवीर्यश्रिया पूर्त्तमहं प्रपद्ये 1321
परं प्रधानं पुरुषं one oe कविं त्रिवृतं लोकपालम् ।
आत्मानुभूत्यानुगतप्रपञ्चं स्वच्छन्दशक्तिं कपिलं Wa 1331
आ स्माभिपृच्छेद्य प्तिं saat त्वयावतीर्णार्ण उताप्तकाम: |
परिव्रजत्पदवीमास्थितोऽहं चरिष्ये wat ae aaa विजशोक: avi
Having come to know that it was Lord Visnu Himself (who is possessed of three pairs of
divine attributes, viz., power and affluence, piety and renown, wisdom and dispassion, in
their entirety), the foremost of the gods, who had been born (as a son to him), the sage
approached Him when He wasall alone, and, bowing to Him, said: (26) "Alas! on those who
are burning in this hell of transmigration as a result of their own evil deeds, the gods shower
their grace after a long time. (27) Contrary to this, the Lord whose truth striving souls seek
to realize in lonely places through concentrated practice of Devotion matured through many
ives, and who promotes the cause of His devotees, has this time appeared in the house of
sensual men like us, not minding the ignominy incident to such a birth. (28-29) Intent on
enhancing the dignity of His devotees, You have been born into my house just to redeem
Your pledge and to found the Sankhya system (which leads to true Knowledge). (30) O Lord,
Your transcendent forms alone are worthy of You; even so the human semblances that
appeal to Your own devotees are as well liked by You, even though You are devoid of a
material form. (31) | take refuge in You, whose footstool is always fit to be saluted by sages
<een to know the Truth, and who are perfect in power and energy, wisdom and dispassion,
fame and affluence. (32) | take refuge in Kapila, the supreme Lord, who has all the potencies

2i His beck and call, who appears as Primordial Matter, the Spirit, the Mahat-tativa or the
orinciple of cosmic intelligence, the Time-Spirit, the threefold (Sattvika, Rajasika and
