Dis. 24 ] BOOK FOUR , 403

PORK पि रे कौ TERE EEHKEEEEKERE HAE EAHA HA EEE TEE क केक्तै ङ ती SHE AEH ङी कौ क दौ वी ती क्तं दौ व्ये त्क HSH

blessings sought for by mortals—with the fellowship, enjoyed even for half a moment, of
those who have developed an attachment for the Lord. (57) May we enjoy the (blessed)
company of those whose sins have been washed away by immersing their soul in (the stream
of) Your glories and their body in (the holy waters of) the Ganga flowing from Your feet—
which absolve one of all sins—nay, who are imbued with compassion for all creatures and
are possessed of a mind free from likes and dislikes and endowed with virtues (such as
straightforwardness and so on) ! Let this be Your boon to us. (68) The contemplative soul
whose mincis neither distracted by external objects nor loses itself in a spell of drowsiness
(during meditation) exceedingly pure and blessed as it is by the loving devotion of such
devotees, easily and surely succeeds in realizing Yours true nature at this stage. (59) You
are the same Brahma (Infinite) in whom is manifested this universe and who shines through
the universe, nay, who is supreme effulgence and is all-pervading like ether. (60)

यो माययेदं पुरुरूपयासृजद् fault ya: क्षपयत्यविक्रिय: |

यद्भेदबुद्धि सदिवात्मदु:स्थथा amend भगवन् प्रतीमहि ।६१।

क्रियाकलापैरिदमेव aim: sean: साधु यजन्ति सिद्धये ।

भूतेन्द्रियान्तरकरणोपलक्षितं a च at च a एवं कोबिदा: ।६२॥

त्वमेक oS: पुरुष: सुप्तशक्तिस्तया रज:सत्त्वतमो विभिद्यते ।

vere खे मरुदग्निवार्धरा: सुरर्षयो भूतगणा इदं यत: 1831

ae स्वशक्त्येदमनुप्रविष्टश्चतुर्विधं पुरमात्मांशकेन ।

अथो विदुस्तं ged सन्तमन्तर्भुङ्के हृषीकैर्मधुं सारघं य: 1

"O Lord, we know You to be absolute—You, who evolve this (universe), sustain it and

again dissolve it, as though it were real, Yourself remaining unchanged, through (the
instrumentality of) Your Maya (deluding potency), that assumes multitudinous forms and
gives rise to the notion of difference; yet which is powerless against You. (61) They alone
are well-versed in the Vedas and the Tantras (the scriptures dealing with the worship of the
various deities and revealed by Lord Siva to His Divine Consort, Goddess Parvati), who,
devoted as they are to the path of Action andimbued with faith, duly adore, for (the attainment
of) perfection (in the form of Self-Realization or final beatitude) through a network of rituals,
this very (embodied) form of Yours, which is hinted at by the five (gross) elements, the
Indriyas (the senses of perception, as well as the organs of action) and the mind (as their
Ruler).(62) You are the one primeval Person, whose energy (in the form of Maya) lies
dormant (before creation). It is by the said Maya that Sattva, Rajas and Tamas (the three
modes of Prakrti) get differentiated and it is from the same Maya that this universe—
consisting of Mahat-Tattva (the principle of cosmic intelligence), the ego, ether, the air, fire,
water and earth, the gods and the Rsis (seers) and the multitudes of living beings—springs
up. (63) By a part of Your being You have entered the body, which is of four kinds (viz. ,sweat-
born, oviparous, viviparous and sprouting from the soil), and has been brought forth by Your
own Energy (Maya). It is therefore that they call that ray of your being, residing in the body,
as the Purusa or Jiva, which (wrapped in ignorance) enjoys through the (various) senses the
trivial pleasures of sense like the honey collected (and enjoyed) by bees. (64)

a ow लोकानतिचण्डवेगो विकर्षसि @ ws कालयान: |
भूतानि भूतैरनुमेयतत्त्वो घनावलीर्वायुरिवाविषह्य: 1&4 |
प्रमत्तमुच्चैरितिकृत्यचिन्तया प्रवृद्धलोभं विषयेषु लालसम्।
त्वमप्रमत्त: सहसाभिपद्यसे क्षुल्लेलिहानोऽहिरिवाखुमन्तक: 1६६1
