Dis. 13} 7 \,BOOK ONE | 51

Sete Br ङी डि rere te tree RERE RRA RR GRO BPR ROR Re SR RESEARCH he Be SOR TH He ८ङ छो Ae Br Be Bi SRT RTM Hr We FER ER ET Re HS: BBE
स्ना म्मि

Yudhisthira in his supreme splendour rejoiced with his younger brothers, who were as
powerful as the guardians of the various worlds. (16) In this way time, whose movements
are most difficult to control, passed unnoticed by them, attached as they were to their home
and had lost sight of their goal (for the time being) on account of their remaining engrossed
in worldly activities. (17)

विदुरस्तदभिप्रेत्य धृतराष्ट्रमभाषत | राजन्निर्गम्यतां शीघ्रं wee भयमागतम् ।१८॥
प्रतिक्रिया न यस्येह कुतश्चित्कर्हिचित्प्रभो । स wa भगवान् काल: सर्वॆषां न: समागत: ।१९॥
येन चैवाभिपन्नोऽयं प्राणै: प्रियतमैरपि । जन: wet वियुज्येत किमुतान्यैर्धनादिभि: 1201
पितृभ्रातृसुहृत्पुत्रा हतास्ते व्रिगतं वय:। आत्मा च जरया ग्रस्त: परगेहमुपाससे । २१॥
अहो महीयसी जन्तोर्जीविताशा war wari भीमापवर्जितं पिण्डमादत्ते गृहपालवत् । २२
अग्निर्निसृष्टो दत्तश्च गरो दाराश्च दूषिता: । हृतं at धनं येषां तद्दत्तैरसुभि: कियत् । २३|
went wa देहोऽयं oor जिजीविषो: । परैत्यनिच्छतो जीर्णो ac वाससी ga । २४॥
गतस्वार्थमिमं देहं विरक्तो मुक्तबन्धन:। अविज्ञातगतिर्जह्यात् स A धीर उदाहूत: 1241
a: स्वकात्परतो वेह जातनिर्वेद आत्मवान्।हदि कृत्वा हरिं गेहात्प्रव्रजेत्स नरोत्तम: 1261
अथोदीचीं fet aq स्वैरज्ञातगतिर्भवान्। इतोऽर्वाक्त्रायरा: are: पुंसां गुणविकर्षण: 1201

Perceiving this, Vidura said to Dhrtarastra,"Look here: a terrible time has come. Let us,
therefore, soon be away, my royal brother ! (18) That all-powerful time (the time of
death) has come upon us all, which cannot be averted on any account and under any
circumstance.(19) Overtaken by it, a man is immediately made to part with his life, which is
most dear to him, to say nothing of other things such as wealth and so on. (20) Your uncles
(Bhisma and Somadatta), your brother and cousin (Pandu and Bhurisrava), your relations
(such as your brothers-in-law, Sakuni and Salya, your son-in-law, Jayadratha and so on),
nay, your own sons (Duryodhana and others) have been killed; your days are almost ended
and your body is overcome with old age, and (what is worst) you are living under the roof of
another (king Yudhisthira, who was your mortal enemy till yesterday) ! (21) Oh, how strong
isthe desire in a living being to survive, impelled by which you accept the morsels of food
thrown to you by Bhima even like a dog ! (22) What do you expect to achieve through a life
depending on the good-will of those whose dwelling was set on fire, to whom poison was
administered, whose wedded wife was subjected to ignominy (in open court), nay, whose
lands and other possessions were seized (all with your connivance) ? (23) How foolish of
you that you still desire to live ! Like tattered clothes, your age-worn body will nonetheless
leave you, however reluctant you may be to cast it off. (24) Therefore, free from worldly
attachment and shaking off all bondage, he who drops this body, which is no longer of any
use to him, away from and unknown to his kith and kin, he alone is spoken of as wise. (25)
Fed up with this world either by himself or by another's precept and with a subdued mind,
and holding Sri Hari in his heart, he who leaves his home (as a recluse) is foremost among
men, (26) Therefore, unnoticed by your kinsmen, proceed to the north (the Himalayan
region); for the time which will come hereafter will be mostly such as would take away the

The sage now approached Yama and wanted to know for what sinful act ofhis he was made to suffer such terrible agony. Yama
told him that he had in his childhood pierced a live locust with the point of a blade of KuSa grass, and that was responsible for
the pangs of impalement suffered by him. The sage felt that the punishment meted out to him was out of all proportion with the
crime, which must have been committed by him through ignorance. He, therefore, uttered an imprecation against the god,
consigning him to earthly life as a Sidra for one hundred years. It was under his imprecation that Yama was reborn on this
earth as Vidura.
