108 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA { Dis. 6

Sep IRC aintot npiotrtototetesiainiottatatctn gy int tet y: tom intact tt ewer er te Wee 8 AE ee ST ear te tee er eet wy ees ae el ae a wena जो जी Or चै

न मे हृषीकाणि पतन्त्यसत्पथे यन्मे हृदौत्कण्ठ्यवता धृतो aft: 133!
सोऽहं यस्तपोमयक: प्रजापतीनामभिवन्दिततर पति: |

आस्थाय चोगं gut समाहितस्तं नाध्यगच्छं चत आत्मसम्भव: ।३४॥
यो ह्यात्ममायाविभवं स्म पर्यगाद् चथा नभ: स्वान्तमथापरे कुत: 134
तन्मायया मोहितबुद्धयस्त्विदं विनिर्मितॆ चात्मसमं विचक्ष्महे 136 I
When | sprang up from the lotus in the navel of this Cosmic Being, | found no materials
for sacrifice beyond the limbs of the Supreme Person. (22) Of these requisites, O noblest
sage, | collected from the limbs of the Cosmic Being Himself materials for sacrifice such as
the animals to be sacrificed, trees for sacrificial posts, blades of Kuga grass, this sacrificial
ground (where Brahma evidently happened to be at the time of the discourse) and a most
advantageous time (spring etc.), for the performance of a sacrifice, vessels and other
necessary things, cereals (like rice, barley and so on), clarified butter and other only
substances, saps of Soma and other plants, gold and other metals, earths of various kinds,
water, the sacred texts of the Rgveda, the Yajurveda and the Samaveda and the duties of
the four chief priests officiating at a sacrifice (viz., Hota, Adhvaryu, Udgata and Brahma), the
names of sacrifices (such as Jyotistoma etc.), and Mantras (such as Swaha etc.), as also
the sacrificial fees and the sacred vows to be observed during the performance of a sacrifice,
the mention of the gods, the texts laying down the process of conducting sacrifices, the formal
undertaking of a vow (to perform a sacrifice) and the process of performingit, the movements
at the close of a sacrifice and contemplation on the deities, expiatory ceremonies for errors
and omissions and offering the whole performance to the Lord. (23—26) Having thus
collected all the materials from the limbs of the Cosmic Being, | worshipped with those very
materials the same Supreme Person, Lord Visnu. (27) Then these your (elder) brothers, the
nine lords of creation (Marici and others), with perfect concentration of mind, adored the
Supreme Person, who is manifest (in the form of the Cosmic Being) and unmanifest (as the.
inner controller of all beings). (28) Thereafter, when the time came, the Manus and the other
Rsis (seers), the manes, the gods, the demons and men, all worshipped the Lord through
sacrifices. (29) This universe, O Narada, rests on the support of the same Lord Narayana,
who, though essentially devoid of all attributes, assumes innumerable attributes at the dawn
of creation by His Maya. (30) | create the universe as commissioned by Him; Lord Hara
(Siva), under His control, dissolves it; while He Himself as the Purusa (Lord Visnu) preserves
it. In fact, it is He who has assumed the three powers of Sattva, Rajas and Tamas (severally
for the purpose of creation, protection and dissolution). (31)Thus, dear son, have | told you ,
what you enquired of me. There is nothing in this creation, whether existing as a cause or.
an effect, which is other than the Lord. (32) My words, dear Narada, are never observed to.
be false; my mindtoo never conceives a false idea and my sensesare never led astray either.
This is because | have ever contemplated on Sri Hari with a longing heart. (33) |am Veda
personified, my life is full of austere penance and | am the lord of Prajapatis (the progenitors |
of races) and adored by them all; nay, | practised Yoga in all thoroughness with a,’
concentrated mind. Yet! failed to realize Him to whom | owe my existence. (34) I bow to His
most blessed feet, which are the home of all auspiciousness and end the cycle of birth and
death in the case of those who take refuge in Him. Even as the sky knows not its limits He
too 1s unable to realize the extent of His own Maya (deluding potency), how, then, can others
know it ? (35) Neither myself nor you (my sons) nor even Vamadeva (Lord Siva) knows His
