Dis. 13 ] BOOK NINE

titre five veveetrenrthtiettrentermnctiniehteehkenieten

कृतध्वजात्केशिध्वज: खाण्डिक्यस्तु मितध्वजात् | कृतध्वजसुतो राजन्नात्मविद्याविशारद: 120 |
खाण्डिक्य: कर्मतत्त्वज्ञो भीत: केशिध्वजाद् द्रुत: । भानुमांस्तस्य पुत्रोऽभूच्छतद्युम्नस्तु तत्सुत: 1281

ज्चुचिस्तत्तनयस्तस्मात् सनद्वाजस्ततोऽभवत्।ऊर्ध्वकेतु: सनद्वाजादजोऽथ पुरुजित्सुत: 1221
अरिष्टनेमिस्तस्यापि श्रुतायुस्तत्सुपार्श्वक: । ततश्चित्रथो यस्य क्षेमधिर्मिथिलाधिप: 1231
तस्मात् . समरथस्तस्य सुत: सत्यरथस्तत: | आसीदुपगुरुस्तस्मादुपगुप्तोऽग्निसंभव: ।२४॥
वस्वनन्तोऽथ तत्पुत्रो युयुधो यत् सुभाषण: । श्रुतस्ततो जयस्तस्माद् विजयोऽस्मादृत: सुत: । २५1
Wat जज्ञे वीतहव्यो धृतिस्तत: । बहुलाश्चो धृतेस्तस्य कृतिरस्य महावज्ञी ize
एते वै मैथिला राजन्नात्मविद्याविञ्ञारदा: । योगेश्वरप्रसादेन दइन्दैर्मुक्ता गृहेष्पि । २७॥

Of Janaka was born Udavasu, whose son was Nandivardhana. From Nandivardhana
followed Suketu and his son, again, was Devarata, O protector of the earth! (14) From (the
Joins of) Devarata sprang up Brhadratha, whose son Mahavirya was the father of Sudhrt
(Sudhrti). Sudhrti's son indeed was Dhrstaketu. Then came Haryaswa, of whom was born
Maru. (15) Maru's son was Pratipaka, of whom was born Krtiratha. From (the loins of)
Krtiratha sprang up Devamidha, whose son was Visruta, and then came Mahadhrti. (16) Of
him was born Krtirata, from whom followed Maharoma. Again, his son was Swarnaroma, and
Hrasvaroma was born as his son. (17) Of Hraswaroma was born Siradhwaja. (The divine)
Sita (the Spouse of Sri Rama) appeared from his ploughshare while he was ploughing the
earth for the purpose of a sacrifice; hence he is remembered as Siradhwaja (who owed his
celebrity to a plough). (18) His son was KuSadhwaja, of whom wasborn King Dharmadhwaja;
and DharmadhWaja had two sons, Krtadhwaja and Mitadhwaja (by name). (19) From (the
loins of) Krtadhwaja sprang up Kesidhwaja and from Mitadhwaja (Krtadhwaja's younger
brother) followed Khandikya. (Of these) Kesidhwaja (the son of Krtadhwaja), O king, was
well-versed in the science of the Spirit. (20) Khandikya (on the other hand) was proficient in
the science or rituals and fled (left his kingdom) for fear of Kesidhwaja. Kesidhwaja's son was
Bhanuman, whose son was Satadyumna. Satadyumna’ ऽ son was Suci, of whom was born
Sanadwaja; and from the said Sanadwaja followed Urdhvaketu. From Urdhvaketu followed
Aja and his son was Purujit. (21-22) His son, again, was Aristanemi. From the latter followed
Srutayu and his son was Suparswaka. Of the latter was born Citraratha, whose son was
Ksemadhi, the (famous) king of Mithila. (23) From (the loins of) Ksemadhi sprang up
Samaratha, whose son was Satyaratha. Of Satyaratha was born Upaguru and from him
followed Upagupta, who emanated from (a ray of) the god of fire (Agni). (24) Then came
Vasvananta and his son was Yuyudha, from whom followed Subhasana. Then came Sruta,
from whom followed Jaya and from (the toins of) the latter sprang up Vijaya, of whom was
born a son, Rta (by name). (25) Then came Sunaka, of whom was born ason Vitahavya by
name and from him followed Dhrti. Dhrti's son was Bahulaswa, of whom Krti was born and
from (the loins of) Krti sprang up Mahavasi. (26) (All) these kings of Mithila, O king, were really
proficient in the knowledge of the Spirit. By the grace of masters of Yoga (like the sage
Yajfiavalkya) they were rid of pairs of opposites (such as joy and sorrow) even in their
household life. (27)

Thus ends the thirteenth discourse entitled “The posterity of Nimi described’,
in Book Nine of the great and glorious Bhagavata-Purana,
otherwise known as the Paramahamsa-Samhita.

Stitt:
PerFe SSE rors
