Dis. 10 } BOOK FIVE 475.

Rheh rt rtrkthet eek r keer ttebthhtetitthhtthitiirrecthhehereetik .३.३.३.७..६.३.३.३.३.३.३.३.३..३ HEE
eee EE EE Se SSA eee ee

` 1० Rahugana who had in his pride mixed with anger (a product of Rajoguna) and
infatuation ( a product of Tamoguna or ignorance) slighted (through Bharata) all the
devotees of the Lord (who constitute His favourite abode) and thought himself to be a wise
man although he was not much acquainted with the ( queer and deluding) ways of masters
of Yoga, and was at the same time talking much nonsense, accounting himself to be a ruler
of men —that worshipful Brahmana, who had become one with Brahma (the Infinite) and was
a friend, nay, the very self ofall living beings, smilingly spoke as follows, even though he was
altogether free from pride:—(8)

ब्राह्मण उवाच
त्वयोदितं व्यक्तमविप्रलब्धं wd: a मे स्याद्यदि de भार:।
गन्तुर्यदि स्यादधिगम्यमध्वा पीवेति राशौ न विदां प्रवाद:। ९ ।
स्थौल्यं awd व्याधय आधयश्च ayeud कलिरिच्छा जरा च।
frat रतिर्मन्युरहंमद: yet देहेन जातस्य fe मे न सन्ति।१०॥
Wert नियमेन राजन् आद्यन्तवद्यद्दिकृतस्य दृष्टम्।
स्वस्वाम्यभावो ys ssl ax तर्ह्यच्यतेऽसौ विधिकृत्ययोग:।११।
विशेषबुद्धैर्विवरं मनाक च पश्याम यन्न व्यवहारतोऽन्यत्।
क ईश्वरस्तत्र किमीशितव्यं तथापि राजन् करवाम किं ते।१२॥।
उन्मत्तमत्तजडवत्स्वसंस्थां गतस्य Ft वीरॆ चिकित्सितेन।
अर्थ: कियान् भवता शिक्षितेन स्तब्धप्रमत्तस्य च पिष्टपेष:।१३॥

The Brahmana said : What has been (ironically) hinted at by you (just now’), (viz., that
| am in no way fatigued and that | have not borne the palanquin to along distance) is evidently
true and constitutes no reproach. It would be a slur if this burden borne on (the shoulders of)
its bearer (the body), O valiant king, had rested on me (the incorporea! Spirit, who has no
burden at all) and if the goal to be reached or the way (leading to it), existing in the eyes of
the goer (the moving body), had reference to me (the all-pervading and, therefore,
immovable Spirit). (Even so) the epithet 'stout' is used by the wise with reference to a body
(a conglomerate of the five gross elements) alone and never in relation to the incorporeal
Spirit. (9) Stoutness andleanness, (bodily) ailments and (mental) worries, hunger and thirst,
fear and strife, desire and old age, sleep and attachment to the pleasures of sense, anger
and vanity arising from egotism, and grief appear (only) in one who is born with a feeling of
identification with the body and not in me (the pure Self). (10) Death synchronous with life,
O king, is as a rule perceived in everything which undergoes transformation; for whatever
undergoes transformation has a beginning and an end (too). And orders should be given
by one and carried out by another without fail only where the relation of servant and master
is fixed (unchangeable), O praiseworthy monarch! (11) (In our case itis not so; for you can
become a servant and | your master if there is a revolution.) And we do not find the slightest
occasion (justification) for the notion of difference (as between a master and servant) apart
from usage or convention. Under such circumstances whois the ruler and who, the servant
(fit to be ruled) ? Nevertheless, O king, (if you account yourself a master, tell me,) what can
we do for you (what service can we render to you ?). (12) And what object will be gained

* Vide passage 6 above.
