Dis. 26 ] BOOK FOUR 441

…धैघेधैभेभ्रेश्चेर्व्यर्व्यष्पैर्व्य…घेद्दैश्चेघ्रेप्रेंघेर्व्यर्किप्रेंर्व्यगेर्व्यघेधैभेथेप्नेग्ने…घ्रेग्नीग्भिघेध्रेघेस्मिँघेर्व्यषींध्रेनोंर्पोर्मीघेधे
त्र्त्त न न ता ता ज व्ये ती Re ee व

आसुरीं वृत्तिमाश्रित्य घोरात्मा निरनुग्रह: | न्यहनन्निशितैर्बाणैर्वनेषु वनगोचरान्। ५ |
तीर्थेषु प्रतिदृष्टेषु राजा मेध्यान् पशून् at यावदर्थमलं लुब्धो हन्यादिति नियम्यते । ६ |
य एवं कर्म fad विद्वान् कुर्वीत मानव:। कर्मणा तेन राजेन्द्र ज्ञानेन न स लिपष्यते |
अन्यथा कर्म कुर्वाणो मानारूढो निबध्यते। गुणप्रवाहपतितो नष्टप्रज्ञो व्रजत्यध: । ८ ।

Narada resumed : Armed with a mighty bow, clad in his gold armour, equipped with his
inexhaustible quiver and attended by his eleventh general, Purafijana one day mounted his
car drawn by five horses and fit for swift marches, and proceeded to the forest called
Parficaprastha. The car had a pair of shafts, two wheels, one axle-tree, three flag-staffs, five
cords, a single rein, one charioteer, a seat (for the owner of the chariot), two (central) poles
(to which the yoke is fixed), five recesses and sevenfold protection.|t was capable of five
kinds of motion and was provided with appurtenances of gold. (1—3) Leaving behind his
wife, who (however ) did not deserve such (callous) treatment, the proud king, who was
totally given up to the passion for game, set about hunting there, bow and arrow in hand. (4)
Following the ways of the demons, he became hard-hearted and cruel and killed with his
sharp arrows a number of wild animals in the woods. (5) The scriptures restrict the scope
of hunting and lay down that a king (alone), if he is excessively fond (of hunting), may kill
in the forest according to his needs (only) such animals as are fit for sacrifice (and that too)
on sacred occasions (Sraddha etc.), recognized in the scriptures. (6) The wise man who
performs his duties thus defined (in the Sastras) is not tainted by that action, O ruler of kings,
thanks to the enlightenment that dawns on him (as a result of such actions). (7) Full of
egotism, he who does his duties otherwise (in violation of the restrictions imposed by the
scriptures) is bound (by such actions). Having fallen into (the whirlpool of) transmigration,
and deprived of his judgment, he goes down in the scale of spiritual evolution. (8)

तत्र निर्भिन्नगात्राणां चित्रवाजै: शिलीमुखै: | विप्लुवोऽभूद्दुखितानां दु:सह: करुणात्मनाम् । ९ ।
शशान् वराहान् महिषान् गवयान् रुरुशाल्यकान् | मेध्यानन्यांश्च विविधान् विनिघ्नन् श्रममध्यगात् । १० |
तत: क्षुत्तृदपरिश्रान्तो fad गृहमेयिवान्। कृतस्नानोचिताहार: dads गतक्लम: ।११॥
आत्मानमर्हयाञ्चक्रे धूपालेपस्रगादिभि: | साध्वलङ्कृतसर्वाङ्गो महिष्यामादधे मन: ।१२।
Ta «ee: सुदृप्तश्च कन्दर्पाकृष्टमानस:। न oes वरारोहां गृहिणीं गृहमेधिनीम् । १३॥
अन्त:पुरस्रियोऽपृच्छद्दिमना इव वेदिषत्। अपि a: कुशलं रामा: सेश्वरीणां यथा पुरा । १४॥
न तथैतर्हि रोचन्ते गृहेषु गृहसम्पद: । ae न स्याद् गृहे माता पत्नी वा पतिदेवता |
SAS रथ इव IM: को नामासीत दीनवत् । १५
क्व add सा ललना Ted व्यसनार्णवे। या wage प्रज्ञां दीपयन्ती पदे पदे ।१६॥
The slaughter of wild animals that had their bodies lacerated by his arrows decorated
with variegated feathers and died with great pain was something hard to bear for those
possessed of a tender heart. (9) While (engaged in) killing hares, boars, bisons, Gayals,
black antelopes and porcupines, fit for sacrifice, and many other creatures, he felt (much)
fatigued. (10) Exhausted with hunger and thirst, he desisted from the cruel act and returned
home; and, when he had finished his bath and duly taken his meals, he lay down to rest and
was (thus) relieved of his fatigue. (11) He graced his person with perfume, sandal paste and
wreath of flowers etc., and, well adorned all over, (now) thought of his queen. (12) Sated with
refreshments, delighted with perfume etc., and highly proud of his royal state, and his mind

seized with passion, he missed his beautiful wife, who helped him in discharging the duties
of a householder. (13) As ifsad at heart, he enquired of the ladies of the gynaeceum, O king
