Dis. 8] BOOK FOUR 325
SRI ii tirinriitierererer

Feet eee ee eee ee ce se were ee = SRE ME ATR NRE eT RR ee ee Re ROR eRe Rees

ae श्वसन्ती वृजिनस्य पारमपर्यती बालकमाह बाला ।
age तात परेषु मंस्था भुङ्के जनो यत्परदु:खदस्तत् ।१७॥
स्तन्येन वृद्धश्च fame यां wif वा वोढुमिडस्पतिर्माम् । १८॥
आतिष्ठ तत्तात विमत्सरस्त्वमुक्तं समान्रापि यदव्यलीकम् ।
-आराधयाधोक्षजपादपद्मं यदीच्छसेऽध्यासनमुत्तमो यथा ।१९॥
अजोऽध्यतिष्ठत्खलु UAB पदं जितात्मश्चसनाभिवन्द्यम् 20 |
तथा मनुर्वो भगवान् पितामहो यमेकमत्या पुरुदक्षिणैर्मखै: ।
इष्टाभिपेदे दुरवापमन्यतो भौमं सुखं दिव्यमथापवर्ग्यम् ।२१॥
अनन्यभावे निजधर्मभाविते मनस्यवस्थाप्य भजस्व पूरुषम् ।२२॥
Te तत: पद्मपलाशलोचनाद् दु:खच्छिदं ते मृगयामि der
यो मृग्यते हस्तगृहीतपद्मया भ्रियेतरैरङ्घे विमृग्यमाणया ।२३॥

Maitreya went on : Pierced by the poignant remarks of his stepmother and hissing in
indignation like a serpent beaten with a staff, Dhruva left his father, who kept gazing mutely,
and went away crying loudly into the presence of his own mother. (14) Suniti lifted up in her
arms the child, who was sobbing with quivering lips, and was sore distressed to hear from
the mouth of the (other) inmates of the gynaeceum what his co-wife had said. (15) Scorched
by grief as a wild creeper by the forestfire, the young girl lost heart andcried. Her eyes, which
were graceful as a pair of lotuses, were filled with tears as she recalled the (poignant)
remarks of his co-wife. (16) Seeing no way out of her sorrow, the girl heaved a deep sigh and
Said to her child, "Entertain no evil thought about others, dear child. For a man reaps (in this
life) the very suffering he has inflicted on others (in a previous existence). (17) Suruci (your
stepmother) has truly said that you were borne in the womb, and brought up with the milk
of, my wretched self, whom the king feels ashamed to accept as his wife, nay, even as his
servant-maid ! (18) Therefore, dear child, abide ungrudgingly by those words, which, though
uttered by your stepmother, are nonetheless true, and adore the lotus-feet of Lord Visnu
(who is beyond the range of sense-perception), if you aspire to (ascend) the royal throne like
Uttama (your half-brother). (19) It was by worshipping the lotus-feet of Lord Visnu, who
assumed the quality of Sattva (harmony) for the protection of the universe, that Brahma,
(your great grandfather) attained to that most exalted position whichis an object of reverence
even to those who have conquered their mind and senses. (20) Even so your grandfather,
the worshipful Manu, secured both earthly and heavenly bliss as well as final beatitude—
whichis so difficult to attain by any other means—by worshipping the Lord with single minded
devotion through sacrifices with liberal sacrificial fees. (21) Take refuge, my child, in Him
alone, who is so fond of His devotees and access to whose lotus-feet is sought after by men
keen to get liberated; and, imprinting His image on your mind, purified by devotion to your
duty and exclusively attached to Him, adore theSupreme Person. (22) | find none other than
the Lord with lotus-like eyes, who can wipe out your sorrow. Even Sri (the goddess of beauty
and prosperity), who is eagerly sought, dear one, by (all) others, (ever) seeks after Him,
holding a lotus (in place of a lamp) in her hand. (23)
