Dis. 19 ] BOOK FOUR । 373
र्धंध्रेघ्रेद्येघैध्रेटींर्व्यञ्चु'न्धिंष्टेघेर्धेध्रेघैर्व्यप्नेपिंग्रेग्नेप्नेप्रेग्रेस्यंग्रेर्व्यर्व्यष्टेष्टेघेदिघेप्नेग्रेशॆघे’घे’र्व्यघेघेमैभेग्रैध्रेघ्रेर्गगेर्मीर्व्यघ्नंर्घोर्धंर्पोघेषींषीर्व्यहाँग्नीद्बीर्व्य
न

Narada and Dattatreya, as well as masters of Yoga like Sanaka and his three brothers, who
are all eager to wait upon Him. (5-6) In that sacrifice, O Vidura (a descendant of Bharata),
goddess Earth attended in the form of a celestial cow, that supplies milk and clarified butter
serving as oblations for the sacred fire and gratifies all one's desire, yielded to the sacriticer
all the objects sought by him. (7) Rivers bore (as their streams) all sorts of sweet and
delicious drinks (pressed out of grapes and sugarcane), as well as milk, curds, butter-milk
and clarified butter together with many liquid foods. The gigantic trees, which profusely
dropped honey (from their pores) bore fruit in abundance. (8) Oceans brought him heaps of
jewels and mountains brought four kinds of foods. Similarly all the worlds with their guardians
brought presents (for the king). (9)

इति चाधोक्षजेशस्य पृथोस्तु परमोदयम्। असूयन् भगवानिन्द्र: प्रतिघातमचीकरत् । १०॥

चरमेणाश्वमेधेन यजमाने यजुष्पतिम्।वैन्ये age, स्पर्धन्नपोवाह तिरोहित: ।११॥

तमत्रिर्भगवानैक्षत्त्वरमाणं विहायसा | आमुक्तमिव पाखण्डं योऽधर्मे धर्मविभ्रम: 1221

अत्रिणा चोदितो हन्तुं पृथुपुत्रो महारथ:। अन्वधावत संक्रुद्धस्तिष्ठ तिष्ठेति चाब्रवीत् । १३॥

तं तादृशाकृतिं वीक्ष्य मेने ad शरीरिणम्। जटिलं भस्मनाच्छन्नं ae at न मुञ्चति । १४॥

वधान्निवृत्तं तं भूयो हन्तवेऽत्रिरचोदयत्। जहि यज्ञहनं तात महेन्द्रं विबुधाधमम्न् ।१५॥।

एवं वैन्यसुत: प्रोक्तस्त्वरमाणं विहायसा । अन्वद्रवदभिक्रुद्धे watt गृध्रराडिव । १६॥

aise रूपं च तद्धित्वा तस्मा अन्तर्हित: स्वराट्। वीर: स्वपश्गुमादाय पितुर्यज्ञमुपेयिवान् । १७॥

तत्तस्य चाद्भुतं कर्म विचक्ष्य परमर्षय: । नामधेयं ददुस्तस्मै विजिताश्च sft प्रभो । १८॥

The powerful Indra grew jealous of such great prosperity of king Prthu—who looked upon
Lord Visnu (who is beyond sense-perception) as his (sole) lord and master—and threw
obstacles in his way. (10) While Prthu (the son of Vena) was (therefore) engaged in
worshipping Lord Visnu (the Lord of sacrifices) through the ‘performance of the last
(hundredth) horse-sacrifice, the jealous Indra stole away the sacrificial animal, himself
remaining hidden from view. (11) The venerable Atri detected him hurrying through the air
in the garb of a heretic, which he had taken on himself as an armour, and which leads one
to mistake unrighteousness for righteousness. (12) Egged on by Atri to kill him; Prthu's
son, who was a great car-warrior, gave a chase, all inflamed with rage, and shouted, “Halt !
Halt !" (13) Indra wore elf-locks on his head and was besmeared with ashes. Seeing him in
that guise, the prince took him to be piety incarnate and refrained from shooting an arrow
at him. (14) When he returned without having killed Indra, Atri urged him once more to slay
the wrong-doer, saying, "Strike, dear child, the great Indra, whois (in fact) the vilest of gods,
inasmuch as he has interfered with (your father's) sacrifice." (15) Thusincited by Atri, Prthu's
son gave chase to Indra as he was hastening through the sky, even as Jatayu (the king of
the vultures) chased Ravana (when he was flying with Sita in his aerial car). (16) Indra (the
lord of paradise) gave up for the prince the horse as wellas the guise which he had assumed
and vanished (from the view of his pursuer). The hero (then) came back to (the site of) his
father's sacrifice, bringing the horse with him. (17) Witnessing the wonderful achievement
of Prthu's son, the great sages (Atriand others, who had been officiating at the sacrifice) gave
him the (significant) name of Vijitaswa (the conqueror of the horse), O Vidura (anincarnation
of Dharma) ! (18)

उपसृज्य तमस्तीव्रं जहाराश्वं पुनर्हरि: । चषालयूपतञ्छन्नो हिरण्यरशनं विभु: 1201
am: सन्दर्शयामास त्वरमाणं विहायसा । कपालखटद्वाङ्गधरं वीरो नैनमबाधत 1201
अत्रिणा चोदितस्तस्मै सन्दधे विशिखं रुषा । सोऽश्वं रूपं च तद्धित्वा तस्थावन्तर्हित: Te । २१॥
