Dis. 24] BOOK FOUR 401

पैश्वैप्रीद्यैग्रेस्रंन्’द्मंच्च॰'!ष्ट्र'प्रंग्रांगांग्नेर्व्यछ्रुब्दग्रेप्रांगांत्यें…घंध्रे…प्रैप्नंप्पैथेह्मैप्रेढ्योघंग्नेक्खिप्घंभैध्रेळ्ळिभेभैभेग्नीघ्रेग्नेप्नेघेक्लीग्रे…श्चंत्रींधै…ध्रेष्ठैप्तोर्यंश्चेभेयींध्दिर्धश्नेघेध्रेषीं

Sankarsana (the second of the four Vythas, that presides over the ego), who is unmanifest
and infinite and destroys the universe (by the fire issuing from His mouth at the time of
universal dissolution), and to Pradyumna (the third VyGha), from whom comes the highest
knowledge of the world and who presides over the intellect or understanding. (35) Hail, hail
to Aniruddha (the fourth manifestation), presiding over the mind, which is the controller of
the sense. Obeisance to You as the sun-god, who pervades the universe by His effulgence
and is devoid of growth and decay. (36) Salutations to Him who is the door to heaven and
final beatitude and who constantly dwells in a pure heart. Hail to the Fire-god (who has
effulgence for his energy), through whom are accomplished sacrifices performed with the
help of four priests (viz., Hota, Adhwaryu, Udgata and Brahma) and who makes for the
continuance of sacrifices. (37) Obeisance to Sri Hari (the Lord of the three Vedas), who as
the moon-god (the seed of Yajfia) serves as the food of both the manes and the gods, and
salutations (again) to the Lord who in the form of water gratifies (all) embodied beings. (38)
Salutations to You, who appear as the bodies of all living beings as well as the Cosmic Body
and take the form of earth. Hail to You, who (as the wind-god) sustain all the three worlds
and are endowed with the strength of mind, senses and body. (39) Obeisance to the Lord,
who as ether supplies a clue to (the existence of) objects (through its attribute, sound) and
provides a basis for the conception of inside and outside. Salutations to Him in the form of
that (well-known) sacred sphere of great splendour (known by the name of heaven). (40) Hail
to You in the form of worldly activity and activity carried on in retirement—leading et
to (the attainment of) the world of the manes and the region of the gods—and also in the
form of death which is the fruit of unrighteousness and causes pain. (41) Obeisance to You,
O Lord, who yield the fruit of all actions and are omniscient (or revealed in the form of
Mantras). Salutations to You in the form of Sri Krsna, whois supreme virtue personified and
is possessed of unobstructed wisdom, nay, who is the most ancient Person, the Lord of both
Sankhya (the path of Knowledge) and Yoga (the path of Action). (42) Hail to You, who as
Rudra (the god of destruction) preside over the ego and are endowed with the three
potencies (in the form or doership, instrumentality and activity). Obeisance to You, who (as
Brahma, the creator) are knowledge and activity personified, and from whom proceeds the
vast wealth of speech. (43)

दर्शनं नो दिदृक्षूणां देहि भागवतार्चितम्। ed प्रियतमं स्वानां सर्वेन्द्वियगुणाञ्जनम् ।४४॥
स्निग्धप्रावृड्घनश्यामं सर्वसौन्दर्यसंग्रहम् | चार्वायतच्तुर्बाहुं सुजातरुचिराननम् ।४५॥
पद्मकोशपलाशाक्षं सुन्दरभ्रु सुनासिकम्। सुद्विजं सुकपोलास्यं समकर्णविभूषणम् ive
प्रीतिप्रहसितापाङ्गमलकॆरुपशोभितम् । लसत्पङ्कजकिञ्जल्कदुकूले HIST!
स्फुरत्किरीटवलयहारनूपुरमेखलम् । शङ्खचक्रगदापद्ममालामण्युत्तमर्धिमत् ।४८॥
सिंहस्कन्धत्विषो बिभ्रत्सौभगग्रीवकौस्तुभम्। श्रियानपायिन्याक्षिप्तनिकषाङ्मोरसोल्लसत् ॥४९॥

पूररेचकसंविद्नवलिवल्गुदलोदरम् । प्रतिसंक्रामयद्विश्चं नाभ्यावर्तगभीरया । ५०॥
श्वामश्रोण्यधिरोचिष्णुर्दुकूलस्वर्णमेखलम् । समचार्वङ्ध्रिजङ्घोरुनिम्नजानुसुदर्शनम् । ५१॥

पदा ङहरत्पद्मपलाशरोचिषा नखद्युभिर्नोऽन्तरघं विधुन्वता ।
प्रदर्शय स्वीयमपास्तसाध्वसं पदं गुरो मार्गगुरुस्तमोजुषाम् 142 |
"Pray, bless us—who are keen to behold You—with Your sight, which is held in such
great esteem by Your devotees. Be pleased to reveal to us Your beautiful form, the most
beloved of Your votaries, which delights all the senses by its (numerous) excellences. (44)
It is cerulean as a charming rain-cloud and the conglomeration of all elegance. it has four
