612 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 21

SHREK EHET ENT EH SHAE TST ETE CLE AT १999 4999 RES CEH AREER SERENE ७> 28०8 9१99 2 ७4०4 ७.84.4% 4२4

of a tank polluted by the touch of a low-born person), by physical fitness and otherwise or
by knowledge and the affluent circumstances (or otherwise) of the individual concerned.
(Nay,) the sin which the aforementioned agencies (of pollution) bring to a sout (by polluting
a substance) really do so (only) according to the local conditions and other circumstances
of the individual concerned. (10-11) The purity of food-grains, (articles of) wood, bones (such
as ivory) andtextiles, savoury substances (suchas milk, ghee and honey), metals (especially
gold), hides and skins and earthen substances is brought about by (passage of) time, the air,
fire, earth and water jointly or severally. (12) That by recourse to which an article (such as
a stool, household utensil or cloth) smeared with an impure substance sheds its (foul) smell
and (impure) coating and returns to its natural state is intended to be its purifier. (13) The
purity of a doer prompted by the ego-sense is brought about by bathing, munificence,
askesis, age (prescribed fora certain act), strength, purificatory rites (such as investiture with
the sacred thread) and righteous acts (like the saying of Sandhya prayers) and (above all)
by remembering Me. A member of the twice-born classes (or even a Sidra for that matter)
should (proceed to) do his duty (only) when purified (by these). (14) The purity of a Mantra
(sacred formula) is brought about by learning it (properly from a qualified man) and the purity
of an act lies in dedicating it to Me. Religious merit is acquired through (the purity of) the
aforesaid factors (place, time, substance, agent, sacred formula and righteous act enumer-
ated in the foregoing verses); while the reverse (their impurity) (makes for)
unrighteousness.(15) In some cases even a virtue turns out to be a fault and vice versa in
the light of a scriptural ordinance. {In this way) the scriptural ordinance determining the
goodness or otherwise of a particular object cuts at the root of the distinction (of good and
bad) itself. (16) in the case of those (already) fallen (in social rank or morals) the perpetration
of an act similar to that which is sinful for others (not so fallen) is not (further) degrading.
(Similarly) sexual intercourse (whith one’s lawfully wedded wife during the days permitted*
by the Sastras) when already afreed upon is a virtue (although it is a sin in the case of a
recluse); (for) a person (already) lying (on the ground) has no chance of a (further) fall. (17)
Amanis rid of attachment for each of those objects and actions from which he desists. This
righteous course (in the shape of detachment) is salutary for men and dispels their grief,
infatuation and fear. (18)

विषयेषु गुणाध्यासात् Ga: सङ्घस्ततो भवेत्। सङ्गात्तत्र waa काम: कामादेव कलिर्नृणाम् ee
कलेर्दुर्विषह: क्रोधस्तमस्तमनुवर्तते । तमसा ग्रस्यते पुंसश्चेतना व्यापिनी द्रुतम् । २०।
तया विरहित: साधो जन्तु: शून्याय कल्पते । ततोऽस्य endian मूर्चछितस्य मृतस्य च । २१।
विषयाभिनिवेशेन Fer वेद नापरम्। वृक्षजीविकया जीवन् व्यर्थं wea य: श्चसन् 122)

From (our) misconception regarding the goodness (agreeability) of an object springs up
attachment to it in man. From attachment follows the desire to possess it and from desire
alone ensues quarrel among men {as a sequel to such desire being thwarted by some-
one).(19) From quarrel proceeds anger which is difficult to restrain; infatuation follows anger
and by infatuation is soon obscured man’s all-penetrating judgment (distinguishing right
from wrong). (20) Deprived of judgment, 0 good one, a living being (man) is as good as

“Rain water collected Ina reservoir such as a tank during the rains canbe used (for drinking and other purposes). Ofcourse
itshould be avoided for three days {so that the Impunties that may have flowed into it from the catchment area may settle down
In the meantime}. Al other times one should wait for ten deys; then (only) purity is ordained 10 have been brought about.”

° A Sruts texl says +--

“One should copulate with one's wedded wife during the sixteen nights tollowing the period of menstruation."
