726 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 15°

त्र्ना ee a वा Be ee i een eter ao Ye Sere © eo eer eo rete weit तं ree tron see ee te Hero et aoe

यस्य साक्षाद् भगवति ज्ञानदीपप्रदे qi need: श्रुतं तस्य ad कुञ्जरशौचवत् । २६॥
एष बवै भगवान्साक्षात् प्रधानपुरुषेश्वर: | योगेश्वरैर्विमृग्याङ्धिर्लोको a मन्यते नरम् । २७॥

One should conquer desire through lack of determination to gratify it, wrath by eschewing
desire, greed by looking upon wealth as an evil, fear by pondering the true nature of things
(unity of life), grief and infatuation by distinguishing matter from Spirit, hypocrisy through
service to exalted souls, impediments (such as worldly gossip) in the path of Yoga
(concentration of mind) through (a vow of) silence, violence (to others) through inactivity of
body etc., (giving up all efforts for securing religious merit, worldly riches and sensuous
enjoyment). (22-23) He should get rid of pain resulting from (other) living beings through
compassion (friendly behaviour to those very beings), suffering brought about by divine
agencies (natural phenomena) by recourse to composure of mind (calm resignation to the
divine will), bodily distemper by dint of Yogic practices (such as breath-controland so on) and
sleep by recourse to Sattvika food etc. (24) (Again,) aman should conquer Rajas (passion)
and Tamas (inertia) by dint of Sattva and Sattva through freedom from attachment and
indeed all these (the evils enumerated above) with ease through devotion to one's
preceptor.(25) Analogous to the bath of an elephant (which throws dust on its body
immediately after washing it) is all sacred knowledge possessed by a man who entertains
the perverted notion about the teacher—who has conferred on him the light of wisdom and
(as such) is no other than the Lord—that he is a mortal (like himself). (26) Just as Sri Krsna,
present before you, is the ruler of (both) Prakrti (primordial Matter), and Purusa (the individual
soul), and His feet are worthy of being sought after even by masters of Yoga (like Siva), and
yet the world looks upon Him as a human being, so is the case with the preceptor, who is
(invariably) the same as the Lord. (27)

wedded: dal नियमचोदना: । तदन्ता ale नो योगानावहेंयु: श्रमावहा: 120!
यथा वार्तादयो wet amend न बिभ्रति । अनर्थाय wage पूर्तमिष्टं तथासत: ।२९॥

All precepts of the nature of an ordinance (such as those enjoining sacrifices and works
of public utility etc.) solely aim at the subjugation of the five senses and the mind. (Even)
though aiming at this, they entail (only) fruitless labour if they do not bring in their train the
(three) stages of contemplation on the Lord (in the shape of Dharana, Dhyana and
Samadhi).(28) (Just) as (vocational) pursuits like agriculture (and their rewards in the shape
of a bumper crop and so on) do not evidently contribute to Liberation (the object of Yoga or
concentration of mind), (on the other hand,) they make for transmigration (which is a positive
evil), so do sacrifices and works of public utility (such as digging of wells, tanks and so on)
under-taken by him who has his face turned away from Godlead to metempsychosis (alone
rather than to Liberation). (29)

यश्चित्तविजये चत्त: स्यान्नि:सङ्घोऽपरिग्रह: । एको विविक्तशरणो भिक्षुर्भिक्षामिताशान: 1301
देशे शुचौ समे राजन्संस्थाप्यासनमात्मन: | fet समं सुखं तस्मिन्नासीतर्ज्यङ्ग ओमिति ।३१।
SUT सन्निरुनध्यात् पूरकुम्भकरेचके: | यावन्मनस्त्यजेत् कामान् स्वनासाग्रनिरीक्षण: 132 |
यतो amt नि:सरति मन: कामहतं भ्रमत्। ततस्तत soe हृदि रुन्ध्याच्छनैर्बुध: 1331
एवमभ्यसतश्चित्तं कालेनाल्पीयसा यते:। ate aa fant यात्यनिन्धनवह्निवत् । ३४॥
कामादिभिरनाविद्धुं प्रशान्ताखिलवृत्ति यत् । चित्तं ब्रह्मसुखस्पृष्टं नैवोत्तिष्ठेत कर्हिचित् । ३५
He whois intent upon the subjugation of (his) mind should become a recluse (renounce
the world) and live alone in a secluded place, free from attachmentand devoid of possession

and subsisting on scanty fare obtained by begging. (30) Arranging his seat (consisting of a
mat of KuSa grass, covered by deerskin with a piece of cloth spread onit), Oking, onaclean
