134 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 8

SP OARA NOC OHHR OO NHET ENERO 92 428 # ७9 ०499 9 # १86 # 899 ##9#^^# # #:^#8 ७9१4 # # 4:^ # #:^ 4949 १499 44

Sri Suka went on: Thus entreated (by Nanda), and (himself) remaining concealed, the
sage performed in secret the naming ceremony with respect to the two boys (the sons of
Rohini and Yasoda); (for) that was sought to be done by himself. (11)

1h उवाच
STAG Aare AFAR TA 1221
आसन् वर्णास्त्रयो Ta गृह्णतोऽनुयुगं तनू: । शुक्को रक्तस्तथा पीत इदानीं कृष्णतां गत: । १३॥
प्राययं वसुदेवस्य क्वचिज्जांतस्तव॰]त्पज:।वासुदेव इति श्रीमानभिज्ञा: सम्प्रचक्षते । १४॥
बहूनि सन्ति नामानि रूपाणि च सुतस्य ai गुणकर्मानुरूपाणि तान्यहं ae नो जना: ।१५॥
एष व: sa आधास्यद् गोपमोकुलनन्दन: । अनेन सर्वदुर्गाणि यूयमञ्जस्तरिष्यथ । १६॥
पुरानेन ब्रजपते साधवो दस्युपीडिता: | अराजके रक्ष्यमाणा जिग्युर्दस्यून् समेधिता: । eo!
य एतस्मिन् महाभागा: प्रीतिं कुर्वन्ति मानवा: । नारयोऽभिभवन्त्येतान् विष्णुपक्षानिवासुरा: । १८॥
तस्मान्नन्दात्मजोऽयं ते नारायणसमो गुणै: । श्रिया कीर्त्यनुभावेन गोपायस्व समाहित: 129!
Fare समादिह्य गर्गे च स्वगृहं गते। नन्द: प्रमुदितो मेन आत्मानं पूर्णमाशिषाम् i201

Garga observed : Delighting his kinsfolk with his exceilences, this son of Rohini, as a
matter of fact, will be styled as Rama (the delighter of the people); and due to his superiority
of strength people will remember him as Bala (strength personified). (Nay,) because of his
observing no distinction (inter se) between the Yadus* (viz., between yourselves, on the one
hand, and Vasudeva etc., on the other) people will also recognize him as Sankarsana (the
unifier). (12) Taking (diverse) forms indeed in each Yuga, Yasoda’s son has manifested three
(different) colours, viz., white, red and yellow; this time he has assumeda dark complexion(13)
Some time in the past this son of yours was born in the house of Vasudeva; (hence) the wise
(who know this truth) will duly designate him as the glorious Vasudeva (son of Vasudeva).(14)
There are numerous names and forms of your son, conforming to his excellences and
actions. | (alone) know them, not the commonality. (15) The delight of the cowherds, nay, of
the entire Gokula, this boy will bring you happiness. By his help you will easily surmount all
difficulties. (16) Protected and strengthened by him during a period of anarchy in former
times, O lord of Vraja, pious souls, tormented by robbers, (eventually) conquered them. (17)
Enemies cannot overpower those highly blessed souls who offer love to this boy, any more
than demons can overpower those whose cause has been espoused by Lord Visnu. (18)
Therefore, this son of yours, O Nanda, is a compeer of Lord Narayana in point of excellences,
splendour, fame and glory. (Please) look after him intently. (19) And, when Garga, having

duly instructed Nanda, had returned to his abode (at Mathura), Nanda felt much delighted
and deemed himself full of (all) blessings. (20)

कालेन व्रजताल्पेन गोकुले रामकेशवौ । जानुभ्यां सह षाणिभ्यां रिङ्गमाणौ विजह्रुतु: । २१॥
तन्नादहृष्टमनसावनुसृत्य लोकं मुग्धप्रभीतवदुपेयतुरन्ति मात्रो: 1221
wart निजसुतौ घृणया स्नुवन्त्यौ पङ्काङ्गरागरुचिरावुपगुह्य seat
दत्त्वा स्तनं प्रपिबतो: स्म मुखं निरीक्ष्य मुग्धस्मिताल्पदशनं ययतु: प्रमोदम् 1231

“In the Harivam$a (The Supplement of the Mahabharata) $n Balarama says to Nande:—
यादवेष्वपि सर्वॆषु भवन्तो मम वह्लभा: ।

“Even among the Yadavas you are (particulerly) beloved of me.”
