720 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 14

SON ee te te ee Ee ee 8 जयो Ste ho Se Se ee य toro one tn Ho ee
sss rr a ST ERE SSE ET SE

punishment. (8) He should look upon deer, camels, donkeys, monkeys, rats, reptiles, birds
and flies as though they were their (own) children What is that which distinguishes these from
those (children)? (They deserve his fostering care as much as his own children). (9) Even
a householder should not seek after the (first) three objects of human pursuit (viz., religious
merit, worldly possessions and sensuous enjoyment) with great pains, but (only) as much
(of them) as has been assigned (to him) by fate and (that too) with due regard to place and
time. (10) He should unsparingly divide in due proportion (all) objects of enjoyment among
all including dogs, sinful creatures and those belonging to the lowest strata of society (lit.,
those living at the end of a town or village); (nay, not minding his own inconvenience,) he
should allow those deserving of service the (legitimate) use (unobjectionable services) even
of his only wife, whom people regard as their (sole) possession. (11) The Lord (who is
conquered by none) is veritably conquered by him who (inwardly) ralinquishes his claim on
that (his) wife for whose sake a manis prone to lay down his own life or (even) to kill his (own)
father and teacher (in the event of their being suspected to have illicit connection with
her).(12) How despicable (on the one hand) is this worthless body, which is sure to be
reduced in the end (after death) to the state of worms (on getting decomposed if interred) or
converted into ordure (if left unprotected and devoured by carnivorous animals) orinto ashes
(if cremated) and equally despicable is (the body of) a wife, who is loved for the sake of such
a body; and how exalted (on the other hand) is this soul (our real Self), which is all-pervading
(lit., covers the entire space by its glory) ! (13)

सिद्धैर्यज्ञावशिष्टार्थै: कल्पयेद वृत्तिमात्मन: 18 we eee: पदवीं महतामियात् । १४॥
देवानृषीन् नृभूतानि पितॄनात्मानमन्वहम्।स्ववृत्यागतवित्तेन यजेत पुरुषं पृथक् ।१५॥
यर्ह्यत्मनोऽधिकाराद्या: सर्वा: स्युर्यज्ञसम्पद: । वैतानिकेन विधिना अग्निहोत्रादिना यजेत् ।१६॥
न ह्यम्निमुखतोऽयं वै भगवान्सर्वयज्ञभुक । इज्येत हविषा राजन्यथा विप्रमुखे हुतॆ: ।१७॥
were ब्राह्मणदेवेषु मर्त्यदिषु यथार्हत: aed: कामैर्यजस्वेनं क्षेत्रज्ञं ब्राह्मणाननु ।१८।
कुर्यादापरपक्षीयं मासि प्रोष्ठपदे द्विज: । ong पित्रोर्यथावित्तं aga च वित्तवान् ।१९॥
अयने विषुवे gag व्यतीपाते दिनक्षये । चन्द्रादित्योपरागे च द्वादशीश्रवणेषु च । २०॥
तृतीयायां शुक्लपक्षे नवम्यामथ कार्तिके । चतसृष्रप्यष्टकासु हेमन्ते fret तथा 1221
ma च सितसप्तम्यां मघाराकासमागमे । राकया चानुमत्या वा मासरक्षाणि युतान्यपि 1221
द्वादश्यामनुराधा स्याच्छ्वणस्तिस्र उत्तरा: | तिसृष्रेकादशी वाऽऽसु जन्मर्क्षश्रोणयोगयुक् 1231
त एते श्रेयस: काला नृणां श्रेयोविवर्धना: । Hala, सर्वात्मनैतेषु श्रेयोऽमोघं तदायुष: 12%
एषु SM wa होमो ad देवद्विजार्चनम्। पितृदेवनृभूतेभ्यो ae दत्तं तद्ध्यनश्वरम् । २५॥
संस्कारकालो जायाया अपत्यस्यात्मनस्तथा । प्रेतसंस्था मृताहश्च कर्मण्यभ्युदये नृप । २६॥

A householder should sustain himself with (live on) articles (of food etc.) obtained by
force of destiny and left after (the performance of) the five great sacrifices (respectful
offerings to the animal kingdom, human beings, manes, Rsis and gods). Forgoing his claim
on everything else, a wise man bids fair to attain the position of exalted souls (ascetics of
the highest order). (14) With the wherewithal earned through one's own vocation he should
daily worship the (highest) Purusa (the Inner Controller of all) separately in the form of the
gods (the divine intelligences presiding over the various departments of Nature), Rsis
(seers), human beings, the animal kingdom, manes (the spirits of the departed) and his own

self. (15) When all the requisites for (the performance of) a sacrifice including his eligibility
for it are forthcoming, he should worship the Deity by means of oblations poured into the
