Dis. 194 4 । — ATASBBRTGNE 83

ee te ead ~
१००८ Br Be Fe REE Be ee Re RR Re AR RT RR RR RRA RSET PRR PR RS RRR HE AH RO AH IO Ne Se Pee a

a विष्णुरातोऽतिथय आगताय at सपर्यां शिरसाऽऽजहार ।
ततो निवृत्ता ह्यबुधा: स्रियोऽर्भका महासने सोपविवेश पूजित: ।२९।
a Aqaeara महान् महीयसां ब्रह्मांर्षॆराजक्सिबक्सिङ्घे: ।
व्यरोचतालं भगवान् यथेन्दुर्ग्रहर्क्षतारानिकरै: परीत: 1301
प्रशान्तमासीनमकुण्ठमेधसं a नृपो भागवतोऽभ्युपेत्य ।
प्रणम्य मूर्धावहित: कृताञ्जलिर्नत्वा गिरा सूनृतयान्वपृच्छत् । ३१1
King Visnurata (Pariksit, so-called because his life had been preserved by Lord Visnu
i.e., Sri Krsna Himself), of whom we have spoken before, bowed his head to the stranger
who had called on him (of his own accord), and did homage to him. The ignorant women
and children thereupon withdrew and, worshipped by all, the sage occupied an exalted
seat. (29) Surrounded by hosts of Brahmana sages, royal sages and celestial sages, the
divine Suka, who was greatest among the great, shone most resplendent even as the
moon in the midst of other planets, constellations and stars. (30) When that sage of
unfailing wisdom had taken his seat, fully composed, the king, who was a devotee of the

Lord, approached him and, touching his feet with his head, stood attentive before him.
Then, bowing (again) with joined palms, he questioned the sage in sweet accents. (31)

परीक्षिदुवाच
अहो Wa वयं ब्रह्मन् सत्सेव्या: क्षत्रबन्धव: | कृपयातिथिरूपेण भवद्भिस्तीर्थका: Fat: 1321
येषां संस्मरणात् पुंसां सद्य: शुद्ध्यन्ति वै गृहा: । किं पुनर्दर्शनस्पर्शपादशौचासनादिभि: । ३३॥
सांनिध्यात्ते महायोगिन्पातकानि महान्त्यपि । सद्यो aah a gat विष्णोरिव सुरेतरा: । ३४॥
अपि मे भगवान् प्रीत: कृष्ण: पाण्डुसुतप्रिय: | पैतृध्वसेयप्रीत्यर्थं तद्गोत्रस्यात्तबान्धव: 1341
अन्यथा तेऽव्यक्तगतेर्दर्शनं a: ae qu fet म्रियमाणानां संसिद्धस्य वनीयस: 1361
aa: पृच्छामि संसिद्धिं योगिनां परमं गुरुम्। पुरुषस्येह यत्कार्यं म्रियमाणस्य सर्वथा 130!
यच्छोतव्यमथो wa यत्कर्तव्यं नृभि: प्रभो । स्मर्तव्यं भजनीयं वा gfe यद्वा विपर्ययम् gc!
नूने भगवतो we गृहेषु गृहमेधिनाम्। न लक्ष्यते ह्यवस्थानमपि गोदोहनं क्वचित् । ३९५

Pariksit said : Oh, how blessed are we today, O holy sage, in that we, vile Ksatriyas,
have been considered worthy of a visit by saints and have been so graciously consecrated
by you by calling on us as our guest. (32) Men's houses are instantly purified by your
remembrance, much more by your sight and touch, by washing your feet, offering a seat
to you and so on. (33) Men’s worst sins, 0 great Yogi, are wiped out at once by your
very presence, even as the demons are by the presence of Lord Visnu. (34) | presume
Lord Sri Krsna, the friend of the Pandavas, is pleased with me. It is for the pleasure
of His cousins (the Pandavas) that He has acted in a friendly manner even towards me,
their scion. (35) otherwise how could we, human beings much less those who are about
to die, obtain the privilege of seeing you, whose movements are so obscure, and who
have fully realized the object of human life and live in a lonely forest ? (36) Therefore,
| enquire of you, the greatest preceptor of the Yogis, the character and the means of the
highest realization. Nay, what should be done under all circumstances by a man who is
on the verge of death ? (37) Again, tell me, my lord, what should be done by men in
general—what should they hear, what should they repeat (with their tongue), what should
they keep in their mind, what should they resort to and what should they avoid ? (38)
For, nowhere, O divine sage, are you seen to stay at the door of householders even for
the brief space of time taken in milking a cow. (39)
