684 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 8 -

`-७.७.&.३.३.२.२.६.३... ७७३३ ७.३..७.३.३.३.३.३.७.३.&.३.३..&.३.३.३.७.७,७.७.७.७..३.३.७.७७.३.३.३.७.७.३.३ HEHEHE HEATER EEE RE EH eT”
wR आपात्य ar लीलया नखैर्यथाहिं गरुडो महाविषम् ।२९॥
॥ । sari . am
असृग्लवाक्तारुणकेसराननो यथान्त्रमाली द्विषहत्यया हरि: 1301

नखाङ्कुरोत्पाटितहृत्सरोरुहं विसृज्य तस्यानुचरानुदायुधान् ।
Te समन्तान्नखशस्त्रपाष्णिभिर्दोर्दण्डयूथोऽनुपथान् सहस्रश: ।३१॥

Thus murmuring and arming himself with a mace, HiranyakaSipu (who was a veritable
elephant among the Daityas) rushed roaring towards Nrsirhha (the Lord appearing in the
form of a man-lion). Fallen into the nimbus of Lord Nrsimha at that time, the said demon
vanished like a moth fallen into a flame. (24) Indeed it was no wonder that the demon (who
was darkness personified) should have disappeared into that Embodiment of Sattva
(unmixed with Rajas and Tamas), who had of yore (at the dawn of creation) actually
swallowed up the darkness (in the form of Tamoguna, which was responsible for the
dissolution of the universe) by His own effulgence. Then, coming near, the mighty demon
angrily assailed Nrsimha with his mace of tremendous force. (25) Nrsirnha (who was no other
than Lord Visnu, the Wielder of a mace) seized him even as he paced forward, mace in hand,
just as Garuda (the son of Tarksya, nicknamed Kasyapa) would catch hold of a huge serpent.
At that time the demon slipped from His hand, even as a serpent would from the clutches of
Garuda sporting with it. (26) The divinities, including the guardians of all the spheres whose
abodes had been usurped (by him) and who stood behind a curtain of clouds, O Yudhisthira
(a scion of Bharata), regarded this as something not good. Believing Lord Nrsimha, from
whose hand he had (just) escaped, to be afraid of his own prowess, the great Asura, who
knew no fatigue in battle, encountered Him with vehemence, tightly grasping his sword and
buckle. (27) Giving forth a shrill peal of laughter, rendered (more) terrific by a roar (that
accompanied it), Sri Hari, who was possessed of extraordinary impetuousity, seized the
demon, who was darting up and down with the swiftness of a hawk, brandishing his sword
in many ways So as to leave no weak point, but whose eyes had (now) closed (due partly to
his enemy's roar and laughter and partly to His dazzling splendour). (28) Throwing down, at
the entrance (of the hall) on His thighs, the demon—who was impatient at having been
caught and was wriggling all over, and whose skin had remained unscratched (even) by
(Indra's thunderbolt)—(just) as a serpent would knock down a rat, Lord Nrsimha tore him with
His claws in (mere) sport even as Garuda (the king of the birds) would tear a most venomous
snake. (29) Licking with His tongue the corners of His gaping mouth, the Lord, whose frightful
eyes were difficult to gaze at due to fury and whose manes and countenance had turned
reddish, stained as they were with drops of blood, and who wore a garland of (the demon's)
entrails, shone as a lion would by having killed an elephant. (80) Casting off the demon,
whose lotus-like heart had been split open by His pointed claws, the Lord, endowed as He
was with a multitude of stout arms, slew with His nails, weapons and heels his bodyguards
that had followed Him on every side in thousands with uplifted arms. (31)

सटावधूता जलदा: परापतन् ग्रहाश्च तददृष्टिविमुष्टरोचिष: ।
अम्भोधय: श्वासहता विघुक्षुभुर्निर्नादभीता दिगिभा विचुकुशु'।३२|
दोता समुत्येतुरमुष्य रंहसा तत्तेजसा खं ककुभो न रेजिरे ।३३॥
