248 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA (Dis. 35

ज् कक ROR RIOR ORR TOROS CROONER OTTER EOE Or En Emer ककक vor ere gory री श्र का

well as deer and cows (in the forest), stand with erect ears, as though they were asleep or
painted, their mind captivated by the music of the flute heard from a distance, and mouthfuls
of grass pressed between their teeth (without being swallowed). (4-5)
है — ।
कर्हिचित् सबल aie a गोपैर्गा: समाह्वयति यत्र मुकुन्द: । ६ |
ae war: सरितो वै तत्पदाम्बुजरजोऽनिलनीतम् ।
स्पृहयतीर्वयमिवाबहुपुण्या: प्रेमवेपितभुजा: स्तिमिताप: । ७ ।

Whenever the aforesaid Sri Krsna (the Bestower of Liberation), accompanied by Bala
and putting on the garb of a wrestler decorated with a tuft of peacock-feathers and tender
leaves, and painted with minerals (of various colours) O friend, calls the cows by theirnames
(through the notes of His flute) in the company of (other) cowherds, the (inanimate) rivers too
find their flow retarded and stand with their arms (in the shape of waves) thrown into motion
(as if to fold the Lord in their embrace), and (when foiled in their attempt) yearning for the dust
of His lotus-feet borne by the breeze but eventually with their waters stilled (as though in
despair), possessed as they are of poor merit like ourselves. (6-7)

अनुचरै: समनुवर्णितवीर्य आदिपूरुष इवाचलभूति: |
वनचरो गिरितटेषु चरन्तीर्वेणुनाऽह्वयति गा: a wa हि । ८ ।
वबनलतास्तरव आत्मनि विष्णुं mea इव पुष्पफलाढ्या: |
प्रणतभारविटपा मधुधारार प्रेमहष्टतनक ससृजु स्म । ९ ।

Whenever Sri Krsna, possessed of everlasting fortune like Lord Visnu (the most ancient
Person) and with His prowess sung in extenso (even as in the case of Lord Visnu) by His
followers, calls by their (respective) names the cows grazing on the slopes of the mountain
(Govardhana) with the help of His flute, while roaming about in the forest (Himself}, the
creepers of the forest as wellas the trees (their partners in life), laden as they are with flowers
and fruits, appear with their boughs bent low under their weight and with their frames thrilled
through (ecstasy of) love shed streams of honey as though manifesting (the all-pervading)
Lord Visnu (indwelling them in the form of rapture). (8-9)

वनमालादिव्यगन्धतुलसीमधुमनत्ते: ।

अलिकुंळैरलघुगीतपभॊष्टग्मप्द्रियन् Bird सन्धितवेणु: 1201
सरसि सारसहंसरविहङ्गाश्चारुगीतहृतचेतस एत्य ।

हरिमुपासत ते यतचित्ता हन्त मीलितदृञ्रो धृतमोना: ।११॥

When Sri Krsna, wearing (on His forehead) a sacred mark (so) charming to look at,
applies the flute to His lips, admiring the high-pitched and agreeable humming of swarms of
black bees drunk with the honey of Tulasi (basil) flowers forming part of His wreath of sylvan
flowers and emitting an ethereal fragrance, the cranes, swans and other birds (dwelling) in
lakes, dear me, approach Sri Hari, their heart captivated by the dulcet music (of the flute),
and flock by His side with their mind (fully) collected and eyes closed and observing
(complete) silence. (10-11)

सहबल: स्रगवतंसविलास: सानुषु क्षितिभृतो व्रजदेव्य: ।
हर्षयन् बर्हि aa जातहर्ष उपरम्भति विश्वम् ee
महदतिक्रमणङाङ्कितचेता मन्दमन्दमनुगर्जति मेघ: ।
सुहृदमभ्यवर्षत् सुमनोभिश्छायया च विदधत् प्रतपत्रम् ॥१३॥
