दशम: स्कन्ध:
(उत्तरार्धंद्वं )
अथ पञ्चारात्तमोऽध्याय:

Srimad Bhagavata-Mahapurana
Book Ten (Latter Half)

Discourse L
The Lord ensconces Himself in a fortress (built by Him in the western sea
under the name of Dwaraka)

श्रीशुक उवाच
अस्ति: प्राप्तिश्च eee महिष्यौ भरतर्षभ । मृते भर्तरिं दु:खार्ते ईयतु: स्म पितुर्गृहान्। १ ।
fa मगधराजाय जरासन्धाय दु:खिते। वेदयाञ्चक्रतु: सर्वमात्मवैधव्यकारणम् | २ ।

a तदप्रियमाकर्ण्य जोकामर्षयुतो नृप। अयादवीं wa कर्तुं चक्रे परममुद्यमम् । ३ |
अक्षौहिणीभिर्विशत्या तिसृभिश्चापि संवृत: । यदुराजधानीं मथुरां न्यरुणत् सर्वतोदिशम् । ४ ।

उत्त Suka began again : Their husband being dead, Asti and Prapti, the two wives of
Karnsa, O Pariksit (the foremost of the Bharatas), went away stricken with sorrow to the
house of their father: so the tradition goes. (1) Seized with agony they made known to their
father, Jarasandha, the ruler of the Magadhas, all thathad contributed to their widowhood.(2)
Full of grief and indignation of hear that unpleasant story, O protector of men, Jarasandha
put forth a supreme endeavour to rid the earth of the Yadavas. (3) Protected by three and
twenty Aksauhinis* he besieged Mathuré, the capital of the Yadus, on all sides. (4)

निरीक्ष्य ac कृष्ण seta सागरम्। स्वपुरं तेन संरुद्धं स्वजनं च भयाकुलम्। ५ ।
चिन्तयामास भगवान् हरि: कारणमानुष: | तद्देशकालानुगुणं स्वावतारप्रयोजनम् । ६ ।
हनिष्यामि बलं ह्येतद् भुवि भारं समाहितम्। मागधेन समानीतं at सर्वभूभुजाम् । ७ |
अक्षौहिणीभि: went भटाश्वरथकुञ्जरै: । मागधस्तु न हन्तव्यो भूय: कर्ता बलोद्यमम् । ८ ।
एतदर्थोऽवतारोऽयं भूभारहरणाय मे । संरक्षणाय साधूनां कृतोऽन्येषां वधाय च । ९ |
अन्योऽपि धर्मरक्षायै देह: died मया । विरामायाप्यधर्मस्य काले प्रभवत: क्वचित्। १०॥

Taking a full view of his army, which resembled an ocean that had overflowed its banks,
of His own city besieged by it and of His people (near and dear ones) stricken with fear, Sri
NN

* The strength of an Aksauhini has been specified as follows :—

द्रिनागे ख्या इत्येषाक्षौहिणो स्मृता ॥

In other words, an Aksauhini consists of 1,09,350 infantry, 65.610 horse. 21 870 elephants and an equal number of

chariots.

