Dis. 82 ] BOOK TEN 461

SAA AREA AAA ORLA EEA AAA ER ACNE 9992 HEAT ELE TET ET ANCL HET AAR 9६ #म57%# 6 # #॥ #

ययुर्भारत तत् at स्वमघं क्षपयिष्णव: । गदप्रद्युम्नसाम्बाद्या: सुचन्द्रशुकसारणै: । ६ ।
आस्तेऽनिरुद्धो waa कृतवर्मा च यूथप:। ते रथैर्देवधिष्ण्याभैर्हयैश्च तरलप्लवै: । ७ ।
गजैर्नदद्भिरभ्राभैर्नृभिर्विद्याधरद्युभि: । व्यरोचन्त महातेजा: षथि काञ्चनमालिन: । ८ ।
fae: कलत्रै: BM इव । तत्र स्नात्वा महाभागा उपोष्य सुसमाहिता: । ९ ।
ब्राह्मणेभ्यो ददुर्धेनूर्वास:स्नग्रुक्ममालिनी: । रामहृदेषु विधिवत् grag वृष्णय: igo!
ददु: स्वन्नं द्विजाग्र्येभ्य: कृष्णे नो भक्तिरस्त्विति । स्वयं च तदनुज्ञाता वृष्णय: कृष्णदेवता: । ११।
भुक्त्वोपविविदयु: कामं स्निग्धच्छायाङ्घिपाङ्घिषु । तत्रागतांस्ते ददृशु: सुहृत्सम्बन्धिनो नृपान् ।१२॥
मत्स्योशीनरकौसल्यविदर्भकुरुसृञ्जयान् । काम्बोजकैकयान् मद्रान् कुन्तीनानर्तकेरलान् । १३॥
अन्यांश्चैवात्मपक्षीयान् परांश्च झतशो qa) नन्दादीन् सुहृदो गोपान्गोपीश्चोत्कण्ठिताश्चिरम् ext
अन्योन्यसन्दर्शनहर्षरंहसा : ।
आश्लिष्य गाढं नयनै: स्रवज्रला हृष्यत्त्वचो रुद्धगिरो ययुर्मुदम् ।१५॥
स्रियश्च संवीक्ष्य मिथोऽतिसोहदस्मितामलापाङ्गदृशोऽभिरेभिरे ।
स्तनै: स्तनान् कुङ्कुमपङ्करुषितान् fea दोर्भि: प्रणयाश्रुलोचना: 1261
ततोऽभिवाद्य ते वृद्धान् यविष्ठैरभिवादिता: । स्वागतं कुरालं पृष्टा चक्रु: कृष्णकथा मिथ: igo!

Pariksit, on this great occasion for pilgrimage people from all parts of India, intent to wash
away their sin, assembled at Kuruksetra. There came Yadus like Akrura, Vasudeva and
Ugrasena (among the elders), and Gada, Pradyumna, Samba and others (among the
younger generation). (Pradyumna's son) Aniruddha and Krtavarma, the Yadava general,
alongwith Sucandra, Suka and Sarana were left (at Dwaraka) for the protection of the city.
The Yadus came all the way with great pomp and splendour. Adorned with necklaces of gold,
garlands of celestial flowers and excellent clothes, and protected by armour, they looked like
gods as they proceeded with their wives in chariots shining like aerial cars, on horses
springing like waves, and on trumpeting elephants appearing like thundering clouds, and in
palanquins, etc., carried by foot-men shining like Vidyadharas. (5—8) (Reaching Kuruksetra,)
the (blessed )Yadus took their bath in the sacred waters, observed a fast according to the
rule (during the eclipse) and made gifts of cows in right earnest to the Brahmanas adorning
them with clothes, garlands and chains of gold. (On the conclusion of the eclipse) they again
took their bath in the tanks associated with the name of ParaSurama, and thereafter fed
deserving Brahmanas with dainty dishes. Their object in doing all this was to strengthen their
devotion to Bhagavan SriKrsna's feet. (Then) the Yadus, who regarded Bhagavan SriKrsna
alone as their deity, broke their fast with the permission of the Brahmanas and lay down to
rest at pleasure under the cool shade of umbrageous trees. (After taking repose for a while)
they began to visit their friends and relations among the princes that had congregated there
on this occasion. (9—12) Kings of Matsya, Usinara, Kosala, Vidarbha, Kuru, Srfjaya,
Kamboja, Kekaya, Madra, Kunti, Anarta, Kerala, and many other principalities, who were
either their allies or enemies, had assembled there in their hundreds, O Pariksit! Besides,
Nanda and the other Gopas, who were (great) friends of the Yadavas, and the Gopis, who
had been long yearning to see Bhagavan Sri Krsna, had also arrived there. (The Yadus saw
them all one after another.) (13-14) The joy they derived from one another's sight opened the
buds of their heart. With faces glowing like lotuses in full blossom and with tears trickling
down their eyes, they clasped one another in close embrace. Their hair stood on end, their
voices got choked with emotion and all were transported with joy. (15) (Like the men) the
