Dis. 29 ] BOOK ELEVEN 657

ल्शा शाक शा गक IOI EEE शामाक मामा SORE On ROR सा ह BORO GOH EG ton Ce Ce ७ न

य एतच्छ्रद्धया नित्यमव्यग्र: शृणुयान्नर: । मयि भक्तिं परां कुर्वन् कर्मभिर्न स बध्यते । २८।
अप्युद्ध्व wa aa सखे समवधारितम्। अपि ते विगतो मोह: शोकश्चासौ मनोभव: ।२९॥
नैतत्त्वया दाम्भिकाय नास्तिकाय wom च अशुश्रूषोरभक्ताय दुर्विनीताय दीयताम् ।३०॥
एतैर्दोषैर्विहीनाय ब्रह्मण्याय प्रियाय च । साधवे qed gare भक्ति: स्याच्छद्रयोषिताम् । ३१॥
नैतद् विज्ञाय जिज्ञासोरज्ञातव्यमवशिष्यते। पोत्वा पीयूषममृतं पातव्यं नावशिष्यते 1321
ज्ञाने कर्मणि योगे च वार्तायां दण्डधारणे । यावानर्थो yo तात तावांस्तेऽहं चतुर्विध: 1331

The aforesaid teaching covers the entire range of Vedantic teaching, which has been
taught by Me to you in a nutshell or in extenso, (as necessary) and which is (so) difficult to
grasp even for the gods. (23) Repeatedly has this Knowledge (of Truth) been expounded by
Me ina very lucid and reasoned way. Having grasped it fully a man will have (all) his doubts
dispelled and bids fair to get liberated. (24) (Nay,) he who treasures (in his mind) this question
of yours as well as this discourse containing my reply (to it) will realize the everlasting
transcendent Brahma, that lies hidden in the Vedas. (25) (Again,) | shall voluntarily confer My
own Self on that teacher of Brahma who imparts this knowledge to My devotees most
extensively. (26) He who repeats aloud in an intelligent way this most sacred teaching (of
Mine). which is capable of sanctifying others (too), will get purified in that he will be revealing
Me day to day (to others) by the lamp of wisdom.(27) A man who attentively listens to this
(dialogue) with reverence from day to day will be practising (in effect) supreme devotion to
Me and will not be bound by actions. (28) | hope, O Uddhava, my friend, (the true nature of)
Brahma has heen fully understood by you: | presume also that your mind-born infatuation
and grief too has totally disappeared. (29) Let this teaching (of Mine) not be imparted by you
to a hypocrite, an unbeliever, a cheat, an irreverent listener, one who is not a devotee and
to an insolent person. (30) One should speak about it to him who is utterly devoid of the
aforementioned faults, to a devotee of the Branmanas, to one’s (own) favourite, toa pious
and holy man, (nay, even) to the Sudras and womenfolk if there is Devotion in them. (31)
Nothing remains to be known by a seeker of Knowledge after knowing this, (just as) nothing
remains to be quaffed after taking a draught of the immortalizing nectar. (32) To (devotees
like) you, O dear Uddhava, | (Myself) cover the entire range of the fourfold object (of human
pursuit), which is (partially) attained by men (in the shape of, say, final beatitude) through self-
knowledge, (Dharma or religious merit) through (the performance of prescribed) duty,
(mystic powers included under the category of Kama or enjoyment) through (the practice of)
Yoga, (wealth) through (the pursuit of) agriculture etc., (the vocation of a Vaisya), and
(dominion, also included in the category of enjoyment) through the wielding of a sceptre (a
symbol of ruling power). (83) When, having relinquished all duties, a mortal dedicates himself
to Me, he is chosen by Me as an object of special favour; and, attaining immortality, he then
gets qualified in reality for becoming one with Me (or acquiring divine powers). (34)

श्रीमुक उवाच
a एवमादर्शितयोगमार्गस्तदोत्तमहलोकवचो निहाम्य i
बद्धाञ्जलि: प्रीत्युपरुद्धकण्ठो न किञ्चिदूचेऽश्रुपरिष्रुताक्ष: 1341
pate: प्राहं यदुप्रवीरं item स्पृशंस्तच्चरणारविन्दम् ।३६॥
