Dis. 8] BOOK EIGHT । 771
६.३.६.३.३ ६१६३ टूग्घेध्रेर्धघ्रेगेध्रेघेद्दैग्रेष्टेश्चंघ्रेर्किर्किघेर्व्यर्व्यघेघेस्मिँप्रेग्नेध्रेगुं!प्रंर्धंर्धभेप्नेच्चै॰प्रेप्रेंध्रेक्खिघेघैर्व्यघेथैथै…घेगेषींघेर्मीक्लीघेर्मी…घे

the Source of (all) riches.Ensconced there, Laksmi promoted (the welfare of) Her creation,
the three worlds and their rulers, by Her benignant look. (25) A great noise issued forth from
conchs, clarionets and clay tomtoms and other musical instruments, as well as from
Gandharvas (attendants of the gods) and their wives singing (on that occasion).(26) All the
creators of the world, headed by Brahma, Rudra (the god of destruction) and the sage
Angira, celebrated the Lord by means of sacred texts purporting to describe Him and
representing the bare truth, and showered flowers on Him. (27) Looked at by Sri, the gods
and other created beings including the lords of creation became rich in amiability and other
qualities and attained supreme felicity. (28) The Daityas and Danavas (on the other hand)
became dispirited, rapacious, effortless and devoid of shame, O Pariksit, when they were
overlooked by Laksmi. (29)

अथासीद् वारुणी देवी कन्या कमललोचना। असुरा जगृहुस्तां वै हरेरनुमतेन ते ।३०॥

अथोदधैर्मध्यमानात् काश्यपैरमृतार्थिभि: | उदतिष्ठन्महाराज पुरुष: परमाद्भुत: 1321

दीर्घपीवरदोर्दण्ड: कम्बुग्रीवोऽरुणेक्षण: | THR: Et सर्वाभरणभूषित: 1321

पीतवासा महोरस्क: सुमृष्टमणिकुण्डल: । स्निग्धकुञ्चितकेशान्त: सुभग: सिंहविक्रम: 1331

अमृतापूर्णकलशं बिभ्रु वलयभूषित:। स वै भगवत: साक्षाद्बिष्णोरंशांशसम्भव: ।३४॥

धन्वन्तरिरिति ward आयुर्वेददृगिज्यभाक् | तमालोक्यासुरा: सर्वे कलशं चामृताभृतम् 13% |

लिप्सन्त: सर्ववस्तूनि mest तरसाहरन्। नीयमानेऽसुरैस्तस्मिन्कलशोऽमृतभाजने ।३६॥

मा खिद्यत मिथोऽर्थं a: साधयिष्ये स्वमायया 13191
Then appeared the goddess presiding over the wine called Varuni, in the form of a

maiden with lotus-like eyes. The aforesaid Asuras (Daityas and Danavas) caught hold of her,
of course, with the approval of Sri Hari. (30) Next arose from the ocean even as it was being
churned by gods and Asuras (the sons of the Sage Kasyapa), seeking nectar, O great king,
a most wonderful personage with long and plump arms, a conch-shaped neck and reddish
eyes,dark-brown (of hue), youthful (in age), wearing a wreath of flowers and adorned with
all (kinds of ) ornaments. (31-32) He was clad in yellow, had a broad chest, was graced with
a pair of very bright ear-rings made of gems, wore glossy and curly hair-tips (on his head)
was charming (of every limb) and possessed of the gait ofa lion.(33) He carried (in his hands)
a jar full of nectar and was decked with a pair of bracelets. Indeed he had emanated from
a minute ray of Lord Visnu Himself. (34) He was known by the name of Dhanvantari; (it was)
he (who) revealed (to the world) the science of medicine and he enjoys a share in the
Sacrificial offerings. Perceiving him as well as the jar brimful with nectar, all the Asuras, who
were eager to secure everything (churned out of the ocean), quickly snatched away the
(precious) jar. On the aforesaid jar containing nectar being carried away by the Asuras, the
gods felt dejected atheart and resorted for protection to StiHari. Noticing their helplessness
as aforesaid, the Lord, who grants the wishes of His servants (devotees), said," Do not feel
depressed; | shall accomplish your purpose by stirring up feud among them as well as
through My own deluding potency (in the form of a bewitching damsel). (35—37)

faa: कलिरभूत्तेषां तदर्थे तर्षचेतसाम्। ae पूर्वमहं WP न त्वं न त्वमिति प्रभो । ३८।
देवा: स्वं भागमर्हन्ति ये तुल्यायासहेतव: । सत्रयाग इवैतस्मिन्नेष धर्म: सनातन: ।३९॥
इति स्वान्प्रत्यषेधन्वै ar जातमत्सरा: | दुर्बला: प्रबलान् राजन् गृहीतकलशान् मुहु: ।`४०॥
एतस्मिन्नन्तरे fry: सर्वोपायविदीश्वर: । योषिद्रूपमनिर्देरयं दधार परमाद्भुतम् 1S |
