814 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 19

RARER AHA LARA EEE EEE EAE 3३2 HEHE EELS ERASE CSE E HET LEATHER .६ ६३

उशजजीजीकीज्यिती क्तैछ EEE SEES E LEE AEE SEE eee: _leeoeooorim[vowo

Spirit, something distinct from the body) and which is nourished by egotism. (13) Your father,
the celebrated Virocana (son of Prahrada), who was (so) fond of the Brahmanas, gave away
his own life to the gods (his enemies), appearing in the guise of Brahmanas, when requested
(by them), even though he knew their real character. (14) You (too) have observed the rules
of conduct followed by Brahmana householders (like Sukracarya), your (own) forbears (such
as Virocana)and other heroes of wide renown. (15) Of you as such, the foremost of the
bestowers of boons, | ask a small strip of land, three paces long, as measured by my stride,
O ruler of the Daityas | (16) | seek nothing else from your magnanimous self, the ruler of the
world. Indeed a learned man receiving (by way of a gift only) as muchas itis (actually) wanted
by him incurs no sin (otherwise attaching to the man who accepts a donation). (17)

अहो ब्राह्मणदायाद वाचस्ते वृद्धसंमता: । त्वं बालो बालिशामति: स्वार्थं प्रत्यबुधो यथा । १८।
Ti वचोभि: समाराध्य लोकानामेकमीश्वरम्। पद्त्रयं quia योऽलुद्धिमान् द्वीपदाशुषम् 128!
न पुमान् मामुपव्रज्य भूयो याचितुमर्हति । तस्माद् वृत्तिकरीं भूमिं वटो कामं प्रतीच्छ मे । २०॥

Bali submitted : Oh, son of a holy Brahmana ! your words are commendable in the eyes
of elders, although you are (yet) a body of puerile intellect, not properly alive to your own
interest, in that you who, having won over by (your) words me, the undisputed ruler of (all)
the worlds and (thus) capable of gifting a (whole) continent, ask (of me only) three paces (of
land), unwise as you are ! (18-19) Having approached (solicited) me, a man must not beg
again. Therefore, O Brahmana boy, accept at will from me land enough to afford (you) a

(decent) living.(20)
यावन्तो विषया: प्रेष्ठास्तिलोक्यामजितेन्द्रियम्। न शक्नुवन्ति a aa प्रतिपूरयितुं नृप ।२१।
fife: amidase द्वीपेनापि न पूर्यते। नववर्षसमेतेन सप्तद्दीपवरेच्छया 1221
सप्तद्दीपाधिपतयो नृपा वैन्यगयादय: | अर्थै: कामैर्गता नान्तं तृष्णाया इति A: श्रुतम् । २३।
यदृच्छयोपपन्नेन संतुष्ठटो वर्तते सुखम्।नासंतुष्टस्रिभिर्लोकैरजितात्मोपसादितैर ।२४॥
पुंसोऽयं संसृतेर्हेतुरसंतोषोऽर्थकामयो: aged संतोषो मुक्तये स्मृत: ।२५)
यदृच्छालाभतुष्टस्य तेजो विप्रस्य वर्धते। तत् प्रशाम्यत्यसंतोषादम्भसेवाशुशुक्षणि: । २६॥
तस्मात् त्रीणि पदान्येव वृणे aq वरदर्षभात्। एतावतैव सिद्धोऽहं fart यावत्प्रयोजनम् । २७

The Lord said : All the dearest objects (or territories) in the three worlds, whatever they
are, cannot satiate one who has not been able to subdue his senses and mind, O protector
of men. (21) He who is not satisfied with three paces (of land) cannot be sated even with a
(whole) continent, consisting of nine Vargas (sub-continents), as he will be seized with a
longing for (all) the seven Dwipas (main divisions of the globe). (22) Prthu (the son of Vena),
Gaya and other kings, suzerain lords of (all) the seven Dwipas, could not reach the end of
(their) thirst following from riches and (other) objects of desire: so have we heard. (23) A
contented person subsists with ease on whatever is got by luck; (whereas) a discontented
fellow of uncontrolled mind does not lead a happy life (even) with (the sovereignty of) the
three worlds acquired by him.(24)This discontentment with wealth and sense-enjoyment is
responsible for the transmigration of a soul; (while) contentment with whatever is obtained
by chance has been declared as conducive to Liberation.(25) The glory of a Brahmana,
contented with whateveris got by chance, grows; through discontent (however) it disappears
(even) as fire gets extinguished with water.(26) Therefore, only three paces (of land) dol ask
of you, the foremost of the bestowers of boons. | shall have accomplished my purpose with
