196 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 14

196 eaeenannnennnents neers nOseRetus tht ewe eTee thE ECER SRS SERS SSE RAST S SSS ESSTSSSS

husband like you is reproduced through them in the shape ot a son. (11) Our father, the
worshipful Daksa, who was fond ofthis daughters, severally asked us long ago (when we were
still unmarried): " Whom are you going to choose for your match, dear ones ?" (12) When he
came to know our mind (through other sources, since we made no reply out of bashfulness),
he gave away to you those thirteen of us who conformed to your nature, since he was keen
to multiply his race. (13) Therefore, O blessed lord with lotus-eyes, be pleased to grantmy wish;
for the afflicted never resort to the great in vain, O perfect one. (14)

इति at वीर मारीच: कृपणां बहुभाषिणीम् । प्रत्याहानुनयन् aa प्रवृद्धानङ्गकरुमलाम् । १५।
wr तेऽहं विधास्यामि fra afte यदिच्छसि | तस्या:कामं न क: कुर्यात्सिद्धिस्रैवर्गिकी aa: । १६।
सर्वाश्रमानुपादाय स्वाश्रमेण कलत्रवान् | व्यसनार्णवमत्येति जलयानैर्यथार्णवम् । १७॥
यामाहुरात्मनो ह्यर्धं श्रेयस्कामस्य मानिनि । यस्यां स्वधुरमध्यस्य पुमांश्चरति विज्वर: ।१८॥
यामाश्रित्येन्द्रियारातीन्दुर्जयानितराश्रमै: ad जयेम हेलाभिर्दस्यूनदुर्गपतिर्यथा ee!
न a प्रभवस्तां anand गृहेश्वरि।अय्यायुषावाकातन्ये’नयेचान्येगुणगृध्नव: 1201
genfr areca XNA SraTaeR| sar aT aera ET AeaTCT 128
एषा घोरतमा वेला घोराणां घोरदर्शंना।चरन्तियस्यांश्लानिभूतेज्ञानुच्याणिह।रर।
एतस्थांसाध्विस:ध्यत्यांभगवान्भूतभाबन:।परोतो भूतपर्षद्भिर्वृषेणाटति भूतराद्।२३॥

Seeing her miserable and pleading much in the aforesaid manner, and finding that her
reason had been clouded by intense passion, O heroic Vidura, Kasyapa (the son of Marici)
replied toherina conciliatory tone as follows :—(15) “I shall presently gratify you by granting
your wish, O timid one. Who would not grant the desire of one’s own wife, through whom one
is able to achieve the threefold object of human pursuit, (viz., worldly possessions,
gratification of the senses and religious merit)? (1 6) Even as one is able to cross the ocean
by means of vessels, 0 does a married man (a householder) cross the ocean of woe (by
conquering the senses) through married life, taking with him the other three Asramas (viz.,
the student community, the anchorite class and the order of recluses, all of whom depend
on the householder) as well. (17) The scriptures speak of a wife as the other half of the body
of a man seeking the three objects of human pursuit, O proud lady. For, shifting his whole
burden (of maintaining the household) to her, a man moves about (in the world) free from
anxiety. (18) Just as the governor of a fortress easily conquers a host of maranders, so by
falling back upon her we (householders) are able to subdue without any difficulty enemies
in the shape of our senses, which people belonging to the other Asramas find hard to
