Dis. 28 ] BOOK FOUR . 419

Mee MORE WE WE Me आ Bir Bi We REEMA LW वा क तं के का A द् ङ य को रोको ER AR eR कोज्जयो RT RR Re BE RRR RR Re RENTER Re Re a Re Re ae ®

heat and cold, storm and rain, hunger and thirst, the agreeable and the disagreeable,
pleasure and pain, viewing all with the same eye. (37) With his latent desires eradicated
through asceticism and worship, and having controlled his senses, breath and mind through
the religious vows (of purity—both internal and external, muttering the divine name and
sacred texts) etc., and the various forms of self-discipline (viz., non-violence, truthfulness
etc.), he united (identified) his self with Brahma (the Infinite). (38) He sat motionless like a
stump at one place for a hundred celestial years. (And) having found (supreme) delight in
Lord Vasudeva, he ceased to be conscious of everything else. (39) With the light of pure
wisdom imparted by the divine Sri Hari Himself as a preceptor, which shed lustre all round
inhis heart, O king he perceived the Self, who is the witness even of the activities of the mind,
as illumining the body etc., and (therefore quite) distinct from them—even as a man sees
himself apart from his severed head etc., in a dream—and verily grew indifferent to
everything else. (40-41) He realized himself as one with the transcendent Brahma and the
transcendent Brahma as identical with himself and (then), giving up even this conscious-
ness, actually rose above (quitted) this world. (42)

uff परमधर्मज्ञं वैदर्भी मलयध्वजम् Son पर्यचरद्धित्वा भोगान् सा पतिदेवता 13
चीरवासा व्रतक्षामा वेणीभूतशिरोरुहा। वभावुप पतिं am ferent शान्तमिवानलम् xy
अजानती प्रियतमॆ यदोपरतमङ्गना । सुस्थिरासनमासाद्य यथापूर्वमुपाचरत् ।४५॥
यदा नोपलभेताङ्घ्रावूष्माणं पत्युरर्चती । आसीत्संविग्नहदया यूथभ्रष्टा मृगी यथा ।४६॥
aa reat दीनमबन्धुं विक्लवाश्रुभि: । स्तनावासिच्य विपिने सुस्वरं sete सा ive!
उत्तिष्ठोत्तिष्ठ राजर्षे इमामुदधिमेखलाम् cep: क्षत्रबन्धुभ्यो बिभ्यतीं पातुमर्हसि isc
एवं विलपती बाला विपिनेऽनुगता पतिम्। पतिता पादयोर्भर्तृ सरुदत्यश्रूण्यवर्तयत् xe
चितिं दारुमयीं चित्वा तस्यां पत्यु: कलेवरम्। आदीप्य चानुमरणे विलपन्ती मनो दधे । ५०॥
WA पूर्वतर: कश्चित्सखा AI आत्मवान्। सान्त्वयन् वल्गुना साम्ना ATS रुदतीं प्रभो । ५१॥

Renouncing (all) sensuous enjoyments, the aforesaid Vaidarbhi (the daughter of the king
of Vidarbha), who looked upon her husband as a veritable god, lovingly waited upon her
spouse, Malayadhwaja, who was conscious of his paramount duty (viz., that of propitiating
the Lord). (43) Clad in tatters, and emaciated through fasting and other vows, her hair stuck
together in knots, she shone beside her husband like a subdued flame by the side of a
flameless fire (live coals). (44) Going up to her most beloved spouse, who was seated ina
steady posture even when he had expired, the lady waited upon him as before, little knowing
that he was dead. (45) When (however) shedid not feel any warmth in the feet of her husband
while serving them, she was much perturbed at heart like a doe that had strayed away from
its herd. (46) Lamenting her lot as she was now friendless and miserable, she felt greatly
alarmed and wept loudly in that forest, bathing her breasts in tears. (47) "Arise, stand up, O
royal sage ! Be pleased to protect this earth, girt by the ocean, (terribly) afraid as she is of
robbers and renegade Ksatriyas.” (48) Weeping and wailing thus, that young woman, who
had followed her spouse to the forest, fell prostrate at her husband's feet and shed (profuse)
tears. (49) Piling up a pyre of fuel, she laid the body of her husband (thereon) and, setting
fire to it, made up her mind (proceeded) to follow him to the other world, weeping (all the
time).(50) That very moment an old friend of hers, a Brahmana who had mastered his self
(appeared there and), soothing her with sweet words of consolation, (thus) addressed the
weeping woman, O king. (51) -

MAT उवाच
का त्वं कस्यासि को ard शयानो यस्य area | जानासि किं सखायं मां येनाग्रे विचचर्थं ह 1421
