464 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 82

AHHENENE CRACK KKK KHAO NNT EKO KEREN AERO REAR मा ग्न # OMAN ANT H HHO 22 RTE NE RE 499 # ER EE

removed the agony of their heart (caused by the long separation from their children, the
apples of their eyes.) (36) Rohiniand Devaki too embraced Yasoda, and remembering her
friendly behaviour towards them spoke to her in faltering words with their throats choked with
tears:—(37) "YaSoda, we can never forget the continued friendship you have showed to us.
It is not possible for us to repay that debt, even if we obtain the fortune of Indra, the ruter of
paradise. (Can anyone be so ungrateful as to forget that service of yours?) (38) When Sri
Balarama and Sri Krsna had not even seen their parents and their father left them under your
care, you protected them even as the eye-lashes protect the eyes. You gave them
nourishment, protection and loving caresses and performed propitiatory rites for their
welfare. In fact, you did all the duty of parents to them. Under your care, they had no cause
of fear from anyone. (] was but meet and proper for you to treat them as your own children,
for) noble souls like you make no distinction between one who is their own and one who is
not so. ( 0 consort of Nanda! you and your husband both are really great souls.") (39)
उवाच
Tags कृष्णमुपलभ्य चिरादभीष्टं यत्पेक्षणे दृशिषु पक्ष्मकृतं झापन्ति ।
दृग्भिर्हदीकृतमलं परिरभ्य सर्वास्तद्धावमापुरपि नित्ययुजां दुरापम् ।४०॥

भगवांस्तास्तथाभूता विविक्त उपसङ्कत: । आङश्लिष्यानामयं पृष्टा प्रहसन्निदमब्रवीत् xe!

aft era न: सख्य: स्वानामर्थचिकीर्षया | गतांश्चिरायिताञ्छत्रुपक्षक्षपणचेतस: ।४२॥

अप्यवध्यायथास्मान् स्विदकृतज्ञाविशङ्कया । नूनं भूतानि भगवान् युनक्ति वियुनक्ति च isa!

वायुर्यथा घनानीकं qt qe रजांसि च। संयोज्याक्षिपते भूयस्तथा yo भूतकृत् ।४४॥

मयि भक्तिर्हि भूतानाममृतत्वाय कल्पते। दिष्ट्या यदासीन्मत्स्नेहो भवतीनां मदापन: ।४५॥

अहं हि सर्वभूतानामादिरन्तोऽन्तरं बहि: । भौतिकानां यथा खं वार्भूर्वायुर्ज्यतिरङ्गना: ive

एवं ह्येतानि भूतानि भूतेघ्नात्माऽत्मना AIS Ra परे पङ्यताभातमक्षरे ॥४७॥

Sri Suka went on: (Pariksit ! | have already told you that the highest object of the Gopis'
love was Bhagavan Sri Krsna.) When seeing Him, they used to curse the Creator for having
provided their eyes with eye-lashes (which interrupted their vision by falling every moment).
Seeing the Lord, for whom they had cherished such intense longing, after such a long time,
they all ushered Him into their heart through ( the gateway of) the eyes and holding Him in
close embrace mentally became one with Him. The state of oneness with the Lord attained
by them through Love was not within the easy reach of even those who are ever united with
Him through meditation. (40) When the Almighty Lord (Bhagavan SriKrsna) found the Gopis
in that state (of absorption), He saw them in private, embraced them, enquired after their
health and smilingly said as follows:—{41) “ (Dear) friends, for the service of our people, We
had to go (out of Vraja and leaving friends like you) had to engage ourselves in destroying
enemies. Do you still remember Us who have been out of sight for a long time? (42) | hope
you do not entertain a low opinion of us, considering us as ungrateful? (You will be unfair
to Me, if you do so.) It is God's will that unites or disunites beings. (43) Just as the wind
brings together or scatters clouds, blades of grass, flakes of cotton, particles of dust, even
so the Creator brings together or scatters beings of His creation. (44) Friends, it is a matter
for congratulation that you have developed that ( transcendental) Love for Me, which
(automatically) leads to My realization; and | need not tell you that loving devotion to Me
brings immortality to all who practise it. (45) | am the beginning and end of all beings and
pervade them both inside and outside, even as the elements, viz., the earth, water, air, fire
and ether constitute the beginning and end of all material objects and pervade them both
inside and outside, O fair ones! (46) These five elements have entered into the constitution
