42 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA ['Dis. 11

RIRROR ERE IOEIORDR ORR REL ROR RRR RRO RRL Sete MRO RRR Bie Be Re Ret Ret RRC BP Bt ROR RE BY ae Be We Be BB BB BE a Ma He Ra AT

Him, longing to see their lord. (3) They respectfully brought their presents to the Lord—who
rejoiced in His own Self and was ever perfect in His own inherent bliss—even as one would
offer lights to the sun-god (the ultimate source of all light); and, their countenance beaming
with joy, they addressed Him, the friend and protector of all, in a voice choked with delight,
even as children would speak to their father :—(4-5)

नता: स्म ते नाथ सदाङ्घ्रिपङ्कजं विरिञ्चिवैरिञ्च्यसुरेन्द्रवन्दितम् |
परायणं क्षेममिहेच्छतां परं न aA काल: प्रभवेत् पर: प्रभु: । ६ ।
भवाय ved wa विश्वभावन waa माताथ gees: पिता |
a wae: wa च tad wegen कृतिनो बभूविम । |
अहो सनाथा van स्म यद्वयं त्रैविष्टपानामपि दूरदर्शनम् ।
प्रेमस्मितस्निग्धनिरीक्षणाननं wan रूपं तव सर्वसौभगम् । ८ ।
यर्ह्यम्बुजाक्षापससार भो भवान् कुरून् मधून् वाथ सुहद्दिदृक्षया |
त्तत्राब्दकोटिप्रतिम: क्षणो भव्रेदु wa विनाक्ष्णोरिव नस्तवाच्युत । ९ ।
इति चोदीरिता ara: प्रजानां भक्तवत्सल: | शृण्वानोऽनुग्रहं Gem वितन्वन् प्राविहात्पुरीम् | १० |

“0 Lord, we ever bow down before Your lotus-feet, adored even by Brahma (the
Creator), Lord Siva (Brahma's son) and Indra (the ruler of the gods), the supreme resort of
those aspiring for the highest bliss (final beatitude) and beyond the realm of Kala (the Time-
Spirit), the supreme Ruler (of all created beings). (6) Be pleased to promote our happiness,
O Creator of the universe; for You are our mother and disinterested friend, our lord and
father; nay, You are our true preceptor and supreme Deity; we have become blessed by
serving You. (7) Oh, how fortunate are we in having You as our lord, since we behold Your
lovely form, the abode of all charms, and Your countenance with its loving smiles and
affectionate looks, a rare sight even for the gods residing in heaven ! (8) Whenever, O Lord
with lotus eyes, You depart for Hastinapura (the capital of the Kurus) or to Mathura (the
capital of the Madhus) to see Your friends and relations, every moment that passes without
You appears to us as long as a myriad years; and we feel as miserable as eyes without the
sun, 0 Acyuta".(9) Hearing the words (of praise) uttered by the people (of Dwaraka), the
Lord, who is so fond of His devotees, entered the city, extending His grace to all through His
looks. (10)

मधुभोजदशार्हार्हकुकुरान्धकवृष्णिभि: । आत्मतुल्यबलैर्गुप्तां नागैर्भोगवतीमिव । ११।

सर्वर्तुसर्वविभवपुण्यवृक्षलताश्रमे: । उद्यानोपवनारामैर्वृतपद्माकरश्रियम् IRI
गोपुरद्वारमार्गेषु कृतकौतुकतोरणाम् | चित्रध्वजपताकाग्रैरन्त: प्रतिहतातपाम् 123 |
सम्मार्जितमहामार्गरथ्यापणकचत्वराम् । सिक्कां गन्धजलैरुप्तां फलपुष्पाक्षताङ्कुरै: । १४
BIR att गृहाणां च दध्यक्षतफलेक्षुभि: | अलंकृतां पूर्णकुम्भैर्बलिभिर्धूपदीपके: । १५॥

Even as the city of Bhogavati (the capital of the region of Patala) is guarded by the Nagas
(a race of serpents, that are capable of assuming any shape they like), the city of Dwaraka
was protected by the Madhus, the Bhojas, the Dasarhas, the Arhas, the Kukuras, the
Andhakas and the Vrsnis—branches of the Yadava race, who were their own equals in
strength (were equalled by none). (11) It was adomed with lotus-lakes that were surrounded
by orchards, gardens and parks full of sacred trees and arbours rich in all the products of
every season. (12) The gates of the city and the palaces as well as the thoroughfares were
adorned with festoons as a mark of festivity. The city was further decorated with flags and
banners of various shapes and designs, the fluttering ends of which intercepted the sun here
