Dis. 23] BOOK ELEVEN 623

DARE ROR CE TEE ETN RR CA EERE ERE EER शामाक Reet enn

upon by the wicked and thus shaken in many ways from one’s fixity in the Seif by the ignorant,
and even when reduced to straits, a seeker of blessedness should (try to) redeem oneself
by recourse to reason. (57-58)

TEI उवाच ।*
adage वद नो oa वर। सुदु:सहमिमं oa आत्मन्यसदतिक्रमम् । ५९1
विदुषामपि विश्वात्मन् प्रकृतिर्हि बलीयसी । ऋते त्वद्धर्मनिरतान् ota चरणालयान् | ६० ।
इति श्रीमद्भागवते महापुराणे पारमहंस्यां संहितायामेकादशस्कन्धे द्वाविंशोऽध्याय: 1221

Uddhava submitted : (Pray,) tell us (all seekers of blessedness), 0 Jewel among
speakers, how I should get enlightened thus (so as tobe able toputupwithallsuch outrages).
| regard such outrage to oneself by the wicked as most difficult to bear even for the knowing,
except (of course) those who are engaged in duties pleasing to You (such as chanting and
hearing Your names and glories) and have found shelter in Your feet and whose passions
have (accordingly) been stilled; for nature (in the form of tendency to revolt against

ill-treatment) is (indeed) very powerful (and therefore hard to conquer), O Soul of the
universe | (59-60)

Thus ends the twenty-second discourse in Book Eleven of the great
and glorious Bhagavata-Purana, otherwise known
as the Paramahamsa-Samnita.

SRE RE aT)
PIR Barry

अथ त्रयोविंशोऽध्याय:

Discourse XXIiIl

The Episode of a forbearing Brahmana

बादरायणिरुवाच
स एवमाशंसित saa भागवतमुख्येन दाङ्मार्हमुख्य: |
सभाजयन् भृत्यवचो भुकुन्दस्तमाबभाषे श्रवणीयवीर्य: । १ ।
Sri Suka (the son of Vedavyasa) began again : Thus prayed to by Uddhava, the
foremost of the Lord's devotees, and welcoming the words of His servant (Uddhava), Lord

Sri Krsna (the Bestower of Liberation) the Jewel of the Dasarhas, the story of whose exploits
is worth listening to, addressed him (as follows). (1)

aaa स वै aa साधुर्वै दुर्जनेरितै: । दुरुकतैर्भिन्नमात्मानं य: समाधातुमीश्वर: । २ |
न तथा तप्यते विद्ध: पुमान् बाणै: सुमर्मगै: । यथा तुदन्ति mien weal परुषेषव: । ३ ।
कथयन्ति महत्पुण्यमितिहासमिहोद्धेव । तमहं वर्णयिष्यामि निबोध सुसमाहित: । ४ ।
केनचिद् भिक्षुणा गीतं परिभूतेन दुर्जनै: । स्मरता धृतियुक्तेन विपाकं निजकर्मणाम् । ५ ।

The glorious Lord said : Indeed, there is scarcely any pious soul in this world, 0 pupil
