380 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 20

HEARTH HE SHEN HOLE EKO ETEK HHO क क टौ की EES SEA AH ELEN EHEHHEETHEE EOE SOT eRe ee
eee SSS

as a father does whatis good for his child of his own accord (without being asked by the child),
You too should likewise strive for our good (31).

मैत्रेय उवाच
इत्यादिराजेन नुत: स विश्वदूकू तमाह राजन् मयि भक्तिरस्तु ते ।
दिष्ट्येदृशी धीर्मयि a कृता यया मायां मदीयां ada स्म दुस्त्यजाम् ।३२॥
wa कुरु मयाऽऽदिष्टमप्रमत्त: प्रजापते । मदादेशकरो लोक: सर्वत्राप्नोति शोभनम् ।३३॥
Maitreya went on: Extolled thus by Prthu (the first constitutional monarch on this earth),
the all-seeing(omniscient) Lord said to him, "May you have devotion to Me, 0 king !
Fortunately enough you have developed such a mental attitude towards Me, through which
One is able to get over My Maya (deluding potency), so hard to escape from. (32) Therefore,

do My bidding carefully. O ruler of the people; for men who carry out My behest reap good
results everywhere." (33)

इति वैन्यस्य राजर्षे: प्रतिनन्द्यार्थवद्वच: | पूजितोऽनुगृहीत्वैनं गन्तुं चक्रेऽच्युतो मतिम् । ३४॥
देवर्षिपितृगन्धर्वसिद्धचारणपन्नगा: । किन्नराप्सरसो aa: खगा भूतान्यनेकहा: 1341

Tere राज्ञा वाग्वित्ताञ्जलिभक्तित: । सभाजिता aq: ad वैकुण्ठानुगतास्तत: 1361

भगवानपि राजर्षे: सोपाध्यायस्य चाच्युत:।हरन्निवं मनोऽमुष्य स्वधाम प्रत्यपद्यत 1301

age नमस्कृत्य नृप: सन्दर्शितात्मने । अव्यक्ताय च देवानां देवाय स्वपुरं ययौ । ३८॥ `

Maitreya resumed : Thus welcoming the words of the royal sage Prthu (the son of

Vena), which were full of deep meaning, and worshipped by him, the immortal Lord
showered his grace on him and made up His mind to depart. (34) Honoured by the king with
(polite) words, wealth (rich presents), salutation (with joined palms) and devotion, and
treated by him as (so many images of) Lord Visnu (the Ruler of all sacrifices), all the gods,
Rsis, manes, Gandharvas (celestial musicians), Siddhas (a class of celestial beings
endowed with mystic powers from their very birth), Caranas (celestial bards), Nagas (a
species of living beings with a human face and serpent-like lower extremities, inhabiting the
subterranean regions), Kinnaras (a class of demigods with a human figure and the head of
a horse, reckoned among the celestial choristers and celebrated as musicians), Apsaras
(the dancing girls of heaven), human beings, birds and many other beings as well as the
attendants of Lord Vaikuntha (Visnu) left that place. (35-36) Stealing away the mind as it
were Of that royal sage as well as that of his preceptor, the immortal Lord too returned to His
own Abode. (37) Bowing to the Lord, who is adorable even to the gods and is unmanifest
by His very nature, and who, having revealed Himself (to Prthu) had become invisible once
more, the king (also) retired to his capital. (38)

Thus ends the twentieth discourse in Book Four of the great and
glorious Bhagavata-Purana, otherwise known
as the i i Samhita.

