514 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 9८

# २० २० NEHA HATA NN EH AO COKE KE LSE SENET ORECEEETE TE OEHEOEECEOEHSORHLEHHHEESENTAENET STAG

from Me. (32) They were Pradyumna and Aniruddha, Diptiman and Bhanu, Samba, Madhu
Brhadbhanu, Citrabhanu, Vrka, Aruna. Puskara and Vedabahu, Srutadeva, Sunandana
Citrabahu and Virupa, Kavi and Nyagrodha. (33-34) Pariksit, of these (eighteen) sons of
Krsna (again) Pradyumna, born of Rukmini, was the first and foremost. He was equal to his
father (in every respect). (35) Pradyumna, a great car-warrior, married Rukmi's daughter,
and out of that wedlock was born Aniruddha possessed of the strength of ten thousand
elephants. (36) Aniruddha married the daughter of his own maternal uncle, Rukmi's son.
Vajra was born out of this wedlock. He was the only survivor after the destruction (of Yadu’s
race) through the instrumentality of a piston (brought into existence by the curse of
Brahmana sages). (37) Vajra's son was named Pratibahu, whose son was Subahu.
Subahu's son was Santasena and his son was Satasena. (38) No one bornin this race was
destitute or weak, and none of them died early. All of them were devoted to the Brahmanas
and possessed more sons than one. (39) O king, this race produced so many (famous and)
distinguished men that it is not possible to enumerate them in tens of thousands of years.
(40) | have heard that the number of teachers who taught the children of this race was three
crore and eighty-eight lakh. (41) Who could tell the number of the high-souled Yadus in
such circumstances? King Ugrasena alone was (always) accompanied by warriors
numbering ten billions (10,000,000,000,000). (42)

देवासुराहवहता दैतेया ये सुदारुणा: । ते चोत्पन्ना मनुष्येषु प्रजा दृप्ता बबाधिरे 1031

afer हरिणा प्रोक्ता देवा यदो: कुले । अवतीर्णा: कुलदतं तेषामेकाधिकं AT ।४४।

aa want भगवान् प्रभुत्वेनाभवद्धेरि: । ये चानुवर्तिनस्तस्य ववृधु: सर्वयादवा: ।४५॥

झाय्यासनाटनालापक्रीडास्त्रानादिकर्मसु । न विदु: सन्तमात्मानं वृष्णय: कृष्णचेतस: ve!

(Pariksit, in days of yore) many a terrible Asura was slain in the encounter between the

gods and the Asuras; they were reborn among men. These proud and arrogant Asuras
(reborn as human beings) began to molest the people. (43) In order to chastise and subdue
them the gods under the direction of the Supreme Lord were bornin the race of Yadu, O King!
This race was divided into one hundred and one families.(44) Bhagavan Sri Krsna was the
sole guide and Lord of all the Yadus. All those Yadavas, who faithfully followed Him (and
worked for Him) prospered (in everyway). (45) The mind of the Yadavas remained
(constantly) fixed on Sri Krsna, so much so that they ‘ost consciousness of their body while
sleeping, resting, walking, chatting, sporting, bathing and performing other duties (of their
daily routine).(They carried on these functions like so many automatons.) (46)

तीर्थं चक्रे नृपोनं यदजनि यदुषु स्व:सरित्पादशौचं
विद्विदस्रिग्धा: wed ययुरजितपरा श्रीर्यदर्थेऽन्ययत्न: |
कृष्णस्यैतन्न चित्रं क्षितिभरहरेणं कालचक्रायुधस्य ।४७।
स्थिरचरवृजिनघ्न: सुस्मितश्रीमुखेन व्रजपुरवनितानां वर्धयन् कामदेवम् ॥४८॥

Pariksit ! the Ganga which washes the feet of Bhagavan Sri Krsna, is (certainly) very
sacred. But, when the same Lord (the holiestof the holy) descended inthe race of Yadu, the
glory of the Ganga naturally diminished as compared to the glory of His incomparable

. fame.(How great, indeed, is the glory of the Lord's Form that) those who loved Him and those

who hated Him, both attained His state. Goddess Laksmi, who is sought after by other gods,
keeps Herself (constantly) engaged in His service. His (auspicious) Name (once) heard or
