Dis. 26 ] BOOK THREE 255

RAMEN SHH EAA EE SEE STE EE A ERE LR RL Rr Er TET TA HH Br GTR HCP HB TY

evolutes of the Taijasa (Rajasika) ego alone, since the power of action belongs to Prana (the
vital air) and the power of perception inheres in Buddhi (and both these—Pranaand Buddhi—
are evolutes of the Taijasa ego).(31)

तामसाच्च विकुर्वाणाद्भगवद्वीर्यचोदितात् | शब्दमात्रमभूत्तस्मान्नभ: श्रोत्रं तु हाब्दगम् । ३२॥
wap शब्दस्य wea च ।तन्मात्रत्वं च नभसो लक्षणं कवयो fag: 1331
ze छिद्रदातृत्वे बहिरन्तरमेव च । प्राणेन्द्रियात्मधिष्ण्यत्वं aval वृत्तिलक्षणम् । ३४॥

From the Tamasika ego, as it underwent transformation, impelled by the Lord's
energy (Cit-Sakti), sprang up the principle of sound; and from the latter was evolved
ether and the auditory sense too, which catches sound. (32)The knowers of truth define
sound as that which conveys the idea of an object (not within sight), indicates the
presence of a speaker screened from view and constitutes the subtle form of ether.(33)
Even so ether is characterized as that which affords room to living beings, gives rise to
the notions of inside and outside and is the abode of Prana (the vital air), the Indriyas
and the mind.(34)

नभस: शब्दतन्मात्रात्कालगत्या विकुर्वत: । स्पर्शोऽभवत्ततो वायुस्त्वक स्पर्शस्य च संग्रह: 1341
"ged ate च उगैत्यमुष्णत्वमेव च । एतत्स्पर्शस्य स्पर्शत्वं तन्मात्रत्वं नभस्वत: 1361
west व्यूहनं प्राप्तिर्नेतृत्वं द्रव्यराब्दयो: | सर्वेन्द्रयाणामात्मत्वं वायो: कर्माभिलक्षणम् । ३७॥

From ether, which is an evolute of the principle of sound, as it underwent transformation
under the impulse of Time, sprang up the principle of touch and thence the air as well as the
tactile sense, by which we perceive touch. (35) Softness and hardness, and even so cold
and heat are the distinguishing attributes of touch anditis further characterized as the subtle
form of air. (36) Even so shaking (the boughs of trees etc.), bringing together (straws lying
apart), having access everywhere, bearing particles of substances containing smell etc., to
the olfactory and other senses, and sound to the auditory sense.and giving strength and
Vitality to all the Indriyas—these are the characteristic functions of air. (37)

वायोश्च «=| eR eae समुत्थितं ततस्तेजश्चक्षू रूपोपलम्भनम् ।३८॥
द्रव्याकृतित्वे गुणता व्यक्तिसंस्थात्वमेव च । तेजस्त्वं तेजस: साध्वि रूपमात्रस्य वृत्तय: । ३९॥
द्योतने wet पानमदनं हिममर्दनम्।तेजसो वृत्तयस्त्वेता: छोषणं क्षुत्तडेव च ।४०॥
From air—which is a product of the principle of touch—impelled by the destiny of the
various Jivas, was evolved the principle of colour and thence fire as well as the sense of sight,
which enables us to perceive colour.(38) To appear in the same form as the material
substance (in which it inheres), to depend (for its existence) on the substance, to have the
same spatial relation as the substance and to constitute the essential nature of fire—these,
O virtuous lady, are the functions of the principle of colour. (39) To give light, to cook and
digest food, to destroy cold, to dry (moisture etc.), to give rise to hunger and thirst and to drink
and eat through them—these are the functions of fire. (40)

रूपमात्राद्दिकुर्वाणात्तेजसो दैवचोदितात् । रसमात्रमभूत्तस्मादम्भो जिह्वा रसग्रह: IRI
कषायो मधुरस्तिक्त: कद्वम्ल sft नैकधा । भौतिकानां विकारेण ta एको विभिद्यते ॥४२॥

get पिण्डनं तृप्ति: प्राणनाप्यायनोन्दनम्।तापापनोदो भूयस्त्वमम्भसो वृत्तयस्त्वमा: ।४३॥
From fire—which is an evolute of the principle of colour—impelled by the destiny of the
various Jivas, proceeded the principle of taste and thence water as well as the sense of taste,
which enables us to perceive taste. (41) Taste, though one (sweet only), becomes manifold
as astringent, sweet, bitter, pungent, sour and sait, due to contact with other substances.(42)
Even so to wet substances, to bring about cohesion, to cause satisfaction, to maintain
