Dis. 22 BOOK NINE 83

(DiS522 | eee 6 0 a onc ca ESE open eRe Te
SIAR: परिवेत्तायमग्रभुक् । राज्यं eT Teepe । १५॥
wa द्विजैज्येष्ठं छन्दयामास सोऽब्रवीत्। तन्मन्निप्रहितैर्विप्रैर्वेदाद् बिभ्रंशितो गिरा 1१६1
वेदवादातिवादान् वबै aq देवो aad ह। देवापिर्योगमास्थाय कलापग्राममाश्रित: 1901
सोमवंशे wet नष्टे कृतादौ स्थापयिष्यति । बाह्लीकात् सोमदत्तोऽभूद् भूरिर्भूरिश्रवास्तत: 1१८1
Wes शन्तनोरासीद् गङ्गायां भीष्म आत्मवान्। सर्वधर्मविदां श्रेष्ठो महाभागवत: कवि: 1१९1
वीरयूथाग्रणीर्येन रामोऽपि युधि तोषित: । शान्तनोर्दाशकन्यायां जज्ञे चित्राङ्गद: सुत: Rol
विचित्रवीर्यश्चावरजो ar चित्राङ्गदो हत: । यस्यां पराशरात् साक्षादवतीर्णो हरे: कला ।२१॥
वेदगुप्तो मुनि: कृष्णो चतोऽहमिदमध्यगाम् er स्विष्यान्पैलादीन् भगवान्बादरायण: 1221
मह्यं पुत्राय were परं गुह्यमिदं जगौ । विचित्रवीर्योऽथोवाह काशिराजसुते बलात् 1221
स्वयंवरादुपानीते अम्बिकाम्बालिके उभे।तयोरासक्तहृदयो गृहीतो यक्ष्मणा मृत: eI
Sie 8 भ्रातुर्मात्रोक्तो बादरायण: । धृतराष्टं च पाण्डु च विदुरं चाप्यजीजनत् 1241

Sri Suka resumed : From (the loins of) Divodasa appeared Mitreyu; and his sons, ७
protector of men, were Cyavana, Sudasa, Sahadeva and Somaka, the father of Jantu. (In
fact,) Somaka had a hundred sons, of whom Prsata was the youngest. His son was

Drupada, whose sons (again) were Dhrstadyumna and others; while Draupadi was his

daughter. (1-2) From (the loins of) Dhrstadyumna appeared Dhrstaketu. These are the

scions of Bharmyagwa, also known as the Paficalas. From (the loins of} Rksa, who was
another son of Ajamidha, appeared Sarhvarana. (3) From his loins appeared, through

Tapati, a daughter of the sun-god, Kuru, the lord of Kuruksetra. Pariksit, Sudhanwa, Jahnu

and Nigadhagwa were the sons of Kuru. (4) Sudhanwa's son was Suhoira, from whom

followed Cyavana; and of Cyavana was born Krti. His son was Uparicara Vasu, of whom
were born Brhadratha and others. (5) (Of them) Kugamba, Matsya, Pratyagra, Cedipa and
others were the rulers of the kingdom of Cedi. From (the loins of) Brhadratha sprang up

Kugagra. His son was Rsabha. Of the latter was born a son, Satyahita (by name) whose

son was Puspavan and the son of the last-named was Jahu. From (the loins of) Brhadratha

through another wife appeared two halves (of a fully developed human foetus). (6-7) They
were thrown away by the mother and were sportingly joined together by (an ogress
named) Jara, uttering the words “Live ! Live !I" and there appeared the son, Jarasandha

(united by Jara) (by name). (8) Of him was born Sahadeva, and from (the loins of)

Sahadeva appeared Somapi, from whom appeared Srutasrava. (Of the four sons of Kuru,)

Pariksit, (the eldest) remained issueless, while Jahu's son was named Suratha. (9) From

the loins of the latter sprang up Vidiratha, of whom Sarvabhauma was born; and from

Sarvabhauma followed Jayasena, whose son was Radhika and from (the loins of) the last-

named indeed appeared Ayuta. (10) From(the loins of) Ayuta, again, sprang up Krodhana,

of whom was born Devatithi; and his son was Rsya. The son of Rsya was Dillpa whose
son, again, was Pratipa. (11) Devapi, Santanu and Bahlka—these were the sons of

Pratipa. Relinquishing his (claim to the) ancestral kingdom, Devapi, for his part, retired to

the forest. (12) (Hence his younger brother) Santanu, who was called by the name of

Mahabhisa (a great physician) in his previous birth, became the king. (Even in that life)

whatever old manhe touched with his hands would regain his youth and also experience

great relief. Through this act of his he came to be known as Santanu (affording relief to
one's body). (Once upon a time) when Indra (the god of rain) did not send down showers
in his kingdom for a period of twelve years, Santanu (on approaching and seeking the
advice of Brahmanas) was replied to by the Brahmanas (as follows):—He (too) who (like

