638 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 26

न न क ज ECE मा कक TENT ERNE ER OU NL ONE RET HEN TEN TOME शाक कक ERD ANTENA नल HOE न १8 १ १७०

agent (as mentioned in verse 26), faith (referred to in verse 27), state of consciousness (as
told in verse 20), form (state of existence as classified in verse 21} and final destiny (as
referred to in verse 22)—everything is as a matter of fact constituted of the three Gunas
alone. (30) (In fact) all entities pervaded by the Spirit and Matter—whatever is seen, heard
of or pondered by the intellect—are constituted of the three Gunas, Ojewel among men! (31)
(All) these states of existence of the embodied soul are brought about by the three Gunas
(holding sway over it) and the actions performed by it. That embodied soul (however) by
which these Gunas (modes of Prakrti) appearing in the mind have been thoroughly brought
under control, O gentle one, and which stands firmly established in Me by treading the path
of Devotion gets qualified for becoming one with Me. (32) Therefore, having obtained this
(human) body, in which (alone) Knowledge and Realization (of Truth) can be had, and
completely shaking off (all) attachment to the (three) Gunas, let the wise worship (take refuge
in) Me. (33) Free from attachment (to the pleasures of sense) and with his senses brought
under control a wise man should carefully worship Me and, given over to contemplation,
should get the better of Rajas and Tamas by duly cultivating Sattva. (34) And, possessed of
a tranquil mind and united with Me (through contemplation), he should thoroughly subdue
Sattva (too) by means of Sattva (itself in the shape of desirelessness). Rid (in this way) of
the (three) Gunas, the embodied soul disowns the subtle body (constituting its Jivahood) and
attains to (becomes one with) Me. (35) Completely disunited from its Jivahood (in the shape
of the subtle body) as well as from the (three) Gunas appearing in the mind, and full of Me
(consisting of perfect bliss) the Jiva neither goes out (to enjoy the external objects) nor turns
inward (to enjoy them mentally). (In other words, he gets liberated during his very lifetime.) (36)

Thus ends the twenty-fifth discourse in Book Eleven of the great
and glorious Bhagavata-Purana, otherwise known
as the Paramahamsa-Samnhita.

sttwetce?,
ru IEE rcs

ay षड्विंशोऽध्याय:

Discourse XXVI

The Utterance of Purtrava bearing on Aversion for the pleasures of Sense
श्रीभगवानुवाच
भल्लक्षणमिमं कायं लब्ध्वा wad आस्थित: | आनन्दं परमात्मानमात्मस्थं समुपैति माम् । १ ।

गुणमय्या जीवयोन्या विमुक्तो ज्ञाननिष्ठया ! गुणेषु मायामात्रेषु दृह्यमानेष्वस्तुत: |
वर्तमानोऽपि न पुमान् युज्यतेऽवस्तुभिर्गुणै: } २ ।

ue न कुर्यादसतां शिश्नोदरतृपां क्वचित् । तस्यानुगस्तमस्यन्थे ,पतत्यन्धानुगान्धवत् | ३ |

we: सम्राडिर्मां गाथामगायत बृहच्छ्रवा: | उर्वश्रीविरहान् मुह्यन् निर्विण्ण: sada । ४ ।

त्यक्त्वाऽत्मानं व्रजन्तीं तां aa उन्मत्तवन्नृप: । विलपन्नन्वगाजाये घोरे तिष्ठेति विक्लव: । ५ ।

कामानतृप्तोऽनुजुषन् क्षुल्लकान् वर्षयामिनी: । न वेद यान्तीर्नायान्तीरुर्वर्याकृष्टचेतन: । ६ ।

The glorious Lord began again : Having obtained this (human) body, the (sole) medium
of perceiving My true nature, he who has betaken himself to the course of conduct pleasing
