188 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 13

PPEERAHENARATAREANAEAHAAAHHEDOATEAAA SE ee SH ES ESTEE ee eee EEE TESTE RES HH G

HAMHAKAAACAAAENAKLAHAEHH RASHES HSE ELSES EE ee—r———eeeeert”e|™erereewrreeooo

continued to exist in the form of fog) Brahma (now) assumed another body distinct from the
former and set his heart once more on creation. Realizing in his heart that the creation had
not expanded even at the hands of seers (Marici and others) who were endowed with
extraordinary powers, he thought once more within himself, O Vidura : "Oh, howstrange that,
even though | am ever up and doing, my progeny are not multiplying. Surely an adverse fate
stands in my way." Brahma always did what was desirable at the moment. While he was thus
waiting for (a more propitious) Providence, Brahma’s body became twofold. A human body
(whether male or female) has come to be known by the name of Kaya* (in Sanskrit) only
because it originally belonged'to Brahma. Those two distinct parts turned out to be a man and
a woman. (49-52) Of those two forms the male was Swayambhuvat Manu, the first
independent sovereign of the entire globe. And the female came to be the spouse of that
noble soul and was called Satarupa. (53) The creation then multiplied through copulation.
Swayambhuva Manu too begot five issues through Sataripa. (54) They were Priyavrata
and Uttanapada and three daughters, Akiti, Devahtti and Prasiti by name, O most pious
Vidura. (55) He gave away Akiti (the eldest) to Ruci (a lord of created beings), the
middle one (Devahiti) to the sage Kardama (another Prajapati) and Prasuti (the
youngest) to Daksa (one of the ten sons of Brahma enumerated in verses 22 and 23
above). The progeny of these three girls filled the whole universe. (56)

Thus ends the twelfth discourse in Book Three of the great and
glorious Bhagavata-Purana, otherwise known as
the Paramahamsa-Samnhita.

Cat CRT २०२ a
red aes

अथ त्रयोदशोऽध्याय:

Discourse XIll

The Lord's Descent as the Divine Boar
श्रीशुक उवाच
निशम्य ad वदतो मुने: पुण्यतमां नृप।भूय: पप्रच्छ कौरव्यो वासुदेवकथादृत: । १ |
Sri Suka continued : On hearing this most sacred discourse from the lips of the sage

(Maitreya), who was proceeding with the same, O king, Vidura made the following enquiry
again, fond as he was of hearing the stories of Bhagavan Sri Krsna (son of Vasudeva). (1)

fag उवाच
aa eye: ame fa: Gr wey: | sree frat wei fs aaa Tat TT z |
afiq wa राजर्षेरादिराजस्य aang & seerra fayetaert aati 3 |

gra | det afaerre, ase afefirifentset

*The word Kayam’ has been derived from the noun ‘Ka’ (aname of Brahma)—>+4 इदम् (that which belongs to Brahma).
+The Manu owed his name to his father, Swayambho (the self-born Brahma). The word has been derived as `स्वयम्भुव:
अपत्यं पुमान्` (the son of Swayambhi).
