398 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 66

eerrerrerererereer HK ATtertreeertseteeteerecenertesttntelseetreriri iri

nights of His enjoyment in Vraja passed as if they were (but) one night. (32)

Thus ends the sixty-fifth discourse entitled “ Baladeva triumphantly diverts the course of the
Yamuna," in the latter half of Book Ten of the great and glorious Bhagavata-Purana,
otherwise known as the Paramahamsa-Samhita.

yt Bat Pet:
seSI Sess

अथ षट्षष्टितमोऽध्याय:

Discourse LXVI
Paundraka and others killed
श्रीगुक उवाच
नन्दव्रजे गते रामे करूषाधिपतिर्नृप । वासुदेवोऽहमित्यज्ञो दूतं कृष्णाय प्राहिणोत्। १ ।
त्वं वासुदेवो भगवानवतीर्णो जगत्पति: । इति प्रस्तोभितो बालैर्मेन आत्मानमच्युतम् । २ ।
दूतं च प्राहिणोन्मन्द: कृष्णायाव्यक्तवर्त्मने । द्वारकावां यथा बालो नृपो बालकृतोऽबुध: । ३ ।
Wa meta सभायामास्थितं प्रभुम्। pet कमलपत्राक्षॆ राजसन्देशमब्रवीत् । ४ |
वासुदेवोऽवतीर्णोऽहमेक we न चापर: । भूतानामनुकम्पार्थं त्वं तु मिथ्याभिधां त्यज । ५ ।
यानित्वमस्मच्चिह्वागिपौट्य।द्विभर्षिसात्वत।त्यक्त्नैहिंप्तात्वश्यानोचेद्देहिफा।हवम्।द्।

Sri Suka began again ; Pariksit, when Sti Balarama had gone to Nanda’s Vraja,
Paundraka, the ruler of Kariisa, sent a messenger to Sri Krsna, saying, "| am Vasudeva"!
Steeped as he was In ignorance, he was flattered by stupid people, who said, " You are the
glorious Lord Vasudeva, protector of the universe, who have appeared on earth (for its
protection)*, and the fellow began to look upon himself as Vasudeva (the immortal Lord). (1-2)
Just as a foolish boy set up by other boys as a king in sport would behave, so did the dull-
witted fellow, unaware ofthe reality of Bhagavan SriKrsna, whose ways are inscrutable, sent
his messenger to Dwaraka. (3) The messenger came to Dwaraka and delivered (the
following) message of his king to Lord Sri Krsna of lotus-like eyes, who was seated in the
council hall. (4) "| alone am Vasudeva, and there is no other. | have come down on earth to
bless all beings with my grace. You have falsely assumed that name, which you should now
give up. (5) O scion of Yadu, abandon all my marks that you have adopted through (sheer)
folly and come to me for shelter, or you should give me battle.”(6)

श्रीगुक उवाच

wer तदुपाकर्ण्य पौण्ड्रकस्याल्पमेधस:। उग्रसेनादय:र सभ्या उच्चकैर्जहसुस्तदा । ७ ।

उवाच दूतं भगवान् परिहासकथामनु । उत्स्रक्ष्ये मूढ चिह्नानि यैस्त्वमेवं विकत्थसे । ८ ।

मुखं तदपिधायाज्ञ कङ्कगृध्रवरैर्वृत: ।श्यिष्यसे हतस्तत्र भविता ot झमुनाम् । |

इति दूतस्तदाक्षेपॆ स्वामिने सर्वमाहरत्।कृष्णोऽपि रथमास्थाय काञशीमुपजगाम ह ॥१०॥
$riSuka continued: Hearing this bragging of the dull-witted Paundraka, King Ugrasena
and (all) others who were presentin the assembly at that time loudly laughed. (7) When their
jokes were over, the Lord replied through the messenger (as follows): “ O foolish one, । shall
(no doubt) discharge My (discus and other) insignia on you and (all) those associates of
yours, encouraged by whom you bragin this manner. (8) O fool, hiding those lips (with which
you are bragging) you will (then) lie down dead on the ground, surrounded by buzzards,
