Dis. 21] BOOK TEN 195

मा trerer see ree sinners pene tenes eves see ea EES Serer gritos rotenone tonto tot 8b HHH

his mind is completely at rest. (40) Cultivators checked the water going out of the fields by
means of strong dams (even) as those practising Yoga preserve the wisdom flowing out
through the senses by controlling the latter. (41) The moon alleviated the suffering of living
beings caused by the rays of the autumnal sun, (even) as (the dawn of) wisdom puts an end
to the miseries born of one's identification with the body or as Sri Krsna (the Bestower of
liberation) relieved the agony (caused by their separation from Him) of the women of
Vraja.(42) The cloudless sky looked charming (at night) with its stars twinkling brightly due
to the autumnal season (even) like the mind with the quality of Sattva predominating in itand
revealing the (correct) import of the Vedas. (43) The full moon shone in the firmament with
the hosts of stars (even) as on the earth did SriKrsna, the Protector of the Yadus, surrounded
by the circle of Vrsnis. (44) Embracing the temperate breeze that blewfrom the woods in (full)
blossom, people dismissed their anguish (occasioned by heat), but not so the cowherd
women (of Vraja), whose mind had been captivated by Sri Krsna (inasmuch as it tended to
enhance the poignancy of their agony of separation from the Lord caused by His absence
from Vraja during the daytime.) (45) Persistently sought by their partners cows, she-deer,
female birds and women conceived under the influence of the autumnal season even as
works intended to propitiate the Lord are necessarily followed by their fruit. (46) At sunrise
(all) aquatic flowers bloomed forthwith the exception of water-lilies, even as (all) people
barring the thieves are rendered fearless under a (good) king. (47) Enriched with ripe corns
the earth looked happy with (Vedic) sacrifices carried on with oblations of first fruits at the
end of the rainy season as well as with (other) grand festivals conducted for the gratification
of the senses in cities and villages, and more so with Sri Krsna and Balarama (the two
Avataras of Sri Hari). (48) Going out (at the end of the four months of the rainy season),
merchants, recluses, kings and students about to return from the house of their preceptor
after the completion of their studies—that had been detained* by the rains—(now) realized
their ends even as those adept in Yoga and well-versed in Mantras (mystic formulas) etc.,
impeded by the span of their life, attain ethereal forms earned by them when the (appropriate)
time comes. (49)

Thus ends the twentieth discourse entitled "A description of the Rains and Autumn"
in the first half of Book Ten of the great and glorious Bhagavata-Purana,
otherwise known as the Paramaharhsa-Samhita.

Stitt asi:
IES rors

Discourse 0
The Song Inspired by the Flute
SP उवाच
wa TRA पद्माकरसुगन्धिना । न्यविदाद् वायुना वातं सगोगोपालकोऽच्युत: । १ ।
मधुपतिरवगाह्य चारबन् गा: सहपदुपालबलश्चुकूज वेणुम् । २ !

* According to Hindu astronomy the four months of the rainy season are regarded as inopportune for commercial trips,
expeditions for extending one's dorrinions, marriages and rambling on the part of recluses.
