584 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 7

SE EET ERR ER EEE SEE REL EAE NEEEEN EEE EEE ESE EEE HEHE REESE AEE EAE REE EEE

a wise counsellor), but felt no peace of mind, though united with (closely and devotedly
followed by) the gods. (17) As soon as they heard of it (the weakness of Indra) the haughty
demons ail took up arms and made preparations for war against the gods, following the
advice of the sage Sukracarya (their wise preceptor). (18) With their (foremost) limbs
(heads), thighs and arms torn asunder by the sharp-pointed arrows discharged by the
demons, the gods, led by Indra, approached Brahma (the creator) for protection, their heads
bent low (with humiliation). (19) Seeing them afflicted on all sides in this way, the glorious
and birthless god Brahma (the self-born) was moved with supreme compassion and spoke

comfortingly (as follows): (20) ~
ब्रह्मोवाच

अहो बत सुरश्रेष्ठा ह्यभद्रं a: कृतं महत्। ब्रह्मिष्ठं ब्राह्मणे दान्तमैश्चर्यान्नाभ्यनन्दत । २१।
तस्यायमनयस्यासीत् परेभ्यो व: पराभव: | प्रक्षीणेभ्य: स्ववैरिभ्य: समृद्धानां च यत् सुरा: 1221
मघवन् द्विषत: wea प्रक्षीणान् गुर्वतिक्रमात्। सम्प्रत्युपचितान् भूय: काव्यमाराध्य भक्तित: |
आददीरन् निलयनं ममापि yeaa: 1231
त्रिविष्टृपं किं गणयन्त्यभेद्यमन्त्रा भृगूणामनुशिक्षितार्था: ।
न `विप्रगोविन्दगवीश्वराणां भवन्त्यभद्राणि नरेश्वराणाम् । 2% |
a विश्वरूपं भजताशु fas तपस्विनं apnea
सभाजितोऽर्थान् a famed at यदि क्षमिष्यध्वमुतास्य adieu
Brahma said : Alas ! your conduct has really been most unwelcome, O jewels among
gods, in that, proud of power and pelf, you did not welcome a Brahmana who had not only
disciplined his self but who had (also) realized (his identity with) Brahma (the Absolute)! (21)
It was the fruit of that misbehaviour (on your part) that you suffered defeat at the hands of
others (the demons)—who are your (sworn) enemies and had grown very weak—in spite
of your being rich and powerful, O gods ! (22) O Indra, look at your enemies, who had (once)
grown extremely weak because of the disrespect (shown by them) to their preceptor
(Sukracarya) but who have now gained in strength again by propitiating the sage Kavya
(Sukracarya) through (their) devotion. (Nay,) devoted as they are to Sukra (a scion of the
celebrated sage Bhrgu), they may (one day) take possession of even my abode
(Brahmaloka)!(23) Treasuring the precepts of the Bhrgus (Sukracarya and others) as their
(only) wealth and their secrets being impenetrable, they hold (the dominion of) heaven as
of no account (easy to acquire). (As a matter of fact,) no evil can (ever) befall the kings who
look upon the Brahmanas, Lord Visnu (the Protector of cows) and the cows as their masters
(Protectors). (24) Therefore, immediately resort (for protection) to Viswarupa—son of the
god Twasta—a Brahmana given to austerities and self-controlled. Treated with respect (by
you), he will (surely) accomplish your ends provided, of course, you tolerate what he does
(his partiality towards the demons, with whom he is connected by blood on the maternal
side—vide, VI. vi. 44). (25)
श्रीगुक उवाच

aq एवमुदिता राजन् ब्रह्मणा fanaa: ia त्वाष्टृमुपव्रज्य परिघ्ज्येदमब्रुवन् ।२६॥

Sri Suka continued : Thus spoken to by Brahma (the creator), and relieved of (their)
anxiety, O king, the gods approached Viswardpa (son of Twasta), the seer, and, embracing
him (as a younger kinsman), spoke (as follows). (26)

देवा ऊचु:
aa तेऽतिथय: प्राप्ता आश्रमं भद्रमस्तु ai काम: सम्पाद्यतां तात पितॄणां समयोचित: ।२७।
