Dis. 1] BOOK EIGHT 737

TEREST ES ESN SUT S CATER ARANETA AEST R WANT THe e HEN Te STAT hae eeTeReMEMn mH eee

of all), neither inside nor outside(because of Its pervading all), to which (all) these stages
(viz., the beginning, middle and end) of the universe are attributable and which is (manifested
in the form of )the universe.(12)The aforesaid Lord has the universe for His body and bears
innumerable names; He (alone) is true, self-effulgent, unbom and (most) ancient. By His
own (creative) Energy (called Maya, which is unborn like Himself; because Sakti and
Saktiman are identical in essence).He undertakes the creation etc., (namely, maintenance
and dissolution as well) of this universe and, having set aside the said Maya by His (other)
Energy (in the shape of consciousness) He remains actionless (in His primary state of
Brahmahood). (13) (Because the Lord Himself first undertakes and then withdraws from
action in the form of creation etc., of the universe,) therefore, the sages (too likewise)
undertake actions (consecratedto the Lord) in the first instance forthe sake of actionlessness
(Liberation). For a man performing (his) duties (as an offering to the Lord) generally attains
liberation (which exonerates one from all duties).(14) The almighty Lord does engage in
action, but does not get attached to it inasmuch as He has all His objects accomplished
through the realization of His own (blissful) character. (Hence) they who follow in His
footsteps never suffer (bondage).(15) | (therefore) take refuge in that Lord, who, though
engaging in action is yet (altogether) free from egotism, being all-wise, perfect (in Himself):
and (therefore) above (all) cravings and is (absolutely) independent (lit., not impelled by
others), (nay,) who teaches humanity (by His own example), (Himself remaining) steadfast
to the course of conduct prescribed by Himself because of His being the protector and
upholder of righteousness.(16)
श्रीरुक उवाच

इति मन्त्रोपनिषदं व्याहरन्तं समाहितम् । दृष्टासुरा यातुधाना जग्धुमभ्यद्रवन् क्षुधा । १७॥
तांस्तथावसितान् वीक्ष्य यज्ञ: सर्वगतो हरि: । यामै: परिवृतो देवैर्हृत्वाश्चासत् त्रिविष्टपम् । १८॥

Sri Suka continued: Finding him repeating (as though in a dream in spite of himself) the
aforesaid mystical prayer consisting of sacred texts* (based on the I$vasyopanisad,
forming part of Yajurveda-Samnhita), (though) absorbedin profound and abstract meditation,
(and therefore oblivious of himself), demons and ogres, impelled by hunger, assailed him
on all sides with intent to devour him.(17) Seeing them thus resolved, the all-pervading Sri
Hari, in the form of Lord Yajfa (the deity presiding over sacrifices and born of Dharma and
Akitit), surrounded by (His sons) the gods known as the Yamas, (appeared there and) slew
them and ruled in heaven (as Indrat, the Lord of paradise).(18)

स्वारोचिषो द्वितीयस्तु मनुरग्ने: सुतोऽभवत्। द्युमत्सुषेणरोचिष्मत्प्मुखास्तस्य चात्मजा: ।१९॥
तत्रेद्रो रोचनस्त्वासीद् देवाश्च तुषितादय: | ऊर्जस्तम्भादय: BA RAM ब्रह्मवादिन: 1201

* The Upanisads, referred to as the crown of the Vedas, have been classified under two heads, viz.,(1)Mantropanigads
(those forming part of the Sarmhita portion, consisting of hymns) and (2) Brahmanopanisads or those forming part of the
Brahmanas or exegetic texts giving rules for the employment of the hymns at particular sacrifices and so on. The Isvasya,
Ihe Swetaswatara and the Mundaka, Upanisads forming partof the Suklaand Krsna Yajurveda and Atharvaveda respectively,
are thus classed as Mantropanisads; while all the rest fall under the category of Brahmanopanisads.

T Vide verses 4 and 5 above.

{We find it mentioned In Book XII. vii. 15 that every Manvantara is presided over by a body of divine administrators
consisting ofa Manuas its head, a group of gods, the Manus sons, an Indra ruling overthe three worlds, the seven Rsis(seers)
anda part manifestation of God Himself. Inthe first Manvantara of the present Kaipa, known as the Swayambhuva Manvantara
after the name of the Manu presiding over it, the Manu was known as Swayambhuva (born of Brahma the creator himself);
Priyavrata and Uttanapada ( whose accounts are given In Books ४ and !V respectively) were his two sons: the gods were
known by the name of Yamas: Lord Yajfia(a part manifestation of the Lord) Himself held the office of Indra; while Maricl. Atri,
Angira, Pulaha, Kratu, Pulastya, and Vasistha were the seven seers—vide Baok IV.
