760 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA । [ Dis, 6

SORTITINROCRTECREOEOEINIOIO Eg erin Rain int te SE tee re tom ftom toi tit ton toto soit sonst etree ict

Sri Suka went on: Thus extolled by Brahma (the creator) and others and having fully
known their heart just as it was, the Lord spoke, in a voice deep as the rumbling of clouds,
to the gods, who stood with joined palms and had fully controlled their senses (to receive His
command). (16) Though capable of accomplishing the purpose of the gods all alone, Lord
Visnu, (the supreme Ruler of the gods) addressed them (as follows), eager as He was to
divert Himself with the churning of the ocean (of milk) and other sports. (17)

हन्त ब्रह्मन्नहो wet हे देवा मम भाषितम्। श्रृणुतावहिता: सर्वे श्रेयो व: स्याद्यथा सुरा: । १८॥
यात दानवदैतेयैस्तावत् सन्धिर्विधीयताम्। कालेनानुगृहीतैस्तैर्वावद् वो भव आत्मन: ।१९॥
अरयोऽपि fe सन्धेया: सति कार्यार्थगौरवे। अहिमूषकवद् tar ह्यर्थस्य पदवीं गतै: 1201
अमृतोत्पादने यत्न: क्रियतामविलम्बितम्। यस्य पीतस्य वै जन्तुर्मृत्युग्रस्तोऽमरो भवेत् । २१।
क्षिप्त्वा क्षीरोदधौ wat वीरुत्तृणलतौषधी: । मन्थानं wet कृत्वा नेत्रं कृत्वा तु वासुकिम् 1221
सहायेन मया देवा निर्मन्थध्वमतन्दिता:। क्लेशभाजो भविष्यन्ति fear ga फलग्रहा: 123
यूयं तदनुमोदध्वं यदिच्छन्त्यसुरा: सुरा: । न संरम्भेण सिध्यन्ति सर्वेऽर्था: सान्त्वया यथा । २४॥
न भेतव्यं कालकूटाद् विषाजजलधिसम्भवात्। लोभ: कार्यो न वो जातु रोष: कामस्तु वस्तुषु 1241
The Lord said: Hullo Brahm, Oh Lord Siva (the Source of (all) blessings), O gods and
(other) heavenly beings (Gandharvas and others) ! listen you all attentively to My word, so
that good may come to you. (18) Go forth and let peace be concluded with (your cousins)
the Danavas and Daityas (the sons of Danu and Diti), who are favoured by time (the tide of
fortune), till prosperity returns to you of its own accord. (19) In the event of the object to be
accomplished being of great moment, enemies too must be won over(through alliance).
Once you have achieved your purpose, O gods, you may certainly behave with your enemies
even as a serpent does with a rat. (20) Efforts should be put forth without delay for producing
nectar, by drinking which even one whois in the jaws of Death would become immortal. (21)
Casting into the ocean of milk all (kinds of ) plants, grasses, creepers and herbs and making
Mount Mandara a churn-dasher and Vasuki (the king of serpents) as a cord for whirling it
round, churn the said ocean unweariedly, O gods, with Myself as your helper. The Daityas
will (only) reap (fruitless), toil while you shall, enjoy its fruit. (22-23) Approve you heartily of
that which the Asuras want, O gods. All one's objects are not accomplished well by anger
as through kind words.(24) You should not be afraid of the poison, called Kalaktta, that will
come out of the ocean (of milk). Nor should you ever evince covetousness or greed with
respect to the objects (that may be churned out of the ocean) nor give vent to anger (if they
are coveted or even taken by force by the demons).(25)

श्रीरुक उवाच
इति देवान्समादिश्य भगवान्पुरुषोत्तम: | तेषामन्तर्दधे राजन्स्वच्छन्दगतिरीश्वर: 12E |
aa we भगवते नमस्कृत्य पितामह:। wag जग्मतु: स्वं स्वं धामोपेयुर्बलिं सुरा: 1201
ते वैरोचनिमासीनं गुप्तं चासुरयूथपै: fre परमया जुष्टं जितारेषमुपागमन् ।२९॥
महेन्द्रश्लक्ष्णया वाचा सान्त्वयित्वा महामति: | अभ्यभाषत aa सर्वं शिक्षितं पुरुषोत्तमात् । ३०॥
तदरोचत दॆत्यस्य तत्रान्ये येऽसुराधिपा: । शम्बरोऽरिष्टनेमिश्च ये च त्रिपुरवासिन: 1391
ततो देवासुरा: कृत्वा die कृतसोहदा:। उद्यमं परमं चक्रुरमृतार्थे परन्तप 1321
ततस्ते मन्दरगिरिमोजसोत्पाट्य दुर्मदा: । नदन्त उदधिं निन्यु: arm: परिघवाहव: ।३३॥
