SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [. Dis. 2

ANDEAN AH ee eee He Key ee eee Es UE TENE PELE E THREES rie eee eee ee

of Yoga, who practise worship of God austere penance, Yoga (abstraction) and Jfiana (Self-
Knowledge), and whose body is as subtle as air, can freely move inside as well as outside
the three worlds (the earth, heaven and the lower worlds). People cannot have such
unimpeded moverneht (in any part of the universe) through mere Karma (ritual). (23) O king,
the Yogi who proceeds to the Brahmaloka (the abode of Brahma) through the bright
Susumna’* reaches first the abode of Vaigwanara (the god of fire) through the heavens.
Shaking off whatever trace of impurity is still left in him, he then rises upwards to the stellar
sphere, resembling in shape the figure of a dolphin and presided over by Lord Visnu. (24)
Passing beyond this sphere, presided over by Visnu, which is like a navel to the wheel of this
universe, he ascends alone in his most subtle and pure body to the realm called Maharloka
(the region immediately enclosing Indra's paradise), which is adored even by the knowers
of Brahma, and which is the delightful abode of gods that live for a whole Kalpa (a day of
Brahma). (25) Thereafter (at the end of the Kalpa) when he sees the whole world below being
consumed by the fire proceeding from the mouth of Lord Ananta (Sesa), he rises still higher
to Brahma's abode, where the foremost among the Siddhas reside in their aerial cars and
which lasts for two Parardhas (the full span of Brahmas life). (26) There is no griefnor agony,
neither old age nor death in that sphere, much less fear of any kind. The only agony they
suffer fromis the mental anguish they feel out of compassion when they see people who have
no knowledge of the process of meditation as described above undergoing repeated births
and deaths, that entail endless suffering. (27) Then (after reaching the Satyaloka) he
fearlessly unites his subtle body with the earth and thereafter steadily pierces the seven
sheaths encasing the earth as below. From his terrestrial form he passes on to the watery
and from the aqueous to the fiery sheath; again, from his fiery form he makes his way into
the aerial sheath, and lastly from his aerial form in course of time he enters the ethereal
sheath, which is an index to the infinitude of Brahma. (28) Again, through his olfactory sense
the Yogi returns to the subtle element of smell, through the sense of taste to the subtle
element of taste, through the sense of sight to the subtle element of colour, through the sense
of touch to the subtle element of touch, through the auditory sense to the subtle element of
sound and through each organ of action to the functioning power of each and thus all of them
return to their subtle form. (29) (Thus reaching beyond the gross and subtle sheaths of the
five elements) the Yogi enters the ego. He dissolves the subtle elements into the Tamasika
ego, the senses into the Rajasika and the mind as well as the deities presiding over the
senses into the Sattvika ego. Then, through the same process (of dissolution) he returns
along with the ego to the principle of cosmic intelligence (Mahat-tattva) and finally to Prakrti
(in which merge all the three Gunas). (30) Again, during the final dissolution (when Prakrti
too merges in God) the Yogi who becomes all-blissful now, merges with that pure blissful
form in God, who is perfectly tranquil and bliss itself. Dear Pariksit, he who attains this divine
goal no more returns to this world of matter (transmigration). (31) These, O king, are the two
eternal paths recommended by the Vedas, about which you enquired of me. Of yore, when
Brahma (the Creator) worshipped Lord Vasudeva (Visnu) andinterrogated Him, itwas these
two paths that were taught to him by the Lord. (32) For him who has fallen into the whirlpool
of transmigration there is no blessed path other than that which makes for devotion to Lord
Vasudeva. (33) Having critically studied the Vedas with a concentrated mind thrice over,
Brahma concluded by force of his reason that alone to be the highest virtue, by which one
is able to develop exclusive devotion to Sri Krsna (the Self of the Universe). (34) Lord Sri
Hari alone is seen as abiding in all (animate and inanimate) beings as their very self; for the

“A particular air tube of the body lying between those called Ida and Pingala. and believed to be one of the passage न
tor the air or the spirit.

