312 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 48

BOREAS ARON R RE OCICS SEO I IRIS 8 8 SOE ris sie tao rere terete trariarsre:

अक्षौहिणीशतवधेन सुरेतरांशराज्ञाममुष्य च कुलस्य यज्ञो वितन्वन् ।२४॥
अद्येश नो वसतय: खलु भूरिभागा a: सर्वदेवपितृभूतनृदेवमूर्ति: |
यत्पादशौचसलिलं त्रिजगत् पुनाति स त्वं जगद्गुरुरधोक्षज या: प्रविष्ट: 1241
क: पण्डितस्त्वदपरं शरणं समीयाद् भक्तप्रियादृतगिर: सुहृद: कृतज्ञात्।
सर्वान् ददाति Gel भजतोऽभिकामानात्मानमप्युपचयापचयौ न यस्य । २६॥
छिन्ध्याशु न: सुतकलत्रधनाप्तगेहदेहादिमोहरशनां भवदीयमायाम् 129

Wishing to get Akrira do some errand (of His) and (aiso) with intent to oblige him Lord
Sri Krsna, accompanied by Balarama and Uddhava, visited in state the residence of
Akrura.(12) Overjoyed to perceive from a distance the aforesaid jewels among the best of
men, (who were) his own relations, and rising (from his seat) to receive them, he (went up
to,) embraced and welcomed them. (13) (Nay, recalling Their divinity) he bowed to SriKrsna
and Balarama (in spite of Their young age) and, greeted by Them too (in return), duly
worshipped Them, who had (now) taken Their seat. (14) Sprinkling over his head in every
direction the water with which he had washed Their feet, O protector of men, and honouring
Them with (various) articles of worship, as well as with exquisite robes, sandal-paste,
garlands and excellent jewels, Akrura, who was (already) bent low with humility, bowed down
to Them with his head (inclined) and, kneading Their feet, that rested on his lap, spoke to Sri
Krsna and Balarama (as follows):—{15-16) "Luckily (enough) by You two the sinful Karnsa
has been slain alongwith his followers and this race of Yours not only saved froma calamity
which was hard to get over but made to prosper (too). (17) You two are Prakrti (primordial
Matter) and Purusa (the Spirit), the (material and efficient) causes (respectively) of the
universe and one with the universe (too). There in neither any cause nor any effect apart from
You two. (18) Entering after its creation (as its Inner Controller) this universe, evolved by
Yourself through the instrumentality of Your own potencies (in the shape of Rajoguna etc.),
O Krsna (the supreme Lord), You are perceived in various forms within the range of hearing
and sight. (19) Even as the (five) elements (earth etc.), appear in various forms in (the diverse
orders of) created beings, (both) mobile and immobile, the media of their manifestation, so
do You, the absolute Self, (entirely) self-dependent, appear in numberless forms in the
various worlds (the fields of Your manifestation). (20) Through the instrumentality of Your
own potencies in the shape of the (three) Gunas (modes of Prakrti}—Rajas, Sattva and
Tamas—You (severally) evolve, then protect (preserve) and (ultimately) reabsorb the
universe. You are (however) not bound by those Gunas or (even) by those actions (in the
form of creation, protection and reabsorption of the universe). Under no circumstance
whatsoevercan ignorance (the cause of bondage) be attributed to You, who are Consciousness
itself. (21) A body and other adjuncts (that are supposed to limit the Self or Consciousness)
being unascertained (through metaphysical investigation), birth and differences (following
it) cannot be directly ascribed to the Spirit (much less to You, the Supreme Spirit). Hence
there can be neither bondage nor liberation for You. What appears as bondage or liberation
in You is (only superimposed by) our ignorance about You and a reflection of our (own) mind.
(22) Each time this dateless path of the Vedas taught by You for the good of the world is
obstructed by false creeds of a heretical type, You assume (for the vindication of the Vedic
path) a form consisting of Sattva (unmixed with Rajas and Tamas). (23) As such, O Lord, You
are born this time in the house of Vasudeva here (on this planet) with Your own part
manifestation (Balarama) in order to remove the earth's burden by destroying hundreds of
Aksauhinis of kings who are partial incarnations of demons and in order to spread the glory

