404 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 68

POEM SCBCICT SC 8S OH EITC ORCI TO 8 SE Er ni icin een nero n sree

Him on the chest with both his fists. (24) (Thereupon) the Lord of the Yadus set aside His
pestle and plough and, full of rage, hit him with both His hands on the collar-bone, and the
latter fell down (dead) vomiting blood. (25) Pariksit, like a ship rocking in water through the
action of wind, the (whole) mountain with its peaks and trees shook as the monkey fell. (26)
In the heavens the gods raised shouts of victory, the Siddhas uttered greetings and great
sages loudly said, 'Well done, Well done! and they all showered flowers on Balarama. (27)
Having thus put an end to Dwivida, who had been desolating the land, Lord Balarama
returned to Dwaraka (His own city) amidst the praises and acclamations of the people. (28)

Thus ends the sixty-seventh discourse entitled "Dwivida killed (by Balarama)," in the latter
half of Book Ten of the great and glorious Bhagavata-Purana,
otherwise known as the Paramaharmsa-Samnita.

च्त्
PISS rry

अथाष्टषष्टितमोऽध्याय:

Discourse LXVIII

Triumph of Sankarsana—in the form of dragging Hastinapura

SRE उवाच
दुर्योधनसुतां राजन् लक्ष्मणां समितिञ्जय: । स्वयंवरस्थामहरत् साम्बो जाम्बवतीसुत: । १ ।
ait: कुपिता ऊच्चुर्दुर्विनीतोऽयमर्भक: | कदर्थीकृत्य न: कन्यामकामामहरद् बलात् । २ ।
बध्नीतेमं दुर्विनीतं किं करिष्यन्ति वृष्णव: । येऽस्मत्रसादोपचितां दत्तां नो भुञ्जते महीम् । ३ |
निगृहीतं सुतं श्रुत्वा यद्येष्यन्तीह वृष्णय: । भग्नदर्पा: ज्ञमं थान्ति प्राणा ga सुसंयता: । ४ ।
इति कर्ण: शलो भूरिर्यज्ञकेतु: सुयोधन: ।साम्मारेभिरे बद्धुं कुरुवृद्धानुमोदिता: । ५ ।

Sri Suka began again : Pariksit ! Samba, son of Jambavati, was (a great warrior, who
was) always victorious in battle. He carried away Laksmana. Duryodhana's daughter, from
an assembly (of kings) called for the choice of her partner by the princess herself. (1) The
Kauravas were enraged at this. They said, ” Setting us at naught, this unruly boy has forcibly
taken away the girl, who did not even seek his hand. (2) Imprison the wayward boy. What
would the Yadavas do, who rule the land conferredon them by us and which has been thriving
through our grace. (3) If, on hearing of the captivity of the boy, the Vrsnis (venture to) come
here, they will find their pride curbed and will be silenced in the same way as the senses
thoroughly controlled (through Pranayama and other means) are easily tamed." (4) Resolving
thus, Karna, Sala, Bhdrigrava, Yajfiaketu, and Duryodhana proceeded to capture Samba
with the approval of the elderly among the Kurus. (5)

दृष्टानुधावत: साम्बो धार्तराष्टान् महारथ: । प्रगृह्य रुचिरं चापं तस्थौ सिंह इवैकल: । ६ ।
तं ते जिघृक्षव: क्रुद्धास्तिष्ठ तिष्ठेति भाषिण: । आसाद्य धन्विनो amt: कर्णाग्रण्य: समाकिरन् । ७ |
विस्फूर्ज्य रुचिरं चापं सर्वान् विव्याध सायकै: । कर्णादीन् षड्थान् वीरांस्तावद्भिर्युगपत् पृथक | ९ ।
चतुर्भिश्चतुरो वाहानेकॆकेन च सारथीन्।रथिनश्च महेषासांस्तस्य तत्तेऽभ्यपूजयन् ।१०॥
