Dis. 6 ] SRIMAD BHAGAVATA-MAHATMYA 43
PARA He He EM ROHNER AMEE HY ATR BR RT ROE NT MRE RH A BRE ERE RR ROTA RT RRR RE HE RE BEBE BIRO RMA AR RRR MONON RR ROE BE HE R RE Re BEN RE
listener should make the audience utter with him shouts of triumph and words of greetings
and raise blasts of conchs; and money as well as food should be dealt out to Brahmanas and
mendicants.(58) If the (chief) listener is a man who has renounced the world the Gita should
be read the following day. If (however) he is a householder, in that case oblations should be
poured into the sacred fire by way of expiation for any sin (voluntarily or involuntarily)
committed in course of the act (of hearing). (59) With the utterance of each verse of Book
Ten (of Srimad Bhagavata) rice boiled in milk with sugar, honey and ghee and mixed with
sesamum seeds and food-grains (barley etc.) should be consigned to the fire. (60) Or (as an
alternative) the chief listener should perform the Havana with a concentrated mind alongwith
the muttering of the holy Gayatri, Srimad Bhagavata (the supreme Purana) beingin essence
the same as the Gayatri. (61) In the event of his being incapable of performing the Havana
a wise man should give away (to Brahmanas) materials fit to be consigned to the sacred
fire in order to achieve its fruit. (Nay) in order to make amends for the various short comings
(that might have married the performance) as well as for neutralizing the faults of deficiency
and excess (committed) he should read the Visnu Sahasranama (the thousand names of
Lord Visnu catalogued in the Mahabharata, Padmapurana and other sacred books).
Through that every performance bids fair to become fruitful inasmuch as there is nothing
more efficacious than that. (62-63)

द्वादश ब्राह्मणान् पश्चाद्भोजयेन्मधुपायसै: । दद्यात्सुवर्णं धेनुं च व्रतपूर्णत्वहेतवे । ६४॥
शक्तौ पलत्रयमितं स्वर्णसिंहं विधाय च । तत्रास्य पुस्तकं स्थाप्यं लिखितं ललिताक्षरम् । ६५॥
सम्पूज्यावाहनाद्यैस्तदुपचारै: सदक्षिणम् । वस्त्रभूषणगन्धाद्यै: पूजिताय यतात्मने । ६६॥
आचार्याय aide मुक्त: स्याद्भवबन्धनै: । एवं ga विधानं च सर्वपापनिवारणे cio
फलदं स्यात्पुराणं तु श्रीमद्भागवतं Bn धर्मकामार्थमोक्षाणां साधनं स्यान्न dara: । ६८॥

He should then feed twelve Brahmanas with sweets and rice boiled in milk with sugar and
give away gold and a cow (to Brahmanas) for the completion of the sacred vow. (64) Having
got prepared a seat of gold weighing three tolas, if his means allow it, he should instal on it
the book of Srimad Bhagavata, written in beautiful letters. (65) Duly worshipping the book
by invoking in it (the presence of) the Deity ensouling it and through other forms of worship
including a gift of money, the wise listener should present it to the expositor of restrained mind
when he has been worshipped by offering wearing apparel, ornaments, sandal-paste etc.
By doing so he will be rid of the shackles of birth and death. On the procedure of hearing (an
exposition of ) Srimad Bhagavata,which purges one of all sins, being thus completed, the
blessed and glorious Bhagavata-Purana yields the desired fruit and proves to be the means
of securing religious merit, self-gratification, worldly possessions and Liberation : there is no
doubt about it. (66—68)

SARI Hy:
इति a कथितं aa किं भूय: श्रोतुमिच्छसि । श्रीमद्भागवतेनैव भुक्तिमुक्ती करे स्थिते eel
The Kumaras went on: In this way everything has been pointed out to you. What more
do you wish to hear ? Through the glorious Bhagavata alone both (worldly) enjoyment and
liberation are brought within one's palm. (69)
Yd sara

इत्युक्त्वा ते महात्मान: प्रोचुर्भागवतीं mem । सर्वपापहरां पुण्यां भुक्तिमुक्तिप्रदायिनीम् ।७०।
