Dis. 6 ] BOOK THREE 159

Sat tee ee oe ore Re EE HE OE NAA ER RAT RA aM ET नौ
rR

आत्यन्तिकेन सत्त्वेन fed देवा: प्रपेदिरे। धरां रज:स्वभावेन पणयो ये च ताननु । २८।
ade स्वभावेन भगवन्नाभिमाश्रिता: । उभयोरन्तरं aim ये रुद्रपार्षदां गणा: ।२९॥
Then appeared in Him a Citta (the seat of intellection), the abode of Brahma (the deity
presiding over the Mahat-tattva or the principle of cosmic intelligence), who entered it along
with his power, the faculty of intellection, by means of which the Jiva distinguishes between right
and wrong etc. (26) From His head emanated the heavenly world, the earth from His feet and
the sky (the space between heaven and earth) from His navel. In these regions are found the
gods and other beings (such as men and ghosts etc.) , the evolutes of Sattva, Rajas and Tamas
respectively. (27) Out of these, the gods through the predominance of Sattva (the quality of
goodness) found their abode in heaven; human beings and other creatures that are useful to
the latter obtained their residence on earth because of their Rajasika temperament; while the
hosts of Rudra’s attendants (spirits, ghosts etc.), took up their residence in the sky between
heaven and earth, which represents the navel of the Cosmic Being. (28-29)

मुखतोऽवर्तत ब्रह्म पुरुषस्य कुरूद्वह । यस्तून्मुखत्वाद्वर्णानां मुख्योऽभूद्बाह्यणो गुरु: 1201
बाहुभ्योऽवर्तत at क्षत्रियस्तदनुव्रत: | यो जातस्त्रायते वर्णान् पौरुष: कण्टकक्षतात् । ३१॥
विशोऽवर्तन्त . तस्योर्बोर्लोकवृत्तिकरीर्विभो: । वैह्यस्तदुद्धवो वार्तां qui a: समवर्तयत् 132i
पद्भ्यां भगवतो जज्ञे eT धर्मसिद्धये । तस्यां जात: पुरा शूद्रो यदवृत्तया qe हरि: 1331
एते वर्णा: स्वधर्मेण यजन्ति ways ef श्रद्धयाऽऽत्मविशुद्ध्यर्थं यज्जाता: सह वृत्तिभि: 13x
एतत्क्षत्तर्भगवतो दैवकर्मात्मरूपिण: । क: श्रद्दध्यादुपाकर्तुं योगमायाबलोदयम् 1341
अथापि कीर्तयाम्यङ्ग यथामति aera कीर्तिं हरे: स्वां सत्कर्तुं गिरमन्याभिधासतीम् । ३६।

एकान्तलाभं वचसो नु पुंसां सुङ्लोकमोलेर्गुणवादमाहु: ।

TAT विद्वद्भिरुपाकृतायां कथासुधायामुपसम्प्रयोगम् 1319 |
आत्मनोऽवसितो वत्स महिमा कविनाऽऽदिना । संवत्सरसहस्रान्ते धिया चोगविपक्वया 3c
अतो भगवतो माया मायिनामपि मोहिनी । यत्स्वयं चात्मवर्त्मत्मा न वेद किमुतापरे । ३९॥

यतोऽप्राप्य न्यवर्तन्त वाचश्च मनसा सह। अहं चान्य इमे देवास्तस्मै भगवते नम: ।४०॥

From the mouth of the Cosmic Being emanated the Vedas, O Vidura (ornament of the
Kurus), as well as the Brahmana who came to be the foremost of all the Varnas (grades of
society) as well as their teacher only because he sprang from the mouth of the Cosmic
Being.(30) From the arms (of the Cosmic Being) emanated the vocation of a Ksatriya (viz.,
the protection and governance of the people) as well as the Ksatriya himself, whois devoted
to that profession and who, being a ray of Lord Visnu (the Protector of the universe), is born
to protect the other Varnas (classes) against the ravages of thieves and robbers. (31) From
the thighs of that almighty Lord (the Cosmic Being) proceeded agriculture and other
occupations of a Vaisya—which provide subsistence (in the shape of food and other
necessaries of life) to the whole world—as also the Vaisya himself, who (by his own pursuit)
procures a living for all mankind. (32) From the Lord's feet was evolved the calling of service,
which is essential for the (proper) discharge of all sacred duties; and (from those very feet)
for carrying on this pursuit was produced of yore the Stidra, whose very occupation secures
the pleasure* of the Lord. (33) For the purification of their heart all these four classes

* Service is the root of the successful performance of all sacred duties; no sacred obligation can be discharged without

service. Hence the place of the Sidra, whose allotted duty is service. the root of all virtues, is Indeed high among all the Varnas.
The Dharma (duty) of a Brahmana has Moxsa (final beatitude) for its goal; that of a Ksatriya has enjoyment for its objective; that
