682 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 4

BEEN EM HEMMER RE He EME ET ON OT MRE SEM ER EON ENO TEE RA ORONO ORO NR ROR TACT

earth, viz., smell; denuded of its smell, the earth then gets dissolved (in water). (14) Fire then
absorbs the property of water, viz., taste; and deprived of its taste, the water (too) is forthwith
dissolved (in the fire). Then the air absorbs the property of fire, viz., colour; and, divested of
colour it loses itself into the air. (Likewise) ether absorbs the property of the air (viz., touch)
and gets dissolved'(in ether), 0 Pariksit ! Then the Tamasika aspect of the Cosmic Ego
absorbs the property of ether, viz., sound; alongwith it ether (too) gets dissolved (in the
Tamasika Ahankara); and the Rajasika type of Ahankara absorbs the Indriyas alongwith their
functions. (Similarly) the Sattvika type of Ahankara absorbs the gods (presiding over them),
O dear Pariksit ! (15—17) The Mahat-tattva absorbs the (triple) Ahankara; while the (three)
Gunas (modes of Prakrti), viz., Sattva etc., absorb Mahat. Impelled by Time, the Unmanifest
(Prakrti) reduces the (three) modes of Prakrti to the state of equilibrium, O king ! (18) Prakrti
is not subject to the (six) states* such as modification, brought about by the divisions of time
(even as they pass).,. it is without beginning or end, unmanifest, constant, the cause (of all)
and not subject to decay. (19) In that state, there is no speech, no mind, no (modes of
Prakrti, viz.,) Sattva, Rajas and Tamas, no Mahat and other products of Matter, no breath,
no intellect, no senses nor the deities (presiding over them) and no conception, much less
location of Lokas (spheres). (20) (Again,) there isno dream nor waking life nor deep slumber;
no ether, water, earth, air, fire or sun. Itis something like deep sleep or vacuity; nay, beyond
conception. The Vedas speak of it as a state which is the root of the universe. (21) This is
(what is known as) Prakrtika Pralaya (the Dissolution of everything into Prakrti or Primordial
Matter), when, impelled by Time, the potencies of the Supreme Person as well as of the
Unmanifest (Prakrti) are completely and helplessly withdrawn (into their substratum) .(22)

बुद्धीन्द्रियार्थरूपेण wea भाति तदाश्रयम्। दृश्यत्वाव्यतिरेकाभ्यामाद्यन्तवदवस्तु वयत् । २३
दीपश्चक्षुश्च रूपं च ज्योतिषो न पृथग् भवेत्। एवं eft: खानि मात्राश्च न स्युरन्यतमादृतात् । २४।
बुद्धेर्जागरणं स्वप्न: सुषुप्तिरिति चोच्यते। मायामात्रमिदं राजन् नानात्वं प्रत्यगात्मनि eu
यथा जलधरा व्योम्नि भवन्ति न भवन्ति च । ब्रह्मणीदं तथा विश्वमवयव्युदयाप्ययात् ।२६॥
wa ह्यवयव: sre: सर्वावयविनामिह। विनार्थेन प्रतीयेरन् पटस्येवाङ्ग तन्तव: 1201
यत् सामान्यविदोषाभ्यामुपलभ्येत स भ्रम: | अन्योन्यापाश्रयात् सर्वमाद्यन्तवदवस्तु यत् । २८
विकार: सख्यायमानोऽपि प्रत्यगात्मानमन्तरा । न निरूप्योऽस्त्यणुरपि स्याच्चेच्चित्सम आत्मवत् । २९॥
न हि सत्यस्य नानात्वमविद्वान् यदि मन्यते। नानात्वं छिद्रयोर्यद्वन्ज्योतिषोर्वातयोरिव 1301

In the form of the intellect, the senses and their objects it is consciousness alone, their
ground or substratum, which shines forth. Whatever has a beginning and an end is unreal,
because it is open to perception and has no existence apart from its cause. (23) Light, the
eye and colour (which are all modifications of fire) are not distinct from fire. Similarly the
intellect, senses and their objects are not distinct from Brahma (the only Reality),which is
quite different from them (inasmuch as It exists even when they cease to be, while the reverse
is not true). (24) Wakefulness, dream and deep slumber, it is said, are so many states of
Buddhi (intellect); the plurality attributed to the pure Self (in the form of Viswa, Taijasa and
Prajfia, as severally presiding over these states), is mere illusion, 0 Pariksit ! (25) (Just) as
clouds appear and disappear in the sky, this universe (too)—because it has a beginning and
an end and since it is made up of parts, sometimes appears and sometimes disappears in
Brahma. (26) In this world, of all objects consisting of parts, the part alone has been declared
{in the Sruti texts) to be real; for the parts are seen to exist (even) in the absence of a
composite just as the threads of a cloth can be seen even when the cloth is not there, O dear
ie sx Slates are (1) birlh, (2) existence, (3) growth. (4) modification, (5) decay and (6) death

