Dis. 6 ] .- . BOOKTWO - 107

SSE का च सा Re ना या जा RR) rar Fert सा चो ता tT eS Or en ROTTOR Wot का ROR RO wee:
je —sssssSsS

yourself, Lord Sankara, those elder brothers of yours ( Sanaka and others), the gods,
demons and men, the Nagas, birds, deer and reptiles, the Gandharvas and celestial
nymphs, the Yaksas, Raksasas and BhUtas (ghosts), serpents and beasts, the manes, the
Siddhas, Vidyadharas and Caranas (the celestial bards), trees and other species of living
beings residing either in water, on land or inthe air, the planets and lunar mansions, comets
and other stars, lightnings and thundering clouds—nay, all this universe, past, present and
future, is no other than the Supreme Person. It is by Him that all this stands pervaded and
it covers only a span of the Cosmic Being. (12—15) Even as the sun shines outside while
illumining its own orb, so does the Supreme Person cast His effulgence inside as well as
outside the univétse, while illumining His own Cosmic Body. (16) He transcends all that is
subject to death as well as the fruit of action, andis the lord of thatimmortal and fearless state
(of Moksa). That is why, O divine sage, no one can fathom the glory of the Supreme
Person.(17) All the worlds represent only a fraction of the Supreme Person anditis in these
worlds, forming part of the Lord, that all created beings are known to reside. Andi itis in the
three highest heavens (viz., Janaloka, Tapoloka and Satyaloka) standing above Maharloka,
which itself exists above the three worlds, that immortality, security and fearlessness have
been established. (18) The three Agramas or stages of life, viz., those of the Brahmacaris
(lifelong celibates) Vanaprasthas (forest-dwellers or anchorites) and the Sarnnyasis
(recluses), none of whom begets children, constitute His three feet, which have their abode
outside the three worlds (viz., the earth, the region of the air and heaven); while the fourth
foot, viz., the stage of the householder, who does not observe a vow of long celibacy, dwells
inside the three worlds. (19) The scriptures speak of two paths—the Path of Action, which
has been characterized as Avidya or ignorance (because of its being conducive to rebirth)
and the Path of Upasana (meditation on God), which has been designated as Vidya
(because it leads to Knowledge or the Realization of Truth). The Jiva(embodied soul) follows
either of these two paths, the first of which leads to enjoyment and the other to final beatitude;
while the Supreme Purusa is the foundation of both. (20) Even as the sun, though illumining
and warming all with its rays, is yet distinct from all, the Lord, from whom was evolved this
universe in the form of an egg as well as His Cosmic Body, consisting of the five gross
elements (earth, water, fire, air and ether), the ten Indriyas (the five senses of perception and
the five organs of action) and the three Gunas (modes of Prakrti), (though indwelling allthese
and manifest in their form) is entirely beyond the universe as well as His Cosmic Body . (21)

यदास्य नाभ्यान्नलिनादहमासं महात्मन:। नाविदं यज्ञसम्भारान् पुरुषावयवादृते 1221

तेषु यज्ञस्य पशव: सवनस्पतय: Haris च देवयजनं कालश्चोरुगुणान्वित: 1231
वस्तून्योषधय: «Se रसलोहमृदो जलम्।ऋचो यजूंषि सामानि चातुर्होत्रं च सत्तम es!
नामधेयानि wang दक्षिणाश्च aa च । देवतानुक्रम: कल्प: सङ्कल्पस्तन्त्रमेव च ।२५॥

गतयो मतय: et प्रायश्चित्तं समर्पणम्। पुरुषावयवैरेते सम्भारा: सम्भृता मया । २६॥
इति सम्भृतसम्भार: पुरुषावयवैरहम्।तमेव पुरुषं चज्ञे तेनैवायजमीश्वरम् । २७॥
ततस्ते भ्रातर इमे प्रजानां पतयो नव। अयजन् व्यक्तमव्यक्तं पुरुषं सुसमाहिता: 1221
wag मनव: काले ईंजिरे ऋषयोऽपरे। पितरो विबुधा दैत्या मनुष्या: क्रतुभिर्विभुम् । २९॥
नारायणे भगवति तदिदं विश्वमाहितम्। गृहीतमायोरुगुण: सर्गादावगुण: स्वत: 1301
सृजामि तन्निचुक्तोऽहं हरो हरति agai विश्वं पुरुषरूपेण परिपाति त्रिहाक्तिधृक । ३१॥
इति तेऽभिहितॆ तात यथेदमनुपृच्छसि । नान्यद्भगवत: किंचिद्भाव्यं सदसदात्मकम् । ३२॥
न भारती ase मृषोपलक्ष्यते न वै क्वचिन्मे मनसो ger गति: ।
