Dis. 6] BOOK EIGHT — 761

SiwbNesenenh bonmeetens Hkh eecennnneenentnewerEntntitennronsnsenecsstnenenenannd el
ER SRA SESS ER SR SEES Be Tie mew hehe mane e neh ohm Ree
दूरभारोद्वहश्रान्ता: शक्रवैरोचनादय: | अपारयन्तस्तं वोढुं विवज्ञा fase: ofa ।३४॥
निपतन्स गिरिस्तत्र लहूनमरदानवान् | चूर्णयामास महता भारेण कनकाचळ: 1341

Sri Suka continued : Having thus duly instructed the gods, the almighty Lord Sri Hari
(the supreme Person), whose movements are (altogether) guided by His own free will,
vanished out of their sight, O Pariksit ! (26) Bowing to the Lord, Brahma (the fatherof the lords
of creation) as well as Lord Siva (the Source of the universe) then returned each to His own,
realm, while the gods (headed by Indra) called on Bali. (27) King Bali (the ruler of the Daityas),
who was praiseworthy (in everyway) and knew when to wage war and when to come toterms
(with the enemy), kept under restraint his own generals, who got excited at the (very) sight
of the enemy (the gods), even though the latter were not (at all) prepared for action.(28) The
gods (now) approached Bali (son of Virocana), who sat (on his throne) guarded by leaders
of Asura troops and, having conquered all (the three worlds), was invested with the highest
(royal) splendour.(29) Having conciliated Bali with his polished language, the highly talented
Indra told him all that he had received instruction in from Lord Visnu (the supreme
Person).(30) The proposal found favour with the Daitya king (Bali) as well as with whosoever
were present there, viz., Sambara, Aristanemi and other demon chiefs and denizens of
Tripura. (31) Having arrivedata (mutual) understanding, the gods and the Asuras (demons),
who had (now) cultivated friendship, thereupon put forth their best energies for (obtaining)
nectar, O chastiser of foes ! (32) Then, uprooting Mount Mandara by their might and roaring
(like lions), the arrogant gods and demons, who were (all) full of energy and whose arms were
Strong as bludgeons, proceeded to take it to the seashore. (33) Exhausted by carrying their
load to a long distance and unable to Carry it (any) further, Indra, Bali (son of Virocana)and
others helplessly dropped it on the way. (34) While falling down, that mountain, which
resembled Mount Sumeru (the mountain of gold), crushed under its huge weight numerous
gods and demons on that spot.(35)

तांस्तथा भग्नमनसो भग्नबाहूरुकन्धरान्।विज्ञाय भगवांस्तत्र aya गरुडध्वज: 138)

गिरिपातविनिष्पिष्टान्विलोक्यामरदानवान् igen जीवयामास निर्जरान् निर्व्रणान्यथा 13191

fit चारोष्य गरुडे हस्तेनैकेन लीलया। आरुह्य प्रययावब्धिं सुरासुरगणैर्वृत: 1321

sara गिरिं स्कन्धात् सुपर्ण: पततां वर: । ययॊ जलान्त उत्सृज्य हरिणा स विसर्जित: ।३९॥

Finding them disheartened and with their arms, thighs and necks broken, the Lord
appeared there on the back of Garuda (the king of birds). (36) Perceiving the gods and
demons badly squeezed by the falling down of the mountain, He revived the gods by His
(mere) look as though they were (quite) unhurt. (37) Nay, placing the mountain on (the back
of ) Garuda with one hand by way of sport and mounting the bird (Himself), He flew to the
seashore, surrounded by the gods and demons. (38) Taking down the mountain from his
shoulder and placing it on the seaside, the celebrated Garuda (possessed of beautiful
wings), the foremost of winged creatures, withdrew, when discharged by Sri Hari (so as to
make room for Vasuki, the king of Serpents, who was too much afraid of Garuda, his mortal
enemy, to arrive in the latter's presence). (39)

Thus ends the sixth discourse, entitled "The transportation of Mount Mandara", comprised in the
Story of the chuming of the ocean for neciar, in Book Eight of the great and glorious
Bhagavata-Purana, otherwise known as the Paramaharisa-Samnhita.

SS १ Nit FN Fh
PDT ED ms
