220 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA - [ Dis. 19

PRAM RR RRA EE EE OE ESHER ती EEE COWIE HAE EKA RHERH OR HL REETH HH ELEM HR

wreath of flowers. (16) He now employed many a conjuring trick against Sri Hari, the Lord
of Yogamaya (the source of all Mayas), at the sight of which the people were filled with alarm
and thought the dissolution of the universe was near. (17) Fierce winds began to blow, which
spread darkness occasioned by dust. And stones came in volleys from every quarter as if
thrown from slings. (18) The luminaries in the heaven disappeared due to the sky being
overcast with masses of clouds, which were accompanied by lightning and thunder, and
frequently rained pus, hair, blood, faeces, urine and bones. (19) Mountains discharging
weapons of various kinds appeared, O sinless Vidura, as also naked demonesses armed
with tridents, their hair hanging loose. (20) Most cruel and savage slogans where uttered by
hosts of Yaksas and Raksasas who were all of a ruffian type and either marched on foot or
rode on horses or elephants or in chariots. (21)

प्रादुष्कृतानां मायानामासुरीणां विनाशयत्। सुदर्शनास्त्रं भगवान् प्रायुङ्क्त दयितं त्रिपात् 1221
aq fat: समभवत्सहसा ge वेपथु: । स्मरन्त्या भर्तुरादेशं स्तनाच्चासृक प्रसुस्रुवे ।२३।
विनष्टासु स्वमायासु भूयश्चाव्रज्य aq रुषोपगूहमानोऽमुं ददूरोऽवस्थितं बहि: । २४॥
तं मुष्टिभिर्बिनिघ्ननत्तं वज्रसारैरधोक्षज: । करेण कर्णमूलेऽहन् यथा त्वाष्टुं मरुत्पति: 1241
a आहतो faa gana परिभ्रमद्गात्र उदस्तलोचन: ।
विशीर्णबाह्वङ्ध्रिशिरोरुहोऽपतद् यथा नगेन्द्रो लुलितो नभस्वता IRE!
farat ।। f ° oe fi \
अजादयो वीक्ष्य जशंसुरागता अहो sar को नु लभेत संस्थितिम् । २७।
यं योगिनो योगसमाधिना wt ध्यायन्ति लिङ्गादसतो मुमुक्षया ।
तस्यैष दैत्यऋषभ: पदाहतो मुखं प्रपश्यंस्तनुमुत्ससर्ज ह ।२८।
एतौ at पार्षदावस्य श्ञापाद्यातावसद्गतिम् ya: कतिपयै: स्थानं प्रपत्स्येते ह जन्मभि: । २९।

The Lord, who represented all the sacrifices in His person, now discharged His beloved
discus, Sudargana, which was capable of dispersing the Mayas (magical forces) displayed
by the demon. (22) That very moment, all of a sudden, a shudder ran through the heart of
Diti (Hiranyaksa's mother) as she recalled the words of her lord (the sage Kasyapa); and
blood flowed from her breasts. (23) When he saw his magic forces dispelled, he went into
the presence of Lord KeSava once more and, full of rage, encompassed Him within his arms
(in order to crush Him; but to his great amazement and chagrin) he found the Lord standing
outside the circle of his arms.(24) As he (now) began to strike the Lord with his fists, which
were harder than adamant, Lord Adhoksaja (who is beyond sense-perception) slapped him
in the root of his ear, even as Indra (the lord of the Maruts or gods of winds) hit the demon
Vrtra (son of Twasta, the architect of the gods). (25) Though struck indifferently by the Lord,
the conqueror of all, the demon’s body began to wheel, the eye-balls bulged out of their
sockets, and he fell down dead like a gigantic tree uprooted by the wind, his arms, legs and
hair on the head broken and scattered. (26) Brahma and others, who had now arrived (on
the spot) saw the demon with fearful tusks lying on the ground, biting his lips, the glow on
his face yet unfaded, and admiringly said, "Oh, who could meet such a (blessed) death! (27)
Struck by a fore-foot of the Lord—whom Yogis meditate upon in seclusion through Yoga in
the form of abstract meditation, seeking freedom from their limitation, which is unreal—and
gazing on His countenance, this crest-jewel of Diti’s sons has shuffled off his mortal coil ! (28)
These two demons (Hiranyakasipu and Hiranyaksa) are no other than the Lord's own

attendants, who have attained to this accursed state (have been born as demons) through
a curse (pronounced by the sage Sanaka and his three brothers). After going through some
