Dis. 87] ` "BOOK ONE 29

OROROIDIT BORE REET SOR ROROR EOR Be RO PORIIIIOR IRON ROW a Re Ree ORIEN OR Br BR ERR ROTOR ORO IRR ORR RT EON NORE aE tr a a ene tr See ey

who is an embodiment of all wonders and who, though unborn Himself, creates, maintains
and destroys this universe by His own deluding potency. (16) When Sri Krsna was about
to leave, the virtuous Prtha (Kunti) along with hersons (the Pandavas), who hadjust escaped
from the fire of the missile presided over by Brahma, and her daughter-in-law, Krsna
(Draupadi), addressed Him as follows: (17)

कुन्त्युवाच
नमस्ये पुरुषं त्वाऽऽद्यमीश्वं spa: परम्। अलश्ष्यं सर्वभूतानामन्तर्बहिरवस्थितम् । १८।
भायाजवनिकाच्छन्नमज्ञाधोक्षजमव्ययम् । न लक्ष्यसे Wega नटो नाट्यधरो यथा 1१९
तथा परमहंसानां मुनीनाममलात्मनाम्।भक्तियोगविधानार्थं कथं aga हि स्रिय: 1201
कृष्णाय वासुदेवाय देवकीनन्दनाय च । नन्दगोपकुमाराय गोविन्दाय नमो नम: 1221
नम: पङ्कजनाभाय नम: पङ्कजमालिने। नम: पङ्कजनेत्राय नमस्ते पङ्कजाङ्घ्रये 1221
विमोचिताहं च सहात्मजा fat त्वयैव नाथेन मुहुर्विपद्गणात् । २३॥
विषान्महाग्ने: पुरुषाददर्शानादसत्सभाया वनवासकृच्छ्रत: |
मृथे मृधेऽनेकमहारथास्त्रतो द्रौण्यस्त्रतश्चास्म हरेऽभिरक्षितो: । २४॥
विपद: सन्तु न: शश्वत्तत्र तत्र जगद्गुरो। भवतो दर्शानं यत्स्यादपुनर्भवदर्शानम् ।२५॥
जन्मैश्चर्यश्रुतश्रीभिरेधमानमद: पुमान् । नेवार्हत्यभिधातुं वै त्वामकिञ्चनगोचरम् 1261
नमोऽकिञ्चनवित्ताय निवृत्तगुणवृत्तये | आत्मारामाय झान्ताय कैवल्यपतये नम: ।२७॥
Kunti said : "I, an ignorant woman, make obeisance to You, the Prime Person,
transcending Prakrti and dwelling inside as well as outside all created beings, the invisible
and imperishable God existing beyond the range of sense-perception and screened by the
curtain of Maya. You, cannot be seen by a man of perverted vision even as a dunce would
fail to recognize an actor appearing in a garb appropriate to the Stage. (18-19) How, then,
can we womenfolk perceive You, who have appeared in our midst just to engender Devotion
in the heart of Paramaharhsas (those endowed with the eye distinguishing the material from
the spiritual) who are given to contemplation and pure of mind? (20) Obeisance, obeisance
to You, Sri Krsna, son of Vasudeva, the delight of Devaki (Your blessed mother), the foster-
child of the cowherd Nanda, Lord Govinda. (21) Obeisance to you whose navel is adorned
with a lotus; obeisance to You, wearing a wreath of lotus flowers; obeisance to You,
possessing lotus-like eyes; obeisance to You, whose feet resemble the lotus. (22) O
Hrsikesa (Lord of the senses), even as You delivered Devaki (Your own mother), who had
been shut up in prison for a long time by the wicked Karnsa and was overcome with grief,
so did You, O almighty Lord, repeatedly save me along with my sons from a series of
calamities. (23) It is You, O Hari, who protected us from poison, from a huge fire, from the
look of man-eating demons, from the assembly of wicked people (Duryodhana and his
associates), from the perils met during forest life, from the missiles of many a great warrior
(like Bhisma, Drona, Karna and so on ) in every battle, and just now from the missile
discharged by ASwatthama (the son of Dronacarya). (24) May calamities befall us at every
step through eternity, O Teacher of the world; for it is in adversity alone that we are blessed
with Your sight, which eliminates the possibility of our seeing another birth. (25) Aman whose
birth, power, learning and affluence only serve to swell his pride is unable even to utter Your
name, You being open to the perception of only those who have nothing to call their own.(26)
You are the only wealth of those who have no sense of possession. Beyond the realm of the
