Dis. 55] BOOK TEN 349

ROTO PORE ECT EAR RO EO त्त

Rati replied : "You are the son of Narayana (Lord Sri Krsna), who were stolen away by
the demon Sambara from the lying-in-chamber. | am your appointed wife, Rati, and you are
(no other than) Love, my consort ! (12) While you were not yet ten days old, the said demon
Sambara cast you into the sea, where a fish devoured you and from the bowels of that fish
you have reached this place (the residence of Sambara), my spouse ! (13) Get rid of this
demon, your formidable foe—(so) difficult to conquer, knowing as he does hundreds of
wiles—by recourse to (similar) wiles like stupefaction. (14) Overwhelmed with parental
affection, your afflicted and disconsolate mother, is wailing like a she-osprey whose young
has departed or like a cow deprived of its calf." (15) Advising him thus, Mayavati (Rati, so-
called because of her being adent in wiles) imparted to the high-souled Pradyumna a spel!
called Mahamaya, which was capable of undoing all kinds of wiles. (16) Approaching
Sambara, Pradyumna accordingly challenged him to a combat, reproaching him with
unbearable taunts and (thus) stirring up strife. (17) Taunted with abuses, Sambara, like a
serpent trodden under foot, sallied forth, mace in hand, his eyes suffused with blood through
indignation. (18) Whirling his mace with (great) velocity and hurling it at the high-minded
Pradyumna, he uttered a roar harsh as a clap of thunder. (19) Beating back with his own the
mace as it came flying at him, the almighty Pradyumna angrily hurled his own mace at the
enemy, O protector of men ! (20) Fully resorting to the illusive demoniac devices taught by
Maya, the demon rained a volley of missiles on Pradyumna (the son of Sri Krsna), himself
remaining (unperceived) in the air. (21) Being plagued with the shower of missiles,
Pradyumna (the son of Rukmini), who was a great car-warrior (able to encounter ten
thousand warriors single-handed) brought into use a great charm consisting (purely) of
Sattva and capable of rendering ineffectual all kinds of illusive devices. (22) The demon then
employed hundreds of illusive devices practised by the Guhyakas (Yaksas), Gandharvas
(celestial musicians), Pisacas (fiends), Nagas and Rakgasas (ogre). The celebrated
Pradyumna (the son of Sri Krsna) counteracted them (all). (23) Taking up a sharp-edged
sword, he then forcibly severed from Sambara's body his head with a coppery beard and
moustaches alongwith his diadem and ear-rings. (24) Being showered over with heaps of
flowers by heavenly beings, who were singing his praises (all the while), Pradyumna was
taken to Dwaraka through the air by his consort (Mayavati), who was capable of journeying
by the air. (25)

wrt राजन् ePATTAREL| Fae पत्या गगनाद् विद्युतेव बलाहक: 1261
a Wl जलदश्यामं पीतकौशेयवाससम्। प्रलम्बवाहुं ame सुस्मितं रुचिराननम् । २७॥
स्वल्ङ्कुतपुंखाम्यान नीलवक्रालकालिभि: 1 कृष्णं मत्वा स्रियो ह्रीता निलिल्युस्तत्र तत्र ह । २८।
sad जहनैरीषद्वैलक्षण्येन योषित: । उपजग्मु: प्रमुदिता: eine सुविस्मिता: 1291
aa तत्रासितापाङ्गी aaah वल्युभाषिणी । अस्मरत् «Sat नष्टं स्नेहस्नुतपयोधरा ।३०॥
को vad नरवैदूर्य: कस्य वा कमलेक्षण: | धृत: HAT वा जठरे केयं लब्धा त्वनेन वा 1३१॥
मम चाप्यात्पजो नष्टो नीतो a: सूतिकागृहात्। एतत्तुल्ववयोरूपो यदि जीवति कुत्रचित् 1३२॥
wa त्वनेन UM सारूष्यं शार्ङ्गधन्वन: । आकृत्यावववैर्गत्या स्वरहासावलोकनॆ: 1३३॥
स एव वा भवेन्नूनं यो मे गर्भे धृतोऽर्भक: | अमुष्मिन् प्रीतिरधिका वाम: स्फुरति मे भुज: ।३४॥

Like a cloud attended with lightning, Pradyumna descended with his spouse from the sky
into the magnificent gynaeceum crowded with hundreds of ladies. (26) Seeing him, sombre
as a cloud and clad in yellow silk, with exceptionally long arms and reddish eyes, wearing
a winsome smile and a charming countenance, his lotus-like face graced with locks of dark-

blue curly hair, and thinking him tobe SriKrsna, the ladies, so the story goes, hid themselves
wherever they could (out of bashfulness). (27-28) Concluding gradually through slight
