ऽद्धिंहुं;'छ्रुण्]ण्र्सछांप्रं’प्नध्रंघंषौप्रंश्नं er enw Eb als bids bn
anyone else than the aforesaid Lord—who is (ever) free from egotism, who is perfectly
tranquil (free from likes and dislikes), who has all His desires fully satisfied by the (very)
realization of His own (blissful) Self and who is (ever) uniform (unconditioned)—in that he
desires to cross the ocean with the help of a dog's tail. (22) The same Lord in the form of the
divine Fish—to whose colossal horn king Satyavrata (destined to be the seventh Manu)
fastened his boat, which was no other than the earth, and duly got through the peril (in the
form of the Deluge)—will surely protect even His dependants, against the danger from (the
demon) Vrtra; which is (So) difficult to get rid of. (23) At the dawn of creation Brahma (all but)
fell from the lotus (sprung from the navel of the Lord) on the water that had submerged
everything during the period of universal dissolution and which had assumed a frightful
aspect due to the roaring of its billows raised by the fierce winds. May the same Lord be our
saviour, with whose help (by whose grace) the same Brahma—who was all by himself—got
over that peril. (24) That (supreme) Lord, though (all) alone, evolved us (gods) by His own
Maya (creative energy); and with His help (by His energy and guidance) we (are enabled
to) create the universe already created by Him. Yet, regarding ourselves as independent
rulers, we are unable to behold His form although He has been fully active even prior to us
(as our inner Controller and Director and the actual Creator of the universe). (25) Though
ever existent, yet manifesting Himself through (various) forms among the gods, Rsis (seers),
human beings and lower animals by His own Maya (divine will), He protects us in every Yuga
and (sometimes) even more than once in a Yuga, treating us as His own, when He finds
us excessively tormented by enemies. (26) We all resort for protection solely to that Shining
One, our object of adoration, and (final) Cause manifested inthe form of the universe and
yet transcending it, appearing (both) as matter and spirit, and affording protection to all. That
Supreme Spirit will bring happiness to us, His devotees. (27)

७ YH FAA
इति तेषां महाराज सुराणामुपतिष्ठताम्।प्रतीच्यां दिर्यभूदावि: ङाङ्खचक्रगदाधर: । २८।
आत्मतुल्यै:; षोडराभिर्विना श्रीवत्सकौस्तुभौ | पर्युपासितमुन्निद्रशरदम्बुरुहेक्षणम् । २९॥।

ae तमवनौ सर्वं इईक्षणाह्लादविकृवा:। दण्डवत् पतिता राजञ्छनैरुत्थाय तुष्टुवु: 130!

Sri Suka continued : While the aforesaid gods were thus praying, O great king, the Lord
appeared (first) in their hearts (in the quarter occupied by the Inner Controller), wielding His
conch, discus and mace. (28) (Again,) they beheld Him (before them) being waited upon on
all sides by (His) sixteen attendants—who were (exactly) similar to Him but without (the mark
of) Srivatsa (the curl of hair on the breast, demarcating the foot print of the sage Bhrgu) and
the Kaustubha gem (the two distinctive marks of the Lord)—and with eyes resembling a pair
of full-blown autumnal lotuses. Overwhelmed with joy at His sight, they all fell prostrate (like
logs) on the ground, O king, and (then) slowly rising, offered (their) praises (thus). (29-30)

नमस्ते यज्ञवीर्याय वयसे उत ते नम:। नमस्ते ह्यस्तचक्राय नम: सुपुरुहूतये 1३१।
यत् ते गतीनां तिसृणामीशितु: परमं पदम्।नार्वाचीनो विसर्गस्य धातर्वेदितुमर्हति 1321

The gods said : Hail to You, whose power (to confer heavenly bliss and other rewards)
stands revealed in the form of sacrificial performances ! Hail to You even as the Time-Spirit
(that limits the duration of those rewards)! Hail to You, who have indeed (on many occasions
in the past) hurled Your discus (to destroy the demons that obstruct the performance of
sacrifices !!!) Hail to You who have (by virtue of such exploits and glories) acquired
numberless blessed names !!! (31) No one born after creation, O Lord, is fit to know Your
