Dis. 1 ] BOOK SIX 551
SORDID E Terie fr tr ei OI ttre $e eee ttre ttre PCR I EAE REA ER EEE
SS EERE दौ दौ ज व ज ABE

discipline, O king, gradually becomes qualified for blessedness (final beatitude). (12)
Through concentration of mind and continence,” subjugation of the mind and control of the
external Indriyas (the senses of perception and the organs of action), charity, truthfulness
and purity (of body and mind), the vows of non-violence etc., and sacred observances (such
as the muttering of prayers), the wise, who are conversant with (the spirit of) Dharma
(righteousness) and full of reverence are able to get rid of even the greatest sin, committed
through body, speech and mind, just as fire destroys a (whole) thicket of bamboos. (13-14)
A few (rarely blessed) souls, who are devoted to Lord Vasudeva, destroy (the stock of) their
sins completely (with their very root in the form of ignorance) through mere devotion, even
as the sun destroys mist in its entirety. (15) Indeed a sinner, O king, is not purified so well
through asceticism and other (expiatory) processes as the one who had dedicated his (very)
life to Sri Krsna through the constant service of His devotees. (16) For in this world this path
(of Devotion) is the best of all, in that itis full of bliss because it has no fear from any quarter.
On this path tread pious (desireless) souls who are amiably (kindly) disposed (towards all)
and devoted to Bhagavan Narayana. (17) (All sorts of) atonements done fail to purify ina
thorough way, O King of kings, him who has turned his face away from Bhagavan Narayana,
even as (a number of) rivers (combined) cannot purify a jar of wine. (18) They who have (but)
once in their life fixed on the lotus-feet of Lord Sri Krsna their mind, that has conceived an
attachment for His excellences, never behold even in a dream Yama (the god of retribution)
and his servants, carrying a noose (in their hand), since they have actually done (all)
atonement. (19)

अत्र चोदाहरन्तीममितिहासं पुरातनम्। दूतानां विष्णुयमयो: संवादस्तं frat 21201

एवं निवसतस्तस्य लालयानस्य तत्सुतान्। कालोऽत्यगान्महान् TITAS: GAT: 123 |
तस्य प्रवयस: पुत्रा दा तेषां तु योऽवम: | बालो-नारायणो नाम्ना पित्रोश्च दयितो FAL ।२४॥
स बद्धहदयस्तस्मिन्नर्भके कलभाषिणि । निरीक्षमाणस्तल्लीलां मुमुदे जरठो भृञम् ।२५॥
War: प्रपिबन् खादन् बालकस्नेहयन्तित: । भोजयन् पाययन्मूढो न वेदागतमन्तकम् ।२६॥

Further, (as an illustration) on this point, the learned narrate the following old legend, in
which there occurs aconversation between the messengers of Lord Visnuand Yama, (Now)
hear it from me. (20) In (the city of) Kanyakubja (the modern Kannauja) there lived a certain
Brahmana, Ajamila by name, who had kept a maid-servant (a woman of the servant class)
and, polluted by intercourse (cohabitation) with that Sadra woman, had cast to the winds (all)
pious conduct (enjoined on a Brahmana householder). (21) Making a reproachful living by
robbery, gambling, cheating and theft and (thus) maintaining his family,the impious fellow

* Brahmacarya (continence) is declared in our scriptures to comprise eight aspects, which consist in scrupulous

abstinence from ail of the eight phases of sexual intercourse mentioned below:—
स्मरणं कोर्तमं केलि: प्रेक्षणं गुह्यभाषणम् । संकल्पोऽध्यवसायश्च क्रियानिर्वृत्तिरव च॥
Wage प्रवदन्ति मनीषिण:। विपरोतं ब्रह्मचर्यमेतदेवाष्टलक्षणम्॥

"The wise speak of sexual intercourse as Consisting of the following eight phases, viz., (1) the recollection of an act of
copulation, (2) uttering words denoting it, (3) dallying with a woman, (4) looking at a woman with lustful eyes, (5) holding secret
(amorous) talks with a woman, (6) intention to have sexual commerce with a woman, (7) making a firm resolve to have such
intercourse and (8) the actual act of copulation. The reverse, i.e., the negation of all these is what they call the eightfold
continence.
