420 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 28

pe Pt PLS IR oA SR US RL RL eS Cn PUR Oe IRE I 0 BR A SLL A IAT
afa स्मरसि चात्मानमविज्ञातसखं सखे । हित्वा मां पदमन्विच्छन् भौमभोगरतो गत: 1431
quae च त्वं ad सखायौ मानसायनौ । aya ate: सहस्रपरिवत्सरान् ।५४॥
स त्वं विहाय ai aan nal ग्राम्यमतिर्महीम्। विचरन् पदमद्राक्षी: कयाचिन्निर्मितं स्रिया ।५५॥
पञ्चारामॆ नवद्दारमेकपालें त्रिकोष्ठकम्।षद्कुलं पञ्चविपणं पञ्चप्रकृति स्रीधवम् । ५६1
पञ्चेन्द्रियार्था आरामा द्वार: प्राणा नव प्रभो । तेजोऽबन्नानि कोष्ठानि कुलमिन्दियसंग्रह: ue!
विपणस्तु क्रियाशक्तिर्भूतप्रकृतिरव्यया | शक्त्यधीश: पुमांस्त्वत्र प्रविष्टो नावबुध्यते । ५८॥
तस्मिंस्त्वं रामया स्पृष्टो रममाणोऽश्रुतस्मृति: । तत्सङ्गादीदरृशीं प्राप्तो दशां पापीयसीं प्रभो ।५९॥

The Brahmana said : Who are you and whose daughter may you be? And who is the
man lying (on the funeral pile), whose death you mourn? Do you know me, your friend, with
whom indeed you moved about of yore ? (52) Can you recall yourself as one who had a
companion, Avijiata by name, O friend, leaving whom you went in search of an abode,
addicted as you were to earthly enjoyments ? (53) Youand I, O noble one, were swans living
on the bosom of the Manasa lake and remained there for thousands of years without any
shelter. (54) Leaving me, O friend, you came down to the earth with your mind set on carnal
pleasures; and in the course of your excursions you saw an abode erected by some woman,
with five pleasure-gardens, nine entrances, one porter, three surrounding walls, six families
of merchants and five market-places. It was built with five materials and had a woman for
its mistress. (55-56) The objects of the five senses constituted its gardens and the nine
appertures locating the Indriyas constituted its nine entrances, O king. Fire, water and earth
served as its (three) Surrounding walls; the mind and the five senses were its (six) merchant
families. (57) The (five) organs of action constituted its market-place ; the (five) elements
served as its undecaying materials. Dominated by the intellect, the man who entered this
abode ceased to be self-conscious. (58) Overpowered there by (the wiles of) the woman
(the mistress of the dwelling) and enjoying life with her, you forgot your divinity, heard of in
the scriptures; and it is through her fellowship that you have been reduced to this most
wretched state, O master of your self ! (59)

न त्वं विदर्भदुहिता ae an: सुहृत्तव । न पतिस्त्वं पुरञ्जन्या रुद्धा नवमुखे यया ।६०॥
Be भवान्न चान्यस्त्वं त्वमेवाहं विचक्ष्व भो: । न नौ cata कवयर्छिद्रं जातु मनागपि 1621
यथा पुरुषं आत्मानमेकमादर्शचक्षुषो: | द्विधाभूतमवेक्षेत तथैवान्तरमावयो: । ६३॥

You are not the daughter of the king of Vidarbha nor is this hero your husband. Nor are
you the spouse of Purafijani by whom you were held captive in the city of nine gates. (60)
It is (nothing but) a piece of illusion created by me. under which you thought yourself
(formerly) as a man and (now) regard yourself as a virtuous lady; (really speaking) you are
neither. You and | are a pair of swans; ( just ) realize our true nature (going to be described
hereafter). (61) | am you and you are no other (than me); mark you, you are just the same
as |. The wise never perceive the least difference between us. (62) Just as a man sees

himself (his image) differently in a mirror and in the pupil of another's eye, the difference
between us two is of the same type. (63)

एवं स मानसो हंसो हंसेन प्रतिबोधित: । स्वस्थस्तदव्यभिचारेण नष्टामाप पुन: स्मृतिम् । ६४॥
