Dis. 14] BOOK SEVEN - 719

COROR ME Rr SPR a Pa Be ee AH HE ECHL SHEAR व्ये HHH SHAH LEHA HOE HEHE ङ त्तवै धी SH

अथ चतुर्दशोऽध्याय:

Discourse XIV
An inquiry into right conduct (continued)
युधिष्ठिर उवाच
गृहस्थ wat पदवीं विधिना येन चाञ्जसा। याति samt ब्रूहि मादूशो गृहमूढधी: । १ ।
Yudhisthira submitted : O celestial sage, (pray) tell me the method (course of conduct)

by which a householder like me, whose mind is excessively attached to his household, may
easily attain the said state (final beatitude). (1)

ARG Sara
गृहेषवस्थितो राजन्क्रिया: कुर्वन् गृहोचिता: । वासुदेवार्पणं साक्षादुपासीत महामुनीन्। २ ।
श्वृण्वन्भगवतोऽभीक्ष्णमवतारकथामृतम्। | श्रद्दधानो यथाकालमुपशान्तजनावृत: । ३ |
सत्सङ्घाच्छनकै: सङ्गमात्मजायात्पजादिषु । विमुच्येन्मुच्यमानेषु स्वयं स्वप्नवदुत्थित: । ४ |
यावदर्थमुपासीनो देहे गेहे च पण्डित: । fant रक्तवत् aa नॄलोके नरतां न्यसेत्। ५ ।
ज्ञातय: पितरौ पुत्रा भ्रातर: सुहृदोऽपरे। यद वदन्ति यदिच्छन्ति चानुमोदेत निर्मम: । ६ ।
feet भौमं चान्तरिक्षं वित्तमच्युतनिर्मितम् । तत् सर्वमुपभुञ्जान एतत् कुर्यात् स्वतो ae । ७ ।
mae भ्रियेत जठरं तावत् we fe देहिनाम्। अधिकं योऽभिमन्येत स स्तेनो दण्डमर्हति । ८ ।
मृगोष्ट्खरमर्काखुसरीसृप्खगमक्षिका: । आत्मन: पुत्रवत् पश्येत्तैरेषामन्तरं कियत्। ९ ।

fat नातिकृच्छेण भजेत गृहमेध्यपि । यथादेशे eens यावद्दैवोपपादितम् । १०॥
आश्चाघान्तेऽवसायिभ्य: कामान्संविभजेद् यथा । अप्येकामात्मनो दारां ANT स्वत्वग्रहो यत: ।११॥

War wet स्वप्राणान्हन्याद् वा पितरं गुरुम् dai स्वत्वं feat ware यस्तेन ह्यजितो जित: । १२॥
कृमिविड्भस्मनिष्ठान्तं qe कलेवरम्। छ्व तदीयरतिर्भार्या क्वायमात्मा नभङ्छदि: 1231

Narada replied : Staying in his house, 0 king (Yudhisthira), and (duly) performing the
duties proper to the life of a householder as an offering to Lord Visnu Himself for His pleasure
alone (expecting no reward for them), a man should wait upon great sages (devotees of the
Lord). (2) Surrounded by (associating with) men who are tranquil (by nature) and reverently
hearing again and again according to his leisure the nectar-like stories of the Lord's descents,
he should gradually give up through the fellowship of saints attachment to his body, wife,
progeny, etc., who are themselves going to be severed (from him), (even) as he who has
woke up (from a dream) gives up attachment to (the objects seen in) a dream. (3-4) Serving
his body and household only to the extentitis (absolutely) necessary to do so and (outwardly)
appearing like one attached to them, though (inwardly) disgusted (with them), a wise man
should exhibit (his) humanity (behave like ordinary men) in the midst of men. (5) And not
recognizing anything as his own, he should give his assent to whatever his kinsmen, parents,
sons, brothers and other relations say and whatever they desire (so that there may be no
occasion for tussle with them). (6) A wise man (aware of the infinite resources of the Lord)
should do (all) this (the duties enjoined on a householder) while enjoying the wealth acquired
by the grace of the Lord as well as that obtained from the earth, nay, (even) that got as a
windfall, everything having been produced by Visnu (the immortal Lord). (7) That much (and
not more) constitutes the (rightful) due of living beings (men), with which their belly may be
filled (their body and soul may be kept together). He who claims more is a thief and deserves
