42 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA-MAHATMYA { Dis. 6
Bee Ry Hr RT Be Ke Be AWE Be ATR BY Be ARR RAR HT RR BRT TE Pe MRR RHR Rr A RR RR RRR PR ERT RR RR Be Ree
vow should abstain from reviling the Vedas, the votaries of Lord Visnu and the Brahmanas
one’s elders or preceptor, those who are vowed to the service of the cow, as well as the
womankind, the king and exalted souls. (48) He who has taken the aforesaid vow should
not speak to a woman in menstruation, a member of the lowest classes, a Mleccha (a beef-
eater), an apostate, a member of the twice-born classes who has not been invested with the
sacred thread though grown to a mature age, a Brahmana-hater and those who are outside
the pale of Vedic religion. (49) Similarly he who is vowed to the hearing of Srimad Bhagavata
should observe truthfulness, (external and internal) purity, compassion, silence, straight-
forwardness, modesty (in his dealings) and likewise practise liberal-mindedness. (50) A
pauper, one suffering from consumption, any (other) ailing man, a wretch, a man of sinful
deeds, one who is issueless and a seeker of Liberation should hear this story ( of Srimad
Bhagavata in seven days). (51) It should be heard with zeal by a woman who has
prematurely ceased to menstruate or who has borne only one child and ceased to conceive
further, nay, (even) by her who is barren, also by her whose children have died as well as
by the woman who miscarries. (52) If it is heard with due ceremony (by those enumerated
in verses 51 and 52 ), the hearing bids fair to yield them a fruit which is absolutely free from
decay, This superb and divine story (of Srimad Bhagavata) is capable of conferring (on its
hearers) the fruit of tens of millions of sacrificial performances. (53)

एवं ea व्रतविधिमुद्यापनमथाचरेत्। जन्माष्टमीव्रतमिव कर्तव्यं फलकाङ्खिभि: । ५४॥
अकिंचनेषु भक्तेषु प्रायो नोद्यापनाग्रह: । श्रवणेनैव पूतास्ते निष्कामा वैष्णवा aa: uu!
Having thus (duly) observed the rules of conduct prescribed for this vow (of hearing
Srimad Bhagavata ina week) the (chief) listener should then perform the rite concluding the
vow. By those seeking the (special) fruit of it this rite should be performed (just on the lines
of the rite of concluding the fast on the Janmastami day (the eighth of the dark half of the
lunar month of Bhadrapada, the birth anniversary of Lord Sri Krsna). (54) In the case
(however) of devotees claiming nothing as their own it is not ordinarily imperative that the
formality of concluding this vow should be’gone through. They are hallowed by the very
process of hearing, disinterested votaries as they are of Lord Visnu. (55)

एवं नगाहयज्ञेऽस्मिन् समाप्ते श्रोतृभिस्तदा । पुस्तकस्य च वक्तुश्च पूजा कार्यातिभक्तित: 146 |
प्रसादतुलसीमाला श्रोतृभ्यश्चाथ दीयताम्।मृदङ्गतालललितं कर्तव्यं कीर्तनं aa: ।५७।
Wares नम: शब्दं शङ्खशब्दे च कारयेत्। विप्रेभ्यो याचकेभ्यश्च वित्तमन्नं च दीयताम् 4c!
विरक्तश्चेद्धवेच्छभेता गीता वाच्या परेऽहनि । गृहस्थश्चेत्तदा होम: कर्तव्य: कर्मशान्तये 148!
siege तु जुहुयाद्विधिना दशमस्य च । पायसं ay सर्पिश्च तिलान्नादिकसंयुतम् iso!
अथवा हवनं Hage सुसमाहित:।तन्मयत्वात्पुराणस्य परमस्य च तत्त्वत: ।६१॥
aor बुधो ea दद्यात्तत्फलसिद्धये । नानाच्छिद्रनिरोधार्थं न्यूनताधिकतानयो: । ६२॥
दोषयो: प्रशमार्थं च पठेन्नामसहस्रकम्। तेन स्यात्सफलं सर्वं नास्त्यस्मादधिकं यत: 1 GR |
When these seven days' sacrificial session (consisting of an exposition of Srimad
Bhagavata) is over, worship should presently be offered by the listeners to the book
(of Srimad Bhagavata) as well as to the expositor with great devotion. (56) Remnants of food,
basil leaves and wreathes of flowers offered to the Deity should forthwith be distributed to

the listeners and the chanting of the Lord's names and glories, sweetened by the sounding
of wooden tomtoms and the striking of cymbals should then be resorted to.(57) The (chief)

