574 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 13

त्तप मा ENE KE NETO MME EL न मा डा ATO MORE NERO ना HEF OL KE नलं ८ न ह # १9 मम

मयैतदुक्तं वो विप्रा गुह्यं यत् सांख्ययोगयो: । जानीत माऽऽगतं aa युष्पद्धर्मविवक्षया 1321
अहं योगस्य सांख्यस्य सत्यस्यर्तस्य तेजस: । परायणं द्विजश्रेष्ठा: fra: कीर्तेर्दमस्य च ।३९॥
at भजन्ति गुणा: ad निर्गुणं निरपेक्षकम् gee प्रियमात्मानं साम्यासङ्गादयोऽगुणा: ।४०॥

One should look upon this (objective) world as anillusionin thatit is acreation of the mind,
open to perception and evanescent as a dream and most unsteady like a revolving firebrand.
Consciousness, though one, appears as many (through a freak of imagination) and this
threefold division (in the shape of the body, the Indriyas and the mind), wrought by the
projection of the (three) Gunas (or modes of Prakrti) is a (mere) illusory appearance. (34)
(Therefore,) diverting one's eye (mind) from the body etc., (which are all superimposed on
the Self), one should remain absorbedin the realization of one's own blissful nature. His thirst
for enjoyment having ceased (once forall), he should keep quiet and effortless. Even if this
body etc., is perceived (as a distinct reality) at times (while taking one's meals, answering
the calls of nature and so on), what has been dismissed as unreal (other than the Self) can
no longer delude us, although its impression on the mind may continue till death. (35) Nay,
a man established in the Self no longer cognizes (even) his perishable body, by means of
which he realized his self, as risen (from his seat), or settled (again), gone out (to some other
place) or come (back) by chance, any more than a man blinded by intoxication caused by
wine cognizes the garment worn by him as (still) on his person or fallen therefrom. (36) The
body too, including the Indriyas and the vital principle, functioning as it does under the control
of Providence, undoubtedly and invariably survives till the Karma (the stock of merit and sin)
which broughtit into existence stands (has not been reaped). He (however) who has climbed
up to the highest ladder of Yoga (concentration of mind) known by the name of Samadhi
(absorption of mind into the Universal Spirit) and realized the truth does not recapture (as
his own self or its own) the body alongwith the world (directly connected with it in the shape
of one's wife, children, house and other material possessions) any more than the man who
has awoke from sleep does his dream-body. (37) This is the secret of Sankhya (the branch
of knowledge which distinguishes Matter from Spirit) and Yoga (the system of philosophy
founded by the sage Patafijali), which has been expounded by Me, to you, O Brahmana
sages ! Know Me to be Yaijfia (Lord Visnu Himself) arrived (here) with intent to expound
(unfold) to you (the secret of) Dharmas (the righteous courses leading to Liberation). (38)!
am the supreme goal of Yoga and Sankhya, virtue both in its ideal and practical form, glory
and prosperity, celebrity and self-control, O jewels among the twice-born ! (39) All virtues like
even-mindedness and non-attachment, which are not products of the three Gunas (and
therefore eternal) find shelter in Me, transcendent and free from desire as | am. the beloved
friend, (nay,) the (very) Self (of all). (40)

इति मे छिन्नसन्देहा मुनय: सनकादय: । सभाजयित्वा परया भक्त्यागृणत संस्तवै: 1x21

तैरहं पूजित: erg संस्तुत: परपर्षिभि: । प्रत्येयाय eh am uaa: परमेष्ठिन: 1x21
Having (duly) worshipped Me with supreme devotion, the sages Sanaka and his (three)
brothers—who had their doubts (as to the way in which the mind could be weaned from the
objects of sense) thus resolved by Me (in the form of the divine Swan)—celebrated Me

through songs of praise. (41) Honoured with due ceremony and glorified at length by the
aforesaid great sages, | flew back to My (divine) realm, Brahma (the highest functionary of
