Dis. 10] BOOK NINE 43

PR RR eR HHT EAE RHEE SHS eee Eee ee eee eet eee eee esi

the hostile army (consisting of elephants, foot-soldiers, chariots and cavalry, all the aforesaid
generals of Sri Rama (the Lord of the Raghus)—Angada and others—struck with trees,
rocks, maces and arrows the demons whose Lord, Ravana, had (all) his good luck wiped off
by the abduction of Sita. (20)
रक्षपति: स्वबलनष्टिमवेक्ष्य रुष्ट आरुह्य यानकमथाभिससार रामम्।
स्व:स्यन्दने gala मातलिनोपनीते विभ्राजमानमहनन्निशितै: क्षुरप्रै: 1221
- रामस्तमाह पुरुषादपुरीष ga: कान्तासमक्षमसतापहृता श्ववत् ते ।
त्यक्तत्रपस्य फलमद्य जुगुप्सितस्य यच्छामि ae इव कर्तुरलङ्घयवीर्य: ।२२॥
एवं क्षिपन् ag संधितमुत्ससर्ज बाणं स वज्रमिव तद्धृदयं बिभेद ।
सोऽसृग् वमन् दशमुखैर्न्यपतद् विमानाद्धाहेति जल्पति जने सुकृतीव रिक्त: 1221
Enraged tosee the destruction of his army and mounting the aerial car (viz., Puspaka that
had been snatched away by him from Kubera, the god of riches), Ravana (the lord of the
demons) forthwith marched against Sri Rama—shining brightly in a splendid heavenly car
brought by Matali (the charioteer of Indra}—and struck Him with sharpened arrows having
crescent-shaped heads. (21) Sri Rama said to him, "O refuse of ogres, I, whose prowess
cannot be prevailed against, shall award this very day to you, who have cast (all) shame to
the winds—(even) as Kala does to a perpetrator of sin—the fruit of your detested action
consisting in the fact that our beloved spouse was stolen away during our absence by your
wicked self, who behaved like a dog." (22) Scolding him thus, the Lord discharged (at him)
an arrow fitted (by Him) to His bow andit split his heart, hard as adamant. Like a virtuous soul
whose stock of merit is exhausted, he fell from his aerial car, vomiting blood through his ten
mouths, in the midst of his people crying "Dear me! Dear me!!" (23)
ततो निष्क्रम्य लङ्काया यातुधान्य: सहस्रा: । मन्दोदर्या समं तस्मिन् प्ररुदत्य उपाद्रवन् IRS!
स्वान् स्वान् बन्धून् परिषज्य लक्ष्मणेषुभिरर्दितान् । रुरुदु: सुस्वरं दीना घ्नन्त्य आत्मानमात्मना 1241
हा हता: स्म ad नाथ लोकरावण रावण । कं यायाच्छरणं लङ्का त्वद्बिहीना परार्दिता ।२६॥
नैवं वेद महाभाग भवान् aa गत: । तेजोऽनुभावं सीताया येन नीतो canis ize
pam fara लङ्का at च कुलनन्दन। देह: कृतोऽन्नं गृध्राणामात्मा नरकहेतवे । २८॥
Issuing forth from Lanka in (their) thousands, with Mandodari (the principal consort of
Ravana), Raksasa women now rushed, weeping bitterly, to the spot (where Ravana lay
dead). (24) Hugging each her own relations struck down by the shafts of Laksmana (Sri
Rama's younger brother), they helplessly wailed in loud tones (as follows), beating their
person with their own hands:—{25) "Alas, undone we are, O lord! O Ravana, who made the
(whole) world weep (by your tyranny) !! Bereft of you and overrun by the enemy, whom should
Lanka seek asits protector? (26) Swayed by passion, you did not realize, O highly blessed
one, such (extraordinary) power of Sita’s glory, by which you have been reduced to this
(miserable) plight! (27) Widowed is this Lanka as well as we, O delight of your race! (Nay,}
your body has been made the food of vultures and your soul rendered fit for hell. (28)

श्रीरुक उवाच
स्वानां बिभीषणश्चक्रे कोसलेन्धानुमोदित: ! पितृमेधविधानेन ode साम्परायिकम् । २९।
ततो ददर्श भगवानज्ञोकवनिकाश्रमे। क्षामां स्वविरहव्याधिं शिंशपामूलमास्थिताम् । ३०॥

राम: प्रियतमां wal दीनां वीक्ष्यान्वकम्पत | आत्मसंदर्शनाह्लादविकसन्मुखपङ्कजाम् 1३१1
amare यानं भ्रातृभ्यां हनुमद्युत: । विभीषणाय भगवान् car रक्षोगणेशताम् 1321
