258 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 38

PAA REELED HAS HEE See RIESE ER ERAT TER TENE EORTC SEE A A REE

wer तत् ant विज्ञाय कृष्ण: शरणद: सताम् । गोपान् नयन्तं जग्राह वृकं हरिरिबौजसा 1221
a BS रूपमास्थाय गिरीन्द्रसदूरशां get) इच्छन् विमोक्तुमात्मानं नाशाक्नोद् ग्रहणातुर: 1321
तं निगृह्याच्युतो deat पातयित्वा महीतले । पश्यतां दिवि देवानां पशुमारममारयत्।३३॥
गुहापिधानं निर्भिद्य गोपान् feat कृच्छ्रत: । स्तूयमान: सुरैर्गोपे: प्रविवेश स्वगोकुलम् । ३४॥
इति श्रीमद्भागवते महापुराणे पारमहंस्यां संहितायां ददामस्कन्धे Walt व्योमासुरवधो नाम सप्तत्रिंशोऽध्याय: ।३७॥

Sri Suka continued : Having thus bowed low to Sri Krsna, the Lord of the Yadus, and
gladly permitted by Him, the sage Narada, the foremost of the Lord's devotees, who was filled
with ecstatic delight at His sight, departed (for his abode in Satyaloka). (25) Having made
short work of the demon Kei in a (personal) combat, Lord Sri Krsna (the Protector of cows)
too continued to tend the cattle as usual in the company of the cowherd boys, who were
(deeply) attached to Him, bringing delight (thereby) to (the entire) Vraja. (26) Once, while
pasturing the cattle on the mountain heights, the cowherd boys played various games of
(cleverly) smuggling others’ goods under the guise of thieves and guards. (27) Of them some
played the part of thieves and others acted as watchmen, O protector of men; while still others
of the Gopas played the role of rams. In this way they sported fearlessly. (28) Maya's son
Vyoma (a demon), who was adept in great conjuring tricks and who made his appearance
there in the guise of a cowherd boy, often playing the part of a thief, carried away many
cowherd boys that were playing the role of rams. (29) Laying down each cowherd boy he
carried away into a mountain cave, the mighty demon closedits entrance with a (large) slab.
(In this way only) four or five (of the Gopas) remained (outside the cave). (30) Perceiving that
work of the demon, Sri Krsna, who affords protection to the righteous, forcibly seized Him
even as he was carrying away the cowherd boys, just as a lion would seize a wolf. (31)
Resuming his natural (demoniac) form, resembling a huge mountain, the powerful demon,
who was feeling pained by the grip, sought to extricate himself but could not. (32) Catching
hold of the demon by the arms and dashing him to the ground, Sri Krsna (the immortal Lord),
made short work of him by gagging him and squeezing his windpipe while the gods inheaven
stood looking on. (33) Having broken asunder the rock that blocked the mouth of the cave
and rescuing the cowherd boys from their uncomfortable situation, and being glorified by the
gods as well as the Gopas, the Lord withdrew to His (realm of) Vraja. (34)

Thus ends the thirty-seventh discourse entitled “The demon Vyoma slain,"
in the first half of Book Ten of the great and glorious Bhagavata-Purana,
otherwise known as the Paramahamsa-Samhita.

saint tte
OCPOL RAE LI OD

अथाष्टात्रिंशोऽध्याय:

Discourse XXXVIII
Akrira’s arrival (in Vraja)
श्रीशुक उवाच
अक्रूरोऽपि च तां UR मधुपुर्यां महामति: । उषित्वा रथमास्थाय प्रययौ नन्दगोकुलम् । १ ।
Te, पथि महाभागो भगवत्यम्बुजेक्षणे। भक्तिं परामुपगत्त एवमेतदचिन्तयत् । २ ।
