Dis. 23] BOOK ELEVEN 627

न २ न ज माज्ज् माङ titi hia ग ग मा he he

traversed this globe and entered towns villages (only) for (begging) alms (and that too)
incognito and unattached. (32) Seeing that aged mendicant untidy (in appearance), wicked
people ill-treated him in numerous insulting ways, 0 good Uddhava ! (33) Some snatched
away his triple bamboo staff (carried as a symbol of complete renunciation), others, his
(begging) bowl and Kamandalu (vessel made of cocoanut shell for carrying water), some
took away his seat and string of Rudraksa beads and still others, his quilt of rags and even
sirips of cloth. (34) Returning them (once) or (simply) showing them (as if offering them back)
they would snatch them from the ascetic once more; nay, while he partook on the riverside
of the food got by way of alms, they would snatch away that (too). (35) People who were
extremely vile (even) spat and urinated on his head; they forced him to speak while he was
silent and would thrash him if he did not. (36) Calling him a thief, others threatened him with
words; while others tied him with a rope, exclaiming "Let him be bound, let him be bound !" (37)
Some would insultingly taunt him, saying "He is (in the heart of his hearts) a rogue, though
(outwardly) carrying a (triple) staff as an emblem of piety. Deserted by his own people on his
wealth having been depleted, he has adopted this course of life (as a means of livelinood
rather than ina spirit of renunciation).” (38) Others would ridicule him saying "Oh, this most
robust fellow is firm as a huge mountain.Strong of resolution like a heron he seeks to gain
his end through (a vow of) silence |" while others broke wind athim. (Nay,) people (even) tied
and restrained that Brahmana (even) as a bird kept for diversion. (39-40) Whatever
affliction—caused by any living being, brought about by Providence, or having its source in
his own body—thus came to him he took each as his own lot to be worked out by him (and
reconciled himself with it),(41) Ill-treated (as aforesaid) by the basest of men benton bringing
about his downfall (by forcing him to abandon his course of conduct befitting a recluse), and
(yet) adhering to his duty and resorting to firmness of a Sativika type (as depicted in Gita,
XVIII. 33), the mendicant sang the following song. (42)

द्विज उवाच
aa जनो मे सुखदु:खहेतुर्न देवताऽऽत्मा ग्रहकर्मकाला: |
मन: परं कारणमामनन्ति dara परिवर्तयेद् यत् ।४३।
wt गुणान् वै gat बलीयस्ततश्च कर्माणि विलक्षणानि ।
Tas gow लोहितानि तेभ्य: सवर्णा: gaat भवन्ति rsx!

aaa यस्य मनो विनश्यद् दानादिभिश्चेदपरं किमेभि: rv
west ह्यभवन् स्म ta मनश्च नान्यस्य ait समेति ।
sien हि देव: asa: सहीयान् युञ्ज्याद् ah तं स fe देवदेव: ive!
a दुर्जये शत्रुमसह्यवेगमरुन्तुदुं तन्न fafa केचित्।

एषोऽहमन्योऽयमिति wa दुरन्तपारे तमसि भ्रपन्तिं।५॰।
