570 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 13

AERA BOTT का गाजा TEE EE OE क RETRO OE TE EET O ORE HES TOE NENG कक ए शाशा ENN ESTES ४१४ १२.०७०

BA त्रयोदशोऽध्याय:

Discourse XIll
The teaching imparted by the Lord in the form of the Divine Swan to the

sage Sanaka and his three brothers

श्रीभगवानुवाच
सत्त्वं रजस्तम gf गुणा बुद्धेर्न चात्मन: । सत्त्वेनान्यतमो हन्यात् ad ae चैव हि । १ ।
सत्त्वाद् धर्मो wae वृद्धात् पुंसो मद्भक्तिलक्षण: | सात्तिकोपासया सत्त्वं ततो ad: प्रवर्तते । २ ।
धर्मो रजस्तमो हन्यात् सत्त्ववृद्धिरनुत्तम: । आशु asa तन्मूलो wed sua हते । ३ ।
आगमोऽप: प्रजा देश: काल: कर्म च जन्म च । ध्यानं मन्त्रोऽथ संस्कारो esta गुणहेतव: । ४ |
तत्तत् सात्तविकमेवैषां यद् ae वृद्धा: प्रचक्षते । निन्दन्ति ama तत्तद् राजसं तदुपेक्षितम् । ५ |
सात्विकान्येव सेवेत पुमान् सत्त्वविवृद्धये । ततो ahead ज्ञानं यावत् स्मृतिरपोहनम् । ६ ।
वेणुसङ्घर्षजो वह्निर्दगध्वा urate तद्वनम्। एवं गुणव्यत्ययजो देह: शाम्यति तत्किय: । ७ ।
The glorious Lord began again : Sattva, Rajas and Tamas—these are the modes of
Buddhi (Prakrti) and not of the Self. By (developing) the quality of Sattva (therefore) one
should control (the operation of) the other two (viz., Rajas and Tamas) and (then) Sattva itself
(in the shape of Sattvika virtues like truthfulness and compassion) by Sattva (in the form of
quietism). (1) As a result of Sattva grown predominant appears in man the virtue bearing the
labet of Devotion to Me. Sattva develops through the use of Sattvika things and thence
proceeds righteousness (in the form of Devotion). (2) Righteousness (in the form of
Devotion), which contributes to the predominance of Sattva and which is (therefore) the
superlative virtue, curbs (the element of) Rajas and Tamas; and, when both these are
subdued, unrighteousness, which has its root in these latter, soon disappears as a matter
of course. (3) Scripture, water, the people (environment), place (surroundings), time,
occupation and birth, (the object of) contempiation, Mantra (spell) and purificatory rites—
these ten are contributory to the growth of a particular Guna. (4) Of these (latter) whatever
men of mature judgment speak approvingly of is unquestionably Sattvika; that which they
condemn is Tamasika and that which is looked upon by them with indifference is Rajasika. (5)
For the predominance of Sattva a man should make use of Sattvika things alone. Thence will
proceed righteousness (in the form of Devotion) and thence (again) will follow (the light of)
wisdom culminating in Self-Realization and the extinction of darkness (in the form of the two
bodies and their ultimate cause, (viz., the three Gunas). (6) The fire produced by the attrition
of bamboo stalks subsides after consuming that thicket (by its flames); so the body born of
unevenness of the (three) Gunas (modes of Prakrtt) and behaving like the (said) fire, ceases
to be. (7)

SEI उवाच
faefa wel: प्रायेण विषयान् पदमापदाम्। तथापि भुञ्जते कृष्ण तत् कथं श्वखराजवत् । ८ ।
Uddhava submitted : Men generally know the pleasures of sense to be the source of

calamities; how is it (then) that, like the dog, the donkey and the goat, they still (doggedly
pursue and) enjoy them, O Krsna ? (8)
