Dis. 28] BOOK FOUR 417

enter a ate Sree ae RRR Ne ae er Fa Bg OR ORE A Re SOR SEE ROR RHR SE ROH Re
यवनोपरुद्धायतनो ग्रस्तायाँ कालकन्यया। पुर्यां प्रज्वारसंसृष्ट: पुरपालोऽन्वतप्यत 123 |
न We सोऽवितुं तत्र पुरुकृच्छ्रोरुवेपथु: । गन्तुमेच्छत्ततो वृक्षकोटरादिव सानलात् । १४॥
शिथिलावयवो यर्हि गन्धर्वैर्हतपौरुष:। यवनैरर्भी राजन्नुपरुद्धो रुरोद ह ।१५॥
gee: पुत्रपोत्रांश्च जामिजामातृपार्षदान्। स्वत्वावशिष्टं यत्किञ्चिद् गृहकोशपरिच्छदम् । १६॥
अहं ममेति स्वीकृत्य गृहेषु कुमतिर्गृही। दध्यौ प्रमदया दीनो विप्रयोग उपस्थिते ew
लोकान्तरं गतवति मय्यनाथा कुटुम्बिनी । वर्तिष्यते कथं am बालकाननुशोचती । १८॥
नमथ्यनाशितेभुङ्क्तेनास्नातेस्नातिमत्मरा।पयिंरुष्टेसुसंत्रस्ताभल्लिंतेयतवाष्पयात्।शा।
wet नु दारका दीना दारकीर्वापरायणा: । वर्तिष्यन्ते मयि wa भिन्ननाव इवोदधौ । २१।
When the city was in flames, Purafijana, the head of his family, suffered (untold) agony
with the entire city, his own retinue, the mistress of the family and his sons and daughters.
(12) When Prajagara’s own abode was besieged by the Yavanas and the city was occupied
by the daughter of Kala, the said guard of the city felt sorely distressed as he closed with
Prajwara. (13) When he was unable to defend the city while on that post and found himself
in great straits, he shook violently and sought to fly away therefrom even asa serpent would
try to escape from the hollow of a tree on fire. (14) With his limbs enfeebled, and himself
deprived of his manliness by the Gandharvas, he actually wept when intercepted by his
enemies, the Yavanas, O king! (15) Purafijana (the master of his house), whose mind has
been perverted by the thoughts of 'I' and 'mine' in respect of his (body and) house etc., felt
(very) wretched when the hour of separation from his wife came, and (anxiously) thought of
his daughters, sons and grandsons, daughters-in-law, sons-in-law and retainers, house,
treasury and (other) belonging, whatever (still) remained his in name only. (16-17) (He said
to himself,) "When! am gone to the other world, how should this widowed mother of the family
eke out her existence, lamenting the lot of her children? (18) (Entirely) depending on me, she
would not take her food until | had been fed nor would she bathe until | had taken my bath.
(Nay,) she would get awfully frightened when । was angry and would hold her tongue out of
fear when scolded by me. (19) She would admonish me when my judgement failed, and
would grow emaciated through grief when | was away from home. (Now) willshe be able to .
follow the way of the householders (when । am no longer with her), even though she is the
mother of heroic sons? (Very likely she will not; rather she will try to follow me to the other
world by ascending my pyre.) (20) And how will these helpless sons and daughters, who
have no one else to depend upon, survive when | am gone? On the other hand, they will
perish like the inmates of a broken vessel in mid ocean." (21)

एवं कृपणया qa जोचन्तमतदर्हणम्।ग्रहीतुं कृतधीरेनं भयनामाभ्यपद्यत 1221
were नीयमान: स्वकं क्षयम्। अन्वद्रवन्ननुपथा: ret भृशमातुरा: । २३॥
पुरीं विहायोपगत उपरुद्धो भुजङ्घम: । यदा तमेवानु पुरी fasion प्रकृतिं गता । २४
विकृष्यमाण: yest यवनेन बचलीयसा । नाविन्दत्तमसाऽऽविष्ट: सखायं सुहृदं पुर: । २५॥
तं यज्ञपशवोऽनेन संज्ञप्ता येऽदयालुना । कुठारैश्चिच्छिदु: Gray: स्मरन्तोऽमीवमस्य तत् । २६
अनन्तपारे तमसि मग्नो नष्टस्मृति: समा: । शाश्वतीरनुभूयार्तिं प्रमदासङ्घदूषित: 129 1
तामेव मनसा गृह्णन् ays प्रमदोत्तमा। अनन्तरं feeder राजसिंहस्य वेह्मनि । २८॥
उपयेमे वीर्यपणां aasif मलयध्वज: | चुधि निर्जित्य राजन्यान् पाण्ड्य: परपुरञ्जय: ।२९॥

