Dis. 66 ] BOOK TEN 399

Soto tonnes ee ieee ste SSAA ERES ESAS EE SEAAARLES SS EERE S SSE CELA

vultures and other (carnivorous) birds, and (instead of giving shelter to Me,) you will serve
as subsistence for dogs.” (9) The messenger (returned) andconveyed the whole of this retort
to his master. Sri Krsna too (for His part} mounted His chariot and invaded Kasi (for the ruler
of Karisa was then staying with his friend, the king of Kasi). (10)

पौण्ड्रकोऽपि तदुद्योगमुपलभ्य महारथ:। अक्षौहिणीभ्यां संयुक्तो निश्चक्राम पुराद् द्रुतम् । ११॥
तस्य काशिपतिर्मित्रं पारष्णिग्राहोऽन्वयान्नृप | अक्षौहिणीभिस्तिसृभिरपङ्यत् पौण्ड्रकं हरि: 1221
शङ्खार्यसिगदाशार्ङ्गश्रीवत्साद्युपलक्षितम् । बिभ्राणं कौस्तुभमणिं वनमालाविभूषितम् 1231
कौशोयवाससी dia वसानं गरुडध्वजम्। अमूल्यमोल्याभरणं स्फुरन्मकरकुण्डलम् । १४॥
we तमात्मनस्तुल्यवेषं कृत्रिममास्थितम्। यथा ze wr विजहास ya हरि: । १५॥
शूलैर्गदाभि:३॥ ue: हक्त्यृष्टिप्रासतोमरै: । असिभि: पट्टिगैर्बाणै: प्राहरन्नरयो हरिम् । १६॥
— fern जिपन्तिमत ।
गदासिचक्रषुप्सिग्दयद् Ft बथा GI BYR पृथक् प्रजा: 1१७॥

आयोधनं तद्रथवाजिकुञ्जरद्दिपत्खरोट्टैररिणावखण्डितै: |
ah fd dese मनस्विनामाक्रीडनं भूतपतेरिवोल्बणम् । १८॥

Having received the news of Sri Krsna’s invasion, Paundraka, the great car-warrior,
hastily sallied forth from the city with (an army consisting of) two Aksauhinis; and his friend,
the king of Kasi, followed him as a commander in the rear, O king, with (a subsidiary force
of) three Aksauhinis. Paundraka could be (easily) distinguished by his conch, discus,
sword and mace, the Sariga bow and (the mark of) Srivatsa, bore a Kaustubha gem and
was decked with a wreath of sylvan flowers. (11—13) He was clad in two pieces of yellow
silk and bore the design of Garuda on his ensign, wore a priceless crown and brilliant
crocodile-shaped ear-rings. (14) All this outfit was so artificial that he looked like an actor
on the stage. Finding Paundraka closely imitating Him in dress, Lord Sri Krsna heartily
laughed. (15) (Now) the enemies assailed Sri Krsna with their pikes, maces, iron clubs,
lances, spears, darts, bludgeons, swords, Pattisas and arrows. (16) Like the fire raging at
the time of universal destruction, which destroys all creatures severally, Sri Krsna utterly
crushed with His mace, sword, discus and shafts that {joint) army of Paundraka and the
king of Kasi, consisting {as it did) of elephants, chariots, horses and footmen. (17) The
(whole) field was strewn with chariots and (dead bodies of) horses, elephants, men,
donkeys and camels— cut to pieces by the discus of Sri Krsna—and looked as fearful as
the place where Sankara carries on His deadly dance of destruction (at the end of a Kalpa).
Its sight afforded delight to the brave. (18)

अथाह पौण्ड्रकं wit भो: पौण्ड्रक यद् भवान् । दूतवाक्वेन मामाह ARTS Tee

त्याजयिष्येऽभिधानं मे यत्त्वयाज्ञ get धृतम्। व्रजामि at asa यदि नेच्छामि संयुगम् । २०॥

sft क्षिप्त्वा शितैर्वाणैर्विरथीकृत्य षोण्ड्रकम्। शिरोऽवृश्चद रथाङ्गेन वज्रेणेन्द्रो यथा गिरे: । २१॥

Ten काशिपते: कायाच्छिर उत्कृत्य पत्रिभि: । न्यपातयत् काशिपुर्यां पद्मकोदामिवानिल: 1221

एवं मत्सरिणं हत्वा tess wad हरि: । द्वारकामाविशत् सिद्धैर्गीयमानकथामृत: 1231

स fea ध्वस्तप्खिलवन्थप्त।विभ्राणश्चहरराजम्स्वस्त्यतन्मयोऽफात्।रभ्रा
Now Sri Krsna addressed Paundraka, (as follows) :" Hullo Paundraka, youasked Me
through the mouth of your messenger to give up the weapons {I carry on My person). । shall

accordingly discharge them on you. {19) | shall compel you to give up My name, which has
been falsely assumed by you, O ignorant one. You asked Me to take refuge in you. | would
