Dis. 5] SRIMAD BHAGAVATA-MAHATMYA 29

SERRE FPP CROAT ARR A BAB BERR RARER SRT RONEN आ क्षीजा आजा झततिन्छ रा आ-आजीजजत्जाजज्यजआ- दौ क
bound to fall; (therefore) renounce everything and retire to the woods.” (76)
तद्वाक्यं तु समाकर्ण्य गन्तुकाम: पिताब्रवीत्। किं कर्तव्यं वने तात ad ae सविस्तरम् ।७७।
अन्धकूपे «ae aa: UR We: ladon पतितो नूनं Aer दयानिधे iwc!
Hearing this admonition of Gokarna his father decided to go to the forest and said, "O son,
point out (to me) in detail what | should do while living in the forest. (77) A fool as |!am, bound

by ties of affection, | have lain as a cripple in the deceptive well of mundane life due to my
(past) Karma. Surely lift me up, O storehouse of compassion!” (78)

गोकर्ण उवाच
देहेऽस्थिमांसरुधिरेऽभिमतिं त्यज त्वं जायासुतादिषु सदा ममतां विमुञ्च ।
पश्यानिशं जगदिदं क्षणभङ्गनिष्ठं वैराग्यरागरसिको भव भक्तिनिष्ठ: ie!
धर्मं भजस्व सततं त्यज लोकधर्मान् सेवस्व साधुपुरुषाञ्जहि कामतृष्णाम् ।
अन्यस्य दोषगुणचिन्तनमाशु मुक्त्वा सेवाकथारसमहो नितरां fa त्वम् । ८०॥

Gokarna continued : Cease you to identify yourself with the body consisting of bones,
flesh and blood. Give up for ever the feeling of meum with regard to wife, son and so on.
Constantly look upon this world as momentary. Taste the joy of dispassion and be
established in devotion to the Lord. (79) Constantly practise the virtue of remembering the
Lord. Abandon all temporal duties. Wait upon saintly persons and give up the thirst for the
pleasures of sense. Ceasing at once to dwell on the shortcomings and excellences of others,
enjoy you exclusively the delight of serving the Lord and listening to His stories. (80)

एवं afresh गृहं faa ant ad स्थिरमतिर्गतषष्टिवर्ष: |
amt हरेरनुदिनं परिचर्ययासौ श्रीकृष्णमाप fad दशमस्य पाठात् ।८१।
इति श्रीपद्मपुराणे उत्तरखण्डे श्रीमद्भागवतमाहात्म्ये विप्रमोक्षो नाम चतुर्थोऽध्याय: ॥`४॥

Renouncing his home in response to his son's advice, Atmadeva withdrew to the forest.
Although he was on the wrong side of sixty at that time, he was a man of firm determination.
Engaged day and night in service to Sri Hari, he attained to Sri Krsna by regularly reading
Book Ten of Srimad Bhagavata. (81)

Thus énds the fourth discourse entitled "The Deliverance of Atmadeva
(a Brahmana)," forming part of the "Glory of Srimad Bhagavata"
in the Uitara-Khanda of the glorious Padma-Purana.

PISS Rey

।। अथ पञ्चमोऽध्याय:

Discourse V
How Gokarna attained final beatitude (alongwith others)

सूत उवाच
पितर्युपरते तेन जननी ताडिता भृशम्।क्ववित्ततिष्ठतिब्रूहिहनिव्येळत्तयानचेत्।’ट्।
