Dis. 63 ] BOOK TEN 387

etinre tint eres rere ite eee eee wee ee LHT ee ee SAA TEE Jr Soiree grein te et HE

headed by Brahma, ascetics, Siddhas and Caranas, Gandharvas, Apsaras and Yaksas
came forth in their aerial cars to witness the conflict. (9) Sri Krsna (a scion of Sura) put to
flight, with His sharp-pointed arrows discharged from the Sarnga bow, the followers of Lord
$iva, viz., the Bhitas, Pramathas, Guhyakas (Yaksas), Dakinis and Yatudhanas, Vetalas
and Vinayakas, Pretas, Matrkas and Pisacas, Kusmandas and Brahmaraksasas. (10-11)
Lord Siva (the Wielder of the Pinaka bow) discharged various kinds of missiles at SriKrsna
(the Wielder of the Sarnga bow); the latter (however) unconcernedly neutralized them all
with counter-missiles. (12) Against Brahmastra He employed Brahmastra; against
Vayavyastra He employed the Parvatastra; against the fiery missile He employed the
Parjanyastra and against the Pasupatastra He employed His own (Narayanastra). (13)
Then, stupefying with Jrmbhanastra Lord Sankara, who (forthwith) began to yawn, Sri
Krsna (a scion of Sura) began to strike down the army of Banasura with His sword, mace
and arrows. (14) Being beaten on all sides by the volleys of arrows discharged by
Pradyumna, and emitting blood from every limb, Skanda escaped from the battle-field on
the back of His peacock. (15) Struck by (Balarama’s) pestle, Kumbhanda and Kipakarna
also fell down. With their generals killed, Banasura's troops fled in alt directions. (16)

विशीर्यमाणं स्वबलं दृष्टा बाणोऽत्यमर्षण: | कृष्णमभ्यद्रवत् संख्ये रथी हित्वैव सात्यकिम् । १७
धनूंष्याकृष्य युगपद् बाण: पञ्चशतानि वै । एकैकस्मिञ्छरौ द्वौ ad wed रणदुर्मद: ।१८।
aft चिच्छेद भगवान् धनूंषि ag: । सारथिं रथमश्वांश्च हत्वा शङ्खमपूरयत् ।१९॥
wat कोटरा नाम नग्ना मुक्तशिरोरुहा । पुरोऽवतस्थे कृष्णस्य पुत्रप्राणरिरक्षया ।२०।
ततस्तिर्यङ्मुखो नग्नामनिरीक्षन् Tees: | बाणश्च तावद् विरथङ्छिन्नधन्वाविशत् पुरम् । २१।

Highly indignant to see his army being scattered, Bana, rushed towards Sri Krsna on the
battle-field in a chariot, leaving Satyaki alone. (17) Drawing five hundred bows all at once,
Banasura, who ran amuck on the battle-field, applied a pair of arrows to each. (18) Lord Sri
Krsna (however) split all those bows at once and, striking down the charioteer and the horses
as well as the chariot, blew His conch. (19) Bana's mother, Kotara by name, (now) stood
naked with dishevelled hair before Sri Krsna with intent to save her son's life. (20) Making
it a point not to look at the nude lady, Sri Krsna (the elder Brother of Gada) turned His face
aside. Meanwhile Bana, who had been deprived of his chariot and had his bows broken,
retreated into the city. (21)

विद्राविते भूतगणे ज्वरस्तु त्रिशिरास्रिपात्। अभ्यधावत दाशाहं दहन्निवं feet दश ।२२॥

ag नारायणो देवस्तं दृष्टा व्यसृजज्ज्वरम्। माहेश्चरो वैष्णवश्च युबुधाते ज्वरावुभौ । २३।

TR: समाक्रन्दन् वैष्णावेन बलार्दित: । अलब्ध्वाभयमन्यत्र भीतो माहेश्वरो ज्वर: ।
शरणार्थी हषीकेशां तुष्टाव प्रयताञ्जलि: । २४॥

On the host of Bhitas (genii) having been put to flight, the three-headed and three-legged
Jwara (the spirit presiding over fever and despatched by Lord Siva, who had now recovered
from His stupefaction) rushed towards Sri Krsna (a scion of Dasarha) as if burning the ten
directions. (22) Beholding him, Sri Krsna (who was no other than Lord Narayana) sent forth
His (own) Jwara and both the Jwaras, the one belonging to Lord Siva (the supreme Ruler of
the universe) and the other belonging to Lord Visnu, began to grapple with each other. (23)
Beaten with violence by the Jwara commanded by Lord Visnu and terrified not to find asylum
anywhere else, the Jwara commanded by Lord Siva loudly screamed and, seeking shelter
with Sr Krsna (the Ruler of the senses),glorified Him with joined palms (as follows). (24)
