834 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 24

PARAM छ ज क AEARER EHEERKEEAKO KEE EEM AEE O REESE ETEK EEO EES HESSEN EOE LAMAR EHR E Cee Hee
प्तर्त

सत्यव्रतोऽञ्जलिगतां we Wa भारत।उत्ससर्ज नदीतोये mpi द्रविडेश्वर: ।१३॥
तमाह सातिकरुणं महाकारुणिकं नृपम्। यादोभ्यो ज्ञातिघातिभ्यो dai ut दीनवत्सल |
कथं विसृजसे राजन् भीतामस्मिन् सरिज्जले । १४॥
तमात्मनोऽनुग्रहार्थं प्रीत्या मत्स्यवपुर्धरम्। अजानन् रक्षणार्थांय शफर्या: स मनो za eu
wen दीनतरं वाक्यमाश्रुत्य स महीपति: । कलशाप्सु निधायैनां दयालुर्निन्य आश्रमम् । १६।
सा तु तत्रैकरात्रेण वर्धमाना कमण्डलौ | अलब्ध्वाऽत्मावकाशं वा इदमाह महीपतिम् । १७
नाहं कमण्डलावस्मिन् was वस्तुमिहोत्सहे। कल्पयौक: सुविपुलं यत्राहं fad सुखम् । १८॥
a Gt wa आदाय न्यधादौदञ्चनोदके।तत्र fam मुहूर्तेन हस्तत्रयमवर्धत ee
न म Was राजन् सुखं वस्तुमुदञ्जनम्। ay ae पदं मह्यं यत् त्वाहं WUT गता । २०॥
तत आदाय सा राज्ञा क्षिप्तां राजन् सरोवरे। तदावृत्यात्मना सोऽयं महामीनोऽन्ववर्धत 1२१॥
नैतन्मे स्वस्तये राजन्नुदकं सलिलौकस:। निधेहि रक्षायोगेन ge मामविदासिनि ।२२॥
yar: सोऽनयन्मत्स्यं तत्र तत्राविदासिनि । serra संमितं तं समुद्रे प्राक्षिपज्झषम् । २३
क्षिप्यमाणस्तमाहेदमिह मां मकरादय: | अदन्त्यतिबला वीर मां नेहोत्स्रष्टुमर्हसि । २४॥

In that (very) Kalpa (the Kalpa that had just ended) there was a certain royal sage,
Satyavrata by name, an exalted soul devoted to Lord Narayana. He was practising
austerities, subsisting on water (alone). (10) That very king who was called Satyavrata (in
the previous Kalpa) was known as Sraddhadeva, son of Vivaswan (the sun-god) in the
present Kalpa and was exalted to the position of Manu by Sri Hari. (11) One day an unknown
fish appeared in the water held in the hollow of the palms of Satyavrata, who was offering
handfuls of water (to the manes) on the bank of the Krtamala river (in South India). (12)
Satyavrata, who ruled over the Dravida territory, proceeded to drop along with the water the
fish (as well) containedin the hollow of his palms intothe water ofthe river, O scion of Bharata! (13)The
fish most pitifully said to that monarch, highly compassionate as he was, "Wherefore do you
throw me in the water of this river, O king who are se kind to the afflicted, helpless as | am
and afraid (too) of aquatic creatures that kill their own species? (14) Not knowing the Lord,
who had lovingly assumed the form of a fish in order to shower His grace on himself,
Satyavrata made up his mind to protect the fish. (15) On hearing the very pitiful appeal of the
fish, the said merciful king (lit., the ruler of the earth) put it in the water of the vessel (he had
brought with him) and took it to his hermitage.(16) Growing in that Kamandalu (a water-pot
made of wood or the shell of a cocoanut) in the course of a single night, however, and not
finding (enough) space for itself in it, the fish actually said to the king as follows:—(17) “lam
not able to live in this Kamandalu (even) with difficulty. (Therefore, kindly) find (for me) a
sufficiently extensive abode, in which | may comfortably live.” (18) Removing it from the
Kamandalu, he placed it in the water of a pitcher. (Even when) thrown into it, the fish grew
toa size of three cubits in the course of less than an hour (and said:—) (19) "(Even) this water-
jar is not sufficient for me to live in at ease, O king! (Therefore, kindly) let me have spacious
accommodation, since | have sought you as my refuge. (20) Having been removed from the
water-jar, the fish was thrown by the king into a good (extensive) pond, O Pariksit! The same
fish (however, instantly) grew to be a monstrous fish and covered the (whole) lake with its
body. (21) (The fish said:) "The water of this lake (too), O king, is not to my comfort.
(Therefore, please) put me in a (large and deep) lake containing (an) inexhaustible (store of)
water with adequate arrangements for my sustenance during the transit."(22) Thus spoken
to, the king took the fish by turns to a number of lakes of inexhaustible water (each
