Dis. 40 ] BOOK TEN 271

opin Retin te goede re ro en rg st oe Wee २२ २२

wea we इति भवत: प्रकृतेर्गुणा: । तेषु हि प्राकृता: प्रोता आब्रह्मस्थावरादय: 1291
qa नमस्तेऽस्त्वविषक्तदृष्टये सर्वात्मने सर्वधियां च साक्षिणे 1
गुणप्रवाहोऽयमविद्यया कृत: प्रवर्तते देवनृतिर्यगात्मसु 1221
aid तेऽवनिरङ्घिरीक्षणं gai नभो नाभिरथो fem: श्रुति: ।
at: कं सुरेन्द्रास्तव बाहवोऽर्णवा: कुक्षिर्मरुत् प्राणबलं प्रकल्पितम् 123
रोमाणि वृक्षौषधय: fare मेघा: परस्यास्थिनखानि तेऽद्रय: |
feat रात्र्यहनी प्रजापतिर्मेद्रस्तु वृष्टिस्तव वीर्यमिष्यते 1१४1
यथा जले सञ्जिहते जलोकसोऽप्युदुम्बरे वा Tee मनोमये ।१५॥
aa यानीह रूपाणि क्रीडनार्थं बिभर्षि fei तैरामृष्ट्लुचो लोका मुदा गायन्ति ते ae: 1१६1
नम: muna प्रलयाब्धिचराय च ।हयज्ञीर्णे ame मधुकैटभमृत्यवे ie!
अकूपाराय बृहते नमो मन्दरधारिणे। क्षित्युद्धारविहाराय नम: सूकरमूर्तये । १८॥
नमस्तेऽद्धुतसिंहाय साधुलोकभयापह | वामनाय नमस्तुभ्यं क्रान्तत्रिभुवनाय च ।१९॥
नमो भृगूणां पतये दृप्तक्षत्रवनच्छिदे। नमस्ते रघुवर्याय रावणान्तकराय च ।२०॥
नमस्ते वासुदेवाय नम: सङ्कर्षणाय च । प्रद्युम्नावानिरुद्धाय सात्वतां पतये नम: Ike!
नमो बुद्धाय शुद्धाय दैत्यदानवमोहिने । म्लेच्छप्रायक्षत्रहन्रे नमस्ते कल्किरूपिणे 1२२॥
Sativa, Rajas and Tamas are the (three) modes of Your (own) Prakrti (energy). Hence
those endowed with a material body—from inanimate creatures (trees etc.) to Brahma (the
creator)—-(ultimately) enter into them (and they into Prakriti, the latter merging in You. in this
way all the gods finally enter into You). (11) (My) salutation be to You, whose mind is
unattached, identified as You are with all and the witness of all minds ! This stream of the
(three) Gunas (in the form of the cycle of birth and death), brought about by Avidya (an energy
of Yours that veils one’s essential character), operates (only) on those that are identified with
acelestial, human or sub-human form. (12) Fire has been conceived (by Your worshippers
for the purpose of meditation) to be Your mouth, the earth as Your feet, the sun as Your eye,
the sky as Your navel, and the quarters as Your ears, the highest heaven (the abode of
Brahma) as the top part of Your head, the chiefs of gods (Indra and others) as Your arms,
the oceans as Your abdomen and the air as Your life-breath and strength. (13) Trees and
annual plants are looked upon as the hair on Your body, clouds as Your locks, the mountains
as the bones and nails of Your transcendent Self, day and night as the twinkling of Your eyes,
Brahma (the lord of creation) as Your membrum virile and rainfall as Your semen. (14)
Conceived in You, the perfect and imperishable person, who can (only) be hinted at by the
mind, the (numberless) universes—teeming with innumerable Jivas (embodied beings)—
with their guardians move about like the eggs of tiny aquatic creatures in water or even like
the (tiny) insects in (the interior of) an Udumbara fruit. (15) With their grief dispelled by the
thought of the several forms You assume (from time to time) for the sake of sport, people sing
Your glory with delight. (16) Hail to You, who appeared as the divine Fish from a definite
motive and roamed through the ocean that deluged the world at the time of universal
dissolution. Salutation to You, the Slayer of (the demons) Madhu and Kaitabha in the person
of Hayagriva (the Lord manifested with the head and neck of a horse). (17) Hail to You as

the gigantic Tortoise that supported Mount Mandara (on His back). Salutation to You in the
form of the divine Boar that sported (in the ocean) for lifting up the earth. (18) Hail to You in

