166 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 8

POS eee REEL EEE Hee eT Tee ee KEKE eV eT ees Heese Ce भो कजा SETH व व कक य ह ह HATO CEE

सोऽन्त:शरीरेऽर्पितभूतसूक्ष्म: कालात्मिकां शक्तिमुदीरयाण: ।
उवास तस्मिन् aie पदे स्वे यथानलो दारुणि wages: 1281
mem च सहस्रमप्सु स्वपन् स्वयोदीरितया स्वशक्त्या ।
कालाख्ययाऽऽसादितकर्मतन्त्रो लोकानपीतान्ददृशे स्वदेहे ।१२॥
तस्यार्थसूक्ष्माभिनिविष्टदृष्टेरन्तर्गतोऽर्थो रजसा तनीयान् ।
गुणेन कालानुगतेन fag: सूष्यंस्तदाभिद्यत नाभिदेशात् 1231
a पद्मकोरा: सहसोदतिष्ठत् कालेन कर्मप्रतिबोधनेन ।
स्वरोचिषा तत्सलिलिं fares विद्योतयन्नर्क इवात्मयोनि: ie
तल्लोकपद्यं स उ एवं fay: प्रावीविहात्सर्वगुणावभासम्।
तस्मिन् wa वेदमयो विधाता स्वयम्भुवं a स्म वदन्ति सोऽभूत् । १५
wet a चाम्भोरुहकर्णिकायामवस्थितो लोकमपङ्यमान: |
परिक्रमन् व्योम्नि विवृत्तनेत्रश्चत्वारि लेभेऽनुदिशं मुखानि 12 |
उपाश्रित: कञ्जमु लोकतत्त्वं नात्मानमद्धाविददादिदेव: 1219 1

(Prior to the creation) the whole of this universe was submerged in water. At that time the only
one that existed was Lord Narayana, who lay on His couch of Sesa (the lord of serpents), having
shut His eyes on account of sleep (in the form of deep meditation), although His consciousness
was wide awake even then, ceasing from all activity (in the form of creation, preservation and
dissolution of the universe) and revelling in the bliss of His own Self. (10) Having deposited the
subtle bodies ofall the Jivas (embodied souls) in His own body, the Lord reposed on those waters,
which served as His resting-place—even as fire remains latent in wood, concealing its burning
capacity etc. —keeping only His potency in the shape of Time active (in order to rouse Him when
the time of creation arrived again). (11) Having thus slept on those waters for (a period equivalent
to) one thousand rounds of the four Yugas with His own energy in the form of consciousness
about Him, when He was shown the residue of Karma of all the Jivas by His potency called Time,
which had already been directed by Him for this purpose, He saw countless worlds merged in
His own body. (12) When His eye thus fell on the subtle matter (in the shape of subtle bodies)
which lay deposited in His body and which was now roused into activity by) the Rajoguna (the
principle of activity impelled by Time, the same issued out of His navel in order to evolve grosser
forms. (13) By force of Time, which roused into activity the residue of Karma of the Jivas, that
subtle matter which came out of the navel of Lord Visnu sprang all of a sudden in the form of a
lotus bud, illuminating with its splendour that vast expanse of water even as the sun. (14) The
all-pervading Lord Visnu Himself, O Vidura, enteredas theinnercontroller thatlotus representing
all the (fourteen) worlds, which brought to light (later on) all the objects of sensuous enjoyment.
(When the Lord entered the lotus ), there appeared from it the Creator (Brahma), whois no other
than Veda personified and whom they call "Self-born” (because his Progenitor was not to be
seen), (15) Perched on the pericarp of the iotus, Brahma failed to perceive any world. Turning
his neck all round, therefore, he looked aboutin the sky with distended eyes and was immediately
endowed with four faces, one on each side. (16) Lo! resting on that lotus, which had emerged
from the waters uproarious with waves tossed by the (furious) winds which characterized
the period of universal destruction, Brahma (the first god) could not make out the reality of
that lotus, which formed the basis of the coming worlds, nor of himself. (17)
