Dis. 21 ] BOOK EIGHT 823
SRPSSETHUN ESSER STRELLARLAHHA SERCH ARE HEAR ted mse ee Rte be there irine diene endot

Sacrifice)— snatched away (from him) by recourse to a deceitful prayer for three paces of
land, the Asuras said (to one another):— (9) "He is certainly not a begging Brahmana but
Visnu (himself), the foremost of (all) conjurers, who—concealed (as he is) under the guise
of a Brahmana—seeks to accomplish the purpose of the gods. (10) By this fellow, (who is
no other than) an enemy disguised as a Brahmana boy, stands wrested, under pretext of
begging, everything belonging to our master (king Bali), who has relinquished (all forms of)
violence by reason of his sacrificial activity. (11) Falsehood is not possible for our master,
who is ever vowed to truthfulness, particularly so long as he is consecrated for sacrificial
activity, (nay,) who is devoted to the Brahmanas and full of compassion (to all). (12)
Therefore, it is our sacred duty anda (distinct) service to our lord to kill this fellow." Saying
so, the Asuras forming the retinue of Bali took up (their) arms.(13) Their anger having been
roused, they all ran forward, Sila (an ancient spear-like steel weapon) and Pattiga (a kind
of sharp-edged spear) in hand, to strike the divine Dwarf, even though Bali did not desire it,
O Pariksit ! (14) Seeing those Daitya generals attacking the divine Dwarf, the attendants of
Lord Visnu heartily laughed and stopped them, their weapons uplifted (to meet their
onslaught). (15) Nanda and Sunanda, Jaya, Vijaya, Prabala, Bala, Kumuda and Kumudaksa,
Viswaksena, Garuda (the ruler of the feathered kingdom), Jayanta and Srutadeva,
Puspadanta and SAatvata, each possessing the strength of ten thousand elephants—they
all proceeded to extirpate the Asura army. (16-17) Finding his own people being slain by
the attendants of Lord Visnu (the supreme Person), and recollecting the imprecation
pronounced by the sage Kavya (Sukracarya), Bali stopped them (in the following words),
enraged as they were:—(18) "O Vipracitti, Hullo Rahu, O Nemi, listen to my word. (Pray,) do
not make war, but retreat; (for) the present time is not conducive to our advantage. (19) No
individual is able to prevail through (personal) prowess, O Daityas, over Him (the Time-Spirit)
who is capable of bringing joy and sorrow to all created beings. (20) The same Lord who was
formerly favourable to our growth and conducive to the decline of the gods (lit., the denizens
of heaven), is proving the reverse of that (i.e., favourable to the growth of the divinities and
conducive to our decline).(21) Indeed no created being can override the Time-Spirit through
physical strength, (expert) coungellors, (a penetrating) intellect, fortifications, spells and
medicines and through conciliation andother expedients. (22) These attendants of Hari were
actually routed by you several times when you were fostered by fate. Having conquered us
in battle, the very same people are roaring today. (23) We shall utterly vanquish them if fate
turns out to be propitious (again). Therefore, await a time which may redound to our
advantage. (24)

श्रीशुक उवाच
पत्युर्निगदितं श्रुत्वा दैत्यदानवयूथपा: । रसां निविविशू राजन् विष्णुपार्षदताडिता: ।२५॥
wa meget ज्ञात्वा विराद्प्रभुचिकीर्षितम् । बबन्ध वारुणै: पाज्ञैर्बलिं सौत्येऽहनि क्रतौ 1261
Ree महानासीद् teat: सर्वतोदिशम् । गृह्यमाणेऽसुरपतौ विष्णुना प्रभविष्णुना i201
तं बद्धं वारुणै: uae ama: air स्थिरप्रज्ञमुदारयशासं नॄप । २८॥
पदानि त्रीणि दत्तानि भूमेर्मह्यं त्वयासुर । द्वाभ्यां क्रान्ता मही सर्वा तृतीयमुपकल्पय । २९॥
aed, wrest गोभिर्यावदिन्दु: सहोडुभि: । यावद् वर्षति पर्जन्यस्तावती भूरियं तव igo!
षदैकेन मया क्रान्तो भूर्लोक: खं दिशस्तनो: । स्वर्लोकस्तु द्वितीयेन पङ्यतस्ते स्वमात्मना । ३१॥
प्रतिश्रुतमदातुस्ते निरये वास इष्यते। विशा त्वं निरयं तस्माद् गुरुणा चानुमोदित: 1321
वृथा मनोरथस्तस्य दूरे स्वर्ग: पतत्यध: । प्रतिश्रुतस्यादानेन योऽर्थिनं विप्रलम्भते । ३३1
