Dis. 20] BOOK ELEVEN 609

EE OE मा COO EE ETE ET EE EE EEE EER ० ४ ७ BEET RENEE OU EMRE ७ १०

प्रोक्तेन भक्तियोगेन भजतो मासकृन्पुने: | कामा geen नड्यन्ति wa मयि हदि स्थिते । २९॥

भिद्यते हदयग्रन्थिञ्छिद्यन्ते सर्वसंशया: | क्षीयन्ते चास्य कर्माणि मयि दृष्टेऽखिलात्मनि ।३०॥

तस्मान्मद्धक्तियुक्तस्य योगिनो चै मदात्मन: । न Wa न च वैराग्यं प्राय: श्रेयो भवेदिह । ३१॥

यत् कर्मभिर्यत्तपसा ज्ञानवैराग्यतश्च यत्।योगेन दानधर्मेण श्रेयोभिरितरैरपि ।३२॥

wa मद्धक्तियोगेन cet लभतेऽञ्जसा । स्वर्गापवर्गं cam कथञ्चिद् af वाञ्छति 1331

न किञ्चित् साधवो धीरा भक्ता ह्येकान्तिनो मम । वाञ्छन्त्यपि मया दत्तं कैवल्यमपुनर्भवम् ।३४॥

नैरपेक्ष्यं परॆ प्राहुर्नि:श्रेयसमनल्पकम्।तस्मान्निराशिषो भक्तिर्निरपेक्षस्य मे भवेत् ।३५!

न मय्येकान्तभक्तानां गुणदोषोद्धवा Wr: agai समचितन्तानां ge: परमुपेयुषाम् ।३६॥

एवमेतान् मयाऽऽदिष्टाननुतिष्ठन्ति मे पथ: । क्षेमं विन्दन्ति मत्स्थानं ae aa परमं fag: 1301
॥ a Yogi (ever) commits through error a reproachful act (although ordinarily there is little
chance of his doing so). he should burn that sin by recourse to Yoga alone (in the form of
repeated effort at Self-Realization, contemplation on Me or chanting of the Divine Name etc.)
and should never resort to any other act (such as penance) in such circumstances. (25) That
(alone) which is known as strict adherence to one's own individual course has been extolled
as a virtue. By making such demarcation of virtue and fault, restriction has been imposed on
actions, which are (all) impure by origin (and that too) with the intention of enabling one to
shake off attachments (to the pleasures of sense). (26) He who has reverence for My stories
developed (in his heart) and has lost (every) charm for all activities (but not for their rewards)
and, though recognizing the pleasures of sense to consist of sorrow (alone) is yet unable to
relinquish them should therefore lovingly worship Me (by means of hearing‘and chanting My
names and stories etc.), full of faith and firm in his conviction (that everything will be
accomplished through Devotion alone) and enjoying those pleasures while condemning
them as attended with misery. (27-28) All the cravings embedded in the heart of the sage
constantly worshipping Me through the discipline of Devotion as (already) taught (in
verses 20—23 of Discourse XIX above) disappear, ! being present in his heart. (29) The knot
(in the shape of the ego-sense) in his heart is broken, all his doubts get resolved and the
(entire) stock of his Karma is exhausted the moment I, the Soul of the universe, am
realized.(30) Therefore, for the Yogi who is full of devotion to Me and has his mind fixed on
Me, neither JAana (spiritual enlightenment) nor even Vairagya (dispassion) is generally
conducive to blessedness in this world. (31) By recourse to the discipline of devotion to Me
My devotee easily attains all that can be had through actions (enjoined by the Vedas), that
which is obtained through askesis, nay, that which is secured by means of spiritual
enlightenment and dispassion, (practice of) Yoga, piety in the form of liberality as weil as by
recourse to other means of attaining blesssedness (such as undertaking a pilgrimage to
sacred places and observing fasts etc.)—heaven, final beatitude or (residence in) My realm
ifhe so desires on any account. (32-33) As a matter of fact, pious men of wisdom exclusively
devoted to Me seek nothing, not even final beatitude characterized by freedom from rebirth,
thouoh conferred by Me. (34) The wise declare desirelessness to be the greatest and most
efficacious way to final beatitude. Therefore, devotion to Me falls to his lot (alone) who does
not seek—much less solicit—anything (else). (35) Virtue and sin, resulting from good and
evil, do not attach to pious souls (free from likes and dislikes) that are even-minded and
exclusively devoted to Me and have (accordingly) attained to Me, who stand beyond
reason.(36) Those who follow in the aforesaid manner the paths shown by Me as leading to
Me attain to My realm, which is free from fear (of death etc.), and realize that which is known
