540 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 6

a awa ean aaa ee eee aetna na oncue nana saseuacebun aansecunaesncones=neeetentnecassasss
सोऽयं तयानुगत आत्मन smear हैमं ससर्ज बहिरावरणैरुपेतम् । १६।
तत्तस्थुषश्च wag ward यन्माययोत्थगुणविक्रिययोपनीतान् |
अर्थाञ्जुषन्नपि हृषीकपते न लिप्तो ast wa: परिहतादपि बिभ्यति स्म ।१७॥
स्मायावलोकलवदर्शितभावहारिभ्रूमण्डलप्रहितसौरतमन्त्रश्यौण्डै:

: ।
पल्यस्तु षोडशसहस्रमनड्गबाणैर्यस्येन्द्वियं विमथितुं करणैर्न विभ्व्य: ect
विभ्व्यस्तवामृतकथोदवहास्तिलोक्या: पादावनेजसरित: went हन्तुम् ।
आनुश्रवं श्रुतिभिरङ्घ्रिजमङ्गसङ्गैस्तीर्थद्वयं शुचिषदस्त उपस्पृन्ति ee!

The gods said : With our reason and senses, body, mind and speech, 0 Lord! we bow
to Your lotus-feet, which are meditated upon in the heart by those who are full of devotion
and seek to be freed from the stout shackles of Karma. (7) O invincible Lord ! presiding over
the (three) Gunas born of Your Maya You create, preserve and destroy this manifest
inconceivable universe in Yourself through Your Maya consisting of the three Gunas, and
yet remain ever unaffected by these actions, being free from (all) blemish (in the form of likes
and dislikes etc.), andsince You remain completely absorbed in the unobscured Bliss which
constitutes Your (very) nature. (8) O praiseworthy and supreme Lord! purification of men of
impure mindis not so radically effected through worship, study of scriptures, (acts of) charity,
austerities, ritual acts etc., as of pure-minded persons through mature and genuine faith,
developed by (constant) hearing, in Your glory. (9) May Your feet serve as a fire to consume
all our unholy cravings—the feet which are being contemplated upon with aheart moistened
with love by ascetics for the sake of blessedness; which are worshipped by devotees through
individual divine manifestations (Vasudeva and so on) for attaining a glory similar io that of
the Lord; and by the wise (as many as) three times (a day) in order that they may transcend
heaven (and ascend to Vaikuntha); (nay,) which are contemplated, O Lord, in the sacrificial
fire (by those well-versed in sacrifices) taking in their outstretched hands the material for
being consigned to that fire according to the procedure laid down by the three Vedas (Rk,
Sama and Yajus); and which are contemplated in the course of their Yogic practite for the
realization of the Self by strivers seeking to obtain an insight into the Maya that veils the true
character of the Spirit, and are worshipped everywhere by the highest devotees of the
Lord. (10-11) Like a co-wife this divine Sri (the goddess of fortune, appearing as a golden
streak on Your bosom), O Lord, vies (even) with a faded garland of sylvan flowers (adorning
Your bosom alongwith Hér). You (nonetheless) accept the worship duly offered (to You by
Your loving devotees even) with such a garland. (So partial You are to Your devotees !) May
Your feet serve as a fire to consume our evil tendencies. (12) O almighty and omnipresent
Lord, may Your foot cleanse our sins, who worship You—the foot which took three strides
(in order to measure the three worlds and thereby to oust Bali from heaven) and (on reaching
Satyaloka, the highest heaven in its second stride) stood as a (tall triumphal) flag with the
Ganga flowing through the three worlds as its streamer and (as such) inspired terror and
instilled fearlessness into the titanic and the celestial armies respectively, and which,
brought heaven to the righteous and spelt ruin to the unrighteous. (13) May the feet of the
Supreme Person in You augment our joy—You who are superior (both) to Prakrti and Purusa.
(Matter and the Spirit) and who are the Propeller of all (as the Time-Spirit) and subject to
whose control, like bulls held by the nose-string, are Brahma (the creator) and other
embodied souls who are being tormented by one another. (14) You are Purusottama (the
Highest Person) in that You are responsible for the creation, continuance and destruction of
this universe; the Vedas speak of You as the Controller of Prakrti, Purusa and the Mahat-
tattva (the principle of cosmic intelligence); and You are also Kala (the wheel of Time
