Dis. 32 ] BOOK THREE 281

SHHHKKE AAA OH EHS १६ ३३१3 eee eke iw ere k hh tin retin ht & dni tie wh hh ertit ७७ ७७७ ० ७ 3१
ज्र्त्त

Spirit), the ultimate Cause (of the universe) and also responsible for the creation, preservation
and dissolution of the world.(5—7) As for those who meditate on Hiranyagarbha (Brahma) as
no other than the Supreme, dwellin the realm of Brahma (the highest heaven known by the
name of Satyaloka) till the dissolution of Brahma, which takes place at the end of two
Parardhas. (8) Intending to dissolve the universe enclosed by earth, water, fire, air, ether,
the mind, the senses and their object and the ego (the source of the elements) and so on,
and having finished his regime extending over two Parardhas, when Brahma (the self-born),
who is higher than the other gods, identifies himself with Prakrti (consisting of the three
Gunas) and enters the Absolute, the Yogis that have controlled their breath and mind and
are free from passion enter (the body of) the worshipful Brahma after casting off their body,
and along with him get merged into the Supreme Brahma, who is an embodiment of the
highest bliss and no other than the most ancient Person, and to whom they did not attain
before inasmuch as their egotism had not left them till then.(9-10) Therefore, O great lady,
seek refuge with devotion in Him alone who has taken up His abode in the lotus-like heart
ofallliving beings and of whose glory you have (just) heard (from Me). (11) On the other hand,
even Brahma (the repository of the Vedas and) the cause of the mobile and immobile
creation, alongwith the sages (Marici and others), the lords of Yoga like Sanaka and others,
and other Siddhas who are the first teachers of Yoga—even after entering (at the time of final
dissolution), by virtue of their disinterested action, (the body of) the first Purusa, the foremost
of all Purusas, who is no other than Brahma presiding over the three Gunas—is born again
as before (if the Lord so desires) at the time of creation—when the equilibrium of the Gunas
is disturbed by the Time-Spirit, a manifestation of the Lord Himself—because of his retaining
the notion of difference and due to his sense of doership. (12-14) And the sages too—after
enjoying the glorious life of the highest heaven, earned by their meritorious acts—(likewise)
return (by the will of the Lord as the mind-born sons of Brahma) on the equilibrium of the
Gunas being disturbed (at the time of creation). (15)

a त्विहासक्तमनस: कर्मसु श्रद्धयान्विता: । कुर्वन्त्यप्रतिषिद्धानि नित्यान्यपि च कृत्स्नश: 126
रजसा कुण्ठमनस: कामात्मानोऽजितेन्दिया: । पितॄन् यजन्त्यनुदिनं गृहेष्भिरताशया: । १७॥
त्रैवर्गिकास्ते पुरुषा विमुखा हरिमेधस:। meat कथनीयोरुविक्रमस्य मधुद्विष: । १८॥
नूनं दैवेन fae ये चाच्युतकथासुधाम्। हित्वा शृण्वन्त्यसद्गाथा: पुरीषमिव बिड्भुज: । १९।
दक्षिणेन var: पितॄलोकं व्रजन्ति ते । प्रजामनु प्रजायन्ते इमणानान्तक्रियाकृत: 1201
ततस्ते क्षीणसुकृता: पुनर्लोकमिमं सति । पतन्ति विवशा देवै: सद्यो बिभ्रंशितोदया: 1221
ward सर्वभावेन भजस्व परमेष्ठिनम्।तद्गुणाश्रयया भक्त्या भजनीयपदाम्बुजम् । २२।
aed भगवति भक्तियोग: प्रयोजित:। जनयत्याशु वैराग्यं ज्ञानं ogee ।२३॥

यदास्य चित्तमर्थेषु समेष्बिन्दियवृत्तिभि:। न विगृह्णाति वैषम्यं प्रियमप्रियमित्युत evi
a तदैवात्मनाऽत्मानं frag समदर्शनम् । हेयोपादेयरहितमारूढं पदमीक्षते (2&1

Wa परं ब्रह्म परमात्मेश्वर: पुमान्।दृश्यादिभि: पृथग्भावैर्भगवानेक ईयते ire

एतावानेव योगेन समग्रेणेह योगिन: । युज्यतेऽभिमतो wef यदसङ्गस्तु कृत्स्नशा: 1201

waa पराचीनैरिन्दियैर्ब्रह्म निर्गुणम्। अवभात्यर्थरूपेण भ्रान्या झब्दादिधर्मिणा । २८॥

यथा महानहंरूपस्रिवृत्पञ्चविध: स्वराट्।एकादशविधस्तस्य वपुरण्डं जगद्यत: ।२९॥

We श्रद्धया vee योगाभ्यासेन नित्यश: । समाहितात्मा नि:सङ्घो विरक्त्या परिप्यति 1301

They, however, whose mind is attached to the world and who are full of reverence for
religious rites perform actions that are actuated by desire, though not prohibited by the
