160 ॥ SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 7

SEP RRR RI IE ER ROMER TAT RAH SAE AOR LER HE eee LT UL EVENT EE HH Re Sr Ser wy er te

we

reverently adore by means of their respective duties their own Father, Sri Hari, from whom
they all sprang up along with their several occupations. (34) Who can dare describe in full,
O Vidura, the cosmic body of the Lord, who has Time, Karma (destiny) and Swabhava (the
innate disposition) of the Jivas for His potencies—the body which reveals the might of the
Lord's Yogamaya (divine power)? (35) Yet, inorder to purify my own speech which has been
rendered foul by other (profane) talk, | proceed to sing, dear Vidura, the glory of Sri Hari
according to my own (poor) lights and on the basis of what | have heard (from my
preceptor).(36) The wise declare that the sole utility of men's speech decidedly lies in uttering
the praises of the Lord, who is the foremost of those enjoying the highest renown, and that
the sole utility of one's ears lies in their coming into touch with the nectar-like discourses on
Sri Hari, delivered by learned men. (37) Was it possible, dear child, for Brahma (the first of
all seers) to fathom the glory of Sti Hari (the Universal Spirit) even after pondering it for a
thousand (celestial) years with his intellect ripened through the practice of Yoga ? (38)
Therefore, the Lord's Maya deludes even those skilled in creating illusions. When the Lord
Himself does not know the course of His own Maya, how can others fathom it ? (39)
Obeisance to the Lord, from whom not only speech and mind but even Rudra (the deity
presiding over the ego) and the other gods (those presiding over the senses and the organs
of action) return disappointed, unable to reach Him. (40)

Thus ends the sixth discourse in Book Three of the great and
glorious Bhagavata-Purana, otherwise known as the
Paramahamsa-Samhita.

Stine Me hs
CDOT EEN ESOS

अथ सप्नमोऽध्याय:

Discourse VII
Vidura's questions
एवं ब्रुवाणं मैत्रेय द्वैपायनसुतो बुध:। प्रीणयन्निव भारत्या fag: प्रत्यभाषत । १ |
Sri Suka continued : When Maitreya spoke thus, the enlightened Vidura, son of

Dwaipayana (Vedavyasa) further asked him as follows, delighting him by his speech as it
were. (1)

विदुर उवाच
ब्रह्मन् कथं भगवतश्चिन्मात्रस्याविकारिण: | लीलया चापि युज्येरन्निर्गुणस्य गुणा: क्रिया: । २ ।
क्रीडायामुद्यमोऽर्भस्य कामश्चिक्रीडिषान्यत: । स्वतस्तृप्त्य च कथं निवृत्तस्य सदान्यत: | ३ |

अस्राक्षीद्भगवान् fad गुणमय्याऽऽत्ममायया । तवा संस्थापयत्येतद्भूय: प्रत्यपिधास्यति । ४ ।

देशत: कालतो चोऽसाववस्थात: स्वतोऽन्यत: | अविलुप्ताववोधात्मा स युज्येताजया कथम् । ५ ।

भगवानेक एवैष सर्वक्षेत्रेष्नवस्थित: । अमुष्य दुर्भगत्वं वा क्लेशो वा कर्मभि: कुत: । ६ ।
र्किफ्रि

of the first three Varnas has the other three Purusarthas (objects of human pursuit) for their goal, that of a Sudra has Dharma
itself for its goal; hence itis declared above that the very occupation of a Sudra secures the pleasure of the Lord.
