Dis. 13] BOOK SEVEN . 717

BRT RR Be Me MA HER Re RR ET eT PE Ee ree Ve RRR I FT A TBR ET OE BOT A HC

सुखमस्यात्मनो ea सर्वेहोपरतिस्तनु: । मन: संस्पर्शजान्दृष्टा भोगान्स्वप्स्यापि संविरान् 1261
इत्येतदात्मन: स्वार्थं wa विस्मृत्य वै पुमान्।विचित्रामसति ga घोरामाप्नोति संसृतिम् । २७॥
जलं तदुद्भवैञ्छन्नं हित्वाज्ञो जलकाम्यया । मृगतृष्णामुपाधावेद यथान्यत्रार्थदूक wa: ।२८।
देहादिभिर्दैवतन्त्रैरात्मन: सुखमीहत: ।दुखात्ययचलीज्ञस्यक्किपोघाबृक्ताकृत्ता । २९॥
आध्यात्मिकादिभिर्दु:खैरविमुक्तस्य कर्हिचित्। मर्त्यस्य कृच्छ्झेपनतैरर्थै: कामै: क्रियेत किम् 1301
Tae aft ae लुब्धानामजितात्मनाम्। भयादलब्धनिद्राणां सर्वतोऽभिविशाङ्किनाम् । ३१
Teas: Fat: स्वजनात्पशुपक्षित: | अर्थिभ्य: कालत: स्वस्मान्नित्यं प्राणार्थवद्भयम् । ३२॥
शोकमोहभयक्रोधरागक्लैब्यश्रमादय: | यन्मूला: स्युर्नृणां जह्यात् स्पृहां प्राणार्थयोर्बुध: 133 1
Bliss constitutes the (very) essence-of this Self and cessation from all activity is the
medium of its manifestation. Realizing (all) enjoyments to be the creation of fancy (alone),
| remain lying down (supine), reaping the fruit of destiny. (26) Thus forgetting the object of
its pursuit, viz., happiness, which is the (very) essence of its being and is eternally dwelling
in it, the Jiva (embodied soul) actually undergoes transmigration—consisting of diverse
states of existence (such as gods, human beings and the lower orders of creation) and (so)
terrible (being characterized by birth, death, old age and so on)—through duality, which is
(really) non-existent. (27) (Even) as an ignorant man impelled by the longing for water may
run after a mirage, leaving (actual) water covered with duck weeds etc., sprung from (that
very) water, a man seeking happiness (the object of his pursuit) elsewhere than his own Self
runs after the objects of senses. (28) Fruitless are the actions repeatedly done by him who,
though unaided by Providence, seeks through his body etc.,—which are controlled by
Fate—happiness and cessation of suffering for himself. (29) (Even if they bear fruit,) what
(good) will be done by riches and objects of desire (enjoyments sought after by men and
procured by wealth), got with (great) hardship, to a mortal who is never free from bodily and
other affliction ? (30) | perceive (everyday) the torment of moneyed men, who are (often)
avaricious, (nay) whose mind is uncontrolled and who get no (sound) sleep for fear, greatly
apprehensive as they are of everybody. (31) To those possessed of (anxious to preserve)
life (virility) and wealth there is (constant) apprehension (of danger) from the king, thieves,
the enemy, kinsmen, beasts and birds, beggars, death and (even) their own self (lest such
wealth may be squandered given away or misplaced by themselves). (32) A wise man should
(therefore) give up the craving for life (virility) and wealth, from which follow grief, infatuation,
fear, anger, attachment, unmanliness and exertion etc., to men. (33)
nya «= लोकेऽस्मिन्नो गुरूत्तमो । वैराग्यं परितोषं च प्राप्ता यच्छिक्षया वयम् ax
fam: सर्वकामेभ्य: शिक्षितो मे मधुव्रतात्। कृच्छ्राप्तं Agee fad हत्वाप्यन्यो हरेत्पतिम् । ३५॥
ang: परितुष्टात्मा यदृच्छोपनतादहम्। नो चेच्छये बह्वहानि महाहिरिव सत्त्ववान् । ३६॥
क्वचिदल्पं क्वचिद भूरि भुञ्जेऽन्नं स्वाद्वस्वादु वा । fae भूरिगुणोपेतं गुणहीनमुत क्वचित् । ३७॥
seared क्वापि कदाचिन्मानवर्जितम्। भुञ्जे भुक्त्वाथकस्मिंश्चिद fear नक्तं यदृच्छया । ३८।
am दुकूलमजिनं dit वल्कलमेव वा । वसेऽन्यदपि सम्प्राप्तं दिष्टभुक तुष्टधीरहम् ।३९॥
क्वचिच्छये धरोपस्थे तृणपर्णाश्मभस्मसु । क्वचित् प्रासादपर्यङ्के कशिपो वा परेच्छया ।४०॥
क्वचित् स्नातोऽनुलिप्ताङ्ग: सुवासा: स्रग्व्वलंकृत: । रथेभाश्वैश्चरे क्वापि दिग्वासा ग्रहवद् fast wet
नाहं निन्दे न च स्तौमि स्वभावविषमं जनम्। एतेषां श्रेय sana sawed महात्मनि 1४२॥
The very best among our teachers in this world are the bee and the python, by (following)
whose example we have acquired (first) dispassion and (then) contentment. (34) Killing the
