Dis. 5] BOOK NINE 19

HEARN SH ECE ET heETESEEEESHHE CECE RE CT ETS TEES ESS ve न २२१० २२२२ १२२२ २२२२ २२२ २११

The glorious Lord said : My heart having been (completely) taken possession of by My
pious devotees, | am really subject to the control of such devotees like one who is not self-
dependent, 0 Brahmana. And | am the (only) beloved of My devotees. (63) As apart from
My pious devotees, to whom | am the highest goal, | covet neither Myself nor Goddess Sri
(My Consort), who is eternal (like Myself), O holy sage ! (64) How dare | forsake them who,
having renounced (all attachments for) their wife, house, children and relations, (nay,) their
(very) life and wealth and (their welfare in) this and the other world, have sought Me as their
protector? (65) Pious souls who have fastened their heart on Me and look upon all with the
same eye enthral Me by (their) devotion (even) as virtuous ladies enthral their virtuous
husband. (66) (Feeling) sated through Devotion, they do not desire even the four types of
final beatitude, beginning with Salokya or residence in the same heaven with the Lord (the
other three types being Samipya orclose proximity with the Lord, Sarupya orsimilarity of form
with the Lord and Sayujya or absorption into the Lord), though attained (actually) through
service rendered to Me. How (then) can they covet anything else (such as the position of
Indra) which is subject to the ravages of Time? (67) Pious souls (devotees) are My (very)
heart (most beloved of Me), while | am the (very) heart (the most beloved) of the righteous.
They do not cognize anything else (dearer) than Me nor do | know in the least anyone else
(dearer) than them. (68) | shall (however) point out to you a means of escape (from this
calamity), 0 Durvasa ! (Please) hear it Seek him alone because of whom this violence
perpetrated by you has actually (recoiled on you and thus) proved to be an act of self-
immolation. Force employed against the righteous brings harm to the striker (himself). (69)
Asceticism and worship (offered to a deity) are both conducive to the highest good (final
beatitude) for Brahmanas (endowed with humility and other virtues). In the case (however)
of a doer who is lacking in modesty, those very practices lead to contrary results (prove
harmful). (70) Therefore, O Brahmana, may good betide you; approach King Ambarisa (the
son of Nabhaga) and seek the forgiveness of that highly blessed soul. Then (alone) will peace
(of mind) come {to you). (71)

Thus ends the fourth discourse, forming part of the story of Ambarisa,
in Book Nine of the great and glorious Bhagavata-Purana,
otherwise known as the Paramahamsa-Samhita.

म्मि
eI Sires

अथ पञ्चमोऽध्याय:

Discourse ४

The story of Ambarisa (Concluded)
श्रीरुक उवाच
एवं भगवताऽऽदिष्टो दुर्वासाश्चक्रतापित: । अम्बरीषमुपावृत्य तत्पादो दु:ख्रितोऽग्रहीत्। १ |
qe सोद्यमनं वीक्ष्य पादस्पर्शवविलज्जित: | अस्तावीत् तद्धरेरस्रं Hoe पीडितो `भृशम् । २ ।
Sri Suka resumed : Thus directed by the Lord and scorched by His discus (Sudargana),
Durvasa came back to Ambarisa and, full of sorrow, clasped the latter's feet. (1) Observing
the endeavour on the part of the sage (to seek his forgiveness), Ambarisa, who was much

ashamed at the sage's touching his feet and sore stricken with compassion, began to extol
the aforesaid missile of Sri Hari {in the following words). (2)
