Dis. 14] BOOK ELEVEN 575

न्न् क HHO TE EOS CREE OREO SATE TENE ee ग गा६ क eH eM PET ee eee Te

the universe) looking on. (42)

Thus ends the thirteenth discourse in Book Eleven of the great and glorious
Bhagavata-Purana, otherwise known as the
Paramahamsa-Samhita.

rete Sees

अथ चतुर्दशोऽध्याय:

Discourse XIV

Glory of the Path of Devotion and the Process of Meditation described
TSF उवाच

वदन्ति कृष्ण श्रेयांसि बहूनि ब्रह्मवादिन: । तेषां विकल्पप्राधान्यमुताहो एकमुख्यता । १ |
भवतोदाहृत: स्वामिन् भक्तियोगोऽनपेक्षित: । निरस्य ada: ag येन त्वय्याविदोन्पन: । २ ।
Uddhava submitted : Exponents of Veda speak of many a course of discipline leading
to final beatitude, O Krsna ! Does their improtance vary according to the choice of the striver
or does prominence attach to (only) one (of them)? (1) The discipline of Devotion—by
recourse to which the mind, having shaken off attachment for all (others), gets fixed on You—
has been declared by You as independent of other disciplines, my Master ! (2)

श्रीभगवानुवाच
कालेन नष्टां प्रलये वाणीयं वेदसंज्ञिता । मयाऽऽदौ ब्रह्मणे प्रोक्ता धर्मो यस्यां मदात्मक: । ३ ।
aa प्रोक्ता च पुत्राय मनवे पूर्वजाय सा । ततो भृग्वादयोऽगृह्णन् सप्त ब्रह्ममहर्षय: । ४ |
तेभ्य: पितॄभ्यस्तत्पुत्रा देवदानवगुह्यका: | मनुष्या: सिद्धगन्धर्वा: सविद्याधरचारणा: । ५ |
किंदेवा: किन्नरा नागा wa: किम्पुरुषादय: । बह्वयस्तेषां प्रकृतयो रज-:सत्त्वतमोभुव: । ६ |
याभिर्भूतानि भिद्यन्ते भूतानां मतयस्तथा । यथाप्रकृति सर्वेषां चित्रा are: aaa हि । ७ |
एवं प्रकृतिवैचित्र्याद् भिद्यन्ते मतयो नॄणाम्।पारम्पर्येण केषाञ्चित् पाखण्डमतयोऽपरे । ८ |
मन्मायामोहितधिय: पुरुषा: पुरुषर्षभ। श्रेयो वदन्त्यनेकान्तं यथाकर्म यथारुचि । ९ |
धर्ममेके यदाश्चान्ये am ad दमं waa वदन्ति स्वार्थं वा beh त्यागभोजनम् । १०1
केचिद् यज्ञतपोदानं व्रतानि नियमान् यमान्। आद्यन्तवन्त एवैषां लोका: कर्मविनिर्मिता: ।
दु:खोदर्कास्तमोनिष्ठा: क्षुद्रानन्दा: शुचार्पिता: ।११॥

The glorious Lord replied : In course of time this word (of Mine), bearing the name of
Veda, in which stands described the course of conduct helping one to fix one’s mind on Me,
disappeared during Pralaya (the period of final dissolution). At the beginning of (the next)
creation (however) it was delivered by Me to Brahma. (3) By Brahma, again, it was taught
to his eldest son, (Swayambhuva) Manu; and the seven great seers associated with the
creation of the universe, Bhrgu andothers, received it from (Swayambhuva) Manu. (4) From
them, the fathers (of creation), their progeny, the gods, the Danavas and the Guhyakas

(Yaksas), human beings, Siddhas and Gandharvas, including Vidyadharas and Caranas as
wellas men’ of the other Dwipas (divisions of the terrestrial globe other than JambUdwipa),

त्राण

* Being proof against fatigue,sweat and foul smell, they are so akin to the gods that when seen they give nse toa doubt
in the mind of the looker-on whether they are gods or earthly beings. Hence they are reterred to in the above verse as `किंदेवा:`
