566 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 4
। ७७ ७३ ७७७ ३.७.३.३.३.३.३.३.७७.३.३.७.६.७.३.३.७.७..६.७७.३.६-७.७.३.३. ६६३4 . १.३.३.३-३ EEE REECE BLEAK ६६६६ -६.६ ३ EASE HHE ED
accounts of the extraordinary exploits of Sri Hari. (82) He who enjoys like a bee the
sweetness of Sri Krsna's lotus-feet (by contemplating on them) delights no more in the
enjoyments brought forth by Maya (Prakrti) , once they have been given up by him as
conducive to suffering. The other man (who does not enjoy the sweetness of those feet and)
who is (consequently) buffeted by desires takes to action (alone in the shape of an expiatory
process) in order to atone for his sin—action which leads only to sin again (inasmuch as it
does not purify the mind and thus proves no better than the path of an elephant, which throws
dust on its body as soon as it emerges from water after the bath). (33)

= ace mea न भ्न्र es

नैवाच्युताश्रयजनं प्रति शङ्कमाना द्रष्टुं च बिभ्यति aa: प्रभृति स्म राजन् । ३४॥

इतिहासमिमं गुह्यं भगवान् कुम्भसम्भव:। कथयामास मलय आसीनो हरिमर्चयन् । ३५।
इति श्रीमद्भागवते महापुराणे पारमहंस्यां संहितायां षष्ठस्कन्धे यमपुरुषसंवादे तृतीयोऽध्याय: 121
The servants of Yama were not at all surprised to (hear and) realize as such the

greatness of the Lord, depicted by their master (Yama). Afraid of men depending on the
immortal Lord (Visnu) they shuddered even to look at them from that moment, O king
(Pariksit) | (34) Dwelling on (the summit of) Mount Malaya and worshipping Sri Hari, the
glorious sage Agastya (who was born of a pitcher) narrated (to me) this secret legend. (35)

Thus ends the third discourse, forming part of the dialogue between Yama and his servants,
in Book Six of the great and glorious Bhagavata-Purana,
otherwise known as the Paramahamsa-Samhita.

अथ चतुर्थोऽध्याय:

Discourse IV
Daksa extols the Lord who appears in person before him

राजोवाच
देवासुरनृणां सर्गो नागानां मृगपक्षिणाम्। सामासिकस्त्वया प्रोक्तो यस्तु स्वायम्भुवेऽन्तरे । १ ।
तस्यैव व्यासमिच्छामि ag ते भगवान् यथा । अनुसर्गं यया een ससर्ज भगवान् पर: । २ |
The king (Pariksit) submitted : The genesis of the gods and demons, human beings
and Nagas (serpent-demons), beasts and birds in the (very first) Manvantara (period
covering seventy-one and odd revolutions of the four Yugas), presided over by Swayambhuva
Manu, was described by you in a nutshell (in Book III). (1) | desire to know from you the
details of it, O glorious sage, as well as how and with what power the Supreme Lord evolved
the subsequent creation (referred to in IV-xxx. 49). (2)
सूत Sara
sft सम्प्रश्नमाकर्ण्य राजर्षेर्बादरायणि: । siete महायोगी जगाद मुनिसत्तमा: । ३ |
Sita continued : Suka (the son of Badarayana), the great contemplative sage ever
united with the Lord, welcomed this noble inquiry of Pariksit (the royal sage), on hearing it,
and replied (as follows), O jewels among sages ! (3)
श्रीगुक उवाच
aq प्रचेतस: पुत्रा al प्राचीनबर्हिष: । अन्त:समुद्रादुन्मम्ना wat द्रुमैर्वृताम् । ४ |
