Dis. 18 ] BOOK FIVE ॥ 505°
SRE Me Re RT He RE ET RT RE Re ET HF RR EH RT RY A He TR RR Br a
of his retinue adore the favourite manifestation of Lord Vasudeva Himself, known by the
name of Hayagriva—who is piety personified—realizing His presence through supreme
concentration of mind while muttering the following prayer. (1)

भद्रश्रवस HY:
ss Tt wet धर्मायात्मविशोधनाय नम इति।२।
अहो fafat भगवद्विचेष्टितं wd जनोऽचं fe मिघन्नं पश्यति।
वदन्ति विश्वं maa: स्म नश्वरं पश्यन्ति चाध्यात्मविदो facta:
तथापि मुह्यन्ति तवाज मायया सुविस्मितं कृत्यमजं नतोऽस्मि तम्।४।
विश्वोद्धवस्थाननिरोधकर्म ते ह्यकर्तुरङ्गीकृतमप्यपावृत: |
ge न fat त्वयि कार्यकारणे सर्वात्मनि व्यतिरिक्ते च वस्तुत:।५]।
प्रत्याददॆ चै कवयेऽभियाचते act नमस्तेऽवितथेहिताय इति।६।
Bhadrasrava and his men pray : “Hail to the almighty Dharma—denoted by the
mystical syllable OM—who purifies the mind !" (2) Oh, (how) marvellous are the doings of
the Lord (Your Maya), deluded by which this Jiva fails to perceive Death (whokills all), though
endowed with vision, when he desires to survive (even) after cremating his father and son
(old and young), contemplating evil deeds in order to enjoy the carnal pleasures (which have
no reality whatsoever) ! (3) The learned have spoken of the world as perishable; while those
wise men who have realized the Self even perceive it as such (through deep concentration
of mind). Yet are people deluded by Your Maya, O birthless one ! Highly wonderful are Your
ways and | (simply) bow to You, the birthless Lord. (4) The functions of creation, preservation
and dissolutions of the universe have been attributed (by the Vedas) to You, who are (really)
anon-doer and unveiled (by Maya). This is (however) not (at all) surprising in Your case; for
activity is (but) proper to You, who are everything (through Maya) and (therefore) the cause
(the progenitor) of (all) effects; while, as a matter of fact, You are unconditioned (unveiled
by Maya and therefore actionless). (5) Appearing in the form of a man-horse (a man with the
head of a horse), it is You who rescued from the bottom of the ocean and restored to the
supplicating Brahma (the first seer) the Vedas, that had been stolen away by the demon
Madhu (who was ignorance personified) at the time of universal dissolution. (Therefore,) hail
to You of unfailing resolve !” (6)
had चापि भगवान्तरहरिरूपेणास्ते तद्रूपग्रहणनिमित्तमुत्तरत्राभिधास्ये तद्दयितं wo
महापुरुषगुणभाजनोमहाभागवतोदॆत्यदानवकुलतीर्थीकरणशीलाचरित: प्रह्रादोऽव्यवधानानन्यभक्तियोगेन
सह तद्वर्षपुरुषैरुपास्ते इदं चोदाहरति | ७ | ॐ नमो भगवते नरसिंहाय नमस्तेजस्तेजसे आविराविर्भव वज्रनख
वज्रदंष्ट्र HATA रन्धय रन्धय तमो ग्रस ग्रस ॐ स्वाहा अभयमभयमात्मनि भूयिष्ठा ॐ क्षौम् । ८ |

स्वस्त्यस्तु विषर्वस्य खल: प्रसीदतां ध्यायन्तु भूतानि शिवं मिथौ धिया।
मनश्च भद्रं भजतादधोक्षजञ आवेश्यतां नो मतिरप्यहॆतुकी। ९ |
मागारदारात्मजवित्तबन्धुषु सङ्घो ae स्याद्भगवत्प्रियेषु न:।
a: Wor uae आत्मवान् सिद्ध्यत्यदूरान तथेन्द्रियप्रिय:। १०॥
यत्सङ्गलब्धं निजवीर्यवैभवं तीर्थं ag: संस्पृशतां fe मानसम्।
हरत्यजोऽन्त: श्रुतिभिर्गतोऽङ्कजं को वै न Baa मुकुन्दविक्रमम्।११।
