.98 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 1

PEER ESE SEED TS SCOT HENNE RAP EOT ES SEAS CH CeE EES EE RE EEE ee eHEREnEEhEReEERe knee ik

(Yudhisthira and others) indeed crossed the ocean of the Kaurava army—(so) difficult to
cross because (of the presence) of whales in the form of great car-warriors like Devavrata
(more popularly known by the name of Bhisma), vanquishers in battle of (even) immortals—
treating it as a (mere) footprint of a calf. (5) Again, having entered, discus in hand, the womb
of my mother (Uttara), who had sought Him as her refuge, He protected this body of mine,
the seed of the race of the Kurus and the Pandavas, and badly burnt by the (mystic) missile
hurled by Aéwatthama (the son of Drona). (6) Recount, O sage, the exploits of that Lord,
disguised as a human being by His transcendental creative energy, who, dwelling (both)
within and outside all embodied beings, (severally) in the form of the Inner Controller and
Time, metes out to them (according to their deserts) death (metempsychosis) as well as
immortality. (7)
रोहिण्यास्तनय: प्रोक्तो राम: सङ्कुर्षणस्त्वया | देवक्या गर्भसम्बन्ध: कुतो देहान्तरं विना । ८ ।
कस्मान्मुकुन्दो भगवान् पितुर्गेहाद् व्रजं गत: । क्ववासंज्ञातिभि: सार्धं कृतवान् सात्वतांपति: 1 ९ ।
व्रजे वसन् किमकरोन्मधुपुर्वां च केशव:। wat चावधीत् कंसं मातुरद्धातदर्हणम् । १०॥
देहं मानुषमाश्रित्य कति वर्षाणि वृष्णिभि: । यदुपुर्यां सहावात्सीत् पत्न्य: कत्यभवन् प्रभो: । ११1
एतदन्यच्च wi A मुने कृष्णविचेष्टितम् । वक्तुमर्हसि सर्वज्ञ श्रद्दधानाय विस्तृतम् 1१२॥
नैषातिदु:सहा att त्यक्तोदमपि बाधते । पिबन्तं त्वन्मुखाम्भोजच्युतं हरिकथामृतम् । १३1
Sankarsana (Balarama) was (first) referred* to by youasa son of Rohini. How could his
connection be conceived with the womb of Devakit without his assuming another body? (8)
Wherefore did Lord Sri Krsna (the Bestower of Liberation) shift to Vraja from His father's
residence (at Mathura)? And where (in what different places) did that Lord of the Yadus take
up His abode alongwith His kinsfolk? (9) What did Lord Sri Krsna (the Ruler even of Brahma
and Siva), do while residing in Vraja as well as at Mathura (the city founded by the demon
Madhu)? And wherefore did He personally slay Karhsa, His (own) mother's cousin and
(therefore) not deserving such fate (at His hands) ? (10) Having assumed a human
semblance, for how many years did He reside in the company of the Vrsnis at Mathura (the
capital of the Yadus), and how many were the wives of the Lord? (11) You ought to relate
fully tome, endowed (as | am) with faith, O omniscient sage, this and all other exploits of
Sri Krsna. (12) This hunger, (so) very difficult to bear, does not (at all) afflict me, although
| have given up even water, drinking as | am the nectar of Sri Hari's story, flowing from your
lotus lips. (13)
सूत उवाच
एवं fara भृगुनन्दन साधुवादं वैयासकि: स भगवानथ विष्णुरातम् ।
प्रत्यर्च्य कृष्णचरितं कलिकल्मषघ्नं व्याहर्तुमारभत भागवतप्रधान: 1१४॥
Siita resumed : Having heard the saidlaudable question, O Sauriaka (ascion of Bhrgu),
and complimenting Pariksit (the protege of Lord Visnu), the glorious sage Suka (the son of

Vyasa), the foremost of the Lord's devotees, proceeded to narrate (as follows) the story of
Sri Krsna, that destroys the impurities of the Kali age. (14)

ATG उवाच
सम्यग्व्यवसिता बुद्धितव राजर्षिसत्तम।वासुदेवकथायां & यजाता नैष्ठिकी रति: ।१५॥
वासुदेवकथाप्रश्न: पुरुषांस्रीन् पुनाति हि। वक्तारं पृच्छकं श्रोतॄंस्तत्पादसलिलं यथा 1१६1

* Vide IX. xxiv. 46.
तं See IX. xxv. 54.
