366 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 17

HAHA EMA HAGA AHEM AREAAELEE HAA ERER EEE EER HECKER CHHKERACETLEVHKHH SS ew HHH

सनत्कुमाराद्भगवतो ब्रह्मन् ब्रह्मविदुत्तमात्। लब्ध्वा ज्ञानं सविज्ञानं राजर्षि: कां गतिं गत: । ५ ।
यच्चान्यदपि कृष्णस्य भवान् भगवत: WM: । श्रव: सुश्रवस: Wa पूर्वदेहकथाश्रयम् । ६ |
भक्ताय मेऽनुरक्ताय तव चाधोक्षजस्य च ।। वक्तुमर्हसि योऽदुह्यद्वैन्यरूपेण गामिमाम् । ७ |

Vidura said : Wherefore did Earth who could take any number of forms, (particularly)
assume the form of a cow that Prthu milked ? Who played the role of a calf for the time being
and what served as the milk-pail ? (3) Uneven (undulated) by nature, how was the earth
made even (levelled) by him? And with what motive did the god (Indra) steal away his
sacrificial horse? (4) Having acquired spiritual knowledge and wisdom (direct realization of
the Truth) from the worshipful sage Sanatkumara, the foremost of those who have realized
Brahma (the Absolute), O holy Brahmana, what was the destiny he attained to? (5) 1am your
loving devotee as well as of Lord Sri Krsna (who is above sense-perception). Therefore, be
pleased to recount to me all the other glorious and holy deeds of the almighty Lord Sri Krsna
of bright renown, connected with the story of that former manifestation of His; for (I know)
it was no other than Sri Krsna who milked this earth in the form of Prthu (sonof
Vena). (6-7)

Yd उवाच
चोदितो विदुरेणैवं वासुदेवकथां प्रति । प्रशस्य तं प्रीतमना मैत्रेय: प्रत्यभाषत । ८ ।
Sita continued : Urged in this way by Vidura to repeat the narrative of Lord Vasudeva,
the sage Maitreya applauded him and with a glad heart replied to him ( as follows). (8)
यदाभिषिक्त yas विप्रैरामन्रितो जनतायाश्च पाल: |
प्रजा fa क्षितिपृष्ठ एत्य क्षुत्षामदेहा: पतिमभ्यवोचन्। ९ ।
aq राजज्जञाठरेणाभितप्ता यथाग्निना कोटरस्थेन Qa: ।
ama याता: ar mug oa: साधितो वृत्तिकर: पतिर्न: 1201
यावन्न नङ्क्ष्यामह उज्झितोर्जा वार्तापतिस्त्वं किल लोकपाल: 1281
Maitreya said : When Prthu, dear Vidura, was crowned and appointed by the Brahmanas
as the ruler of the people, his subjects, whose body had been emaciated through starvation,
the soil being left without any (crop of) foodgrains, approached their lord and said: (9)
"Oppressed with the gastric fire even as trees with the fire burning in their hollows, O king,
we have resorted today for protection to you, who are fit to protect us and have been made
. available to us as our lord, capable of providing us with means of living. (10) You are the
protector of the world as well as the bestower of livelihood. Do you endeavour, therefore, to
give us food, afflicted as we are with hunger, O king of kings, before we perish for want of
provisions." (11)
पृथु: प्रजानां करुणं निशम्य परिदेवितम्। दीर्घं दध्यौ कुरुश्रेष्ठ निमित्तं सोऽन्वपद्यत । १२॥
इति व्यवसितो बुद्ध्या प्रगृहीतशारासन: । सन्दधे fara भूमे: क्रुद्धस्रिपुरहा यथा ।१३॥
प्रवेपमाना धरणी निशाम्योदायुधं च तम्।गौ: सत्यपाद्रवद्भीता मृगीव मृगयुद्गुता ex!
तामन्वधावत्तद्वैन्य: कुपितोऽत्यरुणेक्षण: । श्र धनुषि संधाय चत्र यत्र पलायते । १५॥
सा दिशो विदिशो देवी रोदसी चान्तरं तयो: । धावन्ती तत्र तत्रैनॆ ददर्शानूद्यतायुधम् ।१६॥
