Dis. 64] BOOK TEN

सि २२१२ २२२१ Sen EERIE विच्च् ier teri:

Wa देवाशुभं ya इति we पतेति स: । तावद्द्राक्षमात्मानं कृकलासं पतन् प्रभो । २४॥

ब्रह्मण्यस्य वदान्यस्य qa दासस्य केशव । स्मृतिर्नाद्यापि विध्वस्ता भवत्सन्दर्शनार्थिन: ।२५॥
स त्वं कथं मम विभोऽक्षिपथ: परात्मा योगेश्वरै: श्रुतिदृशामलहद्बिभाव्य: |
साक्षादधोक्षज BEARS: Aiea se यस्य भवापवर्ग: 1२६॥

देवदेव जगन्नाथ गोविन्द पुरुषोत्तम। नारायण ह्षीकेश पुण्यर्लोकाच्युताव्यय 1261

अनुजानीहि मां कृष्ण यान्तं देवगतिं प्रभो । यत्र क्वापि सतश्चेतो भूयान्मे त्वत्पदास्पदम् 1221

नमस्ते सर्वभावाय ब्रह्मणेऽनन्तशक्तये । कृष्णाय वासुदेवाच योगानां पतये नम: ।२९॥

(On a certain day.) a cow belonging to a holy Brahmana (who never accepted any gift
and was devoted to austerities) strayed and mingled with my cattle and, ignorant of the fact,
| gave it away to some (other) Brahmana. (16) While it was being led away (by the latter),
the real owner saw it and said to the Brahmana, " This is mine !* The Brahmana, who had
received it as a gift from me, said, ” This is mine; for King Nrga has given it to me." (17) Both
the Brahmanas, bent on establishing their respective claims, brought their dispute to me.
One of them said, ” You gave it tome." The other said, "If this is a fact, you must have stolen
the cow." | was confounded to hear what they said. (18) Placed on the horns of a dilemma,
| tried to conciliate both (the Brahmanas) and said, "| shall give you one lakh of excellent
cows; please give this over to me. (19) | am your devoted servant. May you be pleased to
forgive this fault committed unwittingly by me and save me from this embarrassing situation,
which willlead me to dirty hell." (20) The ownerof the cowsaid, "Oking! I willinno case accept
the offer made by you," and (abruptly) went away. The other (Brahmana also) departed
saying, "(In exchange for this you offer me a lakh of cows, but) !am not inclined to take even
ten thousand other cows." (21) O God of gods, O Lord of the universe, in the meanwhile (on
my death), | was taken by the messengers of Yama (the god of retribution) to his abode.
There Yama inquired of me, "O king, would you first reap the consequences of your evil
deeds, or enjoy the fruit of your meritorious acts ? | do not see any limit to the charities and
other virtues practised by you nor to the glorious life that awaits you (as their result)." (22-23)
| replied, “0 shining one, | shall first reap the consequences of my evil deeds." (Instantane-
ously) the god of Death said, “ Fall (then)", and falling from there, O Lord, | found myself
transformed into a chameleon. (24) O Krsna, a servant of the Brahmanas and liberal in my
gifts, | was devoted to You and ever craved for a direct vision of You. It is therefore that my
memory of the past has not been lost even today. (25) O Lord, You are the Supreme Self
contemplated and realized in their pure heart by the masters of Yoga through the eye of the
Upanisads. | therefore wonder how You, who are beyond sense-perception, came here
directly within my sight, whose reason is blinded by the sufferings of various kinds; for You
are visible to him alone whose release from the bondage of transmigration is near. (26) O
God of gods, O Protector of cows, O Supreme Person, Ruler of the universe, O most glorious
and infallible Lord, 0 undecaying One, O Narayana (the support of all Jivas), 0 Hrsikega
(prompter of the senses), O Krsna, (pray,) give me leave to go to my celestial abode. O Lord,
wherever | may be, may my mind ever dwell in Your feet. (27-28) O Creator of all, O
changeless One possessed of infinite energy (in the shape of Maya), hail to You. O Krsna,
O Vasudeva (the support of all creatures), O Master of all Yogas, | bow (again and again)
to You. (29) ॥ ॥

इत्युक्त्वा तं परिक्रम्य uel स्पृष्टा स्वमोलिना | अनुज्ञातो विमानाग्र्यमारुहत् पद्यतां FM 1301

Saying so, the king went round the Lord, touched His feet with his head, and with the

permission of the Lord mounted an excellent aerial car while all men stood looking on. (30)
