212 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 17

HHELSCHH AHEM RERHEAAHHELCEANHEESTEHEAESCRERSERCEE EEA EK S THEE ES AH RH HEH KLAN कौ KHATER ED I

arr विमना वार्धिरुदूर्मि:; क्षुभितोदर: । सोदपानाश्च सरितश्चुक्षुभु: 9 eRaET: । ७ ।
मुहु: परिधयोऽभूवन् are: शाशिसूर्ययो: । निर्घाता रथनिर्हादा विवरेभ्य: प्रजज्ञिरे । ८ |
अन्तर्ग्रमेषु मुखतो वमन्त्यो बह्निमुल्बणम्।सृगालोलूकटङ्कारै: प्रणेदुरशिवं झशिवा: । ९ ।
सङ्गीतवद्रोदनवदुन्नमय्य शिरोधराम् । व्यमुञ्चन् विविधा वाचो रामसिंहास्ततस्तत: । १०॥
खराश्च wet: क्षत्त: QE धरातलम्।खार्काररभसा मत्ता: पर्यथावन् aR: ।११॥
रुदन्तो रासभत्रस्ता नीडादुदपतन् खगा:। घोषेऽरण्ये च पशव: हाकृन्मूत्रमकुर्वत । १२।
गावोऽत्रसन्नसृग्दोहास्तोयदा: पूयवर्षिण: । व्यरुदन्देवलिङ्गानि am: पेतुर्विनानिलम् ।१३॥
ग्रहान् पुण्यतमानन्ये भगणांश्चापि after: । अतिचेरुर्वक्रगत्या युयुधुश्च परस्परम् ।१४॥
दृष्टान्यांश्च महोत्पातानतत्तत्त्वविद: प्रजा: । ब्रह्मपुत्रानृते भीता मेनिरे faerie

Maitreya continued : The gods (the denizens of heaven) were rid of fear on hearing the
cause (of the darkness) as explained by Brahma (the self-born); and then they all returned
to heaven. (1) As for Diti, that virtuous lady had been very apprehensive of trouble to the gods
from the children (in her womb) ever since her husband predicted the same, and brought
forth two twin sons after full one hundred years. (2) Even at the hour of their birth in that
hermitage, many an evil portent, which foreboded a great calamity to the world, occurred in
heaven andon earth as well as in the space between these two regions (in mid air). (3) Parts
of the globe shook along with the mountains; all the quarters appeared to be on fire, meteors
and thunderbolts descended on earth and comets portending grief appeared. (4) There blew
winds which were most uninviting to the touch, hissing again and again and uprooting
gigantic trees. They had storm for their army and clouds of dust for their ensigns. (5) The
luminaries in the heavens having been screened by masses of clouds in which lightnings
sometimes flashed as though laughing, darkness reigned everywhere, so that nothing could
be seen anywhere. (6) The ocean with its high waves wailed aloud as if stricken with sorrow,
and there was commotion among the creatures inhabiting its bowels. The rivers and lakes
etc., were also agitated and their lotuses withered. (7) Misty halos appeared round the sun
and the moon during solar and lunar eclipses again and again. Claps of thunder were heard
(even without clouds) and sounds like that of rattling chariots emerged from mountain
caves.(8) In the interior of villages she-jackals yelled portentously, vomiting a strong fire from
their mouth; and jackals and owls also joined them with their cries. (9) Raising their necks,
dogs uttered here and there various cries in the manner now of singing and now of wailing.
(10) And donkeys in rut ran hither and thither in herds, striking the earth, O Vidura, with their
hard hoofs and wildly braying. (11) Frightened with the (braying of the) donkeys, birds flew
shrieking out of their nests, while cattle in the cow-pens as well as in the woods passed dung
and urinated. (12) Cows yielded blood in place of milk from terror, clouds rained pus, the
images of gods shed tears and trees fell down without a blast. (13) Ominous planets (such
as-Mars and Saturn) shone brighter and surpassed the auspicious ones (such as Mercury,
Jupiter and Venus) as well as a number of lunar mansions and, taking a seemingly
retrograde course, came into conflict with one another. (14) Noticing these and other such
mighty portents of an evil type, people other than the sons of Brahma (Sanaka and others,
who were aware of the fall of Jaya and Vijaya and their birth as Diti's sons) were seized with
fear inasmuch as they did not know the secret of these portents, and thought that the
dissolution of the universe was at hand. (15)

तावादिदैत्यौ सहसा व्यज्यमानात्मपौरुषौ । ववृधातेऽश्मसारेण कायेनाद्रिपती इव । १६॥
दिविस्पृञो हेमकिरीटकोटिभिर्निरुद्धकाष्ठौ स्फुरदङ्गदाभुजौ |
