158 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 6

Frat rae nce ee ene ete dete eect res BeBe $e SASSER ARR RTA RTS SET STS PATI RAL OHTA IE SS EEE WE

Recalling the prayer of the deities presiding over the Mahat-tattva and other categories
(that had been entrusted with the duty of creating the universe), the Lord whois beyond sense-
perception illumined (aroused) the Cosmic Being with His own effulgence (in the shape of
consciousness) in order to awaken their potentialities. (10) Now hear from Meas | tell you how
many abodes for the deities (presiding over the senses of perception and the organs of action)
appeared (in the body) of the Cosmic Being, illumined as He now was (by the Lord's effulgence
in the shape of consciousness). (11) (First of all) there appeared in Him a mouth: the god of
fire, one of the (ten) protectors of the world, whose abode itis, entered it along with his power,
the organ of speech, by means of which the Jiva (embodied soul) utters words. (12) Then
appeared in (the body of) Sri Hari (the Cosmic Being) a palate, the abode of Varuna (the god
presiding over the waters), another protector of the world, who entered it along with his power,
the sense of taste, by means of which the Jiva perceives taste. (13) Next appeared in (the body
of) the Cosmic Being a pair of nostrils, the abode of the twin gods Aswins (the celestial
physicians), who entered them along with their power, the olfactory sense, the means of
perceiving odour. (14) Now appeared in (the body of) the Cosmic Being a pair of eyes: Twasta
(the sun-god), another protector of the world, entered them, along with his power, the sense
of sight, the means of perceiving colours. (15) Again, appeared on His body the skin (the seat
of the tactile sense); the wind-god, another protector of the world, entered it along with his
power, the tactile sense, by means of which the Jiva experiences touch. (16) Further, appeared
in His body a pair of ears, the personal abode of Digdevatas (the deities presiding over the
cardinal points), who entered them along with their power, the auditory sense by means of
which the Jiva perceives sound. (17) Then appeared on His body the skin” (the seat of the hair),
the abode of the deities presiding over the annual plants or herbs (that die after they have
ripened), who entered it along with their power in the shape of the hair, by means of which the
Jiva feels the itching sensation. (18) Next appeared on His body a penis, the abode of
Prajapati himself (the god presiding over creation), who enteredit along with his power, the
capacity to procreate, by means of which the Jiva experiences the joy of copulation. (19) Now
appeared in (the body of) the Cosmic Being an anus: the god Mitra (one of the twelve sons
of Aditi who preside over the sun by rotation for one month), a protector of the world, entered
it along with his power, the organ of defecation, by means of which the Jiva evacuates his
bowels. (20) Again appeared on His body a pair of hands (arms): the god Indra, the lord of
paradise, entered them along with his power, the capacity to hold and let go an object, by
means of which the Jiva makes his living.(21) Further appeared on His person a pair of feet
` (legs): Lord Visnu, the (supreme) protector of the world, entered them along with His Power,
the faculty of locomotion, by means ot which the Jiva reaches the place heintends to visit.(22)
Subsequently appeared in Him the intellect, the abode of Brahma (the lord of Saraswati, the
goddess presiding over speech), who entered it along with his power, the faculty of
understanding, the means of apprehending that which is to be known. (23) Thereafter
appearéd in Him a heart, the abode of the moon-god, who entered it along with his power,
the mind, by means of which the Jiva indulges in thoughts of various kinds. (24) Subsequent
to this appearedin Him the ego, the abode of the god Rudra (the deity presiding over the ego),
who entered it along with his power, the feeling of egotism, by means of which the Jiva
entertains the sense of duty. (25)

सत्त्वं चास्य विनिर्भिन्नं महान्धिष्ण्यमुपाविशात्। चित्तेनांशेन येनासौ विज्ञानं प्रतिपद्यते । २६
शीष्णोऽस्य द्यौर्धरा पद्भ्यां खं नाभेरुदपद्यत । गुणानां वृत्तयो येषु प्रतीयन्ते सुरादय: । २७।
“Skin has been enumerated twice in this connection because itis believed tobe the seat of two distinct senses, the sense

of touch and the itching sensation. In the former case the presiding deity is the wind-god. while in the latter case it Is said to
be the abode of the deities presiding over annual plants or herbs, that die as soon as they have ripened. (See Il. X. 22)
