430 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 74

SRERMEGH HOLA ATLL LE TESTE EE ELT EEE EES Ee ee ere EE ee ERE REN te

‘cheered them with sweet words and sent them away to their respective territories. (28) Thus
delivered from their calamity by the high-souled Sri Krsna, the kings left for their capitals,
contemplating on the Lord, His virtues and noble deeds. (29) Reaching their kingdoms, they
related to their subjects the benevolent doings of the Supreme Person and diligently followed
His injunctions in their daily lives. (30)
ws घातयित्वा भीमसेनेन Sea: । पार्थाभ्यां संयुत: प्रायात् सहदेवेन पूजित: ।३१॥
गत्वा ते खाण्डवप्रस्थं शङ्खान् दध्मुर्जितारय: । tea: स्वसुहृदो set ura: 1321
तच्छुत्वा प्रीतमनस इन्द्रप्रस्थनिवासिन: । मेनिरे मागधं ard राजा चाप्तमनोरथ: 1331
अभिवन्द्याय राजानं भीमार्जुनजनार्दना: | सर्वमाश्रावयाञ्चक्रुरात्मना यदनुष्ठितम् ।३४॥
निशम्य धर्मराजस्तत् केरावेनानुकम्पितम्। आनन्दाश्रुकलां मुञ्चन् dom नोवाच किञ्चन 1341
Pariksit, thus having Jarasandha killed by Bhimasena, and being duly honoured by
Jarasandha's son, Sahadeva, Sri Krsna, accompanied by Bhima and Arjuna, departed (for
Indraprastha). (31) On reaching the outskirts of the city, the three victorious heroes blew
their respective conchs, bringing joy to their friends and sorrow to their enemies. (32) The
people of Indraprastha were extremely delighted at heart to hear the sound and concluded
at once that Jarasandha had been killed and that King Yudhisthira had well-nigh achieved
his object. (33) There Bhimasena, Arjuna and Sri Krsna bowed to King Yudhisthira and
related to him all that they had done. (34) Overwhelmed with emotion at the exceptional

favour shown to him by Bhagavan Sri Krsna, King Yudhisthira shed tears of joy and could
not speak a word. (35)

Thus ends the seventy-third discourse, bearing on the return of Sri Krsna and others (to
Indraprastha), in the latter half of Book Ten of the great and glorious Bhagavata-
Purana, otherwise known as the Paramahamsa-Samhita.

Singiner:
PIRES Sirs

BAY चतु:सप्ततितमोऽध्याय:
Discourse LXXIV
Sisupala killed (by Sri Krsna)
SR उवाच
एवं युधिष्ठिरो राजा जरासन्धवघं विभो:। कृष्णस्य चानुभावं तं yen प्रीतस्तमव्रवीत् । १ ।

$riSuka began again: Pariksit, Yudhisthira was highly delighted tohear of Jarasandha's
tall and of the supreme glory of Bhagavan Sri Krsna, and spoke to Him as follows. (1)

युधिष्ठिर उवाच
a waters: wd लोकमहेश्वरा: । वहन्ति दुर्लभं wear शिरसैवानुशासनम् । २ ।
a भवानरविन्दाक्षो दीनानामीरामानिनाम्। धत्तेऽनुशासनं भूमंस्तदत्यन्तविडम्बनम् । ३ ।
न ह्येकस्याद्दितीयस्य ब्रह्मण: परमात्मन: । कर्मभिर्वर्धते at gat च यथा Gey
न वै तेऽजित भक्तानां ममाहमिति mea । त्वं aaa च नानाधी: पदूनामिव वैकृता । ५ ।
