Dis. 1] BGOK TEN 103

Sera hhh eee HHA Ee EL EEE न नजसनननन२ २२२२ ० २२२२ २२२२ २२२२ २२२१२२ २२२२ १

equanimity in Vasudeva (the son of Sidra) as well as his unflinching devotion to truth, Karhsa,
O Pariksit, smilingly spoke the following words—(59) "Let this boy return (to your protection),
for there is no fear to me from him. Obviously my death has been decreed at the hands of
your eighth progeny." (60) Taking the boy with the word "Amen’ Vasudeva returned (home).
(Of course) he did not rejoice over those words of Karhsa (the wicked one) of uncontrolled
mind. (61)

नन्दाद्या ये व्रजे गोपा याश्चामीषां च योषित: । वृष्णयो वसुदेवाद्या देवक्याद्या यदुस्रिय: 1821
wa वै dana उभयोरपि भारत।ज्ञातयो aque ये च केसमनुव्रता: 1631
GH See भगवाञ्छलंसाभ्येत्य नारद: । भूमेर्भारायमाणानां दैत्यानां च वधोद्यमम् । ६४
matin केसो यदून् मत्वा सुरानिति । देवक्या गर्भसम्भूतं विष्णुं च aad प्रति । ६५॥
देवकीं वसुदेवं च निगृह्य निगडैर्गृहे। जातं जातमहन् पुत्रं तयोरजनशङ्कया ।६६1
mat fiat भ्रातॄन् सर्वाश्च सुहृदस्तथा । घ्नन्ति ह्यसुतृपो लुब्धा राजान: saa भुवि । ६७।
आत्मानमिह सञ्जातं जानन् प्राग् विष्णुना हतम्। महासुरं कालेनेमिं यदुभि: स व्यरुध्यत ।६८॥
उग्रसेने च fiat चदुभोजान्धकाधिपम्।स्वयं fre बुभुजे शूरसेनान् महाबल: 168)
इति श्रीमद्भागवते महापुराणे पारमहंस्यां संहितायां दशमस्कने पर्वार्धे श्रीकृष्णावतारोपक्रमे प्रथमोऽध्याय: 121

"Whatever cowherds there are in Vraja, the foremost of whom is Nanda, and again (all)
those who are their wedded wives, the Vrsnis led by Vasudeva, and Yadava women headed
by Devaki, nay, (even) the kinsmen, relatives and friends of both Nanda and Vasudeva, who
are devoted to Karhsa (yourself) are all for the most part gods themselves." This was what
the all-powerful sage Narada communicated to Karnsa, going to him (of his own accord), and
also apprized him of the endeavours (of Brahma and the other gods) for the destruction of the
Daityas, that constituted a burden to Mother Earth, O Pariksit (a scion of Bharata)! (62—64)
Believing the Yadus to be (so many) gods, and Lord Visnu as about to appear from the womb
of Devaki for the purpose of slaying him, and binding Devaki and Vasudeva with fetters in
their own residence after the departure of the (celestial) sage, Karhsa did to death every
son of the said couple even as he was born, suspecting him to be the (birthless) Visnu
(Himself). (65-66) Greedy monarchs given to self-gratification on this earth generally, as a
matter of fact, kill their (own) father and mother, brothers as well as all their relations. (67)
Knowing himself to have been, in a previous existence, the great demon Kalanemi, slain by
Visnu and reborn (as Karhsa) in current life, he entered into hostilities with the Yadus. (68)
Nay, putting in prison his (own) father, Ugrasena—the lord of the Yadus, the Bhojas and the
Andhakas—the mighty Karhsa ruled over the Surasena territory himself. (69)

Thus ends the first discourse, forming an introduction to the descent of Lord Sri Krsna,
in the first half of Book Ten of the great and glorious Bhagavata-Purana,
othenvise known as the Paramaharhsa-Samhita.

pet is ts
Pee Sees
