Dis. 77 ] BOOK TEN 443

EKSHRELAAHELA MERE AAW EE ERE REE REESE E LEAST EERE EREE RSE EE SEEN EES hee EAE

Reaching there, He found His people in a sad plight. Entrusting Balarama with the work of
defending the city and, observing Salva and his aerial car, Saubha, He said to (His
charioteer), Daruka, (as follows).(9) “Take My chariot with great despatch to Salva, owner
-of the aerial car, Saubha. Take care that you do not get frightened; for he is a warrior skilled
in the use of magic." (10) Thus instructed, Daruka mounted the chariot and drove it to the
battle-field. As soon as Sri Krsna entered the field of battle, warriors onboth sides recognized
Him from the emblem of Garuda borne on His banner. (11) (Pariksit !) Salva’s army had
mostly been extirpated. Observing Sri Krsna on the battle-field, Salva discharged a terrible
lance aimed at His charioteer. With a terrible noise it rushed through the air with great speed
like a meteor illumining the quarters. Bhagavan Sri Krsna tore that lance into a hundred pieces
with his arrows, hit Salva with sixteen shafts and pierced the aerial car Saubha, that was
wheeling in the sky, with volleys of arrows, even as the sun fills the space with his rays. (12—14)
In the meantime Salva hit Sri Krsna in the left arm with an arrow, The Sarfiga bow which was
being held by that arm fell from Sri Krsna’s hand. It was a wonderful feat on the part of
SAlva.(15) A loud outcry of wonder and fear rose from beings who watched the conflict (from
the sky or from the ground). Salva now gave a loud roar and said to Sri Krsna:— (16) ° 0
deluded fool, you carried away before our very eyes the fiance of our friend and brother,
Sisupala, and killed him in an assembly, when he was off his guard. (17) I know you regard
yourself as invincible. But if you stand before me in this fight today, | shall, with my sharp
arrows, send you to the region from where people do not return.” (18)

4 य
वृथा त्वं कत्थसे मन्द न पश्यस्यन्तिकेऽन्तकम् । पौरुषं दर्शयन्ति स्म शूरा न बहुभाषिण: ।१९॥
FE भगवाञ्छाल्वं गदया भीमवेगया । तताड जत्रो संरब्ध: स चकम्पे वमन्नसृक 1201
Tet सन्निवृत्तायां शाल्वस्त्वन्तरधीयत।ततो get आगत्य ges: शिरसाच्युतम् ।
देवक्या प्रहितोऽस्मीति नत्वा प्राह वचो रुदन् । २१॥
कृष्ण कृष्ण ere पिता ते पितॄवत्सल । बद्ध्वापनीत: झाल्वेन सौनिकेन यथा VY: 1221
Fara fait कृष्णो मानुषीं प्रकृतिं गात: । विमनस्को घृणी Sere बभाषे प्राकृतो यथा ।२३॥
ee warmed जित्वाजेयं सुरासुरै: | शाल्वेनाल्पीयसानीत: पितामेबलवान्विधि: । २४॥
इति gant गोविन्दे सोभराट् प्रत्युपस्थित: । वसुदेवमिवानीय कृष्णं चेदमुवाच स: 124!
एष ते जनिता तातो यदर्थमिह जीवसि । वधिष्ये वीक्षतस्तेऽमुमीश्चैत् पाहि aes । २६॥
एवं fei मायावी खड्गेनानकदुन्दुभे: । उत्कृत्य er आदाय wei सौभं समाविञत् । २७॥
ततो मुहूर्तं प्रकृतावुपप्नुतत स्वबोधं आस्ते स्वजनानुषङ्गत: ।
महानुभावस्तदबुद्ध्यदासुरीं wat स शाल्वप्रसृतां मयोदिताम् । २८॥
न तत्र दूतं न पितु: कलेवरं sag set समपञ्यदच्युत: |
mi यथा चाम्बरचारिणं fig सौभस्थमालोक्य निहन्तुमुद्यत: । २९1
Bhagavan Sri Krsna replied ; “ 0 fool, in vain do you brag. You do not perceive Death
standing before you. True heroes do not waste their words, but exhibit their prowess in
battle." (19) Saying this, Bhagavan Sri Krsna in great rage struck Salva with tremendous
- force on the collar-bone with His mace. It made Salva shake from head to foot and vomit
blood. (20) When the mace returned to the Lord, Salva for his part (suddenly) disappeared.
Then after an hour a certain person came in, bowed with is head bent low to Sri Krsna and

bursting into tears, said—* I have brought a message from Devaki. (21) She says, "O Krsna
of mighty arms, most devoted to parents, Your father has been captured and carried away
