650 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 1

HHL ह जत्री डी REAM EHH EEE HH त्या OHHH LOCK EECERETE ORE EEA EER HERTHA ERNE HEHEHE SHAE
+ <. sx 4 x ३ ८ 5,
एवं Wet स्वभवनात् Va a: कृपालुभि: । प्रोक्तां पुनर्जन्मभिर्वां त्रिभिर्लोकाय कल्पताम् 13¢ |

Narada replied : (While) traversing the three spheres (heaven, earth and the
intermediate region), the sage Sanandana and his (three) brothers, sons of Brahma (the
Creator), Once went to the realm (Vaikuntha) of Lord Visnu by the Lord's (own) will. (35)
Though born before the elders (in Brahma’'s creation, Marici and others), they look like
children of five to six years of age and have no covering on their body except the quarters.
Accounting them infants, the two gate-keepers (Jaya and Vijaya) stopped them. (36) Full of
anger, they (the sages) cursed them thus : "You do not even deserve to dwell at the soles
of (much less serve) the feet of Lord Visnu (the Slayer of the demon Madhu), which are free
from (all tinge of) Rajas (passion) and Tamas (ignorance). Therefore, enter you at once, O
fools, the most sinful demoniac womb !" (37) Cursed in the aforesaid words, the two gate-
keepers (of Vaikuntha) were, while falling down from their abode, addressed once more (as
follows) bythe merciful sages (Sanaka and others): "Let this imprecation make for your return
to your realm at the end of three incarnations." (38)

जज्ञाते तौ दिते: पुत्रौ दैत्यदानववन्दितौ | fewaenfergetet हिरण्याक्षोऽनुजस्तत: । ३९1
हतो हिरण्यकशिपुर्हरिणा सिंहरूपिणा । हिरण्याक्षो धरोद्धारे बिभ्रता सौकरं वपु: ।४०॥
हिरण्यकशिपु: पुत्रं xgeé केशवप्रियम्। जिघांसुरकरोन्नाना यातना मृत्युहेतवे xe
सर्वभूतात्मभूतं तं प्रशान्ते ANA भगवत्तेजसा स्पृष्टं नारशक्नोद्धन्तुमुद्यमै: ।४२॥

They were born as Hiranyakasipu and Hiranyaksa (the two sons of Diti), the adored of
the Daityas and the Danavas (alike). Hiranyakasipu was the elder; while Hiranyaksa, the
younger, was born afterwards. (39) Hiranyakasipu was slain by Sri Hari, who had taken the
form of a lion (Lord Nrsirnha); and Hiranyaksa was killed by Him even as He assumed the
body of a boar for the sake of lifting up the earth (from water). (40) Anxious to get rid of his
son, Prahrada, the beloved of Lord Visnu (the Protector of both Brahma and Siva),
Hiranyakasipu inflicted on him tortures of various kinds in order to bring about his death, but
could not kill with (all) his devices that perfectly tranquil boy, who had identified himself with
all living beings, looked upon all with the same eye, and was invested with a divine
glory. (41-42)

ततस्तो Tea जातौ केशिन्यां विश्रव:सुतो । रावण: कुम्भकर्णश्च सर्वलोकोपतापनौ ।४३॥
तत्रापि राघवो भूत्वा न्यहनच्छापपुक्तये।राग्मबोर्यंश्रोष्यसित्वंमार्कंण्डेफ्याप्रभॊ 1४४॥
aaa क्षत्रियौ जातो मातृषुस्नात्मजौ तव । अधुना जापनिर्मुक्तौ कृष्णचक्रहतांहसौ xu!
वैरानुबन्धतीव्रेण ध्यानेनाच्युतसात्मताम् | att «Ua: पार्श्व जग्मतुर्विष्णुपार्घदौ ।`४६॥

Then (in the next birth) they were born as a pair of Raksasas (ogres), the tormenters of
all the worlds, Ravana and Kumbhakarna (by name), sons of the sage ViSrava by KeSini. (48)
In order to redeem them from the curse the Lord slew them in that birth too, assuming the
form of Sri Rama (a scion of Raghu). You will hear about the valour of Sri Rama from the lips
of the sage Markandeya, O king ! (44) Those very Raksasas (Ravana and Kumbhakarna)
were born (again) in the Ksatriya race as Sisupala and Dantavaktra (sons of your maternal
aunts). Their sins (in the shape of their impure bodies that were guilty of offence against the
Lord) having been destroyed by the discus (Sudargana) of Lord Sri Krsna, they have now
(at the end of three incarnations) been redeemed from the curse (of Sanaka and his three
brothers). (45) Having (first) been exalted to the state of absorption into the immortal Lord
(Sri Krsna) through contemplation intensified by constant enmity, they (eventually) returned
to the (divine) presence of Sri Hari as attendants of Lord Visnu. (46)
