292 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 45

SERN SSE RAI RET BIE SEE AN 8 Be RYE YP IT 8 SETTER RE SOTTO 8 Be Ee a ar ars trenton wea

सिञ्चन्तावश्रुधाराभि: स्नेहपाशोन चावृतौ । न किञ्चिदूचतू राजन् arernvel विमोहितौ ।११॥

Sri Suka continued ; Deluded by the foregoing speech of Sri Hari, the Soul of the
universe, though appearing as a human being through His Maya (enchanting potency), His
parents experienced supreme felicity as they placed Him on their lap and folded Him in their
arms. (10) Bathing Him with streams of tears and bound with ties of affection the couple said
nothing, O king, bewildered as they were, their throats choked with tears. (11)

एवमाश्वास्य पितरॊ भगवान् देवकीसुत: । मातामहं तूग्रसेने यदूनामकरोन्नृपम् ।१२।
आह चास्मान् महाराज प्रजाश्चाज्ञप्नुमर्हसि | ययातिञ्ञापाद् यदुभिर्नासितव्यं नृपासने ।१३॥
Wa ya उपासीने भवतो विब्रुधादय: । बलिं हरन्त्यवनता: किमुतान्ये नराधिपा: । १४॥
सर्वान्स्वान्ज्ञातिसंबन्धान्दिग्थ्य:कंसभयाकुलान्। यदुवृष्ट्यन्थकमधुदाशार्हकुकुरादिकान् ।॥१५॥
सभाजितान् समाश्वास्य विदेशावासकर्शितान् । न्यवासयत् स्वगेहेषु वित्तै: tae विश्वकृत् । १६
कृष्णसंकर्षणभुजैर्गुप्ता लब्धमनोरथा: । गृहेषु रेमिरे सिद्धा: कृष्णरामगतज्वरा: । १७॥
वीक्षन्तोऽहरह: प्रीता मुकुन्दवदनाम्बुजम् । fe प्रमुदितं श्रीमत् सदयस्मितवीक्षणम् 1१८
तत्र प्रवयसोऽप्यासन् युवानोऽतिबलौजस: । पिबन्तोऽकषैर्मुकुन्दस्य मुखाम्बुजसुधां मुहु: 1981

Having thus comforted His parents Lord Sri Krsna (the Son of Devaki) presently made
His maternal grand-uncle, Ugrasena, king of the Yadus and said, "Be pleased to command
us (your servants) as well as the people (of Mathura), O great king !(As for myself) the Yadus
ought not to sit on a royal throne because of the curse of Yayati. (Since, however, itis My
desire to see you on the throne of Mathura no blame will attach to you). (12-13) When | am
waiting on you as a servant, (even) the gods and others will bear tribute to you, bent low (with
submissiveness). What wonder, then, that other rulers of men should do so." (14) Calling
back from the (various) quarters all His kinsmen and relations—the Yadus, the Vrsnis, the
Andhakas, the Madhus, the Dasarhas, the Kukuras and others—that had fled through fear
of Karnsa and had been pulled down on account of their staying abroad—({nay,) consoling
them fully and highly gratifying them with riches, SrikKrsna (the Maker of the universe) settled
them in their own houses when they had been (duly) honoured. (15-16) Protected by the (all-
powerful) arms of Sri Krsna’ and Sankarsana and having realized their ambition and
accomplished their purpose, they lived happily in their homes, (all) their agony having
disappeared due to (the grace of) Sri Krsna and Balarama. (17) They felt rejoiced to gaze
everyday on the lotuslike countenance of Sri Krsna (the Bestower of Liberation), which was
ever fullof ecstatic joy, charming and enlivened with compassionate and smiling glances. (18)
Drinking now and again with (the cup of) their eyes the nectar-like beauty of the lotus face
of SriKrsna (the Bestower of Liberation), even the aged there (at Mathura) turned young and
acquired great strength and energy. (19),

अथ नन्दं समासाद्य भगवान् देवकीसुत:। संकर्षणश्च राजेन्र परिषुज्येदमूचतु: 1201
पितर्युवाभ्यां स्निग्धाभ्यां पोषितो लालितौ sau पित्रोरभ्वधिका प्रीतिरात्मजेष्ठात्मनोऽपि हि 1221
स पिता सा च जननी at पुष्णीतां स्वपुत्रवत्। शिशून् बन्धुभिरुत्सृष्टानकल्पै: पोषरक्षणे 1221
aa यूयं wi तात वयं च स्नेहदु:खितान्। ज्ञातीन् वो द्रष्टुमेष्यामो विधाय सुहृदां सुखम् । २३
एवं सान्त्वब्य भगवान् नन्दं सव्रजमच्युत: | वासोऽलङ्कारकुप्याद्यैर्हयामास सादरम् ।२४॥
इत्युक्तस्तौ परिधज्य नन्द: प्रणयविह्वल: । पूरयन्नश्रुभिर्नेत्रे owe Wt ययौ ।२५॥

Meanwhile duly approaching Nanda and embracing him, Lord Sri Krsna (the Son of

