698 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 8

SENSE EREMESE RAEI AAAI NITE EERE SSSI AAAI EGE मामा MES CACME ME RH RCE BE

ब्रह्मा भृगुर्भवो दक्षो ब्रह्मपुत्राश्च ये oti नृदेवपितृभ्रूतानि तेनासन्नतिविस्मिता: । १२॥
sa बृहद्तधरस्तप:स्वाध्यायसंयमै: | दध्यावधोक्षजं योगी ध्वस्तक्लेशान्तरात्मना । १३॥
aad युञ्जतश्चित्तं महायोगेन योगिन: । व्यतीयाय महान् कालो मन्वन्तरषडात्मक: । १४॥
एतत् पुरन्दरो ज्ञात्वा सप्तमेऽस्मिन् किलान्तरे। तपोविशाङ्कितो ब्रह्मन्नारेभे तद्विघातनम् |

Sita replied: This inquiry made by you, 0 great sage, is (surely) intended to dispel a
(great) misapprehension lurking in the mind of the people. (Moreover) in replying to this will
have to be told the story of Sri Narayana, which (when sung) washes off the impurities of the
Kali age. (6) Having gone through at the hands of his father in due course the sacred rite of
investiture with the sacred thread (which constitutes the second birth of a boy of the twice-
born classes) and studied the Vedas in the righteous way (according to the scriptural
ordinance), Markandeya was equipped (in course of time) with asceticism and knowledge
of the Veda. (7) Observing the vow of lifelong celibacy, and free from passions, he wore
matted locks (on his head) and the sacred thread and a girdle of Maja grass (about his
person) and used the bark for his clothing. He carried (in his hands) a staff, a handful of (the
sacred) Kuga grass, a Kamandalu (a vessel made from the shell of a wild cocoanut) and the
skin of a black buck and a rosary of Rudraksa beads (on his person). For the enhancement
of his virtue he worshipped Sri Hari both morning and evening through the medium of the
sacred fire, the sun, the preceptor and (other) Brahmanas, as well as by identifying himself
with Him. (8-9) Bringing food by way of alms morning and evening for the sake of his
preceptor, he silently partook of it (only) when allowed by his teacher and at times remained
without foad if not (so) permitted (due to the sudden appearance of an unexpected guest). (10)
Remaining devoted to austerities and study of the Vedas as aforesaid and worshipping Sri
Hari (the Ruler of the senses of all) for a crore of years, he conquered death, which is most
difficult to conquer. (11) Brahma (the creator), Lord Siva (the Source of the universe), Bhrgu,
Daksa and all the other sons of Brahma, (nay,) men, gods, manes and other created beings
were much astonished at that (extraordinary achievement of Markandeya). (12) Observing
thus the vow of lifelong celibacy and equipped with asceticism, study of the Vedas and self-
control, the Yogi (Markandeya) contemplated on Lord Sri Hari (who is above sense-
perception) with a mind that had turned inward due to (all) hindrances (in the shape of
ignorance, egotism, likes and dislikes and fear of death) standing in its way having been
completely destroyed. (13) (Even) as the said Yogi was (busy) concentrating his mind
through the great Yoga (of meditation on the Lord), a very long period, covering six
Manvantaras, elapsed. (14) Coming to know of this and alarmed at (the magnitude of) his
askesis, Indra the lord of paradise), itis said, started interruptingitin this seventh Manvantera
(for fear of losing his throne), O Saunaka | (15)

गन्धर्वाप्सरस: कामं वसन्तमलयानित्मै । मुनये प्रेषयामास रजस्तोकमदौ तथा eal
a वै तदाश्रमे जग्मुर्हिमाद्रे: पार्श्व उत्तरे। पुष्पभद्रा नदी यत्र चित्राख्या च शिला विभो । १७॥
तदाश्रमपदं पुण्यं पुण्यद्रुमलताञ्चितम्। पुण्यद्विजकुलाकीर्णं पुण्यामलजलारायम् C1
मत्तभ्रमरसङ्गीतं मत्तकोकिलकूजितम् । मत्तबर्हिनटाटोपं भत्तद्विजकुलाकुलम् 1१९1
ay: प्रविष्ट आदाय हिमनिर्झरशीकरान्। सुमनोभि: परिघुक्तो ववावुत्तम्भयन् स्मरम् ।२०॥
उद्यच्चन्रनिशावक्त्र प्रवालस्तबकालिभि: । गोपद्रुमलताजालैस्तत्रासीत् कुसुमाकर: ।२१॥
अन्वीयमानो गन्धरवैर्गीतवादित्रयूथकै: । अदृग्यतात्तचापेषु: स्व:स्रीयूथपति: स्मर: 1२२॥
