812 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 19

FEAR Rh PR Rte SER HR PR eee eee SHR ESTONIAN SOO E AHS REHEARSE HEH

Bali submitted: | (hereby) extend my (hearty) welcome to you ! May salutations be to
you, O (holy) Brahmana ! What can | do for you? | look upon you, O noble one, as the austerity
incarnate of Brahmana seers.(29) Today the spirits of our deceased forefathers are (fully)
sated; today our (entire) race is hallowed and today (alone) this sacrifice (of ours) is
successfully performed in that you have visited my house.(30) Today my (sacred) fires stand
properly fed according to the scriptural ordinance, O son of a (holy) Brahmana ! And lo ! this
land as well of mine—whose sins have been destroyed by the waters used in washing your
feet—has been consecrated by your tiny feet. (31) (Pray,) take from me whatever you desire,
O Brahmacari; (for) | infer you, 0 son of a (holy) Brahmana, to be one who seeks for
something. (Therefore,) duly accept (from me), O most worthy one, a cow, gold, a house
provided with (all) luxuries and comforts, as well as delicious food and drink or evena maid,
O (holy) Brahmana, prosperous villages, horses or elephants and chariots.(32)

Thus ends the eighteenth discourse, bearing on the descent of the divine
Dwarf and comprising the dialogue between King Bali and Lord
Vamana, in Book Eight of the great and glorious
Bhagavata-Purana, otherwise known as the
Paramahamsa-Samnita.

ct Peat iwar hs
(PDO RES

अथैकोनविंशोऽध्याय:
Discourse XIX ॥
The Lord asks three paces of land of Bali, who gives his word; while Sukra
remonstrates with him against this course
श्रीरुक उवाच
इति वैरोचनेर्वाक्यं oie ससूनृतम्। निशम्य भगवान्प्रीत: प्रतिनन्द्येदमब्रवीत्। १ ।

Sri Suka resumed: The Lord was delighted to hear the aforesaid speech of Bali (the son
of Virocana), which was not only just but agreeable and full of truth (as well); and welcoming
it, He spoke as follows. (1)

a

श्रीभगवानुवाच

यस्य yam wa: साम्पराये पितामह: कुलवृद्ध: प्रशान्त: । २ |
न ह्येतस्मिन्कुले कश्चिन्नि:सत्त्व: कृपण: a प्रत्याख्याता प्रतिश्रुत्य यो वादाता द्विजातये । ३ ।

नसन्तितीर्थेवुथिन्रार्थिनाथिंता:पराङ्मुखायेत्वपनस्विनोनृपा:।

युष्मत्कुले यद्यशसामलेन प्रह्राद उद्भाति यथोडुपर खे । ४ ।
यतो wal हिरण्याक्षश्चरन्नेक इमां महीम्।प्रतिवीरं दिग्विजये नाविन्दत गदायुध: । ५ |
यं विनिर्जित्य कृच्छ्रेण विष्णु: eaten आगतम्। नात्मानं जयिनं मेने तद्वीर्यं भूर्यनुस्मरन्। ६ ।
fara agi भ्राता हिरण्यकशिपु: पुरा । हन्तुं भ्रातृहणं क्रुद्धो जगाम निलयं हरे: । ७ |
TI समालोक्य ञ्मूलपाणिं कृतान्तवत्। चिन्तयामास कालज्ञो विष्णुर्मायाविनां वर: । ८ |
यतो यतोऽहं तत्रासौ मृत्यु: प्राणभृतामिव । अतोऽहमस्य हृदयं प्रवेक्ष्यामि पराग्दृश: । ९ ।
