222 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 20

THERA ini itor ton rtirrioitr tere Cee ee eee eee Ree eee eee ee ee Rete eR Ree Rr He He Be He KH EAL

assumed the form ofa boar forthe sake of rescuing the earth. (37) This most sacred narrative
confers extraordinary merit, wealth, fame, longevity and all the objects of one’s desire. On
the field of battle it promotes the strength of one’s vital organs and organs of action. Those
who listen to it at the last moment of their life find their asylum in Lord Narayana, O dear
Saunaka ! (38)

Thus ends the nineteenth discourse entitled the "Death of Hiranyaksa"
in Book Three of the great and glorious Bhagavata-Purana,
otherwise known as the Paramahamsa-Samhita.

SEPT २ तज्यं १९
त्ज्ज Sieve

अथ विंशोऽध्याय:

Discourse XX

The various species of living beings created by Brahma
शोनक sara

महीं प्रतिष्ठामध्यस्य सौते स्वायम्भुवो मनु: । कान्यन्वतिष्ठद् द्वाराणि मार्गायावरजन्म्नाम् । १ |

क्षत्ता महाभागवत: कृष्णस्यैकान्तिक: सुहत्। यस्तत्याजाग्रजं कृष्णे सापत्यमघवानिति । २ ।

द्वेपायनादनवरो महित्वे तस्य देहज: । सर्वात्मना Bra: कृष्णं तत्परांश्चाप्यनुव्रत: | ३ |

किमन्वपृच्छन्मेत्रेयं विरजास्तीर्थसेवया । उपगम्य कुशावर्त आसीनं तत्त्ववित्तमम् । ४ |

तयो: संवदतो: सूत NG ह्यमला: कथा: । आपो MET इवाघघ्नीर्हरे: पादाम्बुजाश्रया: | ५ |

ता a: aida भद्रं ते कीर्तन्योदारकर्मण: । रसज्ञ: को नु तृप्येत हरिलीलामृतं पिबन्। ६ ।

Saunaka said : "Having secured a foothold in the shape of the earth, O son of Suta

(Romaharsana), what means did Swayambhuva Manu adopt for evolving the other crea-
tures that were yet to see the light ? (1) Vidura was a great devotee of the Lord and adevoted
friend of Sri Krsna. He abandoned his own elder brother (Dhrtarastra) along with the latter's
sons (Duryodhana and others) because they had offended against Sri Krsna (by turning a
deaf ear to His counsel and behaving inimically towards His beloved Pandavas). (2) Sprung
from the loins of the sage Dwaipayana (Vedavyasa), he was in no way inferiorto him in glory.
Nay, he was devoted to Si Krsna with all his being and attached to His devotees. (3) Further
cleansed of all his sins by resorting to sacred places, what else did he enquire of the sage
Maitreya, the foremost among the knowers of Truth, on meeting him at Kusavarta
(Haridwara), where he was living ?(4) In the course of their conversation, O Sita, there must
have proceeded sacred stories centring round the lotus-feet of Sri Hari, and hence capable
of wiping out all sins like the waters of the holy Ganga, that have their source in those very
feet. (5) May God bless you, please narrate to us those very stories of the Lord, whose
noble deeds are the only achievements worth glorifying. What man who has his aesthetic
sense developed would feel sated with drinking in the nectar-like stories of Sri Hari’s
pastimes?” (6)

wget: पृष्टं ऋषिभिर्नैमिषायनै: | भगवत्यर्पिताध्यात्मस्तानाह श्रूयतामिति । ७ ।

Questioned thus by the sages staying in Naimisa, Ugragrava, with his mind fixed on the

Lord, said to them, “Listen!” (7)
