334 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA . EDis. 52

SARHCHREREL APES KHOHNAL SLE LESS Sewer १3 te Cee EEE ee L eRe e OR Lh h ETE Ewer eeTeTERniNnhe

contented with whatever is obtained (without any endeavour), never swerving from his
sacred duty, such contentment (alone) actually yields to him all his desired blessings. (31)
A discontented Indra (the ruler of gods) too only migrates one after another to the higher
worlds (and knows no rest); while a contented soul, even though destitute, enjoys a sound `
sleep, with all his limbs (including his mind) free from anguish. (32) | salute again and again
with My head (bent low) pious and placid Brahmanas contented with whatever is got
unasked and most friendly to (all) created beings, yet free from egotism. (33) Are you {all)
enjoying security, 0 Brahmana, at the hands of your king ? Indeed he is dear to Me, in whose
dominion the people, protected by him, live happily. (34) If not secret, (pray,) tell us
everything—whence and seeking what you have come to this place crossing the sea (which
is so difficult to cross), What work of yours can we do ?” (35) Politely asked (all) these relevant
questions by SriKrsna the Supreme Ruler of the universe)—who had assumed an embodied
form for the sake of (mere) fun—the Brahmana told Him everything (how the parents of
Rukmini planned to give her away to Sri Krsna and how their plans were being thwarted by
her eldest brother, Rukmi, who was in favour of marrying her to Sigupala, the ruler of Cedi,
and had sent formal invitation to him). (36) (He then delivered to Sri Krsna the following
message either orally or in the form of a letter written by the princess herself).

i दृशां दृशिमतामखिलार्थलाभं aaemiea चित्तमपत्रपं 81301
का त्वा मुकुन्द महती कुलशीलरूपविद्यावयोद्रविणधामभिरात्मतुल्यम् |
धीरा पतिं कुलवती न वृणीत कन्या काले नृसिंह नरलोकमनोऽभिरामम् । ३८॥
तन्मे भवान् खलु वृत: पतिरङ्ग जायामात्मार्पितश्च भदतोऽत्र विभो विधेहि ।
मा वीरभागमभिमर्छततु चैद्य आराद् गोमायुवन्मृगपतेर्बलिमम्बुजाक्ष । ३९
आराधितो यदि गदाग्रज एत्य पाणिं गृह्णातु मे न दमघोषसुतादयोऽन्ये ।`४०॥
श्वोभाविनि त्वमजितोद्वहने विदर्भान् गुप्त: समेत्य पृतनापतिभि: परीत: ।
निर्मथ्य चैद्यमगधेन्द्रबलं प्रसह्य मां राक्षसेन विधिनोद्दह वीर्यशुल्काम् ।४१॥
अन्त:पुरान्तरचरीमनिहत्य बन्धूंस्त्वामुदहे कथमिति प्रवदाम्युपायम् ।
पूर्वेद्युरस्ति महती कुलदेवियात्रा यस्यां बहिर्नववधूर्गिरिजामुपेयात् is
चर्ह्यम्बुजाक्ष न लभेय भवत्प्रसादं जह्यामसून् व्रतकृशाञ्छतजन्मभि: स्यात् ।४३॥

Rukmint says:—Having heard, 0 immortal Lord, most handsome in all the (three)
worlds, of Your excellences—which, entering deep into the heart through the apertures of
the ears, dispel the agony of the hearts, 0 beloved one—as well as of Your charming
appearance, which vouchsafes to those that have eyes all the blessings sought for by their
eyes, my mind has been set on You, (all) shame having fled away from it. (37) What noble,
firm and high-born maiden, O Bestower of Liberation, will, not on her coming of age elect You
as her husband—You, O Lion among men, who are Your own compeerin point of pedigree,
good disposition, comeliness of form, learning, youthfulness, opulence and glory and ravish
the mind of (all) mankind ? (38) Hence you have indeed been elected by me as my husband,

O Darling, and this body has been bestowed on You. (Pray,) take me to wife here (at my
father’s home). Let not SiSupala forthwith touch this share of a hero like a jackal defiling the
