Dis. 11] BOOK FIVE 479
LHHAARAHKE AS HHH KHAN E HD HHSIRAKH AT eHEHEeAhHH Ah Hew ade eS Hee eer eerie
Sante ire rr ff SCI re मज ज HEE a fe trie Soo Arie Rein Retain

glorifying heavenly enjoyments and the means of attaining them—extensively figuring in the
branch of knowledge (known by the name of Kalpa and) elaborating the numerous rituals
connected with household life—an exposition of truth containing no suggestion in favour of
injury to life and free from partiality and prejudice does not, as a matter of fact, generally
appear. (2) Even the utterances (of the Upanisads) which are (held to be) the.most sacred
(representing as they do the very crown of the Vedas) have not proved adequate to reveal
the truth directly to him by whom the (heavenly) bliss resulting from sacrificial acts pertaining
to household life is not spontaneously concluded to be worth throwing away on the analogy
of a dream. (3) So long as the mind of a man is dominated by Sattva, Rajas or Tamas, it
continues unchecked to yield him ( a crop of) virtue or sin through his senses of perception
and organs of action. (4) This mind (which is a conditioning vesture of the soul and therefore
stands identified with it) is a storehouse of impressions (of virtuous and sinful actions), is
attached to the pleasures of sense, tossed about by the three Gunas (modes of Prakrti) and
hence liable to disturbances in the form of lust, anger and so on. It is the foremost among
the sixteen constituents of the subtle body and, (successively) clothing itself with diverse
forms under different names, makes for a higher or lower form of life. (5) Embracing
(enveloping) the embodied soul connected with it, the mind —which is an adjunct of the soul,
brought forth by Maya (the deluding potency of the Lord), and which inveigles the soul into
the whirlpool of birth and death —yields at the proper time pleasure and pain and the other
inevitable fruit different from both (viz., insensateness). (6) It is only till then (so long as the
mind exists) that these phenomena of the waking and dream states ever shine forth and
continue to be perceived by the knowing subject. It is therefore that the knowers of truth
declare the mind to be the cause of the degraded state of mundane life (the state of being
identified with the three Gunas or modes of Prakrti) as well as of the highest state of liberation
(which lies beyond the realm of the three Gunas). (7) A mind attached to the pleasures of
sense (which are modifications of the three Gunas) leads to misery (in the shape of birth and
death); while that which is free from their influence makes for final beatitude. Even asa light
solongasitconsumes a wick soakedin clarified butter emits a flame crowned with soot, while
at other times (when the butter has been consumed) it returns to its original (unmanifest)
state, so does a mind attached to the objects of sense as well as to actions flows in various
(impure) currents, whereas it returns to its (pure)essence (the quality of Sattva) when it is no
longer attached to them. (8)

एकादशासन्मनसो हि gma आकूतय: पञ्च धियोऽभिमान:।
मात्राणि कर्माणि gt च तासां वदन्ति हैकादश dit api ९ ।
एकादशं स्वीकरणं ममेति शय्यामहं द्वादशमेक आहु:।१०॥
wea: शतश: कोटिशश्च saad न feet न स्वत: Tq ees
aad ow wet विभूतीर्जीवस्य मायारचितस्य नित्या:।
आविर्हिता: क्वापि तिरोहिताश्च wer विचष्टे ह्यविशुद्धकर्तु:। १२।
The five organs of action, the five senses of perception and the ego-sense—these are

the eleven currents through which the mind-substance flows. And the wise declare the five
forms of organic activity, the five subtle elements and the body as the eleven receptacles into
