Dis. 16]. "ABSRIPONE="" * 67

AR RACGTROROR RRR RD ini tr RoR RIOR moto Rot ROE Ri RF ROR Rote rer a erie ate te a sot erseere rar fee nett temas
tl

to Lord Kegava (Sri Krsna). (14) Highly pleased with them (those who sang these stories)
the noble-minded emperor bestowed on them costly garments and necklaces, his eyes
wide open with joy. (15) Hearing how Lord Visnu (Sri Krsna) had played the role of a
charioteer (to Arjuna), attended the councils of the Pandavas, waited upon them, played
the friend and ambassador, kept watch outside their camp at night in the pose of a warrior,
followed them as a waiter, eulogized Yudhisthira and bowed to him not only Himself but
caused the whole world to bow at the feet of His beloved Pandavas (made them worthy
of adoration for the whole world), the emperor (Pariksit) developed devotion to His lotus-
feet.(16) As he was thus following in the footsteps of his forefathers from day to day (in
the course of his conquest of the world) a strange incident occurred not very far from
his territorial limits. Hear of it from me. (17) Hoofing about on one foot in the form of a
bull, Dharma (the god of virtue) saw mother Earth in the form of a cow, shorn of her lustre
and bathing her cheeks in tears like a mother that has lost her child, and enquired of

her as follows: (18) =

कच्चिद्धद्रेऽनामयमात्मनस्ते विच्छायासि म्लायतेषन्मुखेन ।
आलक्षये भवतीमन्तराधिं दूरे बन्धुं शोचसि कञ्चनाम्ब 1291
amt सुरादीन् warm प्रजा उत स्विन्मघवत्यवर्षति 1201
अरक्ष्यमाणा: faa sff बालान् ज्ञोचस्यथो पुरुषादैरिवार्तान् ।
art देवीं ब्रह्मकुले कुकर्मण्यब्रह्मण्ये राजकुले कुलाग्रयान् । २१।
fe arp कलिनोपसृष्टान् weit वा तैरवरोपितानि ।
इतस्ततो वाशनपानवास:स्नानव्यवायोन्मुखजीवलोकम् । २२।
यद्वाम्ब ते भूरिभरावतारकृतावतारस्य हरेर्धरित्रि ।
अन्तर्हितस्य स्मरती विसृष्टां कर्माणि निर्वाणविलम्बितानि 1231
इदं ममाचक्ष्व तवाधिमूलं वसुन्धरे येन विकर्शितासि ।
कालेन वा a बलिनां बलीयसा सुरार्चितं fe हृतमम्ब सोभगम् । २४।

Dharma said : Are you keeping well, good lady ? With your somewhat withering
face you look quite pale. | perceive there is agony in your heart. Do you grieve for some
relation living at a distance from you, madam ? (19) It may be you are sorrowing for me,
deprived as | am of three of my feet and left with but one. Or you may be feeling sorry
for yourself, knowing that Siidras are going to rule over you hereafter ? Or you are grieving
for the gods and other heavenly beings that have been robbed of their share (offerings)
in sacrifices ? Or do you sorrow for the people who are suffering due to Indra (the god
of rain) withholding rain ? (20) Do you feel concerned for women who are unprotected
by their husbands, or for children who are being persecuted by their own parents as if
by man-eating demons ? Or are you sorry for the goddess of speech (the Vedic lore),
that has fallen in the hands of Brahmanas of reproachful conduct or for the foremost
Brahmanas who are in the service of royal houses that have no respect for the Brahmana
race? (21) Again, do you grieve for the fallen Ksatriyas dominated by Kali, or for the
kingdoms that have been devastated by them? Or do you sorrow for the world of living
beings, who are intent upon eating and drinking, clothing and washing themselves or on
sexual intercourse, disregarding all barriers? (22) Or deserted by Sri Hari (Sri Krsna)—
