Dis. 20 ] BOOK TEN 193

श्वडन्र न es OE LETH HL EE ES ET IH

Flashes of lightning did not bear constancy to the clouds, which are the friends of the people,
any more than libidinous women are constant (even) to men possessed of virtues. (17) In
the sky, endowed with the attribute of sound, the rainbow (Indra's bow) without a string”
shone like the attributeless Being (Brahma) in the manifest world consisting of the three
Gunas. (18) Screened by clouds illumined by her own effulgence, the moon did notshine any
more than the Jiva (an embodied soul) obscured by the ego-sense which is illumined by its
(the Jiva’s) own light. (19) Exulting over the appearance of clouds, with their hair standing
on end, peacocks rejoiced (even) as householders feeling agonized and disgusted with the
world do on’the advent of servants of Sri Krsna (the immortal Lord). (20) Sucking water
through their roots trees, that had shrunk heretofore due to (the summer) heat, got

-regenerated into numerous forms (in the shape of fresh foliage, blossoms, fruits etc.), (even)
as ascetics that are emaciated and fatigued before through austerities grow robust again
through the enjoyment of pleasures. (21) Cranes continued to live, O Pariksit, even in lakes
whose brink was miry and full of thorns etc. , (even) as householders whose mind is devoted
to the pleasures of sense choose to remain in their houses, which keep them engaged in
distracting duties. (22) While Indra (the ruler of the three worlds) poured down showers, dams
got breached by floods (even) as in the Kali age the paths of virtue chalked out by the Vedas
are destroyed by the false theories of heretics. (23) Driven by the winds, clouds now poured
down nectar-like water to living beings (even) as rulers of men, directed by the Brahmanas,
conferred from time to time desired boons (on those who sought them). (24)

एवं वनं oa वर्षिष्ठं पक्वखर्जूरजम्बुमत्। गोगोपालैर्वृतो wy सबल: प्राविशद्धरि: 124)
aad vam ऊधोभारेण भूयसा । यनुर्भगवताऽऽहूता gt प्रीत्या स्नुतस्तनी: 126)
वनौकस: प्रमुदिता वनराजीर्मधुच्युत: । जलधारा गिरेर्नादानासन्ना eI गुहा: । २७1
क्वचिद् वनस्पतिक्रोडे deat चाभिवर्षति । frida भगवान् रेमे कन्दमूलफलारान: 1261
दध्योदमं समानीतं शिलायां सलिलान्तिके |सम्भ`|जन॰॰|यैर्बुभुज्ञे गोपै: सङ्क॰र्षंणा॰न्वित:।२९|
शाबबलोपरि संविश्व चर्वतो मीलितेक्षणान्। तृप्तान् वृषान् वत्सतरान् गाश्च स्वोधोभरश्रमा: 130 |
wget च तां वीक्ष्य सर्वभूतमुदावहाम्। भगवान् पूजयाञ्चक्रे आत्मशक्त्युपबृंहिताम् । ३१1

Surrounded by cows and cowherd boys and accompanied by Balarama, Sri Hari
entered deep into the said forest (of Vrndavana}—which was so luxuriant and full of ripe
dates and rose-apples—in order to sport. (25) Called by the Lord, cows, that walked with
a slow gait due to the heavy weight of their udders, marched with quick steps, their udders
showering milk (on the way) due to affection. (26) (As He passed through the woods) the
Lord perceived the denizens of the forest (viz., the Bhilas as well as the birds and beasts)
highly rejoiced, rows of trees dripping with honey, streams of water flowing from mountains
as well as their murmur and the caves near them. (27) At times, when it rained on all sides,
the Lord took shelter in the hollow of a tree or in a cave and sported (there) eating bulbs,
roots and fruits. (28) Accompanied by Sankarsana (Balarama), He ate rice and curds
brought by Him (from home) with vegetables etc., on a slab close to the water in the
company of cowherd boys. (29) Beholding fully gratified bulls, calves and cows weary with
the weight of their udders, sitting on the green meadows and ruminating with their eyes closed,
as well as the aforesaid splendour of the rainy season, enhanced by His own (enrapturing)
energy and bringing delight to (all) created beings, the Lord welcomed them all. (30-31)

एवं निवसतोस्तस्मिन् रामकेशवयोर्व्रजे। शरत् समभवद् व्यभ्रा स्वच्छाम्बपरुषानिला 1321
a

* There is a pun on the word Guna, which denotes an attribute as well as a String.
