340 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 10

PHASES AA ज्जीन OHHH KGTK HAH SE चिजक्तै SHEKEL ERESEHE EHH REO EAHA EA EAE EEE HEH eee ee
ज्र्त्त

हतावशिष्टा इतरे रणाजिराद् रक्षोगणा: क्षत्रियवर्यसायकै: ।
प्रायो विवृक्णावयवा विदुद्रुवुर्मृगेन्द्रविक्रीडितवूथपा इव । २०।
SRI: स तदाऽऽततायिनं महामृधे कंचन मानवोत्तम: |
पुरीं दिदृक्षन्नपि नाविशद द्विषां न मायिनां ae चिकीर्षितं जन: ।२१॥
इति ब्रुवंश्चित्रथ: स्वसारथिं यत्त: परेषां प्रतियोगाङ्कित: ।
शुश्राव wee जलधेरिवेरितॆ नभस्वतो दिक्षु रजोऽन्वदृश्यत 1221

Hosts of other Raksasas, who had escaped death, yet who had most of their limbs cut
off with the arrows of Dhruva (the foremost of the Ksatriyas), fled from the field of battle like
troop-leaders of elephants disturbed in their sport by the king of beasts. (20) Not finding then
anyone left with a weapon in that extensive field of battle, Dhruva (the foremost of Manu's
race) felt inclined to behold the city of the enemies, yet he refrained from entering it (and
said,) “No man can know the intention of those skilled in enchantment !" (21) Addressing his
charioteer as above, Dhruva (who rode in a wonderful chariot) remained on his guard,
apprehending renewed opposition from the enemy, when he heard a (loud) noise like the
roaring of an ocean, and further beheld in every direction the dust raised by a blast. (22)

क्षणेनाच्छादितं am घनानीकेन ada: i विस्फुरत्तडिता दिक्षु त्रासयत्स्तनयित्नुना 123)
aay रुधिरौघासृक्पूयविण्मूत्रमेदस: | निपेतुर्गगनादस्य कबन्धान्यग्रतोऽनघ । २४॥
तत: खेऽदृश्यत गिरिर्निपेतु: सर्वतोदिशम्। गदापरिघनिस्रिंशमुसला: साश्मवर्षिण: 1241
अहयोऽशनिनि:श्वासा वमन्तोऽग्निं रुषाक्षिभि: | अभ्यधावन् गजा मत्ता: सिंहव्याघ्राश्च यूथश: । २६॥
समुद्र ऊर्मिभिर्भीम: प्लावयन् सर्वतो भुवम्। आससाद महाह्राद: कल्पान्त sa भीषण: 1201
एवंविधान्यनेकानि त्रासनान्यमनस्विनाम्। ससृजुस्तिग्मगतय आसुर्या माययासुरा: । २८
ध्रुवे प्रयुक्तामसुरैस्तां मायामतिदुस्तराम्। fea तस्य मुनय: ARTA, समागता: 1291

In an instant the sky was overcast on all sides with a canopy of clouds accompanied by
flashes of lightning and alarming claps of thunder in every direction. (23) They rained torrent
of blood as well as phlegm etc., pus, ordure, urine and fat and before him fell headless trunks
from the sky, O sinless Vidura. (24) Then appeared a mountain in the air and there rained
on all sides maces, iron clubs, swords and Musalas (a particular type of arrow), as well as
showers accompanied with volleys of stones. (25) Serpents ran up to him hissing with a
thunder-like roar and discharging fire from their eyes in rage, and there came rushing in
herds mad elephants, lions and tigers. (26) Assuming a threatening aspect as at the time of
universal dissolution and roaring deeply, the terrible ocean approached on all sides deluging
the earth with waves. (27) By their conjuring tricks, peculiar to the demons, the Yaksas, who
are noted for their cruel disposition, displayed many such phenomena which inspired terror
into (the heart of) the pusillanimous. (28) Seeing the conjuring trick employed by the Yaksas
against Dhruva—a trick which was so very difficult to counteract—a number of hermits that
had assembled there prayed for his welfare (in the following words). (29)

मुनय ऊचु:
ओत्तानपादे भगवांस्तव agers देव: क्षिणोत्ववनतार्तिहरो विपक्षान् ।
यन्नामधेयमभिधाय निशम्य चाद्धा लोकोऽञ्जसा तरति दुस्तरमङ्गमृत्युम् । ३०॥
