314 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 6

RR ERI ee ee See ARERR ee HAHAH Hee oH HEHE ESSE IEE ERAS LCTH AH RARE SAMAK HOHE

कुर्वन्ति तत्र ह्यनुकम्पया कृपां न साधवो दॆवबलात्कृते क्रमम् ।४८॥

Indeed anger does not generally overpower—even as it overwhelms the ignorant—the
noble souls who have surrendered themselves to Your feet, who behold You in all living
beings and whoare inclined to see all living beings in their own selfas identical with them.(46)
Let not one (an exalted soul) like You kill them whose mind perceives diversity and whose
eyes are fixed on the ritual, nay, who have a malignant mind and whose heart is ever burning
(with jealousy) at the sight of others’ prosperity and who, being naturally disposed to hurt
others’ feelings, prick them’with abusive words, and are (thus already) doomed by
Providence. (47) On them whose mind is bewildered by the Maya (deluding potency) of Lord
Visnu (whose navel is the seat of a lotus), so difficult to overcome, and whose eye is
(therefore) fixed on diversity, pious souls only shower their grace because of their
compassionate nature; they never use their power against something which (they believe)
has been wrought by their own (adverse) fate. (48)

wag Ya: परमस्य मायया दुरन्तयास्पृष्टमति: समस्तदूक |
तया हतात्मस्वनुकर्मचेत:स्वनुग्रहं कर्तुमिहार्हसि प्रभो ।४९॥
कुर्वध्वरस्योद्धरणं हतस्य भोस्त्वयासमाप्तस्य मनो प्रजापते: |
न यत्र amt तव भागिनो ददु: कुयज्विनों येन मखो निनीयते iyo
जीवताद्यजमानोऽयं प्रप्रद्येताक्षिणी भग: । भृगो: इमश्रूणि रोहन्तु पूष्णो दन्ताश्च पूर्ववत् । ५१1
देवानां भग्नगात्राणामृत्विजां चायुधाह्मभि: । भवतानुगृहीतानामाशु मन्योऽस्त्वनातुरम् 42 |
wa ते रुद्र भागोऽस्तु यदुच्छिष्टोऽध्वरस्य वै । यज्ञस्ते रुद्रभागेन कल्पतामद्य यज्ञहन्।५३।
Omniscient as You are, Your judgment has not been clouded by that Maya of the
Supreme Person, which is so difficult to get through. Therefore, my lord, be pleased to
shower Your grace on these people ( Daksa and others), whose judgmenthas been impaired
by Maya and who have accordingly fixed their mind on the ritual. (49) O Lord presiding over
destruction, revive the sacrifice started by Daksa (lord of created beings), which has been
wrecked by You and could not, therefore, be consummated—which was due to the fact that
the unwise priests did not offer You Your share, to which You hada rightful claim inasmuch
as itis by You thata sacrifice is made to yield the desired fruit. (50) Let the sacrificer (Daksa)
come to life (again); let the god Bhaga get back his eyes; let the sage Bhrgu's moustaches
and beard sprout again and let the god Pisa’s teeth reappear as before. (51) Further, let the
gods and priests whose limbs have been broken by weapons and stones be whole again at
once by Your favour, O Rudra (anger personified). (52) Let that which is left of the sacrifice,

offerings be Your share, O god presiding over destruction! Let this sacrifice, O Rudra, be
consummated today with Your share, O Destroyer of sacrifice. (53)

Thus ends the sixth discourse entitled "The Appeasement of Rudra"
in Book Four of the great and glorious Bhagavata-Purana,
otherwise known as the Paramahamsa-Samhita.

iat ti १६
CI OD REESE LIL
