268 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 29

BRE PEATE EER ERE HET ETE PRESET छो CEH AAEM ERE HEA SETHE SS eH HK er a HB

Bhaktiyoga (the discipline of devotion), which is said to be the end of the above
discussion. (1-2) Pray, also tell me the various destinies (in the form of birth in different
species as well as of death) attained by the Jivas, by hearing an account of which man may
develop a distaste for everything (in this world as well as in the next), O almighty Lord | (3)
Further let me know the essential character of the all-powerful Time, who is the Ruler even
of Brahma and others and identical with You, and for fear of whom people do that which is
good. (4) You have appeared as a sun to diffuse the light of Yoga for awakening men, who
having lost the eye (of wisdom), have identified themselves with objects (such as the body)
possessing no reality and who, feeling fatigued on account of their mind being attached to
action, have long been lying asleep in the bottomless darkness of ignorance. (5)

मैत्रेय उवाच
इति मातुर्वच: इलक्ष्णं प्रतिनन्द्य महामुनि: । आबभाषे कुरुश्रेष्ठ प्रीतस्तां करुणार्दित: । ६ |
Maitreya continued : The great sage (Kapila) greeted these charming words of His
mother and overwhelmed with compassion and full of delight, O crest-jewel of the Kurus,
replied to her (as follows). (6)
श्रीभगवानुवाच

भक्तियोगो बहुविधो arta wedi स्वभावगुणमार्गेण get sat विभिद्यते । ७ |

अभिसन्धाय यो feat ast मात्सर्यमेव वा । संरम्भी भिन्नदृग्भावं मयि कुर्यात्स तामस: । ८ |

विषयानभिसन्धाय यजञ ऐश्चर्यमेव वा ।अर्चादावर्चयेद्यो मां पृथग्भाव: स राजस: । ९ |

कर्मनिर्हारमुद्दिय परस्मिन् वा तदर्पणम् । यजेद्यष्टव्यमिति वा पृथग्भाव: स सात्विक: । १०॥

मद्गुणश्रुतिमात्रेण मयि सर्वगुहाशये | मनोगतिरविच्छिन्ना यथा गङ्गाम्भसोऽम्बुधो । ११।

vent भक्तियोगस्य निर्गुणस्य wee! अहैतुक्यव्यवहिता या भक्ति: पुरुषोत्तमे ।१२।

सालोक्यसाष्ठिसामीप्यसारूप्यैकत्वमप्युत । दीयमानं न गृह्णन्ति faa मत्सेवनं जना: । १३1

स wa भक्तियोगाख्य आत्यन्तिक ser । येनातिव्रज्य त्रिगुणं मद्भावायोपपद्यते ex

The Lord said : The discipline of devotion, 0 noble lady, is recognized as manifold

according to our ways of approach (attitudes of mind with regard) to it; and men’s attitude
of mind varies according to the diversity of their natural characteristics. (7) A man who is
given up to anger and views Me as distinct from himself, and who practises devotion to Me
with a mind full of violence, hypocrisy and jealousy, is a devotee of the Tamasika type. (8)
He who worships Me through an image etc., as distinct from himself with a view to acquiring
objects of senses, fame and power is a devotee of the Rajasika type. (9) And he who adores
Me as distinct from himself, aiming at the eradication of his sins or with the intention of
offering his actions to the Supreme or again with the feeling that it is his duty to worship
Me is a devotee of the Sattvika type.(10) The uninterrupted flow of the mind-stream
towards Me, dwelling in the heart of all—like that of the waters of the Ganga towards the
ocean—at the mere mention of My virtues, combined with motiveless and unremitting love
to Me, the Supreme Person, is spoken of as the distinguishing character of unqualified
Bhaktiyoga. (11-12) My devotees accept not, in exchange for My service (the five forms of
final beatitude, viz.) Salokya (residence in My divine realm), Sarsti (enjoying My powers),
Samipya (living in My presence), Saripya (possessing a form similar to Mine) and Sayujya
(absorption into My Being), even when they are offered to him (by Me). (13) The aforesaid
Bhaktiyoga has been declared as the highest (final) goal; for transcending the realm of the
three Gunas (modes of Prakrti) the devotee thereby becomes qualified for My state (without
any effort). (14)

