656 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [Dis 2

WR RH RR Ee HT BR BM TT ATSB FE HF Fe ET 7 Pe TON BA RE AH HY

and low and characterized by the (five subtle) elements, the !ndriyas (the five senses of
perception and the five organs of action) and the mind—and (in the long run) even actually
gives up such identification by force of its own discrimination. (46) Action proves to be a
source of bondage only so long as the soul stands identified with a subtle body. From such
identification follow the perversion of the (all-blissful) Soul and (the attendant) misery, which
are (however both) conceived in illusion (and not real). (47) To look upon the (three) Gunas
(their products in the shape of pleasure and pain arising from the contact of the senses with
their objects) or speak of them as real—this is a false prepossession. Like a fanciful
conception or a dream every sensuous pleasure is unreal. (48) Hence the knowers of Truth
grieve neither for that which is abiding nor for that which is transient in this world. Nor can
the nature of those who are given to grieving be changed. (49)

लुब्धको विपिने कश्चित्पक्षिणां निर्मितोऽन्तक: | fara जालं विदधे तत्र तत्र प्रलोभयन् 1५०1
कुलिङ्गमिथुनं at विचरत्समदृश्यत। aa: कुलिङ्गी सहसा लुब्धकेन प्रलोभिता 1421
सासज्जत शिचस्तन्त्यां महिषी कालयन्तिता | कुलिङ्गस्तां तथाऽऽपन्नां निरीक्ष्य भृशदु:खित: |
स्नेहादकल्प: कृपण: कृपेणां पर्यदेवयत् । ५२1
al अकरुणो देव: स्रियाऽऽकरुणया fay: | कृपणं मानुशोचन्त्या दीनया किं करिष्यति 143!
कामं नयतु मां देव: किमर्धेनात्मनो fe मे । दीनेन जीवता दु:खमनेन विधुरायुषा ux
कथं त्वजातपक्षांस्तान् मातृहीनान् विभर्म्यहम् । मन्दभाग्या: प्रतीक्षन्ते AS मे मातरं प्रजा: । ५५1
एवं कुलिङ्गे विलपन्तमारात् प्रियावियोगातुरमश्रुकण्ठम् |
aw तं ज्ञाकुनिक: am विव्याधं कालप्रहितो feet: 1५६1
एवं यूयमपर्यन्य आत्मापायमबुद्धय: । नैनं Sema ater: ofa attach 1401

A certain fowler, who had been created (by God) as a (veritable) death (as it were) for
birds, spread his net in a forest and employing (all sorts of) allurements, caught them
wherever he could. (50) A pair of fork-tailed shrikes was seen moving about there. Of them
the female bird was precipitately allured by the fowler. (51) Subject to the control of Time,
the said female bird got entangled in the meshes of the net. Sore afflicted to see her thus
involved in (mortal) danger, yet incapable (of doing anything), the helpless male bird
bewailed (the lot of) his miserable mate out of affection (as follows):— (52) "Oh, what will the
mighty yet merciless Providence do with my wretched wife, pitiable in everyway and grieving
for my miserable self ? (53) Rather let the Deity take me (as well); (for) what is the use to me
of this wretched half body, surviving miserably and dragging a desolate existence (when the
other half in the form of my mate has been snatched away by Him)? (54) My youngs of poor
luck (keenly) await in the nest (the return of) their mother. How shall | (be able to) nourish
those motherless little ones still unfledged?" (55) Hidden close by and impelled by Death,
the same fowler pierced with an arrow the male shrike (too), Sore with separation from its
beloved mate and wailing thus, its throat choked with tears. (56) Not foreseeing your own
death and lamenting your husband in this way, you foolish women will not (be able to) get
him back even in hundreds of years. (57)

ite
am एवं sac ad विस्मितचेतस:।ज्ञातयो मेनिरे सर्वमनित्यमयथोत्थितम् । ५८
यम एतदुपाख्याय तत्रैवान्तरधीयत ।ज्ञातयोऽपि सुयज्ञस्य चक्रुर्यत्साम्परायिकम् 1५९1
तत: ज्लोचत मा यूयं wt चात्मानमेव च । क आत्मा क: परो वात्र स्वीय: पारक्य एव वा |

स्वपराभिनिवेशेन विनाज्ञानेन देहिनाम् । ६०1
