Dis. 12 ] BOOK TWELVE 721

PRIS AR AS AAR SIE RAIA SAAR IAEA AAA AAR AAA EB IRA BA LDAP AR AIM DAA IDS SATA IRA AAA RAR BB

यूयं fra a भूरिभागा यच्छश्वदात्मन्यखिलात्मभूतम् ।
नारायणं देवमदेवमीशमजस्रभावा भजताविवेद्य । ५५॥
अहं च dena आत्मतत्त्वं wf पुरा a परमर्षिवक्त्रात् ।
प्रायोपवेशे qua: परीक्षित: सदस्यृषीणां weet च शृण्वताम् ।५६॥

Uttering at the top of his voice the formula "4 74:’— Hail to Sri Hari |` (even) involuntarily
(without any conscious effort on his part) when fallen (in a well etc.), stumbled (while ascending
a staircase), afflicted or after sneezing a man is absolved from all sin. (46) Entering the mind
of men (even) while His name or praise is being loudly chanted or when His glory is heard of
(by them), the infinite Lord, the wise declare, puts an end to all their misfortune in the same way
as the sun dispels darkness anda tempestuous gale disperses the clouds.(47) Theyare indeed
false and ignoble utterances and contain stories of the unrighteous, of which Lord Visnu (who
is above sense-perception) does not form a theme. That utterance alone (on the other hand)
is true, that alone huzza | is blessed, that alone is sacred and is the fountainhead of divine
excellences, (nay,) that alone is pleasant, that alone gives newer and newer delight, that alone
is a perennial source of great rejoicing to the mind, and (finally) thatis the only means of drying
up the ocean of grief of men, through which the glory of Lord Visnu (of sacred renown) is
constantly sung. (48-49) That speech which, though full of figurative expressions, never utters
the praises of Sri Hari—that are capable of sanctifying the (whole) world—is the delight of
voluptuous men (who wallow in the pleasures of sense like crows, that feed upon the dirty
leavings of food). Itis never resorted to by the swan-like wise men; for pure-minded saints take
delight only where the (immortal) Lord Visnu is sung. (50) On the other hand, that composition
(alone) which, though faulty in diction; consists of verses each of which contains the names of
the immortal Lord, bearing the impress of His glory, wipes out the sins of the people; itis such
composition that pious men (love to) hear, sing and repeat (to an audience). (51) That wisdom
too which is free from blemish in that it is a direct means to the attainment of Liberation does
not adorn one's soul so much if itis destitute of devotion to (the immortal) Lord Sri Hari. How,
then, can action which has not been consecrated to God, no matter if it is of the noblest type,
heighten the beauty of the soul, rooted as it is in sorrow at every stage (both while it is being
performed and when it yields its fruit). (62) The great pains taken over discharging the duties
pertaining to one's Vama (grade in society) and Asrama (stage in life), austerities and learning
etc., culminate only in glory and prosperity. Through the utterance and hearing etc., of the
praises of Sri Hari (however) is secured unceasing remembrance of the lotus-feet of that
Spouse of Sri (the goddess of fortune). (53) Ceaseless thought of the lotus-like feet of Sri Krsna
puts an end to all evils and increases tranquillity (of the mind), enhances purity of the intellect,
stimulates devotion to the Supreme Spirit and promotes spiritual enlightenment coupled with
Self-Realization and dispassion. (54) Oh, you are highly blessed, 0 jewels among the
Brahmanas ! in that, having installed in your mind Lord Narayana, who is the adored of all, and
(as such) has no other object of adoration, and who is the Inner Controller of all, constantly
worship Him, full of ceaseless Devotion (as you are) ! (55) | am also blessed in that | have been
reminded (by you) of the exposition of the true nature of the Supreme Spirit (contained in this
Purana), which | listened to the other day from the lips of Sri Suka (the great seer) in the
assembly of eminent sages, who also listened to it, while King Pariksit sat (on the bank of the
Ganga) with a vow to fast unto death. (56) ॥

We aft for: settee: iced वासुदेवस्य सर्वाशुभविनाशनम् । ५७|
च एवं श्रावयेन्नित्यं यामक्षणमनन्यधी: | श्रद्धावान् योऽनुशृणुयात् पुनात्यात्मानमेव स: 1421
द्वादश्यामेकादर्यां वा श्रृण्वन्नायुष्यवान् भवेत्। पठत्यनश्नन् प्रयतस्ततो भवत्यपातकी । ५९।
पुष्करे मथुरायां च द्वारवत्यां यतात्मवान्। उपोष्य संहितामेतां पठित्वा मुच्यते भयात् ।६०॥

