504 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA { Dis. 18

See eC EE STEM HERA eee He eee य जी जोक्यत्यत्यत्यत्नोतय कचच कचक चो कोकद्रा शा eens crete वी डो ती

(which are products of the Gunas of Maya) nor by the activities of the mind—even though
You witness all with a view to controlling everything—unlike our vision, who have not been
able to curb the vehemence of wrath. (19) To him who looks upon the body (which has no
reality whatsoever) as his own self, You appear through (Your own) Maya (deluding potency)
as though drunk, with Your eyes reddened by the use of spirituous liquor and distillates
(toddy etc.). Nay, the wives of the Nagas (the denizens of Patala, the nethermost of the
. subterranean regions) are unable to worship You through bashfuiness, their mind being
excited (with love) at the very.touch of Your feet. (20) The sacred texts (of the Vedas) declare
You as responsible for the evolution, existence and dissolution of this universe, though
beyond these states Yourself, eternal as You are. You never feel (the presence of) the
terrestrial globe, lying like a mustard seed somewhere on the (sublime) base of Your
thousand hoods. (21) Your very first manifestation, springing up from the three Gunas
(modes of Prakrti) was (known as) Mahat-tattva (the principle of cosmic intelligence), which
(in the form of Citta or the faculty of ratiocination) is rooted in Sattva and which (when
considered from the point of view of the Spirit presiding over it and visualized as one with
the Supreme Deity) came to be known as Lord Brahma. (And) descended from him, | (Rudra)
bring forth—through My own glory (in the form of Ahankara or the Ego), consisting of the
three Gunas (because evolved from the Mahat-tattva, a product of the three Gunas)—the
deities (presiding over the ten Indriyas and the mind) and the mind itself (that are Sattvika
incharacter), the five gross elements (which are rooted in Tamas, being inert by nature) and
the ten Indriyas (which are predominantly Rajasika). (22) Remaining under the control of the
Supreme Person (in You) (and) unified (by the active principle in the shape of the vital airs)
like birds held by a string, we all, viz., the Mahat-tattva, the ego, the deities mentioned above,
the five gross elements and the Indriyas, evolve this creation by Your grace (alone). (23)
Deluded by the objects of senses (which are the creation of the three Gunas), this Jiva (that
is subject to birth and death) can never know (except by Your grace) the Maya (the principle
of cosmic illusion) which has been conjured up by You and which subjects it to the bondage
of Karma (action prompted by interested motives); much less can it know with any amount
of ease the means of getting over that Maya. Moreover, the creation and dissolution (of the
universe) are nothing apart from You (inasmuch and both these events take place in You).
Therefore, obeisance to You !" (24)

Thus ends the seventeenth discourse, in Book Five of the great
and glorious Bhagavata-Purana, otherwise known
as the Paramahamsa-Samhita.

CURSES
CDOLD PELE OOS

अथाष्टादशोऽध्याय:

Discourse XVIII
A description of (the various Varsas) of the terrestrial globe continued
धर्ममयीं हयशीर्पाभिधानां परमेण समाधिना संनिधाप्येदमभिगृणन्त उपधावन्ति। १

Sri Suka went on : Even so in Bhadraswavarsa a son of Dharma (the deity presiding
over righteousness), Bhadrasrava by name (the ruler of this Varsa ) as well as the chief men
