Dis. 12] BOOK FIVE 483
RH LATANNC THELEN EEL HSK eKCOS ECCS eee weer ese seeAk ewer here reewreetereeeeeeee
StU SHOP eSTettteten tthe henereeneerrerestetteehenestetegteeenrrneneererenesneeenere

substance (the gross elements), nature (the mutability of all phenomena), predisposition, the
Time-Spirit (that which disturbs the equilibrium of the three Gunas or modes of Prakrti) and
Karma (good or evil destiny). (10) Consciousness alone is true—Consciousness which is
pure, absolute, one (differenceless), having no inside or outside, all-perfect, directed
towards the Self, immutable and (commonly) known by the appellation of Bhagavan (the
almighty and all-glorious Lord), and that sages call Vasudeva (the abode of all beings). (11)
O Rahigana, one does not attain this (consciousness) through asceticism nor through
(Vedic) rituals, nor (again) by dealing out food and other necessaries (among the needy), nor
by (duly) performing one’s religious duties (pertaining to household life—such as entertaining
an unexpected visitor, service of the afflicted and poor and so on), nor through a (proper)
study of the Vedas nor through the worship of (the gods presiding over) water, fire and the
sun, (nor by any other means) except by sprinkling one's body with the dust of feet of exalted
souls. (12) In their assemblies are held discourses on the excellences of the Lord, which shut
out (all) talks of worldly pleasures and which, when listened to everyday, concentrate the
pure mind of a seeker of liberation on Lord Vasudeva. (13)

ae पुरा भरतो नाम राजा विमुक्तदृष्टश्रुतसङ्गबन्ध:।

amet भगवत इईंहरमानो मृगोऽभवं मृगसङ्गाद्धतार्थ:। ev!

सा मां स्मृतिर्मृगदेहेऽपि dk कृष्णार्चनप्रभवा नो जहाति।

अथो अहं जनसङ्घादसङ्गो विशङ्कमानोऽविवृतश्चरामि | १५ |

ait तदीहाकथनश्रुताभ्यां लब्धस्मृतिर्यात्यतिपारमध्वन:। १६ |

इति श्रीमद्भागवते महापुराणे पारमहंस्यां संहितायां पञ्चमस्कन्धे ब्राह्मणरहूगणसंवादे द्वादशोऽध्याय:। १२
| was formerly (in a previous birth) a king (like you), Bharata by name, and, having

completely got rid of (all) bondage resulting from attachment to (all) thatis seen (in this world)
or heard of (as existing in heaven) endeavoured to propitiate the Lord, but was reborn as a
deer through attachment to a deer, and (thus) lost my purpose (in the shape of God-
Realization). (14) The memory of past life, awakened in me by the worship of Lord Sri Krsna,
(however) did notleave me even in that bestial form, O valiant king. It is therefore that | move
about incognito and unattached, afraid as | am of mixing with the people. (15) Therefore,
having completely severed (all) ties of infatuation with the sword of wisdom developed
through the blessed company of exalted souls (who are free from attachment), and attained
God-consciousness by (constantly) recounting and listening to the stories of Sri Hari, aman
reaches the highest goal of his journey, the Lord (Himself). (16)

Thus ends the twelfth discourse, forming part of the dialogue between the Brahmana and
king Rahugana, in Book Five of the great and glorious Bhagavata-Purana,
otherwise known as the Paramahamsa-Samhita.

StI Stat th
PII Sirs
