Dis. 13 ] BOOK FIVE 487

ERATHAA OK TE SRE HHA Ae EES LEE SHH LOCH SET KEAN TET EEN ANAS eee HEM RE RA eee eee ee

(like you)—whose mind has been purified by (singing and hearing) the glories of Lord Visnu
(the Ruler of the senses)—is not had in abundance? (21) It is no wonder that unalloyed
devotion to Lord Visnu (who is beyond sense-perception) should spring up in (the heart of)
a man whose sins have been scoured off with the dust of your lotus-feet, when | find that my
ignorance, which had its root in fallacious reasoning, has been rooted out by an hour's
fellowship with you. (22) Hail to the Brahmanas who are advanced in age ! Hail to (those who
are yet) infants ! Hail to the young ! Hail to all down to the youngsters ! May (all) kings receive
blessings from those Brahmanas who traverse the earth in the garb of ascetics that have
shaken off all worldly feeling and obligations ! (23)
श्रीशुक उवाच
yaaa: स वै व्रह्मर्षिसुत: सिन्धुपतय आत्मसतत्त्वं विगणयत: परानुभाव:
परमकारुणिकतयोपदिश्य रहूगणेन सकरुणमभिवन्दितचरण आपूर्णार्णव sa निभृतकरणोर्म्ययाशयो
धरणिमिमां विचचार। २४॥ सौवीरपतिरपि सुजनसमवगतपरमात्मसतत्त्व आत्मन्यविद्याध्यारोपितां च्च
देहात्ममतिं विससर्जं | एवं fe नृप भगवदाश्रिताश्रितानुभाव:। २५ ॥

Sri Suka resumed : 0 Pariksit (son of Uttara) having thus explained the true nature of
the Self out of supreme compassion to the ruler of the Sindhu territory (the modern Sindha)
even though he had slighted the Brahmana—that son of a Brahmana sage, who possessed
the highest glory, and whose feet were (now) adored by Rahigana ina pathetic way, roamed
about the earth like an ocean which is full on every side, with a mind whose waves in the form
of the Indriyas had been stilled. (24) Having fully realized the true nature of the Supreme Spirit
as taught by that saintly soul, Rahugana (the lord of the Sauvira territory) too (forthwith) shed
the wrong notion, planted on his mind by ignorance, that he was (no other than) the body.
Such, O king (Pariksit), is the greatness of those who have taken shelter with the devotees
of the Lord ! (25)

+

राजोवाच
यो ह वा ve बहुविदा महाभागवत त्वयाभिहित: परोक्षेण वचसा जीवलोकभवाध्वा a
ह्यार्यमनीषया कल्पितविषयो नाञ्जसाव्युत्पन्नलोकसमधिगम: | अथ तदेवैतद्दुरवगमं समवेतानुकल्पेन
निर्दिश्यतामिति। २६ |
इति श्रीमद्भागवते महापुराणे पारमहंस्यां संहितायां पञ्चमस्कन्धे त्रयोदशोऽध्याय: । १३ ।

The king (Pariksit) said : The course of transmigration of embodied souls, that has been
described by you in the form of an allegory, O great devotee possessed of varied knowledge,
has been fancifully conceived by the inventive genius of wise man and (as such) it cannot
be readily and clearly understood by untrained minds. Therefore, (kindly) point out the hidden
meaning by bringing out the corresponding ideas. (26)

Thus ends the thirteenth discourse in Book Five of the great and
glorious Bhagavata-Purana, otherwise known as
the Paramahamsa-Samnhita.

ए BT ET २५
PITS Sirs
