410 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA ( Dis. 69
WHHETEAT ADT ARERDAD ANDEREH ADEE REECE ORES ERER CEES CHEE RE EERRERERTNHRETEAERRERTEh EEE
faded-paved with the same precious stone. (9) It was (further) furnished with canopies
made by ViSwakarma (himself), from which strings of pearls were hanging, as well as
with seats and beds made of ivory and inlaid with excellent gems. (10) ॥ was attended
by maid-servants adorned with gold necklaces, and dressed in fine clothes, and man-
servants wearing coats, turbans, fine clothes and jewelled ear-rings. (11) Dear Pariksit,
the darkness in the palace was dispelled by lustre of jewels serving as lights. Seeing
fumes of burning aloe-wood issuing out of the air-holes, the peacocks on its picturesque
eaves screamed and danced under the impression that clouds were up. (12) Narada
saw Sri Krsna (the Lord of Yadus) seated there together with the mistress of the house
(Rukmini), who was (herself) fanning the Lord with a chowrie provided with a gold
handle, although she was constantly waited upon by thousands of maid-servants, who
were equal to her in virtue, beauty, age and neat dress. (13)

तं सन्निरीक्ष्य भगवान् सहसोत्थित: श्रीपर्यङ्कत: सकलधर्मभृतां afte:

ama पादयुगलं शिरसा किरीटजुष्टेन साञ्जलिरवीविशदासने स्वे। १४॥

wearers चरणौ dea: eee बिभ्रज्जगद्गुरुतरोऽपि wat पततिर्हि।

ब्रह्मण्यदेव इति चयद्गुणनाम ah तस्यैव यच्चरणशौचमशेषतीर्थम्।१५॥ `

wpa देवऋषिवर्यमृषि: पुराणो नारायणो ara विधिनोदितेन।

वाण्याभिभाष्य मितयामृतमिष्टया तं wre wat भगवते करवाम हे किम्। १६।

Discerning the Devarsi, the almighty Lord (Sri Krsna), the foremost among the
supporters of virtue, immediately rose from the bed of Sri (Rukmini) and, bowing low with
His head, adorned with a crown, at the feet of the sage with joined palms, installed him
on His own seat.(14) (Pariksit,) Sri Krsna is the supreme Teacher of the world; having
washed His feet the Ganga has become capable of purifying all. The Protector of holy
men, He has earned the appropriate title of Brahmanya Deva by virtue of His (singular)
devotion to the Brahmanas. The Lord (therefore) washed the feet of the Devarsi and
bore that water on His head. (15) (Thereafter) the Lord, who was (no other than) the
most ancient sage Narayana, the (eternal) companion of Nara, duly worshipped the
celestial sage according to the prescribed rules (of worship) and, addressing him in
measured words sweet as nectar, humbly said, “ (Pray, tell Me,) My lord, what service
we may render your holy self.” (16)

नारद उवाच
नैवाद्भुतं त्वयि विभोऽखिललोकनाथे मैत्री जनेषु सकलेषु दम: खलानाम्।
नि:श्रेयसाय fe जगत्स्थितिरक्षणाभ्यां स्वैरावतार उरुगाय विदाम सुष्ठु। १७॥
we waster जनतापवर्गं ब्रह्मादिभिर्हृदि विचिन्त्यमगाधबोधै:।
संसारकूपपतितोत्तरणावलम्बं ध्यायंश्चराम्यनुगृहाण यथा स्मृति: स्यात्।१८॥

Narada replied : 0 almighty Lord of the universe, it is no wonder that You love
all Your devotees and chastise the wicked. O glorious Lord, You have come down
to earth of Your own accord for the supreme welfare of all as well as for the sake
of maintaining and protecting the world. We know this full weil. (17) (What a great
fortune that) | have been enabled to day to enjoy the sight of Your (blessed) feet,
which bring to mankind supreme peace and deliverance, which are ever contemplated
at heart by Brahma and others possessed of infinite wisdom—the feet which are
(as a matter of fact) like a rope with the help of which men fallen in the deep well
of worldly life may rise above it. (Kindly) bless me that (wherever | may be) their
thought may (ever) haunt me and | may go about contemplating on them. (18)
