664 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 4

SMR AAR SEMA WE ME EERE RE RE ME SLOT ET RY OE ERT RS Re ER त्तज OR AH जो
eae eee

(They prayed as follows :-) "Salutation be to that quarter where resides the almighty Sri Hari,
the Universal Spirit, and on reaching which the pure-hearted recluses of tranquil mind do not
return (to the mortal plane)." (22) With their mind and intellect (duly) controlled and rid of (all)
impurities, they waited upon Lord Visnu (the Controller of the senses) with the aforesaid
prayer, remaining without sleep and subsisting on air (alone alt the time). (23) A voice without
(any trace of the speaker's) form and deep as the rumbling of clouds, was heard by them,
filling the quarters with its echo and bringing with it assurances of safety to the righteous :(24)
"Do not be afraid, O jewels among gods; may good betide you all ! My sight (as well as the
hearing of My voice) is undoubtedly conducive to the attainment of all blessings for created
beings. (25) The wickedness (tyranny) of this vile demon is (already) known (to Me) and |
shall put an end to it. (Please) wait till then. (26) When hatred develops in the mind of an
individual towards the gods, the Vedas, the bovine race, the Brahmanas and (other) pious
souls, nay, towards righteousness and Myself, the fellow surely perishes before long. (27)
When the demon seeks to harm his own high-souled son, Prahrada, who is free from
animosity and extremely calm, | shall slay him, even though he is powerful by virtue of boons
(bestowed on him by Brahma).” (28)
नारद sara

इत्युक्ता लोकगुरुणा तं yore दिवौकस: । न्यवर्तन्त गतोद्वेगा मेनिरे चासुरं हतम् ।२९॥
Narada continued : Thus addressed by Lord Visnu (the Preceptor of the universe), and

bowing down to Him, the denizens of heaven, who were (now) free from anxiety, returned
and accounted the demon (already) slain. (29)

ब्रह्मण्य: शीलसम्पन्न: सत्यसद्योजितेन्दिय:।अग्त्मबत्सर्वंभूतप्नष्मेक: प्रियसुह_त्त'म:|३१!

दासवत्संनतार्याङ्घ्रि: पितृवद्दीनवत्सल: । भ्रातृवत्सदृशो स्निग्धो Tages: |
विद्यार्थरूपजन्माढ्यो मानस्तम्भविवर्जित: । ३२

यस्मिन्महद्गुणा राजन् Ted कविभिर्मुहु: । न तेऽधुनापिधीयन्ते चथा भगवतीश्वरे । ३४॥

a साधुगाथासदसि रिपवोऽपि qu Fisher प्रकुर्वन्ति किमुतान्ये भवादृशा: 1341

Treated तस्य सूच्यते । वासुदेवे भगवति यस्य नैसर्गिकी wa: ।३६॥

Four most marvellous sons were born to that ruler of the Daityas. Prahrada, (who was)
avotary of exalted souls, was pre-eminent among them (all) in point of virtues. (30) Devoted
to the Brahmanas, richin amiability and true to his word, he had his senses under control and
was the unique beloved friend and the greatest well-wisher ofall living beings as their own
self. (31) Like a servant he bowed low at the feet of the venerable; like a father. he was kind
to the poor; he was affectionate like a brother to his equals and looked upon his elders as
God Himself. Though endowed with learning, wealth, personal charm and high birth, he was
altogether free from pride and arrogance. (32) Always unperturbed at heart in the midst of
calamities, he had no craving for sense, objects seen or heard of, since he looked upon them
as unreal. He had not only controlled his senses, breath, body and intellect, but he had
thoroughly conquered his desires (too); though a demon (by birth), he had relinquished the
characteristics of a demon. (33) The qualities of exalted souls (present) in him. O king
(Yudhisthira), are constantly imbibed by the wise and are not obscured even now (at this
distant date), any more than the excellences present in the Lord. (34) Even gods, his
