Dis. 20 ] - BOOK EIGHT 817

RAAT RHAAKECKHRA AES .॥.०2:3 ३३ 8३३ २२ HAKKAR E KEKE AE LEC EREE AER EAH EHNKE REE EEA eee
eee eee eee

अथ विंशोऽध्याय:

Discourse XX
A vision of the Cosmic Body (of the Lord)

श्रीगुक उवाच
बलिरेवं - गृहपति: कुलाचार्येण भाषित: । तूष्णीं भूत्वा क्षणं राजन्नुवाचावहितो गुरुम् । १ ।
Sri Suka resumed: Thus spokento by the sage Sukra (the preceptor of the demonrace),

Bali, the sacrificer (lit., master of the house or head of his family) kept quiet fora moment and
(then) with a concentrated mind submitted to his teacher (as follows). (1)

बलिरुवाच

सत्यं भगवता प्रोक्तं धर्मोऽयं गृहमेधिनाम्। set कामं aan वृत्तिं यो न बाधेत कर्हिचित् । २ ।
स चाहं वित्तलोभेन प्रत्याचक्षे कथं द्विजम् । प्रतिश्रुत्य ददामीति sree: कितवो यथा । ३ |
न ह्यसत्यात् wisest sf होवाच भूरियम्। सर्वं सोढुमलं wa ॠतेऽलीकपरं नरम् x |
नाहं fast निरयान्नाधन्यादसुखार्णवात्। न स्थानच्यवनान्मृत्योर्यथा विप्रप्रलम्भनात् । ५ |
aq यद्धास्यति लोकेऽस्मिन्संपरेतं धनादिकम् । तस्य art निमित्तं किं विप्रस्तुष्येन्न तेन चेत् । ६ |
sa: कुर्वन्ति भूतानां साधवो दुस्त्यजासुभि: | दध्यङ्शिबिप्रभृतय: को fred धरादिषु । ७ |
af बुभुजे ब्रह्मन्दैत्येन्दैरनिवर्तिभि: | तेषां कालोऽग्रसील्लोकान् न यञ्ञोऽधिगतं भुवि । ८ ।
सुलभा युधि fart ह्यनिवृत्तास्तनुत्यज: । न तथा def आयाते श्रद्धया ये धनत्यज: । ९ ।

wafer: कारुणिकस्य शङोभनं यदर्थिकामोपनयेन दुर्गति: ।

कुत: Waele भवादृशां ततो वटोरस्य ददामि वाञ्छितम् ।१०॥

aia गयज्ञक्रतुभिर्यमादृता भवन्त आम्नायविधानकोविदा: |

a एवं विष्णुर्वरदोऽस्तु वा परो दास्याम्यमुष्मे क्षितिमीप्सितां मुने । ११
यदप्यसावधर्मेण मां बध्नीयादनागसम्।तथाप्येनं न हिंसिष्ये भीतं ब्रह्मतनुं रिपुम् । १२॥
एष वा उत्तमश्लोको न जिहासति aq यश: । हत्वा मैनां Re युद्धे aca निहतो मया । १३॥

Bali said: Truly has it been observed by your worshipful self that such (alone) is the duty
of householders, as does not at any time interfere with his wealth, enjoyment, fame and
livelihood. (2) But, having promised (once) that! shall give, how can |, the celebrated Bali (a
scion of Prahrada) refuse, like a cheat, through greed of wealth, a (holy) Brahmana? (3) This
Earth (once) clearly said: "Indeed there is no unrighteousness greater than falsehood. |
regard myself capable of sustaining all other than a man given to lying.” (4) | am not afraid
(so much) of (the tortures of) hell, poverty and (even) an ocean of misery nor of falling from
my position and death (itself) as of playing a Brahmana false. (5) Whatever wealth etc.,there
is in this world will (surely) abandon a deceased person. (Why, then, should one not give it
away oneself during one’s very lifetime?) (And) what apology is there for parting with (only
a portion of) such wealth ifa Brahmana is not satisfied with that (much)? Pious souls like the
sage Dadhici and king Sibi minister to living beings with their life (itself), (So) difficult to part
with. What scruple can there be (under such circumstances) in giving away land etc.,
(external to the self)? (6-7) Time swallowed the enjoyments of those lords of the Daityas by

whom, O holy Brahmana, (the whole of) this globe was ruled over and who never retreated
(in battle), but not (so) the celebrity acquired by them on earth (which still survives). (8)
