Dis. 11 ] BOOK FOUR 343°

HERE eT EADH AHHH SEEK STE HHNE HAE ककक कक वयै ह्य यैती क HEP ECEE ATER SAE HEHE AAA OAR वी दि HEHE

Thus proceed the creation and preservation as well as the dissolution (of the universe) from
a disturbance in the equilibrium of the three Gunas (Sattva, Rajas and Tamas) brought about
by the Lord's own Maya (deluding potency) O king ! (16) As for God (the Supreme Person),
who is (ever) free from the three Gunas ( modes of Prakrti), He serves only as an occasion
for the transformation of these Gunas. It is due to Him that this universe, consisting of both
cause and effect, (ever) remains in a state of flux even as iron is set in motion (by the
presence of a loadstone). (17) The Lord's energy is divided (in the form of the creative,
protective ahd destructive powers) when the equilibrium of the three Gunas gets disturbed
under the force of His energy known by the name of Time. That is how He creates this
universe, though remaining a non-doer, and dissolves it even though a non-destroyer. The
Lord’s energy (in the shape of Time) is indeed hard to conceive. (18) Itis the same immortal
Lord who as the Time-Spirit puts an end to the world, though endless Himself, and is the first
Maker (of the universe), though Himself without beginning. Itis He who creates the universe
by begetting one individual through another and dissolves the same by destroying the
destroyer Himself through Death.(19) Equally entering all created beings as Death, the
Supreme Being treats none as His own or as His enemy. Like particles of dust following a
blast, all living beings follow the course of the Time- Spirit subject to their own destiny. (20)
The all-pervading Lord, who ever remains in His own natural state, cuts short as well as
prolongs the life of a living being, a creature of its destiny, though Himself immune from
such changes.(21) Some (the followers of the Mimamsa school of thought) speak of Him
as Karma (ritual), while others (the Carvakas or materialists) call Him by the name of
Nature, O ruler of men. Some refer to Him as Kala (Time), others (the astrologers) as
Destiny, while still other people give Him the appellation of Kama (Desire). (22) No one,
dear son, knows (even) the intention of the Lord, who is neither open to sense-perception
nor to any other means of cognition and who is the fountain-head of manifold energies
(such as Mahat-tattva or the principal of cosmic intelligence). Who, then, can know the
Lord Himself, one’s own origin ? (23) .
न चैते पुत्रक भ्रातुर्हन्तारो धनदानुगा: । विसर्गादानयोस्तात पुंसो ea हि कारणम् । २४॥
a wa fad gaia a एवावति हन्ति च । अथापि ह्यनहंकारान्नाज्यते गुणकर्मभि: 1241
we भूतानि भूतात्मा भूतेशो भूतभावन: | स्वशक्त्या मायया युक्त: सृजत्यत्ति च पाति च । २६॥
aa बलिं विश्वसृजो हरन्ति mar यथा a नसि दामयन्तिता: । २७॥
a: पञ्चवर्षो जननीं त्वे विहाय ma: सपत्या वचसा भिन्नमर्मा ।
at गतस्तपसा प्रत्यगक्षमाराध्य लेभे aft पदं त्रिलोक्या: । २८॥
आत्मानमन्विच्छ विमुक्तमात्मदृग् यस्मिन्निदं भेदमसत्प्रतीयते । २९॥
त्वं प्रत्यगात्मनि a wear आनन्दमात्र उपपन्नसमस्तशक्तो |
भक्तिं विधाय परमां शनकैरविद्याग्रन्थिं विभेत्स्यसि ममाहमिति प्ररूढम् । ३०॥
संयच्छ रोषं भद्रं A प्रतीपं श्रेयसां परम्।श्रुतेन भूयसा राजन्नगदेन यथाऽऽमयम् 1321
येनोपसृष्टात्पुरुषाल्लोक उद्विजते भृशम्। न बुधस्तद्वशं गच्छेदिच्छन्नभयमात्मन: 1321
een गिरिहाभ्रातुर्धनदस्य त्वया कृतम्।यजजघ्निवान् पुण्यजनान् भ्रातृघ्नानित्यमर्षित: 1331
तं प्रसादय ae सन्नत्या प्रश्रयोक्तिभि: । न यावन्महतां तेज: He नोऽभिभविष्यति । ३४॥
Itis not these Yaksas (attendants of Kubera, the Bestower of riches), my child, who slew
