Dis. 9] BOOK EIGHT 773

RAN GORESAOARARHENEH ORE HERE EE SHEER tren tot ie ote eee ee ee he ee et
ee SSS Be Re ee SE ee Se सा व ता जा ङ फि हीं Re मि

अहो रूपमहो धाम Bel अस्या नवं वय:। इति ते तामभिद्रुत्य पप्रच्छुर्जातहृच्छया: 1 २ 1
का त्वं कञ्जपलाशाक्षि कुतो वा किं चिकीर्षसि | कस्यासि ae वामोरु मध्नन्तीव मनांसि न: । ३ ।
न aa त्वामरैर्दैत्यै: सिद्धगन्धर्वचारणै: । नास्पृष्टपूर्वां जानीमो oats कुतो नृभि: । ४ ।
नूनं त्वं विधिना सुभ्रू: प्रेषितासि edhe सर्वेन्द्रिमन:प्रीतिं विधातुं सघृणेन किम् । ५ ।
सा त्वं न: स्पर्धमानानामेकवस्तुनि मानिनि । ज्ञातीनां बद्धवैराणां शं विधत्स्व `सुमध्यमे । ६ ।
वयं कश्यपदायादा भ्रातर: कृतपौरुषा: | ब्रिभजस्व यथान्यायं नैव भेदो यथा was ७ ।
इत्युपामन्तितो दैत्यैर्मायायोषिद्वपुर्हरि: | प्रहस्य रुचिरापाङ्गैर्निरीक्षन्निदमब्रवीत् | ८ ।

Sri Suka resumed: Having taken leave of (all) amity and adopted the ways of the
robbers, and snatching the jar (of nectar) from and abusing one another, the Asuras caught
sight of the approaching damsel. (1) Running up to her with the words "Marvellous beauty!
Amazing splendour !! Charming is her youthful age !!!” they questioned her (as follows),
passion having been kindled (in their heart); (2) Tell us, who are you with eyes resembling
the petals of a lotus? Where do you hail from?(Already) churning our hearts as it were, what
do you intend doing (further) and whose daughter are you,O lovely one ? (3) Itis not that we
do not know you as untouched (undefiled) before by immortals and Daityas, by Siddhas,
Gandharvas and C€ranas, (nay,) not even by the guardians of the spheres, much less by
human beings. (4) Have you been sent (here) by the merciful creator, O pretty one, in order
to afford delight to the senses and mind of (all) embodied souls ? Certainly it is so.(5) Such
as you are, (pray,) bring peace (of mind) tous, who are contending for a common object and
have (consequently) sontracted enmity (with one another), eventhough we are kins, Oproud
lady with a slender waist ! (6) Being sons of the sage Kasyapa, we are (all) brothers andhave
exerted (our) strength (for the common good). (Pray,) divide the prize equitably, so that there
may be no more quarrel (among us). (7) Thus urged by the Daityas, Lord Sri Hari, who had
assumed a feminine form through (His) Maya (deluding potency), beautifully laughed and
spoke as follows, looking at them through the lovely corners of His eyes.(8)

श्रीभगवानुवाच
कथं करयपदायादा: पुंश्चल्यां मयि age: | विश्वासं पण्डितो जातु कामिनीषु न याति हि । ९ ।
सालावृकाणां aot च स्वैरिणीनां सुरद्विष: | सख्यान्याहुरनित्यानि zat नूत्रं विचिन्वताम् igo!

The Lord observed: How, O sons of Kasyapa, have you reposed trust in me, a wanton
woman ? Indeed a wise man would never put faith in lustful women. (9) The wise declare the
ties of friendship of wolves and wanton women, who are looking out for newer and newer
delights, O enemies of gods, as inconstant.(10)

श्रीगुक उवाच
इति ते श्ष्वेलितैस्तस्या आश्वस्तमनसोऽसुरा: | जहसुर्भात्रगम्भीरं ददुश्चामृतभाजनम् ।११॥
ततो गृहीत्वामृतभाजनं हरिर्बभाष ईषत्सितञ्ञोभया गिरा ।
यद्यभ्युपेतं क्व च साध्वसाधु वा Ha var at faust सुधामिमाम् । १२॥
इत्यभिव्याहतं तस्या आकर्ण्यसुरपुङ्खवा: | अप्रमाणविदस्तस्यास्तत् तथेत्यन्वमंसत 1231
Sri Suka went on: The Asuras, whose mind felt reassured by these jocular expressions
of her, laughed a significant laugh, which was too deep (for the common man) to
comprehend, and entrusted the jar of nectar to her.(11) Having taken possession of the jar
of nectar, Lord Sri Hari then said in a voice brightened with a gentle smile, "If you accept

whatever is done by me, whether right or wrong, in any wise, | am prepared to divide this
nectar among you (but not otherwise).” (12) Hearing this utterance of that (divine) maiden,
