Dis. 37 ] BOOK TEN 255

Se IR SAA ITI AR EET OEE PECTS eT AH RET HERTS CETTE HELTAH A NR IN

अथ सप्तत्रिंशोऽध्याय:

Discourse XXXVII

The demon Vyoma slain (by the Lord)
श्रीगुक उवाच
asi तु कंसप्रहित atid महाहयो निर्जरयन् मनोजव: ।
सटावधूताभ्रविमानसङ्कुलं कुर्वन् नभो हेषितभीषिताखिल: ।१।
विशालनेत्रो विकटास्यकोटरो बृहद्गलो नीलमहाम्बुदोषम: 1
aa: कंसहितं fers स नन्दस्य जगाम कम्पयन्।२॥
आत्मानमाजौ मृगयन्तमग्रणीरुपाह्वयत् स व्यनदन्मृगेन्द्रवत् 131
स तं निज्ञाम्याभिमुखो मुखेन खं पिबन्निवाभ्यद्रवदत्यमर्षण: |
जघान पद्भ्यामरविन्दलोचनं दुरासदश्चण्डजवो दुरत्यय: ॥४॥
तद्बञ्चयित्वातपधोक्षजोरुषाप्रगृह्यदोभ्र्यांपरिविध्यपादयॊ:।
सावज्ञमुत्सृन्य धनु:शतान्ते चथोरगं तार्क्यसुतो व्यव्स्थित: 1५1
a were: पुनरुत्थितो रुषा व्यादाय केशी तरसाऽऽपतद्धरिम्।
सोऽप्यस्य वक्त्रे भुजमुत्तरं स्मयन् प्रवेशयामास यथोरगं बिले 1६1
am निपेतुर्भगवद्धुजस्पृशस्ते केशिनस्तप्तमय: स्पृशो यथा ।
बाहुश्च तद्देहगतो महात्मनो यथाऽऽमय: संववृधे उपेक्षित: 191
समेधमानेन स कृष्णबाहुना निरुद्धवायुश्चरणांश्च विक्षिपन्।
परस्विन्नगात्र: परिवृत्तलोचन: पपात लेण्डं विसृजन् fat og: ie!
ae: कर्कटिकाफलोपमाद् व्यसोरपाकृष्य भुजं महाभुज: ।
. । अविस्मितोऽयत्नहतारिरुत्स्मयै: प्रसूनवर्षैर्दिविषद्भिरीडित: ।९1
Sri Suka began again : Despatched by Karmsa* and anxious to oblige him, the aforesaid
Keéi of evilintent, for his part, went to Nanda’s Vraja in the form of a colossal horse—quick
as thought, with big eyes, a fearful cave-like mouth and a huge neck and resembling a large
dark cloud—pounding and shaking the earth with its hoofs crowding the firmament with
clouds and aerial cars dispersed by its manes and terrifying all with its neighs.T (1-2) Placing
Himself in the forefront, the Lord challenged the (diabolical) horse, that was frightening (the
inhabitants of) His Vraja with its neighs as aforesaid, throwing the clouds into commotion by
the hair of its tail and seeking after Him for a duel; and the animal roared loudly like a lion
(when thus challenged). (3) Beholding Him, the animal—which was not only difficult to
approach and possessed of terrible speed but formidable too—turned round and ran towards

Him full of rage and, drinking the heavens as it were with its (wide open) mouth struck the
lotus-eyed Lord with its (hind) legs. (4) Dodging the stroke and seizing the horse by its

a

* Vide verses 20-21 of Discourse XXXVI above.
+ Verse 2 has not been commented upon by Sridhara Swami.
