Dis. 19 BOOK TEN 189

MIRREN ron eee er ee i ee eae bee eR SB eee et a RTE

been rid of (all) fear, hit the enemy— who was carrying him through the sky as though it were
some treasure found by him—in (great) rage on his head with his strong fist, which
descended with the vehemence of a thunderbolt, even as Indra (the ruler of the gods) would
strike a mountain. (28) With his head smashed forthwith and deprived of his consciousness
when struck (by Balarama), and vomiting blood, the said demon fell dead, uttering a loud cry,
as a mountain struck with the weapon of Indra. (29)

wi yea fet gen बलशालिना | गोपा: सुविस्मिता आसन् साधु साध्विति वादिन: 1301
आरशिषोऽभिगृणन्तस्तं प्रशकंसुस्तदर्हणम् । प्रेत्यागतमिवालिङ्ग्य प्रेमविह्वलचेतस: 1३१1
ga प्रलम्बे Gea देवा: परमनिर्वृता: । अभ्यवर्षन्बलंमाल्यै: दंसु: साधु साध्विति 1321

इति श्रीमद्भागवते महापुराणे पारमहंस्यां संहिताया दजमस्कन्चे पूर्वार्धे प्रलम्बवघो नामाष्टादशोऽध्याय: 1१८॥

Seeing Pralamba slain by the mighty Balarama, the cowherds felt highly amazed and
shouted, "Well done, Bravo !' (30) Uttering benedictions on him and embracing him as though
he had returned to life after death, they extolled him, deserving as he was of such praise, their
mind overwhelmed with affection. (31) Supremely gratified on the sinful Pralamba having
been slain, the gods covered Bala with flowers and applauded him exclaiming, "Well done !
Bravo !" (32)

Thus ends the eighteenth discourse entitled “The Lord slays Pralamba," in the
first half of Book Ten of the great and glorious Bhagavata-Purana,
otherwise known as the Paramaharnsa-Samhita.

Stine? xsi:
rer Src

अथैकोनविंशोऽध्याय:

Discourse XIX

The Lord swallows up a wild fire (again)

SIR उवाच
क्रीडासक्तेषु गोपेषु तद्गावो दूरचारिणी: ।स्वैरॆ चरन्यो विविशुस्तृणलोभेन गह्वरम् । १ ।
अजा गावो महिष्यश्च fier वनाद् वनम् । इषीकाटवीं निर्विविशु: क्रन्दन्त्यो दावतर्षिता: । २ ।
AST: Ga गोपा: कृष्णरामादयस्तदा | जातानुतापा न विदुर्विचिन्वन्तो गवां गतिम् । ३ ।
तृणैस्तत्खुरदच्छिन्नैर्गोष्पदैरङ्कितैर्गवाम् । मार्गमन्वगमन् aa नष्टाजीव्या विचेतस: । ४ ।
मुञ्जाटव्यां भ्रष्टमार्गं क्रन्दमानं स्वगोधनम् । सम्प्राप्य तृषिता: श्रान्तास्ततस्ते संन्यवर्तयन् । ५ |
ता आहूता भगवता मेघगम्भीरया गिरा । स्वनाम्नां निनदं श्रुत्वा प्रतिनेदु: प्रहर्षिता: । ६ ।

ri Suka began again : While the cowherd boys were absorbed in play, their cows,
grazing atwill, strayed afar and, tempted by (green) grass, entereda dense forest. (1) Moving
from forest to forest, the she-goats, cows and she-buffaloes felt thirsty from heat and, wailing
loudly, entered a thicket of rushes. (2) Not perceiving the cattle, SriKrsna, Balarama and the
other Gopas were now filled with remorse but could not find any trace of the cows even
though they searched for them. (3) The Gopas, whose very means of livelinood had (thus)
