626 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 16

ISS eee ee ee eee ee eee ee eee kT eee teen en ee enema der

He saw the Lord in a form white as a lotus fibre, clad in blue and adorned with a brilliant
diadem, armlets, girdle and wristlets, marked with a cheerful countenance and reddish eyes
and surrounded by rings of Siddhegwaras (the chief among those who have attained
perfection). (30) All his sins having been wiped out by the (very) sight of the Lord, and his
mind clear and rid of all impurities, Citraketu silently approached the most ancient Person
with intensified devotion; and with tears of love in his eyes and hair standing on end, he
bowed to Him. (31) Repeatedly wetting the support under the lotus-feet of the illustrious Lord
with his tear-drops of love, and all utterance having been hindered by (an outburst of) love,
he was notat all able for a long time to extol Him properly in a loud voice. (32) Then, having
composed his mind by dint of reason and restrained the outgoing tendency ofall his senses,
he recovered his faculty of Speech and addressed in the following words that Preceptor of
the universe, whose (divine) Body stands described in scriptures (such as the Paficaratra)
treating of Devotion. (33)

afta ofa: सममतिभि: साधुभिर्भवान् जितात्मभिर्भवता |
विजितास्तेऽपि च भजतामकामात्मनां य आत्मदोऽतिकरुण: 13%
तव faye: खलु भगवन् जगदुदयस्थितिलयादीनि ।
विश्वसृजस्तेंऽशांशास्तत्र मृषा स्पर्धन्ते पृथगभिमत्या । ३५॥
परमाणुपरममहतोस्त्वमाद्यन्तान्तरवर्ती त्रयविधुर: ।
आदावन्तेऽपि च सत्त्वानां यद् ध्रुवं तदेवान्तरालेऽपि । ३६॥
क्षित्यादिभिरेष किलावृत: सप्तभिर्दशगुणोत्तरराण्डकोश: ।
यत्र पतत्यणुकल्प: सहाण्डकोटिकोटिभिस्तदनन्त: । ३७॥
विषयतृषो नरपशवो य उपासते fad परं त्वाम् ।
तेषामाशिष ईश तदनु विनश्यन्ति यथा राजकुलम् । ३८।
कामधियस्त्वयि रचिता न um रोहन्ति यथा करम्भबीजानि ।

+

ज्ञानात्मन्यगुणमये गुणगणतोऽस्य इवन्द्वजालानि 138 |
जितमजित तदा भवता यदाऽऽह भागवतं धर्ममनवद्यम् ।
निष्किञ्चना a मुनय आत्मारामा यमुपासतेऽपवर्गाय 1¥0 |
विषममतिर्न aa qui त्वमहमिति मम waft च यदन्यत्र ।
विषमधिया रचितो य: स ह्यविशुद्ध: क्षयिष्णुरधर्मबहुल: ।४१॥।
क: क्षे॰पो निजपरयो: कियानर्थ: स्वपरद्रुहा धर्मेण |
wae तव कोप: परसम्पीडया च तथाधर्म: ।४२॥
न व्यभिचरति तवेक्षा am ह्यभिहितो भागवतो धर्म: ।

सुरऋषिणा यदुदितं तावकेन कथमन्यथा भवति ।४५ |
