740 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 2

Beek Reh दाक Pte eR ee ee री क ee LE ATER EAE KE TEL ETNA ESET OER HAE EEE
EEO eee ee

as the sky with (its) three (principal) peaks of silver, steel and gold (respectively), and lending
charm to all the quarters with (its) other peaks rendered picturesque by (their wealth of )
precious stones and minerals( of diverse colours), by (their) trees, creepers and shrubs of
various description as well as by the murmuring sound of the water of their cascades. (2-3)
Withits foot being (constantly) washed by the waves of the ocean on every side, the mountain
made the lowlands (enclosing it ) look dark green (as if covered by turf) by its emeralds
scattered on all sides (by the corrosive action of the waves). (4) Its caves were frequented
by sporting Siddhas (a class of demigods endowed with mystic powers from their very birth),
Caranas (celestial bards), Gandharvas (celestial musicians), Vidyadharas (celestial artistes)
and great Nagas( serpent-demons having a human face and serpent-like body) as well as
by Kinnaras (another class of celestial musicians with a human figure and the head of ahorse
orvice versa), and Apsaras( celsestial nymphs). (5) There haughty lions roaredin indignation
aroused by the suspected presence of another lion, with their face turned towards the part
where the caves echoed with the music (of the Kinnaras etc.). (6) The mountain looked
charming with (its) valleys infested by herds of wild beasts of various description. And birds
sweetly warbledin (its) celestial gardens richin a variety of trees. (7) Itwas adorned with rivers
and lakes of limpid water and banks carpeted with the sands of gems and fanned by breezes
charged with drops of water scented with the fragrance lent to it by the bathing of celestial
ladies.(8)
तस्य soa भगवतो वरुणस्य महात्मन: | उद्यानमृतुमन्नाम आक्रीडं सुरयोषिताम्। ९ ।
Tl =m roarhiz Tt: | co fi ay 7 H: 1201
ge: aves: पनसैराम्रैराम्रातकैरपि । क्रमुकैर्नालिकेरैश्च खर्जूरैर्बीजपूरके: ।११॥
मधूकै: सालतालैश्च तमालैरसनार्जुनै: | अरिष्टोदुम्बरप्रक्षैर्वटै: र्किशुक्तन्द्रमैं: 1221
fara: aafratefitcea eee: । तस्मिन्सर: सुविपुलं लसत्काञ्चनपङ्कजम् ।१४॥
कुमुदोत्पलकह्लारहातपत्रश्रियोर्जितम् । मत्तषदपदनिरघुष्टं ङकुन्तैश्च कलस्वनै: ।१५॥
हंसकारण्डवाकीर्णं चक्राह्वे: सारसैरपि | जलकुक्कुटकोयष्टिदात्यूहकुलकूजितम् 1281
मत्स्यकच्छपसञ्चारचलत्पद्मरज:पय: | कदम्बवेतसनलनीपवञ्जुलकैर्वृतम् । १७॥
are: कुरबकाशोके: शिरीषॆ: कुटजेङ्गुदे दॆ: | कुब्जकै: स्वर्णयूथीभिर्नागपुन्नागजातिभि: ।१८॥
मल्लिकाशातपत्रैश्च माधवीजालकादिभि: । छ्ञोभितं तीरजैश्चान्यैर्नित्यर्तुभिरलं द्रुमै: । १९॥

In a (particular) valley of that mountain there existed a garden belonging to the glorious
and high-souled Varuna (the god of water), which bore the name of Rtuman and was the
sporting-ground of celestial ladies. (9) On all sides it was graced with celestial trees ever full
of flowers and fruits and was fenced with Mandaras (acacias), Parijatas (coral trees),
Patalas, ASokas and Campakas, different species of mangoes, Priyalas and Panasas
(bread-fruit trees) as well as with Amratakas (hog-plum trees), Kramukas (arecas) and
cocoanut-trees, date-palms and Bijapuras (citrons), Madhtkas, Salas, Palmyras, Tamalas,
Asanas, Arjunas, Aristas (soap-berries), Udumbaras, Plaksas,banyan trees, KimSukas and
sandal-irees, Nimba-trees, Kovidaras, Saralas (a species of pine trees), deodars, vines,
sugar-canes, plantains and rose-apples, plum-trees, Aksas, the yellow myrobalan and
myrobalan trees, Bilvas (wood-apples), Kapitthas and Jambiras (lemons),as well as by
Bhallatakas (the marking- nut trees) and so on. In that garden there existed a very extensive

lake studded with splendid golden lotuses. (10—14) It looked grand with the splendour of
lilies and lotuses of various species (such as Utpalas, Kalharas and Satapatras) and was
