Dis. 22 } BOOK FIVE 527

See aretha ee Re ew ee ER ee ee ES Ee ee eet hee foe eet eT Eo tt hr oe He ae

pointed out in passage 7 that) the circumference of the terrestrial globe (at the belt of the
Manasottara mountain situated in the heart of the outermost Dwipa, the Puskaradwipa) is
nine crore and fifty-one lakh Yojanas. (Out of this) the sun covers ( a distance of) two

thousand and twoYojanas in a moment. (19)

Thus ends the twenty-first discourse entitled "A description of the stellar sphere as well as of
the chariot of the sun-god and his entourage" in Book Five of the great and glorious
Bhagavata-Purana, otherwise known as the Paramahamsa-Samhita.

at Binet १३८
reo र्ज ९8 थिंफि

अथ द्वाविंशोऽध्याय:

Discourse XXII
The relative position of the planets and their movements
राजोवाच
भगवतोपवर्णितममुष्य aa कथमनुमिमीमहीति। १।
The king (Pariksit) asked : How are we to understand (accept the truth of) what your
glorious self has (just) stated (in passages 8 and 14 of the last discourse) with respect to
that glorious sun, viz., that while appearing to revolve about Mount Meru (on the one hand)

and the pole-star (on the other) with both these onits right, it (actually) moves (through the
various signs of the zodiac) facing the lunar mansions, with the Meru (and the pole-star)

on its left ? (1)

स aaa
चथा कुलालचक्रेण भ्रमता सह भ्रमतां तदाश्रयाणां पिपीलिकादीनां गतिरन्यैव
प्रदेशान्तरेष्वप्युपलभ्यमानत्वादेवं नक्षत्रराशिभिरुपलक्षितेन कालचक्रेण ध्रुवं मेरुं च प्रदक्षिणेन परिधावता

सह परिधावमानानां तदाश्रयाणां सूर्यादीनां ग्रहाणां गतिरन्यैव नक्षत्रान्तरे MIATA चोपलभ्यमानत्वात्। २1
मएपभाक्ता॥दपमपएचप्ताक्षांन्वारायणालक्कानास्वप्तयआत्मानत्रयत्मयकमविशुद्धिंनिमित्त
कविभिरपि च वेदेन विजिज्ञास्यमानो द्वादशधा विभज्य षट्सु वसन्तादिष्वृतुषु यथोपजोषमृतुगुणान्
विदधाति । ३ । तमेतमिह पुरुषास्त्रय्या विद्यया वर्णांश्रमाचारानुपथा उच्चावचै: कर्मभिराम्नातैर्योगवितानैश्च
श्रद्धया यजन्तोऽञ्जसा श्रेय: समधिगच्छन्ति। ४॥ अथ A एष आत्मा लोकानां द्यावापृथिव्योरन्तरेण
नभोवलयस्य कालचक्रगतो GIS मासान् भुङ्क्ते राशिसंज्ञान् संवत्सरावयवान्मास: पक्षद्वयं fear नक्तं
चेति सपादर्क्षद्वयमुपदिशन्ति चावता षष्ठमंशं भुञ्जीत स वै ॠतुरित्युपदिश्यते संवत्सरावयव:। ५ ॥ अथ च

* The diverse functions discharged by the seven groups of attendants of the sun-god enumerated above are described in

other books as below :—
er ॠषव: aA पुर: । नॄत्यन्त्वोऽप्सरसो यान्ति तस्य चानु निशाचरा:॥
त्रहन्ति पन्नगा यक्षै: क्रियतेऽभोषुसंग्रह: । वालखित्यास्तथैठेनं परिवार्यं सहासतं॥
(Visnupurana)

"The sages extol him through hymns of praise, the Gandharvas sing before him. the Apsaras go dancing in front of him,
and then follow the Raksasas. The Nagas draw the charict (alongwith the horses), the Yaksas hold the reins and even so the
Valakhilyas sit in the same chariot surrounding him (on all sides)."

For the names of the attendants as weil as for those of the sun-god changing every month vide,. XII. xi. 33-34.
