246 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 34

१ तत व वित् न् Sota त्त gn ton et tere त्तल् त त्त

their religious observances there, the people of Vraja returned home from that (holy) place,
O protector of men, talking about it with reverence. (19)
कदाचिदथ गोविन्दो (रामश्चाद्भुतविक्रम: । विजह्रुतुर्वने रात्र्यां मध्यगो ब्रजयोषिताम् 1201
निशामुखं मानयन्तावुदितोडुपतारकम्। मल्लिकागन्धमत्तालि YE कुमुदवायुना 1221
we: सर्वभूतानां मन:श्रवणमङ्गलम्।त्तो कल्पयन्तौ युगपत् स्वरमण्डलमूर्चछितम् ।२३॥
गोप्यस्तद्गीतमाकर्ण्य मूर्चिता नाविदन् नृप |स्रंसद्दुकूलमात्मानं स्रस्तकेशस्रजं तत: ।२४॥

On a certain occasion later on Sri Krsna (the Protector of cows) and Balarama of
wonderful prowess sported in the forest at night in the midst of women of Vraja. (20) They
were being melodiously sung by the womenfolk—who had fastened their love on Them—
were well-acorned, (nay) had their limbs smeared with sandal-paste, and were decked with
garlands and dressed in immaculate garments. (21) Making much of the advent of night—
which was marked by the appearance of the moon and the stars as well as by (the hovering
of) black bees intoxicated with the fragrance of jasmines, and was fanned by a breeze
charged with the fragrance of water-lilies—and simultaneously going through the whole
scale of musical notes with a regulated rise and fail of sound, the two Brothers sang to the
delight of the mind and ears of all created beings. (22-23) Hearing Their song, the cowherd
women fell into a trance and did not notice their raiment falling off from their person or their
wreaths dropped from their braid due to that trance, O protector of men ! (24)

एवं विक्रीडतो: ai गायतो: सम्प्रमत्तवत्।शङ्खचूड इति ख्यातो धनदानुचरोऽभ्यगात् ।२५॥
तयोर्निरीक्षतो राजंस्तन्नाथं प्रमदाजनम्।क्रोहान्तं कालयामास दिह्युदीच्यामराङ्कित: ।२६॥
Ret कृष्ण रामेति विलोक्य स्वपरिग्रहम् ae गा दस्युना ग्रस्ता भ्रातरावन्वधावताम् ।२७॥
मा «Sievert wees तरस्विनौ । आसेदतुस्तं तरसा त्वरितं गुह्यकाधमम् ।२८॥
स daa तावनुप्राप्तौ कालमृत्यू इवोद्विजन्। विसृज्य स्रीजनं ye: प्राद्रवज्जीवितेच्छया eel
arama गोविन्दो यत्र यत्र स धावति । जिहीर्षुस्तच्छिरोरत्नं तस्थौ रक्षन् feral बल: 1301
अविदूर gaa शिरस्तस्य दुरात्मन: । जहार afore सहचूडामणि fay: ।३१॥
शङ्खचूडं fede मणिमादाय भास्वरम्। अग्रजायाददात् Ste पङ्यन्तीनां च योषिताम् ।३२॥

इति श्रीमद्घागवते महापुराण पारमहंस्यां संहितायां दशमस्कन्थे पर्वार्धे ESTs नाम चतुर्विंक्लोऽध्याय: 1३४॥
१ a7 Bl

While the two Brothers were thus revelling unconstrainedly and singing as though highly
intoxicated, an attendant of Kubera (the bestower of riches) known by the name of
Sankhaciida, arrived there. (25) Nothing daunted, O king, he drove the screaming young
women, though protected by Them, towards the north before Their very eyes. (26) Beholding
Their own womenfolk crying “0 Krsna ! O Balarama!" even like cows seized by a robber, the
two Brothers ran in pursuit. (27) Shouting Their assurance of safety in the words "Do not be
afraid |" with a sal tree in hand, the two nimble-footed Brothers ran with quick steps and
speedily overtook that vile Guhyaka (Yaksa). (28) Shuddering to perceive the two Brothers,
close upon his heels like Kala (the Time-Spirit) and Death personified, the fool abandoned
the womenfolk and ran post-haste with intent to save his life. (29) Intending to snatch the
jewel on his head, Sri Krsna (the Protector of cows) chased him whithersoever he ran; while
Bala stood guard over the women. (30) Approaching him as though he were not very far off,
the almighty Lord severed the head of that evil-minded fellow, including the jewel on his crest
with a (stroke of) His fist, 0 dear Pariksit ! (31) Having thus slain Sankhacida and taking his

