332 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 52

SERIO SEA SCRRT ST ST EORCREPT SOUS न्विर्त्त त्तना

greatness of the two almighty Brothers. (9) Having run fast fora long distance and (therefore
apparently) fully exhausted, They (nevertheless) climbed up a lofty mountain bearing the
(significant) name of Pravarsana, where the glorious Indra (the god of rain) perpetually
rains.(10) Concluding Them to have hidden (somewhere) on the mountain and not knowing
the (exact) place (of-Their concealment), O protector of men, Jarasandha set the (whole)
mountain ablaze with the help of piles of wood (with which the mountain was girtonall sides),
strewing fire all round, (11) Then, springing up with (great) impetuosity from the mountain-
peak, which was ten and one Yojanas (or eighty-eight miles) high and whose sides were (all)
burning, They descended or'the plains (across the area occupied by the besieging army). (12)
Not being perceived by the enemy (Jarasandha) and his followers, Sri Krsna and Balarama
(the two jewels of Yadu’s race) came back to Their own city (Dwaraka), which had the sea
for its moat, O protector of men! (13) Falsely taking Balarama and SriKrsna (the Ruler even
of Brahma and Lord Siva) as burnt (to death), the aforesaid Jarasandha (the Ruler of
Magadha) too returned to Magadha taking (back with him) the very large army (brought by
him to rout Sri Krsna). (14)

aerifata: श्रीमान् रैवतो रेवतीं सुताम्। ब्रह्मणा चोदित: प्रादाद् बलायेति पुरोदितम् । १५
भगवानपि wee उपयेमे कुरूद्व्रह्र।त्रैदर्भीभॊष्पकसुतांश्रियोग्मन्नांस्वयंवरॆ।१६।
SR तरसा Ue: झाल्वादींश्चैद्यपक्षगान्। पश्यतां सर्वलोकानां aig: सुधामिव । १७॥

Urged by Brahma (the creator), the glorious Kakudmi (son of Revata), the suzerain lord
of the Anartas (the modern Kathiawad or Saurashtra), gave away his daughter, Revati, to
Balarama: this has already been narrated (by me in Book IX)* . (15) Having vanquished by
dint of prowess the kings ranged on the side of Sigupala (the ruler of Cedi—a rival suitor of
Rukmini) the foremost of whom was Salva, LordSri Krsna (the Protector of cows) too, Ojewel
among the Kurus, espoused in a choice-marriage Rukmini (the princess of Vidarbha—the
modern Berar), the daughter of Bhismaka (the ruler of Vidarbha) and a part manifestation
of Sri (the goddess of beauty and prosperity, the principal Spouse of Lord Visnu)}—{even) as
Garuda (son of Tarksa, a nickname of the sage Kasyapa) carried away (the jar containing)
nectar—while all people stood gazing. (1 6-17)

राजोवाच
war, भीष्मकसुतां रुक्मिणीं रुचिराननाम्। राक्षसेन विधानेन उपयेम इति श्रुतम् । १८॥
भगवञ्छोतुमिच्छामि कृष्णस्पम्यापिततेजप्त:।यथामम्यधशात्वग्दॊम्जित्वाक्काग्पुपाहरत्।१९।
Fer कृष्णकथा: पुण्या माध्वीर्लोकमलापहा: । को नु तृप्येत sar: श्रुतज्ञो नित्यनूतना: 1201

The king (Pariksit) said : The Lord espoused Rukmini, the daughter of Bhismaka, of
lovely countenance, according to (what is known as) the Raksasa mode of marriage (so-
called because it is principally in vogue among the Raksasas or ogres); so it is heard. (18)
O divine sage, | long to hear (in detail) the story of Sri Krsna of unlimited energy—how He
Snatched away the girl, having conquered Jarasandha (the ruler of Magadha), Salva and
others. (19) O holy Brahmana, what man who is capable of understanding and appreciating
what he has heard would feel sated as a matter of fact while hearing the stories of Sri Krsna,
which are not only delightful (to hear) and ever interesting but bring a great reward (to the
listener) and wipe out the sins of mankind ? (20)

* Vide verses 27 to 36 of Discourse III.
