Dis. 8] BOOK TEN 137

२११२ ० १ ११२७ २ १ सा NH १6 # ०१5७ 5क १. # EE CHRON EERER EHR ETHERS ३६५ २:७ ६२ HEHE # १6१ # १6 HE HERE HEH

truthful, then examine my mouth with your own eyes (in order to verify their veracity). (35)
"If so, then open your mouth !” Thus urged, the aforesaid Lord Sri Hari, whose lordship is
(ever) unobstructed and who had in sport assumed the form of a human child, opened His
mouth. (36) There (inside the Lord's mouth) she beheld the (whole) universe consisting of
the moving and the stationary, the atmosphere, the (four) quarters, the terrestrial globe with
its mountains, principal divisions and oceans, and including the wind (causing the motion of
the planets), the fire of lightning, the moon as well as the stars, heaven, water, fire, the air
as well as the sky, the deities presiding over the Indriyas (who are modifications of the
Sattvika Ahankara), the mind, the Indriyas (modifications of the Rajasika Ego), the objects
of senses (modifications of the Tamasika Ego), and the three Gunas. (37-38) Synchronously
observing in the (infantile) body of her Son, (nay,) in His wide open mouth, this wonderful
universe—consisting of a variety of organisms (moving as well as immobile) owing their
diversity to the Jiva, Kata (the factor disturbing the equilibrium of the Gunas), Nature (the
cause of the modification of the three Gunas), Karma (the cause of birth), the tendency to
action (the seed of Karma)—as well as Vraja including herself (and her Son), YaSoda was
seized with dismay.(39) (She thought within herself,) "Is this adream or illusion set up by the
Lord, or alas ! is it delusion of my mind or some inborn characteristic divine glory of this very
infant of mine?(40) Therefore, | bow down to that (ultimate) Goal (viz., Brahma), which is
most difficult to comprehend, (nay,) which cannot be easily and correctly guessed through
the intellect, mind, actions and words, which is the ground of this universe, and by means
of which (as presiding over the senses) and because of which it is perceived. (41) He (that
Lord alone) is my refuge, by whose Maya has been generated (inme) this perverse (egotistic)
notion that | am (Yasoda,) the chaste wife of Nanda (the lord of Vraja), the (sole) mistress
of his entire fortune, and he, my husband, that this child (Sri Krsna) is my son and that the
cowherds and cowherdesses (of Vraja) as well as the cattle-wealth (and so on) are
mine."(42) On the cowherdess (Yasoda) who had thus realized the truth, that almighty Lord
(Sri Krsna) cast His divine charm in the form of maternal affection (for Him). (43) Placing Sri
Krsna (her Son) in her lap, the aforesaid cowherd lady, whose revelation had instantly
disappeared, stood with her heart full of intense affection (even) as before. (44) (Once again)
she regarded Sri Hari—whose glory is being celebrated by the three Vedas (treating of the
rituals) as well as by the Upanisads, nay, (even) by the Sankhya and Yoga systems (of
philosophy) and (even so) by the Vaisnava scriptures (such as the Paficaratra of Devarsi
Narada)—as her own son. (45)

+

राजोवाच
नन्द: किमकरोद् ब्रह्मन् श्रेय एवं महोदयम्। Gael च महाभागा पपौ यस्या: स्तनं हरि: ।४६॥
पितरौ नान्वविन्देतां कृष्णोदारार्भकेहितम्। गायन्त्यद्यापि कवयो यल्लोकशमलापहम् xe!

The king (Pariksit) said : What meritorious act did Nanda perform so as to deserve such
great fortune and what did the highly blessed YaSoda do, whose breast Sri Hari (Himself)
sucked, while His parents (Vasudeva and Devaki) did not (even) get to behold the charming
infantile sports of Lord Sri Krsna, which sages glorify even to this day and which (when sung)
are capable of wiping out the sins of the (whole) world ? (46-47)

श्रीगुक उवाच
द्रोणो agai प्रवरो een ae ara करिष्यमाण आदेशान् ब्रह्मणस्तमुवाच ह ।४८॥
जातयोर्नी महादेवे भुवि fade हरौ । भक्ति: स्यात् परमा लोके ययाञ्जो दुर्गतिं तरेत् । ४९1
