Dis. 22] BOOK FIVE 529

PEE HO HO जा य चजा वज ता ह्येतय य CONE eC OTT EEK STEN Cee Ke CUHK Deh rhsh hihi iat th eth ie eee eee el ed

कलाभिरमराणां क्षीयमाणाभिऽच कलाभि: पितॄणा-पहोरात्राणि पूर्वपक्षापरपक्षाभ्यां वितन्वान:

सर्वजीवनिवहप्राणो जीवश्चैकमेकं नक्षत्रं त्रिंशता qeddeatie) य एष षोडशकल: पुरुषो

इति वर्णयन्ति। 201

Similarly, the moon, which is observed at a height of a lakh Yojanas (eight lakh miles)

beyond the orb of the sun, and which moves faster than the sun and (therefore) leads all the
other constelfations, completes in the course of a month (two fortnights) the circuit made by
the sun in a whole year, traverses in two and a quarter days the distance covered (by the
sun) ina month, and the distance covered in a fortnight inthe course of a day. (8) Determining
by its gradually growing and declining splendour, associated with the first (bright) and
second (dark) half-months, the day* and night of the gods and the manes respectively, the
moon—which is the very life (sustenance) of all the species of living beings as well as (their)
life-giver (sustainer)—passes through each constellation in the course of thirty Muhurtas
(twenty-four hours). (9) It is this glorious being appearing in the form of the moon (with its
orb consisting of sixteen parts or digits), the deity presiding over the mind, the foodt of all
living beings and the very embodiment of nectar, who, being by his very nature the nourisher
of the life of (all living beings including) the gods and the manes, human beings and spirits,
beasts and birds, reptiles and plants, is one with all: so declare the wise. (10)

ad उपरिष्टात्त्रिलक्षयोजनतो नक्षत्राणि as दक्षिणेनैव कालायन ईंश्वरयोजितानि

सहाभिजिताष्टाविंशति: | ११ । तत उपरिष्टादुशना द्विलक्षयोजनतउपलभ्यते पुरत: पश्चात्सहैव वार्कस्य
शैघ्रयमान्द्यसाम्याभिर्गतिभिरर्कवच्चरति लोकानां नित्वदानुकूल va प्रायेण वर्षयंश्चारेणानुमीयते स

वृष्टिविष्टम्भग्रहोपशमन: 1 १२॥
Ata height 0 three lakh Yojanas (or twenty-four lakh miles) beyond the moon (or five lakh
Yojanas beyond the earth's surface) are placed the twenty-eight lunar mansions tinclusive of
Abhijit. They revolve with the Meru on their right alone (having no separate course of their own)

* Although the scriotures declare that tne dark and bright fortnight of a lunar month constitute a day and night respectively
of the manes—a species of living beings inhabiting a part of the aerial region which evidently remains lighted by the sun's rays
throughout a dark fortnight and screened from its rays for the whole length of a bright fortnight, the same is not the case with
the gods, whose realm—so declare the scriptures—remains lighted by the sun so long as the latter continues to traverse the
northern skies, and remains screened from the sun's rays throughout the rest of the year. Thus the period of six months
commencing from the day on which the sun enters the sign of the zodiac called Capricornus constitutes the day, and other six
months commencing with the sun's entry into the sign of the zodiac called Cancer constitutes the night of the gods, By the
statement, therefore, that the moon divides the day and night of the gods and the manes by means of the bright and dark halves
of a month, the sage Suka evidently means that the moon determines by means of the bright and dark fortnights the periods
of worship suitable for the gods and the manes respectively; for the Sruti text तस् र्यमाणपक्षे यजन्ते restricts the worship of the
gods, to the bright forinight. Similarly the Sruti text SIH TPT assigns the dark fortnight to the worship of the manes. It ts
in this sense that the bnght fortnight should be understood to be the day of the gods, and the eight of the manes and the dark
fortnight to be the day of the manes and the night of the gods.

+ The moon-god has been referred to in the scriptures as ‘Osadhisa’ (the ruler and protector of herbs and annual plants).
Elsewhere he has been spoken of as supplying food to all living beings (vide V. xx. 12). It is in this sense that he should be
understood as constituting the food of all.

+ The Naksatras or lunar mansions are ordinarily reckoned as twenty-seven only. Their names are: ——Aswini, Bharani,
Kritika, Rohini or Brahmi, Mrgasira or Agrahayani, Ardra, Punarvasu or Yamaka, Pusya or Sidhya, Aslesa, Magha, Purva-
phalguni, Uttaraphalguni, Hasta, Citra, Swati Visakha or Radha, Anuradha (so-called because it is placed next to Radha),
Jyestha, Mila, Pirvasadha, Uttarasadha. Sravana, Sravistha or Dhanistha, Satabhisa. Parvabhadrapada, Uttarabhadrapada
and Revati. The twenty-eight constellations, viz., Abhijit. is located midway between the two Asadha and Sravana. as is borne
out by the Sruti text—' अभिजिन्नाम नक्षत्रमुपरिष्टादाषादानामधस्तच्छणाया:`
