202 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 15

SOI fete een 2 eh eee ee Oe CHER ECCWERL ET ECHL ETA OME HHE CES E ARETE HH AHHH eee
येषां बृहत्कटितटा: स्मितशोभिमुख्य: कृष्णात्मनां न रज आदधुरुत्स्मयाद्यै: 120 |
श्रीरूपिणी modi चरणारविन्दं लीलाम्बुजेन हरिसद्मनि मुक्तदोषा |
संलक्ष्यते स्फटिककुड्यं उपेतहेम्नि सम्मार्जतीव यदनुग्रहणेऽन्ययत्न: 1221
वापीषु विद्रुमतटास्वमलामृताप्सु प्रेष्यान्विता निजवने तुलसीभिरीहाम् ।
अभ्यर्चती स्वलकमुन्नसमीक्ष्य वक्त्रमुच्छेषितं भगवतेत्यमताङ्ग यच्छी: 1221
यन्न व्रजन्त्यघभिदो रचनानुवादाच्छृण्वन्ति येऽन्यविषया: कुकथा मतिघ्नी: |
ag श्रुता हतभगैर्नृभिरात्तसारास्तांस्तान् क्षिपन्त्यशरणेषु तम:सु हन्त 123 |
येऽभ्यर्थितामपि च नो नृगतिं प्रपन्ना wa च तत्त्वविषयं सहधर्म यत्र ।
नाराधनं भगवतो वितरन्त्यमुष्य सम्मोहिता विततया aa मायया ते । २४
यच्च व्रजन्त्यनिमिषामृषभानुवृत्या gam ह्युपरि न: स्पृहणीयशीला: |
ata: सुयञ्ञस: कथनानुरागवैक्ब्यबाष्पकलया पुलकीकृताङ्गा: । २५1
तद्बिश्वगुर्वधिकृतं भुवनैकवन्द्यं दिव्यं विचित्रविबुधाग्र्यविमानशोचि: |
amy: परां मुदमपूर्वमुपेत्य योगमायाबलेन मुनयस्तदथो विकुण्ठम् । २६॥

When the king of bees hums ina high pitch, singing the story of Sri Hari as it were, there
is a temporary lull in the noise of the pigeon, the cuckoo, the crane, the Cakravaka, the
Cataka, the swan, the parrot, the partridge and the peacock (who are all ears as it were to
drink in the bee's song). (18) Seeing that the Lord adorns His person with wreaths etc., made
of the leaves of Tulasi (the basil plant, which is so sacred and dear to Him) and also holds
its fragrance in great esteem, the flowers of the Mandara, Kunda and Kurabaka, the lily, the
Campaka, Arna (Karavira), Punnaga, Nagakesara and Bakula, the lotus and the Parijata i in
that realm, though all fragrant, recognize that Tulasi did greater penance (in her previous
existence) than any of them.* (19) That realm (of Lord Visnu) is crowded with aerial cars made
of lapis lazuli, emerald and gold, which are secured there as a result of mere obeisance at
the feet of Sri Hari (and not through Karmayoga, Jianayoga, Vairagya or penance etc.). The
mind of those who occupy these cars are so full of Sri Krsna (Lord Visnu) that their spouses
with large hips and smiling faces are unable to stimulate their passion by their mirth and other
charms. (20) Sri (the Spouse of Lord Visnu and the goddess of fortune), who is possessed
of a most lovely form and whose favour is sought after by others (including the greatest gods
like Brahma and so on), lives in the abode of Sri Hari free from the fault of capriciousnesstt.
Moving about in that palace with the anklets on Her feet making a tinkling sound, and with
a lotus-flower held in Her hand as a plaything, She is seen (reflected) in the crystal walls (of
that palace), inlaid with gold here and there, as if engaged in dusting the house (although,
really speaking, the abode of the Lord is ever free from dust). (21) While engaged in

worshipping the Lord with Tulasi leaves in Her own pleasure-garden in the midst of Her
attendants, Sri (Laksmi) happens to see Her face with beautiful tresses and a prominent

ne

* This shows that, to say nothing of living beings such as birds, bees and so on, even inanimate beingsin that realm, such
as plants and trees, are not only endowed with consciousness but are ever engaged in conscious service of the Lord, and are
constituted of the same essence as the Lord. In this way everything in that realm is divinely blissful in essence.

+ The goddess of fortune has been charged with fickleness only in Her material form. In Her divine form She is an
embodiment of all feminine virtues and the most constant and devoted of all wives. Although the most beloved of the Lord's,
consoris. and the undisputed queen of His divine household, She isa model of madesty and, like anideal wife, ever looks upon
Herself as an humble servant-maid of the Lord. That is why She has been represented here by poetic imagination as engaged
ina menial service of the Lord's househot.
