Dis. 62 BOOK TEN 385

तीत्त ey te eer ee irs ree eke eee e RESET TES teeeeetenereei ess htet ener es

felt overjoyed, the eunuchs (in charge of the gynaeceum) noticed her, through marks that
could hardly be concealed, as having been deprived of her virginhood. They reported (to
Bana as foliows):—"O king, we notice the conduct of your virgin daughter to be such as is
apt to cast a stain on your family. (27-28) We are unable to make out how came about the
defloration of your daughter, who is constantly guarded by us in her house and could not (as
such) be easily perceived by men."(29)
wa: wet बाणो दुहितु: श्रुतदूषण: । त्वरित: कन्यकागारं प्राप्तोऽद्राक्षीद् यदूद्वहम् ।३०॥

बृहद्भुजं कुण्डलकुन्तलत्विषा स्मितावलोकेन च मण्डिताननम् ।३१॥

agent मधुमल्लिकाश्रितां तस्याग्र आसीनमवेक्ष्य विस्मित: 1321

a तं प्रविष्टं । acta माधव: ।

ama मौर्वं परिघं व्यवस्थितो यथान्तको दण्डधरो जिघांसया । ३३॥

जिघृक्षया तान् ofa: प्रसर्पत: जजुनो यथा सूकरयूथपोऽहनत्॥

ते हृन्यमाना भवनाद् विनिर्गता निर्भिन्नमूर्धोरुभुजा: प्रदुद्गुवु: । ३४॥

4 नागपाज्ञैर्बलिनन्दगो बली wi waa कुपितो बबन्ध ह।

am yp ञोकविषादविह्वला Fe निशम्याश्रुकलाक्ष्यरौदिषीत् 1341

इति श्रीमद्धागवते महापुराणे पारमहंस्यां संहितायां ददामस्कन्धे उत्तरार्धेऽनिरुद्धवन्ध Sy नाम द्विषष्टितमोऽध्याय: 1621

Sore distressed to hear (the news) of his daughter's pollution, Bana hastened thence to
the maidens’ apartments and noticed there Aniruddha (a jewel among the Yadus). (30)
Banasura was taken aback to behold Aniruddha, sprung from the loins of Pradyumna (who
was no other than Love incarnate), (and therefore) exceptionally charming in all the (three)
worlds—dark-brown of hue, clad in yellow, having lotus-like eyes and long arms, a face lit
up with the lustre of his ear-rings and (curly) locks as well as with his smiling glances, playing
at dice with his darling—who was decked with festal ornamenis all over her body—and
seated in front of her, and wearing between his arms a wreath of jasmine flowers peculiar
io the vernal season, tinged with the saffron painted on her breasts, during his bodily contact
with her. (81-32) Perceiving Banasura to have entered the room, surrounded by a
detachment of armed soldiers, Aniruddha (a scion of Madhu) stood firmly taking up (in his
hand) a steel bludgeon with intent to make short work of them (all) like Yama (the god of
death) wielding his rod (of punishment). (33) Like the leader ofa pack of boars killing (anarmy
of) dogs, he made short work of the warriors even as they rushed on all sides with intent to
seize him. Being struck by him, they issued out of the mansion and ran helter-skelter with
their heads, thighs and arms smashed. (34) The powerful Banasura (the son of Bali) got
enraged and bound Aniruddha with the cords of serpents, while he was (busy) exterminating
his army, so the tradition goes. Overwhelmed with grief and despondency to hear of his
bondage, Usa loudly wailed with tear-drops in her eyes. (35)

Thus ends the sixty-second discourse entitled “Aniruddha taken captive," in the
latter half of Book Ten of the great and glorious Bhagavata-Purana,
othenvise known as the Paramahamsa-Samnhita.

othe iNet:
rue Ser
