Dis. 7 ] . -^800!९1४४0 - 115

STAR जजोजा जनयो ज seer WT tee 8 EE छ्य पा क EO BE ECE A के क कत्ये ओ जं त्कजा ज ककच ONT आ

गृह्णीत यद्यदुपबन्धममुष्य माता Yad सुतस्य न तु तत्तदमुष्य माति ।
यज्जृम्भतोऽस्य वदने भुवनानि गोपी संवीक्ष्य शङ्कितमना: प्रतिबोधिताऽऽसीत् । ३० |
we च मोक्ष्यति wale वरुणस्य पाशाद् गोपान् बिलेषु पिहितान्मयसूनुना च ।
अह्नयापृतं निशि दझयानमतिश्रमेण लोकं विकुण्ठमुपनेष्यति गोकुलं स्म । ३१।
धर्तोच्छिलीन्ध्रमिव wa दिनानि सप्तवर्षो महीध्रमनघैककरे सलीलम् ।३२॥
क्रीडन् वने निशि निशाकररश्मिगोर्यां रासोन्मुख: कलपदायतमूर्छितेन |
उद्दीपितस्मररुजां ब्रजभृद्दधूनां हर्तुर्हरिष्यति रिरो धनदानुगस्य । ३३1
a च प्रलम्बखरदर्दुरकेश्यरिष्टमल्लेभकंसयवना: कुजपौ॰ण्डकाद्या इकाद्या: |
अन्ये च जाल्वकपिबल्वलदन्तवक्त्रसप्तोक्षशाम्बरविदूरथरुक्मिमुख्या: 13% |
ये वा मृधे समितिशालिन आत्तचापा: काम्बोजमत्स्यकुरुकॆकयसृञ्जयाद्या: |
In order to relieve the oppression of the earth, which will be overrun by the armies of kings
who are secondary incarnations of demons (the enemies of gods), the Lord will be partially
born as Sri Balarama and Sri Krsna, representing severally a grey and a dark hair* of the
Deity. In these forms He will perform feats bearing testimony to His greatness, even though
His ways are beyond the comprehension of the common people. (26) To suck out the life of
the demoness Ulikika (Pitana) even as a new-born babe (of less than ten days), to turn a
cart upside down with His foot, while yet three months old, and to knock down two very high
Arjuna trees while crawling on His hands and knees between them—all these feats are such
as Cannot be conceived to have been performed by anyone else than the Lord Himself. (27)
Living in Vraja, He will bring back to life the cattle of Vraja as well as their keepers—who meet
their death by drinking the poisonous water of the Yamuna—by casting His gracious look at
them. And further in order to purify the waters of the Yamuna He will sport in that river and
expel the serpent Kaliya, whose tongue is ever restless due to the vehemence of the fierce
poison. (28) The same night, when the (dry) forest of rushes (surrounding them on all
sides) begins to be consumed by wild fire and the entire Vraja is dead asleep (on the bank
of the Yamuna), that Lord of incomprehensible power with Balarama will ask them to close
their eyes, and save them from certain death. This exploit of the Lord will be indeed
supernatural.(29) Every cord that His mother (Yasoda) catches hold of to bind her Child
with will prove inadequate. Nay, when the cowherd lady (Yasoda) beholds the (fourteen)
spheres in His mouth, even as He yawns, she will at first be filled with dismay and then
she will be roused to a sense of His supreme divinity. (30) Again, He will rid His father
Nanda of fear (of the python) and deliver Him from Varuna's noose and will further rescue
the cowherd boys that will be shut up in caves by the demon Vyoma (Maya's son). Nay,
He will take to His own (eternal and blissful) Abode, Vaikuntha, the people of Gokula, even
though they remain working all day long and, due to over-exertion, sleep as a log at
night.(31) When, on the yearly sacrificial offering (to Indra) being stopped by the cowherds
(Nanda and others), the god of rain will pour down torrential showers all over the territory
of Vraja for the destruction of that land, the Lordin His anxiety to protect (them as well as)

* By speaking of Sri Balarama and Sri Krsna as representing the Lord's hair Brahma means to say that a single hair
{the minutest fraction) of the Lord is enough to relieve to earth's burden. The statement is further intended to indicate the
fair and dark complexion of Sri Balarama and Sri Krsna respectively. In reality, however, Sri Krsna is the integra! Divinity,
the Lord Himself— ` कृष्णास्तु भगवान् स्वयम्`
