684 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 5

RHA THERA HEA HEARS ACHE TEGAN EMER RON TH BRR RR RE MTR KI AAR HART RR

types of Dissolution have been described (by me). Such is the course of Time. (38)
एता: कुरुश्रेष्ठ जगद्बिधातुर्नारायणस्याखिलसत्त्वधाम्न: |
लीलाकथास्ते कथिता: समासत: areata नाजोऽप्यभिधातुमीरा: 13¢1
संसारसिन्धुमतिदुस्तरमुत्तितीर्षोनान्य प्लवो भगवत: पुरुषोत्तमस्य |
लीलाकथारसनिषेवणमन्तरेण पुंसो भवेद् विविधदु:खदवार्दितस्य ॥४०॥

पुराणसंहितामेतामृषिर्नारायणोऽव्यय: । नारदाय पुरा Me कृष्णद्वैपायनाय स: el
a वै मह्यं महाराज भगवान् बादरायण: | इमां भागवतीं प्रीत: संहितां वेदसम्मिताम् ।४२॥
Tal वक्ष्यत्यसौ ga ऋषिभ्यो नैमिषालये । दीर्घसत्रे कुरुश्रेष्ठ age: ञ्लौनकादिभि: ree

इति श्रीमद्धागवते महापुराणे पारमहंस्यां संहितायां द्वादशस्कन्धे चतुर्थोऽध्याय: 1४।

In this way, 0 jewel among the Kurus ! have been narrated (by Me) in brief the stories
of the sportful activities of Lord Narayana, the Maker of the universe and the abode ofall living
beings as well as of all strength and goodness; (for) not even Brahma (the birthless creator)
is capable of relating them in all their details and entirety. (9) To a man tormented by the
wild fire of manifold miseries and seeking to cross the ocean of metempsychosis, (which is)
most difficult to cross, there is no vessel other than constantly enjoying the nectar-like stories
of the sportful activities of Lord Purusottama (the Supreme Person). (40) Of yore (at the
beginning of creation) the omniscient and immortal Lord Narayana taught the compilation in
the form of this (Bhagavata) Purana (in four verses’) to the sage Narada (through Brahmat)
and the latter to (my father,) the sage Krsnadwaipayana (Vedavyasa). (41) Full of delight,
O great king, the said divine sage Vedavyasa (who lives in a grove of jujube trees) actually
taught me this compilation (consisting of 18000 Slokas), which is equal (in worth) to the
Vedas. (42) Requested by the sage Saunaka and others, O jewel among the Kurus! that Suta
(sitting over there) will expound it to the (eighty-eight thousand) Rsis (going to be assembled)
in a lengthy sacrificial session at Naimisaranya. (43)

Thus ends the fourth discourse in Book Tweive of the great and
glorious Bhagavata-Purana, otherwise known
as the Paramahamsa-Samihita.

a
PII

अथ पञ्चमोऽध्याय:

Discourse ४
The (Final) Teaching (of Sukadeva) concerning Brahma
श्रीरुक उवाच ॥।
अत्रानुवर्ण्यतेऽभीक्ष्णं विश्चात्मा भगवान् हरि: । यस्य प्रसादजो ब्रह्मा रुद्र: क्रोधसमुद्धव: । १ ।
a तु राजन् मरिष्येति पशुबुद्धिमिमाँ जहि । न जात: प्रागभूतोऽद्य देहवत्त्वं न नङ्क्ष्यसि । २ ।

* Vide Il. ix 31—34.
t Vide Il. ix. 43-44.
