SRIMAD BHAGAVATA Dis. 3

SECKESERAEREE ACES HEL SLE TA SHOT EH ANKE NES ELERA RAE ERE Ess FERRE GEESE SEAR

कृशाश्वात् सोमदत्तोऽभूद् योऽश्वमेधैरिडस्पतिम्। इष्टा पुरुषमापाग्र्यां गतिं योगेश्वराश्रित: ।३५॥
सौमदत्तिस्तु सुमत्तिस्तत्सुतो जनमेजय:। एते वैशालभूपालास्तृणविन्दोर्यञ्चोधरा: । ३६॥

Dama was the son of Marutta and Rajyavardhana, of the former. Sudhrti was born as the
son of Rajyavardhana and the son of Sudhrti was Nara, (also) called Saudhrteya (son of
Sudhrti). (29) His son was Kevala, of whom Bandhuman was born; and from (the loins of)
the latter sprang up Vegavan. His son was Bandhu, of whom (the famous) King Trnabindu
was born. (30) A heavenly damsel, Alambusa, the foremost of celestial nymphs, chose for
her husband Trnabindu, who was a repository of qualities worth acquiring. From their union
were born a number of sons as well as a girl. Idavida (by name). (31) Through her the sage
Visrava begot a son in the person of the god Kubera (the lord and bestower of riches) after
receiving the highest knowledge (of the Self or of Brahma) from his father, the sage Pulastya
(a mind-born son of Brahma and a master of Yoga). (32) Visala, Stnyabandhu and
Dhtmraketu were the sons of Trnabindu, (Of these,) Visala, who became a king and
continued the ancestral line, built the (famous) city of Vaigall. (8) Hemacandra was the
son of Vigala and Dhimraksa, the son of Hemacandra. (And) of Dhimraksa's son,
Sarhyama, was born Krsaswa alongwith (his younger brother) Devaja. (34) From (the loins
of) Krsaswa sprang up Somadatta, who, having propitiated the supreme Person the Lord
(Bestower of the fruit) of sacrifices, through (a number of) horse-sacrifices and depending
on the Lord (the Master of all Yogas), attained the highest goal (viz., the divine state). (35)
Sumatiwas the son of Somadatta and Sumati's son was Janamejaya. These were the kings
born in the line of ViSala, who preserved the glory of Trnabindu. (36)

Thus ends the second discourse, in Book Nine of the great
and glorious Bhagavata-Purana, otherwise known
as the Paramaharhsa Samhita.

स्रे
त्त्सन्हैषकिर्गिकदित0०॥

अथ तृतीयोऽध्याय

Discourse Ill
The story of the sage Cyavana and his wife Sukanya;

the posterity of King Saryati
श्रीशुक उवाच
शर्यातिर्मानवो राजा ब्रह्मिष्ठ: स sya ह यो वा अङ्गिरसां सत्रे द्वितीयमह ऊचिवान् । १ ।
सुकन्या aM तस्यासीत् कन्या कमललोचना । तया सार्धं वनगतो ह्यगमच्च्यवनाश्रमम् । २ I
सा सखीभि: परिवृता विचिन्वन्त्यङ्ध्रिपान् वने। वल्मीकरन्ध्रे ददृशे खद्योते ga ज्योतिषी । ३ ।
ते दैवचोदिता aren ज्योतिषी कण्टकेन वै । अविध्यन्मुग्धभावेन Garage ततो बहु । |
शकृन्मूत्रनिरोधोऽभूत् सैनिकानां च तत्क्षणात्। राजर्षिस्तमुपालक्ष्य पुरुषान् विस्मितोऽब्रवीत्। ५ ।
ag न युष्माभिर्भार्गवस्य विचेष्टितम्। व्युक्तं केनापि नस्तस्य कृतमाश्रमदूषणम्। ६ |
