360 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 58

Sa Ee ee ee eV eee ce eee Pe eee rete teehee te eee ee tee eee

throat was choked with nervousness occasioned by affection and whose eyes were wet with
tears, spoke (as follows) to Sri Krsna, who reveals Himself {to His devotees) in order to end
theirmiseries:—(8) “Happiness returned tous, and we were blessed with a protector the very
moment my cousin (Akrira) was despatched by You (to enquire about our welfare the other
day), remembering us, Your relatives, O Krsna ! (9) The mistaken notion recognizing one
individual as one's own and another as alien does not exist in You—who are the friend, nay,
the very Soul of the universe; yet constantly present in the heart of those who remember You,
You end their sufferings.” €10)

युधिष्ठिर उवाच
fe न आचरितं set न वेदाहमधीश्वर । योगेश्वराणां दुर्दर्शो यन्नो दृष्ट: कुमेधसाम् ।११॥
इति वै वार्षिकान्मासान्राज्ञा सोऽभ्यर्थित: सुखम् । जनवन् नयनानन्दमिन्द्रप्स्थौकसां fay: 1921

Yudhisthira said ; “ do not know what meritorious act has been performed by us, 0
supreme Lord, in that You, who cannot easily be perceived (even) by masters of Yoga, have
come within our sight, men of perverse understanding that we are." (11) Entreated thus by
the king (Yudhisthira), the said Lord happily spent (there all) the (four) rainy months, bringing
joy to the eyes of the residents of Indraprastha (by His divine presence). (12)

एकदा wed विजयो वानरध्वजम्।गाण्डीवं aque quit चाक्षयसायकौ ।१३॥
सार्कं कृष्णेन सन्नद्धो विहर्तुं विपिनं वनम्।बहुव्यालमृगाकीर्णं प्राविशत् परवीरहा ex
तत्राविध्यच्छरैर्व्यघ्रान् सूकरान् महिषान् SEL | शारभान् रावयान् खड्गान् हरिणाञ्छशशल्लकान् । १५॥
am निन्यु: किङ्करा राज्ञे मेध्यान् पर्वण्युपागते | तृट्परीत: परिश्रान्तो बीभत्सुर्यमुनामगात् । १६॥
तत्रोपस्पृश्य विशदं पीत्वा a महारथौ । कृष्णौ ददृशतु: कन्यां चरन्तीं चारुदर्शनाम् । १७॥
तामासाद्य वरारोहां सुद्विजां रुचिराननाम्। Uses Oa: सख्या फाल्गुन: प्रमदोत्तमाम् । १८।
का त्वं कस्यासि सुश्रोणि कुतोऽसि किं चिकीर्षसि । मन्ये त्वां पतिमिच्छन्तीं ad कथय झञोभने ।१९॥

Once upon atime (after the Khandava forest had been consumed by a huge conflagration)
the all-conquering Arjuna, the slayer of hostile warriors, accompanied by Sri Krsna and clad
in an armour, mounted his chariot, distinguished by its flag bearing the device of a monkey,
and, taking his (famous) Gandiva bowanda pair of quivers containing an inexhaustible stock
of arrows, entered a dense forest, infested with carnivorous and other (innocent) beasts, for
the sake of sport. (13-14) There he pierced with his shafts (a number of) tigers, boars, bisons,
Rurus (a species of deer), Sarabhas {a species of eight-footed animals now extinct),
Gavayas (a species of quadrupeds resembling the cow), rhinoceroses, deer, hares and
porcupines. (15) His attendants took such of them as were useful for sacrifice to the king
(Yudhisthira), the full moon (which is considered specially sacred for sacrifices) having
approached. Overcome with thirst and fully exhausted, Arjuna (who abhorred detestable
acts) went to (the bank of) the Yamuna. (16) When they had bathed in the river and drunk
of its crystal water, the two great car-warriors, Sri Krsna and Arjuna, (both of whom had a
dark-brown complexion and accordingly bore the epithet ‘Krsna') noticed a maiden of comely
appearance strolling about (on the river bank). {17) Sent by his (divine) Comrade, Phalguna
(Arjuna) went up to that beautiful and excellent damsel with well-set teeth and a charming
countenance and questioned her (thus):—*Who are you and whose daughter may you be,
O fair damsel ? Where do you come from and what do you mean to do ? । infer you to be in
quest of a (suitable) match. (Pray,) relate everything {to me), 0 good maiden !" (18-19)
