88 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 1

GRRL OR RE ERR RT BBR TR RR ERR RR ERR RT Re PORE ORE RRR RR REDE EE Pe ROI Re toto Ort Rotor fot et a PO eae
अश्वाश्वतर्युष्टगजा नखानि सर्वे मृगा: ra: श्रोणिदेशे । ३५॥
वयांसि तद्व्याकरणं विचित्रं मनुर्मनीषा मनुजो निवास: |
गन्धर्वविद्याधरचारणाप्सर:स्वरस्मृतीरसुरानीकवीर्य: । ३६॥
ब्रह्माननं क्षत्रभुजो महात्मा विडूरुरङ्ध्रिश्रितकृष्णवर्ण: |
नानाभिधाभीज्यगणोपपन्नो द्रव्यात्मक: कर्म वितानयोग: । ३७॥
इयानसावीश्वरविग्रहस्य य: सन्निवेश: कथितो मया ते
सन्धार्यतेऽस्मिन् वरपुषि स्थविष्ठे मन: स्वबुद्ध्या न यतोऽस्ति किञ्चित् । ३८।
a सर्वधीवृत्त्यनुभूतसर्व आत्मा यथा स्वप्नजनेक्षितैक: |
तं सत्यमानन्दनिधिं wa ar ate यतं आत्मपात: 1391

इति श्रीमद्भागवते महापुराणे पारमहंस्यां संहितायां द्वितीयस्कन्धे महापुरुषसंस्थानुवर्णने प्रथमोऽध्याय: ।१।

Sri Suka replied ; Having acquired steadiness of seat and control of one's breath, and
having conquered attachment and subdued one's senses, one should fix one's mind on the
material form of the Lord by force of one's reason. (23) That is His cosmic or universal Form,
the grossest of the gross, wherein is seen this phenomenal universe inits past, present and
future form. (24) Tne Lord who tenants this cosmic body with its seven sheaths (consisting
of water, fire, air, ether, the ego, the Mahat-tattva or the principle of cosmic intelligence and
Prakrti of Primordial Matter) as the Great Being (Virat Purusa)—He alone is the object of
concentration. (25) The knowers of Truth describe Him thus :—Patala (the nethermost
sphere comprising the heart of the terrestrial globe ) constitutes the soles of His feet and
Rasatala (the sphere immediately enclosing Patala) the hinder and the front part of His feet.
Mahatala (the sphere immediately enclosing Rasatala) corresponds to the ankles of the
Creator of the universe and Talatala (the sphere immediately enclosing Mahatala), the
shanks of the Virat Purusa. (26) Sutala (the sphere immediately enclosing Talatala)
represents the knees of the Cosmic Being; while Vitala (the sphere immediately enclosing
Sutala) and Atala (the sphere immediately enclosing Vitala and enclosed in its turn by the
crust of the earth) form His thighs. The earth's surface corresponds to His loins, O king; while
they speak of Bhuvarloka (the sphere immediately enclosing the earth) as His navel. (27)
Indra’s heaven (the sphere immediately enclosing Bhuvarloka), forms His breast; Maharloka
(the sphere immediately enclosing Indra’s heaven), His neck and Janaloka (the sphere
immediately enclosing Maharloka), His face (below the brow). Tapoloka (the sphere
immediately enclosing Janaloka) is recognized as the brow of the Primal Person and
Satyaloka (the highest or seventh heaven, immediately enclosing Tapoloka) as the heads
of the thousand-headed Lord. (28) It is said that the gods from Indra downwards represent
His arms; the cardinal points, His ears and sound, His auditory sense. Nasatya and Dasra
(the twin ASwinikumaras, the physicians of gods) are the nostrils of the Supreme; odour, His
olfactory sense and flaming fire, His mouth. (29) The sky constitutes His eyes; the sun, His
sense of sight and day and night form the eyelids of the Cosmic Being. The abode of Brahma
(in the Satyaloka) represents the play of His eyebrows; water, His palate and taste, His
tongue.(30) They declare the Vedas as the crown of His head; Yama (the god of retribution)
constitutes His grinding teeth and the various forms of personal affection (manifest in
individuals), His other teeth. The Maya which deludes men represents His smile and the
unending (eternal) process of creation, His sidelong glances. (31) Bashfulness forms His
upper lip and greed, the lower; piety constitutes His (right) breast and the path of
unrighteousness, His back. Prajapati (the god presiding over creation) represents His penis
and the gods Mitra and Varuna, His testicles; the oceans form the cavity of His abdomen and
