Dis. 5 ] SRIMAD BHAGAVATA-MAHATMYA 33
RRB RR RE RE REROKE RE ROM MORE MRR RON REBE REM CREB RE ARE ROHR He RE RLM RE Re ROME HE RT Re ME ROWENTA ML Fe RRNA Be BREN BRAM Re He BME
all. Gokarna, they say, then arrested the movement of the sun-god (by virtue of his askesis). (39)
(He prayed to the god as follows :—) "Hail to You, O witness of the universe ! (pray) tell me
the means of release (concerning Dhundhukari)."Hearing this the sun-god spoke distinctly
from afar as follows :— (40) "Mukti will follow from Srimad Bhagavata. Give a (complete)
reading to it in the course of a week.” This pious exhortation of the sun-god was as a matter
of fact clearly heard by all. (41) All said (in one voice),"This should be pursued with diligence;
itis so easy to accomplish." Making up his mind (to that effect) Gokarna set himself to the
task of expounding Srimad Bhagavata. (42)

a संश्रवणार्थाय Same ययु: । पङ्ग्वन्धवृद्धमन्दाश्च तेऽपि पापक्षयाय चै 1४३1
समाजस्तु महाञ्जातो देवविस्मयकारक:। यदैवासनमास्थाय गोकर्णोऽकथयत्कथाम् ।४४॥
स प्रेतोऽपि तदाऽऽयात: स्थानं पह्यन्नितस्तत: । सप्तग्रन्थियुतुं तत्रापश्यत्कीचकमुच्छितम् ।४५॥
तन्मूलच्छिद्रमाविर्य श्रवणार्थं स्थितो met वातरूपी स्थितिं कर्तुमहाक्तो वंशामाविरात् ।४६॥

भ् Men flocked to that place from the different parts of the country including the countryside
for the purpose of listening to an exposition of Srimad Bhagavata. They say the crippled,
blind, aged and dull-witted too arrived for the attenuation of their sin. (43) There was a large
concourse which caused wonder (even) to the gods.The moment Gokarna ascended the
seat (meant for the exponent) and started expounding the story (of Srimad Bhagavata), the
aforesaid spirit too arrived. Looking about fora seat he saw there abamboowith seven joints
standing erect. (44-45) Entering the hollow at the base of the bamboo, he actually settled
down there for hearing the exposition. Unable to remain fixed (at one place in the air),
gaseous as he was, he entered the bamboo.(46)

वैष्णवं ब्राह्मणं मुख्यं श्रोतारं परिकल्प्य स: । प्रथमस्कन्धत: स्पष्टमाख्यानं धेनुजोऽकरोत् ।४७।

दिनान्ते रक्षिता men तदा चित्रं aya ह। वंहीकग्रन्थिभेदोऽभूत्सशब्दुं पर्यतां सताम् xc!

द्वितीयेऽह्नि am a द्वितीयग्रन्थिभेदनम्। तृतीयेऽह्नि an ae तृतीयग्रन्थिभेदनम् 1४९1

एवं सप्तदिनैश्चैव सप्तग्रन्थिविभेदनम्।कृत्वा स द्वादशस्कन्धश्रवणात्प्रेततां जहौ । ५०।

दिव्यरूपधरो जातस्तुलसीदाममण्डित: | पीतवासा waar मुकुटी कुण्डलान्वित: । ५१॥

ननाम भ्रातरं सद्यो गोकर्णमिति चाब्रवीत्। are मोचितो बन्धो कृपया प्रेतकहमलात् । GR |

धन्या भागवती amt प्रेतपीडाविनाशिनी । सप्ताहोऽपि an धन्य: कृष्णलोकफलप्रद: 1431

कम्पन्ते सर्वपापानि सप्ताहश्रवणे स्थिते । अस्मार्कं प्रलयं सद्य: कथा चेयं करिष्यंति । ५४॥

आर्द्र शुष्कं लघु स्थूलं वाङ्मन:कर्मभि: कृतम्। श्रवणं विदहेत्पापं पावक: समिधो यथा ।५५॥
Taking a Brahmana, who is a votary of Lord Visnu, to be the chief listener, the said
Gokarna (lit., the son of a cow) began to expound Srimad Bhagavata in an audible tone from
Book One (itself). (47) At the close of the day when the exposition was adjourned (for that
day), they say, a marvel took place. One of the (seven) joints of the bamboo (viz., the last
one) cracked while the good men present there looked on. (48) On the second day at sunset
likewise the second joint (from below) burst open and on the third at dusk the third one
similarly burst open.(49) Having burst open in this way the seven joints of the bamboo in
seven days, the spirit shed the form of a spectre through the hearing of (all) the twelve
Skandhas (of Srimad Bhagavata). (50) He appeared in a divine form, dark-brown like a
cloud, clad in yellow (silk), adorned with strings of Tulasi beads, wearing a diadem (on his

head) and decked with (a pair of alligator-shaped) ear-rings. (51) He presently greeted his
brother, Gokarna, and addressed him as follows:—"Out of kindness, O brother । । have been
