28 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 7

eeeeeeeseseteinseeeetiorest eeveedeeeedsrerertinrethererehererhtsrerskseerrsseetehe

अथ सप्तमोऽध्याय:

Discourse VII
The story of the King Harigcandra
श्रीशुक उवाच

मान्धातु: पुत्रप्रवरो योऽम्बरीष: प्रकीर्तित: । पितामहेन प्रवृतो यौवनाश्वश्च तत्सुत: ।
हारीतस्तस्य पुत्रोऽभून्मान्यातृप्रवरा इमे । १ ।

नर्मदा भ्रातृभिर्दत्ता पुरुकुत्साय योरगै:। तया रसातलं नीतो भुजगेन्द्रप्रयुक्तया । २ |

गन्धर्वानवधीत् aa वध्यान् वै विष्णुशक्तिधृक् । नागाल्लब्धवर: सर्पादभयं स्मरतामिदम्। ३ ।

त्रसद्दस्यु: पौरुकुत्सो योऽनरण्यस्य देहकृत् । हर्यश्वस्तत्सुतस्तस्मादरुणोऽथ त्रिबन्धन: । ४ ।

Ta सत्यव्रत: पुत्रस्रिशङ्कुरिति विश्रुत: । प्राप्तश्चाण्डालतां TG TR: कौशिकतेजसा । ५ ।

watt गत: स्वर्गमद्यापि दिवि दृश्यते। पातितोऽवाक्शिरादेवैस्तेनैवस्तम्भितो बलात् । ६ ।

Sri Suka resumed : The foremost of the (three) sons (Purukutsa and others) of
Mandhata, who was celebrated by the name of Ambarisa, was adopted (as a son) by his
grandfather (Yuvanaswa) and Yauvanagwa was the son of Ambarisa. Harita was the son
of Yauvanaéwa. These (three) turned outto be the foremost of Mandhata’s line (and the first
of three branches of this line). (1) Purukutsa (the eldest of the three* sons of Mandhata) was
taken to Ras&tala (the sixth of the subterranean spheres from above) by Narmada, as
directed by Vasuki (the king of serpents}—the same Narmada who had been given to him
in marriage by his brothers, the serpent-demons. (2) There indeed Purukutsa (who wielded
the power infused into him by Lord Visnu) killed (a number of) Gandharvas who (being
enemies of the Nagas and wicked too) deserved to be slain. (In recognition of this service)
he secured from Vasuki (the chief of the Nagas) the boon of security from the serpent race
for those who remember this anecdote. (3) Purukutsa’s son (named after his grandfathert
was Trasaddasyu, who was the father of Anaranya. Anaranya’s son was Haryaswa and of
Haryagwa, Aruna was born; while from (the loins of ) the latter sprang up Tribandhana. (4)
Tribandhana's son, Satyavrata, became celebrated under the name of TriSanku.t Having
got the rank of a Candala (pariah) under a curse from his father, he bodily ascended to
heaven by virtue of the extraordinary might of the sage Vigwamitra (a scion of Kusika) and
can be seen in the heavens (in the form of a star of that name) even to this day, having
been forcibly stopped (in mind air) by the same seer when hurled, head downward, by the
gods (from heaven). (5-6)

य gist विश्वामित्रवसिष्ठयो: । यन्निमित्तमभूद ae पक्षिणोर्बहुवार्षिकम् । ७ ।
सोऽनपत्यो विषण्णात्मा नारदस्योपदेशत: | वरुणं Te यात: पुत्रो मे जायतां प्रभो । I

* Vide verse 38 of Oiscourse VI.
+ Itwill be remembered that Mandhata, father of Purukuisa, was also given the name of Trasaddasyu by Indra—vide
verse 33 of Discouse VI.

+ Triganku was guilty of three offences, which tormentedhim like as many darts or spikes. In the first place he displeased
his father and invited his curse by forcibly carrying away a Brahmana girl who was just being married. Secondly he killed a cow
belonging to his preceptor (the sage Vasistha) and thirdly, he ate meat without having consecrated it by sprinkling it with water.
The Harivarnga seys:— 7

षेण गुरोर्दोग्ध्रीवधेन च। अप्रॊक्षितोपयोगाच्च त्रिविधस्ते व्यतिक्रम:॥
