Dis. 8 ] BOOK FOUR -- 327°

HHHOKMCCLELKKHAVWCECKAEHLAM ECE FHKE CHEE दो दे ee eae Ee A Se er RI
णत्तजा ज ना जो त्रज

Dhruva said : Your venerable self has graciously shown a remedy for those whose mind
is disturbed by joys and sorrows—a remedy which cannot be easily found.by people like
us.(35) Yet in the heart of my insubordinate self, who has inherited a violent martial spirit—
a heart which has been cleft by the shaft-like taunts of Suruci (my stepmother)—the precept
has failed to make any abiding impression. (36) Be pleased, O holy sage, to tell me a good
path, keen as | am to attain to a place which is the highest in all the three worlds and which
has not been attained to by (any of) our forefathers or anyone else. (37) You are surely no
other than the son of the worshipful Brahma, who for the good of the world roams about like
the sun, playing on his lute. (38) ॥

मत्रेय उवाच
इत्युदाहृतमाकर्ण्य भगवान्नारदस्तदा | प्रीत: प्रत्याह तं बालं सद्बाक्यमनुकम्पया 1391
Maitreya resumed : The worshipful Narada was pleased to hear the aforesaid words
(of Dhruva) and full of compassion, replied to the child in the following excellent words:—(39)
ARG उवाच
जनन्याभिहित: पन्था: स वै नि:श्रेयसस्य ते। भगवान् वासुदेवस्तं भज तत्प्रवणात्मना ।`४०॥
धर्मार्थकाममोक्षाख्यं य seabed आत्मन:। एकमेव हरेस्तत्र कारणं पादसेवनम् ।४१॥
तत्तात TS WF A यमुनायास्तटं Yai पुण्यं मधुवनं aq सांनिध्यं नित्यदा हरे: ।`४२॥
स्नात्वानुसवनं तस्मिन् cern: सलिले fra कृत्वोचितानि निवसन्नात्मन: कल्पितासन: ।४३॥
प्राणायामेन त्रिवृता प्राणेन्द्रियमनोमलम्। हानैर्व्यदस्याभिध्यायेन्मनसा गुरुणा गुरुम् ।४४॥

Narada said : The course pointed out by your mother is the one leading to your highest
good. Lord Vasudeva (Himself) represents that course (means); (hence) adore Him with a
mind exclusively devoted to Him. (40) For him who seeks his own good in the shape of what
is known by the names of Dharma (religious merit), Artha (worldly riches), Kama (sensuous
enjoyment) and Moksa (final beatitude), adoration of Sri Hari's feet'is the only means to that
end. (41) Therefore, God bless you, dear child, seek the holy bank of the Yamuna covered
by the sacred spot of Madhuvana (the tract of land lying round Mathura, the birthplace of Lord
Sri Krsna), which is ever hallowed with the presence of Sri Hari. (42) Bathing three times (in
the morning and evening as well as at midday) in the blessed waters of the Kalindi (Yamuna)
and after finishing one's proper duties one should spread a seat (of KuSa grass etc.,) and
squat thereon (in a suitable and easy posture). (43) Having gradually cast off the impurities
of one's life-breath, senses and mind by means of the threefold Pranayama (breath-
exercises), one should (then) contemplate with a steady mind on Sri Hari (the Supreme
Preceptor) as below :—(44)

प्रसादाभिमुखं शश्वत्रसन्नवदनेक्षणम्। सुनासं सुभ्रुवं चारुकपोलं सुरसुन्दरम् ।॥४५॥
तरुणं रमणीयाङ्गमरुणोष्ठेक्षणाधरम् | प्रणताश्रवणं नृम्णं झरण्यं करुणार्णवम् ॥४६॥
श्रीवत्साङ्कुं घनश्यामं पुरुषं वनमालिनम्।शङ्खचक्रगदापद्मैरभिव्यक्तचतुर्भुजम् ।`४७॥
किरीटनं कुण्डलिनं केयूरवलयान्वितम्। कोस्तुभाभरणग्रीबं पीतकौरेयवाससम् ive!
काञ्चीकलापपर्यस्तं लसत्काञ्चननूपुरम् । दर्शनीयतमं जशान्ते मनोनयनवर्धनम् xe
Taal नखमणिश्रेण्या विलसद्भ्यां समर्चताम्। हृत्पद्मकर्णिकाधिष्ण्यमाक्रम्यात्मन्यवस्थितम् ।५०॥
स्मयमानमभिध्यायेत्सानुरागावलोकनम् ।नियतेनैकभूतेन मनसा वरदर्षभम् GR

एवं wed रूपं सुभद्रं aad मन: । निर्वृत्या परया qi aad न निवर्तते । ५२।
