Dis. 12 } .. BOOK ONE 45

eRe er we We Re BCR HRT a Wee My By se RT Re He BR Be We wee ay Bee Re .३.३.३.३.३.३.३.३.३.३ .६ ATR Re eR RR RT EH We PE RE RH BRT REA RT Be BY BE RE RT a HAL

by their sight and lastly by their body as well through their babes (under the pretext of offering
the babes for His embrace or in the person of the babes themselves according to the maxim
thatitis the father himself whois born inthe shape of his son—sme1a जायते Ta:). The tears which
they had so far kept within the corners of their eyes out of their bashful nature now trickled
down, in spite of themselves, O Saunaka (foremost of the Bhrgus), since they could nolonger
control their emotion. (32) Although He (ever) remained by their side and that too in their
private chamber, His feet appeared to them as full of fresher charm every moment. What
woman would cease to love those feet, which even Sri (the Goddess of Fortune) cannot
abandon even for a moment, though noted for Her fickleness* ? (33) Even as the wind burns
a whole thicket of bamboos by producing fire (through the abrasion of one bamboo against
another), so did Sri Krsna work the mutual destruction (in the shape of the Mahabharata war)
of princes who had proved a burden to the earth since their very birth and grown very
powerful in the meantime, by pitting one against another, andin a like manner brought about
the extermination of their hosts as well, Himself adhering to His vow of not taking up arms;
and (having thus accomplished the object of His descent on earth) He became silent. (34)
It was the same Lord who, having appeared in this mortal world in His own playful way,
sported in the midst of thousands of most charming women like a worldly man. (35) Stung
by their guileless and winsome smiles and bashful looks, that bespoke their profound love,
even Cupid (the conqueror of the world) fainted and dropped his bow. These jewels among
women, however, could not disturb the serenity of His mind by their amorous gestures. (36)
Finding Him actively engaged like themselves, the people, ignorant as they are, look upon
Him who is absolutely unattached as a human being full of attachment. (37) Herein lies the
divinity of the almighty Lord that, even though abiding in Prakrti (Matter), He never gets
tainted by the Gunas (modes) of Prakrti, just as a mind that has taken refuge in Him is never
contaminated by the Gunas of Prakrti abiding in it. (88) Nay, those ignorant ladies (Sri
Krsna's consorts) themselves, little knowing His greatness, looked upon Him as a hen-
pecked husband, devoted to their service in the private chamber, even as the notions of
Aham (I-ness) conceive of God as sharing their own characteristics. (39)

Thus ends the eleventh discourse entitled "The Entry of Sri Krsna into Dwaraka", forming
part of the story relating to the Naimisa forest, in Book One of the great and glorious
Bhagavata-Purana, otherwise known as the Paramahamsa-Samhita.

३
PITRE i ery

` अथ द्वादशोऽध्याय:

Discourse XIl
Birth of Pariksit
Uae उवाच
अश्वत्थाम्नोपसृष्टेन ब्रह्मशीरष्णोरुतेजसा । उत्तराया हतो गर्भ ईशेनाजीवित: पुन: । १ ।
तस्य जन्म महाबुद्धे; कर्माणि च महात्मन: । निधनं च यथैवासीत्स प्रेत्य गतवान् यथा । २ |
wee श्रोतुमिच्छामो गदितुं यदि मन्यसे। ब्रूहि a: seer यस्य ज्ञानमदाच्छुक: | ३ |
Saunaka said : (You have already told us that) the infant in the womb of Uttara, though
destroyed by the formidable Brahmastra discharged by ASwatthama (Drona's son), was

* Fickleness is attributed to the Goddess of Fortune only in Her material form viz., riches.
