464 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 7

BRA REA HHA OER HEA EER EEL EEA EECA AEAREEEE EAA HEEEA COWHER EHH

attention to all supplementary rites, and when the Adhwaryus took the oblations (in their
hands in order to pour them into the sacred fire), the said sacrificer (Emperor Bharata),
mentally offered the reward, which was expected from a particular sacrifice, in the form of
a virtue known by the name of Dharma (religious merit), entirely to Lord Vasudeva, the
transcendent Reality and the Supreme Deity, who is not only the Soul of sacrifices but their
actual doer too, being the Ruler of the gods represented by the several Mantras (sacred
texts) symbolic of the different deities. And his passions (in the form of likes and dislikes)
having been attenuated by his sagacity (in offering the fruit to the Lord), he contemplated on
the deities enjoying a share in the sacrificial offering as so many limbs of (rather than as so
distinct from) the Supreme Person. (6) When his mind was thus thoroughly purified through
the extreme purity of his actions, there arose (in his heart) loving devotion—which grew
exceptionally intense everyday—to Lord Vasudeva, the transcendent Reality, appearing in
the space within his heart in the form of the Supreme Person (Bhagavan Narayana),
distinguished by the mark of Srivatsa (the foot-print of Bhrgu), the gem known by the name
of Kaustubha, a wreath of sylvan flowers, a discus, a mace and so on, nay, remaining
immovable like a portrait in the heart of his devotees and shining brightly in his own mind as
the Inner Controller.(7)
एवं वर्षायुतसहस्रपर्यन्तावसितकर्मनिर्वाणावसरोऽधिभुज्यमानं स्वतनयेभ्यो रिक्थं पितृपैतामहं

यथादायं विभन्थस्वयसकत्वसम्पम्निकेतात्स्वनिकतात्पुलहाश्नमप्रवन्रप्तं। ८।यत्रहवावभगन्रान्

हरिरद्यापि तत्रत्यानां निजजनानां वात्सल्येन संनिधाप्यत इच्छारूपेण |

यत्रा भयतोनाभिभिर्दृषच्चक्रैश्चक्रनदी नाम सरित्प्रवरा सर्वत: पवित्रीकरोति। १० |

Having concluded at the end of ten million years that the store of merit responsible for
his royal fortune must have thus been exhausted by that time, he proportionately divided
among his own sons the hereditary fortune he had been legitimately enjoying (till then), and
himself retired as a recluse from his own residence, which was the abode of all prosperity,
to the hermitage of the sage Pulaha (situated on the bank of the river Gandaki and known
as the Salagramaksetra’ ). (8) Impelled by His paternal affection for His own devotees
residing in that hermitage, itis said, Lord Sri Hari reveals Himself there in their desired form
even today. (9) The holy river Cakranadi (Gandaki or Gandaka) hallows on all sides the
(various) places of this hermitage through contact with circular (wheel-like) pebbles having
nave-like marks on both sides (above as well as below). (10)

तस्मिन् ara किल स Wad: फूहाश्रमापबन विविधकुसुमकिसलयतुलसिकाम्बुभि:
कन्दमूलफलोपहारेश्च समीहमानो waa आराधनं विविक्त उपरतविषयाभिलाष उपभृतोपशम: परां
निर्वृतिमवाप। ११।

Duly performing all alone the worship of the Lord through flowers and tender leaves of
various kinds, particularly the leaves of the holy basil plant, and water as well as through
edibles such as bulbs, roots and fruits, ina lonely retreat in the grove of the said hermitage,
Bharata was rid of all craving for the pleasures of sense and, developing (great) tranquillity
of mind, derived supreme gratification. (11)

तयेत्थमविरतपुरुषपरिचर्यया भगवति i द्रुतहृदयशैथिल्य:
+ पु २ on x ud
ca om“ रि दुंग्निंन्नू क्तियोगेन परि : ws धि पि
क्रियमाणां भगवत्सपर्यां न सस्मार। ARI इत्थं धृतभगवद्बरत

ऐणेयाजिनवाससानुसवनाभिषेकार्द्रकपिशकुटिलजटाकलापेन च विरोचमान: सूर्यर्चां भगवन्तं हिरण्मयं
पुरुषमुज्जिहाने सूर्यमण्डलेऽभ्युपतिष्ठन्नेतदु होवाच-- 1231

* So-called because it abounds in Salagrama-Silas or sacred stones symbolic of Lord Visnu and found rolling in the
bed of the river Gandaki.
