398 ` SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 24
BREA AHR EE ARH AEE व ङी-डीनी R दान HETEHRSEWTREECLKE MSDE त्रजष्टि क्तैव CEPA e CLEARS
Antardhana, who (it will be remembered) had refused to strike Indra, even though he had
come to know that Indra had stolen (his father's) horse (vide IV. xix. 20), got (a fourth son)
Havirdhana (by name) by (his other wife) Nabhaswati. (5) Under the pretext of (participating
in) a protracted sacrificial session he relinquished the kingly duties, regarding them as cruel
in that they involved (the unpleasant task of) exacting tributes, inflicting punishment and
levying taxes and so on. (6) Even though occupied with that sacrificial session, the king (who
had realized the Self) adored the Supreme Spirit, who is perfect (in everyway) and ends the
suffering of His votaries, and attained a residence in the same Heaven with the Lord by dint
of thorough and uninterrupted concentration of mind. (7)
हविर्धानाद्धविर्धानी विदुरासूत we सुतान्।बर्हिषदं गयं ase Het सत्यं जितव्रतम्। ८ ।
बर्हिषत् सुमहाभागो हाविर्धानि: प्रजापति: । क्रियाकाण्डेषु निष्णातो ary च pegs! ९ ।
wae देवयजनमनु यज्ञे वितन्वत: । प्राचीनाग्रै: कुशैरासीदास्तृतं वसुधातलम् । १०॥
सामुद्रीं देवदेवोक्तामुपयेमे ङतद्रुतिम्। यां वीक्ष्य चारुसर्वाङ्गीं किशोरीं सुष्टवलङ्कृताम् ।
परिक्रमन्तीमुद्बाहे चकमेऽग्नि: शुकीमिव । ११।
विबुधासुरगन्धर्वमुनिसिद्धनरोरगा: । विजिता: सूर्यया fee क्वणयन्त्यैव नूपुरै: 1221
प्राचीनबर्हिष: पुत्रा: WER दशाभवन्।तुल्यनामव्रता: wd wer: प्रचेतस: 1231
पित्राऽदिष्टा: प्रजासर्गे तपसेऽर्णवमाविरान्। दशवर्षसहस्राणि तपसाऽऽर्चस्तपस्पतिम् । १४॥
पथि ogee fife प्रसीदता । तद्ध्यायन्तो जपन्तश्च पूजयन्तश्च संयता: । १५॥
Through Havirdhana (Antardhana's son), O Vidura, Havirdhani (his wife) bore six sons—
Barhisad, Gaya, Sukla, Krsna, Satya and Jitavrata (by name). (8) (Of these) the highly
blessed Barhisad, the eldest son of Havirdhana, became the ruler. He was well-versed in
the sections of theVeda dealing with the rituals, as well as in the methods of Yoga, O worthy
scion of Kuru. (9) As a resultof his performing sacrifices (one after another) close to the place
enclosed for each foregoing sacrifice the entire land was covered with blades of Kuga grass
with their pointed ends turned towards the east. (10) He married Satadruti, a daughter of the
deity presiding over the ocean, recommended by Brahma (the god of gods), who was
charming in every limb and was still very young, and for whom the fire-god (himself)
conceived a passion the moment he saw her going round the fire during the nuptials, richly
bedecked with ornaments, even as he did (on yet another occasion) for Suki (a princess of
that name). (11) Nay, even (other) gods, demons, Gandharvas (celestial musicians), sages,
Siddhas (a class of demigods endowed with mystic powers from their very birth), human
beings and Nagas in every quarter were captivated by the newly-married bride (as she
walked) producing a tinkling sound with her anklets. (12) Ten sons were born to king
Pracinabarhi (so-called because of his having covered the earth's surface with blades of
KuSa grass with their pointed ends turned eastward—vide verse 10 above), through (his
wife) Satadruti. They bore the commonname of Praceta; their mode of life was the same and
they were all fully conversant with the moral code. (13) Enjoined by their father to beget
children, they entered a lake (almost as extensive as a sea) for austerities and, having duly
controlled their mind, worshipped Sri Hari (the lord of austerities) through (their) asceticism
for ten thousand years, contemplating on and adoring Him and muttering what had been
imparted to them by Lord Siva, whom they had met on the way and who had showered His
grace on them. (14-15)
विदुर उवाच
प्रचेतसां गिरित्रेण यथाऽऽसीत्पथि aga: i यदुताह हर: प्रीतस्तन्नो व्रह्मन् वदार्थवत् ।१६॥
