Dis. 7] BOOK TWO 111

RHE A EH AEE ER HIE HEA AYE SERA HAH EEE EEE EH FR HE TF TT HH RO ey

during the first Manvantara and was so-called because he had transcended the three Gunas
or modes of Prakrti), who sought from Him a son, He said, “I have given Myself as a son to
you !" That is why the Lord became known by the name of Datta* (when He was born as
a son of Atri). Purified in body by the dust of His lotus-feet, Yadu, Sahasrabahu (who was
born in the clan of Ksatriyas bearing the title of 'Haihaya’' ) and other kings realized the twofold
consummation of Yoga (in the shape of enjoyment and liberation). (4)
aq तपो विविधलोकसिसृक्षया मे आदौ सनात् स्वतपस: स चतु:सनोऽभूत् |
i सम्यग् जगाद मुनयो यद्चक्षतात्मन्। ५ |

At the dawn of creation | (Brahma) practised austerity for the purpose of creating the
various worlds. As a result of that penance of mine the eternal Lord appeared in the form
of the four brothers (Sanatkumara, Sanaka, Sanandana and Sanatana), all of whom bear the
word 'Sana’ as a part of their names, and fully expounded in the present Kalpa the truth of
the Spirit, which had been lost during the Dissolution at the end of the preceding Kalpa, and
which the sages forthwith perceived in their heart (as a result of that exposition). (5)

धर्मस्य दक्षदुहितर्यजनिष्ट yet नारायणो ax sft स्वतप:प्रभाव: |
दृद्राऽऽत्मनो भगवतो नियमाबलोपं देव्यस्त्वनङ्गपृतना घटितुं न झेकु: । ६ |
कामं दहन्ति कृतिनो ननु रोषदृष्ट्या रोषं दहन्तमुत a न दहन्त्यसह्यम् ।
सोऽयं यदन्तरमलं wae बिभेति am: कथं नु पुनरस्य मन: श्रयेत । ७ ।

Of Marti, a daughter of Daksa and the wife of Dharma (the god of virtue), He was born
as the twin sages Narayana and Nara, who were unequalled in the glory of their austere
penance. The celestial nymphs who accompanied the god of love as his army to conquer
them beheld there other nymphs, as charming as themselves, evolved by dint of their Yogic
power, and could not violate the sanctity of their vow. (6) Pious souls (like Lord Siva) may
burn down the god of love with their angry look; but they cannot burn anger, which they
find too much to endure and which burns their own self. Such anger is afraid to enter the
pure heart of the divine sages Nara and Narayana; how, then, could lust ever penetrate
their mind ? (7)

fag: सपल्युदितपत्रिभिरन्ति wat बालोऽपि सन्नुपगतस्तपसे वनानि |
तस्मा sale ध्रुवगतिं गृणते प्रसन्नो दिव्या: स्तुवन्ति मुनयो यदुपर्यधस्तात् । ८ |

Pierced by the shaft-like words of his step-mother (Suruci) in the presence of his royal
father (king Uttanapada), Dhruva, who was yet a child, betook himself to the woods to
practise austere penance. Pleased with the praises that he uttered, the Lord bestowed upon
him an eternal abode (in the shape of the polar star) which celestial sages extol (to this day)
while coursing round it both up and down. (8)

त्रात्वार्थितो जगति पुत्रपदं च लेभे een वसूनि वसुधा सकलानि येन । ९ ।

King Vena (a descendant of Dhruva) having gone astray, all his power and fortune was
burnt by the thunderbolt of the Brahmanas' curse and he was about to descend into hell.
When, therefore, the Brahmanas prayed to the Lord, He appeared in the form of Prthu
(through the churning of Vena's dead body) and rescued Vena, thus earning the epithet of
‘Putra’ (a son).f It was He again who used the earth as a cow and milked all its rich produce

* ‘Datta’ Is a passive past particle from the root 'Da’ (to give) and therefore means “ Given”.

t ‘Putra ` (Put+tra) literally means he who saves his father from the hell named ‘Put’, into which a man dying without a
son is hurled—

(Manu)
