794 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 14

LAKHS UVE SEATON 2 AEH HHS THA ee He CKke ewe १६.३.७.३.७ ७१७० REVS HELHAATHH ECHR LEELA REHASH aE

described to you. Itis by these that a Kalpa—consisting of a thousand revolutions of the (four)
Yugas (Satya, Treta, Dwapara and Kali)-is measured. (36)

Thus ends the thirteenth discourse entitled "A description of the
(concluding eight) Manvantaras", in Book Eight of the
great and glorious Bhagavata-Purana, otherwise
known as the Paramahamsa-Samhita.

Se र्वज्ज र्व्य ts
curse eo ry

अथ चतुर्दशोऽध्याय:

Discourse XIV

Functions of a Manu and other functionaries holding
office in his administration

a

राजावाच
मन्वन्तरेषु भगवन्यथा मन्वादयस्त्विमे । यस्मिन्कर्मणि ये चेन नियुक्तास्तद्वदस्व मे । १ ।
The king (Pariksit) submitted : (Pray,) tell me this, 0 worshipful one, as to how and
which of these, Manu and others, are employed in what work and by whom in the (various)

Manvantaras. (1) पि

मनवो मनुपुत्राश्च मुनयश्च महीपते।इन्रा: सुरगणाश्चैव सर्वे पुरुषशासना: । २ ।
यज्ञादयो या: कथिता: पौरुष्यस्तनवो नृप । मन्वादयो जगद्यात्रां नयन्त्याभि: प्रचोदिता: । ३ ।
चतुर्युगान्ते कालेन ग्रस्ताञ्छुतिगणान्यथा | तपसा ऋषयोऽपङ्यन्यतो धर्म: सनातन: । ४ |
at धर्मं चतुष्पादं मनवो हरिणोदिता: । युक्ता: सञ्चारयन्त्यद्धा स्वे स्वे काले महीं नृप । ५ ।
पालयन्ति प्रजापाला यावदन्तं fare: । यज्ञभागभुजो देवा a च तत्रान्विताश्च तै: । ६ ।
इन्द्रो भगवता दत्तां त्रैलोक्यथ्रियमूर्जिताम्। yam: पाति लोकांस्त्रीन् कामं लोके प्रवर्षति । ७ ।
at चानुयुगं qd हरि: सिद्धस्वरूपधृक । ॠषिरूपधर: कर्म ani योगेज्रूपधूक् । ८ |
सर्गं प्रजेशरूपेण दस्यून्हन्यात् स्वराड्वपु: । कालरूपेण सर्वॆषामभावाय पृथग्गुण: । ९ ।
स्तूयमानो जनैरेभिर्मायया नामरूपया । विमोहितात्मभिर्नानादर्श्यनैर्न च दृश्यते । १०॥

The sage Suka replied : The Manus and the sons of a Manu, the sages and the Indras,
as well as the (diverse) orders of gods, O ruler of the earth, are all under the (direct) command
of the supreme Person (in the form of His part manifestations in each Manvantara). (2)
Whatever forms (part manifestations) of the supreme Person, Lord Yajfia and so on, have
been mentioned (by me before), O protector of men—directed by these, the Manu and others
carry on the administration of the universe. (3) At the end of (each round of ) the four Yugas,
the seers by virtue of their asceticism discover as they are (and teach) the collections of the
Vedic texts, swallowed by Time, with (the help of) which (the truth of) the eternal religion is
perceived. (4) Instructed by Sri Hari (dwelling in their heart) and (fully) alert (in their mina),
thesManus then directly propagate on the earth in their own time piety with (all) its four limbs
(asceticism, purity of mind and body, compassion and truth), O protector of human beings!(5)
