236 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 22

MBP R ATS ङ ती REM ङी वा शा ता उ CSR R Ret ROI Be IRE NE Re RR Rs Per tI ete ee fon To Set eerie fort ee to a te oe a ee
eee ee ee eee eee eee

agitated with extreme fondness for her. (24) Unable to bear separation from her, he shed
tears again and again, and drenched with them his daughter's looks, crying, "My daughter,
my darling!” (25) Bidding adieu to the great sage and obtaining his leave, the monarch
mounted his chariot along with his spouse and drove to his capital, followed by his retinue
and witnessing the beauty of the hermitages of the tranquil-minded seers on both the
charming banks of the Saraswati, a river so agreeable to sages. (26-27) Overjoyed to know
of his arrival (beforehand), his subjects sallied forth from Brahmavarta to greet their lord with
songs, panegyrics and instrumental music. (28) The city of Barhismati (the capital of
Swayambhuva Manu), which was rich in all kinds of wealth, was so-called because it was
here that the hair of Lord Visnu (manifested in the form of the divine Boar) dropped from His
body as He shook it and it was these very hair that turned into blades of the ever-green Kuga
grass (also known by the name of Barhis) and Kagas (another species of grass used for
mats, roofs, etc.), by means of which the sages got rid of those (demons etc.) who interfered
with the performance of their sacrifices, and worshipped Lord Visnu (through those
sacrifices). (29-30) It was here, again, that the worshipful Manu spreada seat of Kugas and
KaSas and propitiated the Lord presiding over sacrifices, from whom he had secured a
footing in the shape of the terrestrial globe. (31)

बर्हिष्मतीं am fayat निर्विर्य समावसत्।तस्यां sfast wad तापत्रयविनाशानम् 32

सभार्य: सप्रज: कामान् बुभुजेऽन्याविरोधत: । सङ्गीयमानसत्कीर्ति: सस्त्रीभि: सुरगायकै: |
प्रत्यूषेष्ननुवद्धेन CEI VST हरे: HM: ।३३॥

frond योगमायासु मुनिं स्वायम्भुवं मनुम्। यदा भ्रंशयितुं भोगा न ङोकुर्भगवत्परम् । ३४॥

अयातयामास्तस्यासन् यामा: स्वान्तरयापना: । शृण्वतो ध्यायतो विष्णो: कुर्वतो Waa: कथा: । ३५1

स एवं स्वान्तरं fa युगानामेकसप्ततिम्। वासुदेवप्रसङ्गेन परिभूतगतित्रय: । ३६1
शारीरा मानसा दिव्या वैयासे ये च मानुषा: | भौतिकाश्च कथं क्लेशा बाधन्ते हरिसंश्रयम् i301
a: पृष्टो मुनिभि: प्राह धर्मान्नानाविधाञ्छुभान् । qo वर्णाश्रमाणां च सर्वभूतहित: सदा । ३८।
एतत्त आदिराजस्य मनोश्चरितमद्भुतम्।वर्णितं वर्णनीयस्य तदपत्योदयं शृणु 188

Having arrived at the city of Barhismati, where the Manu resided, he entered his palace
there, which drove away the three types of agony (1. that which proceeds from bodily and
mental causes within one's self, 2. that which proceeds from divine or natural causes, and
3. that which is caused by other beings). (32) (There) in the company of his wife and children
he enjoyed the pleasures of sense that did not interfere with the pursuit of other objects of
human aspiration (viz, Dharma, Artha and Moksa). At daybreak (everyday) celestial
musicians along with their wives sang in chorus his fair renown; but with a loving heart he
listened to the stories of Sri Hari alone. (33) Although Swayambhuva Manuwas a past master
in the art of creating objects of sense-enjoyment, the latter could notin the least drag him down
(from his exalted mood), devoted as he was to the Lord and given to contemplation. (34)
Consequently his hours, that gradually brought to an end his long life consisting of a whole
Manvantara, were not spent in vain, engaged as he ever was in listening to, contemplating
on, composing and narrating the stories of Lord Visnu. (35) Having transcended the threefold
destinies* (brought about by the preponderance of any one of the three Gunas—Sattva,

* The threefold destiny referred to above is the same as has been mentioned by the Lordin the following verse of Srimad
Bhagavadgita—
wet गच्छन्ति सत्त्वस्था मध्ये तिष्ठन्ति राजसा:। जघन्दगुणवृत्तिस्था अधो रच्छन्ति तामसा:॥ (XIV. 18)
“Those who abide in the quality of Sattva (harmony) rise upwards (to heaven and other spheres); while those of a

