344 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 54

TURRET TON SETAE TOS SSCS SEO SSRN # ete TEE eee eerie SSCS toe esr acRe Ka

योगैश्वराप्रमेयात्मन् देवदेव जगत्पते । हन्तुं नार्हसि कल्याण भ्रातरं मे महाभुज 1231

Surrounded by an army (consisting of one Aksauhini) the mighty Rukmi, for his part, who
hated Sri Krsna and did not brook his sister's being married (by Him) after the manner of the
Raksasas, followed (close) upon the heels of Sri Krsna. (18) Enraged and full of indignation,
the mighty-armed Rukmi, who was clad in armour and armed with a bow, had undertaken
the following vow within the hearing of all the kings (before they dispersed):—{19) "Without
making short work of Krsna in an encounter and bringing back Rukmini | shall not re-enter
Kundinapura: solemnly do |.declare this before you (all)." (20) Saying so and mounting his
chariot, he commanded the charioteer as follows:—"Drive the horses with despatch to the
place where Krsna may be; (for) there is going to be my encounter with him. (21) With my
sharp-pointed arrows today | shall take away the pride of valour of that most evil-minded
cowherd, by whom my sister has been forcibly carried away." (22) Pursuing the Lord ina
single chariot forthwith the bragging fool, who did not know the extent of greatness of the
almighty Lord, shouted out to Sri Krsna (the Protector of cows) saying “Stop ! Stop !!" (23)
(Nay,) drawing (the string of) his very tough bow at full length, he hit Sri Krsna with three
arrows and said, “Waita moment, my enemy,a (veritable) disgrace to the race of Yadu! (24)
Having kidnapped my sister even as a crow would steal a Sacrificial offering, where are you
going ? | shall presently take away your pride, O fool, who are (so) wily and given to strategic
fighting. (25) Leave my sister before you bite the dust when struck with my arrows." Smilingly
tearing his bow Sri Krsna pierced Rukmi with six arrows, his four horses with eight more, his
charioteer with two and his ensign with three. Taking up another bow, he too hit Sri Krsna
(back) with five shafts. (26-27) Struck with those volleys of arrows, however, Sri Krsna (the
immortal Lord) rent his bow asunder. He snatched yet another and the imperishable Lord
cleft that too.(28) The celebrated Sri Hari (likewise) tore every weapon that he took up
(subsequently one after another)—viz., an iron club, a sharp-edged spear, a pike, a sword
and a shield, a javelin and a bludgeon. (29) Then, leaping down from the chariot, sword
in hand, he darted in rage at Sri Krsna with intent to kill Him, (even) as a moth would into
a flame. (30) While he was (thus) rushing (towards Him), the Lord split his sword and shield
(too) into particles with His shafts and picked up a sharp-edged sword, in readiness to
make short work of Rukmi. (31) Overwhelmed with fear to behold this endeavour (on the
part of Sri Krsna) to dispose of her brother, the virtuous Rukmini fell at the feet of her
Spouse and pitifully prayed (as follows):—(32) “0 Master of Yoga, 0 incomprehensible
Lord of the universe, O blessed god of gods, O mighty-armed One ! You ought not to kil!
my brother." (33)

meg परसैन्यमद्धुतं चदुप्रवीरा नलिनीं यथा गञजा: ।३५॥
विमुच्य बद्धं करुणो भगवान् कृष्णमब्रवीत् 136 |
असाध्विदं त्वया कृष्ण कृतमस्मज्जुगुप्सितम्। वपनं इमश्रुकेज्ञानां Sect सुहृदो वध: ।३७॥
मैवास्मान् साध्व्यसूयेथा भ्रातुर्वैरूंष्यचिन्तया!सुखद्दु:खदोनचज्योऽस्तियत:स्वबृक्तभुकृपुंपान्।इधां
जन्धुर्वधार्हृदोषोऽपि न बसोर्वंधपर्हति।त्याज्यं.॰स्वेनैन्रदॊषेणहृत:किंहन्यतेपुन:।३९।

