Dis. 11 ] «BOOK FOUR . 341

SLESLEHAAKSHEHEKENEEESERR EE EEEHLERECAEESEEARE SHEE CEE EO AREER AHHH foirserere

इति श्रीमद्भागवते महापुराणे पारमहंस्यां संहितायां चतुर्थस्कन्धे ददामोऽध्याय: ।१०॥

The hermits said : 0 son of Uttanapada may the almighty Lord Visnu (the Wielder of
the famous Sarnga bow), who relieves the agony of His suppliants, wipe out your enemies!
By uttering and hearing His very Name people easily succeed in this very life in conquering
death, which is so hard to overcome, O dear Dhruva. (30)

Thus ends the tenth discourse in Book Four of the great
ग and glorious Bhagavata-Purana, otherwise known
as the Paramahamsa-Samnhita.

PIII IDS

Discourse XI
Swayambhuva Manu intervenes and persuades Dhruva to cease fighting
मैत्रेय उवाच
निशम्य गदतामेवमृषीणां धनुषि ध्रुव: | संदधेऽस्त्रमुपस्पृश्य यन्नारायणनिर्मितम् | १ ।
संधीयमान एतस्मिन्माया गुह्यकनिर्मिता: fet विनेशुर्विदुर Sen ज्ञानोदये यथा । २ ।
विनि:सृता आविबिशुद्दिषद्वलं यथा ad भीमरवा: रशिखण्डिन: । ३ ।
तमभ्यधावन् कुपिता उदायुधा: सुपर्णमुन्नद्धफणा इवाहय: । ४ |
स तान् पृषत्कैरभिधावतो yal निकृत्तबाहूरुशिरोधरोदरान्।
निनाय लोके परमर्कमण्डलं व्रजन्ति निर्भिद्य यमूर्ध्वरेतस: । ५ |
तान् हन्यमानानभिवीक्ष्य गुह्यकाननागसश्चित्ररथथेन भूरिश: ।
ओंब्द॥नप'दिं कृपया पित।मह्ये मनुजंग्"दोपगत: सर्हार्पेभिं'. । ६ I
Maitreya went on : On hearing the prayer of the sages, who spoke as above, Dhruva
sipped some water and (after washing his hand) set to his bow the missile that had been
evolved by the divine sage Narayana. (1) While the missile was being fixed to the bow, the
illusory appearances conjured up by the Guhyakas (Yaksas) forthwith vanished in the same
way as nescience and its progeny (egotism and so on) disappear at the dawn of wisdom,
O Vidura. (2) Even as he fixed on his bow the missile evolved by the sage Narayana there
flew from it arrows with shafts of gold and feathers resembling the wings of a swan, and
penetrated the enemy ranks like peacocks entering a forest with a terrible noise. (3) Assailed
on the battle-field with those sharp-edged arrows, the Punyajanas (Yaksas) felt much
enraged and with uplifted weapons darted against Dhruva from all sides even as serpents
would rush at Garuda with their hoods drawn up. (4) As they ran towards him on the field
of battle he tore off with his arrows their arms, thighs, necks and bellies and despatched them
to that highest realm (Satyaloka, the abode of Brahma), which recluses attain to, carving
their way through the sphere of the sun. (5) Dhruva's grandfather, Swayambhuva Manu, was

overcome with compassion to see those innocent Guhyakas being killed in large numbers
by Dhruva (who was mounted on a wondertul car). He arrived (on the scene) along with a
