670 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 5

CABENEOEAE ROR SOLER THERE eERE CE EET ENTE LEENA ARATE EC EE ELEN CERO TEAR EAH

abandoning his own kith and kin, worships like a servant the feet of Visnu, the slayer of his
uncle. (35) Indeed, what good turn will this wicked boy do to Visnu either—the boy who yet
an infant of five years has spurned the love of his parents, (so) hard to renounce ? (36) Even
an enemy (whois) beneficent as a medicineisa (veritable) son; while an inimical son, though
begotten by one's own body, should be shunned as a disease. (Nay,) one should amputate
even that limb which is injurious to one's body (as a whole) and by removing which the rest
of the body may servive in good health.(37) He should (therefore) be got rid of by all
(possible) means—through (poisoned) food or (by disposing of him) when he is lying asleep
or sitting (unguarded). (For) like the corrupt mind of a hermit he is our enemy, though
masquerading as a friend." (38)

Shara समादिष्टा wat & शूलपाणय: । तिग्मदंष्टकरालास्यास्ताम्रश्मश्रुशिरोरुहार 138
नदन्तो भैरवान्नादांर्छिन्धि भिन्धीति वादिन: । आसीनं चाहनन् We: werd सर्वमर्मसु Ivo!

परे ब्रह्मण्यनिर्देश्ये भगवत्यखिलात्मनि । युक्तात्मन्यफला आसन्नपुण्यस्थेव सत्किया: ।४१।
प्रयासेऽपहते तस्मिन् दैत्येनद्र परिहाङ्कित:। चकार तद्बधोपायान्निर्बनध्धेन युधिष्ठिर ।४२।

दिगाजैर्दन्दशूकैश्च अभिचारावपातनै: । arena: संनिरोधैश्च गरदानैरभोजनै: ।४३।
हिमवाय्वम्निसलिलै: पर्वताक्रमणैरपि । न शशाक यदा हन्तुमपापमसुर: AAAI

चिन्तां दीर्घतमां प्राप्तस्तत्कर्तुं नाभ्यपद्यत Ise |
एष मे बह्वसाधूक्तो वधोपायाश्च निर्मिता: । तैस्तैद्रेहिरसद्धर्मैर्मुक्तत स्वेनैव तेजसा ।४५।
वर्तमानोऽविदूरे वै बालोऽप्यजडधीरयम्। न विस्मरति मेऽनार्यं Gata Fa प्रभु: eel
अप्रमेयानुभावोऽयमकुतश्चिद्भयोऽमर: । नूनमेतद्बिरोधेन geet भविता न वा ।४७।
Actually commanded by the master (Hiranyakasipu), those demons, who had sharp
teeth, fearful faces and coppery beards and hair and had spikes in their hands, struck
Prahrada, who was sitting (still), with spears in all (his) vital parts, emitting hideous yells and
shouting “Cut him down ! Rend him asunder !!" (39-40) Like the commendable acts of an
unlucky fellow, their blows proved of no avail against Prahrada, whose mind was en rapport
with the immutable and indefinable Supreme Deity, the Soul of the universe. (41) On that
effort having been foiled, Hiranyakasipu (the ruler of the demons) felt greatly alarmed and
resorted with pertinacity to (various) devices of despatching the boy, O Yudhisthira ! (42)
When (however) the demon failed to get rid of his sinless boy by means of the elephants
guarding the (four) quarters, serpents and destructive spells, by hurling him down (from great
heights), employing conjuring tricks, confining him (in caves etc.) and administering poison,
(nay,) by starving him, exposing him to frost, winds, fire and floods and even crushing him
under rocks, and could not lay his hands on any (other) means to dispose of him, he was
plunged in the deepest anxiety. (43-44) (He said to himself,) "The boy was reproached by
me in a number of ways and devices were (also) employed to kill him. But (fo !) he escaped
(unhurt) from all those mischiefs and destructive spells by virtue of his own glory. (45) Though
standing close to me anda child yet, the fellow is really undaunted in mind and powerful (too).
Like Sunahsepa* he will not forget my wrongs (and is sure to retaliate sooner or later). (46)
Possessed of infinite glory and fearing none, he is immortal (to all appearance). My death
will surely follow as a result of hostility to him. Or else it may not occur (at all). (47)

इति तं चिन्तया किञ्चिन्म्लानश्रियमधोमुखम् । शण्डामर्कावौरानसौ विविक्त इति होचतु: ।४८।

a

*Sunahgepa was the second son of a sage, Ajigarta by name. Having been sold by his parents in favour of the famous
king Harigcandra, the boy joined his father's enemy, the celebrated Viswamitra, and adopted the latter's line as his parentage.
