480 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 85

त्न्र ORE RATE ककक ल्मा मजकाकान शा 8 6 गक शाशा करान न कच कक न न

identification with the body and the feeling of meum with regard to those connected with the
body. (17) (I know) You are no other than the Lords of Prakrtias well as of all individual souls,
and not my sons. You have come down for the destruction of the Ksatriyas, who have
become a burden to the earth; You Yourself spoke like that in unambiguous terms to me (at
the time of Your descent). (18) Therefore, 0 Befriender of the afflicted, | have sought for
Protection this day Your lotus-feet, which (alone) dispel the fear of transmigration haunting
those who have taken shelter with them. | am fed up with this much of craving for sense-
enjoyments. It was under the influence of this that ! have (so long) identified myself with this
mortal body and looked on You, the Supreme, as my child. (19) O Lord, in the lying-in-
chamber You said that, though unborn, You had, as a matter of fact, been manifesting
Yourself through us in different pairs each time for defending Your own laws. Like the sky,
You assume diverse forms and cast them off, even though You are one and infinite. Who can
know the secret of Your wonderful Potency—Yogamaya ? All people extensively sing Your

glories. (20)
a उवाच
orevds पितुर्वाक्यं भगवान् सात्वतर्षभ: | प्रत्याह प्रश्नयानम्र: प्रहसन् Tana गिरा ।२१॥

Sri Suka resumed : Hearing these words of His father (Vasudeva), Lord Sri Krsna ( the
crown-jewel of the Yadus) began to smile. Bowing in all humility { to His father), He replied
in sweet words as follows. (21) ति

वचो व: समवेतार्थं तातैतदुपमन्महे। यन्न: पुत्रान् समुद्दिश्य तत्त्वग्राम उदाहत: 1221
ae यूयमसावार्य इमे च द्वारकौकस: । सर्वेऽप्येवं यदुश्रेष्ठ fae सचराचरम् 1231
aren oes: स्वयंज्योतिर्नित्योऽन्यो निर्गुणो गुणै: । आत्मसृष्टैस्तत्कृतेषु भूतेषु बहुधेयते । २४॥
खं वायुरज्योतिरापो भूस्तत्कृतेषु यथाशयम्। आविस्तिरोऽल्पभूर्येको नानात्वं यात्यसावपि 1241
The glorious Lord said : Father! we are your sons; you have in these words expounded
the highest philosophical truths to us. We accept as true whatever you have said. (22)
Yourself, my venerable brother, Sri Balarama, myself, these citizens of Dwaraka and all
others including the mobile and immobile creation should be regarded as Brahma, O jewel
among the Yadus! (23) (O father!) the Selfis really one, self-effulgent, eternal, identical with
the body etc., and unqualified: yet it projects the Gunas out of Itself, and in the bodies of the
various creatures evolved outof these Gunas itappears as diversified, perceptible, transient,
distinct from the body etc., and qualified. (24) Justas (each of the five elements—) ether, air,
fire, water and earth—though one in essence, appears differently in its different products and
can be distinguished as manifest or unmanifest, meagre or abundant. andsoon, so the Self
too appears as many through Its (various) adjuncts. (25)

उवाच
एवं भगवता राजन् वसुदेव उदाहतम्। श्रुत्वा विनष्टनानाधीस्तूष्णीं प्रीतमना अभूत् । २६॥
Ha त्त्र कुरुश्रेष्ठ देवकी सर्वदेवता । श्रुत्वाऽऽनीतं गुरो पुत्रमात्मजाभ्यां सुविस्मिता 1201
कृष्णरामॊ समाश्राव्य पुत्रान् कंसविहिंसितान् । स्मरन्ती कृपणं प्राह वैकृव्यादश्रुलोचना । २८॥

Sri Suka continued : Pariksit, hearing these words of the almighty Lord Vasudeva was
rid of his sense of diversity, and delighted at heart, became silent and drove away all
thoughts from his mind. (26) Devaki, who representedall the deities in her person (and was
also present there when this conversation was going on) was greatly astonished to hear
that her Sons had brought back the (deceased) son of Their preceptor (from the abode of
Yama). (27) Recollecting her sons who had been done to death by Kamsa, she feltagitated
in mind and, addressing Sri Krsna and Balarama with tears in her eyes, piteously spoke
(thus). (28)
