308 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 47

RIAA AANA AERA ETAL ETE ERNE ESHA Tee He een eee ET REE Nee eERN AEE

एता: परं तनुभृतो भुवि गोपवध्वो गोविन्द एव निखिलात्मनि रूढ्भावा: |
वाञ्छन्ति aq भवभियो मुनयो वचं च किं ब्रह्मजन्मभिरनन्तकथारसस्य । ५८॥
क्वेमा: स्रियो वनचरीर्व्यभिचारदुष्टा: कृष्णे क्व चैष परमात्मनि रूढ्भाव: |
श्वरो जन ~ + + mien
रासोत्सवेऽस्य भुजदण्डगृहीतकण्ठलब्धाशिषां य उदगाद् ब्रजवल्लवीनाम् । ६०॥
आसामहो चरणरेणुजुषामहं स्यां वृन्दावने किमपि गुल्मलतौषधीनाम् |
चा दुस्त्यजं स्वजनमार्यपथं च हित्वा भेजुर्मुकुन्दपदवीं श्रुतिभिर्विमृग्याम् ice
a वै श्रियार्चितमजादिभिराप्तकामैर्योगेश्वैररपि यदात्मनि रासगोष्ठयाम् ।
Par तद् भगवतश्चरणारविन्दं न्यस्तं स्तनेषु fame: परिरभ्य तापम् 1821
at नन्दव्रजस्रीणां पादरेणुमभीक्ष्णश: । यासां हरिकथोद्गीतं पुनाति भुवनत्रयम् ।६३॥
Supremely delighted to perceive the anguish of mind—as depicted before* and of an
allied nature—of the Gopis, occasioned by their absorbing thought of Sri Krsna, and bowing
to them (in reverence), Uddhava sang as follows :—(57) "These cowherd women alone on.
earth have justified their possessing a human body in that they have developed supreme love
exclusively for Sri Krsna (the Protector of cows), the Soul of the universe—(a love) which not
only strivers afraid of metempsychosis but sages (emancipated souls), nay, (even) we
(devotees of the Lord) aspire for ? What (else) is there tobe gained through (three kinds of)t
births as a Brahmana by him who has developed a taste for the stories of Sri Krsna (the
deathiess Lord)? (Or what is to be gained through repeated births as Brahma by him who
has not been able to develop a zest for such stories ?+ (58) The two are quite out of keeping
with one another—these women (impure by their very sex), roaming about in woods and
polluted (in the eyes of adverse critics) through infidelity to their (worldly) husbands, (on the
one hand) and surpassing (unflinching) love for Sri Krsna, the Supreme Spirit, as depicted
above (on the other)! Surely the almighty Lord, directly and liberally confers (final) beatitude
on him who constantly remembers Him, though not knowing His reality, (just) as nectar (the
sovereign of all medicines) does good (toan ailing person) whenused (even unknowingly).(59)
Oh, the grace which descended on the cowherdesses of Vraja—who attained the object of
their desire in the form of having their necks encircled by His stout arms during the Rasa
festival—did not fall to the lot of celestial damsels (nymphs) possessing the fragrance and
splendour of a lotus, or (even) of Sri, whois exclusively attached to His person (bosom); how
(then) could others expect such favour (from Him) ? (60) Oh, let me be (incarnated as)
anyone of the shrubs, creepers or herbs in (the woodlands of) Vrndavana, catching the dust
of feet of these (blessed ladies), who (successfully) trod the path (of Devotion) leading to Sri
Krsna—(the path) which is (still) to be strenuously sought for (even) by the Upanisads$—
——— eS ee ee ae

* Vide verses 4 to 21 and 39 to 52 Supra.

व The three kinds of birth as a Brahmana are :—(1) physical birth from Brahmana parents, (2) invesliture with the sacred
thread and initiation in Ihe holy Gayatri-Mantra, which is regarded as a second birth and (3) consecretion befitting one for Ihe
performance of a sacrifice, which is locked upon as a third incamalion.

+ The compound word `अनन्तकथारसस्य, can be split up in two ways—irstly as अनन्त + कथा + THEA and secondly 83अनन्त
> कथा + स्सस्य, The word ‘Brahma’ too admits of a double meaning. The altemative Interprelation of the las] quarater of the verse
according to the latter way of splitting the compound has been shown within brackets.

$This evidently refers to the Upenishadic text `यतो वाचो निवर्तन्ते अप्राप्य मनसा BE" which tells us that “words (scriptural texts)
fail to reach Brahma and retum (unsuccessful) alongwith the mind.”

