Dis. 40 ] BOOK TEN 269

Se Ree SKE eee eee ees printed ef See FR Te a eta ear BH

and a pair of big toes tender as petals. (50) He shone resplendent with a diadem, bracelets
and armilets set with most valuable gems, as well as with a girdle, a sacred thread, necklaces
and pairs of anklets and ear-rings, and held a lotus (in one of His hands) anda conch, a discus
and a mace (in the others). His breast was distinguished with a white curl of hair, the
Kaustubha gem shining at His neck, and was adorned with a garland of sylvan flowers. (51-52)
He was being glorified through praises expressive of divergent sentiments by attendants, the
foremost of whom were Sunanda and Nanda (and who severally occupied the four quarters
and the four intermediate points), the sage Sanaka and his three brothers (Sanandana,
Sanatana and Sanatkumara, all of whom including Sanaka, were standing behind the Lord),
the chiefs of gods, headed by Brahma and Lord Siva (all of whom occupied a position to His
right), the nine foremost Brahmanas (Marici and others, who stood to His left), as well as by
the foremost of the Lord's devotees of pure mind, such as Prahrada, Narada and the Vasu
(Uparicara by name, all of whom stood in front of the Lord). (53-54) He was (also) waited upon
(inliving forms) by Sri (the goddess of beauty and good fortune), Pusti (the goddesspresiding
over nutrition), Saraswati (the goddess presiding over speech), Kanti (the goddess presiding
over splendour), Kirti (the goddess presiding over glory), Tusti (the goddess presiding over
contentment), Il (goddess Earth), Urja (the goddess presiding over omnipotence), Vidya
(the goddess presiding over spiritual enlightenment conducive to Liberation), Avidya (the
goddess presiding over nescience, which binds the Jiva to mundane existence), Sakti (the
foremost of all divine energies, going by the name of Hladini or the delighting potency) and
Maya (the Cause of Vidya and Avidya both). (55)

facies GR प्रीतो भक्त्या परमया युत: | हृष्यत्तनूरुहो भावपरिक्लिन्नात्मलोचन: । ५६1
गिरा गद्भदयास्तौषीत् सत्त्वमालम्ब्य सात्वत: । प्रणम्य मूर्खावहित: कृताञ्जलिपुट: FA: । ५७।
इति श्रीमद्धागवते महापुराणे पारमहंस्यां संहितायां ददामस्कन्धे पर्वार्धेऽक्रूरप्रतियाने एकोनचत्वारिंशोऽध्याय: 1381
Extremely rejoiced to perceive the Lord and summoning his presence of mind, Akrira
(who belonged to the Satvata clan) and was full of supreme devotion, greeted the Lord with
his head (bent low), and with joined palms and a concentrated mind slowly proceeded to extol

the Lord in a voice choked with emotion, his hair standing on end and his mind and eyes
moistened with love. (56-57)

Thus ends the thirty-ninth discourse forming part of the story of Akrara’s withdrawal
{to Mathura), in the first half of Book Ten of the great and glorious Bhagavata-
Purana, otherwise known as the Paramahamsa-Samnita.

catwetnet:
reir

अथ चत्वारिशोऽध्याय:

Discourse XL
Akrira’s eulogy (of the Lord)
अक्रूर उवाच
चन्नाभिजातादरविन्दकोशाद् ब्रह्माऽविरासीद् at एष लोक: । १ |
