Dis. 65 ] BOOK TEN 397

He I ROR SO ee eee ee EERE eh ETT ne EEE TR I

Skilled in the various methods of conciliation, Lord Sankarsana pacified those Gopis with
Sri Krsna’s messages, which were most pleasing to their heart. (16) Balarama spent there
the two months (of the vernal season, viz.,) Caitra and Vaigakha, entertaining the Gopis
during the nights. (17) At that time a gentle wind wafted the fragrance of (the blooming) lilies,
the gardens on the banks of the Yamuna were illumined by the rays of the full moon, and Sit
Balarama sported in the midst of crowds of Gopis. (18) The celestial beverage called Varuni,
sent by Varuna (the deity presiding over the waters), and flowing from the hollow of a tree,
filled the whole forest with its smell. (19) Perceiving the smell of the stream of honey borne
by the wind, Balarama went up to the tree and drank of it alongwith those women. (20) His
exploits being sung by the Gopis (who surrounded Him), Balarama roamed about intoxicated
through the woods with eyes swimming in intoxication. (21) Adorned with a wreath of flowers
anda necklace called Vaijayanti, (nay,) with an ear-ring shining in one of His ears, and with
His lotus-like face bright with smiles and decked with the dewy drops of sweat, the intoxicated
Lord summoned the Yamuna to come near Him so as to enable Him to sport in her water.
Taking Him to be intoxicated, the Yamuna (however) paid no heed to His command and did
not come, whereupon Balarama got enraged, they say, and, dragging the river with the point
of His plough, said, *O sinfulone, since you have disobeyed Me and donot come eventhough
called by Me, I shall make you taste the fruit of your waywardness. With the end of My plough,
| shall split you into a hundred streams.” (22—24) Thus threatened (by Balarama), the
goddess presiding over the Yamuna fell on His feet and trembling with fear, said:— (25) "O
Rama, the delighter of all, O long-armed one, I had forgotten Your strength, and was ignorant
of Your transcendent glory. O Lord of the universe, ( now realize that) by a mere part
manifestation (Sesa) of Yours, the whole universe is supported. O almighty Lord, O Soul of
the universe, who are (so) fond of (Your) devotees, | take refuge in You; kindly (excuse me
for my error and) give me freedom to flow.” (26-27)

`ततो व्यमुञ्चद यमुनां याचितो भगवान् बल: । विजगाह जलं स्रीभि: करेणुभिरिवेभराद । REI

art विहृत्य सळिलादुत्तीर्णायासिताम्बरे। भूषणानि महार्हाणि eat कान्ति: शुभां स्रजम् । २९1

वसित्वा वाससी नीले म लामामुच्च काञ्चनीम् । रेजे स्वरुङ्कुन्तो लिप्त माहेन्द्र इव ANT: ।३०॥

अद्यापि saa राजन् यमुनाऽऽकृष्टवर्त्सना । बलस्यानन्तवीर्यस्य वीर्यं सूचयतीव हि । ३१1

एवं सर्वा fen चाता एकेव रमतो व्रजे । रामस्याक्षिप्तचित्तस्य माधुर्यैर्व्रजयोषिताम् 132 |
(Thus) entreated by her, the Lord Balarama thereupon released the Yamuna and entered
its waters alongwith the Gopis even as a leader of elephants would enter a stream (to sport)
with his mates. (28) When having sported to His heart's content, Sri Balarama rose from the
waters (of the Yamuna) Kanti, (an embodiment of Laksmi) presented Him with two pieces
of cloth of blue colour, valuable ornaments and a shining necklace (of gold). (29) Putting on
the two pieces of cloth, wearing the necklace and artistically decked with other gold
ornaments and painted with sandal-paste, He shone like Airavata (the white elephant of
Indra, the lord of celestials). (30) Pariksit, even to this day the Yamuna is seen flowing
through the course it took after being dragged by Balarama, as if proclaiming as a matter of

fact the strength of Balarama (who is possessed of infinite prowess). (31) Charmed with the
sweet qualities of the damsels of Vraja, Balarama lost all sense of time. In this way all the
