412 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 26

ROR RR RN ETH SS SOLEMN KEEE HEH SHEKEL SEHERER EEE EEO LHH HASH OKA EAHA Hae ३ ।

Vedisat (Pracinabarhi) : “Is everything well with you and your mistress, O charming
damsels? The household wealth in this house looks not so splendid as before at this
moment. (How is it ?) What wise man would stay like a miserable creature in his house
neglected as a chariot without wheels etc., if there was no mother, or wife looking upon her
husband as God (Himself) in that house. (14-15) Where is that lovely lady, who cheers me
up when | am drowning in an ocean of misery, brightening my intellect at every step ?“ (16)

रामा ऊचु:
नरनाथ न जानीमस्त्वत्प्रया यद्ववयवस्यति। भूतले निरवस्तारे शयानां Wea ङान्नुहन् । १७॥
The ladies replied : 0 lord of men, we know not what your beloved wife is bent upon
(doing). (Just) see her lying on the bare ground, O slayer of foes ! (17)
ARG उवाच
Ter: स्वमहिषीं निरीक्ष्यावधुतां भुवि । तत्सङ्घोन्मथितज्ञानो वैकृव्यं परमं ययो ieci
सान्त्वयन् श्लक्ष्णया वाचा हृदयेन विदूयता । प्रेयस्या: स्नेहसंरम्भलिङ्गमात्मनि नाभ्यगात् । १९।
अनुनिन्येऽथ छनकैर्बीरोऽनुनयकोविद: | पस्पर्शं पादयुगलमाह चोत्सङ्गलालिताम् । 20 |
Narada went on: Purafijana, whose judgment had been shaken through attachment to
his wife, was sorely perturbed to see her lying unkempt on the ground. (18) With an aching
heart he tried to pacify her with soft words, but failed to perceive in (the behaviour of) his
beloved queen any sign of anger prompted by love towards him. (19) The gallant youth then

gradually began to cajole her, skilled as he was in (the art of) conciliation. He touched her
feet and, having seated her in his lap and caressed her, spoke (as follows). (20)

नूनं त्वकृतपुण्यास्ते yar aya: शुभे। कृतागस्स्वात्मसात्कृत्वा शिक्षादण्डं न युञ्जते 1221
परमोऽनुग्रहो दण्डो भृत्येषु प्रभुणार्पित: । बालो न ae तत्तन्वि बन्धुकृत्यममर्षण: 1221
सा त्वं मुखं सुदति सुभ्रवनुरागभारव्रीडाविलम्बविलसद्भसितावलोकम् |
नीलालकालिभिरुपस्कृतमुन्नसं न: स्वानां प्रदर्शाय मनस्विनि वल्गुवाक्यम् 123!
तस्मिन्दधे दममहं aa वीरपत्नि योऽन्यत्र भूसुरकुलात्कृतकिल्बिषस्तम् |
पश्ये न वीतभयमुन्मुदितं त्रिलोक्यामन्यत्र a मुररिपोरितरत्र दासात् । २४॥
वक्त्रं न ते वितिलकं मलिनं विहर्षं संरम्भभीममविमृष्टमपेतरागम्।
का tat ard quasar न भजेत कृत्ये ।२६॥

Purafijana said : Unlucky indeed are those servants whom, when they have committed
some offence, their masters, O fair one, care not to punish by way of correction, recognizing
them as subject to their control. (21) Punishment meted out to servants by their master is
an act of supreme grace (on the latter's part). He who resents it is a fool in that he fails to
recognize it as a friendly act, O lovely one.(22) Therefore, O proud lady with beautiful teeth
and graceful eyebrows, reveal to us, who are yours, your face with a prominent nose and
a sweet tongue, hanging under the weight of love and bashfulness, charming with smiling
glances and decked with dark bee-like tresses. (23) | shall (presently) inflict (suitable)

punishment, O spouse of a warrior, on him who has wronged you, unless he belongs to the
Brahmana race. | do not find him immune from fear, much less rejoicing, in all the three
