30 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 8

QR RA RRB ह ज RKTT FGM HE HY Be संश्री ती OT HB ती te RT ती हो शं ew Re Re Re कीं श्री वी सि र्त री सि ह Bi HB BMT दौ ह PH ती वी

three Gunas or modes of Prakrti, You delight in Your own Self and are perfectly calm; You
are the Lord of Moksa (final beatitude). | bow to You again and again. (27)

मन्ये wi कालमीहानमनादिनिधनं विभुम्। समं aed ada भूतानां यन्मिथ: कलि: 1221
न यस्य कश्चिद्दयितोऽस्ति aide द्वेष्यश्च यस्मिन् विषमा मतिर्नृणाम् । २९॥
wa कर्म च विश्वात्मन्नजस्याकर्तुरात्मन: | तिर्यङ्नूषिषु याद:सु तदत्यन्तविडम्बनम् i301
गोप्याददे त्वयि कृतागसि दाम तावद् या ते दशाश्रुकलिलाञ्जनसम्भ्रमाक्षम् ।
aaa Fete भयभावनया स्थितस्य सा ot विमोहयति भीरपि यद्विभेति । ३१॥
केचिदाहुरजं wa पुण्यङ्लोकस्य कीर्तये । यदो: प्रियस्यान्ववाये मलयस्येव चन्दनम् । ३२।
am वसुदेवस्य tae याचितोऽभ्यगात्। अजस्त्वमस्य क्षेमाय aera च सुरद्विषाम् । ३३॥
भारावतारणायान्ये भुवो नाव इवोदधौ । सीदन्त्या भूरिभारेण जातो ह्यात्मभुवार्थित: । ३४॥
भवेऽस्मिन् क्लिंश्यमानानामविद्याकामकर्मभि: | श्रवणस्मरणार्हाणि करिष्यन्निति केचन ।३५॥
svat गायन्ति गृणन्त्यभीक्ष्णहशा: स्मरन्ति नन्दन्ति तवेहितं जना: |
त Ta पश्यन्त्यचिरेण ded भवप्रवाहोपरमं पदाम्बुजम् ।३६॥
येषां न Weed: पदाम्बुजात् परायणं राजसु योजितांहसाम् ।३७॥
के वयं नामरूपाभ्यां यदुभि: ae पाण्डवा: | भवतोऽदर्शषनं यर्हि हृषीकाणामिवेशितु: । ३८।
a ज्ञोभिष्यते a यथेदानीं गदाधर।त्वत्पदैरङ्किता भाति स्वलक्षणविलक्षितै: । ३९1
इमे जनपदा: wal सुपक्कौषधिवीरुध: । वनाद्बिनद्युदन्वन्तो ह्येधन्ते तव वीक्षितै: ॥४०॥
ay विश्वेश विश्वात्मन् विश्वमूर्ते स्वकेषु मे । स्नेहपाशामिमं छिन्धि दृढं पाण्डुषु वृष्णिषु ive
त्वयि मेऽनन्यविषया मतिर्मधुपतेऽसकृत्। रतिमुद्वहतादद्धा पाङ्गेवौघमुदन्वति ।४२॥
श्रीकृष्ण कृष्णसख वृष्ण्यृषभावनिध्नुग् राजन्यवंशादहनानपवर्गवीर्य ।
Tee गोद्विजसुरार्तिहरावतार योगेश्वराखिलगुरो भगवन्नमस्ते ।४३॥

A "I believe You to be Kala ( the Time-Spirit), the almighty Ruler of all, having no beginning
“V orendand moving alike among all the creatures, although it is You, again, who serve as an
occasion for them to contend with one another. (28) None, O Lord, can know what You intend
doing when You are acting like men. No oneis ever dear or loathsome to You; itis men alone
who think of You in terms of diversity. (29) O Lord, Youare the Soul of the universe, nay, the
universe itself. You are, as a matter of fact, devoid of birth and actions; Your birth and actions

in the sub-human species as well as among men, Rsis and aquatic creatures are mere
sport.(30) When You offended (Your foster-mother) YaSoda (by smashing the pot of curds)
and she took a cord to bind You, the way in which You stood full of fear, with Your face cast
down, Your eyes rolling about in confusion and their collyrium dissolved in tears, fills me with
bewilderment. To think that even He of whom Fear itself is afraid should appear so stricken
with fear ! (31) Some people aver that, though unborn, You have appeared in the race of Your
beloved Yadu of sacred renown justin order to enhance his glory, even as a sandal tree takes
root on the Malaya mountain in order to bring reputation to the latter. (32) Others declare
that, though birthless, You were born of Devaki, Vasudeva's wife for the protection of this
world and the extermination of the enemies of gods, as solicited by the couple (in their
previous existence). (33) Still others assert that in response to the prayer of Brahma (the self-
born Creator) You have appeared (in our midst) to relieve the burden of the earth, which was

