Dis. 60 ] BOOK TEN 375

DORON Ee Ge ee क न ए Ne DER TEE? Or ener enn en क nes eee eh

त्वकदमश्रुरामनखकेशपिनद्धमन्तर्मांसास्थिरक्तकृमिविद्कफपित्तवातम् ।

जीवच्छवं भजति कान्तमतिर्विमूढा चा ते पदाब्जमकरन्दमजिघ्रती स्री ।४५॥

अस्त्वम्बुजाक्ष मम ते चरणानुराग ae we मयि चानतिरिक्तदृष्टे: |

ada वृद्धय उपात्तरजोऽतिमात्रो मामीक्षसे ae ह न: परमानुकम्पा ।४६1
नैवालीकमहं मन्ये वचस्ते मधुसूदन i अम्बाया इव हि प्राय: कन्याया: स्याद् रति: क्वचित् । ४७1
व्यूढायाश्चापि पुंश्चल्या मनोऽभ्येति नवं yar बुधोऽसतीं न विभृयात् at बिभ्रदुभयच्युत: ।४८॥

Rukmini said : Of course, tis as You said. 0 lotus-eyed Lord, that | am surely unlike
You, the glorious one. possessed of infinite qualities. What comparison is there between
You, the glorious Lord of the three principal deities (Brahma. Visnu and Siva) and established
in Your own greatness, and myself, the primordial Nature comprised of the three Gunas and
one whose feet are clutched by the ignorant ! (34) True it is that You sleep in the ocean of
the (devotee’s) heart as if afraid of the three Gunas, O Lord of wide strides, who are pure
Consciousness, the Self. You are ever at loggerheads with the wicked senses and even Your
servants kick aside such a dark and gloomy thing as kingship. (35) The ways (even) of sages
fond of the honey of Your lotus-feet are obscure and hence surely incomprehensible by
beasts among men. For. when the doings of (even) those who follow You are as though
supernatural, those of the Almighty Lord in You must be much more so. (36) Certainly You—
to whom (even) Brahma and others, who accept offerings (from others) bear offerings—are
Akificana (not in the sense that You own nothing but) because there is nothing other than
You. Those blinded by wealth and (engagedin) gratifying their senses do not know You, who
steal away the hours of their life: You are the most beloved of those Brahma and others (who
enjoy the respect of others). and vice versa. (37) Indeed You are the embodiment of every
(recognized) object of human pursuit. a personification of absolute joy, seeking which the
wise give up everything. Their contact with You is most deserved, but not so of the man and
woman who are attached one to the other and therefore subject to pleasure and pain. (38)
You have been elected by me (as my husband). knowing that Your glory has been sung by
sages who have renounced the rod. and that You are the Soul of the universe and are ready
to bestow Your very self (on Your devotees). and rejecting (even) Brahma (the lotus-born)
and the rulers of heaven (Indra and others). whose fortune and blessings are dashed to the
ground by the force of Time as propelled by a mere play of Your eyebrows, others (Sisupala
and so on) being of no account. (39) Your plea that You resorted to the sea out of fear (of
the kings) has no meaning, O elder Brother of Gada: for, by the mere twang of the Sarnga
bow you put them to flightand carried away myself. Your share, O Lord, (even) as alion drives
away other animals and appropriates its prey. (40) The foremost of kings like Anga, Prthu
(the son of Vena), Bharata (born of Jayanti, the spouse of Lord Rsabhadeva), Yayati (the son
of Nahusa), Gaya and others retired to the forest renouncing their undisputed sovereignty
in quest of You. O Lord of lotus eyes. Did they suffer because they sought Your feet here
2(41) O Lord, the abode of virtues ! the fragrance of Your lotus-feet grants freedom from
transmigration to the people, is the resortof Laksmi and has been extolled by menof wisdom.
What mortal woman with a clear insight into the real purpose of life. who has (once) smelt
it, would (dare) ignore it and seek another who is ever subject to grave fears (of senility and
death etc.)? (42) | have sought as my befitting partner You, who are the suzerain lord of the
universe, (nay,) my own Self and the granter of (all) desired boons both here as well as
hereafter. May Your feet, which seek him who worships You and release him from the

_ deceptive cycle of births and deaths, prove to be an asylum to me, who have been wandering
