702 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 9

RRR AAR NARA TEE ERNE EER AE EG SAL HL AE EEA IAB HH RAR TH HI

and fear to men. (45) Therefore, on realizing this truth, O Lord, men of wisdom in this world
worship Your manifestation in the form of Lord Narayana, (which is made up of Sattva
unmixed with Rajas and Tamas and) which is (so) dear to (the heart of) Your devotees; for
the followers of the Paficaratra school recognize Sattva (alone) and no other Guna to be the
manifestation of the Supreme Person and through Sattva (alone) is attained (by them) the
Lord's realm as well as (the state of) fearlessness and the bliss of Self-Realization. (46) Hail
to You, the aforesaid Lord, the Inner Controller (of all), all-pervading as well as existing in the
form of the universe, the Preceptor of the universe, the Supreme Deity appearing in the forms
of the immaculate Sage Narayana and Nara (the foremost of all the Jivas), who have
controlled Your speech and promoted the cult of the Vedas. (47) He whose judgment is
clouded by Your Maya (deluding potency) and whose intellect is bewildered in following the
paths of the misguiding senses does not, as is well-known, cognize You, even though
present in his own senses, vital airs and heart, as well as in the objects of the senses (as the
Inner Controller of all). The selfsame man, though ignorant only at the beginning, directly
cognizes You onobtaining an insight into the Veda revealed by You, the Preceptor of all !(48)
| bow to the Supreme Person (in You), whose vision, that reveals the secret of the Self, can
be, obtained (only) through the Veda and about whose true nature (even) sages — the
foremost of whom is Brahma (the birthless creator), feel bewildered, though striving (to
realize it through Sankhya and Yoga etc.)—(nay) who assumes (presents Himself in) a
character conforming to the conception of all (the various) schools of thought, and whose
light (in the form of the Self) is screened by the body (and other limitations). (49)

Thus ends the eighth discourse in Book Twelve of the great and
glorious Bhagavata-Purana, otherwise known
as the Paramahamsa-Samhita.

अथ नवमोऽध्याय:

Discourse IX

The sage Markandeya witnesses the Lord's Maya
सूत उवाच
संस्तुतो भगवानित्थं मार्कण्डेयेन धीमता।नारायणो नरसख: sta आह WEI १ ।
Sita began again: Duly extolledin the aforesaidwords by the talented sage Markandeya,

Lord Narayana, accompanied by Nara, felt (highly) pleased and spoke to that jewel among
the Bhrgus (as follows). (1)

श्रीभगवानुवाच .
भो भो ब्रह्मर्षिवर्यासि fag आत्मसमाधिना । मयि भक्त्यानपायिन्या तप:स्वाध्यायसंयमै: । २ ।
वयं ते परितुष्ठा: स्म त्वदबृहद्वरतचर्यया । वरं प्रतीच्छ भद्रं a वरदेशादभीप्सितम् 3 |
The glorious Lord replied : Hullo ! you have attained perfection, O jewel among the

Brahmana seers ! through concentration of mind, through unceasing devotion to Me as well
as through asceticism, study of the Vedas and self-control. (2) We are highly pleased with
