460 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 82

न ११११ २२ १ ७ ७ १ १७ २ १ १७ १ १० ७ २ १ २१ १ १ ७ २ १ ERED १७ २4२ ५७ १9 १ ७ ७५ १ 4१ २ ० १७ DDAEDE SERED EH EEDD DERE EEE ERED

wife enjoyed the worldly pleasures sparingly and without attachment, and his devotion
to Sri Krsna grew from more to more. (38)

ma वै देवदेवस्य हरेर्यज्ञपते: प्रभो: । ब्राह्मणा: प्रभवो दैवं न तेभ्यो विद्यते परम्। ३९॥
एवं स fa भगवत्सुहत्तदा ger स्वभृत्यैरजितं पराजितम्।
तद्ध्यानवेगोद्ग्रथितात्मबन्धनस्तद्धाम लेभेऽचिरत सतां गतिम्।४०॥

We ब्रह्मण्यदेवस्य श्रुत्वा ब्रह्मण्यतां नर: । लब्धभावो भगवति कर्मबन्धाद् विमुच्यते। we

इति श्रीमद्भागवते महापुराणे पारमहंस्यां संहितायां दशमस्कन्धे उत्तरार्धे पृथुकोपाख्यानं नायैकाशीतितमोऽध्याय: ॥ ८१॥

(Pariksit!) the almighty God of gods, the Lord of sacrifices, Bhagavan Sri Krsna,
looks upon the Brahmana as His dwn Lord and deity. Therefore, there is no being ( on
earth) greater than the Brahmana. (39) Now, this Brahmana, the friend of the Lord,
realized that, though unconquerable by others, the Lord easily submits to the will of His
devotee. Realizing this, he became absorbed in contemplation on the Lord. His ties of
ignorance were cut asunder by force of this contemplation and before long he attained
the abode of the Lord, the sole resort of saints. (40) (Panksit!) the man who hears this
account which illustrates Bhagavan Sn Krsna’s love for the Brahmanas attains devotion
to the Lord and obtains release from the bondage of Karma. (41)

Thus ends the eighty-first discourse entitled "The story of beaten rice (taken by Sudama as
a present for Sri Krsna),” in the latter half of Book Ten of the great and glorious
Bhagavata-Purana, otherwise known as the Paramahamsa-Samhita.

Tire

अथ द्व्यशीतितमोऽध्याय:
Discourse LXXXIl
Meeting of the Vrsnis with the Gopas and Gopis (of Vrndavana)
श्रीशुक उवाच

अथैकदा द्वारवत्यां aad रामकृष्णयो: । सूर्योपराग: सुमहानासीत् कल्पक्षये यथा।१।

तं ज्ञात्वा मनुजा राजन् पुरस्तादेव सर्वत: । समन्तपञ्चकं at ययु: श्रेयोविधित्सया। २।

नि:क्षत्रियां we कुर्वन् राम: शस्त्रभृतां वर: । नृपाणां रुधिरौघेण यत्र चक्रे महाहृदान्। ३

ईजे च भगवान् रामो यत्रास्पृष्ठोऽपि कर्मणा i लोकस्य ग्राहयन्रीशो यथान्योऽघापनुत्तवे । ४।
Sri Suka began again: Pariksit, once upon a time when Bhagavan Sri Krsna and
Sri Balarama were (thus) residing in Dwaraka, there occurred a total eclipse of the sun,
which (ordinarily) occurs at the time of universal destruction. (1) Having come to know
of it (from astrologers) beforehand, people thronged from all sides to the sacred spot
called Samanta-paficaka (Kuruksetra) with the object of earning merit or blessed-
ness. (2) That is the place where, while exterminating the Ksatriyas on earth, Paragurama,
the foremost warrior (of his time), caused five big tanks to be filled with their blood.(3)
The almighty Lord Paragurama also performed a sacrifice there for the expiation of sin.

Though ever untouched by good or evil Karma, He did it like an ordinary mortal in order
to set an example before the world. (4)

महत्यां तीर्थयात्रायां त्तत्रागन् भारती: प्रजा: । वृष्णयश्च तथाक्रूरवसुदेवाहुकादय: | ५॥
