Dis. 18] * BOOK THREE - 217

Se ir etree etre er a a BR HH He Rw a eRe RR a HE RE RB Hs BRE ROMY जो व

(the demon) waxed violently angry like a serpent which is being played with. (13) Hissing
indignantly with all his senses shaken by wrath, the Daitya quickly sprang upon Sri Hari and
dealt Him a blow with his mace. (14) The Lord, however, dodged the violent blow of the mace
aimed at His breast by the enemy by moving aside a little, just as an accomplished Yogi
would elude death. (15) Sri Hari now waxed angry and rushed to meet the demon, who,
taking up his mace again, began repeatedly to brandish it, biting his lips in rage. (16) And
then with His mace the Lord struck the enemy on his right eyebrow; but skilled as he was
(in a fight with maces), O gentle Vidura, he intercepted it with his own mace. (17) In this way
Haryaksa (a synonym of Hiranyaksa) and Sri Hari struck each other with their huge maces
in great rage, each seeking his own victory. (18) There was a keen rivalry between the two
combatants, both of whom had sustainedinjuries on their body from the blows of each other's
pointed mace and grew more and more enraged at the smell of blood on their person. In their
eagerness to win, they were performing manoeuvres of various kinds; and their contest
presented the sight of an encounter between a pair of bulls for the sake of a cow. (19)
Brahma, surrounded by sages (Marici and others), came (there) to witness the combat, O
Vidura (a descendant of Kuru), of Hiranyaksa (son of Diti) and the Supreme Spirit—who had
assumed the semblance of a boar by dint of His Maya (deluding potency) and who
represents the various Yajnas (sacrifices) on His person—both of whom bore enmity to each
other for Earth's sake. (20) When the worshipful Brahma, who was followed by thousands
of sages and seers, saw that Hiranyaksa (son of Diti) was full of manliness and devoid offear,
had returned the blows of the Lord and possessed irresistible prowess, he spoke to Lord
Narayana, the earliest Boar (as follows): (21)

re

ब्रह्मोवाच
एष ते देव देवानामङ्घिमूलमुपेयुषाम्। विप्राणां सौरभेयीणां भूतानामप्यनागसाम् । २२।
आगस्कृद्धयकृद्दुष्कृदस्मद्राद्भवरोऽसुर: । अन्वेषन्नप्रतिरथो लोकानटति कण्टक: 1231

मैनं मायाविनं दृप्तं निरङ्कुशमसत्तमम्।आक्रीड बालवद्देव यथाऽऽरीविषमुत्थितम् 12% |

न यावदेष वर्धेत स्वां वेलां प्राप्य दारुण: । स्वां देव मायामास्थाय तावज्जह्यघमच्युत 124!

Ta घोरतमा सन्ध्या लोकच्छम्बट्करी प्रभो । उपसर्पति सर्वात्मन् सुराणां जयमावह ।२६॥

अधुनैषोऽभिजिन्नाम योगो मौहूर्तिको ह्यगात् । शिवाय aed सुहृदामाशु निस्तर दुस्तरम् ।२७॥

दिष्ट्या त्वां विहितं मृत्युमयमासादित: स्वयम् । विक्रम्यैनं Ae हत्वा लोकानाधेहि हार्मणि ci
Brahma said : Having secureda boon from me, my lord, this demonis proving aconstant
annoyance (to the universe) and is not only trespassing against but causing fear and doing
injury to the gods, that have sought protection in Your feet, as well as to the Brahmanas, the
cows and other innocent beings and, having no rival to contend with him, goes about the
spheres in search of one. (22-23) Play not with him, as a child may with an enraged
serpent—him who is skilled in conjuring tricks, arrogant, self-willed and most wicked. (24)
Presiding over Your own Maya (wondertul divine energy), slay this sinful demon, O immortal
Lord, before he grows formidable with the approach of an hour which is favourable to
him. (25) The most dreadful hour of twilight, which is ruinous to the worla, my lord, is fast
approaching, O Soul of the universe. Be pleased, therefore, to bring victory to the gods (by
getting rid of this pestilence). (26) The auspicious period, known by the name of Abhijit (so
opportune for victory), which commenced at midday, has now all but passed. Therefore, in
the interest of us, Your friends, pray, dispose of this formidable foe quickly. (27) This fellow has,
luckily enough for us, come of his own accord to You, his death, ordained (by Yourself).
