472 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 84

SPRR NN SN NN KLE NHK HENNA OHSS HHO RE AERA ROKER ORE RT HERRERA EEN NOE HOON EM ORT क्र ४ RNG श8 ROE

taking birth has been fully realized; (for) we have been honoured with a visit from the great
Masters of Yoga, whose sight cannot be easily obtained even by the gods. (9) How can
people whose austerities are poor, and who see God cabined in a particular image (only),
gain (the rare privilege of) your sight and touch, of inquiring about your health etc., and of
offering you salutations and worship ? (10) Sacred waters alone do not possess purificatory
virtues, nor do images of clay and stone alone represent the deities. Whereas these purify
aman after one has recourse to them and worshipped them for a long time, holy men purify
by their very sight. (11) The gods presiding over fire, the sun, the moon, the stars, the earth,
water, ether, air, speech and mind, when worshipped, cannot completely wash off our sins,
inasmuch as they promote our sense of diversity; whereas the wise wipe off our sins even
if we serve them for a few minutes, (less than an hour). (12) (O sages and assembled friends)
he who looks upon His contemptuous body (which is virtually dead), constituted of the three
elements of wind, bile and phlegm as the self, those related to the body (wife etc.) as one's
own and images of clay, stone or wood as his objects of worship, and who regards the sacred
waters alone as purifying, and never so the men of wisdom, is indeed, a donkey among cows
(in human form). (13)

श्रीगुक उवाच
frre भगवत: कृष्णस्याकुण्ठमेधस: | वचो दुरन्वयं विप्रास्तूष्णीमासन् भ्रमद्धिय: ।१४॥
fer faqea मुनय ईश्वरस्थेशितव्यताम्। जनसङ्ग्रह इत्यूचु: स्मयन्तस्तं जगद्गुरुम् । १५1
SriSuka resumed : (Pariksit,) Bhagavan Sri Krsnais the possessor of unfailing wisdom.
Hearing the above words from Hislips, the sages kept silent. Unable to make out the meaning
of those mysterious words, they got confounded. (14) After long consideration they came to
the conclusion that though the (Supreme) Lord of the universe, He was behaving like an

ordinary man subject to the law of Karma justin order to teach a lesson to the world. Realizing
this, they smiled and addressed Sri Krsna (the supreme Teacher of the world) as follows. (15)

मुनय ऊचु:

यन्मायया तत्त्वविदुत्तमा वयं विमोहिता विश्वसृजामधीश्वरा: ।

यदीशितव्यायति ye gem अहो fafa भगवद्विचेष्टितम् ।१६॥

अनीह We बहुधैक आत्मना सृजत्यवत्यन्ति न wad यथा ।

wife भूमिर्बहुनामरूपिणी अहो विभूम्नश्चरितॆ विडम्बनम् । १७।

अथापि ae स्वजनाभिगुप्तये बिभर्षि aa खलनिग्रहाय च ।

स्वलीलया वेदपथं aad वर्णाश्रमात्मा पुरुष: परो भवान्।१८॥
wa a हृदयं Ws तप:स्वाध्यायसंयमै: | यत्रोपलब्धं we व्यक्तमव्यक्तं च तत: परम् । १९।
तस्माद् Fag ब्रह्मन् शास्त्रयोनेस्त्वमात्मन: | सभाजयसि सद्धाम तद ब्रह्मण्याग्रणीर्भवान् 1201
aa नो जन्मसाफल्यं विद्यायास्तपसो दृश: । त्वया age agen यदन्त: श्रेयसां पर: ।२१॥
नमस्तस्मै भगवते कृष्णायाकुण्ठमेधसे | स्वयोगमाययाच्छन्नमहिम्ने परमात्मने 1221
न यं विदन्त्यमी भूपा एकारामाश्च वृष्णय: । मायाजवनिकाच्छन्नमात्मानं कालमीश्वरम् 1231
यथा Wa: पुरुष आत्मानं गुणतत्त्वदृकु । नाममात्रेन्द्रियाभातं न वेद रहितं परम् । २४॥
एवं त्वा नाममात्रेषु विषयेद्विन्दियेहया । मायया विभ्रमच्चित्तो न वेद स्मृत्युपप्लवात् 124!
