Dis. 17 ] yve BOOK THREE 211

Sethe Ret ee OKA ESHA TEE ASCH EL HE ATCEL SHR AEC UE SHR CECHRH CHES डी डी NTO AHH TUE AAA THEN AHHH

prostrated themselves before Him; and then, taking leave of Him, they returned extremely
delighted, applauding His divine splendour. (27-28) The Lord then said to His attendants
(Jaya and Vijaya), "Depart (from this piace) but fear not; may all be well (with you). Though
capable of nullifying the Brahmanas'’ curse, | would not do so; on the contrary, it has My
approval. (29) It had already been pronounced by Rama (Laksmi), who was angry with
you when you on a previous occasion stopped Her entry at the door while । was buried
in My Yoganidra (deep Samadhi or trance). (30) Absolved from the sin of insulting the
Brahmanas by. concentrating your thought on Me through anger, you shall return to My
presence not long afterwards." (31) Having thus instructed His gate-keepers, the Lord
entered His Abode, adorned with rows of palaces and possessed of an all-surpassing
splendour. (32) Asa result of the Brahmanas’ curse, which was not easy to escape,
the two attendants of the Lord, the foremost of the gods (inhabitants of Vaikuntha)
lost their splendour and their pride too was gone even as they were about to fall from
the realm of Sri Hari. (33) When they actually began to fall from the reaim of Lord Visnu,
a loud outcry was raised by the occupants of the principal aerial cars, O dear sons. (34)
It is those two principal attendants of Sri Hari that have now entered the powerful seed
of Kasyapa deposited in the womb of Diti. (35) It is by the glory of these twin Asuras
(demons) that your glory has been eclipsed; and (there is no remedy because) it is the
Lord Himself who is keen to do aii this at this juncture. (36) The Lord, whois the controller
of the three Gunas (modes of Prakrti), nay, who is responsible for the creation,
preservation and dissolution of the universe, and whose Yogamaya (wonderful creative
power) cannot be easily understood even by Masters of Yoga—that most ancient Person
alone will come to our rescue. What purpose can be served in this behalf by our
deliberation on the subject ? (37)

Thus ends the sixteenth discourse in Book Three of the great and
glorious Bhagavata-Purana, otherwise known
as the Paramahamsa-Samnhita.

३ CNT १०
PITS EEN Sees

BA सप्तदशोऽध्याय:

Discourse XVII
Birth of HiranyakaSipu and Hiranyaksa and the latter's

conquest of the four quarters

निशम्यात्मभुवा गीतं कारणं शङ्कयोज्झिता: । तत: ad न्यवर्तन्त त्रिदिवाय दिवौकस: 1 १ ।
दितिस्तु भर्तुरादेशादपत्यपरिशङ्किनी | पूर्णे ade साध्वी gt प्रसुषुवे यमो । २ ।
उत्पाता बहवस्तत्र निपेतुर्जायमानयो: । दिवि भुव्यन्तरिक्षॆ च लोकस्योरुभयावहा: । ३ |
सहाचला भुवश्चेलुर्दिश: सर्वा: प्रजज्वलु: | सोल्काश्चाशनय: पेतु:` केतवश्चार्तिहेतव: । ४ |
चवो वायु: सुदु:स्पर्श: फूत्कारानीरयन्मुहु: । उन्मूलयन्नगपतीन्वात्यानीको रजोध्वज: । ५ ।
उद्धसत्तडिदम्भोदघटया नष्टभागणे | व्योम्नि प्रविष्टतमसा न स्म व्यादृश्यते पदम्। ६ ।
