624 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 23

RFR ७२७ ७२ ० २१ १७७ ५ ७५२० ७ २०9 ७7२.8 # # 99 १.% ११9 ^#^^# 999 #>^#^ # # 9^ # #^४ ^^# 2 ##9# 8१६9 79 2 4१ 94 9१2

of the sage Brhaspati, who isseally able to compose his mind agitated by the abusive words
uttered by a wicked fellow. (2) A manis not so (severely) pained when pierced by shafts that
have deeply entered his vital parts as indeed by the shaft-like pungent words of the wicked,
that wrankle in his heart and torment him. (3) In this connection the wise narrate, O Uddhava,
a most sacred story (of his despondency) told by some mendicant, who was subjected to
indignity by wicked people and (yet) remained full of composure, recongnizing it to be the
consequence of his own (evil) deeds. | shall (presently) relate it to you; please hear it with
a fully concentrated mind. (4-5)

अवन्तिषु द्विज: कश्चिदासीदाढ्यतम: श्रिया । वार्तावृत्ति: कदर्यस्तु कामी लुब्धोऽतिकोपन: 1 ६ |
ज्ञातयोऽतिथयस्तस्य वाङ्मात्रेणापि नार्चिता: । शून्यावसथ आत्मापि काले कामैरनर्चित: । ७ ।
दु:शीलस्य कदर्यस्य द्गुह्यन्ते पुत्रबान्धवा: | दारा दुहितरो भृत्या विषण्णा नाचरन् प्रियम् । ८ |
waa यक्षवित्तस्य च्युतस्योभयलोकत:। धर्मकामविहीनस्य चुक्रुधु: पञ्चभागिन: । ९ |
तदवध्यानविस्रस्तपुण्यस्कन्धस्य afte | अर्थोऽप्यगच्छन्निधनं बह्वायासपरिश्रम: । १०॥
ज्ञातयो जगृहु: किञ्चित् किञ्चिद् दस्यव aga । दैवत: कालत: किञ्चिद् ब्रह्मबन्धोर्नृपार्थिवात् । ११॥
a एवं द्रविणे नष्टे धर्मकामविवर्जित: । उपेक्षितश्च स्वजनैश्चिन्तामाप दुरत्ययाम् ।१२॥
wad ध्यायतो दीर्घं नष्टरायस्तपस्विन: | खिद्यतो बाष्पकण्ठस्य निर्वॆद: सुमहानभूत् ।१३॥

In the principality of Avanti (Malwa) there lived a certain Brahmana richly endowed with
wealth, though parsimonious’, lascivious, greedy and most irascible, and pursued the
vocation of agriculture and trade. (6) Neither relatives nor guests were (ever) honoured by
him even with bare words. (Nay,) living in a house devoid of piety and ritual acts, even his
own person was never gratified with pleasures when there was time for it. (7) The relations
and servants, (nay, even) the wife and sons as well as the daughters of that ill-behaved and
stingy fellow felt disgusted (with him) and not only did not do what was liked by him but
(actually) bore ill-will to him. (8) The five claimants (viz., the gods, the manes, the subhuman
species, human beings, i.e., newcomers and the Brahmana seers, to whom offerings are
made during the five great sacrifices) got angry at that Brahmana, who (simply) guarded his
wealth like a Yaksa (a species of demigods) as aforesaid, was destitute of piety and
enjoyment (both) and (as such) had fallen from this world as well as from the next. (9) Even
the wealth—that had cost him so much (fruitless) exertion through pursuits (like agriculture)
which entailed untold hardships—of that Brahmana, whose (residual) stock of merit had run
out through his neglect of the said (five) claimants, 0 liberal-minded Uddhava, met with
destruction. (10) The relations seized a portion of the wealth of that unworthy Brahmana,
robbers laid their hands on arkgher, © Uddhava: while the rest was lost through the agency
of Providence (in the shape offire etc., time, the king and other human beings. (11) His wealth
having been lost in the aforesaid manner, the Brahmana, who was destitute of (all) piety and
enjoyment and was neglected by his own people, gave way to anxiety that was hard to
overcome. (12) A very great despondency overtook the Brahmana, who, having lost his
wealth, had been reduced to a pitiable condition and had thus long been brooding over his
lot and sorrowing with his throat choked with tears. (13)

ee
* A Kadarya (miser) has been delined in a Smrii text as follows:—
आत्मान धर्मकृत्यं च पुत्रदारांश्च पीडयन् । देवतातिथिभूत्याँश्च स aed इति स्मृत: ॥
“He is spoken of as a miser, who allows his own self (body), sons and wife, 60॥6ऽ guests and servents end (aven) hi.
sacred duttes to suffer (on eccoun! of his slinginess)."
