Dis. 5] BOOK EIGHT 757
EER ALE RCP PELESLE LESSER RECESS CS CLARE ESE LLLG LPL A eee eee ee ah ere
SHHAATSAAULENT AEE DLES ENE TERT OCC ES मा शामा ACEC L ELA Ahhh rere Ree eRENeMENEEEEEE nee

retribution); and from whose eyelashes came forth Kala (the Time-Spirit). (42) The learned
declare the (five gross) elements, Time, destiny(of the Jivas), the (three) modes of Prakrti
(viz., Sattva, Rajas and Tamas) and the material universe—which (being products of Maya)
are not only difficult to comprehend but are (totally) disregarded by the wise—as brought
about by His Yogamaya (wonderful creative energy). May that Lord possessed of boundless
power be favourably disposed towards us. (43) (My) salutation be to Him in whom (all)
energies (in the shape of the three Gunas—Sattva, Rajas and Tamas) have become
dormant, whose mind (ever) remains sated with the enjoyment of supreme Bliss (which is
His very nature), who never gets attached to the (aforesaid three) Gunas, created by Maya,
through His faculties (of sight etc.), and whose role is (thus) similar to that of the air (which,
though moving everywhere, does not get attached anywhere). (44)

स त्वं नो दर्श्ययात्मानमस्मत्करणगोचरम्। प्रपन्नानां दिदृक्षूणां सस्मितं ते मुखाम्बुजम् ॥४५॥

तैस्तै: VGA Wa: काले काले स्वयं विभो । कर्म दुर्विषहं aa भगवांस्तत् करोति fives

क्लेशभूर्यल्पसाराणि कर्माणि विफलानि वा । देहिनां विषयार्तानां न तथैवार्पितं त्वयि ive

नावम: कर्मकल्पोऽपि विफलायेश्वरार्पित: | कल्पते पुरुषस्यैष स ह्यात्मा दयितो हित: । ४८1

यथा हि स्कन्धशाखानां तरोर्मूलावसेचनम्। wees fot: सर्वेषामात्मनश्च हि ।४९॥

नमस्तुभ्यमनन्ताय दुर्वितर्क्यत्मकर्मणे | निर्गुणाय गुणेशाय सत्त्वस्थाय च साम्प्रतम् । ५०॥

इति श्रीमद्भागवते महापुराणे पारमहंस्यां संहितायामष्टमस्कन्धेऽमृतमथने पञ्चमोऽध्याय: ।५।

Such as You are, be pleased to reveal Yourself— in such a way as to come within the
range of our senses (of perception)— to us, that have resorted to You (for protection) and
are eager to behold Your smiling lotus-like countenance.(45) For, through diverse forms
assumed at His own sweet will from time to time, O Lord, the Almighty Himself (in You) does
that work which is beyond our capacity. (46) The actions of embodied souls who are attached
to the pleasures of sense involve much hardship and are of little consequence. Nay, (more
often than not) they prove (altogether) futile. Action (however) which has been resigned to
You is never like that (It involves little exertion, yields very substantial results and is never
futile). (47) Even a poor semblance of action resigned to God (Yourself) can never lead to
frustration; for, being the (very) Self of the Jiva, that (celebrated) Lord is beloved of and
friendly to the latter. (Anything resigned to a beloved friend should never cause
disappointment).(48) Even as watering the roots ofa tree is nourishing its trunk and boughs
as well), So indeed to propitiate Lord Visnu is to propitiate all as well as oneself. (49) Hail to
You, the infinite Lord, whose spontaneous movements are hard to comprehend, who, while
transcending the (three) Gunas (modes of Prakrti), are their Ruler (too) and are now
established in Sattva (the quality of goodness, essential for the preservation of the
world).(50)

Thus ends the fifth discourse, forming part of the story relating to the
churning of the ocean for the sake of nectar, in Book Eight
of the great and glorious Bhagavata-Purana, otherwise
known as the Paramahamsa-Samhita.

SEE TTT
DOD ENB PSE OD OD
