392 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 22

SESS OOK TSUN See ees oeNKVe eee ees kt revere HEEKCCKGOCVK SLE EAE ANTHEA THN HHeH eee eH Hee

rose to the heavens, while everyone stood gazing on them. (48) Vena's son, the foremost
among exalted souls, who was firmly established in the Self through concentration of mind
as a result of the instruction received from them in the science of the Spirit, regarded
himself as one who had realized all his ambitions (in life). (49) He performed (all) his duties
at the proper time, at the proper place and in the proper way to the best of his ability and
resources as an offering to God. (50) Resigning the fruit (of his actions) to God with a
concentrated mind, and regarding himself as a witness of (all) actions and beyond (the
realm of ) Prakrti, he remained unattached (to everything). (51) While remaining a
householder and endowed with imperial fortune, he was free from egotism and conceived
no attachment for the objects of sense, even as the sun, though shining on bog etc., does
not get daubed with it. (52)

एत्रमध्यात्मयोगेन कर्माण्यनुसमाचरन् | पुत्रानुत्पादयामास पञ्चार्चिष्यात्मसम्मतान् 143 |
विजिताश्वं धूम्रकेशं हर्यश्चं द्रविणं वृकम्। adel लोकपालानां दधारैक: पृथुर्गुणान् । ५४॥
गोपीथाय जगत्सृष्टे: काले स्वे स्वेऽच्युतात्मक: | मनोवाग्वृत्तिभि: सौम्यैर्गुणे: संरञ्जयन् प्रजा: । ५५॥
राजेत्यधान्नामधेयं सोमराज इवापर: । सूर्यवद्विसृजन् गृह्णन् प्रतपंश्च yal वसु ।५६॥

स्तेजसे Fs 3a दुर्जय: । तितिक्षया धरित्रीव द्योरिवाभीष्टदो zum । ५७॥
adit स्म यथाकामं wi ga तर्पयन्।समुद्र इव दुर्बोध: सत्त्वेनाचलराडिव । ५८।

धर्मराडिवि शिक्षायामाश्चर्ये हिमवानिव । कुबेर इव reed गुप्तार्थो वरुणो यथा ue
मातारिश्चैव सर्वात्मा बलेन सहसौजसा । अविषह्यतया देवो भगवान् भूतराङिवि igo!
ee इव सोन्दर्ये मनस्वी मृगराडिव । वात्सल्ये मनुवन्नृणां प्रभुत्वे भगवानज: । ६१।
बृहस्पतिर्ब्रह्मवादे आत्मवत्तवे wa हरि: । भक्त्या गोगुरुविप्रेषु विष्लक्सेनानुवर्तिषु ।
ह्रिया प्रश्रयशीलाभ्यामात्मतुल्य: पराद्यमे । ६२।
कीर्त्यर्ध्वगीतया पुम्भिस्रैलोक्ये तत्र तत्र ह। प्रविष्ट: wiry स्रीणां राम: सतामिव ical
इति श्रीमद्धागवते महापुराणे पारमहंस्यां संहितायां चतुर्थस्कन्धे पृथुचरिति द्वाविंशोऽध्याय: 122
Thus duly performing (his) duties at the proper place and time with his mind fixed on
the Self, the king begot through (his consort) Arci five sons who came up to his ideals—
Vijitaswa, DhOmrakesa, Haryaksa, Dravina and Vrka. A part manifestation of the immortal
Lord, Prthu alone manifested at the proper time (special!) qualities of all the regional gods
for the protection of the created beings of the (whole) world. Delighting the people with his
mind, speech and conduct as well as by his charming virtues, he bore the (significant) title
of Raja (he who delights) like another moon-god (who is known by the name of king
Soma because of his delighting all created beings with his cool rays). Even as the sun drains
(in summer) the moisture of the earth, and releases it (during the rains) and radiates heat,
so he drew the wealth of the earth (by way of land revenue and other taxes), (freely)
distributed it (among the people during famines etc.) and exercised his authority (over the
people). (53—56) He was formidable like fire in splendour and hard to conquer like the great
Indra (the lord of paradise), vied with the earth in forbearance, and with the heaven in
bestowing on men whatever they sought.(57) Like the god of rain he showered blessings on
the people according to their desire, (thereby) gratifying (them all). Like the ocean he was
too deep to be understood and in firmness he was a compeer of Mounts Sumeru (the king
of mountains). (58) In meting out punishment he was asjust as Yama (the god of retribution);
in his marvellous acquisitions he resembled the Himalaya mountain. Like Kubera (the god
of wealth) he was rich in treasures, and like Varuna (the god of water) he had his wealth well-

