606 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA ( Dis. 11

SHORE ECKA RHA LAA AE ARORA EACH व व व HATERS LETHE CHET HEN ER HHHIR AHH OHHH eH

entreaty seeking its fulfilment from a miser. (19) Surely this thunderbolt of yours, O Indra, has
been whetted by the energy of SriHarias well as by the asceticism of the sage Dadhici. Prompted
by Lord Visnu, get rid of your enemy (myself) with the selfsame weapon; (for) victory, fortune and
virtues lean to that side alone on which stands Sri Hari. (20) Concentrating my mind on the lotus-
feet of Lord Sankarsana (even) as He has instructed me, and with the cords of attachmentto the
pleasures of sense cut asunder by the force of your thunderbolt, and having (thus) cast off the
body, | shall attain to the destiny of a sage given to contemplation. (21) The Lord does not of
course bestow on His own people, exclusively devoted to Him, the riches that are available in
heaven (the higher worlds), on earth or in the subterranean regions, and from which follow (as
a matter of course) hatred, fear, mental anguish, arrogance, discord, suffering and toil. (22) Our
Master (on the other hand), O Indra, frustrates the efforts of His servant for the attainment of the
three objects of human pursuit (viz., religious merit, worldly riches and sensuous enjoyment).
From such frustration is to be inferred the grace of the Lord, which is the lot of (only) those who
have nothing (to call their own) and is difficult to attain for others. (23)

we oR wa पादैकमूलदासानुदासो भवितास्मि भूय: ।
मन: स्मरेतासुपतेर्गुणांस्ते गृणीत वाक कर्म HT: ।२४॥
न नाकपृष्ठं न च uae न सार्वभौमं न रसाधिपत्यम्।
न योगसिद्धीरपुनर्भवं वा समञ्जस त्वा fam काङ्खे । २५॥
अजातपक्षा sa मातरं WM: RR यथा aa: क्षुधार्ता: |
fa प्रियेव व्युषितं विषण्णा मनोऽरविन्दाक्ष दिदृक्षते त्वाम् । २६॥
मर्म।त्तमरेंलोकजनैषु Tei संसारचक्रे Wad: स्वकर्मभि: ।
त्वन्माययाऽऽत्मात्मजदारगेहेष्नासक्तचित्तस्य न नाथ FATT, | Vo |
(Turning mentally towards the Lord,) May ।, O Hari, be born again (after death) as a
servant of those devotees who have solely taken refuge in Your (lotus) feet. Let my mind
ponder and tongue celebrate the excellences of the Lord of my life (Yourself) andlet my body
do Your service (alone). (24) O Storehouse of all blessedness and grace ! without You |
crave neither the abode of Dhruva (which is placed above Indra's paradise) nor even the
realm of Brahma (the highest heaven) nor the sovereignty of the entire globe nor the lordship
of the subterranean regions nor the (superhuman) powers (Anima and so on) attained
through Yoga nor Liberation (freedom from rebirth). (25) Even as unfledged birds (leftbehind
in their nest) are eager to see the mother bird, young calves tormented with hunger (and kept
away from the mother cow) seek the milk (of its udders) and a beioved wife, depressed in
spirits (due to desolation) longs to see her beloved husband, absent from home, my mind,
O lotus-eyed one, is keen to behold You. (26) Let there be my friendship with the devotees
of the Lord of excellent renown, revolving as | do in the whirligig of transmigration due to

my own deeds. And let him whose mindis attached through Your Maya (deluding potency),
to his body, offspring, wife and home, O Lord, have no friendship with me. (27)

Thus ends the eleventh discourse entitled "Vrtra's teaching to Indra,”
in Book Six of the great and glorious Bhagavata-Purana,
otherwise known as the Paramahamsa-Samnhita.

SEP PETS
CDOT SSE REE OD OD

