20 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA Dis. 5

TRUE HEHE ESE RE LST EEO RELCE SEED HORSE SH SACP SEHH SETHE ER HECHT ALEKS RUA eHeReKEReoKKe EH

अम्बरीष उवाच

त्वमग्निर्भगवान् सूर्यस्त्वं सोमो ज्योतिषां पति: । त्वमापस्त्वं faftetin वायुर्मात्रेन्द्रयाणि च । ३ ।
सुदर्शन नमस्तुभ्यं सहस्राराच्युतप्रिय । सर्वास्त्रघातिन् विप्राय स्वस्ति भूया इडस्यते । ४ ।
त्वं धर्मस्त्वमृतं सत्यं त्वं यज्ञोऽखिलयज्ञभुक् । त्वं लोकपाल: सर्वात्मा त्वं तेज: पौरुषं परम् । ५ ।

नम: सुनाभाखिलधर्मसेतवे ह्यधर्मशीलासुरधूमकेतवे ।

त्रैलोक्यगोपाय विशुद्धवर्चसे मनोजवायाद्धुतकर्मणे गृणे । ६ ।

wine धर्ममयेन tad तम: segs धृतो महात्मनाम्।

दुरत्ययस्ते महिमा गिरां पते त्वद्रूपमेतत् सदसत् परावरम्। ७ ।

यदा विसृष्टस्त्वमनञ्जनेन oa बलं प्रविष्टोऽजित दैत्यदानवम्।

बाहूदरोर्वङ्ध्रिश्ञिरोधराणि वृक्णन्नजस्रं प्रधने विराजसे । ८ 1

a a जगत्राण खलप्रह्मणये निरूपित: सर्वसहो गदाभृता ।

`विप्रस्य चास्मत्कुलदॆवहेतवे विधेहि भद्रं तदनुग्रहो हि न: । ९ ।
यद्यस्ति दत्तमिष्टं वा स्वधर्मो वा स्वनुष्ठित: | कुलं नो faved चेद fish भवतु विज्वर: 1201
यदि नो भगवान् sia एक: सर्वगुणाश्रय: । सर्वभूतात्मभावेन द्विजो भवतु विज्वर: 1221

Ambarisa prayed : You are Agni (the god of fire) and the glorious sun-god; You are
Soma (the moon-god), the lord of the (other) luminaries (lunar mansions). You are water,
You are the earth and the sky, the air, the (five) objects of senses (viz., sound, touch, sight,
taste and smell) and the senses (themselves). (3) Hail to You, O Sudarsgana, endowed with
a thousand spokes and beloved of the immortal Lord! O Destroyer of all (other) missiles,
may You be propitious to the Brahmans (the sage Durvasa), O Protector of the earth ! (4)
You are righteousness; You are truthful and polite speech as well as the faculty of regarding
all with the same eye; You are the Deity presiding over (all) sacrificial performances as well
as the Enjoyer of all sacrifices. You are the Protector of the worlds and the Soul of the
universe; (nay,) You are the transcendent effulgence of the supreme Person. (5) (Altogether
unable to glorify You,) 0 Sunabha (a discus with a beautiful nave), | simply address the
exclamation "Hail" to You, the Upholder of all virtues, a veritable fire to destroy demons given
to unrighteousness, the protector of (all) the three worlds, possessed of purest effulgence,
quick as thought and credited with marvellous deeds. (6) By Your splendour, consisting of
righteousness, the darkness (obscuring the vision) of great souls is dispelled and their light
preserved. (Nay,) this (entire) creation, (both) manifest and unmanifest, high and low, is
illuminated by You (in the form of the sun, the moon and soon). Unfathomable is Your glory,
O Ruler of speech ! (7) When, hurled by the Lord, who is (wholly) untainted (by ignorance
etc.), You actually enter the force of the Daityas and the Danavas, O invincible One, You
shine brightly in battle while unceasingly lopping off their arms, trunks, thighs, feet and
necks. (8) As such You, O Shield of the world, have been detailed by Lord visnu (the Wielder
ofamace) for the extermination of the wicked, capable as You are of resisting all. Therefore,
in order to bring good-luck to our race, (kindly) grant safety 10 this Brahmana (the sage
Durvasa); for that would be an act of grace to us (in that it would save us from the sin of
being an instrument in the death of a Brahmana). (9) If gift was (ever) made (by us) ora
sacrifice (duly) performed or our allotted duty satisfactorily performed, and if our race has
looked upon the Brahmana as a deity, let the Brahmana be relieved of his distress (as a
reward for such a gift, sacrifice or the due performance of a duty). (10) (Nay,) ifthe Lord, (who
is) the one abode of all excellences, is pleased with us by virtue of our looking on all living

