Dis. 3] _ BOOK NINE i

उत्तानबर्हिरानर्तो भूरिषेण इति त्रय: । शयतिरभवन् पुत्रा आनर्तांद्रेवतौऽभवत्।२७।
सोऽन्त:समुद्रे नगरीं विनिर्माय कुदस्थलीम्।आस्थितोऽभुङ्क्त विषयानानर्तादीनरिन्दम 1२८1
तस्य पुत्रशतं जज्ञे ककुद्मिज्येष्ठमुत्तमम्। ककुद्मी रेव्तीं कन्यां स्वामादाय fay गत: ।२९॥
weet परिप्रष्टुं ब्रह्मलोकमपावृतम्। आवर्तमाने गान्धर्वे स्थितोऽलब्धक्षण:क्षणम् 1301
qed आद्यमानम्य स्वाभिप्रायं न्यवेदयत्।तच्छुत्वाफ्यान्ब्रह्माप्रहस्पतमुवाचह।इश्ला
अहो राजन् निरुद्धास्ते कालेन हृदि ये कृता: । तत्पुत्रपौत्रनप्तृणां गोत्राणि च न शृण्महे । ३२।
कालोऽभियातस्रिणवचतुर्युगविकल्पित: । तद् Tes देवदेवांशो बलदेवो महाबल: 1331
कन्यारत्नमिदं राजन् नररत्नाय देहि भो:। get भारावताराय भगवान् भूतभावन: ।३४।
wade निजांशेन पुण्यश्रवणकीर्तन: । इत्यादिष्टोऽभिवन्द्याजं नृप: स्वपुरमागत: |
BRR पुण्यजनत्रासाद् भ्रातृभिर्दिक्ष्ववस्थितै: 1341
सुतां दत्त्वानवद्याङ्गं बलाय बलशालिने। बदर्चाख्यं गतो राजा तप्तुं नारायणाश्रमम् । ३६1
इति श्रीमद्भागवते महापुराणे पारमहंस्यां संहितायां नवमस्कन्धे तृतोयोऽध्याय: ।३।

Uttanabarhi, Anarta and Bhirisena—these were the three sons of Saryati; from (the loins
of) Anarta sprang up Revata. (27) Havingbulltacity called Kusasthali (Dwaraka), in the heart
of the ocean, and ensconced in it, the latter ruled the Anarta (the modern Gujarat) and other
territories, O subduer of enemies ! (28) A hundred excellent sons, of whom Kakudmi was the
eldest, were born of Revata. Taking his daughter, Revati (with him) Kakudmi went to
Brahmaloka (the highest heaven), which is uncovered by the sheaths of Rajas (passion) and
Tamas (ignorance), in order to ask Brahma (the highest ruler of this material world) about
a (suitable) match for the girl. As (however) music was going on (there), Kakudmi failed to
get an opportune moment (to broach the matter) and tarried a while. (29-30) At the end of
the performance he bowed low to Brahma (the first created being) and spoke out his mind
(to the latter). Hearing his submission, the glorious Brahma (the creator) heartily laughed and
spoke tohim as follows:—(31) “Oh, (dear) king, whoever might have been thought of (by you
when you placed your foot here) have (all) been swept off by Time. We hear no more even
of the races of their sons, grandsons and great grandsons. (32) Time computed at (the figure
of) thrice nine (twenty-seven) revolutions of (all) the four Yugas (Satya, Treta, Dwapara and
Kali) has (since) rolled by. Therefore, go; there is (now) the mighty Baladeva, a part
manifestation of the supreme Deity. (33) Give away this jewel of a girl, O Kakudmi, to that
jewel among men. For removing the burden of the earth, the almighty Lord, the Protector of
created beings, the very hearing and chanting of whose glories and names is sanctifying,
has (Himself) descended (on earth) alongwith His (aforesaid) part manifestation (Lord
Balarama)." Thus instructed by and bowing to Brahma (the birthless one), the king
(Kakudmi) returned to his capita! (Kugasthali), deserted (already) for fear of Yaksas by his
brothers, staying here and there (in various quarters). (34-35) Giving away his daughter
(Revat) of faultless limbs to the powerful Balarama, the king retired to the hermitage of the
(divine) sage Narayana, known by the name of Badarikasrama, in order to practise
austerities. (36) ॥

Thus ends the third discourse, in Book Nine of the great and glorious
Bhagavata-Purana, otherwise known as the
Paramaharhsa-Samnita.

Pek oe न
PSR Sees
