Dis. 12} BOOK ELEVEN 569

RAINE EO क्र TORO TOTO EE स क शाशा EUR OIRO EI IIE Et Ee ४7४५ भ् मम न

and intellection and self-identification with the body etc. (the function of the ego), permeating
things (the function of Prakrti) and the entire range of objective existence (consisting of the
Indriyas, the modifications of Rajas, the deities presiding over them, the modifications of
Sattva, and the five gross elements, the modifications of Tamas) are My manifestations. (19)
This God (the, life-giver of all) is indeed one and unmanifest (in the beginning); for He is the
first to become the support of the three Gunas and the source of the lotus of the universe.
Having by force of time purposively embraced His potency (in the form of Maya), He appears
manifold as it were (even) as, having found a (suitable) soil, seeds assume diverse shapes
(in the form of trees etc.). (20) This universe is in no way other than God, in whom it stands
woven warp and woof like a piece of cloth, which owes its existence to the expanse of
threads. (Just as threads exist even independently of the cloth, but not so the cloth, the
universe owes its existence to God but God exists even independently of the universe.) This
tree of mundane existence has no beginning, is characterized by activity and puts forth
flowers and fruits (in the shape of enjoyment and final beatitude). (21) (Virtue and sin—) two
are its seeds, innumerable are its roots (in the shape of cravings), (Sattva, Rajas and
Tamas—.) three are its stalks; five (viz., the five elements) are its main boughs; it yields five
(kinds of) saps (in the shape of the five objects of senses); ten and one are its secondary
branches (in the shape of the ten Indriyas and the mind); it bears (on it) the nest of two birds
(viz., God and the Jiva, the individual soul); three are the layers of its bark (in the shape of
the three humours of the body, viz., wind, bile and phlegm); it bears two (varieties of) fruits
(viz., joy and sorrow) and spreads as far as (the sphere of) the sun (there being no
metempsychosis for those who have penetrated beyond the sphere of the sun). (22) Full of
carnal desires (the vulture-like) men of the world partake of its one fruit (viz., misery, even
heavenly enjoyment being ultimately productive of sorrow); while (the swan-like) men of
wisdom dwelling in the woods (cut off from the world) eat the other (viz., the bliss of
immortality). He (alone) knows (the true import of) the Vedas, who comes to realize through
(his) preceptors (worthy of respect) the one God (Myself) appearing in multitudinous forms
by dint of His Maya (in the shape of His will to become many). (23) Having thus subdued
yourself and remaining alert (all the while), cut at the root of your astral body (the
distinguishing appurtenance of a Jiva) with exclusive devotion (fo Me) acquired by sitting at
the feet of a preceptor or by means of the keen-edged axe of wisdom (in the form of Self-
Realization); and, having (thereby) realized the Self, cast off forthwith (even) the weapon
(with which you have rent the veil of ignorance in the form of your Jivahood). (24)

Thus ends the twelfth discourse in Book Eleven of the great and glorious
Bhagavata-Purana, otherwise known as
the Paramahamsa-Samhita.

CBS katt
ru JtES Sires

{565] B.M. Part II—47
