424 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 29

जज ती WEST A TRS तद आजा ताता MRE EN OTT BY ERE SORE ET EE PEE ET ET eR ET RE RE RE NT RE EN BOR eR WE आआ
eee SESE न AT

Afflicted thus by manifold sufferings, brought about by divine agencies or other fellow-
beings as well as those relating to one's own body or mind, and enveloped in ignorance, the
Jiva dwells in the (human) body for a hundred years, bound by the sense of 'I' and ‘mine’.
(Essentially) attributeless, the Jiva ascribes to itself the qualities of the vital airs, the Indriyas
and the mind and remains contemplating on the trivial pleasures of sense and performing
actions of various kinds (in order to secure them). (24-25) (Thus) not realizing the Lord, its
supreme teacher and very self, when the Jiva, that is (really) self-seeing, gets attached to
the modes of Prakriti, itidentifies itself with those qualities and helplessly performs Sattvika,
Rajasika and Tamasika actions and is born (in the various species of life) according to those
actions. (26-27) Sometimes through Sattvika actions it attains to spheres abounding in light;
now (through Rajasika pursuits) it goes to worlds which lead to suffering and involve exertion
through action and now (through Tamasika actions) it is hurled into regions dense with
darkness (ignorance) and sorrow. (28) The deluded Jivais sometimes (born as) amale, now
(as) a female, and now it is (born) without sex either as a god or as a human being or in the
sub-human species, the birth being determined by its past actions and the mode of Prakrti
(predominating in it at the time of death preceding that birth). (29) Just as a poor dog seized
with hunger and wandering from door to door (in quest of food) receives (good beating with)
a cudgel or cooked rice—whatever is ordained by fate—so does the Jiva whose heart is
possessed by (the demon of) desire reaps a welcome or unwelcome destiny, ranging by
paths high and low through the upper (celestial) or the lower (infernal) or the middle
(terrestrial) regions. (30-31)

Ss aynatonia दैवभूतात्महेतुषु । जीवस्य न व्यवच्छेद: स्याच्चेत्तत्तत्प्रतिक्रिया 1321
यथा fe पुरुषो भारं fae गुरुमुद्वहन्। तं स्कन्धेन स आधत्ते तथा सर्वा: प्रतिक्रिया: 1331
नैकान्तत: प्रतीकार: कर्मणां a केवलम्। द्वयं ह्यविद्योपसृतं स्वप्ने wy इवानघ ।३४॥
अर्थे ह्यविद्यमानेऽपि संसृतिर्न निवर्तते। मनसा लिङ्गरूपेण स्वप्ने विचरतो यथा ।३५॥
अथात्मनोऽर्थभूतस्य यतोऽनर्थपरम्परा | संसृतिस्तदव्यवच्छेदो भक्त्या परमया गुरो । ३६॥
वासुदेवे भगवति भक्तियोग: समाहित: । सधीचीनेन वैराग्यं ad च जनयिष्यति iz!
सोऽचिरादेव राजर्षे स्यादच्युतकथाश्रय: । squad: seer नित्यदा स्यादधीयत: ।३८॥
यत्र भागवता राजन् साधवो विशदाहाया: | भगवद्गुणानुकथनश्रवणव्यग्रचेतस: । ३९॥
तस्मिन्महन्मुखरिता मधुभिच्चरित्रपीयूषशेषसरित: परित: स्रवन्ति ।

ता a पिबन्त्यवितृषो qa गाढकर्णैस्तान्न स्पृडान्त्यशानतृड्भयञोकमोहा: ।४०॥
wag fea acre: स्वभावजै: । न करोति हरेर्नूनं कथामृतनिधौ रतिम् ।४१॥
प्रजापतिपति: साक्षाद्भगवान् fife oq: | दक्षादय: प्रजाध्यक्षा नैष्ठिका: सनकादय: ।४२॥
Tifa पुलस्त्य: पुलह: क्रतु: । भृगुर्वसिष्ठं saa मदन्ता ब्रह्मवादिन: ive

अद्यापि वाचस्पतयस्तपोविद्यासमाधिभि: | पश्यन्तोऽपि न परश्यन्ति पङ्यन्तं परमेश्वरम् ey
शब्दब्रह्मणि दुष्पारे चरन्त उरुविस्तरे। मन्त्रलिङ्गैर्व्यवच्छिन्नं भजन्तो न fae: परम् ॥४५॥
wt यमनुगृह्णाति भगवानात्मभावित: | स जहाति मतिं लोके वेदे च परिनिष्ठिताम् ।४६॥

There is no (such thing as absolute) freedom for the Jiva from even one of the three types
of sufferings, viz., those brought about by divine agencies, those inflicted by one's fellow-
beings and those relating to one's own body or mind. Even if there is a remedy in particular
cases, it only proves to be the precursor of another suffering. (32) Just as a man carrying
a heavy load on his head may place it on one of his shoulders (in order to get relieved of the
burden), so are all remedies. (The remedy, employed to counteract an evil, itself proves to
