Dis. 13] BOOK SIX 611

HESCKKEAHEHK EK क्तयक्तै क EHH SKAEHEH EEL HAE EEELELVEHH ARASH EE HHA HEHEHE कौ चन्विन्र ज क उ He
सा न्

राजोवाच
इन्द्रस्यानिर्वृतेर्हेतु श्रोतुमिच्छामि भो मुने । येनासन् सुखिनो देवा हरेर्दु:खं कुतोऽभवत्। ३ |

The king (Pariksit) said : | long to hear (from you). 0 (holy) sage, the cause of Indra’s
unhappiness. Why should there be agony to Indra (the chief of the gods) from something
as a result of which the (other) gods felt gratified ? (3)

श्रीरुक उवाच
वृत्रविक्रमसंविग्ना: सर्वे देवा: सहर्षिभि: । तद्वधायार्थयन्निन्द्रं नैच्छद भीतो बृहद्वधात् । ४ |

Sri Suka replied ; Frightened with the prowess of the demon Vrira all the gods along
with the sages implored Indra to slay him. He, however, did not feel inclined to do so, afraid
as he was of killing a Brahmana. (4)

oa उवाच
स्रीभूजलङ्गुमैरेनो विश्वरूपवधोद्धवम्। विभक्तमनुगृह्णद्भिर्वृत्रहत्यां क्व ARTI ५ |

Indra said ; The sin caused by the slaughter of Viswartipa has (since) been graciously
shared by women, the earth, water and the trees. (But) how shall | (be able to) atone for (the
sin proceeding from) the slaughter of Vrtra? (5)

श्रीगुक उवाच
ऋॠषयस्तदुपाकर्ण्य महेन्द्रमिदमब्रुवन्। याजयिष्याम भद्रं ते हयमेधेन मा स्म भै: । ६ ।
wai पुरुषं परमात्मानमीश्वरम्।इष्टा नारायणं देवं मोक्ष्यसेऽपि जगद्बधात् । |
ब्रह्महा पितृहा गोघ्नो मातृहाऽचार्यहाघवान्। श्वाद:पुल्कसकोवापिङगुद्धयेरन्यस्यकीर्तनात् । ८ ।
तमश्वमेघेन महामखेन श्रद्धान्वितोऽस्माभिरनुष्ठितेन |
हत्वापि सब्रह्म चराचरं त्वं न लिप्यसे किं खलनिग्रहेण । ९ ।

Sri Suka continued : On hearing this the sages replied to the mighty Indra as follows:—
"We shall get you to propitiate the Lord by means of a horse-sacrifice and all will be well with
you. (Pray) too not be afraid. (6) Having worshipped Lord Narayana, the Supreme Spirit, the
Inner Controller and Ruler of the universe, through a horse-sacrifice you will be absolved even
of the sin proceeding from the extermination of the (whole) world. (7) Through the (very)
utterance of His Name the murderer of a Brahmana, the slaughterer of a cow, the slayer of
one's father, mother or preceptor and any other sinner, (nay,) one who eats the flesh of a dog
andeven aman of sinful birth are purified (at once). (8) Propitiating Him with reverence through
the great sacrifice, Aswamedha, which will be performed by us, you will not be touched by sin
even after killing the (entire) mobile and immobile creation including the Brahmana race, much
less by the sin that may follow from the subjugation of an evil-doer (like Vrtra)." (9)

श्रीगुक उवाच

एवं सञ्चोदितो विप्रैर्मरुत्वानहनद्रिपुम्। ब्रह्महत्या हते तस्मिन्नाससाद वृषाकपिम् । १०॥
was: स्मासहत् तापं निर्वृतिर्नामुमाविदात्।ह्रीमन्तं वाच्यतां प्राप्तं सुखयन्त्यपि नो गुणा: । ११।
तां ददर्शानुधावन्तीं चाण्डालीमिव रूपिणीम्। जरया वेपमानाङ्गीं यक्ष्मग्रस्तामसृक्पटाम् । १२॥
विकीर्य पलितान् केशांस्तिष्ठ तिष्ठेति भाषिणीम् । मीनगन्ध्यसुगन्धेन कुर्वतीं मार्गदूषणम् 23 |
wa Tat दिश: सर्वा: सहस्राक्षो विशाम्पते | प्रागुदीचीं fest तूर्णं प्रविष्टो नृप मानसम् । १४॥

स आव्रसत्पुष्करनालतन्तूनलब्धभोगो यदिहाग्निदूत: ।

वर्षाणि साहस्रमलक्षितोऽन्तत a चिन्तयन् ब्रह्मवधाद् विमोक्षम् । १५॥
