Dis. 1 BOOK ONE 75

यीध्रेध्रेगैन्धिंद्र्प्नुर्धंद्ये*घेणैध्रेषींळंर्धञ्चघेग्रेधैथेञ्चंश्वंगेध्रेध्रेध्रेघ्रेष्टी**घे*र्शेध्रेध्रेध्रेर्घक्लीस्निगैभैगेध्रेर्व्यर्धष्टांगैधंध्रेध्रेर्णेषींस्मिँगैघ्रेर्शेगेभेर्भोक्लीश्चेपोर्षोणॆथौध्रेम्मिर्गीषिंग्नीईंळार्पोक्षैष्पैपो

कर्मण्यस्मिन्ननाश्वासे धूमधूम्रात्मनां भवान्। आपाययति. गोविन्दपादपद्मासवं मधु ।१२॥।
तुलयाम लवेनापि न स्वर्गं नापुनर्भवम्।भगवत्सङ्घिसङ्गस्य मर्त्यनां किमुताशिष: 1231
को नाम qae wie महत्तमेकान्तपरायणस्य ।
aw गुणानामगुणस्य जग्मुर्योगेश्वरा ये भवपाद्ममुख्या: ।१४॥
तन्नो भवान् चै भगवत्प्रधानो महत्तमैकान्तपरायणस्य I
eee चरितं fase ET नो वितनोतु fae ।१५॥
स @ महाभागवत्तर परीक्षिदु येनापवर्गांख्यमदभ्रबुद्धि: ।
ज्ञानेन वैयासकिराब्दितेन भेजे खगेन्द्रध्वजपादमूलम् ।१६॥
तन्न: परं पुण्यमसंवृतार्थमाख्यानमत्यद्भुतयोगनिष्ठम् ।
आख्याह्यनन्ताचरितोपपन्नं पारीक्षितं भागवताभिरामम् । १७॥

The sages said : Good Stta, may you live for years without number—you who
recount the untarnished glory of Lord Sri Krsna, which is like nectar to us mortals. (11)
To us, whose body has been soiled by the smoke arising from the sacrificial fires, even
while we are engaged in this sacrificial performance, the fruit of which is uncertain, you
give to drink to our heart's content the sweet and inebriating honey flowing from the lotus-
feet of Lord Govinda (Sri Krsna) ! (12) We cannot compare with a moment's fellowship
of loving devotees of the Lord either heavenly bliss or even final beatitude (the cessation
of birth and death) much less the enjoyments sought after by mortal men. (13) What man
of good taste would feel sated with hearing the story of the Lord, who is the only and
final goal of the greatest saints ? Even masters of Yoga, headed by Lord Siva and the
lotus-born Brahma, have not been able to exhaust the virtues of the Lord, who is beyond
the Gunas of Prakrti. (14) Therefore, O learned Sita, to whom, among us all, God is the
foremost concern of life, tell us at length the noble and holy doings of Sri Hari (Lord Sri
Krsna), who is the only and final resort of the greatest souls, eager as we are to hear
of them. (15) That great devotee of the Lord, king Pariksit of no mean understanding,
attained to the feet of Lord Sri Krsna (whose banner bears the device of Garuda, the
king of the birds), which are otherwise known by the name of final beatitude, through
wisdom taught by the sage Suka (in the form of a story). (16) Pray, narrate to us that
most sacred story embodying the wisdom imparted to Pariksit (the story of Srimad
Bhagavata), which lays bare the truth in unambiguous terms and firmly establishes one
in the extremely wonderful Yoga (of Love), nay, which also contains an account of the
doings of the Lord and delights His devotees. (17)

सूत उवाच
अहो wd जन्मभृतोऽद्य me वृद्धानुवृत्यापि fact: |
दौष्कुल्यमाधिं विधुनोति att महत्तमानामभिधानयोग: ।१८॥
ea: पुनर्गृणतो नाम तस्य महत्तमैकान्तपरायणस्य ।
योऽनन्तराक्तिर्भगवाननन्तो महद्गुणत्वाद् यमनन्तमाहु: । १९॥
एतावतालं ननु सूचितेन गुणैरसाम्यानतिशायनस्य |
हित्वेतरान् प्रार्थयतो विभूतिर्यस्याङ्ध्रिरेणुं जुषतेऽनभीप्सो: 1201
अथापि यत्पादनखावसृष्टं जगद्विरिञ्चोपहतार्हणाम्भ: ।
सेशं पुनात्यन्यतमो मुकुन्दात् को AM लोके भगवत्पदार्थ: ।२१॥
