428 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA { Dis. 29

SUSIE SE BOAT RONE SOY 9 SOMERS CI tr th CIEE ESO EOI RIDE EIR rota torr Rr Rome tone tomo sem ri ioiinnirtey sore dane
SLUMOI AEH RAEN AE HAA HAE BALI RAFAT I CI ASCII BW RECITES ae ae
२ + ! +- SS S S
ai ह्यविद्यमानेऽपि संसृतिर्न निवर्तते। ध्यायतो विषयानस्य स्वप्नेऽनर्थागमो यथा 1031

The very mind of a man, God bless you, reveals (the nature of) his former existences
as well as the future ones in the case of the man who is going to be reborn and even so
(indicates) the liberation of the man who is not going to be so reborn. (66) Sometimes (ina
dream) a thing (altogether) unseen and unheard of in this world in relation to a particular
place, time or action (such as a sprout of barley on a burning flame, the sun shining at dead
of night or the flying of a creature living on dry land) is seen flashing on (one's) mind. How
this happens should be inferred (from the attendant circumstances, e.g., a disturbed sleep)
and does not disprove in any way the proposition enunciated in verse 65 above.(67) Such
objects alone as are perceptible by the senses flash on the mind in groups in order of
succession and disappear (when they have been enjoyed). (For) all embodied beings are
(invariably) endowed with a mind (full of impressions of past experiences). (68) (As a rule,
things appear before the mind only successively; but) on a mind established in the quality
of Sattva unmixed with Rajas and Tamas andstaying by the side (in the presence) of the Lord
(during meditation) the whole of this universe flashes (simultaneously sometimes), being
united as it were with the Lord, justas Rahu (which has been recognized as a planet in Hindu
astronomy and is nothing but a mass of darkness) appears (before our eyes) in conjunction
with the moon (during a lunar eclipse). (69) The feeling of 'I' and ‘mine’ (with regard to the
physical body), inhering in the Jiva, does not cease so long as the subtle body—which has
existed from time without beginning and which is a product of the three Gunas and a
conglomerate of the intellect, the mind, the Indriyas, (the five senses of perception and the
five organs of action) and the five subtle elements—persists. (70) During sleep, in the
unconscious state and in agony as well as at the time of death and high fever the I-
consciousness (though persisting) does not manifest itself due to the suspension of sense-
activity. (71) The senses being not fully developed during gestation and infancy too, the
conditioning ego appearing in the form of the ten Indriyas and the mind in a young man is
not (distinctly) perceived in those periods any more than the orb of the moon on the last night
of a lunar month. (72) Even though the world of senses does not (really) exist, (the cycle of)
birth and death does not cease, for the Jiva who is (ever) engrossed in the thought of the
pleasures of senses, any more than the reverses experienced in a dream (until one wakes
up). (73)

एवं पञ्चविधं fog fad षोडशविस्तृतम्। एष चेतनया get जीव इत्यभिधीयते ।७४॥
अनेन पुरुषो देहानुपादत्ते विमुञ्चति ed शोकं भयं दु:खं सुखं चानेन विन्दति ।७५॥
यथा तृणजलूकेयं नापयात्यपयाति च । न त्यजेन्म्रियमाणोऽपि प्राग्देहाभिमतिं wa: ।७६॥
यावदन्यं न विन्देत व्यवधानेन कर्मणाम्। मन एवं मनुष्येदद्र भूतानां भवभावनम् ।७७।

यदाक्षैश्चरितान् ध्यायन् कर्माण्याचिनुतेऽसकृत्। सति कर्मण्यविद्यायां बन्ध: कर्मण्यनात्मन: । ७८1
अतस्तदपवादार्थं भज सर्वात्मना हरिम्। पर्यंस्तदात्मकं fad स्थित्युत्पत्त्यप्यया aa: ।७९।

In this way the subtle body, made up of the five suptle elements, and (further) developed
into sixteen modifications (in the form of the five vital airs, the mind and the ten Indriyas), and
which is a product of the three Gunas (Sattva, Rajas and Tamas), is spoken of as the Jiva
when the same is endowed with consciousness. (74) Itis through this (subtle body) that the
Jiva assumes and casts off (physical) bodies and (again) it is through this that he
experiences joy and sorrow, fear, pleasure and pain. (75) Just as acaterpillar does not leave
its foothold (until it has caught at another) and leaves it (only) after it has firmly set its foot
on another, the Jiva does not give up (its) identification with the previous body (the one he
casts off) even while dying until it takes another body (earthly or aerial and so on) with the
exhaustion of Karma (responsible for the existence of the previous body). itis the mindalone,
