Dis. 1] SRIMAD BHAGAVATA-MAHATMYA

WOR शा 3९ ३९३९ MEME उ आ आ च 3८37 ३८ BRCM CEFR ज हजा उ Me Mr Ree KE WON Me दाज्ज ज Re RR RCRA वा REE HE डौ HEAR या ह MENT हो ज MBER ना ती क Me NE RM दा Be he WS

राज्ञो मोक्षं तथा वीक्ष्य पुरा धातापि विस्मित: | सत्यलोके तुलां लद्ध्वातोलयत्साधनान्यज: 1861
लघून्यन्यानि जातानि aan इदं महत्।तदा ॠषिगणा: aa विस्मयं परमं ययु: 129!
मेनिरे भगवद्रूपं mea भागवतं कलौ । पठनाच्छ्रवणात्सद्यो वैकुण्ठफलदायकम् ।२०॥
सप्ताहेन ot चैतत्सर्वथा मुक्तिदायकम्।सनकाद्यै: पुरा प्रोक्तं नारदाय दयापरै: 122
यद्यपि ब्रह्मसम्बन्धाच्छुतमेंतत्सुरर्षिणा | सप्ताहश्रवणविधि: कुमारैस्तस्य भाषित: । २२।

In the former days even Brahma (the creator) was astonished to witness Pariksit's
emancipation that way (as a result of hearing an exposition of Srimad Bhagavata). In the
Satyaloka (his own realm) Brahma (the birthless god) set up a balance and weighed (on it)
the various courses of spiritual discipline. (18) (And lo!) all others proved (too) small while
this one (Srimad Bhagavata) proved superior in point of weight. All the hosts of seers
experienced great wonder on that occasion. (19) They came to regard the holy book of
Srimad Bhagavata as an embodiment of the Lord (Himself) in the Kali age and capable of
conferring the reward of speedy access to Vaikuntha (the divine realm of Lord Visnu) by
(merely) being read or heard. (20) And heard (from beginning to end) in a week's time, it
definitely bestows emancipation. Formerly it was made the subject of a discourse to Narada
by the kind-hearted sages Sanaka and others. (21) Though the story of Srimad Bhagavata
had (already) been heard by Narada (the celestial sage) through his relationship with
Brahma,the procedure of hearing it in a week's time was disclosed to him by the (above-
mentioned) sons of Brahma. (22)

शोनक उवाच

लोकविग्रहमुक्तस्य नारदस्यास्थिरस्य च । विधिश्रवे कुत: प्रीति: संयोग: कुत्र a: सह 1231
Saunaka said : How did Narada, whois above (all) worldly controversies and does
not remain fixed at one place develop a taste for hearing the procedure of listening to
the story of Srimad Bhagavata and where did he meet them ( Sanaka and his three
brothers) ? (23)
Yd उवाच
aa ते कीर्तयिष्यामि भक्तियुक्तं कथानकम्। Gest मम ae रह: शिष्यं विचार्य च । २४।
wre fe विशालायां चत्वार ॠषयोऽमला: । सत्सङ्गार्थं समायाता AERA नारदम् ।२५।

Sita resumed : Here shall | narrate to you an episode connected with Devotion, which
was related to me in private by Sri Suka (himself), accounting me his (devoted) disciple. (24)
Once upona time, itis said, the (above -named) four sinless sages arrived in Badarikasrama
for the sake of Satsanga (fellowship with saints). There they came across Narada. (25)

PAR Hy:
कथं ब्रह्मन्दीनमुख: कुतश्चिन्तातुरो भवान्।त्वरितं mad ga कुतश्चागमनं तव ।२६॥
इदानीं शून्यचित्तोऽसि गतवित्तो यथा जन:। तवेदं मुक्तसङ्गस्य नोचितं ae कारणम् । २७॥

The sons of Brahm said: O self-realized saint! why have you pulled a long face? How
is it that you are afflicted with worry? Where are you proceeding to in haste and where have
you come from? (26) You appear lost at this moment like a man whose wealth is gone. This
is (however) not becoming of you,who have given up all attachments. (Please) point out the
reason. (27)
