492 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 14

PRA RAMA AHR HAHAH क्तैभि कजा EEE HAART HHA CELA R AETHER OER AHA वी कोत्त NH He HED

race get paired and maintain their families by recourse to (what is regarded as) impurity when
judged from the standard of right conduct as laid down in the Vedas. (30) Indulging in
unrestrained licence there too, they feel sorely distressed in mind and remaining engrossed
in vulgar pursuits such as looking at the the face of their wife and vice versa, forget (even
the time of their) death. (1) Sometimes, seeking delight in the household life, which like
trees serves their worldly interests alone, they conceive (excessive) fondness for their sons
and wife and find pleasure like the monkey race in coition (alone and are thus unable to
secure release from the bondage of worldly existence). (32)

एवमध्वन्यवरुन्धानो मृत्युगजभयात्तमसि गिरिकन्दरप्राये।३३॥ क्वचिच्छीतवाताद्यनेक-
दैविकभौतिकात्मीयानां दु:खानां प्रतिनिवारणेऽकल्पो दुरन्तविषयविषण्ण आस्ते | ३४ ॥क्वचिन्मिथो व्यवहरन्
यत्किञ्चिद्धनमुपयाति वित्तशाढ्येन।३५॥। क्वचित्क्षीणधन:  शय्यासनाशनाद्युपभोगविहीनो
यावदप्रतिलब्धमनोरथोपगतादानेऽवसितमतिस्ततस्ततोऽवमानादीनि जनादभिलभते । ३६ । एवं

वित्तव्यतिषङ्गविवृद्धवैरानुवन्धोऽपि पूर्ववासनया मिथ उद्घहत्यथापवहति। 301 एतस्मिन् संसाराध्वनि
बिभ्यद्विवदन् क्रन्दन् संहृष्यन् गायन्नह्यमान: साधुवर्जितो नैवावर्ततेऽद्यापि यत आरब्ध एष नरलोकसार्थो
समध्वन: पारमुपदिशन्ति। ३८ । यदिदं योगानुशासनं न वा एतदवरुन्धते यन्न्यस्तदण्डा मुनय उपशमशीला
उपरतात्मान: समवगच्छन्ति। ३९ । यदपि दिगिभजयिनो यज्विनो ये a राजर्षय: किं तु परं मृधे शरीरन्नस्यामेव
ममेयमिति कृतवैरानुबन्धायां विसृज्य स्वयमुपसंहृता:।1४०]॥ कर्मवल्लीमवलम्ब्य ad आपद:
कथञ्चिन्नरकाद्दिमुक्त३ पुनरप्येवं संसाराध्वनि वर्तमानो नरलोकसार्थमुपयाति एवमुपरि
गतोऽपि । ४१ I
Thus experiencing joy and sorrow on the way, they fall into adversity in the form of
ailments and so on, fearful as a ravine, and remain in (constant) terror of the elephant
(there) in the form of death. (33) Now, unable to counteract manifold unpleasant
experiences—such as cold, wind and so on—brought about by divine agency or any other
being or those relating to one's own body or mind, they are worried with (the thought of)
innumerable objects of sense. (34) Sometimes entering into business dealings with their
own fellow-men, they secure some wealth through stinginess. (35) Now, reduced to poverty
and deprived of (all) enjoyments (comforts) in the shape of a bed (to sleep on), amat to squat
on, food to eat and other such things, they make up their mind to attain (by foul means such
as theft) the objects of their desire when denied to them and meet with ignominy and so on
at the hands of (different) people. (36) In this way though their feeling of enmity (with others)
is enhanced through (mutual) attraction for wealth, they enter into matrimonial alliances with
one another and subsequently dissolve them according to the tendencies of their past
lives.(37) (Nay,) if anyone, afflicted with manifold agonies and obstacles, meets with a
calamity or dies on this road, others—as is well-known—leave him wherever he is and,
taking (with them) every new-born child, give way to grief, infatuation and fear, quarrel (with
those who oppose them), cry (in distress), are transported with joy (under favourable
circumstances), sing (in a sprightly mood) and are bound (by others stronger than they). With
the exception of pious souls this company of men, however, never returns even to this day to
the point (God) whence this road (of mundane existence) commences and which the learned
declare as the end of the road (as well). (38) The aforesaid men do not take to the discipline
of Yoga (Devotion) nor do they attain the supreme state (which can be reached through
Devotion alone and) which is easily attained (only) by sages who have shed (all forms of)
violence, who are naturally given to self-control and who have withdrawn their mind from all
worldly objects. (39) Nor do the royal sages who have conquered the elephants guarding the
quarters as well as the four intervening corners, and who perform (big) sacrifices listen to
this teaching; they would rather bite the dust in battle (and remain lying) on the very earth
