426 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA { Dis. 29-

उ Ee He MR Re जं ज टाज च SCR HE EMER PRT RHE FONT IS WE कज् HONE RETR We ERR Os त्तच्च RTI ee By ROR We RR eR He Ry Ry Bee

leads to faith in Him. (49) Sri Hari is the Self as well as the lord of (all) embodied beings,
and He is their independent Cause (too). The soles of His feet (alone) are their (true)
asylum; for in them lies the safety of men in this world. (50) Indeed He is the most loved
. one, nay, the (very) Self, from whom there is not the least fear. (And) as a matter of fact
he(alone) is wise, who knows this (truth); (and) he who is wise is the (true) preceptor, nay
Sri Hari (Himself). (51)
ARG उवाच
wa एवं fe deat -भवत: पुरुषर्षभ । aa मे वदतो गुह्यं निशामय सुनिश्चितम् ine
अग्रे बृकानसुतृपोऽविगणय्य यान्तं पृष्ठे wt मृगय लुब्धकबाणभिन्नम् 1431

Narada continued: Thus (far) indeed nas your question been answered, O jewel among
men! Nowhear from me as! tell you a hidden truth which has been fully ascertained. (52) (Just)
find (the identity of) the deer fondly consorting (with its female companion) in a garden of
flowers grazing tiny blades of grass with its ears charmed by the sweet humming of swarms

of bees, going about unmindful of the blood-thirsty wolves before it and pierced from behind
by the shaft of a hunter. (53)

[ arene: J
सुमन:सधर्मणां स्रीणां शरण आश्रमे पुष्पमधुगन्धवत्क्षुद्रतमं काम्यकर्मविपाकजं कामसुखलवं

मनोहरवनितादिजनालापेष्नतितरामतिप्रलोभितकर्णमग्रे वृकयूथवदात्मन आयुर्हरतोऽहोरात्रान्तान्
काललवविशेषानविगणय्य गृहेषु विहरन्तं पृष्ठत एव परोक्षमनुप्रवृत्तो लुब्धक: कृतान्तोऽन्त:शरेण यमिह
पराविध्यति तमिममात्मानमहो राजन् भिन्नहदयं द्रष्टुमर्हसीति 14x |
स त्वं विचक्ष्य मृगचेष्टितमात्मनोऽन्तश्चित्तं fers हृदि कर्णधुनीं च faa ।
जह्यङ्गनाश्रममसत्तमयूथगाथं प्रीणीहि हंसशरणं विरम क्रमेण । ५५॥
(The import cf this is given below.)

O king, you would do well to perceive yourself as one seeking after a dose of sense-
delights such as the pleasures of taste and copulation—obtained as a result of actions done
with an interested motive, and most insignificant like the odour of the honey in flowers—in
a house full of women sharing the nature of blossoms (that fade too soon) ! Nay, pairing with
women, you have given your mind to them, your ears completely lured by the exceedingly
charming talks of beloved women and children, resembling the sweet humming of swarms
of bees. You enjoy life at home setting no value on the moments of time culminating in days
and nighis that prey upon your life like a pack of wolves ahead of you; and here is Death,
the hunter, stalking you and striking you with his veiled arrow from a distance an lo ! your
heart has been pierced with the same. (54) Thus pondering the career of the deer, restrain
your mind within the four walls of your heart and (the outward flow of) the stream of your ear
in the mind. Bid adieu to the life of a householder, where you (mostly) hear stories of
unrighteous (libidinous) people; (try to) please the Lord (the shelter of all living beings) and
gradually withdraw from everything else. (55)

राजावाच
श्रुतमन्वीक्षितं wa भगवान् यदभाषत ।। नैतज्जानन्त्युपाध्याया: किं न ब्रूयुर्विदुर्यदि । ५६।
संशयोऽत्र तु मे विप्र संछिन्नस्तत्कृतो महान्। ऋषयोऽपि fe मुह्यन्ति aa नेन्द्रियवृत्तय: ।५७।
कर्माण्यारभते येन पुमानिह विहाय तम्।अमुत्रान्येन देहेन जुष्टानि स यदश्नुते iu
