490 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 87

० ७० ० ०० २ ०२ २० ७ ० NE ७ ७ 7२० MEMENTO EN ७ ०.० ७ १ ७० ७० ७ ० १ १ १ ७ ० ७० ७ ७ ०० ७.२.७ ० ०० 4७ ७ ७ १२ ७ ७ ७ २ २०० २ # ० ७ ० ७ ० 4५० ७ ० ७

effect (the visible universe) ? (1)
श्रीशुक उवाच

खुद्धीन्द्रयमन:प्राणान् जनानामसृजत् प्रभु: | मात्रार्थं च भवार्थं च आत्मनेऽकल्पनाय च। २ ।

सैषा ह्युपनिषद् ब्राह्मी पूर्वेषां पूर्वजैर्धृता । श्रद्धया धारयेद् यस्तां क्षेमं गच्छेदकिञ्चन:। ३ ।

अत्र ते वर्णयिष्यामि met नारायणान्विताम् । नारदस्य च संवादमृषेर्नारायणस्य च। ४ ।

Sti Suka replied: The almighty Lord evolved the intellect, senses, mind and the vital
airs of the (innumerable) Jivas (embodied souls) for their enjoyment (of sense-delights),
acts of being born and so on, for enjoying the delights of the various worlds and for final
beatitude (in the shape of cessation of all speculation). (It is with the help of these that
one can determine the real import of the Sruti texts, which as a matter of fact deal with
Brahma alone).(2) This indeed is the well-known secret of the Vedas relating to Brahma,
treasured up by Sanaka and others (more ancient even than the ancient). Whosoever
cherishes it (even now) will be shorm of identification with body etc, and attain
blessedness. (3) On this subject | shall narrate to you a story connected with the (divine
sage) Narayana, and shall also reproduce (as follows) the dialogue between (the
celestial sage) Narada and the sage Narayana. (4)

एकदा नारदो लोकान् पर्यटन् भगवत्परिय: । सनातनमूषि द्रष्टुं ययौ नारायणाश्रमम्। ५ ।

यो वै भारतवर्षेऽस्मिन् क्षेमाय स्वस्तये नृणाम् । धर्मज्ञानशमोपेतमाकल्पादास्थितस्तप: । ६ ।

तत्रोपविष्टमृषिभि: कलापग्रामवासिभि: । परीतं प्रणतोऽपृच्छदिदमेव कुरूद्वह। ७ ।

तस्मै ह्यवोचद् भगवानृषीणां शृण्वतामिदम् । यो ब्रह्मवाद: पूर्वेषां जनलोकनिवासिनाम्। ८ ।

Going about the worlds, on one occasion, (the sage) Narada, beloved of the Lord,
went to the hermitage of (the sage) Narayana in order to see the immortal seer, who has
from the (very) beginning of the Kalpa (cycle) betaken Himself in this (land of)
Bharatavarsa, for the prosperity and spiritual well-being of men, to (a life of) asceticism,
coupled with piety, Self-Knowledge and dispassion. (5-6) Bending low (with reverence),
O jewel among the Kurus, Narada put this very question to the divine sage, who was
seated there (in His hermitage) surrounded by sages inhabiting the village of Kalapa.*(7)
In the midst of (other) Rsis, who were (all) listening, the divine Sage (Narayana) actually
gave to him the following reply, which embodied (the gist of) a discussion bearing on
(the topic of) Brahma, held among the ancient Rsis (Sanaka and others) of Janaloka (the
fifth heaven). (8)

श्रीभगवानुवाच
स्वायम्भुव ब्रह्मसत्रं जनलोकेऽभवत् पुरा । तत्रस्थानां मानसानां मुनीनामूर्ध्वरेतसाम्। ९ ।
श्वेतद्वीपं गतवति त्वयि xe तदीश्वरम् । ब्रह्मवाद: सुसंवृत्त: श्रुतयो aa शेरते।
wa हायमभूत् प्रश्नस्त्वं मां यमनुपृच्छसि। १०॥

लुल्यश्रुततप:शीलास्तुल्यस्वीयारिमध्यमा: lata ug: प्रवचनमेकं शुश्रूषवोऽपरे। eet

The divine Sage said : O Narada (son of Brahma, the self-born), of yore there took
piace a meeting, for exchange of views regarding (the true nature of) Brahma, in Janaloka,
of sages born of Brahma's mind and dwelling in that sphere, who were all lifelong celibates
(lit., who had directed the flow of their generative fluid upwards). (9) On one occasion when
you (O Narada!) had departed to Swetadwipato see Lord Aniruddha (the Rulerofthatisland,
a form of Lord Visnu), there ensued (among the Rsis of that sphere) a masterly and thorough
discussion concerning Brahma (the Absolute), about which the Vedas (too) remain silent.

* Another name of Badarnkasrama, where the famous shnne of Badnnatha is now siluated.
