422. SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 29

BORER RIOR RR RAR RR ECR RESORT OY IHOT BORON जजाजा ERO TE ITT FO eet ee Oe AT TIE VERE ATONE 338३ HR . ७.. MOT RE

पश्चिमे इत्यधोद्वारौ गुदे शिश्नमिहोच्यते। खद्योताऽऽविर्मुखी चात्र नेत्रे एकत्र निर्मिते ।
we विभ्राजितं ताभ्यां विचष्टे चक्षुषेश्चर: ।१०।

नलिनी नालिनी ara गन्ध: सौरभ sera | घ्राणोऽवधूतो मुख्यास्यं विपणो वाग्रसविद्रस: 1221
आपणो व्यवहारोऽत्र चित्रमन्धो बहूदनम्। पितृहूर्दक्षिण: कर्ण उत्तरो देवहू: Ba: ।१२।
प्रवृत्तं च निवृत्तं च wre पञ्चालसंज्ञितम्। पितृयानं देवयानं श्रोत्राच्छुतधराद्द्रजेत् । १३।
आसुरी मेढुमर्वाख्धार्व्यवायो ग्रामिणां रति: । उपस्थो दुर्मद: प्रोक्तो निरृतिर्गुद उच्यते । १४॥
वैशसं ace wagers तु मे शृणु । हस्तपादॊ पुमांस्ताभ्यां युक्तो याति करोति च । १५॥
अन्त:पुरं च हृदयं विषूचिर्मन उच्यते। तत्र मोहं प्रसादं वा हर्षं प्राप्नोति तद्गुणै: । १६।
यथा यथा विक्रियते गुणाक्तो विकरोति वा । तथा तथोपद्रष्ठाऽत्मा तदवृत्तीरनुकार्यते 1201

The two eyes, the two nostrils, the two ears and the penis and the anus are the (four) pairs
of entrances with the mouth (as the ninth). (It is through these gates that) the Jiva goes out
(to the objects of senses) accompanied by the Indriyas (located in these appertures). (8) (Of
these) the two eyes, the two nostrils and the mouth are the five gates located in the east (in
front of the head). The right ear has been spoken ofas the southern and the left, the northern
gate. (9) The two openings below have been called the western gates and they are
designated here (is the present context) as the penis and the anus. The (two gates) Khadyota
and Avirmukhi (declared as) constructed at one place (side by side) in this city correspond
to the two eyes; and through these, aided by the faculty of vision, the Jiva (the master of the
body) perceives colour, which corresponds to (the realm called) Vibhrajita. (10) The two
nostrils are (the gates) Nalini and Nalini and odour has been spoken of as (the territory of)
Saurabha. The olfactory sense is (the companion of Purafjana known by the name of)
Avadhtta: the mouth is (the gate called Mukhya); the faculty of speech is (the companion
going by the name of) Vipana and the organ of taste is (the friend known as) Rasajfia. (11)
The use of the tongue is the territory mentioned in this story by the name of Apana and the
food of various kinds is the realm known as Bahtidana. The right ear is the gate called Pitrhu
and the left has been referred to under the name of Devahi (the northern gate). (12) The
scriptures dealing with the path of worldly activity (the cult of rituals) and those preaching
quietism (the cult of worship) have bean spoken of as (the dominions of) South Paficala and
North Paficala respectively. Listening to these through the ear, which has been spoken of
as (a companion of Purafijana under the name of) Srutadhara, the Jiva takes severally to
the path of the manes (leading to the realm of the moon-god or heaven) and the path of the
gods (leading to the divine Abode). (13) The membrum virile is the western gate called Asuri;
the act of copulation is the territory called Gramaka (which is only another name for carnal
delight). The faculty of procreation has been spoken of as (a companion of Purafjana under
the name of) Durmada; while the anus has been referred to under the name of Nirrti (the other
gate in the west). (14) The Infernal region is the territory called Vaigasa, while the organ of
defecation (located in the rectum) is the companion named Lubdhaka. (Now) hear from me
about the two entrances leading to blind alleys. They are the hands and feet wherewith the
human soul severally works and moves about. (15) (The region of) the heart is the
gynaeceum and the mind has been spoken of as (the principal waiter in the gynaeceum
under the name of) Vistici (Visucina). Identifying itself with the qualities (Sattva, Rajas and
Tamas) of the mind, the Jiva gives way herein severally to complacence, joy and
infatuation.(16) According as the equilibrium of the intellect is disturbed (in the dreaming
state) or it disturbs the senses in its turn (in the waking state), the Jiva (the embodied soul),
that is affected by its qualities, is compelled to follow its changes. although (by its essential
