672 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [Dis.6 `

SRR Re RIOR RRR AAA AREA HHH ORAM EEA ASHE CH SEAHLET AEE SENHA HEA AAEM EARES LS OHH ARE

Thus ends the fifth discourse, forming part of the narrative of Prahrada,
in Book Seven of the great and glorious Bhagavata-Purana,
otherwise known as the Paramahamsa-Samnhita.

So Pe ETS
PII डिर्ना

. AM षष्ठोऽध्याय:

Discourse VI
Prahrada's teaching to the demon boys

प्रह्राद Sart
an आचरेत्प्रज्ञो धर्मान् भागवतानिह। दुर्लभं mq जन्मं तदप्यध्रुवमर्थदम् । १ ।
यथा fe पुरुषस्येह विष्णो: पादोपसर्पणम्। यदेष सर्वभूतानां प्रिय आत्मेश्वर: सुहृत्। २ |

सुखमैन्द्रियके दैत्या देहयोगेन देहिनाम्।सर्वत्र लभ्यते दॆवाद्यथा दु:खमयत्नत: । ३ |
तत्प्रयासो न कर्तव्यो यत आयुर्व्यय: परम्। न aM विन्दते क्षेमं मुकुन्दचरणाम्बुजम् । ४ |
ततो यतेत pare: aaa भयमाश्रित:। at पौरुषं यावन्न विपद्येत पुष्कलम्। ५ |
qa ated ह्यायुस्तदर्धं चाजितात्पन: | निष्फलं चदसौ रात्र्यां ease प्रापितस्तम: । ६ |
मुग्धस्य बाल्ये कौमारे क्रीडतो याति विंशति: । जरया wee यात्यकल्पस्य विंशाति: । ७ |
agit कामेन मोहेन च बलीयसा ae गृहेषु सक्तस्य प्रमत्तस्यापयाति हि । ८ |
Prahrada said: In this (human) life awise man should practise virtues conducive to God-
Realization in his very childhood; (for) birth as a human being alone bestows on us our
desired object, (viz., lasting happiness), and (yet) such birth is obtained with (great) difficulty
andis transient too. (1) The only course advisable for a man in this world is to betake himself
to the feet of Lord Visnu; for He is the ruler and the beloved friend, nay, the very Self of all
created beings. (2) Like suffering, sensual pleasure (too), O Daityas, is obtained by
embodied beings in every birth by force of destiny without any effort through (mere)
connection with a body. (3) No effort for (the acquisition of) such pleasure should (therefore)
be made; (for) from such effort follows mere waste of (one’s) life. (Moreover,) in that way one
does not attain to the lotus-feet of Lord Visnu (the Bestower of Liberation), the Source of
supreme bliss. (4) Therefore, having fallen into (the whirlpool of) transmigration (the root of
all fear), aclever man should strive for (the attainment of) blessedness while the human body
is yet sound and does not perish. (5) Indeed a hundred years is reckoned to be the (full)
length of a man's life. Half of it (viz., fifty years) is of no use toa man who has not been able
to subdue his mind; for, consigned to blinding ignorance (in the form of sleep) he remains
lying down (in idleness) during the night. (6) (Out of the remaining fifty years) twenty elapse
in (the form of) infancy, when the fellow remains steeped in ignorance, and in (the form of)
boyhood, when he remains absorbed in play; and (another) twenty years roll by in (utter)
helplessness, when his body is in the grip of senility. (7) The rest (of his life) actually passes
away in (gross) negligence, when the man remains attached to his home through desire
which cannot be easily sated and through overwhelming infatuation. (8)

को गृहेषु पुमान्सक्तमात्मानमजितेन्द्रिय: | Aeuededawed विमोचितुम् । ९ ।
को न्वर्थतृष्णां विसृजेत् प्राणेभ्योऽपि च ईप्सित: | यं क्रीणात्यसुभि: प्रेष्ठस्तस्कर: Saat वणिक 10 |
