618 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis.-14.

RAR ONE ERE RAE REE HEA HS CEH ६७ ७७३ .3..६.३-2.३.३.६:३.३..३..३.३.३.३.३.३.३.३. २3३3 EL EEHERSPEEHEALHOATHAERE
प्रविश्य राज्ञी त्वरयाऽऽत्मजान्तिकं ददर्श बालं सहसा FA सुतम् Ive
पपात भूमौ परिवृद्धया शुचा मुमोह बिभ्रष्टशिरोरुहाम्बरा ive!
ततो wR जना नराश्च ads fer रोदनम् ।
आगत्य तुल्यव्यसना:सुदु:खितास्ताश्च eae रुरुदु: कृतागस: ।४९॥
श्रुत्वा yd पुत्रमलक्षितान्तकं विनष्टदृष्टि: प्रपतन् स्खलन् पथि ।
स्नेहानुबन्धैधितया  शुचा ye विमूर्चछितोऽनुप्रकृतिर्दिजेर्वृत: । ५०॥
पपात बालस्य a पादमूले मृतस्य विस्रस्तशिरोरुहाम्बर: |
दीर्घं ve बाष्पकलोपरोधतो निरुद्धकण्ठो न शाक भाषितुम् । ५१।
afd निरीक्ष्योरुशुचार्पितं aa मृतं च ae सुतमेकसन्ततिम् ।
जनस्य Wil प्रकृतेश्च we सती दधाना विललाप चित्रधा । ५२।
स्तनद्वय॰ कुङ्कुपगन्थर्यांण्डंत॰ मिषिञ्चती साञ्जनब।प्पत्निन्दुभि: ।
faa केशान् fares: qi qara fat कुररीव सुस्वरम् । ५३।

Hearing at that time the most painful cry of the nurse, who was violently beating her
breast too with both hands, the queen qgickly entered into the presence of her child and
found her infant son a victim of sudden death. (47) Due to excessive grief she fainted
and fell on the ground, her hair flung about and garments thrown out of order. (48)
Hearing the wail, the inmates of the royal gynaeceum, both men and women,
thereupon came (to the spot) and, sharing the queen’s grief and, therefore, much
distressed, fell to weeping; (nay), even the queens who had perpetrated the crime
shed crocodile tears. (49) Hearing that his son had died, though the cause of his death
was (still) unknown, the king lost his vision through grief intensified beyond measure
by uninterrupted love. Followed by his ministers and other people and surrounded by
the Brahmanas (priests), he (too) came stumbling and falling on the way and, sighing
deeply, dropped unconscious near the feet of the dead child, his hair dishevelled and,
clothes thrown about in disorder; and, his throat choked due to obstruction caused by
tears, he could not utter a word. (50-51) Seeing her husband overwhelmed with
excessive grief and the infant son, her only progeny, dead, the virtuous queen then
wailed in various ways, (thereby) enhancing the heart-ache of the people as well as of
the ministers and others (present there). (52) Bathing her breasts—painted with
saffron and sandal paste—with the drops of her tears mixed with collyrium and throwing

about her hair with the flowers dropping from them, she mourned (the death of) her child
like a female osprey in loud and diverse tones (as follows) :— (53)

अहो वबिधातस्त्वमतीव बालिञ्ञो यस्त्वात्मसृष्ट्यप्रतिरूपमीहसे |
परेऽनुजीवत्यपरस्य या मृतिर्बिपर्ययश्चेत्वमसि a: पर: IG
न fe क्रमश्चेदिह मृत्युजन्मनो: ङारीरिणामस्तु तदाऽऽत्मकर्मभि: |
य: Bet निजसर्गवृद्धये wa कृतस्ते तमिमं विवृश्चसि ie
त्वं तात नार्हसि च मां कृपणामनाथां त्यक्तुं विचक्च्व frat तव arenes |
अञ्जस्तरेम भवताप्रजदुस्तरं Ae ध्वान्तं न याह्यकरुणेन यमेन दूरम् । ५६॥
उत्तिष्ठ aa त इमे शिशवो व्रयस्यास्त्वामाह्वयन्ति नृपनन्दन संविहर्तुम् ।
