196 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 21

SEBEHCRC RENE AEA BEAT RERTA Ae BESTS ECHO Sr STR STEER 8 oto Er tr Seon 6 rane he te freee sree ear

तद् ahaa आश्रुत्य वेणुगीतं स्मरोदयम्। काश्चित्परोक्षंकृष्णस्यस्वसखीभ्योऽन्ववर्णयन् । ३ ।
aq वर्णयितुमारब्धा: स्मरन्त्य: कृष्णचेष्टितम्। aed स्मरवेगेन विक्षिप्तमनसो नृप । ४ ।
बर्हापीडं नटवरवपु: कर्णयो: कर्णिकारं fase वास: कनककपिजं वैजयन्तीं च मालाम् ।

TEM, वेणोरधरसुधया पूरयन् गोपवृन्दैर्वृन्दारण्यं स्वपदरमणं प्राविशद् गीतकीर्ति: । ५ ।
इति बेणुरवं राजन् सर्वभूतमनोहरम्। श्रुत्वा व्रजस्रिय: wal वर्णयन्त्योऽभिरेभिरे । ६ ।

Sri Suka began again : Accompanied by cows and cowherd boys, Sri Krsna (the
immortal Lord) entered deep into the aforesaid forest with its waters made transparent by the
autumn and fanned by a breeze charged with the fragrance of lotus-beds. (1) Having entered
the forest—the lakes and streams as well as the mountains of which were resonant with the
sweet warbling of birds and the (sweet) humming of bees, intoxicated by (the presence of)
rows of trees in full bloom—and pasturing the cows in the company of Balarama and (other)
cowherds, Lord Sri Krsna (the Protector of the Madhus) sounded His flute. (2) Hearing that
(entrancing) music of Sri Krsna's flute—which kindled love (in their heart)—some women of
Vraja proceeded to celebrate it in song before their female companions (all) out of His
sight.(3) Recalling the (loving) gestures of Sri Krsna while commencing to describe the
music, they (however) could not, their mind being distracted by the vehemence of love, O
protector of men. (4) Exhibiting (before their mental eyes) an exquisite form resembling that
of an actor (on the stage), adorned with a crest of peacock feathers, wearing Karnikara
flowers on His ears, a wreath of flowers of five different colours and a golden cloth (round
his loins), and filling the holes of His flute with the nectar of His lips (as itwere), the Lord (they
felt) entered Vrndavana, charming with His footprints (found at every step), His glory being
sung by hosts of cowherd boys. (5) Hearing, O Pariksit, the (said) music of His flute,
Captivating to the mind of all living beings, and celebrating it (in the following strain), all those
women of Vraja mentally embraced the Lord. (6)

अक्षण्वतां फलमिदं न ui विदाम: we: पञ्मूननु विवेशयतोर्वयस्यै: ।

ae व्रजेशसुतयोरनुवेणु ys यैर्वा निपीतमनुरक्तकटाक्षमोक्षम् । ७ ।
ईस्तवको ॥ रिधानविचित्रवेषौ ।

मध्ये विरेजतुरलं पशुपालगोष्ठयां TE यथा नटवरौ wm च गायमानौ । ८ ।

Tre: किमाचरदयं gas स्म वेणुर्दामोदराधरसुधामपि गोपिकानाम्।

भुङ्क्ते स्वयं यदवशिष्टरसं get हृष्यत्त्वचोऽश्रुमुमुचुस्तरवो यथाऽऽर्या: । ९ ।

The Gopis sang : This is the prize for those who have eyes, friends; and we know of no
greater prize than that enjoyed by those who have feasted their eyes on the countenance—
playing on the flute and casting loving glances (all round)—of the two sons of Nanda (the lord
of Vraja) as They lead the cattle alongwith their playmates (the cowherd boys). (7) Singing
at times amidst a circle of cowherd boys, and picturesquely clad ina garment fitted closely
with tender mango leaves, peacock feathers and bunches of flowers (tucked to the curly
locks), a pair of lilies (fastened to the ears), a lotus (heldin the righthand) anda garland (worn
about the neck), (the two Brothers looked most charming like a pair of excellent actors on

the stage. (8) O Gopis, what meritorious act has this flute performed, by virtue of which it
freely enjoys (to its heart's content) the nectar flowing from the lips of Srikrsna (who was once
