348 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 55

BORO ROHR EROS RT SRL ECT OO Ha EI ROTO Sn Ee i re a artitctrtrie

तामाह भगवान् alent मतिरन्यथा । मातृभावमतिक्रम्य add कामिनी यथा । ११

Sri Suka began again : Having been burnt {to ashes) in his former birth by the wrath of
Rudra (the god of destruction), Kama (the god of love), a portion of Lord Sri Krsna, sought
for his part Him alone once more for investiture with a body. (1) Sprung from the loins of Sri
Krsna, the selfsame god of love was (re-) born of Rukmini (the princess of Vidarbha) and
became widely known as Pradyumna, and proved to be a compeer of his Father in every
respect. (2) Coming to know Pradyumna to be his (future) enemy, the demon Sambara, who
could assume any form at will, carried off the babe (from the lying-in-chamber) while it was
not yet ten days old and, casting it into the sea, went home. (3) A mighty fish swallowed it
and the former too was alongwith others enmeshed in a huge net by fishermen. (4) The
fishermen brought the fish as a present to Sambara and the cooks (in charge of his kitchen)
took it into the kitchen and cut the wondertul fish with a knife. (5) Discovering a babe in the
bowels of the fish, they handedit over to Mayavati (a maid-servant of Sambara), whose mind
was full of doubts; and the celestial sage Narada (presently) told her everything as to who
the babe was, how it was born and how it had (finally) made its way into the bowels of the
fish. (6) The maid-servant was really speaking {no other than) the illustrious consort of Kama,
Rati by name, who had been (eagerly) awaiting (all the while) the reincarnation of her spouse,
whose body had been burntto ashes (by Lord Siva). (7) Having been entrusted with (the work
of) cooking pulses and rice, she fastened her affection on the babe now that she had come
to know the child to be (none other than) Kamadeva (the god of love). (8) At no distant date
Pradyumna (the son of Sri Krsna) attained (the prime of) youth and kindled love in the breast
of women who gazed on him. (9) Lovingly regarding him, her husband—who had eyes big
as the petals of a lotus and exceptionally long arms, nay, who was charming among men—
with bashful smiles and upraised eyebrows, Rati, O dear Pariksit, greeted him with amorous
gestures. (10) Lord Pradyumna (the son of Sri Krsna) said to her, “(I find that) your affection
(towards me) has got perverted inasmuch as, having abandoned your motherly sentiment,
you are behaving as a paramour (which is rather strange), O mother !" (11)

तस्जा
War नारायणसुत: जम्बरेणाहृतो गृहात्। अहं तेऽधिकृता पत्नी रति: कामो भवान् प्रभो 1221
wot सिन्धावक्षिपच्छम्बरोऽसुर: | मत्स्योऽग्रसीत्तदुदरादिह प्राप्तो भवान् प्रभो ie
ahd जहि ahh दुर्जयं हान्रुमात्मन: | मायाशतविदं त्वं च मायाभिर्मोहनादिभि: । १४॥
परिज्ञोचति ते माता कुररीव nasi पुत्रस्नेहाकुला दीना विवत्सा गौरिवातुरा । १५॥
प्रभाष्यैवं ददौ विद्यां प्रद्युम्नाय महात्मने। मायावती महामायां सर्वमायाविनाशिनीम् ies
स च शम्बरमभ्येत्य संयुगाय समाह्वयत्। अविषह्यैस्तमाक्षेपै: क्षिपन् सञ्जनयन् कलिम् । १७॥
सोऽधिक्षिप्तो दुर्वचोभि: wa हत sara: | निश्चक्राम गदापाणिरमर्षात्ताम्रलोचन: 1221
गदामाविध्य तरसा प्रद्युम्नाय महात्मने । प्रक्षिप्य व्यनदन्नादं वज्रनिष्पेषनिष्ठुरम् ॥१९॥
तामापतन्तीं भगवान् प्रद्युम्नो गदया गदाम्। अपास्य हात्रवे क्रुद्ध: प्राहिणोत् स्वगदां नृप 1201
स च मायां समाश्रित्य देतेयीं मयदर्शिताम्। qqasand ad ano वैहायसोऽसुर: ।२१।

बाध्यमानोऽस्रवर्षेण रौक्मिणेयो महारथ: । सत्त्वात्मिकां महाविद्यां सर्वमायोपमर्दिनीम् 1221
ततो गौह्यकगान्धर्वपैशाचोरगराक्षसी: | प्रायुङ्क्त ea Se: कार्षिणिर्व्यधमयत् स ता: 123 |

निशातमसिमुद्यम्य सकिरीटं सकुण्डलम्। जम्बरस्य शिर: कायात् ताम्रह्मश्र्वोजसाहरत् । २४॥
आकीर्यमाणो दिविजै: स्तुवद्भि: कुसुमोत्करै: । भार्ययाम्बरचारिण्या gt नीतो freer ।२५॥
