10 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [Dis. 3

ROME Re MORE We eM BERL ME HE GCE STE HE WERE BERL RE Re Me Br My PT AT WS CLT RT RS He eR Me RB Ey es ee eee
शाण

Lord Himself. (30) Even as menof poor wits assume the existence of the clouds in ether and
of dustiness in the air, (even though the clouds, as a matter of fact, hang in the air while
dustiness belongs to the particles of earth,) so the ignorant superimpose the gross
phenomenal universe on the Self, who is the seer. (31) Beyond this material form is a subtle
(and unmanifest) form of the Lord, which is constituted of undeveloped Gunas (Gunas that
have not assumed distinctive shapes) and is neither open to perception nor to hearing. It is
this (subtle or astral) body which is termed as the Jiva or soul (because the soul seems to
enter it or is identified with it) and goes through repeated births or transmigrations. (32) It
is through nescience that the aforesaid astral and material bodies are superimposed on the
Self. When this superimposition is removed through self-knowledge, that very moment takes
place the realization of Brahma. (33) The knowers of Truth are aware that when the Lord's
sportful Maya in the shape of Knowledge withdraws, the Jiva becomes one with Brahma and
gets established in the glory of the Self. (34) In such terms do the wise describe the descents
as well as the doings of the Lord, who is the Ruler of all hearts and is really without birth or
actions; for His descents and doings are a guarded secret of the Vedas. (35)

स वा इदं विश्वममोघलील: gaat न सज्जतेऽस्मिन् ।
भूतेषु चान्तर्हित आत्मतन्त्र: षाड्वर्गिकं जिघ्रति षड्गुणेश: ।३६॥
न चास्य कश्चिन्निपुणेन धातुरवैति wa कुमनीष ऊती: ।
नामानि रूपाणि मनोवचोभि: सन्तन्वतो नटचर्यामिवाज्ञ: । ३७॥
योऽमायया संततयानुवृत्त्या भजेत तत्पादसरोजगन्धम् । ३८1
aa धन्या भगवन्त sel यद्वासुदेवेऽखिललोकनाथे |
KS कुर्वन्ति सर्वात्मकमात्मभावं न wat ya: परिवर्तं उग्र: 1३९1

The pastimes of the Lord are always purposive; by mere sport He creates, preserves and
reabsorbs this universe, but never gets attached to it. Abiding unperceived in the heart of
all living beings, He seems to enjoy the objects of the mind and the five senses as the ruler
of all the six. But being the Master of His Self He remains aloof from these objects (they fail
to bind Him). (36) No stupid creature can know by any dialectical skill the names and forms
or doings ofthe Lord, revealed by His thought or word (the Vedas), any more than anignorant
man can understand the performance of a conjurer, accomplished through his will and
speech. (37) The power of the Lord who wields the discus in His hand is infinite; though the
Maker of this world, He remains ever beyond it. He alone can know His ways who inhales
the fragrance of His lotus-feet through constant and sincere devotion to them. (38) Now you
blessed ones are lucky indeed, since you in this life and in this world (which is full of
impediments and obstacles) thus cultivate that undivided love to Bhagavan Vasudeva (Sri
Krsna), the Lord of the entire universe, by virtue of which one never falls again into the terrible
vortex of birth and death.(39)

इदं भागवतं नाम पुराणं ब्रह्मसम्मितम्। उत्तमश्लोकचरितं चकार भगवानृषि: Io

नि:श्रेयसाय लोकस्य धन्यं स्वस्त्ययनं महत्।तदिदं ग्राहयामास सुतमात्मवतां वरम् ।४१।

सर्ववेदेतिहासानां सारं सारं समुदधृतम्। स तु संश्रावयामास महाराजं परीक्षितम् ise

प्रायोपविष्टं गङ्गायां परीतं परमर्षिभि:। कृष्णे स्वधामोपगते धर्मज्ञानादिभि: ae ।४३॥

wet नष्टदृशामेष पुराणार्कोऽधुनोदित: । तत्र . कीर्तयतो विप्रा विप्रर्षेर्भूरिजस: ree

a चाध्यगमं तत्र निविष्टस्तदनुग्रहात्। सोऽहं a: श्रावयिष्यामि यथाधीतं यथामति isl
इति श्रीमद्भागवते महापुराणे पारमहंस्यां संहितायां प्रथमस्कन्धे नैमिषीयोपाख्याने तृतीयोऽध्याय: ॥ ३ ।।
