544 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [Dis 7

BEECH LE TEER TACO MERE THK न OREO ERS ERE ना ६ TORR EER H ERNE शा MEE HERE N KEENE HS

human beings. (48-49)
श्रांशुक उवाच
एवं विज्ञापितो राजन् भगवान् देवकीसुत: । एकान्तिनं प्रियं भृत्यमुद्ध्वं समभाषत ।५०॥
Sri Suka said : Entreated thus, 0 king, Lord Sri Krsna (the Son of Devaki) spoke (as
follows) to His beloved servant and absolute devotee, Uddhava. (50)

Thus ends the sixth discourse, in Book Eleven of the great
and glorious Bhagavata-Purana, otherwise known
as the Paramahamsa-Samhita.

Find ixet.
PIRES rc

अथ सप्तमोऽध्याय:

Discourse VII
The Legend of an Ascetic—the Story of eight (out of twenty-four)
preceptors (from the earth to the pigeon) recognized by him
श्रीभगवानुवाच
यदात्थ oat महाभाग तच्चिकीर्षितमेव मे। ब्रह्मा भवो लोकपाला: स्वर्वासं मेऽभिकाङ्किण: |
मया निष्पादितं ह्यत्र देवकार्यमहोषत: 1 यदर्थमवतीर्णोऽहमंशेन ब्रह्मणार्थित: ।
ee a शापनिर्दग्धं नङ्कयत्यन्योन्यविग्रहात्। age: सप्तमेऽह्नयेतां Ga च प्लावयिष्यति ।
agar मया त्यक्तो लोकोऽयं नष्टमङ्गल: । भविष्यत्यचिरात् साधो कलिनापि निराकृत: ।
न ame त्वयैवेह मया त्यक्ते महीतले । जनोऽधर्मरुचिर्भद्र भविष्यति wet युगे ।
त्वं तु aa परित्यज्य ae स्वजनबन्धुषु । मय्यावेश्य मन: सम्यक्समदृग्विचरस्व गाम् ।
यदिदं मनसा arn wanal श्रवणादिभि: । नश्वं गृह्यमाणे च विद्धि मायामनोपयम्
पुंसोऽयुक्तस्य नानार्थो wa: सगुणदोषभाक् । कर्माकर्मविकर्मेति गुणदोषधियो भिदा । ८ ।
were युक्तेन्द्रियग्रामो युक्तचित्त इदं जगत्। आत्मनीक्षस्व विततमात्मानं मय्यधीश्वरे । ९ ।
ज्ञानविज्ञानसंयुक्त आत्मभूत: ङशरीरिणाम्। आत्मानुभवतुष्टात्मा नान्तरायैर्विहन्यसॆ 120 |
दोषबुद्ध्योभयातीतो निषेधान्न निवर्तते। गुणबुद्ध्या च विहितं न करोति यथार्भक: ।११॥
सर्वभूतसुहृच्छान्तो ज्ञानविज्ञाननिश्चय: | पद्यन् मदात्मकं विश्वं न विपद्येत a पुन: 1221
The glorious Lord began again: That alone which you have asked Me (to do), O highly
blessed one, (in verse 42 of Discourse VI above) is intended by Me. Brahma (the creator).
Lord Siva (the Source of the universe) and the (other) guardians of the spheres (too) long
for My presence in heaven. (1) Indeed | have wholly accomplished the purpose of the gods
(viz., the removal of the earth's burden) for which, as requested by Brahma. | descended on
this earth with My part manifestation (Balarama). (2) This race (of Yadu), which (is the only
surviving burden on the earth and) has (already) been consumed by the curse (of the

Brahmanas) will surely perish through mutual strife; (and) on the seventh day the sea will
overflow and submerge this city (of Dwaraka). (3) The moment this (mortal) world is forsaken,

१ ७ M FF K ww wD wo
