Dis. 19 ] BOOK SIX 641

SHER SASS SRR E HERES SCS CURNERAERH Ree eT LCR Heh enhhhhehreeeeeeENNSHANRNHREhEEN een
RRR R DER AREA ES SS SECURE SERERAEEERPESIUOHERENOARHR REO न न व TNR hee eM
ox उवाच
अम्ब तेऽहं व्यवसितमुपधार्यागतोऽन्तिकम्। लब्धान्तरोऽच्छिदं गर्भमर्थबुद्धिर्न धर्मवित् ice
कृत्तो मे सप्तधा meh आसन् सप्त कुमारका: | तेऽपि चैकैकञ्ञो वृक्णा: सप्तधा नापि aA ।७२।
ततस्तत्परमाश्चर्यं वीक्ष्याध्यवसितं मया । महापुरुषपूजाया: सिद्धि: काप्यनुषङ्गिणी 193 |
आराधनं भगवत ईहमाना निराशिष: । ये तु नेच्छन्त्यपि परं ते स्वार्थकुशला: स्मृता: । ७४।
आराध्यात्मप्रदं देवं स्वात्मानं जगदीश्वरम्। को वृणीते गुणस्पर्शं Fa: स्यान्नरकेऽपि यत् । ७५1
तदिदं मम ait बालिशस्य महीयसि | क्षन्तुमर्हसि मातस्त्वं दिष्ट्या गर्भो मृतोत्थित: । ७६1

Indra replied : Mother, having come to know of your vow, | sought your presence and,
having discovered your fault, cut the child in your womb, bent as | was on achieving my
(selfish) end and lost to all sense of righteousness. (71) The embryo was cut by meinseven
and there appeared seven children. They too were cut each in seven; yet they would not
die.(72) Seeing that great miracle, | at last concluded that it must be some incidental reward
of the worship of Lord Visnu (the Supreme Person). (73) They alone are declared as clever
in accomplishing their object, who while engaged in propitiating the Lord are (entirely) free
from desires and do not aspire even to attain final beatitude (as a reward for their
worship).(74) Having propitiated the Lord, the ruler of the universe, who is not only the Self
of us all but who bestows His very Self on His devotees, what wise man would ask of Him
the pleasures of sense, which could be had even in hell ? (75) Therefore, may you be pleased
toforgive, O mother, this actof wickedness on my part, foolish as! am, O highly noble lady! Thank
God ! the child in your womb has risen to life (as it were) after death. (76)

ARYA उवाच
FRNA: शुद्धभावेन तुष्टया । मरुद्धि: सह तां नत्वा जगाम त्रिदिवं प्रभु: । ७७।
एवं ते सर्वमाख्यातं यन्मां त्वं परिपृच्छसि age मरुतां जन्म किं ya: कथयामि ते । ७८।
Sri Suka went on : Permitted by Diti, who was pleased with his sincerity, the powerful
Indra bowed to her and left for the third heaven along with the Maruts (wind-gods). (77) In

this way | have told you all that you enquired of me, viz., the story of the auspicious birth of
the Maruts. What more shall | speak to you about ? (78)

Thus ends the eighteenth discourse entitled "An account of the birth of the Maruts!
in Book Six of the great and glorious Bhaga vata-Purana,
otherwise known as the Paramahamsa-Samhita.

oo PE Bat ९६
POI PISS ip

अथैकोनविंशोऽध्याय:

Discourse XIX
The procedure of observing the sacred vow of Purnsavana

at पुंसवनं ब्रह्मम् भवता यदुदीरितम्।ततस्य वेदितुमिच्छामि येन विष्णु: प्रसीदति । १ ।
The king (Pariksit) said : | wish to know the procedure of observing the (sacred) vow
of Pumsavana, which has just been mentioned by you, O holy one, and by which Lord Visnu
is (easily) propitiated. (1)
