310 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA Dis. 48

SERRE RO ReRs Serr RRR YE rs Retr Sa EOE ts. Sr ere ere ererer sre eines 9 ज् HR RRR eerie

अथाष्टचत्वारिशोऽध्याय:

Discourse XLVIII
The Lord pays a visit to Kubja (the hunchbacked woman) and Akrira at
- their respective places
श्रीशुक उवाच
अथ विज्ञाय भगवान् सर्वात्मा सर्वदर्शन: | deen: कामतप्ताया: प्रियमिच्छन् गृहं ययो । १ ।
`भहार्होपस्करैराढ्यं कामोपायोपबृंहितम् | मुक्तादामपताकाभिर्वितानशयनासनै: ।
धूपै: सुरभिभिर्दपि: स्रगान्धैरपि मण्डितम् । २ ।
गृहं तमायान्तमवेक्ष्य साऽसनात् सद्य: समुत्थाय fe जातसम्भ्रमा ।
यथोपसङ्गम्य सखीभिरच्युते सभाजयामास सदासनादिभि: । ३ ।
कृष्णोऽपि तूर्णं wa महाधनं fea लोकाचरितान्यनुव्रत: । ४
सा मज्जनालेपदुकूलभूषणस्त्रगान्धताम्बूलसुधासवादिभि: ।
प्रसाधितात्मोपससार maa सव्रीडलीलोत्सितविभ्रमेक्षितै: । ५ ।
आहूय कान्तां नवसङ्घमह्निया विदाङ्कितां कङ्कणभूषिते  करे।

दोर्या स्तनान्तरगतं परिरभ्य कान्तमानन्दमूर्तिमजहादतिदीर्घतापम् । ७ ।
सैवं कैवल्यनाथं तं प्राप्य commie agama दुर्भगेदमयाचत । ८ ।
आहोष्यतामिह प्रेष्ठ दिनानि कतिचिन्मया । रमस्व नोत्सहे त्यक्तुं as तेऽम्बुरुहेक्षण । ९ ।
Ta कामवरं दत्त्वा मानयित्वा च मानद:। सहोद्धवेन सर्वेश: स्वघामागमदर्चितम् ।१०॥
दुराराध्यं समाराध्य विष्णुं सर्वेश्वरेश्वम्। यो वृणीते मनोग्राह्यमसत्त्वात् कुमनीघ्यसौ । ११।

Sri Suka began again : Perceiving what wasin the mind of Trivakra (the erstwhile maid-
servant of Karhsaj, smitten (as she was) with (pangs of) love (for Sri Krsna), and seeking her
gratification, the all-seeing Lord, the Soul of the universe, then called at her house, (which
was) equipped with costly articles of household use and supplemented by devices stimulating
passion (such as erotic pictures), nay, embellished with strings of pearls and flags, canopies,
beds and seats as well aswith fragrant incenses, lights, wreaths and perfumes.(1-2) Seized with
a flurry, as a matter of fact, to perceive Him coming to her house, she stood up at once from
her seat and, meeting Him with due ceremony alongwith her female companions, honoured
Sri Krsna (the unfailing Lord) by offering Him a good seat and other articles of worship. (3)
Duly honoured by her in a like manner, Uddhava squatted on the floor touching the seat
(offered by her) with his head. Following the practices of the worldly-minded, Sri Krsna, for
His part, quickly settled down on the costly bed (already placed there).(4) Duly preparing
herself with a bath, pigments, fine linen, jewellery, garlands, perfumes, betel-leaves chewed
with catechu, lime and areca-nut parings etc., nectar-like beverage and so on, she
approached Sri Krsna (a scion of Madhu) with shy looks accompanied by sportful smiles and
