304 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 4

BAAR EAA ERE ERE CEES RAP EEE CETH RATE EHHAREE HE ORR AE हो त्योयो हीं ECEMHHRE EOE HORAK

own Self does not (invariably) follow the utterances of the Vedas (in the form of injunctions
and interdictions). Just as the movements of an immortal and a human being vary (while the
one can tread on air, the other can walk on solid ground alone), even so the ways of the
enlightened and the ignorant are not alike. Therefore, while holding fast exclusively to one's
own duty, one should never cast aspersions against another. (19) Activity in the shape of
performing one's religious duties (pouring oblations into the sacred fire and so on) and that
consisting of pursuits carried on in retirement (such as the control of one's mind and senses
etc.) are equally right, both being prescribed in the Vedas severally for the two types of men,
the one characterized by worldly attachment and the other by its absence, as willappear from
the fact that the two are found incompatible in an agent practising both at a time. (But even
as the one duty is not incumbent on the other type of men) so no duty of any kind devolves
on Lord Siva (who is the same as Brahma). (20)

मा @: wea: पितरस्मदास्थिता या यज्ञञ्ञालासु न धूमवर्त्मभि: |

तदन्नतृप्तैरसुभृद्भिरीडिता अव्यक्तलिङ्गा अवधूतसेविता: 1221

ater ममाभूत्कुजनप्रसङ्गतस्तजन्म धिग् यो महतामवद्यकृत् ।२२॥
Tt weet भगवान् quest दाक्षायणीत्याह यदा सुदुर्मना: |
व्यपेतनर्मस्मितमाशु तद्ध्यहं AT एतत्कुणपं त्वदङ्मजम् ।२३॥

The natural gifts (mystic powers) possessed by us, O father, cannot be acquired by you.
They are not extolled in sacrificial halls by creatures following the path of ritual and gratified
with the food offered in sacrifices; for their origin is unknown (depending as they do on our
will) and they are enjoyed only by the knowers of Brahma. (21) | have no longer any use for
this body of ignoble birth, sprung as it is from the loins of one who has sinned against Lord
Siva (the Destroyer of the universe). Away, away with it ! | am ashamed of my relationship
with a vile man. Accursed be the birth from him who offends against exalted souls. (22) When
Lord Siva (whose banner bears the device of a bull) calls me (jocularly) by the name of
Daksayani (Daksa's daughter)—an appellation derived from your name, | shall feel deeply
piqued, and forget all mirth and smile. Therefore, | will forthwith cast off this corpse-like body
begotten of you (so that no such occasion may arise). (23)

मैत्रेय उवाच
इत्यध्वरे दक्षमनूद्य शत्रुहन् क्षितावुदीचीं निषसाद शान्तवाक |
We जलं पीतदुकूलसंवृता निमील्य दृग्योगपथं समाविशात् । २४॥
कृत्वा समानावनिलौ जितासना सोदानमुत्थाप्य च नाभिचक्रत: |
amd स्थाप्य धियोरसि स्थितं aus भ्रुवोर्मध्यमनिन्दितानयत् ।२५॥
जिहासती दक्षरुषा मनस्विनी दधार गात्रेनिलाग्निधारणाम् ।२६॥
तत: स्वभर्तुश्चरणाम्बुजासवं जगद्गुरोश्चिन्ततती न चापरम्।
wet देहो हतकल्मष: सती we: प्रजज्वाल समाधिजाम्निना.। २७

Maitreya went on: Having thus addressed Daksa in the sacrificial assembly, O Vidura
(queller of enemies in the shape of lust, anger and so on), Sati sat down silent on the floor,
facing the north. She sipped (some) water (by way of purification), wrapped herself with a
