Dis. 43} BOOK TEN 285

Beg aoe nie nore gn ote gg eg ett nis wre ee ere ee ne ee aera

and strokes of lightning. (26-27) Beholding with joy His ever-cheerful and smiling face
enlivened with penetrating glances the cowherd women overcame agonies of various kinds
without any effort. (28) The wise declare that, protected in everyway by the yonder Boy, this
race of Yadu will become very well-known and attain prosperity, renown and glory. (29) And
here is His elder brother, the glorious Balarama of lotus-like eyes, by whom was slain
Pralamba as well as the demon who came disguised as a calf* and others of whom Baka was
the foremost. (30)

जनेष्ठेवं - ब्रुवाणेषु तूर्येषु निनदत्सु च । कृष्णरामौ समाभाष्य चाणूरो वाक्यमब्रवीत् ।३१।

हे नन्दसूनो हे राम भवन्तौ वीरसंमतौ । नियुद्धकुशलौ श्रुत्वा राज्ञाऽहूतौ दिदृक्षुणा 1321

fa wa: प्रकुर्वन्त्य: श्रेयो विन्दन्ति a प्रजा: । मनसा कर्मणा वाचा विपरीतमतोऽन्यथा 1331

fret प्रमुदिता गोपा वत्सपाला यथा स्फुटम्। वनेषु मल्लयुद्धेन क्रीडन्तश्चारयन्ति गा: । ३४॥

तस्माद् Ua: प्रियं यूयं ad च करवाम हे। भूतानि a: प्रसीदन्ति सर्वभूतमयो qo: । ३५1

While the people were talking thus and trumpets were loudly sounding, Canira (the

foremost of the king's wrestlers) accosted Sri Krsna and Balarama and spoke (to Them) as
follows:—(31) "O Krsna (Nanda’s darling), 0 Balarama, both of you are esteemed (by the
people) as heroes ! On hearing of you as skilled in wrestling, you have been invited (to
participate in the tournament) by the king, who has been eager to see you. (32) Subjects
doing precisely by thought, word and deed what is agreeable to their king attain to prosperity
indeed; while those acting otherwise than this meet with contrary results. (33) Itis well-known
how cowherds, from the time they begin to tend calves, daily pasture their cows with great
joy in woodlands, diverting themselves with wrestling. (34) Therefore, let yourselves as well
as ourselves, O boys, do whatis liked by the king. (If the king is pleased, all) beings will be
pleased with us; (for) the king is an embodiment of all creatures." (35)

तन्निशम्बाब्रवीत् कृष्णो देशकालोचितं वच: । नियुद्धमात्मनोऽभीष्टं मन्यमानोऽभिनन्द्य च 136!
प्रजा भोजपतेरस्य ad चापि वरनेचरा: । करवाम fd fet तन्न: परमनुग्रह: ।३७।
बाला aa तुल्यबलै: क्रीडिष्वामो यथोचितम्। भवेन्नियुद्धं माधर्म: स्पृशेन्मल्ल सभासद: 131
Hearing the aforesaid speech (of Cantira) and welcoming it, Sri Krsna, who regarded
wrestling (with him) as something to His liking, gave the following reply, which was
appropriate to the occasion and place (of the dialogue):—(36) "We too, who dwell in the
woods, as well as yourselves are the subjects of this king of the Bhojas. Let us (all therefore)
always do what would please him; through such behaviour his infinite grace will descend on
us. (37) Youngsters as we are, we shall (however) sport with those who are our equals in
stréngth. Let there be a well-matched wrestling bout, so that no sin (of allowing an unequal
match) may attach to those present in the assembly, O (great) wrestler ! (38)

चाणूर उवाच
न बालो न किशोरस्त्वं बलश्च बलिनां वर: । लीलयेभो हतो येन सहस्ररद्दिपसत्त्वभृत् ।३९॥
तस्माद् भवद्भ्यां बलिभिर्योद्धिव्यं नानयोऽत्र वै। मयि विक्रम वारष्णेय बलेन सह मुष्टिक: ।४०॥
Canira replied : You are neither a youngster nor a lad; noris Bala, the foremost of the

* Vide foot-note Oils. 43 Verse 25; Page 284.
