RARER ED REE EAR ङ विछैक्त कके क्तयक्तै EEE CREE EEE EEE क क द्छ त् य त्त्छैत्यै कौ व SESE EEE EH

766 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 7
KAAS AH

names of Tatpurusa, Aghora, Sadyojata, Vamadeva and Isana), O Lord, from (the thirty-
eight parts of) which the thirty-eight fragmentary Mantras came into existence, constitute
Your (five) faces (bearing the same names as the sacred texts themselves). Again, that self-
effulgent Principle,-constituting the supreme Reality, which is known by the name of Siva, 0
Deity, is (nothing but) Your absolute state. (29) Your shadow is seen in waves of
unrighteousness (greed, manifestedin the form of hypocrisy and so on), by which destruction
is wrought; while Sattva, Rajas and Tamas constitute Your three eyes. (And) the eternal
Veda, mainly consisting of metrical compositions, O Lord, represents a glance from You, the
all-wise originator of the sacred lore.(30) Brahma (the Absolute)—which is not accessible to
the guardians of all the spheres, nay, not even to Brahma (the creator), Visnu and Indra (the
ruler of the gods), O Protector of mountains, (nay,) in which Rajas and Tamas and Sattva
(too) find no place and which has all differences cast away from it—is (nothing but) Your
supreme effulgence.(31) The act of Your destroying many an enemy of living beings—such
as the god of love, the sacrificial performance undertaken by Daksa, the three (flying) cities
(built by the demon Maya), the god of death and the poison (Halahala)—is no matter for
praise on Your part, who (remain so deeply absorbed in meditation that You) do not even
perceive this universe, created by Yourself, as having been reduced to ashes by the sparks
and flames of fire shot by Your own (middle) eye at the time of (universal) dissolution ! (32)
They, on the other hand, that revile You as living in the company (excessively fond) of
Goddess Uma (Your divine Spouse)—even though Your feet are contemplated upon in the
heart by teachers (of mankind) revelling in their Self—and as fierce and violent and
particularly fond of the cremation-ground, even though You stand thoroughly disciplined by
austerities, have surely not understood Your pastimes and have cast (all) shame to the winds
(as otherwise they would not have the impudence to rail at You in this way).(33) (Even)
Brahma and others are not capable of correctly comprehending Your essential nature, much
less extolling properly You, the perfect One, who are (so mysterious and ) higher (even) than
that (Prakrti or primordial Matter) which lies beyond both causes and effects. How can,
therefore, we, who (are very recent in that we) have been created by Marici and others (the
‘creation of Brahma), feel equal to it ? Yet, we have tried to extol You according to our barest
capacity. (34) We clearly perceive this (visible form of Yours) alone and not Your transcendent
reality, O supreme Lord! Asa matter of fact, Your manifestation is intended (only) to gladden
the world, even though Your activities are not (always) open (to the world). (35)
श्रीगुक उवाच
weet व्यसनं तासां कृपया भृशापीडित: । सर्वभूतसुहृद देव इदमाह सतीं प्रियाम् । ३६1

Sri Suka went on: Perceiving the aforesaid distress of theirs and sore stricken with
mercy, the Lord, who is the Friend of all living beings, told Sati, His beloved Consort, as
follows:—(36)

Rre sara
Ha बत भवान्येतत् प्रजानां पर्य वैशासम्। क्षीरोदमथनोद्धूतात् कालकूटादुपस्थितम् 13191
आसां प्राणपरीप्सूनां विधेयमभयं fe मे। एतावान्हि प्रभोरर्थो ae दीनपरिपालनम् isc

प्राणै: स्वै: प्राणिन: पान्ति साधव: क्षणभङ्गुरै:।बद्धवैरेषु भूतेषु मोहितेघ्वात्ममायया ।३९॥
तस्मादिदं गरं भुञ्जे प्रजानां स्वस्तिरस्तु मे ।४०॥
Sri Siva observed: Oh, how distressing itis | Observe, O Bhavani (Consort of Lord Siva,
the Source of the universe), this calamity that has come upon these creatures from (the
