Dis. 48 ] BOOK TEN 313

ककक ery ron soe Son fete sn tts शार्ह ete ee eta ee rere Eine tee eee ७

of this race (the race of the Yadus). (24) Highly blessed indeed are our dwellings today, that
You, O Lord who are above sense-perception, have visited—You, the well-known Father
and Precepior of the universe, manifestedin the form ofall the gods, manes, spirits and kings
(the rulers of men)—the waters washing whose feet (under the name of the Ganga) sanctify
(all) the three worlds. (25) What wise man would seek as his protector anyone other than You,
who are (so) truthful of speech, friendly, grateful and loving to Your votaries, and who grant
all the desires of a pure-hearted devotee, nay, bestow on him Your very Self, to which neither
growth nor decay can be attributed. (26) Luckily enough (for us), O Lord who are supplicated
by (al!) men, You have been perceived by us here (at our very house)—You, whose ways
cannot be easily comprehended even by masters of Yoga (like Sanaka) and rulers of gods
(like Indra). (Pray,) dispel atonce Your Maya (enchantment) in the shape of ties of attachment
to our children, wife, wealth, relations, houses, body and so on." (27)

इत्यर्चित: संस्तुतश्च भक्तेन भगवान् हरि: । अक्रूरं सस्मितं ore गीर्भि: सम्मोहयन्निव ।२८।

उत्त Suka continued : Thus honoured and glorified by His devotee, Lord Sri Hari smilingly
replied to Akriira (as follows), enchanting him as it were by His (sweet and polite) words. (28)

त्वं नो गुरु: पितृव्यश्च yeret बन्धुश्च नित्यदा | वयं तु रक्ष्या: पोष्याश्च अनुकम्प्या: प्रजा हि व: 1231

vag महाभागा निषेव्या अर्हंसत्तमा: | श्रेयस्कामैर्नृभिर्नित्यं देवा: स्वार्था न साधव: ।३०॥

न ह्यम्मयानि तीर्थानि न देवा मृच्छिलामया: । ते पुनन्त्युरुकालेन दर्शनादेव साधव: ।३१॥

स भवान् सुहृदां a न: श्रेयाञ्छेयश्चिकीर्षया | जिज्ञासार्थं पाण्डवानां गच्छस्व त्वं गजाह्वयम् 1३२1

feria बाला: सह मात्रा सुदु:खिता: | आनीता: स्वपुरं राज्ञा वसन्त इति WA ।३३॥

तेषु untae wg dad । समो न वर्तते नूनं दुष्पुत्रवज्ञगोऽन्धदूक् । ३४1

गच्छ जानीहि तदवृत्तमधुना साध्वसाधु वा । विज्ञाय aa विधास्यामो यथा शं सुहृदां भवेत् ।३५॥

इत्यक्रूरं समादिश्य भगवान् हरिरीश्चर: । सङ्कुर्षणोद्धवाभ्यां वै तत: स्वभवनं ययौ Re

इति श्रीमद्भागवते महापुराणे पारमहंस्यां संहितायां Ta पूर्वार्घे अष्टचत्वारिंशोऽध्याय: Pec

The glorious Lord said : You are our preceptor (counsellor) and uncle, nay, our
praiseworthy friend. We ever deserve to be protected, nourished and treated with compassion
by you, as a matter of fact, since we are your children. (29) Highly blessed and most worthy
souls like you deserve constantly to be adored (more than gods) by men seeking blessed-
ness. Gods are (after all) actuated by self-interest (and are pleased with those alone who
offer ob!ations to them through the sacred fire); (but) not so the pious (who habitually do good
to others without expecting any return from them). (30) It is not that there are no purifying
agencies (in the shape of rivers, lakes etc.), consisting of water and no deities (with a body)
made of clay and stone. They (however) exert a purifying influence through a long process
of time, whereas pious souls do so through their very sight. (31) As such you are the foremost
of our friends. Therefore, with intent to do a good turn to (my cousins) Yudhisthira and others
(the sons of Pandu) proceed you to Hastinapura (the capital of the Kauravas, named after
its founder, King Hasti) for making enquiries about them. (32) Brought (back from the forest
where King Pandu lived) to his capital by the (blind) king (Dhriarastra, their elder uncle, who
had ascended the throne on the plea of his being the reversionary heir of Pandu), their father
having died (the other day), the boys are living ina most miserable condition with their mother

[565] B.M. Part Il—39

