796 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 15

६.३.३.३.६.३.७.७..३.३.३..३..३....६.३.३..३..३..३&.३.३.३.३.१७६..३.३.८..६.७ ३३३३ २३ ३२३3 .२-३.७.३.3.3.3-&.६.३ १३3 .3.३.३.३.३.६.३.३.३.३ .. -६.३.७.३.३..६.७.७.३.६.३.३.१
श्रीगुक उवाच
पराजितश्रीरसुभिश्च हापितो dam राजन् भृगुभि: स जीवित: |
wate | तानभजदू भृगूनबलि: शिष्यो महात्मार्थनिवेदनेन । ३ ।
a ब्राह्मणा भृगव: saan अयाजयन्विश्वजिता fore
जिगीषमाणं विधिनाभिषिच्य महाभिषेकेण महानुभावा: । ४ ।
ततो रथ: काञ्चनपट्टनद्धो हयाश्च हर्यश्वतुरङ्गवर्णा: |
ag ff fart ewer हविर्भिरिष्टात्। ५ |
as fet weg तूणावरिक्तो कवचं च fem
पितामहस्तस्य ददौ च mememgm जलजं च जशुक्र: । ६ ।
एवं स विप्रार्जितयोधनार्थस्तै:कल्पितस्वस्ययनोऽथ far
प्रदक्षिणीकृत्य कृतप्रणाम: प्रह्रादमामन्त्य नमश्चकार । ७ ।
अथारुह्य रथं दिव्यं भृगुदत्तं महारथ: | सुस्रग्धरोऽथ संनह्य धन्वी wet धृतेषुधि: । ८ ।
हेमाङ्गक्काद्बाहु: स्फुरन्मकरकुण्डल: । रराज रथमारूढो धिष्ण्यस्थ ga हव्यवाट्। ९ |
तुल्यैश्चर्यबलश्रीभि: स्वयूथैर्दैत्ययूथपै: | पिबद्भिरिव खं दृग्भिर्दहद्भि: परिधीनिव igo!
वृततो विकर्षन् महतीमासुरीं ध्वजिनीं विभु: । ययाविन्द्रपुरीं स्वृद्धां कम्पयन्निव रोदसी ees
Sri Suka replied: Since Bali, who had been worsted (in battle) and (thus) divested of (his
royal) splendour (nay,) even deprived of (his) life by Indra, O Pariksit, was brought back to
life by the Bhrgus (Sukracarya and other descendants of the sage Bhrgu), that high-souled
demon, their disciple, served the Bhrgus with all his being by offering (them) all that they
desired. (3) Having consecrated him with a grand ablution (appropriate to Indra) conducted
with due ceremony (as laid downin the Bahvrca Brahmana ofthe Rgveda), those Brahmanas
of the Bhrgu race, (who were all) possessed of extraordinary power and favourably disposed
(towards their disciple), helped him propitiate the Lord by means ofa ViSwajit sacrifice (in the
course of which one is required to give away all one's possessions), anxious as he was to
conquer (the dominion of) heaven. (4) Thereupon arose from the fire, worshipped by means
of sacrificial offerings, a chariot covered all over with plates of gold as well as horses of the
same colour as those of Indra (viz.,green) and an ensign adorned with the emblem ofa lion,
also an ethereal bow plated with gold, a pair of quivers containing an inexhaustible stock of
arrows and an ethereal coat of mail (too). Again, his grandfather (Prahrada) gave him a
wreath of never-fading flowers and Sukra (his preceptor), a conch.(5-6) Thus equipped with
the necessaries of war procured (for him) by the Brahmanas (the Bhrgus) and having the
(necessary) auspicious rites performed (for him) by them, Bali forthwith went round the
Brahmanas keeping them (always) to his right (as a mark of respect); and, having bowed low
to them, he asked leave of Prahrada and saluted him. (7) Presently mounting the ethereal
chariot bestowed (on him through the sacrifice) by the Bhrgus, Bali (the great car-warrior)
wore the excellent garland (offered to him by Prahrada); and putting on the armour, he then
armed himself with a bow and sword and (further) equipped himself with a quiver.(8) Mqunted
onthe chariot with His arms resplendent with gold armlets, and adorned with radiantalligator-
shaped ear-rings, he shone like a fire burning in the sacrificial pit.(9) Surrounded by his own
retinue in the person of Daitya generals— generals who were equal to himin wealth, strength
and splendour and were drinking in the sky and burning the quarters as it were with their

eyes—and leading a huge army of the Asuras, the powerful Bali marched against the most
prosperous capital of Indra (in heaven), shaking as it were earth and heaven (both). (10-11)
