Dis. 41 ] BCOK TEN 273

DOI O I HIRIMISIIE वित् शे न sc ar ett oe न न न tots २२२२ ttt

difficult of access to the unrighteous. This too | think is possible (only) with Your grace; (for)
devotion to You comes through the service of holy men (only) when the end of (the cycle of)
birth and death fora man draws near, O Lord with a lotus sprung from Your navel ! (28) Hail
to You who are all perfect and possessed of endless potencies, are invested with a body
consisting of (pure) consciousness, the Source of all knowledge and the Ruler of all those
(viz., the Time-Spirit, Karma, nature and so on) that control {the destiny of) the Jiva ! (29)
Salutation to You, the Deity presiding over the intellect (in the form of Vasudeva), the abode
ofall created beings (in the form of Lord Sankarsana, the Deity presiding over the ego-sense,
which is the sustainer of all living creation)! Hail to You, O Ruler of the senses in the forms
of Pradyumna and Aniruddha (the deities presiding over reason and the mind respectively)!
(Pray,) protect me, fallen at Your feet, O Lord ! (30)

Thus ends the fortieth discourse entitled "Akrira's Eulogy (of the Lord)"
in the first half of Book Ten of the great and glorious Bhagavata-
Purana, otherwise known as the Paramahamsa-Samnhita.

sgtwstwst:

अथैकचत्वारिंशोऽध्याय:

Discourse XLI

Entry into Mathura (of Sri Krsna and Balarama)

स्तुवतस्तस्य भगवान् दर्शयित्वा जले वपु: 1 भूय: समाहरत् कृष्णो नटो नाट्यमिवात्मन: 1 १ ।
सोऽपि चान्तर्हितं dea जलादुन्मज्ज्य सत्वर: । कृत्वा चाव्यकं सर्वं विस्मितो रथमागमत् । २ !
तमपृच्छद्धूषीकेश: किं ते दृष्टमिवाद्धुतम्। yt वियति तोये वा तथा त्वां लक्षयामहे | ३ |

Sri Suka began again : Having shown (to Akrira) His (Narayana’s) form under water,
Lord SriKrsna withdrew it again, (even) while he was eulogizing Him, (just) as an actor would
wind up his part. (1) Perceiving the vision withdrawn and emerging from the water, Akrura
also hurriedly finished all his unavoidable routine of devotions, and returned wonder-struck
to the chariot. (2) Sri Krsna (the Ruler of the senses) asked him, "What wonder did you see
(just) now on earth, in the heavens or in the water (of the Yamuna)? (From your moist and
blooming eyes and cheerful countenance etc.), we conclude you to have witnessed
something unusual. (3)

अक्रूर उवाच

अद्भुतानीह यावन्ति yet वियति वा जले । त्वयि विश्वात्मके तानि किं मेऽदृष्टं विपर्यत: । ४ ।
wargame सर्वाणि भूमौ वियति वा जले । तं त्वानुपश्यतो ब्रह्मन् किं मे दृष्टमिहाद्भुतम् । ५ |
इत्युक्त्वा चोद्यामास wet गान्दिनीसुत: । मथुरामनवद् रामं कृष्णं चैव दिनात्यये । ६ ।

मार्गे त्रामजना राजंस्तत्र तत्रोपसंगता: । वसुदेवसुतो die sin दृष्टिं न चाददु: । ७ |
तावद् ब्रजौकसस्तत्र नन्दगोपादयोऽग्रत: | पुरोषवनमासाद्य प्रतीक्षन्तोऽवतस्थिरे । ८ |

तान् समेत्याह भगवानक्रूरं जगदीश्वर: । गृहीत्वा पाणिना पाणिं प्रश्रितं प्रहसन्निव । ९ |
