236 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 32

जन SUITS RIES ORR ER rr tert Seno 8 fi sermon far saint een a erin iiiieieairie

O Delighter of souls, (pray) set on our bosom, O Reliever of agony, Your most blissful
lotus-like feet, which grant the desires of those that bow low to them, and are worshipped by
Brahma (the lotus-born), which are the ornament of the earth and are worth contemplating
upon in (times of) adversity. (13) Vouchsafe to us, 0 heroic Lord, the nectar of Your lips,
which heightens our enjoyment and destroys (all) grief, (nay,) which is fully enjoyed by the
flute sounded by You and makes people forget all other attachments. (14) When You
proceed to the woods during the daytime, (even) half a moment becomes an age to us, who
fail to see You. And dull-witted is he (Brahma) who has created rows of hair on the edge (and
thus interrupted the joy) of eyés of us (all), that eagerly behold (without winking Your splendid
countenance overhung by curly hair (on Your return from the woods at eventide). (15)
Completely neglecting our husband, children, kinsmen, brothers and other relations, O
immortal Lord, and enchanted by the shrill note of Your flute, we have sought Your presence,
knowing as we did Your (alluring) ways. What man, O Trickster, would abandon (helpless)
women at (dead of) night ? (16) Perceiving Your amorous advances made in secret, Your
smiling countenance, which kindles love in our heart, Your loving glances and broad chest,
the abode of Sri (the goddess of beauty and prosperity). Our mind gets infatuated again and
again through intense longing (to meet You). (17) Your manifestation (on earth), O Darling,
has put an end to the sorrows of the inhabitants of Vraja as well as of the denizens of the
forest, and is extremely auspicious for the whole universe. (Pray) unreservedly administer
to us—whose mind is full of longing for you—(at least) a little of that remedy (in the form of
Your company) which may relieve the pangs of heart of Your own people. (18) You traverse
the forest on those tender lotus-like feet which, O Darling, we have gently and timidly set on
our hard bosom (for fear of injuring them). Are they not pained by coming in contact with
gravel etc. ? The mind of us (all), whose life is centred in You, reels at the (very) thought of
it. (19)

Thus ends the thirty-first discourse, entitled "the Gopis‘ Song (at the Lord's disappearance)
during the Rasa-Play,” in the first half of Book Ten of the great
and glorious Bhagavata-Purana, otherwise known
as the Paramaharhsa-Samhita.

cStue ttt,
CIS RNS

अथ द्वात्रिंशोऽध्याय:

Discourse XXXIl
The Lord comforts the Gopis during the Rasa Play

SS

श्रीगुक उवाच
इति गोप्य: प्रगायन्त्य: प्रलपन्त्यश्च चित्रधा । रुरुदु: Get राजन् कृष्णदर्शनलालसा: । १ ।
तासामाविरभूच्छौरि स्मयमानमुखाम्बुज:। पीताम्बरधर: edt साक्षान्मन्मथमन्मथ: । २ ।
तं विलोक्यागतं प्रेष्ठं प्रीत्युत्फुल्लदूशोऽबला: । उत्तस्थुर्युगपत् सर्वास्तन्व: प्राणमिवागतम् । ३ |
काचित् कराम्बुजं ज्ञौरेर्जगृहेज्जलिना मुदा। काचिद् za तद्बाहुमंसे चन्दनरूषितम् । ४ ।
काचिदञ्जलिनागृह्णात्तन्वी ताम्बूलचर्वितम्। एका dates सन्तप्ता स्तनयोरधात्। ५ |

