480 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 11

PERCHA HHHAERERELEHARAAHAAEEHCERERNAELEEEHELAEESEEHEHHERTEN ETOH A AA eee UHH AHHH

which these currents flow, O valiant king ! (9) Smell, colour, touch, taste and sound are the
Objects of the (five) senses of perception; defecation, coition, locomotion, speech and
grasping or releasing an object—these are the (five) functions of the organs of action; and
acknowledging the body as 'mine' —which is the eleventh—is the function of the ego-sense.
Others declare awareness of the body as one's own self ('l') as the twelfth current of the mind
(their contention being that itis the sensible alone who acknowledge the body as ‘mine’ ,i.e.,
something other than their self, the ignorant regarding it as their very self). And they speak
of the body (the object of the’aforesaid awareness) as the twelfth object (of the activities of
the mind). (10) Due to the endless variety of objects, as well as to the very nature of things
(which are ever in a state of flux), and to the diversity of predispositions and Karmas (past
actions) and the action of time (which disturbs everything), these eleven modifications
(currents) of the mind are multiplied (first) into hundreds, (then into) thousands and
(eventually into) tens of millions. They (all, however,) proceed from God and have no
existence of their own nor do they owe their existence to one another. (11) God, whois (ever)
pure (unattached to the world) merely looks on (as a witness and never gets identified with)
these (manifold) waves—appearing in an endless series, now manifest (in the waking and
dream states) and (now) disappearing (in deep sleep)—of the mind, which is an adjunct of
the Jiva and a creation of Maya, and which (ever) indulges in impure activities (leading to
transmigration). (12)

क्षेत्रज्ञ आत्मा पुरुष: पुराण: साक्षात्स्वयंज्योतिरज: परेश:।
नारायणो भगवान् TS: स्वमाययाऽऽत्मन्यवधीयमान:।१३।
एवं ow भगवान् वासुदेव: क्षेत्रज्ञ आत्मेदमनुप्रविष्ट:।१४॥
न यावदेतां तनुभृन्तरेद्र विधूय मायां वयुनोदयेन।
विमुक्तसङ्घो जितषट्सपत्नो वेदात्मतत्त्वं भ्रमतीह तावत्।१५॥
न wae setae संसारतापावपनं wel

यच्छोकमोहामयरागलोभवैरानुबन्धं ममतां विधत्ते । १६1
भ्रातृव्यमेनं तददभ्रर्वोर्यमुपेक्षवाव्येधितमप्नमत्त:।
गुरोर्हरश्चरणोपासनास्त्रो जहि व्यलीकं स्वयमात्ममोषम्।१७।

(The aforesaid) God is all-pervading, the most ancient (the first cause of the universe),
all-perfect, (ever) patent, self-effulgent, free from birth (and death), the Ruler (even) of the
highest beings (Brahma, Siva and others), the almighty Lord Vasudeva (the abode of the
universe), (Himself) dwelling as the (Inner) Controller of all the Jivas in every heart by His
own Maya (wonderful divine power). (13) Even as the air, entering in the form of breath (all)
mobile (animate) and immobile (inanimate) beings, controls them, so the supreme Lord
Vasudeva has interpenetrated this universe as the all-witnessing Inner Controller (of all).
(14) Man (lit., an embodied soul) continues to revolve in (the whirligig of) mundane existence
so long as he is not able, O ruler of men, to realize the true nature of the Self—by shaking
off this Maya (illusion in the form of identification with the body) by means of the light of
wisdom, having got rid of (all) attachment and conquered the six (internal) enemies (in the
shape of lust, anger, greed, infatuation, arrogance and jealousy), and so long as he is not
