Dis. 16] BOOK SIX 623

HHAAHASHEREHCHEA EEE HEALS SCEHER ELSE H LL ECHEATCLEN CEE EEE HEM BH MOKA HH MELA HL AHH CERI

meat waar wea: सुहृद्वृत: । भुङ्क्ष्व भोगान् पितॄप्रत्तानधितिष्ठ नृपासनम् 3 ।

_ N&rada said : O embodied soul, may you be blessed. (Just) look at your father and
mother. (Your) kinsmen and relations (too) are deeply agonized with grief caused by
(separation from) you. (2) Entering your body (again), and surrounded by your kinsmen,
enjoy the luxuries provided by your (royal) father, for the rest of your life (which has been
apparently cut short by your untimely death), and ascend the imperial throne (when your
father is no more). (3)

जीव Jara
कस्मिञ्जन्मन्यमी ad पितरो otsvaqiaditfeere देवतिर्यङ्नृयोनिषु । ४ |
बन्धुज्ञात्यरिमध्यस्थमित्रोदासीनविद्विष: । सर्वं wa हि सर्वेषां भवन्ति moan मिथ: । ५ ।
यथा वस्तूनि पण्यानि god ततस्तत: । पर्यटन्ति aye जीवो ay कर्तृषु । ६ ।
नित्यस्यार्थस्य सम्बन्धो ह्यनित्यो दृश्यते नृषु । यावद्यस्य fe सम्बन्धो ममत्वं तावदेव हि । ७ |
एवं योनिगतो sta: स नित्यो निरहङ्कृत: | यावद्यत्रोपलभ्येत तावत्स्वत्वं fe तस्य तत् । ८ |
एष नित्योऽव्यय: yan एष सर्वाश्रय: BER! आत्ममायागुणैर्विश्वमात्मानं सृजति प्रभु: । ९ ।
न ह्यस्यातिप्रिय: कश्चिन्नाप्रिय: स्व: परोऽपि वा । एक: सर्वधियां द्रष्टा कर्तॄणां गुणदोषयो: ।१०॥
नादत्त आत्मा fe गुणं न दोषं न क्रियाफलम्। उदासीनवदासीन: परावरदृगीश्वर: 1११॥
The soul replied : In what (particular) incarnation were these people (the souls of
Citraketu and his numerous queens) parents to me, who have been revolving by force of
Karma (destiny) through the species of gods, lower animals and human beings ? (4)
Indeed by turns (during different incarnations) all people actually come to be relatives and
kinsmen, adversaries and mediators, friends and neutrals and even bitter enemies in
relation to one another. (5) (Even) as gold and other commodities pass from one place to
another among (different) men, so does an embodied soul pass through (different) wombs
and (different) procreants. (6) The relation with men (even of an) animals (cow etc.) yet
living (not torn away by death) isindeed perceived to be temporary (and not abiding). (And)
the feeling of mineness with respect to (such) abeing really continues only so long as there
exists a relation with it. (7) Similarly a Jiva that has found its way into a (particular) womb
(and thereby entered into the relation of a son with another embodied soul that has
begotten or given birth to it) is (really) unrelated with any inasmuch as it is eternal
(birthless) and free from the consciousness of being a son etc. Itis only so long as itis seen
related to another (as a son) that the other Jiva (that begot or gave birth to it) can claim
it as its own (and not after that relation has ceased). (8) (Being essentially the same as
Brahma), the Jiva is everlasting, free from decay and unmanifest (free from birth etc.). It
is the ground of all (body, mind and so on) and self-illuminating. Being all-powerful, Jt
manifests itself in the form of the universe by means of the Gunas (Sattva, etc.) of its own
Maya (Prakrti). (9) Indeed none is very dear and none unwelcome, none is akin and none
alien to it. On the other hand, it is the one (dispassionate) witness of the varied minds of
friends as well as of foes (those who do a good or ill turn to him). (10) In fact, the Self earns
neither virtue nor sin nor does it enjoy the fruit of actions (in the shape of joy and sorrow)
and remains (altogether) unconcerned as it were. For it is the witness of both causes and
effects and (altogether) independent. (11)
sin Sara
इत्युदीर्य गतो जीवो ज्ञातयस्तस्य ते तदा । विस्मिता मुमुदु: ate छित्त्वाऽऽत्मस्नेहशृङ्खलाम् 122!
