Dis. 3] BOOK ELEVEN 529

न ककजा ER TOP CONE # ग TASER ल्क KKH HA का ल् ४99 4६०5 १०५० 8 १०५० ११० ५४१८

apparently convey. The real purpose of the Veda is to secure exemption from actions and
their fruit but (obviously) temptations of gaining heaven through prescribed actions are held
out to the ignorant, just as a boy is tempted with sweets to swallow a (bitter) medicine. (44)
One whois himself ignorant and has no control over one's senses and fails to perform actions
enjoined by the Vedas commits the sin of dereliction and passes from one death to another
(that is, remains involved in the cycle of births and deaths). (45) One who performs only
actions prescribed by the Vedas, without attachment to their fruits and surrendering them to
the Lord, attains to that ultimate fulfilment, which means that knowledge which proceeds from
freedom from actions. The promise of fruits (as mentioned in the Vedas) is meant only to
create interest iti actions (The prescribed actions and their fruits are described really for
getting ultimately freedom from actions). (46)
a आशु हृदयग्रन्थिं निर्जिहीर्षु: परात्मन: । विधिनोपचरेद् देवं तन्त्रोक्तेन च केशवम् ive!
लब्धानुग्रह आचार्यात् तेन सन्दर्शितागम: | महापुरुषमभ्यर्चेन्मूर्याभिमतयाऽऽत्मन: sel
शुचि: सम्मुखमासीन: प्राणसंयमनादिभि: । पिण्डं विशोध्य संन्यासकृतरक्षोऽर्चयेद्धरिम् 1x
wala हृदये चापि यथालब्धोपचारकै: | द्रव्यक्षित्यात्मलिङ्गानि free प्रोक्ष्य चासनम् ।५०॥
पाद्यादीनुपकल्प्याथ सन्निधाप्य समाहित: । हृदादिभि: कृतन्यासो मूलमन्त्रेण चार्चयेत् । ५१।
साङ्गोपाङ्गां सपार्षदां at at मूर्तिं स्वमन्त्रत: । पाद्यार्घ्यचमनीयाद्यै: स्नानवासोविभूषणै: 1421
गन्धमाल्याक्षतस्त्रग्भिर्धूपदीपोपहारकै: । साङ्गं सम्पूज्य विधिवत् स्तवै: स्तुत्वा नमेद्धरिम् । ५३
आत्मानं तन्मयं ध्यायन् मूर्तिं सम्पूजयेद्धरे: । रोषामाधाय शिरसि स्वधाम्न्युद्वास्य सत्कृतम् । ५४॥
`एवमग्न्यर्कतोयादावतिथौ हृदये च य: । यजतीश्वरमात्मानमचिरान्मुच्यते हि स: ।५५॥
इति श्रीमद्भागवते महापुराणॆ पाग्महंस्यां संहितायामेकादटास्कन्धे तृतीयोऽध्याय. 131
Whoever wishes to snap quickly the knot of heart (viz., egotism—the sense of | and
mine—and mistaking the body for the soul) in the soul, who is no other than the Supreme,
should with Vedic rites, accompanied by Tantric rites, worship Lord KeSava. (47) One who
has obtained initiation (in the sacred texts) through the grace of a preceptor, and has learnt
from him the mode of worship should worship the Lord in the image of his choice. (48) He
should observe cleanliness and then, sitting in front of the image, purify his body by
controlling his breath and other practices and fortify himself by duly assigning the various
parts of the body to different deities and worship the Lord. (49) First he should purify the
articles of worship (flowers etc., by removing insects and so on), the earth (by sweeping it),
his own self (through calmness) and the image (by removing the coating of sandal-paste
etc.), and thus make them fit for worship. Then he should sprinkle water on his seat, keep
ready water for washing the hands and feet etc., of the Deity with and other articles. Then
with a concentrated mind (he should) invoke the Deity (in the image) and, having installed
the Deity in his heart and other parts of the body, adore the Lord, with the available articles
of worship, in the image etc., or in the heart chanting the fundamental sacred formula or
Mantra. (50-51) He should worship the image of the Deity including His (various) limbs as
well as the emblems He wears (e. g., the discus Sudargana etc.), and His retinue (Sunanda
and others), repeating the sacred syllables pertaining to that Deity, offering water for washing
His hands and feet and rinsing His mouth, and so on, bathing the image, robing and
decorating It with ornaments, offering Him sandal-paste, flowers, unbroken grains of rice (for
adoming His forehead with), garland, incense, light and food. Thus worshipping the Lord with
His entourage well according to the prescribed rites, the devotee should sing hymnsin praise
ot Lord Sri Hari and prostrate himself (before the image). (52-53) One should duly worship
the image of Sri Hari while thinking himself as permeated by the Lord; and then, placing the
