Dis. 7] BOOK EIGHT 767
RHHHAMKES ANKE KESHEAKH EER oe Ske ehh hh eh ii tein in tet init ee ee he ee
—u—vna—@=__—_—a—————L EER ARH AHH EG EH Tre

poison called) Kalaktita, produced by the churning of the ocean of milk. (37) Security must
be vouchsafed by me to these people, anxious (as they are) to preserve their life. For, to
protect the afflicted, this much is the concern (duty) of a great one (who is endowed with
power). (38) The virtuous protect (other) living beings by (sacrificing) their own transient life.
Sri Hari, the Soul of the universe, O good lady, is pleased with a man who shows mercy to
created beings that are bewildered by the deluding potency of the Supreme Spirit and have
contracted enmity with one another. (And) when Lord Sri Hari is pleased, | (too) feel gratified
along with the (whole) mobile (animate) and immobile (inanimate) creation. Therefore, |
(hereby) swallow this poison. May ahappy (prosperous)life be assured to (all) created beings

through Me.(39-40)
श्रीरुक उवाच

एवमामन्त्य भगवान्भवानीं विश्वभावन:।तद् fae जग्धुमारेभे प्रभावज्ञान्वमोदत ive

a: करतलीकृत्य anit हालाहलं विषम्। serra: कृपया भूतभावन: ।॥४२॥

तस्यापि दर्शयामास स्ववीर्यं जलकल्मष:। यच्चकार गले नींलं तञ्च साधोर्विभूषणम् । ४३

तप्यन्ते लोकतापेन साधव: प्रायशो जना:। परमाराधनं तद्धि पुरुषस्याखिलात्मन: ।४४॥

Para कर्म तच्छम्भोर्देवदेवस्य मीढुष: । प्रजा दाक्षायणी ब्रह्मा वैकुण्ठश्च THAT ।४५॥

प्रस्कन्नं पिबत: पाणेर्यत् किञ्चिजगृहु: स्म तत्। वृश्चिकाहिविषौषध्यो दन्दशूकाश्च येऽपरे ४६1

इति श्रीमद्भागवते महापुराणे पारमहंस्यां संहितायामष्टमस्कन्धेऽमृतमथने सप्तमोऽध्याय: [ol
Sri Suka continued: Having thus sought leave of Bhavani, Lord Siva (the Delighter of

the universe) proceeded to swallow that poison. And Sati, who was aware of His greatness,
heartily gave Her conseni.(41) Then, Squeezing into (the cavity of) His palm the Halahala,
which was spreading all round, Lord Siva (the supreme Deity), the Protector of (all) living
beings,swallowed it out of compassion.(42) The poison (which was the concentrated
impurity of the oceanic water) showed its power even on His person in thatit made Him (look)
blue at the throat, although the spot became a special ornamentto that benevolent Soul. (43)
Generally noble souls are afflicted at the agony of the world. For, that (viz., sharing the
affliction of others) constitutes the highest worship of the supreme Person, the Soul of the
universe.(44) Observing that (benevolent) act of Lord Siva (the Source of blessedness), the
god of gods, who showers blessings on His devotees, the created beings (who had
approached Him), as well as Sati (Daksa's Daughter), Brahma and Lord Visnu (too)
applauded it. (45) Scorpions, snakes and poisonous herbs as well as what other biting
creatures (dogs, jackals and so on) there were took in what little (of the poison) leaked from
the palm of Lord Siva (even) while He drank it. (46)

Thus ends the seventh discourse, forming part of the story of the
churning of the ocean for (obtaining) nectar, in Book Eight of
the great and glorious Bhagavata-Purana, otherwise
known as the Paramahamsa-Samhita.

PITS ies ry
