90 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 2

ROR BERR HEME RON RE TE AE IER ६ EH ST ETT RR RT RTE NORE Be TO OT OE RR ee te

aa: कविर्नामसु यावदर्थ स्यादप्रमत्तो व्यवसायब्रुद्धि: ।
सिद्धेऽन्यथार्थे न ada ad afer at समीक्षमाण: । ३ ।
सत्यञ्जलौ किं पुरुधान्नपात्र्या दिग्वल्कलादौ सति किं दुकूलै: । ४ ।
चीराणि किं पथि न सन्ति दिशन्ति भिक्षां नैवाङ्ध्रिपा: परभृत: सरितोऽप्यशुष्यन्।
eel Ue: किमजितोऽवति नोपसन्नान् कस्माद् भजन्ति कवयो धनदुर्मदान्धान्। ५ |
एवं स्वचित्ते wa wa fag आत्मा प्रियोऽर्थो भगवाननन्त: |
a निर्वृतो नियतार्थो भजेत संसारहेतूपरमश्च यत्र । ६ ।
कस्तां त्वनादृत्य परानुचिन्तामृते ware नाम युञ्ज्यात्।
wat पतितं वैतरण्यां स्वकर्मजान् परितापाञ्जुषाणम् । ७ ।

Sri Suka continued : It was through such concentration that Brahma (the self-born)
propitiated that Lord and got from Him at the dawn of creation the knowledge (about
creation), which he had forgotten (during the last Pralaya or universal destruction). Having
thus acquired unfailing vision and a conclusive understanding, he created this universe even
as it existed before the universal dissolution. (1) Such is the (alluring) method (of presenta-
tion) of the Vedas that the mind seeks gratification through empty names devoid of any
corresponding reality. Expecting happiness in the world of Maya (illusion), the soul wanders
(through the various realms comprised in this world) as though it were dreaming, but fails to
derive real happiness there. (2) Therefore, a wise man should have connection with the
objects of enjoyment (which exist merely in name and have no abiding reality) only to the
extent they are useful for maintaining the body. At the same time he should be convinced in
his mind (about the emptiness of sensuous enjoyments) and should never commit the error
of getting attached to them. And if such objects could be had otherwise (by force of Prarabdha
or destiny as a matter of course), he should notstrive for them, seeing that such an endeavour
would entail (fruitless) labour. (8) When the earth is there, what would be gained by taking
pains for a bed? When nature has provided us with arms, what use have we for pillows ?
When we can hold things in the hollow of our palms, what need is there for dishes and cups
of various kinds ? And when there are the cardinal points,the barks of trees and so on (to
cover our body with), of what avail are silken robes ? (4) Are there no rags on the road (to
wrap ourselves with) ? Do not trees, that live only to maintain others, give alms (in the shape
of fruits, leaves and so on to the needy)? Have rivers dried up (for the man who needs water)?
Have the mouths of mountain caves been blocked (against those who seek to use them as
a shelter)? And (above all) does the supreme Lord Sri Hari deny protection to those who
approach Him ? Wherefore (then) should the wise knock at the door of those who are blind
with the pride of wealth ? (5) Having thus determined his goal with a complacent mind, a man
should adore the infinite and eternal Lord, residing in his very heart as his beloved Self, and
as a self-evident Truth; for through His worship the seed of metempsychosis (in the shape
of Ignorance ) ceases to be. (6) Who else than beasts would desist from meditating on the

‘Supreme and set his mind on the pleasures of sense even when he actually sees people
fallen into the hellish river of mundane life and suffer the agonies brought by their own past
actions ? (7)

केचित्स्वदेहान्तर्हृदयावकाशे प्रादेशमात्रं पुरुषं वसन्तम् ।
चतुर्भुजं कञ्जरथाङ्गशङ्खगदाधरं धारणया स्मरन्ति । ८ ।
