530 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 22°

SIRE Rar tenn RO Soe titi चोआ fn Ee Ree TE ER NH ती कौन्र

fixed as they are to the wheel of time by God. (11) At a height of two lakh Yojanas beyond
them is observed USana (Venus), which traverses the heavens in rapid, slow and moderate
marches like the sun, (sometimes) going before, (at other times following) in the rear, and
(at still other times) keeping pace with, the sun. Bringing showers (in its train) almost
invariably, it is ever propitious to (all) living beings and by its flitting (across certain
constellations) is concluded to be neutralizing the influence of planets (such as the Mars)
obstructing rainfall. (12)
उशनसा बुधो व्याख्यातस्तत उपरिष्टाद् द्विलक्षयोजनतो बुध: सोमसुत उपलभ्यमान: प्रायेण
शुभकृद्यदार्काद् व्यतिरिच्येत तदातिवाताभ्रप्रायानावृष्ट्यादिभयमाशंसते | १३ । अत ऊर्ध्वमङ्गारकोऽपि
योजनलक्षद्वितय उपलभ्यमानस्निभिस्तिभि: पक्षैरेकैकशो राशीन्द्वादशानुभुङ्क्ते यदि न वक्रेणाभिवर्तते
प्रायेणाशुभग्रहोऽघशंस: । १४॥ Aa SURES द्विलक्षबोजनान्तरगतो भगवान् बृहस्पतिरेकैकस्मिन्
Tet `परिवत्सरं परिवत्सरं चरति यदि न वक्र: स्यात्प्रायेणानुकूलो व्राह्मणकुलस्य । १५ |
By describing (the course of) Venus, (the course of) Budha or Mercury (too) stands
described. Observed at a height of two lakh Yojanas beyond Venus, Budha, an offspring of
the moon, is generally beneficent (in its influence). When (however) it outstrips the sun, it
forebodes storm, a cloudy weather almost throughout (that period), drought and other
unwelcome conditions. (13) Beyond Mercury, Angdraka (Mars) too is observed at a height
of two lakh Yojanas. It passes through the twelve signs of the zodiac at the rate of one in three
fortnights, unless it takes a retrograde course, and is an inauspicious planet, often
portending evil. (14) Placed at a height of two lakh Yojanas beyond Mars, the glorious
Brhaspati (Jupiter) passes through one sign of the zodiac in a whole year unless it takes a
retrograde course. It is generally propitious to the Brahmana race. (15)

सर्वानेवानुपर्येतितावद्भिरनुवत्सरै:प्रायेण हि सर्वेषामशान्तिकर: | १६ ।तत उत्तरस्मादृषयएएकादशलक्षयोजनान्तर
उपलभ्यन्ते य एव लोकानां शमनुभाववन्तो भगवतो विष्णोर्यत्परमं पदं प्रदक्षिणं प्रक्रमन्ति। १७।

Observed at a height of two lakh Yojanas beyond Jupiter, and tarrying in each sign of the
zodiac for thirty months (two years and a half), the planet Sanaiscara or Saturn (so-called
because of its slow moving nature) passes through all (the twelve signs) in exactly the same
number of years and is indeed mostly a source of anxiety to all. (16) At a height of eleven
lakh Yojanas beyond Saturn are observed the seven Rsis (the seven stars known by the
name of the Big Bear or Ursa Major), that move clockwise round what they call the highest
abode of Lord Visnu (viz., the pole-star or Dhruvaloka), (ever) contemplating the (unmixed)
good of all living beings. (17)

Thus ends the twenty-second discourse, forming part of an account of the stellar
sphere, in Book Five of the great and glorious Bhagavata-Purana,
otherwise known as the Paramahamsa-Samhita.

Sot Et Pet ES
PDL ONE EELS 1S
