Dis. 41 ] BOOK TEN “277

पिन्र rE ER og ee re sma ar tes ROR RE me

याताशु बालिशा da wed यदि जिजीविषा । बध्नन्ति घ्नन्ति लुम्पन्ति ad राजकुलानि वै । ३६॥
एवं विकत्थमानस्य कुपितो देवकीसुत:। रजकस्य कराग्रेण Rr: कायादपातयत् ।३७॥
तस्यानुजीविन: wa वास: कोञ्ञान् विसृज्य वै । aga: सर्वतो मार्गं वासांसि जगृहेऽच्युत: ।३८॥
वसित्वाऽऽत्मप्रिये aa कृष्ण: सङ्कुर्षणस्तथा । जेषाण्वादत्त गोपेभ्यो विसृज्य भुवि कानिचित् । ३९॥
Seeing a certain washerman, who was (also) a dyer (of clothes), coming (that way), Sri
Krsna (the elder Brother of Gada* ) asked of him the very best and well-washed clothes (in
the following-words)—{32) "(Please) give Us both—who deserve the gift (from you)—
eminently suitable clothes, O dear one! The highest blessing will be yours if you make the
gift: there is no doubt about it." (33) Solicited (thus) by the Lord, who was most perfect in
everyway, that extremely arrogant servant of Karnsa (the king of Mathura), angrily and
tauntingly replied (as follows):— (34) "Do you always wear such (excellent) clothes alone,
roaming as you do on the mountain and in the woods, that, transcending all bounds of
propriety, you dare seek to have royal goods? (35) Get away soon, O foolish ones! You
should never make such requests if you wish to survive. The king's men actually put in bonds,
slay and strip the insolent of their possessions.” (36) While he was thus bragging, SriKrsna
(the Son of Devaki) got angry and severed the head of the washerman from his body with
His finger-tips (alone). (37) Leaving the bundles of clothes, all his servants ran away in every
direction and Sri Krsna (the immortal Lord) seized the clothes. (38) Putting on two pieces of
cloth (each) of Their choice (one about the loins and the other across the shoulder
baldricwise), Sri Krsna and Sankarsana distributed the rest among the (other) cowherds
according to their liking, casting some to the ground. (39)

ततस्तु वायक: प्रीतस्तयोर्वेषमकल्पयत्। विचित्रवर्णैश्चैलेयैराकल्पैरनुरूपत: ।४०॥
नानालक्षणवेषाभ्यां कृष्णरामो विरैजतु:।रवल्ङ्कुत्तौ बालगजौ पर्वणीव सितेतरौ ।४१॥
तस्य प्रसन्नो भगवान् प्रादात् सारूप्यमात्मन: | Be च परमां लोके बलैश्चर्यस्मृतीन्दियम् ।४२।
Then, again, a weaver full of love adorned the two Brothers with ornaments of cloth of
various colours in a befitting manner. (40) With Their decorations of divergent patterns Sri
Krsna and Balarama shone brightly like a pair of young elephants, one dark and the other
white, tastefully adorned on a festive occasion. (41) Pleased with the weaver, the Lord
conferred on him (a title to final beatitude in the shape of) similarity of form with Himself as
well as great prosperity, (physical) strength, authority, God-consciousness and acuteness
of the senses in the world. (42)

aa: सुदाम्नो भवनं मालाकारस्य जग्मतु: । तौ ee स समुत्थाय ननाम शिरसा भुवि ।४३।
तयोरासनमानीय पाद्यं चार्च्यर्हृणादिभि: । पूजां सानुगयोश्चक्रे स्रक्ताम्बूलानुलेपनै: ।४४॥
me a: सार्थकं wa पावितं च कुलं प्रभो । पितृदेवर्षयो मह्यं Ge ह्यागमनेन वाम् isu
gest fee विश्वस्य जगत: कारणं परम्। अवतीर्णाविहांशेन क्षेमाय च भवाय च 1४६1
न fg वां विषमा दृष्टि: सुहृदोर्जगदात्मनो: | समयो: सर्वभूतेषु भजन्तं भजतोरपि vel
तावाज्ञापयतं भृत्यं किमहं करवाणि वाम्। पुंसोऽत्यनुग्रहो ह्येष भवद्धिर्यन्नियुज्यते ive!
waite we सुदामा प्रीतमानस:। ge: सुगन्धै: कुसुमैर्माला विरचिता xe!

* The foremost of Sri Krsna’s half-brothers (next to Balarama), who was born of Devaraksita—one of the thirteen wives
of Vasudeva and 2 sister of Devaki—who gave birth to nine sons. the eldest of whom was Gada. (Vide IX. xxiv. 52)
