432 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 74

ERP L ERATE PAT R PRET AAP AAPA ALAASAL SER ASARARAD SRE SERAASS ES ASLERSAAARS REE TE RS

Rajasuya sacrifice of King Yudhisthira at his invitation. (13—15) All of them admitted without
any hesitation that he was qualified to perform the same. For to a devotee of Sri Krsnanothing
is impossible of achievement. Then the priests, who were as glorious as the gods, conducted
for the king the Rajasuya sacrifice according to the scriptural ordinance, as in ancient times
the gods did for Varuna. (16) On the day fixed for extracting the Soma juice, the king
honoured the blessed priests as well as the supervisors of the performance with due
attention. (17) -

सदस्याग्रयार्हणार्हं वै विमृशन्त: सभासद: । नाध्यगच्छन्ननैकान्त्यात् सहदेवस्तदाब्रवीत् ।१८॥

अर्हति oan: Sei भगवान् सात्वतां पति: । एष वै देवता: wal देशकालधनादय: 1281

यदात्मकमिदं fad क्रतवश्च यदात्मका: । अग्निराहुतयो मन्त्रा: सांख्यं योगश्च यत्पर: ।२०॥

एक एवाद्वितीयोऽसावैतदात्म्यमिदं जगत्। आत्मनाऽऽत्माश्रय: सभ्या: सृजत्यवति हन्त्यज: 1221

विविधानीह malin जनयन् यदवेक्षया। ईहते aed ad: set धर्मादिलक्षणम् । २२।

तस्मात् कृष्णाय महते दीयतां परमार्हणम्। एवं चेत् सर्वभूतानामात्मनश्चार्हणं भवेत् 1231

सर्वभूतात्मभूताय कृष्णायानन्यदर्शिने aa शान्ताय पूर्णाय दत्तस्यानन्त्यमिच्छता । २४॥

इत्युक्त्वा सहदेवोऽभूत् तूष्णीं कृष्णानुभाववित् | तच्छुत्वा Wa: सर्वे साधु साध्विति सत्तमा: 1241

श्रुत्वा द्विजेरितं राजा ज्ञात्वा Be सभासदाम्। समर्हयद्धृषीकेशं प्रीत: प्रणयविह्वल: । २६

तत्पादाववनिज्याप fra लोकपावनी: aud: सानुजामात्य:सकुटुम्बोऽवहन्मुदा 1201

areata: पीतकौरोयैर्भूषणैश्च महाधनै: । अर्हयित्वाश्रुपूर्णाक्षो aren, समवेक्षितुम् । २८

इत्थं सभाजितं वीक्ष्य सर्वे प्राञ्जलयो sa नमो जयेति Age निपेतु: पुष्पवृष्टय: 1२९॥
Now, the members of the assembly proceeded to consider who was worthy of receiving
the first place of honour, but could not come to any decision for want of unanimity. Thereupon
Sahadeva addressed the assembly in the following words: (18) "In my opinion Bhagavan Sri
Krsna, the crown-jewel of the Yadus, is the best man in this assembly and deserve the first
place of honour. For all the gods as well as Time, Space, Wealth and Whatever other things
there are in this world—all are but He. (19) The whole universe is His manifestation. The
sacrifices are He, He is Fire, He is the oblations, He is revealed in the form of the Mantras.
The path of Knowledge and the path of Action both lead to Him. (20) Members of this august
assembly, Bhagavan Sri Krsna is the one Absolute without a second; the whole universe is
His body. Though self-dependent and unborn, He creates, protects and destroys the
universe by His own will. (21) Through His grace people perform various acts in the world
and pursue the fourfold object of life, viz., Dnarma (virtue), Artha (worldly prosperity), Kama
(worldly enjoyment) and Moksa (liberation). (22) Therefore, | propose that foremost honour
should be offered to Bhagavan Sri Krsna, the greatest of the great. Through honouring Him,
we shall have honoured all beings as well as our own self. (23) He who seeks that his gifts
should embrace infinity, should make them to Sri Krsna, who is the Self of all beings and
views, noneas other than Himself, who is absolutely unruffled and perfect in everyway.” (24)
Pariksit ! Sahadeva, who was aware of Bhagavan Sri Krsna's greatness, became silent after
saying this. All good people in the assembly were pleased to hear this, and applauded him
saying, well said, well said’. (25) Hearing this ejaculation of the Brahmanas and ascertaining
the general sense of the members of the assembly, King Yudhisthira was extremely
delighted and with a heart overwhelmed with emotion, honoured Sri Krsna by offering Him
the worship due to the First Man in the assembly. (26) In great joy he washed the feet of Sri
Krsna and together with his consort (Draupadi), brothers, ministers and other members of
his family, bore on his head the drops of that water, which purify the world. (27) Then he
