Dis. 16] BOOK SIX 627

HAAAKCERHANKCCOES HO OSheCeeeeeheCeetheveeenenhereernanhitetenntererhnrceenr renege

विदितमनन्त समस्ते तव जगदात्मनो जनैरिहाचरितम् ।
विज्ञाप्यं परमगुरो: कियदिव सवितुरिव Gala: ।४६॥
दुरवसितात्मगतये कुयोगिनां भिदा परमहंसाय ।४७॥
a a श्वसन्तमनु विश्वसृज: श्वसन्ति a चेकितानमनु fara उच्चकन्ति ।
_ भूमण्डलं सर्षपायति ae fi तस्मै नमो भगवतेऽस्तु arene ।४८॥

Citraketu said ; O unconquerable Lord, You stand conquered by the righteous,
that have subdued their self and are possessed of an unruffled mind; and they too
are conquered by (none else than) You—You, who bestow Your very Self on those
that adore You in a disinterested spirit, exceedingly compassionate as You are. (34)
The evolution, maintenance and dissolution etc., of the universe, O Lord, are, as a
matter of fact, a (mere) sport on Your part. (And) the creators of the universe
(Brahma and the other lords of creation) are (so many) parts of the Cosmic Being
(who is only a part manifestation of Yours); yet in vain do they try to outshine one
another due to the consciousness of their being an independent lord. (35) You exist
before (the appearance of) the atom (the minutest cause) and at the end (after the
dissolution) of the infinite universe (the final product) and likewise pervade the
intermediate stages (too); while You are without beginning, middle or end. That
which is constant at the beginning as well as at the end of phenomenal existences
is constant in the middle too. (36) This egg-shaped universe—which further resem-
bles a bud inasmuch as it is enveloped, they say, by seven sheaths in the shape of
earth etc., each outer sheath being ten times thicker than the one enclosed by it—is
swimming within You like an atom alongwith countless millions of (other similar) eggs.
Hence You are (spoken of as) infinite. (37) They are (really) brutes in human form, who
in their thirst for the pleasures of sense worship the gods (who represent so many
sparks of Your infinite glory) but not You, the Supreme. The blessings enjoyed by them
(as gifts from those gods), O Lord, perish (as a matter of course) after (the end of)
those gods even as the blessings enjoyed by the dependants of a royal house
(automatically) come to an end after (the extinction of) that house. (38) Entreaties
made to You—who are possessed of a body which is all consciousness and not a
product of the three Gunas—even for the pleasures of sense, O Supreme Lord, do not
make for rebirth any more than fried seeds put forth shoots; for pairs of opposites
(such as likes and dislikes, which lead to rebirth) proceed (only) from the (three) Gunas.
(While You are entirely free from them and therefore people adoring You even with an
interested motive gradually get rid of the three Gunas). (39) (Such being the value of
adoring You even for the attainment of sensuous enjoyments,) You surpass all (confer
an incomparable boon on Your devotees) on such occasions, O unconquerable
Lord, when You preach the flawless Bhagavata Dharma (the easy means of attaining
to the Lord as taught by the Lord Himself), which even sages (like the great Sanatkumara
ever) revelling in the Self and having nothing to call their own resort to for (the attainment
of) loving Devotion to the Lord (which transcends all the four objects of human pursuit
including Liberation andis therefore known as the fifth object—Paficama Purusartha).(40)
Differential notions such as ‘l'and’You’, 'mine' and Yours’ do not disturb (the mind of) men
treading on this path, as they do in the case of (those following) other cults (such as the
cult of rituals). (Besides,) a ritual act which is performed by one having a differential
outlook is ideed impure (because characterized by likes and dislikes), yields a perishable
