Dis. 5] BOOK SIX । 575

,.३.३.4...३.३.] र्धृ!॰श्चै’श्चैमैर्व्यगेश्चैर्व्यध्रेर्व्यध्रेक्खिग्रैप्रेगैर्व्यघ्नेद्मेप्रेंघेघेक्लिमेध्रेमे ३ ६.३.4.३.३.६ ३३३३

(aforesaid) collection* of causes and effects, what is to be gained here through useless
actions (that are done with the consciousness that the doer is a free agent, and which,
therefore, tend to veil one's true nature). (17) Ignoring (refraining from the study of and
refusing to follow) the body of teachings establishing the existence of God, which not only
distinguishes Spirit from matter (even as a swan, according to the traditional belief,
instinctively separates milk from water where the two are mixed), but further enables one
to perceive the true nature of bondage and liberation, what can be achieved here through
useless actions (that tend to direct one's mind towards the extemal world)? (18) (Again,)
what will be gained here through useless actions (whose fruit is swept away by the ravages
of Time) by him who has no knowledge of the wheel of Time, which is (ever) revolving, sharp-
edged and independent and destroys the whole creation (and who resorts to various
activities under the belief that their fruit is eternal). (19) How can he who does not know the
precepts of his (second) father, the Sastra (which invests him with a second body in the
shape of the sacred thread and whose advice is as salutary as that of a father—precepts
that turn him away from worldly activity—and who has faith in the path of worldly activity
(which has reference to the three Gunas, i.e., the world of matter), proceed to act in
conformity with such precepts ?" (20) Thus resolved, O king (Pariksit), the Haryagwas, who
were (ail) of one mind, went round the Sage (from left to right, as a mark of respect) and took
to the path (leading to God-Realization) which does not bring one back to the mortal
plane.(21) Having fixed his undivided mind on the lotus-feet of Lord Visnu (the Controller of
the senses) as revealed in the notes of the gamut, which stand as a symbol of the
(all-pervading) Brahma (and lead to its realization), the sage (Narada) went about the
spheres.(22)

नाशं निशम्य पुत्राणां नारदाच्छीलश्ञालिनाम्। अन्वतप्यत क: शोचन् सुप्रजास्त्वं शुचां पदम् । २३

स भूय: पाञ्चजन्यायामजेन परिसान्तित: । पुत्रानजनयद् दक्ष: WAC, AEA: । २४॥

तेऽपि पित्रा समादिष्टा: प्रजासर्गे धृतव्रता: । नारायणसरो जग्मुर्यत्र सिद्धा: स्वपूर्वजा: 1241

तदुपस्पर्शानादेव विनिर्धू।मलारंत्था:।जपन्तोब्रह्यपरमंतेपुंप्तेछ्य महत् AT: ।२६॥

saan: कतिचिन्मासान् कतिचिद्वायुभोजना :। आराधयन् मन्त्रमिममभ्यस्यन्त इडस्पतिम् । २७॥

ॐ नमो नारायणाय पुरुषाय महात्मने । विशुद्धसत्त्वधिष्ण्याय महाहंसाय धीमहि 1201

इति तानपि राजेन्द्र प्रतिसर्गधियो मुनि: ste ane: प्राहं वाच:कूटानि पूर्ववत् । २९॥

दाक्षायणा: संश्रृणुत गदतो निगमं मम | अन्विच्छतानुपदवीं भ्रातॄणां भ्रातृवत्सला: 1301

WT प्रायणं भ्राता योऽनुतिष्ठति धर्मवित्। स पुण्यब्न्धु: yest मरुद्धि: ae मोदते । ३१॥

२ च

एतावदुक्त्वा प्रययाँ नारदोऽमोघदर्शन: । तेऽपि चान्वगमन्मार्गं भ्रातॄणामेव मारिष 1321
` According to the Sankhya system of philosophy, which recognizes the twenty-five categories enumerated in the above
verse, Prakrti or primordial matter is the cause of all causes. From Prakrii follows the Mahat-tattva, which tn its tum brings
forth the ego and the ego gives rise to the five subtle elements, the mind and the ten Indriyas (the five senses of perception
and the five organs of action); and from the five subtle elements are evolved the five gross elements (earth, water, fire, air
and ether). Thus it will appear that while Prakrtiis an uncaused cause, the Mahat-tattva, the @go and the subtle elements are
both causes and effects—causes in relation to their effects and effects in relation to their causes. The remaining sixteen
(besides the Purusa or soul), viz., the mind, the ten Indriyas and the five gross elements are mere effects inasmuch as they

are causes of no other category; while the Purusa or soul is neither a cause nor an effect. This is summed up in the following
verse of Igwara Krsna’s popular manual on the Sankhya system, known by the name of Sankhya-Karika:—
मूलप्रकृतिरविकृतिर्महदाद्या: प्रकृतिविकृतय: सप्त।
षोडशकस्तु विकारो न wri fapia: पुरुष:॥

It is in this sense that ihe human body has been spoken of in the above verse as a collection of causes and effects.
