44 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis.-14

Te ETE AE LE LL A RR E RAE Re ee ead
of the bee-like devotees; nay, each of His limbs is an embodiment of elegance. That is why
the eyes of the residents of Dwaraka knew no satiety, even though they beheld Him
everyday. (25-26) With the white umbrella spread over His head and a pair of chowries
waving on both sides and flowers raining all round, the Lord, who was clad in yellow robes
and adorned with His garland of sylvan flowers, shone on the road like a cloud with the sun

shining overhead, a pair of moons moving in a circle about it, stars scattered all round and
a rainbow and flashes of lightning illumining it. (27)

प्रविष्टस्तु गृहं fet: परिघ्वक्त: स्वमातृभि:। ववन्दै शिरसा सप्त देवकीप्रमुखा मुदा IRC!

a: पुत्रमङ्कमारोप्य स्नेहस्नुतपयोधरा: । हर्षविह्वलितात्मान: सिषिचुर्नेत्रजैर्जलै: 1221

अथाविशत् स्वभवनं सर्वकाममनुत्तमम्। प्रासादा यत्र पत्नीनां सहस्राणि च alse 130!
usa: uff ste गृहानुपागतं विलोक्य संजातमनोमहोत्सवा: |

उत्तस्थुरारात् सहसाऽऽसनाशायात् साकं व्रतैरव्रीडितलोचनानना: 1321
तमात्मजैर्दृष्टिभिरन्तरात्मना दुरन्तभावा: परिरभिरे पतिम्।
निरुद्धमप्यास्रवदम्बु नेत्रयोर्बिलज्जत्तीनां भृगुवर्य ATL ।३२॥

यद्यप्यसौ पार्श्वगतो रहोगतस्तथापि तस्याङ्धियुगं wd Aa
पदे पदे का fama तत्पदाच्चलापि यच्छीर्न जहाति कर्हिचित् । ३३॥
एवं नृपाणां क्षितिभारजन्मनामक्षौहिणीभि: परिवृत्ततेजसाम् ।
fama ato gett यथानलं मिथो वधेनोपरतो निरायुध: ।३४॥
स we नरलोकेऽस्मिन्नवतीर्ण: स्वमायया । रेमे स्रीरत्नकूटस्थो भगवान् प्राकृतो यथा ।३५॥
उद्दामभावपिशुनामलवल्गुहासव्रीडावबलोकनिहतो पमदनोऽपि यासाम् ।
ay चापमजहात्प्रमदोत्तमास्ता यस्येन्दियं विमथितुं कुहकैर्न ae: । ३६॥
amd मन्यते लोको ह्यसङ्घमपि सङ्घिनम्। आत्मोपम्येन मनुजं व्यापृण्वानं यतोऽबुध: 1301
एतदीशानमीशस्य प्रकृतिस्थोऽपि तद्गुणै: । न युज्यते सदाऽऽत्मस्थैर्यथा बुद्धिस्तदाश्रया 131
तं मेनिरेऽबला मूढा: aul चानुव्रतं रह:। अप्रमाणविदो भर्तुरीश्चरुं मतयो यथा ।३९॥
इति श्रीमद्भागवते महापुराणे पारमहंस्यां संहितायां प्रथमस्कन्धे नैमिषीयोपाख्याने
श्रीकृष्णद्वारकाप्रवशो नामैकादशोऽध्याय: ।। ११ ॥

First of all He entered the palace of His parents (Devaki and Vasudeva) and gladly bowed
His head to all His seven mothers, Devaki and others, who in their turn clasped Him to their
bosom. (28) As they placed their son in their lap, milk flowed from their breasts (even in their
old age) due to their affection for Him; and beside themselves with joy, they bathed Him in
tears. (29) He next entered His own palace, unsurpassed by any other, which was equipped
with all that could be desired and had a separate mansion for each of His consorts, sixteen
thousands and odd in number. (30) The ladies felt overjoyed at heart to behold from a
distance their lord, who had returned home after a long absence; and, with bashful eyes and
faces, they quickly abandoned their seats as well as their thought of Him (not that He was
present before them in person) as also the vows of austerity” (that they had taken during the
absence of their lord). (31) Full of infinite love, they embraced their Lord, first mentally, then

* The Yajnavalkya-Smrti says :—
"A waman whose husband is away from her, should give up anmusement, decoration of her body. visiting social functions.

gesting and calling at another's house.”
