Dis. 3] BOOK ELEVEN 525

SEERORIIOTOIE ROTTER COCR मामा ERCIOROIO 8 8 ककक eres माजाञ न न tet

Antariksa said ; O mighty-armed one, Maya is that energy by which the most ancient
Person, figuring as the Source of (the entire) creation, evolved with the help of these gross
elements (all) forms of life, great and small, for the enjoyment and emancipation of embodied
souls (His particles). (3) Having thus (for the good of the Jivas) entered (as the Inner
Controller of) all forms of life evolved by means of the five gross elements, the Supreme
Person splits Himself up (and appears first) as one (in the form of the mind) and (further) into
ten (in the form of the ten Indriyas) and makes them (the Jivas) enjoy the (various) pleasures
(through them). (4) Enjoying the (various) pleasures of sense by means of the senses
illuminated by the (said) Inner Controller, the embodied soul identifies itself with this created
body and gets attached to it. (5) Performing with the organs of action actions prompted by
interested motives and reaping the agreeable and disagreeable consequences of his varied
actions (of past lives), the embodied soul revolves in this whirligig (of mundane life). (6) Thus
undergoing (various) forms of existence brought about by his (past) actions and carrying
many evils (with them), the soul helplessly goes through (repeated) births and deaths till the
final dissolution of creation. (7) When the dissolution of the (five gross) elements is imminent,
the Time-Spirit, endless and without beginning, actually draws the manifest universe,
consisting of gross and subtle matter, towards the Unmanifest (primordial Matter). (8) (Then)
there appears on earth a dreadful drought lasting for a hundred years. The sun with its heat
increased by the said Time-Spirit torments the three worlds. (9) A (huge and terrible) fire
rising from the (thousand) mouths of Sankarsana (the serpent-god) and, burning everything
from the bottom of the subterranean world, shoots up in high flames and, propelled by the
wind, spreads in all directions. (10) The host of clouds charged with universal dissolution
pour down showers, as thick as the trunk of an elephant, for one hundred years (without
pause) with the result that the cosmos is submerged in water. (11) Then, leaving his cosmic
body, O protector of men, Brahma (the cosmic person) gets merged in the Unmanifest
(Brahma), just as fire enters its unmanifest state (gets extinguished) when divested of
fuel.(12) Denuded of its (distinctive quality) smell by the wind, the earth is reconverted into
the state of water; and, deprived by the same of taste, water is reduced to the state of fire.(13)
Deprived of (its attribute, viz.,) colour by darkness, fire gets merged into the air; and, deprived
of (its quality of) touch by ether, the air merges into the latter (ether, its cause). (14) Deprived
of (its quality of) sound by God in the form of the Time-Spirit, ether gets merged into the
(Tamasika) ego. The senses and the intellect, O king, merge in the ego of passion, and the
mind with the deities born of the illuminated ego merges into the knowledge of the Self. The
ego with its triple modification merges into the Mahat-tattva, which in its turn merges into
Prakrti or the elemental Nature and this (ultimately) merges into Brahma. (15) We have
described (for you) the Lord's triple Maya (comprising of Sattva, Rajas and Tamas) which
creates, sustains and annihilates (the creation). What else do you desire to hear ? (16)

राजोवाच
यथैतामैश्वीं माया दुस्तरामकृतात्मभि: । तरन्त्यञ्ज: स्थूलधियो aed इदमुच्यताम् । १७॥

The king (Nimi) submitted : It may (kindly) be pointed out (to me now), Oeminent sage,
how men looking upon the gross body as their self may easily get over this divine Maya, (so)
difficult to cross for those who have not been able to control their mind. (17)

WTR उवाच
कर्माण्यारभमाणानां दु:खहत्यै सुखाय al waa पाकविपर्यासं मिथुनीचारिणां नॄणाम् । १८।
नित्यार्तिदेन वित्तेन दुर्लभेनात्ममृत्युना । गृहापत्याप्तपशुभि: का प्रीति: साधितैश्चलै: vee)
