Dis. 4'} “ &\BOOK-ONE: “> 1
BORIS STE SORM EORTC ERIE EERIE EIR EER SOR Sea RIOR Ea aah Ne

The divine seer, Vedavyasa, composed this Purana, known by the name of Srimad
Bhagavata, which stands on a par with the Vedas and contains the stories of the Lord of
excellent renown. (40) He taught this blessed, benedictory and great Purana, for the highest
good of mankind, to his son (Sukadeva), whois the foremost among Self-realized souls. (41)
This represents the very cream extracted from all the Vedas and Itihasas (epics). Suka in
his turn recited it to the great king Pariksit, who sat on the bank of the Ganga, surrounded
by the foremost sages, with a vow to fast unto death. Now that Sri Krsna has left for His
(divine) abode with piety, wisdom and all, this sun-like Purana has made its appearance for
the benefit of those who have been blinded (by the darkness of ignorance) in this Kali age.
While the glorious sage Sukadeva, O Brahmanas, was reciting this Purana there (on the
bank of the Ganga), I too was present and learnt it by his grace. | will now recite the same
to you even as | have learnt it, according to the best of my lights. (42—45)

Thus ends the third discourse, forming part of the Story relating to the Naimisa
forest, in Book One of the great and glorious Bhagavata-Purana,
otherwise known as the Paramaharsa-Samhita.

cat Livek TT ES
POISE Sire

अथ चतुर्थोऽध्याय:

Discourse IV

A sense of frustration overtakes Vedavyasa
ONG उवाच

इति ब्रुवाणं संस्तूय मुनीनां दीर्घसत्रिणाम्। ga: कुलपति: सूतं बह्वृच: छोनकोऽव्रवीत् । १ ।
Vedavyasa says : When Sita spoke thus, Saunaka, who was a studentof Rgveda and
the head of a large seminary,and was the oldest of the Sages assembled for that long
sacrificial session, applauded him and said:(1)

A उवाच

सूत YA महाभाग aq नो aa ati कथां भागवतीं पुण्यां were भगवाञ्छुक: । २ |
कस्मिन् युगे प्रवृत्तेयं स्थाने वा aa हेतुना । कुत: सञ्चोदित: Ho: कृतवान् संहितां मुनि: । ३ ।
तस्य पुत्रो महायोगी समदूङ्निर्विकल्पक: । एकान्तमतिरुन्निद्रो गूढो ws इवेयते । |

दृष्टानुयान्तमृषिमात्पजमप्यनग्नं देव्यो ह्रिया परिधुर्न सुतस्य fa

तद्बीक्ष्य पृच्छति मुनो जगदुस्तवास्ति स्नीपुम्भिदा न तु सुतस्य विविक्तदृष्टे: । ५ ।
कथमालक्षित: Ut: Tae: कुरुजाङ्गलान्। उन्मत्तमूकजडवद्विचरन् गजसाह्वये । ६ ।
कथं वा पाण्डवेयस्य राजर्षेर्मुनिना सह। संवाद: समभूत्तात BIT सात्वती श्रुति: । ७ |
a गोदोहनमात्रं fe गृहेषु गृहमेधिनाम्। अवेक्षते महाभागस्तीर्थीकुर्वस्तदाश्रमम् । ८ ।
अभिमन्युसुतं सूत प्राहुर्भागवतोत्तमम्। तस्य जन्म महाश्चर्यं कर्माणि च गृणीहि न: । ९ ।
स सम्राद् HA वा हेतो: पाण्डूनां मानवर्धन: । प्रायोपविष्टो गङ्गायामनादृत्याधिरादश्रियम् । १०॥

नमन्ति यत्पादनिकेतमात्मन: शिवाय हानीय धनानि ara: ।

wt स वीर: श्रियमङ्ग ge युवैषतोत्स्रष्टुमहो सहासुभि: ।११॥
