Dis. 7} BOOK NINE 29

HeKeeskeceheuederetevesseesHerenkeee terete verse ees CULE He eH A EKWE AEH टकन्र HATH TR

ae वीरो महाराज तेनैव al यजे इति । तथेति वरुणेनास्य gi जातस्तु रोहित: । ९ ।
जात: सुतो ह्यनेनाङ्ग मां यजस्वेति सोऽब्रवीत्। यदा ware: स्यादथ मेध्यो भवेदिति । १०॥
fil च स आगत्य यजस्वेत्याह सोऽब्रवीत्। दन्ता: पशोर्यजायेरन्नथ मेध्यो भवेदिति ee
जाता दन्ता यजस्वेति स प्रत्याहाथ सोऽब्रवीत्। यदा पतन्त्यस्य दन्ता अथ Aen भवेदिति ।१२॥
पशोर्निपतिता दन्ता यजस्वेत्याह सोऽव्रवोत्। यदा vat: Gada जायन्तेऽथ पशु: Ga: । १३॥
पुनर्जाता यजस्वेति स प्रत्याहाथ सोऽब्रवीत्। सान्नाहिको यदा राजन्राजन्योऽथ पशु: शुचि: । १४।
इति पुत्रानुरागेण स्नेहयन्त्रितचेतसा । कालं वञ्चयता तं तमुक्तो देवस्तमैक्षत eu)

रोहितस्तदभिज्ञाय fie: कर्म चिकीर्षितम्। प्राणप्रेप्सुर्धनुष्पाणिररण्यं प्रत्यपद्यत । १६॥
frat वरुणग्रस्तं sear जातमहोदरम्।रोहितो ग्राममेयाय तमिन्द्र: प्रत्यषेधत ।१७॥
ga: पर्यटनं पुण्यं तीर्थक्षेत्रनिषेवणै: | रोहितायादिराच्छक्र: सोऽप्यरण्येऽवसत्समाम् । १८॥

wa द्वितीये तृतीये wai पञ्चमे तथा । अभ्येत्याभ्येत्य स्थविरो विप्रो भूत्वाऽऽह वृत्रहा 1१९॥
षष्ठं संवत्सरं a चरित्वा रोहित: पुरीम्। उपव्रजन्नजीगर्तादक्रीणान्पध्यमं सुतम् 1 २०॥
Wat wy पित्रे प्रदाय समवन्दत।तत: पुरुषमेधेन हरिश्च्रो महायदा: ।२१॥
मुक्तोदरोऽयजद् देवान् वरुणादीन् महत्कथ: | विश्चामित्रोऽभवत्तस्मिन्होता चाध्वर्युरात्मवान् । २२।
जमदग्निरभूद् ब्रह्मा वसिष्ठोऽयास्यसामग: । तस्मै apt carers: ज्ञातकौम्भमयं रथम् ।२३|

TrigSanku's son was Harigcandra, because of whom there raged a fight, lasting for many
years, between the sages Viswamitra and Vasistha, who (having been mutually cursed) had
been transformed into two birds*. (7) Devoid of (any) issue and (therefore) sad at heart,
Hari$candra soughi, under the instructions of (the sage) Narada, Varuna (the god of water)
as his protector with the following prayer:—"Let a son be born to me, O lord ! (8) If he turns
outto be a hero, O greatlord, ! shal! propitiate you by sacrificing him (to you)." Varuna granted
his prayer, saying "Be itso! and through the agency of Varuna a son, Rohita (by name),
was born to Harigcandra. (9) "Now thata son has been born (io you), propitiate me, dear king,
by sacrificing him to me," Varuna (appeared and) said (to Hariscandra, who replied): "A
prospective victim is (considered) fit for being sacrificed only when it has passed the age of
ten days." (10) On the child having crossed (the limit of) ten days, the god appeared (before
him again) and said, "(Please) sacrifice the child now." Harigcandra (however) replied, "A
prospective victim is (deemed) fit for being sacrificed only when it has teethed.” (11) Afterthe
dentition of the child, Varuna (approached and) said once more, "The teeth have (already)
appeared; (please) propitiate me (now).” Thereupon the king replied, “When its (first) teeth
have fallen, the victim will be fit for being sacrificed (only) then." (12) (On the teeth having
fallen,) Varuna (appeared once more and) said, "The teeth of the prospective victim have
(already) fallen, (please) worship me (now)." (To this) Hari$candra replied, "When the teeth
of the prospective victim sprout again, then (alone) is the prospective victim (regarded as)

*It is well-known that under the pretext of demanding the Daksina due to himself for the Rajastya sacrifice conducted
by him on hehalf of king Harigcandra, the sage ViSwamitra not only stripped him of his all but persecuted him in many other
ways too; but HariScandra remained true to his word and firm under the most trying circumstances. The sage Vasistha, the
4ing's preceptor, fiew into a rage when he heard this and uttered on him the curse that he would be transformed into an Adi
(a species of cranes). VigwAmitra too pronounced a counter-curse on Vasistha to the effect that he would be changed into
a heron.
