616 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 22

FLEE Oe OH OCR TEE TERE EONS ROTE CHORUS TORT ORE E NFER ED 6४ COO OMEM EE ERREORERER ER ROME

अथ द्वाविंशोऽध्याय:

Discourse XXIl

Categories enumerated; Distinction between Prakrti and Purusa
उद्धव उवाच

कति तत्त्वानि विश्वेश संख्यातान्यृषिभि: प्रभो । नवैकादश पञ्च त्रीण्यात्थ त्वमिह qm । १ ।

केचित् षड्विंशति प्राहुरपरे पञ्चविंशतिम्। सप्तैके aa we केचिच्चत्वार्येकादशापरे । २ ।

केचित् सप्तदश् प्राहु: षोडरैके त्रयोदश । एतावत्त्वं fe संख्यानामृषयो यद्विवक्षया ।

गायन्ति पृथगायुष्मन्निदं नो वक्तुमर्हसि । ३ ।
Uddhava submitted : How many are the categories or fundamental principles enumerated

by the seers, O Ruler of the universe ? You (for your part) have referred {in Discourse XIX
above) to nine, eleven, five and three—twenty-eight categories (in all), O Lord, as we have
heard (1) Some (however) speak of twenty-six categories, others, of twenty-five. Some
(more) declare seven, nine, six and four respectively; while others mention eleven. (2) Some

(again) declare seventeen; others, sixteen and (still) others, thirteen. With what intention do
the sages severally declare such a (large) variety of numbers ? Be pleased O eternal Lord,

to tell us this. (3)
युक्तं च सन्ति ada भाषन्ते ब्राह्मणा यथा । मायां मदीयामुद्गृह्य वदतां किं नु दुर्घटम् । ४ ।
aa यथाऽऽत्थ त्वं यदहं af तत्तथा । एवं विवदतां हेतुं शक्तयो A दुरत्यया: । ५ ।
यासां व्यतिकरादासीद् विकल्पो वदतां पदम्। प्राप्ते ङमदमेऽप्येति वादस्तमनुशाम्यति । ६ ।
परस्परानुप्रवेशात् तत्त्वानां पुरुषर्षभ । पौर्वापर्यप्रसंख्यानं यथा वक्तुर्विवक्षितम् । ७ |
एकस्मिन्नपि gad प्रविष्टानीतराणि च । पूर्वस्मिन्वा परस्मिन् वा तत्त्वे aaa ade: । ८ |
पौर्वापर्यमतोऽमीषां प्रसंख्यानमभीप्सताम् | यथा विविक्तं weet गृह्णीमो युक्तिसम्भवात् । ९ |
The glorious Lord replied ; Whatever the Brahmanas (well-versed in the Vedas)
declare is but right; (for) all categories stand included in all (others). What is there hard to
establish for those who make their assertion accepting the potency of My Maya ? (4) My
potencies (in the form of the three Gunas—Sattva, Rajas and Tamas appearing as so many
modifications of the mind)—which are (so) difficult to overcome—are at the back of those
wrangling over the cause (of the universe) in the following strain; "It is not quite as you say;
what | say is correct.” (5) Diversity (in the form of this universe), which is the subject of
controversy among the disputants, follows from the disturbance of equilibrium of these
potencies. When control of the mind and subjugation of the senses are attained, the diversity
disappears and the controversy (also) is set at rest as a sequel to it. (6) The categories being
comprised in one another, O jewel among men, they are enumerated as more or less
according to the viewpoint of the speakere (by including effects in a cause and vice versa).{7)
In a single category, whether it is a cause or an effect, are found comprised all other
categories (viz., effects in acause and vice versa). (8) Therefore, we accept as conclusive
whatever is stated according to one's own viewpoint by anyone of those (disputants) seeking
to establish the relation as cause and effect or a definite number of categories, there being
a cogent reason behind every such assertion. (9)

अनाद्यविद्यायुक्तस्य पुरुषस्यात्मवेदनम् | स्वतो न सम्भवादन्यस्तत्त्वज्ञो ज्ञानदो भवेत् । १०॥
