Dis. 19 } BOOK FOUR 375

Be Rr दौ श्री Be कज् न्नो RR RR RE RH OR ER ती की RR जज Br RR HE BR HY
eee ee eee NR SSE eer

मास्मिन्महाराज कृथा: स्म fet निशामयास्मद्दच आदूतात्मा ।

यद्ध्यायतो दॆवहतं नु कर्तुं मनोऽतिरुष्ठं विञाते तमोऽन्धम् । ३४
क्रतुर्विरमतामेष देवेषु दुरवग्रह: । धर्मव्यतिकरो यत्र पाखण्डैरिन्द्रनिर्मितै: । ३५॥
एभिरिन्द्रोपसंसृष्टै: पाखण्डैर्हारिभिर्जनम् | ह्रियमाणं विचक्च्वैनं यस्ते यज्ञध्नुगश्वमुद् । ३६॥

warm परित्रातुमिहावतीर्णो धर्मं जनानां समयानुरूपम्।
- वेनापचारादवलुप्तमद्य तद्देहतो विष्णुकलासि as । ३७॥

स त्वं विमृश्यास्य va प्रजापते ase विश्वसृजां पिपीपृहि ।
wa च मायामुपधर्ममातरं प्रचण्डपाखण्डपथं प्रभो जहि ।३८॥

Having addressed Prthu (the master of the sacrifice), in these words, 0 Vidura, his
priests were indignantly proceeding to pour oblations into the sacred fire (with the avowed
object of invoking Indra), with the sacrificial ladle in their hand, when Brahma (himself)
appeared (before them) and prevented them (from proceeding further), saying, "Indra does
not deserve to be killed by you, for Yajfia (by which name the then Indra was called), whom
you seek to get ride of, is a manifestation of the Lord Himself, while the gods who are (being)
propitiated (by you) are (so many) forms of Indra alone. (29-30) Look at the great violation
of Dharma committed by Indra, O Brahmanas, with the intention of obstructing this
(sacrificial) performance of King Prthu (which mischief is likely to be repeated if he is not
conciliated). (31) Therefore, let the number of sacrifices standing to the credit of Prthu of wide
renown fall short of one hundred by one. (Turning to Prthu himself, Brahma said,) You have
no use for sacrifices well performed, since you are conversant with the Dharma conducive
to Liberation. (32) It is not worthy of you to show anger against the mighty Indra, who is your
second self; for God bless you, both of you are manifestations of the Lord enjoying excellent
renown. (33) Brood nomore over this incident, O mighty monarch, andlisten to our word with
an attentive mind. For the mind of the man who contemplates achieving what has been
thwarted by Providence gets highly enraged andis steeped in blind infatuation. (34) Let this
sacrificial performance cease; for the gods are obstinate (by nature). It is due to this
performance that Dharma is being violated through pseudo-religious practices started by
Indra. (35) Look at these men being carried away by the attractive forms of false religion
given currency of Indra, who has interfered with your sacrifice and stolen your horse. (36)
A ray of Lord Visnu, you have now appeared on this earth from the body of Vena in order
to preserve the religious faith of the people, conforming to the various scriptures, that had
been undermined by his misdeeds, O Prthu ! (37) Therefore, considering the (true) welfare
of this universe, O Ruler of the people, fulfil the desire of the progenitors of the world (such
as Bhrgu and others, who have fondly cherished the hope that the Lord Himself will manifest
in your person and bring salvation to the world) and foil the conjuring trick employed by Indra
in the shape of the terrible path of pseudo-religion (shown by him) which gives rise to a
number of false creeds. (38)

sa स लोकगुरुणा समादिष्टो विज्ञाम्पति: । तथा च कृत्वा वात्सल्यं मघोनापि च सन्दधे । ३९॥
कृतावभृथस्नानाय yaa भूरिकर्मणे। वरान्ददुस्ते ar a ag तर्पिता: iol
fam: सत्याशिषस्तुष्टा: श्रद्धया लब्धदक्षिणा: | आशिषो युयुजु: क्षत्तरादिराजाय सत्कृता: ।४१॥
त्वयाऽऽहूता महाबाहो Fe एव समागता: | पूजिता दानमानाभ्यां पितृदेवर्षिमानवा: 1x21
