58 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA ( Dis. 14

BARB He We RE Re MEAT WRT Re He Re TW TC BME AT RE ROR, ART HT A BE He Be He MRR ROA RE Re Hs A AH ER OR Bi We WW Ra HA Re Be A A BHA A

that the Prime Person (Sri Krsna) is living in the milk ocean of the Yadava race with His
constant companion, Lord Ananta (Sri Balarama). (35) Respected by all, the Yadus revel,
like the attendants of Lord Visnu, in their own city (of Dwaraka), protected by His long
arms.(36) By virtue of their service to His feet, which they regard as their foremost duty,
Satyabhama and the other sixteen thousand and odd spouses of the Lord prevailed on the
latter to conquer gods on the field of battle and carried by force the objects of sense-
enjoyment (such as the celestial Parijata tree) sought by the gods themselves and fit to be
enjoyed by goddess Saci (the spouse of Indra, the wielder of a thunderbolt). (37) Nay, the
great Yadava warriors, who depend on the might of His stout arms, always fearlessly tread
the council-chamber, known by the name of Sudharma, which was snatched by force (from
Indra) and was worthy of the foremost gods." (38)

कच्चित्तेऽनामयं तात भ्रष्टतेजा विभासि मे। अलब्धमानोऽवज्ञात: किं वा ara चिरोषित: 1391

कच्चिन्नाभिहतोऽभावै:र ङब्दादिभिरमङ्गलै: । न दत्तमुक्तमर्थिभ्य आशया यत्प्रतिश्रुतम् ।४०॥

कच्चित्त्वं ब्राह्मणं बालं TH og रोगिणं स्रियम्। शरणोपसृतं सत्त्वं नात्याक्षी: wus: ।४१॥

कच्चित्त्वं नागमोऽगम्यां गम्यां वासत्कृतां स्रियम्। पराजितो वाथ भवान्नोत्तमैर्नासमै: पथि ise

aft स्वित्पर्यभुङ्क्थास्त्वं सम्भोज्यान् वृद्धबालकान् । जुगुप्सितं aad किंचित्कृतवान्न यदक्षमम् ।४३॥

af प्रेष्ठतमेनाथ हृदयेनात्मबन्धुना | शून्योऽस्मि रहितो नित्यं मन्यसेतेऽन्यथा न HH ।४४॥

इति श्रीमद्भागवते महापुराणे पारमहंस्यां संहितायां प्रथमस्कन्धे युधिष्ठिरवितर्को नाम चतुर्दशोऽध्याय: ।१४॥

"Are you enjoying good health yourself, dear Arjuna? You seem to have lost the
brightness of your countenance. Did you fail to receive proper attention or were you ever
treated with disrespect during your prolonged stay (at Dwaraka), dear brother ? (39) | hope
no one tormented you with words etc., devoid of love and full of inauspicious import. Did you
ever fail to grant the prayer of suppliants who approached you with some hope or to give
something which you might have promised of your own accord ? (40) | hope you never turned
away any Brahmana, child, cow, aged or ailing man, any woman or any creature whatsoever
that might have approached you for protection, noted as you are for affording shelter (to the
needy). (41) 1am sure you never shared the bed with a woman unworthy of you nor did you
copulate flippantly with a woman worthy of you. | further hope that you were not vanquished,
while on your way back, by your equals nor by your inferiors. (42) Did you ever take your
meals ignoring the aged or children deserving to be fed ? Or did you perpetrate any
loathsome act which was unbecoming of you ? (43) Oris it that you have been torn from your
ever most beloved and intimate friend and relation (Sri Krsna) and thus consider yourself
desolate; for there can be no other cause of your agony." (44)

Thus ends the fourteenth discourse entitled "Yudhisthira's Doubt",
in Book One of the great and glorious Bhagavata-Purana,
otherwise known as the Paramahamsa-Samnhita.

cA ENE Oe १६
PICIESS ES ID
