674 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 6

Seto ini taininirtin ernie tite eewerend decree tee eee trey see ee eee ee te ae

avoiding froma respectable distance, O Daityas, the company of the Daityas, who have set
their mind on the objects of senses, take refuge in Lord Narayana, the most ancient Deity;
(for) He (alone) is the final beatitude sought for (even) by those who have given up
attachment (for everything). (17-18)
न ह्यच्युतं प्रीणयतो बह्वायासोऽसुरात्मजा: | आत्मत्वात् सर्वभूतानां सिद्धत्वादिह ada: ।१९।
परावरेषु भूतेषु ब्रह्मान्तस्थावरादिषु । भौतिकेषु विकारेषु भूतेषथ AE च । २०।
गुणेषु गुणसाम्ये च गुणव्यतिकरे तथा । एक Wa परो ह्यात्मा भगवानीश्वरोऽव्यय: 122)
प्रत्यगात्मस्वरूपेण दृश्यरूपेण च स्वयम्। व्याप्यव्यापकनिर्देरयो ह्यनिर्देश्योऽविकल्पित: । २२।

केवलानुभवानन्दस्वरूप: परमेश्वर: । माययान्तर्हितैश्चर्य ईयते गुणसर्गया । २३।
तस्मात् सर्वेषु भूतेषु दयां HEA सौहदम्। आसुरं way यया तुष्यत्यधोक्षज: । २४
तुष्टे च तत्र किमलभ्यमनन्त आद्ये किं तैर्गुणव्यतिकरादिह a स्वसिद्धा: |

धर्मादय: किमगुणेन च काङ्खितेन सारंजुषां चरणयोरुपगायतां न: ।२५॥
धर्मार्थकाम sf योऽभिहितस्रिवर्गं gen त्रयी नयदमौ विविधा च वार्ता ।
wa तदेतदखिलं निगमस्य सत्यं स्वात्मार्पणं wage: परमस्य Ga: । २६॥
एकान्तिनां भगवतस्तदकिञ्चनानां पादारविन्दरजसाऽऽप्नुतदेहिनां स्यात् । २७।
श्रुतमेतन्मया पूर्वं ज्ञानं विज्ञानसंयुतम्। धर्मं भागवतं BS नारदाद् देवदर्शनात् । २८|
Indeed there is not much exertion to him who is engaged in propitiating the immortal Lord,
O children of the Asuras, He being the very Selfofall createdbeings and present everywhere
in this world. (19) In (all) created beings, high and low, commencing from the immobile
creation (the vegetable kingdom) and culminating in Brahma (the creator), nay, in (all)
material products as well as in the (five) gross elements, in the (three) Gunas (modes of
Prakrti), in Prakrti (Primordial Matter, which is nothing but a state of equilibrium of the three
Gunas) as well as in the Mahat-tattva etc., (which constitute a mixture of the three Gunas in
uneven proportions) exists the one and only one transcendent Spirit, the almighty and
imperishable God. (20-21) Though really indescribable and undifferentiated Himself, He can
be hinted at as all-pervading in the form of the subject and as pervaded in the form of the
objective universe. (22) The supreme Lord consisting of absolute consciousness and bliss,
He is realized as having His divinity concealed by Maya (His deluding potency), which gives
tise to the material creation. (23) Therefore, giving up the demoniac disposition, show
compassion and friendliness to all created beings, whereby is pleased Lord Visnu (who is
beyond sense-perception). (24) When that infinite Being, the Cause of all, is pleased, what
is there that cannotbe attained? And whatis the use of our worrying over religious merit etc.,
which are attained in this world of their own accord (without any effort) through modification
of the three Gunas (in the form of destiny moulded by one's past actions); and what is the
use of hankering after final beatitude (which lies beyond the three Gunas) to us who enjoy
the nectar of His (lotus) feet and are (ever) singing His praises? (25) The triad which has been
spoken of (in the Vedas) as the three objects of human pursuit—viz., religious merit, worldly
riches and sensuous enjoyment—as well as the science of Self-Realization, the science of
rituals, logic and political science and the diverse means of earning one's livelinood—all this
subject-matter of the Veda | regard as true, (only) if it enables one to offer one's self to the
supreme Person, one's Inner Controller. (26) (The divine sage) Narayana, the (eternal)
Companion (and Brother) of (the sage) Nara (His divine Counterpart), itis said, taught this
