Dis. 18 ] BOOK NINE 67

Siete He eek REE REE RP ERERA TEESE eee AeA ROR ERE TEE EAEELENE EEA AEE EES EOE BERS

आत्मानमर्पयामास प्रह्वादाद्यरिशङ्कित: | पितर्युपरते पुत्रा याचमानाय नो ददु: । १४॥

fast महेन्द्राय यज्ञभागान् सम'ददु=|गुरुणाद्दृङ्गुग्॰प॰|नेऽप्तोबलभित्तनयग्न्रजे:|१५।

अवधीद् भ्रंशितान् मार्गान्न कश्चिदवहोषित: | कुशात् प्रति: क्षात्रवृद्धात् सञ्जयस्तत्सुतो जय: ।१६॥

सङ्कृतिस्तस्य च जय: क्षत्रधर्मा AERA: | क्षत्रवृद्धान्वया भूपा: YO] SRT च नाहुषात् 1१८॥
इति श्रीमद्भागवते महापुराणे पारमहंस्यां संहितायां नवमस्कन्धे चन्द्रवंशानुवर्णने सप्तदञ्चोऽध्याय: ।१७॥

(All) these aforesaid kings in the line of Ksatravrddha were the descendants of Kasi.
Rambha's son was Rabhasa, whose son (again) was Gambhira and from him followed
Akriya. (10) Through his wife was sprung a line of Brahmanas; (now) listen to the posterity
of Anena. From (the loins of) Anena sprang up Suddha, from whom followed Suci. Of him
was born Trikakud, alias Dharmasarathi. (11) Ofhim was born Santaraya, who had his object
(in the shape of final beatitude) accomplished and was enlightened (too so that he did not
beget any child). Raji had five hundred sons, who were (all) possessed of immense
strength.(12) Solicited by the gods, he slew the demons and restored (ihe kingdom of)
heaven to Indra. Returning it to him (Raji) and clasping his feet, Indra placed himself in his
hands, afraid as he was of Prahrada and other enemies. On the death of their father, the sons
of Raji did not return to the great Indra, even though he asked for it, (the sovereignty of)
heaven and (even) fully appropriated the sacrificial offerings. When oblations were being
poured by the preceptor (the sage Brhaspati) into the sacred fire (according to the procedure
laid down for the employment of spells for a malevolent purpose), Indra (the slayer of the
demon Bala) slew (all) the sons of Raji, who had strayed from the path of virtue, and none
(of them) was left alive. From (the loins of ) Kuga, the grandson of Ksatravrddha, sprang up
Prati; then came Safijaya, whose son was Jaya. (13—16) From Jaya followed Krta and of
Krta, again, was born King Haryavana. Next came Sahadeva and from Sahadeva followed
Hina; while Hina's son was Jayasena. Then came Sankrii and the latter's son was Jaya, a
great car-warrior devoted to the course of conduct of a Ksatriya. These are all the kings born
in the line of Ksatravrddha; now hear of the line which originated from King Yayati (the son
of Nahusa). (17-18)

Thus ends the seventeenth discourse, forming part of an account of the lunar dynasty,
in Book Nine of the great and glorious Bhagavata-Purana,
otherwise known as the Paramaharhsa-Samhita.

Sottnets
eS iees

अथाष्टादशोऽध्याय:
Discourse XVIII
The story of Yayati
श्रीगुक उवाच

चतिर्ययाति:र संयातिरायतिर्वियति:र कृति:। षडिमे नहुषस्यासन्निन्दियाणीव देहिन: । १ ।
राज्यं fae af: fir दत्तं तत्परिणामवित्। aa प्रविष्ट: पुरुष आत्मानं नावबुध्यते । २ 1
frat भ्रंशिते स्थानादिन्द्राण्या atone द्विजै: । प्रापितेऽजगरत्वे चै ययातिरभवन्नृप: । ३ 1
चतसृध्वादिशद fa oa भ्राता यवीयस: । कृतदारो जुगोपोर्वीं काव्यस्य वृषपर्वण: । ४ |
