660 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 3

न सा डत्र का र्दी को चो PS EE EE ER ee eH Ee HEE HH EH YE Heh He et

आत्मना fan ae सृजत्यवति लुम्पति । रज:सत्त्वतमोधाम्ने पराय wed नम: 1201
नम आद्याय बीजाय ज्ञानविज्ञानमूर्तये। प्राणेन्द्रियमनोबुद्धिविकारैर्व्यक्तिमीयुषे । २८॥

त्वमीशिषे जगतस्तस्थुषश्च प्राणेन मुख्येन पति: प्रजानाम् ।
चित्तस्य चित्तेर्मनइन्द्रियाणां पतिर्महान् भूतगणाशयेश: । २९॥
त्वं सप्ततन्तून् वितनोषि a wen चातुर्होत्रकविद्यया च ।

त्वमेकर आत्माऽऽत्मवरतामनादिरनन्तपार: MARIA । ३०॥

त्वमेव कालोऽनिमिषो जनानामायुर्लवाद्यावयवै:र क्षिणोषि |

कूटस्थ आत्मा WR महांस्त्वं जीवलोकस्य च sta आत्मा । ३१॥

त्वत्त: परॆ नापरमप्यनेजदेजच्च किञ्चिद् व्यतिरिक्तमस्ति ।

fam: कलास्ते तनवश्च सर्वा हिरण्यगर्भोऽसि बृहत्तिपृष्ठ: 1221

भुङ्खे स्थितो धामनि ames अव्यक्त sen पुरुष: पुराण: 1331
अनन्ताव्यक्तरूपेण येनेदमखिलं ततम्।चिदचिच्छक्तियुक्ताय «ae भगवते नम: ।३४॥
ae दास्यस्यभिमतान् वरान्मे वरदोत्तम। भूतेभ्यस्त्वद्विसृष्टेभ्यो मृत्युर्मा भून्मम प्रभो । ३५॥
नान्तर्बहिर्दिवा नकत्तमन्यस्मादपि aga: । न भूमौ नाम्बरे मृत्युर्न att मृगैरपि ।३६॥
व्यसुभिर्वासुमद्भिर्वा सुरासुरमहोरगै: | अप्रतिट्वन्दवतां युद्धे ऐकपत्यं च देहिनाम् । ३७॥

सर्वेषां लोकपालानां महिमानं यथाऽऽत्मन: । तपोयोगप्रभावाणां यन्न रिष्यति कर्हिचित् । ३८।

HiranyakaSipu said : Hail to the all-pervading Supreme, the Groundof (the three modes
of Prakrti, viz.,) Sattva, Rajas and Tamas (the principles of harmony, activity and inertia
respectively), who—self-effulgent as He is—manifests (again) by His native splendour this
universe, enveloped at the end of a Kalpa (the life-time of the three worlds) in blinding
Tamoguna evolved by Time, and who by His own Self—associated with the (aforesaid) three
Gunas—creates, protects and destroys it. (26-27) Salutations to the First Cause, whois an
embodiment of both (scriptural) knowledge and wisdom and who has (objectively)
manifested Himself in the form of the vital airs, the Indriyas (the five senses of perception and
the five organs of action), the mind and intellect and the (five gross) elements (which are
modifications of the five subtle elements). (28) (Itis) You (who) rule over the mobile (animate)
and immobile (inanimate) creation with the Prana (the life-breath), the foremost of the five
vital airs, and are (thus) the lord of created beings. (Nay,) You are the Controller of their
reason and consciousness (the modification of reason) as well as of the mind and the
Indriyas and are (thus) supreme, being the ruler of the (five gross) elements and their
properties (viz., sound, touch, sight, taste and smell), the internal senses (viz., the mind,
intellect, reason and ego) as well as of (their) cravings. (29) Through Your body in the form
of the three Vedas and the science of rituals conducted with the help of four officiating priests
(viz., Hota, Adhwaryu, Udgata and Brahma) You popularize the seven types of sacrificial
performances (namely, Agnistoma, Atyagnistoma, Uktha, Sodagi, Atiratra, Aptoryama and
Vajapeya). You are the Soul as well as the Inner Controller of (all) embodied beings; for You
are omniscient, indivisible, without beginning or end and unlimited (in space). (30) You alone
are the unwinking Time and (as such) shorten the duration oflife of (all) men by Your divisions
