306 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 5

PARE AEEALH EAA SEHK EE THLE HEE CEH EAHA EERE EEA EAR ES EHH EERE EEO E ER EEE eRe a

force. (33) Beaten by these (divinities), who were armed with firebrands and resplendent with
the spiritual glow investing a holy Brahmana, all the Pramathas (attendants of Lord Siva)
along with the Guhyakas (Yaksas, attendants of Kubera, the god of riches) ran away in
various directions. (34)

Thus ends the fourth discourse entitled "The Self-immolation of Sati"
in Book Four of the great and glorious Bhagavata-Purana,
otherwise known as the Paramahamsa-Samhita.

st Bt Bt
ord ery

अथ पञ्जमोऽध्याय:

Discourse V

Virabhadra wrecks Daksa's sacrifice and beheads him
मैत्रेय उवाच

wa waren निधनं प्रजापतेरसत्कृताया अव्रगम्य नारदात्।
स्वपार्षदसैन्यं च तदध्वरर्भुभिर्विद्रावितं क्रोधमपारमादधे । १ ।
we: Ue: स धूर्जटिर्जटां तडिद्वह्निसटोग्ररोचिषम् ।
उत्कृत्य te: सहसोत्थितो हसन् गम्भीरनादो विससर्ज ai भुवि । २ ।
त्ततोऽतिकायस्तनुवा wired सहस्रबाहुर्घनरुक त्रिसूर्यदृक ।
करालदंष्टो aera: कपालमाली विविधोद्यतायुध: । ३
a fe करोमीति गृणन्तमाह बद्धाञ्जलिं wear भूतनाथ: ।
दक्षॆ wae Oe मद्भटानां त्वमग्रणी रुद्र भटांशको मे। ४ ।
आज्ञप्त एवं afr wan a देवदेवं परिचक्रमे faq

मेने तदाऽऽत्मानमसङ्गरंहसा महीयसां तात सह: सहिष्णुम् । ५ ।
उद्यम्य शूलं जगदन्तकान्तकं स प्राद्रवद् घोषणभूषणाङ्घ्रि: । ६ ।

Maitreya continued : Lord Siva's fury knew no bounds when He learnt from Narada that
Sati (His spouse) had burnt herself to death on being slighted by Daksa (a lord of created
beings) and that the host of His own attendants had been driven away by the Rbhus, who
had appeared from Daksa's sacrifice. (1) Sharply biting His lips in rage, Lord Siva (who bore
a heavy burden of matted locks on His head) pulled up one of those clotted locks, which
shone brightly like a flash of lightning or as a flame of fire and, springing on His feet all at
once, laughed with a deep roar and dashed the lock against the ground. (2) From that lock
sprang a colossal being (Virabhadra by name) whose (tall) figure touched the skies, who
was possessed Of a thousand arms and, dark like a cloud, had three eyes bright as the sun,
fierce teeth and matted hair shining like flaming fire, wore a garland of skulls and was armed
with various uplifted weapons. (3) When he prayed with joined palms, "(Command me) what
to do!" Lord Siva (the lord of the spirits) said, "You being My part manifestations, O valiant

Rudra, lead My warriors (against Daksa) and dispose of Daksa and his sacrifice." (4)
Enjoined thus by the wrathful Rudra (who is anger personified), he went round (as a mark
