Dis. 2] BOOK ELEVEN 519

ST EER OEE RHE DEEN कक AEN O TE HEANOR me ee

उत्त Suka began again : O Pariksit (the best of the Kurus) | eager to wait upon Sri Krsna,
Narada very frequently stayed in Dwaraka, which was protected by the arms of Govinda. (1)
O king ! what mortal man, possessing sound senses, would possibly neglect to worship the
lotus-feet of Lord Mukunda, which are fit to be adored by the best of gods (Brahma and
others) ? (2) On one occasion, when Narada (the divine sage) came to His house and had
been worshipped and comfortably seated, Vasudeva greeted him and spoke thus:—(3)
उवाच

भगवन् भवतो यात्रा स्वस्तये सर्वदेहिनाम्। कृपणानां यथा पित्रोरुत्तमह्लोकवर्त्मनाम् | ४ ।
wrt graft gua च सुखाय wi सुखायैव fe साधूनां त्वादृशामच्युतात्मनाम् । ५ ।
भजन्ति ये यथा देवान् देवा अपि तथैव तान्। छायेव कर्मसचिवा: साधवो दीनवत्सला: । ६ ।
ब्रह्म्तथापि पृच्छामो धर्मान् फ्यारेंस्तव।याच्छूत्वग्श्रद्धयाग्मत्याँपुंव्यतेसर्वंनोश्यात्।…
ag किल पुरानन्तं प्रजार्थो भुवि मुक्तिदम्। अपूजयं न मोक्षाय मोहितो देवमायया । ८ ।
यथा विचित्रव्यसनाद् भवद्भिर्विश्चतोभयात्। मुच्येम ह्यञ्जसैवाद्धा तथा a: शाधि सुव्रत । ९ ।

Vasudeva submitted : 0 venerable sage, (just) as the movement of parents is
conducive to the welfare of children, and that of pious persons treading the path of the
glorious Lord is meant for the good of those bound by worldly attachments, your visit is a
blessing to all creatures. (4) The conduct of the deities may conduce both to the happiness
and misery of created beings; but the conduct of pious souls devoted to Lord Visnu like you
promotes their happiness only. (5) The deities, acting like one's own shadow, serve their
worshippers even as the latter worship them, following the course of their Karma. Saints
(however) are compassionate towards the afflicted (irrespective of their Karma). (6) All the
same, O holy Brahmana, we request you to tell us those Dharmas (righteous courses) which
delight the Lord, and hearing of which with faith the mortal man is rid of all fear. (7) Indeed,
in my previous birth in this world | worshipped the immortal Lord, who grants Liberation, for the
sake of progeny, but not for (the boon of) emancipation, deluded as | was by His Maya. (8) O
sage of noble vows, so instruct us that through you we may surely and easily be rid of (this)
worldly existence full of manifold misery and beset with fear on all sides. (9)

श्रीगुक उवाच
wha कृतप्रश्नो वसुदेवेन धीमता । प्रीतस्तमाह देवर्षिर्हे: संस्मारितो गुणै: । १०॥
Sri Suka continued : 0 king ! questioned thus by the wise Vasudeva, and vividly
reminded (thereby) of the Lord's qualities, the divine sage (Narada) felt (much) pleased and

said to him (as follows). (10)
ARG उवाच

सम्यगेतद् व्यवसितं भवता सात्वतर्पभ। यत् पृच्छसे भागवतान् धर्मांस्त्वं विश्वभावनान् । ११।
श्रुतोऽनुपठितो ध्यात आदरृतो वानुमोदित: । सद्य: पुनाति सद्धर्मो देव विश्वद्गुहोऽपि fe । १२।
aa परमकल्याण: पुण्यश्रवणकीर्तन: । स्मारितो भगवानद्य देवो नारायणो मम । १३॥

अत्राप्युदाहरन्तीममितिहासं पुरातनम्। आर्षभाणां च संवादं विदेहस्य महात्मन: । १४॥
प्रियव्रतो नाम सुतो मनो: स्वायम्भुवस्य य: । तस्याग्नीध्रस्ततो नाभिर्ऋषभस्तत्सुत: स्मृत: । १५॥
तमाहुर्वासुदेवांशं मोक्षधर्मविवक्षया । अवतीर्ण सुतशातं तस्यासीद् ब्रह्मपारगम् । १६॥

तेषां वै भरतो ज्येष्ठो नारायणपरायण:। विख्यातं वर्षमेतद् यन्नाम्ना भारतमद्भुतम् ।१७।
स भुक्तभोगां wean निर्गतस्तपसा ef उपासीनस्तत्पदवीं लेभे a जन्मभिस्तिभि: । १८॥
