“556 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 2

DOORN Retest tae Sri tt 2k ee PEN AOE EEK EER EET AEH AEE TERE . ....७..३.३.३ eee eee beret

polluted by the touch of a harlot, we shall accordingly take this sinner, who has done no
atonement (for his crimes so far), to the presence of Yama (who wields the rod of
punishment), where he will be purified through punishment. (67-68)

Thus ends the first discourse, forming part of the story of Ajamila,
in Book Six of the great and glorious Bhagavata-Purana,
otherwise known as the Paramaharisa-Samhita.

oe
न ord Sie

अथ द्वितीयोऽध्याय:

Discourse Il
The messengers of Lord Visnu expound the Bhagavata
Dharma (the cult of Devotion) and Ajamila
ascends to the Lord's supreme Abode

ARYA उवाच
एवं ते भगवद्दूता यमदूताभिभाषितम्। उपधार्याथ तान् राजन् प्रत्याहुर्नयकोबिदा: । १ ।
Sti Suka went on: Having thus heard and (duly) followed the dissertation of the messengers

of Yama, the aforesaid messengers of the Lord, who were masters of the moral science, now
replied to them (as follows), O king (Pariksit) ! (1)
विष्णुदूता ऊचु:

अहो कष्टं धर्मदृशामधर्म: स्पृशते aM यत्रादण्ड्येन्नपापेषु at यैर्धियते वृथा । २ ।

प्रजानां पितरो ये च शास्तार: साधव: समा: | ae स्यात्तेषु वैषम्यं कं यान्ति al प्रजा: । ३ |

यद्यदाचरति श्रेयानितरस्तत्तदीहते। स यत्प्रमाणं कुरुते लोकस्तदनुवर्तते | ४ |

यस्याङ्के RR आधाय ote: स्वपिति निर्वृत: । स्वयं धर्ममधर्मं वा न fe de यथा पशु: । ५ ।

a कथं waited कृतमैत्रमचेतनम्। विश्रम्भणीयो भूतानां सघृणो द्रोग्धुमर्हति । ६ ।

The messengers of Visnu said : Oh, what apity that unrighteousness should penetrate

the court of the knowers of Dharma (the secret of virtue), where punishment is unnecessarily
inflicted by those very knowers of Dharma on sinless people who do not deserve any ! (2)
If iniquity appears in (the heart of) those who are protectors (like a father) and teachers of
the people and are beneficent and even-minded (to all), whom shall the people resort to for
protection? (3) Whatever a superior man does, that very thing the common (ignorant) man
(also) does. The people (at large) follow that which the former sets up as a standard (to be
followed). (4) Like a brute, the common man himself has no knowledge of righteousness or
unrighteousness and (generally) sleeps at ease (over this question), resting his head on the
lap (utterly depending on the wisdom) of another (his ruler or preceptor). (5) How can it be
worthy of the latter, if he is full of compassion and deserves the confidence of (all) living
beings, to seek to harm the unwary world that has thrown itself entirely at his mercy, reposing
(full) trust on him ? (6)

aa हि कृतनिर्वेशो जन्मकोट्यंहसामपि । यद् व्याजहार feast नाम स्वस्त्ययनं 1 ७ ।
एतेनैव ह्यघोनोऽस्य कृतं स्यादघनिष्कृतम्। यदा नारायणायेति जगाद चतुरक्षरम् । ८ |
