604 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis..11

SOE REO ee A HO SK AEH ES EKEE SLE RERHLEL HE ESS SeEAT HEL OHHH HEAR

struck from behind ? Indeed the slaughter of the terror-stricken is neither praiseworthy nor
conducive to heavenly enjoyment for those who account themselves as brave. (4) If you are
keen about fighting or if there is courage in your heart, O vile creatures, and (again) if there
is no craving (in your heart) for sensuous enjoyments, stand but for a moment before me”. (5)

एवं सुरगणान् wet भीषयन् age रिपून्। व्यनदत् सुमहाप्राणो येन लोका विचेतस: । ६ ।
तेन देवगणा: सर्वे बृत्र॰न्निरकोटन-…ग्` a । निपेतुर्मूर्छिता yet यथैवाहानिना हता: । ७ |

mag पद्भ्यां सुरसैन्यमातुरु निमीलिताक्षॆ रणरङ्गदुर्मद: ।

T™ कम्पयन्नुद्यतशूल sere am वनं यूथपतिर्यथोन्मद: । ८ ।

विलोक्य तं वज्रधरोऽत्यमर्षित: स्वशात्रवेऽभिद्रवते महागदाम्।

चिक्षेप तामापततीं सुदु:सहां wae वामेन करेण लीलया । ९ ।

a sea: कुपितो भृशं am महेन्द्रवाहं गदयोग्रविक्रम: ।

जघान कुम्भस्थल उन्नदन् मृधे तत्कर्म सर्वे समपूजयन्नृप 1201

ऐरावतो वृत्रगदाभिमृष्टो fags: कुलिशाहतो यथा ।

अपासरद् भिन्नमुख:+ सहेन्द्रो मुञ्चन्नसृक सप्तधनुर्भृशार्त: 1221

न aaa विषण्णचेतसे प्रायुङ्क्त wa: स गदां महात्मा ।

इन्द्रोऽमृतस्यन्दिकराभिमर्शावीतव्यथक्षतवाहोऽवतस्थे । १२॥

a तं नृपेन्द्राहवकाम्यया fq वज्रायुधं wee विलोक्य ।

स्मरंश्च तत्कर्म नृशंसमंह: ञशोकेन मोहेन हसञ्जगाद 123 1

Thus threatening the host of gods, his enemies, by his (words as well as by his gigantic)
figure, and full of rage, Vrtra, who was possessed of vast strength, roared in such a way that
people fainted (to hear the sound). (6) Rendered unconscious by that (terrible) yell of Vrtra, all
the gods actually dropped on the ground just as they would when struck with lightning. (7) Taking
up his spear and shaking the earth by his strength, Vrtra (whose ardent passion for the pastime
of warfare could not be easily repressed) trod down under his feet the troops of the gods—(that
were) lying unconscious with their eyes closed—even as a lordly elephant would trample down
in its mad fury a bed of lotuses. (8) Indra (the wielder of the thunderbolt) was seized with great
indignation to see him and hurled a huge mace at his enemy, who was (now) rushing towards
him. Thedemon (however) sportfully caught that most formidable weapon with his lefthand even
asitapproached him. (9) Roaring in fury, the said enemy of Indra, who was possessed of terrible
prowess, struck on the head with that mace the elephant (Airavata) that bore the mighty Indra
onits back. All those present on the battle-field admired this feat of his, O Pariksit! (10) Smitten
with the mace hurled by Vrtra even like a mountain struct with lightning and much afflicted,
Airavata along with Indra (mounted on its back) retreated to a distance of twenty-eight cubits,
reeling and vomiting blood, its mouth broken. (11) That noble soul (Vitra) did not aim the mace
for a second time at Indra, who felt dejected in mind and whose elephant was stunned (with the
blow). (Meanwhile,) O king of kings, Indra, whose wounded elephant was rid of its pain by the
(very) touch of his hand, that shed drops of nectar, stood (once more) before Vrtra. (12) Seeing
the aforesaid Indra (his own enemy and) the slayer of his (elder) brother (ViSwarupa), standing
(before him) armed with the thunderbolt and seeking a (single) combat with him, O king of kings,
Vitra was filled with grief and infatuation as he recollected that cruel and sinful deed of his
adversary, and spoke laughing (as follows) : (13)
qa उवाच

fem war A समवस्थितो रिपुर्यो weer गुरुहा भ्रातृहा च ।
