Dis. 5] BOOK ELEVEN 533

APHHED HAH K ERA ४१४१ १5 KEN 89 १६9 ४9१ 9४१2 #:# 9१ 9-#१:^ 2७ १११9 heen ७9 १७ १99 Eehe Re eee ७ १० # hhE
7

Asuras. And during His descent as the Man-Lion (Lord Narasimha) He killed Hiranyakasipu
(the ruler of the Asuras) in order to rid His devotees (like Prahlada) of fear. (19) And in the war
between the gods and demons‘He killed the demon chiefs for the sake of the gods, and in
different Manvantaras through (different) part manifestations protected the worlds. Assuming
the form of the divine Dwarf (Vamana) He obtained on the pretext of asking for alms the earth
from Bali and gave it to the gods (the sons of Aditi). (20) Descending as Paragurama, the fire
born of the Bhargava race for the destruction of the Haihayas, He swept the Ksatriyas off the
surface of the earth thrice seven times. And (in His descent) as Sri Rama (the Spouse of Sita)
He bridged the ocean and kitled the ten-headed demon (Ravana) and destroyed (his capital)
Lanka. He is (always) victorious everywhere and His fame destroys the sins of the people.(21)
Though birthless, the Lord will appear in the race of Yadu in order to remove the burden of the
earth, and perform deeds which cannot easily be accomplished even by the gods. (Then
appearing as Lord Buddha) He will bewilder (and confuse) by His arguments those who
perform sacrificial rites though unqualified for them. And (appearing as Kalki) at the end of the
Kali age, He will destroy the Sdidra kings. (22) O king of mighty arms ! many such descents and
deeds of the Lord of the universe, of immense glory have been recounted (by the wise). (23)

Thus ends the fourth discourse in Book Eleven of the great and glorious
Bhagavata-Purana, otherwise known as the
Paramahamsa-Samnhita.

stinetnet:
IIE rcs

अथ पञ्चमोऽध्याय:

Discourse ४

The Fate of non-devotees; different methods of the Lord's worship
according to the different Yugas
राजोवाच
wed a प्रायो न भजन्त्यात्मवित्तमा: | तेषामज्ञान्तकामानां का निष्ठाविजितात्मनाम् । १ ।
The king (Nimi) submitted : O jewels among those (sages) who have realized the Self!
what will be the fate of those who do not generally adore Lord Sri Hari and whose desires
have not been satiated and whose mind and senses are (yet) uncontrolled ? (1)

चमस उवाच

मुखबाहूरूपादेभ्यअ UT: सह।चत्वारो जज्ञिरे ami गुणैर्विप्रादय: पृथक् । २ ।
य एषां पुरुषं साक्षादात्मप्रभवमोश्चरम्। न भजन्त्यवजानन्ति स्थानाद्भ्रष्टा: पतन्त्यध: । ३ ।
दूरेहरिकथा: केचिद् दूरेचाच्युतकीर्तना: | fara: शूद्रादयश्चैव तेऽनुकम्प्या भवादृशाम् । ४ |
fast राजन्यवैश्यौ च हरे: प्राप्ता: पदान्तिकम्। श्रौतेन जन्मनाथापि मुह्यन्याम्नायवादिन: । ५ ।
कर्मण्यकोविदा: wen मूर्खा: पण्डितमानिन: । वदन्ति चाटुकान् मूढा यया माध्व्या गिरोत्सुका: । ६ ।
रजसा घोरसङ्कल्पा कामुका अहिमन्यव: | दाम्भिका मानिन: पापा विहसन्त्यच्युतप्रियान् । ७ ।

वदन्ति तेऽन्योन्यमुपासितस्रियो गृहेषु मैथुन्यपरेषु चाशिष: ।

यजन्त्यसृष्टान्नविधानदक्षिणं वृत्यै परं घ्रन्ति पदूनतद्विद: । ८ ।
