Dis. 6] BOOK NINE

EERE HEUTE ER He EES SE HERE EROS EERE TECEHA LESAN EL CEHE A SEES THLELAHHERE यक

felt (greatly) amazed and gave up ( all) pride accompanying the fortune of a universal
monarch. (47) Thus fully attached to his household life and enjoying sense-objects (of
various kinds), Saubharidid not fee! satiated with manifold delights (of sense) any more than
afire would with drops of clarified butter. (48)

स कदाचिदुपासीन आत्मापह्नवमात्मन:। ददर्श बह्वुचाचार्यो मीनसङ्गसमुत्थितम् ।४९॥
aa इमं पश्यत मे fet तपस्विन: सच्चसितिव्रतस्य ।
अन्तर्जले वारिचरप्रसङ्गात् प्रच्यावितं ब्रह्म fat qd यत्॥५०॥
एकश्चरन् रहसि चित्तमनन्त to युञ्जीत तद्व्रतिषु साधुषु चेत् प्रसङ्ग: 14k!
एकस्तपस्व्यहमथाम्भसि मत्स्यसङ्गात् पञ्चाशदासमुत पञ्चसहस्रसर्ग: |
aR व्रजाम्बुभयकृत्यमनोरथानां मायागुणैर्हुतमतिर्विषयेऽर्थभाव: 1421
एवं वसन् गृहे कालं fant न्यासमास्थित: । वनं जगामानुययुस्तत्पत्य: पतिदेवता: 1431
तत्र तप्त्वा तपस्तीक्ष्णमात्मकर्शनमात्मवान्। सहैवाग्निभिरात्माने युयोज परमात्मनि । ५४॥

a: स्वपत्युर्महाराज निरीक्ष्याध्यात्मिकीं गतिम्। अन्वीयुस्तत्प्रभावेण aft शान्तमिवार्चिष: । ५५॥

Ona certain occasion, while sitting (at ease), hat teacher of those professing Rgveda,
perceived his fall from asceticism, brought about by his association with the fish through the
agency of his own mind. (49) (He said to himself,) "Ah, look at this fall of mine, a saintly ascetic
who had observed (sacred) vows (till recently), but whose asceticism, (though) maintained
for long, has been swept away thanks to (a moment's) close association with aquatic
creatures under water ! (50) He who seeks liberation (from the trammels of worldly
existence) should (therefore) eschew with one's mind, body and senses the company of
those who have taken to a married life, and should never allow his senses to move out (in
the midst of sense-objects). Living (all) alone (without any companion) in seclusion. He
should concentrate his mind on the infinite Lord and betake himself (only) to pious souls
devoted to Him, ifat all company is desired. (51) 1 wasacompanionless ascetic (till recently).
Thanks to the company of fish under water (however), | later on became fifty (as it were by
marrying as many wives), and again (by begetting a hundred sons through each) । became
divided into five thousand parts (in the form of as many sons). Now that my judgment has
been obscured by infatuation etc., (tne adjuncts of Maya or Prakrti) and | have begun to look
upon the objects of senses as worth seeking, | find no limit to desires relating to the duties
of both husband and wife. (52) Thus, staying at home for a long time, he (eventually) got
disgusted (with it) and, having embraced the life of an anchorite, retired to the forest, and his
wives (too), who (all) looked upon their husband as a deity, followed suit. (53) Having
practised there severe asceticism, that emaciated his body, the sage (who had now
mastered his self) merged his soul alongwith the sacred fires in the supreme Spirit (attained
final beatitude in the form of oneness with the Absolute). (54) Observing the absorption of
their husband into the supreme Spirit, O great king, his wives (too) followed him (reached the
same goal) by virtue of his spiritual glory even as flames get extinguished with the fire that
has cooled down (for want of fuel). (55)

Thus ends the sixth discourse, hinging on the story of Saubhari,
in Book Nine of the great and glorious Bhagavata-Purana,
otherwise known as the Paramahamsa-Samhita.

न्न्
PIOLE EOE OS OD
