Dis. 6 ] SRIMAD BHAGAVATA-MAHATMYA 47

SRSA ASTIN SH AO He tte Be RE BBE BR BG Be BREA BRR BE RR RR RE AER BEBE BBG BEB BER RN BEM R RERT RTH BER REPRO HR BPE He

we उवाच
शुकेनोक्तं कदा Ua गोकर्णेन कदा पुन: । सुरर्षये कदा madera मे dare त्विमम् । ९३॥

Saunaka submitted : When was Srimad Bhagavata expounded by Sri Suka for the sake
of the King (Pariksit)? When again was it expounded by Gokarna and when (again) by
Sanaka and his three brothers (sons of Brahma) for the sake of Narada (the heavenly seer) ?
(Pray) resolve this doubt of mine as a matter of fact.(93)

Ud उवाच
आकृष्णनिर्गमात्निंशद्दर्षाधिकगते कलौ | नवमीत्तो नभस्ये च कथारम्भं tse । ९४॥
परीक्षिच्छ्रवणान्ते च कलौ वर्षशतद्दये। शुद्धे शुचौ नवम्यां च धेनुजोऽकथयत्कथाम् । ९५॥
तस्मादपि कलौ प्राप्ते त्रिंशद्वर्षगते सति । ऊच्तुरुर्जे सिते पक्षे नवम्यां ब्रह्मण: सुता: । ९६॥
इत्येतत्ते समाख्यातं यत्पृष्टोऽहं त्वयानघ। कलौ भागवती oat भवरोगविनाशिनी ew!
Sita continued : Sri Suka started his exposition of Srimad Bhagavata on the ninth of
(the bright fortnight of ) the month of Bhadrapada (roughly corresponding to August of the
English calender) after thirty years of the Kali age, commencing from the departure of Sri
Krsna (for His divine realm), had rolled away. (94) After Pariksit's hearing (of Srimad
Bhagavata) when two hundred more years of the Kali age had elapsed, Gokarna (who was
born of a cow) commenced his exposition (of Srimad Bhagavata) on the ninth of the bright
half of Asadha (roughly corresponding to June of the English calendar). (95) When thirty
more years of Kaliyuga had elapsed since then, Brahma's sons (Sanaka and his three
brothers) commenced the exposition (of Srimad Bhagavata) on the ninth of the bright
fortnight of Kartika (roughly corresponding to the month of October ofthe English calendar). (96)
| have thus told you as aforesaid what । was asked by you, O sinless Saunaka ! The
exposition of Srimad Bhagavata in the age of Kali puts an end to the disease of
metempsychosis. (97)
कृष्णप्रियॆ सकलकल्मषनाशनं च मुक्त्येकहेतुमिह भक्तिविलासकारि |
सन्त: कथानकमिदं पिबतादरेण लोके fe तीर्थपरिशीलनसेवया किम् । ९८ ।
स्वपुरुषमपि वीक्ष्य पाशहस्तं वदति यम: किल तस्य कर्णमूले |
परिहर भगवत्कथासु मत्तान् प्रभुरहमन्यनृणां न वैष्णवानाम्। ९९ ।

जगति शुककथातो निर्मलं नास्ति किञ्चित् पिब परसुखहेतोर्द्वदादरस्कन्धसारम् 12021
एतां यो नियततया spit wae यश्चैनां कथयति झद्धवैष्णवाग्रे ।
तौप्तप्यग्विफ्रिलभेतेवाथाथ्यत्निहिभुकोकिंपप्यसाध्यम्।र॰ऎ।
इति श्रीपद्मपुराणे उत्तरखण्डे श्रीमद्भागवतमाहात्म्ये श्रवणविधिकथनं नाम षष्ठोऽध्याय: ।। ६ I
समाप्तमिदं श्रीमद्भागवतमाहात्म्यम्
