SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 10

Heir iat eee ee SRT Seve ae arte eee tee Hees He ger Wer wee erica ote te Beg ECT CREEP RO AH ST AH RE

टि Ea nie Ono aeevrV1rker—

following a Mahapralaya or Final Dissolution) the whole process of creation begins anew
(including even the transformation of Matter, from the evolution of Mahat down to the
crystallization of the five elements); while in the other Kalpas (the Kalpas following a night
of Brahma) itis only the bodies of the animate and inanimate beings that are created anew.
(46) | shall describe in full the measures of time (both gross and subtle), the duration of a
Kalpa and its divisions later on (in Book III). Now hear the story of the Padma Kalpa. (47)

gee नो भवान् Ga क्षत्ता आगवतोत्तम: | चचार तीर्थानि भुवस्त्यक्त्वा बन्धून् सुदुस्त्यजान् SCI
ga कौषारवेस्तस्य संवादोऽध्यात्मसंश्रित: । यद्वा स भगवांस्तस्मै पृष्टस्ततत्वमुवाच ह ।४९।

ब्रूहि नस्तदिदं सौम्य विदुरस्य विचेष्टितम् । बन्धुत्यागनिमित्तं च तथैवागतवान् UA: 1401

Saunaka said : Sita, you told us how Vidura, who was the foremost of the Lord's
devotees left his kith and kin, so very difficult to part with, and travelled on foot to all the
sacred places on the earth's surface. (48) Where did he come to have a talk with the sage
Maitreya (the son of Kusaru) on spiritual topics, and what was the truth that the venerable
sage taught to Vidura in response to the latter's queries ? (49) Tell us all that story of Vidura,
O gentle Sita, as also the circumstances in which he left his kinsmen and what led to his
return. (50)

सूत उवाच
ua परीक्षिता पृष्टो चदवोचन्महामुनि: | तद्वोऽभिधास्ये श्रणुत राज्ञ: प्रश्नानुसारत: ।५१।

पुरुषसंस्थानुवर्णनं नाम दशमोऽध्याय:। १० |

Xe

इति द्वितीय: स्कन्ध: समाप्त: |
Watt: ॐ तत्सत् ।।

Sita said : King Pariksit too asked this very question. | now proceed to reproduce to you
the discourse that the great sage (Suka) gave in response to the king's queries. (51)

Thus ends the tenth discourse entitled “The Disposition of the limbs of the Cosmic Being”
in Book Two of the great and glorious Bhagavata-Purana, othenvise known
as the Paramaharnsa-Samhita, a collection of eighteen thousand
verses composed by the sage Vedavyasa.

SS PNT HT
CSOD ESN OIDOD

End of Book Two

rn
