Dis. 8] BOOK ELEVEN 553

SO AOR AE न RRS BER ROR RI OE OR TOO OE OEE OE व En ne माल् REE OE

and give her plentiful money. (25) Waiting at the door thus frustrated, and having fost her `
sleep, she kept going inside and outside the house till it was midnight. (26) Her mouth was
parched and she felt dejected through hope for earning money; but ultimately the sense of
frustration leading to happiness dawned on her through thinking as mentioned below. (27)
Now duly hear from me the song she sang in her utter disappointment, because for people
dispassion is like a sword to cut asunder the noose of hope. (28) For no person, O King, who
has not acquired this feeling of disgust for the world would snap the bodily ties any more than
he who is devoid of discretion could give up the sense of my-ness. (29)

अहो मे मोहविततिं | ageerfafaera: । या कान्तादसत: कामं कामये येन बालिझा i301

arm, यार्थतृषोऽनुशोच्यात् क्रीतेन वित्तं रतिमात्मनेच्छती ।३२॥
यदस्थिभिर्निर्मितवंशवंदयस्थूणं त्वचा रोमनखै: पिनद्धम् |
क्षरन्नवद्वारमगारमेतद् विण्मूत्रपूर्णं मदुपैति ART 1331
विदेहानां पुरे ह्यस्मिन्नहमेकैव मूढधी: । यान्यमिच्छन्त्यसत्यस्मादात्मदात् काममच्युतात् 131
Wel प्रेष्ठतमो नाथ आत्मा चायं झरीरिणाम्। तं विक्रीयात्मनैवाहं रमेऽनेन यथा रमा ।३५॥
कियत् प्रियं ते व्यभजन् कामा ये कामदा नरा: | आद्यन्तवन्तो भार्याया देवा वा कालविद्रुता: । ३६1
नूनं मे भगवान् प्रीतो विष्णु: केनापि कर्मणा । निर्वेदोऽयं दुराशाया यन्मे जात: सुखावह: 13001
aa स्युर्मन्दभाग्याया: an निर्वेदहेतव: । येनानुबन्धं fee पुरुष: ङाममृच्छति ।३८॥
तेनोपकृतमादाय शिरसा ग्राम्यसङ्घता: | RST दुराशा: झरणं wari तमधीश्वरम् । ३९॥
we श्रद्दधत्येतद्यथालाभेन जीवती । विहराम्यमुनैवाहमात्मना रमणेन चै ।४०॥
संसारकूपे पतितॆ विषयैर्मुषितेक्षणम् । ग्रस्तं कालाहिनाऽऽत्मानं कोऽन्यस्त्रातुमधीश्वर: ।४१॥
आत्मैव ह्यात्मनो गोप्ता निर्विद्येत यदाखिलात् । अप्रमत्त इदं asda wet कालाहिना जगत् ।`४२॥
Pingala said: Alas! how senseless and of uncontrolled mind am । ! Behold the extent
of my foolishness; ignorant as | am, | have expected the fulfilment of my desire from a trifling
mean paramour ! (30) Forsaking (the adoration of) the eternal and real Lord, who resides in
the heart and gives joy and wealth forever, fondly have | sought a poor man who cannot
satisfy my desires and who only gives grief. fear, worry, sorrow and infatuation. (31) Lo! how
uselessly have | afflicted my soul by leading the life of a courtesan and living by such a highly
reproachful profession; | expected wealth and satisfaction from a lustful, greedy and
lamentable person through my body sold tohim ! (32) What female other than myself would
find enjoyment through a (paramour's) body. which is like a house of which the framework
is of bones, covered with skin, hair and nails, which is full of urine and excreta and has nine
doors through which constantly flows foul matter ? (33) Among the (wise) citizens of Mithila
(am the only foolish and wicked person in that | expect satisfaction from anybody else than
the immortal Lord, who bestows his own Self. (34) He is the friend, most beloved Lord and
Self of all embodied beings; to Him shail | offer myself as a price and find enjoyment in Him
like Laksmi, who sports with Him. (35) To what extent have mortal men and even celestials,

supject to the ravages of Time, been able to give satisfying pleasure or enjoyment to their
wives ? (36) Forsooth, Lord Visnu has been pleased with me for some action of mine, as in
