38 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 10

7a: समुद्रा गिरय: सवनस्पतिवीरुध:। फलन्त्योषधय: wal: काममन्वृतु तस्य वै । ५ ।
नाधयो व्याधय: Fe दैवभूतात्महेतव: | अजातशत्रावभवञ्जन्तूनां राज्ञि कर्हिचित्। ६ ।
उषित्वा हास्तिनपुरे मासान् कतिपयान् eft: | geet च faa was प्रियकाम्यया । ७ ।
आमन्त्य चाभ्यनुज्ञात: परिष्ज्याभिवाद्य तम्। आरुरोह रथं केश्चित्परिषुक्तोऽभिवादित: । ८ |
सुभद्रा द्रौपदी galt विराटतनया तथा । गान्धारी yous युयुत्सुर्गौतमो यमो । ९ ।
वृकोदरश्च धोम्यश्च स्रियो मत्स्यसुतादय:। न सेहिरे विमुह्यन्तो विरहं शार्ङ्गधन्वन: igo!
सत्सङ्गान्मुक्तदु:सङ्घो हातुं नोत्सहते ge कीर्त्यमानं an यस्य सकृदाकर्ण्य रोचनम् ।११॥
तस्मिन्न्यस्तधिय: wat: सहेरन् विरहं men दर्शनस्पर्शसंलापरायनासनभोजनै: 1221
wa तेऽनिमिषैरक्षैस्तमनुद्गुतचेतस: । वीक्षन्त: स्नेहसम्बद्धा विचेलुस्तत्र तत्र ह 1231
न्यरुन्धन्नुद्गलद्बाष्पमोत्कण्ठयाद्देवकीसुते । निर्यात्यगारान्नोऽभद्रमिति स्याद्बान्धवस्रिय: । १४॥

Sita continued: Having revived the race of Kuru, that had been consumed by the fire
of internecine feud—even as the wild fire produced by the rubbing of bamboo stems against
one another consumes a whole forest of bamboos—and established Yudhisthira on his
throne, the almighty Sri Hari (Sri Krsna), the promoter of the world, rejoiced at heart. (2)
Having shaken off his infatuation by force of the wisdom that had dawned on him as a result
of his hearing the teachings of Bhisma and the exhortation of Lord Acyuta (Sri Krsna),
Yudhisthira ruled over the whole earth, stretching as far as the ocean, like Indra (the lord of
paradise), enjoying as he did the protection of Sri Krsna (the invincible Lord) and the loyal
submission of his younger brothers. (3) The god of rain poured down copious showers; the
earth yielded all that was desired; while cows that had large udders, gladly sprinkled the
stalls with milk. (4) Rivers, seas, mountains, trees and creepers and other herbs and plants,
all bore him abundant products in due season. (5) Living beings had no worries or physical
ailment nor afflictions of any kind—whether brought about by a wrathful Providence, any
fellow-being or by one's own self (in the form of bodily or mental suffering) at any time
whatsoever so long as Yudhisthira (who regarded none as his enemy) reigned as king. (6)
After spending some months at Hastinapura for the consolation of His friends and relatives
as well as for the satisfaction of His sister (Subhadra, wife of Arjuna), Sri Hari (Sri Krsna)
asked leave of king Yudhisthira (to return home) and, permitted by him, He embraced him
and bowed to him and, embraced or greeted in turn by others (those who were of the same
age or younger) mounted His chariot. (7-8) Subhadra, Draupadi, Kunti and Uttara (the
daughter of king Virata), and even so Gandhari, Dhrtarastra, Yuyutsu (the only surviving son
of Dhrtarastra, born of a Vaisya wife), Krpacarya (born in the line of the sage Gotama),
Nakula and Sahadeva (the twin-born half-brothers of Yudhisthira), Bhimasenaand Dhaumya,
and Satyavati (Bhisma's stepmother) and other ladies almost fainted (with sorrow), unable
to bear separation from the Lord (who wielded the Sarnga bow). (9-10) A wise man, who has
abjured evil company through the fellowship of saints cannot even afford to forgo the
privilege of listening to His sweet praises being sung by others, having once had the
opportunity to hear them. (11) How, then, could the Pandavas (the sons of Prtha) bear
separation from the Lord, on whom they had bestowed their mind and heart, having had the
privilege not only of seeing Him (at close quarters), touching His person and conversing with
Him, but also of reposing, sitting and dining with Him ? (12) Regarding Him with unwinking
eyes, boundas they were by ties of affection to Him, they all hurried to and fro (to fetch parting
presents for Him), their heart running after Him. (13) As Sri Krsna (son of Devaki) was about
todepartfrom the palace, the ladies who were bound to Him by ties of kinship restrained their
tears of affection from trickling down, anxious as they were lest any harm might come to Him
