Dis. 21] BOOK FOUR 385

PEKKEHKESREK ESCH HG EH KEELE HEEL E AERA CEA PONTE ITE HA TRAE RR BPR HE

various rites are directed, the intention with which a sacrifice is undertaken, the distinctive
virtue of things and the appellation (such as Jyotistoma and Vajapeya) by which a sacrifice
is known. (34) Even as fire manifested through (various) pieces of wood appears endowed
with their peculiarities (size, shape etc.), so does the all-pervading Lord (who is supreme ~
Bliss)—manifesting Himself through the medium of the intellect (which has identified itself
with external objects) in the body (of an individual), which is a product of Prakrti (primordial
Matter), the Time-spirit, latent desires and destiny—appear as the fruit of various religious
rites as well.(35) Oh! those of my subjects on the surface of this globe whowith a firm resolve
incessantly worship, through the performance of their (allotted) duty, Sri Hari, the Preceptor
of the universe and the Supreme Lord of all those who receive a share in the sacrificial
offerings (really) do me a favour. (36) May the lustre emanating from the ruling (Ksatriya)
race through their great affluence and power never overpower the Brahmana race, and the
votaries of the invincible Lord Visnu, shining brightly through sheer forbearance, austerity
and adoration. (37) It is by ever adoring the feet of the Brahmanas that Sri Hari, the most
ancient Person—whois a (great) devotee of the Brahmana community, and who takes the
lead among the most exalted—won Laksmi (the goddess of fortune), who never leaves Him,
and a glory which sanctifies the universe. (38) Following as you do the righteous conduct of
the Lord, pray, adore in all humility and with your entire being the Brahmana race, by serving
whom that independent Lord—who dwells in the heart of all and is (extremely) fond of the
Brahmanas—is supremely pleased. (39) Who is better qualified in this world to serve as a
mouth of (vehicle to convey offerings to) the gods (who feed on sacrificial food) than the
Brahmana race, by constantly adoring whom a man automatically attains final beatitude (in
the shape of everlasting peace) before long consequent on his mind getting purified as a
matter of course? (40) The immortal Lord, who is the sole theme of the Upanisads (the
utterances referring to those who are devoted to Self-Realization) surely does not enjoy the
oblations poured into the sacred fire—which is bereft of consciousness—so well as those
offered with reverence into the mouth of a Brahmana by the knowers of Truth in the name
of gods fit to be adored ina sacrifice. (41) Equipped with reverence, austerity, commendable
conduct, chariness of speech, self-control and concentration of mind, the Brahmanas ever
retain in their memory, with a view to discovering the Truth, the pure and eternal Veda, in
which (the whole of) this universe can be (clearly) seen as in a mirror. (42) O venerable ones !
let me carry the dust of their lotus-feet on my crown all my life; for the sins of the man who
constantly wears it (on his head) speedily disappear and all sorts of virtues seek their abode
in him. (43) And riches (of every kind), as a matter of course, woo him who is an abode of
excellences, rich in moral character, full of gratitude and devoted to the elders. (Therefore),
may the Brahmana race and the bovine species as well as Lord Janardana and His servants
be gracious to me ! (44)

इति ब्रुवाणं नृपति पितृदेवद्विजातय: । तुष्टुवुर्हष्टमनस: साधुव्रादेन साधव: ।४५॥
पुत्रेण wad लोकानिति सत्यवती श्रुति: । ब्रह्मदण्डहत:र पापो ययद्वेनोऽत्यतरत्तम: ।४६॥
हिरण्यकशिपुश्चापि भगवन्निन्दया तम: । विविक्षुरत्यगात्सूनोर प्रह्रादस्यानुभावत: Iso
ahead पित: पृथ्व्या: समा:सञ्जीव aad: । यस्येदृश्यच्युते भक्ति: सर्वलोकैकभर्तरि iwc
we at ga पवित्रकीर्ते wie नाथेन मुकुन्दनाथा: |
य उत्तमश्लोकतमस्य विष्णोर्व्रह्मण्यदेवस्य कथां व्यनक्ति vel
नात्यद्भुतमिदं नाथ तवाजीव्यानुशासनम्। प्रजानुरागो महतां प्रकृति: करुणात्मनाम् | Ko |
