554 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 9

TERME ८ २ २२ २ २१०० २ २ २१० ET २ ० ७ RETO OME REDE NHT १ २ ० ० TEST ETEREMPORERE DUT ETETE SEL ET १०४ ०

my heart, full of vicious hope, the feeling of disgust for the world has been engendered, which
will lead to happiness. (37) Had | been unfortunate, | would not have met with miseries which
have produced the feeling of disgust for the world. Itis this despondency through which man
attains peace by snapping the fetters of home etc. (38) Placing on my head the benefit
rendered by Him and forsaking vicious hopes of sense-enjoyments, I shall seek refuge with
the said Lord. (39) Feeling contented with whatever | get and living upon it, and trusting the
Lord, who is my own Self, | shall now sport with Him as my husband. (40) My soul is fallen
in the well of worldliness, the senses have deprived me of discrimination, and | stand
devoured by the serpent of Time. Who else but the Lord can save me? (41) When one
carefully sees the world devoured by the serpent of Time and feels disgusted with worldly
objects, one realizes the fact that one’s Self is the only protector. (42)

ब्राह्मण उवाच
एवं व्यवसितमतिर्दुराश्रां कान्ततर्धजाम्। छित्त्वोपशाममास्थाय शय्यामुपविवेशा सा ।४३॥
आशा हि परमं दु:खं feed परमं सुखम्।यथा संछिद्य arora qe gas पिङ्गला sx!

The Brahmana said : Thus determined, she abandoned the vicious hope born of lust
and, resorting to peace, she (quietly) sought her bed. (43) Hope is the greatest misery and
the absence of it is the greatest joy; for Pingala, getting rid of the hope to get a paramour,
enjoyed a peaceful sleep. (44)

Thus ends the eighth discourse in Book Eleven of the great and glorious
Bhagavata-Purana. otherwise known as the
Paramahamsa-Samnhila.

AINSI NRE:
PII Eire

अथ नवमोऽध्याय:

Discourse IX
Story of the seven preceptors, the osprey and others; and the
end of the Avadhita's discourse
ब्राह्मण उवाच
परिग्रहो fe दु:खाय ae यत्परियतमं नॄणाम्। अनन्तं सुखमाम्नोति aa विद्वान् यस्त्वकिञ्चन: | १ ।
सामिषं gt जघ्नुर्बलिनो a निरामिषा:। तदामिषं परित्यज्य a qd समविन्दत । २ ।
न मे मानावमानौ स्तो न चिन्ता गेहपुत्रिणाम्। आत्मक्रीड आपत्मरतिर्विचरामीह बालवत् । ३ !
waa चिन्तया मुक्तौ परमानन्द आष्लुतौ । यो विमुग्धो जडो बालो यो गुणेभ्य: परं गत: । ४ ।
क्वचित् कुमारी त्वात्मानं वृणानान् गृहमागतान् | स्वयं तानर्हयमास क्वापि यातेषु बन्धुषु । ५ ।
तेषामभ्यवहारार्थं शालीन् रहसि पार्थिव | Hare: प्रकोष्ठस्थाश्चक्रु: शङ्खा: स्वनं महत् । ६ |
सा तज्जुगुप्सितं मत्वा महती व्रीडिता तत: । बभञ्जैकैकशा: शङ्खान् द्वौ द्वौ पाण्योरहोषयत् । ७ |
उभयोरप्यभूद् घोषो ह्यवध्नन्तया: स्म झङ्खयो: । तत्राप्येकॆ निरभिददेकस्मान्नाभवद् ध्वनि: । ८ |
