418 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 28

RR WE RSE RR Sr Wet Bee a ee SE A RE IE TR EY

Tat स जनयाञ्चक्र आत्मजामसितेक्षणाम्। यवीयस: GA WAM GA द्रविडभूभृत: 1301
एकैकस्याभवत्तेषां राजन्नर्बुदमर्बुदम्। Hert यट्वंशाधरैर्मही मन्वन्तरं परम् ।३१॥
ame: प्राग्दुहितरमुपयेमे धृतव्रताम्। यस्यां दृढच्युतो जात इध्मवाहात्मजो मुनि: 1321
While Purafjana was sorrowing thus with a feeble mind, even though he should not have
done so, there came up the lord of the Yavanas, Bhaya by name, bent upon seizing him. (22)
When he was being taken by the Yavanas to their own place, bound as a beast, his
attendants (too) followed him, sorrowing in extreme perturbation. (23) When the serpent
(too), that had been held up (till now by the Yavanas) deserted the city and came up (to his
master), the city was completely destroyed after him and reduced to the elements. (24)
(Even) while being forcibly dragged by the mighty Yavana, Purafijana failed to remember his
old friend and companion (Avijiata), seized as he was with infatuation. (25) The sacrificial
animals that had been mercilessly slaughtered by him (now) choppedhim with axes in anger,
remembering that cruelty of his. (26) Steeped in ignorance, to which there was no limit or end,
and having lost his memory, he suffered (untold) agony (in hell) for numberless years, his
mind being perverted through attachment to his wife. (27) Mentally clinging to her alone
(even at the last moment), he was then born as a most beautiful girl in the house of the (then)
ruler of Vidarbha, a veritable lion among kings. (28) Malayadhwaja, a ruler of the Pandya
kingdom, who had conquered (all) his enemies’ cities, married this princess of Vidarbha, who
was offered as the prize of valour, after vanquishing all the other princes in battle. (29)
Through her Malayadhwaja begot alovely daughter with dark eyes and seven younger sons,
who became the seven rulers of the Dravida kingdom. (30) A hundred million sons were born
to each one of these latter, by whose descendants the earth will be ruled over for a whole
Manvantara and (even) beyond it. (31) Agastya married the first-born daughter (of
Malayadhwaja), constant in virtue; of her was born the sage Drdhacyuta, who (in his turn)
had a son, Idhmavaha by name. (32)
विभज्य तनयेभ्य: ent राजर्षिर्मलयध्वज: | आरिराधयिषु: कृष्णं स जगाम कुलाचलम् 1331
हित्वा Yer सुतान् भोगान् वैदर्भी मदिरेक्षणा | अन्वधावत पाण्ड्येदं ज्योत्स्नेव रजनीकरम् । ३४॥
तत्र Wea नाम ताम्रपर्णी वरटोदका | तत्पुण्यसलिलैर्नित्यमुभयत्रात्मनो मृजन् । ३५॥
कन्दाष्टिभिर्मूलफलै: पुष्पपर्णैस्तृणोदकै: | aaa: ङनैर्गात्रकर्शनं तप आस्थित: 1361
शीतोष्णवातवर्षाणि क्षुत्पिपासे प्रियाप्रिये। सुखदु:खे इति दइन्द्वान्यजयत्समदर्शन: 1301
तपसा विद्यया ovens नियमैर्यमॆ: । युयुजे ब्रह्मण्यात्मानं विजिताक्षानिलाशय: ।३८॥
आस्ते स्थाणुरिवैकत्र दिव्यं वर्षरातं स्थिर: । वासुदेवे भगवति नान्यद्वेदोद्टहन् रतिम् । ३९
स व्यापकतयाऽऽत्मानं व्यतिरिक्ततयाऽऽत्मनि । fer स्वप्न इवामर्शसाक्षिणं विरराम ह ixol

साक्षाद्भगवतोक्तेन गुरुणा हरिणा नृप । विशुद्धज्ञानदीपेन wen विश्चतोमुखम् ।४१॥

परे ब्रह्माणि चात्मानं wt wa तथाऽऽत्मनि । dian विहायेक्षामस्मादुपरराम ह ।४२।
Having divided the earth among his (seven) sons, that royalsage, Malayadhwaja, betook
himself to the Kulacala mountain, eager to worship Lord Sri Krsna. (33) Abandoning her
house, sons and luxuries, the lovely eyed daughter of the king of Vidarbha followed the lord
of the Pandyas, even as moonlight follows the moon. (34) (Three) rivers, Candravasa,
Tamrapami, and Vatodaka by name, flow in that region. Cleansing the impurities of both his
body and mind with their holy waters everyday, and subsisting on bulbs and seeds, roots and
fruits, flowers and leaves, as well as on blades of grass and water, he practised austerities,
which gradually emaciated his body. (35-36) He triumphed over pairs of opposites such as

