306 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 47

SERN 9 9) Sn Sere av sr erp er arrest Sf eRe et are seer २8 व क

Itis only with intent to focus your thought constantly on Me in order to ensure your mental
proximity with Me that |, your Darling, am actually staying (so) far from your eyes. (34) The
mind of women as well as of others does not get so absorbed in the thought of their most
beloved one living close by and open to their view as in that of one staying ata distance. (35)
Incessantly thinking of Me (as you do), having devoted to Me your whole (undivided) mind,
which has completely shed all (other) thoughts, you will come to Me before long. (36) Those
blessed (cowherd) women who (having been held back by their husbands and others) stayed
away in Vraja and could not (therefore) get an opportunity to sport with Me while | diverted
myself in the woodland (of Vrndavana) one night attained to Me through contemplation on
My exploits. (37)

एवं प्रियतमादिष्टमाकर्ण्य व्रजयोषित: । ता ऊचुरुद्धवं प्रीतास्तत्सन्देशागतस्मृती: 1301

Sri Suka continued : Delighied to hear the message of 87 Krsna (their most beloved
Lord), the aforesaid women of Vraja spoke to Uddhava (as follows), their memories of Sri
Krsna having been awakened by His message. (38)

गोप्य ऊचु:

दिष्ट्याहितो हत: कंसो यदूनां सानुगोऽधकृत्। दिष्ट्याऽऽपतैर्लब्धसर्वा if: कुशल्यास्तेऽच्युतोऽधुना 13° 1
कच्चिद् गदाग्रज: सौम्य करोति पुरयोषिताम्। प्रीतिं न: स्निग्धसव्रीडहासोदारेक्षणार्चित: ।४०॥
कथं tate: प्रियश्च वरयोषिताम्।नानुबध्येत तद्वाक्यैर्विभ्रमैश्चानुभाजित: 1४१॥
अपिं स्मरति न: साधो गोविन्द: प्रस्तुते क्वचित् । गोष्ठीमध्ये पुरस्रीणां ग्राम्या: स्वैरकथान्तरे ve

am: किं fen: स्मरति यासु दा प्रियाभिर्वृन्दावने कुमुदकुन्दशङञाङ्करम्ये ।

रेमे  क्वणच्चरणनूपुररासगोष्ठयामस्माभिरीडीतमनोज्ञकथ: कदाचित् ।४३|
अप्येष्यतीह दाशार्हस्तप्ता: स्वकृतया Yan सञ्जीवयन् नु नो गात्रैर्यथेन्द्रो वनमम्बुदै: ।४४॥
कस्मात् HN इहायाति प्राप्तराज्यो हताहित: । नरेन्द्रकन्या उद्बाह्य प्रीत: सर्वसुहृद्वृत: ॥४५॥

किमस्माभिर्वनोकोभिरन्याभिर्वा महात्मन: । श्रीपतेराप्तकामस्य क्रियेतार्थ: कृतात्मन: ।४६॥
परं सौख्यं ॰हिनैराट्यंरवैरिंण्यंप्याहपिङ्गक्ता|तज्ञानर्तम्नांन:बृत्र्घ्योतथाफ्याद्रुस्त्यया।४७।

क उत्सहेत सन्त्यक्तुमुत्तमश्लोकसंविदम्। अनिच्छतोऽपि यस्य sitters च्यवते क्वचित् ।४८॥
सरिछैलवनोद्देशा गावो वेणुरवा इमे। सङ्कुर्षणसहायेन कृष्णेनाचरिता: प्रभो ।४९॥
पुन: पुन: स्मारयन्ति नन्दगोपसुतं ami श्रीनिकेतैस्तत्पदकैर्विस्मर्तुं नैव apm: ।५०॥
गत्या ललितबोदारहासलीलावलोकनै: | माध्व्या गिरा हृतधिय: कथं तं विस्मरामहे । ५१॥
हे नाथ हे wa sania । मग्नमुदुरं गोविन्द गोकुलं atria ies

The Gopis said : By good-luck Karnsa, the (sworn) enemy and persecutor of the Yadus,
has been killed alongwith his followers. It is a maiter for (further) gratification that Sri Krsna
(the immortal Lord) is now doing well with His relations, who have attained all their objects
(through Him). (39) (Others said), Does Sri Krsna (elder Brother of Gada), who was (till the
other day) greeted (by us) with our loving and pleasing glances accompanied by bashful
smiles, bring delight to the women of the city (of Mathura), O gentle one? (40) (Still others
said,) How can He, an expert in love-making and (hence) beloved of charming women, help
being won over (by them) when greeted with their (sweet) words and amorous gestures ?(41)
(Some more said,) Does Sri Krsna (the Protector of cows), O pious one, remember us, rustic
