562 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 3

उ आड कौ चिड क्तैत् व वित् क दि शरपर्क ECHR EKER वित् प ESTEE SHEE EAE EER EEE fee fee fh titi & fet dite ere
मिम्नि SSeS ee Ee EN EEE ST NY SPATS! Br Ar Wee ETAT Se

obstructed, say in reply to his servants—who had been foiled by the messengers of Lord
Visnu (the Slayer of the demon Mura)—on hearing their report ? (1) (Such) supersession
of the authority of the glorious Yama at the hands of another was never heard of before, O
(holy) sage ! (And) none other than you can resolve the doubt which will arise in the popular
mind on this point; that is my conviction. (2)
HY उवाच
भगवत्पुरुषॆ राजन् याम्या: प्रतिहतोद्यमा: । पतिं विज्ञापयामासुर्यमं संयमनीपतिम् । ३ ।
Sri Suka replied : The messengers of Yama, whose efforts (to execute the commands

of their master) were interrupted by the servants of the Lord, O king, submitted to their
master, Yama, the ruler of the (city of) Sarnyamani (as follows). (3)
qgH nq:

कति सन्तीह Wend strstr वै प्रभो ।त्रैविध्यं pda: कर्म फलाभिव्यक्तिहेतव: । ४ ।

यदि स्युर्बहवो लोके ered दण्डधारिण: | कस्य स्यातां न वा कस्य मृत्युश्चामृतमेव वा । ५ ।

faq शास्तृबहुत्वे स्याद्दहूनामिह कर्मिणाम्।शास्तृत्वमुपचारो हि यथा मण्डलवर्तिनाम् । ६ ।

अतस्त्वमेको भूतानां सेश्वराणामधीश्वर: | शास्ता दण्डधरो For शुभाशुभविवेचन: । ७ |

we ते विहतो दण्डो न लोके वर्ततेऽधुना । चतुर्भिरद्भुतै: सिद्धैराज्ञा ते विप्रलम्भिता । ८ ।

नीयमानं तवादेशादस्माभिर्यातनागृहान् । व्यमोचयन् पातकिनं छित्त्वा पाशान् प्रसह्य ते । ९ ।

area वेदितुमिच्छामो यदि नो मन्यसे क्षमम्। नारायणेत्यभिहिते मा भैरित्याययुर्दुतम् । १०॥

The messengers of Yama said : How many in this world are the rulers of human
beings performing actions of three kinds (virtuous, sinful and of a mixed type)—rulers
who are responsible for the manifestation (dispensation) of their fruit (in the shape of
happiness, misery and a mixture of both)? (4) If there be in the world many a ruler
wielding the rod of punishment, who would suffer death (the tortures of hell) and who
would enjoy immortality or heavenly bliss (in the event ofa split, resulting in a complete
deadlock); whereas (in the reverse case, i.e., in the event of harmonious relations,
obtaining between them) who would not experience the tortures of hell as well as
immortality too (for, while one ruler may ordain hellish tortures in the case of a particular
man in view of a grievous sin committed by him, overlooking his meritorious acts,
another may condone his faults and reward his virtuous deeds with immortality and the
orders of both will be executed as carrying equal force). (5) If there be a plurality of rulers
in this world for (the control of) the vast number of men engaged in action, their
authority will (no doubt) exist. Such authority (however) would be only secondary
like that enjoyed by tributary chiefs (inasmuch as it would extend over a limited
section of humanity and would not be absolute and primary, thus rendering it necessary
to postulate another ruler exercising primary, and universal authority). (6) Therefore (a
plurality of rulers being out of the question), you are (to our mind) the one Supreme Lord
and ruler of all living beings—including the guardian deities—capable of distinguishing the
merit and sin of men (who alone enjoy freedom of action), and (actually) wielding the rod
of punishment (for the evil-doers, and rewarding the virtuous). (7) Such as you are, your
authority stands superseded and no longer prevails in the world today, as is evidenced
by the fact that your command was set at naught by four wonderful angelic persons ! (8)
They forcibly released a sinner who was being taken by us under your order to the infernal
regions (the places of suffering), cutting the nooses (with which he had been fastened).(9)
We are keen to know them (their particulars) from you, if you deem it good for us (as
otherwise by showing disrespect to them through ignorance we may bring harm even to

