594 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 9

HOM We SY ए त्वा ज WONT ज हं RON उ जजहं EAE OT OEE CEH बा उत्तज्यो च ३३३3 MEME RS i Fe eT He Me RE Re ee HSE EE HEH eM TR ee aC OY

Anvaharyapacana (or Daksinagni) rose a demon of terrible aspect, who looked like Death
appearing (in the form of Kalagnirudra) at the time of universal dissolution for the destruction
of the worlds. (12) He rapidly grewto the extent of an arrow's throw on every side from day
to day, presented the appearance of a burnt hill (by his colossal size and dark colour) and
possessed the glow of a mass of evening clouds. (13) With a beard and moustaches and
hair (too) red as heated copper and eyes as fierce as the midday sun he dancedas if holding
the vault of heaven on the end of his brilliant trident, gave a loud roar and shook the earth
with (the stamp of) his feet. (14-15) Terribly afraid (of him), all created beings ran to and fro
(in all directions) as they saw him respiring again and again with his extensive gaping mouth,
containing fearful teeth and deep as a cavern, which seemed to imbibe the firmament, lick
the stars with the tongue and devour (all) the three worlds. (16-17)

येनावृता इमे लोकास्तमसा त्वाष्टृमूर्तिना। स a aa इति प्रोक्त: पाप: परमदारुण: । १८॥

तं निजघ्नुरभिद्ग्य सगणा विव्रुधर्षभा: | a: स्वैर्दिव्यास्त्रशस्त्रौघधै: सोऽग्रसत् तानि कृत्स्नरा: । १९1

ततस्ते विस्मिता: सर्वे विषण्णा ग्रस्ततेजस: । प्रत्यञ्चमादिपुरुषमुपतस्थु: समाहिता: 120 |

That (apparently) sinful and most ferocious demon was rightly named as Vrtra inasmuch

as (all) these worlds were enveloped by that (gigantic mass of) darkness appearing in the
form of Twasta's offspring. (18) Rushing against him with their troops, the generals of the
gods assailed him, each with his hosts of celestial missiles and weapons; he (however)
swallowed them all. (19) With their splendour eclipsed (his) nay, amazed and dejected (at
their discomfiture), they all thereupon composed themselves and (mentally) approached
Lord Narayana (the most ancient Person), dwelling in their very heart (with the following
prayer). (20)

वाय्वम्बराग्न्यप्क्षितयस्रिलोका wet 8 वरयमुद्विजन्त: ।

हराम यस्मै बलिमन्तकोऽसौ बिभेति यस्मादरणं ततो न: 1221
विनोपसर्पत्यपरं हि afer: श्वलाङ्गुलेनातितितर्ति सिन्धुम् । २२।
स एवं नस्त्वाष्टुभयाद् दुरन्तात् त्राताऽऽश्रितान् वारिचरोऽपि नूनम् 1231
एकोऽरविन्दात् पतितस्ततार तस्माद् wae येन a नोऽस्तु पार: । २४॥
य एक ईशो निजमायया न: ससर्ज येनानुसृजाम fam

wa न यस्यापि पुर: समीहत: पर्याम लिङ्गं पृथगीशमानिन: । २५॥
यो न: सपत्नैर्भृशमरद्यमानान् देवर्षितिर्यङ्नृषु fa wi

कृतावतारस्तनुभि: स्वमायया कृत्वाऽत्मसात् पाति युगे युगे wires
व्रजाम सर्वे शरणं ww स्वानां स नो धास्यति BW महात्मा । २७॥

The gods prayed : May our safety follow from Him (the Supreme Person), of whom is
afraid (even) the well-known Death (the Time-Spirit)—Death, to whom (the five elements,
viz.,) ether, air, fire, water and earth, the three worlds (heaven, earth and the intermediate
region, including their inhabitants, the creation of the five elements), nay, Brahma and others

(the rulers of these worlds) and we (gods, who owe our allegiance to these), all pay tribute
(homage), trembling (with fear). (21) An ignoramus is he who resorts (for protection) to
