84 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 15

BEER RR ROHR ORE EH ARE REA AR RRR AORN RR RR ROR RR PN ARE ME ROT NRT Re eR BH BERT Be क जो AT HOM ना RACER ROR १ AOR HORT

another; for both were equal in the eye of the Lord. (34) Even as the Lord, like an actor,
assumes and then drops the forms of a fish etc., so did He shuffle off the body with
which He had removed the earth's burden. (35)* When Lord Sri Krsna (the Bestower of
Liberation) bodily departed from this earth, leaving behind His stories which are charming
to the ear, that very day entered the Kali age, which leads men of unawakened
consciousness to unrighteousness. (36) The wise king Yudhisthira saw the growth of
vices like greed, falsehood, deceit and violence etc., not only in the city (of Hastinapura)
but in the whole of his state, nay, in every home as well as in the mind of the people,
and, concluding therefrom the advance of the Kali age, prepared to depart from this
world.(37) At Hastinapura the emperor installed his grandson (Pariksit)—who was not only
well-disciplined but was his own compeer in virtues—as the sovereign of the ocean-
girdled earth; while at Mathura he enthroned Vajra (the son of Aniruddha and the only
surviving member of Sri Krsna's family) as the lord of the Stirasenas. Then, having offered
a sacrifice to Prajapati (the divinity presiding over procreation), Yudhisthira, who had
mastered his self, received the sacred fires into himself (renounced his home and became
a recluse). (38-39) Leaving at the palace his fine clothes, bangles and all he renounced
the feelings of "I" and "mine" and completely severed all his worldly ties. (40) He mentally
merged his speech into mind, the mind into Prana (the vital air, which has its seat in the
lungs), the Prana into the Apana (the life-wind which goes downwards and out at the
anus), the Apana with its function (of excretion) into Mrtyu (the god of death) and merged
Mrtyu into his body made up of the five elements. (41) Thus realizing his body as nothing
but death, the royal sage (Yudhisthira) merged the same into the three Gunas (modes
of Prakrti); these three Gunas, again, he merged into the one fundamental Prakrti
(Nature). This Prakrti, which is the universal Cause, he merged into the Jiva (individual
soul) and the Jiva into the imperishable Brahma (the Absolute). (In other words, he began
to feel that the whole of this phenomenal universe is the same as Brahma). (42) Clad
in rags, and abstaining from food and drink, he took a vow of complete silence, flung
about his hair in a disorderly way and exhibited himself like a dullard or a madman or
a fiend. (43) Waiting for none and hearing nothing like a deaf man, he came out of the
palace; and contemplating in his heart on the supreme Brahma, he took the path towards
the north, a path trodden by exalted souls even in the past, and treading which one does
not return. (44) Finding the people on earth in the grip of the Kali age, the promoter of
unrighteousness, all his brothers too followed him with a similar resolve (to attain the
divine Abode). (45) Having fully achieved all the ends of life and knowing the lotus-feet
of Lord Vaikuntha (Sri Krsna) as their eternal abode, they clung to them with their
mind.(46) Their intellect being purified by Devotion that had grown in intensity through
meditation on those feet, their mind was exclusively fixed on the supreme Reality of
Bhagavan Narayana (Sri Krsna), which is the abode of only those who are purged of all
sin. With that pure mind they attained that goal which is difficult of attainment for the
wicked and sensually-minded. (47-48) Vidura too, whose mind was fully controlled and
possessed by Sri Krsna, cast off his body at Prabhasa (near Dwaraka); and with his
thought fixed on Sri Krsna, he returned to his abode (the realm of Yama) accompanied

a

* Verses 34 and 35 are missing in the oldest manuscript yet found of Srimad Bhagavata, existing in the Saraswati
Bhavana Library attached to the Queen's College at Varanasi. The well-known commentator Vijayadhwaja (who represents
the Madhva school) has rejected these two verses as well as the one immediately preceding them as interpolated. The divine
form of Lord Sri Krsna, which is spiritual and of the same essence as the Lord Himself, is eternal; and to say that the Lord cast
it off as something adventitious or superiluous would be a contradiction in terms. Hence the volaries of the Lord have rejected
these two verses as Spurious. Theiromission from the manuscript existing in the Saraswati Bhavana Library also confirms their
questionable autheniicity.
