Dis. 15] BOOK FOUR 361
RHLEELARAARAH OPER ESE SESE CHAE LAHENAGELEAREERTRKTA OE TEE eee ee eaATE HEHEHE
PRSPRORR TA ROHOTETES SESE CERAER STASIS E NOR ERTE TE Sere e reer Rees द् ATA शे

for him an armour representing Veda (all-comprehensive knowledge) and the goddess of
learning, a necklace of unique make. Sri Hari (the Supreme Lord divine) gave him His divine
Disc bearing the name of Sudargana; and His Consort, the goddess of wealth, beauty and
bliss, favoured him with never failing prosperity. (16) The great god whose function is to
destroy and absorb the world at the end honoured him with a broadsword bearing ten brilliant
marks of the moon and his consort, Durga, with a shield bearing one hundred marks of the
moon. The moon, the deity presiding over the lunar sphere, brought him immortal horses
made of the substance of nectar. An exceedingly beautiful chariot was given him by Twasta
(a radiant agent of the sun-god). (17) The god of fire gave him a bow made of the horns of
the goat and the cow and the sun-god gave him arrows shining like his rays. The goddess
of the earth brought for him a pair of wooden sandals possessing the mysterious power of
carrying him, as soon as he placed his feet upon them, wherever he should want to go.
The goddess of the celestial regions gave him the privilege of getting celestial flowers
everyday.(18) The sky-ranging spirits imparted to him the arts of acting and dancing, music,
vocal and instrumental, and the occult way of disappearance. The sages and seers brought
for him blessings that were sure to come true; and the deity of the ocean brought for him a
conch that was his own progeny. (19) Seas, mountains and rivers offered to allow passages
for his chariot. Then a herald, a bard and a panegyrist started singing songs of praise to the
mighty monarch. (20) When Prthu, the powerful king, the offspring of Vena, came to know
that they had come to praise him, he smiled and made these utterances with a volce as deep
as the thunder of clouds. (21)

पृथुरुवाच
भो: सूत हे मागध सौम्य वन्दिंल्लोकेऽधुनास्पष्टगुणस्य मे aM
किमाश्रयो मे स्तव एष योज्यतां मा मय्यभूवन् वितथा गिरो व: 1221
तस्मात्परोक्षेऽस्मदुपश्रुतान्यलं करिष्यथ स्तोत्रमपीच्यवाच: |

a दे जुगुप्सितॆ न स्तवयन्ति सभ्या: 1231
महद्गुणानात्मनि कर्तुमीशा:र क: स्तावकै: स्तावयतेऽसतोऽपि ।
तेऽस्याभविष्यन्निति विप्रलब्धो saree कुमतिर्न वेद ।२४॥

प्रभवो ह्यात्मन: स्तोत्रं जुगुप्सन्त्यपि विश्रुता: । ह्रीमन्त: परमोदारा: पौरुषं वा विगर्हितम् । २५॥
aa त्वविदिता लोके सूताद्यापि वरीमभि: । कर्मभि: कथमात्मानं गापयिष्याम बालवत् । २६॥
इति श्रीमद्भागवते महापुराणे पारमहंस्यां संहितायां चतुर्थस्कन्धे पृथुचरिते पञ्चदलोऽध्याय: ।१५॥

Prthu said : O you noble minstrel, herald and singer of praises ! praises may be due to
me when my virtues (performances) will be known among men. Where is the ground at
present for praises being addressed to me? Itis not desirable that your eulogies should prove
untrue in my case. (22) Therefore, at some future date, when we attain distinctions worthy
of being heard and spoken of, you, who are masters of fine expressions, may praise us to
your heart's fill. Respectable persons do not let minstrels extol ordinary men (like me) of the
recent times, it being open to them to glorify the greatness of God, whose Shining attributes
no darkness can touch. (23) (If you urge that it is possible for me to prove the existence of
such and such virtues in my conduct and therefore you should extol me for the same. | do
not fall in with your view.) Who would have himself extolled by bards for the qualities which
are non-existent in him, even though he may be able to manifest remarkable virtues in
himself ? Such and such qualities, it may be urged, are likely to fall to his lot. But to get oneself
praised thus on mere possibilities is to be an object of peoples' ridicule. A fool, however, will
not understand this banter. (24) Noble-minded persons shrink from their own praise even

[564] B. M. J4—
