Dis. 19] - BOOK THREE 219

SRR RR Penn a ७७७७ %&.&७.२.३.&.७.७३.३.६.७..३२.३.३.२.2.२.७..३.३.३.२.७.७.३.३.३.३..७.७.७.३.३.३-.३.३...३.३.३.३.७.३.२.३.३.३.६.६..३:६.३.३.७.३.३.३.३.३.७.३.३.३.

द्यौर्नष्टभगणाभ्रौघै: सविद्युत्स्तनयित्नुभि: | वर्षद्भि: पूयकेशासृग्विण्मूत्रास्थीनि चासकृत् । १९।
fra: प्रत्यदूर्यन्तं नानायुधमुचोऽनघ । दिग्वाससो यातुधान्य: शूलिन्यो मुक्तमूर्धजा: 1201
बहुभिर्यक्षरक्षोभि: पत्त्यश्चरथकुञ्जरै: | आततायिभिरुत्सृष्टा हिंस्रा वाचोऽतिवैशसा: 1221

Maitreya continued : Hearing the words of Brahma (the creator), which were free from
guile and sweet as nectar, the Lord heartily laughed and accepted his prayer with a glance
laden with love. (1) Thereupon the divine Boar (who had appeared from Brahma’s nose)
sprang and aimed His mace at the chin of His enemy in the form of that demon, who was
stalking fearlessly before Him. (2) Struck by the demon with his own mace, however, it
slipped from the Lord’s hand and looked splendid as it fell down whirling. This was something
miraculous as it were. (3) Even though he had an (excellent) opportunity (to hit the Lord), the
demon refused to strike his unarmed foe and respected the law of a single combat, thereby
kindling the fury of the Universal Lord. (4) As His mace fell (on the ground) and acry of alarm
rose (from the witnessing crowd of gods and Rsis), the almighty Lord acknowledged the
demon’s love of righteousness (fair play) and invoked His discus SudarSana. (5) As the
discus (presently) began to revolve (in the Lord's hand) and the Lord was contending at close
quarters with the chief of His attendants, who had now been born as Hiranyaksa (a vile son
of Diti), there issued from every direction strange expressions uttered by those who were
witnessing the scene from their aerial cars and had no knowledge of the Lord's real reality,
saying : "May victory attend You. Pray, despatch him (play no more with him)!” (6) When he
beheld the Lord, who had eyes as big and lovely as the petals of a lotus, standing in position
before him, and further saw Him armed with a discus, his senses were overpowered with
indignation and, hissing (as a serpent) he bithis lips in great resentment. (7) The demon, who
had fearful tusks, stared at Sri Hari, as though he would burn Him and, springing into the air,
aimed his mace at Him, exclaiming at the same time: "You are slain.” (8) The Lord, who had
assumed the form of aboar, that represented all the sacrifices, playfully knocked it down with
His left foot, O saintly Vidura, even as it came upon Him with the force of a tempest, while
the enemy was still looking on. (9) The Lord then said, "Take up your weapon and try again,
eager as you are to conquer Me.” Challenged in these words, the demon aimed His mace
(at the Lord) once more and loudly roared. (10) When the Lord saw it flying towards Him, He
stood firm (where He was) and caught it, even as it came, with the same ease as Garuda
(the king of the birds) would seize a serpent. (11) The great demon felt humiliated and was
put out of countenance when his valour was thus frustrated; and he was reluctant to take
back the mace which was being offered by Sri Hari. (12) He now took a trident, which was
rapacious as a flaming fire, for hurling it against the Lord, who was Yajfia personified, even
as one would use spells for a malevolent purpose against a holy Brahmana. (13) Hurled with
all his strength by the mighty Daitya, the glowing trident shone all the brighter in the sky. Sri
Hari, however, tore it to pieces with His discus (Sudarsana)—which had a sharp-edged
rim—even as Indra cut down a wing of Garuda dropped by the latter.* (14) The demon got
enraged when his trident was cut to pieces by the discus of Sri Hari. He, therefore, advanced
towards the Lord and, roaring aloud, smote Him with his hard fist on His broad chest, which
bore the mark of Srivatsa (a curl of white hair), and then went out of sight. (15) Hit in this
manner by the demon, O Vidura, the Lord, who appeared as the First Boar, did not feel the
least quaking in any part of His body, any more than an elephant would when struck with a

* Once upon a time Garuda snatched away nectar from the gods in heaven, in order to liberate his mother (Vinata) from
the thraldom of his stepmother Kadré (the mother of the serpent race). Thereupon Indra (the lord of paradise) hurled his
thunderbolt against Garuda. Witha view to respecting the infallibility of Indra's weapon, Garuda (who was otherwise invincible,
being the Lord’s own mount) dropped one of his wings, which was shattered to pieces by the thunderbolt.
