Dis. 2] BOOK FOUR 295
SEER ISIE EER PERRET OR ER EERE EE Eee hein it een iniiriniciicriimirineenine ae

sacrificial session held by the Prajapatis (lords of created beings). (4) Daksa too appeared
there, shining like the sun and illumining the grand assembly by his splendour. With their
mind overwhelmed by his brilliance, (all) those assembled there, including the deities
presiding over the sacrificial fires, rose from their seats when they saw him, excepting, of
course, Brahma (his father) and Lord Siva (the Destroyer of the universe). (5-6) Duly
honoured by the superintending priests, the worshipful Daksa bowed to Brahma, the
progenitor of the universe, and took his seat with the latter's permission. (7)

प्राङ्निषण्णं मृडं दृष्टा नामृष्यत्तदनादृत: । उवाच aM चक्षुरभ्यामभिवीक्ष्य दहन्निव । ८ ।

Seeing Lord Sankara (the Delighter of the world) already seated, and receiving no

attention from Him, Daksa grew indignant. He looked with angry eyes at Siva as if he would
burn Him, and exclaimed :(8)

श्रूयतां ब्रह्मर्षषो मे सहदेवा: सहाम्नय: । साधूनां व्रुवतो वृत्तं नाज्ञानान्न च मत्सरात् । ९ ।

wa तु लोकपालानां ait निरपत्रप: । सद्धिराचर्ति: पन्था येन स्तब्धेन दूषित: । १०॥

wa मे शिष्यतां प्राप्तो यन्मे दुहितुरग्रहीत्। पाणिं विप्राग्निमुखत: सावित्र्या sa साधुवत् । ११

गृहीत्वा मृगशावाक्ष्या: पाणिं मर्कटलोचन: | प्रत्युत्थानाभिवादार्हे वाचाप्यकृत नोचितम् 1221

प्रेतावासेषु घोरेषु प्रेतैर्भूतगणैर्वृत: | अटत्युन्पत्तवन्नम्नो व्युप्तकेशो हसन् रुदन् । १४॥

पति: प्रमथभूतानां तमोंमात्रात्मकात्मनाम् । १५
तस्मा उन्मादनाथाय नष्टशौचाय दुर्हृदे। दत्ता aa मया साध्वी चोदिते परमेष्ठिना ies
“Listen tome, 0 Brahmana sages alongwith the gods (presenthere) including the deities

presiding over the sacred fires, as | speak to you about the conduct of pious souls neither
from ignorance nor from spite. (9) This shameless fellow has wrecked the fame of the
guardians of the various spheres inasmuch as the arrogant man has violated the path
trodden by the virtuous. (10) He has become a veritable son to me ever since he accepted
the hand of my daughter, who is another Savitri (the consort of Brahma) as it were, in the
presence of Brahmanas and the sacred fire like a good-natured soul. (11) Though he has
taken the hand of that fawn-eyed girl, this monkey-eyed fellow did not show due courtesy
to me even by word of mouth, when (as a matter of fact) he ought to have risen from his seat
and greeted me. (12) To this haughty and impure person, who has not only abandoned all
pious acts but has outstepped all bounds of propriety, | gave away the girl, though unwilling
to do so, even as one would impart the sacred word (Veda) to a Sudra (who has been
declared by the scriptures as unqualified to receive it). (13) Surrounded by spirits and troops
of ghosts, with his hair scattered about, now laughing and now crying, he roves about
uncovered like a madman in frightful crematories (the abodes of spirits). (14) Bathed in the
ashes of funeral piles and adorned with a garland of skulls (befitting spirits) and wearing
ornaments of human bones, heis really inauspicious, though bearing the appellation of Siva
(all-auspicious). (Ever) drunk (himself), he is fond of drunken people andis the lord of goblins
and-ghosts, who are purely Tamasixa (wicked) by nature. (15) At the instance of Brahma,
alas | | gave away my virtuous girl to such an impure and evil-minded person, the lord of
ghosts." (16)

HAE उवाच
fared स गिरिशमप्रतीपमवस्थितम् । दक्षोऽथाप उपस्पृश्य HE: WY प्रचक्रमे । १७॥
