Dis. 8] ` BOOK TWELVE

a a भजाम्यृतधियस्तव पादमूलं हित्वेदमात्मच्छदि चात्मगुरो: परस्य ।
देहाद्यपार्थमसदन्त्यमभिज्ञमात्रं विन्देत a तर्हि सर्वमनीषितार्थम् ॥४४॥
aa we sda तवात्मबन्धो मायामया: स्थितिलयोदयहेतवोऽस्य ।
लीला धृता यदपि सत्त्वमयी प्रशान्त्यै नान्ये नॄणां व्यसनमोहभियश्च याभ्याम् । ४५1
यत् सात्वता: TERA सत्त्वं लोको यतोऽभयमुतात्मसुखं न चान्यत् ।४६॥
wa wh wea पुरुषाय wi विश्वाय विश्वगुरवे परदेवतायै ।
नारायणाय ऋऋषये च नरोत्तमाय हंसाय संयतगिरे निगमेश्वराय ive!
aaa a वितथाक्षपथैरभ्रमद्धी: ad स्वखेष्वसुषु हृद्यपि दृक्पथेषु ।
तन्माययाऽऽवृततमति: स उ Wa साक्षादाद्यस्तवाखिलगुरोरुपसाद्य वेदम् ।४८॥
welt निगम आत्मरह:प्रकाञषं मुह्यन्ति ax कवयोऽजपरा यतन्त: ।
4 सर्ववादविषयप्रतिरूपश्चीलॆ वन्दे महापुरुषमात्मनिगूढोधम् xe!
इति श्रीमद्भागवते महापुराणे पारमहंस्यां संहितायां द्वादशस्कन्धेऽष्टमोऽध्याय: 121

Markandeya prayed : 0 Lord ! how can | extol You ? For, propelled by You (alone)
function the vital air and following it the speech, mind and Indriyas (the senses of perception
and the organs of action), not only of (all} embodied beings but even of Brahma (the birthless
creator) and Lord Siva (the godof destruction) as well as of myself; yet You behave asa friend
of the soul (and not only of the body as the parents and others do) of those who worship You
(with these) ! (40) These two forms of Your omnipotent Self, O Lord ! stand revealed for the
well-being, (nay,) for putting a stop to the (threefold) suffering and for the liberation (lit.,
subduing the death) of (the denizens of) the three worlds. (But) just as You assume many
other forms (such as that of the divine Fish) in order to protect this universe, so (too) do You
swallow everything after evolving it (just) like the spider (which produces a web and then
swallows it). (41) The impurities incident to actions, the (three) Gunas (modes of Prakrti) and
Time (and the aforesaid agonies etc.), can never contaminate him who takes refuge in the
soles of feet of that Saviour (of the world) and Ruler of the immobile as wei] as the mobile
creation (in You). (Nay,) in order to attain to those feet, as is well-known, sages that have
treasured up (the spirit of) the Vedas in their heart extol, devoutly bow to, worship and
constantly meditate on them. । resort to those (very) soles. (42) We know no safe retreat, 0
Lord ! for the Jiva, beset with fear on all sides, other than resorting to the feet of the Lord in
You, the Embodiment of final beatitude. (Even) Brahma, whose realm endures for two
Parardhas, is immensely afraid of Kala (the Time-Spirit), which is a (mere) play of Your
eyebrows; what wonder, then, that it inspires fear in the heart of living beings created by
him ? (43) Therefore, turning my back upon (giving up all attachment to) this body and all that
is connected with it—which obscures the Self and serves no (real) purpose, is unsubstantial
and transient, and (really) no other than the (conscious) Self—I actually take refuge in the
soles of feet of the Supreme in You, the Embodiment of true wisdom, the Director of the soul;
for if a man resorts to those feet, he bids fair to secure from You every object sought for (by
him). (44) Although Rajas, Sattva, and Tamas, © Lord, which are products of Maya (Prakrti)
and (severally) responsible for the appearance, continuance and dissolution of this (visible)
universe, O Befriender of the soul ! have been laid hold of by Yourself for (carrying on) Your
pastimes (of creation etc.), Your Sattvixa form (alone) is conducive to everlasting peace (in
the form of final beatitude) and not the other two, from which proceed suffering, infatuation
