286 । SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 33

PARAM AEE EEE EEE EEE SENSE SESE EHSAN AACE WHE HEARSE AAT HEPES EE ड

REHASH EE eT eae TT

She renounced her incomparable house, which had been enriched by the austere penance
and Yogic power of the sage Kardama, a lord of created beings, and was coveted even by
the gods, furnished as it was with beds of ivory, soft and white as the foam of milk and
adorned with gold, and seats of gold provided with cushions exceedingly soft to the
touch. (15-16) In the walls of that house, which were made of transparent crystal and
precious emerald, shone lights of jewels borne by beautiful statues of women.(17) She also
deserted the garden attached to her house, charming with its many blossoming celestial
trees, cooing pairs of birds and humming bees drunk with honey.(18) When she used to enter
the pond in that garden, (the water of) which was scented with the fragrance of lotuses, along
with Kardama, who bestowed his loving attention on her, Gandharvas and Kinnaras (the
attendants of gods) sang her praises.(19) (Although she felt no compunction) while leaving
that garden, which was most eagerly sought after even by the spouses of Indra (the lord of
paradise), Devahuti did wear a desolate look on her face, afflicted as she was at the
separation from her son. (20)

वनं प्रव्रजिते पत्यावपत्यविरहातुरा । ज्ञाततत्त्वाप्यभून्नष्टे वत्से गोरिव वत्सला । २१।

ata ध्यायती देवमपत्यं कपिलं afi बभूवाचिरतो ac नि:स्पृहा तादृशे गृहे । २२।

ध्यायती भगवद्रूपे यदाह ध्यानगोचरम्।सुत: प्रसन्नवदनं समस्तव्यस्तचिन्तया 123 |

भक्तिप्रवाहयोगेन वैराग्येण बलीयसा । युक्तानुष्ठानजातेन AAT ब्रह्महेतुना । २४॥

विशुद्धेन तदाऽऽत्मानमात्मना विश्वतोमुखम्।स्वानुभूत्या तिरोभूतमायागुणविहोषणम् । २५

ब्रह्मण्यवस्थितमतिर्भगवत्यात्मसंश्रये । निवृत्तजीवापत्तित्वादक्षीणक्लेशाऽऽप्तनिर्वृति: ।२६॥

नित्यारूढसमाधित्वात्परावृत्तगुणभ्रमा । न सस्मार तदाऽऽत्मानं स्वप्ने दृष्टमिवोत्थित: 1291

we: परत: पोषोऽप्यकृशश्चाध्यसम्भवात्। बभौ मलैरवच्छन्न: सधूम FA पावक: । २८|

ae तपोयोगमयं मुक्तकेशं गताम्बरम्।दैवगुप्तं न बुबुधे वासुदेवप्रविष्टधी: ।२९।

(She had somehow consoled herself by the presence of her son) when her husband
(the sage Kardama) retired to the forest; but she felt very disconsolate, in spite of her having
realized the truth, at the separation from her son (Lord Kapila), even as a cow, who is
extremely fond of her calf, is grieved at the loss of the latter.(21) Fixing her thought
exclusively on her son, the divine Kapila, who was no other than Sri Hari, she soon grew
indifferent, my son,-even to such a house (as has been described above). (22) She (now)
meditated on the form of the Lord, adorned with a cheerful countenance and spoken of by
her son as worth meditating upon, fixing her thought on the same as a whole as well as in
parts.(23) With a mind thoroughly depurated by the uninterrupted practice of Devotion, most
intense dispassion and spiritual enlightenment leading to Brahmahood (oneness with
Brahma) and resulting from a due performance of one's duties, she then contemplated on
her own self as projected everywhere, having set aside by the realization ofits true nature
the limitations imposed on it by the modes of Prakriti. (24-25) Her mind being now settled in
Brahma, the substratum of all the Jivas, who is no other than the Lord, she no more thought
of herself as a Jiva, and was accordingly rid of all afflictions and attained final beatitude. (26)
Firmly established in perpetual Samadhi (deep meditation), her misapprehension about the
reality of the sense-objects now disappeared and she was no more conscious of her body
than-the man arisen from sleep remembers the body seen in a dream.(27) Her body, though
nourished by others (the Vidyadhara damsels summoned and lodged in the hermitage by
her husband to look after her), did not grow lean because there was no mental agony.
Though covered with layers of dirt, it shone through it like a fire enveloped in (a mass of)
smoke.(28) Her mind being fully merged in Lord Vasudeva, she did not perceive her own
body—which was completely given up to austerity and Yoga, and was being maintained by
