Dis. 82] BOOK TEN 463

feetnt henna म र्म्मरा मामा ग्रल्क मकमकलकशआ-लकाश्नश् ATER ANe On

at the sight of Bhagavan Sri Krsna. (23) Pariksit! Bhisma, Drona, Dhrtarastra, Gandhari with
her sons (Duryodhana and others), the Pandavas with their consorts, Kunti, Sriijaya, Vidura,
Krpacarya, Kuntibhoja, Virata, Bhismaka, the great king Nagnajit, Purujit, Drupada, Salya,
Dhrstaketu alongwith the king of Kasi, Damaghosa, Vigalaksa, the king of Mithila, the kings
of Madra and Kekaya, Yudhamanyu and Susarma, Bahlika and others with their sons—
these and other kings, who had accepted the suzerainty of Yudhisthira, were astonished to
see the person of Bhagavan Sri Krsna, the abode of all excellence and beauty, together with
His consorts. (24—27) Sri Balarama and Bhagavan Sri Krsna duly honoured them all, and
they in their turn joyfully extolled ( the good fortune of ) the Yadus, who were the kinsfolk of
Bhagavan Sri Krsna and lived under His care. (28) (Addressing Ugrasena,) they said." O
king of Bhojas! of all men in this world you Yadus alone have realized the fruit of your
existence inasmuch as you constantly have before your eyes Bhagavan Sri Krsna, who can
rarely be seen even by the greatest of Yogis. (29) The glory of Bhagavan Sti Krsna, which
is sung by the Vedas (with such zest), the Ganga water that washes His feet and His
utterances in the form of the scripture go a long way in purifying the world. The earth had of
late been robbed of its splendour by Time; its potentialities have now been revived by the
mere touch of His lotus-like feet, and it has once more begun to yield all the objects of our
desire. (30) You Yadus have both marital and lineal relationship with Sri Krsna. You
constantly see Him, touch His sacred person, walk with Him, chat with Him, sit close to Him,
eat with Him and even sleep with Him. Even though you lead the life of a householder, which
ordinarily paves the way to hell, you have constalntly in your midst all-pervading Lord Visnu
Himself, whose very sight puts an end to the craving not only for heaven but for salvation

itself.” (31)
श्रीरुक उवाच
नन्दस्तत्र यदून् प्राप्तान् ज्ञात्वा कृष्णपुरोगमान्। तत्रागमद् वृतो गोपैरन:स्थार्थैर्दिदृक्षया 1321
तं दृष्टा वृष्णयो हष्टास्तन्व: प्राणमिवोत्थिता: । परिषस्वजिरे गाढं चिरदर्शनकातरा: 1331
वसुदेव: परिघ्रज्य सम्प्रीत: प्रेमविह्वल: । स्मरन् कंसकृतान् क्लेशान् पुत्रन्यासं च गोकुले ।३४॥
कृष्णरामौ परिघ्वज्य पितरावभिवाद्य च । न किञ्चनोचतु: प्रेम्णा साश्रुकण्ठडौ कुरूद्वह ।३५॥
तावात्मासनमारोप्य बाहुभ्यां परिरभ्य च । यश्ञोदा च महाभागा सुतौ विजहतु: Wa: । ३६1
गेहिणी देवकी wma of व्रजेश्वरीम्। स्मरन्त्यौ तत्कृतां मैत्रीं बाष्यकण्ड्यो समूचतु: 1301
का विस्मरेत वां मैत्रीमनिवृत्तां व्रजेश्वरि । अवाप्याप्यैन्द्रमैश्वर्यं यस्या नेह प्रतिक्रिया 1३८1
एतावदृष्टपितरौ युवयो: स्म ft: सम्प्रीणनाभ्युदयपोषणपालनानि ।
प्राप्योषतुर्भवति पक्ष्म ह यद्ददश्ष्णोर्न्यस्तावकुत्र च भयौ न सतां पर: स्व: ।३९॥
Sri Suka continued : (Pariksit,) when (the celebrated Gopa) Nanda learnt that Bhagavan
Sri Krsna and the other Yadus had come to Kuruksetra, he too came there together with other
Gopas to see them with abundant supplies of provisions in their carts. (32) The Yadus were
delighted to see Nanda (and his companions). They stood up to receive him, even as dead
bodies are spurred into activity when infused with new life. Having been anxious for long to
meet him, they embraced him tightly. (33) Vasudeva embraced Nandawith great delight and
was overwhelmed with emotion as he recollected (one by one) the persecutions to which
he had been subjected by Karnsa, and how he had been compelled to place his sons in
Nanda’s keeping at Gokula. (34) Bhagavan Sri Krsna and Sri Balarama embraced their
foster-parents Nanda and Yasoda and bowed to them. Pariksit, overwhelmed with emotion,

they could not utter a word as their throats were choked with tears. (35) The blessed Yagoda
and Nanda, too, made their foster-sons sit on their lap and folded them in their arms. This
