$32 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA { Dis. 23

FER RO A TE ENR OHHH HE OPERAS ER HAE EORE KLE NHEPECOEKR HEEROMA EHH ERK MRE

पुच्छाग्रेऽवाकशिरस:कुण्डलीभूतदेहस्य Ya उपकल्पितस्तस्य लाङ्गूले प्रजापतिरग्निरिन्द्रो धर्म इति पुच्छमूले
धाता विधाता च कट्यां सप्तर्षय:। तस्य दक्षिणावर्तकुण्डलीभूतशरीरस्य यान्युदगयनानि दक्षिणपाश्वे तु
नक्षत्राण्युपकल्पयन्ति दक्षिणायनानि तु सव्ये।यथा शिशुमारस्यकुण्डलाभोगसन्निवेशस्यपार्श्वयोरुभयोरप्यवयवा:

समसंख्या भवन्ति ।पृष्ठे त्वजवीथी आकाशगङ्गा चोदरत: । ५ । पुनर्वसुपुष्यौ दक्षिणावामयो: श्रोण्योरारद्गाश्लेषे
च दक्षिणवामयो: पश्चिमयो: पादयोरभिजिदुत्तराषाढे दक्षिणवामयोर्नासिकयोर्यथासंख्यं श्रवणापूर्वाषाढे
दक्षिणवामयोर्लोचनयोर्धनिष्ठा मूलं च दक्षिणवामयो: कर्णयोर्मघादीन्यष्टं नक्षत्राणि दक्षिणायनानि
वामपाश्ववङ्क्रिषु युञ्जीत ade मृगशीर्षादीन्युदगयनानि दक्षिणपार्श्ववङ्क्रिषु प्रातिलोम्येन प्रयुञ्जीत
शतभिषाज्येष्ठे स्कन्धयोर्दक्षिणवामयोर्न्यसेत्। ६। उत्तराहनावगस्तिरधराहनौ यमो मुखेषु चाङ्मारक:

शनैश्चर उपस्थे बृहस्पति: ककुदि वक्षस्यादित्यो Fea नारायणो मनसि चन्द्रो नाभ्यामुशना स्तनयोरश्विनौ
बुध: प्राणापानयो राहुर्गले haa: सर्वाङ्गेषु रोमसु Wa तारागणा:। ७।

Some people declare the stellar sphere as capable of being meditated upon through
deep concentration of mind as a form of Lord Vasudeva, (existing) in the shape of a dolphin. (4)
At the end of the tail of this (divine) dolphin, whose body lies coiled with its head downwards,
is allocated the pole-star; at its tail (below the end) are located one after another (the four
stars representing) the Prajapati (the sage Kasyapa), Agni (the god of fire), Indra (the chief
of the gods) and Dharma (the god of piety); at the root of its tail, (the stars representing the
gods) Dhata and Vidhata; at the hip, the seven stars (of the Great Bear, representing the
seven seers); on the right side of the dolphin, whose body lies coiled from left to right, they
locate the (fourteen) constellations that mark the northern course (viz., from Abhijit to
Punarvasu) and (the other fourteen, viz.,) those marking the southern course (i.e., from
Pusya to Uttaragadha) on the left side, (even) as on both sides of a (common) dolphin whose
body is disposed in concentric rings, the parts are equally divided. (To mention the limbs
separately) at its back is placed the (group of constellations known by the name of) Ajavithi
(consisting of Mila, Parvasadha and Uttarasadha) and atits belly, the milky way. (5) One
should locate Punarvasu and Pusya at the right and left loins, Ardra and Aslesa at the right
and left hind legs, Abhijit and Uttarasadha at the right and left nostrils, Sravana and
Purvasadha at the right and left eyes. Dhanistha and Mila at the right and left ears
respectively and the eight constellations from Magha onwards, marking the southern
course, at the ribs on the left side; and even so one should place the (other) eight, marking
the northern course, (viz.,) Mrgasirsa and so on, at the ribs on the right side in the reverse
order (i.e., from Purvabhadrapada back to Mrgasirsa), and locate (the remaining two, viz.,)
Satabhisa and Jyestha at the right and left shoulders. (6) (Again,) at the upper jaw should
be placed (the star representing the sage) Agasti (Agastya) and (the star representing)
Yama (the god of punishment) at the lower jaw, (the planet) Mars as the mouth, Saturn at
the penis, Jupiter at the hump, the sun at the chest, (the star representing the divine sage)
Narayana at the heart, the moon in the mind, Venus at the navel, (the two stars representing
the twin gods) Aswinikumaras (the celestial physicians) at the breasts, Mercury in the
outgoing and incoming breaths, (the planet) Rahu at the neck, the Ketus (comets) all over
the body and all the hosts of (other) stars in the hair (on the body). (7)

नमो ज्योतिर्लोकाय कालायनायानिमिषां पतये महापुरुषायाभिधीमहीति। ८ |
नमस्यत: स्मरतो वा त्रिकालं नश्येत तत्कालजमाशु पापम्।९।
