400 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 24

PEEL MEMOIR KEE RE AERA EA CSA H EEE EKE SHOR HSK REET Se CHASER EEE Hee HHH eee Here re eee

अथ भागवता यूयं प्रिया: स्थ भगवान् यथा । न मद्भागवतानां च प्रेयानन्योऽस्ति कर्हिचित् 130 |
इदं विविक्तं जप्तव्यं viet मङ्गलं परम्। नि:श्रेयसकरं चापि saat तद्वदामि a: 1321

Sri Rudra said : You are the sons of king Vedisad (Barhisad); your intention (too) is
known to Me. It is only to shower My grace on you, may all be well with you, that | have thus
blessed you with My sight. (27) He is indeed (supremely) dear to Me, who has directly taken
refuge in Lord Vasudeva, whois beyond both the Unmanifest, consisting of the three Gunas
(Sattva, Rajas and Tamas), and the Spirit, known by the name of Jiva. (28) A man devoted
tohis own duty (prescribed in the Sastras) attains tothe position of Brahma (the creator) after
a hundred lives and realizes Me (only) if he has acquired still higher merit. A devotee of the
Lord, on the other hand, ascends immediately after death to the (supreme) Abode of
Bhagavan Visnu, which lies entirely beyond the realm of Matter and which Myself (as Rudra)
and the (other) gods (holding some office in the cosmic order) shall reach (only) after the
dissolution of our subtle body (at the expiry of our term of office). (29) Now you are (all)
devotees of the Lord and as such are dear to Me as the Lord (Himself). And to the votaries
of the Lord either, no one else is ever dearer than Myself. (30) (Now) distinctly hear this holy
and supremely auspicious hymn, which is also conducive to final beatitude; | (hereby) impart
it to you. (31) ह
मत्रय Sard
FIR भगवानाह तान् शिव:। वद्धाञ्जलीन् राजपुत्रान्नारायणपरो वच: ।३२॥

Maitreya resumed : With a heart full of compassion Lord Siva, who is ( ever) devoted
to Bhagavan Narayana, spoke the following words to those princes, who stood with joined
palms (before Him). (32)

AR उवाच
जितं त आत्मविदधुर्यस्वस्तये स्वस्तिरस्तु Fi भवता राधसा राद्धं सर्वस्मा आत्मने नम: 1331
नम: GSAT भूतसूक्ष्मेन्द्रियात्मने। वासुदेवाय जान्ताय कूटस्थाय स्वरोचिषे ।३४॥
सङ्कर्षणाय सूक्ष्माय दुरन्तायान्तकाय च । नमो विश्वप्रबोधाय प्रद्युम्नायान्तरात्मने ।३५॥
नमो नमोऽनिरुद्धाय हृषीकेशेन्दियात्मने। नम: परमहंसाय पूर्णाय निभृतात्मने । ३६1
स्वर्गापवर्गद्वाराय नित्यं शुचिषदे नम:। नमो हिरण्यवीर्याय चातुर्होत्राय तन्तवे । ३७॥
नम ऊर्ज इषे त्रय्या: पतये aaa dea च जीवानां नम: सर्वरसात्मने ।३८॥
सर्वसत्त्वात्मदेहाय विशेषाय स्थवीयसे।नमस्त्रैलोक्यपालाय सहऒओजोबलाय च ।३९॥
अर्थलिङ्गाय नभसे नमोऽन्तर्बहिरात्मने । नम: पुण्याय लोकाय अमुष्मै भूरिवर्चसे ।४०॥
प्रवृत्ताय निवृत्ताय पितृदेवाय कर्मणे । नमोऽधर्मविपाकाय मृत्यवे दु:खदाय च ।४१॥
नमस्त आशिषामीश मनवे कारणात्मने। नमो धर्माय बृहते कृष्णायाकुण्ठमेधसे |
पुरुषाय पुराणाय सांख्ययोगेश्वराय च ।४२॥

शक्तित्रयसमेताय मीढुषेऽहंकृतात्मने । चेतआकूतिरूपाय नमो वाचोविभूतये iw

Sri Rudra said : “Your glory tends to the blessedness (unfoldment of the blissful nature)
of the foremost among the knowers of the Self; may it conduce to My blessedness as well.
You ever exist as the supremely Blissful; hail to You, the (supreme) Spirit, who have
assumed all forms. (33) Obeisance to Him who has alotus (constituting the universe) sprung
from His navel, the Controller of the subtle elements and the senses, to Vasudeva (the first

and foremost of the four VyGhas or manifestations of the Lord, the one presiding over the
Citta or reason), who is (ever) tranquil, immutable and self-luminous. (34) Salutations to
