Dis. 6 BOOK TWELVE 694

तासां स age: शिष्यानुपाहूय महामति: । एकैकां संहितां ब्रह्मन्नेकैकस्मै ददौ fay: । ५१।
पैलाय संहितामाद्यां बह्वचाख्यामुवाच ह। वैशम्पायनसंज्ञाय निगदाख्यं यजुर्गणम् ।५२।
साम्नां जैमिनये me तथा छन्दोगसंहिताम्। अथर्वाङ्गिरसीं am स्वशिष्याय सुमन्तवे । ५३।
ae: स्वसंहितामूच sania मुनि: | बाष्कलाय च सोऽप्याह शिष्येभ्य: संहितां स्वकाम् । ५४॥
चतुर्धा व्यस्य बोध्याय याज्ञवल्क्याय भार्गव । परादारायाग्निमित्रे इन्द्रप्रमितिरात्मवान् । ५५
अध्यापयत् संहितां स्वां माण्डूकेयमृषिं कविम्। तस्य fren देवमित्र: सोभर्यादिभ्य ऊचिवान् । ५६1
aa: Bi तु पञ्चधा व्यस्य संहिताम् । वात्स्यमुद्गलश्ञालीयगोखल्यशिशिरेषधात् ।५७।
जातूकर्ण्यश्च तच्छिष्य: सनिरुक्तां स्वसंहिताम्। बलाकपैजवैतालविरजेभ्यो ददौ मुनि: ।५८॥
बाष्कलि: प्रतिशाखाभ्यो वालखिल्याख्यसंहिताम् | चक्रे बालायनिर्भज्य: कासारश्चैव तां दधु: ।५९1
age: संहिता dat एभिर्ब्रह्मर्षिभिर्धृता: । श्रुत्वैतच्छन्दसां व्यासं सर्वपापै: प्रमुच्यते tg!

Descended from (the loins of) the sage Paragara through Satyavati in the form of
Vedavyasa (representing a ray of Sattva, forming part of Maya, the divine potency) as prayed
to by Brahma, Sankara and other guardians of the spheres, for the vindication of righteous-
ness, O Brahmana sage, in the current Manvantara too, The almighty Lord, the Life-giver of
the universe, divided the Veda, O highly blessed one ! into four parts. (48-49) Picking out and
classifying in four (distinct) groups the multitudes of Mantras belonging to the categories of
Rk, Atharva, Yajus and Sama, (even) as various kinds of gems are assorted into so many
groups, the said Maharsi compiled four Sarnhitas or collections out of those Mantras. (50)
Summoning in his presence four (of his foremost) pupils (Paila and others), the powerful
Vyasa of mighty intellect imparted one of those collections to each, O Saunaka ! (51) He
taught, they say, the very first Samhita under the name of Bahvrca-Samhita (because
consisting of a collection of Rks or psalms) to Paila and the body of sacred texts in prose,
recited during sacrifices and bearing the name of Nigada (prose), to another named
VaisSampayana. (52) (Even) so he taught the body of Samas or songs, going by the name
of Chandoga-Samhita (because sung in various metres) to Jaimini and (the fourth called)
Atharvangirasi, to his (fourth) pupil Sumantu. (53) The sage Paila taught his own (Bahvrcha-)
Samhita (in two parts) one each to Indrapramiti and Baskaia; the latter too divided his branch
into four parts and taught (one each), O scion of Bhrgu, tothe disciples Bodhya, Yajfiavalkya,
Parasara and Agnimitra. Indrapramiti, a man of selfcontrol, taught his collection to the
learned sage Mandtkeya; and his pupil was Devamitra, who (in his turn) imparted its
knowledge to the sages Saubhari and others. (54—56) Mandiikeya's son was Sakalya, who
for his part divided his collection into five branches and taught them to (his pupils) Vatsya,
Mudgala, Safiya, Gokhalya and Sigira. (57) The sage Jatukarya, another pupil of Sakalya,
imparted the knowledge of his own collection (in three parts), as well as of its Nirukta
(explanation of obscure words), to his (four) pupils, Balaka, Paija, Vaitala and Viraja. (68)
Baskala’s son, Baskali, made out of all the (aforesaid) branches the collection bearing the
name of Valakhilya-Samhita. (His pupils) Balayani, Bhajya and Kasara (learnt and)
memorized it. (69) By these Brahmana sages were (learnt and) preserved the Samhitas
forming part of Rgveda. Hearing of the calssification of these Mantras of the Veda one is
completely absolved from all sins. (60)

चरकाध्वर्यवोऽभवन् । यच्चेरुर्ब्रह्महत्यांह-क्षपणं स्वगुरोर्व्रतम् ।६१॥
याज्ञवल्क्यश्च तच्छिष्य आहाहो भगवन् कियत्। चरितेनाल्पसाराणां चरिष्येऽहं सुदुश्चरम् । ६२।
इत्युक्तो गुरुरप्याह कुपितो याह्यलं त्वया । विप्रावमन्त्रा शिष्येण मदधीतं त्यजाश्विति । ६३।
देवरातसुत: सोऽपि wide यजुषां गणम्। ततो गतोऽथ मुनयो ददृशुस्तान् यजुर्गणान् । ६४॥

