468 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 83

ARADO SANNA OS क AA AENAE AAAS TAAL AAA 999 # ARAN ORK ANELHHOHT AHO EAN ANI RANE 2४ % ७ # # #

भद्रोवाच

पिता मे मातुलेयाय स्वयमाहूय दत्तवान्। Het कृष्णाय तच्चित्तामक्षौहिण्या सखीजनै: । १५।
अस्य मे पादसंस्पर्शो भवेज्जन्मनि जन्मनि । कर्मभिर्भराम्यमाणाया येन तच्छेय आत्मन: 1261

Bhadra said : Draupadi, Bhagavan Sri Krsna is the son of my maternal uncle. Knowing
that | had given my heart to Him, my father sent for Sri Krsna of his own accord and bestowed
me on Him, with an army consisting of one Aksauhini and many maids-of-honour. (15) Inow
consider that my highest good lies in obtaining in every birth the touch of His feet, wherever
| may be thrown by the force of my Karma. (16)

ma राज्ञ्यच्युतजन्मकर्म श्रुत्वा मुहुर्नारदगीतमास ह ।
fad मुकुन्दे किल पद्महस्तया वृत: qaqa विहाय लोकपान् । १७॥

ज्ञात्वा wa मतं साध्वि fam दुहितृवत्सल: । बृहत्सेन इति र्यातस्तत्रोपायमचीकरत् । १८।

यथा स्वयंवरे राज्ञि मत्स्य: पार्थेष्सया Ha: अयं तु बहिराच्छन्नो seed स जले परम् ।१९॥

श्रुत्वैतत् सर्वतो भूपा आययुर्मत्पितु: पुरम्। सर्वास्त्रशस्त्रतत्त्वज्ञा: सोपाध्याया: सहस्रश: 1201

fo सम्पूजिता: ad यथावीर्यं यथावय: । आददु: wat am ag पर्षदि मद्धिय: ।२१॥

आदाय व्यसृजन् केचित् सज्यं कर्तुमनीश्वरा: | आकोटि sat समुत्कृष्य पेतुरेकेऽमुना हता: 1221

ad कृत्वापरे वीरा मागधाम्बष्ठचेदिपा: । dim दुर्योधन: कर्णो नाविन्दंस्तदवस्थितिम् 1231

मत्स्याभासं जले वीक्ष्य ज्ञात्वा च तदवस्थितिम् । पार्थो यत्तोऽसृजद् बाणं नाच्छिनत् पस्पृशे परम् । २४॥
Laksmana said ; 0 queen, Devarsi Narada frequently sings the story of the descent and
sports of the Lord on earth. Having heard those songs and duly considering the fact that
Laksmi, the goddess of wealth, rejecting (Indra and) the (other) guardians of the world, had
chosen Him as her consort, । set my heart on the Lord. (17) O virtuous lady ! my father, who
is known by the name of Brhatsena, loved me intensely. When he came to know of my mind,
he contrived a plan for carrying it into effect. {18) O queen, just as on the occasion of your self-
choice of a husband your father invented the device of a fishin order to get Arjuna for you, my
father too invented a similar device, with this difference that thé fish was totally screened
externally and only its reflection could be seen in the water. (19) Hearing of this, kings versed
in the secrets of archery, and the use of all other arms comes alongwith their teachers, in their
thousands from all sides to the capital of my father. (20) All were honoured by my father with
due regard to their prowess and age. With their heart set on (winning) me, they took up the bow
andarrowkeptin thatassembly andattempted, (tum by turn.) tohit the mark. (21) Some of them
lifted the bow but finding themselves unable to string it left it where it was. Others succeeded
in drawing the string as far as the other end of the bow, but (unable to fasten it to that end) fell
down struck by it. (22) Greatest warriors like Jarasandha, Sigupala, the king of Ambastha,
Bhima, Duryodhana and Karna succeeded in stringing the bow, but could not locate the
fish.(23) Seeing the reflection of the fish in the water, Arjuna was able to locate it, discharged
the arrow aiming at it with great care, but failed to hit it, the arrow only touching the fish. (24)

राजन्येषु निवृत्तेषु भग्नमानेषु मानिषु । भगवान् धनुरादाय सज्यं कृत्वाथ लीलया 1241
तस्मिन् सन्धाय विशिखं मत्स्यं वीक्ष्य सकृज्जले | छित्त्वेषुणापातयत्तं सूर्ये चाभिजिति स्थिते ।२६॥
दिवि दुन्दुभयो नेदुर्जयङाब्दयुता भुवि । देवाश्च कुसुमासारान् मुमुचुर्हर्षविह्वला: 1201
